
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



MORNING BY MORNING; 



0B9 



§M^ |lir»iilft»0!$ 



FOB 



THE FAMILY OR THE CLOSET. 



BT 

C ... o . ■ , N 
C. H. SPURGEON. 



ZW WAKJSTff MOBJfJNQ BY MOBNINQ. HS WaKBNBTB MUlfE 
EAR TO HEAR AS TUB LEARNED. 

I«AUH L 4. 



NEW YORK: 
SHELDON AND COMPANY, 

198 AND SOO BBOABWAT. 

1867. ; 




>, 



I 



I 



/ 



T^TORKS 



OP THB 



REV. C. H. SPUEGEON. 



8ERM0N8. Eight Series. Revised by the 

Author. Each 1.6C 

SAINT AND SAVIOUR. . . . 1.6C 

SRURGEOJSrS GEMS. . . . . 1.5C 

MORNING BY MORNING, or Daily 

Readings .1.71 



fliarcotyped at tbe Boston Stereotype Fouudiy, 
No. 4 Spring Lane. 



PRE PAC E. 




|OETS have delighted to sing of the morning as ** Mother 
of the Dews," "sowing the earth with orient pearl;" 
and many of the saints, upstarting from their beds at 
the first blush of dawn, have found the poetry of nature 
to be the reality of grace as they have felt the dews of heaven 
refreshing their spirits. Hence morning exercises have ever been 
dear to enlightened, heaven-loving souls, and it has been their 
rule, never to see the face of man till they have first seen the 
face of God. The breath of morn redolent of the smell of flowers 
is incense offered by earth to her Creator, and living men should 
never let the dead earth excel them ; truly living men tuning their 
hearts for song, like the birds, salute the radiant mercy which 
reveals itself in the east. The first fresh hour of every morning 
should be dedicated to the Lord, whose mercy gladdens it with 
golden light. The eye of day openeth its lids, and in so doing 
opens the eyes of hosts of heaven-protected slumberers ; it is fit- 
ting that those eyes should first look up to the great Father of 
Lights, the fount and source of all the good upon which the sun- 
light gleams. It augurs for us a day of grace when we heg^in 
betimes with God ; the sanctifying influence of the season spent 
upon the mount operates upon each succeeding hour. Morning 
devotion anchors the soul, so that it will not very readily drift far 
away from God during the day : it perfumes the heart so that it 
smells fragrant with piety until nightfall ; it girds up the soul's 
garments so that it is less apt to stumble, and feeds all its powers 
so that it is not permitted to faint. The morning is the gate of 

(V) 



VI PREFACE. 

the day, and should be well guarded with prayer. It is one end 
of the thread on which the day's actions are strung, and should 
be well knotted with devotion. If we felt more the majesty of 
life, we should be more careful of its mornings. He who rushes 
from his bed to his business and waiteth not to worship, is as 
foolish as though he had not put on his clothes,, or cleansed his 
face, and as unwise as though he dashed into battle without arms 
or armor. B6 it ours to bathe*in the softly-flowing river of com- 
munion with God, before the heat of the nidlderness and the bur- 
den of the way begin to oppress us. 

In penning these short reflections upon certain passages of Hqly 
Writ, the author has had in view the assistance of the private 
meditations of believers. A child may sometimes suggest a con- 
solation which might not othennrise have cheered a desolate heart ; 
and even a flower smiling upwaf d from the sod may turn the 
thoughts heavenward : may we not hope that, by the Holy Spirit^s 
grace, as the reader turns, morning bj^ n^niini^to our simple^ 
page, he will hear in it a still small voice, whose speech shall be 
the word of God to his soul ? The mind wearies of one thing, and 
we have therefore studied variety, changing our method con- 
stantly; sometimes exhorting, then soliloquizing, then convers- 
ing ; using the first, second, and third persons, and speaking both 
in the singular and the plural — and all with the desire of avoiding 
sameness and dulness. Our matter, also, we venture to hope, is 
wide in its range, and not altogether without a dash of freshness. 
Readers of our sermons will recognize many thoughts and expres- 
sions which they may have met with in our discourses ; but much 
is, to the author at least, new, and, as far as anything can be when 
it treats upon the common salvation, it is original. We have writ- 
ten, out of our own heart, and most of the portions are remem- 
brances of words which jvere refreshing in our own experience, 
and therefore we hope the daily meditations will not be without 
savor to our brethren ; in fact, we know they will not if the Spirit 
of God shall rest upon them. 

Our ambition has led us to hope that our little volume may also 
aid the worship of families where God's altar burns in the mori\- 
ing. We know that it has been the custom in some households 
to read Mason, Hawker, Bogatsky, Smith, or Jay, and without 
wishing to usurp the place of any of these, our " Morning by 
Morning " aspires to a position among them. Our happiness will 



FBEFACS. Til 

overflow should we be made a blessing to Christian ho^iseholds. 
Family worship is, beyond measure, important both for the pres- 
ent and succeeding generations, and to be in part a chaplain in 
the houses of our friends, we shall esteem to be a very great 
honor. 

We have written no prayers, because we think that a prayer is 
good for nothing if it be not written on the heart by the Holy 
Spirit, and made to gush forth warm from the soul. We should 
as soon think of printing a form for our children to use in address- 
ing their parents, as draw up a form to be offered to our Father 
who is in heaven. It has been said in defence of forms, " Better 
to go on crutches than not at aH; " but it is our firm conviction' 
that those who truly ^(C> in the sense of worshipping aright, ^ighi 
with a little effort, and an earnest cry to the Holy Spirit' for assist- 
ance, go much better on their own proper legs than .uf>on the 
cripple's wearisome aids. 

Hymns we have selected ; but our fear is that comparatively few 
English families will use them ; on the northern side of the Tweed 
the singing of the psalm is far more general. Would to God that 
the daily turmoil were less vehement — that we had more time and 
heart for praising the name of the Lord ! Praise makes worship 
complete, and vrithout it the pillar of devotion lacks its capital. 

If there be not time to read both our morning portion: an^ the 
usual chapter, we earnestly entreat that our book may -be 'dis- 
pensed with, for it were a sore affliction to us to know that :'ahy 
family read the Word of God less on our account. Wo-iiave had 
it in our heart to lead our friends to search their Bibles more than 
ever, and therefore we have culled passages out of corners and 
nooks of Scripture, that curiosity might lead to a search for their 
context ; we shall be disappointed indeed, if, after all, we frustrate 
our own design by diverting one moment of time to the perusal 
of our remarks which ought to have been given to searching the 
Word of God itself 

The hope has also been cherished that village and cottage 
preachers may sometimes glean a text and suggestions for a 
sermon from our daily page. Certainly they are very free to do 
so if they can ; the thoughts are not ours, but are common prop- 
erty. Tossed about by cares, and worried by business, men's 
minds are not always in a condition on -Saturday evenings to rise 
from earth and start upon a line of meditation ; but once let their 



Vm ^ PBEFACE. 

thoughts get wiiig, they can % well enough, and the very events 
of the week help their flight; perhaps we may lift some heart up- 
wards, an4 if so, God be praised. Possibly a hint here given may 
serve as a match to set fire to a preacher's soul, and that heart on 
a blaze may warm and gladden hundreds. Amen, and the Lord 
our God say so too. 

Hoping for a favorable reception for our present attempt, we 
have already commenced a volume of the same size and character 
for evening readings which will,. by Divine permission, follow so 
soon as we can prepare it. Meanwhile, with many prayers for 
Heaven's blessing upon this our labor of love, and with earnest 
requests for the prayers of the faithful, this work is humbly ded- 
icated to the honor of the Triune Jehovah, and respectfully pre- 
sented to tiie Christian Church. 

Clapham, Deomibeit^ 1886. 



Jan. 1. DAILY BEADINGS. 




" They did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that yearJ^ 
Joshua v. 11. 

^SRAEL'S weary wanderings were all over, and the 
promised rest was attained. No more moving tents, 
fiery serpents, fierce Amalekites, and howling wil- 
dernesses, they' came to the land which flowed with milk and 
honey, and they ate the old corn of the land. Perhaps this 
year, beloved Christian reader, this may be thy cage or mine. 
Joyful is the prospect, and if faith be in active exercise, it 
will yield unalloyed delight. To be with Jesus in the rest 
which remaineth for the people of God, is a cheering hope 
indeed, and to expect this glory so soon is a double bliss. 
Unbelief shudders at the Jordan which still rolls between us 
and the goodly land, but let us rest assured that we havfr 
already experienced more ills than death at its worst can 
cause us. Let us banish every fearful thought, and rejoice 
with exceeding great joy, in the prospect that this year we 
shall begin to be " forever with the Lord." 

A part of the host will this year tarry on earth, to do 
service for their Lord. If this should fall to our lot, there 
is no reason why the New Year's text should not still be true. 
"We who have believed do enter into rest." The Holy 
Spirit is the earnest of our inheritance. He gives us " glory 
begun below." In heaven they are secure, and so are we 
preserved in Christ Jesus; there they triumph over their 
enemies, and we have victories too. Celestial spirits enjoy 
communion with their Lord, and this is not denied to us ; 
they rest in His love, and we have perfect peace in Him ; 
they hymn His praise, and it is our privilege to bless Him 
too. We will this year gather celestial fruits on earthly 
ground, where faith and hope have made the desert like the 
garden of the Lord. Man did eat angels' food of old, and 
why not now ? O for grace to feed on Jesua, and so to eat 
of the fruit of the land of Canaan this year. 

1 



-Jin. 8. DAILY BEADIK6S. 




^Iwill give thee for a covenant of the people,'* — Isaiah xlix. 8. 

SSUS Christ is Himself the sum and substance of the 

covenant, and as one of its gifts He is the property 

of every believer. Believer, canst thou estimate 

I thou hast gotten in Christ ? "In Him dwelleth aJl the 

\ of the Godhead bodily.*' Consider that word " God " 

I its infinity, and then meditate upon " perfect man " and all 

ISs beauty ; for all that Christ, as God and man, ever had, or 

^wa have, is thine — out of pure free favor, passed over to thee 

to be Uuue entailed property forever. Our blessed Jesus, 

■9m OocU is omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent. Will it not 

eonsole you to know that all these great and glorious attributes 

:«re altogether yours ? Has He power ? That power is yours 

to aq^port and strengthen you, to overcome your enemies, 

and to preserve you even to the end. Has He love ? Well, 

there is not a drop of love in His heart which is not yours. 

Tott may dive into the immense ocean of His love, and you 

may aay of it all, " It is mine." Hath He justice ? It may 

seem a stem attribute, but even that is yours ; for He will, 

by His justice, see to it, that all which is promised to you in 

tb^ cove^iant of grace, shall be most certainly secured to you. 

AiA:^ that He has as perfect man is yours. As a perfect 

l&e Father's delight was upon Him. He stood accepted 

i High. believer, God's acceptance of Christ 

eptance ; for knowest thou not that the love which 

f;Set on a perfect Christ, He sets on thee now ? For 

st did is thine. That perfect righteousness which 

ght out, when through His stainless life He kept 

. made it honorable, is thine, and is imputed to 

ist is in the covenant. 

••My God, I am thine —what a comfort divine ! 
What a blessing to know that the Saviour is mine ! 
In the heavenly Lamb thrice happy I um, 
f' And my heart it doth dance ut the sound of \il% ivwick&«* 




kK\>< \ KVk'.VV,-^ 



/asLl. 



V 



.v,-.7. ~jn n kZ 






:v-rr 




r z^j-. *>. * .-.if... ii" y/rv'.i .:■ ir:L'/r. 



Jan. 5* I>AILY BEADIKOS. 




**And Ood saw the lights thai it was good: and Qod divide the 
light from the darkness,'* — Genesis L 4. * 

I&HT might well be good, since it sprang from that 
fiat of goodness, "Let there be light." We who 
enjoy it, should be more grateful for it than we are, 
and see more of God in it and by it. Light physical is said 
by Solomon to be sweet, but gospel light is infinitely more 
precious, for it reveals eternal things, and ministers to our 
immortal natures. When the Holy Spirit giyes us spirittial 
light, and opens our eyes to behold the glory of God in the 
face of Jesus Christ, we behold sin in its true colors, and 
ourselves in our real position ; we see the Most Holy God 
as He reveals Himself, the plan of mercy as He propounds 
it, and the world to come as the Word describes it. Spiritual 
light has many beams and prismatic colors, but whether they 
be knowledge, joy, holiness, or life, all are divinely good. If 
the light received be thus good, what must the essential light 
be, and how glorious must be the place where He reveals 
Himself ! Lord, since light is so good, give us more of 
it, and more of Thyself, the true light. 

No sooner is there a good thing in the world, than a division 
is necessary. Light and darkness have no communion ; God 
has divided them, let us not confound them. Sons of light 
must not have fellowship with deeds, doctrines, or deceits of 
darkness. The children of the day must be sober, honest, 
and bold in their Lord's work, leaving the works of darkness 
to those who shall dwell in it forever. Our churches should 
by discipline divide the light from the darkness, and we should 
by our distinct separation from the world do the same. In 
judgment, in action, in hearing, in teaching, in association, 
we must discern between the precious an"3 the vile, and 
maintain the great distinction which the Lord made upon the 
world's first day. Lord Jesus, be Thou our light through- 
out the whole of this day, for Thy light is the light of men. 
1* 



."fir S. 



-r 




Jan. 9. DAILY BEADIN68. 




"I toUl he their God" —- Jeremiah xxxi. 33. 

ISTIAN ! here is all thou canst require. To ?aake 
thee happy thou wantest something that shall satisfy 
thee ; and is not this enough ? If thou canst pour 
this promise into thy cup, wilt thou not say, with David, 
*' My cup runneth over ; I have more than heart can wish " ? 
When this is fulfilled, ^^ I am thy Ood" art thou not possessor 
of all things ? Desire is insatiable as death, but He who fill- 
eth all in all can fill it. The capacity of our wishes who can 
measure ? but the immeasurable wealth of God can more than 
overflow it. I ask thee if thou art not complete wjien God 
is thine ? Dost thou want anything but God ? Is not His 
all-sufficiency enough to satisfy thee if all else should fail ? 
But thou wantest more than quiet satisfaction ; thou desirest 
rapturoiLs delight. Come, soul, here is music fit for Heaven 
in this thy portion, for God is the Maker of Heaven. Not 
all the music blown from sweet instruments, or drawn from 
living strings, can yield such melody as this sweet promise, 
*' I will be their God." Here is a deep sea of blisa^ a shore- 
less ocean of delight ; come, bathe thy spirit in it,; swim an 
age, and thou shalt find no shore ; dive th;*ough^iat eter- 
nity, and thou shalt find no bottom. " / tuilt he their Ood" 
If this do not make thine eyes sparkle, and thy heart beat 
high with bliss, then assuredly thy soul is not in a healthy 
fitata. But thou wantest more than present delights — thou 
cravest something concerning which thou mayest exercise 
hope ; and what more canst thou hope for than the fulfilment 
of this great promise, *' I will be their God '* ? This is the 
masterpiece of all the promises ; its enjoyment makes a heav- 
en below, and will make a heaven above. Dwell in the light 
of thy Lord, and let thy soul be always ravished with His love. 
Get out the marrow and fatness which this portion yields thee. 
Live up to thy privileges, and rejoice with unspeakable joy. 




26539 



L «. * <* » t 




TVORKS 

OF THB 

KEV. C. H. SPURGEON. 

SERMONS. Eight Series. Revised by the 

AtUhor. Each ..... 1.60 

SAINT AND SAVIOUR. . . . l.so 

SPURGEONS GEMS. . . . . 1.60 

MORNING BY MORNING, or Daily 

Readings /.75 





!• StAIET WillinM Jil^ lit 



merer eauer ^txwemT Text meft I aJi dbe yeoflr €f 
6«m1 akafl enter dM^. IkredbefnEKSJ^mgcf a 
djrii^ flKM, «fe ezelaised, *^ I kxre w> fear of g«a^ kuoiie ; 
I lotre sent aD UCove; Go^si^cr is w 1^ lidtckofs^ 
door, aad I aa readj lor Him to emeT.'' ^ Bvt,'' sud om, 
^ are joa sol afraid ksk jov dioiild viss joar iakoilaBce ?** 
^ Xajy^ toad he, *^ naj ; diere is CHie crovn ia kearea wiudk 
tbe «k|^el Gnibfid eoold not wear; it will ft no kead bal 
ittiike:* There is one tibstyne in hearea iHudi Paal Ike iposde 
eoidd not ID; it was laade for me, and I diafl kare it.'' O 
Cbristiaii, iHial a jojoas tkoo^it! tkj portion is secore; 
^ikereremainetkarest.'' " But cannot I forfeit it r " No; 
it is enUnled. If I be a ekild of God I sball not lose it. It 
is mine as seenrelj as if I were tkere. Come witk me, be- 
ll erer, and let ns sit npon the top of Nebo, and view Ike 
goodly land, even Canaan. Seest tbon tkat little rirer of 
df;atli glistening in the sunlight, and across it dost thou see 
the pinnacles of the eternal city > Dost thou mark the pleas- 
ant conntry and all its joyous inhabitants ? Know then that 
if thou couldst fly across thou wouldst see written upon one 
of it» many mansions, '* This remaineth for such a one ; pre- 
served for him only. He shall be caught up to dwell forever 
with God/' Poor doubting one, see the fair inheritaace ; it 
w Ifime, If thou believest in the Lord Jesus, if thou hast 
repented of sin, if thou hast been renewed in heart, thou art 
one of the Lord's people, and there is a place reserved for 
tljee, a crown laid up for thee, a harp specially provided for 
theo. No one else shall have thy portion; it is reserved in 
heaven for thee, and thou shalt have it ere long, for there 
shall be no vacant thrones in glory when all the chosen are 
gathered in. 




Jan. 11. DATLY BEADIKG8. 11 

" These Tiave no root** — Luke viii. 13. 

j^Y soul, examine thyself this morning by the light of 
this text. Thou hast received the word with joy; 
thy feelings have been stirred, and a lively impres- 
sion has been made; but, remember, that to receive the 
word in the ear is one thing, and to receive Jesus into thy 
very soul is quite another ; superficial feeling is often joined 
to inward hardness of heart, and a lively impression of the 
word is not always a lasting one. In the parable, the seed 
in one case fell upon ground having a rocky bottom, covered 
over with a thin layer of earth ; when the seed began to take 
root, its downward growth was hindered by the hard stone, 
and therefore it spent its strength in pushing its green shoot 
aloft as high as it could, but having no inward moisture de- 
rived from root nourishment, it withered away. Is this my 
case ? Have I been making a fair show in the flesh without 
having a corresponding inner life ? Good growth takes place 
upwards and downwards at the same time. Am I rooted in 
sincere fidelity and love to Jesus ? If my heart remains 
unsoftened and unfertilized by grace, the good seed may 
germinate for a season, but it must ultimately wither, for it 
cannot flourish on a rocky, unbroken, unsanctified heart. 
Let me dread a godliness as rapid in growth and as wanting 
in endurance as Jonah's gourd ; let me count the cost of 
being a follower of Jesus ; above all let me feel the energy 
of His Holy Spirit, and then I shall possess an abiding and 
enduring seed in my soul. If my mind remains as obdurate 
as it was by nature, the sun of trial will scorch, and my hard 
heart will help to cast the heat the more terribly upon the 
ill-covered seed, and my religion will soon die, and my de- 
spair will be terrible ; therefore, heavenly Sower, plough 
me first, and then cast the truth into me, and let me yield 
Thee a bounteous harvest. 




12 DAILY SEADiKOs. Jan. 12. 

**Te are ChrUfs.**-^! Corinthians liL 23. 

care Christ's. You are His by donation, for the 
Father gave you to the Son ; His by His bloody 
purchase, for He counted down the price for your 
redemption ; His by dedication, for you have con- 
secrated yourself to Him ; His by relation, for you are named 
by His name, and made one of His brethren and joint-heirs. 
Labor practically to show the world that you are the servant, 
the friend, the bride of Jesus. When tempted to sin, reply, 
" I cannot do this great wickedness, for I am Christ's." Im- 
mortal principles forbid, the friend of Christ to sin. When 
wealth is before you to be won by sin, say that you are 
Christ's, and touch it not. Are you exposed to difficulties 
and dangers ? Stand fast in the evil day, remembering that 
you are Christ's. Are you placed where others are sitting 
down idly, doing nothing ? Rise to the work with all your 
powers ; and when the sweat stands upon your brow, and 
you are tempted to loiter, cry, " No, I cannot stop, ibr I am 
Christ's. If I were not purchased by blood, I might' be like 
Issachar, couching between two burdens ; but I am Christ's, 
and cannot loiter." When the siren song of pleasure would 
tempt "you from the path of right, reply, " Thy music cannot 
charm me ; I am Christ's." When the cause of God invites 
thee, give thyself to it ; when the poor require thee, give 
thy goods and thyself away, for thou art Christ's. Never 
belie thy profession. Be thou ever one of those whose 
manners are Christian, whose speech is like the Nazarene, 
whose conduct and conversation kre so redolent of heaven, 
that all who see you may know that you are the Saviour's, 
recognizing in you His features of love and His counteijance 
of holiness. "I am a Roman ! " was of old a reason for 
integrity ; far more, then, let it be your argument for holi- 
ness, " I am Christ's." 




Jan. 18. DAIIiY BEADINOS. Id 

" Jehoshaphat made ships of TharsTiish to go to Ophir for gold : 

hid; they went not ; for the ships were broken at Egion-geberJ* 

1 Kings xxii. 48. 

^OLOMON'S ships had returned in safety, lut Je- 
hoshaphat's vessels never reached the land ol gold. 
Providence prospers one, and frustrates the desires 
of another, in the same business and at the same spot, yet 
the G-reat Kuler is as good and wise at one time as another. 
May we have grace to-day, in the remembrance of this text, 
to bless the Lord for ships broken at Ezion-geber, as well as 
for vessels freighted with temporal blessings ; let us not envy 
the more successful, nor murmur at our losses as though we 
were singularly and specially tried. Like Jehoshaphat, ^e 
may be precious in the Lord's sight, although our schemes 
end in disappointment. The secret cause of Jehoshaphat's 
loss is well worthy of notice, for it is the root of very much of 
the suffering of the Lord's people ; it was his alliance with a 
sinful family, his fellowship with sinners. In 2 Chron. xx. 37, 
we are told that the Lord sent a prophet to declare, '* Be- 
cause thou hast joined thyself with Ahaziah, the Lord hath 
broken thy works." This was a fatherly chastisement, which 
appears to have been blessed to him ; for in the verse which 
succeeds our morning's text we find him refusing to allow his 
servants to sail in the same vessels with those of the wicked 
king. Would to God that Jehoshaphat's experience might 
be a warning to the rest of the Lord's people, to avoid being 
unequally yoked together with unbelievers ! A life of mis- 
ery is usually the lot of those who are united in marriage, 
or in any other way of their own choosing, with the men of 
the world. for such love to Jesus that, like Him, we 
may be holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners ; 
for if it be not so with us, we may expect to hear it often 
aaid, '* The Lord ha^ broken thy works." 




14 DAILY B£ADINGS. Jan. 14* 

** Mighty to saveJ' — Isaiah IxiiL L 

(Y the words ** to save *' we understand the whole of 
the great work of salvation, from the first hoty desire 
onward to complete sanctification. The words are 
multum in parvo ; indeed, here is all mercjr in one word. 
Christ is not only ^< mighty to save *' those who repent, baft 
He is able to make men repent. He will carry those to 
heaven who believe ; but He is, moreover, mighty to give 
men new hearts, and to work faith in them. He is mighty 
to make the man who hates holiness love it, and to constrain 
the despiser of His name to bend the knee before ffim. 
Nay, this is not all the meaning, for the divine power is 
eqnally seen in the after-work. The life of a believer is a 
series of miracles wrought by " the Mighty God." The bnsh 
bums, but is not consumed. He is mighty to keep His 
people holy after He has made them so, and to preserve 
them in His fear and love until He consummates their spir- 
itual existence in heaven. Christ's might doth not lie in 
making a believer and then leaving him to shift for himself, 
but Ho who begins the good work carries it on ; He who 
imparts the first germ of life in the dead soul, prolongs the 
divine existence, and strengthens it until it bursts asunder 
every bond of sin, and the soul leaps from earth, perfected 
in glory. Believer, here is encouragement. Art thou pray- 
ing for some beloved one ? give not up thy prayers, for 
Christ is " mighty to save." You are powerless to reclaim 
the rebel, but your Lord is Almighty. Lay hold on that 
mighty arm, and rouse it to put forth its strength. Does 
your own case trouble you ? Fear not, for His strength is 
sufficient for you. Whether to begin with others, or to carry 
on the work in you, Jesus is "mighty to save;" the best 
proof of which lies in the fact that He has saved you. 
What a thousand mercies that you have not found Him 
mighty to destroy I 




Jan. 15. DAILY BEADING8. 15 

"Do as Thou hast said.** -^2 Samuel viL 25. 

^OD'S promises were never meant to be thrown aside 
as waste paper; He intended that they should be 
used. G-od's gold is not miser's money, but is minted 
to be traded with. Nothing pleases our Lord better than to 
see his promises put in circulation; He loves fo see His 
children bring them up to Him, and say, *' Lord, do as Thou 
hast said." We glorify God when we plead His promises. 
Do you think that God will be any the poorer for giving you 
the riches He has promised ? Do you dream that He will be 
any the less holy for giving holiness to you ? Do you imagine 
He will be any the less pure for washing you from your sins ? 
He has said, '* Come, now, and let us reason together, saith 
the Lord : though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as 
white as snow ; though they be red like crimson, they shall 
be as ^ool." Faith lays hold upon the promise of pardon, 
and it does not delay, saying, '* This is a precious promise ; 
I wonder if it be true ? " but it goes straight to the throne 
with it, and pleads, " Lord, here is the promise. * Do as Thou 
hast said.' " Our Lord replies, " Be it unto thee even as 
thou wilt." When a Christian grasps a promise, if he do 
not take it to God, he dishonors him ; but when he hastens 
to the throne of grace, and cries, " Lord, I have nothing to 
reconmiend me but this, * Thou hast said it,' " then his 
desire shall be granted. Our heavenly Banker delights tb 
cash His own notes. Never let the promise rust. Draw the 
word of promise out of its scabbard, and use it with holy 
violence. Think not that God will be troubled by your im- 
portunately reminding Him of His promises. He loves to 
hear the loud outcries of needy souls. It is His delight to 
bestow favors. He is more ready to hear than you are to 
ask. The sun is not weary of shining, nor the fountain of 
flowing. It is God's nature to keep His promises ; therefore 
go at once to the throne with '' Do as Thou hast said." 



"^Iwm U^ Ate, JHft Ac LmdJ'—Umk idL IC ' 




.^r:..ii^ lei us hear die Lofd Jesii q>eak to each 
one af 11.4 : '* I viQ l^Zp diee,^' ^"Jxu hm m small 
liuBg for Me, tlij God, to kdp tlies. Cvkiuidar whai 
I bare done ^h-eadj. Wbatl oalJi^tkev? Wkj, I bought 

tbee wiUi Mj blood. Wbai! Doibetptbee^ Ik&Tedieafof 
thee ; and if I baye done the greater, nill I iial do the less } 
Selp thee ! It is the ka^ tMog 1 will erer do for thee ; I 
have done more, and i£<i^ do mare. Before tbe world began 
I dioae thee. I made the coTenaEit for thee, I l&id aside 
Hy gloiy and became a man for diee ; I gate My life for thee ; 
and if I did all tkis, I will garelj help thee now. In helping 
theOy I am giying thee what I have bought for thee alreadj. 
If tboQ badet need of a thousand times as mneb help, I would 
giro it thee ; thon requirest Ihtle compared with what I am 
ready to giTc, 'Tis much for thee to need* but it 13 hothiug 
for Me to bestow, *JSdp thee ? ' Fear not I If there were 
an ant at tht* door of thj graoarj ai^king for help, it would 
not ruin thee to give him a handful of thy wheat ; and thou 
art nothing but a tiny insect at the door of My all-sufficiency. 
* I will help thee.'"' 

my soul, is not this enough? Dost thou need more 
strength than the omnipotence of the United Trinity ? Dost 
thou want more wisdom than exists in the Father, more love 
than displays itself in the Son, or more power than is manifest 
in the influences of the Spirit ? Bring hither thine empty 
pitcher I Surely this well will fill it. Haste, gather up thy 
wants, and bring them here — thine emptiness, thy woes, thy 
needs. Behold, this river of God is full for thy supply ; what 
canst thou desire beside? Go forth, my. soul, in this thy 
might. The Eternal God is thine helper ! 

** Foar not, I am with thee ; be not dismayed I 
I, I am thy Qod, and will still give thee aid." 




Jan. 17. DAILY BEADIK66. 17 

** And I lookedf and, lo, a Lanib stood on the Mount Zion" 
Revelation xiv. 1. 

apostle John was privileged to look within the 
gates of heaven, and in describing what he saw, he 
begins by saying, " I looked, and lo, a lamb ! " This 
teaches us that the chief object of contemplation in the 
heavenly state is '^ the Lamb of God, which taketh away the 
sins of the world." Nothing else attracted the apostle's at- 
tention so much as the person of that Divine Being, who hath 
redeemed us by His blood. He is the theme of the songs 
of all glorified spirits and holy angels. Christian, here is joy 
for thee ; thou hast looked, and thou hast seen the Lamb. 
Through thy tears thine eyes have seen the Lamb of God 
taking away thy sins. Bejoice, then. In a little while, when 
thine eyes shall have been wiped from tears, thou wilt see 
the same Lamb exalted on His throne. It is the joy of thy 
heart to hold daily fellowship with Jesus ; thou shalt have the 
same joy to a higher degree in heaven ; thou shalt enjoy the 
constant vision of His presence ; thou shalt dwell with Him 
forever. " I looked, and, lo, a Lamb ! " Why, that Lamb is 
heaven itself; for as good Rutherford says, "Heaven and 
Christ are the same thing ; " to be with Christ is to be in heav- 
en, and to be in heaven is to be with Christ. That prisoner of 
the Lord very sweetly writes in one of his glowing letters — 
" my Lord Christ, if I could be in heaven without thee it 
would be a hell ; and if I could be in hell, and have thee still, it 
would be a heaven to me, for thou art all the heaven I want." 
It is true, is it not. Christian ? Does not thy soul say so ? 
"Not all the harps above 

Can make a heavenly place, 
If God His residence remove, 
Or but conceal His face." 
All thou needest to make thee blessed, supremely blessed, 
is, " to be with Christ." 
2* 



1 



VMZr ITEABOiaB. J&o. lfi« 



** TJwre remainMh therefore a rest io the people of O&d^^ 
Hebrews ir, 9* 

§^0W different will be the stale of the believer in heaven 
» from wbat it ii here ! Here he is born to toil and 
BuiTer wearinciB ; but ia the laDd of the immortal, 
fatigue is never known* Anxious to serve his Master, he 
finds his strength unequal to his zeal : his constant cry iB» 
^ " Help me to serve Thoe, my Crod." If he be thoroughly 
iMJtive, he will have much labor ; not too much for his will, 
but more than enough for his power, so that he will cry out, 
*' I am not wearied of the labor, bnt I am wearied in it" Ah 1 
Christian, tbe hot day of weariness lasts not forever : the 
sun is Hearing the horizon ; it shall rise again with a brighter 
day than thou hast ever seen, upon a land where they serve 
God day and night, and yet rest from their labors, ^ffere, 
rest h but partial; there^ it is perfect Here, the Christian 
ii always unsettled j he feels that he has not yet attained, 
Th&ra, all are al rest ; they have attaiueJ the summit of the 
mountain ; they have ascended to the bosom of their G-od. 
Higher they cannot go. Ah, toil-worn laborer, only think 
when thou shalt rest forever ! Canst thou conceive it ? It 
is a rest eternal; a rest that "remaineth." Here, my best 
joys bear "mortal" on their brow; my fair flowers fade; 
my dainty cups are drained to dregs ; my sweetest birds 
fall before death's arrows ; my most pleasant days are 
shadowed into nights ; and the flood-tides of my bliss sub- 
side into ebbs of sorrow ; but thersy everything is immor- 
tal ; the harp abides unrusted, the crown unwithered, the 
eye undimmed, the voice unfaltering, the heart unwaver- 
ing, and the immortal being is wholly absorbed in infinite 
delight. Happy day! happy day! when mortality shall 
be swallowed up of life, and the Eternal Sabbath shall 
begin. 




Jan. 19. DAILY BEADnros. 10 

"J sought him, but I found him not" — Canticles iii. 1. 

DLL me where you lost the company of Christ* and I 
will tell you the most likely place to find Him. Have 
you lost Christ in the closet by restraining prayer ? 
Then it is there you must seek and find Him. Did you lose 
Christ by sin ? You will find Christ in no other way but by 
the giving up of the sin, and seeking by the Holy Spirit to 
mortify the member in which the lust doth dwell. Did you 
lose Christ by neglecting the Scriptures ? You must find 
Christ in the Scriptures. It is a true proverb, " Look for a 
thing where you dropped it ; it is there." So look for Christ 
where you lost Him, for He has not gone away. But it is 
hard work to go back for Christ. Bunyan tells us, the pil- 
grim found the piece of the road back to the Arbor of Ease, 
where he lost his roll, the hardest he had ever travelled. 
Twenty miles onward is easier than to go one mile back for 
the lost evidence. 

Take care, then, when you find your Master, to cling close 
to Him. But how is it you have lost Him? One would 
have thought you would never have parted with such a pre- 
cious friend, whose presence is so sweet, whose words are so 
comforting, and whose company is so dear to you ! How is 
it that you did not watch Him every moment for fear of 
losing sight of Him ? Yet, since you have let Him go, what 
a mercy that you are seeking Him, even though you mourn- 
fully groan, " that I knew where I might find Him ! " Go 
on seeking, for it is dangerous to be without thy Lord. With- 
out Christ you are like a sheep without its shepherd ; like a 
tree without water at its roots ; like a sere leaf in the tem- 
pest — not bound to the tree of life. With thine whole heart 
seek Him, and He will be found of thee : only give thyself 
thoroughly up to the search, and verily, thou shalt yet dis- 
cover Him to thy joy and gladness. 




aO " DAILY BEADINGH9, Jan. SN). 

*'Abd was a ke&per of aheep.*^ — Genesis iv. 2. 

^S a shepherd Abel sanctified his work to the glory of 
Ood, and offered a sacrifice of blood upon his aUarj 
and the Lord had respect unto Ahd and his offering. 
This early type of our Lord is exceedingly clear and distinct. 
Like the first streak of light which tinges the east at sunrise, 
it does not reveal everything, but it clearly manifests the great 
fact that the sun is coming. As we see Abel, a shepherd 
and yet a priest, offering a sacrifice of sweet smell unto God, 
we discern our Lord, who brings before His Father a sacri- 
fice to which Jehovah ever hath respect. Abel was hated by 
his brother — hated without a cause ; and even so was the 
Saviour : the natural and carnal man hated the accepted man 
in whom the Spirit of grace was found, and rested not until 
his blood had been shed. Abel fell, and sprinkled his altar 
and sacrifice with his own blood, and therein sets forth the 
Lord Jesus slain by the enmity of man while serving as a 
priest before the Lord. " The good Shepherd layeth down 
His life for the sheep." Let us weep over Him as we view 
Him slain by the hatred of mankind, staining the horns of His 
altar with His own blood. AheVs blood speaketh. *' The 
Lord said unto Cain, The voice of thy brother's blood crieth 
unto Me from the ground." The blood of Jesus hath a mighty 
tongue, and the import of its prevailiYig cry is not vengeance, 
but mercy. It is precious beyond all preciousness to stand at 
the altar of our good Shepherd ; to see Him bleeding there as 
the slaughtered priest, and then to hear His blood speaking 
peace to all His flock, peace in our conscience, peace between 
Jew and Gentile, peace between man and his offended Maker, 
pejtce all down the ages of eternity for blood-washed men. 
Abel is the first shepherd in order of time, but our hearts 
shall ever place Jesus first in order of excellence. Thou great 
Keeper of the sheep, we the people of Thy pasture bless Thee 
with our whole hearts^when we see Thee slain for us. 




Jan. 21. DAILY BEADIKOS. 21 

"And so all Israel shall be saved," — Bomans xL 26. 

4 

?|HEN Moses sang at the Red Sea, it was his joy to 
know that all Israel were safe. Not a drop of spraj 
fell from that solid wall until the last of God's Israel 
had safely planted his foot on the other side the flood. That 
done, immediately the floods dissolved into their proper place 
again, but not till then. Part of that song was, " Thou in thy 
mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed." 
In the last time, when the elect shall sing the song of 
Moses, the servant of Grod, and of the Lamb, it shall be the 
boast of Jesus, " Of all whom thou hast given me, I have lost 
none." In heaven there shall not be a vacant throne. 

" For all the chosen race 

Shall meet around the throne, 
Shall bless the conduct of His grace, 
And make His glories known.'* 

As many as God hath chosen, as many as Christ hath re- 
deemed, as many as the Spirit hath called, as many as believe 
in Jesus, shall safely cross the dividing sea. We are not 
all safely landed yet : 

** Part of the host have crossed the flood, 
And part are crossing now." 

The vanguard of the army has already reached the shore. 
We are marching through the depths ; we are at this day fol- 
lowing hard after our Leader into the heart of the sea. Let 
us be of good cheer : the rearguard shall soon be where the 
vanguard already is ; the last of the chosen ones shall soon 
have crossed the sea, and then shall be heard the song of 
triumph, when all are secure. But oh ! if one were absent 
— oh! if one of his chosen family should be cast away — it 
would make an everlasting discord in the song of the re- 
deemed, and cut the strings of the harps of paradise, so that 
music could never be extorted from them. 









mAIE.T 1 


ffiWM 


j^n. f 


hrm 


^mm. 


biffM 




a^a^/^^f''- 






tbrf are eJfed Gof ■ vik, li^ vkii k« tfa^ l;f «»- 
_^MreifaBOi^a? Thiy. iy G<Js g o cd ft ei i, 
h»r# b«c»aie fr^lfid, braif bectt plmtnj mmgmdmiB ; de 
JLord hstk tratstd ^en ti^«m tlie wdffii nf AeaMCtmr^. and 
ikcf^ bring fartli hmt to Hb gloij ; bm wlo;! are tliej iritJioiit 
IbdrGod? Wliai ate tlii^ vitLu tfc« csBtiBul iidb^ee 
erf tlie Spirri, be gi e ttii ig finj^nbie» m t&ctt ? O lieile'?irt 
leafii to f^jeet pride, s€«iiig tliM tlioit haA no grosad for iL 
Wlt^iterer t&on »t, thorn basi ootbing to make tbee proiid. 
The moftt di0ti baatf the wmre tlioii art In debt to God : and 
tfaoQ ebonldst ttot be proad of that whieh renders tbee a 
debtor. Conmder thine origin ! look back to what thon waM. 
ConMid^ what tbou woaldst have been bnt for divine grace* 
Look Qpon thjMelf as thon art now. Dotb not thj coBseienee 
f^roach tbee } Do not tbj thousand wandering:^ stand be> 
fore thee, and tell thee that thon art nnworthj to be called 
His son ? And if He hath made thee anything, art thon not 
taught thereby that it is graee which hatii made thee to dif- 
fer ? Great believer, thon wouldst have been a great sinner 
if God had not made thee to differ. thon who art valiant for 
truth, thou wouldst have been as valiant for error if grace 
had not laid hold upon thee. Therefore, be not proud, 
though thou hast a large estate — a wide domain of grace ; 
thou hadst not once a single thing to call thine own ex- 
cept thy sin and misery. Oh! strange infatuation, that 
thou, who hast borrowed everything, shouldst think of ex- 
altiug thyself; a poor dependent pensioner upon the bounty 
of thy Saviour, one who hath a life which dies without fresh 
dtrcams of life from Jesus, and yet proud ! Fie on thee, 
silly heart 1 




Jan. 23. daily beadings. 28 

" I Tiave exaUed one chosen out of the people.*^ — Ps. Ixxxix. 19. 

was Christ chosen out of the people? Speak, 
my heart, for heart-thoughts are best. Was it not 
that He might be able to be our brothtr in the blest 
tie of kindred blood ? Oh, what relationship there is be- 
tween Christ and the believer ! The believer can say, " I 
have a Brother in heaven; I may be poor, but I have a 
Brother who is rich, and is a King, and will He suffer me to 
want while He is on His throne ? Oh, no ! He loves me ; 
He is my brother.' • Believer, wear this blessed thought, 
like a necklace of diamonds, around the neck of thy meino- 
ry ; put it, as a golden ring, on the finger of recollection, 
and use it as the Bang's own seal, stamping the petitions of 
thy faith with confidence of success. He is a brother, born 
for adversity ; treat him as such. 

Christ was also chosen out of the people that He might 
know our wants and sympathize with us. " He was tempted 
in all points like as we are, yet without sin." In all our 
sorrows we have His sympathy. Temptation, pain, disap- 
pointment, weakness, weariness, poverty — He knows them 
all, for He has felt all. Eemember this, Christian, and let 
it comfort thee. However difficult and painful thy road, it 
is marked by the footsteps of thy Saviour ; and even when 
thou reachest the dark valley of the shadow of death, and 
the deep waters of the swelling Jordan, thou wilt find His 
footprints there. In all places whithersoever we go, He has 
been our forerunner ; each burden we have to carry, has once 
been laid on the shoulders of Immanuel. 

** His way was much rougher and darker than mine ; 
Did Christ, my Lord, suffer, and shall I repine ? " 

Take courage ! Royal feet have left a blood-red track upon 
the road, and consecrated the thorny path forever* 





* ill itticTvcs. !£i TtemA : 

-W*r iiN' -Mwasfiiatw -ful sob. ^-hl ai nr 
3^ n i t m ivT nfsuuk -itt aw. T^ «-- *• ^^inL - 

**rt!r !• rVnm. 4r ^^saaas ^srd. 3inir "jktb iwaiL 

V^ftiw^K^ -te iirfi» Tmn. "ift net ir nfi^ 
f^p^m 3S« -)#ir)QUi /^^m "iiB «iari5 if "iie irwiier ^ 

.*■ !•*<* v^Xynrrr 4haJ- Ji la ■j'^1 innr. irjme iiiDj rae a«c- yet 
''/vl ril -^rn^ .urn ->'tr :/x- '-' ^aiiksIiAier. ae viasc .iuwiL. 

4^^r^ i »:a j^si-r-*. m*iri7 t?«:il t-il"* Bot jja saj yoa 
A.,t.r,r/'. f^nn\, fr>r 7^>n ar'5 ^ -larcrre. Ti^n i^eii to die 
^/,Tt>wA.._ ^'' .Hn/'^ly Hi^ *^^ .i^iirer tiee c^ -if tiae snare 
^^ *f»A fv.r>,r. ■' Th^n ^Wii J-^t; be tr:Ti;zii: oiin cf all die 
/^ '.; .(^Ur VftiAh tUn hAAt faHen: ani Uiosga thoa shah 
^A',/^/ f'A^^f^ to f^^t oi thj wzjir vet He tKa: hatK loved 
fKAA ;^;U r»a '^.*^. ftK'^^^ *^ay ; He will receive thee, and 
^i 7^ OrM yrj Ari4 ^fMnftaa, that the bones which He has 
tffok^ff mny f^jm^A. No bird of paradise shaU die in the 




Jan. 25. daily beadings. 25 

" I will mention the loving kindnesses of the Lord, and the 
praises of the Lord, according to all that the Lord hath bestowed 
on us" — Isaiah Ixiii. 7. 

?iND canst thou not do this? Are there no mercies 
which thou hast experienced f What though thou art 
gloomy now, canst thou forget that blessed hour 
when Jesus met thee, and said, " Come unto me " ? Canst 
thou not remember that rapturous moment when He snapped 
thy fetters, dashed thy chains to the earth, and said, "I 
came to break thy bonds and set thee free " ? Or if the 
love of thine espousals be forgotten, there must surely be 
some precious milestone along the road of life not quite 
grown over with moss, on which thou canst read a happy 
memorial of His mercy toward thee. What, didst thou 
never have a sickness like that which thou art suffering now, 
and did He not restore thee ? Wert thou never poor before, 
and did He not supply thy wants ? Wast thou never in straits 
before, and did He not deliver thee ? Arise, go to the river 
of thine experience, and pull up a few bulrushes, and plait 
them into an ark, wherein thine infant-faith may float safely 
on the stream. Forget not what thy God has done for thee ; 
turn over the Jjook of thy remembrance, and consider the 
days of old. Canst thou not remember the hill Mizar ? Did 
the Lord never meet with thee at Hermon ? Hast thou never 
climbed the Delectable Mountains ? Hast thou never been 
helped in time of need ? Nay, I know thou hast. Go back, 
then, a little way to the choice mercies of yesterday, and 
though all may be dark now^ light up the lamps of the past ; 
they shall glitter through the darkness, and thou shalt trust 
in the Lord till the day break and the shadows flee away. 
"Remember, Lord, thy tender mercies and thy loving 
kindnesses, for they have bc^a ever of old." 
3 




96 ]ft4ix.T mjuiMii JsB. 3llw 

^S^ring Irj creadfliw simI tkcj are Hia sons bj adap- 
^on IB Cfa^ut. Heaee llicj are piivdegcd U» eiH 
HiiQ, '^Our Ymihmr wtiJdi nt Im haven" Fiiber! OK 
wbat a |i?€«iQcut vor^ is tint ! Here b sulioi^^ : ^'- If I be 
a Patfaer, where ij mine lioiior ? " If je be s&iis, irhere is 
jour obefJieiiee ? Here m affedi&n mmgle^ witb author it j i 
an antlion^ wbieh doea Dot proToke rebelli<ifi ; an obedteDcc 
demanded which Ib most checiibllj rendered — -whieh would 
itot be witbheld eren if it miglit. The abedience whieh God*a 
chOdrca yield to Him most be iWfiij obedience. JDo not go 
about the service of God as slaTes to their taskmaster s toOf 
bat mn in the waj of His commands becaiise it U your 
Falh til's wa J. Yield jo ur bodies as instrnm en ts of right eous- 
nesst because rigbteouSDCss is jrour Father ;* will; and Mh wiH 
iihcuild te the will of Hii child. Father / — Here is a kingly 
attribxite so sweetly Teiled in l^ve, that the King*B crown is 
forgotten io the King's face, and His steptre becomes not a 
rod of iron, but a silver sceptre of mercy — the sceptre 
indeed seems to be forgotten in the tender hand of Him 
who wields it. Father ! — Here is honor and love. How 
great is a father's love to his children ! That which friend- 
ship cannot do, and mere benevolence will not attempt, a 
father's heart and hand must do for his sons. They are his 
offspring, he must bless them ; they are his children, he must 
show himself strong in their defence. If an earthly father 
watches over his children with unceasing love and cAre, how 
much more does our heavenly Father ! Abba, Father ! He 
who can say this, hath uttered better music than cherubim 
or seraphim can reach. There is heaven in the depth of 
that word — Father ! There is all I can ask ; all my necea- 
sitics can demand ; all my wishes can desire. I have all in 
mJJ to nil eternity when I can say, " Father." 



Jan. 27. daily thelthnob. 27 

" And of his fulness have all we received.** — John i. 16. 
^pHESB words tell us that there is a fulness in Christ. 




There is a fulness of essential Deity, for " in Him 
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead." There 
is a fulness of perfect manhood, for in Him, bodily, that 
Godhead was revealed. There is a fulness of atoning efficacy 
in His blood, for " the blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, 
cleanseth us from all sin." There is a fulness of justifying 
righteousness in His life, for *' there is therefore now no 
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus." There is 
a fulness of -divine prevalence in His plea, for "He is able 
to save to the uttermost them that come unto God by Him ; 
seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them." There 
is a fulness of victory in His death, for through death He 
destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the devil. 
There is a fulness of efficacy in His resurrection from the 
dead, for by it " we are begotten again unto a lively hope." 
There is a fulness of triumph in His ascension, for " when 
He ascended up on high. He led captivity captive, and 
received gifts for men." There is a fulness of blessings of 
every sort and shape ; a fulness of grace to pardon, of grace 
to regenerate, of grace to sanctify, of grace to preserve, and 
of grace to perfect. There is a fulness at all times ; a ful- 
ness of comfort in affliction ; a fulness of guidance in prosper- 
ity. A fulness of every divine attribute, of wisdom, of power, 
of love ; a fulness which it were impossible to survey, much 
less to explore. " It pleased the Father that in Him should all 
fulness dwell." Oh, what a fulness must this be of which all 
receive ! Fulness indeed must there be when the stream is 
always flowing, and yet the well springs up as free, as rich, 
*as full as ever. Come, believer, and get all thy need 
supplied ; ask largely, and thou shalt receive largely, for this 
" fulness " is inexhaustible, and is treasured up where oil \k<i 
needy ma/ reach it, even in Jesus, ImmauueV — Gco^^\Nk\y^* 



unT m^nocaL fcn. tt. 



^Ptf/ffsf m CkriM JamM.'— 




CO fov BOt fe^ in Toor ovm mil Aai pofecdoft » noi 
L? ]>oe9]ioteTaTdiytnAT0«tkal? Bfwj 
tear irineh tiiddes from pyor cje, negps ^^ia^etfto. 
timk;^ ewtrj ngfc wliidi borats frus yoar lieart, cries 
^imperfeetian;*' ereiy harsh word vhiA fsmeeda from 
four lip, mutters ^ impeifecdoii.'* Yon haTe too freqMntff 
ba4 a Tiew of joor own heart to dream lor a aMnnenl ^ amy 
perfection ia yamrsdf. But amidst this sad consrionsiieaB of 
imperfeetion, here is comfort for yon — yon are *• perfeel «» 
Chritt Jen»r In God's sight, yon are ** complete in Him ; ** 
€ten now yon are ** accepted in the beloyed." Bnt there is 
A second perfection, yet to be realiied, which is snre to aD 
(he seed. Is it not delightfbl to look forward to the time 
when erery sUun of sin shall be remored from the beHeireri 
and he shall be presented fanhless before the throne, wiUiont 
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing ? The Chorch of Christ 
then will be so pnre, that not eyen the eye of Omniscience 
will see a spot or blemish in her ; so holy and so glorious, 
that Hart did not go beyond the truth when he said — 
" "With my Saviour's garments on, 
Holy as the Holy One.** 

Then shall we know, and taste, and feel the happiness of this 
vaHt but short sentence, " Complete in Christ." Not till then 
shall we fully comprehend the heights and depths of the sal- 
vation of Jesus. Doth not thy heart leap for joy at the 
thought of it? Black as thou art, thou shalt be white one 
day ; filthy as thou art, thou shalt be clean. Oh, it is a 
marvellous salvation this ! Christ takes a worm and trans- 
fortriH it into an angel ; Christ takes a black and deformed 
thing and makes it clean and matchless in His glory, peerless' 
in I J 18 ])oauty, and fit to be the companion of seraphs. 
my Honl, stand and admire this blessed truth of perfection 
in Christ. 




Jan. 29. datlt headings. 29 

** The things which are not seen,** — 2 Corinthians iv. 18. 

our Christian pilgrimage, it is well, for the most 
part, to be looking forward. Forward lies the crown, 
and onward is the goal. Whether it be for hope, for 
joy, for consolation, or for the inspiring of our love, the future 
must, after all, be the grand object of the eye of faith. Look- 
ing into the fature, we see sin cast out, the body of sin and 
death destroyed, the soul made perfect, and fit to be a par- 
taker of the inheritance of the saints in light. Looking far- 
ther yet, the believer's enlightened eye can see death's river 
passed, the gloomy stream for^ded, and the hills of light at- 
tained on which standeth the celestial city ; he seeth himself 
enter within the pearly gates, hailed as more than conqueror, 
crowned by the hand of Christ, embraced in the arms of Je- 
sus, glorified with Him, and made to sit together with Him 
on His throne, even as He has overcome and has sat down 
with the Father on His throne. . The thought of this future 
may well relieve the darkness of the past and the gloom of 
tbe present. The joys of heaven will surely compensate for 
the sorrows of earth. 'Hush, my fears ! this world is but a 
narrow span, and thou shalt soon have passed it. Hush, hush, 
my doubts ! death is but a narrow stream, and thou shalt soon 
have forded it. Time, how short — eternity, how long ! Death, 
how brief — immortality, how endless ! Methinks I even now 
eat of Eshcol's clusters, and sip of the well which is within the 
gate. The road is so, so short ! I shall soon be there. 

** When the world my heart is rending 

With its heaviest storm of care, 
My glad thoughts, to heaven ascending, 

Find a refuge from despair. 
Faith's bright vision shall sustain me 

Till life's pilgrimage is past ; 
Fears may vex, and troubles pain me^ 

I shall reach my home at last." 

8* 



30 DAILY HEADINGS^ tTftll. 30* 

iij ^ ^ ^ ^ — -^ — — ■ — 

**Whm thou k&tNUri^ ike iound of a going in ike tops of the fnul- 
herjy ireeSf ikm ihou sMlt htsiir thyself" — 2 Sam* y* 24. 

S^i^^^HE membera of Christ's Cburoh sbould be ¥ery prayer* 
1^' ful, always seeking tbe unction of the Holj One to 
rest upon tbelr hearts, that the klDgdom ^f Christ 
niay eome, and that His '' will be done on earth, even as it 
is in heaven i '* but there are times when G-od seems especial- 
ly to faTOT Zion ; sueh seasons ought to be to them like '' the 
sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees*" Wa 
ought then to be doubly prayerful, doubly earnest, wreetling 
more at tlie throne than wc have been wont to do. Action 
should then be prompt and vigorous*. The tide is flowing — 
now let us pull manfully for the shore. for Pentecostal 
outpourings and Pentecostal labors I Christian, in youradf 
there are times '^* when thou hearest the sound of a going in 
the tops of the mulberry trees." You have a peculiar power 
in prayer ; the Spirit of God gives you Joy and gladness ; the 
Scripture is open to you ; the promises are applied ; you walk 
in the light of God's couHtenance ; you have peculiar free- 
dom and liberty in devotion, and more closeness of commun- 
ion with Christ than was your wont. Now, at such joyous 
periods, when you hear the " sound of a going in the tops of 
the mulberry trees," is the time to bestir yourself; now is the 
time to get rid of any evil habit, while God the Spirit helpeth 
your infirmities. Spread your sail ; but remember what yon 
sometimes sing — 

** I can only spread the sail ; 
Thou I Thou ! must breathe the auspicious gale." 

Only be sure you have the sail up. Do not miss the gale 
for want of preparation for it. Seek help of God, that you 
may be more earnest in duty when made more strong in 
faith ; that you may be more constant in prayer when yon 
have more liberty at the throne ; that you may be more holy 
Jn your oon\eTB2^\Aou whilst you live more closely with Christ. 



Jan. 31. DAILY SEADIN08. 81 

" The Lord our righteotisneas.** — Jeremiah xxiii. 6. 

M^T will always give a Christian the greatest calm, quiet, 
^ ease, and peace, to think of the perfect righteousness 
^ of Christ. How often are the saints of God downcast 
and sad ! I do not think they ought to be. I do not think 
they would if they could always see their perfection in Christ. 
There are some who are always talking about corruption, and 
the depravity of the heart, and the innate evil of the soul. 
This is quite true, but why not go a little further, and re- 
member that we are " perfect in Christ Jesus " ? It is no 
wonder that those who are dwelling upon their own corrup- 
tion should wear such downcast looks ; but surely if we call 
to mind that " Christ is made unto us righteousness," we 
shall be of good cheer. What though distresses afflict me, 
though Satan assault me, though there may be many things 
to be experienced before I get to heaven ; those are done for 
me in the covenant of divine grace ; there is nothing wanting 
in my Lord ; Christ hath done it all. On the cross He said, 
" It is finished ! " and if it be finished, then am I complete 
in Him, and can rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of 
glory, " not having mine own righteousness, which is of the 
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the right- 
eousness which is of God by faith." You will not find on 
this side heaven a holier people than those who receive into 
their hearts the doctrine of Christ's righteousness. When the 
believer says, " I live on Christ alone ; I rest on Him solely 
for salvation ; and I believe that, however unworthy, I am 
still saved in Jesus ; " then there rises up as a motive of grat- 
itude this thought — " Shall I not live to Christ ? Shall I not 
love Him and serve Him, seeing that I am saved by His mer- 
its ? " " The love of Christ constraineth us," " that they 
which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but 
unto Him which died for them." If saved by imputed right- 
eousness, we shall greatly value imparted T\^\jO,OM^\ifc's»'^. 



* 

as 








DAILY SEADi:ErOS. 






t. 


*' TAey 


^hall 


nng 


in 


the 


u?at/s of the Lord"^ 


^Ps. 


cxxx'viii. 


6. 



*^^HE time when Christians begin to sing in the ways of 
P the Lord ia when they first loBO their burden at the 
foot of the Cross. Not eTen the songs of the angek 
seem so sweet as the first song of rapture which gnsbes from 
the inmost soul of the forgiven eliild of Go(3. You know 
how John Bunyan describe b it. He says, when poor Pilgrim 
lost his burden at the OrasSr he gave three great leaps, and 
went on his way singing — 

^* Blest Crosa \ blest Sepulchre ! btest T-atlie; be 
The Mail that there was put tQ shame for me I " 

Belie?erj do you recollect the day when ^our fetters feO off ? 
Do you remember the plaee when Jesus met yon, and said, 
**I have loved thee with an everlasting love ; I have blotted 
out as a cloud thy transgressions, and as a thick cloud thy 
sins; they shall not bo mentioned against thee any more 
forever ** ? Oh ! what a sweet season is that when Jeaua 
takes away the pain of sin I When the Lord first pardoned 
my sin, I was so joyous that I could scarce refrain from 
dancing. I thought on my road home from the house 
where I had been set at liberty, that I must tell the stories 
in the street the story of my deliverance. So full was my 
soul of joy, that I wanted to tell every snow-flake that was 
falling from heaven, of the wondrous love of Jesus, who 
had blotted out the sins of one of the chief of rebels. But 
it is not only at the commencement of the Christian life 
that believers have reason for song; as long as they live 
they discover cause to sing in the ways of the Lord, and 
their experience of His constant loving kindness leads them 
to say, *' I will bless the Lord at all times : His praise shall 
continually be in my mouth." See to it, brother, that thou 
magnifiest the Lord this day, 

" Long as we tread this desert land, 
New mercies shall new songs demand." 




Feb. 2. DATLT BXADINOS. 83 

" WUhoui shedding of blood is no remissionJ* — Heb. ix. 22. 

IS is the voice of unalterable truth. In none of the 
Jewish ceremonies were sins, even typically, removed 
without blood-shedding. In no case, by no means can 
sin be pardoned without atonement. It is clear, then, that 
there is no hope for me out of Christ ; for there is no other 
blood-shedding which is worth a thought as an atonement for 
sin. Am I, then, believing in Him ? Is the blood of His 
atonement truly applied to my soul ? All men are on a level 
as to their need of Him. If we be never so moral, generous, 
amiable, or patriotic, the rule will not be altered to make an 
exception for us. Sin will yield to nothing less potent than 
the blood of Him whom God hath set forth as a propitiation. 
What a blessing that there is the one way of pardon ! Why 
should we seek another ? Persons of merely formal religion 
cannot understand how we can rejoice that all our sins are 
forgiven us for Christ's sake. Their works, and prayers, and 
ceremonies, give them very poor comfort ; and well may they 
be uneasy, for they are neglecting the one great salvation, 
and endeavoring to get remission without blood. My soul, 
sit down, and behold the justice of God as bound to punish 
sin ; see that punishment all executed upon thy Lord Jesus, 
and fall down in humble joy, and kiss the dear feet of Him 
whose blood has made atonement for thee. It is in vain 
when conscience is aroused, to fly to feelings and evidences 
for comfort ; this is a habit which we learned in the Egypt 
of our legal bondage. The only restorative for a guilty con- 
science is a sight of Jesus suffering on the cross. ** The 
blood is the life thereof," says the Levitical law, and let us 
rest assured that it is the life of faith and joy and ever/ other 
holy grace. 

" Oh ! how sweet to view the flowing 

Of my Saviour's precious blood, 
With divine assurancef knowing m* 

He lui8 made my peace >vith God ! ** 





i^ H^ jpB«r Cb» vn. ^la -has Ms : 

^HA^ite^rt><i ^a^fip'KtiH ife: dTS^Pt* Taw; as nnmxE^^r ai^ tf^^ar- d 

^^/4^mifm% 6<Mr fin: fcw fv»cFi«i j^v i 

^'4^4*A^ hm^ UmiK j<w pa^Twksre &€aaUe t» kaU m 
//^ ir4i/. iUmtM^ what jm omr to Bk JmmmimfiMfy. 
'tyfH0f pm t^r^ ^^ItoM^ed a tkia»EBd liws. He kas bo4 
f'if^Hi(t<A Mt^A, ?>#//« art an deep in defet as tfaov canst be 
f// /^y^// ft4Mtff$U ^ff (hfd. To God dum owest tkjself; and 
^// M^//^^ hk^.-^ yUUl ihfiM a# a Hring fiaenfice; it is bul 




Feb. 4. DAILY HEADINGS. 35 

" The love of the Lord" — Hosea iii. 1. 

il^ELIEVEK, look hack through all thine experience, 
and think of the way whereby the Lord thy God has 
led thee in the wilderness, and how He hath fed and 
clothed thee every day — how He hath borne with thine ill 
manners — how He hath put up with all thy murmurings, 
and all thy longings after the flesh-pots of Egypt — how Ho 
has opened the rock to supply thee, and fed thee with manna 
that came down from heaven. Think of how His grace has 
been sufficient for thee in all thy troubles — how His blood 
has been a pardon to thee in all thy sins — how His rod and 
His staff have comforted thee. When thou hast thus looked 
back upon the love of the Lord, then let faith survey His 
love in the future, for remember that Christ's covenant and 
blood have something more in them than the past. He who 
has loved thee and pardoned thee, shall never cease to love 
and pardon. He is Alpha, and He shall be Omega also : He 
is first, and He shall be last. Therefore, bethink thee, when 
thou shalt pass through the valley of the shadow of death, 
thou needesfc fear no evil, for He is with thee. When thou 
shalt stand in the cold floods of Jordan, thou needest not 
fear, for death cannot separate thee from His love ; and when 
thou shalt come into the mysteries of eternity thou needest 
not tremble, ** for I am persuaded, that neither death, nor 
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things 
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any 
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of 
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." Now, soul, is not 
thy love refreshed ? Does not this make thee love Jesus ? 
Doth not a flight through illimitable plains of the ether of 
love inflame thy heart and compel thee to delight thyself in 
the Lord thy God ? Surely as we meditate on " the love of 
the Lord," our hearts burn within us, and we long to love 
Him more. 




86 DAILY READINGS. Feb. 5. 

" The Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world.** 
1 John iv. 14. 

[i^T is a sweet thought that Jesus Christ did not come 
forth without His Father's permission, authority, con- 
sent, and assistance. He was sent of the Father, that 
He might be the Saviour of men. We are too apt to forget, 
that while there are distinctions as to the 'persons in the Trin- 
ity, there are no distinctions of honor. We too frequently 
ascribe the honor of our salvation, or at least the depths of 
its benevolence, more to Jesus Christ than we do to the Fa- 
ther. This is a very great mistake. What if Jesus came ? 
Did not His Father send Him ? If He spake wondrously, 
did not His Father pour grace into His lips, that He might 
be an able minister of the new covenant ? He who knoweth 
the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost as he should 
know them, never setteth one before another in his love ; he 
sees them at Bethlehem, at Gethsemane, and on Calvary, all 
equally engaged in the work of salvation. Christian, hast 
thou put thy confidence in the Man Christ Jesus ? Hast thou 
placed thy reliance solely on Him ? And art thou united with 
Him ? Then believe that thou art united tmto the God of 
heaven. Since to the Man Christ Jesus thou art brother, and 
boldest closest fellowship, thou art linked thereby with .God 
the Eternal, and '* the Ancient of days " is thy Father and 
thy Friend. Didst thou ever consider the depth of love in 
the heart of Jehovah, when God the Father equipped His 
Son for the great enterprise of mercy ? If not, be this thy 
day's meditation. The Father sent Him ! Contemplate that 
subject. Think how Jesus works what the Father wills. In 
the wounds of the dying Saviour see the love of the great 
I AM. Let every thought of Jesus be also connected with 
the Eternal, ever-blessed God, for " it pleased the Lord to 
bruise Him ; He hath put Him to grief." 




Feb. 6. DAILY BEAJDOGS. 87 

^Praying cdtoaysJ* — Epliesians vi. 18. 

gl^l^HAT multitudes of prayers we have put up from the 
first moment when we learned to pray! Our first 
prayer was a prayer for ourselves ; we asked that God 
would have mercy upon us, and blot out our sin. He heard 
us. But when He had blotted out our sins like a cloud, then 
we had more prayers for ourselves. We have had to pray for 
sanctifying grace, for constraining and restraining grace ; we 
have been led to crave for a fresh assurance of faith, for the 
comfortable application* of the promise, for deliverance in the 
hour of temptation, for help in the time of duty, and for suc- 
cor in the day of trial. We have been compelled to go to. 
God for our souls, as constant beggars asking for everything. 
Bear witness, children of God, you have never been able to 
get anything for your souls elsewhere. All the bread your 
soul has eaten has come down from heaven, and all the water 
of which it has drank has flowed from the living rock — Christ 
Jesus the Lord. Your soul has never grown rich in itself ; 
it has always been a pensioner upon the daily bounty of God ; 
and hence your prayers have ascended to heaven for a range 
of spiritual mercies all but infinite. Your wants were in- 
numerable, and therefore the supplies have been infinitely 
great, and your prayers have been as varied as the mercies 
have been countless. Then have you not cause to say, ^* I 
love the Lord, because He hath heard the voice of my sup- 
plication " ? For as your prayers have been many, so also 
have been God's answers to them. He has heard you in 
the day of trouble, has strengthened you, and helped you, 
even when you dishonored Him by trembling and doubting 
at the mercy-seat. Remember this, and let it fill your heart 
with gratitude to God, who has thus graciously heard your 
poor weak prayers., *' Bless the Lord, my soul, and forget 
not all His benefits." 
4 



30 BAJXT BMAJJlJiaS, 



** Arise ye, and depart ^^* — ^Micoh ii 10. 





I 



HE boiij* is approaching when the message will come 
to lis, ae it comes to all^^^ — ** Arise, and go forth from 
the home in which tbou hast dwelt, from the citj i^ ^ 
which tho^ hiist done thy businees, from thy family, from thy 
friends. Arise, and take thy last journey/' And what know 
we of the journey ? And what know we of the country to 
which we are bound ? ,A little we have read thereof, and 
somewhat has been revealed to us by the Spirit ; but how 
little do we know of the realms of the future ! We know 
that there is a black and stormy river called "^ Death," God 
bids us cross it, promising to be with us. And, after death, 
"what eometh ? What wonder-world will open upon our as- 
tonished sight ? What scene of glory will be unfolded to our 
view ? No traveller has ever returned to tell. But we know 
enough of the heavenly land to make us welcome our sum- 
mons thither with joy and gladness. The journey of death 
may be dark, but we may go forth on it fearlessly, knowing 
that God is with us as we walk through the gloomy valley, 
and therefore we need fear no evil. We shall be departing 
from all we have known and loved here, but we shall be going 
to 'our Father's house — to our Father's home, where Jesus 
is — to that royal '* city which hath foundations, whose builder 
and maker is God." This shall be our last removal, to dweU 
forever with Him we love, in the midst of His people, in 
the presence of God. Christian, meditate much on lieaven ; 
it will help thee to press on, and to forget the toil of the 
way. This vale of tears is but the pathway to the better 
country; this world of woe is but the stepping-stone to a 
WQrld of bliss. 

Prepare us, Lord, by grace divine, 

For Thy bright courts on high ; 
Then bid our spirits rise, and join 

The chorus of the sky." 




Feb. 8; DAILY READnros. dd 

« Thou tkalt call his name t7e«U5."— Matthew i. 21. 

jijHEN a person is dear, everything connected with him 
becomes dear for his sake. Thus, so precious is the 
person of the Lord Jesus in the estimation of all true 
believers, that everything about Him they consider to be in- 
estimable beyond all price. "All thy garments smell of 
myrrh, and aloes, and cassia," said David, as if the very vest- 
ments of the Saviour were so sweetened by His person that 
he could not but love them. Certain it is, that there is not 
a spot where that hallowed foot hath trodden — there is not 
a word which those blessed lips have uttered — nor a thought 
which BSs loving Word has revealed — which is not to us 
precious beyond all price. And this is true of the names of 
Christ — they are all sweet in tbe believer's ear. Whetiier 
He be called the Husband of the Chiwch, her Bridegroom, 
her Friend ; whether He be styled the Lamb slain from the 
foundation of the world — the King, the Prophet, or the 
Priest — every title of our Master — Shiloh, Emmanuel, 
Wonderful, the Mighty Counsellor — every name is like the 
honeycomb dropping with honey, and luscious are the drops 
that distil from it. But if there be one name sweeter than 
another in the believer's ear, it is the name of Jesus, Jesus ! 
it is the name which moves the harps of heaven to melody. 
Jesus ! the life of all our joys. If there be one name more 
charming, more precious than another, it is this name. It is 
woven into the very warp and woof of our psalmody. Many 
of our hynuis begin with it, and scarcely any, that are good 
for anything, end without it. It is the sum total of all de- 
lights. It is the music with which the bells of heaven ring ; 
a song in a word ; an ocean for comprehension, although a 
drop for brevity ; a matchless oratorio in two syllables ; a 
gathering up of the hallelujahs of eternity in fiv( letters. 

•* Jesus, I love Thy charming name-; 
'Tis musio to mine ear.'* 



«r sir X«^-— S Wk^A r. M. 




I 



«^^1B p«tf ^^.k^l^Aeke^ of fl«^^ 
>, Dtoiii «i Mi p vp to i^ 

kaT^ eoiiqver^ umte^ I aid trimpli fvi «§ai&, Wk««f<>re 
8lnttldItuT7t0«e«kmttfeLvfslM&?*' Not so David. 
Jfehaigimedwe tetie lp]r Ae itragA of Hie Lof^ ; be 
wmM aoi liiiiiu vpott anslfaar «Mfl ha lad msored tlie 
sine.* Me inqnked, " ^d I §• «p ^«iB«i theai?** Me 
vdt^ until 6^>drs sigti wss grf^n^ Leani from Band to take 
no !«tep ^^tltocit God. Ouisdui, if tlma wonldst know the 
patli of dutT, la^* 6€id for ihj cempaes ; If thoa wonldsfc steer 
thy ship tiirongh the d»k bfflows, put the tiller into the hand 
of the Almighty. Man j a rock might be escaped, if we wonld 
let onr Father take the helm ; many a shoal or quicksand we 
might well avoid, if we would leave to Bis sovereign will to 
choose and to command. The Puritan said, ^^ As sure as 
ever a Christian carves for himself, he'll cut his own fingers ; '* 
this is a great truth. Said another old divine, ^' He that goes 
before the cloud of God's providence goes on a fool's errand; " 
and so he does. We must mark Grod's providence leading 
us ; and if providence tarries, tarry till providence comes. 
He who goes before providence, will be very glad to run 
back again. " I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way 
which thou shalt go," is God's promise to Hii people. , Let 
UH, then, take all our perplexities to Him, and say, "Lord, 
what wilt thou have me to do ? " Leave not thy chamber 
thi« morning without inquiring of the Lord. 



Feb. 10. DAILY BEADINOS. 41 

<' J know how to abound" — Philippians iv. 12. 

P^HEBJE are many who know "how to be abased," who 
have not learned *' how to abound." When they are set 
upon the top of a pinnacle their heads grow dizzy, and 
they are ready to fall. The Christian far oftener disgraces his 
profession in prosperity than in adversity. It is a dangerous 
thing to be prosperous. The crucible of adversity is a less 
•severe trial to the Christian than the fining-pot of prosperity. 
Oh, what leanness of soul and neglect of spiritual things have 
tieen brought on through the very mercies and bounties of 
(J-od ! Yet this is not a matter of necessity, for the apostle 
tills us that he knew how to abound. When he had much he 
khew how to use it. Abundant grace enabled him to bear 
abundaiit prosperity. When he had a full sail he was loaded 
with much ballast, and so floated safely. It needs more than 
human skill to carry the brimming cup of mortal joy with a 
steady hand ; yet Paul had learned that skill, for he declares, 
" In all things I am instructed both to be fiill and to be hun- 
gry." It is a divine lesson to know how to be fuU, for the 
Israelites were full once ; but while the flesh was yet in their 
mouth, the wrath of God came upon them. Many have asked 
for mercies that they might satisfy their own hearts' lust. Ful- 
ness of bread has often made fulness of blood, and that has 
brought on wantonness of spirit. When we have much of God's 
providential mercies, it often happens that we have but little 
of God's grace, and little gratitude for the bounties we have 
received. We are full, and we forget God : satisfied with earth, 
we are content to do without heaven. Rest assured it is harder 
to know how to be fiill than it is to know how to be hungry — 
so desperate is the tendency of human nature to pride and for- 
getfulness of God. Take care that you ask in your prayers 
tkat God would teach you *' how to be ftdl." 
♦* Let not the gifts Thy love bestows 
Estrange our hearts from Thee." 
4» 



BAI1.T xi^BiTffit* Feb, 11, 



■ Aad a^ took imomM^ qftkem^ Hal llqr Am! hmm with /e^j." 
Acts IT- IS. 

I i^ CHEISTIAN shoold he & sirHMng likeness of Jtsus 
Ckrist. You Lave read livea of ChriiSt, beautifully 
*^ and eloqiietitlj vtitteQ ; but the best life of Clirist is 
His liring biograplijH^ written oiit in the words and actions of 
His people. If we were wbai we profess to be, and what ^e 
gboald be, we should be pietnre^ of €hii$t ; y€m, sneh striking 
likenesses of Him, that ibe world would not have to bold ua t^ 
by the h©tir together, and say, *' Well, it seems somewhat of a 
likeness ;" but they would, when ihej once beheld us, esclaim, 
** He bas been with Jesus ; he has been taught of Him ; be is 
like Him ^ be has caught the veij idea of the holy Man of Na^ 
areth, and he works it out in his life and e very-day actional," 
A Christiau should be like Christ in his boldness. Never blush 
to own your religion; your profession will never disgrace 
you : take care yoa never disgrace that. Be like Jesus ^ — 
very valiant for your Grod. Imitate Him in your loving spirit j 
think kindly, speak kindly, and do kindly, that men may say 
of you, " He has been with Jesus." Imitate Jesus in His 
holiness. Was He zealous for His Master ? So be you ; ever 
go about doing good. Let not time be wasted : it is too 
precious. Was He self-denying, never looking to His own 
interest ? Be the same. Was He devout ? Be you fervent in 
your prayers. Had He deference to His Father's will ? So 
submit yourselves to Him. Was He patient ? So learn to en- 
dure. And best of all, as the highest portraiture of Jesus, try 
to forgive your enemies, as He did ; and let those sublime words 
of your Master, "Father, forgive them; for they know not 
what they do," always ring in your ears. Forgive, as you 
hope to be forgiven. Heap coals of fire on the head of your 
foe by your kindness to him. Good for evil, recollect, is god- 
like. Be godlike, then ; and in all ways and by all means, so 
live that all may say of you, " He has been with Jesus." 




Feb. 12; i>aily aeadinos. 49 

'' For as the sufferings qf Christ abound in us, so our consolation 
also aboundeih hy Christ" — - 2 Corinthians L 5. 

SEE is a blessed proportion. The Ruler of providence 
bears a pair of scales — in this side He puts His peo- 
ple's trials, and in that He puts their consolations. 
When the scale of trial is nearly empty, you will always find 
the scale of consolation in nearly the same condition ; and 
when the scale of trials is full, you will find the scale of con- 
solation just as heavy. When the black clouds gather most, 
the light is the more brightly revealed to us. When the night 
lowers and the tempest is coming on, the Heavenly Captain is 
always closest to His crew. It is a blessed thing, that when 
we are most cast down, then it is that we are most lifted up by 
the consolations of the Spirit. One reason is, because trials 
make more room for consolation. Or eat hearts can only be made 
by great troubles. The spade of trouble digs the reservoir of 
comfort deeper, and makes more room for consolation. God 
comes into our heart — He finds it full — He begins to break 
our comforts and to make it empty ; then there is more room 
for grace. The humbler a man lies, the more comfort he will 
always have, because he wiU be more fitted to receive it. An- 
other reason why we are often most happy in our troubles, is 
this — then we have the closest dealings with God, When the 
barn is full, man can live without God : when the purse is burst- 
ing with gold, we try to do without so much prayer. But once 
take our gourds away, and we want our God; once cleanse the 
idols out of the house, then we are compelled to honor Je- 
hovah. " Out of the depths have I cried unto Thee, Lord." 
There is no cry ao good as that which comes from the bottom 
of the mountains ; no prayer half so hearty as that which comes 
up from the depths of the soul, through deep trials and afflic- 
tions. Hence they bring us to God, and we are happier ; for 
nearness to God is happiness. Come, troubled believer, fret 
not over your heavy troubles, for thej aiQ \iiQi V«t^^^ ^i 
weighty mercies. 







!• i 



m^Tm 




: Willi die i 

'^n^iAfe tb£ vodd bQrv«tb WB m^ liewjc it koi^w Hon 
DCPt." We sre emieiii $o he imkiioini witli Him in His ha- 
nliblioci, &r we are In be exalled wit^ Him. ^"Bti&vcd^ wne 
0r« «^ eA« •o»a 0/ {rotL"^ That is ea^y to read, but it is not 
§0 §Mf to feeL Haw b it with yanr bemrt tbb momiitg ? Are 
you in the lowest depths of sorrow ? Does corroption rise 
within yoitr spirit, and grace seem like a poor spark trampled 
under foot ? Does your faith almost fail yoa ? Fear not, it 
IH neither your graces nor feelings on which you are to live : 
you must live simply by faith on Christ. With all these 
UiingH against us, now — in the very depths of our sorrow, 
wherever wo may be — nowj as much in the valley as on the 
mountain, ** Beloved, now are we the sons of God."" " Ah, 
but," you say, ** sec how I am arrayed ! my graces are not 
briglit ; my righteousness does not shine with apparent glory." 
J hit road the next : **/i^ doth not yet appear what we shall he: 
hut wo know ihaiy when He shall appear^ we shall he like Mm.*' 
'riiu Holy Spirit shall purify our minds, and divine power 
»hall ruiluo our bodies ; then shall we see Him as He is. 



Feb. 14* DAILY HEADINGS. 45 

**And his cdlowance was a continual allowance given him of the 

king, a daily rate for every day, all the days of his life.** 

2 Kings XXV. 30. 

EHOIACHJLM was not sent away from the king's pal- 
ace with a store to last him for months, but his pro- 
vision was given him as a daily pension. Herein he 
well pictures the happy position of all the Lord's people. A 
daily portion is all that a rttan really wants. We do not need 
to-morrow's supplies — that day has not yet dawned, and its ^ 
wants are as yet unborn. The thirst which we may suffer in 
the month of June does not need to be quenched in Febru- 
ary, for we do not feel it yet ; if we have enough for each 
day as the days arrive we shall never know want. ' Sufficient 
for the day is all that we can enjoy. We cannot eat or drink 
or wear more than the day's supply of food and raiment ; the 
surplus gives us the care of storing it, and the anxiety of 
watching against a thief. One staff aids a traveller, but a 
Bundle of staves is a heavy burden. Enough is not only as 
good as a feast, but is all that the veriest glutton can truly 
enjoy. This is all that we should expect ; a craving for more 
than this is ungrateful. When our Father does not give us 
more, we should be content with his daily allowance. Je- 
hoiachim's case is ours ; we have a sure portion, a portion 
given us of the king, a gracious portion, and a perpetual por- 
tion. Here is surely ground for thankfulness. 

Beloved Christian reader, in matters of grace you need a 
daily supply. You have no store of strength. Day by day 
must you seek help from above. It is a very sweet assurance 
that a daily portion is provided for you. In the word, through 
the ministry, by meditation, in prayer, and waiting upon God 
you shall receive renewed strength. In Jesus all needful 
things are laid up for you. Then enjoy your continual allow^ 
ance. Never go hungry while the daily bread of grace is on 
the table of mercy. 



^ 




BlAIXT 


mEABISGiL 


Feb. 


U. 


'*T& mmU 


1/^ 


Mi mmt 


mAfmm^r- 


^2 Peter vL 


18L 



9%5?;EA YEN win be foil of tlie eex&elesd priises of Je^n^. 
^r \ Blemily ! Uone vimtmbered jewi sbaH gpe«ct tiietr 
i^^Ak. eTcrksliiig eovfse, b«t foa^f^- aad ferev^r, ** to Biin 
be gKofj.*^ li He not a '* Priest fbrrrert aBer the ord^r of 
MelchijMdek ? *" ** To Him be gloiy ." Is He BOt Kag Iw- 
ever? — King of kiitg^ and Lord of lords^ the everl siting 
Father ? ** To TTiwi be gloty farer^erJ* Never shall His 
praises eease. That which was bought with blood deserves 
to last while ismiortalltj eodures. The glory of the erom 
mnsi never be eclipsed ; the liiftre of the grave and of the 
resujTecrtion mnR% never be dimmed, O Jesus I thou shalt 
be prabed forever* Long aa immortal spirits live — loBg as 
the Fiitlier*s throtie endnres — forever, forever, unto Thee 
fihall be glory. Believer, yon are jmticipating the time whea 
yoo ifhall join the saints above in ascribing all glory to Jesns i 
but arc yon glorifying Him now f The apostle's "words are, 
** To Him lir- fflnrv l^'otli now and forever." Will ^on not tliis 
day make it your prayer ? " Lord, help me to glorify Thee. 
I am poor ; help me to glorify Thee by contentment. I am 
eick ; help me to give Thee honor by patience. I have talents; 
help me to extol Thee by spending them for Thee. I have 
time ; Lord, help me to redeem it, that I may serve Thee. I 
have a heart to feel ; Lord, let that heart feel no love but 
Thine, and glow with no flame but affection for Thee. I have 
a htiad to think ; Lord, help me to think of Thee and/or Thee. 
Thou hast put me in this world for something ; Lord, show me 
what that is, and help me to work out my life-purpose. I 
cannot do much ; but as the widow put in her two mites, 
which were all her living, so. Lord, I cast my time and eter- 
nity too into Thy treasury. I am all Thine ; take me, and 
enable me to glorify Thee now, in all that I say, in all that 
I d^, and with all that I have." 




Feb. 16. DAILY BEADINGS. 47 

"/ have learned, in whatsoever state lam, therewith to be content," 
Philippians iv. 11. 

DSE words show us that contentment is not a natural 
propensity of man. " HI weeds grow apace." Cov- 
etousness, discontent, and murmuring, are as natural 
to man as thorns are to the soil. We need not sow thistles and 
brambles ; they come up naturally enough, because they are 
indigenous to earth : and so, we need not teach men to com- 
plain ; they complain fast enough without any education. But 
the precious things of the earth must be cultivated. If we 
would have wheat, we must plough and sow ; if we want flowers, 
there must be the garden, and all the gardener's care. Now, 
contentment is one of the flowers of heaven, and if we would 
have it, it must be cultivated ; it will not grow in us by na- 
ture ; it is the new nature alone that can produce it, and even 
then we must be specially careful and watchful that we main- 
tain and cultivate the grace which God has sown in us. Paul 
says, " I have learned . . to be content ; " as much as to 
say, he did not know how at one time. It cost. him some pains 
to attain to the mystery of that great truth. No doubt he 
sometimes thought he had learned, and then broke down. 
And when at last he had attained unto it, and could say, '' I 
have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be con- 
tent," he was an old, gray-headed man, upon the borders of 
the grave — a poor prisoner shut up in Nero's dungeon at 
Rome. We might well be willing to endure Paul's infirmities, 
and share the cold dungeon with him. if we too might by 
any means attain unto his good degree. Do not indulge the 
notion that you can be contented without learning, or learn 
without discipline. It is not a power that may be exercised 
naturally, but a science to be acquired gradually. We know 
this from experience. Brother, hush that murmur, natural 
though it be, and continue a diligent pupil in the College of 
Content. 




4S DAILY BEABINGS. Feb. l7. 

^*Ia(mc dtetU hy the wdl ZaAa*-row**^Geneak xst- 11, 

LGAH had onec found deliveranee there, and IsiiMael 
had drank from the water so graciously revealed bj 
the God who liveth aud scetb the sous of mcu ; but 
thia was a mereij casual visit, such as worldlings pay to the 
Lord in times of need, when it serves their turn- They cry 
to Him in trouble, but forsake Him in prosperity* Isaac 
dwdt there, and made the well of the living and all- seeing 
God biB constant sourer of supply. The usual tenor of a 
man^a life, the dwelling of his soul, is the true test of his 
state. Perhaps the providential visitation eiperieoeed hf^ 
Hagar fltruck Isaac's mind, and led him to revere the place; 
its mystical name endeared it to him ; his frequent musings 
by its brim at eventide made him familiar with the well ; his 
meeting Eebecca there had made his spirit feel at home near 
the spot ; but best of all, the fact that he there enjoyed foU 
low ship with the living God, had made him select that hal- 
lowed ground for his dwelling. Let us leai'n to live in the 
presence of the living God ; let us pray the Holy Spirit that 
this day, and every other day, we may feel, " Thou God 
seest me." May the Lord Jehovah be as a well to us, de- 
lightful, comforting, unfailing, springing up unto eternal life. 
The bottle of the creature cracks and dries up, but the well of 
the Creator never fails ; happy is he who dwells at the well, 
and so has abundant and constant supplies near at hand. Tho 
Lord has been a sure helper to others : His name is Shaddai, 
God All-sufficient ; our hearts have often had most delightful 
intercourse with Him; through Him our soul has found her 
glorious Husband, the Lord Jesus ; and in Him this day we 
live, and move, and have our being ; let us, then, dwell in 
closest fellowship with Him. Glorious Lord, constrain us 
that we may never leave Thee, but dwell by the well of the 
living God, 




Feb. 18. DAILY BEADINGS. 49 

**Shov) me wherefore thou contendest with me" — Job x. 2. 

|ERHAPS, O tried soul, the Lord is doing this to 
develop thy graces. There are some of thy graces 
which would never be discovered if it were not for 
thy trials. Dost thou not know that thy faith never looks 
so grand in summer weather as it does in winter ? Love is 
too often like a glow-worm, showing but little light except 
it be in the midst of surrounding darkness. Hope itself is 
like a star — not to be seen in the 'sunshine of prosperity, 
and only to be discovered in the night of adversity. Afflic- 
tions are often the black foils in which God doth set the 
jewels of His children's graces, to make them shine the better. 
It was but a little while ago that, on thy knees, thou wast 
saying, '' Lord, I fear I have no faith : let me know that I 
have faith." Was not this really, though perhaps uncon- 
sciously, praying for trials ? — for how canst thou know that 
thou hast faith until thy faith is exercised ? Depend upon it, 
God often sends us trials that our graces may be discovered, 
and that we may be certified of their existence. Besides, it 
is not merely discovery ; real growth in grace is the result of 
sanctified trials. God often takes away our comforts and our 
privileges in order to make us better Christians. He trains 
His soldiers, not in tents of ease and luxury, but by turning 
them out and using them to forced marches and hard service. 
He makes them ford through streams, and swim through rivers, 
and climb mountains, and walk many a long mile with heavy 
knapsacks of sorrow on their backs. Well, Christian, may 
not this account for the troubles through which thou art passing ? 
Is not th« Lord bringing out your graces, and making them 
grow ? Is not this the reason why He is contending with you ? 

** Trials make the promise sweet ; 
Trials give new life to prayer ; 
Trials bring me to His feet, 
Lay me low, and keep me theie.** 





50 hah^t B]&iJ>rsfQS. Feb. 19L 

** Thu^ saiih the Lyr4 Ood: I ki7/ yet /or lAiV be inquired oftg 
ihe house oflsrad^ to df> Ufo/r ikem^ — Ezek. isxvL 37. I 

|BATER is the foreniimer of mercy. Turn to saoted 
bistorj, and you will find tiiat scarcely ever did a 
great mercy come t& tbis world unheralded by ^iip- 
plieatioD, Tou haire found this true In your own jjersoaal 
esperienee, God has given you many an unsolicited lavor, 
but BtiH great prayer has always been the prelude of great 
mercy with yon. When you first found peace through the 
blood of the eross^ you bad been praying muebj aad earnestiy 
interceding with God that He would remove your donbtSj and 
deliver you from your distresses. Your assurance wae the re- 
sult of prayer, ^\Tien at any time you have had high and rap- 
turous joys, you have been obliged to look upon tbem as an-» 
swers to your prayers. When you have had great deliverancei 
out of sore troubles, and mighty helps in great dangersj you 
have been able to say, *' I sought the Lordj and He heard me, 
and delivered me from all my fears/' Prayer la always the 
preface to blessing. It goes before the blessing as the hksdng^s 
shadow. When the sunlight of God's mercies rises upon our 
necessities, it casts the shadow 0/ prayer far down upon the 
plain. Or, to use another illustration, when God piles up a 
hill of mercies. He Himself shines behind them, and He casts 
on our spirits the shadow of prayer, so that we may rest cer- 
tain, if we are much in prayer, our pleadings are the' shadows of 
mercy. Prayer is thus connected with the blessing to show us 
the value of it. If we had the blessings without asking for 
them, we should think them common things ; but prayer makes 
our mercies more precious than diamonds. The things w« ask 
for are precious, but we do not realize their preciousness until 
we have sought for them earnestly. 

** Prayer makes the darkened cloud withdraw; 
Prayer climbs the ladder Jacob saw ; 
Gives exercise to faith and love ; 
Brings every blessing from above." 




Feb. 20. DAILY BEABINGS. 51 

" Oodf ihcA comforteth those that are cast dovm,^* — 2 Cor. vii. 6. 

^ND who comforteth like Him ? Go to some poor, 
melancholy, distressed child of God : tell him sweet 
promises, and whisper in his ear choice words of com- 
fort : he is like the deaf adder ; he listens not to the voice of 
the charmer, charm he never so wisely. He is drinking gall 
and wormwood, and comfort him as you may, it will be only 
a note or two of mournful resignation that you will get from 
him ; you will bring forth no psalms of praise, no hallelujahs, 
no joyful sonnets. But let Ood come to His child, let Him 
lift up his countenance, and the mourner's eyes glisten with 
hope. Do you not hear him sing — 

" Tis paradise, if Thou art here ; 
If Thou depart, 'tis hell " ? 

You could not have cheered him : but the Lord has done it ; 
** He is the God of all comfort." There is no balm in Gilead, 
but there is balm in God. There is no physician among the 
creatures, but the Creator is Jehovah-rophi. It is marvel- 
lous how one sweet word of God will make whole songs for 
Christians. One word of God is like a piece of gold, and 
the Christian is the goldbeater, and can hammer that promise 
out for whole weeks. So, then, poor Christian, thou needest 
not sit down in despair. Go to the Comforter, and ask Him 
to give thee consolation. Thou art a poor dry well. You 
have heard it said, that when a pump is dry, you must pour 
water down it first of all, and then you will get water; "and 
so, Christian, when thou art dry, go to God, ask Him to shed 
abroad His joy in thy heart, and then thy joy shall be full. 
Do not go to earthly acquaintances, for you will find them 
Job's comforters after all; but go first and foremost to thy 
" God, that comforteth those that are cast down," and you 
will soon say, " In the multitude of my thoughts within me 
Thy comforts delight my soul." 



-<-A k^k mkL'—l 





we <9DL ooIt VBBg these wanfe hr l 

^HWfiwp*"'^y MMptfiH Wi <iQp ] 

HOC be JaiiL br this cvo-etipd 
m cfaeze wiiidL ^hail nut &iL autten widi » < 
fbre tfaift aixow fttnn the bow of GoiTs eev 
die disccesea of Ii&. and xba penoff of 
eomiptioiis widiiiu ami die iiiaE«s widuras ; w3Li 
hofXL aboTe* and die tempttfiTona finmi beneadi^ aft accm M 
figbt afficdanev when we cut hide oucselTes beaeaik lh» M. 
wsikof ^He hadi Aui**r Yes; wfaedier finr ^^^bl oi Mr 
(piecodey or far screngdi in oar ooniiiL^. ""He kiA nid* 
muse be onr daily resort. And diis maj teaeb V8 dbe ex- 
treme Tilne of iearrhl/nj xke Senptnres. Tbeie maj be a 
promise in the Word whidi would escwdj fib jMr CMe, b«l 
joa may not know of it, and therefore yon miss ils tom^kftt. 
Yon are like pru*oners in a dungeon* and there may be one 
key in the banoh whioh would unlock the door« and yon 
might be firee : but it you \rill no: look for it, yon may remain 
a prisoner still, though lib err v L< so near ac hand. There 
may be a potent medicine in the great pharmacop4£ia of 
Scripture, and you may yet continue sick unless you will ex- 
amine and search the Scriptures to discover what '• He hath 
said/' Should you not, besides reading the Bible, store yonr 
mcTnoriea richly with the promises of God ? You can recol- 
lect the sayings of great men : you treasure up the verses of 
rf;nowned poets ; ought you not to be profound in your 
knowledge of the words of God, so that you may be able to 
r|iiot(; them readily when you would solve a difficulty, or over- 
throw a doubt r Since " He hath said," is the source of all 
wisdom, and the fountain of all comfort, let it dwell in yon 
richly as ** a well of water, springing up into everlasting 
life/* Ho shall you grow healthy, strong, and happy in the 

fe. 



j^ 




Feb. 22i PATLT HEADINGS. 53 

" His how abode in strength, and the arms of Ms hands were made 
strong hy the hands of the mighty Ood of Jacob,** — Gen. xlix. 24. 

^HAT strength which God gives to His Josephs is 
real strength ; it is not a boasted valor, a fiction, a 
thing of which men talk, but which ends in smoke ; it 
is true — divine strength. Why does Joseph stand against 
temptation ? Because God gives him aid. There is nought 
that we can do without the power of God. All true strength 
comes from '' the mighty God of Jacob.'' Notice in what a 
blessedly familiar way God gives this strength to Joseph — 
" The arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the 
mighty God of Jacob." Thus God is represented as putting 
His hands on Joseph's hands, placing His arms on Joseph's 
arms. Like as a father teaches his children, so the Lord 
teaches them that fear Him. He puts His arms upon them. 
Marvellous condescension ! God Almighty, Eternal, Omnipo- 
tent, stoops from His throne and lays His hand upon the 
child's hand, stretching His arm upon the arm of Joseph, that 
he may be made ^ong ! This strength was also covenard 
strength, for it is ascribed to " the mighty Ood of Jacobs 
Now, wherever you read of the God of Jacob in the Bible, you 
should remember the covenant with Jacob. Christians love 
to think of God's covenant. All the power, all the grace, all 
the blessings, all the mercies, aU the comforts, all the things 
we have, flow to us from the well-head, through the covenant. 
If there were no covenant, then we should fail indeed ; for 
all grace proceeds from it, as light and heat from the sun. 
No angels ascend or descend, save upon that ladder which 
Jacob saw, at the top of which stood a covenant God. 
Christian, it maybe that the archers have sorely grieved you, 
and shot at you, and wounded you, but still your bow abides 
in strength ; be sure, then, to ascribe all the glory to Jacob's 
God. ; 

6* ■ 




54 ]>Aix.T BEAniNoSi Feb. 23, 

**IwiU 7ie&^ leave tAea/* — IKlirc^s xiii, 6. 

fSO promise ia of private interpretation* Wliateyer 
Grod lias said to any one saint. Ho haa said to ^H. 
When He opens a well for one, it is that all may 
drink* When He openGth a granary-door to give out food, 
tliere may be some one starring man who is the occasion of 
its being opened, but all hungry saints may come and feed 
too* Whether He gave the word to Abraham or to Moses, 
matters not, believer ; He has given it to thee as one of 
the covenanted seed. There ia not a high blessing too 
lofty for thee^ nor a wide mercy too extensive for tUee» 
Lift up now thine eyes to the north and to the south, to the 
oast and to the west, for all this is thine. Climb to Fiegah's 
top, and view the utmost limit of the divide promise, for the 
land is aU thine own. There m not a brook of living water 
of which thou mJiyst not drink. If the land floweth with 
milk and honey, cat the honey and drink the milk, for both 
are thine* Be thou hold to believe, for He hath said^ '* I 
will never leave thee, nor forsake theeJ^ In this promise, 
Grod gives to His people everything. "J will never leave thee." 
Then no attribute of God can cease to be engaged for tis, la 
He mighl^ ? He will show Himself strong on the behalf of 
them that trust Him. Is He love? Then with h>ving kind- 
ness will He have mercy upon us. Whatever attributes may 
compose the character of Deity, every one of them to its 
fullest extent shall be engaged on our side. To put every- 
thing in one, there is nothing you can want, there is nothing 
you can ask for, there is nothing you can need in time or in 
eternity, there is nothing living, nothing dying, there is noth- 
ing in this world, nothing in the next world, there is noth- 
ing now, nothing at the resurrection-morning, nothing in 
heaven which is not contained in this text — "I will never 
leave thee, nor forsake thee." 




Feb. 24. DALLY EEADINGS. " 55 

**IwiU cause the shower to come down in Ms season: there shaU 
be showers of blessing,'^ — Ezekiel xxxiv. 26. 

|pEE,E is sovereign mercy — "I will give them the 
shower in its season." Is it not sovereign, divine 
mercy ? — for who can say, " I will give them showers," 
except Grod ? There is only one voice which can speak to the 
clouds, and bid them beget the rain. Who sendeth down the 
rain upon the earth ? Who scattereth the showers upon the 
green herb ? Do not I, the Lord ? So grace is the gift of 
God, and is not to be created by man. It is also needed 
grace. What would the ground do without showers ? You 
may break the clods, you may sow your seeds, but what can 
you do without the rain ? As absolutely needful is the divine 
blessing. In vain you labor, until God the plenteous shower 
bestows, and sends salvation down. Then, it is plenteous grace. 
** I will send them showers." It does not say, " I will send 
them drops," but " showers." So it is with grace. If God 
gives a blessing. He usually gives it in such a measure that 
there is not room enough to receive it. Plenteous grace ! 
Ah ! we want plenteous grace to keep us humble, to make us 
prayerful, to make us holy ; plenteous grace to make us zeal- 
ous, to preserve us through this life, and at last to land us in 
heaven. We cannot do without saturating showers of grace. 
Again, it i» seasonable grace, " I will cause the shower to come 
down in his season.'* What is thy season this morning ? Is it 
the season uf drought ? Then that is the season for showers. 
Is it a season of great heaviness and black clouds ? Then that 
is the season for showers. " As thy day, so shall thy strength 
be." And here is a varied blessing. " I will give thee showers 
of blessing." The word is in the plural. All kinds of blessings 
God will send. All God's blessings go together, like links in 
a golden chain. If lie gives converting grace. He will also 
give comforting grace. He will send *' showers of blessing." 
Look up to-day, parched plant, and open \\i3 \e^N^^ ^;x!A. 
Bowers for a heavenly watering. 



. 25. f 



56 PAiLY HEAZJiNGS, Feb- 

" The wrath to cdtjw*^ — Matthew iii. 7. 

t@^^T is pleasant to pass over a country afer a storm lias 
^^l^vi spoilt' itself; to smell the freshness of the herbs after 
W/^UA ^^^ jg^^jj jj^q passed iiwaj, and to note the drops while 
they glisten like purest diamonds in the sunlight. That is tbe 
position of a Christian, He is going through aland where 
the storm has spent itself upon Km Saviour^s bead, and if 
there be a few drops of sorrow falling, they distil from clouds 
of meri^t S'tid Jeaas cheers him by tbe assurance that they are 
not for his destruction. But how terrible is it to witness the 
approacb of a tempest ; to note the fore warnings of tbe storm ; 
to mark the birds of heaven as they droop their wings ; to see 
tbe cattle as they lay their heads low in terror ; to discern tbe 
face of the sky as it growetb black, and look to tbe sun wMcb 
shinetli not, and tbe heavens wbieb are angry and frowning ! 
How terrible to await tbe dread advance of a hurricane — jiuob 
as occurs, sometimes, in the tropics — to wait in terrible ap- 
prehension tiD the wind shall rush forth in fury, tearing up 
trees from their roots, forcing roeks from their pedestals, and 
burling down all the dwelling-places of man \ And yet, din- 
ner, this is your present position. No hot drops have aa yet 
fallen, but a shower of fire is coming. Ho terrible winds 
bowl around you, but Good's tempest is gathering its dread 
artillery* A a yet the water-floods are dammed up'by mercy, 
but the flood-gates shall soon be opened ; the thunderbolts 
of God are yet in His storehouse, but lo ! the tempest hastens, 
and how awfuL shall that moment be when God, robed in 
vengeance, shall march forth in fury ! Where, where, where, 
sinner, wilt thou hide thy head, or whither wilt thou flee ? 
that the hand of mercy may now lead you to Christ ! He 
is freely set before you in the gospel : His riven side is the 
rock of shelter. Thou knowest thy need of Him ; believe in 
Him, cast thyself upon Him, and then the fury shall be over- 
past forever. 




Feb. 26. DAILT BEADINOS. 57 

^'8(dvati(m is of the Lord:' — Jonah iL 9. 

SALVATION is the work of God. It is He alone who 
quickens the soul '* dead in trespasses and sins," and 
it is He also who maintains the soul in its spiritual 
life. He is both "Alpha and Omega." *' Salvation is of the 
Lord." If I am prayerfal, God makes me prayerful ; if I 
have graces, they are God's gift to me ; if I hold on in a con- 
sistent life, it is bci^ause He upholds me with His hand. I do 
nothing whatever towards my own preservation, except what 
God himself first does in me. Whatever I have, all my good- 
ness, is of the Lord alone. Wherein I sin, that is my own ; 
but wherein I act rightly, that is of God, wholly and com- 
pletely. If I have repulsed a spiritual enemy, the Lord's 
strength nerved my arm. Do I live before men a consecrated 
life ? It is not I, but Christ who liveth in me. Am I sanc- 
tified ? I did not cleanse myself: God's Holy Spirit sanctifies 
me. Am I weaned from the world ? I am weaned by OocPs 
chastisements sanctifi^ to my good. Do I grow in knowl- 
edge ? The great Instructor teaches me. All my jewels 
were fashioned by heavenly art. I find in God all that I 
want ; but Ijfind in myself nothing but sin and misery. "He 
only is my rock and my salvation." Do I feed on the Word ? 
That WorA would be no food for me unless the Lord made 
it food for my soul, and helped me to feed upon it. Do I 
live on the manna which comes down from heaven ? What 
is that manna but Jesus Christ himself incarnate, whose body 
and whose blood I eat and drink ? Am I continually re- 
ceiving fresh increase of strength ? Where do I gather my 
might ? My help cometh from heaven's hills : without Jesus 
I can do nothing. As a branch cannot bring forth fruit ex- 
cept it abide in the vine, no more can I, except I abide in 
Him. What Jonah learned in the great deep, let me learn 
this morning in my closet i " Salvation is of the Lord." 




58 BAILT SEADIKG8. If eh. 27. 

"Thou Tiast made the. Lord, which is my refuge, even the Most 
High, thy habitation" — Psalm xcL 9. 

^HE Israelites in the wilderness were continually ex' 
posed to change. Whenever the pillar stayed its 
motion, the tents were pitched ; but to-morrow, ere 
the morning sun had risen, the trumpet sounded, the ark 
was in motion, and the fiery, cloudy pillar was leading the 
way through the narrow defiles of the mountain, up the hill- 
side, or along the arid waste of the wilaerness. They had 
scarcely time to rest a little before they heard the sound of 
"Away! this is not your rest; you must still be onward 
journeying towards Canaan!" They were never long in 
one place. Even wells and palm trees could not detain 
them. Yet they had an abiding home in their God ; His 
cloudy pillar was their roof-tree, and its flame by night their 
household fire. They must go onward from place to place, 
continually changing, never having time to settle, and to 
say, " Now we are secure ; in this place we shall dwell." 
" Yet," says Moses, *^ though we are always changing, Lord, 
thou hast been our dwelling-place throughout all genera- 
tions." The Christian knows no change with regard to 
God. He may be rich to-day and poor to-morrow ; he may 
be sickly to-day and well to-morrow ; he may be in happi- 
ness to-day, to-morrow he may be distressed — but there is 
no change with regard to his relationship to God. If He 
loved me yesterday. He loves me to-day. My unmoving 
mansion of rest is my blessed Lord. Let prospects be 
blighted; let hopes be blasted; let joy be withered; let 
mildews destroy everything ; I have lost nothing of what I 
have in God. He is " my strong habitation whereunto I can 
continually resort." I am a pilgrim in the world, but at 
home in my God. In the earth I wander, but in God I 
dwell in a quiet habitation. 



Feb. 28. DAILY BEADIliQS. 59 

**My expectation is from Himy — Psalm hiL 5. 

IK^T is the believer's privilege to use this language. If 
1 ^ he is looking for aught from the world, it is a poor 
'* expectation " indeed. But if he looks to God for 
the supply of his wants, whether in temporal or spiritual 
blessings, his " expectation " will not be a vain one. Con- 
stantly he may draw from the bank of faith, and get his 
need supplied out of the riches of God's loving kindness. 
This I know, I had rather have God for my banker than all 
the Eothschilds. My Lord never fails to honor Ilis promises ; 
and when we bring them to His throne, He never sends 
them back unanswered. Therefore I will wait only at His 
door, for He ever opens it with the hand of munificent grace. 
At this hour I will try Him anew. But we have " expecta- 
tions " beyond this life. We shall die soon ; and then our 
" expectation is from^ Him." Do we not expect that when 
we lie upon the bed of sickness He will send angels to carry 
us to His bosom ? We believe that when the pulse is faint, 
and the heart heaves heavily, some angelic messenger shall 
stand' and look with loving eyes upon us, and whisper, " Sis- 
ter spirit, come away ! " As we approach the heavenly gate, 
we expect to hear the welcome invitation, " Come, ye blessed 
of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world." We are expecting harps of gold 
and crowns of glory ; we are hoping soon to be amongst the 
multitude of shining ones before the throne ; we are looking 
forward and longing for the time when we shall be like our 
glorious Lord — for "we shall see Him as He is." Then ff 
these be thine " expectations," my soul, live for God ; 
live with the desire and resolve to glorify Him from whom 
Cometh all thy supplies, and of whose grace in thy election, 
redemption, and calling, it is that thou hast any " expecta- 
tion " of coming glory. 




i>An/i B£uiJ>iarGi. Feb. 29. 



** With ^rin^ kindness hare I drmeth th^eJ' — Jen ^xil, 3. 

^p^HE thunders of tbe law and the terrors of judgment 
vlJt^l: are all used to bring ns to Ctiriat | but the final Tie- 
^^^**^^ tory is effected bj loving kindness. The prodigal set 
out to his father's house from a sense of Deed ; but his father 
sdw him a great way off, and ran to meet him ; so that the last 
gfcepe he took towards Mb father's hou^c were with the kiss still 
warm upon his cheek, and the welcome etill musical in his ears. 

*' Law ftad lerrors do but hardea 
All tbe while they ^ork alone; 
Btit a £en»e of blood^boi^gbt pardon 
Will dissolve n beart of Blaiie."' 

The Master came one night to the door* und knocked with 
the iron hand of the law; the door shook and trembled upon 
its hinges i but the man piled eYery piece of furnittire which 
he eould find against the door, for he said, ** I will not ad- 
mit the man." The Master turned away, but hy-and-hy He 
came hack, and with His own soft hand, using most that 
part"^ where the nail had penetrated, he knocked again — oh, 
so softly and tenderly. This time the door did not dhake, 
but, strange to say, it opened, and there upon his knees the 
once unwilling host was found rejoicing to receive his guest. , 
** Come in, come in ; thou hast so knocked that my bowels 
are moved for thee. I could not think of thy pierced hand 
leaving its blood-mark on my door, and of thy going away 
houseless, ' Thy head filled with dew, and thy locks with the 
drops of the night.* I yield, I yield. Thy love has won my 
heart." So in every case : loving kindness wins the day. 
What Moses with the tablets of stone could never do, Christ 
does with His pierced hand. Such is the doctrine of efFectual 
calling. Do I understand it experimentally ? Can I say, " He 
drew me, and I followed on, glad to confess the voice divine " ? 
If so, may He continue to draw me, till at last I shall sit 
down at the marriage supper of the Lamb. 




March 1. daily beabings. 61 

**Atoake, north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my gar- 
den, that the spices thereof may flow out" — Canticles iv. 16. 

fjNYTHING is better than the dead calm of indiffer- 
ence. Our souls may wisely desire the north wind 
of trouble if that alone can be sanctified to the draw- 
ing forth of the perfume of our graces. So long as it cannot 
be said, " The Lord was not in the wind," we will not shrink 
from the most wintry blast that ever blew upon plants of 
grace. Did not the spouse in this verse humbly submit her- 
self to the reproofs of her Beloved ; only entreating Him to 
send forth His grace in some form, and making no stipulation 
as to the peculiar manner in which it should come ? Did not 
she, like ourselves, become so utterly weary of deadness and 
unholy calm that she sighed for any visitation which would 
brace her to action ? Yet she desires the warm south wind 
of comfort, too, the smiles of divine love, the joy of the Re- 
deemer's presence ; these are often mightily effectual to arouse 
our sluggish life. She desires either one or the other, or 
both ; so that she may but. be able to delight her Beloved 
with the spices of her garden. She cannot endure to be un- 
profitable, nor can we. How cheering a thought that Jesus 
can find comfort in our poor feeble graces ! Can it be ? It 
seems far too good to be true. Well may we court trial, or 
even death itself, if we shall thereby be aided to make glad 
Immanuel's heart. that our heart were crushed to atoms, 
if only by such bruising our sweet Lord Jesus could be glori- 
fied ! Graces unexercised are as sweet perfumes slumbering 
in the cups of the flowers : the wisdom of the great Husband- 
man overrules diverse and opposite causes to produce the 
one desired result, and makes both affliction and consolation 
draw forth the grateful odors of faith, love, patience, hope, 
resignation, joy, and the other fair flowers of the garden. 
May we know by sweet experience what this means I 
6 




md damm to dm 
li MM ofarrMi 




re engaged IB. a ^i«as war vidk^he ', 

to aecH}a.a»iaIeBiswUiAkne been tfKMfi^ too 
fiv MTffKe vDEff 10 V lie OHflo jed. Culler, and axB, 
aadBitttid^yBATallbevBcfslmabipBgFhifislaes: roai^ 
tools mj deal kud lilovs> and kiffiag need not be diegiaiilf 
done, so loag «s it is dwie i fff ttMillj. EecbBOMCBtof tinB, 
m season <» out of season ; eaek fragnenl of abifily, edneated 
or mitalored; eaek opportoniiT, ^Torable or ui&TonUe, 
mnsl beased, for oar foes are manj and our force bol sknder. 
Most of owr tooU want skarpemmg ; we need qoidmeBS of 
perception, tact, energy, pronq»tness ; in a word, eoH^lete 
adaptation for the Lord^s work. Practical common sense it 
a very scarce thing among the conductors of Christian enter- 
pri$es« Wo might learn from our enemies if we wonld, and 
so mtiAv th^ PhilUtines sharpen our wtap'jns. This morning 
let Ui^ uottf enough to sharpen our zeal during this day by the 
aid of the Holy Spirit. See the energy of the Papists, how 
they compass sea and land to make one proselyte ! are they 
to monopolize all the earnestness ? Mark the heathen deyo- 
tees, what tortures they endure in the service of their idols ! 
are they alone to exhibit patience and self-sacrifice ? Ob- 
serve the prince of darkness, how persevering in his endeav- 
ors, how unabashed in his attempts, how daring in his plans, 
how thoughtfal in his plots, how energetic in all ! The devils 
arc united as one man in their infamous rebellion, while we 
believers in Jesus are divided in our service of God, and 
Bcarcely ever work with unanimity. that from Satan's 
infernal industry we may leam to go about like good Samari- 
tau»« socking whom wc may bless ! 




March 3» daily beadings. 63 

^^ I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction,^* — Is. xlviii. 10. 

|OMFORT thyself, tried believer, with this thought : 
God saith, " I have chosen thee in the fiirnace of 
affliction." Does not the word come like a soft 
shower, assuaging the fury of the flame ? Yea, is it not an 
asbestos armor, against which the heat hath no power ? Let 
affliction come — God has chosen me. Poverty, thou mayst 
stride in at my door, but God is in the house already, and 
He has chosen me. Sickness, thou mayst intrude, but I 
have a balsam ready — God has chosen me. Whatever be- 
falls me in this vale of tears, I know that He has " chosen " 
me. If, believer, thou requirest still greater comfort, re- 
member that you have the Son of Man with you in the furnace. 
In that silent chamber of yours, there sitteth by your side 
One whom thou hast not seen, but whom thou lovest ; and 
ofbtimes when thou knowest it not. He makes all thy bed in 
thy affliction, and smooths thy pillow for thee. Thou art in 
poverty ; but in that lonely house of thine the Lord of life 
and glory is a frequent visitor. He loves to come into these 
desolate places, that He may visit thee. Thy friend sticks 
closely to thee. Thou canst not see Him, but thou mayst 
feel the pressure of His hands. Dost thou not hear His 
voice ? Even in the valley of the shadow of death He says, 
" Fear not, I am with thee ; be not dismayed, for I am thy 
God." Remember that noble speech of Cassar : " Fear not, 
thou carriest Caesar and all his fortune." Fear not. Christian ; 
Jesus is with thee. In all thy fiery trials. His presence is 
both thy confort and safety. He will never leave one whom 
He has chosen for His own. " Fear not, for I am with thee," 
is His sure word of promise to His chosen ones in the " fur- 
nace of affliction." Wilt thou not, then, take fast hold' of 
Christ, and say, — 

** Through floods and flames, if Jesus lead, 
I'U follow where he goes ** ? 




^—^i 




wim 

» oh. That 
Gnfm gnee is mastrmted 
f of WEercTs. Sainta 
; d&ai ^ tliiiigi 
i tlui ««t ^ appateni eTila 
a real Vtmmog AiM oliiniilel^ ^irt]^^ — tkai tiieir Gt>d will 
ftlbef WQ^k A 4ettTeraiiee f(»r Ibeni ^peedHv, or mosl assor^ 
u4lj ii@pp<»it Ihnii in tie titnilile, as hm^ as He is pleased 
Uf kcf^p t^sem In it. Tlua patiemee ^ the saints proT€t the 
power of cU viae grace. Hkcre is a ligktli<iiiie out at sea : it 
ii a mlm mght — I c^imot teU whether the edifice is firm 5 
tbci iismpttitM must rage about it, and then I shall know 
whether it will stand. So with the Spirit's work : if it were 
not on many occasions snrronnded with tempestuous waters, 
wc should not know that it was true and strong ; if the winds 
did not blow upon it, we should not know how firm and se- 
cure it was. The master-works of God are those men who 
Miand in the midst of difficulties, steadfast, unmovable, — 

" Calm 'mid the bewildering cry, 
Confident of victory." 

lie who would glorify his God must set his account upon 

mooting with many trials. No man can be illustrious before 

tlio Tiord unloHH his conflicts be many. If, then, yours be a 

niiKih-triml path, rejoice in it, because you will the better show 

Toi'lh tlio all-Hufllci(5nt grace of God. As for His failing you, 

novor (Iroani of it — hate the thought. The God who has 

boon MuiHuiout until now shoula be trusted to the end. 




March 5. daily headings. 65 

" Let us not sleep, as do others,^ — 1 Thessalonians v. 6. 

iiRE are many ways of promoting Christian wake- 
fdness. Among the rest, let me strongly advise 
Christians to converse together concerning the ways 
of the Lord. Christian and Hopeful, as they journeyed to- 
wards the Celestial City, said to themselves, " To prevent 
drowsiness in this place, let us fall into good discourse.*' 
Christian inquired, " Brother, where shall we begin ? " And 
Hopeful answered, *' Where God began with us." Then 
Christian sang this song — 

" When saints do sleepy grow, let them come hither, 
And hear how these two pilgrims talk together ; 
Yea, let them learn of them, in any wise, 
Thus to keep ope their drowsy, slumbering eyes. 
Saints* fellowship, if it be managed well, 
Keeps them awake, and that in spite of hell.*' 

Christians who isolate themselves and walk alone, are very 
liable to grow drowsy. Hold Christian company, and you will 
be kept wakeful by it, and refreshed and encouraged to make 
quicker progress in the road to heaven. But as you thus 
take '* sweet counsel" with others in the ways of God, take 
care that the theme of your converse is your Lord Jesus. 
Let the eye of faith be constantly looking unto Him ; let your 
heart be full of Him; let your lips speak of His worth. 
Friend, live near to the cross, and thou wilt not sleep. La* 
hor to impress thyself with a deep sense of the value of the place 
to which thou art going. If thou rememberest that thou art go- 
ing to heaven, thou wilt not sleep on the road. If thou think- 
est that hell is behind thee, and the devil pursuing thee, thou 
wilt not loiter. Would the manslayer sleep with the avenger 
of blood behind him, and the city of refuge before him? 
Christian, wilt thou sleep whilst the pearly gates are open — 
the songs of angels waiting for thee to join them — a crown 
of gold ready for thy brow ? Ah ! no ; in holy fellowship 
continue to watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. 

6* 




ies it ^e Tccf 

I he t-rry ^tH£«al is 

I Af^m^^' for t&i9« 

Be aseved Alt 

^of AQsisbiia: mm! 
^ t«oogiiixed »s 

t added is it — t^ bein^ *^ bom 
ifiia '^ tj tbe power oi tfae Hotj- Sfinl- To be ^' bora agaao/' 
ii m iHitler m aifitmivp, Ibai kmnja words caamot descri]>e 
it. '^ Tk« w»d blow^tb viere h liite€k, azkd tkon b^arest 
tli« eamid thereof, but canst not leQ wlieiice it oometli, and 
wMtlier It goetli ; ao b ef«ij Atne tbat is boon ef the Spirit/^ 
Kerertlideit, il fa a diaiige nMdi is itiKHirtf tmdfdt ; known 
hj wvrlni of bolinesdt and f&it by a graeious expeneoee. Tiiii 
greai irfirk is miptm^ural. It is not an operation wbicli a 
man performs for Eimielf : a uaw principle is infeed, wMcb 
If orku in tbe heart, renews the soul, and affects the entire man. 
It JH not a change of my name, but a renewal of mj nature, 
BO that I am not the man I used to be, but a new man in Christ 
Jc'HUH. To wash and dress a corpse is a far different tibing 
from making it alive : man can do the one, God alone can do 
the other. If you have, then, been " born again," your ac- 
knowledgment will be, " Lord Jesus, the everlasting 
Kathor, Thou art my spiritual Parent ; unless Thy Spirit had 
brdathod into me the breath of a new, holy, and spiritual 
lii'iS 1 httd boon to this day 'dead in trespasses and sins.' 
My hcittvonly life is wholly derived from Thee, to Thee I as- 
oiUkj it. * My life is hid with Christ in Grod.' It is no longer. 
1 who livo, but Christ who liveth in me." May the Lord en- 
iihlo UH to bo well assured on this vital point, for to be un- 
ro^(u»orato is to bo unsaved, unpardoned, without God, and 
without hope. 




March 7, daily readings. 07 

" Save faith in God." — Mark xi. 22. 

ITH is the foot of the soul by which it can march 
along the road of the commandments. Love can 
make the feet move more swiftly ; but faith is the 
foot which carries the soul. Faith is the oil enabling the 
wheels of holy devotion and of earnest piety to move well ; 
and without faith the wheels are taken from the chariot, and 
we drag heavily. With faith I can do all things ; without 
faith I shall neither have the inclination nor the power to do 
anything in the service of God. If you would find the men 
who serve God the best, you must look for the men of the 
most faith. Little faith will save a man, but little faith can- 
not do great things for God. Poor little faith could not have 
fought " Apollyon ; " it needed " Christian " to do that. Poor 
little faith could not have slain ** Giant Despair ; ** it required 
" Great-heart's " arm to knock that monster down. Little 
faith will go to heaven most certainly, but it often has to 
hide itself in a nut-shell, and it frequently loses all but its 
jewels. Little faith says, " It is a rough road, beset with 
sharp thorns, and ftdl of dangers ; I am afraid to go ; but 
great faith remembers the promise, " Thy shoes shall be iron 
and brass ; as thy days, so shall thy strength be : " and so 
she boldly ventures. Little faith stands desponding, min- 
gling her tears with the flood ; but great faith sings, " When 
thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee ; and 
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee : " and she 
fords the stream at once. Would you be comfortable and 
happy ? Would you enjoy religion ? Would you have the 
religion of cheerfulness, and not that of gloom ? Then " have 
faith in God." If you love darkness, and are satisfied to 
dwell in gloom and misery, then be content with little faith ; 
but if you love the sunshine, and would sing songs of rejoic- 
ing, covet earnestly this best gift, " great faith." 



IUII.T 



:^^lgOB'S pMpie kvvie thor tii^. It vas nerer < 

bj 6i>d, vlieii He <fcoee His people, tbat thej skoali | 
be «Q tmtried pmoflh* Hie j wc7« dboseii m l&e fiiz^ j 
&a4^ of afllction ; tlier were ner^' eiioMii ta woddlr peace 
nnd 43aTt]ilj joj. Freedom &om skkneia and the pains of, j 
tnort^tf w^ nerer promised tiiejo ; but wbei» tbeir Loid ] 
drew op tbe charter of priTileges^ Me mcluded ch&stisementi 
ainongst tlie tbmgs to wMcb tliej sbo^d meiitably b€ beirs^ 
Triak are a part of our lot ; tbej irere predestinated for nA ] 
in God^i Bolemn decrees, and bequeathed us in Christ* s last 
legacy. So siirelj as the stars are fadiioned by Hii^ hands,^ 
find their orblia fixc^d by Hi.m, &o purely are our trials allotted 
to 11H * He has ordained their season and their pliice, their in- 
tenHity, and the eifect they shall have upon ns. Good men 
must never expeL^t to escape troubles ; if they do, they will be 
di«flp pointed, for none of their predecessors have been with- 
out them. Mark the patience of Job ; remember Abraham, for 
he had his trials, and by his faith under them, he became the 
** Father of the faithful." Note well the biographies of all 
the patriarchs, prophets, apostles, and martyrs, and you shall 
discover none of those whom God made vessels of mercy, who 
wore not made to pass through the fire of affliction. It is 
ordained of old, that the cross of trouble should be engraven 
on every vessel of mercy, as the royal mark whereby the 
King's vessels of honor are distinguished. But although 
tribulation is thus the path of God's children, they have the 
comfort of knowing that their Master has traversed it before . 
thorn ; they have His presence and sympathy to cheer them. 
His grace to support them, and His example to teach them 
how to endure ; and when they reach "the kingdom," it will 
more than make amends for the "much tribulation" through 
which thoy passed to enter it. 




March 9. daily BEADmos. ^ 69 

" Yea, He is altogether lovely*^ — Solomon's Song v. 16. 

superlative beauty of Jesus is all-attracting ; it is 
not so much to be admired as to be loved. He is 
more than pleasant and fair, He is loyely. Surely 
the people of God can folly justify the use of this golden word, 
for He is the object of their warmest love, a love founded on 
the intrinsic excellence of His person, the complete perfection 
of His charms. Look, disciples of Jesus, to your Master's 
lips, and say, are they not most sweet ? Do not His words 
cause your hearts to burn within you as He talks with you by 
the way ? Ye worshippers of Immanuel, look up to His head 
of much fine gold, and tell me, are not His thoughts precious 
unto you ? Is not your adoration sweetened with affection as 
ye humbly bow before that countenance which is as Leb- 
anon, excellent as the cedars ? Is there not a charm in His 
every feature, and is not His whole person fragrant with such 
a savor of His good .ointments, that therefore the virgins love 
Him ? Is there one member of His glorious body which is 
not attractive ? — one portion of His person which is not, a 
fresh loadstone to our souls ? — one office which is not a strong 
cord to bind your heart ? Our love is not as a seal set upon 
His heart of love alone ; it is fastened upon His arm of power 
also ; nor is there a single' part of Him upon which it does not 
fix itself. We anoint His whole person with the sweet spike- 
nard of our fervent love. His whole life we would imitate ; 
His whole character we would transcribe. In all other beings 
we see some lack, in Him there is all perfection. The best 
even of His favored saints have had blots upon their garments 
and wrinkles upon their brows ; He is nothing but loveliness. 
All earthly suns have their spots ; the fair world itself hath 
its wilderness ; we cannot love the whole of the most lovely 
t^ing ; but Christ Jesus is gold without alloy — light without 
darkness — glory without cloud — " Yea, He is altogether 
lovely." 



70 _ DAILT Bl^AStNGS. 



" In m^ pTOSp^ihj I said^ I nhall ne^er he movedJ* 





|OAB is gettJed on his leea, Le hath not been emptii 
from Tessel to ve&sel. Give a man wealth ; let 
ships bring home contmnally rich freights ; let thi 
winds and waves appear to be his eervanta to bear his vessei 
across the bosom of the mighty deep y let Ms lands ywh 
abundantly i let the weather be propitious to Lis crops ; 
uninterrupted success attend Mm j let him stxind among mei 
as a guccesfi$ful merchant ^ let him enjoy continued health 
allow him with braced nerTe aud brilliant eye to march through 
the world and li?e happOy ; give Mm the buoyant epLrit ; let 
Mm Lave the eong perpetually on his lips ; let his eye be eve»' 
sparkling with joy — and the natural consef][uence of such an 
easy state to any man, let him be the best Christian who ever.' 
breathed J will be presumfdion ; even David said, **I ahaA 
never be moved ; " and we are not better than David, nor 
half m good. Brother, beware of the smooth places of the 
w^y, if you are treading them ; or if the way bo rough, tbank 
God for it. If Orod should always rock us in the cradle of 
prosperity ; if we were always dandled on the knees of for- 
tune ; if we had not some stain on the alabaster pillar ; if 
there were not a few clouds in the sky ; if we had not some 
bitter drops in the wine of this life, we should become intox- 
icated with pleasure; we should dream "we stand;" and 
stand we should, but it would be upon a pinnacle ; like the 
man asleep upon the mast, each moment we should be in 
jeopardy. We bless God, then, for our^afflictions ; we thank 
Him for our changes ; we extol His name for losses of prop- 
erty; for we feel that had He not chastened us thus, we 
might have become too secure. Continued worldly pros- 
perity is a fiery trial. 

** Afflictions, though they seem severe, 
In mercy oft are sent." 



I 



March 11. daily beadixgs. 71 

*^ Sin . . . exceeding sinful/' — Romans vii. 13. 

^EWARE of light thoughts of ^in. At the time of 
conversion, the conscience is so tender that we are 
afiraid of the slightest sin. Young converts have a 
holy timidity, a godly fear, lest they should offend against God. 
But alas ! very soon the fine hloom upon these first ripe fruits 
is removed by the rough handling of the surrounding world ; 
the sensitive plant of young piety turns into a willow in after 
life, too pliant, too easily yielding. It is sadly true, that even 
a Christian may grow by degrees so callous, that the sin which 
once startled him, does not alarm him in the least. By de- 
grees men get familiar with sin. The ear in which the can- 
non has been booming, will not notice slight sounds. At first 

na little sin startles us ; but soon we say, "Is it not a little 
one ? " Then there comes another, larger, and then another, 

. until by degrees we begin to regard sin as but a little ill ; 
and then follows an unholy presumption : " We have not falleii 
into open sin. True, we tripped a little, but we stood upright 
in the main. We may have uttered one unholy word, but as 
for the most of our conversation, it has been consistent.'' So 
we palliate sin ; we throw a cloak over it ; we call it by dainty 
names. -Christian, beware how thou thinkest lightly of sin. 
Take heed lest thou fall by little and little. Sin, a little thing ? 
Is it not a poison ? Who knows its deadliness ? Sin, a little 
thing ? Do not the little foxes spoil the grapes ? Doth not 
the tiny coral insect build a rock which wrecks a navy ? Do 
not little strokes fell lofty oaks ? Will not continual drop- 
pings wear away stones ? Sin, a little thing ? It girded the 
Redeemer's head with thorns, and pierced His heart ! It 
made Mim suffer anguish, bitterness, and woe. Could you 
weigh the least sin in the scales of eternity, you would fly 
from it as from a serpent, and abhor the least appearance of 
evil. Look upon all sin as that which crucified the Saviour,! 
and you will see it to be " exceeding sinful." * 



72 PMI.T K£A0i3rQs. Mareb 12. 

** TfuM ihali lote ihj nei^Mor,*" — Mattliev r, 43w 

^V f *XiVE thy oeigliboT. Perhaps lie ralk in riches, ftud] 
r/1 ■'% i^tt (t^ poor, and OviDg in tbj tittle eot side by sidtf j 
^'**^*^ with his lordly tnaneioa; tboa eeegt every dzj bii] 
fiiiutiiit, hlw flue liDcn^ and hia numptnoas banquets ; God batfl 
givt^ii bliu UioHe gifts ; C0T€t not his wealth, and think n^ J 
hard though tn eonceming him. Be content with thine oimj 
hit, if th<m unn^t not better it ; bnl do not look upon thj 
iwlilhlHiT, and witah that he were ae tbjself. Love him, and | 
then thou wiJt not envy hini. Mayhap, on the other baiidf 
thou art rlcb, and near thee reside the poor. Do not scorn 
to ertll them nnighbore. Own that thou art bound to love 
thenu The world caM& them th^ inferiors. In what are they 
inf4!rior? They are far more thine et^^uals than tbine iuferii^^l 
or«, for " (Jod hath made of one blood all people that dwcU 
upon the face of the earth." It is thy eoat which is better 
tbart their», bat thou art by uo means better than they. 
Th'v fire itifTi, am] vfhtit firt thou moro tlir-rf tliat r Take 
hood that thou love thy neighbor even though he be in rags; 
or iitunken in the depths of poverty. But, perhaps, yon say, 
** I cannot love my neighbons, because for all I do they re- 
turn ingratitude and contempt." So much the more room 
for the heroism of love. Wouldst thou be a feather-bed 
warrior, instead of bearing the rough fight of love ? He% 
who dares the most, shall ^in the most ; and if rough be thy 
path of love, tread it boldly, still loving thy neighbors 
through thick and thin. Heap coals of fire on their heads ; 
and if they be hard to please, seek not to please them^ 
but to please thy Master ; and remember, if they spurn thy 
love, thy Master hath not spurned it, and thy deed is as ac- 
ceptable to Him as if it had been acceptable to them. Love 
thy neighbor, for in so doing thou art following in the foot* 
stops of Christ. 




March 13. daily readings. . 73 

" Why sit we here urUil we dief " — 2 Kings viL 3. 

J\EAR reader, this little hook was mainly intended for 
the edification of helievers ; but if you are yet unsaved, 
our heart yewnas over you ; and we would fain say a 
word which may be blessed to you. Open your Bible, and 
read the story of the lepers, and mark their position, which 
was much the same as yours. If you remain where you are 
you must perish ; if you go to Jesus you can but die. " Noth- 
ing venture, nothing win," is the old proverb, and in your 
case the venture is no great one. If you sit still in sullen 
despair, no one can pity you when your ruin comes ; but if 
you die with mercy sought, if such a thing were possible, you 
would be the object of universal sympathy. None escape 
who refdse to look to Jesus ; but you know that, at any rate, 
some are saved who believe in Him, for certain of your own 
Acquaintances have received mercy : then why not you ? The 
Ninevites said, " Who can tell ? " Act upon the same hope, 
and try the Lord's mercy. To perish is so awful, that if 
ikere were but a straw to catch at, the instinct of self-preser- 
vation should lead you to stretch out your hand. We have 
thus been talking to you on your own unbelieving ground ; we 
would now assure you, as from the Lord, that if you seek Him 
He will be found of you. Jesus casts out none who come unto 
Him. You shall not perish if you trust Him ; on the con- 
trary, you shall find treasure far richer than the poor lepers 
gathered in Syria's deserted camp. May the Holy Spirit 
embolden you to go at once, and you shall not believe in vain. 
. When you are saved yourself, publish the good news to others. 
Hold not your peace ; tell the king's household first, and unite 
with them in fellowship ; let the porter of the city, the minis- 
ter, be informed of your discovery, and then proclaim the 
good news in every place. The Lord save thee ere the sun 
goes down this day. 
7 




74 DAILY BEADiNGS. March 14. 

" Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest hefcXU* 
1 Corinthians x. 12. 

M^ is a curious fact, that there is such a thing as be- 
vi^ ing proud of grace. A man says, "I have great 
faith ; I shall not fall ; poor little faith may, but I 
never shall." *' I have fervent love," says another ; " I can 
stand ; there is no danger of my going astray." He who 
boasts of grace has little grace to boast of. Some who do 
this imagine that their graces can keep them, knowing not 
that the stream must flow constantly from the fountain head, 
or else the brook will soon be dry. K a continuous stream 
of oil comes not to the lamp, though it burn brightly to-day, 
it will smoke to-morrow, and noxious will be its scent. Take 
heed that thou gloriest not in thy graces, but let all thy 
glorying and confidence be in Christ and His strength, for 
only so canst thou be kept from falling. Be much more in 
prayer. Spend longer time in holy adoration. Read the 
Scriptures more earnestly and constantly. Watch your lives 
more carefully. Live nearer to Grod. Take the best exam- 
ples for your pattern. Let your conversation be redolent of 
heaven. Let your hearts be perfumed with affection for 
men's souls. So live that men may take knowledge of you 
that you have been with Jesus, and have learned of Him ; 
and when that happy day shall come, when He whom you love 
shall say, " Come up higher," may it be your happiness to hear 
Him say, " Thou hast fought a good fight, thou hast finished 
thy course, and henceforth there is laid up for thee a crown 
of righteousness which fadeth not away." On, Christian, with 
care and caution ! On, with holy fear and trembling ! On, 
with faith and confidence in Jesus alone, and let your con- 
stant petition be, " Uphold me according to Thy word." He is 
able, and He alone, " to keep you from falling, and to present 
you faultless before the presence of His glory with exceed- 
ing joy." 




March 15. daily headings. 75 

" Be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus" — 2 Tim. ii. 1. 

3T has grace without measure in Himself, but He 
hath not retained it for Himself. As the reservoir 
empties itself into the pipes, so hath Christ emptied 
out His grace for His people. " Of His fulness have all we 
received, and grace for grace." He seems only to have, in 
order to dispense to us. He stands like the fountain, always 
flowing, but only running in order to supply the empty pitch- 
ers and the thirsty lips which draw nigh unto it. Like a 
tree. He bears sweet fruit, not to hang on boughs, but to be 
gathered by those who need. Grace, whether its work be to 
pardon, to cleanse, to preserve, to strengthen, to enlighten, 
to quicken, or to restore, is ever to be had from Him freely 
and without price ; nor is there one form of the work of 
grace which He has not bestowed upon His people. As the 
blood of the body, though flowing from the heart, belongs 
equally to every member, so the influences of grace are the 
inheritance of every saint united to the Lamb ; and herein 
there is a sweet communion between Christ and His Church, 
inasmuch as they both receive the same grace. Christ is the 
head upon which the oil is first poured ; but the same oil 
runs to the very skirts of the garments, so that the meanest 
saint has an unction of the same costly moisture as that which 
fell upon the head. This is true communion when the sap 
of grace flows from the stem to the branch, and when it is 
perceived that the stem itself is sustained by the very nour- 
ishment which feeds the branch. As we day by day receive 
grace from Jesus, and more constantly recognize it as coming 
from Him, we shall behold Him in communion with us, and en- 
joy the felicity of communion with Him. Let us make daily 
use of our riches, and ever 'repair to Him as our own Lord 
in covenant, taking from Him the supply of all We need with 
as much boldness as men take money from their own purse. 



7d DAJXT BJEABESTGS* BfaTCh 16. 



**/«im a BtrcLngtr with theeJ* — Fsalm xxxix. 12. 



M 



sES, O Lord, with Thee, but not to Thee, AD mj m 
ural alietiation from Thee, Thj grace baa effectnallj 

■*^ removed ; and now, in fellowship with Thjself, 1 
walk through this sin^l world as a pilgrim in a for- 
«ign country. Thou art a stranger in Thine own world* 
Man forgets Thee, dishonors Thee, sets up new laws and 
alien customs, and knowa Thee not. When Thj dear Sou 
came unto His own. His own received Him not. He was in 
the world, and the world was made by Him, and the world 
knew Him not* Never was foreigner so speckled a bird 
among the denizens of any land, as Thy beloved Bon among 
Hii mother^s brethren. It is no marvel, then, if I, who live 
the life of Jesus, should be utJcuowu and a stranger here be^ 
low- Lord, I would not be a citizen where Jesus was an 
alien. Hii pierced hand has loosened the cords which once 
bound my soul to earth, and now I find myself a stranger in 
the land. My speech seems to these Babylonians among 
whom I dwell, an outlandish tongue ; my manners are singu- 
lar, and my actions are strange. A Tartar would be more 
at home in Gheapsido than I could ever be in the haunts of 
sinners. But here is the sweetness of my lot; I am a 
stranger tmth Thee, Thou art my fellow -sufiferer, my fcllow- 
Jjilgrim. Oh ! what joy to wander in sueb blessed society ! 
My heart burns within me by the way when thou dost speak 
to me, and though I be a sojourner, I am far more blessed 
than those who sit on thrones, and far more at home than 
those who dwell in their ceiled houses. 

" To me remains nor place, nor time : 
My country is in every clime ; 
I caa be calm and free from care 
On any shore, since God is there. 

While place we seek, or place we shun, 
The soul finds happiness in none : 
But with a God to guide our way, 
'Tis equal joy to go or stay.** 




March 17. daily headings, 77 

**Bemember the poor" — Galatians iL 10. 

^HY does God allow so many of His children to be 
poor ? He could make them all rich if he pleased ; 
He could lay bags of gold at their doors ; He could 
send them a large annual income ; or He could scatter round 
their houses abundance of provisions, as once He made the 
quails lie in, heaps round the camp of Israel, and rained bread 
out of heaven to feed them. There i& no necessity that they 
should be poor, except that He sees it to be best. " The 
cattle upon a thousand hills are His " — He could supply 
them; He could make the richest, the greatest, and the 
mightiest bring all their power and riches to the feet of His 
children, for the hearts of all men are in His control. But 
He does not choose to do so ; He allows them to suffer want, 
He allows them to pine in penury and obscurity. Why is this ? 
There are many reasons : one ia», to give us, who are favored 
with enough, an opportunity of showing our love to Jesus. We 
show our love to Christ when we sing of Him, and when we 
pray to Him ; but if there w«re no sons of need in the world, 
we should lose the sweet privilege of evidencing our love, by 
ministering, in alms-giving, to His poorer brethren ; He has 
ordained that thus we should prove that our love standeth not 
in word only, but in deed and in truth. If we truly love 
Christ, we shall care for those who are loved by Him. Those 
who are dear to Him will be dear to us. Let us then look 
upon it not as a duty, but as a privilege, to relieve the poor of 
the Lord's flock — remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, 
" Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these 
My brethren, ye have done it unto Me." Surely this assur- 
ance is sweet enough, and this motive strong enough, to lead 
us to help others with a willing hand and a loving heart — 
recollecting that all we do for His people is graciously 
accepted by Christ as done to Himsel£i 
7* 



fft HATLT mE4J)nrG». 





**T€ are ail the cMMtm of <?o«l b^faiih in €krut /««»-'• 
GaL iii 26. 

^HE faiherhood of God is comm<m to aU Mm childrm^ 
Ah 1 Little-fmth, jom have ohen laid, '* O thai I 
had the courage of Great-heart, th&t I could widd 
His Bword and be as Talmnt as He ! But, alas, I stumble at 
every Mtraw, and a ehadow makes me afraid/^ List thee« 
Little-faith. Groat-heart ia God^s child, and you are God's 
child too ; and Great-heart is not ono whifc more God*3 child 
than yon are. Peter and Paul, the highlj-favored apostles, 
were of the family of the Most High ; and so are you also | 
the w«ak Ohristian is m muah a child of God as the idroog 
one, 

** TMi coveDAQt ttandfi fl^ome, 
Though cirthL's old pillars bow; 
Tbe itroBg} ilie feeble, and the weak, 
Are one in Jesca now." 

All the names are in the same family register. One may 
have more grace than another, but God, onr heaTeBly Fa- 
ther* has the same tender heart towards alL One may do 
more mighty works, and may bring more glory to his Father, 
but he whose name is the least in the kingdom of heaven is 
as much the child of God as he who stands among the king's 
mighty men. Let this cheer and comfort us, when we draw 
near to God and say, " Our Father." 

Yet, while we are comforted by knowing this, let ns not 
rest contented with weak faith, but ask, like the Apostles, to 
have it increased. However feeble our faith may be, if it be 
real faith in Christ, we shall reach heaven at last, but we 
shall not honor our Master much on our pilgrimage, neither 
shall wo abound in joy and peace. If, then, you would live 
to Christ*s glory, and be happy in His service, seek to be 
filled with the spirit of adoption more and more completely, 
till perfect love shall cast out fear. 



I 




March 1.9^ daily beadh^os. 79 

" Strong in faith,^^ — Bomans iv. 20. 

IISTIAN, take good care of thy faith ; for recollect 
• faUh is the only way whereby thou canst obtain bless- 
ings. If we want blessings from God, nothing ^an 
fetch them down but faith. Prayer cannot draw down an- 
swers from God's throne except it be the earnest prayer of 
the man who believes. Faith is the angelic messenger be- 
tween the soul and the Lord Jesus in glory. Let that angel 
he withdrawn, we can neither send up prayer, nor receive the 
answers. Faith is the telegraphic wire which links earth 
and heaven — on which God's messages of love fly so fast, 
that before we call He answers, and while we are yet speak- 
ing He hears us. But if that telegraphic wire of faith be 
snapped, how can we receive the promise ? Am I in trouble ? 

— I can obtain help for trouble by faith. Am I beaten about 
by the enemy ? — my soul on her dear Keftige leans by faith. 
But take faith away — in vain I call to God. There is no 
road betwixt my soul and heaven. In the deepest winter- 
time faith is a road on which the horses of prayer may travel 

— ay, and all the better for the biting frost ; but blockade 
the road, and how can we communicate with the Great King ? 
Faith links me with divinity. Faith clothes me with the 
power of God. Faith engages on my side the omnipotence 
of Jehovah. Faith insures every attribute of God in my 
defence. It helps me defy the hosts of hell. It makes me 
march triumphant over the necks of my enemies. But with- 
out faith how can I receive anything of the Lord ? Let not 
him that wavereth — who is like a wave of the sea— r expect 
that he will receive anything of God ! 0, then, Christian, 
watch well thy faith ; for with it thou canst win all things, 
however poor thou art, but without it thou canst obtain 
nothing. " If thou canst believe, all things are possible to 
him that believeth." 



80 DAILY BKADIXGB, 




** Mf/ beloved" — ^Caaticles ii. 8. 




13 waa a golden name wMcL the ancient Church in 
her most joyous moments was wont to give to the 
Anointed of the Lord, When the time of the sing- 
ing of birds was como^ and the voice of the turtle was beard 
in her land, her love -note waa sweeter than either, as she 
BUtjg, ''3[y htlomd is mine^ and I am His : He feedeth among 
the liUes/' Ever in her song of songs doth ishe eall Him b^ 
that delightful name, "My beloved T' Even in the long 
winter, when idolatry had withered the garden of the Lord, 
her prophets found space to lay aside the burden of the Lord 
for a little season, and to say, as Esaias did, "Now will I 
sing to my well-beloved a song of mj beloved touching His 
vineyard/' Though the saints had never seen His face, 
though as yet Ho was not made flesh, nor had dwelt among 
us I uor had man beheld His glory, yet He was the consola- 
tion of Israel, the hope and joy of all the chosen, the "be- 
loved " of all those who were upright before the Most High* 
We, in the summer days of the Church, arc also wont to 
speak of Christ as the best beloved of our soul, and to feel 
that He is very precious, the *' chiefest among ten thousand, 
and the altogether lovely." So true is it that the Chureh 
loves Jesus, and claims Him as her beloved, that the apostle 
dares to defy the whole universe to separate her from the 
love of Christ, and declares that neither persecutions, dis- 
tress, affliction, peril, or the sword have been able to do it; 
nay, he joyously boasts, " In all these things we are more 
than conquerors through Him that loved us." 

O that we knew more of Thee, Thou ever precious One ! 

" My sole possession is Thy love ; 
In earth beneath, or heaven above, 

I have no other store ; 
And though with fervent suit I pray. 
And importune Thee day by day, 

I ask Thee nothing more." 




March 21. daily £eadings> 81 

<' Te shaU he scattered, every man to his oum, and shaU leave me 
alone" — John xvi. 32. 

iiW had fellowship with the sorrows of Gethsemane. 
The majority of the disciples were not sufficiently ad- 
vanced in grace to be admitted to behold the mysteries 
of " the agony." Occupied with the passover feast at their 
own houses, they represent the many who live upon the letter, 
but are mere babes as to the spirit of the gospel. To twelve, 
nay, to eleven only, was the privilege given to enter Gethsem- 
ane and see " this great sight." Out of the eleven, eight were 
left at a distance ; they had fellowship, but not of that intimate 
sort to which men greatly beloved are admitted. Only three 
highly favored ones could approach the veil of our Lord's mys- 
terious sorrow ; within that veil even these must not intrude ; 
a stone's-cast distance must be left between. He must tread 
the wine-press alone, and of the people there must be none 
with Him. Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, represent the 
few eminent, experienced saints, who may be written down as 
" Fathers ; " these having done business on great waters, can 
in some de^ee measure the huge Atlantic waves of their Re- 
deemer's passion. To some selected spirits it is given, for the 
good of others, and to strengthen them for future, special, and 
tremendous conflict, to enter the inner circle and hear the 
pleadings of the suffering High Priest ; they have fellowship 
with Him in His sufferings, and are made conformable unto 
His death. Yet even these cannot penetrate the secret places 
of the Saviour's woe. " Thine unknown sufferings," is the 
riBmarkable expression of the Greek liturgy : there was an 
inner chamber in our Master's grief, shut out from human 
knowledge and fellowship. There Jesus is '* left alone,^* 
Here Jesus was more than ever an " unspeakable gift." Is 
not Watts right when he sings — 

" And all the unknown joys he gives 
Wsre bought with agonies unknown " ? 



82 BArtiT ^£Ai>n?as« 





"And He went a little farther^ and fell an Jli^face, and jyrayedf 
Matthew xxvL 39. 

f&^HERE are several instructive feature b in our Savionr'a 
prayer in His horn- of trial. It was lond^ prayer. He 
witlidrew evaxi from Hia three favored disciples* Be* 
Hever, be mneli in solitary prayer, especially in times of trial. 
Family prayer, social prayer, prayer in the Church, will not 
suffice ; these are very precious, but the best beaten spice 
wiU smoke in your censer in your private devotions, where 
no ear hears but God*s. 

It was huinhle prayer, Li^e says He knelt ; but another 
evangelist says He " feD on His face." Where, then, must be 
THT place, thou humble servant of the great Master ^ What 
dust an d ashes shoul d CO ver #^y h ead I Hum! h ty gi ve s u B go o d 
foot-hold in prayer. There is no hope of prevalence with God 
unless we abase ourselves that He may exalt us in due time. 

It was filial prayer, " Abba, FaCher,*' You will find it a 
stronghold in the day of trial to plead your adoption. You 
have no rights as a subject, you have forfeited them by your 
treason ; but nothing can forfeit a child's right to a father's 
protection. Be not afraid to say, " My Father, hear my cry." 

Observe that it was persevering prayer. He prayed three 
times. Cease not until you prevail. Be as the importunate 
widow, whose continual coming earned what her first sup- 
plication could not win. Continue in prayer, and watch in 
the same with thanksgiving. 

Lastly, it was the prayer of resignation. ' ' Nevertheless, not 
as I will, but as thou wilt." Yield, and God yields. Let it 
be as God wills, and God will determine for the best. Be 
thou content to leave thy prayer in His hands, who knows 
when to give, and how to give, and what to give, and what 
to withhold. So pleading, earnestly, importunately, yet with 
humility and resignation, thou shalt surely prevail. 




March 28» daily beadlntos. 83 

**Ms moecU was (is U were great drops of blood falling down 
to the ground.*' — Luke xxii. 44. 

^HB mental pressure arising from our Lord's struggle 
with temptation, so forced His frame to an unnatural 
excitement, that His pores sent forth great drops of 
blood which fell down to the ground. This proves how tre- 
mendous must have been the weight of sin when it was able to 
crush the Saviour so that He distilled great drops of blood ! 
This demonstrates the mighty power of His love. It is a very 
pretty observation of old Isaac Ambrose that the gum which 
exudes &om the tree without cutting is always the best. This 
precious camphor-tree yielded most sweet spices when it was 
wounded under the knotty whips, and when it was pierced by 
the nails on the cross ; but see, it giveth forth its best spice 
when there is no whip, no nail, no wound. This sets forth 
the voluntariness of Christ's suffering s, since without a lance 
the blood flowed freely. No need to put on the leech, or ap- 
ply the knife ; it flows spontaneously. No need for the rulers 
to cry, " Spring up, well ; " of itself it flows in crimson 
torrents. If men suffer great pain of mind apparently the 
blood rushes to the heart. The cheeks are pale ; a fainting 
fit comes on ; the blood has gone inward, as if to nourish the 
inner man while passing through its trial. But see our Sa- 
viour in His agony ; He is so utterly oblivious of self, that 
instead of His agony driving His blood to the heart to nourish 
Himself, it drives it outward to bedew the earth. The agony 
of Christ, inasmuch as it pours Him out upon the ground, 
pictures the fulness of the offering which He made for men. 
Do we not perceive how intense must have been the wres- 
tling through which He passed, and will we not hear its voice 
iousf "Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, striving against 
sin." Behold the great Apostle and High Priest of our pro- 
fession, and sweat even to blood rather than yield to the 
great tempter of your souls. 




84 DALLY BEADiNOS. Maroh 24. 

" Ee was heard in thai he feared.^* — Hebrews v. 7. 

PD this fear arise from the infernal suggestion thai He 
wa^ utterly forsaken f There may be sterner trials 
than this, but surely it is one of the worst to be utterly 
forsaken. " See," said Satan, " thou hast a friend nowhere ! 
Thy Father hath shut up the bowels of His compassion against 
thee. Not an angel in His courts will stretch out his hand to 
help Thee. All heaven is alienated from Thee. Thou art left 
alone. See the companions with whom Thou hast taken sweet 
counsel ; what are they worth ? Son of Mary, see there Thy 
brother James, see there Thy loved disciple John, and Thy 
bold apostle Peter : how the cowards sleep when Thou art in 
Thy sufferings ! Lo ! Thou hast no friend left in heaven or 
earth. All hell is against Thee. I have stirred up mine in- 
fernal den. I have sent my missives throughout all regions, 
summoning every prince of darkness to set upon Thee this 
night, and we will spare no arrows, we will use all our infernal^ 
might to overwhelm Thee ; and what wilt Thou do, Thou sol- 
itary one ? " It may be, this was the temptation ; we think it 
was, because the appearance of an angel unto Him, strength- 
ening Him, removed that fear. He was heard in that He 
feared ; He was no more alone, but heaven was with Him. 
It may be that this is the reason of His coming three times 
to His disciples — as Hart puts it — 

** Backwards and forwards thrice lie ran, 
As if He sought some help from man." 

He would see for Himself whether it were really true that all 
men had forsaken Him ; He found them all asleep ; but per- 
haps He gained some faint comfort from the thought that 
they were sleeping, not from treachery, but from sorrow; 
the spirit indeed was willing, but the flesh was weak. At any 
rate He was heard in that lie feared. Jesus was heard in 
His deepest woe ; my soul, thou shalt be heard also. 




March 25. daily jleadikos. 85 

^^ Betray est ikou the Son of Man with a kiss 9** — Luke xxii. 48. 

j^^HE kisses of an enemy are deceitful. Let me be on 
my guard when the world puts on a loving face, for 
it will, if possible, betray me, as it did my Master, 
with a kiss. Whenever a man is about to stab religion, he 
usually professes very great reverence for it. Let me be- 
ware of the sleek-faced hypocrisy which is armor-bearer to 
heresy and infidelity. Knowing the deceivableness of un- 
righteousness, let me be wise as a serpent to detect . and 
avoid the designs of the enemy. The young man, void of 
xmderstanding, was led astray by the kiss of the strange 
woman: may my soul be so graciously instructed all this 
day, that " the much fair speech" of the world may have no 
eflfect upon me ! Holy Spirit, let me not, a poor frail son 
of man, be betrayed with a kiss ! 

But what if I should be guilty of the same accursed sin as 
Judas, that son of perdition ? I have been baptized into 
the name of the Lord Jesus ; I am a member of His visible 
Church ; I sit at the communion table : all these are so many 
kisses of my lips. Am I sincere in them ? If not, I am a 
base traitor. Do I live in the world as carelessly as others 
do, and yet make a profession of being a follower of Jesus ? 
Then I must expose religion to ridicule, and lead men to 
speak evil of the holy name by which I am called. Surely 
if I act thus inconsistently, I am a Judas, and it were better 
for me that I had never been born. Dare I hope that I am 
clear in this matter ? Then, Lord, keep me so. Lord, 
make me sincere and true. Preserve me from every false 
way. Never let me betray my Saviour. I do love Thee^ 
Jesus, and though I often grieve Thee, yet I would desire 
to abide faithful even unto death. God, forbid that I 
should be a high-soaring professor, and then fall at last into 
the lake of fire, because I betrayed my Master with a kiss. 
8 





86 BJUXT ]lEADI5fG&. MflTch 26, 

"Jesus saidfirdo ili^m. If ye seekMi&f let these go their wa^/*^ 
John xYxiL 8. 

LRK, ray eoul, the care wliich Jesus manifested^ eTCB ^ 
ia His hour of trial, towards the sheep of His hand ! < 
Tlie ruling passion is strong in death. He resigns j 
Himself to the eoemy, but He interposes a word of power to 
set His disciples free. Ab to Hlniself* like a sbeep before 
her Bhearers, He is dumb, and openeth not His mouth » but 
for pis disciples' sake He speaks with Almighty energy. 
Herein is loyCj constant, self-forgetting, faithful love. Bui is 
there not far more here than is to be found upon the surface ? 
Have we not the very soul and spirit of the atonement in 
these words ? The Good Shepherd lays down His life for 
the sheep, and pleads that they must therefore go free. The 
Surety is bomid, and justice demands that those for whom 
He stands a substitute should go their way. In the midst 
of Egypt's bondage, that voice rings as a word of power, 
"Zfei these go their way.^' Oat of the slavery of sin and 
Satan the redeemed must come* In every cell of the dun- 
geons of Despair J the sound is echoed, "ie^ these go th^t 
way" and forth come Despondency and Much-afraid. Satan 
hears the well-known voice, and lifts his foot from the neck 
of the fallen ; and Death hears it, and the grave opens her 
gates to let the dead arise. Their way is one of progress, 
holiness, triumph, glory, and none shall dare to stay them 
in it. No lion shall be on their way, neither shall any 
ravenous beast go up thereon. "The hind of the morning" 
has drawn the cruel hunters upon himself, and now the most 
timid roes and hinds of the field may graze at perfect peace 
among the lilies of his loves. The thunder-cloud has burst 
over the Cross of Calvary, and the pilgrims of Zion shall 
never be smitten by the bolts of vengeance. Come, my 
heart, rejoice in the immunity which thy Redeemer has se- 
oared thee« and bless his name all the d^^ and every day« 




March 27. daily bsadikos. 87 

^Then aU the disciples forsook Him and jM."— Matt zxtL 56. 

t never deserted them, bnt they, in cowardly fear of 
their lives, fled from Him in the very beginning of 
His sufferings. This is hut one instructive instance 
of the frailty of all believers if lefib to themselves ; they are 
but sheep at the best, and they flee when the wolf cometh. 
They had all been warned of the danger, and had promised 
to die rather than leave their Master ; and yet ^ey werB 
seized with sudden panic, and took to their heels. It may 
be that I, at the opening of this day, have braced up my 
mind to bear a trial for the Lord's sake, and I imagine my- 
self to be certain to exhibit perfect fidelity ; but let me be 
very jealous of myself, lest, having the same evil heart of 
unbelief, I should depart from my Lord as the apostles did. 
It is. one thing to promise, and quite another to perform. 
It would have been to their eternal honor to have stood at 
Jesus' side right manfally : they fled from honor ; may I be 
kept from imitating them! Where else could they have 
been so safe as near their Master, who could presently call 
for twelve legions of angels ? They fled from their true safety. 
O God, let me not play the fool also. Divine grace can 
make the coward brave. The smoking flax can flame forth 
like fire on the altar when the Lord wills it. These very 
apostles, who were timid as hares, grew to be bold as lions 
after the Spirit had descended upon them, and even so the 
Holy Spirit can make my recreant spirit brave to confess my 
Lord, and witness for His truth. 

What anguish must have filled the Saviour as He saw His 
friends so faithless ! This was one bitter ingredient in His 
cup ; but that cup is drained dry ; let me not put another 
drop in it. If I forsake my Lord, I shall crucify Him afresh, 
and put Him to an open shame. Keep me, blessed Spirit, 
from an end so shameful i 




§8 DATLT E£AI>OIGS. Ms^ctl 28. 

« ?le low (j/ a&^^^, wMch pas^h hiowl^e.'' — Eph. fiL 19. 

love of Christ in its sireetDese, its fulneis, its 
greatDefis, itfi faitiifalness^ passeth sH human com- 
prehension. Where shall language be found wMth 
shall descrih^ His mat^hleBs, His unparalleled Itrre towards 
the children of men ? It is so vast and boundless that, si 
the swallow but skimmeth the water, and diveth not into iti 
depths, so ail descriptive words but to^eb the surface, while 
depths immeasurable lie beneath. Well ntight the poet iaj, 

** lovtf thou fathomless abyag ! " ^ i 

for this love of Christ is indeed meastireleas and fathomleaa^l 
none can attain unto it. Before we can have any right idea 
of the loT^e of Jesus, we must understand His previous glory 
in its height of majesty, and His tncaroation upon the earth 
in aU its r!cpths of shame. But who can tell us the majesty 
of Christ r When He was enthroned in the highest heavens 
He was very God of very God ; by Him were the heavens 
made, and ail the hosta thereof. His own almigbtj arm 
upheld the spheres ; the praises of cherubim and seraphim 
perpetually surrouftded Him ; the full chorus of the HaBelu- 
jabs of the universe unceasingly flowed to the foot of His 
throne: He reigned supreme above all His creator es, God 
over all, blessed forever. Who can tell His height of glory 
then ? And who, on the other hand, can tell how low He 
descended ? To be a man was something, to be a man of 
BorroVs was far more ; to bleed, and die, and suffer, these 
were much for Him who was th6 Son of God ; but to suffer 
such unparalleled agony — to endure a death of shame and 
desertion by His Father, this is a depth of condescending 
love which the most inspired mind must utterly fail to fathom. 
Herein is love I and truly it is love that ** passeth knowledge." 
let this love fill our hearts with adoring gratitude, and 
lead us to practical manifestationa of its power ! 




March 5^. daily readings. 89 

** Though He were a Son, yet leanied Me obedience by the things 
which He aufferedJ^ — Hebrews v. 8. 

are told that the Captain of our salvation was made « 
perfect through suflFering ; therefore we who are sin- 
ful, and who are far from being perfect, must not 
wonder if we are called to pass through suffering too. 
Shall the head be crowned with thorns, and shall the other 
members of the body be rocked upon the dainty lap of ease ? 
Must Christ pass through seas of His own blood to win the 
crown, and are we to walk to heaven dryshod in silver slip- 
pers ? No, our Master's experience teaches us that suffer- 
ing is necessary, and the true-born child of God must not, 
would not, escape it if he might. But there is one very com- 
forting thought in the fact of Christ's " being made perfect 
through suffering " — it is, that He can have complete sym- 
pathy with us. "He is not a high priest that cannot be 
touched with the feelings of our infirmities." In this sym- 
pathy of Christ we find a sustaining power. One of the 
early martyrs said, " I can bear it all, for Jesus suffered, 
and He suffers in me now ; He sympathizes with me, and 
this makes me strong." Believer, lay hold of this thought 
in all times of agony. Let the thought of Jesus strengthen 
you as you follow in His steps. Find a sweet support in 
His sympathy ; and remember that to suffer is an honorable 
thing — to suffer for Christ is glory. The Apostles rejoiced 
that they were counted worthy to do this. Just so far as 
the Lord shall give us grace to suffer for Christ, to suffer 
with Christ, just so far does He honor us. The jewels of a 
Christian are his afflictions. The regalia of the kings whom v 
God hath anointed are their troubles, their sorrows, and 
their griefs. Let us not, therefore, shun being honored. 
Let us not turn aside from being exalted. Griefs exalt us, 
and troubles lift us up. "If we suffer, we shall als^o reign 
with Him." 





fiO DMi»T EEADiNGS* Marcli 8 Op 

** Ht WUB numbered w^ the iransgressors" *^ Isaiah liii. 12. 

jpHY did Jesus suffer Himself to be enrolled amongst 
amners ? This wonderful condesconeion was justi* 
fied by many powerful reasons. In such a charactef ' 
M& could the hetlBr become their adimcate. In somo triala 
there is an identification of the counsellor with the elient j > 
nor can they be looked upon in the eye of the law as apart 
from one another. Now, when tlie sinner is brought to the 
bar, Jesus appears there Himself. He stand s to answer the 
aecusation, He points to His side. His hunda, Hia feet, 
and challenges Justice to bring anything against the sinners 
whom He represents ; He pleads Hia blood, and pleads so 
triumpliantly, being numbered with them, and having a part 
with them, that the Judge proelaimB, ** Let them go their 
way ; deliver them from going down into the pit, for He 
hath found a ransom/* Our Lord Jesus was numbered with 
the transgressors in order that they might feel their hearts 
drawn towards Sfim. Who can be afraid of one who is 
written in the same list with us? Surely we may come 
boldly to Him, and confess our guilt. He who is numbered 
with us cannot condemn us. Was He not put down in the 
transgressor's list that we might be written in the red roU of 
the saints ? He was holy, and written among the holy : we 
were guilty, and numbered among the guilty. He transfers 
His name from yonder list to this black indictment, and our 
names are taken from the indictment, and written in the roll 
of acceptance, for there is a complete transfer made between 
Jesus and His people. All our estate of misery and sin 
Jesus has taken ; and all that Jesus has comes to us. His 
righteousness, His blood, and everything that He hath, He 
gives us as our dowry. Rejoice, believer, in your tmion to 
Him who was numbered among the transgressors ; and prove 
that you are truly saved by being manifestly numbered with 
those who are new creatures in Him. 



March 81. daily seadikos. 91 

'* WWi His stripes we are hecUedJ' — Isaiah liii. 5. 

IILATE delivered *oiir Lord to the lictors to be 
scourged. The Boman scourge was a most dreadful 




instrument of torture. It was made of the sinews 
of oxen, and sharp bones were intertwisted every here and 
there among the sinews ; so that every time the lash came 
down these pieces of bone inflicted fearful laceration, and 
tore off the flesh from the bone. The Saviour was, no 
doubt, bound to the column, and thus beaten. He had 
been beaten before ; but this of the Boman lictors was prob- 
ably the most severe of "His flagellations. My soul, stand 
here and weep over his poor stricken body. 

Believer in Jesus, can you gaze upon Him without tears, 
as He stands before you the mirror of agonizing love ? He 
is at once fair as the lily for innocence, and red as the rose 
with the crimson of His own blood. As we feel the sure 
and blessed healing which His stripes have wrought in us, 
does not our heart melt at once with love and grief? If 
ever we have loved our Lord Jesus, surely we must feel 
that affection glowing now within our bosoms. 

" See how the patient Jesus stands, 
Insulted in His lowest case ! 
Sinners have bound the Almighty's hands. 
And spit in their Creator's face. 

With thorns His temples gored and gashed 
Send streams of blood from every part ; 

His back's with' knotted scourges lashed, 
But sharper scourges tear His heart." 

We would fain go to our chambers and weep ; but, since 
our business calls us away, we will first pray our Beloved to 
print the image of His bleeding self upon the tablets of our 
hearts all the day, and at nightfall we will leturn to commune 
with Him, and sorrow that our sins should have cost Him so 
dear. 



02 PAILY EBAJ3Z^G3j 





^^Ltt Bim Mss me mth the kisses of His mattth^^* — Cant, L 2. 

I^OE several days we have bee^ dwelling upon tke 
Sayionr's passion^ and for some little time to come 
we shdH linger tliere. In beginning a new months 
let us seek the a am© desires after our Lord as those 
which glowed in the heart of the elect spouse. See how 
she leaps at once to Sim ; there are no prefatory words ; 
she does not eveu mention His name ; she is in the heart 
of her theme at once, for she speaks of Him who was the 
only Him in the world to her. How bold is her love I It 
was mueh eondescension Vfhiah perlnitted the weeping peni^H 
tent to anoint His feet with spikenard — it was rich love' 
which allowed the gentle Mary to sit at His feet, and learn 
of Him — hut here love, strong, fervent love, aspires to 
higher tokens of regard, and closer signs of feUowship* 
Esther trembled in the presence of Ahaahuerus, but the 
spouse in joyful liberty of perfect love knows no fear. If 
we have received the same free spirit, we also may ask the 
like. By kisses we suppose to be intended those varied 
manifestations of affection by which the believer is made to 
enjoy the love of Jesus. The kiss of reooncUiation we en- 
joyed at our conversion, and it was sweet as honey dropping 
from the comb. The kiss of acceptance is still warm on our 
brow, as we know that He hath accepted our persons and our 
works through rich grace. The kiss of daily, present comimu' 
nion is that which we pant after to be repeated day after day, 
till it is changed into the kiss of reception, which removes l^e 
Boul from earth, and the kiss of consummation, which fills it 
with the joy of heaven. Faith is our walk, but fellowship sen- 
sibly felt is our rest. Faith is the road, but communion with 
Jesus is the well from which the pilgrim drinks. O loveicof 
our souls, be not strange to us ; let the lips of Thy blessing 
meet the lips of our asking; let the lips of Thy fulness toudb 
the lips of our need, and straightway the kiss will be effected. 




AprQ 2. DAILY READINGS. 93 

"5(5 answered him to never a word,** — Matthew xxvii. 14. 

JE had never been slow of speech when He could bless 
the sons of men, but He would not say a single word 
for Himself. " Never man spake like this man," and 
never man was silent like Him. Was this singular silence 
the index of His perfect self-sacrifice f Did it show that He 
would not utter a word to stay the slaughter of His sacred 
person, which He had dedicated as an offering for us ? Had 
He so entirely surrendered Himself that He would not inter- 
fere in His own behalf, even in the minutest degree, but be 
bound and slain an unstruggling, uncomplaining victim ? 
Was this silence a type of the defencelessness of sin f Noth- 
ing can be said in palliation or excuse of human guilt ; and, 
therefore. He who bore its whole weight stood speechless 
before His judge. Is not patient silence the best reply to a 
gainsaying world f Calm endurance answers some questions 
infinitely more conclusively than the loftiest eloquence. The 
best apologists for Christianity in the early days were its 
martyrs. The anvil breaks a host of hammers by quietly 
bearing their blows. Did not the silent Lamb of God furnish 
us with a grand example of wisdom f Where every word was 
occasion for new blasphemy, it was the line of duty to afford 
no fuel for the flame of sin. The ambiguous and the false, 
the unworthy and mean, will ere long overthrow and confute 
themselves, and therefore the true can afford to be quiet, 
and finds silence to be its wisdom. Evidently our Lord, by 
His silence, furnished a remarkable fulfilment of prophecy. 
A long defence of Himself would have been contrary to 
Isaiah's prediction : '' He is led as a lamb to the slaughter, 
and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so He openeth 
not His mouth." By His quiet He conclusively proved Him- 
self to be the true Lamb of God. As such we salute Him, 
this morning. Be with us, Jesus, and in the silence of our 
heart let us hear the voice of Thy love. 



M I>JJXT REAPiXGS. April 3« 

. — __ ^-^ 




bad heetk aB tdghi ia ^gOE^* He had spent the earlj 
moming &t tbe huh of Caiaphas. He had been hmried 
from Caiaph&s to Pilate, from Pilate to Herod, Mid 
fro m Herod back again to Pilate . He bad, th erefore, tut little 
fitrengtb left, and yet neither re&eakment nor rest was per- 
mitted Him. Tbey were eager for His blocMif and therefore led 
Him out to die, loaded with the cross. O dolorous procession I 
Well ma J S alem' 9 daagbt ers weep. Mj sonl , do t ho n we ep ak o . 
What learn we here as we gee our blessed Lord led forth? 
Bo we not perceive that trnth which was set forth in shadow 
by the $mpegoai f Did not the high-priest bring the seape- 
goat, aiid pnt both his hands upon its bead^ confessing the 
sins of tbe people, that thus those sins might be laid npon 
the goat, and cease &om the people ? Then the goat wai 
led away by a fit man ihto the wilderness^ and it carried 
away the sins of the people ; so that» if they were songht 
for, they could not be found, ^ow we see Jeans brouglit 
before the priests and rulers, who pronounce Him guilty* 
Q-od Himself imputes our siua to Mim ■ "the Lord hath laid 
on ffim the iniquity of us all ; " "He was made sin for ua;" 
and, as the snhstitutc for our guilt, bearing our sin upon Mia 
shoulders, represented by the cross, we see the great Scape- 
goat led away by the appointed officers of justice. Beloved, 
can you feel assured that He carried your sin ? As you 
look at the cross upon His shoulders, does it represent your 
sin ? There is one way by which you can tell whether He 
carried your sin or not. Have you laid your hand upon His 
head, confessed your sin, and trusted in Him ? Then your 
sin lies not on you ; it has all been transferred by blessed 
imputation to Christ, and He bears it on His shoulder as a 
load heavier than the cross. Let not the picture vanish till 
you have rejoiced in your own deliverance, and adored the 
loving Redeemer upon whom your iniqtdties were laid. 




April 4. DAILY BEADIN08. 95 

*'^or He Jiath made Him to he sin for us, who knew no Wn; 

tTuxi we migM he made the righteousness of Ood in Him/* 

2 Corinthians v. 21. 

^OUENINQ- Christian ! why weepest thou ? Art thou 
mourning over thine own corruptions ? Look to thy 
perfect Lord, and remember, thou art complete in 
Him ; thou art in God's sight as perfect as if thou hadst never 
sinned ; nay, more than that, the Lord our Righteousness hath 
put a divine garment upon thee^ so that thou hast more than 
the righteousness of man — thou, hast the righteo.u$ness of 
God. thou who art mourning by reason of inbred sin and 
depravity, remember, none of. thy sins can condemn thee. 
Thou hast learned to hate sin ; but thou hast learned also to 
know that sin is not thine — it was laid upon Christ's head. 
Thy standing is not in thyself — it is in Christ ; thine accept- 
ance is not in thyself, but in thy Lord ; thou art as much 
accepted of God to-day, with all thy sinfulness, as thou wilt 
be when thou standest before His throne, free from all 
corruption. O, I beseech thee, lay hold on this precious 
thought, 'perfection in Christ I For thou art *' complete in 
Him." With thy Saviour's garment on, thoii art holy as 
the Holy One. " Who is he that condemneth ? It is Christ 
that died, yea, rather, that is risen again, who is even at the 
right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us." 
Christian, let thy heart rejoice, for thou art " accepted in the 
beloved " — what hast thou to fear ? Let thy face ever wear 
a smile ; live near thy Master ; live in the suburbs of the 
Celestial City ; for soon, when thy time has come, thou shalt 
rise up where thy Jesus sits, And reign at His right hand, 
even as He has overcome and has sat down at His Father's 
right hand ; and all this because the divine Lord " was made 
to be sin for us, who knew no sin ; that we might be made 
the righteousness of God in Him." 




96 UAIXT B£ADIKGS* ApHJ 5* 

** On Mm iJiti/ laid the cmsSj that he might hear it offer Jesui." 
Luke xxiiL 26. 

RE see m Simon's carrjing the cross a pictnre of the 
work of the ChuTch throughout all geuerationa ; she 
is the cross-hearer after Jesus. Mark then, Chris- 
tiao, Jesus does not suffer so as to exclude your suffering. 
He bear^ a cross, root that you may escape iti hut that jou 
may endure it. Christ exempts jou from sin, but not from 
sorrow. Remember that, and expect to suffer. 

But let us comfort ourselveB with this thought, that in our 
case, as in Simon's, it is not <mr aroBs^ hut Christ'' s cross it?AicA 
we carr^. When yon are molested for your piety, when 
your religion brings the trial of cruel mockings upon jou, 
then remember it is not your cross, it is Chrisfs cross ; and 
how delightful is it to carry the cross of our Lord Jesus ! 

You carry the cross after Him. You have blessed com- 
pany ; your path is marked with the footprints of your Lord. 
The mark of His blood-red shoulder is upon that heaTy burden, 
'Tis His cross, and He goes before you as a shepherd goes 
before his sheep. Take up your cross daily, and follow Him. 

Do not forget, also, that you hear this cross in partnership. 
It is the opinion of some that Simon only carried one end of 
the cross, and not the whole of it. That is very possible ; 
Christ may have carried the heavier part, against the trans- 
verse beam, and Simon may have borne the lighter end. Cer- 
tainly it is so with you ; you do but carry the light end of 
the cross, Christ bore the heavier end. 

And remember, though Simon had to hear the cross for a 
very little while, it gave him lasting honor. Even so the cross 
we carry is only for a little while at most, and then we shall 
receive the crown, the glory. Surely we should love the cross, 
and, instead of shrinking from it, count it very dear^ when it 
works out for us " a far more exceeding and eternal weight 
of glory." 



April 6. DAILY HEADINGS. 97 

" Let us go forth therefore unto Him without the camp.** 
Hebrews xiii. 13. 

^ ^ESUS, bearing His cross, went forth to suffer without 
^ the gate. The Christian's reason for leaving the camp 
^ of the world's sin and religion is not because he loves 
to be singular, but because Jesus did so ; and the disciple must 
follow his Master. Christ was '* not of the world : " His life 
and His testimony were a constant protest against conformity 
with the world. Never was such overflowing affection for men 
as you find in Him ; but still He was separate from sinners. 
In like manner Christ's people must " go forth unto Him." 
They must take their position " without the camp," as witness- 
bearers for the truth. They must be prepared to tread the 
straight and narrow path. They must have bold, unflinching, 
lion-like hearts, loving Christ first, and His truth next, and 
Christ and His truth beyond all the world. Jesus would have 
His people " go forth without the camp " for their own sano- 
tificaiion. You cannot grow in grace to any high degree 
while you are conformed to the world. The life of separa- 
tion may be a path of sorrow, but it is the highway of safety ; 
and though the separated life may cost you many pangs, and 
make every day a battle, yet it is a happy life after all. No 
joy can excel that of the soldier of Christ ; Jesus reveals Him- 
self so graciously, and gives such sweet refreshment, that the 
warrior feels more calm and peace in his daily strife than 
others in their hours of rest. The highway of holiness is the 
highway of communion. It is thus we shall hope to tain the 
crown if we are enabled by divine grace faithftdly to follow 
Christ '* without the camp." The crown of glory will follow 
the cross of separation. A moment's shame will be well 
recompensed by eternal honor; a little while of witness- 
bearing will seem nothing when we are *' forever with the 
Lord." 

9 



9B DAixY EiADiKGS. April 7. 

** ye smis of metif kou^ Imig mil ^e turn mi/ glory into shame P* 
Psalm IT. 2, 

'y^iN icBtruetiTe writer has mad^ a mournful list of the 
It^fi lionors which the blinded people of Israel awarded to 
*^^ their long-expected King. (L) They gave Him a 
procesnion of honor, in wbich -Roman legiooaries, Jewish 
priests, men and women, took a part. He Himself bearing 
His eroBB. This is the triiimpli which the world awards to 
Him who eomei to o?erthrow man'e direst foes. DeriaiYe 
shouts are His only acclamations, and cruel taunts His onlj 
pieans of praise, (2,) They presented Him with the wine of 
honor. Instead of a golden enp of generouB wine, thej oiered 
Him the eriminal*e stupefying death- draught, which He re- 
fused because He would preserve an uninjured taste where- 
with to tjiste of death ; and afterwards when He cried, ** I 
thirst J*' they gave Him vinegar mixed with gall, thrust to His 
mouth upon a sponge. Oh ! wretched, detestable inhospi- 
tality to the King's Hon. (3.) He was provided with a guard 
of honor J who showed their esteem of Him by gambling over 
His garments, which they had seized as their booty. Sueh 
was the body-guard of the adored of heaven ; a quaternioL 
of brutal ganiblers, (4.) A IhTone of honor was found for 
Hun upon tht* bloody tree ; no easier place of rest would 
rebel men yield to their liege Lord. The cross was, in fact, 
the full expression of the world's feeling towards Him. 
" There," they seemed to say, " Thou Son of God, this is the 
manner in which God Himself should be treated, could we 
reach Him." (5.) The title of honor was nominally " ELing 
of the Jews," but that the blinded nation distinctly repudi- 
ated, and really called Him *' King of thieves," by preferring 
Bar abbas, and by placing Jesus in the place of highest shame 
between two thieves. His glory was thus in all things turned 
into shame by the sons of men, but it shall yet gladden the 
eyes of saints and angels, world without end. 




April 8. DAILY READINGS. 99 

** If they do these things in a green tree, what shall he done in the 
dry ? " — Luke xxiii. 31. 

^MONQ- other interpretations of this suggestive ques- 
tion, the following is full of teaching : '' K I, the in- 
nocent substitute for sinners, suffer thus, what wilj 
be done when the sinner himself — the dry tree — shall fall 
into the hands of an angry God ? " When God saw Jesus in 
the sinner's place, He did not spare Him ; and when He finds 
the unregenerate without Christ, He will not spare them, 
sinner, Jesus was led away by His enemies : so shall you be 
dragged away by fiends to the place appointed for you. 
Jesus was deserted of God ; and if He, who was only im- 
putedly a sinner, was deserted, how much more shall you be ! 
*^Eloij Eloi, lama, sahachthani!" what an awftd shriek! 
But what shall be your cry when you shall say, " God ! 
O God ! why hast Thou forsaken me ? " and the answer shall 
come back, " Because ye have set at nought all My counsel," 
and would none of My reproof, I also will laugh at your 
calamity ; I will mock when your fear cometh " ? If God 
spared not His own Son, how much less will He spare you ! 
What whips of burning wire will be yours when conscience 
shall smite you with all its terrors ! Ye richest, ye merriest, 
ye most self-righteous sinners, who would stand in your 
place when God shall say, " Awake, O sword, against the 
man that rejected Me; smite him, and let him feel the 
smart forever " ? Jesus was spit upon : sinner, what shame 
will be yours ! We cannot sum up in one word all the mass 
of sorrows which met upon the head of Jesus, who died for 
us ; therefore it is impossible for us to tell you what streams, 
what oceans of grief, must roll over your spirit if you die as 
you now are. You may die so, you may die now. By the 
agonies of Christ, by His wounds and by His blood, do not 
bring upon yourselves the wrath to come ! Trust in the Son 
of God, and you shall never die. 



100 »AiLY B£U>rKG«. April 9, 

** And there followed Blm a great companif qfpeoplef and of wff- 
men, which also bewailed and lamtnUd Aim," — ^Luke ixiiL 27- 

ll'^MED tlie rabble rottt which homided the Kedeemer to 
His doom, there were some gracioiii Botila whose 
, *^^-^^ bitter aogaisb s ought rent in wailiBg and lamenta- 
tions — fit music to accompany that march of woe. When 
my soul can, in imagination^ see the Sariour bearing His 
croag to Calvary, she joins the godly women and weeps with 
them; for^ indeed, there is true canse for grief — cause lying 
deeper than those monrning women thought. They bewailed 
innocence maltreated, goodness persecute d^ love bleeding, 
meekness about to die ; but mj heart has a deeper and moro 
bitter cause to mourn ^ My sina wero the scourges which 
lacerated those blessed shoulders, and crowned with thorn 
those bleeding brows : my sins cried ^ ** Cmcify Him I crucify 
Him I " and laid the cross upon His graeiona shoulders. His 
being led forth to die is sorrow enough for one eternity ; but 
my having been Hii murderer, is more, indefinitely more, 
grief than one poor fountain of tears can express. 

Why those women loved and wept it were not hard to guess ; 
but they could not have had greater reasons for love and 
grief than my heart has. Nain*s widow saw her son restored 
— but I myself have been raised to newness of life. Peter's 
wife's mother was cured of the fever — but I of the greater 
plague of sin. Out of Magdalene seven devils were cast — 
but a whole legion out of me. Mary and Martha were 
favored with visits — but He dwells with me. His mother 
bare his body — but He is formed in me the hope of glory. 
In nothing behind the holy women in debt, let me not 
be behind them in gratitude or sorrow. 

"Love and grief my heart dividing, 
With my tears His feet I'll lave — 
Constant still in heart abiding, 
* Weep for Him who died to Bave." 




April 10. DAILY BEADJNOS. 101 

" The place which is cdUed Calvary/* -^Luke xxiiL 33. 

i^^HE hill of comfort is the hill of Calvary ; the house of 
consolation is built with the wood of the cross ; the 
temple of heavenly blessing is founded upon the riven 
rock — riven by the spear which pierced His side. No scene in 
sacred history ever gladdens the soul like Calvary's tragedy. 

*'Ib it not strange, the darkest hoar 
That ever dawned on sinful earth 
Should touch the heart with softer power. 
For comfort, than an angel's mirth ? 
That to the Cross the mourner's eye should turn. 
Sooner than where the stars of Bethlehem bum ? " 

Light springs from the midday-midnight of G-olgotha, and 
every herb of the field blooms sweetly beneath the shadow 
of the once accursed tree. In that place of thirst, grace 
hath dug a fountain which ever gusheth with waters pure as 
crystal, each drop capable of alleviating the woes of mankind. 
You who have had your seasons of conflict, will confess that 
it was not at Olivet that you ever found comfort, not on the 
hill of Sinai, nor on Tabor ; but Gethsemane, Gabbatha, and 
Golgotha have been a means of comfort to you. The bitter 
herbs of Gethsemane have often taken away the bitters of 
your life ; the scourge of Gabbatha has often scourged away 
your cares, and the groans of Calvary have put all other 
groans to flight. Thus Calvary yields us comfort rare and 
rich. We never should have known Christ's love in all its 
heights and depths if He had not died ; nor could we guess 
the Father's deep affection if He had not given His Son to 
die. The common mercies we enjoy all sing of love, just as 
the sea-shell, when we put it to our ears, whispers of the 
deep sea whence it came ; but if we desire to hear the ocQan 
itself, we must not look at every-day blessings, but at the 
transactions of the crucifixion. He who would know love, let 
him retire to Calvary and see the Man of sorrows die. 
0^ 



104 ©ATT.T READIKGg 


April La. 1 


** A bundU of myrrh u fny weil-bdoi^ed un#o tjw." - 


- Cant. L 13- f 



F^TKRH may well bo chosen m the tjpe of Jesus on 
1.4' aceouTit of its preciousness^ its "perfume^ ita p?easa3i^- 
neu^ its healing f prtservin^, disinfectinff qualities^ and 
its eonnection with sacrifice. But why is He compared to ^* a 
hundle of mjrrh " ? First, for flenty. He is not a drop of 
it. He is a casket full. He is not a sprig or flower of it, but 
a whole bundle. There is enough in Christ for all my neces- 
sities ; let me not be slow to avail myself of Him. Our well- 
beloted m compared to a " buinlle," again, for i^ariet}/ ; for 
tJiere is in Christ not only the one thing needful, but **iii Him 
dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily ; '' evcrjthiug 
needful is iu Him. Take Jesus in His different eharacterg, 
and you will see a marvellous variety — Prophet, Priest, 
King, Husband, Friend, Shepherd. Consider Him iu Hlfl 
life» death, resurrection, ascension, secoud advent; view Him 
in His virtue, gentleness, courage, self-denial, love, faithful- 
ness, truth, righteonaness — everywhere He is a bundle of 
preciousnesB. Ho is a "bundle of myrrh'* for jireservtdion 
— not loose myrrh, to be dropped on the floor or trodden on, 
but myrrh tied up, myrrh to be stored in a casket. Wc musfe 
Talue Him as our best treasure ; we must prize His words 
and His ordinances ; and we must keep our tbougbts of Him 
and knowledge of Him as under lock and kej, lest the devil 
should steal anything from us, Horeover Jesus is a "bundle 
of myrrh " for speciality ; the emblem suggests the idea of 
distinguishing, discriminating grace. From before the foun- 
dation of the world. He was set apart for His people ; and 
He gives forth His perfume only to those who nuderstaud 
bow to enter into eommunion with Him, to have close deal« 
ingH with Him, Oh ! blessed people whom the Lord bath ad- 
mitted into His secrets, and for whom He sets Himself apart. 
Oh ! choice and happy who are flius made to say, " A bun- 
dle of myrrh is my well-beloved unto me." 



I 




AprU 13. DAILY BEADINGS. 103 

" My^ heart is Uke wax ; it is melted in the midst of my bowels.** 
Psalm xxii. 14. 

§UR blessed Lord experienced a terrible sinking and 
^J melting of soul. ** The spirit of a man will sustain 
^^ his infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can bear ? " 
Deep depression of spirit is the most grievous of all trials ; all 
besides is as nothing. Well might the suffering Saviour cry 
to His God, " Be not far from me," for above all other sea- 
sons a man needs his G-od when his heart is melted within 
him because of heaviness. Believer, come near the cross 
this morning, and humbly adore the Eang of glory as having 
once been brought far lower, in mental distress and inward 
anguish, than any one among us ; and mark His fitness to be- 
come a faithful High Priest, who can be touched with a feeling 
of our infirmities. Especially let those of us whose sadness 
springs directly from the withdrawal of a present sense of 
our Father's love, enter into ifear and intimate communion 
with Jesus. Let us not give way to despair, since through 
this dark room the Master has passed before us. Our souls 
may sometimes long and faint, and thirst even to anguish, to 
behold the light of the Lord's countenance : at such times let 
us stay ourselves with the sweet fact of the sympathy of our 
great High Priest. Our drops of sorrow may well be forgot- 
ten in the ocean of His griefs ; but how high ought our love 
to rise ! Come in, O strong and deep love of Jesus, like the 
sea at the flood in spring tides, cover all my powers, drown 
all my sins, wash out all i^y cares> lift up my earth-bound 
soul, and float it right up to my Lord's feet, and there let 
me lie, a poor broken shell, washed up by His love, having 
no virtue or value ; and only venturing to whisper to Him that 
if He will put His ear to me, He will hear within my heart 
faint echoes of the vast waves of His own love which have 
brought me where it is my*delight to lie, even at His feet 
forever. 






"t - ^^ -T ^^r" ni» M rriiij'MiifcMiiMin- i^hi ■■! i 






liere behold -im '^vioot-iv tfap AgA oif Hb i 

<lizuc an 4 -oiTSKT; ^imi :» 
:i Ml nitt of ricoar nsrhM is^ 

3t>iiie« pkrsinki wvaknvM ivM tiirttfi mUkn 

-*ixT> nmK rile *^uud» ^uui igpomiiBrthfni^ iiiiiiili fc iai l» 

-^^oi rlM li tf p M i miu •>! Sft Fltthiff^pnBMn&. Hbw Iks 
tttttk Tjidnudit tic SfrOttR^fT? TiHttil^ 

-tjc -'C ^Mri* ««MK SvoM *^i *» dune arc 

r^. ■- *%• 'itf»4. TKf i^ -^ ixa«r thpK fl iiiia l sB at?" 

- v\isw4»«i '^ ^jmitf 'jxu iarkiMMi ; bar Iat tof 
-t.1,5 ^Hi it^^rvr io»*s -^*:%ilr -^nswte !«• B iff craiy a s 

^-.►>ri Tf . ."■ -. — :j^ rt\«7u 1 fir ?atlier** jive: bat 
.:. -.*:u :-jrr::z^ vr-v - - -i* -si^f r-ut His ?on» w&*» skall 
j^..'i-:ir.* :. -V :^:i- -,. ^.—- T::..fi j austfi Sill ? 

Zz "7 '.is:^. -:7 =7- i -r. :: J..'iLL-. v luueiief: m His 
:i.--, - T-is n.' irr.rr^. * r : ■.r^aui--ii Ticu iir bpjd hid 
~*^;i*Ir -nr-:.*:« vn-r t-^'h ZluL xr L -*:ai^»u. riiua poor, 
■ >;;-^ws»»ri irri^ vr^r -^iv'- i.'-*-.! a ti*. ^uiisriiiud 'jf God's 
■♦..■•■."*':: ir- i.-^ u iiir-xne**. ^f^mt-iubt-r Time H^ has not 
V i..r :\irvi.vv •; l:.^- ^-.i n rj^t- -ioiuis > jtf mjxA omr 

'*«: N;iu't» ^"-0*1 :Ixk* '.h'if'fc "fiar ^•* iui- 7.»r*uiraa iff dciriK us 
^jV^^jiiit -uujir -:>/ T-.- 'T -i:-' r^i— '.:r i-jt-r^ Ju^a when 
JM^^^^ktii. •* H^- ■:--.{, ii-- ;--,:, -T^*- ia;:ixr -i^.-fi torsAken 





April 16. DAILY BEADIN08. 107 

« The precious blood of Christ:'^ 1 Peter L 19. 

STANDING- at the foot of the cross, we see hands, 
and feet, and side, all distilling crimson streams of 
precious blood. It is " precious " because of its re- 
deeming and aioning efficacy. By it the sins of Christ's peo- 
ple are atoned for ; they are redeemed from under the law ; 
they are reconciled to God, made one with Him. Christ's 
blood is also " precieus" in its cleansing power; it " cleans- 
eth from all sin." '' Though your sins be as scarlet, they 
shall be as white as snow." Through Jesus' blood there is 
not a spot left upon any believer ; no wrinkle, nor any such 
thing, remains. O precious blood, which makes us clean, 
removing the stains of abundant iniquity, and permitting us 
to stand accepted in the Beloved, notwithstanding the many 
ways in which we have rebelled against our God ! The blood 
of Christ is likewise " precious " in its preserving power. We 
are safe from the destroying angel under the sprinkled blood. 
Remember, it is Ood's seeing the blood which is the true 
reason for our being spared. Here is comfort for us when 
the eye of faith is dim, for God's eye is still the same. The 
blood pf Christ is ** precious " also in its sanctifying influ- 
ence. The same blood which justifies by taking away sin, 
does, in after-action, quicken the new nature, and lead it 
onward to subdue sin, and to follow out the commands of 
God. There is no motive for holiness so great as that 
which streams from the veins of Jesus. And " precious," 
unspeakably precious, is this blood, because it has an over- 
coming power. It is written, " They overcame through the 
blood of the Lamb." How could they do otherwise ? He who 
fights with the precious blood of Jesus fights with a weapon 
which cannot know defeat. The blood of Jesus ! Sin dies 
at its presence, death ceases to be death; heaven's gates are 
opened. The blood of Jesus ! We shall march on, con- 
quering and to conquer, so long as we can trust its power I 




At 

111 
We 

>. Nv, :fis ^ :&felsN jy»j^ '^ 3: i> imished ; HuiTeaiade an 
.V- ,'. s.-* 1 rjr-^ r."* ^::^rk": it t^criasnnx: li^teoQfiness." 

.' ^* V ii*^".v;^ .: r^; 7CiVur«is> biood of Jesus! If you 

•.*^». * ::j«. ;, ,^ -'iK*^. r.ii: viL coid^ to it constantlj. 

> .:■ > ' x - .i:;.c ujir* .'i^!5ii?^." Yolzrirhole con- 

^ .'. V ,:.-.ii .,-,•. : n.'^ — " Ti vhc'in coming." Not 

V NvM , ... ,-..uv.. X-: :/ vh*iit I JLin oTirayi coming. If 

^:,v*. ioix.' ,xv: ,v^n 5/ an w»v»A of ^nnnkling, then wilt 

^sv *>A »sv>i X ^vyaisr^ ?^ 3* ^'Txsrr daj. He idio does not 

^,vxi>v 4ro %Axi ;r. UMt: \';--i iJ^u ii»s iseTcr washed in it at 

^V, ^i^^' KCjox-,sr * \vr ^J< :j to be Ms jot and privilege 

^SAi «^'i'^'^' ^^ 5*^-'- * ?\.fitj5x:x wued. Past experiences are 

,:,*ut^HNi* tVss^ t\\r Oy.r;s::*r,!i : a prc^^^rt coming to Christ alone 

It) »:«>*' ^^'^,'^'\^ *"-^ vVsxrVrK This looming let us sprinkle 

o;.i \iooi^i^*^' <^*^ ^i^ Kiood, and then feast n^on che Landl)- 

^^H^ ihai ih^" d<siux>pn( angel must pass os bj. 



April 18. DAILY BEABnrOS. 109 

"She bound the scarlet line in the window." — Joshua IL 21. 

Jk^AHAB depended for her preservation upon the prom- 
%P^ ise of the spies, whom she looked upon as the repre- 
^^ sentatives of the God of Israel. Her faith was simple 
and firm, but it was very obedient. To tie the scarlet line in 
the window was a very trivial act in itself, but she dared not 
run the risk of omitting it. Come, my soul, is there not here 
a lesson for thee ? Hast thou been attentive to all thy Lord's 
will, even though some of His commands should seem non- 
essential ? Hast thou observed in His own way the two or- 
dinances of believers' baptism and the Lord's Supper ? These 
neglected, argue much unloving disobedience in thy heart. 
Be henceforth in all things blameless, even to the tying of a 
thread, if that be matter of command. 

. This act of Eahab sets forth a yet more solemn lesson. 
Have I implicitly trusted in the precious blood of Jesus ? 
Have I tied the scarlet cord, as with a gordian knot, in my 
window, so that my trust can never be removed ? Or can I 
look out towards the Dead Sea of my sins, or the Jerusalem 
of my hopes, without seeing the blood, and seeing all things 
in connection with its blessed power ? The passer-by can see 
a cord of so conspicuous a color, if it hangs from the window : 
it will be well for me if my life makes the efficacy of the atone- 
ment conspicuous to all onlookers. What is th«re to be 
ashamed of? Let men or devils gaze if they will ; the blood 
is my boast and my song. My soul, there is One who will 
see that scarlet line, even when from weakness of faith thou 
canst not see it thyself; Jehovah, the Avenger, will see it 
and pass over thee. Jericho's walls fell flat ; Eahab*s house 
was on the wall, and yet it stood unmoved ; my nature is 
built into the wall of humanity, and yet when destruction 
smites the race, I shall be secure. My soul, tie the scarlet 
thread in the window afresh, and rest in peace, 
10 




ML n>i 

t of tbe 
<lf 

tJcmu. Tkere' 
r«ltiie 
I tfe t^p to tlie bettoni* 

ftf^m. fflaZE ve fetr if w^ £3T dot iLe cpenmc cf t&e Holr 4^ 
Holies m ibis maxreiioiid manner Dj oar ijord s e^umg ciy 
WM the iypt of the apenhkg of the gates of paradise to all the 
gainis hj ririue of the Passion ? Onr bleeding Lord hath the 
key of heaven ; He openeth and no man shntteth ; let ns enter 
in with Him into the heavenlj places, and sit with Him diere 
till otif eomiiion enemiefl shall be made His footstooL 




April 20. DAILY BEADIirOS. Ill 

** That through death He might destroy htm that had the povoer 
of death,** — Hebrews ii. 14. 

\ CHILD of God, death hath lost its sting, because the 
devil's power over it is destroyed. Then cease to 
fear dying. Ask grace from God the Holy Ghost, 
that by an intimate knowledge and a firm belief of thy Re- 
deemer's death, thou mayst be strengthened for that dread 
hour. Living near the cross of Calvary, thou mayst think 
of death with pleasure, and welcome it when it comes with 
intense delight. It is sweet to die in the Lord ; it is a cov- 
enant-blessing to sleep in Jesus. Death is no longer banish- 
ment ; it is a return from exile, a going home to the many 
mansions where the loved ones already dwell. The distance 
between glorified spirits in heaven and militant saints on 
earth seems great ; but it is not so. We are not far from 
home — a moment will bring us there. The sail is spread ; 
the soul is laumshed upon the deep. How long will be its 
voyage? How many wearying winds must beat upon the 
sail ere it shall be reefed in the port of peace ? How long 
shall that soul be tossed upon the waves before it comes to 
that sea which knows no storm ? Listen to the answer : ''Ab- 
sent from the body, present with the Lord." Yon ship has 
just departed, but it is already at its haven. It did but spread 
its sail and it was there. Like that ship of old, upon the lake 
of Galilee, a storm had tossed it ; but Jesus said, '' Peao^, be 
still," and immediately it came to land. Think not that a 
long period intervenes between the instant of death and the 
eternity of glory. When the eyes close on earth they open 
in heaven. The horses of ^^ are not an instant on tl^e road. 
Then, O child of God, what is there for thee to fear in death, 
seeing that through the death of thy Lord its curse and sting 
are destroyed ? and now it is but a Jacob's ladder whose foot 
is in the dark grave, but its top reaches to glory everlasting. 



f 

.t 

« 





It I- 



lis- :~::i- iii.. ?-r:n:rsr^ s- -=irr :=::zrit27«=5 i£ f>S!»» 

-rir?:^ Tie- —- : n- -_:i I: I r^.^: 1117 5»Qa:iL laas C 
jr iLT ziiz-. ::!-- ::irr^ i -z.--r3r jLHiSiri w^ lie sa 
Lcim 1 rur x I insi^ -r^-r 7=^?^ 1—5* lie ne. laaea dui 

*i^, thjtf o*ir ^"Ti-i-^a^Ks IT** ri^iiz- l*sc ▼« cgiI-I upon an 

i;.',f' ; f*^itu*U^zifjt*, for h Ls fr:2i :Le upp^r rooms xhax in 
in'; wi'i^;iit ]ft(f%]^x, A firing Bedeemer, truly mine, L 




April 22, DAILY BEADINOS* 118 

"Him Tuxth God exalted." -— Acta y, 31. 

USUS, our Lord, once crucified, dead and buried, now 
sits upon the throne of glory. The highest place 
that heaven affords is His by undisputed right. It is 
sweet to remember that the exaltation of Christ in heaven is 
a representative exaltation. He is exalted at the Father's right 
hand, and though as Jehovah He has eminent glories, in 
which finite creatures cannot share, yet as the Mediator, the 
honors which Jesus wears in heaven are the heritage of all 
the saints. It is delightfiil to reflect how close is Christ's 
onion with His people. We are actually one with Hijn ; we 
are members of His body; and His exaltation is our exaltation. 
He will give us to sit upon His throne, even as He has over- 
come, and is set down with His Father on His throne : He 
has a crown, and He gives us crowns too : He has a throne, 
but He is not content with having a throne to Himself; on 
His right hand there must be His queen, arrayed in "gold 
of Ophir." He cannoj be glorified without His bride. Look 
up-, believer, to Jesus now ; let the eye of your faith behold 
Him with many crowns upon His head ; and remember that 
you will one day be like Him, when you shall see Him as He 
is ; you shall not be so great as He is, you shall not be so 
divine, but still you shall, in a measure, share the same hon- 
ors, and enjoy the same happiness and the same dignity which 
He possesses. Be content to live unknown for a little while, 
and to walk your weary way through the fields of poverty, 
or up the hills of affliction ; for by and by you shall reign 
with Christ, for He has "made us kings and priests unto 
God, and we shall reign forever and ever." Oh ! wonderful 
thought for the children of God ! We have Christ for our 
glorious representative in heaven's courts now, and soon He 
will come and receive us to Himself, to be with Him there, 
to behold His glory, and to share in His joy. 
10* 








OttWt 



r for powar 2d 

TOIL. 4k jpfr aumld hir libenr Ait toAS 
jssm of jnu^IIeBehFBdjTf: A£%HEk%'&Bi 
arhrAtiieKnigof&i&T Jagjc jp liiiilMh ? 

£ex liifBK- : wf- BK faudfied «c& fun. 

Ti' pw an ilhifiBxaiium — jom-mmiA tm ^vetomub an angij 
lonjiBr; hem dc jmi ^b xa wm^r it is Feiy p«HiUa jet 
Lttvt arwr mad ibe xi^ n^ of finag te Jeaw wik ijb. 
Ei«v did I |f«s sahaxum r I aaaie to Jesaa jaat aa I «ai, 
uud I xmsoed liiiL ui saxe me. I must laB, mj aiagiy tea^w 
:l ihi suufr vsj. li is lie cmh" in»T in vhiek I can eT«e 
i-1 jw 1 ilhs^i ro ;:■ lit cross "with it, and say to Jesus, 
•• Liru, I Trusi Thvt to diOiTer me from it." Tliis is the ovij 
v&v xi r>i y* fc ofiUi-lucw. Are tou covetous? I>o you 
:V;I iLi vi-rjJ eLijaiirje yon: Ycm may straggle against this 
i v;: so i^.iii: ii> v.-n T.Ie&si, bni if it be yonr besetting sin, you 
w:!! never bt aeiivcrod from it in any way but by the Wood 
vf .le>ns^ Take it to Christ. Tell Him, '-Lord, I have 
n«>toa Thoc, and Thy name is Jesus, for Thou dost save 
Tlo people from their sins : Lord, this is one of my sins ; save 
\uo tVom it ! " Orvlinanees are nothing without Christ as a 
uioHUN of mortification. Your prayers, and your repentances, 
n\\y\ ,\ i>ur fears — the whole of them put together — are worth 
uolhiu^' apart from Him. *' None but Jesus can do helpless 
Mhuei'B t^ooil ; " or hi>lpless saints either. You must be con- 
^wur** thriiugh Uim who hath loved you, if conquerors at all. 
UurtOd niuttt. grow among His olives in Gethsemane. 




April 24; DAILY BLADINGS. 115 

<< And because o/aU this we make a sure covenant" 
Nehemiah ix. 38. 

are many occasions in our experience when 
we may very rightly, and with benefit, renew our 
covenant with God. After recovery from sickness^ 
when, like Hezekiah, we have had a new .term of years 
added to our life, we may fitly do it. After any ctdiverance 
from trouble^ when our joys bud forth anew, let us again visit 
the foot of the cross, and renew our consecration. Espe- 
cially, let us do this after any sin which has grieved tlie Holy 
Spirit, or brought dishonor upon the cause of Ood ; let us 
then look to that blood which can make us whiter than snow, 
and again offer ourselves unto the Lord. We should not 
only let our troubles confirm our dedication to God, but our 
prf^perity should do the same. If we ever meet with occa- 
sions which deserve to be called " crowning mercies," then, 
surely, if He hath crowned us, we ought also to crown our 
God ; let us bring forth anew all the jewels of the divine 
regalia which have been stored in the jewel-closet of our 
heart, and let our God sit upon the throne of our love, ar- 
rayed in royal apparel. If we would learn to profit by our 
prosperity, we should not need so much adversity. If we 
would gather from a kiss all the good it might confer upon 
us, we should not so often smart under the rod. Have we 
lately received some blessing which we little expected ? Has 
the Lord put our feet in a large room ? Can we sing of mer- 
cies multiplied ? Then this is the day to put our hand upon 
the horns of the altar, and say, " Bind me here, my God; bind 
me here with cords, even forever." Inasmuch as we need 
the fulfilment of new promises from God, let us offer renewed 
prayers that our old vows may not be dishonored. Let us 
this morning jnake with Him a sure covenant, because of 
the pains of Jesus which for the last month we have been 
considering with gratitude. 



Afdli&. 










liees Ijiag aaMig Ife p«lB i^f vozlAi«BH. He Is i 
mm ivcB n Hni ; «^ ftei iteaU I d^mTe nsta tlie 
IkoBi Immr liiv«s» 4tare^ panmx^ Mni asptimttoiia, I wovld 
liie tmntiii Hitt, He &Jh m& hf the sweet tide of '' Mj 
lore,** and eonDli ae fiiik ; tkk is Ag<M>d a^imeiil for iny rb- 
mg~ It He haa dms exalted viep vnd dunks me tliits oomelj^ 
how csa I lingeT in ike tents af Ke4ar aord iud oongenid 
aisodsles aisoag the sons of men ^ He Mds me, ^^ €oipe 
awaj^** Fartlier and ^itlier &om eTerything eelfish, gro?d- 
littg, worldly, sinfBl, He calls me ; jes« &om tke ontwardlj 
religiotiB world wliieE knows Him not^ and has ho b jmpalhjr 
with the mystery of the higher life. He calls me. ^^ Come 
away" has no harsh sound in it to my ear, for what i& there 
to hold me in this wilderness of vanity and sin ? my Lord, 
wonld that I could cotne away ; bnt I am taken among the 
thomSf and eannot escape &om them as I would. I would, 
if it were possible, have neither eyes, nor ears, nor heart for 
iin. Thou callest me to Thyself by saying, *^ Come away,'* 
and this is a melodious call indeed. To come to Thee is to 
come homo from exile, to come to land out of the raging 
storm, to come to rest after long labor, to come to the goal 
of my desires and the summit of my wishes. But, Lord, how 
can a stone rise ? how can a lump of clay come away from 
the horrible pit ? raise me, draw me. Thy grace can do 
it. Send forth Thy Holy Spirit to kindle sacred flames of 
love in my heart, and I will continue to rise until I leave 
k life and time behind me, and indeed come away. 



April 26. 




DAILY 


READINGS 






117 


'*This do 


in 




of if«." — 


1 CorinthianB 


xi. 


24. 




seems, then, that Christians may forget Christ! 
There conld be no need for this loving exhortation, 
if there were not a fearful supposition that our mem- 
ories might prove treacherous. Nor is this a bare supposi- 
tion ; it is, alas ! too well confirmed in our experience, not 
as a possibility, but as a lamentable fact. It appears almost 
impossible that those who have been redeemed by the blood 
of the dying Lamb, and loved with an everlasting love by the 
eternal Son of God, should forget that gracious Saviour ; but, 
if startling to the ear, it is, alas ! too apparent to the eye to 
allow us to deny the crime. Forget Him who never forgot 
ns ! Forget Him who poured His blood forth for our sins ! 
Forget Him who loved us even to the death ! Can it be pos- 
sible ? Yes, it is not only possible, but conscience confesses 
that it is too sadly a fault with all of us, that we suffer Him 
to be as a wayfaring man tarrying but for a night. He 
whom we should make the abiding tenant of our memories 
is but a visitor therein. The cross where one would think 
that memory would linger, and unmindfulness would be ah 
unknown intruder, is desecrated by the feet of forgetfulness. 
Does not your conscience say that this is true ? Do you not 
find yourselves forgetful of Jesus? Some creature steals 
away your heart, and you are unmindful of Him upon whom 
your affection ought to be set. Some earthly business en- 
grosses your attention when you should fix your eye steadily 
upon the cross. It is the incessant turmoil of the world, 
the constant attraction of earthly things, which takes away 
the soul from Christ. While memory too well preserves a 
poisonous weed, it suffereth the rose of Sharon to wither. 
Let us charge ourselves to bind a heavenly forget-me-not 
about our hearts for Jesus our Beloved, and whatever ^i^'* 
we let slip, let us hold fast to Him< 




Ike 

■0 

lo^WiMKejwwwwii^JBiiaHi. Be ttapoed die 

Ae if«nB^ Kr. T«i«ft m« «SMr i^Mi ike i^cr jni loiig^ 
C Ap ciifgg «f G^iTs tyi-^7«vm dyUnm. We seed winds 
sad tcfl^ens to gccki^^ ««r &Bik, to tear aS ike rotten 
boogh of edf-d^p^desce, a^ u> root «s mate firmlj in 
Cbrist. 11iedaj<tf erflrereoktows^keTalBeof oor^oii- 
hope. 




April 80. DAILT SEADINGS. 121 

" And all the children of Israel murmured." — Num. xiv. 2. 

SRE are murmurers amongst Christians now, as 
there were in the camp of Israel of old. There are 
those who, when the rod falls, cry out against the af- 
fliotive dispensation. They ask, '' Why am I thus afflicted ? 
What have I done to be chastened in this manner ? *' A word 
with thee, murmurer ! Why shouldst thou murmur against 
the dispensations of thy heavenly Father? Can He treat 
thee more hardly than thou deservest ? Consider what a rebel 
thou wast once, but He has pardoned thee ! Surely, if He 
in His wisdom sees fit now to chasten thee, thou shouldst not 
. complain. After all, art thou smitten as hardly as thy sins 
deserve ? Consider the corruption which is in thy breast, 
and then wilt thou wonder that there needs so much of the 
rod to fetch it out ? Weigh thyself, and discern how much , 
dross is mingled with thy gold ; and dost thou think the fire 
too hot to purge away so much dross as thou hast ? Does not 
that proud rebellious spirit of thine prove that thy heart is 
not thoroughly sanctified ? Are not those murmuring words 
contrary to the holy submissive nature of God's children ? 
Is not the correction needed^? But if thou tuUt murmur 
against the chastening, take heed, for it will go hard with 
murmurers. God always chastises His children twice, if they 
do not bear the first stroke patiently. But know one thing 
— ** He doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of 
men." All His corrections are sent in love, to purify thee, 
and to draw thee nearer to Himself. Surely it must help 
thee to bear the (Chastening with resignation if thou art able 
to recognize thy Father^ s hand. For " whom the Lord lo'veth 
He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth. 
If ye endure chastening, God deateth with you as with sons." 
*' Murmur not as some of them also murmured and were de- 
Btroyed of the destroyer.'* 
11 




122 DAJXT BEAPOC&S. Msj? 1. 

"Mis €lieeMmp0 Ui a bed of^pices^ as sv>§st Jhvferi" — ^ Cant. v. 13. 

l^Oi the flowery montk ia conae i Marcli winds 'nnd 
April sliowers haTo done their work, and the earth 
is all bedecked with beautj. Come, my soul, put on 
tbine holiday attire, and go forth to gather garlands of heav- 
enly thoughts. ThoTi knowest whither to betake thyself, 
for to thee the *' beds of epiees '* are well known, and thoa 
• hast so often smelt the perfume of the ** sweet flowers,*' that 
thou wilt go at oDce to thy well-beloved and find all loveli- 
ness, all joy in Elm. That cheek onee so rudely sioitten 
with a rod, ofl bedewed with tears of sympathy, and then 
defiled with spittle — that cheek, as it smiles with mercy, ia 
as fragrant aromatie to my heart. Thou didst not hide Thy 
face ^om shame and spitdng, Lord Jesus, and therefore 
I will find my dearest delight in praising Thee. Those 
cheeks were furrowed by the plough of grief, and crimsoned 
with red lines of blood firom Thy thorn-crowned temples; 
eucb marks of love unbounded cannot but charm my soul far 
more than " pillars of perfume." If I may not see the whole 
of His face, I would behold His cheeks, for the least glimpse 
of Him is exceedingly refreshing to my spiritual sense, and 
yields a variety of delights. In Jesus I find not only fra- 
grance, but a bed of spices ; not one flower, but all manner of 
sweet flowers. He is to me my rose and my lily, my hearts- 
ease and my cluster of camphor. When he is with me, it is 
May all the year round^ and my soul goes forth to wash her 
happy face in the morning-dew of His grace, and to solace 
herself with the singing of the birds of His promises. Pre- 
cious Lord Jesus, let me in very deed know the blessedness 
which dwells in abiding, unbroken fellowship with Thee. 
I am a poor worthless one, whose cheek Thou hast deigtied 
to kiss. let me kiss Thee, in return, with the kisses of my 
lips. 




May 2. daily readings. 123 

" I pray noi ih4xt Thon shotddst take them out of the world." 
John xvii. 15. 

^T is a sweet and blessed event which will occur to all 
believers in God's own time — the going home to be 
with Jesus. In a few more years the Lord's soldiers, 
who are now fighting '* the good fight of faith," will have 
done with conflict, and have entered into the joy of their 
Lord. But although Christ prays that His people may event- 
ually be with Him where He is. He doea not ask that they 
may be taken at once away from this world to heaven. He 
wishes them to stay here. Yet how frequently does the 
wearied pilgrim put up the prayer, '' that I had wings like 
a dove, for then would I flee away and be at rest ! " but Christ 
does not pray like that; He leaves us in His Father's hands, 
until, like shocks of com fully ripe, we shall each be gathered 
into our Master's garner. Jesus does not plead for our in- 
stant removal by death, for to abide in the flesh is needful 
for others, if not profitable for ourselves. He asks that we 
may be kept from evil, but He never asks for us to be ad- 
mitted to the inheritanee in glory till we are of fall age. 
Christians often want to die when they have any trouble. 
Ask them why, and they tell you, " Because we would be 
-with the Lord." We fear it is not so much because they are 
longing to be with the Lord, as because they desire to get rid 
of their troubles ; else they would feel the same wish to die 
at other times, when not under the pressure of trial. They 
want to go home, not so much for the Saviour's company, as 
to be at rest. Now it is quite right ty desire to depart, if we 
can do it ih the same spirit that Paul did, be<5ause to be with 
Christ is far better ; but the wish to escape irom trouble is a 
selfish one. Rather let your care and wish be to glorify God 
by your life Iftre as long as He pleases, even though it be in 
the midst of toil, and conflict, and suffering, and leave Him 
to say when '* it is enough." 



124 DAU^ B£AJ>IBGS. Maj 0. 

** /i» ike world i/e shaU hase trUmi^^Uim/* — John xvL 33, 

irf^T thou agkiiig the reason of this, l>elieTer ? Look 
1;% vpward to tbj lieaTetilj Father, and behold Him 
•^ pvxe and lioJj- I>ost than know that thon art one 
day to be like Km ^ Wilt thou easily he conformed to His 

image ? Wilt then not require much refining in the furnace 
of affliction to purify thee r Will it be an eaaj thing to get 
rid of thy eormptions, and make thee perfeet, eren as thj 
Father which is in hear en is perfect ? Nextj Chris tiau, turn 
thine eye d(>wnward^ Dost thou know what foes thou hast 
beneath thy feet ? Thon wast once a servant of Satan^ 
and no king will willingly lose his subjects. Dost thou think 
that Satan will let thee aioae f Ko, he wiB be always at 
thee, for ho " goeth about like a roaring liou, seeking whom 
he may devour/' Expect trouble therefore, Cbristia!!, wheu 
tbou look eat beneath thee. Then look around thee. Where 
art thou? Thou art in an enemy'a country, a stranger 
and a sojourner. The world is not thy friend. If it 
be, then thou art not Grod's friend, for he who is the 
friend of the world is the enemy of Grod. Be assured that 
thou shalt find foemen everywhere. When thou sleepest, 
think that thou art resting on the battle-field; when thou 
walkest, suspect an ambush in every hedge. As mosquitos 
arc said to bite strangers more than natives, so will the trials 
of earth be sharpest to you. Lastly, look within thecy into 
thine own heart, and observe what is there. Sin and self 
are still within. Ah ! if thou hadst no devil to tempt thee, no 
enemies to fight thee, and no world to insnare thee, thou 
wouldst still find in thyself evil enough to be a sore trouble 
to thee, for " the heart is deceitful above aU things, and des- 
perately wicked." Expect trouble then, but despond not on 
account of it,,for God is with thee, to help and to strengthen 
thee. He hath said, " I wiU be with thee in trouble; I will 
deliver thee and honor thee." 




May 4; DAILY BEADDraS. 199 

** ShM a man make gods unto hifrutdf, and they are no gode^** 
Jer. xvi. 20. 

great besetting sin of ancient Israel was idolatry, 
and liie spiritual Israel are vexed with a tendency to 
the same folly. Bemphan's star shines no longer, 
and tilie women weep no more for Thamnmz ; but Mammon 
still intrudes his golden calf, and the shrines of pride are not 
forsaken. Self, in various forms, struggles to -subdue the 
chosen ones under its dominion, and the flesh sets up its al- 
tars wherever it can find space for them. Favorite children 
are often the cause of much sin in believers; the Lord is 
grieved when he sees us doting upon thepi above measure : 
tiiey will live to be as great a curse to us as Absalom was to 
David, or they will be taken from us to leave our homes deso- 
late» If Christians desire to grow thorns to stuff their sleep- 
less pillows, let them dote upon their dear ones. 

It is truly said that " they are no gods," for the objects of 
our foolish love are very doubtM blessings ; the solace which 
they yield us now is dangerous, and the help which they can 
give us in the hour of trouble is little indeed. Why, then, 
are we so bewitched with vanities ? We pity the poor hea- 
then who adores a god of stone, and yet worship a god of 
gold. Where is the vast superiority between a god of flesh 
and one of wood ? The principle, the sin, the folly is the 
same in either case, only that in ours the crime is more ag- 
gravated, because we have more light, and sin in the face of 
it. The heathen bows to a false deity, but the true God he has 
never known ; we commit two evils, inasmuch as we forsake 
the living Gk>d and turn unto idols. May the Lord purge us 
all from this grievous iniquity. 

"The dearest idol I hare knoxm. 
Whatever that idol be, 
Help me to tear it from thy thronci 
And worship only Thee." 

11* 




126 baUjI KBAi>iiro3,^ May 5* 

*'IwiU he ih^ir God^ and the^ shall he M^pwpleJ** — 2 Cor, tL 16k 

ilS^'HAT a sweet title — ** My people '* ! What a ebeering 
revel ati on — 'Hbeir God" ! How maoh of meaning 
ii cottched in those two words, " My people '' ! Here 
is speciality. The whol<^ world is Grod'a ; the heavee, even 
the heaven of heavens, is the Lord's, and He reign eth among 
the ehildren of men ; but, of those whom He hath chosen, 
whom He hath pnrchaaed to Himself^ He saitb what He 
saitb not of others — '' My people/* In this word there if 
the idea of propri^torsMp. In a special manner the "Lord's 
portion ia His people ; Jacoh is the lot of His inheritance/* 
All the nations upon earth are His ; the whole world is in 
His power; yet arc His people ^ His chosen, more especially 
Bis possession ; for He has done more for them than others ; 
He has bought them with his blood ; He has brought them 
nigh to Himself ; He has set His great heart upoti them; 
He has loved them with an everlastiDg love, a love wiiieli 
many waters cannot quench, and which the revolutions of 
time shall never suffiee in the least degree to diminish > 
Dear Mends, can yoU| by faith, see yourselves in that num- 
ber ^ Can you look up to heaven, and say> " My Lord and 
my God ; mine by that sweet relationship which entitles me to 
call Thee Father ; mine by that hallowed fellowship which I 
delight to hold with Thee when Thou art pleased to manifest 
Thyself unto me as Thou dost not unto the world ? " Canst 
thou read the Book of Inspiration, and find there the inden- 
tures of thy salvation ? Canst thou read thy title writ in 
precious blood ? Canst thou, by humble faith, lay hold of 
Jesus' garments, and say, "My Christ"? If thou canst, 
then God saith of thee, and of others like thee, "My peo- 
ple ; " for, if God be your God, and Christ your Christ, the 
Lord has a special, peculiar favor to you ; you are the ob- 
ject of His choice, accepted in His beloved Son. 




May 6. daily eeadings. 127 

« We dwdl in Eim."-^ 1 John iv. 13. 

jvO you want a house for your soul? Do you ask, 
" What is the purchase ? " It is something less than 
proud human nature will like to give. It is without 
money and without price. Ah ! you would like to pay a re- 
spectable rent ! You would love to do something to win 
Christ ! Then you cannot have the house, for it is " without 
price." Will you take my Master's house on a lease for a!! 
eternity, with nothing to pay for it, nothing but the ground- 
rent of loving and serving Him forever ? Will ybu take 
Jesus, and '^ dwell in Him " ? See, this house is furnished 
with all.you want ; it is filled with riches more than ypu will 
spend as long as you live. Here you can have intimate 
communion with Christ, and feast on His love ; here are ta- 
bles well stored with food for you to live on forever ; in it, 
when weary, you can find rest with Jesus ; and from it you 
can look out, and see heaven itself. Will you have the 
house ? Ah ! if you are houseless, you wijl say, ** I should 
like to have the house ; but may I have it ? " Yes ; there is 
the key — the key is, " Come to Jesus." " But," you say, 
" I am too shabby for such a house." Never mind ; there 
are garments inside. If you feel guilty and condemned, 
come ; and, though the house is too good for you, Christ 
will make you good enough for the house by and by. He 
will wash you and cleanse you, and you will yet be able to 
sing, " We dwell in Him." Believer ! thrice happy art thou 
to have such a dwelling-place ! Greatly privileged thou art, • 
for. thou hast a " strong habitation " in which thou art ever 
safe. And, " dwelling in Him," thou hast not only a per- 
fect and secure house, but an everlasting one. When this 
world shall have melted like a dream, our house shall livei 
and stand more imperishable than marble, more solid than 
granite, self-existent as God, for it is God Himself. " We 
dwell in Him." 




12S DAILY BEAPHfOB, May 7. 

**MuUitud€sfQllov^ed Simj and Me hmkd ihi^m aU," — Matt. xiL 15, 

[^]KAT a mass of hideous sicknees must haye tkniBt it- 
self under the eye of Jesus I Yet we read not tbat 
He was disgusted, but paticEtly waited on every 
case. What a singular variety of evils must hav^ met at 
His feet ! What sickening ulcers and putrefying sore^ ! Yet 
He was ready for every new shape of the monster evil, and 
waa victor over it in every form. Let the arrow fly from 
what quarter it might, He quenched its fiery power* The 
heat of fever, or the eold of dropsy ; the lethargy of palsy, 
or the rage of madness ; the filth of leprosy, or the darkness 
of ophthalmia, — all knew the power of His word, and fled at 
Hiii command. In every corner of the field He was triom- 
phant over evil, and received the homage of delivered cap- 
tives. He came. He saw, He conquered everywhere. It is 
even so this morning. Whatever my own case may be, the 
h cloved Physician can heal me ; and whatever may be the 
state of others whom I may remember at this moment in 
prayer, I may have hope in Jesus that He will he able to 
heal them of their sins. My child, my friend, my dearest 
one, I can have hope for each, for all, when I remember the 
healing power of my Lord ; and on my own account, however 
severe my struggle with sins and infirmities, I may yet be 
of good cheer. He who on earth walked the hospitals still 
dispenses His grace, and works wonders among the sons of 
men : let me go to Him at once in right earnest. Let me 
praise Him, this morning, as I remember how He wrought 
His spiritual cures, which bring Him most renown. It was 
by taking upon Himself our sicknesses. " By His stripes we 
are healed." The Church on earth is full of souls healed by 
our beloved Physician ; and the inhabitants of heaven itself 
confess that " He healed them all." Gome, then, my soul, pub- 
lish abroad the virtue of His grace, and Jet it be " to the Lord 
for a name, fu an everlasting sign which shall not be out off.** 




Majcd^ DAILTt XXADIKGWr 199 

^Be ihat vma UoHed wifi not who U mm," — John t. la. 

SABS are short to the happy and healthy ; but thirty- 
eight years of disease must have dragged a very 
weary length along the life of the poor impotent man. 
When Jesus, therefore, healed him by a word, while 
he lay at the pool of Bethesda, he was delightfiilly semible 
of a change. Even so the sinner, who has for weeks and 
mon^s been paralysed with despair, and has wearily sighed 
for salvation, is very oonsdons of the change when tiie Lord 
Jesus speaks the word of power, and gives joy and peace in 
believing. The evil removed is too great to be removed with- 
out our discerning it ; the life imparted is too remarkable to be 
possessed, and remain inoperative; and the change wrought is 
too marvellous not to be perceived. Yet the poor man was 
ignorcmt of the cmthor of his cure ; he knew not the sacredness 
of His person, the offices which He 0ustained, or the errand 
which brought Him among men* Much ignorance of Jesus 
may remain in hearts which yet feel the power of His blood» 
We must not hastily condemn men for lack of knowledge ; 
but where we can see the faith which saves the soul, we must 
believe that salvation has been bestowed. The Holy Spirit 
makes men penitents long before He makes them divines ; 
and he who believes what he knows shall soon know more 
clearly what he believes, ignorance is, however, an evil ; 
for tiiis poor man was much tantalized by the PharUeesy and 
was quite unable to cope with them. It is good to be able 
to answer gainsayers ; but we cannot do so if we know not 
the Lord Jesus clearly, and with understanding. The cure 
of his ignorance, however, soon followed the cure of his in- 
firmity, for he was visited by the Lord in the temple ; and, 
after that gracious manifestation, he was found testifying 
that " it was Jesus who had made him whole." Lord, if 
Thou hast saved me, show me Thyself, that I may declare 
Thee to the sons of men. 




j2^i kasibttmii whxA asMnirf m^ is mes. Ike lilood^ 
«weat» Ac ^c^arje- she cra«5« are «ii5 feterer. WliateTer 

giirymemoA, remrrt^cto&m. ««x«w», or uferoesmm, all are oms 
brffijowBgift- UpoaHkbreas^irteHeisBowbcmiigoiir 
names; aid in His aiiliiorilatiTe pkadmgs al t^be throne He 
remembers ©or persons and pleads onrcanse. m&damimum 
if^i^ pnneipalities and powers, and His absohile majesty in 
h^rftVfm, He employs for the benefit of them who tmst in Him. 
Hi« bigh estate is as much at onr serrice as was His con- 
iMijn ifi abatement. He who gave Himself for ns in the 
d«pih« of woe and death, doth not withdraw the grant now 
ik ii onihf oned in the higboet heavens. 




May 10. DAILY BEADINGS. 131 

: 4 

**But now is Christ risen from the dead.** — 1 Cor. xv. 20. 

whole system of Christianity rests upon the fact 
that "Christ is risen from the dead ;" for, *' if Christ 
be not risen, then is our preaching vain, and your 
faith is also vain : ye are yet in your sins." The divinity of 
Christ finds its surest proof in His resurrection, since He 
was " declared to be the Son of God with power, according 
to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead." 
It would not be unreasonable to doubt His deity if He had 
not risen. Moreover, Christ's sovereignty depends upon His 
resurrection, " fpr to this end Christ both died, and rose, 
and revived, that He might be Lord both of the dead and 
living." Again, our justification, that choice blessing of the 
covenant, is linked with Christ's triumphant victory over 
death andNihe grave ; for " He was delivered for our offences, 
and was raised again for our justification." Nay, more, our 
very regeneration is connected with His resurrection ; for we 
are " begotten again unto a Uvely hope by the resurrection 
of Jesus Christ from the dead." And most certainly our 
ultimate resurrection rests here ; for " if the Spirit of Him 
that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that 
raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal 
bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth in you." If Christ be not 
risen, then shall we not rise ; but if He be risen, then they who 
are asleep in Christ have not perished, but in their fiedh shall 
surely behold their God. Thus, the silver thread of resurrec- 
tion runs through all the believer's blessings, from his regen- 
eration onwards to his eternal glory, and binds them together. 
How important, then, will this glorious fact be in his estima- 
tion, and how will he rejoice that beyond a doubt it is estab- 
lished, that " now is Christ risen from the dead" ! 

"The promise is fulfilled, 

Redemption's work is done, 
Justice with mercy 's reconciled^ 
For God has raised His Son." 




1» 




' 16 veil there Is One 'w^Q is tret th^ same, and Vfho 

b ♦wr ^viA «r. It b m^eH there is one stable roek 

Ma ike Ulo«s of t}»e bc^ of life. O mj aoiil, set 

ftOl Iklae mie«tdB8 vpoa nrtm^, si^tli- eaten, decaying tTea^Hl 

ll«s« tet itt IUm lieazf i^pon Hin w^o abides foreTer faith^^ 

M lo 4fM* Bdd wM ttitte koQ9^ vpon tlie moving quick* 

i^idi of a deeeitfiil worM* b«it feiuid tBj hopes mpon this 

Boelu viucsli, siBid de^eendiiig fiiii and roaring ioods, shall 

stand ouonMjr secure. M j sovJ, I elurge thee, laj up 

thj treagicre im the oulj sernre eahmet ; itore thy jewels, 

where thou c&nfx i^ercr lo^ them. Fat thine all in Christ : 

e«l ill thioe ifffclio^ on His person, aD ihj hope in His 

]»OTi, an thj tr^t in His efficadons hlo^d^ all thy joy in His 

pe«ieoee« and so thoa majst lasgh at loss, and defy destme- 

tioa. Bamember that aB the lovers lu the world's garden fade 

hj tums^ and the day eonseth when nothing will be left but 

die hiaek* ecdd earth. Death's hlaek extinguisher inu^t soon 

put out thy caudle. Oh ! how gweet to have sunlight when the 

candle is gone ! The dark flood most soon roll between thee 

and all thou hast ; then wed thine heart to Him who will 

never leave thee; trust thyself with Him who will go with 

thee through the black and surging current of death^s stream, 

and who will land thee safely on the celestial shore, and 

make thee sit with Him in heavenly places forever. Go, 

sorrowing son of affliction, tell thy secrets to the Friend who 

Bticketh closer than a brother. Trust all thy concerns with 

Him who never can be taken from thee, who will never 

leave thee, and who will never let thee leave Him, even 

" Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to-day, and forever." 

" Lo, I am with you alway," is enough for my soul to live 

upon, let who will forsake me. 




May 12. daily beadings. 188 

•• And tnUmanifesi myself to HimJ* — John xiv. 21. 

I Lord Jesus gives special revelations of Himself to 
His people. Even if Scripture did not declare this, 
there are many of the children of God who could 
testify the truth of it from their own experience. They have 
had manifestations of their Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ 
in a peculiar manner, such as no mere reading or hearing 
could afford. Id. ilie biographies of eminent saints, you will 
find many instances recorded in which Jesus has been 
pleased, in a very special manner, to speak to their souls, 
and tQ unfold the wonders of His person ; yea, so have their 
souls been steeped in happiness that they have thought them- 
selves to be in heaven, whereas they were not there, though 
they were well nigh on the threshold of it— for when Jesus 
manifests Himself to His people, it is heaven on earth ; it is 
paradise in embryo ; it is bliss begun. Especial manifesta- 
tions of Christ exercise a holy influence on the believer's 
heart. One effect will be humility. If a man says, ** I have 
bad such and such spiritual communications, I am a great 
man," he has never had any communion with Jesus at all ; 
for " God hath respect unto the lowly ; but the proud He 
knoweth afar ojf." He does not need to come near them to 
know them, and will never give them any visits of love. 
Another effect will be happiness ; for in God's presence there 
are pleasures forevermore. Holvaess will be sure to follow. 
A man who has no holiness has never had this manifestation. 
Some men profess a great deal ; but we must not believe 
any one unless we see that his deeds answer to what he says. 
•* Be not deceived, God is not mocked." He will not bestow 
His favors upon the wicked : for while He will not cast away 
a perfect man, neither will He respect an evil doer. Thus 
there will be three effects of nearness to Jesus — humility, hap- 
piness, and holiness. May God give them to thee, Christian 1 
12 




4=- 

iKKk 



! Lirakiii^ as ^foi ka« m the pcoapeci> 
; ¥vK vieiL we get to kesi«m we shall 



** wit&. tranfyirtmg joys 
The hbaa of our bet.' 



Oar tnab win tk»i seem Hgkt azid iBoiiieiitaij affictions* Let 
US go on boldlf ; if tke nigiit be neTer so dazk^ the momiiig 
eometh, whieh is more that thej can saj idio are shut op in 
the darkness of helL Bo jon know what it is thus to five on 
the future — to Kre on expectation — to antedate hearen? 
Happy belierer, to hare so snre, so comforting a hope. It 
may be all dark now, but it will soon be light ; it may be all 
trial now, but it will soon be all happiness. What matters 
H though "weeping may endure for a night/' when "joy 
ootndih io iho morning'' t 




Hay 14, daily bsadikgs, 135 

"Joint heirs with Christ.^ — Bomans viiL 17. 

boundless realms of His Father's universe are 
Christ's by prescriptive right. As * * heir of all things," 
He is the sole proprietor of the vast creation of God, 
and He has admitted us to claim the whole as ours, by virtue 
of that deed of joint-heirship which the Lord hath ratified 
with His chosen people. The golden streets of paradise, the 
pearly gates, the river of life, the transcendent bliss, and the 
unutterable glory, are, by our blessed Lord, made over to us 
for our everlasting possession. All that He has He shares 
with His people. The crown royal He has placed upon the 
head of His Church, appointing her a kingdom, and calling 
her sons a royal priesthood, a generation of priests and kings? 
He uncrowned Himself that we might have a coronation of 
glory ; He would not sit upon His own throne until He had 
procured a place upon it for all who overcome by His blood. 
Crown the head, and the whole body shares the honor. Be- 
hold here the reward of every Christian conqueror ! Christ's 
throne, crown, sceptre, palace, treasure, robes, heritage, are 
yours. Far superior to the jealousy, selfishness, and greed, 
which admit of no participation of their advantages, Christ 
deems His happiness completed by His people sharing it. 
"The glory which thou gavest Me have I given them." 
" These things have I spoken unto you, that My joy might 
remain in you, and that your joy might be full." The smiles 
of His Father are all the sweeter to Him, because His people 
share them. The honors of His kingdom are more pleasing, 
because His people appear with Him in glory. More valu- 
able to Him are His conquests, since they have taught His 
people to overcome. He delights in His throne, because on 
it there is a place for them. He rejoices in His royal robes, 
since over them His skirts are spread. He delights the more 
in His joy, because He calls them to enter into it. 






to fEe son! m the Moment wfi^i it daaei wkh CkriM,, aoiil 
nceepta Him aa its aJl in alL Are tibt^ vko ataod ^elvini 
die lEiroflie of God jvitiied nov? — so »« w«, an tarafy ini 
SI eleai-]^ joftMetl as tWr wlio w^Ik m wUte \ 
£oiis iirmtset to eele^tial hups. The t^ef vpun Cke < 
, Waa justified the moment that lie tmned tlie e^e of &itli to 
J^sns; and Pmol the aged, ^er yeai9 of i«rnee, wa,& not 
more jiiati£ed thma vas Mie thief wtili no «crrioe at aH We 
are io-day ae<!epted in the BeloTedf to-d^ absolred from 
gin, to-day aeqoitted at the bar of Ood, O, soul-traos' 
portmg thought ! There are some elopers of EtihcoFa vine 
which w? ^ (lall not be able to gather tiH we enter heaven ; 
btit thiB i^ a baisgh which rmnneth o¥er the waU, Thia 
IS not a^ the com of the hmd, which we can nerer eat tiU 
wo cross the Jordan ; but this la part of the Tn^nna in the 
wilderness, a portion of our daily nutriment with whidi 
God supplies us in our journeying to and fro. We are 
now — even now pardoned ; even now are our sins put 
away ; even now we stand in the sight of God accepted, 
as though we had never been guilty. " There is tiierefor^ 
now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus." 
There is not a sin in the Book of God, even now, against 
one of his people. Who dareth to lay anything to their 
charge ? There is neither speck, nor spot, nor wrinkle, 
nor any such thing remaining upon any one believer in 
the matter of justification in the sight of the Judge of all 
the earth. Let present privilege awaken us to present 
duty, and now, while life lasts, let us spend and be spent 
for our sweet Lord Jesus* 




May 16. DAILY BEASINGS. 187 

** Who givdh us richly (ill things to enjoy. ^^ — 1 Timothy vL 17. 

Lord Jesus is ever giving, and does not for a 
solitary instant withdraw his hand. As long as there 
is a vessel of grace not yet full to the brim, the oil 
shall not be stayed. He is a sun ever-shining ; He is manna 
always falling round the camp ; He is a rock in the desert, 
ever sending out streams of life from His smitten side ; the 
rain of His grace is always dropping ; the river of His bounty 
is ever flowing, and the well-spring of His love is constantly 
overflowing. As the King can never die, so His grace can 
never fail. Daily we pluck His fruit, and daily His branches 
bend down to our hand with a fresh store of mercy. There 
are seven feast days in His weeks, and as many as are the 
days, so many are the banquets in His years. Who has ever 
returned from His door unblessed ? Who has ever risen from 
His table unsatisfied, or from His bosom un-emparadised ? 
His mercies are new every morning and fresh every evening. 
Who can know the number of His benefits, or recount the list 
of His bounties. Every sand which drops from the glass of 
time is but the tardy follower of a myriad of mercies. The 
wings of our hours are covered with the silver of His kind- 
ness, and with the yellow gold of His aflFection. The river of 
time bears from the mountains of eternity the golden sands 
of His favor. The countless stars are but as the standard 
bearers of a more innumerable host of blessings. Who can 
count the dust of the benefits which He bestows on Jacob, 
or tell the number of the fourth part of His mercies towards 
Israel ? How shall my soul extol Him who daily loadeth us 
with benefits, and who crowneth us with loving kindness ? 
that my praise could be as ceaseless as His bounty ! miser- 
able tongue, how canst thou be silent ? Wake up, I pray thee, 
lest I call thee no more my glory, but my shame. " Awake, 
psaltery and harp : I myself will awake right early." 
12* 




Chrot ? The^ dunili ] 
i — If %f mhU cae^e the i 
* ^^^ if tii^ won 

I so sssi^ jem tn j 

It k 
L sre eniMed to valk wiA\ 

^ flC (ML Feier m&r off 

p ^ii¥ie to be likal 
I beta sorelj sbot at t)j 

one halt &o dan* 
^v iHends. WImj made tho^ 

w>>uud$ in Uie l^ir kuid of godlmess r The professor who 
xs$^ Uie d;»^:^r v>f liTpo<nsy. The man wlio, with pret^iees, 
enters the i^>ld. being nought b<it a wolf in sheep's dothing. 
wv^rries the fLoek more than the Hon outside. There is no 
weapon half so deadij as a Jndas-kiss. Inconsistent pro- 
fes;sor$ injure the gospel more than the sneering critic or the 
infideL Bat> e^pedaUr fotr Ooists omm sdbe, imitate ffis 
example. Christian, lorest thon thj Savionr ? Is His name 
precious to thee r Is His cause dear to thee ? Wouldst 
thou see the kingdoms of the world become His ? Is ii thy 
desire that He should be glorified r Art thou longing that 
souls should be won to Him ? If so, imkaU Jesus ; be .an 
•' epistle of Christ, known and read of all men." 




May 1B» daily bbadixgs. 139 

** In Eim dweOdh aU ike fulness of the Godhead hodUy. And 
ye are complete in -Htm." — Colossians ii. 9, 10. 

^LL the attributes of Christ, as G-od and man, are at 
our disposal. All the fulness of the Godhead, what- 
ever that marvellous term may comprehend, is ours 
to make us complete. He cannot endow us with the attri- 
butes of Deity ; but He has done all that can be done, for He 
has made even Hia divine power and Godhead subservient 
to our salvation. His omnipotence, omniscience, omnipres- 
ence, immutability, and infallibility, are all combined for our 
defence. Arise, believer, and behold the Lord Jesus yoking 
the whole of His divine Godhead to the chariot of salvation ? 
How vast His grace, how firm His faithfulness, how unswerv- 
ing His immutability, how infinite His power, how limitless 
His knowledge i All these are by the Lord Jesus made the 
pillars of the temple of salvation ; and all, without diminution 
of their infinity, are covenanted to us as our perpetual inherit- 
ance. The fathomless love of our Saviour's heart is every 
drop of it ours ; every sinew in the arm of might, every 
jewel in the crown of majesty, the immensity of divine knowl- 
edge, and the sternness of divine justice, all are ours, and 
shall be employed for us. The whole of Christ, in His ador- 
able character as the Son of God, is by Himself made over 
to us most richly to enjoy. His wisdom is our direction. His 
knowledge our instruction. His power our protection. His 
justice our surety. His love our comfort. His mercy our sol- 
ace, and His immutability our trust. He makes no reserve^ 
but opens the recesses of the Mount of God, and bids us dig 
in the mines for the hidden treasures. '*A11, all, all are 
yours," saith He ; " be ye satisfied with favor and full of the 
goodness of the Lord." Oh ! how sweet thus to behold Je- 
sus, and to call upon Him with the certain confidence that in 
seeking the interposition of His love or power, we are but 
asking for that which He has akeady faithfully promised I 




ra bi^ smI the Iwt feflL Soe lav Ifcs fertile sons of 
kvi il Ib tie «v^* Wlii » Ugk him# tbrf ride 1 
How di^ HI 1^ tkm born on fai^ ! Hiinan is in the tstmHf 
n^M^ MmAmm «!■ m the gat«; BnTid vanders on the 
BioQniaiM^ vMIe Seal r^t^itf in slal^ ; £]i|a}i is eompl^nini^ 
in the eare, wliile Jezebel is boasting in the palace; jet 
who wonld wish to take the places of the prond rebels ? and 
who, on the other lumd, might not enTj the demised saints? 
When the wheel tnms, those who are lowest rise, and the high- 
est sink. Patience then, believer ! eternity will right the wrongs 
of time. Let us not fall into the error of letting onr passicms 
and carnal appetites ride in triumph, while our nobler powers 
walk in the dust. Grace must reign as a prince, and make the 
members of the body instruments of righteonisness. The Holy 
Hpirit loves order, and He therefore sets our powers and facnl- 
tioii in due rank and place, giving the highest room to those 
spiritual faculties which link ns with the great Eang ; let us not 
(linturb the divine arrangement, but ask for grace that we may 
keep under our body, and bring it into subjection. We were 
not new created to allow our passions to rule over us, but that 
jef as kings, may reign in Christ Jesus over the triple kingdom 
' spirit, soul, and body, to the glory of God the Father. 




MayjM). daily bsadikos. 141 

« Marvellous loving kindness" — Psalm xviL 7. 

we give oxu: hearts with our alms, we give well, 
but we must often plead to a failure in jiiis respect. 
Not so our Master and our Lord. His favors are 
alwajs performed wil^ the love of His heart. He does not 
fiend to us the oold meat and the broken pieoes from the ta- 
ble of His luxury, but He dips our morsel in His own dish, 
and seasons our provisions with the spices of His fragrant 
affections. When He puts the golden tokens of His grace 
into our palms, He accompanies the gifb with such a warm 
pressure of our hand, that the manner of His giving is as 
precious as the boon itself. He will come into our houses 
upon His errands of kindness, and He will not act as some 
austere visitors do in the poor man's cottage, but He sits by 
our side, not despising our poverty, nor blaming our weak- 
ness. Beloved, with what smiles does He spes^! What 
golden sentences drop from His gracious lips ! What em- 
braces of affection does He bestow upon us ! If He had but 
given us farthings, the way of His giving would have gilded 
them ; but as it is, the costly alms are set in a golden basket 
by His pleasant carriage. It is impossible to doubt the sin- 
cerity of His charity, for there is a bleeding heart stamped 
upon the face of all His benefactions. He giveth liberally, 
and upbraideth not. Not one hint that we are burdensome 
to Him ; not one cold look for ffis poor pensioners ; but He 
rejoices in His mercy, and presses us to His bosom while 
He is pouring out ELis life for us. There is a fragrance in 
His spikenard which nothing but His heart could produce ; 
there is a sweetness in His honeycomb which could not be 
in it unless the very essence of His soul's affection had been 
mingled with it. Oh ! the rare communion which such sin- 
gular heartiness effecteth ! May we continually taste and 
know the blessedness of it ! 




142 

**If9obe^e AuFe t&gttd that tkB Lord is ^mciemsJ"'^ I Peter E* 3.^ 

5?F : — then this is not a matter to be taken lor granted 
m eoneerniiig every one of tko Imman race, ^*-Iiz" — 
them there is a possibility &Qd a probability tbat 
gome may not have tasted lliat the Lord is graeious^ ^"If ; *^ 
— then this is not a general^ but a special mercy ; and it ig 
needful to inquire whether we know the grace of God by 
inward earperience. There is no spiritual favor wMeh may 
not be a matter for heart- searching. Bat while this should 
be a matter of earnest and prayerM inqniry, no one ought 
to be content whilst there is any such thing as an ^'if'* 
about bis having tasted that the Lord is gracious* A jealoui 
and holy distru^ of self may give rise to the question even 
in the believer's heart, but the continuanee of such a doubt 
would be an evil indeed- We must not rest without a des- 
perate struggle to clasp the Saviour in the arms of faith, 
and say, " I know whom I have believed, and I am per* 
suaded that Ke is able to keep that which I have committed 
nnto Him." JDo not rest, believer, till thou hast a full 
assurance of thine interest in Jesus. Let nothing satisfy 
thee till, by the infallible wifness of the Holy Spirit bearing 
witness with thy spirit, thou art certified that thou art a 
child of God. Oh, trifle not here ; let no ** perhaps," and 
" peradventure," and " if," and " may be," satisfy ihj souL 
Build on eternal verities, and verily build upon them. Get 
the sure mercies of David, and surely get them. Let thine 
anchor be cast into that which is within the veil, and see to 
it that thy soul be linked to the anchor by a cable that will 
not break. Advance beyond these dreary " ifs ; " abide no 
more in the wilderness of doubts and fears ; cross the Jor- 
dan of distrust, and enter the Canaan of peace, where the 
Canaanite still lingers, but where the land ceaseth not to 
flow with milk and honey. 




May 22. daily bsaddiob. 143 

**^e led thWi forth by the right toay." — Psalm cvii. 7. 

^GEFUL experience often leads the anxious be- 
liever to inquire, "Why is it thus with me?" I 
looked for light, but lo, darkness came ; for peace, 
but behold, trouble. I said in my heart. My moimtain stand- 
eth firm ; I shall never be moved. Lord, Thou dost hide 
Thy face, and I am troubled. It was but yesterday that I 
could read my title clear; to-day, my evidences are be- 
dimmed, and my hopes are clouded. Yesterday, I could 
climb to Pisgah's top, and view the landscape o'er, and rejoice 
with confidence in my future inheritance ; to-day, my spirit 
has no hopes, but many fears ; no joys, but much distress. 
Is this part of God's plan with me ? Can this be the way in 
which God would bring me to heaven ? Yes, it is even so. 
The eclipse of your faith, the darkness of your mind, the 
fainting of your hope, — all these things are but parts of 
God's method of marking you ripe for the great inheritance 
upon which you shall soon enter. These trials are for the 
testing and strengthening of your faith — they are waves 
that wash you farther upon the rock — they are winds which 
waft your ship the more swiftly towards the desired haven. 
According to David's words, so it might be said of you, 
. " So He bringeth them to their desired haven." By honor 
and dishonor, by evil report and by good report, by plenty 
and by poverty, by joy and by distress, by persecution and 
by peace, by all these things is the life of your soul main- 
tained, and by each of these are you helped on your way. 
Oh, think not, believer, that your sorrows are out of God's 
plan ; they are necessary parts of it. " We must, through 
much tribulation, enter the kingdom." Learn, then, even 
to " count it all joy when ye fall into divers temptations*' 

" O let my trembling soul be still, 
And wait Thy wise, Thy holy will ; 
I cannot, Lord, Thy purpose see, 
Yet aU is well* since ruled by Thee.'' 




"t 



Mi 

the VBabnki 

Hjb £d not 

tkat iHiic^ 

il 1^ nm iUg- 

1 Bern gr&w coM — joaj 

B iBore ii ; ** no, las ds^ 

It we indsl^ m snj 

u mU faM ifiom as, aad 
arrer at «itk tta twbsv to ««r 8«tow ami coBfnsiciiu All 
t^a£ BiiBrt ^ni« ti«e vffl ^uvf%t, to ^e «i»iial eoEifiisioii 
of all vbo are dufand tkovlB. The Psalmist was wise ; ha 
rt^ed vpon natlgBUg Aoff ^ the Lar^§ w«>rk. It is tlie 
Lciinl mh0 haj bcgn tke good wi^rk witliin us ; il is He who 
has canied it ow ; and if He does not £niah il, tt neTer will 
be complete* If th^e he one stitcli in t^ eeles^al gatment 
of our rigtiieoitsiiess which we are to ioscTi onrgelvesH, then 
we are lost ; bat this is our confidence, tiie Lord who began 
will perfect. He has done it all, must do it all, and vilL do 
it alL Our confidence most not be in what we have done, 
nor in what we have resolved to do, bat entirely in what the 
Lard will do. Unbelief insinuates — "Yon will never be 
able to stand. Look at the evil of joor heart; yon can never 
conquer sin ; remember the sinful pleasores and temptations 
of the world that beset you; you will be certainly allured by 
them and led astray." Ah ! yes, we should indeed perish if 
left to our own strength. If we had alone to navigate our frail 
vessels over so rough a sea, we might well give up the voyage* 
in despair ; but, thanks be to Grod, He will perfect that which 
conccrneth us, and bring us to the desired haven. We can 
never be too confident when we confide in Him alone, and 
iver too much concerned to havesuch a trust. 




May 24. daily headings. 145 

'* Blessed be Chd, which hcdh not turned away my prayer. ^^ 
Psalm Ixvi. 20. 

looking back upon the character of onr prayers, if 
we do it honestly, we shall be filled with wonder that 
Ch>d has ever answered them. There may be some 
who think their prayers worthy of acceptance — as the Phar- 
isee did; but die true Christian, in a more enlightened 
retrospect, weeps oyer his prayers, and if he could retrace 
his steps he would desire to pray more earnestly. Bemem- 
ber. Christian, how cdd thy prayers have been. When in thy 
doset thou shouldst have wrestled as Jacob did ; but instead 
thereof, thy petitions have been faint and few — far removed 
from .that Immble, believing, persevering faii^, which cries, 
*« I will not let Thee go except Thou bless me." Yet, wonder- 
ful to say, God has heard these cold prayers of thine, and not 
only heard, but answered them. Reflect, also, how unfrt" 
quent have been thy prayers, unless thou hast been in trouble, 
and O^en thou hast gone often to the mercy-seat ; but when 
deliverance has come, where has been thy constant supplica- 
tion? Yet, notwithstanding thou hast ceased to pray as 
once thou didst, God has not ceased to bless. When thou 
hast neglected the mercy-seat, God has not deserted it, but 
the bright light of the Shekinah has always been visible be- 
tween the wings of the cherubim. Oh ! ' it is marvellous that 
the Lord should regard those intermittent spasms of impor- 
tunity which come and go with our necessities. What a Gt)d 
is He thus to hear the prayers of those who come to Him 
when they have pressing wants, but neglect Him when they 
have received a mercy ; who approach Him when they are 
forced to come, but who almost forget to address Him when 
mercies are plentiful and sorrows are few ! Let EQs gracious 
kindness in hearing such prayers touch our hearts, so that 
we may henceforth be found "praying always with all prayer 
and supplication in the spirit." 
13 



140 i»Aii.T m^AifEsvm* Mmj ^^ 




n 



EEQUEliTLY we prmj tlial Ood wonli ii0t fbtnke 
fie lioiBr of trial md te^iutian^ baf w» too 
fo!rg^ ^al w« ba-re iieod m sse tMs pnjiiff of 
a£i Iuii6i. There is no momeni «f oor Ills, li0iirtrrfT 
boly^ in wfai^ we ean do wtticMt Mm miBlHit vptbeldiiig^ 
Whether in lighl or in dat^ness, in eBttnmiiioii or in temp- 
tatioQ, we alike need the prater, "^Fonike noBiil»OIi<ifd." 
•* Hold ThoB me up, and I ehall t>o anfe." A little dcild, 
whQe lemnung I0 walk, always needft t^e mirie's aid. The 
ship lefl by the pilot djifle at once front be? eomfie. Wo 
dannot do without continned aid £rom aboT^ ; let tt then be 
your prayer to-day, "Forsake me not,'' Father, forsake 
not Thy ehOd, le^t bo fall by th« hand of the enemy. Shep* 
berd« forsake not Thy lamb, lest be wander from the eaftty 
of the fold. Great Husbandman, forsake not Thy plant, lent 
It wither and die, " Forsake me not, Lord/' now ; and 
forsake tne not at anv niometit of mv life. Forsake me not 
in my joys, lest they absorb my heart. Forsake me not in 
my sorrows, lest I mnrmur against Thee. Forsake me not 
in the day of my repentance, lest I lose the hope of pardon, 
and fall into despair ; and forsake me not in the day -of my 
strongest faith, lest faith degenerate into presumption. ¥ia- 
sake me not, for without Thee I am weak, but with Thee I 
am strong. Forsake me not, for my path is dangerous, and 
full of snares, and I cannot do without Thy guidance. The 
hen forsakes not her brood ; do Thou then evermore cover 
me with Thy feathers, and permit me under Thy wings to 
find my refuge. " Be not far from me, O Lord, for trouble 
is near, for there is none to help." " Leave me not, neither 
forsake me, God of my salvation." 

" 0, ever in our cleansed breast 
Bid Thine Eternal Spirit rest. 
And make our secret soul to be 
A temple pure and worthy Thee."* 




May 26. daily bkabikgs. 147 

'< Cast iky burden tg^on ihe Lard^ and Be mHoU ^uskun thee." 
Psalm Iv. 22. 

even though exercised upon legitimate ohjects, 
i£ earned to excess, has in it the nature of sin. The 
precept to avoid anxious care is earnestly inculcated 
hy our Saviour, again and again ; it is reiterated by th« 
apostles ; and it is. one which cannot be neglected without 
involving transgression ; for the very essence of anxious care 
IB the imagining tiis^ we are wiser than Ood, and the thrust- 
ing ourselves into His place to do for Him that which He has 
undertaken to do for us. We attempt to think of that which 
we fancy He will forget ; we labor to take upon ourselves 
our weary burden, as if He were unable or unwilling to take 
it for us. Now this disobedience to His plain precept, this 
unbelief in His Word, this presumption in intruding upon 
His province, is all sinM. Yet more than this, anxious care 
ofben leads to acts of sin. He who cannot calmly leave his 
afiairs in God's hand, but will carry his own burden, is very 
likely to be tempted to use wrong means to help himself. 
This sin leads to a forsaking of God as our counsellor, and 
resorting instead to human wisdom. This is going to the 
** broken cistern" instead of to the '' fountain ; " a sin which 
was laid against Israel of old. Anxiety makes us doubt 
God's loving kindness, and thus our love to Him grows cold ; 
we feel mistrust, and thus grieve the Spirit of God, so that our 
prayers become hindered, our consistent example marred, and 
our life one of self-seeking. Thus want of confidence in 
God leads us to wander far from Him ; but if, through sim- 
ple faith in His promise, we cast each burden as it comes 
upon Him, and are '* careful for nothing " because He un- 
dertakes to care for us, it will keep us close to Him, and 
strengthen us against much temptation. " Thou wilt keep 
him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on Thee, because 
he trusteth in Thee." 




fmt i< did €txi CGmiinu- 
Ihk m ksik Ms fed* TM 

see ift hiB &ee the features 

c: :_, -,,. : -^-- MepMioahgili, we maj cry 

wt* 1^ Kag of Gloiy, "« Wlat is 1% derraiit, tiiat Than 

I diig aa I uu ? * ^ but Etill tlie 
coizrse with mmseif, 
I He ®«o ift o« MiBrtcawiflca die remembrance of His 
Ui Ijaedrs people a^e dear for an- 
M ItfPi vydi tbd Father beais to Hb 
L Ar ffis mke Me razf^s His Ic^wlj brethreti 
&ofli fway e rty and Waidaaent to couxilj compftmonsLip, noUe 
frnnk, moil rojal proTxsioii. Their il^<»nni^ sAoZI nof rod lAon 
^ikmF fiiifltJjLin. T^iftfiBfi is BO l»r to Bonskip ; the crip- 
|fe is as Maflk t]|« hm as if ke eonld nm like AsaheL Our 
Hf hi does not limp, though owt laigkt may. A king's table 
is a noble hiding-place for lame legs, and at the gospel feast 
we learn to glory in infirmities, because the power of Christ 
resteth upon us. Yet grievoas disability may mar the per- 
sons of the best-iovtd saitUs, Here is one feasted by David, 
and yet so lame in both his feet that he could not go up with 
the king when he fled firom the city, and was therefore ma- 
ligned and injured by his servant Ziba. Saints whose faith is 
weak, and whose knowledge is slender, are great losers ; they 
are exposed to many enemies, and cannot follow the king 
whithersoever he goeth. This disease frequently arises from 
falls. Bad nursing in their spiritual infancy often causes 
converts to fall into a despondency from which they never 
recover, and sin in other cases brings broken bones. Lord 
help the lame to leap like a hart, and satisfy all Thy people 
with the bread of Thy table 1 




May 28* pai^y bxadtnqb. 149 

« Wham He justified, them He also glorified." -^ILom. yiiL 30. 

■ ■ ' ■ ' 

SRE is a precious trnth for thee, believer. Thou 
mayst be poor, or in sufpiering, or unknown, but for 
thine encouragement take a review of thy '* calling/' 
and the consequences that flow from it, and especially that 
blessed result here spoken of. As surely as thou art G-od's 
child to-day, so surely shall all thy trials soon be at an 
end, and' tiliou shalt be rich to all the intents of bliss. 
Wait awhile, and that weary head shall wear the crovn of 
glory, and that hand of labor shall grasp the palm-branch 
of victory. Lament not thy troubles, but rather rejoice that 
ere long thou wilt be where '' there shall be neither sorrow 
nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain." The 
chariots of fire are at thy door, and a moment will suffice to 
bear ihee to the glorified. The everlasting song is almost 
on thy lip. The portals of heaven stand open for thee. 
Think not that thou canst fail of entering into rest. If He 
hath called thee, nothing can divide thee from His love. Dis- 
tress cannot sever the bond ; the fire of persecution cannot 
bum the link ; the hammer of hell cannot break the chain. 
Thou art secure ; that voice which called thee at first, shall 
call thee yet again from earth to heaven, from death's dark 
gloom to immortality's unuttered splendors. Rest assured, 
the heart of Him who has justified thee beats with infinite 
love towards thee. Thou shalt soon be with the glorified, 
where thy portion is ; thou art only waiting here to be made 
meet for the inheritance ; and that done, the wings of angels 
shall waft thee far away to the mount of peace, and joy, and 
blessedness, where 

** Far from a T^orld of grief and sin, 
With God eternally shut in," 

thou shalt rest forever and ever. 
13* 



Wmj^. 



'—^^dm Al 7- 




^; Vol tfe prteeepls of 
, ^a&e it ant 
k a Ae dDdreh. So 
»mr there is be- 
ler shsU 
'Depart, 
a |ct>loBf3ii^ii of His 
i Mnfesi Hii abkorrence 
«f iaii|ulj. Aft wmn m is ffis Icrre t0 iomers^ sa hot is 
Hb bitred of BB ; at pofeci 19 ia ffis i^lileoaaDesSt so 
complete duD be ^ iestraetim of erety fonn of wictked- 
nei^a. O tboti glorioos eliflnipion of rigbt, and destroyer 
of ^Tong, for tills eame hath God^ eTca tlij God, anointed 
thee iritL the oO of gladness above ikj fellaws* 



\ 




May so. daily BSADnras. 151 

** Take us the foxes, ihe little foxes that spoU the vines.** 
Canticles ii. 15. 

LITTLE thorn may cause much suffering. A litde 
cloud may hide the sun. Little foxes spoil the 
vines; and little sins do mischief to the tender 
heart. These little sins burrow in the soul, and make it 
full of that which is hateful to Christ, so that He will hold 
no comfortable fellowship and communion with us. A^great 
sin cannot destroy a Christian, but a little sin can make him 
miserable. Jesus will not walk with His people unless they 
drive out every known sin. He says, '* If ye keep My com- 
mandments, ye shall abide in My love, even as I have kept 
My Father's commandments and abide in His love." Some 
Christians very seldom enjoy their Saviour's presence. How 
is this ? Surely it must be an afiOiiction for a tender child to 
be separated from his father. Art thou a child of God, and 
yet satisfied to go on without seeing thy Father's face ? 
What ! thou the spouse of Christ, and yet content without 
His company ! Surely, thou hast fallen into a sad state, for 
the chaste spouse of Christ mourns like a dove without her 
mate, when He has left her. Ask, then, the question. What 
has driven Christ from thee ? He hides His face behind the 
wall of thy sins. That wall may be built up of little pebbles, 
as easily as of great stones. The sea is made of drops ; the 
rocks are made of grains : and the sea which divides thee 
from Christ may be filled with the drops of thy little sins ; 
and the rock which has well nigh wrecked thy bark, may 
have been made by the daily working of the coral insects of 
thy little sins. If thou wouldst live with Christ, and walk 
with Christ, and see Christ, and have fellowship with Christ, 
take heed of " the little foxes that spoil the vines, for our 
vines have tender grapes." Jesus invites you to go with 
Him and take them. He will surely, like Samson, take the 
foxes at once and easily. Go with Him to the hunting. 




al t^Ae. 1$ il bttAf pHB, p«va^« fiMWuMiim , or con- 
tempir Orer eacb of these Bdnms the King has gone 
before as. ^ In all our affikdons He was afficted." The 
idea of strangeness in onr trials must be bani^ed at once and 
forerer, for He, who is the Head of all saints, knows by ex- 
perienee the grief which we think so peculiar. All the citi- 
zeu» of Zion most be free of the HonoraUe Company of 
MoumerSy of which the Prince Immannel is Head and Captain. 
Notwithstanding the abasement of David, he yet retomed 
in triumph to his city, and David's Lord arose victorions 
from the grave ; let us then be of good courage, for we also 
HlittU' win the day. We shall yet with joy draw water out of 
tli<5 well« of Balvation, though now for a season we have to 
jmMM liy the noxious streams of sin and sorrow. Courage, 
HoldicrH of the Cross; the King himself triumphed after going 
ovar Kidron, and 00 shall you. 




June 1. DAILT BXABIKOS. 158 

** The evening and the morning were ihejiret day.** — Genesis i. 5. 

JAS it so even in the beginning ? Did Kght and dark- 
ness divide the realm of time in the first day ? Then 
litUe wonder is it if I have also changes in my cir- 
emnstanoes from the sunshine of prosperity to the midnight 
of adversity. It will not always be the blaze of noon even in 
my sonl concerns ; I must expect at seasons to mourn the ab- 
sence of my former joys, and seek my Beloved in the night. 
Nor am I alone in this, for all the Lord's beloved ones have 
had to sing the mingled song of judgment and of mercy, of 
trial and deliverance, of mourning and of delight. It is one 
of the arrangements of divine Providence that day and night 
shall not cease, either in the spiritual or natural creation, till 
we reach the land of which it is written, '' There is no night 
tiiere." What our heavenly Father ordains is wise and good. 
What then, my soul, is it best for thee to do ? Learn first 
to he content with this divine order, and be willing with Job 
to receive evil from the hand of the Lord as well as good. 
Studi^ next to make the outgoings of the morning and the even^ 
ing to rejoice. Praise the Lord for the sun of joy when it 
rises, and for the gloom of evening as it falls. There is 
beauty both in sunrise and sunset ; sing of it, and glorify the 
Lord. Like the nightingale, pour forth thy notes at all 
hours. Believe that the night is as useful as the day. The 
dews of grace fall heavily in the night of sorrow. The stars 
of promise shine forth gloriously amid the darkness of 
grief. Continue thy service under all changes. If in the 
day thy watchword be labor, at night exchange it for 4vatch, 
Every hour has its duty ; do thou continue in thy calling as 
the Lord's servant until He shall suddenly appear in his 
glory. My soul, thine evening of old age and death is 
drawing near ; dread it not, for it is part of the day ; and 
the Lord has said, "I will cover him all the day long." 



154 DAILY BBABnraa. 




" Jbr the fitih hate^k a gains Hht Spirit, and the Spirit a^ainM ' 
ili€ flesh.*' — Gal, V. 1 7- 

I3f[0j^ every belieTer*s heart ther€ is a comstaiit straggle 
Si M between the old nature and the new* The old hsf- 



cS?% "cfl between tlie old nature ana ttie new* The aict na^r , 
^^ tore IB very active, and loses no opportunity of pljW^ 
ing aD the weapons of its deadly armory against new-bom 
grace ; while, on the other hand» the new nature is ever on 
the watoh to reiigt and destroy its enemy. Grace witliin iis 
will employ prayer, and faith, and hope, and love, to east 
out the evil ; it takes unto it tho " whole armor of God," and 
wrestles earnestly. These two opposing natures mil never 
cease to struggle go long as we are in this world. The bat^ 
tie of " Christian " with " ApoUyon " lasted three hours, bnt 
the battle of Chriatian with himself lasted aJi the way from 
the Wicket Gate to the Kiver Jordan. The enemy ia so se* 
eurely intrenched within us that he can never be driven out 
while we are in this body : but although we are closely be^ 
set, and often in sore confliet, we have an Almighty Helper, 
even Jesus, the Captain of our salvation, who is ever with 
us, and who assures us that we shall eventually come off 
more than conquerors through EUrn. With such assistancey 
the new-born nature is more than a match for its foes. Are 
you fighting with the adversary to-day? Are Satan, the 
world, and the flesh, all against you ? Be not discouraged 
nor dismayed. Fight on ! For God Himself is with you ; 
Jehovah Nissi is your banner, and Jehovah Bophi is the 
healer of your wounds. Fear not; you shall overcome; for 
who can defeat Omnipotence? Fight on, "looking unto 
Jesus ; " and, though long and stern be the conflict, sweet 
will be the victory, and glorious the promised reward. 

" From strength to strength go on ; 
Wrestle, and fight, and pray, 
Tread all the powers of darkness dowiif 
And win the well-fought day." 




June 8. daily BEADnrGa. 155 

" These wearepotten^ and those that dtodt among plants and hedges : 
there they dwdt with the king for his workJ* — 1 Chron. iv. 23. 

|OTTERS were not the very highest grade of workers, 
buf the king" needed potters, and therefore they 
were in royal service^ although the material upon 
which they worked was nothing but clay. We, too, may be 
engaged in the most menial part of the Lord's work, but it 
is a great privilege to do anything for " the king ; " and 
therefore we will abide in our calling, hoping that, '^ although 
we have lien among the pots, yet shall we be as the wings 
of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow 
gold." The text tells us of those who dweU ainong pkmts 
cmd hedgesy having rough, rustic, hedging and ditching work 
to do. They may have desired to live in the city, amid its 
life, society, and refinement, but they kept their appointed 
places, for they also were doing the king's work. The place 
of our habitation is fized, and we are not to remove from it 
out of whim and caprice, but seek to serve the Lord in it, by 
being a blessing to those among whom we reside. These 
potters and gardeners had royal company^ for they dwelt 
^' with the king," and although among hedges and plants, 
they dwelt with the king there. No lawful place, or gracious 
occupation, however mean, can debar us from communion 
with our divine Lord. In visiting hovels, swarming lodging- 
houses, workhouses, or jails, we may go vnth the king. In all 
works of faith we may count upon Jesus' fellowship. It is when 
we are in His work that we may reckon upon His smile. Ye un- 
known workers, who are occupied for your Lord amid the dirt 
and wretchedness of the lowest of the low, be of good cheer, 
for jewels have been found upon dunghills ere now, earthen 
pots have been filled with heavenly treasure, and ill weeds 
have been transformed into precious flowers. Dwell ye with 
the King for His- work, and when He writes His chronicles 
your name shall be recorded. 



«flii 



llmx^Gwimm' . 



^ — TitfisiiL'l. 




cbr S&TioQF eonuntuatng 
de I Thf're can he noih^ 
^ hf Alt ftiTine %)irit« to W 
laiMM^Mlsrtak S^d nf diljtfcl JUet tJie mind for m 
juiltfiMBvier tl»e Msfeatj «C ^^ Bcdceuer^s love^ and s 
■ia«CaffecEcioii will suggest tiiemselTeSf 
I §m l&ttr 4iiBi|gD tlie weftTmg of the 
I Am iatertsifltabg of the tlioagkts &Ed 
irf tWtWMPcd simI «ttk the siiiid of Jesiis, When 

iMiii «^lii« oar ftMls ma^ well &iBl for joj. Who is he 
tlBit tan i ^Jm> wmh m wm^ «£ |0V«? tThAi partial sense , 
of tl mUA tiM B% Spnifc is wiHiiCQ pa^ft&ed to dlord 
b mvf^ Amm Am m«1 cmb c<mlim; kow ttiatt»oHiiig muBl 
W m ^Mifkte mtm ef it ! When l^ sool shall have under* 
Maading to ^seeiH all the 8aTM>iir*& gil^^, wisdom wherewith 
tii> > ' ~ ' ' ' meditate tijmjij them, 

sach as the world to come will afford us, we shall then com- 
mune with Jesos in a nearer manner than at present. Bat 
who can imagine the sweetness of such fellowship ? It most 
be one of the things which hare not entered into the heart 
of man, but which God hath prepared for them that love 
Him, Oh, to burst open the door of our Joseph's granaries, 
and see the plenty which He hath stored up for us ! This 
will overwhelm us with love. By faith we see as in a glass 
darkly the reflected image of His unbounded treasures, bat 
when we shall actually see the heavenly things themselves, 
with our own eyes, how deep will be the stream of fellowship 
in which our soul shall bathe itself ! Till then, our loudest 
gonuots shall be reserved for our loving benefactor, Jesus 
P^l^^ur Lord, whose love to us is wonderful, passing the 




June 5. daily bjradinqs. 157 

*' The Lord shiut him in." — Genesis yiL 16^ 

go AH was shut in away from all the world by the hand 
of divine love. The door of electing purpose inter- 
poses between ns and the world which lieth in the 
wicked one. We are not of the world, even as our Lord 
Jesus was not of the- world. Into the sin, the gayety, the 
pursuits of the multitude we cannot enter ; we cannot play 
in the streets of Vanity Fair with the children of- darkness, 
for our heavenly Father has shut us in. Noah was shut in 
with his Ood. *' Come thou into the ark," was the Lord's 
invitation, by which He clearly showed that He himself in- 
tended to dwell in the ark with EKs servant and his family. 
Thus all the chosen dwell in God and God in them. Happy 
people to be enclosed in the same oircle which contains God 
in the Trinity of His persons. Father, Son, and Spirit. Let 
us never be inattentive to that gracious call, ''Come, my 
people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors 
about thee, and hide thyself as it were for a little moment, 
until the indignation be overpast." Noah was so shut in that 
no evil could reach him. Floods did but lift him heaven-ward, 
and winds did but waft him on his way. Outside of the ark all 
was ruin, but inside all was rest and peace. Without Christ 
we perish, but in Christ Jesus there is perfect safety. Noah 
was so shut in that he could not even desire to come ov;t, and 
those who are in Christ Jesus are in Him forever. They shall 
go no more out forever, for eternal faithfulness has shut 
them in, and infernal malice cannot drag them out. The 
Prince of the house of David shutteth and no man openeth ; 
and when once in the last days, as Master of the house. He 
shall rise up and shut to the door, it will be in vain for mere 
professors to knock, and cry, Lord, Lord, open unto us, for 
that same door which shuts in the wise virgins will shut out 
the foolish forever. Lord, shut me in by Thy grace. 
14 



us mxLt TKMAJxam, Jivw^fb 



^Jffdfflff, I mn nfh.* Ttih ri. JL 




ehMring word, poor lort BaiMr,iDr IImI ir1ir 

tUnk you muBt not eome to God beoMiie .]rq(l|kli|^ 

▼ilo. Nowy ihero u not a Mint livuig o&iiirfHHi 

hu been nudo to fed that he is yriMh if.«l#lb, 

and Paul were all obliged to aaj, I am tflew <d^ ! 

wik Aott be ashamed to join is the aaoie newftsiii»^> ^JjL 

diiine grace does not eradioatoatt sen ftoHihe bili0ir«c# WjK 

dost thou hope to do iithyBetfr aad if fikid loYea:Bisfafli)|| 

while thefVe yet Tile , dost thou tUak thy Tileaesa wiHimK 

▼ant His knring thee? BeUeTOon Jesos^thomratosstofllui 

wodd's society ! Jesus oaUs tibe, kaad suok aa them uL,..].'. 

•• Hat flM rii^itMM» Bottha lii^toOM I 
Sinnm, Jmm eviiA to ^aU." 

Bven now say» " Thou hsst died for sinners; I mari|ii|ttr* 
Lord Jesos, sprinkle Thy Uoodonme;'' if thouwiH^0Qi^Ba» 
thy sin, thou shalt find pardon. If, now, with all thy heart, 
thou wilt say, '^ I am vile ; wash me," thou shalt be washed 
now. If the Holy Spirit shall enable thee from thy heart to 
tsry, — 

*' Jast as I am, without one plea 
But that Thy blood was shed for me, 
And that Thou bid'st me come to Thee, 
0, Lamb of GK>d, I come I "^ 

thon shalt rise from reading this morning's portion with all 
thy sins pardoned ; and though thou didst wake this morning 
with every sin that man hath ever committed on thy head, 
thou shalt rest to-night accepted in the Beloved ; though once 
degraded with the rags of sin, thou shalt be adorned witUit 
robe of righteousness, and appear white as the angels are. 
For " now,-' mark it, " now is the accepted time." If thou 
" believest on Him who justifieth the ungodly thou art saved." 
Oh ! may the Holy Spirit give thee saving faith in Him who 
receives the vilest. 




Jime 7. DAILT BiBABINOS. 159 

«r« that love the Lord, hate eoilJ'^Vwhxi xeviL 10. 

lOU hast good reason to " hate evil ;"• for only con- 
sider what harm it has already wrought thee. Oh, 
what a world of mischief sin has brought into thy 
heart ! Sin blindeth thee, so that thou couldst not see the 
beauty of the Saviour ; it made thee deaf, so that thou couldst 
not hear the Eedeemer's tender invitations. Sin turned thy 
feet into the way of death, and poured poison into the very 
fountain of thy being ; it tainted thy heart, . and made it 
** deceitfol above all things, and desperately wicked." Oh, 
what a creature thou wast when evil had done its utmost 
wiih thee, before divine grace interposed ! Thou wast an 
heir of wrath even as others ; thou didst ^* run with the 
multitude to do evil." Such were all of us ; but Paul reminds 
us, " but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are 
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of 
our God." We have good reason, indeed, for hating evil 
when we look back and trace its deadly workings. Such mis- 
chief did evil do us, that our souls would have been lost had 
not omnipotent love interfered to redeem us. Even now it 
is an active enemy, ever watching to do us hurt, and to drag 
us to perdition. Therefore " hate evil," Christians, unless 
you desire trouble. If you would strew your path with thorns, 
and plant nettles in your death-pillow, then neglect to " hate 
evil ; " but if you would live a happy life, and die a peaceful 
death, then walk in all the ways of holiness, hating evil, even 
unto the end. If you truly love your Saviour, and would 
T^onor Him, then " hate evil." We know of no cure for the 
love of evil in a Christian like abundant intercourse with the 
Lord Jesus. Dwell much with Him, and it is impossible for 
you to be at peace with sin. 

" Order my footsteps by Thy "Word, 
And make my heart sincere ; 
Let sin have no dominion, Lord, 
But keep my oons^ence clear." 




160 BAiLT s£Ai>oroi. June S» 

** There f^ dotm jwony slaint bemuse the war wo* of 0odL" 

f -ARRIOR, fighting under the baaner of the Lord Jenua, 
observe this rerse witb holy joy, for as it was in the 
days of old, 90 is it now ^ if the war be of God, the 
victory is snre. The sons of Reuben, and the Gaditas, and 
the half tribe of Manaaseh, eonld barely muster five and forty 
thouBand figbtmg men ; and yet in their war with the Hagar- | 
itee, they slew ** men a hundred thousand/' *^ for they cried 
to God m the battle* and He was entreated of them, because 
they put their trtust in Him." The Lord saveth not by many 
nor by few; it is ours to go forth in Jehovah's name if 
we be but a handfol of men, for the Lord of Hosts is with ua 
for onr Captain. They did not neglect buckler, and sword, 
and bow, neither did they place their trust in these weapons ; 
we muit use all fitting means, but our confidence must rest 
in the Lord alone, for He is the sword and the shield of His 
people- The great reason of their extraordinary success lay 
in the fact that " the war was of God." Beloved, in fighting 
with sin without and within, with error doctrinal or practical, 
with spiritual wickedness in high places or low places, with 
devils and the devil's allies, you are waging Jehovah's war, 
and unless He himself can be worsted, you need not fear 
defeat. Quail not before superior numbers, shrink not firom . 
difficulties or impossibilities, flinch not at wounds or death, 
smite with the two-edged sword of the Spirit, and the slain 
shall lie in heaps. The battle is the Lord's, and He will deliver 
His enemies into our hands. With steadfast foot, strong 
hand, dauntless heart, and flaming zeal, rush to the conflict, 
and the hosts of evil shall fly like chaff before the gale. 

" Stand up ! stand up for Jesus ! To Him that overcometh. 
The strife will not be long ; A crown of life shall be ; 

This day the noise of battle, He with the King of glory 
The next the victor's song : Shall reign eternally." 




June 9. DAILY BEADINGS. 161 

'' The Lord hath done great things for ua, whereof toe are glad/* 
Psalm exxvL 3. 

)ME Christians are sadly prone to look on the dark 
side of everything, and to dwell' more upon what they 
have gone through than upon what God has* done for 
them. Ask for their impression of the Christian life, and they 
will describe their continual conflicts, their deep afflictions, 
their sad adversities, and the sinfulness of their hearts, yet 
with scarcely any allasion to the mercy and help which God has 
vouchsafed them. But a Christian whose soul is in a healthy 
state will come forward joyously, and say, '^ I will speak, not 
about myself, but to the honor of my God. He hath brought 
me up out of a horrible pit, and out of the miry clay, and set 
my feet upon a rock, and established my goings : and He hath 
put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God. The 
Lord hath done great things for me, whereof I am glad.'' 
Such an abstract of experience as this is the very best that 
any child of God can present. It is true that we endure trials, 
but it is just as true that we are delivered out of them. It is 
true that we have our corruptions, and mournfully do we know 
this, but it is quite as true that we have an all-sufficient Sa- 
viour, who over«omes these corruptions, and delivers us from 
their dominion. In looking back, it would be wrong to deny 
that we haive been in the Slough of Despond, and have crept 
along the Valley of Humiliation ; but it would be equally 
wicked to forget that we have been through them safely and 
profitably; we have not remained in them, thanks to our Al- 
mighty Helper and Leader, who has brought us " out into a 
wealthy place." The deeper our troubles, the louder our 
thanks to God, who has led us through all, and preserved us 
until now. Our griefs cannot mar the melody of our praise ; 
we reckon them to be the bass part of our life's song, " He 
hath done great things for us, whereof we are glad." 
14* 




L^ liavrwB M At MMM «r ■■■lllliM B 

to be ft] 

he hi&ta 

saa^rtifi^ticiiL is « 
ifeoc be {perfected 
tin we Ibtfaadfliwrbo^ss sad cater viUB Hie Teil; liivtn€T- 
itrtbe4«H, !ia^ ike Lord so wOicsd ijI, He migiit kava fshaapfl 
■ft h^m uifcefiectioB l4» peife«doa^ aod tiave taken iti to 
kcafcn al aaaa* Wlrj tbeii are we h&re f Would 6t^ ke^p 
Hii childreii oat of pandkc a sia^a akDmemt longer tlima wii 
aec^saij ? Wky k tlie arsKjr of tfaa Mricg God gtill on tlie 
baitle^ieid, wksm oaa ehvga might gire tLem the Tietory ? 
'Why are Hii diildr^a EtiH wandering hitlier and thither 
tUrottgh a maxe, wheti a soHtaiy word from His lips would 
briog them into the centre of their hopes in hcaTen ? The 
answer is — They are here that they may " live ufUo the hord^ 
and may bring others to know His love. We remain on earth 
as sowers to scatter good seed ; as ploughmen to break up the 
fallow ground ; as heralds publishing salvation. We are here 
as the ^' salt of the earth," to be a blessing to Uie world. 
We are here to glorify Christ in our daily life. We are 
here as workers for Him, and as ''workers together with 
Him/* Let us see that our life answereth its end. Let us 
live earnest, useful, holy lives, to " the praise of the glory 
of His grace." Meanwhile we long to be with Him, and 
daily sing — 

'* My heart is with Him on His throne, 
And ill can brook delay ; 
Each moment listening for the voicOi 
Bise up, and come away.' " 



'-^ 



June 11. DAILY xejldikgs. 163 

''We love Sim hecaum He first loved t£«."— 1 John iy. 19. 

^■jBpBLBKE is no Kght in the planet but that which pro- 
^ra^H eeedeth from the sun ; and there is no true love to 
'*'■■"** Jesus in the heart but that which cometh from the 
Lord Jesus Himself. From this overflowing fountain of the 
infinite love of God, all our love to God must spring. This 
must ever be a great and certain truth, that we love Him for 
no other reason than because He first loved us. Our love 
to Him is the f cm offspring of His love to us. Cold admira- 
tion, when studying the works of God, any one may have ; 
but the warmth of love can only be kindled in. the heart by 
God's Spirit. How great the wonder that such as we should 
ever have been brought to love Jesus at all ! How marvellous 
that when we had rebelled against Him, He should, by a 
display of such amazing love, seek to draw us back. No ! 
never should we have had a grain of love towards God unless 
it had been sown in us by the sweet seed of His love to us. 
Love, then, has for its parent the love of God shed abroad 
in the heart ; but after it is thus divinely bom, it must be 
divinely nourished. Love is an exotic; it is not a plant 
which will flourish naturally in human soil, it must be watered 
from above. Love to Jesus is a flower of a delicate nature ; 
and if it received no nourishment but that which could be 
drawn from the rock of our hearts, it would soon wither. 
As love comes from heaven, so it must feed on heavenly 
bread. It cannot exist in the wilderness unless it be fed by 
manna from on high. Love must feed on love. The very 
60ul and life of our love to God is His love to us. 

" I love Thee, Lord, but with no love of mine, 

For I have none to give ; 
I love Thee, Lord, but all the love is Thine, 

For by Thy love I live, 
I am as nothing, and rejoice to be 
£mptied, and lost, and swallowed up in Thee." 



^ThGUr art wdgJw^ in the ba^enea ^id/omtd wimiimg^'' 
Daniel t, 27* 

ffpa b weU frequentlj to w^igh onrselTes in the scale of 
1 0] God's Word* Yoti will find it a k&lj exerdse to reid ^j 
•^ some ps&lni of David, and^ as joe meditaete iipoiH 

emh. Terse, to ask yourself, '' Can I &aj tluB ? Hare I felt 
' a^ David felt ? Has mj heart ever beea broken on account of 
sin, aa his was when he penned his penitential psahna f H&s 
my sotil been fiill of tme confidence in the honr of di:Seiiltj, 
as his was wben he sang of God*e mercies in the cave of 
Adollam, or in the bolds of Engedi f Do I take the cap 
of salvation and caU npon the name of the Lord ? *' Then 
turo to the life of ChrigtH, and, as yon read, ask yourselves 
how far you are conforraied to His likeness. Endeavor to 
discover whether yon have the meekneBS, the hnmility, the 
lovely spirit which He constantly inculcated mid displayed. 
Take, then, the epistles, and see whether yon can go with 
the apostle In what ho said of his experience. Have you 
ever cried out as he did — ** O wretched man that I am! 
who shall deliver me from the body of this death ? " Have 
you ever felt his self-abasement? Have you seemed to 
yourself the chief of sinners, and less than the least of all 
saints ? Have you known anything of his devotion ? Could 
you join with him and say, " For me to live is Christ, and to 
die is gain " ? If we thus read God's Word as a test of our 
spiritual condition, we shalJi have good reason to stop many 
a time and say, " Lord, I feel I have never yet been here ; 

bring me here ! give me true penitence, such as this I read 
of. Give me real faith ; give me warmer zeal ; inflame me 
with more fervent love ; grant me the grace of meekness ; 
make me more like Jesus. Let me no longer be * found 
wanting,* when weighed in the balances of the sanctuary, lest 

1 bo found wanting in the scales of judgment." " Judge 
yourselves that ye be not judged." 




June 13. DAILY BEADINGS. 165 

" Whoso€X)er wUl, let him take the water ((flifefredy** — Rev. xxii.l7. 

SSUS says, " Take freely." He wants no payment 
or preparation. He seeks no reoommendation from 
our virtuous emotions. If you have no good feelings, 
if you be but willing, you are invited ; therefore come ! You 
have no belief and no repentance, — come to Him, and He 
will give them to you. Gome just as you are, and take 
" freely," without money and without price. He gives Him- 
self to needy ones. The drinking fountains at the corners 
of our streets are valuable institutions ; and w^ can hardly 
imagine any one so foolish as to feel for his purse when he 
stands before one of them, and to cry, *^ I cannot drink be- 
caiise I have not five pounds in my pocket." However poor 
the man is, there is the fountain, and just as he is he may 
drink of it. Thirsty passengers, as they go by, whether 
they are dressed in fustian or in broadcloth, do not look for 
any warrant for drinking ; its being there is their warrant 
for taking its water freely. The liberality of some good 
friends has put the refreshing crystal there, and we take it, 
and ask no questions. Perhaps the only persons who need 
go thirsty through the street where there is a drinking foun- 
tain are the fine ladies and gentlemen who are in their car- 
riages. They are very thirsty, but cannot think of being so 
vulgar as to get out to drink. It would demean them, they 
think, to drink at a common drinking fountain : so they ride 
by with parched lips. Oh, how many there are who are rich 
in their own good works, and cannot therefore come to 
Christ! " I will not be saved," they say, " in the same way 
as the harlot or the swearer." What ! go to heaven in the 
same way as a chimneysweep ! Is there no pathway to 
glory but the path which led the thief there ? I will not be 
saved that way. Such proud boasters must remain without 
the living water ; but, " Whosoeveb wlll, let him TAKE 
THE WATER OF LIFE FREELY." 




^ jrjwfegSBWTTrig^ii^ Wafeifc 



r\ 







June 15. DAILY BEADIN08. 167 

**And Sarah said, God JuUh made me to laugh, so that aU that 
hear wUl laugh with me." — Genesis xxi. 6. 

was hx above the power of nature, and even con- 
trary to its laws, that the aged Sarah should be hon- 
ored with a son ; and even so it is beyond all ordinary 
mles that I, a poor, helpless, undone sinner, should find 
grace to bear about in my soul the indwelling Spirit of the 
Lord Jesus. I, who once despaired, as well I might, — for 
my nature was as dry, and withered, and barren, ^d ac- 
cursed as a howling wilderness, — even I have been made to 
bring forth fruit unto holiness* Well may my mouth be 
filled with joyous laughter, because of the singular, surpris- 
ing grace which I have received of the Lord, for I have 
found Jesus, the promised seed, and He is mine forever. 
This day will I lift up psalms of triumph unto the Lord, who 
has remembered my low estate, for " my heart rejoiceth in 
the Lord; mine horn is exalted in the Lord; my mouth is 
enlarged over mine enemies, because I rejoice in Thy salva- 
tion." I would have all those that hear of my great deliver- 
ance from hell, and my most blessed visitation from on high, 
laugh for joy with me. I would surprise my family with my 
abundant peace ; I would delight my friends with my ever- 
increasing happiness; I would edify the Church with my 
grateful confessions ; and even impress the world with the 
cheerfulness of my daily conversation. Bunyan tells us that 
Mercy laughed in her sleep, and no wonder when she dreamed 
o^ Jesus ; my joy shall not stop short of hers while my Be- 
loved is the theme of my daily thoughts. The Lord Jesus 
is a deep sea of joy ; my soul shall dive therein, shall be 
swallowed up in the delights of His society. Sarah looked 
on her Isaac, and laughed with excess of rapture, and all her 
friends laughed with her; and thou, my soul, look on thy 
Jesus, and bid heaven and earth unite in thy joy unspeakable. 



168 II&IX.T KRADtSSGS. 

**Aftd I give uni^ them eitnml li/ff amd tk^ JkaS matrptritkJ' 
John X 2a 





^HE Christian should never think or ^eak ligMkj of 
tinbelief. For a chfld of God to mistrust His lafc. 
His truth J HI3 faithfiiljieEs, mmst be greatlj dispkis- 
it]g to nim. How can we ever grieve Him by doabtiog Bis 
upholding gi'aee? ChriBtian! it is coDtrarj to eTery proviiie 
of God's precious Word that thou sbouldEl erer be forgotten 
or loft to porish. If it could be bo, how could He be true 
who httrt naid, '* Can a woman forget her sticking child, that 
nIhi Nltould not bavo compassion on the son of ber womb ? 
Yea, they may forget, yet will I never forget thee/' What 
W«ro the value of that promise — '**• The mountains shall de- 
part, and tho hills be removed ; but My kindneea shall uot 
Uuptirt from tliee, neither eball the eovenaiit of My peace be 
removed, Hnith the Lord that hath mercy on thee'* f Where 
Wt^ro tho truth of Christ's words — "I give unto My sheep 
tsttsrnal lifo ; and they ehall never periBh, neither shall auy 
man pluck them out of My hand. My Father which gave 
thorn Me is greater than all, and no man is able to plnck them 
out of My Father's hand " ? Where were the doctrines of 
grace ? They would be all disproved if one child of God 
should perish. Where were the veracity of God, His honor, 
His power, His grace, His covenant. His oath, if any of those 
for whom Christ has died, and who have put their trust in 
Him, should nevertheless be cast away ? Banish those un- 
believing fears which so dishonor God. Arise, shake thy- 
self from the dust, and put on thy beautiful garments. Re- 
member it is sinful to doubt His Word wherein He has 
promised thoo that thou shalt never perish. Let the eternal 
lifo within thee express itself in confident rejoicing. 

** The gospel bears my spirit up : 
A faithful and unchanging God 
Lays the foundation for my hope 
In oaths, and promises, and blood.** 




June 17. * DAILY BEADINGS« 169 

« " Hdp, Lord!* — Psalm xiL 1. 

SHE prayer itself is remarkable^ for it is shorty but sear 
sonable, sententious,, and suggestive, David mourned 
the fewness of faithful men, and therefore lifted up 
his heart in supplication ; when the creature failed, he flew 
to th'e Creator. He evidently felt his own weakness, or he 
would not have cried for help ; but at the same time he in- 
tended honestly to. exert himself for the cause of truth, for 
the word " help " is inapplicable where we ourselves do noth- 
ing. There is much of directness, clearness of perception, and 
distinctness of utterance in this petition of two words ; much 
more, indeed, than in the long rambling outpourings of cer- 
tain professors. The Psalmist runs straightforward to his 
God, with a well-considered prayer ; he knows what he is 
seeking, and where to seek it. Lord, teach us to pray in 
the same blessed manner. 

The occasions for the use of this prayer are frequent. In 
providential afflictions how suitable it is for tried believers 
who find all helpers failing them. Students, in doctrinal 
difficulties, may often obtain aid by lifting up this cry of 
** Help, Lord," to the Holy Spirit, the great Teacher. Spirit- 
ual warriors in inward conflicts may send to the throne for 
reinforcements, and this will be a model for their request. 
Workers in heavenly labor may thus obtain grace in time of 
need. Seeking sinners in doubts and alarms may offer up 
the same weighty supplications ; in fact, in all cases, times, 
and places, this will serve the turn of needy souls. "Help, 
Lord," will suit us living and dying, suffering or laboring, 
rejoicing or sorrowing. In Him our help is found ; let us 
not be slack to cry to Him. 

^e answer to the prayei^ is certain, if it be sincerely of- 
fered through Jesus. The Lord's character assures us that 
He will not leave His people ; His relationship as Father and 
Husband guarantees us His aid ; His gift of Jesus is a pledge 
of every good thing ; and His sure promise stands. Fear not, 

I WILL HELP THEE. 

16 




«*iT<irfn^ beantj : due ztrcEerin^ virsBes <}£ H» 

fik deaxik our a«ia:?c ami giiirr. He lHi^«eads «b His 
msoi^ftr^ frfifSL wtick no leam Wv Go«i esBe dk>wm to Mm ; 
aad ffis Cro6S no ceaek n^ how omzL m^j g^ «p to ^lod. AH 
lilt tiKmgii&r emotioiis. aedoo^, iEKer;&ae«s« aiiades, md 
mteTt^tissa&as, were for as. He crod die n»d of sonov <» 
our b^balf, and KatK made orer to as as His keaT^tj legacj 
th^ fjdll resnka of aE the labors of His Hfe. He is now as midi 
rmr ^ z» heretofore : and He bhishes not to acknowle^e 
iiltfiMeM ** rrur Lord Jesus Clirist,'^ tiioiigh He is the Uesaed 
ft.nd (m\j Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords. 
il\m^i fe^erywhere and erery way is our Christ, foroTer and 
^r^rr ttitf%i richly to enjoy. O my soul, by the power of the 
lUAy HpFirit call Him this morning, ^' thy Bedeemer." 



June 19. DAILY BEADINGS. 171 

"And they were allJUled with the Holy Ohost.** — Acts iL 4. 

jj^^^ICH were the blessings of this day if all of us were 
fei filled with the Holy Ghost. The consequences of 
this sacred filling of the soul it would be impossible 
to over-estimate. Life, comfort, light, purity, power, peace, 
and many other precious blessings are inseparable from the 
Spirit's benign presence. As sacred oU, He anoints the 
head of the believer, sets him apart to the priesthood of 
saints, and gives him grace to execute his office aright. As 
the only truly purifying water ^ He cleanses us from the power 
of sin, and sanctifies us unto holiness, working in us to will 
and to d» of the Lord's good pleasure. As the light. He 
manifested to us at first our lost estate, and now He reveals 
the Lord Jesus to us and in us, and guides U3 in the way of 
righteousness. Enlightened by His pure celestial ray, wo 
are no more darkness, but light in the Lord. As fire, he 
both purges us from dross, and sets our consecrated nature 
on a blaze. He is the sacrificial flame by which we are enabled 
to offer our whole souls as a living sacrifice unto Gpd. As 
heavenly dew. He removes our barrenness and fertilizes our 
lives. that He would drop from above upon us at this 
early hour. Such morning dew would be a sweet commence- 
ment for the day. As the dove, with wings of peaceful love. 
He broods over His Church and over the souls of believers, 
and as a Comforter, He dispels the cares and doubts which 
mar the peace of His beloved. He descends upon the chosen 
as upon the Lord in Jordan, and bears witness to their son- 
ship by working in them a filial spirit, by which they cry, Abba, 
Father. As the wind. He brings the breath of life to men ; 
blowing where He listeth He performs the quickening opera- 
tions by which the spiritual creation is animated and sus- 
tained. Would to God that we might feel His presence 
this day and every day. 






mik 



nnr^ ^eaiiE am, ^al z^ffanr 

asffiic <^s«t3isiL 3Eaimisr. -^j^bs ^at- ftTEr k- j^ai ■ 

^ad pet fe^ a£ iftsw mm i^ simffifiic. ^^cesB. «r HMSt sloir- 

Wr^ v<y<ii>i Bi« k<s€ •g^Le ^eef^ asr a jevdkr <i»e duBoiid, 
f^/r « MNvdUr ^ifk^ eMM, nor a mam ooe fisb of liis bo^, nor 
wHl th^. l^ffd \f0kit fmt of hk redeemed people. However 
Jju|/f ir^ fMJkjr l/c% tf ire are the Lord's, we maj rejoice thai 
■i lir« itftiU^tftA in Christ Jesus. 




Jime 21. DAILY B£ADm08. 173 

" Thm art fairer than the childr^ of men." — Psalm xlv. 2. 

^HB entire person of Jesus is but as one gem, and His 
life is all along but one impression of tbe seal. He 
is altogether complete ; not only in His several parts, 
but as a gracious, all-glorious whole. His character is not a 
mass of fair colors mixed confusedly, nor a heap of precious 
stones laid carelessly one upon another ; He is a picture of 
beauty and a breastplate of glory. In Him all the ** things 
of good repute" are in their proper places, and assist in 
adorning each other. Not one feature in His glorious per- 
son attracts attention at the expense of others ; but He is 
perfectly and altogether lovely. Oh, Jesus ! Thy power. 
Thy grace, Thy justice, Thy tenderness, Thy truth. Thy ma- 
jesty, and, Thine immutability, make up such a man, or rather 
such a God-man, as neither heaven nor earth hath seen else- 
where. Thy infancy, Thy eternity, Thy sufferings. Thy tri- 
umphs, Thy death, and Thine immortality, are all woven in 
one gorgeous tapestry, without seam or rent. Thou art 
music without discord ; Thou art many, and yet not divided ; 
Thou art all things, and yet not diverse. As all the colors 
blend into one resplendent rainbow, so all the glories of 
heaven and earth meet in Thee, and unite so wondrously, that 
there is none like Thee in all things ; nay, if all the virtues of 
the most excellent were bound in one bundle, they could not 
rival Thee, Thou mirror of all perfection. Thou hast been 
anointed with the holy oil of myrrh and cassia, which Thy God 
hath reserved for Thee alone ; and as for Thy jfragrance, it is 
as the holy perfume, the like of which none other can ever 
mingle, even with the art of the apothecary ; each spice is 
fragrant, but the compound is divine. 

" sacred symmetry ! O rare connection 
Of many perfects, to make one perfection ! 
heavenly music, where all parts do meet 
In one sweet strain, to make one perfect sweet t *' 
15« 




Mtfekand 

' Ipeemse ^ 

ife ^Drt lyiii k Tm$ to 

T^ &r 11 wlr via^ J<^ Ipdl^ — tk« 

: ivadr is all doae o« e^rtk. Wki» we lescii kemyeii, 

iliei« win be BO suctifnEig W5 A«re, bo sqiuring us with 

affictioB, BO pliBiBg 1^ wi^ swffsisg. No, we must be 

made meet bere — aU tko^ Cbiist will do befbreband; and 

when He has done it, we shall be fenied bj a loving band 

across the stream of deatb, and brought to the heavenly 

Jerusalem, to abide as eternal pillars in the temple of onr 

Lord. 

*« Beneath His eje and care. 
The edifice shall rise. 
Majestic, strong, and fair. 



-^ 



And shine abore the sldea.'^ 




June 23. dally readings. 175 

" Ephraim is a cake not turned.^' — Hosea vii. 8. 

CAKE not turned is uncooked on one side ; and so 
Ephraim was, in many respects, untouched by divine 
grace ; though there was some partial obedience, 
there was very much rebellion left. My soul, I charge thee, 
see whether thi§ be thy case. Art thou thorough in the things 
of God ? Has grace gone through the very centre of thy 
T)eing, so as to be felt in its divine operations in all thy pow- 
ers, thy actions, thy words, and thy thoughts ? To be sanc- 
tified, spirit, soul, and body, should be thine aim and prayer ; 
and although sanctification may not be perfect in thee any- 
where in degree, yet it must be universal in its action ; there 
must not be the appearance of holiness in one place and reign- 
ing sin in another, else thou, too, wilt be a cake not turned. 
A cake not turned is soon burned on the side nearest the fire ; 
and although no man can have too much religion, there are 
some who seem burned black with bigoted zeal for that part of 
truth which they have received, or are charred^to a cinder 
with a vain-glorious Pharisaic ostentation of those religious 
performances which suit their humor. The assumed appear- 
ance of superior sanctity frequently accompanies a total ab- 
sence of all vital godliness. The saint in public is a devil in 
private. He deals in flour by day and in soot by night. The 
cake which is burned on one side, is dough on the other. 

If it he so with me, Lord, turn me I Turn my unsancti- 
fied nature to the fire of Thy love, and let it feel the sacred 
glow ; and let my burned side cool a little, while I learn my 
own weakness and want of heat when I am removed from Thy 
heavenly flame. Let me not be found a double-minded man, 
but one entirely under the powerful influence of reigning 
grace ; for well I know if I am left like a cake unturned, and 
am not on both sides the subject of Thy grace, I must be 
consumed forever amid everlasting burnings. 



!«. 1 * 







^» .^im-^^^m * w ^^^ ^ ^v ^K. ^ a<i"S- I y 







3 itb 



|NMMMt f^/ Mf « <rbum^<iL E^f^ will tit W tku privileged t 




Jane 25. daily bsabings. 177 

<' €M ihee t^ into the high mowUain.** — Igaiah xL 9. 

knowledge of Christ is qomewhat like climbing 
one of onr Welsh mountains. When you are at the 
base you see but little : the mountain itself appears 
to be but one half as high as it really is. Confined in a little 
talley, you discover scarcely anything but the rippling brooks 
as they descend into the stream at the foot of the mountain. 
Climb the first rising knoll, and the valley lengthens and 
widens beneath your feet. Go higher, and you see the coun- 
try for four or five miles round, and you are delighted with 
the widening prospect. Mount still, and the scene enlarges ; 
till at last, when you are on the summit, and look east, west, 
north, and south, you see almost all England lying before 
you. Yonder is a forest in some distant county, perhaps 
two hundred tniles away, and here the sea, and there a shin- 
ing river and the smoking chimneys of a manufacturing town, 
or the masts of the ships in a busy port. All these things 
please and delight you, and you say, *' I could not have ima- 
gined that so much could be seen at this elevation." Now, 
the Christian life is of the same order. When we first believe 
in Christ we see but little of Him. The higher we climb the 
more we discover of His beauties. But who has ever gained 
the summit ? Who has known all the heights and depths 
of the love of Christ which passes knowledge ? Paul, when 
grown old, sitting gray-haired, shivering in a dungeon in 
Bome, could say with greater emphasis than we can, "I 
know whom I have believed," for each experience had been 
^ke the cliijiibing of a hill, each trial had been like ascending 
another summit, and his death seemed like gaining the top 
of the mountain, from which he could see the whole of the 
faithfulness and the love of Him to whom he had committed 
his soul. Get thee up, dear friend, into the high moun- 
tain. 



JneSC 



1" 



*\\S — ^ ' ^"s* W Ac jpatfMe finfrvior'^ doom vlien lib 

ami i^ 

from If J 




8«t 

L Ic jmmA tke gospel in 

r; ^ht nlmked ibc ^r 

P!'^ "Aim!" s*jt 

M^CMlist — one 

r; he u tibe ^la vko boated 

; t^ iij|»octtt€*s 8oqI down 
lis vith iuMwire Imt svfiil 
I Ifee ^cmks of tlie l«ck-w&j to hell. 
I wish nine oord^, aad djraggcd 
, in vMdi he bftd professed to 
«yk, attd ihnKsl kia tfaMg^ the b&ck-^oor into hel. >Imd 
ttol Iwck^vmj to MAf prolesion! ^Exaadiie joa^^ve# 
vhfither je be in tJie ^Itli.*" Look weU to |irar ataie ; see 
whH^tt yoa be in Cbrisi or not. ]i m the ea^est thing in 
the vorid to gtre a l^eni verdict when ene^s self 13 to be 
uied ; but O, he just and tme here. Be jost to &11^ but 
be rigorotM to jonr^elf. Bemember, if it be not a rock on 
which joQ baild^ when tlie house ghaU fall, greai will be the 
fill of i£. 0, may the Lord giTC jon ginoeri^, ooostatiej, 
and firmness ^ and in no daj^ however otiI, maj jou be led 
to lam aiiido. 




June 27. daily beadinos. 179 

" Ordy ye sTudl not go very far away" — Ex. viii. 28. 

« 

IIS is a crafty word from the lip of the arch-tyrant 
Pharaoh. If the poor bondaged Israelites must needs 
go out of Egypt, then he bargains with them that it 
shall not be very far away ; not too far, for them to escape 
the terror of his arms and the observation of his spies. 
* After the same fashion, the world loves not the nonconformity 
of nonconformity, or the dissidence of dissent ; it would have 
us be more charitable, and not carry matters with too severe 
a hand. Death to the world, and burial with Christ, are ex- 
periences which carnal minds treat with ridicule, and hence 
the ordinance which sets them forth is almost universally 
neglected, and even contemned. Worldly wisdom recom- 
mends the path of compromise, and talks of " moderation." 
According to this carnal policy, purity is admitted to be very 
desirable, but we are warned against being too precise ; truth 
is of course to be followed, but error is not to be severely 
denounced. " Yes," says the world, " be spiritually minded 
by all means, but do not deny yourself a little gay society, 
an occasional ball, and a Christmas visit to the theatre. 
What's the good of crying down a thing when it is so fash- 
ionable, and everybody does it ? " Multitudes of professors 
yield to this cunning advice to their own eternal ruin. K 
we would follow the Lord wholly, we must go right away 
into the wilderness of separation, and leave the Egypt of 
the carnal world behind us. We must leave its maxims, 
pleasures, and its religion too, and go far away to the place 
where the Lord calls His sanctified ones. When the town 
is on fire, our house cannot be too far from the flames. 
When the plague is abroad, a man cannot be too far from 
its haunts. The farther from a viper the better, and the 
farther from worldly conformity the better. To all true be- 
lievers, let the trumpet-call be sounded, " Come ye out from 
among them ; be yo separate." 




m*^t^ 



hMk 

pttiv^srsw our duin^Sw ar our 63«im^ ; it is w&a4 <^mb is^ not 

w:^ac «« :irtt» di2iir ^ves r«s& t» ^e suiiL If we wiMuld at 

oaee av^s:T»}iiLe Sicui lad have^ peace witli Crod, it ■net be 

bv *^ Luokmg unm Jesos.** Keep diixie eye simpl;' on Him; 

let Sa vietuiu H^ :HrtfttrTng^> Sa meExbs, Ws ^ovies, ffis 

interceaaiaiu be 6:esL upoa thj mnid ; w&»i ikon wakesi in 

the xnonuBg look to ^^rm ; wken tkou fiest down at nig^ 

look to Km. Oil I let aot tkj kopes or fears eome between 

thee and Jeatis : follow hud after Him, and He will neTer 

fail thee. 

**Mj hope-Es bmit (m nothixig leas 
Tban Jeana' blood and rx^Oeoasieas : 
1 dare not trust the sweetest frames 
But wboDy kaa <» Jesus' Bams.** 




Jtrne 29. daily beading^. . 181 

" Them also tohich sleep in Jesus tnU God bring with Him.** 
1 These, iv. 14. 

ST us not imagine that the soul sleeps in insensibility. 
' To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise," is the 

whisper of Christ to every dying saint. They " sleep 
in Jesus," but their souls are before the throne of God, 
praising Him day and night in His temple, singing hallelu- 
jahs to Him who washed them from their sins in His blood. 
The body sleeps in its lonely bed of earth, beneath the cover- 
let of grass. But what is this sleep ? The idea connected 
with sleep is " rest^^ and that is the thought which the Spirit 
of God would convey to us. Sleep makes each night a Sab- 
bath for the day. Sleep shuts fast the door of the soul, and 
bids all intruders tarry for a while, that the life within may 
enter its summer garden of ease. The toil-worn believer 
quietly sleeps, as does the weary child when it slumbers on 
its mother's breast. Oh 1 happy they who die in the Lord ; 
they rest from their labors, and their works do follow them. 
Their quiet repose shall never be broken until God shall 
rouse them to give them their full reward. Guarded by 
angel watchers, curtained by eternal mysteries, they sleep 
on, the heritors of glory, till the fulness of time shall bring 
the fulness of redemption. What an awaking shall be theirs ! 
They were laid in their last resting-place, weary and worn, 
but such they shall not rise. They went to their rest with 
the farrowed brow, and the wasted features, but they wake 
up in beauty and glory. The shrivelled seed, so destitute 
of form and comeliness, rises from the dust a beauteous 
flower. The winter of the grave gives way to the spring of 
redemption and the summer of glory. Blessed is death, 
since it, through the divine power, disrobes us of this work- 
day garment, to clothe us with the wedding gurment of in- 
corruption. Blessed are those who " sleep in J^5f»i>i." 
16 



IS2 'mSSfTHBHfBS^^^ June 30, 

*' And the glor^ ichieh Tkem gavcst Me I have ^iveti ikem.^ 



M 



[©^EHOLD the eiiperlative liberality of the Lord Je&nai] 
for He hath given us His alL Although a tithe of flii^ 
possessions would have made a nniverse of angek 
rich beyond all thonght, yet was He not content imtil He bad,' 
given us all that He had. It would have been surprising grace 
if He had allowed us to eat the crumbs of His bounty be- 
neath the table of His mercy ; but He will do nothing hj^ 
halves ; He makes ns sit with Him and share the feast, Ha4* 
He given us some small penaiou from His royal coffers, wa 
should have had cause to love Him eternally \ but no, H^' 
will have His bride as rich as Himself, and He will noi' 
have & glory or a grace in which she shall not share, Hd 
has not been content with less than making us joint-heirs 
with Htmself, so that we might have equal possessions. 
He has emptied all His estate into the coffers of tlia 
Church, and hath all thingB common with His redeemed. 
There is not one room in His house the key of which He 
wiU withhold from His people. He gives them full libertj 
to take all that He hath to be their own ; He loves them to 
make free with His treasure, and appropriate as much aa 
iitej can possibly carry. The boundless Mness of His all- 
Bufficiency is as free to the believer as the air he breathes- 
Christ hath put the flagon of His love and grace to the be- 
liever's lip, and hidden him drink on forever ; for could ha 
drain it, he is welcome to do so, and as he cannot exhaust it, 
he is bidden to drink abundaotly, for it is all his own, 'What 
truer proof of fellowship can heaven or earth afford ? 



k 



■* When I stand before the throne, 
Dressed in beauty not my own ; 
When I see Thee as Thou art, 
LoYe Thee irith unsinning h«:art ; 
Then I Lord, BhaU I fnUy kn^JW — 
Not tiU then ^ how mn«h I owe." 




y-olj l: DAILT BEADIKOS. 183 

"In summer and in winter shall it he** — Zech. xiv. 8. 

|HB streams of living water which flow from Jerusa- 
lem are not dried up by the parching, heats of sultry 
midsummer, any more than they were frozen by the 
cold winds of blustering winter. Rejoice, my soul, that 
thou art spared to testify of the faithfulness of the Lord. The 
seasons change and thou changest, but thy Lord abides ever- 
more the same, and the streams of His love are as deep, as 
broad, and as full as ever. The heats of business cares and 
scorching trials make me need the cooling influences of the 
river of his grace ; I may go at once and drink to the frdl 
from the inexhaustible fountain, for in summer and in winter 
it pours forth its flood. The upper springs are never scanty, 
and blessed be the name of the Lord, the nether springs 
cannot fail either. Elijah found Cherith dry up, but Jeho- 
vah was still the same God of providence. Job said his 
brethren were like deceitful brooks ; but he found his God 
an overflowing river of consolation. The Nile is the great 
confidence of Egypt, but its floods are variable ; our Lord is 
evermore the same. By turning the course of the Euphrates, 
Cyrus took the city of Babylon ; but no power, human or 
infernal, can divert the current of divine grace. The tracks 
of ancient rivers have been found all dry and desolate ; but 
the streams which take their rise on the mountains of divine 
sovereignty and infinite love shall ever be fiill to the brim. 
Generations melt away, but the course of grace is unaltered. 
The river of God may sing with grater truth than the brook 
in the poem — 

"Men may come, and men may go, 
But I go on forever." 

How happy art thou, my soul, to be led beside such still 
waters ! Never wander to other streams, lest thou hear the 
Lord's rebuke, " What hast thou to do in the way of Egypt 
to drink of the muddy river ? " 




184 SMLT 33S4i>nroi, Judji 

'* Our htart shall rejoice in Mm." — Psftlni xxxm. 21. 

^LESSEB 13 the faet that Chrlstiane can rejoioCj eva 
in the deepest distress j although trouble may m ' 
roTind them, they atill sing ; and, like many bi 
they sing best in their cages. The wayes may roB o? 
them* but their souls soon rise to the surface, and see 
light of Ood's countenance; they have a buoyancy about 
them which keeps their head always above the water, and 
helps thorn to sing amid the tempestj " God is with me still/* 
To whom shall the glory be given ? Oh ! to Jesus — it is all 
by Jesus, Trouble does not neceesarily bring consolation 
with it to the believer^ but the presence of the Son of God 
iu the fiery fumaee with him, fills hia heart with joy. He is 
sick and suffering, but Jesns visits him and makes his bed 
for him. He is dying, and the cold, chilly waters of Jordan 
are gathc'riiig about him up to the neck, but Jesus puts HiMa 
arms around him, and cries, " Fear not, beloved ; to die is" 
to bo blessed ; the waters of death have their fountain-head 
in heaven ; they are not bitter, they are sweet as nectar, for 
they flow from the throne of God." As the dcpartiap^ Bniiit 
wades through the stream, and the billows gather around 
him, and heart and flesh fail him, the same voice sounds in 
his ears, "Fear not; I am with thee: be not dismayed; I 
am thy God." As he nears the borders of tHk infinite un- 
known, and is almost affrighted to enter the realm of shades, 
Jesus says, " Fear not ; it is your Father's good pleasure to 
give you the kingdom." Thus strengthened and consoled, 
the believer is not afraid to die ; nay, he is even willing to 
depart, for since he has seen Jesus as the morning star, he 
longs to gaze upon Him as the sun in his strength. Truly, 
the presence of Jesus is all the heaven we desire. He is at 

once 

" The glory of our brightest days ; 
The comfort of our nighti." 




July 3. DAILY HEADINGS. 185 

** The UUfawMred and lean-fleshed kine did eat up {he seven toeH- 
favored and fat kineJ' — Genesis xli. 4. 

IHARAOffS dream has too often teen my waking 
experience. My days of sloth have ruinously de- 
stroyed all that I had achieved in times of zealous 
industry ; my seasons of coldness have frozen all the genial 
glow of my periods of fervency and enthusiasm, and my fits 
of worldliness have thrown me back from my advances in the 
divine life. I had need to beware of lean prayers, lean 
praises, lean duties, and lean experiences, for these will eat 
up the fat of my comfort and peace. If I neglect prayer fot 
never so short a time, I lose all the spirituality to which I 
had attained ; if I draw no fresh supplies from heaven, the 
old com in my granary is soon consumed by the famine which 
rages in my soul. When the caterpillars of indifference, the 
canker-worms of worldliness, and the palmer-worms of self- 
indulgence, lay my heart completely desolate, and make my 
soul to- languish, all my former fruitfulness and growth in 
grace avails me nothing whatever. How anxious should I 
be to have no lean-fleshed days, no ill-favored hours ! If 
every day I journeyed towards the goal of my desires I should 
soon reach it, but backsliding leaves me still far off from the 
prize of my high calling, and robs me of the advances which 
I had so laboriously made. The only way in which all my 
days can be as the " fat kine," is to feed them in the right 
meadow, to spend them with the Lord, in His service, in His 
company, in His fear, and in His way. Why should not every 
year be richer than the past,'in love, and usefulness, and joy ? 
— I am nearer the celestial hills ; I have had more experience 
of my Lord, and should be more like Him. Lord, keep far 
from me the curse of leanness of soul ; let me not have to cry, 
*' My leanness, my leanness, woe unto me ! " but may I be well 
fed and nourished in Thy house, that I may praise Thy name. 
16* 



" Banetlfy them ihrouffh Tktf tndhJ^ — John itvii. 17* 

|^5A^CTIFICATI0N begins in regeueTation. The 
l^^ll¥ ^P^^^^ of God mfnsea into man that new living prin- 
^*^^^ ciple by wEich be becomes " a new creature " in Chriat 
Jesns* This work, wbicli begins in the new birth, is carried 
on in two ways — mortification* whereby the lusts of the fle&b 
are snbdued and kept nnder j and vivifieationj by which the 
life which Grod has put within ufi is made to be a well of 
water springing up unto everlasting life. This is carried on 
every day in what ia called " perseverance," by which the 
Christian is preserved and continued in a gracious gtate, and 
is made to abound in good works unto the praise and glory 
of Grod ; and it culminates or comes to perfection, in " glory,*' 
when the bouI, being thoroughly purged, is caught up to dwell 
with holy beings at the right hand of the Majesty on high* 
But while the Spirit of God is thus the author of sanctifica- 
tion, yet there is a visible agency employed which must not 
be forgotten- '* Sanctify them," said Jesus, "through Thj 
truth. Thy word is truth /^ The passages of Scriptnre which 
prove that the instrument of our sanctification is the Word of 
God are very many. The Spirit of God brings to our minds 
the precepts and doctrines of truth, and applies them with 
power. These are heard in the ear, and being received in 
the heart, they work in us to will and to do of God's good 
pleasure. The truth is the sanctifier, and if we do not hear 
or read the truth, we shall not grow in sanctification. We 
only progress in sound living as we progress in sound under- 
standing. " Thy word is a lamp unto my feet and a light 
unto my path." Do not say of any error, "It is a mere 
matter of opinion." No man indulges an error of judgment, 
without sooner or later tolerating an error in practice. Hold 
fast the truth ; for by so holding the truth shall you be sanc- 
tified by the Spirit of God. 



My i. 3tt3XX SK&3E9IE&. 1$7 



^iKi 




I are ^v^enr ape -a? if^sri i^ wf^rftBr saoms as if ibn* 
B a iiHir^ -esg^mal maancr idtaa ^^ 

lias vailed bgr ffif ^nce a&i sasKSa&id Vt ffis Sfom : tatii^ 
are apt to \Mk apen die flgfaff«d& a$ ercnerdiaaiT Keii^$« 
seareety snliject to the same aneabessiK a»d tcuq^maakms as 
ouTsdres. Yet ia so doix^. w are f«^^ctial <ii ^is tnrtk. 
diat tiie nearer a Ban fiws to God. ike nore iate^»^ lias 
he to sioani orcr his oan cril heart ; and d»e more his Mas* 
ter hcHiOTS him ia His seniee, d»e mwe also doth the eiil of 
the liedi rex and tease him dar by day. The fact is^ if wo 
had seen the jostle PaaU we shoald hare thonght him re« 
markably like the jest of the chosen £inuly ; and if ire had 
talked widi him, we dionld hare said, **" We find that his ex* 
perience and onrs are rnnch the same. He is more futhfulit 
more holy, and more deepty tan^t than we are> but he has 
the sel&ame trials to endure. Nay, in some respects he is 
more sorely tried than onrselves." Do not, then, look upon 
the ancient saints as being exempt either from infirmities or 
sins; and do not regard them with that mystic reverence 
which will almost make us idolaters. Their holiness is at- 
tainable even by us. We are '' called to be saints,** by that 
same voice which constrained them to their high vocation. 
It is a Christian's duty to force his way into the iuuor circle 
of saintship ; and if these saints were superior to us in their 
attainments, as they certainly were, let us follow them ; lot 
us emulate their ardor and holiness. Wo have the sanio 
light that they had, the same grace is accessible to us, and 
why should we rest satisfied until wo have equalled thoiu 
in heavenly character ? They lived tvith Josus, thoy lived 
for Jesus, therefore they grew like Jesus. Lot us live by 
the same Spirit as they did, ** looking unto Jesus,*' and our 
saintship will soon be apparent. 



PAXLT nJLDCPO&. I^k 



' Wkom ktmrkmtik «fo me wUB 4mm wmdf, md a^i^ he fMt 

fr&m/mt ^ mL" — P^ovote L 31. 

r — » . .^-_ . , ^ — - - -. =. 

in tke niite of jodgBcaliw Fai^ ii Aaft lone liv 

Id^ k dbft Ottu vluek UocaH m tbe wAlemBss tif pmi; 
tfa &ixiiidiobfig|it]ilvTemtIieai]dMrfvTiA. Wltealb 
IsraeBlei proT^k^d tlie Moil High bj tli«tr eotuitsaied iUiiiy, 
Me ^ifliiiliedilieBi bj willdMlding botli de v uid tsul^ g<» Ait 
ifaeir Itnd w^a lisiced by a iore ^iiime \ but wiiile He did tbkt 
Be toi>k e«rfi that His oira ^oacn Miei liMrali te t«a>«* If 
all oduer brooks are dry, jet ilttn there h^ inw yea i Efvt a l for 
Etijab ; and wben tJial f&Jb^ God sbiQ stlQ ^tes^-re f<»r Mm a 
place of iQBt^naace ; nay, not only fio, ibe l4>rd had sol lisiplj 
one ** Elijah,^ bat He bad a renmaitt, accerding to the ek^ 
tioti of paG«, who were bidden by ifiiee In a eave» and Ibovgb 
ibe wbole land was ^oliject to famine, yet these fiMea in the 
care we?e fed» and fed from Ahab^s table too by Hb faLthfalt 
God-fearing steward^ Obadiab^ Let as ^om ibis draw tbe in- 
fereocaHi that come what may, God's people are safe. Let eoQ- 
TulsioDB sbaJce tlie solid earthy let tbe skies tbemBelTes be rent 
in twain, yet aniid the wreck of worlds tbe beMerer shall be fl^ 
ee<mrc as in the calmest hour of re^t. K God cannot save HIa 
people under heaven. He will save them in beaven- If the 
world becomes too hot to hold them, then heaveiL shall be the 
place of their reception and their safety. Be ye tbeu confi- 
dent, when ye hear of wars, and rumors of wars. Let no 
agitation distress you, but be quiet from fear of evil. What- 
soever cometh upon the earth, you, beneath the broad wings 
of Jehovah, shall be secure. Stay yourself upon His prom- 
ise ; rest in His faithfulness, and bid defiance to the blackest 
future, for there is nothing in it direful for you. Your sole 
concern should be to show forth to the world the blessedness 
hearkening to the voice of wisdom. 



^ 




July 7. DAILY BEADH^GS. 189 

*^ Brethren^ pray for usy — 1 Thessalonians v. 25. 

^HIS one morning in the year we reserved to refresh 
the reader's memory upon the subject of prayer for 
ministers, and we do most earnestly implore every 
Christian household to grant the fervent request of the text 
first uttered by an apostle and now repeated by us. Brethren, 
our work is solemnly momentous, involving weal or woe to 
thousands ; we treat with souls for God on eternal business^ 
and our word is either a savor of life unto life, or of death 
unto death. A very heavy responsibility rests upon us, and it 
will be no small mercy if at the last we be found clear of the 
blood of all men. As officers in Christ's army, we are the 
especial mark of the enmity of men and devils ; they watch 
for our halting, and labor to take us by the heels. Our 
sacred calling involves us in temptations from which you are 
exempt ; above all it too often draws us away from our per- 
sonal enjoyment of truth, into a ministerial and official con- 
sideration of it. We meet with many knotty cases, and our 
wits are at a nonplus ; we observe very sad backslidings, and 
our hearts are wounded ; we see millions perishing, and our 
spirits sink. We wish to profit you by our preaching ; we 
desire to be blest to your children ; we long to be useful both 
to saints and sinners ; therefore, dear friends, intercede for 
us with our God. Miserable men are we if we miss the aid 
of your prayers, but happy are we if we live in your suppli- 
cations. You do not look to us, but to our Master, for spirit- 
ual blessings ; and yet how many times has He given those 
blessings through His ministers ! Ask, then, again and again, 
that we may be the earthen vessels into which the Lord may 
put the treasures of the gospel. We, the whole company of 
missionaries, ministers, city-missionaries, and students, do» 
in the name of Jesu^, beseech you 

" Bkethken, pbay foe us." 




100 0AII.T RKADIXOS* JqIj %, 

Judges xwL B. 

^^^^ILEEE Ilea the secret strength of faith ? It lies m 1 

h food it feeds on ; for faith studies what the prommi 
— an emanation of diyiiie grace, an oversowing \ 
the great heart of God ; and faith says, " My God eould n^ 
have given this promise^ except from love and grace ; thett 
fore it is quite certain His Word will he folMed/' Th« 
faith thinketht *' H^^o g^tv^ this promise?'' It consideretk 
not so much its greatness^ as *' Who is the author of it ? " 
She rememhere that it is Grod, who cannot lie — ^God om- 
nipotent, God immutable ; and therefore conclndeth that the 
promise must be ftilMied ; and forward she advances in this 
firm oonviction. She remcmbereth why (h^ promise was glv^Hi 
— ^ namely, for God* a glory, and she feels perfectly sure that 
God's glory is safe, that Me will never stain Kis own eseuteh- 
eon, nor mar tho lustre of His own crown i and therefoi^ 
the promise must and will stand. Then faith also eonsideretli 
the amazing work of Christ aa being a clear proof of the 
Father's intontion to fuMl His word. ^^ He that spared not 
His own Son, but freely delivered Him np for us all, how 
shall He not with Him also freely give us all things ? " More- 
over, faith looks back upon the past, for her battles have 
strengthened her, and her victories have given her courage. 
She remembers that God never has failed her ; nay, that 
He never did once fail any of His children. She recoUectetb 
times of great peril, when deliverance came ; hours of awful 
need, when as her day her strength was found, and she cries, 
*' No, I never will be led to think that He can change and 
leave His servant now." *' Hitherto the Lord hath helped 
me, and He will help me still/' Thus faith views each 
promise in its connection with the Promise -giver, and, be- 
cause she does so, can with assurance say, '* Surely goodness 
and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life I " 




July 9. DAILY BEADINGS. 191 

**Forgei not all His benefits." — Psalm ciii. 2. 

is a delightful and profitable occupation to mark 
the hand of Ood in the lives of ancient saints, and to 
observe His goodness in delivering them, His mercy 
in pardoning them, and His faithfnlness in keeping His cove- 
nant with them. But wonld it not be even more interesting and 
profitable for ns to remark the hand of God in our own lives ? 
Ought we not to look upon our own history as being at least 
as full of God, as full of His goodness and of His truth, as 
much a proof of His faithfulness and veracity, as the lives of 
any of the saints who have gone before ? We do our Lord 
an injustice when we suppose that He wrought all his mighty 
acts, and showed Himself strong for those in the early time, 
but doth not perform wonders or lay bare His arm for the 
saints who are now upon the earth. Let us review our own 
lives. Surely in these we may discover some happy incidents, 
refreshing to ourselves and glorifying to our God. Have 
you had no deliverances? Have you passed through no 
rivers supported by the divine presence ? Have you walked 
through no fires unharmed ? Have you had no manifestations f 
Have you had no choice favors f , The God who gave Solo- 
mon the desire of his heart, hath He never listened to you 
and answered your requests ? That God of lavish bounty of 
whom David sang, "Who satisfieth thy mouth with good 
things," hath He never satiated you with fatness ? Have 
you never been made to lie down in green pastures ? Have 
you never been led by the still waters ? Surely the goodness 
of God has been the same to us as to the saints of old. Let 
us, then, weave His mercies into a song. Let us take the 
pure gold of thankfulness, and the jewels of praise, and make 
them into another crown for the head of Jesus. Let our souls 
give forth music as sweet and as exhilarating as came from 
David's harp, while we praise the Lord, whose mercy endur- 
eth forever. 





ff^ 



EAT 18 moBt hf ( 

n.^fSBfl tJisI msre i 

pmjm mt "- Thy wM Iw iiaa «a «vA «i it k ui IieaT^D," 
Tkt ffmdammmum ianei fren As tlffoike of glorj Me 
frecij i»<€iTm4 Itf* 99 % tk dggccg of tlie Great King ve 
dbeerfe]l|' i>b^. Thsii, u dtn^is of tbe Kew Jemsalem, ee 
fcoMOfs. Tk ^Mf «1ii«fc beloi^ to bcatiied 
to w, for ve are alreadf soaa of (rodr alt «sfiy 
priiH^ec of the blood iaipmal ; ikeadj we wear the spotleM 
robe of Jesoa* rigbteofi«Be$g ; alreat^j wt h^xB aag^h for owr 
fierritofm^ ^wits far our companions, Cltrbt for otir hrc^ibeff 
God for OBT Fatlier., and a crowia of immortalitj for our re- 
waid. We sliare the hoBors of eittxeasliipf for we haf^ 
€Oflie to the general assemblj and Clmreh of the first-born 
names are written in heaven. Ab citisens, we haT£ 
righU to all the property of heaten. Oars are its 
gates of pearl and walls of chrjsolite ; onrs the axtire light 
of the city that needs no candle nor light of the son ; ours 
the river of the water of life, and the twelve manner of fruits 
which grow on the trees planted on the banks thereof; iAiert 
is nonght in heaven that belongeth not to ns. ** Things 
present, or things to come," all are ours. Also, as citizens 
of heaven, we enjoy its delights. Do they there rejoice over 
sinners that repent — prodigals that have retnrned ? So do 
we. Do they chant the glories of triumphant grace ? We 
do the same. Do they cast their crowns at Jesns' feet? 
Such honors as we have we cast there too. Are they charmed 
with His smile ? It is not less sweet to us who dwell below. 
Do they look forward, waiting for His second advent ? We 
also look and long for His appearing. K, then, we are thus 
citizens of heaven^ let our walk and actions be consistent with 
high dignity. 




July 11. DAILY BEADINGS. 193 

^^ After that ye have suffered awhile, make you perfect, stablish, 
strengthen, settle you.*' — 1 Peter v. 10. 

^OU have seen the arch of heaven as it spans the 
plain : glorious are its colors, and rare its hues. It is 
beautiful, but, alas, it passes away, and lo, it is not. 
The fair colors give way to the fleecy clouds, and the 
sky is no longer brilliant with the tints of heaven. It is not 
established. How can it be ? A glorious show made up of 
transitory sunbeams and passing rain-drops, how can it 
abide ? The graces of the Christian character must not re- 
semble the rainbow in its transitory beauty, but, on the con- 
trary, must be stablished, settled, abiding. Seek, believer, 
that every good thing you have may be an abiding thing. 
May your character not be a writing upon the sand, but an 
inscription upon the rock. May your faith be no *' baseless 
fabric of a vision," but may it be builded of material able to 
endure that awful fire which shall consume the wood, hay, 
and stubble of the hypocrite. May you be rooted and 
grounded in love. May your convictions be deep, your love 
real, your desires earnest. May your whole life be so set- 
tled and established that all the blasts of hell and all the 
storms of earth shall never be able to remove you. But notice 
how this blessing of being ** stablished in the faith" is gained. 
The apostle's words point us to suffering as the means em- 
ployed — ^^ After that ye have suffered atohileJ' It is of no use 
to hope that we shall be well rooted if no rough winds pass over 
lis. Those old gnarlings on the root of the oak tree, and those 
strange twistings of the branches, all tell of the many storms 
that have swept over it, and they are also indicators of the 
depth into which the roots have forced their way. So the 
Christian is made strong and firmly rooted by all the trials and 
storms of life. Shrink not then from the tempestuous winds 
of trial, but take comfort, believing that by their rough dis- 
cipline God is fulfilling this benediction to you. 
17 



I'M riArr.v rkadings. July 12. 



. ..„.i,i„ 1 1,., r,..,i ii„. r,iilHr:'-^S\\Cie 1. ^'Sanctified in Christ 
./. II. I r-.ni,!lii;iiiM i. 'J. ^* Through sanctiJzc'jLtion of the 

:.jiiifl." -• I I'l frr i. 2. 

f|>^AlJK iIh- iiiiloii of iho Three Divine Persona in all 
I 1 |- iln-ir ^M:ii-inii.s acts, llow unwisely <Io those believ- 
^ y tru liilk, wliti make prefereuees iii the Firson* cf the 
'riiiiii\ ; wlin lliiiik i»t* Jesus as it lie wore die enibo'iiment 
».r i\ri\)lliiii^ Invil^- aiul •rr;uiou5, wliLle :he Fithtr tli.j 
u«Mnl MM M'viTily just, Init Jesritiito :: iiaimeis?. En^i^lj 
wrnn;.^ are tlm>e who m:i»:Mity the -.ItXTve l* :iie FirhtT. ua-i 
llii- aitniu'imul of lUe t^eii, 50 as :.' i'.prv-iiito :iif nr-rk .■:' 
llu' Spirit. In ileeils ef i:r.ioo. "^- ::■.* l' ::ii- 1" r^viis if 'ii*? 
'rriiiilv ail apart from the rc^:. '"i«;' ir- i* lu.:^.-; .ii "iinr 
dn *1.^ as iu tiieir ^s^eiuc. I". :!;•. :* ' ■ .v:-.r-^? "ii.- ■n.-i-.-'H 
tlu"\ are one, ami iu t:io lu:. ••> v:.. .: : ■.- r- -^ l.l.: ,-r -: 
. iilral souree ihev ar^- <:;'.'. -t :. ■ . .. ?v- .J- :.::.t l.j 
i 1 i'u- matter of sauv'ti'/.-.i:. ■■;. ■ ... . _. ■■. :..:: z-:- 
\ ''x ' >|'eak i>i* saiKi;:ii.i.:: ■" i» : v ■ . *'•;■. ~ 



IS no- 






July 13. BAIIiY BEADIKGd. 195 

" Ood said to Jonah, Doest thou well to be angry ? " — Jon. iv. 9. 
?[NGER is not always or necessarily sinful, but it has 




such a tendency to run wild, that, whenever it dis- 
plays itself, we should be quick to question its char- 
acter with this inquiry, " Doest thou well to be angry ? " It 
may be that we can answer, " YES." Very frequently anger 
is the madman's firebrand, but sometimes it is Elijah's fire 
from heaven. We do well when we are angry with sin, be- 
cause of the wrong which it commits against our good and 
gracious God ; or with ourselves, because we remain so fool- 
ish after so much divine instruction ; or with others, when 
the sole cause of anger is the evil which they do. He who 
is not angry at transgression becomes a partaker in it. Sin 
is a loathsome and hateful thing, and no renewed heart can 
patiently endure it. God Himself is angry with the wicked 
every day, and it is written in His Word, " Ye that love the 
Lord, hate evil." Far more frequently it is to be feared 
that our anger is not commendable, or even justifiable, and 
then we must answer, " NO." Why should we be fretful 
with children, passionate with servants, and wrathful with 
companions ? Is such anger honorable to our Christian pro- 
fession, or glorifying to God ? Is it not the old evil heart 
seeking to gain dominion, and should we not resist it with 
all the might of our new-born nature. Many professors give 
way to temper as though It were unless to attempt resist- 
ance ; but let the believer remember that he must be a con- 
queror in every point, or else he cannot be crowned. If we 
cannot control our tempers, what has grace done for us ? 
Some one told Mr. Jay that grace was often grafted on a 
crab-stump. *'Yes," said he, "but the fruit will not be 
crabs." We must not make natural infirmity an excuse for 
Bin, but we must fly to the cross, and pray the Lord to cru- 
cify our tempers, and renew us in gentleness ovid \s\ft.^V\!^^'«»'?^ 
after His own image^ 




Its B&tLT MKABnsGS, July 14, 

^01)^8 aJiar wab to be b&ilt of unkeini ftones, that no 
If tra4^e of Ihhbui skill m hktmr migM be seen upon it* 
Ii^QSK wisdoBi ddigltiB to "brim and arrange lli€ diic» 
timea of tlie cfoes islo m Bj^caa mo^re arti^eial md more 
congenial witii ibe depraved taslai of fallen nature ; instead, 
lioir#T^, of impTOTing the gospel^ eamal wi^^om poUutaa it, 
until il beeomes aoollier gospel, and not tlie trotli of God at 
all. All alterations and amendments of the Lord's own 
Word are defilements and poUntions, The proud lieart of 
man is Terj ansioua to hare a band in the justification of the 
Bonl before God ; preparations for Chrbt are dreamed of, 
hnmblingB and rep en tings are trusted io, good works are 
cried up, natural ability is much vaunted, and bj all means 
the attempt is made to lifl up human tools upon the divine 
altar. It were well if sinners would remember that, so far 
from perfeeting the Saviour's work, their carnal confidences 
only pollute and dishonor it. The Lord alone must be ex- 
alted in the work of atonement, and not a single mark of 
man^B chisel or hammer will -be endured. There is an in- 
herent blasphemy in seeking to add to what Christ Jesus in 
His dying momenta declared to be finished, or to improve 
that in which the Lord Jeliovali findij perfect satisfaction- 
Trembling sinner, away with thy tools, and fall upon thy 
knees in humble supplication i and accept the Lord Jasus tD 
bo the altar of thine atonement, and rest In Him alone. 

Many professors may take warning from this morning's 
tesct as to the doctrines which they believe. There is among 
Christians far too much inclination to square and reconoile 
the truths of revelation ; this is a form of irrcvcrenco and 
unbelief ; let us strive against it, and receive truth as we 
find it; rejoicing that the doctrines of the Word arc unhewn 
fitnneai and so arc aU the more flt to bnild au altar for the 
Lord, 




JvHj 15. DAILY BSADIKG8. 197 

** The firt shaXL ever he burning upon the altar; it shaU never go 
out J* — Leviticus vi. 13. 

5EEP the altar of private 'prayer burning. This is the 
very life of all piety. The sanctuary and family altars 
borrow their fires here ; therefore let this burn well. 
Secret devotion is the very essence, evidence, and barometer 
of vital and experimental religion. Burn here the fat of 
your sacrifices. Let your closet seasons be, if possible, reg- 
ular, frequent, and undisturbed. Effectual prayer availeth 
much. Have you nothing to pray for ? Let us suggest the 
Church, the ministry, your own soul, your children, your re- 
lations, your neighbors, your country, and the cause of God 
and truth throughout the world. Let us examine ourselves 
on this important matter. Do we engage with lukewarmness 
in private devotion ? Is the fire of devotion burning dimly 
in our hearts ? Do the chariot wheels drag heavily ? K so, 
let us be alarmed at this sign of decay. Let us go with weep- 
ing, and ask for the spirit of grac^ and of supplication. Let 
OS set apart special seasons for extraordinary prayer. For 
if this fire should be sihothered beneath the ashes of a worldly 
conformity, it will dim the fire on the family altar, and lessen 
our influence both in the Church and in the world. The text 
will also apply to the altar of the heart. This is a golden altar 
indeed. God loves to see the hearts of His people glowing 
towards Himself. Let us give to God our hearts, all blazing 
with love, and seek His grace, that the fire may never be 
quenched ; for it will not burn if the Lord does not keep it 
burning. Many foes will attempt to extinguish it; but if 
the unseen hand behind the wall pour thereon the sacred 
oil, it will blaze higher and higher. Let us use texts of 
Scripture as fuel for our heart's fire ; they are live coals ; 
let us attend sermons, but above all let us be much alone 
witb Jesus. 

X7* _ 





KtWgoU»fcoro4ir 

iqfG^id^ k«tHewki 

Tkj ttoastaiii onbf 
^ « Hb place; tf He Mde fljs 
V die Samvr AoftM see 
I secsl the Hghl 
lit an Ib^iM^ Joshua 
mm mad ad, ki^ Jes«» am Abroad it in totd 
Mt OB mAA^^ tke JO J of tkine besit^^ the light 
•f llkiat Q«s» lad tW stFesgtli ik tbj life : in Bis hand thy 
«>>mforts lie« and ;u His will tkej can depart firom thee. This 
hooiir dependence oor Lord is determined that we shall feel 
and recogniie, for He onh- permits us to pray for ** daily 
bread."* and only promises that *'* as our days our strength 
shall be.** Is it not best for us that it should be so, that we 
may ofteu repair to His throne* and constantly be reminded 
of His love ? Oh. how rich die grace which supplies us so 
ci^tinoally* and doth not refrain itself because of our in- 
gratitude ! The golden shower nerer ceases, the cloud of 
blessing tarries erermcffe abore our habitation. Lord 
Je^us> we would bow at Thy feet, conscious of our utter 
ttj^iU^ to do anything without Thee ; and in every favor 
^^k ir« are privileged to receive, we would adore Thy 
^■1 mono and acknowledge Thine unexhausted love* 




Jufy 17. DAILY HEADINGS. ' 199 

**Knowing, brethren beloved, your election of Ood,** — 1 Thess. i. 4. 

!lNY persons want to know their election before they 
look to Christ ; but they cannot learn it thus ; it is 
only to be discovered by " looking unto Jesus." 
If you desire to ascertain your own election, — after the 
following manner shall you assure your heart before God. 
Do you feel yourself to be a lost, guilty sinner ? Go straight- 
way to the cross of Christ, and tell Jesus so ; and tell Him 
that- you have read in the Bible, " Him that cometh unto 
Me I will in no wis€t cast out." Tell Him that He has said, 
" This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, 
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners." 
Look to Jesus and believe on Him, and you shall make 
proof of your election directly, for so surely as thou be- 
lievest, thou art elect. If you will give ' yourself wholly up 
to- Christ and trust Him, then you are one of God'» chosen 
ones ; but if you stop and say, *' I want to know first 
whether I am elect," you ask you know not what. Go to 
Jesus, be you never so guilty, just as you are. Leave all 
curious inquiry about election alone. Go straight to Christ, 
and hide in His wounds, and you shall know your election. 
The assurance of the Holy Spirit shall be given to you", so 
that you shall be able to say, " I know whom I have be- 
lieved, and I am persuaded that He is able to keep that 
which I have committed to Him." Christ was at the ever- 
lasting council : He can tell you whether you were chosen 
or not ; but you cannot find it out in any other way. Go 
and put your trust in Him, and His answer will be, *' I have 
loved thee with an everlasting love ; therefore with loving- 
kindness have I drawn thee." There will be no doubt about 
His having chosen youy when you have chosen Him. 

" Sons we are through God's election. 
Who in Jesus Christ belieye." 



* ^ m<^ 9kaU gc hindmoMi wiik ik^ rfaaJfA* — Ki^ S. SI. 



fl ^ BKffiE ^uip of Dan broitghi up tlie resr vbes Ae 
fl^w 0f lirael were on the march. The fiuiita a 
®*""^ l/i« hindnwit place ; but wiiat maltar^ii the po^tM, 
Mliioo tbey were oa truly pari of the ho£t as were the iOT«mQsl 
trlbofi ^ They fallowed the Esime fiery dotidj piDar ; thejal« 
of tiio iiainii tniiriTiu, drunk of tlie game jpijitiu^ rodr, bsiI 
JrMjrnt'yod Ut Lbti >«aR)e mberitaoc€. Come, mj heart, cheer 
tqi, thimgb lajst and leafit ; it la thy pririlege to be in the 
army, and tQ fare ais they far^ n? ho lead the van. Some oam 
mufit be bindtiiotit in honor and esteem; &ome one must lio 
ijn'tiliil work for JmuBi and wby ehonld not I ? Is a poor 
villngc, among an ignorant peasantry^ or in a haek etp^t 
among tji^gradod Blnnere, I will work on, and "^^ go hindmost 
with my Ktuiidard/' The Danite^ occnpied a very useful place. 
Btra^glcrH have to be picked up upon the march, and lost 
property has to be gathered from the field. Fiery spirits may 
dii^li forwjird over untrodden paths to learn fresh troth, and 
win morn houIb to Josum ; but some of a more conservatiTe 
npirh mn^' bo wttll engaged in reminding the Church of her 
ancient faith, and restoring her fainting sons. Every position 
buM itM duties, and the Miowiy moving children of God will find 
thejr p ecu liar j^tate, one in which they may be eminently a 
blewHing to the whole host. The rear guard is a place o/dau' 
gGTt Tbcro are foes behind na as well as before us* Attacks 
may como from any quarter. We read that Amalek fell upon 
Israel, and slew ho mo of the hindmost of them. The cxperi- 
enued (Jliristiau will Jind much work for hi a weapons in aiding 
thoHQ poor doubting, desponding, wavering souls, who are 
bind most in faith, knowledge, and joy. These must not be 
left nuiiided, and therefore be it the business of well-taught 
iaiats to boar their standards among the hindmost. My soal, 
do thou tenderly watch to help the hindmost this day. 




Jtilty ld« DAILY BBABIK08. 201 

" The Lord our God hath showed ub His gUny.** — Beat v. 24. 

|OD'S great design in all His works is the manifesta- 
tion of His own glory. Any aim less than this were 
unworthy of Himself. But how shall the glory of 
G-od be manifested to such fallen creatures as we are ? 
Man's eye is not single ; he has ever a side glance towards 
his own honor, has too high an estimate of his own powers, 
and so is not qualified to behold the glory of the Lord. It 
is dear, then, that self must stand out of the way, that there 
may be room for God to be exalted ; and this is the reason 
why He bringeth His people ofbtimes into straits and diffi- 
culties, that, being made conscious of their own folly and 
weidniess, they may be fitted to behold the majesty of God 
when He comes forth to work their deliverance. He whose 
life is one even and smooth path, will see but little of the 
glory of the Lord, for he has few occasions of self-emptying, 
<and hence but little fitness for being filled with the revela- 
tion of God. They who navigate little streams and shallow 
<3reeks, know but little of the God of tempests ; but they who 
" do business in great waters," these see His "wonders in 
the deep." Among the huge Atlantic-waves of bereavement, 
poverty, temptation, and reproach, we learn the power of 
Jehovah, because we feel the littleness of man. Thank God, 
then, if you have been led by a rough road ; it is this which 
has given you your experience of God's greatness and loving- 
kindness. Your troubles have enriched you with a wealth 
of knowledge to be gained by no other means ; your trials 
have been the cleft of the rock in which Jehovah has set you, 
as He did His servant Moses, that you might behold His 
glory as it passed by. Praise God that you have not been 
left to the darkness and ignorance which continued pros- 
perity might have involved, but that in the great fight of 
atfiiction, you have been capacitated for the outshinings of 
His glory in His wonderful dealings with you. 



2M 



JbLfSO. 



•T%mi 



U. 




I «f lie ■rpMrrr «% e«aiii>t reai woirds |«t» 

mnoh leas can we pat sentences together ; lm*» as one says, 
** He that has been in heaven but fi^ve minutes, knows more 
than the general assembly of divines on earth." Mfe have 
many nngratilieti desires at present, bat soon every wish shall 
be i^atid^ed ; and aQ oar powers shall find the sweetest em- 
ployment in that eternal world of joy. O Christian, antedate 
heaven for a few years. Within a very little time thon shalt 
be rid of all thy trials and thy troubles. Thine eyes, now 
BofTased with tears, shall weep no longer. Thon shalt gate 
in ineffable rapture upon the splendor of Him who sits upon 
the throne. Nay, more, upon His throne shalt thou sit. 
The triumph of His glory shall be shared by thee ; His crown, 
J 1)3 joy, His Paradise, these shall be thine, and thou ^halt be 
co-heir with Him who is the Heir of all things. 



July 21. DAILY BEADINOS. 203 

" The daughter of Jerusalem hath shaken her head at thee" 
Isaiah xxxvli. 22. 

ar^^EASSUKED by the Word of the Lord, the poor 
(ilsl^ trembling citizens of Zion grew bold, and shook 
'^^'^^^ their heads at Sennacherib's boastful threats. Strong 
faith enables the servants of God to look with calm con- 
tempt upon their most haughty foes. We know that our 
enemies are attempting impossibilities. They seek to destroy 
the eternal life, which cannot die while Jesus lives ; to over- 
throw the citadel, against which the gates of hell shall not 
prevail. They kick against the pricks to their own wound- 
ing, and rush upon the bosses of Jehovah's buckler to their 
own hurt. 

. We know their weakness. What are they but men ? And 
what is man but a worm ? They roar and swell, like waves 
of the sea, foaming out their own shame. When the Lord 
axiseth, they shall fly as chaff before the wind, and be con- 
sumed as crackling thorns. Their utter powerlessness to do 
damage to the cause of God and His truth, may make the 
weakest soldiers in Zion's ranks laugh them to scorn. 

Above all, we know that the Most High is with us, and when 
He dresses Himself in arms, where are His enemies ! If He 
Cometh forth from His place, the potsherds of the earth will 
not long contend with their Maker. His rod of iron shall 
dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel, and their very 
remembrance shall perish from the earth. Away, then, all 
fears ; the kingdom is safe in the Eang's hands. Let us shout 
for joy, for the Lord reigneth, and His foes shall be as straw 
for the dunghill. 

" As true as God's own word is true. 

Nor earth nor hell, with all their crew, 
Against us shall prevail. * 

A jest and by-word are they grown ; 

God is with us, we are his own ; 
Our victory cannot fail*'' 



Be mfrnttftA Mis Oiin-di a^ a chastii | 

^« ite fiA vider die joke of bond 

Be toaed^ like Jacob fori 

prnthaae^miQuej h^d beenj 

' by His q>int, and brougb 

ksffv imI Isfv Kh, fie xsaitE Ike glorious bonr wbe 

■ribMl ttiB ^aB W fiHMiiiiiiiili'fl at tbe marriagii^ 

•f Ik I^iadbu X«l j«t listk the glorioiis Bridegroom 

1 BOk fc etretheJ i , perfected wd eosiplete, before tbe 

jvt kiHi £be aetmallj entered upon 

tlie eajajBuuA ef bcr dignities ms His wife and queen ; she 

m as T«i a vmdcivr in a irorld of voe, a dweOer in the tents 

«f Kedar; lut sfce b er^s naw the bride, the eponse of 

JuiiBi^ dear to m^ heart, pre^ions in His sight, written on 

T^s hands^ and limited vith His person. On earth He 6xer> 

ci:s^^ towards her all the affectionate offiees of Ha^^^hnnd. He 

nakes rich proTi^ioo for her wants, pajs all her debts, allows 

her to assume His name, and to share in all His wealth. 

'Sot will He ever act otherwise to her. The word divorce 

He will never mention, for " He hateth putting away." Death 

must sever the conjugal tie between the most loving mortals, 

but it cannot divide the links of this immortal marriage. In 

heaven they marry not, but are as the angels of God, yet 

there is this one marvellous exception to the rule, for in 

heaven Christ and His Church shall celebrate their joyous 

nuptials. This affinity, as it is more lasting, so is it more 

near than earthly wedlock. Let the love of husband be 

never so pure and fervent, it is but a faint picture of the 

flame which burns in the heart of Jesus. Pas-^ing all human 

union is that mystical cleaving unto the Church, for which 

Christ left His Father, and became one flesh with her 




Jtlly d3» DAILY BEAD1K6S. 205 

" Even thou wast as (me of them." — Obadiah i. 1 1. 

JROTHEKLY kindness was due from Edom to Israel 
in the time of need, but instead thereof, the mei) of 
Esau made common cause with Israel's foes. Special 
stress in the sentence before us is laid upon the word thou ; 
as when CsBsar cried to Brutus, " And thou^ Brutus ; " a bad 
action may be all the worse because of the person who has 
committed it. When we sin, who are the chosen favorites of 
Heaven, we sin with an emphasis ; ours is a crying offence, 
because we are so peculiarly indulged. If an angel should 
lay his hand upon us when we are doing evil, he need not 
use any other rebuke than the question, " What, ihou f What 
dost thou here?" Much forgiven, much delivered, much 
instructed, much enriched, much blessed, shall we dare to put 
forth our hand unto evil ? God forbid ! 

A few minutes of confession may be beneficial to thee, 
gentle reader, this morning. Hast thou never been as the 
wicked ? At an evening party certain men laughed at un- 
cleanness, and the joke was not altogether offensive to thine 
ear ; even thou wast as one of them. When hard things were 
spoken concerning the ways of God, thou wast bashfully 
silent ; and so, to on-lookers, thou wast as one of them. When 
worldlings were bartering in the market, and driving hard 
bargains, wast thou not as one of them ? When they were 
pursuing vanity with a hunter's foot, wert thou not as greedy 
for gain as they were ? Could any difference be discerned 
between thee and them ? Is there any difference f Here we 
come to close quarters. Be honest with thine own soul, and 
make sure that thou art a new creature in Christ Jesus ; but 
when this is sure, walk jealously, lest any should again be able 
to say, " Even thou wast as one of them." Thou wouldst not 
desire to share their eternal doom ; why then be like them here ? 
Come not thou into their secret, lest thou come into their ruin. 
Side with the afllioted people of God, and not with the world. 
18 



206 DIXLT HKJtDIKOfl. Jidj 24^ 



"Btand siilh UTtd scetJie sahation of the Lard," — ^odua si?, 13. 




r^HESE words contain God's command to the believer 



W when be is reduced to great straits and brought lal 
extraordinary difficulties. He cannot retreat ; htj 
cannot go forward ; be is sbut up on the right hand and o: 
the left ; what ia ho now to do ? The Master s word to hii 
jj, " Stand etilL" It wiU be well for him if at such times h«, 
listens onlj;to bis Maafcer's word, for other and evil advisert. 
come with their suggestions. Despair whispers, *"'- Lie dow^ 
and die; gi^o it all up/' But €rod would haye us put on m 
cheerful courage, and eveii in o^ worst times, rejoice in Bm 
love and faithfulness. Cowardice says, '* Retreat ; go bacfe^ 
to the worldling's way of action ; you cannot play the Christ 
tian's part ; it is too difficult. Relinquish your principles/* 
But, however mnch Satan may urge this course upon you, you. 
cannot follow it if you arc a child of Qod» His divine £atH 
has bid thee go from strength to strength, and so thou shalt, 
and neither death nor heU shall turn thee from thy course* 
What if for a while Ihou art called to stand still ; yet this ia 
but to renew thy strength for some greater advance in due 
, time. Precipitancy cries, " Do something. Stir yourself; to 
stand still and wait is sheer idleness." We miLst be doing 
something at once — t^e must do it, so we think — instead of 
looking to the Lord, who will not only do something, but will 
do everything. Presumption boasts, " If the sea be before 
you, march into it, and expect a miracle." But Faith listens 
neither to Presumption, nor to Despair, nor to Cowardice, 
nor to Precipitancy, but it hears God say, " Stand still," and 
immovable as a rock it stands. "iS^awc? still; " — keep the 
posture of an upright man, ready for action, expecting further 
orders, cheerfully and patiently awaiting the directing voice; 
and it will not be long ere Grod shall say to you, as distinctly 
as Moses said it to the people of Israel, " Go forward/' 




July 25. DAILT BSADIKOS. 207 

'< He left his goamerd in her hand, and fled, and g^ him out/* 
Genesis xxxix. 12. 

contending with certain sins, there remains no 
mode of victory but by flight. The ancient nat- 
uralists wrote much of basilisks, whose eyes fasci- 
nated their victims, and rendered them easy victims ; so the 
mere gaze of wickedness puts us in solemn danger. He who 
would be safe from acts of evil must haste away from occa- 
sions of it. A covenant must be made with our eyes not even 
to look upon the cause of temptation, for such sins only need 
a spark to begin with, and a blaze follows in an instant. 
Who would wantonly enter the leper's prison and sleep amid 
its horrible corruption i He only who desires to be leprous 
himself would thus court contagion. If the mariner knew 
how to avoid a storm, he would do anything rather than run 
the risk of weathering it ? Cautious pilots have no desire to 
try how near the quicksand they can sail, or how often they 
may touch a rock without springing a leak ; their aim is to 
keep as nearly as possible in the midst of a safe channel. 

This day I may be exposed to great peril ; let me have the 
serpent's wisdom to keep out of it and avoid it. The wings 
of a dove 'may be of more use to me to-day than the jaws of 
a lion. It is true I may be an apparent loser by declining 
evil company, but I had better leave my cloak than lose my 
character ; it is not needful that I should be rich, but it is 
imperative upon me to be pure. No ties of friendship, no 
chains of beauty, no flashings of talent, no shafts of ridicule 
must turn me from the wise resolve to flee from sin. The 
devil I am to resist, and he will flee from me ; but the lusts 
of the flesh I must fle«, or they will surely overcome me. 
O God of holiness, preserve Thy Josephs, that Madam 
Bubble bewitch them not with her vile' suggestions. May 
the horrible trinity of .the world, the flesh, and the devil, 
never overcome us. 




Hal J :^pflr^ 9fih«'?ie? : ai^ Hfm to grre t&ee Aal pili«Cf 
whiek ouinzTHii iifiietioa : wiiica. wkea ic i;^ cried, AaR eome 
forrk 3S ffQiiL Amj jtjarseif wick p^eikce, ^at yoa may 
not: mnmmr nor be iepn>5sed in tout alBiedoiis* Wken thit 
gnee i9 woo. L^^k to jtjdliness^ Gtniliiiess is somelliing 
more tban migioit. Miike G^'* giory tout object in life ; 
li^e in Hi'^ sgkt : dwell eio^^e co Him ; seek for fl^owship 
with Him : and dtou ki^t ^ godliness ; '^ Mid to thai idd 
broth^y lovi. Have a lore to all the saints ; and add to that 
sTrharit^, which openedi its arms to ail men, and lores their 
nonU. When yon are adorned with these jewels, and just in 
proportion aa you practise these heavenly virtues, will you 
f'omfi to know by clearest evidence *' your calling and elec- 
tion/* ** Give diligence/' if you would get assurance, for 
hikcwarmueHH and doubting very naturally go hand in hand. 




July 27. daily beadinos. 209 

" Exceeding great and precious promises.^' — 2 Peter i. 4. 

you would know experimentally the preciousness 
of the promises, and enjoy them in your own heart, 
meditate much upon them. There are promises which 
are like grapes in the wine-press : if you will tread them the 
juice will flow. Thinking over the hallowed words will often 
be the prelude to their fulfilment. While you are musing 
upon them, the boon which you are seeking will insensibly 
come to you. Many a Christian who has thirsted for, the 
promise has found the favor which it insured gently distilling 
into his soul even while he has been considering the divine 
record ; and he has rejoiced that ever he was led to lay the 
promise near his heart. But besides meditating upon the 
promises, seek in thy soul to receive them as being the very 
words of God. Speak to thy soul thus : " If I were dealing 
with a man's promise, I should carefully consider the ability 
and the character of the man who had covenanted with me. 
So with the promise of God ; my eye must not be so much 
fixed upon the greatness of the mercy — that may stagger 
me, as upon the greatness of the Promisor — that will cheer 
me. My soul, it is God, even thy God, God that cannot 
lie, who speaks to thee. This word of His which thou art 
BOW considering is as true as His own existence. He is a 
God unchangeable. He has not altered the thing which has 
gone out of His mouth, nor called back one single consola- 
tory sentence. Nor doth He lack any power ; it is the God 
that made the heavens and the earth who has spoken thus. 
Nor can He fail in wisdom as to the time when He will be- 
stow the favors, for He knoweth when it is best to give, and 
when better to withhold. Therefore, seeing that it is the 
word of a God so true, so immutable, so powerful, so wise, 
I will and must believe the promise." If we thus meditate 
upon the promises, and consider the Promisor, we shall ex- 
perience their sweetness, and obtain their fulfilment. 
18* 



210 BAILY BMAJDINGB, Julj 28 

*■ So/ootUk was If and ignormit : I was as a beast before tkee^'* 
Psalm Ixxiii. 22. 

fi|?^:^EMEMBEE, tliis is the confeBsk>]i of the man aftet 
' ^^i> Gud*8 own heart ; and* in telling ua his inner life, he 



m 



writes, " So foolish was I, and ignorant/' The word 
"fooluh" here* means more than it signifies in ordinfiry 
language- David, in a former Terse ©f the Psalm, writes, 
" I was envious of the fooluh when 1 saw tbe prosperity of 
the wieked," which shows that the folly he intended had m 
in it. He puts himself down m being thus " foolish," and 
adda a word which is to give intensity to it : " so foolish wm 
I" Moivfooliih^ he could not tell. It was a sinful folly, a 
folly which was not to be excused by frailty, but to be eon- 
deraned because of its perverscnosa and wilful ignorance, for 
he had been enviouB of the present prosperity of the ungodly, 
forgetful of the dreadful end awaiting all such. And are we 
better than David, that tue should caL ourselves wise ? Bo 
we profess that we have attained perfectioUj or to have been 
BO chastened that the rod has taken all our wilfulness out of 
us ? Ah, this were pride indeed ! If David was foolishi 
how foolish should we be in our own esteem if we could but 
see ourselves ! Look back, believer : think of your doubting 
God when he has been so faithful to you — think of your 
foolish outcry of, " Not so, my Father," when He crossed His 
hands in affliction to give you the larger blessing ; think of 
the many times when you have read His providences in the 
dark, misinterpreted His dispensations, and groaned out, 
"All these things are against me," when they were all work- 
ing together for your good ! Think how often you have 
chosen sin because of its pleasure, when, indeed, that pleas- 
ure was a root of bitterness to you ! Surely if we know our 
own heart we must plead guilty to the indictment of a sinful 
folly ; and, conscious of this " foolishness," we must make 
David's consequent resolve oixr own — "2%ou shalt guide m6 
with Thy counaeU* 




July 29. i>ArLT headings, 211 

** NeveriheUsSf I am continuaUy with TheeJ* — Ps, IxxiiL 23. 

NEVERTHELESS. — As if, notwithstanding all the 
foolishness and ignorance which David had just been 
confessing to God, not one atom the less was it true 
and certain that David was saved and accepted, and that the 
blessing of being constantly in God's presence was undoubt- 
edly his. Fully conscious of his own lost estate, and of the 
deceitfulness and vileness of his nature, yet, by a glorious 
outburst of faith, he sings, ^^ Nevertheless, I am continually 
with Thee." Believer, you are forced to enter into Daniers 
confession and acknowledgment ; endeavor in like spirit to 
say, " Nevertheless, since I belong to Christ I am continu- 
ally with God ! " By this is meant continually upon His 
mind ; He is always thinking of me for my good. Continu- 
ally before His eye ; the eye of the Lord never sleepeth, 
but is perpetually watching over my welfare. Continually 
in His hand, so that none shall be able to pluck me thence. 
Continually on His heart, worn there as a memorial, even as 
the high priest bore the names of the twelve tribes upon his 
heart forever. Thou always thinkest of me, God. The 
bowels of Thy love continually yearn towards me. Thou 
art always making providence work for my good. Thou hast 
set me as a signet upon Thine arm ; Thy love is strong as 
death ; many waters cannot quench it, neither can the floods 
drown it. Surprising grace ! Thou seest me in Christ, and, 
though in myself abhorred. Thou beholdest me as wearing 
Christ's garments, and washed in His blood, and thus I stand 
accepted in Thy presence. I am thus continually in Thy 
favor — " continually with Thee." Here is comfort for the 
tried and ^.fflicted soul ; vexed with the tempest within — 
look at the calm without. " Nevertheless " — say it in thy 
heart, and take the peace it gives. " Nevertheless, I am 
continually with Thee." 




212 HALLY KEAim?o9, Jul J 3<^, 

**And when he fkou^M th&'eon, he wept/^ — Marft liv, 72. 

has been thought by some, tJiat, &s long as Peter 
^ lived, the fountiiiii of his tears began to flow when- 
ever he remembered his denying his Lord. It ia not 
onUkely that it wai so^ for his sin was very great, and grac^ 
in him had aftenrardi a perfect work. This same eiperi- 
enee is common to all the redeemed family according to the 
degree in which the Spirit of God has removed the natural 
heart of stone. We, like Peter, remember our homtjui 
promise : "■ Though all men shall forsake Thee» yet will not 
I/* We eat our own words with the bitter herbs of repent- 
ance. When we think of what we vowed we would be, and 
of what we have been, we may weep whole showera of 
grief. He thought on hu deriying ht-s hord^ the place in 
which he did it, the little cause which led him into such 
heinous sin, the oaths and blaBphemies with which he nought 
to con&rm hia falsehood, and the dreadful hardness of heart 
which drove him to do so again and yet again. Can we, 
when we are reminded of our sins and their exceeding sin- 
fulness, remain stolid and stubborn ? Will we not make Our 
house a Bochim, and cry unto the Lord for renewed assur- 
ances of pardoning love ? May we never take a dry-eyed 
look at sin, lest ere long we have a tongue parched in the 
flames of hell. Peter also thought upon his Master's look of 
love. The Lord followed up the cock*s warning voice witii 
an admonitory look of sorrow, pity, and love. That glance 
was never out of Peter's mind so long as he lived. It was 
far more effectual than ten thousand sermons would have 
been without the Spirit. The penitent apostle would be sure 
to weep when he recollected the Saviour's full forgiveness, 
which restored him to his former place. To think that we 
have offended so kind and good a Lord is more than suffi- 
cient reason for being constant weepers. Lord, smite our 
rocky hearts, and make the waters flow. 




July 81. BAiXT BEADnros. 1^18 

" Ji» them." -^ John xvii. 23. 

sneh be the union which subsists between our 
souls and the person of our Lord, how deep and'broad 
is the channel of our communion ! This is no narrow 
pipe through which a thread-like stream may wind its way ; 
it is a channel of amazing depth and breadth, along whose 
glorious length a ponderous volume of living water may roll 
its floods. Behold He hath set before us an open door ; let 
us not be slow to enter. This city of communion hath many 
pearly gates ; every several gate is of one pearl, and each gate 
is thrown open to the uttermost, that we may enter, assured 
of welcome. If there were but one small loophole through 
which to talk with Jesus, it would be a high privilege to 
thrust a word of fellowship through the narrow door ; how 
much we are blessed in having so large an entrance ! 
Had the Lord Jesus been far away from us, with many a 
stormy sea between, we should have longed to send a mes- 
sengei* to Him to carry Him our loves, and bring us tidings 
from His Father's house; but see His kindness; He has 
built His house next door to ours, nay, more. He takes lodgr 
ing with us, and tabernacles in poor humble hearts, that so 
He may have perpetual intercourse with us. 0, how foolish 
must we be, if we do not live in habitual communion wiUi 
Him ! When the road is long, and dangerous, and difficult, 
we need not wonder that friends seldom meet each other ; 
but when they live together, shall Jonathan forget his David? 
A wife may, when her husband is upon a journey, abide 
many days without holding converse with him, but she coald 
never endure to be separated from him if she knew him to be 
in one of the chambers of her own house. Why, believer, 
dost not thou sit at His banquet of wine ? Seek thy Lord, 
for He is near ; embrace Him, for He is thy Brother. Hold 
Him fast, for He is thine Husband ; and press Him to thine 
heart, for He is of thine own flesh. 



$14 DAILY BEABINGS. Augast 1. 

" Letm^WM fo to thejtddj and tjletm eors qfcomJ^^ — Ruth ii. 2. 

PSS^iOWNCA8T md fcroubled Christian, come and glean to- 
f^ / <l;iy in the broad field of promise. Here are abooa- 
*^^^'-^ danoe of precious promiaes, which exactlj meet thy 
wants. Take this one : " He will not break the bruised reed, 
nor qnench the smoking flax," Doth not that suit thy eajse ? 
A reed, helpless, insignifieant, and weak ; a bruised reei 
out of whicli no music can come i weaker thao weakness 
itself I a reed, and that reed braised^ yet He will not break 
thee ; but, on the contrary, will restore and strengthen thee. 
Thou art like the smoking flax i no light, no warmth ttm 
come from thee ; but He will Dot quench thee ; He will blow 
with His sweet breath of mercy till He fana thee to a flamt\ 
Wouldst thou glean another ear ? " Come unto Me* all ye 
that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest/* 
What eoft words \ Thy heart is tender^ and the Master 
knows it J and therefore He speaketh so gently to thee. Wilt 
thou not obey Him, and corDe to Him even now ? Take an- 
other ear of com : " Fear not, thou worm Jacob ; I will help 
thee, saith the Lord and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of 
Israel." How canst thou fear with such a wonderful assur- 
ance as this ? Thou mayst gather ten thousand such golden 
ears as these : " I have blotted out thy sins like a cloud, and 
like a thick cloud thy transgressions." Or this : " Though 
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as wool ; though they 
be red like crimson, they shall be whiter than snow." Or 
this : '* The Spirit and the Bride say come ; and let him that 
is athirst come ; and whosoever will, let him take the water 
of life freely." Our Master's field is very rich ; behold the 
handfuls ! See, there they lie before thee, poor timid be- 
liever ! Gather them up, make them thine own, for Jesus 
bids thee take them. Be not afraid, only believe ! Grasp 
these sweet promises, thresh them out by meditation, and 
feed on them with joy. 




August 2. ©ATLT BEADIXOS. 215 

" Who toorketh all things after the cottnsd of Sis own will," 
Ephesians i. 12. 

SUB. belief in Ood's wisdom snpposes and necessitates 
that He has a settled purpose and plan in the work 
of salvation. What would creation have been with- 
out His design ? Is there a fish in the sea or a fowl in the 
air which was left to chance for its formation ? Nay, in every 
bone, joint, and muscle, sinew, gland, and blood-vessel, you 
mark the presence of a God working everything according 
to the design of infinite wisdom. And shall God be present in 
ereation, ruling over all, and not in grace f Shall the new cre- 
ation have the fickle genius of free will to preside over it when 
divine counsel rules the old creation ? Look at Providence ! 
Who knoweth not that not a sparrow falleth to the ground 
without your Father ? Even the hairs of your head are all 
numbered. God weighs the mountains of our grief in scales, 
and the hills of our tribulation in balances. And shall there 
be a God in providence, and not in grace ? Shall the shell be 
ordained by wisdom, and the kernel be left to blind chance ? 
No ; He knows the end from the beginning. He sees in its 
appointed place, not merely the corner-stone which He has 
laid in fair colors, in the blood of His dear Son, but He be- 
holds in their ordained position each of the chosen stones 
taken out of the quarry of nature, and polished by His grace ; 
He sees the whole from corner to cornice, from base to roof, 
from foundation to pinnacle. He hath in His mind a clear 
knowledge of every stone which shall be laid in its prepared 
space, and how vast the edifice shall be, and when the top- 
stone shall be brought forth with shoutings of, " Grace ! 
Grace ! unto it." At the last it shall be clearly seen that in 
every chosen vessel of mercy, Jehovah did as He willed with 
His own ; and that in every part of the work of grace He 
accomplished His purpose, and glorified His own name. 



216 DAILY KEAIJINGS^ 





** The Lamb is ihe4iffht thereof J* — Kevelatioii isjd. 23* 

^^UIETLY eon template the Lamb as tho light of heavcBu J 
J Light in Scrip tirre ii the emblem of jo^. The joy of i 
the saints in heaven is comprised in this : Jesus chese 
lifli loved U3, bought iie, eleansed ua^ robed us, kept as, glo- 
rified us ; we are here entirely through the Lord Jeaus. Eaeh 
one of these thoughts shall be to them like a eluster of the 
grapes of EsbcoL Light is also the eause of heanty. Nought 
of beauty ia letli wl^en light is gone. Without light no radi- 
ance flashes from the eapphire, no peaceful ray proceedetli 
Irom the pearl ; and thus all the beauty of the saints above 
comes from JeeuB. As planets, they reflect the light of the 
Sun of RighteonsnesB j they live as beams proceeding from 
the central orb. If He withdrew, they must die; if Hia 
glory were veiiedj their glory must expire. Light is also the 
emblem of knowledge. In heaveu our knowledge will be per- 
fect, but the Lord Jesus Himseif wiU be the fountain of it 
Dark providences, never understood before, will then be 
clearly seen ■ and all that puzzles us now will become plain 
to us in the light of the Lamb. Oh, what unfoldings there 
will be, and what glorifying of the God of love ! Light also 
means manifestation. Light manifests. In this world it doUi 
not yet appear what we shall be. God's people are a hidden 
people ; but when Christ receives His people into heaven, He 
will touch them with the wand of His own love, and change 
them into the image of His manifested glory. They were poor 
and wretched, but what a transformation ! They were stained 
with sin, but one touch of His finger, and they are bright as 
the sun and clear as crystal. Oh, what a manifestation ! All 
this proceeds from the exalted Lamb. Whatever there may 
be of effulgent splendor, Jesus shall be the centre and soul 
of it all. Oh, to be present and to see Him in His own light, 
the King of kings and Lord of lords ! 




August 4. DAILY BEADINOS. 217 

** The people thai' do know their Ood shaU be strong,'* — Dan. xi. 32. 

^VERY believer understands that to know Q-od is the 
highest and best form of knowledge ; and this spir- 
itual knowledge is a source of strength to the Chris- 
tian. It strengthens his faith. Believers are constantly 
spoken of in the Scriptures as being persons who are enlight- 
ened and tau^t of the Lord ; they are said to '' have an unc- 
tion from the Holy One," and it is the Spirit's peculiar office 
to lead them into all truth ; and all this for the increase and 
the fostering of their faith. Knowledge strengthens lovcy as 
f well as faith. Ejiowledge opens the door, and then through 
that door we see our Saviour. Or, to use another similitude, 
knowledge paints the portrait of Jesus ; and when we see 
tiiat portrait, then we love Him ; we cannot love a Christ 
whom we do not know, at least in some degree. If we know 
bat little of the excellences of Jesus, what He has done for 
us, and what He is doing now, we cannot love Him much ; 
bat ihe more we know Him, the more we shall love Him. 
Kiiowledge also strengthens hope. How can we hope for a 
thing if we do not know of its existence ? Hope may be the 
telescope; but till we receive instruction, our ignorance 
stands in the front of the glass, and we can see nothing what- 
ever. EjQOWledge removes the interposing object ; and when 
we look through the bright optic-glass we discern the glory 
to be revealed, and anticipate it with joyous confidence. 
Knowledge supplies us reasons for patience. How shall we 
have patience unless we know something of .the sympathy of 
Christ, and understand the good which is to come out of the 
correction which our heavenly Father sends us ? Nor is there 
on6 single grace of the Christian which, under God, wiU not be 
fostered and brought to perfection by holy knowledge. How 
important, then, is it that we should grow not only in grace, 
but in the ** knowledge " of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ ! 
19 




SI 9 BAJLT BSAXtl^Gd. August 



** Wi JbwMT ihfii all ihing» work iogttherfor good-to tkem that ioH 



^^^PON some points a believer is absolutely sure. He 
jr l[ Ir knows J for instaucet tbai God sits in the sterD~sbei!t« 
"^^^ of tlie vessel wben h roeks most* He believea tbat 
an invisible hand is always on the world^s tiller, and that, 
wherevei" providence may drift, Jehovah steera it. That 
reassuring knowledge prepares him for everytMng. He 
looks over the raging waters, and sees the spirit of Jesus 
treading the billows, and he hears a voice saying, '"^It is I; 
be not afraid/' He know^s, too, that God is always wise, 
atid, knowing this, he is confident that there cau be oo acci- 
dents, no mistakes ; that nothing can occur which ought not 
to arise. He can say, '' If I sbould lose all 1 have, it if 
better that I should lose thau have, if God so wills : the 
worst calamity is the wisest and the kindest thing that could 
befall to me if God ordains it/' *' We know that all tbiugs 
work together for good to them that love God/' The Chris- 
tian does not merely hold this as a theory, but Iw ktwws it 
as a matter of fact. Everything hds worked for good as 
yet; the poisonous drugs, mixed in fit proportions, have 
worked the cure ; the sharp cuts of the lancet have cleansed 
out the proud flesh, and facilitated the healing. Every event 
as yet has worked out the most divinely blessed results; 
and so, believing that God rules all, that He governs wisely, 
that He brings good out of evil, the believer's heart is as- 
sured, and he is^enabled calmly to meet each trial as it comes. 
The believer can, in the spirit of true resignation, pray, 
" Send me what thou wilt, my God, so long as it comes from 
Thee ; never came there an ill portion from Thy table toUny 
of Thy children/' 

" Say not, my soul, *From whence can God relieve my care ? * 
Remember that Omnipotence has servants everywhere. 
His method is sublime, His heart profoundly kind ; 
God never is before His time, and never is behind." 




AngOSt 6. BAUiY KEADINOS. 219 

" Watckmcm, what of the night f** — Isaiah xxL 11. 

(JHAT enemies are abroad f Errors are a numerous 
horde, and new ones appear every hour: against 
what heresy am I to be on my guard ? Sins creep 
from their lurking-places when the darkness reigns : I must 
myself mount the watch-tower, and watch unto prayer. Our 
heavenly Protector foresees all the attacks which are about 
ta be made upon us, and, when as yet the evil designed us 
is but in the desire of Satan, He prays for us that our faith 
fail not when we are sifted as wheat. Continue, gracious 
Watchman, to forewarn us of our foes, and for Zion*s sake 
hold not Thy peace. 

" Watchman, what of the night ? '* Whai weather is com- 
ing for the Church ? Are the clouds lowering, or is it all 
clear and fair overhead ? We must care for the Church of 
Q-od with anxious love ; and now that Popery and infidelity 
are hoih threatening, let us observe the signs of the times, 
and prepare for conflict. 

" Watchman, what of the night ? " What stars are visible f 
What precious promises suit our present case ? You sound 
the alarm ; give us the consolation also. Christ, the pole- 
star, is ever fixed in His place, and all the stars are secure 
in the right hand of their Lord. 

But, watchman, when comes the morning f The Bride- 
groom tarries. Are there no signs of His coming forth as 
the Sun of Righteousness ? Has not the morning star arisen 
as the pledge of day ? When will the day dawn, and the 
shadows flee away ? O Jesus, if Thou come not in person 
to thy waiting Church this day, yet come in Spirit to my 
sighing heart, and make it sing for joy. 

** Now all the earth is bright and glad 

With the fresh morn ; 
But all my heart is cold, anc^dark, and sad: 
Sun of the soul, let me behold thy dawn ! 

Come, Jesus, Lord, 
quickly come, according to Thy word." 



220 IfAILY B^ABIK&S, 




"JAe uprujht loi^^ Tkee*^* — ^ Canticles L 4. 



j|fj%J^IiIEVERS love Jesus with a deeper affection than 
^^^ they dare to give te any othor being. They would 
BO oner lose father and mother than part with Chriit, 
They hold aU earthly comforts with a loose hand, but they 
carry Him fast locked in their bosoms. Thoy volimtiirily 
deny themselves for His sake, but they are not to be driven 
to deny Him. It is scant love which the fire of peraecutioB 
eatj dry up ; the true believer's love is a deeper stream tbaa 
this. Men have labored to divide the faithful from their 
Master, but their attempts have been fruitless in every age. 
Neither crowns of honor, nor frowns of anger, have untied 
this more than gordian knot. This is no every -day attiick- 
ment which the world's power may at length disaolfe. 
Neither man nor devil has found a key which opena this 
lock. Never has the craft of Satan been more at fault tbaa 
when he has exercised it in seeking to rend in sunder this 
union of two divinely welded hearts. It is written, and 
nothing can blot out the sentence, " The upright love Thee,'* 
The intensity of the love of the upright, however, is not so 
much to be judged by what it appears as by what the upri^ 
long for. It is our daily lament that we cannot love enough. 
Would that our hearts were capable of holding more and 
reaching farther. Like Samuel Rutherford, we si^ and 
cry, "0 for as much love as would go round about the 
earth, and over heaven — yea, the heaven of heaved, and 
ten thousand worlds — that I might let all out upon fair, 
fair, only fair Christ " ! Alas ! our longest reach is but a 
span of love, and our affection is but as a drop of a bucket, 
compared with His deserts. Measure our love by our inten- 
tions, and it is high indeed ; 'tis thus, we trust, our Lord 
doth judge of it. that we could give all the love in all 
hearts in one great mass, a gathering together of all loves 
to Him who is altogether lovely I 




JLoffrnt^ DAILY BSADOrCHi; 231 

" They weaoe the spider' 8 vseb.** — Isaiah lix. 6. 

i!E the spider's web, and behold in it a most sugges- 
tive picture of the hypocrite's religion. It is meant 
to catch his prey : the spider fattens himself on flies, 
and the Pharisee has his reward. Foolish persons are easily 
entoapped by the loud professions of pretenders, and even 
the more judicious cannot always escape. Philip baptized 
Simon Magus, whose guileful declaration of faith was so soon 
exploded by the stem rebuke of Peter. Custom, reputation, 
praise, advancement, and other flies, are the small game 
which hypocrites take in their nets. A spider's web is a 
marvel of skiU : look at it, and admire the cunning hunter's 
wiles. Is not a deceiver's religion equally wonderful ? How 
does be make so barefaced a lie appear to be a truth ? How 
can he make his tinsel answer so well the purpose of gold ? 
A spider's web comes aU/rom the creature* s own bowels. The 
bee gathers her wax from flowers ; the spider sucks no flow- 
ers, and yet she spins out her material to any length. Even 
80 hypocrites find their trust and hope within themselves; 
tiieir anchor was forged on their own anvil, and their cable 
twisted by iheir own hands. They lay their own foundation, 
and hew out the pillars of their own house, disdaining to be 
debtors to the sovereign grace of God. But a spider's web 
is very frail. It is curiously wrought, but not enduringly 
manufactured. It is no match for the servant's broom, or 
the traveller's staff. The hypocrite needs no battery of 
Armstrongs to blow his hope to pieces : a mere puff of wind 
will do it. Hypocritical cobwebs will soon come down when 
the besom of destruction begins its purifying work. Which 
reminds us of one more thought, viz., that such cobwebs are 
not to be endured in the Lord^s house : He will see to it that 
^ they and those who spin them shall be destroyed forever. 
O my soul, be thou resting on something better than a gli- 
der's web. Be the Lord Jesus thine eternal hiding-placo. 
19* 





JONI>ER, in the better world, the inJiabitaiits are imde- 
pentlent of all ereatiire comforts. They have no need 
of raiment ; their white robea never wear out, neither 
shall they eye? be defiled. They need no medicine 
to heal diseases, *'• for the inhabitant sbaU not eay, I am eiek.'^ 
They need no sleep to recruit their frames — they rest not 
day nor night, but imweariedly praise Him in His temple. 
They need no Bocial relationship to minister comfort, and 
whatever happiness they may derive from association with 
their fellows, is not essential to their bHsa, for their Lord's 
society is enough for their largest desires. They need no 
teachers there ; they doubtless commune with one another 
concerning the things of Ood, but they do not require this by 
way of instruction ; they shall all be taught of the Lord* 
Ours are the alms at the king's gate, but they feast at the 
table itself. Here we lean upon the friendly arm, but there 
they lean upon their Beloved, and upon Him alone. Here 
we must have the help of our companions, but there they 
find all they want in Christ Jesus. Here we look to the meat 
which perisheth, and to the raiment which decays before -the 
moth, but there they find everything in God. We use the 
bucket to fetch us water from the well, but there they drink 
from the fountain head, and put their lips down to the liying 
water. Here the angels bring us blessings, but we shall want 
no messengers from heaven then. They shall need no Gabri- 
els there to bring their love-notes from God, for there they 
shall see Him face to face. Oh, what a blessed time shall that 
be, when we shall have mounted above every second cause, 
and shall rest upon the bare arm of God ! What a glorious 
hour when God, and not His creatures, — the Lord, and not* 
His works, — shall be our daily joy ! Our souls shall then 
have attained the perfection of bliss* 




August 10, DAJGLY SEADINOS. f223 

" Christy who is our liftr — Colossians iii. 4. 

|AUL'S marvellously rich expression indicates, that 
Christ is the soi^rce of our life. "You hath He 
quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins." 
That same voice which brought Lazarus out of the tomb, 
raised us to newness of life. He is now the substance of our 
spiritual life. It is by His life that we live ; He is in us, the 
hope of glory, the spring of our actions, the central thought 
which moves every other thought. Christ is the sustenance of 
our life. What can the Christian feed upon but Jesus* flesh 
and blood? "This is the bread which cometh down from 
heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die." O way- 
worn pilgrims in this wilderness of sin, you never get a mor- 
sel to satisfy the hunger of your spirits, except ye find it in 
Him ! Christ is the solace of our life. All our true joys come 
from Him ; and in times of trouble. His presence is our con- 
solation. There is nothing worth living for but Him ; and 
His loving-kindness is better than life ! Christ is the object 
of our life. As speeds the ship towards the port, so hastes 
the believer towards the haven of his Saviour's bosom. As 
flies the arrow to its goal, so flies the Christian towards the 
perfecting of his fellowship with Christ Jesus. As the sol- 
dier fights for his captain, and is crowned in his captain's 
victory, so the believer contends for Christ, and gets his tri- 
umph out of the triumphs of his Master. " Eor him to live 
is Christ." Christ is the exemplar of our life. Where there 
is the same life within, there will, there must be, to a ^eat 
extent, the same developments without ; and if we live in near 
fellowship with the Lord Jesus, we shall grow like Him. 
We shall set Him before us as our Divine copy, and we shall 
seek to tread in His footsteps, until He shall become the 
crown of our life in glory. Oh ! how safe, how honored, how 
happy is the Christian, since Christ is our life ! 




I 



** O thai Iwt^e at in mmtikMpattf'* — Job xdx- 2, 

^K^IJMBERS of Chrisiians eaii Tiew the past with pleas- 
,^ ure, but regard the present with dissatisfactiaii ; 
^ they look back upon the days which thej have parsed , 
in commttning with the Lord^ as being the sweetest and the I 
beit they have ever knowti ; but as to the preseatj it is clad 
in a sable garb of gloom and dreariness. Once they li^ed 
near to Jeana, but now they feel that they have wandered 
from Him, and they say, " that I were as in months past!" 
They complain that they have lost their evidences, or that 
they have not present peace of mind, or that they have no 
enjoyment in the means of grace » or that eonscienee is not 
io tender, or that they have not so much zeal for God'ij glorj. 
The catisee of this mournftil state of things are manifold. It 
may arise through a comparative nctjlad of prai/er^ for a 
neglected closet is the beginning of all spiritoal decline* Of 
it may be the result of id^lcdry. The heart has been occupied 
with something else, more than with God ; the affections 
have been set on the thii^gs of earth, instead of the thlugs of 
heaven, A jealous God will not be content with a divided 
heart ; He must be loved first and best. He will withdraw 
the sunshine of his presence from a cold, wandering heart. 
Or the cause may be found in self-confidence and self-right- 
eousness. Pride is busy in the heart, and self is exalted in- 
stead of lying low at the foot of the cross. Christian, if you 
are not now as you "were in months past," do not rest sat- 
isfied with wishing for a return of former happiness, but go 
at once to seek your Maker, and tell Him your sad state. 
Ask His grace and strength to help you to walk more closely 
with Him ; humble yourself before Him, and He will lift you 
up, and give you yet again to enjoy the light of His coun- 
tenance. Do not sit down to sigh and lament; while the 
beloved Physician lives there is hope ; nay, there is a cer- 
tainty of recovery fo^ithe worst cases. 




Axtgaak 12. djolt bsadxk00. 225 

" The Lord reigned let the earth r^'oice."—- Psalm xcriL 1. 

^IJSES for disquietude there are none flo long as 

this Uessed sentence is true. On earth the Lord's 

power as readily controls the rage of the wicked as 

the rage of the sea ; His love as easily refreshes the poor 

with mercy as the earth with showers. Majesty gleams in 

flashes of Are amid the tempest's horrors, and the glory of 

the Lord is seen in its grandeur in the fall of empires, and 

the crash of thrones. In ail our conflicts and tribulations, 

we may behold the hand of the divine King. 

** Qod. is Gk>d : He sees and hears 
All our troubles, all our tears. 
Soul, forget not, 'mid thy pains, 
God o'er all forever reigns." 

In heU^ evil spirits own, with misery, Els undoubted su- 
premacy. When permitted to roam abroad, it is with a chain 
at their heel ; the bit is in the mouth of behemoth, and the 
hook in the jaws of leviathan. Death's darts are under the 
Lord's lock, and the grave's prisons have divine power as 
their warder. The terrible vengeance of the Judge of all 
the earth makes fiends cower down and tremble, even as 
dogs in the kennel fear the hunter's whip. 

" Fear not death, nor Satan's thrusts, 
God defends who in Him trusts ; 
Soul, remember, in thy pains, 
God o'er all forever reigns." 

In heaven^ none doubt the sovereignty of the King Eternal, 
tmt all fall on their faces to do Him homage. Angels are 
His courtiers, the redeemed His favorites, and all delight 
to serve Him day and night. May we soon reach the city 
of the great King. 

" For this life's long night of sadness 
He will give us peace and gladness. 
Soul, remember, in thy pains, 
God o'er all forever reigns." 




223 BATLT HSABIKdBp AugllSt 13. 

«7^e cedars fyf Lebanon v^kich He kaiJi planiedJ* — Pialm civ, 16. 

SB ANON' 8 cedara are emblematic of the Christian, 
in that thetf owe their planting entireit/ lo the Lordm 
Tliia is quite true of every ehlld of God* He is not 
man-planted, nor self- planted, but God -planted- The my§^ 
terions hand of the divine Spirit dropped the living seed into 
a heart which He had Himself prepared for its reception. 
Every tme heir of heaven owns the great Huabandman aa 
hi8 planter* Moreover, the cedars of Lebanon are not de- 
ftendeni tipon rnan for iheir watering ; they stand on the lofty 
rock, unmoistened by human irrigation ; and yet our heavenly 
Father supplieth them. Thus it is with the Christian who 
has learned to live by faith. He is indepeudent of man, 
even in temporal things ; for his continued maintenance he 
looks to the Lord his God, and to Him alone. The dew of 
heaven is his portion, and the God of heaTen is his fountain. 
Again, the cedars of Lebanon arc not protected by any inortal 
power. They owe nothing to man for their preservation from 
stormy wind and tempest. They are God's trees, kept add 
preserved by Him, and by Him alone. It is precisely tiie 
same with the Christian. He is not a hot-house plant, shel- 
tered from temptation ; he stands in the most exposed posi- 
* tion ; he has no shelter, no protection, except this, that ^e 
broad wings of the eternal God always cover the cedars which 
He Himself has planted. Like cedars, believers arefvU of 
sap^ having vitality enough to be ever green, even unid 
winter's snows. Lastly, the flourishing and majestic condi- 
tion of the cedar is to the praise of God only. The Lord, 
even the Lord alone, hath been everything unto the cedars, 
and, therefore, David very sweetly puts it in one of the 
psalms, *' Praise ye the Lord, fruitful trees and all cedars." 
In the believer there is nothing that can magnify man ; He 
is planted, nourished, and protected by the Lord's own hand, 
Mnd to Him let all the glory be ascribed. 




AngOSl 14. DAILY READINGS. 227 

*'l%au,Lord,hati made me glad ihraugh Thy vxnrk.'* -^Ts. xdi. 4. 

^O you believe that your sios are forgiven, and that 
Ghriflt has made a full atonement for them ? Then 
what a joyful Christian you aught to be I How you 
ahould .live above the common trials and troubles of the 
world ! Since sin is forgiven, can it matter what happens to 
you now? Luther said, '' Smite, Lord, smite, for my sin is 
forgiven ; if Thou hast but forgiven me, smite as hard as 
Thou wilt ; " and in a similar spirit you may say, *' Send 
siekness, poverty, losses, crosses, persecution, what Thou 
wilt, Thou hast forgiven me, and my soul is glad. Christian, 
if thou art thus saved, whilst tibou art glad, he grcUeftU and 
loving. Cling to that cross which took thy sin away ; serve 
thou Him who served thee. " I beseech you, therefore, by 
the mercies of 6od, that ye present your bodies a living 
sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reason- 
able service." Let not your zeal evaporate in some little 
ebullition of song. Show your love in expressive tokens. 
Love the brethren of Him who loved you. If there be a 
Mephibosheth anywhere who is lame or halt, help him for 
Jonathan's sake. If there be a poor tried believer, weep 
with him, and bear his cross for the sake of Him who wept 
for thee and carried thy sins. Since thou art thus forgiven 
freely for Christ's sake, go and tell to others the joyful news 
of pardoning mercy. Be not contented with this unspeakable 
blessing for thyself alone, but publish abroad the story of the 
cross. Holy gladness and holy boldness will make you a 
good preacher, and all the world will be a pulpit for you to 
preach in. Cheerful holiness is the most forcible of ser- 
mons, but the Lord must give it you. Seek it this morning 
before you go into the world. When it is the Lord's work 
in which we rejoice, we need not be afraid of being too 
^ad. 




22S 

** haac ttiiit oai to meditate in ike^€l4 (st the ermtidcJ^ 

{^ff^i?^^^^ ^dmiTable iva& hw occupation. If tliose i^vho spend 
Wjy l' so many Loutb in idle company, light reading, and 
^^^^^ useless pastimes » could learn wisdom, they would find 
more profitable society and more interesting engagementfi in 
medilation than in the Tanities which now have such oharini 
for them. We should all know more, live nearer to God, and 
grow in grace, if we were more alone. Meditation chews the 
cud and extracts the real nutriment from the mental food 
gathered elsewhere. When Jesus ie the theme, meditation is 
Bweet indeed. Isaac found Rebecca while engaged in priTato 
mnstngs ; many others have found their best beloved there* 

Very adntirahle was the choice of place. In the field we 
have a study hung round with texts for thought* From the 
cedar to the hyssop, from the soaring eagle down to the chirp- 
ing grasshopper, irom the blue expanse of heaven to a drop 
of dew I all things are full of teaching ; and when the eye is 
divinely opened, that teaching flashes upon the mind far more 
vividly than from written books. Our little rooms are neither 
so healthy, so suggestive, so agreeable, nor so inspiring as the 
fields. Let us count nothing common or unclesin, but feel 
that all created things point to their Maker, and the field will 
at once be hallowed. 

Very admirable was the season. The season of sunset, as it 
draws a veil over the day, befits that repose of the soul when 
earth-born cares yield to the joys of heavenly commonion. 
The glory of the setting sun excites our wonder, and the so- 
lemnity of approaching night awakens our awe. If the busi- 
ness of this day will permit it, it will be well, dear reader, if 
you can spare an hour to walk in the field at eventide ; but if 
not, the Lord is in the town, too, and will meet with thee in 
thy chamber or in the crowded street. Let thy heart go forth 
to meet Him. 




August 16. daily beadinqs. 229 

" Cfive tmio the Lord the glory due wnto His name." — Pa. xxix. 2. 

gOD'S glory is the result of His nature and acts. . He 
is glorious in His character, for there is such a store 
of everything that is holy, and good, and lovely in 
Gkid, that He must be glorious. The actions which flow from 
His character are also glorious ; but while He intends that 
they should manifest to His creatures His goodness, and mer* 
cy, and justice, He is equally concerned that the glory asso* 
ciated with them should be given only to Himself. Nor is 
there aughi in ourselves in which we may glory; for who 
maketh us to differ from another ? And what have we that 
we did not receive from the God of all grace ? Then how 
careful ought we to be to walk humbly before the Lord I The 
moment we glorify ourselves, since there is room for one glory 
only in the universe, we set ourselves up as rivals to the Most 
High. Shall the insect of an hour glorify itself against the 
sun which warmed it into lifie ? Shall the potsherd exalt itself 
above the man who fashioned it upon the wheel ? Shall the 
dust of the desert strive with the whirlwind ? or the drops 
of the ocean struggle with the tempest ? Give unto the Lord, 
all ye righteous, give unto the Lord glory and strength ; give 
unto Him the honor that is due unto His name. Yet it is, 
perhaps, one of the hardest struggles of the Christian life to 
learn this sentence — " Not unto us, not unto us, but unto 
Thy name be glory." It is a lesson which God is ever teach- 
ing us, and teaching us sometimes by mosf painful discipline. 
Let a Christian begin to boast, " I can do all things," with- 
out adding, '' through Christ which strengthenetib me," and 
before long he will have to groan, " I can do nothing," and 
bemoan himself in the dust. When we do anything for the 
Lord, and He is pleased to accept of our doings, let us lay 
our crown at His feet, and exclaim, " Not I, but the grace 
of God which was with me I " 
20 



230 BAXLT bj:ai>i>'G3. August 17t 

*' The m^€U qf Q&d:* — Psalin lii. 8. 




;EDITATE a little on tM& meroj of Uie Lord. It is 
tender viercy. With gentle, loving toncli. He liealeth 
tbe broken in heart, and biadeth np their wounds,. 
Ho is &B gracious in the manner of His mercy as in tbe iuattlflB| 
of it. It is great Tuerc^. There is nothing little in God ; HIs^ 
meroy is liJ^e Himself — it is iEfinite, You cannot measure 
it. Hjs merey h so great that it forgives great giua to great 
sinners, after groat lengths of time, and then gtrea great 
favore and great priTilegeSt and raises us up to great enjoy- 
ments in the great heaven of the great God. It ie unde^t^rved 
fnerc^j as indeed all truo mercy must be^ for deserved mercy 
is only a misnomer for justice. There was no right on the 
fiinner'a part to the kind consideration of the Most High ; 
had the rebel been doomed at once to eternal fire, he would 
have richly merited the doom j and if delivered from wxath, 
sovereign love alone has found a cause, for there was none 
in the sinner himself. It is rich mercy. Some things are 
great, but have little o^^eaey in them ^ but this mercy is a 
cordial to your drooping spirits ; a golden ointment to yom^ 
bleeding wounds ; a heavenly bandage to your broken bones ; 
a royal chariot for your weary feet ; a bosom of love for your 
trembling heart. It is manifold mercy. As Bunyan says, 
" All the flowers in God*s garden are double." There is no 
single mercy. You may think you have but one mercy, bnt 
you shall find it to be a whole cluster of mercies. It is ahw^ 
ing mercy. Millions have received it ; yet far from its being 
exhausted, it is as fresh, as full, and as free as ever. It is 
wnf ailing mercy. It will never leave thee. If mercy be thy 
friend, mercy will be with thee in temptation to keep thee from 
yielding ; with thee in trouble, to prevent thee from sinking ; 
with thee living, to be the light and life of thy countenance ; 
and with thee dying, to be the joy of thy soul when earthly 
comfort is ebbing fast 




AuglUrt 18. BAILT BBABIKG8. 281 

** Strangers are come Mo the eanciuariee of the LorcPs house/' 
Jeremiah IL 51. 

this account the faces of the Lord's people were 
covered with shame, for it was a terrible thing that 
men should intrude into the Holy Place reserved for 
the priests alone. Everywhere about us we see like cause for 
sorrow. How many ungodly men are now educating with the 
view of entering into the ministry ! What a crying sin is that 
solemn lie by which our whole population is nominally com- 
prehended in a National Church I How fearful it is that or- 
dinances should be pressed upon the unconverted, and that 
among the more enlightened churches of our land there should 
be such laxity of discipline. K the thousands who will read 
tiiis portion shall all take this matter before the Lord Jesus 
this day. He will interfere and avert the evil which else will 
come upon His Church. To adulterate the Church is to pol- 
lute a well, to pour water upon fire, to sow a fertile field 
with stones. May we all have grace to maintain in our own 
proper way the purity of the Church, as being an assembly 
of believers, and not a nation, an unsaved community of 
unconverted men. 

Our zeal must, however, begin at home. Let us examine 
owsdves as to our right to eat at the Lord's table. Let us 
see to it that we have on our wedding garment, lest we our- 
selves be intruders in the Lord's sanctuaries. Many are 
called, but few are chosen ; the way is narrow, and the gate 
is strait. for grace to come to Jesus aright, with the faith 
of God's elect ! He who smote Uzzah for touch ingthe ark 
is very jealous of His two ordinances ; as a true believer I 
may approach them freely ; as an alien I must not touch 
them lest I die. Heart-searching is the duty of all who are 
baptized or come to the Lord's table. '' Search me, God, 
and know my way ; try me, and know my heart." 




i 



SS2 BAIIft BEADUfGS. AllgUfit I9bl 

" He shall Hand and feed in the strength of the Lord" — Mleah v. 

3T*S reign in His Church is that of a shepJi$ri 
klng^ He has supremacy, but it is the euperlority 
of a wise and tetider shepherd 0"rer his needy atid 
loring iock ; He commands and recei^'es obedience, but it is 
the willing obedience of the well -cared -for sheepj rendered 
joyfully to their beloved Shepherd, whoso voice they know 
so welL He rules by the force of love and the energy 
goodness, — His reign is practical in its ehamcter. It is sail 
'^ He shall stand and feed:' The great Head of the Cbni 
is actively engaged in providing for His people. He di 
not sit down upon the throne in empty state, or hold a scep- 
tre without wielding it in governmenL No ; He stands and 
feeds„ The expression *'feed/' in the original, is like an 
analogous one in the Greek, which means to ehepherdize, to 
do every (Ling expected of a shepherd ; to guide, to watch, to 
preserve, to rcsfore, to tend, as well as to feud. — Hin rei^n 
is continual in its duration. It is said, ^^He shall stand and 
feed ; " not, " He shall feed now and then, and leave His 
position ; " not, " He shall one day grant a revival, and then 
next day leave His Church to barrenness." His eyes nevtt 
slumber, and His hands never rest ; His heart never ceases 
to beat with love, and His shoulders are never weary of «ar*> 
rying His people's burdens. — His reign is effectuaUy pOwtf^ 
ful in its action ; '' He shall feed in the strength of JAo^ 
vah." Wherever Christ is, there is God ; and whatever 
Christ does is the act of the Most High. Oh ! it is a joyM 
truth to consider that He who stands to-day representlttf 
the interests of His people is very God of very God, lo 
whom every knee shall bow. Happy are we who belong to 
such a shepherd, whose humanity communes with us, and 
whose divinity protects us. Let us worship and bow down 
before Him as the people of His pasture. 




August 30. daily beadings. 233 

" The sweet psalmist of IsraeL** — 2 Samuel xxiii. 1. 

It^MONQ- all the saints whose lives are recorded in Holy 
Writ, David possesses an experience of the most 
striking, varied, and instructive character. In his 
history, we meet with trials and temptations not to be dis- 
oorered, as a whole, in other saints of ancient times, and 
henee he is all the more suggestive a type of our Lord. 
David knew the trials of all ranks and conditions of men. 
Kings have their troubles, and David wore a crown : the 
peasant has his cares, and David handled a shepherd's crook : 
the wanderer has many hardships, and David abode in the 
cares of Engedi : the captain has his difficulties, and David 
found the sons of Zeruiah too hard for him. The psalmist 
was also tried in his friends ; his counsellor Ahithophel for- 
sook him. '' He that eateth bread with me, hath lifted up 
his heel against me." His worst foes were they of his own 
household: his children were his greatest afflietion. The 
temptations of poverty and wealth, of honor and reproach, 
of health and weaknes^ all tried their power upon him. He 
had temptations from without to disturb his peace, and from 
within to mar his joy. David no sooner escaped from one 
trial than he fell into another ; no sooner emerged from one 
season of despondency and alarm, than he was again brought 
into the lowest depths, and all God's waves and billows rolled 
over him. It is probably from this cause that David's psalms 
are so universally the delight of experienced Christians. 
Whatever our frame of mind, whether ecstasy or depression, 
David has exactly described our emotions. He was an able 
master of the human heart, because he had been tutored in the 
best of all schools — the school of heart-felt, personal experi- 
ence. As we are instructed in the same school, as we grow ma- 
tured in grace and in years, we increasingly appreciate David's 
psalms, and find them to be "green pastures." My soul, let 
David's experience cheer and counsel thee this day. 
20* 




We 



per- 

diriDje 

We dis- 

■tbi^jed for 

hf o«r vcaMng f oi 

kd the eonsolalion 
» nvetL in the gnow : 
IMis «hiirf Alt oCltfff^i bbe to ke^ lum from djing, and ii^ 
mf Af^itf kefrt kis <m Mood in drcoIatioB, and sa^ed Ms 
ffwn lifts. The poor widow of S^^|>ia g^re from her ecan^ 
nUtfin H nnpply for tiie prophet*s wants, and from tliat daj 
piht^ fM<v*;r ugaiii knew what want was. Give, then, and it 
frl^fll im givoii unto you, good measure, pressed down, and 
HHinltig ov4)r. 





August 22. DAILY HEADINGS. 335 

" I charge you, dauyhters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that 
ye tell Him that I am sick of love,*^ — Solomon's Song v. 8. 

^UGH is the language of the believer panting after 
present fellowship with Jesus : he is sick for his 
Lord. Gracious souls are never perfectly at ease 
except they are in a state of nearness to Christ ; for when 
they are away from Him they lose their peace. The nearer 
to Him, the nearer to the perfect calm of heaven; the 
nearer to Him, the fuller the heart is, not only of peace, but 
of life, and vigor, and joy, for these all depend on constant 
intercourse with Jesus. What the sun is to the day, what 
the moon is to the night, what the dew is to the flower, such 
is Jesus Christ to us. What bread is to the hungry, cloth- 
ing to the naked, the shadow of a great rock to the traveller 
in a weary land, such is Jesus Christ to us ; and therefore, 
if we are not consciously one with Him, little marvel if our 
spirit cries in the word of the Song, " I charge you, ye 
daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, tell Him that 
I am sick of love." This earnest longing after Jesus has a 
blessing attending it : '' Blessed are they that do hunger and 
thirst after righteousness ; " and therefore supremely blessed 
are they who thirst after the Eighteous One. Blessed is 
that hunger, since it comes from G-od. If I may not have 
the full-blown blessedness of being filled, I would seek the 
same blessedness in its sweet bud-pining in emptiness and 
eagerness till I am filled with Christ. If I may not feed on 
Jesus, it shall be next door to heaven to hunger and thirst 
after Him. There is a hallowedness about that hunger, since 
it sparkles among the beatitudes of our Lord. But the 
blessing involves a promise. Such hungry ones " shall be 
filled " with what they are desiring. If Christ thus causes us 
to long after Himself, He will certainly satisfy those long- 
ings ; and when He does come to us, as come He will, o/^ 
how sweet it wiU be I 




03$ DAUT KEADTTTO?, AngTUrt 39* 

** The voiee of weeping shall he nrj more Iteard?* — Isaiah !xt. 19* 

^^HE glorified woep no more, for all outward cattses of 
grief are ^one. There are no broken fi-iendships, 
nor blighted prospects, in heaven. Poverty, famitje, 
peril, pereecntion, and slander, are unknown there. No pain 
distreBses, no thought of death or bereavement Baddens. 
They weep no more, for they ars perfectlif sanctijied. No 
*' evil heart of unbelief" prompta them to depart from the 
living Q-od ; they are without fault before His throne, and 
are fiilly conformed to His injage. Well may they eease to 
mourn who have ceased to gin. They weep no more, be- 
eauee all fear of change i^ pa^t They know that they are 
eternally secure. Sin is ehnt out, and they are shut in. They 
dwell witbin a city which shall never be stormed ; they bask 
in a STin which ahall never set ; they drink of a river which 
ehal! never dry; they plnck fruit from a tree which sbixll 
never wither. Countless cycles may revolve, hut eternity 
shall not be eshauRted, and while eternity endnrea, their im- 
mortality and blessedness shall co-exist with it. They are 
forever with the Lord. They weep no more, becanse every 
desire is fulfilled. They cannot wish for anything which they 
have not in possession. Eye and ear, heart and hand, judg- 
ment, imagination, hope, desire, will, all the faculties, vte 
completely satisfied ; and imperfect as our present ideas are 
of the things which Q-od hath prepared for them that lot« 
Him, yet we know enough, by the revelation of the Spirit, 
that the saints above are supremely blessed. The -joy of 
Christ, which is an infinite fulness of delight, is in them. 
They bathe themselves in the bottomless, shoreless sea of 
infinite beatitude. That same joyful rest remains for us. It 
may not be far distant. Ere long the weeping willow shall 
be exchanged for the palm-branch of victory, and sorrow's 
dewdrops will be transformed into the pearls of everlasting 
bliss, " Wherefore comfort one another with these words/* 




AllglUll34. DAILY BEADIK08. !287 

" The breaker is came up h^ore ihemJ^ — Micah ii 13. 

INASMUCH as Jesus has gone before us, things re- 
main not as they would have been had He neTer 
passed that way. He has conqv^ed every foe that 
obstmoted the way. Cheer up now, thou faint-hearted war- 
rior. Not only has Chrfst travelled the road, but He has 
slftin thine enemies. Dost thou dread sin ? He has nailed 
it to His cross. Dost thou fear death ? He has been the 
death of Death. Art thou afraid of hell ? He has barred it 
against the advent of any of His children ; they shall never 
see the gulf of perdition. Whatever foes may be before the 
Ohristian, they are all overcome. There are lions, but their 
teeth are broken; there are serpents, but their fangs are 
extracted ; there are rivers, but they are bridged or fordable ; 
there are flames, but we wear that matchless garment which 
renders us invulnerable to fire. The sword that has been 
forged against us is already blunted ; the instruments of war 
which the enemy is preparing have already lost their point. 
God has taken away in the person of Christ all the power 
that anything can have to hurt us. Well then, the army may 
safely march on, and you may go joyously along your jour- 
ney, for all your enemies are conquered beforehand. What 
shall you do but march on to take the prey ? They are 
beaten ; they are vanquished ; all you have to do is to divide 
the spoil. You shall, it is true, often engage in combat ; 
but your fight shall be with a vanquished foe. His head is 
broken ; he may attempt to injure you, but his strength shall 
not beusufficieft for his malicious design. Your victory shall 
be easy, and your treasure shall be beyond all count. 

" Proclaim aloud the Saviour's fame, 
Who bears the Breaker*8 wondrous name ; 
Sweet name ; and it becomes Him well, 
Who breaks down earth, sin, death, and hell." 



238 DAILY BEAXHITGS. AngtlSt 2$4 

" Ei^fniU was mceet to mtj taste.'* — Cantlclea ii. 3, 

|AITH, in tbe Scripture, ia spoken of nnder the an 
-^ bletn of all the senses. It ia sight, " Look unto Md 




and be je saved/* It ia hearinfi. ** Hear, and your soy 
ahaU live/' Faith is m^dlifig, ** Ail thy garmenti 
smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia i " 'VTiiy name is oint 
ment poured forth." Faith is spiritual touch. By this fait 
the woman came behind and touched the hem of Cbrist*| 
garment, and by this we handle the things of the good wo 
of life. Faith is equally the spirit's iaM&. ** How sweet i 
Thy words to my taste ! yea, sweeter than honey to my lips J 
'^ Except a man eat my flesh /^ saith Christ , ^^ and dimk mj 
blood, there is no life in him." 

This ** taste "is faith in oug of iU highest operaiionMn On 
of the first performances of faith is heuTing. We hear the 
voice of God» not with the outward ear alone, but with the 
inward ear ; we hear it as God's Word, and we believe it to 
be BO ; that is the " hearing '* of faith. Then our mind Imh- 
eth upon the truth as it is presented to us ; that is to saj, we 
understand it ; we perceive its meaning ; that is the " Bemng" 
of faith. Next we discover its preciousness ; we begin to 
admire it, and find how fragrant it is ; that is faith in its 
^^smeU" Then we appropriate the mercies which aire pre- 
pared for us in Christ ; that is faith in its ** touch.'^ H^ee 
follow the enjoyments, peace, delight, communion ; which 
are faith in its ** taste." Any one of these acts of faith is 
saving. To hear Christ's voice as the sure voice of God in 
the soul will save us ; but that which gives ftue enjoyment 
is the aspect of faith wherein Christ, by holy taste, is rec^ved 
into us, and made, by inward and spiritual apprehension of 
His sweetness and preciousness, to be the food of our souls. 
It is then we sit " under His shadow with great delight/' 
and find His fruit sweet to our taste* 




August 26. ^ DAILY BEADnrGS. 239 

" He hath commanded His covenant forever.** — Psalm cxi. 9. 

Lord's people delight in the covenant itself. It 
is an unfailing source of consolation to them so often 
as the Holy Spirit leads them into its banqueting- 
house, and waves its banner of love. They delight to con- 
template the antiquity of that covenant, remembering that 
before the day-star knew its place, or planets ran their round, 
the interests of the saints were made secure in Christ Jesus. 
It is peculiarly pleasing to them to remember the sureness of 
the covenant, while meditating upon " the sure mercies of 
David." They delight to celebrate it as '' signed, and sealed, 
apd ratified, in all things ordered well." It often makes 
their hearts dilate with joy to think of its immutability, as a 
covenant which neither time nor eternity, life nor death, 
shall ever be able to violate — a covenant as old as eternity, 
and as everlasting as the Eock of ages. They rejoice also 
to feast upon the fulness of this covenant, for they see in it 
all things provided for them. God is their portion, Christ 
their companion, the Spirit their Comforter, earth their lodge, 
and heaven their home. They s6e in it an yiheritance re- 
served and entailed to every soul possessing an interest in 
its ancient and eternal deed of gift. Their eyes sparkled 
when they saw it as a treasure-trove in the Bible ; but, oh, 
how their souls were gladdened when they saw in the last 
will and testament of their divine kinsman, that it was be- 
queathed to them ! More especially it is the pleasure of God's 
people to contemplate the graciousness of this covenant. They 
see that the law was made void, because it was a covenant of 
works, and depended upon merit ; but this they perceive to 
be enduring, because grace is the basis, grace the condition, 
grace the strain, grace the bulwark, grace the foundation, 
grace the top-stone. The covenant is a treasury of wealth, 
a granary of food, a fountain of life, a storehouse of salva- 
iion, a charter of peace, and a haven of joy. 




** Hijiw long mil it be ere thmf 6di«re Me f ^ — Xmnbcis w, IL 




^TRIYE, with all diligence^ to k^ otil fA4tt 1 
i^ belii^. It »o dishooori Chngi, ttmt He vill vithdii 
HiB viaible prcBGuc€ if we insult Etim bj indolgid^ t 
It U true it is a weed the seeds of whick we cfto nerer < 
tlrc^Iy extract from the soilf but w€ must aim at its root will 
^eiU and peracVGraoce* AmoDg hateful things k i& the tnost 
to bo abhorred, lu injuriouii nature is &o Tenomons th^Jt he 
that oxcfimvih it, and he upon whom it l& exercised^ are botli 
hurt thereby. In thy ease, O believer, it is most wicked, for 
tho uiorciea of thy Lord in the past increase thj guilt in 
doubting Him now. When thou dost distruat the Lord Js§mt 
He may well cry oufc^ " Behold I am pressed under you, as a 
cart Ib prcBMod that is full of sheaTesJ* This is crowning Bk 
head with thorns of the sharpest kind. It is very eruel for » 
weU-beloved wife to mistrust a kind and faithM husband. 
Tbe if^in 'm necdlcHB, fuoli^jh, ^nd unwarranted. Jesus hia 
never given the slightest ground for Buspicion, and it is hifd 
to be doubted by thoi^e to whom our eonduet is uniformly af- 
fectionate and true. Jesus is the Son of the Highest, and 
has unbounde^d wealth ; it is shameful to doubt Omnipotence 
and distrust all-sufficiency. The cattle on a thousand hillfl 
will suffice for our most hungry feeding, and the granaries of 
heaven are not likely to be emptied by our eating. If Christ 
were only a cistern, we might soon exhaust His fulness ; but 
who can drain a fountain ? Myriads of spirits have drawn 
their supplies from Him, and not one of them has murmured 
at the scantiness of His resources. Away, then, with this 
lying traitor unbelief, for his only errand is to cut the bonds 
of communion and make us mourn an absent Saviour. Bun- 
yan tells us that unbelief has " as many lives as a cat ;" if so, 
let us kill one life now, and continue the work till the whole 
nine are gone. Down with thee, thou traitor; my heart 
abhors thee. 




AngtlSt 28. ' DAILY BEADINGS. 241 

" Oil for the lights — Exodus xxv. 6. 

|Y soTil, how much thou needest this ! for thy lamp will 
not long continue to burn without it. Thy snuff will 
smoke and become an offence if light be gone, and 
gone it will be if oil be absent. Thou hast no oil well spring- 
ing up in thy human nature, and therefore thou must go to 
them that sell, and buy for thyself, or, like the foolish vir- 
gins, thou wilt have to cry, " My lamp is gone out." Even the 
consecrated lamps could not give light without oil ; though 
they shone in the tabernacle they needed to be fed, though 
no rough winds blew upon them they required to be trimmed, 
and thy need is equally as great. Under the most happy 
circumstances thou canst not give light for another hour 
imless fresh oil of grace be given thee. 

It was not every oil that might be used in the Lord's ser- 
vice ; neither the petroleum which exudes so plentifully from 
the earth, nor the produce of fishes, nor that extracted from 
nuts, would be accepted ; one oil only was selected, and that 
the best olive oil. Pretended grace from natural goodness, 
fancied grace from priestly hands, or imaginary grace from 
outward ceremonies, will never serve the true saint of God. 
He knows that the Lord would not be pleased with rivers of 
such oil. He goes to the olive-press of G-ethsemane, and 
draws his supplies from Him who was crushed therein. The 
oil of gospel grace is pure and free from lees and dregs, and 
hence the light which is fed thereon is clear and bright. Our 
churches are the Saviour's golden candelabra, and if they 
are to be lights in this dark world, they must have much holy 
oil. Let us pray for ourselves, our ministers, and our 
churches, that they may never lack oil for the light. Truth, 
holiness, joy, knowledge, love, these are all beams of the 
sacred light ; but we cannot give them forth unless in private 
we receive oil from God the Holy Ghost. 
21 



~iwtam.i- 




Aa^d be cot 



Caezs^, 



A^vm 17^ irei; 



di 



and Bost lK-?k->pe-i .>f dje 5;&iiits approadi their Gt>d. Bie 
best of mea are (ic>iLi<ic*ii5« abore all others, that they ire 
men at the be^t. Empty boats fioat high, bat heaTilj-laden 
ressels are low in the vater ; mere professors can boast, but 
true children of God cry for merer npon their unprofitable- 
ness. We hare need that the Lord should have merej upon 
our good works, our prayers, our preachings, our alms-gi?- 
ingH, and our holiest things. The blood was not only sprin- 
kled upon the door-posts of Israel's dwelling-houses, but 
upon the sanctuary, the mercy-seat, and the altar, because, 
ixH nin intrudes into our holiest things, the blood of Jesus is 
needed to purify them from defilement. If mercy be needed 
to be exercised towards our duties, what shall be sard of our 
HiUH ? How sweet the remembrance that inexhaustible mercy 
iu wuitiug to be gracious to us, to restore our backslidings, 
make our broken bones rejoice! 




August 30. DAILY KEADIJJTGS. "248 

" Wait on the Lord.** — Psalm xxvii. 14. 

^T may seem an easy thing to wait, but it is one of the 
postures which a Christian soldier learns not without 
years of Caching. Marching and quick-marching 
are much easier to God's warriors than standing still. There 
are hours of perplexity when the most willing spirit, anxiously 
desirous to serve the Lord, knows not what part to take. 
Then what shall it do ? Vex itself by despair ? Fly back 
in cowardice, turn to the right hand in fear, or rush forward 
in ' presumption ? No, but simply wait. Wait in 'prayer^ 
however. Call upon God, and spread the case before Him ; 
tell Him your difficulty, and plead His promise of aid. In 
dilemmas between one duty and another, it is sweet to be 
humble as a child, and wait with simplicity of soul uppn the 
Lord. It is sure to be well with us when we feel and know 
our own folly, and are heartily willing to be guided by the 
will of God. But wait in faith. Express your unstaggering 
confidence in Him ; for unfaithful, untrusting' waiting is but 
an insult to the Lord. Believe that if He keep you tarrying 
even till midnight, yet He will come at the right time ; the 
vision shall come, and shall not tarry. Wait vn quiet patience^ 
not rebelling because you are under the aflOdction, but bless- 
ing your God for it. Never murmur against the second 
cause, as the children of Israel did against Moses ; never 
wish you could go back to the world again, but accept the 
case as it is, and put it as it stands simply and with your whole 
heart, without any ^elf-will, into the hand of your covenant 
God, saying, '* Now, Lord, not my will, but Thine be done. 
I know not what to do ; I am brought to extremities ; but I 
will wait until Thou shalt cleave the floods, or drive back 
my foes. I will wait, if Thou keep me many a day, for my 
heart is fixed upon Thee alone, O God, and my spirit waiteth 
for Thee in the full conviction that Thou wilt yet be my joy 
and my salvation, my refuge and my strong tower." 




Bisons ef iercrr tiiil, Ike Cluisliaii has iio^tiiig 
mt eank tlifti hm tarn Im^ to, &iid m therefore am* 
liellrd to east himself on his GcnI «lone. Whe« his 
■pejwil is cm ]t2 beam-ends, and. no hasLaii d^treraoce can 
STaE^ he tmsi mmplj aad eotirelj tm^ himself to the prori' 
deuce B&d esre of God. Happj storm that wrecks a man on 
wa^ a roek &? thk I hlessed htm-ieaEie that djires the 
ionl ta Gcd, and God ^one ! Thfre is no getting at our God 
ponaeiines heesnae of the jooliittide of oor Meiid^ ; but irheo 
m mxa. is bo poor, eo fri endless, so helple^s^ that he has no- 
where else to tujn, he flies into his Father's arms, »nd is 
blessedly clasped therein ! WTien he is hnrdened with trou- 
bleg, so pressing and so peculiar that he cannot teD them Ui 
any but his God, he may he thsnkful for them ; for he wiM 
leaxn more of his Lord then than at any other time, OIit 
temp&st«tossed helierer. It ts a happy trouble that drires thet 
to thj Father ! Now that thou hast only thy God to trust tOi 
see that thou put test thy fiill confide Dce in Him. Dishonor 
not thy Lord and Master by unworthy doubts and fears ; but 
be strong in faith, giTing glory to God. Show the world that 
thy God is worth ten thousand worlds to thee. Show ricli 
men how rich thou art in thy poverty when the Lord Q^d is 
thy helper. Show the strong man how strong thon art in thy 
weakness when underneath thee are the everlasting arms. 
Now is the time for feats of faith and valiant exploits. Be 
strong and very courageous, and the Lord thy God shall cer- 
tainly, as surely as he built the heavens and the earth, glorify 
Himself in thy weakness, and magnify His might in the 
midst of thy distress. The grandeur of the arch of heaveu 
would be spoiled if the ^ky were supported by a single visi- 
ble column, and your faith would lose its glory if it rested on 
anything discernible by the carnal eye. May the Holy Spirit 
givo you to rest iu Jesus this closing day of the month. 




Sept. 1, DAILT BEADIXOS. 245 

*♦ Thou ahalt guide me with Thy counsel, and aftenoard receive 
me to glory J' — Psalm Ixxiii. 24. 

Psalmist felt his need of divine guidance. H^ 
had just been discovering the foolishness of his own 
heart, and, lest he should be constantly led astray 
by it, he resolved that G-od's counsel should henceforth guide 
him. A sense of our own folly is a great step towards being 
wise when it leads us to rely on the wisdom of the Lord. 
The blind man leans on his Mend's arm, and reaches home 
in safety ; and so would we give ourselves np implicitly to 
divine guidance, nothing doubting, assured that, though we 
cannot see, it is always safe to trust the All-seeing Grod. 
"2%ott shalt** is a blessed expression of confidence. He 
was sure that the Lord would not decline the condescending 
task. There is a word for thee, believer ; rest thou in it. 
Be assured that thy God will be thy counsellor and friend ; 
He shall guide thee ; He will direct all thy ways. Li His 
written Word thou hast this assurance in part fulfilled, for 
holy Scripture is His counsel to thee. Happy are we to have 
God's Word always to guide us ! What were the mariner 
without his compass ? And what were the Christian without 
the Bible ? This is the unerring chart, the map in which 
every shoal is described, and all the channels, from the 
quicksands of destruction to the haven of salvation, mapped 
and marked by one who knows all the way. Blessed be 
Thou, God^ that we may trust Thee to guide us now, and 
guide us even to the end ! After this guidance through life, 
the Psalmist anticipates a divine reception at last — **And 
afterward receive me to glory,*' What a thought for thee, 
believer ! Ood Himself will receive thee to glory — thee I 
Wandering, erring, straying, yet He will bring thee safe at 
last to glory I This is thy portion ; live on it this day, and, 
if perplexities should surround thee, go in the strength of 
this text straight to the throne* 
21 • 



840 QAILT B£ADIKOa. Sept. 3. 

*^But Simon's wij'f^j$ mofhtr la^ Hck qfafeuer^ and anon they t^ 
Him o/hcrJ' — Mark i, 30, , 

(^^"^jL^^ERY ioteresting is tfaia little peep into the house of 
^mjjM the Apostolic Fisherman, We see at once that house- 
^^^^'^ hold joys and cafes are no hinderanee to the full ex- 
erciae of the ministry ; nay, that since they famish an oppop- 
timity for personally witnessing the ^Lord's gracions work 
upon one's own fieah and blood, they may even instruct the 
teaeher better than any other earthly discipline, Fapista 
and other sectaries* may deerj marriage, but true Christi- 
anity ^and household life agree well together* Peter's house 
was probably a poor fisherman's hut* but the Lord of Glory 
entered it, lodged in it, and wrought a miracle in it. Should 
our little book be read this morning in some very humble 
cottage, let this faot encourage the inmates to seek the com- 
pany of King JeauB* God ia oftener in little huts than ia 
rich palaces. Jesus is looking round yotu* room now, and 
is waiting to be gracious to you. Into Simon's house sick- 
ness had entered, fever in a deadly form had prostrated hia 
mother-in-law, and as soon as Jesus came they told Him of 
the sad affliction, and He hastened to the patient's bed. 
Have you any sickness in the house this morning ? You 
will find Jesus by far the best physician ; go to Him at once, 
and tell Him all about the matter. Immediately-lay the case 
before Him. It concerns one of His people, and therefore 
will not be trivial to Him. Observe, that at once the Saviour 
restored the sick woman ; none can heal as He doe?. We 
may not make sure that the Lord will at once remove all 
disease from those we love, but we may know that believing 
prayer for the sick is far more likely to be followed by 
restoration than anything else in the world ; and where this 
avails not, we must meekly bow to His will by whom life and 
death are determined. The tender heart of Jesus waits to 
hear our griefs ; let us pour them into His patient ear. 




Sept. 3. DAILY SEADIX6S. 247 

' " Thou whom my soul loveth" — Canticles L 7. 

tRT is well to be able, without any "if" or "but," to 
I ^ say of the Lord Jesus — " Thou whom my souklovethJ' 
Many can only say of Jesus that they hope they love 
Him ; they trust they love Him ; but only a poor and shallow 
experience will be content to stay here. No one ought to 
give any rest to his spirit till he feels quite sure about a 
matter of such vital importance. We ought not to be satis- 
fied with a superficial hope that Jesus loves us, and with a 
bare trust that we love Him. The old saints did not gen- 
erally speak with "buts," and "ifs," and "hopes," and 
*! trusts," but they spoke positively and plainly. " I know 
whom I have believed," saith Paul. " I know that my Re- 
deemer liveth," saith Job. Get positive knowledge of your 
love of Jesus, and be not satisfied till you can speak of your 
interest in Him as a reality, which you have made sure by 
having received the witness of the Holy Spirit, and His seal 
upon your soul by faith. 

True love to Christ is in every case the Holy Spirit's work, 
and must be wrought in the heart by Him. He is the ejffir 
cient cause of it ; but the logical reason why we love Jesus 
lies in Himself. Why do we love Jesus ? Because He first 
lo'Oed us. Why do we love Jesus? Because He ^^gave 
Himself for us.'* We have life through His death ; we have 
peace through His blood. Though He was rich, yet for 
our sakes He became poor. Why do we love Jesus ? Be- 
cause of the excellency of His person. We are filled with a 
sense of His beauty ! an admiration of His charms ! a con- 
sciousness of His infinite perfection ! His greatness, good- 
ness, and loveliness, in one resplendent ray, combine to 
enchant the soul till it is so ravished that it exclaims, " Yea, 
He is altogether lovely." Blessed love this — a love which 
binds the heart with chains more soft than silk, and yet more 
firm than adamant 1 




248 DAILY E£APING3. 




**ImU ; he th&u dmjiJ^ — Majk L 41, 




|RIMEVAIi darkness heard the Almiglity fiat, ** Light 
f|l! be," and Htraightwaj light was ; and the Word of the 
Lord JesuB is equal in majesty to that ancient word 
of power. Redemption, like Creation, has its word of might. 
Jeau3 speaks and it is donB, Leprosy yielded to no human 
remedies, but it fled at once at the Lord's *' I wiU/' The 
disease exhibited no hopeful signs or tokens of recovery; 
nature contributed nothing to its own healing ; but the un- 
aided Word effected the entire work on the apot and for ever. 
The sinner is in a plight more miserable than the leper; let 
him imitate his example, and go to Jesusi ** beseeching Him, 
and kneeling down to Uim." Let him exercise what little 
faith he has, eren though it should go no farther than, ** Lordj 
if thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean ; ** and there need be 
no doubt as to the result of the application* Jesus heab all 
who come, and casts out none. In reading the narrative in 
which our morning^s text occurs, it is worthy of devout no- 
tice that Jesua touched the leper. This unclean person had 
broken through the regulations of the ceremonial law, and 
pressed into the house ; but Jesus, so far from chiding him, 
broke through the law Himself in order to meet him. He 
made an interchange with the leper, for while He cleansed 
him, He contracted by that touch a Levitical defilement 
Even so Jesus Christ was made sin for us, although in Him- 
self He knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness 
of God in Him. that poor sinners would go to Jesus, be- 
lieving in the power of His blessed substitutionary work, and 
they would soon learn the power of His gracious touch. That 
hand which multiplied the loaves, which saved sinking Peter, 
which upholds afflicted saints, which crowns believers, that 
same hand will touch every seeking sinner, and in a moment 
make him clean. The love of Jesus is the source of salya* 
tion. He loves. He looks, He touches us, we lite. 




Sept. 5. DAILY BEADnms. 249 

** Woe is me, tJuxt I sqjoum in Mesech, that I dweU in the tents of 
I Kedar!** — Psalm cxx. 5. 

^S a Christian you have to live in the midst of an un- 
godly world, and it is of little use for you to cry, 
" "Woe is me." Jesus did not pray that you should 
be taken out of the world, and what He did not pray for you 
need not desire. Better far in the Lord'B strength to meet 
the difficulty, and glorify Him in it. The enemy is ever on 
the watch to detect inconsistency in your conduct ; be there- 
fore very holy. Remember that the eyes of all are upon you, 
and that more is expected from you than from other men. 
Strive to give no occasion for blame. Let your, goodness be 
the only fault they can discover in you. Like Daniel, com- 
pel them to say of you, " We shall not find any occasion 
against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning 
the law of his God." Seek to be useful as well as consist- 
ent. Perhaps you think, " If I were in a more favorable 
position I might serve the Lord's cause, but I cannot do any 
good where I am ; " but the worse the people are among 
whom you live, the more need have they of your exertions ; 
if they be crooked, the more necessity that you should set 
them straight ; and if they be perverse, the more need have 
you to turn their proud hearts to the truth. Where should 
the physiciaS be but where there are many sick ? Where 
is honor to be won by the soldier but in the hottest fire of 
the battle ? And when weary of the strife and sin that meet 
you on every hand, consider that all the saints have endured 
the same trial. They were not carried on beds of down to 
heaven, and you must not expect to travel more easily than 
they. They had to hazard their lives unto the death in the 
high places of the field, and you will not be crowned, till you 
also have endured hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. 
Therefore, " stand fast in the faith ; quit you like men ; be 
strong." 



DAIXY BZABDf as. . Sepl* $« 




" In the midji of a crooked mid penserse ttaiion^ amrni*/ ic&of» |« 
9Mne ms UgJt&s in the wo^ld,^ — FhOippiaas iL la, ^J 

" n use lights to make, manifest A Christiaii man 
should SQ sliiDe m hie life, that a person could not 
live with him a week without koowiug the gos- 

His conversation should be such that all who are ah out 
him should cloarly perceive whose he is, and whom he serves; 
and should see the image of Jesus reflected in his daily ac- 
tions* Lights are intended for guidance. We are to help 
those around us who are in the dark. We are to hold forth 
k) them the Word of life. We are to point sinnera to thfl 
Saviour, and Jhe weary to a divine resting-plaee. Men 
eometimes read their Bibles, and fail to understand them; 
wo should be ready, like Philips to instruct the inquirer in 
tiie meaning of God's Word, the way of salTation, and the 
life of godliness- Lights are also used for waTnin^, On 
our roeks aod shoals a lighthouse is sure to be erected. 
Christian men should know that there are many false Hghta 
shown everywhere in the world, and therefore the right light 
is needed. The wreckers of Satan are always abroad, tempt- 
ing the ungodly to sin under the name of pleasure : they 
hoist the wrong light ; be it ours to put up the true Jight upon 
every dangerous rock, to point out every sin, and tell what 
it leads tp, that so we may be clear of the blooQ of all men, 
shining as lights in the world. Lights also have a very 
cheering influence, and so have Christians. A Christian 
ought to be a comforter, with kind words on his lips, and 
sympathy in his heart ; he should carry sunshine wherever 
he goes, and diffuse happiness around him. 

" Gracious Spirit, dwell with me | 
I myself would gracious be, 
And with words that help and heal, 
"Would Thy life in mine reveal, 
Apd with actions bold and meek. 
Would for Christ my Saviour speak." 




Sept. 7. DAILY BEADIN08. 251 

*' And when they could not come nigh unto Him for the press, they 
uncovered the roof where He was : and when they had broken it 
up, they let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay.** 
Mark ii. 4. 

^AITH is full of inventions. The house was fall, a 
crowd blocked up. the door, but faith found a way of 
getting at the Lord and placing the palsied ma^ be- 
fore Him. If we cannot get sinners where Jesus is by 
ordinary methods, we must use extraordinary ones. It seems, 
according to Luke v. 19, that a tiling had to be removed, 
which would make dust and cause a measure of danger to those 
below ; but where the case is very urgent, we must not hiind 
running some risks and shocking some proprieties. Jesus 
was there to heal, and therefore fall what might, faith ven- 
tured all so that her poor paralyzed charge might have his 
sins forgiven. 0»that we had more daring faith among us ! 
Cannot we, dear reader, seek it this morning for ourselves 
and for our fellow-workers, and will we not try to-day to 
perform some gallant act for the love of souls and the glory 
of the Lord. 

The world is constantly inventing ; genius serves all the 
purposes of human desire : cannot faith invent too, and reach 
by some hew means the outcasts who lie perishing around us ? 
It was the presence of Jesus which excited victorious courage 
in the four bearers of the palsied man : is not the Lord among 
us now ? Have we seen His face for ourselves this morning ? 
Have we felt His healing power in our own souls ? If so, 
then through door, through window, or through roof, let us, 
breaking through all impediments, labor to bring poor souls 
to Jesus. All means are good and decorous when faith and 
love are truly set on winning souls. If hunger for bread can 
break through stone walls, surely hunger for souls is not to 
be hindered in its efforts. Lord, make us quick to suggest 
methods of reaching Thy poor sin-sick ones, and bold to 
earry them out at all hazards. 



353 BAn^T BEABtNOK. Bept. 8. 

" From Me is tk^Jhiit found,** — Hosefi iiv, 8. 

j^l|SjSUR fruit i» fomtd from our God as to tmion, Tbe 
dil K^/^ frnit of the brancli ie direetlir traceable to tlie root, 
^^^ Se^er the connection, tho branch dies, and no frmt 
13 produced. By virtue of our union with Cbri^t we bring 
forth fruit. Every bunch of grapes has been first in the root ; 
it baa passed through the stem, and flowed through the sap 
vessels, and fashioned itself externally into fruit ; but it waa 
first in the &tem : so also every good work was first in Chrii^t, 
and then is brought forth in us, O Christian, prize this 
precious unioo to Christ ; for it must be the source of all the 
fruitfulness which thon canst hope to know. If thou wert 
not joined to Jesus Christ, thou would st be a barren bongli 
indeed. 

Out fruit comes from God as to spiritu^ provid^ice* 
When the dew-drops fall from beaven^ when the cloud looka 
down from on high, and is about to distil its liquid treasure, 
wlien the bright sun swells the berries of the cluster, each 
heavenly boon may whisper to the tree and say, " From me 
is thy fruit found." The fruit owes much to the root — that 
is essential to fruitfulness — but it owes very much also to 
external influences. How much we owe to God's grace- 
providence ! in which He provides us constantly with quick- 
ening, teaching, consolation, strength, or whatever else we 
want. To this we owe our all of usefulness or virtue. 

Our fruit comes from God as to wise husbandry. The 
gardener's sharp-edged knife promotes the fruitfulness of the 
tree, by thinning the clusters, and by cutting off superfluous 
shoots. So is it, Christian, with that pruning which the Lord 
gives to thee. " My Father is the husbandman. Every branch 
in Me that beareth not fruit He taketh away ; and every branch 
that beareth fruit. He purgeth it, that it may bring forth more 
fruit." Since our God is the author of our spiritual graces, 
let us give to Him all the glory of our salvation. 




Sept. 9. DAILY BEADINGS. 258 

" IwUl answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things which 
thou knowest not" — Jeremiah xxxiii. 3. 

DRE are different translations of these words. One 
version renders it, "I will show thee great and 
fortified things;" another, "great and reserved 
things." Now, there are reserved and special things in 
Christian experience : all the developments of spiritual life 
are not alike easy of attainment. There are the common 
frames and feelings of repentance, and faith, and joy, and 
hope, which are enjoyed by the entire family ; but there is 
an upper realm of rapture, of communion, and conscious 
union with Christ, which is far from being the common dwell- 
ing-place of believers. We have not all the high privilege 
of John, to lean upon Jesus' bosom; nor of Paul, to be 
caught up into the third heaven. There are heights in exr 
perimental knowledge of the things of 6od which the eagle's 
eye of acumen and philosophic thought hath never seen : 
God alone can bear us there ; but the chariot in which He 
takes us up, and the fiery steeds with which that chariot is 
dragged, are prevailing prayers. Prevailing prayer is vic- 
torious over the God of mercy. " By his strength he had 
power with God : yea, he had power over .the angel, and 
prevailed : he wept and made supplication unto Him ; he 
found Him in Beth-el, and there He spake with us." Pre- 
vailing prayer takes the Christian to Carmel, and enables him 
to cover heaven with clouds of blessing, and earth with floods 
of mercy. Prevailing prayer bears the Christian aloft to 
Pisgah, and shows him the inheritance reserved ; it elevates 
UB to Tabor, and transfigures us, till in the likeness of his 
Lord, as he is, so are we also in this world. If you would 
reach to something higher than ordinary grovelling experi- 
ence, look to the Rock that is higher than you, and gaze with 
the eye of faith through the window of importunate prayer. 
When you open the window on your side, it will not be bolted 

on the other. 

22 




354 DAXLT BEADiirae. Sept. 10 

" And He godh up into a mountain, and caUetk unto Eifn KhomBa 
iuoutd: and ihetf ciLma ftnto EimJ^ — ^Mark iii. 13. 

^EKE was sovereignty. Impatieiit spirits may fret aai 
fume because tbey are not called to the higheBl 
places in the mimstTj ; but, reader, be it thine to re- 
joice that Jeaua calloth whom He will. If He shall leau^ 
me to be a doorkeeper in His honse, I will cheerfullj bleaa 
Him for Hxb graee in permitting me to do anything in Hit 
service- The call of Christ* b servants comes from above. 
tTesns stands on the mountain, evermore above the world in 
boHnesi, earnestness, love^ and power. Those whom He calk 
must go up the mountain to Him ; they must seek to rise to 
His level by living in constant communion with Him. Thej 
may not be able to mount to classic honors^ or attain scho^ 
laatic eminence, but they must like Moses go up into the 
mount of God, and have familiar intercourse with the unseen 
God, or they will nevor bo fitted to proclaim the gospel of 
peace. Jesus went ap^rt to hold high fellowship with the 
Father, and we must enter into the same divine eompanion- 
ship if we would bless our fellow-men. No wonder that the 
apostles were clothed with power when they came down fresh 
from the mountain where Jesus was. This morning we must 
endeavor to ascend the mount of communion, that there we 
may be ordained to the life-work for which we are set apart. 
Let us not see the face of man to-day till we have seen Jesus. 
Time spent with Him is laid out at blessed interest. We too 
shall cast out devils and work wonders if we go down into 
the world girded with that divine energy which Christ alone 
can give. It is of no use going to the Lord's battle till we 
are armed with heavenly weapons. We must see Jesus ; this 
is essential. At the mercy-seat we will linger till He shall 
manifest Himself unto us as He doth not unto the world, and 
until we can truthfully say, '* We were with Him in the Holy 
Mount." 




Sept. 11. DAILY BEADnros. 255 

" Be ye separated — 2 Corinthians vi. 17. 

|HE Christian, while in the world, is not to be of the 
world. He should be distinguished from it in ihe 
great object of his life. To him, " to live," should be 
" Christ." Whether he eats, or drinks, or whatever he does, 
he should do all to God's glory. You may lay up treasure ; 
but lay it up in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth 
corrupt, where thieves break not through nor steal. You 
may strive to be rich ; but be it your ambition to be " rich 
in faith" and good works. You may have pleasure; but 
when you are merry, sing psalms and make melody in your 
hearts to the Lord. In your spirit^ as well as in your aim, 
you should differ from the world. "Waiting humbly before 
God, always conscious of His presence, delighting in com- 
munion with Him, and seeking to know His will, you will 
prove that you are of heavenly race. And you should be 
separate from the world in your actions, K a thing be right, 
though you lose by it, it must be done ; if it be wrong, though 
you would gain by it, you must scorn the sin for your Master's 
sake. You must have no fellowship with the unfruitful works 
of darkness, but rather reprove them. "Walk worthy of your 
high calling and dignity. Remember, O Christian, that thou 
art a son of the Bang of kings. Therefore, keep thyself un- 
spotted from the world. Soil not the fingers which are soon 
to sweep celestial strings; let not those eyes become the 
windows of lust which are soon to see the King in His beauty 
— let not those feet be defiled in miry places which are soon 
to walk the golden streets ; let not those hearts be filled with 
pride and bitterness which are ere long to be filled with 
heaven, and to overflow with ecstatic joy. 
Then rise, my soul ! and soar away, Up where eternal beauties bloom, 

Above the thoughtless crowd ; And pleasures all diyine ; [sume, 

Above the pleasures of the gay, Where wealth that never can con- 

And splendors of the proud | And endless glories shine* 



'• God is jealoUM*^ — Nahum L 2, 




SIPSiyOUR Lord is virij jealous of your love^ belier^i; 
^ifl^ Did lie choose you ? He cannot bear tliat you slio 
^'^JT' cbooae an other. Did He buy yon with his own bloo3 
He cannot endure that you should think that you i 
your own, or that you belong to this world. He loved you wid 
such a love that He wonld not stop in heaven without you ; Htf^ 
would sooner die than you should perish, and he eaonot endure 
that anything should stand between your heart's love and Hlta^iJ 
eelf. He %& very jealous of your trust. He will not permit yoil - 
to tfugt iu au arm of flesh. He cannot bear that yon should 
hew out broken cisterna, when the overflowing fountain is al- 
ways free to yon. When we lean upon Him, He is glad ; but 
when we transfer our dependence to another, when we re 
upon our own wisdom or the wisdom of a friend, worst of i 
when we trust in any works of our own. He is displeased, mi 
will chasten na that He may bring us to Himself. Me ts aim 
very jealous of our compa^iy* There £^hould be no one with 
whom wo converse so much as with Jesus- To abide in Him 
odIj, this is true love ; but to commune with the world, to find 
Biifticient solace in our carnal eomfort^St to prefer even the so- 
ciety of our fellow -Christians to secret intercourse with Him* 
this is grievous to our jealous Lord. He would fain have us 
abide in Him, and enjoy constant fellowship with Himself; 
and many of the trials which He sends us are for the purpose 
of weaning our hearts from the creature, and fixing them more 
closely upon Himself. Let this jealousy, which should keep 
us near to Christ, be also a comfort to us ; for if He loves us 
so much as to care thus about our love, we may be sure that 
He will suffer nothing to harm us, and will protect us from 
all our enemies. that we may have grace this day to keep 
our hearts in sacred chastity for our Beloved alone, with sacred 
jealousy shutting our eyes to all the fascinations of the world! 




Sept. 13. DAILY HEADINGS. 257 

" Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a wdlf the rain 
also Jilleth the pools" — Psalm Ixxxiv. 6. 

IS teaches us that the comfort obtained by one may 
often prove serviceable to another ;' just as wells 
would be used by the company who came after. We 
read some book full of consolation, which is like Jonathan's 
rod, dropping with honey. Ah ! we think our brother has 
been here before us, and digged this well for us as well as for 
himself. Many a " Night of Weeping," " Midnight Harmo- 
nies," an " Eternal Day," " A Crook in the Lot," a " Comfort 
for Mourners," has been a well digged by a pilgrim for him- 
self, but has proved quite as useful to others. Specially, we 
notice this in the Psalms, such as that beginning, *' Why art 
thou cast down, O my soul?" Travellers have been de- 
lighted to see the footprint of man on a barren shore, and 
we love to see the waymarks of pilgrims while passing through 
the vale of tears. 

The pilgrims dig the well, but, strange enough, it fills &om 
the top instead of the bottom. We use the means, but the 
blessing does not spring from the means. We dig a well, 
but Heaven fills it with rain. The horse is prepared against 
the day of battle, but safety is of the Lord. The means are 
connected with the end, but they do not of themselves pro- 
duce it. See here the rain fills the pools, so that the wells 
become useful as reservoirs for the water ; labor is not lost, 
but yet it does not supersede divine help. 

Grace may well be compared to rain for its purity, for its 
refreshing and vivifying influence, for its coming alone from 
above, and for the sovereignty with which it is given or with- 
held. May our readers have showers of blessing, and may 
the wells they have digged be filled with water. Oh, what 
are means and ordinances without the smile of Heaven ! they 
are as clouds without rain, and pools without water. God of 
love, open the windows of heaven, and pour us out a blessing ! 
22* 



258 DAiLy EEABiT^off, Sept, li 

** There were also mih Elm other Utile ships," — Mark iv, 36. 

^flW^SUS waa tlie Lord Higli Admiral of the sea that 
/\: I "I night* ^^^ His presence preserved die wliole conYO^p 
^y^'^'^ It ia well to bbU. with Jesus, even though it be in a 
little ship. When we. sail in Christ's company, we may not 
make sure of fair weather, for great storms may toss the yes- 
sel which carries the Lord Himself, and we must not estpect 
to fi^nd the sea less boisterous around onr little boat. If m 
go with Jesus we must be content to fare as He fares ; aad 
wheu the waves arc rough to Him, they will be rongli to is. 
It is by tempest and tossing that wo shaU come to landj ai 
He did before us. 

When the storm swept over Galilee's dark lake, all facci 
gathered blackness, and all hearts dreaded shipwreck . When 
all creattire-help waa useless, the slumbering Saviour arose, 
and with a word, transformed the riot of the tempest into the 
deep quiet of a calm ; then wcro the little vessels at rest, m 
wEfll as tbat which carried the Lord. Jesus is the star of die 
sea ; and though there be sorrow upon the sea, when Jesui 
is on it there is joy too. May our hearts make Jesus their 
anchor, their rudder, their lighthouse, their lifeboat, and their 
harbor. His Church is the Admiral's flagship ; let us attend 
her movements, and cheer her officers with our presence. 
He Himself is the great attraction ; let us follow ever in His 
wake, mark His signals, steer by His chart, and never fear 
while He is within hail. Not one ship in the convoy shall 
suffer wreck ; the great Commodore will steer every bark 
in safety to the desired haven. By faith we will slip onr 
cable for another day's cruise, and sail forth with Jesus into 
a sea of tribulation. Winds and waves will not spare us, but 
they all obey Him ; and, therefore, whatever squalls may oc- 
cur without, faith shall feel a blessed calm within. He is ever 
in the centre of the weather-beaten company; let us rejoice 
in Him. His vessel has reached the haven, and so shall omra* 




Sept. 15. DAILY BEADIK6S. 359 

" He shall not he afraid of evil tidings J* — Psalm cxiL 7. 

IRISTIAN, you ought not to dread the arrival of 
evil tidings ; because if you are distressed by them, 
what do you more than other mUn f Other men have 
not your God to fly to ; they have never proved His faithful- 
ness as you have done, and it is no wonder if they are 
bowed down with alarm and cowed with fear; but you pro- 
fess to be of another spirit ; you have been begotten again 
unto a lively hope, and your heart lives in heaven, and not 
on earthly things ; now, if you are seen to be distracted as 
other men, what is the value of that grace which you profess 
to have received^ Where is the dignity of that new nature 
which you claim to possess ? 

Again, if you should be filled with alarm, as others are, 
you tvould, doubtless^ he led into the sins so common to others 
under trying drctimstances. The ungodly, when they are 
overtaken by evil tidings, rebel against God ; they murmur, 
and think that God deals hardly with them. Will you fall 
into that same sin ? Will you provoke the Lord as they do ? 

Moreover, unconverted men often run to wrong mean? in 
order to escape from difficulties, and you will be sure to do 
the same if your mind yields to the present pressure. Trust 
in the Lord, and wait patiently for Him. Your wisest course 
is to do as Moses did at the Red Sea — " stand still, and see 
the salvation of God." For if you give way to fear when 
you hear of evil tidings, you will be unable to meet the 
trouble with that calm composure which nerves for duty, and 
sustains under adversity. How can you glorify God if you 
play the coward ? Saints have often sung God's high praises 
in the fires, but will your doubting and desponding, as if 
you had none to help you, magnify the Most High ? Then 
take courage, and relying in sure confidence upon the faith- 
fulness of your covenant God, "let not your heart bo 
troubled, neither let it be afraid.*' 



5160 DAII.T aEADmofl, Sept, 16. 

** Partah&r^ o/iM dimne nature" — 2 Peter i 4, 

^C^iO he a partaker of the divine nature is eot^ of eourse, 
.ffck^fc to become God* That cannot be. The essence of 
'^^^-^ Deity is Qot to be participated in by the creature. 
Between the creature and the Creator there must ever be a 
gulf fixed in respect of essence ; but as the first man Adam 
was made in the image of God, ao we, by the renewiil of the 
Holy Spirit, are in a yet diTiner sense made in the image of 
the Most High, and are partakers of the divine nature. We 
are, by grace» made like God. " God is lo?e;" we beeomQ 
love — " He that loveth is born of God," God is truth ; we 
become true, and we love that which is tni^ God is good, 
and He makes us good by His grace, ao thafc we become the 
pure in heart who shall see God. Moreover, we become 
partakers of the divine nature in even a Mgher sense than 
this — ^in fact, in as lofty a sense as can he coDoeived^ short 
of our being absolutely divine. Do we not become members 
of the body of the divine person of Christ ? Yes, the same 
blood which fows in the head flows in the hand ; and the 
same life which quickens Christ quickens His people, for, 
" Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God." 
Nay, as if this were not enough, we are married unto Christ. 
He hath betrothed us unto Himself in righteousness and in 
faithfulness, and he who is joined unto the Lord is one 
spirit. Oh, marvellous mystery ! we look into it, but who 
shall understand it ? One with Jesus — so one with Him 
that the branch is not more one with the vine than we are a 
part of the Lord, our Saviour and our Kedeemer ! While we 
rejoice in this, let us remember that those who are made 
partakers of the divine nature will manifest their high and 
holy relationship in their intercourse with others, and make 
it evident, by their daily walk and conversation, that they 
have escaped the corruption that is in the world through luflt. 
for more divine holiness of life ! 




Sept. 17. DAILY BEADINOS. 261 

" Bring him nnto Jlfc."-^ Mark ix. 19. 

5^ESPAIRIN&LY the poor disappointed father turned 
away from the disciples to their Master. His son 
was in the worst possible condition, and all means 
had failed ; but the miserable child was soon delivered from 
the eyil one when the parent, in faith, obeyed the Lord Jesus' 
word, " Bring him unto Me." Children are a precious gifib 
from God, but much anxiety comes with them. They may be 
a great joy or a.great bitterness to their parents ; they may 
be filled with the Spirit of God, or possessed with the spirit 
of evil. In all cases, the Word of God gives us one receipt 
for the curing of all their ills, " Bring him unto Me." O for 
more agonizing prayer on their behalf, while they are yet 
babes. Sin is there, let our prayers begin to atack it. Our 
cries for our offspring should precede those cries which be- 
token their actual* advent into a world of sin. In the days 
of their youth we shall see sad tokens of that dumb and deaf 
spirit which will neither pray aright nor hear the voice of 
God in the soul ; but Jesus still commands, '^ Bring them unto 
Me." When they are grown up they may wallow in sin and 
foam with enmity against God ; then, when our hearts are 
breaking, we should remember the great Physician's words, 
" Bring them unto Me." Never must we cease to pray until 
they cease to breathe. No case is hopeless while Jesus lives. 
The Lord sometimes suffers His people to be driven into 
a corner that they may experimentally know how necessary 
He is to them. Ungodly children, when they shew us our 
own powerlessness against the depravity of their hearts, 
drive us to flee to the Strong for strength ; and this is a great 
blessing to us. Whatever our morning's need may be, let it, 
like a strong current, bear us to the ocean of divine love. 
Jesus can soon remove our sorrow. He delights to comfort 
us. Let us hasten to Him while He waits to meet us. 




262 DAixT BEAPiKos, Sept. IS. 

"If we Urn in the Spirit ^ let us alii> tealk in thG Spirit J* 
Gaktians v. 2d. 

JgHE two most important things in our holy religion 
W are the life of fadk and the ^alk of fakh. He who 
shall rightly understand these ib not far from heing 
a master in experimental theology, for they are vital poinU 
to a Christian* You will never find true faith unattentted by 
true godliness ; on the other hand, you will never discover 
a truly holy life which has not for its root a living faith upon 
the righteousness of Christ, Woe unto those who seek after 
the one without the other t There are some who cultivate 
faith and forget holiness ; these may be very high in ortho- 
doxy, but they shall be very deep in condemnation, for they 
hold the truth in unrighteousness ; and there are others who 
have strained after holiness of life, hnt have denied the faiths 
like the Pharisees of old, of whom the Master said, they 
were " whitewashed sepulchres*" We must have faith, for 
this is the foundation ; we miiBt have holiness of life, for this 
is the superstructure. Of what service is the mere founda- 
tion of a building to a man in the day of tempest ? Can he 
hide himself therein ? He wants a house to cover him, as 
well as a foundation for that house. . Even so we need the 
superstructure of spiritual life if we would have comfort in 
the day of doubt. But seek not a holy life without faith, for 
that would be to erect a house which can afford no perma- 
nent shelter, because it has no foundation on a rock. Let 
faith and life be put together ; and, like the two abutments 
of an arch, they will make our piety enduring. Like light 
and heat streaming from the same sun, they are alike full of 
blessing. Like the two pillars of the temple, they are for 
glory and for beauty. They are two streams from the foun- 
tain of grace ; two lamps lit with holy fire ; two olive trees 
watered by heavenly care. Lord, give us this day life 
within, and it will reveal itself without to Thy glory. 




Sept. 19. DAILY BEADINOS. 263 

" The liberty wherewith Christ hath made usfree.^^ — Gal. v. i. 

I^^HIS " liberty " makes us free to heaven's charter — 
the Bible. Here is a choice passage, believer : " When 
thou passest through the rivers I will be with thee." 
You are free to that. Here is another : " The mountains 
shall depart, and th6 hills be removed, but my kindness shall 
not depart from thee." You are free to that. You are a 
welcome guest at the table of the promises. Scripture is 
a never-failing treasury filled with boundless stores of grace. 
It is the baiik of heaven ; you may draw from it as much as 
you please, without let or hinderance. Come in faith, and 
you are welcome f o all covenant blessings. There is not a 
promise in the Word which shall be withheld. In the depths 
of tribulations, let this freedom comfort you ; amidst waves 
of distress^ let it cheer- you; when sorrows surround thee, 
let it be thy solace. This is thy Father's love-token; thou 
art free to it at all times. Thou art also free to the throne 
of grace. It is the believer's privilege to have access at all 
times to His heavenly Father. Whatever our desires, our 
difficulties, our wants, we are at liberty to spread all before 
Him. It matters not how much we may have sinned, we 
may ask and expect pardon. It signifies nothing how poor 
we are, we may plead His promise that He will' provide all 
things needftd. We have permission to approach His throne 
at all times — in midnight's darkest hour, or in noontide's 
most burning heat. Exercise thy right, believer, and live 
up to thy privilege. Thou art free to all that is treasured 
up in (7Am< — wisdom, righteousness, aanctification, and 
redemption. It matters not what thy need is, for there is 
fulness of supply in Christ, and it is there for thee, 0, what 
a ** freedom " is thine ! freedom from condemnation, free- 
dom to the promises, freedom to the throne of grace, and at 
last freedom to enter heaven ! 



384 DAILY BEADOfGS, Sopt. 21). 



' 77ie sword of ike Lord and of Gideot^'* — Jmlg^ei* vu. 20. ^ 

i^IDEON ordored his men to do two thiDgs ; covering 
up a torch in an earthen pitcher, he bade them, iit 
an appointed signal, break the pitcher » and let tlie 
shine, and then sound with the trumpet, crying, ^* The 
of the Lord and of Gideon ! the i?word of the Lord 
d of Gideon ! *' This is precisely what ail Christians must 
. Firsts you mud shine j* break the pitcher which conceals 
ur light; throw aside the bushel which has been hiding 
ur candle, and shine. Let your light shine before men ; 
. your good works be such, that, when men look upon you, 
3y shall know that you have been with Jesus* Then thm 
isi he th8 Bound, the blowing of the trumpet* There misst 
active exertions for the ingathering of Binners by pro- 
|«laiming Christ crucified* Take the gospel to them ; carry 
their door ; put it in their way ; do not suffer them to 
escape it ; blow the trumpet right against their ears, Ke- 
rn ember, that the true war-cry of the Church is Gideotfs 
watchword, ''The sword of the Lord and of Gideon I " God 
must do it ; It is His own work. Bat we are not to be idle ; 
instrumentality is to be used — ** The sword of the Lord and 
of Gideon!" If we only cry, "The sword of the Lord!" 
we shall be guilty of an idle presumption ; and if we shout, 
" The sword of Gideon ! ? alone, we shall manifest idolatrous 
reliance on an arm of flesh : we must blend the two in prac- 
tical harmony, — *' The sword of the Lord and of Gideon ! " 
We can do nothing of ourselves, but we can do everything 
by the help of our God ; let us, therefore, in His name de- 
termine to go out personally, and serve with our flaming 
torch of holy example, and with our trumpet tones of earnest 
declaration and testimony, and God shall be with us, and 
Midian shall be put to confusion, and the Lord of hosts shaU 
reign forever and ever. 




Sept. 21. DAILY BEADINOS. 265 

"IudUI r^'oice over them to do them goodJ^ — Jer. xxxii. 41. 

^OW heart-cheering to the believer is the delight whioh 
God has in His saints ! We cannot see any reason 
in ourselves why the Lord should take pleasure in 
us ; we cannot take delight in ourselves, for we often have 
to groan, being burdened, conscious of our sinfulness, and 
deploring our unfaithfulness ; and we fear that God's people 
cannot take much delight in us, for they must perceive so 
much of our imperfections and follies, that they may rather 
lament our infirmities than admire our graces. But we love 
to dwell upon this transcendent truth, this glorious mystery: 
that as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so does the 
Lord rejoice over us. We do not read anywhere that God 
delighteth in the cloud-capped mountains, or the sparkling 
stars, but we do read that He delighteth in the habitable 
parts of the earth, and that His delights are with the sons 
of men. We do not find it written that even angels give 
His soul delight; nor doth He say, concerning cherubim 
and seraphim, "Thou shalt be called Hephzibah, for the 
Lord delighteth in thee ; " but He does say all that to poor 
fallen creatures like ourselves, debased and depraved by sin, 
but saved, exalted, and glorified by His grace. Li what 
strong language He expresses His delight in His people ! 
Who could have conceived of the eternal One as bursting 
forth into a song? Yet it is written, " He will rejoice over 
thee with joy ; He will rest in His love ; He will joy over 
thee with singing." As He looked upon the world He had 
made, He said, "It is very good;" but when He beheld 
those who are the purchase of Jesus' blood, His own chosen 
ones, it seemed as if the great heart of the Infinite could re* 
strain itself no longer, but overflowed in divine exclamations 
of joy. Should not we utter our grateful response to such a 
marvellous declaration of His love, and sing, " I will rejoice 
in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation." ? 
23 




266 nhXLY BLADINGS. Sept. 22. 

**Zd IsraH r^oice in Him" — Psalm cxLiat, 2, 

<^^ glad of heart, believer j but take care tliat tkj 
gladtjesB has its spring in the Lord. Thou hast much 
cause for gladness id thy God, for thou canst i^g 
with David, " God, my exceeding joy." Be glad that tke 
Lord reigneth, that Jehovah b King ! Rejoice that He sm 
upon the throne, and ruleth all things ! Every attribute of 
God shoidd become a fresh ray in the sunlight of our glad- 
ness. That He is tQue, should make us glad, knowing as we 
do our own fooIishnesB. That ho is mighlif^ should cause m 
to rejoice, who tremble at our weakness. That He is ever* 
lasting^ should always be a theme of joy when we know that 
we wither as the grass. That He is unchungingj should per- 
petually yield us a song, since we change every hour. That 
He is full of grace J that He ia overflowing with it, and that 
this grace in covenant He has given to us ; that it is ours to 
cleanse us, ours to keep us, ours to sanctify us, ours to per- 
fect lis J ours to bring us to glory — all thia should tend U> 
make us glad in Him, This gladness in God is as a deep 
river ; we have only as yet touched its brink ; we know a 
little of its clear, sweet, heavenly streams, but onward, the 
depth is greater, and the current more impetuous in its joy. 
The Christian feels that he may delight himself not only in 
what God is, but also in all that God has done in the past. 
The Psalms show us that God's people in olden times were 
wont to think much. of God's actions, and to have a song 
concerning each of them. So let God's people now rehearse 
the deeds of the Lord ! Let them tell of His mighty acts, 
and " sing unto the Lord, for He hath triumphed gloriously." 
Nor let them ever cease to sing, for as new mercies flow to 
them day by day, so should their gladness in the Lord's 
loving acts in providence and in grace show itself in con- 
tinued thanksgiving. Be glad, ye children of Zion, and 
rejoice in the Lord your God. 




Sept. 23. DAILY fiEADlNGS. 267 

"Accepted in the bdoved" — Ephesians i. 6. 

SHAT a state of privilege ! It includes our justifica- 
tion before God ; but the term " acceptance," in the 
Greek, means more than that. It signifies that we 
are the objects of divine complacency, nay, even of divine 
delight. How marvellous that we, worms, mortals, sinners, 
should be the objects of divine love ! But it is only ^^ in the 
beloved** Some Christians seem to be accepted in their own 
experience ; at least, that is their apprehension. When their 
spirit is lively, and their hopes bright, they think God ac- 
cepts them, for they feel so high, so heavenly-minded, so 
drawn above the earth ! But when their souls cleave to the 
dust, they are the victims of the fear that they are no longer 
accepted. If they could but see that all their high joys do 
not exalt them, and all their low despondencies do not really 
depress them in their Father's sight, but that they stand 
accepted in One who never alters, in One who is always the 
beloved of God, always perfect, always without spot or wrin- 
kle, or any such thing, how much happier they would be, 
and how much more they would honor the Saviour ! Rejoice 
then, believer, in. this : thou art accepted "in the beloved." 
Thou lookest within, and thou sayest, " There is nothing 
acceptable here I " But look at Christ, and see if there is 
not everything acceptable there. Thy sins trouble thee ; but 
God has cast thy sins behind His back, and thou art accepted 
in the Righteous One. Thou hast to fight with corruption, 
and to wrestle with temptation, but thou art already accepted 
in Him who has overcome the powers of evil. The devil 
tempts thee ; be of good cheer, he cannot destroy thee, for 
thou art accepted in Him who has broken Satan's head. 
Know by full assurance thy glorious standing. Even glori- 
fied souls are not more accepted than thou art. They are 
only accepted in heaven " in the beloved," and thou art even 
now accepted in Christ after the same manner. 



268 UAILT HEADINGS, Sept, 2ff 

I ** F'or I tDm ashamed to require of ths king a hund of soldiers anA 

horsemen iohdpus against ike enemy in the way ; because wi 

I had spoJcen tinto the king^ mying^ The hand of &ur God is upon 

' all them for good that seek Eim ^ but His power and Bis wrath 

is tii^ainst all them thai forsake Htm/' — Ezra viiL 2*2. ^ 

11^ CONTOY on many acoounta would ha-ve been desira- 
ble for tlie pilgrim baud, but a holy bL; m efface due§fl 
'"^ would not allow Ezra to seek one. He feared leet 
I the heathen king should think his professions of faith in God 
ftto be mere hypocrisy^ or imagine that the God of Israel was 
MHot able to preserve His own .worshippers. Ke could not 
Paring his mind to lean on an arm of fiesli in a matter so eTi- 
Idently of the Lord, and therefore the caravan set out with no 
■visible protection, guarded by Him who is the eword aad 
shield of His people. It is to be feared that few believers 
feel this holy jealousy for God ; even those who in a measure 
walk by faith, occasionally mar the lustre of their life by 
craving aid from man. It is a most blessed thing to have 
no props and no buttresses, but to stand upright on the Rock 
of Ages, upheld by the Lord alone. Would any belieyera 
seek state-endowments for their Church, if they remembered 
that the Lord is dishonored by their asking Csesar's aid? as 
if the Lord could not supply the needs of His own cause ! 
Should we run so hastily to friends and relations for assist- 
ance, if we remembered that the Lord is magnified by our 
implicit reliance upon His solitary arm ? My soul, wait thou 
only upon God, " But," says one, " arc not means to be 
nsed } ** Assuredly they are ; but our faolt seldom lies in 
their neglect : far more frequently it springs out of foolishly 
believing in them, instead of believing in God* Few run too 
far in neglecting the creature's arm ; hut very many sin 
greatly in making too mueh of it. Learn, dear reader, to 
glorify the Lord by leaving no means untried, if by using 
them tboa wouldst not dkkonot the name of the Lord. 




Sept. 25. DAILY BEABINGS. 269 

** Just, and ihe justifier of him which believeth" — Romans iii. 26. 

SING justified by faith, we have peace with God. 
Conscience accuses no longer. Judgment now de- 
cides for the sinner instead of against him. Memory 
looks back upon past sins, with deep sorrow for the sin, but 
yet with no dread of any penalty to come ; for Christ has 
paid the debt of His people to the last jot and tittle, and re- 
ceived the divine receipt ; and unless God can be so unjust 
as to demand double payment for one debt, no soul for whom 
Jesus died as a substitute can ever be sent into hell. It 
seems to be one of the very principles of our enlightened 
nature to believe that God is just ; we feel that it must be 
so, and this gives us our terror at first ; buiPis it not marvel- 
lous that this very same belief that God is just, becomef# 
afterwards the pillar of our confidence and peace ! If God 
be just, I, a sinner, alone and without a substitute, must be 
punished ; but Jesus stands in my stead, and is punished for 
me ; and now, if God be just, I, a sinner, standing in Christ, 
can never be punished. God must change his nature before 
one soul, for whom Jesus was a substitute, can ever by any 
possibility sufier the lash of the law. Therefore, Jesus hav- 
ing taken the place of the believer, having rendered a full 
equivalent to divine wrath for all that His people ought to 
have suffered as the result of sin, the believer can shout with 
glorious triumph, " Who shall lay anything to the charge of 
God's elect ? " Not God, for He hath justified ; not Christ, 
for He hath died, " yea, rather, hath risen again." My hope 
lives, not because I am not a sinner, but because I am a sin- 
ner for whom Christ died ; my trust is not that I am holy, 
but that, being unholy. He is my righteousness. My faith 
rests not upon what I am, or shall be, or feel, or know, but 
in what Christ is, in what He has done, and in what He is* 
now doing for me. On the lion of justice the fair maid of 
hope rides like a queen. 
23 • 



**Tht myrilc frees th(ti were in the bottom J* — Zechariab L 8. 

JglpE Tisian in this ehapter describes the coodition of 
Israel in Zecliari all's day ; but being interpreted it 
its aspect towards ms, it describes the Church of Glod 
as wo find it now in the world. The Chnrch ia eoin pared lo 
a myrtle grove flourishing in a valley. It is hidden^ tin ob- 
served, secreted ; eourtiDg no honor and attracting no obser* 
vation from the careless gazer. The Church, like her Head, 
has a glory, hut it is concealed from carnal eyes, for the timd 
of her hreakiBg forth in all her splendor is not yet come. 
The idea of tranqnil security is also suggested to us ; for the 
myrtle grove in the valley is still and oalm, while the storm 
sweeps over the%iountain sumraits. Tempests spend their 
force upon the craggy peaks of the Alps, but down yonder, 
where flows the stream which maketh glad the city of ooi 
God» the myrtles flourish by the still waters, all unshaken by 
the impetuous wind. How great is the inward tranquillity 
of God's Church ! Even when opposed and persecuted, she 
has a peace which the world gives not, and which, therefoxe, 
it cannot take away : the peace of G-od which passeth til 
understanding keeps the hearts and minds of God's people. 
Does not the metaphor forcibly picture the peacefol, p«f- 
petual growth of the saints ? The myrtle sheds not her 
leaves ; she is always green ; and the Church, in her vrank 
time, still hath a blessed verdure of grace about her ; n«y, 
she has sometimes exhibited most verdure when her winter 
has been sharpest. She has prospered most when her ad- 
versities have been most severe. Hence the text hini$ <A 
victory. The myrtle is the emblem of peace, and a signifi- 
cant token of triumph. The brows of conquerors were bound 
with myrtle and with laurel ; and is not the Church ever vic- 
torious ? Is not every Christian more than a conquercnr 
through Him that loved him ? Living in peace, do not tho 
saints fall asleep in the arms of victory ? 




Sept. 27, DAILY BEADINOS. 271 

** Happy art thoUf lirael; who is like unto thee, people saved 
by the Lord *? " — Deuteronomy xxxiii. 29. 

^E who affirms that Christianity makes men miserable, 
is himself an utter stranger to it. It were strange 
indeed if it made us wretched ; for see to what a po- 
aition, it exalts us! It makes us sons of G-od. Suppose you 
tliat God will give all the happiness to His enemies, and re- 
serve all the mourning for His own family ? Shall His foes 
Lave mirth and joy, and shall His home-bom children inherit 
sorrow and wretchedness ? Shall the sinner, who has no part 
'in Christ, call himself rich in happiness, and shall we go 
mourning as if we were penniless beggars ? No, we will re- 
joice in the Lord always, and glory in our inheritance, for we 
•' Wve not received the spirit of bondage again to fear ; but 
we have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, 
Abba, Father." The rod of chastisement must rest upon us 
in our measure, but it worketh for us the comfortable fruits 
of righteousness ; and therefore, by the aid of the divine Com- 
forter, we, the " people saved of the Lord," will joy in the 
God of our salvation. We are married unto Christ ; and shall 
our great Bridegroom permit His spouse to linger in constant 
grief ? Our hearts are knit unto Him ; we are His members ; 
and though for a while we may suffer as our Head once suf- 
fered, yet we are even now blessed with heavenly blessings 
in Him. We have the earnest of our inheritance in the com- 
forts of the Spirit, which are neither few nor small. Her- 
itors of joy forever, we have foretastes of our portion. There 
are streaks of the light of joy to herald our eternal sunrising. 
Our riches are beyond the sea ; our city with firm foundations 
lies on the other side the river ; gleams of glory from the 
spirit- world cheer our hearts, and urge us onward. Truly is 
it said of us, " Happy art thou, Israel ; who is like unto 
thee, people saved by the Lord ? " 



273 DAILY EEAiofGS. Scpt* 38- 




•* The Lord hoketh from heamn§ Et beholddh aUihtstms ofmmT 
Pa aim xxxiiL 13. 

fERHAPS no figure of epeoch represents God in & 
more gracioug light tban when Hb Ib spoken of as 
^^ etoopiBg fi"om His throne, and coming down ^om 
hoaven to attend to the wants and to behoM the woes of man* 
kiad. We love Hinij who, when Sodom and Gomorrah were 
full of iniquity, would not destroy those cities until He had 
made a personal Tisitation of them* We cannot help pour- 
ing out our heart in affection for our Lord, who inclines his 
ear from the highest glory, and puts it to the lip of the djing 
sinner, whose failing heart longs afiier reconciliation. Hew 
can we but love Him, when we know that He numbers the 
very hairs of otir heads, marks our path, and orders our ways ? 
Specially Is this great trmth brought near to our heart, when 
we recollect how attentive He is, not merely to the temporal 
interests of His creatures, but to their spiritual concerns* 
Though leagues of distance lie between the finite creature 
and the infinite Creator, yet there are links uniting both. 
When a tear is wept by thee, think not that God doth oot 
behold ; for, " like as a father pitieth his children, so the 
Lord pitieth them that fear Him." Thy sigh is able to move 
the heart of Jehovah ; thy whisper can incline His ear imto 
thee ; thy prayer can stay His hand ; thy faith can move His 
arm. Think not that God sits on high taking no account of 
thee. Remember that however poor and needy thou art, yet 
the Lord thinketh upon thee. For the eyes of the Lord run 
to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show Himself strong 
in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect towards Him. 

" Oh ! then repeat the truth that never tires ; 
No God is like the God my soul desires ; 
He at whose voice heaven trembles, even He, 
Great as He isj knows how to stoop to me" 




Sept ii9. DAILY BEABINOS. 273 

" Behold, if the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce 
him clean that hath the plague" — Leviticus xiii. 13. 

STRANGE enough this regulation appears ; yet there 
was wisdom in it, for the throwing out of the disease 
proved. that the constitution was sound. This morn- 
ing it may be well for us to see the typical teaching of so sin- 
l^nlar a rule. We, too, are lepers, and may read the law of 
leper as applicable to ourselves. When a man sees himself 
to be altogether lost and ruined, covered all over with the 
defilement of sin, and no part free from pollution ; when he 
disclaims all righteousness of his own, and pleads guilty be- 
Ibre the Lord ; then Is he clean through the blood of Jesus, 
^imd the grace of God. Hidden, unfelt, unconfessed iniquity 
is the true leprosy ; but when sin is seen and felt, it has re- 
vived its death-blow, and the Lord looks with eyes of mercy 
vpon the soul afficted with it. Nothing is more deadly than 
ielf-righteousness, or more hdpeful than contrition. We 
"^ust confess that we are '^ nothing else but sin," for no con- 
-^ssion short of this will be the whole truth ; and if the Holy 
t|pirit be at work with us, convincing us of sin, there will be 
)ko difficulty about making such an acknowledgment — it will 
-Ijpring spontaneously from our lips. What comfort does the 
; tej^ afford to those under a deep sense of sin ! Sin mourned 
clbtid confessed, however black and foul, shall never shut a 
I man out fieom the Lord Jesus. Whosoever cometh unto Him, 
He will in no wise cast out. Though dishonest as the thief, 
&bngh unchaste as the woman who was a sinner, though 
l(erce as Saul of Tarsus, though cruel as Manasseh, though 
Vebellious as the prodigal, the great heart of love will look 
tipon the man who feels "himself to have no soundness in him, 
iftnd will pronounce him clean, when he trusts in Jesur> cruci- 
Bled. Come to Him, then, poor heavy-laden sinner, 

" Come needy, come guilty, come loathsome and bare ; 
Tou can't come too filthy — come just as you are." 




274 BA1X.T RSABoro®, 8&pt so. 

" Sifig Jorth ike honor of His mnnef make His praise glijriiyim^ 
Pa (dm IxtL 3. 

fl?AT is not left to our own option whether we shall praiae 
Grod or BOt, Praise is God's most righteous dii% 
ftad ever J Christian, a^ the recipient ©f His grace, k 
botind to praise Ood from day to daj. It is true we have oo 
authoritative rubric for daily praise ; we have no command- 
ment preicribing certain hours of song and thanksgiving ; bat 
tha law written upon the heart teaches us that it is ri^ht to 
praise God ; and the unwritten mandate comes to us with m 
much force as if it had been recorded on the tables of stone, 
or handed to us from the top of thundering Sinai. Yes, it is 
the Christian's €/i(^^ to prai&e God* It is not only m pleasur- 
able exercise, but it is the absolute obligation of hia life. 
Tbittk nott je who arc always mourning, that ye are guiltless 
in this respect, or imagine that ye can discharge your duty 
to your God without songs of praise. You are bound by the 
bonds of His love to bless His name so long as you live, and 
His praise should continually be in your mouth, for you are 
blessed in order that you may bless Him ; " this people have 
I formed for myself; they shall show forth' my praise ; " and 
if you do not praise God, you are not bringing forth the fruit 
which He, as the Divine Husbandman, has a right to expect 
at your hands. Let not your harp then hang upon the wil- 
lows, but take it down, and strive, with a grateful heart, to 
bring forth its loudest music. Arise and chant His praise. 
With every morning's dawn, lift up your notes of thanksgiv- 
ing, and let every setting sun be followed with your song. 
Girdle the earth with your praises ; surround it with an at- 
mosphere of melody, and God Himself will hearken from 
heaven and accept ybur music. 

** E*en so I love Thee, and will love, 
And in Thy praise will sing, 
Because Thou art my loving God, 
And my redeeming King." 




Oct. I. DAII.T KEADIJrGS. 275 

^^lUaMOMtfndU^ mem and oid, wkick I hare laid f/or fku, O m^f 
hdottdS — C&nticles tiL 13. 

^E[E spouse desires to give to Jesus all that she pro- 
duces. Our heart has ^^all manner of pleacani 
firuits," both *'*' new and old,^ and they are Lud op 
for our Beloved. At this rich autumnal seas^m of fruit, lei 
us survey our stores. We have mtw fruits. We desire to 
feel new life, new joy, new gratitude ; we wish to make new 
resolves, and carry them out by new labors ; our heart blos- 
soms with new prayers, and our soul is pledging hendf to 
new efforts. But we have some aid fruits too. Thete is 
our first love : a dioiee fruit that 1 and Jesus d^ights in 'nL 
There is our first faith ; that simple faith by whidi, having 
noUiing, we became possessors of all things. There is our 
joy when first we knew the Lord ; let us revive it. We have 
our old remembrances of the promises. How faithful has 
God been ! In sickness, how sofdy did He make our bedl 
In deep waters, how pladdly did He buoy us up ! In the 
flaming furnace, how graciously did He deliver us! Old 
fruits, indeed ! we have many of them, for His mereies have 
been more than tlie hairs of our head. Old sins we most 
regret, but then we have had repentances whic^ Ue has 
given us, by which we have wept our way to the erosSf 
and learned the merit of His blood. We have fruits, this 
morning, both new and old; but here is the point — they a/re 
all laid up for Jesus. Truly, those are the best and most 
acceptable services in whid^ Jesus is the solitary aim of the 
soul, and His glory, without any admixture whatever, the 
end of all our efforts. Let our many fruits be laid up only 
for our Beloved ; let us display ^em when He is with us, 
and not hold them up before the gaze of men. Jesus, wo 
will turn the key in our garden-door, and none shall enter 
to rob Thee of one good fruit from the soil which Thou hast 
watered with Thy bloody sweat. Our all shall be ThinOy j 
Thine only, Jesus, our Beloved! m 



276 IJJJl.Tr KEAIII2IQ9. Ooi 2. 



" The hope which is laid upjbr i/ou in heavejiJ* -^ CoL L 5, 




?^UB hope in Christ fot the ftiture is the mainspring 
and the mainstay of onr Joj here. It will animate 
our hearts to think often of heaven, for all that ipe 
can desire is promised there* Here we are weary and toil- 
worn, but yonder is the land of re^i, where the sweat of laboi 
shall no more bedew the worker's brow, and fatigue shall be 
forever banished. To those who are weary and spent, the 
word ** rest" is fcdl of heaven. We are always in the field 
of battle ^ we are so tempted within, and so molested by foea 
without, that we have little or no peace ; btit in heaven we 
shall enjoy the ticiary, when the banner shall be waved aloft 
in triumph, and the sword shall be sheathed, and we shall 
hear our Captain say^ *' Well done, good and faithful ser- 
vant/' We have suffered bereavement after bereaveinentj 
but we are going to the land of the itnrnoricUj where graves 
are unknown things. Here sin is a constant grief to US| 
but there we shall bo perfectly hol^^ for there shall by no 
means enter into that kingdom anything which defileth. 
Hemlock springs not up in the furrows of celestial fields. 
Oh ! is it not joy that you are not to be irf banishment for- 
ever ? that you are not to dwell eternally in this wilderness, 
but shall soon inherit Canaan ? Nevertheless, let it never 
be said of us that we are dreaming about the future^ and 
forgetting the present ; let the future sanctify the present to 
highest uses. Through the Spirit of Grod, the hope of heaven 
is the most potent force for the product of virtue ; it is a 
fountain of joyous effort ; it is the corner-stone of cheerful 
holiness. The man who has this hope in him goes about 
his work with vigor, for the joy of the Lord is his strength. 
He fights against temptation with ardor, for the hope of the 
next world repels the fiery darts of the adversary. He can 
labor without present reward, for he looks for a reward in 
the world to come. 




Oct. 3. BAII.T XJBADniGS. 277 

**Are ihey not aU minisUring wpiriiSj tad forth to wnmUlerfor 
them who shall be heirs of salcation i" — Heb. L 14. 

^G£LS are the unseen attendants of the saints of 
God ; they bear ns up in their hands, lest we dash 
our foot against a stone. Loyalty to their Lord leads 
them to take a deep interest in the children of His love ; 
they rejoice over the return of the prodigal to his father's 
house below, and they welcome the advent of the belieyer 
to the !&ng's palace above. Li olden times the sons of God 
were favored with their visible appearance, and at this day, 
although unseen by us, heaven is still opened, and the angels 
of God ascend and descend upon the Son of man, that they 
may visit the heirs of salvation. Seraphim still fly with live 
coals from off the altar to touch the lips of men greatly be- 
loved. If our eyes could be opened, we should see horses 
of Are and chariots of fire about the servants of the Lord ; 
for we have come to an innumerable company of angels, who 
are all watchers and protectors of the seed-royal. Spenser's 
life is no poetic fiction, where he sings, — 

'* How oft do they with golden pinions cleaTO 
The flitting skies, like flying pursuiyant. 
Against foul flends to aid us militant ! " 

To what dignity are the chosen elevated when the brilliant 
courtiers of heaven become their willing servitors ! Lito 
what communion are we raised, since we have intercourse 
with spotless celestials ! How well are we defended, since 
all the twenty thousand chariots of God are armed for our 
deliverance ! To whom do we owe all this ? Let the Lord 
Jesus Christ l^e forever endeared to us, for through Him we 
are made to sit in heavenly places far above principalities 
and powers. He it is whose camp is round about them that 
fear Him ; He is the true Michael whose foot is upon the 
dragon. All hail, Jesus ! thou Angel of Jehovah's presence ; 
to Thee this family offers its morning vows. 
24 




i7B HAILY EEAB1NG3* Oet L 

**Ai evening Itfntf U wkall &e UffM/* — ^ Zechanab kit. 7. 

^TENTIMKS we look forward with forebodinga to 
the time of nid age^ forgetful that at eventide it shall 
h^ light. To maoy aaints, old age is the choiceafe 
season ill their lires. A balmier air f&Ds the martBer^s cheek^ 
as he neara the shore of immortalitj, fewer waTos ruffle hi» 
sea, quiet reigtiSH^ deep, still, and aolemn* Prom the altap 
of age the flashes of the fire of youth are gone, but the more- 
real flame of earnest feeling remains* The pilgrims have 
reached the land Benlah, that happj eountrj whose dajs are 
aa the days of heaven upon earth. Angeb visit it, eelestial 
gdes blow over it, flowers of paradise grow in it, and the 
air is filled with seraphic music. Some dwell here for years, 
and others come to it but a few hours before their departure, 
but it is an Eden o« earth. We may well long for tlio time 
when we shall recline in its shady groves, aud be satisfied 
with hope imtU the time of fruition eomes. The settiug sun 
seems larger than when aloft in the sky, and a splendor of 
glory tinges all the clouds which surround his going down. 
Pain breaks not the calm of the sweet twilight of age, for 
strength made perfect in weakness bears up with patience 
under it all. Kipe fruits of choice experience are gathered 
as the rare repast of life's evening, and the soul prepares 
itself for rest. The Lord's people shall also enjoy light in 
the hour of death. Unbelief laments : the shadows fall, the 
night is coming, existence is ending. Ah, no, crieth faith, 
the night is far spent, the true day is at hand. Light is 
come, the light of immortality, the light of a Father's coun- 
tenance. Gather up thy feet in the bed, see the waiting 
band of spirits ! Angels waft thee away. Farewell, be- 
loved one ; thou art gone, thou wavest thine hand. Ah, 
now it is light. The pearly gates are open, the golden 
streets shine in the jasper light. We cover our eyes, but 
thou beholdest the unseen. Adieu, brother t thou hast light 
^ OTontide, such as we have not yet. 





Oct. 5. 

meat forty dnf9md 

the stren^ 
ismeiBt fori 
When tiie prophet E^i^ 

ihe eoalB, and tibe owe «f 1 

Bnder the joniper tree, k ' 

with dainty toe, i 

otherwue, he wa» eonHMMBed 

ni^ts in the etren^tk of ii. ; 

nHyimt of God. When ^^ 

*' eome and dine** vith B^l \ 

He said to Peter, ^ Feed mj \ 

lowme.'* £¥enthn§]tisi 

en, that we maj expend «nr 3 

We eome to tii« ] 

loins girt, and staff in hand, m \ 

we haye aatisied onr 1 

ing on Christ, hat 

Earth should he a p te pa r juimn iwr liHVHn.; m^ jait—i» it 

the plaee where saints feast must and w^A m^/L T$0sff m. 

down at the taUe of onr Lord, and ^m^ mtv^ BBns ^sf «i«i 

night in His ten^. They«< rfhittgr«i3Tfcv^<i»^fH»liir 

perfect ser^ee. Befierer, in tbe stroi^ jr^n diNB|r ^m* 

from Christ, lahor for Him. Bo rne ^ nt hai^ j4i( i(» Im* 

much concerning die design of vm \j0iA m iprjaig Hi Ui» 

grace. We are not to retain the pnfwjmk irtsam ^ tnHfc tit 

the Egyptian mnmmj held the wheat, for aim« viliMM j^ifliHf 

it an opportonity to grow: we mnst S'Ow k and waUr it. H'V^ 

does the Lord send down the rain tq^/n tbe ttarmf ^mit^ mA 

give the genial smishine ? Is it wA that th^MM; smi^ all Ji>4ri^ 

the fruits of the earth to jieM fr>od f>>r matt i ¥/t^M ^f t^ 

Lord feeds and refreshes onr sonls, that m^ mtnf iduiervfw^ 

use our renewed strength in the promotMm of ifii | 






280 D4ILY HEAlJlllClS. Oct. I. 

*' Who^e^er drink^th of t)it WM^er thai I shall gi^e Mm Mkall iww 
l/tiV*;.*' — JohaiT. 14. 

?5*5^^K \s\\o is a bDliever in Jesus finds enotigb in his Lord 
satisfy him now, and to content him foreTernioTe. 
The belieTer m not the m&n wbose dajs are weary 
for want of comfort, and whose nights are long from absence 
of heart-cheering thought, for he finda in religion such a 
spring of jojf such a fountain of consolation^ that he is cod^ 
tent and happj. Put him in a dungeon, and ho will find good 
oompanj ; place him in a barren wild ernes a, he will eat the 
bread of heaven ; drive him away from friendsliip, he will 
meet the '* friend that stick eth closer than a brother," Blast 
ijl his gourds, and he will find shadow beneath the Bock of 
Ages ; sap the foundation of his earthly hopes, but his heart 
will itUl be fixed, Irufiting in the Lord. The heart is as iu- 
satiahle a;^ the grave till Jesus enters it, and then It is a cup 
full to overflowing. There is aueh a fulnees in Christ that 
He alone is the believe/g all. The true saint is so com* 
pletely satisfied with the all- sufficiency of Jesus, that he thirsts 
no more, except it be for deeper draughts of the living foun- 
tain. In that sweet manner, believer, shalt thou thirst; it 
shall not be the thirst of pain, but of loving desire ; thou 
wilt find it a sweet thing to be panting after a fuller enjoy- 
ment of Jesus' love. One in days of yore said, " I have been 
sinking my bucket down into the well full often, but now my 
thirst after Jesus has become so insatiable, that I long to 
put the well itself to my lips, and drink right on."- Is this 
the feeling of thine heart now, believer ? Dost thou feel that 
all thy desires are satisfied in Jesus, and that thou hast no 
want now but to know more of Him, and to have closer fel- 
lowship with Him ? Then come continually to the fountain, 
and take of the water of life freely. Jesus will never think 
you take too much, but will ever welcome you, saying, 
*' Drink, yea, drink abundantly, beloved." 




Oct. 7. BAII.T MMAiaaG^ m 

**Whertfore hast Hum ^.ided liyMnMEntf}*'— XmbcnzL VL 

^UR heaTenlj Father sends ns frequent tronUeB io try 
our faiik. If our €uth be worth anything, it will 
stand the test. Gik is afraid of fire, hat gold is 
not ; the paUe gea dreads to be toodbed bj the diamond, 
bat the true jewel fears no test. It is a poor fudi iHiieh 
can only tmst God when friends are tme, die body loll of 
healdi, and the business profitable ; but that is true fnth 
which holds by the Lord's futhfulneBS idien friends are gone, 
when the body is siek, when spirits are depressed, and die 
light of our Father's countenance is hi4den. A fiuth iHiieh 
can say, in the direst trouUe, ** Thon^ He slay me, yet will 
I trust in Him," is heaTen-bom faith. The Lord afflicts His 
servants to glorify Himud/\ for He is greatly glorified in the 
graces of His people, which are His own handiwork. When 
*' tribulation worketh patience; and patience, ezpenenee; 
and experience, hope,*' the Lord is honored by these grow- 
ing virtues. We should never know the music of the harp 
if the strings were left untouched ; nor enjoy the jmce o( the 
grape if it were not trodden in the wine-press ; nor discover 
the sweet perfume of cinnamon if it were not pressed and 
beaten ; nor feel the warmth of fire if the coab were not 
utterly consumed. The wisdom and power of the great 
Workman are discovered by the trials through which His 
vessels of mercy are permitted to pass. Present afflictions 
tend oho to heighten future joy. There must be shades in the 
picture to bring out the beauty of the lights. Gould we be 
so supremely blessed in heaven, if we had not known the 
curse of sin and the sorrow of earth? Will not peace foe 
sweeter after conflict, and rest more welcome after toil? 
Will not the recollection of past suJBferings enhance the bliss 
of the glorified ? There are many other comfortable answers 
to the question with which we opened our brief meditation : 
let us muse upon it all day long. 

24» * A 



382 DAIIiT BEAIJnfQfl, Oct, 1. 

** Launch out inlQ the thepf and let d&mfi your nei^ for a draughts 
Luke V* 4> 



i 




E learn from this narratlTre the neG&t^ity of hwma^^ 
agericy. The draught of fishes was miraoulong, yet 
neither the fiiherm&n, nor his boat, nor liis Ashing 
tft^kle, were ignored, but all were used to take the ^ahes- 
So IE the saving of souls, God worketh by means ; and while 
the present economy of grace shall stand, Grod will be pleased 
by the fooUshnesi of preaching to save them that hel]e?e. 
When &od worketh without instruments, doubtless He ia 
glorified ; but He hath Himself selected the plan of instri^ 
mentalitj as being that by which He is most magnified in the 
earth. Means of themsdve^ are utte'dif uthavailing. ** Master, 
we have toiled all the night and have taken nothing.*' What 
was the reason of this ? Were they not fishermen plying 
their speeial calling ? Verily^ they were no raw hands ; they 
understood the work* Had they gone about the toU unskil- 
fuliy ? No. Had they lacked industry ? No ; they had 
toiled. Had they lacked perseverance ? No ; they hid 
toiled all the night. Was there a deficiency of fish in the 
sea ? Certainly not, for as soon as the Master came, they 
swam to the net in shoals. What, then, is the reason ? Is 
it because there is no power in the means of themselves 
apart from the presence of Jesus ? *' Without Him we can 
do nothing." But with Christ we can do all things. Chrises 
presence confers sticcess. Jesus sat in Peter's boat, and His 
will, by a mysterious influence, drew the fish to ihe net. 
When Jesus is lifted up in His Church, His presence is the 
Church's power — the shout of a King is in the midst of her. 
*' I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me." Let us 
go out this morning on our work of soul-fishing, looking up 
in faith, and around us in solemn anxiety. Let us toil till 
night comes, and we shall not labor in vain, for He who bids 
us let down the net, will ^ it with fishes. 



Oct. 0. 1>AII.T SKAIHSrOiL S8S 



'^AbU io ketp fomfrtmfmaim^''-^J^^ M. 




some seBse the padi to hemTcn is Terj Bile, bat m. 
ofJier respects tliere is mo road 90 dmMkjfrom. Ik im 
beset wiUi diiieiiides. One fidse itep (and horn 
easjr ii u to take tliat, if graee be abeent!) and down we go. 
WbatsBlippeijpatbu tbatwbicb wnae of w bare to tread! 
How niaay tiaies bare we to exdani witb tbe Ptaabaiat, ^ Jfy 
feet were ahiiost gone ; mj steps bad weH wa^ sipped." ff 
we were strong, sore-footed iMnnitaiiieerB, dns voald not 
matter so mndi ; but in oorselTes, kow woai we are I In ibe 
best roads we soon/aUer, in tbe nnootbest patbs we qmMj 
stumble. Tbese feeble knees ci oun ean seareelf supp or t 
our tottering wei^kt. A straw may ibrow as, and a pebUe 
ean wound ns ; we are mere cbildren tremUin^ taking oar 
first steps in tbe walk of £utb ; oar bearenlj Fadier bdds as 
by tbe arms, or we sboold soon be down. Ob, if we are kept 
firom fiilling, bow mast we bless tbe patient power iHiieb 
watches oyer as day by day ! Think how prone we are to 
sin, how apt to choose danger, how strong oar tendeney to 
cast ourselyes down, and these reflections will make as sing 
more sweetly than we haye ever done, ** Ghwy be to Him 
who is able to keep as from £dling/' We have many/oee who 
try to push us down. The road is rough, and we are weak; 
but in addition to this, enemies lurk in ambush, who rash 
out when we least expect tiliem, and labor to trip us iq), or 
hurl us down tilie nearest precipice. Only an Almighty arm 
can preserye us from these unseen foes, who are seeking to 
destroy us. Such an arm is engaged for our defence. He is 
faithful that hath promised, and He is able to keep as from 
falling ; so that, with a deep sense of our utter weakness, we 
may cherish a firm belief in our perfect safety, and say, with 
joyful confidence, — 

" Against me earth and hell combine. 
But on my side is power divine ; 
Jesus is aJl, and He is mine I " 



SS4 PAixrr akabi^^g^. Oct. 10* 



^FauIUess he/ore ike presence ^f His ^?ory ." -* Jude 24* 



gl|% *liTOLYE m your mind th&t wondrous word^ **/a«lft*| 
0|l^i^ fess/* We arc far of from it now ; bat ^s our Loci] 
^^^™*^ oeTer stops short of perfection in His work of lovi 
we ihall reajcK it one daj, Tlie Say i our wbo will keep ] 
people to the end, vdll also present tbi^m at last to HimseU 
as ^* a gloriouB chnroh, not having spot, or wrinkle ^ or ail 
Bueh thing, bat holj Mid without blemish." AE the joweb 
in the Saviour's crown are of the first water, and without a 
fingte fiaw* All the maids of honor who attend the Lamb'i 
wife are pure virgins without spot or stain. But how wiU 
Jesus m^e ns faultless ? He will wash us from our sins in 
His own blood J until we are white and fair as God's purest 
angel ; and we shall be clothed io His righto ousnesa, tliat 
righteousness which makes the saint who wears it positiTcli 
faultless; yea, perfect in the sight of God. We shall be uQ^ 
blanmble and ttareprovable even in His e^es. His law will 
not onlj have no charge against uSt but it will be magnified 
in us. Moreover, the work of the Holy Spirit within us wiH 
be altogether complete. He will make us so perfectly holy, 
that we shall have no lingering tendency to sin. Judgment, 
memory, will — every power and passion — shall be emanci- 
pated from the thraldom of evil. We shall be holy even as 
God is holy, and in His presence we shall dwell forever. 
Saints will not be out of place in heaven ; their beauty will 
be as great as that of the place prepared for them. Oh, the 
rapture of that hour when the everlasting doors shall be lifted 
up, and we, being made meet for the inheritance, shall dwell 
with the saints in light. Sin gone, Satan shut out, tempta- 
tion past forever, and ourselves "faultless" before God, this 
will be heaven indeed ! Let us be joyful now as we rehearse 
the song of eternal praise so soon to roll forth in full chorus 
from all the bloodwashed host ; let us copy David's exultings 
before the ark, as a prelude to our ecstasies before the throne. 



Oct. 11 DAILY XEAHETGSL RS 

'*LausliftMpomrh€ariwi&<mrimAmKU Gid im ^U^ampoay 




act of prayer ttaeka «f <?vr w^ ngrftwiflw, i 
is a Teiy sahnair lessen for fvdi pmd bem^ at ▼« 
are. If God gave a* Citots vidiovt eo>BstraiB!B^ vs 
to pray for them, we should nerer ksov hov poor ve are; 
but a tnie prayer is an inventoTT of waoi^ a eaulogge of 
necessities, a rerelation of hidden porerty. While it k an 
application to dirine weakh, it is a «9af€:»ioa of koBan 
emptiness. The most healthy nat« of a Qiriidja is to be 
always empty in self, and constantly depending ^on tke 
Lord for supplies ; to be always poor in self, and ridh in Jentt ; 
weak as water personally, but mighty, through God, to do 
gr-eat exploits ; and hence the nse of prayer, because, wlnLe 
it adores God, it lays the creature where it should be, in the 
very dust. Prayer is in itself, apart from the answer which 
it brings, a great benefit to the Christian. As the mnner 
gains strength for the race by daily exercise, to Va the great 
race of life we acquire energy by the hallowed labor of prayer. 
Prayer plumes the wings of God's young eaglets, that they 
may learn to mount above the clouds. Prayer f^Ah the 
loins of God's warriors, and sends them forth to combat with 
iheir sinews braced and their muscles firm. An earnest 
pleader cometh out of his closet, even as the sun ariseth 
from the chambers of the east, rejoicing like a strong man to 
run his race. Prayer is that uplifted hand of Moses which 
routs the Amalekites more than the sword of Joshua ; it b 
the arrow shot from the chamber of the prophet foreboding 
defeat to the Syrians. Prayer girds human weakness with 
divine strength, turns human foUy into heavenly wisdom, and 
gives to troubled mortals the peace of God. We know not 
wljat prayer cannot do ! We thank thee, great God, for tho 
mercy-seat, a choice proof of Thy marveUous loving-] 
Help us to use it aright throughout this day 1 



ig-ld^^M. 




286 PAJLY BEAi>tNOS< Oci< IS 

^^Imtl meditate iu Hiif pre^ept^J"^ — Psalro cxix, 15* 

F^jHERE are times whea solitude is better than socktfi , 
aad Bilenee is wiser than speech. We shoiald 
tetter Christians if we were more alone, wailing' 
upon God, and gathering, throngh meditation ou His Wordf 
spirifciial strength for lahor in His service. We onght to 
mnse upon the things of Godt because toe thus get the reed nniri* 
merd (nii of them. Truth Is something like the elnster of thi 
vine ; if we would have wine from it, we must bruise it ; we 
must press and squeeze it many times. The bruisers* feet 
must eome down jojfnlly upon the bunehes, or eke the iaicU rt 
will not flow ; and they mnst well tread the grapes, or elsi 
much of the precious liquid will be wasted* So we must, by 
meditation^ trend the clusters of truth, if we would get the 
wine of oonselation therefrom. Our bodies are not supported 
by merely takiug food into the mouth, but the proeess which 
really supplies the muscle, and the nerve, and the sinew, 
and the bone, is the proeess of digestion. It is by digestion 
that the outward food becomes assimilated with the inner 
life. Our souls are not nourished merely by listening awhile 
to this, and then to that, and then to the other part of divine 
truth. Hearing, reading, marking, and learning, all require 
inwardly digesting to complete their usefulness, and the in- 
ward digesting of the truth lies for the most part in meditat- 
ing upon it. Why is it that some Christians, although they 
hear many sermons, make but slow advances in the divine 
life ? Because they neglect their closets, and do not thought- 
fully meditate on God's Word. They love the wheat, but 
they do not grind it ; they would have the corn, but they will 
not go forth into the fields to gather it ; the fruit hangs upon 
the tree, but they will not pluck it ; the water flows at their 
feet, but they will not stoop to drink it. From such folly 
deliver us, O Lord, and be this our resolve this morning, 
" I will meditate in Thy precepts." 





Oct. IS. 

giawm wMmnm 
#yBtei8, Imt pcBifta 
diTiiic gTBoe woriks it is i 
zeal hatred for aim, God 
nature's tlMRBs nercr ] 
lK>m of flesk is fleah.^ 

Tme repentaiiee hmt m ^mtimet MWM ^s mut 
When we repent of ain, ve sbbk hare i*e €i 
another upon the croaa, or it vill he bcsser i 
oar eyes npon Christ, and see oar t 
light of ffis loTe. 

Tme sorrow fiM* an is eamaitfjfjifisisCMC. Si» nMi 
say he hates sin, if he lires in it. 
the eyil of sin, not uMrely as a theorr, bat i 
as a burnt ehild dreads iie. We lUl be as mmA iMntA ^ 
it, as a man wlio has lately been st«fi|^ asd r riA oi is afiaad 
of the tiiief npon the higliway ; and we shafl ikmm Jt^-dh^a 
it in everything — not in great things only^bnt in fittiefiHaiBii, 
as men shnn little vipers as well as great snakes. TnieMwmrn^ 
ing for sin will make us very jeaknu over aor Umgae^ itm, it 
shooldsay a wrong word; we shall be rciy watekfid <6^<r e«r 
daily actions, lest in anything we offend, and eaeb aigiki w# 
shall dose the day wiA painful confessions of skorteoflrfn^ 
and each morning awaken with anxuras prayers, tha^ tkis i^m 
God would hold ns np that we may not sin w^simti Hiai« 

Sincere repentance is continual. BeUeren repent mitil 
their dying day. This dropping well is not intenttittent. 
Every other sorrow yields to time, but this dear sorrow grows 
with onr growth, and it is so sweet a bitter, that we thank 
God we are permitted to enjoy and to suffer it until we enter 
our eternal rest. 



290 DAILY aliADiiffai. Oet, 16, 

^^ Jesus saith unto lAem, dime and £?*»€." — John ixL 12. 

^^^^I^rN these words the believer is invited to a holy near- 
V 1' -1 "nesa to JeRus. ** Come and diae." implies the same 
y^^^i^e^ tabloj the same meat ; aj, and sometimes it roesos to 
sit Bide by side, and lean our head upon the Saviour's boaoia. 
It is being brought into the banquetiug-houae, where waves 
the banner of redeeming love. " Come and dine," gives us 
a vision of unioji with Jesus^ because the only food that we 
can feast upon when we dice with JestiB is Mirnself. Oli, 
what union is this I It is a depth which reason cannot fathuai, 
that we thus feed upon Jesua. " He that eateth My fiesh, 
and drinketh My blood, dwelleth in Me, and I in him/' It 
is also an invitalion to en^oj fellowship tintk tJie »aintB. CbriS' 
tiana may differ on a variety of points, but they have all oni 
ipiritual appetite ; and xf we cannot aU feel alike, we can all 
feed alike on the bread of life sent down &om heaven. At 
the table of fellowship with Jesns we are one bread and ooe 
cup. As the loving cup goes round, we pledge one another 
heartily therein. Get nearer to Jesus, and you will find your- 
self linked njore and more in spirit to all who are, like yourself, 
supported by the same heavenly manna. If we were more 
near to Jesus, we should be more near tcv^A^ another. We 
likewise see in these words the source of strength for every 
Christian. To look at Christ is to live, but for strength to 
serve Him you must " come and dine." We labor under 
much unnecessary weakness on account of neglecting this 
precept of the Master. We none of us need to put ourselves 
on low diet ; on the contrary, we should fatten on the mar- 
row and fatness of the gospel, that we may accumulate strength 
therein, and urge every power to its full tension in the Mas- 
ter's service. Thus, then, if you would realize nearness to 
Jesus, union with Jesus, love to His people, and strength from 
Jesus, " come and dine " with Him by faith. 




Oct. 17. BAILT BSADIKG8. 291 

*^And Dcsoid said in his hearty I shaU now perish one day by the 
hand of SauL" — 1 Samuel xxviL 1. 

thought of David's heart at this time was t^fahe 
thought, because he certainly had no ground for link- 
ing that God's anointing him by Samuel was intended 
to be left as an empty, unmeaning act. On no one occasion 
had the Lord deserted His servant ; he had been placed in 
perilous positions very often, but not one instance had oc- 
curred in which divine interposition had not delivered him. 
The trials to which he had been exposed had been varied ; 
they had not assumed one form only, but many — yet in 
every case He who sent the trial had also graciously ordained 
a way of escape. David could not put his finger upon any 
entry in his diary, and say of it, *' Here is evidence that the 
Lord will forsake me," for the entire tenor of his past life 
proved the very reverse. He should have argued from what 
God hixd done for him that God would be his defender still. 
But is it not just in this same way that we doubt God's help ? 
Is it not mistrust without a cause ? Have we ever had the 
shadow of a reason to doubt our Father's goodness ? Have 
not His loving-kindnesses been marvellous ? Has He once 
failed to justify oiq^ trust ? Ah, no ! our God has not left us 
at any time. We have had dark nights, but the star of love 
has shone forth amid the blackness ; we have been in stern 
conflicts, but over our head He has held aloft the shield of 
our defence. We have gone through many trials, but never 
to our detriment, always to pur advantage ; and the conclu- 
sion from our past experience is, that He who has been with 
us in six troubles will not forsake us in the seventh. What 
we have known of our faithful God proves that He will keep 
us to the end. Let us not, then, reason contrary to evi- 
dence. How can we ever be so ungenerous as to doubt our 
God? Lord, throw down the Jezebel of our unbejkrf, aud 
let the dogs devour it. ^-.. 



\ 





292 



P)ANT are ** the paths of the Lord" which " drop fat^ 
lies a," but an especial one is the path ofpraifer. No 
believer who la much in the closet will have need to 
CTj, ** My leanness, my ieannees ; woe unto mo," BtarYiug 
souls liv'e at a diBtanee from the metcy-seat, and become 
like the parched fields in times of drought. Prevalence with 
God in wrestling prayer is auro to make the believer stroug 
— if not happy. The nearest place to the gate of heaven is 
the throne of the heavenly grace. Much alone, and jou will 
have maeh assurance ; little alone with Jeaus, your religion 
will be ihallow, polluted with many doubts and fears, and 
not sparkling with the joy of the Lord. Since the soul- 
enriching path of prayer is open to the very weakest saiut ; 
since no high attainmenta are required ; since yon are not 
bidden to come because you are an advanced saint, but freely 
invited if you be a saint at all ; see to it, dear readery that 
you are often in the way of private devotion. Be much on 
your knees, for so Elijah drew the rain upon famished Is- 
raePs fields. There is another especial path dropping with 
fatness to those who walk therein : it is the secret walk of 
communion. Oh ! the delights of fellowship with Jesus ! 
Earth hath no words which can set forth the holy calm of a 
soul leaning on Jesus' bosom. Few Christians imderstand 
it : they live in the lowlands, and seldom climb to the-top of 
Nebo ; they live in the outer court ; they enter not the holy 
place ; they take not up the privilege of priesthood. At a 
distance they see the sacrifice, but they sit not down with 
the priest to eat thereof, and to enjoy the fat of the burnt 
off'ering. But, reader, sit thou ever under the shadow of 
Jesus ; come up to that palm tree, and take hold of the branches 
thereof; let thy Beloved be unto thee as the apple tree among 
the trees of the wood, and thou shalt be satisfied as with 
marrow and fatness. Jesus, visit us with Thy Balvation. 




Oct. 19. DAILY EEADINGS, 293 

"Babes in Christ J^ — 1 Corinthians iii. 1. 

'^RE you mourning, believer, because you are so weak 
in the divine life ? because your faith is so little, your 
love so feeble? Cheer up, for you have cauate for 
gratitude. Eemember, that in some things you are equal to 
the greatest and most full-grown Christian. You are as much 
bought with blood as he is. You are as much an adopted 
child of God as any other believer. An infant is as truly a 
child of its parents as is the full-grown man. You are as 
completely justified, for your justification is not a thing of 
degrees : your little faith has made you clean every whit. 
You have as much right to the precious things of the covenant 
as the most advanced believers, for your right to covenant 
mercies lies not in your growth, but in the covenant itself; 
and your faith in Jesus is not the measure, but the token of 
your inheritance in Him. You are as rich as the richest, if 
not in enjoyment, yet in real possession. The smallest star 
that gleams is set in heaven ; the faintest ray of light has 
affinity with the great orb of day. In the family register of 
glory the small and the great are written with the same pen. 
You are as dear to your Father's heart as the greatest in 
the family. Jesus is very tender over you. You are like 
the smoking flax. A rougher spirit would say, " Put out that 
emokin'g flax ; it fills the room with an off^ensive odor I " but 
the smoking flax He will not quench. You are like a braised 
reed ; and any less tender hand than that of the Chief Mu- 
sician would tread upon you, or throw you aw%, but He will 
never break the bruised reed. Instead of being downcast 
by reason of what you are, you should triumph in Christ. 
Am I but little in Israel ? Yet in Christ I am made to sit in 
heavenly places. Am I poor in faith ? Still in Jesus I am 
beir of all things. Though '* less than nothing I can boast, 
and vanity confess," yet if the root of the matter be in me, I 
will rejoice in the Lord, and glory in the God of my salvation. 
25* 




294 DiJI^T EEADixas. Oct* 20.* 

" dmw up inio Him in all tilings" — Ephesiaas i\\ 15. 




?;ANy CliristiaDs remain stunted and dwarfed in spir- 
it itmd thingji, so as to present the saioe appearcmce 
year after jear. Ko up -springing of advanced and 
refined feeling la manifest in them. They emst^ but do not 
^*' grow up into Him in all things.'^ But should we rest con- 
tent with being in the •-* green blade /^ when we might ad- 
vance to "the ear," and eventually ripen into the '' foil corn 
in the ear " ? Shouid we be satisfied to believe in Christ, 
and to say, ** I am safe," without wishing to know in our own 
experience more of the fulness whieh is to be found in Him ? 
It should notbeao^ we should, as good traders in heaven*a 
market, covet to be euriehed in the knowledge of Jesus. It 
is all very well to keep other men's vineyards , bnt we mmt 
not neglect our own spiritual growth and ripening. Why 
should it always be winter time in our hearts } Wo must 
have our seed time, it is true ; but for a spring time — 
yea, a summer season, whieh shall give promise of an early 
harvest ! If we would ripen in grace, we must live near to 
Jesus — in His presence — ripened by the sunshine of His 
smiles. We must hold sweet communion with Him. We 
must leave the distant view of His face, and come near, as 
John did, and pillow our heads on His breast ; then shall we 
find ourselves advancing in holiness, in love, in faith, in 
hope — yea, in every precious gift. As the sun rises first 
on mountain-tops, and gilds them with his light, and presents 
one of the nif&t charming sights to the eye of the traveller, 
so is it one of the most delightful contemplations in the 
world to mark the glow of the Spirit's light on the head of 
some saint, who has risen up in spiritual stature, like Saul, 
above his fellows, till, like a mighty Alp, snow-capped, he re- 
flects first among the chosen the beams of the Sun of Righte- 
ousness, and bears the sheen of His effulgence high aloft for all 
to see, and seeing it, to ^0T\i^\i\ft^^^i)ii^^^\iV5.\vis in heaven. 




Oct. 21. DAILY HEADINGS. 295 

" The love of Christ constraineth t«." — Matthew v. 47. 

30W much owest thou unto my Lord ? Has He ever 
done anything for thee ? Has He forgiven thy sins ? 
Has He covered thee with a robe of righteousness ? 
Has He set thy feet upon a rock ? Has He established thy 
goings ? Has He prepared heaven for thee ? Has He pre- 
pared thee for heaven ? Has He written thy name in His 
book of life ? Has He given thee countless blessings ? Has 
He laid up for thee a store of mercies, which eye hath not 
seen nor ear heard ? Then do something for Jesus worthy 
of His love. Give not a mere wordy oflfering to a dying Re- 
deemer. How will you feel when your Master comes, if you 
have to confess that you did nothing for Him, but kept your 
love shut up, like a stagnant pool, neither flowing forth to 
His poor or to His work. Out on such love as that ! What 
do men think of a love which never shows itself in action ? 
Why, they say, " Open rebuke is better than secret love." 
Who will accept a love so weak that it does not actuate you 
to a single deed of self-denial, of generosity, of heroism, or 
aeal ? Think how He has loved you, and given Himself for 
you ! Do you know the power of that love ? Then let it be 
like a rushing mighty wind to your soul, to sweep out the 
clouds of your worldliness, and clear away the mists of sin. 
** For Christ's sake " — be this the tongue of fire- that shall sit 
upon you : "for Christ's sake " — be this the divine rapture, 
the heavenly afflatus to bear you aloft from earth, the divine 
spirit that shall make you bold as lions and swift as eagles 
in your Lord's service. Love should give wings to the feet 
of service, and strength to the arms of labor. Fixed on God 
with a constancy that is not to be shaken, resolute to honor 
Him with a determination that is not to be turned aside, and 
pressing on with an ardor never to be wearied, let us \nani- 
fest the constraints of love to Jesus. May the divine load- 
stone draw us heavenward towards itBeVf \ 




HAILT EEAUTX OS. OcL 32,. ] 

I ^|B3S|BIS setH^nt^ Is a bodj of didoitj in miniature* He 

who uuderiitaiids its meaniog 18 a tbe^lDgian, ani li4B 
who can dive into its fulnei^s is a truo ma^t^r In Ts-^ 
raeL It is a coiideusiitiou of the glorious message of salva* 
tjon wHeh wafi delivered to us in Christ Jesus our Hedeemer^ 
TLe nenso hinges upon the word ** freelj." TMs is the glo- 
rioua, the suitable* the divine way bj which lore streamf 
IVom heaven to earth, a gpontaneoiiH love flowing forth t©, 
thoio who neither deserTed it, purchased it, Qor songht afte 
U, It IK, iiideod, the onij way m which God can love wm 
li wo are. The text i^ a death-blow to aJl sorts of fitn€!38 li 
'*I wiD love thein freett^" Now, if there were any fitnesi 
necoBsary In us, then He would not love us freely ; at least, 
this would bo a mitigation and a drawback to the freenc 
of it. But it stands, " I will love you fredyJ'^ Wo com^ 
plain, **Lord, my heart is so hard/* "I will love yonJ 
freely." '* But I do not feel my need of Christ as I could 
wish." ** I will not love you because you feel your need : I 
will love you freely." *' But I do not feel that softening of 
spirit which I could desire." Kemember, the softening of 
spirit is not a condition, for there are no conditions ; the 
covenant of grace has no conditionality whatever; so that 
we, without any fitness, may venture upon the promise of 
God which was made to us in Christ Jesus, when He said, 
•' He that believeth on Him is not condemned." It is 
blessed to know that the grace of God is free to us at all 
times, without preparation, without fitness, without money, 
and without price ! "I will love them freely," These words 
invite backsliders to return : indeed, the text was specially 
written for such — "I will heal their backsliding ; I will love 
theni irccly," Backslider ! surely the generosity of the 
promise will at once break your heart, and you will return 

|||tt^_syQk your injured Father's face. 




Oet 23. DAILY BEABIKGS. 297 

" Wm ye aUo go away^^ — John vl 67. 

have forsaken Christ, and have walked no more 
with Him ; but what reason have you to make a 
change f Has there been any reason for it in ^ 
p€Htf Has not Jesus proved Himself all-sufficient? He 
appeals to yon this morning — ''Have I been. a wilderness 
unto you ? " When your soul has simply trusted Jesus, have 
you ever been confounded ? Have you not up till now found 
your Lord to be a compassionate and generous friend to 
you, and has not simple faith in Him given you all the peace 
your spirit could desire ? Can you so much as dream of a 
better friend than He has been to you ? Then change not 
the old and tried for new and false. As for the present^ can 
that compel you to leave Christ ? When we are hard beset 
with this world, or with the severer trials within the Church, 
we find it a most blessed thing to pillow our head upon the 
bosom of our Saviour. This is the joy we have to-day, that- 
we are saved in Him, and if this joy be satisfying, wherefore 
should we think of changing ? Who barters gold for dross ? 
We will not forswear the sun till we find a better light, nor 
leave our Lord until a brighter lover shall appear ; and, since 
this can never be, we will hold Him with a grasp inmiortal, 
and bind His name as a seal upon our arm. As for the 
future^ can you suggest anything which can arise that shall 
render it necessary for you to mutiny, or desert the old flag 
to serve under another captain ? We think not. If life be 
long. He changes not. If we are poor, what better than to 
have Christ, who can make us rich ? When we are sick, 
what more do we want than Jesus to make our bed in our 
sickness? When we die — is it not written that "neither 
death, nor life, nor things present, nor things to come, shall 
be able to separate us from the love of God, which i§ in 
Christ Jesus our Lord " ? We say with Peter, " Lord, to 
whom shall we go ? " 




" Th€ trtes nfiht Lcrd artfM a/^mp.*^ — Psalm cir, 16. 

■ . — ^ . ^ — ^ .^ — ^ , „^ 

P;nHOUT Bap the tree cannot flouriBh, or even exist. 
Vitality 19 essential to a Christian. There mijst be 
life — a vital principle infused into ue by God tLe 
Holy Ghost — or we cannot be trees of the Lord, The 
mere name of being a Christian is but a dead thing | we must 
be filled with the spirit of divine life. This life is mr/BteriovM. 
Wo do not nnderstand the cireulation of the sap — by what 
forco it riseSj and by what power it descends again. So the 
life within us is a sacred mjstery. Regeiieration is wrought 
by the Holy Ghost entering into man and becoming man*e 
life ; and thii divine life in a believer afterwards feeds upon 
the flesh and blood of Christ, and Is thus eustained by diviae 
food ; but whence it cometh and whither it goetli^ who shaU 
explain to us ? What a secret thing the sap is ! The roots 
go searching through the soil with their little spongioles, but 
we cannot see them suck out the various gases, or transmute 
the mineral into the vegetable : this work is done down iu the 
dark. Our root is Christ Jesus, and our life is hid in him : 
this is the secret of the Lord. The radix of the Christian 
life is as secret as the life itself. How permanently active is 
the sap in the cedar ! In the Christian, the divine life is 
always full of energy — not always in fruit-bearing, but in 
inward operations. The believer's graces are not every one 
of them in constant motion, but his life never ceases to pal- 
pitate within. He is not always working for God, but his 
heart is always living upon Him. As the sap manifests itself 
in producing the foliage and fruit of the tree^ so with a truly 
healthy Christian ; his grace is externally manifested in his 
walk and conversation. If you talk with him, he cannot 
help speaking about Jesus. If you notice his actions, you 
will see that he has been with Jesus. He has so much sap 
within, that it must fill his conduct and convcr3ation with 
Ufe. 




Oct. 25. PATLY KEADINGS. 299 

^ Fw the truWs sake which dwdleth in us, and shall he wUh U8 
forever y — 2 John 2. 

TOE let the truth of God obtain an entrance into thi 
human heart, and subdue the whole man unto itself 
no power, human or infernal, can dislodge it. We en- 
tertain it not as a guest, but as the master of the house — this 
is a Christian necessity ; he is no Christian who doth not thus 
believe. Those who feel the vital power of the gospel, and 
know the might of the Holy Ghost as He opens, applies, and 
seals the Lord's Word, would sooner be torn to pieces than 
be rent away from the gospel of their salvation. What a 
thousand mercies are wrapped up in the assurance that the 
truth will be with us forever ; will be our living support, our 
dying comfort, our rising song, our eternal glory ! This is 
Christian 'privilege; without it our faith were little worth. 
Some truths we outgrow and leave behind, for they are but 
rudiments and lessons for beginners ; but we cannot thus deal 
with Divine truth, for though it is sweet food for babes, it is 
in the highest sense strong meat for men. The truth that 
we are sinners, is painfully with us to humble and make 
us watchful ; the more blessed truth that whosoever believeth 
on the Lord Jesus shall be saved, abides with us as our hope 
and joy. Experience, so far from loosening our hold of the 
doctrines of grace, has knit us to them more and more firmly; 
our grounds and motives for believing are now more strong, 
more numerous than ever, and we have reason to expect that 
it will be so till in death we clasp the Saviour in our arms. 

Wherever this abiding love of truth can be discovered, we 
are bound to exercise our love. No narrow circle can contain 
our gracious sympathies ; wide as the election of grace must 
be our communion of heart. Much of error may be mingled 
with truth received ; let us war with the error, but still love 
the brother for the measure of truth which we see in Him ; 
above all, let us love and spread the truth ourselves. 



flOi DAIDT HEAl>TXGi. Oct. 30* 

** I wiU praise l%ee, L&ird." — PSalm ix. 1. 




lAISE should alwaya follow answered pray ei*, as the 
mist of earth's gratitude rises wlico the sun of heaven's 
love waniis the ground. Hath the Lord been gra- 
cious to thee, and inclined his ear to the voice of thy suppli- 
cation ? Then praise Him as long as thou livest. Let the 
ripe fruit drop upon the fertile soil from which it drew its 
life. Deny not a &ong to Him who hath answered thy prayer 
and given thee the desire of thy heart. To be silent over 
God's mercies is to incur the guilt of ingratitude ; it is to aot 
as hasely m tho nine lepers, who, after they had been cured 
of their leprosy, returned not to give thanks unto the healing 
Lord, To forget to praise G^od, is to refuse to benefit our- 
selves ; for praise, like prayer, is one great means of promot- 
lug the growth of the spiritual life. It helps to remove our 
burdens, to excite our hope, to increase our faith. It is a 
healthful and invigorating eseroise, wMcL quickens tlie poise 
of the believer, and nerves bira for fresh enterprises in his 
Master's service. To bless God for mercies received is tiU^ 
the way to benefit our fellow-men ; *' the humble shall hear 
thereof and be glad." Others, who have been in like circum- 
stances, shall take comfort if we can say, " Oh ! magnify the 
Lord with me, and let us exalt His name together ; t^is poor 
man cried, and the Lord heard him.'* Weak hearts will be 
strengthened, and drooping saints will be revived, as they 
listen to our " songs of deliverance." Their doubts and 
fears will be rebuked, as we teach and admonish one another 
in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs. They too shall 
** sing in the ways of the Lord," when they hear us magnify 
His holy name. Praise is the most heavenly of Christian 
duties. The angels pray not, but they cease not to praise 
both day and night ; and the redeemed, clothed in white 
robes, with palm-branches in their hands, are never weary 
of singing the new song, " Worthy is the Lamb." 




Oct. 31, DAILY HEADINGS. 305 

" Benew a right spirit witJiin me" — Psalm K. 10. 

BACKSLIDER, if there be a spark of Ufe left in 
him, will groan after restoration. In this renewal 
the same exercise of grace is required as at' our con- 
version. We needed repentance then ; we certainly need it 
now. We wanted faith that we might come to Christ at 
first ; only the like grace can bring us to Jesus now. We 
wanted a word from the Most High, a word from the lip of 
the loving One, to end our fears then ; we shall soon dis- 
cover, when under a sense of present sin, that we need it 
now. No man can be renewed^thout as real and true a mani- 
festation of the Holy Spirit's energy as he felt at first, be- 
cause the work is as great, and flesh and blood are as much 
in the way now as ever they were. Let thy personal weak- 
ness, O Christian, be an argument to make thee pray ear- 
nestly to thy God for help. Remember, David, when he felt 
himself to be powerless, did not fold his arms or close his 
lips, but he hastened to the mercy-seat with, ** Renew a right 
spirit within me." Let, not the doctrine that you, unaided, 
can do nothing, make you sleep ; but let it be a goad in your 
side to drive you with an awful earnestness to Israel's strong 
Helper. that you may have grace to plead with God, as 
though you pleaded for your very life — "Lord, renew a 
right spirit within me." He who sincerely prays to God to 
do this, will prove his honesty by using the means through 
which God works. Be much in prayer ; live much upon the 
Word of God ; kill the lusts which have driven your Lord 
from you; be careful to watch over the future uprisings of 
sin. The Lord has his own appointed ways ; sit by the way- 
side, and you will be ready when He passes by. Continue in 
all those blessed ordinances which will foster and nourish 
your dying graces ; and, knowing that all the power must 
proceed from Him, cease not to cry, *' Renew a right spirit 

within me." 

26* 



i 



^rc 

^%^ 



** Tht Church in thy ftoiwc." — Phflemon 2. 

I there a Church in this bouaa ? Axe parents, clul- 
dreii, friends, servants, all members of it? or are 
some still uuconyertod? Let us panee here, and M 
the question go round — Am la tn^mher of the Church m 
this house f How would father's heart leap for joy, aad 
mothcr*s eyes fill with holy tearsj if from the eldest to the 
youngest all were eared ! Let us pray for this great mercy 
uutil the Lord iihall grant it to us. Probably it had been the 
dearest object of Philemon's desires to have all his household 
gaved ; bat it wae not at first granted him in its fulne&B. He 
had a wicked serYaat» OnesimuSj who, haying wronged him, 
rail away from his service. His master's prayers followed 
him^ and at last, as God would have it, Onesimus was led to 
hear Paul p reach j his heart was touched, and he returned to 
Philemon, not only to be a faithful servant, but a brother 
beloved, adding another member to the Church in Philemon's 
house. Is there an unconverted servant or child absent this 
morning ? Make special supplication that such may, on their 
retui;n to their home, gladden all hearts with good news of 
what grace has done ! Is there one present ? Let him par- 
take in the same earnest entreaty. 

If there be such a Church in our house, let us order it well, 
and let all act as in the sight of God. Let us move in the 
common affairs of life with studied holiness, diligence, kind- 
ness, and integrity. More is expected of a Church than of 
an ordinary household ; family worship must, in such a case, 
be more devout and hearty ; internal love must be more wanh 
and unbroken, and external conduct must be more sanctified 
and Christ-like. We need not fear that the smallness of our 
number will put us out of the list of Churches, for the Holy 
Spirit has here enrolled a family-church in the inspired book 
of remembrance. ' As a Church let us now draw nigh to the 
reatHead of the one Church universal, and let us beseech Him 
give us grace to shine before men to the glory of His name. 




Nov. d. DAILY BEADINOS. ZOj 

**Iam the Lord, I change noV — Malachi iii. 6, 

^T is well for us that, amidst all the variableness of 
life, there is One whom change cannot affect ; One 
whose heart can never alter, and on whose brow mu- 
tability can make no furrows. All things else have changed 
^•^ all things are changing. The sun itself grows dim with 
age ; ihe world is waxing old ; the folding up of the worn- 
out vesture has commenced ; the heavens ^nd earth must soon 
pass away ; they shall perish, they shall wax old as doth a 
garment ; but there is One who only hath immortality, of 
whose years there is no end, and in whose person there is no 
change. The delight which the mariner feels, when, after 
having been tossed about for many a day, he steps again upon 
ihe solid shore, is the satisfaction of a Christian, when, amidst 
all the changes of this troublous life, he rests the foot of his 
faith upon this truth — *' I am the Lord, I change not" 

The stability which the anchor gives the ship when it has 
at last obtained a hold-fast, is like that which the Christian's 
hope affords him when it fixes itself upon this glorious truth. 
With God " is no variableness, neither shadow of turning." 
Whatever His attributes were of old, they are now; His 
power, His wisdom, His justice. His truth, are alike un- 
' changed. He has ever been the refuge of His people, their 
stronghold in the day of trouble, and He is their sure helper 
still. He is unchanged in His love. He has loved His peo- 
ple with *' an everlasting love ; " He loves them now as much 
as ever He did, and when all earthly things shall have melted 
in the last conflagration. His love will still wear ike dew of 
its youth. Precious is the assurance that He changes not ! 
The wheel of providence revolves, but its axle is eternal love. 

" Death and change are busy ever ; 
Man decays and ages move ; 
But His mercy waneth never ; 
God is wisdom, God is lov9.'' 



D-UJ-Y KEA0IKO3, NoT* I. 



* * Beh old^ h tt prayeih, ^ —^ Acts ix, 1 1 , 




j^RAYERS are instantly noticed in Eeaven, The mo- 

(Ji ment Saul began to pray the Lord heard him. Here 

IB comfort for the distrcsaed but prajing sauL Of- 

1 4entimGi a poor broken-hearted ooe bends his knee, but can 

konlj utter his wailiug in the language of sighs and tears ; 

Wet that groan has made all the harps of heaven tm^iU with 

[ mufiio ; that tear h^ been caught bj God, and tieasiired ia 

the lachrjinatory of heaven. " Thou putto&t my tears into 

Thy bottle/' implies that tlxey are caught as they flow. The 

imppliani whose fears prevent his words will be well under* 

latood by the Moat High. He may only look up with misty 

leye ; but *' prayer ia the falling of a teat,"^ Tears are the 

Ldiamonds of heaven ; sighs are a part of the mugic of Jeho* 

[•Tiih's court, and are numbered with *^ the sublimest strains 

' that reach the Majesty on high/' Think not that your prayer » 

however weak or trembling, will be unregarded. Jaeob's 

ladder is lofty, but our prayer shall lean upon the angel of 

the covenant, and so climb its starry rounds. Our God not 

only hears prayer, but also loves to hear it. " He forgetteth 

not the cry of the humble.'' True, He regards not higk looks 

and lofty words ; He cares not for the pomp and pageantry 

of kings ; He listens not to the swell of martial music ; He 

regards not the triumph and pride of man ; but wherever 

there is a heart big with sorrow, or a lip qnivering with 

agony, or a deep groan, or a penitential sigh, the heart of 

Jehovah is open ; He marks it down in the registry of His 

memory ; He puts our prayers, like rose leaves, between the 

pages of His book of remembrance, and when the volume is 

opened at last, there shall be a precious fragrance springing 

up Iherefrom. 

" Faith asks no signal from the skies, 
To show that prayers accepted rise ; 
Our Priest is in His holy place, 
And answers from the throne of grace." 




Not. 4. DAILY BEADIV68. 809 

^For My strength is made perfect in weakness." — 2 Cor. xii. 9. 

PRIMARY qualification for serving God with any 
amount of success, and for doing God*s work well and 
triumphantly, is a sense of our own weakness. When 
God's warrior marches forth to battle, strong in his own 
might; when he boasts, ''I know that I shall conquer; my 
own right arm and my conquering sword shall get unto me 
the victory," — defeat is not far distant. God will not go 
forth with that man who marches in his own strength. He 
who reckoneth on victory thus, has reckoned wrongly, for 
** it is not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith 
the Lord of hosts." They who go forth to fight, boasting 
of their prowess, shall return with their gay banners trailed 
in the dust, and their armor stained with disgrace. Those 
who serve God must serve Him in His own way, and in His 
strength, or He will never accept their service. That which 
man doth, unaided by divine strength, God can never own. 
The mere firuits of the earth He casteth away ; Ue will only 
reap that corn, the seed of which was sown from heaven, 
watered by grace, and ripened by the sun of divine love. 
God will empty out all that thou hast before He will put His 
own into thee ; He will first clean out thy granaries before 
He will fill them with the finest of the wheat. The river of 
God is full of water ; but not one drop of it flows from earthly 
springs. God will have no strength used in His battles but 
the strength which He Himself imparts. Are you mourning 
over your own weakness } Take courage, for there must be 
a consciousness of weakness before the Lord will give thee 
victory. Your emptiness is but the preparation for your 
being filled, and your casting down is but the making ready 
for your lifting up. 

"When I am weak, then am I strong; 
Grace is my shield, and Christ my song." 



310 



DAILY BEADIK68. 



Nov. S, 




" A^D weapon thai i^Jhrmedagaiiiit ihte ikuil prosper -^^ — Isu. lir, 17* 

!^vHI3 ilaj is notable in EDgliBh history for three gT€at 
deliveraooea wrought by God for ua. 

The lirat, the total destruction of the Spanish Ar- 
mada, bj the breath of the Almighty, in 1588, 

**Whefi iwiglity naTies from afar, 
To Btitam Krafted, Hoating wur, 
His breath dispi^rsesj tUem all with eaecj 
And iaunk their terrors m the seas." 

On this day the plot of the Papists to destroy owe Houde 
of Parliament was diacoveredi 1605, 

**Wliile for our princes tkey prepate 
_ In caverns deep a btimiiig en are, 

He shot from heaven a pi«?rcmg ray, 
And the dark treachery broi^ght to day." 

fe*, thirdly, to-day ia the anniversary of the landiog of 
King William HI. at Torbay, by which the hope of Popish as- 
cendeacj was quashed, and religious liberty was secured, 1688. 
This day ought to be celebrated, not by the saturnalia of 
striplings, but by the songs of saints. Our Puritan fore- 
fathers most devoutly made it a special time of thanksgiving; 
there is extant a record of the annual sermons preached by 
Matthew Henry on this day. Our Protestant feeling, and 
our love of liberty, should make us regard its anniversary 
with holy gratitude. Let our hearts and lips exclaim, ** We 
have heard with our ears, and our fathers have told ufi, the 
wondrous things which Thou didst in their day, and in the 
old time before them." Thou hast made this nation the 
home of the gospel ; and when the foe has risen against her, 
Thou hast shielded her. Thrice repeated songs" for thrice 
repeated deliverances. Grant us more and more a hatred 
of Antichrist, and hasten on the day of her entire extinction. 
Till then and ever, we believe the promise, " No weapon 
that is formed against thee shall prosper." 




Nov. 6. DAILY SEADIK08. 311 

"lunUpour water upon him that is thirsty J" — Isaiah xliv. 3. 

gHEN a believer has fallen into a low, sad state of 
feeling, he often tries to lift himself oat of it by 
chastening himself with dark and doleful fears. Such 
is not the way to rise from the dust, but to continue in it. 
As well chain the eagle's wing to make it mount, as doubt 
in order to increase our grace. It is not the law, but the 
gospel, which saves the seeking soul at first ; and it is not a 
legal bondage, but gospel liberty, which can restore the faint- 
ing believer afterwards. Slavish fear brings not back the 
backslider to God, but the sweet wooings of love allure him 
to Jesus' bosom. Are you this morning thirsting for the 
living God, and unhappy because you cannot find Him to 
the delight of your heart ? Have you lost the joy of religion, 
and is this your prayer, ^ Restore unto me the joy of Thy 
salvation " ? Are you conscious, also, that you are barren, 
like the dry ground ? that you are not bringing forth the 
fruit unto God which He has a right to expect of you ? that 
you are not so useftd in the Church, or in the world, as your 
heart desires to be ? Then here is exactly the promise which 
you need : •' I will pour water upon him that is thirsty." 
You shall receive the grace you so much require, and you 
shall have it to the utmost reach of your needs. Water re- 
freshes the thirsty: you shall be refreshed; your desires 
shall be gratified. Water quickens sleeping vegetable life : 
your life shall be quickened by fresh grace. Water swells 
the buds, and makes the fruits ripen : you shall have fructi- 
fying grace ; you shall be made fruitful in the ways of God. 
Whatever good quality there is in divine grace, you shall 
enjoy it to the full. All the riches of divine grace you shall 
receive in plenty ; you shall be, as it were, drenched with 
it : and as sometimes the meadows become flooded by the 
bursting rivers, and the fields are turned into pools, so shall 
you be — the thirsty land shall be springs of water. 




mb^dKNild 
love «s to 
**IkmTe gnyen 
TW BUM is tha«, 




^ 



9ti wncssoL TQ«nL lae jTfMff «f ^^^ 

inn xJa^ » oiic a^ : - 1 ^sre giaTem tice.^ See tke fofaiess 
«f ckk ! I kare grsTe& t^ posoa, tkme uMge, Ikj ase, 
tkj tmrnmeoaees, ^j ass, tkj (^^qrtadoiis, tkj weaknesses, 
tbj vasts, tkj works ; I hare ^raren tk^t^ eToythin^ aboat 
th^^, ali that eoneems thee; I bare put thee altogether 
iln^rh. Wilt thoa erer say again that thj God hath forsaken 
fSf when He ha« graren thee upon His own palms ? 




Nov. 8. DAILY BEADINGS. 813 

" As ye Tiave received Christ Jesus the Lord" — Col. ii. 6. 

life of faith is represented as receiving — -_ an act 
which implies the very opposite of anything like merit. 
It is simply the acceptance of a gift. As the earth 
drinks in the rain, as the sea receives the streams, as night 
accepts light from the stars, so we, giving nothing, partake 
freely of the grace of G-od. The saints are not, by nature, 
wells, or streams ; they are but cisterns into which the living 
water flows ; they are empty vessels into which God pours 
His salvation. The idea of receiving implies a sense of real" 
ization, making the matter a reality. One cannot very well 
receive a shadow ; we receive that which is substantial : so is 
it in the life of faith, Christ becomes real to us. While we are 
without faith, Jesus is a mere name to us — a person who lived 
a long while ago, so long ago that His life is only a history 
to us now ! By an act of faith Jesus becomes a real person 
in the consciousness of our heart. But receiving also means 
grasping, or getting possession of. The thing which I receive 
becomes my own : I appropriate to myself that which is given. 
When I receive Jesus, He becomes my Saviour, so mine that 
neither life nor death shall be able to rob me of Him. AH 
this it is to receive Christ — to take Him as 6od*s free gift ; 
to realize Him in my heart, and to appropriate Him as mine. 
Salvation may be described as the blind receiving sight, 
the deaf receiving hearing, the dead receiving life ; but we 
have not only received these blessings, we have received 
Chbist Jestjs Himself. It is true that He gave us life from 
the dead. He gave us pardon of sin ; He gave us imputed 
righteousness. These are all precious things, but we are not 
content with them ; we have received Christ Himself. The 
Son of God has been poured into us, and we have received 
Him, and appropriated Him. What a heartful Jesus must 
be^ for heaven itself cannot contain Him ! 
27 




J<*sns taSi» Lfiri. «<} -vrsik t^ iEi Sk : "^ fxuag fg i c in tke same 
wsT at w^^ j^ hsrr^^ hi-xriL, sb^ a^ st ike first Ckiisl Jesos 
w** i&fr ttnK 'if jivnr ffcTifr.. die «»:»rfe of josr Bfe, tke prin- 
«?fpl* «f j*s«r a«£oa- aad tie )»?j of tow spirit, so let Him be 



xhe same tiH hf-f^ ei^ : tlte sase wben tou walk tkroagli the 
raHej of the sliadow of deatiu and enter into the joy and the 
remain for tlie people of God. O Holj Spirit, 
I to obey tills heartily prec^t. 





W^V. 10. DAILY beadh^gs. 815 

" The eternal Ood is thy refuge " ^^Deut xxxiii. 27. 

|HE word refuge may be translated "mansion," or 
" abiding-place," which gives the thought that Ood is 
our ahodej our home. There is a fulness and sweetness 
in the metaphor, for dear to our hearts is our home, although 
it be the humblest cottage, or the scantiest garret ; and dear- 
er far is our blessed God, in whom we live, and move, and 
have our being. It is at home that we feel safe : we shut 
the world out and dwell in quiet security. So when we are 
with our God we "fear no evil." He is our shelter and 
retreat, our abiding refuge. At home, we take our rest ; it 
is there we find repose after the fatigue and toil of the day. 
And so our hearts find rest in God, when, wearied with life's 
conflict, we turn to Him, and our soul dwells at ease. At 
home also, we let our hearts loose ; we are not afraid of being 
misunderstood, nor of our words being misconstrued. So 
when we are with God we can commune freely with him, lay- 
ing open all our hidden desires ; for if the " secret of the 
Lord is with them that fear Him," the secrets of them that 
fear Him ought to be, and must be, with their Lord. Home, 
too, is the place of our truest and 'purest happiness ; and it is 
in God that our hearts find their deepest delight. We have 
joy in Him which far surpasses all other joy. It is also for 
home that we work and lahor. The thought of it gives strength 
to bear the daily burden, and quickens the fingers to perform 
the task ; and in this sense we may also say that God is our 
home. Love to Him strengthens us. We think of Him in 
the person of His dear Son ; and a glimpse of the suffering 
face of the Redeemer constrains us to labor in His cause. 
We feel that we must work, for we have brethren yet to be 
saved, and we have our Father's heart to make glad by bring- 
ing home His wandering sons ; we would fill with holy mirth 
the sacred family among whom we dwell. Happy are those 
who have thus the God of Jacob for their refuge I 




316 HAixT BJc^DCfGs. Not* lU 

** Und^itimik Oft li# mtrl^gtin^ arms.*' — Dent. xxxHL 27. 

^OD — the eternal God— is Himself our wuppori il dt 
I) time^f and especially wbeti we mre sioktiig in deep 
trouble. There are seasons when the Christisa sinht 
very hm in Anmiimtion, Under a deep sense of his great 
sinfulness, he ts bumbled before God tiU he scarcely knoim 
how to prnyH, beeanse Le appears, in his own sights so worth- 
leitf^. Well, child of Ood, remember that when thou art at 
thj worst and lowest, yet *' nnderneatii '* thee *' are the ever* 
lasting arms," fim may drag thee ever bo low, bnt Christ'i 
great atonement ts still under aU. Yon may have descended 
into tho deeps« hut you cannot have fallen so low as *"*• tho 
uttermost;'^ and to the uttermost He saves. Again, tha 
OhriBtian sometimes sinks very deeply in mre trial from mth* 
out. Every earthly prop is cut away. What then ? StiU 
underneath him are '*■ the everlasting arras," He cannot faU 
§0 deep in distress and affliction but what the covenant grace 
of an ever- faithful God wjjl still encircle him. The Christian 
maybe sinking under trouble from within through fierce con- 
flict, but even then he cannot be brought so low as to be be- 
yond the reach of the ** everlasting arms" — they are under- 
neath him ; and, while thus sustained, all Satan's efforts to 
harm avail nothing. 

This assurance of support is a comfort to any weary hA 
earnest worker in the service of God. It implies a promise of 
strength for each day, grace for each need, and power for each 
duty. And, further, when death comes, the promise shall still 
hold good. When we stand in the midst of Jordan, we shall be 
able to say with David, ** I will fear no evil, for Thou art with 
me." We shall descend into the grave, but we shall go no lower, 
for the eternal arms prevent our further fall. All through life, 
and at its close, we shall be upheld by the " everlasting arms " 
— arms that neither flag nor lose their strength, for " the 
everlasting God fainteth not, neither is weary.*' 




Nov. 12. DAILY HEADINGS. 817 

« The tmal of ymr faith," — 1 Peter i. 7. 

gAITH untried may be true faith, but it is sure to 
be little faith, and it is likely to remain dwarfish so 
long as it is without trials. Faith never prospers 
so well as when all things are against her ; tempests are 
her trainers, and lightnings are her illuminators. When 
a calm' reigns on the sea, spread the sails as you will, the 
ship moves not to its harbor ; for, on a slumbering ocean, 
the keel sleeps too. Let the winds rush howling forth, and 
let the waters lift up themselves, then, though the vessel may 
rock, and her deck may be washed with waves, and her mast 
may creak under the pressure of the ftdl and swelling sail, it 
is then that she makes headway towards her desired haven. 
No flowers wear so lovely a blue as those which grow at the 
foot of the frozen glacier ; no stars gleam so brightly as those 
which glisten in the polar sky ; no water tastes so sweet as 
that which springs amid the desert sand ; and no faith is so 
precious as that which lives and triumphs in adversity. Tried 
faith brings experience. You cogld not have believed your 
own weakness had you not been compelled to pass through the 
rivers ; and you would never have known God's strength had 
you not been supported amid the water-floods. Faith in- 
creases in solidity, assurance, and intensity, the more it is 
exercised with tribulation. Faith is precious, and its trial is 
precious too. 

Let not this, however, discourage those who are young in 
faith. You will have trials enough without seeking them ; 
the foU portion will be measured out to you in due season. 
Meanwhile, if you cannot yet claim the result of long experi- 
ence, thank God for what grace you have ; praise Him for 
that degree of holy confidence whereunto you have attained ; 
walk according to that rule, and you shall yet have more and 
more of the blessing of God, till your faith shall remove 

mountains and conquer impossibilities. 
27. 




i 



lOW did you begin to bear fi-uit ? It was when yoti 
came to Jettus and cast yonrself cm His great 
atonement, and rested on His finished righteonsness. 
Ah, what fruit yon had then 1 Do yon remember those early 
^^B f Then I iodccd, the vine flourished, the tender grapei 
*il{|>eared, the pomegranates budded forth, and the beds of 
Bpices gave forth their smell* Have you declined since then ? 
If you have, we charge you to remember that time of love, 
and repent, and do thy first works- Be most in those £7igage~ 
ments i/jhich you have experimenialhf proved to draw you near* 
est to Christ, be can so it is from Him that all yonr fruits pro- 
ceed* Any holy exercise which will bring you to Him wHJ 
help you to bear fruit. The sun is» no doubt, a great worker 
in fruit-ereating among the trees of the orchard ; and Jesua 
is still more so among the trees of His garden of grace. 
When have yon been the most fruitless ? Has not it been 
when you have lived farthest from the Lord Jesus Christ, 
when you have slackened ii^prayer, when you have departed 
from the simplicity of your faith, when your graces have en- 
grossed your attention instead of your Lord, when you have 
said, " My mountain standeth firm, I shall never be moved ;" 
and have forgotten where your strength dwells — has not it 
been then that your fruit has ceased ? Some of us have been 
taught that we have nothing out of Christ, by terrible abase- 
ments of heart before the Lord ; and when we have seen the 
utter barrenness and death of all creature power, we have 
cried in anguish, " From Him all my fruit must be found, for 
no fruit can ever come from me." We are ta.ught, by past 
experience, that the more simply we depend upon the grace 
of God in Christ, and wait upon the Holy Spirit, the more 
we shall bring forth fruit unto God. Oh, to trust Jesus for 
fruit as well as for life I 




Nov. 14. DJOLY BEADIKGS. 819 

** I mU cut offihem thai woruhip and that swear by the Lord, and 
that swear by McHchamJ^ — Zephaniah L 5. 

|UCH persons thought themselves safe because they 
were with both parties : they went with the followeni 
of Jehovah, and bowed at the same time to Malcham. 
But duplicity is abominable with God, and hypocrisy his 
soul hateth. The idolater who distinctly gives himself to his 
false god, has one sin less than he who brings his polluted 
and detestable sacrifice unto the temple of the Lord, while 
his heart is with the world and the sins thereof. To hold 
with the hare and run with the hounds, is a dastard's policy. 
In the common matters of daily life, a double-minded man is 
despised, but in religion he is loathsome to the last degree. 
The penalty pronounced in the verse before us is terrible, 
but it is well deserved ; for how should divine justice spare 
the sinner, who knows the right, approves it, and professes 
to follow it, and all the while loves the evil, and gives it 
dominion in his heart ? 

My soul, search thyself this morning, and see whether thou 
art guilty of double-dealing. Thou professest to be a fol- 
lower of Jesus — dost thou truly love Him ? Is thy heart 
right with God ? Art thou of the family of old Father Honest, 
or art thou a relative of Mr. By-ends ? A name to live is of 
little value if I be indeed dead in trespasses and sins. To 
have one foot on the land of truth, and another on the sea 
of falsehood, will involve a terrible fall, and a total ruin. 
Christ will be all or nothing. God fills the whole universe, 
and hence there is no room for another god ; if, then. He 
reigns in my heart, there will be no space for another reign- 
ing power. Do I rest alone on Jesus crucified, and live 
alone for Him ? Is it my desire to do so ? Is my heart set 
upon so doing ? If so, blessed be the mighty grace which 
has led me to salvation ; and if not so, Lord, pardon my 
sad offence, and unite my heart to fear Thy name. 



DAII.T KEADIRGS, Wov. 15. 



"3%« 




\€ L(mi*s portion i» UU peoph.^* — ^ Deuteronomy 5:sxu, 9, 

are fhtij Hh? By His own soyerdgn choice. 
^ Ho choso them, and Bet Hia love upon them. This 
He did Jil to gather apart from anj goodness in them 
at the time, or any goodness which He foresaw in them. He 
had mercy on whom He would have mercy, and ordained n 
ohof^en company unto eternal life ; thus, therefore, are thej 
His by His unconstrained election* 

They are not only Hi& by choice, but by purchase. He 
has bought and paid for them to the utmost farthing ; henci* 
about His title there can be no dispute. Not with cormpti- 
We tiiinga, as with silver and gold, but with the precious 
blood of the Lord Jejius Chttst, the Lord's portion has been 
fully redeemed. There is no mortgage on His estate; no 
euits can be raised by opposing claimants ; the priee was paid 
in open court, and the Church is the Lord's freehold forever. 
Bee the blood -mark npon all the chosen, invisible to human 
eye, but known to Christ, for " the Lord knoweth them that 
are Hi a ; " He forge ttcth none of those whom He has re- 
deemed from among men ; He counts the sheep for whom 
He laid down His life, and remembers well the Church for 
which He gave Himself. 

They are also His by conquest. What a battle He had in 
us before we would be won ! How long He laid siege to our 
hearts ! how often He sent us terms of capitulation ! but we 
barred our gates, and fenced our walls against Him. Do we 
not remember that glorious hour when He carried our hearts 
by storm ? when He placed His cross against the wall, and 
scaled our ramparts, planting on our strongholds the blood- 
red flag of His omnipotent mercy ? Yes, we are, indeed, the 
conquered captives of His omnipotent love. Thus chosen, 
purchased, and subdued, the rights of our divine possessor are 
inalienable : we rejoice that we never can be our own ; and wo 
desire, day by day, to do His will, and to show forth His glory. 



Not. 16. ikaict SBAmoL ai 

^ The Lord i» my poHiam, mtiSk ay an£r — loK. tL 3L 




is not *^ Tlie Lofrd is ptr6lf kt ^wIml."' sflr'^ne 
Lord is «R mr ^ordcm ; '^ Ina fie H iMKi f maium w^ 
the sum total of nj fioaTs iaiientJMce. Tifiob lit 
circomfereiiee of tkat circk^ hes aD ikm vfr y i WMK «r ic«Qft:, 
The i^oix^ is nj portion. Xoc Hk ^rMie fltfr^« jmt Hk 
love, nor ffis eorenant, bvt JdKmdi HkiMif. Behm^^^mgL 
ns for His portion, and we kare ciioiiea^ flSbft f fv ifan^ Ji jt 
true that the Lord nrait feet cik^oce ^v iidtfrffa»f< fur ^i;^ 
or else we shall nerer dbo^ it for (mrscir^fc ; Vm if «^ ^i^^ 
really called accordi^ to ^e pnrjfOiit; ijf 4iMi6Bbf if0w^ ^^ 
can sing — 

WiA leve attcsK I iiBct ; 
I cfcfB^ae Soi a xccws-" 

The Lord is onr oZT-ti^rinEl portk^xi. O^OkKmmlf; tn^l 
if God is aD-soffieiait in Hntfel^ Hie mud W ^-iufcfenit 
for us. It is not eafr to mud^ ndRt'f detur^. 1^1»mf jU 
dreams that he is satisfied, aiKMi lie wafeef V/ ^ yff<^^j,n^ 
that there is somewhat jet i^^^i«d, aeu^ iftraj^i^itwai tl^ 
horse-leeeh in his heart trik^ ** Cir*:, tg:r^r fC^yti ^ tA^gt 
we can wish for is to be ifnoA m <«r 43rjui*e f^vft^^ i»v tj(ttit 
we ask, " Whom hare I in htrreti Vut T1»»^ f aM tW^ U 
none upon earth that I dedre b&^de TV>e.** W^JB ^ ^y ^^^^ 
" delight ourselTcs in the LOTd,** wW> ittalK« m i^ 4$it$k vf 
the river of ffis pleasorea* 0«r UiUk tAf^iUit^at^ ^sf w'mgM 
and mounts like an eagle into tbe b/ear^ <^ dir^ l^r^ ^ 
to her proper dwelling-place. " Th<6: Iiim^ bay« &lk«» «^ i|<;i^ 
in pleasant places ; yea, we hare a f <K>41y WilA^^;.^ |>4 
us rejoice in the Lord always; let m »h//w t// <bi^ wz/rld tliai 
we are a happy and a blessed people, and tfatw ind«^ ili^fiii 
to exclaim, " We will go with yon, for we bare b«ard iiial 
God is with you." 



a22 -DAILr BBABDrai. 



•* To ip/iom he glor^ forei^er. Amen.** — Eomana xL 36. 




MgO whom be glory forcTer. This Bhould be the m/n^ . 

defiire of the Chrbtian, All other wiehes tnn^t be 

finbfi^rYient and tribntarj to this ob©. The Chn&tiaii 

may wish for proBperiiy in his business, but only so far aa it 

may help him to promote this — " To Him be glory foreyer*** 

He may desire to attatn more gifts and more graces, but it 

should only bo that ** to Him may be glory fore¥er," You 

are not actiog m you ought to do when joti are moved by 

any other motive than a single eye to your Lord's glory. As 

a Christian, you are •■* of Crod» and througli God ; " then live ' 

"to God,'' Let nothing ever set your heart beatlog eo 

miffhiil^ as love to Him. Let this ambition fire your soul; 

be this the foundation of every enterprise upon which you 

enter, and thie your $nEtain{ng motive whenevet your zeal 

would grow chill; m^^e God your only object. Depend 

upon it, where self begins, sorrow begins ; but if God be my 

supreme delight and only object, 

" To me 'tis equal whether love ordain 
My life or death — appoint me ease or pain." 

Let your desire for God's glory be a growing desire. You 
blessed Him in your youth; do not be content with such 
praises as you gave Him then. Has God prospered you in 
business ? Give Him more as He has given you more. Has 
God given you experience ? Praise Him by stronger faith 
than you exercised at first. Does your knowledge grow? 
Then sing more sweetly. Do you enjoy happier times than 
you once had ? Have you been restored from sickness, and 
has your sorrow been turned into peace and joy ? Then give 
Him more music ; put more coals and more sweet frankin- 
cense into the censer of your praise. Practically in your 
life, give Him honor, putting the " Amen" to this doxology 
to your great and gracious Lord, by your own individual ser- 
vice and increasing holiness. 

\ 




Not. 18. t>attt 2Xa3o;£&. SSft 

It u a spnn^ h^ic t^- . jia: w ixht*: wcr^ jfriii^ it 
the Ettfc, over vUeli aa «££» iru inuk. ^r iuc liUbt f^uitit 
reidi thcBi save ^see loifr kitpv ^le i*<sst!: <annai^; *t iit 
the heart oC a bcfierer -viibl i: s tbu^v^ in ^n^^ iiifsK: 
is a mjBteniMts fife aJiklL -v^ika. m laaua iicll «u. Awi^L^ 
It is a secret vUck i» maiss jukl JOi^fm^ : ur . -wfut^t iut 
very man vko is tfe pofiKaofor uf x ttamvi -usl ^ iik inif^^ 
bor. The tcxi w-laftftf ins uujj vg^r^*. inc miim'tA0ini,, Jb 
is not the eo — ic m spddi^ uf -riosa. <?v4r;( jhim^-;^ jwtr 
drink; it is one kept aaii ]Vffl«rr4fC imsb nI titftit^iti i: >^ # 
fomitainbesinigaianacaibB'staex;* — ibjui^^;vT«,«««U'-^*v 
that an can pcreerre diat 2» ii iifft a *fsmauM. isnxutiux^ \nA a 
fountain owmtd hj a jfftfsSsMff, aufi yjm^fQ tsyiftiuJiff iy 
itself alone. So is k n&i loc!: sp2r&u£ JuiSi:. Tm ^««vm4» 
of (rod woe separttoi is tiiS: ^^^maC o^^tsr^; '^Eii'i^ iv^^r^ 
separated bj God m ^bt ^xj uf rt^tkeasi^ut : tsut ik^ im*s^ 
separated hj tke |KH«»idm (/<f a 2& -riutn. v$i<trt ii4»i^^ juvt ; 
and it is in^ossiUe fm "ditfatk ^v Sm^ in i«utt<^ "we/Hn. im vevf^i, 
or to delig^ in its f^eanru. Thiari^ Jt mv tM; ><M:^ ^ 
mcrednen. The ^ring iioa i^ k >)!r^!»^:rr%>^ ivf liU tiM; vf 
some special person : aiid sadb k lo^ie ^^a«iUm/^i^ l*4:»iMt/ li 
is a spring kept for Jenu. Ertrr ^JSbtfT^niicMU «A^vmM 6^^ tlM4 
he has God's seal i^on htis — toA L^ t^wl^ U a<(>)k iv iMt/ 
witii Panl, *' From henec^c^rtL kt luv Mot^ uW/lk MMr^ U^ I 
bear in my body the nudb «>f ti«/>; Ijf/f^ 4*Fk^f* Ku^M^f 
idea is prominent — it is that </f f;^/Mr%^. ^AJ fc//w *Mr# 
and safe is the inner life of thit; b^Jkr^f \ If Mih^ f^w^trn 
of earth and hell conld combine h^niu^ Hf iluii imw/zftal 
principle most still exist, for H^ wIm/ ifar^ it pkdg^jd Uis 
life for its preservation. And who ** i» h*i thai shall harm 
you,** when G^ is yonr protector ? 



324 dah-y BBAPorGS, Not> 19, 

**A^oidfot^tM qutMwm" — Titus iii. 9. 




fc^^l.TE days are few, and are far better spent in doing 
good than in dispnting otct matters whieh are, at 
beet, of minor importance. The old schoolmen did 
a world of mischief by their ineeaaant discuaaion of subjecia 
of no praetleal importance ; and our Churches enffer mucU 
from petty wars over abstmse points and nnimportant tjiies- 
tions. Alter everything has been said that can be said, 
neither party is any the wiser, and therefore the discussion 
no more promotes knowledge than love, and it is foolish to 
sow in so barren a field. Questions upon points wherein 
Scripture is silent; upon mjgteriea which belong to God 
alone ; npon prophecies of doubtful interpretation ; and upon 
mere modes of observing human ceremonials, are all foolish, 
and wise men avoid them. Our business is neither to mk 
nor answer foolish questions, but to avoid them altogether j* 
and if we observe the apostle's precept (Titus iii. 8) to be 
careful to maintain good works, we shall find ontselveB far 
too much occupied with profitable business to take much 
interest in unworthy, contentious, and needless strivings. 

There are, however, some questions which are the reverse 
of foolish, which we must not avoid, but fairly and honestly 
meet, such as these : Do I believe in the Lord Jesus Christ ? 
Am I renewed in the spirit of my mind ? Am I walking, not 
after the flesh, but after the Spirit ? Am I growing in grace ? 
Does my conversation adorn the doctrine of Grod my Saviour? 
Am I looking for the coming of the Lord, and watching as 
a servant should do who expects his master ? What more 
can I do for Jesus ? Such inquiries as these urgently de- 
mand our attention ; and if we have been at all given to 
cavilling, let us now turn our critical abilities to a service so 
much more profitable. Let us be peacemakers, and endeavor 
to lead others, both by our precept and example, to " avoid 
foolish questions." 




Nov. 20. DAILY BEAIHNOS. 825 

** Lordf Thou hast pleaded the causes of my sovlJ* — Lam. iii. 58. 

I^BSERVB how positively the prophet speaks. He 
doth not say, '* I hope, I trust, I sometimes think, 
that God hath pleaded the causes of my soul ; " but 
he speaks of it as a matter of fact not to be disputed. 
'* Thou hast pleaded the causes of my soul." Let us, by the 
aid of the gracious Comforter, shake off those doubts and 
fears which so much mar our peace and comfort. Be this 
our prayer, that we may have done with the harsh, croaking 
voice of surmise and suspicion, and may be able to speak 
with the clear, melodious voice of fail assurance. Notice 
how gratefully the prophet speaks, ascribing all the glory to 
God alone ! You perceive there is not a word concerning 
himself or his own pleadings. He doth not ascribe his de- 
liverance in any measure to any man, much less to his own 
merit : but it is " Thou " — « O Lord, Thou hast pleaded the 
causes of my soul ; Thou hast redeemed my life." A grate- 
ful spirit should ever be cultivated by the Christian ; and 
especially after deliverances we should prepare a song for 
our God. Earth should be a temple filled with the songs of 
grateful saints, and every da^ii^^hould be a censer smoking 
with the sweet incense of thanksgiving. How joyful Jere- 
miah seems to be while he recsprds the Lord's mercy ! How 
triumphantly he lifts up the steein ! He has been in the low 
dungeon, and is even now no other than the weeping prophet; 
and yet in the very book which is called " Lamentations," 
clear as the song of Miriam when she dashed her fingers 
against the tabor, shrill as the note of Deborah when she 
met Barak with shouts of victory, we hear the voice of Jere- 
my going up to heaven — ''Thou hast pleaded the causes 
of my soul ; Thou hast redeemed my life." O children of 
God, seek after a vital experience of the Lord's loving- 
kindness, and when you have it, speak positively of it, sing 
gratefully, shout triumphantly. 

28 _^ 




S2G B1IX.T SEJUII^CiS. No?. SU 

** Qri€V€ not tke Bd^ SpitU," ^Ephedans iv. SO, 

ifr^LL diat tlio beli€Ter has must eotne from Christ, bui« 
il oomeg solely through the channel of the Spirit of J 
tSk gnce* Moreover, as ^ blessings thus flowttfl 
joa tliTough fht Hoi J Spirit, so also no good thmg eau eon 
out of jou in holj thought, devout worship^ or graciotts act, 
apart from the sartctifjiag operation of the tame Spirit. 
Bven if the good seed be sowu tn jou, yet it lies dormant 
except He workcth in you to will and to do of His owb good 
lilaasiU'O. Do you desire to speak for Josus — how can jon 
unleie the Holy Ghost tooeh your tongue f Do you deiire 
to pray } Alaa I what dull work it is unless the Spirit makatk 
intereesstOB for you ! Do you desire to subdue sin ? Would 
you be holy } Would you imitate your Master ? Do jou 
desire to lise to superlatiYo heights of spirituality? Are 
you wan ting to be made» like the angels of God, full of zeal^ 
and ardor for the Master'ii cause ? You cannot without the * 
Spirit — "Without Me ye can do nothing," O branch of 
the Tine, thou canst have no fruit without the sap I child 
of God, thou hast no life within thee apart from the life 
which God gives thee through His Spirit ! Then let us not 
grieve Him, or provoke Him to anger by our sin. Let us 
not quench Him in one of His faintest motions in our soul ; 
let us foster every suggestion, and be ready to obey every 
prompting. If the Holy Spirit be indeed so mighty, let us 
attempt nothing without Him ; let us begin no project, and 
carry on no enterprise, and conclude no transaction, without 
imploring His blessing. Let us do Him the due homage of 
feeling our entire weakness apart from Him, and then de- 
pending alone upon Him, having this for our prayer, " Open 
Thou my heart and my whole being to Thine incoming, and 
uphold me with Thy free Spirit when I shall have received 
that Spirit in my inward parts." 



i 



Not. 22. dailt sxADiarGs. ISCT 

** Israel served for a wifej omdfar a mf€ ke hspt Atrp7 
Hoseaxn. 12. 




^COB, while ezpostnlatmg with Lahaz^ thu < 
his own toil: " This twenty years hare I been wA 
thee. That which was torn of beasts I farongbt not 
unto thee : I bare the loss of it ; of my hand didst tfaoa le^ 
quire it, whether stolen by day, or stolen by night. Thu I 
was : in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by 
night ; and my sleep departed from mine eyes.** E^en more 
toilsome than this was the life of ixsa Sayiour here below. 
He watched oyer aU His sheep tiH He gave in as fiEs hut 
account, " Of aU those whom Then hast grreiL me, I have 
lost none." His hair was wet with dew, and His loefci wiA 
the drops of the night. Sleep departed from His eyce, for 
all night He was in prayer, wrestling for His people. One 
night, Peter must be pleaded for ; anon, another dauH His 
tearful intercession. No shepherd sitting beneath the edd 
skies, looking np to the stars, conld erer mter saeii com- 
plaints, becanse of the hardness of his toil, as Jesiu Christ 
might haye brought, if He had diosen to do so, because «f 
the sternness of His seryice in order to procure His spouse. 
** Cold momitsiBS, and the yn^rn^jrx air. 

Witnessed the lerror of His pnyer ; 

The desert His temptations knev, 

His conflict and His yntUxj too." 

It is sweet to dwell upon the spiritual paraEd 4€ Labaa 
haying required aU the sheep at Jacob's hand. If they were 
torn of beasts, Jacob must make it good ; if any of them died^ 
he must stand as surety for the whole. Was not the toil ^/f 
Jesus for His Church the toil of one who was UMler forecj' 
ship obligations to bring eyery belieying one safe to the Uaftd 
of Him who had committed them to His charge r V^f^M u^^u, 
toiling Jacob, and you see a representation of Him of wW/«« 
we read, " He shall feed His flod^ like a shepherd*^ 




S30 DilLT BEADIKGS. KoV, 2S, 

" F^Mowship With fli'fli."— 1 Jobn I 6. 

jffiHEN we were uBited by faith to Cbrist, we were brought 
into such eomplcle fellowship with Him, that we were 
made one with Him, and FTis iDteresta and ours ht- 
came mutual and identical. We have fellowship with Christ 
ia His hvt. What He loves we love. He loves the saints 
— &o do we. Ho loves sinners — so do we. He loves the 
poor perishing race of man, and pants to see earth's deserts 
traDsformed into the garden of the Lord — so do we. We 
have fellowship with Him in Hi a desms. He desires the 
glorj of God ^ — we tiho labor for the same. He desires tit at 
the saints may be with Him whore He is — wo desire to hs 
with Him there too. He desires to drive out sin — behold, 
we fight under His banner. He desires that His Father*! 
name may be loved and adored by all His creatures — we 
pray dai]j\ *' Let Thy kingdom come, and Thy will be done 
on earth, even as it la m heaven/* We have feDowship with 
Christ in His siifferin(js. We are not nailed tfl the cross, not 
do we die a cruel deatii j but when He is reproached, wc are 
reproached ; and a very sweet thing it is to be blamed for 
His sake, to be despised for following the Master, to have 
the world against us. The disciple should not be above His 
Lord. In our measure we commune with Him in His labors, 
ministering tq men by the word of truth and by deeds of love. 
Our meat and our drink, like His, is to do the will of Him 
who hath sent us, and to finish His work. We have also fel- 
lowship with Christ in His joys. We are happy in His hap- 
piness, we rejoice in His exaltation. Have you ever tasted 
that joy,' believer ? There is no purer or more thrilling de- 
light to be known this side heaven than that of having Christ's 
joy fulfilled in us, that our joy may be full. His glory awaits 
us to complete our fellowship, for His Church shall sit with 
Him upon His throne, as His well-beloved bride and queen. 



Nov. 24. BAII.T 



«* The glonofu Lwd wiU he miio mt m flaee t/ hrwad 
gtreams." — Isaiah xzhxl 2L 




10 AD rivers and streams prodoee fertiKfej, lad abiB> 
dance in the hmd. Places near broad rirera are re- 
markable for the variety of their jJants ad Aeir 
plentifdl harvests. God is all this to ffis Chnn^ HsviBg 
God she has abundance. What can die ask for thai He wiD 
not give her? What want can she mentioniriiidi He wiD not 
supply ? "In this moimtain shall the Lord of Hosts nmke 
nnto all people a feast of lat things." Wiktt ye the bread 
of life ? It drops like manna firom the sky. Want ye re- 
freshing streams ? The rock follows yon, and that BoA is 
Christ. Kyon suffer any want, it is yonr own fuilt; if yofa 
are straitened, yon are not straitened in Him, but in your own 
bowels. Broad rivers and streams also point to eammeree. 
Oar glorious Lord is to ns a place of heavenly merchaadiae. 
Through our Bedeemer we have commerce with the past ; 
the wealth of Calva|y, the treasures of the covenant, the 
riches of the ancientlli^ of election, the stores of eternity, 
all come to us down^ti^ broad stream of our gracious Lord. 
We have commerce/iioo, with the future. What galkys, 
laden to the water^s edge, come to us from the millenniam ! 
What visions we have of the days of heaven upon earth! 
Through our glorious Lord we have commerce with angeb ; 
communion with the bright spirits.washed in blood, who sing 
before the throne ; nay, better still, we have fellowship with 
the Infinite One. Broad rivers and streams are speeiaDy 
intended to set forth the idea of security, Bivers were of 
old a defence. Oh I beloved, what a defence is God to His 
Church ! The devil cannot cross tiiis broad river of God. 
How he wishes he could turn the current ! but fear not, for 
God abideth immutably the same. Satan may worry, but he 
cannot destroy us ; no galley with oars shall invade onr river^ 
neither shall gallant ship pass thereby. 
28* 




'Ask, and U »Ml he given yow." — Matthew vii. 7. 

IJE know of a place in Englaiid, still existing, where a 
dole of bread is served to everj passer-by who 
€boos*es to aek for it. Whoever the traveller may 
be, be has bat to knock at the door of St. Cross Hospital, 
and there is the dole of bread for him, Jesus Chn.«?t bo !ot- 
eth sinners that He has built a St, Cross Hospital, so that 
whenever a sinner is hungry, he has but to knock and have 
hia wants isupplied. Nay, He has done better; He has at- 
tached to this Hospital of the Cross a bath ; and whenever a 
floul is black and filtb}^ it has but to go there and be washed. 
The fountain is always full, aJwaya effieacious. No sinner 
ever went into it and found that it could not wash away his 
stains. Sins which were scarlet and erinason have all disap- 
peared, and the sinner Haa been whiter than enow. As if 
this were not enough, there is attached to this Hospital of 
the Cross a wardrobe, and a. sinner , making application 
Fitmply as a sinner, may be clothed from head to foot ; and 
if he wishes to be a soldier, he may not merely have a gar- 
ment for ordinary wear, but armor which shall cover him 
from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head. If he 
asks for a sword, he shall have that given to him, and a 
shield too. Nothing that is good for him shall be denied 
him. He shall have spending money so long as he lives; 
and he shall have an eternal heritage of glorious treasure 
when he enters into the joy of his Lord. — If all these things 
are to be had by merely knocking at mercy's door, O my 
soul, knock hard this morning, and ask large things of thy 
generous Lord. Leave not the throne of grace till all thy 
wants have been spread before the Lord, and until by faith 
thou hast a comfortable prospect that they shall be all sup- 
plied. No bashfulness need retard when Jesus invites. No 
unbelief should hinder when Jesus promises. No cold-hearted- 
ness should restrain, when such blessings are to be obtained. 



J)et.fL 



1 Cuguithiain i xr. -I8l 





I head aad Bealwra are of omt iuckii^ ha uk jJk 
tkit ■ttMiiuMi iHace wiiieiL ^i^buckttJiiAnBir imf h 
Us draa. TW fcmi w of ftuft cn^ &ac iM Mlf 
and tliigliB were of bnH* ^e legs af irrm. aoii 4u^ ififlL ; 
of iron and pait Cff dn-. CkmcTs oEVHOsai suvfif ji nt ^ 
combinatkHi 4^ oppoaott; ^e at ■iii'i i w 
therefore Jesaa £cd; Ae fisrdieii lie^ » 
therefore the hodr k jbhiiiii if sm* Sir ^bia 'iuk 
stands: *^ Becanse I fire. j« ihaH xT<i iw^v.'^ Jk» Ji ^ifar .JtyK^ 
ing head, soch is the hodf • snki ev^rj senbiBr iia fassumar. 
A chosen Head, aad ehoaca. nenhiers; ao. um^j ^ m^ ifeML 
and aoeepted ■eibgfs ; a Evia^ H«a«L Mii E-ni^ aufaCMrt. 
If the head he pare g^ld. afi ^e para ^i ^ ikiifr avt if 
pore gold also. ThaB is there a d^vihie aama ^v^ aann» an a 
basis for the doacatcoMnBUim. Vimm^a:^ii0r*ymwa^er. 
and see if thoa caast, aishoac tj^sma^fi: aauttfaumt, (SnaMn^ 
plate the infinite condftaeeaoMi «»/ du( .^^ ")/ ^3P«vi i» ^vw 
exalting Ihj wretdicdacas iat^ Ueasefi aauHi irjAk Hui 
glory. Thon art so Mcaft thas, ift rinumbrgiitts^ ^ dkj aii^" 
taEtj, thon majst saj to eofmpCM«k, *^ Ts^n art any ^idMr^'* 
and to the worB^ ^ Thon an ssj fi.^er ; "^ aaii jet na Ckriat 
thon art so honored ^at tfew eaaat say «> the Ahntrhty, 
*' Abba, Father,** and to ^e laearaate &o4, "^ThM art mj 
brother and mj hnsband.** Smetj if reiatioaahxpa to aMieat 
and noble funiUea make men think hi^dily ^ th<»aghre», «^ 
have whereof to glory orer ikt heads oi theai alL liet the 
poorest and most despised beHerer ]zj hold apoa this prrri^ 
lege ; let not a senseless indolence make him neif^ig«At Up 
trace his pedigree, and let him suffer no iofdish attaehw^t 
to present ranities to occopy his thoughts to the €%t'\w^'u$n 
of this glorious, this heayenly honor of xpmmJ^j^^^^' 
29* 





049 DAII.T BEADoros. Deo. 7* 

" B€me things (if the v*orld haik God choaenJ* — 1 Cor- i^ 28» 

r^ALK tbe streets by moonliglit, if you dare, and yon 
will B6e smoors then. Wa;tch wbeo the nigkt is 
dark, and tbe wind is howling* aiid the pieklook is 
grallng ia the door, and yon will see sinnDre then. Go to 
yon jaU* and walk through the wards, and mark the men 
with heavy I over- hanging brows, men whom you would not 
like to meet at nightj and there are sinners there. Go to 
the reformatorieg, and note those who have betrayed a ram- 
pant juvenile depTavity, and you will iee sinners there. Cro 
aeroiia the seas to a place where a man will gnaw a bone 
upon which is reeking human flesh, and there is a sinner 
there. Go where you will, you need not ransack earth to 
find sinners, for they are eommon enough ; you may find them 
in every lane and street of every eity, and town, and village, 
and hamlet. It w for such that Jesus died. If you will se- 
leet me the grossest speeimen of humanity, if he be but born 
of woman, I will have hope of him yet, because Jesus Christ 
is come to seek and to save sinners. Electing love has se- 
lected some of the worst to be made the best. Pebbles of 
the brook grace turns into jewels for the crown-royal. 
Worthless dross He transforms into pure gold- Eedeeming 
love has set apart many of the worst of mankind to be the 
reward of the Saviour's passion. Effectual grace calls forth 
many of the vilest of the vile to sit at the table of mercy, and 
therefore let none despair. 

Eeader, by that love looking out of Jesus' tearful eyes; by 
that love streaming from those bleeding wounds; by that 
faithful love, that strong love, that pure, disinterested, and 
abiding love ; by the heart and by the bowels of the Savionr's 
compassion, we conjure you, turn not away as though it 
were nothing to you ; but believe on Him, and yon shall be 
saved. Trust your soul with Him, and He will bring you to 
Eis Father's right hand in glory everlasting. 




Dec. 8. DAILY BEADINOS. 848 

'* Thou hast a few names even in Sardis which have not d^led 
their garments ; and they shall walk with Me in white, for they 
are worthy" — Revelation iii. 4. 

may understand this to refer to justification, ** They 
shall walk in white ; " that is, they shall enjoy a con- 
stant sense of their own justification by faith ; they 
shall understand that the righteousness of Christ is imputed 
to them ; that they have all been washed and made whiter 
than the newly-fallen snow. 

Again, it refers to joy and gladness ; for white robes wore 
holiday dresses among the Jews. They who have not defiled 
their garments shall have their faces always bright; they 
shall understand what Solomon meant when lie said, ** Go 
thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a 
merry heart. Let thy garments be always white, for God 
hath accepted thy works.'' He who is accepted of God Hhall 
wear white garments of joy and gladness, while he walkn in 
sweet communion with the Lord Jesus. Whence so many 
doubts, so much misery and mourning? It is because so 
many believers defile their garments with sin and error ; and 
hence they lose the joy of their salvation, and the comfort- 
able fellowship of the Lord Jesus ; they do not here below 
walk in white. 

The promise also refers to walki/ng in white "before the throne 
of Ood, Those who have not defiled their garments hero, 
shall most certainly walk in white up yonder, whore the white- 
robed hosts sing perpetual hallelujahs to the Most High. 
They shall possess joys inconceivable, happiness beyond a 
dream, bliss which imagination knoweth not, blessedness 
which even the stretch of desire hath not reached. The 
"undefiled in the way" shall have all this — not of merit, 
nor of works, but of grace. They shall walk with Christ in 
white, for He has made them '' worthy.'' In His sweet com- 
pany they shall drink of the living fountains of waters. 



DAILY BLADINGS. 



■* Therefore will the Lord wait^ that He imiy be graetou» fmt6 
Isaiah xxx. 18. 



Deo. 9- 



you/' 



jOD ofteti DELAYS IN jjjswEsr^G PBAYEB, We have 
Mj several instances of this in sacred Scriptnre, Jacob 
-^ did BOt get the blessiflg from the angel until near the 
awn of day — he had to wrestle ail night for it The poor 
onmn of B^Tophenicia was answered not a word for a long 
[i%hile. Paul besought the Lord thrice that "the thorn in the 
esh " might be taken firom him, and he received no asatir- 
.nee that it should bo taken away, but instead thereof a 
roinise that God's grace ehoiJild be snffieieTit for him. If 
on hast been knocking at the gate of mere?, and hast re- 
leived DO aaswer, shall I tell thee why tbe raigbty Maker hath 
ot opened the door and let thee in ? Our Father has rea- 
ns peculiar to Himself for thns keeping us waiting, 8ome- 
Smea it i^ to show His power^ and His soTereignty, that men 
may know that Jehovah has a right to give or to withhold. 
More frequently the delay is for our profit. Thou art per- 
haps kept waiting in order that thy desires may be more fer- 
vent. God knows that delay will quicken and increase 
desire, and that if He keeps thee waiting thou wilt see thy 
necessity more clearly, and wilt seek more earnestly; and 
that thou wilt prize the mercy all the more for its long tarry- 
ing. There' may also be something wrong in thee which has 
need to be removed, before the joy of the Lord is given. 
Perhaps thy views of the Gospel plan are confused, or thou 
mayst be placing some little reliance on thyself, instead of 
trusting simply and entirely to the Lord Jesus. Or, God 
makes thee tarry awhile that He may the more fully display 
the riches of His grace to thee at last. Thy prayers are all 
filed in heaven, and if not immediately answered, they are 
certainly not forgotten, but in a little while shall be fulfilled 
to thy delight and satisfaction. Let not despair make thee 
\iieiit, but continue instant in earnest supplication. 




Deo. 10. BAILY BEADINGS. 845 

** 80 JmM weeoerbe with the LordJ'^l Thess. iv. 17. 

|VEN the sweetest visits from Christ, how short they 
- are — and how transitory ! One moment our eyes see 
Him, and we rejoice with joy unspeakable and fall of 
glory, but again a little time and we do not see Him, for our 
Beloved withdraws Himself from us ; like a roe or a young 
hart he leaps over the mountains of division ; He is gone to 
the land of spices, and feeds no more among the lilies. 

** If to-day He deigns to bless us 
With a sense of pardoned sin, 
He to-morrow may dl8tres»us, 
Make us feel the plague within.** 

Oh, how sweet the prospect of the time when w^e shall not 
behold Him at n distance, but see Him face to face ! when 
He shall not be as a wayfaring man tarrying but for a night, 
but shall eternally enfold us in the bosom of His glory I We 
shall not see Him for a little season, but 

'^ Millions of years our wondering eyes 
Shall o'er our Saviour's beauties rove, 
And myriad ages we'll adore 

The wonders of His love." ' 

In heaven there shall be no interruptions from care or sin; 
no weeping shall dim our eyes ; no earthly business shall 
distract our happy thoughts ; we shall have nothing to hin- 
der us from gazing forever on the Sun of Eighteousness with 
unwearied eyes. Oh, if it be so sweet to see Him now and 
then, how sweet to gaze on that blessed face for. aye, and 
never have a cloud rolling between, and never have to turn 
one's eyes away to look on a world of weariness and woe I 
Blest day, when wilt thou dawn ? Eise, unsetting sun ! 
The joys of sense may leave us as soon as they will, for this 
shall make glorious amends. If to "die is but to enter into 
uninterrupted communion with Jesus, then death is indeed 
gain, and the black drop is swallowed up in a sea <r' ^'.cto/y* 




346 DAILY nEAuiNos. Deo. 11*^1 

- i I 

** Fctithful u Me that calleth jfouj who also wiU da #♦*' I 

1 Thessaloniana v. 24* J 

IpEAYEN ia a place where we BhaU tioyer sin ; whettt 
we shall eeaae our constunt watcli against ati lode- 
fatigahle enemy, because there will be no tempter tQ 
inenare our feet. There the wicked cease from trouhiing, | 
and the weary^ are at resL Heaven is the ^'undefiled inher* | 
itance ; " it is the land of perfect bolinesst and therefore of \ 
complete security. But do not the aainta even on earth 
sometimes taste the joys of bliaaful seeurity ? The doctrine j 
of God's word ia, that 'all who are in union with the Lamb 
are safe ; that all the righteous shall hold oil their way ; that \ 
those who have committed their souls to the keeping of Christ I 
shall fitid Him a faithful and immutable prcserrer. Sustamed I 
by fiueh a doctrine, we can enjoy security even on earth; nol j 
that high and glorious secTirity which renders us free from I 
every slip, but that holy security which arises from the sure 
promise of Jesus that none who believe in Him shall ever 
perish, but shall be with Him where He is. Believer, let us 
often reflect wii-h joy on the doctrine of the perseverance of 
the saints, and honor the faithfulness of our God by a holy 
confidence in Him. 

May our God bring home to you a sense of your safety in 
Christ Jesus. May He assure you that your name is- graven 
on His hand, and whisper in your ear the promise, " Fear 
not, I am with thee." Look upon Him, the great Surety of 
the covenant, as faithful and true, and, therefore, bound and 
engaged to present you, the weakest of the family, with all 
the chosen race, before the throne of God ; and in such a 
sweet contemplation you will drink the juice of the spiced 
wine of the Lord's pomegranate, and taste the dainty fruits 
of Paradise. You will have an antepast of the enjoyments 
which ravish the souls of the perfect saints above, if you can 
believe with unstaggering faith that "faithful is He that 
calletb jou, who also wiW do *\\»." 




Deo. 12. DAHiY beadings. 847 

** His ways are everlasting J* — Habakkuk iu. 5. 

IlT He hath done at one time, He will do yet again. 
Man's ways are variable, but Qod*s ways are ever- 
lasting. There are many reasons for this most com- 
forting truth : among them are the following — the Lord's 
ways are the resuU of wise ddibercUion ; He ordereth all things 
aeoording to the counsel of His own will. Human action is 
frequently the hasty result of passion or fear, and is followed 
by regret and alteration ; but nothing can take the Almighty 
by surprise, or happen otherwise than He has foreseen. His 
ways are the outgrowth of an vmmutahle character^ and in them 
the fixed and settled attributes of God are clearly to be seen. 
Unless the Eternal One Himself can undergo change, His 
ways, which are Himself in action, must remain forever the 
same. Is He eternally just, gracious, faithful, wise, tender ? 
—then His ways must ever be distinguished for the same ex- 
cellences. Beings act according to their nature : when those 
natures change, their conduct varies also ; but since God can- 
not know the shadow of a turning. His ways will abide ever- 
lastingly the same. Moreover there is no reason from without 
which could reverse the divine ways, since they are the em^ 
hodiment of irresistible might. The earth is said, by the 
prophet, to be cleft with rivers, mountains tremble, the deep 
lifts up its hands, and sun and moon stand still, when Jehovah 
inarches forth for the salvation of His people. Who can 
stay His hand, or say unto Him, What doest Thou ? But it 
is not might alone which gives stability ; God's way are the 
manifestations of the eternal principles of right, and therefore 
can never pass away. Wrong breeds decay and involves 
ruin, but the true and the good have about them a vitality 
which ages cannot diminish. 

This morning let us go to our heavenly Father with confi- 
dence, remembering that Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, 
to-day, and forever, and in Him the Lord is ever gracious to 
His people. 




« S0JI, ttMma pFfMcriiHng hm^ muck J" — Mwtti vii 22, 

SALT vts t^<Ml in eref T offering made by fire unto the 
Ijonlt »ini from its preserving and pnrifjing proper- 
ikm it Wfi^ the gmtefnl emblem of divine grace in tlie 
isonl. Il M worthy of our attentive regard that, when Artai- 
m%m g^Tf 9ft]t to Etra the prieBt, be set no limit to the 
qii*ikltty : mad we utaj be quite eertiiin that when the King of 
kiiigy dbtrilMll60 gtmce among His royal priesthood, the sup- 
ply I9 T40t cMdl »hort by Him. Often are we straitened in our- 
eolv<j«^ but ti^vt^r in the Lord, He who chooses to gather 
laiKsli manuft will find ihat he ma}'^ have as mnch &b he desires. 
Tltert^ u till tmoh f^unlne in Jemsaiem that the citizens should 
eal tlieir bread by weight and drink their water by measure. 
8t>mo things in the economy of grace are measured ; for in- 
stnanee^ our riueg^ and gall are given ub with such exaetnesi 
that we never have a single drop too much, but of the salt of 
gruee no stiut is m&dc : '^ Ask what thou wilt, and it s^hall be 
giv<?n unto thee,'* Parents need to lock up the fruit cup- 
board^ and the sweet jars, but there is no need to keep th@ 
salt-bos under lock and key, for few children wUl eat too 
greedily from that. A man may have too much money ^ or 
too much honor, but he cannot have too much grace. When 
Jeshurun waxed fat in the fles^h, ho kicked against God ; bit 
there ii^ no fear of a man's becoming toofuD of grace; tipldhofa 
of grace is impossible. More wealth brings more care, but 
more grace brings more joy. Increased wisdom is increased 
sorrow, but abundance of the Spirit is fulness of joy- Be- 
liever, go to the throne for a large supply of heavenly salt. 
It will season thine afflictions, which are unsavory without 
salt ; it will preserve thy heart, which corrupts if salt be 
absent ; and it will kill thy sins even as salt kills reptiles. 
Thou needest much ; seek much, and have much. 




]>eo« 14. daHiY bbadinos. 849 

" They go from gtrength to atrtngih.** — Psalm Ixxxiv. 7. 

il^HEY go from strength to strength. There are various 
renderings of these words, but all of them contain 
the idea <5f progress. 

Our own good translation of the authorized version is 
enough for us this niDrning. " They go from strength to 
strength." That is, they grow stronger and stronger. Usu- 
ally, if we are walking, we go from strength to weakness ; 
we start fresh and in good order for our journey ; but by and 
by the road is rough, and the sun is hot ; we sit down by the 
wayside, and then again painfully pursue our weary way. 
But the Christian pilgrim, having obtained fresh supplies of 
grace, is as vigorous after years of toilsome travel and strug- 
gle as when he first set out. He may not be quite so elate 
and buoyant, nor perhaps quite so hot and hasty in his zeal, 
as he once was ; but he is much stronger, in all that consti- 
tutes real power, and travels, if more slowly, far more surely. 
Some gray-haired veterans have been as firm in their grasp 
of truth, and as zealous in diffusing it, as they were in their 
younger days ; but, alas, it must be confessed it is often 
otherwise, for the love of many waxes cold, and iniquity 
abounds ; but this is their own sin, and not the fault of the 
promise, which still holds good : " The youths shall faint and 
be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall ; but they that 
wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength ; they shall 
mount up with wings as eagles, they shall run and not be 
weary, and they shall walk and not faint." Fretful spirits sit 
down and trouble themselves about the future. ** Alas," say 
they, " we go from affliction to affliction." Very true, O 
thou of little faith, but then thou goest from strength to 
strength also. Thou shalt never find a bundle of affliction 
which has not bound up in the midst of it sufficient grace. 
God will give the strength of ripe manhood with the burden 
allotted to full-growfa shoulders. 
80 



DiJIiT BEADXNGB. 1)30. t| 



OtjioA kissed her mother-^n-lmw i hid Ruth dave ujUo h^J' 
Ruth i. 14, 




40 TH of them ktid an affoction for Naomi, and there- 
fore set out with her upon her return to the land of 
Jadah. But the hour of test oame ^ Naomi most 
|imeeI£Bhlj set before each of them the triaJs which awaited 
Lthem, and bade them, if they cared for ease and eomfort, to 
ireturn to their Moabitisiili Mendi. At first hoth of them de- 
clared that thoy would eaat in their lot with the Lord's people ; 
rtut^ upon 6tiU further coEsideratiou* Orpah, with mueh grief 
Iwad a respectful Mss, left her mother-in-laWj and her people^ 
LAnd her God^ and went hack to her idolatrous frieuds, while 
[Ruth, with all her heart, gave here elf up to the God of her 
1 mother-in-law. It is one thing to love the wajs of the Lord 
LIT lien aU is fair, aud qtiite another to eleave to them under aU 
Fdiaoouragements and dlMenlties. The kisB of outward pro* 
fession is very cheap and easy, but the practical cleaving to 
the Lord which must show itself in holy decision for truth 
and holiness, is not so small a matter. How stands the case 
with us ? is our heart fixed upon Jesus ? is the sacrifice bound 
with cords to the horns of the altar ? Have we counted the 
cost, and are we solemnly ready to suffer all worldly loss for 
the Master's sake ? The after gain wilLbe an abundant rec- 
ompense, for Egypt's treasures are not to be compared with 
the glory to be revealed. Orpah is heard of no more ; in 
glorious ease and idolatrous pleasure, her life melts into the 
gloom of death ; but Ruth lives in history and in heaven, for 
grace has placed her in the noble line whence sprung the 
King of kings. Blessed among women shall those be who for 
Christ's sake can renounce all ; but forgotten, and worse than 
forgotten, shall those be, who, in the hour of temptation, do 
violence to conscience, and turn back unto the world. O that 
this morning we may not be content with the form of devotion, 
which may be no better than Orpah's kiss ! but may the Holy 
Spirit work in us a cleavmg^oi o\xt ^\io\^\i<i«t\»\a ^svaLord Jesus. 




Deb. 16. BAII.T BXADnros. 851 

" Came unto JHe." ^Matthew zL 28. 

E (srj of the Christian religion is the gentle word^ 
** Come." The Jewish law harshly said, ** Go, take 
heed ante thy steps as to the path in whieh thon shalt 
walk. Break the commandments, and thon shalt perish; 
keep diem, and thon shalt live." The law was a dispensa- 
tion of terror, which drove men before it as with a scourge ; 
the gospel draws with bands of love. Jesus is the good 
Shepherd going before His sheep, bidding them follow Him, 
and ever leading them onwards with the sweet word, ** Come." 
The law repels ; the gospel attracts. The law 'shows the dis- 
tance which there is between God and man; the gospel 
bridges that awfiil chasm, and brings the sinner across it. 

From the first moment of your spiritual life imtil you are 
ushered into glory, the language of Christ to you will be, 
** Came, came unto Me." As a mother puts out her finger to her 
little child, and wooes it to walk by saying, '' Come," even so 
does Jesus. He will always be ahead of you, bidding you 
follow Him as the soldier follows his captain. He will always 
go before you to pave your way, and clear your path, and 
you shall hear His animating voice calling you after Him all 
through life ; while in the solemn hour of death. His sweet 
words with which He shall usher you into the heavenly world 
shall be — " Come, ye blessed of my Father." 
. Nay, further, this is not only Christ's cry to you, but, if yon 
be a believer, this is your cry to Christ — " Come ! come ! " 
You will be longing for His second advent ; you will be say- 
ing, " Come quickly ; even so, come. Lord Jesus." You will 
be panting for nearer and closer communion with Him. As 
His voice to you is, " Come," your response to Him will be, 
'' Come, Lord, and abide with me. Come, and occupy alone 
the throne of my heart; reign there without a rival, and 
consecrate me entirely to Thy service." 



§9t PATLY B£JJDIK0S> Pe€. Vf* 

" I remember tJiee*^ — Jeremifth iL 2. 

^Bg^T ns note that Christ delights to think upon Hii 
i,Vl[:^"| Church, and to look upon her beautj. As the hifd 
'"^^^^^-^ f eturneth ofteii to its nest, and as the wayfarer haje- 
tens to hia home, bq doth the mind continually pursue the 
object of its choice. Wo cannot look too often upon th»t 
face which we lore ; we desire always to have our precious 
things in our eight. It is even bo with our Lord Jesus. 
From all eternity, *' His deiighta were with the sons of 
men;'* His thonghtg rolled onward to the time when Hii 
elect should be born into the world ; He viewed them in the 
mirror of His foreknowledge. " In Thy book," he says, 
** all my members were written, which in oontiuuance were 
fashioned, when as yet there was none of them.*' (Ps, cnxi^ 
16.) When the world was set upon its pillars, Ke was there, 
and He pct the bounds of the people according to the num- 
ber of tliu children of liirael. Many a time before His incar- 
nation, He descended to this lower earth in the similitude 
of a man ; on the plains of Mamre (Gen. xviii.), by the brook 
of Jabbok (Gen. zxxii. 24-30), beneath the walls of Jericho 
(Josh. V. 13), and in the fiery furnace of Babylon (Dan. iiL 
19-25), the Son of man visited His people. Because His 
soul delighted in them. He could not rest away from them, 
for His heart longed after them. Never were they absent 
from His heart, for He had written their names upon His 
hands, and graven them upon His side. As the breastplate 
containing the names of the tribes of Israel was the most 
brilliant ornament worn by the high priest, so the names 
of Christ's elect were His most precious jewels, and glittered 
on His heart. We may often forget to meditate upon the 
perfections of our Lord, but He never ceases to remember 
us. Let us chide ourselves for past forgetfulness, and pray 
for grace ever to bear Him in fondest remembrance. Lord, 
paint upon the eyeballs of my soul the image of Thy Son. 




Dec. 18. DAILY BBADnroB. 868 

**BeHd your kearif and not your garments,** — Joel ii. 13. 

SNT-RENDING, and other outward signs of 
religious emotion, are easily manifested^ and are /re- 
quently hypocritical : but to feel true repentance is 
fur more difficult, and consequently far less common. Men 
will attend to the most multiplied and minute ceremonial 
regulations, — for such things are pleasing to the fleshy — but 
true religion is too humbling, too heart-searching, too 
thorough for the tastes of carnal men ; they prefer something 
more ostentatious, flimsy, and worldly. Outward observances 
are temporarily comfortable ; eye and ear are pleased ; self- 
conceit is fed, and self-righteousness is pu£fed up : but they 
are uUimaJtdy ddusvue^ for in the article of death, and at the 
day of judgment, the soul needs something more substantial 
than ceremonies and rituals to lean upon. Apart from vital 
godliness, all religion is utterly vain ; oflfered without a sin- 
cere heart, every form of worship is a solemn sham and an 
impudent mockery of the majesty of heaven. — Heast-bend- 
ING is divinely wrought and solemnly felt. It is a secret 
grief which is personally tacperienced^ not in mere form, but 
as a deep, soul-moving work of the Holy Spirit upon the in- 
most heart of each believer. It is not a matter to be merely 
talked of and believed in, but keenly and sensitively felt in 
every living child of the living God. It is powerfully hu- 
nhiUaiing^ and completely sin^purging ; but then it is sweetly 
preparative ioT those gracious consolations which proud, 
unhumbled spirits are unable to receive ; and it is distinctly 
discriminating J for it belongs to the elect of God, and to 
them alone. The text commands us to rend our hearts, but 
they are naturally hard as marble : how, then, can this be 
done ? We must take them to Calvary : a dying Saviour's 
voice rent the rocks once, and it is as powerful now. O 
blessed Spirit, let us hear the death-cries of Jesus, and our 
hearts shall be rent even as men rend their vestures in the 
day of lamentation. 
SO* 



DAiLT BiLADiifoe* Deo. 19< 



'* ^ie lot is easi into tlie lapf but the whoh dijtposing tkermf k of 
the Lord.*' — Froy^Ths xyL 33, 

^tTI , I^ ^^^ disposal of tlio lot m the Lord's, whose is the 



lv|,|| arrangement of our whole life? If the simple cast- 
y/^R^ ing of a lot in guided by Him, how much njorB the 
Civents of our eiitire Efe — espeoinUy when we are told hy 
our hi e seed SaTiour, ** The very hairs of your head are all 
numbered ; not a sparrow falleth to the ground without your 
Father." It would bring a holy calm over your mind, dear 
friend, if you were always to remember this. It would bo 
relieve your mind firom anxiety, that you would be the better 
able to walk in patience, quiet, aitd cheerfulness, as a Chris- 
tian should^ When a man is anxiotu, he cannot pray with 
faith ; when he is troubled about the worlds he cannot serve 
his Master j Ms thoughts are serving himself , If you would 
** seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousneBs/' all 
things would then be added unto you. You are meddling 
with Christ's business, and neglecting your own, when you 
fret about your lot and circumstances. You have been try- 
ing " providing " work, and forgetting that it is yours to 
obey. Be wise, and attend to the obeying, and let Christ 
manage the providing. Come and survey your Father's 
storehouse, and ask whether He will let you starve while He 
has laid up so great an abundance in His garner. Look at 
•His heart of mercy; see if that can ever prove unkind i 
Look at His inscrutable wisdom ; see if that will ever be at 
fault. Above all, look up to Jesus Christ, your Intercessor, 
and ask yourself, while He pleads, can your Father deal un- 
graciously with you ? If He remembers even sparrows, will 
He forget one of the least of His poor children ? " Cast 
thy burden upon the Lord, and He will sustain thee. He 
wiU never sujQfer the righteous to be moved." 
" My soul, rest happy in thy low estate, 
Nor hope nor wish to be esteemed or great ; 
To take the impieaa ot l\i^ "Will Divine, 
Be that thy gVorj, BJx^\.\io^Qxv^^%^hacaft, 




Dec. 30» DAILY VLBADISQB. 859 

" Yea, I have laved Ihee with an eoeriagting love." — Jer. xxxi. 3. 

)METIMES the Lord Jesus tells His Church His 
love thoughts. " He does not think it enough be- 
hind her back to tell it, but, in her very presence. 
He saySy * Thou art all fair, my love.* It is true, this is not 
His ordinary method ; He is a wise loyer,. and knows when 
to keep back the intimation of loye, and when to let it out ; 
but there are times when He will make no secret of it; times 
when he will put it beyond all dispute in the souls of his peo- 
ple." * The Holy Spirit is often pleased, in a most gracious 
manner, to witness with our spirits of the love of Jesus. 
He takes of the things of Christ, and reveals them unto us. 
No voice is heard from the clouds, and no vision is seen in 
the night, but we have a testimony more sure than either of 
these. If an angel should fly from heaven, and inform the 
saint personally of the Saviour's love to him, the evidence 
would not be one whit more satisfactory than that which is 
borne in the heart by the Holy Ohost. Ask those of the 
Lord's people who have lived the nearest to the gates of 
heaven, and they wiU tell ;f ou that they have had seasons 
when the love of Christ towards them has been a fact so 
clear and sure, that they could no more doubt it than they 
could question their own existence. Yes, beloved believer, 
you and I have had times of refreshing from the presence of 
the Lord, and then our faith has mounted to the topmost 
heights of assurance. We have had confidence to lean our 
heads upon the bosom of our Lord, and we have no more 
questioned our Master's affection to us than John did when 
in that blessed posture : nay, nor so much ; for the dark 
question, ** Lord, is it I that shall betray thee ? " has been 
put far from us. He has kissed us with the kisses of His 
mouth, and killed our doubts by the closeness of His em- 
brace. His love has been sweeter than wine to our souls. 

• B. EnUne's Sennoni. 



" T^ H€ k&ik mait wtli wte «i i 

2 S&smi^ i^^M. 5, 




i eoTeilftlit m divine tn iiB cfi^im, ^ Hz hftibiBidi 
viili iii«e til eTerlftstmg eowetiMmLr Ok, iJbA ^«9| 
word Mm I 6top« mj bouL 6i>d, tlie eTezita^ng Fft- 
tkcTt luA pOMiiTtlj made » e&Teu&nt with tkee ; j€«, ttHlO«d 
who B^mkiB tlie world into aiistetiee hj a ward ; He, ^•Ofoig 
from Bii niAJee^, trnkm hold of tbj hutd and mak^e a obt&> 
natit wilb ihee. la it not a deed, llie elnpeiidiMu «0(&dittMar^ 
Mi4>n (»f which might ramh QUr besrtfl for ever if we oinddfcil^ 
uudefntaQd it t **- HE hath made wilh me a coTeoauC A 
kiog baa not made a ceTenant with me — that were some- 
what ; hot Ibe Prinoe of the kings of the earib, Sbaddmit ^e 
Lord AU-sufficient, the JehoT&b of ages, the eTer1a«dng 
Elobim, ** He bath made with me an eyerlasting eoTenant.^^ 
Bui noti^ef it ii p^^icuiar m iU appUcaiAon, *^ Tet hiitb 
Ho made with mb an everlasting covenant." Here Mei the 
Hwoetneaa of it to each believer. It la nought for me that 
He made peace for the world ; I want to know whether He 
made peace for me I It is little that He hath made a oove- 
nant ; I want to know whether He has made, a covenant with 
me. Blessed is the assurance that He hath made a covenant 
with me ! If God the Holy Ghost gives me assurance of 
this, then His salvation is mine, His heart is mine, He him- 
self is mine — He is my Ood. 

This covenant is everlasting in its duration. An everlast- 
ing covenant means a covenant which had no beginning, and 
which shall never, never end. How sweet, amidst iJl the 
uncertainties of life, to know that <' the foundation of the 
Lor^standeth sure," and to have God's own promise, " My 
covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone 
out of my lips." Like dying David, I will sing of this, even 
though my bouse be not so with God as my heart desiretb. 




I>ec. d2. BAILT JEtKADINQS. d57 

"IwiU drmgihen ihee.''— Isaiah xlL 10. 

^OD has a strong reserve with which to discharge this 
engagement, for He is able to do all things ! Be- 
liever, till thou canst drain dry the ocean of omnip6- 
tence, till thou canst break into pieces the towering moun* 
tains of almighty strength, thou never needest to fear. 
Think not that the strength of man shall ever be able to 
overcome the power of God. Whilst the earth's huge pil- 
lars stand, thou hast enough reason to abide firm in thy faith. 
The same Gtod who directs the earth in its orbit, who feeds 
the burning furnace of the sun, and trims the lamps of heaven, 
has promised to supply thee with daily strength. While He 
is able to uphold the universe, dream not that He will prove 
unable to fulfil His own promises. Eemember what He did 
in the days of old, in the former generations. Remember 
how He spake and it was done ; how He commanded, and it 
stood fast. Shall He that created the world grow weary i 
He hangeth the world upon nothing ; shall He who doth this 
be unable to support His children i Shall He be unfaithfiil 
to His word for want of power ? Who is it that restrains 
the tempest? Doth not He ride upon the wings of the 
wind, and make the clouds His chariots, and hold the ocean 
in the hollow of His hand ? How can He fail thee ? When 
He has put such a faithful promise as this on record, wilt 
thou for a moment indulge the thought that He has out- 
promised himself, and gone beyond His power to fulfil? 
Ah ! no ! Thou canst doubt no longer. 

Thou who art my God and my strength, I can believe 
that this promise shall be fulfilled, for the boundless reser- 
voir of Thy grace can never be exhausted, and the overflow- 
ing storehouse of Thy strength can never be emptied by Thy 
friends or rifled by Thine enemies. 

<* Now let the feeble all be strong, 
And make Jehovah's arm their song." 




$68 BAILY READlKQfl. Beo. i^ 

" Friend^ go up higher J* — Luke mr, 10, 

fjHEN first the life of grace begittB in the sonl, we do 
indeed draw near to God^ tot it is with great fear 
and trembling. Tfce soul, conscious of gailt, and 
}inmbled thereby, i& oTcrawcd witb the sclemnily of its posi- 
tion I it is cast to the earth b j a Bense of tbc grandeoi' of 
Jebovah, in whose presenoe it stands. Witt unfeigned bash- 
fnlneBB it takes tho lowest room. 

Bnt, in after lifoj as the Christian grows in grace , altbongt 
he will never forget the solemmtj of hta position, and will 
never lose that holy awe which mast encompass a graciona 
man when he is in the presence of the Ood who can create 
or can destroy * yet his fear has all its terror taJfen out of 
it J it becomes a holy reverence, and no more an over- 
shadowing dread. He is called up higher, to greater ac- 
cess to G-od in Christ Jesus. Then the man of God, walkmg 
amid the splendors of Deity, and veiling his face. Ilk @ the 
glorious cherubim, with those twin wings, the blood and 
righteousness of Jesus Christ, will, reverent and bowed in 
spirit, approach the throne ; and seeing there a God of love, 
of goodness, and of mercy, he will readize rather the cove- 
nant character of God than His absolute Deity. He will see 
in God rather His goodness than His greatness, and more 
of His love than of His majesty. Then will the soul, bowing 
still as humbly as aforetime, enjoy a more sacred liberty of 
intercession ; for, while prostrate before the glory of the In- 
finite God, it will be sustained by the refreshing conscious- 
ness of being in the presence of boundless mercy and infinite 
love, and by the realization of acceptance " in the Beloved/* 
Thus the believer is bidden to come up higher, and is en- 
abled to exercise the privilege of rejoicing in God, and draw- 
ing near to Him in holy confidence, saying, "Abba, Father." 

" So may we go from strength to strength, 
And daily grow in grace. 
Till, in Thine image raised at length, 




Bee. 24. daily BEADnros. 859 

^^For your sakes He became poor.** — 2 Corinthians viii. 9. 

Lord Jesus Christ was eternally rich, glorious, 
and exalted ; but " though He was rich, yet for ytur 
sakes He became poor." As the rich saint cannot 
be true in his communion with his poor brethren, unless of his 
substance he ministers to their necessities, so (the same rule 
holding with the head as between the members) it is impos- 
sible that our Divine Lord could have had fellowshiji with us 
unless He had imparted to us of His own abounding wealth, 
and had become poor to make us rich. Had He remained 
upon His throne of glory, and had we continued in the ruins 
of the fall without receiving His salvation, communion would 
have been impossible on both sides. Our position by the 
fall, apart from the covenant of grace, made it as impossible 
for fallen man to communicate with God as it is for Belial to 
be in concord with Christ. In order, therefore, that com- 
munion might be compassed, it was necessary that the rich 
Ejnsman should bestow his estate upon his poor relatives ; 
that the righteous Saviour should give to His sinning breth- 
ren of His own perfection, and that we, the poor and guilty, 
should receive of His fulness grace for grace ; that thus in 
giving and receiving, the one might descend from the heights, 
and the others ascend from the depths, and so be able to em- 
brace each other in true and hearty fellowship. Poverty must 
be enriched by Him in whom are infinite treasures before it 
can venture to commune ; and guilt must lose itself in im- 
puted and imparted righteousness ere the soul can walk in 
fellowship with purity. Jesus must clothe His people in His 
own garments, or He cannot admit them into His palace of 
glory ; and He must wash them in His own blood, or else 
they will be too defiled for the embrace of His fellowship. 

O believer, herein is love ! For your sake the Lord Jesus 
" became poor," that He might lift you up into communion 
with Himself. 




'BiOt die 

led tbe wij 

loiFt., shei and she 

, tiie Hoij 
B^ ife pa p ii flf tfac Ailf %iEitt He mim bom 

^ ssxf T^c^fs. winati^s lae aiss of ofi^iii^ an wiiich appertains 
Sk> iJ. acMi^ viij ar« &««& of tke iesk. Let as rererentlj bow 
^«^>f« ikie fiair C&ild wifaoise innoceiiee restores to manhood 
iiLs infTiiiK gkfj ; a2bd kt us praj tiiat He may be formed in 
i£f . vtt kope <yi poij. Fail nos to note .Sis humble parentage. 
His Bkotiker oor Boning's portion describes simply as '' a 
Tirgin,** not a prineess or propbetess, nor a matron of large 
estate. True, ber lineage was not to be despised, for tbe blood 
of kings ran in ber reins ; nor was ber mind a weak and nn- 
tangbt one, for sbe coold sing most sweetly a song of praise ; 
bat yet bow bumble ber position, bow poor tbe man to wbom 
sbe stood affianced, and bow miserable tbe accommodation 
afforded to tbe new-bom King ! Tbos bas poverty become 
consecrated, and men of low estate are exalted to bonor. 
Lbeliever is a portrait of (Mist, but a poor saint is tbe 



Deo. 25. DAILY EEADINGS. 861 

same well-drawn picture hung in the selfsame frame of 
poverty which surrounds the Master's image. 

We esteem every day alike, but still, as the season and 
the general custom suggest thoughts of Jesus, let us joyfully 
remember our dear Eedeemer's glorious hirth. Every day 
should be the birthday of the Saviour to a renewed soul. 
Amid all that is humiliating, there is much that is honorable 
in the circumstances of the birth of our Immanuel. Whose 
birth was ever ushered in by a long train of prophecy, or 
longed for by such a multitude of hearts ? Who but He can 
boast of a forerunner who marked Him as the coming Man ? 
When did angels indulge in midnight songs, or did God ever 
hang a new star in the sky before ? To whose cradle did rich 
and poor make so willing a pilgrimage, and offer such hearty 
and unsought oblations ? Well may earth rejoice ; well may 
all men cease their labor to celebrate " the great birthday" 
of Jesus. Bethlehem, house of bread, we see in thee our 
hopes forever gratified. 'Tis He, the Saviour, long foretold, 
to usher in the age of gold. Let gladness rule the hour ; 
let holy song and sweet heart-music accompany our soul in 
its raptures of delight. 

The golden name, Immanuel, is inexpressibly delightful. 
It is a word fit for the lips of cherubim for its majesty, but, 
because of its marvellous condescension, none but men can 
utter it. He is not so with seraphs as He is with vs. God 
with us in our nature, in our sorrow, in our lifework, in our 
punishment, in our grave, and now with us, or rather we 
with Him, in resurrection, ascension, triumph, and second 
advent splendor. The babe of Bethlehem appears to be 
manifestly with us in weakness and in poverty; let us not 
forget that He is equally near us in His glory and honor. 
Faith clasps the child, and love kisses Him with the kisses 
of her lips. for true spiritual fellowship with Immanuel 
all this day! 

81 



362 UAILT BEADINGS. D&C, 20. J 

** The last Adam.^— 1 Corinthians xv, 45. I 

^ESUS is the federal head of his elect. As in Adaial 
'U etery heir of flesh aiid Mood has a porsonal iDterest J 
*^ because he is the covenant head and representative 1 
of the race, as considered under the law of works?, so, nnd^J 
the law of grace, every redeemed soul is one with the LordJ 
from heaven f since He is the Second Adam, the SponsofI 
and Substitute of the elect in the new covenant of love. I 
The apostle Patil declares that Levi wag in the loins of] 
Ahraham when Mel chizedek met him: it is a certain truth J 
that the believer was in the loins of Jesus Christ, the Medi-I 
ator, when in old eternity the covenant settlements of gracoJ 
were decreed, ratified, and made snro forever. Thus, whatH 
ever Christ hath doncj He hath wroiight for the whole bodyi 
of His Chureh. We were crucified in Him, and buried withi 
Him (read Col. ii. 10-13), and, to make it still more won-' 
derful, we are risen with Him, and even ascended with Him 
to the seats on high. (Eph. ii. 6.) It is thus that the Church 
has fulfilled the law, and is " accepted in the Beloved,^^ It is 
thus that she is regarded with complacency by the just Jeho- 
vah, for He views her in Jesus, and does not look upon her 
as separate from her covenant head. As the anointed Re- 
deemer of Israel, Christ Jesus has nothing distinct from His 
Church, but all that He has He holds for her. Adam's 
righteousness was ours so long as he maintained it, and his 
sin was ours the moment that he committed it ; and, in the 
same manner, all that the Second Adam is or does is ours 
as well as His, seeing that He is our representative. Here 
is the foundation of the covenant of grace. This gracious 
system of representation and substitution, which moved Jus- 
tin Martyr to cry out, '* blessed change ! sweet permu- 
tation ! " this is the very groundwork of the gospel of our 
salvation, and is to be received with strong faith and rap- 
turous }0J, 




Dec. 27. DAILY BEAD1N68. 363 

" Can the rush ffrow up without mire ? " — Job viiL 11. 

i nish is spongy and hollow, and even so is a hypo- 
crite ; there is no substance or stability in him. It 
is shaken to and fro in every wind, just as formalists 
yield to every influence ; for this reason the rush is not broken 
by tibe tempest, neither are hypocrites troubled with perse- 
cution. I would not willingly be a deceiver, or be deceived ; 
perhaps the text for this day may help me to try myself, 
whether I be a hypocrite or no. The rush by nature lives 
in water, and owes its very existence to the mire and moisture 
wherein it has taken root ; let the mire become dry, and the 
rush withers very quickly. Its greenness is absolutely de- 
pendent upon circumstances ; a present abundance of wat^r 
makes it flourish, and a drought destroys it at onoe> Is this 
my case ? Do I only serve God when I am in good com- 
pany, or when religion is profitable and respectable ? Do I 
love the Lord only when temporal comforts are received 
from His hands ? If so, I am a base hypocrite, and, like the 
withering rush, I shaU perish when death deprives me of 
outward joys. But can I honestly assert that, when bodily 
• comforts have been few, and my surroundings have been 
rather adverse to grace than at all helpful to it, I have still 
held fast my integrity? — then have I hope that there is genu- 
ine vital godliness in me. The rush cannot grow without mire, 
but plants of the Lord's right hand planting can and do 
flourish even in the year oi drought. A goodly man often 
grows best when his worldly circumstances decay. He who 
follows Christ for his bag is a Judas ; they who follow for 
loaves and fishes are children of the devil ; but they who at- 
tend Him out of love to Himself are his own beloved ones. 
Lord, let me find my life in Thee^ and not in the mire of 
this world's favor or gain. 



PKEPACE. 



SNOWING that heads of families, in these busy 
JH^ days, have little time to select Hymns for 
the family altar, and are not always judicious in 
their choice, I have carefully made a selection of 
verses which I believe . will be found sweet and 
suitable for morning song. It is unwise to make 
family exercises long, and therefore I have only 
allotted two, or, at the most, three verses; but 
these ^are of the richest kind. The tunes are merely 
appended for the guidance of beginners in song; 
they have been generally chosen on account of their 
simplicity of character. 

Let no family neglect the praises of the Lord, for, 
as Matthew Henry says, those who pray do well, 
those who read and pray do better, but those who 
sing, and read, and pray, do best of all. Happy is 
that household where the day begins with God, all 
hearts and tongues praising him. Let those who 
sing in the family continue the exercise, and let those 
who do not, begin at once, if possible. 



3T4 HTMN8 FOR MORNING WORSBlPi 



THOU from wliom all goodncas flowsj 
I lift tay Beart to Thee ; 
Ijq all my iorrows* eijnflicte* woes, 
Deitr Lord, remember mo I 







When groaning on mj burdoned heart 

My sins lie heayily. 
My pardon speak, new peaee impart, 

In love remember me, 

0TE MoasiKG. C* M* . Bdmm, NaemL 

LORD, in the day. Then art about 
The paths wherein I tread ; 
And in the night, when I He downi 
Thou art about mj bed. 

*Tis Thou dost crown my hopes, and plant 

With good sue ess each day ; 
This crown, together with myself, 

At Thy blest feet Hay, 

0, let my house a temple be, 

That I and mine may sing 
Hosanna to Thy Majesty, 

And praise our heavenly King ! 

7th Mokning. 7's. Fulton* Wayland. 

JESUS, cast a look on me ; 
Give me sweet simplicity ; 
Make me poor and keep me low, 
Seeking only Thee to know. 

Leaning on Thy loving breast, 
Where a weary soul may rest ; 
Feeling well the peace of God 
Flowing from Thy precious blood ! 

In this posture let me live. 
And hosannas daily give ; 
In this temper let me die, 
And hosannas ever cry ! 



HYMNS FOB MORNING WOBSHIP. 876 

Bta MofiKiKO. L. M. Duke 8i. JMkwdL 

WAKE, my soul, and with the sua 
Thy daily stage^f duty run ; 
Shake off dull sloth, mm early rise 
To pay thy morning sacrifice. 

All praise to Thee, who safe hast kept. 
And hast refreshed me whilst I slept ! 
Grant, Lord, when I from death shall wak^ 
I may of endless life partake ! 

Direct, control, suggest, this day. 
All I design, or do, or say ; 
That all my powers, with all their might. 
In Thy sole glory may unite. 

9th MoBioNO. L. M. Wmdkam. Hephyr. 

"VTyTHEN I survey the wondrous cross 

T T On which the Prince of glory died, 
My richest gain I count but loss. 
And pour contempt on all my pride. 

Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast, 
Save in the death of Christ, my God ; 

All the vain things which charm me most, 
I sacrifice them to His blood. 

See from His head, His hands, His feet^ 
Sorrow and love flow mingled down I 

Did e'er such love and sorrow meet. 
Or thorns compose so rich a crown ? 

10th Morning. C. M. OrioMilU. WUik. 

HOW sweet the name of Jesus sounds 
In a believer's ear ! 
It soothes his sorrows, heals his wouUds, 
And drives away his fear ! 

It makes the wounded spirit whole. 

And calms the troubled breast ; 
'Tis manna to the hungry soul, 

And to the weary rest. 



876 HYMNS FOB MOBNING WOBSHIP. 



Utu MoRNnro. L. M. Havfhburg, RoUandw 



I 



OGOD, Thoti art mj God alone ; 
Early to Tliee raj soal shall cry j 
A pilgrim in a laud dkknowQ, 

A thirsty land, where ipri ugs are dry. 

Better than life itself Thy love^ 
Dearer than all beside to me i 

For whom have I in heavou above, 
Or what on earth, compared to Thee } 

Praise with my heart, my mind^ my voioei 
For all Thy mercy, I will give ; 

My Boul shall still in God rejoice, 

My tongue shall blcsB Thee while I liTOf 



12Tn MonmsQ* C. M. MarUw* Mrmsnm 

LET all the just, to God, with Joy, 
Their cheerful voices raise ; 
^ For well the righteous it becomes 

To sing glad songs of praise. 

For faithful is the word of God ; 

His works with truth abound ; 
He justice loves — and all the earth 

Is with his goodness crowned. 



13th Mobning. S. M. Golden HtU. BoyU. 

BLESS the Lord, my soul ! 
Let all within me join, 
And aid my tongue to bless His name 
Whose favors are divine. 







'Tis He forgives thy sins, 
'Tis He relieves thy pain, 
'Tis He that heals thy sicknesses, 
And makes thee young again. 

He crowns thy life with love, 
When ransomed from the grave ; 
He that redeemed my soul from hell 
Hath sovereign power to save. 



0' 



HTMNS FOB MOBNING WORSHIP. 877 

14th Mornino. C. M. Azmon, Dedham. 

|IIR God, our help in ages past. 
Our hope for years to come, 
Our shelter from the stormy blast. 
And our eternal hVkne. 

Under the shadow of Thy throne 

Thy saints have dwelt secure ; 
Sufficient is Thine arm alone. 

And our defence is sure. 

15th Mobnino. C. M. Helena, NaomiL 

THEEE is an hour when I must part 
With all I hold most dear, 
And life, with its best hopes, will then 
As nothingness appear. 

There is an hour when I must stand 

Before the judgment-seat. 
And all my sins, and all my foes. 

In awful vision meet. 

Saviour, then, in all my need. 
Be near, be near to me. 

And let my soul, in steadfast faith, 
Find life and heaven in Thee ! 

16th Mobniko. C. M. Ihmdee, OrionviUi. 

JESUS, Thou art my Righteousness, 
For all my sins were Thine ; 
Thy death hath boUght of God my peace. 
Thy life hath made Him mine. 

Spotless and just in Thee I am ; 
I feel my sins forgiven ; 

1 taste salvation in Thy name, 
And antedate my heaven. 

17th Mobnikg. C. M. Old JBundredih, 

THOU by whom we come to God, 
The Life, the Truth, the Way ; 
The path of prayer Thyself hast trod : 
Lord, teach us how to pray I 







878 HYMNS FOE MOBNINa WORSHIP. 

IBtH MoENHfa. B^M^ M, Thomas* Lahan. 

THE Lord Himself will keep 
His people safe from harm, 
Will bold the helm, and guide the gMp, 
With Hia almighty arm. 

Then let the tempests roar. 

The billows heave and swell ; 
We trust to reach the peacefal Bhore 

Where all the ransomed dwell* 



Y spirit on Thy care, 
Blest Saviour, I recline ; 
Thou wilt not leave me to despair. 
For Thou iirt Love diidne- 



M^ 



In Thee I place my trust, 

On Thee I calmly rest ; 
I know Thee good, I know Thee just. 

And count Thy choice the host. 



O' 



^TJR Lord, when here in feeble flesh, 
Poured out His criea and tearSt 
And in His mi^asure feels afresh 
What every member bears. 

Then let our humble faith address 

His mercy and His power ; 
We shall obtain delivering graee 

In the distressing houTp 

2 1st MaBxi)fa« 7's. Iftiremberg Serndon* 

tOME, my soul, thy suit prepare ; 
Jesus loves to answer prayer ; 
He Himself has bid thee pray. 
Therefore will not say thee nay. 

Thou art coming to a King ; 
La^rge petitions with thee bring; 
For His grace and power are such, 
Kone can ever ask too much* 



c* 



G< 



HTHNB FOB MaJEOONO WORSHIP. 879 

22d Mobnino. L. M. Zephyr. Betreai. 

IN every dark, distressing hour, 
When sin and Satan join their power. 
Let this dear hope repel the dart — 
That Jesus bears us on His heart. 

Great Advocate, Almighty Friend, 
On Him our humble hopes depend ; 
Our cause can never, never fall. 
For Jesus pleads, and must prevail. 

23]> Morning. C. M. Ihmdee* ByefiM. 

LOD is our Refuge, tried and proved. 
Amid a stormy world ; 
We will not fear, though earth be moved. 
And hills in ocean hurled. 

The waves may roar, the mountains shake. 

Our comforts shall not cease ; 
The Lord His saints will not forsake, 

The Lord will give us peace. 

24th Mobning. C. M. Evom. La Mvra. 

COME, let us to the Lord our God, 
With contrite hearts, return ; 
Our God is gracious, nor will leave 
The desolate to mourn. 

His voice commands the tempest forth, 

And stills the stormy wave ; 
And though His arm be strong to smite, 

'Tis also strong to save. 

25th Morning. CM. Henry. Stephens* 

" Y God, the Spring of all my joys. 
The Life of my delights, 
The Glory of my brightest days. 
And Comfort of my nights ! 

Li darkest shades, if He appear. 

My dawning is begun ; 
He is my soul's sweet morning star. 

And He my rising sun. 



M 



882 UYUUB FOB H0BKI2ia WOBSSIIP* 




ITYMNS FOR MORNING WORSfflP. 



JV ihe maniht of Febmar}/, Aprils J«m§^ 



1«T UomimQ. C. M* Bfemm, 

THAT I oould tbc bjegsiug prore^ 
My Leart'a cxtretoo desire ! 







Live happy In my SaTiour's Igre, 
A Sid HI lib arma expire! 

Notliin j? I nuk or want beiide. 
Of all in earth or beaTeiif 

But let mo feci Thy blood applicilt 
And VifG and die forgiYoa, 



O" 



|M Thee, eaob momiDg, mj God, 
My waking thoughts attend ; 
In Theo are founded all my hopes, 
In Thee my wishes end. 

My spirit, in Thy hand secure, 

Fears no approaching ill ; 
For whether waking or asleep, 

Thou, Lord, art with me still. 

Sd Mobkino. C. M. Balcrma. Hdauu 

LORD, I believe Thou hast prepared, 
Unworthy though I be, 
For mo a blood-bought free reward, — 
A golden harp for me. 

'Tis strung and tuned for endless years, 

And formed by power divine, 
To sound in God the Father's ears 

No other name but Thine. 



H' 



HTMNS FOB MOBNINO WORSHIP. 883 

4th Morning. L. M. Hamhwrg. Zephyr* 

"EAR, gracious God ! a sinner's cry, 
For I have nowhere else to fly ; 
My hope, my only hope 's in Thee ; 
God, be merciM to me 1 

To Thee I come, a sinner poor, 
And wait for mercy at Thy door ; 
Indeed, I've nowhere else to flee : 
O God, be merciful to me ! 

6th Mobning. L. M. Dumbwtton* Ward* 

IN every pang that .rends the heart, 
The Man of Sorrows had a part ; 
He sympathizes with our grief, 
And to the sufferer sends relief. 

With boldness, therefore, at the throne. 
Let us make all our sorrows known ; 
And ask the aid of heavenly power 
To help us in the evil hour. 

6th Mobning. L. M. Rest. Capivvtty* 

BENEATH Thy cross I lay me down, 
And mourn to see thy bloody crown 5 
Love drops in blood from every vein ; 
Love is the spring of all His pain. 

Here, Jesus, I shall ever stay, 
And spend my longing hours away. 
Think on Thy bleeding wounds and pain, 
And contemplate Thy woes again. 

7th Morning. C. M. Naomi. La Mvra* 

GIVE me a calm, a thankful heart, 
From every murmur free ; 
The blessings of Thy grace impart. 
And let me live to Thee. 

Let the sweet hope that Thou art mine 

My path of life attend ; 
Thy presence through my journey shine. 

And bless its happy end I 



Bt HYENS Foa MOa^TKG wonsHip. ^ 

dm MoKNiNO. L. M, Old ITundrcd* Malhiiid, 

JESUB, our God, our bohIs adore, 

A painful sufferer now no more i ^«- 

High on His Fatbcr'a tkroue He reigris WM 

O'er earth, aod heiwen'a oxteDslre plain B. ^M 

IliB race forever is complete ; ^M 

Forever uutlisturbed His seat ; ^U 

Myriads of aiagcls round Him fl j^ ^H 

Anil sing Hia well- gained victorj. ^H 

¥^t *midst the honors of His thronet ^H 

He joys not for Himself atone ; ^H 

His meaueat servants share their pfirt — ^ ^M 

Bharo in their Saviour's tender heart. ^* 

FOKEVER here my rest elmU be, 
Close to Thy bleeding side ; 
This all my hope and all my plea,*— 
For mo the Saviour died. 

My dying Saviour and my God, 

Fountain for guilt and sin, 
Sprinkle me ever with Thy blood, 

And cleanse and keep me clean* 

IOth Mobnino. L. M. Loving Kindness, RoUand* 

AWAKE, my soul, in joyful lays. 
To sing Thy great Redeemer's praise ; 
He justly claims a song from me ; 
His loving-kindness, 0, how free ! 

He saw me ruined in the fall. 
Yet loved mo notwithstanding all ; 
He saved me from my lost estate ; 
His loving-kindness, 0, how great 1 

Though numerous hosts of mighty foes, 
Though earth and hell my way oppose. 
He safely leads my soul along ; 
His loving-kindness, 0, how strong I 



HTMNS FOB MOBNINO WORSHIP. 885 



N' 



11th Mobnikg. C. M. Peterboro*» Azmon* 

""OW let our cheerful eyes survey 
Our great High Priest above, 
And celebrate His constant care 
And sympathetic love. 

Though raised to a superior throne. 

Where angels bow around, 
And high o'er all the shining train, 

With matchless honors crowned, — 

The names of all His saints He bears 

Deep graven on His heart ; 
Nor shall the meanest Christian say 

That he hath lost his part. 

12th Mobning. C. M. Brown* Dowm* 

JESUS, the King of glory, reigns 
On Sion's heavenly hill ; 
Looks like a lamb that has been slain, 
And wears His priesthood still. 

He ever lives to intercede 

Before His Father's face ; 
Give Him, my soul, thy cause to plead, 

Nor doubt the Father's grace. 

18tb Morning. L. M* Scmhurgt BuU 

JESUS, our Saviour and our God, 
Arrayed in majesty and blood. 
Thou art our life ; our souls in Thee 
Possess a full felicity. 

All our immortal hopes are laid 
In Thee, our Surety and our Head ; 
Thy cross. Thy cradle, and Thy thronOi 
Are big with glories yet unknown. 

O, let our souls forever lie 
Beneath the blessings of Thine eye ; 
'Tis heaven on earth, 'tis heaven above, 
To see Thy face and taste Thy love. 

33 



L' 







HYMK3 FOIt MOENINa WOBSHIP. 

14tii MoR?ftNo, L. M, Oraiitude* Aiki^M* 

pED JESUS, wbeo we stand afar 
And lee Thoe blcedmi^ on the cross* 
Itt lore of Tbee and scorn of self, 
0, may we count tli© world as lose, 

Wheo wf> behold Thy bleoding wounds. 
And the rougb way that Thou hast trod. 

Make us to hato the load of sin 
That lay so heavy on our God. 

IBtu MoRjrrao. C M, BaUrma* A^mtftu 

FOR a heart to praise my God, 
A heart from sin set free, 
A heart that always feels Thy blood 
So freely spilt for me ! 

A heart resigned, sub missive, meek^ 

My dear Redt»emer'a throne. 
Where only Citriat is heard to speak, 

AVhere Jean a reigns alone » 

16th Morning. L. M. . Woodworfh, Zephyr, 

JUST as I am, without one plea, 
But that Thy blood was shed for me, 
And that Thou bidd'st me come to Thee, 
Lamb of God, I come I I come ! 

Just as I am, and waiting not 
To rid my soul of one dark blot, 
To Thee, whose blood can cleanse each spotj 
Lamb of God, I come ! I come ! 

17th Morning. C. M. Marlow, OrtoiwiUe* 

^ES, I will bless Thee, my God, 
Through all my mortal days, 
And to eteruity prolong 

Thy vast, Thy boundless praise. 

In every smiling, happy hour, 

Be this my sweet employ ; 
Thy praise refines my earthly bliss, 

And doubles all my joy. 



S' 



HTMN8 FOR MOUNING WORSHIP. 887 

I81B MoBNiNG. 7*8. Nuremberg. Fulton* 

I ON of God, to Thee we bow; 
Thou art Lord, and only Thou ; 
Thou the woman's promised Seed ; 
Thou, who didst for sinners bleed I 

Thee the angels ceasless sing ; 
Thee we praise, our Priest and King* 
Worthy is Thy name of praise. 
Full of glory, full of grace ! 

19th Mobning. C. M. Azmon. Selena, 

APPROACH, my soul, the mercy-seat, 
Where Jesus answers prayer ; 
There humbly fall before His feet, 
For none can perish there. 

Thy promise is my only plea ; 

With this I venture nigh ; 
Thou callest burdened souls to Thee, 

And such, Lord, am L 

20th Mobking. C. M. Balerma, Natym* 

^ID Jesus bow His sacred head. 
And die a death of shame ? 
Let men and angels magnify 
And bless His holy name ! 

0, let us live in peace and love, 

And cast away our pride. 
And crucify our sins afresh. 

As He was crucified I 



D' 



2l8T Mobning. 7's. Fulton. Pleyt^s EyiMH 

HEAVENLY FATHER, to whose eye 
Future things unfolded lie, 
Through the desert, where I stray. 
Let Thy counsels guide my way. 

Lord, uphold me day by day, 
Shed a light upon my way, 
Guide me through perplexing snares. 
Care for me in all my cares. 



iB8 BYMK3 FOE MORNING WOESHIP. 

GIVE to the wiudn % fears; 
Hope and he ua dismayed ; 
God hoiirs tby f^igh^, and eounts thj tears ^ 

God shall Hfl up thy head. ■ 

tThrough waves, and cloud s^ and etoTnii, ^M 

lie gently clearB thy way ; ^M 

Wait thou His time ; so ehall this night ^M 

Boon end in joyous day« ^^H 

d^D MoBKiiso. 0* M. I>undeeM Brown. 

THE head that once was eroinied with thorna 
la crowned with glory now ; 
A royal diadem adorns 

The mighty Victor*a hrow, ^— 

The hight^st place that heaven affordfl ^| 

' 1b Hia, 18 Hisi hy right ; ^| 

The Kinf^ of kings, and Lord of Iord@f ^^ 
And heaven's eternal Light. 

The joy of all who dwell above, 

The joy of all below, 
To whom He manifests His love. 

And grants His name to know. 

24th Morning. L. M. Hthroju Oa^ivUi/t 

ITHIKST, but not as once I did, 
The vain delights of earth to share ; 
Thy wounds, Immanuel, all forbid 

That I should seek my pleasure there. 

It was the sight of Thy dear cross 

First weaned my soul from earthly things. 

And taught me to esteem as dross 

The mirth of fools and pomp of kings. 

Dear Fountain of delight unknown, 

No longer sink below the brim, 
But overflow, and pour me down 

A living and life-giving stream* 



S' 



HTM14S FOB MOBNINO WOBSHIP. 889 

26th Mobning. 8, 7. Sicily ^ or Dismission* 

[WBET the moments, ricli in blessing, 
Which before the cross I spend ; 
Life, and health, and peace possessing 
From the sinner's dying Friend. 

Here TU sit, forever viewing 

Mercy's streams in streams of blood ; 

Precious drops, my soul bedewing. 
Plead and claim my peace with God. 

26th Morning. 8, 7. Orcen/oiHe, 

TRULY blessed is the station 
Low before His cross to lie, 
While I see divine compassion 
Floating in His languid eye. 

Here it is I find my heaven, 

While upon the Lamb I gaze : 
Love I much ? I've more forgiven ; 

Pm a miracle of grace. 

27th Mobning. C. M. Brovm, Dedham. 

WHOM have we. Lord, in heaven but Thee, 
And whom on earth beside ? 
Where else for succor can we flee, 
Or in whose strength confide ? 

Thou art our portion here below, 

Our promised bliss above : 
Ne'er may our souls an object know 
. So precious as Thy love. 

28th Mobning. L. M. Vxbridge* Mtroe. 

ETERNAL Spirit ! we confess. 
And sing the wonders of Thy grace ; 
Thy power conveys our blessings down 
From God the Father and the Son. 

The troubled conscience knows Thy voice, 
Thy cheering words awake our joys ; ^ 

Thy words allay the stormy wind. 
And calm the surges of the mind. 
88* 



890 HTMN8 FOB MOUKtNG WOnSKIP, 

f I inE Lord 19 King [ lift up thy yoice ; 

1 earth, and all ye heavens, rejoice j 
From world to world the joy BliaU ring ; 
The Lord omnipotent is King. 



The Lord ia King I who then shall dare 
Resist His will, distrust His care. 
Or murmur at His wise decrees. 
Or doubt Hia royal promises f 



BOtu MoRHnro. 7*«. FuUon. Flcyefs B'ymfu 

CmLDREN of the heavenly King, 
Ai ye journey, iweetly siog ; 
Bing you? Saviour's worthy praiae. 
Glorious in His works and ways ! 

We are travelling home to God, 
In the way the fathers trod ; 
They are happy now ; and wo 
Boon their liappitiesB shall see. 



Fear not, brethren ! joyful stand 
On the borders of your land ; 
Jesus Christ, your Father's Spn, 
Bids you undismayed go on. 



SlsT Morning. C. M. Mear. SeUtuu 

GOD of Bethel, by whose hand 
Thy people still are fed. 
Who through this weary pilgrimage 
Hast all our fathers led, — 







Our vows, our prayers, we now present 
Before Thy throne of grace ; 

God of our fathers ! be the God 
Of their succeeding race. 

Through each perplexing path of life 
Our wandering footsteps guide ; 

Give us each day our daily bread, 
And raiment fit provide. 



HYMNS 



FOB 



FAMILY WORSHIP 



ON THB MOBKING OF 



e ^0xA*» ing* 



« Praise ye the Lord. Sing unto the Lord a new aong, and His 
praise in the congregation of saints."— P^oZm cxlix. 



(»1) 




NOTE. 

SUFFICIENT Sabbath Hymns are here provided for 

six months, and we feel sure that, occurring only 

twice in the year, there will be no fear of monotony. 

Haying once gone through them, on the first Sunday of 

July the family will recommence the series, and continue 

till the end of the year. It is only occasionally that twenty- 
« 
seven Sundays will occur in any one half-year, and therefore 

the twenty-seventh Hymn will not be usually sung. 

May the Lord of the Sabbath hear the morning songs of 

His people, and prepare them for the louder shout of the 

great congregation. We should, at the family altar, tune 

our harps for the solemn music of the sanctuary. They are 

blessed indeed who go from worship in the tents of Jacob 

to the solemnities of the temple of Zion. May the Lord, 

who rested on the seventh day and was refreshed, give to 

His people rest and refreshment on this their day of sacred 

Sabbath. 

(893) 



HTMNS FOR THE LORD'S DAT. 



H 



IsT MoBKiNG. L. M. Hebron, Meroe. 

ANOTHER six days* work is done. 
Another Sabbath is begun ; 
Return, my soul, enjoy thy rest, 
Improve the day thy God hath blest. 
that our thoughts and thanks may rise 
As grateful incense to the skies, 
And draw from heaven that sweet repose 
Which none but he that feels it knowfi. 
This heavenly calm within the breast 
Is the dear pledge of glorious rest. 
Which for the church of God remains, * 

The end of cares, the end of pains. 
2i> MoBNiNG. L. M. Dvke Stwet. SeH. 

"AIL ! sacred mom, when Christ arose 
Triumphant o*er our mighty foes ; 
Hail ! blissful day, when He appears 
In Zion's courts, and Zion cheers. 
Entombed in doubts and fears we lie, 
Till Christ, descending from on high, 
Rolls unbelief (that stone) away. 
And bids us rise to gospel day. 
Come, thou covenant Angel, come, 
Roll back the stone, our hearts unfcombf 
The beams of thy bright countenance shed, 
Revive the drooping, raise the dead. 

Sd Mobning. 7*8. Nuremberg* 

CHRIST, the Lord, is risen to-day ! 
Sons of men and angels say : 
Raise your joys and triumphs high ; 
Sing, ye heavens, and, earth, reply. 
Soar we now where Christ has led. 
Following our exalted Head ; 
Made like Him, like Him we rise. 
Ours the cross, the grave, the skies. 

(395) 



.9M 



BTHKS FOR TBE LOBD'S DAT. 



O 



4ia M<wimFQ. C* M, Dcdham, La Mira, 

TIIt>U Umt (iTt thf? Tiifirhty One, 
Thir i*wi>rJ ginl rm Tf»y tliigli ; 

A&d iritli Tby Miyttstjr. 

For moi^kii^^sd, tntdi, and rigtit^oufinesdy 

Tlib tliiy rtdc prosperoufly. 
And Thj rlgbi liand s^holl Tliee iQBtmol 

In tlungfl lliil foarfU be. 

0T11 MaftKisri^. L. M. Sr^iU Street, ^tpkyr, 

IiHINE e«rtlilj SabbaOis, Lord, we love ; 
But iJier*?V a noUkr rest above ; 
T41 Uial our kbtiring auuIs a3pire« 
Witli udoil puigit of sti-oug desire* 

No mir* ftligiio, mi moi^ di^tTes3» 
Nor aiif Bor Bell iliaU rfscb the ^lace ; 
Ka i^roani to mingk with lb© googd 
Wbioh warbU* from immortal tonnes, 

©TH MoRMNo. 7\<. Mariyn. 

pO Thy tomplo I repair. 

Lord. I love to worship there ; 
When, within the veil. I meet 
Christ before the mercy-seat. 

Thou, throuirh Ilim, art reconciled; 

I, through Him, became Thy child; 

Abba, Father I give me grace, 

In Thy courts to seek Thy face, , 

7th Morning. C. >[. Mario w, Cambrid^ 



T 



'VY/'HAT shall I render to my God 
T T For all Ilis kindness shown ? 

My feet shall visit Thine abode, 
My songs address Thy throne. 

Among the saints that till Thine house 
3Iy otiorings shall bo paid : 

There shall my Foal perform the vows 
My sold in anguish made. 



HTMNS FOB THE LOBD'S DAT. 897 

8th Morning. S. M. Silver Street, St, Thomas. 

WELCOME, sweet day of rest, 
That saw the Lord arise ; 
Welcome to this reviving breast, 
And these rejoicing eyes. 

The King Himself comes near^ 

And feasts His saints to-day ; 
Here we may sit and see Him here, 

And love, and praise, and pray. 

One day amidst the place 

Where my dear God hath been, 
Is sweeter than ten thousand days 

Of pleasurable sin. 

9th Morning. L. M. Federal Street, Ecmivrff. 

GREAT God, attend while Zion sings 
The joy that from Thy presence springs ; 
To spend one day with Thee on earth 
Exceeds a thousand days of mirth. 

Might I enjoy the meanest place 
Within Thy house, God of grace. 
Not' tents of ease, nor thrones of power. 
Should tempt my feet to leave Thy door. 

10th Morning. L. M. RoUcmd, Duke Street 

10ME, dearest Lord, descend and dwell 
By faith and love in every breast ; 
Then shall we know, and taste, and feel 
The joys that cannot be expressed. 

Gome, fill our hearts with inward strength. 

Make our enlarged souls possess, 
And learn the height, and breadth, and lengthy 

Of Thine immeasurable grace. 

Now to the God whose power can do 
More than our thoughts or wishes know. 

Be everlasting honors done, 

By all the Church, through Christ His Son. 



c 




Tarn. xbB scone, the imrfr tike seal; 
Cbrissi hniJL burse die r%ces of keH ; 
Deack in Tain forbi^is His rise ; 
Cbrisc kadi op^ifiil paradise ! 

"^^HS, it is good to worsliip Thee, 
JL To tread Thy courts, O Lord, 
To rai«e the voice, to bend the knee. 
To hear Thy holy Word. 

How gweet, O God, to sing Thy praise. 

Till all our spirits glow, 
And we could almost seem to raise 

The notes of heaven below. 

Hut O, if songs like ours be sweet. 
How Hweet that song must be 

Wlion all the ransomed ones shall meet« 
From sin and sorrow free, 



BdauL 



M^ 



HYMNS FOB THB LOBD'S DAY. 899 

14th MoRioNG. L. M. RoUand, Uxbridge. 

HOW pleasant, how divinely fair, 
Lord of hosts. Thy dwellings are ! 
With long desire my spirit faints 
To meet th' assemblies of Thy saints. 

My flesh would rest in Thine abode. 
My panting heart cries out for God ; 
My God, my King, why should I be 
So far from all my joys and Thee ? 

15th Mobiono. L. M. Hebron. Orcaiivde, 

'Y God, how excellent Thy grace, 

Whence all our hope and comfort springs; 
The sons of Adam in distress. 
Fly to the shadow of Thy wings. 

From the provisions of Thy house 
We shall be fed with sweet repast ; 

There mercy, like a river flows, 
And brings salvation to our taste. 

16th Mobning. L. M. Federal Street. Zephyr. 

SACRED day of peace and joy. 
Thy hours are ever dear to me ; 
Ne'er may a sinful thought destroy 
The holy calm I find^in Thee. 

Dear are Thy peaceful hours to me, 
For God has given them in his love. 

To tell how calm, how blest shall be 
The endless rest of heaven above. 

17th Mosnino. C. M. Dedham. Oaddo. 

GLORY to God ! who deigns to bless 
This consecrated day. 
Unfolds His wondrous promises, 
And makes it sweet to pray. 

Glory to God ! who deigns to hear 

The humblest sigh we raise. 
And answers every heartfelt prayer, 

And hears our hymn of praise. 



o 








X7 -i^L --~!;*il jncT iir iLuiL sal 






J 



^^T ▼i-*r*'s- i£e sun 
'm^ Fs^ie^iriTr: ^:-?snieT3 ran ; 
Hl-t LjL.Tif^'SL «?^^»^ fea ihore to shore, 
T:l r:^'^.'.:^* tbiH -p^ai in-i «^ce no more. 

Y'jf \i\zu *h3ili endle;? \*t^^^t be made, 
Afi'l [/fal-^r throD^r to crown His head; 
jli;: haf/j^-, like ^weet perfume, shall rise 
With every morning sacrifice. 



N* 



HTMNS FOR THE LORD'S DAY. 401 

21sT Morning. C M. BaUrma. Brovm. 

""OW from the altar of our hearts 
Let flames of incense rise ; 
Assist us, Lord, to offer up 
Our Sabbath sacrifice. 

Each solemn day of sacred rest 

Doth a new song require ; 
Teach Us the sonnets of the blest, 

Our hearts like theirs inspire. 

Awake our love, awake our joy, 

With music loud and long ; 
Let praise the SCbbath hours employ 

From morn to even song. 

22d Mobning. C. M. Dedham, Laneshoro'* 

EARLY, my God, without delay, 
I haste to seek Thy face ; 
My thirsty spirit faints away 
Without Thy cheering grace. 

I've seen Thy glory and Thy power 

Through all Thy temple shine ; 
My God, repeat that heavenly hour. 

That vision so divine. 

Not all the blessings of a feast 

Can please my soul so well. 
As when Thy richer grace I taste. 

And in Thy presence dwell. 

23d Mo^jong. C. M. WoodUmd, Peterhoro*. 

THIS is the day the Lord hath made, 
He calls the hours his own ; 
Let heaven rejoice, let earth be glad. 
And praise surround the throne. 

To-day He rose and left the dead, 

And Satan's empire fell ; 
To-day the saints His triumphs spread. 

And all his wonders tell. 



INDEX. 



GENESIS. 
Chap. & Yene 

i. 4 . 
i. 5 . 

iv. 2 . 
vii. 16 
zxi. 6 . 
xxiv. 63 

XXV. 11 

xxxix. 12 
xli. 4 . 
xlix. 24 



EXODUS. 



viii. 28 
xiv. 13 
xvi. 21 
XX. 26 
XXV. 6 
xxviii. 8 



Page 

5 

153 

20 
157 
167 
228 

48 
207 
185 

53 



179 
206 
198 
196 
241 
8 



LEVITICUS. 

vi. 13 ... 197 

xiii. 13 . . . 273 

xix. 16, 17 . . 334 



NUHBEBS. 



ii.dl . 
xi. 11 . 
xiv. 2 . 
xiv. 11 



.200 
281 
121 
240 



DEUTERONOMY. 
V. 24 . . . . 201 



xxxii. 9 . 
xxxiii. 27 
xxxiii. 27 
xxxiii. 29 



320 
315 
316 
271 



JOSHUA. 
Chap. & Yene 
ii. 21 . . . 

V. 12 . . . 



Pago 
109 

1 



JUDGES. 

vii. 20 ... 264 

xvi. 6 ... 190 

SUTH. 

i. 14 . . . . 350 

u. 2 .... 214 

1 SAMUEL. 

vii. 12 ... 865 

xiii. 20 . . . 62 

xxvii. 1 . . . 291 

2 SAMUEL. 

V. 23 . . . . 40 

V. 24 . . . , 30 

vii. 25 ... 15 

ix. 13 ... 148 

XV. 23 ... 152 

xxiii. 1 ... 233 

xxiii. 5 . . . 356 

1 KINGS. 

xix. 8 ... 279 

xxii. 48 . . • 13 

2 KINGS. 

vii. 3 ... . 73 

XXV. 30 ... 45 

1 CHBONICLBS. 

iv. 23 ... 155 

V.92 .... 1^ 



2 CHBONICLBS. 
Chap. & Yene Pkg* 

XXV. 9 ... 335 

EZRA. 

vii. 22 ... 848 
viii. 22 . . . 268 



NEHEMIAH. 



L&. OO 


JOB. 




viii. 11 


. . 


. 


X. 2 . 


, , 


, 


xix. 26 


, , 


, 


xxix. 2 


, , 


. 


xl.4 . 


. . 


. 



iv. 2 . . 
ix. 1 . . 
xii. 1 . . 
xvii. 7 
xxii. 1 
xxii. 7 
xxii. 14 . 
xxii. 14 . 
xxvii. 14 . 
xxix. 2 • 
XXX. 5 • 
XXX. 6 
xxxiii. 13 
xxxiii. 21 
xxxvii. 4 
xxxviii. 21 
xxxix. 12 
xiv. 2 



v.«««\ 



116 



868 
49 
112 
224 
158 



804 
169 
141 
106 
105 
102 
103 
243 
229 
134 

70 
272 
184 
166 
146 

76 
173 



108 



INDEX. 



EPlIESUJffl. 


1 TiMonnr* 




2pErEB- 


1 


CU^ ft Tmt 


Bw» 


Chip. & YcPW 


p*?« 


Chap, & Vcfto 


PM 


lY. IC , • 


« Sv4' 


vi. 17 . . . , 


137 


i. 4 - . , . 


21 


4T. aa - . 


. iS6 






1.4 , . , . 




tJ« 18 , . , 


. . 87 


2 TlMOTttT. 




i. 5, 6 , , , , 








rLl . . , . 


7E 


lii, 18 , - , , 




ruiLiPi*iAsm* 


iL 11 , . . , 


801 


iU. 19 , , , , 


41 


LSI . . 


. 7 


iy, 8 . . , . 


10 






1.15 . . 


. 250 






1 JOHN, 




as . . 


. 2S8 


FiULEMOir. 




L6 • - . . 


sm 


It. 11 . • , 


. 47 


Terse 2 , . . 


30G 


ii.e . , - . 


138 


It, 13 . . 


. 41 






m. 1, 2 , • . 


44 










IT, 13 . . . , 


127 


COLOSSI 


IHS. 






IT. 14 . - . . 


86 


u , . 


• S76 


LU . 






277 


IT. 19 ... . 


161 


LS8 . . . 


* 2S 


ii, 14 , 






111 






1.6 . , 


. fil3 


iv, 9 , 






oS 


2 JOHN. 




1.6 . * 


. »14 


T. T * 






84 


Teree 3 . . . 


S9»l 


1.9.10 * 


, 139 


V. 8 . 






69 




J 


il,4 , . , 


, 223 


Jx, 22 , 






33 


3 jomi. 


J 


if.i . . . 


2 


xii. 2 . 
3dL24. 






180 
108 


Terse 8 - , . 


4 


imsssAU 


imxss* 


xiU. 5 . 






52 


JtJDE. 


, 


u i * • 1 


- 190 
* 181 


3dli. 5 . 
joii. 13 






M 
97 


verse 1 - . . 

" 24 - . . 


194 
2if3 


It, it . • 


, 345, 






(< (C 


2M 


T. G . . 


, er* 


1 PETEE. 








T.1H . . . 


. S4G 


i.2 . . , . 


194 


KEVELATION. 




T, 25 . , 


, 189 


i, T , 






317 


iii. 4 . , . . 


343 






i. 19 . 






107 


XIT, 1 . , , , 


17 


Trnri 


* 


ii. 3 . 






142 


xd. 23 , , . 


216 


iii,4 . . . 


. 156 


T. T * . 






6 


m. 23 . . . 


222 


iii.ff - , , 


, 324 


V, 10 , 






193 


\x\u 17 , . . 


165 



Bleno^Tped at Um Bo6ton Steieo^Tpe IVraikby, 4 Spring Lanaw 



;^ 



^ 



