MOSES 

THE    SERVANT    OF    GOD 


F.    B.    MEYER,    B.A 

Author  of 

ABRAHAM:  or,  the  Obedience  of  Faith 

CHRIST  IN  ISAIAH 

SAVED  AND  KEPT 

etc.,  etc. 


MORGAN    AND    SCOTT    LTD. 
(Office  of  tljc   ®lj«siiatt) 
12,  PATERNOSTER  BUILDINGS 
LONDON  MCMIX 


05 


Seventh  Impression 
Completing  22,000 


PREFACE. 


HE  conception  of  Moses,  which  I  have  elaborated 
in  the  following  chapters,  was  suggested  years 
ago  by  contrast  with  Michael  Angelo's  statue  of 
him,  colossal  in  proportions,  hewn  in  stone. 

Yet  one  turns  away  from  that  mighty  head,  that 
pregnant  brow,  that  towering  height,  hopeless  of  re 
peating  aught  of  a  life,  which,  if  that  conception  be  the 
true  one,  must  have  had  so  little  in  common  with  our 
own.  It  is  a  comfort,  therefore,  to  turn  to  the  record  of 
the  New  Testament,  which  tells  that  he  did  not  spring 
at  a  leap  to  the  throne  on  which  he  has  sat  through  the 
ages,  but  that  his  character  took  years  to  form,  and  that 
his  mighty  deeds  were  due,  not  to  some  rare  combination 
of  personal  qualities,  but  to  the  faith  which  he  had  ia 
common  with  the  rank  and  file  of  the  great  army  of  the 
saints. 


v 

I  have  tried,  therefore,  to  show  that  Moses  was  a 
man  like  other  men ;  with  great  qualities  that  needed  to 
be  developed  and  improved ;  with  flaws  that  veined  the 
pure  marble  of  his  character ;  with  deficiencies  that  had 
rendered  him  powerless  but  for  the  all-sufficient  grace 
that  he  learned  to  appropriate ;  and  that  he  wrought  his 
life-work  by  the  simplicity  of  his  faith,  by  communion 
with  God,  and  by  becoming  a  channel  through  which 
the  Divine  purpose  was  achieved. 

I  wish  to  express  my  special  obligations  for  geo 
graphical  and  other  details  to  the  works  of  the  late 
Dean  Stanley;  to  the  monograph  on  Moses  in  the  "Men 
of  the  Bible"  Series;  as  well  as  to  "Modern  Science 
in  Bible  Lands,"  by  Sir  J.  W.  Dawson,  F.R.G.S. 

F.  B.  MEYER. 


PAGE 

I.  OUR  STANDPOINT      7 

II.  His  MOTHER'S  FAITH         n 

III.  "  COME  TO  YEARS  " 17 

IV.  DELIVERANCE  BY  MAIN  FORCE 24 

V.  THE  MARVELLOUS  COLLOQUY      31 

VI.  "To  EGYPT" 38 

VII.  FAILURE  AND  DISAPPOINTMENT 44 

VIII.  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD  IN  THE  FIRST  FOUR  PLAGUES  ...    51 

IX.  How  THE  CHARACTER  OF  MOSES  GREW        60 

X.  PREPARING  FOR  THE  EXODUS      68 

XI.  THE  PASSAGE  OF  THE  RED  SEA 75 

XII.  THE  SONG  OF  VICTORY       81 

XIII.  MARAH  AND  ELIM 88 

XIV.  THE  GIFT  OF  MANNA        94 

XV.  REPHIDIM         101 

XVI.  THE  GOD-WARD  ASPECT     108 

XVII.  AT  THE  FOOT  OF  SINAI      115 

XVIII.  THE  VISION  OF  GOD  AND  ITS  EFFECT 122 

XIX.  THE  BROKEN  SENTENCE     128 

XX.  GOD'S  PRESENCE  OUR  REST          134 

XXI.  TABERNACLE  BUILDING      140 

XXII.  THE  START  FROM  SINAI     148 

XXIII.  NOBLE  TO  THE  CORE          154 

XXIV.  A  BITTER  DISAPPOINTMENT         161 

XXV.  FAITHFVL  UNDER  REPROACH        168 

XXVI.  How  IT  WENT  ILL  WITH  HIM      174 

XXVII.  PREPARING  FOR  PISGAH     180 

XXVIII.  THE  DEATH  OF  MOSES       185 


MOSES:  THE  SERVANT  OF  GOD. 

-®- 


"By  faith,  Moses.     .    ." — HEB.  xi.  24, 

HE  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the   Hebrews   lays  bare 
the  secret  of  the  marvels  effected  by  the  heroes  of  ^ 
Hebrew  story.     Obedient  to  his  summons,  they  range 
themselves   in  one  great  battalion,  and  with  united 
breath,  cry,  Why  marvel  ye  at  these  things  ?  or  why 
look  ye  so  earnestly  on  us,  as  though  by  our  own 
power  or  holiness  we  had  effected  them  ?    The  God  of  Abra 
ham,  of   Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,  the  God  of  our  fathers,  made 
bare  his  holy  arm  and  wrought  by  us.     And  his  name,  through     t 
faith  in  his  name,  hath  done  all  these  wonderful  works.  \j 

We  make  a  profound  mistake  in  attributing  to  these  men 
extraordinary  qualities  of  courage,  and  strength  of  body  or 
soul.  To  do  so  is  to  miss  the  whole  point  of  the  reiterated 
teaching  of  Scripture.  They  were  not  different  from  ordinary 
men,  except  in  their  faith.  In  many  respects  it  is  most  likely 
that  they  were  inferior  to  ourselves.  We  should  probably  be 
much  surprised  if  we  were  to  encounter  them  in  the  daily  walks 
of  modern  life,  and  should  find  it  almost  impossible  to  believe 
that  they  wrought  such  prodigies  of  valour,  endurance,  and 
deliverance.  Gideon  and  Barak,  Samson  and  Jephthah,  were 
rather  of  the  type  of  the  sturdy  Borderers  of  olden  days,  whose 
wild  doings  kept  our  northern  counties  in  constant  agitation, 
than  like  our  modern  clerics  or  Christian  philanthropists.  But 
there  was  one  characteristic  common  to  them  all,  which  lifted 


8  ©ttr 

them  above  ordinary  men,  and  secured  for  them  a  niche  in  the 
Temple  of  Scripture— that  they  had  a  marvellous  faculty  of  faith  ; 
which,  indeed,  is  but  the  capacity  of  the  human  heart  for  God.  / 
Four  times  over  this  is  cited  as  the  secret  of  all  that  Moses  did 
for  his  people. 

The  same  truth  is  repeatedly  corroborated  in  the  teaching  of 
our  Lord.  He  never  stops  to  ask  what  may  be  the  specific 
quantity  of  power,  or  wisdom,  or  enthusiasm,  which  exists  in 
his  disciples.  In  his  judgment  these  things  are  as  the  small 
dust  of  the  balance,  not  to  be  taken  into  serious  consideration, 
and  not  likely  to  affect  the  aggregate  results  of  a  man's  life.  But 
his  incessant  demand  is  for  faith.  If  only  there  be  faith,  though 
it  be  but  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  sycamore  trees  can  be 
uprooted ;  mountains  cast  into  the  midst  of  the  sea ;  and  demons 
exorcised  from  their  victims.  To  a  father  He  once  said : 
"There  is  no  if  in  my  power  ;  it  is  in  thy  faith.  If  thou  canst 
believe,  all  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth." 

And  what  is  this  faith  ?  It  is  not  some  inherent  power  or 
quality  in  certain  men,  by  virtue  of  which  they  are  able  to  v 
accomplish  special  results  unrealized  by  others.  It  is  rather 
the  power  of  putting  self  aside  that  God  may  work  unhindered 
through  the  nature.  It  is  the  attitude  of  heart  which,  having 
ascertained  the  will  of  God,  and  being  desirous  of  becoming 
an  organ  for  it,  goes  on  to  expect  that  God  will  work  out  his 
purposes  through  its  medium.  It  is,  in  brief,  that  capacity  for  \ 
God  which  appropriates  Him  to  its  uttermost  limit,  and  be 
comes  the  channel  or  vehicle  through  which  He  passes  forth 
to  bless  mankind.  The  believer  is  the  God-filled,  the  God- 
moved,  the  God-possessed  man  ;  and  the  work  which  he  effects 
in  the  world  is  not  his,  but  God's  through  him. 

There  are,  therefore,  these  necessary  conditions  of  all  true 
faith  :— 

The  sense  of  helplessness  and  nothingness. 

An  absolute  assurance  of  being  on  God's  plan. 

Entire  consecration,  that  He  may  work  out  his  will  through 
heart  and  life. 

The  daily  food  of  promise. 

A  daring  to  act,  in  utter  independence  of  feeling,  on  a  faith 
which  reckons  absolutely  on  the  faithfulness  of  God. 


JFaitlj.  9 

It  will  be  our  contention  throughout  our  study  of  the  remark 
able  life  before  us,  that,  though  Moses  may  have  had  com 
manding  features  of  mind  and  body,  and  have  been  versed  in 
'all  the  learning  of  his  time ;  yet  the  marvellous  outcome  of  his 
life-work  was  not  due  to  any  of  these  qualities,  but  to  the  faith' 
which  knit  his  soul  to  God.  His  faith  sufficed  to  do  what  all  his 
other  qualities,  without  his  faith,  must  have  failed  in  doing. 

We  hope  to  go  further,  and  show  that  all  the  blessings  which 
God  in  his  mindfulness  of  his  covenant  bestowed  on  Israel, 
came  to  that  rebellious  and  stiff-necked  people  through  the 
channel  of  Moses'  faith.  It  is  God's  method  to  seek  the 
co-o_peration  of  man  in  the  execution  of  his  purposes,  and 
jo  fulfil  his  promise  through  his  servants'  faith.  In  this  case 
it  was  Moses  who  was  called  into  partnership  with  Jehovah, 
and  it  was  through  his  faith  that  God  fulfilled  the  promise 
made  to  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob. 

Each  of  the  above-mentioned  conditions  of  a  mighty  faith 
was  fulfilled  in  the  history  of  Moses. 

He  was  allowed  to  make  his  first  efforts  for  the  emancipation 
of  his  people  in  the  energy  of  his  own  strength,  and  to  fail 
egregiously ;  so  that  he  fled  away  to  Midian,  abandoning  all 
hope  of  delivering  them,  and  spending  his  years  in  solitude 
and  exile,  until  it  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty  that  he  could 
\  be  induced  to  undertake  the  Divine  commission.  He  was 
reduced  to  the  last  extreme  of  helpless  nothingness  when  the 
burning  bush  flamed  in  his  path,  a  symbol  of  utter  weakness, 
possessed  and  indwelt  yet  unconsumed  by  God,  who  is  a 
consuming  fire. 

He  could  have  no  doubt  as  to  GooVs_ glan  ;  for  that  lay 
unfolded  before  him  in  the  promise  "made  to  Abraham  long 
years  before,  fixing  four  hundred  years  as  the  limit  of  the 
Egyptian  sojourn.  And,  in  addition,  God  distinctly  told  him 
that  He  had  come  down  to  deliver. 

He  was  as  thoroughly  yieldedtothejjurpose  of  God,  as  the 
staff  which  he  held  in  his  hand  was  to  his  own"wTnT=~Hehce  his 
>*  chosen  name,  "  the  servant  of  the_  Lord "  ;  and  the  constant 
recurrence  of  the  phrase,  u  as  the  Lord  commanded  Moses." 

He  fed  daily  on  the  promises  of  God,  pleading  them  in 
prayer,  and  leaning  his  whole  weight  upon  them.  And  he 
often  knew  what  it  was  to  leave  behind  him  the  familiar  and 


io  u 

tried,  for  the  strange  and  new  ;  at  the  bidding  of  God,  he 
stepped  out,  though  there  seemed  nothing  to  tread  upon, 
launching  himself  and  three  millions  of  people  absolutely 
on  the  care  of  God,  assured  that  God's  faithfulness  could 
not  fail. 

His  faith  made   Moses   all   he   was.       We    shall    see    this 
more"  dearly  as  we   proceed.      For  it  is  our  eager  desire  to 
learn   exactly  how  such  a  faith  as  his  was^jpcodjiced.     Why 
should  we  not  have  it  ?     God's  methods  are  never  out  of  date. 
It  is  certain  that  we  shall  have  his  faith,  if  we  but  pay  the 
price  of  enduring  his  discipline.     And  if  only  we  possessed  his 
faith,  why  should  we  not  see  anotb«*-fecodus  ? — seas  seamed  "\  f 
with  paths  of  salvation  ;  foes  defied  ;  chains  snapped  ;  captives   ; 
emancipated  ;  and  Jehovah  worshipped  with  songs  of  triumph  !  j 
Surely  there  is  no  limit  to  the  possibilities  of  a  life  which  has/ 
become  the  aperture  or  channel  through  which  God  can  pour 
Himself  forth. 

Are  you  willing  to  die  to  your  own  strength  ;  to  forsake  your 
own  plans  for  God's  ;Tb  seek  out  and  do  his  will  absolutely ; 
to  take  up  the   attitude  of  entire   and  absolute  surrender  to 
'his   purposes  ;   to  feed   daily  on   the   promises  of  God,  as   a\  L 

\  girl  on  the  pledge  of  her  absent  lover  ;   to  step  out  in  faith,  )    ' 
reckoning,  without  emotion  of  any  kind,  on  the  faithfulness  of 
God,  only  fully  persuaded  that  He  will  perform  all  that  He  has 
promised  ?    Then  surely  through  you  God  will,  here  or  hereafter, 
work  as  in  the  times  of  old,  of  which  our  fathers  have  told  us. 

It  is  certain,  as  the  present  age  draws  to  a  close,  that  God 
.has  great  schemes  on  hand  which  must  shortly  be  realized. 
According  to  his  invariable  method  He  will  have  to  perform 

V  them  through  the  instrumentality  and  faith  of  men  ;  the  one 
question  is,  Are  we  in  such  a  condition,  is  our  faith  of  such  a 
nature,  that  He  can  work  by  us  to  the  glory  of  his  holy  Name  ? 
Let  us  ponder  well  the  lessons  taught  in  the  life  and  character 
of  Moses,  that  in  due  time  we  too  may  become  vessels  meet  for 
the  Master's  use,  and  prepared  to  every  good  work. 


II. 

His 


By  faith    Moses,  when  he  was  born,  was  hid  three  months  of  his  • 
parents,  because  they  saw  he  was  a  proper  child  ;  and  they  were 
not  afraid  of  the  king's  commandment."  —  HEB.  xi.  23. 

T  was  on  a  very  unfriendly  world  that  the  little  babe  \ 
opened  his  eyes.  Without,  all  was  as  fair  as  nature  < 
and  art  could  make  it.  Hard  by  the  mean  cottage, 
which  for  a  brief  space  was  to  shelter  him,  the  mighty 
Nile  rolled  between  its  reedy  banks,  reflecting  on  its 
broad  bosom  the  deep  azure  of  the  arching  heavens 
by  day,  and  the  starry  constellations  of  the  night.  Within  the 
easy  distance  of  a  maiden's  morning  walk  stood  the  great  city 
of  Memphis,  metropolis  of  Egypt  and  seat  of  the  Court  ;  centre 
of  trade,  and  art,  and  war,  and  religion  ;  the  focus  to  which  the 
national  life  converged. 

Past  that  cottage-home  would  go  royal  processions,  as  in 
solemn  state  the  monarch  went  forth  to  war,  or  came  down  to 
the  Nile  brink  to  worship.  Priests  from  all  parts  of  the  land 
would  pass  it  on  their  way  to  the  mighty  Temple  of  Phthah, 
whose  pillared  avenues,  and  sculptured  galleries,  and  hiero- 
glyphed  chambers,  were  the  result  of  centuries  of  industry,  and 
told  the  story  of  the  generations  that  had  built  them  ;  but  how 
little  would  they  dream  that  the  site  of  that  humble  cottage 
would  attract  the  interest  of  generations  to  the  end  of  time, 
when  their  lordly  temple  had  fallen  into  an  indistinguishable 
heap  !  And  the  perpetual  supply  of  leeks  and  melons  and 
garlic,  of  barley  and  wheat  and  rye,  of  delicate  fabrics  from 
the  loom,  for  which  the  Egyptians  became  so  famous,  of 
spice  and  balm  for  the  vast  City  of  the  Dead,  and  of  all  the 
multitudinous  provision  for  the  demands  of  a  large  and  wealthy 
population,  must  have  covered  the  neighbouring  roads  with  an 
unceasing  stream  of  camels  and  asses  and  caravans,  and  the 
river  with  an  innumerable  flotilla  of  boats,  barges,  and  ships. 
Not  far  away,  across  the  level  sands,  were  the  Pyramids,  which 
even  then  were  becoming  venerable  with  age,  and  were  des 
tined  to  remain  for  forty  centuries,  witnesses  alike  to  man's 


12  Iris  plotter's 

instinctive  belief  in  his  immortality,  and  to  his  selfish  indif 
ference  to  the  anguish  of  his  fellows.  Amid  these  circum 
stances  of  wealth  and  splendour  the  little  babe  was_born  to  an 
inikuodly  lot. 

ft.  He  belonged  to  an  alien  race, — More  than  three  hundred 
'  years  before,  the  forefathers  of  his  people  had  emigrated  from 
the  neighbouring  land  of  Palestine,  at  the  invitation  of  the 
Prime  Minister  of  the  time,  who  was  connected  with  them  by 
the  ties  of  kinship  and  race.  The  king  had  welcomed  them  as 
likely  to  be  valuable  allies  ;  for  he  also  belonged  to  a  foreign 
race,  and  sat  on  an  unstable  throne.  At  his  command  they 
had  settled  in  the  best  of  the  land,  a  strip  of  green,  called 
Goshen,  situated  amid  vast  tracks  of  sand.  There  they  pros 
pered  and  multiplied,  till  they  numbered  near  upon  two  million 
souls.  But  they  remained  as  distinct  a  people  as  they  are 
now  in  every  nation  under  heaven,  and  as  such  were  open  to 
..suspicious  hate. 

S  He  belonged  to  an  oppressed  race. — A  different  dynasty  had 
succeeded  to  that  which  welcomed  them,  and  one  to  whom  the 
name  of  Joseph  had  no  charm.  At  the  time  of  which  we  write 
a  tiny  cloud  of  impending  war  trembled  on  the  Eastern  sky, 
and  suggested  to  the  reigning  monarch  the  fear  that  there 
might  be  a  coalition  between  his  enemies  and  the  Hebrew  race, 
which  had  grown  into  such  numbers  and  might,  as  to  be  very 
formidable.  He  resolved,  therefore,  to  wear  them  out,  and  to 
reduce  both  their  numbers  and  their  spirit  by  the  rigour  of 
their  lot. 

Suddenly,  the  shepherds  of  Goshen  found  themselves  drafted 
for  service  in  the  brickfields,  under  the  eye  and  whip  of  cruel 
taskmasters,  who  exacted  from  them  daily  a  certain  tale  of 
bricks ;  or  they  performed  service  in  the  field,  drawing  water 
from  the  river  for  the  irrigation  of  the  land,  and  toiling  in  the 
cultivation  of  the  soil.  "And  all  their  service  wherein  they 
made  them  serve  was  with  rigour "  ;  as  if  every  occasion  was 
eagerly  taken  advantage  of  for  dealing  out  cruel  and  merciless 
punishment. 

(The  father  of  the  little  household  was,  probably,  compelled 
to  bear  his  share  in  the  bondage  and  blows  which  made 
the  existence  of  his  people  so  bitter.  From  morning  to  night 
he  would  toil,  naked,  beneath  the  burning  sun,  returning  often 


's  £|crree  autr  (Soft's  Cabettattt.         13 

with  bleeding  wounds  torn  open  by  the  scourge,  and  inclined 
to  question  the  very  existence  of  God  and  his  character  for 
mercy.     Very  dark  was  the  night  which  lay  heavily  on  the 
chosen  people  in  these  years  of  cruel  enslavement. 
p   He  was  born  at  a  time  of  unusual  trouble. — The  household 
consisted  of  father  and  mother,  of  an  elder  sister,  some  fifteen  '. 
years  of  age,  marvellously  gifted  with  the  power  of  song,  and  i 
of  a  little   brother,  Aaron,  a  bright   and   merry  boy  of  three  • 
years  of  age.    When  the  latter  was  born,  there  was  apparently* 
no  special  need  of  secrecy ;  for  the  king  was  trying  to  attain 
his  object  by  the  vigorous  policy  we  have  above  described. 
But  during  the  interval,  he  had  discovered  that  it  was  not 
stringent   enough   to   attain   his   end  ;   and  he  had,  therefore, 
added  to   it   a   scheme  for  the   destruction   of    all  the  male 
children,  by  casting  them  into  the  river  as  they  were  born. 

It  is  not  likely  that  this  decree  was  in  active  operation  for 
more  than  a  few  months.  It  was  a  spasm  of  cruelty  which 
was  inspired  by  sudden  fear ;  but  was  too  utterly  opposed  to 
the  better  instincts  of  human  nature  to  secure  for  itself  a 
permanent  position  in  the  practice  of  Pharaoh's  subordinates. 
But  whilst  it  lasted,  it  was  the  bitterest  element  in  all  that 
bitter  sorrow.  Privation,  hardship,  scorn,  and  rigour,  are  easy 
to  bear,  if  only  the  beloved  circle  of  the  home  is  left  intact ; 
but  when  that  is  threatened,  and  the  little  fledglings  are 
menaced  by  the  bird  of  prey,  the  waters  of  a  full  cup  are 
wrung  out. 

Generally,  the  birth  of  a  child,  and   especially  of  a  boy,' 
was  heralded  with  unstinted  joy :  but  now  it  was  the  subject 
of  anxiety,  and  almost  of  dread.     There  was  no  glad  antici 
pation,  no  welcome,  no  rapture,  to  compensate  for  the  mother's 
anguish,  in  the  thought  that  a  man  was  born  into  the  world. 
Yet  in  spite  of  all,  "the  people  multiplied  and  became  very-^ 
mighty."      The   edict   remained    in   operation  for  but  a  short 
time,  but  it  was  during  its  enforcement  that  Moses  was  born.  x 
This  is  God's  way.     In  the  darkest  hours  of  the  night  his  tread 
draws   near  across   the  billows.     As  the  day  of  execution   is  \ 
breaking,  the  angel  comes  to  Peters  cell.    When  the  scaffold 
for  Mordecai  is  complete,  the  royal  sleeplessness  leads  to  a 
reaction   in  favour  of  the  threatened  race.     Ah,  soul,  it  may 
have  to  come  to  the  worst  with  thee  ere  thou  art  delivered  ; 


i4  Ira, 

but  thou  wilt  be  !  God  may  keep  thee  waiting ;  but  H,R  an]! 
eyer  b£  mindftd  of  his  covenant,  and  will  appear  to  fulfil  his 
inviolable  word. 

But  he  was  the  child  of  believing  parents. — We  know  but 
little  of  them.  The  father  is  said  to  have  been  "a  man  of 
the  house  of  Levi,"  and  we  learn  afterwards  that  his  name 
was  Amram,  and  descended  from  Kohath,  the  son  of  Levi ; 
but  the  tribe  of  Levi  had  then  no  special  importance — in 
fact,  it  seemed  destined  to  be  divided  in  Jacob,  and  scattered 
in  Israel.  The  mother,  Jochebed,  belonged  to  the  same  tribe, 
and,  indeed,  was  related  to  her  husband  in  a  closer  con 
sanguinity  than  was  afterwards  permitted.  They  were  humble 
folk,  glad  enough  to  receive  "  wages  "  from  the  hand  of  wealth 
and  royalty ;  but  they  preserved  the  best  religious  traditions 
of  their  nation,  and  in  this  contrasted  favourably  with  many 
of  their  race. 

Dean  Stanley  has  shown  that  the  sojourn  in  Egypt  had 
produced  a  very  deleterious  result  on  the  children  of  Israel. 
"The  old  freedom,  the  old  energy,  above  all,  the  old  religion 
of  the  patriarchal  age,  had  faded  away."  There  are  clear 
evidences  in  the  later  Scriptures  that  the  people  participated 
in  the  idolatrous  rites  of  the  land  of  their  adoption.  "Your 
fathers,"  said  Joshua,  "served  other  gods  in  Egypt"  (Josh, 
xxiv.  14).  And  through  the  lips  of  Ezekiel,  Jehovah  reminded 
the  nation,  at  a  later  date,  of  their  early  unfaithfulness.  "  In 
the  day  that  I  lifted  up  mine  hand  unto  them,  to  bring  them 
forth  of  the  land  of  Egypt  into  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and 
honey,  the  glory  of  all  lands.  Then  said  I  unto  them,  Cast  ye 
away  every  man  the  abominations  of  his  eyes,  and  defile  not 
yourselves  with  the  idols  of  Egypt  ;  I  am  the  Lord  your  God. 
But  they  rebelled  against  Me,  and  would  not  hearken  unto  Me  ; 
they  did  not  every  man  cast  away  the  abominations  of  their 
eyes,  neither  did  they  forsake  the  idols  of  Egypt"  (Ezek. 
xx.  6-8).  The  Sabbath  was  forgotten  ;  the  rite  of  circumcision, 
the  significant  token  of  the  covenant,  fell  into  disuse  ;  the 
comparative  purity  of  their  forefathers  proved  unable  to  .resist 
the  licentious  attractions  of  heathen  festivals,  to  which  in  after 
years  they  perpetually  recurred. 

But  evidently  there  were  some  families  who  remained  faithful 
amid  the  prevalent  corruption.  Amongst  these  was  that,  into 


tnere  not  ^.fraib."  15 

which  this  child  was  born.  'The  sacred  covenant  between  God 
and  their  race  was  reverently  remembered,  and  held  by  a  faith 
which  dared  to  believe  that,  sooner  or  later,  God  must  inter 
pose.  The  treasured  stories  which  are  preserved  to  us  in  the 
book  of  Genesis  would  be  carefully  taught  to  the  children  as 
soon  as  their  hearts  could  appreciate,  and  their  memories 
preserve  them.  The  first-born,  Aaron,  would  be  set  apart, 
with  some  kind  of  conseci-ation,  to  perform  the  functions  of 
the  priest  of  the  household.  And  Miriam,  the  first  Mary  of 
Scripture,  would  be  taught  to  use  her  sweet,  clear,  voice  in 
the  praise  and  worship  of  the  God  of  their  fathers. 

But  their  religious  life  was  still  more  manifested  by  their 
faith.  "  By  faith  Moses,  when  he  was  born,  was  hid  three 
months  of  his  parents,  because  they  saw  he  was  a  proper  child  ; 
and  they  were  not  afraid  of  the  king's  commandment."  We 
have  often  been  furnished  with  a  picture  depicting  the  anxiety 
with  which  his  parents  received  their  new-born  babe,  the 
distress  of  Amram,  and  the  fears  of  Jochebed.  Such  a  picture 
may  be  true  of  others  of  the  Hebrew  parents,  but  it  is  not  true 
of  them.  "They  were  not  afraid."  When  it  was  announced 
to  Jochebed  that  she  had  T5oTRe  a  boy,  she  was  enabled  to  cast 
the  care  of  him  on  God,  and  to  receive  the  assurance  that  he 
should  come  to  no  hurt.  And  as  the  couple  bent  over  their 
child,  in  that  peasant's  hut,  and  saw  his  exceeding  goodliness, 
the  conviction  grew  in  their  hearts  that  a  great  destiny  awaited 
him ;  and  that  in  some  way  he  would  live  to  see  the  expiration 
of  the  time  of  slavery,  foretold  centuries  before  in  words  which 
had  passed  from  lip  to  lip,  the  one  rift  of  light  amid  the  black 
ness  of  their  night.  Josephus  says  that  a  dream  announced  to 
Amram  that  Moses  would  be  the  deliverer  of  his  people. 

Could  those  down-trodden  serfs  ever  forget  what  God  had 
told  their  great  ancestor,  when  the  horror  of  a  great  darkness 
had  fallen  on  his  soul  ?  "  Know  of  a  surety  that  thy  seed  shall 
be  a  stranger  in  a  land  that  is  not  theirs,  and  shall  serve  them, 
and  they  shall  afflict  them  four  hundred  years,  .  .  .  but  in 
the  fourth  generation  they  shall  come  hither  again"  (Gen.  xv. 
13,  1 6).  The  slow-moving  years  had  at  last  accumulated  to 
the  prescribed  number.  Four  hundred  years  had  nearly,  if  not 
quite,  elapsed.  The  promise  must  be  on  the  point  of  fulfilment. 
The  words,  "they  shall  come  out"  (Gen.  xv.  14)  rang  like  a 


1 6  fjis  lltotljcr's  JFatth-. 

peal  of  bells  in  the  mother's  heart ;  and  there  was  a  confidence 
nurtured  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  by  the  loveliness  of  her 
child,  who  was  "goodly"  (Exod.  ii.  2),  "proper"  (Heb.  xi.  23), 
and  "exceeding  fair"  (Acts  vii.  20),  that  in  some  way  he  should 
share  in  that  Exodus. 

She  was  not  always  on  the  gut  vive  for  the  step  of  officer  or 
midwife.  She  would  take  all  ordinary  precaution ;  but  she 
would  never  give  way  to  excessive  fear.  Sometimes  when  her 
heart  grew  sick  she  would  betake  herself  to  her  knees,  and 
plead  the  Divine  promise  on  which  she  had  been  caused  to 
hope.  The  whole  family  lived  on  that  woman's  faith,  as  men 
live  on  bread  ;  and  God's  angels  bent  over  the  unconscious 
babe,  shielding  it  with  their  tenderest  care,  and  whispering 
their  love-words  into  its  ear.  Finally,  the  mother  was  led  by 
the  good  Spirit  of  God  to  weave  the  papyrus  rushes  into  a  little 
ark,  or  boat,  coating  it  with  bitumen,  to  make  it  impervious  to 
wet.  There  she  put  the  child  with  many  a  kiss,  closed  the  lid 
upon  its  sweet  face,  with  her  own  hands  bore  it  to  the  water's 
edge,  and  placed  it  tenderly  among  the  flags  that  grew  there. 
She  knew  that  Pharaoh's  daughter  came  there  to  bathe,  and 
it  might  be  that  she  would  notice  and  befriend  the  little 
foundling.  Or,  if  not,  the  God  whom  she  trusted  would  help 
her  in  some  other  way.  But  all  the  while  she  never  lost 
her  simple,  steadfast  faith.  "  Th^e.  Lord  was  her  light  and  her 
salvation  :  whom  should  she  fear  ?  The  Lord  was  the  strength 
of  her  life  :  of  whom  should  sTie  be  afraid  ?  When  her  enemies 
and  foes  came  upon  her  to  eat  up  her  flesh,  they  would  stumble 
and  fall.  Though  an  host  should  encamp  against  her,  yet 
should  she  not  fear." 

Miriam  was  set  to  watch,  not  with  any  thought  of  harm  that 
would  ensue,  whether  from  unfriendly  hand,  or  from  beast  of 
prey,  but  simply  to  see  "  what  would  be  done  to  him  "  ;  and 
Jochebed  went  back  to  her  house,  fighting  a  mother's  natural 
anxiety  by  a  faith  which  had  enclasped  the  very  arm  of  the 
living  God,  who  could  not  fail  her,  though  the  heavens  should 
fall,  or  the  pyramids  be  hurled  into  the  broad  bosom  of  the 
Nile.  That  is  faith.  Can  we  wonder  at  the  faith  of  the  man 
who  was  born  of  such  a  mother,  and  nurtured  in  such  a 
home? 


III. 

"  Comr  to 

By  faith,  Moses,  when  he  was  come  to  years,  refused  to  be  called 
the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter." — HEB.  xi.  24. 


ijjlLf'T  all  befell  according  to  the  mother's  faith.  The 
mr/H  princess,  accompanied  by  a  train  of  maidens,  came 
jjjfi  to  the  r'ver  bank  to  bathe.  She  saw  the  ark  among 
mMf  the  flags,  and  sent  her  maid  to  fetch  it.  In  the  jnidst 
of  the  little  group  the  lid  was  carefully  uplifted ;  and 
their  eyes  were  charmed  with  the  sight  of  the  beautiful 

('face,  whilst  their  hearts  were  touched  with  the  whimper  of  the 
babe,  who  missed  its  mother,  and  was  frightened  by  its  un 
wonted  surroundings  and  the  many  strange  faces. 

Quickly  the  woman's  heart  guessed  the  secret.  The  neigh 
bourhood  of  Hebrew  huts,  the  features  and  complexion  of  the 
babe,  the  unlikelihood  of  a  mother  forgetting  her  sucking  child, 
the  sudden  recollection  of  the  stern  edict  which  her  father  had 
lately  promulgated,  all  pointed  to  the  inevitable  conclusion, 
"This  is  one  of  the  Hebrews'  children."  The  sudden  inter 
position  of  Miriam,  who  had  eagerly  and  breathlessly  watched 
the  whole  scene,  with  her  naive  suggestion  of  fetching  a  Hebrew 
j  nurse,  solved  the  problem  of  what  should  "be  done  with  the 
foundling  almost  as  soon  as  it  could  have  suggested  itself. 
y^Quickly  the  child's  mother  stood  before  the  princess,  and 
^  received  the  precious  burden  from  her  hands  ;  and  as  she  did 
so,  was  there  not  something  in  her  almost  convulsive  movement 
which  revealed  to  that  quick  eye  the  secret  of  the  little  plot? 
Whether  it  were  so  or  not,  the  story  does  not  tell.  But  with 
what  an  ecstasy  of  joy  would  that  mother  pour  out  her  heart 
when  the  door  was  closed  on  the  little  group  ?  The  child's  life 
was  secure  beneath  the  powerful  protection  of  Pharaoh's  own 
•^  daughter,  who  had  said,  "Nurse  it  for  me."  And  the  wages 
which  she  had  promised  would  do  more  than  provide  for  all 
their  need.  God  had  done  "  exceedingly  abundantly." 


i8  "  (Kotttfi  to  |)Ears." 

How  long  the  boy  stayed  in  that  lowly  home  we  do  not 
know— perhaps  till  he  was  four  or  five  years  old  :  but  long 
enough,  in  any  case,  to  know  something  of  the  perils  and  hard 
ships  of  his  people's  lot ;  to  learn  those  sacred  traditions  of 
j  their  past,  which  he  was  afterwards  to  weave  with  such  majestic 
simplicity  into  the  Book  of  Genesis  ;  and  to  receive  into  his 

•  heart   the   love   of  the   only  God,  which  was   to  become  the 
\  absorbing  passion  and  pole-star  of  his  career.     Priests,  philo 
sophers,  and  scholars,  might  do  their  best  afterwards  ;  but  these 
things  had  been  built  into  the  growing  structure  of  his  soul, 
never  again  to  be   disintegrated   from   its  fabric.      What   an 
encouragement  is  suggested  by  this  record  to  mothers — to  make 
the  very  most  of  the  early  years  during  which  children  are  con 
fided  to  their  charge.     The  circumstances  must  be  exceptional 
indeed  under  which  that  charge  can  be  entrusted  to  others. 

At  last  the  time  arrived  when  Thermutis  claimed  for  her 

•  own  the  child  whom  she  l;ad^rescued.     He  had  now  grown  so 
>    beautiful  that,  Josephus  tells  us,  passers-by  stood  still  to  look 

at  him,  and  labourers  left  their  work  to  steal  a  glance.  The 
mother's  heart  must  have  suffered  bitterly  as  she  let  her  boy 
go  into  the  unknown  world  within  the  great  palace-gate  ;  and 
very  lonely  must  the  little  household  have  felt  when  the  last 
kisses  had  been  exchanged,  the  last  instruction  given,  and  the 
last  prayer  offered.  What  a  crowd  of  tender  thoughts,  curious 
speculations,  and  eager  yearnings  must  have  followed  the  little 
nurseling  of  the  Hebrew  home,  as  his  mother  took  him  and 
brought  him  unto  Pharaoh's  daughter,  and  he  became  her  son  ! 
But,  amid  all,  faith  rose  pre-eminent,  and  believed  that  He 
who  had  delivered  the  child  from  the  perils  of  the  Nile,  would 
keep  him  pure  and  sweet  amid  the  evils  and  fascinations  of  the 
Court. 

What  a  magnificent  land  must  Egypt  have  been  in  those 
days  of  which  Herodotus  and  the  hieroglyphic  records  speak  ! 
/  The  atmosphere  was  rainless  :  the  Nile  brought  from  afar  the 
rich  alluvial  soil,  that  bore  corn  enough  to  feed  the  world  ;  the 
banks  of  the  river  were  covered  with  cities,  villages,  stately 
temples,  and  all  the  evidences  of  an  advanced  civilization ;  whilst 
mighty  pyramids  and  colossal  figures  towered  to  a  hundred  feet 
in  height.  Seven  millions  of  people  throve  on  this  green  riband "' 
of  territory ;  and  whilst  the  great  mass  of  them  were  probably 


in  Mortra  antt  in  geefrs."  19 

poor  and  ignorant,  the  upper  classes,  and  especially  the  priests, 
were  remarkable  for  their  familiarity  with  much  of  which  we 
boast  ourselves  to-day. 

The  cream  of  all  this  was  poured  into  the  cup  of  Moses.  He 
was  brought  up  in  the  palace,  and  treated  as  the  grandson  of 
Pharaoh.  If  he  rode  forth  into  the  streets,  it  would  be  in  a 
princely  equipage,  amid  the  cries  of  "  Bow  the  knee."  If  he 
floated  on  the  Nile,  it  would  be  in  a  golden  barge,  amid  the 
strains  of  voluptuous  music.  If  he  wished  for  aught,  the  almost 
illimitable  wealth  of  the  treasures  of  Egypt  was  within  his 
reach. 

When  old  enough  he  was  probably  sent  to  be  educated  in  the 
college,  which  had  grown  up  around  the  Temple  of  the  Sun, 
and  has  been  called  "the  Oxford  of  Ancient  Egypt."  There 
he  would  learn  to  read  and  write  the  mysterious  hieroglyph  ; 
there,  too,  he  would  be  instructed  in  mathematics,  astronomy, 
and  chemistry,  in  all  of  which  the  Egyptians  were  adepts. , 
There,  also,  he  would  acquire  a  taste  for  music  ;  so  that  in 
after  days  he  could  sing  glad  and  triumphant  songs  of  victory, 
and  compose  odes  which  embalmed  the  history  of  God's  deal 
ings  with  his  people.  How  wonderfully  was  God  fitting  him 
-  br  his  after-life!  Stephen  says:  "Moses  was  learned  in  all 
/he  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians"  (Acts  vii.  22).  Much  of  it  was 
undoubtedly  the  merest  folly  ;  but  much  of  it,  also,  stood  him  in 
good  stead  when  he  became  the  founder  of  a  new  state. 

But  Moses  was  something  more  than  a  royal  student,  spend 
ing  his  years  in  cultured  refinement  and  lettered  ease.  He 
'was  a  statesman  and  a  soldier.  Stephen  tells  us  that  he  was 
"mighty  in  words  and  in  deeds  " :  mighty  in  words — there  is  the 
statesman  ;  mighty  in  deeds — there  the  soldier.  Josephus  says 
that  whilst  he  was  still  in  his  early  manhood  the  Ethiopians 
invaded  Egypt,  routed  the  army  sent  against  them,  and 
threatened  Memphis.  In  the  panic  the  oracles  were  consulted; 
and  on  their  recommendation  Moses  was  entrusted  with  the 
command  of  the  royal  troops.  He  immediately  took  the  field,"? 
surprised  and  defeated  the  enemy,  captured  their  principal 
city,  "  the  swamp-engirdled  city  of  Meroe,"  and  returned  to 
Egypt  laden  with  the  spoils  of  victory. 

Thus  year  followed  year  till  he  was  forty  years  of  age. 
Already  the  foremost  positions  of  the  State  were  open  to  him  ; 


20  4<  <K0tne  to  tjcars." 

and  it  seemed  as  if  the  river  of  his  life  would  continue  in  the 
same  bed,  undiverted,  and  only  waxmg  ever  broader  and 
deeper  in  its  flow. 

But,  beneath  all,  another  thought  was  always  present  with 
him,  and  gradually  dwarfed  all  others  as  it  grew  within  his    y, 
soul.     He  could  not  forget  that  his  parents  were  slaves;  that  N]  7 
the  bondmen  who  were  groaning  in  the  brickfields  beneath  the 
lash  of  the  task-masters  were  his  brethren.     He  never  lost  the 
thought  of  that  God  to  whom  his  mother  had  taught  him  to  / 
pray :    and   in    his   gayest,   most   successful    moments,   when 
sipping  the  intoxicating  cup  of  earthly  success,  he  could   not 
rid  himself  of  the  impression  that  his  destiny  did  not  lie  amid 
such  surroundings  as  those,  but  was  in  some  way  to  be  asso 
ciated  with  the  fulfilment  of  that  promise  which  he  had  heard 
so  often  from  his  mother's  lips 

Thoughts  like  these  would  often  cast  strange  shadows  over 
his  face,  which  baffled  those  who  knew  him  best.  His  foster- 
mother  might  attribute  the  strange  tinge  of  melancholy  to  ill- 
health  or  some  unrequited  love.  His  friends  and  companions 
would  rally  him  on  his  absent-mindedness.  His  suite  would 
often  discuss  the  subject  of  their  master's  depression,  and 
wonder  as  to  its  cause.  But  the  mystery  remained  locked  in 
his  heart  till  his  vague  impressions  had  become  settled  resolves ; 
and  he  broke,  as  gently  as  he  might,  the  news  to  his  bene 
factress  that  he  could  no  longer  hold  the  position  to  which  she 
had  raised  him,  or  be  called  her  son,  but  must  step  back  to  the 
lowly  lot  which  was  his  by  birth. 

The  announcement  would  be,  perhaps,  met  by  bitter  tears 
and  hot  indignation  on  the  part  of  her  to  whom  he  owed  so 
much  ;  but  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  made  him  swerve  by  a 
hair's-breadth  from  his  purpose.  And  how  great  a  sensation 
must  have  been  caused  throughout  the  Court  as  the  news 
leaked  out !  In  how  many  circles  it  would  be  discussed,  and 
what  different  interpretations  would  be  placed  on  it  !  Some 
would  attribute  it  to  mortification  or  jealousy ;  others  to  the 
presence  in  his  veins  of  base  slave-blood ;  others  to  some 
scheme  of  ultimate  self-aggrandizement.  All  would  com 
miserate  the  princess,  whose  kindness  seemed  so  rudely  re-  i 
quited.  But  no  one  guessed  the  strength  or  purity  of  his  hid-YM 
den  purpose,  born  of  God,  and  nurtured  by  His  good  Spirit.  A 


jjjis  (Sireat  Hcsnlfac.  21 

I.  — NOTICE  THE  NOBLE  INGREDIENTS  IN  THIS  GREAT 
RESOLVE,  (i)  It  was  made  in  tJie  full  maturity  of  his  powers. 
The  impulsive  ardour  of  youth  will  sometimes  lead  a  young 
heart  to  say,  "  This  people  shall  be  my  people,  and  their  God 
my  God."  But  there  was  nothing  of  that  kind  here.  It  was 
the  deliberate  resolve  of  a  man  who  had  seen  much  of  life,  who 
knew  all  that  could  be  urged  from  every  side,  and  who  was 
N\  come  to  years.  With  nothing  to  gain  and  all  to  lose,  afteX 
thoughtful  examination,  he  descended  from  the,  footsteps  of  the  \ 
loftiest  throne  in  the  world.  V/^ 

(2)  //  was  made  when  the  fortunes  of  the  children  of  Israel 
were  at  their  lowest  ebb.      They  were  slaves,  were   suffering 
affliction,  and  were  reproached.     For  a  palace  there  would  be  a 
hut ;    for  luxury,  hard  fare  and  coarse  food  ;    for  respect  and 
honour,  hatred  and   contempt ;    for  the   treasures   of    Egypt, 
poverty   and  want ;   for  the  society  of  the  learned  and  llite^ 
association  with  the  ignorant  and  depraved.     But  none  of  these 
things  moved  him.     He  counted  them  as  the  small  dust  of  the 
balance.    With  deliberate  resolution  he  bowed  his  head  beneath 
the  yoke,  albeit  it  was  rough  and  heavy. 

(3)  //  was  made  when  the  pleasures  of  sin  seemed  most  fascin 
ating.      There  is  nothing  gained  in  saying  that  there  are  no 
pleasures  in  sin.     There  are.     The  forbidden  fruit  is  pleasant  to 
the  eye  and  luscious  to  the  taste ;  the  first  steps  along  the  broad 
road  are  over  a  carpet  of  velvet  grass,  enamelled  with  countless 
flowers  ;  there  are  notes  of  dulcet  sweetness  in  the  syren's  song, 
which  ravish  the  heart.     Temptation  would  have  no  power  at 
all  if  it  were  not  so.     The  keen  thrill  of  pleasure  is  the  bait, 
beneath  which  the  great  enemy  of  souls  hides  the  inevitable 
hook.    And  Moses  was  not  oblivious  to  all  this;  yet,  in  the\ 
heyday  of  his  strength,  in  the  prime  of  his  manhood,  in  a  court  ' 
where  continence  and  purity  must  have  been  unknown,  he  dared 
to  forego  it  all. 

(4)  //  was  made  decisively.     Many  would  have  tried  to  retain 
the  proud  position  and  to  benefit  their  enslaved  brethren  at  the 
same  time ;   to  temporize  between  an  outward  recognition  of 
Osiris,  and  a  heart-loyalty  to  Jehovah  ;  to  keep  on  good  terms 
with  court  and  brick-kiln.     But  there  was  no  trace  of  this  in  the 
great  renunciation  which  cut  Moses  off  from  the  least  association 
with  the  fond  and  fascinating  associations  of  early  life. 


22  "  <E0tttE     tO     fJCarS'" 

Are  there  not  times  in  all  our  lives  when  a  similar  step  has  to 
be  taken  by  ourselves  ?  We  have  to  die  to  much  that  is 
pleasant  and  attractive,  in  order  to  rise  to  our  true  life.  Buried, 
to  bear  fruit ;  maimed,  to  enter  life  ;  laying  our  Isaac  on  the  altar, 
to  become  the  leader  of  the  faithful ;  turning  aside  from  the 
gate  of  a  sunlit  garden,  to  take  a  darker,  stonier,  path  ;  renoun 
cing  what  others  hold  without  rebuke,  because  of  some  high 
")  purpose  which  has  forced  its  way  into  the  soul ;  choosing 
^"Gethsemane  and  Calvary  and  the  grave,  in  fellowship  with 
the  Man  of  Sorrows ;  being  willing  to  renounce  friends,  wealth, 
reputation,  and  success,  and  to  be  flung  like  a  shipwrecked 
sailor  on  some  lone  shore,  because  of  some  vision  that  beckons 
us.  Those  who  have  done  any  one  of  these  can  understand,  as 
others  cannot,  the  nobility  and  greatness  of  Moses'  choice. 

II.  THE  THOUGHT  WHICH  LED  TO  IT.     "By  faith  Moses 

refused "     Faith  rests  on  promise  ;   to  her  the  promise  is 

equivalent  to  fulfilment ;  and  if  only  she  has  the  one,  she  dares 
to  count  on  the  other  as  already  hers.  It  matters  comparatively 
little  that  the  thing  promised  is  not  given ;  it  is  sure  and  certain, 
because  God  has  pledged  his  word  for  it,  and  in  anticipation 
she  enters  on  its  enjoyment.  She  weighs  the  things  that  she 
can  touch  against  those  which  are  only  as  yet  foretold,  because 
in  her  judgment  the  latter  are  as  real  as  the  former.  Thus  it 
was  with  Moses. 

He  believed  God's  promise  to  Abraham,  that  after  four 
hundred  years  of  bondage  his  people  would  come  out;  and  he 
knew  that  that  period  had  nearly  expired.  He  cherished  a 
fervent  belief  in  that  promise  made  to  the  chosen  people,  that 
from  their  ranks  the  true  Deliverer  would  arise — a  shadowy 
belief  in  the  coming  Messiah,  which,  notwithstanding  its  vague- 
\  ness,  he  dared  not  forfeit.  He  believed  that  there  was  a 
destiny  waiting  for  the  chosen  people  in  the  long  future,  which 
would  throw  into  shadow  all  the  pomp  and  splendour  of  the 
magnificent  Pharaoh.  He  believed  that  there  was  a  recom 
pense  of  reward  awaiting  them  beyond  the  bourne  and  limit  of 
Egypt,  more  glorious  than  the  dazzling  splendour  of  its  highest 
rewards  and  honours.  He  evidently  believed,  what  he  expected  \ 
his  brethren  to  believe,  that  God  would  deliver  them  by  his  J 
hand.  And  it  was  this  that  determined  him. 


"®ljE  lleproatlj  oi  Christ."  23 

Had  he  simply  acted  on  what  he  saw,  he  had  never  left 
Pharaoh's  palace.  But  his  faith  told  him  of  things  hidden 
from  his  co-temporaries ;  and  these  altered  his  course,  and  led 
him  to  act  in  a  way  which  to  them  was  perfectly  incompre 
hensible. 

He  did  not  simply  close  his  eyes  to  the  claims  of  Egypt, 
and  steel  his  nerves  against  the  threats  of  Pharaoh,  isolating 
himself  with  the  exclusiveness  of  a  cynic  :  that  might  have 
been  dictated  by  a  strong  and  wise  policy.  But  he  did  what 
he  did,  because  he  saw  by  faith  what  eye  had  not  seen,  or  ear 
heard,  or  the  heart  conceived  ;  and  these  things — that  wealth 
and  that  reward — being  so  much  better  than  anything  Egypt 
could  offer,  he__cheerfully  took  the  path  .of  _ajflkt' oj ,  nf  <u*1f-S 
denial  and  reproach,  which  led  to  them. 

""See,  child^oTTiod,  what  is  within  thy  reach,  if  only  thou  wilt 
dare  to  deny  thyself  and  take  up  thy  cross !  Send  the  spies 
into  the  Land  of  Promise.  Climb  the  delectable  mountains, 
and  put  the  telescope  to  thine  eyes.  And  as  the  far  more 
exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  breaks  on  thy  vision, 
thou  wilt  be  prepared  to  count  all  things  else,  which  had 
seemed  gain,  to  be  loss  and  dung,  and  not  worthy  to  be 
mentioned  in  the  comparison.  Is  the  renunciation  hard  ?  Do 
not  forget  that  Christ  is  suffering  with  you  in  it  all.  His  steps  \ 
lie  along  this  road.  It  is  "the  reproach  of  Christ"— a  little 
phase  of  His  long  suffering  through  the  sufferings  of  his  people. 
He  knows  every  step  of  the  way,  because  He  has  so  often 
traversed  it  in  the  experience  of  his  own.  There  is  no  solace 
to  the  agonized  soul  so  sweet  as  the  perpetual  mention  of  his 
dear  name,  as  if  it  were  conscious  that  in  all  its  afflictions  He 
is  afflicted^  and  that  the  Angel  of  his  presence  is  going  at  its 
side. 

And  who  can  estimate  the  result  ?  The  water  streams  from 
the  smitten  rock  ;  the  flower  springs  from  the  dead  seed  ;  the 
crystal  river  flows  from  the  moraine  of  the  glacier  ;  the  bright 
gold  emerges  from  the  dark  mine  and  the  cleansing  fires.  An 
Exodus  and  the  birth  of  a  nation  of  freemen  were  the  outcome 
of  this  great  renunciation. 


IV. 
Steltiwrattr*  tig  Jttaitt  3fom. 

11  And  seeing  one  of  his  brethren  suffer  wrong,  he  defended  him,  and 
avenged  him  that  was  oppressed,  and  smote  the  Egyptian.  For  he  sup 
posed  his  brethren  would  have  understood  how  that  God  by  his  hand 
ould  deliver  them :  but  they  understood  not. " 

ACTS  vii.  24,  25. 

^HERE  was  true  heroism  in  the  act,  when  Moses  stepped 
down  from  Pharaoh's  throne  to  share  the  lot  of  his 
brethren.  He  might  have  contented  himself  by  send 
ing  them  money  from  the  treasures  of  Egypt;  but  it 
»aj'as  a  greater  and  nobler  thing  to  give  himself.  And 
the  true  religious  instinct  of  his  soul  gleamed  out  as 
he  did  so.  There  was  a  revelation  of  the  faith  which  had  been 
kindled  within  him  when  he  knelt  at  his  mother's  side  in  the 
slave-hut,  and  had  survived  all  the  adverse  influences  of  the 
Egyptian  Court,  like  a  spark  of  fire  living  in  the  heart  of  black 
coals. 

At  the  same  time  there  was  a  great  deal  for  him  to  learn.  In 
after  days  he  was  to  know  the  ways  of  the  Lord — God  would 
make  them  kno  *'n  to  him  (Psa.  ciii.  7) ;  but  just  now  he  was  full 
of  his  own  ways.  In  after  days  he  was  to  be  a  hand,  nerved, 
and  used,  and  empowered  by  God  Himself  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  20) ;  but 
now  he  was  acting  in  his  own  self-energy — rash,  impetuous, 
headstrong,  girding  hin^elf  and  walking  whither  he  would.  In 
after  days  he  was  to  be  the  meekest  and  least  obtrusive  of  men, 
conscious  to  a  fault  of  his  own  weakness,  and  at  every  step 
lookv.  g  up  for  guidance  and  help  ;  but  now  he  leaned  wholly  on 
his  own  understanding,  and,  without  taking  counsel  of  God, 
thought  to  secure  the  emancipation  of  his  people  by  the  asser 
tion  of  his  will,  and  the  forth-putting  of  his  might. 

Ah  !  there  was  the  making  of  a  saint  in  him ;  but  it  would 
take  many  a  long  year  of  lonely  waiting  and  trial  before  this 
strong  and  self-reliant  nature  could  be  broken  down,  shaped 


®Jjc  Jfirst  Attempt.  25 

into  a  vessel  meet  for  the  Master's  use,  and  prepared  for  every 
good  work.  God's  work  can  only  be  done  by  his  chosen  instru 
ments,  and  they  must  be  specially  fitted  for  the  service  they  are 
to  render.  That  special  adaptation  is  not  natural  to  any  of 
us,  and  can  only  come  after  years  of  deep  and  searching  dis 
cipline. 

I.  THE  FIRST  ATTEMPT  AT  DELIVERANCE.— (i)  It  sprang 
1^  largely  from  human  sympathy.  As  soon  as  he  reached  Goshen 
his  first  act  was  to  go  out  and  see  his  brethren  in  the  midst  of 
their  toils,  working  amid  the  conditions  of  the  severest  hard 
ship.  Brick-making  in  stiff  clay-pits  must  always  be  arduous 
employment ;  but  how  much  more  so  when  an  Egyptian  sun 
shone  vertically  above  them,  and  a  task-master  stood  by  with 
his  heavy  whip  to  punish  the  least  attempt  to  flinch  from  toil  or 
shirk  the  collar  !  Imagine  the  accomplished  courtier,  the  child 
of  luxury  and  fashion,  the  man  of  letters  and  of  mighty  deeds, 
as  he  moves  amid  these  long  lines  of  slaves.  At  first  it  must 
have  seemed  very  strange  to  him  to  realize  that  he  was  bound 
in  bonds  of  such  close  kinship  to  these  toiling,  suffering,  dying, 
Hebrews.  "  He  went  out  unto  his  brethren."  But  this  feeling 
must  soon  have  given  place  to  an  intense  commiseration,  as  he 
heard  the  nation  sighing  by  reason  of  its  bondage ;  and  groan 
ing  under  its  accumulated  sorrows,  his  soul  would  be  filled 
with  tender  pity.  But  within  a  little,  that  pity  for  his  people 
turned  to  indignation  against  their  oppressors.  Before  he 
had  taken  many  steps  he  came  on  one  of  the  task-masters 
cruelly  beating  a  Hebrew  ;  and  as  he  witnessed  the  horrid 
spectacle,  the  heavy  blows  falling  on  the  unresisting  quivering 
body,  he  could  restrain  himself  no  longer,  and  felled  the  caitiff 
lifeless  to  the  ground,  then  bore  away  his  body  and  buried  it 
in  the  nearest  sands,  ever  waiting  to  encroach  on  the  more 
cultivated  lands  of  Egypt. 

It  was  a  chivalrous  act,  well  meant,  and  at  least  significant  of 
the  strength  of  the  emotions  pent  up  within  him  ;  but,  after  all, 
the  mere  impulse  of  pity  would  never  have  been  strong  enough 
to  bear  him  through  the  weary  years  of  the  desert  march. 
Beneath  the  repeated  provocations  of  the  people  it  must  have  ' 
given  way.  He  could  never  have  carried  them  as  a  n'-^jing- 
father,  or  asked  that  he  might  be  blotted  out  of  the  book  u/  life 


26  gdiberana  bjr  |Jtant  Jnrre. 

for  them,  or  pleaded  with  them  for  God.  Nothing  short  of  a 
reception  of  the  Divine  patience,  let  into  his  soul  as  the  ocean 
waves  find  an  inlet  into  some  deeply-indented  coast,  could 
suffice  for  the  demands  which  would  be  made  on  him  in  those 
coming  terrible  years. 

Is  there  not  a  lesson  here  for  many  of  God's  workers  ?  They 
have  not  learned  to  distinguish  between  passion  and  principle, 
between  impulse  and  a  settled  purpose.  If  some  touching  tale 
is  told,  some  piteous  appeal  made  for  help,  or  some  crowded 
gathering  swept  by  a  wave  of  missionary  enthusiasm,  they  are 
the  first  to  yield  to  the  impulse,  to  volunteer  their  service,  to 
give  their  money,  and  fling  themselves  into  the  breach.  But, 
after  all,  this  is  not  the  loftiest  motive  for  Christian  service,  and 
it  certainly  is  not  the  most  permanent.  After  a  little  while  it 
dies  down,  and  leaves  us  stranded  as  by  a  receding  tide.  It  is 
better  far  to  sacrifice  the  mere  natural  impulse  for  the  strong 
sense  of  what  is  right,  and  what  God  requires.  If  we  undertake 
a  definite  work  because  He  calls  us  to  it,  because  it  is  put 
before  us  as  a  duty  for  his  sake,  or  because  we  are  channels 
through  which  the  unebbing  torrent  of  his  Divine  pity  is  flowing, 
we  have  secured  a  principle  of  action  which  will  bear  us  through 
disappointment,  failure,  and  ingratitude.  The  way  in  which 
men  treat  us  will  make  no  difference  to  us,  because  all  is  done 
for  Him. 

),  (2)  //  was  premature.  God's  time  for  the  deliverance  of 
x^iis  people  was  not  due  for  forty  years.  The  iniquity  of  the 
Amorites  had  not  reached  its  full,  though  it  was  nearing  the 
brim  of  the  cup  (Gen.  xv.  16).  His  own  education  was  very 
incomplete ;  it  would  take  at  least  forty  years  to  drain  him  of  his 
self-will  and  self-reliance,  and  make  him  a  vessel  meet  for  the 
Master's  use.  The  Hebrew  people  had  not  as  yet  come  to  the 
pitch  of  anguish,  which  is  so  touchingly  referred  to,  when  the 
death  of  their  principal  oppressor  seems  to  have  brought  matters 
to  a  crisis,  and  they  forsook  the  false  gods  to  which  they  had 
given  their  allegiance  in  order  to  return  to  the  God  of  their 
fathers  (Exod.  ii.  23). 

We  all  know  something  of  this  haste.  We  find  it  so  hard  to 
sit  still,  whilst  our  great  Boaz  does  his  work  (Ruth  iii.  18).  We 
think  that  the  set  time  of  God's  salvation  must  have  arrived,  long 
before  the  clock  strikes.  As  Saul,  in  presence  of  the  Philistine 


27 

invasion,  we  suppose  that  we  cannot  last  out  for  another  hour, 
and  force  ourselves  to  offer  the  burnt-offering  ;  and  are  chagrined 
to  see  Samuel's  figure  slowly  pacing  up  the  mountain  pass  as  the 
fire  burns  down  to  its  last  embers,  and  to  hear  from  his  lips  the 
sentence  of  deposition  for  our  impatience  (i  Sam.  xiii.  12-14). 
Well  may  our  Master  say  of  us,  as  He  did  once  of  his  brethren, 
"  My  time  is  not  yet  come  ;  but  your  time  is  alway  ready " 
(John  vii.  6). 

Oh  for  grace  to  wait  and  watch  with  God,  though  a  horror  of 
great  darkness  fall  on  us,  and  sleep  steals  up  into  our  eyes,  and 
the  head  becomes  thickly  sown  with  the  grey  hair  of  age !  One 
blow  struck  when  the  time  is  fulfilled  is  worth  a  thousand  struck 
in  premature  eagerness.  It  is  not  for  thee,  O  my  soul,  to  know 
the  times  and  seasons  which  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own 
power ;  wait  thou  only  upon  God ;  let  thy  expectation  be 
from  Him  ;  wait  at  the  gates  of  thy  Jericho  for  yet  seven  days  ; 
utter  not  a  sound  till  He  says,  Shout  :  but  when  He  gives  the 
signal,  with  the  glad  cry  of  victory  thou  shalt  pass  over  the 

*  fallen  wall  into  the  city. 

S  ,  (3)  It  was  executed  in  the  pride  of  human  strength.  It  was 
but  natural  that  Moses  should  suppose  that  he  could  do  some 
thing  for  the  amelioration  of  his  people's  lot.  He  had  always 
been  accustomed  to  have  his  way.  Crowds  of  obsequious 
servants  and  courtiers  had  yielded  to  his  slightest  whim.  By 
his  strong  right  hand  he  had  hewn  out  a  great  career.  He  was 
conscious  of  vast  stores  of  youthful  energy  ana  natural  force, 
untapped  by  sufficient  calls,  and  undiminished  by  physical 
excess  ;  surely  these  would  count  for  something.  He  would 
make  that  nation  of  oppressors  reel  before  his  blows,  and  of 
course  he  would  be  hailed  by  his  brethren  as  their  God-sent 
deliverer. 

It  was  a  rude  surprise  when,  on  the  second  day,  he  went  out 
to  continue  his  self-imposed  task,  and  essayed  to  adjust  a 
difference  between  two  Hebrews,  to  find  himself  repulsed  from 
them  by  the  challenge,  "Who  made  thee  a  prince  and  a  judge 
over  us  ?  "  He  had  never  expected  a  rebuff  from  that  quarter. 
"  For  he  supposed  his  brethren  would  have  understood  how 
that  God,  by  his  hand,  would  deliver  them  :  but  they  under 
stood  not."  Evidently,  then,  God's  time  had  not  arrived;  nor 
could  it  come  until  the  heat  of  his  spirit  had  slowly  evaporated 


28  gditrerancE  bji  Attain  Jforrc. 

in  the  desert  air,  and  he  had  learnt  the  hardest  of  all  lessons, 
that  "  by  strength  shall  no  man  prevail." 

We  have  been  disposed  to  attribute  too  much  of  the  success 
of  the  Exodus  to  the  natural  qualities  of  the  great  leader  ;  but 
we  must  always  remember  that,  like  Gideon's  host,  he  was  at 
first  too  strong  for  God.  God  cannot  give  his  glory  to  another. 
He  dare  not  entrust  his  power  to  men,  till  they  are  humbled 
and  emptied,  and  conscious  of  their  helplessness.  Even  the  Son 
learned  obedience  by  the  things  that  He  suffered,  and  descended 
into  the  dust  of  death,  crying,  "  I  am  a  worm  and  no  man," 
ere  He  could  say,  "All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven 
and  in  earth."  The  most  eminent  of  his  saints  must  suffer 
from  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  to  remind  him  of  his  weakness  ;  and 
he  confessed  himself  grateful  for  it,  because  only  when  he  w<is 
weak  could  he  be  strong.  When  the  soul  is  inflated  with  a 
strong  reliance  on  its  own  sufficiency,  the  power  of  God  is 
unable  to  effect  an  entrance,  or  use  that  soul  as  a  channel  for 
its  work.  It  is  when  we  are  willing  to  be  accounted  as  worms, 
as  broken  reeds,  as  little  children,  as  foolish,  weak,  base, 
despised,  as  "  things  which  are  not,"  that  we  become  aware 
of  being  vehicles  for  the  working  of  the  might  of  his  power, 
which  He  wrought  in  Christ  when  He  raised  Him  from  the 
dead.  You  must  be  brought  to  an  end  of  yourself  before  God 
can  begin  with  you.  But  when  once  you  have  come  to  that  point 
there  is  no  limit  to  what  may  be  wrought  during  a  single  life  by 
the  passage  through  it  of  his  eternal  power  and  God-head. 

It  was  too  apprehensive  of  the  judgment  of  other  men. 
are  told  thatTie  looked  this  way  and  that  way  before 
he  smote  the  Egyptian  ;  and  when  he  found  that  his  deed 
of  revenge  was  known,  he  feared  and  fled  (Exod.  ii.  15).  But 
suppose  that  he  had  felt  that  he  had  been  divinely  commis 
sioned  to  execute  judgment  upon  Egypt  ;  suppose  he  had 
realized  the  Divine  Presence  with  him  ;  suppose  he  had  known 
that  he  was  on  the  line  of  Divine  purpose — would  he  have 
cared  who  was  looking,  and  what  was  being  said  ?  It  would 
not  have  been  possible.  Fixing  his  eyes  on  the  movement 
of  the  Divine  cloud,  absorbed  in  the  one  passion  of  doing 
God's  will,  sure  that  he  was  immortal  till  his  work  was  done,  he 
would  have  been  perfectly  indifferent  to  the  praise  or  blame  of 
men.  Whenever  men  look  this  way  and  that  to  see  what  other 


ta  tfre  §eacrt.  29 

men  are  doing  or  saying,  you  may  be  quite  sure  that  they  do 
not  know  certainly  their  Master's  plan  ;  they  are  in  front  of 
Him,  and  are  acting  from  the  prompting  of  their  own  self- 
will,  though  perhaps  under  the  cover  of  religious  zeal. 

There  has  been  only  one  perfect  Servant  of  God  who  has  ever 
trodden  our  world.  He  never  looked  this  way  nor  that.  Away 
on  the  mountain  height  of  unbroken  fellowship  He  received 
the  plan  of  his  life,  which  He  wrought  out  in  daily  detail,  and 
He  alone  could  say,  "  He  that  sent  Me  is  with  Me  ;  the  Father 
hath  not  left  Me  alone,  for  I  do  always  those  things  that  please 
Him."  Oh  for  the  single  eye,  that  our  whole  body  also  may  be 
full  of  light ! 

II.  THE  FLIGHT  TO  THE  DESERT.— The  news  of  Moses'  first 
attempt  came  to  the  ears  of  Pharaoh,  and  he  sought  to  slay 
Moses.  But  Moses  feared,  and  fled  from  the  face  of  Pharaoh. 
In  after  years,  under  similar  circumstances,  it  is  said,  "  He 
forsook  Egypt,  not  fearing  the  wrath  of  the  king"  (Heb.  xi.  27). 
And  when  we  ask  the  reason  of  his  fearlessness,  we  learn  that 
it  was  by  faith  he  did  so;  for  "he  endured,  as  seeing  Him  who 
is  invisible."  But  if  such  were  the  case  afterwards,  why  was  it 
not  so  at  the  time  with  which  we  are  dealing  ?  Why  did  he 
not  exercise  faith  in  the  invisible  God  ?  Why  did  not  his  heart 
beat  with  even  throb  in  the  one  crisis  as  in  the  other.  The 
reason  is  obvious. 

Faith  is  only  possible  when  we  are  on  God's  plan,  and  stand 
on  God's  promise.  It  is  useless  to  pray  for  increased  faith  until 
we  have  fulfilled  the  conditions  of  faith.  It  is  equally  useless 
to  spend  time  in  regrets  and  tears  over  the  failures  which  are 
due  to  our  unbelief.  "  And  the  Lord  said  to  Joshua,  Get  thee 
up  ;  wherefore  liest  thou  thus  upon  thy  face  ? "  Faith  is  as 
natural  to  right  conditions  of  soul,  as  a  flower  is  to  a  plant. 
And  amongst  those  conditions  this  is  the  first— ascertain,"1 
your  place  in  Gnd's  plan^  and  get  on  to  it ;  and  this  is  the 
second^fe^d  on  God's  promises.  And^  when  each  of  these 
is  realized,  faith  comes  of  itself;  and  there  is  absolutely  nothing 
which  is  impossible.  The  believing  soul  can  "  do  all  things " 
with  God,  because  it  has  got  on  to  God's  lines  ;  yea,  it  is 
itself  as  the  metal  track  along  which  God  travels  to  men  in 
love,  grace,  and  truth. 


30  gclibcratue  b|r  JRain  JForre. 

But  Moses  was  out  of  touch  with  God.  So  he  fled,  and 
crossed  the  desert  that  lay  between  him  and  the  eastern 
frontier  ;  threaded  the  mountain  passes  of  the  Sinaitic  penin 
sula,  through  which  in  after  years  he  was  to  lead  his  people  ; 
and  at  last  sat  wearily  down  by  a  well  in  the  land  of  Midian. 
There  his  chivalrous  interference  was  suddenly  elicited  on 
behalf  of  the  daughters  of  the  priest  of  Midian,  who  seem  to 
have  suffered  daily  from  the  insolence  of  shepherds  appro 
priating  the  water  which  the  shepherd-maidens  had  drawn  for 
their  flocks.  That  day,  however,  the  churls  met  their  match, 
and  were  compelled  to  leave  the  water-troughs  to  the  women ; 
who  hurried  home,  unexpectedly  early,  to  tell,  with  girls' 
enthusiasm,  of  the  Egyptian  who  had  delivered  them  from 
the  hand  of  the  shepherds.  It  was  a  good  office  that  could 
not  pass  without  requital  in  that  hospitable  land,  and  it  opened 
the  door  to  the  chieftain's  tent ;  ultimately  to  marriage  with  one 
of  those  same  shepherdesses  ;  and  finally  to  the  quiet  life  of  a 
shepherd  in  the  calm  open  spaces  of  that  wonderful  land, 
which,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  has  served  for  a  Divine 
school. 

Such  experiences  come  to  us  all.  We  rush  forward,  thinking 
to  carry  all  before  us  ;  we  strike  a  few  blows  in  vain  ;  we  are 
staggered  with  disappointment,  and  reel  back  ;  we  are  afraid  at 
the  first  breath  of  human  disapprobation  ;  we  flee  from  the 
scenes  of  our  discomfiture  to  hide  ourselves  in  chagrin.  Then 
we  are  hidden  in  the  secret  of  God's  presence  from  the  pride  of 
man.  And  there  our  vision  clears :  the  silt  drops  from  the  current 
of  our  life,  as  from  the  Rhone  in  its  passage  through  the  deep 
waters  of  Geneva's  lake  ;  our  self-life  dies  down  ;  our  spirit 
drinks  of  the  river  of  God,  which  is  full  of  water ;  our  faith 
begins  to  grasp  his  arm,  and  to  be  the  channel  for  the  manifesta 
tion  of  his  power ;  and  thus  at  last  we  emerge  to  be  his  hand  to 
lead  an  Exodus.  "  This  also  cometh  forth  from  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  who  is  wonderful  in  counsel,  and  excellent  in  working." 


JEartrdl0us 

God  called  unto  him  out  of  the  midst  of  the  bush,  and  said 
Moses,  Moses.     And  he  said,  Here  am  I." — EXOD.  iii.  4. 

MEMORABLE  DAY.— There  are  days  in  all  lives 
which  come  unannounced,  unheralded ;  no  angel  faces 
look  out  of  heaven  ;  no  angel  voices  put  us  on  our 
guard :  but  as  we  look  back  on  them  in  after  years,  we 
realize  that  they  were  the  turning  points  of  existence. 
Perhaps  we  look  longingly  back  on  the  uneventful 
routine  of  the  life  that  lies  beyond  them ;  but  the  angel,  with 
drawn  sword,  forbids  our  return,  and  compels  us  forward.  It 
was  so  with  Moses. 

Quite  ordinary  was  that  morning  as  it  broke.  The  sun  rose 
as  usual  in  a  dull  haze  over  the  expanse  of  sand,  or  above  the 
gaunt  forms  of  the  mountains,  seamed  and  scarred.  As  the 
young  day  opened,  it  began  to  shine  in  a  cloudless  sky,  casting 
long  shadows  over  the  plains ;  and  presently,  climbing  to  the 
zenith,  threw  a  searching,  scorching,  light  into  every  aperture  of 
the  landscape  beneath.  The  sheep  browsed  as  usual  on  the 
scant  herbage,  or  lay  panting  beneath  the  shadow  of  a  great 
rock;  but  there  was  nothing  in  their  behaviour  to  excite  the 
thought  that  God  was  nigh.  The  giant  forms  of  the  mountains, 
the  spreading  heavens,  the  awful  silence  unbroken  by  song  of 
bird  or  hum  of  insect  life,  the  acacia  bushes  drooping  in  the 
shadeless  glare — these,  things  were  as  they  had  been  for  forty 
years,  and  as  they  threatened  to  be,  after  Moses  had  sunk  into 
an  obscure  and  forgotten  grave.  Then,  all  suddenly,  a  common 
bush  began  to  shine  with  the  emblem  of  Deity;  and  from  its 
heart  of  fire  the  voice  of  God  broke  the  silence  of  the  ages  in 
words  that  fell  on  the  shepherd's  ear  like  a  double-knock: 
"  Moses,  Moses." 

And  from  that  moment  all  his  life  was  altered.     The  door 
c 


32  ?£he  iHarbellous 

which  had  been  so  long  in  repairing  was  suddenly  put  on  its 
hinges  again  and  opened.  The  peaceful  quiet,  the  meditative 
leisure,  the  hiding  from  the  strife  of  tongues,  the  simple  piety  of 
the  homestead — where  the  priest  of  Midian  ministered,  and 
Zipporah  welcomed  him  with  his  boys,  as  he  brought  the  flock 
home  to  its  fold — suddenly  vanished,  as  a  tract  of  land  submerged 
beneath  the  ocean.  And  he  went  forth,  not  clearly  knowing 
whither  ;  knowing  only  that  he  dared  not  be  disobedient  to  the 
heavenly  vision,  or  refuse  the  voice  of  Him  that  spake. 

That  voice  still  speaks  to  those  whose  hearts  are  hushed  to 
hear.  By  written  letter  or  printed  page,  by  the  beauty  of  a  holy 
life,  the  spell  of  some  precious  memory,  or  the  voice  of  some 
living  teacher,  the  God  of  past  generations  still  makes  known 
\  A  his  will  to  the  anointed  ear.  Nor  will  our  lives  ever  be  what 
j ;  j  they  might  until  we  realize  that  God  has  a  plan  for  every  hour 
in  them  ;  and  that  He  waits  to  reveal  that  plan  to  the  loving  and 
obedient  heart,  making  it  known  to  us  by  one  of  the  ten  thousand 
ministries  that  lie  around  us.  Insensibly  to  ourselves  we  con 
tract  the  habit  of  thinking  of  Him  as  the  God  of  the  dead,  who 
spake  to  the  fathers  in  oracle  and  prophet ;  whereas  the  I  AM  is 
God  of  the  living — passing  through  our  crowded  thoroughfares, 
brooding  over  our  desert  spaces,  and  seeking  hearts  which  are. 
s^L§LQ.°_ugh  jrom  their  own  plannings  and  activities  to  listen. 

The  main  point  for  each  of  us  is  to  be  able  to  answer  his 
summons  with  the  response,  "Here  am  I."  It  may  seem  long  to 
wait,  and  the  oft-expected  day  so  slow  in  coming,  that  the  heart 
sinks  down,  oppressed  with  the  crowd  of  common  days,  and 
relinquishes  hope  ;  but  your  opportunity  will  come  at  last.  Be 
always  ready !  Never  let  the  loins  be  ungirded,  or  the  lamps 
expire  ;  never  throw  yourself  down  at  full  length  by  the  brook, 
to  drink  lazily  of  the  limpid  stream.  In  such  an  hour  as  you 
think  not  the  Lord  will  come.  What  rapture  to  be  able  to 
answer  his  appeal  with,  "Here  am  I."  If  that  summons  were  to 
come  to-day,  too  many  of  us  would  have  to  ask  for  a  moment's 
respite  while  we  went  to  finish  some  neglected  duty.  Oh  for  > 
the  free,  untrammelled,  unengaged  spirit,  to  be  ready  to  go  . 
at  any  moment  whithersoever  the  Lord  may  appoint. 

A  REMARKABLE  ANNOUNCEMENT.— Out  of  the  bush  came 
the  voice  of  God,  blending  past,  present,  and  future,  in  one 


'"8  hiill  acnii  trjce."  33 

marvellous  sentence  :  the  past,  "  I  am  the  God  of  thy  father, 
the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob  " ; 
the  present,  "  I  have  surely  seen  the  affliction  of  my  people 
which  are  in  Egypt,  and  have  heard  their  cry  by  reason  of  theii 
taskmasters  ;  for  I  know  their  sorrows,  and  I  am  come  down  to 
deliver  them";  the  future,  "Come  now,  therefore,  and  I  will 
send  thee  unto  Pharaoh"  (Exod.  iii.  6-10). 

Deep  and  searching  thoughts  arrest  us,  which  should  be  laid 
most  seriously  to  heart,  especially  by  the  Lord's  busiest  workers. 
We  are  all  too  apt  to  run  before  we  are  sent,  as  Moses  did  in  his 
first  well-meant,  but  ill-timed,  endeavours.  We  put  our  hands, 
at  our  own  prompting,  to  a  work  that  needs  doing  ;  we  ask  God 
to  help  us,  and  we  go  on  very  well  with  the  momentum  of  our 
own  energy  for  at  least  a  day.  But  on  the  morrow,  when  chiding 
and  rebuke  and  difficulty  arise,  as  they  did  to  Moses,  we  are 
disappointed,  and  throw  it  all  up  ;  betaking  ourselves  to  flight, 
rinding  our  refuge  in  the  solitudes  of  the  desert. 

But  what  a  contrast  to  all  this  ineffectual  effort  and  dismal 
disappointment  is  presented  in  those  who  have  learnt  to  wait  for 
God  !  When  the  time  is  full,  they  hear  Him  say,  I  am  come  down, 
and  I  will  send  tJiee  ;  and  from  that  moment  they  are  no  longer 
promoters,  but  instruments,  agents,  and  tools,  through  whom 
He  executes  his  plans.  What,  then,  are  difficulties  to  them? 
They  anticipate  them  without  anxiety  ;  they  pass  through  them 
without  fear.  God  must  have  foreseen  all  before  He  put  his  hand 
to  the  work.  He  must  be  able  to  see  a  pathway  threading  the 
apparently  trackless  waste.  He  must  know  a  door  through 
what  appears  to  be  an  impregnable  barrier  of  rock.  At  any 
rate,  the  chosen  soul  has  simply  to  walk  with  Him  ;  to  be  ready 
to  do  the  errands  He  requires,  whether  they  consist  in  accosting 
monarchs,  lifting  up  a  rod,  or  uttering  his  words.  That  is  all  ; 
and  then  to  stand  still  to  watch  the  ease  with  which  He  cleaves 
a  pathway  through  the  sea,  and  provides  a  commissariat  in  the 
desert. 

DIVINE  LONG-SUFFERING  UNDER  PROVOCATION. — In  the 
first  blush  of  youthful  enthusiasm  Moses  had  been  impetuous 
enough  to  attempt  the  emancipation  of  his  people  by  the  blows 
of  his  right  hand.  But  now  that  God  proposes  to  send  him  to 
lead  an  Exodus,  he  starts  back  in  dismay  almost  petrified  at  the 


fl  f&fyt  IKarbclIrras  ®0U0iju|i. 

proposal.  But  how  true  this  is  to  nature  !  The  student,  as  a 
precocious  schoolboy,  thinks  that  he  knows  all  that  can  be 
acquired  of  a  certain  branch  of  science  ;  but  twenty  years  after 
he  feels  as  if  he  had  not  mastered  its  elements,  though  he  has 
never  ceased  to  study.  The  believer  who  began  by  speaking  of 
himself  as  "the  least  of  saints"  ends  by  calling  himself  "the  chief 
of  sinners."  And  Moses,  who  had  run  before  God  in  feverish 
impatience,  now  lags  faint-hearted  behind  Him. 

At  first  he  expostulated:  "Who  am  I,  that  I  should  go  to 
Pharaoh  ?  "  There  was  something  more  than  humility  here  ; 
there  was  a  tone  of  self-depreciation  which  was  inconsistent 
with  a  true  faith  in  God's  selection  and  appointment.  Surely  it 
is  God's  business  to  choose  his  special  instruments ;  and  when  we 
are  persuaded  that  we  are  in  the  line  of  his  purpose,  we  h&e  no 
right  to  question  the  wisdom  of  his  appointment.  To  do  so  is 
to  depreciate  his  wisdom,  or  to  doubt  his  power  and  willingness 
to  become  the  complement  of  our  need. 

"  And  God  said,  Certainly,  I  will  be  with  thee."  "  I  whose 
glory  shines  here,  who  am  as  unimpaired  by  the  flight  of  the 
ages  as  this  fire  is  by  burning  ;  who  am  independent  of  susten 
ance  or  fuel  from  man  ;  who  made  the  fathers  what  they  were  ; 
whose  nature  is  incapable  of  change — I  will  be  with  thee." 
What  an  assurance  was  here  !  And  yet  something  of  this  kii»d 
is  said  to  each  of  us  when  we  are  called  to  undertake  any  new 
charge.  We  have  been  called  into  the  fellowship  of  the  Son  of 
God.  "He  died  for  us,  that  whether  we  wake  or  sleep,  we 
should  live  together  with  Him."  He  is  with  us  all  the  days, 
even  unto  the  end  of  the  age.  He  will  never  leave  us,  neither 
forsake  us.  "  Fear  not,"  He  seems  to  say  ;  "  I  am  with  thee  : 
I  who  change  not,  and  without  whom  no  sparrow  falls  to  the 
ground.  All  power  is  given  unto  Me  in  heaven  and  in  earth. 
Not  an  hour  without  my  companionship  ;  not  a  difficulty  without 
my  co-operation  ;  not  a  Red  Sea  without  my  right  arm ;  not  a 
mile  of  wilderness  journeying  without  the  Angel  of  my  Presence." 
Days  break  very  differently  on  us.  Sometimes  we  open  the 
door  to  a  flood  of  sunshine,  sometimes  to  a  sky  laden  with 
black,  dull  clouds  ;  now  a  funeral,  and  then  a  marriage  ;  hours 
in  which  it  is  luxury  to  live,  and  others  which  pass  with  leaden- 
footed  pace  ;  but  nothing  can  part  us  from  our  Divine  Com- 
— nothing  but  needless  worry  or  permitted  sin. 


"3f  nm  tljat  I  am."  35 

In  his  next  excuse  Moses  professed  his  inability  to  answer  if 
he  were  asked  the  name  of  God  (13)  ;  and  this  was  met  by  the 
proclamation  of  the  spirit-stirring  name,  JEHOVAH  :  I  AM 
THAT  I  AM.  There  we  have  the  unity  of  God  to  the  exclusion 
of  the  many  gods  of  Egypt  ;  the  unchangeableness  of  God, 
who  lives  in  an  eternal  present ;  the  self-sufficiency  of  God, 
who  alone  is  his  own  equivalent.  No  other  term  can  describe 
Him  ;  when  you  have  said  your  utmost  you  must  fall  back  on 
this— that  God  is  God. 

The  term  JEHOVAH  was  not  wholly  unknown  to  Moses,  for  it 
entered  into  his  mother's  name,  Jochebed— Jehovah  my  glory  ; 
but  now  for  the  first  time  it  was  adopted  as  the  unique  title  by 
which  God  was  to  be  known  in  Israel.  Slowly  it  made  its  way 
into  the  faith  of  the  people  ;  and  whenever  employed,  it  speaks 
of  the  self-existent  and  redeeming  qualities  of  the  nature  of 
God,  and  is  for  ever  enshrined  in  the  precious  name  of  our 
Saviour,  JESUS.  The  whole  subsequent  life  of  Moses  and  of 
Israel  was  inspired  by  this  name.  All  through  their  history  the 
thought  of  what  He  was,  and  what  He  would  be  to  them,  rang 
out  like  a  chime  of  bells. 

And  for  us  it  is  full  of  meaning.  "  This,"  said  He,  "  is  my 
name  forever,  and  this  is  my  memorial  to  all  generations"  (15). 
And  as  its  full  meaning  opens  to  our  vision,  it  is  as  if  God  put 
into  our  hands  a  blank  cheque,  leaving  us  to  fill  it  in  as  we  will. 
Are  we  dark  ?  let  us  add  to  his  I  AM  the  words,  the  true  Light ; 
are  we  hungry  ?  the  words,  the  Bread  of  Life  ;  are  we  defence 
less  ?  the  words,  the  Good  Shepherd;  are  we  weary  ?  the  words, 
Shiloh,  the  Rest-giver.  "In  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of 
the  Godhead  bodily,  and  in  Him  ye  are  made  full"  (Col.  ii. 
9,  10,  R.V.). 

Moses1  third  excuse  was  that  the  people  would  not  believe 
him,  nor  hearken  to  his  voice  (Exod.  iv.  i).  But  God  graciously 
met  this  also  by  showing  him  miracles  which  he  might  perform 
in  Egypt,  and  which  would  read  deep  lessons  to  himself.  "  What 
is  that  in  thine  hand  ?  And  he  said,  A  rod."  It  was  probably 
only  a  shepherd's  crook.  What  a  history,  however,  awaited  it  ! 
It  was  to  be  stretched  out  over  the  Red  Sea,  pointing  a  pathway 
through  its  depths  ;  to  smite  the  flinty  rock  ;  to  win  victory  over 
the  hosts  of  Amalek  ;  to  be  known  as  the  Rod  of  God.  When 
God  wants  an  implement  for  his  service  He  does  not  choose 


3&  SLJje  IHarfadlous 

the  golden  sceptre,  but  a  shepherd's  crook  ;  the  weakest  and 
meanest  thing  He  can  find — a  ram's  horn,  a  cake  of  barley 
meal,  an  ox-goad,  an  earthen  pitcher,  a  shepherd's  sling.  He 
employs  a  worm  to  thresh  the  mountains  and  make  the  hills  as 
chaff.  A  rod  with  God  behind  it  is  mightier  than  the  vastest 
army. 

At  God's  command  the  rod  was  cast  on  the  ground,  and  it 
became  a  serpent.  In  Egyptian  worship  the  serpent  played  a 
very  conspicuous  part.  And  as  it  wriggled  on  the  sand,  and 
sought  to  do  him  harm,  so  that  he  fled  from  it,  it  was  an  emblem 
of  the  might  of  Egypt  before  which  he  had  become  a  fugitive. 
But,  when  God  gave  the  word,  how  easily  it  became  once  more 
a  rod  in  his  hand,  as  he  fearlessly  grasped  the  venomous 
animal  by  the  tail.  So  God  would  instruct  his  faith.  If  only 
he  would  dare  to  do  as  he  was  bidden,  Pharaoh  and  all  his 
priests,  and  the  whole  force  of  the  Egyptian  empire  would  be 
equally  submissive. 

The  second  sign  was  eve"  more  significant.  His  hand  thrust 
into  his  bosom  became  lepror"  ;  and  then  again  pure  and  white. 
It  was  as  if  God  me'  his  consciousness  of  moral  pollution,  and 
taught  him  that  it  could  be  put  away  as  easily  as  his  flesh  was 
cleansed  through  His  forgiving  grace. 

And  the  third  sign,  in  which  it  was  promised  that  the  water 
of  the  Nile  should  become  b'  od  on  the  dry  land,  was  full  of 
terrible  omen  to  the  gods  of  that  mighty  country,  the  people 
of  which  depended  so  entirely  on  its  river,  and  worshipped  it 
as  a  god. 

We  may  well  ponder  these  significant  signs.  Are  we  only  as 
rods,  and  rods  which  were  once  serpents  ?  Yet  God  can  do 
great  things  by  us,  if  only  we  are  willing  to  be  wielded  by  his 
hand.  Are  we  polluted  with  the  leprosy  of  sin  ?  Yet  we  may 
be  as  his  hand,  thrust  into  his  bosom  and  made  clean  and  pure. 
Are  our  foes  many  ?  They  are  his  foes  too,  absolutely  in  his 
power  to  cover  them  with  confusio1 

The  last  excuse  that  Moses  alleged  was  his  lack  of  eloquence. 
"  O  Lord,  I  am  not  eloquent ;  I  am  slow  of  speech,  and  of  a  slow 
tongue"  (ver.  10).  Probably,  like  our  Cromwell,  he  had  no 
ready  supply  of  words.  But  God  was  willing  to  meet  this  also 
with  his  patient  grace ;  and  if  only  Moses  had  been  willing  to 
trust  Him,  it  is  probable  that  he  would  have  added  the  gifts  of 


"  3f  toill  be  toitr;  tljg  moutlj."  37 

a  persuasive  and  splendid  oratory  to  the  other  talents  with 
which  he  was  so  copiously  endowed.  "And  the  Lord  said,  Who 
hath  made  man's  mouth  ?  or  who  maketh  the  dumb,  or  deaf,  or 
the  seeing,  or  the  blind?  Have  not  I,  the  Lord?  Now  therefore 
go,  and  I  will  be  with  thy  mouth,  and  teach  thee  what  thou 
shalt  say"  (verses  n,  12). 

But  Moses  would  not  believe  it ;  so  at  length  the  Divine  anger 
burnt  against  him,  and  the  Lord  ended  the  conference  by  saying 
that  He  would  send  Aaron  with  him,  to  be  his  colleague  and 
spokesman.  Ah  !  better  a  thousand  times  had  it  been  for  him 
to  trust  God  for  speech,  than  be  thus  deposed  from  his  premier 
ship  !  Aaron  shaped  the  golden  calf,  and  wrought  folly  in 
Israel,  and  became  a  thorn  in  the  side  of  the  saint  of  God. 
And  probably  in  the  eyes  of  their  contemporaries,  Aaron  en 
grossed  the  greater  attention,  and  had  most  of  the  honour  and 
credit  of  the  great  deliverance. 

THE  FINAL  ASSENT. — It  was  a  very  grudging  one.  "And 
he  said,  O  my  Lord,  send,  I  pray  Thee,  by  the  hand  of  him 
whom  Thou  wilt  send."  It  was  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Since 
Thou  art  determined  to  send  me,  and  I  must  undertake  the 
mission,  then  let  it  be  so  ;  but  I  would  that  it  might  have  been 
another,  and  I  go  because  I  am  compelled."  So  often  do  we 
shrink  back  from  the  sacrifice  or  obligation  to  which  God  calls 
us,  that  we  think  we  are  going  to  our  doom.  We  seek  every 
reason  for  evading  the  Divine  will,  little  realizing  that  He  is 
forcing  us  out  from  our  quiet  homes  into  a  career  which  includes, 
among  other  things,  the  song  of  victory  on  the  banks  of  the 
Red  Sea  ;  the  two  lonely  sojourns  for  forty  days  in  converse 
with  God  ;  the  shining  face  ;  the  vision  of  glory ;  the  burial  by  the 
hand  of  Michael ;  and  the  supreme  honour  of  standing  beside 
the  Lord  on  the  Transfiguration  Mount. 


VI. 


"And  Moses  returned  to  the  land  of  Egypt;  and  took  the 
rod  of  God  in  his  hand."  —  EXODUS  iv.  20. 

HE  fire  faded  from  the  bush  ;  the  light  above  the 
brightness  of  the  sun  died  away  ;  the  voice  was  still  ; 
and  Moses  looked  around  on  the  browsing  sheep  and 
the  mighty  mountains  with  the  strange  wonder  of  a 
man  awaking  from  a  trance.  It  had  been  the  supreme 
hour  of  his  life  ;  for  which  all  previous  years  had  been 
preparing,  and  from  which  all  future  ones  would  date. 

I.  FIRST  STEPS  TOWARD  RETURN.  —  Slowly,  thoughtfully, 
perhaps  painfully,  he  prepared  to  obey  the  heavenly  summons. 
Gathering  his  flock  together,  he  conducted  it  from  the  backside 
of  the  desert,  with  its  stern  grandeur,  its  unoccupied  spaces,  its 
intense  silence,  to  Midian,  the  seat  of  his  clan,  where  human 
voices  and  interests  could  reassert  themselves.  ''And  Moses 
went  and  returned  to  Jethro,  his  father-in-law."  By  inter 
marriage  with  the  tribe  of  which  Jethro  was  the  chieftain, 
Moses  had  placed  himself  under  those  olden  customs  which 
still  obtain,  as  unchanged  as  the  world  of  nature  around  them, 
among  the  wild  sons  of  the  desert.  One  of  these  customs 
demanded  that  any  member  of  the  tribe  should  seek  and 
obtain  permission  before  starting  on  a  distant  errand,  involv 
ing  prolonged  absence  from  the  camp.  This  permission  Moses 
sought.  "  Let  me  go,  I  pray  thee,  and  return  unto  my  brethren 
which  are  in  Egypt,  and  see  whether  they  be  yet  alive." 

Probably  he  said  nothing  of  the  vision  he  had  seen,  or  of  the 
mission  with  which  he  had  been  entrusted  ;  and  it  was  a  noble 
reserve.  We  conserve  spiritual  strength  when  we  refrain  from 
speaking  of  our  dealings  with  the  Lord.  Of  course  it  is  some 
times  necessary  to  speak  of  them,  to  explain  our  reasons  for 
action  or  to  lead  other  souls  into  the  same  experiences  ;  but  it 
takes  the  freshness  and  delicacy  from  our  inner  fellowship 
with  God  if  we  are  always  talking  about  it.  It  is  not  the 


44 (50  in  33 ear*!"  39 

nature  of  the  deepest  love  to  unveil  all  its  endearments  to 
unsympathizing  eyes.  It  is  much  more  important  that  men 
should  see  and  feed  on  the  fruits  and  results  of  such  inter 
course,  than  that  they  should  be  admitted  to  study  its  inner 
secrets.  So  Moses  only  sought  leave  to  depart  by  the  way 
which  he  had  come  some  forty  years  before. 

The  request  must  have  involved  surprise  and  pain  to  the 
entire  family.  They  never  suspected  that  strong  heart  of 
yearnings  for  the  distant  land  where  his  kinsfolk  were  slaves. 
He  seemed  to  have  become  so  entirely  one  with  themselves. 
And  his  going  would  involve  that  of  wife  and  boys  and  of  the 
infant  son,  who  seems  to  have  been  but  recently  born.  How 
ever,  no  obstacle  was  thrown  in  his  way,  and  the  permission  he 
asked  was  granted  in  the  laconic  answer,  "  Go  in  peace." 

But  even  then  he  lingered.  So  utterly  had  the  forty  years 
done  their  work,  that  his  impulsive,  hasty  spirit  had  died  down; 
and  he  who  previously  had  run  before  God  now  began  to  lag 
behind  Him.  He  was  in  no  hurry  to  be  gone.  Was  it  that  he 
dreaded  the  turmoil  and  stir  of  the  busy  crowds  of  those 
teeming  hives  of  population  ?  Was  it  that  he  had  commenced 
to  feel  the  pressure  of  growing  years,  disinclining  him  from 
great  exertion  ?  Was  it  that  he  loved  the  hush  of  those  desert 
solitudes,  and  the  companionship  of  those  mighty  mountains, 
and  was  reluctant  to  tear  himself  away  from  them  ?  Was  it 
that  he  had  misgivings  about  the  safety  of  his  person  when 
exposed  to  the  hatred  of  king  and  court  ?  We  cannot  tell  the 
reason  ;  our  only  point  is  to  notice  the  marvellous  transforma 
tion  which  had  been  wrought  in  his  inner  life,  the  deliberation, 
the  self-possession,  the  reserve.  For  these  qualities  were  so  in 
the  ascendant  that  it  was  needful  for  God  to  send  a  second 
summons  into  his  life.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses  in 
Midian  :  Go,  return  into  Egypt  ;  for  all  the  men  are  dead 
which  sought  thy  life." 

Stirred  up  by  this  second  summons,  as  Abraham  by  the 
second  summons — which  came  to  him  also — when  Terah  was 
dead,  Moses  prepared  to  start  for  Egypt.  It  was  a  very 
simple  cavalcade,  reminding  us  of  another  which,  in  similar 
lowliness,  but  centuries  after,  was  destined  to  travel  through  a 
part  of  that  same  desert  towards  the  same  goal.  Moses, 
however,  went  as  the  servant  who  was  faithful  in  all  his 


40  "  ®0    <E01Ipt." 

house  ;   but  the  infant  whom  Mary  carried  was  the  Son  who 
had  builded  the  house,  and  was  coming  to  live  in  it  for  ever. 

Imagine,  then,  that  setting-forth.  Zipporah  sitting  on  the 
ass,  perhaps  nursing  a  little  babe,  new-born,  whilst  the  husband 
and  father  walked  beside.  And  in  his  hand  was  the  sacred 
rod — only  a  shepherd's  crook,  but  now  the  rod  of  God — destined 
to  be  employed  for  deeds  of  transcendent  power,  and  always 
reminding  him  of  what  weak  things  could  do  when  wielded  by 
strong  hands  behind  them.  Three  things  happened  on  that 
journey. 

II.  A  FURTHER  REVELATION.— "  And  the  Lord  said  unto 

Moses,    .    .    ."(21).    And  there  followed  a  marvellous  epitome 

1      .  of  events  which  were  to  transpire  within  the  next  few  months, 

from  the  making  of  the  water  into  blood  to  the  slaying  of  the 

first-born. 

This  was  in  harmony  with  one  of  the  greatest  principles  in 
the  moral  and  spiritual  realm.  We  only  learn  as  we  endeavour 
to  obey.  Light  is  given  to  us  to  know  what  next  step  we 
should  take— just  light  enough  and  no  more  ;  a  rim  of  light, 
hemmed  in  by  darkness  falling  as  a  faint  circle  on  our  path. 
Shall  we  take  that  step  ?  We  hesitate,  because  we  cannot  see 
the  step  beyond,  and  the  next  beyond  ;  or  because  we  fail  to 
see  the  reason,  and  are  not  satisfied  to  act  on  the  conviction  of 
known  duty  ;  or  because  we  dread  the  awful  pain  which 
threatens  to  benumb  us  and  turn  our  hearts  sick.  But  so 
long  as  we  refuse  to  act,  that  light  cannot  increase,  but 
begins  inevitably  to  decline.  Obedience  is  the  one  condition 
for  its  increase,  nay,  for  its  maintenance  at  all. 

It  may  be  that  you  are  in  darkness  like  that  which  enveloped 
King  Saul  to\vards  the  end  of  his  troubled  reign,  when  the 
Lord  answered  him  not,  "neither  by  dreams,  nor  by  Urim, 
nor  by  prophets."  It  is  long  since  you  heard  his  voice,  or 
saw  his  face.  But  as  with  Saul  so  with  you,  disobedience 
is  the  cause.  You  have  neglected  to  .perform  the  Divine 
commandments  ;  you  have  disobeyed  the  distinct  word  of  the 
Lord.  And  you  will  never  get  back  into  the  warm,  blessed, 
circle  of  his  manifested  presence,  where  his  face  smiles  and 
his  voice  speaks,  till  you  have  gone  back  to  the  place  where 
you  dropped  the  thread  of  obedience,  and,  taking  it  up  where 


you  left  it,  do  what  you  know  to  be  the  word  and  will  of  God. 
Then,  as  you  start  to  obey,  the  voice  of  God  will  greet  you  once 
more  with  the  old  familiar  tones. 

III.  A  PREPARATORY  RITE.— In  the  caravanserai  Moses 
seems  to  have  been  attacked  by  sudden  and  dangerous  illness, 
and  was  on  the  point  of  death.  What  a  strange  and  awful 
visitation  ! — that  the  destined  deliverer  of  Israel  should  die 
amid  the  hubbub  and  unrest  of  an  Eastern  Khan  ;  his  call 
cancelled  ;  his  wife  returning  to  her  people,  a  widow  ;  his  chil 
dren  fatherless  ;  his  people  unenfranchised.  But  amid  the 
horror  of  that  hour  conscience  did  its  work  unmolested,  and 
searched  the  secrets  of  his  heart  with  her  lighted  torch.  How 
often  have  we  experienced  a  similar  dealing  at  the  Lord's  hands  ! 
We  have  lain  all  night  in  a  bath  of  fi-e ;  we  have  suffered  almost 
to  the  limits  of  sanity  ;  we  have  gone  down  to  the  depths  of  the 
ocean  of  grief :  and  as  we  have  raised  our  weary  eyes  to  God, 
and  asked  the  reason  of  discipline  so  searching,  his  answer  has 
come  back  to  us  in  the  memory  of  some  hidden  sin  or  neglected 
duty. 

It  would  seem  that  for  some  reason  Moses  had  neglected  the 
rite  of  circumcision  for  one  of  his  children,  perhaps  the  newly- 
born  one.  That  reason  may  have  been  due  to  Zipporah's  dislike. 
He  allowed  her  to  have  her  way  ;  but,  as  the  head  of  the  house, 
he  was  held  responsible  for  its  omission.  We  cannot  shirk 
responsibilities  placed  on  our  shoulders  by  God  Himself.  The 
husband  cannot  put  them  on  the  wife,  nor  the  wife  take  them 
from  the  husband.  And  as  he  seemed  to  hang  in  the  quivering 
balance,  between  life  and  death,  this  was  brought  to  mind,  and 
he  was  compelled  to  insist  that  the  rite  should  be  performed. 

It  was  comparatively  a  trivial  thing,  insignificant  in  the  eyes 
of  man  ;  and  yet  there  are  no  trifles  in  a  man's  dealings  with 
God.  Great  principles  are  involved  in  very  insignificant  acts, 
as  ponderous  bridges  revolve  on  very  small  pivots.  The  self-life 
is  sometimes  more  strongly  intrenched  in  a  small  thing  than 
in  a  bigger  one.  And  so  he  is  kept  waiting  on  the  threshold  of 
the  great  enterprise  of  his  life,  because  this  rite  of  circumcision 
had  not  been  administered  to  a  little  babe.  We  may  be  con 
scious  of  having  been  sent  to  do  a  great  work  for  God,  and  yet 
be  shrinking  from  some  small  known  duty  ;  and  disobedience 


42 

here  will  impede  our  progress,  as  the  stone  in  a  traveller's 
shoe.  We  can  never  learn  the  lesson  too  deeply,  that  our 
action  in  the  commonplaces  of  life  is  deciding  our  destiny. 
What  we  are  in  them  will  affect  all  our  future,  making  us 
either  the  emancipators  of  our  people,  or  carcases  that  bleach 
on  the  desert  sand. 

There  is  a  very  striking  passage  in  the  Minor  Prophets,  in 
which  God  says,  "  You  only  have  I  known  of  all  the  families  of 
the  earth  ;  therefore  I  will  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities  " 
(Amos  iii.  2).  The  more  dear  we  are  to  God,  the  more  care 
will  He  expend  on  us.  The  more  fruit-bearing  qualities  we 
possess,  the  more  thoroughly  shall  we  be  pruned.  The  finest, 
rarest,  metals  are  exposed  to  the  whitest  heat.  And  it  was 
because  Moses  was  to  be  so  eminently  used,  that  he  came 
into  God's  most  searching  discipline.  Take  heart,  suffering 
child  of  God  !  He  chastens  because  He  loves,  and  is  about  to 
use  you.  Be  careful  to  ascertain  the  evil  thing  which  grieves 
Him,  and  put  it  away  ;  or  if  it  seem  impossible  to  put  it  out  of 
thy  life,  ask  the  Priest  to  cut  it  out,  for,  though  touched  with 
our  pain,  He  holds  a  sharp  two-edged  sword  to  pierce  to  the 
very  border-land  of  soul  and  spirit.  Then  shall  God  remove 
the  stroke  of  his  hand.  "  So  He  let  him  go." 

The  exhibition  of  incompatibility  displayed  by  Zipporah, 
when  she  had  performed  the  rite,  seems  to  have  led  Moses 
to  feel  that  it  would  not  be  wise  to  take  her  with  him  ;  and, 
on  the  whole,  it  seemed  better  that  she  should  abide  quietly 
with  her  own  people,  until  the  act  of  emancipation"  was  wrought. 
And  this  was  easier,  inasmuch  as  God  had  so  distinctly  told 
him  that  he  should  bring  the  people  through  those  very 
districts  on  their  way  to  Canaan  (Exod.  iii.  12).  And  it  befell 
according  to  his  faith  ;  for  in  the  after  narrative  we  find  this 
record,  "  Jethro,  Moses'  father-in-law,  came  with  his  sons  and 
his  wife  unto  Moses  into  the  wilderness,  where  he  encamped 
at  the  mount  of  God  "  (Exod.  xviii.  5). 

We  are  not  always  to  follow  this  example  in  ridding  ourselves 
of  family  ties  in  order  to  do  God's  work.  At  the  same  time,  a 
man  must  always  move  steadily  forward  on  the  appointed  plan 
of  his  life,  not  swayed  by,  but  swaying,  the  members  of  his 
home,  and  bearing  them  along  with  him  in  one  common  work. 
The  circumstances  must  be  very  exceptional  that  invade  the 


in  tlje  flaunt  at  (Soft.  43 

close  ties  of  the  home  ;  birt  when  such  circumstances  arise, 
they  will  be  so  evidently  indicated  by  God's  providence  that 
there  will  be  no  reflection  cast  on  the  character  of  his 
servants. 

IV.  A  BROTHERLY  ALLIANCE. — Recovered  from  his  illness, 
but  lonely,  Moses,  having  sent  back  his  wife  and  children, 
started  again  on  his  journey,  threading  his  way  through  those 
corridors  of  red  sandstone,  by  which  he  had  passed  some 
forty  years  ago.  But  how  different  all  seemed  !  He  was 
different.  No  longer  a  disappointed  man,  smarting  with  the 
sense  of  recent  failure  ;  but  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the 
power  of  his  might,  conscious  of  a  great  mission,  and  of 
the  presence  of  an  angel  beside  him  who  would  be  equal 
to  every  emergency. 

And  he  knew  that  the  same  power  which  brought  him 
forward  was  bringing  towards  him  the  brother  whom  he  had 
not  seen  for  forty  years.  How  the  hearts  of  the  two  throbbed 
at  the  thought  of  meeting  !  How  eagerly  would  each  press 
forward  !  How  earnestly  would  each  scan  the  distant  figure 
of  the  other  in  the  long  vista  !  And,  finally,  God  so  contrived 
it  that  they  met  in  the  Mount  of  God,  where  the  bush  had 
burned,  and  the  voice  of  God  had  summoned  Moses  from 
shepherding  a  flock  to  become  shepherd  of  a  host.  Then 
what  greetings  !  "  He  kissed  him."  What  interchange  of 
confidences  !  "  Moses  told  Aaron  all  the  words  of  the  Lord 
who  had  sent  him."  What  questionings,  as  the  exile  would 
ask  tidings  of  those  whom  he  had  loved  ! 

So  we  shall  meet.  God  knows  where  our  Aarons  are,  our 
twin-souls  whom  we  need  to  have  beside  us  for  the  completion 
of  our  life-work.  They  may  be  far  away  now.  But  He  is 
bringing  them  to  us,  and  us  to  them.  The  Zipporah  goes,  but 
the  Aaron  comes.  And  we  shall  not  miss  each  other,  since 
He  is  Guide.  Let  us  live  on  his  providence  and  love  ;  and 
He  will  so  arrange  it  finally  that  we  shall  meet  at  the  Mount 
of  God,  some  consecrated  spot,  some  bower  of  holy  converse, 
some  blessed  trysting-place,  selected  by  Himself.  And  the 
embrace,  the  joy,  the  kiss  of  welcome,  shall  in  the  ecstasy 
cause  us  to  forget  the  forty  years  of  exile,  loneliness,  and 
sorrow. 


VII. 
antr    ID  is  appointment. 

''  And  Moses  said,  Lord,  wherefore  hast  Thou  so  evil  entreated  this 
people  ?    why  is  it  that  Thou  hast  sent  me  ?    For  since  I  came  to  Pharaoh 
to  speak  in  Thy  name,  he  hath  done  evil  to  this  people  ;  neither 
hast  Thou  delivered  Thy  people  at  all." — EXOD.  v.  22,  23. 

N  loving  interchange  of  thought,  the  noble  and  vener 
able  brothers  reached  Egypt ;  and  in  pursuance  of  the 
Divine  command  proceeded  to  summon  the  elders  of 
Israel  to  a  conference,  at  which  they  should  present 
their  credentials,  and  give  utterance  to  the  Divine 
message  with  which  they  were  entrusted. 

I.  THE  INTERVIEW  WITH  THE  ELDERS.— It  must  have 
been  a  very  remarkable  meeting,  perhaps  the  first  of  the  sort 
ever  held.  Never  before  had  this  downtrodden  nation  produced 
men  daring  enough  to  take  such  a  step,  the  first,  indeed,  towards 
national  autonomy.  We  are  not  told  whether  there  was  any 
disposition  on  the  part  of  any  of  these  elders,  who  were  pro 
bably  the  heads  of  the  Hebrew  families  and  tribes,  to  question 
the  right  of  the  brothers  to  convene  them.  In  all  likelihood, 
they  were  but  too  glad  to  merge  all  prior  and  selfish  claims  in  a 
united  effort  on  their  people's  behalf;  and  there  were  probably 
many  stories  afloat  of  Moses'  life  and  deeds,  before  his  strange 
and  sudden  self- expatriation,  which  predisposed  them  to  obey 
his  call,  and  gather  at  some  convenient  spot  within  the  territory 
allotted  to  them  to  inhabit. 

When  all  were  gathered  Aaron  recited  on  the  behalf  of  Moses, 
who  probably  stood  beside  him  without  a  word,  the  magnificent 
words  spoken  at  the  bush  (Exod.  iii.  16-22).  We  do  not  know 
how  they  were  received.  Perhaps  Moses'  own  fear  was  partly 
realized  when  he  said  to  God,  "They  will  not  believe  me,  nor 
hearken  unto  my  voice ;  for  they  will  say,  the  Lord  hath  not 
appeared  unto  thee."  The  long  years  of  bondage  may  have  so 
quenched  their  hopes  and  quelled  their  spirits  that  they  were 


Closes  ntttr  JUrott  before  ^Jljaraoij.  45 


unable  to  realize  that  the  hour  of  deliverance  had  come.  As 
the  inmates  of  the  house  of  Mary  could  not  believe  that  Peter, 
for  whose  release  they  had  been  praying,  really  stood  outside 
the  door  ;  so  it  was  almost  impossible  to  believe  that  the  days 
of  slavery  were  nearly  ended,  and  that  the  hands  of  the  clock  of 
their  destiny  were  at  last  pointing  to  the  hour  of  release. 

At  this  juncture  the  brothers  would  probably  give  the  signs 
with  which  God  had  provided  them  ;  the  serpent  changed  into 
a  rod  ;  the  leprous  hand  made  natural  and  whole  ;  the  water  of 
the  river  becoming  blood  as  it  was  poured  out  upon  the  land 
(Exod.  iv.  2-9).  These  won  conviction  ;  and  from  that  meeting 
the  tidings  spread  throughout  the  nation,  whispered  from  hut  to 
hut,  told  in  under-breaths  from  slave  to  slave  among  the  brick 
kilns.  "  And  the  people  believed  ;  and  when  they  heard  that 
the  Lord  had  visited  the  children  of  Israel,  and  that  He  had 
looked  upon  their  affliction,  then  they  bowed  their  heads  and 
worshipped." 

II.  THE  AUDIENCE  WITH  PHARAOH.  —  The  next  point  for 
the  brothers  was  to  go  to  Pharaoh,  writh  the  demand  that  he 
should  let  the  people  go  to  hold  a  feast  in  the  wilderness. 
This  was  according  to  the  Divine  direction  (Exod.  iii.  18)  ;  and 
was  moreover  a  reasonable  request.  So  fastidious  a  people  as 
the  Egyptians  could  well  understand  how  Israel  would  prefer 
to  carry  out  their  rites  apart  from  the  inspection  of  strangers, 
and  the  contagion  of  the  predominant  religious  cult  surround 
ing  them.  Besides,  it  was  like  asking  for  a  brief  holiday,  after 
an  unbroken  spell  of  centuries  of  incessant  toil.  It  did  not  set 
forth  all  they  wanted  ;  but  inasmuch  as  it  was  a  foregone 
conclusion  that  Pharaoh  would  grant  nothing,  even-  care 
was  taken  to  deprive  him  of  the  excuse  of  saying  that  their 
demands  were  preposterous. 

It  was  probably  in  an  audience-room  of  some  splendid 
palace,  where  the  lordly  Pharaoh  received  deputations  and 
embassies,  that  they  met  him.  How  mixed  must  Moses' 
feelings  have  been,  entering  as  a  suppliant  the  precincts  in 
which  he  had  played  no  inconspicuous  part  in  those  buried 
years  !  And  then  Aaron  and  he  uttered  the  words,  which 
pealed  as  a  thunder-clap  through  the  audience,  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  hold 
a  feast  unto  Me  in  the  wilderness." 


46  JFatlure  anfc 

In  order  to  appreciate  the  audacity  of  the  demand,  we  must 
remember  the  unbridled  power  and  authority  which  were 
claimed  by  the  Egyptian  monarchs.  Each  Pharaoh  was  the 
child  of  the  sun.  He  is  depicted  as  fondled  by  the  greatest 
gods,  and  sitting  with  them  in  the  recesses  of  their  temples  to 
receive  worship  equal  to  their  own.  "  By  the  life  of  Pharaoh," 
was  the  supreme  oath.  Without  Pharaoh  could  no  man  lift  up 
his  hand  or  foot  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt.  For  him  great 
Egypt  existed.  For  him  all  other  men  lived,  suffered,  and 
died.  For  him  the  mighty  Nile  flowed  from  its  unexplored 
fountains  to  fructify  the  soil.  For  him  vast  armies  of  priests, 
and  magicians,  and  courtiers,  wrought  and  ministered.  From 
his  superb  throne  he  looked  down  on  the  wretched  crowds  of 
subject  peoples,  careless  of  their  miseries.  What  were  their 
tears  and  groans,  and  the  wail  of  their  bondage,  but  a  fitting 
sacrifice  to  be  offered  to  his  exalted  majesty  !  In  addition, 
the  present  monarch  had  recently,  through  his  generals, 
achieved  certain  great  victories ;  and  these  successes  had 
greatly  enhanced  his  arrogant  pride,  so  that  it  was  in  a 
paroxysm  of  supercilious  scorn  that  he  answered  the  Divine 
demand  :  "  Who  is  the  Lord,  that  I  should  obey  his  voice, 
to  let  Israel  go?  I  know  not  the  Lord,  neither  will  I  let 
Israel  go." 

The  point  of  the  reply  lies  in  that  word  obey.  He  saw  that 
these  men  did  not  present  him  with  a  request,  but  with  a 
mandate  from  One  of  greater  authority  than  himself.  This 
stung  him  to  the  quick.  He  also  was  a  god.  Who  was  this 
other  God,  stronger  than  himself,  who  dared  to  issue  such  a 
summons  !  A  God  of  whose  existence  till  that  moment  he 
had  been  unaware  !  The  God  of  a  parcel  of  slaves  !  How 
dare  they  speak  of  their  paltry  Deity  in  his  presence,  and 
in  the  midst  of  priests,  courtiers,  and  high  officers  of  state  ! 

The  brothers  met  this  outburst  with  a  reiteration  of  their 
message,  telling  how  the  God  of  the  Hebrews  had  met  with 
them  ;  and  requesting,  in  a  softer  tone,  that  they  might  be 
permitted  to  do  as  He  had  enjoined.  But  the  king  refused 
to  believe  that  their  plea  was  genuine  ;  and  insisted  on  re 
garding  the  whole  matter  as  a  desire  to  escape  from  their 
labours,  and  as  a  plea  for  idleness.  Turning  sharply  on  the 
two  brethren,  he  accused  them  of  hindering  their  people's 


£.  litter  taunt.  47 

toils,  and  bade  them  begone  to  their  own  share  in  the  clay- 
pit,  or  the  brick-kiln  :  "  Wherefore  do  ye,  Moses  and  Aaron, 
let  the  people  from  their  works  ?  Get  you  unto  your  burdens." 
What  a  bitter  taunt  there  was  in  that  last  sentence  !  How 
the  royal  lip  curled  as  it  was  uttered  !  Already  the  heart 
had  begun  to  harden  !  And  so  the  audience  ended,  and 
the  brothers  came  down  the  crowded  corridors  amid  the 
titter  of  the  court.  A  very  different  scene  was  to  be  enacted 
a  few  months  later,  as  the  news  came  there  of  the  overthrow 
of  the  monarch  in  the  Red  Sea — the  last  stage  of  the  conflict 
between  himself  and  the  God  of  the  Hebrews,  whose  name  he 
heard  that  day  for  the  first  time. 

III.  FAILURE  AND  DISAPPOINTMENT. — That  same  day  a 
new  order  was  issued  from  the  palace,  emanating  from  Pharaoh 
himself,  to  the  taskmasters  of  the  people.  And  probably,  ere 
the  evening  fell,  the  ominous  word  had  passed  from  the  task 
masters  to  the  head-men  who  were  set  over  their  fellow  Hebrews, 
and  were,  therefore,  responsible  for  the  daily  delivery  of  a  certain 
tale  of  bricks,  that  they  must  expect  no  more  straw,  though  the 
daily  returns  must  be  maintained.  "  Thus  saith  Pharaoh,  I  will 
not  give  you  straw  ;  go  ye,  get  you  straw  where  ye  can  find  it. 
Yet  not  aught  of  your  work  shall  be  diminished." 

Then  ensued  a  time  of  awful  anguish.  The  Hebrew  head 
men  told  off  some  of  the  people  to  scatter  themselves  over  the 
country,  collecting  straw  from  every  quarter,  and  to  do  it  with 
all  haste.  And  in  the  meantime  they  urged  on  the  rest  of  the 
people  to  compensate  for  the  absence  of  the  straw-gatherers  by 
their  added  energy.  Every  nerve  was  strained  to  the  uttermost. 
From  early  morning  to  the  last  ray  of  light  the  whole  nation 
sought  to  do  the  impossible  beneath  the  scorching  sun,  and 
with  never  a  moment's  pause.  And  yet  as  the  tale  of  bricks 
was  counted  it  fell  inevitably  short.  In  vain  did  the  taskmasters 
haste  them,  saying,  "  Fulfil  your  works,  your  daily  tasks,  as 
when  there  was  straw."  In  vain  were  the  officers  of  the 
children  of  Israel,  whom  Pharaoh's  taskmasters  had  set  over 
them,  beaten,  and  such  beating  as  they  would  get  might  mean 
death.  It  was  as  when  a  whole  crew,  stripped  to  the  waist, 
works  at  the  pumps  ;  but  they  cannot  pump  out  the  water  as 
quickly  as  it  pours  in  ;  the  water-line  will  not  fall,  and  at  length 
drowning  is  preferable  to  the  agonized  suspense. 


48  ^Failure  attfr  £H 


Finally,  they  could  stand  it  no  longer,  and  resolved  to  make 
an  appeal  direct  to  Pharaoh.  "  The  officers  of  the  children  of 
Israel  came  and  cried  unto  Pharaoh  "  (ver.  15).  It  was  a  bitter 
day  for  the  two  brothers  when  the  people  took  the  matter  into 
their  own  hands,  and,  without  using  them  as  intermediaries, 
went  direct  to  the  king  to  get  him  to  put  them  back  to  the  point 
at  which  they  stood  before  that  well-meant,  but  disastrous  inter 
ference.  But  it  was  evidently  better  that  Moses  and  Aaron 
should  wait  outside  the  palace  to  learn  the  result  of  the  inter 
view  (ver.  20). 

It  happened  just  as  it  might  have  been  expected,  the  king 
would  not  listen  to  the  appeal  made  to  him.  "  He  said,  Ye  are 
idle,  ye  are  idle  :  therefore  ye  say,  Let  us  go  and  do  sacrifice  to 
the  Lord.  Go  therefore  now,  and  work  ;  for  there  shall  no  straw 
be  given  to  you,  yet  shall  ye  deliver  the  tale  of  bricks  "  (verses 
17,  1  8).  It  maybe  that  he  referred  again  sarcastically  to  the 
"  vain  words,"  on  which  the  brothers  had  caused  them  to  hope 
(ver.  9).  And  so  they  came  forth  from  Pharaoh,  at  the  very 
extreme  of  agony,  dreading  the  lingering  death  from  exhaustion 
and  stripes,  which  apparently  awaited  their  whole  nation  ;  and 
as  Moses  and  Aaron  stood  there  they  poured  on  them  the 
bitterness  of  their  spirit.  What  must  it  not  have  been  for 
them  to  hear  from  those  lips  the  bitterest  reproaches  they  could 
frame,  cutting  them  as  knives,  although  they  would  have  gladly 
given  their  lives  to  alleviate  the  circumstances  out  of  which 
they  sprang  ?—  "  The  Lord  look  upon  you,  and  judge  ;  because 
ye  have  made  our  savour  to  stink  in  the  eyes  of  Pharaoh,  and 
in  the  eyes  of  his  servants,  to  put  a  sword  into  their  hand  to 
slay  us." 

As  we  look  back  on  that  scene,  we  can  somewhat  understand 
the  reason  for  it  all.  God  can  afford  to  bring  us  through  pas 
sages  like  this,  because  of  "  the  afterward  "  to  which  they  lead. 
It  was  necessary  that  Moses,  Aaron,  and  the  Hebrews,  should 
come  to  see  that  their  case  was  desperate,  and  that  no  appeals 
or  reasonings  or  remonstrances  could  alter  it.  It  was  necessary 
that  the  leaders  should  be  weaned  from  the  enthusiastic  loyalty 
of  the  people,  that  they  might  lean  only  on  the  arm  of  the 
living  God,  and  venture  forth  depending  on  Him  alone.  It 
was  necessary  that  the  people  should  see  that  they  could  not 
better  their  position  by  any  efforts  of  their  own.  Yes,  and 


to  £feif.  49 

their  thoughts  would  henceforth  be  directed  past  the  leaders, 
who  were  discredited  in  their  very  first  endeavour,  to  the  hand 
and  heart  of  the  Almighty. 

IV.  THE  RESORT  OF  THE  BAFFLED  SOUL.— "And  Moses 
returned  unto  the  Lord,  and  said,  Lord,  wherefore  hast  thou 
so  evil  entreated  this  people  ?  Why  is  it  that  Thou  hast  sent 
me  ?  "  (ver.  22).  There  is  no  other  help  for  us  when  passing 
through  such  stern  discipline  ;  and  the  man  who  cannot  flee 
thither  in  similar  straits  is  pitiable  indeed.  When  we  see 
our  hopes  blasted,  our  plans  miscarry,  our  efforts  do  more 
harm  than  good,  whilst  we  are  discredited  and  blamed, 
pursued  with  the  taunts  and  hate  of  those  for  whom  we  were 
willing  to  lay  down  our  lives,  we  may  preserve  an  outward 
calm  ;  but  there  will  be  a  heart-break  underneath,  and  the 
noblest  part  in  us  will  wither,  as  corn  blasted  by  an  east 
wind,  unless  we  are  able  to  pour  out  our  whole  complaint 
before  God. 

The  agony  of  soul  through  which  Moses  passed  must  have 
been  as  death  to  him.  He  died  to  his  self-esteem,  to  his 
castle-building,  to  pride  in  his  miracles,  to  the  enthusiasm 
of  his  people,  to  everything  that  a  popular  leader  loves.  As 
he  lay  there  on  the  ground  alone  before  God,  wishing  himself 
back  in  Midian,  and  thinking  himself  hardly  used,  he  was  fall 
ing  as  a  corn  of  wheat  into  the  ground  to  die,  no  longer  to 
abide  alone,  but  to  bear  much  fruit. 

Ah,  but  dying  is  not  pleasant  work  !  It  is  not  easy  nor 
pleasant  to  forego  one's  own  plans,  to  cease  from  one's  own 
works,  to  renounce  one's  own  reputation,  to  be  despised  and 
flouted  by  the  very  slaves  you  would  save.  What  corn  of 
wheat  enjoys  having  its  waterproof  sheath  torn  from  it,  its 
elements  disintegrated,  its  heart  eaten  into,  as  it  lies  helpless, 
exposed  to  the  earth-forces,  in  the  cold,  damp,  dark  soil  ? 
And  yet  this  is  the  necessary  condition  which  must  be  fulfilled, 
ere  it  can  put  forth  the  slender  stalk,  like  a  hand  holding  to  the 
sun  thirty,  sixty,  or  a  hundred  grains  like  itself.  "  That  which 
thou  so  west  is  not  quickened  except  it  die;.,  but  if  it  die  it 
bringeth  forth  much  fruit.;) 

It  is  a  lesson  for  us  all.  God  must  bring  us  down  before  He 
can  raise  us  up.  Emptying  must  precede  filling.  We  must 


So  failure  anfc   gtsappoinimcut. 

get  to  an  end  of  ourselves  before  He  can  begin  in  us.  But 
what  a  beginning  He  makes !  "  Then  the  Lord  said  unto 
Moses,  Now  thou  shalt  see  what  I  will  do  to  Pharaoh,  for 
with  a  strong  hand  shall  he  let  them  go,  and  with  a  strong 
hand  shall  he  drive  them  out  of  his  land"  (Exod.  vi.  i).  And 
as  those  words  of  encouragement  and  promise  broke  on  his  ear, 
he  must  have  forgotten  the  averted  looks  and  bitter  words 
of  the  people,  and  risen  into  a  new  world  of  restful  expectation. 
Deliverance  was  sure,  though  he  had  learned  that  it  did  not 
depend  on  anything  that  he  could  do,  but  on  that  all-sufficient 
God,  who  had  announced  Himself  as  the  I  AM. 

And  out  of  the  whole  story  there  comes  to  us  this  lesson :  we 
must  never  suppose  that  the  difficulties  which  confront  us 
indicate  that  we  are  not  on  God's  path,  and  doing  his  work. 
Indeed  the  contrary  is  generally  the  case.  If  we  are  willing  to 
walk  with  God,  He  will  test  the  sincerity  and  temper  of  our 
soul ;  He  will  cause  men  to  ride  over  our  heads ;  He  will  bring 
us  through  fire  and  through  water.  But  out  of  all  He  will 
bring  us  into  a  large  room,  and  give  us  the  very  thing  on 
which  we  have  been  taught  to  set  our  hearts.  The  further 
banks  of  the  Red  Sea  with  their  song  of  victory  will  wipe 
out  the  memory  of  those  bitter  disappointments,  those  sharp 
speeches,  those  hours  of  lonely  anguish. 


VIII. 
of  (B0&  in  the  Jfirst  |Four 

hough  the  Lord  cause  grief,  yet  \vill  He  have  compassion  according 
to  the  multitude  of  His  mercies." — LAMENTATIONS  iii.  32. 

rN  despair  Moses  had  thrown  himself  on  God,  pouring 
out  the  story  of  his  failure  and  shame.  "  Wherefore 
hast  Thou  so  evil  entreated  this  people  ?  why  is  it 
that  Thou  hast  sent  me?"  But  there  was  no  chiding, 
no  rebuke,  on  the  part,  of  his  strong  and  faithful 
Friend,  who  knew  his  frame,  and  remembered  that 
he  was  but  dust.  "Then  Che  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Now 
shalt  thou  see  what  I  will  do  to  Pharaoh." 

The  emphasis  lies  on  the  words,  Then, — Now, — /.  Then, — 
when  he  had  reached  the,  lowest  point  of  self-confidence. 
Now, — since  all  human  effort  ha.s  been  put  forth  in  vain. 
/, — the  self-existent,  ever-glorious  Lord.  He  will  not  give 
his  glory  to  another.  He  is  for  our  sakes  jealous  of  his 
honour.  Therefore  it  is  that  He  brings  us  down  to  the  dust 
of  self-humiliation,  empties  us  of  human  pride,  divides  with 
his  sharp  two-edged  swoid  between  the  energy  of  our  soul- 
life  and  the  divine  energy  of  His.  Only  when  this  is  complete, 
and  we  have  drunk  1o  the  dregs  the  bitter  cup  of  despair  of 
self,  does  He  step  in,  saying  in  effect,  "  Child  of  my  love, 
stand  aside  ;  quiet  thyself  as  a  weaned  babe,  and  thou  shalt 
see  what  I  will  do.  1  need  thee  not,  save  as  the  vehicle  and 
expression  of  the  purpose  which  I  have  formed  in  my  heart, 
and  which  I  am  prepared  to  execute  by  my  strong  right  arm." 

The  time  of  depression  with  the  discouraged  servant  of  God 
is  always  a  time  of  promise.  Then  God  takes  to  Himself  a 
new  name  (Exod.  vi.  3)  ;  then  He  gives  a  glimpse  of  the 
meaning  of  his  dealings  in  the  past  (4)  ;  then  He  reveals 
the  sympathy  of  his  heart.,  which  can  detect  inarticulate 


52    £fa»  f  0fre  of  (Bott  in  tfre  Jirst  JFour 

groans  (5) ;  then,  since  He  can  swear  by  no  other,  He 
pledges  Himself  with  a  sevenfold  guarantee  (6-8).  Does  any 
soul  cursed  with  the  tyranny  of  a  bondage  beneath  which 
all  its  energies  are  pressed  to  the  dust  peruse  these  lines  ?  Let 
such  an  one  lay  to  heart  the  repeated  "I  will"  of  this 
marvellous  necklace  of  promises,  which  are  Yea  and  Amen 
in  Christ  Jesus,  applicable  to  all  circumstances,  parallel  with 
all  ages,  unchangeable  and  eternal  as  the  nature  of  Jehovah 
who  gave  them.  "I  will  bring  you  out...,  I  will  rid  you..., 
I  will  redeem  you...,  I  will  take  you  to  Me...,  I  will  be  to  you 
a  God...,  I  will  bring  you  into  the  land...,  I  will  give  it  you..."  ; 
and  notice  that  this  cluster  of  I  wills  is  contained  within  two 
brackets,  that  pledge  the  very  nature  of  God  itself  to  their 
accomplishment,  "I  am  the  Lord  (6). ..I  am  the  Lord"  (8). 

God  always  links  obedience  and  promise.  The  doing  his 
will  must  follow  close  upon  the  hearing  his  voice.  Promise 
is  intended  as  spur  to  action.  We  hear,  that  we  may  pass 
on  to  others  the  words  that  have  stirred  our  spirits  ;  and, 
therefore,  it  befell  that  Moses  was  recommissioned  to  speak, 
first  to  the  children  of  Israel,  and  then  to  Pharaoh,  king 
of  Egypt.  It  must  have  been  a  very  memorable  day  in 
which  the  summons  came  to  him  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  as 
it  had  come  before  in  the  wilderness  of  Sinai  (Exod.  vi.  28). 

Had  it  ever  occurred  to  him  that  that  vision  and  voice 
were  inseparable  from  the  solitude  of  those  unfrequented 
wastes,  and  the  silences  of  those  everlasting  hills  ;  and  that 
what  was  possible  there,  could  have  no  counterpart  amid 
the  stir  of  Egyptian  life,  and  the  presence  of  the  hoary 
monuments  of  idolatry?  If  so,  the  suggestion  was  at  once 
answered  by  that  voice  finding  him  in  Egypt  itself.  Ah ! 
souls  of  men,  God  speaks  not  only  in  the  stillness  of  the 
hermit's  life  ;  but  amid  the  stir  of  active  engagement,  and 
the  press  of  crowds. 

It  needed  more  than  usual  courage  for  the  two  brothers 
to  undertake  this  further  ministry;  their  people  were  too 
broken  with  anguish  of  spirit  and  disappointed  hope  to  care 
very  much  what  was  said,  especially  when  it  was  said  by 
men  who  had  been  the  cause  of  the  increase  of  their  burdens  : 
and  as  for  Pharaoh,  it  was  idle  to  suppose  that  he  would 
be  touched  by  lips  which  had  no  power  to  charm  the  ears 


S3 

of  Hebrews.  "And  Moses  spake  before  the  Lord,  saying, 
Behold,  the  children  of  Israel  have  not  hearkened  unto  me; 
how  then  shall  Pharaoh  hear  me,  who  am  of  uncircumcised 
lips  ? "  (chap.  vi.  1 2).  But  it  was  not  the  time  for  parley. 
There  was  no  doubt  as  to  his  duty,  there  should  be  no 
hesitation  in  his  obedience. 

At  the  outset  of  the  interview,  Pharaoh,  as  was  expected, 
asked  for  their  credentials,  which  they  gave  as  God  had 
instructed  them.  But  the  evidence  was  neutralized  by  the 
magicians  counterfeiting  them,  either  by  the  dexterity  of  their 
sleight-of-hand,  or  by  collusion  with  that  evil  spirit,  who  has 
ever  sought  to  mimic  Divine  work.  It  was  significant,  how 
ever,  that  Aaron's  rod  swallowed  up  their  rods.  But  the 
great  question  would  have  to  be  settled  on  a  wider  arena, 
and  by  a  series  of  more  remarkable  signs. 

It  is  necessary  that  we  should  for  a  moment  consider  the 
underlying  principle  of  God's  dealings  with  Pharaoh,  especially 
in  the  earlier  plagues.  And  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  discern  the 
operation  of  the  eternal  principles  of  Divine  justice  and  love  in 
the  staggering  blows  which  the  Divine  Power  dealt  to  Pharaoh 
and  his  land. 

I.  THE  LOVE  OF  GOD.  Always  and  everywhere,  God  is 
Love.  Whoso  is  wise  with  heavenly  wisdom,  and  has  eyes 
purged  from  the  scales  of  prejudice  and  passion,  will  see  as 
much  of  the  tender  mercy  of  God  in  the  Old  Testament  as  in 
the  New  ;  in  the  storm  as  in  the  zephyr  ;  in  the  earthquake  as  in 
the  still  small  voice  ;  in  the  plagues  as  in  the  cross.  The  very 
term  JEHOVAH,  so  constantly  employed  on  these  pages,  indicates, 
first  the  unchangeableness,  and  then  the  redemptive  side,  of 
God's  nature.  And  surely  we  must  believe  that  Pharaoh  was 
included  in  the  love  that  gave  Jesus  Christ  to  the  world  ;  was 
embraced  within  the  compass  of  his  propitiation  ;  and  might 
have  shone  as  a  star  in  the  firmament  of  blood-bought  saints. 

It  must  be  possible,  therefore,  to  find  a  clue  which  will  recon 
cile  the  love  of  God,  which  brooded  over  Pharaoh  and  his  land, 
with  the  apparent  harshness  that  inflicted  the  successive  plagues. 
And  it  will  help  us  if  we  remember  that  there  is  a  marked 
difference  between  the  first  four  plagues  and  the  rest.  In  the 
commencement  of  God's  dealings  with  the  tyrant  it  would 


54    fe  Wobt  of  (Sob  in  trjc  JFirst 


almost  appear  as  if  He  set  Himself  to  answer  the  question, 
"Who  is  the  Lord  that  I  should  obey  his  voice?"  and  to 
remove  the  ignorance  of  which  he  complained  when  he  said, 
"  I  know  not  the  Lord." 

The  case  was  this.  Here  was  a  man  who  from  his  earliest 
childhood  had  been  accustomed  to  think  that  the  deities  of  his 
nation  were  supreme  in  heaven  and  on  earth  ;  such  as  the 
bountiful  goddess,  who,  from  her  secret  urn,  was  ever  pouring 
forth  the  waters  of  the  sacred  Nile,  inundating  the  land  with 
fertility  and  beauty  ;  the  prolific  source  of  life,  whose  favourite 
emblem  was  the  frog,  which  in  unlimited  numbers  swarmed  on 
the  banks  of  the  Nile  !  whilst  he  would  attach  reverential  im 
portance  to  the  purity  of  the  priesthood,  and  the  supremacy  of 
the  sun-god,  of  whom  the  beetle  was  the  sacred  sign.  It  would 
have  been  impossible  to  expect  that  in  a  single  week  he  should 
turn  away  from  these,  to  accept  the  commands  of  One  whose 
name  was,  for  the  first  time,  uttered  in  his  presence  by  the 
representatives  of  a  nation  of  slaves. 

When  in  Athens  the  Apostle  Paul  discovered  an  altar  to  THE 
UNKNOWN  GOD.  He  did  not  rebuke  the  people  for  not  having 
given  Him  suitable  worship  ;  but  set  himself  to  declare  His 
nature  and  attributes.  And  he  went  on  to  show  that  nature, 
with  all  her  marvellous  processes,  was  due,  not  to  the  deities  of 
the  heathen  Pantheon  —  though  their  effigies,  sculptured  by  the 
art  of  Phidias,  stood  out  before  the  gaze  of  his  audience,  irradiate 
with  the  pure  light  and  unstained  in  the  pure  air  —  but  was  the 
creation  of  Him  who  had  spoken  to  mankind  in  Jesus,  and 
whose  representative  he  was.  And  so  God  set  Himself  to  show 
that  the  gods  of  the  heathen  were  no  gods  ;  that  the  whole 
system  of  Egyptian  worship  must  be  subordinate  to  the  empire 
of  a  greater  God  than  any  known  to  their  magicians  or  priests  ; 
and  that  though  He  had  winked  at  (to  use  the  old  expressive 
term)  the  days  of  past  ignorance,  the  time  had  come  when  He 
commanded  all  men  everywhere—  Pharaoh  on  his  throne,  the 
priest  in  his  temple,  the  ryot  in  his  hut  —  to  repent. 

"Who  is  Jehovah?"  He  is  the  God  of  Nature,  at  whose 
bidding  the  Nile  no  longer  blesses,  but  curses,  her  devotees  ;  at 
whose  command  the  objects  of  Egyptian  worship  become  a 
loathing  and  an  abomination,  and  make  the  land  stink  ;  at  the 
expression  of  whose  will  the  bodies  of  the  priests  are  covered 


®ljc  |3rescttCE  anti  joiner  of  lefroimlr.          55 

with  the  lice  that  deride  all  that  razor  or  water  can  do  for  their 
exteritvination,  and  at  whose  summons  the  sacred  beetle  corrupts 
the  lanfi.  "Not  know  Him?"  He  is  the  God  who  speaks 
through  human  voices ;  the  God  of  the  aged  brethren ;  the  God 
of  those  groaning  serfs  ;  the  God  who  could  not  run  back  from 
a  covenant  into  which  He  had  entered  with  that  long-suffering 
people  ;  the  God  of  Redemption  and  of  Eternity. 

II.  THE  FAITH  OF  MOSES.— Though  it  is  quite  true  that  the 
love  of  God  was  at  work,  seeking  to  reveal  itself  to  Pharaoh  by 
the  ordering  of  the  plagues  ;  yet  we  must  always  remember 
that  the  faith  of  Moses  played  no  inconspicuous  part  in  respect 
to  them.  This  is  very  apparent  in  connection  with  the  last  of 
the  series,  concerning  which  we  are  told  "  by  faith  he  forsook 
Egypt";  and  that  "he  endured,  as  seeing  Him  who  is  invisible." 
What  was  true,  therefore,  concerning  the  last,  was  probably 
true  of  the  rest ;  and  it  becomes  us  to  read  into  the  story  of 
Exodus  the  spiritual  qualities  unveiled  to  us  in  the  Epistle  to 
the  Hebrews,  where  the  Spirit  of  God  draws  aside  the  vail  of 
the  workings  of  his  inner  life  and  manifests  him  as  he  was. 

In  all  probability,  therefore,  throughout  the  conflict  which 
issued  in  the  emancipation  of  Israel,  Moses  was  closely  dealing 
with  God.  God  was  vividly  present  to  the  eye  of  his  soul.  He 
thought  much  more  of  the  presence  and  power  of  Jehovah  than 
he  did  of  the  majesty  and  might  of  the  greatest  king  of  the 
time  ;  and  as  God  disclosed  to  him  each  successive  stage  of  his 
providential  dealings  with  Pharaoh,  his  faith  claimed  that  He 
should  do  even  as  He  had  said.  It  was  therefore  through  his 
faith,  as  the  medium  and  instrument,  that  God  wrought  with  his 
mighty  hand  and  outstretched  arm. 

Are  there  any  marvels  recorded  in  Scripture  which  took  place 
apart  from  the  operation  of  the  faith  of  some  believing  soul  or 
souls  ?  If  Enoch  was  translated  as  a  warning  to  the  antedi 
luvian  world,  it  was  because  he  had  faith  for  it.  If  Isaac  was 
born  to  a  mother  who  had  renounced  all  hope  of  child-bearing, 
it  was  because  her  faith  received  strength.  If  the  Red  Sea 
yielded  a  path  to  the  ransomed  hosts,  it  was  because  their 
leader's  faith  rolled  back  the  glassy  billows.  If  the  walls  of 
Jericho  fell  down,  it  was  because  Joshua  had  faith  to  believe 
they  would.  Just  as  electricity  must  have  a  wire  to  conduct  it, 
so  the  almighty  power  of  God  demands  the  organ  of  our  faith. 


56      STljc  i?obc  of  (Soft  in  ifre  JTirat  JF0ur  |Hajjucs. 

That  faith  may  be  very  slender ;  the  believer  may  be  very 
deficient  in  what  the  world  accounts  most  precious  :  but  if  only 
there  be  a  genuine  connection  between  the  eternal  God  and  the 
case  that  has  to  be  met,  it  is  enough.  All  the  Godhead  may 
pass  through  the  slender  faith  of  a  very  unworthy  man  ;  just  as 
the  ocean  may  pass  through  a  very  narrow  channel.  It  is  with 
such  thoughts  in  our  mind  that  we  consider  the  first  four 
plagues,  and  how  God  showed  his  love  in  them. 

III.  THE  PLAGUES.—  The  River.— One  morning,  shortly 
after  the  events  already  described,  as  the  sky  would  be  covered 
with  the  roseate,  hue  of  dawn's  first  faint  blush,  Pharaoh, 
accompanied  by  high  officials,  court  functionaries,  and  priests, 
came  down  either  to  perform  his  customary  ablutions  or  to 
worship.  Upon  the  river's  brink  he  found  Moses  awaiting 
him,  with  the  rod,  with  which  he  was  already  familiar,  in 
his  hand.  There  was  no  hesitation  now  in  the  peremptory 
summons,  "  The  Lord  God  of  the  Hebrews  hath  sent  me 
unto  thee,  saying,  Let  my  people  go,  that  they  may  serve 
Me  in  the  wilderness."  Then  follow  words  which  bear  out 
what  has  been  already  said  of  God's  purpose  in  the  plagues, 
"  In  this  shalt  thou  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."  The  first 
revelation'  of  God  was  to  be  made  in  the  smitten  water 
flowing  blood  ;  in  the  death  of  its  fish,  that  formed  not  only 
objects  of  worship,  but  provided  a  large  part  of  the  food  staple  ; 
and  in  the  stench  that  filled  the  land  with  loathing. 

The  summons  was  met  by  the  curled  lip  of  scorn  or  im 
perturbable  silence  ;  and  as  there  was  no  alternative,  Aaron 
smote  the  water  with  the  rod  in  the  presence  of  the  court. 
Most  certainly,  as  he  did  so,  the  two  brothers  exercised 
faith  that  God  would  do  as  He  had  said ;  and  according  to 
their  faith  it  befell.  An  instantaneous  change  passed  over 
the  appearance  and  the  nature  of  the  water.  It  became 
blood.  From  bank  to  brae,  the  tide  of  crimson  gore  swept 
on,  hour  after  hour,  day  after  day,  till  a  week  was  fulfilled. 
The  fish  died,  and  floated  on  the  surface.  The  air  reeked 
with  corruption.  And  the  effects  of  the  visitation  extended 
throughout  all  the  pools,  and  reservoirs,  and  cisterns,  in  places 
of  public  resort,  as  well  as  in  the  homes  of  the  people.  There 
was  no  water  in  all  the  land,  save  the  scanty  supplies  obtained 


ffrt  3First  ^wtnptom  of  JSumttber.  57 

by  digging  shallow  wells,  and  collecting  the  brackish  surface 
water. 

The  magicians,  in  some  way,  counterfeited  the  marvel ;  and 
Pharaoh  probably  thought  that  on  the  part  of  Moses  and 
Aaron  there  was  only  a  superior  sort  of  legerdemain.  There 
fore  he  did  not  set  his  heart  to  it,  though  he  must  have 
realized  that  he  was  at  issue  with  a  power  greater  than  that 
of  the  goddess  of  the  Nile. 

Frogs. — It  has  been  supposed  that  the  plagues  followed  in 
rapid  succession,  so  that  the  impression  of  one  had  not  passed 
away  before  another  succeeded  it.  And  thus  the  whole  conflict 
was  probably  comprehended  within  nine  or  ten  months.  It 
may  have  therefore  been  but  a  few  days  after,  that  Moses 
and  Aaron  renewed  their  demand  for  emancipation,  and  told 
the  king  the  penalty  of  refusal.  But  there  was  no  response,  no 
proposal,  and  the  inevitable  blow  fell. 

The  land  suddenly  swarmed  with  frogs.  They  came  up 
from  the  river  in  myriads,  till  the  very  ground  seemed  alive 
with  them,  and  it  was  impossible  to  walk  far  without  crushing 
scores.  Frogs  in  the  houses,  frogs  in  the  beds,  frogs  baked 
with  the  food  in  the  ovens,  frogs  in  the  kneading-troughs 
worked  up  with  the  flour ;  frogs  with  their  monotonous  croak, 
frogs  with  their  cold,  slimy  skins,  everywhere — from  morning 
to  night,  from  night  to  morning — frogs.  And  the  aggravation 
of  the  plague  consisted  in  the  fact  of  the  frog  being  the 
emblem  of  the  goddess  of  fecundity  ;  so  that  it  was  sacrilege 
to  destroy  it. 

This  plague  elicited  from  Pharaoh  the  first  symptom  of  sur 
render.  He  sent  for  the  brethren,  and  implored  their  prayers 
that  the  scourge  might  be  removed,  promising  that  compliance 
with  his  request  would  secure  deliverance,  "  I  will  let  the  people 
go."  To  make  the  supremacy  and  power  of  God  more  manifest, 
Moses  bade  the  monarch  fix  his  own  time  for  the  staying  of  the 
plague,  and  then  went  to  cry  to  the  Lord  :  "  Moses  cried  unto 
the  Lord  ;  and  the  Lord  did  according  to  the  word  of.  Moses." 

It  is  remarkable  that  though  the  magicians  counterfeited  the 
coming  of  the  frogs,  they  were  evidently  unable  to  remove 
them  ;  and,  indeed,  the  king  does  not  appear  to  have  appealed  to 
them  for  help  in  this  direction.  Alleviation  of  human  suffering 
is  no  part  of  the  programme  of  the  devil  or  his  agents.  That 


53     ®Ij£  £ 0fo  nf  (SoJr  in  tljc  first  JF0ur  f  Ia0ues. 

can  only  come  from  Jehovah,  through  the  believing  cry  of  his 
servants.  But  what  a  lesson  was  taught  to  Pharaoh — that 
Jehovah  was  above  all  gods,  and  that  He  alone  could  do 
according  to  his  will  ! 

Lice. — The  Egyptians  were  scrupulously  cleanly  in  their 
personal  habits,  anticipating  the  habits  of  our  own  time.  And 
the  priests  were  specially  so.  They  bathed  themselves  re 
peatedly,  and  constantly  shaved  their  persons,  that  no  un- 
cleanliness  might  unfit  them  for  their  sacred  duties.  What 
horror,  then,  must  have  taken  hold  of  them  when  the  very 
dust  of  Egypt  seemed  breeding  lice ;  and  they  found  that 
they  were  not  exempted  from  the  plague,  which  was  as  painful 
as  it  was  abhorrent  to  their  delicate  sensibility. 

Perhaps  there  is  something  more  than  appears  at  first  sight 
in  the  words,  "  there  was  lice  in  man  and  in  beast"  Not  only 
on  the  bodies  of  the  priests,  but  on  those  of  the  sacred  beasts, 
was  there  this  odious  pest.  Each  revered  shrine  boasted  its 
sacred  bull  or  goat,  whose  glossy  skin  was  cleansed  with 
reverent  care  ;  and  it  was  an  unheard-of  calamity  that  it 
should  become  infested  with  this  most  disgusting  parasite. 
Thus  upon  the  gods  of  Egypt  did  God  execute  judgment, 
in  order  that  Pharaoh  might  know  that  He  was  God  of  gods, 
deserving  of  the  allegiance  which  He  claimed.  The  magicians 
themselves  seem  to  have  felt  that  this  plague  was  a  symptom  of 
the  working  of  a  higher  Power  than  they  knew  ;  and  even  they 
urged  Pharaoh  to  consider  that  it  was  the  finger  of  God.  How 
often  do  unexpected  voices  read  for  us  the  lessons  that  God 
designs  to  teach  ! 

The  Beetle. — It  is  not  perfectly  certain  what  is  meant  by  the 
word  translated  "  flies."  And  though  it  is  possible  that  it  is 
rightly  rendered  "  flies,"  yet  it  is  quite  as  likely  that  it  stands 
for  a  peculiar  kind  of  beetle,  which  was  the  emblem  of  the 
sun-god.  Their  most  powerful  deity  seemed  now  to  have 
turned  against  them,  and  to  have  become  their  scourge  at 
the  behest  of  the  God  of  these  shepherd-slaves.  The  beetles 
covered  the  ground,  swarmed  into  the  houses,  and  spoilt  the 
produce  of  their  land. 

That  it  was  no  mere  natural  visitation  was  made  clear  by  a 
division  being  made  in  this  plague  between  the  land  of  Egypt 
and  that  of  Goshen,  where  the  Israelites  were  found.  This 


|)i)nnurb's  Concession.  59 

God,  who  could  turn  the  very  deities  of  Egypt  against  their 
votaries,  could  as  evidently  protect  his  own.  And  perhaps 
this  wrought  on  Pharaoh's  heart,  as  nothing  else  had  done  ; 
for  he  was  prepared  to  allow  the  Israelites  to  sacrifice  in  the 
land.  It  was  a  concession  which  Moses  could  not  accept ; 
alleging  that  the  Israelites  would  be  obliged  to  sacrifice  as 
victims  animals  which  the  Egyptians  considered  sacred,  and 
irritated  feeling  might  provoke  some  terrible  outbreak  of 
violence.  Pharaoh  yielded  to  this  reason  ;  and  promised  to 
let  them  go,  if  they  did  not  go  very  far,  on  the  condition,  that 
Moses  should  secure  the  removal  of  the  plague.  "And  the 
Lord  did  according  to  the  word  of  Moses." 

In  all  this  Moses  was  but  the  medium,  the  ambassador, 
the  instrument  through  whom  God  wrought.  The  suggestion 
of  the  plagues  lay  with  the  Almighty ;  their  execution  was 
effected  through  the  strong  faith  of  the  faithful  servant,  who 
did  as  he  was  told,  and  spoke  as  he  was  bidden.  And  it 
was  in  answer  to  his  believing  prayer  that  the  plagues  ceased. 
Through  faith  like  that  God  will  pass  out  to  do  his  work  of 
might  and  love  and  salvation  amongst  men. 


TX. 
IJcta  tljr  (CJjarartiT  of 

"  Moses  was  faithful  in  all  his  house." — HEB.  iii.  2. 

F  we  were  engaged  in  telling  the  story  of  the  Exodus,  it 
would  become  us  to  study  minutely  the  account  of  the 
succeeding  plagues.  But  the  story  of  Israel  is,  for 
our  present  purpose,  incidental  to  the  study  of  that 
great  personage  who  gave  tone  and  character  to  the 
mighty  movement  which  issued  in  the  passage  of  the 
Red  Sea.  It  is  on  Moses  that  our  attention  must  be  focussed  ; 
and,  indeed,  it  is  marvellous  to  trace  the  growth  of  this  man,  in 
perhaps  a  few  months,  from  the  diffidence  and  hesitancy  ofC 
Midian  to  the  moral  sublimity  which  made  him  "  very  great  in 
the  land  of  Egypt,"  in  the  sight  of  the  great  officials  of  the  court, 
no  less  than  of  the  mass  of  the  common  people  (£Terr.  xi.  3).  ~ 

We  can  trace  _this  development  of  character  through  the 
remaining  plagues ;  and  as  we  do  so  we  shall  inevitably  discover 
that  the  secrets  of  growth  consist  in  an  instant  and  unquestioning 
obedience,  an  utter  indifference  to  human  opinion,  strength  of 
purpose,  unfailing  patience,  indomitable  courage,  persevering 
faith  and  prayer. 

Murrain.— In  the  earlier  part  of  his  ministry  Moses  had 
repeatedly  questioned  with  God  before  he  set  about  the  per 
formance  of  the  Divine  commissions.  "  Who  am  I,  that  I 
should  go  in  unto  Pharaoh?"  "How  shall  Pharaoh  hear  me 
who  am  of  uncircumcised  lips  ?  "  "  Behold,  I  am  of  uncircum- 
cised  lips  ;  how  shall  Pharaoh  hearken  unto  me  ? "  And,  using 
the  language  of  men,  it  needed  much  persuasion  and  entreaty 
before  he  would  fulfil  Jehovah's  word. 

But  all  that  had  vanished  now.  Though  he  had  been  at  least 
seven  times  in  the  royal  presence,  and  each  time  the  bearer  of 
heavy  tidings,  increasingly  abhorred  by  Pharaoh  and  his  court, 


(Dbefcmtre,  tin?  &csf  of  f  ohc.  61 

and  though  so  far  his  appearances  there  had  been  unsuccessful 
in  securing  the  great  object  which  God  had  set  before  him,  yet 
there  was  no  hesitancy  or  questioning,  when  for  the  eighth  time 

f   the  Lord  bade  him  present  himself  in  the  palace  to  demand 

A  the  emancipation  of  the  people  on  pain  of  a  murrain  on  the 

&  beasts. 

k  It  is  hardly  possible  to  over-estimate  the  value  of  simple, 
unquestioning  obedience  in  the  growth  of  character.  The 
rejection  of  Saul,  the  first  king  of  Israel,  and  the  selection  of 
David  hinged  on  the  fact  that  the  one  did  not  obey  the  voice  of 
the  Lord  in  performing  his  commandments,  and  that  the  other 
was  a  man  after  God's  heart  and  fulfilled  all  his  will.  The 
stress  of  our  Lord's  farewell  discourse  is  on  the  reiterated  word 
obey.  Obedience  is  the  test  of  love  ;  the  condition  of  divine 
revelation  ;  the  precursor  of  the  most  sacred  intimacy  into 
which  God  can  enter  with  the  human  spirit.  In  proportion 
as  we  obey,  we  become  possessed  of  noble  elements  of  char 
acter  ;  which  exist  in  our  hearts  as  vapour  until  they  are  con 
densed  in  some  act  of  obedience,  and  become  henceforth  a 
permanent  property.  Disbelief  and  disobedience  are  inter 
changeable  terms  fHeb.  iv.ii.  marg.) ;  from  which  we  may  infer 
that  as  our  obedience  is,  so  will  our  faith  become.  Live  up  to 
what  you  know  to  be  your  duty:  fill  in  the  outlines  of  God's 
commands;  never  stay  to  count  consequences  or  to  question 
results  ;  if  God  says,  "  Go  unto  Pharaoh  and  tell  him,"  and  you 
obey,  you  will  not  only  be  set  to  greater  tasks,  but  you  will 
acquire  a  character  which  no  amount  of  meditation  or  prayer 
could  afford. 

The  murrain  came  at  the  fixed  time,  "  and  the  cattle  of  Egypt 
died."  The  cattle  that  fed  on  the  green  meadows  of  the  Nile  ; 
the  horses  of  the  wealthy,  for  which  Egypt  was  famous ;  the 
asses  of  the  poor ;  the  camels  that  bore  the  merchandise  of 
Egypt  afar,  in  exchange  for  spices  and  balm  and  myrrh  (Gen. 
xxxvii.  25);  the  oxen  that  ploughed  the  fields;  the  sheep  which 
constituted  so  large  a  proportion  of  their  wealth — on  all  of  these 
the  murrain  fell.  The  land  was  filled  with  death ;  the  rich  land 
owners  were  greatly  impoverished;  the  poor  suffered  severely; 
thousands  of  shepherds  and  teamsters  were  thrown  out  of  work; 
the  routine  of  business  communication  was  seriously  interrupted; 
and  evidence  was  given  of  the  increasing  severity  of  the  plague: 


62  2§oiD  ilje  Character  of  |K0ses  (Sreto. 

whilst  God's  care  for  his  own  was  clearly  shown  in  the  cordon 
of  protection  that  He  placed  around  Goshen,  concerning' 
which  it  is  said,  "  Of  the  cattle  of  the  children  of  Israel  died 
not  one." 

Boils  and  Blains. — In  estimating  a  man's  work  we  must 
always  consider  the  character  of  the  man  himself.  Certain 
kinds  of  work,  congenial  to  some  dispositions,  are  most  distaste 
ful  to  others ;  and  you  might  as  well  look  for  apples  on  vines  as 
expect  to  find  the  two  in  conjunction.  It  is  much  more  startling 
to  find  certain  attributes  in  some  characters  than  in  others — it 
is  like  finding  a  layer  of  gneiss  in  chalk.  And,  surely,  it  must 
have  been  a  much  greater  effort  for  Moses  to  be  the  medium  of 
such  judgments,  and  the  object  of  so  much  bitter  hatred,  than 
for  ,many.  He  was  naturally  gentle,  tender,  and  very  meek— 
'  always  ready  to  pray  for  the  cessation  of  a  plague,  and  never  for 
its  advent ;  yearning  sympathetically  over  sister  and  brother, 
though  they  had  grievously  injured  him ;  willing  to  be  accursed 
if  the  people  might  be  spared.  A  man  who  had  kept  sheep  for 
forty  years  would  be  likely  to  acquire  a  tender  shepherd-heart.^ 
And  it  must  have  been  no  small  effort  to  be  the  instrument  for 
inflicting  pain.  Yet  this  fell  plentifully  to  his  lot  in  his  terrible 
vindication  of  the  supremacy  and  sovereignty  of  God. 

But  he  flinched  not.  It  was  not  for  him  to  aspire  to  be  more 
pitiful  than  God  ;  and,  therefore,  when  Aaron  and  he  were 
bidden  to  take  ashes  from  some  expiring  furnace,  and  fling 
them  broadcast  on  the  air,  to  become  a  boil  breaking  forth  with 
blains  upon  man  and  upon  beast,  he  did  not  hesitate.  Taking 
Cj  in  his  hands  handfuls  of  ashes,  he  accosted  Pharaoh  on  some 
-public  occasion,  when  he  and  his  court  of  magicians  were 
assembled  in  the  open  air,  and  sprinkled  the  light  grey  dust  up 
towards  heaven  ;  with  such  immediate  effect  that  "the  magicians 
could  not  stand  before  him  because  of  the  boils,  for  the  boil  was 
upon  the  magicians  and  upon  all  the  Egyptians"  (ver.  11),  and, 
perhaps,  penetrated  also  to  the  sacred  precincts  of  the  temples, 
breaking  out  in  the  beasts  which  were  there  zealously  kept  free 
from  taint,  as  gods  of  the  nation  (Num.  xxxiii.  4). 

The  Hail. — As  the  plagues  advance,  Aaron  is  increasingly 
dropped  out  of  sight.  In  the  first  three  plagues  the  Lord  said 
distinctly  unto  Moses,  "Say  unto  Aaron"  (vii.  19  ;  viii.  5,  16). 
In  the  fourth  (viii.  20)  and  fifth  (ix; -i),  the  word  was  to  Moses 


Uttmashuj  JFcutfr.  63 

only.  In  the  sixth  the  command  is  to  them  both  (ix.  8). 
But  in  this,  the  seventh,  the  command  is  given  exclusively  to 
Moses.  "  The  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Stretch  forth  thine  hand 
toward  heaven,  that  there  may  be  hail  (ver.  22).  And  so  with 
the  plagues  of  locusts  (x.  12),  and  of  the  darkness  that  might  be 
felt  (x.  2i).  Why  this  was  we  are  not  told.  It  does  not  appear 
that  Aaron  had  in  any  way  forfeited  his  position  by  misconduct ; 
but  he  may  have  lacked  that  simplicity  and  directness  and 
purity  of  motive  which  were  so  characteristic  of  his  brother  : 
and  the  faith  of  Moses  grew  with  every  trial  of  the  faithfulness 
and  reliableness  of  God,  till  it  alone  was  able  to  act  as  the 
vehicle  of  the  Divine  Will.  In  any  case,  Moses  came  increasingly 
to  the  front  as  the  wielder  of  the  miracle-working  rod,  and  as 
the  emancipator  of  Israel. 

In  the  present  instance,  also,  he  seems  to  have  acquired  to  a 
surprising  extent  the  power  of  speech.  Those  stammering  lips 
became  the  channels  of  unwonted  eloquence,  and  were  kindled 
by  unexpected  fire.  It  was  as  if  he  had  suddenly  felt  able  to 
lay  aside  the  mediation  of  Aaron,  and  to  claim  those  words 
which  the  Almighty  had  promised  to  put  into  his  mouth.  And 
is  it  not  full  of  comfort  to  find  that  the  Lord  did  not  keep  him 
to  the  mistaken  bargain  he  had  made,  that  Aaron  should 
be  his  spokesman  (Exod.  iv.  15-17).  We  may  have  said 
rash  things  in  the  past,  which  we  now  deeply  and  seriously 
regret ;  but  if  we  show  ourselves  worthy  of  a  greater  destiny 
than  our  weak  faith  imagined  possible,  God  may  not  tie  us  to 
our  words,  but  will  open  before  us  possibilities  of  which  we  had 
not  dreamt.  Aaron  shall  not  be  our  mouth-piece ;  we  will 
stand  and  speak  for  ourselves. 

The  warning  given  to  Pharaoh  in  that  early  morning  was  a 
very  solemn  one  ;  but  it  was  in  vain.  He  had  deliberately 
hardened  himself  so  often  that  now  both  warning  and  appeal  fell 
on  him  like  rain  and  sun  on  granite  slabs,  and  even  tended  to 
harden  his  heart  still  more.  There  is  no  ice  so  hard  as  that 
which  melts  by  day  and  freezes  by  night. 

And  so  the  storm  broke.  As  the  rod  was  uplifted,  vast 
thunderclouds  drifted  up  from  the  sea,  and  covered  the  land, 
and  poured  out  their  contents  in  thunder,  hail,  and  fire.  Storms 
of  any  kind  are  very  rare  in  Egypt ;  and  this  was  "very  grievous, 
such  as  there  was  none  like  it  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  since  it 

E 


64  ifritr  tire  Cfranuier  0f  ^Hoscs 

became  a  nation."  There  are  several  references  in  the  Psalms 
to  this  fearful  visitation.  We  can  almost  hear  the  peal  of  the 
thunder,  and  detect  the  devastation  caused  by  the  hail,  in  the 
vibrating  chords  of  Hebrew  minstrelsy.  In  the  intervals  of  the 
thunder-peals,  in  which  the  Almighty  uttered  his  voice,  we  can 
hear  the  pelt  of  the  hailstone  chorus  and  the  explosion  of  the 
balls  of  fire  (Psa.  xviii.  12,  13).  The  vines  torn  from  their 
trellises  and  beaten  into  the  soil  ;  the  sycamore  trees  blighted 
as  by  frost ;  the  forest-trees  broken  down ;  the  crops  of  flax  and 
barley  utterly  spoilt  ;  beasts  and  herdsmen  unsheltered  in  the 
open  fields  in  defiance  of  the  warning  given,  smitten  to  death 
by  hailstones,  which  fell  as  thick  as  rain,  and  may  have  weighed 
(as  in  exceptional  instances  hailstones  have  been  known  to 
weigh)  from  six  to  eight  ounces — such  are  some  of  the  indica 
tions  given  of  the  terror  of  the  scene  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  47,48;  cv.  32). 
But  from  all  these  the  land  of  Goshen  was  free. 

Through  the  pelting  storm,  Moses  and  Aaron  were  sum 
moned  into  the  royal  presence  to  hear  for  the  first  time 
from  those  proud  lips  the  confession  of  sin  (Exod.  ix.  27)  ; 
with  an  urgent  entreaty  that  the  mighty  thunderings  and  hail 
which  were  then  shaking  palace  and  city  might  cease.  Moses 
had  no  doubt  as  to  the  answer  which  would  come  to  his 
prayer ;  but  he  had  grave  doubts  of  the  reliableness  of  the 
royal  word.  However,  he  did  as  Pharaoh  required.  Passing 
uninjured  through  the  storm,  he  went  beyond  the  city  gates 
into  the  open  country.  It  was  as  if  he  consciously  lived  in 
the  secret  place  of  the  Most  High,  and  abode  under  the 
shadow  of  the  Almighty.  With  outspread  hands  he  interceded 
for  the  land  of  the  oppressors  of  his  people ;  and  God  hearkened 
to  his  request :  so  that  the  thunders  and  hail  ceased,  and  the 
rain  was  no  more  poured  out  upon  the  earth  (ver.  33). 

The  Locusts. — The  tone  of  Moses  rose  with  every  plague. 
Hitherto  he  had  been  content  with  repeating  his  demand  ; 
but  now  the  failure  of  the  king  to  keep  his  royal  word  had 
altered  the  relations  between  them.  Pharaoh  had  forfeited 
all  claim  to  his  respect.  He  had  made  repeated  promises 
and  broken  them.  His  confessions  of  sin  had  been  followed 
by  no  efforts  at  amendment.  He  was  no  longer  ignorant  of 
Jehovah,  but  wilfully  obstinate  and  defiant.  Weak,  vacillating, 
cringing  in  trial,  imperious  and  truculent  in  prosperity,  he  had 


saittr  tlje  f  orir  ©oft."  65 

become  unspeakably  despicable.  And  Moses  altered  his  tone  ; 
not  now  treating  him  as  a  sovereign,  but  as  a  sinner,  and 
dealing  directly  with  his  proud  and  obstinate  heart  :  <fThus 
saith  the  Lord  God  of  the  Hebrews,  How  long  wilt  thou 
refuse  to  humble  thyself  before  Me  ? "  The  penalty  of  further 
delay  was  to  be  an  infliction  of  locusts. 

The  Egyptians  well  knew  what  a  plague  of  locusts  might 
mean  ;  and  therefore  the  sen-ants  of  Pharaoh  pleaded  with 
the  king  to  acquiesce  in  the  demand  of  the  Hebrew  leaders. 
Better  lose  a  nation  of  slaves,  said  they,  than  imperil  the  land. 
So  that  from  that  moment  it  became  a  trial  of  strength  between 
the  king  of  Egypt  and  God,  in  whom  for  the  first  time  in  his 
history  he  had  found  more  than  his  match. 

Pharaoh,  at  his  servants'  suggestion,  proposed  a  compromise. 
He  was  willing  to  let  the  men  go,  and  threatened  them  with 
evil  if  they  did  not  accept  this  proposition.  But  there  was  no 
hesitation  in  its  instant  refusal  by  the  brothers.  It  could  not 
be.  The  young  and  old  must  go,  sons  and  daughters,  flocks 
and  herds — all.  None  was  to  be  absent  in  that  great  con 
vocation,  which  was  to  assemble  somewhere  in  the  desert  to 
hold  a  feast  to  Jehovah.  The  court  had  never  heard  the 
great  Pharaoh  so  addressed  ;  nor  could  he  endure  that  daunt 
less  speech  ;  so,  at  a  signal  from  him,  they  were  driven  from 
his  presence. 

But  the  locusts  came  with  an  east  wind,  which,  blowing 
straight  from  the  desert,  had  set  in  on  the  land  for  a  whole 
day  and  night.  "  When  it  was  morning,  the  east  wind  brought 
the  locusts."  Their  numbers  filled  the  air,  and  literally  covered 
the  earth.  Its  green  surface  was  darkened  by  their  brown 
forms  ;  and  every  trace  of  green  in  the  fields,  on  the  fruit 
trees,  and  among  the  plentiful  herbs,  of  which  the  Egyptians 
were  so  fond,  instantly  disappeared.  There  was  no  bud,  nor 
blossom,  nor  shoot,  nor  leaf,  left  anywhere  "through  all  the 
land  of  Egypt"  (x.  15).  The  animals  had  perished,  and 
now  the  produce  of  the  earth.  Surely  the  next  visitation 
must  sweep  away  all  human  life.  Panic-stricken,  the  king 
sent  for  the  men  whom  a  little  before  he  had  driven  from 
his  presence  ;  confessed  that  he  had  not  only  sinned  against 
Jehovah,  who  had  now  become  an  evident  Personality  to  his 
conscience,  but  against  them  ;  and  entreated  that  this  death 


66  IfohJ  tlje  (Character  of  |Hoscs  ©rcitr. 

might  be  removed.  How  gracious  and  long-suffering  is  God  ! 
In  answer  to  Moses'  intercession,  "the  Lord  turned  a  mighty 
strong  west  wind,  which  took  away  the  locusts,  and  cast  them 
into  the  Red  Sea  ;  there  remained  not  one  locust  in  all  the 
coasts  of  Egypt"  (ver.  19).  But  again  Pharaoh  went  back 
from  his  word. 

The  Darkness. —  Unannounced,  the  darkness  fell  like  a 
pall  upon  the  land,  "  even  darkness  that  could  be  felt." 
Travellers  tell  us  of  darkness  caused  by  sand-storm,  so  thick 
that  it  was  impossible  to  see  the  hand  when  placed  close 
against  the  face.  From  whatever  cause,  the  darkness  of  this 
plague  must  have  been  of  the  same  description. 

"  They  saw  not  one  another,  neither  rose  any  from  his  place 
for  three  days."  All  the  activities  of  the  land  were  paralysed. 
The  stoutest  hearts  were  dismayed.  It  seemed  as  if  their 
greatest  deity  had  suddenly  deserted  them,  abandoning  their 
case.  Perhaps  the  light  would  never  visit  them  again.  In  that 
land  of  radiant  sunlight  it  was  an  awful  experience.  The  very 
temples  were  so  draped  in  gloom  that  the  priests  could  not  see 
the  sacred  beasts,  nor  were  they  able  to  perform  their  usual 
rites.  For  the  first  time  in  perhaps  centuries  great  Memnon's 
statue  failed  to  greet  the  beams  of  the  morning  sun  with 
music. 

When  the  plague  passed  away,  for  the  last  time  the  monarch 
summoned  the  brothers,  and  made  a  final  desperate  effort  at 
compromise.  The  nation  might  go,  said  he ;  but  the  flocks  and 
herds  must  remain.  But  Moses  penetrated  the  craft  of  the  pro 
posal,  and  tore  it  to  shreds.  "  Our  cattle  shall  go  with  us,  there 
shall  not  an  hoof  be  left  behind."  Clearly  they  would  be 
required  for  sacrifice  (ver.  25).  Then,  again,  the  proud  spirit  of 
the  king,  uncowed  by  repeated  misfortune,  untaught  by  the 
stern  discipline  of  pain,  broke  vehemently  forth ;  and  he 
said,  as  if  exasperated  beyond  endurance,  "Get  thee  from  me, 
take  heed  to  thyself,  see  my  face  no  more  ;  for  in  that  day  thou 
seest  my  face  thou  shalt  die  "  (ver.  28). 

The  spirit  of  Moses,  also,  was  swept  with  that  anger  which  at 
rare  intervals  asserted  itself  in  him,  as  a  storm  on  a  tranqu  1 
lake  (Exod.  xi.  8) ;  but  he  made  answer  with  calm  dignity,  as 
became  the  ambassador  of  God.  "  And  Moses  said,  Thou  hast 
spoken  well ;  I  will  see  thy  face  again  no  more  "  (ver.  29).  But 


jOcmtttriaitott  an&  Wanting.  67 

as  he  turned  to  leave  the  royal  presence,  he  raised  himself  to  his 
full  height,  and  poured  one  overwhelming  torrent  of  denuncia 
tion  and  warning  on  the  wilful  spirit  that  had  deliberately  chosen 
evil  for  its  god,  and  destruction  for  its  doom.  "And  Moses 
said,  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  About  midnight  will  I  go  out  into  the 
midst  of  Egypt  ;  and  all  the  firstborn  of  Egypt  shall  die.  And 
all  these  thy  servants  shall  come  down  unto  me,  and  bow  down 
themselves  unto  me,  saying,  Get  thee  out,  and  all  the  people 
that  follow  thee  ;  and  after  that  I  will  go  out  (xi.  4-8). 

}»--Thus  did  the  bowing  reed  of  Midian  become  as  a  rock  on 
which  the  tempest  expends  its  force  in  vain  ;  the  man  who  had 
left  that  palace  in  fear,  strode  its  courts  as  a  king ;  and  the  faith 
which  fled  before  the  serpent-rod  became  strong  enough  to  wield 
the  thunderbolts  of  heaven,  and  to  bring  the  land  of  Egypt  to 
the  very  brink  of  destruction. 


X. 

|3  rearing  for  t{j 

'And  it  came  to  pass  at  the  end  of  the  four  hundred  and  thirty 

years that  all  the  hosts  of  the  Lord  went  out  from  the 

land  of  Egypt." — EXOD.  xii.  41. 

E  have  seen  how,  during  those  months  of  agony,  Moses 
had  been  the  organ  through  which  God  wrought  out 
his  purposes ;  first  of  informing  Pharaoh's  mind,  and 
latterly  of  breaking  his  stubborn  will.  And  already 
we  have  had  indications  that  through  the  faith  of  this 
man,  which  was  growing  exceedingly,  blessing  would 
accrue  to  the  chosen  people. 

The  first  three  plagues  fell  equally  on  the  children  of  Israel  as 
on  the  Egyptians  ;  but  when  the  brothers  threatened  Pharaoh 
with  the  fourth,  they  were  commissioned,  in  the  name  of  God,  to 
utter  this  further  message  :  "  I  will  sever  in  that  day  the  land  of 
Goshen,  in  which  my  people  dwell "  (Exod.  viii.  22).  And  from 
that  hour  the  children  of  Israel  were  exempted  from  the  terrible 
inflictions  by  which  Egypt  was  desolated.  Moses  claimed  that 
God  should  do  as  He  had  said.  And  according  to  his  faith  it 
befell.  No  murrain  swept  off  their  beasts.  No  boils  broke  out 
on  their  persons.  No  tempest  swept  their  fields.  No  locusts 
destroyed  their  crops.  No  darkness  obscured  to  them  the  sun. 
Thus,  while  the  minds  of  their  oppressors  were  engrossed  with 
their  own  special  sufferings,  the  Hebrews  were  at  peace ;  and 
when  the  Egyptians  were  prevented  by  the  darkness  from 
moving,  the  oppressed  population  of  Goshen  had  ample  time 
to  prepare  for  that  Exodus  which  Moses  at  least  knew  was  so 
near. 

As  we  study  that  strange  and  marvellous  episode,  we  must 
never  forget  the  light  thrown  on  it  by  the  memorable  verse 
which  tells  us  that  "  by  faith  Moses  kept  the  Passover,  and  the 
sprinkling  of  blood ;  lest  he  that  destroyed  the  first-born  should 


gimttons  for  the  fpassober.  69 

touch  them"  (Heb.  xi.  28).  The  importance  of  this  verse  lies 
in  the  fact  that  it  attributes  the  keeping  of  the  Passover,  the 
sprinkling  of  blood  on  the  lintels  of  the  Hebrew  houses,  and 
the  immunity  of  the  Hebrew  people,  to  the  effect  of  the  heroic 
faith  which  burnt  so  steadily  in  the  soul  of  this  simple-hearted 
man  ;  the  entirety  of  whose  obedience  was  only  equalled  by  the 
absoluteness  of  the  unquestioning  faith,  which  dared  to  take 
God  at  his  word. 

I.  His  FAITH  WAS  BASED  ON  PROMISE. — All  faith  must 
rest  there.  There  must  be  some  distinct  word  or  undertaking 
on  the  part  of  one  who  is  perfectly  trustworthy,  or  there  is  no 
ground  for  faith  to  build  on.  Here  is  the  difference  between 
faith  and  credulity ;  between  faith  and  following  some  vain 
will-o'-the-wisp,  generated  amid  the  miasma  of  an  unhealthy 
imagination. 

We  cannot  tell  the  form  in  which  the  Divine  Word  came  to 
the  two  brethren.  Was  it  as  when  a  man  speaketh  to  his 
friend  ?  Should  we  have  heard  it,  with  our  uncircumcised  ears, 
had  we  been  in  their  company  ?  Or  was  it  an  impression 
photographed  on  the  heart  of  each,  upturned  towards  the 
source  of  light  ?  But,  howsoever  the  communication  came, 
in  those  accents — which  first  declared  what  Israel  was  to  do, 
and  then,  with  unhesitating  precision,  announced  the  successive 
acts  which  would  finally  smite  the  fetters  from  the  captives' 
hands,  and  free  the  nation  in  a  single  night — they  recognised  the 
voice  that  had  bidden  them  go  to  Pharaoh  with  repeated  sum 
monses  to  surrender. 

The  directions  were  substantially  these.  On  the  tenth  of  the 
following  month,  the  head  of  each  family,  whether  slave  or  elder, 
was  to  select  a  firstling  lamb,  free  of  disease  and  defect.  Only 
if  the  family  were  too  small  to  need  a  lamb  for  itself  might  it 
join  with  some  neighbouring  household.  There  was  no  question 
as  to  the  lamb  being  too  little  for  the  household.  Jesus  is 
"  enough  for  all,  enough  for  each,  enough  for  evermore."  The 
lamb  was  to  be  kept  from  the  tenth  to  the  fourteenth  of  the 
month,  and  killed  on  the  latter  day,  towards  the  close  of  the 
afternoon.  The  blood,  as  it  gushed  warm  from  the  wound,  was 
to  be  carefully  caught  in  a  basin,  and  sprinkled  on  the  two  side 
posts  and  lintel  of  the  houses  where  the  Israelites  dwelt ;  the 


7°  ^preparing  fnr  the  (Barotms. 

carcase  roasted  whole,  and  eaten  with  unleavened  bread  _nd 
bitter  herbs. 

Special  instructions  were  also  given  as  to  the  attitude  in 
which  that  feast  was  to  be  eaten.  The  whole  family  was  to  be 
gathered  around  the  table,  from  the  grey-headed  sire  to  the 
new-born  babe.  There  was  to  be  no  symptom  of  lassitude  or 
indolence.  The  men  were  to  have  their  loins  girt  as  for  a  long 
journey,  and  to  grasp  their  staves.  The  women  were  to  have 
their  dough  and  kneading  troughs  bound  up  in  little  bundles, 
with  their  clothes,  for  easy  carriage  on  their  shoulders.  All 
were  to  have  their  feet  sandalled.  The  meal  was  to  be  eaten  in 
haste.  And  thus,  with  ears  intent  to  catch  the  first  note  of  the 
trumpet,  the  whole  nation  was  to  await  the  signal  for  its  Exodus, 
sheltered  by  blood  ;  whilst  strength  was  stored  for  the  fatigues 
that  must  be  endured  ere  the  land  of  bondage  was  left  behind 
for  ever. 

There  was  a  great  contrast,  therefore,  between  the  attitude 
of  the  Israelites  in  the  destruction  of  the  first-born  and  in  the 
former  plagues.  In  those  they  had  been  perfectly  inactive,  only 
reaping  the  benefits  which  accrued  from  the  successive  victories 
won  through  the  faith  of  their  great  leader.  But  now  they  were 
called  upon  to  appropriate  benefits,  which  might  not  accrue  if 
they  failed  to  conform  to  the  conditions  laid  down.  And  in  those 
demands  on  their  obedience  and  faith,  there  surely  must  have 
broken,  on  the  minds  of  the  more  intelligent  at  least,  the  feeling 
that  there  was  a  deeper  meaning  in  the  whole  transaction  than 
appeared  on  the  surface  ;  and  that  eternal  issues  were  being 
wrought  out,  the  meaning  of  which  they  could  not  as  yet  ade 
quately  apprehend. 

Moses  at  least  must  have  felt  that  God  was  in  effect  saying  to 
his  people  that  they  were  not  less  guilty,  in  some  respects,  than 
the  Egyptians  around  them.  It  was  not  enough  for  them  to 
allege  that  they  had  not  gone  to  the  same  lengths  of  stiff-necked 
rebellion  as  Pharaoh  and  his  people.  Had  they  not  forgotten 
his  Sabbaths,  and  turned  to  serve  other  gods,  and  mingled  in 
the  evil  rites  of  Egyptian  idolatry  ?  For  these  things,  at  least, 
they  were  held  guilty  in  his  sight,  and  liable  to  lose  the 
first-born  of  their  homes,  unless  they  kept  the  sprinkling 
of  blood. 

And  when  all  the  provisions  had  been  thus  solemnly  recited, 


is  Contagious.  71 

there  followed  the  words  of  promise,  on  which  thenceforward 
Moses  reposed  his  faith  ;  "  I  will  pass  through  the  land  of 
Egypt,  and  will  smite  all  the  first-born  in  the  land  of  Egypt, 
both  man  and  beast;... and  when  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over 
you,  and  the  plague  shall  not  be  upon  you  to  destroy  you,  when 
I  ?mite  the  land  of  Egypt "  (ver.  12,  13). 

II.  His  FAITH  LED  TO  ACTION. — He  gathered  the  elders  of 
Israel,  and  informed  them  of  the  instructions  he  had  received  ; 
and  whether  it  was  that  come  prognostications  of  their  coming 
deliverance  had  entered  their  souls,  or  that  they  had  come  to 
believe  in  their  great  leader  to  an  extent  which  had  been  previ 
ously  impossible,  it  is  certain  that  they  offered  neither  opposition 
nor  suggestion  to  his  proposals.  They  bowed  the  head  and 
worshipped,  and  went  their  way  to  do  "  as  the  Lord  had  com 
manded  Moses  and  Aaron  :  so  did  they  "  (ver.  27,  28). 

It  is  a  glorious  thing  for  men  and  angels  to  see  a  faith  which, 
with  no  outward  appearance  to  warrant  it,  will  yet  step  out  on 
a  path  of  literal  obedience,  though  there  seems  nothing  but  thin 
air  to  tread  upon.  It  seemed  so  utterly  extraordinary  for  such 
a  thing  to  be,  as  the  deliverance  of  his  people,  because  blood 
happened  to  be  sprinkled  on  the  outside  of  their  doors.  There 
was  no  precedent ;  no  apparent  reason  to  justify  such  a  thing  to 
ordinary  common-sense  ;  no  likelihood  of  obedience  having  any 
connection  with  deliverance.  Many  such  thoughts  may  have 
occurred  to  him  ;  but  he  dismissed  them  from  his  mind,  and 
simply  obeyed,  believing  that  there  could  be  no  mistake,  no 
shadow  of  turning  in  Him  to  whom  he  had  given  the  allegiance 
of  his  soul. 

Oh  that  such  faith  were  ours  !  Not  arguing,  nor  questioning, 
nor  reasoning :  but  believing  that  the  promises  of  God  are  Yea 
and  Amen  in  Christ ;  and  that  what  He  says  about  accepting  all 
who  believe  in  Christ,  making  us  sit  together  with  Him  on  his 
throne,  and  loving  us  with  the  love  He  bears  his  Son,  He  is 
willing  and  able  to  perform. 

And  such  faith  becomes  contagious.  How  did  that  memorable 
tenth  night  of  the  month  Abib  close  in  upon  Egypt  ?  Did  not 
the  air  seem  oppressed  with  the  burden  of  the  coming  woe  ? 
Did  no  priestess,  intoxicated  with  Mephitic  vapour,  utter  in 
piercing  shrieks  some  warning  of  the  terrible  visitation  at  hand? 


T£  fprcparittrj  f0r  tlje  (Bxattu*. 

Did  not  the  wings  of  the  Angel  of  Death  overshadow  the 
doomed  land,  before  he  smote  with  his  sword  ?  Surely  the  fact 
of  the  Israelites  obtaining  so  many  gifts  of  jewellery  and  raiment 
from  the  Egyptians  indicated  that,  on  both  sides,  there  was  an 
anticipation  of  their  near  release.  Whilst,  however,  on  the  one 
hand,  there  must  have  been  grave  foreboding  and  suspense  ;  on 
the  other  there  were  expectancy  and  hope.  The  faith  of  Moses 
had  kindled  faith  in  three  millions  of  people ;  who  stood  ready  to 
plunge  the  knife  into  the  fleecy  victim  that  awaited  it,  to  sprinkle 
the  blood,  to  start  on  the  distant  march,  but  with  no  fear  that 
the  first-born  of  the  house  should  be  left  a  corpse  behind.  No 
father  eyed  his  son  with  anxiety  ;  no  mother  trembled  to  hear 
the  rustle  of  the  angel-wing  ;  no  boy  shuddered  at  the  near 
approach  of  death.  It  was  enough  that  God  had  said,  that, 
when  He  saw  the  blood,  He  would  pass  over.  But  though  they 
could  not  see  it  or  understand  it,  or  fathom  the  purposes  of  God, 
they  knew  the  blood  was  there  to  speak  for  them  ;  and  they 
believed,  therefore,  that  all  must  be  well.  And  though  no  one 
knew  exactly  their  destination,  nor  how  they  would  reach  it,  they 
had  no  misgiving  as  to  the  issue. 

III.  His  FAITH  WAS  VINDICATED.— Who  can  depict  that 
night,  ever  memorable  in  the  history  of  our  race — when,  indeed, 
as  Bunsen  says,  history  itself  was  born— the  night  when  God 
brought  Israel  out  of  the  house  of  bondage  !  It  was  the  early 
spring,  and  a  time  of  the  full  silver  moon,  which  shed  her  soft 
light  in  cascades  of  beauty  on  the  land  that  lay  beneath  her ; 
from  where,  on  the  Western  frontier,  the  Nile  rolled  its  majestic 
volumes,  to  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  on  the  far  Eastern  border. 
All  was  still  with  an  almost  preternatural  silence ;  "broken  only 
by  the  hoot  of  the  owl,  the  scream  of  the  bittern,  the  plunge 
of  the  monster  in  the  water,  or  the  cry  of  the  jackal  on  the 
plains." 

But  suddenly  the  stillness  was  interrupted  by  a  scream  of  an 
guish,  as  a  mother  rushed  out  into  the  night  to  tell  that  the  Angel 
of  Death  had  begun  his  work,  and  she  was  presently  answered 
by  the  wail  of  a  mother  in  agony  for  her  first-born ;  and  this  by 
another,  and  yet  another.  It  was  useless  to  summon  priest  or 
physician,  magician  or  courtier ;  how  could  they  help  others  who 
had  not  been  able  to  ward  off  death  from  their  own?  The  maid 


JV  (great  (Erg  in  (B0irpt.  73 

grinding  at  the  mill  and  her  lady  sleeping  under  curtains  of  silk 
were  involved  in  a  common  sorrow,  which  obliterated  all  social 
distinctions,  and  made  all  one.  There  was  not  a  house  where 
there  was  not  one  dead — even  Pharaoh's  palace  was  not  exempt. 
The  news  spread  like  wildfire  that  the  heir  to  the  throne  was 
dead.  "  And  there  was  a  great  cry  in  Egypt." 

Ah,  Egypt !  bitter  as  that  night  was,  it  did  not  counterbalance 
the  wrongs  that  Israel  had  suffered  at  thy  hands  for  centuries  ! 
Thy  tears  were  as  a  rill,  compared  to  the  rivers  of  sorrow  which 
had  been  extorted  from  that  high-spirited  people,  who  were 
compelled  to  turn  the  soil  to  brick,  with  no  reward  but  the  task 
master's  scourge  !  Thy  loss  in  sweet  and  noble  life  was  insignifi 
cant,  compared  with  the  thousands  flung  into  the  Nile,  or  done 
to  death  in  the  cruel  brick-kilns  !  Thy  cry,  piercing  and  heart 
rending  though  it  were,  a  whisper,  compared  with  the  sobs  wrung 
from  mothers  as  their  babes  were  torn  from  their  breasts,  the 
groans  of  the  oppressed  as  they  saw  their  dear  ones  failing  under 
a  bondage  they  could  not  alleviate,  or  with  the  cries  of  the  men 
driven  to  despair. 

"  Then  Pharaoh  rose  up  in  the  night,  he  and  all  his  servants, 
and  all  the  Egyptians  ;  and  he  called  for  Moses  and  Aaron 
by  night,  and  said,  '  Rise  up,  and  get  you  forth  from  among 
my  people.' "  There  was  no  attempt  at  parley.  They,  their 
people,  their  children,  and  their  property,  were  to  be  gone. 
And  the  bidding  of  the  palace  was  repeated  by  ten  thousand 
tongues.  The  one  eager  desire  of  the  Egyptians  was  to  get  rid 
of  them  at  all  speed,  and  at  all  cost.  They  were  glad  to  give 
them  anything  they  asked,  and  thus  bestowed  some  payment 
for  their  long  unremunerated  labour ;  and  even  Pharaoh,  the 
haughty  monarch,  entreated  that  they  would  bless  him  ere 
they  went. 

And  so  the  host  stepped  forth  into  freedom.  For  the  first  time 
the  Israelites  realized  that  they  were  a  nation,  and  drank  the 
earliest  rich  deep  draught  of  liberty.  A  mere  horde  of  slaves, 
they  suddenly  crystallized  into  a  people.  The  spirit  of  their 
leader  inspired  and  thrilled  them.  There  was  a  fire  in  their  eye, 
an  elasticity  in  their  step,  a  courage  in  their  heart,  which  told 
their  own  story.  Then  was  their  mouth  filled  with  laughter, 
and  their  tongue  with  singing.  God  hath  made  bare  his  holy 
arm  in  their  deliverance.  And  sentiments  began  to  assert 


74  ^Jrepnrin^  fur  tbt 


themselves  which  were  destined  ere  long  to  roll  in  thunderous 
acclaim  along  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea.  What  faith  did 
for  them  it  will  do  for  thee  and  me,  O  soul  enslaved  by  a  worse 
tyranny  than  Pharaoh's.  If  only  thou  wouldst  claim  deliver 
ance  thou  shouldst  have  it.  Listen  to  the  song  which  heralded 
the  work  of  Christ  :  "  that  we,  being  delivered  out  of  the  hand 
of  our  enemies,  might  serve  Him  without  fear,  in  holiness  and 
righteousness  all  our  days  "  (Luke  i.  74,  75).  This  is  for  us. 
We,  too,  may  overcome  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  by  the 
word  of  our  testimony.  By  faith  we,  too,  may  obtain  promises 
and  stop  the  mouths  of  lions,  and  quench  the  violence  of  fire. 
Only  claim  thy  freedom,  and  thou  shalt  tread  on  the  lion  and 
adder  ;  the  young  lion  and  dragon  shalt  thou  trample  under 
foot 


XI. 
passage  of  tlje 


'•'The  waters  were  a  wall  unto  them  on  their  right  hand,  and  on  their 
left.  Tims  the  Lord  saved  Israel  out  of  the  hand  of  the 
Egyptians."  —  EXOD.  xiv.  29,  30. 

--  —  :  «•'/ 

J|':;/JL/T  was  not  long  after  the  hour  of  midnight  before  the 
jjjfjj      entire   Israelite  host  was  on  the  move  ;  and   as   the 
!ft*fr      morning  light  suffused  the   cloudlets  with   its   flush, 
fcMi      it  beheld  them  marching,  the  men  five  abreast,  whilst 
wives  and  children  and  baggage  and  cattle  followed. 
From  different  points  the  vast  host  —  which,  judging 
by  the   fact   that   the   number  of  the   men   amounted   to  six 
hundred  thousand,  could  not  have  been  less  than  two  and  a 
half   millions  —  converged    towards    the   central   meeting-place 
at  Succoth. 

Mose3  probably  led  the  largest  of  several  detachments  ;  and 
we  can  almost  imagine  the  flush  of  honest  pride  upon  his  face, 
mingling  with  a  sense  of  profound  humility,  that  he  had  been 
honoured,  in  the  hand  of  God,  to  become  the  instrument  of  so 
great  a  deliverance. 

Succoth  would  be  about  fifteen  miles  from  their  starting-place, 
and  there  they  made  their  first  prolonged  halt  ;  baked 
unleavened  cakes  of  the  dough  which  they  had  brought  with 
them  ;  rested  the  weary  women  and  children  in  leafy  tabernacles 
hastily  improvised  from  the  foliage  of  that  region  :  so  that  the 
whole  host,  heartened  and  refreshed,  was  able  to  undertake  its 
second  stage,  which  was  Etham,  on  the  edge  of  the  wilderness, 
where  the  green  vegetation  of  Egypt  fades  into  wastes  of  sand. 
There  is  one  episode  in  this  setting  forth  that  we  must  not  forget 
to  mention,  and  which  shows  how  largely  the  whole  Exodus 
was  wrought  in  faith,  at  least  in  the  case  of  Moses,  and  perhaps 
of  more.  "  And  Moses  took  the  bones  of  Joseph  with  him  " 
(xiii.  19).  This  great  ancestor  of  their  race  had  been  dead  some 


76  SIlje  passage  of  tire  He&  £ea. 

four  hundred  years  ;  but  on  his  death-bed  he  had  made  his 
brethren  swear  that  when  God  visited  them,  as  He  most  surely 
would,  and  brought  them  out  of  Egypt,  they  should  bear  his 
bones  with  them  in  their  march.  In  his  death,  and  through  that 
weary  waiting  time,  he  had  been  the  prophet  of  the  Exodus;  and 
how  often  must  those  unburied  bones  have  been  the  theme  of 
conversation  in  Hebrew  homes  !  And  now  that  they  were 
accompanying  their  march,  all  the  people  realized  that  the 
anticipations  of  generations  were  being  fulfilled.  "  God  had 
surely  visited  them." 

I.  THE  GUIDING  PILLAR.— In  the  campaigns  of  Alexander 
the  Great,  we  are  told  that  a  brazier  rilled  with  combustibles 
and  elevated  on  a  high  pole  indicated  his  pavilion,  and  directed 
the  march  of  his  victorious  armies.  But  a  still  greater  spectacle 
came  into  view  as  that  Hebrew  host  broke  away  from  the  land 
of  bondage.  Who  has  not  seen  in  a  summer  sky  some  majestic 
cumulus  cloud  sailing  slowly  through  the  heavens,  as  if  it  had 
taken  the  impression  of  some  mighty  Alp,  whose  cliffs,  recesses 
and  snows  were  being  reduplicated  in  its  shape  and  colour? 
Something  of  this  sort  must  have  gathered  in  the  pure  morning 
atmosphere  at  the  head  of  the  vanguard,  never  again  to  desert 
that  pilgrim  band  till  the  Jordan  was  crossed  and  it  had  settled 
down  to  brood  over  the  house  of  God.  But  all  through  the  years, 
when  night  fell,  it  burnt  with  fire  at  its  heart ;  fire,  which  was 
always  the  symbol  and  sign  of  the  presence  of  God. 

This  served  many  purposes.  It  was  the  guide  of  their  march; 
it  was  a  shadow  from  the  burning  heat  of  a  vertical  sun,  spread 
ing  its  folds  in  fleecy  beauty  to  shelter  them  in  a  "weary  land"; 
and  at  night  it  provided  them  with  a  light  as  it  watched  over 
them  like  the  Eye  of  God.  On  one  occasion,  at  least,  as  we 
shall  see  presently,  it  rendered  the  utmost  service  by  concealing 
the  movements  of  Israel,  lying  between  them  and  the  pursuit  of 
their  foes. 

There  is  no  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  now — long  since  it  has 
faded  from  the  sky  ;  but  it  was  in  probable  allusion  to  its 
blessed  help  that  Jesus  said,  "  I  am  the  Light  of  the  World," 
indicating  by  his  use  of  a  well-known  phrase,  that  what  the 
cloud  had  been  to  Israel,  He  was  prepared  to  be  to  every  soul 
of  man. 


?Dje  pillar  of  Cloutr  nntr  of  Jtre.  77 

/£?  &  our  Guide ;  by  his  Spirit  within  us,  by  the  example  of 
his  life,  by  the  words  of  his  Gospel,  and  by  the  manifold  indica 
tions  of  his  providence,  He  conducts  us  over  the  wastes  of  our 
earthly  pilgrimage  to  the  land  where  we  would  fain  be.  Do 
not  anticipate  Him  by  rash  haste,  or  by  acting  on  your  own 
hurriedly-formed  conclusions.  Do  not  lag  behind  Him  in 
dolently.  Dare  to  wait  for  months,  or  even  years,  if  He  give 
no  indication  that  the  time  has  come  to  strike  your  tents  and 
follow. 

He  is  our  Shield j  beneath  his  canopy  we  may  shelter  from 
the  arrows  of  the  sun  of  temptation  or  of  prosperity,  and  from 
the  glare  of  worldly  success. 

He  is  our  Light;  those  who  follow  Him  do  not  walk  in  the 
darkness  of  ignorance,  impurity,  or  sorrow,  but  have  the  light 
of  life.  Draw  the  curtain  of  your  tent,  Christian  pilgrim  !  look 
out  into  the  night  already  glowing  with  the  myriad  stars  of 
promise  ;  amid  them  all  behold  the  sign  that  He  is  with  you, 
who  slumbers  not,  nor  sleeps,  and  to  whom  the  night  shineth  as 
the  day. 

In  the  thought,,  of  Moses,  that  cloud  by  day  and  night  must 
have  been  full  of  re-assurance,  because  it  was  the  very  chariot 
of  God,  in  which  He  went  before  his  people.  And  it  is  very 
touching  to  learn  that  "  He  took  it  not  away,"  as  if  neither  sin, 
nor  murmuring,  nor  disobedience,  could  ever  drive  away  Him 
who  loves  us,  not  because  we  are  good,  but  to  make  us  so  ;  and 
who  cannot  leave  or  forsake  those  whom  He  has  taught  to  lisp, 
"Abba,  Father." 

II.  THE  ROUTE. — The  easiest  route  to  Canaan  lay  through 
the  Isthmus  of  Suez  and  the  land  of  the  Philistines.  A  journey 
of  a  little  over  one  hundred  miles  would  have  conducted  them 
direct  to  their  destination.  But  God  did  not. 'permit  them  to  go 
that  way,  lest  the  sight  of  embattled  hosts  should  unnerve  them. 
In  after  years,  when  the  education  and  revelations  of  the  desert 
were  finished,  they  might  behold  those  scenes  undismayed. 
But  as  yet  they  must  not  know  war  till  they  had  been  more 
deeply  taught  in  the  might  and  care  of  God.  So  is  our  journey 
tver  adapted  to  our  strength.  God  is  always  considering  what 
»ve  are  able  to  bear  ;  never  leading  us  into  dangers  before  which 
heart  and  flesh  would  succumb.  "  God  led  them  about"  The 


78  ®ij 

leading  about  tries  our  patience  ;  but  it  is  the  best  route  for 
timid  hearts  and  inexperienced  feet. 

It  must  have  been  a  great  disappointment  when  the  cloud 
altered  its  course,  and  led  them  due  south.  But  there  was  no 
alternative  ;  and  so  they  finally  found  themselves  encamped  in 
the  last  place  in  all  the  land  that  human  judgment  would  have 
selected.  It  would  appear  as  if  Moses  himself  would  have 
hesitated  encamping  there,  had  he  not  been  distinctly  com 
manded  to  bid  the  children  of  Israel  take  up  that  position.  On 
one  side  of  them  was  Migdol  (the  modern  Muktala)  and 
impassable  wastes  of  sand  ;  on  the  other  was  the  Red  Sea. 
East  of  them,  or,  as  it  might  be,  in  front,  was  the  impassable 
range  of  Baal-Zephon. 

It  was  a  perfect  cul-de-sac.  There  was  no  egress  from  it 
except  the  way  by  which  they  had  entered.  The  most  inex 
perienced  eyes  in  the  whole  multitude  must  have  seen  the 
apparent  absurdity  of  the  movement ;  and  loud  and  deep  must 
have  been  the  murmurs  and  protestations  of  the  people.  "  Is 
this  the  way  to  Canaan  ?  We  know  better  !  How  dare  you 
presume  to  lead  us,  when  your  very  first  tactics  prove  you  to  be 
wholly  untrustworthy  ?  Well  for  you  and  us  that  Pharaoh  has 
his  son  to  bury ;  or  if  he  came  after  us  we  should  be  like  a 
penned  flock  of  sheep,  the  prey  of  the  first  wolf  that  can  leap 
the  hurdles  ! " 

Such  reflections  and  reproaches  are  not  easy  to  bear.  They 
can  only  be  borne  by  a  man  who  has  learnt  utterly  to  trust  his 
God.  But  they  made  no  impression  on  Moses.  He  knew  Him 
whom  he  believed.  He  had  learnt  to  obey  Him  implicitly,  and 
to  see  himself  always  completely  vindicated.  "  Though  a  host 
should  encamp  against  him,  his  heart  should  not  fear ;  though 
war  should  rise  against  him,  in  this  would  he  be  confident." 
Oh  for  more  of  this  simple  trust  in  God,  which  rests  so  distinctly 
in  his  guidance  and  help  ! — that  the  believer  will  dare  to  do 
what  to  the  eye  of  others  are  marks  of  insanity  and  wild 
fanaticism,  but  which  are  vindicated  by  the  result. 

Often  God  seems  to  place  his  children  in  positions  of  profound 
difficulty — leading  them  into  a  wedge  from  which  there  is  no 
escape  ;  contriving  a  situation  which  no  human  judgment  would 
have  permitted  had  it  been  previously  consulted.  The  very 
cloud  conducts  them  thither.  You,  reader,  may  be  thus  involved 


79 

at  this  very  hour.  It  does  seem  perplexing  and  mysterious  to 
the  last  degree.  But  it  is  perfectly  right.  The  issue  will  more 
than  justify  Him  who  has  brought  you  hither.  It  is  a  platform 
for  the  display  of  his  almighty  grace  and  power.  He  will  not 
only  deliver  you,  but  in  doing  so  He  will  give  you  a  lesson  that 
you  will  never  forget ;  and  to  which,  in  many  a  psalm  and  song 
in  after  days,  you  will  revert.  You  will  never  be  able  to  thank 
God  enough  for  having  done  just  as  He  has.  Had  you  brought 
yourself  into  this  position  by  your  caprice,  you  had  perished 
miserably  ;  but  since  He  has  brought  you  here,  you  have  only  to 
stand  still  and  see  his  salvation,  which  is  prepared  as  the 
morning. 

III.  THE  PURSUIT.— No  sooner  had  Israel  gone  than 
Pharaoh  was  sorry.  The  public  works  stood  still  for  lack  of 
labour.  Vast  territories  were  suddenly  unoccupied.  The  labour 
of  this  enslaved  people  was  missed  on  every  side,  in  city  and 
field.  There  was  a  sudden  loss  of  revenue  and  service  which  he 
could  ill  dispense  with.  And  his  pride  forbade  that  he  should 
quietly  acquiesce  in  their  unhindered  Exodus.  Besides,  in  their 
mad  haste  to  be  rid  of  this  people,  the  Egyptians  had  laden 
them  with  jewels  of  silver,  and  jewels  of  gold,  and  raiment ;  so 
much  so  that  it  is  distinctly  said,  "  they  spoiled  the  Egyptians." 
It  is  clear  from  the  contributions  afterwards  made  to  the  building 
of  the  Tabernacle,  that  Israel  was  carrying  off  a  large  amount  of 
treasure  and  valuables.  "  And  the  heart  of  Pharaoh,  and  of  his 
servants,  was  turned  against  the  people  ;  and  they  said,  Why 
have  we  done  this,  that  we  have  let  Israel  go  from  serving  us  ?" 
(xiv.  5,  6). 

At  this  juncture,  the  king  heard  of  the  extraordinary  move 
ment  southwards,  which  seemed  to  have  thrown  them  again 
into  his  power.  Surely  his  gods  were  recovering  their  olden 
power,  and  were  rallying  to  his  aid  !  And  he  said,  "  I  will  pursue  ; 
I  will  overtake  ;  I  will  divide  the  spoil ;  my  lust  shall  be  satisfied 
upon  them  ! "  Then  there  was  great  haste,  and  the  marshalling 
of  the  chivalry  and  the  pride  of  Egypt,  six  hundred  of  the  chosen 
chariots,  with  cavalry  and  infantry,  horsemen  and  foot-soldiers. 
"And  the  Egyptians  pursued  after  them,  all  the  horses  and 
chariots  of  Pharaoh... and  overtook  them"  (xiv.  9). 

And  so  as  the  afternoon  closed  in,  of  perhaps  the  fifth  day  of 


8o  ®&£  ^assa^e  of  tljc  ftctr  J&R. 

the  Exodus,  the  outposts  of  the  fugitive  host  beheld  the  dreaded 
forms  of  the  Egyptian  warriors  coming  over  the  ridges  of  the 
desert  hills  ;  and  as  the  night  fell  they  were  aware  that  the 
whole  Egyptian  host  was  encamped  in  their  near  vicinity,  only 
waiting  for  the  morning  light  to  swoop  down  on  them,  involving 
them  either  in  a  general  massacre,  or  in  what  was,  perhaps, 
more  dreadful,  a  return  to  slavery. 

It  was  an  awful  plight.  Terrible,  indeed,  was  the  breaking  of 
that  news  on  those  craven  hearts.  They  immediately  turned  on 
Moses,  and  spent  their  fear  and  anguish  on  his  heart.  "Where 
fore  hast  thou  dealt  thus  with  us  ?  Were  there  no  graves  in 
Egypt?  Better  to  have  perished  there  than  here !  Why  did  you 
not  leave  us  alone  ?  Where  is  your  God  ? "  And  then  that 
noble  spirit  rose  up  in  the  might  of  its  faith,  and  in  the  words 
he  spake  we  read  his  own  inner  attitude.  He  was  not  fearful 
nor  dismayed,  his  cheeks  were  unblanched,  his  heart  untroubled  ; 
he  was  standing  still  to  see  God's  salvation,  he  was  perfectly  sure 
that  it  would  be  forthcoming  that  day  ;  and  he  knew  that  Jehovah 
would  fight  for  them,  and  redeem  them,  and  vindicate  his  word. 
So  we  shall  see  in  our  next  chapter. 


XII. 
of 


'  Sing  ye   to  the   Lord,  for   he  hath  triumphed  gloriously ;  the  horse 
and  his  rider  hath  He  thrown  into  the  sea." 

EXOD.  xv.  21. 

^|HEN  God's  cloud  brings  any  of  his  children  into  a 
'™  position  of  unparalleled  difficulty,  they  may  always 
count  upon  Him  to  deliver  them.  Our  Almighty 
Parent,  like  the  eagle  of  which  Moses  sang  afterwards, 
delights  to  conduct  the  tender  nestlings  of  his  care  to 
the  very  edge  of  the  precipice,  and  even  to  thrust 
them  off  into  the  steeps  of  air,  that  they  may  learn  their  pos 
session  of  unrealized  powers  of  flight,  to  be  for  ever  after  a 
luxury;  and  if,  in  the  attempt,  they  be  exposed  to  unwonted 
peril,  He  is  prepared  to  swoop  beneath  them,  and  to  bear  them 
upward  on  his  mighty  pinions. 

A  conspicuous  example  of  this  is  given  here.  From  his 
chariot-cloud  their  Almighty  Friend  looked  down  upon  the 
cowering  crowd  of  fugitives  in  their  sore  fear  as  they  cried  to 
Him.  "  In  all  their  affliction  He  was  afflicted,  and  the  angel  of 
his  presence  saved  them ;  in  his  love  and  in  his  pity  He  re 
deemed  them;  and  He  bare  them,  and  carried  them"  through 
out  that  memorable  night  and  day.  As  Moses  foretold,  "  He 
fought  for  them,  while  they  held  their  peace." 

It  would  almost  seem,  from  an  expression  in  the  Psalms,  that 
the  children  of  Israel  yielded  to  more  rebellion  at  the  Red  Sea 
than  appears  from  the  narrative  of  Moses.  We  are  told  dis 
tinctly  that  they  "  provoked  him  at  the  Sea,  even  at  the  Red 
Sea,  because  they  remembered  not  the  multitude  of  his  mercies ; " 
so  that  God  saved  them  in  spite  of  their  rebelliousness,  for  his 
Name's  sake,  and  "  that  He  might  make  his  mighty  power  to 

hf»  known  "  (P<m    rvi    7.  R\       Anr?  thic  Qncrcrpct-Q  flip  fnrtVipr  t-hnncrVif- 


82  &he  ^on    of 


that  our  deliverance  does  not  depend  on  our  deserts,  but  upon 
the  Divine  purpose.  And  even  though  it  might  be  supposed 
that  our  behaviour,  in  seasons  of  peril,  must  alienate  from  us 
the  Divine  helpfulness,  yet  it  shall  not  be  so  ;  but  notwith 
standing  all,  He  will  work  miracles  of  power  for  such  as  have 
no  claim  on  Him,  save  that  which  his  love  gives. 

The  one  man  who  seemed  unmoved  amid  the  panic  of  the 
people  was  their  heroic  leader,  whose  faith  was  the  organ  of 
their  deliverance.  And  therefore  it  is  that  in  all  after-allusions 
to  this  great  event  his  hand  is  always  referred  to  as  the  instru 
ment  through  which  the  might  of  Jehovah  wrought.  "Thou 
leddest,"  says  the  Psalmist,  "  thy  people  like  a  flock,  by  the 
hand  of  Moses  and  Aaron  "  (Psa.  Ixxvii.  20).  "  He  caused," 
says  Isaiah,  "his  glorious  arm  to  go  at  the  right  hand  of  Moses" 
(Isa.  Ixiii.  12,  R.V.).  The  people,  therefore,  had  good  reason  to 
remember  the  ancient  days  of  Moses;  for  they  were  made 
famous  by  Moses'  mighty  faith.  By  his  faith  they  passed 
through  the  Red  Sea  as  by  dry  land. 

THE  ROD.  —  There  is  a  limit  to  prayer.  While  Moses  pre 
sented  an  appearance  of  unbroken  fortitude  towards  the  people, 
rearing  himself  among  them  like  a  rock,  before  God  he  bent 
like  a  broken  reed,  crying  to  Him.  That,  however,  was  not  the 
time  for  heart-rending  supplication,  but  for  action  :  he  must 
give  to  the  people  the  word  of  advance.  Over  the  sea,  on  which 
the  shadows  of  night  were  falling  rapidly  he  must  stretch  out 
his  rod  ;  and  by  his  faith  he  must  afford  the  power  of  God  a 
channel  through  which  it  should  pass  to  the  cleavage  of  the 
mighty  waters. 

That  rod  had  already  played  many  parts  ;  it  grew  first  in 
some  watered  glade  of  the  Sinaitic  peninsula,  little  witting  of  its 
destiny,  till  cut  down  by  the  shepherd  for  the  purpose  of  guiding 
his  flock,  or  clubbing  some  beast  of  prey  ;  it  was  in  his  hand 
when  God  first  met  with  him,  and  cast  upon  the  ground  it 
became  a  serpent,  emblem  of  Egyptian  pride.  Already  it  had 
figured  in  many  of  the  Egyptian  plagues  ;  stretched  over  the 
waters  of  the  river  to  turn  them  to  blood  ;  lifted  towards  heaven 
to  summon  the  storm  ;  extended  over  the  land  to  turn  the  very 
dust  to  lice  ;  hereafter  it  was  to  win  victory  over  Amalek,  and 
to  open  streams  from  the  heart  of  the  rock  ;  everywhere 
emphatically  as  "  the  rod  of  God."  But  never  in  all  its  history 


f  (Don."  83 

had  it  done,  nor  would  it  do,  such  marvels  as  awaited  it  that 
night,  when  at  the  bidding  of  God  it  was  stretched  over  the 
waters  of  the  Red  Sea. 

As  the  rod  was  in  the  hands  of  Moses,  so  Moses  was  in  the 
hand  of  God  ;  and  so  may  each  of  us  be,  if  only  we  yield  our 
selves  implicitly  to  Him  for  service.  By  nature  we  may  be  of 
the  coarsest  texture,  not  pine,  nor  oak,  nor  cedar  ;  by  education, 
we  may  be  uncultured  and  unpolished  ;  there  may  be  many 
notches  in  us  which  mar  our  symmetry  and  beauty  :  but  what 
do  these  things  matter?  the  one  essential  is  to  know  that  we  are 
being  wielded  and  used  by  the  hands  that  shaped  the  worlds, 
and  built  the  arch  of  heaven.  The  glass-blower  has  beside  him 
on  the  bench  the  rudest  iron  tools  to  aid  him  in  the  execution  of 
the  most  exquisite  designs  ;  but  the  dexterity  of  his  touch  more 
than  compensates  for  their  apparent  inaptitude.  Be  a  piece  of 
iron  if  you  will,  or  a  rod  cut  from  the  forest  tree  ;  but  be  sure 
that  you  are  in  the  right  hand  of  the  Master  Workman. 

THE  CLOUD. — Up  till  now  the  pillar  of  cloud  had  swept  in 
majestic  glory  through  the  heavens  ;  but  at  this  juncture  it 
settled  down  upon  the  ground  like  a  great  wall  of  billowy  vapour, 
.standing  for  a  fence  between  the  camp  of  Egypt  and  the  camp 
of  Israel.  To  the  former  it  was  dark  and  menacing,  forbidding 
progress,  and  enshrouding  the  movements  of  the  fugitives  ;  to 
the  latter  it  gave  light,  casting  a  sheen  upon  the  sand  and  sea, 
and  indicating,  with  unerring  accuracy,  the  path  that  soon 
appeared.  All  night  through,  those  heaven-lit  beacon  fires 
shone  out ;  and  in  after-days  the  memory  of  the  effect  produced 
by  the  mingling  of  their  light  with  the  walls  of  glassy  water, 
supplied  the  inspired  seer  with  the  imagery  with  which  to  depict 
the  triumph  of  the  redeemed,  who  stand  on  the  shores  of  the 
"glassy  sea  mingled  with  fire,  having  the  harps  of  God."  It 
seemed  a>  if  inspiration  itself  could  find  no  worthier  emblem  for 
that  supreme  event  than  the  rapture  and  triumph  of  the  host  of 
Israel  on  the  night,  when  the  glory  of  the  Shechinah  flashed 
back  from  the  crested  billows,  marshalled  on  either  hand,  as 
the  pillared  entrance  to  a  mighty  temple. 

THE  PASSAGE.— At  tKo  point,  following  the  lead  of  the  Psalmist- 
historian,  it  is  clear  that  a  terrific  storm  broke  upon  the  scene. 
The  earth  shook  and  trembled  ;  the  massy  foundations  of  the 
mountains  rocked  ;  from  out  the  darkness  brooding  overhead, 


84  ®lje  Jfoitjj  of 

the  curtains  of  God's  pavilion,  came  the  repeated  flash  of  the 
lightning,  followed  by  the  long  reverberation  of  the  thunder. 
The  Most  High  uttered  his  voice,  which  was  followed  by  the 
pelt  of  the  hailstones  and  the  fall  of  fireballs.  The  east  wind 
rose  in  fury,  driving  before  it  the  retreating  waters,  which  fled 
at  the  blast  of  the  breath  of  his  nostrils ;  then  catching  them  up 
in  its  hands  it  piled  them,  wave  on  wave,  until  they  stood  up  a 
wall  of  foam  and  tumult,  from  base  to  top,  fretting,  seething, 
fuming,  chafing  at  the  unexpected  restraint,  and  wondering  at 
the  unwonted  posture,  but  held  steadily  and  always  by  the  pres 
sure  of  that  mighty  blast,  that  gave  them  no  respite,  but  held 
them  as  in  a  vice  ;  and  all  the  water  behind,  backed  up, 
leant  upon  that  rampart,  so  strangely  built,  so  marvellously 
maintained. 

And  on  the  other  side  the  tide  withdrew  back  and  back 
towards  the  fountains  of  the  great  deep  behind.  It  was  as  if 
every  wavelet  felt  the  pull,  the  suction  of  an  abyss  opening  some 
where  far  down  in  the  sea,  and  hastened  to  fill  it,  leaving  the 
foundations  of  the  deep  naked  in  the  headlong  rush.  Then  the 
channels  of  water  appeared,  the  foundations  of  the  world  were 
laid  bare,  so  that  rocks  and  stones  deposited  in  primeval  times, 
and  closely  veiled  from  all  prying  gaze,  awoke  to  find  themselves 
discovered. 

Presently  it  seemed  as  if  there  was  a  pause  in  the  speed  of  the 
retreating  waters,  and  they  began  slowly  to  return  ;  but  as  they 
did  so  they  met  with  the  restraint  of  the  hand  of  God,  which, 
leaving  a  pathway  of  sufficient  breadth  from  the  wall  already 
formed,  commenced  to  constitute  a  second,  and  "  so  the  flood 
stood  upright  as  an  heap,  and  the  deeps  were  congealed  in  the 
heart  of  the  sea." 

Shelving  down  from  the  shore  between  these  two  walls  of 
water,  a  broad  thoroughfare  lay  outspread,  which  the  prophet 
compares  to  those  mountain  paths  by  which  cattle  descend  from 
the  heights  on  which  they  graze  to  the  valleys  where  they  rest 
(Isa.  Ixiii.  14).  Was  there  ever  such  a  strange  comparison?  And 
yet  for  the  moment  it  seemed  almost  as  natural ;  and  at  that 
moment  the  word  which  had  sprung  from  the  lips  of  the  leader, 
and  had  been  caught  by  those  who  stood  closest  around  him, 
passed  like  prairie  fire,  though  in  a  whisper,  from  lip  to  lip. 
u  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel  that  they  go  forward  "  ;  and 


44  IE  bntlj  trmtttpbefc  glortouslg."  85 

immediately,  without  precipitate  haste,  but  with  glad  obedience, 
the  ransomed  host  stepped  down,  rank  after  rank,  and  passed 
between  the  walls  of  glass  and  fire  amid  the  rattle  of  the 
storm,  which  made  the  withdrawal  of  their  hosts  inaudible  to 
their  foes. 

Imagine,  O  child  of  God,  if  you  can,  that  triumphal  march  : 
the  excited  children  restrained  from  ejaculations  of  wonder  by 
the  perpetual  hush  of  their  parents  ;  the  almost  uncontrollable 
excitement  of  the  women  as  they  found  themselves  suddenly 
saved  from  a  fate  worse  than  death  ;  while  the  men  followed  or 
accompanied  them,  ashamed  or  confounded  that  they  had  eve: 
mistrusted  God  or  murmured  against  Moses  :  and  as  you  see 
those  mighty  walls  of  water  piled  by  the  outstretched  hand  of 
the  Eternal  in  response  to  the  faith  of  a  single  man,  learn  what 
God  will  do  for  his  own.  Dread  not  any  result  of  implicit 
obedience  to  his  command  ;  fear  not  the  angry  waters  which,  in 
their  proud  insolence,  forbid  your  progress  ;  fear  not  the  turbu 
lent  crowds  of  men  who  are  perpetually  compared  to  waters 
lifting  up  their  voice  and  roaring  with  their  waves.  Fear  none 
of  these  things.  Above  the  voices  of  many  waters,  the  mighty 
breakers  of  the  sea,  the  Lord  sits  as  king  upon  the  flood  ;  yea, 
the  Lord  sitteth  as  king  for  ever.  A  storm  is  only  as  the  out 
skirts  of  his  robe,  the  symptom  of  his  advent,  the  environment 
of  his  presence.  His  way  lies  through,  as  well  as  in  the  sea,  his 
path  amid  mighty  waters,  and  his  footsteps  are  veiled  from 
human  reason.  Dare  to  trust  Him  ;  dare  to  follow  Him  !  Step 
right  down  into  the  ooze  of  the  sea,  to  find  it  rock  ;  go  down 
into  the  mighty  depths,  to  discover  that  the  very  forces 
which  barred  your  progress  and  threatened  your  life,  at  his 
bidding  become  the  materials  of  which  an  avenue  is  made  to 
liberty. 

THE  PURSUIT. — As  soon  as  the  Egyptians  became  aware  that 
Israel  was  escaping,  they  followed  them,  and  went  on  after  them 
into  the  midst  of  the  sea.  There  was  a  good  deal  of  pride  and 
obstinacy  in  this  act,  which  tempted  God  and  presumptuously 
dared  him  to  do  his  worst ;  and,  forthwith,  when  the  host  was 
between  the  walls  of  water,  the  whole  force  of  the  storm  seemed 
to  spend  itself  on  them.  The  Lord  looked  upon  them  through 
the  .pillar  of  fire  and  of  cloud,  and  troubled  them  ;  a  sudden 
panic  seized  them  ;  their  heavy  chariots  could  make  but  ill 


86  fjTIjc  j$ang  of 

progress  amid  the  ooze  of  the  sea  bottom,  and  the  wheels  them 
selves  became  clogged  and  bound  so  that  they  could  not  move  ; 
and  they  turned  to  flee,  conscious  that  a  greater  than  Israel 
was  engaged  against  them. 

At  this  juncture  the  morning  light  began  to  break ;  and,  at  the 
bidding  of  God,  Moses  stretched  out  his  hand  over  the  sea  from 
that  further  shore  which  he  and  Israel  had  by  this  time  gained, 
and  the  sea  returned  to  its  strength.  The  Egyptians  fled  against 
it  in  vain  ;  they  were  overwhelmed  in  the  sudden  rush  of  water 
toppling  down  on  them  from  either  side.  They  sank  as  lead  in 
the  mighty  waters ;  they  went  down  like  a  stone  into  its  depths ; 
and  in  less  time  than  it  takes  to  tell  the  story,  not  a  trace  of 
their  proud  array  remained. 

THE  SONG  OF  MOSES. — "  Then  sang  Moses."  The  morning 
dawn  revealed  one  of  the  most  memorable  spectacles  of  history. 
A  nation  of  slaves,  fleeing  from  their  masters,  had  suddenly 
become  a  nation  of  freemen,  and  stood  emancipated  upon  the 
shores  of  a  new  continent.  The  proud  people,  which  for  genera 
tions  had  inflicted  such  untold  griefs  upon  them,  had  suffered  a 
humiliation  from  which  it  would  take  them  generations  to 
recover.  The  chivalry  of  Egypt  was  overwhelmed  in  the  midst 
of  the-'sea,  there  remained  not  so  much  as  one  of  them  left ;  and 
all  along  the  shore  lay  the  bodies  of  the  dead,  cast  up  from  the 
depths  of  the  tide.  At  this  day  a  significant  blank  in  the  hiero- 
glyphed  memorials  of  Egypt  tells  the  story  of  that  overwhelming 
disaster.  And  there  was  given  to  Israel  for  all  subsequent  time 
an  evidence  of  the  trustworthiness  of  God,  which  compelled 
belief,  not  only  in  their  great  Deliverer,  but  in  his  servant 
Moses.  It  is  thus,  if  only  we  are  still,  and  commit  to  Him  our 
cause,  that  He  will  vindicate  us  from  the  aspersions  of  our 
detractors,  and  bring  out  our  judgment  to  the  light.  And  we 
shall  look  back  on  the  forms  which  once  filled  us  with  dread, 
dead  upon  the  seashore  ;  unable  to  pursue  or  hurt  us  more. 

And  from  that  ransomed  host,  congregated  there  in  one  vast 
throng,  broke  forth  an  anthem,  whose  sublime  conceptions  of 
language  rendered  it  worthy  of  the  occasion,  as  it  has  been  the 
model  for  triumphal  songs  in  all  subsequent  times. 

There  is  no  thought  of  any  but  the  Lord  throughout  the  entire 
piece.  The  song  was  sung  to  Him  and  of  Him.  It  was  He  that 
had  triumphed  gloriously,  and  cast  horse  and  rider  into  the  sea. 


jrc  to  tlje  i?0r& !  "  87 

It  was  his  right  hand  that  had  dashed  in  pieces  the  enemy.  It 
was  because  He  blew  with  his  wind,  that  they  sank  as  lead  in 
the  mighty  waters.  It  was  through  the  greatness  of  his  excel 
lency  that  they  were  overthrown  who  had  risen  against  Him. 
All  the  honours  of  the  victory  were  reverently  laid  at  his  feet. 
Moses  is  not  once  referred  to 

And  the  ease  of  his  victory  was  clearly  accentuated.  The 
waters  were  piled  as  walls  by  his  breath.  He  blew  with  his 
wind,  and  a  whole  army  sank  as  a  stone  into  the  depths.  He 
had  but  to  stretch  out  his  right  hand,  and  the  sea  swallowed 
the  flower  of  the  greatest  army  of  the  time. 

Note  the  epithets  heaped  on  God  :  "My  strength  and  song 
and  salvation  ; "  "glorious  in  holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  doing 
wonders;"  whilst  the  men  extolled  Him  as  "a  man  of  war," 
and  dwelt  on  the  anguish  that  must  take  hold  of  the  Inhabitants 
of  Canaan  when  they  heard  the  story  of  the  overthrow.  The 
women,  led  by  Miriam,  replied  in  a  noble  refrain,  "  Sing  ye  to 
the  Lord,  for  He  hath  triumphed  gloriously  ;  the  horse  and  his 
rider  hath  He  thrown  into  the  sea." 

Whether  or  not  this  ode  were  composed  beforehand  in  antici 
pation  of  this  moment  we  cannot  tell.  It  may  have  been  ;  else 
how  could  it  have  been  sung  by  those  assembled  thousands  ? 
But  this  in  itself  would  be  a  striking  token  of  the  faith  which 
dwelt  so  vigorously  in  the  heart  of  Moses.  It  was  his  song  pre 
eminently  ;  and  in  its  closing  notes  we  catch  a  glimpse  of  his  fore 
cast  of  the  future,  and  the  certainty  of  his  convictions  :  "  Thou 
shalt  bring  them  in  and  plant  them  in  the  mountain  of  thine 
inheritance." 

So  does  God  turn  our  anxieties  into  occasions  of  singing — 
weeping  endures  for  a  night,  but  joy  comes  in  the  morning. 
The  redeemed  obtain  gladness  and  joy  ;  God  puts  gladness  into 
their  hearts,  and  new  songs  into  their  mouths.  Long  years  of 
waiting  and  preparation  and  obedience  shall  be  rewarded  at 
last,  as  certainly  as  God  is  God.  If  not  before,  yet  surely  when 
the  eternal  morning  is  breaking  on  the  shores  of  time,  we 
shall  join  in  shouts  of  victory  ;  which  shall  awaken  eternal 
echoes,  as  with  myriads  beside  we  sing  the  song  of  Moses,  the 
servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb. 


XIII, 
JEaralj   antr 

"  All  these  things  happened  unto  them  by  way  of  figure." 
(i  COR.  X.  ii,  R.v.,  marg.} 

HE  peninsula  of  Sinai,  on  the  shores  of  which  the 
ransomed  people  stood,  and  which  for  forty  years 
was  to  be  their  school-house,  is  one  of  the  wildest, 
grandest,  barest  countries  in  the  world.  It  has  been 
described  as  a  tangled  maze  of  mountains,  piled  in 
inextricable  confusion,  and  gradually  rising  in  height 
towards  the  lofty  summit  of  Um-Shomer,  to  the  south  of  Sinai. 
Between  the  Red  Sea  and  the  lowest  outworks  of  these  mighty 
citadels  of  rock  there  is  a  plain  of  gravel ;  and  thence  the  way 
climbs  slowly  upward  through  long  avenues  and  passes  com 
posed  of  purple  granite  or  brilliant  sandstone,  which  give  a 
richness  to  the  landscape  unknown  to  our  bleaker  and  greyer 
hills. 

We  have  not  now  to  do  with  those  majestic  approaches  to  the 
inner  sanctuary ;  but  with  the  sandy  plain  over  which,  during 
the  first  weeks  of  wandering,  the  host  was  led,  skirting  the 
shores  of  the  Red  Sea,  along  which  they  probably  beheld  the 
dead  bodies  of  their  foes — a  ghastly  spectacle  ! 

Though  not  expressly  stated,  there  must  have  been  a  division 
of  the  Israelite  host,  from  the  point  where  their  first  encamp 
ments  were  pitched  in  the  strange  new  land  of  freedom.  The 
flocks  and  herds,  as  is  the  custom  with  modern  Arabs,  were  dis 
persed  far  and  wide  over  the  country,  to  crop  the  scanty 
"pastures  of  the  wilderness,"  of  which  the  Psalmist  speaks. 
"  Nearly  everywhere,"  Dean  Stanley  tells  us,  "  there  is  a  thin,  it 
might  almost  be  said  a  transparent,  coating  of  vegetation.  And 
in  some  few  places  there  are  more  marked  spots  of  verdure,  the 
accompaniments,  not  of  the  empty  beds  of  winter  torrents, 
but  of  the  few  living,  perhaps  perennial  springs  ;  which  by  the 


&|JE  Mag  of  the  Miltornm.  ^ 

mere  fact  of  their  rarity  assume  an  importance  difficult  to  be 
understood,  in  the  moist  scenery  of  these  northern  lands."  It  was 
there  that  their  flocks  and  herds  were  preserved,  whilst  the 
main  body  of  the  people  marched  with  Moses. 

How  marvellous  the  change  !  No  longer  the  ceaseless  pulse 
of  movement  of  Egypt,  with  festival  and  pageant,  song  and 
feast,  the  court  and  the  army  ;  no  longer  the  green  valley  of  the 
beneficent  Nile,  where  water  never  failed,  and  luscious  vege 
tables,  melons,  leeks,  and  garlic,  charmed  away  thirst ;  no 
longer  the  majestic  glory  of  sphinx,  and  pyramid,  and  temple  : 
but  instead,  a  silence  so  intense  that  the  Arabs  say  they  can 
make  their  voices  heard  across  the  Gulf  of  Akaba,  a  waste  so 
waterless,  that  they  might  count  themselves  fortunate  if  they 
met  a  spring  in  a  day's  march ;  whilst  they  were  literally  enclosed 
within  a  temple,  whose  walls  were  stupendous  rocks,  such  as 
human  hands  had  never  piled.  But  amid  all  these  chequered 
and  strange  experiences,  the  cloud  slowly  led  them  forward  ; 
and  as  the  successive  scenes  crowd  on  our  view,  we  cannot  but 
see  in  them  an  allegory  or  parable  of  human  life,  and  we 
acknowledge  the  truth  of  the  Apostle's  statement,  "  Now  these 
things  happened  unto  them  by  way  of  figure"  (i  Cor.  x.  u, 
R.v.,  niarg.}. 

I.  THE  COURAGEOUS  FAITH  OF  MOSES.— He  knew  that 
desert  well — its  wild  and  desolate  character,  its  dried  torrent- 
beds,  its  lack  of  all  that  would  support  human  life  ;  he  knew, 
too,  that  if  they  were  to  follow  the  northern  route  it  would  not 
take  them  very  long  to  reach  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  "which 
was  near,"  and  where  they  would  be  easily  able  to  procure  all 
necessary  supplies  either  by  force  or  purchase  ;  but  we  are  told, 
nevertheless,  that  he  deliberately  led  them  southwards  and 
entered  the  wilderness.  "  So  Moses  brought  Israel  from  the 
Red  Sea,  and  they  went  out  into  the  wilderness  of  Shur."  He 
could  not  do  otherwise,  because  the  cloud  went  that  way  ;  but 
even  with  that  indication  of  God's  will  before  his  eyes,  it  must 
have  required  an  heroic  faith  to  lead  two  millions  of  people 
direct  into  the  wilderness  (Exod.  xiii.  17  ;  xv.  22). 

We  all  of  us  need  the  leading  about  by  the  way  of  the  wilder 
ness.  In  its  majestic  scenery,  our  minds,  dwarfed  and  stunted 
by  too  great  familiarity  with  the  works  of  men,  are  turned  to  a 


9°  £tara(j  anfc  (Blim. 

higher  keynote,  and  learn  to  wonder  at  the  littleness  of  the 
vanities  which  engross  so  many.  There  we  learn  to  deal  with 
God  not  at  second-hand,  as  is  too  frequent  in  human  civiliza 
tion  ;  but  directly,  as  scattering  with  his  own  hand  the  manna  for 
our  food,  and  deriving  from  "  the  flinty  rock  "  the  living  streams 
to  quench  our  thirst.  We  lose  the  luxuries  which  were  sapping 
and  enervating  our  moral  nature,  to  find  ourselves  becoming 
braced  and  strengthened  in  every  sinew  by  privation  and  hard 
ship.  Patience,  freedom,  faith,  the  pilgrim-spirit — all  these  are 
children  of  the  wilderness  wanderings,  that  thrive  in  its  rare  and 
peculiar  air. 

There  was  good  reason,  then,  why  the  great  leader  should 
follow  the  lead  of  the  cloud  ;  but  it  was  not  the  less  a  sublime 
evidence  of  a  faith  that  could  trust  God  to  the  uttermost,  as  he 
turned  his  back  on  Philistia,  and  stedfastly  took  his  course 
towards  the  heart  of  the  desert,  veiled  as  yet  in  those  mighty 
ramparts  and  walls  of  rock. 

II.  THE  TESTING  OF  His  FAITH.— "They  went  three  days  in 
the  wilderness,  and  found  no  water"  (Exod.  xv.  22).  The  first 
day's  journey  was,  doubtless,  very  distressing — the  blinding 
sand-storms  ;  the  glare  of  the  sun  reflected  from  the  white  lime 
stone  plains  ;  the  absence  of  shade,  of  tree,  of  water.  And  the 
water  which  they  carried  in  their  water-skins  must  have  become 
hot  and  unrefreshing. 

The  second  day  was  not  less  trying.  The  sea  was  now  far  in 
their  rear,  and  there  was  nothing  to  break  the  monotony  of  the 
treeless,  lifeless,  waterless  horizon.  And  surely  as  they  pitched 
their  black  tents  for  the  night,  it  was  difficult  to  repress  some  dis 
content,  or  at  least  anxiety,  as  to  what  the  morrow  might  bring 
to  their  blistered  feet  and  fevered  lips.  Their  supplies  of  water 
were  also  getting  low,  if  they  were  not  quite  exhausted. 

The  third  day  broke.  Perhaps  Moses,  knowing  that  pools 
of  water  were  not  far  away,  encouraged  them  to  persevere  ;  and 
every  eye  was  eagerly  strained  to  catch  the  first  sight  of  palm 
trees  and  living  verdure.  Not  more  eagerly  does  the  mother 
look  for  the  symptoms  of  returning  life  on  the  cheek  of  her 
child,  or  the  beleaguered  garrison  scan  the  horizon  for  the 
first  signal  of  the  relieving  squadron,  than  did  those  wistful 
eyes  seek  for  the  promised  signs. 


91 

And  when  at  last,  towards  the  close  of  the  day,  they  descried 
them  in  the  far  distance,  how  glad  their  shouts,  how  buoyant 
their  hearts,  how  ready  their  expressions  of  confidence  in 
Moses  !  Their  fatigues  and  complaints  and  privations  were  all 
forgotten,  as  with  quickened  pace  they  made  for  the  margin  oi 
the  wells.  But  ah,  how  great  was  their  disappointment  and 
chagrin  when  the  first  long  draught  filled  their  mouths  with 
bitterness,  and  they  discovered  that  the  water  was  too  nauseous 
to  drink  ! 

So  long  as  there  was  none  to  be  got,  they  had  managed  to 
endure ;  but  this  sorrow  was  harder  than  they  could  bear, 
and  they  turned  on  Moses  and  murmured,  "What  shall  we 
drink  ?"  "They  soon  forgot  His  works."  From  minstrels  they 
became  mutineers. 

Do  we  not  all  know  something  of  the  wilderness  march  ?  It 
may  follow  on  some  great  deliverance.  But  how  great  a  contrast 
there  is  between  the  rapturous  hallelujahs  of  the  one,  and  the 
wearying  commonplace  of  the  other  !  The  start  is  both  interest 
ing  and  delightful  ;  but  it  is  so  hard  to  plod  on  day  after  day, 
amid  the  dust  of  the  shop,  the  glare  of  temptation,  the  pressure 
of  grinding  poverty,  the  routine  of  irksome  toil.  The  wilder 
ness  is  no  child's  play  ;  it  is  meant  to  be  our  school,  our 
training-ground,  our  arena,  where  we  are  being  sternly  and 
carefully  educated  for  our  great  future.  And  then  Marahs  will 
come  —  bitter  disappointments,  heart-rending  sorrow,  as  our 
ideals  are  shattered  and  our  cherished  plans  torn  to  shreds.  Ah 
me  !  it  were  better  to  plod  on  day  by  day  without  the  vision 
of  coming  bliss,  than  to  awake  to  discover  that  it  has  been  an 
unsubstantial  mirage.  The  Marahs  are  permitted  to  prove  us, 
or,  in  other  words,  to  show  what  is  in  us.  What  pilgrim  to  the 
New  Jerusalem  is  there  that  has  not  visited  those  springs,  and 
mingled  bitter  tears  with  the  bitter  waters  ? 

III.  MOSES'  RESOURCE.— "  He  cried  unto  the  Lord."  How 
much  better  this  than  to  rebuke  the  people,  or  to  threaten  to 
throw  up  his  appointment,  or  to  sit  down  in  despondency  as 
utterly  out  of  heart !  The  disciples  of  John,  when  they  had 
buried  their  beloved  leader,  went  and  told  Jesus.  And  in  all 
ages  the  servants  of  God  have  been  glad  to  turn  from  their 
discouragements  and  the  ingratitude  of  those  for  whom 


92  ^Haralj  att&  (Blint. 

they  would  have  gladly  laid  down  their  lives,  to  Him  whose 
heart  is  open  to  every  moan,  and  whose  love  is  over  all  and 
through  all,  and  in  all. 

Beside  each  bitter  Marah  pool  there  grows  a  tree,  which, 
when  cast  into  the  waters,  makes  them  palatable  and  sweet.  It 
is  so  ever.  Poison  and  antidote,  infection  and  cure,  pain  and 
medicine,  are  always  close  together.  The  word  which  saves  is 
nigh  even  in  the  mouth  and  in  the  heart.  We  do  not  always  see 
the  "  sufficient  grace  "  ;  but  it  is  there.  Too  occupied  with  our 
disappointment,  we  have  no  heart  to  seek  for  it ;  but  when  we 
cry,  it  is  shown  to  our  weary  longing  eyes. 

And  of  what  is  that  tree  the  type,  if  not  of  the  cross  of  Jesus — 
which  is  the  symbol,  not  only  of  our  redemption,  but  of  a  yielded 
will  ?  It  was  there  that  his  obedience  to  the  will  of  his  Father 
reached  its  supreme  manifestation.  He  became  obedient  to 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  Nor  is  there  anything  that 
will  so  take  the  bitterness  out  of  disappointment,  and  so  make 
it  palatable  and  even  life-giving,  as  to  look  up  from  it  to  the 
cross,  and  to  say,  "  Not  my  will,  but  Thine  be  done.  Thy  will 
is  my  weal.  In  Thy  will  is  my  bliss." 

What  a  constant  lesson  Moses  was  learning  from  day  to  day ! 
God  must  indeed  have  become  a  living  reality  to  him.  He 
learnt  God's  ways  ;  we  are  expressly  told  "  that  they  were  made 
known  to  him."  And  gradually  he  must  have  come  to  feel  that 
the  whole  responsibility  of  the  pilgrimage  was  on  the  great, 
broad  shoulders  of  his  Almighty  Friend.  Ah,  fellow-workers, 
let  us  not  carry  the  burdens  of  responsibilities  arising  out  of  his 
work  !  Our  one  thought  should  be  to  be  on  his  track,  and  to  be 
in  living  union  with  Himself.  We  may  leave  all  the  rest  with 
Him. 

IV.  ELIM. — There  are  more  Elims  in  life  than  Marahs  ;  and 
we  encamp  by  them.  We  are  not  bidden  to  tarry  at  the  one, 
but  we  may  spend  long  blessed  days  at  the  other.  How  re 
freshing  the  shadow  of  those  seventy  palm-trees  !  How  sweet 
the  water  of  those  twelve  wells  !  How  delightful  those  long 
restful  days  !  You  say  that  they  will  never  come  to  you  ?  Yes, 
but  they  will  !  They  come  to  all  tired  souls.  There  is  no 
desert-march  without  an  Elim  at  last.  The  Lamb  cannot  fail 
to  lead  you  by  living  fountains  of  water,  and  to  wipe  away  all 


Surprises.  93 

tears  from  your  eyes,  before  you  pass  the  gateway  of  pearl.  A 
lull  comes  in  the  storm  ;  an  arbour  on  the  Hill  Difficulty  ;  a 
pause  in  the  march.  He  makes  his  sheep  to  lie  down  in 
pastures  of  tender  grass,  and  leads  them  beside  waters  of  rest. 
"  Oh,  magnify  the  Lord  with  me,  and  let  us  exalt  his  name 
together ! " 

We  must  tread  the  desert,  or  we  can  never  come  to  Elim. 
But  the  desert  lends  the  Elim  much  of  its  bliss.  The  Castle  of 
Doubting  makes  the  vision  from  the  Delectable  Mountains  so 
entrancing.  The  long  illness  makes  the  air  so  exquisite  in  the 
first-permitted  walk  or  drive.  The  long  winter  snows  paint  the 
fairest  colours  on  the  spring  flowers.  Do  not  stay  murmuring 
at  Marah  ;  press  on  !  our  Elim  is  within  sight.  Hope  thou  in 
God,  for  thou  shalt  yet  praise  Him. 

At  Marah  Moses  received  from  God  a  glad,  fresh  revelation, 
that  God  would  be  the  healer  of  his  people  in  their  wilderness 
march,  securing  them  from  the  diseases  of  Egypt.  Marvellous 
that  such  a  message  should  be  sent  at  such  a  time  !  But  the 
grace  of  God  is  not  restrained  by  human  sin  from  making  its 
glad  surprises.  And  Elim  was  the  vindication  of  the  promise. 
What  a  God  is  ours  !  He  overthrows  our  foes  in  the  sea,  and 
disciplines  his  people  in  the  desert.  He  leads  us  over  the 
burning  sand,  and  rests  us  in  luxuriant  glades.  He  permits  dis 
appointment  at  Marah,  and  surprises  us  at  Elim.  He  leads  us 
by  a  cloud  ;  but  He  speaks  to  us  by  a  human  voice.  He  counts 
the  number  of  the  stars  ;  but  He  feeds  his  flock  like  a  shepherd, 
and  gently  leads  those  that  give  suck.  He  chooses  a  thunder 
cloud  as  the  canvas  on  which  He  paints  his  promise  in  rainbow 
hues.  He  proves  by  Marah,  and  at  Elim  recruits  us. 


XIV. 
®Ij*  Ciift  of  JJtamta. 

"  When  the  dew  that  lay  was  gone  up,  behold,  upon  the  face  of  the 
wilderness  a  small  round  thing,  small  as  the  %  hoar  frost  on  the  ground. 
And  when  the  children  of  Israel  saw  it,  they  said  one  to  another.What  is 
it?  for  they  wist  not  what  it  was.  And  Moses  said  unto  them, It  is  the 
bread  which  the  Lord  hath  given  you  to  eat." 

EXOD.  xvL  14-16  (K.V.). 

E  may  encamp  at  Elim,  and  stay  for  long  happy  days  in 
its  green  bowers,  but  we  may  not  live  there  ;  at  least 
the  majority  may  not.  It  is  so  much  harder,  and 
needs  so  much  more  grace,  to  remain  devoted  and 
earnest,  to  retain  the  girt  loin  and  the  soldier-like  bear 
ing,  in  its  soft,  enervating  climate,  than  on  the  bare 
and  sterile  sand  of  the  desert,  with  its  rare  and  stimulating  air. 
Few  characters  are  able  to  reach  their  highest  and  noblest 
excellence  amid  the  genial  conditions  through  which  at  times 
each  life  is  permitted  to  pass.  Therefore  it  is  that,  though  the 
cloud  of  the  Divine  guidance  broods  at  Elim  long  enough  to 
recruit  us,  it  soon  gathers  up  its  folds,  and  commences  its 
majestic  progress  over  the  desert  expanse,  leaving  us  no  alterna 
tive  but  to  strike  our  tents  and  follow.  So  it  is  said  that  "  they 
took  their  journey  from  Elim  ;  and  all  the  congregation  of  the 
children  of  Israel  came  unto  the  wilderness  of  Sin,  which  is 
between  Elim  and  Sinai "  (ver.  i). 

Farewell  to  the  seventy  palm-trees  and  the  twelve  water- 
springs  !  Farewell  to  the  brief,  bright  hours  of  respite  from  the 
blinding  glare  of  the  desert  !  But  He  whose  nature  was 
mirrored  in  that  exquisite  beauty,  who  was  able  to  reproduce  any 
number  of  Elims  if  He  chose— He  could  never  be  left  behind, 
but  always  must  accompany  his  people. 

It  is  immaterial  whether  He  locates  us  amid  verdure  or  desert. 
He  is  responsible  to  make  up  from  his  own  resources  for  that 
which  is  lacking  in  outward  circumstance.  What  if  there  are  no 


(£{re  Desert  ^tuntrartttgs.  91, 

palm-trees  ?    The  shadow  of  the  Almighty  must  be  our  shelter 
from  the  sultry  heat. 

There  are  things  about  God,  and  his  ability  to  supply  all 
needs  of  the  soul  of  man,  which  could  not  be  learnt  in 
any  Elim,  with  all  its  beauty  ;  and  can  only  be  acquired  where 
its  bowers  are  exchanged  for  those  long  corridors  of  rock  which 
lead  to  the  foot  of  Sinai,  as  the  ancient  approaches  of  obelisks 
conducted  to  the  pillared  halls  of  Karnak.  The  eagle-wings  on 
which  God  bears  his  people  are  only  spread  beneath  them  when 
the  nest  is  broken  up  and  left.  The  supremacy  of  God  over  all 
natural  laws  is  only  learnt  when  they  are  seen  to  stand  before 
Him  as  the  angels  who  do  his  bidding,  hearkening  unto  the 
voice  of  his  word.  The  patient  tenderness  of  God,  the  mother- 
side  of  his  nature,  is  only  apparent  where  a  whole  host  breaks 
out  into  the  sobbings  of  a  querulous  child.  The  punctuality  of 
God  is  more  easily  discerned  in  the  spread  breakfast-table  of 
the  wilderness  than  in  the  procession  of  the  seasons  or  the 
march  of  worlds.  It  is  well,  then,  to  leave  Elim  ;  beyond  it  lie 
Sinai,  Pisgah,  and  Canaan. 

I.  THE  DESERT  MURMURINGS.— It  was  a  great  aggravation 
of  the  responsibilities  which  already  lay  heavily  on  the  heart  of 
Moses,  to  have  to  encounter  the  perpetual  murmurings  of  the 
people  whom  he  loved  so  well.  It  only  drove  him  continually 
ack  on  his  Almighty  Friend  and  Helper,  to  pour  into  his  most 
tender  and  sympathizing  ear  the  entire  tale  of  sorrow.  But  the 
repeated  outbreak  of  these  murmurings  all  along  the  wilderness 
route  only  sets  in  more  conspicuous  prominence  the  beauty  of 
his  gentle  meekness,  and  the  glory  of  his  faith,  which  probably 
was  the  one  channel  through  which  the  power  of  God  wrought 
for  the  salvation  and  blessing  of  his  people. 

The  race  of  rnurmurers  is,  alas  !  not  extinct.  Lips  which  have 
joined  in  singing  consecration  hymns,  sometimes  give  passage 
to  complaints.  And  we  are  none  of  us  so  careful  as  we  ought 
to  be  to  restrain  the  expression  of  discontent.  How  often  are 
murmurings  mingled  with  the  food  we  eat,  because  we  are  not 
exactly  pleased  with  its  quality  or  preparation;  with  the  weather, 
because  it  does  not  quite  fit  in  with  our  plans  ;  with  our  daily 
calling,  because  it  is  irksome  and  distasteful ;  and  with  the 
presence  or  absence  of  certain  persons  in  our  lives  ! 


96  ®Il£  <5ift  0f 

Murmurcrs  are  short  of  Memory.  It  was  only  one  short  month 
since  the  people  had  come  forth  out  of  Egypt — a  month  crowded 
with  the  wonders  which  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  had  wrought. 
The  chronicler  specially  notes  that  it  was  the  fifteenth  day  of  the 
second  month,  and  adds,  "The  whole  congregation  of  the  children 
of  Israel  murmured  against  Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  wilder 
ness  ;  and  the  children  of  Israel  said  unto  them,  Would  to  God 
we  had  died  by  the  hand  of  the  Lord  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  when 
\ve  sat  by  the  flesh-pots,  and  when  we  did  eat  bread  to  the  full ; 
for  ye  have  brought  us  forth  into  this  wilderness  to  kill  this 
whole  assembly  with  hunger  "  (verses  2  and  3). 

They  could  remember  very  well  the  sensual  delights  of  Egypt; 
but  they  forgot  the  lash  of  the  taskmaster,  and  the  anguish  of 
heart  with  which  they  wrought  at  the  kneading  of  the  clay. 
They  f6rgot  how  graciously  God  had  provided  for  their  needs, 
ever  since  they  had  stood  around  their  tables  to  eat  the  flesh  of 
the  paschal  lamb.  They  forgot  the  triumph-song,  which  re 
corded  their  undoubting  faith  that  God  would  bring  them  in 
and  plant  them  in  the  land  of  their  inheritance.  None  of  these 
things  availed  to  stay  the  torrent  of  their  murmuring  com 
plaint. 

Whenever  a  murmuring  fit  threatens,  let  us  review  the  past, 
and  recount  the  Lord's  dealings  with  us  in  bygone  years.  Did 
He  deliver  in  six  troubles,  and  is  He  likely  to  forsake  us  in  the 
seventh?  Has  He  ransomed  our  souls  from  the  power  of  the 
grave,  and  will  He  not  regard  the  body,  which  is  included  in 
the  purchase-money  ?  When  the  Psalmist  complained,  and  his 
spirit  was  overwhelmed,  he  tells  us  that  he  considered  the  days 
of  old,  the  years  of  ancient  times ;  he  called  to  remembrance  his 
song  in  the  night ;  he  remembered  the  years  of  the  right  hand 
of  the  Most  High.  "  I  will  remember  the  works  of  the  Lord  ; 
surely  I  will  remember  thy  wonders  of  old."  And  as  at  the 
summons  of  memory,  the  sea  of  the  past  gives  up  its  dead,  each 
risen  record  of  God's  goodness  will  condemn  the  murmur,  and 
rally  the  wavering  faith. 

Murmurers  are  short  of  Sight.  They  fail  to  see  that  behind 
all  the  appearances  of  things  there  lie  hid  the  Presence  and 
Providence  of  God.  Moses  called  the  attention  of  the  people 
to  this  fact,  which  enhanced  so  gravely  the  magnitude  of  their 
offence.  They  thought  that  they  were  only  venting  their  spleen 


"^ht  forfr  Ijearetlj."  97 

on  a  man  like  themselves.  Annoyed  and  apprehensive,  it  was 
some  relief  to  expend  their  spleen  on  the  one  man  to  whom 
they  owed  everything.  Ah !  how  vain  it  is  to  trust  the  populace, 
which  to-day  cries  Hosanna  ;  to-morrow,  Crucify !  But  their 
faithful  leader  showed  them  that  their  insults  were  directed  not 
against  himself,  but  against  Him  whose  servant  he  was,  and  at 
whose  bidding  everything  was  being  wrought.  "  The  Lord 
heareth  your  murmurings  which  ye  murmur  against  HIM  ;  and 
what  are  we  ?  Your  murmurings  are  not  against  us,  but  against 
the  Lord"  (ver.  8). 

It  becomes  us  to  ponder  well  those  words.  Some  of  God's 
children  are  more  willing  to  admit  a  general  providence  than 
a  special  particular  one.  But  the  former  involves  the  latter. 
The  whole  teaching  of  Jesus  compels  us  to  believe  in  a  care 
which  counts  the  hairs  of  our  heads.  The  very  necessities  of 
our  education  demand  a  Divine  superintendence  of  the  insig 
nificances  and  commonplaces  of  life.  God  must  be  in  all  things, 
ordaining  and  permitting  them.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to 
grumble,  without  the  sword  of  our  words  cutting  through  the 
gauze-like  drapery  of  what  we  see,  and  wounding  Him  whom 
circumstances  scarcely  avail  to  hide.  Grumblings,  murmurings, 
complaints,  these  are  directed  against  the  will  and  arrangement 
and  plan  of  God.  And  their  cure  is  to  accept  all  things  from 
his  hand,  to  acquiesce  in  his  wise  appointments,  and  to  believe 
that  He  is  securing  the  very  best  results. 

Murmurers  are  Short  of  Faith.  The  pressure  of  want  had 
begun  to  make  itself  felt  but  very  slightly,  if  at  all,  on  the  host. 
It  was  not  so  much  the  hardship  that  they  were  at  that  moment 
experiencing,  but  that  which  they  thought  to  be  imminent. 
Provisions  were  running  short  ;  supplies  were  becoming  ex 
hausted  ;  the  slender  store  refused  to  be  eked  out  beyond  a 
comparatively  short  period.  It  was  thus  that  they  came  to 
Moses  and  murmured. 

God  often  delays  his  help.  He  tarries  ere  He  comes,  long 
enough  to  bring  us  to  the  end  of  ourselves,  and  to  show  the 
futility  of  looking  for  creature  aid.  At  such  times  we  too  often 
evade  the  lesson  which  He  would  teach,  and  bemoan  our  hard 
lot,  though  it  is  only  a  suggestion  of  our  fearful  hearts.  From 
the  marshy  swamps  of  our  inner  life  arises  the  miasma  of 
unbelief,  in  the  folds  of  which  our  imagination  affects  to  descry 


98  ®rje  (Sift  of  gtanns. 

gaunt  and  fearful  objects ;  and  immediately  we  think  that  they 
have,  or  will  have,  a  real  existence,  we  fall  straightway  all 
along  on  the  earth,  and  are  sore  afraid,  as  Saul  before  the  ghost 
of  Samuel. 

Too  many  of  God's  children  despond  because  of  what  they 
dread,  and  break  out  into  murmurings  that  they  are  going  to  be 
killed  ;  when  if  they  were  to  stop  to  think  for  a  single  moment, 
they  would  see  that  God  is  pledged  by  the  most  solemn  obliga 
tions  to  provide  for  them.  Why  do  you  murmur?  It  is  because 
you  doubt.  Why  do  you  doubt  ?  It  is  because  you  will  look  out 
on  the  future,  or  consider  your  circumstances,  apart  from  God. 
But  when  the  eye  is  single  in  its  stedfast  gaze  towards  Him — 
his  love,  his  wisdom,  his  resources — faith  grows  strong,  reads 
his  love  in  his  eyes,  reckons  on  his  faithfulness,  and  realizes 
that  He  who  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  Him  up  for 
us  all,  will  with  Him  also  freely  give  us  all  things. 

How  different  to  this  murmuring  life  was  that  of  our  blessed 
Lord,  who  also  was  led  into  the  wilderness,  and  was  without 
food  for  forty  days !  But  He  did  not  complain  ;  no  word  of 
murmuring  passed  his  lips,  although  He  might  have  remon 
strated  with  the  Father  for  dealing  thus  with  one  who  had 
always  yielded  Him  a  prompt  and  glad  obedience.  And  even 
when  He  hungered,  and  the  devil  suggested  that  hunger  was 
not  becoming  to  the  newly-designated  Son  of  God,  He  meekly 
said  that  it  was  enough  for  Him  to  have  his  Father's  will.  He 
was  prepared  for  all  that  it  might  involve.  He  insisted  that  if 
God  withheld  bread,  He  would  sustain  the  body  He  had  made 
in  some  other  way.  The  Son  never  for  a  moment  questioned  his 
Father's  right  to  follow  any  line  of  procedure  He  chose,  and 
was  apparently  perfectly  satisfied.  He  had  learnt  the  secret  of 
how  to  be  full  and  to  be  hungry,  how  to  abound  and  to 
suffer  need.  He  did  not  live  by  bread  alone ;  but  by  every  word 
that  proceeded  out  of  the  mouth  of  God.  And  in  this  Divine 
patience  He  has  shown  how  murmuring  may  find  no  foothold, 
and  how  the  soul  may  be  braced  to  endure  hardship. 

II.  THE  WILDERNESS  FOOD. — It  is  not  for  us  to  tell  here  the 
whole  story  of  the  manna,  with  its  wealth  of  spiritual  refer 
ence  to  the  true  Bread,  which  is  Christ.  It  is  enough  to 
remember  : — 


bg  gag."  99 

To  look  up  for  our  supplies.  "He  gave  them  bread  from  heaven 
to  eat."  For  the  believer  there  are  five  sources  from  which  help 
may  come  ;  for  in  addition  to  the  four  quarters  of  the  winds  he 
looks  up  to  the  heavens.  There  came  from  heaven  the  sound  of 
the  rushing  of  a  mighty  wind.  Look  higher,  child  of  God,  to  the 
heart  and  hand  of  the  Father  ! 

To  feed  on  the  heavenly  bread  daily  .and  early.  "  They 
gathered  it  every  morning,  and  when  the  sun  waxed  hot  it 
melted."  There  is  no  time  like  the  early  morning  hour  for 
feeding  on  the  flesh  of  Christ  by  communion  with  Him,  and 
pondering  his  words.  Once  lose  that,  and  the  charm  is  broken 
by  the  intrusion  of  many  things,  though  it  may  be  they  are 
all  useful  and  necessary.  You  cannot  re-make  the  broken 
reflections  of  a  lake  swept  by  wind.  How  different  is  that  day 
from  all  others,  the  early  prime  of  which  is  surrendered  to  fellow 
ship  with  Christ  !  Nor  is  it  possible  to  live  to-day  on  the 
gathered  spoils  of  yesterday.  Each  man  needs  all  that  a  new 
day  can  yield  him  of  God's  grace  and  comfort.  It  must  be 
daily  bread. 

To  feed  on  Christ  is  the  only  secret  of  strength  and  blessedness. 
If  only  believers  in  Christ  would  realize  and  appropriate  the 
lesson  so  clearly  taught  in  this  narrative,  as  well  as  in  the 
wonderful  discourse  which  our  Lord  founded  upon  it  (John  vi. 
22-58),  they  would  find  themselves  the  subjects  of  a  marvellous 
change.  It  is  almost  incredible  how  great  a  difference  is 
wrought  by  the  prolonged  and  loving  study  of  what  the  Scrip 
tures  say  concerning  Him.  To  sit  down  to  enjoy  them;  to 
read  two  or  three  chapters,  an  epistle,  or  a  book,  at  a  sitting  ; 
to  let  the  heart  and  mind  steep  in  it ;  to  do  this  before  other 
intruders  have  noisily  entered  the  heart  and  distracted  its 
attention — ah,  how  this  transforms  us  ! 

We  close  this  chapter,  however,  by  calling  attention  to  the 
remarkable  expression  used  by  our  Lord,  when  He  said,  "  Moses 
gave  you  not  that  bread  from  heaven  "  (John  vi.  32) ;  intimating 
that  though  Moses  did  not  give  that  eternal  Bread  of  which  He 
was  speaking,  yet  he  did  give  some  sort  of  bread,  i.e.,  the 
manna  :  so  that  there  was  a  sense  in  which  the  faithful  servant 
procured  and  gave  daily  the  provision  on  which  his  people 
fed. 

We  are  not  unfamiliar,  in  these  days,  with  instances  in  which 


ioo  ®\jt  (gift  0f 

the  faith  of  one  man  avails  to  procure  the  daily  food  of  hundreds 
of  orphans  and  of  others.  God  gives  to  them  that  they  may 
give  to  those  with  whom  they  are  charged.  But  all  these  are 
dwarfed  before  the  stupendous  miracle  of  a  faith  that  was 
Capable  of  covering  the  desert  place  with  food  for  forty  years  ! 

No  one  who  reads  these  words  need  ever  hesitate  to  enter 
into  partnership  with  God  for  any  enterprise  to  which  the 
Almighty  may  summon  him.  The  only  thing  that  is  at  all 
necessary  is  to  be  quick  to  catch  the  faintest  expression  of  his 
will,  prompt  to  obey,  and  strong  to  persevere.  When  these 
conditions  are  fulfilled,  the  soul  walks  with  God  in  blessed  com 
panionship  ;  taking  pleasure  in  difficulty,  straitness,  famine,  and 
peril,  because  each  of  these  becomes  a  foil  for  the  display  of  the 
Divine  resources,  who  makes  even  mountains  a  way.  Such  an 
one  is  perfectly  indifferent  to  murmuring  or  applause,  to  censure 
or  praise ;  since  the  soul  is  engrossed  with  a  companionship 
which  is  perfect  bliss,  because  perfect  satisfaction. 

Let  us,  then,  unceasingly  make  our  boast  in  the  Lord,  as  we 
step  out  on  to  the  unknown  and  untried.  And  who  shall  lament 
the  beauty  of  Elim,  or  the  fleshpots  of  Egypt,  or  the  frugal 
meals  of  Jethro's  tent,  when  such  lessons  are  to  be  learnt  in  the 
society  of  our  eternal  Friend,  who  can  never  fail  those  who  dare 
to  trust  Him  ;  and  who  gives  to  the  uttermost  capacity  of  our 
faith,  that  we  may  in  turn  give  as  much  as  they  need  to  those 
poor  friends  of  ours,  who  knock  us  up  with  entreaties  for  help 
and  bread  (Luke  xi.  5-9). 


XV. 


"  And  there  was  no  water  for  the  people  to  drink.  And  the  Lord  said, 
Thou  shall  smite  the  rock,  and  there  shall  come  water  out  of  it.  And 
Moses  did  so. 

"  Then  came  Amalek  and  fought  with  Israel  in  Rephidim.    .     .    .    And 
Moses'  hands  were  steady  until  the  going  down  of  the  sun.    .    .    .     And 
Moses  built  an  altar  and  called  the  name  of  it  JEHOVAH-NISSI— 
The  Lord  my  banner."  —  EXOD.  xvii.  1-15. 

F  you  essay  to  lead  men,  you  will  sooner  or  later  come 
to  a  Rephidim.  We  are  distinctly  told  that  it  was 
according  to  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  that  the 
children  of  Israel  journeyed  "by  stages  "  (ver.  i,  R.V., 
marg.}  from  the  wilderness  of  Sin,  and  pitched  in 
Rephidim.  The  character  of  the  worker  is  as  dear  to 
God  as  the  work  he  is  doing  ;  and  no  pains  must  be  spared  by 
the  Divine  Artificer  to  complete  the  design  to  which  He  has  set 
his  hand.  Do  not  be  surprised  then,  Christian  worker,  if  you 
find  yourself  landed  in  Rephidim.  There  are  lessons  to  be 
learnt  there  of  incalculable  worth. 

Geographers  and  historians  have  found  it  difficult  to  fix  on  its 
precise  locality  ;  but  the  site  is  immaterial.  It  lay,  no  doubt, 
somewhere  along  that  coast  in  one  of  the  Wadys  that  lead  up 
into  the  heart  of  the  mountains  of  the  central  table-land.  But 
the  experiences  of  which  that  place  was  the  scene  are  common 
to  all  lives,  ages,  and  lands. 

I.  THERE  WE  LEARN  THE  LIMIT  OF  OUR  ABILITY.—  Few  of 
us  can  stand  great  or  long-continued  success.  It  is  compara 
tively  easy  to  walk  in  the  Valley  of  Humiliation,  when  our  path 
is  hidden  and  the  faces  of  men  are  averted  ;  but  to  stand  on  the 
height,  with  none  to  rival,  with  nothing  left  to  scale,  the  wonder 
and  the  envy  of  a  host  —  ah  !  this  is  a  task  in  which  the  brain 
reels,  the  step  falters,  and  the  heart  gets  proud.  It  is  easier  to 


know  how  to  be  abased  than  how  to  abound,  how  to  be  empty 
than  how  to  be  full.  We  are  so  apt  to  repeat  the  folly  of  Heze- 
kiah  in  showing  his  treasures  to  the  ambassadors  of  Babylon  ; 
and  to  utter  the  mad  vaunt  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  "  Is  not  this 
great  Babylon  which  /  have  built,  by  the  might  of  my  power, 
and  for  the  glory  of  my  majesty  !  " 

But  whenever  this  happens,  directly  the  heart  of  man  is 
inflated  with  pride,  and  lifts  itself  up  in  self-confidence,  there  is 
an  end  to  its  usefulness.  God  will  not  give  his  glory  to  another. 
He  will  not  permit  his  power  to  be  employed  for  the  inflation  of 
human  pride,  or  to  minister  to  the  exaltation  of  the  flesh.  It 
is  his  solemn  decree  that  no  flesh  shall  glory  in  his  presence. 
"  Shall  the  axe  boast  itself  against  him  that  heweth  therewith  ? 
shall  the  saw  magnify  itself  against  him  that  shaketh  it  ?  as  if  the 
rod  should  shake  itself  against  them  that  lift  it  up"  (Isa.  x.  15). 

This  is  why  so  many  of  God's  servants,  who  once  did  yeoman 
service,  are  laid  aside.  They  were  marvellously  helped  till 
they  were  strong ;  but  when  they  were  strong,  their  hearts 
were  lifted  up  to  their  destruction.  They  still  preach  the  old 
sermons  that  once  pealed  like  the  archangel's  trumpet,  or  thrilled 
with  the  wail  of  Calvary's  broken  heart ;  but  there  is  no  stir  or 
shaking  among  the  dry  bones  that  strew  the  valley  of  vision. 
They  utter  the  old  exorcisms  ;  but  the  demons  laugh  at  them 
from  behind  their  ramparts,  and  refuse  to  go  forth.  They  know 
that  the  Lord  has  departed  from  them,  and  that  it  is  not  with 
them  as  in  the  days  that  are  past.  If  such  would  only  consider 
and  search  their  hearts,  they  would  find  that  they  had  com 
menced  to  trust  in  the  momentum  of  past  success  ;  and  to  think 
that  somehow  the  draught  of  fishes  was  due  to  their  own  fisher- 
experience,  instead  of  being  the  direct  gift  of  One  who  often 
traverses  all  the  rules  of  art  by  a  Divine  knowledge  and 
power. 

We  can  easily  suppose  that  Moses  was  in  danger  of  a  similar 
fall.  For  the  last  few  months  his  career  had  been  an  uninter 
rupted  line  of  success.  He  had  brought  the  proudest  monarch 
of  his  time  to  his  knees  with  the  cry  of  a  suppliant.  He  had 
become  very  great  in  the  eyes  of  priesthood  and  court.  He  had 
led  the  greatest  Exodus  the  world  had  seen  or  would  see.  The 
parted  ocean,  the  submerged  host,  the  song  of  victory,  the  fall 
of  the  manna,  the  evidence  of  his  statesmanship  and  sagacity  as 


"|£ct  Ijim  that  glorietlj  glory  in  tije  ft'orft."    103 

a  born  leader  of  men— all  combined  to  place  him  in  an  unparal 
leled  position  of  authority  and  glory.  As  the  triumphal  ode  puts 
it,  "  He  was  king  in  Jeshurun,  when  the  heads  of  the  people 
were  gathered  "  (Deut.  xxxiii.  5). 

Was  there  no  temptation  in  all  this  ?  Men  warn  others  against 
temptations  on  which  they  have  been  at  the  point  of  sliding  to 
their  fall ;  and  may  it  not  have  been  from  his  own  experience 
that  Moses  derived  the  caution  given  to  the  people,  "  Beware 
that  thou  forget  not  the  Lord  thy  God... lest  when  all  that  thou 
hast  is  multiplied,  thine  heart  be  lifted  up,  and  thou  forget  the 
Lprd  thy  God... and  thou  say  in  thine  heart,  My  power  and 
the  might  of  mine  hand  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth" 
(Deut.  viii.  11-17). 

Great  and  good  men  are  not  proof  against  these  attacks  of 
pride  and  vainglory.  We  are  none  of  us  free  from  the  tendency 
to  sacrifice  to  our  net,  and  burn  incense  to  our  drag,  because  by 
them  our  portion  is  fat,  and  our  meat  plenteous.  It  was  for  this 
reason  that  Paul  gloried  in  his  infirmities  ;  finding  in  them 
perpetual  reminders  of  his  weakness,  which  kept  him  low  enough 
for  God  to  choose  him  as  the  platform  for  the  putting  forth  of 
his  might. 

It  was  probable,  therefore,  that  God  brought  Moses  to  Rephi- 
dim  to  counteract  and  check  all  uprisings  of  self-sufficiency  ;  to 
bring  him  down  to  the  dust  of  abject  helplessness  ;  to  teach  him 
the  narrow  limits  of  his  resources  and  ability.  Lo,  all  these 
things  doth  God  work,  "  That  He  may  withdraw  man  from  his 
purpose,  and  hide  pride  from  man"  (Job  xxxiii.  17). 

Whatever  Moses  may  have  begun  to  think,  all  self-confidence 
must  have  vanished  like  a  wreath  of  mist  among  the  hills  when 
he  found  himself  face  to  face  with  that  infuriated  mob ; 
who  broke  through  every  barrier  erected  by  gratitude,  or 
patriotism,  or  self-respect,  or  memory  of  past  deliverances,  and 
with  violence  demanded  water.  "  The  people  did  chide  with 
Moses,  and  said,  Give  us  water  that  we  may  drink... And  the 
people  murmured  against  Moses,  and  said,  Wherefore  hast 
thou  brought  us  up  out  of  Egypt,  to  kill  us  and  our  children 
and  our  cattle  with  thirst  ?  "  (Exod.  xvii.  2,  3).  And  such  was 
their  irritation  that  they  seemed  ready  to  stone  him. 

Was  this  the  way  that  they  repaid  his  unstinted  service  for 
them  ?  Did  they  not  care  for  him  more  than  this?  Ah,  he  was 


I04 

not  king  of  their  hearts,  as  he  had  thought  and  hoped  !  And  as 
for  water,  whence  could  he  procure  it  ?  No  wisdom  or  power 
of  his  could  help  in  such  a  strait.  Nothing  that  he  could 
suggest  would  meet  the  case.  He  was  absolutely  at  the  end 
of  himself ;  and  "  he  cried  unto  the  Lord,  saying,  What  shall 
I  do  ? " 

It  is  a  blessed  position  to  which  the  providence  of  God 
reduces  us  when  we  find  ourselves  face  to  face  with  an  over 
mastering  necessity.  Were  it  a  brook,  we  might  ford  it ;  but 
here  is  a  river !  Were  it  the  thirst  of  a  little  child,  we  might 
quench  it ;  but  here  are  two  millions  of  thirsty  souls  !  Were  it 
for  the  water  of  earth's  wells,  we  might  begin  to  build  aqueducts 
from  the  lakes  that  lie  in  the  bosom  of  the  hills  ;  but  here  is 
thirst  for  the  living  water,  which  issues  from  the  throne  of  God 
and  the  Lamb !  Then  we  learn  the  limit  of  our  sufficiency. 
We  cry,  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things?  And  we  confess 
that  we  are  not  sufficient  of  ourselves,  to  account  anything  as 
from  ourselves  ;  but  our  sufficiency  is  from  God.  We  cannot 
make  a  revival  ;  or  save  a  soul ;  or  convince  a  heart  of  sin,  or 
break  it  down  in  contrition  ;  we  cannot  comfort,  or  counsel,  or 
satisfy  the  parching  thirst.  And  when  we  have  reached  the  end 
of  self,  we  have  got  to  the  beginning  of  God.  It  is  from  the  low 
threshold  of  the  door  that  the  life-giving  stream  gushes  on  its 
heaven-sent  way. 

II.  THERE  WE  LEARN  MUCH  ABOUT  GOD.— This  always 
follows  the  other  lesson.  We  are  brought  to  know  ourselves 
that  we  may  be  prepared  to  know  God.  The  Master  always 
says,  "  Whence  are  we  to  buy  bread,  that  these  may  eat  ?  how 
many  loaves  have  ye?"  not  because  He  needs  the  information  ; 
but  because  He  desires  to  bring  his  workers  face  to  face  with 
the  utter  inadequacy  of  their  supply,  and  to  prepare  them  better 
to  appreciate  the  greatness  of  his  power.  But  that  question, 
eliciting  the  fewness  of  the  loaves,  is  invariably  followed  by  the 
demand,  "  Bring  them  hither  to  Me";  and  by  the  heaps  of  broken 
victuals,  evidence  of  the  abundance  of  the  supply.  So  at 
Rephidim  the  need  which  abases  us  and  drives  us  to  God, 
reveals  God. 

We  learn  his  patience.  Not  a  word  of  reproach  or  remon 
strance  breaks  upon  the  still  desert  air.  If  the  people  had  been 


44  Jear  not !  "  105 

exemplary  in  their  humble  trust,  they  could  not  have  met  with 
more  tender  willingness  to  supply  their  need.  The  people,  and 
perhaps  Levi  especially,  proved  Him  at  Massah,  and  strove  with 
Him  at  the  waters  of  Meribah,  asking  whether  the  Lord  were 
among  them  or  not,  though  the  cloud  brooded  overhead,  and  the 
manna  lay  each  morning  around  the  camp  :  yet  there  was  no 
word  of  rebuke,  only  directions  for  the  immediate  supply  of  their 
need.  It  is  only  at  Rephidim  that  we  learn  his  patience  towards 
ourselves  and  towards  others  ;  because  He  will  ever  be  mindful 
of  his  covenant.  "  His  mercy  endureth  for  ever." 

We  learn  the  reality  of  his  spiritual  presence.  "  I  will  stand 
before  thee  upon  the  rock  in  Horeb"  (ver.  6).  The  people  had 
just  threatened  to  stone  Moses  ;  but  God,  in  effect,  bade  him  not 
to  fear.  It  was  as  if  He  said,  "Fear  not,  I  am  with  thee  ;  be 
not  dismayed,  I  am  thy  God  :  none  shall  set  on  thee  to  hurt  thee, 
for  I  am  with  thee  to  deliver  thee.  Pass  on  before  them,  thou 
shalt  take  no  harm  ;  and  this  shall  be  a  sign  that  I  am  actually 
there  upon  the  rock,  it  shall  gush  with  watersprings."  Never 
before  had  God  been  more  real  to  his  servant  than  he  was  that 
day,  when  He  rose  up  as  a  rampart  to  protect  him  from  the 
infuriated  crowd  with  their  threatening  stones.  It  is  when  men 
turn  against  us  most,  that  the  Lord  stands  beside,  as  He  did  to 
Paul,  and  says,  Fear  not  ! 

We  learn  God's  secret  storehouses.  "Thou  shalt  smite  the 
rock,  and  there  shall  come  water  ou;  of  it."  This  is  strange  ! 
A  rock  would  seem  the  last  place  to  choose  for  the  storage  of 
water.  But  God's  cupboards  are  in  very  unlikely  places.  Ravens 
bring  food.  The  Prime  Minister  of  Egypt  gives  corn.  Cyrus 
lets  go  the  people  of  Israel  from  Babylon.  The  Jordan  heals 
the  leper.  Meal  makes  poisoned  pottage  wholesome.  Wood 
makes  iron  swim.  A  Samaritan  binds  up  the  wounds  and 
saves  the  life  of  the  pillaged  traveller.  Joseph  of  Arimathaea 
buries  the  sacred  body  in  his  own  new  tomb.  It  is  worth  while 
to  go  to  Rephidim  to  get  an  insight  into  the  fertility  and 
inventiveness  of  God's  providence.  There  can  be  no  lack  to 
them  that  fear  Him,  and  no  fear  of  lack  to  those  who  have 
become  acquainted  with  his  secret  storehouses.  "  Eye  hath  not 
seen,  nor  ear  heard. ..the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for 
them  that  love  him  ;  but  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by 
his  Spirit"  (l  Cor.  ii.  9,  10). 


106 

That  smitten  rock  was  a  type  of  Christ.  A  Rock,  indeed  !— 
stable  amid  upheaval,  permanent  amid  change.  A  smitten 
Rock  !  Reproach  broke  his  heart,  and  the  soldier's  spear  set 
abroach  the  blood  and  water,  which  have  issued  to  heal  the 
nations  and  quench  their  thirst.  "They  drank  of  that  spiritual 
Rock  that  followed  them,  and  that  Rock  was  Christ."  There  is 
no  water  that  will  so  satisfy  thirst  as  this  crystal  Rock-water. 
"  Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me." 

III.  THERE  WE  LEARN  THE  POWER  OF  PRAYER.— The  tribe 
of  Amalek  was  probably  descended  from  Esau  ;  and,  like  him, 
was  wild  and  fierce  and  warlike.  Were  they  likely  tamely  to 
submit  to  the  intrusion  of  a  new  people  into  their  pasture-lands 
and  fastnesses,  which  they  had  succeeded  in  holding  against 
Egypt  ?  It  was  impossible  ;  and  so,  according  to  Josephus,  this 
powerful  tribe  gathered  to  this  spot  all  the  forces  of  the  desert, 
from  Petra  to  the  Mediterranean  ;  and  "  they  smote  the  hind 
most  of  the  Israelites,  even  all  that  were  feeble  among  them, 
when  they  were  faint  and  weary." 

If  Egypt  represents  the  power  of  darkness,  Amalek  is  a  type 
of  the  flesh  ;  which,  though  thoroughly  defeated  and  broken,  is 
always  apt  to  crop  up  in  moments  of  weakness  and  unwatchful- 
ness.  Far  down  the  history  of  Israel,  Haman,  the  Amalekite, 
had  nearly  compassed  the  annihilation  of  the  whole  people.  It 
is  in  keeping  with  this  typology  that  Saul  was  commissioned 
utterly  to  destroy  the  Amalekites  ;  and  that  Jehovah  solemnly 
pledged  Himself  to  have  war  with  Amalek  from  generation  to 
generation. 

Moses,  now  eighty-one  years  old,  shrank  from  the  brunt  of  the 
battle.  He  entrusted  the  troops  to  Joshua,  here  first  brought 
into  prominence,  whilst  he  climbed  the  hill,  with  the  sacred  rod 
in  his  hand.  Thence  he  surveyed  the  battle,  and  stretched  out 
his  hands  in  prayer — fought  with  unseen  combatants  the  livelong 
day,  and  won  the  victory  by  intercessions,  of  which  those  steady 
arms  were  the  symbol.  It  is  a  most  beautiful  picture.  Three 
old  men  in  prayer.  Two  staying  up  the  third  ! 

In  Rephidim  we  learn  the  lesson  that  prayer  will  do  what 
else  were  impossible.  In  earlier  days  Moses  would  never  have 
thought  of  winning  a  battle  save  by  fighting.  He  now  learns 
that  he  can  win  it  by  praying.  Probably  Paul,  too,  learnt  that 


dire  Secret  nf  j^ttcress.  107 

lesson  in  his  long  and  wearisome  imprisonments.  How  they 
must  at  first  have  chafed  his  eager  spirit ;  accustomed  as  he 
was  to  gird  himself,  and  go  whither  he  would.  He  may  have 
even  been  tempted  to  feel  that  all  his  power  to  affect  the  destiny 
of  the  Church  was  at  an  end ;  when  he  suddenly  discovered  a 
leverage  by  which  he  was  able  to  secure  greater  results  than 
ever ;  and  henceforth  each  epistle  contains  a  reference  to  his 
prayers.  Remember  his  recurring  phrase,  "  I  never  cease  to 
make  mention  of  you  in  my  prayers." 

We  cannot  compare  ourselves  with  either  of  these,  save  as 
Lilliputians  might  with  a  Gulliver ;  and  yet  we  may,  at  least, 
emulate  them  in  their  intercessions.  According  to  the  prayers 
of  a  church  are  the  successes  of  a  church.  Are  they  maintained, 
the  banner  floats  on  to  victory  :  are  they  languid  and  depressed, 
the  foe  achieves  a  transient  success.  Let  us,  then,  learn  to  pray, 
filling  our  Rephidims  with  strong  crying  and  tears,  obtaining  by 
faith  for  ourselves  and  others  victories  which  no  prowess  of  our 
own  could  win.  These  shall  encourage  us  like  nothing  beside, 
filling  our  heart  with  joy,  our  lips  with  songs,  and  our  hands 
with  the  spoil  of  the  foe.  What  deliverances  might  we  win  for 
our  dear  ones,  and  all  others  who  are  strongly  molested  by  the 
flesh,  if  only  we  were  more  often  found  on  the  top  of  the  hill 
with  the  uplifted  rod  of  prayer  in  our  steadied  hands  !  Let 
then  the  Christ  who  is  in  thee,  plead  through  thee  for  his  Peters, 
that  their  faith  may  not  fail ;  but  that  they  may  be  saved  as  birds 
from  the  snare  of  the  fowler. 


XVI. 


"Be  thou  for  the  people  God-ward,  that  Ihou  mayest  bring  the 
causes  unto  God. " — ExOD.  xviii.  19. 

HEN  the  Israelite  host  had  left  Rephidim,  they  began 
to  climb  up  from  the  coast  of  the  Red  Sea  into  the 
heart  of  the  mountain  range  of  Sinai.  Their  route 
has  been  compared  to  a  stair  of  rock.  Before  them, 
through  the  pure  air,  floated  the  majestic  cloud,  leading 
them  they  knew  not  whither.  They  only  knew  that 
they  had  no  option  but  to  follow,  since  their  supply  of  manna 
and  water  depended  on  absolute  obedience  to  its  movement. 
On  either  side  rose  the  cliffs  of  red  sandstone,  like  the  walls  of 
some  mighty  temple,  to  the  Holy  of  Holies  of  which  they  were 
ever  approaching.  It  was  apparently  on  the  route  that  the 
incident  reported  in  this  chapter  took  place.  For  the  words, 
"at  the  mount  of  God,"  probably  refer  to  the  entire  region. 

Tidings  in  the  desert  fly  fast ;  and  the  aged  priest,  in  the  fast 
nesses  of  Midian,  had  been  kept  fully  informed  of  the  wonderful 
series  of  events  of  which  his  relative  had  been  the  centre. 
When,  therefore,  tidings  came  of  the  arrival  of  the  vast  host  in 
the  vicinity  of  Sinai,  he  took  Zipporah,  Moses'  wife,  and  her 
two  sons,  who  had  been  entrusted  to  his  care,  and  brought  them 
unto  Moses.  After  the  customary  profuse  Oriental  salutations, 
they  spoke  long  and  admiringly  of  the  way  in  which  the  Lord 
had  led  his  people.  And  the  day  closed  with  a  solemn  feast 
and  sacrifice.  The  morrow  seems  to  have  been  a  rest  day. 
The  cloud  did  not  move  forward,  but  remained  stationary  ;  as  if 
moored  by  an  invisible  cable,  and  spreading  itself  out  as  a 
refreshing  canopy  from  the  burning  heat  of  the  sun.  And  on 
that  day  an  incident  took  place  which  was  destined  to  have 
important  issues  on  the  history  of  the  great  leader  as  well  as  of 
the  people  whom  he  led.  "  It  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow  that 


Mork  109 

Moses  sat  to  judge  the  people  ;  and  the  people  stood  by  Moses 
from  the  morning  unto  the  evening"  (ver.  13). 

Moses'  Habitual  Practice. — We  get  a  sudden  glimpse  here 
into  the  kind  of  life  which  Moses  at  this  time  was  leading. 
When  the  host  encamped,  and  there  was  a  day  at  liberty  from 
the  weariness  of  the  march,  he  seems  to  have  sat  on  a  judgment- 
seat,  to  which  all  the  people  came  who  had  any  disputes,  or 
grievances,  or  matters  about  which  they  desired  to  obtain  advice 
and  Divine  counsel.  Despite  all  their  murmurings  they  looked 
upon  him  as  the  organ  for  the  voice  of  God,  and  sought  from  his 
lips  an  authoritative  declaration  of  the  Divine  will.  To  use  his 
own  words,  when  the  people  had  a  matter,  they  came  unto  him  to 
inquire  of  God  ;  and  he  made  them  know  the  statutes  of  God  and 
his  laws. 

It  was  a  Divine  work,  sufficient  to  engross  his  noblest  powers, 
and  to  tax  resources  which  had  been  stored  up  within  him 
through  long  years  of  waiting ;  for  what  is  higher  in  all  this 
world  than  to  serve  as  the  interpreter  of  whom  Job  speaks, 
"  One  among  a  thousand,  to  show  unto  man  what  is  right  for 
him?"  (Job  xxxiii.  23,  R.v.)  To  hear  the  difficulties,  perplexi 
ties,  and  hard  questions  of  the  anxious  and  troubled  ;  to  inquire 
for  them  to  God  ;  to  bring  their  causes  to  his  bar  for  judgment, 
and  to  his  mercy-seat  for  help  :  to  come  back  to  them  to  teach 
them,  to  show  them  the  way  in  which  they  should  walk,  and  the 
work  they  should  do — this  is  employment  which  were  worthy  of 
the  delicacy  and  strength  of  an  angel's  love,  and  most  nearly 
approaches  the  ministry  of  the  Redeemer.  This  blessed  work 
of  mediatorship  was  not  borne  by  Moses  as  a  Priest,  for  as  yet 
the  Priesthood  was  not  constituted  ;  but  as  a  large-hearted,  noble 
man,  who  was  at  leisure  from  himself,  and  had  the  ear  of  God. 
He  was  "for  the  people  to  God-ward."  And  it  opens  up  a 
very  interesting  vista  of  service  for  us  all,  especially  for  those 
who  are  intimate  with  the  King,  and  habituated  to  the  royal 
Court.  Why  should  we  not  enter  more  largely  into  participation 
with  Moses  in  this  delightful  service,  which  is  open  to  those  who 
are  slow  of  speech  equally  as  to  those  who  are  golden-mouthed ; 
and  affords  opportunities  for  the  very  powers  which  most  shrink 
from  the  glare  of  publicity  and  the  gaze  of  men  ? 

We  can  imagine  him  going  to  God  each  day  with  long  lists  of 
questions  for  one  and  another  of  the  mighty  host.  This  and  the 


no  CljE  (BciJ-hiartr 

other  cause  he  laid  before  Him  for  counsel,  quoting  names  and 
circumstances,  arguments  and  reasons  on  either  side,  and 
waiting  for  the  message  which  he  was  to  carry  back.  What 
variety  !  What  directness  !  What  reality  must  have  pervaded 
his  prayers  !  How  vividly  must  he  have  realized  that  he  was, 
indeed,  in  partnership  with  the  Most  High,  a  fellow-worker  and 
yoke-fellow  ;  and  that  they  had  a  common  interest  in  the  people 
whom  they  loved  !  Why  should  not  we  also  begin  to  live  such  a 
life  ?  The  voice  that  spake  to  him  speaks  to  us,  "  Be  thou  for 
the  people  to  God-ward,  that  thou  mayest  bring  the  causes 
unto  God"  (ver.  19).  And  the  gates  through  which  he  passed 
and  repassed  stand  open  day  and  night. 

We  often  wonder  at  Luther,  who  spent  three  hours  each  day 
in  prayer  and  meditation  ;  at  Bishop  Andrewes,  spending  the 
greater  part  of  five  hours  every  day  in  fellowship  with  God  ;  at 
John  Welsh,  who  thought  that  day  ill  spent  which  did  not 
witness  eight  or  ten  hours  of  closet  communion.  It  seems  to  us 
as  if  such  prolonged  praying  must  involve  an  endless  monotony 
of  vain  repetitions.  We  forget  that  when  men  are  sent  to  market 
with  a  host  of  commissions  from  their  neighbours  and  friends, 
they  must  needs  tarry  longer  than  when  they  go  only  for  them 
selves.  It  would  be  a  very  wholesome  thing  if  the  causes  of 
others  were  to  detain  us  more  constantly  before  the  Lord. 

This  "being  for  the  people  to  God-ward"  became  more  and 
more  characteristic  of  the  life  of  Moses.  Whenever  the  people 
cried  unto  him,  he  prayed  unto  the  Lord.  When  the  spirit  of 
revolt  spread  through  the  camp,  he  fell  upon  his  face.  When  it 
seemed  likely  that  the  whole  nation  must  perish  for  their  sin,  he 
stood  in  the  breach,  and  besought  the  Lord,  and  turned  away 
the  destruction  that  hung  over  them  like  a  lurid  cloud.  Twice 
for  forty  days  their  interests  detained  him  in  the  holy  mount. 
And  in  long  after  years  he  is  classed  with  Samuel  as  one  who 
had  stood  before  God  for  his  people. 

What  a  striking  type  is  this  of  our  Lord  Jesus,  though  at  the 
best  there  is  a  marvellous  gulf  between  the  two.  For  Moses 
was  faithful  over  God's  household  as  a  servant ;  but  Christ  as  a 
Son,  whose  house  are  we.  All  that  Moses  did  He  will  do,  and 
more.  When  we  have  a  matter,  let  us  go  to  Him.  He  is  for  us 
to  God- ward,  and  will  bring  our  causes  to  God.  Through  Him 
we  may  inquire  of  God ;  and  he  will  make  us  know  (for  the 


responsibility  of  making  us  know  is  on  Him,  and  if  one  way  will 
not  suffice  we  may  trust  Him  to  adopt  another)  the  statutes  of 
God  and  his  laws ;  and  will  show  us  the  way  in  which  we  should 
walk,  and  the  work  that  we  must  do. 

The  Tax  on  Moses'  Strength. — Work  like  this  cannot  be 
done  without  severe  expenditure  of  all  that  is  most  vital  to 
man.  It  drains  the  sympathies,  taxes  the  brain,  wearies  the 
heart  charged  with  the  anxieties  and  sorrows,  the  burdens  and 
needs  of  a  throng  of  perplexed  and  troubled  souls.  You  cannot 
save  others  and  save  yourself  as  well.  Virtue  cannot  go  forth 
to  heal  without  your  becoming  conscious  of  the  drain.  You 
can  only  comfort  others  when  you  understand  them  ;  and  you 
cannot  understand  them  till  you  have  given  yourself  away  to 
them.  But  the  effort  to  do  this  costs  you  all  that  you  are  worth 
to  some  other  soul.  And  it  therefore  became  apparent  to  the 
keen  eye  of  Jethro's  loving  solicitude  that  both  Moses  and  the 
people  were  being  worn  away  in  his  attempt  to  meet  all  their 
demands. 

In  after  years  Moses  himself  seems  to  have  broken  down 
under  the  burden.  "  And  Moses  said  unto  the  Lord,  Wherefore 
hast  Thou  afflicted  thy  servant  ?  and  wherefore  have  I  not 
found  favour  in  thy  sight,  that  Thou  layest  the  burden  of  all 
this  people  upon  me  ?  Have  I  conceived  all  this  people  ?  Have 
I  begotten  them,  that  Thou  shouldst  say  unto  me,  Carry  them  in 
thy  bosom,  as  a  nursing  father  beareth  the  sucking  child,  unto 
the  land  which  Thou  swarest  unto  their  fathers?"  (Num.  xi.  1 1,  12.) 
Moses  did  not  feel  that  strain  now  when  Jethro  spoke,  for  it 
was  as  yet  fresh  on  him  :  but  it  was,  nevertheless,  sapping  his 
strength,  and  Jethro  remarked  it. 

We  do  not  always  see  the  cost  at  which  we  are  doing  our 
work.  We  are  sustained  by  the  excitement  and  interest  of  it, 
The  stir,  the  rush,  the  cry  of  the  combatants,  the  chances 
and  opportunities  of  the  battle,  the  alluring  form  of  victory,  to 
be  won  at  the  price  of  just  one  more  effort — all  these  things 
conceal  from  us  the  expenditure  of  our  reserves,  which  is  patent 
enough  to  others.  Some  men  get  weary  of  forbearing  ;  they 
cannot  live  slowly  ;  they  must  expend  themselves,  pouring  their 
lives  out  as  a  libation  from  a  bowl.  And  it  is  an  act  of  benevo 
lence  when  some  Jethro  is  prompted  to  interpose  and  suggest  a 
mitigation  of  the  fever,  a  slackening  of  the  eager  rush.  The 
H 


ii2  Clje  (J3ctt-foar&  Aspect, 

Jethros  seldom  prevail  with  us.  They  get  scant  thanks  for  their 
pains.  We  have  to  learn  by  some  terrible  collapse.  But  they 
have,  at  least,  deserved  well  by  us. 

From  man,  breaking  down  under  the  weight  of  human  care 
imposed  on  his  heart  by  his  fellows,  let  us  turn  to  the  true  Priest 
and  Brother  of  Man  ;  into  whose  ear  is  being  poured  one  inces 
sant  stream  of  complaint  and  sorrow,  of  care  and  need,  and  sin. 
It  is  as  if  all  the  letters,  deposited  in  all  the  receiving  boxes  of 
England  year  by  year,  were  directed  to  one  man,  who  must  open 
and  answer  them  all  himself.  But  even  that  illustration  gives 
an  utterly  inadequate  idea  of  all  that  devolves  on  our  dear 
Master,  Christ,  whose  heart  is  the  receptacle  of  all  the  anguish, 
sorrow,  and  soul-travail  of  mankind. 

Moses'  patience  lasted  for  a  few  months  only  ;  but  His  till  the 
work  is  done  (Deut.  i.  31  ;  Isa.  Ixiii.  9  ;  Acts  xiii.  18,  R.V.). 
He  faints  not,  neither  is  weary  ;  because  He  combines  with  a 
woman's  sympathy  and  delicacy  of  touch  and  insight,  all  the 
patience  and  strength  of  the  Divine.  But  do  we  sufficiently 
realize  the  cost  at  which,  through  the  ages,  He  is  exercising  his 
ministry  on  our  behalf?  Think  ye  not  that  the  festal  processions 
of  the  glorified  often  halt  upon  their  way,  like  that  which  stayed 
on  the  shoulder  of  Olivet,  because  the  king  is  in  tears  !  He  is 
"touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities." 

Moses'  Assent  to  Jethrds  Proposal. — It  cannot  be  God's 
will  that  any  of  his  servants  should  wear  away.  He  knows  our 
frame  too  well  to  overtax  its  frail  machinery.  No  hard  task 
master  is  He,  driving  his  slaves  beyond  the  limit  of  human 
endurance.  The  burden  of  responsibility  which  He  lays  upon 
their  shoulders  may  be  heavy  ;  but  it  is  not  too  heavy.  The 
engagements  which  He  assigns  for  each  day  may  be  many  ;  but 
not  too  many  for  its  working  hours.  The  souls  committed  to 
their  charge  may  be  numbered  by  thousands  ;  but  they  are  not 
more  than  can  be  overlooked  and  shepherded.  The  bell  never 
summons  a  servant  to  a  duty  concerning  which  God  does  not 
say  to  him,  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  ;  as  thy  day  so  shall 
thy  strength  be. 

Sometimes  God's  workers  make  the  mistake  of  burdening 
themselves  with  work  which  others  could  do  as  well  as  them 
selves,  and,  indeed,  would  be  the  better  for  doing.  This  seems 
to  have  been  the  case  with  Moses.  He  appeared  to  think  that 


Jl  Wttise  fJoltcir.  113 

he  alone  could  judge,  manage,  and  administer  the  affairs  of 
Israel.  And  this  monopoly  of  the  administration  was  working 
adversely.  It  was  overtaxing  himself ;  it  was  wearing  out  the 
people  ;  it  was  delaying  the  course  of  justice  ;  and  it  was  allowing 
a  large  amount  of  talent  to  lie  unused.  Jethro's  advice  was 
therefore  most  timely,  that  he  should  provide  out  of  all  the 
people  able  men,  with  the  three  important  qualifications,  that 
they  should  fear  God,  love  truth,  and  hate  unjust  gain.  These 
were  to  deal  with  the  small  matters,  whilst  the  greater  ones  were 
still  brought  to  himself. 

Moses  has  been  blamed  for  doing  this.  It  has  been  said  that 
if  he  had  trusted  God,  the  power  which  was  now  to  be  divided 
among  many  might  have  been  concentrated  on  himself ;  so  that 
he  might  have  continued  to  bear  the  responsibility  and  honour 
of  judgment  alone.  God  could  have  enabled  him  to  do  all  the 
work  which  these  others  were  now  to  divide  with  him. 

But,  surely,  even  if  that  had  been  the  case — and  we  would  not 
for  a  moment  dispute  that  it  could  have  been  so — yet,  it  would 
not  have  been  so  well  as  the  division  of  interest  and  labour 
which  now  took  place.  It  was  much  better  to  set  all  these  men 
to  work  than  to  do  all  their  work.  It  evoked  talent ;  it  ennobled 
them  by  placing  them  in  positions  of  responsibility  before  their 
fellows  ;  it  drove  them  to  personal  dealings  with  God ;  it 
inspired  them  with  a  fellow-feeling  with  Moses  ;  it  turned  critics 
into  sympathizers  and  companions ;  it  educated  them  for 
positions  for  which  they  might  be  required  in  the  emergencies 
of  the  future.  It  is  a  great  matter  to  be  a  good  workman,  one 
not  needing  to  be  ashamed  ;  but  it  is  a  greater  to  be  able  to  call 
out  other  workmen,  and  to  set  them  at  work. 

This  policy  was  that  which  the  apostles  adopted  when  the 
business  of  the  Church  had  so  grown  upon  their  hands  as  to 
engross  too  much  of  their  time  and  energy.  They  could  no 
longer  combine  the  serving  of  tables  with  the  ministry  of  the 
Word  ;  and  as  they  could  not  hesitate  which  side  of  their  double 
office  to  abandon,  they  called  in  the  help  of  Stephen  and  his 
colleagues  "to  serve  tables,"  whilst  they  gave  themselves  to 
prayer  and  to  the  ministry  of  the  Word. 

Is  there  not  a  thought  here  for  many  of  the  Lord's  workers 
who  may  read  these  words  ?  Are  we  not  dissipating  our 
energies  over  too  wide  an  area  ?  Do  we  not  attempt  to  embrace 


H4  !j 

in  our  life  many  things  which  others  could  do  as  well  as  our 
selves  ?  Ought  not  those  specially,  who  are  gifted  with  the 
power  of  prayer  and  spiritual  insight,  to  cultivate  those  special 
sides  of  their  nature,  leaving  details  of  management  and  direc 
tion  of  finance  to  others  ?  We  should  live  on  the  greatest  side 
of  our  naturej  reserving  ourselves  for  that ;  not  careless  of 
minor  details,  if  there  is  no  one  else  to  manage  them  ;  but 
prepared  to  hand  them  over  to  "  able  men,"  even  though  they 
may  have  to  learn  their  duties  at  a  cost,  in  the  beginning,  of 
some  mistakes  and  failures.  The  mountain  brow,  with  its 
fellowship,  affords  a  leverage  from  which  we  may  best  move 
earth.  We  touch  men  most  when  we  most  touch  God.  The 
prophet  and  priest,  the  man  of  God,  the  teacher,  these  are 
among  the  choicest  gifts  of  God  to  men.  And  if  you  are  gifted 
specially  in  these  directions,  cultivate  such  endowments  to  the 
uttermost — they  are  rare  enough — leaving  other  details  to  be 
cared  for  by  others  who  may  be  cast  in  a  more  practical 
mould 


XVII. 
of 


"And  Mount  Sinai  was  altogether  on  a  smoke,  because  the  Lord  des-_ 
cended  upon  it  in  fire  :  and  the  smoke  thereof  ascended  as  the  smoke  of  a 
furnace,  and  the  whole  mount  quaked  greatly." 

EXOD.   xix.  18. 

fROM  Rephidim  the  children  of  Israel  marched  slowly 
and  laboriously  through  the  great  thoroughfare  of  the 
desert  now  known  as  the  Wady-es-Sheykh,  the  long 
est,  widest,  and  most  continuous  of  those  vast  desert 
valleys.  It  must  have  been  an  astonishing  exchange 
from  the  flat  alluvial  land  of  Egypt,  where  the  only 
hills  were  those  raised  by  the  hands  of  man.  On  either  side  of 
the  pilgrim  host,  lofty  and  precipitous  mountains  reared  their 
inaccessible  ramparts  of  red  sandstone  and  variegated  granite, 
without  verdure,  or  gushing  rills,  or  trace  of  living  thing.  They 
must  have  appeared  like  the  majestic  corridors  of  a  vast  temple, 
to  the  inner  shrine  of  which  the  pillar  of  cloud  was  conducting 
them  by  its  stately  march. 

The  Red  Sea,  which  must  have  become  like  a  friend, 
had  been  long  ago  left  behind  ;  and  there  was  no  chance  of 
retracing  their  path  or  returning.  There  was  nothing  to  allure 
them  or  arrest  their  steps  amid  the  awful  desolation  and 
grandeur  of  those  inaccessible  precipices.  They  would  be 
sometimes  almost  overwhelmed  by  the  bare  sterility  of  the 
scene,  and  by  the  awful  silence  that  was  stirred  to  resent  the 
intrusion  of  such  a  multitude  upon  its  ancient  reign.  But  their 
course  was  always  onwards  ;  and  a  deepening  awe  must  have 
grown  upon  their  souls,  such  as  became  those  who  were  already 
treading  the  precincts  of  a  temple  not  made  with  hands,  a 
shrine  of  incomparable  majesty,  to  which  those  vast  and  sub 
lime  avenues  were  the  befitting  approach. 


n6  £t  tire  foot  of 

At  last  it  broke  on  them.  After  a  march  of  eighteen  miles 
from  the  Red  Sea,  they  came  out  on  a  perfectly  level  plain  of 
yellow  sand,  some  two  miles  long,  and  half-a-mile  wide,  nearly 
flat,  and  dotted  over  with  tamarisk  bushes.  The  mountains 
which  gather  around  this  plain  have  for  the  most  part  sloping 
sides,  and  form  a  kind  of  natural  amphitheatre  ;  but  towards  the 
south  there  is  one  pile  of  jagged  cliffs  which  rises  sheer  upwards 
in  wild  precipitousness,  whilst  behind  lies  the  granite  mass  of 
Gebel  Mousa,  deeply  cleft  with  fissures,  and  torn,  as  though  it  had 
fought  a  hard  battle  with  earthquake,  storm,  and  fire.  This  pile  of 
rocks  is  called  Ras  Sufsafeh,  and  was  probably  "  the  mount  that 
might  be  touched  and  burned  with  fire."  It  rises  from  the  plaia 
below  as  a  huge  altar ;  and  all  that  transpired  on  its  summit 
would  have  been  easily  visible  to  the  furthest  limits  of  the  camp 
of  two  million  souls  pitched  beneath. 

Such  was  the  chosen  scene  for  the  giving  of  the  Law.  There 
the  hosts  of  Israel  remained  stationary  for  long  weeks  ;  and 
there,  whilst  clouds  veiled  the  heights,  and  fire  played  from  peak 
to  peak,  and  mysterious  voices,  resembling  at  times  a  trumpet's 
notes,  awoke  unwonted  echoes  in  the  heart  of  the  hills,  God  met 
with  his  people  and  gave  them  his  Law ;  writing  his  name, 
not  on  tablets  of  stone  merely,  but  on  the  entire  course  of 
human  history. 

I.  GOD'S  OBJECT  AT  SINAI.— We  can  but  briefly  touch  on 
this,  as  we  are  most  of  all  concerned  with  the  character  of  the 
great  leader ;  but  in  that  more  exclusive  study  we  may  for  a 
moment  consider  the  impressions  which  the  marvellous  scenes 
associated  with  Sinai  were  calculated  to  produce  on  the  people 
and  on  himself. 

At  the  time  of  the  Exodus  the  world  was  almost  wholly  given 
to  idolatry.  The  first  objects  of  idolatrous  worship  were  probably 
simply  the  sun  and  moon  and  heavenly  bodies,  or  other  con 
spicuous  objects  of  creative  wisdom  and  power.  Afterwards  the 
Deity  was  supposed  to  reside  in  men,  and  even  beasts.  Of 
these,  images  were  made  and  worshipped — at  first  covered  with 
drapery,  but  afterwards  in  a  state  of  nudity,  and  exerting  the 
most  demoralizing  effect.  "Professing  themselves  to  be  wise, 
they  became  fools,  and  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible 
God  for  the  likeness  of  an  image  of  corruptible  man,  and  of  birds, 


"  31  filmtltar  ffoople."  117 

and  four-footed  beasts,  and  creeping  things.     Wherefore  God 
gave  them  up  to  the  lusts  of  their  hearts"  (Rom.  i.  22-24, 

R.V.). 

In  dealing  with  this  deluge  of  idolatry,  God  acted  as  with  the 
deluge  of  water  that  drowned  the  ancient  world.  He  began 
with  a  single  family,  teaching  them  the  sublime  lessons  concern 
ing  Himself;  which  when  they  had  perfectly  acquired,  they  were 
to  make  the  common  coin  of  the  world. 

Let  us  notice  the  successive  steps. 

First  Step. — God  chose  from  the  masses  of  heathendom  one 
man,  "  called  him  alone,"  and  led  him  to  follow  Him  into  a 
strange  land.  There,  shut  away  from  surrounding  peoples,  He 
began  to  teach  him  about  Himself.  As  a  gardener  selects  one 
plant  that  he  may  bring  it  to  rare  perfection,  and  make  it  the 
means  of  improving  the  entire  sisterhood,  so  Jehovah  spared 
no  time  or  pains  with  the  first  great  Hebrew,  that  being  blessed 
he  might  be  the  means  of  blessing  to  the  race. 

Second  Step.— God.  welded  the  Hebrew  people  together  into 
one,  that  they  might  be  able  to  receive  and  retain  as  a  part  of 
their  national  life  those  great  truths  with  which  they  were  to  be 
entrusted.  This  welding  was  accomplished  by  the  tie  of  common 
parentage,  of  which  they  were  justly  proud  ;  by  the  bond  of  a 
common  occupation,  which  kept  them  to  themselves  as  shep 
herds,  apart  from  the  busy  traffic  of  cities  and  marts  of  com 
merce  ;  and,  lastly,  by  the  pressure  of  a  common  trial,  which, 
together  with  the  marvellous  deliverance  that  was  granted  them, 
remained  fresh  'and  indelible  in  all  after  generations,  like  those 
colors  in  the  land  of  their  bondage,  which  in  the  dry  desert  air 
have  lasted  in  unfading  vividness  for  thirty  centuries.  So 
perfectly  did  God  do  this  work,  that  while  other  nations  have 
risen,  reigned,  and  fallen,  and  their  disintegration  has  been 
utter  and  final,  the  children  of  Abraham  endure,  like  an 
imperishable  rock,  undestroyed  by  the  chafe  of  the  waves  or  the 
fret  of  the  ages. 

Third  Step. — God  revealed  his  existence.  Into  the  midst  of 
their  bondage  tidings  came  that  the  god  of  their  fathers  was  a 
living  God  ;  that  He  had  met  one  of  their  number  in  the  desert 
and  had  called  him  by  name,  and  had  promised  to  interfere  in 
their  behalf.  The  news  may  have  excited  but  a  languid  interest. 
They  were  glad  that  like  other  nations  of  the  time  they  had 


n8  £t  tire  foot  of 

their  tutelary  deity,  but  that  was  all ;  and  they  knew  little  or 
nothing  beside. 

Fourth  step. — God  showed  by  the  plagues  that  He  was 
stronger  than  the  gods  of  Egypt.  Can  you  not  imagine  the 
children  of  Israel  saying,  "  Our  God  is  great,  He  has  turned  the 
water  into  blood  ;  but  perhaps  He  is  not  so  strong  as  I  sis,  or 
Osiris,  or  Serapis,  or  the  sacred  bull "  ?  But  the  wonders 
which  were  wrought  on  the  gods  of  Egypt  settled  that  question 
for  ever. 

Fifth  step. — God  excited  their  love  and  gratitude.  You  can 
do  anything  you  like  with  those  you  love  :  but  to  get,  you  must 
give  ;  to  excite  love,  you  must  declare  it.  Hence  they  were 
touchingly  reminded  of  what  He  had  done  :  "Ye  have  seen  what 
I  did  unto  the  Egyptians,  and  how  I  bare  you  on  eagles'  wings, 
and  brought  you  unto  Myself"  (Exod.  xix.  4). 

Sixth  step. — God  set  Himself  to  teach  them  concerning 
certain  of  those  great  qualities,  the  knowledge  of  which  lay  at 
the  foundation  of  all  right  dealings  between  the  people  and 
Himself.  And  in  order  to  achieve  his  purpose,  He  made  use 
of  outward  significant  signs  ;  which  did  more  than  the  most 
elaborate  discourse  to  instruct  the  ignorant  and  sensual  people 
whom  He  had  taken  for  his  own. 

Seventh  step. — God  clearly  designated  Moses  to  be  the  organ 
and  channel  of  his  communications  to  man.  "  Lo,  I  come  unto 
thee  in  a  thick  cloud,  that  the  people  may  hear  when  I  speak 
with  thee,  and  believe  thee  for  ever"  (ver.  9).  It  was  im 
possible  to  forecast  the  way  in  which  God  was  fulfilling  his 
purposes  at  the  time ;  but  as  we  look  back  on  the  story  we  can 
detect  the  development  of  his  plan,  just  as  from  the  summits  of 
the  eternal  hills  we  shall  see  the  way  by  which  He  has  been 
leading  us  all  the  days  of  our  pilgrimage. 

II.  THE  LESSONS  OF  SINAI.— (i)  The  Majesty  of  God.  The 
natural  scenery  was  sufficiently  majestic;  but  it  became  more  so 
as  the  incidents  of  the  third  day  were  unfolded.  Was  there  not 
majesty  in  the  thunders  and  lightnings  ;  in  the  brooding  cloud 
where  clouds  were  almost  unknown  ;  in  the  flashing  lightning 
dispelling  the  pitchy  gloom  ;  in  the  trumpet  peal  echoing 
through  the  hills — now  soft  as  a  flute  rolling  through  the  yielding 
air,  now  loud  as  an  organ  striking  against  some  outstanding 


"(gotr  is  a  Spirit."  119 

cliff?  Meanwhile  the  clouds  dropped  water,  and  there  were 
showers  of  tropical  rain.  And  it  was  amid  such  scenes  that 
God  spake.  Could  any  combination  of  natural  phenomena 
have  given  grander  conceptions  of  the  Majesty  of  the  Divine 
Nature  ? 

(2)  The  Spirituality  of  God.     What   was   their   God   like? 
Would  He  assume  the  form  of  anything  that  is  in  the  heaven 
above,  or  in  the  earth  beneath,  or  in  the  waters  under  the  earth  ? 
Would  it  be  in  any,  or  in  a  combination  of  all,  of  these  forms 
that  they  should  see  Him  who  had  brought  them  out  of  Egypt  ? 
But  on  that  memorable  occasion,  "  when  Moses  brought  forth 
the  people  out  of  the  camp  to  meet  God,"  they  saw  no  likeness. 
He  was  there,  for  He  spoke.     But  there  was  no  outward  form 
for  the  eye  to  discern.     It  was  very  hard.     The  extreme  diffi 
culty  of  the  human  heart  accustoming  itself  to  the  worship  of 
what  the  eye  cannot  perceive,  or  the  imagination  realize,  has 
been  attested  by  the  repeated  relapse  into  idolatry,  from  the 
days   of   the   golden   calf  to   the   crucifix   which   the    Roman 
Catholic  devotee  presses  to  her  lips.     It  has  not  been  easy  for 
mankind  to  learn  this  lesson  so  clearly  taught  on  Sinai,  that  God 
is  a  Spirit. 

(3)  The  Holiness  of  God.     This  primal  lesson  was  also  taught 
in  striking  fashion  by  outward  signs  which  impressed  the  sense. 
Bounds  were  erected  to  keep  the  beasts  from  grazing  on  the  thin 
herbage  of  the  lower  slopes  ;  whoever  touched  the  Mount  must 
die  ;  all  clothes  were  to  be  carefully  washed  against  that  third 
day  ;   absolute  purity  was  to  be  observed  in  heart  and  life  ; 
Moses  alone  was  called  up  to  the  top  of  the  Mount,  where 
smoke  and  fire  and  lightning  flash  commingled,  and  the  thunder 
peal  vied  with  the  trumpet-blast  ;    and  when  he  had  climbed 
thither,  he  was  sent  all  the  way  down  again  for  the  express 
purpose  of  charging  the  people,  and  even  the  priests,  not  to 
break  through  upon  the  Lord  to  gaze,  lest  God  should  break 
forth  upon  them.    All  these  significant  acts  converged  to  give 
outward  and  sensible  manifestation  of  the  Holiness  of  God. 

(4)  The  Royalty  of  God.     In  their  triumphal  ode  of  victory  by 
the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea,  the  people  had  confessed  the  right 
of  Jehovah  to  reign  over  them  for  ever ;  but  they  were  yet  to 
learn  that  He  was  indeed  absolute  monarch.     The  Jewish  state 
was  a  kingdom,  and  God  was  King.      And  the  reality  of  his 


J20  £t  the  |F0nt  of 

government  appeared  in  the  way  in  which  Moses  himself 
obeyed  his  behest.  It  was  a  sight  never  to  be  forgotten  to 
see  how  their  great  leader  Moses  was  absolutely  subservient  to 
the  command  issued  from  God's  pavilion.  At  the  best  he  was 
only  God's  executor,  "the  passive  instrument  of  the  Divine 
will."  The  Decalogue  was  spoken  by  God  Himself  "  out  of  the 
midst  of  the  fire,  of  the  cloud,  and  of  the  thick  darkness,  with  a 
great  voice  "  (Deut.  v.  22).  Every  ordinance  of  the  Law,  every 
custom  and  provision  for  domestic  and  civil  life,  every  item  in 
the  construction  of  the  sanctuary  and  in  the  ordering  of  the 
priests,  was  due  to  the  direct  will  of  God,  spoken  from  his 
mouth.  "  God,  and  not  Moses,  was  the  author  of  each  proviso, 
the  real  Legislator,  the  real  Law-giver,  the  real  King ;  Moses  was 
but  the  mouthpiece,  an  intermediary  to  communicate  God's 
decrees  to  his  people."  How  clear  was  the  testimony  to  the 
supremacy  of  the  Most  High  !  Such  were  some  of  the  lessons 
taught  at  Sinai. 

III.  MOSES  AT  SINAI. — He  seemed  at  home  there.  Though 
as  to  his  physical  system  he  could  not  but  fear  and  quake  from 
the  unwonted  accompaniments  of  the  Divine  Glory,  yet  there 
was  no  slavish  dread  such  as  would  make  him  draw  afar  off,  as 
the  people  did.  Mark  the  successive  stages  in  that  familiarity  be 
tween  him  and  God.  "  Moses  went  up  unto  God  "  (Exod.  xix.  3). 
Having  reported  God's  words  to  the  people,  he  returned  to  tell 
the  people's  words  to  the  Lord  ;  for  we  are  told  "  he  went  down 
from  the  mount  unto  the  people"  (ver.  14).  When  Jevovah 
came  down  in  thunder  and  smoke,  for  the  third  time  Moses 
went  up  to  the  top  of  the  mount  (ver.  20).  When  the  ten  words 
of  the  Law  had  been  spoken,  Moses  drew  near  to  the  thick  dark 
ness  where  God  was  (Exod.  xx.  21).  After  this,  he  was  bidden 
to  ascend  the  mountain  a  fifth  time,  the  elders  accompanying 
him  to  a  certain  point,  and  Joshua  still  further ;  but  he  alone 
entering  the  cloud,  which  was  like  devouring  fire  on  the  top 
of  the  mount :  and  he  remained  there  forty  days  and  forty  nights 
to  receive  the  Divine  instructions  for  the  erection  of  the  Taber 
nacle  (Exod.  xxiv.  1 8).  A  sixth  time  he  returned  unto  God, 
offering  to  be  blotted  from  his  book,  if  only  Israel  might  be 
spared,  and  their  sin  atoned  (Exod.  xxxii.  32).  And  yet  a 
seventh  time  he  was  invited  to  come  up  early  in  the  morning, 


Jcllotoship  tottlj  6o&.  121 

carrying  with  him  two  tablets  of  stone  ;  and  there,  as  he  stood  in 
an  alcove  of  the  rocks,  the  presence  of  God  passed  by,  and  the 
name  of  God  was  proclaimed,  and  he  remained  for  a  second 
period  of  forty  days  and  forty  nights,  descending  to  the  people 
with  shining  face,  the  living  evidence  of  the  reality  and  closeness 
of  the  fellowship.  "And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  face  to 
face,  as  a  man  speaketh  unto  his  friend"  (Exod.  xxxiii.  11). 

This  fellowship  had  an  ennobling  effect  on  his  character.  Not 
only  did  his  face  shine,  but  his  life  shone  also.  There  was 
henceforth  a  supernatural  grace  and  beauty  about  his  aspect  and 
demeanour  which  clearly  marked  him  out  as  "  the  man  of  God." 
His  meekness,  his  gentleness  under  provocation,  his  jealousy 
for  the  name  and  cause  of  God,  burnt  with  an  intenser  and 
more  even  flame. 

The  life  of  fellowship  with  God  cannot  be  built  up  in  a  day. 
It  begins  with  the  habitual  reference  of  all  to  Him,  hour  by 
hour,  as  Moses  did  in  Egypt.  But  it  moves  on  to  more  and 
longer  periods  of  communion.  And  it  finds  its  consummation 
and  bliss  in  days  and  nights  of  intercession  and  waiting  and 
holy  intercourse.  Ah,  what  patterns  are  seen  on  the  Mount ! 
What  cries  are  uttered  there  !  What  visions  are  seen  there  ! 
What  revelations  are  made  there !  What  injunctions  are 
received  there  !  Alas  for  us  that  we  remove  so  far  away  from  it ! 
or  at  the  best  are  admitted  to  stand  only  with  the  elders,  and  see 
paved  work  of  sapphire  stone  beneath  God's  feet !  Oh  for  the 
closer  access,  the  nearer  view,  the  more  intimate  face  to  face 
intercourse,  such  as  is  open  still  to  the  friends  of  God  ! 


XVI 1 1. 
fhf  tfisimt  of  (£o&  anfc  its  (Pfitct 

It  CBBC  to  pBss,  wbec  liases  OMC  dovm  froa  )f ooat  Siui,  ftM 

•  • :      -r:  J:  ..  :>.:        ,    :r:     .    -      -  -  .  •_ 

'  '  -  •  "    -    '.'  •  .  ".h;      :;::.; 


•-- 
:-.    -: 


:r   ITS    '^?^.\7:FICATIOX.      During  IOT.J   ye^r;    : 
irtr.   rr;---c  in  the  Iwart  of  Moses  to  see  the  face  of  G-od. 
~  Sbow  me  now  tiy  way,  ^ar  I  mar  know  Thee  ~  ;  ~  I  beseech 
Thee,  show  me  thy  glory.*     Prayers  like  these  were  <•«••*•  j»*iy 

oo  his  lips.    And  sometimes  w:ih  I.'.,      t 

cays,  the  yearning  must  have  become  alnxjst  too  intense  to  be 

-;        .'--:.--.:-—-:.••:      ^  -          ^-   .    r^  •-  the 


^j   i  - 

I 


"1  •--.;:--;   -'::     ~:J  1*3 

I  -----       •      -.  .  ;   -_•-  :  -  -  .  :     .        -.'..:•=•_-.-.__--     , 

:"-      /-"-..         7  -    :  -:        :-:--,:---..:-• 

-  '.    :  -"..-:-        .•:._.-      i.          -—-:'-:...  :       :  •- 


....... 


.     : 


- 
.: 

-.- 


~*  _: 

:  ..  _  ;.    . 

. :    .  .  • . 


124  dHje  ^Tisiott  0f  (Botr  rmfc  its 

bell  over  the  waves  :  "  as  the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  so  did 
he."  God  could  always  depend  on  him.  He  was  a  man  after 
his  own  heart,  who  could  fulfil  all  his  will.  And  it  was  to  him, 
rather  than  to  the  disobedient  hearts  of  the  people,  that  God 
revealed  Himself. 

And  this  is  consistent  with  the  words  of  our  Lord,  who  said. 
"  He  that  hath  my  commandments,  and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is 
thatloveth  Me  ;  and  I  will  manifest  Myself  unto  him"  (John  xiv. 
21).  Clearly,  obedience  is  the  stepping-stone  to  vision.  We 
must  be  servants  ere  we  can  be  friends.  The  path  of  literal 
obedience,  albeit  that  it  is  rough  and  steep,  is  the  only  path  to 
the  mountain-summit,  with  its  marvellous  revelation.  Is  it  not 
so  always  ?  The  discoverer  must  obey  nature,  before  he  can 
expect  to  reach  the  vantage-ground  from  which  to  survey  the 
harmony  and  helpfulness  of  her  mighty  laws,  and  the  mystery  of 
her  secret  processes. 

Do  not  be  disobedient  to  heavenly  visions  ;  never  turn  aside 
to  your  own  preferences  from  the  narrow  path  of  unswerving 
loyalty  to  the  voice  of  God — speaking  in  his  word,  and  in  your 
heart,  and  in  circumstance.  Dare  to  do  right,  though  you  stand 
alone  amongst  the  recreant  hosts  ;  and  you  will  thus  fulfil  one 
prime  condition  of  the  vision  of  God. 

(2)  We  must  be  willing  to  pass  through  the  thick  cloud. — 
"God  called  to  Moses  out  of  the  midst  of  the  cloud... and  Moses 
went  into  the  midst  of  the  cloud"  (Exod.  xxiv.  16-18).  Thick 
banks  of  dense  cloud,  dark  in  their  earthward  aspect,  though 
insufferably  bright  on  their  inner  side,  shut  out  the  light  of  sun 
and  the  spectacles  of  earth,  and  shut  him  in  with  God.  But  he 
had  not  seen  the  vision,  had  he  not  been  willing  to  pass 
through  the  cloud  and  to  stand  beneath  the  shadow  of  the 
Divine  hand. 

The  traveller  who  would  pass  from  the  wintry  slopes  of 
Switzerland  into  the  summer  beauty  of  the  plains  of  Italy,  must 
be  prepared  to  tunnel  the  Alps.  The  garden,  the  cross,  and  the 
grave,  are  the  only  way  to  the  Easter  morning.  The  walls  must 
be  toned  to  a  neutral  tint  on  which  masterpieces  of  painting  are 
to  be  exhibited.  And  it  seems  indispensable  that  we  should 
pass  into  the  shadow  of  bereavement,  temptation,  and  distress, 
if  we  are  to  emerge  into  God's  marvellous  light  and  estimate  its 
brilliance. 


JUott*  nn  tire  JJt0ttttt.  125 

Not  first  the  light,  and  after  thatM.he  dirk  ;^  ^  ^ 
But  first  the  dark,  and  after  that  the  light. 

First,  the  thick  cloud,  and  thtlTthe  rainbow  arc; 
First,  the  dark  grave,  and  then  the  resurrection  light. 

(3)  We  must  dare  to  be  alone. — When  we  read  (Exod.  xxxiv, 
2,  3)  those  solemn  words,  "  Be  ready  in  the  morning,  and  come 
up  in  the  morning,  and  present  thyself  there  to  Me  in  the  top 
of  the  mount  :  and  no  man  shall  come  up  with  thee  ;  neither 
let  any  man  be  seen  throughout  all  the  mount,  neither  let  the 
flocks  nor  herds  feed  before  the  mount  "—they  seem  to  echo 
down  to  us  in  other  but  similar  tones,  "When  thou  prayest, 
enter  into  thy  closet,  and  when  thou  hast  shut  thy  door,  prav 
to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret."  Jacob  must  be  left  alone  if 
the  Angel  of  God  is  to  whisper  in  his  ear  the  mystic  name  of 
Shiloh ;  Daniel  must  be  alone  if  he  is  to  see  the  celestial  vision ; 
John  must  be  banished  to  Patmos  if  he  is  deeply  to  take  and 
firmly  to  keep  "the  print  of  heaven."  The  insulated  cloud  alone 
contains  in  its  bosom  the  mighty  thunderstorm  ;  that  which  is 
stranded  on  the  mountain  slope  is  soon  robbed  of  its  electricity. 

Valuable  as  are  the  prolific  opportunities  for  Christian  culture 
and  service  which  surround  us,  they  will  be  disastrous  indeed  in 
their  effect  if  they  rob  us  of  the  time  that  we  should  otherwise 
spend  wfith  God,  or  give  us  a  distaste  for  lonely  heart-fellow 
ship.  Let  the  first  moments  of  the  day,  when  the  heart  is  fresh, 
be  given  to  God.  Never  see  the  face  of  man  till  you  have  seen 
the  King.  Dare  to  be  much  alone  on  the  Mount. 

III.  WHEN  THE  CONDITIONS  ARE  FULFILLED,  THE  VISION 
IS  SURE. — Perhaps  Moses,  as  he  entered  the  cloud,  expected 
that  the  Almighty  would  pass  before  him,  riding  upon  a  cherub, 
flying  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind,  girt  with  rainbow  and 
storm,  while  the  thunder  rolled  as  drums  in  his  march.  But 
lo  !  he  seemed  to  stand  in  a  ravine,  upon  a  ledge  of  rock, 
shadowed  by  a  hand,  whilst  through  that  mountain-rent  passed 
the  Divine  procession  ;  and  a  voice,  still,  sweet,  penetrating,  told 
that  God  was  Love. 

Mark  the  progress  of  revelation  to  the  adoring  soul.  In 
Horeb,  Moses  had  stood  in  the  outer  court,  to  learn  that  God  is 
changeless.  In  the  giving  of  the  Law  he  had  stood  in  the 
effulgent  glory  of  the  Holy  Place,  to  learn  that  God  is  righteous. 


i26  ®rjE  Vision  nf  C5oti  antr  its 

Now  he  was  admitted  to  the  inner  shrine,  to  learn  that  the  Lord 
God  was  merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering,  and  abundant  in 
goodness  and  truth. 

The  answers  to  our  prayers  for  spiritual  vision  may  not  always 
come  as  we  expect.  But,  however  they  come,  come  they  will. 
None  of  those  who  wait  for  Him  shall  be  ashamed.  He  will 
satisfy  desires  which  He  has  Himself  implanted.  The  King  will 
be  punctual  to  enter  to  see  the  guests  who  have  complied  with  his 
conditions.  As  to  Fletcher  of  Madeley,  to  Catherine  of  Siena, 
to  President  Edwards,  to  Dr.  Payson,  and  to  hundreds  besides, 
so  to  you,  when  least  expecting  it,  will  come  the  beatific  vision, 
perhaps  constraining  you  to  cry,  as  John  Tennant  did  :  "  Hold, 
Lord,  it  is  enough !  or  the  frail  vessel  will  break  beneath  the 
weight  of  glory." 

IV.  SUCH  VISIONS  LEAVE  UNMISTAKEABLE  TRACES. — The 
face  of  Moses  shone :  and  did  not  his  heart  and  life  shine  also  ? 
Could  it  have  been  otherwise  ?     Linen  in  which  the  housewife 
has  laid  rosemary  and  lavender  will  smell  fragrantly  ;  ordinary 
iron  placed  near  a  magnet  becomes  magnetic  ;  those  that  are 
in  king's  courts  catch  a  refined  and  courteous  mien  ;  the  friend 
of  wise  men  gets  wisdom  ;  the  members  of  a  closely-knit  family 
contract  by  association  some  tiny  gesture,  a  peculiarity  which 
betrays  their  oneness  ;  it  is  proverbial  how  on  the  faces  of  an 
aged  couple  there  is  seen  a  strong  resemblance,  so  that  each 
reflects  the  other.    And  it  is  impossible  for  us  to  be  much  with 
God  without  becoming  godly,  i.e.,  God-like. 

The  old  legends  of  the  saints  tell  of  those  who,  by  long 
meditation  on  the  crucifixion  of  the  Lord,  received  in  their  very 
flesh  the  marks  of  his  wounds.  There  is  certainly  a  spiritual 
counterpart  of  this  in  the  long,  fixed  gaze  of  the  soul  on  the 
vision  of  God,  by  which  the  lineaments  of  the  Divine  beauty 
pass  into  the  life,  and  light  it  up  with  a  loveliness  which  is  not 
of  earth. 

V.  SUCH  TRACES  ARE  NOT  PERCEIVED  BY  THOSE  WHO 
PRESENT  THEM. — "  Moses  wist  not  that  his  face  shone."     He 
was  glorious  in  all  eyes  but  his  own. 

There  is  a  law  known  to  medical  men  as  Holland's  law  ;  which 
affirms  that  whenever  attention  is  directed  specially  to  any  one 


&Ije  J^bhuncj  Jate.  127 

organ  of  the  body,  the  action  of  that  organ  is  more  or  less 
disturbed.  If,  for  instance,  we  begin  to  think  of  our  heart, 
counting  its  beats,  and  listening  to  its  throbs,  we  disturb  its 
rhythmic  action.  There  are  few  who  can  let  the  physician  feel 
their  pulse  with  perfect  composure  ;  and  he  is  generally  obliged 
to  make  some  allowance  for  the  effects  of  this  self-consciousness. 
So  with  the  functions  of  digestion,  and  respiration,  and  thought. 
These  great  and  vital  processes  of  the  body  go  on  most  healthily 
and  satisfactorily,  when  they  are  not  made  direct  subjects  of 
attention.  And  in  these  respects  we  may  trace  a  close  analogy 
between  the  physical  and  the  spiritual  life  of  man.  A  counter 
part  of  Holland's  law  pervades  the  physiology  of  the  spiritual 
life.  We  shall  do  best,  and  make  quickest  progress,  when  we 
know  it  not. 

True  Christian  excellence  is  as  unconscious  of  its  beauty  as 
Moses  was  ;  whenever  it  becomes  self-conscious  it  loses  its 
charm.  Beware  of  the  man  who  talks  about  his  graces.  There 
is  such  a  thing  as  being  proud  of  humility,  and  making  capital 
out  of  our  nothingness.  The  man  who  boasts  of  a  shining  face 
is  a  counterfeit  and  a  cheat.  The  possessor  of  the  genuine 
article  never  talks  about  it,  never  thinks  about  it ;  and  would  be 
almost  overwhelmed  to  hear  of  any  such  thing  being  ascribed 
to  him.  The  charm  of  a  little  child  is  its  utter  unconsciousness 
of  self ;  and  that  is  the  charm  in  true  God-likeness.  It  is  like 
the  bloom  on  a  peach,  the  dew-jewels  on  the  morning  lawn,  or 
f  he  stillness  of  the  surface  of  a  mountain  pooL 


XIX. 


"Yet  now,  if  Thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin  —  ;  and  if  not,  blot  me,  1  pray 
Thee,  out  of  Thy  book  which  Thou  hast  written." 

EXOD.  xxxii.  32. 

HIS  is  one  of  the  most  pathetic  verses  of  the  Bible, 
which  bears  on  its  face  the  evidence  of  its  genuineness. 
It  could  not  have  emanated  from  the  mind  or  pen  of 
some  later  scribe;  because  so  entirely  unexpected,  so 
strange,  and  yet  so  likely.  It  reminds  us  of  the  shaft 
of  a  graceful  column  broken  off  in  the  middle  ;  or  of  a 
strain  of  plaintive  music  hushed  to  sudden  silence  by  the 
snapping  of  a  string.  It  is  the  fragment  of  a  sentence  of  which 
we  would  have  given  much  to  hear  the  conclusion  ;  but  who  can 
presume  to  finish  that  which  in  this  supreme  hour  was  choked 
by  a  paroxysm  of  grief,  a  sob  of  irrepressible  emotion  ? 

I.  THE  PROBLEM  WITH  WHICH  HE  HAD  TO  DEAL,  (i)  Their 
idolatry.  —  After  the  utterance  of  the  ten  great  words  of  Sinai, 
the  people,  frightened  by  the  thunderings  and  lightnings, 
and  the  voice  of  the  trumpet,  and  the  smoke  of  the  mountain, 
entreated  Moses  to  act  as  their  daysman  and  mediator.  "  They 
said  unto  him  :  Speak  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  hear  ;  but  let  not 
God  speak  with  us,  lest  we  die"  (Exod.  xx.  19).  The  great  law 
giver  and  leader,  acting  on  their  request,  thereupon  withdrew 
himself  into  the  divine  pavilion,  and  was  absent  for  about 
six  weeks. 

After  the  return  of  the  seventy  elders  who  had  accompanied 
Moses  to  some  lower  ledge  of  the  mountain  but  had  returned 
without  him,  the  people  were  doubtless  well  content.  Better  to 
be  temporarily  deprived  of  their  leader,  than  be  exposed  to  those 
terrible  thunderings.  But,  after  awhile,  they  became  uneasy 
and  restless.  From  one  to  another  the  word  passed,  l'  Where  is 
he  ?  He  did  not  take  food  enough  with  him  to  sustain  him  for 


(Efa  liaturc  of  fttrolafrg.  129 

so  long.  Has  he  met  with  some  mishap  on  those  lonely  steeps  ? 
or  perchance  he  has  been  destroyed  by  that  burning  fire,  or 
absorbed  into  the  unseen."  "  As  for  this  Moses,  the  man  that 
brought  us  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,  we  wot  not  what  is 
become  of  him"  (Exod.  xxxii.  l).  And  then  turning  to  Aaror., 
the  man  of  words,  sure  that  neither  he  nor  twenty  like  him 
could  fill  the  gap  which  the  loss  of  Moses  had  caused,  they 
cried,  "  Up,  make  us  gods,  which  shall  go  before  us." 

We  may  notice,  as  we  pass,  the  essential  nature  of  idolatry. 
For  in  this  marvellous  chapter  we  have  its  entire  history,  from 
the  first  cry  of  the  soul,  which  betrays  so  marvellous  a  yearning 
for  an  idol,  to  the  draining  of  the  last  bitter  dregs,  with  which, 
when  ground  to  powder,  the  idolater  has  to  drink  its  very  dust. 
Men  sometimes  speak  of  idolaters  bowing  down  before  material 
forms,  whether  of  gold,  stone,  or  wood,  as  if  they  supposed  that 
these  were  Divine,  and  possessed  Divine  attributes — and  such 
may  be  the  case  with  the  more  degraded  and  debased  ;  but  in  the 
beginning  it  was  not  so.  And  if  we  carefully  study  the  question 
in  all  its  bearings,  we  shall  discover  that  the  idolater  does  not — 
in  the  first  instance,  at  least — look  upon  his  image  as  God,  but 
as  a  representation  or  manifestation  of  God.  It  is  an  attempt  on 
the  part  of  the  human  spirit,  which  shrinks  from  the  effort  of 
communion  with  the  unseen  and  spiritual,  to  associate  God 
with  what  it  can  own  and  handle  ;  so  as  to  have  a  constant  and 
evident  token  of  the  presence  and  favour  of  God. 

This  was  the  case  of  Israel.  It  was  only  three  months  since 
they  had  stood  by  the  Red  Sea,  and  seen  its  waters  roll  in  pride 
over  the  hosts  of  Pharaoh.  Every  day  since  then  God's  love 
had  followed  them.  For  them  the  heaven  had  given  bread,  and 
the  rocks  had  flowed  with  water  ;  and  his  cloud  had  sailed 
majestically  through  the  sky,  shielding  them  in  the  daylight,  and 
burning  like  a  watch-fire  through  the  night.  And  even  at  the 
time  with  which  we  are  dealing  the  whole  summit  of  the  mount 
was  crowned  by  the  pavilion  of  cloud,  which  was  the  emblem  of 
his  presence  in  their  midst.  But  notwithstanding  all,  they  were 
carried  away  before  that  imperious  craving  of  the  human  heart, 
which  cries  out  for  a  sensible  image  for  its  worship. 

Their  idolatry,  then,  was  a  violation,  not  of  the  first,  but  of  the 
second  commandment.  They  did  not  propose  to  renounce 
Jehovah — that  was  left  for  the  days  of  Ahab  ;  but  they  desired 


130  ®fre  Broken 

to  worship  Jehovah  under  the  form  of  a  calf,  and  in  distinct 
violation  of  the  emphatic  prohibition,  which  said,  "  Thou  shalt 
not  make  unto  thee  any  graven  image,  or  any  likeness  of  any 
thing  that  is  in  heaven  above,  or  that  is  in  the  earth  beneath  ; 
thou  shalt  not  bow  down  thyself  to  them,  nor  serve  them." 
This  was  the  sin  also  of  Jeroboam. 

(2)  Their  Degradation. — There  can  be   no  doubt  that  the 
worship  of  the  calf  was  accompanied  with  the  licentious  orgies 
which  were  a  recognised  part  of  Egyptian  idolatry.     As  much 
•js  this  is  implied  in  the  narrative.     "  The  people  sat  down  to  eat 
and  to  drink,  and   rose  up   to   play."     In  the  R.v.  a   striking 
emendation  is  given  of  the  25th  verse.     "  Moses  saw  that  the 
people  were  broken  loose ;   for  Aaron  had  let  them  loose  for  a 
derision  among  their  enemies."     And  from  this  we  may  infer 
that  the  bonds  of  continence,  that  had  restrained  them  since  the 
Exodus,  had  been  suddenly  slackened  ;   with  the  result  of  their 
breaking  from  all  restraint,  and  giving  themselves  up  to  their 
unholy  riot. 

(3)  The  Claims  of  God. — There  was  every  reason  to  believe 
that  God  would  exact  the  full  amount  of  penalty  ;   not  because 
He  was  vindictive,  but  because  the  maintenance  of  his  authority 
seemed  to  demand  it.     The  righteousness  of  his  character,  the 
inviolability  of  his  oath,  the  authority  of  the  Ten  Command 
ments,  so  recently  given,  combined  to  make  it  necessary  that 
He  should  do  as  He  had  said. 

And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  the  fear  lest,  if,  to  use 
the  language  of  men,  God's  anger  waxed  hot  and  He  consumed 
them,  the  Egyptians  might  say,  "  For  evil  did  He  bring  them 
forth  to  slay  them  on  the  mountains,  and  to  consume  them  from 
the  face  of  the  earth."  And  thus  Jehovah's  character  might  be 
misunderstood  and  maligned  amongst  the  nations  around. 

How  could  God  maintain  his  character  with  his  own  people 
without  imperilling  it  with  the  Egyptians?  If  he  spared  the 
people,  they  would  begin  to  think  that  neither  his  threats  nor 
his  promises  were  worth  their  heed.  And  if  He  destroyed  them, 
his  glory  would  be  dimmed  ;  and  He  might  seem  to  have  become 
unmindful  of  the  oath  which  He  swore  by  Himself  to  his 
servants,  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Israel,  that  He  would  multiply 
their  seed,  and  give  the  land  of  Canaan  to  them  as  an  heritag  e 
for  ever.  So  greatly  did  these  considerations  weigh  with  Moses, 


bcsmujKi  tljc  |for&."  131 

that  he  refused  the  Divine  offer  to  make  him  the  only  survivor 
of  the  host,  and  the  progenitor  of  a  great  nation. 

It  would  almost  seem  as  if  this  proposal  resembled  the  sug 
gestion  made  to  Abraham,  that  he  should  offer  up  his  only  son, 
Isaac.  In  each  case  God  tried — or  tested — his  servant.  But  there 
is  this  great  difference  between  the  temptations  of  the  devil  and 
of  God.  The  former  seeks  to  bring  out  all  the  evil,  and  to  make 
it  permanent,  as  the  streams  of  lava  poured  from  the  heart  of  a 
volcano  :  the  latter  seeks  to  bring  out  all  the  good,  and  to  make 
it  ours  ;  for  moral  qualities  never  become  ours  till  we  have  put 
them  into  practice. 

II.  THE  EMOTIONS  WITH  WHICH  HIS  SOUL  WAS  STIRRED. — 
In  the  mount  he  acted  as  intercessor.  When  God  told  him  all 
that  was  transpiring  in  the  plain  below,  and  showed  the  glitter 
ing  sword  of  justice  suspended  over  the  guilty  nation  by  a  thread, 
he  pleaded  for  the  people  whom  he  loved.  "And  Moses 
besought  the  Lord  his  God... Turn  from  thy  fierce  wrath,  and 
repent  of  this  evil  against  thy  people."  "And  the  Lord 
repented  of  the  evil  which  He  thought  to  do  unto  his  people." 

On  his  way  down  from  the  mount,  when  he  came  near  enough 
to  see  the  calf  and  the  dancing,  peering  over  some  over-hanging 
ledge  of  rock,  the  old  impetuous  vehemence  which  had  charac 
terized  him  in  earlier  life,  and  had  slept  for  so  many  years,  broke 
out  with  all  its  early  intensity.  It  was  not  against  the  people,  but 
against  their  sin,  that  his  anger  flamed  out.  "  Moses'  anger 
waxed  hot ;  and  he  cast  the  tables  out  of  his  hands,  and  brake 
them  beneath  the  mount."  Those  splintered  bits  leaping  from 
crag  to  crag  are  an  apt  symbol  of  the  inability  of  man,  even  the 
holiest,  to  keep  intact  the  holy  Law  of  God. 

When  he  reached  the  camp,  he  seems  to  have  strode  into  the 
astonished  throng,  broken  up  their  revelry,  and  overturned  their 
calf,  ordering  it  to  be  destroyed,  and  the  fragments  mingled 
with  the  water  they  drank.  But  as  this  did  not  avail  to  stay  the 
inveterate  evil,  he  was  compelled  to  use  more  drastic  measures, 
and  by  the  sword  of  Levi  to  extinguish  it  with  the  life-blood 
of  three  thousand  men. 

Then  when  the  next  day  came,  when  the  camp  was  filled  with 
mourning  over  those  newly-made  graves,  when  the  awful  reaction 
had  set  in  on  the  people  and  himself,  the  tide  seems  to  have 


turned.  His  indignation  was  succeeded  by  bitter  sorrow  and 
pity.  The  thunderstorm  was  broken  into  floods  of  tears.  The 
pitiable  state  to  which  their  sin  had  reduced  them  aroused  his 
deepest  compassion  ;  and  he  said  unto  the  people,  "  Ye  have 
sinned  a  great  sin  :  and  now  I  will  go  up  unto  the  Lord,  perad- 
venture  I  shall  make  an  atonement  for  your  sin  "  (ver  30) ;  but 
he  did  not  tell  them  the  purpose  which  was  in  his  heart,  nor  the 
price  which  he  was  purposing  to  pay. 

III.  THE  OFFER  THAT  HE  MADE.— He  went  quietly  and 
thoughtfully  back  to  the  presence-chamber  of  God,  as  the  people 
stood  beholding.  "  Peradventure,"  he  had  said — he  was  not 
sure.  He  felt  that  the  sin  was  very  great.  He  could  not  see 
how  God  could  go  back  from  his  solemn  threatenings.  He  was 
convinced  that  if  the  merited  judgments  were  averted,  it  must 
be  in  consequence  of  an  atonement.  Yet,  what  atonement  could 
there  be  ?  Animals  could  not  avail,  though  they  were  offered  in 
hecatombs.  There  was  only  one  thing  he  could  suggest — he 
could  offer  himself.  He  was,  of  course,  by  no  means  clear  that 
even  this  would  be  accepted  or  avail ;  but  he  could  at  least  make 
the  offer.  This  was  the  secret  which  he  locked  in  his  breast  as 
he  climbed  the  mountain.  And  it  was  this  which  made  him  say, 
"  Peradventure."  He  could  not  be  sure  that  the  ransom  price 
would  be  large  enough. 

It  may  be  asked  how  he  came  to  think  of  atonement  But 
we  must  remember  that  probably  there  had  already  been  much 
talk  between  God  and  himself  about  the  sacrifices  which  the 
people  were  to  offer.  Again  and  again  had  the  word  atonement 
been  employed  :  he  had  lean.ed  that  one  by  suffering  could 
redeem  others ;  he  had  seen  the  deep  possibilities  in  the  law  of 
substitution  ;  and  it  seemed  a  natural  thing,  therefore,  to  propose 
that  he,  the  chosen  servant,  the  prince  and  leader  of  the  people, 
should  be  weighed  in  the  scale  against  the  nation,  and  God 
should  accept  his  blood  as  a  ransom  for  their  life. 

And  Moses  confessed  his  people's  sin  to  God,  and  added  : 

"  Yet  now,  if  Thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin ".  He  would  not 

finish  that  sentence.  He  could  not  trust  himself  to  depict  the 
blessed  consequences  that  would  ensue,  if  only  God  would  for 
give.  If  Thou  wilt  forgive,  freely,  and  without  a  ransom  price, 
then  thy  noblest  attributes  will  appear  ;  then  my  tongue  shall 


Jin  JLtoncment.  133 

sing  aloud  of  thy  goodness  ;  then  I  will  bind  myself  to  thy  service 
with  new  enthusiasm  ;  then  the  people  surely  will  become  touched 
with  the  passion  of  gratitude  and  love. 

But  the  dark  fear  oppressed  him  that  free  pardon  was  too 
much  to  expect.  Ah,  how  little  did  he  realize  the  love  of  God 
in  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  !  And  he  therefore  added  :  "And  if 
not,  blot  me,  I  pray  Thee,  out  of  thy  book  which  Thou  hast 
written."  That  book  may  be  the  Book  of  Life  ;  or  it  may  be 
the  registry  of  God's  people,  whether  in  this  life  or  in  the  next. 
So  that  the  proposal  was  either  that  he  should  there  and  then 
die,  and  not  see  the  good  land  beyond  Jordan  ;  or  that  he 
should  cease  to  be  numbered  with  God's  people,  and  miss  for 
ever  the  beautiful  vision,  finding  his  portion  among  the  repro 
bate. 

This  proposal  was  made  deliberately  and  thoughtfully.  He 
had  had  ample  time  to  think  it  over  during  the  long  and  tedious 
climb  from  the  mountain  foot.  He  was  quite  prepared  for  God 
to  accept  it.  He  would  have  counted  himself  highly  honoured 
to  have  been  allowed  to  be  a  sin-offering  on  those  heights.  Oh, 
how  the  heart  of  God  must  have  moved  towards  the  faithful 
servant,  whose  proposal  recalled  another  scene  in  the  far-away 
ages  of  eternity,  when  the  Son  of  God  undertook  to  redeem 
man  by  making  an  atonement  through  the  shedding  of  his  own 
blood  ! 

Of  course,  the  offer  was  not  accepted.  No  one  can  atone  for 
his  own  sin,  much  less  for  the  sins  of  others.  Yet  the  people 
were  spared.  The  passing  by  of  their  transgression  was  ren 
dered  possible  by  the  propitiation  which  was  to  be  offered  in  the 
course  of  the  ages  on  the  ooss  (Rom.  iii.  25).  And  though 
they  were  threatened  with  the  loss  of  the  Divine  presence  in  its 
richer  manifestations,  yet  the  Angel  of  God  was  sent  before 
them  to  lead  them  into  the  land  of  promise. 


XX. 
fob's  J3wsma  0ur 

"  My  presence  shall  go  with  thee,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 

EXOD.  xxxiii.  14. 

HIS  assurance  of  rest  is  as  applicable  to  the  present 
age  as  to  that  of  the  Exodus.  Nay,  perhaps  there  is 
a  special  message  in  it  to  these  feverish  days,  so  filled 
with  discord,  confusion,  and  strife.  Its  very  utterance 
shows  a  deep  acquaintance  with  the  heart  of  man. 
For  there  is  a  settled  conviction  with  us  all  that  we 
are  not  to  live  ever  thus,  the  victims  of  merciless  disquiet. 

Every  revolution — the  Anarchist's  plot  and  the  Socialist's 
dream,  the  well-meant  effort  to  bring  about  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  by  social  reconstruction — is  a  plea  on  the  part  of  men  for 
rest.  But  that  rest  must  be  sought  deeper  down  than  in  circum 
stances.  It  must  begin  at  ,the  centre  of  our  being,  and  in  its 
accord  with  the  being  of  God.  His  presence  must  be  welcome 
to  us,  and  accompany  us,  or  rest  is  a  vain  dream. 

I.  THE  CIRCUMSTANCES  BY  WHICH  THIS  ASSURANCE  WAS 
CALLED  FORTH. — (i)  Moses  was  a  very  lonely  man.  Perhaps 
more  lonely  in  the  midst  of  the  two  millions  of  people  whom 
he  was  leading  as  a  flock,  than  he  had  been  amid  the  solitudes 
of  the  desert,  tending  the  flock  of  Jethro.  The  very  contrast 
between  his  lofty  enjoyment  of  Divine  communion,  and  the 
people,  always  set  on  sensual  pleasure,  must  have  lent  intensity 
to  the  isolation  of  his  spirit,  which  reared  itself  amid  their 
sensual  longings,  as  the  peak  of  Sufsafeh  above  the  lower  ranges 
of  Sinai.  "  And  Moses  said  unto  the  Lord,  See,  Thou  sayest 
unto  me,  bring  up  this  people  ;  and  Thou  hast  not  let  me  know 
whom  Thou  wilt  send  with  me."  What  a  sigh  there  is  here  for 
companionship  ! 

It  is  certain  that  these  words  will  be  read  by  many  whose 
lives  are  outwardly  solitary.  Some  are  left  during  long  hours  to 


of  Ittoses. 


135 


bear  the  burden  of  the  home,  or  of  suffering,  or  of  foreign  service, 
like  a  sentry  on  night-duty  at  a  lone  post.  Others  amid  crowds 
are  not  less  solitary  ;  many  soldiers,  but  no  brother-officer  ; 
many  voices,  but  the  one  voice  missing  ;  many  companions,  but 
no  friend.  In  the  physical  world  we  are  told  that  in  the  most 
solid  bodies  the  atoms  do  not  touch  ;  and  how  often  though  the 
crowd  throngs  us  we  are  not  conscious  that  any  one  has  touched 
us.  It  is  to  that  state  of  mind  that  the  assurance  of  the  text 
was  given. 

(2)  In  addition  to  this,  the   hosts   were  soon   to  leave   the 
mountain  region  of  Sinai,  with  which  Moses  had  been  familiar 
during  his   shepherd  life,  in  order  to  take  the  onward  road 
through  unknown  deserts,  infested  by  daring  and  experienced 
foes.     What  though  the  pillar  and  cloud  led  them  slowly  along 
those  solemn  desert  pathways,  and  at  night  shed  a  broad  flood 
of  light  on  the  clustered  tents  of  the  desert  encampment  ;  yet  the 
prospect  of  that  journey  through  the  great  and  terrible  wilder 
ness  was  sufficient  to  appal  the  stoutest  heart. 

Such  a  summons  to  arise  and  depart  is  often  sounding  with 
its  bugle-call  in  our  ears.  We  are  not  like  those  who  travel  by 
the  metal  track  of  the  railroad,  on  which  they  have  been  to  and 
fro  every  day  for  years,  and  are  able  to  tell  exactly  the  names 
and  order  of  the  stations  ;  but  like  an  exploring  expedition  in  an 
absolutely  unknown  district,  when  even  the  leader,  as  he  leaves 
his  hammock  in  the  morning,  does  not  know  where  it  will  be 
slung  at  night.  What  seems  a  monotonous  life,  always  the 
same,  does  not  revolve  around  a  beaten  circle,  as  the  horse  or 
ass  winding  up  buckets  from  a  well  ;  but  is  ever  striking  out 
over  new  tracts  of  territory,  which  we  have  not  traversed 
before. 

(3)  Still  further  difficulties  had  lately  arisen  in  connection 
with  the  people's  transgression.     From  a  careful  study  of  the 
passage  it  would  seem  that  a  change  was  proposed   by  their 
Almighty  Friend.     Hitherto  He  had  gone  in  the  midst  of  them. 
Now  He  avowed  his  intention  of  substituting  an  angel  for  Him 
self,  lest  He  should  suddenly  consume  the  people  because  of  their 
stiff-neckedness  (ver.  3).     Already  the  people  had  been  bidden 
to  strip  themselves  of  their  ornaments  ;  and  the  tent,  which  was 
recognised  as  the  temporary  pavilion  for  God,  must  be  pitched 
without   the    camp,  afar   off  from    the   camp,    so   that    those 


J36  (Boil's  fprmttcc  our 

who  sought  the  Lord  were  compelled  to  take  a  considerable 
journey  to  reach  his  visible  shrine.  But  now  it  seemed  likely 
that  some  sensible  diminution  of  the  evidence  of  the  Divine 
presence  and  favour  was  about  to  take  place  ;  and  the  fear  of 
this  stirred  the  soul  of  the  great  leader  to  its  depths.  Like 
Jacob  at  the  fords  of  the  Jabbok,  he  felt  that  he  could  not  let 
God  go,  and  he  told  Him  so  :  "If  thy  presence  go  not  with  us, 
carry  us  not  up  hence."  Better  abandon  thy  mighty  scheme, 
slay  us  at  once,  and  wrap  us  in  a  winding  sheet  of  sand,  than 
allow  us  to  take  another  step  without  thy  presence. 

Are  there  not  times  with  many  of  us  when  we  have  reason  to 
fear  that,  in  consequence  of  some  sad  failure  or  sin  on  our  part, 
the  Lord  may  be  obliged  to  withdraw  the  conscious  enjoyment 
of  his  love  ?  A  chill  fear  lays  its  icy  hand  upon  the  strings  of 
our  heart,  and  almost  petrifies  it  into  silence.  "  Supposing  He 
should  be  compelled  to  leave  me  to  myself,  to  withdraw  his 
tender  mercies,  to  shut  up  his  compassions.  Supposing  that  I 
should  be  like  a  sledge  abandoned  in  Arctic  snows,  or  a  ship 
abandoned  by  its  crew  in  mid-ocean.  Supposing  that  the  fate 
of  Saul  should  be  mine,  and  that  of  me  God  should  say,  It 
repenteth  me  that  I  have  made  him  king."  Such  thoughts  quicken 
the  pace  of  the  soul  as  it  goes  to  his  footstool. 

II. — THE  PLACE  WHERE  THIS  ASSURANCE  WAS  GIVEN. — 
The  earlier  intercourse  between  the  servant,  "  faithful  in  all  his 
house,"  and  Him  who  had  appointed  him,  seems  to  have  been 
on  the  mountain  summit.  But  after  the  outburst  of  the  people's 
sin,  a  change  was  made  which  did  not  necessitate  such  prolonged 
or  distant  absences  from  the  camp.  Indeed,  he  was  absent  for 
only  one  other  period  of  forty  days  (chap,  xxxiv.  28)  till  the  time 
of  his  death,  some  thirty-eight  years  afterwards. 

During  the  prolonged  interview  which  he  had  been  permitted 
to  enjoy,  God  had  spoken  to  him  much  of  the  Tabernacle 
which  was  shortly  to  be  reared.  He  at  once  saw  the  blessed 
ness  of  this  proximity  of  the  shrine  for  worship  and  fellowship, 
and  his  ardent  soul  seems  to  have  been  unable  to  brook  delay. 
A  tent  was  therefore  selected  ;  it  may  have  been  his  own,  or 
one  specially  prepared,  and  was  pitched  "  without  the  camp, 
afar  off  from  the  camp.  And  he  called  it  the  Tent  of  Meeting  ; 
and  it  came  to  pass  that  every  one  which  sought  the  Lord  went 


®lje  tot  of  fleeting.  13? 

out  into  the  tent  of  meeting,  which  was  without  the  camp" 
(ver.  7,  R.V.). 

But  its  special  benefit  was  obvious  in  the  case  of  Moses 
himself.  It  was  no  longer  necessary  for  him  to  climb  to  the 
mountain  summit,  entrusted  with  errands  on  behalf  of  the 
people,  or  eager  for  advice  in  difficult  problems.  He  was 
able  to  transact  all  necessary  business  by  going  out  to  the 
tent.  And  when  it  was  rumoured  through  the  camp  that  he 
was  about  to  do  so,  "all  the  people  rose  up"  to  see  the  mar 
vellous  spectacle,  "and  stood,  every  man  at  his  tent  door," 
looking  after  him  ;  because,  so  soon  as  he  entered  into  the 
tent,  the  pillar  of  cloud  descended  from  its  position  in  mid- 
heaven,  and  stood  at  the  door  of  the  tent,  the  vehicle  and 
emblem  of  the  Divine  presence.  Thus  "  the  Lord  spake 
unto  Moses  face  to  face,  as  a  man  speaketh  unto  his  friend"  ; 
and  Moses  spake  to  his  Father,  who  is  in  secret,  with  the 
freedom  of  a  child.  And  as  the  people  beheld  that  wondrous 
sight  of  God  stooping  to  commune  with  man,  they  "  rose  up 
and  worshipped,  every  man  in  his  tent  door"  (ver.  10). 

It  was  there  that  this  amazing  colloquy  took  place.  Moses 
spoke  of  his  loneliness,  and  asked  who  was  to  be  associated 
with  him  in  his  great  task ;  and  contrasted  this  silence  on 
the  part  of  God  in  a  particular  which  so  closely  concerned 
his  comfort  and  efficiency  with  all  his  other  dealings  with 
him.  "Yet  Thou  hast  said,  I  know  thee  by  name,  and  thou 
hast  also  found  grace  in  my  sight "  (ver.  12).  Then  it  seemed 
as  if  that  faithful  heart  suddenly  caught  sight  of  a  blessing 
more  transcendent  in  glory  than  any  he  had  yet  dared  to  ask. 
His  petition  was  couched  in  great  humility,  sandwiched  be 
tween  a  double  reference  to  the  grace  to  which  he  owed  every 
thing  ;  but  he  ventured  to  suggest  that  God  should  Himself 
show  him  his  ways,  that  he  might  know  Him.  It  was  as  if 
he  said,  Wilt  Thou  Thyself  be  my  comrade  and  companion— my 
referee  in  difficulty  ;  my  adviser  in  perplexity  ;  my  friend  in 
solitude?  Thine  angels  are  strong  and  fair  and  good;  but 
none  of  them  will  suffice  me,  nothing  short  of  Thyself.  Without 
Thee,  it  were  better  for  me  to  relinquish  my  task  and  die  ;  but 
with  Thee,  no  difficulty  can  baffle,  no  fear  alarm,  no  obstacle 
deter. 

And  God's  answer  came  back  on  his  spirit  with  music  and 


J38  (Soft's  prmnre  out  Heat. 

balm,  "  My  presence  shall  go  with  thee,  and  I  will  give  thee 
rest"  (ver.  14).  Nothing  was  said  as  to  the  people.  The 
promise  of  the  Divine  presence  was  made  apparently  to  Moses 
alone. 

But  faith  gets  bolder  as  it  mounts.  Each  answer  to  its  claims 
makes  it  claim  more.  We  may  seriously  question  whether  our 
faith  is  of  the  right  quality  if  it  is  unable  to  compass  more  in  its 
hand  to-day  than  it  did  a  year  ago.  And,  therefore,  Moses  not 
only  took  the  assurance  of  the  Divine  presence  for  himself, 
but  asked  that  it  should  be  extended  to  include  the  people. 
"  Wherein  shall  it  be  known  here  that  I  and  thy  people  have 
found  grace  in  thy  sight  ?  Is  it  not  in  that  Thou  goest  with  us  ? 
so  shall  we  be  separated,  I  and  thy  people,  from  all  the  people 
that  are  upon  the  face  of  the  earth"  (ver.  16). 

In  this  request  also  he  was  successful.  "And  the  Lord  said 
unto  Moses,  I  will  do  this  thing  also  that  thou  hast  spoken  ; 
for  thou  hast  found  grace  in  my  sight "  (ver.  1 7).  There  are 
moments  of  holy  intercourse  with  God,  rapturous,  golden 
moments,  in  the  lives  of  all  his  servants  ;  when  next  they 
visit  us,  and  we  would  make  the  most  of  their  brief,  bright, 
rapturous  glow,  let  us  plead,  not  only  for  ourselves,  but  for 
others,  asking  for  them  an  equal  blessedness. 

III.  THE  BLESSEDNESS  WHICH  THIS  ASSURANCE  GUAR 
ANTEED. — There  was,  first,  the  Divine  presence  ;  and  there 
was,  secondly,  the  promised  Rest — not  the  rest  of  Canaan,  for 
this  Moses  never  saw ;  but  a  deeper  and  more  blessed 
inheritance,  which  may  be  the  portion  of  all  faithful  souls. 
But  at  their  heart  these  two  are  one.  The  Divine  presence  is 
Rest. 

Of  course,  the  conscious  presence  of  God  with  us  is  only 
possible  on  three  conditions. 

Firstly,  we  must  walk  in  the  light,  as  He  is  in  the  light ;  for 
He  will  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  dark 
ness,  or  turn  aside  to  go  with  us  on  any  crooked  path  of  our 
own  choosing. 

Secondly,  we  must  recognise  that  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
his  Son  constantly  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin ;  not  only  that 
which  we  judge  and  confess,  but  that  also  which  is  only  seen 
by  his  pure  and  holy  eyes. 


44  Wjtrm  rjabe  3  ...  but  fljw  ?  "  139 

Thirdly,  we  must  claim  the  gracious  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
to  make  real  that  presence,  which  is  too  subtle  for  the  eye  of 
man,  unless  it  be  specially  enlightened. 

And  above  all,  we  must  remember  that  for  us,  at  least,  that 
presence  is  localized  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  For  us  there 
is  no  attenuated  mist  of  presence,  though  a  mist  of  light ;  but  a 
Person  in  whom  that  presence  is  made  real  and  touches  us. 
But  when  these  conditions  are  fulfilled,  the  blessed  soul  enters 
upon  an  experience  of  the  presence  of  God  which  can  find  no 
better  words  to  express  its  bliss  than  the  psalmist's,  as  he  turned 
from  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked  to  consider  his  own  estate: 
"  Nevertheless,  I  am  continually  with  Thee ;  Thou  hast  holden 
me  by  my  right  hand... Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee?  and 
there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I  desire  beside  Thee  "  (Psa.  Ixiii. 
23,  25). 

And  the  sense  of  that  presence  is  Rest.  I  have  a  vision  of  a 
woodland  glade.  A  group  of  tired,  frightened  children  are 
cowering  around  the  bole  of  an  old  tree,  dropping  the  fragile, 
withered  flowers  from  their  hands  and  pinafores,  as  the  first 
great  drops  of  the  thunder  shower,  which  had  been  darkening 
the  sky,  begin  to  fall.  They  have  lost  their  way  ;  they  sob 
bitterly,  and  crowd  together.  Suddenly  through  the  wood  there 
comes  a  quick  step,  beneath  which  the  twigs  crackle  and  break — 
Father  has  come,  and  as  he  carries  some  in  his  strong  arms 
through  the  storm  on  the  nearest  track  for  home,  and  the 
others  run  at  his  side,  they  have  learnt  that  there  is  a  presence 
which  is  Rest. 


XXL 

18  tufting. 

According  to  all  that  I  shew  thee,  even  so  shall  ye  make  it after  the 

pattern  which  was  showed  thee  in  the  mount." 

EXOD.  xxv.  9,  40. 

HE  heart  of  the  Jewish  people  was  the  Tabernacle, 
around  which  their  tents  circled,  and  the  movements 
of  which  determined  the  journeyings  of  the  host. 
The  Tabernacle  also  taught  them  some  of  the  deepest 
thoughts  about  God,  in  a  kind  of  picture  language, 
which  was  best  suited  to  their  immature  minds. 
These  we  can  touch  on  but  incidentally,  as  our  main  point  is 
the  part  borne  by  Moses  in  its  creation. 

We  must  remember  that  the  children  of  Israel  did  not  possess 
a  language  like  our  own,  with  many  words,  and  a  rich  vocabu 
lary,  capable  of  expressing  all  kinds  of  abstract  ideas,  such  as 
love,  wisdom,  purity,  spirituality,  holiness.  We  hardly  realize 
how  great  a  hindrance  to  the  communication  of  spiritual  truth 
arises  from  the  lack  of  suitable  words  to  act  as  the  channels  of 
thought.  How  could  you  speak  of  love  to  savages,  if  the  only 
word  for  it  in  their  language  had  impure  and  coarse  associa 
tions?  So  that  before  making  his  revelation  God  had  to  provide 
language  for  his  thoughts.  This  He  did  largely  in  the  construc 
tion  of  the  Tabernacle. 

I.  THE  CONCEPTION  OF  THE  TABERNACLE. — The  pattern  in 
the  mount  !  Then  clearly  there  must  have  been  some  visible 
phenomenon,  some  bright  apparition,  some  glorious  picture  cast 
on  the  clouds  or  built  on  the  old  rocks.  There  may  have  been 
stakes  and  curtains,  cherubs  and  lamps,  gold  and  silver,  altar 
and  candlestick ;  but  they  would  not  bear  the  touch — they 
existed  as  a  beautiful  dream,  like  some  mystery  of  cloud  that 
stands  for  a  moment  in  the  heavens  at  sunset,  and  then 
is  gone. 


3  mag  Jrfodl  among  them."  141 

But  it  is  almost  inconceivable  that  God  did  not  at  the  same 
time  explain  to  Moses  those  wonderful  conceptions  of  his 
own  nature,  and  his  relations  to  men,  which  were  intended 
to  be  set  forth  in  this  material  structure.  In  those  days  of 
hallowed  intercourse,  the  Almighty  Teacher  must  have  im 
pressed  on  the  reverent  and  receptive  mind  of  his  pupil  trains 
of  holy  thought  which  engrossed  and  delighted  him.  It  may 
be  that  even  to  him  they  were  first  conveyed  under  those 
pictorial  forms  in  which  they  were  afterwards  presented  to  the 
people  ;  but  in  any  case  they  were  surely  communicated  by  the 
Spirit  which  reveals  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  makes  them 
known  to  those  who  love  Him.  They  were  as  follows  : — 

God's  willingness  to  share  man's  life. — If  the  people  had  only 
seen  the  devouring  fire  on  the  top  of  Sinai,  the  pavilion  of  God's 
presence,  they  would  never  have  dared  to  think  that  there  was 
any  community  of  interest  between  Him  and  them.  To  their 
minds,  He  would  always  have  seemed  distant  and  unapproach 
able.  So  God  said,  "  Let  them  make  Me  a  sanctuary,  that  I 
may  dwell  among  them"  (ver  8);  and  He  promised  concerning 
it,  "  I  will  dwell  among  the  children  of  Israel,  and  will  be  their 
God"  (Exod.  xxix.  45). 

Thus  it  was  ordained  that  this  larger  tent  should  be  pitched 
among  them,  only  differing  from  their  own  in  its  proportions  and 
materials  ;  but  standing  on  the  same  level  sand,  struck  and 
pitched  at  the  same  hour  with  theirs,  and  enduring  the  same 
vicissitudes  of  weather  and  travel.  Did  not  this  say,  as  plainly 
as  words  could,  that  the  tabernacle  of  God  was  with  men,  and 
that  He  was  willing  to  dwell  with  them  and  become  their  God  ? 
Did  it  not  teach  that  Jehovah  had  become  a  pilgrim  with  the 
pilgrim  host ;  no  longer  a  God  afar  off,  but  a  sharer  in  their 
national  fortunes?  And  is  not  this  the  very  lesson  of  the  Incar 
nation  ?  May  we  not  venture  to  suppose  that  the  Church,  that 
holy  body  which  was  being  prepared  for  the  Son  of  God,  was 
even  then  revealed  to  the  faithful  servant  ?  and  that  in  his 
wonderful  structure  he  was  taught  to  repeat,  in  material 
forms,  that  mystic  union  of  spirit,  soul,  and  body,  in  the  man 
Christ  Jesus,  of  which  the  holy  of  holies,  the  holy  place,  and 
the  outer  court  were  the  transient  but  striking  emblem  ? 

It  was  thus  that  the  mind  of  man  was  prepared  to  learn  that 
God  could  become  flesh,  and  tabernacle  amongst  us.  It  was 


142  ^Tabernacle  f8u:IMtt0. 

thus  that  the  first  syllables  were  coined  which  were  to  be  built 
up  into  the  name  Emmanuel.  It  was  thus  that  the  Incarnation 
was  prefigured.  For  the  body  of  Jesus  is  the  true  Tabernacle, 
which  the  Lord  hath  pitched,  and  not  man  ;  that  body  which 
was  born  of  the  pure  Virgin,  in  which  He  abode  with  men,  and 
through  which  He  achieved  redemption. 

The  Greatness  of  God. — To  this,  too,  a  visible  expression  was 
to  be  given.  The  Tabernacle  was  the  most  superb  building  of 
its  kind  ever  reared  by  man.  It  must  have  cost  at  least  a 
quarter  of  a  million  sterling  —  an  immense  sum  for  that 
fugitive  nation  of  slaves.  The  silver  pedestals  placed  at 
intervals  along  the  sand  to  hold  the  upright  boards  ;  the 
gorgeous  tapestry  which  composed  ceiling  and  walls  ;  the 
golden  furniture,  of  which  the  seven-branched  candelabra 
alone  weighed  one  hundredweight  of  gold,  equal  to  ,£5500 
in  value  ;  the  brass  wrought  into  sixty  brazen  pillars,  with 
their  silver  capitals  and  hooks,  from  which  were  suspended 
curtains  of  so  slight  a  gauze  that  people  could  see  all  that  was 
transpiring  in  the  outer  court.  How  costly  were  these  ! 

On  that  new  year's  day,  the  anniversary  of  the  Exodus 
(Exod.  xl.  17),  as  it  stood  forth  completed  in  the  desert  sun 
shine,  it  must  have  seemed  to  all  who  beheld  it  as  fair  as  the 
New  Jerusalem  did  to  the  eye  of  the  seer,  when  he  beheld  it 
descending  out  of  heaven  from  God  ;  and  must  have  furnished 
new  and  enlarged  conceptions  of  the  Divine  majesty  :  though 
to  the  eye  of  Moses  there  must  have  been  almost  a  disappoint 
ment,  because  the  actual  fell  so  far  short  of  the  pattern  he  had 
seen. 

God's  Unity. — All  around,  the  nations  were  under  the  spell  of 
idolatry.  But  the  Tabernacle,  with  all  its  differing  parts,  and 
materials,  and  accessories,  was  one.  One  ark ;  one  incense 
altar ;  one  altar  of  burnt-offering  ;  one  sacred  purpose  in  every 
order  and  rite  for  the  putting  away  of  uncleanness.  It  stood, 
therefore,  among  men  as  a  perpetual  protest  against  idolatry, 
and  as  an  emphatic  witness  to  the  Unity  of  God.  "  Hear,  O 
Israel;  the  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord."  Such  was  the  perpetual 
message  that  floated  on  the  desert  air  from  that  unique  struc 
ture. 

But  how  sublime,  how  awe-inspiring  must  that  message  have 
been,  as  it  first  broke  on  the  heart  of  Moses !  He  knew  it  before, 


is  a  Spirit."  143 

but  he  saw  it  as  one  who  looks  into  the  heart  of  truth ;  compar 
ing  small  things  with  great,  it  was  as  when  we  look  into  the  eye 
of  our  friend,  and  detect  there  depths  of  life  and  love  which 
we  could  not  put  into  words,  and  which  had  passed  our 
thoughts. 

GocVs  Spirituality. — On  the  mountain  the  lawgiver  saw  the 
robes  of  the  King,  but  not  the  King  ;  his  glory,  but  not  his 
person  ;  his  back  part,  but  not  his  face  ;  and  the  conception 
that  God  was  a  Spirit  was  conveyed  to  the  people  in  that  most 
striking  form. 

Enter  the  holy  place  ;  your  eye  is  arrested  by  the  heavy  but 
magnificent  curtain,  wrought  with  cherubim,  that  cuts  off  six 
feet  of  the  length  of  the  entire  structure.  Pull  that  aside,  and 
you  pass  into  a  chamber  which  is  a  perfect  cube,  a  miniature  of 
the  New  Jerusalem,  whose  length,  and  breadth,  and  height,  are 
equal.  In  the  Egyptian  temple,  this  apartment  would  contain 
the  crocodile  or  ibis  ;  but  here  there  was  only  a  box,  over  which 
forms  of  exquisite  beauty  bent  with  outspread  wings,  and 
between  them  a  light  shone  which  was  not  borrowed  from  sun 
or  stars.  Could  anything  more  significantly  convey  the  idea 
that  God  was  a  Spirit  ? 

This  absence  of  any  visible  form  in  the  inner  shrine  most 
astonished  the  rough  soldier  Pompey,  who  strode  with  eager 
curiosity  across  the  floor,  which  had  never  before  been  pressed 
by  aught  but  the  unsandalled  foot  of  the  high  priest  once  a  year. 
He  expected  Lo  find  some  visible  embodiment  of  Jehovah, 
and  turned  contemptuously  away  deriding  the  empty  void. 
But  to  Moses  it  must  have  been  an  unparalleled  conception, 
overpowering  his  thoughts. 

God's  Purity. — The  impression  of  this  was  produced  by  a 
series  of  comparisons.  First,  the  Tabernacle  stood  within  a 
courtyard  fenced  from  public  approach,  the  outer  part  could  be 
trodden  only  by  those  men  who  had  passed  through  certain 
rites  of  purification  ;  and  as  to  the  inner,  it  could  only  be  trodden 
once  a  year  by  the  high  priest,  carefully  cleansed  by  many  rites, 
and  clad  in  garments  of  special  design,  whilst  the  blood  of  slain 
animals,  selected  out  of  the  herds  for  their  freedom  from  any 
blemish  or  speck,  was  sprinkled  around.  All  was  done  to 
impress  upon  the  people  the  care  with  which  they  must  approach 
God ;  and  in  this  way  impressions  of  his  holiness  were  wrought 
K 


144 

into  the  national  mind,  which  succeeding  centuries  have  not 
been  able  to  efface. 

And  throughout  these  arrangements,  and  notably  by  these 
repeated  references  to  the  blood  of  sacrifices  that  was  to  be  shed 
and  sprinkled,  Moses  became  much  familiarized  with  the  phi 
losophy  of  the  Atonement.  He  must  have  seen  across  the 
centuries  the  cross  of  Jesus,  with  its  mystery  of  love  and  sacri 
fice  and  substitution  for  the  sins  of  men  ;  and  there  must  have 
arisen  a  very  clear  prevision  of  those  various  aspects  of  that 
marvellous  death,  which  were  faintly  shadowed  forth  in  the 
offerings,  and  which  touch  God  and  the  believer,  the  offender  in 
ignorance,  and  the  sinner  in  presumption,  the  great  world  of 
men,  and  apparently  the  universe  of  God. 

Such  thoughts  as  these  must  have  penetrated  the  soul  of 
Moses  as  he  waited  before  God,  oblivious  to  the  flight  of  time, 
the  waning  love  and  idolatry  of  his  people,  or  the  demands  of 
the  body  for  food.  And  as  we  behold  the  great  spectacle  of 
that  rapt  and  spell-bound  soul,  we  get  some  conception  of  one 
part  at  least  of  the  engagements  of  eternity,  and  we  are  stirred 
to  seek  after  a  more  intimate  knowledge  of  God. 

Oh  to  know  God  !  Not  to  know  about  Him,  but  to  know 
Him  ;  to  "follow  on  to  know  the  Lord"  ;  to  think  his  thoughts  ; 
to  give  Him  time  to  convey  his  thoughts  into  our  minds  ; 
to  acquaint  ourselves  with  Him,  who,  indeed,  invites  us  to 
the  knowledge,  and  sets  open  all  the  doors  of  his  nature  for 
us  to  enter.  This  were  better  than  all  beside  ;  no  rapturous 
experience,  no  deliverance  from  evil,  no  flight  of  emotion, 
could  so  repay  our  soul  as  this,  which  must  carry  in  its 
embrace  all  of  these.  It  were  well,  indeed,  to  suffer  the 
loss  of  all  things  to  know  Him  ! 

II.  THE  REPRODUCTION  OF  THE  PATTERN.— There  is  a 
special  interest  to  us  all  in  this.  We  are  not  called  to  build 
again  the  Tabernacle,  after  that  old  pattern  which  has  served 
its  purpose,  and  fallen  into  disuse  because  superseded  by  the 
clearer  revelations  of  the  Gospel ;  yet  there  is  an  analogy  which 
is  full  of  instruction  and  inspiration  in  the  life  of  every  true 
believer,  and  deserves  our  attention  for  a  moment. 

As  the  Tabernacle  dwelt  in  the  mind  of  God  before  it  was 
reproduced  on  the  desert  sands,  so  does  the  life  of  each  one 


(goJr's  pattern.  145 


exist,  as  a  conception  of  that  same  infinite  intelligence  —  which 
comprehends  in  its  sweep  the  flight  of  an  angel  with  the  ever 
lasting  Gospel,  and  the  fall  of  a  sparrow  to  the  ground. 

When  a  child  is  born  into  the  world,  with  all  its  faculties 
shut  up  within  it,  as  a  flower  in  the  bud,  there  is  in  the  mind 
of  God  a  perfect  picture  of  what  that  life  may  become,  an 
ideal  to  which  it  may  be  conformed.  There  is  a  clear  antici 
pation  of  what  it  will  be  ;  but  side  by  side  there  is  a  distinct 
prevision  of  what  it  might  be.  And  if  only  that  pattern 
could  be  seen  and  literally  reproduced,  if  only  that  life  could 
attain  to  the  Divine  ideal,  there  would  be  no  room  for  regret 
or  disappointment.  It  would  fulfil  its  complete  purpose  as  a 
thought  of  the  Divine  mind,  and  attain  its  perfect  consumma 
tion  and  bliss. 

So  with  the  believer  standing  on  the  threshold  of  the 
Christian  life,  full  of  hope  and  purpose.  For  him  also  there 
is  a  perfect  ideal  stored  in  the  Divine  nature,  of  a  life  full 
of  the  blessedness  of  the  Beatitudes,  and  overflowing  with 
the  mighty  works  of  the  Gospels.  If  only  it  were  realized 
from  day  to  day  !  —  of  growing  glory,  from  strength  to  strength, 
from  grace  to  grace.  Alas,  that  with  so  many  of  us,  as 
the  years  have  passed,  we  have  wrought  our  own  evil  will 
and  followed  our  own  design  ! 

The  main  inquiry  for  us  all  as  we  enter  on  any  fresh  enter 
prise,  or  even  pass  over  the  threshold  of  each  new  day,  should 
be,  not  How  would  other  men  act  ?  nor  What  will  make  for  my 
own  advantage?  nor  What  would  increase  my  reputation,  or 
add  to  my  gains  ?  but  —  What  is  God's  ideal,  God's  thought, 
God's  pattern  ?  And  our  one  aim  should  be  to  understand 
it,  sure  that  to  fulfil  it  is  to  have  lived  well. 

God^s  Pattern  was  Comprehensive.  —  No  tassel,  nor  socket, 
nor  tiny  detail,  was  left  to  the  fancy  or  ingenuity  of  the 
artificers  ;  all  was  comprehended  in  the  Divine  pattern.  Of 
every  detail  God  had  a  plan  ;  because  in  each  some  purpose 
was  hidden,  and  the  symmetry  of  the  whole  depended  on 
the  perfection  of  each  part.  So  in  life  God's  thought  covers 
all  details.  Nothing  is  too  trivial  to  be  made  a  matter  of 
prayer  and  supplication.  No  great  life  is  possible  that  does 
not  comprehend  in  its  scheme  and  scope  attention  to  the 
commonplaces  and  trifles  of  character. 


146  dTabmtade  §u:IMtt0. 

God's  Plan  was  unfolded  gradually. — Probably  the  account 
of  the  revelation  of  the  successive  parts  of  the  Tabernacle  is 
an  exact  transcript  of  the  method  by  which  the  Divine  design 
was  unfolded  to  Moses'  thought.  Line  upon  line,  precept  upon 
precept — such  is  ever  the  Divine  method.  If  we  may  so  put 
it,  the  plan  of  the  life  of  Jesus  was  only  unfolded  to  his  human 
intelligence  a  step  at  a  time.  Remember  how  He  said,  "  the 
Son  can  do  nothing  of  Himself,  but  what  He  seeth  the  Father 
do."  "  He  will  show  Him  greater  works  than  these."  The  eye 
of  the  perfect  Servant  was  always  fixed  on  the  development  of 
his  Father's  scheme  for  Him ;  this  was  shown  in  the  touch 
of  a  wasted  hand,  the  cry  of  an  agonized  parent,  the  pressure 
of  the  hate  of  his  foes,  the  demands  of  the  crowds. 

We  shall  not  be  able  to  see  far  in  front,  nor  the  whole  completed 
plan  of  our  life  ;  but  as  we  complete  one  thing,  another  will  be 
revealed,  and  then  the  next,  and  the  next.  It  may  be  that  we 
shall  have  to  fulfil  the  different  portions  of  the  Tabernacle  of  our 
life,  without  apparent  connection  with  each  other,  "by  divers 
portions  and  in  divers  manners,"  and  we  shall  not  understand 
the  Divine  purpose  ;  but  at  the  end  of  life  we  shall  see  that  it 
\vas  one  complete  and  exquisite  structure,  of  which  no  part  was 
wanting. 

God's  Plan  was  commensurate  with  the  peopled  resources. — 
As  the  pattern  was  there  on  the  Mount,  there  were  the  materials 
for  its  realization  in  the  possession  of  the  people  below — the 
gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones  ;  the  blue  and  purple  and 
scarlet  ;  the  fine  linen  and  goats'  hair  ;  the  rams'  skins  and 
badgers'  skins  ;  the  genius  of  the  artificers ;  and  the  willingness 
of  the  people. 

God  never  gives  a  man  a  pattern  without  making  Himself 
responsible  for  the  provision  of  all  materials  needed  for  its  exe 
cution.  Take  God's  plan,  and  then  trust  God  utterly  for  the 
needful  grace ;  it  is  there  ;  it  only  awaits  the  claim  of  your  faith. 
All  things  are  added  to  the  man  who  seeks  first  and  only  the 
kingdom  of  God.  If  the  materials  are  not  forthcoming,  you  may 
seriously  question  whether  you  are  not  working  on  a  plan  of 
your  own.  God  will  not  provide  for  a  single  tassel  of  your  own 
addition  to  his  scheme. 

God^s  Plan  must  be  resolutely  Obeyed. — Again  and  again  in 
the  last  chapter  of  Exodus  we  are  told  that  all  was  done,  "as  the 


&l;e  fkafcn  Serpent.  147 

Lord  commanded  Moses."  This  was  his  supreme  joy  and  satis 
faction,  that  he  had  not  added  to  or  diminished  from  the  Divine 
command  ;  and  so  the  work  was  finished.  It  would  be  well 
for  us  to  cultivate  the  habit  of  immediate  and  entire  subservience 
to  the  prompting  of  the  Divine  will,  repeating  it  in  the  tiniest 
details  as  well  as  in  the  most  difficult  experiences. 

Thus  would  the  human  life  become  harmonious  with  the 
Divine,  the  tabernacles  of  our  lives  would  become  the  home  of 
Him  that  inhabiteth  eternity,  and  whose  name  is  Holy  ;  and 
there  would  be  the  settling  down  upon  us  of  the  Divine 
Shekinah,  "  the  cloud  by  day  and  fire  by  night,"  through  all  our 
journeys,  till  we  reach  our  Father's  home. 

God's  Plan  z's  always  Progressive. — In  pursuing  the  earlier 
stages  of  the  Divine  tuition,  Moses  was  specially  occupied 
with  elaborating  the  elementary  idea  of  sacrifice,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  Paschal  Lamb.  The  next  stage  was  the  building 
of  the  Tabernacle,  with  which  we  have  now  been  engaged. 
But  this  was  not  the  final  form  of  the  Divine  revelation  to 
which  he  was  called  to  give  visible  shape.  In  after  years, 
when  disease  was  mowing  down  thousands  of  victims  through 
out  the  camp,  as  a  judgment  on  the  murmurings  of  the  people, 
their  leader  was  summoned  to  make  a  serpent  of  brass,  and 
place  it  on  a  pole,  that  all  who  looked  might  live. 

In  that  supreme  moment,  he  caught  sight  of  the  dying  Lord, 
and  discerned,  not  only  the  fact,  but  the  method  of  his  death. 
To  no  other  Old  Testament  seer,  so  far  as  we  can  learn,  was  it 
given  to  know  that  Jesus  must  be  lifted  up  upon  a  cross.  But 
this  was  permitted  to  him  who  had  faithfully  wrought  out  the 
Divine  plan  in  its  earlier  stages;  and  he,  too,  was  privileged 
to  set  forth,  so  graphically  and  simply,  the  nature  of  saving 
faith.  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in  the  wilderness,  so 
must  the  Son  of  Man  be  lifted  up,  that  whosoever  believeth 
in  Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life." 

Thus  is  it  always.  As  we  climb  the  hill,  the  horizon  ex 
pands  ;  as  we  do  God's  will  more  thoroughly,  we  know  his 
doctrine  more  completely  ;  as  we  follow  the  Divine  plan,  we 
are  permitted  to  look  into  and  proclaim  those  deeper  things, 
"  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  Him." 


XXII. 
f&\lt  ^tart  from  Utttai. 

"And  Moses  said  unto  Hobab,  We  are  journeying  unto  the  place  of 
which  the  Lord  said,  I  will  give  it  you.  Come  thou  with  us,  and 
we  will  do  thee  good." — NUM.  x.  29. 

rSRAEL  sojourned  under  the  shadow  of  Sinai  for  about 
eleven  months — long  enough  to  see  the  round  of  the 
seasons  ;  but  the  green  verdure  of  the  spring  and  the 
fading  tints  of  the  autumn  would  leave  no  trace  on  the 
appearance  of  those  vast  sandstone  rocks.  But  what 
a  change  had  been  wrought  in  their  condition  !  They 
arrived  there  a  fugitive  and  unorganized  people  :  they  left  it  a 
mighty  nation  in  battle  array,  provided  with  a  sacerdotal  system 
which  was  to  last  for  centuries,  as  a  type  of  the  Priesthood  of 
Christ  and  his  saints ;  and  furnished  with  a  code  of  laws  and 
sanitary  enactments  which  have  been  a  model  for  the  most 
civilized  peoples  of  the  world. 

The  very  appearance  of  the  camp  indicated  this  marvellous 
change.  In  the  midst  the  sacred  tent  with  its  brooding  cloud, 
and  around  it  the  goodly  tents  of  the  people,  "  as  gardens  by 
the  riverside,  as  lign  aloes  which  the  Lord  had  planted,  or  as 
cedars  beside  the  waters."  The  priests  and  Levites  pitched 
immediately  around  it,  in  the  inner  circle ;  and  around  them 
again  the  twelve  great  tribes,  three  towards  each  point  of  the 
compass,  guarding  the  Tabernacle  as  a  most  sacred  charge,  and 
as  the  centre  of  their  national  life. 

It  was  a  marvellous  spectacle,  also,  when  the  cloud  was  taken 
up,  and  the  priests,  through  the  silver  trumpets,  gave  the  signal 
that  the  camps  on  the  east  side  should  begin  to  lead  off  the 
march.  Then  Judah  passed  on  first,  followed  by  Issachar  and 
Zebulun ;  and  the  sons  of  Gershom  and  Merari,  with  their  six 
wagons,  bearing  the  heavier  portions  of  the  Tabernacle  (Num.  vii. 


"  ®0tne  thoti  hritlj  us."  M9 

1-9)  came  next ;  and  after  these  Reuben,  followed  by  Simeon 
and  Gad  ;  then  the  long  lines  of  Kohathites,  carrying  on  their 
shoulders  the  vessels  of  the  Holy  Service  ;  and,  lastly,  the 
remaining  six  tribes  in  two  great  divisions,  the  one  led  by 
Ephraim  and  the  other  by  Dan. 

All  was  beautifully  ordered  ;  and  though  we  may  not  attribute 
the  mighty  revolution  which  had  been  thus  effected  to  the 
unaided  genius  of  Moses,  we  cannot  but  feel  that,  as  God  for  the 
most  part  gave  his  teachings,  through  minds  competent  to 
receive  and  transmit  them,  so  the  mental  endowments  of  Moses 
must  have  been  of  no  mean  order,  that  he  could  so  readily  take, 
and  keep,  and  transmit  the  legislation  which  made  Israel  a  great 
people.  But  side  by  side  with  this  colossal  intellect,  there  was 
still  a  weak,  human  heart,  which  betrayed  itself  in  the  proposal 
which  he  made  to  Hobab. 

I.  MOSES'  PROPOSAL. — During  their  stay  at  Sinai,  it  is 
probable  that  deputations  from  neighbouring  tribes  visited  the 
people,  and  amongst  them  was  this  chieftain  of  a  tribe  closely 
related  to  Moses  by  marriage.  Hobab,  we  are  told,  was  the  son 
of  Reuel,  the  Midianite,  Moses'  father-in-law.  Of  course,  he 
knew  the  country  well,  every  foot  of  it — where  the  springs  lay, 
and  the  pastures,  and  the  safest,  shortest  routes  ;  and  so  Moses 
approached  him  with  the  request  that  he  would  go  with  them, 
to  give  them  the  benefit  of  his  practical  knowledge.  "  Leave 
us  not,  I  pray  thee  ;  forasmuch  as  thou  knowest  how  we  are  to 
encamp  in  the  wilderness,  and  thou  mayest  be  to  us  instead  of 
eyes"  (chap.  x.  31). 

This  request  was,  obviously,  most  natural.  Moses  was  a  very 
lonely  man,  as  we  have  seen ;  and  it  was  pleasant  to  have  onef 
bound  to  him  by  a  blood  affinity,  to  unburden  himself  to,  in  any 
special  crisis. 

At  the  same  time,  it  was  at  variance  with  the  general  custom, 
which  even  then  must  have  commenced  strongly  to  assert  itself, 
of  Israelite  exclusiveness.  This  national  characteristic  was 
acutely  perceived  and  adverted  to  by  Balaam,  when  he  said: 
"  Lo,  the  people  shall  dwell  alone,  and  shall  not  be  reckoned 
among  the  nations"  (Num.  xxiii.  9).  The  Jew  made  no  inter 
marriages  with  neighbouring  peoples  on  pain  of  death ;  he 
dressed  in  a  special  garb,  and  differed  from  all  other  men  to  the 


iso  ®lje  J5i>tart  from  j^htat. 

very  dressing  of  his  beard.  And  all  this,  to  keep  the  people 
free  from  the  plague-spots  of  the  earth,  which,  in  the  expressive 
language  of  Leviticus  (xviii.  25),  was  "vomiting  out  her 
inhabitants." 

Even  though  we  admit  that  at  the  heart  of  the  nation  there 
were  more  tender  emotions  towards  any  who  were  willing  to 
sympathize  with  its  spirit — to  a  Rahab  and  a  Ruth  ;  to  the 
strangers  within  its  gates  ;  and  to  the  Gentiles,  who  might  in 
after  days  be  attracted  by  the  light  which  shines  from  Zion's 
hill — yet  it  was  an  unusual  thing  for  the  great  lawgiver  to  go 
out  of  his  way  to  utter  this  winsome  invitation  to  a  Midianite 
prince.  And  there  must  have  been  a  strong  reason  that 
prompted  it. 

And  shall  we  not  find  it  in  that  instinctive  shrinking  of  the 
human  heart  from  the  strange  and  unknown  way?  It  was 
because  Moses  had  never  gone  that  way  before  that  he  was  so 
eager  to  obtain  Hobab's  company,  and  offered  as  a  bribe  that 
"  what  goodness  the  Lord  shall  do  unto  us,  the  same  will  we  do 
unto  thee  "  (Num.  x.  32).  How  closely  home  does  this  phase  of 
thought  come  to  us  all !  We  do  not  know  what  may  await  us  at 
the  next  turn  of  the  path,  or  at  the  top  of  the  pass  ;  what  foes 
may  lurk;  what  emergencies  arise;  what  unexpected  barriers 
arrest  our  steps.  What  if  we  are  going  into  the  midst  of  the  foe ; 
or  missing  a  sweet  glen  with  its  luscious  herbage ;  or  making  for 
a  cul  de  sac,  through  which  we  shall  find  no  aperture,  and  must 
return  !  And  then  how  shall  we  survey  the  place  in  time  to  get 
suitable  camping-grounds  for  the  coming  hosts  !  How  well  to 
have  a  Hobab  who  knows  the  ground  ! 

We  seek  our  Hobabs  in  the  advice  of  sage,  grey-haired 
counsellors ;  in  the  formation  of  strong,  intelligent,  and 
wealthy  committees  ;  in  a  careful  observance  of  precedent. 
Anything  seems  better  than  a  simple  reliance  on  an  unseen 
guide.  Now,  in  one  sense,  there  is  no  harm  in  this.  We 
have  neither  right  nor  need  to  cut  ourselves  adrift  from 
others,  who  have  had  special  experience  in  some  new  ground 
on  which  we  are  venturing.  It  is  a  mistake  to  live  a  hermit 
life,  thinking  out  all  our  own  problems,  and  meeting  all  our 
own  questions  as  best  we  may.  Those  who  do  so  are  apt 
to  become  self-opinionated  and  full  of  crotchets.  God  often 
speaks  to  us  through  our  fellows  ;  they  are  his  ministers  to 


Sire  g  eastern  of  ^obab.  151 

us  for  good,  and  we  do  well  to  listen  to  our  Samuels,  our 
Isaiahs,  our  Johns.  But  there  is  also  a  great  danger  that 
we  should  put  man  before  God  ;  that  we  should  think  more 
of  the  glasses  than  of  that  which  they  are  intended  to  reveal ; 
and  that  we  should  so  cling  to  Hobab,  as  to  become  unmindful 
of  the  true  Guide  and  Leader  of  souls.  When  we  have  given 
Him  his  right  place,  He  will  probably  restore  our  judges  as  at 
the  first,  and  our  counsellors  as  at  the  beginning  ;  but  the  first 
necessity  is  that  the  eye  should  be  single  towards  Himself,  so 
that  the  whole  body  may  be  full  of  light. 

II.  THE  FAILURE  OF  HOBAB,  AND  THE  DIVINE  SUB 
STITUTE. — The  desert  chieftain  was  by  no  means  enamoured 
of  the  proposal  of  his  great  relative.  He  had  no  desire 
to  leave  his  tribe,  his  camping-ground,  his  free,  careless  exist 
ence,  to  link  his  fortunes  to  that  great  but  ill-mannered  host. 

And  other  considerations  may  have  weighed  with  him.  It 
was  only  a  month  before  that  Aaron  and  his  sons  had  been 
set  apart  for  their  sacred  work,  and  the  fire  of  God  had 
fallen  on  their  dedicatory  sacrifices.  The  people  had  seen 
and  shouted  ;  but  before  evening  their  joy  had  been  shrouded 
in  sudden  mourning.  For  some  violation  of  the  sacred  ritual, 
or  perhaps,  as  the  subsequent  prohibition  of  wine  suggests, 
for  personal  misconduct  whilst  engaged  in  their  ministry,  the 
two  young  priests  had  been  stricken  dead,  and  Aaron  forbidden 
to  weep.  This  must  have  struck  an  awful  fear  through  the 
camp. 

Shortly  after  this,  another  incident  occurred.  The  son  of  an 
Israelitish  woman,  whose  father  was  an  Egyptian,  had  blas 
phemed  the  holy  name  of  God,  and  cursed  in  the  midst  of 
conflict  with  a  man  of  Israel.  The  blasphemer  had  been 
stoned.  The  sentence  must  have  seemed  severe,  though,  as 
God  was  King,  the  sin  had  amounted  to  high  treason  ;  but 
the  swift  and  awful  vengeance  may  have  been  another  deterrent 
cause  in  influencing  the  decision  of  Hobab. 

The  result  of  it  all  was  that  in  reply  to  Moses'  request,  he 
said  bluntly,  "I  will  not  go  ;  but  I  will  depart  unto  mine  own 
land,  and  to  my  kindred  "  (ver.  30).  Moses  still  further  urged 
and  entreated  him ;  but  whether  he  succeeded  or  not  is 
doubtful ;  though  there  are  some  reasons  for  thinking  that 


J52  ®te  J^iart  from  j^htat. 

the  second  request  prevailed,  because  the  descendants  of  the 
Kenite  are  numbered  amongst  the  chosen  people  (Judg.  1.  16). 

But  it  would  seem  as  if  his  aid  were  rendered  needless  by 
the  provision  of  guidance  immediately  promised.  Up  to  this 
moment  the  position  of  the  Ark  had  been  in  the  midst  of  the 
host,  in  front  of  Ephraim,  Benjamin,  and  Manasseh  ;  but 
henceforth  it  went  three  days'  journey  in  front  of  the  people, 
"to  seek  out  a  resting-place  for  them."  We  are  left  to  con 
ceive  of  its  lonely  journey  as  it  went  forward,  borne  by  its 
attendant  band  of  priests  and  Levites,  and  perhaps  accom 
panied  by  a  little  group  of  princes  and  warriors,  and  specially 
by  the  great  lawgiver  himself.  Far  behind,  at  a  distance  of 
miles,  followed  the  camp  with  its  tumult,  its  murmur  of  many 
voices,  the  cries  of  little  children,  the  measured  tramp  of 
armed  bands.  But  none  of  these  intruded  on  the  silence 
and  solemnity  which,  like  majestic  angels,  passed  forward 
with  that  courier  group  accompanying  the  Ark,  over  which 
cherubic  forms  were  bending.  That  Moses  was  there  is 
indubitable  ;  for  the  august  sentences  are  recorded  with  which 
he  announced  its  starting  forth  and  its  setting  down.  In 
the  one  case,  looking  into  the  thin  air,  which  seemed  to 
him  thronged  with  opposing  forces  of  men  and  demons,  he 
cried,  "  Rise  up,  O  Lord,  and  let  thine  enemies  be  scattered, 
and  let  them  that  hate  Thee  flee  before  Thee "  ;  and  in 
the  other  he  cried,  "  Return,  O  Lord,  unto  the  many  thousands 
of  Israel"  (verses  35  and  36).  Thus  God  Himself  superseded 
the  proposal  of  Moses  by  an  expedient  which  more  than  met 
their  needs. 

What  consolation  there  is  to  each  of  us,  in  realizing  the 
spiritual  truth  underlying  this  historical  fact !  We  have  to 
pass  into  the  untried  and  unknown,  and  know  not  the  way 
we  should  take.  Some  have  to  go  alone.  Some  with  the 
memory  of  companions  that  once  went  at  their  side,  but 
whom  they  will  see  no  more  in  this  life.  Some,  though  at 
present  dowered  with  dear  fellow-pilgrims,  are  apprehensive 
and  fearful  as  to  the  route,  and  what  a  day  may  bring  forth. 
But  amid  all  Jesus  is  with  them,  and  goes  before  them,  whether 
for  war  or  rest.  He  never  will  forsake  nor  leave  them.  And 
the  days  as  they  pass  will  enable  them  to  say  with  ever  new 
meaning,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed." 


Cljrist  tlje  Cruc  ^Vrh.  153 

The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  true  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  who  has 
gone  before  us  through  the  world  and  death,  through  the 
grave  and  the  last  rally  of  the  hosts  of  darkness,  to  the  glory. 
We  have  but  to  follow  Him.  It  is  for  Him  to  scatter  our 
enemies,  while  we  stand  still  and  see  his  salvation.  It  is  for 
Him  to  choose  our  resting-place,  while  we  lie  down  and  prepare 
ourselves  for  new  obedience. 

Let  us  not  anticipate  God's  guidance  or  press  on  Him 
unduly.  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  Let  there 
be  an  interval  between  the  Ark  and  your  steps,  so  that 
you  may  see,  so  far  as  possible,  what  God  would  have  you 
do  ;  and  then  deliberately,  thoughtfully,  but  with  fixed  deter 
mination,  follow.  He  will  "be  to  us  instead  of  eyes." 

And  oh,  the  bliss  of  knowing  that  Jesus  is  not  "three 
days'  journey"  distant  ;  but  near,  so  that  He  is  ever  between 
us  and  our  foes.  Before  they  can  hurt  us  they  must  reckon 
with  Him.  In  Him,  too,  is  rest ;  so  that  we  may  lie  under  his 
shadow  with  great  delight,  and  know  that  all  must  be  well, 
since  He  has  chosen  our  inheritance  for  us. 


XXIII. 
to  tfa 

"And  Moses  said,  Enviest  thou  for  my  sake?    Would  God  that  all 
the  Lord's  people  were  prophets." — NUM.  xi.  29. 

NINTERRUPTED  success  is  hard  to  bear,  much  more 
so  than  perpetual  trial.  This  was  the  moral  of  the 
story  of  the  plains  of  Capua,  where  the  demoralization, 
wrought  in  the  troops  of  Hannibal  by  the  enervating 
climate,  wrought  more  havoc  than  the  prowess  of  the 
legions  of  Rome.  Many  who  were  vigorous  and 
energetic  when  climbing  the  steep  cliffs  of  adversity,  have 
succumbed  to  petty  temptations  in  days  of  sunny  prosperity. 

If  it  should  be  debated  as  to  whether  sunshine  or  storm, 
success  or  trial,  were  the  severer  test  for  character,  the  shrewdest 
observers  of  human  nature  would  probably  answer  that  nothing 
so  clearly  shows  the  real  stuff  of  which  we  are  made  as  pros 
perity;  because  this  of  all  tests  is  the  severest.  When  the 
younger  son  came  to  possess  the  portion  of  goods  that  fell  to  him, 
he  went  down  to  feed  swine. 

For  some  two  years  Moses  had  been  borne  along  on  a  flowing 
tide.  Through  faith  in  the  living  Jehovah,  he  had  vanquished 
the  proudest  monarch  of  his  time ;  had  conducted  nearly  three 
millions  of  people  through  the  wilderness  wastes  without  a 
settled  commissariat;  had  disciplined  an  unorganized  multitude 
into  a  mighty  host,  with  a  code  of  legislation  and  ritual  which 
is  the  admiration  of  all  thoughtful  men.  This  was  success 
enough  to  turn  the  head  of  any  ordinary  man ;  nor  could 
we  have  wondered  if  he  had  shown  signs  of  undue  elation  and 
pride.  But  the  two  incidents  which  we  are  now  to  consider  show 
how  absolutely  simple  and  humble  he  had  remained  amid  a  very 
summer  of  success. 

ELDAD  AND  MEDAD. — In  condescension  to  his  weakness,  his 
Almighty  Friend  appointed  seventy  colleagues  to  bear  with  him 


Clje  £>Ebcni5  (Blfcers.  155 

the  burden  of  the  people  ;  and  concerning  them  the  somewhat 
ominous  announcement  is  made  that  "  the  Lord  came  down  in 
a  cloud,  and  took  of  the  spirit  that  was  upon  him  and  gave  it 
unto  them"  (Num.  xi.  25). 

I  do  not  agree  with  those  who  think  that  there  was  any 
diminution  of  the  spirit  that  rested  upon  Moses.  It  is  very 
difficult  to  speak  of  the  sub-division  of  spirit.  You  cannot  draw 
it  off  from  one  man  to  others,  as  you  draw  off  water.  The  whole 
Spirit  of  God  is  in  each  man,  waiting  to  fill  him  to  the  uttermost 
of  his  capacity.  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  nothing  more  is 
intended  than  to  affirm  that  the  seventy  were  "  clothed  upon " 
with  the  same  kind  of  spiritual  force  as  that  which  rested  upon 
Moses. 

In  each  case  of  those  thus  anointed,  the  accession  of  spiritual 
force  was  marked  by  the  sudden  breaking  forth  of  prophecy; 
reminding  us  of  that  memorable  day,  of  which  this  was  a 
miniature,  when  "  they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
began  to  speak  with  other  tongues,  as  the  Spirit  gave  them 
utterance  "  (Acts  ii.  4).  May  we  not  say  that  the  entrance  of 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  fulness  to  the  heart  of  man  will  always  lead 
to  the  utterance  of  thoughts  that  strive  for  expression,  as  the 
ocean  wave  sweeps  along  the  sea  wall  seeking  for  the  inlet 
where  it  may  expend  itself ! 

For  sixty-eight  of  them  the  power  of  utterance  was  only  spas 
modic  and  temporary.  "  They  prophesied,  but  they  did  so  no 
more"  (R.V.).  Emblems  are  they  of  those  who,  beneath  some 
special  influence — like  that  which  cast  Saul  down  among  the 
prophets — suddenly  break  out  into  speech  and  act,  and  give 
promises  not  destined  to  be  fulfilled.  Two,  however,  of  the 
selected  number,  who,  for  some  reason,  had  remained  in  the 
camp,  suddenly  became  conscious  of  their  reception  of  that 
same  spirit,  and  they,  too,  broke  out  into  prophecy,  and  appear 
to  have  continued  to  do  so.  Instantly  a  young  man,  jealous  for 
the  honour  of  Moses,  carried  to  him  the  startling  tidings,  "Eldad 
and  Medad  do  prophesy  in  the  camp  ; "  and  as  he  heard  the 
announcement,  Joshua,  equally  chivalrous,  exclaimed,  "My  lord 
Moses,  forbid  them  !"  eliciting  the  magnificent  answer,  "Art 
thou  jealous  for  my  sake?  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's 
people  were  prophets — that  the  Lord  would  put  his  Spirit  upon 
them  ! " 


156  $,0blE  to  tire  Core. 

It  was  as  if  he  said,  "  Do  you  think  that  I  alone  am  the 
channel  through  which  the  Divine  influences  can  pour?  Do  you 
suppose  that  the  supplies  in  the  being  of  God  are  so  meagre, 
that  He  must  stint  what  He  gives  through  me,  when  He  gives 
through  others  ?  If  it  should  please  Him  to  create  new  stars, 
must  He  rob  the  sun  of  its  light  to  give  them  brilliance  ?  Is  the 
gratification  of  a  mean  motive  of  vanity  a  matter  of  any  moment 
to  me,  who  have  gazed  on  the  face  of  God  ?  Besides,  what  am 
I,  or  what  is  my  position,  amongst  this  people,  compared  with 
the  benefit  which  would  accrue  to  them,  and  the  glory  which 
would  redound  to  God,  if  He  did  for  each  of  them  all  that  He 
has  done  for  me  ?  " 

This  is  the  spirit  of  true  magnanimity.  A  spirit  of  self- 
aggrandizement  is  set  on  retaining  its  exclusive  position  as  the 
sole  depository  of  the  Divine  blessing ;  though  this  has  the  certain 
effect  of  forfeiting  it,  so  that  fresh  supplies  cease  to  pass  through. 
But  whenever  the  eye  is  single  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  position 
is  looked  upon  only  as  his  gift  to  be  used  for  his  glory,  and 
when  the  spirit  is  concentred  in  one  eager  and  intense  desire 
to  see  his  will  done,  the  glory  of  that  light  extinguishes 
the  fires  of  ambition,  and  the  faithful  servant  is  willing 
to  be  anything  or  nothing,  if  only  the  Divine  purpose  is 
accomplished. 

There  is  no  test  more  searching  than  this.  Am  I  as  eager  for 
God's  kingdom  to  come  through  others  as  through  myself?  In 
my  private  intercessions  can  I  pray  as  heartily  and  earnestly  for 
the  success  of  my  competitors  as  for  my  own  ?  Can  I  see  with 
equanimity  other  and  younger  men  coming  to  the  front,  and  show 
ing  themselves  possessed  of  gifts  which  I  always  considered  to  be 
my  special  province  ?  Am  I  conscious  of  the  rising  of  jealousy 
or  envy  when  my  leadership  is  subordinated  to  the  claims  of 
rivals  ?  Should  I  be  willing  that  the  will  of  God  should  be  done 
through  another,  if  he  suited  God's  purpose  better  than  myself? 
Few  of  us  could  answer  these  questions  without  the  sense  of 
almost  insuperable  difficulty  in  assuming  the  position  taken  up 
by  Moses  when  he  heard  that  Eldad  and  Medad  prophesied  in 
the  camp. 

And  yet,  in  so  far  as  we  fall  short  of  that  position,  do  we  not 
betray  the  earthly  ingredients  which  have  mingled,  and  mingle 
still,  in  our  holy  service  ?  Yes  ;  it  is  ourselves  that  we  serve — 


$ttrtattt's  ^titrmurittrj.  157 

our  schemes,  and  plans,  and  selfhood.  And  if  we  were  to  elimi 
nate  from  Christian  service  all  that  has  emanated  from  these 
sources,  what  a  scanty  handful  of  gold-dust  would  be  left  !  Oh, 
when  shall  we  be  able  to  say,  "  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's 
people  were  prophets,"  and  view  with  thankful  joy  the 
levelling  up  of  all  Christians  to  the  table-land  of  our  gifts 
and  grace  ? 

This,  however,  can  never  come  till  we  have  learnt  to  spend 
long  hours  with  God  ;  till  we  have  been  taken  into  his  secret 
place  ;  till  we  have  come  to  care  for  his  honour  more  than  for 
our  own  ;  till  we  have  become  absorbed  in  the  one  consuming 
passion  to  see  Him  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  admired  in  all 
them  that  believe.  "The  zeal  of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up." 
Thus  does  the  herald  star,  which  on  the  fringe  of  night  has  told 
wear}'  eyes  that  the  dawn  is  near,  sink  contentedly  into  a  very 
ocean  of  light ;  though  not  itself  less  bright  because  every  inch 
of  space  is  illuminated  with  a  lustre  like  its  own. 

MIRIAM. — We  remember  her  as  the  little  black-eyed,  watchful 
maiden  who  stood  beneath  the  tall  palm-trees  of  the  river's 
brink  to  watch  the  bulrush  ark ;  and  again  as  the  heroic  woman 
who  answered  the  deep  bass  of  the  delivered  hosts  by  leading 
the  women's  chorus  on  the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea.  What  did 
she  not  owe  to  Moses  ?  But  for  him  she  must  have  been  an 
unknown  slave  girl,  mated  to  a  toiler  in  Pharaoh's  brickfields, 
the  mother  of  slaves.  But  now  she  was  free,  and  the  repre 
sentative  woman  of  an  emancipated  race,  through  the  brother 
whom  she  had  rocked  in  her  arms.  Ah,  it  was  sad,  indeed, 
that,  at  the  age  of  ninety,  she  should  turn  against  him  whom 
she  had  tended  and  loved  ;  and  that  she  should  poison  the 
mind  of  the  elder  brother  who  had  been  his  spokesman  and 
right  hand. 

They  spoke  against  him  because  of  the  Ethiopian  woman 
whom  he  had  married.  Some  have  thought  that  Moses  had 
married  a  second  time ;  but  it  seems  wiser,  since  the  death  of 
Zipporah  is  i.ot  mentioned,  to  consider  the  reproach  as  applic 
able  to  her,  especially  as  she  probably  bore  in  her  complexion 
the  brand  of  another  race.  "  Cushite  "  means  black,  or  dark- 
complexioned.  She  had  comparatively  recently  come  to  the 
camp  ;  and  for  some  time  Miriam  may  have  been  carefully 
watching  her,  with  the  result,  that  her  whole  woman's  nature 


tn  il 

revolted  from  the  thought  of  having  to  resign  her  primacy 
to  such  as  she  was.  It  is  always  difficult  to  see  another  filling 
the  place  which  we  have  looked  upon  as  ours,  especially  if  we 
are  conscious  of  being  able  to  fulfil  its  duties  better. 

How  well  we  can  imagine  her  talking  to  Aaron  and  to  the 
women  with  whom  she  was  intimate,  about  these  "  Cushites," 
until  she  had  raised  quite  a  storm  of  feeling.  This  was  bad 
enough  in  her ;  but  how  much  worse  in  Aaron,  who  held  the 
proudest  position  in  the  camp?  The  function  of  Moses  was 
temporary,  and  would  pass  away  with  his  life  ;  whereas  that  of 
Aaron  was  permanent  to  himself  and  his  heirs.  Yet  Aaron 
could  not  but  feel  how  vast  was  the  gulf  between  him  and  his 
brother.  And  out  of  this  there  sprang  the  jealousy  which  made 
Zipporah  its  excuse.  "And  they  said,  Hath  the  Lord  indeed 
spoken  only  by  Moses  ;  hath  He  not  spoken  also  by  us  ?"  How 
easy  it  is  to  disguise  jealousy  beneath  the  cloak  of  zeal  for  the 
law  of  God  ;  and  to  think  ourselves  immaculate  when  rebuking 
the  faults  of  others. 

But  how  did  Moses  act— he  who,  years  before,  had  felled  an 
Egyptian  with  one  blow  of  his  fist  ?  Did  he  pour  out  a  torrent  of 
indignation,  assuring  himself  that  he  had  just  cause  to  be  angry  ? 
Did  he  show  them  the  door  of  the  tent ,  and  bid  them  mind  their 
own  affairs  ?  Did  he  call  on  God  to  strike  them  down  in  his 
anger  ?  Nothing  of  the  sort.  He  answered  not  a  word ;  for 
"the  man  Moses  was  very  meek,  above  all  the  men  which  were 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth"  (Num.  xii.  3).  In  his  bearing  he 
reminds  us  of  Christ  in  the  judgment-hall,  who,  "  when  He  was 
reviled,  reviled  not  again." 

Was  this  weakness,  as  some  would  say  ?  Nay,  verily  ;  it  was 
the  exhibition  of  colossal  spiritual  strength.  Only  a  Samson 
with  unshorn  locks  could  have  acted  thus.  It  is  the  weak 
man  who  gives  blow  for  blow  ;  who  blurts  out  his  wrath  ;  who 
cannot  control  the  passion  of  his  spirit.  Only  the  strong  man 
can  be  perfectly  still  under  provocation,  holding  himself  in,  and 
turning  the  vehemence  of  his  soul  into  the  heat  of  an  intense 
love. 

It  may  be  well  to  give  some  closing  rules  as  to  the  attain 
ment  of  this  meek  and  quiet  spirit,  which  in  the  sight  of  God  is 
of  great  price. 

Firstt  let  us  claim  the  meekness  of  Christ. — This,  of  course, 


44  ©lie  |Keek  antr  (Quiet  Spirit."  159 

was  not  possible  for  Moses  in  the  direct  way  in  which  it  is  for 
us.  And  yet  doubtless,  in  his  case  also  there  was  a  constant 
appeal  for  heavenly  grace.  The  humility  of  Jesus  did  not  forbid 
his  proposing  Himself  as  our  model  for  meekness.  "Learn  of 
Me,"  He  said  ;  "  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  The  like 
ness  of  the  dove  that  rested  on  his  head,  and  the  lamb  to  which 
he  was  compared,  were  the  sweet  emblems  of  his  heart.  And  in 
moments  of  provocation  there  is  nothing  better  than  to  turn  to 
Him  and  claim  his  calm,  sweet  silence,  his  patience  and 
meekness,  saying,  "  I  claim  all  these,  my  Lord,  for  the  bitter 
need  of  my  spirit." 

Let  us  cultivate  the  habit  of  silence. — Express  a  thought, 
and  you  give  it  strength  and  permanence  ;  repress  it,  and  it  will 
wither  and  die.  Wisely  did  the  Apostle  James  lay  such  stress 
On  the  use  of  the  tongue,  as  the  rudder  and  bit  of  the  whole 
body  ;  for  its  use  will  instantly  determine  whether  the  heart  is 
filled  with  evil  or  peace.  You  will  often  hear  it  said  that  the 
best  way  of  getting  rid  of  an  importunate  passion  is  to  let  it  out 
and  have  done  with  it.  It  is,  however,  a  very  mistaken  policy. 
Utterance  will  give  it  vigour,  and  will  sow  another  crop  that 
will  soon  fruit  again.  Silence  will  kill  it ;  as  ice  kills  fish 
when  there  are  no  vent-holes  by  which  they  can  come  up  to 
breathe. 

Learn  to  be  still  ;  to  keep  the  door  of  the  lips  closed  ;  to  give, 
indeed,  an  answer  when  it  is  asked,  and  an  explanation  when  it 
is  needed  to  correct  a  misapprehension.  But  for  the  most  part 
imitate  the  example  of  David,  who  was  prepared  for  his  victory 
over  Goliath  by  the  previous  victory  which  he  won  over  his 
elder  brother  in  the  soft  answer  returned  to  his  insulting  ques 
tions.  "Let  every  man  be  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak,  slow  to 
wrath"  (Jas.  i.  19). 

Next,  consider  the  harm  done  by  the  aggressors  to  themselves. — 
The  cloud  removed  from  over  the  tent,  as  if  it  must  leave  the 
very  spot  where  the  culprits  stood  ;  and  behold,  Miriam  was 
leprous,  white  as  snow.  There  is  a  piece  of  profound  instruction 
here  ;  you  cannot  say  unkind  or  bitter  things  about  another, 
without  hurting  yourself  more  than  you  hurt  him.  Like  the 
boomerang  of  the  savage,  curses  come  back  to  the  spot  from 
which  they  start.  And  the  wronged  one  may  well  forget  his  own 
anguish  as  he  pours  out  his  soul  in  pity  and  prayer  for  those 


160  |loWe  to  t|je  Core. 

who,  in  dealing  out  their  bitter  words,  have  contracted  the  blot 
of  leprosy  on  themselves. 

Let  us  leave  God  to  vindicate  our  cause. — Moses  trusted  God 
to  vindicate  him ;  and  the  Almighty  God  "  rode  upon  a  cherub 
and  did  fly ;  yea,  He  did  fly  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind."  The 
Lord  heard  all  that  was  said,  and  spake  suddenly  to  the  three,  and 
told  them  that  whilst  He  would  speak  to  others  in  visions  and 
dreams,  it  was  to  Moses  only  that  he  would  speak  face  to  face,  so 
that  he  might  behold  Jehovah's  form.  "Wherefore  then,"  said 
He,  "were  ye  not  afraid  to  speak  against  my  servant  Moses?" 
(Num.  xii.  8).  This  is  the  secret  of  rest — to  cultivate  the  habit  of 
handing  all  over  to  God ;  as  Hezekiah  did,  when  he  spread  out 
Sennacherib's  letter  in  the  house  of  the  Lord. 

Commit  yourself  to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously,  in  sure 
certainty  that  He  will  vindicate  you,  and  bring  out  your 
righteousness  as  the  light,  and  your  judgment  as  the  noonday. 

Let  us  give  ourselves  to  intercessory  prayer. — Moses  cried 
unto  the  Lord,  saying,  "Heal  her  now,  O  God,  I  beseech  Thee" 
(ver.  13).  When  we  pray  for  those  who  have  despitefully 
used  and  persecuted  us,  it  is  marvellous  how  soon  the  soul  gets 
calm  and  tender.  We  may  begin  to  do  it  as  a  duty,  in  obedience 
to  the  command ;  we  soon  discover  it  to  be  as  snow  on  a  fevered 
forehead,  cooling  and  soothing  the  soul.  Do  not  wait  to  feel  an 
inspiration — act  on  the  sense  of  what  your  Lord  requires  ;  and 
as  you  pray,  in  the  caln  and  holy  presence  of  God,  in  the  secret 
where  your  Father  is  found,  you  will  find  that  unworthy  thoughts 
will  sink,  as  silt  is  precipitated  to  the  river-bed,  leaving  the 
stream  pellucid  and  clear. 

And  the  Lord  heard  his  servant's  prayer,  and  healed  Miriam; 
but  the  whole  host  was  delayed  a  week  through  her  sin.  We 
may  be  forgiven  ;  but  these  outbreaks  of  sin  always  entail  disaster 
and  delay.  Neither  we  nor  others  can  be  where  we  might  have 
been  had  they  not  occurred. 


XXIV. 
^  ISitt^r  Bisappoittttmnt 

"  To-morrow  turn  you,  and  get  you  into  the  wilderness  by  the  way 
of  the  Red  Sea."— NUM.  xiv.  25. 

fT  was  a  weary  journey  from  Kibroth-hataavah  to 
Hazeroth,  and  thence  to  Kadesh,  probably  the  weari 
est  of  the  entire  route.  Moses  spoke  of  it  afterwards 
as  "that  great  and  terrible  wilderness"  (Deut.  i.  19). 
But  at  last  the  hosts  reached  Kadesh-barnea,  on  the 
very  borders  of  the  Land  of  Promise ;  within  sight  of 
the  low  hills,  the  flying-buttresses,  so  to  speak,  of  the  verdant 
table-land,  which  first  arrests  the  eye  of  the  traveller  coming  up 
from  the  vast  limestone  plain  of  the  desert. 

How  welcome  that  spectacle,  after  the  four  hundred  miles  of 
journey  which  had  occupied  the  people  for  the  past  fifteen 
months  !  Welcome  as  the  land-haze  to  Columbus,  or  as  his 
native  village  nestling  in  the  embrace  of  the  hills  to  the 
returning  traveller.  It  must  have  been  specially  grateful  to 
the  eye  of  Moses. 

I.  His  HOPES. — As  yet  God  had  graciously  veiled  from 
him  the  weary  journeys  of  the  forty  years  that  were  to 
succeed.  He  had  no  idea  of  them.  They  had  never  entered 
into  his  calculations.  From  the  way  in  which  he  spoke  to 
the  people,  he  evidently  counted  on  a  comparatively  brief 
struggle,  sharp,  but  short,  through  which  they  would  pass 
to  their  possession.  It  never  occurred  to  him  that  any  one 
but  himself  would  plan  that  campaign,  even  if  Joshua  led 
it ;  or  that  any  other  hand  would  settle  the  people  in  the 
land  of  their  eager  longings.  These  are  the  words  he  ad 
dressed  to  the  people  as  they  camped  in  sight  of  the  rolling 
prairies  of  Canaan  :  "  Ye  are  come  unto  the  mountain  of  the 
Amorites,  which  the  Lord  our  God  doth  give  unto  us.  Behold 


1 62  3V,  fBitto:  Disappointment. 

the  Lord  thy  God  hath  set  the  land  before  thee:  go  up  and 
possess  it,  as  the  Lord  God  of  thy  fathers  hath  said  unto  thee  ; 
fear  not,  neither  be  discouraged"  (Deut.  i.  20,  21). 

As  he  said  these  words,  must  there  not  have  been,  deep 
in  his  heart,  a  sigh  of  relief  now  his  task  was  almost  done, 
and  he  might  lay  down  his  weighty  responsibilities  ?  God's 
glory  was  secured  beyond  their  power  to  tarnish  its  lustre. 
The  Egyptians  and  all  the  neighbouring  nations  must  hear 
and  be  convinced.  And  as  for  himself,  surely  there  were 
in  store  some  few  happy  years  in  which  he  should  repose 
after  the  long  toils  of  his  life.  "  Ah,  sweet  Land,  of  which 
God  has  spoken  to  me,  surely  there  is  within  thy  precincts 
some  sequestered  nook,  where  I  may  sit  down  and  rest,  and 
review  an  accomplished  work  ! " 

Who  can  doubt  that  some  such  hopes  and  thoughts  as 
these  filled  his  soul,  and  whispered  the  one  deep  sweet  word, 
Rest — Rest  ?  No  more  the  daily  gathering  of  manna;  because 
it  was  a  land  of  wheat  and  barley,  in  which  they  should  eat 
bread  without  scarceness.  No  more  the  quenching  of  thirst 
at  the  water  that  flowed  hot  over  the  desert  sand ;  because 
there  would  be  vines,  and  fig-trees,  and  pomegranates  :  it 
was  a  land  of  brooks  of  water,  of  fountains  and  depths  that 
sprang  out  of  valleys  and  hills.  No  more  the  pitching  and 
striking  of  tent,  the  setting  of  the  watch,  the  perpetual  move 
ment  ;  for  every  man  would  sit  under  his  own  vine  and  fig-tree. 
After  a  few  years  spent  thus,  he  might  ask  to  depart  in  peace, 
and  pass  home  from  the  Canaan  of  earth  to  the  Sabbath- 
keeping  of  heaven. 

Is  it  not  thus  that  we  all  picture  to  ourselves  some  blessed 
landscape,  lying  warm  and  sunny  under  the  smile  of  heaven  ? 
Life  is  pretty  hard  just  now  :  a  march  over  a  great  and  terrible 
wilderness  ;  a  stern  fight ;  a  bearing  of  burdens,  for  which  we 
have  only  just  got  strength  enough.  But  never  mind,  it 
cannot  last — there  must  be  respite  ;  the  long  lane  must  have 
a  turning;  the  wilderness-march  must  have  a  Canaan;  the 
lack  of  sympathy  and  tenderness  must  be  swallowed  up  and 
forgotten  in  the  embrace  of  a  love  which  shall  obliterate  the 
memory  of  all,  so  that  we  shall  awake  as  out  of  a  brief,  un 
pleasant  dream.  But  suppose  it  be  not  so  !  What  if  He  who 
loves  us  better  than  we  love  ourselves  has  marked  out  stations 


the  fanfc."  163 

in  a  desert-march,  that  lead  right  up  to  the  mount  from  which 
\ve  are  to  ascend  to  our  Father's  home  !  What  if  we  are 
to  fight  with  Moab,  and  meet  Balaam,  and  see  every  one 
of  those  with  whom  we  commenced  life  droop  around  us  ! 
What  if  we  are  to  lie  down  to  die  alone  beneath  his  kiss, 
away  from  the  prattle  of  children,  and  the  warm  pressure 
of  loving  hands,  on  some  Pisgah  height  !  All  this  may  be 
so  ;  but  if  it  is  so,  how  will  we  do  ?  Yet  this  is  precisely  what 
came  to  Moses. 

II.  THE  QUARTER  FROM  WHICH  HIS  DISAPPOINTMENT 
CAME.— It  came  entirely  from  the  people.  Their  first  mistake 
was  in  desiring  to  spy  out  the  land.  It  is  certainly  said  in 
these  chapters  that  "  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  saying,  Send 
thou  men,  that  they  may  search  the  land  of  Canaan"  (Num. 
xiii.  I,  2).  But  the  proposal  did  not  emanate  from  the  Lord. 
It  had  another  origin,  which  was  disclosed  by  Moses  himself 
forty  years  afterwards,  in  words  that  followed  those  quoted 
above,  "  And  ye  came  near  unto  me,  every  one  of  you,  and 
said,  We  will  send  men  before  us,  and  they  shall  search  us  out 
the  land,  and  bring  us  word  again"  (Deut.  i.  22). 

As  in  the  case  of  Saul,  the  King  of  Israel,  God  gave  them 
what  they  would  have.  Their  self-will  was  a  profound  mistake. 
Had  not  God  promised  to  give  them  the  land,  and  could  they 
not  trust  his  choice  ?  Were  not  his  eyes  ever  upon  it,  from  the 
beginning  to  the  end  of  the  year?  Why  need  they  wish  to  spy 
it  out  ?  What  about  his  promise  to  give  it  them  ;  why,  then, 
need  they  be  so  anxious  to  see  whether  they  could  cope  with 
its  possessors?  They  had  but,  as  Moses  said,  to  go  up  and 
possess  that  which  He  had  given. 

Their  second  mistake  was  in  receiving  the  discouraging 
report  of  the  majority  of  the  spies.  Up  to  a  certain  point 
there  was  perfect  agreement  between  them.  "We  came  into 
the  land  whither  thou  sentest  us,  and  surely  it  floweth  with 
milk  and  honey,  and  this  is  the  fruit  of  it."  Then  the  ten 
said,  "The  people  are  strong,  the  cities  are  fenced  and  very 
great  ;  and,  moreover,  we  saw  the  children  of  Anak  there. 
....  We  be  not  able  to  go  up  against  the  people,  for 
they  are  stronger  than  we"  (verses  28,  31,  R.V.).  But  the  two, 
Caleb  and  Joshua,  whose  names  alone  linger  on  our  tongues  as 


164 

household  words,  replied,  "If  the  Lord  delight  in  us,  then  He 
will  bring  us  into  this  land,  and  give  it  us  "  (Num.  xiv.  8). 

The  difference  between  the  two  lay  in  this,  that  the  ten 
looked  at  God  through  the  difficulties,  as  when  you  look  at 
the  sun  through  a  reversed  telescope,  and  it  seems  indefinitely 
distant  and  shorn  of  its  glory ;  while  the  two  looked  at  diffi 
culties  through  God.  And  the  people  sided  with  the  ten, 
and  turned  aside  from  the  thought  of  God,  to  dwell  long 
and  sadly  on  the  stupendous  obstacles  that  menaced  their 
occupation  of  the  land.  Here  was  a  fatal  mistake.  Unbelief 
never  gets  beyond  the  difficulties— the  cities,  the  walls,  the 
giants.  It  is  always  picturing  them,  dwelling  on  them,  pitting 
them  against  its  own  resources.  Faith,  on  the  other  hand, 
though  it  never  minimises  the  difficulties,  looks  them  steadily 
in  the  face,  turns  from  them,  and  looks  up  into  the  face  of 
God,  and  counts  on  Him.  This  is  what  the  people  failed  to  do  ; 
and  for  this  they  lost  Canaan.  "And  the  Lord  said  unto 
Moses,  How  long  will  this  people  not  believe  in  Me "  (chap, 
xiv.  u,  R.V.).  "We  see  that  they  could  not  enter  in,  because 
of  unbelief"  (Heb.  iii.  19). 

Note,  that  they  lost  Canaan,  not  because  of  the  graves  of 
lust,  but  because  of  their  unbelief.  My  brother,  do  not  sit 
down  beside  that  grave  of  lust,  and  suppose  that  that  is 
going  to  settle  your  future.  Never  !  God  is  not  going  to 
tether  you  for  ever  to  a  grave.  There  is  a  resurrection  and  a 
new  life  before  you,  even  for  you  ;  arise  in  the  light  of  his 
forgiveness,  and  walk  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the 
land  to  possess  it.  Know  thou  this,  that  the  only  thing  which 
can  exclude  thee  thence  is  that  thou  wilt  not  believe  in  a  for 
giveness  and  grace,  which  are  like  the  blue  arch  of  heaven 
above  thee,  or  like  the  immensity  of  eternity  itself. 

Their  next  mistake  was  in  their  murmuring,  which  proposed 
to  substitute  a  captain  for  their  tried  friend  and  God-given 
leader.  "  All  the  congregation  lifted  up  their  voice  and  cried ; 
and  the  people  wept  that  night.  And  all  the  children  of 
Israel  murmured  against  Moses  and  against  Aaron,  and  said, 
Would  God  that  we  had  died  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  .  .  And 
they  said  one  to  another,  Let  us  make  a  captain,  and  let  us 
return  into  Egypt"  (chap.  xiv.  1-3). 
This  was  perhaps  the  bitterest  hour  in  Moses'  life.  They  had 


"  l?et  us  return  info  (Brjgpt."  165 

proposed  to  elect  a  captain  before,  but  it  was  when  he  was  away; 
this  proposal  was  made  before  his  face.  The  people  whom  he 
had  loved  with  passionate  devotion,  whose  very  existence  was 
due  to  his  intercession  on  the  Mount  when  they  were  on  the 
point  of  being  destroyed,  had  forgotten  all  he  had  done ;  actually 
proposed  to  supersede  his  authority ;  and  if  he  would  not  go 
with  them  beneath  their  new-made  captain,  to  leave  him  to  his 
own  devices  there.  And  he  fell  on  his  face  before  all  the 
assembly  of  the  congregation.  What  unutterable  agony  rent  his 
breast  ! — not  only  that  he  should  be  thus  set  aside,  but  that  the 
anger  of  God  should  be  thus  provoked  by  the  people  he  loved  ! 

And  as  he  lay  there,  did  he  not  also,  in  those  dark,  sad 
moments,  see  the  crumbling  of  his  fairy  vision,  the  falling  of  a 
shadow  over  the  fair  prospect  of  his  hopes ;  as  when  a  pelting 
shower  of  rain  hides  a  landscape  which  a  moment  before  had 
lain  radiant  in  the  summer  light  ?  So  it  has  befallen  in  our 
own  experience,  not  once,  nor  twice.  We  had  been  on  the  point 
of  realizing  some  long-cherished  hope.  We  were  within  a  day's 
march  of  it.  Our  hands  had  already  reached  across  the  frontier 
line,  and  plucked  the  first  fruits  and  pressed  the  luscious  grapes 
of  Eshcol  to  our  lips.  Oh,  rapture !  oh,  fruition  of  long  expecta 
tion  !  oh,  heaven  of  bliss !  Then  suddenly  there  is  some  one  or 
more  to  whom  we  are  tied,  and  their  education  is  not  complete. 
They  cannot  yet  go  over  into  the  good  land  ;  and  because  they 
cannot,  we  may  not.  And  as  we  stand  there,  the  voice  says, 
"  To-morrow  turn  you,  and  get  you  into  the  wilderness  by  the 
way  of  the  Red  Sea"  (chap.  xiv.  25). 

III.  His  REFUSAL  TO  ESCAPE  THE  DISAPPOINTMENT. — The 
dream  of  Moses  for  a  speedy  entrance  into  the  land  might  even 
yet  have  been  realized.  If  all  the  people  were  cut  off,  and  he 
spared  to  be  a  second  Abraham,  the  founder  of  the  nation,  it 
might  be  possible  even  yet  for  him  to  pass  into  the  good  land, 
and  like  Abraham  settle  there.  And  thus  the  trial  came  into 
his  life.  Satan  tempts  us,  to  reveal  the  evil  in  us ;  God  to  reveal 
the  good.  So  God,  knowing  the  hidden  nobleness  of  his  faithful 
servant,  and  eager  that  it  should  be  revealed  to  all  the  world, 
suggested  to  him  a  proposal,  that  He  should  smite  the  people 
with  pestilence,  and  disinherit  them,  and  make  of  him  a  nation 
greater  and  mightier  than  they. 


1 66  ^  fitter 

"  Accept  it,"  said  the  spirit  of  the  self-life,  "  thou  hast  had 
trouble  enough  with  them ;  it  will  only  hasten  the  inevitable 
issue  of  their  misconduct ;  besides,  think  of  the  rest  thou  wilt 
enter  and  the  renown  which  will  accrue  to  thee  in  all  after-time." 
"  No,"  said  his  nobler,  truer  self.  "  It  may  not  be  ;  what  would 
become  of  Jehovah's  fame  ?  and  how  can  I  endure  to  see  my 
people  cut  off?" 

There  are  few  grander  passages  in  the  whole  Bible  than  that 
in  which  Moses  puts  away  the  testing  suggestion  as  impossible. 
"If  Thou  shalt  kill  all  this  people  as  one  man,  then  the  nations 
which  have  heard  the  fame  of  Thee  will  speak,  saying :  Because 
the  Lord  was  not  able  to  bring  this  people  into  the  land  which 
He  sware  unto  them,  therefore  He  hath  slain  them  in  the 
wilderness"  (verses  15,  16).  Then  quoting  the  words  which 
God  had  spoken  into  his  heart  on  that  memorable  occasion 
when  He  passed  down  the  mountain  gorge,  he  pleaded  that  He 
would  pardon  the  people  according  unto  the  greatness  of  his 
mercy,  as  He  had  been  doing  from  the  first  of  leaving  Egypt 
until  then.  In  other  words,  Moses  would  not  have  the  rest  he 
longed  for  at  the  sacrifice  of  a  ray  of  God's  glory,  or  of  the 
people  with  whom  his  life  was  linked,  though  they  had  sadly 
plagued  and  disowned  him.  And  so  he  turned  away  from  the 
open  gate  into  Paradise,  and  again  chose  rather  to  suffer  with 
the  people  in  their  afflictions  than  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  Canaan 
alone.  Let  us  ponder  the  lesson  ;  and  when  next  a  dear  delight 
is  within  our  reach,  and  it  will  be  more  for  the  glory  of  God  and 
the  good  of  others  to  turn  from  it,  let  us  ask  grace  to  take  the 
rugged  path  of  the  wilderness,  though  it  mean  a  lonely  life  for 
forty  years,  and  a  death  on  Pisgah. 

IV.  A  CONTRAST  TO  HIS  ENDURANCE  OF  DISAPPOINT 
MENT.— Little  is  said  about  the  leader's  bearing.  He  kept 
silence,  and  opened  not  his  mouth ;  he  hid  his  face  even  from 
good,  because  God  did  it.  But  the  people's  behaviour  throws 
his  into  strong  relief. 

When  they  heard  that  they  were  to  wander  in  the  wilderness 
for  forty  years,  till  their  carcases  fell  in  its  wastes,  to  be 
interred  in  the  sands  as  winding-sheets,  they  rose  up  early  in 
the  morning,  and  gat  them  up  to  the  top  of  the  mountain, 
saying  "  Lo,  we  be  here,  and  will  go  up  unto  the  place  which 


(Brar*.  167 

the  Lord  hath  promised.. .Nevertheless  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
of  the  Lord,  and  Moses,  departed  not  out  of  the  camp  "  (verses 
40,  44).  By  force  of  will  and  energy  they  sought  to  reverse  the 
sentence  just  passed  on  them.  Moses  meekly  bowed  his  head 
to  it,  and  accepted  the  discipline  of  those  long  years. 

Do  not  times  like  this  come  into  our  lives  ?  We  have  come 
to  the  brink  of  some  great  opportunity,  and  the  prize  has  seemed 
within  our  reach.  But  by  some  outburst  we  have  shown  our 
selves  unable  or  unfit  to  possess  it.  God  puts  us  back.  He 
says  in  effect,  You  are  not  yet  fit  to  enjoy  the  blessing.  You 
must  go  back  to  the  common  round,  sit  at  the  daily  task,  plod 
around  the  dull  mill-wheel.  Exercise  yourself  in  toils  and  frets 
and  trifles,  which  are  not  worthy  of  a  place  in  history ;  and 
after  awhile  come  back  and  stand  before  these  gates  again,  and 
you  shall  be  admitted. 

But  we  will  not  submit  to  it.  "Nay,  but  we  will  go  up."  We 
will  storm  the  position  ;  we  will  not  be  thwarted.  It  is  a 
hapless  and  useless  resolve.  You  cannot  force  the  gate.  Better 
a  hundred  times  wait  meekly  outside,  learning  the  lesson  of 
patience  and  faith,  and  you  shall  stand  there  again  ere  long  to  find 
it  open  to  the  summons  of  your  ennobled  and  purified  spirit. 

V.  MOSES'  SOLACE  IN  DISAPPOINTMENT. — Yet  there  were 
springs  at  which  that  weary  spirit  slaked  its  thirst.  The  sense 
that  he  did  the  will  of  God ;  the  blessedness  which  unselfishness 
always  brings  to  the  elect  spirit ;  the  joy  of  seeing  the  result  of 
the  Divine  discipline  in  the  growing  earnestness  and  strength  of 
his  people  ;  the  reception  of  daily  grace  for  daily  need.  All 
these  were  his. 

But  even  better  than  these  there  was  the  growing  realization 
that  the  true  rest  of  which  he  dreamed  was  not  to  be  found  in 
any  earthly  Canaan,  however  enticing  ;  but  in  that  rest  of  heart, 
that  Sabbath-keeping  of  the  soul,  that  repose  of  the  nature  in 
God,  which  is  alone  permanent  and  satisfying,  amid  the  change 
and  transience  of  all  human  and  earthly  conditions.  So  our 
God  not  unseldom  breaks  up  our  earthly  visions,  dear  and 
cherished,  in  order  that  our  soul,  bereaved  and  solitary,  may 
search  for  and  find  those  diviner  things  which  the  moth  of  change 
cannot  gnaw  into,  and  the  rust  of  time  cannot  corrode.  "These 
things  God  worketh  oftentimes  with  man.1' 


XXV. 
JfattljM  imte 

O  God,  shall  one  man  sin,  and  wilt  Thou  be  wroth  with  all  the 
congregation?" — NUM.  xvi.  22. 

EW  men  have  had  greater  experience  of  the  ingratitude 
of  their  fellows  than  Moses.  Here  it  broke  out  again, 
and  this  time  in  a  formidable  conspiracy  led  by  Korah, 
with  whom  were  associated  two  hundred  and  fifty 
princes,  men  of  renown.  The  special  points  were  the 
position  he  held  and  the  authority  he  exercised ;  and 
the  revolt  throws  some  interesting  light  on  the  manner  in  which 
God's  servants  should  consider  the  position  they  occupy  in  his 
church. 

In  the  history  of  all  workers  for  God  there  will  come  crises, 
when  wrong  motives  will  be  imputed  and  unkind  suggestions 
passed  from  mouth  to  mouth,  even  by  those  whose  spiritual 
life  has  been  due  to  their  prayers  and  tears.  Now  it  is  jealousy 
of  growing  influence  :  then  it  is  unwillingness  to  accept  direc 
tions  and  fall  in  rank  at  the  word  of  command  ;  again  it  is  the 
dislike  of  a  carnal  soul  at  the  high  spiritual  demands  which  are 
in  direct  collision  with  its  longings  for  milk  and  honey,  fields 
and  vineyards.  Such  disaffection  begins  with  one  discontented 
sensual  soul ;  but  it  spreads  as  fire  in  prairie  grass.  There  are 
many  craven  hearts  ready  enough  to  follow,  who  would  not  dare 
to  lead,  in  an  attempt  to  subvert  some  eminent  and  devoted 
servant  of  God.  Sometimes  the  pretext  is  no  better  than  in  the 
case  of  the  man  who  voted  for  the  expulsion  of  Aristides,  for 
no  other  reason  than  that  he  was  tired  of  hearing  him  called 
"  the  Just." 

At  such  times  we  do  well  to  turn  to  this  dark  chapter  in  the 
history  of  the  forty  years'  wanderings,  and  learn  how  men 
ought  to  behave  themselves  in  the  house  of  God,  which  is  the 
church  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth. 


"tto  £itt  of  forah."  169 

I.  LOOK  ON  YOUR  POSITION  AS  GOD'S  APPOINTMENT.— 
Korah  and  his  confederates  suggested  that  Moses  and  Aaron 
had  taken  on  themselves  the  offices  which  they  held,  the  one  as 
king  in  Jeshurun,  whenever  the  heads  of  the  people  gathered  ; 
the  other,  with  his  family,  as  priest.  "Why  should  these  offices 
be  exclusively  vested  in  the  two  brothers  ?  Were  there  not 
plenty  of  men  as  good  as  they  ?  Was  not  all  the  congregation 
holy?  And  might  not  the  presence  of  Jehovah  be  had  by 
others  as  well  as  by  them?"  It  was  a  conspiracy  of  princes 
against  the  leader  and  prince,  and  of  Levites  against  the 
priestly  family. 

Instantly  Moses  fell  on  his  face  before  God — his  favourite 
attitude  for  meeting  these  outbreaks  of  popular  hatred  and  dis 
content — like  the  bulrush  which  meekly  bows  its  head  as  the 
autumn  blast  sweeps  over  the  moor.  But  he  made  no  further 
attempt  to  justify  his  position  or  Aaron's.  He  might  have 
alleged  his  past  services,  his  claims  on  the  gratitude  and  loyalty 
of  the  people ;  he  might  have  reminded  them  that  their  national 
existence  was  due,  under  God,  to  his  faith,  his  prayers  and  tears, 
his  intercessions  and  exertions  on  their  behalf.  But  on  all  these 
points  he  held  his  peace,  and  took  the  whole  matter  into  the 
Divine  presence,  throwing  the  responsibility  on  his  God. 

First,  he  reminded  the  malcontents  that  their  own  position  had 
been  assigned  by  the  appointment  of  the  Most  High.  The  God 
of  Israel  had  separated  them  from  the  congregation  of  Israel,  to 
bring  them  near  unto  Himself,  to  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle 
of  the  Lord,  and  to  stand  before  the  congregation  to  minister 
unto  them.  It  was  distinctly  He  who  had  brought  them  near,  and 
all  the  sons  of  Levi  with  them.  There  was,  therefore,  no  cause 
for  jealousy.  The  places  of  influence  and  authority  in  Israel 
were  not  a  lottery,  where  some  men  might  happen  to  draw 
prizes  and  others  blanks.  Posts  were  assigned  to  men,  and  men 
to  posts,  by  the  distinct  interposition  of  God.  And  they  who 
had  been  so  distinctly  appointed  surely  should  admit  that  an 
equally  distinct  Divine  appointment  had  been  made  in  respect 
of  Aaron  and  himself. 

Next,  and  as  a  result  of  such  a  conception  of  the  true  position 
of  affairs,  this  ebullition  of  anger  was  shown  to  be  really  directed 
against  God  Himself.  "  Therefore  thou  and  all  thy  company 
are  gathered  together  against  the  Lord ;  and  Aaron,  what  is  he. 


X7°  ^Faithful  tmtor 

that  ye  murmur  against  him  ?"  (ver.  u,  R.v.)  When  men  turn 
against  us,  we  are  too  apt  to  run  away  from  our  position  in 
panic ;  to  make  terms  with  them ;  or  to  throw  down  the  reins  in 
a  pet.  Any  of  these  courses  is  a  profound  mistake,  and  quite 
incompatible  with  a  right  apprehension  of  our  position  towards 
God  on  the  one  hand,  and  man  on  the  other. 

There  are  many  passages  which  show  beyond  doubt  that  our 
positions  in  the  visible  church  are  defined  as  carefully  as  of 
members  in  the  human  body.  Though  you  be  only  a  joint  or 
hinge,  on  which  other  members  articulate  and  work,  you  must 
believe  that  your  position  was  fixed  by  the  All-wise  and  Almighty 
Disposer  of  all.  Is  it  to  be  supposed  for  a  moment  that  He,  who 
appointed  the  place  where  each  star  should  shine  in  the  bosom 
of  night,  should  leave  the  position  of  the  stars  of  his  church  to 
chance?  (Acts  xx.  28  ;  i  Cor.  xii.  28  ;  Eph.  iv.  ir,  R.V.). 

If,  then,  disaffection  or  dissatisfaction  arise,  they  must  not  in 
themselves  determine  your  course.  It  may  be  that  they  indicate 
that  the  time  has  come  for  you  to  go  elsewhere.  But  this 
evidence  is  by  no  means  conclusive.  You  must  go  to  Him  who 
sent  you,  whose  servant  you  are,  and  ask  if  it  is  his  will  for  you 
to  vacate  your  post ;  and  if  so,  that  He  should  make  it  clear.  If 
He  does  not,  then  let  nothing  that  man  can  do  alarm  or  trouble 
you.  You  must  stand  to  your  post,  as  the  lonely  sentinel  amid 
the  falling  lava  of  the  eruption,  till  the  Commander  of  the  Lord's 
hosts  tells  you  that  you  may  surrender  your  sacred  charge.  But 
if  no  such  orders  come,  grace  and  patience  will ;  and  you  must 
remain  till  relieved  by  death. 

Lastly,  Moses  left  the  ultimate  decision  ivith  God. — They  were 
all  to  take  censers,  which  were  the  ordinary  pre-requisites  of  the 
priests  alone ;  and  having  charged  them  with  fire  and  incense, 
were  to  present  themselves  before  the  Lord,  at  the  door  of  the 
tent  of  meeting.  It  would  be  then  for  God  to  choose  who  should 
be  holy,  and  who  should  be  caused  to  come  near  unto  Him. 

What  infinite  rest  would  come  into  the  lives  of  many  of  God's 
servants,  if  only  they  drank  in  the  spirit  of  this  heroic  soul ! — so 
resolute  to  do  the  Divine  will,  at  all  hazards  ;  and  to  remain  at 
the  helm,  though  the  fire  of  popular  resentment  crept  along  the 
bulwarks  and  blistered  the  skin  from  his  hands.  How  often  the 
face  is  worn  with  care,  and  the  head  streaked  with  grey,  even  if 
the  course  of  the  life  be  not  deflected  from  the  straight  rule  it 


Ijatfr  sent  me."  171 

should  follow  by  thoughts  like  these — What  will  my  committee, 
or  elders,  or  supporters  say?  What  will  become  of  my  children's 
bread,  if  I  thwart  so  influential  a  contributor  ?  How  shall  I  be 
able  to  withstand  so  strong  a  popular  movement  ?  Must  I  not 
yield  to  the  suggestions  of  friends,  or  threatenings  of  foes  ? 
Alas  !  these  questions  are  so  often  asked,  and  the  course  of  life 
decided  by  the  weighing  of  prudential  suggestions,  and  the  con 
sideration  of  human  policy,  but  with  little  or  no  reference  to 
Him,  whose  slaves  we  are,  selected  and  appointed  for  special 
work. 

Let  us  act  as  Moses,  the  faithful  servant  did,  and  refer  all  to 
the  decision  of  our  Master  and  Lord ;  and  in  the  meanwhile  be 
at  peace.  It  is  such  a  profound  mistake  to  carry  the  burdens  of 
the  Lord's  work.  When  difficulties  come,  as  they  will,  they 
are  his  quite  as  much  as  they  are  ours.  We  have  no  right  to 
carry  his  anxieties  and  care  for  his  cares.  He  asks  us  to  do  his 
work ;  to  obey  his  behests ;  to  fulfil  his  commissions ;  and  to 
transfer  all  the  weary  pressure  and  burden  to  Himself.  If  the 
people  do  not  like  us,  it  is  for  Him  to  determine  whether  He  will 
continue  us  in  our  position  ;  and  if  He  choose  to  do  so,  He  must 
keep  us  there,  and  give  us  favour  with  them.  If  our  supplies 
fall  off  in  doing  his  work,  He  must  maintain  us  and  our  dear 
ones.  A  royal  court  is  bound  to  support  its  own  embassies.  If 
our  mission  involve  the  assumption  of  leadership  which  is  dis 
puted  by  our  fellows,  we  cannot  recede  from  it,  so  long  as  we 
can  say  with  Moses,  "The  Lord  hath  sent  me  to  do  all  these 
works,  for  I  have  not  done  them  of  mine  own  mind  "  (ver.  28). 
Thus  pride  and  jealousy  are  alike  impossible.  We  know  we 
receive  nothing  except  it  is  given  us  from  heaven ;  and  we  refer 
all  disputants  to  Him  who  has  put  us  where  we  are. 

II.  CHERISH  KINDLY  FEELINGS  TOWARDS  THOSE  WHO 
OPPOSE. — How  nobly  Moses  dealt  with  this  murmuring  crowd ! 
When  first  he  heard  their  contentious  voices,  he  assumed  the 
posture  of  intercession,  and  began  to  plead  for  those  who 
despitefully  used  and  persecuted  him.  When  it  seemed,  on  the 
following  morning,  as  if  God  would  destroy  not  the  ringleaders 
only,  but  all  the  congregation  who  assembled  with  them  at  the 
door  of  the  tent  of  meeting,  he  fell  on  his  face  and  pleaded  with 
the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh  not  to  punish  all  for  the  sin  of 


J72  JFaitfrful  ittttor  ttqrrcarlj. 

one  man.  Dathan  and  Abiram,  the  sons  of  Eliab,  were  specially 
contumelious ;  and,  when  he  sent  to  summon  them,  returned  an 
insulting  message,  accusing  him  of  betraying  them  with  false 
representations,  asking  why  he  had  not  led  them  into  the  land 
of  milk  and  honey.  They  went  so  far  as  to  insinuate  that  they 
dared  not  come,  lest  he  should  bore  out  their  eyes  (ver.  14). 
Moses  was  naturally  very  indignant  and  wounded  by  these  bitter 
and  undeserved  reproaches ;  but  he  made  no  attempt  to  answer 
them,  except  in  self-vindication  before  the  Lord.  And  when 
bidden  he  did  not  hesitate  to  rise  up,  and  go  to  them,  with  no 
trace  of  vindictiveness  in  his  address. 

And  on  the  following  day,  when  the  people,  unawed  by  the 
terrible  judgments  that  had  befallen,  murmured  against  Aaron 
and  himself,  and  accused  them  of  having  killed  the  people 
of  the  Lord,  he  again  averted  from  them  the  judgment  which 
was  threatened — first  by  his  prayers,  and  then  by  hastening 
Aaron  to  stand,  censer  in  hand,  between  the  plague-stricken  and 
those  as  yet  unreached  by  the  sickle  of  death.  How  quick  he 
was  to  know  when  wrath  had  gone  out  from  the  Lord  !  How 
eager  to  stay  its  progress  !  How  generous  to  make  such  efforts 
on  the  behalf  of  those  who  had  but  an  hour  before  launched  at 
him  their  bitter  reproaches  ! 

This  is  the  true  pastor's  heart.  He  partakes  of  the  spirit  of 
the  Good  Shepherd,  who  loved  those  who  taunted  Him,  and 
pleaded  for  the  forgiveness  of  his  murderers.  There  is  no  more 
resentment  in  his  heart  towards  those  who  oppose  Him  than  in 
a  mother's  towards  the  babe  who,  in  its  paroxysm  of  temper, 
smites  her  breast  with  its  tiny  hands.  The  grey-headed 
retainers,  who,  prepared  to  die,  resist  the  entrance  of  the  mob 
at  the  palace  gates,  that  by  their  blood  they  may  purchase 
time  for  their  royal  master's  escape,  do  not  take  the  malice  of 
the  bloodthirsty  crowd  as  a  mere  personal  matter,  since  they 
know  that  they  are  hated  as  his  representatives,  and  are  proud 
to  suffer  for  him.  Oh  for  that  chivalrous  devotion  to  Christ, 
that  we  may  only  suffer  in  fellowship  with  his  sufferings,  die 
only  in  conformity  to  his  death,  identified  with  Him  in  all !  It 
is,  perhaps,  the  loftiest  summit  of  devotion  when  we  crave  love 
only  to  pass  it  on  to  Him;  and  dread  hatred  only  because  it 
hurts  the  hearts  that  cherish  it,  and  inflicts  a  wrong  on  the  dear 
and  glorious  Lord. 


"  (Bat!  toill  gclthcr."  173 

III.  You  MAY  EXPECT  GOD  TO  VINDICATE  YOU.— "And 
Moses  said,  If  these  men  die  the  common  death  of  all  men... 
then  the  Lord  hath  not  sent  me.  But  if  the  Lord  create  a 
creation  (marg.\  and  the  ground  open  her  mouth  and  swallow 
them  up... then  ye  shall  understand  that  these  men  have  despised, 
the  Lord.  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  he  made  an  end  of  speaking 
all  these  words,  that  the  ground  clave  asunder  that  was  under 
them,  and  the  earth  opened  her  mouth  and  swallowed  them  up" 
(verses  28-32,  R.V.).  It  was  a  terrible  act  of  vengeance.  It 
was  essential  to  the  existence  of  the  camp  that  the  mutiny 
should  be  stamped  out  without  mercy.  There  was  no  help  for 
it.  The  cancer  must  be  cut  out  of  the  quivering  flesh.  The 
death  would  be  painless  for  the  little  ones,  and  though  cut  off 
from  life  here  they  would  pass  at  once  into  the  broad  and 
blessed  spaces  of  eternity  ;  but  for  the  rest  the  punishment  was 
merited,  and  their  extermination  saved  the  camp. 

Many  have  essayed  to  stamp  out  the  church  of  God ;  but,  like 
Haman,  have  been  hanged  on  the  gallows  prepared  for  Mordecai. 
Others  have  spoken  against  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  but  have 
suffered  untimely  and  terrible  deaths.  The  bears  out  of  the 
wood  have  devoured.  Herod  has  been  eaten  by  worms.  Perse 
cutors  have  died  in  horrible  torment.  No  weapon  that  has  been 
formed  against  God's  saints  has  prospered.  Every  tongue  that 
has  been  raised  against  them  in  judgment  has  been  con 
demned. 

Trust  Him,  O  suffering  saints,  doing  his  will  in  the  teeth  of 
opposition  and  hate !  Fear  not  the  faces  of  men ;  be  not  dismayed 
before  their  threats — He  is  with  you  to  deliver  you.  They  may 
fight  against  you,  but  they  shall  not  prevail ;  their  proudest 
threats  shall  fail  of  their  fulfilment,  as  the  sea-billow  which 
flings  itself  on  the  boulder  is  dissolved  into  a  cloud  of  harmless 
spray.  God  loves  his  saints.  They  are  all  in  his  hand.  But  es 
pecially  those  are  in  its  covert  who  are  engaged  in  his  sacred 
work.  If  only  they  are  faithful  to  Him  and  to  his  behests,  and 
live  on  his  plan,  there  is  nothing  He  will  not  do  for  them.  When 
they  call  upon  Him  in  their  distress,  He  will  deliver  them 
from  their  strong  enemy,  and  bring  them  into  a  large  place  ; 
because  He  delights  in  them,  and  they  put  their  trust  in  Him. 


1 


XXVI. 
it  hi£ttt  III  toitb  frim. 

And  Moses  lifted  up  his  hand,  and  with  his  rod  he  smote  the  rock 
^  twice." — NUM.  xx.  u. 

LfT  was  but  one  act,  one  little  act ;  but  it  blighted  the  fair 
|/  flower  of  a  noble  life,  and  shut  the  one  soul,  whose 
p.  faith  had  sustained  the  responsibilities  of  the  Exodus 
/£  with  unflinching  fortitude,  from  the  reward  which 
Z9@j*t  seemed  so  nearly  within  its  grasp. 

The  wanderings  of  the  forty  years  were  almost  over. 
The  congregation  which  had  been  scattered  over  the  peninsula 
had  converged  towards  the  given  meeting-place  in  Kadesh. 
There  the  encampment  remained  for  some  months ;  and  there 
Miriam  died — one  of  the  few  with  whom  that  lonely  spirit  could 
still  hold  converse  of  that  life  which  lay  beyond  the  desert 
sands,  the  valleys  of  Sinai,  and  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea,  in 
the  distant  mighty  land  of  the  Pharaohs  and  the  Pyramids. 
Aaron,  Caleb,  Joshua  (and  perhaps  the  Levites),  were  the  only 
relics  and  survivors  of  that  vast  triumphant  host,  whose  voices 
had  rung  out  their  challenge  on  the  morning  of  emancipation  ; 
and  each  of  the  four  thought  himself  sure,  and  his  comrades 
also,  of  going  over  to  "  see  the  good  land  that  is  beyond  Jordan, 
that  goodly  mountain,  and  Lebanon."  But  this  was  not  to  be. 

I.  How  IT  BEFELL.— The  demand  of  the  people  on  the  water 
supply  at  Kadesh  was  so  great,  that  the  streams  were  drained  ; 
whereupon  there  broke  out  again  that  spirit  of  murmuring  and 
complaint  which  had  cursed  the  former  generation,  and  was 
now  reproduced  in  their  children.  Oblivious  to  the  unwavering 
care  of  all  the  preceding  years,  the  people  assembled  themselves 
together  against  Moses,  and  against  Aaron,  though  it  was  against 
Moses  that  they  principally  directed  their  reproach. 

They  professed  to  wish  that  they  had  died  in  the  plague  that 
Aaron's  censer  had  stayed  They  accused  the  brothers  of 


jtc  unto  tljfi  $T0r.h!"  175 

malicious  designs  to  effect  the  destruction  of  the  whole  assembly 
by  thirst.  Although  the  cloud  of  God  brooded  overhead,  and 
the  manna  fell  day  by  day,  they  cursed  their  abiding-place  as  evil. 
They  taunted  Moses  with  the  absence  of  figs,  vines,  and  pome 
granates.  They  demanded  water.  And  this  was  the  new  gene 
ration  of  which  he  had  cherished  such  high  hopes,  the  new 
growth  on  the  old  stock  !  It  could  hardly  have  been  otherwise 
than  that  he  should  feel  strongly  provoked. 

However,  he  resumed  his  old  position,  prostrating  himself 
at  the  door  of  the  tent  of  meeting  until  the  growing  light 
that  welled  forth  from  the  secret  place  indicated  that  the 
Divine  answer  was  near.  Unlike  the  injunction  on  a  similar 
occasion,  which  now  lay  back  in  the  haze  of  years,  Moses  was 
bidden,  though  he  took  the  rod,  not  to  use  it ;  but  to  speak  to 
the  rock  with  a  certainty  that  the  accents  of  his  voice,  smiting 
on  its  flinty  face,  would  have  as  much  effect  as  ever  the  rod  had 
had  previously,  and  would  be  followed  by  a  rush  of  crystal  water. 
Yes,  when  God  is  with  you,  words  are  equivalent  to  rods  ;  the 
gentlest  whisper  spoken  in  his  name  will  unlock  the  secrets  of 
rocky  chambers,  and  roll  away  great  stones,  and  splinter 
sepulchres  where  entombed  life  awaits  a  summons.  Rods  are 
well  enough  to  use  at  the  commencement  of  faith's  nurture,  and 
when  its  strength  is  small ;  but  they  may  be  laid  aside  without 
hesitance  in  the  later  stages  of  the  education  of  the  soul.  For 
as  faith  grows,  the  mere  machinery  and  apparatus  it  employs 
becomes  ever  less ;  and  its  miracles  are  wrought  with  the 
slightest  possible  introduction  of  the  material.  Years  ago  you 
were  bidden  to  use  the  rod  because  your  faith  was  untried ;  but 
by  this  time  the  greater  faith  should  work  through  a  slighter 
and  more  fragile  means. 

Moses  might  have  entered  into  these  thoughts  of  God  in 
quieter  and  more  tranquil  moments  ;  but  just  now  he  was  irri 
tated,  indignant,  and  hot  with  disappointment  and  anger. 
When,  therefore,  the  assembly  was  gathered  together  in  their 
thronging  multitudes  around  him,  he  accosted  them  as  rebels. 
He  spoke  as  if  the  gift  of  water  depended  on  himself  and 
Aaron.  He  betrayed  his  sense  of  the  irksomeness  of  their 
demand,  and  then  vehemently  smote  the  rock  with  his  rod 
twice.  And  as  those  blows  re-echoed  through  the  still  air,  they 
bhivcred  for  ever  the  fabric  woven  by  his  dreams  and  hopes. 
M 


176  $0ta  it  hmtt  HJll  farith  Ijint. 

The  vision  that  had  allured  him  through  those  long  years  faded 
as  light  off  Alpine  snows  at  sunset ;  and  angels  were  sent  to 
choose  the  site  beneath  the  cliffs  of  Pisgah,  where  his  body 
should  keep  guard  at  the  gate  of  the  Land,  in  which  he  had 
hoped  to  lie.  What  a  warning  is  here,  admonishing  us  that  we 
sometimes  fail  in  our  strongest  point ;  and  that  a  noble  career 
may  be  blasted  by  one  small  but  significant  and  for  ever  lament 
able  failure  !  "The  Lord  said  unto  Moses  and  Aaron,  Because 
ye  believed  not  in  Me,  to  sanctify  Me  in  the  eyes  of  the  children 
of  Israel,  therefore  ye  shall  not  bring  this  assembly  into  the 
land  which  I  have  given  them"  (ver.  12,  R.V.). 

The  people  did  not  suffer  through  their  leader's  sin.  The 
waters  gushed  from  out  the  rock  as  plentifully  as  they  would 
have  done  if  the  Divine  injunctions  had  been  precisely  complied 
with.  "The  water  came  forth  abundantly ;  and  the  congregation 
drank,  and  their  cattle."  Man's  unbelief  does  not  make  the 
power  of  God  of  none  effect  :  though  we  believe  not,  yet  He 
remaineth  faithful ;  He  cannot  deny  Himself,  or  desert  the  people 
of  his  choice. 

II.  THE  PRINCIPLE  THAT  UNDERLAY  THE  DIVINE  DE 
CISION,  (i)  There  was  distinct  Disobedience.  No  doubt  was 
possible  as  to  the  Divine  command  ;  and  it  had  been  distinctly 
infringed.  He  was  not  to  strike,  but  to  speak;  and  he  had  twice 
smitten  the  rock.  In  this  way  he  had  failed  to  sanctify  God  in 
the  eyes  of  the  people.  He  who  ought  to  have  set  the  example 
of  implicit  obedience  to  every  jot  and  tittle,  had  inserted  his  own 
will  and  way  as  a  substitute  for  God's.  This  could  not  be  tol 
erated  in  one  who  was  set  to  lead  and  teach  the  people. 

God  is  sanctified  whenever  we  put  an  inviolable  fence  around 
Himself  and  his  words  ;  treating  them  as  unquestionable  and 
decisive  ;  obeying  them  with  instant  and  utter  loyalty ;  daring 
to  place  them  high  above  all  dispute  as  the  supreme  rule  and 
guide  of  conduct.  Therefore,  when  Moses  set  them  aside  to 
follow  the  behest  of  his  own  whim,  .it  was  equivalent  to  a  dese 
cration  of  the  holy  name  of  God.  "  Ye  did  not  sanctify  Me  in 
the  eyes  of  the  children  of  Israel." 

It  is  a  solemn  question  for  us  all  whether  we  are  sufficiently 
accurate  in  our  obedience.  It  is  a  repeated  burden  of  those 
sad  chapters  of  Hebrews,  which  tell  the  story  of  the  wilderness 


^,  Solemn  (Question.  177 

wanderings — the  cemetery  chapters  of  the  New  Testament— 
that  "they  could  not  enter  in  because  of  unbelief."  But  through 
out  the  verses  the  margin  suggests  the  alternative  reading  of 
disobedience ;  because  disobedience  and  unbelief  are  the  two 
sides  of  the  same  coin — a  coin  of  the  devil's  mintage.  They 
who  disobey  do  not  believe  ;  and  they  who  do  not  believe 
disobey.  May  the  great  High  Priest,  with  his  sharp,  two-edged 
sword,  pierce  to  our  innermost  heart,  to  cut  away  the  least 
symptom  of  disobedience ;  then  shall  faith  be  strong,  and 
through  its  gates  we  shall  pass  into  the  land  of  rest. 

(2)  There  was  Unbelief. — It  was  as  if  he  had  felt  that  a  word 
was  not  enough.  As  if  there  must  be  something  more  of  human 
might  and  instrumentality.  There  was  a  too  evident  reliance 
upon  his  own  share  in  the  transaction,  or  on  the  mysterious 
power  of  the  rod  which  had  so  often  wrought  great  wonders. 
He  thought  too  much  of  these,  to  the  exclusion  or  dwarfing  of 
God's  eternal  power.  He  did  not  realize  how  small  an  act  on 
his  part  was  sufficient  to  open  the  sluice-gates  of  Omnipotence. 
A  touch  is  enough  to  set  Omnipotence  in  action 

It  is  very  wonderful  to  hear  God  say  to  Moses,  "  Ye  believed 
not  in  Me."  Was  not  this  the  man  by  whose  faith  the  plagues 
of  Egypt  had  fallen  on  that  unhappy  land ;  and  the  Red  Sea  had 
cleft  its  waters ;  and  the  daily  manna  had  spread  the  desert  floor 
with  food ;  and  the  people  had  marched  for  thirty-eight  years 
unhurt  by  hostile  arm  ?  What  had  happened  ?  Had  the 
wanderings  impaired  that  mighty  soul,  and  robbed  it  of  its  olden 
strength,  and  shorn  the  locks  of  its  might,  and  left  it  like  any 
other  ?  Surely,  something  of  this  sort  must  have  happened  I 
One  act  could  only  have  wrought  such  havoc  by  being  the 
symptom  of  unsuspected  wrong  beneath.  Oaks  do  not  fall 
beneath  a  single  storm,  unless  they  have  become  rotten  at  their 
heart. 

Let  us  watch  and  pray,  lest  there  be  in  any  of  us  an  evil  heart 
of  unbelief;  lest  we  depart  in  our  most  secret  thought  from 
simple  faith  in  the  living  God  ;  lest  beneath  a  fair  exterior  we 
yield  our  jewel  of  faith  to  the  solicitation  of  some  unholy  passion. 
Let  us  especially  set  a  watch  at  our  strongest  point.  Just 
because  we  are  so  confident  of  being  strong  there,  we  are  liable 
to  leave  it  unguarded  and  unwatched,  and  therefore  open  to  the 
foe.  So  shall  we  be  saved  from  a  fall  that  shall  shut  the  gates 


1 78  ijohr  it  brent  fll  toitlj  \jirn. 

of  Canaan  against  us,  and  consign  us  to  an  unknown  and 
untimely  grave. 

But  how  much  there  is  of  this  reliance  on  the  rod  in  all 
Christian  endeavour  !  Some  special  method  has  been  owned  of 
God  in  times  past,  in  the  conversion  of  the  unsaved,  or  in  the 
edification  of  God's  people,  and  we  instantly  regard  it  as  a  kind 
of  fetish.  We  try  to  meet  new  conditions  by  bringing  out  the 
rod  and  using  it  as  of  yore.  It  is  a  profound  mistake.  God 
never  repeats  Himself.  He  suits  novel  instrumentalities  to  new 
emergencies.  He  puts  new  wine  into  new  bottles.  Where  a  rod 
was  needful  once,  He  sees  that  a  word  is  better  now.  It  is  for 
us  to  consult  Him,  and  to  abide  by  his  decision ;  doing  precisely 
as  He  tells  us,  and  when,  and  where. 

(3)  There  was  the  spoiling  of  the  type.—"  That  Rock  was 
Christ";  from  whose  heart,  smitten  in  death  on  Calvary,  the  river 
of  water  of  life  has  flowed  to  make  glad  the  city  of  God,  and  to 
transform  deserts  into  Edens.  But  death  came  to  Him,  and  can 
come  to  Him  but  once.  "  Christ  was  once  offered  to  bear  the 
sins  of  many."  "The  death  that  He  died,  He  died  unto  sin  once ; 
but  the  life  that  He  liveth,  He  liveth  unto  God."  "  I  am  He  that 
was  dead ;  and  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore."  These 
texts  prove  how  important  it  was  to  keep  clear  and  defined 
the  fact  of  the  death  of  Christ  being  a  finished  act,  once 
for  all.  It  is  evident  that  for  the  completeness  of  the  likeness 
between  substance  and  shadow,  the  rock  should  have  been 
stricken  but  once.  Instead  of  that,  it  was  smitten  at  the  begin 
ning  and  at  the  close  of  the  desert  march.  But  this  was  a  mis 
representation  of  an  eternal  fact ;  and  the  perpetrator  of  the 
heedless  act  of  iconoclasm  must  suffer  the  extreme  penalty,  even 
as  Uzzah  died  for  trying  to  steady  the  swaying  ark. 

But  there  was  something  even  deeper  than  these  things. 
There  was  an  eternal  fitness  in  the  nature  of  the  case  in  Moses 
not  being  permitted  to  lead  the  people  into  the  land  of  rest. 
Moses  represented  the  law.  It  came  by  him  ;  and  he  therefore 
fitly  stands  before  the  gaze  of  the  ages  as  the  embodiment  of 
that  supreme  law,  whose  eye  does  not  wax  dim  or  its  force  abate, 
under  the  wear  and  tear  of  time.  But  the  law  can  never  lead 
us  into  rest.  It  can  conduct  us  to  the  very  margin  and  threshold, 
but  no  further.  Another  must  take  us  in,  the  true  Joshua — 
Jesus,  the  Saviour  and  Lover  of  men. 


"  OHjat  Hotk  toas  Christ."  179 

III.  THE  IRREVOCABLENESS  OF  THE  DIVINE  DECISIONS. — 
Moses  drank  very  deeply  of  the  bitter  cup  of  disappointment. 
And  it  seems  to  have  been  his  constant  prayer  that  God  would 
reverse  or  mitigate  his  sentence.  "  Let  me  go  over,  I  pray  Thee, 
and  see  the  good  land  that  is  beyond  Jordan,  that  goodly 
mountain,  and  Lebanon"  (Deut.  iii.  25).  No  poet  could  have 
painted  that  land  with  more  glowing  colours.  He  dipped  his 
brush  in  rainbow  tints  as  he  spoke  of  that  good  land — that  land 
of  brooks  and  fountains  and  depths ;  that  land  of  wheat  and 
barley,  of  vines  and  pomegranates  and  figs  ;  that  land  of  oil, 
olives,  and  honey.  And  no  patriot  ever  yearned  for  fatherland 
as  Moses  to  tread  that  blessed  soil.  With  all  the  earnestness 
that  he  had  used  to  plead  for  the  people,  he  now  pleaded  for 
himself.  But  it  was  not  to  be.  "  The  Lord  was  wroth,  and 
said  unto  me,  Let  it  suffice  thee  ;  speak  no  more  unto  Me  of 
this  matter."  The  sin  was  forgiven  ;  but  its  consequences  were 
allowed  to  work  out  to  their  sorrowful  issue.  There  are  experi 
ences  with  us  all  in  which  God  forgives  our  sin,  but  takes 
vengeance  on  our  inventions.  We  reap  as  we  have  sown.  We 
suffer  where  we  have  sinned. 

At  such  times  our  prayer  is  not  literally  answered.  By  the 
voice  of  his  Spirit,  by  a  spiritual  instinct,  we  become  conscious 
that  it  is  useless  to  pray  further.  Though  we  pray,  not  thrice, 
but  three  hundred  times,  the  thorn  is  not  taken  away.  But 
there  is  a  sense  in  which  the  prayer  is  answered.  Our  suffering 
is  a  lesson  warning  men  in  all  after-time.  We  are  permitted 
from  Pisgah's  height  to  scan  the  fair  land  we  long  for,  and  are 
then  removed  to  a  better.  We  have  the  answer  given  to  us  in 
the  after-time,  as  Moses,  who  had  his  prayer  gloriously  fulfilled 
when  he  stood  with  Christ  on  the  Transfiguration  Mount.  And 
in  the  meanwhile  we  hear  his  voice  saying,  My  grace  is  sufficient 
for  thee  ;  my  strength  is  made  perfect  in  weakness. 

But  oh  that  God  would  undertake  the  keeping  of  our  souls ! — 
else,  when  we  least  expect  it,  we  may  be  overtaken  by  some 
sudden  temptation ;  which  befalling  us  in  the  middle,  or  towards 
the  close  of  our  career,  may  blight  our  hopes,  tarnish  our  fair 
name,  bring  dishonour  to  Him,  and  rob  our  life  of  the  worthy 
capstone  of  its  edifice. 


XXVII. 

ng  f0r 

And  Moses  said  unto  them,  I  am  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  old  this 
day ;  I  can  no  more  go  out  and  come  in :  also  the  Lord  hath  said 
unto  me,  Thou  shall  not  go  over  this  Jordan." — DEUT.  xxxi.  2. 

UST  before  the  dark  River  through  which  Pilgrims  pass 
to  the  City  of  Gold,  Bunyan  places  the  land  of  Beulah  ; 
where  the  sun  ever  shines,  the  birds  sing,  and  every 
day  the  flowers  appear  on  the  earth.  The  air  is  very 
sweet  and  pleasant.  It  is  within  sight  of  the  City,  but 
it  is  beyond  the  reach  of  Giant  Despair ;  and  they  who 
come  thither  cannot  so  much  as  see  the  turrets  of  Doubting 
Castle.  And  in  some  such  blissful  experience  saintly  men  have 
sought  to  spend  a  brief  parenthesis  between  the  press  of  life's 
business  and  their  entrance  into  the  welcome  of  Christ.  But 
such  was  not  the  experience  of  Moses.  The  last  year  of  his  life 
was  as  full  of  work  as  any  that  had  ever  passed  over  his  head. 

There  was,  first,  the  conquest  of  Eastern  Canaan. — Dean 
Stanley  speaks  of  it  as  that  mysterious  eastern  frontier  of  the 
Holy  Land,  so  beautiful,  so  romantic,  so  little  known.  Its 
original  inhabitants  had  been  expelled  by  the  kindred  tribes  of 
Moab  and  Ammon ;  but  they,  in  their  turn,  had  been  dispossessed 
of  a  considerable  portion  of  the  territory  thus  acquired,  by  the 
two  Canaanite  chiefs,  Sihon  and  Og,  whose  names  occur  so  fre 
quently  in  this  narrative. 

The  attack  of  the  Israelites  was  justified  by  the  churlish 
refusal  of  Sihon  to  the  request  that  they  might  march  through 
his  borders  on  their  way  to  Jericho.  He  not  only  refused  them 
passage,  but  gathered  all  his  people  together,  and  went  out 
against  Israel  on  the  frontier  line  between  his  territory  and  the 
wilderness.  The  song  which  commemorated  the  victory  lays 
special  emphasis  on  the  prowess  of  the  slingers  and  archers  of 
Israel,  afterwards  so  renowned:  "We  have  shot  at  them; 
Heshbon  is  perished."  These  words  suggest  the  probable 
reason  for  the  overthrow  of  this  powerful  monarch,  under  the 


"Slje  (Boobhr  fan&."  181 

providence  of  God.  The  sword  followed  on  arrow  or  stone,  so 
that  the  army  was  practically  annihilated  ;  no  further  resistance 
was  offered  to  the  march  of  the  victorious  foe.  The  cities 
opened  their  gates ;  and  this  fertile  region  between  the  Arnon 
and  the  Jabbok,  consisting  of  "  a  wide  table-land,  tossed  about 
in  wild  confusion  of  undulating  downs,  clothed  with  rich  grass, 
and  in  spring  waving  with  great  sheets  of  wheat  and  barley," 
came  into  possession  of  the  chosen  people. 

But  this  was  not  all.  North  of  this  lay  Bashan,  which  has 
been  described  by  Canon  Tristram  and  others  as  a  rich  and 
well-wooded  country,  abounding  in  noble  forests  of  oak  and  of 
olive  trees,  interspersed  with  patches  of  corn  in  the  open  glades. 
It  was  and  is  the  most  picturesque  and  the  most  productive 
portion  of  the  Holy  Land.  Og,  its  king,  was  renowned  for  his 
gigantic  stature.  According  to  Josephus'  narrative,  he  was 
coming  to  the  assistance  of  Sihon,  when  he  heard  of  his  defeat 
and  death.  But,  undaunted,  he  set  his  army  in  array  against 
the  hosts  of  Israel.  The  battle  took  place  at  Edrei,  which  stood 
to  guard  the  entrance  of  a  remarkable  mountain  fastness  ;  and 
it  ended  in  the  complete  victory  of  Israel.  The  result  is  told  in 
the  strong,  concise  narrative  of  Moses.  "They  smote  him,  his 
sons,  and  all  his  people,  until  there  was  none  left  him  remaining; 
and  they  possessed  his  land." 

Nothing  could  have  accounted  for  the  marvellous  victories, 
which  gave  Israel  possession  of  these  valuable  tracts  of  country— 
with  cities  fenced  with  high  walls,  gates,  and  bars,  together  with 
a  great  many  unwalled  towns — but  the  interposition  of  God. 
He  had  said  beforehand,  "  Fear  not !  I  have  delivered  him  into 
thy  hand;"  and  so  it  befell.  Immense  swarms  of  hornets, 
which  are  common  in  Palestine,  seemed  to  have  visited  the 
country  at  this  juncture ;  so  that  the  people  were  driven  from 
their  fortresses  into  the  open  plains,  where  they  were  less  able 
to  stand  the  assault  of  the  Israelites. 

Moses,  at  their  urgent  request,  proceeded  to  allot  this  rich  and 
beautiful  territory  to  the  Reubenites  and  Gadites  and  the  half- 
tribe  of  Manasseh,  after  receiving  their  solemn  pledge  to  bear 
their  share  in  the  conquest  of  Western  Palestine.  "  I  com 
manded  you,"  he  said  afterwards,  "  that  ye  shall  pass  armed 
before  your  brethren,  the  children  of  Israel,  until  the  Lord  give 
rest  unto  your  brethren,  as  unto  you." 


182  preparing  for  ^piagali. 

Next  came  his  last  charge  to  the  people.  This  was  delivered 
in  a  series  of  farewell  addresses,  which  are  contained  in  chapters 
i.-xxx.  of  the  Book  of  Deuteronomy.  This  book  is  to  the 
four  preceding  ones  much  what  the  Gospel  according  to  John  is 
to  the  other  three.  It  is  full  of  the  most  pathetic  and  stirring 
appeals.  Memory  of  the  past,  gratitude,  fear,  self-interest,  are 
the  chords  made  to  vibrate  to  this  master-touch.  Well  may  it 
be  said  of  Moses  that  he  loved  the  people  ;  and  in  these  pages 
we  may  trace  the  course  of  the  molten  lava  which  poured  from 
his  heart. 

The  key-phrases  of  that  remarkable  book  ave  :  Keep  dili 
gently  ;  Observe  to  do ;  and,  The  Lord  shall  choose.  It  abounds 
with  exquisite  descriptions  of  the  Land  of  Promise,  which  may 
be  spiritually  applied  to  those  rapturous  experiences  denoted  by 
the  phrase,  The  Rest  of  Faith.  It  is,  indeed,  as  old  Canaan  was, 
p  good  land,  a  land  of  brooks  of  water,  of  fountains  and  depths 
springing  out  of  valleys  and  hills.  There  we  drink  of  the  river 
of  the  water  of  life ;  there  we  eat  the  bread  of  life  without 
scarceness,  and  lack  nothing  that  we  really  need.  The  28th 
chapter  anticipates  the  Beatitudes  of  our  Lord's  Sermon  on  the 
Mount;  and  happy  is  he  that  can  appropriate  them  in  blissful 
experience,  and  go  in  to  possess  the  land. 

In  our  judgment  the  much-debated  question  of  authorship  is 
settled  by  the  distinct  affirmation  of  the  New  Testament.  Take, 
for  instance,  the  quotation  of  Deut.  xxx.  11-14  in  Rom.  x.  6-10. 
The  Apostle  Paul  distinctly  speaks  of  Moses  as  having  written 
these  words. 

Next  came  his  anxiety  about  a  successor. — Moses  spake  unto 
the  Lord,  saying,  "Let  the  Lord,  the  God  of  the  spirits  of 
all  flesh,  set  a  man  over  the  congregation,  which  may  go  out 
before  them,  and  which  may  go  in  before  them  ;  which  may 
lead  them  out,  and  bring  them  in,  that  the  congregation  of  the 
Lord  be  not  as  sheep  which  have  no  shepherd."  In  answer  to 
this  request,  he  had  been  directed  to  take  Joshua,  the  son  of 
Nun,  in  whom  was  the  Spirit,  to, bring  him  before  Eleazar,  the 
priest,  and  before  all  the  congregation,  and  to  give  him  a  charge. 
This  he  seems  to  have  done ;  but  as  death  drew  near  he  appar 
ently  gave  him  a  second  charge  (compare  Num.  xxvii.  16,  17, 
and  Deut.  xxxi.  7,  8). 

What   a   striking  scene  it  must   have  been  when,  on  his 


'  J$hratt-&0tt0.  183 

one-hundred-and-twentieth  birthday,  the  aged  law-giver  called 
unto  Joshua,  and  said  unto  him  in  the  sight  of  all  Israel,  "Be 
strong  and  of  a  good  courage  :  for  thou  must  go  with  this  people 
unto  the  land  which  the  Lord  hath  sworn  unto  their  fathers  to 
give  them ;  and  thou  shalt  cause  them  to  inherit  it.  And  the 
Lord,  He  it  is  that  doth  go  before  thee;  He  will  be  with  thee; 
He  will  not  fail  thee,  neither  forsake  thee  ;  fear  not,  neither  be 
dismayed."  Immediately  afterwards  the  pillar  of  cloud  stood 
over  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle,  and  Moses  and  Joshua  were  sum 
moned  to  present  themselves  before  God  in  its  sacred  precincts. 
There,  in  almost  identical  words  to  those  which  He  had  spoken 
by  the  lips  of  Moses,  God  gave  Joshua  his  commission  to  bring 
the  children  of  Israel  into  the  land  which  He  had  sworn  unto 
them,  together  with  the  promise  that  He  would  be  with  them. 

His  last  acts  were  to  arrange  for  the  custody  of  the  Law  and 
the  perpetuation  of  its  reading. — He  did  the  first  by  depositing 
the  book,  in  which  he  had  recorded  the  Divine  revelations  made 
to  him,  in  the  side  of  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant.  It  was  to  be 
kept  under  the  custody  of  the  Levites  ;  and  passages  were  to  be 
read  from  it  at  the  end  of  every  seven  years,  when  all  Israel 
appeared  before  God  in  the  place  which  He  should  choose. 

And  as  to  the  second,  Moses  put  his  exhortations  and 
entreaties  into  two  magnificent  odes,  the  one  dealing  out  warn 
ings  against  apostasy,  the  other  dwelling  seriatim  on  the 
characteristics  of  the  tribes,  and  giving  them  a  parting  blessing, 
after  the  fashion  of  the  dying  Jacob. 

The  thirty-second  chapter  of  Deuteronomy  is  one  of  the 
sublimest  human  compositions  on  record.  It  was  Moses'  swan 
song.  It  is  the  store  from  which  later  Scripture  writers  draw 
plentifully.  It  has  been  called  the  Magna  Charta  of  Prophecy. 
It  is  worthy  to  be  compared  to  one  only  song  else,  the  Song  of 
the  Lamb,  with  which  it  is  combined  by  the  harpers  on  the 
margin  of  the  glassy  sea  :  "  They  sing  the  song  of  Moses,  the 
servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb." 

The  repeated  comparisons  of  God  to  a  Rock;  the  lavish  kind 
ness  with  which  He  had  treated  his  people  since  He  first  found 
them  in  a  desert  land ;  the  comparison  of  the  Eternal  to  a  mother 
eagle  in  teaching  its  young  to  climb  the  unaccustomed  steeps  of 
air ;  the  ingratitude  with  which  his  marvellous  kindness  had  been 
requited;  the  dread  fate  to  which  their  rebellion  must  expose 


184  Irsaritti   for 


them  ;  the  mercy  with  which  their  repentance  would  be  greeted— 
all  these  are  recorded  in  glowing,  eloquent  words,  that  stand  for 
ever  as  a  witness  of  how  stammering  lips  may  speak  when  they 
have  been  touched  with  the  live  altar  coal.  Or  take  the  closing 
verses  of  the  Benediction  on  the  tribes.  The  lonely  glory  of  the 
God  of  Jeshurun,  who  rides  on  the  heavens  to  help  and  save  his 
people  ;  the  home  which  men  may  find  in  his  eternal  nature  ;  the 
underpinning  everlasting  arms  ;  the  irresistible  might  with  which 
He  thrusts  out  the  enemy  from  before  the  forward  march  of  the 
soul  He  loves;  the  safe  though  isolated  dwelling  of  Israel;  the 
fertility  of  the  soil  and  the  generosity  of  the  clouds  ;  the  blessed 
ness  of  having  Jehovah  as  the  shield  of  help  and  the  sword  of 
excellency  —  all  these  features  of  the  blessed  life  are  delineated  by 
the  master-hand  of  one  who  dipped  his  brush  in  the  colours 
mixed  by  his  own  experience. 

What  glimpses  we  get  of  the  inner  life  of  this  noble  man  ! 
All  that  he  wrought  on  earth  was  the  outcome  of  the  secret 
abiding  of  his  soul  in  God.  God  was  his  home,  his  help,  his 
stay.  He  was  nothing  :  God  was  all.  And  all  that  he  accom 
plished  on  the  earth  was  due  to  that  Mighty  One  indwelling, 
fulfilling,  and  working  out  through  him,  as  his  organ  and  instru 
ment,  his  own  consummate  plans. 

Thus  Moses  drew  his  life-work  to  a  close.  Behind  him,  a 
long  and  glorious  life,  before,  the  ministry  and  worship  of  the 
heavenly  sanctuary.  Here,  the  shekinah  ;  there,  the  unveiled 
face.  Here,  the  tent  and  pilgrim  march  ;  there,  the  everlasting 
rest.  Here,  the  promised  land,  beheld  from  afar,  but  not 
entered;  there,  the  goodly  land  beyond  Jordan  entered  and  pos 
sessed.  What  though  it  was  a  wrench  to  pass  away,  with  the 
crowning-stone  not  placed  on  the  structure  of  his  life  ;  to  depart 
and  be  with  God  was  far  better  ! 


XXVIII. 


"So  Moses,  the  servant  of  the  Lord,  died  there  in  the  land  of  Moab, 
according  to  the  word  of  the  Lord.  And  He  buried  him  in  a  valley  in  the 
land  of  Moab,  over  against  Beth-peor." 

DEUT.  xxxiv.  5,  6. 

JjHE  Bible  is  the  book  of  life.  Its  pages  teem  with 
biography ;  they  contain  but  scant  memorials  of  death. 
The  only  death  they  describe  at  length  is  that  of  Him 
who  in  dying  slew  death.  The  very  minuteness  of  the 
description  there  shows  how  unique  and  all-important 
it  was.  Men  make  more  of  death  than  of  life  as  a 
gauge  of  character.  A  few  pious  sentences  spoken  then  will  go 
far  to  efface  the  memory  of  years  of  inconsistency.  God 
makes  most  of  life. 

The  records  of  Scripture  find  little  room  for  dying  testi 
monies,  words,  or  experiences;  whilst  they  abound  in  stories 
of  the  exploits  and  words  of  those  who  have  stormed  and 
suffered  and  wrought  in  life's  arena.  This  may  explain  why, 
contrary  to  human  custom  and  expectation,  the  death  of  the 
great  Lawgiver  is  described  with  such  brief  simplicity. 

But  this  simplicity  is  only  equalled  by  the  sublimity  of  the 
conception.  After  such  a  life  it  was  meet  that  Moses  should 
have  a  death  and  burial  unparalleled  in  the  story  of  mankind ; 
and  we  do  not  wonder  that  poet,  painter,  and  preacher,  have 
found  in  that  lonely  death  on  Pisgah's  summit  a  theme  worthy 
01  their  noblest  powers.  We  can  but  cull  a  few  wild  flowers 
as  they  caress  that  mountain  brow  ;  more  we  must  leave  to 
others.  Moses'  death  casts  a  light  on  sin,  and  death,  and  dis- 
pensational  truth. 

I.  ITS  BEARING  ON  SIN.  —  We  cannot  suppose  that  the 
sudden  outburst  of  impetuous  temper  at  Meribah — when  his 


0f  Closes. 

spirit  was  agitated  by  a  fierce  whirlwind  of  wrath,  as  a  storm 
sweeping  down  some  mountain  rent  on  an  inland  lake— could 
remain  long  unforgiven.  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west, 
so  far  had  that  transgression  been  removed.  But  though  the 
remission  was  complete,  yet  the  result  lingered  in  his  life,  and 
shut  him  out  from  an  experience  which  should  have  been  the 
crown  of  his  career. 

"The  Lord  hath  put  away  thy  sin,"  said  Nathan  to  the 
royal  transgressor;  but  "thy  child  shall  die,  and  the  sword 
shall  not  depart  out  of  thy  house."  The  dying  chief  was 
pardoned  ;  but  he  suffered  in  his  body  the  extreme  penalty 
of  his  sin.  The  mistrust  which  hinders  a  man  from  accepting 
all  the  benefits  of  Christ's  Ascension  is  put  away;  but  nothing 
can  compensate  him  for  his  loss.  Never  a  word  may  be 
spoken  about  the  evil  courses  that  have  wrecked  the  health 
and  fortunes  of  the  Prodigal  ;  but  though  he  sits  at  his  father's 
board,  he  can  never  be  in  health  or  vigour  or  overflowing  joy, 
as  he  might  have  been  if  he  had  never  wandered  forth. 

Nor  does  sin  only  entail  loss  and  sorrow  on  the  transgressor  ; 
it  robs  mankind  of  much  of  the  benefit  which  otherwise  had 
accrued  from  his  life.  If  it  had  not  been  for  his  want  of  faith 
and  his  passionate  behaviour,  Moses  had  led  his  people  across 
the  Jordan,  and  served  them  for  many  an  after  year. 

Let  not  the  ease  of  pardon  ever  tempt  thee  to  think  lightly 
of  sin,  or  to  imagine  that  it  leaves  no  traces  on  soul  or  life, 
because  it  is  secure,  through  penitence  and  faith,  of  God's  for 
giving  mercy.  If  one  act  of  mistrustful  anger  laid  Moses,  the 
friend  and  servant  of  God,  in  a  desert  grave  on  the  frontiers  of 
the  Land,  what  may  it  not  do  for  thee  ? 

II.  ITS  BEARING  ON  DEATH.—  Its  Loneliness.  That  majestic 
spirit  had  ever  lifted  itself,  like  some  unsealed  peak,  amid  other 
men.  Into  its  secrets  no  foot  had  intruded,  no  human  eye  had 
peered.  Alone  it  wrought  and  suffered,  and  met  God,  and 
legislated  for  the  people.  But  its  loneliness  was  never  more 
apparent  than  when,  unattended  even  by  Joshua,  he  passed  up 
to  die  amid  the  solitudes  of  Nebo.  Alone  he  trod  the  craggy 
steep ;  alone  he  gazed  on  the  fair  landscape  ;  alone  he  laid 
down  to  die. 

But  in  that  loneliness  there  is  a  foreshadowing  of  the  loneliness 


"  ^lone,  get  not  JUonc."  187 

through  which  each  of  us  must  pass  unless  caught  up  to  meet 
the  Lord  in  the  air.  In  that  solemn  hour  human  voices  will 
fade  away,  beloved  forms  retire,  familiar  scenes  dim  to  the 
sight.  Silent  and  lonely,  the  spirit  migrates  to  learn  for  itself 
the  great  secret.  Happy  the  man  who,  anticipating  the  moment, 
can  say:  "Alone,  yet  not  alone,  my  Saviour  is  with  me.  He 
who  went  this  way  by  Himself  is  now  re-treading  at  my  side." 

Its  Method.  We  die,  as  Moses  did,  "by  the  word  of  the  Lord." 
It  is  said  in  the  Hebrew  legend  that  one  angel  after  another 
sought  to  take  his  life  in  vain.  First,  there  came  the  one  who 
had  been  his  special  instructor;  but  his  courage  failed  him 
when  he  essayed  to  destroy  the  fabric  on  which  he  had  spent 
so  much  pains.  Then  the  angel  of  death  was  summoned  to 
undertake  the  task.  He  eagerly  approached  him;  but  when  he 
saw  the  wondrous  lustre  of  his  face  shining  like  the  sun,  and 
heard  him  recite  the  prodigies  of  his  career,  he,  too,  shrank 
back  abashed. 

And  when  these  great  angels  had  given  up  the  work  as  sur 
passing  their  loftiest  powers,  Moses  turned  to  the  Almighty  (so 
the  legend  runs)  and  said,  "Thou,  Lord  of  the  Universe,  who 
wast  revealed  unto  me  in  the  burning  bush,  remember  that 
Thou  didst  carry  me  up  into  thy  heaven,  where  I  abode  forty 
days  and  forty  nights  ;  have  mercy  upon  me,  and  hand  me  not 
over  into  the  power  of  the  angel  of  death." 

This,  of  course,  is  the  picturesque  form  in  which  the  love 
and  reverence  of  after  generations  elaborated  these  wonderful 
words,  which  tell  us  that  Moses  died  "by  the  word  of  the  Lord." 
Some  still  further  substituted  "  kiss "  for  "  word  " ;  so  that  it 
seemed  as  if  the  Almighty  had  kissed  away  the  soul  of  his 
faithful  servant,  drawing  it  back  to  himself  in  a  long,  sweet, 
tender  embrace. 

Is  not  this  the  manner  in  which  all  saints  die?  Their  deaths 
are  precious  to  the  Lord,  and  after  the  troubled  day  of  life — 
agitated  in  its  early  morning  by  the  trumpet  calling  to  battle  ; 
fretted  through  an  overcast  noon  by  the  pressure  of  its  responsi 
bilities  and  cares ;  lit  in  the  evening  by  the  rays  of  a  stormy 
sunset,  piercing  through  the  cloud-drift,  the  tired  spirit  sinks 
down  upon  the  couch,  which  the  hands  of  God  had  spread,  and 
He  bends  over  it  to  give  it  its  good-night  kiss,  as  in  earliest 
days  the  mother  had  done  to  the  wearied  child.  That  embrace, 


of  Closes. 

however,  is  the  threshold,  not  of  a  long  night  of  insensibilit, 
but  of  an  awakening  in  the  supernal  light  of  the  everlastir 
morning. 

Its  Sepulchre.     We  are  told  that  "the  Lord  buried  him  in 
valley  in  the  land  of  Moab,"  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  the 
Evil  One,  who  contended  with  the  archangel  sent  to  secure  that 
noble  deserted  shrine.      What  had  the  archfiend  to  do  with 
it  ?     Did  he  desire  to  make  it  vie  with  the  temple  of  the  living 
God,  filching  honours  which  the  people  would  be  only  too  glad 
to  give  ?    We  know  not ;   but  his  purpose  was  ignominiously 
frustrated.     God  cared  for  the  dead  body  of  his  child.     Not 
even   the   king  of  terrors    could  make  it   distasteful   to  the 
Father's  love.    Though  in  ruins,  the  temple  was  precious.     And 
so  even  a  band  of  angels  was  not  permitted  to  perform  the 
sacred  work  of  interment.     We  are  told  that  He  buried  him  ; 
as  if  the  Almighty  would  not  delegate  the  sacred  office  to  an-      , 
inferior  hand.      And  is  it  not  attributable  to  the  love  of  r 
that    through   the   love  of   friendly  hearts   the   last   riter 
rendered  to  the  bodies  which  Christ  has  purchased  ?  J-£    \ 

As  we  trust  God  to  supply  the  needs  of  the  body  in          a/    j 
let  us  trust  Him  for  its  burial  in  death.     He  marks  whe- 
dust  of  each  of  his  children  mingles  with  its   mother  e 
When  a  grave  is  opened,  his  eye  rests  on  it ;  and  thoug 
foot   may  ever  tread  its   soil,  no   hand   keep   it   deckecV,tly     v 
flowers,  He  never  forgets  it ;  and  none  will  be  overlooked  iife:  w^e 
the  archangel  blows  his  trumpet  over  land  and  sea.  for 

Its  Purpose.  We  are  told  that  "the  children  of  Israe  th.]  vveP 
for  Moses  thirty  days;"  and  if  we  connect  this  statemer-s  0]t  1VJtl 
the  fact  of  the  unknown  grave,  we  shall  be  able  to  disce.  rn  th< 
Divine  purpose  in  its  concealment.  We  often  underrat  s  ^ 
living,  and  have  to  wait  until  they  are  removed  from  ujc  s  t< 
estimate  them  truly.  r 

Few  men  have  had  greater  claims   on   their  fellows   tl-j  ^ar  - 
Moses.       He   had   sacrificed   his   high   position   in   Pharao        ^ 
court  to  bear  his  people  as  a  nurse  through  the  ailments         c 
their  childhood.     He  had  enjoyed  unparalleled  opportunities  of 
fellowship  with  God.     He  had  wielded  uncommon  power : 
the  bidding  of  his  faith  winds  had  brought  meat ;  rocks  hi 
gushed  with  water-springs;  the  sea  had  parted  and  met;  tl. 
desert-floor  had  been  strewn  with  food.     Is  it  not  more  tha; 


f  Ijc  litrten  (Srabe.  189 

<ely  that,  if  the  Lord  had  not  concealed  his  grave,  the  valley 

V  Bethpeor  would  have  become  a  second  Mecca,  trodden  by 

le  feet  of  pilgrims  from  all  the  world?     It  was  best  to  make 

such  idolatry  impossible.     The  hidden  grave  forced  the  people 

to  turn  from  earth  to  heaven. 

Is  not  this  God's  policy  with  us?  When  Lazarus  is  dead, 
the  sisters  send  for  Jesus.  When  the  gourd  is  blasted,  the 
pilgrim  in  the  weary  land  turns  to  the  shadow  of  the  great 
Rock.  When  no  place  is  found  for  the  sole  of  her  foot,  the 
dove  makes  for  the  window  of  the  ark.  When  the  supply  fails 
from  the  rock-cisterns,  we  are  driven  to  the  stream  which  flows 
from  the  throne  of  God.  This  is  why  your  home  is  desolate, 
and  your  heart  bereaved.  It  is  for  this  that  he  who  was  to  you 
what  Moses  was  to  the  people  has  been  removed. 

For  e'en  the  cloud 

That  spreads  above,  and  veiled  love, 
Itself  is  love. 

'  Vision.     From  the  spot  on  which  he  stood,  without  any 

^  rdinary  gift  of  vision,  his  eye  could  range  over  an  almost 

ailed  panorama.     At  his  feet,  the  far-away  tents  of  Israel ; 

,     ]      :  North,  the  rich  pasture-lands  of  Gilead  and   Bashan, 

/  ded  by  the  desert  haze  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the 

•  by  the  Jordan  valley,  from  the  blue  waters  of  the  Lake 

Galilee  to  the  dark  gorge  of  the  Dead  Sea.    And  beyond 

the  river  he  could  sweep  over  the  fair  Land  of  Promise,  from 

the   snow-capped   summits   of  Hermon   and   Lebanon   to   the 

uplands  of  Ephraim  and   Manasseh  ;  with  the  infinite  variety 

of  cities  perched  on  their  pinnacles  of  rock,  of  cornfields  and 

pasture  lands,   of   oil,   olives,   figs,   vines,   and   pomegranates. 

mmediately  before   him,   looking   West,   was   Jericho,   in   its 

yreen    setting  of   palm-trees,  connected  by  the   steep   defile 

vith  Jerusalem  ;  not  far  from  which  Bethlehem,  on  the  ridge 

of  the  hills,  gleamed  as  a  jewel. 

So  to  dying  men  still  comes  the  vision  of  the  goodly  land 
beyond  the  Jordan.  It  is  not  far  away — only  just  across  the 
nver.  On  fair  days  of  vision,  when  some  strong  wind  parts 
'Ae  vails  of  mist  and  smoke  that  too  often  dominate  our 
jiritual  atmosphere,  it  is  clearly  visible.  But  the  vision  is 
nost  often  reserved  for  those  who  are  waiting  on  the  confines 
jf  the  Land,  ready  for  the  signal  to  enter.  They  tell  us  that  on 


I9Q  ®ljE    §EatIj   Of 

that  border-land  they  hear  voices,  and  discern  visions  of  beauty 
and  splendour,  of  which  heart  had  not  conceived.  Dr.  Payson 
said,  shortly  before  he  died,  "  The  Celestial  City  is  full  in  my 
view.  Its  glories  have  been  upon  me;  its  breezes  fan  me;  its 
odours  are  wafted  to  me  ;  its  sounds  strike  upon  my  ears ; 
and  its  spirit  is  breathed  into  my  heart."  May  God  grant  us 
the  blessedness  of  dying  on  the  hill-top  with  that  vision  in 
our  gaze. 

III.  THE  BEARING  ON  DISPENSATIONAL  TRUTH.  The 
Law  came  by  Moses ;  and  Moses  stands  on  the  plains  of 
history  as  the  embodiment,  as  he  was  also  the  vehicle,  of 
the  moral  law,  whether  given  from  Sinai  or  written  on  the 
fleshy  tablets  of  the  human  heart. 

It  was  in  perfect  keeping  with  this  conception  that  there  was 
no  decay  in  his  natural  vigour.  His  eye  was  as  a  falcon's,  his 
step  lithe  and  elastic,  his  bearing  erect.  He  did  not  die  of 
disease,  or  amid  the  decrepitude  of  old  age ;  "  he  was  not, 
because  God  took  him."  Time  had  only  made  him  venerable, 
but  not  weak.  And  thus  he  represents  God's  holy  law,  which 
cannot  grow  outworn  or  weak,  but  always  abides  in  its  pristine 
and  perfect  strength,  though  it  cannot  bring  us  into  God's 
rest. 

Of  that  rest  it  is  not  possible  to  speak  here.  Canaan  does 
not  primarily  represent  the  rest  which  awaits  us  on  the  other 
side  of  death,  where  the  fret  and  chafe  of  life  are  over ;  but 
the  rest  which  may  be  entered  here  and  now,  in  which  the 
soul  is  set  free  from  the  tyranny  of  self  and  corruption,  and 
abides  in  the  peace  of  God  which  passes  all  understanding. 
Then  life  becomes  one  blessed  succession  of  trustful  obedience 
to  the  will  of  God  ;  then,  too,  we  are  satisfied  with  the 
abundant  wealth  stored  up  for  us  in  God,  and  He  makes  us 
drink  of  the  river  of  his  pleasure.  This  is  the  goodly  Land 
of  promise,  which  can  only  be  seen  from  afar  by  those  who 
know  nothing  except  what  Moses  can  teach  them  ;  but  may  be 
entered  by  those  who  follow  the  Ark  through  the  river  of  death 
to  the  self-life  and  forward  to  resurrection  ground. 


MORGAN   AND  SCOTT  LTD.,    LONDON. 


