<  t*  JUt 


MY  SERMON-NOTES 

A  SELECTION  FROM 

OUTLINES  OF  DISCOURSES 

DELIVERED  AT 

THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE 

WITH  ANECDOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 


BY 

0.  H.  SPURGEON. 


FROM  ECCLESIASTES  TO  MALACHI—  LXV.  TO  CXXDL 


FUNK  &  WAGNALLS   COMPAN 

NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 
PRINTED  IN  THE  U.  8.  A. 


PREFACE. 


THE  speedy  sale  of  the  first  part  of  "My  Sermon  Notes " 
has  constrained  me  to  issue  a  second  portion  without 
delay.  These  outlines  have  evidently  been  appreciated, 
or  they  would  not  have  been  so  largely  purchased  in  so 
short  a  time.  I  hardly  hoped  to  meet  with  so  much 
encouragement,  but  I  must  attribute  it  to  the  need  of 
those  whom  I  have  endeavored  to  serve,  and  to  the 
favorable  notices  which  have  been  kindly  given  by  the 
public  press  with  an  almost  unbroken  unanimity. 

The  fact  is  that  in  these  hurried  times  many  who 
desire  to  speak  to  edification  are  hard  pressed  by  the 
incessant  activities  of  Christian  life,  and  become  so 
jaded  and  worn  that  a  hint  from  a  brother  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  set  them  upon  a  train  of  thought.  He 
whose  ministry  is  most  original  will  be  the  first  to  con 
fess  his  obligation  to  his  books.  He  waits  upon  God  for 
a  subject,  and  as  often  as  not  he  finds  it  while  reading ; 
neither  does  he  hesitate  to  say  that  the  Lord  his  God 
brought  it  to  him  because  it  came  by  the  instrumentality 
of  another  man's  writings.  If  it  be  so  with  the  more 
fruitful,  the  less  fertile  minds  among  us  are  eerteinly  all 


iv  PBATAGB. 

the  more  in  need  of  aid;  though  it  s  very  possible  that 
they  will  be  more  slow  in  owning  it,  and  more  shy  in 
accepting  it.  They  do  well  to  use  their  own  powers,  but 
they  will  do  none  the  worse  if  they  will  condescend  to 
receive  suggestions  from  others. 

These  outlines  were  not  written  to  be  used  as  they  are. 
True,  they  may  be  filled  up  with  choice  original  matter, 
and  employed  as  frameworks  in  their  present  form ;  but 
more  probably  they  will  be  taken  to  pieces  and  built  up 
in  another  shape,  or  they  will  be  cut  in  halves,  or  por 
tions  of  them  will  be  united  with  other  materials.  I  hope 
to  lend  a  handful  of  chips  and  shavings,  or,  if  you  will, 
a  bundle  of  firewood,  to  a  brother,  with  which  he  may 
kindle  a  fire  on  his  own  hearth,  and  prepare  food  for  his 
people.  Possibly  a  lazy  brother  may  boil  his  own  pot 
with  my  sticks,  but  even  that  I  shall  not  deplore  so  long 
as  the  food  is  well  cooked.  Should  I  be  so  unfortunate 
as  to  be  a  helper  to  the  utterly  idle  man,  by  tempting 
him  to  gather  no  fuel  of  his  own,  I  shall  not  even  then 
view  the  matter  with  despair,  for  perhaps  the  idler  may 
burn  his  fingers  in  the  operation ;  and  I  shall  fall  back 
upon  the  consideration  that  he  would  have  taken  wood 
from  some  other  pile  if  he  had  not  met  with  mine.  A 
man  will  do  no  great  harm  with  my  fagots  if  he  will  use 
holy  fire :  the  truths  which  are  contained  in  these  Notes 
will  injure  no  man  if  they  be  honestly  allowed  to  speak 
for  themselves. 

If  life  and  health  be  spared,  I  shall  proceed  with  the 


PKHFAOK.  V 

New  Testament  in  two  volumes  of  the  same  size  as  that 
which  is  now  in  the  reader's  hand,  or  one  volume  in  the 
large  form ;  and  I  trust  each  portion  will  be  as  favorably 
received  as  the  first.  When  the  writer  sleeps  with  his 
fathers,  it  may  be  that  other  voices  will,  by  these  out 
lines,  be  helped  to  preach  the  gospel  of  the  ages,  and  so 
to  glorify  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  May  the  Holy 
Spirit  breathe  upon  these  dry  bones,  and  make  them 
live!  May  he  fill  each  preacher's  heart  with  suitable 
emotions,  and  give  to  his  mouth  forcible  expressions, 
and  may  the  name  of  Jesus  be  thus  made  known  to  many 
of  the  Lord's  redeemed ! 

So  prays  the  humble  servant  of  Christ,  and  of  his 
Church. 

C.  H.  SFURGEON. 

WMTWOOD,  May,  1886. 


CONTENTS. 


LXV.  Eccies.  viii.  4.— THE  WORD  OF  A  KINO  1 
LXVI.  Solomon's  Song  ii.  1.—  THEE  ROSE  AND 

THE  LILT 7 

LXVIJ.  Solomon's  Song  iii.  4. — CONSTRAINING  TBS 

BELOVED 13 

LXVUT.  Solomon's  Song  vi.  5. — THE  CONQUEST  OF 

A  HOLT  ETE 19 

LXIX.  Isa.  i.  18. — INVITATION  TO  A  CONFERENCE  25 

LXX.  Isa.  ii.  5. — WAITING  IN  THE  LIGHT    .     .  31 

LXXI.  Isa.  v.  6.— No  RAIN 87 

LXXTT.  Isa.  xiv.  32. — ENQUIRERS  ANSWERED  .     .  42 

LXXJU.  Isa.  xxxii.  2.— OUR  HIDING-PLACE      .     .  48 

LXXTV.  Isa.  xxxii.  2. — RIVERS  IN  THE  DESERT      .  54 
LXXV.  Isa.  xxxviii.  17.— THE  BITTER  AND  THE 

SWEET 60 

LXXVI.  Ua.  xlv.  22.— THE  LIFE-LOOK  ....  66 

LXXVU.  Isa.  zlvi.  4.— A  SERMON  FOR  THE  AGED  .  72 

LXXVm.  Isa. xlix. 20, 21.— CHURCH  INCREASE.    .  78 
LXXLX.  Isa.  1.  2-6.— THE  RRmMcunen  DESCRIBED 

BT  HnraELF 84 

LXXX.  Isa.  1. 7.— THE  REDEEMER'S  FA'CE  SET  ^IKE 

APLnrr     .    .     . 90 

LXXXI.  Isa.  liii.  5.— CHRISTOPATHT 96 

LXXXTT.  Isa.  liv.  7-9.— THE  LITTLE  WRATH  AMD 

THE  GREAT  WRATH 104 

Isa.  ly.  7.— REPENTANCE  .         .         .     .  109 

(vii) 


VI  ii  CONTENTS. 

LXXXIV.  I8a.lv.  7.— ABUNDANT  PARDON    ...  115 
LXXXV.  Isa.  Ix.  8.— THE  CLOUD  OF  DOVES    .     .121 
LXXXVI.  Jer.iii.12, 14,  22.— RETURN!    RETURN!  127 
LXXXVJ1.  Jer.  iii.  19. — INTERROGATION   AND   EX 
CLAMATION  133 

LXXXVIII.  Jer.  v.  3. — DECIDED  UNGODLINESS    .     .  139 

LXXXIX.  Jer.  vi.  16.— REST  AS  A  TEST  .     .     .     .143 

XC.  Jer.  xiii.  23.— THE  ETHIOPIAN     .     .     .149 

XCI.  Jer.xviii.il. — INDIVIDUAL  REPENTANCE  155 

XCH.  Jer.  xxxiii .  3 .  —PRATER  ENCOURAGED    .161 

XCHT.  Jer.  li.  50.— SACRED  MEMORIES    .     .     .167 

XCIV.  Ezek.  xxxvi.  11.— BETTER  THAN  AT  TOUR 

BEGINNINGS 178 

XCV.  Ezek.  xxxvi.  30,  81 .  -MISTAKEN   NO 
TIONS  ABOUT  REPENTANCE    .     .     .     .179 
XCVI.  Ezek.xlvii.il.— MARSHES      .     .          .185 
XCVII.  Dan.  v.  6.— A  MAN  TROUBLED  BY  HIS 

THOUGHTS 19J 

XCVUL  Dan.  ix.  17.— PRATER  FOB  THE  CHDRCH  197 
XCIX.  Hos.  ii.  6,  7.— WATS  HEDGED  UP      .     .  203 
C.  Hos.  ii.  14.— STRANGE  WATS  OF  LOVE  .  209 
CI.  Hos.  ii.  23,  and  Rom.  ix.  25,26.— A  PEO  - 

PLE  WHO  WERE  No  PEOPLE      .     .     .215 
GIT.  Hos.  viii.  7. — WHAT  WILL  THE  HARVEST 

BE? 2£1 

GUI.  Hos.  x.  2.— HEART-DISEASE    ....  227 
CIV.  Hos.  x.  12.— THE  STROKE  OF  THE  CLOCK  288 
CV.  Hos.  xiii.  10.— THEOCBACT     ...        289 
CVT.  Joel  ii.  18.— INWARD  MORE  THAN  Our 

WARD 245 

CVH.  Amos  vii.  7.— THE  PLUMBLINE    .     .     .251 
CVTIJ.  Obad.  i.  8.— SELF-DECEIVED    .  .  257 


CONTENTS.  IX 

CHA*.  PAGk 

CLX.  Jonah  iii.  4,  and  Matt.  xii.   41.— THE 

NINKVTFES'  REPENTANCE 262 

CX.  Micah  i.  12. — MAROTH  ;   OR,  IHE  DISAP 
POINTED     268 

CXI.  Micah  ii.  8.— THE  WORST  OF  ENEMIES     .  274 
CXII.  Micah  vi.  3. — THE  LORD'S  APPEAL  TO  HIS 

OWN  PEOPLE ,  .  279 

CXIII.  Nahum  i.  7.— THE  STRONGHOLD     ...  285 
CXIV.  Hab.    ii.    1-4. —WATCHING,      WAITING, 

WRITING 291 

CXV.  Hab.  ii.  4. — PRIDE  THE  DESTROYER      .     .  297 
CXVI.  Hab.  ii.  4,  Rom.  i.  17,  Gal.  iii.  11,  and 

Heb.  x.  38.— FAITH  :  LIFE     .     .     .     .303 

CXVn.  Zeph.  ii.  3.— MAY  BE 308 

CXVIII.  Zeph.  iii.  2.— FOURFOLD  FAULT      .     .     .314 
CXIX.  Hag.  ii.  13, 14. — DEFILED  AND  DEFILING  .  318 
CXX.  Zech.  iv.  10.— SMALL  THINGS  NOT  TO  BE 

DESPISED 324 

CXXI.  Zech.  vii.  5,  6.— SELF  OR  GOD  .     .     .     .330 

CXXII.  Zech.  ix.  11,12.— PRISONERS  OF  HOPE     .  336 

CXXHI.  Zech.  x.  6.— PERFECT  RESTORATION     .     .  342 

CXXIV.  Zech.  x.  12.— SPIRITUAL  CONVALESCENCE  347 

CXXV.  Zech.  xii.  10. — MOURNING  AT  THE  CROSS  .  353 

CXXVI.  Zech.  xii.  10.— THE  BITTERNESS  OF  THE 

CROSS 357 

CXXVII.  Zech.  xii.  12-14.— APART 361 

CXXVIII.  Mai.  i.  2.— LOVE  QUESTIONED  AND  VINDI 
CATED   367 

CXXIX    Mai.  iv.  2.— SUNSHINE  .  378 


MY  SERMON  NOTES. 


LXV. 

"  WHERE  THE  WOKD  OF  A  Kmo  a,  THIXE  IB  Powxm.** 
Ecciesiatles  viii.  4. 

THINGS  were  autocratic  in  Solomon's  day.  We 
-*•*•  may  be  glad  that  we  are  not  under  bondage  to 
an  absolute  monarch,  but  enjoy  the  blessings  of  consti 
tutional  government.  We  are  by  no  means  slow  to 
say  to  any  one  of  our  governors,  "What  doest  thou?" 
And  such  a  question,  wisely  put,  is  good  both  for 
him  and  for  us. 

God  alone  is  rightfully  sovereign  without  limit. 
He  is  King  in  the  most  absolute  sense;  and  so  it 
should  be;  for  he  is  supremely  good,  wise,  just, 
holy,  &o. 

As  he  is  Maker  of  all,  dominion  over  his  creatures 
is  a  matter  of  natural  right. 

He  has  infinite  power  wherewith  to  carry  out  hit 
royal  will. 

Even  in  his  least  word  there  is  omnipotence. 

Let  us  consider  thii, — 


2  MY    SHSttMON     KOTIPft 

I.  TO   EXCITE   OUR   AW/5. 

Let  us  carefully  think  of — 

1.  His  creating  word,  by  which  all  things  arose 

out  of  nothing. 

2.  His  preserving  word,  by  which  all  things  abide. 

3.  His  destroying  word,  by  which  he  will  shake 

earth  and  heaven. 

4.  His  word  of  prerogative  by  which  he  kills  and 

makes  alive. 

5.  His  word  of  everlasting  promise,  which  is  our 

comfort. 

6.  His  word  of  terrible  threatening,  which  is  our 

warning. 

7.  His  word  of  prophecy  and  fore-ordination,  which 

is  a  great  deep,  full  of  solemn  teaching  to 
the  lowly  in  heart. 

Who  can  stand  before  any  of  these  without  tremb 
ling  adoration  ?  Power  attends  them  to  the  fullest 
degree,  for  each  one  is  the  word  of  a  King, 

II.  TO  ENSURE  OUR  OBEDIENCE. 

1.  No  divine  command  is  to  be  treated  as  non 

essential,  for  it  is  the  word  of  Jehovah,  the 
King.     (See  verses  2  and  3.) 

2.  Each  precept  is  to  be  obeyed  at  once,  heartily, 

to  the  full,  by  every  one,  since  the  King 
commands. 

8.  His  service  must  not  be  shunned,  for  that  were 

to  rebel  against  our  Sovereign.     Jonah  did 
not  find  this  succeed :  for  the  Lord  will  not 


THE   WORD  OF  A  KING. 

be  trifled  with,  and  will  make  runaways 
know  that  his  arm  is  long. 

4.  Disobedience  is  to  be  repented  of.  If  we  have 
fallen  into  sin,  let  the  King's  word  have 
a  gracious  power  to  subdue  us  to  hearty 
grief. 

III.  TO  INSPIRE  OUR  CONFIDENCE. 

1.  That  he  is  able  to  give  to  the  penitent,  par 

don  ;  for  he  has  promised  in  his  word  to 
do  so. 

2.  That  he  will  give  to  the  believing,  power  to 

renew  their  lives.  "  He  sent  his  word,  and 
healed  them,"  is  true,  spiritually. 

3.  That  he  will   give  to  the  tempted,  power  to 

overcome  temptation.  God  ensures  the  be 
liever's  victory  over  every  assault  of  Satan 
through  the  word.  This  weapon  Jesus  used 
in  the  wilderness. 

4.  That  he  will  give  to  the  suffering,  power  to 

endure  with  patience,  and  to  gather  profit 
from  the  trial. 

6.  That  he  will  give  to  the  dying,  hope,  peace, 
beatific  vision,  &c.  One  word  from  the 
Lord  of  life  robs  death  of  its  sting. 

IV.  TC   DIRECT  OUR   CHRISTIAN  EFFORT. 

1.  In  all  we  do  we  should  respect  the  King's  word. 
Churches  should  own  Christ's  headship,  obey 
his  laws,  and  acknowledge  no  other  law- 


MY  8ERMOK  NOTKS. 

giver.    This  would  be  a  source  of  power,  as 
the  opposite  is  the  cause  of  weakness. 
2.  We  must  look  nowhere  else  for  power.     Educa 
tion,  oratory,  music,  wealth,  ceremonialism, 
are  weakness  itself,  if  depended  on. 
8.  We  must  rely  upon  the  word  of  our  King  as 
the  instrument  of  power  whenever  we  seek 
to  do  works  in  his  name. 

Preach  it:  for  nothing  else  will  break  hard 
hearts,  comfort  the  despairing,  beget  faith, 
or  produce  holiness. 

Plead  it  in  prayer :  for  the  Lord  will  surely 
keep  his  own  promises,  and  put  forth  his 
power  to  make  them  good. 

Receive  it  into  our  mind  and  heart :  for  where 
divine  truth  is  treasured,  there  .will  be  a 
wealth  of  spiritual  power. 

Practise  it :  for  none  can  gainsay  a  life  which 
is  ordered  according  to  the  precepts  of  the 
Lord.    An  obedient  life  is  full  of  a  power 
before  which  men  and  devils  do  homage. 
4.  We  shall  see  its  power  in  various  ways. 

Gathering  congregations.  After  all,  the  many 
do  not  go  to  listen  to  mere  human  teachings, 
but  the  cross  attracts  everywhere. 

Gaining  true  converts.  No  conversion  is 
worth  anything  unless  it  is  wrought  by 
the  word  of  truth. 

Keeping  such  converts  to  the  end.  The  in 
corruptible  seed  alone  produces  an  incor 
ruptible  life. 


THE   WORD   OF   A   KINO.  5 

Order  is  created  and  preserved  in  the  church 
by  God's  word. 

Saints  are  instructed,  edified,  sanctified,  and 
fed  by  the  word. 

Love,  joy,  peace,  and  every  grace,  are  begot 
ten  and  fostered  by  the  word. 

Read  much  the  royal  word. 

Speak  more  than  ever  the  King's  word,  which  it 
the  gospel  of  peace. 

Believe  in  the  word  of  King  Jesus,  and  be  bold  to 
defend  it. 

Bow  before  it,  and  be  patient  and  happy. 


EXPEDIENCES. 

No  language  ever  stirs  the  deeps  of  uiy  nature 
like  the  Word  of  God;  and  none  produces  such  a 
profound  calm  within  my  spirit.  As  no  other  voice 
can,  it  melts  me  to  tears,  it  humbles  me  in  the  dust, 
it  fires  me  with  enthusiasm,  it  fills  me  with  felicity, 
it  elevates  me  to  holiness.  Every  faculty  of  my 
being  owns  the  power  of  the  sacred  Word:  it 
sweetens  my  memory,  it  brightens  my  hope,  it  stim 
ulates  my  imagination,  it  directs  my  judgment,  it 
commands  my  will,  and  it  cheers  my  heart.  The 
word  of  man  charms  me  for  the  time ;  but  I  outlive 
»nd  outgrow  its  power;  it  is  altogether  the  reverse 
with  the  Word  of  the  King  of  kings:  it  rules  me 
more  sovereignly,  more  practically,  more  habitually, 
more  completely  every  day.  Its  power  is  for  all 


6  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

seasons :  for  sickness  and  for  health,  for  solitude  and 
for  company,  for  personal  emergencies  and  for  pub 
lic  assemblies.  I  had  sooner  have  the  word  of  God 
at  my  back  than  all  the  armies  and  navies  of  all  the 
great  powers ;  ay,  than  all  the  forces  of  nature ;  for 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  is  the  source  of  all  the  power 
in  the  universe,  and  within  it  there  is  an  infinite 
supply  in  reserve. 

Believers  know  the  life-giving  power  of  the  Word, 
for  they  can  say,  "  Thy  word  hath  quickened  me ; " 
and  its  life-sustaining  power,  for  they  live  "  by  every 
word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God"; 
and  its  power  against  sin,  for  they  can  say,  "Thy 
word  have  I  hid  in  my  heart,  that  I  might  not  sin 
against  thee." 

"  His  word  was  with  power  "  in  Capernaum  of  old, 
and  it  will  be  with  the  same  power  in  any  place  now 
adays.  His  word  cannot  fail ;  "  it  shall  not  return 
void  ;  it  shall  prosper."  Therefore,  when  our  "  words 
fall  to  the  ground,"  it  only  proves  that  they  were 
not  his  words. — Miss  Havergal. 


LXVI. 

"I  AM  THE  ROSE  OP  SHARON,  AND  THE  LILT  OP 
VALLEYS." — Song  of  Solomon  ii.  1. 

HERE  we  have  the  Bridegroom  praising  himself, 
and  this  is  a  thing  to  be  considered  with  care 
ful  attention. 

This  self-praise  is  not  tainted  with  pride :  such  a 
fault  could  not  find  a  place  in  the  lowly  Jesus.  His 
ego-ism  is  not  egotism.  He  does  not  commend  him 
self  for  his  own  sake,  but  for  our  sakes.  He  sets 
himself  forth  in  glowing  terms  because : — 

In  condescension  he  desires  our  love.    What 
a  poor  thing  it  is  for  him  to  care  about  I 
Yet  he  thirsts  after  it. 
In  wisdom  he  uses  the  best  way  to  win  our 

love. 

In  tenderness  he  deigns  to  describe  himself 
that  we  may  be  encouraged  by  his  familiar 
ity  in  praising  himself  to  us.  This  is  one  of 
the  most  effectual  proofs  of  lowliness. 
Of  necessity  he  describes  himself,  for  who 
else  can  describe  him  ?  "  No  man  knoweth 
the  Son,  but  the  Father : "  Matt.  xi.  27. 
Moreover,  he  states  a  fact  which  else  might 
not  be  believed,  seeing  he  makes  himself  so 
common  a  flower  of  earth,  so  graciously  a 
joy  for  men,  that  all  may  have  him. 

(7) 


8  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

We  will  not  take  up  your  time  by  trying  to  di* 
cover  what,  flowers  these  may  have  been  in  the  east* 
ern  flora :  we  may  select  those  most  like  them  in  our 
own  western  land,  and  do  our  Lord  no  wrong. 

I.      THE      EXCEEDING      DBLIGHTFULNE88     OF     OTJB 
LOBD. 

He  compares  himself,  not  only,  as  in  other  places, 
to  needful  bread,  and  refreshing  water,  but  to  lovely 
flowers.  In  Jesus  there  are  all  delights  as  well  as 
all  necessaries. 

1.  He  is  now  all  that  he  ever  was,  for  his  "  I  am  " 

runs  through  all  eternity  in  unabated  force. 

2.  He  is  in  himself    the  delight  of    men.     He 

speaks  not  of  offices,  gifts,  works,  posses 
sions,  but  of  himself.  "  I  am." 

8.  He  is  delightful  to  the  eye  of  faith,  even  as 
flowers  are  to  the  bodily  sight.  What 
more  beautiful  than  roses  and  lilies? 

4.  He  is  delightful  in  the  savor  which  comes  of 
him.  In  him  is  a  delicious,  varied,  abiding 
fragrance. 

6.  In  all  this  he  is  the  choicest  of  the  choice :  the 
rose — yea,  Sharon's  rose :  the  lily — yea,  the 
most  delicious  lily  of  the  valleys.  There 
is  none  like  him.  He  is  indeed  "  a  plant 
of  renown." 

Tet  blind  men  see  no  color,  and  men   without 
•cent  perceive  no  odor  in  the  sweetest  flowers ;  and 
men  see  no  delights  in  Jesus.     Roses  ard 


THE    ROSE    AND  THE   LILY.  9 

lilies  require  eyes  and  light  ere  they  can  be  appre 
ciated,  and  to  know  Jesus  we  must  have  grace  and 
gracious  dispositions.  He  says,  "  I  am  the  Rose  of 
Sharon;"  and  so  he  is  essentially;  but  the  grave 
question  is, — "  Is  he  this  to  you  ?"  Yes,  or  no. 

II.  THE  SWEET  VARIETY  OF  HIS  DELIGHTFT7LNB88. 

1.  Of  the  rose,  majesty :  of  the  lily,  love. 

2.  Of  the  rose,  suffering :  of  the  lily,  purity. 

3.  Of  both,  a  great   variety:    all   the  roses  and 

all  the  lilies,  all  the  beauties  of  heaven  and 
earth  meet  in  Jesus. 

4.  Of  both  the  very  essence.     Of    all  the  crea 

tures,  all  the  excellences,  virtues,  and 
blessings,  which  may  be  found  in  them, 
come  from  Jesus,  and  abide  in  Jesus  without 
limit.  Many  eyes  are  wanted  to  spy  out 
the  whole  of  Christ.  No  eye,  nor  all  eyes, 
can  see  all  that  lies  in  his  varied  perfections. 
6.  Of  all  these  a  perfect  proportion,  so  that  no 
one  excellence  destroys  another.  He  is  all 
a  rose  should  be,  and  yet  not  the  less 
perfect  as  a  lily. 

Hence,  he  is  suitable  to  all  saints,  the  joy  of  all, 
the  perfection  of  beauty  to  each  one. 

III.  THE    EXCEEDING    FEEENE88    OF   HIS    DELIGHT- 

FULNESS. 

1.  Meant  to  be  plucked  and  enjoyed  as  roses  and 
lilies  are. 


10  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

2.  Abundant  as  a  common  flower.  He  is  not  as  a 
rare  orchid,  but  as  the  anemones  which 
covered  Sharon's  plains,  and  as  the  lilies 
which  abounded  in  all  the  valleys  of 
Palestine. 

8.  Abiding  in  a  common  place,  as  roses  in  Sharon 
and  lilies  in  the  valleys,  where  every  passer 
by  was  free  to  gather  according  to  his  own 
sweet  will.  Not  found  on  inaccessible  steeps, 
or  within  guarded  enclosures,  Jesus  is  out 
in  the  open :  a  flower  of  the  common.  This 
is  a  leading  idea  of  the  text.  Those  who 
desire  Christ  may  have  him. 

4.  Scattering  fragrance,  not  over  a  room  or  a  house, 
but  far  and  wide,  perfuming  every  wander 
ing  wind. 

6.  Yet  roses  and  lilies  fail  to  set  forth  our  Beloved, 
for  his  is  unfading  virtue.  They  are  soon 
withered,  but  "  He  dieth  no  more." 

In  all  things  look  for  Jesus.  See  him  in  primroses 
and  daisies. 

In  Jesus  look  for  all  things  of  beauty  and  sweet 
ness  :  lilies  and  roses  are  in  him. 

Listen  much  to  Jesus,  for  he  can  tell  you  most 
about  himself ;  and,  coming  at  first  hand,  it  will  be 
surely  true,  and  come  with  great  force  and  unction. 
Hearken,  and  hear  him  say,  "  I  am  the  Rose  of 
Sharon." 


THJfi   BOSS    AND   THE   LLLY.  11 

OBSERVATIONS. 

*/  am  the  Rose  of  Sharon,  and  the  Lily  of  the 
Galleys  ;  "  words  most  seemly  in  the  lips  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  it  is  not  robbery  from  others, 
but  condescension  and  grace,  to  commend  himself  to 
the  sons  of  men.  "I  am  meek  and  lowly,"  would 
be  the  utterance  of  pride  in  Gabriel,  but  it  is  humil 
ity  in  Jesus,  who  has  stooped  that  he  might  become 
meek  and  lowly.  "  I  am  the  true  Vine,"  "  I  am  the 
good  Shepherd,"  etc.,  are  the  expressions  alike  of 
truth  and  grace,  and  so  here. — A.  Moody  Stuart. 

Not  to  flowers  which  only  the  rich  and  great  can 
possess,  but  to  those  easily  obtainable,  does  he  liken 
himself ;  for  always  did  he  stoop  to  the  lowliest,  and 
the  common  people  ever  heard  him  gladly.  His 
presence  on  earth  never  failed  to  bring  comfort  to 
the  needy,  and  refreshment  to  the  downcast  spirit, 
just  as  sweet  odors  float  around  roses  and  lilies,  and 
minister  solace  to  the  organ  of  smell,  while  their  fair 
forms  and  rich  and  delicate  colors  gratify  the  eye. — 
H.  K.  Wood,  in  "  27*<?  Heavenly  Bridegroom  and  his 
Bride." 

We  believe  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  rose 
is  really  intended  by  the  Hebrew  word.  Even  if  in 
the  general  sense  it  should  mean  but  a  flower,  we 
should  still  infer  that,  when  applied  in  a  particular 
sense,  it  means  a  rose,  for  this  would  be  according  to 
the  usage  of  the  East.  Thus  the  Persian  word  gul 
describes  a  flower  in  general,  and  the  rose  par  excels- 


MY   SUtK  VSS, 

This  suffices  to  show  the  estimation  in  * 
t  ho  r  *e  is  held  in  the  East.     In  the  Persian  language 

.ularly,  ther*  is  perhaps  no  poem  in  v. 
allusions  to  it,  and  comparisons  drawn  from  i: 
not  wour  eTen  to  repletion.  The  extreme 

fragranee  and  beauty  of  the  rose  in  some  parts  of 
Western  Asia  have  attracted  the  notice  of  man) 
travellers.  It  is  also  ealtmted,  not  merely  as  a 
garden  plant  for  pleasure*  hut  in  extensire  fields* 
from  the  produce  of  which  is  prepared  that  valued 


and  the  number  of  the  flowers  on 
each*  fcr  exceed  in  the  rose  districts  of  Persia,  any- 
ftwutMnad  to  witness.—  JSdmtf 


LXVII. 

"  IT  WAS  BUT  A  LITTLE  THAT  I  PASSED  FROM  THEM,  BCT  I 
FOUND  HIM  WHOM  MY  SOUL  LOTETH:  I  HELD  HlM,  AMD 
WOULD  NOT  LET  IIlM  GO,  UNTIL  I  HAD  BBOUGHT  HlM 
OTTO  MY  MOTHEB'8  HOUSE,  AKD  WTO  THE  CHAMBEB  OF 

HEB  THAT  CONCEIVED  ME."—8ong  qf  Bolomfm,  Hi.  4. 

THE  first  position  is,  "  I  patted  Jrvm  them:'  We 
must  go  beyond  the  fellowship  of  the  best  of 
men,  and  commune  with  him  whom  our  soul  Joveth. 
Our  love  must  lead  to  action,  "I  taught  him"  Those 
who  love  Jesus  seek  his  presence  with  an  agony  of 
desire. 

After  this  seeking,  we  read  at  first,  "  /  found  him 
not"  Sad,  but  needful  disappointment.  But  this 
lasts  not  for  ever ;  we  soon  come  into  the  region  of 
text,  where  everything  is  bright  with  sunlight. 
Three  flashes  of  delight  follow  each  other:  *  I found 
Mm  ;  "  «  /  held  him  ;  "  "  I  brought  him."  May  these 
be  our  joyous  experience !  To  that  end  let  us  muse 
upon  them,  and  pray  the  Holy  Spirit  to  help  us. 

I.  al  FOCTXD  HIM  ":  or,  love  in  fellowship. 

1.  I  was  enquiring  for  him. 

2.  I  had  got  beyond  all  men  and  means,  and  could 

not  be  content  with  any  but  himself. 


14  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

3  I  beheld  his  person.  He  drew  near  in  his  Word 
and  ordinances.  I  perceived  him  by  the 
Spirit.  Faith  saw  him  clearly. 

4.  I  was  assured  of  his  presence.     My  heart  felt 

peculiar  influences  operating  upon  it.     It 
was  a  time  of  love. 

5.  I  knew  him  to  be  mine.     There  were  no  doubts 

and  fears.     He  was  "my  Beloved,"  and  I 
was  all  his  own. 

6.  I  was  filled  with  content.     I  looked  for  no  one 

else,  for  in  finding  him  I  had  found  my  all 
for  earth  and  heaven. 

Do  we  know  what  this  blessed  finding  means? 
If  not,  let  us  never  rest  till  we  do. 

II.  "  I  HELD  HIM  : "  or,  love  in  possession. 

1.  By  my  heart's  resolve,  determining  never  to 

lose  him  again. 

2.  By   my   tearful  pleas,   entreating  him  not  to 

make    me    wretched    by   withdrawing.     I 

pleaded — 

My  joy  in  his  society. 
My  need  of  his  gracious  protection. 
My  love  to  him,  which  made  me  hunger  for 

him. 
His  love  to  me,  which  surely  would  not  let 

him  leave  me. 
8.  By  making  him  my  all  in  all.     He  stays  where 

he  is  prized,  and  I  set  him  on  a  high  throne 

in  my  spirit. 


COHSTKAINING  THE  BELOVED.  16 

4.  By  renouncing  all  other  loves,  sins,  idols,  &c. 

He  is  jealous,  and  I  kept  myself  altogether 

for  him. 
6.  By  a  simple  faith :  for  he  is  pleased  with  trust ; 

and  dwells  where  he  is  rested  in. 
6.  By  his  own  power.     "  I  would  not  let  him  go," 

because  I  held  him  by  his  promise,  and  by 

the  power  which  it  gave  me. 

If  you  have  Jesus,  hold  him. 

He  is  willing  to  be  constrained.  See  how  often, 
In  his  life  on  earth,  "  they  constrained  him,"  and  he 
yielded  to  their  will. 

III.  "  I  BROUGHT  HIM  :  "  or,  love  in  communication. 

The  love  of  Jesus  creates  in  our  hearts  love  to  our 
fellow-believers  for  their  Redeemer's  sake. 

The  church  of  God  is  our  mother :  the  holy  assem 
bly  is  her  chamber,  where  we  were  born  unto  God, 
and  nurtured  in  his  fear.  We  are  to  labor  to  pro 
mote  communion  with  Christ  among  those  who  are 
our  brethren,  taking  Jesus  with  us  whensoever  we 
go  up  to  the  gatherings  of  the  faithful. 

This  we  should  do — 

1.  By  our  own  spirit :  communing  with  Jesus  be 

fore  we  go  to  public   worship,  and  going 
there  with  him  in  our  company. 
We  shall  always  find  him  in  the  church  if  we 
take  him  in  our  hearts  to  its  hallowed  ser 
vices. 

2.  By  our  words :  we  should  so  speak  as  to  set 

forth  Jesus,  and  promote  fellowship  with 


16  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

him.  Alas,  how  many  speak  oontrover- 
sially,  or  without  savor,  or  with  carnal  ora 
tory  wherein  is  no  room  for  the  Beloved  1 
Oh,  for  a  crucified  style  of  speech  I 
8.  By  our  prayers  we  should  bring  him  into  the 
assembly ;  ay,  bring  him  into  society  where 
hitherto  he  has  been  unknown.  The  world 
also  was  once  our  mother.  Oh,  that  we 
could  introduce  the  Lord  Jesus  into  her 
chambers,  that  he  might  reign  and  rule 
there !  "  Thy  Kingdom  come."  By  lov 
ing  violence  we  will  constrain  him  to  come 
with  us  in  his  presence  and  power. 

See  what  the  church  needs  ! — Christ  in  her  midst. 

See  how  he  is  likely  to  come  I — he  must  be  brought. 

See  what  must  first  be  done  I — he  must  be  held. 

See  who  alone  can  do  this! — those  who  have 
found  him. 

Yet  see,  also,  who  may  find  him ! — all  who  IOT« 
him,  and  seek  him. 

Are  we  among  the  number  ? 


FURTHER  SUGGESTIONS. 

Hold  him  by  not  offending  him.  First,  by  sloth. 
When  the  soul  turns  sleepy  or  careless,  Christ  goes 
away.  Secondly,  by  idols.  You  cannot  hold  two 
objects.  Thirdly,  by  being  unwilling  to  be  sanctified. 
Fourthly,  by  an  unholy  house.  "  I  brought  him  into 
my  mother's  houw."  Remember  to  take  Christ  home 


CONSTRAINING    THE   BET/3VED.  17 

with  you,  and  let  him  rule  in  your  house.  If  you 
walk  with  Christ  abroad  but  never  take  him  home, 
you  will  soon  part  company  for  ever. — McCheyne. 

"I  found  him;"  I,  a  man,  found  the  Lord  of 
Glory  ;  I,  a  slave  to  sin,  found  the  great  Deliverer ; 
I,  the  child  of  darkness,  found  the  Light  of  life ;  I, 
the  uttermost  of  the  lost,  found  my  Saviour  and  my 
God ;  I,  widowed  and  desolate,  found  my  Friend,  my 
Beloved,  my  Husband.  Go  and  do  likewise,  sons 
and  daughters  of  Zion,  and  he  will  be  found  of  you ; 
for  "  then  shall  ye  find  when  ye  search  with  all  your 
heart." 

But  we  have  another  mother,  and  other  brethren, 
in  the  human  family  from  which  we  are  sprung. 
The  Church  has  the  first,  not  the  only  claim  on  our 
affections;  the  perishing  world  has  its  right  to  a 
large  share  of  our  pity  and  our  prayers.  Compara 
tively,  it  is  not  hard  for  us  to  bring  Jesus  into  the 
Church,  which  is  his  mother's  house  as  well  as  ours. 
But  the  world  hates  Christ,  has  nothing  in  common 
with  him,  is  aware  that  he  rightfully  claims  the 
dominion,  is  sensitively  jealous  of  the  claim,  and 
lives  with  its  doors  barred  against  him  night  and 
day.  No  criminal  keeps  so  vigilant  a  watch  against 
the  officers  of  justice,  no  lonely  widow  makes  her 
gates  so  fast  against  the  midnight  robber,  no  miser 
apurns  so  haughtily  the  beggar  from  his  door,  as  the 
unrenewed  heart  keeps  watch  and  ward  against  the 
entrance  of  Jesus,  and  scornfully  sends  him  away 
when  he  asks  for  a  lodging  in  the  soul.  To  intro- 
2—2 


18  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

duce  him,  therefore,  into  this  home  of  our  mother  is 
a  work  demanding  effort,  watchfulness,  patience. 
There  is  much  to  provoke  him  to  turn  away;  we 
must  plead  with  him,  hold  him,  and  not  let  him  go  ; 
and  with  our  mother's  children  we  must  also  plead 
with  "  the  soft  tongue  that  breaketh  the  bone,"  for 
they  are  offended  with  us  as  well  as  with  him.  So 
sought  and  prevailed  the  Bride  of  the  Lamb,  till  she 
brought  her  own  Beloved  into  the  midst  of  her 
mother's  children,  by  whom  she  had  been  herself  so 
hardly  entreated,  requiting  evil  with  good.  Have 
you  attempted  this  ?  Are  you  engaged  in  the  effort 
now?  If  not,  rise  and  commence  such  a  work  of 
faith  and  labor  of  love  on  behalf  of  the  lost. — 
A.  Moody  Stuart. 


Lxvm. 

«*  TUBN  AWAY  THINE  EYES  FBOM  ME,  FOR  THEY  HAVE 
OVEBCOME  ME." — Song  of  Solomon  vi.  5. 

Ti  yi"UCH  of  our  life's  business  consists  in  overcom- 
-*-^-*-  ing  evil,  but  here  we  have  to  deal  with  over 
coming  him  who  is  perfect  good. 

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  there  is  any  opposi 
tion  in  the  heavenly  Bridegroom,  nor  any  unwilling 
ness  to  be  overcome  by  his  bride :  no,  it  is  the  loving 
heart  of  Jesus  which  is  readily  overcome  by  the  love 
of  his  chosen  one. 

Let  us  learn  from  this  most  remarkable  excla 
mation, — 

I.  THAT  LOOKING  UPON  HIS  CHURCH  HAS  OVEB 
COME  THE  HEART  OF  THE  LORD  JESUS. 

1.  He  left  heaven  to  be  one  with  her.     He  could 

not  bear  to  see  her  ruin,  but  left  his  Father 
that  he  might  share  her  lot. 

2.  He  died  to  redeem  her :  **  found  guilty  of  excess 

of  love." 

3.  His  delight  is  in  her  now ;  she  is  lovely  in  his 

sight. 

4.  His  eternal  joy  is  to  spring  from  her :  he  will 

see  in  her  the  result  of  his  death-agony: 
"  he  will  rest  in  his  love." 

(19) 


20  MY    SERMON   NOTES. 

Jesus  is  so  overcome  that  he  still  gives  all  that  he 
is,  and  has,  yda,  and  his  own  self,  to  his  beloved, 

IL  THAT  THE  EYES  OF  HIS  CHOSEN  STILL  OVKB 

COME  THE  LORD  JESUS. 

Because  his  eyes  are  full  of  love,  therefore  is  he 
overcome  by  our  eyes  when  we  are — 

1.  Looking  up  in  deep  repentance. 

At  first  seeking  for  pardon. 

At  times  when  we  pine  for  restoration  from 
backsliding. 

Whenever  we  are  struggling  to  maintain  fel 
lowship,  and  mourning  our  breaches  of  it. 

Whenever  we  groan  under  inbred  sin,  and 
would  be  free  from  it. 

2.  Looking  at  him  by  faith  for  salvation. 

At  first,  by  a  desperate  act,  daring  to  glance 

with  feeble  hope. 
Afterwards,  in  simplicity,  day  by  day  gazing 

at  his  wounds. 
In  deep  distress  still  hoping  on,  and  never 

removing  our  eyes. 
8.  Looking  for  all  things  to  his  love  alone. 

When  in  sore  trouble,  patiently  submitting. 
When  in  humble  hope,  quietly  waiting. 
When  under  severe  tests,  firmly  believing. 
When  in  full  assurance,  joyfully  expecting. 
4.  Looking  in  prayer. 

In  personal  trouble,  like  Jacob,  pleading  the 

promise,  and  saying,  "  I  will  not  let  the* 

go."     The  Lord  «ays,  "  Let  me  go." 


THE  CONQUEST  OF  A  HOLY  EYE.  21 

In  holy  compassion  pleading  for  others,  like 
Moses,  to  whom  the  Lord  said,  "Let  me 
alone." 
6.  Looking  in  rapturous,  restful  love. 

He  is  altogether  lovely,  and  all  mine :  my  eyes 
swim  with  tears  of  delight  as  they  gaze  on 
him,  and  thus  they  overcome  him. 

My  heart  burns  with  love  to  him,  and  I  adore 

him ;  and  this  wins  everything  from  him. 
6.  Looking  in  sacred  longing  for  his  appearing. 

Pining  for  a  personal  revelation  of  himself  to 
me  by  his  Spirit. 

Most  of  all,  sighing  for  his  speedy  coming  in 
the  glory  of  the  Second  Advent.  He  re 
plies,  "  Behold,  I  come  quickly  1 " 

\ 

Oh,  the  power  of  a  spiritual  man  with  Jesus  1 
Oh,  the  power  of  a  church  with  heaven!     The 
Lord  will  deny  nothing  to  the  prayer  of  his  elect. 

III.  THAT  rp  THE  CHURCH  WOULD  BUT  LOOK  TO 

HEB  LORD  MORE  SHE  WOULD  OVERCOME 
THE  WORLD  MORE. 

To  overcome  the  Lord  is  the  greater  thing,  and 
when  this  is  done,  the  church  may  well  go  forth 
conquering  and  to  conquer  all  that  is  less  than  her 
Lord.  The  eyes  of  the  church  should  be  set  on 
Jesus,  and  then  she  would  overcome.  If  we  were — 

1.  Weeping  for  dishonor  done  to  him,  he  would 
«ee  this,  and  retrieve  our  defeat. 


22  MT    SERMON    NOTES. 

2.  Depending  on  him  for  our  strength,  our  faith 
would  give  us  victory  through  Jesus'  love. 

8.  Obediently  following  his  commands,  he  would 
then  feel  it  right  to  give  honor  to  his  own 
truth,  and  to  reward  obedience  to  his  own 
precepts. 

4.  Confidently  expectant  of  victory,  Jesus  would 

make  bare  his  arm  for  us.  Faith's  eyes 
calmly  watching,  or  flashing  with  exultant 
expectancy,  would  be  as  flames  of  fire  to 
the  foe. 

5.  Eagerly  pleading  for  his  interposition,  our  tear 

ful,  earnest  eyes  would  soon  succeed  with 
our  gracious  God. 

See  the  secret  of  strength.  Look  to  Jesus,  and 
ayercome. 

Let  us  lament  our  infrequent  use  of  this  conquer 
ing  weapon. 

Now  for  a  long  and  loving  look  at  the  Bridegroom 
of  our  souls. 

Help  us,  O  Holy  Spirit,  to  whom  our  eyes  owe 
their  sight ! 


HINTS. 

Who  has  not  felt  the  power  of  the  eye?  The 
beggar  looked  so  imploringly  that  we  gave  him  alms ; 
the  child's  eye  so  darkened  with  disappointment  that 
we  indulged  his  desire ;  the  sick  man  gazed  so  sadly 


THE   CONQUEST   OF   A    HOLY    EYE.  23 

at  our  departure  that  we  turned  back,  and  lengthened 
our  visit.  But  the  eyes  of  those  we  love  master  us. 
Does  a  tear  begin  to  form  ?  We  yield  at  once.  We 
cannot  endure  that  the  beloved  eyes  should  weep. 
Oar  Lord  uses  this  figure  to  most  encouraging  pur 
pose.  The  weeping  eyes  of  prayer  move  the  loving 
heart  of  Jesus.  Matthew  Henry  says,  "Christ  is 
pleased  to  borrow  these  expressions  of  a  passionate 
lover  to  express  the  tenderness  of  a  compassionate 
Redeemer,  and  the  delight  he  takes  in  his  redeemed, 
and  in  the  workings  of  his  own  grace  in  them." 

We  read  in  Matthew  xv.  that  the  Lord  Jesus  said 
to  the  Canaanitish  woman,  "  O  woman,  great  is  thy 
faith ;  be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt."  He  seems 
to  surrender  at  discretion,  conquered  by  that  faith 
which  he  had  himself  p*it  into  her  heart.  Now, 
faith  is  the  eye  of  the  soul,  and  here  is  an  instance 
of  the  eyes  overcoming  the  Lord.  We  cannot  van 
quish  him  with  the  works  of  our  hands,  or  the 
eloquence  of  our  lips ;  but  we  can  win  the  victory 
by  the  pleadings  of  our  eyes, — those  eyes,  which  are 
as  the  eyes  of  doves,  seeing  afar, — the  eyes  of  true 
faith. 

Some  devout  persons  find  it  a  profitable  exercise 
to  bow  the  knee,  and  to  look  up.  Using  few  words, 
they  commune  through  a  long,  upward,  pleading 
glance.  One  only  cried,  "  My  God,"  and  at  another 
time,  "  God  be  mercifr  /  to  me,  a  sinner ; "  and  yet 
he  came  fo  *th  from  his  closet  as  one  who  had  bathed 
in  heaven 


Si  MY  8EBMON   NOTES. 

u  Have  you  a  glimpse  of  Christ  now  that  you  ar« 
dying?"  was  the  question  asked  of  an  old  Scottish 
saint,  who,  raising  himself,  made  the  emphatic  reply, 
"  I'll  hae  none  o'  your  glimpses  now  that  I  am  dying, 
since  that  I  have  had  a  full  look  at  Christ  these  forty 
years  gane." — Annal*  of  tKt  Early  Friend$. 


LXIX. 

"COME  NOW,  AND  LET  US  BEASON  TOGETHER,  8AITH  TH1 
LORD:  THOUGH  YOUR  SINS  BE  AS  SCARLET,  THEY  SHALL 
BE  AS  WHITE  AS  SNOW?  THOUGH  THEY  BE  RED  LEKB 
CRIMSON,  THEY  SHALL  BE  AS  WOOL." — Isaiah  L  18. 

r  •"'HE  sinful  condition  of  men  is  terrible  in  the  ex- 
•*•  treme.  This  is  set  forth  vividly  in  previous 
verses  of  the  chapter.  They  are  altogether  alienated 
from  their  God. 

God  himself  interposes  to  produce  a  change.  The 
proposal  of  peace  is  always  from  his  side. 

He  urges  that  a  conference  be  held  at  once,  "  Come, 
and  let  us  reason  together." 

That  conference  is  to  be  held  at  once:  "Come 
now"  for  the  danger  is  too  great  to  admit  of  a 
moment's  delay.  God  is  urgent ;  let  us  not  procras 
tinate. 

In  our  text  we  have, — 

I.  AN   INVITATION   TO  A   CONFEBKNOB. 

Sinful  men  do  not  care  to  think,  consider,  and 
look  matters  in  the  face ;  yet  to  this  distasteful  duty 
they  are  urger1 

If  they  reason,  they  rather  reason  against  God 
than  together  with  him  ;  but  here  the  proposal  is  not 


26  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

to  discuss,  but  to  treat  with  a  view  to  reconciliation. 
This  also  ungodly  hearts  decline. 

1.  They   prefer   to   attend  to  ceremonial  observ 

ances.  Outward  performances  are  easier, 
and  do  not  require  thought. 

2.  Yet  the  matter  is  one   which   demands   most 

serious  discussion,  and  deserves  it ;  for 
God,  the  soul,  heaven,  and  hell  are  involved 
in  it.  Never  was  wise  counsel  more  desir 
able. 

8.  No  good  can  come  of  neglecting  to  consider  it. 
It  is  one  of  those  matters  which  will  never 
drift  the  right  way  of  itself. 

a,  It  is  most  gracious  on  the  Lord's  part  to  sug 
gest  a  conference.  Kings  do  not  often  in 
vite  criminals  to  reason  with  them. 

5.  The  invitation  is  a  pledge  that  he  desires  peace, 

is  willing  to  forgive,  and  anxious  to  set  us 
right. 

6.  The  appointment  of  the  immediate  present  as 

the  time  for  the  reasoning  together  is  a 
proof  of  generous  wisdom.  "  Just  as  thou 
art,"  come  to  God  in  Christ,  just  as  he  is. 
Love  invites  thee  in  all  thy  sin  and  misery. 

II.   A  SPECIMEN  OF  THE  REASONING  ON  GOD'S  PART. 

1  T'he  one  main  ground  of  difference  is  honestly 

mentioned, — "  though  your  sins  be  as  scar 
let."  God  calls  the  most  glaring  sinners  to 
come  to  him,  knowing  them  to  be  such. 

2  This  ground  of  difference  God  himself  w'll  re« 


iJKVlTATloN    TO    A 

move, — "  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow." 

He  will  forgive,  and  so  end  the  quarrel. 
8.  He  will    remove    the    offence  perfectly, — M  as 

snow — as  wool." 

He  will  remove  forever  the  guilt  of  sin. 
He  will  discharge  the  penalty  of  sin. 
He  will  destroy  the  dominion  of  sin. 
He  will  prevent  the  return  of  sin. 
4.  He  explains  by  his  own  Word  how  this  is  done. 
Free  forgiveness  obliterating  guilt. 
Full  atonement  averting  punishment. 
Regeneration  by  the  Spirit  breaking  the  power 

of  sin. 
Constant  sanctin cation  forbidding  its  return. 

See,  then,  the  way  of  your  return  to  God  made  easy. 
Consider  it  carefully,  and  talk  with  God  about 
it  at  once. 

III.    THIS    SPECIMEN    REASONING  18    AN    ABSTRACT 
OF  THE   WHOLE  ARGUMENT. 

Each  special  objection  is  anticipated. 

1.  The  singular  greatness  of  your  sins, — "  red  like 

crimson."     This  is  met  by  a  great  atone 
ment,  which  cleanses  from  all  sin. 

2.  The  long  continuance  of  your  sins.    Cloth  dyed 

scarlet  has  lain  long  in  the  dye-vat.  The 
blood  of  Jesus  cleanses  at  once. 
8.  The  light  against  which  your  sins  were  com 
mitted.  This  puts  a  glaring  color  upon 
them.  But  "all  manner  of  sin  and  blas 
phemy  shall  be  forgiven  UP  to  men." 


28  MY  8BBMON   NOTES. 

4.  The  grieving  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Even  this  ii 
removed  by  Jesus. 

6.  The  failure  of  your  attempts  to  whiten  youi 
soul.  Crimson  and  scarlet  cannot  be  re 
moved  by  the  art  of  man ;  but  the  Lord 
saith,  "  I  have  blotted  out  thy  sins." 

6.  The  despair  which  your  sins  create :  they  are 
so  glaring  that  they  are  ever  before  you, 
yet  they  shall  be  washed  out  by  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world. 

Come  now.  Your  minister  pleads  with  you  on 
God's  behalf. 

Can  it  be  right  to  slight  God's  invitation  ? 

What  harm  can  come  of  a  conference  with  him? 

Must  it  not  be  right  to  be  reconciled  with  your 
Maker? 

What  if  this  day  should  see  you  made  "  white  aa 
snow  ?  " 


ENFORCEMENTS. 

A  husband  and  wife  had  parted,  and  had  been  for 
years  separated.  He  on  several  occasions  entreated 
her  to  meet  him,  and  talk  over  their  differences  with 
»  view  to  reconciliation.  She  steadily  declined  an 
interview,  and  would  not  enter  upon  the  subject  of 
their  alienation.  Are  you  surprised  when  we  add 
that  the  fault  from  th:  beginning  lay  with  her?  You 


i:srviTATiON  TO  A  CONFERENCE.  2b 

cannot  doubt  that  the  sin  of  their  continued  division 
was  her's  alone.  The  parable  is  easy  to  be  inter 
preted. 

Certain  scarlet  cloth  is  first  dyed  in  the  grain,  and 
then  dyed  in  the  piece ;  it  is  thus  double-dyed.  And 
so  are  -ve  with  regard  to  the  guilt  of  sin ;  we  are 
double-dyed,  for  we  are  all  sinners  by  birth,  and 
sinners  by  practice.  Our  sins  are  like  scarlet,  yet 
by  faith  in  Christ  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow :  by 
an  interest  in  Christ's  atonement,  though  our  offences 
be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool ;  that  is, 
they  shall  be  as  white  as  the  undyed  wool. 

—"Friendly  Greetings." 

When  a  dye  enters  into  the  very  substance  of  the 
stuff,  how  can  it  be  removed  ?  Our  own  laundresses, 
by  continually  removing  common  stains,  at  length 
destroy  the  fabrio  of  our  linen ;  but  what  is  to  be 
done  where  art,  and  labor,  and  time  have  mingled 
the  color  and  the  cloth  into  one  ?  With  man  this 
may  be  impossible,  but  not  with  God.  When  a  man 
has  taken  up  sin  into  him,  till  it  is  as  much  himself 
as  his  black  skin  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  Ethiopian, 
yet  the  Lord  can  put  the  sin  away  as  thoroughly  as 
if  the  negro  became  a  fair  Caucasian.  He  takes  the 
spots  out  of  human  tigers,  and  leaves  not  one  of 
them. 

Consider  how  the  Tynan  scarlet  was  dyed;  not 
superficially  dipped,  but  thoroughly  drenched  in  the 
liquor  that  colored  it,  as  thy  soul  in  custom  of 


80  MV    SEKMON    NOTBii. 

sinning.  Then  was  it  taken  out  for  a  time  and  dried, 
put  in  again,  soaked  and  sodden  the  second  time  in 
the  vat;  called  therefore  twice-dyed;  as  thou  corn- 
plainest  thou  hast  been  by  relapsing  into  the  same 
sin.  Ysa,  the  color  so  incorporated  into  the  cloth, 
not  drawn  over,  but  diving  into  the  very  heart  of  the 
wool,  that,  rub  a  scarlet  rag  on  what  is  white,  and  it 
will  bestow  a  reddish  tincture  upon  it ;  as,  perchance, 
thy  sinful  practice  and  precedent  have  also  infected 
those  which  were  formerly  good,  by  thy  badness. 
Yet  such  scarlet  sins,  so  solemnly  and  substantially 
colored,  are  easily  washed  white  in  the  blood  of  our 
Saviour. — Thomas  Fuller. 


LXX. 
O  HOUSE  or  JACOB,  COME  YE,  AND  LET  us  WALK  IN  THE 

LIGHT  OP  THE  LOBD!" — Isaiah  U.   5. 

that  the  literal  "  house  of  Jacob  "  would  walk 
in  the  light  of  Jehovah  by  acknowledging  Jesus, 
who  is  the  Day  spring  from  on  high  I  Alas,  they 
refuse  the  light,  for  the  veil  is  upon  their  hearts ! 
Let  us  pray  for  the  ingathering  of  the  tribes  of 
Israel.  Surely  "it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last 
days  "  (verse  2). 

We  will  treat  at  this  time  of  the  spiritual  Israel, 
even  of  the  children  of  God  at  this  hour. 

I.  HEKB  is  AN  INVITATION.    "Come  ye,  and  let  us 
walk  in  the  light  of  Jehovah." 

It  is  singular  that  the  people  of  Jehovah  should 
need  such  an  invitation,  for  it  seems  natural  that 
they  should  live  in  him,  rejoice  in  him,  and  learn  of 
him,  seeing  he  is  their  own  God. 

It  is  a  still  more  singular  invitation  in  that  it 
conies  from  the  nations  to  the  house  of  Jacob.  The 
word  of  the  Lord  goes  forth  from  Jerusalem,  con 
verts  the  nations,  and  then  returns  to  the  people 
from  whom  it  first  caine.  The  parallel  is  found 
when  the  invitation  comes  to  those  of  us  who  are 
believers, — 

(81) 


89  AIY  8EBMON   NOTES. 

1.  From  those  to  whom  we  have  ministered.     How 

it  rewards  and  encourages  us  to  hear  such  a 
call  from  those  who  once  refused  the  invi 
tations  of  the  gospel  I  When  there  is  a 
move  among  the  dry  bones,  we  hope  for  the 
best  results. 

2.  From  new  converts,  who  in  their  burning  zeal 

urge  on  older  saints,  and  thus  create  joy, 
and  hint  a  gentle  rebuke. 

8.  From  saints  bent  on  mutual  edification.  "  Come 
ye,  and  let  us"  Here  are  willing  brethren 
calling  to  others  who  are  equally  willing. 
Would  God  we  had  more  of  this  ! 

ouch  invitations  as  these  are  healthy  signs.  We 
should  encourage  their  production  by  mutual  inter 
course  upon  holy  things. 

II.  LET  us   ACCEPT  THIS   INVITATION.    "Let  us 
walk  in  the  light  of  the  Lord." 

No  other  light  is  comparable  to  it ;  especially  for 
the  Lord's  own  people.  Jehovah  should  be  the  light 
of  Jacob. 

No  other  walking  is  so  safe,  so  gladsome. 

No  other  people  are  so  able  to  walk  in  the  light  of 
God :  their  eyes  are  opened,  their  feet  are  strength 
ened,  their  hearts  are  purified,  their  actions  suit 
the  day. 

1.  In  this  light  we  find  certainty  for  the  mind. 
Reason  makes  guesses,  or  confesses  that  ah* 
knows  no  IP' 


WALKING   IN  THE   LIGHT. 

Fanaticism  dotes  on  dreams  and  superstitions, 

Human  authority  blunders. 

Revelation  alone  is  sure,  infallible,  unalter 
able.     All   other  light   is   darkness   when 
compared  with  it. 
2.  In  this  light  we  find  rest  for  the  conscience. 

We  see  Jesus,  his  blood,  and  the  perfect  par 
don  which  it  procures. 

We  see  his  perfect  righteousness  covering  us, 

and  making  us  comely  before  God. 
8.  In  this  light  we  find  direction  for  the  judgment. 

We  see  sin,  love,  providence,  the  future,  &c., 
in  their  true  colors,  and  know  how  to  act 
in  reference  to  them. 

We  learn  to  know  the  right  way,  and  the  wise 
course. 

We  discover  the  hidden  snares,  and  are  led  to 

avoid  them. 
4.  In  this  light  we  find  delight  for  the  soul. 

In  the  purposes  of  the  Lord.  "  Predestinated 
to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son." 

In  our  personal  condition  in  Christ.  "  Com 
plete  in  him." 

In  the  dealings  of  our  Father's  hand.  "  All 
things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that 
love  God,"  etc. 

In  the  struggling  which  goes  on  within,  which 
as  a  symptom  of  grace  yields  us  comfort 
able  hope. 

In  the  future  of  death  and  eternity,  which 
else  would  dif+jcse  us. 


34  MY    S&&MOH   NOTJW*. 

5.  In  this  light  we  find  communum  for  the  Heart. 
We  see  God,  and  feel  perfect  peace. 
We  see  grace  within,  and  enjoy  full  assurance. 
We  see  Jesus,  and  are  in  conscious  union  with 

him. 
We  feel  t_te  Spirit  of  God,  and  are  workers 

with  him. 

We  see  the  saints,  and  delight  in  their  graces. 
Beloved  hearers,  may  the  Holy  Spirit  lead  you — 
To  enter  into  the  light  of  God. 
To  remain  in  it,  walking  therein  quietly  from 

day  to  day. 
To    make    progress    in  it,  walking  onward 

toward  perfection. 

Come  ye,  and  let  us  even  now  walk  together  in 
this  light. 

It  shines  perpetually,  and  we  are  the  children  of 
light. 

Living  in  it  here  will  prepare  us  for  enjoying  it  in 
all  its  glorious  brightness,  where  "  the  Lamb  is  the 
light." 

OIL  FOB  THE  LIGHT. 

A  weary  and  discouraged  woman,  after  struggling 
all  day  with  contrary  winds  and  tides,  came  to  her 
home,  and  flinging  herself  into  a  chair,  said  :  "  Every 
thing  looks  dark,  dark." 

44  Why  don't  you  turn  your  face  to  the  light,  aunty 
dear?"  said  a  little  niece  who  was  standing  near. 

The  words  were  a  message  from  on  high,  and  the 


WALKING    FN   THE   LIGHT.  35 

weary  eyes  were  turned  toward  him  who  is  the  Light 
and  the  Life  of  men,  and  in  whose  light  alone  we 
see  light. 

A  man  who  looks  toward  the  light  sees  no  shadow ; 
a  man  who  walks  toward  the  light  leaves  darkness 
behind  him.  People  get  in  darkness  by  turning 
away  from  the  light.  They  hide  in  obscure  corners . 
they  bury  themselves  in  nooks  where  the  rays  of  ths 
Sun  of  Righteousness  cannot  reach  them ;  they  close 
their  blinds  and  shutters,  and  wonder  that  they  hav* 
no  light. 

A  house  may  be  dark,  but  it  is  not  the  fault  of  the 
sun.  A  soul  may  be  dark,  but  it  is  not  because  the 
Light  of  the  world  does  not  shed  beams  abroad.  He 
that  folio  we  th  Christ  "shall  not  walk  in  darkness, 
but  shall  have  the  light  of  life."  But  if  our  deeds 
are  evil,  we  shall  turn  away  from  God,  and  love 
darkness  rather  than  light ;  while  if.  we  are  willing 
to  be  reproved,  corrected  and  guided  in  the  right 
way,  we  shall  find  that  "  light  is  sown  for  the  right 
eous,  and  gladness  for  /ie  upright  in  heart."  Walk 
ing  in  the  light,  as  Christ  is  in  the  light,  we  have 
fellowship  with  the  Father,  and  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ,  his  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin. — The  Bos 
ton  "  Christian" 

It  is  worth  noting  how  plants  and  trees  turn  to 
the  light ;  how  bleached  vegetation  becomes  if  it  be 
shut  up  in  darkness.  The  utter  dark  is  dreadful  to 
men,  it  may  even  be  felt,  so  does  it  press  upon  the 
mind.  The  dimness  of  a  foggy  day  depresses  many 


$6  MY  8EBMON    NOTES. 

spirits  more  than  trouble  or  pain.  The  cry  of  tne 
sick  man,  "  Would  God  it  were  morning !  is  the 
groan  of  all  healthy  life  when  gloom  surrounds  it. 
What  then  can  be  said,  if  there  be  light,  and  we  re 
fuse  it  ?  He  must  have  ill  work  on  hand  who  loves 
the  darkness.  Only  bats,  and  owls,  and  unclean 
and  ravenous  things  are  fond  of  the  night.  Children 
of  light  walk  in  the  light,  and  reflect  the  light. 

"  Where  the  sun  does  not  enter,  the  physician 
must;  "  so  say  the  Italians,  and  their  witness  is  true. 
Sunlight  has  not  only  a  cheering  but  a  health-giving 
influence.  Along  the  Riviera,  invalids  owe  every 
thing  to  the  sut ;  and  when  it  is  gone,  they  shrink 
into  their  own  rooms.  Chambers  to  which  his 
warmth  does  no;  come  are  at  a  discount:  the  light  is 
essential  to  restcration  as  well  as  to  enjoyment. 


LXXL 

"  I  WILL  ALSO  COMMAND  THE  CLOUDS   THAT  THKT    RAIN   NC 

RAIN  UPON  IT." — Isaiah  v.  6. 

RAIN  essential  for  growth  of  seed  and  fruit,  and 
its  withdrawal  for  a  length  of  time  a  terrible 
temporal  judgment,  especially  in  hot  climates. 

The  spiritual  rain  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  influence 
essential  to  a  spiritual  life,  in  its  beginning,  growth, 
r/pening,  perfecting. 

Its  withdrawal  the  last  and  most  terrible  of  judg 
ments.  (See  whole  verse.) 

Especially  is  it  a  mark  of  anger  for  clouds  to  be 
overhead,  and  yet  to  drop  no  rain :  to  have  the  means 
of  grace,  but  no  grace  with  the  means. 

Let  us  consider, — 

I.  WHAT  IT  MEANS. 

1.  Ministers  allowed  to  preach,  but  without  power. 

2.  Ordinances  celebrated,  but  without  the  bene 

diction  of  the  Lord. 

3.  Assemblies  gathered,  but  the  Lord  not  in  the 

ruidst. 

4.  The  Word  read,  but  with  no  application  to  the 

heart. 

5.  Formality  of  prayer  kept  up,  but  no  pleading 

with  God. 

6.  The  Holy  Ghost  restrained,  mnd  grieved. 


38  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

This  has  been  the  case  full  often,  and  may  be  tgain 
with  any  church  or  person  if  sin  be  tolerated  after 
warning.  Is  it  so  in  the  present  assembly,  or  with 
any  one  in  it  ? 

The  clouds,  ordained  to  rain,  are  commanded  not 
to  do  so ;  commanded  by  God  himself,  with  whom  is 
the  key  of  the  rain ;  commanded  altogether  to  with 
hold  their  refreshing  showers.  There  is  no  necessary 
connection  between  outward  ordinances  and  grace ; 
we  may  have  clouds  of  the  first,  and  no  drops  of  the 
second. 

II.  WHAT  IT  INVOLVES. 

1.  No  conversions,  for  these  are  by  the  Spirit. 

2.  No  restorations  of  backsliders.    Withered  plants 

are  not  revived  when  there  is  no  rain. 

3.  No    refreshing    of    the    weary :    comfort    and 

strength   come   not  except  by  the  dew  of 
heaven. 

4.  No  spiritual  activities.     Lukewarmness  reigns 

through  routine  unto  death.     The  workers 
move  like  persons  walking  in  their  sleep. 
6.  No  holy  joys,  delights,  triumphs. 
As  everything  pines  when  there  is  no  rain,  so  do 
all  good  things  suffer   when   there  is  a   spiritual 
drought. 

Nothing  can  make  up  for  it. 
Nothing  can  flourish  without  it. 

III.  HOW  IT  MANIFESTS   ITSELF. 

A  parched  season  spiritually  has  its  own  signs  in 
the  individual. 


NO 

1.  The   soul  experiences  no    benefit    undei    the 

Word. 

2.  The  man  feels  glutted  with  the  gospel,  and 

wearied  with  it. 

8.  He  begins  to  criticise,  carp,  cavil,  and  despise 
the  Word. 

4.  Soon  he  is  apt  to  neglect  the  hearing  of  it. 

5.  Or  he  hears  and  perverts  the  Word,  either  to 

boasting,  to  ridicule,  to  controversy,  or  to 
ill-living. 

It  is  a  horrible  thing  when  that  which  should  be  a 
savor  of  life  unto  life  becomes  a  savor  of  death  unto 
death,  when  even  the  clouds  refuse  to  rain. 

Is  it  so  with  any  one  of  us  ? 

IV.   HOW  IT  CAN  BE  PREVENTED. 

Let  us  humbly  use  the  means  without  putting  our 
trust  in  them,  and  then  let  us, — 

1.  Confess  our  ill-desert.     The  Lord  might  justly 

have  withheld  his  grace  from  us. 

2.  Acknowledge  our  dependence  upon  the  heavenly 

showers  of  spiritual  influence. 

3.  Pray  incessantly,  till,  like  Elias,  we  bring  down 

the  rain. 

4.  Look  alone  to  Jesus.     "  He  shall  come  down 

like  rain." 

6.  Value  the  least  sign  of  grace,  watching  for  it  as 

the  prophet  did  from  the  top  of  Carmel,  till 
he  saw  the  little  cloud  arise  from  the  sea. 
6.  Use  the  blessing  more  diligently  when  it  returns, 
bringing  forth  fruit  unto  God. 


40  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

Let  this  act  as  an  incentive  to  gratitude  to  those 
who  are  wet  with  showers  of  blessing. 

And  as  a  warning  to  those  who  are  losing  their 
interest  in  the  gatherings  of  the  Sabbath. 


ANECDOTES  AND  APHORISMS. 

God's  grace  can  save  souls  without  any  preaching : 
but  all  the  preaching  in  the  world  cannot  save  souls 
without  God's  grace. — Benjamin  JSeddome. 

The  hearer  sometimes  complains  that  there  is  no 
food  for  his  soul ;  when  the  truth  is  that  there  is  no 
soul  for  the  food. — Joseph  Parker. 

Every  preacher  must  have  felt  that  in  certain 
places  his  labor  is  in  vain.  For  some  cause  unknown 
to  him,  there  is  no  response  to  his  appeals,  no  fruit 
of  his  teaching.  I  knew  a  place  from  which  Mr. 
Whitefield  was  chased  away,  and  it  was  said  of  it 
that  ever  since  there  appeared  to  be  a  blight 
upon  it;  and  indeed  it  seemed  so.  I  have  seen 
churches  acting  wrongly,  and  becoming  withered 
from  that  time.  On  the  other  hand,  we  feel 
when  there  is  dew  about,  and  we  know  when  there 
is  a  sound  of  abundance  of  rain.  I  have  preached 
at  times  with  the  absolute  certainty  of  success  be 
cause  a  grace-shower  was  on  saint  and  sinner,  on 
preacher  and  people. 

In  a  newspaper  we  met  with  the  following: — 
"There   was  an  old   turnpike-man,   on  a    quiet 
country  road,  whose  habit  was  to  shut  his  gate  at 


NO   RAIN.  41 

night,  and  take  his  nap.  One  dark,  wet  midnight  I 
knocked  at  his  door,  calling,  '  Gate,  gate  !  *  '  Com 
ing,*  said  the  voice  of  the  old  man.  Then  I  knocked 
again,  and  once  more  the  voice  replied,  'Coming.' 
This  went  on  for  some  time,  till  at  length  I  grew 
quite  angry,  and  jumping  off  my  horse,  opened  the 
door,  and  demanded  why  he  cried  'Coming'  for 
twenty  minutes,  and  never  came.  i  Who  is  there  ? ' 
said  the  old  man,  in  a  quiet,  sleepy  voice,  rubbing 
his  eyes.  '  What  d'ye  want,  sir  ? '  Then  awakening, 
4  Bless  yer,  sir,  and  ax  yer  pardon,  I  was  asleep ;  I 
gets  so  used  to  hearing  'em  knock,  that  I  answer 
"  coming "  in  my  sleep,  and  take  no  more  notice 
about  it.' " 

Thus  may  the  ministry  accomplish  nothing  because 
the  habitual  hearer  remains  in  a  deep  sleep,  out  of 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  alone  can  awaken  him. 
When  the  secret  influence  from  heaven  ceases  to 
speak  to  the  heart,  the  best  speaking  to  the  ear 
avails  little. 


LXXII. 

"  WHAT  SHAM,  ONE  THEN  ANSWER  THE  MESSENGERS  OF  THE 
NATION  ?    THAT  THE  LORD  HATH  FOUNDED  ZION,  AND  THE 

POOR  OF  HIS  PEOPLE  SHALL  TRUST  IN  IT. — Isaiah  XIV.  32. 

TT  is  clear  that  Zion  attracts  attention.     The  mes- 
•*•     sengers  of  the  nations  enquire  concerning  her. 

The  church  excites  attention  by — 
The  peculiarity  of  her  people. 
The  specialty  of  her  teaching. 
The  singularity  of  her  claims. 
The  greatness  of  her  privileges. 

It  is  so  good  a  thing  to  have  this  attention  excited, 
that  one  should  be  ever  ready  to  give  an  answer,  for 
this  is  the  way  by  which  the  truth  is  spread  in  the 
earth. 

Oh  that  all  nations  would  send  messengers  to  en 
quire  concerning  our  King,  and  his  reign  !  Perhaps 
they  will  when  we  are  what  we  ought  to  be,  and  are 
ready  to  answer  their  enquiries. 

I.  WHAT  DO  THE  MESSENGERS  ASK? 

They  come  as  the  Ambassadors  from  Babylon  to 
see  everything. 

They  ask  questions,  as  did  the  Queen  of  Sheba. 


ENQUIRERS   ANSWERED.  43 

Concerning  Zion,  or  the  church,  they  ask : — 

1.  What  is  her  origin  ?     (Ps.  Ixxviii.  68,  69.) 

2.  What  is  her  history?     (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  3.) 

3.  Who  is  her  King?     (Ps.  xcix.  2.) 

4.  What  is  her  charter?     (Gal.  iv.  26.) 

5.  What  are  her  laws  ?     (Ezek.  xliii.  12.) 

6.  What  is   her   treasure?      (Ps.   cxlvii.   12-14, 

Rev.  xxi.  21.) 

7.  What  is  her  present  security  ?     (Ps.  xlviii.  13.) 

8.  What  is  her  future  destiny  ?     (Ps  cii.  16.) 

There  is  nothing  about  Zion  which  is  un 
worthy  of  their  enquiry. 

There  is  nothing  about  Zion  which  is  closed 
against  enquiry. 

[I.    WHY   DO  THEY  ASK? 

1.  Some  from  mere  contempt.     "What  do  these 

fesble  Jews  ?  "  They  would  see  the  naked 
ness  of  the  land.  Perhaps  when  they  know 
more  their  contempt  will  evaporate. 

2.  Some  from  idle  curiosity.     Yet  many  who  come 

to  us  from  that  poor  motive  are  led  to 
Christ.  Zaccheus  comes  down  from  his 
tree  as  he  did  not  go  up. 

8.  Some  from  hearty  admiration.  They  enquire, 
"  What  is  thy  Beloved  more  than  another 
beloved?"  They  have  seen  his  star,  and 
are  come  to  worship,  asking,  "Where  is 
he?" 


44  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

4.  Some  from  a  desire  to  become  citizens.  How 
can  they  be  initiated  ?  What  is  the  price 
of  her  franchise?  What  will  be  required 
of  her  burgesses  ?  Is  there  room  for  more 
citizens  ? 

They  are  wise  thus  to  ask,  and  count  the  cost. 

Men  can  hardly  remain  indifferent  when  the  true 
Church  of  God  is  near  them:  for  some  reason  or 
another  they  will  enquire. 

III.  WHY   BHOTTLD  THEY  BE  ANSWERED? 

1.  It  may  silence  their  cavils. 

2.  It  may  win  them  to  God. 

8.  It  will  do  us  good  to  give  a  reason  for  the  hcpe 
that  is  in  us. 

4.  It  will  glorify  God  to  tell  of  what  his  grace  has 
done  for  his  church  and  of  what  it  is  pre 
pared  to  do. 

The  answers  should  be  prudently  suited  to  the 
enquirer. 

They  should  be  clear,  bold,  truthful,  and  joyous. 

We  should  think  before  we  give  an  anewer. 
"  What  shall  one  answer  ?  "  Our  manner  in  answer 
ing  should  be  gracious.  (1  Pet.  iii.  15.) 

The  answer  should  refer  rather  to  God  than  to 
ourselves :  it  is  so  in  the  text  now  before  us. 

IV.  WHAT  SHOULD  BE  THE  AHBWEB? 

1.  That  God  is  all  in  all  to  his  church,—-"  The 
Lord  hath." 


ENQUIRERS    ANSWERED.  46 

2.  That  her  origin  is  from  him, — "  The  Lord  hath 
founded  Zion." 

8.  That  his  people  are  poor  in  themselves,  and  rely 
upon  another.  It  is  a  city  to  which  the 
poor  flee  for  refuge,  as  many  fled  to  the 
cave  of  Adullara  who  were  in  debt  and  dis 
contented. 

4.  That  their  trust  is  in  the  foundation  which  the 

Lord  hath  laid. 

5.  That  we  resolve  to  abide  in  that  trust, — "  The 

poor  of  his  people  shall  trust  in  it." 

If  you  ungodly  ones  would  only  ask  the  righteous 
concerning  their  hope,  it  would  be  well. 

If  you  godly  ones  would  tell  enquirers  your  ex 
perience,  it  might  do  great  good.  "That  we  may 
seek  him  with  thee : "  (Solomon's  Song,  vi.  1.) 

INCENTIVES. 

Visiting  a  vaulted  passage  in  the  palace  of  Nero, 
at  Rome,  we  were  shown  certain  frescoes  upon  the 
roof.  To  exhibit  these  a  candle  was  lifted  up  upon 
a  telescopic  rod,  and  then  moved  along  from  picture 
to  picture.  Let  the  candle  stand  for  the  believer, 
and  let  him  be  willing  to  be  so  elevated  in  life  as  to 
shine  upon  those  high  mysteries  of  our  holy  faith 
which  else  had  never  been  perceived  by  other  men. 
Eminent  saints  in  the  past  have  served  such  a  pur 
pose:  their  lives  have  cast  a  light  upon  priceless 
truths,  which  else  had  been  forgotten. 


46  MY    SEBMON   NOTES. 

If  a  man  should  ask  me,  after  I  have  recovered 
from  an  illness,  by  what  means  I  had  been  healed, 
should  I  not  tell  him  with  pleasure  ?  To  monopolize 
such  information  would  be  monstrous.  The  church 
of  Christ  is  not  a  close  borough,  or  a  club  with 
exclusive  rules.  Its  walls  are  for  inclusion,  not  for 
exclusion ;  its  gates  shut  out  no  refugees  who  would 
enter.  All  that  we  know  we  are  glad  to  tell,  for  all 
that  there  is  to  tell  is  glad  tidings  to  our  fellow-men. 

A  young  Kaffir,  who  was  brought  to  England  to 
be  educated  for  mission-work  in  his  own  country, 
when  taken  to  St.  Paul's  Cathedral,  gazed  up  into 
the  dome  for  some  time  as  if  lost  in  wonder,  and 
when  at  length  he  broke  silence,  it  was  to  ask,  "  Did 
man  make  this  ?  "  Those  who  obtain  a  view  of  the 
grandeur  and  glory  of  the  spiritual  temple  may  ask 
a  similar  question.  We  can  tell  them  that  its 
"  Builder  and  Maker  is  God." 

Enquirers  should  be  answered.  It  is  never  well 
to  be  dumb  to  attentive  ears.  As  some  one  has 
wisely  said,  "  we  shall  have  to  give  an  account  of 
idle  silence,  as  well  as  of  idle  speech." 

Our  testimony  should  be  bright  and  cheerful. 
The  dismal  tale  some  tell  of  trials  and  temptations 
is  not  likely  to  fetch  home  the  prodigal  from  the  far 
country :  such  lean  and  discontented  followers  will 
never  make  anybody  say,  "  How  many  hired  servants 
of  my  Father  have  bread  enough,  and  to  spare  I" 

— Mark  Q-uy  Pearse 


ENQUIRERS   ANSWERED.  47 

To  the  matter  of  the  safety  of  the  church,  through 
the  presence  of  the  Lord,  we  may  apply  the  follow 
ing  dialogue  between  a  heathen  and  a  Jew  : — "After 
the  Jews  returned  from  captivity — all  nations  around 
about  them  being  enemies  to  them — a  heathen  asked 
a  Jew  how  he  and  his  countrymen  could  hope  for 
any  safety,  *  because,'  saith  he,  'every  one  of  you  is 
as  a  silly  sheep  compassed  about  with  fifty  wolves.' 
4 Ay,  but,'  saith  the  Jew,  'we  are  kept  by  such  a 
Shepherd  as  can  kill  all  these  wolves  when  he  pleases, 
and  by  that  means  preserve  his  sheep.'  " 

— Thomas  Brooks* 


LXXIII. 


"  A  MAN  SHALL    BE    AS     AN  HIDING-PLACE  FROM  THE   WIND, 
AND  A  COVERT  FROM  THE  TEMPEST.  —  Isaiah  mil.  2. 


best  blessings  to  men  have  usually  come 
by  men. 

When  our  Lord  ascended  on  high,  he  received 
gifts  for  men,  and  these  gifts  were  men.  (Ps.  Ixviii. 
18.  Eph.  iv.  8.  11.) 

Immense  boons  have  come  to  nations  by  kings  like 
David,  prophets  like  Samuel,  deliverers  like  Gideon, 
lawgivers  like  Moses. 

But  what  are  all  good  men  put  together  compared 
with  THE  MAN  Christ  Jesus? 

We  are  now  to  view  him  as  our  shield  against  ten 
thousand  ills:  the  hiding-place  and  covert  of  his 
people. 

Let  us  consider  that,  — 

I.      THIS  LIFE  IS  LIABLE  TO  STORMS. 

1.  Mysterious  hurricanes  within,  which  cause  the 
most  dreadful  confusion  of  mind.  Winds, 
whose  direction  is  uncertain,  shaking  every 
thing,  creating  unrest  and  distraction.  Fre 
quently  no  definite  cause  can  be  assigned 
for  them;  the  cause  maybe  constitutional, 
or  physical,  or  circumstantial. 

(48) 


OUR  HIDING-PLACE.  49 

2,  Overwhelming  tempests  of  spiritual  distress  on 
account  of  sin,  wrong  desire,  conscious  de 
clension,  unbelief,  &c. 

8.  Fierce  blasts  of  temptation,  insinuation,  sug 
gestion,  denunciation,  etc.,  from  Satan. 

4.  Wild  attacks  from  human  enemies,  who  taunt, 

slander,  threaten,  etc.  David  was  wont  to 
use  this  refuge.  He  says,  "  I  flee  unto  thee 
to  hide  me  :  "  Ps.  cxliii.  9. 

5.  Trying  gales  of  temporal  losses,  bereavements, 

and  other  afflictions. 

6.  Above  all,  the  storm  of  divine  anger  when  we 

have  grieved  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  lost  com 
munion  with  God. 

None  of  these  winds  and  tempests  are  we  able  to 
bear:  our  only  safety  lies  in  getting  out  of  them 
by  finding  a  shelter  where  God  has  provided  it. 
(Is.  xxv.  4,  xxvi.  20.  Ps.  xxxii.  7.) 

II.   FROM  THESE  STORMS  THE  MAN  CHRIST  JESUS 
IS  OUR  HIDING-PLACE. 

1.  As  truly  man.     Sympathizing  with  us,  and 

Bringing  God  near  to  us. 

2.  As  more  than  man,  ruling  every  tempest,  cover 

ing  every  feeble  traveller,  as  within  the 
cleft  of  a  rock. 

8.  As  Substitutionary  Man,  interposing,  breasting 
the  storm  for  us,  hiding  us  by  being  weather- 
beaten  himself. 

4.  As  Representative  Man,  more  than  conqueror, 

and  glorified. 
2—4 


50  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

In  him  we  are  delivered  from  divine  wrath. 
In  him  we  are  covered  from  Satan's  blasts. 
In  him  we  dwell  above  trial  by  happy  fellowship 
with  him. 

In  him  we  are  victors  over  death. 

5.  As  Ever-living  Man :  we  live  because  he  lives, 

and  thus  we  defy  the  tempest  of  death. 
John  xiv.  19. 

6.  As  Interceding  Man.     He  says,  "  I  have  prayed 

for  thee,"  when  Satan  is  seeking  to  destroy 
any  one  of  us :  Luke  xxii.  32. 

7.  As  the  Coming  Man.     We  dread  no  political 

catastrophes,  or  social  disruptions,  for  "  he 
must  reign."  The  end  is  secured.  "Be 
hold,  he  cometh  with  clouds : "  Rev.  i.  7. 

III.  LET  us  SEE  TO  IT  THAT  WE  TAKE  SHELTEB 
IN  THE  MAN. 

1.  Let  him  stand  before  us,  interposing  between 

us  and  the  punishment  of  sin.  Hide  be 
hind  him  by  faith. 

2.  Let  him  daily  cover  us  from  all  evil,  as  our 

Shield  and  Protector.     Ps.  cxix.  114. 

8.  Let  us  enter  into  him  more  and  more  fully,  that 

we  may  be  more  hidden,  that  he  may  be 
more  known  to  us,  and  that  we  may  have  a 
fuller  sense  of  security. 

O  you  that  are  out  of  Christ,  the  tempest  is 
lowering  I  Come  to  this  covert;  hasten  to  this 
hiding-place  1 


OUR   HIDING-PLACB.  61 

He  is  an  effectual  shelter,  tried  and  proved. 
He  is  an  open  refuge,  available  now  for  you. 

He  is  a  capacious  hiding-place:  "Yet  there  is 
room."  As  in  Adullum  all  David's  army  could  hide, 

BO  is  Jesus  able  to  receive  hosts  of  sinners. 
« 

He  is  an  eternal  covert:  our  dwelling-place 
throughout  all  generations. 

He  is  an  inviting  shelter,  because  he  is  Man,  and 
therefore  has  compassion  towards  men,  and  a  joy  in 
their  salvation. 


INSTANCES  AND  INSTRUCTIONS. 

Well  do  I  remember  being  caught  in  the  mistral 
at  Hyeres,  when  it  blew  with  unusual  fury ;  it  not 
only  drove  clouds  of  dust  with  terrible  force,  but 
boughs  of  trees,  and  all  sorts  of  light  material  were 
propelled  with  tremendous  force.  One  wondered 
that  a  tree  remained  upright,  or  a  fence  in  its  place. 
What  a  joy  it  was  to  hide  behind  a  solid  wall,  and 
under  its  shelter  to  run  along  till  we  were  safe  with 
in  doors !  Then  we  knew  in  some  measure  the  value 
of  a  hiding-place  from  the  wind.  But  what  is  that 
to  a  cyclone,  which  tears  down  houses,  and  lifts 
ships  upon  the  dry  land  ?  Friends  who  have  lived 
abroad  have  startled  us  with  their  descriptions  of 
what  wind  can  be,  and  they  have  made  us  cease  to 
wonder  that  a  hiding-place  should  be  greatly  prized 
by  dwellers  in  eastern  lands. 


62  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

The  tempest's  awful  voice  was  heard  ; 

O  Christ,  it  broke  on  thee ! 
Thy  open  bosom  was  my  ward, 

It  braved  the  storm  for  me. 
Thy  form  was  scarred,  thy  visage  marred ; 

Now  cloudless  peace  for  me. 

— Sacred  Songs  and  Solos. 

I  creep  under  my  Lord's  wings  in  the  great  shower, 
and  the  waters  cannot  reach  me.  Let  fools  laugh 
the  fools'  laughter,  and  scorn  Christ,  and  bid  the 
weeping  captives  in  Babylon  to  sing  them  one  of  the 
songs  of  Zion.  We  may  sing,  even  in  our  winter's 
storm,  in  the  expectation  of  a  summer's  sun  at  the 
turn  of  the  year.  No  created  powers  in  hell,  or  out 
of  hell,  can  mar  our  Lord's  work,  or  spoil  our  song 
of  joy.  Let  us  then,  be  glad  and  rejoice  in  the 
salvation  of  our  Lord,  for  faith  had  never  yet  cause 
to  have  tearful  eyes,  or  a  saddened  brow,  or  to  droop 
or  die. — Samuel  Rutherford. 

A  shelter  is  nothing  if  we  stand  in  front  of  it. 
The  main  thought  with  many  a  would-be  Christian 
is  his  own  works,  feelings,  and  attainments:  this  is 
to  stand  on  the  windy  side  of  the  wall  by  putting 
self  before  Jesus.  Our  safety  lies  in  getting  behind 
Christ,  and  letting  him  stand  in  the  wind's  eye.  We 
must  be  altogether  hidden,  or  Christ  cannot  be  our 
hiding-place. 

Foolish  religionists  hear  about  the  hiding-place, 
but  never  get  into  it.  How  great  is  the  folly  of 
such  conduct !  It  makes  Jesus  to  be  of  no  value  or 
effect.  What  is  a  roof  to  a  man  who  lies  in  the  op*n, 


OCTB   HIDING-PLACE.  68 

or  a  boat  to  one  who  sinks  in  the  sea  ?  Even  the 
Man  Christ  Jesus,  though  ordained  of  God  to  be  a 
covert  from  the  tempest,  can  cover  none  but  those 
who  are  in  him.  Come  then,  poor  sinner,  enter 
where  you  may;  hide  in  him  who  was  evidently 
meant  to  hide  you,  for  he  was  ordained  to  be  a 
Mding-place,  and  must  be  used  as  such,  or  tne  very 
aim  of  his  life  and  death  would  be  missed. 


LXXIV. 

•«A    KAN    SHALL    BE    ...    AS  RIVERS  OF  WATER    IN  A  DR1 

PLACE." — Isaiah  xxxii.  2. 

OUR  Lord  Jesus  is  nearest  and  dearest  to  us  as 
Man. 
His  manhood  reminds  us  of — 

His   incarnation,   in    which  he   assumed  our 

nature. 
His  life  on  earth,  in  which  he  honored  our 

nature. 

His  death,  by  which  he  redeemed  our  nature. 
His  resurrection,  by  which  he  upraised  our 
nature. 

Consider  the  Word  made  flesh,  and  you  have 
before  you  "  rivers  of  water."  "  It  pleased  the 
Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell." 

Though  manhood  seems  to  be  a  dry  place,  a  salt 
and  barren  land,  yet  in  the  case  of  this  Man  it  yields 
rivers  of  water, — numberless  streams,  abounding 
with  refreshment. 

Let  us  learn  from  the  simile  before  us : — 

I.  THAT  NATURE'S  DROUGHT  DOES  NOT  HINDER 

CHRIST'S  COMING  TO  MEN. 

1.  He  came  into  the  dry  plaoe  of  a  fallen,  ruined, 
rebellious  world. 
(54) 


! LIVERS    IN    THE   DESERT.  66 

2.  He  comes  to  men  personally,  notwithstanding 

their  being  without  strength,  without  right 
eousness,  without  desire,  without  life. 

3.  He  flows  within  us  in  rivers  of  grace,  though 

the  old  nature  continues  to  be  a  dry  and 
parched  land. 

4.  He  continues  the  inflowing  of  his  grace  till  he 

perfects  us,  and  this  he  does  though  decay 
of  nature,  failure,  and  fickleness  prove  us 
to  be  as  a  dry  place. 

"  Where   sin   abounded,   grace   did    much    more 
abound." 

II.  THAT    NATURE'S    DROUGHT    ENHANCES    THE 

PRECIOUSNESS   OF   CHRIST. 

1.  He  is  the  more  quickly  discovered;  as  rivers 

would  be  in  a  desert. 

2.  He  is  the  more  highly  valued ;  as  water  in  a 

torrid  clime. 

3.  He  is  the  more  largely  used ;  as  streams  in  a 

burning  wilderness. 

4.  He  is  the  more  surely  known  to  be  the  gift  of 

God's  grace.  How  else  came  he  to  be  in  so 
dry  a  place  ?  Those  who  are  most  devoid  of 
merit  are  the  more  clear  as  to  God's  grace. 

5.  He  is  the  more  gratefully  extolled.     Men  sing 

of  rivers  which  flow  through  dreary  wastes. 

III.  THAT  NATURE'S  DROUGHT  is  MOST  EFFECT 

UALLY  REMOVED  BY  CHRIST. 
Rivers  change  the  appearance  and  character  of  a 


66  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

dry   place.     By   our  Lord  Jesus  appearing  in  our 
manhood  as  Emmanuel,  God  with  us, — 

1.  Our  despair  is  cheered  away. 

2.  Our  sin  fulness  is  purged. 
8.  Our  nature  is  renewed. 

4.  Our  barrenness  is  removed. 

5.  Our  trials  are  overcome. 

6.  Our  fallen  condition  is  changed  to  glory. 

The  desert  of  manhood  rejoices  and  blossoms  as 
the  rose  now  that  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  has  ap 
peared  in  it 

IV.  THAT  OUR  OWN  SENSE  OP  DROUGHT  SHOULD 
LEAD  US  THE  MORE  HOPEFULLY  TO  APPLY 
TO  CHRIST. 

He  is  rivers  of  water  In  a  dry  place.  The  dry 
place  is  his  sphere  of  action.  Nature's  want  is  the 
platform  for  the  display  of  grace. 

1.  This  is  implied  in  our  Lord's  offices.    A  Saviour 

for  sinners.  A  Priest  who  can  have  com 
passion  on  the  ignorant,  etc. 

2.  This  is  remembered  in  his  great  qualifications. 

Rivers,  because  the  place  is  so  dry.  Full  of 
grace  and  truth,  because  we  are  so  sinful 
and  false.  Mighty  to  save,  because  we  are 
so  lost,  &c. 

8.  This  is  manifested  by  the  persons  to  whom  he 
comes.  Not  many  great  or  mighty  are 
chosen.  "  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous, 
but  sinners  to  repentance."  He  calls  "  the 


RIVERB   IK  THE  DESERT.  67 

chief  of  sinners."  In  every  case  the  rivers 
of  love  flow  into  a  dry  place. 
4.  This  is  clear  from  the  object  which  he  aimed  at, 
namely,  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  making 
known  of  the  riches  of  his  grace.  This  can 
be  best  accomplished  by  working  salvation 
where  there  is  no  apparent  likelihood  of  it, 
or,  in  other  words,  causing  rivers  to  water 
dry  places. 

Come  to  Jesus,  though  your  nature  be  dry,  and 
your  case  hopeless. 

Come,  for  there  are  rivers  of  grace  in  him. 
Come,  for  they  flow  at  your  feet, — "in  a  dry 
place." 

Come,  if  you  have  come  before,  and  are  just  now 
in  a  backsliding  condition.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  still 
the  same ;  the  rivers  of  mercy  in  him  can  never  be 
dried  up. 

Christ  never  seems  empty  to  any  but  those  who 
are  full  of  themselves.  He  is  dry  to  those  who  over 
flow  with  personal  fulness,  but  he  floods  with  his 
grace  all  who  are  dried  up  as  to  all  self-reliance. 

RIVULETS. 

It  Li  my  sweetest  comfort,  Lord, 

And  will  for  ever  be, 
To  mute  upon  the  gracioua  truth 

Of  thy  humanity. 

—Edward  Caswall 

Men  that  have  dry  land  spare  no  cost,  refuse  ro 
pains,  to  bring  rivulets  of  waters  through  it,  that  it 


&8  MY;   SERMON   NOTES. 

may  be  moistened.  It  will,  they  know,  in  a  little 
time,  quit  all  their  cost,  and  recompense  all  their 
labor.  Oh,  that  men  would  be  as  careful  that  their 
dry  hearts  might  be  watered ! — Ralph  Mobinson. 

The  claims  of  Jesus  Christ  upon  our  gratitude  and 
devotion  are  such  that  we  gladly  borrow  language 
from  any  that  may  help  us  to  utter  his  praise.  Thug 
Dr.  Marsh  adopted  Pope's  lines,  altering  only  th« 
last  words, — 

Not  bubbling  waters  to  the  thirsty  swain, 
IsTot  rest  to  weary  laborers,  faint  with  pain, 
Not  showers  to  larks,  not  sunshine  to  the  bee, 
Are  half  so  precious  as  thy  love  to  me — 

My  Saviour. 

With  what  joy  do  travellers  through  the  Bayuda 
desert  come  within  sight  of  the  Nile  I  While  toiling 
over  the  burning  sand  they  have  dreamed  of  rivers, 
and  the  mirage  mocks  them  with  the  image  of  their 
day-dream.  The  fiction  enchants  them  because  the 
fact  would  be  so  delightful.  What  must  it  be  actually 
to  drink  of  the  stream  after  terrible  hours  of  thirst  ? 
Hindoos  worship  their  rivers  as  gods,  so  precious  dc 
they  conceive  them  to  be.  Do  you  wonder  that  the 
gratitude  of  the  ignorant  should  take  such  a  form  ? 
What  would  their  hot  country  be  without  them? 
What  would  our  hearts,  our  lives,  our  present,  our 
future,  be  without  Christ?  What  would  be  the 
outlook  of  the  age — what  the  prospect  ot  our  na 
tion — what  the  destiny  of  the  world,  without  the 
Lord  Jesus  ? 

What  we  want  in  Christ,  we  always  find  in  him. 


RIVERS    IN    THE    DESERT,  6V 

When  we  want  nothing,  we  find  nothing.  When  we 
want  little,  we  find  little.  When  we  want  much,  we 
find  much.  But  when  we  want  everything,  and  get 
reduced  to  complete  nakedness  and  beggary,  we  find 
in  Christ  God's  complete  treasure-house,  out  of 
which  come  gold  and  jewels  to  enrich  us,  and  gar 
ments  to  clothe  us  in  the  richness  and  righteousness 
of  the  Lord. — Sears, 


LXXV. 

»«BEHOID,  FOR  PEACE  I  HAD  GREAT  BITTERNESS:  BUT  moo 

HAST  IN  LOVE  TO  MY  SOUL  DELIVERED  IT  FROM  THE  PIT 
OF  CORRUPTION:  FOR  THOU  HAST  CAST  ALL  MY  SIN3  BE 
HIND  THY  BACK. — Isaiah  xxxviii.  17. 

T  TERE  is  the  case  of  a  man  who,  as  far  as  mortal 
•*•  -*-  help  was  concerned,  was  a  dead  man,  and  yet 
prayer  prevailed  for  his  recovery,  and  the  lengthen 
ing  of  his  life. 

He  records  his  experience  for  the  glory  of  God, 
for  his  own  refreshment,  and  for  our  encouragement. 

In  our  deep  depressions  we  have  the  same  God  to 
help  us. 

Hezekiah  sets  before  us  in  this  verse, — 

I.  HEALTHFUL  BITTERNESS.    "  For  peace  I  had  bit 
ter  bitterness  "  (margin.') 

1.  He  had  been   in   peace.      Probably  this   had 

brought  with  it  a  dangerous  state,  in  which 
the  mind  became  carnally  secure,  self-con 
tented,  stagnant,  slumbering,  careless, 
worldly. 

2.  He  underwent  a  change.     It  was  sudden  and 

surprising, — "  Behold."     It    broke    up  all 
his  peace,  and  took  the  place  of  it. 
8.  His   new  state  was   one  of  emphatic   sorrow, 
— u Bitterness."     "Great   bitterness/'     In 


THE  BITTER  AND   THE   SWEET.  61 

bodily  condition  and  in  mental  emotion  he 
tasted  the  wormwood  and  the  gall.  Read 
previous  verses,  and  see  how  he  mourned. 

4.  It  wrought  his  health.     u  So  wilt  thou  recover 

me  "  (verse  16.) 
It  led  him  to  repentance  for  the  past.     He 

speaks  of  "  my  sins." 
It  brought  him  to  his  knees  in  prayer. 
It  revealed  his  inward  decline,  and  weakness 

of  grace. 

It  made  him  put  away  his  defilements. 
It  deepened  his  faith  in  God.     "The  Lord 

was  ready  to  save  me  "  (verse  20). 

5.  Peace  came  back  again,  and  with  it  songs  of 

joy. 

If  any  are  now  drinking  the  bitter  cup,  let  them 
»>e  of  good  cheer,  for  there  is  a  cup  of  salvation  in 
God's  hand. 

II.  DELIVEBING  LOVE.  "  In  love  to  my  soul  thou 
hast  delivered  it." 

In  its  first  meaning  we  see  recovery  from  sickness, 
but  it  intends  much  more:  upon  the  surface  lies 
benefit  to  his  soul. 

Let  us  observe — 

1.  The  deed  of  love.     "  Thou  hast  loved  my  soul 

from  the  pit "  (margin.) 

The  Lord  delivers  the  soul  from  the  pit  of 
hell,  of  sin,  of  despair,  of  temptation,  of 
death.  He  alone  can  do  this. 

2.  The  love  which  performed  the  deed. 


62  MY    8KKMON    NOTM8. 

Love  suggested  and  ordained  it. 

Love  actually  performed  it  by  its  own  hands. 
"  In  love  to  my  soul  thou  has  loved  it  from 
the  pit." 

Love  breaks  the  heart,  and  binds  it  up. 

Love  sets  us  free,  and  then  holds  us  captive. 

We  are  by  love  loved  out  of  sorrow,  rebel 
lion,  despondency,  coldness,  and  weakness. 
Acknowledge  this  heartily. 

Measure  this  love  by  your  demerit,  your  dan 
ger,  your  present  complete  safety,  and  by 
the  greatness  of  the  Deliverer,  and  what 
the  delivery  cost  him. 

Treasure  this  love,  and  sing  of  it  all  the  days 
of  your  life. 

III.  ABSOLUTE  PAEDON.     "Thou  hast  cast  all  my 
sins  behind  thy  back." 

1.  This  was  the  cause  of  his  restored  peace.     He 

was  burdened  while  sin  remained,  but  when 
that  was  gone,  peace  returned. 

2.  This  removed  the  whole    burden.      "  Sins ;  " 

"my  sins  ; "  "all  my  sins." 

8.  This  involved  effort  on  God's  part.  "Thou 
has  cast."  We  remember  the  more  than 
herculean  labors  of  Jesus,  who  has  hurled 
our  load  into  the  bottomless  deep. 

4.  This  is  wonderfully  described.  "Behind  thy 
back  :  "  this  is — The  place  of  desertion. 
God  has  gone  from  our  sin  never  to  return 
to  it.  He  has  left  it  for  ever,  and  it  will 


THB    BJTTKH   AJSfD   THUS   8WB»T.  68 

never  cross  his  path  again,  for  he  never 
moves  backward. 

The  place  of  forgetfuiness :  he  will  not  re 
member  it  any  more. 

The  place  of  nonentity:  nothing  is  behind 
the  back  of  God. 

Therefore  we  will  tell  others  our  story,  as  Heze- 
kiah  has  told  us  his.  Let  us  seek  out  one  or  more 
who  will  hear  us  with  attention. 

"  Therefore  we  will  sing  my  songs  to  the  stringed 
instruments"  (verse  20).  At  this  hour  let  us  lift 
up  the  voice  of  gratitude. 


ENJLABQBMENTS. 

Thomas  Bilney,  the  martyr,  after  his  submission 
to  the  Papacy,  being  brought  again  to  repentance, 
was,  as  Latimer  reports,  for  a  time  inconsolable. 
"  His  friends  dared  not  suffer  him  to  be  alone  day  or 
night.  They  comforted  him  as  they  could,  but  no 
comforts  would  serve ;  and  as  for  the  comfortable 
places  of  Scripture,  to  bring  them  to  him  was  as 
though  a  man  should  run  him  through  the  heart 
with  a  sword. 

Now  friend,  give  me  your  answer :  Is  it  best  to 
see  sin  and  guilt  now,  while  you  may  see  a  Saviour 
also;  or  to  see  sin  and  a  judge  hereafter,  but  no 
Saviour  ?  Sin  you  shall  see,  as  w«  say,  in  spite  of 
your  teath,  will  you,  nil  you.  Oh,  then,  let  me  see 
•in  and  guilt  now ;  Oh,  n<w>,  with  a  iweet  Saviour, 


64  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

that  I  may  have  this  woful  sight  past  when  I  come 
to  die. —  Giles  Firmin. 

"Thou  hast  cast"  &o.  These  last  words  are  a 
borrowed  speech,  taken  from  the  manner  of  men, 
who  are  wont  to  cast  behind  their  backs  such  things 
as  they  have  no  mind  to  see,  regard,  or  remember. 
A  gracious  soul  hath  always  his  sins  before  his  face  : 
"  I  acknowledge  my  transgressions,  and  my  sin  is 
ever  before  me ; "  and  therefore  no  wonder  if  the 
Lord  cast  them  behind  his  back.  A  father  soon 
forgets  and  casts  behind  his  back  those  faults  that 
the  child  remembers  and  hath  always  before  his  eyes, 
so  doth  the  Father  of  spirits. — Thomas  Brooks. 

I  have  read  somewhere  of  a  great  divine  (I  think 
it  was  (Ecolampadius),  who  being  recovered  from  a 
great  sickness,  said,  "  I  have  learned  under  this  sick 
ness  to  know  sin  and  G-od"  Did  he  not  know  these 
before?  Doubtless  he  could  preach  good  sermons 
concerning  God  and  sin  ;  but  the  Spirit,  it  seems,  in 
that  sickness,  taught  him  these  otherwise  than  he 
knew  them  before. —  Giles  Firmin. 

Some  of  the  pits  referred  to  in  the  Bible  were 
prisons ;  one  such  I  saw  at  Athens,  and  another  at 
Rome.  To  these  there  were  no  openings,  except  a 
hole  at  the  top,  which  served  for  both  door  and 
window.  The  bottoms  of  these  pits  were  necessarily 
in  a  filthy  and  revolting  state,  and  sometimes  deep  in 
mud.  Isaiah  speaks  of  "  the  pit  of  corruption,"  or 
putrefaction  and  filth. — John  G-ad&by. 

Dr.  Watts,  from  his  early  infancy   to  his  dying 


THE   BITTER     \ND   THE    SWEET.  65 

day,  scarcely  ever  knew  what  health  was ;  but  how 
ever  surprising  it  may  appear,  he  looked  on  the 
affliction  as  the  greatest  blessing  of  his  life.  The 
reason  he  assigned  for  it  was,  that,  being  naturally  of 
a  warm  temper,  and  an  ambitious  disposition,  these 
visitations  of  divine  providence  weaned  his  affections 
from  the  world,  and  brought  every  passion  into  sub 
jection  to  Christ.  This  he  often  mentioned  to  his 
dear  friend,  Sir  Thomas  Abney,  in  whose  house  he 
lived  many  years. — John  Whitecross, 


LXXVI. 

"  LOOK  UNTO  MI,  AND  BE  YE  SAVED,  ALL  THE  ENDS  OF  THE 
EAKTH:  FOB  I  AM  GrOD,  AND  THERE  18  NONE  ELSE." — 

Isaiah  xlr.  22. 

r  I  ^HE  nations  have  been  looking  to  their  Idols  for 
-*•  all  these  centuries,  but  in  vain. 

Many  of  them  are  looking  to  their  boasted  philoso 
phies,  and  still  in  vain. 

False  religions,  politics,  alliances,  theories,  organi 
zations,  men — all  will  be  hi  vain  to  save  the  nations. 

They  must  look  to  God :  the  God  of  all  the  fami 
lies  of  the  earth. 

Happy  are  we  that  we  live  in  a  time  when  God's 
command  to  the  nations  is  proclaimed  abroad.  Be 
it  ours  to  spread  the  saving  truth,  and  bid  men  look 
and  live. 

The  same  principle  applies  to  individuals.  If  they 
would  be  saved  they  must  look  to  the  Lord. 

If  you,  O  hearer,  would  be  saved,  here  is  the  only 
method, — "  Look." 

I.  WHAT  MEANS  THIS  WORD  **LOOK"  IN  REFER 
ENCE  TO  GOD? 

It  includes  many  things ;  as  for  instance — 
1.  Admit  his  reality  by  looking  to  him.     Consider 
that  there  fo  a  God,  and  enthrone  him  in 


THE   LUTE-LOOK.  37 

your  mind  as  a  real  Person,  the  true  God, 
and  your  Lord.  Let  the  Invisible  God  be 
to  you  as  real  as  that  which  you  see  with 
your  eyes. 

2.  Address  yourself  to  him  by  prayer,  thanksgiy- 
ing,  thought,  obedience,  reverence,  &c., 
looking  to  him  so  as  to  know  him,  and 
recognise  his  presence. 

8.  Acknowledge  that  from  him  only  salvation  can 
come.  Regard  him  as  the  only  possible 
Saviour.  "  There  is  none  else." 

4  Anticipate  that  HE  will  bless  you:  look  for 
his  interposition. 

S.  Abide  alone  in  HIM  for  salvation.  Keep  your 
eyes  fixed  on  him,  as  the  Morning  Star  of 
your  day. 


WHAT  PART   OF   SALVATION  ABE  WE  THUS 
TO   LOOK? 

For  every  part  of  it  from  beginning  to  end. 

1.  Pardon.     This  must  be  God's  act,  and  it  can 

only  come  through  the  atonement  which  hft 
has  provided  in  Christ  Jesus. 

2.  Preparation  for  pardon,  namely,  life,  repentance, 

faith.  Grace  must  prepare  us  for  more  grace. 
8.  Renewal  of  heart  is  the  Holy  Ghost's  work: 

look  to  him  for  it.     Regeneration  must  b« 

of  the  Lord  alone. 
4.  Sustenance  in  spiritual  life  is  of  the  Lord  alone. 

All  growth,  strength,  fruit,  must  be  looked 

for  from  him. 


68  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

6.  Daily  succor  in  common  things  is  as  much  a 
divine  gift  as  great  deliverances.  Our  look 
should  be  constant,  and  it  should  comprise 
expectancy  for  time  as  well  as  eternity. 

Any  one  matter  left  to  self  would  ruin  us  alto 
gether. 

III.  WHAT  is  OUR  ENCOURAGEMENT  TO  LOOK? 

1.  His  command.     He  bids  us  look,  and  therefore 

we  may  look. 

2.  His  promise.     He  says,  "  look,  and  be  saved," 

and  he  will  never  run  back  from  his  own 
word. 

3.  His  Godhead.     "For  I  am  God."     All  things 

are  possible  to  him :  his  mercy  is  equal  to 
our  salvation,  his  glory  will  be  manifest 
thereby. 

4.  His  character,  as  "  a  just  God  and  a  Saviour." 

(See  verse  21).  This  combination  is  seen 
by  those  who  know  the  cross,  and  it  is  full 
of  hope  to  sinners. 

5.  His  broad  invitation:    "all   the  ends   of    the 

earth."     Each  seeking  soul  may   be  sure 
that  he  is  included  therein. 
Who  will  refuse  so  simple  an  act  as  to  look. 

IV.  WHAT  is  THE  BEST  TIME  IN  WHICH  TO  LOOK  ? 

Look  now,  at  this  very  moment. 

1.  The  command  is  in  the  present  tense:  "Lock 

unto  me." 

2.  The  promise  is  in  the  same  tense :  "  and  be  ye 


THE   LIFE-LOOK.  69 

saved."     It  is  a  fiat,  like  "  light  be."     It 
takes  immediate  effect. 

8.  Your  need  of    salvation    is  urgent:    you   are 
already  lost. 

4.  The  present  time  is  yours,  no  other   time   is 

yours  to  use ;  for  the  past  is  gone,  and  the 
future  will  be  present  when  it  comes. 

5.  Your  time  may  soon  end.     Death  comes  sud 

denly.     Age  creeps    on    us.     The   longest 
life  is  short. 

6.  It  is  the  time  which  God  chooses :  it  is  ours  to 

accept  it. 

This  is  a  great  soul-saving  text :  give  earnest  heed 
to  it. 

All  who  have  obeyed  it  are  saved :  why  should 
you  not  at  once  be  saved?  This  is  the  one  com 
mand,  "Look!  Look  I" 


STORIES  AND  BREVITIES. 

A  striking  example  of  prayer  unto  "gods  that 
cannot  save  "  is  given  by  Miss  Isabella  Bird,  who 
describes  a  service  in  a  Buddhist  temple  in  Japan, 
when  a  popular  priest  preached  to  a  vast  congrega 
tion  on  future  punishment,  i.  e.,  the  tortures  of  the 
Buddhist  hells.  When  he  concluded,  the  people, 
slightly  raising  the  hands  on  which  the  rosaries  were 
wound,  answered  with  the  roar  of  a  mighty  response, 
"  Eternal  Buddha,  save  !  " 

To  this  +ext,  under  God,  I  owe  my  own  deliverance 


70  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

from  despair.  An  explanation  of  the  work  oi  Jesus, 
given  by  a  humble,  unlettered  lay  preacher,  was  fol 
lowed  by  a  direct  appeal  to  me.  "  Young  man>  you 
are  miserable,  and  you  will  never  be  happy  unless 
you  obey  this  message.  Look !  Look  I "  I  did 
look,  and  in  that  instant  lost  my  crushing  load  of 
guilt.  It  was  all  clear  to  me.  Jesus  had  taken  the 
sins  of  all  believers.  I  believed,  and  knew  that  he 
had  taken  mine,  and  therefore  I  was  clear.  The 
matchless  truth  of  the  substitution  of  the  divine 
Lord  for  me  was  light  and  liberty  to  my  soul.  A 
look  saved  me,  and  for  my  present  salvation  I  have 
no  other  resort  but  still  to  look.  "  Looking  unto 
Jesus,"  is  a  motto  both  for  penitent  and  preacher, 
for  sinner  and  saint. — C.  H.  S. 

There  is  an  affecting  story  of  a  celebrated  literary 
man,  Heinrich  Heine,  who  was  prematurely  disabled 
by  disease,  and  utterly  heart-sick  and  weary.  In 
one  of  the  art-palaces  of  Paris  there  is  the  famous 
itatue  called  the  Venus  of  Milo,  the  bewitching 
goddess  of  pleasure,  which,  by  the  rude  accident  of 
time,  has  lost  both  her  arms,  but  still  preserves  much 
of  her  supreme,  enchanting  beauty.  At  the  feet  of 
this  statue  Heine  cast  himself  down  in  remorse  and 
despair,  and,  to  use  his  own  words,  "  There  I  lay  a 
long  time,  and  wept  so  passionately  tnat  a  stone 
must  have  had  compassion  on  me.  The  goddess 
looked  down  compassionately  upon  me,  but  she  was 
helpless  to  console  me.  She  looked  as  if  she  would 
say — 4See  you  not  that  I  have  no  arms,  and  thai 


THE   LIFE-LOOK.  71 

therefore  I  can  give  you  no  help  ? ' '  So,  vain  and 
useless  is  it  to  look  to  any  for  spiritual  help  and 
comfort,  except  to  Him  of  whom  it  is  declared,  "  Be 
hold,  the  Lord's  hand  is  not  shortened,  that  it  can 
not  save." 

Sonfe  divines  would  need  a  week  in  which  to  tell 
yon  what  you  are  to  do  to  be  saved :  but  the  Holy 
Ghost  only  uses  four  letters  to  do  it.  Four  letters, 
and  two  of  them  alike — "  Look  I " 

Be  not  like  the  man  in  the  Interpreter's  house, 
whose  eyes  were  fixed  on  the  ground  where  he  was 
raking  together  straws  and  dust,  and  who  would  not 
look  up  to  him  who  was  offering  him  a  celestial 
crown.  Look  up  I  Look  up  I 


LXXVII. 

"AND  EVEN  TO  YOUR  OLD  AGE  I  AM  HE ;  AND  EVEN  TO 
HOAR  HAIRS  WILL  I  CARRY  YOU:  I  HAVE  MADE  AND  I 

WILL   BEAR;    EVEN  I  WILL  CARRY,   AND   WILL  DELIVER 
YOU."— Isaiah  xlvi.  4. 

r  I  ^HE   doctrine    of  the    text    is   the    unchanging 
-*-      nature  of  God,  and  the  constancy  of  his  kind 
ness  towards  his  people  in  providence  arid  grace. 

We  need  scarcely  prove  the  unchanging  nature  of 
God's  dealings  with  his  people,  during  the  short 
period  of  mortal  life,  when — 

In   nature   we   see   many   things   unchanged 
during  seventy  or  eighty  years :  sun,  ocean, 
rocks,  &c. 
We  see  his  Word  and  gospel  to  be  still  the 

same. 
Prayer,  praise,  communion,  and  holy  service 

are  the  same. 
Our  experience  is  similar  to  that  of  saints  in 

the  olden  time. 

Especially  we  remember  that  the  very  nature 
of  God  places  mutability  beyond  the  range 
of  supposition. 

Of  the  Lord's  dealings  in  providence  and  grace  it 
fe  scarcely  necessary  to  prove  the  immutability,  when 
•we  remind  you — 


A  SERMON   FOR   THE   AGED.  78 

That  the  mercies  of  one  age  are  in  the  main 
identical  with  those  of  another;  and  the 
promises  are  altogether  unaltered. 

That  holy  men  are  ready  to  testify  to  the  faith 
fulness  of  God,  and  that  both  now  and  in 
the  past  the  witnesses  to  his  divine  truth 
and  immutability  are  many. 

That  divine  strength  is  not  dependent  on 
man's  weakness ;  divine  love  is  not  changed 
by  man's  demerits ;  and  divine  truth  is  not 
affected  by  lapse  of  years. 

That  the  completion  of  the  body  of  Christ 
requires  the  preservation  of  all  the  saints, 
and  therefore  the  Lord  must  abide  the  same 
to  every  one  of  them. 

Yet  without  doubt  "  old  age  "  has  its  peculiarities, 
which  do  but  serve  to  evidence  the  firmness  of  God'a 
grace. 

I.  IT  HATH  ITS  PECULIAR  MEMORIES. 

1.  It  remembers  many  joys,  and  it  sees  in  them 

proofs  of  love. 

2.  It  remembers  many  visits  to  the  house  of  sick 

ness,  and  it  recollects  how  the  Lord  cheered 

its  desolate  chamber. 
8.  It  remembers  many  trials  in  its  loss  of  friends, 

and   its  changes  of  condition,   but  it  seea 

HIM  to  have  been  ever  the  same. 
4.  It  remembers  many  conflicts  with  temptation, 

doubt,  Satan,  the  flesh,  and  the  world ;  but 


74  MT  SERMON  NOTES. 

it  remembers  how  HE  covered  its  head  in 
the  day  of  battle. 

5.  It  remembers  its  own  many  sins ;  and  it  is  not 
forgetful  how  many  professors  have  made 
shipwreck  of  faith  ;  but  it  clearly  sees  cove 
nant  faithfulness  in  its  own  preservation. 
All  our  recollections  are  unanimous  in  their  testi 
mony  to  an  unchanging  God. 

II.  IT  HATH  ITS  PECULIAR  HOPES. 

It  has  now  few  things  to  anticipate;  but  those 
few  are  the  same  as  in  younger  days,  for  the  cove 
nant  abides  unaltered. 

1.  The  Ground  of  its  hope  is  still  Jesus,  and  not 

long  service. 

2.  The  Reason  of  its  hope  is  still  faith  in  the  infal 

lible  Word. 

3.  The  Preservation  of  its  hope  is  still  in  the  same 

hands. 

4.  The  End  of  its  hope  is  still  the  same  heaven, 

the  same  crown  of  life  and  blessedness. 

5.  The  Joy  of  its  hope  ia  still  as  bright  and  cheer 

ing  as  before. 

III.  IT  HATH  ITS  PECULIAR  SOLICITUDES. 

Cares  are  fewer,  for  business  is  curtailed,  and  the 
needs  which  remain  only  serve  to  show  that  God  is 
the  same. 

1.  The  Body  is  infirm,  but  grace  makes  amends 
for  the  departed  joys  of  youth,  health,  and 
acti  dty. 


A   SERMON   FOB  THE   AGED.  16 

2.  The  Mind  is  weaker,  the  memory  less  retentive, 
and  the  imagination  less  vivid ;  but  gracious 
doctrines  are  more  sweet  than  ever,  and 
eternal  verities  sustain  the  heart. 

8  Death  is  nearer,  but  then  Heaven  is  nearer  too. 
Earth  may  be  less  lovely,  but  the  home- 
country  is  dearer,  since  more  loved  ones 
have  entered  it,  and  have  left  us  fewer  ties 
to  earth. 

4.  Preparation  by  Examination  is  now  more  im 
perative,  but  it  is  also  more  easy,  since 
repetition  has  removed  its  difficulties,  faith 
has  more  constancy,  and  tried  promises 
afford  richer  comfort. 

All  these  prove  God  the  same. 

IV.  IT  HATH  ITS  PECULIAR  BLESSBDNESS. 

Deprived  of  certain  enjoyments,  age  is  enriched 
with  others. 

1.  It  has  a  long  experience  to  read,  proving  the 

promise  true. 

2.  It  has  less  wavering  in  its  doctrines,  knowing 

now  what  once  it  only  guessed. 
8.  It  has  less  to  fear  in  the  future  of  life,  seeing 

the  way  is  shorter. 
4.  It  has  more  divine  unveilings  of  the  celestial 

regions,  for  it  is  now  in  the  land  Beulah. 
6.  It  has   less   business  on   earth,   and   more   in 

heaven,  and  hence  it  has  an  inducement  to 

be  more  heavenly-minded. 
Here  is  divine  love  made  manifest  as  still  the  same. 


76  MY    SERMON    NOTES. 

V.  IT  HATH  ITS  PECULIAR  DUTIES. 

These  are  proofs  of  divine  faithfulness,  since  they 
cause  men  to  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age.  They  are — 

1.  Testimony  to  the  goodness  of    God,  the  un- 

changeatleness   of  his   love,   and   the   cer 
tainty  of  his  revelation. 

2.  Comfort  to  others  who  are  battling,  assuring 

them  that  they  will  come  off  safely. 
8.  Warning  to  the  wayward :  such  warning  com 
ing  with  tenfold  force  from  the  aged  saint. 
4.  And  frequently  we  may  add — 

Instruction,  since  the  old  man's  experience 

has  opened  up  many  a  mystery  unknown 

before. 
From  the  whole  we  gather — 

A  lesson  to  the  young  to  make  this  God  their 

God,  since  he  will  never  forsake  his  people. 
A  Solace  for  men  in  middle  life  to  persevere, 

for  they  shall  still  be  carried  in  the  arms  of 

grace. 
A  song  for  the  aged,  concerning  undying  love 

and    unchanging  mercy.     With  mellowed 

voice  let  it  be  sung. 

To  THB  POINT. 

Dr.  O.  W.  Holmes  says,  "  Men,  like  peaches  and 
pears,  grow  sweet  a  little  while  before  they  begin  to 
decay."  This  is  true ;  but  Christian  men  should  be 
sweet  from  the  hour  that  they  are  renewed  in  heart. 
Yet  even  then  maturity  brings  a  special  mellowness. 


A   SE.UMO1S    FOR   THE   AGED.  77 

Of  the  Christian  it  has  been  said,  "  The  decay 
and  wasting  and  infirmities  of  old  age  will  be,  as 
Dr.  Guthrie  called  these  symptoms  of  his  own  ap 
proaching  death,  only  4  the  land-birds  lighting  on  the 
shrouds,  telling  the  weary  mariner  that  he  is  nearing 
the  desired  haven.' " 

It  is  a  favorite  speculation  of  mine  that,  if  spared 
to  sixty,  we  then  enter  on  the  seventh  decade  of 
human  life,  and  that  this,  if  possible,  should  be 
turned  into  the  Sabbath  of  our  earthly  pilgrimage, 
and  spent  Sabbatically,  as  if  on  the  shores  of  an 
eternal  world,  or  in  the  outer  courts,  as  it  were,  of 
the  temple  that  is  above,  the  tabernacle  that  is  in 
heaven. — Dr.  Chalmers. 


LXXVIII. 

"  THE  CHILDREN     WHICH    THOU    SHALT    HAVE,   AFTER    THOC 

HAST  LOST  THE  OTHER,  SHALL  SAY  AGAIN  IN  THINE  EARS, 
THE  PLACE  IS  TOO  STRAIT  FOR  ME :  GIVE  PLACE  TO  ME 
THAT  I  MAY  DWELL. 

"  THEN  SHALT  THOU  SAY  IN  THINE  HEART,  WHO  HATH  BE 
GOTTEN  ME    THESE,    SEEING    I    HAVE    LOST    MY    CHILDREN, 

AND  AM  DESOLATE,  A  CAPTIVE,  AND  REMOVING  TO  AND 
FRO?  AND  WHO  HATH  BROUGHT  UP  THESE?  BEHOLD,  I 
WAS  LEFT  ALONE;  THESE,  WHERE  HAD  THEY  BEEN?"— 
Isaiah  xlix.  20,  21. 

A  HOPEFUL  mood  becomes  the  church  of  God, 
•**•  for  the  memories  of  the  past,  the  blessings  of 
the  present,  and  the  promises  of  the  future  are  full 
of  good  cheer. 

"  All  the  promises  do  travail  with  a  glorious  day 
of  grace." 

The  church  lives,  progresses,  conquers  by  her 
faith;  let  her  abandon  despondency,  as  her  weakness, 
her  sin,  her  greatest  hindrance. 

The  prophet,  to  remove  all  fear,  reminds  us  that — 

I.   IN    THE    CHURCH    THERE    ARE  DECREASES.      "I 

have  lost  my  children,"  etc.     This  is  fre 
quently  the  bitter  cry  of  a  church. 
1.  Death  invades  the  house  of   God,  and  takes 
away  those  who  were  its  pillars  and  orna- 
(71) 


CHURCH   INCREASE.  79 

merits.  But  those  who  depart  go  to  swell 
the  chorus  of  heaven. 

2.  Providence  takes  away  useful  persons  by  re 

moval,  or  by  excessive  occupation  which 
keeps  them  from  holy  service.  The  removed 
ones  go  to  build  up  the  church  elsewhere: 
those  who  are  lawfully  detained  by  business 
are  still  doing  the  Lord's  will. 

3.  Sin  causes  some,  to  backslide,  wander  away,  or 

become  inactive.  But  they  go  from  us 
because  they  are  not  of  us. 

This  decrease  is  painful,  and  it  may  go  so  far  that 
a  church  may  feel  itself  to  be  "  desolate,"  and  "  left 
alone."  Yet  the  Lord  has  not  forgotten  his  church, 
for  he  is  her  Husband. 

II.  IN  THE  CHURCH  WE  SHOULD  LOOK  FOR  IN 
CREASE.  "  The  children  which  thou  shalt 
have." 

Let  us  not  be  absorbed  in  lamenting  losses;  let 
us  rejoice  by  faith  in  great  gains  which  are  surely 
coming. 

1.  Increase  is  needful,  or  what  will  become  of  the 

church  ? 

2.  Increase  is  prayed  for,  and  God  hears  prayer. 
8.  Increase  can  only  come  through  God,  but  he 

will  give  it,  and  be  glorified  by  it. 

4.  Increase  is  promised  in  the  text,  and  in  many 

other  Scriptures. 
6.  Increase   i,s   to   be   labored  for  with  agony  of 


80  Ml    SERMON   NOTES. 

heart.     "  As   soon   as    Zion   travailed,    she 
brought  forth  children." 

III.   IN     THE     CHURCH     INCREASE     OFTEN     CAUSES 

SURPRISE. 

So  narrow  are  our  hearts,  so  weak  our  faith,  that 
we  are  amazed  when  conversions  are  numerous. 

1.  Because   of    the   time:    "Behold,    I   was   left 

alone." 

2.  Because  of  their  number :  "  Who  hath  begotten 

me  these  ?  " 
8.  Because   of   their   former   character :    "  These, 

where  had  they  been?"     They  were  not 

after  all  so  very  far  off. 
Some  of  them  were  quite  near  to  us  and  near 

to  the  kingdom,  in  the  family,  school,  class, 

congregation,  enquiry-room. 
Others  were  far  off  in  irreligion,  and  open  sin. 
Others    were    opposed   through    rationalism, 

superstition,  or  self-righteousness. 

4.  Because  of   their  good  nurture :    "  Who  hath 

brought  up  these  ?  " 

5.  Because  of  their  eagerness  and  courage.    "  Shall 

say  again  in  thine  ears,  The  place  is  too 
strait  for  me." 

6.  Because  of  their  constancy.     "Give  place  to 

me  that  I  may  dwell." 
They  come  to  remain. 

Where  had  they  been  ?  Say  rather,  "  Where  had 
we  been  ? "  that  we  had  not  long  ago  looked  after 
them,  and  welcomed  them. 


OHURCH  INCREASE.  81 

IV.  IN  THE  CHURCH  INCREASE  SHOULD  BE  PRE 
PARED  FOR. 

We  make  ready  for  the  coming  of  children.  Is 
the  church  an  unnatural  mother  ?  Will  she  not 
welcome  new-born  souls? 

We  must  prepare  for  an  increase— 

1.  By  intense  united  prayer  for  it. 

2.  By  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  which  is  the 

means  of  it. 

3.  By  every  form  of  Christian  effort  which  may 

lead  to  it. 

4.  By  enlarging  our  bounds :     "  The  place  is  too 

strait  for  me."     To   provide   a   larger  au 
dience-chamber  may  be  a  true  act  of  faith. 

5.  By  welcoming  all  true-born  children  of  God : 

who  say,  each  one,  "  give  place  to  me  that 
I  may  dwell." 

Oh,  for  a  triumphant  faith  that  the  little  one  shall 

become  a  thousand  I 

Oh,  for  grace  to  act  upon  such  faith  at  once  I 
"Believe    great    things;    attempt    great    things; 

expect  great  things." 


NOTES. 

My  observation  leads  me  to  believe  that,  where 
churches  are  duly  careful  in  the  admission  of  mem 
bers,  they  will  find  that  their  best  converts  come  in 
flocks.     My  impression  is  that,  when  very  few  come 
2—6 


82  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

forward,  everybody  leans  towards  a  less  exact  ;  idg* 
ment  than  in  times  when  many  are  forthcoming. 
Bad  fish  are  more  likely  to  be  taken  home  when  fish 
are  scarce  than  when  they  are  plentiful;  for  then 
the  fisherman  feels  more  free  to  make  a  rigid  selec 
tion.  I  say  nothing  about  the  severity  or  laxity  cJ  a 
church  in  receiving  members,  but  it  is  incidental  to 
human  nature  that  when  we  are  in  a  revival  we 
become  more  guarded,  and  in  dull  times  we  are  more 
kpt  to  look  at  a  convert  with  a  hope  which  is  rather 
eager  than  anxious.  Thus  I  account  for  what  I 
believe  to  be  a  fact,  that  rare  converts  are  frequently 
bare  converts ;  and  that  the  best  sheep  come  to  us  in 
flocks. 

Dr.  Judson,  the  devoted  missionary  to  Burmah, 
during  his  visit  to  Boston,  was  asked,  "  Do  you  think 
the  prospect  bright  of  the  speedy  conversion  of  the 
heathen  ?  "  "  As  bright,"  he  replied,  "  as  the  prom 
ises  of  God." 

Monday,  December  22,  1800. — Creesturo,  Gokol 
and  his  wife,  and  Felix  Carey  gave  us  their  experi 
ence  to-night.  Brother  C.  concluded  in  prayer  after 
we  had  sung,  "Salvation,  oh,  the  joyful  sound!" 
.  .  .  Brother  Thomas  is  almost  mad  with  joy. — 
Diary  of  the  Rev.  W.  Ward,  of  Serampore. 

"I  am  inclined  to  think  that  a  single  soul  is  never 
born  again,  apart  from  the  tender  concern  and 
anxiety  of  some  creaturely  heart  or  hearts.  .  .  . 
Probably  Saul  was  converted  in  answer  to  the  pray- 
•rs  of  the  disciples  at  Damascus. — John  Puhford. 


CHURCH   INCREASE  83 

Dr.  Isaac  Barrow,  when  a  lad  was  most  unpromis 
ing.  Such  was  his  misconduct,  and  so  irreclaimable 
did  he  seem,  that  his  father,  in  despair,  used  to  say 
that  "  if  it  pleased  God  to  remove  any  of  his  chil 
dren,  he  wished  it  might  be  his  son  Isaac."  What 
became  of  the  other  and  more  hopeful  children  of 
the  worthy  linen-draper,  we  cannot  tell ;  but  this 
unworthy  son  lived  to  be  the  happiness  and  pride  of 
his  father's  old  age,  to  be  one  of  the  most  illustrious 
members  of  the  university  to  which  he  belonged,  and 
one  of  the  brightest  ornaments  of  the  chinch  of 
which  he  became  a  minister. 


LXXIX. 

"WHEREFORE,  WHEN  I  CAME,  WAS  THERE  NO  MAN?  WHEN 
I  CALLED,  WAS  THERE  NONE  TO  ANSWER?  Is  MY  HAND 
SHORTENED  AT  ALL,  THAT  IT  CANNOT  REDEEM?  OR  HAVE 
1  NO  POWER  TO  DELIVER  ?  BEHOLD,  AT  MY  REBUKE  I  DRY 
UP  THE  SEA,  I  MAKE  THE  RIVERS  A  WILDERNESS :  THEIR 
FISH  STINKETH,  BECAUSE  THERE  IS  NO  WATER,  AND  DIETH 
FOR  THIRST. 

"  I  CLOTHE  THE  HEAVENS  WITH  BLACKNESS,  AND  I  MAKE 
SACKCLOTH  THEIR  COVERING. 

"THE  LORD  GOD  HATH  GIVEN  ME  THE  TONGUE  OF  THE 

LEARNED,  THAT  I  SHOULD  KNOW  HOW  TO  SPEAK  A  WORD 
IN  SEASON  TO  HIM  THAT  IS  WEARY:  HE  WAKENETH 
MORNING  BY  MORNING,  HE  WAKENETH  MINE  EAR  TO  HEAR 
AS  THE  LEARNED. 

"THE  LORD   GOD  HATH  OPENED  MINE  EAR,  AND   I  WAS 

NOT  REBELLIOUS,   NEITHER  TURNED  AWAY   BACK. 
'I  GAVE    MY    BACK    TO    THE    SMITERS,    AND    MY    CHEEKS    TO 
THEM  THAT  PLUCKED  OFF  THE  II  AIR  :   I   HID  NOT  MY  FACE 
FROM  SHAME  AND  SPITTING."— Isaiah  1.  2-6. 

r  I  ^HERE  was  no  one  to  take  up  tbe  divine  chal- 
"*•      lenge :  no  one  to  answer  for  guilty  man.     To 
the  call  of  God  for  one  who  could  save,  there  was 
no  answer  but  the  echo  of  his  voice. 

See  who  it  is  that  CDmes  to  rescue  man  I  Jehovah 
interposes  to  save ;  but  he  appears  in  a  special 
manner. 

The  Lord  himself  Irawa  the  portrait.  View  it 
with  solemn  attention 


THE   REDEEMER   DESCRIBED   BY   HIMSELF.        86 

I.  BEHOLD  THE  MESSIAH  AS  GOD  I 

1.  He  comes  in  fulness  of  power.     "  Is  my  hand 

shortened  at  all?" 

2.  His  power  to  save  is  equal  to  that  with  which 

he  destroys.  Let  Egypt  be  the  instance: 
"  I  dry  up  the  sea,"  etc. 

8.  His  power  is  that  which  produces  the  phenom 
ena  of  nature.  "  I  clothe  the  heavens  with 
blackness." 

4.  This  should  excite  deep  gratitude,  that  he  who 
rebukes  the  sea  was  himself  rebuked ;  he 
who  clothes  the  heavens  with  blackness  was 
himself  in  darkness  for  our  sake. 

6.  This  should  excite  confidence;  for  he  is  evi 
dently  Lord  of  the  sea  and  the  sky,  the 
dark  and  the  gloom. 

II.  BEHOLD  HIM  AS  THE  APPOINTED  TEACHER  ! 

1.  Instructed  and  endowed :  "  the  Lord  hath  given 

me  the  tongue  of  the  learned."  He  knows, 
and  he  imparts  knowledge. 

2.  Condescending  to  the  needy :  "  to  him  that  is 

weary." 

3.  Watchful  of  each  case :  "  that  I  should  know 

how  to  speak  a  word  in  season."  This  is  a 
rare  gift:  many  speak,  and  perhaps  speak 
in  season,  but  have  not  learned  the  right 
manner. 

4.  Constantly    in    communion    with    God :    "  he 

wakeneth  morning  by  monr  ng."  "He  that 
hath  sent  me  is  with  me." 


86  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

Should  we  ^ot  be  heartily  attentive  to  his  teach 
ings  ?     "I  will  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak." 

III.  BEHOLD  HIM  AS  THE  SERVANT  OF  THE  LORD  ! 

1.  Prepared  by  grace :  "  he  wakeneth  mine  ear  to 

hear."  He  spoke  not  his  own  words,  but 
those  which  he  had  heard  of  his  Father. 

2.  Consecrated  in  due  form :  "  hath  opened  mine 

ear,"  boring  it  to  the  door-post.  This  was 
publicly  done  in  his  baptism,  when  in  out 
ward  symbol  he  fulfilled  all  righteousness. 

8.  Obedient  in  all  things  :  "  I  was  not  rebellious." 
In  no  point  did  Jesus  refuse  the  Father's 
will,  not  even  in  Gethsemane. 

4.  Persevering  through  all  trials  :  "  neither  turned 
away  back."  He  did  not  relinquish  the 
hard  task,  but  set  his  face  as  a  flint  to  carry 
it  through. 

6.  Courageous  in  it  all:  as  we  see  in  the  verse 
following  our  text. 

What  a  model  for  our  service  I     Consider  him,  and 
copy  him. 

IV.  BEHOLD  HTM  AS  THE  PEERLESS  SUFI^RER! 

1.  His  entire  submission  ;  his  back,  his  cheeks,  hii 

hair,  his  face. 

2.  His  willing  submission :  "  I  gave  my  back  to  the 

snr.ters."     "  I  hid  not  my  face." 
8.  His  lov  ly  submission,  bearing  the  felon's  scourge, 
and  the  utmost  of  scorn :  "  shame  and  spit' 
ting." 


THE   REDEEMER  DESCRIBED   BY  HIMSELF.       87 

4.  His  patient   submission.     Not  a  word   of  re 
proach,  or  resentment. 

Grace  had  taught  him  effectually,  and  he  suffered 
perfectly. 

It  may  bring  out  important  truths  very  vividly  if 
we  make  combinations  of  the  four  subjects  which 
have  come  before  us. 

Place  the  first  and  the  last  together :  the  &od 
and  the  Sufferer.  What  condescension ! 
what  ability  to  save  I 

Place  the  two  middle  terms  together:  the 
Teacher  and  the  Servant,  and  see  how 
sweetly  he  serves  by  teaching,  and  teaches 
by  serving. 

Put  all  together,  and  let  the  blended  charac 
ters  ensure  ardent  affection,  obedient  rever 
ence,  and  devout  delight. 


A  GOLDEN  LECTURER'S  WORD. 

I  imagine  myself  placed  in  the  world  at  the  time 
when  the  Christ  was  expected,  commissioned  to 
announce  to  it  that  God  was  about  to  send  his  own 
Son,  having  endowed  him  with  the  "tongue  of  the 
learned."  What  excitement  in  all  the  schools  of 
philosophy  I  What  gatherings  of  the  sages  of  the 
earth!  What  expectations  of  the  discoveries  with 
which  science  was  about  to  be  enriched !  "  Now," 
•ay  they,  "shall  long-hidden  secrets  be  revealed: 
now  shall  we  penetrate  the  laboratories  of  nature, 


88  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

and  observe  all  those  processes  of  which,  at  present, 
we  see  only  the  results.  For  what  purpose  can 
the  tongue  of  the  learned  have  been  given  to  a 
Divine  Person,  if  not  that  he  may  expound  myste 
ries  to  the  world,  that  he  may  tell  us  what  the  wise 
have  been  unable  to  detect,  and  the  studious  labored 
in  vain  to  unfold? 

But  this  Divine  person  shall  speak  for  himself  to 
the  assembled  throng  of  philosophers  and  sages. 
"  Yes,  the  Lord  God  hath  given  me  the  tongue  of 
the  learned;  and  I  have  descended  that  I  might 
speak  with  that  tongue  to  every  nation  of  the  earth. 
But  he  hath  not  given  me  the  tongue  that  I  might 
tell  how  stars  and  planets  roll,  or  settle  the  disputes 
of  the  wise.  He  hath  not  given  me  the  tongue  that 
I  should  know  how  to  speak  a  word  to  you,  ye  dis- 
puters  of  this  world ;  but  simply  that  I  should 
know  how  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  him  that  is 
weary.  Oh,  how  fallen  are  the  expectant  counte 
nances  of  philosophers  and  sages!  "Is  this  all?" 
they  exclaim.  "  Was  it  only  for  this  that  the  tongue 
of  the  learned  was  bestowed?  Does  this  require,  or 
can  this  employ,  the  tongue  of  the  learned?" 

Nay,  men  of  science,  turn  not  angrily  away.  With 
all  your  wisdom  you  have  never  been  able  to  do 
this.  The  weary  have  sought  to  you  in  vain.  They 
have  found  no  "  word  in  season,"  no  word  of  com 
fort  and  sustainment ;  and  why  then  should  you  be 
indignant  at  the  province  here  assigned  to  "the 
tongue  of  the  learned  ?  " 

What  tongue  but  "the  tongue  of  the  learned" 


THE   REDEEMER   DESCRIBED   BY   HIMSELF.        89 

could  speak  "  a  word  in  season  "  to  a  world  oppressed 
with  this  universal  weariness  ?  The  tongue  must  be 
one  which  could  disclose  the  mysteries  of  the  God 
head,  prove  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  be 
charged  with  intelligence  as  to  the  pardon  of  sin, 
and  the  mode  of  reconciliation  between  man  and  his 
maker :  things  into  which  angels  had  in  vain  striven 
to  look.— Condensed  from  Henry  Melvitt. 


LXXX. 

**  FOB  THE  LrORD  (xOD  WILL  HELP    ME  ;   THEREFC  RE  SHALL  I 

NOT  BE  CONFOUNDED:  THEREFORE   HAVE  i  SLT  MY   FACT 

LIKE     A     FLINT,     AND     I     KNOW     THAT     I     SHALL     NOT     B« 

ASHAMED.  —  Isaiah  1.  7. 


was  no  flint  in  the  heart  of  Jesus,  but 
there  was  much  in  his  face.  He  was  as  reso 
lute  as  he  was  submissive.  Read  verse  6  and  this 
verse  together  —  "  I  hid  not  my  face  from  shame  and 
spitting  ...  I  have  set  my  face  like  a  flint." 
Gentleness  and  resolve  are  married. 

In  Luke  ix.  51,  we  read,  "he  steadfastly  set  his 
face  to  go  to  Jerusalem."  In  our  Lord  there  was  no 
turning  aside,  though  none  helped  him,  and  every 
one  hindered  him.  He  was  neither  confounded  by 
thoughts  within  his  own  soul,  nor  rendered  ashamed 
by  the  scorn  of  others. 

Let  us  consider  our  Lord's  stern  resolution,  thus,  — 

I.   HIS  STEADFAST  RESOLVE  TESTED. 

He  declared  his  determination  in  the  language  of 
our  text,  and  by  many  an  ordeal  this  declaration  was 
justified.  He  was  tried  — 

1.  By  the  offers  of  the  world.  They  would  make 
him  a  king.  His  triumphant  ride  into  Jeru- 


THE    AEDBKMJfiR'8   FACE   SET   LIKE   A    FLINT.      91 

salem  proved  how  easily  he  could  have 
become  a  popular  leader.  By  a  little  com 
promise  he  might  have  won  an  enthusiastic 
following  as  a  religious  teacher. 
2.  By  the  persuasions  of  friends.  Peter  rebuked 
him.  All  the  disciples  marvelled  at  his  de 
termination.  His  relatives  sought  a  very 
different  career  for  him.  Many  yield  to 
well-meaning  friends;  but  Jesus  set  his  face 
like  a  flint. 
8.  By  the  unworthiness  of  his  clients. 

He  that  ate  bread  with  him  betrayed  him. 

His  disciples  forsook  him  and  fled. 

The  whole  race  conspired  to  put  him  to  death. 

4.  By  the  bitterness  which  he  tasted  at  his  en 

trance  upon  his  great  work  as  a  substitu- 
tionary  sacrifice.  Gethsemane,  the  betrayal, 
the  false  accusation,  the  mockery:  these 
were  sharp  commencements,  and  many  have 
shrunk  when  the  fire  has  begun  to  kindle 
upon  them ;  but  Jesus  stood  firm. 

5.  By  the  ease  with  which  he  could  have  relin 

quished  the  enterprise. 
Pilate  would  have  released  him  had  Jesus 

pleaded. 
Legions  of  angels  would  have  come  to  his 

rescue. 
He  might  himself  have  come  down  from  the 

cross. 
He  was  not  held  to  his  work  by  inability  to 

quit,  but  only  by  that  lor«  which  is  strong 


92  MY    SERMON    iNOTES. 

as  death.  He  said,  "If  it  be  possible,  let 
this  cup  pass  from  me : "  the  impossibility 
lay  in  his  resolve  to  redeem  his  people. 

6.  By  the  taunts  of  those  that  scoffed. 

The  people :  "  Let  us  see  whether  Elias  will 

come  to  save  him." 
The   priests,   &c.:     "If  he   be   the   King  of 

Israel,"  etc. 

The  thieves  :  "If  thou  be  Christ,  save  thyself 
and  us." 

Strong  men  have  been  overcome  by  ridicule ;  but 
not  so  Jesus. 

7.  By  the  full  stress  of  the  death-agony. 

The  pain,  thirst,  fever,  fainting,  desertion, 
death :  none  of  these  moved  him  from  his 
invincible  resolve. 

II.   HIS   STEADFAST   RESOLVE  SUSTAINED. 

As  man,  our  Lord  owed  his  glorious  steadfastness 
to  several  things,  and  he  gives  us  in  the  text  two 
"  therefores."  It  was  due — 

1.  To  his  divine  schooling.     See  verse  4. 

2.  To  his  conscious  innocence.     "I  know  that  I 

shall  not  be  ashamed."     See  verse  5. 

8.  To  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him.     He  would 

overcome  for  his  people.     "  Who  will  con 
tend  with  me  ?  "     See  verse  8. 
4.  Specially  to  his  unshaken  confidence  in  the  help 
of  the  Lord  God.   We  have  this  both  in  the 
text  and  in  verse  9. 


THE  REDEEMER'S  FACE  SET  LIKE  A  FLINT.     98 

Even  to  his  cry  of  "It  is  finished"  he  never 
flinched,  but  held  to  his  grand  purpose. 

III.    HIS   STEADFAST   RESOLVE   IMITATED. 

1.  Our  purpose  must  be  God's  glory,  as  his  was. 

2.  Our  education  must  be  God's  teaching,  as  his 

was. 

3.  Our   life    must    combine    active    and    passive 

obedience,  as  his  did.     See  verses  5  and  6. 

4.  Our  strength  must  lie  in  God,  as  his  did. 

5.  Our  path  must  be   one   of   faith,   as  his  was. 

Note  verse  10,  and  its  remarkable  connec 
tion  with  the  whole  subject. 

6.  Our  resolve  must  be  carefully  made,  and  steadily 

carried  out  till  we  can  say,  "  It  is  finished," 
in  our  manner  and  degree. 

Close  with  a  warning  to  the  men  of  this  world 
from  verse  11. 

The  ungodly  must  have  present  light,  from  earth, 
from  a  fire  of  their  own  kindling,  from  mere  mo 
mentary  sparks. 

Their  resolve  will  end  in  eternal  regrets ;  they 
shall  lie  down  as  for  the  night ;  their  bed  shail  be 
sorrow ;  they  shall  never  rise  from  it. 


ADDENDA. 

A  secret  divine  support  was  rendered  to  the  human 
nature  of  our  Redeemer;  for  the  great  work  in 
which  he  was  engaged  required  abundant  strength 


94  MY   SERMON    NOTES, 

One  has  well  said  that  "  it  would  have  broken  the 
hearts,  backs,  and  necks  of  all  the  glorious  angels  in 
heaven,  and  all  the  mighty  men  upon  earth,  had 
they  engaged  in  it."  Upon  the  Father's  aid  the  Lord 
Jesus  relied,  according  to  our  text ;  and  this  enabled 
him  to  contemplate  the  tremendous  woes  of  the  pas 
sion  with  a  resolve  of  the  most  steadfast  kind. 
Faith  in  God  is  the  best  foundation  for  a  firm  reso 
lution,  and  a  firm  resolution  is  the  best  preparative 
for  a  great  undertaking.  There  is  nothing  so  hard 
but  that  it  can  be  cut  by  that  which  is  harder: 
against  his  hard  labor  our  Lord  set  his  harder  deter 
mination.  His  face  was  as  a  flint;  you  could  not 
turn  him  to  leave  his  work,  nor  melt  him  to  pity 
himself.  He  was  set  upon  it :  he  must  die  because 
he  must  save  his  people ;  and  he  must  save  his  people 
because  he  loved  them  better  than  himself. 

The  saints  endeavor  to  imitate  the  strong  resolve 
of  their  Lord  to  yield  themselves  up.  For  instance, 
a  Scottish  peasant,  dying  as  a  martyr  on  the  scaffold, 
said,  "  I  came  here  to  die  for  Christ,  and  if  I  had  as 
many  lives  in  my  hand  as  1  have  hairs  on  my  head, 
I  would  lay  them  all  down  for  Christ." 

Oh,  what  a  sea  of  blood,  a  sea  of  wrath,  of  sin,  of 
sorrow  and  misery,  did  the  Lord  Jesus  wade  through 
for  your  internal  and  eternal  good  I  Christ  did  not 
plead,  "  This  cross  is  too  heavy  for  me  to  bear ;  this 
wrath  is  too  great  for  me  to  lie  under;  this  cup, 
which  hath  in  it  all  the  ingredients  of  divine  dis 
pleasure,  is  too  bitter  for  me  to  sup  off,  how  muob 


THK   KEDEEMEK  S   JfAOJfi   SET   LIKE   A   FLINT        95 

more  to  drink  the  very  dregs  of  it!"  No,  Christ 
stands  not  upon  this ;  he  pleads  not  the  difficulty  of 
the  service,  but  resolutely  and  bravely  wades  through 
all,  as  the  prophet  shows.  Christ  makes  nothing  of 
his  Father's  wrath,  the  burden  of  your  sins,  the 
malice  of  Satan,  and  the  rage  of  the  world,  but 
sweetly  and  triumphantly  passes  through  all.  Ah, 
souls,  if  this  consideration  will  not  raise  up  your 
spirits  above  all  the  discouragements  that  you  meet 
with,  to  own  Christ  and  his  service,  and  to  stick  and 
cleave  to  Christ  and  his  service,  I  am  afraid  nothing 
will  I  A  soul  not  stirred  by  this,  not  raised  and 
lifted  up  by  this,  to  be  resolute  and  brave  in  the 
service  of  God,  notwithstanding  all  dangers  and 
difficulties,  is  a  soul  left  of  God  to  much  blindnesi 
and  hardness. — Thomas  Brookt. 


LXXXL 

"Wrra  HIS  STRIPES  WE  ARE  HEALED."— Isaiah  liii.  6. 

"IT7HAT  a  chapter  I     A  Bible  in  miniature.     The 

*  *      Gospel  in  its  essence. 

When  our  subject  brings  us  near  to  the  passion  of 
our  Lord,  our  feelings  should  be  deeply  solemn,  our 
attention  intensely  earnest. 

Hark,  the  scourge  is  falling !  Forget  everything 
but  "  his  stripes" 

We  have  each  one  a  part  in  the  flagellation :  we 
wounded  him,  for  certain ;  is  it  as  certain  that  "  with 
his  stripes  we  are  healed  f  " 

Observe  with  deep  attention, — 

I.  THAT  GOD  HERE  TREATS  SIN  AS  A  DISEASE. 

Sin  is  a  great  deal  more  than  a  disease,  it  is  a 
wilful  crime ;  but  the  mercy  of  our  God  leads  him 
to  consider  it  under  that  aspect,  in  order  that  he  may 
deal  with  it  in  grace. 

1.  It  is  not  an  essential  part  of  man  as  he  was 

created:    it  is   abnormal,   disturbing,    and 
destructive. 

2.  It  puts  the  faculties  out  of  gear,  and  breaks  the 

equilibrium  of  the  life-forces,  just  as  disease 
disturbs  the  bodily  functions. 


CHRISTOPATHY.  97 

8.  It  weakens  the  moral  energy,  as  disease  weakens 

the  body. 
4.  It  either  causes  pain,  or  deadens  sensibility,  as 

the  case  may  be. 
6.  It  frequently  produces  visible  pollution.     Some 

sins  are  as  defiling  as  the  leprosy  of  old. 
6.  It  tends  to  increase  in  the  man,  and  it  will 

prove  fatal  before  long. 

Sin  is  a  disease  which  is  hereditary,  universal,  con 
tagious,  defiling,  incurable,  mortal.  No  human 
physician  can  deal  with  it.  Death,  which  ends  all 
bodily  pain,  cannot  cure  this  disease :  it  displays  its 
utmost  power  in  eternity,  after  the  seal  of  perpetuity 
has  been  set  upon  it  by  the  mandate  :  "  He  that  is 
filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still." 

II.  THAT  GOD  HEBE  DECLARES  THE  REMEDY  WHICH 

HE  HAS  PROVIDED. 

Jesus  is  his  Son,  whom  he  freely  delivered  up  for 
as  all. 

1.  Behold  the  heavenly  medicine:  the  stripes  of 

Jesus  in  body  and  in  soul.  Singular 
surgery,  the  Healer  is  himself  wounded, 
and  this  is  the  means  of  our  cure ! 

2.  Remember  that  these  stripes  were  vicarious: 

he  suffered  in  our  stead. 

8.  Accept  this  atonement,  and  you  are  saved  by  it. 
Prayer  begs  for  the  divhw  surgery. 
Belief  is  the  linen  cloth  which  binds  on  the 

plaster. 


98  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

Trust   is  the  hand   which  secures  it  to  the 

wound. 
Repentance  is  the  first  symptom  of  healing. 

4.  Let  nothing  of  your  own  interfere  with  the 
one  medicine.  You  see  the  proper  places 
of  prayer,  faith,  and  repentance;  do  not 
misuse  them,  and  make  them  rivals  of  the 
"  stripes."  By  the  stripes  of  Jesus  we  are 
healed,  and  by  these  alone. 

One  remedy,  and  only  one,  is  set  forth  by  God 
Why  seek  another  ? 

III.  THAT  THIS  DIVINE  REMEDY  is  IMMEDIATELY 

EFFECTIVE. 

To  the  carnal  mind  it  does  not  appear  to  touch 
ihe  case. 

But  those  of  us  who  have  believed  in  the  stripes 
of  Jesus  are  witnesses  to  the  instant  and  perfect 
efficacy  of  the  medicine,  for  we  can  speak  from 
experience,  since  "  We  are  healed." 

1.  Our  conscience  is  healed  of  its  smart:  eased 

but  not  deadened. 

2.  Our  heart  is  healed  of  its  love  of  sin.     We 

hate  the  evil  which  scourged  our  Well- 
Beloved. 

8.  Our  life  is  healed  of  its  rebellion.  We  are 
zealous  of  good  works. 

4.  Our  consciousness  assures  us  that  we  are  healed. 
We  know  it,  and  rejoice  in  it.  None  can 
dispute  us  out  of  it 


CHBISTOPATHY.  99 

APPLICATION. 

1.  Friend,  you  are  by  nature  in  need  of  healing. 

You  do  not  think  so :  this  disease  affects  the 

mind,  and  breeds  delusions. 
You    ridicule   such   teaching:    your    disease 

leads  to  madness. 
You    oppose   it.      Thus   do   the  sick    refuse 

medicine,  and  the  insane  hate  their  friends. 

2.  Friend,  you  are  either  healed  or  sick. 

Do  you  not  know  which  is  your  condition  ? 

You  ought  to  know.     You  may  know. 
8.    Why  are  you  not  healed  ? 

There  is  power  in  the  remedy,  for  you,  for 

you  now. 
4.  If  you  are  healed,  behave  accordingly. 

Quit  diseased  company. 

Do  a  healthy  man's  work. 

Praise  the  Physician,  and  his  singular  surgery. 

Publish  abroad  his  praises. 


SUGGESTIVE  PABAGRAPHS. 

The  Balsam-tree  sheds  its  balm  to  heal  the  wounds 
of  those  that  cut  it ;  and  did  not  our  blessed  Saviour 
do  the  like?  They  mock  him,  and  he  prays  for 
them  ;  they  shed  his  blood,  and  he  makes  it  a  medi 
cine  for  their  healing ;  they  pierce  his  heart,  and  he 
opens  therein  a  fountain  for  their  sin  and  unclean- 
ness.  Was  it  ever  heard,  before  or  since,  that  a 
physician  should  bleed,  and  thus  leal  his  patient : 


100  MY    SERMON    .NOTES. 

or  that  an  offended  prince  should  die  to  expiate  the 
treasons  of  his  rebellious  subjects  ? 

Our  heavenly  Balsam  is  a  cure  for  all  diseases. 
If  you  complain  that  no  sins  are  like  yours,  remember 
that  there  is  no  salvation  like  Christ's.  If  you  have 
run  the  complete  round  of  sin,  remember  that  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanseth  from  all.  No  man 
ever  perished  for  being  a  great  sinner,  unless  he  was 
also  an  unbelieving  sinner.  Never  did  a  patient  fail 
of  a  cure  who  accepted  from  the  great  Physician  the 
balm  of  his  atoning  blood. 

See  how  Christ,  whose  death  was  so  bitter  to  him 
self,  becomes  sweetness  itself  to  us.  Rejection  was 
his,  but  acceptance  is  ours ;  the  wounding  was  his, 
but  the  healing  is  ours ;  the  blood  was  his,  but 
the  balm  is  ours ;  the  thorns  were  his,  but  the  crown 
is  ours ;  the  death  was  his,  but  the  life  is  ours ;  the 
price  was  his,  but  the  purchase  is  ours.  There  is 
more  power  in  Christ's  blood  to  save  than  in  your 
sin  to  destroy.  Do  but  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  thy  cure  is  wrought. — Modernized  from  Spur- 
stow's  "  Spiritual  Chymist" 

The  Hebrew  word  here,  and  the  Greek  word  the 
Apostle  Peter  uses  in  his  quotation  of  this  passage 
which  we  render  "  stripes "  (1  Pet.  ii.  24),  denote 
properly  the  marks  which  stripes  or  wounds  leave 
upon  the  body,  or  as  we  say,  scars.  The  scars  in 
his  hands,  feet,  and  side,  and  perhaps  other  marks  of 
his  many  wounds,  remained  after  his  resurrection. 
And  John  saw  him,  in  vision,  before  the  throne,  as 


CHBISTOPATHY.  10  J 

"a  Lamb  as  it  had  been  slain."  All  these  expres 
sions  and  representations,  I  apprehend,  are  designed 
to  intimate  to  us  that,  though  the  death  of  the  Mes 
siah  is  an  event  long  since  past,  yet  the  effects  and 
benefits  are  ever  new,  and  to  the  eye  of  faith  are 
ever  present.  How  admirable  is  this  expedient,  that 
the  wounds  of  one,  yea  of  millions,  should  be  healed 
by  beholding  the  wounds  of  another !  Yet  this  is 
the  language  of  the  gospel, — "  Look,  and  live !  " 
"  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved ! "  Three  great 
wounds  are  ours,  guilt,  sin,  and  sorrow ;  but  by  con 
templating  his  weals,  or  scars,  with  an  enlightened 
eye,  and  by  rightly  understanding  who  was  thus 
wounded,  and  why,  all  these  wounds  are  healed. 

You  who  live  by  this  medicine,  speak  well  of  it. 
Tell  to  others,  as  you  have  opportunity,  what  a 
Saviour  you  have  found.  It  is  usual  for  those  who 
have  been  relieved,  in  dangerous  and  complicated 
diseases,  by  a  skilful  physician,  to  commend  him  to 
others,  who  are  laboring  under  the  like  maladies, 
We  often  see  public  acknowledgments  to  this  pur 
pose.  If  all  the  persons  who  have  felt  the  efficacy 
of  a  dying  Saviour's  wounds,  apprehended  by  faith, 
were  to  publish  their  cases,  how  greatly  would  his 
power  and  grace  be  displayed  ! — John  Newton. 

He  cures  the  mind  of  its  blindness,  the  heart  of  its 
hardness,  the  nature  of  its  perverseness,  the  will  of 
its  backwardness,  the  memory  of  its  slipperiness,  the 
conscience  of  its  benumbness,  arid  the  affections  of 


102  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

their  disorder,  all  according  to  his  gracious  promises: 
Ezek.  xxxvi.  26,  27.— John  Willison. 

Trajan,  it  is  said,  rent  his  clothes  to  bind  up  his 
soldiers'  wounds.  Christ  poured  out  his  blood  to 
heal  his  saints'  wounds,  and  tears  his  flesh  to  bind 
them  up. —  G-urnall. 

Dr.  Cheyne  was  an  eminent  as  well  as  a  pious 
physician  ;  but  he  was  supposed  to  be  severe  in  his 
regimen.  When  he  had  prescribed,  and  the  patient 
began  to  object  to  the  treatment,  he  would  say,  "  I 
see  you  are  not  bad  enough  for  me  yet."  Some  are 
not  bad  enough  for  Christ  yet — we  mean  in  their 
own  apprehension ;  but  when  they  find  and  feel  that 
they  are  entirely  lost,  and  have  no  other  help  or 
hope,  they  will  cordially  acquiesce  in  his  recommend 
ations,  however  mysterious,  however  humbling,  how 
ever  trying. — Jay. 

Four  travellers,  not  very  well  acquainted  with  the 
cross-road  over  which  they  were  journeying,  began 
to  look  out  for  a  finger-post.  Soon  after  this,  one  of 
them  cried  out,  "  I  think  I  can  see  one  yonder  in  the 
distance ; "  and  "  I  believe  that  I  can  see  it  too, 
about  half  a  mile  off,"  rejoined  another,  and  "I  am 
almost  certain  that  I  can  see  it,"  added  a  third,  "  it 
stands  up  higher  than  the  hedges."  "  Well,  well," 
said  the  fourth,  "  you  may  be  right,  or  you  may  be 
wrong ;  but  we  had  better  make  the  best  of  our  way 
to  it,  for  while  we  keep  at  such  a  distance,  whether  it 
be  a  finger-post  or  not,  it  will  be  of  little  use  to  us." 


OHB1STOPATHY.  103 

Now  I  want  you  all  to  draw  near  to  the  Saviour  of 
sinners,  and  not  be  satisfied  with  "thinking,"  or 
"believing,"  or  "being  almost  certain,"  that  he  is 
your  Redeemer;  I  want  you  to  see  him  as  your 
Saviour,  as  distinctly  as  you  can  see  the  sun  in  the 
skies,  and  to  break  out  with  all  the  conviction  and 
fervency  of  Thomas,  the  Apostle,  "  My  Lord,  and 
my  God  ,  " — George  Mogridge. 


LXXX11. 

"  FOR    A    SMALL    MOMENT    HAVE     I     FORSAKEN     TKEE  ;     BUT 

WITH  GREAT  MERCIES  WELL  I  GATHER  THEE. 
"IN  A  LITTLE  WRATH    I    HID    MT   FACE    FROM    THEE    FOB  A 

MOMENT;  BUT  WITH  EVERLASTING  KINDNESS  WILL  I  HAVE 

MERCY  ON  THEE,   SATTH  THE  LORD   THY  REDEEMER. 
"FOB  THIS  IS  AS  THE  WATERS  OF  NOAH  UNTO  ME:    FOB  AS 
I  HAVE  SWORN  THAT  THE  WATERS  OF    NOAH    SHOULD  NO 
MORE  GO  OVER  THE   EARTH;    SO    HAVE    I    SWORN    THAT   I 
WOULD  NOT  BE  WBOTH  WITH  THEE,  NOB  REBUKE  THEE."  — 

Isaiah  liv.  7-9. 


nr^HIS  text  is  the  property  of  all  believers.  Their 
-••  title  to  it  is  seen  at  the  end  of  the  chapter 
(verse  17).  Let  them  not  fail  to  enjoy  it.  It  follows 
upon  the  prophecy  of  their  Lord's  great  griefs. 
(Isaiah  liii).  We  are  never  so  able  to  believe  a 
great  promise  as  when  we  have  been  at  the  cross. 

The  people  of  God  are  often  greatly  tried,  and 
their  griefs  are  sometimes  spiritual,  and  more  deep 
than  those  of  the  wicked. 

Their  grand  comfort  lies  in  this,  that  in  all  their 
afflictions  there  is  no  penal  wrath,  no  great  indigna 
tion,  no  final  judgment  from  the  Lord. 

We  shall  speak  upon,  — 

L   THE  LITTLE  WRATH,   AND  ITS  MODIFICATIONS. 

The  Lord  calls  it  "  a  little  wrath,  and  speaks  of 
(104) 


THE  LITTLE  WRATH  AND  THE  GREAT  WRATH.     105 

the  time  of  its  continuance  as  "  a  moment,"  "  a  small 
moment." 

1.  Our  view  of  it  differs  from  the  Lord's.     To  us 

it  appears  to  be  an  utter  forsaking,  and  the 
hiding  of  his  face  for  ever. 

We  are  too  foolish,  too  agitated,  too  unbeliev 
ing,  to  judge  aright. 

God's  view  is  truth  itself,  therefore  let  us 
believe  it. 

2.  The  time  of  it  is  short.     What  is  less  than  "  a 

small  moment?" 
As  compared  with  eternal  love. 
When  looked  back  upon  in  after  years  of  holy 

peace. 

In  reality  it  only  endures  for  a  little  while. 
It  will  soon  be  over  if  we  repent  and  pray. 

3.  The   recompense  is   great.     Jehovah   vows   to 

give  "mercies,"  many,  divine,  everlasting, 
great,  effectual :  "  with  great  mercies  will  I 
gather  thee." 

4.  The  wrath  itself  is  little.     A  Husband's  wrath, 

a    Redeemer's    wrath;    a    Pitier's    wrath; 
wrath  occasioned  by  holy  love. 
6.  The  expression  of  it  is  not  severe. 

Not  set  my  face  against  thee ;  nor  change  my 

mind. 

But  hide  my  face,  and  that  only  for  a  moment. 
Thus  God  views  the  matter  of  our  chastise 
ment,  seeing  the  end  from  the  beginning. 
6.  It  is  quite  consistent  with  sternal  love.     This 


106  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

love  will  endure  for  ever,  is  present  during 
the  little  wrath,  is  the  cause  of  the  wrath, 
and  will  continue  unchanged  for  ever. 
The  chastened  child  is  none  the  less  loved. 
7.  It  does  not  change  our  relationship  to  the  Lord. 
He  is  still  our  Redeemer  (verse  8),  and  we 
are  still  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord. 

Our  duty  is  to  grieve  because  of  the  Lord's  anger ; 
to  be  humbled  and  sanctified  by  it ;  but  not  to  faint, 
or  despair  under  it. 

II.     THE     GBEAT      WRATH,      AND      OUB      SECURITY 
AGAINST  IT. 

1.  The  wrath  of  God  against  his  people  can  no 

more  break  out  upon  them  than  can  Noah's 
flood  return  to  go  over  the  earth.  That 
flood  has  not  returned  during  these  many 
centuries,  and  it  never  will.  Seed-time  and 
harvest  continue,  and  the  bow  is  in  the 
cloud.  We  have  no  dread  of  another  uni 
versal  deluge  of  water,  nor  need  believers 
fear  a  return  of  divine  wrath.  (Enlarge  on 
verse  9.) 

2.  The  great  flood  of  wrath  has  broken  forth  once 

for  all.  On  our  Lord  it  has  burst,  and  thus 
it  has  been  ended  for  ever.  "  Christ  hath 
redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
being  made  a  curse  for  us : "  Gal.  iii.  13. 
"  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so  far 
hath  he  removed  our  transgressions  from 
"  Who  is  he  that  oon- 


THE  LITTLE  WRATH  AND  THE  GREAT  WRATH.    107 

demneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died :  "  Rom. 
viii.  34.  '*  The  iniquity  of  Israel  shall  be 
sought  for,  and  there  shall  be  none  •  and 
the  sins  of  Judah,  and  they  shall  not  be 
found : "  Jer.  1.  20.  This  is  real,  true, 
effectual,  eternal  atonement. 

8.  We  have  the  oath  of   God  that  it  shall   not 

return :  "  so  have  I  sworn  that  I  would  not 

be  wroth  with  thee,  nor  rebuke  thee."    In  a 

way  of  punishment  there  shall  not  even  be 

a  hard  word  uttered — "  nor  rebuke  thee." 

4.  We  have  a  covenant  of  peace  as  sure  as  that 

made  with  Noah,  and  of  a  higher  order,  for 
it  is  made  with  Jesus  our  Lord. 

5.  We   have   pledges    of    immutable,   immovable 

mercy  :  "  the  mountains  and  the  hills : " 
verse  10.  These  may  depart  and  be  re 
moved,  but  never  the  kindness  of  the  Lord. 

6.  All  this  is  spoken  to  us  by  Jehovah  the  Merci 

ful  :  "  saith  the  Lord  that  hath  mercy  on 
thee." 

How  wicked  it  is  to  doubt  and  distrust  I 
How  safe  is  the  condition  of  the  covenanted  ones  I 
How  glorious  is  our  God  of  everlasting  kindness  I 
How  careful  we  should  be  that  we  do  not  grieve 
himl 

CHEERING  WORDS. 

Ah,  Sion's  daughters !  do  not  feare 

The  cross e,  the  cords,  the  nailes,  the  speare, 

The  myrrhe.  the  gall,  the  vinegar ; 


108  MY    SERMON    NOTKb. 

For  Christ,  jour  loving  Saviour,  hath 
Drunk  up  the  wine  of  God's  fierce  wrath , 
Only  there's  left  a  little  froth, 

Less  for  to  taste,  than  for  to  shew 

What  bitter  cups  had  been  your  due, 

IJad  he  not  drunk  them  up  for  you. — Herrick. 

The  darkness  of  sorrow  has  often  been  shown  to 
be  "  the  shadow  of  God's  wing  as  he  drew  near  to 
bless." 

We  cannot  have  fertilizing  showers  on  the  earth 
without  a  clouded  heaven  above.  It  is  thus  with 
our  trials. 

O  Lord !  let  me  have  anything  but  thy  frown ; 
and  anything  with  thy  smile. — R.  Cecil. 

A  learned  minister,  attending  an  aged  Christian 
in  humble  life,  when  in  his  last  illness,  remarked  that 
the  passage  in  Hebrews  xiii.  5,  "  I  will  never  leave 
thee,  nor  forsake  thee,"  was  much  more  emphatic  in 
the  original  language  than  in  our  translation,  inas 
much  as  it  contained  no  fewer  than  five  negatives  in 
proof  of  the  validity  of  the  divine  promise,  and  not 
merely  two,  as  it  appears  in  the  English  version  ;  in 
tending  by  this  remark,  to  convey  to  him  that,  in 
consequence  of  the  number  of  negatives,  the  promise 
was  expressed  witlr  much  greater  force  in  the  origi 
nal  language  than  *n  the  English.  The  man's  reply 
was  very  simple  and  striking :  "  I  have  no  doubt, 
sir,  that  you  are  quite  right,  but  I  can  assure  you 
that  if  God  had  only  spoken  once,  I  should  have 
believed  him  just  the  same." 


LXXXIII. 

"  LET  THE  WICKED  FORSAKE  HIS  WAY,  AND  THE  UNRIGHT 
ECUS  MAN  HIS  THOUGHTS:  AND  LET  HIM  RETIBN  UNTO 
THE  LORD,  AND  HE  WILL  HAVE  MERCT  UPON  HIM.— 

Isaiah  Iv.  7 

'T^HIS  is  the  great  chapter  of    gospel   invitation. 
-*•       How  free !     How  full !     How  plain  and  press 
ing  are  the  calls  to  receive  grace  I 

Yet  the  necessity  of  repentance  in  its  most  practi 
cal  form,  is  not  cast  into  the  background.  Turning, 
or  conversion,  is  insisted  on. 

Gospel  provisions  are  presented  freely  (verses 

1  and  2). 
A  Saviour  is  provided  and  proclaimed  (verses 

8  and  4). 
Saved  nations  are  absolutely  promised  to  him 

(verse  5). 
Men  are  encouraged  to  seek  and  find  the 

Lord  (verse  6). 

But  the  call  to  conversion  follows  close  after,  and 
is  intended  to  be  the  necessary  inference  from  all 
that  preceded  it.  Men  must  return  to  God :  his  very 
mercy  makes  it  imperative. 

Very  earnestly,  therefore,  let  us  turn  our  thoughts 
to,~ 

(109) 


110  MY   SERMON  NOTES. 

I.   THE  NECESSITY  OF   CONVERSION. 

The  text  makes  this  clear,  but  it  may  also  be  in 
ferred  from — 

1.  The  nature  of  God.     How  can  a  holy  God  wink 

at  sin,  and  pardon  sinners  who  continue  in 
their  wickedness  ? 

2.  The  nature  of  the  gospel.     It  is  not  a  procla 

mation  of  tolerance  for  sin,  but  of  deliver 
ance  from  it.  It  contains  no  single  promise 
of  forgiveness  to  the  man  who  goes  on  in 
his  iniquity. 

8.  The  facts  of  the  past.  No  instance  has  occurred 
of  pardon  given  to  a  man  while  obstinately 
persisting  in  his  evil  way.  Conversion 
always  goes  with  salvation. 

4.  The  needs  of  society.     It  would  be  unsafe  to 

the  common  weal  of  the  universe  to  show 
mercy  to  the  incorrigible  offender.  Sin 
must  be  punished,  or  else  virtue  will  perish. 

5.  The  well-being  of  the  sinner  himself   requires 

that  he  should  quit  his  sin,  or  feel  its  pen 
alty.  To  be  favored  with  a  sense  of  divine 
pardon,  while  obstinately  abiding  in  sin, 
would  confirm  the  man  in  sin;  and  sin 
itself  is  a  worse  evil  than  its  penalty. 

6.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  would  be  set  aside, 

for  he  is  the  Sanctifier. 

7.  The  design  of  our  Lord  Jesus  would  be  over 

borne,  for  he  comes  to  save  from  sin. 

8.  The  character  of  heaven  requires  that  a  sinner's 

nature  be  renewed,  and  his  life  purged,  ere 


REPENTANCE.  Ill 

he  can  enter  the  holy  place  where  God,  and 
holy  angels,  and  perfect  saints  abide. 
'  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as  little 
children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  king 
dom  of  heaven : "  Matt,  xviii.  3. 

II.   THE  NATURE  OP   CONVEBSION. 

1.  It  deals  with  the  life  and  conduct.     The  man's 

"  way." 
His   natural  way;  that  into  which  he   runs 

when  left  to  himself. 

His  habitual  way ;  to  which  he  is  accustomed. 
His  beloved  way ;  wherein  his  pleasures  lie. 
The  general  way ;  the  broad  road  in  which  the 

many  run. 
This,  our  text  says,  he  must  "forsake."     He  must 

have  done  with  sin,  or  he  will  be  undone. 

It  will  not  suffice  for  him  to — 
Own  that  it  is  wrong ; 
Profess  to  be  sorry  for  following  it ; 
Resolve  to  leave  it,  and  end  in  resolve ,  or 
Move  more  cautiously  in  it. 

No,  he  must  forsake  it,  altogether,  at  once,  and 
ft>r  ever. 

2.  It  deals  with  the   "thoughts."     A  man  must 

forsake — 

His   unscriptural    opinions,    and   self-formed 
notions — 

About  God,  his  law,  his  gospel,  his  people. 

About  pin,  punishment,  Christ,  self,  &c. 


112  MV    SERMON    NOTEb. 

His  contemplations,  so  far  as  the}  lead  him — 
To  find  pleasure  in  evil ; 
To  indulge  in  conceit  and  self- sufficiency  ; 

or, 

To  harbor  wrong  thoughts  of  God. 
His  evil  resolves : — 

To  continue  in  sin,  to  delay  repentance,  to  be 
a  free-thinker,  to  be  his  own  master,  to  defy 
God,  &c. 

Such  thoughts  are  to  be  forsaken;  he  must  flee 
from  them. 

3.  It  deals  with   the   man  in  reference  to  God. 

"  Let  him  return  unto  the  Lord." 
It  bids  him  cease  from  pride,  neglect,  opposi 
tion,  distrust,  disobedience,  and  all  other 
forms  of  alienation  from  the  Lord.  He 
must  turn  and  return :  wandering  no  further, 
but  coming  home. 

III.   THE   GOSPEL  OP  CONVERSION. 

1.  A  sure  promise  is  made  to  it.     "  He  will  have 

mercy  upon  him." 

2.  Divine  power  is  exercised  to  effect  it.     "  Turn 

thou  us  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  and  we  shall  be 
turned : "  Lam.  v.  21.  A  man  converts 
when  grace  converts  him. 

8.  It  is  itself  promised  to  faith  in  Jesus.     Acts 
v.  31 ;  xiii.  38,  39. 

4.  The  pardon  which  comes  with  it  is  the  result  of 

a  full  atonement,  which  renders  the  pardon 


KEPENTASCE.  113 

abundant,  just,  safe,  and  easy  of  belief  to 
the  awakened  conscience. 

Oh,  that  the  sinner  would  consider  the  need  of  a 
total  change  of  thought  within,  and  way  without !  It 
must  be  thorough  and  radical  or  it  will  be  useless. 

Total  and  terrible  ruin  must  ensue  if  you  continue 
in  evil. 

May  this  hour  see  the  turning-point  in  your  life's 
course  I  God  saith,  "  Let  him  return."  What  doth 
hinder  you? 


A  STOEY. 

William  Burns  was  preaching  one  evening  in  the 
open  air,  to  a  vast  multitude.  He  had  just  finished, 
when  a  man  came  timidly  up  to  him,  and  said,  "  O 
Sir !  will  you  come  and  see  my  dying  wife  ?  "  Burns 
consented ;  but  the  man  immediately  said,  "  Oh !  I 
am  afraid  when  you  know  where  she  is  you  won't 
come."  "  I  will  go  wherever  she  is,"  he  replied. 
The  man  then  tremblingly  told  him  that  he  was  the 
keeper  of  the  lowest  public-house  in  one  of  the  most 
wretched  districts  of  the  town.  "  It  does  not  mat 
ter,"  said  the  missionary,  "come  away."  As  they 
went,  the  man,  looking  up  in  the  face  of  God's 
servant,  said  earnestly,  "  O  Sir !  I  am  going  to  give 
it  up  at  the  term."  Burns  replied,  "  There  are  no 
terms  with  God."  However  much  the  poor  tremb 
ling  publican  tried  to  get  Burns  to  converse  with 
him  about  the  state  of  his  soul,  and  the  way  of  salva- 
2—8 


114  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

tion,  he  was  unable  to  draw  another  word  from  him 
than  these — "  There  are  no  terms  with  God."  The 
shop  was  at  last  reached.  They  passed  through  it  in 
order  to  reach  the  chamber  of  death.  After  a  little 
conversation  with  the  dying  woman,  the  servant  of 
the  Lord  engaged  in  prayer,  and  while  he  was  pray 
ing  the  publican  left  the  room,  and  soon  a  loud  noise 
was  heard,  something  like  a  rapid  succession  of  de 
termined  knocks  with  a  great  hammer.  Was  this 
not  a  most  unseemly  noise  to  make  on  such  a  solemn 
occasion  as  this  ?  Is  the  man  mad  ?  No.  When 
Burns  reached  the  street,  he  beheld  the  wreck  of  the 
publican's  sign-board  strewn  in  splinters  upon  the 
pavement.  The  business  was  given  up  for  good  and 
all.  The  man  had  in  earnest  turned  his  back  on  his 
low  public-house,  and  returned  to  the  Lord,  who  had 
mercy  upon  him,  and  unto  our  God,  who  abundantly 
pardoned  all  his  sins.  Nothing  transpired  in  his 
after-life  to  discredit  the  reality  of  his  conversion. — 
William  Brown,  in  "Joyful  Sound" 


LXXXIV. 

44  LET  HIM  RETURN  UNTO  THE  LOBD,  AND  HE  WILL  HAT! 
MERCY  UPON  HIM;  AND  TO  OUB  GOD,  FOR  HE  WILL 
ABUNDANTLY  PARDON. —  Isaiah  Iv.  7. 

'THHE  prophet  is  setting  forth  the  mission  of  Jesus 
-*•  (verses  4  and  5). 

Straightway  he  makes  an  appeal  to  sinners,  for 
Jesus  comes  to  sinners.  He  proclaims  pardon  to 
them,  for  this  Jesus  brings:  his  coming  is  as  the 
morning,  bedewing  the  earth  with  delight. 

The  call  is  practically  to  faith  and  repentance; 
immediate,  frank,  spiritual,  complete. 

The  inducement  presented  is  an  abundant  free- 
grace  pardon :  "  he  will  abundantly  pardon." 

There  is  no  more  likely  argument  wherewith  to 
persuade  souls. 

I.   LET     US     CONTEMPLATE     THE      ABUNDANCE     OF 
DIVINE  PARDON. 

We  may  do  so  the  better  if  we  consider, — 
1.  The  abundance  of  the  attribute  from  which  it 
springs.  All  the  attributes  of  God  are  in 
finite  and  harmonious,  but  we  are  told  that 
44  God  is  love,"  and  this  is  not  said  of  jus 
tice,  or  power.  "  Thy  mercy  is  great  above 
the  hearens :  "  Ps.  cviii.  4.  "  The  earth, 

(IU) 


116  MY   SEKMON  NOTES. 

O  Lord,  is  full  of  thy  mercy  : "  Ps.  cxix.  64. 

"  His  mercy  endureth  forever."  Ps.  cxxxvi. 
2.  The  abundance  of  the  objects  of  the  pardon. 

Since  the  days  of   Adam  and  even  until 

now  God  has  pardoned   multitudes  among 

all  nations,  classes,  and  ages. 
We  quickly  lose  patience  when  many  offend, 

but  it  is  not  so  with  our  God.     "  Thou  hast 

forgiven  this  people  from  Egypt  even  until 

now :  "  Num.  xiv.  19. 
3    The  abundant  sins  which  are  pardoned.     Who 

can  count  the  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds 

which  are  pardoned  I 
These   repeated    ad    nauseam.     Is.  xliii.   24 

Rev.  iii.  16. 
Sins  against  law  and  gospel,  light  and  love,  in 

youth  and  old  age. 
Yet  these  God  removes,  like   the   countless 

locusts  blown  away  by  the  wind,  or  as  the 

drops  of  dew  exhaled  by  the  sun. 
4.  The  abundant  sin  of  the  sins  which  are  par 
doned. 
Some  sins  are  planned  and  deliberated  on, 

and  each  plotting  and  devising  entails  sin. 
Some  are  a  spider's  nest,  swarming  with  many 

sins. 
Some  are  proud,  wanton,  cruel,  blasphemous, 

impudent. 

Some  are  repeated,  aggravated,  and  persisted  in. 
Yet  the  intensified  venom  of  epitomized  sin 

the  Lord  removes. 


ABUNDANT   PARDON.  117 

5.  The  abundant  means  of  pardon. 

The  atonement  of  his  Son,  and  his  righteous 
ness. 

The  infinite  merit  of  the  ever-living  Advocate. 

The  Holy  Spirit  ever  present  to  apply  gospel 
provisions. 

6.  The  abundant  ease  of  the  terms  of  pardon. 

No  hard  conditions  of  penance  or  purgatory. 
Only  ask  and  have  ;  repent  and  trust. 
Even  the  repentance  and  faith  required  are 
also  given. 

7.  The  abundant  fullness  of  the  pardon. 

It  covers  all  sin,  past,  present,  and  to  come. 

It  is  most  effectual,  and  sure. 

It  is  perpetual,  and  irreversible. 

It  is  accompanied  with  imputed  righteousness. 

Pardon   washes,   and    justification    clothes 

and  beautifies. 

8.  The  abundant  blessings  which  attend  it. 

Liberation  from  spiritual  prison,  legal  bonds, 

&c. 

Freedom  from  the  reigning  power  of  inbred  sin. 
Adoption  into  the  heavenly  family. 
Acceptance    so   full  that  we  may  challenge 

accusers. 

Employment  in  services  of  trust. 
Communion  with  the  thrice-holy  God. 
Reception  of  answers  to  our  prayers,  as  true 

and  certain  as  if  we  were  perfectly  pure. 
Ultimate  admission  into  glory  itself  with  the 

perfect  ones. 


Ill 

IL   LK  ; 

and  these  shall  furnish  the 

1,  Him  th<wrc  la  no  loom  for  dam! 


kxdl 

»  he  ia  ao 


Here  k  a  apodal  oaH  to  A 
ainoa  abundant  avrajk 
tothairoaaa:  and  no  ki 
guilt joomtk  amoathwa 


4*  Such  a   ttuoh-JtagiTutg  God  daaaifot  to  ba 
muoh  loT«d,  and  ilia  HTM  of  the  paidonod 
J«OT«  that  to  whom  muoh  m  loi^ 
the  aame  lo^retii  muoh. 

If  auoh  mewj  be  slighted,  we  ouy  be  auz»  it 
will  entail  gfeatwwtfcu 


Somme. 

That  ain  which  k  not  too  great  to  befonaken,  ia 
lot  too  great  to  be  faigiTenu 

Meroj  in  o%  it  ia  no  more  than  a  drop;  but  in  God 
it  k  an  ooean;  in  ua  it  k  no  more  than  a  little  stream; 
in  God  it  k  a  springing  and  flowing  fountain.  A 


ABUNDANT   JPAiiDON.  119 

§  pi  big  continually  runs,  an  ocean  is  never  drawn 
dry.  What  is  a  little  sparkle  of  fire,  if  it  fall  into 
the  main  sea  ?  The  same  are  the  sins  of  a  penitent 
person  when  dealt  with  by  the  mercy  of  God. — 
Thomat  Norton. 

One  of  the  captive  followers  of  the  Duke  of  Mon- 
mouth  was  brought  before  James  the  Second.  "  You 
know  it  is  in  my  power/*  said  the  king,  "  to  pardon 
you."  "  Yes,"  said  the  man,  who  well  knew  his  cruel 
character,  "  but  it  is  not  in  your  nature."'  However 
unwise  this  answer  was,  its  truth  was  soon  seen. 
Happily,  we  know  that  God  has  not  only  the  power 
but  the  disposition  to  show  mercy.  Also,  unto  thee, 
O  Lord,  belongeth  mercy." 

Mr.  Fleming,  in  his  "Fulfilling  of  the  Scriptures,** 
relates  the  case  of  a  most  hardened  sinner  who  was 
put  to  death  in  the  town  of  Ayr.  It  pleased  the 
Lord  to  bring  him  to  repentance  when  in  prison,  and 
so  full  was  his  assurance  of  pardoning  mercy  that, 
when  he  came  to  the  place  of  execution,  he  could 
not  help  crying  out  to  the  people,  under  the  sense  of 
naj-dnu,  "  Oh,  he  is  a  great  Forgiver !  He  is  a  great 
Forgiver ! '"  and  he  added,  "  Now  hath  perfect  love 
cast  out  fear.  I  know  God  hath  nothing  to  say 
against  me,  for  Jesus  Christ  hath  paid  all ;  and  those 
are  free  whom  the  Son  makes  free/' — G.  S.  BWDC*. 

Lord,  before  I  commit  a  sin,  it  seems  to  me  so 
shallow  that  I  may  wade  through  it  dry-shod  from 
»ny  sruiltines* ;  but  when  I  have  committed  it.  it 


120  MI    8ERMO>i    NOTES. 

often  seems  so  deep  that  I  cannot  escape  without 
drowning.  Thus  I  am  always  in  extremities :  either 
my  sins  are  so  small  that  they  need  not  any  repent 
ance,  or  so  great  that  they  cannot  obtain  thy  pardon. 
Lend  me,  O  Lord,  a  reed  out  of  thy  sanctuary,  truly 
to  measure  the  dimension  of  my  offences.  But  O ! 
as  thou  revealest  to  me  more  of  my  misery,  reveal 
also  more  of  thy  mercy;  lest,  if  my  wounds,  in 
my  apprehension,  gape  wider  than  thy  tents 
(plugs  of  lint),  my  soul  run  out  at  them.  If 
my  badness  seem  bigger  than  thy  goodness  but  one 
hair's  breadth,  but  one  moment,  that  is  room  and 
time  enough  for  me  to  run  to  eternal  despair. — 
Thomas  Fuller. 


LXXXV. 

"WHO     ABE     THESE    THAT    FLY    AS    A    CLOUD,   AND    AB    THE 
DOVES  TO  THEIB  WINDOWS  P  " — Isaiah  ll.  8. 

IN  the  days  when  the  Lord  shall  visit  his  church, 
multitudes  will  come  to  seek  him. 

It  is  a  great  blessing  when  they  do  so :  a  matter 
for  admiring  praise. 

They  will  come  from  far  to  learn  of  Jesus,  flying 
in  a  straight  line,  as  pigeons  when  they  return  to 
their  homes. 

Jesus  is  the  great  attraction,  and  when  he  is  faith 
fully  lifted  up,  men  will  hasten  to  him  in  flocks, 
flying  like  clouds  before  a  gale. 

Yet  will  it  astonish  those  who  see  it,  and  they  will 
ask  questions  such  as  those  which  follow. 

I.  WHO  ARE  THESE  CONVERTS  THAT  THEY  SHOULD 
BE  80  MANY?   "  As  a  cloud." 

The  answers  are  many  and  easy. 

1.  Are  not  sinners  many  ? 

2.  Is  not  Christ's  redemption  great  ? 
8.  Are  not  his  blessings  attractive  ? 

4.  Shall  Satan  have  the  pre-eminence  in  numbers 
at  the  last  ?    We  cannot  think  it  will  be  so. 
6.  Is  not  the  Spirit  of  God  able  to  draw  many? 

(121) 


122  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

6-  Is  not  heaven  great,  and  is  there  not  room  for 
hosts  of  souls  ? 

Naturalists  tell  us  of  vast  clouds  of  pigeons  in 
America.     Oh,  to  see  such  a  cloud  of  converts  ? 

II.  WHO   ABB  THEY  THAT  THEY   SHOULD   PLY? 

Why  are  they  in  such  eager  haste  as  to  speed  like 
doves  when  coming  homeward  to  their  cotes  ? 
This  also  is  plain. 

1.  They  are  in  great  danger. 

2.  Their  time  is  very  short. 

3.  They  are  driven  by  a  great  wind.     The  Spirit, 

like  a  heavenly  breath,  impels  souls  to  seek 
salvation. 

4.  They   are   moved   by   strong   desire:    a  great 

hunger  is  on  them  to  reach  their   home, 
where  they  shall  be  fed  and  housed. 

Doves  fly  straight,  swiftly,  surely.     They  neither 
linger  nor  loiter,  but  hasten  home. 

III.  WHO  ABE  THEY  THAT  THEY  SHOULD  FLY 

TOGETHER  ? 

They  fly  in  such  a  flock  that  they  appear  like  a 
cloud :  why  is  this  ? 

1.  They  are  all  in  one  common  danger. 

2.  They  have  no  time  to  quarrel  while  seeking 

safety. 
8.  They  have  one  common  object :  they  seek  one 

Saviour. 
4.  They  are  wafted  by  the  same  heavenly  wind. 


THE  CLOUD  Oif  DOVE8.  128 

The  Spirit  works  in  each  according  tc  his 
own  will. 

5.  They  find  comfort  in  each  other's  society. 

6.  They  hope  to  live  together  forever  above. 

IV.  WHO  ABE  THEY  THAT  THEY  SHOULD  FLY  THIS 

WAY? 

They  are  doves,  and  so  they  come  to  their  usual 
abodes  in  the  clefts  of  the  rock,  or  to  the  openings 
of  the  dove-house. 

1.  Seeking  safety  in  Jesus,  from  the  hawks  which 

pursue  them. 

2.  Desiring  rest  in  his  love,  for  they  are  wearied, 

and  find  no  other  rest  for  the  soles  of  theii 
feet. 

3.  Finding  a  home  in  his  heart.     Swallows  go  to 

another  home  in  winter,  but  saints  abide  in 
Christ  for  ever. 

4.  Their  companions  are  there :  doves  congregate, 

and  so  do  saved  sinners  love  fellowship 
with  each  other. 

5.  Their  young  are  there.     "The  swallow  hath 

found  a  nest  for  herself,  where  she  may  lay 
her  young:"  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  3.  Believers 
love  to  have  their  children  housed  in  Christ. 

6.  Their  food  is  there.     Where  else  can  we  find 

provender  ? 

7.  Their  all  is  there.     Christ  is  all. 

V.  BUT  WHO  ABE  THEY  INDIVIDUALLY  ? 

1.  Some  are  onr  own  children. 


L%4  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

2.  Some  are  from  the  Sabbath-school. 

8.  Some  are  old  hearers,  who  were  gospel -hardened. 

4.  Some  are  quite  strangers,  outsiders. 

5.  Some  are  backsliders  returning. 

6.  Some  are  those  whom  we  sought  in  prayer,  and 

personal  address. 

Dear  hearer,  are  you  one  of  them  ? 
Have  you  not  reason  to  fly  from  the  wrath  to  come? 
Fly  first  to  Jesus,  and  then  without  delay  hasten 
to  his  church. 


FEATHEBS. 

This  text  has  been  well  illustrated  by  Morier.  "  In 
the  environs  of  the  city  (Ispahan),  to  the  westward, 
near  Zainderood,  are  many  pigeon-houses,  erected  at 
a  distance  from  habitations.  They  are  large,  round 
towers,  rather  broader  at  the  bottom  than  at  the  top, 
and  crowned  by  conical  spiracles,  through  which  the 
pigeons  descend.  The  interior  resembles  a  honey 
comb,  pierced  with  a  thousand  holes,  each  of  which 
forms  a  snug  retreat  for  a  nest.  The  extraordinary 
flights  of  pigeons,  which  I  have  seen  upon  one  of 
these  buildings,  afford  perhaps  a  good  illustration  of 
the  passage.  The  great  numbers,  and  the  compact 
ness  of  the  mass,  literally  looked  like  a  cloud  at  a 
distance,  and  obscured  the  sun  in  their  passage." 
What  gives  an  additional  value  to  this  illustration 
is  the  probability  that  similar  dove-houses  were  in 
use  among  the  Hebrews,  for  they  certainly  were  so 


THE   CLOUD  OF   DOVES.  126 

among  their  Egyptian  neighbors. — Kitto's  Pictorial 
Bible. 

God's  children  love  communion  and  fellowship 
one  with  another,  that  they  may  mutually  be  com 
forted  and  edified  in  faith :  "  they  fly  like  a  cloud, 
and  as  doves  to  their  windows ;  "  that  is,  to  the  house 
or  church  of  God. — Benjamin  Keaoh. 

Those  that  are  weak  want  supply  and  support 
from  others.  Nature  teacheth  this  lesson.  The 
weakest  creatures  amongst  fish,  or  fowls,  or  beasts,  go 
usually  in  flocks  and  companies. —  &.  Swinnock. 

Birds  of  a  feather  flock  together. 

Everybody  knows  that  large  flocks  of  pigeons 
assemble  at  the  stroke  of  the  great  clock  in  the 
square  of  St.  Mark,  Venice.  Believe  me,  it  is  not 
the  music  of  the  bell  which  attracts  them,  they  can 
hear  that  every  hour.  They  come,  Mr.  Preacher,  for 
food,  and  no  mere  sound  will  long  collect  them. 
This  is  a  hint  for  filling  your  meeting-house ;  it  must 
be  done  not  merely  by  that  fine,  bell-like  voice  of 
yours,  but  by  all  the  neighborhood's  being  assured 
that  spiritual  food  is  to  be  had  when  you  open  your 
mouth.  Barley  for  pigeons,  go'od  sir ;  and  the  gos 
pel  for  men  and  women.  Try  it  in  earnest,  and  you 
cannot  fail ;  you  will  soon  be  saying,  "  Who  are  they 
that  fly  as  a  cloud,  and  as  doves  to  their  windows  ?  " 
— From  "  Feathers  for  Arrows"  by  0.  H.  Spurgeon. 

A  writer  is  "Nature  "  states  that  the  small  birds, 


120  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

that  are  unable  to  fly  the  three  hundred  and  fifty 
miles  across  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  are  carried  over 
on  the  backs  of  cranes.  When  the  first  cold  weather 
comes,  the  cranes  fly  low,  making  a  peculiar  cry. 
Little  birds  of  every  species  fly  up  to  them,  while 
the  twittering  of  those  already  settled  may  be  dis 
tinctly  heard.  But  for  this  provision,  many  species 
of  small  birds  would  become  extinct.  So,  many 
converts  that  are  young  and  feeble  need  much 
assistance  in  seeking  Christ.  Let  those  that  are 
strong  help  the  weaker  ones  in  their  spiritual  flight. 


LXXXVI. 

ItETURN,   THOU  BACKSLIDING  ISRAEL,   SAITH  THE  LORD. 
"  TURN,   O  BACKSLIDING  CHILDREN,   SAITH  THE  LORD. 

44  RETURN,  YE  BACKSLIDING  CHILDREN,  AND  I  WILL  HEAL  YOUB 
BACKSLIDINGS."— Jeremiah  iii.  12,  14,  22. 

IT  is  a  fearful  thing  that  a  believer  should  back 
slide. 

Such  mercy  has  been  shown  to  him. 
Such  love  has  been  enjoyed  by  him. 
Such  prospects  lie  before  him. 
Such  comfort  is  sacrificed  by  his  backsliding. 
It  is  a  wretched  business  for  the  man  himself, 
since   by  it   nothing   is  gained,  and   everything  is 
endangered. 

It  is  injurious  to  the  whole  church  to  which  the 
backslider  belongs. 

It  is  mischievous  to  the  outside  world. 
What  is  the  immediate  duty  of  the  backslider? 
the  immediate  remedy  for  his  backsliding  ? 

One   word   sums  it  up,  and  it  is   God's  word, 
*  Return" 
Let  us  earnestly  note, — 

I.   WONDEB  AWAKENED  BY  THE  CALL. 

There  would  seem  to  be  many  reasons  why  the 
Lord  should  not  invite  the  backslider  to  return.    We 

C37) 


128  MY   8EKMON   NOTES. 

will  follow  the  guidance  of  the  chapter,  which  will 
richly  repay  a  careful  exposition. 

1.  The  usual  jealousy  of  love.     Note  the  terrible 

imagery  of  verse  1.  A  wanton  adulteress 
is  allowed  to  return  to  her  husband. 

2.  The  abundance  of  the  sin:     "Thou  hast  pol 

luted  the  land"  (verse  2).  The  very  earth 
felt  the  leprosy  of  the  idolatry. 

3.  The   obstinate   continuance   in   evil,    notwith 

standing  chastisements  (verse  3). 

4.  The  refusal  of  tender  persuasion.     "Wilt  thou 

not?"  etc.  (verse  4.) 

5.  The  perversion  of  mercy.     God  did  not  reserve 

his  anger  for  ever,  and  they  sinned  the  more 
because  of  his  long-suffering  (verse  5). 

6.  The  warnings  which  had  been  despised.    Judah 

saw  Israel  doomed,  and  yet  followed  her 
evil  ways  (verses  6 — 11).  It  is  a  great 
increase  of  iniquity  when  we  perceive  the 
suffering  which  it  causes  others,  and  yet 
persevere  in  it  ourselves. 

Is  it  not  marvellous  that  God  should  be  so  full  of 
mercy  as  to  bid  such  revolters  return,  and  repeat  the 
exhortation  again  and  again  ? 

II.  MEMORIES  AROUSED  BY  THE  CALL. 
Does  it  not  remind  you  of  other  days  ? 

1.  When  you  first  came  to  Jesus  ? 

2.  When  you  were  happy  with  other  believers. 
8.  When  you  could  teach  and  warn  others. 

4.  When  you  began  to  go  aside,  a  little* 


RETURN  I    RETURN  I  12$ 

6.  When  you  have  sinned  grievously  through  this 
backsliding. 

Indulge  these  memories  till  they  affect  your  heart. 

III.  REASONS  URGED  FOR  OBEYING  THE  CALL. 

1.  It  is  God  himself  who  utters  it.      Twice  we 

read,  "  saith  the  Lord." 

2.  Anger  will  be  removed :  "  I  will  not  cause  mine 

anger  to  fall  upon  you"  (verse  12). 
8.  Love  continues :    "  I  am  married   unto   you  " 

(verse  14). 
4.  Healing  will  be  given :  "  I  will  heal  your  back- 

slidings  "  (verse  22). 
Each  verse  yields  its  own  forcible  argument. 

IV.  DIRECTIONS  GIVEN   TO  MAKE  OBEDIENCE  TO 

THE   CALL  EASY. 

1.  "  Only  acknowledge  thine  iniquity  "  (verse  13). 

What  a  simple  matter ! 

2.  Lament  the  evil :  "  Weeping  and  supplications  " 

(verse  21)»      Do  you  not  mourn  your  sin 
even  now? 

8.  Own  the  sad  result.     "  We  lie  down  in   our 
shame,"  &c.  (verse  25.) 

4.  Trust  in  God  for  restoration:  "Truly  in  the 

Lord  our  God  is  the  salvation  of  Israel" 
(verse  23). 

5.  Heartily  renew  allegiance :  "  Behold,  we  come 

unto  thee ;  for  thou  art  the  Lord  our  God  " 
(verse  22). 

These  things,  carefully  and  immediately  attended 
2—9 


ISO  MV    8KKMON    NOTfciV 

to,  will  restore  the  fallen  to  their  first  estate.    4*  Ro 
turn !  Return ! "  saith  the  Lord. 

Oh,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  may  lead  them  to  it ! 

V.  PROMISES    MADE   TO   THOSE    ANSWERING    TO 

THE  GALL. 

Such  shall  obtain — 

1.  Special  guidance :  "  I  will  bring  you  to  Zion  " 

(verse  14). 

2.  Suitable  food :   "  Feed  you   with  knowledge ' 

(verse  15). 

3.  Spiritual  insight.     (See  verses  16  and  17.) 

4.  Childlike   spirit :  "  Thou   shalt   call   me,   *  My 

father'"  (verse  19). 

The  whole  subject  needs  pressing  upon  all  be 
lievers,  for  we  may  have  already  backslidden  more 
than  we  are  aware. 

Upon  the  conscious  backslider  the  three-fold  call 
should  be  pressed,  "  Return  I  "  "  Turn ! "  "  Return ! " 

TURNS  OF  EXPRESSION. 

There  is  a  play  upon  words,  or  rather  upon  senses, 
in  the  original,  "  Return,  ye  backsliding  children," 
more  literally,  "  Turn  ye,  turned-away  sons,  and  I 
will  heal  your  turnings,"  as  in  Hosea  xiv.  4. 

God  invites  and  does  not  drive ;  he  here  exchanges 
threats  for  promises.  God  will  "  heal,"  not  simply 
receive  his  children.  God  alone  can  heal  their 
apostacies.  Man  repents  of  sin,  but  God  cures  it. 
It  is  our  part  to  turn  from  evil,  God's  to  destroy  that 


RETURN !    RETURN I  131 

evil.  Sin  is  washed  out,  not  by  tears  of  penitence, 
but  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  healing  is  of  the 
apostacies  themselves,  not  simply  of  their  painful 
effects.  Christ  saves  from  sin. — The  Pulpit  Com 
mentary. 

I  was  weary  of  a  cold  heart  towards  Christ,  and 
his  sacrifice,  and  the  work  of  his  Spirit — of  a  cold 
heart  in  the  pulpit,  in  secret  prayer,  and  in  study. 
For  fifteen  years  previously  I  had  felt  my  heart 
burning  within,  as  if  going  to  Emmaus  with  Jesus. 
On  a  day  ever  to  be  remembered  by  me,  as  I  was 
going  from  Dolgelly  to  Machynlleth,  and  climbing 
up  towards  Cadair  Idris,  I  considered  it  to  be  in 
cumbent  upon  me  to  pray,  however  hard  I  felt  my 
heart,  and  however  worldly  the  frame  of  my  spirit 
was.  Having  begun  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  I  soon 
felt  as  it  were  the  fetters  loosening,  and  the  old 
hardness  of  heart  softening,  and,  as  I  thought, 
mountains  of  frost  and  snow  dissolving,  and  melting 
within  me.  This  engendered  confidence  in  my  soul 
in  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  felt  my  mind 
relieved  from  some  great  bondage :  tears  flowed 
copiously,  and  I  was  constrained  to  cry  out  for  the 
gracious  visits  of  God,  by  restoring  to  my  soul  the 
joy  of  his  salvation.1 — Christmas  Evans. 

I  am  sometimes  downright  staggered  at  the  ex 
ceeding  riches  of  his  grace.  How  Christ  can  go  on 
pardoning  day  after  day,  and  hour  after  hour ;  some 
times  I  feel  almost  afraid  to  ask,  for  shame. — A.  L. 

Newton. 


182  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

Alan-like  is  it  to  fall  into  sin, 
Fiend-like  is  it  to  dwell  therein, 
Christ-like  is  it  for  sin  to  grieve, 
God- like  is  it  all  sin  to  leave. — Longfellow 

Yet  sovereign  mercy  calls,  «•  Return ! " 
Dear  Lord,  and  may  I  come  ? 

My  vile  ingratitude  I  mourn  — 
O  take  the  wanderer  home ! — Btetlt. 


LXXXVIL 

"  BUT  I  SAID,  HOW  SHALL  I  PUT  THEE  AMONG  THE  CHILDREN, 
AND  GIVE  TUEE  A  PLEASANT  LAND,  A  GOODLY  HERITAGE 
OF  THE  HOSTS  OF  NATIONS?  AND  I  SAID,  THOU  SHALT 
CALL  ME,  MY  FATHER ;  AND  SHALT  NOT  TURN  AWAY  FROM 

ME."— Jeremiah  iii.  19. 

Man  thinks  lightly  of  sin ;  but  not  so  the  Lord. 
Man  thinks  lightly  of  grace ;  but  not  so  the  Lord. 
Man  trifles  where  God  wonders. 
Man  forgets  where  God  considers. 
The  text  may  be  viewed  as  written  with  a  note  of 
interrogation  (?),  or  a  note  of  exclamation  (I). 
Let  us  treat  it  somewhat  in  that  blended  fashion. 

I.  HERE  is  A  DIFFICULT  QUESTION. 

Many  knotty  questions  are  involved  in  it. 

1.  As  to  the  holy  Lord.     "  How  shall  I  put  thee 

among  the  children?"  How,  in  consist 
ency  with  justice  and  purity,  shall  the 
Holy  One  place  in  his  family  persons  of 
such  character  ?  They  have  forgotten,  de 
spised,  forsaken,  rejected,  and  insulted  their 
God  and  can  he  treat  them  as  if  they  had 
loved  and  obeyed  ? 

2.  As  to  the  unholy  person.    "How  shall  I  put 

(138) 


134  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

thee  among  the  children  ?  "  Shalt  them  be 
adopted  after  being — 

A  rebel  so  set  on  mischief,  wilfully  disobeying? 

A  sinner  so  open,  so  presumptuous,  so  ob 
stinate  ? 

A  desperado  so  profligate,  profane,  and  per 
secuting  ? 

A  criminal  "  condemned  already "  by  thine 
unbelief  ? 

Such  persons  do  obtain  mercy,  but  how  is  it  done  ? 

3.  As   to   the   family.     "How   shall   I   put   thee 

among  the  children  f  " 

What  will  the  children  say  ?  "  A  fine  brother, 
certainly ! " 

What  will  the  world  say  ?  Will  not  observers 
exclaim, — "  See  what  characters  are  received 
into  the  household  of  God ! "  May  it  not 
even  seem  like  trifling  with  iniquity  ?  May 
not  the  wicked  hope  for  impunity  in  their 
sinning  ? 

What  can  I  myself  say  to  justify  such  a 
course  ?  How  shall  I  make  this  appear  to 
be  the  act  of  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  ? 

4.  As  to  the  inheritance :  "  and  give  thee  a  pleasant 

land,  a  goodly  heritage  ?  "     Is  not  this  too 

good  for  such  ? 

Shalt  thou  have  peace  and  happiness  below  ? 
Shalt  thou  have  all  that  my  favored  children 

enjoy  ? 
Shalt  thou  be  admitted  into  heaven' 


INTERROGATION   AND  EXCLAMATION.          136 

It  is  a  question  which  none  but  the  Lord  would 
ever  have  thought  of. 

He  himself  asked  it  long  ago,  as  if  to  let  us  see 
that  it  was  no  small  matter  which  he  proposed. 

He  himself  answered  the  question,  or  it  had  been 
unanswerable. 

II.  HERE  is  A  WONDERFUL  ANSWER. 

1.  It  is  from  God  himself,  and  is  therefore  a  per 

fect  answer. 

2.  It  is  in  the  divine  style :  "  Thou  shalt ; "  and 

"  thou  shalt  not."  Omnipotence  speaks,  and 

grace  reveals  its  unconditional  character. 
8.  It  is  concerning  a  divine  work.     God  himself 

puts  sinners  among  his  children,  and  none 

beside  can  do  it. 

The  Lord  infuses  a  new  spirit — a  filial  spirit. 
The  spirit  expresses   itself   by  a   new   call: 

"My  Father." 
This  creates  new  bonds :  "  and  shalt  not  turn 

away  from  me." 
4.  It  is  effectual  for  its  purpose. 

Those  who  heartily  cry  "My  Father"  may 

safely  be  put  among  the  children. 
Those  who  do  not  turn  away  from  their  father 

must  be  children.    Servants  go,  but  sons 

abide. 

Thus  the  wisdom  of  our  gracious  God,  by  regen 
eration  and  adoption,  answers  the  difficult  question. 


136  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

III.  HERE,  WITHOUT  QUESTION,  is  A  MATCHLESS 

PRIVILEGE. 

We  are  put  among  the  children. 

1.  We  are  indeed  made  children  of  God,  and  joint- 

heirs  with  Chriit. 

2.  We  are  as  much  loved  as  the  children. 
8.  We  are  treated  as  the  children. 

We  are  forgiven  as  a  father  forgives  his  chil 
dren. 

We  are  clothed,  fed,  and  housed  as  children. 
We  are  taught,  ruled,  and  chastened  as  chil 
dren. 

We  are  honored  and  enriched  as  children. 
4.  We  are  placed  under  filial  obligations, — 

To  love,  honor,  obey,  and  serve  our  Father. 
This  should  be  regarded  as  a  high  honor,  and  not 
as  a  burden. 

Let  us  admire  the  grace  which  puts  us  into  the 
family. 

Let  us  enjoy  the  privileges  which  this  secures  to  us. 
Let  us  act  as  loving  children  should  do. 


EXTRACTS. 

God  seems,  as  it  were,  to  be  at  a  stand.  "  How  shall 
I  act  so  as  to  save  these  sinners,  and  yet  not  wrong 
myself  ? "  This  should  greatly  humble  us  for  our 
sins.  As  if  a  child  should  do  much  evil,  and  bring 
himself  into  grievous  troubles,  so  that  if  his  tender 
father  would  help  him  he  must  be  put  to  abundance 


INTERROGATION  AND  EXCLAMATION.          137 

of  difficulties,  and  is  fain  to  beat  his  brains,  and 
laboriously  study  how  he  shall  contrive  to  save  his 
poor,  foolish  child  from  utter  undoing.  Now,  if  the 
child  has  any  ingenuousness  in  him,  he  will  not  think, 
"  My  father's  anxiety  is  no  great  matter,  so  long  as  I 
am  delivered  ; "  but  he  will  cry — "  Alas,  this  will 
break  my  heart !  What  troubles  have  I  brought  my 
father  into !  I  cannot  bear  to  think  of  it  ? "  It 
should  be  thus  with  us  in  reference  to  our  God,  who 
in  this  text  speaketh  after  the  manner  of  men. — 
Jeremiah  Burroughs. 

In  the  second  century,  Celsus,  a  celebrated  adver 
sary  of  Christianity,  distorting  our  Lord's  words, 
complained,  "  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to 
make  the  most  horrible  and  dreadful  society ;  for  he 
calls  sinners,  and  not  the  righteous  ;  so  that  the  body 
he  came  to  assemble  is  a  body  of  profligates,  sepa 
rated  from  good  people,  among  whom  they  before 
were  mixed.  He  has  rejected  all  the  good,  and  col 
lected  all  the  bad."  "  True,"  said  Origen,  in  reply, 
"  our  Jesus  came  to  call  sinners — but  to  repentance. 
He  assembled  the  wicked — but  to  conyert  them  into 
new  men,  or  rather  to  change  them  into  angels.  We 
come  to  him  covetous,  he  makes  us  liberal ;  lascivi 
ous,  he  makes  us  chaste ;  violent,  he  makes  us  meek ; 
impious,  he  makes  us  religious." 

Regeneration  is  not  a  change  of  the  old  nature, 
but  an  introduction  of  a  new  nature.  Not  "  Ishmael 
changed,"  but  "  Isaac  born,"  is  the  son  of  the  promise. 


138  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

Whom  God  adopts,  he  anoints ;  whom  he  makes 
sons,  he  makes  saints. —  Watson. 

One  of  my  parishioners  at  East  Hampton,  con 
verted  after  having  lived  through  three  or  four 
revivals,  to  the  age  of  fifty,  and  having  given  up 
hope,  used  to  exclaim  for  several  weeks  after  his 
change,  "  Is  it  I  ?  Am  I  the  same  man  who  used  to 
think  it  so  hard  to  be  converted,  and  my  case  so 
hopeless?  Is  it  I?  Is  it  I?  Oh,  wonderful  I"— 
Dr.  Lyman  BeecKer. 


LXXXVIII. 

"  THEY  HATE  REFUSED  TO  RETUKN."— Jeremiah  v.  3 
HHHERE  is   about   all   men   the  primary  evil   of 


JL 


sm. 


This  is  greatly  increased  by  a  refusal  to  return  to 
their  allegiance. 

This  is  intensified  by  the  rejection  of  pressing 
invitations. 

I.   WHO   HAVE   REFUSED  TO  RETURN  ? 

1.  Those  who  have  said  as  much.     With  unusual 

honesty  or  presumption,  they  have  made 
public  declaration  that  they  will  never  quit 
their  sinful  ways. 

2.  Those  who  have  made  a  promise  to  repent,  but 

have  not  performed  it. 

8.  Those  who  have  offered  other  things  instead  of 
practical  return  to  God: — ceremonies,  re 
ligiousness,  morality,  and  the  like. 

4.  Those  who  have  only  returned  in  appearance. 

Formalists,  mere  professors,  and  hypocrites 
offer  the  counterfeit  for  the  genuine ;  and 
thus  in  a  veiled  manner  really  refuse  to 
repent. 

5.  Those  who  have  only  returned  in  part.     Hug 

(189) 


140  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

ging  some  sins  while  hanging  others  is  a 
wretched  method  of  continuing  rebellion 
while  feigning  submission. 

II.  WHAT  THIS  REFUSAL  UNVEILS. 

1.  An  intense  love  of  sin.     Suppose  the  prodigal 

had  refused  to  leave  the  famine-stricken 
country,  it  would  have  proved  his  insane 
attachment  to  those  with  whom  he  had 
spent  his  substance. 

2.  A  want  of  love  to  the  great  Father,  who  bids 

them  return. 

8.  A  disbelief  of  God:  they  neither  believe  in 
what  he  has  revealed  concerning  the  evil 
consequences  of  their  sin,  nor  in  what  he 
promises  as  to  the  benefit  of  returning 
from  it. 

4.  A  despising  of  God :  they  reject  his  counsel, 
his  command,  and  even  himself. 

6.  A  resolve  to  continue  in  evil.  This  is  their 
proud  ultimatum^  "they  have  refused  to 
return.'* 

6.  A  trifling  with  serious  concerns.  They  are  too 
busy,  too  fond  of  gaiety,  etc.  There  is 
time  enough  yet.  There  is  no  need  to  be 
so  earnest.  No  doubt  things  will  come 
right.  Thus  they  treat  God's  command  as 
a  light  matter. 

II.  WHAT  DEEPENS  THE  SIN  OF  THIS  REFUSAL? 

1.  When  correction  brings  no  repentance. 

2.  When  conscience  is  violated,  and  the  Spirit  of 


DECIDED   UNGODLINESS.  141 

God  is  resisted.  Repentance  is  seen  ./o  be 
right,  but  yet  refused :  duty  is  known  but 
declined. 

8.  When  repentance  is  known  to  be  the  happiest 
course,  and  yet  it  is  obstinately  neglected 
against  the  plainest  reasons. 

4.  When  this  obstinacy  is  long-continued,  and  is 
persevered  in  against  convictions  and  inward 
promptings. 

6.  When  vile  reasons  are  at  the  bottom :  such  as 
secret  sins,  which  the  sinner  dares  not  con 
fess  or  quit ;  or  the  fear  of  man,  which 
makes  the  mind  cowardly. 

EV.  WHAT  is  THE  KEAL  REASON  OF  THIS  REFUSAL? 

1.  It  may  be  ignorance,  but  that  can  be  only  in 

part,  for  it  is  plainly  a  man's  duty  to  return 
to  his  Lord.  No  mystery  surrounds  this 
simple  precept, — "  Return." 

2.  It  may  be  self-conceit :  perhaps  they  dream  that 

they  are  already  in  the  right  road. 
8.  It  is  at  times  sheer  recklessness.  The  man 
refuses  to  consider  his  own  best  interests. 
He  resolves  to  be  a  trifler ;  death  and  hell 
and  heaven  are  to  him  as  toys  to  sport 
with. 

4.  It   is  a  dislike  of  holiness.     That  lies  at  the 

bottom  of  it :  men  cannot  endure  humility, 
self-denial,  and  obedience  to  God. 

5.  It  is   a   preference  for  the  present  above  the 

eternal  future. 


142  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

Oh,  do  not  refuse  the  reasonable  reques » to  return 
when  God  tenderly  invites  you  to  come  to  himself  I 
Is  it  not  right  ?  Is  it  not  wise  ? 

Life  or  death  hangs  on  your  choice  1  Why  will 
you  die  ? 

Let  a  sweet  consent  be  given.  "Say,  "I  will 
arise,  and  go  unto  my  Father."  You  will  never 
regret  obedience  to  such  a  suggestion. 

What  is  >  he  riotous  living  of  the  far  country  com 
pared  with  the  joy  of  your  Father's  house. 

From  tl:  i  cross  the  Lord  Jesus  calls  on  you  to 
return.  r  .asten  home  I 


MORSELS. 

The  door  of  heaven  shuts  from  below,  not  from 
above.  "  Your  iniquities  have  separated,"  saith  the 
Lord. —  Williams,  of  Wern. 

Lord  Byron,  a  short  time  before  death,  was  heard 
to  say,  "Shall  I  sue  for  mercy?"  After  a  long 
pause,  he  added,  "Come,  come,  no  weakness;  let's 
be  a  man  to  the  last !  " 

The  reason  why  a  wicked  man  doth  not  turn  unto 
God  is  not  because  he  cannot  (though  he  cannot^, 
but  because  he  will  not.  He  cannot  say  at  the  day 
of  judgment,  "  Lord,  thou  knowest  I  did  my  best  to 
be  holy,  but  I  could  not."  The  man  that  had  not 
on  a  wedding-garment  could  not  say,  "  Lord,  I  was 
not  able  to  get  one."  But  he  was  "  speechless."— 
W.  Fenner. 


LXXXIX. 

"  ASK  FOB  THE  OLD  PATHS,  WHERE  IS  THE  GOOD  WAY,  AND 
WALK  THEREIN,  AND  YE  SHALL  FDO  REST  FOR  YOUR  SOULS." 

— Jeremiah  vi.  16. 

TT  is  the  distinguishing  feature  of  the  good  old 
•*•  way  that  in  it  we  find  rest  for  our  souls.  This 
is  one  of  the  tokens  by  which  we  may  discern  the 
false  from  the  true. 

Rest  was  the  promise  of  the  Saviour.  "I  will 
give  you  rest." 

Rest  is  the  point  in  which  the  law  failed.  Moses 
could  not  lead  the  people  into  Canaan,  neither  can 
the  works  of  the  law  conduct  us  into  the  rest  of 
God. 

Rest  has  been  enjoyed  by  believers,  and  it  is  now 
enjoyed  by  them. 

Rest  is  never  found  apart  from  the  gospel,  and 
faith  in  Jesus. 

Rest  comes  not  from  wealth,  health,  honor,  or  any 
other  earthly  thing. 

I.  IN  "THE  GOOD  WAY"   WE  FIND   BEST  IP  WB 

WALK   THEREIN. 

We  walk  by  faith  in  the  gospel  way,  and  are 
rested. 

1.  The  way  of  pardon  by  an  atonement  gives  rest 
to  the  conscience. 

(143) 


144  MY   SERMON  NOTES. 

2.  The  way  of  believing  the  Word  as  a  little  child 
gives  rest  to  the  understanding. 

8.  The  way  of  trusting  our  affairs  with  God  gives 
rest  to  the  mind. 

4.  The  way  of  obedience  to  divine  commands  gives 

rest  to  the  soul. 

5.  The  way  of  communion  with  Christ  gives  rest 

to  the  heart. 

It  is  no  little  matter  which  can  rest  the  desires, 
the  fears,  the  regrets,  the  questionings,  of  our  man 
hood  ;  but  gospel  doctrines,  promises,  and  precepts, 
and  the  gospel  spirit  accomplish  this. 

II.   REST     FOUND     BY     WALKING     IN     "THE     GOOD 
WAY"   IS   GOOD  FOB  THE   SOUL.  * 

Some  forms  of  rest  rust  and  injure  the  soul ;  but 
this  does  not. 

1.  It  brings  satisfaction,  but  not  self-satisfaction. 

2.  It  brings  a  sense  of  safety,  but  does  not  lead  to 

presumptuous  sin. 
8.  It  creates  content,  but  also  excites  desires  for 

progress. 
4.  It  removes  legal    fears,  but  supplies  superior 

motives  for  holiness. 

It  is  actually  beneficial  to  a  man  to  walk  in  the 
good  way,  for  as  a  saved  believer  his  possession  of 
salvation — 

Supplies  him  with  an  answer  to  the  bribes 
of  Satan ;    for  what  can  Satan  offer  which 
could  be  preferable  to  assured  salvation  ? 
Sets  him  free  from  personal  anxiety,  and  thus 


REST  AS  A  TEST.  145 

enables  him  to  serve  the  Lord  without  dis 
traction,  since  he  is  himself  saved. 

Engenders  intense  love  to  his  Saviour  for  his 
completed  work. 

Excites  him  to  holy  imitation  of  his  heavenly 
Father,  who  is  so  gracious  as  to  afford  rest 
to  the  weary. 

III.   REST   OP  THIS  KIND  SHOULD  BE  ENJOYED  NOW. 

It  is  so  enjoyed  by  many  of  us,  and  it  is  a  grievous 
error  when  it  is  not  the  case  with  all  real  Christians. 

1.  You  should  be  in  the  way,  know  that  you  are 

there,  and  try  to  keep  to  the  very  middle 
of  the  road.  Truly  believe  in  Jesus,  and 
perfect  rest  must  come.  "  Therefore,  being 
justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God : " 
Rom.  v.  1. 

2.  You  should  have  no   doubt  that  the   way   is 

good,  and  that  it  is  the  way  of  the  Lord. 

This  is  the  assurance  of  understanding. 
8.  You  should  lay  aside  all  anxious  care  because 

"  he  careth  for  you." 
4.  You  should  feel  an  intense  satisfaction  in  Jesus. 

You  will  do  so  unless  you  live  at  a  distance 

from  him,  and  so  miss  his  presence  and  smile. 

A  present  Christ  is  a  well  of  delight. 
6.  You  should  indulge  the  largest  anticipations 

concerning  your  future  blessedness,  both  in 

time  and  eternity. 

We   challenge    Romanists,   sacramentarians,   self- 
justiciaries,  and  the  like,  to  say  that  they  have  any 
2—10 


146  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

rest.  Rome  does  not  promise  it  even  to  her  own 
votaries,  either  in  this  world  or  in  the  world  to  come ; 
but  goes  on  saying  her  masses  for  the  repose  of  the 
souls  of  her  own  departed  cardinals,  who  evidently 
are  not  at  rest.  If  her  most  eminent  divines  go  to 
purgatory,  where  do  the  common  people  go  ? 

We  invite  all  the  laboring  and  laden  to  come  and 
try  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  see  if  he  does  not  rest  them 
at  once,  and  for  ever. 

We  bear  our  own  willing  testimony  to  the  sweet 
ness,  safety,  perpetuity,  and  truthfulness  of  the  rest 
of  faith. 


WAY-MARKS. 

It  is  called  "  the  good  way."  It  is  not  the  easy 
way :  the  idle  and  the  foolish  ask  for  that,  but  it  is 
not  worth  seeking  for,  since  it  leads  to  poverty  and 
perdition.  Neither  is  it  the  popular  way,  for  few 
there  be  that  find  it.  But  it  is  the  good  way,  made 
by  a  good  God,  in  infinite  goodness  to  his  creatures  ; 
paved  by  our  good  Lord  Jesus,  with  pains  and  labors 
immeasurable;  and  revealed  by  the  good  Spirit  to 
those  whose  eternal  good  he  seeks.  It  is  the  way  of 
holiness,  of  peace,  of  safety,  and  it  leads  to  heaven. 
Is  it  not  good  ?  It  has  been  traversed  by  the  best  of 
men  since  time  began,  and  the  unclean  do  not  pass 
over  it.  It  is  good  at  its  commencement,  for  at  its 
entrance  men  are  born  again ;  it  is  good  in  its  con 
tinuation,  for  they  are  righteous  who  hold  on  their 


REST    AS    A   TEST.  1  17 

way ;  and  it  is  good  in  its  termination,  for  it  leads 
to  perfection,  to  bliss,  to  God  himself. 

In  this  good  old  way  you  shall  find  rest  if  you 
have  never  enjoyed  it  before ;  travelling  you  shall 
rest,  as  certain  birds  are  said  to  rest  upon  the  wing. 
Joy  shall  be  upon  your  head,  peace  shall  prepare  the 
place  of  your  feet.  It  is  wisdom's  dominion,  and 
concerning  her  we  read,  "  Her  ways  are  ways  of 
pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  peace."  Rest  for 
the  conscience  comes  to  those  who  enter  God's  way 
of  salvation ;  rest  of  heart  arises  out  xof  their  love 
to  him  who  is  the  Way;  rest  of  brain  from  their 
acceptance  of  his  teaching ;  rest  of  desire  from  their 
satisfaction  with  his  person, — in  a  word,  the  soul 
rests  in  all  its  powers  and  faculties.  Nor  does  it 
alone  rest  in  the  present ;  the  future  is  guaranteed 
beyond  all  fear.— O.  H.  S. 

Here  there  is  a  well-beaten  track  under  our  feet. 
Let  us  keep  it.  It  may  not  be  quite  the  shortest 
way ;  it  may  not  take  us  through  all  the  grandeur 
and  sublimity  which  bolder  pedestrians  might  see: 
we  may  miss  a  picturesque  waterfall,  a  remarkable 
glacier,  a  charming  view :  but  the  track  will  bring 
us  safe  to  our  quarters  for  the  night. — Dr.  Dale. 

Dr.  Judson  once  sent  for  a  poor  Christian  convert, 
who  was  about  to  engage  in  something  which  he 
feared  would  not  be  for  her  spiritual  good.  "  Look 
here,"  he  said,  snatching  a  ruler  from  the  table,  and 
tracing  a  not  very  straight  line  upon  the  floor ;  "  here 


148  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

is  where  you  have  been  walking.  You  have  made  a 
crooked  track,  to  be  sure — out  of  the  path  half  the 
time ;  but  then  you  have  kept  near  it,  and  not  taken 
to  new  roads ;  and  you  have,  to  a  certain  extent, 
grown  in  grace.  And  now  here  you  stand.  You 
know  where  this  path  leads.  You  know  what  is 
before  you:  some  struggles,  some  sorrows,  and 
finally,  eternal  life,  and  a  crown  of  glory.  But  to 
the  left  branches  off  another  very  pleasant  road,  and 
along  the  air  floats,  rather  temptingly,  a  pretty  bub 
ble.  You  do  not  mean  to  leave  the  path  you  have 
walked  in  fifteen  years ;  you  only  want  to  step  aside, 
and  catch  the  bubble,  and  think  you  will  come  back 
again;  but  you  never  will."  The  solemn  warning 
was  not  given  in  vain. 


xc. 

"CAN  THE  ETHIOPIAN  CHANGE  ms  SKIN?"— Jer.  xiii.  23. 

TEREMIAH  had  spoken  to  these  people,  and  they 
*J  would  not  hear;  he  had  wept  over  them,  and 
they  would  not  consider.  Even  God's  judgments 
had  failed  to  move  them,  and  he  came  to  the  conclu 
sion  that  they  were  incorrigible,  and  could  no  more 
improve  than  a  black  man  could  become  white. 

Jeremiah's  figure  was  most  probably  suggested  to 
him  by  the  Ethiopians  in  the  king's  court,  one  of 
whom  attended  more  to  him  than  his  countrymen 
ever  did.  (Jer.  xxxviii.  7 — 13.)  Persons  of  color 
were  no  doubt  more  notable  among  an  exclusive 
people  like  the  Jews  than  they  would  be  among  us. 

I.    THE    QUESTION    AND    ITS    AN8WEB.       "  Can  the 

Ethiopian  change  his  skin?"     The  expected 
reply  is,  "  He  cannot  do  so." 

The  outward  impossibility  is  the  Ethiopian's  chang 
ing  the  color  of  his  own  skin :  a  physical  experiment 
never  yet  accomplished. 

The  inward  impossibility  is  a  change  of  heart  and 
character  by  one  "  accustomed  to  do  evil." 

Can  he — will  he — change  himself  ?    Never. 

(149) 


160  MY   SERMON   KOTES. 

The  difficulty  in  the  sinner's  case  lies — 

1.  In  the  thoroughness   of   the   operation.      The 

Ethiopian  can  wash,  or  paint ;  but  he  can 
not  change  that  which  is  part  and  parcel  of 
himself.  A  sinner  cannot  change  his  own 
nature. 

2.  In  the  fact  that  the  will  is  itself  diseased  by  sin. 

The  man  cannot  do  good,  for  he  has  no 
mind  to  it,  no  wish  that  way.  In  man's 
will  lies  the  essence  of  the  difficulty:  he 
can-not  means  that  he  does  not  will  to  have 
it  done.  He  is  morally  unable. 

8.  In  the  strength  of  habit.  Use  is  second  nature. 
Practice  in  transgression  has  forged  chains, 
and  bound  the  man  to  evil. 

4.  In  the  pleasure  of  sin,  which  fascinates  and 
enslaves  the  mind. 

*.  In  the  appetite  for  sin,  which  gathers  intensity 
from  indulgence.  Drunkenness,  lechery, 
covetousness,  &c.,  are  a  growing  force. 

6.  In  the  blindness  of  the  understanding,  which 

prevents  men  from  seeing  the  evil  of  their 
ways,  or  noting  their  danger.  Conscience 
is  drugged  into  a  deep  sleep,  out  of  which 
the  man  cannot  arouse  himself. 

7.  In  the  growing  hardness  of  the  heart,  which 

becomes  more  stolid  and  unbelieving  every 
day,  till  nothing  affects  it. 

8.  In  the  evident  fact  that  outward  means  prove 

ineffectual :  BJke  "  soap  "  and  "  nitre  "  on  a 


THE  ETHIOPIAN.  161 

negro,  they  fail  to  touch  the  living  black 
ness. 

For  all  these  reasons  we  answer  the  question  in 
the  negative :  sinners  can  no  more  renew  themselves 
than  Ethiopians  can  change  their  skins. 
Why  then  preach  to  them? 

It  is  Christ's  command,  and  we  are  bound  to 
obey.     Their  inability  does  not  hinder  our 
ministry,  for  power  goes  with  the  word. 
Why  tell  them  that  it  ii  their  duty  to  repent  ? 

Because  it  is  so :  moral  inability  is  no  excuse : 
the  law  is  not  to  be  lowered  because  man 
has  grown  too  evil  to  keep  it. 
Why  tell  them  of  this  moral  inability  f 

To  drive  them  to  self-despair,  and  make  their 
look  to  Christ. 

II.  ANOTHER  QUESTION  AND  ANSWER.  Can  the 
Ethiopian's  skin  be  changed  f  Or,  can  the 
sinner  be  made  anew  ? 

This  is  a  very  different  affair,  and  in  it  lies  the 
door  of  hope  for  men. 

Assuredly  the  Lord  can  make  a  black  man  white. 

The  greatest  sinner  can  be  transformed  into  a 
saint. 

The  grounds  for  so  believing  are  many. 

Here  are  a  few  of  them, — 

1.  All  things  are  possible  with  God.  Matt.  xix.  26. 

2.  The  Holy  Spirit  has  special  power  over  the 

human  heart. 
8.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  determined  to  work  this 


162  MY  BEBMON  NOTES. 

wonder,  and  for  this  purpose  he  came  into 
this  world  and  died,  and  rose  again.  «*  H« 
shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins:" 
Matt.  i.  21. 

4.  Many  such  jet-black  sinners  have  been  totally 
changed:  among  ourselves  there  are  such, 
and  in  all  places  such  may  be  found. 

6.  The  gospel  is  prepared  with  that  end.  It  does 
more  than  change  the  skin ;  for  it  affects 
the  head,  the  heart,  the  understanding,  the 
conscience,  the  motives,  the  desires,  the 
hopes,  the  fears;  and  through  these,  the 
whole  conduct,  so  that  those  who  were 
accustomed  to  do  evil  become  expert  in 
doing  good. 

6.  God  has  made  his  church  long  for  such  trans 
formations,  and  prayer  has  been  offered 
that  they  may  now  be  wrought.  Will  not 
the  Lord  hear  us  ? 

Herein  lies  hope  for  the  most  inveterate  sinner. 
Not  in  the  bath  of  baptism ; 
Nor  in  the  scalding  tears  of  remorse ; 
Nor  in  the  medicine  of  vows  arid  pledges : 
But  in  his  word  of  power,  who  doeth  great 
wonders  of  grace. 


CHIPS. 

Dirt  contracted  may  be  washed  off,  but  we  cannot 
alter  the  natural  color  of  a  hair  (Matt.  v.  36),  much 
less  of  the  skin;  and  so  impossible  is  it,  morally 


THE  ETHIOPIAN.  163 

Impossible,  to  reclaim  and  reform  these   people. — 
Matthew  Henry. 

If  it  were  possible  for  those  who  have  been  for 
ages  in  hell  to  return  to  the  earth,  (and  not  to  be 
regenerated,)  I  firmly  believe  that,  notwithstanding 
all  thsy  have  suffered  for  sin,  they  would  still  love  it, 
and  return  to  the  practice  of  it. — John  Ryland. 

The  Christian  sects  in  Syria  appear  to  consider  a 
true  case  of  Druze  conversion  to  Christianity  as  out 
of  the  question.  "  The  wolfs  whelps,"  they  say, 
"are  not  tamed."  The  conversion  of  many  sinners 
appears  equally  impossible,  and  yet  how  many  such 
triumphs  of  grace  are  recorded  as  that  which  John 
Newton  described  in  himself :  "  I  was  a  wild  beast 
on  the  coast  of  Africa  once,  but  the  Lord  Jesus 
caught  me,  and  tamed  me,  and  now  people  come  to 
see  me  as  they  would  go  to  look  at  the  lions  in  the 
tower. 

0  endless  misery ! 

I  labor  still,  but  still  in  vain, 

The  stains  of  sin  I  see 
Are  woaded  all,  or  dy'd  in  grain. 
There's  not  a  blot  will  stir  a  jot, 

For  all  that  I  can  do. 
There  is  no  hope  in  fuller's  soap, 

Though  I  add  nitre  too. 

1  many  ways  have  tried 
Have  often  soak'd  it  in  cold  fears ; 

And  when  a  time  I  spied, 
Fonr'd  upon  it  scalding  tears : 


154  MY    SEBMO.N 


Havt  rins'd  and  rubb'd,  and  scrap'd  and  scruob'd 

And  turn'd  it  up  and  down  ; 
Yet  can  I  not  wash  out  one  spot  ; 

It's  rather  fouler  grown. 

Can  there  no  help  be  had  P 
Lord,  thou  art  holy,  thou  art  pure  : 

Mine  heart  is  not  so  bad, 
So  foul,  but  thou  canst  cleanse  it,  sure. 
Speak,  blessed  Lord,  wilt  thou  afford 

Me  means  to  make  it  clean  P 
I  know  thou  wilt  :  thy  blood  was  spilt. 

Should  it  run  still  in  vain  P 

Christopher  Harvey,  in  "  Schola  (Vttt*. 


XOI. 

"  RETURN  TE  NOW  EVERY  ONE  FKOM  ms  EVIL  WAT,  AND  MAXI 
TOUR  WATS  AND  TOUR  DOINGS  GOOD." — Jeremiah  rriii.  11. 

THIS  is  the  voice  of  mercy,  anxious  about  each 
individual. 

Justice  might  slay  the  sinner  in  his  sin ;  but  mercy 
would  slay  the  sin,  and  spare  the  sinner. 

Yet  it  is  the  voice  of  holiness,  opposed  to  each 
man's  special  evil  way ;  and  claiming  of  each  man 
an  acceptable  life.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  not  come  to 
be  the  Minister  of  sin,  but  the  Destroyer  of  it. 

Let  us  hear  each  one  for  himself  on  this  occasion, 
for  have  we  not  every  one  some  evil  way  of  his 
own? 

It  is  Jehovah's  voice,  and  concerning  its  message 
we  enquire, — 

I.  WTAT?  "Return" 

This  includes  three  things. 

1.  Stop  I     Stand  still  I     Go  not  a  foot  further  ia 

your  evil  way. 

2.  Turn  round  I      Face   towards   God,    holiness, 

heaven,  &c. 

8.  Hasten  back  1  Practically  move  in  the  right 
way,  and  continue  in  that  good  course 
which  is  the  reverse  of  your  present  one. 


156  MY   SEKMON  NOTES. 


II.  WHEN  ?    "  Return  ye 

1.  Every  step  makes  so  much  more  to  retrace. 

2.  Every  step  makes  it  more  difficult  to  return. 

8.  Further  wandering  will  be  wanton  and  wilful  ; 

a  presumptuous   rejection  of  the  warning 

which  is  now  so  earnestly  given. 
4.  Never  again  may  you  have  an  opportunity  to 

return. 
There  is  nothing  certain  about  life  save  its 

uncertainty. 
Joy  is  being  lost  by  this  procrastination  ;  you 

are  missing  present  peace  of  mind. 
God  is  robbed  of  your  service,  and  you  can 

not  make  up  the  loss. 
Man  is  being  injured  by  your  example. 

Every  reason  pleads  for  now,  but  for  delay  there  is 
no  excuse. 

III.  WHO  ?     "  Return  ye  now  every  one" 

The  personality  of  the  call  to  each  hearer  of  it  is 
necessary,  for  — 

1.  Each  man  haa  his  own  peculiar  way  of  sin. 

2.  Each  man  is  apt  to  think  of  his  neighbor's  sin 

more  than  his  own. 
8.  Each  man  needs  a  special  effectual  call  ere  he 

will  turn. 
4.  Back  man  is  now  lovingly  invited  to  return. 

IV.  FROM  WHAT  ?     "  From  his  evil  way" 

"We  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way:" 


INDIVIDUAL   REPENTANCE.  167 

Is.  liii.  6.     This  way  of  your  own  you  are  to  return 
from, — 

From  your  own  personal  sin. 

From  your  constitutional  sin. 

From  your  most  frequent  sin. 

To  many  it  will  be  important  to  be  able  to  dis 
cover  this  favorite  sin. 

1.  It  is  that  into  which  you  are  most  easily  led. 

2.  It  is  that  which  has  already  been  most  indulged 

by  you. 

8.  It  is  that  about  which  you  are  most  irritated 
if  you  are  rebuked  concerning  it.  Darling 
sins  must  not  be  touched,  or  their  fond 
friends  grow  angry. 

4.  It  is  that  for  which  you  give  up  other  sins ;  a 

covetous  person  will  not  be  extravagant,  a 
hypocrite  will  deny  himself,  &c. 

5.  It  is  that  with  which  you  are  most  loth  to  part. 

6.  It  is  that  on  which  you  spend  most  money, 

energy,  &c. 

From  such  a  darling  sin  each  man  must  turn. 

V.  To  WHAT?    "Make  your  ways  and  ycur  doings 
good" 

Negative  religion  is  not  enough,  there   must  be 
positive  goodness. 

1.  Your  general  habits  or  ways  must  be  made 

good  as  a  whole. 

2.  Your  ways  in  reference  to  yourself. 

8.  Your  doings  towards  both  God  and  man 


168  MY    BE II WON    NOTKB. 

Personal  examination  of  the  utmost  importance. 

Practical  repentance  an  absolute  necessity. 

Yet  how  difficult  is  the  way  back.  To  descend 
into  sin  is  easy,  but  to  retrace  your  steps,  this  is  the 
work,  this  is  the  labor. 

Only  by  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  can  it  be  accom 
plished,  a  look  at  his  cross  breeds  more  repentance 
than  anything  in  the  world  besides. 

To  those  who  believe  in  Jesus,  he  will  send  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  lead  them  in  the  way  everlasting. 


EXPLANATORY. 

There  are  two  things  proper  to  a  man  that  return- 
eth :  first,  to  go  a  way  clean  contrary  to  the  way  he 
went  before ;  secondly,  to  tread  out  and  obliterate 
his  former  steps  .  .  .  First,  I  say,  he  must  go  a 
way  clean  contrary  to  his  former  way.  Many  men 
think  that  the  way  to  hell  is  but  a  little  out  of  the 
way  to  heaven,  so  that  a  man  in  a  small  time,  with 
small  ado,  may  pass  out  of  the  one  into  the  other ; 
but  they  are  much  deceived :  for  as  sin  is  more  than 
a  stepping  aside,  viz.,  a  plain,  a  direct  going  away 
from  God  ;  go  is  repentance,  or  the  forsaking  of  sin, 
more  than  a  little  coasting  out  of  one  way  into 
another.  Crossings  will  not  serve  ;  there  is  no  way, 
from  the  road  of  sin  to  the  place  we  seek,  but  to  go 
quite  back  again  the  way  we  came.  The  way  of 
pleasure  in  sin  must  be  changed  for  sorrow  for  the 
•ame.  He  that  hath  superstitiously  worshipped  false 
gods  must  n  w  as  devoutly  serve  the  true ;  the 


INDIVIDUAL    KEPKNTAJtfOK.  169 

tongue  that  hath  uttered  swearings,  and  spoken  blas 
phemies,  must  as  plentifully  sound  forth  the  name  of 
God  in  prayer  and  thanksgiving ;  the  covetous  man 
must  become  liberal;  the  oppressor  of  the  poor  as 
charitable  in  relieving  them ;  the  calumniator  of  his 
brother  a  tender  guarder  of  his  credit;  in  fine,  he 
that  hated  his  brother  before  must  now  love  him  as 
tenderly  as  himself. — Joseph  Mede. 

"  Now"  thou  resolvest,  "  I  will  hereafter  look  to  it 
better  than  I  have  done  before."  Alas,  this  will  for 
hereafter  is  no  will  I  First :  because  it  is  only  to 
shuffle  off  the  willing  of  the  present.  The  heart  is 
unwilling  to  obey,  and  therefore  it  puts  off  the  com 
mandment  to  the  future,  not  for  any  desire  that  it 
hath  to  do  it  hereafter,  but  only  because  it  is  un wil 
ing  to  do  it  for  the  present;  like  a  man  that  is 
unwilling  to  lend.  "  I'll  lend  you  hereafter,"  says 
he,  only  because  he  would  shuffle  off  lending  at  all. 
Secondly :  this  will  for  hereafter  is  no  will,  because 
it  goes  without  God's  will.  God's  will  is  now  ;  thine 
is  hereafter.  "  He  that  will  not  when  he  may,  when 
he  would  he  shall  have  'Nay.'"  Take  heed  lest 
when  thou  wouldst  fain  be  pardoned,  and  criest, 
"Lord,  open  to  me,"  thou  dost  find  thyself  too 
late. —  William  Fenner. 

A  missionary  in  India,  addressing  the  natives  on 
the  question  of  sin,  asked,  "What  say  your  own 
shasters  ? — 

•  I  a  sinner,  you  a  sinner,  sinners  every  one, 
8inU»» — none  are  found  who  dwell  beneath  the  ran.1 " 


160  MY   SEIiMON    NOTES. 

1.  He  that  leaves  not  all  sin ;  2.  He  that  leaves  sin 
only  outwardly;  3.  He  that  leaves  sin  because  he 
cannot  commit  it ;  4.  He  that  leaves  sin  out  of 
sinister  respects ;  5.  He  that  leaves  one  sin  for 
another ;  6.  He  that  leaves  sin  but  for  a  time ;  7.  He 
that  leaves  sin,  but  does  not  endeavor  to  subdue  it ; 
8.  He  that  so  turns  from  sin  as  not  to  turn  to  God — 
has  not  had  complete  repentance. — Clarkson. 

Many  would  kill  the  adder,  and  spare  the  viper 
'as  in  Hudibras,  they — 

"  Compound  for  sins  they  are  inclined  to, 
By  damning  those  they  have  no  mind  to."—  G.  H.  8 


XCII. 

CALL  UNTO  ME,  AND  I  WILL  ANSWER  THEE,  AND  SHEW 

THEE  GREAT  AND    MIGHTY  THINGS  WHICH   THOU   KNOWEST 

NOT."  —  Jeremiah  xxxiii.  3. 


is  a  prison-word:  let  those  who  are  spirit- 
ually  in  prison  prize  it. 

This  was  the  second  time  the  Lord  had  spoken  to 
the  prophet  while  in  the  dungeon.  God  leaves  not 
his  people  because  of  their  being  in  ill  odor  with  the 
world,  nor  even  when  they  are  put  into  prison. 
Nay,  rather,  he  doubles  his  visits  when  they  are  in 
double  trouble. 

The  first  prison-word  was  a  trial  of  Jeremiah's 
faith  by  obedience:  he  was  to  redeem  the  field  at 
Anathoth  ;  and  this  he  did. 

This  second  word  tested  his  faith  by  prayer,  and 
we  doubt  not  that  he  endured  the  test,  for  in  after 
days  he  saw  great  and  mighty  things,  even  as  the 
Lord  had  promised. 

The  text  belongs  to  every  afflicted  servant  of  God. 

It  encourages  him  in  a  threefold  manner,  — 

I.  To  CONTINUE  IN  PRAYETI.     "Call  unto  me!" 

1.  Pray,  though  you  have  prayed.     See  previoui 

chapter  at  16th  verse  and  onward. 
2-11 


102  MY   SERMON   NOTBB. 

2.  Pray   concerning    your    present    trouble.      In 

chapter  xxxii.  24  the  prophet  mentions 
"  the  mounts "  which  were  raised  against 
Jerusalem,  and  in  verse  4  of  this  chapter 
the  Lord  answers  on  that  very  point. 

3.  Pray  though  you  are  still  in  prison  after  prayer. 

If  deliverance  tarries,  make  your  prayers 
the  more  importunate. 

4.  Pray ;  for  the  word  of  the  Lord  comes  to  you 

with  this  command. 

5.  Pray;  for  the  Holy  Spirit  prompts  you,    and 

helps  you. 

We  need  this  precept  because  of  our  backward- 
nsss,  forgetfulness,  want  of  spirituality,  and  tendency 
to  unbelief. 

This  precept  is  sent  to  us  because  of  the  Lord's 
wisdom,  love,  and  condescending  thoughtfulness  for 
our  welfare. 

II.     TO    EXPECT    ANSWERS    TO    PRAYEE.      "I    will 

answer  thee,  and  shew  thee." 

Usually  the  promise  is  to  "  hear "  us :  but  when 
we  are  in  trouble  the  promise  is  special :  "  I  will 
answer  thee." 

The  Lord  will  answer  us  because — 

1.  He  has  appointed  prayer,  and  made  arrange 

ments  for  its  presentation  and  acceptance. 
He  could  not  have  meant  it  to  be  a  mere 
farce :  that  were  to  treat  us  as  fools. 

2.  He  prompts,  encourages,  and  quickens  prayer ; 

and  surely  he  would  never  mock  us  by  ex- 


PRAYER    ENCOURAGED.  163 

citing  desires  which  he  never  meant  to 
gratify.  Such  a  thought  well  nigh  blas 
phemes  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  indites  prayer 
in  the  heart. 

8.  His  nature  is  such  that  he  must  hear  his  chil 
dren. 

4.  He  has  given  his  promise  in  the  text ;  and  it  is 

often  repeated  elsewhere :  he  cannot  lie  01 
deny  himself. 

5.  He  has  aleady  answered  many  of  his  people, 

and  ourselves  also. 

We  know  that  the  only  limit  to  the  prevalence  of 
prayer  is  our  heavenly  Father's  wise  and  loving  will ; 
which  to  his  loving  children,  is  really  no  limit  what 
ever.  Let  us  ask  in  faith,  and  look  up  in  hope. 

III.   TO    EXPECT    GREAT    THINGS    AS    ANSWERS    TO 

PRAYER.  "I  will  shew  thee  great  and 
mighty  things." 

Read  the  previous  chapter  from  verse  18,  and 
learn  from  it  that  we  are  to  look  for  things — 

1.  Great  in  counsel :    full  of  wisdom  and  signifi 

cance. 

2.  Mighty  in  work :  revealing  might,  and  mightily 

effectual. 

8.  New  things  to  ourselves,  fresh  in  our  experi 
ence,  and  therefore  surprising.  We  may 
expect  the  unexpected. 

i.  Divine  things :  "  I  will  shew  thee."  These  are 
enumerated  in  the  verses  which  follow  the 


164  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

text,  even  to  the  end  of  the  chapter;  such 

as  these — 

Health  and  cure  (verse  6). 
Liberation  from  captivity  (verse  7). 
Forgiveness  of  iniquity  (verse  8). 

See  how  prayer  increases  the  knowledge  of  those 
who  know  best. 

See  how  saints  may  advance  in  experience  by  call 
ing  unto  God. 

See  how  sufferers  may  win  unexpected  deliver 
ances. 

See  how  workers  may  achieve  surprising  marvels. 

See  how  seekers  may  find  more  than  they  dare 
expect. 


FUBTHEB  ENCOURAGEMENTS. 

Many  years  ago,  the  late  Duchess  of  Gordon  called 
on  good  Harrington  Evans,  and  said,  "  I  have  just 
five  minutes,  but  I  could  not  leave  town  without 
calling  to  say  '  good-bye  I  "  "  Five  minutes,"  said 
Mr.  Evans,  with  that  solemn  and  impressive  manner 
by  which  he  was  distinguished;  "five  minutes! 
Then  pray  I  Pray  I  Pray!  Good  morning."  "I 
felt  so  struck  with  these  words,"  said  the  Duchess  to 
a  friend,  "  that  I  could  not  forget  them ;  and,  as  I 
thought  on  them,  I  was  led  to  study  prayer,  as  a 
means  of  grace  as  well  as  an  act  of  worship,  and 
eyer  after  my  chief  work  in  the  Lord's  service  be 
came  the  promotion  of 


PRAYER  ENCOURAGED.  165 

&  young  engineer  was  being  examined,  and  this 
question  was  put  to  him :  "  Suppose  you  have  a 
steam-pump  constructed  for  a  ship,  under  your  own 
supervision,  and  know  that  everything  is  in  perfect 
order,  yet,  when  you  throw  out  the  hose,  it  will  not 
draw ;  what  should  you  think ? "  "I  should  think, 
sir,  there  must  be  a  defect  somewhere."  "  But  such 
a  conclusion  is  not  admissible ;  for  the  supposition  is 
that  everything  is  perfect,  and  yet  that  the  pump 
will  not  work."  "  Then,  sir,"  replied  the  student,  "  I 
should  look  over  the  side  of  the  ship  to  see  if  the 
river  had  run  dry."  Even  so  it  would  appear  that 
if  true  prayer  is  not  answered  the  nature  of  God 
must  have  changed. 

God's  praying  people  get  to  know  much  more  of 
his  mind  than  others ;  like  as  John,  by  weeping,  got 
the  book  opened ;  and  Daniel,  by  prayer,  had  the 
king's  secret  revealed  unto  him  in  a  night  vision. 
44  Bene  orasse,  est  bene  studuisse"  said  Luther ;  who, 
as  he  had  much  communion  with  God  by  prayer,  so 
holy  truths  were  daily  more  and  more  made  known 
into  him  he  knew  not  how  or  which  way,  as  himself 
said. — Trapp. 

Sir  Walter  Raleigh  one  day  asking  a  favor  from 
Queen  Elizabeth,  the  latter  said  to  him,  "  Raleigh, 
when  will  you  leave  off  begging?"  To  which  he 
answered,  44  When  your  Majesty  leaves  off  giving." 
Ask  great  things  of  God.  Expect  great  things  from 
God.  Let  his  past  goodness  make  us  "  instant  in 
prayer — New  Cyclopaedia  of  llluttrative  Anecdote. 


166  MTV   SERMON   NOTES. 

Thomas  Brooks,  alluding  to  the  old  classical  myth 
of  Daedalus,  who,  being  imprisoned  in  the  island  of 
Crete,  made  wings  for  himself,  by  which  he  escaped 
to  Italy,  says,  "  Christians  must  do  as  Daedalus,  who, 
when  he  could  not  escape  by  a  way  upon  earth,  went 
by  a  way  of  heaven."  Holy  prayers  are  the  wings 
of  the  soul's  deliverance. 

The  dungeon  of  the  Mamertine,  where  a  probable 
tradition  declares  that  Paul  was  for  a  while  confined, 
is  entered  through  a  round  hole  in  the  floor  of  an 
other  dungeon  above.  The  uppermost  apartment  i* 
dark  enough,  but  the  lower  one  is  darkness  itself,  so 
that  the  apostle's  imprisonment  was  of  the  severest 
kind.  We  noticed,  however,  a  strange  fact : — in  the 
hard  floor  there  is  a  beautiful  fountain  of  clear  crystal 
water,  which  doubtless  was  as  fresh  in  Paul's  day  as 
it  is  now ;  of  course  the  Papists  believe  the  fountain 
to  be  miraculous ;  we  who  are  not  so  credulous  of 
traditions  rather  see  in  it  a  symbol  full  of  instruc 
tion  : — there  never  was  a  dungeon  for  God's  servants 
which  was  without  its  well  of  consolation. —  C.  R.  & 


XCIII. 

LET  JERUSALEM  COME  INTO  TOUB  MIND."  —  Jer.  11.  60. 


captives  in  Babylon  are  charged  to  remem- 
•*•      ber  Jerusalem,  — 

Because  the  temple  of  their  God  was  there  ; 
To  keep  them  from  settling  down  in  Babylon  ; 
To  make  them  long  for  the  holy  city  ;  and 
To  keep  them  prepared  to  return  to  it. 

There  are  equally  good  reasons  for  our  remember 
ing  the  New  Jerusalem. 

We  are  too  apt  to  forget  our  spiritual  citizenship, 
and  hence  we  will  meditate  on  our  text  under 
two  aspects. 

I.  THERE  is  A  JERUSALEM  HERE  BELO^J  WHICH 

SHOULD  COME  INTO  OUR  MEND. 

The  church  of  the  living  God  is  our  holy  city, 
the  city  of  the  Great  King,  and  we  should 
have  it  in  mind,  — 

1.  To  unite  with  its  citizens.    We  should  join  with 

them  in  open  profession  of  faith  in  Christ* 
in  Christian  love  and  mutual  help,  in  holy 
service,  worship,  communion,  &c. 

2.  To  pray  for  its  prosperity.      Whenever  it   is 

well  with  us  in  prayer,  we  should  let  the 

(167) 


168  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

cause  of  God  be  on  our  mind.  Our  win 
dow,  like  that  of  Daniel,  should  be  opened 
towards  Jerusalem. 

8.  To  labor  for  its  advancement.  We  should  re 
member  it  in  the  allotment  of  our  money, 
the  use  of  our  time,  the  employment  of  our 
talents,  the  exercise  of  our  influence,  &c. 

4.  To  prefer  its  privileges  above  earthly  gain.  We 
ought  to  consider  these  privileges  in  our 
choice  of  our  residence,  occupation,  &c. 
With  many  professors  this  is  a  very  small 
matter. 

6.  To  act  consistently  with  her  holy  character. 
We  must  not  dishonor  the  place  of  our 
citizenship.  God's  people  must  not  degrade 
his  name  and  cause  by  living  in  sin. 

6.  To  lament  its  declensions  and  transgressions. 
Remember  how  our  Lord  wept  over  Jerusa 
lem,  and  Paul  wept  over  enemies  in  the 
churches.  Luke  xix.  41.  Phil.  iii.  18. 

Oh,  that  all  Christians  took  a  deeper  interest  in 
the  church  of  God  I 

It  were  well  if  into  all  our  joys  and  sorrows  the 
cause  of  God  were  interwoven  like  a  thread  of  gold. 
He  is  a  poor  patriot  who  forgets  his  country,  and  he 
is  no  Christian  who  does  not  bear  the  church  upon 
his  heart. 

II.  THEBE  is  A  JERUSALEM  ABOVE  WHICH  SHOULD 

COME  INTO  MIND. 

1.  Let  the  believer's  thoughts  often  go  thither,  for 


SACRED  MEMORIES.  169 

Jesus  is  there,  our  departed  brethren  are 

there,  our  own  home  is  there,  and  thither 

our  hopes  and  desires  should  always  tend. 
It  should  be  upon  our  minds — 

In    our    earthly   enjoyments,   lest   we    grow 

worldly. 

In  our  daily  trials,  lest  we  grow  despondent. 
In   our  associations,  lest  we  idolize  present 

friendships. 

In  our  bereavements,  lest  we  grieve  inordi 
nately. 
In  old  age,  that  we  may  be  on  the  watch  fop 

the  home-going. 
In  death,  that  visions  of  glory  may  brighten 

our  last  hours. 
In  all  seasons,  that  our  conversation  may  be 

in  heaven. 
2.  Let  the  unconverted  permit  such  thoughts  to 

come  into  their  mind,  for  they  may  well 

enquire  of  themselves  thus, — 
What  if  I  never  enter  heaven  ? 
Shall  I  never  meet  my  godly  relatives  again? 
Where  then  must  I  go  ? 
Can  I  hope  that  my  present  life  will  lead  me 

to  heaven  ? 

Why  am  I  not  taking  the  right  path  ? 
Unbelievers  perish :  why  am  I  one  of  them  ? 

Do  I  wish  to  perish  ? 
How  can  I  hope  to  enter  heaven  if  I  do  not 

BO  much  as  think  about  it,  or  the  Lord  who 

reigns  in  it  ? 


170  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

Such  thoughts  will  come  to  our  minds  if  we  will 
let  them. 

Shall  we  not  open  the  door  of  our  minds  at  once, 
and  let  the  heavenly  visitors  enter  and  abide  ? 


REMINDERS. 

The  undying  love  of  the  Jews  for  their  Father 
land,  and  their  ineradicable  desire  to  return  to  it, 
are  displayed  in  an  affecting  manner  on  the  day  of 
atonement,  which  is  still  observed  by  them  with 
great  solemnity.  The  services  of  the  day  close  with 
the  beseeching  shout,  "  when  next  year  comes,  may 
we  all  be  in  Jerusalem  I "  We  could  almost  make 
this  prayer  our  own  as  we  think  of  the  "  Jerusalem 
above." 

I  have  been  endeavoring  to  establish  amongst  us 
what  are  called  "Aaron  and  Hur  Societies,"  f.  e., 
little  collections  of  four  or  five  or  more  persons,  who 
meet  before  service  on  Sabbath  morning  to  spend  an 
hour  in  prayer  for  a  blessing  on  the  minister  and  the 
ordinances.  They  began  on  New  Year's  Day,  and 
we  seemed  to  have  an  immediate  answer,  for  the 
meeting  was  unusually  solemn,  and  we  have  reason 
to  hope  that  the  word  was  not  preached  in  vain. — 
Dr.  Payson. 

My  soul  thall  pray  for  Zion  still, 

While  life  or  breath  remains : 
There  my  best  friends,  my  kindred  dwell ; 

There  God  my  Saviour  reigns. — Watt*. 


SACKED   MEMOBEB8.  171 

The  church  of  God  should  come  into  our  minds  as 
spontaneously  as  the  recollection  of  our  wife  or 
mother.  When  we  look  at  a  map  of  any  country, 
we  should  think  of  how  the  cause  of  God  prospers 
in  that  region.  If  we  make  a  profit  in  business,  one 
of  our  first  thoughts  should  be, — "now  I  can  do 
something  more  for  the  work  of  the  Lord."  When 
the  newspaper  is  read,  it  should  be  in  relation  to  the 
progress  of  the  kingdom  of  God.  This  one  thing 
should  tinge  all  other  things  with  its  own  color,  and 
draw  all  other  thoughts  into  its  net.  The  cause  of 
Christ  should  be  an  all-absorbing  maelstrom,  into 
which  all  our  thoughts  and  pursuits  should  be  drawn. 
A  man  of  one  idea  sees  the  universe  by  the  light  of 
it,  and  he  who  loves  the  church  of  God  with  all  his 
heart  will  do  the  same.  How  can  we  say,  "  Lord, 
remember  me,"  to  Christ  in  heaven,  if  we  do  not 
remember  his  church  on  earth  ? 

It  may  be  a  sin  to  long  for  death,  but  I  am  sure  it 
is  no  sin  to  long  for  heaven. — Matthew  Henry. 

Blessed  are  the  home-sick,  for  they  shall  come  at 
last  to  the  Father's  house. — Heinrich  Stillings. 

John  Eliot  was  once  on  a  visit  to  a  merchant,  and 
finding  him  in  his  counting-house,  where  he  saw 
books  of  business  on  the  table,  and  all  his  books  oi 
devotion  on  the  shelf,  he  said  to  him,  "  Sir,  here  is 
earth  on  the  table,  and  heaven  on  the  shelf.  Pray 
don't  think  so  much  of  the  table  as  altogether  to 
forget  the  shelf." 


172  ICY   SERMON   NOTES. 

"  Here  I  sit  the  whole  day  with  the  visage  of  the 
church  ever  before  me,  and  the  passage  '  Why  hast 
thou  made  all  the  sons  of  men  in  vain?'  How 
horrible  a  form  of  God's  anger  is  that  abominable 
kingdom  of  the  Roman  Antichrist  I  I  abhor  my  own 
hardness  of  heart  that  I  am  not  dissolved  in  tears, 
and  that  I  do  not  weep  fountains  of  tears  for  the 
slain  sons  of  my  people.  But  is  there  no  one  to 
arise,  and  cleave  to  God,  and  make  himself  a  wall 
for  the  house  of  Israel  in  this  last  day  of  his  wrath? 
God  have  mercy  on  us !  Wherefore,  be  thou  mean 
while  instant  as  a  minister  of  the  Word,  and  fortify 
the  walls  and  towers  of  Jerusalem  till  they  shall 
assail  thee. — From  a  letter  to  Melancthon,  written  by 
Luther  at  the  Cattle  of  the  Wartburg. 


XCIV. 

"  I  WILL  SETTLE  YOU  AFTER  YOUB  OLD  ESTATES,  AND  WILL 
DO  BETTER  UNTO  YOU  THAN  AT  YOUB  BEGINNINGS,  AND  Yl 
SHALL  KNOW  THAT  I  AM  THE  LOBD. — Ezekicl  XXXVi.  11. 

"\T7HEN  other  nations  fall  they  rise  no  more, 
*  *  but  to  the  covenanted  people  a  future  still 
remains. 

Even  the  land  given  by  covenant  has  an  entailed 
blessing  on  it,  for  these  words  are  to  the  "  mountains 
of  Israel." 

To  hypocrites  and  formalists  an  end  cometh ;  but 
true  children  of  God  rise  again  after  decays  and 
declensions.  As  saith  the  prophet,  "Rejoice  not 
against  me,  O  mine  enemy :  when  I  fall,  I  shall  arise ; 
when  I  sit  in  darkness,  the  Lord  shall  be  a  light  unto 
me : "  Micah  vii.  8. 

A  greater  blessing  than  that  which  they  have  lost 
may  yet  be  granted  to  restored  wanderers. 

The  text  contains  a  great  promise.  Oh,  that  we 
may  enjoy  it  I 

I.  WHAT  WAS  THERE  so  GOOD  IN  OUB  BEGIN 
NINGS? 

As  Israel's  land  in  the  beginning  flowed  with  milk 
and  honey,  so  our  first  estate  had  a  singular  richness 
about  it.  Oftentimes,  in  looking  back,  we  sing, — 

(173) 


174  MY   SKKMON 

"  Where  is  the  blessedness  I  knew 

When  first  I  saw  the  Lord? 
Where  is  the  soul-refreshing  view 
Of  Jesus,  and  his  Word? 

1.  We   enjoyed    a  vivid   sense    of  free  and  full 

forgiveness. 

2.  We  had  a  delicious  proof  of  the  joy  of  true 

religion. 

8.  We  gained  repeated  victories  over  sinful  incli 
nations,  and  outward  temptations ;  and  this 
made  us  jubilant  in  Christ. 

4.  We   felt  great   delight  in   prayer,   the  Word 

communion,  &c. 

5.  We  abounded  in  zeal  and  service,  and  the  joj 

of  the  Lord  was  our  strength. 

6.  We  were  in  our  first  love,  and  everything  was 

lively,  intense,  hopeful,  wonderful,  to  our 
humble,  happy  mind.  We  were  simple- 
hearted  and  confiding,  had  not  yet  found 
out  the  imperfections  of  our  brethren,  and 
were  too  humble  to  look  for  them.  We 
have  not  gained  much  by  losing  that  con 
fidence  if  in  its  room  we  have  received 
suspicion. 

We  read  of  "  the  first  ways  of  David :  "  2  Chron, 
xvii.  3.  We  are  bidden  to  do  our  "  first  works :  " 
Rev.  ii.  6. 

II.   CAN  WE  ENJOY  SOMETHING  BETTER  THAN  OUK 
BEGINNINGS  ? 

Assuredly  we  shall,  if  the   Lord  will  fulfil   this 


BETTER  THAN   AT  YOTJR   BEGINNINGS.          176 

promise ;  and  that  lie  is  sure  to  do  if  we  walk  more 
closely  with  him. 

1.  Our  faith  will  be  stronger,  more  steadfast,  and 
intelligent. 

2    Our  knowledge  will  be  fuller  and  deeper. 

3.  Our   love   will    be    more   constant,    practical, 

enduring. 

4.  Our  prayer  will  be  more  prevalent. 

5.  Our  usefulness  will  be  more  extended,  more 

abiding. 

6.  Our  whole  being  will  be  more  mature. 

We  are  to  shine  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect 
day.  Prov.  iv.  18. 

Growth  in  grace  brings  with  it  many  good  things? 

III.   HOW  CAN  WE  SECURE  THIS  BETTERNESS? 

There  must  be  a  re-settlement  according  to  our 
old  estates  in  our  own  souls,  and  then  there  will  be 
a  renewed  settlement  by  the  act  of  God. 

1.  We   must  return  to  our  first  simple  faith  in 

Jesus. 

2.  We  must  quit  the  sins  which  alienated  us  from 

God. 
3."  We  must  be  more  thorough,  and  earnest. 

4.  We    must    seek  after  closer  fellowship    with 

Christ. 

5.  We  must  more  resolutely  strive  to  advance  in 

divine  things. 

Admire  the  liberality  of  our  God  I  He  promise! 
to  do  better  unto  us  than  at  our  beginnings.  What 
more  can  he  do  ? 


176  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

See  the  constancy  of  his  love — how  he  maintains 
ancient  settlements,  and  restores  old  estates  I  Cove 
nant  heritages  are  entailed  upon  their  holders  by  the 
unchanging  grace  of  God. 

Mark  with  what  tenderness  he  woos  us  to  return 
to  his  fellowship :  he  draws,  he  allures,  he  wins  by 
greatness  of  love  I 

Let  us,  in  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  return 
to  him ! 

DOOBS  OF  HOPE. 

God's  dealings  with  his  people  are  best  at  last; 
they  may  have  much  kindness  and  mercy  in  the 
morning,  but  they  shall  have  more  in  the  evening. 
"  I  will  settle  you  after  your  old  estates,"  &c.  The 
Jews  had  the  best  wine  at  last ;  they  had  milk  and 
honey  before,  but  the  feast  of  fat  things  full  of 
marrow,  and  of  wines  on  the  lees  well-refined,  were 
at  the  latter  end  of  their  day  given  in ;  they  had 
Christ  and  the  Gospel  at  last.  Abraham  had  much 
of  the  world  at  first,  and  his  Isaac  afterward.  "  God 
blessed  the  latter  end  of  Job  more  than  his  begin 
ning."  Simeon  in  his  latter  days  saw  Christ,  and 
had  him  in  his  arms. —  Wm.  Greenhill. 

No  instance  of  backsliding  can  be  more  aggravated 
than  that  of  the  apostle  Peter,  and  yet  no  recovery 
was  more  signal.  While  that  stands  upon  record,  no 
traitor  to  his  Lord  and  Master  is  justified  in  saying. 
"  The  door  of  hope  is  closed  against  rry  return."  The 
Scriptures  contain  several  instances  in  which  the 


BETTEB   THAN  AT  YOUR   BEGINNINGS.         177 

lamentable  and  disgraceful  lapses  of  God's  people 
are  shown  to  be  followed  by  their  recovery  and 
restoration.  Frequently  such  characters,  after  they 
have  been  corrected  and  chastened  of  the  Lord,  have 
risen  to  stations  of  great  eminence  in  his  church. 
David  in  the  Old  Testament,  and  Peter  in  the  New, 
while  both  illustrating  the  shame  and  sorrow  of  a 
backsliding  state,  stand  forth  as  monuments  of  that 
sovereign  grace  which  can  forgive  the  penitent  wan 
derer,  and  once  more  infuse  into  his  heart  "the  peace 
that  passeth  all  understanding." — Leif child. 

Fractures   well  cured   make  us   more    strong.— 
Herbert. 

The  joy  of  conversation  is  great — 

44  Earth  has  a  joy  unknown  to  heaven, 
The  new-born  peace  of  sins  forgiven ! 
Tears  of  such  pure  and  deep  delight, 
Ye  angels  !  never  dimmed  your  sight : " 

but  there  are  wondrous  joys  as  yet  unknown  to  the 
inexperienced  soul,  and  concerning  which  the  most 
advanced  believer  has  to  sing — 

44  I  have  a  heritage  of  joy 

That  yet  I  must  not  see : 
The  hand  that  bled  to  make  it  mine, 
Is  keeping  it  for  me." 

Those  that  will  not  return  to  the  duties  they  have 
neglected,  cannot  expect  to  return  to  the  comforts 
they  have  lost. —  G-.  8.  Bowes. 

He  is  a  skilful  physician  indeed  who,  finding  a 
man  sorely  afflicted,  not  only  succeeds  in  restoring 
2—12 


178  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

him  to  health,  but  actually  causes  him  to  be  better 
than  he  was  before,  dealing  with  his  medicine,  not 
only  with  the  disease  which  caused  pain,  but  with 
some  other  which  lay  deeper,  but  had  scarcely  been 
perceived  by  the  patient.  Such  is  the  medicine  of 
mercy.  Thus  graciously  doth  God  deal  with  repent 
ing  sinners.  He  must  be  worse  than  a  brute  beast 
who  would  turn  this  into  an  argument  for  sinning. 
A  true  child  of  God  feels  the  water  standing  in  hi* 
eyes  when  he  thinks  of  such  superabounding  love. 


xcv. 

14  Am>  1  WILL  MULTIPLY  THE  FRUIT  OP  THE  TREE,  AND  THB 
INCREASE  OF  THE  FIELD,  THAT  YE  SHALL  RECEIVE  NO  MORE 
REPROACH  OF  FAMINE  AMONG  THE  HEATHEN. 

"THEN  SHALL  YE  REMEMBER  YOUR  OWN  EVIL  WAYS,  AND 
YOUR  DOINGS  THAT  WERE  NOT  GOOD,  AND  SHALL  LOATHE 
YOURSELVES  IN  YOUR  OWN  SIGHT  FOR  YOUR  INIQUITIES, 
AND  FOR  YOUR  ABOMINATIONS."— Ezekfel  XXXVi.  30,  81. 

r  •"'HE  day  of  manifested  mercy  is  to  be  the  day  of 
•••     hearty  repentance.    "  Then."    When  God  loads 
you  with  benefits  you  shall  loathe  yourselves. 

The  Lord  speaks  as  one  who  is  supreme  in  the 
region  of  free  agency,  and  able  to  work  his  will  with 
human  minds :  "  Then  shall  ye"  etc. 

His  processes  of  grace  are  such  as,  in  the  nature 
of  things,  lead  up  to  the  end  which  he  proposes. 

He  declares  that  he  will  conquer  by  love, — love  so 
wonderful  that  the  objects  of  it  must  of  necessity 
yield  to  its  power,  and  change  their  minds  and  their 
conduct. 

Repentance  is  wrought  in  the  heart  by  a  sense  of 
love  divine. 

This  sets  repentance  in  its  true  light,  and  helps  ng 
to  meet  a  great  many  mistakes  which  have  darkened 
this  subject.  Many  are  kept  from  Christ  and  hope 
by  misapprehensions  of  this  matter.  They  have — 

(179) 


180  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

I.  MISTAKEN  IDEAS  OF  WHAT  REPENTANCE  IB. 
They  confound  it  with — 

1.  Morbid  self-accusation,  which  is  the   fruit   of 

dyspepsia,  or  melancholy,  or  insanity.  This 
is  an  infirmity  of  mind,  and  not  a  grace  of 
the  Spirit.  A  physician  may  here  do  more 
than  a  divine. 

2.  Unbelief,  despondency,  despair:  which  are  not 

even  a  help  to  repentance,  but  tend  rather 
to  harden  the  heart. 

8.  Dread  of  hell,  and  sense  of  wrath  :  which  might 
occur  even  to  devils,  and  yet  would  not 
cause  them  to  repent.  A  measure  of  this 
may  go  with  repentance,  but  it  is  no  part 
of  it. 

4.  Satanic  temptations.  These  are  by  no  means 
like  to  repentance,  which  is  the  fruit  of  the 
Spirit. 

6.  A  complete  knowledge  of  the  guilt  of  sin; 
which  even  advanced  saints  have  not  yet 
obtained. 

6.  Entire  abstinence  from  all  sin, — a  consumma 
tion  devoutly  to  be  wished,  but  by  no 
means  included  in  repentance. 

It  is  a  hatred  of  evil  }  wrought  by  a  sense 

a  sense  of  shame  of  divine  love, 

a  longing  to  avoid  sin  ) 

II.  MISTAKEN  IDEAS  OF  THE  PLACE  WHICH  RE 

PENTANCE  OCCUPIES. 
1.  It  is  looked  ipon  by  some  as  a  procuring  cauM 


MISTAKEN   NOTIONS   ABOUT   REPENTANCE.      181 

of  grace,  as  if  repentance  merited  remission : 
a  grave  error. 

2.  It  is  wrongly  viewed  by  others  as  a  preparation 
for  grace ;  a  human  goodness  laying  the 
foundation  for  mercy,  a  meeting  of  God 
half  way  ;  this  is  a  deadly  error. 

8.  It  is  treated  as  a  sort  of  qualification  for  believ 
ing,  and  even  as  the  ground  for  believing : 
all  which  is  legality,  and  contrary  to  pure 
gospel  truth. 

4.  Others  treat  it  as  the  argument  for  peace  of 
mind.  They  have  repented  so  much,  and 
it  must  be  all  right.  This  is  to  build  our 
confidence  upon  a  false  foundation. 

Repentance  attends  faith,  and  is  a  precious  gift  of 
the  Spirit  of  God. 

III.  MISTAKEN  IDEAS  OP  THE  WAY  IN  WHICH  IT 

IS  PRODUCED  IN  THE  HEABT. 

It  is  not  produced  by  a  distinct  and  immediate 
attempt  to  repent. 

Nor  by  strong  excitement  at  revival  meetings. 

Nor  by  meditating  upon  sin,  and  death,  and  hell, 
etc. 

But  the  God  of  all  grace  produces  it — 

1.  By  his  free  grace,  which  by  its  action  renews 

the  heart  (verse  26). 

2.  By  bringing  his  great  mercy  to  our  mind. 

8.  By  making  us  receive  new  mercy  (verses 
28— 80X 


182  MY    SERMON   NOTES 

4.  By  revealing  himself  and  his  methods  of  grace 
(verse  32). 

Every  gospel  truth  urges  repentance  upon  the  re 
generate.  Election,  redemption,  justification,  adop 
tion,  eternal  love,  etc.,  are  all  arguments  for  loathing 
every  evil  way. 

Every  gospel  privilege  makes  us  loathe  sin: 
prayer,  praise,  the  reading  of  Scripture,  the  fellow 
ship  of  saints,  the  table  of  the  Lord,  etc. 

Every  gospel  hope  purifies  us  from  sin,  whether  it 
be  a  hope  for  more  grace  in  this  world,  or  for  glory 
in  the  next. 

Oh,  that  we  might  feel  the  touch  of  love,  and  weep 
ourselves  away  for  having  grieved  our  Lord !  This 
would  work  in  us  a  revenge  against  all  our  sins,  and 
lead  us  to  entire  consecration  to  our  holy  Lord. 


RECTIFICATIONS. 

There  are  no  arguments  like  those  that  are  drawn 
from  the  consideration  of  the  great  and  glorious 
things  Christ  hath  done  for  you ;  and  if  such  will 
not  take  with  you,  and  win  upon  you,  I  do  not 
think  the  throwing  of  hell-fire  in  your  faces  will 
ever  do  it. — Thomas  Brooks. 

The  Roman  Catholic  definition  of  penitence  is  not 
e  bad  one,  though  they  draw  bad  conclusions  from 
it — "  Confessio  0m,  contritio  cordis,  satisfactio  vitce  " — 
that  is,  for  true  repentance  there  should  be  confes 
sion  with  the  mouth,  grieving  in  the  heart,  and 


MISTAKEN   NOTIONS  ABOUT  REPENTANCE.      183 

amendment  made  for  our  faults  as  far  as  possible  in 
our  life. — Richard  Glover. 

Repentance, — the  tear  dropped  from  the  eye  of 
faith. 

God's  loving  kindnesses  and  mercies  do  work  more 
with  sinners  than  his  judgments  do.  All  the  time 
the  Jews  were  in  Babylon,  their  hearts  were  never 
so  affected  for  their  sins  as  after  God  brought  them 
out,  settled  them  in  Canaan,  and  showed  much  love 
unto  them;  then  they  should  remember  their  evil 
ways,  before  they  minded  them  not;  then  they 
should  loathe  themselves.  Mercies  in  Zion  are  more 
efficacious  with  sinners  than  judgments  in  Babylon; 
God's  favor  melts  hard  hearts  sooner  than  the  fire  of 
his  indignation ;  his  kindness  is  very  penetrative,  it 
gets  into  the  hearts  of  sinners  sooner  than  his  threats 
and  frowns ;  it  is  like  a  small  soaking  rain,  which 
goes  to  the  roots  of  things,  whereas  a  dashing  rain 
runs  away,  and  does  little  good.  It  was  David's 
kindness  that  brake  the  heart  of  Saul,  1  Sam.  xxiv. ; 
and  it  is  God's  kindness  which  breaks  the  hearts  of 
sinners.  The  milk  and  honey  of  the  gospel  affect 
the  hearts  of  sinners  more  than  the  gall  and  worm 
wood  of  the  law ;  Christ  on  Mount  Zion  brings  more 
to  repentance  than  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai.—  William 
Greenhill. 

Cowper,  the  poet,  in  his  own  memoirs  of  his  early 
life,  describes  the  time  when  he  reflected  on  the 
necessity  of  repentance.  "  I  knew  that  many  per- 
sons  had  spoken  of  shedding  tears  for  sin ;  but  when 


184  MY   SBftMON   NOTES. 

I  asked  myself  whether  the  time  would  ever  come 
when  I  should  weep  for  mine,  it  seemed  to  me  that 
a  stone  might  sooner  do  it.  Not  knowing  that  Christ 
was  exalted  to  give  repentance,  I  despaired  of  ever 
attaining  it."  A  friend  came  to  his  bed-side,  and 
declared  to  him  the  gospel.  He  insisted  on  the  all- 
atoning  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Jesus,  arid  his  right 
eousness  for  our  justification.  "  Then,"  says  Cowper, 
"while  I  heard  this  part  of  his  discourse,  and  the 
Scriptures  on  which  he  founded  it,  my  heart  began 
to  burn  within  me;  my  soul  was  pierced  with  a 
sense  of  my  bitter  ingratitude  to  so  merciful  a 
Saviour;  and  these  tears,  which  I  thought  impossible, 
burst  forth  freely." 

"  Some  people,"  says  Philip  Henry,  "  do  not  wish 
to  hear  much  of  repentance,  but  I  think  it  so  neces 
sary  that,  if  I  should  die  in  the  pulpit,  I  wish  to  die 
preaching  repentance ;  and  if  out  of  the  pulpit, 
practising  it." 


XCVI. 

**  BUT  THE  WTRT  PLACES  THEREOF  AND  THE  MARSHES  THERE 
OF  SHALL  NOT  BE  HEALED  ;  THEY  SHALL  BE  GIVEN  TO  SALT." 

—Ezekiel  xlvii.  11. 

E  prophet  saw  in  vision  the  flow  of  the  life- 
giving  river,  and  marked  its  wonderful   and 
beneficial  effects. 

Let  the  chapter  be  read,  and  a  brief  abstract  of  it 
be  given. 

The  prophet  also  observed  that  here  and  there  the 
river  carried  no  blessing :  there  were  marshes  which 
remained  as  barren  as  ever. 

I.  THERE   ABE   SOME   MEN   WHOM   THE   GOSPEL 

DOES  NOT  BLESS. 

1.  It  stagnates  in  them :  they  hear  in  vain ;  learn 

but  do  not  practise ;  feel  but  do  not  decide ; 
resolve  but  do  not  perform. 

2.  It  mingles  with  their  corruptions,  as  clear  water 

with  the  mire  of  the  marshes.  They  see 
with  blinded  eye,  understand  in  a  carnal 
manner,  and  receive  truth  but  not  in  the 
power  of  it. 

8.  It  becomes  food  for  their  sins,  even  as  rank 
sour  grass  is  produced  by  the  stagnant 
waters  of  "miry  places." 

185) 


l£t)  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

Their  unbelief  makes  mysteries  into  apologies 

for  infidelity. 
Their  enmity  is  stirred  by  the  sovereignty  of 

grace. 
Their  impenitence  takes  liberties  from  grace, 

and  makes  excuses  out  of  divine  mercy. 
Their   carnal   security  feeds   on   the   fact  of 

having  heard  the  gospel. 
It  makes  them  worse  and  worse.     The   more 

rain,  the  more  mire. 
The  more  grace  misused,  the  more  wicked  the 

heart. 
The  more  unsanctified  knowledge,  the  greater 

the  capacity  for  evil. 
The  more  false  profession,  the  more  treachery. 

Li.   SOME   OF   THESE  WE  HAVE  KNOWN. 

These  marshes  are  at  no  great  distance.    They  con 
stitute  an  eye-sore,  and  a  heart-sore,  near  at  hand. 

1.  The  talkative  man,  who  lives  in  sin :  flooded 

with    knowledge,    but    destitute   of  love : 
fluent  expression  but  no  experience. 

2.  Those  critics  who  note  only  the  faults  of  Chris 

tians,  and  are  quick  to  dwell  on  them ;  but 

are  false  themselves. 
8.  Those  who  receive  orthodox  truth,  and  yet  love 

the  world. 
4.  Those  who  feel  impressed  and  moved,  but  never 

obey  the  word.     They  delight  to  hear  the 

gospel,  and  only  the  gospel,  and  yet  they 

have  no  spiritual  life. 


MARBHEB.  187 

6.  Those  who  are  mere  officials,  and  attend  to 
religion  in  a  mechanical  manner.  Judas  is 
both  treasurer  and  traitor,  apostle  and 
apostate.  His  descendants  are  among  us. 

III.  SUCH  PERSONS  ARE    IN    A    TERRIBLE    PLIGHT. 

Their  condition  is  more  than  commonly  dreadful. 

1.  Because  they  are  not  aware  of  it:  they  think  it 

is  well  with  them. 

2.  Because  the   ordinary   means  of  blessing  men 

have  failed  in  their  case.  That  which  is  a 
river  of  life  to  others  is  not  so  to  them. 

3.  In   some  instances  the  very  best  means  have 

failed.  A  special  river  of  gracious  oppor 
tunity  has  flowed  down  to  them,  but  ita 
streams  have  visited  them  in  vain. 

4.  No  known  means  now  remain :     "  What  shall  I 

do  unto  thee  ?  "  What  more  can  be  hoped 
for  from  the  economy  of  mercy  ? 

5.  Their  ruin  appears  certain :  they  will  be  given 

over;  left  to  themselves  to  be  barren 
marshes. 

6.  Their  ruin  is  as  terrible  as  it  is  sure  :  much  like 

that  of  the  cities  of  the  plain — given  to 
salt ;  only  their  doom  will  be  less  tolerable 
than  that  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah. 

IV.  FROM  THESE  WE  MAY  LEARN — 

1.  A  lesson  of  warning,  lest  we  ourselves  be 
visibly  visited  by  grace-streams,  and  yet 
never  profit  thereby. 


188  MY  SERMON  KOTBS. 

2.  A  lesson  of  arousing,  lest  we  rest  in  ordinances, 
which  in  themselves  are  not  necessarily  a 
saving  blessing. 

8.  A  lesson  of  gratitude :  if  we  are  indeed  healed 
by  the  life-river,  let  us  bless  the  effectual 
grace  of  the  Lord  our  God. 

4.  A  lesson  of  quickening  to  ministers  and  other 
workers,  that  they  may  look  well  to  the 
results  of  their  labor,  and  not  be  making 
marshes  where  they  wish  to  create  fields 
rich  with  harvest. 


APROPOS. 

No  persons  appear  less  likely  to  be  saved  than 
your  religious  unbelievers.  They  wear  an  armor  of 
proof.  You  cannot  tell  them  anything  new  and 
striking,  their  heads  are  helmeted  with  religious 
knowledge ;  you  cannot  touch  their  hearts,  for  they 
wear  the  breast-plate  of  gospel-hardening.  They 
bow  assent  to  every  truth,  and  yet  believe  nothing  ; 
they  attend  to  every  religious  observance,  and  yet 
have  no  religion.  No  other  suit  of  plate  armor  is 
one  half  so  effective  for  warding  off  the  strokes  of 
truth  as  that  which  is  forged  in  the  arsenals  of  reli 
gion.  I  have  more  hope  of  an  avowed  infidel  than  of 
a  gospel-proof  hearer. — C.  H.  S. 

Either  the  waters  came  not  to  these  marshes ;  or 
if  they  did,  they  refused  them,  and  so  were  given  to 
salt,  made  like  Sodom,  barren  and  accursed.  Some 
places  hive  not  the  waters  of  the  sanctuary,  the 


MAKSHE8.  189 

doctrine  of  the  gospel,  and  they  are  barren,  and 
perish  for  want  of  the  same,  as  Tyre  and  Sidon. 
Other  places  have  them,  and  because  they  are  im 
penitent,  and  will  not  receive  the  truth  with  the  love 
of  it,  because  they  will  not  drink  in  these  waters, 
therefore  they  are  given  to  salt,  they  are  barren,  and 
must  perish.  So  it  was  with  Capernaum  and  Jeru 
salem  (Matt.  xi.  23,  and  xxiii.  37,  38) ;  and  so  is  it 
with  many  places  in  this  nation,  I  fear. —  William 
Q-reenhilL 

Certain  persons  are  to  be  met  with,  at  revival 
services,  who  are  the  first  to  enter  the  enquiry-room, 
but  when  full  enquiry  is  made  about  their  history  it 
will  be  found  that  they  are  old  practitioners,  and 
have  undergone  conversion  of  a  sort  many  times 
before.  These  are  the  plague  and  disgrace  of  a 
religious  awakening.  Easily  affected,  their  piety 
itself  is  an  affectation:  they  are  not  exactly  hypo 
crites,  but  yet  there  is  so  little  depth  in  them  that 
they  are  next  door  to  it.  We  heard  of  one  who  had 
been  healed  of  lameness,  so  he  said,  but  within  a 
few  days  he  took  to  his  crutches  again,  and  thereby 
cast  grave  doubt  upon  the  professed  healer.  Even 
thus  do  these  wretched  converts  raise  a  cry  against 
admirable  movements.  They  are  a  sort  of  people 
whom  even  the  gospel  does  not  bless, — marshes, 
which  even  the  river  of  life  does  not  fertilize. 

Who  is  the  most  miserable  man  on  earth,  and 
whither  shall  we  go  to  seek  him  ?  Not  to  the  tavern ; 
not  *x>  ths  theatre ;  not  even  to  the  brothel ;  but  to 


190  MY    BttUMON    NOTES. 

the  church  I  That  man,  who  has  sat,  Sabbath  after 
Sabbath,  under  the  awakening  and  affecting  calls  of 
the  gospel,  and  has  hardened  his  heart  against  these 
calls,  he  is  the  man  whose  condition  is  the  most 
desperate  of  all  others.  "  Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin ! 
woe  unto  thee,  Bethsaida  I  And  thou,  Capernaum, 
which  art  exalted  to  heaven,  shall  be  thrust  down  to 
hell."— Richard  Cecil 

The  Latins  used  to  say,  "  The  corruption  ot  what 
is  best  is  the  worst  of  all  things." 

Of  all  compounds  of  human  weakness  and  de 
pravity,  the  most  repulsive  is  a  bonfire  of  religious 
cant,  which  is  all  feeling  and  no  principle,  all  talk 
and  no  character,  all  prayer  and  no  life,  all  Sunday 
and  no  week-day.  "  Ye  whited  sepulchres  ! "  "  Ye 
generation  of  vipers  !  "  The  holiest  of  men  join  the 
indignant  outcry  of  the  world  against  such  nauseat 
ing  hypocrisy.  That  is  a  wise  and  always  timely 
petition  of  the  Church  of  England :  "  From  the 
deceits  of  the  world,  from  the  crafts  of  the  devil, 
good  Lord,  deliver  us  I  " — Austin  Phelpt. 


xcvn. 

"  Hia  THOUGHTS  TROUBLED  HIM." — Dan.  v.  6. 

nPO  many  men  thinking  is  an  unusual  employ- 
-*-  ment. 

Yet  it  is  a  distinction  of  man  that  he  can  think. 

No  wonder  that  when  thought  is  forced  on  some 
men  they  are  troubled. 

This  trouble  from  thought  is  salutary :  by  it  con 
viction  and  conversion  may  come ;  and,  in  any  case, 
troubled  thought  is  as  the  sounding  of  the  tocsin, 
arousing  the  mind,  and  warning  the  soul. 

Let  us  think  of  Belshazzar,  and  of  ourselves.  Of 
us,  too,  it  may  have  been  said,  "His  thoughts 
troubled  him."  We  must  be  in  a  bad  way  if  we 
dare  not  face  our  own  thoughts  about  ourselves. 
What  must  God's  thoughts  of  us  be? 

I.   IT  DID  NOT  APPEAR  LIKELY  THAT  HIS  THOUGHTS 
WOULD  TROUBLE   HIM. 

1.  He  was  an  irresponsible  and  reckless  monarch. 

He  came  of  a  fierce  nation,  and  was  born 
of  a  father  who  had  been  punished  for  his 
haughty  spirit. 

2.  He  had  hardened  his  heart  with  pri  ie  (verses 

22  and  23).  Daniel  said,  "  thou  hast  lifted 
up  thyself  against  the  Lord  of  heaven." 

(191) 


192  MY   8EKMON   HOTJfiU. 

3.  He  was  drinking  wine,  and  it  had  worked  upon 

him  (verse  2). 

4.  He  was  rioting  in  gay  company :  "  his  princes, 

his  wives,  and  his  concubines."  Such  com 
rades  as  these  usually  chase  all  thought 
away,  and  help  their  leader  in  his  reck 
lessness. 

6.  He  was  venturing  far  in  profanity  (verse  8)  ; 
daring  to  abuse  the  sacred  vessels,  in  his 
banquets,  as  an  expression  of  his  contempt 
for  Israel's  God,  whom  he  despised  in  con 
trast  with  his  "gods  of  gold,  and  of  silver, 
of  brass,  of  iron,  of  wood,  and  of  stone." 
Perhaps  he  had  mentioned  these  in  detail 
as  the  gods  who  had  triumphed;  at  any 
rate,  the  prophet  brings  them  forward  with 
detestation  in  verse  4. 

No  man  is  rendered  wise  or  thoughtful  by  the 
wine-cup. 

No  man  is  out  of  the  reach  of  the  arrows  of  God. 

No  conscience  is  so  dead  that  he  cannot  arouse  it. 

Many  other  men  in  far  lower  positions  exhibit 
equal  pride  of  station  and  success ;  this  is  stimulated 
in  much  the  same  manner,  and  exhibited  with  much 
the  same  contempt  for  the  things  of  God. 

A  parallel  is  easily  drawn  between  Belshazzar  and 
other  proud  ones. 

II.    YET  WELL  MIGHT  HIS  THOUGHTS  TROUBLE  HIM. 

1.  For  what  he  saw  was  appalling :  "  Angers  of  a 


A   MAN  TROUBLED  BY  HIS   THOUGHTS.         19S 

man's  hand  over  against  the  candlestick  " 
(verse  5). 

God   sometimes  gives   men  warnings  which 
they  must  notice. 

2.  For   what   he   could  not   see  was   suggestive. 

Where  was  the  hand? 
Where  was  the  writer  ?   What  had  he  written? 

What  did  it  mean?     A  terrible  mystery 

was  involved  in  his  vision. 
God  gives  men  hints   of  something  behind, 

which  is  yet  to  appear. 

3.  For  what  he  had  done  was  alarming. 

His  own  past  flashed  before  him.     His  cruel 

wars,  oppressions,  blasphemies  and  vices. 
What  he  knew  of  his  father's  career  increased 

his  terror. 
What  he  had  himself  failed  to  do  came  before 

him :  "  The  God  in  whose  hand  thy  breath 

is,  arid  whose  are  all  thy  ways,  hast  thou  not 

glorified  "(verse  23). 
What  he  was  then  in  the  act  of  doing  startled 

him.     He  was  wantonly  defying  Jehovah, 

the  God  of  Israel. 

See  him  trembling  before  whom  all  trembled. 
He  has  drunk  a  strange  draught  out  of  those  holy 
cups. 

III.   AND    MIGHT    NOT    YOUB    THOUGHTS    TROUBLE 

SOME   OF   YOU? 

1.  You  are  careless,  riotous,  fond  of  feasts,  given  to 
much  wine.  Does  wantonness  ever  end  well? 
2—1° 


194  MY   SERMON   NOTBJ8. 

2.  You  are  prosperous.     Are  not  beasts  fattened 

for  the  slaughter  ? 
8.  You  are  trifling  with  holy  things.    You  neglect, 

or  ridicule,  or  use  without  seriousness  the 

things  of  God.    Will  this  be  endured  ?    Will 

not  the  Lord  be  provoked  to  avenge  this 

contempt  ? 
4.  You  mix  with  the  impure.    Will  you  not  perish 

with  them? 
6    Your  father's  history  might  instruct  you,  or  at 

least  trouble  you. 

6.  The  sacred  writing  "over  against  the  candle 

stick"  is  against  you.  Read  the  Holy 
Scripture,  and  see  for  yourself. 

7.  Specially,  you  have  been  weighed  in  the  bal 

ances,  and  found  wanting.  Conscience  be 
holds  the  scales  in  the  hand  of  the  infallible 
Judge. 

Take  heed  that  you  do  not  fall  into  Belshazzar's 
condition,  to  whom  Daniel  gave  no  counsel,  but 
simply  interpreted  the  sentences  which  sealed  his 
doom. 

As  yet  we  dare  preach  the  gospel  to  you,  and  we 
do.  God's  thoughts  are  above  your  thoughts.  He 
bids  you  repent  of  sin,  and  believe  in  his  Son  Jesus ; 
and  then  your  thoughts  will  cease  to  trouble  you. 

THOUGHTS  AND  FACTS. 

Conscience,  from  inaction,  is  like  a  withered  arm 
in  thtx  souls  of  many;  but  the  Lord  of  conscience 


A    MAN    TROUBLED   BY    HIS   THOUGHTS.        195 

will  one  day  say  to  it,  "  Be  thou  stretched  forth,  and 
do  thine  appointed  work." 

Such  mystery  of  iniquity  within, 
That  we  must  loathe  our  very  thoughts,  but  for  the  cure 

He  hath  devised, — the  blessed  Tree 
The  Lord  hath  shown  us,  that,  cast  in,  can  heal 
The  fountain  whence  the  bitter  waters  flow. 
Divinest  remedy 

Whose  power  we  feel, 
Whose  grace  we  comprehend  not,  but  we  know. 

— Miss  Havergal. 

As  the  ant-hill,  when  stirred,  sets  in  motion  its 
living  insects  in  every  direction,  so  the  conscience  of 
the  sinner,  disturbed  by  the  Spirit,  or  judgments  of 
God,  calls  up  before  its  vision  thousands  of  deeds 
which  fill  the  soul  with  agony  and  woe. — Mo  Cosh. 

The  Duke  of  Wellington  once  said  that  he  could 
have  saved  the  lives  of  a  thousand  men  a  year,  had 
he  had  chaplains,  or  any  religious  ministers.  The 
uneasiness  of  their  minds  reacted  on  their  bodies, 
and  kept  up  continual  fever,  once  it  seized  upon 
their  frames.  It  is  our  blessed  office  to  tell  of  One 
who  can  "  minister  to  a  mind  diseased,"  whose  grace 
can  deliver  from  "  an  evil  conscience,"  and  through 
whom  all  inward  fear  and  trouble  are  removed. 

Charles  IX.  of  France,  in  his  youth,  had  humane 
and  tender  sensibilities.  The  fiend  who  had  tempted 
him  was  the  mother  who  had  nursed  him.  When 
she  first  proposed  to  him  the  massacre  of  the 
Huguenots,  he  shrunk  from  it  with  horror:  "No, no, 


196  MY  8BBMON  NOTES. 

madam !  They  are  my  loving  subjects."  Then  was 
the  critical  hour  of  his  life.  Had  he  cherished  that 
natural  sensitiveness  to  bloodshed,  St.  Bartholomew's 
Eve  would  never  have  disgraced  the  history  of  his 
kingdom,  and  he  himself  would  have  escaped  the 
fearful  remorse  which  crazed  him  on  his  death-bed. 
To  his  physician  he  said  in  his  last  hours,  "  Asleep 
or  awake,  I  see  the  mangled  forms  of  the  Huguenots 
passing  before  me.  They  drip  with  blood.  They 
make  hideous  faces  at  me.  They  point  to  their  open 
wounds  and  mock  me.  Oh,  that  I  had  spared  at 
least  the  little  infants  at  the  breast!"  Then  he 
broke  out  in  agonizing  cries  and  screams.  Bloody 
sweat  oozed  from  the  pores  of  his  skin.  He  was  one 
of  the  very  few  cases  in  history  which  confirm  the 
possibility  of  the  phenomenon  which  attended  our 
Lord's  anguish  in  Gethsemane.  That  was  the  fruit 
of  resisting,  years  before,  the  recoil  of  his  youthful 
conscience  from  the  extreme  of  guilt. — Austin  Phelpt, 


XCVIII. 

;  NOW  THEREFORE,  O  OUR  GOD,  HEAR  THE  PRATER  OF  THT 
SERVANT,  AND  HIS  SUPPLICATIONS,  AND  CAUSE  THY  FACE 
TO  SHINE  UPON  THY  SANCTUARY  THAT  IS  DESOLATE,  FOB 

THE  LORD'S  SAKE." — Daniel  ix.  17. 

r  I  ^HIS  true-hearted  man  lived  not  for  himself. 
•*•  Daniel  was  a  fervent  lover  of  his  country. 

He  had  been  personally  faithful,  and  in  conse 
quence  he  had  been  honored,  but  he  did  not  rest 
content  with  personal  ease. 

He  had  visions  of  God,  but  he  was  not  visionary. 

He  had  searched  and  studied,  but  now  he  prayed. 
Supplication  should  ever  be  the  outcome  of  our 
meditation. 

His  prayer  is  instructive  to  us. 

It  suggests  our  fervent  entreaties  for  the  church 
of  God  in  these  days. 

I.  THE  HOLY  PLACE.    "  Thy  sanctuary." 

The  temple  was  typical,  and  for  our  edification  we 
shall  read  the  text  as  if  the  spiritual  house  had  been 
meant.     There  are  many  points  in  the  type  worthy 
of  notice,  but  these  may  suffice : — 
1.  The  temple  was  unique ;  and  as  there  could 
only  be  one  temple  for  Jehovah,  so  there  i* 
but  one  church. 

(197) 


198  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

2.  The  temple  was  "  exceeding  magnifical ; "  and 

in  the  eyes  of  God,  and  of  holy  beings,  the 
church  is  the  house  of  God's  glory. 

3.  The  temple  was  the  fabric  of  wisdom.     King 

Solomon  built  it;  and  of  the  church  we 
may  say,  "  a  greater  than  Solomon  is  here." 

4.  The  temple  was  the  result  of  great  cost  and 

vast  labor:  so  was  the  church  builded  by 
the  Lord  Jesus  at  a  cost  which  can  never 
be  estimated. 

5.  The  temple  was  the  shrine  of  God's  indwelling. 

6.  The  temple  was  the  place  of  his  worship. 

7.  The  temple  was  the  throne  of  his  power :  his 

word  went  forth  from  Jerusalem  ;  there  he 
ruled  his  people,  and  routed  his  foes. 

The  church  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  latter  day  shall 
be  more  accurately  the  anti-type  of  the  temple,  as  the 
present  church  is  of  the  tabernacle  in  the  wilderness. 

II.  THE  EARNEST  PRAYER.     "  Cause  thy  face  to 
shine  upon  thy  sanctuary  that  is  desolate. 

1.  It  rose  above  all  selfishness.     This  was  his  one 

prayer,  the  centre  of  all  his  prayers. 

2.  It  was  the  child  of  thought  (verse  2). 

He   had   thought  over   the   sins,   calamities, 

prospects  of  his  people. 
Such  prayers  show  the  way  in  which  a  man's 

mind  is  running,  and  are  more  full  of  force 

than  unprepared  expressions. 

8.  It  cast  itself  upon  God.     "  O  our  God." 

4.  It  was  a  confession  that  he  could  do  nothing  of 


PRATER   FOB   THE  CHURCH.  199 

himself.    Honest  men  do  not  ask  God  to  do 
what  they  can  do  themselves. 
6    It  asked  a  comprehensive  boon.     "  Cause  thy 

face  to  shine." 
This  would  mean  many  things  which  we  also 

implore  for  the  church  of  God. 
(1.)  Walls  rebuilt  and  securely  standing. 
(2.)  Ministers  in  their  places,  faithful  in  their 

service. 

(8.)  Worship  presented  with  acceptance. 
(4.)  Truth  proclaimed  in  its  clearness.    God's 
face  cannot    shine    upon  falsehood  or 
equivocation. 

(6.)  Holiness  displayed  in  its  beauty.   Where 
the  Holy  God  is  smiling,  his  servants 
holy. 
(6.)  Delight  in  fellowship:  the  saints  walking 

are  with  God. 

(7.)  Power  in  testimony.  When  God  is  pleased, 
his  word  is  mighty,  and  all  holy  endeavors 
are  prospered. 
6.  It  asked  needful  things. 

For  the  church ;   unity,  life,  purity,  power, 

joy,  etc. 
For  the  world ;  enlightenment  and  conversion. 

A  desolate  church  is  a  defeated  church. 
For  ourselves ;  edification.     We  cannot  proa- 

per  in  soul  when  Zion  languishes. 
For  our  children;  salvation.     Our  sons  and 
daughters  are  not  likely  to  be  saved  in  a 
desolate  church. 


200  MY  8EKMON  NOTES. 

7.  It  asked  with  a  mighty  plea :  *4  For  the  Lord' 

sake/' 

HI.  THE  CONSISTENT  CONDUCT.    This  is  suggested 
by  such  a  prayer. 

1.  Let  us  consider  the  state  of  Zion  (verse  23). 

Let  us  form  a  careful  estimate  of  the  con 
dition  of  true  religion. 

2.  Let  us  lay  it  earnestly  to  heart.     Whether  for 

joy  or  sorrow,  let  the  condition  of  the  church 
concerns  us  deeply. 

8.  Let  us  do  all  we  can  for  her,  or  our  prayer  will 

be  a  mockery. 
4.  Let  us  do  nothing  to  grieve  the  Lord ;  for  all 

depends  upcn  his  smile.     "  Cause  thy  face 

to  shine." 
6.  Let  us  pray  much  more  than  we  have  done. 

Let  each  one  of  us  be  a  Daniel. 


INCITEMENTS. 

During  the  troublous  times  of  Scotland,  when  the 
Popish  court  and  aristocracy  were  arming  themselves 
to  suppress  the  Reformation  in  that  land,  and  the 
cause  of  Protestant  Christianity  was  in  imminent 
peril,  late  on  a  certain  night  John  Knox  was  seen  to 
leave  his  study,  and  to  pass  from  the  house  down 
into  an  enclosure  to  the  rear  of  it.  He  was  followed 
by  a  friend,  when,  after  a  few  moments  of  silence,  his 
voice  was  heard  as  if  in  prayer.  In  another  moment 
Ihe  accents  deepened  into  intelligible  words,  and  the 


PRAYER  FOR  THE  CHURCH.         201 

earnest  petition  went  up  from  his  struggling  soul  to 
heaven,  "  O  Lord,  give  me  Scotland,  or  I  die ! " 
Then  a  pause  of  hushed  stillness,  when  again  the 
petition  broke  forth,  "  O  Lord,  give  me  Scotland,  or 
I  die ! "  Once  more  all  was  voiceless  and  noiseless, 
when,  with  a  yet  intenser  pathos  the  thrice-repeated 
intercession  struggled  forth,  "  O  Lord,  give  me  Scot 
land,  or  I  die ! "  And  God  gave  him  Scotland,  in 
spite  of  Mary  and  her  Cardinal  Beatoun ;  a  land  and 
a  church  of  noble  loyalty  to  Christ  and  his  crown. 

"  At  the  time  the  Diet  of  Nuremburg  was  held," 
says  Tholuck,  "  Luther  was  earnestly  praying  in  his 
own  dwelling ;  and  at  the  very  hour  when  the  edict, 
granting  full  toleration  to  all  Protestants,  was  issued, 
he  ran  out  of  his  house,  crying  out,  *  We  have  gained 
the  victory/  " 

The  church  may  be  sick,  yet  not  die.  Die  it  can 
not,  for  the  blood  of  an  eternal  King  bought  it,  the 
power  of  an  eternal  Spirit  preserves  it,  and  the 
mercy  of  an  eternal  God  shall  crown  it. —  Thomas 
Adams. 

Prayer  was  a  universal  habit  among  the  heathen 
people  of  Samoa,  and  they  manifested  considerable 
intelligence  in  their  conception  of  prayer.  For 
example,  when  on  their  boat-journeys,  those  who 
were  sitting  as  passengers  in  the  boat  were  expected 
to  pray  for  those  who  were  plying  the  paddles.  The 
passengers  would  repeatedly  thank  the  rowers  in 
these  words :  "  Thanks  for  your  strong  strokes ;  " 


202  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

to  which  the  rowers  immediately  made  answer 
"  Thanks  for  your  intercessory  prayers,"  recognizing, 
it  will  be  seen,  the  principle  that  their  power  to  ply 
the  paddles  was  dependent  upon  the  prayers  of  the 
passengers. — The  Gongregationalist. 


XCIX. 

*'  THEREFORE,  BEHOLD,  I  WILL  HEDGE  UP  THY  WAT  WITH 

THORNS,   AND  MAKE  A  WALL,   THAT    SHE    SHALL    NOT  FIND 
HER  PATHS. 

"  AND  SHE  SHALL  FOLLOW  AFTER  HER  LOVERS,  BUT  SHE  SHALL 
NOT  OVERTAKE  THEM ;  AND  SHE  SHALL  SEEK  THEM,  BUT 
SHALL  NOT  FIND  THEM  ;  THEN  SHALL  SHE  SAY,  I  WILL  GO 
AND  RETURN  TO  MY  FIRST  HUSBAND;  FOR  THEN  WAS  U 
BETTER  WITH  ME  THAN  NOW." — HOSCO,  ii.  6,  7. 

r  I  "HIS  is  a  parenthesis  of  mercy  in  a  passage  of 
•*-  threatening. 

It  relates  to  a  people  to  whom  the  Lord  was  united 
by  bonds  of  covenant  love,  who  had,  nevertheless, 
been  faithless  and  rebellious. 

Strangely  enough,  it  begins  with  a  "therefore;" 
and  the  logic  of  it  lies  in  the  immutable  resolve  of 
the  unchanging  God  never  to  renounce  his  covenant, 
nor  utterly  to  cast  away  his  chosen ;  as,  also,  in  his 
unchangeable  determination  to  win  them  to  himself. 

The  words  might  still  be  spoken  in  reference  to 
the  chosen  but  sinning  people  of  God. 

Let  us  note  carefully, — 

I.   THE  STUBBORN  CHARACTER   OF   MANY  SINNERS. 

This  appears  in  their  case,  as  in  that  of  Israel,  in 
•everal  ways : — 

1.  Ordinary  means  have  missed  their  aim.     The 
details  are  given  in  previous  verses;  and 

(203) 


204  MY    SERMON   NOTES. 

then  we  read  "  therefore :  "  showing  that 
because  of  former  failures  the  Lord  is  about 
to  try  further  measures. 

2.  Extraordinary  means  are  now  to  be  used,  and 

attention  is  called  to  their  speciality  by  the 
word  "  behold."  God's  wonderful  ways  of 
grace  prove  the  wonderful  obstinacy  of 
sinners. 

3.  Even  these  means  are  to  fail.     Providence  uses 

strange  ways,  like  making  hedges  and 
walls ;  and  yet  for  a  while  the  sinner  defeats 
the  gracious  design.  "She  shall  follow 
after  her  lovers,"  etc.  Men  will  leap  hedges, 
and  scale  walls,  to  get  at  their  darling  sins. 

4.  Only  divine  power  can  overcome  the  hardened 

one.  God  saith,  "  I  will,"  and  adds  "  she 
shall  not,"  and  "  she  shall ; "  proving  that 
the  omnipotence  of  love  had  now  entered 
the  lists,  and  intended  to  conquer  the  rebel 
lious  and  obstinate  transgressor.  God  him 
self  must  personally  interpose,  or  none  will 
turn  to  him. 

What  sinners  those  must  be  whom  neither  hedge 
nor  wall  will  stop  unless  God  be  there  also  in  om 
nipotence  of  grace ! 

II.   THE     MEANS    WHICH    GOD     USES    TO     BECLAIM 
THEM. 

These,  when  used  by  God  himself,  become  effect 
ual,  though  they  would  have  accomplished  nothing 
of  themselves. 


WAYS    HEDGED    UP.  206 

1.  Sharp  afflictions:  "I  will  hedge  up  thy  way 

with  thorns."  Many  are  checked  and  made 
to  think  by  being  made  to  smart.  Travel 
lers  tell  us  of  the  "  wait-a-bit  thorn,"  which 
puzzles  the  most  cautious  walker.  When 
in  full  pursuit  of  evil,  the  Lord  can  bring 
the  sinner  to  a  pause. 

2.  Insurmountable  difficulties :  "  and  make  a  wall." 

The  Lord  of  love  places  effectual  stop 
pages  in  the  road  of  those  whom  he  means 
to  save:  if  men  break  down  hedges,  his 
persevering  love  builds  walls,  so  that  they 
may  find  it  hard  to  persevere  in  sin. 

3.  Blinding  perplexities:  "she  shall  not  find  her 

paths."  He  can  make  the  ways  of  sinful 
pleasure  to  be  difficult  and  bewildering,  till 
even  the  broad  road  seems  to  be  barricaded. 

4.  Utter  failures :  "  she  shall  follow  after,  but  not 

overtake."  We  know  persons  with  whom 
nothing  is  going  right;  even  the  utmost 
diligence  in  their  case  fails  to  secure  pros 
perity  :  and  all  because  their  ways  are  not 
pleasing  to  God,  and  he  means  to  bring 
them  out  of  them.  Such  men  hunt  after 
sinful  success,  but  it  flees  from  them. 

6.  Bitter  disappointments :  "  she  shall  seek  them, 
but  shall  not  find  them."  Pleasure  shall 
be  no  longer  found  by  them  even  in  those 
amusements  where  once  it  danced  around 
them. 

These    severe   chasten  ings    are    frequently    made 


206  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

useful   in  the  early  days   of   religious   impression  * 
they  are  the  ploughing  before  the  sowing. 

III.     THE    BLESSED    RESULT    WHICH    IS    AT     LAST 
ATTAINED. 

The  wandering,  wanton  spirit  is  led  to  return 
to  her  God. 

1.  Remembrance   aroused :   "  it   was   better  with 

me." 

2.  Confession  of  sad  loss  extorted :  "  then  was  it 

better  with  me  than  now"  She  thinks 
upon  happier  times,  now  that  her  days  are 
clouded  over. 

3.  Resolution  formed:  "I  will  go  and  return." 

4.  Affection  stirred:    "I  will  return  to  my  first 

husband." 

She  owns  the  bands  of  love ;  she  sorrows  that  she 
has  strained  them  so  terribly. 

When  the  matter  has  come  so  far,  the  sad  breach 
is  healed,  the  work  of  reclaiming  love  is  done. 

Let  us  turn  to  the  Lord  before  he  uses  thorns  to 
stop  us. 

If  already  hedged  up,  let  us  consider  our  ways. 

In  any  case,  let  us  by  faith  turn  to  Jesus,  and 
rest  in  him. 

CUTTINGS. 

"j?  will  hedge  up  thy  way" — There  is  a  two-fold 
hedge  that  God  makes  about  his  people.  There  is 
the  hedge  of  protection,  to  keep  evil  from  them; 
and  the  hedge  of  affliction,  to  keep  them  from  eviL 


WAYS   HEDGED    UP.  207 

The  hedge  of  protection  you  have  in  Isa.  v.  5,  where 
God  threatens  that  he  "  will  take  away  the  hedge  " 
from  hie  vineyard ;  and  it  is  said  of  Job  that  God 
had  "  hedged  him  about."  But  the  hedge  here  meant 
is  the  hedge  of  affliction.  "I  will  hedge  up  thy 
way,"  that  is,  I  will  bring  sore  and  heavy  afflictions 
upon  you  to  keep  you  from  evil. 

When  a  husbandman  sees  passengers  make  a  path 
in  his  ground  where  they  ought  not,  and  so  spoil  the 
grass  or  the  corn,  he  lays  thorns  in  the  way  that 
they  cannot  go  into  his  corn ;  or  if  they  do,  they 
shall  go  with  some  pain  and  trouble:  "so,"  saith 
God,  "I  will  hedge  up  thy  way  with  thorns."- 
Jeremiah  Burroughs. 

Consider  the  good  effects  of  a  wounded  conscience, 
privative  for  the  present,  and  positive  for  the  future. 
First,  privative ;  this  heaviness  of  thy  heart  (for  the 
time  being)  is  a  bridle  to  thy  soul,  keeping  it  from 
many  sins  it  would  otherwise  commit.  Thou  that 
now  sittest  sad  in  thy  shop,  or  standest  sighing  in 
thy  chamber,  mightest  perchance  at  this  time  be 
drunk,  or  wanton,  or  worse,  if  not  restrained  by  this 
affliction.  God  saith  to  Judah,  "  I  will  hedge  up 
thy  way  with  thorns,"  namely,  to  keep  Judah  from 
committing  spiritual  fornication.  A  wounded  con 
science  is  a  hedge  of  thorns ;  but  this  thorny  fence 
keeps  our  wild  spirits  in  the  true  way,  which  other 
wise  would  be  straggling ;  and  it  is  better  to  be  held 
in  the  right  road  with  briars  and  brambles  than  to 


208  MY   SERMON    JJOTES. 

wander  on  beds  of  roses  in  a  wrong  path  which  leadi 
to  destruction. — Thomas  Fuller. 

A  popular  and  successful  young  minister  in  Amer 
ica  became  entangled  in  the  meshes  of  infidelity,  left 
the  pulpit,  joined  an  infidel  club,  and  derided  the 
name  he  had  preached  to  others  as  the  Saviour  of 
the  world.  But  he  sickened,  and  came  to  his  death 
bed.  His  friends  gathered  round  him,  and  tried  to 
comfort  him  with  their  cold  and  icy  theories,  but  in 
vain.  The  old  thought  came  back  to  him — the  old 
experience  came  before  him.  He  said,  "  Wife,  bring 
me  my  Greek  Testament."  Upon  his  bed  he  turned 
to  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  First  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians.  When  he  had  finished  the  chapter, 
great  tears  of  joy  rolled  down  his  cheeks.  He  closed 
the  book,  aid  said,  "Wife,  back  again  at  last  upoD 
the  old  rock  to  die." 


o. 

44  THEREFORE,  BEHOLD,  I  WILL  ALLURE  HER,  AND  BRING 

INTO    T1IE    WILDERNESS,  AND    SPEAK    COMFORTABLY    UNTO 

HER." — Hosea  ii.  14. 

TN  the  former  part  of  the  chapter  we  find  words  of 
-*•  accusation  and  threatening  most  justly  uttered 
towards  a  guilty  nation. 

In  this  second  portion  we  come  to  a  passage  of 
unmixed  grace. 

The  person  dealt  with  is  the  same,  but  she  is  dealt 
with  under  another  dispensation,  even  that  covenant 
of  grace  of  which  we  find  an  abstract  in  verse  23. 

God,  intending  to  deal  with  his  sinful  people  in 
love,  speaks  words  which  are  of  the  most  extraordi 
nary  tenor. 

I.  HERE  is,  FOB  ma  DBXDS  OF  LOVE,  A  REASON 

BEYOND  ALL  BJAfiON. 

The  text  begins  with  "therefore."  God  always 
has  a  reason. 

The  context  describes  the  grossest  sin,  and  how 
should  God  find  a  reason  there  ? 

1.  God  finds  a  reason  for  grace  where  there  ii 

none.     Why  else  did  he  bless  Israel,  or  any 
one  of  us? 

2.  God  makes  a  reason  which  overrides  all  other 

2—14 


210  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

reasons.  Because  his  people  will  persist  in 
being  so  evil,  he  will  display  more  love  till 
he  wins  them  from  their  wanderings. 

8.  God  creates  a  reason  for  out  of  reasons  against. 
"  She  forgat  me,  saith  the  Lord.  Therefore 
I  will  allure  her."  (See  all  preceding 
verses.)  The  great  sin  which  is  in  itself  a 
reason  for  judgment  is  by  divine  grace 
turned  into  an  argument  for  mercy. 

4.  God  justifies  his  own  reasoning  with  men  by  a 
reason.  According  to  the  margin,  "  I  will 
speak  to  her  heart,"  is  the  promise  of  the 
text,  and  the  Lord  gives  a  "  therefore  "  for 
it.  He  has  a  gracious  reason  for  reasoning 
with  us  in  love. 

The  sovereign  grace  of  God  had  chosen  his  people, 
and  his  immutable  love  resolves  to  win  this  people 
to  itself,  therefore  it  sets  about  the  work. 

II.  HEBE  is  A  METHOD  OF  POWER  BEYOND  ALL 

POWER.    "  I  will  allure  her." 
1.  Allurement  of  love  surpasses  in  power  all  other 

forces. 

It  appears  that  other  methods  had  been  used, 
such  as — 

Affliction  with  its  thorny  hedge  (verse  6). 
Instruction  with  all  its  practical  application 

(verse  8). 

Deprivation  even  of  necessaries  (verse  9). 
Exposure  of  sin  beyond  all  denial  (verse  10). 
Sorrow  upon  sorrow  (verses  11  and  12). 


STRANGE   WAYS   OF  LOVE. 

The  sweet  allurement  of  tenderness  would  succeed 
where  these  failed. 

2,  Allurement  of  love  overcomes  the  will  to  resist. 

Assaulted  we  defend,  allured  we  yield. 
8.  Allurement    of   grace    has    many   conquering 

weapons. 
The  person,  work,  offices,  and  love  of  Jesus 

lead  men  captive. 
The  freeness  and  abundance  of  divine  pardon 

vanquish  opposition. 
The  grace  and  truth  of  the  covenant  defy 

resistance. 

The  adoption  and  inheritance  so  graciously 
bestowed  subdue  the  heart  by  overwhelm 
ing  force  of  gratitude. 

The  sense  of  present  peace,  and  the  prospect 
of  future  glory,  allure  us  beyond  all  things. 

III.  HERB  is  A  CONDITION  OP  COMPANY  BEYOND 

ALL  COMPANY. 

1.  She  is  made  to  be  alone.     Free  from  tempting, 

distracting,  or  assisting  company.  All  her 
lovers  far  from  her.  Her  hope  in  them  is 
gone. 

2.  Alone  with  God.    He  becomes  her  trust,  desire, 

aim,  love. 

8.  Alone  as  in  the  wilderness.  Illustrate  by 
Israel,  who,  in  the  wild  M  npss,  knew  the 
Lord  as  Deliverer,  Guide,  Guard,  Light, 
Manna,  Physician,  Champion,  central  Glory, 
and  King. 


212  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

4.  Alone  for  the  same  purpose  as  Israel,  for  train 
ing,  growth,  illumination,  and  preparation 
for  the  promised  rest :  above  all  that  they 
might  be  the  Lord's  own  separated  ones. 

IV.  HEBE  is  A  VOICE  OF  COMFORT  BEYOND  ALL 
COMFORT.    "  And  speak  comfortably  to  her." 

1.  Real  comfort  is  given  to  souls  alone  with  God. 

The  divine  speech  is  applied  to  the  heart, 
and  so  its  comfort  is  understood,  and  appro 
priated,  and  effectually  touches  the  affec 
tions. 

2.  Abundant  comfort  is  bestowed,  received   and 

acknowledged, — 

By  renewed  gratitude :  '*  she  shall  sing  there 

as  in  the  days  of  her  youth."    See  verse  15. 

By  a  more  confiding  spirit:  "thou  shalt  call 

me  Ishi,"  &c.  See  verses  16  and  17. 
By  an  established  peace.  See  verse  18. 
By  a  clearer  revelation  of  eternal  love.  See 

verses  19  and  20. 

By  a  surer  sense  of  the  eternal  future,  and 
its    marriage-union   of    endless  bliss;    for 
betrothal  prophesies  marriage. 
Now  let  all  this  be  known  and  felt,  and  we  are 
sure  the  heart  is  won:   there  can  be  no  revolting 
after  this. 

Let  the  prayer  of  each  one  of  us  be, — 

O  heavenly  love,  iny  heart  subdue, 

I  would  be  led  in  triumph  too ; 
Allured  to  live  for  God  alone, 

And  bow  submissive  at  his  throno 


STRANGE  WAYS  OF  LOVE.  213 

JOTTINGS. 

When  God's  free  grace  has  pitched  upon  its  object, 
it  often  solicits  that  soul  in  its  own  peculiar  way :  I 
mean  that  grace  woos  and  wins  by  its  own  gracious- 
ness,  it  conquers  not  by  arms  but  by  allurement. 
Have  you  not  seen  a  mother  allure  her  child  to  run 
into  her  uosom  with  the  promise  of  a  kiss?  Have 
you  never  heard  the  little  birds  alluring  their  mates 
with  rapturous  song?  Know  you  not  the  way  of 
love  by  which  it  wins  its  victories?  If  so,  you  also 
understand  why  the  beloved  one  is  to  be  spoken 
with  in  the  wilderness.  Love  is  shy,  and  shuns  the 
crowd:  solitude  is  her  element.  When  a  soul  is 
made  to  be  alone  with  God,  it  shall  hear  many 
things  which  for  the  present  could  not  be  spoken 
to  it.  Speaking  to  the  heart  is  reserved  for  retire 
ment;  it  were  not  meet  to  display  the  secrets  of 
divine  communion  to  a  mingled  concourse.  Under 
stand,  therefore,  O  lonely  one,  why  thou  art  made  to 
be  one  by  thyself;  and  now  surrender  thy  heart  to 
the  sacred  allurements  of  sovereign  grace ! — C.H.8. 

Some  years  ago  an  affecting  incident  was  reported 
in  reference  to  the  ex-Empress  Charlotte,  an  Austrian 
princess,  whose  husband  was  for  a  short  time  Em 
peror  of  Mexico.  In  the  year  1867  he  was  shot  by 
the  revolutionists,  and  his  unhappy  widow  became 
the  victim  of  melancholy  madness,  which  her  physi 
cians  gave  up  all  hope  of  curing.  As  in  similar 
oases,  she  returned  to  the  tastes  and  habits  of  child 
hood,  one  of  which  was  a  passion  for  flowers,  and 


24  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

she  spent  most  of  her  time  over  them.  Their  attract 
iveness  for  her  was  touchingly  manifested  on  the 
occasion  in  question,  when,  having  eluded  the  watch 
of  her  attendants,  she  had  fled  from  the  castle. 
When  overtaken  it  was  found  impossible  to  induce 
her  to  return,  except  by  the  use  of  means  which 
would  certainly  have  proved  hurtful.  One  of  her 
physicians  happily  bethought  himself  of  her  intense 
affection  for  flowers;  and  by  showing  them  from 
time  to  time  before  her,  she  was  gradually  lured  on 
her  way  back  to  her  home.  May  not  this  story  be 
taken  as  an  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  God 
allures  wandering  souls  back  to  himself  by  the  in 
vitations  and  promises  of  the  gospel  ? 


CI. 

"  I  WILL  HAVE  MERCY  UPON  HER  THAT  HAI>  NOT  OBTAINED 

MERCY;  AND  I  WILL  SAY  TO  THEM  WHICH  WERE  NOT  MT 

PEOPLE,    THOU    ART    MY    PEOPLE;     AND    THEY    SHALL   SAY, 

THOU  ART  MY  GOD." — Eosea  ii.  23. 

"  AS  HE  SAITH  ALSO  EN  OSEE,  I  WILL  CALL  THEM  MY  PEOPLE, 

WHICH  WERE  NOT  MY  PEOPLE ;  AND  HER  BELOVED,  WHICH 
WAS  NOT  BELOVED.  AND  IT  SHALL  COME  TO  PASS,  THAT 
IN  THF.  PLACE  WHERE  IT  WAS  SATO  UNTO  THEM,  YE  ASK 
NOT  MY  PEOPLE;  THERE  SHALL  THEY  BE  CALLED  THE 

CHILDREN  OF  THE  LIVING  GrOD." — Romans  ix.  25,  26. 

WE  accept  the  supreme  author!  iy  of  Holy  Scrip 
ture  :  every  word  of  it  is  truth  to  us. 

Yet  we  attach  special  weight  to  words  which 
are  the  personal  utterance  of  the  Lord  God ;  as  in 
this  case,  where  God  himself  is  the  Speaker,  in  the 
first  person. 

Still  more  ere  we  impressed  when  a  divine  message 
is  repeated  ;  as  in  this  instance,  where  Paul  writes: — 
"  As  he  saith  also  in  Osee." 

God  "  saith  "  still  what  he  said  long  ago. 

Come  then,  anxious  souls,  and  hear  the  story  of 
God's  grace  to  his  chosen,  in  the  hope  that  he  may 
do  the  like  for  you. 

Observe  with  attention,  concerning  the  Lord'i 
people, — 


216  MY  8EBMON  KOTE8. 

I.  THEIE  ORIGINAL  STATE  :  M  not  obtained  mercy,— 
not  my  people." 

1.  They  not  only  were  not  "beloved,"  but  they 

were  expressly  disowned.  "  It  was  said  unto 
them,  ye  are  not  my  people."  Their  claim, 
if  they  made  any,  was  negatived. 

This  is  the  worst  that  can  be :  worse  than  to 
be  left  alone. 

This,  conscience,  providence,  and  the  Word 
of  God  all  appear  to  say  to  men  who  per 
sist  in  sin. 

2.  They  had  no  approval  of  God. 

They  were  not  numbered  with  his  people. 
They  were  not  "  beloved,"  in  the  sense  of  the 

love  of  complacency. 
8.  They  had  not  in  the  highest  sense  "  obtained 

mercy." 

For  they  were  under  providential  judgment. 
That  judgment  had  not  become  a   blessing 

to  them. 

They  had  not  even  sought  for  mercy. 
4.  They  were  the  types  of  a  people  who  as  yet — 
Have   felt    no    application   of  the   blood  of 

Jesus ; 

Have  known  no  renewing  work  of  the  Spirit ; 
Have  obtained  no  relief  by  prayer ;  perhaps 

have  not  prayed ; 

Have  enjoyed  no  comfort  of  the  promises ; 
Have  known  no  communion  with  God ; 
And  possess  no  hope  of  heaven,  or  prepare 

tion  for  it. 


A   PEOPLE  WHO   WEBB  NO   PEOPLE.  217 

It  is  a  terrible  description,  including  all  the  un 
saved. 

It  is  concerning  certain  of  such  that  the  uncon 
ditional  promise  is  made  in  the  text :  "  I  will  call 
them  my  people."  Who  these  are  shall  be  seen  in 
due  time  by  their  repentance  and  faith,  which  shall 
be  wrought  in  them  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  There 
are  such  people,  and  this  fact  is  our  encouragement 
in  preaching  the  gospel,  for  we  perceive  that  our 
labor  will  not  be  in  vain.  * 

II.  THEIR  NEW  CONDITION.    "  Thou  art  my  people." 

1.  Mercy  is  promised :  "  I  will  have  mercy  upon 

her  that  had  not  obtained  mercy."     This  is 
absolutely  free. 

2.  A   divine   revelation   is  pronounced:    "I  will 

say,  Thou  art  my  people." 
This  is  done  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  heart. 
This  is  supported  by  gracious  dealings  in  the 

life. 
8.  A  hearty  response  shall  be  given :  "  they  shall 

say,  Thou  art  my  God."     The  Holy  Ghost 

will  lead  them  to  this  free  acceptance. 
As  a  whole,  they  will  say  this  with  one  voice. 
Each  individual  will  say  it  for  himself  in  the 

singular,  "  Thou." 
4,  A  declaration  of  love  shall  be  made :  "  I  will 

call  her  beloved,  which  was  not  beloved." 

(Rom.  ix.  25.)     Love  shall  be  enjoyed. 
6.  This  shall  be  perceived  by  others :  "  There  shall 

they  be  called  the  children  of  the  living  God." 


218  MY    SEKMON    NUTEtt. 

Their  likeness  to  God  shall  make  them  to  be 
called   the   children  of  God,   even  as  the 
peacemakers  in  Matthew  v.  9. 
Thus  every  blessing  shall  be  theirs,  surely,  per 
sonally,  everlastingly. 

Reflections  arising  from  all  this : — 

We  must  give  up  none  as  hopeless;  even 
though  they  be  marked  out  by  terrible  evi 
dence  to  be  not  the  people  of  God. 

None  may  give  up  themselves  in  despair. 

Sovereign  grace  is  the  ultimate  hope  of  the 
fallen. 

Let  them  trust  in  a  God  so  freely  gracious,  so 
omnipotent  to  save,  so  determined  to  bring 
in  those  whom  it  seemed  that  even  he,  him 
self,  had  disowned,  whom  everybody  had 
abandoned  as  not  the  people  of  God. 


NOTABILIA. 

"  Have  you  ever  heard  the  gospel  before  ?  "  asked 
an  Englishman,  at  Ningpo,  of  a  respectable  China 
man,  whom  he  had  not  seen  in  his  mission-room 
before. 

"  No,"  he  replied,  "  but  I  have  seen  it.  I  know  a 
man  who  used  to  be  the  terror  of  his  neighborhood. 
If  you  gave  him  a  hard  word,  he  would  shout  at  you, 
and  curse  you  for  two  days  and  nights  without 
ceasing.  He  was  as  dangerous  as  a  wild  beast,  and 
a  bad  opium-smoker  ;  but  when  the  religion  of  Jesus 


A    PEOPLE   WHO   WEBB   NO   PEOPLE.  219 

took  hold  of  him,  he  became  wholly  changed.  He  is 
gentle,  moral,  not  soon  angry,  and  has  left  off  opium. 
Truly,  the  teaching  is  good  1 " —  Word  and  Work. 

It  will  give  a  kind  of  exaltation  to  the  saint'i 
happiness  to  look  down  upon  that  moral  depth  from 
which  he  was  taken.  A  man  on  the  edge  of  a 
precipice,  at  night,  cannot  clearly  see  it ;  but  when 
the  morning  dawns,  he  will  be  able  to  see  the  danger 
he  has  been  in.  So  the  saint  cannot,  while  on  earth, 
conceive  the  depth  of  sin  from  which  he  has  been 
raised ;  but  he  will  be  able  to  measure  it  by  the 
light  of  heaven,  and  he  may  go  down  ages  before  he 
comes  to  the  place  where  he  once  was :  and  then  to 
think  what  he  is — how  deep  once,  but  how  high 
now — it  will  augment  the  sense  of  happiness  and 
glory : — and  then  to  recollect  who  has  been  the 
cause — and  every  time  he  looks  down  at  what  he 
was,  it  will  give  greater  emphasis  to  the  ascription, 
"  Unto  him  that  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our 
sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and 
priests  unto  God  and  his  Father:  to  him  be  glory 
and  d  Dminion  for  ever  and  ever." — John  Foster. 

The  announcement  made  by  Brownlow  North  to 
his  old  friends  of  his  sudden  change,  whether  orally 
or  in  writing,  created  no  small  sensation  among  them. 
Some  thought  he  had  gone  out  of  his  mind,  others 
thought  it  was  a  temporary  impression  or  excitement, 
and  that  it  would  soon  pass  off;  arid  this  was 
specially  the  case  with  those  of  them  who  were  ac 
quainted  with  his  previous  convictions,  and  tern- 


220  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

porary  reformation,  while  in  some  of  the  newspapers, 
it  was  even  said,  after  he  began  his  public  work,  that 
the  whole  thing  was  done  for  a  wager,  and  that 
he  had  taken  a  bet  to  gather  a  certain  number  of 
thousands  or  tens  of  thousands  of  hearers  in  a  given 
time.  So  little  do  carnal  men  understand  the  work 
ings  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  even  when  they  see  the 
most  striking  and  manifest  proofs  of  it. — From 
Brownlow  Norths  Life-story^  by  Rev.  K.  Moody- 
Stuart,  M.  A. 


on. 

"  FOR  THEY  HAVE  SOWN  THB  WIND,  AND  THEY  SHALL  REAF 

THE  WHIRLWIND:   rr  HATH  NO  STALK:  THE  BUD  SHALL 

YIELD  NO  MEAL :  IF  SO  BE  IT  YIELD,  THE  STRANGERS  SHALT, 

SWALLOW  IT  UP." — Hosea  yiii.  7. 

LIFE  is  a  seed-time.  Of  all  men  it  may  be  said, 
"they  have  sown." 

Prudent  men  put  the  question,  "What  will  the 
harvest  be?" 

The  hope  of  harvest  is  the  joyful  encouragement 
of  the  righteous. 

The  certainty  of  harvest  should  be  a  solemn  warn 
ing  to  the  godless. 

It  is  well  to  follow  worldly  lives  to  their  issues 
that  we  may  avoid  them.  Here  we  see  what  evil 
seed  will  produc*. 

I,  THE     RESULT    OF    CERTAIN    SOWINGS    WILL    BE 

TERRIBLE.    "They  have  sown   the   wind, 
and  they  shall  reap  the  whirlwind." 
The  sowing  was  careless,  or  mischievous,  or  change 
able;   and  the  harvest  was  of   the  same  reckless, 
ruthless,  mingled  character,  only  terribly  intensified. 
Wind  grew  into  whirlwind. 

1.  Vicious  men  sow  their  wild  oats,  and  we  need 
not  say  what  they  reap.    The  debauched; 


222  &TY   SERMON   NOTES. 

dranken,  and  profligate  are  around  us, 
bearing  already  in  their  own  persons  the 
first-fruits  of  the  fearful  harvest  of  trans 
gression. 

2.  Oppressors  in  a  nation  are  sure  to  be  repaid 
with  revolt,  bloodshed,  etc.,  as  may  be  seen 
in  the  French  revolution,  and  many  other 
dreadful  historical  incidents.  Wars  bring 
an  awful  harvest  of  poverty  and  death. 
Oh,  that  our  nation  would  cease  to  be  so 
eager  for  the  fray  ! 

8.  Immoral  theories  go  far  beyond  their  original 
intent.  The  speculation  was  an  airy  noth 
ing,  but  the  outcome  is  a  whirlwind,  break 
ing  down  all  that  is  built  up. 

4.  Heresies  in  the  church  also  lead  to  unexpected 
evils.  Apparently  trifling  errors  grow  to 
grievous  evils.  The  use  of  a  symbol  devel- 
opes  into  idolatry.  A  little  laxity  increases 
into  absolute  immorality.  Small  disputes 
lead  on  to  heart-burnings  and  divisions. 

6.  Tolerance  of  sin  in  a  family  is  a  fruitful  source 
of  overwhelming  evil.  See  the  case  of  Eli. 
Mind  it  is  not  your  own. 

6.  Toleration  of  sin  in  yourself.  Occasional  in 
dulgence  becomes  habit,  and  habit  is  as  the 
SimOoni  of  the  desert,  before  which  life 
expires,  and  hope  is  swept  away.  Even 
allowable  acts  may  grow  into  dangerous 
excess. 

Let  no  man  think  that  he  can  measure,  much  less 


WHAT   WILL,   THE   HARVEST   BE?  223 

limit,  the  consequences  of  sin  as  to  himself,  his 
family,  the  church,  or  the  world.  When  once  the 
winds  are  up,  who  can  still  them? 

II.  THE    RESULT    OF    SOME   SOWINGS   IS    MANIFEST 

FAILURE.      "  It  hath  no  stalk." 
The  seed  feebly  tries  to  grow,  but  it  comes  to 
nothing. 

1.  Self-conceit  vainly  endeavors  to  produce  a  repu 

tation. 

2.  Self-righteousness  strives  unsuccessfully  to  ob 

tain  salvation. 

3.  Human  wisdom  idly  struggles  to  make  a  new 

gospel. 

4.  Mere  idlers  and  talkers  affect  to  be  useful,  but 

it  is  a  delusion.  What  appears  to  be  accom 
plished  soon  vanishes  away.  Great  talk, 
but  "no  stalk." 

6.  He  who  spends  his  life  without  faith  in  Christ, 
and  obedience  to  his  will,  may  dream  of  a 
happy  future,  but  he  will  be  deceived :  "  it 
hath  no  stalk." 

Wherefore  do  men  live  for  folly,  and  dote  on 
vanity  ? 

III,  THE    RESULT    OF   MANY    SOWINGS    IS   UNSATIS 

FACTORY.     "  The  bud  shall  yield  no  meal." 
"  The  devil's  meal  is  all  bran,"  so  they  say,  and  it 
is  true. 

1.  The  man  lived  for  pleasure,  and  found  satiety. 

2.  He  lived  for  fame,  and  gathered  vanity. 


224  MT 

3.  He  lived  for  self  and  found  misery. 

4.  He  lived  by  his  own  works  and  religiousness, 

but  reaped  no  peace  of  mind,  and  no  real 
salvation. 

IV.   THE  RESULT   OF  MANY  SOWINGS  IS   PERSONAL 

DISAPPOINTMENT.  "  If  so  be  it  yield,  the 
strangers  shall  swallow  it  up." 

1.  The  man  spends  his  life  as  a  common  toiler, 

who  earns  much  for  his  master,  but  nothing 
for  himself,  and  this  is  a  poor  result  if  there 
be  no  higher  object  in  life. 

2.  He  invents,  devises,  and  commences,  but  another 

gains  the  profit. 

8.  He  heapeth  up  riches,  and  knoweth  not  who 
shall  gather  them.  His  heirs  forget  him, 
and  strangers  swallow  up  his  savings  with 
out  gratitude. 

Without  God,  nothing  is  wise,  or  strong,  or  worth 
the  doing. 

Only  to  live  unto  God  is  a  wise  sowing. 
May  the  Lord  destroy  utterly  all  our  sowings  to 
the  flesh,  lest  we  reap  corruption !     Gal.  vi.  8. 

May  the  Lord  Jesus  supply  us  with  good  seed,  and 
bless  us  in  the  sowing  1  Oh,  for  a  consecrated  life  I 

INCIDENTS. 

An  Eastern  apologue  tells  us  of  Abdallah,  to  whom 
an  evil  spirit  came  at  first  as  a  fly,  sipping  an  atom 
of  syrup.  He  did  not  drive  away  the  creature,  and 
to  his  surprise  it  increased  to  the  size  of  a  locust 


WHAT   WILL  THE   HARVEST   BE?  225 

Being  further  indulged,  the  creature  went  on  grow 
ing,  and  made  such  rapid  increase  that  it  became  an 
enormous  monster,  devoured  his  substance,  and  in 
the  end  murdered  him,  leaving  in  the  garden,  where 
it  slew  its  victim,  a  footprint  six  cubits  long.  Thus 
does  sin  grow  upon  men,  till  it  becomes  a  giant  habit, 
and  slays  them. 

Augustine  tells  us  of  a  young  man  who  thought 
that  the  devil  had  made  flies,  and  such  like  tiny 
things.  By  the  influence  of  this  apparently  insig 
nificant  error,  he  was  led  on,  step  by  step,  till  in  the 
end  he  ascribed  everything  to  Satan,  and  ceased  to 
believe  in  God.  Thus  does  error  sow  the  wind,  and 
reap  the  whirlwind.  Scrupulous  correctness  of  faith 
is  as  much  a  duty  as  careful  practice  in  morals. 

David  Hume,  the  historian,  philosopher,  and  sceptic, 
spent  his  life  in  traducing  the  Word  of  God.  In  his 
last  moments  he  joked  with  those  around  him ;  but 
the  intervals  were  filled  up  with  sadness.  He  wrote, 
"I  am  affrighted  and  confounded  with  the  forlorn 
solitude  in  which  I  am  placed  by  my  philosophy. 
When  I  turn  my  eye  inward,  I  find  nothing  but 
doubt  and  ignorance.  Where  am  I,  and  what?  I 
begin  to  fancy  myself  in  the  most  deplorable  condi 
tion  imaginable,  environed  in  the  deepest  darkness." 
— New  Cyclopaedia  oj  Anecdote. 

The  history  of  the  Rev.  Caleb  Colton,  M.A.,  the 
author  of  "  Lacon,"  may  serve  as  a  striking  illustra 
tion  of  the  truth  of  our  text.     He  was  a  clergyman 
2—15 


226  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

at  Tiverton,  popular  and  clever,  but  very  fond  of 
field-sports.  One  day,  however,  a  friend  suddenly 
expired  while  uttering  most  impious  language.  The 
awe-struck  minister  abjured  dogs  and  guns,  and  vowed 
to  live  henceforth  for  his  sacred  calling.  For  months 
his  preaching  was  earnest,  but  at  the  end  of  that 
time  he  resumed  the  sporting  life.  He  had,  more 
over,  acquired  a  love  for  gambling.  A  presentation 
to  the  vicarage  of  Kew  and  Petersham  brought  him 
to  London,  and  while  numbers  were  reading  with 
delight  his  "Lacon ;  or,  Many  Things  in  Few  Words; 
addressed  to  those  who  think,"  the  wretched  author 
was  sitting  far  into  the  night  among  swindlers.  His 
passion  for  play  involving  him  in  pecuniary  difficul 
ties,  he  was  forced  to  abscond,  and  his  living  was 
declared  void.  After  leading  a  vagabond  life,  he 
perished  by  his  own  hand  at  Fontainebleau,  in  1832. 


cm. 

"THEIR    HEART     IS    DIVIDED;   NOW  SHALL  THEY    BE    FOUN» 

FAULTY." — Hosea  x.  2. 

TSRAEL,  as  a  nation,  divided  its  allegiance  between 
•*•  Jehovah  and  Baal,  and  so  became  good  for  noth 
ing,  and  was  given  up  to  captivity. 

God  has  made  one  heart  in  man,  and  the  attempt 
to  have  two,  or  to  divide  the  one,  is  in  every  case 
injurious  to  man's  life. 

A  church  divided  into  parties,  or  differing  in  doc 
trine,  becomes  heretical,  or  contentious,  or  weak  and 
useless. 

A  Christian,  aiming  at  another  object  besides  his 
Lord's  glory,  is  sure  to  spend  a  poor,  unprofitable 
life.  He  is  an  idolater,  and  his  entire  character  will 
be  faulty. 

A  seeker  after  Christ  will  never  find  him  while  his 
heart  is  hankering  after  sinful  pleasures,  or  self- 
righteous  confidences :  his  search  is  too  faulty  to  be 
successful. 

A  minister,  aiming  at  something  else  besides  hia 
one  object,  whether  it  be  fame,  learning,  philosophy, 
rhetoric,  or  gain,  will  prove  to  be  a  very  faulty  ser 
vant  of  God. 

In  any  case  this  heart-disease  is  a  dire  malady.     A 

(227) 


228  M\    SERMON   NOTES. 

broken  heart  is  a  blessing ;  but  a  divided  heart  is  a 
mortal  malady. 

Let  us  seriously  consider, — 

I.  THE  DISEASE.     "  Their  heart  is  divided  " 
This  evil  is  to  be  seen — 

1.  In  their  idea  of  their  state :  they  say  they  are 

"  miserable  sinners,"  but  they  believe  them 
selves  to  be  exceedingly  respectable. 

2.  In  the  ground  of  their  trust :  they  profess  faith 

in  Christ,  and  yet  they  rely  upon  self :  they 
try  to  mix  grace  and  works. 

8.  In  the  aim  of  their  life :  God  and  mammon, 
Christ  and  Belial,  heaven  and  the  world. 

4.  In  the  object  of  their  love.     It  is  Jesus  and 

some  earthly  love.  They  cannot  say  "  Jesus 
only." 

5.  In  the  decision  of  their  will.     They  are  never 

settled  ;    they  halt  between  two  opinions ; 
they  do  not  know  their  own  mind :  they 
have  two  minds,  and  so  no  mind  at  all. 
The  disease  complained  of  is  in  the  central  foun 
tain  of  life,  and  it  affects  every  part  of  their  man 
hood.     It  is  fearfully  common,  even  in  those  who 
make  a  loud  profession.    If  not  cured  it  will  end 
fatally,  and  perhaps  suddenly,  as  heart-disease  is 
very  apt  to  do. 

II.  THE  EVTL  EFFECT  OF  IT.    "Now  shall  they  be 

found  faulty." 

In  all  sorts  of  ways  the  fault  will  show  itself. 
1.  God  if  not  loved  at  all  when  not  wholly  loved. 


HEART-DISEASE.  229 

2.  Christ  is  insulted  when  a  rival  is  admitted. 

3.  No  grace  reigns  within  the  soul  if  the  heart  be 

not  wholly  won. 

4.  The  life  limps  and  halts  when  it  has  not  a  whole 

heart  behind  it. 

5.  Before  long  the  man  goes  over  entirely  to  the 

wrong  side. 

The  secret  evil  must  sooner  or  later  prove  the 
whole  profession  to  be  faulty  from  beginning  to  end. 
It  will  be  an  awful  thing  if  this  be  never  discovered 
till  death  is  close  at  hand. 

III.  ATTEMPTS  AT  A  CUBE. 

Let  it  be  seriously  considered  by  the  double-hearted 
man — 

1.  That  he  condemns  himself  by  yielding  so  much 

of  his  heart  to  God.  Why  any  if  not  all  ? 
Why  go  this  way  at  all,  if  not  all  the  way  ? 

2.  That  his  salvation  wiU  require  all  his  thought 

and  heart ;  for  it  is  no  trifling  matter. 
"The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  vio 
lence:"  Matt.  xi.  12.  The  righteous 
scarcely  are  saved:  1  Pet.  iv.  18. 

8.  That  the  blessing  he  seeks  is  worthy  of  all  his 
soul  and  strength. 

4.  That  Jesus  gave  his  whole  heart  to  our  redemp 
tion,  and  therefore  it  is  not  consistent  foi 
us  to  be  half-hearted. 

6.  That  all  potent  beings  in  the  universe  are  undi 

vided  in  heart. 
Bad  men  are  eager  for  their  pleasure,  gains,  &o. 


280  MY    SERMON    NOTES. 

The  devil  works  evil  with  his  whole  power. 

Good  men  are  zealous  for  Ohrist. 

God  is  earnest  to  bless. 

6.  That  faith  in  Christ  is  an  act  of  the  whole  heart, 
and  therefore  a  divided  heart  is  not  capable 
of  saving  faith,  and  consequently  shuts  it 
self  off  from  the  Saviour. 

From  this  time  forward  pray  that  you  may  have 
an  undivided  heart. 

Read,  hear,  pray,  repent,  believe  with  your  whole 
heart,  and  you  shall  soon  rejoice  with  all  your  heart. 

HELPS  TOWARD  APPLICATION. 

A  minister  in  Brooklyn  was  recently  called  upon 
by  a  business  man,  who  said  to  him,  "  I  come,  sir,  to 
enquire  if  Jesus  Christ  will  take  me  into  the  concern 
as  a  sleeping  partner."  "  Why  do  you  ask  ?  "  said 
the  minister.  "  Because  I  wish  to  be  a  member  of 
the  firm,  and  do  not  wish  anybody  to  know  it."  The 
reply  was  :  fc*  Christ  takes  no  sleeping  partners." 

Some  talk  that  the  devil  hath  a  cloven  foot ;  but 
whatever  the  devil's  foot  be,  to  be  sure  his  sons  have 
a  cloven  heart :  one  half  for  God,  the  other  half  for 
sin ;  one  half  for  Christ,  the  other  half  for  this  present 
world.  God  hath  a  corner  in  it,  and  the  rest  is  for 
sin  and  the  devil. — Richard  Alleine. 

As  to  the  evil  of  being  neither  one  thing  nor  the 
other,  one  finds  an  illustration  in  the  water-ways  of 
Southern  China,  which  in  winter-time  are  quite  use- 


HEABT-DISEASE.  23w 

less  for  purposes  of  commerce.  The  temperature  is 
most  tantalizing,  for  it  is  neither  cold  enough  ta 
freeze  the  canals,  so  that  the  ice  would  be  able  to 
bear  traffic ;  nor  warm  enough  to  thdw  them,  so  that 
they  could  be  navigable  by  boats. 

Some  great  king  or  potentate,  having  a  mind  to 
visit  his  imperial  city,  the  harbinger  is  ordered  to  go 
before,  and  mark  out  a  house  suitable  to  entertain 
his  majesty's  retinue.  The  prince  will  only  come  to 
a  house  where  he  may  dwell  alone :  if  he  cannot 
have  the  whole  house,  he  will  go  elsewhere.  The 
herald  findeth  one  house  where  the  master  desireth 
to  entertain  the  king,  but  he  must  have  but  one  small 
chamber,  wherein  to  lodge  his  wife  and  children. 
The  herald  will  not  accept  his  offer.  Then  he 
entreats  the  benefit  of  some  by-place,  to  set  up  a 
trunk  or  two,  full  of  richer  goods  than  ordinary. 
"  No,"  says  the  harbinger,  "  it  cannot  be ;  for  if  your 
house  were  as  big  again  as  it  is,  it  would  be  little 
enough  to  entertain  the  king  and  all  his  royal  train." 
So  it  is  that  every  man's  body  is  a  temple  of  God, 
and  his  heart  the  sanctum  sanctorum  of  that  temple. 
His  ministers  are  sent  out  into  the  world  to  inform 
us  that  Christ  is  coming  to  lodge  there,  and  that  we 
must  clear  the  rooms,  that  this  great  King  of  glory 
may  enter  in.  God  will  have  the  whole  heart,  the 
whole  mind,  the  whole  soul, — and  all  will  be  too  little 
to  entertain  him,  and  the  graces  of  his  Holy  Spirit, 
which  are  attendant  on  him.  "Let  it  be  neither 
mine  nor  thine;  divide  it:"  was  the  voice  of  a 


282  MY  SKBMON  NOTES. 

strange  woman  (1  Kings  iii.  26),  and  such  is  that  of 
the  present  world;  but  God  will  take  nothing  by- 
halves  :  he  will  have  the  whole  heart  or  nothing. — 
John  Spencer. 

On  one  occasion,  when  a  former  ruler  of  Monte 
negro  was  supposed  to  have  received  the  offer  of 
peace  and  a  sum  of  money  if  he  would  acknowledge 
himself  a  vassal  of  the  Porte,  it  is  said  that  the  chief 
men  of  the  people  waited  on  him  to  remind  him  that 
he  was  at  perfect  liberty  to  take  service  with  the 
Sultan,  but  that  no  servant  of  the  Sultan  could  be 
Gospodar  of  the  Black  Mountaineers. — Travels  in  the 
Sclavonic  Province*  of  Turkey. 


crv, 

"SOW  TO  YOURSELVES  IN  RIGHTEOUSNESS,  REAP  IN  MERCY ; 
BREAK  UP  YOUR  FALLOW  GROUND :  FOR  IT  18  TIME  TO  SEEK 
THE  LORD,  TILL,  HE  COME  AND  RAIN  RIGHTEOUSNESS  UPO* 

YOU."— Hosea  x.  12. 

WHAT  should  we  think  of  a  farmer  who  allowed 
his  finest  fields  to  lie  fallow  year  after  year? 

Yet  men  neglect  their  souls;  and  besides  being 
unprofitable,  these  inward  fields  become  full  of  weeds, 
and  exceedingly  foul. 

You  see  to  everything  else,  will  you  not  see  to 
your  souls  ? 

It  is  God  who  calls  you  to  break  up  the  fallow 
ground  of  your  uncultivated  heart,  and  he  waits  to 
aid  you  therein. 

Regard  attentively  the  argument  which  he  uses : 
"  for  it  is  time  to  seek  the  Lord."  Thus  God  reasons 
with  you.  To  this  he  adds  Instructions  which  deserve 
our  best  attention. 

1.  WHEN  IB  IT  TIME?    "It  is  time." 

1.  In  the  very  first  hour  of  responsibility  it  is  none 

too  soon. 

2.  At  the  present  it  it  late,  but  not  too  late.    "  It 

is  tints.'' 

(233) 


234  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

8.  When  chastening  has  come,  seek  the  Lord 
instantly ;  for  now  it  is  high  time,  "  lest  a 
worse  thing  come  unto  thee :  "  John  v.  14. 

4.  Before  trial  comes,  let  mercy  and  gentleness 

lead  to  gratitude.  Why  should  we  need  to 
be  flogged  to  our  God  ?  Isa.  i.  5. 

5.  Have  you  not  sinned  long  enough  ?     May  not 

the  time  past  suffice  for  us  to  have  served 
the  flesh?  1  Peter  iv.  3. 

6.  When  you  assume  great  responsibilities,  and 

enter  on  a  new  stage  of  life : — married, 
made  a  master,  a  father,  etc.:  1  Chron. 
xxii.  19. 

7.  When  God's  Spirit  is  specially  at  work,  and 

therefore  others  are  saved.     Acts  iii.  19. 
When  you  yourself  feel  holy  stirrings  in  your 

conscience,  and  hope  in  your  heart.     Ps. 

xxvii.  8.     2  Sam.  v.  24. 
When  the  gospel  is  aimed  at  you  by  an  earnest 

minister  or  friend. 

II.  WHAT  is  THE  PECULIAR  WOEK? — "  to  seek  the 
Lord." 

1.  To  draw  nigh  unto  God ;  seeking  him  in  worship, 

prayer,  etc.     Ps.  cv.  4. 

2.  To  ask  pardon  at  his  hands  through  the  atone 

ment  of  Jesus.     Isa.  Iv.  6. 

8.  To  obtain  the  blessings  connected  with  the  new 

birth.     John  i.  12,  13. 

4.  To  live  for  his  glory :  seeking  his  honor  in  all 
things.  Matt.  vi.  38. 


THE  STROKE  OF   THE   CLOCK.  235 

III.  HOW   LONG   SHALL  THIS    BE    DONE?       *  Till   h« 

come  and  reign  righteousness  upon  you. ' 

1.  Until  the  blessing  of  righteousness  be  obtained. 

"  till  he  come." 

2.  Until  it  be  plenteously  received :  "  rain  right 

eousness." 

3.  Until  your  soul  is  saturated :  "  rain  righteous 

ness  upon  you." 

Suppose  a  pause  between  the  seeking  and  the 
blessing,  do  not  look  in  some  other  direction,  but 
seek  the  Lord  still. 

What  else  can  you  do  ?    John  vi.  68. 

Is  not  God  a  Sovereign  ?  May  he  not  give  when 
he  pleases  ? 

Even  now  some  rain  of  grace  falls  on  you.  Be 
thankful  for  it. 

Is  it  not  worth  waiting  for  this  grace  of  life  ? 

It  is  sure  to  come.  He  will  come,  and  will  not 
tarry.  Heb.  x.  37. 

IV.  WHAT  WILL  COME  or  IT? 

1.  He  will  come.     This  is  implied  in   ne  expression 

"  till  he  come."      God's  coming  in  grace  is 
all  you  need. 

2.  He   will  come  in    righteousness.      You  need 

purity  and  holiness,  and  he  will  bring  these 
with  him. 

8.  He  will  come  in  abundance  of  grace  meeting  your 
obedient  sowing.  Mark  the  precept,  "  Son 
in  righteousness."  Then  note  the  promise, 
"and  rain  righteousness  upon  you." 


236  MY   SEBMON   NOTES. 

4.  In  consequence  of  the  Lord's  coming  to  you  in 
righteousness,  you  shall  "  reap  in  mercy." 
With  joy  you  shall  gather  the  fruits  of  his 
love ;  not  because  of  your  own  righteous 
ness,  but  because  of  his  righteousness, 
which  he  rains  upon  you;  not  as  merit, 
but  as  mercy. 

Come  then,  and  seek  the  Lord  at  this  very  hour ! 
If  thou  wduldst  find  him,  he  is  in  Christ.   Believe, 
and  thou  hast  found  him,  and  righteousness  in  him. 


While  Christ  calls,  it  is  not  too  late  to  come. 
Dost  thou  object, — "  Is  there  not  a  set  day,  which, 
if  sinners  neglect,  the  door  is  shut  I "  I  answer, — 
There  is  truth  in  this;  but  yet  there  is  no  day  but  a 
sinner  ought  to  come  in  it.  Though  thou  mayest 
think  the  day  of  Christ's  acceptance  to  be  over,  yet 
is  not  the  day  of  thy  submission  over.  Thy  time  to 
be  subject  to  the  divine  precept  is  not  over  while 
thou  livest.  Thou  art  still  under  the  command,  and 
bound  to  yield  obedience  to  God  whatever  he  biddest 
thee  do.  ...  So  long  as  God  calls  thee,  the  day 
is  not  over.  This  should  encourage  thee  to  come  at 
once,  driven  by  duty,  and  drawn  by  grace. — Ralph 
Robinson. 

Sir  Thomas  More,  whilst  he  was  a  prisoner  in  the 
Towar,  would  not  so  much  as  suffer  himself  to  be 


THE   STROKE   OF   TKE  CLOCK.  237 

trimmed,  saying  that  there  was  a  controversy  betwixt 
the  king  and  him  for  his  head,  and  till  that  was  at  a 
happy  end,  he  would  be  at  no  cost  about  it.  Let  us 
but  scum  off  the  froth  of  his  wit,  and  we  may  make 
a  solemn  use  of  it;  for  certainly  all  the  cost  we 
bestow  upon  ourselves,  to  make  our  lives  pleasurable 
and  joyous  to  us,  is  but  mere  folly,  till  it  be  decided 
what  will  become  of  the  suit  betwixt  God  and  us, 
what  will  be  the  issue  of  the  controversy  that  God 
hath  against  us,  and  that  not  for  our  heads,  but  for 
our  souls,  whether  for  heaven  or  hell.  Were  it  not, 
then,  the  wisest  course  to  begin  with  making  our 
peace;  and  then  we  may  the  sooner  lead  a  happy 
life  ?  It  is  said,  "  He  who  gets  out  of  debt  grows 
rich."  Most  sure  it  is  that  the  pardoned  soul  cannot 
be  poor ;  for  as  soon  as  peace  is  concluded,  a  free 
trade  is  opened  between  God  and  the  soul.  If  once 
pardoned,  we  may  then  sail  to  any  port  that  lies  in 
God's  dominions,  and  be  welcome.  All  the  promises 
stand  *  open  with  their  treasures,  and  say,  "  Here, 
poor  soul,  take  in  full  lading  of  all  precious  things, 
even  as  much  as  thy  faith  can  bear  and  carry  away  I " 
— John  Spencer. 

A.  little  maiden  stood  trembling,  weeping,  timidly 
knocking  at  the  door  of  a  minister's  library.  "  Come 
in,"  said  a  cheerful  voice.  The  door  handle  slowly 
turned,  and  there  she  stood,  sobbing  with  emotion. 
"  What  is  the  matter,  my  dear  child  ? "  said  the 
sympathising  pastor.  "  Oh,  sir"  was  the  reply,  "  1 
have  lived  seven  years  without  Jesus  f "  She  had  just 


MY   SEEMON    NOTES. 

been  celebrating  her  seventh  oirthday. — The  British 
Messenger. 

Moments  seize ; 

Heaven's  on  their  wing :  a  moment  we  may  wish, 
When  worlds  want  wealth  to  buy. — Young. 

Thomas  fuller  says,  "  God  invites  many  with  his 
golden  sceptre  whom  he  never  bruises  with  his  rod 
of  iron."  If  the  invitations  of  his  grace  were  more 
freely  accepted,  we  should  often  escape  the  chastise 
ments  of  his  hand.  Oh,  that  men  did  but  know 
that  a  time  of  health,  and  happiness,  and  prosperity 
is  as  fit  a  season  as  can  be  for  seeking  the  Lord/ 
Indeed,  any  hour  is  a  good  time  in  which  to  seek  the 
Lord,  so  long  as  it  is  present  with  us.  He  who 
would  be  wise  will  find  no  better  day  in  the  calendar 
for  casting  away  folly  than  that  which  is  now  with 
him.  But  let  no  man  trifle  with  time,  for  in  an 
instant  the  die  may  be  cast,  and  then  it  is  written 
concerning  the  ungodly,  "  I  also  will  laugh  at  your 
calamity,  and  mock  when  your  fear  cometh : " 
Prov.  i.  26. 


cv. 

"  I  WILL  BE  THT  KINO."— Eosea  xiii.  10. 

r  I  ^HIS  was  God's  declaration  to  Israel,  meeting  a 
-*•  great  want,  and  saving  the  people  from  a  great 
burden. 

They  were  to  be  spared  the  expense  and  danger 
arising  from  a  human  monarch,  and  to  find  govern 
ment  and  headship  in  God  himself. 

This  did  not  content  their  unspiritual  nature,  and 
they  desired  a  king,  like  the  nations  around  them. 
By  this  desire  they  angered  the  Lord,  and  missed  a 
great  privilege. 

To  us  the  Lord  presents  the  same  privilege  in  a 
high  spiritual  sense,  and  if  we  are  wise  we  shall 
accept  it. 

I.  THE  CRAVING  OF  NATURE.     "  Give  me  a  king." 

We  do  not  go  into  the  political  question  of  the 
right  or  wrong  of  monarchy  in  the  abstract:  that 
would  be  too  vexed  a  discussion,  and  unsuitable  for 
our  present  engagement.  We  are  quite  content  with 
the  form  of  government  of  our  own  land. 

But  we  speak  morally  and  spiritually  of  individual 
need. 

Man  was  happy  in  the  garden  while  God  was  his 

(239) 


240  MY    8KUA1ON    NOTES. 

King ;  but  when  he  became  a  rebel  against  the  King 
of  kings,  he  was  forced  to  accept  another  lord. 
"  Give  me  a  king  "  is — 

1.  The  cry  of  weakness.     Man  needs  some  one  to 

look  up  to. 

2.  The  sigh  of  distress.    In  straits  he  sighs  for  the 

wise  and  the  strong  to  counsel  and  succor 

him. 
8.  The  prayer  of  thoughtfulness. 

Anarchy  of  soul  is  terrible ;  each  passion  fights 

for  mastery. 
A  kingless,  aimless  life  is  misery.     Idleness  is 

hard  work :  the  purposeless  are  unhappy. 
King  Self  is  a  poor,  mean,  despicable  despot, 

foolish  and  feeble. 

The  World  is  a  cruel  and  ungrateful  master. 
4.  The  desire  of  experience. 

Folly  proved  makes  us  desire  a  Lawgiver. 
Danger  felt  makes  us  long  for  a  Protector. 
Responsibility  weighing  upon  us  makes  us 

sigh  for  a  Superior,  who  will  undertake  to 

choose  our  way,  and  direct  us  in  it. 

II.  THE  EOYAL  AtfSWEB  OF  GBAOB.      "  I  Will  be  thy 

King." 
1.  Eminently  condescending.    Our  God  comes  to 

rule  over — 

A  ruined,  bankrupt,  desolated  realm. 
Torn  to  pieces  by  contending  pretenders, 
Surrounded  by  mighty  and  relentless  enemies 
Full  of  unrulv  members. 


THEOCRACY.  241 

Nothing  but  infinite  love  could  prompt  him  to 
assume  such  a  throne,  or  to  wear  a  crown 
which  cost  him  so  dear.      "Behold  your 
King ! " 
2.  Abundantly  satisfactory ;  for — 

He  has  power  to  subdue  every  inward  rebel. 

He  has  a  character  worthy  of  dominion.  It  is 
a  great  honor  to  submit  to  such  a  Prince. 

He  has  more  than  the  wisdom  of  Solomon  to 
arrange  every  matter. 

He  has  goodness  to  bless,  and  he  is  as  ready 
as  he  is  able  to  make  his  reign  a  period  of 
happiness,  peace,  and  prosperity. 

He  has  love  with  which  to  command  affec 
tionate  obedience. 
8.  Infinitely  consoling — 

To  be  protected  by  his  omnipotence. 

To  be  ruled  by  absolute  perfection. 

To  be  governed  by  a  King  who  can  neither  be 
defeated,  nor  die,  nor  abdicate,  nor  change. 

To  find  in  God  far  more  of  greatness  and 
goodness  than  could  be  dreamed  of  as  exist 
ing  in  the  best  of  earthly  sovereigns. 
i.  Gloriously  inspiring — 

To  live  and  die  for  such  a  Leader. 

To  claim  possession  of  human  hearts  for  such 
a  Benefactor. 

To  have  such  an  Example  for  obedient  imi 
tation. 

To  be  for  ever  linked  with  a  Potentate  so 
majestic. 

2—16 


242  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

III.  THE  DELIGHT  OF  LOYALTY.     Our  answer  to  the 
promise  of  the  text  is  this — "  Thou  art  my 
King,  O  God:"  Ps.  xliv.  4. 
If  we  unreservedly  accept  our  King — 

1.  We  look  to  see  and  share  nis  glory  ere  long. 

Isa.  xxxiii.  17 

2.  We  expect  present  deliverances.     Ps.  xliv.  4. 

3.  We  repose  in  delicious  confidence  in  the  wis 

dom,  goodness,  and  immutability  of  all  his 
arrangements. 

4.  We  seek  to  extend  his  dominions.    Matt.  vi.  10. 
6.  We  glory  in  his  name  with  unspeakable  delight. 

His  history  is  our  meditation,  his  promise  is 
our  sustentation,  his  honors  are  our  glory, 
and  his  person  is  our  adoration.  His  throne 
is  our  haven  and  our  heaven.  He,  himself, 
is  all  our  salvation,  and  all  our  desire. 
2  Sam.  xxiii.  5. 


PLEAS  FOE  HOMAGE. 

Is  Jesus  in  very  deed  and  truth  my  King?  Where 
is  the  proof  of  it  ?  Am  I  living  in  his  kingdom  of 
"righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost "  now  ?  (Rom.  xiv.  17.)  Am  I  speaking  the 
language  of  that  kingdom  ?  Am  I  following  "  the 
customs  of  the  people  "  (Jer.  x.  3)  which  are  not 
his  people  ?  or,  do  I  "  diligently  learn  the  ways  of 
his  people  ?  "  (Jer.  xii.  16.)  Am  I  practically  living 
under  the  rule  of  his  laws?  Have  I  done  heart- 
homage  to  him  ?  Am  I  bravely  and  honestlv  uphold 


THEOCRACY.  243 

ing  his  cause,  because  it  is  his,  not  merely  because 
those  around  me  do  so?  Is  my  allegiance  making 
any  practical  difference  to  my  life  to-day. — Miss 
Havergal. 

God  is  the  ultimate  foundation  of  all  human 
society;  without  him  you  can  neither  cement  nor 
govern  society.  The  mad  attempt,  if  you  remember, 
was  made  in  France.  The  governing  council  de 
creed  that  there  was  no  God.  What  was  the  result? 
Anarchy,  confusion,  license,  bloodshed,  terror.  Robes 
pierre,  one  of  the  leading  spirits  of  the  Revolution, 
had  to  declare  to  his  comrades  in  conclave  assembled, 
"  If  there  be  no  God,  we  must  make  one — we  cannot 
govern  France  without  him. — J.  Cynddylan  Jones. 

What,  then,  shall  we  render  for  this  inestimable 
favor,  in  taking  us  to  be  his  subjects?  Oh,  let  us 
offer  him  not  only  the  tenths  of  our  labors,  but  the 
first  fruits  of  our  affections:  let  us  open  not  only 
the  doors  of  our  lips,  but  the  gates  of  our  hearts, 
that  the  King  of  glory  may  come  in.  And  when 
thou  vouchsafest,  O  my  Lord,  to  come  with  thy  high 
majesty  under  my  low  roof;  and  to  work  a  miracle, 
by  having  that  greatness,  which  the  world  containeth 
not,  contained  in  a  little  corner  of  my  breast ;  vouch 
safe  also  to  send  thy  grace  for  the  harbinger  of  thy 
glory ! 

Possess  me  wholly,  O  my  Sovereign  I  Reign  in 
my  body,  by  obedience  to  thy  laws ;  and  in  my  soul, 
by  confidence  in  thy  promises :  frame  my  tongue  to 
praise  thee,  my  knees  to  reverence  thee,  my  strength 


244  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

to  serve  thee,  my  desires  to  covet  thee,  and  my  heart 
to  embrace  thee. — Sir  R.  Baker,  on  the  "LorcTt 
Prayer." 

The  Lord  in  our  text  assumes  the  throne,  not  so 
much  by  the  election  of  his  subjects  as  by  his  elec 
tion  of  them ;  and  the  act  is  not  an  ascent  to  a 
higher  dignity  than  that  which  he  naturally  possesses, 
but  a  descent  of  love  to  a  position  which  is  for  our 
gain  rather  than  his  own.  He  comes  to  us  with  this 
sweet  willingness  to  reign  over  us,  and  it  is  our  wis 
dom  joyfully  to  accept  the  infinite  privileges  of  his 
endless 


CVI. 

'•REND  TOUK  HEART  AND  NOT  YOUR  GARMENTS,  AND  TUKS 
UNTO  THE  LORD  YOUR  GOD." — Joel  ii.  13. 

"pXPLAIN  the  oriental  custom  of  rending  robes. 
•*-'  People  were  ready  enough  to  use  the  outward 
signs  of  mourning  when,  as  in  the  present  instance, 
locusts  appeared  to  devour  their  crops,  or  when  any 
other  judgment  threatened  them. 

They  failed  in  mourning  as  to  the  Lord^  and  in 
rendering  spiritual  homage  to  his  chastising  rod. 
Hence  the  language  of  the  text. 

Let  us  revolve  in  our  minds, — 

I.  THE    GENERAL    DOCTRINE  THAT  TRUE  RELIGION 
IS  MORE  INWARD  THAN  OUTWARD. 

The  expression  "  Rend  your  heart,  and  not  your 
garments,"  casts  somewhat  of  a  slur  upon  the  merely 
outward. 

1.  This  respects  forms  and  ceremonies  of  men's 

devising.  These  are  numerous  and  vain. 
"  Not  your  garments  "  may  in  their  case  be 
treated  in  the  most  emphatic  manner.  Will 
worship  is  sin. 

2.  It  bears  also  upon  ordinances  of    God's  own 

ordaining  if  practiced  without  grace,  and 
relied  upon  as  of  themselves  effectual. 

(245) 


246  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

Among  good  things  which  may  become  unprofit 
able  we  may  mention — 

The  regular  frequenting  of  a  place  of  worship, 
The  practice  of  family  prayer  in  one's  own 

home. 

The  reading  of  Holy  Scripture. 
The  holding  of  an  orthodox  creed. 
The  practice  of  private  prayer. 
The  attendance  upon  sacraments. 
All  these  good  things  should  have  their  place  in 
our  lives :  but  they  do  not  prove  saintship :  since  a 
sinner   may  practice   them    all,   after   a   sort.     The 
absence  of  a  true  heart  will  make  them  all  vain. 

II.  THE  FURTHER  DOCTRINE  THAT  MAN  IS  MORE 
INCLINED  TO  THE  OUTWARD  OBSEEVANCE 
THAN  TO  INWARD  MATTERS. 

Hence  he  needs  no  exhortation  to  rend  his  gar 
ments,  though  that  act  might  in  certain  cases  be  a 
fit  and  proper  expression  of  deep  repentance,  and 
holy  horror  for  sin. 

Man  is  thus  partial  to  externals — 

1.  Because  he  is  not  spiritual,  but  carnal  by  nature. 

2.  Because  the  inward  is  more  difficult  than  the 

outward,  and  requires   thought,  diligence, 

care,  humiliation,  &c. 
8.  Because  he  loves  his  sin.      He  will  rend  his 

robes,  for  they  are  not  himself ;  but  to  rend 

off  his  beloved  sins  is  like  tearing  out  his 

eyes. 
i   Because  he  cares  not  to  submit  to  God.     Law 


INWARD  MORE  THAN    OUTWAKD.  247 

and  gospel  are  both  distasteful  to  him ;  he 
loves  nothing  which  necessitates  the  obedi 
ence  of  his  heart  to  God. 

Many  throng  the  outer  courts  of  religious  observ 
ance  who  shun  the  holy  place  of  repentance,  faith, 
and  consecration. 

III.  THE  PARTICULAR  DOCTRINE  THAT  HEART 
RENDING  IS  BETTER  THAN  ANY  EXTERNAL 
ACT  OF  PIETY. 

1.  Heart-rending  should  be  understood.     It  is — 

To  have  the  heart  broken,  contrite,  tender, 

sensitive. 

To  have  the  heart  grieving  over  past  evils. 
To  have  the  heart  rent  away  from  sin,  as  by 

holy  violence. 
To  have  the  heart  torn  with  holy  horror  and 

indignation  in  the  presence  of  temptation. 

The  sight  of  sin  should  rend  the  heart, 

especially  when  it  is  seen  by  the  light  of 

the  cross. 

2.  Heart-rending  is  to  be  preferred  to  external 

observances,  for — 

These  are  not  commanded  for  their  own  sakes. 

They  are  good  or  evil  as  the  heart  may  be. 

Their  observance  may  co-exist  with  sin,  even 
with  great  sin. 

Outward  signs  may  even  be  Antichrists  keep 
ing  us  from  Christ. 

They  can  never  supply  the  place  of  Jesus 
himself. 


248  MY    SERMON    NOTES. 

8.  Heart-rending  should  be  practised.    "Rend  yom 

hearts." 
This  would  need  a  great  tug.     Can  a  man 

rend  himself  ? 

This  drives  us  to  look  to  a  higher  power. 
This  is  met  only  by  Jesus.     Looking  to  him 

whom  we  have  pierced,  our  hearts  are  rent. 
This,  when  fully  done,  leaves  us  at  his  feet, 

who  alone  "  healeth  the  broken  in  heart, 

and  bindeth  up  their  wounds." 


AD   BEM. 

An  old  Hebrew  story  tells  how  a  poor  creature 
came  one  day  to  the  Temple,  from  a  sick  bed,  on 
tottering  limbs.  He  was  ashamed  to  come,  for  he 
was  very  poor,  and  he  had  no  sacrifice  to  offer ;  but 
as  he  drew  near  he  heard  the  choir  chanting,  "  Thou 
desirest  not  sacrifice;  else  would  I  give  it:  thou 
delightest  not  in  burnt  offerings.  The  sacrifices  of 
God  are  a  broken  spirit:  a  broken  and  a  contrite 
heart,  O  God,  thou  wilt  not  despise."  Other  worship 
pers  came,  pressed  before  him,  and  offered  their  sacri 
fices;  but  he  had  none.  At  length  he  prostrated 
himself  before  the  priest,  who  said,  "What  wilt 
thou,  my  son  ?  Hast  thou  no  offering  ?  "  And  he 
replied,  "  No,  my  father,  for  last  night  a  poor  widow 
and  her  children  came  to  me,  and  I  had  nothing  to 
offer  them  but  the  two  pigeons  which  were  ready  for 
the  sacrifice."  "  Bring,  then,"  said  the  priest,  "an 
ephah  of  fin*  flour."  "  Nay,  but,  my  father,"  said 


THEOCRACY.  249 

the  old  man,  "  this  day  my  sickness  and  poverty  have 
left  only  enough  for  my  own  starving  children;  I 
have  not  even  an  ephah  of  flour."  "  Why,  then,  art 
thou  come  to  me  ? "  said  the  priest.  "  Because  I 
heard  them  singing,  'The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a 
broken  spirit.'  Will  not  God  accept  my  sacrifice  if 
I  say,  'Lord,  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner?' '  Then 
the  priest  lifted  the  old  man  from  the  ground,  and 
he  said,  "  Yes,  thou  art  blessed,  my  son ;  it  is  the 
offering  which  is  better  than  thousands  of  rivers  of 
oil."—"  The  World  of  Proverb  and  Parable,"  by  E. 
Paxton  Hood. 

If  this  hypocrisy,  this  resting  in  outward  perform 
ances,  was  so  odious  to  God  under  the  law,  a  religion 
full  of  shadows  and  ceremonies,  certainly  it  will  be 
much  more  odious  under  the  gospel,  a  religion  of 
much  more  simplicity,  and  exacting  so  much  the  more 
sincerity  of  heart,  even  because  it  disburdens  the 
outward  man  of  the  performances  of  legal  rights  and 
observances.  And  therefore,  if  we  now,  under  the 
gospel,  shall  think  to  delude  God  Almighty,  as 
Michael  did  Saul,  with  an  idol  handsomely  dressed 
instead  of  the  true  David,  we  shall  one  day  find  that 
we  have  not  mocked  God,  but  ourselves ;  and  that 
our  portion  among  hypocrites  shall  be  greater  than 
theirs. —  William  Chillingworth. 

As  garments  to  a  body,  so  are  ceremonies  to 
religion.  Garments  on  a  living  body  preserve  the 
natural  warmth ;  put  them  on  a  dead  body  and  they 
will  never  fetch  life.  Ceremonies  help  to  increase 


250  MY   SEllMUN    NOTES. 

devotion ;  but  in  a  dead  heart  they  cannot  breed  it. 
These  garments  of  religion  upon  a  holy  man  are  like 
Christ's  garments  on  his  own  holy  body ;  but  joined 
with  a  profane  heart,  they  are  like  Christ's  garments 
on  his  crucifying  murderers. — Ralph  Brownrig. 

Rending  the  clothes  was  a  common  and  very  ancient 
mode  of  expressing  grief,  indignation,  or  concern ; 
and  as  such  is  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures. 
...  It  is  said  that  the  upper  garment  only  was  rent 
for  a  brother,  sister,  son,  daughter,  or  wife,  but  all 
the  garments  for  a  father  or  mother.  Maimonides 
says  that  the  rents  were  not  stitched  up  again  till 
after  thirty  days,  and  were  never  sewed  up  well. 
There  is  no  law  which  enjoins  the  Jew?,  to  rend 
fcheir  clothes;  yet  in  general  they  so  far  think  it 
requisite  to  comply  with  this  old  custom  as  to  make 
a  slight  rent  for  the  sake  of  form. — Pictorial  Bible. 


CVII. 

"  THUS    HE    SHEWED    ME :     AND,    BEHOLD,   THE    LORD    STOOB 
UPON  A   WALL   31ADE    BY  A   PLUMBLINE,  WITH   A  PLDMBLINB 

IN  HIS  HAND." — Amos  vii.  7. 

THE  metaphors  of  Amos  are  very  forcible,  though 
homely  and  simple. 

He  was  God-taught ;  or,  as  men  say,  self-taught. 

Let  his  vision  come  before  us,  as  though  we  saw  it 
ourselves. 

What  the  Lord  had  done  was  according  to  rule : 
"  he  stood  upon  a  wall  made  by  a  plumbline."  His 
past  dealings  are  just  and  true. 

The  Lord  continues  to  use  the  same  infallible 
rule :  wherever  he  is,  he  has  a  plumbline  in  his  hand. 

The  plumb  of  lead  falls  in  a  straight  line,  and 
therefore  the  line  is  the  best  test  as  to  whether  a 
wall  is  truly  perpendicular.  The  plumbline  shows 
whether  it  bows  outward,  or  inclines  inward.  It 
never  flatters,  but  by  its  own  certainty  of  truth  it 
reveals  and  condemns  all  deviations  from  upright 
ness  :  such  is  the  judgment  of  the  Most  High. 

We  shall  treat  the  plumbline  as  the  emblem  of 
truth  and  light. 

I.  A  PLUMBLINE  is  USED  IN  BUILDING. 

In  all  that  we  build  up,  we  must  act  by  the  surf 
mle  of  righteousness 

(251) 


252  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

1.  In  God's  building  it  is  so. 

He  removes  the  old  walls  when  tested  ly  the 
plumbline,  and  found  faulty.  Truth  re 
quires  the  removal  of  falsehood. 

He  builds  in  truth  and  reality.  Sincerity  ia 
his  essential. 

He  builds  in  holiness  and  purity. 

He  builds  to  perfection  according  to  the  rule 
of  right. 

2.  In  our  own  life-building  it  should  be  so. 

Not  haste,  but  truth  should  be  our  object. 

Not  according  to  the  eye  of  man,  but  accord 
ing  to  fact. 

We   should   build   by   the  Word;    in   God's 
sight ;  after  Christ's  example ;  by  the  Spirit , 
unto  holiness.     Only  thus  shall  we  be  using 
the  plumbline. 
8.  In  our  building  of  the  church  it  should  be  so. 

Teaching  the  Scriptures  only  in  all  things. 

Preaching  nothing  but  the  gospel. 

Laying  sinners  low  by  the  law,  and  exalting 
the  grace  of  God. 

Leading  men  to  holiness  and  peace  by  the 
doctrines  of  truth. 

Exercising  discipline  that  the  church  may 
be  pure. 

II.  A  PLUMBLDTB  18  USED  FOE  TESTING. 

That  which  is  out  o*  the  upright  is  detected  by 
the  plumbline,  and  so  are  men  tested  by  the  truth. 


THE   PLUMBLINE.  253 

1.  We  may  use  it — 

On   the  wall   of    self-righteousness,   conceit, 

boasting,  etc. 

On  the  wall  of  careless  living. 
On  the  wall  of  trust  in  ceremonials. 
On  the  wall  of  reliance  upon  merely  hearing 

the  gospel. 
On  the  wall  of  every  outward  profession. 

2.  God  uses  it  in  this  life.     He  tests  the  hearts  of 

men,  and  tries  their  doings.  They  are  often 
detected  in  the  act  of  deception.  Time 
also  proves  them,  and  trials  test  them. 

8.  He  will  use  it  at  the  last 

4.  Let  us  use  it  on  ourselves. 

Are  we  born  again?  Are  we  without  faith,  &o.? 
Are  we  without  holiness?  Or  is  the  work  of  the 
Spirit  to  be  seen  in  us  ? 

III.   A  PLUMBUNB  WILL   B»  USED  FOB  DESTROYING. 

Strict  justice  is  the  rule  of  God's  dealing  on  the 
judgment-seat. 
The  same  rule  will  apply  to  all. 

1.  Even  the  saved  will  be  saved  justly  through 

our  Lord  Jesus,  and  in  their  case  every  sin 
will  be  destroyed,  and  every  trace  of  evil 
will  be  removed  before  they  enter  heaven. 

2.  No  one  will  be  condemned  who  does  not  de 

serve  it.  There  will  be  a  trial,  with  wit 
nesses,  and  pleadings,  and  an  infallible 
Judge.  The  righteous  are  saved  by  sorer- 


251  MY    SERMON    NOTES. 

eignty,  but  the  wicked  are  condemned  by 
righteousness  alone. 
8.  Not  a  pain  will  be  inflicted  unjustly. 

Differences  will  be  made  in  the  cases  of  the 
condemned. 

There  will  be  the  strictest  justice  in    each 
award. 

Every  circumstance  will  be  taken  into  account. 

Knowledge  or  ignorance  will  increase  or  abate 

the  number  of  stripes.     Luke  xii.  47,  48. 
4.  Rejectors  of  Christ  will  find  their  doom  intol 
erable,  because   they,   themselves,  will   be 
unable  to  deny  its  justice.     Luke  xix.  27. 
The  lost  know  their  misery  to  be  deserved. 
6.  Since  every  sentence  will  be  infallible,  there 
will  be  no  revision.     So  impartial  and  just 
will  be  each  verdict  that  it  shall  stand  for 
ever.    Matt.  xxv.  46. 

Are  we  able  to  endure  the  test  of  the  plumbline 
of  perfect  truth  ? 

Suppose  it  to  be  used  of  God  at  this  moment. 

Will  it  not  be  wisest  to  look  to  Jesus,  that  we 
may  have  him  for  a  foundation,  and  be  built  up 
in  him? 


SAYINGS  AND  SENTENCES. 

The  question,  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  was  proposed  at 
a  Deaf  and  Dumb  Institution,  when  one  of  the  boys 
drew  a  straight  line.  "  And  what  is  falsehood  ?  "  The 
answer  was  a  crooked  line. —  &.  S.  Bowes. 


THE    PTjTTMBLlNR.  266 


That  will  be  a  wretched  day  tor  the  church  of  God 
when  she  begins  to  think  any  aberration  from  the 
truth  of  little  consequence.  —  J.  .  Evans. 

Whitefield  often  affirmed  that  he  would  rather 
have  a  church  with  ten  men  in  it  right  with  God, 
than  one  with  five  hundred  at  whom  the  world  would 
laugh  in  its  sleeve.  —  Joseph  Cook. 

Livingstone,  is  a  missionary,  was  anxious  to  avoid 
a  large  church  of  nominal  adherents.  "Nothing," 
he  wrote,  "will  induce  me  to  form  an  impure 
church.  *  Fifty  added  to  the  church  '  sounds  well 
at  home,  but  if  only  five  of  these  are  genuine,  what 
will  it  profit  in  the  Great  Da,y?"—Blaikie. 

Set  thine  heart  upright,  if  thou  wouldst  rejoice, 
And  please  thyself  in  thine  heart's  pleasing  choice  : 
But  then  be  sure  thy  plumb  and  level  be 
Rightly  applied  to  that  which  pleaseth  me. 

—  Christopher  Harvey. 

Sinners  on  earth  are  always  punished  less,  and  in 
hell  never  more,  than  their  iniquities  deserve.  —  Ben 
jamin  Beddome. 

It  is  said  of  the  Areopagites,  in  Athens,  that  their 
sentence  was  so  upright  that  none  could  ever  say  he 
was  unjustly  condemned  of  them.  How  much  more 
true  is  this  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God,  who 
must  needs  therefore  be  justified,  and  every  mouth 
stopped.  —  Trapp. 

When  a  building  is  noticed  to  bulge  a  little,  our 
builders  hasten  to  shore  it  up  with  timbers;  aod 


256  AfX   SERMON   NOTES. 

before  long  the  surveyor  bids  them  take  it  down. 
Should  we  not  see  great  changes  in  our  churches  if 
all  the  bowing  walls  were  removed  ?  Yet  this  would 
be  no  real  loss,  bnf  in  the  Lord's  sight  an  actual 
gain  to  the  City  of  God. 

When  a  man  is  afraid  of  self-examination,  his  fear 
is  suspicious.  He  who  does  not  dare  to  apply  the 
plumbline  to  his  wall  may  rest  assured  that  it  is  out 
of  perpendicular.  A  sincere  man  will  pray,  "  Lord, 
let  me  know  the  worst  of  my  case."  It  is  far  better 
to  suffer  needless  distress  than  to  be  at  ease  in  Zion, 
and  then  perish  of  the  dry-rot  of  self-deceit. 


CVIIL 

"  THE  PRIDE  OF  THINB  HEAKT  HATH  DECEIVED    tHEE." 

Obadiah  i.  3. 

r  I  ^HIS  is  true  of  all  proud  persons,  for  pride  is 
-*-  self-deceit. 

There  may  be  proud  persons  in  this  congregation. 

Those  who  are  sure  that  they  have  no  pride  are 
probably  the  proudest  of  all.  Those  who  are  proud 
of  their  humility  are  proud  indeed. 

The  confidence  that  we  are  not  deceived  may  only 
prove  the  completeness  of  the  deception  under  which 
we  labor. 

In  considering  the  case  of  the  Edomites,  and  the 
pride  of  their  hearts,  let  us  look  to  ourselves  that  we 
may  profit  withal. 

I.  THEY  WERE  DECEIVED. 

The  prophet  mentions  certain  matters  in  which 
they  were  deceived. 

1.  As  to  the  estimate  formed  of  them  by  others. 
They  thought  themselves  to  be  had  in 
honor,  but  the  prophet  says, — "Thou  art 
greatly  despised."  See  verse  2. 
You  might  not  be  pleased  if  you  knew  how 
little  others  think  of  you ;  but  if  you  think 
little  of  others  you  need  not  wonder  if  you 


^168  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

are  yourself  greatly  despised,  for  "with 
what  measure  ye  mete,  it  shall  be  measured 
to  you  again  : "  Matt.  vii.  2. 

2.  As  to  their  personal  security.     They  felt  safe, 

but  were  near  their  doom.  "  Who  shall 
bring  me  down ? "  "I  will  bring  thee 
down,  saith  the  Lord"  (verses  3  and  4). 
Dwelling  in  their  rock-city  of  Petra  was  no 
real  security  to  them :  neither  may  any  one 
of  us  think  himself  proof  against  misfor 
tune,  sickness,  or  sudden  death. 

3.  As  to  their  personal  wisdom.     They  talked  of 

"  The  wise  man  out  of  Edom  "  (verse  8) ; 
but  the  Lord  said,  "There  is  none  under 
standing  in  him  "  (verse  7). 

Those  who  know  better  than  the  word  of  God 
know  nothing. 

4.  As  to  the  value  of  their  confidences.     Edom 

relied  on  alliances,  but  these  utterly  failed. 
"The  men  that  were  at  peace  with  thee 
have  deceived  thee  "  (verse  7).  Rich  rela 
tives,  influential  friends,  tried  allies — all 
will  fail  those  who  trust  in  them. 

II.  THEIR  OWN  PRIDE  DECEIVED  THEM. 

1.  In  each  of  the  points  mentioned  above,  pride 

lay  at  the  bottom  of  their  error. 

2.  In  every  way  pride  lays  a  man  open  to  being 

deceived. 

His  judgment  is  perverted  by  it :  he  cannot 
hold  the  acales. 


SELF-DECEIVED.  269 

His  standard  is  rendered  inaccurate:  his 
weights  are  false. 

His  desires  invite  flattery,  and  his  folly  ao- 

cepts  it. 

8.  In  every  case  a  proud  man  is  a  deceived  man : 
he  is  not  what  he  thinks  himself  to  be ; 
and  he  is  blind  to  that  part  of  his  character 
which  should  cause  him  to  be  humble. 
4.  In  spiritual  cases  it  is  emphatically  so. 

The  self-righteous,  self-sufficient,  perfection 
ists,  etc.,  are  all  deceived  by  the  pride  of 
their  hearts. 

III.   THIS  PRIDE   LED   THEM  INTO  EVIL   WAYS. 

1.  They  were  full  of  defiance.     "  Who  shall  bring 

me  down  to  the  ground  ? "  This  self- 
asserting  spirit  provokes  hostility,  and  leads 
to  wars  and  fightings,  and  all  manner  of 
emulations  and  contentions. 

2.  They  were  destitute  of    compassion.     "  Thou 

stoodest  on  the  other  side."  See  verses 
9-12.  Those  of  kindred  race  were  being 
slain,  and  they  had  no  pity.  Pride  is  stony 
hearted. 

8.  They  even  shared  in  oppression.  See  verses  13 
and  14.  This  is  not  unusual  among  purse- 
proud  religionists.  They  are  not  slow  to 
profit  by  the  nurseries  of  God's  poor  people. 

4.  They  showed  contempt  of  holy  things.  "Ye 
have  drunk  upon  my  holy  mountain" 
<  verse  16).  God  will  not  have  his  church 


260  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

made  into  a  tavern,  or  a  play-house:    yet 
something  like  this  may  be  done  even  now 
by  proud  hypocrites  and  formalists. 
IV.  THESE  EVIL  WAYS  SECURED  THEIR  RUIN. 

1.  Their  defiance  brought  enemies  upon  them. 

2.  Their  unkindness  was  returned  into  their  own 

bosom.     Verse  15  shows  the  lex  talionii  in 
action. 

8.  Their  contempt  of  God  made  him  say,  "there 
shall  not  be  any  remaining  of  the  house  of 
Esau  "  (verse  18). 

How  different  the  lot  of  despised  Zion?  See 
verses  17  and  21. 

Let  us  seek  him  who  in  Zion  is  above  all  others 
"  the  Saviour." 

Hating  all  pride,  let  us  humbly  rest  in  him. 
Then  we  shall  not  be  deceived,  for  Jesus  is  "  the 
Truth." 

WARNINGS. 

There  is  something  intensely  amusing,  according 
to  our  notions,  in  the  name  which  the  Eskimo  be 
stow  upon  themselves.  It  appears  they  call  them 
selves  the  "Innuit," — that  is,  "the  people"  par 
excellence. 

If  a  man  is  a  perfectionist,  and  thinks  he  is  sin 
less,  it  is  a  proof  not  that  he  is  better,  but  only  that 
he  is  blinder,  than  his  neighbors. — Richard  Grlover. 

When  a  proud  man  thinks  best  of  himself,  then 
God  and  man  think  worst  of  him  ;  all  his  glory  is 
but  like  a  vapor,  which  climbeth  as  though  it  would 


SELF-DECEIVED.  261 

go  up  to  heaven,  but  when  it  comes  to  a  little  height, 
it  falls  down  again,  and  never  ascends  more.  So 
Adam  thought  that  the  fair  apple  should  make  him 
like  his  Maker,  but  God  resisted  his  pride,  and  that 
apple  made  him  like  the  serpent  that  tempted  him 
with  it.  Absalom  thought  that  rebellion  would 
make  him  a  king,  but  God  resisted  his  pride,  and  his 
rebellion  hanged  him  on  a  tree. — Henry  Smith. 

Stranger,  henceforth  be  warned ;  and  know  that  pride, 

Howe'er  disguised  in  its  own  majesty, 

Is  littleness ;  that  he  who  feels  contempt 

For  any  living  thing,  hath  faculties 

Which  he  has  never  used ;  that  thought  with  him 

Is  in  its  infancy.  — Wbrdsivorth. 

The  Venetian  ambassador  wrote  of  Cardinal  Wol- 
8t3y: — "I  do  perceive  that  every  year  he  groweth 
more  and  more  in  power."  When  I  first  came  to 
England,  he  used  to  say,  "His  Majesty  will  do  so 
and  so ; "  subsequently,  he  said,  "  We  shall  do  so 
and  so ; "  but  now  he  says,  "  I  shall  do  so  and  so." 
But  history  records  how  Wolsey's  pride  went  before 
destruction,  and  his  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall. 

Napoleon  Buonaparte,  intoxicated  with  success, 
and  at  the  height  of  his  power,  said,  "  I  make  cir 
cumstances."  Let  Moscow,  Elba,  Waterloo,  and 
St.  Helena,  that  rocky  isle  where  he  was  caged  until 
he  fretted  his  life  away,  testify  to  his  utter  helpless 
ness  in  his  humiliating  downfall. — J.  B.  G-ough. 

As  God  hath  two  dwelling-places,  heaven  and  a 
contrite  heart,  so  hath  the  devil — hell  and  a  proud 
he*rt— T.  Watson. 


CIX. 

•AND  JONAH  BEGAN  TO  ENTER  INTO  THE  CITY  A  DAY'S 
JOURNEY,  AND  HE  CRIED,  AND  SAID,  YET  FORTY  DAYS, 
AND  NINEVEH  SHALL  BE  OVERTHROWN."  —  Jonah  iii.  4. 

"  THE  MEN  OF  NINEVEH  SHALL  RISE  IN  JUDGMENT  WITH 
THIS  GENERATION,  AND  SHALL  CONDEMN  IT  :  BECAUSE  THEY 
REPENTED  AT  THE  PREACHING  OF  JONAS  ;  AND,  BEHOLD, 

A  GREATER  THAN  JONAS  IS  HERE."  —  Matthew  xii.  41. 


Lord  never  lost  patience  with  an  audience, 
and  never  brought  railing  accusation  against 
any  man  :  his  rebuke  was  well  deserved. 

Nineveh  under  Jonah  was  indeed  a  reproof  to  the 
Jerusalem  of  our  Lord's  day,  for  the  Jews,  though 
favored  by  his  divine  ministry,  did  not  repent,  but 
wickedly  crucified  the  Messenger  of  peace. 

Might  not  our  Lord  rebuke  the  unbelievers  of  our 
day  in  the  same  way  ?  Is  not  Nineveh  a  reproach  to 
England  ? 

Let  us  see. 

The  men  of  Nineveh  repented,  and  turned  to  God, 
and  yet  — 

I.  THEIR  CALLS  TO  REPENTANCE  WERE  NOT  MANY. 

Many  unbelievers  have  been  warned  and  entreated 
times  without  number,  and  yet  they  remain  impeni 
tent  ;  but  — 


THE   NINEVITES'   REPENTANCE.  263 

Nineveh   enjoyed   no   privileges:    it   was   in 

heathen  darkness. 
Nineveh  heard  but  one  prophet ;  and  he  was 

none  of  the  greatest,  or  most  affectionate. 
Nineveh  heard  that  prophet  only  once ;  and 

that  was  an  open-air  sermon,  very  short, 

and  very  monotonous. 
Nineveh  had  heard  no  word  of  good  tidings ; 

she  heard  the  thunder   of   the  law,  but 

nothing  else. 

Tet  the  obedience  to  the  warning  was  immediate, 
universal,  practical,  and  acceptable,  so  that  the  city 
was  spared. 

II.    THE    MESSAGE    OF    THE    PBOPHET    WAS     NOT 
ENCOTJBAQINO. 

1.  He  proclaimed  no  promise  of  pardon. 

2.  He  did  not  even   mention    repentance;    and 

consequently  he  held  out  no  hope  to  the 

penitent. 
8.  He  foretold  a  crushing  and  final  doom :  "  Nineveh 

shall  be  overthrown."     His  message  began 

and  ended  with  threatening. 
4.  He  mentioned  a  speedy  day :   "  yet  forty  days." 

Yet  out  of  this  dreadful  message  the  people  made 
a  gospel,  and  so  acted  as  on  it  to  find  deliverance ; 
while  to  many  of  us  the  rich,  free,  sure  promise  of 
the  Lord  has  been  of  no  force  through  our  unbelief. 

Those  who  heard  the  teaching  of  Jesus  were,  like 
ourselves,  highly  favored,  for  "never  man  spake  like 


364  MY   BB&MON   NOTES. 

this  Man ; "  and,  like  us  they  were  grievously  guilty 
in  that  they  repented  not. 

III.  THE  PROPHET    HIMSELF  WAS    HO    HELPEB    TO 

THEIB  HOPE. 

Jonah  was  no  loving,  tender  pastor,  anxious  to 
gather  the  lost  sheep. 

1.  He  disliked  the  ministry  in  which  he  was  en 
gaged,  and  no  doubt  discharged  it  in  a  hard,  harsh 
manner. 

2.  He  uttered  no  word  of  sympathetic  love,  for 
he  had  none  in  his  heart.    He  was  of  the  school  of 
Elijah,  and  knew  not  the  love  which  burned  in  the 
heart  of  Jesus. 

3.  He  offered  no  prayer  of  loving  pity. 

4.  He  was  even  displeased    that    the   city  was 
spared. 

Yet  these  people  obeyed  his  voice,  and  obtained 
mercy  through  hearkening  to  his  warnings.  Does 
not  this  rebuke  many  who  have  been  favored  with 
tender  and  loving  admonitions?  Certainly  it  re 
buked  those  who  lived  in  our  Lord's  day,  for  no  two 
persons  could  afford  a  more  singular  contrast  than 
Jonah  and  our  Lord. 

Indeed,  a  "greater."  better,  tenderer  than  Jonah 
was  there. 

IV.  THE  HOPE  TO  WHICH    THE  [NlNEVITES  COULD 

BEACH   WAS   SLENDEB.    It  was  no  more 
than,— "Who  can  tell?" 

1.  They  had  no  revelation  of  the  character  of  the 
God  of  Israel. 


THE   NINEVITES*   REPENTANCE.  265 

2.  They  knew  nothing  of  an  atoning  sacrifice. 
8.  They  had  received  no  invitation  to  seek   the 

Lord,  not  even  a  command  to  repent. 
4.  Their  argument  was  mainly  negative. 

Nothing  was  said  against  their  repenting. 
They  could  not  be  the  worse  for  repenting. 
6    The  positive  argument  was  slender. 

The  mission  of  the  prophet  was  a  warning: 
even  a  warning  implies  a  degree  of  mercy  • 
they  ventured  upon  that  bare  hope,  saying, 
"  Who  can  tell  I " 

Have  we  not  all  at  least  this  much  of  hope  ? 
Have  we  not  far  more  in  the  gospel  ? 
Will  we  not  venture  upon  it? 

MONITIONS. 

I  saw  a  cannon  shot  off.  The  men  at  whom  it  was 
leveled  fell  flat  on  the  ground,  and  so  escaped  the 
bullet.  Against  such  blows,  falling  is  all  the  fenc 
ing,  and  prostration  all  the  armor  of  proof.  But 
that  which  gave  them  notice  to  fall  down  was  their 
perceiving  of  the  fire  before  the  ordnance  was  dis 
charged.  Oh !  the  mercy  of  that  fire,  which,  as  it 
were,  repenting  of  the  mischief  it  had  done,  and  the 
murder  it  might  make,  ran  a  race,  and  outstripped 
the  bullet,  that  men  (at  the  sight  thereof)  might  be 
provided,  when  they  could  not  resist  to  prevent  it! 
Thus  every  murdering-piece  is  also  a  warning-piece 
against  itself. 

God,  in  like  manner,  warns  before  he  wounds 


266  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

frights  before  he  fights.  "Yet  forty  days,  and 
Nineveh  shall  be  overthrown."  Oh,  let  us  fall 
down  before  the  Lord  our  Maker  I  Then  shall  his 
anger  be  pleased  to  make  in  us  a  daily  pass-over, 
and  his  bullets  leveled  at  us  must  fly  above  us. — 
Thomas  Fuller. 

"I  have  heard,"  says  Mr.  Daniel  Wilson,  in  a 
sermon  of  his,  "of  a  certain  person  whose  name  I 
could  mention,  who  was  tempted  to  conclude  his 
day  over,  and  himself  lost;  that,  therefore,  it  was 
his  best  course  to  put  an  end  to  his  life,  which,  if 
continued,  would  but  serve  to  increase  his  sin,  and 
consequently  his  misery,  from  which  there  was  no 
escape ;  and  seeing  he  must  be  in  hell,  the  sooner  he 
was  there  the  sooner  he  should  know  the  worst; 
which  was  preferable  to  his  being  worn  away  with 
the  tormenting  expectation  of  what  was  to  come. 
Under  the  influence  of  such  suggestions  as  these, 
he  went  to  a  river,  with  a  design  to  throw  himself 
in ;  but  as  he  was  about  to  do  it,  he  seemed  to  hear 
a  voice  saying  to  him,  ''Who  can  tell?'  as  if  the 
words  had  been  audibly  delivered.  By  this,  there 
fore,  he  was  brought  to  a  stand ;  his  thoughts  were 
arrested,  and  thus  began  to  work  on  the  passage 
mentioned:  'Who  can  tell?  (Jonah  iii.  9)  viz.,  What 
God  can  do  when  he  will  proclaim  his  grace  glorious. 
Who  can  tell  but  such  an  one  as  I  may  find  mercy  ? 
or  what  will  be  the  issue  of  humble  prayer  to  heaven 
for  it  ?  Who  can  tell  what  purposes  God  will  serve 
in  my  recovery  ? '  By  such  thoughts  as  these,  being 


THE    NINEVITES'    REPENTANCE.  267 

so  far  influenced  as  to  resolve  to  try,  it  pleased  God 
graciously  to  enable  him,  through  all  his  doubts  and 
fears,  to  throw  himself  by  faith  on  Jesus  Christ,  as 
able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come  to  God 
by  him,  humbly  desiring  and  expecting  mercy  for  his 
sake,  to  his  own  soul.  In  this  he  was  not  disap 
pointed,  but  afterwards  became  an  eminent  Christian 
and  minister:  and,  from  his  own  experience  of  the 
riches  of  grace,  was  greatly  useful  to  the  conver 
sion  and  comfort  of  others." — Religious  and  Moral 
Anecdotes. 


ex. 


"  FOB  THE  INHA.BITANT  OF  MAROTH  WAITED  CAREFULI  T  FOB 
GOOD:    BUT  EVIL  CAME  DOWN  FROM  THE  LORD  UNTC    THE 

GATE  OF  JERUSALEM." — Micah  i.  12. 

HT*HE  village  of  the  bitter  spring  (for  such  is 
•*-  probably  the  meaning  of  the  name  Maroth) 
experienced  a  bitter  disappointment. 

The  more  eager  and  patient  their  careful  waiting, 
the  more  distasteful  the  draught  of  evil  which  they 
were  compelled  to  drink. 

Their  trust  in  man  proved  to  be  vain,  for  the 
Assyrian  swept  over  them,  and  stopped  not  till  he 
reached  the  gate  of  Jerusalem,  where  Hezekiah's 
faith  in  God  made  the  enemy  pause  and  retreat. 

Let  us  consider,  as  suggested  by  the  text, — 

I.  SAD   DISAPPOINTMENTS — "waited    carefully   for 

good:  but  evil  came." 

Disappointments  come  frequently  to  the  sanguine, 
but  they  also  happen  to  those  who  wait,  wait  care 
fully,  and  expect  reasonably. 

1.  Disappointments  are  often  extremely  painful  at 

the  time. 

2.  Yet  could  we  know  all  the  truth,  we  should  not 

lament  them. 
8.  In  reference  to  hopes  of  several  kinds  they  are 


MAROTH;  OK,    THE  DISAPPOINTED.  269 

certain.  As  for  instance,  when  we  expect 
more  of  the  creature  than  it  was  ever  meant 
to  yield  us,  when  we  look  for  happiness  in 
sin,  when  we  expect  fixity  in  earthly  things, 
etc. 

4.  In  many  cases  disappointments  are  highly  prob 

able.  Conceited  hopes,  groundless  expec 
tations,  speculations,  etc. 

5.  In  all  cases  they  are  possible.     "  There's  many 

a  slip  'twixt  the  cup  and  the  lip." 

6.  They  should  be  accepted  with  manly  patience. 

7.  They  may  prove  highly  instructive,  teaching 

us — 

Our  fallibility  of  judgment. 
The  uncertainty  of  sublunary  things. 
The  need  of  reserve  in  speaking  of  the  future. 

James  iv.  14. 
The  duty  of  submitting  all  onr  projects  to  the 

divine  will. 

8.  They  may  be  greatly  sanctified. 

Sometimes  they  have  turned  the  current  of  a 
life. 

They  are  intended  to  wean  us  from  the  world. 

They  tend  to  make  us  prize  more  the  truth 
fulness  of  our  God,  who  fulfils  the  desire 
of  them  that  fear  him. 

They  bring  us  precious  things  which  can  only 
come  of  experience. 

They  save  us  from  unknown  evils  which 
might  ruin  us. 


270  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

II.  STRANGE  APPOINTMENTS. 
The  text  tells  us,  "  evil  came  down  from  the  Lord." 

1.  The   expression   must   not   be   misunderstood. 

God  is  not  the  author  of  moral  evil.  It  is 
the  evil  of  sorrow,  affliction,  calamity  that 
is  here  meant. 

2.  It  is  nevertheless  universally  true.     No  evil  can 

happen  without  divine  permission.  "  I  make 
peace,  and  create  evil : "  Isa.  xlv.  T. 
8.  Some  evils  are  distinctly  from  the  Lord.    "  This 

evil  is  of  the  Lord :  2  Kings  vi.  83. 
For  testing  men,  and  making  their  true  char 
acter  to  be  known. 

For  chastening  the  good.     1  Chron.  xxi.  7. 
For  punishing  the  wicked.     Gen.  vi.  6 — 7, 

xix.  24,  25. 

4.  Hence  such  evils  are  to  be  endured  by  the 
godly  with  humble  submission  to  their 
heavenly  Father's  will. 

6.  Hence  our  comfort  under  them :  since  all  evils 
are  under  divine  control,  their  power  to 
injure  is  gone. 

6.  Hence  the  antidote  for  our  disappointments  lies 
in  the  fact  that  they  are  God's  appoint 
ments. 

HI.  EXPECTATIONS  WHICH  WILL  NOT  END  IN  DIS 
APPOINTMENT. 

1.  Hopes  founded  on  the  promises  of  God.    Heb. 

x.  23. 

2.  Confidence  placed  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  1  Pet.  ii.  & 


MABOTH;   OB,   THE   DISAPPOINTED.  273 

8.  Desires  presented  in  believing  prayer.     Matt, 
xxi.  22. 

4.  Harvest  hopes  in  connection  with  sowing  seed 

for  the  Lord.     Ps.  cxxvi.  5,  6. 

5.  Expectations  in  falling  asleep  in  Jesus.  1  Thess. 

iv.  14. 

Is  your  life  embittered  by  disappointment  ? 
Cast  the  cross  into  the  bitter  water,  and  it  will 
become  sweet. 


GATHEBINGS. 

During  the  period  when  lotteries  were  unhappily 
allowed  to  flourish  in  this  country,  a  gentleman, 
looking  into  the  window  of  a  lottery-office  in  St. 
Paul's  Churchyard,  discovered  to  his  joy  that  his 
ticket  had  turned  up  a  £  10,000  prize.  Intoxicated 
with  this  sudden  accession  of  wealth,  he  walked 
round  the  churchyard,  to  consider  calmly  how  he 
should  dispose  of  his  fortune.  On  again,  in  his 
circuit,  passing  the  lottery-office,  he  resolved  to  take 
another  glance  at  the  charming  announcement  in  the 
window,  when,  to  his  dismay,  he  saw  that  a  new 
number  had  been  substituted.  On  enquiry,  he  found 
that  a  wrong  number  had  at  first  been  posted  by 
mistake,  and  that  after  all  he  was  not  the  holder  of 
the  prize.  His  chagrin  was  now  as  great  as  his 
previous  pleasure  had  been. —  W.  Haig  Miller* 8  "Life's 
Pleasure  Garden." 

It  is  wise,  when  we  are  disappointed  in  one  thing, 


272  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

to  set  over  against  it  a  hopeful  expectancy  of  another, 
like  the  farmer  who  said,  "  If  the  peas  don't  pay,  let 
us  hope  the  beans  will."  Yet  it  would  be  idle  to 
patch  up  one  rotten  expectation  with  another  of  like 
character  for  that  would  only  make  the  rent  worse. 
It  is  better  to  turn  from  the  fictions  of  the  sanguine 
worldling  to  the  facts  of  the  believer  in  the  Word 
of  the  Lord.  Then,  if  we  find  no  profit  in  our 
trading  with  earth,  we  shall  fall  back  upon  our  heart's 
treasure  in  heaven.  We  may  lose  our  gold,  but  we 
can  never  lose  our  God.  The  expectation  of  the 
righteous  is  from  the  Lord,  and  nothing  that  comes 
from  him  shall  ever  fail. 

^  knew  one  who  had  made  an  idol  of  his  daughter, 
and  when  she  sickened  and  died,  he  was  exceedingly 
rebellious,  and  the  result  was  that  he  died  himself. 
Expectations  which  hang  upon  the  frail  tenure  of  a 
human  life  may  fill  our  cup  with  wormwood  if  we 
indulge  them.  Could  this  father  have  owned  the 
Lord's  hand  in  the  removal  of  his  child,  and  had  he 
beforehand  moderated  his  expectations  concerning 
her,  he  might  have  lived  happily  with  the  rest  of  his 
family,  and  have  been  an  example  of  holy  patience. 

— a  n.  s. 

Who  has  not  muttered  "  Marah  M  over  some  well 
in  the  desert  which  he  strained  himself  to  reach, 
and  found  to  be  bitterness  ?  Have  you  found  no 
salt  waters  where  you  thought  to  find  sweetness  and 
joy?  Love,  beauty,  the  world's  bright  throngs, 


MAEOTH;    OB,   THE   DISAPPOINTED.  273 

marriage,  home,  the  things  which  once  wooed  you, 
and  promised  to  slake  the  thirst  of  your  soul  for 
happiness,  are  they  all  Elirns,  sweet  springs  and 
palms  ?  Oh,  what  fierce  murmurings  of  "  Marah  " 
have  I  heard  from  hearts  wrung  with  anguish,  from 
souls  withered  and  blasted  by  a  too  fond  confidence 
in  anything  or  any  being  but  God  !  Believe  it,  no 
man,  with  a  man's  heart  in  him,  gets  far  on  his 
wilderness  way  without  some  bitter  soul-searching 
disappointment ;  happy  he  who  is  brave  enough  to 
push  on  another  stage  of  the  journey  and  rest  in 
Elim,  where  there  are  twelve  springs,  living  springs 
of  water,  and  threescore  and  ten  palm-trees. — J. 
S.  Brown. 

Disappointments  in  favorite  wishes  are  trying,  and 
we  are  not  always  wise  enough  to  remember  that 
disappointments  in  time  are  often  the  means  of  pre 
venting  disappointments  in  eternity. —  William  Jay. 


CXI. 

"  EVEN  OF  LATE  MY  PEOPLE  IS    RISEN  UP  Afl  AN 

Micah  ii.  8. 

WHEN  men  are  in  trouble  they  are  apt  to  blame 
God. 

But  the  blame  lies  with  themselves.  "  Are  these 
his  doings  ?  "  (verse  7.)  Does  the  good  Lord  arbi 
trarily  cause  sorrows  ?  No,  they  are  the  fruit  of  sin, 
the  result  of  backsliding. 

The  Lord  here  answers  Israel's  complaint  of  kin* 
by  a  deeply  truthful  complaint  of  them. 

They  should  not  have  wondered  that  they  suffered, 
for  they  had  become  enemies  of  God,  and  thus  ene 
mies  to  themselves. 

I.  LET   US   LISTEN  TO  THE  GRIEVOUS   CHARGE. 

There  is  a  deep  pathos  about  this  as  coming  from 
the  God  of  love. 

1.  They   were   his  own   people.      "My  people." 

God  has  enemies  enough  without  his  own 
beloved  ones  becoming  such.  It  is  horrible 
ingratitude  and  treachery  for  the  chosen  to 
rebel. 

2.  They  had  risen  up  "  as  an  enemy."     Faithless 

friends  wound  keenly,  and  are  often  more 
(27^0 


THE    WORST   OP   ENEMIES.  275 

bitter  than  other  antagonists.  For  favored 
ones  to  rise  up  as  foes  is  cruel  indeed. 

8.  They  had  lately  done  this :  "  even  of  late," — 
"yesterday,"  in  the  margin.  The  sin  is 
fresh,  the  wound  is  bleeding,  the  offence  is 
rank.  A  fit  of  wilfulness  was  on  them. 

4.  They  had  done  this  wantonly.  (See  latter  part 
of  verse.)  They  picked  a  quarrel  with  One 
who  is  "averse  from  war."  God  would 
have  our  love,  yet  we  turn  against  him 
without  cause. 

How  far  may  this  indictment  lie  against  us  ? 

II.   LET  US  HEAR  THE  MORE  GRIEVOUS  EVIDENCE  BY 
WHICH  THE  CHARGE  IS  SUBSTANTIATED. 

Taking  the  words  "  my  people  "  as  referring  to  all 
professing  Christians,  many  of  them  "  rise  up  as  an 
enemy  "  from  the  fact  of  — 

1.  Their  separation  from  their  Lord.     "  He  that  is 

not  with  me  is  against  me : "  Matt.  xii.  30. 
They  walk  not  in  communion  with  him, 
neither  are  they  diligent  in  his  service,  nor 
careful  in  obedience,  nor  consecrated  to  his 
cause. 

2.  Their  worldliness.     By  this  the  Lord's  jealousy 

is  moved,  for  the  world  is  set  up  as  his  rival 
in  the  heart.    "  The  friendship  of  the  world 
is  enmity  with  God  :  "  James  iv.  4. 
8.  Their  unbelief,  which  stabs  at  his  honor,  hia 
veracity,  his  immutability.     1  John  i.  10. 


276  MY   SERMON  NOTES. 

n  man  cannot  treat  another  more  malici 
ously  than  by  calling  him  a  liar. 

4.  Their   heresies,   righting   against   his   revealed 

truth.  It  is  wretched  work  when  the  church 
and  its  ministers  oppose  the  gospel.  It  is 
to  be  feared  that  this  is  by  no  means  uncom 
mon  in  these  degenerate  days. 

5.  Their  unholiness.     Unholy  professors  are,  par 

excellence,  "the  enemies  of  the  cross  of 
Christ:"  Phil.  iii.  18. 

6.  Their   lukewarmness :    by   which   they   sicken 

their    Saviour   (Rev.   iii.   16),   grieve    his 

Spirit  (Eph.  iv.  30),  encourage  sinners  in 

sin  (Ezek.  xvi.  54),  and  discourage  seekers. 

By  these,  and  other  miserable  courses  of  action, 

those  who  should  be  the  friends  of  God  are  often 

found  to  be  "  risen  up  as  an  enemy." 

III.   LET  US  HEARKEN  TO  MOST    GRIEVOUS  WARN 
INGS. 

No  good  can  possibly  come  of  opposition  to  the 
Lord ;  but  the  most  painful  evils  will  inevitably  ensue. 

1.  In  the  case  of  true  Christians,  there  will  come 

to  them  heavy  chastisements  and  humilia 
tions.  If  we  walk  contrary  to  the  Lord,  he 
will  walk  contrary  to  us.  Lev.  xxvi.  23,  24. 

2,  With  these  will  come  the  keenest  regrets,  and 

agonies  of  heart.  It  may  be  pleasant  to  go 
down  By-path  Meadow,  but  to  return  to  the 
King's  highway  will  cost  many  a  groan  and 
tear. 


THE  WORST   OF  ENEMIES.  277 

8.  In  the  case  of  mere  professors,  there  will  SOOD 
come  abandonment  of  profession,  immor 
ality,  seven-fold  wickedness,  &c. 

4,  To  such  may  also  come  special  punishments, 
which  will  make  them  a  terror  to  the  uni 
verse  of  God. 

Be  anxious  to  be  truly  reconciled  to  God  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus. 

Abide  in  peace  with  God  by  yielding  to  his  Spirit. 

Increasingly  love  and  honor  him,  that  no  root  of 
bitterness  may  ever  spring  up  between  him  and  you. 


HOME-THRUSTS. 

It  is  not,  perhaps,  that  we  are  determinately  his 
enemies,  but  his  love  is  so  great  that  he  feels  very 
keenly  the  slightest  swerving  of  our  hearts  from  him. 
So  much  so  that  he  that  is  not  with  him  is  against 
him,  he  that  turns  aside  from  his  friendship  is  felt  to 
be  "  an  enemy." — From  "  Wounded  in  the  House  of 
his  Friends,"  ly  F.  M. 

Sin  will  cause  repenting  work,  even  for  the  chil 
dren  of  God.  The  sins  of  the  wicked  pierce  Christ's 
side,  but  the  sins  of  the  godly  plunge  the  spear  into 
his  heart. 

Carlyle,  speaking  of  the  changes  made  by  time, 
says,  "  How  tragic  to  me  is  the  sight  of  old  friends ; 
a  thing  I  always  really  shrink  from  !  "  Sin  has  made 
still  more  painful  changes  in  some  once  numbered 
amongst  the  friends  of  God. 


278  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

Pharnaces,  the  son  of  Mithridates,  the  king  of 
Pontus,  sending  a  crown  to  Csesar  at  the  time  he 
was  in  rebellion  against  him,  he  refused  the  present, 
saying,  "Let  him  first  lay  down  his  rebellion,  and 
then  I  will  receive  his  crown."  There  are  many 
who  set  a  crown  of  glory  upon  the  head  of  Christ  by 
a  good  profession,  and  yet  plant  a  crown  of  thorns 
upon  his  head  by  an  evil  conversation. — Seeker. 

After  poor  Sabat,  an  Arabian,  who  had  professed 
faith  in  Christ  by  the  means  of  the  labors  of  the 
Rev.  H.  Martyn,  had  apostatized  from  Christianity, 
and  written  in  favor  of  Mohammedanism,  he  was  met 
at  Malacca  by  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  Milne,  who  proposed 
to  him  some  very  pointed  questions,  in  reply  to  which, 
he  said,  "  I  am  unhappy !  I  have  a  mountain  of 
burning  sand  on  my  head.  When  I  go  about,  I 
know  not  what  I  am  doing  I  "  It  is  indeed  an  evil 
thing  and  bitter  to  forsake  the  Lord  our  God. — 
Bate's  Cyclopaedia. 

Blow,  blow,  thou  winter  wind, 
Thou  art  not  so  unkind 

As  man's  ingratitude ; 
Thy  tooth  is  not  so  keen, 
Because  thou  art  not  seen, 

Although  thy  breath  be  rude. 

Freeze,  freeze  thou  bitter  sky, 
Thou  dost  not  bite  so  nigh 

AS  benefits  forgot : 
Though  more  the  waters  warp, 
H»y  sting  is  not  so  sharp 

SLS  friend  remembered  not. — Shaketpear* 


CXII. 

"O    MY    PEOPLE,    WHAT    HATE    I    DONE    UNTO    THEE?    AND 
WHEREIN  HAVE  I  WEARIED  THEE  ?    TESTIFY  AGAINST  ME." 

Micahvi.  3. 

/T*HIS  is  a  portion  of  Jehovah's  pleading  with  his 
•*•  people. 

He  has  called  upon  the  mountains  and  the  strong 
foundations  of  the  earth  to  hear  the  suit  between 
him  and  Israel. 

Far  be  it  from  us  to  trifle  when  God  has  a  contro 
versy  with  us,  for  to  him  it  is  a  matter  of  deep 
solemnity.  In  condescending  grace  he  makes  much 
of  the  affection  of  his  people,  and  he  will  not  lose  it 
without  effort. 

We  have  before  us, — 

I.  A  PITEOUS  EXCLAMATION.    "  O  my  people  I  " 

Is  it  not  remarkable  that  such  language  should  be 
used  by  the  Eternal  God  ? 

1.  It  is  the  voice  of  solemn  earnestness. 

2.  It   is  the  cry  of  sorrow.     The  interjection  is 

wet  with  tears. 

3.  It  is  the  appeal  of  love.     Love  injured,  but 

living,  pleading,  striving,  entreating. 

4.  It  is  the  language  of  desire.   Divine  love  yearns 

for  the  reconciliation  of  the  rebel :  it  pines 
to  have  his  loyal  affection. 

(279) 


280  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

The  Lord  calls  a  revolted  nation  "niy  people" 
still.  Grace  is  stronger  than  sin.  Eternal  love  is 
not  founded  upon  our  merits. 

II.  A  PAINFUL  FACT.     "  Wearied  thee." 

Israel  acted  as  if  they  were  tired  of  their  God. 

1.  They   were   weary  of    his  name.      Baal    and 

Ashtaroth  had  become  the  fashion,  and  the 
living  God  was  despised. 

2.  They  were  weary  of  his  worship.    The  sacrifice, 

the  priest,   the   holy  place,  prayer,  praise 

&c. ;  all  these  were  despised. 
S.  They  were  weary   of  obedience   to   his  laws, 

though  they  were  right,  and  just,  and  meant 

for  their  good. 
4.  They  were  weary  of  his  restraints :  they  desired 

liberty  to  ruin  themselves  by  transgression. 

The  parallel  between  ourselves  and  Israel  lies 
upon  the  surface. 

In  the  following  points,  and  many  more,  certain 
professors  prove  their  weariness  of  God, — 

They  give  up  nearness  of  communion. 
They  abandon  preciseness  of  walking. 
They  fail  in  fulness  of  consecration. 
They  cool  down  from  intensity  of  zeal, 
They  lose  the  full  assurance  of  faith,  and  othei 

joys. 
And  all  this  because  they  are  in  reality  weary 

of  their  God. 
Tliis  is  a  sorrow  of  sorrows  to  the  great  heart  of  love. 


THE  LORD'S   APPEAL   TO   HIS   OVN   PECPLB.    281 

III.  A  PATIENT  ENQUIRY.    "  What  have  I  done  unto 

thee?"etc. 
Amazing  love !  God  himself  puts  himself  upon  trial. 

1.  What  single  act  of  God  could  induce  us  to  for 

sake  his  way  t     "  What  have  I  done  unto 
thee?" 

2,  What  continuous  way  of  the  Lord  could  have 

caused  us  weariness  ?     "  Wherein   have   I 
wearied  thee  ?  " 

8.  What  testimony  of  any  kind  can  we  bear  against 
God  ?    "  Testify  against  me." 

No  answer  is  possible  except  the  most  unreserved 
confession  that  the  Lord  has  done  us  no  ill. 

The  Lord  is  goodness  itself,  and  unmingled  kind 
ness. 

He  has  not  wearied  us  with  demands  of  offer 
ings. 

He  has  not  burdened  us  with  austerities. 
He  has  not  tired  us  with  monotonies. 
He  has  not  denied  us  rest,  but  has  even  com 
manded  it. 
If  wearied  with  our  God,  it  is — 

Because  of  our  foolish  waywardness. 

Because  of  our  fickle  fancy. 

Because  of  our  feeble  love   to  himself  and 

holiness. 

Or  because  we  have  misunderstood  his  com 
mands. 

By  all  that  God  has  already  done  for  us,  let  us  cling 
to  him. 


282  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

By  the  superlative  excellence  of  Jesus,  let  us  be 
bound  to  him. 

By  the  sacred  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  may  we 
be  kept  loving  to  the  end. 

QUOTATIONS. 

Now  there  is  one  thing  to  which  we  need  to  call 
the  attention  of  backsliders ;  and  that  is, — that  the 
Lord  never  forsook  them;  but  that  they  forsook 
him  I  The  Lord  never  left  them  ;  but  they  left  him  ! 
And  this,  too,  without  a  cause !  He  says :  "  What 
iniquity  have  your  fathers  found  in  me,  that  they  are 
gone  far  from  me  ?  "  Is  not  God  the  same  to-day  as 
when  you  came  to  him  first?  Has  God  changed? 
Men  are  apt  to  think  that  God  has  changed ;  but  the 
change  is  with  them.  Backslider,  I  would  ask  you, 
"  What  iniquity  is  there  in  God,  that  you  have  left 
him,  and  gone  far  from  him  ?  " 

Love  does  not  like  to  be  forgotten.  You  mothers 
would  break  your  hearts  if  your  children  left  you, 
and  never  wrote  you  a  word,  or  sent  any  memento  of 
their  affection  for  you :  and  God  pleads  over  back 
sliders  as  a  parent  over  loved  ones  who  have  gone 
astray  and  he  tries  to  woo  them  back.  He  asks, 
"  What  have  I  done  that  you  should  have  forsaken 
me  ?  "  The  most  tender  and  loving  words  to  be  found 
in  the  whole  of  the  Bible  are  from  Jehovah  to  those 
who  have  left  him  without  a  cause. — D.  L.  Moody. 

Let  those  tempted  to  depart  from  the  Lord  remem 
ber  the  answer  of  Christian  to  Apollyon,  when  the 


TELH   LOUD  8   APPBAL  TO   HIS   OWN  PEOPLE. 

latter  sought  to  persuade  him  to  turn  back,  and  for 
sake  his  Lord:  "O  thou  destroying  Apollyon,  to 
speak  truth,  I  like  his  service,  his  wages,  his  servants, 
his  government,  his  company,  and  country,  better 
than  thine ;  and,  therefore,  leave  off  to  persuade  me 
further :  1  am  his  servant,  and  I  will  follow  him." 

Polycarp,  being  required  by  an  infidel  judge  to 
blaspheme  Christ,  made  him  this  witty  and  devout 
answer :  "  Eighty-six  years  have  I  lived,  neither  did 
he  once  harm  me  in  any  one  thing;  why,  then, 
should  I  blaspheme  my  God,  which  hath  neither 
hindered  me  nor  injured  me  ?  "  We  cannot  charge 
our  God  with  any  wrong,  our  gracious  Lord  with  any 
hardness,  injury,  or  unkindness  towards  us ;  but  must 
always,  with  Polycarp,  acknowledge  his  exceeding 
bounty  and  unspeakable  goodness. — Richard  Mere- 
deth. 

44  0  my  people,  what  have  2  done  unto  thee  f "  or, 
rather,  what  have  I  not  done  to  do  thee  good  ?  "  O 
generation,  see  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,"  and  not 
hear  it  only ;  was  ever  anything  more  evidencing  and 
evincing  than  what  I  now  allege  ?  "  Have  I  been  a 
wilderness  unto  Israel,  a  land  of  darkness  ?  "  Jer.  ii. 
31.  May  I  not  well  say  unto  you,  as  Themistocles 
did  to  his  ungrateful  countrymen,  "What?  are  ye 
weary  of  receiving  so  many  benefits  from  one  man  ?  " 
But  say,  What  hurt  have  I  ever  done  you?  and 
wherein  have  I  wearied  you,  or  been  troublesome  to 
you  ?  unless  it  be  by  daily  loading  you  with  loving- 
kindness  (Ps.  Ixviii.  19),  and  bearing  with  your 


284  MY  8BBMON   NOTES. 

provocations  ?     Forgive  me  that  injury  (2  Cur.  xii. 
l$).—Trapp. 

"  0  mij  people,"  &c.  If, subjects  quit  their  allegi 
ance  to  their  prince,  they  will  pretend,  as  the  ten 
tribes  did  when  they  revolted  from  Rehoboam,  that 
his  yoke  is  too  heavy  for  them  ;  but  can  you  pretend 
any  such  thing  ?  What  have  I  done  to  you  that  is 
unjust  or  unkind?  Wherein  have  I  wearied  you 
with  the  impositions  of  service,  or  the  exactions  of 
tribute?  Have  I  made  you  to  serve  with  an  offering? 
Isa.  xliii.  23. — Matthew  Henry. 


CXIII. 

"  THE  LORD  is  GOOD,  A   STRONG  HOLD  IN  THE   DAT  01 

TROUBLE ;  AND  HE  KNOWETH  THEM  THAT  TRUST  IN  HIM." — 

Nahum  i.  7. 

TTERE  we  come  upon  an  island  in  Nahum's  stormy 
-*•  •*•  lake.  All  is  calm  in  this  verse,  though  the 
whole  context  is  tossed  with  tempest. 

The  text  is  full  of  God,  and  brims  over  with  his 
praise. 

I.  GOD  HTMSET.TP.    **  Jehovah  is  good." 

1.  Good;   in   himself   essentially  and   independ 

ently. 

2.  Good ;  eternally  and  unchangeably. 

8.  Good  in  each  person :   Father,  Son,  and  Holy 

Ghost. 

4.  Good  in  all  his  acts  of  grace. 

6.  Good  in  all  former  acts  of  providence. 

6.  Good  in  his  present  act,  be  it  what  it  may. 

7.  Good  for  a  stronghold :  to  be  trusted  in  trouble. 

8.  Good  to  his  own  people,  who  find  their  good 

ness  in  him. 

Let  us  praise  him  as  good  in  the  most  emphatic 
and  unlimited  sense.  Whoever  else  may  or  may  not 
be  good,  we  know  that  the  Lord  is  good.  Yea,  "  there 
is  nona  good  but  one,  that  is,  God  r  "  Matt.  xix.  17. 

(286) 


286  MY   8EKMON    NOTB8. 

II.  GOD  TO  us.     "A   strong  hold  in   the   day   of 

trouble." 

1.  Under  special  circumstances  our  resort. 

The  day  of  trouble,  when  trial  is  special  and 

vehement. 
The  day  of  trouble :  temporary,  but  yet  long 

enough  to  last  through  our  life  unless  the 

Lord  prevent. 
The  day  of   trouble:  when  within,  without, 

around,  there  seem  to  be   only  care,  and 

fear,  and  want,  and  grief. 

2.  Securing  our  safety  at  all  times :  for  a  strong 

hold  is  always  strong,  even  when  there  is 

no  immediate  war. 
8.  Maintaining  our  peace.     Within  the  walls  of  a 

castle  men  walk  at  ease,  for  they  are  shut 

in  from  enemies. 
4.  Defying  our  foes,  who  dare  not  attack  such  a 

fortress. 
6.  Abiding  for  ever   the   same:    always  a  sure 

refuge  for  the  needy. 

Let  us  run  to  him,  as  the  poor  people  of  the  open 
country  fly  to  the  walled  towns  in  the  time  of  war. 

III.  GOD  WITH  us.     "  He  knoweth  them  that  trust 

in  him." 

The  term  "  he  knoweth  "  them  includes — 

1.  His  intimate  acquaintance  with  their  persons, 

conditions,  &c. 

2.  His  tender  care  to  supply  all  their  necessities. 


TUB    STRONGHOLD.  287 

3.  His  divine  approval  of  them.     To   others  he 

says,  u  I  know  you  not : "  Luke  xiii.  25. 

4.  His  loving  communion  with  them,  which  is  the 

best  proof  that  they  are  known  to  him,  and 
are  his  beloved  friends. 

6.  His  open  acknowledgment :  he  owns  them  now, 
and  will  confess  them  before  assembled 
worlds :  Rev.  iii.  5. 

Let  us  believe  in  the  goodness  of  the  Lord  even 
when  we  cannot  discern  it  with  the  eye  of  sense. 

Let  us  fly  to  his  protection  when  storms  of  trouble 
fall. 

Let  us  confide  in  his  loving  care  when  hunted  by 
our  enemies. 

Let  us  take  care  that  we  rely  upon  him,  in  Christ 
Jesus,  for  salvation. 


TESTIMONIES. 

The  only  place  of  safety  in  this  world  is  the  one 
in  which  we  are  sure  to  meet  God,  and  to  be  "  under 
the  shadow  of  his  wing."  The  Bible  sets  forth,  in 
grand  metaphor,  this  idea,  by  speaking  of  a  "  fortress 
into  which  the  righteous  runneth,  and  is  safe  ; "  and 
of  "  a  strong  tower,"  and  of  "  the  shadow  of  a  great 
rock."  When  we  were  in  the  Yosemite  Valley, 
lately,  our  driver  told  us  of  a  series  of  terrific  earth 
quakes,  which  visited  the  valley  several  years  ago. 
The  few  inhabitants  who  dwelt  there  were  thrown 
out  of  their  beds  in  the  night.  Frail  cottages  were 


288  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

overturned.  Loose  rocks  were  hurled  do^n  from 
the  precipices  into  the  valley.  These  shocks  were 
repeated  for  several  days  until  the  people  were 
panic-stricken  and  ready  to  despair.  "What  did 
you  do  ?  "  we  inquired.  The  driver  (pointing  to  the 
mighty  and  immovable  rock,  El  Capitan,  which  rises 
for  three  thousand  feet  on  the  south  side  of  the 
valley,  and  has  a  base  of  three  solid  miles)  replied : 
"  We  determined  to  go  and  camp  under  old  Capitan  ; 
for  if  that  ever  moved  we  knew  the  world  would  be 
coming  to  an  end." — Dr.  Cuyler. 

Tamar  may  disguise  herself,  and  walk  in  an  unac 
customed  path,  so  that  Judah  may  not  know  her; 
Isaac,  through  the  dimness  of  his  sight,  may  bless 
Jacob,  and  pass  over  Esau ;  want  of  time  may  make 
Joseph  forget,  or  be  forgotten  of,  his  brethren ; 
Solomon  may  doubt  to  whom  of  right  the  child 
belongeth;  and  Christ  may  come  to  his  own,  and 
not  be  received :  but  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that 
are  his,  and  his  eye  is  always  over  them.  Time, 
place,  speech,  or  apparel  cannot  obscure  or  darken 
his  eye  or  ear.  He  can  discern  Daniel  in  the  den ; 
and  Job,  though  never  so  much  changed,  on  the 
dung-hill.  Let  Jonah  be  lodged  in  the  whale's  belly, 
Peter  be  put  into  a  close  prison,  or  Lazarus  be 
wrapped  in  rags,  or  Abel  rolled  in  blood,  yet  can  he 
call  them  by  name,  and  send  his  angels  to  comfort 
them.  Ignorance  and  forgetfulness  may  cause  love 
and  knowledge  to  be  estranged  in  the  creature,  but 
the  Lord  is  not  incident  to  either,  for  his  eye,  as  hig 


THE   STRONGHOLD.  289 

essence,  is  everywhere ;  he  knoweth  all  things. — 
Spencer  8  "  Things  New  and  Old." 

A  safe  stronghold  our  God  is  still, 

A  trusty  shield  and  weapon ; 
He'll  help  us  clear  from  all  the  ill 

That  hath  us  now  overtaken. 
The  ancient  Prince  of  hell 

Hath  risen  with  purpose  fell ; 
Strong  mail  of  craft  and  power 

He  weareth  in  this  hour, 
On  earth  is  not  his  fellow, 

With  force  of  arms  we  nothing  can, 

Full  soon  were  we  down-trodden ; 
But  for  us  fights  the  proper  Man, 

Whom  God  himself  hath  bidden. 
Ask  ye,  "  Who  is  this  same  ?  " 

Christ  Jesus  is  his  name, 
The  Lord  Zebaoth's  Son, 

He  and  no  other  one 
Shall  conquer  in  the  battle. — Martin  Luther . 

Many  talk  of  trusting  God  when  indeed  they 
know  nothing  of  real  faith.  How  are  we  to  know 
who  is,  and  who  is  not,  a  believer?  This  question  is 
hard  to  answer  in  times  of  prosperity,  but  not  in  the 
day  of  trouble :  then  the  true  truster  is  calm  and 
quiet  in  his  God,  and  the  mere  pretender  is  at  his 
wits'  end.  Our  text  seems  to  hint  as  much.  Every 
body  can  find  a  bird's  nest  in  winter  when  the  trees 
are  bare,  but  the  green  leaves  hide  them  ;  so  are 
believers  discovered  by  adversity.  One  thing,  how 
ever,  should  never  be  forgotten :  whether  we  know 
believers  or  not,  God  knows  them.  He  does  not  in- 
2—19 


290  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

elude  one  hypocrite  in  the  number,  nor  exclude  one 
sincere  truster,  even  though  he  be  of  little  faith. 
He  knows  infallibly  and  universally.  Does  he  know 
me,  even  me,  as  one  of  those  who  trust  in  him? 
The  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his,  and  they  know 
him  as  their  stronghold.  Have  I  such  knowledge  ? 


CXIV 

"1  WELL  STAND  UPON  MY  WATCH,  AND  SET  MB  UPON  THE 
TOWER,  AND  WILL  WATCH  TO  SEE  WHAT  HE  WILL  SAT 
UNTO  ME,  AND  WHAT  I  8HALL  ANSWER  WHEN  F  AM 
REPROVED. 

"AND  THE  LORD  ANSWERED  ME,  AND  SAID,  WRITE  THB 
VISION,  AND  MAKE  IT  PLAIN  UPON  TABLES,  THAT  HE  MAT 
RUN  THAT  READETH  IT. 

"  FOR  THE  VISION  IS  YET  FOR  AN  APPOINTED  TIME,  BUT  AT 
THE  END  IT  SHALL  SPEAK  AND  NOT  LIE  :  THOUGH  IT  TARRT, 
WAIT  FOR  IT:  BECAUSE  IT  WILL  SURELY  COME,  IT  WILL 
NOT  TARRY. 

"  BEHOLD,  HIS  SOUL  WHICH  is  LIFTED  UP  is  NOT  UPRIGHT 

IN    HIM:     BUT     THE    JUST    SHALL    LIVE    BY    HIS    FAITH.11  — 

Eabakkuk  ii.  1  —  4. 


promise  of  God  tarried,  and  the  ungodly 
triumphed. 

Here  was  the  old  problem  of  David  in  another 
form.  "  Wherefore  lookest  thou  upon  them  that 
deal  treacherously  ?  "  (Hab.  i.  13)  is  but  a  repetition 
of  "  I  was  envious  at  the  foolish,  when  I  saw  the 
prosperity  of  the  wicked."  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  3.) 

This  same  problem  occurs  to  ourselves,  and  this 
text  may  help  us. 

Observe  with  understanding,  — 

I.   THE    SENSE    IN    WHICH    THERE    IS  A  DELAY  Hff 
THE  PROMISE. 

It  is  not  every  apparent  delay  which  is  real.     Onr 

(291) 


292  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

time  and  God's  time  are  not  measured  upon   the 
same  dial. 

1.  Each  promise  will  bide  in  due  season  for  fulfil 

ment:  "For  the  vision  is  yet  for  an  ap 
pointed  time." 

2.  Each  promise  in  the  end  will  prove  true :  "  At 

the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not  lie." 

3.  Each  promise  will  repay  our  waiting  :  "  Though 

it  tarry,  wait  for  it." 

4.  Each  promise   will   really  be   punctual   to  its 

hour:    "It  will   surely   come,   it  will  not 
tarry." 

The  word  of  the  Lord  is  as  true  to  the  time  as  to 
the  thing. 

To  him  its  time  of  ripening  is  short :  only  to  us 
is  it  long. 

II.   THE    ATTITUDE    OF    A    BELIEVES    WHILE    THE 
PROMISE  DELAYS. 

We  should  watch  for  the  appearing  of  the  Lord 
in  fulfilment  of  his  promise,  and  should  be  prepared 
to  receive  reproof  as  well  as  blessing. 

The  prophet  took  up— 

1.  A  determined  and  thoughtful  attitude :  "I  will 

stand,  and  set  me." 

2.  An  attentive  attitude :  "  and  will  watch  to  see 

what  he  will  say  unto  me."   He  is  engrossed 
;r  this  one  pursuit :  he  only  desires  to  be 
taught  of  the  Lord. 
8.  A  patient  attitude:  "I  will  set  me  upon  the 


WATCHING,   WAITING,  WRITING.  293 

tower."     It  is  as  if  he  had  been  set  as  a 

sentinel,  and  would  remain  at  his  post. 
4.  A  solitary  position  if  need  be.     He  speaks  of 

himself  alone. 
6.  A  humble  and  submissive  frame  of  mind:  "what 

I  shall  answer  when  I  am  reproved." 

In  all  respects  the  man  of  God  is  ready  for  his  Lord. 

The  delay  is  evidently  a  blessing  to  him. 

The  blessing  will  be  the  greater  when  it  comes. 

III.  THE  WORK  OF  THE  LORD'S  SERVANT  WHILE 

THE  PROMISE  DELAYS. 

1.  By  faith  see  the  vision.     Realize  the  fulfilment 

of    the   divine    word    in    your   own   soul. 
"  Watch  to  see  what  he  will  say." 

2.  Declare  it  as  certain:  record  it  in  black  and 

white,    as    a   fact    not   to   be   questioned. 
"Write  the  vision  upon  tables." 

3.  Declare   it  plainly,   so  that  the  runner  may 

read  it. 

4.  Declare  it  practically,  so  that  he  that  readeth 

may  run  in  consequence  of  it. 
6.  Declare  it  permanently.      Write  down  the  mat 
ter  for  a  record  to  be  referred  to :  engrave 
it  on  tablets  for  perpetuity. 

Sham  faith  prudently  declines  to  mention  her  ex 
pectations. 

It  is  deemed  presumptuous,  fanati  »al,  and  impru 
dent  to  be  positive  that  God  will  keep  his  promise 
and  still  more  to  say  BO. 


*«*4  MY   SERMON   JSOTEJB. 

The  real  believer  thinks  not  so,  but  acts  with  the 
Lord's  promises  as  he  would  deal  with  engagements 
made  in  business  by  honest  men  :  he  treats  them  as 
real,  and  would  have  others  do  the  like. 

IV.   THE    DIFFERENCE    SEEN    IN    MEN    WHEN    THB 
DELAY  OF  THE  PROMISE  TESTS   THEM. 

1.  The  graceless  man  is  too  proud  to  wait  on  God 

as  the  Lord's  servant  will  do.     u  His  soul 

is  not  upright  in  him." 
He  is  himself  dishonest,  and  so  suspects  his 

God. 
This    prevents    his   finding    comfort   in    the 

promise. 

2.  The  just  man  .believes  the  word  of  a  holy  God. 

He  waits  serenely,  in  full  assurance ;  and 
He  lives  in  the  highest  sense  by  his  faith. 

"My  soul,  wait  thou  only  upon  God :  "  Ps.  Ixii.  5. 
What  can  he  do  who  has  no  faith  in  his  Maker  ? 
Heb  xi.  6. 


FROM  OUR  TABLETS. 

It  was  a  custom  among  the  Romans  for  the  public 
affairs  of  every  year  to  be  committed  to  writing  by 
the  pontifex  maximum  or  high  priest,  and  published 
on  a  table.  They  were  thus  exposed  to  public  view, 
so  that  the  people  migH  have  an  opportunity  of 
being  acquainted  with  them.  It  was  also  usual  to 
hang  up  laws  approved  and  recorded  on  ablea  of 


WATCHING,   WAITING,    WRITING.  295 

brass  in  their  market-places,  and  in  their  temples, 
that  they  might  be  seen  and  read.  (Tacitus.)  In 
like  manner,  the  Jewish  prophets  used  to  write,  and 
expose  their  prophecies  publicly  on  tables,  either  in 
their  own  houses,  or  in  the  temple,  that  every  one 
that  passed  by  might  go  in  and  read  them. — Burder. 

And  though  it  linger  till  the  night, 

And  round  again  till  morn, 
My  heart  shall  ne'er  mistrust  thy  might, 

Nor  count  itself  forlorn. 
Do  thus,  O  ye  of  Israel's  seed. 

Ye  of  the  Spirit  born  indeed, 
Wait  for  your  God's  appearing !    Martin  Luther. 

Good  old  Spurstow  says  that  "  some  of  the  prom 
ises  are  like  the  almond-tree — they  blossom  hastily 
in  the  very  earliest  spring;  but,"  saith  he,  "there 
are  others  which  resemble  the  mulberry-tree  they 
are  very  slow  in  putting  forth  their  leaves."  Then 
what  is  a  man  to  do,  if  he  has  a  mulberry-tree 
promise,  which  is  late  in  blossoming  ?  Why,  he  is 
to  wait  till  it  does  blossom ;  since  it  is  not  in  his 
power  to  hasten  it.  If  the  vision  tarry,  exercise  the 
precious  grace  called  patience,  and  the  appointed 
time  shall  surely  bring  you  a  rich  reward. — C.  H.  S. 

God's  promises  are  dated,  but  with  a  mysterious 
character ;  and,  for  want  of  skill  in  God's  chronology, 
we  are  prone  to  think  God  forgets  us ;  when,  indeed, 
we  forget  ourselves  in  being  so  bold  as  to  set  God  a 
time  of  our  own,  and  in  being  angry  that  he  comes 
not  just  then  to  us. —  Chirnall. 


296  MY   SERMON  NOTES. 

If  we  were  more  humble,  we  should  be  more 
patient.  A  beggar,  who  is  worn  with  hunger,  will 
wait  at  the  rich  man's  gate  for  many  an  hour  with 
the  hope  of  getting  broken  victuals ;  but  my  lord, 
who  is  in  no  need,  will  soon  be  gone  if  the  door  does 
not  open  to  his  knock.  We  have  kept  the  Lord 
waiting  long  enough,  and  we  need  not  wonder  if  he 
tries  our  faith  and  patience  by  apparent  delays.  In 
any  case,  let  us  settle  this  in  our  hearts,  that  he  must 
and  will  fulfil  his  promises.  Our  text  shows  us  a 
punctual  God,  a  patient  waiter,  and  a  published 
confidence ;  but  it  finishes  up  with  a  proud  unbe 
liever.  Or,  if  you  will,  it  is  man  uttering  a  bi-ave 
resolve,  and  the  Lord  answering  to  his  faith ;  reasons 
presented  to  patient  faith,  and  rebukes  to  impatient 
pride. 


cxv, 

"  BEHOLD,  HIS  SOUL  WHICH  is  LIFTED  UP  is  NOT  UPKIOHT 

IN  HIM:     ?UT  THE  JUST  SHALL  LIVE  BY  HIS  FAITH."— Hob- 

akkuku  4. 

1PVELAY  of  deliverance  is  a  weighing  of  men. 
-•-^     Suspense  is  very  trying,  and   constitutes  a 
searching  test. 

This  divides  men  into  two  classes  by  bringing  out 
their  real  character. 

The  proud  and  the  just  stand  out  in  relief;  the 
uplifted  and  the  upright  are  far  as  the  poles  asunder; 
and  the  result  of  trial  in  the  two  cases  is  as  different 
as  death  from  life. 

The  tarrying  of  the  promise — 

I.  REVEALS  A  QBE  AT  FAULT — "his  soul  which  is 

lifted  up." 

The  man  is  impatient,  and  will  not  endure  to  wait. 
This  is  pride  full-blown,  for  it  quarrels  with  the 
Lord,  and  dares  to  dictate  to  him. 

1.  It  is  very  natural  to  us  to  be  proud.     So  fell 

our  first  father,  and  we  inherit  his  fault. 

2.  Prides  takes  many  shapes,  and  among  the  rest 

this  vainglorious  habit  of  thinking  that  we 
ought  to  be  waited  on  at  once. 
8.  In  all  cases  pride  is  unreasonable.    Who  are 

(297) 


298  MY   SERMO1H    NOTES. 

we  that  God  should  make  himself  our  ser* 
vant,  and  take  his  time  from  our  watch. 
4  In  every  case  pride  is  displeasing  to  God,  and 
specially  when  it  interferes  with  the  sov 
ereign  liberty  of  his  own  grace.  Shall  he  be 
dictated  to  in  the  matter  of  his  own  love  ? 
"Nay,  but,  O  man,  who  art  thou  that  re- 
pliest  against  God  ?  "  Rom.  ix.  20. 

II.  BETRAYS  A  SAD  EVIL — "  his  soul  is  not  upright 
in  him." 

1.  He  does  not  know  the  truth.     His  mind  is  out 

of  the  perpendicular,  his  knowledge  is  in 
correct,  and  his  judgment  is  mistaken.  He 
puts  "bitter  for  sweet,  and  sweet  for  bit 
ter:"  Is.  v.  20. 

2.  He  does  not  seek  the  light.     His  heart  is  not 

upright :  the  affections  are  perverted.  He 
has  a  bias  towards  conceited  views  of  self, 
and  does  not  wish  to  be  set  right.  Obad.  i.  3. 

8.  His  whole  religion  is  warped  by  his  false  mood 
of  heart  and  mind.  The  very  soul  of  the 
man  is  put  out  of  order  by  his  vanity. 

4.  He  will  not  endure  the  test  of  waiting ;  he  will 
sin  in  his  haste  to  be  delivered ;  he  will 
rush  from  God  to  other  confidences;  he 
will  show  by  his  life  that  his  real  self  is 
not  right  with  God. 

IH.  DISCOVERS  A  SERIOUS  OPPOSITION. 

He  grows  tired  of  the  gospel,  which  is  the  sum  of 


PRIDE  THE  DESTROYER.  299 

the  promises,  and  he  becomes  averse  to  the  exercise 
of  the  faith  which  it  requires. 

His  pride  makes  him  reject  salvation  by  grace, 
through  faith  in  Jesus. 

1.  He  is  too  great  to  consider  it 

2.  He  is  too  wise  to  believe  it. 

3.  He  is  too  good  to  need  it. 

4.  He  is  too  advanced  in  "  culture  "  to  endure  it. 

Most  of  the  objections  to  revealed  truth  arise  from 
a  mind  thrown  out  of  balance  by  pride  of  Intellect, 
or  pride  of  purse,  or  pride  of  heart. 

IV.  DIRECTS  us  TO  A  PLEASING  CONTRAST. 

1.  The  man  who  is  really  just  is  truly  humble. 

The  text  implies  a  contrast  in  this  respect 
between  the  proud  and  the  just. 

2.  Being  humble,  he  does  not  dare  to  doubt  hia 

God,  but  yields  to  his  word  an  implicit 
faith. 

8.  His  faith  keeps  him  alive  under  trial,  and  con 
ducts  him  into  the  joys  and  privileges  of 
spiritual  life. 
4.  His  life  conquers  the  trial,  and  developes  into 

life  eternal. 

The  Believer  has  the  blessing  promised,  and  truly 
lives  while  he  lives. 

The  Unbeliever  misses  the  blessing,  and  is  dead 
while  he  lives. 

What  folly  to  refuse  faith  because  of  pride,  and 
so  to  miss  eternal  life  and  all  its  felicities  I 


800  MV  SERMON  NOTE8. 

QUOTATIONS. 

**I  think  it  is  decidedly  unscriptural  to  fix  any 
time  with  God  for  his  doing  anything.  The  times 
and  seasons  the  Father  hath  put  in  his  own  hand. 
The  man  Christ  Jesus  has  asked  for  the  heathen, 
and  he  will  get  them,  but  he  has  waited  eighteen 
hundred  years  already,  and  has  told  us  that  as  Man 
he  knows  nothing  of  the  'when.'  Pray  on,  and 
believe ;  you  shall  reap."— -From  a  letter  of  Brown- 
low  North  to  a  Christian  worker. 

Strange  that  the  mortal,  who  cannot  believe  in  the 
healing  power  of  the  sparkling  Jordan,  will  often 
willingly  go  down  to  the  muddiest  creek  of  Abana 
and  Pharpar ! — JSdward  Q-arrett. 

As  the  first  step  heavenward  is  humility,  so  the 
first  step  hellward  is  pride.  Pride  counts  the  gospel 
foolishness,  but  the  gospel  always  shows  pride  to  be 
so.  Shall  the  sinner  be  proud  who  is  going  to  hell  ? 
Shall  the  saint  be  proud  who  is  newly  saved  from  it? 
God  had  rather  his  people  fared  poorly  than  live 
proudly — Mason. 

Poverty  of  spirit  is  the  bag  into  which  Christ  puts 
the  riches  of  his  grace. — Rowland  Sill. 

We  must  be  emptied  of  self  before  we  can  be  filled 
with  grace ;  we  must  be  stripped  of  our  rags  before 
we  can  be  clothed  with  righteousness;  we  must  be 
unclothed  that  we  may  be  clothed ;  wounded,  that 
we  may  be  healed;  killed,  that  we  may  be  made 
alive  buried  in  disgrace,  that  we  may  rise  in  holy 


PRIDE   THE  DESTROYER.  301 

glory.  These  words,  "  Sown  in  corruption,  that  we 
may  be  raised  in  incorruption ;  sown  in  dishonor, 
that  we  may  be  raised  in  glory ;  sown  in  weakness, 
that  we  may  be  raised  in  power,"  are  as  true  of  the 
soul  as  of  the  body.  To  borrow  an  illustration  from 
the  surgeon's  art :  the  bone  that  is  set  wrong  must 
be  broken  again,  in  order  that  it  may  be  set  aright. 
I  press  this  truth  on  your  attention.  It  is  certain 
that  a  soul  filled  with  self  has  no  room  for  God ;  and 
like  the  inn  at  Bethlehem,  crowded  with  meaner 
guests,  a  heart  preoccupied  by  pride  and  her  godless 
train,  has  no  chamber  within  which  Christ  may  be 
born  in  us  "the  hope  of  glory." — Gruthrie. 

A  heart  full  of  pride  is  but  a  vessel  full  of  air ; 
this  self-opinion  must  be  blown  out  of  us  before 
saving  knowledge  be  poured  into  us.  Humility  is 
the  knees  of  the  soul,  and  to  that  posture  the  Lamb 
will  open  the  book ;  but  pride  stands  upon  tip-toes, 
as  if  she  would  snatch  the  book,  and  unclasp  it  her 
self.  The  first  lesson  of  a  Christian  is  humility ; 
and  he  that  hath  not  learned  the  first  lesson  is  not 
fit  to  take  out  a  new. — Thomas  Adams. 

But  for  pride,  the  angols  who  are  in  hell  should  be 
in  heaven  (Jude  6)  ;  but  for  pride,  Nebuchadnezzar, 
who  is  in  the  forest,  should  be  in  his  palace  (Daniel 
iv.) ;  but  for  pride,  Pharaoh,  who  lies  with  the  fishes, 
should  be  with  his  nobles  (Exodus  xiv.) ;  no  sin 
hath  pulled  so  many  down  as  this,  which  promised 
to  set  them  up.  Of  all  the  children  of  pride,  the 


802  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

Pope  is  the  father,  which  sitteth  in  the  temple  of 
God,  and  is  worshipped  as  God  (2  Thess.  ii.  4).  ... 
But  for  pride,  the  Pharisees  would  have  received 
Christ  as  gently  as  his  disciples ;  but  for  pride,  Herod 
would  have  worshipped  Christ  as  humbly  as  the  shep 
herds;  but  for  pride,  our  men  would  go  like  Abraham, 
and  our  women  like  Sarah,  as  they  would  be  called 
their  children ;  but  for  pride,  noblemen  would  come 
to  church  as  well  as  the  people ;  but  for  pride, 
gentles  would  abide  reproof  as  well  as  servants ;  but 
for  pride,  thou  wouldst  forgive  thy  brother,  aid 
the  lawyers  should  have  no  work. — Henry  Smith. 


CXVI. 

'BEHOLD,  HIS  SOUL  WHICH  IS  LIFTED  UP  IS  NOT  UPRIGHT 
IN  HIM:  BUT  THE  JUST  SHALL  LIVE  BY  HIS  FAITH." — 

Habakkuk  ii.  4. 

"  FOR  THEREIN  IS  THE  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  GOD  REVEALED 
FROM  FAITH  TO  FAITH:  AS  IT  IS  WRITTEN,  THE  JUST 
SHALL  LIVE  BY  FAITH.11 — Romans  \.  17. 

41  BUT  THAT  NO  MAN  IS  JUSTIFIED  BY  THE  LAW  IN  THE 
SIGHT  OF  GOD,  IT  IS  EVIDENT :  FOR  THE  JUST  SHALL  LIVE 

BY  FAITH." — Oalaiians  iii.  11. 

"NOW  THE  JUST  SHALL  LIVE  BY  FAITH:  BUT  IF  ANY  MAN 
DRAW  BACK,  MY  SOUL  SHALL  HAVE  NO  PLEASURE  IN 

HIM."— Hebrews  x.  88. 

WHEN  the  Spirit  of  God  frequently  repeats  him 
self,  he  thereby  appeals  for  special  attention. 
A  doctrine  so  often  declared  must  be  of  the  first 
importance. 

A  doctrine  so  often  declared  should  be  constantly 
preached. 

A  doctrine  so  often  declared  should  be  unhesita 
tingly  received  by  each  one  of  our  hearers. 

I.   WE   WELL  TREAT  THE  FOUR  TEXTS  AS   ONE. 

The  teaching  is  clear.     "  The  just  shall  live  by  his 
filth." 

1.  Life  is  received  by  the  faith  which  makes  a  man 

just. 
A  man  begins  to  live  by  a  full  acquittal  from 


£04  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

jondemnation,  and  from  penal  death,  so  soon 
as  he  believes  in  Jesus. 

A  man  begins  to  live  as  one  raised  out  of 
spiritual  death  so  soon  as  he  has  faith  in 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

No  form  of  works,  or  profession,  or  knowledge,  or 
even  of  natural  feelings,  can  prove  him  to  be  an 
absolved  and  quickened  man ;  but  faith  does  this. 

2.  Life  is  sustained  by  the  faith  which  keeps  a 

man  just. 

He  who  is  forgiven  and  quickened  lives  ever 
afterwards  as  he  began  to  live — namely,  by 
faith.  Neither  his  feelings,  nor  devotions, 
nor  acquirements  ever  become  his  trust: 
he  still  looks  out  of  himself  to  Jesus.  He 
is  nothing  except  so  far  as  he  is  a  believer. 
He  lives  by  faith  as  to  all  the  forms  of  his 

life,— 

As  a  child,  and  as  a  servant ; 
As  a  pilgrim  progressing,  and  as  a  warrior 

contending ; 
As  a  pensioner  enjoying,  and  as  an  heir 

expecting. 
He  lives  by  faith  in  every  condition, — 

In  joy  and  in  sorrow;  in   wealth   and  in 

poverty ; 

In  strength  and  in  weakness;  in  laboring 

and  in  languishing ;   in  life  and  in  death. 

He  lives  best  when  faith  is  at  its  best,  even 

though  in  other  respects  he  may  be  sorely 


FAITH:  LIFE.  305 

put  to  it.  He  lives  the  life  of  Christ  mo*t 
blessedly  when  most  intensely  he  believes 
in  Christ. 

Hearty  belief  in  God,  his  Son,  his  promises,  his 
grace,  is  the  soul's  life,  neither  can  anything  take  its 
place.  "Believe  and  live"  is  a  standing  precept 
both  for  saint  and  sinner.  "Now  abideth  faith." 
1  Cor.  xiii.  13. 

II.    WE  WILL  TKBAT  THE  FOUR  TEXTS  SEPARATELY. 

If  we  read  with  precision,  we  shall  see  that  Scrip 
ture  contains  no  repetitions.  The  context  gives 
freshness  of  meaning  to  each  apparent  repetition. 

1.  Our   first  text  (Hab.   ii.  4)  exhibits  faith  as 

enabling  a  man  to  live  on  in  peace  and 
humility,  while  as  yet  the  promise  has  not 
come  to  its  maturity.  While  waiting  we 
live  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight. 

We  are  thus  able  to  bear  up  under  the  tem 
porary  triumphs  of  the  wicked.  See  the 
first  chapter  of  Habakkuk's  prophecy. 

We  are  thus  preserved  from  proud  impatience 
at  delay. 

We  are  thus  filled  with  delight  in  confident 
expectation  of  good  things  to  come. 

2.  Our  second  text  (Rom.  i.  17)  exhibits  faith  as 

working  salvation  from  the  evil  which  is  in 
the  world  through  lust.  The  chapter  in 
which  it  stands  presents  &n  awful  view  of 
human  nature,  and  implies  that  only  faith  in 
the  gospel  can  bring  us  life  in  the  form  of— 
2—20 


306  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

Mental  enlightenment  of  life  as  to  the  true 

God :  Rom.  i.  19—23. 
Moral  purity  of  life:  Rom.  i.  verse  24,  and 

onward. 
Spiritual  life  and  communion  with  that  which 

is  divine  and  holy. 
Naturally  men  are  dead  and  corrupt.     The 

law  reveals  our  death,  see  Rom.  iii.  10 — 20 ; 

but  the  gospel  imparts  spiritual  life  to  those 

who  receive  it  by  faith. 
8.  Our  third  text  (Gal.  iii.  11)  exhibits  faith  as 

bringing  to  us  that  justification  which  saves 

us  from  the  sentence  of  death. 
Nothing  can  be  plainer,  more  positive,  more 

sweeping  than  this  declaration  that  no  man 

is    justified  before    God   except  by  faith. 

Both  the   negative    and  the   positive   are 

plain  enough. 
4.  Our  fourth  text  (Heb.  x.  38)  exhibits  faith  as 

the  life  of  final  perseverance. 
There   is   need   of    faith   while    waiting  for 

heaven  (verses  32 — 36). 
The  absence  of  such  faith  would  cause  as  to 

draw  back  (verse  38). 
That  drawing  back  would  be  a  fatal  sign. 
That  drawing  back  can  never  occur,  for  faith 

saves  the  soul  from  ail  hazards,  keeping  its 

face  heavenwards  even  to  the  end. 
What  can  you  do  who  have  no  faith  ? 
In  what  other  way  can  you   be  accepted  with 
God? 


FAITH:   LIFE.  307 

On  what  ground  can  fou  excuse  your  unbelief  in 
your  God? 

Will  you  perish  sooner  than  believe  him  ? 

BRBVIATES. 

The  Jews  in  the  Talmud  have  the  saying,  "  The 
whole  law  was  given  to  Moses  at  Sinai,  in  six  hun 
dred  and  thirteen  precepts."  David,  in  the  fifteenth 
Psalm,  brings  them  all  within  the  compass  of  eleven. 
Isaiah  brings  them  to  six  (Isaiah  xxxiii.  15) ;  Micah 
to  three  (Micah  vi.  8)  ;  Isaiah,  again,  to  two  (Isaiah 
Ivi.)  ;  Habakkuk  to  this  one,  "  The  just  shall  live  by 
his  faith." — Liglitfoot. 

The  soul  is  the  life  of  the  body.  Faith  is  the  life 
of  the  soul.  Christ  is  the  life  of  faith. — Flavel. 

Inscribed  upon  the  portal  from  afar 

Conspicuous  as  the  brightness  of  a  star, 

Legible  only  by  the  light  they  give 

Stand  the  soul-quickening  words — BELIEVE  AND  LIVE. 

To  believe  God  is  not  a  little  thing :  it  is  the  index 
of  a  heart  reconciled  to  God,  and  the  token  of  true 
spirituality  of  mind ;  it  is  the  essence  of  true  worship, 
and  the  root  of  sincere  obedience.  He  who  believes 
his  God  in  spite  of  his  sins,  does  him  more  honor 
than  cherubim  and  seraphim  in  their  continual  ador 
ation.  A  little  thing  faith !  How  is  it  then  that 
unbelief  is  so  great  a  crime  that  it  is  marked  out  for 
reprobation  as  the  one  damning  evil  which  shuts 
men  out  of  heaven  ?  Whatever  else  you  put  in  the 
second  place,  give  faith  the  lead;  it  is  not  a  vain 
thing,  for  it  is  your  life. 


CXVII. 

'  SEEK  YE  THE  LORD,  ALL  YE  MEEK  OF  THE  EARTH,  WHICH 
HAVE  WROUGHT  HIS  JUDGMENT  ;  SEEK  RIGHTEOUSNESS,  SEEK 
MEEKNESS:  IT  MAY  BE  YE  SHALL  BE  HID  IN  THE  DAY  OF 
THE  LORD'S  ANGER." — ZephanioJi  ii.  3. 

"  INHERE  is  a  "  may  be  "  about  all  temporal  things ; 
•*•      and  in  pleading  for  them  we  ask  with  much 
diffidence. 

Yet  we  may  plead  confidently  when  our  appeal  is 
made  to  God  in  the  day  of  his  anger.  Then  our 
need  is  pressing :  it  is  for  our  life  that  we  are  plead 
ing,  and  the  Lord  is  very  gracious  in  our  extremities. 
In  spiritual  things  we  may  draw  encouragement 
from  the  faintest  sign  of  hope  when  it  proceeds  from 
God :  "  it  may  be  ye  shall  be  hid." 

The  seeking  for  refuge,  here  commanded,  is  directed 

only  to  the  meek  and  righteous ;  but  it  is  our  joy  to 

proclaim  a  hiding-place  for  the  guilty,  and  to  bid 

them  seek  the  Lord  even  on  the  least  encouragement. 

The  three  ssekiugs  commanded  are : — 

"Seek  the  Lord;"   or,  repent,  and  trust  in 

Jehovah. 

"Seek  righteousness."     Directed  as  it  is  in 
the  text  to  those  who  are  already  righteous, 
it  bids  them  persevere  in  righteousness. 
"Seek  meekness."     Spoken   to  the  meek,  i* 

(308) 


MAY  BE.  309 

bids  them  bow  even  more  humbly  before 
the  chastening  hand  of  God. 

But  our  point  is  this :  that  we  may  seek  the  Lord 
upon  the  faintest  encouragement.  There  are  strong 
inducements  and  large  promises;  but  if  we  cannot 
grasp  these  we  may  come  even  with  a  "'  may  be." 

I.   IN  MANY  A  RECORDED  INSTANCE  "  MAY  BE  "  HAS 
PROMPTED  AND  JUSTIFIED  A  RIGHT  ACTION. 

From  the  cases  which  we  will  mention  lessons  may 
be  learned. 

1.  A  "  may  be  "  led  Jonathan  to  attack  the  garri 

son  of  the  Philistines.  1  Sam.  xiv.  6.  "  It 
may  be  that  the  Lord  will  work  for  us  :  for 
there  is  no  restraint  to  the  Lord  to  save  by 
many  or  by  few."  This  should  nerve  saints 
for  holy  enterprises. 

2.  A  "  may  be "  cheered  David  when  Absalom 

rebelled,  and  Shimei  cursed.  2  Sam.  xvi.  12. 
"  It  may  be  that  the  Lord  will  look  on  mine 
affliction."  Let  us  hope  in  God  in  our 
darkest  hours. 

8.  A  "  may  be "  induced  the  lepers  to  visit  the 
Syrian  camp.  2  Kings  vii.  4.  Their  des 
perate  venture  should  be  laid  to  heart  by 
those  who  are  in  like  condition.  They  can 
but  perish  in  any  case ;  let  them  seek  the 
Lord,  and  try  whether  he  does  not  save. 

4.  A  "may  be,"  diluted  with  an  "  if  so  be,"  moved 
the  afflicted  to  humble  himself.  See  Jeie- 


310  MY   SERMCN   NOTES. 

miih's  Lamentations  iii.  29.     Let  iic  tried 

soul  refuse  the  like  hope. 
6.  A  "may  be,"  in  the  form  of  "Who  can  tell?" 

brought  all  Nineveh  to  repentence.     Jonah 

iii.  9. 

If  others  have  acted  so  vigorously  upon  such  slen 
der  encouragement,  may  not  we,  when  dreading  the 
ruin  of  our  souls,  act  with  like  decision  and  hopeful 
ness?  If  we  fly  to  Jesus  by  childlike  faith,  there  is 
more  than  a  "  may  be  "  that  the  result  will  be  happy. 

II.   IN   THE   INSTANCE    OF   A   SINCERE   SEEKER   THE 
"MAY  BE"   IS   OF  UNUSUAL  STRENGTH. 

There  is  every  probability  of  the  penitent  obtain 
ing  salvation  if  we — 

1.  Consider  the  gracious  nature  of  our  God.    Micah 

vii.  18. 

2.  Consider  the  glorious  work  of  Christ  for  sinners. 

1   Tim.  i.15. 
8.  Consider  the  mercy  they  have  already  received. 

"  It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not 

consumed : "  Lam.  iii.  22. 
4.  Consider  the  number  and  character  of  those  who 

have  been  saved.     Rev.  v.  9,  vii.  9.     1  Cor. 

vi.  11. 

6.  Consider  the  omnipotence  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
John  iii.  8. 

6.  Consider  the  glory  which  is  to  be  the  Lord's  at 
the  last :  surely  it  will  come  by  saving  souls^ 
and  saving  many  of  them. 


MAY    Bfc.  311 

III.  BUT  IN  THE  SEEKER'S  CASE  HE  HAS  FAB  MOBB 

TO   GO   UPON   THAN   A   MERE    "  MAY  BE." 

There  are  innumerable  sure  promises  in  the  Word 
of  God,  and  these  are  made  to — 

Repentance.     Prov.  xxviii.  13.     Isa.  Iv.  7. 
Faith.     Mark  xvi.  16.      John  iii.  18.     Acts 

xvi.  31. 

Prayer.     Matt.  vii.  7.     Acts  ii.  21. 
Let  these  promises  be  studied,  and  their  encourage 
ment  accepted  by  immediate  compliance  with  their 
requirements. 

Consider  that  God  foresaw  all  events  when  he 
made  these  promises,  and  accordingly  he 
has  not  made  them  in  error. 
Consider  that  he  cannot  withdraw  his  promise. 
Consider  that  he  is  the  same  as  when  he  made 
the  promise,  and  so  in  effect  makes  it  again 
every  day. 

Consider  that  it  will  be  a  crime  to  doubt  the 

Lord  our  God,  and  an  act  of  reverence  to 

believe  him.     Venture  now  upon  the  bare 

promise  of  God,  who  cannot  lie.    Titus  i.  2. 

O  sinner,  seek  the  Lord ! 

He  comes  to  you  in  Christ  Jesus.  Look  to  him  at 
once,  and  live. 

CHEERING  WORDS. 

Possibly  ye  may  be  hid  from  punishment,  probably 
ye  shall  escape  sorrow :  but  pardon  of  sin  ye  shall 
be  sure  of ;  mitigation  also  of  sorrow,  if  not  preven- 


812  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

tion  of  it.  Saved  ye  shall  be,  or  more  gently 
handled,  or  so  inwardly  calmed,  that  ye  shall  be  able 
to  call  your  souls  to  rest  when  others  are  at  their 
wits'  ends.  You  shall  be  safe  under  the  cover  of 
God's  wings,  and  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand ;  when 
others,  that  are  without  God  in  the  world,  shall  be 
as  a  naked  man  in  a  storm,  as  an  unarmed  man  in 
the  field  of  battle,  or  as  a  ship  at  sea  without  an 
anchor,  subject  to  dash  and  split  against  rocks  and 
quicksands. —  Trapp. 

Dr.  John  Duncan  was  once  heard  thus  address 
ing  a  beggar-woman  in  Edinburgh : — "  Now,  you'll 
promise  me  that  you'll  seek :  but  mind,  seeking  will 
not  save  you,  yet  it  is  your  duty ;  and  if  you  seek 
you'll  find,  and  finding  will  save  you." 

Our  hope  is  not  hung  upon  such  untwisted  thread 
as  "I  imagine  so ; "  or,  " it  is  likely ;  "  but  the  cable, 
the  strong  rope  of  our  fastened  anchor,  is  the  oath 
and  promise  of  him  who  is  eternal  verity ;  our  salva 
tion  is  fastened  with  God's  own  hand,  and  Christ's 
own  strength,  to  the  strong  stake  of  God's  unchang 
ing  nature. — Rutherford. 

How  long  a  beggar  will  wait,  and  how  eagerly  he 
will  plead,  although  he  has  no  promise  of  an  alms, 
but  only  the  bare  chance  of  winning  a  penny  from  a 
passer-by  I  How  laboriously  will  fishers  cast  their 
nets  again  and  again,  though  nothing  has  been  taken 
as  yet,  and  their  only  encouragement  is  the  possi 
bility  that  fish  may  come  that  way  !  How  desperately 
will  men  dive  into  the  sea  with  the  expectation  of 


MAY  BE. 

finding  pearls  in  oyster-shells,  encountering  fierce 
monsters  of  the  deep  with  the  uncertain  hope  of 
being  enriched!  And  will  not  men  draw  near  to 
God  when  their  outlook  is  so  much  more  bright, 
their  expectation  so  much  more  justifiable  ?  As  for 
me,  I  will  lay  down  my  sick  soul  at  Christ's  feet,  in 
sure  and  certain  belief  that  he  will  heal  me,  and  then 
I  will  follow  him  whithersoever  he  goeth,  in  calm 
assurance  that  he  will  lead  me  to  his  eternal  king 
dom  and  glory. — (7.  ff.  8. 


CXVIII. 

"SHE  OBETED  NOT  THE  VOICE;  SHE  RECEIVED  NOT  CORREC 
TION;  SHE  TRUSTED  NOT  IN  THE  LORD ;  SHE  DREW  NOT 

NEAR  TO  HER  GOD.' — Zephaniah  iii.  2. 

*\T  7HEN  the  Lord  is  judging  men  he  does  not 
*  *  spare  those  who  are  called  his  people :  Moab 
and  Ammon  and  Nineveh  are  visited,  and  Jerusalem 
is  not  spared. 

There  are  sins  which  outsiders  cannot  commit,  such 
as  those  of  the  text.  When  peculiar  privileges  only 
create  peculiar  sins,  they  will  be  followed  by  peculiar 
punishments. 

The  offences  mentioned  in  this  verse  are  to  be 
found  in  nations,  churches,  and  individuals  unto  this 
day :  and  in  a  measure  among  God's  own  people. 

I.  IN  THE  TEXT  WE  PERCEIVE  FOUR  MANIFEST  SINS. 

1.  We   will  make   upon  them,  as    a  whole,  four 
observations. 

Sins  of  omission  are  sure  to  exist  where  there 
are  sins  of  commission.  Jerusalem  is  said 
to  be  "  filthy  and  polluted,"  and  then  these 
omissions  are  recited. 

Sins  of  omission  rank  with  the   blackest  of 
offences.      Consider  the  context,  and    see 
with  what  fearful  crimes  omissions  are  cata 
logued,  as  if  to  mark  their  vileness. 
(314) 


FOCKlfOLD   FAULT.  816 

Sins  of  omission  go  in  clusters.  "  She  obeyed 
not."  "She  received  not  instruction." 
"  She  trusted  not."  "  She  drew  not  near  to 
her  God."  How  many  foul  birds  may  dwell 
in  one  nest !  One  sin  never  goes  alone. 
Sins  of  omission  are  none  the  less  when  they 
are  mainly  spiritual.  Such  are  those  men 
tioned  in  the  text,  and  they  are  cited  among 
crimes  of  deepest  dye. 

2.  We  will  note  each  one  of  the  four  separately. 
They   heard    God   speak,    but   they  took  no 
heed.     This  included  rebellion,  hardness  of 
heart,   presumption,    and    defiance   of  the 
Lord ;  and  all  this  after  solemn  warnings, 
great  instruction,  and  tender  invitation. 
They  felt  correction,  but  were  not  instructed. 
This  involved  greater  persistence  in  rebel 
lion,  and  still  more  obduracy  of  heart. 
They  were  unbelieving  and  distrustful,  and 
relied  upon  idols,  and  not  upon  the  Lord. 
Unbelief  is  a  master-sin. 

They   had   no    communion   with   their   God. 
"  Her  God  "  implies  existence  of  covenant- 
relationship,    in   name  at  least ;  but  there 
was  no  worship,  love,  or  service. 
These  four  sins  abound  around  us,  and  among  us. 
Inattention,  Obstinacy,  Unbelief,  and  Aversion  to 
God  are  all  common. 

They  involve  men  in  misery  in  this  life,  and  in 
eternal  ruin  in  the  world  to  come.  Are  they  not 
destroying  home  of  y«wv 


316  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

II.   IN    THE    TEXT  WE    SPY  OUT  FOUR   HIDDEN   EN 
COURAGEMENTS   TO   SEEK  BETTER   THINGS. 

Let  those  who  confess  their  sin  look  at  the  text 
with  hope,  for  it  is  clear  that — 

1.  God  does  speak  to  men.     He  may  speak  to  us 

again. 

2.  God  corrects  for  our  good.      It  is  meant  for 

instruction,  not  for  destruction.     (See  the 

margin.) 
8.  God  would  have  us  trust  him.     He  would  not 

blame  us  for  not  trusting  if  we  were  not 

permitted  to  trust  him. 
4.  God  would  have  us  draw  near  to  him.     Else  it 

were  not  mentioned  as  our  sin  that  we  do 

not  draw  near  to  him. 

All  this  applies  to  us  at  this  day. 

Still  the  Lord  is  in  the  midst  of  us,  reading  our 
inmost  souls. 

Let  us  lay  our  sins  to  heart,  and  seek  his  face 
through  Christ  Jesus. 

A   FEW   SMALL  FlSHES. 

Remember,  O  my  soul,  the  fig-tree  was  charged, 
not  with  bearing  noxious  fruit,  but  no  fruit. —  Thomas 
Fuller. 

The  last  words  that  Archbishop  Usher  was  heard 
to  say  were  these — "  Lord  forgive  my  sins,  especially 
my  sins  of  omission." 

Sins  of  commission  are  usual  punishments  for  sing 


FODKFOLD   FAULT.  317 

of  omission      He  that  leaves  a  duty  may  soon  be 
left  to  commit  a  crime. —  Q-urnall. 

No  sin  is  ever  alone.  Dr.  Macdonald  says,  "  There 
is  no  fault  that  does  not  bring  its  brothers  and  sisters 
and  cousins  to  live  with  it." 

Oh,  how  rare  it  is  to  find  a  soul  still  enough  to 
hear  God  speak  I — Fenelon. 

Grace  turns  the  serpent  into  a  rod ;  but  sin  turns 
the  rod  into  a  serpent.  The  former  turns  poison 
into  a  remedy ;  but  the  latter  turns  the  remedy  into 
poison. — Benjamin  Beddome. 

Sorrow  is  sent  for  our  instruction,  just  as  we 
darken  the  cages  of  birds  when  we  would  teach 
them  to  sing. — Jean  Paul  Hichter. 


CXIX. 

"THEN  SAID  HAGGAI,  IF  ONE  THAT  is  UNCLEAN  BY  A  DEAL 

BODY  TOUCH  ANY  OF  THESE,  SHALL  IT  BE  UNCLEAN?  ANB 
THE  PRIESTS  ANSWERED  AND  BALD,  IT  SHALL  BE  UNCLEAN. 
"THEN  ANSWERED  HAGGAI,  AND  SAID,  SO  IS  THIS  PEOPLK, 
AND  SO  IS  THIS  NATION  BEFORE  ME,  SATTH  THE  LORD ; 
AND  SO  IS  EVERY  WORK  OF  THEIR  HANDS;  AND  THAT 
WHICH  THEY  OFFER  THERE  IS  UNCLEAN." — Haggai  U.  13,  14 

r  I  "HE  prophet  makes  the  priests  witness  against 
•*-  themselves  and  the  people.  This  was  a  pow 
erful  means  of  forcing  home  the  truth. 

It  is  clear  from  verse  12  that  the  mere  bearing  of 
a  holy  thing  did  not  enable  the  bearer  to  communi 
cate  consecration. 

But  the  priests  owned  that  the  touch  of  an  unclean 
person  did  communicate  uncleanness. 

What  a  picture !  An  unclean  person  making 
everything  unclean  wherever  he  laid  his  hand! 
He  could  not  move  without  spreading  defilement 
on  all  sides. 

Such  were  the  erring  people  of  Haggai's  day  m 
the  judgment  of  their  God,  and  he  never  judges  too 
severely. 

Such  are  sinful  men  at  this  day. 


DOJHLKD   AND  DBJfLLING.  819 

I.  THE  TERRIBLE  UNCLEANNE88.     Here  we  keep  to 

our  text. 
For  a  New  Testament  exposition,  r«ad  Titus  i.  15. 

1.  Common  things  are  polluted  by  men  ot  unclean 

nature. 

Nothing  is  common  or  unclean  naturally;  for 
every  creature  of  God  is  good.  (1  Tim.  iv.  4.) 
But  in  divers  ways  the  things  of  ordinary  life  are 
made  to  be  unclean, — 

By  making  gods  of  them,  saying,  "  What  shall 

we  eat?"  &c. 
By  excess  in  the  use  of  them.     By  gluttony, 

drunkenness,  &c. 
By  excess  in  the  keeping  of  them.     A  miser's 

goods  are  accursed. 

By  ingratitude  concerning  them.     Then  they 
remain  unblessed. 

2.  Holy  things  are  polluted  by  men  of  unclean 

nature. 

They  use  the  gospel  as  an  excuse  for  sin. 
They  offer  prayer  in  solemn  mockery. 
They  make  praise  into  a  musical  performance. 
They  turn  the  sacraments  into  hypocrisy  or 

worse. 
There  is  nothing  so  holy  but  that  sin  can 

defile  it. 
8.  Good  works  are  polluted  when  they  come  from 

evil  men :  "  so  is  every  work  of  their  hands." 
They  can  be  charitable  for  ostentation. 
They  can  be  religious  to  be  seen  of  men. 


320  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

They  can  be  sternly  righteous  in  order  to  b« 

revenged. 

They  can  be  humble  to  gain  their  ends. 
4.  Sacrifices  are  polluted  when  offered  by  unclean 
men :  "  and  that  which  they  offer  there  is 
unclean." 

Their  public  thanksgivings  are  a  falsehood. 
Their  solemn  fasts  are  a  mere  comedy. 
What  a  wretched  condition  is  he  in  who,  even  in 
his  holiest  acts,  is  defiling  everything !    He  may  well 
pause  and  humble  himself  before  God,  for  the  more 
he  does  in  his  present  state  the  more  does  he  defile. 

Sin  has  cast  a  serpent's  trail  over  the  whole  uni 
verse,  making  the  creation  itself  subject  to  vanity. 
What  does  man  touch  which  he  does  not  degrade 
and  pollute  ?  Here  is  a  wide  field  for  thought,  and 
abundant  cause  for  humiliation. 

II.  THE  ALL-SUFFICIENT  BEMEDY.  Here  we  go  be 
yond  our  text. 

In  Numbers  xix.  we  have  the  type  of  the  great 
remedy,  and  a  fuller  account  of  the  uncleanness 
which  it  removed. 

In  the  rites  used  for  purifying  the  unclean — 

1.  There  was  a  sacrifice  (Num.  xix.,  verses  2—4) : 

"A  red  heifer  without  spot."  This  must 
be  slain.  Without  shedding  of  blood  there 
is  no  remission  of  sin.  Heb.  ix.  22. 

2.  There  was  a  burning :  verses  5  and  6.     Sin  is 

hateful,  and  we  must  see  it  to  be  such ;  it 
must  be  burned  without  the  camp. 


DEFILED   AND   DEFILING.  321 

8.  There  was  a  water  of  separation.  Having  been 
purged  with  blood  of  sacrifice,  we  must  be 
sprinkled  with  water  of  sanctifi cation. 

4.  There  was  an  application  with  hyssop.     Faith 

must   receive   the    cleansing.     "Purge   me 
with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean." 

5.  This  must  cleanse  our  whole  nature.    See  verse 

19.    There  was  a  washing  of  the  whole  man 
and  his  garments. 
All  that  this  type  intended  may  be  found,— 

In  the  water  and  the  blood  which  flowed  from 
the  side  of  our  Lord,  manifesting  the  doubly 
cleansing  power  of  his  sacrifice :  and 
In  the  efficacious  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
See,  O  sinner,  your  need  of  cleansing  before  you 
attempt  anything. 

Before  this,  nothing  you  are,  or  have,  or  do,  Is 
clean  before  God. 

After  this,  all  things  shall  be  holy  to  you. 
See  to  this  cleansing  at  once,  and  all  else  will 
follow  in  due  course. 


VIVACITIES. 

"My  friends  say  everywhere  that  I  am  not  a 
Christian.  I  have  just  given  them  the  lie  direct  by 
performing  my  Easter  devotions  (mes  paques)  pub 
licly,  thus  proving  to  all  my  lively  desire  to  termi 
nate  my  long  career  in  the  religion  in  which  I  was 
born,  and  I  have  fulfilled  this  important  act  after  a 
dozen  attacks  of  consecutive  fever,  which  made  me 
2—21 


822  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

fear  I  should  die  before  I  could  assure  you  of  my 
respect  and  my  devotion." —  Voltaire,  to  Madame  du 
BarrL  (What  a  specimen  of  polluted  holy  things !) 

Those  whose  devotions  are  plausible,  but  whose 
conversation  is  wicked,  will  find  their  devotions 
unable  to  sanctify  their  enjoyments,  but  their  wick 
edness  prevailing  to  pollute  them. 

When  we  are  employed  in  any  good  work,  we 
should  be  jealous  over  ourselves,  lest  we  render  it 
unclean  by  our  corruptions  and  mismanagements. — 
Matthew  Henry. 

Diogenes,  standing  beside  a  foul  bath,  was  heard 
to  exclaim,  "  Where  shall  those  be  washed  who  wash 
here  ?  "  When  even  the  religious  duties  of  men  are 
defiled,  what  hope  can  they  have  of  making  them 
selves  clean  ?  Those  who  turn  prayer  into  a  mockery, 
and  sacraments  into  a  show,  have  turned  medicine 
into  poison ;  and  how  shall  they  be  healed  ? 

A  child  has  taken  an  infectious  disease.  He  comes 
to  fondle  you,  and  you  push  him  away.  He  moves 
the  furniture,  and  you  command  him  to  take  his 
hands  off.  He  must  be  shut  up,  and  kept  from  con 
tact  with  the  household.  Suppose  he  persists  in 
leaving  his  room,  and  joining  with  the  rest  of  the 
family.  No  matter  how  kind  his  motive,  he  is  doing 
wrong  and  acting  mischievously.  The  more  indus 
triously  he  works  about  the  house,  and  runs  to  and 
fro,  the  more  does  he  spread  the  disorder.  The 
household  work  which  he  does  would  be  wel1  enough 


DftJULKD   AND   DEFILING.  828 

If  he  were  but  in  health:  as  it  is,  his  eveiy  move 
ment  is  a  danger,  and  his  best  endeavors  are  perilous. 
The  child  must  be  healed  before  he  can  do  real  good 
in  the  family:  while  he  is  infected  he  pollutes  all 
that  he  touches,  and  injures  all  whom  he  approaches. 
Oh,  that  unconverted  men  were  wise  enough  to  see 
that  what  they  need,  at  first,  is  not  so  much  work  to 
do,  as  cleansing  from  pollution,  in  order  that  they 
may  be  able  to  do  good  works. 

At  one  of  the  Ragged-schools  in  Ireland,  a  clergy 
man  asked  the  question,  "What  is  holiness?"  After 
some  pause,  a  poor  Irish  convert,  in  dirty,  tattered 
rags,  jumped  up,  and  said,  "  Plaise  your  Ri Terence, 
it's  to  be  clane  inside. —  G-.  8.  Bowt>s. 


cxx. 

«*FOB  WHO  HATH   DESPISED  THE  DAT  OF  8MAI.Z,  THINGS!  * 

Zechariah  iv.  10. 

GREAT  numbers  of  persons  do  despise  "  the  day 
of  small  things." 

If  they  were  wise,  they  would  not  do  so ;  for  it  is 
not  wise  to  despise  anything,  and  to  despise  a  thing 
because  it  is  small  is  great  folly. 

A  small  thing  may  be  greatly  good,  or  terribly 
evil;  and  in  neither  case  would  it  be  prudent  to 
despise  it. 

It  is  usually  God's  way  to  begin  his  great  works 
with  a  day  of  small  things. 

Thus  it  is  seen  that  there  is  nothing  in  the 

means  themselves. 

Thus  the  divine  power  is  more  fully  displayed. 
Thus  faith   is  exercised,  and  made  to  learn 

many  lessons. 

Why  should  men  despise  what  God  ordains  ? 
Who  are  those  persons  who  dare  act  thus  con 
temptuously?     They  are  not  entitled  to  give  them 
selves  such  airs :  yet  they  dare  to  do  so. 
They  show  their  contempt  in  various  ways. 

They  affect  pity  for  such  feebleness.     Nehe- 

miah  iv.  2. 

They  decry  and  find  fault.   1  Samuel  xvii.  28. 
(324) 


SMALL  THINGS   NOT  TO   BE   DESPISED.          326 

Tbey  sneer,  and  ridicule.   Matt.  xiii.  55.  Acts 

xvii.  18. 
They  leave  alone,  with  silent  neglect.    Actn 

v.  38. 

It  is  a  sad  pity  when  this  contempt  is  poured  upon 
a  beginner  in  grace,  for  it  may  cause  him  sad  distress 
and  discouragement. 

Our  object  at  this  time  is  to  reprove  those  who 
despise  the  earlier  and  weaker  works  of  grace  in  the 
soul.  True  it  is  "  the  day  of  small  things,"  but  this 
is  to  be  rejoiced  in,  and  is  not  to  be  despised. 

Let  us  commune  with — 

I.  THOSE  WHO  DESPISE  OTHERS  WHO  ABE  IN  THE 

DAY   OF   SMALL  THINGS. 

1.  Do  you  not  know  that  there  are  babes  in 
grace,  and  that  these  are  true  children  of 
God  ?  Do  you  doubt  that  evident  fact  ? 

2.  Were  you  not  once  such  little  ones  yourselves  ? 
If  you  never  were,  who  are  you  to  despise 
your  betters? 

8.  Were  not  the  greatest  of  the  saints  once  very 
feeble?  Would  you  have  acted  thus  to 
them? 

4.  May  not  the  strong  be  glad  at  times  to  be  as 
sure  of  salvation  as  these  little  ones  ?  Why 
despise  those  whom  you  may  yet  envy  ? 

6.  Does  not  our  Lord  care  tenderly  for  the  lambs  ? 
Is.  xl.  11. 

6.  Has  he  not  threatened  all  proud  despisers? 
Matt,  xviii.  6. 


326  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

Who  then  dares  despise  the  day  of  g^nall  things  ? 

Who  are  those  who  are  so  wicked  ?  They  are  the 
proud,  the  ignorant,  the  thoughtless,  the  unfeeling, 
the  profane,  and  such  like. 

II.  THOSE  WHO  DESPISE  THE  DAY  OF  SMALL  THINGS 

IN   THEMSELVES. 

1.  They  will  frequently  fail  to  notice  and  nurture 

thoughts  and  feelings  which  would  lead 
them  to  Christ. 

2.  They  cannot  believe  that  salvation  can  come 

by  ordinary  means,  or  through  their  present 
knowledge  and  emotions:  these  are  too 
small  in  their  esteem,  they  crave  for  signs 
and  wonders. 

3.  Therefore   they  endeayor    to    kill    their  own 

thoughtfulness  at  its  birth,  and  quench  the 
spark  of  desire  before  it  can  become  a 
flame.  Yet  these  despised  things  might 
have  led  on  to  salvation. 

4.  If  they  would  nurture  their  weak  desires,  and 

feeble  resolves,  and  faint  beliefs,  and  tremb 
ling  hopes,  good  would  come  of  them. 

5.  No  doubt  many  think  ill  of  their  own  condition 

when    God   thinks    well    of   them.     They 
judge  that  little  faith,  and  little  life,  and 
little  strength  are   useless;    but  the  Lord 
thinks  not  so. 
It  is  wise  to  look  away,  both  from  small  things  and 

great  things,  to  Jesus.     Let  us  see  his  day,  and  be 

glad.     John  viii.  56. 


SMALL  THINGS   NOT   TO   BE   DESPISED.          327 

Let  us  trust  in  his  finished  work,  and  rejoice  io 
his  continued  work. 

"Rejoice,  and  see  the  plummet  in  the  hand  ot 
Zerubbabel."  See  context. 

III.  THOSE  WHO  DO  NOT  DESPISE  THE   DAY   OF 

SMALL   THINGS. 

1.  Hopeful    pastors.     We    are    looking    out    for 

gracious  signs,  and  are  more  apt  to  be  mis 
led  by  our  sanguine  hopes  than  to  fall  into 
the  opposite  fault  of  despising  the  day  of 
small  things. 

2.  Anxious  parents.     They  long  to  see  buds  of 

grace  in  their  children.  The  smallest  signs 
of  spiritual  life  would  charm  them. 

3.  Wise  soul-winnera.     They  rejoice  to  see  "  first 

the  blade." 

4.  Jesus  himself.    He  loves  the  little  ones.    Mark 

x.  14. 
Come  ye  to  him,  all  ye  trembling  souls  ! 


MULTUM  IN  PABVO. 

When  the  boy  began  to  draw  portraits  upon  his 
slate,  and  to  sketch  with  charcoal,  the  great  artist 
was  in  him  in  embryo.  It  was  not  every  eye  that 
could  perceive  his  budding  genius,  but  he  who  did 
80,  and  encouraged  the  youth  to  pursue  art  as  his 
vocation,  found  a  life-long  satisfaction  in  having 
helped  him.  Had  he  sneered  at  the  young  draughts 
man  he  would  have  lived  to  see  his  folly ;  but  now 


S28  MT   SERMON   NOTES. 

he  takes  pleasure  in  every  triumph  of  the  ienowued 
painter.  Some  such  joy,  only  of  a  higher  and  more 
spiritual  order,  will  be  yours  if  you  stimulate  early 
piety,  and  teach  the  tender  heart  the  way  to  peace 
and  holiness.  To  repress  desires  which  are  heaven 
ward,  because  they  are  attended  with  something  of 
childishness,  is  wicked  cruelty :  prune  the  vine  of  its 
wild  shoots,  but  do  not  uproot  it.  Foster  and  nurture 
even  the  tiniest  sign  of  grace.  "  Destroy  it  not ;  for 
a  blessing  is  in  it :  "  Is.  Ixv.  8. 

FEEBLEMIND. — I  do  not  yet  know  all  the  truth ;  I 
am  a  very  ignorant  Christian  man ;  sometimes,  if  I 
hear  some  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  it  troubles  me  because 
I  cannot  do  so  too.  It  is  with  me  as  it  is  with  a  weak 
man  among  the  strong,  or  as  with  a  sick  man  among 
the  healthy,  or  as  a  lamp  despised.  "  He  that  is  ready 
to  slip  with  his  feet  is  as  a  lamp  despised  in  the  thought 
of  him  that  is  at  ease : "  Job.  xii.  5.  So  that  I  know 
not  what  to  do. 

GBEATHEABT. — But,  brother,  I  have  it  in  com 
mission  to  comfort  the  feeble-minded,  and  to  support 
the  weak.  You  must  needs  go  along  with  us :  we 
will  wait  for  you,  we  will  lend  you  our  help,  we  will 
deny  ourselves  of  some  things,  both  opinionative  and 
practical,  for  your  sake ;  we  will  not  enter  into  doubt 
ful  disputations  before  you,  we  will  be  made  all  things 
to  you  rather  than  you  shall  be  left  behind.  (Rom. 
xiv.,  1  Cor.  viiL,  ix.  22.)—J5uwya»'*  "  P&griiri '« 


One  aftenioou,  i  aoticed  a  young  lady  at  the  set 


SMALL  THINGS   NOT  TO  BE   DESPISED.         329 

vice,  whom  I  knew  to  be  a  Sunday  School  teacher. 
After  the  service,  I  asked  her  where  her  class  was. 
"  Oh,"  said  she,  "  I  went  to  the  school,  and  found 
only  a  little  boy,  and  so  I  came  away."  "  Only  a 
little  boy  !  "  said  I ;  "  think  of  the  value  of  one  such 
soul !  the  fires  of  a  Reformation  may  be  slumbering 
in  that  tow-headed  boy ;  there  may  be  a  young  Knox, 
or  a  Wesley,  or  a  Whitefield  in  your  class." — D.  L. 
Moody. 

The  little  lichen  imperceptibly  deposits  the  first 
layer  of  soil  upon  barren  rocks  in  mid-ocean,  from 
which  grow  up  all  the  luxuriant  wealth  and  beauty 
of  the  spice-island.  Ferns  have  seeds  so  extremely 
diminutive  that  for  a  long  time  it  was  doubted  if 
they  existed  at  all.  Yet  such  a  seed,  altogether 
invisible  to  the  naked  eye,  floats  on  long  journeys 
through  the  air,  and  falls  on  some  lichen-covered 
island,  where  it  immediately  fructifies,  and  covers  the 
place  with  vegetation. 

The  moss  is  but  a  very  little  plant,  yet  when  its  seeds 
fall  on  deep,  swampy,  treacherous  morasses,  they  grow 
up,  and  bind  the  ground  together  with  such  bands 
that  it  becomes  quite  safe  to  pass  over, — building,  in 
fact,  a  broad  and  durable  bridge.  "  Throughout 
creation  the  grandest  and  most  complicated  ends  are 
obtained  by  the  employment  of  the  simplest  means." 
—Jamet  2feil,  in  "  Hayt  from  the  Realms  of  Nature.1 


CXXI. 

'  SPEAK  UNTO  ALL  THE  PEOPLE  OF  THE  LAND,  AND  TO  rn» 

PRIESTS,   SAYING,   WHEN  YE  FASTED  AND  MOURNED  IN  THE 
FIFTH  AND  SEVENTH  MONTH,  EVEN  THOSE  SEVENTY  YEARS, 
.    DID  YE  AT  ALL  FAST  UNTO  ME,    EVEN  TO  ME? 
**  AND  WHEN    YE    DID    EAT,   AND  WHEN    YE    DID    DRINK,   DID 
NOT    YE    EAT    FOR    YOURSELVES,    AND     DRINK    FOR    YOUR 
SELVES  ?  " — Zechariah  vii.  5,  6. 

r  I  "'HE  acceptableness  of  religious  duties  must  not 
•••  be  taken  for  granted. 

We  should  ask  searching  questions  about  them,  for 
the  Lord  himself  does  so.  It  behoves  hearers  to  be 
very  attentive  to  close  personal  enquiries  as  to  their 
holy  things. 

During  long  years,  "even  those  seventy  years," 
pious  observances  may  have  been  kept  up,  and  yet 
there  may  have  been  no  virtue  in  them. 

This  fact  makes  it  wise  for  us  all  to  question  our 
selves,  for  we  may  have  been  habitual  religionists, 
and  yet  may  also  never  have  done  anything  as  "  unto 
the  Lord." 

Two  reflections  rise  before  our  mind : — 

I   RELIGIOUS  OBSERVANCES  SHOULD  BE  UNTO  THB 
LORD.     "  Did  ye  at  all  fast  unto  me,  even 
tome?" 
1.  They  should  be  attended  to  out  of  respect  to  hie 


SELF   OB  GOD.  381 

command.  Ceremonies  which  are  not  oi  his 
ordaining  are  mere  will-worship.  We  par 
take  of  ordinances,  not  because  of  custom, 
or  church  rule,  but  "  unto  the  Lord."  Rom. 
xiv.  6. 

2.  They  should  be  carried  out  with  a  dependence 
upon  God's  grace  to  make  them  useful  to 
us,  for  outward  forms  are  nothing  of  them 
selves.  Unless  the  Spirit  of  God  apply  them 
to  us,  they  are  empty  buckets  drawn  up 
from  a  dry  well.  John  vi.  63. 

8.  They  should  be  fulfilled  with  such  an  eye  to 
God  as  their  nature  and  meaning  suggest : 
as  for  instance,  in  fasting  there  should  be 
sorrow  towards  God  for  having  grieved  him ; 
and  in  holy  feasting  the  joy  must  not  be 
carnal,  but  "joy  in  the  Lord." 

4.  They  should  be  accompanied  with  that  spiritual 
understanding  without  which  they  are  mere 
play-acting  in  the  sight  of  God.  There 
must  be  the  true  fasting,  which  is  absti 
nence  from  sin  ;  and  the  true  feasting,  which 
is  the  reception  of  Christ  with  joy. 

6.  They  should  be  attended  to  with  a  view  to  glori 
fying  God  in  them.  For  this  end  come  we 
to  baptism,  communion,  praise,  etc. 

tf  these  things  are  not  done  unto  the  Lord,  what 
are  they  but  the  rites  of  atheism? — or  a  sort  of 
witchcraft,  a  repetition  of  incantations,  genuflexions, 
and  the  like  ?  Isaiah  Ixvi.  8. 


382  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

Jl.  RELIGIOUS  OBSERVANCES  MAY  BE  UNTO  OUR 
SELVES.  "Did  not  ye  eat  for  yourselves, 
and  drink  for  yourselves?" 

They  are  so  most  clearly — 

4.  When  the  spiritual  element  is  absent.  Then 
even  in  the  Sacred  Supper  there  is  nothing 
more  than  mere  eating  and  drinking,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  Corinthian  church.  How 
generally  have  religious  festivals  become 
mere  excuses  for  banqueting ! 

2.  When  the  ordinance  is  attended  to  because  it 
brings  personal  credit.  Motives  of  custom, 
respectability,  or  dignity,  may  lead  men 
even  to  the  table  of  the  Lord.  This  is 
eating  for  ourselves. 

8.  When  the  outward  observance  is  used  as  a 
means  of  pacifying  the  conscience,  and 
taken  as  a  spiritual  opiate.  Without  draw 
ing  near  to  God,  the  man  feels  easier  be 
cause  he  has  performed  a  bit  of  pious 
ritual.  This  is  eating  and  drinking  for 
ourselves. 

4.  When  outward  ritual  is  practised  in  the  hope 
that  we  shall  be  saved  thereby.  The  mo 
tive  is  religious  selfishness,  and  the  act 
must  be  unacceptable. 

6.  When  there  is  no  intent  to  please  God  therein: 
for  as  the  intent  is,  such  is  the  act ;  and 
when  there  is  no  intent  toward  God,  the 
whole  matter  falls  short  of  acceptance  with 
God. 


SELF  OB  GOD.  333 

See  how  vain  are  the  religious  performances  of 
unbelievers.  Read  verses  1  to  3  of  this  chapter. 

Let  us  come  to  Jesus,  who  is  the  sum  and  sub 
stance  of  all  fasts,  and  feasts,  and  all  else  of  right 
observance. 

Let  us  live  as  unto  the  Lord.     Rom.  xiv.  8. 

STRIKING  PARAGRAPHS. 

If,  after  thou  hast  heard  so  many  masses,  matins, 
and  even-songs,  and  hast  received  holy  bread  and 
holy  water,  and  the  bishop's  blessing,  or  the  cardi 
nal's  or  the  pope's,  thou  wilt  be  more  kind  to  thy 
neighbor,  and  love  him  better,  and  be  more  obedient 
to  thy  superiors,  more  merciful  and  ready  to  forgive ; 
if  thou  dost  more  despise  the  world,  and  art  more 
athirst  for  spiritual  things,  then  do  such  things  in 
crease  grace.  If  not,  they  are  a  lie. — Tyndale. 

A  certain  king  would  build  a  cathedral,  and,  that 
the  credit  of  it  might  be  all  his  own,  he  forbade  any 
one  to  contribute  to  its  erection  in  the  least  degree. 
A  tablet  was  placed  in  the  side  of  the  building,  and 
on  it  his  name  was  carved  as  the  builder.  But  one 
night  he  saw  in  a  dream  an  angel,  who  came  down 
and  erased  his  name ;  and  the  name  of  a  poor  widow 
appeared  in  its  stead.  This  was  three  times  repeated, 
when  the  enraged  king  summoned  the  woman  before 
him,  and  demanded,  "  What  have  you  been  doing, 
and  why  have  you  broken  my  commandment?" 
The  trembling  widow  replied,  "I  loved  the  Lord, 
and  longed  to  do  something  for  his  name,  and  foi 


834  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

the  building  up  of  his  church.  I  was  forbidden  to 
touch  it  in  any  way,  so  in  my  poverty  I  brought  a 
wisp  of  hay  for  the  horses  that  drew  the  stones." 
Then  the  king  saw  that  he  had  labored  for  his  own 
glory,  but  the  widow  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  he 
commanded  that  her  name  should  be  inscribed  upon 
the  tablet. —  Cyclopaedia  of  Illustrative  Anecdotes. 

In  no  part  of  the  great  universe  is  any  being  fer 
vently  devout  by  accident.  Everywhere,  even  in 
heaven,  creatures  are  devout  from  purpose,  design, 
endeavor.  Eminently  is  this  true  on  earth  ;  no  man 
ever  happened  to  be  religious. — Dr.  Stoughton,  in 
"  Lights  of  the  World." 

*  There  is  an  Eastern  story  of  a  Sultan  who  over 
slept  himself,  so  as  not  to  awaken  at  the  hour  of 
prayer.  So  the  devil  came,  and  waked  him,  and 
told  him  to  get  up  and  pray.  "Who  are  you?" 
said  the  Sultan.  "  Oh,  no  matter ! "  replied  the 
other,  "  my  act  is  good,  is  it  not  ?  No  matter  who 
does  the  good  action,  so  long  as  it  is  good."  "  Yes," 
replied  the  Sultan,  "  but  I  think  you  are  Satan.  I 
know  your  face ;  you  have  some  bad  motive." 
"  But,"  said  the  other,  "  I  am  not  so  bad  as  I  am 
painted.  I  was  an  angel  once,  and  still  keep  some 
of  my  original  goodness."  "  That's  all  very  well," 
replied  the  sagacious  and  prudent  Caliph,  "  but  you 
are  the  tempter :  that's  your  business ;  and  I  wish 


*  A  story  which  needs  careful  telling,  and  then  may  be  moat 
awful. 


SELF   OB   GOD.  335 

to  know  why  you  want  me  to  get  up  and  pray." 
"  Well,"  said  the  devil,  with  a  flirt  of  impatience, 
"if  yon  must  know,  I  will  tell  you.  If  you  had 
slept  and  forgotten  your  prayers,  you  would  have 
been  sorry  for  it  afterwards,  and  penitent;  tut  if 
you  go  on  as  now,  and  do  not  neglect  a  single  prayer 
for  ten  years,  you  will  be  so  satisfied  with  yourself 
that  it  will  be  worse  for  you  than  if  you  had  missed 
one  sometimes,  and  repented  of  it.  God  loves  your 
fault  mixed  with  penitence  more  than  your  virtue 
seasoned  with  pride." 

What  is  all  righteousness  that  men  devise, 
What — hut  a  sordid  bargain  for  the  skies  ? 
But  Christ  as  soon  would  abdicate  his  own, 
As  stoop  from  heaven  to  sell  the  proud  a  throne. 

— Cowper. 


CXXI1. 

"  AS    FOR  THEE    ALSO,   BY   THE    BLOOD  OF  THY   COVENANT  I 

HAVE  SENT  FORTH  THY  PRISONERS  OUT  OF  THE  PIT  WHEREIN 
IS  NO  WATER. 

"  TURN  YOU  TO  THE  STRONGHOLD,  YE  PRISONERS  OF  HOPE: 
EVEN  TO-DAY  DO  I  DECLARE  THAT  I  WILL  RENDER  DOUBLE 
UNTO  THEE." — Zecharioh  ix.  11,  12. 

T  ET  us  commence  our  meditation  with  the  de- 
•*- '  scription  of  our  Lord  which  is  given  us  in 
verses  9  and  10. 

Here  we  see  his  kingdom,  his  character,  his  power 
to  save,  his  lowliness,  the  weapons  of  his  conquest — 
"speak  peace  unto  the  heathen,"  and  the  ultimate 
extent  of  his  dominion — "to  the  ends  of  the  earth." 

Because  of  him,  and  through  him,  there  is  mercy 
for  the  oppressed  and  troubled  ones  in  Zion — "as 
for  thee  also,"  verse  11. 

This  is  a  wonderful  text  for  those  who  are  in  the 
lowest  possible  state  of  mind.  May  the  Lord  make 
it  a  blessing  to  them  ! 

Our  subjects  of  thought  shall  be, — 

I.  CONDITION  OF  THE  SORROWING  ONES.  "  Prisoners 
in  the  pit  wherein  is  no  water." 

They  are  described  as — 

1  Prisoners:  bound,  freedom  gone,  unable  to  do 
(88C) 


PRISONERS   OF  HOPE.  837 

as  they  would,  in  the  power  of  another, 
miserable. 

2.  Prisoners  in  a  pit :  escape  impossible,  darkness 
intolerable,  fate  unavoidable,  present  dis 
comfort  terrible. 

8.  Prisoners  in  a  pit  wherein  is  no  water:  com 
fortless,  and  likely  to  perish  of  thirst.  They 
find  no  comfort  in  sin,  nor  indeed  in  any 
thing  else.  They  are,  however,  though  less 
comfortable,  all  the  less  likely  to  be  drowned 
when  there  is  no  water.  Comfort  in  sin 
is  deadly:  the  absence  of  that  comfort  is 
hopeful. 

Thus  are  many  oppressed  souls  helplessly  in  the 
power  of  despair  till  the  Lord  comes  to  rescue  them. 

II.  CAUSE  OP  THEIR  DELIVERANCE.     "  I  have  sent 
forth  thy  prisoners." 

1.  The  Lord  Omniscient  spies  them  out  in  their 

dungeon,  and  he  knows  whose  prisoners 
they  are. 

2.  He  has  the  power  and  the  right  to  set  free 

prisoners.     Who  can  shut  up  those  whom 

he  delivers? 
8.  He  sends  them  forth  from  the  pit.     He  grants 

life,  light,  and  liberty  to  them.     Their  feet 

are  free,  and  they  are  on  free  soil. 
4.  He  sends  them  forth  by  "  the  blood." 

By  the  expiation  made  for  sin  before  GodL 
By  the  peace  created  in  the  conscience  of  the 

penitent. 
2 22 


838  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

5.  He  sends  them  forth  by  what  is  called  u  the 
blood    of    thy   covenant "  —  the   covenant 
made  between  Zion  and  her  King. 
Let   a   soul  once  know  the  blessedness  ®f  "the 
covenant,"  and  the  sealing  power  of  "the  blood," 
and  it  is  a  prisoner  no  longer. 

III.  COURSE  COMMENDED  TO  THE  DELIVERED  ONES. 

"  Turn  you  to  the  strong  hold,  ye  prisoners 
of  hope." 

They  are  out  of  the  pit  of  despair,  but  not  "  out 
of  the  wood "  of  trouble :  they  have  hope  of  salva 
tion,  but  they  need  salvation  itself. 
It  will  be  their  wisdom — 

1.  To  make  hope  their  characteristic.    When  they 

feel  like  prisoners,  let  them  hope,  and  so 
become  "prisoners  of  hope." 

2.  To  make  Christ  their  Stronghold. 

8.  To  turn  to  him  every  day,  and  all  the  day. 

4.  To  turn  to  him  specially  when  they  feel  like 
prisoners. 

When  a  man  is  freed  from  death  and  despair,  he 
is  still  to  come  to  Jesus  more  and  more.  "  To  whom 
coming,"  &c.  (1  Pet.  ii.  4). 

IV.  COMFORT  GIVEN  TO  THOSE  WHO  TURN  TO  THB 

STRONGHOLD.     "  Even  to-day  do  I  declare 

that  I  will  render  double  unto  thee." 
1,  God  is  speedy  in  his  comforts  to  those  who  turn 

to  Jesus.    "Even  to-day  do  I  declare." 
2    God  is  abundant  in  his  mercy :  "  I  will  render 

double  unto  thee." 


PRISONERS   OF   HOPE. 

The  double  of  your  trouble.     Job  xiii.  10. 
The  double  of  your  expectation.     Is.  Ixi.  7. 
The  double  of  your  attainments :  "  grace  foi 

grace  "  (John  i.  16). 

The  double  of  your  largest  faith.    Eph.  iii.  20. 
3.  God  is  consoling  in  his  promise  ;  for  it  is — 
Plain :  "  I  declare." 
Present :  "  Even  to-day  do  I  declare." 
Positive :  "  I  declare  that  I  will." 
Personal :  "  I  will  render  unto  thee." 
Let  us  glorify  the  Lord  for  lifting  us  out  of  the 
pit. 

Let  us  glorify  the  Lord  Jesus  for  being  our  Strong 
hold. 

Let  us  glorify  the  Lord  for  that  double  portion 
which  he  allots  us. 

FREE  THOUGHTS. 

Here  God  the  Father  speaks  to  Christ  with  relation 
to  some  covenant  between  them  both ;  and  what 
covenant  can  that  be  but  the  covenant  of  redemp 
tion  ?  All  the  temporal,  spiritual,  and  eternal  deliv 
erances  which  we  enjoy,  they  swim  to  us  through  the 
blood  of  that  covenant  that  is  passed  between  the 
Father  and  the  Son.  By  virtue  of  the  same  blood 
of  the  covenant,  wherewith  we  are  reconciled,  justi 
fied,  and  saved,  were  the  Jews  delivered  from  their 
Babylonish  captivity.  The  Babylonish  captivity, 
thraldom,  and  dispersion,  was  that  waterless  pit,  that 
dirty  dungeon,  that  uncomfortable  and  forlorn  condi- 


840  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

tion,  out  of  which  they  were  delivered  by  virtue  of 
the  blood  of  the  covenant ;  that  is  by  virtue  of  the 
blood  of  Christ,  figured  by  the  blood  that  was 
sprinkled  upon  the  people,  and  by  virtue  of  the  cove 
nant  confirmed  thereby,  Exod.  xxiv.  8 ;  Ps.  Ixxiv. 
20 ;  Heb.  xiii.  20.  Look,  as  all  the  choice  mercies, 
the  high  favors,  the  noble  blessings,  that  the  saints 
enjoy,  are  purchased  by  the  blood  of  Christ ;  so  they 
are  made  sure  to  the  saints  by  the  same  blood ;  "  by 
the  blood  of  thy  covenant  I  have  sent  forth  thy 
prisoners."  Whatever  desperate  distresses,  and 
deadly  dangers,  the  people  of  God  may  fall  into,  yet 
they  are  "prisoners  of  hope,"  and  may  look  for 
deliverance  by  the  blood  of  the  covenant. — Thomas 
Brooks. 

With  what  gratitude  and  joy  should  these  intima- 
mations  of  hope  be  received  by  those  who  are 
naturally  in  so  miserable  a  condition  I  It  is  a  cele 
brated  story  that,  when  Titus  Flamininus,  at  the 
public  games,  proclaimed  the  liberty  of  Greece,  after 
it  had  been  conquered  by  the  Romans,  the  auditors 
were  at  first  lost  in  a  silent  amazement,  and  then 
burst  out  into  one  continued  shout  for  two  hours 
together,  "  Liberty  !  Liberty  !  "  Methinks  such  joy, 
and  greater  than  this,  should  appear  amongst  mis 
erable  sinners  when  these  proclamations  for  liberty 
are  made.  And  are  they  not  now  made  ?  Have  I 
not  been  telling  you,  from  the  Word  of  God,  that 
though  you  were  condemned  under  the  righteout 
sentence  of  the  law,  through  a  Redeemer  that  sen 


PERFECT  RESTORATION.  841 

tence  may  be  reversed,  your  souls  may  be  restored 
to  life  and  happiness?  Have  I  not  been  proving 
that,  though  Satan  held  you  in  a  dark  captivity,  yet 
by  the  law  of  the  great  Redeemer  you  may  be 
rescued  from  his  hands,  and  made  more  than  con 
querors  through  him  ?  Have  I  not  told  you  that, 
notwithstanding  the  painful  and  the  fruitless  struggle 
which  you  have  hitherto  had  with  the  feebleness  and 
corruptions  of  a  depraved  nature,  you  may  still 
receive  those  communications  of  the  Spirit  which 
will  purify  and  strengthen  you,  and  enable  you  to 
perfect  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God  ?  .  .  .  Prisoners 
of  hope,  will  you  despair  ? — Dr.  Doddridge.  Sermon 
on  thi*  text. 


cxxni. 

"  I  HAVE  MERCY  UPON  THEM :  AND  THEY  SHALL  BE  AS  THOUGH 
I  HAD  NOT   CAST  THEM   OFF :    FOB    I  AM  THE   LORD    TTIEIE 

GOD.  AND  WILL  HEAR  THEM."— Zecharidh  x.  6. 

r  I  ^HE  manner  in  which  hope  can  come  to  sinners : 
-*•  "I  have  mercy  upon  them."  Mercy  abides  in 
the  heart  of  God  even  after  the  hope  of  it  has  left 
the  human  bosom. 

The  token  that  God's  mercy  is  coming,  and  that  it 
is  indeed  come,  is  prayer.  "  Behold  he  prayeth  "  is 
the  sure  indication  of  coming  deliverance.  Acts 
ix.  11. 

God  had  observed  prayer  in  them,  for  he  said,  "  I 
will  hear  them." 

The  result  of  mercy's  coming  is  exceedingly  de 
lightful  :  "  They  shall  be  as  though  I  had  not  cast 
them  off." 

This  promise  may  be  applied, — 

I.  IN  GENERAL,   TO    ATT,  PENITENT  8INNEB8, 

God's  mercy  in  many  ways  restores  men  to  their 
lost  position :  and  in  some  senses  even  to  their  pris 
tine  condition  before  the  fall. 

1.  The   forgiveness  of  sin,   and  justification  by 
faith,  make  them  as  acceptable  as  if  they 
had  never  transgressed. 
(342) 


PERFECT  RESTORATION.  343 

2.  The  renovation  of  nature,  by  the  regenerating 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  creates  in  them 
as  pure  an  inner  life  as  Adam  ever  had. 

8.  Restoration  to  paradise.  Even  now  we  dwell 
with  God  in  a  blessed  state,  for  the  Lord 
hath  raised  us  to  the  heavenlies  in  Christ. 

4.  Redemption  from  the  curse.     The  curse  is  clean 

gone  for  ever,  through  him  who  was  made 
a  curse  for  us.  Gal.  iii.  13.  The  anger  of 
God  is  removed  from  us  for  ever. 

5.  Engagement    in    service.     We   are   honorably 

employed,  and  could  not  have  been  more  so 
had  we  never  sinned. 

6.  Communion  with  God.     This  we  enjoy  as  truly 

as  unfallen  humanity  could  have  done.  In 
deed,  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  in  the  regen 
erate,  and  this  is  not  said  of  Adam. 

7.  Eternal   life.     We   are   preserved   from    penal 

death.  As  Jesus  lives  so  must  we.  John 
xiv.  19.  There  is  no  fear  that  we  shall  eat 
and  die,  for  the  Lord  has  given  us  eternal 
life,  and  we  shall  never  perish.  John  x.  28. 

The  further  working  out  of  the  likeness  between 
the  state  of  the  saved  and  that  of  Adam  in  the 
garden,  may  be  made  highly  instructive. 

II.   IN     PARTICULAR,    TO    PENITENT     BACKSLIDEB8. 

Only  return  unto  God,  and  live  in  his  fear, 
and  you  shall  enjoy  all  the  blessedness  of 
your  best  spiritual  state. 


844  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

You  shall  again  enjoy — 

1.  The  complete  removal  of  your  guilt,  and  shall 

have  no  more  consciousness  of  sin;  thua 
shall  you  return  to  rest  of  soul. 

2.  Renewed  joy,  as  in  the  days  of  your  first  love. 

3.  Restored  purity  of  heart,  as  in  the  times  before 

you  wandered. 

4.  Fresh  communion  with  God,  and  guidance  from 

his  Holy  Spirit.  Is  not  this  your  cry, 
"Take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me?" 
Ps.  li.  11. 

6.  New  usefulness.     You  shall  teach  transgressors 
the  pardoning  ways  of  Jehovah.    Ps.  li.  13. 

6.  Restoration  to  the  church,  from  which  you  may 

have  been  excluded.  Your  brethren  will 
rejoice  over  you,  and  so  will  your  God. 

7.  Future  upholding.     You   shall  watch   against 

temptation  all  the  more  earnestly,  and  so 
you  shall  stand  the  more  firmly  through 
grace.  God  can  make  use  of  your  unhappy 
fall  to  teach  you  many  precious  lessons. 

Suppose   this  invitation  to  turn  unto  the  Lord 
should  be  refused — 

It  will  be  a  wanton  rejection  of  generous  love. 

There  can  never  be  a  fairer  offer. 

This  will  increase  the  uneasiness  of  a  guilty 

conscience. 

This  will  lead  to  the  fear  that  the  refuser  ig 
not  one  of  the  Lord's  chosen. 

But  we  hope  better  things  of  you,  and  things  which 


PERFECT   RESTORATION. 


845 


accompany  salvation,  though  we  thus  speak.  We  art 
jealous  lest  you  miss  the  day  of  grace. 

At  once  confess  your  sin,  and  humbly  plead  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  "  I  have  mercy  upon  them." 

Then  cry  out  in  prayer,  for  it  is  written,  "  I  will 
hear  them." 

Then,  in  faith  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  hang  upon 
the  promise,  "  They  shall  be  as  though  I  had  not 
cast  them  off." 

By  the  mercy  of  God,  we  entreat  you  to  seek  his 
•face  at  once,  with  true  heart,  and  resolute  importunity. 


SELECTIONS. 

The  fall  is  a  greater  mystery  than  the  Redemption. 
He  who  has  had  experience  of  the  one  may  well  accept 
the  revelation  of  the  other. —  O.  Vaughan. 

Now  thou  hast  avenged 
Supplanted  Adam,  and,  by  vanquishing 
Temptation,  hast  regain'd  lost  Paradise, 
And  frustrated  the  conquest  fraudulent. 
He  nevermore  henceforth  will  dare  set  foot 
In  Paradise  to  tempt ;  his  snares  are  broke : 
P  or,  though  that  seat  of  earthly  bliss  be  f ail'd, 
A  fairer  Paradise  is  founded  now 
For  Adam  and  his  chosen  sons,  whom  thou, 
A  Saviour,  art  come  down  to  reinstall, 
Where  they  shall  dwell  secure,  when  time  shall  be, 
Of  Tempter  and  temptation  without  fear. — Milton. 

The  end  of  the  gospel  is  life  and  perfection  .  .  . 
It  is  to  make  ITS  partakers  of  the  image  of  God,  in 
righteousness  and  true  holintas.  .  .  .  God  him- 


346  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

self  cannot  make  me  happy,  if  he  be  only  without 
me ;  unless  he  give  me  a  participation  of  himself  and 
his  own  likeness  unto  my  soul. —  Oudworth. 

He  raised  me  from  the  deeps  of  sin, 

The  gates  of  gaping  hell, 
And  fixed  my  standing  more  secure 

Than  'twas  before  I  fell.—  Watts. 

A  man  upon  the  way,  having  accidentally  lost  his 
purse,  is  questioned  by  his  fellow-traveller  where  he 
had  it  last.  "Oh  !  "  says  he,  "  I  am  confident  that  I 
drew  it  out  of  my  pocket  when  I  was  in  such  a  town, 
at  such  an  inn."  "Why,  then!"  says  the  other, 
"  there  is  no  better  way  to  have  it  again  than  by 
going  back  to  the  place  where  you  last  had  it." 
This  is  the  case  of  many  a  man  in  these  loose,  unset 
tled  times ;  they  have  lost  their  love  to  Christ,  and 
his  truth,  since  their  corn  and  wine  and  oil  have 
increased;  since  outward  things  are  in  abundance 
added  unto  them  they  have  slighted  the  light  of 
God's  countenance.  When  they  were  poor  and 
naked  of  all  worldly  comfort,  then  they  sought 
God's  face  both  early  and  late,  and  nothing  was 
more  dear  and  precious  unto  them  than  the  truth  of 
Christ.  What,  then,  is  to  be  done  to  recover  this 
lost  love  to  Christ?  Back  again,  back  again  directly 
where  you  last  had  it!  Back  to  the  sign  of  the 
broken  and  contrite  heart !  There  it  was  that  you 
drew  it  out  into  good  words  and  better  \torks;  and 
though  it  be  since  lost  in  the  crowd  of  worldly  em 
ployments,  there  and  nowhere  else,  you  shall  be  sure 
to  find  it  again. — Spencer  s  "  Things  New  and  Old" 


CXXIV. 

"  AND  I  WILL   STRENGTHEN   THEM   IN  THE  LOKD  ;    AND   THES 
SHALL    WALK     UP    AND    DOWN    IN    HIS    NAME,   SAITH    THE 

LORD." — Zechariah  x.  12. 

•  .^NLARGE  upon  the  reference  of  the  text  and  01 
•*— '  the  whole  chapter  to  the  Lord's  ancient  people, 
the  Jews. 

They  are  so  much  forgotten,  and  so  often  perse 
cuted,  and  so  generally  despised,  that  we  do  well  to 
think  upon  the  prophecies  of  a  glorious  future,  which 
the  Lord  God  has  spoken  concerning  them. 

But  the  heritage  of  the  natural  and  typical  Israel 
belongs,  in  its  spiritual  meaning,  to  the  spiritual 
Israel ;  and  this  promise  is  ours. 

To  those  who  lament  their  weakness  the  promise 
of  the  text  is  peculiarly  cheering. 

I.    DlVINB      STRENGTHENING      PKOMISED.      "I    will 

strengthen  them  in  the  Lord." 
1.  It  is  painfully  needed. 

We  are  naturally  weak  as  water. 

After  soul-sickness  we  are  sadly  feeble. 

In  the  presence  of  great  labors  we  feel  oni 

weakness. 

We   want  strength    for  watching,   walking, 
working,  and  warring. 

(S47) 


848  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

2.  It  is  freely  promised.     See  also  verse  6. 
Justice  might  have  left  us  to  ourselves. 
Tender  love  observes  our  need. 
Infinite  power  abundantly  supplies  it. 
8.  It   is   divinely  bestowed :    "  I  will   strengthen 

them.'      Hence  it  is — 
Certain  in  accomplishment. 
Honorable  in  reception.     How  ennobling  to 
receive  strength  immediately  from  the  Lord 
Jehovah ! 
Unlimited  in  communication,  if  we  have  but 

faith  to  receive  it. 
4.  It  is  gradually  received.     We  go  from  strength 

to  strength. 

By  use  of  the  means  of  grace :  prayer,  com 
munion  with  God,  spiritual  exercise,  expe 
rience,  etc. 

By  the  silent  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
By  the  growth  of  each  holy  grace,  and  the 

increase  of  life  within. 
6,  It  is  delightfully  perceived. 

An    excellent  illustration  is  that  of  a  sick 
man  recovering  strength. 
As  in  his  case,  so  in  ours, — 

Appetite  returns :  we  relish  the  Word. 
Difficulties  vanish :  burdens  grow  light, 

etc. 
Employment  is  desired :   strength  pinea 

for  exercise. 

Expansive  views  are  obtained.    We  walk 
abroad    with    delight,  and    leave    th« 


SPIRITUAL  CONVALESCENCE.  849 

narrow  chamber  in  which  a  sickly  soul 
is  shut  up. 
Pleasure    is    enjoyed,   and    gratitude   is 

excited. 
6.  It  is  sufficiently  continued, 

God  continues  to  strengthen  us  day  by  day. 
He  increases  our  strength  as  it  is  required. 
He  makes  his   strength  more  and  more  ap 
parent  in  our  weakness,  till  we  know  no 
power  but  his. 

II.  CHRISTIAN  ACTIVITY  PREDICTED.    "  They  shall 

walk  up  and  down  in  his  name." 

1.  They  shall  enjiy  ease, — implied  in  walking  up 

and  down. 

2.  They  shall  possess  freedom:  it  is  the  gait  of 

liberty. 

3.  They  shall  be  active  for  the  Lord,  in  varied 

forms  of  service. 

4.  They  shall  persevere  in  such  activity,  walking 

up  and  down;   and  evermore   crying  joy 
ously,  "  Onward  and  Upward ! " 

5.  They  shall  consecrate  that  activity  with  care : 

"  they  shall  walk  in  his  name," — doing  all 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Sick  souls  shall  exhibit  the  activities  of  conval 
escence  when  the  Lord  imparts  strength  to  them. 
Those  who  are  recovering  from  sickness  know  how 
happy  such  a  condition  usually  is. 

III.  BOTH  BLESSINGS  GUARANTEED. 

1.  Here  is  the  divine  "  I  will "  of  omnipotent  grace. 


860  MY   8KBMON    NOTBB. 

2.  Here  is  the  divine  "  they  shall  "  of  consecrated 
free-agency. 

8  Here  is  the  divine  "  saith  the  Lord  "  of  infal 
lible  faithfulness. 

All  these  united  make  our  text  a  glorious  one. 

Are  you  sick,  sorry,  weak?  This  sacred  text  is 
for  you. 

See  where  your  strength  lieth!  Look  to  the 
Strong  for  strength. 

Believe  in  Jesus  to  obtain  it!  He  is  ready  to 
bestow  it. 

When  you  have  it — use  it  abundantly !  Help  the 
weak,  bear  the  burdens  of  others,  serve  the  Lord 
with  gladness,  and  glorify  God. 

WORDS  OP  A  GREAT  PREACHER. 

Sir  Walter  Scott  relates  in  his  autobiography  that 
when  he  was  a  child,  one  of  his  legs  was  paralyzed 
and  when  medical  skill  failed,  a  kind  uncle  induced 
him  to  exert  the  muscles  of  the  powerless  limb  by 
drawing  a  gold  watch  before  him  on  the  floor,  tempt 
ing  him  to  creep  after  it,  and  thus  keeping  up  and 
gradually  increasing  vital  action  and  muscular  force. 
So  God  deals  with  us  in  our  spiritual  childhood,  and 
the  weakness  of  our  faith.  How  weak  our  efforts ; 
how  slow  our  movements !  But  spiritual  vitality  is 
elicited,  developed,  strengthened  by  those  efforts  and 
movements.,  slow  and  weak  as  they  are. 

Every  man  needs  strength.  We  ask  for  daily 
bread :  %nd  we  ask  for  it  as  a  means  of  renewing  our 


BPLB1TUA1.  OOKVALBSOaNUJB.  S51 

strength.  We  have  as  much  need  to  ask  for  strength, 
as  for  deliverance  from  evil,  and  for  the  forgiveness 
of  our  trespasses.  There  are  certain  things  to  be 
done,  certain  things  to  be  endured,  and  things  to  be 
resisted,  which  can  be  performed,  and  borne,  and 
stood  against,  only  by  power  of  a  certain  kind,  and 
by  that  power  in  a  certain  degree.  Nor  is  strength 
needful  merely  for  doing  and  for  suffering.  It  is 
also  necessary  for  enjoyment.  Weakness  is  so  much 
less  of  life.  The  feeble  live  but  in  a  low  degree. 

Lack  of  strength  is  more  serious  than  lack  of  any 
kind  of  outward  possession.  A  weak  rich  man  is  in 
a  far  worse  position  than  a  strong  poor  man  ;  and 
the  strong  poor  man  is  really  the  wealthier.  Weak 
ness  lessens  work,  reduces  enjoyment,  and  greatly 
aggravates  suffering  of  any  kind.  In  many  instances, 
moreover,  it  is  the  cause  of  wickedness, — leading 
directly  to  transgression,  and  exposing  the  individual 
to  fierce  and  exceedingly  dangerous  temptations. 
So  that,  as  a  means  of  preserving  ourselves  against 
sin,  we  should  ask  daily  for  strength. 

Every  man  needs  strength ;  but  no  man  has  with 
in  him  strength  equal  to  the  demands  that  are  made 
upon  him.  He  requires  strengthening. 

The  Christian  is  no  exception  to  this  rule.  He 
needs  strength.  His  conversion  was  not  translation 
to  inactivity,  to  ease  and  to  unbroken  quiet.  His 
work  is  not  the  ceaseless  singing  of  psalms  while  he 
reclines  upon  green  pastures,  and  sits  beside  still 
waters.  There  are  times  when  he  lies  down  in  green 
pastures;  but  he  lies  down  wearied;  and  he  lies 


352  MY  SERMON   NOTES. 

down  that  he  may  rise  again  a  stronger  man,  to  entei 
upon  fiercer  battles,  and  to  do  harder  work.  We  rest, 
not  for  resting's  sake,  but  that  we  may  work  again. 

Brethren,  a  Christian's  strength  can  come  only  by 
his  being  strengthened.  There  is  not  within  the 
man,  as  a  man,  nor  within  him  as  a  Christian,  any 
stock  or  store  of  strength  given  him  at  the  com 
mencement  of  his  life.  Day  by  day,  stage  after 
stage,  first  as  a  babe,  then  as  a  young  man,  and  then 
as  a  father  in  Christ,  does  the  man  need  strengthen 
ing.  And  what  a  glorious  thing  it  is  that,  instead  of 
our  resources  being  given  to  us  at  the  beginning  of 
our  Christian  life,  they  are  supplied  to  us  as  we 
need  them.  Does  not  this  arrangement  keep  us  in 
close  communion  with  the  Father  of  our  spirits, 
and  with  the  Source  of  all  energy  and  wisdom  ?  So 
that  the  very  application  to  God,  apart  from  the 
things  which  application  always  secures,  tends  to 
strengthen  you. — Samuel  Martin. 


cxxv. 

"  AND  I  WILL  POUB  UPON  THE  HOUSE  OP  DAVID,  AND  UPOM 
THE  INHABITANTS  OF  JERUSALEM,  THE  SPIRIT  OF  GBACB 
AND  OF  SUPPLICATIONS :  AND  THEY  SHALL  LOOK  UPON  MX 
WHOM  THEY  HAVE  PIERCED,  AND  THEY  SHALL  MOURN  FOB 
HIM,  AS  ONE  MOURNETH  FOR  HIS  ONLY  SON,  AND  SHALL 
BE  IN  BITTERNESS  FOR  HIM,  AS  ONE  THAT  IS  IN  BITTEB- 

NESS  FOR  HIS  FIRSTBORN." — Zecharioh  xii.  10. 

NOTE  the  remarkable  change  of  persons:  "look 
upon    me,"    and    "mourn    for    him."     Such 
changes  indicate  unity  and  distinctness ;  and  afford 
us  a  hint  as  to  the  Unity  of  the  Godhead,  and  the 
Trinity  of  the  Persons. 

He  who  speaks  is  Jehovah,  "which  stretcheth 
forth  the  heavens,"  (see  verse  1,)  and  yet  he  says 
"me,  whom  they  have  pierced." 

It  is  Jehovah-Jesus  who  is  pierced,  and  pours  out 
the  Spirit  of  grace. 

It  is  a  marvel  that  Jesus  should  be  crucified  when 
the  Jewish  law  required  stoning;  and  that,  when 
crucified,  the  Roman  soldier,  though  ignorant  of  the 
prophecy,  should  pierce  him  with  his  spear. 

The  conversion  of  the  Jews  is  here  promised: 
they  will  be  converted  to  a  crucified  Christ. 

They,  by  their  unbelief  and  hatred,  were  guilty  of 
his  death :  let  us  pray  that  they  may  be  saved  by  it 
right  speedily. 
2—23 


864  MY  SERMON  NOTES. 

Our  text  reveals  their  way  of  repentance,  and  thia 
must  also  be  ours. 

Evangelical  sorrow  for  sin  is  to  be  our  subject  at 
this  time. 

We  shall  remark  that, — 

'L    IT   IS   CHEATED   B\T   THE   HOLY   SPIRIT.       "1    will 

pour  upon  the  house  of  David,  ma  upon 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  the  spirit  of 
grace  and  of  supplications." 

1.  It  is  not  produced  by  mere  conscience,  nor  by 

terror,  nor  by  the  use  of  a  form  of  peni 
tence  ;  much  less  by  music,  pictures,  &c. 

2.  It  comes  as  a  gift  of  grace :    "  I  will  pour." 

The  understanding  is  enlightened,  the  heart 
renewed,  &c.,  by  a  distinct  act  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  sent  forth  by  the  Father. 

8.  It  is  attended  by  prayer :  "  grace  and  of  suppli 
cations."  In  this  differing  from  remorse, 
which  never  prays. 

4.  It  is  continuous,  for  it  comes  with  abiding 
things,  such  as  the  xountain  opened  (see 
next  chapter);  and  it  flows  from  an  abid 
ing  source,  for  the  Spirit  of  grace  and  of 
supplications  abides  in  the  saints. 

II.  IT  is  CAUSED  BY  LOOKING  TO  JESUS.  '*  They 
shall  look  upon  me,  whom  they  have 
pierced." 

It  cannot,  therefore,  prepare  for  that  look:  we 
look  to  Jesui  as  we  are,  and  the  look  makes  peni 
tents  of  ua. 


MOURNING   AT   THE   CROSS.  355 

1.  We   see   the   horrible  hatred  which  sin  bears 

toward  purity,  for  it  slew  the  Holy  One, 
and  that  when  he  was  arrayed  in  the  most 
lovely  and  attractive  form. 

2.  We   see   its   ingratitude   to   love.     Sin  repays 

infinite  compassion  with  inveterate    hate, 
and  therefore  crucifies  Jesus. 
8.  We  see  its  abhorrence  of  God.     It  would  slay 
him  if  it  could,  and  it  did  so  in  effect.     Sin 
is  Deicidal  in  intent  and  tendency. 

4.  We  see  that  such  is  the  terrible  guilt  of  our  sin 

that  nothing  but  an  infinite  sacrifice  could 
atone  for  it. 

5.  We  see  that  we  have  entered  into  the  sin  of 

Calvary  by  our  conduct  towards  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  our  rejecting  and  resisting  him  and 
his  cause.  We  have  repeated  the  crime  of 
the  cross. 

III.  IT  is  THE  CHIEF  OF  SORROWS.  "  They  shall 
mourn  for  him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his 
only  son." 

1.  Comparable  to  a  terrible  parental  agony,  for  an 

only  son,  or  for  a  first-born  child :  both  very 
special  sources  of  grief. 

2.  Comparable  also  to  the  national  mourning  for 

Josiah.  See  verse  11.  Never  nation  sus 
tained  greater  loss  than  Judah  when  it  lost 
Josiah,  and  the  people  showed  it  by  the 
national  lamentation.  Such  is  a  penitent'i 
sorrow  at  the  death  of  Jesus. 


B66  MY   SERMON    Nl  TES. 

3.  It  is  personal  and  private.     See  verses  12  to  14. 

4.  It  is   spreading   and  social.     "  The  land  shall 

mourn :  "  verse  12. 

IV.   IT   IS   NOT  IN  ITSELF  THE   CLEANSING  FOR  SIN. 

By  it  we  confess  the  crime,  but  cannot  thereby 
remove  it.  Conviction  is  a  glass  to  show  our  spots, 
not  a  bath  to  cleanse  them. 

1.  It  acknowledges  our  need  of  the  fountain ;  but 

it  is  not  itself  a  fountain  of  cleansing. 

2.  It  goes  with  the  saving  look  to  Jesus,  but  it  is 

no  rival  to  it. 

3.  It  leads   away   from   self,   and   even  from  its 

own  self. 

4.  It  leads  to  Jesus :  we  mourn  for  Kim  ;  and  this 

linking   us  with  Jesus  is   most  operative 
upon  our  hearts. 

Come,  bleeding  heart,  and  look  to  Jesus  for 
healing  I 

Come,  hard  heart,  and  look  to  Jesus  for  broken- 
ness  ! 

Come,  careless  heart,  for  the  sight  of  Jesus  may 
arrest  even  fhee ! 


[For  variety  we  add  a  second  outline  on  the  same  text.'] 

CXXVI. 
"  THEY  SHALL  BE  IN  BITTERNESS  FOR  HIM ."  —Zechariah  xii.  J }. 

"\T  7HEN  the  Jews  receive  Jesus  as  Messiah,  they 
*  *  shall  look  upon  him  as  pierced  and  slain  : 
and  the  first  result  will  be  bitter  repentance.  It  is 
the  same  with  us.  Of  all  sights,  a  sight  of  Jesus 
crucified  is  the  sweetest;  but  at  the  same  time  it 
causes  bitterness. 

I.   OUR  FIRST  SIGHT  OF  CHRIST  BRINGS  BITTERNESS. 

1.  For  not  having  known  his  preciousness  before. 

What  a  loss ! 

2.  For  having  slighted  such  love  so  long.     What 

crime  upon  crime  I 

8.  From  fear  lest  he  should  not  be  ours  after  all. 
This  causes  a  bitter  pang,  an  anxious  grief 
of  soul. 

4.  Sin,  its  greatness,  and  its  effects,  are  seen  in  his 

cruel  death ;  and  this  makes  us  deplore  our 
guilt,  and  his  woes. 

5.  The  wrath  of  God,  its  justice  and  terribleness, 

are  also  seen  at  the  cross,  and  we  tremble. 

6.  Dread  of  never  being  forgiven,  and  a  sense  that 

we  can  never  forgive  ourselves,  are  mingled 
in  one  bitter  draught. 


8  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

II.  OUR  CONTINUED  SIGHT  OF  CHRIST  WORKS  IN  U8 

THROUGHOUT    LIFE    A    MEASURE    OF     THE 
SAME   BITTERNESS. 

1.  His   great   love,    when    better   known,   brings 

deeper  grief  for  sin. 

2.  It  inspires  a  direr  dread  of  grieving  him. 

3.  It  creates  a  deeper  regret  for  our  present  un- 

worthiness. 

4.  It  inspires  a  greater  horror  at  man's  rejection 

of  him,  while  we  see  thousands  around  us 
perishing  by  that  madness. 

6.  It  promotes  a  more  overwhelming  sympathy 
with  Jesus  in  his  striving  against  the  evil 
which  he  died  to  destroy. 

III.  THIS  BITTERNESS  HAS  MOST  GRACIOUS  EFFECTS. 

1.  It  works  great  hatred  of  sin,  and  a  tender  and 
eareful  avoiding  of  it. 

2.  It  makes  Christ  very  sweet. 

3.  It  makes  worldly  joys  and  temptations  tasteless. 

4.  It   removes   the   bitterness   of  affliction,  pain, 

and  death. 
6.  It  prevents  the  sinful  bitterness  of  anger,  etc., 

at  persecution. 
6.  It  has  an  unutterable  sweetness  in  it.  We  come 

to  relish  repentance,  and  to  feel  a  pleasure 

in  lowly  grief  for  Jesus. 

NAILS. 

It  is  a  sweet  saying  of  one  of  old,  "Let  a  man 
grieye  for  his  sin,  and  then  joy  for  his  grief." 


THE   BITTERNESS    OF   THE   CROSS.  359 

I  see  the  crowd  in  Pilate's  hall,  I  mark  their  wrathful  mien ; 

Their  shouts  of  "  Crucify ! "  appal,  with  blasphemy  betveen, 
And  of  that  shouting  multitude  I  feel  that  I  am  one ; 

And  in  that  din  of  voices  rude,  I  recognize  my  own. 

I  see  the  scourges  tear  his  back,  I  see  the  piercing  crown, 
And  of  that  crowd  who  smite  and  mock  I  feel  that  I  am  one ; 

Around  yon  cross,  the  throng  I  see,  mocking  the  Sufferer's  groan, 
Yet  still  my  voice  it  seems  to  be, — as  if  I  mocked  alone. 

'Twas  I  that  shed  the  sacred  blood,  I  nailed  him  to  the  tree, 
I  crucified  the  Christ  of  God,  I  joined  the  mockery ; 

Yet  not  the  less  that  blood  avails  to  cleanse  away  my  sin, 
And  not  the  less  that  cross  prevails  to  give  me  peace  within. 

We  must  nail  our  sins  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  fasten 
them  upon  the  tree  on  which  he  suffered.  Sin  will 
begin  to  die  within  a  man  upon  the  sight  of  Christ 
on  the  cross,  for  the  cross  of  Christ  accuses  sin, 
shames  sin,  and  by  a  secret  virtue  destroys  the  very 
heart  of  sin.  We  must  use  sin  as  Christ  was  used 
when  he  was  made  sin  for  us ;  we  must  lift  it  up, 
and  make  it  naked  by  confession  of  it  to  God;  we 
must  fasten  the  hands  and  feet  of  it  by  repent 
ance,  and  pierce  the  heart  of  it  by  godly  sorrow. — 
Byfield. 

I  am  no  preacher,  let  this  hint  suffice — 

The  3ross  once  seen  is  death  to  every  vice ; 

Else  he  that  hung  there  suffered  all  his  pain, 

Bled,  groan'd,  and  agonized,  and  died,  in  vain. — Cowpet . 

Newton's  hymn,  "In  evil  long  I  took  delight," 
describes  the  experience  of  one  who  was  brought  to 
repentance  and  salvation  by  the  sight  of  Christ 
crucified. 


&6G  MT  8SRMON  NOTK8. 

Now,  to  make  and  keep  the  heart  soft  and  tender, 
the  consideration  of  Christ's  dolorous  passion  must 
needs  be  of  singular  use  and  efficacy ;  as  the  sight  of 
Caesar's  bloody  robes  greatly  affected  the  people  cf 
Rome,  and  edged  them  on  to  revenge  his  death. — 
Trapp. 


CXXVII. 

»*  AHD  THE  LAND  SHALL  MOURN,  EVEBY  FAMILY  APART ;  THB 

FAMILY  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  DAVID  APART,  AND  SHEIR  WIVES 
APART;  THE  FAMILY  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  NATHAN  APART. 
AND  THEIR  WIVES  APART; 

"THE  FAMILY  OF  THE  HOUSE  OF  I>EVI  APART,  AND  THEIR 
WIVES  APART ;  THE  FAMILY  OF  SlIIMEI  APART,  AND  THEIR 
WIVES  APART; 

"ALL  THE    FAMILIES    THAT    REMAIN,   EVERY  FAMILY    APART, 

AND  THEIR  WIVES  APART." — Zecharioh  xii.  12-14. 

TRUE  repentance  is  attended  with  mourning.    It 
may  not  in  itself  be  sorrow,  but  a  repentance 
which  did  not  include  sorrow  for  sin  would  be  a  mere 
pretence.     It  is  a  change  of  mind,  and  that  change 
involves  sorrow  for  the  past. 

We  have  need  to  stand  in  doubt  of  that  repentance 
which  hath  no  tear  in  its  eye,  no  mourning  in  ite 
heart. 

Even  when  Christ  is  clearly  seen,  and  pardon  is 
enjoyed,  mourning  for  sin  does  not  cease ;  say  rather, 
it  is  both  deepened  and  purified. 

This  mourning  has  one  special  characteristic  that 
it  is  personal,  the  act  of  each  individual,  and  the  act 
of  the  individual  apart  from  any  of  his  fellows.  Ite 
watchword  is  "apart." 

(361) 


362  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

I.   THE  INDIVIDUALIZING  EFFECT   OF   SORROW  FOB 

SIN.  Observe  the  many  times  in  which  we 
here  have  the  word  "  apart." 

1.  It  is  seen  even  when  that  mourning  is  universal. 

"  The  land  shall  mourn,  every  family  apart." 
The  widest  spread  of  grace  will  not  dimm 
ish  its  power  over  each  separate  person. 

2.  It  will  be  seen  in  the  separation  of  one  family 

from  another  when  the  mourning  is  com 
mon,  and  most  families  repent.  How  much 
more  when  only  a  few  households  worship 
God! 

3.  It  is  seen  in  the  distinction  between  family  and 

family  even  when  both  fear  the  Lord.  Each 
family  has  its  peculiar  sin,  and  a  speciality 
must  be  made  in  the  confession  of  each  one. 

The  royal  family :  or  rich :  or  influential :  "  the 
family  of  the  house  of  David  apart." 

The  prophet's  family :  the  family  at  the  manse : 
"  the  family  of  the  house  of  Nathan  apart." 

The  priest's  family ;  the  family  of  the  church- 
officer,  or  the  teacher,  &c. :  "  the  family  of 
the  house  of  Levi  apart." 

The  ordinary  family:  the  household  of  the 
trader,  workman,  &c. :  "the  family  of 
Shimei  apart." 

Each  family  has  its  neglected  duties,  evil  habits, 
differences,  unconverted  members,  besetments,  &c. 

4.  It  is  seen  in  the  individualizing  of  those  nearesc 

akin :  "  and  their  wives  apart."     These  are 


AJ»AKT.  363 

one  flesh ;  but  when  their  hearts  are  made 
flesh,  each  one  mourns  alone. 
Common  sin  in  husbands  and  wives  should  be 
mourned   in   common ;  holy  joy,  and  holy 
grief,   and    much   of    devotion    should    be 
united ;  but  in  seeking  the  Lord  by  repent 
ance  each  one  must  come  alone. 
This  personality  of  holy  grief  has  been  stigmatized 
as  morbid,  self-conscious,  and  selfish ;  but  those  who 
thus  speak  are  strangers  to  spiritual  facts,  and  cavil 
for  the  mere  sake  of  cavilling. 

II.   HOW    DOES   THIS  INDIVIDUALITY  SHOW  ITSELF  ? 

Of  course,  from  the  nature  of  things,  it  differs  in 
each  case,  but — 

1.  Each  individual  sees  most  his  own  sin :   he  is 

alone  as  to  character. 

2.  Each  individual  desires  to  be  alone  as  to  place. 

No  matter  where,  whether  at  the  bed-side, 
or  in  the  field,  or  in  the  barn :  but  solitude 
is  desired,  and  must  be  obtained. 

8.  Each  individual  has  his  own  time.  At  once 
the  penitent  must  mourn,  whether  it  be 
morning,  noon,  or  night:  he  cannot  be 
timed  by  regulation. 

4.  Each  individual  has  his  own  manner.  Some  are 
silent ;  others  cry  aloud.  One  weeps,  an 
other  cannot  literally  do  so,  and  it  is  all 
the  more  sad.  One  feels  broken  in  heart, 
another  laments  his  hardness,  &c. 

6.  Each  individual  has  his  own  teoret.    None  can 


364  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

enter  into  it  even  if  they  would  do  so. 
Each  mourner  has  a  secret  hidden  away  in 
his  own  soul,  and  he  cannot  reveal  it  to  men. 

III.   HOW    DO    WE    ACCOUNT    FOB     THIS     INDIVID 
UALITY  ? 

1.  In  part  it  is  accounted  for  by  a  natural  and 

justifiable  shame,  which  prevents  our  con 
fessing  all  our  sins  before  another. 

2.  The  heart  desires  to  come  to  God  himself,  and 

the  presence  of  a  third  person  would  be  an 
interruption. 

3.  The  man  is  conscious  that  his  guilt  was  all  his 

own,  and  as  he  dissociates  everyone  else 
from  it,  he  instinctively  comes  to  God  apart, 
and  solely  on  his  own  account. 

4.  This  is  the  sign  of  sincerity.     Sham  piety  talks 

about  religion  as  national,  and  delights  to 
display  itself  in  the  assembly,  or  in  the 
street ;  true  godliness  is  of  the  heart,  and 
being  "  in  spirit  and  in  truth,"  it  is  deeply 
personal. 

6<  This  is  the  mark  of  spiritual  life  with  its  indi 
vidual  emotions,  needs,  struggles,  desires, 
regrets,  confessions,  &c.  No  two  living 
men  are  quite  alike  outwardly,  and  certainly 
none  are  so  inwardly ;  therefore,  before  the 
Lord  they  must  exhibit  a  separate  personal 
existence. 

Practise    much    self-examination;     minute,    and 
searching. 


APAKT.  365 

Realize  the  fact  that  you  must  die  apart,  and,  in  a 
sense,  be  judged,  and  sentenced  apart.  Never  forget 
your  own  individuality.  You  must  have  Christ  for 
yourself,  and  be  born  again  yourself,  or  you  are  lost. 

Go  forth  and  bless  all  the  world  when  you  are 
yourself  prepared  for  such  work.  Light  your  own 
torch,  or  you  cannot  enlighten  others.  There  is  no 
selfishness  in  seeking  to  be  made  unselfish,  and  that 
is  what  grace  alone  can  do  for  you. 

PERSONALITIES. 

Let  the  question  of  eternity  have  a  monopoly  in 
you.  It  is  an  intensely  personal  question  ;  but  in 
stead  of  making  you  selfish,  it  will  expand  your 
heart.  He  who  has  never  felt  for  his  own  soul  can 
not  feel  for  another's. — Brownlow  North. 

Personal  private  faults  must  be  privately  con 
fessed.  It  is  not  meet  a  wife  should  know  all  the 
bosom-sins  of  him  in  whose  bosom  she  lieth.  Per 
chance  being  now  offended  for  not  hearing  her 
husband's  prayers,  she  would  be  more  offended  if 
she  heard  them.  Nor  hath  she  just  cause  to  complain, 
seeing  herein  Nathan's  wife  is  equal  with  Nathan 
himself;  what  liberty  she  alloweth  is  allowed  her, 
and  she  may,  as  well  as  her  husband,  claim  the 
privilege  privately  and  apart,  to  pour  forth  her  soul 
unto  God  in  her  daily  devotions.  Yet  man  and  wife, 
at  other  times,  ought  to  communicate  in  their 
prayers,  all  others  excluded. — Thomas  Fuller. 

The  question  "Guilty?  "  or  "Not  Guilty?"  must 


366  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

be  put  to  each  prisoner  separately,  and  each  one 
must  answer  to  his  name,  and  put  in  his  personal 
plea.  Should  a  pardon  be  granted,  it  must  bear  the 
individual's  name,  and  it  must  be  issued  distinctly 
to  Jdm,  or  it  will  be  a  document  of  no  value  to  him. 
In  every  case,  the  guilt  arid  the  pardon  must  have  a 
personal  bearing :  but  how  hard  it  is  to  make  a  man 
see  this !  Oh,  that  we  could  preach  in  the  "  thou- 
and-thee "  style,  and  could  make  each  hearer  feel 
that  we  were  as  personal  as  Nathan  when  he  said, 
"  Thou  art  the  man  ! "  If  our  hearers  will  not  cry, 
"  Lord,  is  it  I  ?  "  we  must  go  to  them  with  the  word, 
"I  have  a  message  from  God  unto  thee." 


CXXVIII. 

14  I     HAVE    LOVED     YOU,    SAITH     THE    LORD.       YET    YE    SAY 

WHEREIN  HAST  THOU  LOVED  us?" — Malachii.%. 

TSRAEL  under  Malachi  was  in  a  captious,  queru- 
•*•  lous  condition ;  his  brief  prophecy  is  full  of  unbe 
lieving  questions,  in  which  man  seems  bent  upon 
having  the  last  word  with  God. 

The  text  might  be  treated  as  bearing  upon  our 
own  favored  nation,  for  God  has  been  very  gracious 
to  Britain,  and  Britain  is  sadly  ungrateful. 

We  prefer  to  consider  Israel  as  the  type  of  the 
election  of  grace. 

It  occurs  even  to  the  chosen,  when  grace  runs  low, 
to  fall  into  an  ill  humor,  and  to  appear  beaten  down, 
depressed,  and  full  of  sullen  unbelief.  This  is  a  very 
wretched  state  of  affairs. 

With  this  state  of  heart  we  deal. 

I.  GOD'S  LOVE  DECLARED.     "  I  have  loved  you,  saith 

the  Lord." 

To  every  believer  the  special  love  of  God  is  de 
clared  in  the  Scriptures,  and  to  that  love  the  text 
refers,  This  is  clear  if  we  observe  the  words  which 
follow : — "  Was  not  Esau  Jacob's  brother  ?  saith  the 
Lord :  yet  I  loved  Jacob,  and  I  hated  Esau."  This 
is  the  precise  language  used  by  Paul  when  speaking 
of  the  election  of  grace.  Rom.  ix.  13. 

(867) 


868  MY  SEBMON   NOTES. 

To  every  believer  this  love  has  been  shown  in — 

1.  Election  in  Christ  Jesus  from  of  old. 

2.  Covenant  engagements  made  by  Christ  on  his 

behalf. 
8.  Accomplished  Redemption  by  the  Lord  Jesus. 

4.  Regeneration   and  the   gift  of  eternal  life  in 

Christ  Jesus. 

5.  Pardon  of  sin,  justification  by  faith,  adoption, 

sanctification,  &c. 

6.  Preservation  to  this  hour,  and  promise  for  all 

future  time. 

This  is  a  scanty  list  of  the  ways  by  which  the 
Lord  has  said  to  each  regenerate  soul,  "  I  have  loved 
you." 

Do  we  not  remember  times  of  love  when  this  was 
personally  sealed  upon  our  hearts  by  the  Holy 
Spirit? 

Even  now  the  Lord  speaks  thus  to  his  redeemed 
by  his  Word,  and  by  his  Spirit.  Do  they  not  hear 
it  ?  Are  they  not  touched  with  so  gracious  and  con 
descending  an  avowal  of  love  ? 

II.  GOD'S  LOVE  QUESTIONED.    "Yet  ye  say,  Wherein 

hast  thou  loved  us  ?  " 

This  is  a  shocking  and  disgraceful  thing;  but, 
alas,  it  indicates  a  condition  of  heart  which  ias  been 
seen  far  too  frequently. 

Such  a  question  has  been  asked — 
1.  Under  great  afflictions  in  which  there  seemed 
no  relief.     Petulantly  the   sorrowing   one 
has  questioned  divine  love. 


LOVE   QUESTIONED   AND    VINDICATED.          369 

2.  In  sight  of  the  prosperous  wicked  in  their  day 
of  pride  many  a  poor  despised  believer  has 
rashly  doubted  the  special  love  of  God. 

8.  In  times  of  grievous  doubt  as  to  one's  personal 
salvation,  and  under  heavy  temptations  of 
Satan,  the  same  doubt  has  arisen. 

4.  Alas,  this  has  also  happened  when,  immersed 
in  worldliness,  the  man  for  the  time  has 
lost  all  sight  and  sense  of  spiritual  things, 
and  has  treated  distinguishing  love  as 
though  it  were  a  fiction ! 

This  is  a  grievous  wounding  of  the  Lord  of  love. 

It  pours  despite  upon  amazing  mercy. 

It  exposes  the  questioner  to  fearful  peril. 

III.    GOD'S  LOVE  CONSIDERED. 

When  we  solemnly  turn,  and  meditate  upon  these 
things,  we  see — 

1.  Love  lamenting.     Is  God  to  be  thus  treated? 

Shall  he  mournfully  cry,  "I  have  loved 
you.  Yet  ye  say,  Wherein  hast  thou  loved 
us?" 

2.  Love  entreating.     Does  not  each  accent  say, 

"  Return  to  me  ?  " 
8.  Love  abounding.    Our  question  shames  us.    God 

loves  us  in  ten  thousand  ways ;  loves  us  so 

as  to  be  patient  even  when  we  wickedly 

question  his  love. 
4.  Love  conquering.     We  bow  at  Jehovah's  feet 

with  shame,  and  yield  our  heart's  best  love 

in  return  for  his  love. 
2-94 


£70  MY    SEKMOJtf    1SOT.ES. 

Come,  ye  cast-down  ones,  leave  your  suliea  que» 
tioniugs ! 

Run  into  his  arms,  and  receive  the  quietux  of  all 
your  fears. 


LOVE-JSOTEB. 

A  child  has  wilfully  disobeyed.  For  this  offence 
he  has  been  chastised,  and  confined  to  his  own  room. 
He  is  very  sullen  and  obstinate,  and  his  father  reasons 
with  him,  and  tells  him  with  tears  that  he  is  greatly 
grieved  with  him,  and  feels  wounded  by  the  ingrati 
tude  which  he  receives  after  all  his  love.  The  boy 
angrily  replies  that  he  does  not  believe  in  his  father's 
love :  if  he  loved  him,  why  did  he  whip  him,  and 
send  him  to  bed?  This  would  be  a  very  rebellious 
speech ;  but  it  would  be  pitched  in  the  same  key  as 
our  text.  It  would  also  set  forth  the  spirit  which 
is  often  seen  in  Christians  when  they  measure  the 
Lord's  love  by  their  temporal  circumstances,  and 
ask  in  rebellion  whether  their  poverty,  their  pains, 
and  their  persecutions  are  fit  fruits  of  divine  favor. 
The  Lord  knows  how  foolish  we  are  apt  to  be  when 
our  soul  is  vexed  with  bitter  anguish,  and  therefore 
he  does  not  destroy  us  for  our  presumption,  but  he 
patiently  reasons  with  us  that  he  may  bring  us  to  a 
better  mind. 

If  it  would  be  marvellous  to  see  one  river  leap  up 
from  the  earth  full-grown,  what  would  it  be  to  gaze 
upon  a  vast  spring  from  which  all  the  rivers  of  the 


LOVE   QUESTIONED   AND   VINDICATED.          371 

earth  should  at  once  come  bubbling  up,  a  thousand 
of  them  born  at  a  birth  ?  What  a  vision  would  it 
be  !  Who  can  conceive  it  ?  And  yet  the  love  of  God 
is  that  fountain,  from  which  all  the  rivers  of  mercy, 
which  have  ever  gladdened  our  race — all  the  rivers 
of  grace  in  time,  and  of  glory  hereafter — take  their 
rise.  My  soul,  stand  thou  at  that  sacred  fountain- 
head,  and  adore  and  magnify  for  ever  and  ever  God, 
eveii  our  Father,  who  hath  loved  us. —  C.  H.  S. 

What  is  more  tender  than  a  mother's  love 

To  the  sweet  infant  fondling  in  her  arms  ? 
What  arguments  need  her  compassion  move 

To  hear  its  cries,  and  help  it  in  its  harms  ? 
Now,  if  the  tenderest  mother  were  possessed 

Of  all  the  love  within  her  single  breast 
Of  all  the  mothers  since  the  world  began, 

'Tis  nothing  to  the  love  of  God  to  man. 

— John  Byrorn. 

A  very  tender  parent  had  a  son,  who,  from  his 
earliest  years,  proved  headstrong  and  dissolute. 
Conscious  of  the  extent  of  his  demerits,  he  dreaded 
and  hated  his  parent.  Meanwhile,  every  means  was 
used  to  disarm  him  of  these  suspicions,  so  unworthy 
of  the  tenderness  and  love  which  yearned  in  his 
father's  bosom,  and  of  all  the  kindness  and  forbeai- 
ance  which  were  lavished  upon  him.  Eventually  the 
means  appeared  to  be  successful,  and  confidence,  in 
a  great  degree,  took  the  place  of  his  ungenerous 
suspicions.  Entertained  in  the  family  as  one  who 
had  never  trespassed,  he  now  left  his  home  to  embark 
in  mercantile  affairs  and  was  assured  that  if  in  any 


872  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

extremity  lie  would  apply  to  his  parent,  he  should 
find  his  application  kindly  received.  In  the  course 
of  years  it  fell  out  that  he  was  reduced  to  extremity; 
but,  instead  of  communicating  his  case  to  his  parent, 
his  base  suspicion  and  disbelief  of  his  tenderness  and 
care  again  conquered  him,  and  he  neglected  to  apply 
to  him.  Who  can  tell  how  deeply  that  father's 
heart  was  rent  at  such  depravity  of  feeling  ?  Yet 
this  is  the  case  of  the  believer,  who,  pardoned  and 
accepted,  yet  refuses  to  trust  his  heavenly  Parent, 
throws  away  his  filial  confidence,  and  with  his  old 
suspicions  stands  aloof  in  sullen  distrust.  Oh,  how 
is  God  dishonored  by  this  sinful  unbelief ! — Salter. 

Dr.  Chalmers  used  to  say  that  "  As  soon  as  a  man 
comes  to  understand  that  *  God  is  love,'  he  is  infalli 
bly  converted." 


CXXIX. 

"BUT  UNTO  YOU  THAT  FEAR  MT  NAME  SHALL  THE  SUN  OF 
RIGHTEOUSNESS  ARISE  WITH  HEALING  IN  HIS  WINGS ;  AND 
YE  SHALL  GO  FORTH,  AND  GROW  UP  AS  CALVES  OF  THE 

STALL."— Malachi  iv.  2. 

HHERE  is  one  grand  distinction  among  men — 
-*-  "  him  that  serveth  God,  and  him  that  serveth 
him  not."  See  last  verse  of  previous  chapter. 

Fearing  God  is  the  mark  which  distinguishes  man 
from  man  far  more  than  wealth,  rank,  or  nationality. 

The  coming  of  Christ  is  a  calamity  or  a  blessing 
to  men  according  to  their  character. 

What  a  change  of  figures !  To  the  wicked  "aw  oven  !  " 
(See  verse  1.)  To  God-fearing  men  a  "Sun!" 

Our  text  was  fulfilled  at  our  Lord's  first  coming. 

It  awaits  a  far  larger  fulfilment  at  his  second 
coming. 

It  is  always  true  as  a  general  principle,  and  it  is 
felt  to  be  true  when  the  Lord  Jesus  spiritually  draws 
near  to  his  people. 

I.  LET  US  THINK  OF  OUK  LOKD  AS  THE  SUN. 

1.  He  is  the  centre  of  the  whole  system  of  grace. 

2.  He  is  to  us  the  Grand  Attraction,  and  Holdfast, 

keeping  us  in  our  places,  as  the  sun  keeps 
the  planets  in  their  orbits. 

(378) 


874  MY   SERMON    NOTES. 

3.  He  is  the  source  of  all  good.  His  beams  are 
righteousness :  all  that  emanates  from  him 
is  good :  all  good  emanates  from  him ;  even 
as  all  light  and  heat  come,  directly  or  indi 
rectly,  from  the  sun. 

1.  He  is  without  variableness  or  shadow  of  turning. 
James  i.  17.  In  himself  he  is  for  ever  the 
same,  shining  on  without  ceasing. 

5.  To  us  he  has  his  risings,  and  his  settings.     If 

for  a  while  we  are  in  the  shade,  let  us  look 
for  his  arising. 

6.  To  those  who  fear  him  not  he  never  rises,  for 

they  are  blind,  and  know  no  day,  and  see 
no  light. 

What  the  world  would  be  without  the  sun,  that 
should  we  be  without  our  Lord.  Can  we  conceive 
the  gloom,  the  death,  etc.? 

II.    LET     US     ENJOY     THE     BLESSINGS     WHICH     HE 
SCATTERS. 

1.  What  light  of  knowledge,  what  warmth  of  love, 

what  radiance  of  joy  we  receive  from  him  I 
Let  us  walk  in  it. 

2.  What  health  he  gives !     Healing  for  the  sick, 

health  for  the  strong. 
Every  sunbeam  is  medicinal,  every  word  of 

Christ  is  life. 
The  earlier  we  come  to  Christ  the   better: 

his  rising  is  attended  with  sparkling  dewi 

of  joy. 


8UN8HLNB.  876 

The  more  we  commune  with  him  the  better :  let 
as  bask  in  the  sunlight. 

8.  What  liberty  he  brings !  "  Ye  shall  go  forth." 
When  the  sun  has  reached  a  certain  point  in 
his  annual  course,  the  cattle  which  have 
been  stalled  are  led  for,th  to  the  mountain 
pastures ;  so  the  Lord  Jesus  sets  his  people 
free,  and  they  go  forth — 

To  enjoy  spiritual  privileges. 
To  perform  spiritual  duties. 
To  reach  spiritual  attainments. 
To  carry  abroad  spiritual  influences. 
4,  What  growth  he  fosters! — "and  grow  up  M 

calves  of  the  stall." 

When  the  Lord  Jesus  is  with  his  people — 
They  are  abundantly  fed. 
They  are  comfortably  housed, 
They  are  regularly  tended. 
They  advance  rapidly  to  maturity. 
A  heart  which  communes  with  Jesus  possesses 
a  freshness  of  youth,  an  ease  of  life,  and 
other  advantages,  which  admirably  fulfil  the 
comparison  oi  4*  calves  of  the  stall." 

As  all  this  comes  of  fearing  the  Lord,  let  us  be 
diligent  in  worship,  careful  in  obedience,  and  reverent 
in  spirit. 

As  all  this  conies  through  our  Lord  Jesus,  let  ua 
abide  under  his  sweet  influences,  and  never  more 
out  of  his  sunshine  into  that  far  off  country,  where 


876  MY   SERMON    NOTBtt 

the  Arctic  winter  is  never  cheered  by  the  San  at 
righteousness. 

We  have  not  to  make  a  Sun,  or  move  the  Sun,  or 
buy  the  Sun  ;  but  only  to  step  into  the  free  and 
blessed  sunshine.  Why  do  we  hesitate  ? 

Why  do  we  not  by  faith  pass  from  darkness  into 
bis  marvellous  light  ? 


The  late  Mr.  Robinson,  of  Cambridge,  called  upon 
a  friend  just  as  he  had  received  a  letter  from  his  son, 
who  was  surgeon  on  board  a  vessel  then  lying  off 
Smyrna.  The  son  mentioned  to  his  father  that  every 
morning,  about  sunrise,  a  fresh  gale  of  air  blew  from 
the  sea  across  the  land,  and,  from  its  wholesomenesa 
and  utility  in  clearing  the  infected  air,  this  wind  is 
always  called  the  Doctor.  "Now,"  says  Mr.  Robin 
son,  "  it  strikes  me  that  the  prophet  Malachi,  who 
lived  in  that  quarter  of  the  world,  might  allude  to 
this  circumstance  when  he  says  that  'the  Sun  of 
righteousness  shall  arise  with  healing  in  his  wings.' 
The  Psalmist  mentions  'the  wings  of  the  wind,'  and 
it  appears  to  me  that  this  salubrious  breeze,  which 
attends  the  rising  of  the  sun,  may  be  properly  enough 
considered  as  the  wings  of  the  sun,  which  contain 
•uch  healing  influences,  rather  than  the  beams  of  the 
sun,  as  the  passage  has  been  commonly  understood." 
—  Burder'*  "  Oriental  CVaCowu." 

There  is  a  beautiful  fable  of  the  ancient  mythology, 
to  the  effect  that  Apollo,  who  represent*  the  inn, 


SUNSHINE.  377 

killed  a  huge  poisonous  serpent  by  arrows  surely 
aimed,  and  shot  from  afar.  It  intimates  that  sun 
beams,  darted  straight  from  heaven,  destroy  many- 
deadly  things  that  crawl  upon  the  ground,  and  so 
make  the  world  a  safer  habitation.  The  parable  is, 
in  this  respect,  a  stroke  of  truth,  and  it  coincides 
with  a  feature  of  the  eternal  covenant.  Light  from 
the  face  of  Jesus,  when  it  is  permitted  to  stream 
right  into  a  human  heart,  destroys  the  noisome 
things  that  haunt  it,  as  Apollo's  arrows  slew  the 
snake. —  W.  Arnot. 

In  all  the  departments  of  vegetable,  animal,  moral, 
and  spiritual  life,  light  stands  out  as  the  foremost 
blessing  and  benefit  which  God  confers.  In  physical 
existence  this  is  especially  true.  Thousands  die  for 
lack  of  light.  No  vigorous  vegetable  life,  no  healthy 
animal  life,  can  long  exist  without  light.  The  pesti 
lence  "  walketh  in  darkness  ".....  Sir  James 
Wylie,  late  physician  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia, 
attentively  studied  the  effects  of  light  as  a  curative 
agent  in  the  hospital  of  St.  Petersburg,  and  he  dis 
covered  that  the  number  of  patients  who  were  cured 
in  rooms  properly  lighted  was  four  times  that  of  those 
confined  in  dark  rooms.  These  different  results  are 
due  to  the  agency  of  light,  without  a  full  supply  of 
which  plants  and  animals  maintain  but  a  sickly  and 
feeble  existence.  Light  is  the  cheapest  and  best  of 
all  medicines.  Nervous  ailments  yield  to  the  power 
of  sunshine.  Pallid  faces  grow  fresh  and  ruddy 
beneath  its  glow.  The  sun's  rays  have  wonderful 
purifying  power. — H.  L.  Basting*. 


878  M?   SERMON  NOTES. 

"  Heaven  be  p>raised  I  I  have  once  more  seen  the 
sun,"  said  Dr.  Hayes,  in  his  record  of  the  experience 
of  a  certain  Arctic  day,  when  he,  with  others,  had 
visited  a  point  from  which  they  could  see  the  sun 
come  up  for  the  first  time  from  his  long  winter  isola 
tion.  "  Off  went  our  caps  with  simultaneous  impulse, 
and  we  hailed  this  long-lost  wanderer  of  the  heavens 
with  loud  demonstrations  of  joy." 

A  man  scoffingly  asked,  "  What  advantage  has  a 
religious  man  over  any  one  like  myself  ?  Does  not 
the  sun  shine  on  me  as  on  him,  this  fine  day?" 
**  Yes,"  replied  his  companion,  a  pious  laborer,  "  but 
the  religious  man  has  two  suns  shining  on  him  at 
once, — one  on  his  body,  the  other  on  his  soul." — Tk* 
Biblical  Treasury* 


An  Exhaustive   Treatment  of  the  Mental 
Factor  in  Medicine 

"Fitted  to  prove  a  stimulus  to  thought  upon  a  sub 
ject  of  much  importance  to  the  medical  profession." — 
Scottish  Medical  and  Surgical  Journal. 

The  Force  of  Mind 

By  A.  T.  SCHOFIELD,  M.D.,  M.R.C.S.E. 

The  action  of  the  mind  in  the  cause  and  cure 
of  important  disorders  is  considered  in  this 
book  from  scientific  standpoints.  In  emphasizing 
the  importance  of  the  mental  factor  in  thera 
peutics  the  author  by  no  means  depreciates  the 
advance  or  the  importance  of  the  art  of  medi 
cine.  The  book  claims  that  drugs  have  a  two 
fold  value — physical  and  psychical — and  urges 
the  physician  to  study  men  as  men,  mastering 
the  intricacies  of  spirit,  soul,  and  body. 

THE  CONTENTS 


The  Force  of  Mind 
Illustrations    of    Curative 

Power  of  Mind 
Psycho-Physiology 
The  -(Etiology  of  Hysteria 
Some  Varieties  of  Mental 

Therapeutics 
Treatment    of    Functional 

Nerve   Diseases 
The  Unity  of  Mind 
Psycho-Pathology 
Mental  Factor  in  Organic 

Diseases 


Psycho-Therapy 

Causes  and  Symptoms  of 
Functional  Nerve 
Diseases 

Phenomena  and  Illustra 
tions  of  Hysteria 

The  Vis  Medicatrix 
Naturae 

Mental  Therapeutics  i  n 
Nerve  Diseases 

The  Therapeutics  o  f 
Hysteria 

The  Practical  Conclusions 


"The  demand  for  a  second  edition  of  this  -work  shows 
that  the  medical  mind  has  found  in  it  food  for  thought 
and  a  helpful  guide  in  the  control  of  the  mental  state 
in  many  physical  ailments." — Chicago  Medical  Recorder. 

\2rno,   Cloth,   335  Pages.  $2.00,   net; 
$2.14,  post-paid. 

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY,  Publishers 
354-360  Fourth  Avenue,  New  York,  N.  Y. 


Highly   Interesting  and  Instructive   Talks  on  Intellectual, 
Physical,  and  Moral  Development 

On   Self-Culture 

By  JOHN  STUART  BLACKIE 

Formerly  Professor  of  Greek  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh 

This  book  is  recognized  as  a  classic  wherever  the 
English  language  is  spoken.  The  author  deals  with 
the  development  of  the  intellectual,  physical,  and 
moral  faculties.  It  is  an  eminently  practical 
treatise,  and  has  been  the  source  of  inspiration  and 
guidance  for  many  men  who  are  now  prominent  in 
all  branches  of  public  life.  The  author  gives  advice 
on  the  reading  that  should  be  pursued  in  order  to 
attain  the  highest  intellectual  development.  He 
shows  the  lessons  that  are  to  be  learned  in  the 
lives  of  great  men  of  history — how  one  may  draw 
from  their  mode  of  living  fundamental  ideas  which 
will  be  of  priceless  advantage  when  applied  to 
one's  own  life.  Other  topics  taken  up  include 
Reasoning,  Observation,  Imagination,  Memory, 
Style,  Public  Speaking,  Professional  Reading,  Exer 
cise,  Eating  and  Drinking,  Sleep,  Baths  and  Water, 
Obedience,  Truthfulness,  Idleness,  Narrow-mind 
edness,  Moderation,  Virtuous  Energy,  Love,  Prayer. 
OVER  TWENTY  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  BOOK  HAVE 
BEEN  ISSUED  SINCE  THE  BOOK  WAS  FIRST 
PUBLISHED  IN  1873 

"...  But  whatever  else  Mr.  Blackie  is,  he  is 
never  dull;  not  even  when,  as  it  almost  seems,  he 
tries  to  be  so.  He  writes  with  vivacity,  clearness, 
and  eloquent  fervor  .  .  .  and  we  may  learn  a  great 
deal  from  him." Saturday  Review,  London,  England. 

\2rno.     Cloth.     94  pates.     Price  $1.00.  net;  by 
mail,  $1.10. 

FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY,    Publishers 
NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 


MORE    THAN    THIRTY    EDITIONS    SOLD 


The  Education  of  the  Will 

By  Jules   Payot,  Litt.D.,  Ph.D. 

Translated  by  Smith  Ely  Jelliffe,  M.D. 

One  of  the  really  great  educational  books  of 
recent  times  is  now  available  to  English  readers  in 
the  form  of  a  translation  by  an  acknowledged  expert 
on  the  psychology  of  mind.  The  author,  Jules  Payot, 
one  of  the  leading  thinkers  of  France  along  these  lines, 
has  produced  a  work  that  is  absolutely  authoritative 
while  essentially  simple.  It  can  be  readily  understood 
by  any  one  of  ordinary  intelligence  and  its  reasoning  is 
so  convincing  that  no  one  can  fail  to  benefit  by  its 
clearly  presented  arguments. 

Dr.  Payot  proves  conclusively  that  character  is  not 
wholly  a  matter  of  birth  or  heredity,  but  that  through 
the  education  of  ihe  will  it  can  be  strengthened  and 
developed  to  the  highest  degree.  The  one  thing 
necessary  is  that  one  should  possess  the  desire  for 
mental  superiority. 

"It  is  a  prescription  for  the  attainment  of  self-mastery  which 
is  procurable  in  the  drug-store  of  most  any  mind,  and  of  which 
men  in  general  stand  in  immediate  need  at  the  present  moment." — 
North  American,  Philadelphia,  Pa. 

12mo,  Cloth.    448  pages.    $1.75,  net;  $1.89, post-paid 


FUNK    C&    WAGNALLS    COMPANY,    Publishers 
354-360  Fourth  Avenue  -:-  -:-  New  York,  N.  Y. 


The  Preparation  of 

Manuscripts  for 

the  Printer 

By  FRANK  H.  VIZETELLY,  Litt.D.,  LL.D. 

Managing  Editor  of  the  "New  Standard  Dictionary,"  etc. 

This  book  is  designed  for  the  guidance  of  all  who 
have  any  concern  with  printing,  and  will  prove  of 
permanent  value  to  all  persons  engaged  in  writing 
or  in  copying  manuscripts.  Typographical  marks 
are  exemplified  and  explained ;  the  different  sizes 
of  type  with  their  names  and  uses  are  presented, 
with  aids  to  the  computing  of  space  which  manu 
scripts  will  occupy  in  printed  form;  the  book  also 
shows  authors  how  they  can  effectively  reduce  the 
cost  of  corrections  in  type,  and  tells  them  when, 
where,  and  how  to  make  such  corrections  and  how 
to  dispose  of  manuscripts. 

"Not  only  a  valuable  volume  for  the  writer  and  author, 
but  it  contains  much  of  interest  to  those  who  are  inter 
ested  in  literary  matters.  It  will  be  found  a  valuable 
addition  to  any  writer's  library." — Hawk  Eye,  Burlington, 
Iowa. 

"A  thoroughly  practical  little  book  which  will  prove 
invaluable  to  all  who  are  interested  in  the  preparation  of 
manuscripts." — Times,  Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 

12mo,  Cloth,  153  pages,  $1.50,  net;  by  mail,  $1.64. 

FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY,    Publishers 
NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 


