00 


,CD 


CO 


MY    SERMON-NOTES. 


A  SELECTION  FROM 

OUTLINES  OF  DISCOURSES 

DELIVERED  AT 

Tjr{E  METROPOLITAN   TABERNACLE 

WITH    ANECDOTES    AND    ILLUSTRATIONS. 


BY 

C.   H.   SPURGEON. 


X  3 

FROM  MATTHEW  TO  ACTS— CXXX.   TO  Q^CV.    ' 


FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY 

NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 

PRfNTED  IN  THE  U   *   A. 


PREFACE. 


THIS  is  the  third  portion  of  "My  Sermon  Notes,"  and 
it  consists  of  Notes  of  Sermons  preached  by  me  011 
Sabbath  and  Thursday  evenings.  I  trust  it  will  be 
helpful  to  men  who  are  greatly  occupied,  and  are 
therefore  sorely  pressed  for  subjects  of  discourse. 
One  more  selection  of  outlines — upon  certain  texts 
which  range  from  Romans  to  Revelation — will  com 
plete  the  series.  This  last  part  I  hope  to  prepare  for 
publication  before  this  year  has  quite  run  out.  I 
might  have  taken  longer  time  over  the  rest  of  the 
work  ;  but  as  the  sale  of  the  former  volumes  indi 
cates  a  want,  I  feel  bound  to  supply  it  as  speedily  as 
I  can.  "  The  night  cometh,  when  no  man  can  work." 
1  hope  and  believe  that  these  Notes  will  not  be  of 
much  use  to  persons  who  fail  to  think  for  themselves. 
For  such  talkers  I  have  no  sort  of  compassion.  My 
outlines  are  meant  to  be  aids  to  preparation,  and  no 
thing  more.  The  theory  that  they  will  induce  men  to 
be  idle  is  not  supported  by  facts.  Concerning  this, 
information  of  the  most  reliable  kind  is  forthcoming. 
Those  who  have  valued  them,  and  turned  them  to  ac 
count,  have  almost  always  used  them  in  the  man- 
Cm) 


IV  PREFACE. 

ner  which  I  proposed  to  them  :  they  have  cut  them  up 
into  several  sermons,  or  have  taken  the  raw  material 
and  rearranged  it  after  their  own  fashion,  and  so  have 
made  it  as  good  as  new.  In  several  instances  brethren 
who  have  been  necessarily  occupied  in  visitation  and 
other  pastoral  work,  have  found  great  assistance  from 
these  summaries,  and  have  been  able  on  the  Lord's-day 
to  give  their  people  a  fair  measure  of  spiritual  food, 
by  working  out  at  full  length  the  thoughts  suggest 
ed.  Knowing  what  it  is  to  be  hardly  pressed  myself, 
and  remembering  my  great  gratitude  when  a  friend 
has  suggested  a  theme  and  a  line  of  thought,  I  am 
now  happy  in  rendering  to  others  a  service  which  I 
have  so  often  needed  myself. 

Mr.  PAGE,  of  Chelsea,  has  again  helped  me  in  the 
somewhat  difficult  task  of  appending  illustrations  to 
the  outlines.  We  have  brought  forth  "  things  new 
and  old."  In  this  age  of  Cyclopaedias  it  is  hard  to 
find  anything  which  has  not  been  used  in  some  form 
or  other  ;  but  yet  I  hope  that,  to  a  fair  extent,  there 
is  real  freshness  about  these  selections.  At  any  rate, 
most  of  the  quotations  and  anecdotes  are  new  to  me. 
The  very  oldest  will  be  novel  in  some  places,  and  to 
some  hearers. 

In  all  these  outlines  evangelical  truth  is  set  forth 
as  clearly  as  I  am  able  to  do  it.  This  will  injure  my 
work  in  the  estimation  of  those  whose  admiration  I 
do  not  covet ;  but  this  will  cause  me  no  alarm,  for 
the  weight  of  their  censure  is  not  great.  My  con 
viction  is,  that  the  lovers  of  the  Old  Gospel  are  far 
more  numerous  than  the  cold  other-gospellers  sus- 


PREFACE.  V 

peot,  and  that  the  orthodox  are  increasing  every  day. 
The  mania  of  "advanced  thought "  has  nearly  had  its 
day,  and  a  eorry  day  it  has  proved  to  many.  The  will- 
o'-the-wisp  has  flitted  on  and  on  towards  the  pesti 
lent  swamps  of  Sociniaiiism.  At  one  time  the  pre 
tended  goddess  was  resplendent  in  fine  apparel,  but 
the  foolish  creature  has  danced  itself  threadbare  :  its 
tattered  garments  of  pretentious  knowledge  no  long 
er  conceals  its  deformity. 

Better  days  are  coming  for  the  lovers  of  the  eter 
nal  verities.  For  a  season  we  seemed  to  be  surround 
ed  by  a  torrent  of  unbelief  ;  but  the  waters  are 
assuaging,  and  the  mountains  of  truth  lift  their  peaks 
above  the  flood.  Whatever  the  times  may  be,  there 
shall  be  no  doubt  as  to  where  the  writer  of  these  out 
lines  took  up  his  standing  in  the  hour  of  controversy. 
I  know  nothing  but  the  doctrines  of  grace,  the  teaching 
of  the  cross,  the  gospel  of  salvation  ;  and  I  write  only 
that  these  things  may  be  the  more  widely  published. 
If  those  who  believe  these  truths  will  honor  me  by 
using  my  Notes,!  shall  rejoice,  and  shall  trust  that  the 
blessing  of  God  will  go  with  their  discourses.  It  is 
no  small  pleasure  to  be  helping  brethren  in  the  faith 
to  sow  beside  all  waters  the  living  seed  of  the  Word 
of  God. 

While  all  around  us  workers  are  being  taken  to 
their  reward,  it  becomes  us  to  be  doubly  diligent  in 
our  Lord's  service.  Let  us  all  use  such  ability  as  we 
have.  One  can  preach  sermons  without  aid  from 
books  ;  another  can  fill  up  a  frame-work,  though  he 
cannot  construct  one  for  himself  ;  a  third  can  only 


IV  PREFACE. 

ner  which  I  proposed  to  them  :  they  have  cut  them  up 
into  several  sermons,  or  have  taken  the  raw  material 
and  rearranged  it  after  their  own  fashion,  and  so  have 
made  it  as  good  as  new.  In  several  instances  brethren 
who  have  been  necessarily  occupied  in  visitation  and 
other  pastoral  work,  have  found  great  assistance  from 
these  summaries,  and  have  been  able  on  the  Lord's-day 
to  give  their  people  a  fair  measure  of  spiritual  food, 
by  working  out  at  full  length  the  thoughts  suggest 
ed.  Knowing  what  it  is  to  be  hardly  pressed  myself, 
and  remembering  my  great  gratitude  when  a  friend 
has  suggested  a  theme  and  a  line  of  thought,  I  am 
now  happy  in  rendering  to  others  a  service  which  I 
have  so  often  needed  myself. 

Mr.  PAGE,  of  Chelsea,  has  again  helped  me  in  the 
somewhat  difficult  task  of  appending  illustrations  to 
the  outlines.  We  have  brought  forth  "  things  new 
and  old."  In  this  age  of  Cyclopaedias  it  is  hard  to 
find  anything  which  has  not  been  used  in  some  form 
or  other  ;  but  yet  I  hope  that,  to  a  fair  extent,  there 
is  real  freshness  about  these  selections.  At  any  rate, 
most  of  the  quotations  and  anecdotes  are  new  to  me. 
The  very  oldest  will  be  novel  in  some  places,  and  to 
some  hearers. 

In  all  these  outlines  evangelical  truth  is  set  forth 
as  clearly  as  I  am  able  to  do  it.  This  will  injure  my 
work  in  the  estimation  of  those  whose  admiration  I 
do  not  covet ;  but  this  will  cause  me  no  alarm,  for 
the  weight  of  their  censure  is  not  great.  My  con 
viction  is,  that  the  lovers  of  the  Old  Gospel  are  far 
more  numerous  than  the  cold  other-gospellers  sus- 


PEEFACE.  V 

pect,  and  that  the  orthodox  are  increasing  every  day. 
The  mania  of fl  advanced  thought "  has  nearly  had  its 
day,  and  a  sorry  day  it  has  proved  to  many.  The  will- 
o'-the-wisp  has  flitted  on  and  on  towards  the  pesti 
lent  swamps  of  Socinianism.  At  one  time  the  pre 
tended  goddess  was  resplendent  in  fine  apparel,  but 
the  foolish  creature  has  danced  itself  threadbare  :  its 
tattered  garments  of  pretentious  knowledge  no  long 
er  conceals  its  deformity. 

Better  days  are  coming  for  the  lovers  of  the  eter 
nal  verities.  For  a  season  we  seemed  to  be  surround 
ed  by  a  torrent  of  unbelief  ;  but  the  waters  are 
assuaging,  and  the  mountains  of  truth  lift  their  peaks 
above  the  flood.  Whatever  the  times  may  be,  there 
shall  be  no  doubt  as  to  where  the  writer  of  these  out 
lines  took  up  his  standing  in  the  hour  of  controversy. 
I  know  nothing  but  the  doctrines  of  grace,  the  teaching 
of  the  cross,  the  gospel  of  salvation  ;  and  I  write  only 
that  these  things  may  be  the  more  widely  published. 
If  those  who  believe  these  truths  will  honor  me  by 
using  my  Notes,!  shall  rejoice,  and  shall  trust  that  the 
blessing  of  God  will  go  with  their  discourses.  It  is 
no  small  pleasure  to  be  helping  brethren  in  the  faith 
to  sow  beside  all  waters  the  living  seed  of  the  Word 
of  God. 

While  all  around  us  workers  are  being  taken  to 
their  reward,  it  becomes  us  to  be  doubly  diligent  in 
our  Lord's  service.  Let  us  all  use  such  ability  as  we 
have.  One  can  preach  sermons  without  aid  from 
books  ;  another  can  fill  up  a  frame-work,  though  he 
cannot  construct  one  for  himself  ;  a  third  can  only 


VI  PREFACE. 

read  a  discourse  :  let  no  man  so  envy  his  fellow's  gift 
as  to  neglect  his  own  ;  but  let  each  one  do  what  he 
can,  and  look  up  for  a  blessing. 

To  God  I  commend  these  baskets  of  fragments 
which  remained  after  the  multitudes  were  fed :  the 
Master's  example  has  encouraged  me  to  "  take  up  " 
what  else  had  been  forgotten. 

C.  H.  SPURGEON. 

WESTWOOD.  March,  1886. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAP.  PACT 

CXXX.  Matt.  iv.  3. — SONSHIP  QUESTIONED.       11 
CXXXI.  Matt.    iv.    19.— THE    MAKING   OF 

MEN-CATCHERS 17 

CXXXII.  Matt.  vii.  21-23.— THE  DISOWNED       23 
CXXXIII.  Matt.  viii.  7,  Luke  vii.  7.— THY 

WORD  SUFFICES  ME 29 

CXXXIV.  Matt.  ix.  9.— "A  MAN  NAMED  MAT- 

THEW" 35 

CXXXV.  Matt.  ix.  36.— A  PORTRAIT  OF  JESUS       41 
CXXXVI.  Matt.   x.    27.— LEARNING   IN  PRI 
VATE  WHAT  TO  TEACH  IN  PUBLIC  .       47 
CXXXVII.  Matt.    x.     30.  — THE    NUMBERED 

HAIRS 52 

CXXXVIIT.  Matt.  x.  38.— CROSS-BEARING    .     .       58 
CXXXIX.  Matt.  xi.  28-30.— PIEST  FOR  THE 

KESTLESS 64 

CXL.  Matt.  xi.  28. — JESUS  CALLING    .     .       70 
CXLI.  Matt.  xiv.  31.— THE  WHY  AND  THE 

WHEREFORE  OF  DOUBT.     ...       74 
CXLII.  Matt.   xx.    3,    4.— FROM  TWENTY- 
FIVE  TO  THIRTY-FIVE.     ....       80 
CXLIII.  Matt.    xxii.    8-10.— GUESTS    FOR 

THE  WEDDING  FEAST    ....      86 

(vii) 


v 


CHAP.  PAG» 

CXLIY.  Matt.  xxv.  10.—  ENTRANCE  AND  EX 

CLUSION    ......    o     .       92 

CXLV.  Matt,  xxvii.  29.  —  MOCKED  OF  THE 

SOLDIERS   ........       98 

CXLVI.  Matt,      xxviii.     9,      10.  —  "ALL 

HAIL!"     ........     103 

CXLVI  I.   Mark  iv.  24.—  HEARING  WITH  HEED     109 
CXLVI  1  1.  Mark  v.  6,  Luke  xv.  20.—  HE  RAN, 

AND  HE  RAN  .......       116 

CXLIX.  Mark  v.  7.  —  RESISTANCE  TO  SALVA 

TION  .........     .120 

CL.  Mark    viii.    22-25.  —  THE    FREE- 

AGENCY  OF  CHRIST    .....     125 

CLI.  Mark  ix.   24.  —  FEEBLE  FAITH  AP 

PEALING  TO  A  STRONG  SAVIOUR.     .     131 
CLII.   Mark  x.  49,  50.—  THE  BLIND  BEG 

GAR  OF  JERICHO  ......     137 

CLIII.  Mark  xii.  34.—  So  NEAR     ...     142 
CLIV.  Mark  xiv.  32.—  GETHSEMANE   .     .     148 
CLV.  Mark  xiv.  72.  —  FOUNTAINS  OF  RE 

PENTANT  TEARS  .......     153 

CLVI.  Mark  xvi.   10.  —  A   SAD  INTERIOR 

AND  A  CHEERY  MESSENGER.     .     .     159 

CLVII.  Luke  v.  26.—  STRANGE  THINGS  .     .     163 

CLVIIT.  Luke  vii.  38.—  "AT  His  FEET"  .     167 

CLIX.  Luke  vii.  42.  —  LOVE'S  FOREMOST  .     173 

CLX.  Luke  viii  40.  —  A   WELCOME  FOR 

JESUS  .........     179 

CLXI.  Luke  x.  39.—  LOVE  AT  HOME  .     .     183 
CLXII.  Luke  xv.  4-6—  THE   GOOD  SHEP 

HERD  IN  THREE  POSITIONS  ,  .189 


CONTENTS.  IX 

CHAP.  PAGB 

CLXI1I.  Luke  xix.  5. — MUST  HE?    ...  195 
CLXI V.  Luke  xxii.  19,  20.— THE  ORDAINED 

MEMORIAL 199 

CLXV.   Luke  xxii.  27. — SERVUS  SERVORUM  204 
CLXVI.  Luke  xxiii.  34. — u  FATHER,  FOR 
GIVE  THEM."     210 

CLXVII.  Luke  xxiv.  36.— A  DIVINE  VISI 
TATION  216 

CLXVIII.  Luke  xxiv.  50.— OUR  LORD'S  AT 
TITUDE  IN  ASCENSION     ....  222 
CLX1X.  John  i.  29.— THE  BAPTISTS  MES 
SAGE     228 

CLXX.  John  i.  47. — THE  ISRAELITE  INDEED  234 
CLXXI.  John  iv.  G. — JESUS  SITTING  ON  THE 

WELL 240 

CLXXI  I.  John  iv.  11.— THE  SOURCE.     .     .  246 

CLXXIII.  John  v.  9.— SABBATH-WORK,     .     .  252 

CLXXIV.  John  vii.  11.—"  WHERE  is  HE?"  257 
CLXXV.  John  vii.  43. — CHRIST  THE  CAUSE 

OF  DIVISION 263 

CLXXVI.  John    viii.    37. — PLACE    FOR    THE 

WORD 269 

CLXXVII.  John  ix.  31.— TRUE  AND  NOT  TRUE  275 

CLXXVIII.  John  x.  9.— THE  DOOR  ....  281 
CLXXIX.  John  x.  22,  23.— THE  LORD  IN  OUR 

ASSEMBLIES 286 

CLXXX.  John  xiv.  28.— LOVE'S  IMPORTANCE  291 

CLXXXI.  John  xiv.  31.— A  WATCHWORD     .  297 
CLXXXII.  John    xix.     14.— "BEHOLD   YOUR 

KING!" 303 

CLXXXIII.  John    xx.  15.— A  HANDKERCHIEF  308 


X  CONTENTS. 

CHAP.  PACK 

CLXXXIV.  John  xx.  17.— NOLI  ME  TANGERE  314 
CLXXXV.  John   xx.    27.— SIGNS    AND    EVI 
DENCES  320 

CLXXXVL  John    xx.     29.— FAITH    WITHOUT 

SIGHT        325 

CLXXXVII.  Acts  ii.  24. — BONDS  WHICH  COULD 

NOT  HOLD 331 

CLXXXVIII.  Acts  ii.  37.— LIFE-WOUNDS  .     .     .  335 

CLXXXIX.  Acts  iv.  14.— THE  GOLDEN  MUZZLE  341 

CXC.  Acts  vii.  13.—"  THE  SECOND  TIME  "  347 

CXCI.  Acts  vii.  58.— STEPHEN  AND  SAUL.  353 

CXCII.  Acts  xiii.  26.— "To  You  "...  359 

CXCIII.  Acts  xix.  18-20.— GROWING   AND 

PREVAILING 365 

CXC IV.  Acts  xx vi.  14. — THE  Ox  AND  THE 

GOAD 371 

CXCV.  Acts  xxviii.  2.— KINDLING  A  FIRE  377 


MY   SERMON-NOTES. 


cxxx. 

"  IF  THOU  BE  THE  SON  OK  GOD." — Matthew  iv.  3. 

THERE  is  no  sin  in  being  tempte<l ;  for  the  per' 
feet  Jesus  "was  in  all  points  tempted  like  we 
are:"  Heb.  iv.  15. 

Temptation  does  not  necessitate  sinning ;  for  of 
Jesus,  when  tempted,  we  read, — "  yet  without  sin." 

Not  even  the  worst  forms  of  it  involve  sin:  for 
Jesus  endured  without  sin  the  subtlest  of  tempta 
tions,  from  the  evil  one  himself. 

It  may  be  needful  for  us  to  be  tempted — - 

For  test.     Sincerity,  faith,  love,  patience,  are 

thus  put  to  proof. 

For  growth.     Temptation  developes  and  in 
creases  our  graces. 
For  usefulness.     We  become  able  to  comfort 

and  warn  others. 

For  victory.     How  glorious  to  overcome  the 
arch-enemy ! 


12  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

For   God's  glory.     He  vanquishes  Satan   by 

feeble  men. 
Solitude  will  not  prevent  temptation. 

It  may  even  aid  it.    Jesus  was  tempted  in  the 

wilderness. 
Nor  will  fasting  and  prayer  always  keep  off  the 

tempter ;  for  these  had  been  fully  used  by 

our  Lord. 
Satan  knows  how  to  write  prefaces:  our  text  is 

one. 
He  began  the  whole  series  of  his  temptations 

by  a  doubt  cast   upon   our  Lord's    Sonship, 

and  a  crafty  quotation  from  Scripture. 
He  caught  up  the  echo  of  the  Father's  word  at 

our   Lord's    baptism,   and  began   tempting 

where  heavenly  witness  ended. 
He  knew  how  to  discharge  a  double-shotted 

temptation,  and  at  once  to  suggest  doubt  and 

rebellion:  this  was  such — "Ifthou  be  the 

Son  of  God,  command,"  &c. 

I.    THE    TEMPTER    ASSAILS    WITH    AN    "  IF.'* 

1.  Not  with  point-blank  denial.     That  would  be 

too    startling.       Doubt  serves   the   Satanic 
purpose  better  than  heresy. 

2.  He  grafts  his  "if"  on  a  holy  thing.     He  makes 

the  doubt  look  like  holy  anxiety  concerning 
divine  Sonship. 

3.  He  ifs  a  plain  Scripture.     "  Thou  art  my  Son  :  " 

Ps.  ii.  7. 

4.  He  ifs  a  former  manifestation.     At  his  baptism 


SONSHIP   QUESTIONED.  13 

God  said,  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son."     Satan 
contradicts  our  spiritual  experience. 

5.  He  ifs  a  whole  life.     From  the  first  Jesus  had 

been  about  his  Father's  business  ;  yet  after 
thirty  years  his  Sonship  is  questioned. 

6.  He  ifs  inner  consciousness.     Our   Lord  knew 

that  he  was  the  Father's  Son ;  but  the  evil 
one  is  daring. 

7.  He  ifs  a  perfect  character.     Well  may  he  ques 

tion  us,  whose  faults  are  so  many. 

II.    THE    TEMPTER    AIMS    TIIE    "  IP "    AT    A    VITAL    PART. 

1.  At  our  sonship. 

In  our  Lord's  case  he  attacks  his  human  and 
divine  Sonship. 

In  our  case  he  would  make  us  doubt  mr  re 
generation. 

2.  At  our  childlike  spirit.     He  tempts  us  to  cater 

for  ourselves.      "  Command  that  these  stones 
be  made  bread." 

3.  At  our  Father's  honor.     He  tempts  us  to  doubt 

our  Father's  providence,  and  to  blame  him 
for  letting  us  hunger. 

4.  At  our  comfort  and  strength  as  members  of  the 

heavenly  family. 
By  robbing  us  of  our  sonship,  he  would  leave 

us  orphans,  and  consequently  naked,  poor 

and  miserable. 
Thus  he  would  have  us  hindered  in  prayer. 

How  could  we  say,  "  Our  Father "    if  we 

doubted  our  sonship  ?     Matthew  vi.  9. 


14  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

Thus  he  would  destroy  patience.  How  can 
we  say,  "  Father,  thy  will  be  done,"  if  we 
are  not  his  sons  ?  Luke  xxii.  42. 

Thus  he  would  lay  us  open  to  the  next  shot, 
whatever  that  might  be.  Doubt  of  sonship 
leaves  us  naked  to  the  enemy. 

III.  TlIE    TEMPTER     SUPPORTS     THAT     "  IP "     WITH     CIRCUM 

STANCES. 

1.  You  are  alone.      Would  a  Father  desert    his 

child? 

2.  You  are  in  a  desert.     Is  this  the  place  for  God's 

Heir? 

3.  You  are  with  the  wild  beasts.     Wretched  com 

pany  for  a  Son  of  God ! 

4.  You  are  an  hungered.     How  can  a  loving  Father 

let  his  perfect  Son  hunger  ? 

Put  all  these  together,  and  the  tempter's  question 
comes  home  with  awful  force  to  one  who  is  hungry, 
and  alone. 

When  we  see  others  thus  tried,  do  we  think  them 
brethren  ?  Do  we  not  question  their  sonship,  as  Job's 
friends  questioned  him  ?  What  wonder  if  we  question 
ourselves ! 

IV.  WHEN  OVERCOME,  THE  TEMPTER'S  "  IF  "  is  HELPFUL. 

1.  As  coming  from  Satan,  it  is  a  certificate  of  our 
true  descent. 

He  only  questions  truth :  therefore   we  are 
true  sons. 

He  only  leads  sons  to  doubt  thek  sonship  ; 
therefore  we  are  sons. 


SONSHIP   QUESTIONED.  15 

2.  As  overcome,  it  may  be  a  quietus  to  the  enemy 

for  years. 
It  takes  the  sting  out  of  man's  questionings 

and  suspicions  ;   for  if  we  have  answered 

the  devil  himself  we  do  not  fear  men. 
It  puts  a  sweetness  into  all  future  enjoyment 

of  OUR  FATHER. 

3.  As  past,  it  is  usually  the  prelude  to  angels  com 

ing  and  ministering  to  us,  as  in  our  Lord's 
case.  No  calm  is  so  deep  as  that  which  fol 
lows  a  great  storm.  Mark  iv.  39. 

Friend,  are  you  in  snch  relation  to  God  that  it 
would  be  worth  Satan's  while  to  raise  this 
question  with  you  ? 

Those  who  are  not  heirs  of  God  are  heirs  of  wrath. 

SELECTIONS 

What  force  there  is  often  in  a  single  monosyllable! 
What  force,  for  instance,  in  the  monosyllable  "  If," 
with  which  this  artful  address  begins  !  It  was  em 
ployed  by  Satan,  for  the  purpose  of  insinuating  into 
the  Saviour's  mind  a  doubt  of  his  being  in  reality  the 
special  object  of  his  Father's  care,  and  it  was  pro 
nounced  by  him,  as  we  may  well  suppose,  with  a 
cunning  and  malignant  emphasis.  How  different  is 
the  use  which  Jesus  makes  of  this  word  "if"  in 
those  lessons  of  Divine  instruction  and  heavenly  con 
solation,  which  he  so  frequently  delivered  to  his  dis 
ciples  when  he  was  on  earth  !  He  always  employed 
it  to  inspire  confidence  ;  never  to  excite  distrust. 
Take  a  single  instance  of  this: — "If  God  so  clothe 


16  MY 

the  grass  of  the  field,  which  to-day  is,  and  to-morrow 
is  cast  into  the  oven,  shall  he  not  much  more  clothe 
you,  O  ye  of  little  faith  ?  "  What  a  contrast  between 
this  divine  remonstrance  and  the  malicious  insinua 
tion  of  the  great  enemy  of  God  and  man  ! 

Daniel   Bagot. 

God  had  but  one  Son  without  corruption,  but  he 
had  none  without  temptation.  Such  is  Satan's  en 
mity  to  the  Father,  that  the  nearer  and  dearer  any 
child  is  to  him,  the  more  will  Satan  trouble  him,  and 
vex  him  with  temptation??.  None  so  well-beloved  as 
Christ ;  none  so  much  tempted  as  he. — Thomas  Brooks. 

Satan  doth  not  come  to  Christ  thus,  "Thou  art 
not  the  Son  of  God"  ;  or,  "That  voice  which  gave 
thee  that  testimony  was  a  lie  or  a  delusion."  No,  he 
proceeds  by  questioning,  which  might  seem  to  grant 
that  he  was  the  Son  of  God,  yet  withal  might  possi 
bly  beget  a  doubt  in  his  mind. — Richard  Gilpin. 

Oh,  this  word  "if"  !  Oh,  that  I  could  tear  it  out 
of  my  heart !  0  thou  poison  of  all  my  pleasures ! 
Thou  cold  icy  hand,  that  touchest  me  so  often,  and 
freezest  me  with  the  touch  !  "  Iff  ///  " 

Robert  Robinson. 


CXXXI. 

"  AND  HE  SAITH  UNTO  THEM,  FOLLOW  ME,  AND  I  WILL  MAKE  YOU 

FISHERS  OF  MEN." — Matthew  iv.  19. 

CONVERSION  is  most  fully  displayed  when  it 
V_^  leads  converts  to  seek  the  conversion  of  others: 
we  most  truly  follow  Christ  when  we  become  fishers 
of  men. 

The  great  question  is  not  so  much  what  we  are 
naturally,  as  what  Jesus  makes  us  by  his  grace  : 
whoever  we  may  be  of  ourselves,  we  can,  by  following 
Jesus,  be  made  useful  in  his  kingdom. 

Our  desire  should  be  to  be  men-catchers;  and  the 
way  to  attain  to  that  sacred  art  is  to  be  ourselves 
thoroughly  captured  by  the  great  Head  of  the  Col 
lege  of  Fishermen.  When  Jesus  draws  us  we  shall 
draw  men. 

I.   SOMETHING  TO  BE  BONE  BY  us.      "  Follow  me." 

1.  We  must  be  separated  to  him,    that   we    may 

pursue  his  object. 
We  cannot  follow  him  unless  we  leave  others. 

Matthew  vi.  24. 
We  must  belong  to  him,  that  his  design  may 

be  our  design. 

2.  We  must  abide  with  him,  that  we  may  catch 

his  spirit. 

2  (17) 


18  MY   SERMOIST-TJOTES. 

The  closer  our  communion  with  Christ,  the 
greater  our  power  with  souls.  Near  follow 
ing  means  full  fellowship. 

3.  We   must  obey  him,  that   we  may   learn   his 

method. 

Teach  what  he  taught.     Matthew  xxviii.   20. 
Teach  as  he  taught.     Matthew  xi.  29 ;  1  Thes- 

salonians  ii.  7. 
Teach  such  as  he  taught,  namely,  the  poor, 

the  base,  children,  etc. 

4.  We  must  believe  him,  that  we  may  believe  true 

doctrine. 

Christ's  own  teaching  catches  men  ;  let  us  re 
peat  it. 

Faith  in  Jesus  on  our  part  is  a  great  force  to 
beget  faith. 

5.  Wo  must  copy  his  life,  that  we  may  win  his 

blessing  from  God  ;  for  God  blesses  those 
who  are  like  his  Son. 

II.  SOMETHING  TO  BE  DONE  BY  HIM.      "I  will  make  you." 
Our  following  Jesus  secures  our  education  for  soul- 
winning. 

1.  By  our  following  Jesus  he  works  conviction  and 

conversion  in  men  :  he  uses  our  example  as 
a  means  to  this  end. 

2.  By  our  discipleship  the  Lord  makes  us  fit  to  be 

used. 
True    soul-winners   are   not    self-made,     but 

Christ-made. 
The  making  of  men-catchers  is  a  high  form  of 

creation. 


THE  MAKING   OF   MEA-CATCHERS.  19 

3.  By  our  personal  experience  in  following  Jesus 

he  instructs  us  till  we  become  proficient  in 
the  holy  art  of  soul- winning. 

4.  By  inward  monitions  he  guides  us  what,  when, 

and  where  to  speak. 

These  must  be  followed  up  carefully  if  we 
would  win  men. 

5.  By  his  Spirit  he  qualifies  us  to  reach  men. 

The  Spirit  comes  to  us  by  our  keeping  close 
to  Christ. 

6.  By  his  secret  working  on  men's  hearts  he  speeds 

us  in  our  work. 

He  makes  us  true  fishers  by  inclining  men  to 
enter  the  gospel  net. 

III.  A  FIGURE  INSTRUCTING  us.     "  Fislicrs  of  men." 
The  man  who  saves  souls  is  like  a  fisher  upon  the 
sea. 

1.  A  fisher  is  dependent  and  trustful. 

2.  He  is  diligent  and  persevering. 

3.  He  is  intelligent  and  watchful. 

4.  He  is  laborious  and  self-denying. 

5.  He  is  daring,  and  is  riot  afraid  to  venture  upon 

a  dangerous  sea. 

6.  He  is  successful.     He  is  no  fisher  who   never 

catches  anything. 

See  the  ordination  of  successful  ministers.  They 
are  made,  not  born  ;  made  by  God,  and  not  by  mere 
human  training. 

See  how  we  can  partake  in  the  Lord'.*  work,  and 


20  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

be  specimens  of  his  workmanship  :  "  Follow  me,  and 
I  will  make  you." 

HOOKS. 

I  love  your  meetings  for  prayer,  you  cannot  have 
too  ro any  of  them  :  but  we  must  work  while  we  pray, 
and  pray  while  we  work.  1  would  rather  see  a  man, 
who  has  been  saved  from  the  gulf  below,  casting  life 
lines  to  others  struggling  in  the  maelstrom  of  death, 
than  on  his  knees  on  that  rock  thanking  God  for  his 
own  deliverance  ;  because  I  believe  God  will  accept 
action  for  others  as  the  highest  possible  expression 
of  gratitude  that  a  saved  soul  can  offer. — Thomas 
Guthrie. 

Ministers  are  fishers.  A  busy  profession,  a  toil 
some  calling,  no  idle  man's  occupation,  as  the  vulgar 
conceive  it,  nor  needless  trade,  taken  up  at  last  to 
pick  a  living  out  of.  Let  God's  fishermen  busy  them 
selves  as  they  must,  sometimes  in  preparing,  some 
times  in  mending,  sometimes  in  casting  abroad, 
sometimes  in  drawing  in  the  net,  that  they  may 
"  separate  the  precious  from  the  vile,"  etc.  Jeremiah 
xv.  1 9,  Matthew  xiii.  48  ;  and  no  man  shall  have  just 
cause  to  twit  them  with  idleness,  or  to  say  they  have 
an  easy  life. — John  Trapp. 

The  minister  is  a  fisherman.  As  such  he  must  fit 
himself  for  his  employment.  If  some  fish  will  bite 
only  by  day,  he  must  fish  by  day  ;  if  others  will  bite 
only  by  moonlight,  he  must  fish  for  them  by  moon- 
t. — Richard  Cecil. 


THE  MAKING   OF  MEN-CATCHERS.  21 

I  watched  an  old  man  trout-fishing  the  other  day, 
pulling  them  out  one  after  another  briskly.  "  You 
manage  it  cleverly,  old  friend,"  I  said:  <£I  have 
passed  a  good  many  below  who  don't  seem  to  be  do 
ing  anything."  The  old  man  lifted  himself  up  and 
stuck  his  rod  in  the  ground.  "  Well,  you  see,  Sir, 
there  be  three  rules  for  trout-fishing,  and  'tis  no  good 
trying  if  you  don't  mind  them.  The  first  is,  Keep 
yourself  out  of  sight ;  and  the  second  is,  Keep  your 
self  farther  out  of  sight  ;  and  the  third  is,  Keep  your 
self  farther  still  out  of  sight.  Then  you'll  do  it." 
"  Good  for  catching  men,  too,"  thought  I. — Mark  Guy 
Pearse. 

Lord,  speak  to  me,  that  I  may  speak 

In  living  echoes  of  thy  tone  : 
As  thou  bast  sought,  HO  let  me  seek 

Thy  erring  children,  lost  and  lone. 

O  lead  me,  Lord,  that  I  may  lead 

The  wandering  and  the  wayward  feet; 

O  feed  me,  Lord,  that  I  may  feed 

Thy  hungering  ones  with  manna  sweet. 

0  strengthen  me,  that  while  I  stand 
Firm  on  the  Rock,  and  strong  in  thee, 

1  may  stretch  out  a,  loving  hand 

To  wrestlers  with  the  troubled  sea. 

O  teach  me,  Lord,  that  I  may  teach 
The  precious  tilings  thou  dost  impart; 

And  wing  my  words,  that  they  may  reach 
The  hidden  depths  of  many  a  heart. 

F.  R.  Havergal. 

The  best  training  for  a  soul-saving  minister  is 
precisely  that  which  he  would  follow  if  his  sole  ob- 


22  MY   SEKMON-KOTES. 

ject  were  to  develop  the  character  of  Christ  in  him 
self.  The  better  the  man,  the  more  powerful  will  his 
preaching  become.  As  he  grows  like  Jesus,  he  will 
preach  like  Jesus.  Given  like  purity  of  motive,  ten 
derness  of  heart,  and  clearness  of  faith,  and  you  will 
have  like  force  of  utterance.  The  direct  road  to  suc 
cess  in  saving*  souls  is  to  become  like  the  Saviour. 
The  imitation  of  Christ  is  the  true  art  of  sacred  rhe 
toric.—  a  H.  s. 

Mr.  Jesse  relates  that  certain, fish  give  preference 
to  bait  that  has  been  perfumed.  When  the  prince 
of  evil  goes  forth  in  quest  of  victims,  there  does  not 
need  much  allurement  added  to  the  common  tempt 
ations  of  life  to  make  them  effective.  Fishers  of  men, 
however,  do  well  to  employ  all  the  skill  they  can  to 
suit  the  minds  and  tastes  of  those  whom  they  seek  to 
gain. — G.  McMicJiad. 


cxxxn. 

"NOT  EVERY  ONE  THAT  SAITH  UNTO  ME,  LORD,  LORD,  SHALL 
ENTER  INTO  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HEAVEN;  BUT  HE  THAT  DOETH 
THE  WILL  OF  MY  FATHER  WHICH  18  IN  HEAVEN. 

"  MANY  WILL  SAY  TO  ME  IN  THAT  DAY,  LORD,  LORD,  HAVE  WE 

NOT  PROPHESIED  IN  THY  NAME  ?  AND  IN  THY  NAME  HAVE  CAST 
OUT  DEVILS?  AND  IN  THY  NAME  DONE  MANY  WONDERFUL 
WORKS  ? 

"AND  THEN  WILL  I  PROFESS  UNTO  THEM,  I  NEVER  KNEW  YOU: 
DEPART  FROM  ME,  YE  THAT  WORK  INIQUITY." — Matthew  vii. 
21-23. 

ONE  of  the  best  tests  of  everything  is  how  it  \vill 
appear  in  the  moment  of  death,  in  the  morning 
of  resurrection,  and  at  the  day  of  judgment.  Our 
Lord  gives  us  a  picture  of  persons  as  they  will  appear 
"  in  that  day." 

Eiches,  honors,  pleasures,  successes,  self-congra 
tulations,  etc.,  should  all  be  set  in  the  light  of  "  that 
day." 

This  test  should  especially  be  applied  to  all  relig 
ious  professions  and  exercises  ;  for  "  that  day"  will 
try  these  things  as  with  fire. 

The  persons  here  depicted  in  judgment-light  were 
not  gross  and  open  sinners ;  but  externally  they  were 
excellent. 

I.  THEY  WENT  A  LONG  WAY  IN  RELIGION. 

1.  They  made  an   open    profession.     They    said, 
"  Lord,  Lord." 

(23) 


24  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

2.  They  undertook  Christian  service,  and  that  of  a 

high  class  :  they  habitually  prophesied  and 
worked  miracles. 

3.  They  had  obtained  remarkable  success. 

Devils  had  owned  their  power. 

4.  They  were  noted  for  their  practical  energy. 

They  had   done  many  wonders :    they  were 
active  in  many  ways. 

They  had  done  wonders.  Astonished  every 
body. 

5.  They  were  diligently  orthodox. 

They  did  everything  in  the  name  of  Christ. 
The  words  "  Thy  name"  are  mentioned  three 
times. 

II.  THEY  KEPT  IT  UP  A  LONG  WHILE. 

1.  They  were  not  silenced  by  men. 

No  one  discovered  their  falsehood,  or  detect 
ed  their  inconsistency. 

2.  They  were  not  openly  disowned  by  the  Lord 

himself  during  life. 

3.  They  were  not  made  a  laughing-stock  by  being 

left  to  use  the  holy  name  without  result. 
Actsxix.  13-17. 
Devils  were  cast  out. 

4.  They  expected  to  enter  the  Kingdom,  and  they 

clung  to  that  false  hope  to  the  last. 
They  dared  to  say,  "Lord,  Lord,"  to  Christ 
himself,  at  the  last. 

III.  THEY  WERE  FATALLY  MISTAKEN. 

1.  Their  tongue  was  belied  by  their  hand.     They 


THE  DISOWNED.  25 

said,  "Lord,  Lord,"  but  did  not  do  the  will 
of  the  Father. 

2.  They  used  the  name  which  is  named  by  disci 

ples,  but  did  not  possess  the  nature  of  obe 
dient  servants.  Luke  vi.  46. 

3.  They  prophesied,  but  did  not  pray. 

4.  They  cast  out  devils,  but  the  devil  was  not  cast 

out  of  them. 

5.  They  attended  to  marvels,  but  not  to  essentials. 

6.  They  wrought  wonders,  but  were  also  workers 

of  iniquity. 

IV.  THEY  FOUND  IT  OUT  IN  A  TERRIBLE  WAY. 

They  had  the  information  from  the  mouth  of  him 
whom  they  called  Lord.  Here  let  us  carefully  no 
tice — 

1.  The  solemnity  of  what  he  said.     "  I  never  knew 

you."  He  had  been  omitted  from  their  re 
ligion.  What  an  oversight ! 

2.  The  terror  of  what  it  implied  :  they  must  de 

part  from  all  hope,  and  continue  for  ever 
to  depart. 

3.  The  awful  truth  of  what  he  said.     They  were 

utter  strangers  to  his  heart.  He  had  not 
chosen  them,  nor  communed  with  them, 
nor  approved  them,  nor  cared  for  them. 

4.  The  solemn   fixedness   of  what   he   said.     His 

sentence  would  never  be  recalled,  altered, 
or  ended.  It  stood,  "depart  from  me." 

Brethren,  the  Lord  cannot  say  to  some  of  us  that 


26  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

he  does  not  know  us,  for  he  has  often  heard  our 
voices,  and  answered  our  requests. 
He  has  known  us — 

In  repentance,  seeking  mercy,  and  receiv 
ing  it. 

In  gratitude,  blessing  his  gracious  name. 

In  adversity,  looking  for  his  aid,  and  enjoy 
ing  it. 

In  reproach,  owning  his  cause  under  ridi 
cule. 

In  difficulty,  seeking  help  and  safety  under 
his  wing. 

In  love,  enjoying  happy  fellowship  with  him. 

In  these  and  many  other  ways  he  knows  us. 

Professor,  does  Jesus  know  you  ?  The  church 
knows  you,  the  school  knows  you,  the  world  knows 
you  ;  does  Jesus  know  you  ? 

Come  unto  him,  ye  strangers,  and  find  eternal  life 
in  him. 

WARNINGS. 

In  many  simple  works  God  is  more  seen  than  in 
wonderful  works.  The  Pharisee  at  heaven's  gate 
says,  u  Lord,  I  have  done  many  wonderful  works  in 
thy  name  ";  but,  alas  !  has  he  ever  made  the  Lord's 
name  wonderful? — T.  T.  Lynch. 

Pollok  describes  the  hypocritical  professor  as — 

"  The  man  that  stole  the  livery  of  heaven 
To  serve  the  devil  in.'' 


THE  DISOWNED  27 

I  knew  you  well  enough  for  "black  sheep,"  or, 
rather,  for  reprobate  goats :  I  knew  you  for  hirelings 
and  hypocrites,  but  I  never  knew  you  with  a  special 
knowledge  of  love,  delight,  and  complacency.  I 
never  acknowledged,  approved,  and  accepted  of  your 
persons  and  performances.  See  Psalm  i.  6;  Romans 
xi.  2. — John  Trapp 

Not  "I  once  knew  you,  but  cannot  own  you  now  " ; 
but  "  I  never  knew  you; — as  real  penitents,  suppliants 
for  pardon,  humble  believers,  true  followers." 

E.  E.  Conder. 

Note  our  Lord's  open  confession  before  men  and 
angels,  and  specially  to  the  men  themselves — "  I 
never  knew  you."  I  knew  about  you  ;  I  knew  that 
you  professed  great  things;  but  you  had  no  acquain 
tance  with  me ;  and  whatever  you  knew  about  me,  you 
did  not  know  me.  I  was  not  of  your  company,  and 
did  not  know  you.  Had  he  once  known  them,  lie 
would  not  have  forgotten  them. 

Those  who  accept  his  invitation,  "Come unto  me," 
shall  never  hear  him  say,  "  Depart  from  me." 
Workers  of  iniquity  may  now  come  to  the  Saviour 
for  mercy ;  but  if  they  set  up  a  hope  of  their  own,  and 
ignore  the  Saviour,  he  will  bid  them  depart  to  en 
dure  the  rigors  of  his  justice.  Is  it  not  striking 
that  preachers,  casters-out  of  devils,  and  doers  of 
wonders,  may  yet  be  workers  of  iniquity  ?  They  may 
work  miracles  in  Christ's  name,  and  yet  have  neither 
part  nor  lot  in  him. — G.  II.  S. 


28  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

"  Depart  from  me" — a  fearful  sentence,  a  terrible 
separation.  "From  me,"  saith  Christ,  that  made 
myself  man  for  your  sakes,  that  offered  my  blood  for 
your  redemption.  "  From  me,"  that  invited  you  to 
mercy,  and  you  would  not  accept  it.  "  From  me," 
that  purchased  a  kingdom  of  glory  for  such  as  be 
lieved  on  me,  and  have  resolved  to  honor  their 
heads  with  crowns  of  eternal  joy.  "  Depart  from 
me : "  from  my  friendship,  my  fellowship,  my  para 
dise,  my  presence,  my  heaven. — Thomas  Adams. 


CXXXIII. 

•  AND  JKSUS  SAITII  UNTO  HIM,  I  WILL  COME  AND  HEAL  HIM." 
Matthew  viii.  7. 

"SAY     IN     A     WORD,    AND     MY     SERVANT     SHAI>L    BK     IIEAJLKD." 

Luke  vii.  7. 


centurion  who  cared  for  the  religious  wel- 
-*-  fare  of  the  people,  and  built  them  a  synagogue, 
had  also  a  heart  of  compassion  for  the  sick.  It  is 
well  when  public  generosity  is  sustained  by  domestic 
kindness. 

This  servant  was  his  boy,  and  perhaps  his  slave  ; 
but  he  was  dear  to  him.  A  good  master  makes  a 
good  servant. 

It  is  well  when  all  ranks  are  united  in  sympathy: 
captain  and  page  are  here  united  in  affection. 

The  master  showed  his  affection  by  seeking  help. 
Heart  and  hand  should  go  together.  Let  us  not  love 
in  word  only. 

It  is  well  that  the  followers  of  Jesus  should  be 
ready  to  help  all  sick  folk;  and  that  healing  should 
be  still  associated  with  prayer  to  Jesus. 

Mark  the  growingly  manifest  faith  of  the  centu 
rion,  and  the  growing  manifestation  of  Jesus. 

Centurion  sends  elders  with  request  to  "  come 
and  heal."     Jesus  will  come  and  heal. 

(29) 


30  MY   SERMON -:NTOTES. 

Centurion  comes  himself  asking  for  "a  word.** 

Jesus  gives  the  word,  and  the  deed  is  done. 

We  see  in  this  passage  a  miracle  in  the  physical 

world,  and  are  thereby  taught  what  our  Lord  Jesus 

can  do  in  the  spiritual  world. 

Let  us  imitate  the  centurion  in  seeking  to  Jesus 
about  others. 

We  learn  from  the  narrative — 

I.    THE    PERFECT    READINESS    OF    CHRIST. 

1.  He  did  not  debate  with  the  elders  of  the  Jews, 

and  show  the  weakness  of  their  plea, — "  He 
was  worthy:"  Luke  vii.  4,  5. 

2.  He  cheerfully  granted  their  request,  although  it 

was  needless  for  him  to  come.     "Then  Jesus 
went  with  them:"  Luke  vii.  6. 

3.  He  did  not  raise  a  question  about  the  change 

which  the  centurion  proposed,  although  he 
Avas  already  on  the  road.     Luke  vii.  6. 

4.  He  did  not  suspect  the  good  man's  motive,  as 

some  might  have  done.     He  read  his  heart 
and  saw  his  true  humility. 

5.  He  did  not  demur  to  the  comparison  of  himself 

to  a  petty  officer.     Our  Lord  is  never  cap 
tious  ;  but  takes  our  meaning. 

6.  He  promptly  accepted  the  prayer  and  the  faith 

of  the  centurion,  gave  the  boon,  and  gave  it 
as  desired. 

Our  Lord's  love  to  sinners,  his  forgetfulness  of 
self,  his  willingness  to  please  us,  and  his  eagerness  to 
fulfil  his  own  mission,  should  encourage  us  in  prayer 
to  him  for  ourselves  and  others. 


THY   WORD   SUFFICES   ME.  31 

II.  THE  CONSCIOUS  ABILITY  OF  CHRIST. 

1.  He  is  not  puzzled  with  the  case.     It  was  singu 

lar  for  the  servant  to  be  at  once  paralyzed 
and  tormented  ;  but  whatever  the  disease 
may  be,  the  Lord  says  u  I  will  come  and 
heal  him." 

2.  He  is  not  put  in  doubt  by  the  extreme  danger 

of  the  servant.  No,  he  will  come  to  him, 
though  he  hears  that  he  is  stricken  down, 
and  is  utterly  prostrate. 

3.  He  speaks  of  healing  as  a  matter  of  course. 

His  coming  will  ensure  the  cure:  "come  and 
heal." 

4.  He  treats  the  method  of  procedure  as  of  no  con 

sequence. 

He  will  come  or  he  will  not  come,  but  will 
"  say  in  a  word  ; "  yet  the  result  will  be  the 
same. 

5.  He  wonders  more  at  the  centurion's  faith  than 

at  the  cure. 

Omnipotent  grace  moves  with  majestic  ease. 
We  are  worried  and  fretted,  but  the  Lord  is  not. 
Let  us  thus  be  encouraged  to  hope. 

III.  THE    ABIDING    METHOD    OF  CHRIST. 

He  is  accustomed  to  heal  by  his  Word  through 
faith.  Signs  and  wonders  are  temporary,  and  an 
swer  a  purpose  for  an  occasion ;  but  both  faith  and 
the  Word  of  the  Lord  are  matters  for  all  time. 

Our  Lord  did  not  in  the  case  before  us  put  in  a  per 


32  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

sonal  appearance,  but  spake,  and  it  was  done  ;  *and 
this  he  does  in  our  own  day. 

1.  This  is  coming  back  to  the  original  form  of 

working  in  creation. 

It  is  apparently  a  greater  miracle  than  work 
ing  by  visible  presence  ;  at  any  rate,  the 
means  are  less  seen. 

2.  This  method  suits  true  humility,    We  do  not  de 

mand  signs  and  wonders  ;  the  Word  is 
enough  for  us.  Luke  vii.  7. 

3.  This  pleases  great  faith  ;  for  the  Word  is  faith's 

chosen  manifestation  of  God.  It  rejoices 
more  in  the  Word  than  in  all  things  visible. 
Psalm  cxix.  162. 

4.  This    is    perfectly   reasonable.     Should  not   a 

word  of  command  from  God  be  enough  ? 
Mark  the  centurion's  reasoning.  Matt, 
viii.  9. 

5.  This  is  sure  to  succeed.     Who  can  resist   the 

divine  .fiat  ?  In  our  own  case,  all  we  need 
is  a  word  from  the  Lord. 

6.  This  must  be  confidently  relied  on  for  others. 

Let  us  use  the  Word,  and  pray  the  Lord  to 
make  it  his  own  word. 

Henceforth,  let  us  go  forward  in  his  name,  relying 
upon  his  Word ! 

INSERTIONS. 

Had  the  centurion's  roof  been  heaven  itself,  it 
could  not  have  been  worthy  to  be  come  under  of  him 
whose  word  was  almighty,  and  who  was  the  Al- 


THY  WORD   SUFFICES  ME.  33 

mighty  "Word  of  his  Father.  Such  is  Christ  confess 
ed  to  be  by  him  that  says,  "only  say  the  word." 
None  but  a  divine  power  is  unlimited:  neither  hath 
faith  any  other  bounds  than  God  himself.  There 
needs  no  footing  to  remove  mountains,  or  devils,  but 
a  word.  Do  but  say  the  word,  0  Saviour,  my  sin  shall 
be  remitted,  my  soul  shall  be  healed,  my  body  shall 
be  raised  from  dust,  and  both  soul  and  body  shall  be 
glorified. — Bishop  Hall. 

"  I  have  been  informed,"  says  Tlervey,  "  that  when 
the  Elector  of  Hanover  was  declared  by  the  Parliament 
of  Great  Britain  successor  to  the  vacant  throne,  sev 
eral  persons  of  distinction  waited  upon  his  Highness, 
to  make  timely  application  for  valuable  preferments. 
Several  requests  of  this  nature  were  granted,  and 
confirmed  by  a  kind  of  promissory  note.  One  gen 
tleman  solicited  the  Mastership  of  the  .Rolls.  Being 
indulged  in  his  desire,  ho  was  offered  the  sumo  con 
firmation  which  had  been  vouchsafed  to  other  suc 
cessful  petitioners  ;  upon  which  he  seemed  to  be 
overcome  by  grateful  confusion  and  surprise,  and 
begged  that  he  might  not  put  the  royal  donor  to  such 
unnecessary  trouble,  protesting  that  he  looked  upon 
His  Highness's  word  as  the  best  ratification  of  his 
suit.  With  this  compliment  the  Elector  was  not  a 
little  pleased.  'This  gentleman,'  he  said,  'treats  me 
like  a  king  ;  and,  whoever  is  disappointed,  he  shall 
certainly  be  gratified.* " 

Our  Lord  can  cure  either  by  coming  or  by  speak 
ing.  Let  us  not  dictate  to  him  the  way  in  which  he 


34  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

shall  bless  us.  If  we  were  permitted  a  choice,  we 
ought  not  to  select  that  method  which  makes  most 
show,  but  that  in  which  there  is  least  to  be  seen  and 
heard,  yet  most  to  be  admired.  Comparatively,  signs 
and  wonders  show  less  of  him  than  his  bare  Word, 
which  he  has  magnified  above  all  his  name.  Mar 
vels  dazzle,  but  the  Word  enlightens.  That  faith 
which  sees  least  sees  most,  and  that  which  hath  no 
eyes  at  all  for  the  visible  hath  a  thousand  eyes  for  the 
invisible.  Lord,  come  in  thy  glory,  and  bless  me,  if 
such  be  thy  will  ;  but  if  thou  wilt  stay  where  thou 
art,  and  bless  me  only  through  thy  will  and  Word,  I 
will  be  as  well  content,  and  even  more  so  if  this 
method  the  more  honors  thee  ! — C.  H.  £ 


CXXXIV. 


AS  JESUS  PASSED  FORTH  FROM  THENCE,  HE  SAW  A 
NAMED  MATTHEW,  SITTING  AT  THE  RECEIPT  OF  CUSTOM  :  AND 
HE  SAITH  UNTO  HIM,  FOLLOW  ME.  AND  HE  AROSE,  AND  FOL 
LOWED  HIM."  —  Matthew  ix.  9. 

TV  yf  ATTHEW  is  here  writing  about  himself.  Note 
•*•*•*•  his  modesty  in  the  expression  —  "a  man,  named 
Matthew,"  and  his  omission  of  the  fact  that  the  least 
mentioned  in  verse  10  was  held  i:i  his  own  house. 

The  story  is  placed  immediately  after  a  miracle,  as 
if  to  hint  that  Matthew's  conversion  v.-.-is  a  miracle. 

There  are  points  of  similarity  between  the  miracle 
and  the  conversion. 

Matthew  was  spiritually  palsied  by  his  sin,  tMvdhis 
money-making  ;  hence  he  needed  the  divin"  com 
mand,  "  Arise,  and  walk." 

There  may  be  points  of  likeness  also  between 
Matthew's  personal  story  and  our  own.  These  may 
be  profitably  considered. 

I.    IIlS    CALL    SEEMED    ACCIDENTAL    AND    UNLIKELY. 

Jesus  had  often  been  at  Capernaum,  which  lie  had 
selected  to  be  "  his  own  city  ;  "  and  yet  Mat 
thew  remained  unsaved.  Was  it  likely  that 
he  would  now  be  called  ?  Had  not  his  day 
of  grace  closed  ? 

(35) 


36  MY   SEEMON-JNOiES. 

Jesus  was  about  other  business  ;  for  we  read,  "  as 

Jesus  passed  forth  from  thence."     Would 

he  now  be  likely  to  call  Matthew? 
Jesus  left  many  other  persons  uncalled;  was  it  not 

highly  probable  that  the  tax-gatherer  would 

be  passed  by  ? 
Yet   Jesus  called   to    himself  this  "man,  named 

Matthew,"  while  many  another  man  had  no 

such  special  call. 
"  Ho  saw  a  man,  named  Matthew,"  for  he  foresaw 

him. 

He  knew  him,  for  he  foreknew  him. 
In  all  which  there  is  a  parallel  between  Matthew 

and  ourselves. 

II.    HlS     CALL    WAS    ALTOGETHER     UNTHOUGHT     OP    AND      UN 
SOUGHT. 

1.  He  was  in  a  degrading  business.     None  but  the 

lowest  of  the  Jews  would  care  to  gather  tax 
es  for  the  Roman  conqueror.  His  disciple- 
ship  would  bring  no  honor  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 

2.  He  was  in  an  ensnaring  business.     The  publi 

cans  usually  made  a  personal  profit  by  ex 
torting  more  than  was  due.  He  was  not 
paying  away,  but  sitting  "  at  the  receipt  of 
custom  ;  and  this  is  a  pleasing  exercise.K 
Money  is  bird-lime  to  the  soul. 

3.  He  would  not  have  dared  to  follow  Jesus,  even 

if  he  had  wished  to  do  so.  He  felt  himself 
to  be  too  unworthy. 

4.  He  would  have  been  repulsed  by  the  other  dig- 


"A  MAN  NAMED  MATTHEW."  37 

ciples  had  he  proposed  to  come  without  the 
•      Lord's  open  invitation. 

5.  He  Diade  no  sign  in  the  direction  of  Jesus. 
No  prayer  was  offered  by  him,  nor  wish  ex 
pressed  toward  better  things. 

The  call  was  of  pure  grace,  as  it  is  written,  •'  I  am 
found  of  them  that  sought  mo  not." 

III.  HlS     CALL      WAS     GIVEN'     IJY     THE     LORD,      with     FULL 

KNOWLEDGE    OF    Hill. 

Jesus  "  saw  a  man,  named  Matthew,"  and  he  called 
him. 

1.  He  saw  all  the  evil  that  had  been  in  him,  and 

was  yet  there. 

2.  He  saw  his  adaptation  for  holy  service,  as  a  re 

corder  and  penman. 

3.  He  saw  all  that  he  meant  to  make  of  him. 

4.  He  saw  in  him  his  chosen,  his  redeemed,  his 

convert,  his  disciple,  his   apostle,   his    bio 
grapher. 

The  Lord  calls  as  he  pleases,  but  he  sees  what  he  is 
doing.  Sovereignty  is  not  blind :  but  acts  with 
boundless  wisdom. 

IV.  HlS    CALL    WAS    GRACIOUSLY    CONDESCENDING. 

The  Lord  called  "  a  man,  named  Matthew," — that 

was  his  best. 
He  was  a  publican — that  may  not  have  been  his 

worst. 
He  allowed  such  a  sinner  to  be  his  personal  attend- 


38  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

ant ;  yea,  called  him  to  that  honor,  saying, 
"  Follow  me." 

He  allowed  him  to  do  this  immediately,  without 
putting  him  into  quarantine.  He  was  to 
follow  the  Lord  there  and  then. 

V.  HlS    CALL    WAS    SUBLIMELY    SIMPLE. 

1.  Few  were  the  words  :  "  Follow  me." 

It  is  very  tersely  recorded,  "  He  saw  ...  he 
saith  ...  he  arose." 

2.  Clear  was  the  direction  :   "  Follow  me." 

3.  Personal  was  the  address  :    "He  saith untohim" 

4.  Royal  was  the  command  :   "He  saith." 

VI.  HlS    CALL    WAS    IMMEDIATELY    EFFECTUAL. 

1.  Matthew  followed  at  once.     "  He  arose,  and  fol 

lowed  him." 

2.  lie  followed  spiritually  as  well  as  literally.     He 

became  a  sincere,  devout,  earnest,  intelligent 
disciple. 

3.  He   followed  wholly  :   bringing  his  voice  and 

his  pen  with  him. 

4.  lie  followed  growingly,  more  and  more. 

5.  He   followed   ever   after,    never    deserting  his 

Leader. 

What  a  call  was  this  !  None  could  have  given  it 
but  the  Lord. 

VI I.  IIlS  CALL  WAS  A  DOOR  OF  HOPE  FOR  OTHERS. 

1.  His   salvation   encouraged    other  publicans  to 

come  to  Jesus. 

2.  His  open  house  gave  opportunity  to  his  friends 

to  hear  Jesus. 


"A   MAN  NAMED   MATTHEW.'  39 

3.  His   personal   ministry  brought  others  to  the 

Saviour. 

4.  His  written  gospel  has  convinced  many,  and 

will  always  do  so. 

Are  you  up  to  your  neck  in  business  ?  Are  you 
"  sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom  ?  "  Yet  may  a  call 
come  to  you  at  once.  It  does  come. 

Hear  it  attentively,  rise  earnestly,  and  respond 
immediately. 

GOOD  WORDS. 

God  often  calls  men  in  strange  places.  Not  in  the 
house  of  prayer,  not  under  the  preaching  of  the  Word ; 
but  when  all  these  things  have  been  absent,  and  all 
surrounding  circumstances  have  seemed  most  ad 
verse  to  the  work  of  grace,  that  grace  has  put  forth 
its  power.  The  tavern,  the  theatre,  the  ball-room, 
the  gaming-house,  the  race-course,  and  other  similar 
haunts  of  worldiness  and  sin,  have  sometimes  been 
the  scenes  of  God's  converting  grace.  As  an  old 
writer  says :  "  Our  calling  is  uncertain  in  respect  of 
place,  for  God  calls  some  from  their  ships,  and  some 
from  their  shops  ;  some  from  under  the  hedges,  and 
others  from  the  market  ;  so  that,  if  a  man  can  but 
make  out  unto  his  own  soul  that  he  is  certainly 
called,  the  time  when  and  the  place  where,  matter 
little." 

How  I  now  loved  those  words  that  spake  of  a 
Christian's  calling  !  As  when  the  Lord  said  to  one, 
"Follow  me  ;'  and  to  another,  "Come  after  me." 


40  MY   SERMON   NOTES. 

Oh  !  thought  I,  that  he  would  say  so  to  me  :  how 
gladly  would  I  run  after  him  !  I  could  seldom  read 
of  any  that  Christ  did  call,  but  I  presently  wished, 
*  Would  I  had  been  in  their  clothes !  Would  I  had 
been  born  Peter,  or  John !  "  I  often  thought,  "  Would 
I  had  heard  him  when  he  called  lliem,  how  would  I 
have  cried,  '  0  Lord,  call  me  also  ! ' '  But  I  feared 
he  would  not  call  me. — John  Bunyan. 

We  read  in  classic  story  how  the  lyre  of  Orpheus 
enchanted  with  its  music,  not  only  the  wild  beasts, 
but  the  very  trees  and  rocks  upon  Olympus,  so  that 
they  moved  from  their  places  to  follow  him;  so 
Christ,  our  heavenly  Orpheus,  with  the  music  of  his 
gracious  speech,  draws  after  him  those  less  suscep 
tible  to  benign  influences  than  beasts  and  trees  and 
stones,  even  poor,  hardened,  senseless,  sinful  souls. 
Let  him  but  strike  his  golden  harp,  and  whisper  in 
thy  heart,  "  Come,  follow  me,"  and  thou,  like  anoth 
er  Matthew,  shalt  be  won. 


CXXXY. 

"HE   WAS  MOVED  WITH   COMPASSION  ON  THEM." 

ix.  36. 


r~T1HE  expression  is  very  strong  (ea7T\ayXvia6ij.') 
•*•     All  that   was  within   him  was  stirred  by  the 
sight  which  he  beheld.     He  was  full  of  emotion,  and 
showed  it  in  his  whole  person. 

His  yearning  compassions  gathered  around  (Ttepi) 

the  people. 
Exhibit    the    picture    of   Jesus  under  strong 

emotion. 
This  is  a  portrait  of  him  as  he  appeared  on 

many  occasions. 
Indeed,  the  words  before   us   might  sum  up 

his  entire  life. 
Let  us  behold  his  compassion  as  manifestsd  in  — 

I.     TlIE  GREAT  TRANSACTIONS  OF  HIS  LIFE. 

1.  The  Eternal  Covenant,  in  its   conception,    ar 

ranging,  provisions,  &c.,  is  full  of  compass 
ion  to  men. 

2.  The  Incarnation  of  our  Lord  shows  matchless 

compassion. 

3.  His  living  in  the  flesh  among  men  declares  it. 

4.  His  bearing  the  death  penalty  is  the  highest 

fruit  of  it. 

(41) 


42  MY   SEKMON   NOTES. 

5.     His  intercession  for  sinners  proves  its  contin 
uance. 

This  is  a  wide  subject.     In  every  act  of  his  grace 
the  Lord  of  love  manifests  tender  pity  to  men. 

II.    THE  SPECIAL  INSTANCES  RECORDED  BY  THE  EVANGELISTS. 

1.  In  Matthew  xv.  32,  we  see  a  fainting  crowd, 

hungry,  &c. 
A  crowd  is  a  sad  sight :  a  crowd  when  faint,  is 

far  more  so. 
Such  crowds  are  perishing  in  our  cities  to-day. 

2.  In  Matthew  xiv.  14,  the  sick  are  most  prominent 

in  the  throng. 

Jesus  lived  in  a  vast  hospital,  himself  suffer 
ing,  as  well  as  healing,  the  diseases  of  men. 

None  can  tell  how  deep  is  his  pity  for  suffer 
ing  humanity. 

3.  In  the   case  mentioned  in  the  text  he  saw  an 

ignorant,  neglected,  perishing  crowd. 

The  sorrows,  dangers,  and  sins  of  spiritual  ig 
norance  are  great. 

The  Lord  Jesus  is  the  Shepherd  of  the  un- 
shepherded. 

4.  In  Matt.  xx.  34,  we  see  the  blind.     Jesus  pities 

spiritual  blindness. 

Dwell  upon  the  interesting  details  of  the  two 
blind  men. 

5.  In  Mark  i.  41,  we  see  the  leper.     Christ  pities 

sin-polluted  men. 

Jesus  compassionated  the  man  who  said,  "  If 
thou  wilt,  thou  canst." 


A   PORTRAIT   OF  JESUS.  43 

6.  In  Mark  v.  19,  we  have  the  demoniac.     Jesus 

pities  tempted  souls. 

The  man  out  of  whom  he  cast  a  legion  of  dev 
ils  was  to  be  dreaded,  but  the  Lord  gave 
him  nothing  but  compassion. 

He  pities  rather  than  blames  those  sore  vexed 
by  the  devil. 

7.  In  Luke  vii.   13,  we  meet  with  the  widow  of 

Nain.     The  bereaved,  the  widow  and  father 
less  are  specially  near  to  the  heart  ot  Jesus. 
These  instances  should  encourage  similar  cases  to 
hope  in  our  Lord. 

III.  THE    FORESIGHT    OF    COMPASSION. 

Knowing  our  ignorance,  needs,  sorrows,  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  provided  beforehand  for  our  wants — 

1.  The  Bible  for  our  guidance  and  comfort. 

2.  The  minister  to  speak  as  man  to  man,  tenderly, 

experim  entally. 

3.  The  Holy  Spirit  to  comfort  us,  and  help  our  in 

firmity,  in  prayer,  etc. 

4.  The  mercy-seat  as  our  constant  resort. 

5.  The  promises  to  be  our  perpetual  food. 

6.  The  ordinances  to  help  our  memories,  and  inake 

truth  vivid  to  us. 

The  whole  system  reveals  a  most  compassionate 
Saviour, 

IV.  OUR   PERSONAL  RECOLLECTIONS  PROVE  THIS  COMPASSION. 

Let  us  remember  how  tenderly  he  dealt  with.   us. 
1.   He  tempered  our  convictions  with  intervals  of 
hope. 


44  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

2.  He  ended  them  ere  they  drove  us  to  despair. 

3.  He  has  moderated  our  afflictions,  and  sustained 

us  under  them. 

4.  He  has  taught  us,  as  we  have  been  able  to  bear 

it.  "I  have  many  things  to  say  unto  you, 
but  ye  cannot  bear  them  now." 

5  He  has  put  us  to  graduated  tasks. 

6.  He  has  returned  to  us  in  love  after  our  back- 
slidings. 

Let  us  trust  in  this  divine  mercifulness  for  our 
selves. 

Let  us  commend  it  to  those  around  us. 

Let  us  imitate  it  in  dealing  compassionately  with 
our  fellows. 

TOUCHES  FOR  THE  PORTRAIT. 

The  literal  translation  is — "All  his  bowels  were 
agitated,  and  trembled  with  sympathy  and  compas 
sion."  The  ancients  believed  the  bowels  to  be  the 
seat  of  sympathy,  or  mercy.  The  Greek  word  used 
here  to  denote  compassion  is  the  most  expressive 
that  human  language  is  capable  of  employing,  inso 
much  that  our  version  utterly  fails  to  convey  the 
vastness  and  fulness  of  the  meaning  of  the  original. 

Dr.  Gumming. 

Compare  the  impression  produced  upon  Xerxes  by 
the  sight  of  his  enormous  army.  "  His  heart  swelled 
within  him  at  the  sight  of  such  a  vast  assemblage 
of  human  beings;  but  his  feelings  of  pride  and  pleas 
ure  soon  gave  way  to  sadness,  and  he  burst 


A   PORTRAIT  OF  JESUS.  45 

tears  at  the  reflection  that  in  a  hundred  years  not 
one  of  them  would  be  alive." 

How  a  tender-hearted  mother  would  plead  with  a 
judge  for  her  child  ready  to  be  condemned  !  Oh, 
how  would  her  bowels  work ;  how  would  her  tears 
trickle  down ;  what  weeping  rhetoric  would  she  use 
to  the  judge  for  mercy !  Thus  the  Lord  Jesus  is  full 
of  sympathy  and  tenderness  (Heb.  ii.  17),  that  he 
might  be  a  merciful  High  Priest.  Though  he  hath 
left  his  passion,  yet  not  his  compassion.  An  ordi 
nary  lawyer  is  not  affected  with  the  cause  he  pleads, 
nor  doth  he  care  which  way  it  goes;  profit  makes 
him  plead,  not  affection.  But  Christ  intercedes  feel 
ingly;  and  that  which  makes  him  intercede  with  af 
fection  is,  it  is  his  own  cause  which  he  pleads  in  the 
cause  of  his  people. —  Thomax  Watsau. 

"  Five  hundred  millions  of  souls,"  exclaimed  a  mis 
sionary  (many  years  ago),  "  are  represented  as  being 
unenlightened!  I  cannot,  if  I  would,  give  up  the 
idea  of  being  a  missionary,  while  1  reflect  upon  this 
vast  number  of  my  fellow-sinners,  who  are  perishing 
for  lack  of  knowledge.  'Five  hundred  millions'  in 
trudes  itself  upon  my  mind  wherever  I  go,  and  how 
ever  I  am  employed.  When  1  go  to  bed,  it  is  the 
last  thing  that  recurs  to  my  memory ;  if  I  awake  in 
the  night,  it  is  to  meditate  on  it  alone;  and  in  the 
morning  it  is  generally  the  first  thing  that  occupies 
my  thoughts." 

We  may  suppose  that  there  was  nothing  in  the  ex 
ternal  appearance  of  these  multitudes  wiiich,  to  the 


46  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

common  eye,  would  indicate  their  sad  condition. 
We  may  suppose  that  they  were  "  well-fed  and  well- 
clad,"  and  that  their  hearts,  under  the  influence  of 
numbers,  as  is  generally  the  case,  were  buoyant 
with  pleasurable  excitement  ;  that  good  humor  sun 
ned  their  countenances,  and  enlivened  their  talk,  and 
that — both  to  themselves,  and  to  the  ordinary  spec 
tator — they  were  a  happy  folk.  But  he,  who  seeth 
not  as  man  seeth,  looked  down  through  the  superfi 
cial  stream  of  pleasurable  excitement  which  now 
flowed  and  sparkled,  and  saw — What?  Intellect 
enslaved,  reason  blinded,  moral  faculties  benumbed, 
souls  "  faint "  and  lost, — "  scattered  abroad  as  sheep 
having  no  shepherd." — David  TJiomas. 


CXXXVI. 

"WHAT  I  TELL  TOU  IN  DARKNESS,  THAT  SPEAK  YE  IN  LIGHT: 

AND  WHAT  YE  HEAR  IN  THE  EAR,  THAT  PREACH  YE  UPON  THE 

HOUSE-TOPS." — Matthew  x.  27. 

T  TSEFULNESS  is  the  great  desire  of  our  souls  if 
^J  we  are  disciples  of  Jesus. 

We  believe  that  it  will  most  surely  be  attained  by 
our  making  known  the  gospel.  We  have  full  faith 
in  "the  foolishness  of  preaching." 

We  feel  that  we  have  need  to  receive  that  gospel 
personally  from  the  Lord  himself,  or  we  shall  not 
know  it  so  as  to  use  it  aright. 

We  must  not  run  till  we  are  prepared.  This  verse 
describes,  and  by  implication  promises,  the  needful 
preparation  of  heart.  Our  Lord  will  speak  in  our 
ear:  he  will  commune  with  us  in  solitude. 

I.  AN  INVALUABLE  PRIVILEGE.  The  disciple  is  asso 
ciated  very  nearly  with  his  Lord,  and  re 
ceived  into  closest  fellowship  with  him. 

We  see  before  us  three  important  matters. 

1.  We  are  permitted  to  realize  our  Lord's  presence 

with  us  personally. 

He  is  still  on  speaking  terms  with  us  :  still  is 
he  our  Companion  in  the  night,  our  Friend 
in  solitude. 

(47) 


48  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

2.  We  are  enabled  to  feel  his  word  as  spoken  to 

us. 

Immediately:  "/tell  you"    Personal  contact. 

Forcefully:  "  in  the  ear."  Not  as  thundered 
from  Sinai,  but  as  whispered  by  "  a  still, 
small  voice."  Still,  very  effectually. 

3.  We  are  privileged  to  receive  such  communica 

tions  again  and  again :  "I  tell  you     .     .     . 

ye  hear." 

We  need  precept  upon  precept,  line  upon  line. 
Our  Lord  is  willing  to  manifest  himself  to  his 

own,  day  by  day. 

We  shall  be  wise  to  make  occasions  for  hear 
ing  his  voice  in  solitude,  meditation,  prayer, 

communion,  &c. 
We  shall  do  well  to  use  occasions  of  the  Lord's 

own  making,  such  as  the  Sabbath,  sickness, 

the  night-watches,  etc. 
We  need  for  a  thousand  reasons  this  private 

tuition,  this  personal  communication  with 

our  Comrnander-in-chief 

II.  A  PREPARATORY  PROCESS.     We  do   not  rightly  per 
ceive    what  we  have  to  make  known   till 
Jesus  personally  imparts  his  holy  teaching 
to  our  inmost  hearts. 
We  see  by  reason  of  personal  contact  with   our 

Lord — 

1.  Truth  in  its  personality ;  living,  acting,  feeling ; 
for  he  is  "the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life." 
Truth  is  no  theory  or  phantom  in  Christ 
Substantial  truth  is  spoken  by  him. 


LEARNING   IN  PRIVATE  WHAT  TO  TEACH.      49 

2.  Truth  in  its  purity  is  found  in  him,  in  his  writ 

ten  teaching,  and  in  that  which  he  speaks 
to  the  heart.  Truth  from  man  is  mixed  and 
adulterated  ;  from  Jesus  it  is  unalloyed. 

3.  Truth  in  its  proportions;  he  teaches  all  truth, 

in  its  true  relations.  Christ  is  no  carica 
turist,  partisan,  or  politician. 

4.  Truth  in  its  power.     It  comes  strikingly,  per 

suasively,  convincingly,  omnipotently  from 
him.  It  quickens,  and  sustains. 

5.  Truth  in  its  spirit.     His  words  are  spirit,  life, 

love. 

6.  Truth  in  its  certainty.     "  Verily,  verily,"  is  his 

motto. 

7.  Truth  in  its  joyfulness.     He  speaks  delight  un 

to  the  soul.     The  truth  in  Jesus  is  glad  tid 
ings. 
See  the  advantage  of  studying  in  Christ's  College. 

III.  THE  CONSEQUENT  PROCLAMATION.  What  Jesus  has 
told  us  alone  in  the  dark  we  are  to  tell 
out  openly  in  the  light. 

Courting  publicity,  we  are  to   preach  "upon  the 

house-tops." 

What  is  this  message  which  we  have  heard  in  the 
ear  ? 

We  bear  our  willing  witness  that — 

1.  There  is  peace  in  the  blood  of  Jesus. 

2.  There  is  sanctifying  power  in  his  Holy  Spirit. 

3.  There  is  rest  in  faith  in  our  Lord  and  God. 

4  There  is  safety  in  conformity  to  our  great  Ex* 
emplar. 

4 


50  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

5.  There  is  joy  in  nearness  to  Jesus  our  Lord. 
As  we  hear  more  we  will  tell  more. 
Oh,  that  men  would  receive  our  earnest  testimony  i 
Will  not  you  receive  it,  who  hear  us  at  this  present 
hour? 

PRIVATE  PENCILLINGS. 

Claus  Hames,  one  of  the  most  useful  preachers  in 
Germany,  once  met  a  friend  to  whom  he  told  how 
many  times  daily  he  was  obliged  to  speak.  His 
friend  presently  asked,  "  But,  Friend  Hames,  if  thou 
hast  so  much  to  say,  when  art  thou  still?  And 
when  does  the  Spirit  of  God  speak  to  thee  ?  ''  That 
simple  question  so  impressed  Hames  that  he  resolved 
from  that  time  to  devote  a  portion  of  each  day  to  re 
tirement  and  silent  study. 

"  How  is  it  ?"  said  a  Christian  man  to  his  compan 
ion,  as  they  were  both  returning  from  hearing  the 
saintly  Bramwell,  "Plow  is  it  that  Brother  Bramwell 
always  tells  us  so  much  that  is  new?"  The  compan 
ion  answered,  ''Brother  Bramwell  lives  so  near  the 
gates  of  heaven  that  he  hears  a  great  many  things 
which  the  rest  of  us  do  not  get  near  enough  to  hear." 
— J.  II.  Hitchens. 

Of  a  certain  preacher  it  was  said  :  "  He  preaches 
as  if  Jesus  Christ  were  at  his  side.  Don't  you  see 
how  every  now  and  then  he  turns  around  as  if  he 
were  saying  :  '  Lord  Jesus,  what  shall  I  say  next  ?  ' ' 

Take  my  lips,  and  let  them  be 
Filled  with  messages  from  thee. 

F.  It*  Haver  gal. 


LEARNING  IN   PRIVATE   WHAT  TO   TEACH.     #1 

Then  sorrow  touched  by  thee  grows  light, 

With  more  than  rapture's  ray ; 
As  darkness  shows  us  worlds  of  light 

We  never  saw  by  day. 

Thomas  Moore. 

Men  learn  in  suffering  what  they  teach  in  song. 

Possessors  of  divine  truth  are  eager  to  spread  it. 
"  For,"  as  Carlyle  says,  "  if  new- got  gold  is  said  to 
burn  the  pockets  till  it  be  cast  forth  into  circulation  ; 
much  more  may  new-found  truth." 

A  servant  was  desired  by  his  master  to  carry  a  pres 
ent  of  fish  to  a  friend,  and  to  do  it  as  quickly  as  pos 
sible.  In  all  haste  the  man  seized  a  basket,  and  set 
out  ;  but  when  he  reached  his  journey's  end  he  be 
came  a  laughing-stock,  for  he  had  forgotten  the  fish  : 
his  basket  was  empty.  Teacher  I  Preacher!  let  not 
the  like  happen  to  thee. 

Often  in  the  South  of  France  have  I  needed  to  have 
a  fire  lighted  ;  but  I  have  found  little  or  no  comfort 
from  it  when  my  wish  has  been  granted.  The 
dwellers  in  that  mild  region  build  their  fire-places  so 
badly  that  all  the  heat  goes  up  the  chimney.  No 
matter  how  big  the  blaze,  the  hearth  only  seems  to 
warm  itself.  Thus  many  professors  of  our  holy  faith 
would  seem  to  get  grace,  and  light,  and  pious  feeling 
for  themselves  only  :  their  heat  goes  up  their  own 
chimney.  What  is  told  them  in  the  dark  they  keep 
in  the  dark,  and  that  which  is  spoken  in  their  ear 
never  blesses  any  other  ear. — C.  H.  S. 


CXXXVII. 

"BUT  THE  VERY  HAIRS  OF  YOUR  HEAD  ARE  ALL  NUMBERED." 

Matthew  x.  30. 


H 


OW  considerate  of  our  fears  is  the  Lord  Jesus ! 
He  knew  that  his  people  would  be  persecuted, 
and  he  sought  to  cheer  them. 

In  how  sweet  and  homely  a  way  he  puts  things  ! 
He  deigns  to  speak  about  the  hairs  of  our  head. 
Here  is  a  proverb,  simple  in  words,  but  sublime  in 
sense. 

We  think  we  see  four  things  in  this  sentence. 

I.  FORE-ORDINATION.  The  text  may  be  read,  "  have 
all  been  numbered."  It  is  of  the  past  as  well  as  of 
the  present. 

1.   Its  extent.      Predestination  extends  to  every 
thing. 

All  the  man  ;  his  being  as  a   whole  is  fore 
known.     4<  In   thy   book  all   my    members 
were  written  : "     Ps.  cxxxix.  16. 
All  that  concerns  him  is  foreknown  ;  even  to 
his   hair,  which  may   be   shorn   from  him 
without  damage  to  life  or  health. 
All  that  he  does  ;  even  the   least   and  most 
casual  thought,  or  act. 
(52) 


THE  NUMBERED   HAIRS.  53 

All  that  he  undergoes.  This  may  affect  his 
hair  so  as  to  change  its  color  ;  but  every 
hair  blanched  with  sorrow  is  numbered. 

2.  Its  source.     The  counting  is  done  by  the  Lord. 

3.  Its  lessons.     Jesus  mentions  this  fore-ordination 

for  a  purpose. 

To  make  us  brave  under  trial. 
To  teach  us  to  be  submissive. 
To  help  us  to  be  hopeful. 
To  induce  us  to  be  joyful. 

4.  Its   influence.     It  ennobles  us  to  be  thus  min 

utely  predestinated. 

If  God  arranges  even  our  hairs,  we  are  honored 
indeed. 

To  be  the  subject  of  a  divine  purpose  of  grace  is 
glorious. 

II.  KNOWLEDGE.     We  are  known  so  well  as  to  have 

our  hairs  counted. 
Concerning  this  divine  knowledge  let  us  note — 

1.  Its  character. 

Minute.      4<  The  very  hairs  of  your  head." 
Complete.     The  whole  man,  spirit,  soul,  and 

body,  is  thus  most  assuredly  well  known  to 

the  Omniscient  Lord. 
Pre-eminent.     God  knows  us  better  than  we 

know  ourselves,  or  than  others  know  us  ; 

for  neither  we  nor  they  have  numbered  the 

hairs  of  our  head. 
Tender.     Thus  a  mother  values  each  hair  of 

her  darling's  head.     Sympathetic,     God  en- 


54  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

ters  into  those  trails,  those  years,  and  those 
sicknesses  which  are  registered  in  a  man's 
hair. 

Constant.     Not   a   hair  falls  from   our  head 

without  God. 
2.  Its  lessons. 

Concerning  consecration,  we  are  taught  that 
our  least  precious  parts  are  the  Lord's,  and 
are  included  in  the  royal  inventory.  Let 
us  not  use  even  our  hair  for  vanity. 

Concerning  prayer.  Our  heavenly  Father 
knoweth  what  things  we  have  need  of.  We 
do  not  pray  to  inform  him  of  our  case. 

COD  corn  ing  our  circumstances.  These  are  be 
fore  the  divine  mind,  be  they  little  or  great. 
Since  trifling  matters  like  our  hairs  are  cat 
alogued  by  Providence,  we  are  assured  that 
greater  concerns  are  before  the  Father's  eye. 

III.   VALUATION.     The  hairs  of  our  head  are  counted 
because  valued. 

These  were  poor  saints  who  were  thus  highly  es 
teemed. 

The  numbering  mentioned  in  the  text  suggests 
several  questions. 

If  each  hair  is  valued,  what  must  their  heads 
be  worth  ? 

What  must  their  bodies  be  worth  ? 

What  must  their  souls  be  worth  ? 

What  must  they  have  cost  the  Lord,  their  Re 
deemer  ? 


THE   NUMBERED   HAIRS.  55 

How  can  it  be  thought  that  he  will  lose  one 

of  them  ? 

Ought  we  not  greatly  to  esteem  them  ? 
Is  it  not  our  duty,  our  honor,  our  joy  to  seek 

after  such  of  them  as  are  not  yet  called  by 

grace  ? 

IV.  PRESERVATION.  The  hairs  of  their  head  are  all 
numbered,  because  they  are  to  be  preserved  from 
all  evil. 

1.  From  the  smallest  real  loss  we  are  secured  by 

promise.     "  There  shall  not  a  hair  of  your 
head  perish:"  Luke  xxi.  18. 

2.  From  persecution  we  shall  be  rescued.     "Fear 

not  them :  "    Matt.  x.  28. 

3.  From  accident.     Nothing  can  harm  us  unless 

the  Lord  permits. 

4.  From  necessity.     You  shall  not  die  of  hunger, 

or  thirst,  or  nakedness.    God  will  keep  each 
hair  of  your  head. 

5.  From    sickness.     It  shall  sanctify  rather  than 

injure  you. 

6.  From  death.     In  death  we  are  not  losers,  but 

infinite  gainers.     Resurrection  will  restore 

the  whole  man. 

Let  us  for  ourselves  trust,  and  not  be  afraid. 
Let  us  set  a  high  value  upon  souls,  and  feel  an 
earnest  love  for  them. 

PINS. 

"Hairs" — of  which  ye   yourselves  are  heedless. 
Who   cares  for   the    hairs    once   dragged   out  by  a 


56  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

comb  ?     A  hair  is  a  proverbial  expression   for   an 
utter   trifle. — John  Albert  Bengel 

If  God  numbers  their  hairs,  much  more  does  he 
number  their  heads,  and  take  care  of  their  lives, 
their  comforts,  their  souls.  This  intimates  that  God 
takes  more  care  of  them  than  they  do  of  themselves. 
They  who  are  solicitous  to  number  their  money,  and 
goods,  and  cattle,  yet  were  never  careful  to  number 
their  hairs,  which  fall,  and  are  lost,  and  they  never 
miss  them :  but  God  numbers  the  hairs  of  his  people, 
and  not  a  hair  of  their  head  shall  perish :  Luke  xxi. 
18.  ISot  the  least  hurt  shall  be  done  them,  but  upon 
a  valuable  consideration:  so  precious  to  God  are  his 
saints,  and  their  lives  and  deaths  ! — Matthew  Henry. 

There  are  who  sigh  that  no  fond  heart  is  theirs, 
None  love  them  best — Oh  !   vain  and  seltish  sigh! 

Out  of  the  bosom  of  His  love  He  spares — 
The  Father  spares  the  Son,  for  thee  to  die: 

For  thee  He  died — for  thee  He  lives  again  : 

O'er  thee  He  watches  in  His  boundless  reign. 

Thou  art  as  much  His  care,  as  if  beside 
Nor  man  nor  angel  lived  in  Heaven  or  earth : 

Thus  HUM  beams  pour  alike  their  glorious  tide 
To  light  up  worlds,  or  wake  an  insect's  mirth  : 

They  shine  and  shine  with  uuexhaushed  store — 

Thou  art  thy  Saviour's  darling — seek  no  more. 

John  Keble. 

An  Italian  martyr,  in  the  sixteenth  century,  was 
most  cruelly  treated  in  the  prisons  of  the  Inquisition. 
His  brother,  who  with  great  difficulty  obtained  an 
interview  with  him,  was  deeply  affected  by  the  sight 


THE   NUMBERED  HAIRS.  57 

of  his  sufferings.  "  My  brother,"  said  the  prisoner, "  if 
you  are  a  Christian,  why  do  you  distress  yourself  thus  ? 
Do  you  not  know  that  a  leaf  cannot  fall  to  the  ground 
without  the  will  of  God  ?  Comfort  yourself  in  Christ 
Jesus,  for  the  present  troubles  are  not  to  be  com 
pared  with  the  glory  to  come." 

If  pestilence  stalk  through  the  land,  ye  say  ' '  This  is  God's  doing ; n 
Is  it  not  also  his  doing  when  an  aphis  creepeth  on  a  rosebud  ? — 
If  an  avalanche  roll  from  its  Alp,  ye  tremble  at  the  will  of  Pro 
vidence; 

Is  not  that  will  concerned  when  the  sear  leaves  fall  from  the  pop 
lar? 

Martin  F.  Tapper. 


CXXXVIII. 

"HE   THAT  TAKETH  NOT  HIS   CROSS,  AND  FOLLOWETH  AFTER  ME, 

is  NOT  WORTHY  OF  ME." — Matthew  x.  38. 

BEFORE  his  crucifixion,  our  Lord  has  a  foresight 
of  it,  and  does  not  hesitate  to  realize  himself  as 
bearing  his  cross. 

With  equal  prescience  he  foresees  each  true  disciple 
receiving  and  taking  up  his  own  personal  cross. 
He  sees  none  exempted. 

Picture  to  the  mind's  eye  a  procession  led  by  a 
cross-bearing  Jesus,  and  made  up  of  his  cross-bear 
ing  train.  This  i«  not  a  pageant,  but  a  real  march  of 
suffering.  It  reaches  through  all  time. 

The  chief  requirement  of  a  disciple  is  to  follow  Je 
sus  in  all  things,  in  cross-bearing  as  in  all  else. 

Cross-bearing  is  trying,  laborious,  sorrowful,  1m- 
militating. 

Cross-bearing  is  inevitable  to  the  follower  of  Je 
sus.  We  are  bound  to  take  up  our  cross  or  give  up 
all  idea  of  being  Christians. 

Let  us  obediently  inquire — 

I.  WHAT  is  MY  PECULIAR  CROSS ?     "He  that  taketh  not 
his  cross." 

1.  It  may  be  the  giving  up  of  certain  pleasures  or 
indulgences. 

(58) 


CROSS-BEAKLtfG.  59 

2.  It  may  be  the  endurance  of  reproach  and  un- 

kindness,  or  remaining  in  poverty  and  ob 
scurity  for  the  good  of  others. 

3.  It  may  be  the  suffering  of  losses  and  persecu 

tions,  for  Christ's  sake. 

4.  It  certainly  means  the  consecrating  of  all  to  Je 

sus  .  the  bowing  of  my  whole  self  beneath 
the  blessed  burden  of  service  with  which  he 
honors  me. 

5.  It  also  includes  the  endurance  of  my   heavenly 

Father's  will  with  patience,  acquiescence, 
and  thanksgiving. 

My  cross  is  well,  wisely,  kindly,  and  surely  chos 
en  for  me  by  my  Lord. 

It  is  only  meet  that  I  should  be  made  like  my 
Lord  in  bearing  it. 

II.   WHAT  AM  I  TO  DO  WITH  IT  ?     "  Taketh  ....  follow- 
eth  after  me." 

1.  I  am  deliberately  to  take  it  up. 

Not  to  choose  a  cross,  or  pine  after  another 
form  of  trial. 

Not  to  make  a  cross  by  petulance  and  obsti 
nacy. 

Not  to  murmur  at  the  cross  appointed  me. 

Not  to  despise  it,  by  callous  stoicism,  or  wil 
ful  neglect  of  duty. 

Not  to  faint  under  it,  fall  beneath  it,  or  run 

from  it. 

2.  [  am  boldly  to  face  it.     It  is  only  a  wooden 

cross,  after  all. 


60  MY    SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  I  am  patiently  to  endure  it,  for  I  have  only  to 

carry  it  a  little  way. 

4.  I  am  cheerfully  to  resign   myself  to  it,  for  my 

Lord  appoints  it. 

5.  1    am    obediently    to    follow    Christ   with   it. 

What  an  honor  and  a  comfort  to  be  tread 
ing  in  his  steps !  This  is  the  essential 
point. 

It  is  not  enough  to  bear  a  cross,  we  must  bear  it 
after  Jesus. 

I  ought  to  be  thankful  that  I  have  only  to  bear  it, 
and  that  it  does  not  bear  mo.  It  is  a  royal  burden,  a 
sanctified  burden,  a  sanctifying  burden,  a  burden 
which  gives  communion  with  Christ. 

III.   WHAT  SHOULD  ENCOURAGE  ME  ? 

1.  Necessity  :  I  cannot     be    a    disciple    without 

cross-bearing. 

2.  Society  :  better  men  than  I  have  carried  it. 

3.  Love :  Jesus  bore  a  far  heavier  cross  than  mine. 

4.  Faith :  grace  will  be  given  equal  to  the  weight 

of  the  cross. 

5.  Hope  :   go</l  J  o  myself  will  result  from  my  bear 

ing  ti  is  load. 

6.  Zeal:  Jesus    will    be   honored  by   my  patient 

endurance. 

7.  Experience :  I  shall  yet  find  pleasure  in  it,  for 

it  will  produce  in  me  much  blessing.  The 
cross  is  a  fruitful  tree. 

8.  Expectation:  glory   will  be  the  reward   of  it, 

No  cross,  no  crown. 


CEOSS-BEARING.  61 

Let  not  the  ungodly  fancy  that  theirs  is  a  better 
lot :  the  Psalmist  says,  "  many  sorrows  shall  be  to 
the  wicked." 

Let  not  the  righteous  dread  the  cross,  for  it  will 
not  crush  them :  it  may  be  painted  with  iron  colors 
by  our  fears,  but  it  is  not  made  of  that  heavy  metal  ; 
we  can  bear  it,  and  we  will  bear  it  right  joyously. 

NAILS. 

When  Alexander  the  Great  marched  through  Per 
sia,  his  way  was  stopped  with  ice  and  snow,  inso 
much  that  his  soldiers,  being  tired  out  with  hard 
marches,  were  discouraged,  and  would  have  gone  no 
further,  which  he  perceiving,  dismounted  his  horse, 
and  went  on  foot  through  the  midst  of  them  all,  mak 
ing  himself  a  way  with  a  pickaxe,  whereat  they  all 
being  ashamed,  first  his  friends,  then  the  captains  of 
his  army,  and,  last  of  all,  the  common  soldiers  fol 
lowed  him.  So  should  all  men  follow  Christ  their 
Saviour,  by  that  rough  and  unpleasant  way  of  the 
cross  that  he  hath  traversed  before  them.  Ho  having 
drunk  unto  them  in  the  cup  of  his  passion,  they 
are  to  pledge  him  when  occasion  is  offered;  he  hav 
ing  left  them  an  example  of  his  suffering,  they  are 
to  follow  him  in  the  self-same  steps  of  sorrow. — Join 
Spencer. 

The  cross  is  easier  to  him  who  takes  it  up  than  to 
him  who  drags  it  along. — J.  E.  Vaux. 

We  are  bid  to  take,  not  to  make  our  cross.  God  in 
his  providence  will  provide  one  for  us.  And  we  are 


62  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

bid  to  take  it  up;  we  hear  nothing  of  laying  it  down 
Our  troubles  and  our  lives  live  and  die  together. 

W.  Gurnall. 

Must  Jesus  bear  the  cross  alone, 

And  all  the  church  go  free  ? 
Xo,  there's  a  cross  for  every  one, 

And  there's  a  cross  for  me. 

"  No  man,"  said  Flavel,  "  hath  a  velvet  cross." 

As  an  old  Yorkshire  working-man,  a  friend  of 
mine,  said,  "  Ah !  it  is  blessed  work,  cross-bearing, 
when  it's  tied  011  with  love." — Newman  Hall. 

Welcome  the  cross  of  Christ,  and  bear  it  triumph 
antly;  but  see  that  it  be  indeed  Christ's  cross,  and 
not  thine  own. —  Wilcox. 

Christ's  cross  is  the  sweetest  burden  that  ever  I 
bore ;  it  is  such  a  burden  as  wings  are  to  a  bird,  or 
sails  to  a  ship,  to  carry  me  forward  to  my  harbor. 

Samuel  Rutherford. 

Whatever  the  path  is,  Christ  is  there,  and  to  be 
with  him  is  joy  enough  for  any  creature,  whether 
man  or  angel.  He  does  not  send  us  to  walk  in  a 
dreary,  desolate  road.  He  does  not  say,  "  Go  ye," 
pointing  to  a  lonely  way  in  which  he  is  not  to  be 
found;  he  says,  "Come  after  me,"  so  that  we  need 
not  take  a  single  step  where  his  footprints  cannot  be 
seen,  and  where  his  presence  may  not  still  be  found. 
If  the  sharp  flints  cut  our  feet,  they  have  wounded 
his  before.  If  the  darkness  gathers  thickly  here  and 
there,  it  was  a  denser  gloom  that  surrounded  him. 


CROSS-BEARING.  63 

If  ofttimes  we  must  stand  and  fight,  it  was  through 
fiercer  conflicts  that  he  passed.  If  the  cross  is  heavy 
to  our  shoulder,  it  is  light  when  compared  with  the 
one  he  bore.  "Christ  leads  me,"  said  Baxter, 
"  through  no  darker  room  than  he  went  through  be 
fore."  If  the  road  were  a  thousand  times  rougher 
than  it  is,  it  would  be  well  worth  while  to  walk  in  it 
for  the  sake  of  walking  with  Christ  there.  Follow 
ing  Jesus  means  fellowship  with  Jesus,  and  the  joy 
of  that  fellowship  cannot  be  told. — P. 


CXXXIX. 

"  COME  UNTO  ME,  ALL  YE   THAT  LABOR    AND  ARE   HEAVY  LADEN, 
AND   I   WILL   GIVE   YOU  REST. 

"  TAKE  MY  YOKE  UPON  YOU,  AND  LEARN  OF  ME  ;  FOR  I  AM  MEEK 

AND  LOWLY  IN  HEART J   AND  YE   SHALL  FIND  REST  UNTO  YOUR 
SOULS. 
"  FOR  MY  YOKE   IS   EASY,  AND  MY   BURDEN  IS  LIGHT." — MattkeiC 

xi.  28-30. 

JESUS  had  first  taught  the  solemn  truth  of  human 
responsibility  (verses  20-24),  and  afterwards  he 
had  joyfully  proclaimed  in  prayer  the  doctrine  of 
election :  now  he  turns  to  give  a  free  and  full  invita 
tion  to  those  who  are  needing  rest.  These  three 
things  are  quite  consistent,  and  should  be  found  in 
all  Christian  preaching. 

Remember  who  he  is  who  thus  invites  men  to 
come  to  him. 

The  Son  of  the  Highest,  the  revealer  of  God  then 
and  now;  he  bids  men  draw  near  to  himself  without 
fear,  and  rest  in  such  nearness. 

The  Saviour  ever  living,  having  once  died,  is  wait 
ing  to  receive  and  save  all  who  will  come  to  him; 
and  such  he  will  bless  with  rest. 

In  our  Lord's  gracious  invitation  you  note— 

I.    A    CHARACTER    WHICH    DESCRIBES    YOU. 

1.  Laboring,  "  all  ye  that  labor,"  in  whatever  form, 
(64) 


REST  FOR  THE   RESTLESS.  65 

In  the  service  of  formal  religion,  in  the  attempt 
to  keep  the  law,  or  in  any  other  way  of 
self-justification. 

In  the  service  of  self  to  get  gain,  honor,  ease, 
etc. 

In  the  service  of  the  world  to  discover,  invent, 
legislate,  etc. 

In  the  service  of  Satan,  lust,  drink,  infidelity, 

etc. 
2.  Laden.     All  who  are  "  heavy  laden,"  are  called. 

Laden  heavily  because  weary,  vexed,  disap 
pointed,  despairing. 

Laden  with  sin,  guilt,  dread,  remorse,  fear  of 
death. 

Laden  with  care,  anxiety,  greed,  ambition,  etc. 

Laden  with  sorrow,  poverty,  oppression,  slan 
der,  etc. 

Laden  with  doubt,  temptation,  conflict,  inner 
faintriess,  etc. 

II.    A    BLESSING    WHICH    INVITES    YOU. 

1.  Rest  to  be  given.     "  I  will  give  you  rest." 

To  the  conscience,  by  atonement  and  pardon - 
To  the  mind,  by  infallible  instruction  and  es 

tablishment. 
To  the  heart  a  rest  for  love.     Jesus  fills  and 

contents  the  heart. 
To  the  energies,  by  giving  an  object  worth 

attaining. 
To  the  apprehensions,  assuring  that  all  things 

work  for  good. 
5 


MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

2.  Rest  to  be  found.  "Ye  shall  find  rest  nnto 
your  souls." 

This  is  rest  upon  rest,  deepening,  settling. 

This  is  rest  which  comes  of  conquered  passion, 
desire,  etc. 

This  is  rest  which  comes  of  being  fully  conse 
crated  to  the  Lord. 

How  such  rest  would  cheer  you,  strengthen  you, 
save  you ! 

How  it  would  counteract  the  labors  and  the  loads  I 

III.    A  DIRECTION    TO    GUIDE    YOU. 

1.  "  Come  unto  me." 

Come  to  a  person,  to  Jesus,  the  living  Sa 
viour  and  Example. 

Come  at  once,  Jesus  is  ready  now.     Are  you  ? 

Come  all  who  labor  and  are  loaded.  None 
will  be  refused. 

Come  laden,  with  your  burdens  on  your  hearts, 
and  "  I  will  give  you  rest."  Come  as  you 
are.  Come  by  faith. 

2.  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you." 

Be  obedient  to  my  command. 

Be  willing  to  be  conformed  to  me  in  service 

and  burden-bearing. 
Be  submissive  to  the  afflictions  which  I  may 

lay  upon  you. 
8.  "  Learn  of  me." 

You  do  not  know  ;  but  must  be  content  to 

learn. 
You  must  not  cavil ;  but  have  a  mind  to  learn. 


TEST  FOR  THE    1IESTLESS.  67 

You  must  learn  by  heart,  and  copy  my  meek 
ness  and  lowliness. 

IV.     AN   ARGUMENT    TO    PERSUADE    YOU. 

You  wish  to  be  like  your  Lord  in  restfulness  and 
service;  then  come  and  learn  of  him,  and  remember 
that  he  is — 

1.  A  lowly  Teacher:  bearing  with  failure,  repeat 

ing  his  lessons,   assisting  the   disciple,  re 
storing  the  fallen. 

2.  Laying  110  heavy  burden.      "  My  yoke  is  easy," 

etc. 

3.  Giving  rest  by  the  burden  which  he  causes  you 

to  bear:  "  Take  my  yoke  ....  and  ye  shall 
find  rest." 


MAGNETS. 

The  immediate  occasion  of  the  invitation,  with  its 
deep  earnestness  of  pity  and  sympathy,  was  found, 
I  doubt  not,  in  the  outward  appearance  of  the  crowd 
actually  surrounding  Jesus.  Probably  by  this  time 
it  was  about  sunset.  After  a  day  of  exhausting  toil 
for  our  Saviour  himself;  the  workman  from  the  field, 
the  busy  trader,  the  fisher  with  his  nets,  the  slave 
with  his  burden,  the  rich  man  with  his  heavier  bur 
den  of  care,  the  gray-haired  sinner  stooping  under 
the  weight  of  years,  and  inly  burdened  with  remorse 
and  fear; — these,  and  such  as  these,  met  the  Saviour's 
eye,  which  read  their  hearts ;  but  in  them  he  saw 
represented  our  toiling,  suffering  world,  and  uttered 
a  voice  of  invitation  meant  to  reach,  and  destined 


68  MY   SESMON-NOTES. 

yet  to  reach,  all  mankind.  "  /  ivill  give  you  rest." 
Kest  for  the  burdened  conscience,  in  pardon ;  for  the 
unquiet  intellect,  in  truth;  for  the  aching,  thirsty 
heart,  in  divine  love;  for  the  care-fretted  spirit,  in 
God's  providence  and  promises ;  for  the  weary  with 
sorrow  and  suffering,  in  the  present  foretaste,  and 
shortly  in  the  actual  enjoyment  of  "  his  rest." — E.  R. 
Conder. 

u  Come,"  saith  Christ,  "  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
I  will  not  show  you  rest,  nor  barely  tell  you  of  rest, 
but  I  will  give  you  rest.  1  am  faithfulness  itself,  and 
cannot  lie,  I  will  give  you  rest.  I  that  have  the 
greatest  power  to  give  it,  the  greatest  will  to  give  it, 
the  greatest  right  to  give  it,  come,  laden  sinners, 
and  /will  give  you  rest.  Best  is  the  most  desirable 
good,  the  most  suitable  good,  and  to  you  the  great 
est  good.  Come,  saith  Christ,  that  is,  believe  in  me, 
and  I  will  give  you  rest;  I  will  give  you  peace  with 
God,  and  peace  with  conscience :  I  will  turn  your 
storm  into  an  everlasting  calm ;  I  will  give  you  such 
rest,  that  the  world  can  neither  give  to  you  nor  take 
from  you. — Thomas  Brooks. 

Lord,  thou  madest  us  for  thyself,  and  we  can  find 
no  rest  till  we  find  rest  in  thee  ! — Augustine. 

A  poor  English  girl,  in  Miss  Leigh's  home  in  Pa~ 
ris,  ill  in  body  and  hopeless  in  spirit,  was  greatly 
affected  by  hearing  some  children  singing  "  I  heard 
the  voice  of  Jesus  say."  When  they  came  to  the 
words,  "  weary,  and  worn,  and  sad,"  she  moaned, 
4  That's  me  !  That's  me  I  What  did  he  do  ?  Fill  it  up, 


REST  FOR  THE  RESTLESS.  69 

fill  it  up  !  **  She  never  rested  until  she  had  heard  the 
whole  of  the  hymn  which  tells  how  Jesus  gives  rest 
to  such.  By-and-by  she  asked,  t;  Is  that  true  ? " 
On  being  answered,  u  Yes,"  she  asked,  "  Have  you 
come  to  Jesus  ?  Has  he  given  you  rest  ?  "  "  He 
has."  Raising  herself,  she  asked,  "  Do  you  mind 
my  coming  very  close  to  you?  May  be  it  would  be 
easier  to  go  to  Jesus  with  one  who  has  been  before 
than  to  go  to  him  alone."  So  saying,  she  nestled  her 
head  on  the  shoulder  of  her  who  watched,  and 
clutching  her  as  one  in  the  agony  of  death,  she 
murmured,  "  Now,  try  arid  take  me  with  you  to  Je 
sus." —  The  Sunday  at  Home. 

There  are  many  heads  resting  on  Christ's  bosom, 
but  there's  room  for  yours  there. — Samud  Rutherford. 


For  variety  we  add  another  outline  on  a  portion  of  the  same  text. 
CXL. 

"  COME  UNTO  ME,  ALL  YE  THAT  LABOR  AND  ARE   HEAVY  LADEN, 
AND   I    WILL   GIVE   YOU   REST." — Matthew  xi.  28. 

THIS  text  is  often  preached  from,  but  never  too 
often,  since  the  sorrows  with  which  it  deals 
always  abound,  and  the  remedy  is  always  effective. 

This  time  we  purpose  to  view  it  from  our  Lord's 
side. 

He  entreats  the  weary  to  come  to  him.  He  be 
seeches  them  to  learn  of  him.  He  not  only  receives 
those  who  come,  but  begs  them  to  come. 

What  is  this  desire  which  burns  in  his  bosom  ? 
And  whence  comes  it? 

Let  us  carefully  consider — 

I.  WHO  is  HE  ? 

1.  One    who     has   been    rejected,    yet   he    cries, 

"  Come  unto  me." 

2.  One  whose  rejection  involves  us  in  fearful  guilt, 

yet  he  is  ready  to  forgive,  and  to  bestow 
rest  upon  us  if  we  come. 

3.  One  who  knows  his  Father's  purpose,  but  fears 

not   to  give  a   pressing    invitation    to    all 
who  labor  and  are  heavy  laden. 
(70) 


JESUS   CALLING.  71 

4.  One  who  has  all  power  to  receive  such  as  come, 

and  to  give  rest  to  them  all.     This  is  no 
vain  invitation,  saying  more  than  it  means. 

5.  One  who  as  the  Son  of  God  is  infinitely  blessed, 

and  yet  finds  new  joy  in  giving  rest  to  poor 
restless  men. 

II.  WHOM  DOES  HE  CALL,  AND  WHY  ? 

1.  Laborers,  with  more   than  they   can   do  :  dis 

quieted,  unhappy. 

These  he  calls  to  himself  that  he  may  give 

them  rest,  and  cause  them  to  find  rest. 

2.  Heavy  laden  ones,  with  more  than    they   can 

bear  :  oppressed,  sorrowful,  ready  to  die. 

3.  The  poor  and  illiterate  who  need  to  be  taught. 

4.  The  spiritually   burdened,  who  much  need  a 

helping  hand,  and  can  only  find  it  in  him. 

III.  WHAT  CAUSES  HIS  DESIRE  FOR  THEM? 

Not  his  own  need  of  them. 

Not  their  personal  worthiness. 

Nor  aught  that  they  are  or  can  ever  be.     But — 

1.  He  has  a  love  to  our  race.     "My  delights  were 

with  the  sons  of  men  :"  Prov.  viii.  31.     He 
would  have  these  resting  with  himself. 

2.  He  is  himself  a  man,  and  knows  the  needs  of 

men. 

3.  He  has  done  so  much  to  buy  us  rest  that   he 

would  fain  give  it  to  us. 

4.  He  delights  to  do  more  and  more  for  us  :  it  is 

his  joy  to  give  good  things  to  men. 


72  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

5.  He  knows  what  our  ruin  will  be  unless  we  find 

rest  in  him. 

6.  He  knows  what  our  bliss  will  be  if  we  come 

unto  him. 

IV.    How  THEN    SHALL    WE   TREAT   THIS  CALL  ? 

1.  It  is  very  earnest,  let  us  heed  it. 

2.  It  is  very  simple,  let  the  poorest  seize  upon  it. 

3.  It  exactly  suits  us.     Does  it  not  suit  you  ? 

4.  It  is  very  gracious,  let  us  accept  it. 

ECHOES. 

The  most  condescending  affections  that  ever  he 
discovered,  the  most  gracious  invitations  that  ever 
he  made,  were  at  those  times  when  he  had  a  sense 
of  his  glory  in  a  particular  manner,  to  show  his  in 
tention  in  his  possessing  it.  When  he  spake  of  all 
things  delivered  to  him  by  his  Father,  an  invitation 
to  men  to  come  unto  him  is  the  use  he  makes  of  it. 
Matt.  xi.  27,  28.  If  this  be  the  use  he  makes  of  his 
glory,  to  invite  us,  it  should  be  the  use  we  should 
make  of  the  thoughts  of  it,  to  accept  his  proffer.  A 
nation  should  run  to  him  because  he  is  glorified. 

Stephen  Gharnock. 

"Come  unto  me,"  is  the  invitation  of  this  Blessed 
One,  so  intensely  human,  though  so  gloriously  di 
vine.  "  Unto  me,"  in  whose  arms  little  children  were 
embraced,  on  whose  bosom  a  frail  mortal  lay  :  "  un 
to  me,"  who  hungered,  thirsted,  fainted,  sorrowed, 
wept,  and  yet  whose  love,  and  grief,  and  pains,  and 


JESUS   CALLING.  73 

tears,  wore  the  expression  of  emotions  felt  in   the 
mighty  heart  of  God. — Caird. 

Lord,  I  have  invited  all, 

And  I  shall 

Still  invite,  still  call  to  thee : 
For  it  seems  but  just  and  right 

In  my  sight, 
Where  is  all,  there  all  should  be. 

George  Herbert. 

It  runs  thus — you  to  me,  and  I  to  you.  Here  is  a 
double  communion  set  up.  This  is  all  to  our  advan 
tage,  and  to  the  display  of  our  Lord's  great  gracious- 
ness.  We  come,  and  therein  he  obtains  the  company 
of  a  beggar,  a  leper,  a  patient,  a  repulsive  rebel  : 
this  is  no  gain  to  anything  in  him  except  his  pity, 
But  surely  he  expects  something  of  us  to  reward 
him  for  receiving  us  ?  By  no  means.  We  are  to 
come  to  him,  not  that  we  may  give  him  something, 
but  that  he  may  give  everything  to  us.  What  a 
Lord  is  this ! 


CXLI. 

"AND  IMMEDIATELY  JESUS  STRETCHED  FORTH  HIS  HAND,  AND 
CAUGHT  HIM,  AND  SAID  UNTO  HIM,  O  THOU  OF  LITTLE  FAITH, 
t  WHEREFORE  DIDST  THOU  DOUBT?" — Mdttliew  xiv.  31. 

OUR  Lord  did  not  question  the  doubter  till  he 
had  saved  the  sinker. 

His  rebukes  are  always  timely. 

The  question  was  not  only  well  deserved  as  a  re 
buke,  but  it  was  specially  instructive,  and  no  doubt 
it  proved  useful  in  after  years. 

When  the  grace  of  faith  is  really  present,  doubt 
has  to  answer  for  itself,  and  to  die  if  it  cannot  defend 
itself. 

Oh,  that  it  may  die  in  us  at  once  ! 

We  will  put  the  question  of  our  test  to  the  two 
great  classes  of  men. 

I.  WHEREFORE  DOST  THOU  DOUBT,  0  CHRISTIAN  ? 

1.  Lei  us  mention  some  supposdble  valid  reasons. 

Can    you    quote   past   experience   of  broken 

promises  ? 

Is  the  present  evil  beyond  the  power  of  Om 
nipotence  ? 

Are  the    promises   abolished?  Are   the   pur 
poses  of  grace  annulled? 
(74) 


THE  WHY  AND  THE  WHEREFORE  OF  DOUBT.      75 

Has   God   himself    changed?     Is   his   mercy 

clean  gone  for  ever  ? 

None  of  these  supposable  reasons  have  any  exist 
ence. 

2.  Tjet  us  Jwar  your  actual  reasons ;  if  you  dare  state 

them. 

My  sense  of  guilt  is  peculiarly  deep  and  clear. 

My  inbred  sin  has  risen  upon  me  with  terri 
ble  fury. 

My  failures  justify  despair  when  viewed  by 
the  side  of  other  men's  attainments,  and 
my  own  obligations. 

My  trials  are  so  peculiar,  so  fierce,  so  long,  so 
varied. 

My  heart  fails  mo.     I  can  bear  up  no  longer. 

My    fears     predict     greater   evils   still,    and 

threaten  ultimate   ruin. 

Many  such  insufficient  reasonings  becloud  the 
mind  ;  and  it  may  be  wisdom  to  look  them  in  the 
face,  and  so  dissipate  them. 

3.  Let  us  view  these  reasonings  from  otJier  standpoints. 

How  would  you  have  viewed  them  when  first 
you  believed  ? 

How  did  you  view  former  trials  when  they 
came  in  your  way  ;  and  how  do  you  view 
them  now  that  you  have  overcome  them  ? 

What  do  you  think  of  your  trials  when  you 
are  lying  in  Jesus'  bosom — assured  of  his 
love  ? 

How  do  you  speak  of  them  when  you  are  in 
structing  others  ? 


76  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

How  will  they  appear  to  you  when  you  get 

to  heaven  ? 

Jesus  is  now  near  you.  How  can  you  take  such 
gloomy  views  of  things  in  his  presence  ? 

4  Shall  we  hint  at  the  true  reasons  of  your  doubting  ? 
You  were  self-confident,  and  that  confidence 

has  failed  you. 

You  looked  too  much  to  things  seen  by  the 
light  of  sense  ;  and  now  that  it  is  dark,  you 
are  in  consequence  troubled. 
You  took  your  eye  off  from  your  Lord. 
Perhaps  you  neglected  prayer,  watching,  re 
pentance,  etc. 

When  you  find  out  the  real  reason  of  your  doubt, 
cry  for  pardon,  and  seek  to  the  Holy  Spirit  to  restore 
faith,  and  set  you  right. 

II.   WHEREFORE  DOST  THOU  DOUBT,  0  SINNER  ? 

The  Lord's  hand  is  stretched  out  to  save  sinking 
sinners. 

Do  not  distrust  the  power  of  Jesus  to  save  you 
from  sinking. 

1.  Let  us  suppose  good  reasons  for  your  doubting. 
Have  others  believed  and  perished  ? 
Have  you  yourself  tried  faith  in  Jesus,  and 

found  it  vain  ? 

Has  the  blood  of  Jesus  lost  its  power  ? 
Has  the  Holy  Spirit  ceased  to  comfort,  en 
lighten,  renew? 

is  the  gospel  abrogated?     Is  God's  mercy  clean 
gone  for  ever  ? 


THE  WHY  AND  THE  WHEREFORE  OF  DOUBT.     77 

None  of  these  can  be  answered  in  the  affirmative. 

2.  Let  us  hear  your  apparent  reasons. 

Your  sins  are  great,  numerous,  aggravated, 

and  singular. 

You  cannot  think  that  salvation  is  for  you. 
You  have  refused  the  gospel  call  so  long. 
Your  heart  is  so  dreadfully  hard  and  unfeeling. 
None  of  these  are  sufficient  reasons  for  doubting 
Almighty  love. 

3.  Let  us  learn  the  way  to  deal  with  such  unreasonable 

doubting. 

Repent  of  it,  for  it  dishonors  the  power  and 
promise  of  the  Father,  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
and  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
End  it,  by  simply  believing  what  is  so  surely 

true. 
Run  as  far  as  possible  the  other  way.    Believe 

up  to  the  hilt. 

In  every  case,  let  us  be  sure  that  to  believe  God  is 
sanctified  common-sense,  and  to  doubt  him  is  an 
extravagance  of  folly. 

MODERN  INSTANCES. 

Mr.  Haslam  has  reported  a  conversation  between 
two  poor  aged  Christians  to  the  following  efiect  : 
"  Oh  !  "  said  the  husband,  who  was  evidently  the 
weaker  vessel,  "I've  got  so  little  faith,  I  do  get  these 
'ere  doubts  so  much."  "Yes,"  added  the  wife,  "and 
ye  keeps  them,  Peter,  and  brings  them  to  me." 

Though  the  providence  of  God  may  be  exceedingly 


78  HY   SERMON-NOTES. 

dark,  the  language  of  faith  is,  "  The  Lord  is  ready 
to  save."  If  you  look  into  your  past  experience,  you 
will  find  that  God  has  done  great  things  for  you. 
Is  it  not  true  that  nine-tenths  of  all  the  difficulty  you 
have  anticipated  have  never  come  to  pass  at  all  ?  I 
have  great  sympathy  with  Billy  Bray,  whose  wife 
said  to  him,  when  he  came  home,  having  given  all 
his  money  away,  "  I  never  saw  such  a  man  in  my  life. 
Thee'lt  go  and  look  after  other  people's  wives  and 
children,  and  help  them,  and  thee  own  wife  and  chil 
dren  may  starve."  Billy,  with  great  force,  said,  "  Well, 
woman,  thee'st  never  starved  yet  ;"  and  that  was  the 
fact,  for  there  she  stood,  a  living  witness  to  his  word, 
— Henry  Varley. 

Good  old  Mr.  Crisp,  who  had  been  President  of  the 
Baptist  College  at  Bristol  for  fifty  years,  was  towards 
the  end  of  his  life  fearful  that  his  faith  would  fail.  Be 
ing  reminded  of  the  passage,  "  He  that  spared  not  his 
own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he 
not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  "  he  said, 
after  repeating  and  dwelling  on  the  last  words,  "  No, 
it  would  be  wrong  to  doubt ;  I  cannot,  I  dare  not,  I 
will  not  doubt !  "— S.  A.  Swaine,  in  "  Faithful  Men." 

When  darkness  long  has  veiled  my  mind, 
And  smiling  day  once  more  appears, 

Then,  my  Redeemer!  then  I  find 
The  folly  of  my  doubts  and  fears. 

I  chide  my  unbelieving  heart ; 

And  blush  that  I  should  ever  be 
Thus  prone  to  act  so  base  a  part, 

Or  harbor  one  hard  thought  of  thee. 

Cowper. 


THE  WHY  AND  THE  WHEREFORE  OF  DOUBT.      79 

Certain  persons  think  that  doubting  is  a  needful 
part  of  Christian  experience,  but  it  is  by  no  means 
the  case.  A  child  may  have  a  deep  experience  of  its 
father's  love,  and  yet  it  may  never  have  known  a 
doubt  of  him.  All  the  experience  of  a  Christian  is 
not  Christian  experience.  If  many  Christians  are  de 
spondent,  it  is  no  reason  why  I  must  be  :  it  is  rather 
a  reason  why  I  should  watch  against  it.  What  if 
many  sheep  suffer  from  the  fly  ;  am  I  to  be  anxious 
to  have  my  fleece  fly-blown  in  order  to  be  like  them  ? 
Never  doubt  the  Lord  till  you  have  cause  for  it  ;  and 
then  you  will  never  doubt  him  as  long  as  you  live. 


CXLIL 

"AND  HE  WENT  OUT  ABOUT  THE  THIED  HOUR,  AND  SAW  OTH 
ERS  STANDLXD  IDLE  IN  THE  MARKET-PLACE, 

"  AND  SAID  UNTO  THEM  ;  Go  YE  ALSO  INTO  THE  VINEYARD,  AND 
WHATSOEVER  IS  RIGHT  I  WILL  GIVE  YOU.  AND  THEY  WENT 

THEIR  WAY." — Matthew  xx.  3,  4. 

THE  reason  for  employing  these  people  must  have 
been  gracious. 

Surely  the  good  man  could  have  waited  till  the 
next  morning  ;  but  he  charitably  chose  to  employ 
the  needy  ones  at  once.  He  did  not  need  laborers, 
but  the  poor  men  needed  their  pennies. 

Certainly  it  is  sovereign  grace  alone  which  leads 
the  Lord  God  to  engage  such  sorry  laborers  as  we 
are. 

Let  us  inquire — 

I.    HOW    MAY    THE    LORD   BE    SAID    TO    GO    OUT  ? 

1.  Inasmuch  as  the  impulse  of  grace  comes  first  in 

every  case,  and  none  go  into  the  vineyard 
till  he  calls  them. 

2.  Inasmuch  as  there  are  times  of  revival,  when 

the    Lord  goes  forth   by  the  power  of  his 
Spirit,  and  many  are  brought  in. 

3.  Inasmuch  as  there  are  times  of  personal  visita 

tion  with  most  men  when  they  are  specially 
moved  to  holy  things. 
(80) 


FROM  TWENTY-FIVE  TO  THIRTY-FIVE.         81 

II.  WHAT  is  THE  HOUR  HERE  MENTIONED? 

It  represents  the  period  between  25  and  35  years 
of  age,  or  thereabouts. 

1.  The  dew  of  youth's  earliest  and  best  morning 

hour  is  gone. 

2.  Habits  of  idleness  have  been  formed  by  standing 

in  the  market-place  so  long.  It  is  harder 
to  begin  at  the  third  hour  than  at  the  first. 
Loiterers  are  usually  spoiled  by  their  loafing 
ways. 

3.  Satan  is  ready  with  temptation  to  lure  them  to 

his  service. 

4.  Their  sun  may  go  down  suddenly,  for  life  is  un 

certain.  Many  a  day  of  life  has  closed  at 
its  third  hour. 

5.  Fair  opportunity  for  work  yet  remains  ;  but  it 

will  speedily  pass  away  as  the  hours  steal 
round. 

6.  As  yet    the  noblest  of  all  work  has  not  been 

commenced  ;  for  only  by  working  for  our 
Lord  can  life  be  made  sublime. 

III.  WHAT  WERE  THEY  DOING  TO  WHOM  HE  SPOKE  ?  "Stand 

ing  idle  in  the  market-place." 

L  Many  are  altogether  idling  in  a  literal  sense, 
They  are  mere  loafers  and  dilettanti,  with 
nothing  to  do. 

2.  Many  are  idle  with  laborious  business — indus 

trious  triflers,  wearied  with  toils  which  ac 
complish  nothing  of  real  worth. 

3.  Many  are  idle  because  of  their  constant  inde- 

6 


82  MY   SERMON- JS  OTES. 

cision.      Unstable   as    water  they   do   not 
excel.     James  i.  6. 

4.  Many  are  idle  though  full  of  sanguine  inten 

tions  ;  but    as  yet  their  resolves   are   not 
carried  out. 

IV.  WHAT  WORK  WOULD  THE  LORD  HAVE  THEM  DO? 
He  would  have  them  work  by  day  in  his  vineyard. 

1.  The  work  is  such  as  many  of  the  best  of  men 

enjoy. 

2.  The  work  is  proper  and  fit  for  you. 

3.  For  that  work  the  Lord  will  find  you  tools  and 

strength. 

-4.  You  shall  work  with  your  Lord,  and  so  be  en 
nobled. 

5.  Your  work  shall  be  growingly  pleasant  to  you. 

6.  Your  work  shall  be  graciously  rewarded  at  the 

last. 

V.  WHAT  DID  THEY  DO  IN  ANSWER  TO  HIS  CALL  ?     "  They 

went  their  way." 

May  you,  who  are  in  a  similar  time  of  the   day, 
imitate  them? 

1.  They  went  at  once.     The  parable  indicates  im 

mediate  service. 

2.  They  worked  with  a  will. 

3.  They  never  left  the  service,  but  remained  till 

night. 

4.  They  received  the  full  reward  at  the  day's  end. 

Let   us   pray    the    Lord   to    go    out   among   our 
young  men  and  women. 


FBOM   TWENTY-FIVE   TO   THIRTY-FIVE.          83 

Let  us  expect  to  see  such  come  into  the  church, 
and  let  us  guide  them  in  their  work,  for  they  come 
into  the  vineyard  to  labor. 

Let  us  inquire  if  some  will  corne  now. 


SPADES. 

Have  you  never  thought  with  extreme  sadness  of 
the  many  men  and  women  upon  our  earth  whose 
lives  are  useless  ?  Have  you  never  reflected  upon  the 
millions  of  people  who  waste  in  nothingness  their 
thoughts,  their  affections,  their  energies,  all  their 
powers,  which  frivolity  dissipates  as  the  sand  of  the 
desert  absorbs  the  water  which  is  sent  upon  it  from  the 
sky?  These  beings  pass  onward,  without  even  asking 
themselves  toward  what  end  they  journey,  or  for  what 
reason  they  were  placed  here  below.  —Eugene  Bcrsicr. 

All  activity  out  of  Christ,  all  labor  that  is  not 
labor  in  his  church,  is  in  his  sight  a  "standing  idle." 

Archbishop  Trench. 

A  good  minister,  now  in  heaven,  once  preached  to 
his  congregation  a  powerful  sermon,  founded  upon 
the  words  of  Christ,  "  Why  stand  ye  here  all  the  day 
idle  ?  "  The  sermon  did  good  to  many,  among  whom 
was  a  lady  who  went  to  the  minister  the  next  day, 
and  said,  "  Doctor,  I  want  a  spade."  "We  should  be 
happy  to  put  spades  into  the  hands  of  all  our  idle 
friends.  There  are  Sunday-school  spades,  Mission- 
room  spades,  Tract-distribution  spades,  Sick-visita 
tion  spades,  &c.,  &c.  Who  will  apply  for  them  ? — 

Home  Evangel. 


84  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

What  can  I  do  the  cause  of  God  to  aid  ? 

Can  powers  so  weak  as  mine 

Forward  the  great  design  ? 
Not  by  young  hands  are  mighty  efforts  made. 

Not  mighty  efforts,  hut  a  willing  mind, 

Not  strong,  hut  ready  hands 

The  vineyard's  Lord  demands  ; 
For  every  age  fit  labor  he  will  find. 

Come,  then,  in  childhood,  to  the  vineyard's  gate ; 

E'en  you  can  dress  the  roots, 

And  train  the  tender  shoots — 
Then  why  in  sloth  and  sin  contented  wait  ? 

To  move  the  hardened  soil,  to  bend  and  lift 

The  fallen  branch,  to  tread 

The  winepress  full  and  red, 
These  need  a  stronger  arm,  a  nobler  gift ; 

But  all  can  aid  the  work.     The  little  child 

May  gather  up  some  weed, 

Or  drop  some  fertile  seed, 

Or  strew  with  flowers  the  path  Avhich  else  were  dark  and 
wild.—  J.  H.  Clinch. 

"Are  you  not  wearying  for  the  heavenly  rest?" 
said  White  field  to  an  old  minister.  "  No,  certainly 
not!"  he  replied.  "Why  not?"  was  the  surprised 
rejoinder.  "  Why,  my  good  brother,"  said  the  aged 
saint,  uif  you  were  to  send  your  servant  into  the 
fields,  to  do  a  certain  portion  of  work  for  you,  and 
promised  to  give  him  rest  and  refreshment  in  the 
evening,  what  would  you  say  if  you  found  him  lan 
guid  and  discontented  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  and 
murmuring,  '  Would  to  God  it  were  evening '  ? 


FROM   TWENTY-FIVE  TO   THIKTY-FIVE.         85 

Would  you  not  bid  him  be  up  and  doing,  and  finish 
his  work,  and  then  go  home,  and  enjoy  the  promised 
rest  ?  Just  so  does  God  require  of  you  and  me  that, 
instead  of  looking  for  Saturday  night,  we  do  our 
day's  work  in  the  day." 


CXLIII. 


SAITH  UK  TO  HIS  SERA'  ANTS,  THE  WEDDING  is  READY, 

BUT  THEY  WHICH  WERE    BIDDEN   WERE  NOT  WORTHY. 
"GO   YE   THEREFORE   INTO   THE    HIGHWAYS,    AND   AS  MANY  AS  YE 

SHALL   FIND,  HID  TO  THE  MARRIAGE. 
"SO    THOSE    SERVANTS   WENT     OUT   INTO     THE     HIGHWAYS,     AND 

GATHERED    TOGETHER   ALL     AS    MANY    AS     THEY     FOUND,    BOTH 

BAD    AND   GOOD  :   AND   THE    WEDDING    WAS      FURNISHED    WITH 

GUESTS."  —  Matthew  xxii.  8-10. 

THE  grand  design  of  God  is  to  make  a  marriage 
for  his  Son. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  has  espoused  his  Church,  and  there 
must  be  a,  feast  at  the  wedding.  Is  it  not  meet  that 
it  should  be  so  ? 

A  feast  would  be  a  failure  if  none  came  to  it,  and 
therefore  the  present  need  is  that  the  wedding  be 
"  furnished  with  guests.1' 

T.    THE    FIRST    INVITATION    WAS    A    FAILURE. 

This  is  seen  in  Jewish  history. 

Among  Gentiles,  those  to  whom  the  gospel  invita 
tion  specially  comes  are,  as  a  rule,  unwilling  to  ac 
cept  it. 

Up  to  this  hour,  children  of  godly  parents,  and 
hearers  of  the  word,  many  of  them  refuse  the  invita 
tion  for  reasons  of  their  own. 
(86) 


GUESTS   FOR  THE   WEDDING-FEAST.  87 

The  invitation  was  refused — 

1.  Not  because  it  involved  suffering,  for  it   was 

a  wedding-feast  to  which  they  were  bidden. 

2.  Nor  because  there  were  no  adequate  prepara 

tions, — "  The  wedding  is  ready." 

3.  Nor  because  the  invitations  were  not  delivered, 

or  were  misunderstood, — they    "were    bid 
den." 

4.  But  because  they  were  not  fit  for  the  high  joy. 

They  were  not  loyal  to  their  King. 

They  were  not  attached  to  his  royal  Son. 

They  were  not  pleased  with  his  noble  mar 
riage. 

They  were  wrapt  up  in  self-interest. 

They  were  cruel  to  well-intentioned  messen 
gers. 

5.  Therefore  they  were   punished   with   fire   and 

sword. 
But  this  destruction  was  no  wedding-feast  for 

the  King's  Son. 
This  punishment  was  no  joy  to  the  King. 

Love  must  reign  :  mercy  must  be  glorious;  Christ- 
must  re  veal  his  grace;  otherwise  he  has  no  joy  of  his 
union  with  mankind. 

Therefore — 

II.  THE  COMMISSION  WAS  ENLARGED. 

1.  Disappointment  must  arouse  activity  and  enter- 

prise, — "  Go  ye." 

2.  Disappointment  suggests  change  of  sphere, — 

"into  the  highways." 


DO  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

3.  A  wide  invitation  is  to  be  tried, — "  as  many  as 

ye  shall  find,  bid." 

4.  A  keen  outlook  is  to  be  kept, — u  as  many  as  ye 

shall  find." 

5.  Publicity  is  to  be  courted, — "  went  out  into  the 

highways." 

6.  Small  numbers, — ones  and  twos,  are  to  be  press 

ed  in. 

This  is  said  to  have  been  the  result  of  the  anger  of 
the  King. 

So  good  is  the  Lord  that  his  wrath  to  despisers 
works  good  for  others. 

III.    THE    NEW    MISSION    WAS    FULFILLED. 

The  particulars  of  it  will  be  suggestive  for  our* 
selves  at  this  present  era. 

1.  The  former  servants,  who  had  escaped  death, 

went  out  again. 

2.  Other  servants,  who  had  not  gone  at  first,  en 

tered  zealously  into  the  joyful  but  needful 
service. 

3.  They  went  in  many  directions, — "  into  the  high 

ways." 

4.  They  went  out  at  once.     Not  an  hour  could  be 

left  unused. 

5.  They  pointed  all  they  met  to  one  centre. 

6.  They  welcomed  all   sorts   of  characters, — "as 

many  as  they  found." 

7.  They  found  them  willing  to  come.     He   who 

sent  the   messengers  inclined  the   guests: 
none  seem  to  have  refused. 


GUESTS   FOB  THE   WEDDING-FEAST.  89 

This  blessed  service  is  being  carried  on  at  this  very- 
hour. 

IV.    TlIE   GREAT    DESIGN    WAS  ACCOMPLISHED. 

1.  The  King's   bounty  was  displayed   before  the 

world. 

2.  His  provision  was  used.     Think  of  grace  and 

pardon  unused ! 

3.  The  happiness  of  men  was  promoted:  they  feast 

ed  to  the  full. 

4.  Their  grateful  praise  was  evoked.    All  the  guests 

were  joyful  in  their  King  as  they  feasted  at 
his  table. 

5.  The  marriage  was  graced. 

6.  The  slight  put  upon  the    King's    Son,    by   the 

churls  who  refused  to  come,  was  more  than 
removed. 

7.  The  quality  of  the  guests  most  fully  displayed 

the  wisdom,  grace,  and  condescension  of  the 
Host. 

The  whole  business  worked  for  the  highest  glory  of 
the  King  and  his  Son. 

Amen  !    So  let  it  be  among  us  ! 

WEDDING-CARDS. 

The  wicked,  for  the  slight  breakfast  of  this  world, 
lose  the  Lamb's  supper  of  glory  (Rev.  xix.  9)  ; 
where  these  four  things  concur,  they  make  a  perfect 
feast : — A  good  time,  eternity  ;  a  good  place,  heav 
en  ;  a  good  company,  the  saints  ;  good  cheer,  glory. 
— Thomas  Adams. 


90  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

The  devil  does  not  like  field-preaching  ;  neither  do 
I.  I  love  a  commodious  room,  a  soft  cushion,  a 
handsome  pulpit  ;  but  where  is  my  zeal  if  I  do  not 
trample  all  these  under  foot  in  order  to  save  one  more 
soul? — John  Wesley. 

11  Call  them  in  "—the  Jew,  the  Gentile ; 

Bid  the  stranger  to  the  feast ; 
"Call  them  in"— the  rich,  the  noble, 

From  the  highest  to  the  least : 
Forth  the  Father  runs  to  meet  them, 

lie  hath  all  their  sorrows  seen  ; 
Robe,  and  ring,  and  royal  sandals, 
Wait  the  lost  ones  :  ''  Call  them  in." 

Sacred  Songs  and  Solos. 

From  hedges  and  lanes  of  con  scions  nakedness  and 
need,  the  marriage-festival  is  furnished  with  guests. 
To  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached,  and  the  poor  in 
spirit  gladly  listen,  whether  they  are  clothed  in  pur 
ple  or  in  rags. —  William  Arnot. 

We  might  do  better  if  we  went  further  afield. 
Our  invitations  to  Christ  which  fall  so  feebly  on  the 
ears  of  those  who  regularly  hear  us,  would  be  wel 
comed  by  those  to  whom  we  never  deliver  them. 
We  are  fools  to  waste  time  in  the  shallows  of  our 
churches  and  chapels  when  the  deep  outside  teems 
with  waiting  fishers.  We  need  fresh  hearers:  the 
newer  the  news  to  any  man,  the  more  likely  is  he  to 
regard  it  as  good  news.  Music-hall  work,  out-door 
preaching,  and  house-to-house  visitation  have  virgin 
soil  to  deal  with,  and  there  is  none  like  it.  Invite 
the  oft-invited — certainly  ;  but  do  not  forget  that 


GUESTS  FOE  THE   WEDDESTG-FEAST.  91 

those  who  have  never  been  invited  as  yet  cannot  have 
been  hardened  by  refusals.  Beggars  in  the  highways 
had  never  been  bidden  to  a  marriage-feast  before  ;  and 
so,  when  they  were  surprised  with  an  invitation,  they 
raised  no  questions,  but  ^Jad1;*7  hastened  to  the  ban 
quet 


OXLIV. 

"THEY  THAT  WERE  READY  WENT  IN  WITH  HIM  TO  THE  MAR 
RIAGE  :   AND  THE  DOOR  WAS   SHUT." — Matthew  XXV.  10. 

DURING  the  waiting  period,  the  virgins  seemed 
much  alike,  even  as  at  this  day  one  can  hardly 
discern  the  false  professor  from  the  true 

When  the  midnight  cry  was  heard  the  difference 
began  to  appear,  as  it  will  do  when  the  Second  Ad 
vent  approaches. 

When  the  Bridegroom  was  actually  come,  they 
were  finally  divided. 

Let  us  prayerfully  consider — 

I.    Tl-lE    READY,    AND    THEIR    ENTRANCE. 

1.  What  is  this  readiness  ?  ' '  They  that  were  ready." 
It  is  not  a  fruit  of  nature.     None  are  ready  to 
enter  the  marriage-feast  of  glory  while  they 
are  in  an  unregenerate  condition. 
It  must  be  a  work  of  grace  ;  since  we  are  un 
able  to  make  ourselves  fit  for  the  vision  of 
God,  and  the  glory  of  Christ  is  too  bright 
for  us  to  be  naturally  fit  to  share  in  it. 
It  should  be  our  daily  concern.     He  who  is 
ready  for  the  marriage-feast  is  ready  to  live, 
and  ready  to  die — ready  for  anything. 


ENTRANCE  AND  EXCLUSION.         93 

It  mainly  consists  in  a  secret  work  wrought  in 

us. 
In  being  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of 

his  Son. 
In  being  regenerated,  and  so  made  meet  for 

glory. 
In  being  anointed  with  the  Spirit,  and  fitted 

for  holy  service. 
In  being  quickened  into    a    high    and   holy 

fellowship  with  God. 
In  being  delighted  with  God,  and  so  being 

ready  to  enjoy  him. 
It  should  be  our  present  inquiry  whether  we 

are  now  u  ready." 
Some    make    110  profession,   never   pray,   nor 

praise. 
Others    make    profession,    but   neither    love, 

nor  trust  ;  they  have  lamps,  but  no  oil  with 

which  to  keep  them  burning. 

What  is  this  entrance  ?     A  going  in  unto  glory 

to  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord.     1  Thess.  iv.  17. 

Immediate.     "  They  that  were  ready  went  in" 

No  sooner  was  the  Bridegroom  corne,  than 

they  went  in.     Love  brooks  no  delays. 

Intimate.     They  "  went  in  with  him.11     This  is 

the  glory  of  heaven,  and  the  crown  of  its 

joys,   that   we   go   into   them   with   Jesus, 

who     remains     our     constant     companion 

therein. 

Joyous.        The^  ^e,nt  in  with  him  to  tfie  mar- 


94  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

Personal.     "  They  went  in:"  each  one  enter- 

ed  for  herself. 

Eternal.  "  The  door  was  shut " — to  shut  them 
in  for  ever.  "He  shutteth,  arid  no  man 
openeth."  Rev.  iii.  7. 

Actual.  In  all  the  marriage-festival  each  one 
of  the  wise  virgins  had  a  share :  indeed,  they 
enjoyed  more  than  appears  in  the  parable, 
for  they  were  brides,  as  well  as  maids  of 
honor. 

What  a  world  of  meaning  lies  in  that  abundant 
entrance  which  will  be  ministered  to  all  the  faithful ! 
2  Peter  i.  11. 

II.    THE   UNREADY,    AND   THEIR    EXCLUSION. 

1.  What  is  this  unreadiness? 

It  was  the  absence  of  a  secret  essential ;  but 
that  absence  w.is  consistent  with  much  ap 
parent  preparation. 

These  persons  had  the  name  and  character  of 
virgins. 

They  had  the  lamps  or  torches  of  true  brides 
maids. 

They  were  companions  of  the  true  virgins. 

They  acted  like  the  true;  in  their  virtues  and 
in  their  faults. 

They  awakened  as  the  true  did,  startled  by  the 
same  cry. 

They  prayed  also,  after  a  fashion. — "give  us 
of  your  oil." 

Ifet  were  they  never  ready  to  enter  in  with 
the  King. 


ENTUAISCE   AND   EXCLUSION.  95 

/    They   had  no  heart-care  to  be  found  ready,  4 
^        hence  flaming  external  lamps,  but  no  hid-  j 
den  internal  oil. 

They  had  no  faith-foresight  ;  they  had  not  pro 
vided  for  the  probable  waiting,  and  the  late 
coming. 

They  played  the  fool  with  Christ's  wedding 
feast,  not  thinking  it  worth  the  purchase  of 
a  little  oil,  but  going  to  it  with  torches 
which  would  inevitably  go  out  in  smoke. 

They  put  off  till  night  what  should  have  been 

done  at  once. 
2.  What  is  this  exclusion  ? 

It  was  universal  to  all  who  were  not  ready. 

It  was  complete;  "the  door  was  shut," — shut 
for  those  without  quite  as  surely  as  for  those 
within. 

It  was  just;  for  they  were  not  ready,  and  so 
slighted  the  King. 

It  was  final.  Since  the  fatal  news  that  the 
door  was  shut,  no  news  has  come  that  it  has 
been  opened,  or  that  it  ever  will  be. 

What  if  the  cry  were  heard  at  this  moment,  "Be 
hold  he  cometh  "  ? 

As  yet  the  door  is  not  shut.      Be  ready  ere  it  closes. 


FLASHES  FROM  THE  LAMPS. 

"  Uncle  Ned,"  a  colored  Baptist  of  the  South,  was 
talking  with  his  former  master's  son.  "  Child,"  said 
the  old  man  solemnly,  "  yer  talk  is  too  highfalutin' 


96  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

for  me ;  but  de  Bible  is  plain  as  A  B  C,  whar  it  says 
yer  got  ter  'pent  and  be  baptizen,  or  yer  will  be 
damned.  Ise  erfeared,  fact  I  knows,  yer's  not  dun 
nuther.  'Member,  honey,  ther  Scripture  says — 'keep 
yer  lamp  trum  an'  er  burning,  an'  yer  ile-can  full  to 
pour  in  it.'"  "Now,  Uncle  Ned,"  was  the  evasive 
reply,  "  I  hope  you  don't  think  my  lamp  is  without 
oil,  do  you?"  "Child,  'tain't  even  got  no  wick  in 
it.  Fac'  is,  Ise  erfeared  yer  airit  even  got  a  lamp" 
muttered  the  old  negro,  as  he  mournfully  shambled 
off. 

The  poet  Co  wper  tells  us  that,  when  under  convict 
ion  of  sin,  he  dreamed  that  he  was  walking  in  West 
minster  Abbey,  waiting  for  prayers  to  begin.  "  Pre 
sently  I  heard  the  minister's  voice,  and  hastened  to 
wards  the  choir.  Just  as  I  was  upon  the  point  of  en 
tering,  the  iron  gate  under  the  organ  was  flung  in 
my  face,  with  a  jar  that  made  the  Abbey  ring.  The 
noise  awakened  me ;  and  a  sentence  of  excommunica 
tion  from  all  the  churches  upon  earth  could  not  have 
been  so  dreadful  to  me  as  the  interpretation  which 
I  could  not  avoid  putting  upon  this  dream." 

Have  you  not  felt  a  fainting  of  heart,  and  a  bitter 
ness  of  spirit,  when,  after  much  preparation  for  an 
important  journey,  you  have  arrived  at  the  appointed 
place,  and  found  that  the  ship  or  train,  by  which  you 
intended  to  travel,  had  gone  with  all  who  were  ready 
at  the  appointed  time,  and  left  you  behind?  Can 
you  multiply  finitude  by  infinitude  ?  Can  you  conceive 
the  dismay  which  will  fill  your  soul  if  you  come  too 


ENTRANCE   AND   EXCLUSION.  97 

late  to  the  closed  door  of  heaven,  and  begin  the  hope 
less  cry,  "  Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us"? — WlUiam  Arnot. 

A  lady,  who  heard  Whitefield,  in  Scotland,  preach 
upon  the  words,  "And  the  door  was  shut,"  being 
placed  near  two  dashing  young  men,  but  at  a  con 
siderable  distance  from  the  pulpit,  witnessed  their 
mirth;  and  overheard  one  say,  in  a  low  tone,  to  the 
other,  "  Well,  what  if  the  door  be  shut  ?  Another  will 
open."  Thus  they  turned  off  the  solemnity  of  the 
text.  Mr.  Whitefield  had  not  proceeded  far  when  he 
said,  "  It  is  possible  there  may  be  some  careless, 
trifling  person  here  to-day,  who  may  ward  off  the 
force  of  this  impressive  subject  by  lightly  thinking, 
'  What  matter  if  the  door  be  shut  ?  Another  will 
open.'"  The  two  young  men  were  paralyzed,  and 
looked  at  each  other.  Mr.  Whitefield  proceeded: 
"Yes;  another  will  open.  And  I  will  tell  you  what 
door  it  will  be :  it  will  be  the  door  of  the  bottomless 
pit ! — the  door  of  hell ! — the  door  which  conceals 
from  the  eyes  of  angels  the  horrors  of  damnation !  " 
7 


CXLY. 

"AND  WHEN  THEY  HAD  PLATTED  A  CROWN  OF  THORNS,  THEY 
PUT  IT  UPON  HIS  HEAD,  AND  A  REED  IN  HIS  RIGHT  HAND: 
AND  THEY  BOWED  THE  KNEE  BEFORE  HIM,  AND  MOCKED  HIM, 

SAYING,  HAIL,  KING  OF  THE  JEWS!" — Matthew  xxvii.  29. 

r~p1HE  shameful  spectacle  !  What  element  of  scorn 
-»•  is  lacking  ! 

Roman  soldiers  mocking  a  supposed  rival  of  Caesar 
are  sure  to  go  to  the  utmost  lengths  in  their  derision. 

Jesus  himself  is  a  victim  so  novel  in  his  gentle 
weakness  that  they  set  no  bounds  to  their  scorn. 

The  spectacle  is  as  cruel  as  it  is  derisive.  Thorns 
and  rough  blows  accentuate  mockeries  and  scoffs. 

Roman  legionaries  were  the  brutalized  instruments 
of  a  race  noted  for  its  ignorance  of  all  tenderness  ; 
they  wrought  cruelties  with  a  singular  zest,  being 
most  at  home  in  amusements  of  the  most  cruel  kind. 

Let  us  go  into  the  Hall  of  the  Praetorian  guard, 
and  watch  with  our  Lord  in  the  hour  of  his  mockery. 

I.   HERE  LEARN  A  LESSOX  FOR  YOUR  HEART. 

In  the  Lord  of  glory  thus  made  the  centre  of  cruel 
scorn — 

1.  See  what  sin  deserved.     It  is  all  laid  on  him. 
Ridicule  for  its  folly.     It  should  be  despised 
for  its  mad  rebellion  against  the  omnipotent 
will  of  the  great  King. 
(98) 


MOCKED     OF  THE  SOLDIERS.  99 

Scorn  for  its  pretensions.  How  dared  it  pro 
pose  to  usurp  dominion  over  hearts  and 
lives  which  belonged  alone  to  God  ? 

Shame  for  its  audacity.  It  dared  defy  the 
Eternal  to  battle.  Oh,  wretched,  braggart 
sin ! 

2.  See  how  low  your  Saviour  stooped  for  your  sake. 

He  is  made  the  Substitute  for  foolish,  sinful 

man  ;  and  is  treated  as  such. 
He  is  scoffed  at   by   soldiers  of  the  meanest 

grade. 
He  is  made  a  puppet  for  men  who  play  the  fool. 

3.  See  how  your  Redeemer  loved  you. 

He  bears  immeasurable  contempt,  bears  in 
silence,  bears  to  the  bitter  end  ;  and  all  for 
love  of  his  people. 

4.  See  the  grand  facts  behind  the  scorn. 

He  is  a  King  in  very  surety.  They  said, 
"  Hail.  King  !  "  and  he  is  indeed  the  King 
whom  all  shall  hail. 

He  is  glorified  by  conquering  earth's  sorrow  : 
he  is  crowned  with  thorns.  What  a  glorious 
diadem  !  No  other  coronet  ever  betokened 
such  a  conquest. 

He  rules  by  weakness  ;  a  reed  is  his  sceptre. 
What  a  glory  to  be  able  to  reign,  not  by 
force  of  arms,  but  by  patience  and  gentleness ! 

He  makes  men  bow  the  knee:  real  homago  is 
his  ;  he  reigns,  whether  men  will  have  it  so 
or  not. 

He  is  the  true  Monarch  of  the  Jews.     In  him 


100  MY   SEltMOX-NOTES. 

the  dynasty  of  David  endures  for  ever,  and 

Israel  has  hope  of  glory. 
5,   See  that  you  honor  and  love  him  in  proportion 

to  this  shame  and  mockery. 
Bernard  used  to  say,  "The  more  vile   Christ 

hath  made  himself  for  us,  the  more  dear  he 

ought  to  be  to  us." 
Can  you  ever  reach  so  great  a  height  ? 

II.  HERE  LEARN  A  LESSON  FOR  YOUR  CONSCIENCE. 

1.  Jesus  may  still  be  mocked. 

By  deriding  his  people.  "  Saul,  Saul,  why 
persecutest  thou  me  ? "  Men  mock  the 
Master  in  the  servant. 

By  contemning  his  doctrine.  Many  do  this 
who  affect  to  admire  his  character.  This  is 
the  peculiar  sin  of  the  present  age. 

By  resolves  never  fulfilled.  Sinners  vow,  but 
never  pay  ;  confess  faults,  and  cling  to  them. 
This  is  to  insult  the  Lord. 
By  beliefs  never  obeyed.  It  is  common  to 
pretend  to  a  belief  which  never  affects  the 
life,  mocking  great  truths  by  acting  contrary 
to  them. 

By  professions  never  justified.     May  not  many 
a  church-member  be  guilty  of  putting  the 
Lord  to  an  open  shame  in  this  fashion  ? 
2.  If  guilty  of  mocking  him,  what  shall  you  do  ? 

Do  not  despair,  but  confess  and  lament  your 
in. 

Do  not  give  all  up  for  lost.     Believe  and  live. 


MOCKED   OF   THE   SOLDIERS.  101 

Do  not  repeat  the  sad  offence.     Repent,  and 

quit  the  crime. 
Do  not  abide  in  sullen  silence.     Honor  him 

whom  you  once  despised. 
3.  What  shall  you  do  in  any  case  ? 
Crown  him  with  love. 
Sceptre  him  with  obedience. 
Bow  the  knee  of  worship. 
Proclaim  him  King  by  your  personal  testimony. 
Ye  sinners,  destroy  the  sins  which  grieved  your 
Saviour ! 

Ye  saints,  defy  all  the  contempt  of  the  world  for 
his  sake ! 

LAMENTS  AND  HONORS. 

Whither,  0  whither,  dost  thou  stoop,  0  thou  co- 
eteriial  Son  of  thine  eternal  Father  ?  Whither  dost 
thou  abase  thyself  for  me?  I  have  sinned,  and  thou 
art  punished  ;  I  have  exalted  myself,  and  thou  art 
dejected  ;  T  have  clad  myself  with  shame,  and  thou 
art  stripped  ;  I  have  made  myself  naked,  and  thou 
art  clothed  with  robes  of  dishonor;  my  head  hath 
devised  evil,  and  thine  is  pierced  with  thorns;  I  have 
smitten  thee,  and  thou  art  smitten  for  me  ;  1  have 
dishonored  thee,  and  thou,  for  my  sake,  art  scorned; 
thou  art  made  the  sport  of  men,  for  me  that  have  de 
served  to  be  insulted  by  devils ! — Bishop  Hall. 

Christ's  head  hath  sanctified  all  thorns ;  his  back, 
all  furrows;  his  hands,  all  nails;  his  side,  all  spears; 
his  heart,  all  sorrows  that  can  ever  come  to  any  of 
his  children. — Samuel  Clark,  in  "  The  Saint's  Nosegay." 


102  MY   SEKMON-ttOTES. 

Here  we  see  our  King  receiving  the  best  homage 
the  world  would  give  him.  His  robe  was  some  old 
cloak  of  purple.  Behold  his  crown,  platted  of 
thorns !  His  coronation  is  performed  by  a  ribald 
soldiery.  His  sceptre  is  a  reed;  his  homage  is  given 
by  the  knee  of  scorn  ;  his  proclamation  by  the  mouth 
of  ridicule.  How  then  can  we  expect  honor  for 
ourselves  ? 

Let  us  never  despise  the  weak,  or  scoff  at  brethren 
who  may  appear  singular,  or  oppress  any  man  of 
woman  born.  Haply  we  may  be  following  the  act 
of  these  Praetorians,  and  may  be  insulting  saints  more 
like  to  Jesus  than  we  are  ourselves.  To  be  ridiculed 
may  give  us  communion  with  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  to 
ridicule  others  will  place  us  in  fellowship  with  his 
persecutors. — C.  H.  S. 

During  the  last  moments  of  a  gracious  lady,  speech 
had  left  her  ;  but  she  managed  to  articulate  the  word 
*'  Bring."  Her  friends,  in  ignorance  of  her  meaning, 
offered  her  food,  but  she  shook  her  head,  and  again 
repeated  the  word  "Bring."  They  then  offered  her 
grapeu,  which  she  also  declined,  and,  for  the  third 
time  uttered  the  word  "  Bring."  Thinking  she  de 
sired  to  see  some  absent  friends,  they  brought  them 
to  her:  but  again  she  shook  her  head;  and  then,  by 
a  great  effort,  she  succeeded  in  completing  the  sen 
tence  — 

"  Bring  fortli  tlie  royal  diadem, 
And  crown  Him  Lord  of  all ; " 

and  t)  «n  passed  away  to  be  with  Jesus. 

Newman  HalL 


CXLYI. 

*  AND  AS  THEY  WENT  TO  TELL  HIS  DISCIPLES,  BEHOLD,  JESUS 

MET  THEM,  SAYING,  ALL  HAIL.    AND  THEY  CAME  AND  HELD 

HIM  BY  THE  FEET,  AND  WORSHIPPED  HIM. 
"  THKN  SAID  JESUS  UNTO  THEM,  BE  NOT  APRAID  :  GO  TELL  MY 

BRETHREN  THAT  THEY  GO  INTO  GALILEE,  AND  THERE  SHALL 

THEY  SEE  ME." — Matthew  xxviiL  9,  10. 

ALL  that  concerns  our  Lord  after  his  resurrection 
is  calm  and  happy.     A  French  writer  calls  the 
forty   days   on  earth,   "the  life  of  Jesus  Christ   in 
glory  ;  "  truly  it  was  glory  as  full  as  earth  could  then 
bear. 

His  tomb  was  empty,  and  consequently  the  dis 
ciples'  griefs  would  have  been  over  had  they  fully 
understood  what  that  vacant  grave  meant. 

Then  was  their  choicest  time  for  living  fellowship 
with  their  risen  Lord,  arid  he  did  not  fail  to  grant 
them  the  privilege  on  many  memorable  occasions. 

Since  our  Lord  is  risen,  we  also  may  have  happy 
communion  with  him. 

These  are  days  in  which  we  may  expect  him  to 
manifest  himself  to  us  spiritually,  as  he  did  for  forty 
days  to  the  disciples  corporeally. 

Let  us  not  be  satisfied  unless  it  is  often  said  of  us, 
44  Jesus  met  them." 

I.     IN   THE    WAY    OF   SERVICE  JESUS  MEETS   US.       "  As  they 

(103) 


404  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

went  to  tell  his  disciples,  behold,  Jesus  met 
them." 

1.  He  may  come  at  other  times,  as  he  did  to  those 

who  visited  the  sepulchre,  to  those  walking 
out  to  Emmaus,  to  others  fishing,  and  to  the 
eleven  assembled  for  mutual  consolation. 

2.  He  is  likeliest  to  come  when  we  are  doing  his 

work,  since — 
We  are  then  most  awake,  and  most  able  to 

see  him. 

We  are  then  in  special  need  of  him. 
We  are  then  most  in  accord  with  him. 

3.  But  come  when  Jesus  may,  it  will  be  a  blessed 

visitation,  worthy  to  be  prefaced  by  a  "  Be 
hold  I  "  Oh,  that  he  would  come  no^v  ! 

II.  WHEN   JESUS  MEETS  us,  HE  HAS  EVER  A  GOOD  WORD 

FOR  us. 

The   fittest   motto  for   resurrection   fellowship   is 
" All  hail!" 

1.  A  word  of  salutation.     He  is  not  ashamed  to 

call  us  brethren,  and  welcome  us  with  u  All 
hail ! " 

2.  A  word  of  benediction.     He  wishes  us  well,  and 

expresses  his  hearty,  sacred  desire  by  the 
words  "  All  hail ! " 

3.  A  word  of  gratulation.     He  was  glad  to  see 

these  women,  he  gave  them  glad  tidings,  he 
bade  them  be  glad,  he  made  them  glad,  he 
was  glad  with  them,  saying,  "  All  hail ! " 

4.  A  word  of  pacification.     He   afterwards    said, 


"ALL  HAIL!"  105 

"  Be  not  afraid  ; "  but  this  was  virtually 
contained  in  his  "  All  hail !  "  His  presence 
can  never  mean  us  harm  ;  it  ever  works  us 
health. 

III.  WHEN  JESUS  MEETS  us,  IT  BECOMES   us   TO   AROUSE 

OURSELVES. 

We  ought  at  such  times  to  be  like  the  disciples, 

who  were — 

1.  All  alive  with  hopeful  energy.  "They  came.'' 
In  eager  haste  they  drew  near  to  him. 
What  life  it  would  put  into  preachers  and 
hearers  if  the  Lord  Jesus  would  manifestly 
appear  unto  them  !  Dulness  flees  when 
Jesus  is  seen. 

2.  All  aglow  with  happy  excitement.    They  "  held 

him  by  the  feet," — hardly  knowing  what 
they  did,  but  enraptured  with  the  sight  of 
him. 

3.  All   ardent   with   reverent  love.     They    "  wor 

shipped  him."  What  heartiness  they  threw 
into  that  lowly  adoration  ! 

4.  All  amazed  at  his  glory.     They  were  prostrate, 

and  began  to  fear. 

5.  All    afraid   lest  they  should  lose   their   bliss. 

They  grasped  him,  and  held  him  by  the 
feet 

IV.  FROM  SUCH  A  MEETING  WE  SHOULD  GO  ON  A  FURTHER 

ERRAND. 

1.  We  must  not  plead  spiritual  absorption  as  an 


106  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

excuse  for  inactivity,  but  we  must  "  go  "  at 
our  Lord's  bidding. 

2.  We  must  seek  the  good  of  others  because  of  their 

relation  to  our  Lord.  He  says,  "  tell  my 
brethren.11 

3.  We  must  communicate  what  our  Lord  has  im 

parted—4'  go  tell." 

4.  We  must  encourage  our  brethren  by  the  assur 

ance  that  joy  similar  to  ours  awaits  them — 
"there  shall  they  see  me."  Thus  shall  we 
best  realize  and  retain  the  choice  benefits 
of  intercourse  with  the  Lord.  Not  only  for 
ourselves,  but  mainly  for  the  benefit  of 
others,  are  we  to  behold  our  Lord. 

Let  us  go  to  holy  work  hoping  to  meet  Jesus  as 
we  go. 

Let  us  go  to  more  holy  work  when  we  have  met 
him. 

Let  us  labor  to  "  abide  in  him,"  looking  for  hia 
promised  appearing  and  exhorting  others 
to  do  the  same. 

ILLUSTRATIVE. 

It  is  said  that  a  venturesome  diplomatist  once 
asked  the  Emperor  Nicholas  who  was  the  most  dis 
tinguished  of  His  Majesty's  subjects.  According  to 
report,  the  Czar  replied  that  the  most  distinguished 
Russian  was  he  whomsoever  the  Emperor  honored 
by  speaking  to  him.  Royal  vanity  dictated  that 
reply,  but  we  speak  u  words  of  truth  and  soberness" 
when  we  say  that  the  most  distinguished  of  men  is 


"ALL  HAIL!"  107 

he  whom  the  Lord  of  hosts  honors  by  admitting  to 
communion  with  himself.  "  Speak,  Lord  ;  for  thy 
servant  heareth." 

In  vain  thou  strugglest  to  get  free, 

I  never  will  unloose  my  hold ; 
Art  thou  the  Man  that  died  for  me  ? 

The  secret  of  Thy  love  unfold. 
Wrestling,  I  will  not  let  thee  go, 

Till  I  Thy  name,  Thy  nature  know. 

Charles  Wesley. 

There  is  a  striking  legend  illustrating  the  bless 
edness  of  performing  our  duty  at  whatever  cost  to 
our  own  inclination.  A  monk  had  seen  a  beautiful 
vision  of  our  Saviour,  and  in  silent  bliss  he  was  gaz 
ing  upon  it.  The  hour  arrived  at  which  it  was  his 
duty  to  feed  the  poor  at  the  convent-gate.  He  would 
fain  have  lingered  in  his  cell  to  enjoy  the  vision; 
but  under  a  sense  of  duty,  he  tore  himself  away 
from  it  to  perform  his  humble  service.  When  he  re 
turned,  he  found  the  blessed  vision  still  waiting  for 
him,  and  heard  a  voice,  saying,  "  Hadst  thou  staid, 
I  would  have  gone.  As  thou  hast  gone,  I  have  re 
mained." 

It  is  a  blessed  thing  to  go  forth  with  the  Master's 
message  after  having  seen  him  ;  it  is  delightful  to 
meet  him  on  the  way  when  we  are  going  to  tell  his 
disciples  ;  and  it  is  inexpressibly  pleasant  to  find 
him  in  the  assembly  bearing  witness  with  us.  To 
go /row  the  Lord, /or  the  Lord,  with  the  Lord,  is  such 
an  agreeable  combination  that  it  cannot  be  described, 
but  must  be  personally  experienced.  The  Lord  Jesus 


108  MY   SEEMOX-NOTES. 

is  by  no  means  niggardly  in  his  converse  with  his 
people  :  he  meets  us  as  often  as  we  are  fit  to  be  met, 
and  oftener  ;  and  he  uses  such  familiarities  as  could 
never  have  been  expected  had  they  not  been  already 
enjoyed.  Who  would  have  dreamed  of  his  saying 
"  All  hail !  "  if  he  had  not  himself  selected  the  term  ? 

—a  K  s. 

A  good  theme  might  be  found  in  the  words  of  the 
message  recorded  in  our  text.  Jesus  prepares  his 
messengers  by  saying  "Be  not  afraid."  Those  who 
bear  tidings  for  him  should  be  calm  and  happy.  He 
calls  his  disciples  by  a  sweet  name,  "  my  brethren ;  " 
invites  them  to  meet  him  ;  appoints  a  well-known 
trysting-place ;  and  promises  to  be  there.  Whatever 
else  they  had  begun  to  do,  they  must  make  this 
their  chief  business,  to  be  at  Galilee  to  commune 
with  him,  to  put  themselves  at  his  disposal,  and  to 
receive  his  commission. — C.  H.  S. 


CXLVII. 

"  AND  HE  SAID  UNTO  THEM,  TAKE  HEED  WHAT  YE  HEAR  :  WITH 
WHAT  MEASURE  YE  MEET,  IT  SHALL  BE  MEASURED  TO  YOU  :  AND 
UNTO  YOU  THAT  HEAR  SHALL  MORE  BE  GIVEN." — Mark  iv.  24. 

IN  these  days  we  have  many  instructions  as  to 
preaching  ;  but  our  Lord  principally  gave  di 
rections  as  to  hearing.  The  art  of  attention  is  as 
difficult  as  that  of  homiletics. 

The  text  may  be  viewed  as  a  note  of  discriminor 
tion.  Hear  the  truth,  and  the  truth  only.  Be  not  in 
different  as  to  your  spiritual  meat,  but  use  discern 
ment.  1  John  iv.  1  ;  Job  xii.  11. 

We  shall  use  it  as  a  note  of  arousing.  When  you 
do  hear  the  truth,  give  it  such  attention  as  it  de 
serves.  Give  good  heed  to  it. 

I.   HERE  is  A  PRECEPT.     "Take  heed  what  ye  hear." 

The  previous  verse  is — "  If  any  man  have  ears  to 
hear,  let  him  hear  ; "  that  is — use  your  ears  well, 
and  to  the  best  purpose. 

1.  Hear  with  discrimination,  shunning  false  doc 

trine.     John  x.  5. 

2.  Hear  with  attention ;  really  and  earnestly  hear 

ing.     Matt.  xiii.  23. 

3.  Hear  for  yourself,    with  personal    application. 

1  Sam.  iii.  9. 

(109) 


110  MY   SEKMOIST-NOTES. 

4.  Hear    retentively,  endeavoring    to    remember 

the  truth. 

5.  Hear  desiringly,  praying  that  the  Word  may 

be  blessed  to  you. 

6.  Hear  practically,  obeying  the  exhortation  which 

has  come  to  you. 

This  hearing  is  to  be  given,  not  to  a  favorite  set 
of  doctrines,  but  to  the  whole  of  the  Word  of  God. 
Fs.  cxix.  128. 

II.  HERE  is  A  PROVERB.     u  With    what    measure    ye 

mete,  it  shall  be  measured  to  you." 
In  proportion  as  you  give  yourself  to  hearing,  you 
shall  gain  by  hearing. 

Tli  is  is  practically  illustrated  in  the  result  of  preach 
ing. 

1.  Those  who  have  no  interest  in  the  Word  find  it 

uninteresting. 

2.  Those    who    desire    to    find    fault    find     faults 

enough. 

3.  Those  who   seek  solid  truth  learn  it  from  any 

faithful  ministry. 

4.  Those  who  hunger  find  food. 

5.  Those  who  bring  faith  receive  assurance. 
f>.   Those  who  come  joyfully  are  made  glad. 
But  no  man  finds  blessing  by  hearing  error. 

Nor  by  careless,  forgetful,  cavilling  hearing  of  the 
truth. 

III.  HERE  is  A  PROMISE.     "  Unto  you  that  hear  shall 

more  be  given." 
You  that  hear  shall  have — 


HEARING  WITH  HEED.  Ill 

1.  More  desire  to  hear. 

2.  More  understanding  of  what  you  hear. 

3.  More  convincement  of  the  truth  of  what  you 

hear. 

4.  More  personal  possession   of  the   blessings   of 

which  you  hear. 

5.  More  delight  while  hearing  the  glorious  gospel. 

6.  More  practical  benefit  therefrom. 

God  giveth  more  to  those  who  value  what  they 
have. 

For  practical  application  let  us  say— 

Hear.  It  is  your  wisdom  to  know  what  God 

says. 

Hear  well.     God's  teaching  deserves  the  deepest  at 
tention. 

It  will  repay  the  best  consideration. 
Hear  often.     Waste  no  Sabbath,  nor  any  one  of  its 
services. 
Use    week-day    lectures   and  prayer 

meetings. 
Hear  better.     You  will  grow  the  holier  thereby. 

You  will  find  heavenly  joy  by  hear 
ing  with  faith. 

HEAR!   HEAR! 

What  care  I  to  see  a  man  run  after  a  sermon  if 
he  cozens  and  cheats  as  soon  as  he  comes  home  ? — 
John  Selden. 

A  heart-memory  is  better  than  a  mere  head-mem 
ory.  It  were  better  to  carry  away  a  little  of  the 


112  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

life  of  God  in  our  souls  than  if  we  were  able  to  re 
peat  every  word  of  every  sermon  we  ever  heard. — 
De  Sales. 

Ebenezer  Black  well  was  a  rich  banker,  a  zealous 
Methodist,  and  a  great  friend  of  the  Wesley s.  "Are 
you  going  to  hear  Mr.  Wesley  preach  ?  "  said  one  to 
Mr.  Black  well.  "No,"  he  answered,  "lam  going  to 
hear  God;  I  listen  to  him,  whoever  preaches;  other 
wise  I  lose  all  my  labor." 

Once-a-day-hearers,  represented  by  a  Perthshire 
landlord,  were  pithily  rebuked  by  Mr.  Walker,  the 
minister  of  Muthill.  The  landowner,  meeting  the 
minister  on  Monday,  explained  to  him  that  he  had 
not  been  hearing  him  at  the  second  service  on  the 
previous  day,  as  he  could  not  digest  more  than  one 
sermon.  "  I  rather  think,"  said  Mr.  Walker,  "  the 
appetite  is  at  fault  rather  than  the  digestion." 

Alas,  the  place  of  hearing  is  the  place  of  sleeping 
with  many  a  fine  professor  !  I  have  often  observed 
that  those  that  keep  shops  can  briskly  attend  upon  a 
twopenny  customer,  but  when  they  come  themselves 
to  God's  market,  they  spend  their  time  too  much  in 
letting  their  thoughts  wander  from  God's  command 
ments,  or  in  a  nasty,  drowsy  way.  The  head,  also, 
and  hearts  of  most  hearers,  are  to  the  Word  as  the 
sieve  is  to  water ;  they  can  hold  no  sermons,  remem 
ber  no  texts,  bring  home  no  proofs,  produce  none  of 
the  sermons  to  the  edification  and  profit  of  others. — * 
John  Bunyan. 


HEAEING  WITH   HEED.  113 

Some  can  be  content  to  hear  all  pleasant  things, 
as  the  promises  and  mercies  of  God ;  but  judgments 
and  reproofs,  threats  and  checks,  these  they  cannot 
brook ;  like  unto  those  who,  in  medicine,  care  only  for 
a  pleasant  emell  or  appearance  in  the  remedy,  as  pills 
rolled  in  gold,  but  have  no  regard  for  the  efficacy  of 
the  physic.  Some  can  willingly  hear  that  which 
concerns  other  men  and  their  sins,  their  lives  and 
manners,  but  nothing  touching  themselves  or  their 
own  sins;  as  men  can  willingly  abide  to  hear  of 
other  men's  deaths,  but  cannot  abide  to  think  of 
their  own. — Richard  Stock. 

If  verse  23  exhorts  us  to  hear,  verse  24  exhorts  us 
to  look  to  that  which  we  do  hear,  and  use  it  rightly. 
''Take  heed  what  ye  hear,"  means  "  Look  after  it  as 
you  would  look  after  money  that  you  have  received." 
Learning  a  truth  is  not  the  end,  but  the  beginning. 
After  it  is  learnt,  it  is  to  be  applied,  kept,  obeyed. 
And  it  would  appear  from  the  next  sentence  that, 
unless  it  is  shared  with  others,  we  can  neither  get  it 
nor  keep  it  for  ourselves.  "  With  what  measure  ye 
mete,  [understand,  4mete  out  your  light,']  it  shall 
be  measured  unto  you :  and  more  shall  be  given  un 
to  you."  (Revised  Version.)  To  learn  the  truth  of  God 
you  need  to  listen,  but  you  need  to  tell  it  to  another 
as  well.  The  meaning  of  this  passage  is  brought  out 
in  the  words  of  the  old  Rabbi:  "Much  have  I  learnt 
from  my  tutors;  more  from  my  companions;  but  most 
of  all  from  my  pupils."  The  more  light  you  give 
another,  the  more  you  get  yourself.  You  get  a  bet 
ter  grip  of  truth  by  pondering  it  with  the  wish  to  im- 


114  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

part  it.  The  love,  which  imparts  what  you  have, 
opens  yonr  heart  to  receive  something  still  higher. 
It  is  true,  not  only  in  regard  to  money,  butto  knowl 
edge,,  and  all  power  of  help,  that,  "  There  is  that 
ecattereth,  and  yet  increaseth ;  and  there  is  that  with- 
holdeth  more  than  is  meet,  but  it  tendeth  to  pover 
ty."  He  is  a  dull  teacher  that  does  not  learn  by  all 
he  teaches.  Rejoice  in  your  work;  it  is  worth  doing 
well,  for  it  is  the  best  way  of  learning. — Richard 
Glover. 


CXLYIII. 

"  BUT  WHEN  HE  SAW  JESUS  AFAR  OFF,  HE  RAN  AND  WORSHIPPED 

HIM." — Mark  v.  6. 

"  BUT  WHEN  HE  WAS  YET  A  GREAT  WAT  OFF,  HIS  FATHER  SAW 
HIM,  AND  HAD  COMPASSION,  AND  RAN,  AND  FELL  ON  HIS  NECK, 
AND  KISSED  HIM." — Lllke  XV.  20. 

rT^HESE  two   texts  have   a  measure  of  apparent 
-*-   likeness :  the  man  runs  to  Jesus  from  afar,  and 
the  Father  runs  to  the  prodigal  from  afar. 

They  do,  however,  as  much  illustrate  the  differ 
ence  as  the  likeness  of  our  action  towards  the  Lord, 
and  the  Lord's  action  towards  us. 

From  the  two  together  a  blended  lesson  may  be 
learned. 

I.  THB  SINNER^  s  PLACE.  "  Alar  off."  Jesus  is  afar  off 
in  the  sinner's  apprehension,  and  the  sinner 
is  in  very  deed  far  off  from  God. 

1.  As  to  character.    What  a  difference  between  the 

demoniac  and  the  Lord  Jesus:  between  the 
prodigal  son  and  the  great  Father  ! 

2.  As  to  knowledge.     The  demoniac  knew  Jesus, 

but  knew  little  of  his  love.     The  prodigal 
knew  little  of  his  Father's  great  heart. 

3.  As  to  hope.     The  man  possessed  of  a  devil  had 

no  hope  of  recovery,  or  but  a  faint  one,  and 
that  hope  the  demons  tried  to  extinguish. 

(115) 


116  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

The  prodigal  only  hoped  to  be  received  as 
a  hired  servant :  he  felt  that  his  sins  had  put 
him  far  away  from  the  true  position  of  a  son. 
4.  As  to  possession.  The  demoniac  had  no  hold 
upon  the  Saviour ;  on  the  contrary,  he  cried, 
"  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  "  The  pro 
digal  thought  he  had  lost  all  claim  to  his 
Father,  and  therefore  said,  "  I  am  no  more 
worthy  to  be  called  thy  son." 

Immeasurable  is  the  distance  between  God  and  a 
sinner :  it  is  wide  as  the  gulf  between  sin  and  holi 
ness,  death  and  life,  hell  and  heaven. 

II.  THE  SINNER'S  PRIVILEGE.     "  He  saw  Jesus." 

This  much  you,  who  are  most  under  Satan's  in 
fluence,  are  able  to  see  concerning  Jesus :  you  know 
that— 

1.  There  is  such  a  Person.     He  is  God  and  man, 

the  Saviour. 

2.  He  has  done  great  things. 

3.  He  is  able  to  cast  out  the  powers  of  evil. 

4.  He  may  cast  them  out  from  you,  and   deliv.r 

you. 

III.  THE  SINNER'S  WISEST  COURSE.     "  He  ran  and  woj 

shipped  him." 

The  demoniac  was  all  in  confusion,  for  he  was  Tin 
der  contending  influences  :  his  own  spirit  and  th< 
evil  spirit  strove  together. 

He  ran  towards  Jesus,  and  worshipped  him  ;  and 
yet  in  the  same  breath  he  cried,  "  What  have  I  to  do 
with  thee  ?  "  Thus  are  sinners  tossed  about. 


HE  RAN,    AND   HE  BAN.  117 

But  it  is  the  sinner's  wisest  course  to  run  to  Jesus, 
for— 

1.  He  is  the  Son  of  the  Most  High  God.    John  i.  34. 

2.  He  is  the  great  enemy  of  our  enemy,  the  devil. 

Heb.  ii  14. 

3.  He  is  abundantly  able  to  drive  out  a  legion  of 

devils. 

4.  He  can  cause  us  to  be  clothed,  and  in  our  right 

mind. 

5.  He  permits  us  even  now  to  draw  near  and  wor 

ship  him. 

It  was  the  prodigal's  wisdom  to  hasten  to  his  Father. 
Like  arguments  may  be  easily  found  in  his  case. 

IV.  THE  SECRET   OF   HOPE   FOR   SINNERS.     "  His  Father 

saw  him." 

1.  The   returning   sinner  was   seen  from  afar  by 

omniscience. 

2.  He  was  recognized  as  a  son  is  known  by  his 

Father. 

3.  He  was   understood,  beloved,  and  accepted  by 

his  Father. 

This  is  the  basis  of  hope  for  lost  ones  :  not  so  much 
what  they  can  see,  as  the  fact  that  the  Lord  of  love 
and  grace  sees  them  in  all  their  sin  and  misery. 

V.  THE  ACTION  OF  THE  SINNER'S  FATHER.     He  "  ran,  and 
fell  on  his  neck,  and  kissed  him." 

1.  Here   was  great  tenderness — "  his  Father  saw 

him,  and  had  compassion." 

2.  Here  was  great  swiftness — "  and  ran." 


118  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

3.  Here   was  great  condescension — he  "ran,  and 

fell  on  his  neck." 

4.  Here  were  great  love  and  mercy — "  and  kissed 

him." 

The  Father's  running  made  an  end  of  the  son's 
fears,  and  brought  swift  realization  of  joyful  accep 
tance. 

Let  us  run  to  our  Saviour,  and  our  Father. 

Let  us  rejoice  that  our  Saviour  and  our  Father  run 
to  meet  vs. 


RUNNING    COMMENTS. 

A  needle  will  move  towards  a  magnet  when  once 
a  magnet  has  moved  near  to  it.  Our  heart  manifests  a 
sweet  willingness  towards  salvation  and  holiness 
when  the  great  and  glorious  good-will  of  the  Lord 
operates  upon  it.  It  is  ours  to  run  to  Jesus  as  if  all 
the  running  \vere  ours  ;  but  the  secret  truth  is  that 
the  Lord  runs  towards  us,  and  this  is  the  very  heart 
of  the  business. — C.  II.  S. 

The  mother,  as  she  sits  in  her  house,  hears  a  little 
one  shriek,  and  knows  th»i  voice,  and  cries  out,  U0h ! 
'tis  my  child ! ''  Away  she  throws  all  she  hath  in  her 
hands,  and  runs  to  her  babe.  Thus  God  takes  the 
alarm  of  his  children's  cry.  u  I  heard  Ephrairn  be 
moaning  himself/'  saith  the  Lord  ;  his  cry  pierced 
God's  ear,  and  his  ear  affected  his  bowels,  and  his 
bowels  called  up  his  power  to  the  rescue  of  him. — 
William  GurncdL 


HE   EAT*,    AND    HE    RAN.  1X9 

God  will  pardon  a  repentant  sinner  more  quickly 
than  a  mother  would  snatch  her  child  out  of  the  fire. 
—  Vianney. 

When  either  God  or  man  is  strongly  moved,  the 
pace  is  running.  A  soul  in  distress  runs  to  Jesus  : 
God  in  compassion  runs  to  meet  returning  wanderers. 
A  slow  pace  evidences  an  unwilling  heart;  hence  de 
lay  to  repent  is  a  deadly  sign.  With  sin  within  thce, 
Christ  before  thce,  time  pressing  thee,  eternity  await 
ing  thee,  hell  beneath  thee,  heaven  above  thee  ;  O  sin 
ner,  thou  mayest  well  run  !  It  is  the  pace  of  one  hunt 
ing  after  the  game  he  desires,  one  anxious  to  win  a 
prize,  one  escaping  the  avenger  oi  blood.  lie  that 
would  have  heaven  must  run  for  it.  —  C.  II.  S. 

A  father,  whose  affluence  was  considerable,  mourn 
ed  over  a  reckless  son,  whoso  misconduct  brought 
shame  upon  himself  and  his  family.  From  home  the 
prodigal  went  into  another  country,  and  for  years  he 
was  lost  to  his  relatives.  A  chance  occurring,  the 
sorrowing  parent  sent  by  a  friend  this  message, 
should  he  meet  his  boy,  "  Your  fatJter  loves  you  still." 
The  bearer  long  sought  him  in.  vain.  At  last  he  saw 
him  enter  a  house  of  vice,  and  called  him  ;  and  there, 
at  a  late  hour  of  evening,  he  delivered  this  message. 
The  dissolute  gambler's  heart  was  touched.  The 
thought  that  his  father  still  loved  him,  and  wished  to 
forgive  him,  broke  the  spell  of  Satan.  He  abandoned 
his  profligacy,  and  returned  to  his  father.  Oh,  the 
power  of  such  a  message  of  inalienable  love  from 
God! — The  Preachers  Commentary. 


CXLIX. 

"  AND  CRIED  WITH  A  LOUD  VOICE,  AND  SAID,  WHAT  HAVE  I  TO 
DO  WITH  THEE,  JESUS,  THOU  SON  OF  TFIE  MOST  HIGH  GOD  ? 
I  ADJURE  THEE  BY  GoD,  THAT  THOU  TORMENT  ME  NOT."- 

Markv.  1. 

THE  coming  of  Jesus  into  a  place  puts  all  into 
commotion. 

The  gospel  is  a  great  disturber  of  sinful  peace. 
Like  the  sun  among  wild  beasts,  owls,  and  bats,  it 
creates  a  stir.     In  this  case,  a  legion  of  devils  began 
to  move. 

I.    TlIE      DEVIL      CRIES      OUT      AGAINST      THE      INTRUSION      OF 

CHRIST.      "  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  " 

1.  Christ's  nature  is  so  contrary  to  that  of  the  devil 

that   war   is  inevitable   as    soon   as   Jesus 
comes  upon  the  scene. 

2.  There  are  no  designs  of  grace  for  Satan,  and, 

therefore,   as  he  has  nothing  to   hope  for 
from  Jesus,  he  dreads  his  coming. 

3.  He  wishes  to  be  let  alone;  for  thoughtlessness, 

stagnation,  and  despair  suit  his  plans. 

4.  He  knows  his  powerlessness  against  the  Son  of 

the  Most  High  God,  and  has  no  wish  to  try 
a  fall  with  him. 

5.  He  dreads  his  doom;  for  Jesus  will  not  hesitate 

(120) 


RESISTANCE  TO   SALVATION.  121 

to  torment  him  by  the  sight  of  good  done, 
and  evil  overcome. 

II.    MEN     UNDER   THE    DEVII/S    INFLUENCE    CRY   OUT    AGAINST 
THE    INCOMING    OF    CHRIST    BY    THE    GOSPEL. 

1.  Conscience  is  feared  by  them :  they  do  not  wish 

to  have  it  disturbed,  instructed,  and  placed 
in  power. 

2.  Change  is  dreaded  by  them ;  for  they  love  sin, 

and  its  gains,  and  pleasures,  and  know  that 
Jesus  wars  with  these  things. 

3.  They  claim  a  right  to  be  let  alone :  this  is  their 

idea  of  religious  liberty.     They  would  not 
be  questioned  either  by  God  or  man. 

4.  They  argue  that  the  gospel  cannot  bless  them. 

They  expect  nothing  from  it,  for  they  do  not 
know  its  rich  benedictions,  or  the  power  of 
sovereign,  almighty  grace. 

They  think  themselves  too  poor,  too  ignorant, 
too  busy,  too  sinful,  too  weak,  too  involved, 
and  perhaps  too  aged,  to  receive  any  good 
from  the  gospel. 

5.  They  view  Jesus  as  a  tormentor,  who  will  rob 

them  of  pleasure,  sting  their    consciences, 
and  drive  them  to  obnoxious  duties. 
Therefore  they  cry  out,  u  What  have  we  to  do  with 
thee  ?  " 

III.  SOBER  MEN  CAN  ANSWER  THESE  OUTCRIES. 

They  endeavor  to  answer  the  question — "  What 
have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?  "  They  remember  a  fact, 
and  make  an  inquiry. 


122  MY   SEEIMO^-T^OTES. 

1.  I  have  to  do  with  him  inevitably. 

He  has  come  to  save,  and   1   am  responsible 

for  accepting  or  refusing  his  grace. 
I  am  his  creature,  as  he  is  the  Son  of  God,  and 

he  has  power  over  me,  and  a   right   to   my 

obedience. 
I  am  under  his  rule,  and  he  will  judge  me   at 

the  last  day. 

2.  Has  he  to  do  with  me  graciously  ? 

He  has  to  do  with  me  by  the  gospel  which  he 

has  sent  me. 
He  has  abundantly  much  to  do  with  me  if  he 

has  wrought  in  me  repentance,  faith,  prayer, 

etc. 
He  has  everything  to  do  with  me  if  he  has 

bestowed  on   me  pardon,  peace,  sanctifica- 

tion,  etc. 

IV.  MEN  SAVED  FROM  SATAN  RAISE  AN  OPPOSITE  CRY. 

According  to  the  instance  before  us  in  the  narra 
tive — 

1.  They  beg  to  sit  at  Jesus'  feet,  clothed,  and  in 

their  right  mind. 

2.  They  ask  to  be  with  him  always,  and  never  to 

cease  from  personal  attendance  upon  him. 

3.  They  go  at  his  bidding,  and  publish  abroad 

what  great  things  Jesus  has  done  for  them. 

4.  Henceforth  they  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  live 

for  Jesus,  and  for  him  alone. 

Come,  ye  despisers,  and  see  yourselves  as  in  a 
looking-glass ! 


RESISTANCE  TO   SALVATION.  123 

Look  until  you  see  yourselves  transformed. 

CASES  m  POINT. 

Conversion  is  feared  as  a  great  danger  by  natural 
men,  lest  the  promises  put  them  on  the  pain  and  la 
bor  of  godliness;  for  men  do  flee  nothing  but  that 
which  they  apprehend  as  evil,  dangerous,  and  so  the 
true  object  of  fear.  Now,  when  Felix  and  Agrippa 
were  both  upon  the  wheel  of  the  great  Potter,  I  can 
not  say  that  conversion  formally  was  begun,  yet 
materially  it  was.  The  one  trembled,  and  so  was 
afraid  and  fled,  and  did  put  Paul  away  till  another 
time.  He  saw  the  danger  of  grace  (Acts  xxiv.  25, 
26),  and  fled  from  it.  The  other  said  that  he  was 
half  a  Christian  (but  it  was  the  poorer  half),  and  "he 
arose,  and  went  aside."  (Acts  xxvi.  28,  30,  31.)  "Their 
eyes  they  have  closed;  lost  at  any  time  they  should 
see  with  their  eyes,  and  hear  with  their  ears,  and 
should  understand  with  their  heart,  and  should  be 
converted,  and  I  should  heal  them."  (Matt.  xiii.  15.) 
In  which  words  it  is  evident  that  conversion  is  fear 
ed  as  an  evil. 

A  wretch  once  jested  that  he  was  once  in  danger 
to  be  catched,  when  a  Puritan  preacher,  as  he  said, 
"  was  preaching  with  divine  power,  and  evidence  of 
the  Spirit  of  God." — Samuel  Rutherford. 

It  is  said  that  Voltaire,  being  pressed  in  his  last 
moments  to  acknowledge  the  divinity  of  Christ, 
turned  away,  and  said  feebly,  "  For  the  love  of  God, 
don't  mention  that  Man — allow  me  to  die  in  peace  '/ 

A  number  of  young   men  were  sitting  together  in 


124  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

a  country  store  one  evening,  telling  what  they  did 
not  believe,  and  what  they  were  not  afraid  to  do. 
Finally,  the  leader  in  the  group  remarked  that  so  far 
as  he  was  concerned,  he  would  be  willing  at  any 
time  to  sign  away  all  his  interest  in  Christ  for  a  five- 
dollar  bill.  "  What  did  I  understand  you  to  say  ?  " 
asked  an  old  farmer,  who  happened  to  be  in  the  store, 
and  who  had  overheard  the  remark.  "  I  said  that 
for  five  dollars  I  would  sign  away  all  my  interest  in 
Christ,  and  so  I  will."  The  old  farmer,  who  had 
learned  to  know  the  human  heart  pretty  well,  drew 
out  his  leathern  wallet,  took  therefrom  a  five-dollar 
bill,  and  put  it  in  the  storekeeper's  hand.  Then  call 
ing  for  ink  and  paper,  he  said:  "  My  young  friend, 
if  you  will  just  step  to  the  desk  now,  and  write  as  I 
dictate,  the  money  is  yours. "  The  young  man  took 
the  pen,  and  began:  "In  the  presence  of  these  wit 
nesses,  I,  A—  -  B ,  for  the  sum  of  five  dollars 

received,  do  now,  once  for  all,  and  for  ever,  sign 
away  all  my  interest  " — then  he  dropped  the  pen,  and 
with  a  forced  smile  said :  "  I  take  it  back,  I  was  only 
fooling"  That  young  man  did  not  dare  to  sign  that 
paper.  Why  ?  He  had  an  accusing  conscience. 
He  knew  that  there  was  a  God.  He  believed  in  re 
ligion.  He  meant  to  be  a  Christian  some  time.  And 
so  do  you,  reader.  Notwithstanding  your  apparent 
indifference,  your  trifling  conduct,  your  boasting 
speech,  you  would  not  to-day  for  ten  thousand  dol 
lars  sign  away,  if  such  a  thing  were  possible,  your  in 
terest  in  Jesus  Christ.  You  do  not  desire  or  expect 
to  lose  heaven. — The  Congregationalist  (American). 


CL. 


••AND  HE  COMETH  TO  BETIISATDA;  AND  THEY  BRING  A  BLIND 
MAN  UNTO  HIM,  AND  BESOUGHT  HIM  TO  TOUCH  HIM. 

"  AND  HE  TOOK  THE  BLIND  MAN  BY  THE  HAND,  AND  LED  HIM 
OUT  OF  THE  TOWN ;  AND  WHEN  HE  HAD  SPIT  ON  HIS  EYES,  AND 
PUT  HIS  HANDS  UPON  HIM,  HE  ASKED  HIM  IF  HE  SAW  OUGHT. 

"  AND  HE  LOOKED  UP,  AND  SAID,  I  SEE  MEN  AS  TREES,  WALK 
ING. 

"  AFTER  THAT  HE  PUT  HIS  HANDS  AGAIN  UPON  HIS  EYES,  AND 
MADE  HIM  LOOK  UP  :  AND  HE  WAS  RESTORED,  AND  SAW  EV 
ERY  MAN  CLEARLY."— Mark  viii.  22-25. 

MEN  arrive  at  Christ  by  different  processes :  one 
is  found  by  Christ  himself,  another  comes  to 
him,  another  is  borne  of  four,  and  this  blind  man  is 
led.    This  matters  little,  so  long  as  we  do  come  to  him. 
The  act  of  bringing  men  to  Jesus  is  most    com 
mendable. 

It  proves  kindly  feeling. 

It  shows  practical  faith  in  the  power  of  Jesus. 
It  is  thus  an  act  of  true  wisdom. 
It  is  exceedingly  acceptable  to  the  Lord  ;  and 
is  sure  to  prove  effectual  when  the  person 
himself  willingly  comes. 

In  this  case  there  was  something  faulty  in  the 
bringing,  since  there  was  a  measure  of  dictation  as 
to  the  method  in  which  the  Lord  should  operate. 

I.    IT     IS   A   COMMON     WEAKNESS     OF    FAITH    TO    EXPECT    THE 

(125) 


126  MY   SERMONVNOTES. 

BLESSING     IN     A     CERTAIN     FIXED    WAY.          "They 

besought  him  to  touch  him." 
The  Lord  has  his  usual  ways,  but  he  is  not  bound 

to  them. 
Yet  too  often  we  think  and  act  as  if  he  were  so. 

1.  We  dream  that  deliverance  from  trouble  must 

come  in  one  way. 

2.  We  look  for  sanctification  either  by  afflictions 

or  by  ecstasies. 

3.  We  hope  for  salvation  only  by   one  form  of  ex 

perience. 

4.  We  look  to  see  others  converted  in  one  fashion 

of  feeling  only,  or  by  some  one  favorite  min 
istry. 

5.  We  expect  a  revival  to  take  the  stereotyped 

shape. 

II.  WHILE  OUR  LORD   HONORS   FAITH,    HE   DOES   NOT   DE 
FER   TO    ITS   WEAKNESS. 

He  did  not  consent  to  work  in  the  prescribed  man 
ner. 

He  touched,  but  no  healing  came;  and  thus  he 
proved  that  the  miracle  was  not  attached  to  that 
special  form  of  operation. 

He  did  nothing  to  the  blind  man  before  their 
eyes ;  but  led  him  out  of  the  town.  He  would  not  in 
dulge  their  observation  or  curiosity, 

He  did  not  heal  him  instantly,  as  they  expected. 

He  used  a  means  never  suggested  by  them — "  spit 
on  his  eyes,"  etc. 

When  he  did  put  his  hands  on  him,  he  did  it  twice, 


THE  FREE-AGENCY   OF   CHRIST. 

BO  that,  even  in  compliance  with  their  wish,  he  vin 
dicated  his  own  freedom. 

1.  Thus  he  refused  to  foster  the  superstition  which 

limited  his  power. 

2.  Thus  he   used   a   method   more  suited  to  the 

case. 

3.  Thus  he  gave  to  the  people  larger  instruction. 

4.  Thus  he  displayed  to  the  individual  a  more  per 

sonal  care. 

The  like  happens  in  each  distinct  conversion:  its 
specialty  is  justified  in  a  multitude  of  ways. 

III.     WHILE  OUR  LORD  REBUKES  THE  WEAKNESS  OF  FAITH, 

HE    HONORS    FAITH    ITSELF. 

1.  The   blind  man   had    consented   to   be  led  to 

Jesus,  and  Jesus  leads  him  further.  He  re 
fuses  none  because  their  coming  to  him 
has  been  less  their  own  spontaneous  act 
than  yielding  to  the  persuasion  of  others. 

2.  His  friends  had  asked  for  sight,  and  the  Lord 

gave  sight.  If  we  have  praying  faith,  he 
will  keep  pace  with  it. 

3.  The  man   and  his  friends  had  exhibited  confi 

dence  in  him,  and  he  gave  them  even  more 
than  they  expected.  If  we  can  confide,  we 
shall  receive. 

4.  The  cure  was  perfect,  and  the  method  used  dis 

played  the  completeness  of  it.     Jesus  gives 
perfect  gifts  to  imperfect  faith. 
Faith   ever   honors  the   Lord,   and  therefore   the 
Lord  honors  it. 


128  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

If  faith  were  not  thus  rewarded,  Jesus  himself 
would  suffer  dishonor. 

He  who  has  faith  shall  surely  see;  he  who  de 
mands  signs  shall  not  be  satisfied. 

Let  us  for  ever  have  done  with  prescribing  meth 
ods  to  our  Lord. 

Jesus  will  surely  heal  those  who  believe  in  him; 
he  knows  the  best  method;  and  he  is  to  be  trusted 
without  reserve. 

EXAMPLES. 

This  case,  and  that  of  the  deaf  and  stammering 
man  brought  to  Christ  in  Decapolis,  have  many 
points  of  resemblance.  In  both,  those  who  brought 
the  diseased  to  Jesus  prescribed  to  him  the  mode  of 
cure.  Was  it  for  the  purpose  of  reproving  and  coun 
teracting  the  prejudice  which  connected  the  cure  with 
a  certain  kind  of  manipulation,  on  the  part  of  the 
curer,  that  Jesus,  in  both  instances,  went  so  far  out 
of  his  usual  course,  varying  the  manner  of  his  action 
so  singularly  that,  out  of  all  his  miracles  of  healing, 
these  two  stand  distinguished  by  the  unique  mode  of 
their  performance  ?  It  is  certain  that,  had  Jesus  ob 
served  one  uniform  method  of  healing,  the  spirit  of 
formalism  and  superstition,  which  lies  so  deep  in  our 
nature,  would  have  seized  upon  it,  and  linked  it,  in 
separably,  with  the  divine  virtue  that  went  out  of 
him,  confounding  the  channel  with  the  blessing  it 
conveyed.  As  we  ponder  the  life  of  our  Redeemer, 
dwelling  particularly  on  those  parts  of  it — such  as 
his  institution  of  the  sacraments — in  which  food 


THE  FREE-AGENCY   OF   CHRIST.  129 

might  have  been  furnished  upon  which  the  spirit  of 
formalism  might  have  fed,  more  and  more  do  we 
admire  the  pains  evidently  taken  to  give  to  that 
strong  tendency  of  our  nature  as  little  material  as 
possible  to  fasten  on. — Dr.  If  anna. 

Is  the  sick  man  the  doctor,  that  he  should  choose 
the  remedy  ? — Madam  Swetchine. 

John  Newton's  hymn  is  a  case  in  point.  We 
quote  a  verse  or  two : — 

I  asked  the  Lord  that  I  might  grow 
In  faith,  and  love,  and  every  grace, 

Might  more  of  His  salvation  know, 
And  seek,  more  earnestly,  His  face. 

I  hoped  that  in  some  favored  hour, 
At  once  He'd  answer  my  request ; 

And,  by  His  love's  constraining  power, 
Subdue  my  sins,  and  give  me  rest. 

Instead  of  this  He  made  me  feel 

The  hidden  evils  of  my  heart, 
And  let  the  angry  powers  of  hell 

Assault  my  soul  in  every  part. 

Thus  did  infinite  wisdom  answer  his  prayer  in  a 
way  which  he  had  never  dreamed  of,  and  yet  it  was 
the  right  way,  as  he  confessed. 

So  apt  are  people,  as  in  the  case  of  Naaman,  to  set 
tle  in  their  own  minds  the  method  of  the  work  of 
grace,  that  it  is  hard  to  overcome  their  preconcep 
tions.  I  met  with  one  young  woman,  before  whom 
I  set  the  way  of  salvation  by  faith  alone.  She  was 
long  in  accepting,  or  even  understanding  it  ;  and 
9 


180  MY   SERMOX -NOTES. 

when  she  did  grasp  it,  and  the  joy  of  it  filled  her 
heart,  she  exclaimed  with  surprise,  "  I  never  thought 
that  people  could  find  peace  in  this  way."  "Why 
not  ?  "  I  asked  her,  and  she  replied  very  energeti 
cally,  u  I  always  believed  that  one  must  almost  go 
to  hell  to  get  to  heaven.  My  father  was  so  full  of 
despair  that  they  locked  him  up  in  the  asylum  for 
six  months,  and  then  at  last  he  got  religion." — 
C.  ff.  S. 


CLI. 

"AND  STRAIGHTWAY    THE    FATHER    OF    THE    CHILD    CRIED    OUT, 
AND  SAID  WITH    TEARS,    LORD,    I  BELIEVE  J    HELP    THOU    MINK 

UNBELIEF." — Mark  ix.  24. 

HERE  was  a  man  fully  aroused  to  anxiety,  prayer, 
and  the  use  ot  means,  and  yet  his  desire  was 
not  at  once  granted  to  him. 

Even  so,  many  are  in  earnest  about  their  souls, 
and  yet  do  not  immediately  find  conscious  salvation. 

This  drives  them  to  yet  deeper  grief. 

Perhaps  this  father's  case  may  help  them  to  un 
derstand  their  own. 

His  child  was  not  cured,  but  even  appeared  to  be 
worse  than  ever. 

Yet  the  matter  came  to  a  happy  issue  through  the 
power  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Let  us  note  the  case  carefully,  and  observe — 

I.    THE    SUSPECTED    DIFFICULTY. 

1.  The  father  may  have  thought  it  lay  with  the 

disciples. 

Yet  alone  they  could  never  have  done  any 
thing. 

Had  their  Lord  been  with  them,  they  could 
have  done  everything. 

1131) 


132  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

The  main  difficulty  was  not  with  the  disciples, 
though  it  was  partly  there. 

2.  He  probably  thought  that  the  case  itself  was 

well-nigh  hopeless. 
The  disease  was — 

So  fitful  and  mysterious. 

So  terribly  violent  and  sudden  in  its  at- 

tacks. 

So  deep-seated,  and  of  such  long  contin 
uance. 

So  near  to  utterly  destroying  life. 
But,  after  all,  it  is  not  our  own  case,  or  the  case  of 
those  for  whom  we  plead,  which  presents  any 
unusual  impediment  to  divine  power.     The  Lord 
d(3 lights  to  work  impossibilities. 

3.  lie  half  hinted  that  the  difficulty  might  lie  with 

the  Master.     "If  thou  canst  do  anything, 
have  compassion  on  us,  and  help  us." 
"If  thou  canst."     Had   he  seen  the  transfigu 
ration,  he  would  have  known   the  power 
and  glory  of  the  Lord. 

"  Have  compassion."  Could  he  have  read  the 
Lord's  heart,  he  would  have  felt  sure  that 
the  Saviour's  pity  was  already  aroused. 

Rest  assured,  0  anxious  heart,  that  the  difficulty 
of  your  case  lies  alone  in  your  want  of  faith  ! 

II.  THE  TEARFUL   DISCOVERY.       "He   said   with   tears, 
Lord,  I  believe;  help  thou  mine  unbelief." 

The  Lord  Jesus  repudiated  the  insinuation  that 
thero  was  any  question  as  to  his  power,  and  cast  the 


FEEBLE  FAITH  APPEALING  TO  A  SAVIOUR.      133 

"  if"  back  upon  the  father  with    "  If  thou  canst  be 
lieve."     Then — 

1.  The  man's  little  faith  discovered  his  unbelief. 

2.  He  was  distressed  and  alarmed  at  the  sight  of 

his  own  unbelief. 

3.  He  turned  his  thoughts  and  prayers  in  that  di 

rection.     It  was   now  not  so  much  "  Help 
my  child,"  as  "  Help  my  unbelief." 

4.  He  became  deeply  sensible  of  the  sin  and  dan 

ger  of  unbelief. 

Let  us  look  in  the  same  direction  personally,  and 
we  shall  see  that  unbelief  is  an  alarming  and  crimi 
nal  thing;  for  it  doubts — 

The  power  of  Omnipotence. 
The  value  of  the  promise  of  God 
The  efficacy  of  Christ's  blood. 
The  prevalence  of  his  plea. 
The  al mightiness  of  the  Spirit. 
The  truth  of  the  gospel. 

In  fact,  unbelief  robs  God  of  his  glory  in  every 
way,  and  therefore  it  cannot  receive  a  blessing  from 
the  Lord.  Heb.  xi.  6. 

III.  THE  INTELLIGENT  APPEAL.     "  Lord,  Ibclieve;  help 
thou  mine  unbelief." 

In  his  great  perplexity  he  cries  to  Jesus  only. 

1.  On  the  basis  of  faith — "  Lord,  I  believe  !" 

2.  With  confession  of  sin — "mine  unbelief." 

3.  To  One  who  knows  how  to  help  in  this  matter, 

"  Lord,  help." 


134  MY    SERMOJST-]STOTES. 

4.  To  One  who  is  himself  the  best  remedy  for  un 
belief—"  help  them." 

Unbelief  is  overcome  when  we  fly  to  Jesus, 
and  consider — 

The  majesty  of  his  divine  nature. 
The  tenderness  of  his  humanity. 
The  graciousness  of  his  offices. 
The  grandeur  of  his  atonement. 
The  glorious  object  of  his  work. 

Come  to  Jesus  with  any  case,  and  in  every  case. 

Come  with  your  little  faith  and  with  your  great 
unbelief,  for  in  this  matter  also  he  can  help  as  none 
other  can. 

HELPS. 

There  is  no  sin  which  may  not  be  traced  up  to  un 
belief. — Mason. 

"  Lord,  I  believe"  etc.  This  act  of  his,  in  putting 
forth  his  faith  to  believe  as  he  could,  was  the  way 
to  believe  as  he  would. — Trapp. 

A  young  man  in  the  seventeenth  century,  being 
in  deep  distress  of  mind,  applied  to  Dr.  Goodwin  for 
advice  and  consolation.  After  he  had  laid  before 
him  the  long  and  black  list  of  sins  that  troubled  his 
conscience,  the  doctor  reminded  him  that  there  was 
one  blacker  still,  which  he  had  not  named.  "  What 
can  that  be,  sir?"  he  despondingly  asked.  "The 
sin,"  replied  the  doctor,  "  I  refer  to  is  that  of  refus 
ing  to  believe  in  Christ  Jesus  as  a  Saviour."  The 
simple  word  banished  the  anxious  one's  guilty  fears. 


FEEBLE  FAITH  APPEALING  TO  A  SAVIOUE.     135 

There  was  once  a  good  woman  who  was  well 
known  among  her  circle  for  her  simple  faith,  and 
her  great  calmness  in  the  midst  of  many  trials. 
Another  woman,  living  at  a  distance,  hearing  of  her, 
said,  "  I  must  go  and  see  that  woman,  and  learn  the 
secret  of  her  holy,  happy  life."  She  went  ;  and  ac 
costing  the  woman,  said,  "Are  you  the  woman  with 
the  great  faith?"  "No,"  replied  she,  "  I  am  not  the 
woman  with  the  great  faith  ;  but  I  am  the  woman 
with  a  little  faith  in  the  great  God." 

O  help  us,  through  the  prayer  of  faith, 

More  firmly  to  believe ; 
For  still  the  more  thy  servant  hath, 

The  more  shall  he  receive. 

Mllman. 

A  friend  complained  to  Gotthold  of  the  weakness 
of  his  faith,  and  the  distress  this  gave  him.  Gott 
hold  pointed  to  a  vine,  which  had  twined  itself 
around  a  pole,  and  was  hanging  loaded  with  beauti 
ful  clusters,  and  said,  "  Frail  is  that  plant ;  but  what 
harm  is  done  to  it  by  its  frailty,  especially  as  the 
Creator  has  been  pleased  to  make  it  what  it  is  ?  As 
little  will  it  prejudice  your  faith  that  it  is  weak, 
provided  only  it  be  sincere  and  unfeigned.  Faith 
is  the  work  of  God,  and  he  bestows  it  in  such  meas 
ure  as  he  wills  and  judges  right.  Let  the  measure 
of  it  which  he  has  given  you  be  deemed  sufficient  by 
you.  Take  for  pole  and  prop  the  cross  of  the  Saviour 
and  the  Word  of  God  ;  twine  around  these  with  all 
the  power  which  God  vouchsafes.  A  heart  sensible 
of  its  weakness,  and  prostrating  itself  continually  at 


130 


MY 


-^  OTES. 


the  feet  of  the  divine  mercy,  is  more  acceptable  than 
that  which  presumes  upon  the  strength  of  its  faith, 
and  falls  into  false  security  and  pride.  Can  you 
suppose  that  the  sinful  woman,  who  lay  and  wept  at 
the  Lord's  feet,  was  less  approved  than  the  swelling 
and  haughty  Pharisee?" — Christian  Scriver. 


CLII. 

"  AND  JESUS  STOOD  STILL,  AND  COMMANDED  HIM  TO  BE  CALLED. 

AND  THEY  CALL  THE  BLIND  MAN,  SAYING  UNTO  HIM,  BE  OP 

GOOD  COMFORT,  RISE;  HE  CALLETH  THEE. 
"AND  HE,  CASTING  AWAY  HIS  GARMENT,  ROSE,  AND  CAME  TO 

JESUS."— Mark  x.  49,  50. 

r  I  ^HIS  man  is  a  picture  of  what  we  would  fain 
-*•  have  every  seeker  of  Christ  to  become. 

In  his  lonely  darkness,  and  deep  poverty,  he 
thought  and  became  persuaded  that  Jesus  was  the 
Son  of  David. 

Though  he  had  no  sight,  he  made  good  use  of  his 
hearing.  If  we  have  not  all  gifts,  let  us  use  those 
which  we  have. 

I.  HE  SOUGHT   THE    LORD    UNDER    DISCOURAGEMENTS. 

1.  No  one  prompted  his  seeking. 

2.  Many  opposed  his  attempts.     '*  Many  charged 

him  that  he  should  hold  his  peace  :"  verse  48. 

3.  For  a  while  he  was  unheeded  by  the  Lord  him 

self. 

4.  He  was   but   a   blind  beggar,  and  this   alone 

might  have  checked  some  pleaders. 
Let  our  hearers  imitate  his  dogged  resolution. 

II.  HE  RECEIVED  ENCOURAGEMENT. 

This  came  from  our  Lord's  commanding  him  to  be 
called. 

(137) 


138  MY   SEKMOX-NOTES. 

There  are  several  kinds  of  calls  which  come  to 
men  at  the  bidding  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  There 
is  the — 

1.  Universal  call.  Jesus  is  lifted  up  that  all  who 
look  to  him  may  live.  John  iii.  14,  15.  The 
gospel  is  preached  to  every  creature. 

$.  Character  call.  To  those  who  labor,  and  are 
heavy  laden.  Many  are  the  gospel  promises 
which  call  the  sinful,  the  mourning,  the 
weary  to  Jesus.  Is.  Iv.  7.  Matt.  xi.  28. 
Acts  ii.  38,  39. 

&  Ministerial  call.  Given  by  the  Lord's  sent  ser 
vants,  and  so  backed  by  his  authority 
Acts  xiii.  26,  38,  39  ;  xvi.  31. 

4.  Effectual  call.  Sent  home  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 
This  is  the  calling  of  which  we  read, 
"whom  he  called,  them  he  also  justified  :" 
Eom.  viii.  30. 

HI.    BUT  ENCOURAGEMENT  DID  NOT  CONTENT    HIM  ;   HE    STILL 
SOUGHT  JESUS. 

To  stop  short  of  Jesus  and  healing  would  have 
been  folly  indeed. 

1.  He  arose.     Hopefully,  resolutely,  he  quitted  his 

begging  posture.  In  order  to  salvation  we 
must  be  on  the  alert,  and  in  earnest. 

2.  He  cast  away  his  garment,  and  every  hindrance. 

Our  righteousness,  our  comfortable  sin,  our 
habit — anything,  everything  we  must  quit 
for  Christ. 

3.  He  came  to  Jesus.     In  the  darkness  occasioned 


THE  BLIND  BEGGAK  OF  JEEICHO.  139 

by  his  blindness,  he  followed  the  Saviour's 
voice. 

4.  He  stated  his  case.     "  Lord,  that  I  might  receive 

my  sight ! " 

5.  He   received  salvation.     Jesus  said  unto  him, 

"  Thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole."  He 
obtained  perfect  eyesight;  and  in  all  respects 
he  was  in  complete  health. 

IV,  HAVING  FOUND  JESUS,  HE  KEPT  TO  HIM. 

1.  He  used  his  sight  to  see  his  Lord. 

2.  He  became  his  avowed  disciple.     See  verse  52. 

3.  He  went  with  Jesus  on  his  way  to  the    cross, 

and  to  the  crown. 

4.  He    remained    a    well-known   disciple,    whose 

father's  name  is  given. 

This  man  came  out  of  cursed  Jericho  :  are  there 
not  some  to  come  from  our  slums  and  degraded  dis 
tricts  ?  This  man  at  best  was  a  beggar,  but  the  Lord 
Jesus  did  not  disdain  his  company.  lie  was  a  stand 
ing  glory  to  the  Lord,  for  every  one  would  know 
him  as  the  blind  man  whose  eyes  had  been  opened. 

Let  seeking  souls  persevere  under  all  drawbacks. 
Do  not  mind  those  who  would  keep  you  back.  Let 
none  hinder  you  from  finding  Christ  and  salvation. 

Though  blind,  and  poor,  and  miserable,  you  shall 
yet  see,  and  smile,  and  sing,  and  follow  Jesus. 

ENCOURAGEMENTS. 

" And  commanded  him  to  be  called"  By  this  circum 
stance  he  administered  reproof  and  instruction :  re- 


140  MY   SERMOX-XOTES. 

proof,  by  ordering  those  to  help  the  poor  man  who 
had  endeavored  to  chock  him :  instruction,  by  teach 
ing  us  that,  though  he  does  not  stand  in  need  of  our 
help,  he  will  not  dispense  with  our  services ;  that  we 
are  to  aid  each  other ;  that  though  we  cannot  recov 
er  our  fellow-creatures,  we  may  frequently  bring 
them  to  the  place  and  means  of  cure. —  William  Jay. 

Sad  one,  in  secret,  bending  low, 
A  dart  in  thy  breast  that  the  world  may  not  "know, 
Striving  the  favor  of  God  to  win, 
Asking  his  pardon  for  days  of  sin  ; 
Press  on,  press  on,  with  thy  earnest  cry, 
"Jesus  of  Nazareth  passeth  by." 

Mrs.  Sigoumey. 

"And  he,  casting  away  Ms  garment,  rose,  and  came  to 
Jesus"  I  remember  once  reading  these  words  on  a 
memorial  tablet  in  a  country  church.  Inscriptions 
on  tombstones  are  often  unsatisfactory,  and  scriptu 
ral  quotations  upon  them  most  inappropriate;  but  this 
one  was  as  suitable  as  it  was  singular.  The  squire 
of  the  village,  a  high-churchman,  and  an  ardent 
sportsman,  had  late  in  life  come  under  the  influence 
of  Christian  friends,  who  brought  him  to  a  knowl 
edge  of  the  gospel;  and  to  him  the  words  of  the 
Evangelist  were  applied.  They  were  very  sugges 
tive.  They  told  of  pride,  and  worldly  pursuits,  and 
self-righteousness,  of  all  to  which  the  man  had  clung 
for  a  life-time,  cast  away  that  he  might  come  to  the 
Saviour.  For  a  sinner  saved  in  life's  last  hours  a  bet 
ter  epitaph  could  hardly  have  been  chosen.  I  admir 
ed  the  piety  that  compared  the  rich  man  lying  there 
to  the  poor  blind  beggar  of  the  gospel  story;  the 


THE  BLIND  BEGGAR  OF  JERICHO.  141 

once  highly  esteemed  garment  of  personal  right 
eousness  to  the  beggar's  worthless  robe ;  and  that  ex 
pressed  the  one  hope  and  refuge  of  the  soul  in  Christ 
by  the  words  "  he  came  to  Jesus."  It  reminded  me 
of  the  lines  on  William  Carey's  tomb — 

A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm, 
On  thj  kind  arms  I  fall ; 
Be  Thou  my  strength  and  righteousness, 
My  Jesus  and  my  all. — P. 

Success  in  this  world  comes  only  to  those  who  ex 
hibit  determination.  Can  we  hope  for  salvation  un 
less  our  mind  is  truly  set  upon  it  ?  Grace  makes  a 
man  to  be  as  resolved  to  be  saved  as  this  beggar  was 
to  get  to  Jesus,  and  gain  his  sight.  "  I  must  see  him," 
said  an  applicant  at  the  door  of  a  public  person. 
"  You  cannot  see  him,"  said  the  servant;  but  the  man 
waited  at  the  door.  A  friend  went  out  to  him,  and 
said,  4t  You  cannot  see  the  master,  but  I  can  give  you 
an  answer."  "  No,"  said  the  unfortunate  pleader,  "  1 
will  stay  all  night  on  the  doorstep,  but  I  will  see  the 
man  himself.  He  alone  will  serve  my  turn."  You 
do  not  wonder  that,  after  many  rebuffs,  he  ultimate 
ly  gained  his  point :  it  would  be  an  iniinitely  greater 
wonder  if  an  importunate  sinner  did  not  obtain  an 
audience  from  the  Lord  Jesus.  If  you  must  have 
grace,  you  shall  have  it.  If  you  will  not  be  put  oil', 
you  shall  not  be  put  off.  Whether  things  look  fa 
vorable,  or  unfavorable,  press  you  on  till  you  find 
Jesus,  and  you  shall  find  him. — C.  H.  S. 


CLIII. 

"  AND  WHEN  JESUS  SAW  THAT  HE  ANSWERED  DISCREETLY,  HE 
SAID  UNTO  HIM,  THOU  ART  NOT  FAR  FROM  THE  KINGDOM  OP 
GOD."— Mark  xii.  34. 

r  I  MIE  kingdom  of  God  is  set  up  among  men. 
JL     Those  who  are  in  it  are — 

Quickened  with  divine  life.     "  He  is  not  the 

God  of  the  dead,  but  the  God  of  the  living  :w 

verse  27. 
Eeceived  under  the   reign   of  grace.     Rom. 

v.  21. 

Obedient  to  the  law  of  love.     1  John  iv.  7. 
Favored  with  divine  privileges.     Matt.  vi.  33  ; 

Luke  xii.  32. 

Raised  to  special  dignities.     Rev.  i.  6. 
Indulged    with    peculiar   happiness.      Matt. 

xxv.  34. 

Those  who  are  outside  of  it  are  in  some  respects 
on  a  level. 

But  in  other  regards,  some  are  "  far  off,"  and 
others  "  not  far." 

The  scribe  in  the  narrative  was  on  the  borders  of 
the  kingdom. 

Of  such  a  character  we  will  now  treat. 

I.  WHAT   ARE   ITS   MARKS? 
1.  Truthfulness  of  spirit. 


SO   NEAK.  143 

This  man  was  candid  as  a  student  of  the  law. 
This  man  was  honest  as  a  teacher  of  the  law. 
This  man  was  fair  as  a  controversialist. 
A  spirit  of  general  uprightness,  sincerity,  and 
fairness,  is  a  great  moral  advantage. 

2.  Spiritual    perception.     This   scribe   must  have 

spoken  with  great  discretion,  or  the  Lord 

Jesus  would  not  have  taken   such   special 

notice  of  his  reply.     He  saw — 
More  than  a  Papist,  who  makes   everything 

of  ceremonies. 
More   than    a    mere     doctrinalist,    who   puts 

head-knowledge     above      heart-experience 

and  holiness. 
More  than  a  moralist,  who  forgets  the  love  of 

the  heart. 

3.  Acquaintance  with  the  law. 

Those  who  see  the  unity,  and  yet  the  breadth 

and  spirituality  of  the  law's  demands  are  in 

a  hopeful  condition. 
Still  more  those  who  perceive  that  their  own 

lives  fall  short  of  those  demands,  and  grieve 

on  that  account. 

4.  Teachableness,  which  this  man  clearly  exhibit 

ed,  is  a  good  sign  ;  especially  if  we  are 
willing  to  learn  truth,  although  its  advo 
cate  is  unpopular. 

5.  A  sense  of  need  of  Christ,  which  did  not  appear 

in  the  case  of  this  scribe,  but  is  seen  in 
many  who  attend  the  ministry. 


144  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

6.  A  horror  of  wrong-doing,   and  of  impurity  of 

every  kind. 

7.  A  high  regard  for  holy  things,  and  a  practical 

interest  in  them. 

8.  A  diligent  commencement  of  prayer,  Bible-read 

ing,  meditation,  regular  hearing  of  the  word, 
and  other  gracious  habits. 

There  are  other  signs,  but  time  would  fail  us  to 
mention  more. 

Many  of  these  appear,  like  blossoms  on  a  tree,  but 
they  disappoint  the  hopes  which  they  excite. 

II.  WHAT   ARE   ITS   DANGERS? 

No  man  is  safe  till  he  is  actually  in  the  kingdom  : 
the  border-land  is  full  of  peril.  There  is  the  dan 
ger. 

1.  Lest  you  slip  back  from  this  hopefulness. 

2.  Lest  you  rest  content  to  stop  where  you  are. 

3.  Lest  you  grow  proud  and  self-righteous. 

4.  Lest  you  proceed  from  being  candid  to  become 
indifferent. 

5.  Lest  you  die  ere  the  decisive  step  be  taken. 

III.  WHAT   ARE   ITS   DUTIES  ? 

Though  your  condition  is  not  one  in  which  to 
rest,  it  is  one  which  involves  you  in  many  responsi 
bilities,  since  it  is  a  condition  of  singular  privilege. 

1.  Thank  God  for  dealing  so  mercifully  with  you. 

2.  Admit  with  deep  sincerity  that  you  need  super 

natural  help  for  entrance  into  the  kingdom. 


SO   NEAR.  145 

3.  Tremble  lest  that  decisive  and  saving  step  be 

never  taken. 
4  Decide  at  once  through  divine  grace.     Oh,  for 

the  Spirit  of  God  to  work  effectually  upon 

you! 

What  a  pity  that  any   should  perish  who  are   so 
near ! 

What  horror  to  see  such  hopeful  ones  cast  away ! 
How  fatal  to  stop  short  of  saving  faith ! 


EXPOSTULATIONS. 

Among  those  who  have  turned  out  to  be  the  most 
determined  enemies  of  the  gospel  are  many,  who 
once  were  so  near  to  conversion,  that  it  was  a  won 
der  that  they  avoided  it.  Such  persons  seem  ever 
after  to  take  vengeance  upon  the  holy  influence 
which  had  almost  proved  too  much  for  them.  Hence 
our  fear  for  persons  under  gracious  impressions  ;  for 
if  they  do  not  now  decide  for  God,  they  will  become 
the  more  desperate  in  sin.  That  which  is  set  in  the 
sun,  if  it  be  not  softened,  will  be  hardened.  T  re 
member  well  a  man,  who,  under  the  influence  of  an 
earnest  revivalist,  was  brought  to  his  knees,  to  cry 
for  mercy,  in  the  presence  of  his  wife  and  others  ; 
but  never  afterwards  would  he  enter  a  place  of  wor 
ship,  or  pay  attention  to  religious  conversation. 
He  declared  that  his  escape  was  so  narrow  that  he 
would  never  run  the  risk  again.  Alas,  that  one 
should  graze  the  gates  of  heaven,  and  yet  drive  on 
to  hell!—  G.  H.  S. 
10 


146  MY   SEEMOX-ISTOTES. 

Some  are  in  the  suburbs  of  the  city  of  refuge.  I 
warn  you  against  staying  there.  Oh,  what  pity  is  it 
that  any  should  perish  at  the  gates  of  salvation  for 
want  of  another  step ! 

He  that  makes  but  one  step  up  a  stair,  though  he 
be  not  much  nearer  to  the  top  of  the  house,  yet  he 
has  stepped  from  the  ground,  and  is  delivered  from 
the  foulness  and  dampness  of  that.  So,  he  that  tak- 
eth  the  first  step  of  prayer  by  truly  crying — "  0  Lord, 
be  merciful  unto  me ! "  though  he  be  not  established 
in  heaven,  yet  he  has  stepped  from  off  the  world,  and 
the  miserable  comforts  thereof. — Dr.  D&nne. 

A  Christian  minister  says,  "When,  after  safely  cir 
cumnavigating  the  globe,  Tlie  Royal  Charter  went  to 
pieces  in  Moelfra  Bay,  on  the  coast  of  Wales,  it  was 
my  melancholy  duty  to  visit  and  seek  to  comfort  the 
wife  of  the  first  officer,  made  by  that  calamity  a 
widow.  The  ship  had  been  telegraphed  from  Queens- 
town,  and  the  lady  was  sitting  in  the  parlor  expect 
ing  her  husband,  with  the  table  spread  for  the  even 
ing  meal,  when  the  messenger  came  to  tell  her  he 
was  drowned.  Never  can  T  forget  the  grief,  so  strick 
en  and  tearless,  with  which  she  wrung  my  hand,  as 
she  said,  l  So  near  home,  and  yet  lost ! '  That  seemed 
to  me  the  most  terrible  of  human  sorrow.  But,  ah  ! 
that  is  nothing  to  the  anguish  which  must  wring  the 
soul  which  is  compelled  to  say  at  last,  *  Once  I  was 
at  the  very  gate  of  heaven,  and  had  almost  entered 
in,  but  now  I  am  in  hell !  " 

I  remember  a  man  coming  to  me  in  great  distress 


SO   NEAK.  147 


of  soul,  and  his  case  made  a  deep  impression  upon 
my  mind.  He  was  a  man-of-war's  man,  with  all  the 
frankness  of  a  British  tar,  but,  alas!  also,  with  a  sail 
or's  fondness  for  strong  drink.  As  we  talked  and 
prayed  together,  the  tears  literally  rained  down  the 
poor  fellow's  weather-beaten  face,  and  he  trembled  vio 
lently.  "Oh,  sir,"  he  exclaimed,  "I  could  fight  for 
it  !  "  Truly,  if  salvation  could  have  been  obtained  by 
some  deed  of  daring,  he  would  have  won  it.  He  left 
me  without  finding  peace,  and  the  next  day  he  went 
back  drunk)  to  join  his  ship  ;  and  I  have  never  heard 
of  him  since.  —  -J.  W.  H. 


CLIV 

THEY   CAME   TO   A   PLACE   WHICH  WAS  NAME»   GETHSEMA- 

NE."— Mark  xiv.  32. 

OUR  Lord  left  the  table  of  happy  fellowship,  and 
passed  over  the  brook  Kedron,  so  associated 
with  the  sorrows  of  David.  2  Sam.  xv.  23. 

He  then  entered  into  the  garden,  named  Gethsem- 
ane,  not  to  hide  himself  from  death,  but  to  prepare 
for  it  by  a  season  of  special  prayer. 

Gethsemane  was  our  Lord's  place  of  secret  prayer. 
John  xviii.  1,  2. 

If  he  resorted  to  his  closet  in  the  hour  of  trial,  we 
need  to  do  so  far  more. 

In  his  solitary  supplication  he  was  oppressed  with 
a  great  grief,  and  overwhelmed  with  a  terrible  an 
guish. 

It  was  a  killing  change  from  the  cheerful  commun 
ion  of  the  Supper  to  the  lone  agony  of  the  garden. 

Let  us  think  with  great  solemnity  of  the  olive-gar 
den  where  the  Saviour  sweat  as  it  were  great  drops 
of  blood. 

I.  THE  CHOICE  OP  THE  SPOT — 

1    Showed  his  serenity  of  mind,  and  his  courage. 
He  goes  to  his  usual  place  of  secret  prayer. 
He  goes  there  though  Judas  knew  the  place. 

(148) 


GETHSEMANE.  149 

2.  Manifested  his  wisdom. 

Holy  memories  there  aided  his  faith. 

Deep  solitude  was  suitable  for  his  prayers  and 

cries. 
Congenial  gloom  fitted  his  exceeding  sorrow. 

3.  Bequeathed  us  lessons. 

In  a  garden,  Paradise  was  lost  and  won. 

In  Gethsemane,  the  olive-press,  our  Lord  him 
self  was  crushed. 

In  our  griefs,  let  us  retreat  to  our  God  in  secret. 

la  our  special  prayers,  let  us  not  be  ashamed 
to  let  them  be  known  to  our  choicer  friends, 
for  Jesus  took  his  disciples  with  him  to  his 
secret  devotions  in  Gethsemane. 

II.    THE   EXERCISE    UPON   THE    SPOT. 

Every  item  is  worthy  of  attention  and  imitation. 

1.  He  took  all  due  precautions  for  others. 

He  would  not  have  his  disciples  surprised,  and 
therefore  bade  them  watch.  So  should  we 
care  for  others  in  our  own  extremity.  The 
intensity  of  his  intercourse  with  God  did 
not  cause  him  to  forget  one  of  his  compan 
ions. 

2.  He  solicited  the  sympathy  of  friends. 

We  may   not  despise  this;  though,  like  our 
Lord,   we  shall  prove  the  feebleness  of  it, 
and  cry,  u  Could  ye  not  watch  with  me?  " 
&  He  prayed  and  wrestled  with  God. 

In  lowliest  posture  and  manner.     See  verse  35. 

In  piteous  repetition  of  his  cry.  See  verses 
36  and  39- 


150  MY   SEEMdiST-NOTES. 

In   awful  agony  01   spirit   even   to  a  bloody 

sweat.     Luke  xxii.  44 
In  full  and  true  submission.     Matt.  xxvi.  42, 

44. 

4.  He  again  and  again  sought  human  sympathy, 

but  made  excuse  for  his  friends  when  they 
failed  him.  See  verse  38.  We  ought  not 
to  1  >e  soured  in  spirit  even  when  we  are  bit- 
terl  y  disappointed. 

5.  He  returned  to  his  God,  and  poured  out  his  soul 

in  strong1  crying  and  tears,  until  he  was 
heard  in  that  he  feared.  Heb.  v.  7. 

III.  THE  TKICMPH  UPON  THI;    SPOT. 

1.  Behold  his  perfect  resignation.     He   struggles 

with  u  if  it  be  possible,"  but  conquers  with 
"not  what  I  will,  but  what  thou  wilt/'  He 
is  our  example  of  patience. 

2.  Rejoice  in  his  strong  resolve.     He  had  under 

taken,  and  would  go  through  with  it.  Luke 
ix.  51;  xii.  50. 

3.  Mark  the  angelic  service  rendered.     The  blood- 

bestained  Sufferer  has  still  all  heaven  at  his 
call.  Matt.  xxvi.  53. 

4.  Remember  his  majestic  bearing  towards  his  en 

emies. 

He  meets  them  bravely.     Matt.  xxvi.  55. 
He  makes  them  fall.     John  xviii.  6. 
He   yields  himself,   but   not  to  force.      John 

xviii.  8. 
He  goes  to  the  cross,  but  transforms  it  to  a 

throne. 


GETHSEMANE.  151 

We,  too,  may  expect  our  minor  Gethsemane. 
We  shall  not  be  there  without  a  Friend,  for  he  is 
with  us. 

We  shall  conquer  by  his  might,  and  in  his  manner. 

IN  MEMORIAM. 

The  late  Rev.  W.  H.  Krause,  of  Dublin,  was  visit 
ing  a  lady  in  a  depressed  state, "  weak,  oh,  so  weak !  " 
She  told  him  that  she  had  been  very  much  troubled 
in  mind  that  day,  because  in  meditation  and  prayer 
she  had  found  it  impossible  to  govern  her  thoughts, 
and  kept  merely  going  over  the  same  things  again 
and  again.  "  Well,  my  dear  friend,"  was  his  prompt 
reply,  "  there  is  provision  in  the  gospel  for  that  too. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  his  soul  was  exceeding 
sorrowful,  even  unto  death,  three  times  prayed,  and 
spoke  the  same  words."  This  seasonable  application 
of  Scripture  was  a  source  of  great  comfort  to  her. 

Gethsemane,  the  olive-press ! 
(And  why  so  called  let  Christians  guess.) 
Fit  name,  fit  place,  where  vengeance  strove, 
And  griped  and  grappled  hard  with  love. 

Joseph  Hart. 

"  My  will,  not  thine,  be  done,"  turned  paradise  in 
to  a  desert.  "  Thy  will,  not  mine,  be  done,"  turned 
the  desert  into  Paradise,  and  made  Gethsemane  the 
gate  of  heaven. — E.  de  Pressense. 

An  inscription  in  a  garden  in  Wales  runs  thus: — 

"  In  a  garden  the  first  of  our  race  was  deceived, 
In  a  garden  the  promise  of  grace  he  received, 
In  a  garden  was  Jesus  betrayed  to  his  doom, 
In  a  garden  his  body  was  laid  in  a,  tomb." 


152  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

There  will  be  no  Christian  but  what  will  have  a 
Gethsemane,  but  every  praying  Christian  will  find 
that  there  is  no  Gethsemane  without  its  angel. — 
Thomas  Binney. 

The  Father  heard ;  and  angels,  there, 
Sustained  the  Son  of  God  in  prayer, 

In  sad  Gethsemane; 
He  drank  the  dreadful  cup  of  pain- 
Then  rose  to  life  and  joy  again. 

When  storms  of  sorrow  round  us  sweep, 
And  scenes  of  anguish  make  us  weep ; 

To  sad  Gethsemane 
We'll  look,  and  see  the  Saviour  there, 
And  humbly  how,  like  Him,  in  prayer. 

S.  F.  SmMk. 

"  And  there  appeared  an  angel  unto  him,  from  heaven, 
strengthening  him." — What !  The  Son  of  God  receives 
help  from  an  angel,  who  is  but  his  creature  ?  Yes. 
And  we  learn  thereby  to  expect  help  and  comfort 
from  simple  persons  and  common  things,  when  God 
pleases.  All  strength  and  comfort  come  from  God, 
but  he  makes  creatures  his  ministers  to  bring  it.  We 
should  thank  both  them  and  him. — Practical  Reflec 
tions  on  every  verse  of  the  Holy  Gospels,  by  a  Clergyman. 

There  is  something  in  an  olive-garden,  on  a  hill 
side,  which  makes  it  most  suitable  for  prayer  and 
meditation.  The  shade  is  solemn,  the  terraces  divide 
better  than  distance,  the  ground  is  suitable  for  kneel 
ing  upon,  and  the  surroundings  are  all  in  accord  with 
holy  thoughts.  I  can  hardly  tell  why  it  is,  but  often 
as  I  have  sat  in  an  olive-garden,  I  have  never  been 
without  the  sense  that  it  was  the  place  and  the  hour 
of  prayer.— C.  H.  S- 


CLY. 

*  AND  WHEN  HE   THOUGHT  THEREON,    HE  WEPT."  —  Mark  xir.  72. 


EPENTANCE  is  wrought  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
J-V  But  he  works  it  in  us  by  leading  us  to  think 
upon  the  evil  of  sin. 

Peter  could  not  help  weeping  when  he  remem 
bered  his  grievous  fault. 

Let  us  at  this  time  — 

L   STUDY  PETER'S  CASE,  AND  USE  IT  FOR  OUR  OWN  INSTRUC 
TION. 

1.  He  considered  that  he  had  denied  his  Lord. 

Have  we  never  done  the  like  ? 
This  may  be  done  in  many  ways. 

2.  He  reflected  upon  the  excellence  of  the  Lord 

whom  he  had  denied. 

3.  He  remembered  the  position  in  which  his  Lord 

had  placed  him,  —  making  him  an  apostle, 
and  one  of  the  first  of  them. 
Have  we  not  been  placed  in  positions  of  trust  ? 

4.  He  bethought  him  of  the   special   intercourse 

which  he  had  enjoyed.     He  and  James  and 
John  had  been  most  favored.     Matt.  xvii. 
1—13;  xxvi.  36—46;  Mark  v.  37—43. 
Have  not  we  known  joyous  fellowship  with 
our  Lord  ? 

(153) 


154  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

5.  He  recollected  that  he  had  been  solemnly  fore 

warned  by  his  Lord. 

Have    we    not     sinned    against    light    and 
knowledge  ? 

6.  He  recalled  his  own  vows,  pledges,  and  boasts. 

"Although  all  shall  be  offended,  yet  will 
not  I:"  verse  29. 

Have  we  not   broken   very   earnest   declara 
tions  ? 

7.  He  thought  upon  the  special  circumstances  of 

his  Lord  when  he  had  so  wickedly  denied 
him. 
Are  there  no  aggravations  in  our  case  ? 

8.  He  revolved  in  his  mind  his  repetitions  of  the 

offence,  and  those  repetitions  with  added 
aggravations:  his  lie,  his  oath,  etc. 
We  ought  to  dwell  on  each  item  of  our  trans 
gressions,   that  we   may    be  brought  to  a 
more  thorough  repentance  of  them. 

I.  STUDY  OUR  OWN  LIVES,  AND   USE  THE   STUDY  FOR  OUR 

FURTHER  HUMILIATION. 

1.  Think  upon  our  transgressions  while  unregen- 

erate. 

2.  Think  upon  our  resistance  of  light,  and  con 

science,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  before  we  were 
overcome  by  divine  grace. 

3.  Think  upon  our  small  progress  in  the  divine 

life. 

4.  Think  upon  our  backslidings  and  heart-wander 

ings. 


FOUNTAINS   OF   REPENTANT  TEARS.  IDS 

5.  Think  upon  our  neglect  of  the  souls  of  others. 

6.  Think    upon   our  little   communion   with   our 

Lord. 

7.  Think  upon  the  little  glory  we  are  bringing  to 

his  great  name. 

8.  Think  upon  our  matchless  obligations  to  his 

infinite  love. 

Each  of  these  meditations  is  calculated  to  make  us 
weep. 

III.  STUDY  THE  EFFECT  OF  THESE  THOUGHTS  UPON  OUR  OWN 

MINDS. 

1.  Can  we  think  of  these  things  without  emotion  ? 

This  is  possible;  for  many  excuse  their  sin 
on  the  ground  of  their  circumstances,  their 
constitution,  their  company,  their  trade, 
their  fate :  they  even  lay  the  blame  on  Sa 
tan,  or  some  other  tempter.  Certain  hard 
hearts  treat  the  matter  with  supreme  indif 
ference. 

This  is  perilous.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  such 
a  man  is  not  Peter,  but  Judas:  not  a  fallen 
saint,  but  a  son  of  perdition. 

2.  Are  we  moved  by  thoughts  of  these  things  ? 

There  are  other  reflections  which  may  move 

us  far  more. 
Our    Lord   forgives  us,  and  numbers  us  with 

his  brethren. 
He  asks  us   if  we   love  him,  and  he  bids  us 

feed  his  sheep. 
Surely,  when  we  dwell  on  these  themes,   it 


156  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

must  be  true    of  each,   of  us — "When  he 
thought  thereon,  he  wept." 

RECOLLECTIONS. 

Peter's  recollection  of  what  he  had  formerly  heard 
was  another  occasion  of  his  repentance.  We  do  not 
sufficiently  consider  how  much  more  we  need  recol 
lection  than  information.  We  know  a  thousand 
things,  but  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  be  kept 
alive  in  our  hearts  by  a  constant  and  vivid  recollec 
tion.  It  is,  therefore,  extremely  absurd  and  childish 
for  people  to  say,  u  You  tell  me  nothing  but  what  I 
know."  I  answer,  you  forget  many  things  ;  and 
therefore,  it  is  necessary  that  line  should  be  upon 
line,  and  precept  upon  precept.  Peter,  himself, 
afterwards  said,  in  his  Epistles,  "  I  will  not  be  neg 
ligent  to  put  you  always  in  remembrance  of  these 
things,  though  ye  know  them."  We  are  prone  to 
forget  what  we  do  know;  whereas  we  should  con 
sider  that,  whatever  good  thing  we  know  is  only  so 
far  good  to  us  as  it  is  remembered  to  purpose. — 
Richard  Cecil. 

Peter  falls  dreadfully,  but  by  repentance  rises 
sweetly;  a  look  of  love  from  Christ  melts  him  into 
tears.  He  knew  that  repentance  was  the  key  to  the 
kingdom  of  grace.  At  once  his  faith  was  so  great 
that  he  leaped,  as  it  were,  into  a  sea  of  waters  to 
come  to  Christ ;  so  now  his  repentance  was  so  great 
that  he  leaped,  as  it  were,  into  a  sea  of  tears,  for  that 
he  had  gone  from  Christ.  Some  say  that,  after  his 
sad  fall,  he  was  ever  and  anon  weeping,  and  that 


FOUNTAINS  OF  REPENTANT  TEAES.     157 

his  face  was  even  furrowed  with  continual  tears. 
He  had  no  sooner  taken  in  poison  but  he  vomited  it 
up  again,  ere  it  got  to  the  vitals;  he  had  no  sooner 
handled  this  serpent  but  he  turned  it  into  a  rod,  to 
scourge  his  soul  with  remorse  for  sinning  against 
such  clear  light,  and  strong  love,  and  sweet  discov 
eries  of  the  heart  of  Christ  to  him. 

Clement  notes  that  Peter  so  repented  that,  all  his 
life  after,  every  night  when  he  heard  the  cock  crow, 
he  would  fall  upon  his  knees,  and,  weeping  bitterly, 
would  beg  pardon  for  his  sin.  Ah  !  souls,  you  can 
easily  sin  as  the  saints,  but  can  you  repent  with  the 
saints  ?  Many  can  sin  with  David  and  Peter,  who 
cannot  repent  with  David  and  Peter,  and  so  must 
perish  for  ever. —  Thomas  Brooks. 

Cowper  describes  the  time  when  he  reflected  on 
the  necessity  of  repentance.  "  I  knew  that  many 
persons  had  spoken  of  shedding  tears  for  sin  ;  but 
when  I  asked  myself,  whether  the  time  would  ever 
come,  when  I  should  weep  for  mine,  it  seemed  to  me 
that  a  stone  might  sooner  do  it.  .  .  .  Not  know 
ing  that  Christ  was  exalted  to  give  repentance,  I  de 
spaired  of  ever  attaining  it."  A  friend  came  to  his 
bedside,  and  declared  to  him  the  gospel.  He  insisted 
on  the  all-atoning  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and 
his  righteousness  for  our  justification.  "  While  I 
heard  this  part  of  his  discourse,  and  the  Scriptures 
on  which  he  founded  it,  my  heart  began  to  burn 
within  me ;  my  soul  was  pierced  with  a  sense  of  my 
bitter  ingratitude  to  so  merciful  a  Saviour;  and  those 


158  MY   SEEMON-XOTES. 

tears,  which  I  thought  impossible,  burst  forth  freely. 
Cowpers  "  Memoirs  of  his  Early  Life'' 

Nothing  will  make  the  faces  of  God's  children 
more  fair  than  for  them  to  wash  themselves  every 
morning  in  their  tears. — Samuel  Clark, 

The  old  Greeks  thought  that  memory  must  be  a 
source  of  torture  in  the  next  world,  so  they  inter 
posed  between  the  two  worlds  the  waters  of  Lethe, 
the  river  of  forgetfulness;  but  believers  in  Christ 
want  no  river  of  oblivion  on  the  borders  of  Elysium, 
Calvary  is  on  this  side,  and  that  is  enough. 

Alexander  Madaren. 


CLVI. 

u  AND  SHE  WENT  AND  TOLD  THEM  THAT  HAD  BEEN  WITH  HIM, 
AS  THEY  MOURNED  AND  WEPT." — Mark  Xvi.  10. 

MARK  is  graphic :  he  paints  an  interior  like  a 
Dutch  artist. 

We  see  a  choice  company — "  them  that  had  been 
with  him." 

We  know  many  of  the  individuals,  and  are  inter 
ested   to  note  what  they  are  doing,  and  how  they 
bear  their  bereavement. 
We  see — 

I.  A  SORROWFUL  ASSEMBLY.  "  As  they  mourned  and 
wept." 

What  a  scene!  We  behold  a  common  mourning, 
abundantly  expressed  by  tears  and  lamentations. 

They  mourned — 

1.  Because  they  had  believed  in  Jesus,  and  loved 

him ;  and  therefore  they  were  concerned  at 
what  had  happened. 

2.  Because  they  felt  their  great  loss  in  losing  him. 

3.  Because  they  had  seen  his  sufferings  and  death. 

4.  Because  they  remembered  their  ill-conduct  to 

wards  him. 

5.  Because  their  hopes  concerning  him  were  dis 

appointed. 

(159) 


160  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 


6.  Because  they  were  utterly  bewildered  as  to 
what  was  now  to  be  done,  seeing  their 
Leader  was  gone. 

In  considering  the  death  of  Jesus,  there  is  just 
cause  for  mourning. 

Let  us  intelligently  mourn  for  him,  since  our  sins 
occasioned  his  woes  and  death. 

II.  A   CONSOLING  MESSENGER.     Mary  Magdalene  came 
and  told  them  that  Jesus  had  risen,  and  had 
appeared  unto  her. 
Concerning  this  ministry,  we  note — 

1.  She  was  one  of  themselves.     The  witnesses  to 

our  Lord's  resurrection  were  such  as  his 
disciples,  and,  indeed,  all  the  world,  might 
safely  trust.  They  were  not  strangers,  but 
individuals  well  known  to  those  who  heard 
them. 

2.  She  came  with  the  best  ot  news.     She  declared 

that  Jesus  was  indeed  risen.  The  resur 
rection  of  our  divine  Lord — 

Removes  the  cause  of  our  sorrow. 

Assures  us  of  the  help  of  a  living  Redeemer. 
John  xiv.  19. 

Secures  our  own  personal  resurrection.  1 
Cor.  xv.  23. 

Brings  us  personal  justification.     Rom.  iv.  25. 

3.  She  was  not  believed. 

Unbelief  is  apt  to  become  chronic:  they  had 
not  believed  the  Lord  when  he  foretold  his 
own  resurrection,  and  so  they  do  not  believe 
an  eye-witness  who  reported  it. 


A  SAD  INTERIOR— A  CHEERY  MESSENGER.    161 

Uiibelief  is  cruelly  unjust:  they  made  Mary 
Magdalene  a  liar,  and  yet  all  of  them  es 
teemed  her. 

III.    A    REASSURING    REFLECTION. 

1.  We  are  not  the  only  persons  who  have  mourn 

ed  an  absent  Lord. 

2.  We  are  not  the  only  messengers  who  have  been 

rejected. 

3.  We  are  sure  beyond  all  doubt  of  the  resurrection 

of  Christ. 

The  evidence  is  more  abundant  than  that 
which  testifies  to  any  other  great  historical 
event. 

The  apostles  so  believed  it  as  to  die  as  wit 
nesses  of  it. 

They  were  very  slow  to  be  convinced,  and 
therefore  that  which  forced  tJiem  to  believe 
should  have  the  like  effect  upon  the  most 
careful  of  us. 

4.  We  have  thus  the  most  ample  reason  for  joy 

concerning  our  Lord. 

Let  us  not  think  too  mournfully  of  our  Lord's  pas 
sion.  Let  us  not  be  too  mournful  about  anything,  now 
that  we  know  that  we  have  a  living  Saviour  for  our 
Friend. 

MEMORANDA. 

In  the  famous  picture-gallery  of  Bologna,  there  is 
a  striking  picture  by  Domenichmo,  representing  an 
angel  standing  beside  the  empty  cross,  from  which 
11 


162  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

the  body  of  Christ  has  just  been  removed.  He  holds 
in  his  hands  the  crown  of  thorns,  that  had  just  fallen 
from  the  august  Sufferer's  brow;  and  the  expression 
that  passes  over  his  face,  as  he  feels  with  his  finger 
the  sharpness  of  one  of  the  protruding  thorns,  is  full 
of  meaning.  It  is  a  look  of  wonder  and  surprise. 
To  the  pure,  unstained,  immortal  nature  of  the  angel, 
all  that  suffering  is  a  profound  mystery.  The  death 
of  Christ  was  equally  a  mystery  to  his  disciples.— 
Hugh  Macmillan. 

A  sorrow  is  none  the  less  sharp  because  it  is 
founded  upon  a  mistake.  Jacob  mourned  very  bit 
terly  for  Joseph,  though  his  darling  was  not  torn  in 
pieces,  but  on  the  way  to  be  lord  over  all  Egypt. 
Yet  while  there  is  of  necessity  so  much  well-founded 
sorrow  in  the  world,  it  is  a  pity  that  one  unnecessary 
pang  should  be  endured,  and  endured  by  those  who 
have  the  best  possible  grounds  for  joy.  The  case 
in  the  text  before  us  is  a  typical  one.  Thousands  are 
at  this  day  mourning  and  weeping  who  ought  to  be 
rejoicing.  Oh,  the  mass  of  needless  grief !  Unbelief 
works  for  the  father  of  lies  in  this  matter,  and  works 
misery  out  of  falsehood  among  those  who  are  not  in 
truth  children  of  sadness,  but  heirs  of  light  and  joy. 
Rise,  faith,  and  with  thy  light  chase  away  this  dark 
ness  !  And  if  even  thou  must  have  thy  lamp  trimmed 
by  a  humble  Mary,  do  not  despise  her  kindly  aid. 


CLVII. 

HAVE  SEEN  STRANGE  THINGS  TO-DAY." — Lttko  V.  26. 

rT"1HE  world  is  aweary,  and  longs  for  something 
-*•  novel. 

The  greatest  stranger  in  the  world  is  Jesus;  and, 
alas,  he  is  the  least  seen,  and  the  least  spoken  of  by 
most  of  men  ! 

If  men  would  come  and  watch  him,  they  would 
see  strange  things. 

His  person,  his  life,  his  death,  his  teaching,  are  full 
of  strange  things. 

What  he  is  now  doing  has  as  much  as  ever  the 
element  of  strangeness  and  wonder  about  it. 

I.  MARK  THE  STRANGE  THINGS  OF  THAT   PARTICULAR   DAY. 

1.  Power  present  to  heal  doctors  !     Verse  17. 

2.  Faith  reaching  down  to  the    Lord  from  above ! 

Verse  10. 

3.  Jesus  pardoning  sin  with  a  word.     Verse  20. 

4.  Jesus  practising  thought-reading.     Verse  22. 

5.  Jesus  making  a  man  carry  the  bed  which  had 

carried  him.      Verse  25. 

II.  MARK   THE   STRANGE    THINGS   OF   CHRIST'S   DAY. 

1    The  Maker  of  men  born  among  men      The  In* 

finite  an  infant. 
2.  The  Lord  of  all  serving  all. 

(163) 


164  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

3.  The  Just  One  accused,  condemned,    and  sacri 

ficed  for  sin. 

4.  The  Crucified  rising  from  the  dead. 

5.  Death  slain  by  the  dying  of  the  Lord. 

These  are  but  incidents  in  a  life  which  ie  aD  strange 
and  marvellous. 

IIL   MARK   THE  STRANGE   THINGS   SEEN  BY  BBLJKVERS  IN 

THEIR   DAY  WITHIN  THEMSELVES  AND   OTHERS. 

1.  A  self-condemned  sinner  justified  by  faith. 

2.  A  natural  heart  renewed  by  grace. 

3.  A  soul  preserved  in  spiritual  life  amid   killing 

evils,  like  the  bush  which  burned  with  fire 
and  was  not  consumed. 

4.  Evil   made  to  work  for  good  by   providential 

wisdom. 

5.  Strength  made  perfect  in  weakness. 

6.  The  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  a  believer. 

7.  Heaven  enjoyed  on  earth. 

These  are  a  small  number  out  of  a  host  of  strange 
things. 

Life  never  grows  stale  to  a  companion  of  Jesus. 

Do  you  find  it  becoming  so,  and  are  you  a  believer? 

Seek  the  conversion  of  your  family,  and  your 
neighborhood. 

Seek  to  know  more  of  Jesus  at  work  among  men. 

This  will  cause  you  to  see  stranger  and  stranger 
things,  till  you  see  the  strangest  of  all  with  Christ 
in  glory. 


STRANGE  THINGS.  165 

WONDERS. 

"Wonder  at  the  work  of  God  is  natural,  justifia 
ble,  commendable.  He  is  a  God  of  wonders.  It  is 
right  to  say  of  the  Lord's  doing,  "  It  is  marvellous  in 
our  eyes."  We  are  to  talk  of  all  his  wondrous  works ; 
but  this  must  be  in  the  spirit  of  devout  admiration, 
not  in  the  spirit  of  suspicion  and  doubt.  A  holy, 
grateful  wonder  should  be  indulged  to  the  full ;  but 
a  cold,  sceptical  wonder  should  be  resisted  as  a  sug 
gestion  from  Satan.  Faith  accounts  all  things  possi 
ble  with  God;  it  is  unbelief  that  incredulously  mar 
vels  at  the  work  of  his  hand. 

Guthrie,  of  Fen  wick,  a  Scotch  minister,  once  visited 
a  dying  woman.  He  found  her  anxious  about  her 
state,  but  very  ignorant.  His  explanation  of  the 
gospel  was  joyfully  received  by  her,  and  soon  after 
she  died.  On  his  return  home,  Guthrie  said,  "I  have 
seen  a  strange  thing  to-day — a  woman  whom  I  found 
in  a  state  of  nature,  I  saw  in  a  state  of  grace,  and 
left  in  a  state  of  glory." 

In  a  manuscript  by  an  old  Scotch  minister,  in  the 
early  part  of  the  last  century,  there  is  a  remarkable 
account  of  the  conversion  of  Lord  Jeddart,  who  had 
been  famous  foi  h.»^  recklessness  in  sin,  and  of  the  as 
tonishment  it  caused  among  Christian  people.  A 
little  after  his  conversion,  and  before  the  thing  was 
known,  he  came  to  the  Lord's  table.  He  sat  next  a 
lady  who  had  her  hands  over  her  face,  and  did  not 
see  him  till  he  delivered  the  cup  out  of  his  hand. 


166  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

When  she  saw  that  it  was  Lord  Jeddart,  who  had 
been  so  renowned  for  sin,  she  fell  a-trembling  terri 
bly  for  very  amazement  that  such  a  man  should  be 
there.  He  noticed  it,  and  said,  "  Madam,  be  not 
troubled :  the  grace  of  God  is  free  !  "  This  calmed 
the  lady:  but  when  we  consider  what  sort  of  man 
Lord  Jeddart  had  been,  we  can  account  for  her  sur 
prise. 

When  I  get  to  heaven,  I  shall  see  three  wonders 
there — the  first  wonder  will  be  to  see  many  people 
there  whom  I  did  not  expect  to  see;  the  second 
wonder  will  be  to  miss  many  people  whom  I  did  ex 
pect  to  see;  and  the  third  and  greatest  wonder  of  all 
will  be  to  find  myself  there. — John  Newton. 

Wonders  of  grace  to  God  belong, 
Repeat  His  mercies  in  your  song. 

Dr.  Watts. 


CLYIII. 

"  AT  HIS  FEET." — Luke  vii.  38. 

ORIENTALS  are  demonstrative,  and  in  their  de 
votions  they  pay  greater  attention  to  bodily 
posture  than  we  do.  Let  us  be  the  more  careful  of 
the  posture  of  our  souls. 

It  is  interesting  to  consider  our  posture  towards 
our  Lord. 

He  bears  us  on  his  heart  (Solomon's  Song  viii.  fi.) 
in  his  bosom  (Is.  xl.  11),  in  his  hand  (Is.  xhx.  2.  li. 
16),  on  his  shoulders  (Luke  xv.  5). 

But  yet  "  at  his  feet  "  is  our  most  usual  place. 

I.    IT    IS    A    BECOMING    POSTURE. 

The  posture  is  admirable  for  many  reasons. 

1.  As  he  is  divine,  let  us  pay  him  lowliest   rever 

ence. 

2.  As  we  are  sinful,  let  us  make  humble  confes 

sion. 

3.  As  he  is  Lord,  let  us  make  full  submission. 

4  As  he  is  All  in  All,  let  us  manifest  immovable 
dependence. 

5.  As  he  is  infinitely  wise,  let  us  wait  his  appoint 
ed  time. 

The  best  are  at  his  feet  joyfully,  bowing  before  him. 

(167) 


168 


MY    SERMON-NOTES. 


The  worst  must  come  there,  whether  they  will  or 
no. 

II.    IT    IS   A    HELPFUL    POSTURE. 

1.  For  a  weeping  penitent  (Luke  vii.  38). 

Our  humility  will  help  penitence. 

Our  lowly  submission  will  bring  assurance. 

Our  full  obeisance  will  prepare  for  service, 

2.  For  a  resting  convert  (Luke  viii.  35). 

In  such  a  position  devils  are  driven  out,  and 
no  longer  rule  us. 

In  such  a  position  they  are  kept  off,  and  can 
not  return. 

In  such  a  position  we  give  the  best  proof  of 
being  in  our  right  mind. 

3.  For  a  pleading  intercessor  (Luke  viii.  41). 

We  plead  best  when  we  are  lowliest. 

We  may  be  rulers  of  the  synagogue,  but  when 

our  heart  is  breaking  we   find    most   hope 

"at  his  feet." 

4.  For  a  willing  learner  (Luke  x.  39).      Mary  "at 

his  feet,"  showed — 

A  lowly  sense  of  personal  ignorance. 

A  believing  acceptance  of  the  Lord's  teach 
ing. 

A  hopeful  uplooking  to  him. 

5.  For  a  grateful  worshipper  (Luke  xvii.  16). 

So  the  healed  leper  expressed  his  thanks. 

So  angels  adore,  giving    him    thanks,  while 

bending  low. 
So    would    our    hearts    bow    in    unutterable 

gratitude. 


"AT  HIS  FEET."  169 

6.  For  a  saint  beholding  his  Lord's  glory  (Rev.  i. 

17). 
Overwhelmed,  humbled,  overjoyed,  exhausted 

with  excess  of  ecstasy. 
Come,  then,   and  submit  to  Jesus,  and  bow 

at  his  feet. 

He  is  so  worthy :  pay  him  all  reverence. 
He  has  received  from  you  so  much  despite: 

kiss  his  feet. 
He  will  so  freely  forgive:  this  may  well  cause 

you  to  bow  in  the  dust  before  him. 
He  will  give  you  such  joy:  in  fact,  no  joy  ex 
cels  that  of  full  submission  to  his  blessed 

sway. 

III.    IT    IS    A    SAFE    POSTURE. 

1.  Jesus  will  not  refuse  us  that  position,  for  it  is 

one  which  we  ought  to  occupy. 

2.  Jesus  will  not  spurn  the   humbly  submissive, 

who  in  self-despair  cast  themselves  before 
him. 

3.  Jesus  will  not  suffer  any  to  harm   those  who 

seek  refuge  at  his  feet. 

4.  Jesus  will  not  deny  us  the  eternal  privilege  of 

abiding  there. 
Let  this  be  our  continual  posture — "  at  his 

feet." 

Sorrowing  or  rejoicing;  hoping  or  fearing; 
Suffering  or  working ;  teaching  or  learning ; 
In  secret  or  in  public;  in  life  and  in  death. 
"  Oh,  that  I  might  for  ever  sit 
With  Mary  at  the  Master's  feet" 


170  MY    SERMON- NOTES. 

CLIPPINGS. 

In  order  that  the  mats  or  carpets,  which  are  hal 
lowed  by  domestic  prayer,  may  not  be  rendered  un 
clean  by  any  pollution  of  the  streets,  each  guest,  as 
he  enters  a  house  in  Syria  or  Palestine,  takes  off  his 
sandals,  and  leaves  them  at  the  door.  He  then  pro 
ceeds  to  his  place  at  the  table.  In  ancient  times,  as 
we  find  throughout  the  Old  Testament,  it  was  the 
custom  of  the  Jews  to  eat  their  meals  sitting  cross- 
legged — as  is  still  common  throughout  the  East — in 
front  of  a  tray  placed  on  a  low  stool,  on  which  is  set 
the  dish  containing  the  heap  of  food,  from  which  all 
help  themselves  in  common.  But  this  custom, 
though  it  has  been  resumed  for  centuries,  appears  to 
have  been  abandoned  by  the  Jews  in  the  period  suc 
ceeding  the  captivity.  Whether  they  had  borrowed 
the  recumbent  posture  at  meals  from  the  Persians, 
or  not,  it  is  certain,  from  the  expressions  employed, 
that,  in  the  time  of  our  Lord,  the  Jews,  like  the 
Greeks  and  Eomans,  reclined  at  banquets,  on  couches 
placed  round  tables  of  much  the  same  height  as  those 
now  in  use.  We  shall  see,  hereafter,  that  even  the 
Passover  was  eaten  in  this  attitude.  The  beautiful 
and  profoundly  moving  incident,  which  occurred  in 
Simon's  house,  can  only  be  understood  by  remem 
bering  that,  as  the  guests  lay  on  the  couches  which 
surrounded  the  tables,  their  feet  would  be  turned 
towards  any  spectators  who  were  standing  outside 
the  circle  of  bidden  guests. — Archdeacon  Farrar. 

Artabanus,    one   of  the   military    officers   of  the 


"AT  HIS  FEET."  171 

Athenians,  was  applied  to  by  a  certain  great  man, 
who  told  him  that  he  desired  an  audience  of  the 
king.  He  was  answered  that,  before  it  was  granted, 
he  must  prostrate  himself  before  him,  for  it  was  a 
custom  of  the  country  for  the  king  to  admit  no  one 
to  his  presence  who  would  not  worship  him.  That 
which  was  an  arrogant  assumption  in  an  earthly 
king  is  a  proper  condition  of  our  approach  to  the 
King  of  kings.  Humility  is  the  foundation  of  our 
intercourse  with  him.  We  must  bow  before  his 
throne.  No  sinner  who  is  too  proud  to  yield  obe 
dience  to  this  law  may  expect  any  favors  from  hie 
hands. — Handbook  of  Illustration. 

When  the  Danish  missionaries,  stationed  at  Mala 
bar,  set  some  of  their  converts  to  translate  a  cate 
chism,  in  which  it  was  asserted  that  believers  be 
come  the  sons  of  God,  one  of  the  translators  was  so 
startled  that  he  suddenly  laid  down  his  pen,  and  ex 
claimed,  "  It  is  too  much.  Let  me  rather  render  it, 
'They  shall  be  permitted  to  kiss  his  feet.'" — 
G.  8.  Bowes. 

The  Rev.  Mr.  Young  was,  one  stormy  day,  visit 
ing  one  of  his  people,  an  old  man,  who  lived  in 
great  poverty,  in  a  lonely  cottage,  a  few  miles  from 
Jedburgh.  He  found  him  sitting  with  the  Bible 
open  on  his  knees,  but  in  outward  circumstances  of 
great  discomfort,  the  snow  drifting  through  the  roof 
and  under  the  door,  and  scarcely  any  fire  on  the 
hearth.  "  What  are  you  about  to-day,  John  ?  "  was 
Mr.  Young's  question  011  entering.  "  Ah  !  sir,"  said 


173  MY   SEEIMON-NOTKS. 

the  happy  saint,  "  I  am   sitting  under  his  shadow, 
wi'  great  delight" — T/ie  Christian  Treasury. 

The  end  of  all  Christian  preaching  is  to  cast  the 
sinner  trembling  at  the  feet  of  mercy. —  VineL 

Low  at  Thy  feet  my  soul  would  lie, 
Here  safety  dwells,  and  peace  divine ; 
Still  let  me  live  beneath  Thine  eye, 
EOT  lile,  eternal  life,  is  Thine. 

Anne  £toefe 


CLIX. 


'TELL    MB,     THMMBPOBB,    WHICH    OP    THEM    WILL     LOTE    KIM 

MOST?"— Lukevn.  42. 


IT  is  right  for  us  to  desire  to  be  among  the  most 
loving  servants  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  would  be 
an  interesting  question  concerning  a  company  just 
joining  the  church, — "  Which  of  them  will  love  him 
most  ?  " 

How  can  we  reach  this  point  ?  How  can  we  love 
him  most  ? 

We  would  love  him  as  did  the  penitent  who 
washed  his  feet  with  tears  :  whence  shall  come  such 
eminence  of  love  ? 

The  passage  before  us  may  help  us  to  a  conclusion 
on  that  point. 

I.    WE     MUST     FIRST     BE     SAVED    IN   THE    SAME   MANNER    A3 
OTHERS. 

The  road  to  eminence  in  love  is  just  the  plain  way 
of  salvation,  which  all  who  are  in  Christ  must 
travel.  There  is  no  new  gospel  of  the  higher  life, 
and  there  need  be  no  singularity  of  dress,  abode,  or 
vow,  in  order  to  attain  the  greatest  heights  of  love. 

1.  All  are  in  debt;  we  must  heartily  own  this  to 
be  our  own  case. 


174  MY  SEBMOtf-tfOTES. 

2.  None  have  anything  to  pay;  we  must  confess 

this,  without  reserve,  as  being  our  own  per 
sonal  condition. 

3.  The  loving  Lord  forgives  in  each  case:  person 

ally  we  have  exceeding  great  need  of  such 
remission.  We  must  feel  this. 

4.  In  each  case  he  forgives  frankly,  or  without  any 

consideration  or  compensation :  it  must  be 
so  with  us.  We  must  accept  free  grace 
and  undeserved  favor. 

5.  Out  of  this  arises  love.     By  a   sense   of  free 

grace  we  begin  to  love  our  Lord ;  and  in 
the  same  way  we  go  on  to  love  him  more. 

The  more  clear  our  sense  of  sinnership,  and  the 
more  conscious  our  obligation  to  free  grace,  the 
more  likely  are  we  to  love  much, 

li.    WE   MUST   AIM   AT   A   DEEP   SENSE   OP   SIN. 

1.  It  was  the  consciousness  of  great  indebtedness 

which  created  the  great  love  in  the  peni 
tent  woman.  Not  her  sin,  but  the  con 
sciousness  of  it  was  the  basis  of  her  loving 
character. 

2.  Where  sin  has  been  open  and  loud,  there  ought 

to  be  this  specially  humbling  consciousness; 
lbr  it  would  be  an  evidence  of  untruthful- 
ness  if  it  were  not  manifest.     1  Cor.  xv.  9. 
•&  Yet  is  it  frequently  found  in  the  most  moral, 
and  it  abounds  in  saints  of  high   degree. 
In  fact,  these  are  the   persons   who  are  most 
Capable  of  feeling  the  evil  of  sin,  and  the 


LOVE'S  FOREMOST.  175 

greatness  of  the   love   which   pardons   it. 
1  John  i.  8. 

4.  It  is  to  be  cultivated.     The  more  we  bewail 
sin  the  better,  and  we  must  aim  at  great 
tenderness  of  heart  in  reference  to  it. 
In  order  to  cultivate  it  we  must  seek  to  get — 

A  clearer  view  of  the  law's  requirements. 
Luke  x.  26,  27. 

A  fuller  idea  of  God's  excellence,  especially 
of  his  holiness.  Job  xlii.  5,  6. 

A  sharper  sense  of  sin's  tendencies  in  our 
selves,  towards  God,  and  towards  men;  and 
also  a  more  overwhelming  conviction  of  its 
dreadful  punishment.  Rom.  vii.  13 ;  Ps.  li. 
3,  4;  John  v.  28,  29. 

A  deeper  consciousness  of  the  love  of  God  to 
us.  1  John  iii.  1,  2. 

A  keener  valuation  of  the  cost  of  redemption. 
1  Peter  i.  18,  19. 

A  surer  persuasion  of  the  perfection  of  our 
pardon  will  also  help  to  show  the  baseness 
of  our  sin.  Ezek.  xvi.  62,  63. 

By  these  means,  and  all  others,  we  must  endeavor 
to  keep  our  conscience  active,  that  our  heart  may 
be  sensitive. 

III.    THIS      WILL      LEAD     TO      A      HIGHLY     LOVING     CARRIAGE 
TOWARDS  OUR  LORD. 

We  shall  so  love  him  as  to  behave  like  the  peni 
tent  in  the  narrative. 
1.  We  shall  desire  to  be  near  him,  even  at  his  feet 


176  MY   SEKMOX-NOTES. 

2.  We  shall  make  bold  confession,  and  shall  do 

this  at  all  risks;  honoring  him  before 
gainsayers,  and  doing  so  though  it  may 
cause  others  to  make  unkind  remarks. 

3.  We  shall  show  deep  humility,  delighting  even 

to  wash  his  feet. 

4.  We  shall  exhibit  thorough  contrition,  behold 

ing  him  with  tears. 

5.  We  shall  render  earnest  service ;  doing  all  that 

lies  in  our  power  for  Jesus,  even  as  this 
woman  did. 

6.  We  shall  make  total  consecration  of  all  that  we 

have:    our    tears,     our  eyes,    our   choicest 
gifts,  our  hearts,  ourselves,  etc. 
Thus  shall  we  reach  the  goal  we  desire. 

A  company  of  those  who  "  love  him  most,"  dwell 
ing  in  any  place,  would  give  a  tone  to  the  society 
around  them. 

We  have  enough  of  head-workers :  now  for  heart- 
lovers. 

Why  should  we  not  aim  to  be  among  the  closest 
followers  of  our  Lord,  loving  most,  and  living  spec 
ially  consecrated  lives  ? 

EXPERIMENTAL  REMARKS. 

A  spiritual  experience  which  is  thoroughly  flav 
ored  with  a  deep  and  bitter  sense  of  sin  is  of  great 
value  to  him  that  hath  had  it.  It  is  terrible  in  the 
drinking,  but  it  is  wholesome  in  the  bowels,  and  in 
the  whole  of  the  after-life.  Possibly  much  of  the 
flimsy  piety  of  the  day  arises  from  the  ease  with 


LOVE'S   FOREMOST.  177 

which  men  reach  to  peace  and  joy  in  these  evange 
listic  days.  We  would  not  judge  modern  converts, 
but  we  certainly  prefer  that  form  of  spiritual  exer 
cise  which  leads  the  soul  by  the  way  of  the  Weep 
ing-cross,  and  makes  it  see  its  blackness  before  it  as 
sures  it  that  it  is  "  clean  every  whit."  Too  many 
think  lightly  of  sin,  and  therefore  lightly  of  a  Sa 
viour.  He  who  has  stood  before  his  God,  convicted, 
and  condemned,  with  the  rope  about  his  neck,  is  the 
man  to  weep  for  joy  when  he  is  pardoned,  to  hate 
the  evil  which  has  been  forgiven  him,  and  to  live  to 
the  honor  of  the  Redeemer  by  whose  blood  he  has 
been  cleansed. 

Many  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  sauits  were,  be 
fore  conversion,  ringleaders  in  sin :  instances  will 
suggest  themselves  to  all  readers  of  church  history. 
We  naturally  expect  that  a  remarkable  conversion 
should  show  itself  by  special  fruits ;  we  very  proper 
ly  doubt  it  if  it  does  not.  A  virulent  rebel,  when  he 
returns  to  his  Lord,  is  bound  to  be  valiant  as  well  as 
loyal ;  for  he  remembers  that  he  not  only  owes  fealty 
to  his  Lord  by  nature,  but  he  owes  that  life  a  second 
time  to  his  Prince's  clemency.  Those  who  were  once 
far  gone  in  sin  ought  always  to  be  found  in  the  thick 
of  the  battle  against  sin.  Bold  blasphemers  ought 
to  be  enthusiasts  for  the  honor  of  their  Lord  when 
they  are  washed  from  their  iniquities.  As  they  say 
reclaimed  poachers  make  the  best  game-keepers,  so 
should  the  greatest  sinners  be  the  raw  material  out 
of  which  the  Lord's  transforming  grace  shall  create 
great  saints. 
12 


178  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

The  Christian  mentions  a  reminiscence  of  that 
saintly  man,  Mr.  Pennefather.  One  day  n  member 
of  his  household  knocked  at  the  door  of  his  study, 
and  when  at  length  it  was  opened,  the  good  man 
was  in  tears.  Being  anxiously  asked  the  cause,  he 
replied,  "  My  sins  !  my  sins!  "  The  sensitiveness  of 
that  holy  soul,  its  quickened  estimate  of  sin,  its  rever 
ent  conception  of  God's  righteousness,  which  the  tear 
ful  exclamation  manifested,  commend  his  memory  to 
our  love  and  veneration.  All  who  knew  him  loved 
him  as  a  living  manifestation  of  the  seven  beatitudes. 

I  have  heard  say  the  depth  of  a  Scotch  loch  corre 
sponds  with  the  height  of  the  surrounding  mountains. 
So  deep  thy  sense  of  obligation  for  pardoned  sin,  so 
high  thy  love  to  him  who  has  forgiven  thee. — 

a  ii.  s. 

Love  to  the  Saviour  rises  in  the  heart  of  a  saved 
man  in  proportion  to  the  sense  which  he  entertains 
of  his  own  sinfulness  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  the 
mercy  of  God  on  the  other.  Thus  the  height  of  a 
saint's  love  to  the  Lord  is  as  the  depths  of  his  own 
humility  :  as  this  root  strikes  down  unseen  into  the 
ground,  the  blossoming  branch  rises  higher  in  the 
sky. —  William  Arnot. 


CLX. 

"  AND  IT    CAME    TO    PASS,   THAT,   WHEN  JESUS  WAS  RETURNED, 
THE    PEOPLE    GLADLY    RECEIVED   HIM:     FOR    THEY  WERE  ALL 

WAITING  FOR  HIM." — Luke  viii.  40. 

JESUS  went  to  those  who  refused  him  in  the  land 
of  Gadara ;  and  there  he  saved  one,  to  show  the 
freeness  and  sovereignty  of  his  grace. 

He  then  quitted  the  inhospitable  country,  to  show 
that  he  forces  himself  on  none.  Wisdom  abandons 
those  who  refuse  her  counsels.  Prov.  i.  24.  Those 
Vv'hom  the  Lord  has  chosen  shall  be  willing  in  the 
day  of  his  power.  Ps.  ex.  3. 

In  the  Revised  Version  we  read,  "  The  multitude 
welcomed  him." 

When  Jesus  is  waited  for  and  welcomed,  he  de 
lights  to  come. 

He  is  not  waited  for  by  all  in  our  congregations  ; 
so  that  we  may  ask  the  question  of  our  present  hear 
ers — Do  you  welcome  Christ  ?  Let  it  be  answered 
by  each  one  this  day. 

I.  A  BEAUTIFUL  SIGHT.     "They  were  all   waiting   for 

him." 

This  waiting  may  be  seen  in  several  different  forms. 

1.  A  gathered  congregation,  waiting  in  the  place 

where  prayer  is  wont  to  be  made.     Want  of 

(179) 


180  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

punctuality,  and  irregular  attendance,  oft 
en  show  that  Jesus  is  not  waited  for. 

2.  A  praying  company,  an  earnest  church,  looking 

for  revival,  and  prepared  to  co-operate  in 
labor  for  it.  Some  churches  do  not  wait 
for  the  Lord's  presence,  and  would  not  be 
ready  for  him  if  he  were  to  come. 

3.  A  seeking  sinner,  sighing  for  mercy,  searching 

the  Scriptures,  hearing  the  Word,  inquir 
ing  of  Christians,  constantly  praying,  and 
thus  "  waiting  for  him." 

4.  A  departing  saint,  longing   for   home :  saying, 

like  Jacob,  "  I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation, 
0  Lord:"  Gen.  xlix.  18. 

5.  An  instructed  church,  looking   for  the    Second 

Advent.     Rev.  xxii.  17. 
It  is  good  for  the  eyes  to  behold  such  sights. 

IT.  A.  SURE  ARRIVAL.     "  Jesus  was  returned." 

We  arc   quite  sure  that  our   Lord  will   graciously 
appear  to  those  who  are  "all  waiting  for  him,"  since — 

1.  His  spirit  is  there  already,  making   them  wait. 

Romans  viii.  23. 

2.  His   heart  is  there,  in   sympathy    with   them, 

longing  to  bless  them. 

3.  His  work  is  there.     He   has  brought  them  into 

that  waiting  condition,  and  now  he  has 
found  a  sphere  wherein  to  display  his  grace 
to  saints  and  sinners. 

4.  His  promise  is  there,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  al 

ways  :"  Matt,  xx viii.  20. 


A    WELCOME  FOR  JESUS.  181 

5.  His  custom  is  to  be  there.     His  delights  are  still 

with  the  sons  of  men.     Proverbs  viii.  31. 
What  countless  blessings  his  coming  will  bring ! 

III.  A  HEARTY  WELCOME.    "  The  people  gladly  received 
him." 

1.  Their  fears  made  him  welcome. 

They  feared  lest  he  might  have  gone  for  ever 
from  them.     Ps.  Ixxvii.  7. 

2.  Their  hopes  made  him  welcome. 

They  trusted  that  now  their  sick  would  be 
cured,  and  their  dead  would  be  raised. 

3.  Their  prayers  made  him  welcome. 

Those  who  pray  that  Jesus  may  come  are  glad 
when  he  comes. 

4.  Their  faith  made  him  welcome. 

Jairus  now  looked  to  have  his  child  healed. 
See  verse  41. 

5.  Their  love  made  him  welcome. 

When  our  heart  is  with  him,  we  rejoice  in  his 
appearing. 

6.  Their  care  for  others  made  him  welcome. 

Jesus  never  disappoints  those  who  wait  for  him. 
Jesus  never  refuses  those  who  welcome  him. 
Jesus  is  near  us  now  :  will  you  not  open  the  doors 
of  your  hearts  to  receive  him  ?     Rev.  iii.  20. 

HEARTY  WELCOME. 

A  congregation  cannot  be  said  to  welcome  the 
Lord  Jesus  unless  they  are  all  there,  which  requires 
punctuality ;  unless  they  have  come  with  design  to 


182  MY   SEEMON-JXOTES. 

meet  him,  which  implies  prayerful  expectancy;  unless 
they  are  ready  to  hear  from  him,  which  involves  at" 
tenticm  ;  and  unless  they  are  resolved  to  accept  his 
teaching,  which  demands  obedience. 

When  the  inhabitants  of  Mentone  desired  a  visit 
from  the  Prince  of  Savoy,  they  made  a  way  for  him 
over  the  mountains.  Hills  were  tunnelled,  and  val 
leys  bridged,  that  the  beloved  sovereign  might  re 
ceive  the  welcome  of  his  subjects.  If  we  would  real 
ly  welcome  the  Lord  Jesus,  we  must  make  a  road  for 
him  by  abasing  our  pride,  elevating  our  thoughts, 
removing  our  evil  habits,  and  preparing  our  hearts. 
Never  did  a  soul  cast  up  a  highway  for  the  Lord,  and 
then  fail  to  enjoy  his  company. — C.  H.  S. 


CLXI. 

"AND    SHE    HAD  A   SISTER     CALLED    MARY,    WHICH  ALSO  SAT   AT 
JESUS'  FEET,    AND   HEARD   HIS   WORD." — Luke  X.    39. 

THE  family  at  Bethany  was  highly  favored  by 
being  permitted  to  entertain  our  Lord  so  often. 

They  all  appreciated  the  privilege,  but  Mary  made 
the  wisest  use  of  it. 

Martha  sought  to  serve  the  Lord  with  her  very  best. 

Mary  was  full  of  love  to  Jesus,  as  we  know  by  her 
anointing  him,  and  therefore  she  also  would  serve  him 
witli  her  very  best. 

She  did  so  by  attending  to  his  words. 

She  was  a  wise  and  saintly  woman,  and  our  Lord 
commended  her  chosen  method  of  service. 

It  will  be  safe,  therefore,  for  us  to  follow  her  ex 
ample. 

Let  us  learn  from  the  woman  who  sat  as  a  learner 
at  the  feet  of  our  Lord,  and  thus  taught  us  to  choose 
the  good  part, 

Here  we  see — 

I.  LOVE  AT  LEISURE.  "  Which  also  sat  at  Jesus'  feet." 
When  the  evening  comes  on,  and  all  the  members 
of  the  family  are  around  the  fireside,  then  love  rests 
and  communes,  forgetting  all  care,  happily  at  home, 
oblivious  of  the  outside  world,  and  of  time  itself. 

(183) 


184  MY   SEKMON-^OTES. 

Like  Mary — 

We  would  feel  ourselves  quite  at  home  with 

Jesus  our  Lord. 
We  would  be  free  from  worldly  care — leaving 

all  with  Jesus. 
We  would  even  be  free  from  the  care  of  his 

service,  the  battle  for  his  Kingdom,  and  the 

burden  of  the  souls  committed  to  our  charge. 
We  would   sweetly  enjoy  the   happy    leisure 

which  he  provides  for  us,  as  we  muse  upon 

the  rest-giving  themes  which  he  reveals  so 

clearly,  and  makes  so  true  to  us — 
His  work  for  us,  finished,  accepted,  abidingly 

effectual,  and  perpetually  overflowing  with 

priceless  blessings. 
His  great  gifts  received,    which  are  greater 

than  those  to  come. 
All  other  needful  and  promised  benedictions 

of  grace,  sure  to  come  in  due  season.     Rom. 

viii.  32. 
All  our  future,  for  time  and  for  eternity,  safe 

in  his  dear  hands. 
Let  us,  without  fear,  enjoy  leisure  with  Jesus — • 

leisure,  but  not  laziness : — leisure  to  love,  to 

learn,  to  commune,  to  copy. 
Leisure  in  a  home  where  others  are  cumbered. 

See  verses  40-42. 

Leisure  to  sit,  and  to  sit  in  the  most  delight 
ful  of  all  places. 

II.  LOVE  IN  LOWLINESS.     "  At  Jesus'  feet." 


LOVE  AT  HOME.  185 

In  this  lowliness  let  each  one  personally  copy 
Mary. 

Say  nnto  yourself,  "  I  choose  the  feet  of  Jesus  tc 
be  my  place." 
Let  me  be — 

Not  a  busy  housewife  and  manager,  which  am 
one  may  be,  and  yet  be  graceless;  but— 

1.  A  penitent,  which  is  an  acknowledgment  of 

my  unworthiness. 

2.  A  disciple,  which  is  a  confession  of  my  ignor 

ance. 

3.  A  receiver,  which  is  an  admission  of  my  empti 

ness. 

This  posture  benefits  me  when  I  think  of  what  JL 
was,  what  I  am,  what  I  must  be,  what  my 
Lord  is,  and  what  he  is  to  inc. 

Let  me  bless  his  condescending  love,  which  per 
mits  me  this  bliss. 

III.   LOVE  LISTENING.     t;  And  heard  his  word." 

She  could  not  have  heard  if  she  had  not  been  at 
leisure  to  sit,  nor  if  she  had  not  been  lowly,  and 
chosen  to  sit  at  his  feet. 

Be  it  ours  to  hear  that  love- word  which  says, 
"  Hearken,  O  daughter,  and  consider:"  Ps.  xlv.  10. 

Listening  to  what  Jesus  says  in  his  Word,  in  his 
creation,  in  his  providence,  and  by  his  Spirit  in  our 
soul. 

Listening  to  the  tones  and  accents  with  which  he 
emphasizes  and  sweetens  all  that  he  says. 

Listening  to  himself.  Studying  him,  reading  his 
very  heart. 


186  MY    S 


Listening,  and  not  obtruding  our  own  self-formed 
thoughts,  notions,  reasonings,  questionings,  desires, 
and  prejudices. 

Listening,  and  forgetting  the  observations  and  un 
beliefs  of  others. 

Listening,  and  bidding  all  cares  lie  still,  that  they 
may  no  more  disturb  the  reverent  silence  of  the  heart. 

How  sweet  !  How  instructive  !  How  truly  "  the 
good  part  !  " 

IV.  LOVE  IN  POSSESSION. 

She  had  obtained  her  Lord,  his  love,  his  presence, 
his  word,  his  fellowship,  and  she  sat  there  in  full  en 
joyment  to  delight  her  soul  Avith  that  which  she  had 
so  joyfully  lighted  upon. 

She  had  in  this  one  thing  supplied  her  soul's  ne 
cessity,  and  so  she  sat  down  in  perfect  satisfaction. 

She  had  her  Lord's  promise  that  she  should  riot  be 
robbed  of  it,  and  she  sat  down  in  full  assurance,  to  be 
happy  in  her  possession. 

Her   Lord's   promise  assured  her  that  she  should 
not  lose  the  good  part,  which  she  had  chosen  — 
By  a  cold  word  from  her  Lord. 
By  the  angry  expostulation  of  her  sister. 
By  any  future  affliction,  or  temptation,  or  occu 

pation. 

Nor  even  by  death  itself. 

Now,  then,  she  rests  in  resolute  constancy  :  she  has 
reached  her  ultimatum  :  she  will  go  no  further  than 
her  Lord  and  his  word. 

Oh,  to  be  more  with  Jesus  !    This  is  true  life. 
Oh,  to  hear  Jesus  more  !    This  is  true  service. 


LOVE  AT  HOME.  187 

Ob,  to  love  Jesus  more  !    This  is  true  treasure. 
Oh,  to  abide  with  Jesus,  aud  never  dream  of  go 
ing-  beyond  him  !     This  is  true  wisdom. 

QUIET  MORSELS. 

Behold  Mary,  all  reverence,  all  attention,  all  com 
posure,  feeding  on  the  doctrine  of  eternal  life — she 
"sat  at  Jesus'  feet."  She  wisely  and  zealously  im 
proved  the  opportunity  given  her  for  the  good  of  her 
soul.  "This  is  my  summer,  my  harvest:  let  me  re 
deem  the  time." — Jay. 

Mary  sitteth  to  hear  the  word,  as  Christ  used  to 
sit  when  he  preached  the  word  (Matthew  v.  ;  Luke 
xiv.  ;  John  viii.);  to  show  that  the  word  is  to  be 
preached  and  heard  with  a  quiet  mind.  In  a  still 
night,  /ery  voice  is  heard,  and  when  the  body  is 
quiet  1  .>.o  mind  most  commonly  is  quiet  r  ^o.  .  . 
When  JUT  minds  are  quiet,  we  are  fit  to  deal  with 
heavenly  matters ;  therefore  the  doctors  conferred 
sitting  in  the  temple,  and  God  delighteth  to  deal 
with  us  when  we  are  most  in  private  :  he  appeared 
to  Abraham  sitting  in  the  door  of  his  tent.  (Gen. 
xviii.)  The  Holy  Ghost  came  down  upon  the  Apos 
tles,  and  filled  all  the  house  where  they  were  sitting 
(Acts  ii.)  The  eunuch,  sitting  in  his  chariot,  was 
called  and  converted  by  Philip's  preaching.  (Acts 
viii.) — Henry  Smith. 

Whether  shall  we  praise  more,  Mary's  humility  or 
her  docility  ?  I  do  not  see  her  take  a  stool  and  sit 
by  him,  or  a  chair  and  sit  above  him  ;  but,  as  desir- 


188  MY   SEEM  ON -NOTES. 

ing  to  show  her  heart  was  as  low  as  her  knees,  she 
sits  at  his  feet.  She  was  lowly  set  and  richly 
warmed  with  his  heavenly  beams.  The  greater  sub 
mission,  the  more  grace.  If  there  be  one  hollow  in 
the  valley  lower  than  another,  thither  the  waters 
gather. — Bishop  Hall. 

Dr.  Chalmers  complained:  "I  am  hustled  out  of 
my  spirituality." 

At  tlie  foot  of  Jesus,  listening  to  His  word  ; 
Learning  wisdom's  lesson  from  her  loving  Lord ; 

Mary,  led  by  heavenly  grace, 

Chose  the  meek  disciple's  place. 
At  the  feet  of  Jesus  is  the  place  for  me  ; 
There  a  humble  learner  would  I  choose  to  be. 
Sacred  Songs  and  Solos. 


CLXII. 

S<WHAT  MAN  OP  YOU,  HAVING  AN  HUNDRED  SHEKP,  IP  HE  LO«B 
ONE  OF  THEM,  DOES  NOT  LEAVE  THE  NINETY  AND  NINE  IN  THE 
WILDERNESS,  AND  GO  AFTER  THAT  WHICH  IS  LOST,  UNTIL  HE 

FIND   IT  ? 

"  AND  WHEN  HE  HATH  FOUND  IT,  HE  LAYETH  IT  ON  HIS  SHOUL 
DERS,  REJOICING. 

*'AND  WI1KN  HE  COMETH  HOME,  HE  CALLETH  TOGETHER  HIS 
FRIENDS  AND  NEIGHBORS,  SAYING  UNTO  THEM,  REJOICE  WITH 
ME;  FOR  I  HAVE  FOUND  MY  SHEEP  WHICH  WAS  LOST." 

THE  love  of  Jesus  is  not  mere  sentiment;  it  is 
active  and  energetic. 

It  is  prevenient  love,  going  after  sheep  that  have 
no  notion  of  returning  to  the  fold  from  which  they 
have  wandered. 

It  is  engrossing,  making  him  leave  all  else:  mak 
ing  one  lost  one  to  be  of  more  present  importance 
than  ninety  and  nine. 

It  sets  him  upon  resolute,  determined,  persevering 
search. 

Let  us  behold  our  great  Shepherd — 

I.  IN  THE  SEARCH.      "  Until  he  find  it." 

Mark  him  well,  as,  with  his  eyes,  and  heart,  and 
all  his  faculties,  he  goes  "  after  that  which  is  lost." 
1.  No   rejoicing   is   on    his   countenance.     He   is 
anxious  for  the  lost. 

(189) 


190  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

2.  No    hesitation    is  in    his   mind.     Despite    the 

roughness  of  the  way,  or  the  length  of  the 
time,  or  the  darkness  of  the  night,  he  still 
pursues  his  lost  one. 

3.  No  anger  is  in  his  heart.     The  many  wander 

ings  of  the  sheep  cost  him  dear,  but  he 
counts  them  as  nothing,  so  that  he  may  but 
find  it. 

4.  No  pausing  because  of  weariness.     Love  makes 

him  forget  himself,  and  causes  him  to  re 
new  his  strength. 

5.  No  giving  up  the  search.     His  varied  non-suc 

cesses  do  not  compel  him  to  return  de 
feated. 

Such  must  our  searches  after  others  be. 

We  must  labor  after  each  soul  until  we  find  it. 

II.  AT  THE  CAPTURE.     "  When  he  hath  found  it." 

Mark  the  Shepherd  when  the  sheep  is  at  last  with 
in  reach. 

1.  Wanderer    held.     How   firm   the   grip!     How 

hearty  !     How  entire ! 

2.  Weight  borne.     No  chiding,  smiting,  driving; 

but  a  lift,  a  self-loading,  an  easing  of  the 
wanderer. 

3.  Distance  travelled.     Every  step  is  for  the  Shep 

herd. 

He  must  tread  painfully  all  that  length  of 
road  over  which  the  sheep  had  wandered 
so  wantonly. 


THE   GOOD   SHEPHERD.  191 

The  sheep  is  carried  back  with  no  suffering 
on  its  own  part. 

4.  Shepherd  rejoicing  to  bear  the  burden. 

The  sheep  is  so  dear  that  its  weight  is  a  load 

of  love. 
The  Shepherd  is  so  good  that  he  finds  joy  in 

his  own  toil. 

5.  Sheep  rejoicing,  too.     Surely  it  is  glad  to  be 

found  of  the  Shepherd,  and  so  to  have  its 
wanderings  ended,  its  weariness  rested,  its 
distance  removed,  its  perfect  restoration  se 
cured. 

III.  IN  THE  HOME-BRINGING.    "  When  he  cometh  home." 

Mark  well  the  end  of  the  Shepherd's  toil  and  care: 
he  does  not  end  his  care  till  he  has  brought  the  stray 
one  "home." 

1.  Heaven  is  home  to  Christ. 

2.  Jesus  must  carry  us  all  the  way  there. 

3.  The  Shepherd's  mission  for  lost  souls  is  known 

in  glory,  and  watched  with  holy  sympathy : 
in  this  all  heavenly  ones  are  "his  friends 
and  neighbors." 

4.  Jesus  loves  others  to  rejoice  with  him  over  the 

accomplishment  of  his  design.  "  He  call- 
eth  together  his  friends."  See  how  they 
crowd  around  him!  What  a  meeting! 

5.  Repentance    is    also    regarded   as   our  being 

brought  home.  See  verse  7.  "I  have 
found "  refers  to  the  repenting  sinner,  and 


192  MY    SEKMON-NOTE3. 

it  is  a  finding  which  secures  salvation,  or; 
angels  would  not  rejoice  over  it. 
6.  One  sinner  can   make  all  heaven   glad.     See 

verses  7  and  10. 

Let  us  learn  a  lesson  from  each  of  the  three  pic 
tures  which  we  have  looked  upon — 

Of  perseverance  till  souls  are  saved. 

Of  patience  with  souls  who  are  newly  found. 

Of  encouragement  in  expectation  of  the  gathering 
into  glory  of  those  for  whom  we  labor  on  behalf  of 
Jesus. 


SHEEP-TRACKS. 

One  evening,  in  1861,  as  General  Garibaldi  was 
going  home,  he  met  a  Sardinian  shepherd  lamenting 
the  loss  of  a  lamb  out  of  his  flock.  Garibaldi  at  once 
turned  to  his  staff,  and  announced  his  intention  of 
scouring  the  mountain  in  search  of  the  lamb.  A 
grand  expedition  was  organized.  Lanterns  were 
brought,  and  old  officers  of  many  a  campaign  started 
off,  full  of  zeal,  to  hunt  the  fugitive.  But  no  lamb 
was  found,  and  the  soldiers  were  ordered  to  their 
beds.  The  next  morning,  Garibaldi's  attendant  found 
him  in  bed,  fast  asleep.  He  was  surprised  at  this, 
for  the  General  was  always  up  before  anybody  else. 
The  attendant  went  off  softly,  and  returned  in  half- 
an-hour.  Garibaldi  still  slept.  After  another  delay, 
the  attendant  awoke  him.  The  General  rubbed  his 
eyes,  and  so  did  his  attendant,  when  he  saw  the  old 
warrior  take  from  under  the  covering  the  lost  lamb, 


THE   GOOD   SHEPHEED.  193 

and  bid  him  convey  it  to  the  shepherd.  The  Gen 
eral  had  kept  up  the  search  through  the  night,  until 
he  had  found  it.  Even  so  doth  the  Good  Shepherd 
go  in  search  of  his  lost  sheep  until  he  finds  them. — • 
TJie  PreacJiers  Monthly. 

Christ  a  Shepherd. — He  is  the  Good  Shepherd  that 
laid  down  his  life  for  the  sheep  (John  x.  11);  the 
Great  Shepherd  that  was  brought  again  from  the 
dead  (Hob.  xiii.  20);  the  Chief  Shepherd  who  shall 
appear  again  (1  Peter  v.  4) ;  the  Shepherd  and  Bishop 
of  souls  (1  Peter  ii.  2o);  he  is  the  Shepherd  of  the 
sheep,  who  gathers  the  lambs  with  his  arm,  and  car 
ries  them  in  his  bosom  (John  x.,  Isaiah  xl.  11);  the 
Shepherd  of  Israel  (Ezekiel  xxxiv.  23):  Jehovah's 
Shepherd  (Zechariah  xiii.  7.) — John  Bate. 

Why  doth  he  not  drive  the  sheep  before  him,  es 
pecially  seeing  it  was  lively  enough  to  lose  itself? 
First,  because,  though  it  had  \vildness  more  than 
enough  to  go  astray,  it  had  not  wisdom  enough  to 
go  right.  Secondly,  because  probably  the  silly  sheep 
had  tired  itself  with  wandering.  "  The  people  shall 
weary  themselves  for  very  vanity"  (Ilab.  ii.  13). 
Therefore  the  kind  Shepherd  brings  it  home  on  his 
own  shoulders. —  Thomas  Fuller. 

Yam  Sing,  on  his  examination  for  membership  on 
experience  before  the  Baptist  Church,  San  Francisco, 
in  response  to  the  question,  "How  did  you  find 
Jesus?"  answered,  "  I  no  find  Jesus  at  all;  he  find 
me."  He  passed. 
13 


194  MY   SEEMON-NOTES. 

A  little  boy,  in  a  Chinese  Christian  family  at 
Amoy,  wishing  to  make  a  profession  of  religion,  was 
told  that  he  was  too  young  to  be  received  into  tne 
church.  He  replied,  '*  Jesus  has  promised  to  carry 
the  lambs  in  his  bosom.  I  am  only  a  little  boy ;  it 
will  be  easier  for  Jesus  to  carry  me." — The  Sunday- 
School  Teacher. 


CLXIIL 

"AND  WHEN  JRSUS  CAME  TO  THE  PLACE,  HE  LOOKED  UP,  AND 
SAW  HIM,  AND  SAID  UNTO  HIM,  ZACCHJEUS,  MAKE  HASTE,  AND 

COME    DOWN  J    FOR  TO-DAY    I    MUST   ABIDE   AT  THY   HOUSE." — 

Luke  xix.  5. 

OUR  Saviour  for  the  first  time  invited  himself  to 
a  man's  house. 

Thus  he  proved  the  keenness  and  authority  of  his 
grace.  "  I  am  found  of  them  that  sought  me  not:" 
Isaiah  Ixv.  1. 

We  ought  rather  to  invite  him  to  our  houses. 
We  should  at  least  cheerfully  accept  his  offer  to 
come  to  us. 

Perhaps  at  this  hour  he  presses  himself  upon  us. 
Yet  we  may  feel  ourselves  quite  as  unlikely  to  en 
tertain  our  Lord  as  Zaechaeus  seemed  to  be.     He  was 
a  man — 

In  a  despised  calling — a  publican,  or  tax-col 
lector. 

In  bad  odor  with  respectable  folk. 
Kich,  with  the  suspicion  of  getting  his  wealth 

wrongly. 
Eccentric,  for  else  he  had  hardly  climbed  a 

tree. 

Excommunicated  because  of  his  becoming  a 
Eoman  tax-gatherer. 

(185) 


196  MY   SEKMON-NOTE8. 

Not  at  all  the  choice  of  society  in  any  respect. 
To  such  a  man  Jesus  came;  and  he  may  come  to 
us  even  if  we  are  similarly  tabooed  by  our  neigh 
bors,  and  are  therefore  disposed  to  fear  that  he  will 
pass  us  by. 

I.  LET    US    CONSIDER    THE    NECESSITY   WHICH    PRESSED     UPON 
THE    SAVIOUR    TO    ABIDE    IN    THE    HOUSE    OP    ZACCHJ3US. 

He  felt  an  urgent  need  of — 

1.  A   sinner    who  needed  and  would   accept   his 

mercy. 

2.  A  person  who  would  illustrate  the  sovereignty 

of  his  choice. 

3.  A  character  whose  renewal  would  magnify  his 

grace. 

4.  A  host  who  would  entertain  him  with  hearty 

hospitality. 

5.  A    case    which   would   advertise    his    gospel. 

Verses  9  and  10. 

There  was  a  necessity  of  predestination  which  ren 
dered  it  true,  "  To-day  I  must  abide  at  thy  house." 

There  was  a  necessity  of  love  in  the  Redeemer's 
gracious  heart. 

There  was  also  a  necessity  in  order  to  the  blessing 
of  others  through  Zacchseus. 

II.  LET     US    ENQUIRE    WHETHER    SUCH    A    NECESSITY     EXISTS 

IN    REFERENCE    TO    OURSELVES. 

We  can  ascertain  this  by  answering  the  following 
questions,  which  are  suggested  by  the  behavior  of 
Zacchseus  to  our  Lord: — 


MUST  HE?  197 

1.  Will  we   receive  him  this  day  ?     "  He   made 

haste." 

2.  Will  we  receive  him  heartily  ?    u  Received  him 

joyfully." 

3.  Will   we   receive   him    whatever   others    say? 

"  They  all  murmured." 

4.  Will  we     receive   him   as    Lord  ?     "  He    said, 

Behold,  Lord." 

5.  Will  we  receive  him  so  as  to  place  our  substance 

under  the  control  of  his  laws  ?     Verse  8. 

If  these  things  be  so,  Jesus  must  abide  with  us. 
He  cannot  fail  to  come  where  he  will  have  such 
a  welcome. 

III.    LET  US  FULLY    UNDERSTAND    WHAT    THAT    NECESSITY  IN 
VOLVES. 

If  the  Lord  Jesus  comes  to  abide  in  our  house— 

1.  We  must  be  ready  to  face  objections  at  home. 

2.  We    must   get  rid  of  all  iii   our  house   which 

would  be  objectionable  to  him.  Perhaps 
there  is  much  there  which  he  would  never 
tolerate. 

3.  We  must  admit  none  who   would  grieve  our 

heavenly  Guest.  His  friendship  must  end 
our  friendship  with  the  world. 

4.  We  must  let  him  rule  the  house  and  ourselves, 

without  rival  or  reserve,  henceforth  and  for 
ever. 

5.  We  must  let  him   use  us  and  ours  as  instru 

ments  for  the  further  spread  of  his  king 
dom. 


198  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Why  should  we  not  to-day  receive  our  Lord  ? 
There  is  no  reason  why  we  must  not 
There  are  many  reasons  why  we  must  do  so  at  once. 
Lord,  issue  thine  own  mandate,  and  sa\T,  "  I  must." 


NOTEWORTHY  PASSAGES. 

Had  our  Saviour  said  no  more,  but  "Zacchseus, 
come  down,"  the  poor  man  would  have  thought  him 
self  taxed  for  his  boldness  and  curiosity:  it  were  bet 
ter  to  be  unknown  than  noted  for  misbehavior. 
But  how  the  next  words  comfort  him:  "For  to-day 
I  must  abide  at  thy  house  !  "  What  a  sweet  famil 
iarity  was  here  !  as  if  Christ  had  been  many  years 
acquainted  with  Zacchrcus,  whom  he  now  first  saw. 
Contrary  to  custom  the  host  is  invited  by  the  guest, 
and  called  to  an  unexpected  entertainment.  Well  did 
our  Saviour  hear  Zacchaeus'  heart  inviting  him, 
though  his  mouth  did  not :  desires  are  the  language  of 
the  spirit,  and  are  heard  by  him  that  is  the  God  of 
spirits. — Bishop  Hall. 

Now,  Christ  begins  to  call  Zacchaeus  from  the 
tree  to  be  converted,  as  God  called  Adam  from 
among  the  trees  of  the  garden  to  be  judged :  Genesis 
iii.  8,  9.  Before,  Zacchaeus  was  too  low,  and  there 
fore  was  fain  to  climb;  but  now  he  is  too  high,  and 
therefore  he  must  come  down. — Henry  Smith. 


CLXIV. 


HB  TOOK  BREAD,  AND  GAVE  THANKS,  AND  BRAKE  IT, 
AND  GAVE  UNTO  THEM,  SAYING,  THIS  IS  MY  BODY  WHICH  IS 
GIVEN  FOR  YOU  :  THIS  DO  IN  REMEMBRANCE  OF  ME. 

"  LIKEWISE  ALSO  THE  CUP  AFTER  SUPPER,  SAYING,  THIS  CUP  is 

THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  IN  MY  BLOOD,  WHICH  18  SHED  FOB  YOU.* 

—  Luke  xxii.  19,  20. 

HERE  we  have  full  directions  for  observing  the 
Lord's  Supper. 

You  see  what  it  was,  and  how  it  was  done. 

The  directions  are  plain,  clear,  definite. 

It  will  not  be  right  to  do  something  else  ;  we  must 
"this  do." 

Nor  this  for  another  purpose;  but  "  this  do  in  re 
membrance  of  me." 

This  command  raises  a  previous  question:  —  Do 
you  know  him?  He  who  does  not  know  him  can 
not  remember  him. 

This  being  premised,  let  us  observe  that  — 

I.    THE  MAIN  OBJECT  OF  THE  SUPPER  IS  A  PERSONAL  MEMORIAL. 

"  In  remembrance  of  me"     We  are  to  remember 
not  so  much  his  doctrines,  or  precepts,  as  his  person, 
Remember  the  Lord  Jesus  at  this  Supper  — 

1.  As  the  trust  of  your  hearts. 

2.  As  the  object  of  your  gratitude. 

(199) 


200  MY  SERMON  -NOTES. 

3.  As  the  Lord  of  your  conduct. 

4.  As  the  joy  of  your  lives. 

5.  As  the  Representative  of  your  persons. 

6.  As  the  Rewarder  of  your  hopes. 
Remember  what  he  was,  what  he  is,  what  he  will 

be. 

Remember  him  with  heartiness,  concentration  of 
thought,  realizing  vividness,  and  deep  emotion. 

II.    THE  MEMORIAL  ITSELF  IS  STRIKING. 

1.  Simple,  and  therefore  like  himself,  who  is  trans 

parent  and  unpretentious  truth.  Only 
bread  broken,  and  wine  poured  out. 

2.  Frequent, — "  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,"  and  so  point 

ing  to  our  constant  need.  He  intended  the 
Supper  to  be  often  enjoyed. 

3.  Universal,  and  so  showing   the    need   of  all. 

"  Drink  ye  all  of  it."  In  every  land,  all  his 
people  are  to  eat  and  drink  at  this  table. 

4.  His  death  is  the  best  memory  of  himself,  and  it 

is  by  showing  forth  his  death  that  we  re 
member  Jdm. 

5.  His  covenant  relation  is  a  great  aid  to  memory  ; 

hence  he  speaks  of — "  The  new  covenant  in 
my  blood."  We  do  not  forget  Adam,  our 
first  covenant -head  ;  nor  can  we  forget  our 
second  Adam. 

6   Our  receiving  him  is  the  best  method  of  keeping 
him  in  memory;  therefore  we  eat  and  drink 
in  this  ordinance. 
No  better  memorial  could  have  been  ordained. 


THE   ORDAINED   MEMORIAL.  201 

III.    THE    OBJECT    AIMED    AT    IS    ITSELF    INVITING. 

Since  we  are  invited  to  come  to  the  holy  Supper 
that  we  may  remember  our  Lord,  we  may  safely  in 
fer  that — 

1.  We  may  come  to  it,  though  we  have  forgotten 

him  often  and  sadly.     In  fact,  this  will  be  a 
reason  for  coming. 

2.  We  may  come,  though  others  may  be  forgetful 

of  him.     We  come  not  to  judge  them,  but  to 
remember  him  ourselves. 

3.  We  may  come,  though  weak  for  aught  else  but 

the  memory  of  his  goodness. 

4.  It  will  be  sweet,  cheering,  sanctifying,  quicken 

ing,  to  remember  him  ;  therefore  let  us  not 
fail  to  come. 

Let  us  at  the  sacred  table  quit  all  other  themes. 

Let  us  not  burden  ourselves  with  regrets,  resolves, 
&c. 

Let  us  muse  wholly  and  alone  on  him  whose  flesh 
is  meat  indeed,  whose  blood  is  drink  indeed  :  John 
vi.  55. 

TESTIMONIES. 

Our  Lord  Jesus  has  his  own  memorials  of  us,  even 
as  he  has  given  us  a  memorial  of  himself.  The  prints 
of  the  nails  constitute  forget-me-nots  of  a  peculiarly 
personal  and  abiding  kind  :  "  Behold,  I  have  graven 
thee  upon  the  palms  of  my  hands :  "  Isaiah  xlix.  16. 
By  these  marks  he  sees  what  he  has  already  suffered, 
and  he  pledges  himself  to  do  nothing  apart  from 


202  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

those  sufferings,  for  his  hands,  with  which  he  works, 
are  pierced.  Since  he  thus  bears  in  his  hands  the 
marks  of  his  passion,  let  us  bear  them  on  our  hearts. 
Frequently  to  me  the  Supper  has  been  much  bet 
ter  than  a  sermon.  It  has  the  same  teaching-power, 
but  it  is  more  vivid.  The  Lord  is  known  of  us  in  the 
breaking  of  bread,  though  our  eyes  have  been  holden 
during  his  discourse.  I  can  see  a  good  meaning  in 
the  saying  of  Henry  III.,  of  France,  when  he  prefer 
red  the  Sacraments  to  a  sermon:  *'  I  had  rather  see 
my  Friend  than  hear  him  talked  about."  I  love  to 
hear  my  Lord  talked  about,  for  so  I  often  see  him, 
and  I  see  him  in  no  other  way  in  the  Supper  than  in 
a  sermon  ;  but  sometimes,  when  my  eye  is  weak 
with  weeping,  or  dim  with  dust,  that  double  glass 
of  the  bread  and  wine  suits  me  best. — C.  H.  S. 

"  This  do  in  remembrance  of "me." — 1.  This  command 
implies  a  knowledge  of  himself.  To  remember,  we 
must  first  know.  It  is  no  use  saying  to  a  man  born 
blind,  "  Remember  the  sunshine."  2.  It  reveals  the 
love  of  Christ.  Why  should  he  care  about  our  re 
membering  him  ?  Dying  voices  have  said  to  some  of 
us,  "Think  of  me  sometimes  ;  don't  forget  me." 
It  is  the  very  nature  of  love  to  want  to  be  remembered. 
3.  It  implies  a  tendency  to  forget.  God  never  founds 
a  needless  institution.  It  is  a  sin  that  we  do  not  re 
member  Christ  more.  We  should  thankfully  use 
every  help  to  memory. — Outline  of  an  Address  by  Dr. 
Stanford. 

At  school  we  used  certain  books  called  "  Aids  to 
Memory."  I  am  sure  they  rather  perplexed  than  as- 


THE   ORDAINED   MEMORIAL.  203 

sisted  me.  Their  utility  was  equivalent  to  that  of  a 
bundle  of  staves  under  a  traveller's  arm  :  true,  he 
might  use  them  one  by  one  to  walk  with,  but  in  the 
mean  time  he  carried  a  host  of  others  which  he  would 
never  need.  But  our  Saviour  was  wiser  than  all  our 
teachers,  and  his  remembrances  are  true  and  real  aids 
to  memory.  His  love-tokens  have  an  unmistakable 
language,  and  they  sweetly  win  our  attention. 

a  IL  s. 

If  a  friend  gives  us  a  ring  at  his  death,  we  wear  it 
to  keep  up  the  memory  of  our  friend  ;  much  more, 
then,  ought  we  to  keep  up  the  memorial  of  Christ's 
death  in  the  sacraments.  —  T hernias  Watson. 

In  mom'ry  of  Thy  cross  and  shame,  (1  Cor.  xi.  23-26,) 
I  take  tliia  Supper  in  Thy  name  ; 
This  juice  of  grape,  and  Hour  of  wheat, 
My  outward  man  doth  drink  and  eat. 
Oh,  may  my  inward  man  be  fed 
With  better  wine  and  better  bread  ; 
Hay  Thy  rich  flesh  and  precious  blood 
Supply  my  spirit's  daily  food  !    (John  vi.  54.) 
I  thank  Thee,  Lord,  Thou  diedst  for  me  : 
Oh,  may  I  live  and  die  to  Thee !     (Koin.  xiv.  7-10.) 

A.  A. 


CLXY. 

"  I   AM  AMONG  YOU  AS   HE   THAT   SERVETH." — LuJce  XXii.  27. 

OINGULAR  fact  with  regard  to  the  apostles. 
^  They  were  at  the  same  time  troubled  with  two 
questions:  "  Which  of  them  should  be  accounted  the 
greatest  ?  "  and  "  Which  of  them  should  betray  his 
Master?" 

Where  humility  should  have  abounded  ambition 
intruded. 

Of  the  evil  of  self-seeking  our  Lord  would  cure  the 
apostles. 

The  remedy  which  he  used  was  his  own  conduct. 
John  xiii.  12-17. 

If  he  made  himself  least,  they  must  not  strive  to  be 
greatest. 

May  this  example  be  blessed  to  us  also  ! 

Let  us  attentively  note — 

I.  OUR  LORD'S  POSITION. — "  I    am  among   you   as   he 
that  serveth." 

1.  In  the  world  our  Lord  was  not  one  of  the  cul 

tured  few  on  whom  others  wait.  He  was  a 
working-man,  and  in  spirit  he  was  servus 
servorum,  servant  of  servants.  Mark  x.  45. 

2.  In  the  circle  of  his  own  disciples  he  was   one 

(204) 


8EKVUS   SEKVORUM.  205 

that  served.     Where  he  was  most  Master  he 

was  most  servant. 

He  was  like  a  shepherd,  servant  to  the  sheep. 
He  was  like  a  nurse,  servant  to  a  child. 

3.  In  the  celebration  of  the  Supper,  our  Lord  was 

specially  among  them  "as  he  that  serveth," 
for  he  washed  his  disciples'  feet. 

4.  In  the  whole  course  of  his  life,  Jesus  on  earth 

ever  took  the  place  of  the  servant,  or  slave. 
His  ear  was  bored  by  his  entering  into  cove 
nant.      "  Mine   ears   hast  thou   digged,  or 

pierced:"  Ps.  xl.  6  (Margin);  Ex.  xxi.  6. 
His  office  was  announced  at  his  coming,   "  Lo, 

I  come  to  do  thy  will!  "     Ps.  xl.  7;  Heb.  x. 

5-9. 
His  nature  was  fitted  for  service  :  he    "  took 

upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant:"  Phil,  ii  7. 
He  assumed  the  lowest   place   among   men. 

Ps.  xxii.  6;  Is.  liii.  3. 
He    cared   for   others,    and  not  for   himself. 

The  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  served  but 

to  serve :  "  Mark  x.  45. 
He  laid  aside  his  own  will.     John  iv.  S4;  vi. 

38. 
He  bore  patiently  all  manner  of  hardness.     1 

Peter  ii.  23. 

II.  THE  WONDER  OF  IT. — That  he  should  be  a  servant 
among  his  own  servants. 

The  marvel  of  it  was  rendered  the  greater — 


206  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

1.  As  he  was  Lord  of  all  by  nature  and   essence. 

Col.  1 15-19. 

2.  As  he  was  superior  in  wisdom  holiness,  power, 

and  in  every  other  way,  to  the  very  best  of 
them.     Matt.  viii.  26,  27 ;  John  xiv.  9. 

3.  As  he  was  so  greatly  their  Benefactor.     John 

xv.  16. 

4.  As  they  were  such  poor  creatures,  and  so  un 

worthy  to  be  served. 

How  could  it  be  that  they  suffered  themselves    to 

be  served  of  him  ? 
How  could  it  be  that  he  endured  to  serve  them? 

III.  TlIE    EXPLANATION    OF    IT. 

We  must  look  for  this  to  his  own  nature. 

1.  lie  is  so  infinitely  great.     Heb.  i.  2-4. 

2.  He  is  BO  immeasurably  full  of  love.     John  xv. 

9;  1  John  iii.  16. 

Because  of  these  two  things  lie  condescended  so 
marvellously. 

IV.  THE    IMITATION   OF    IT. 

Let  us  copy  our  Lord — 

1.  In  cheerfully  choosing  to  fulfil  the  most  lowly 

offices. 

2.  In   manifesting   great  lowliness  of  spirit,  and 

humility  of  bearing.     Eph.  iv.  1-3;  Phil.  ii. 
3;  1   IMer  v.  5. 

3.  In  laying  ourselves  out  for  the  good  of  others. 

Let  self-sacrifice  be  the  rule  of  our  existence. 
2.  Cor.  xii.  15. 


SERVUS   SERVORUM.  207 

4.  In  gladly  bearing  injustice  rather  than  break 

the  peace,  avenge  ourselves,  or  grieve 
others.  1  Peter  ii.  19,  20;  iii.  14. 

5.  In   selecting  that  place  in  which    we   receive 

least,  and  give  most; — choosing  to  wait  at 
table  rather  than  to  sit  at  meat. 

Does  not  the  text  rebuke  our  pride  ? 

Does  it  not  arouse  our  adoring  love  ? 

Does  it  not  lead  us  to  gird  up  our  loins  to  serve 
the  brethren  ? 

CONCERNING  SERVICE. 

When  the  son  of  Gamaliel  was  married,  Rabbis 
Eliezer,  Joshuah,  and  Zadig  were  invited  to  the  mar 
riage-feast.  Gamaliel,  though  one  of  the  most  distin 
guished  men  among  the  Israelites,  himself  waited  on 
his  guests,  and  pouring  out  a  cup  of  wine,  handed  it  to 
Eliezer,  who  politely  refused  it.  Gamaliel  then  hand 
ed  it  to  Joshuah.  The  latter  accepted  it.  "  How  is 
this,  friend  Joshuah  ?  "  said  Eliezer.  "  Shall  we  sit  and 
permit  so  great  a  man  to  wait  on  us?  "  Why  not? 
replied  Joshuah,  u  a  man  even  greater  than  he  did 
so  long  before  him.  Was  not  our  father  Abraham  a 
very  great  man?  Yet  even  he  waited  upon  his 
guests,  as  it  is  written,  'and  lie  (Abraham)  stood  by 
them  whilst  they  were  eating.1  Perhaps  you  may  think 
he  did  so  because  he  knew  them  to  be  angels;  no 
such  thing.  He  supposed  them  to  be  Arabian 
travellers,  else  he  would  neither  have  offered  them 
water  to  wash  their  feet,  nor  viands  to  allay  their 
hunger.  Why  then,  shall  we  prevent  our  kind  host 


208  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

from  imitating  so  excellent  an  example  ?  "  "I  know," 
exclaimed  Rabbi  Zadig,  "  a  Being  still  greater  than 
Abraham,  who  doth  the  same."  "  Indeed,"  continued 
he,  "  how  long  shall  we  be  engaged  in  reciting  the 
praises  of  created  beings,  and  neglect  the  glory  of  the 
Creator  ?  Even  he,  blessed  be  his  name,  causes  the 
winds  to  blow,  the  clouds  to  accumulate,  and  the 
rain  to  descend  !  He  fertilizes  the  earth,  and  daily 
prepares  a  magnificent  table  for  his  creatures.  Why, 
then,  shall  we  hinder  our  kind  host,  Gamaliel,  from 
following  so  glorious  an  example  ?  " — Hebrew  Tales. 

An  old  woman  in  Glencroe,  visited  by  William 
McGavin,  was  found  seated  in  bed,  which,  contrary 
to  usual  experience  in  the  district,  was  scrupulously 
clean. 

';  You  are  an  old  servant  of  Christ,  I  understand/ 
said  he. 

"Servant  of  Christ!"  she  responded,  "  Xa,  na; 
I'm  naething  pit  a  puir  sinner.  It's  nine-and- forty 
years  syne  he  pegan  tae  serve  me." 

"  Serve  you,  how  ?  " 

"  Dae  ye  no  ken  that  ? "  she  replied.  "  In  the 
hoose  o'  Christ  the  Maister  serves  a'  the  guests. 
Di<l  he  no'  himsel'  say,  '  I'm  amang  ye  as  ane  that 
serveth  ?  '  When  he  brocht  me  hame  tae  himsel'  he 
then  pegan  tae  serve  me,  an'  he  ha'  served  me  ere 
syne.  Nane  ere  compleened  o'  Christ  pein'  a  pad  ser 
vant  ! " 

"  Well,  but  I  hope  you  are  a  servant  for  all  that. 
In  the  state  of  glory  his  servants  serve  him ;  and 
what  is  perfected  there  must  begin  here." 


SEEVU3   SEKVOKUM.  209 

"That's  a'  fery  true.  I  ken  that  I'm  under  his 
authority,  pit  somehoo  I  dinna  like  tae  think  much 
aboot  servin'  Christ.  It  gi'es  me  nae  comfort." — 
The  Sword  and  the  Trowel 

Why  is  it  that  so  many  professed  Christians  "  feel 
above"  undertaking  humble  work  for  God  and  hu 
manity  ?  We  have  heard  of  a  minister  of  Christ 
complaining  that  his  station  was  "  beneath  his  tal 
ents  !  "  As  if  the  soul  of  a  beggar  were  beneath  the 
genius  of  a  Paul !  Some  are  unwilling  to  cuter  a 
mission-school,  or  to  distribute  tracts  through  a  poor 
district,  strangely  forgetting  that  their  divine  ?»Iaster 
was  himself  a  missionary.  Have  such  never  learned 
that  the  towel  wherewith  Jesus  wiped  his  disciples' 
feet  outshone  the  purple  that  wrapped  Caesar's  limbs? 
Do  they  not  know  that  the  post  of  honor  is  the  post 
of  service  ?  "  .My  seat  in  the  Sunday-school  is 
higher  than  my  seat  in  the  Senate,"  said  an  eminent 
Christian  statesman. — Dr.  Cuyler. 
14 


CLXVL 


THEN  SAID  JESUS,  FATHER,  FORGIVE  THEM  ;  TOR  THBT  KNOW 
NOT  WHAT  THEY  DO."  —  Luke  xxiii.  34. 


LET  us  go  to   Calvary  to  learn  how  we  may  be 
forgiven  ; 
And  then  let  us  linger  there  to  learn  how  we  may 

forgive 
There  shall  we  see  what  sin  is,  as  it  murders  the 

Lord  of  love  ; 
Ajid   see    also    how   almighty    mercy    prevailed 

against  it. 

As  we  behold  our  Lord  nailed  to  the  cross,  and 
l*&r  his  first  words  upon  the  tree,  let  us  watch,  and 
learn,  and  love. 


I.    WE    SEE    THE    LOVE    OF    JESUS    ENDURING  - 

To  the  closing  act  of  human  malice, 

To  the  utmost  endurance   of  shame.     Phil.  ii.  8; 

Heb.  xii.  2. 
To  the  extreme  limit  of  personal  suifering.    Psalm 

xxii.  1-18. 

We  see  not  alone  patience  that  bears  without  com 
plaint,  but  love  that  labors  to  bestow  benefits  upon 
its  enemies. 

IL    WE    SEE    THAT    LOVE   REVEALING   ITSELF. 
(210) 


"FATHER,  FOKGIVE  THEM."  211 

Love  can  use  no  better  instrument  than  prayer. 

Love,  when  in  a  death-agony,  still  prays. 

Love  thus  brings  heaven  to  the  succor  of  those  for 
whom  it  cares. 

Love  thus,  to  the  highest,  blesses  its  object. 

To  this  present  our  Lord  Jesus  continues  to  bless 
the  people  of  his  choice  by  continually  interceding 
for  them.  Rom.  viii.  34;  Heb.  vii.  25.  This  is  his 
daily  prayer  for  us. 

III.  WE    SEE    FOR   WHAT    THAT    LOVE    TRAYS. 

Forgiveness  is  the  first,  chief,  and  basis  blessing. 
Forgiveness  from  the  Father  can  even  go  BO  far  as 

to  pardon  the  murder  of  his  Son. 
Forgiveness  is  the  great  petition  of  our  Lord's  sac 
rifice. 

Love  admits  that  pardon  is  needed,  and  it  shud 
ders  at  the  thought  of  what  must  come  to  the  guilty 
if  pardon  be  not  given. 

IV.  WE    SEE    HOW    THE    LOVING   JfiSUS    PRATS. 

For  his  wanton  murderers  in  the  very  act. 

For  their  full  and  immediate  forgiveness. 

For  no  other  reason  except  their  ignorance;  and 
this  plea  grace  alone  could  suggest  or  ac 
cept. 

Are  there  any  so  guilty  that  Jesus  would  refuse  to 
intercede  for  them  ? 

V.  WE   SEE    HOW    HIS    PRAYER    BOTH    WARNS    AND    WOOS. 

It  warns,  for  it  suggests  that  there  is  a  limit  to  the 
possibility  of  pardon. 


212  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Men  may  so  sin  that  there  shall  remain  no 
plea  of  ignorance ;  nay,  no  plea  whatever. 
It  woos,  for  it  proves  that  if  there  be  a  plea,  Jesus 
will  find  it. 

Come  and  trust  your  case  in  his  hands;  he  will 
draw  out  his  own  brief,  and  invent  his  own  argu 
ments  of  love. 

VI.    WE    SEE    HOW    HE   INSTRUCTS    FROM    THE    CROSS. 

He  teaches  us  to  put  the  best  construction  on  the 
deeds  of  our  fellow- men,  and  to  discover  mitigating 
circumstances  when  they  work  us  grievous  ill. 

He  teaches  us  to  forgive  the  utmost  wrong.     Mark 
xi.  25. 

He  teaches  us  to  pray  for  others  to  our  last  breath. 
Acts  vii.  59,  60. 

That  glorious  appeal  to  the  divine  Fatherhood, 
once  made  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  still  prevails  for  us. 

Let  the  chief  of  sinners  come  unto  God  with  the 
music  of  "Father,  forgive  them,"  sounding  in  their 
ears. 

COMMENDATIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS. 

It  is  well  to  suppose  ignorance  when  we  suffer 
wrong.  A  cruel  letter  came  to  me  in  my  illness,  but 
I  hoped  the  writer  did  not  know  how  depressed  I 
was;  a  gossip  repeated  a  silly  slander,  but  I  always 
believed  that  she  thought  it  was  the  truth ;  an  indi 
vidual  intentionally  grossly  insulted  me,  but  I  mis 
took  it  for  a  rough  jest.  In  every  case  I  have  found 
it  to  my  own  comfort  to  believe  that  there  must  have 


"FATHER,  FORGIVE  THEM."  213 

been  a  mistake ;  besides,  it  makes  it  much  easier  to 
remove  any  unpleasant  feeling  if  all  along  you  have 
treated  it  as  an  error  of  judgment,  or  a  blunder,  oc 
casioned  by  want  of  better  information. — C.  H.  S. 

There  is  something  in  this  plea  that  at  first  con 
founds  me,  and  that  makes  me  ask  with  reverence 
in  what  sense  Christ  used  it.  Surely  ignorance  is 
not  the  gospel  plea.  Ignorance  gives  no  man  a 
claim  on  God.  .  .  We  are  not  to  say,  "  Being 
justified  by  ignorance,  we  have  peace  with  God." 
Ignorance  is  not  innocence,  it  is  often  a 
sin  ;  and  one  sin  is  no  salvation  from  another. 

The  ignorance  of  Christ's  enemies  of  what  is 
involved  in  their  capital  crime  brings  them  within 
the  pale  of  mercy,  and  allows  their  pardon  to  be  a 
possibility  —  a  possibility  on  the  ground  which  his 
cross  supplies.  Perhaps  no  mere  men  really  know 
what  they  do  in  repudiating  Christ.  Satan  knew 
what  he  did,  and  nothing  has  been  said  in  our  hear 
ing  of  any  gospel  for  him ;  but  human  sinners  cannot 
fully  know;  and  their  ignorance,  though  it  does  not 
make  sin  sinless,  leaves  it  pardonable. 

Charles  Stanford. 

O  Saviour,  thou  couldst  not  but  be  heard !  Those 
who  out  of  ignorance  and  simplicity  thus  persecuted 
thee,  find  the  happy  issue  of  thine  intercession. 
Now  I  see  whence  it  was  that  three  thousand  souls 
were  converted  soon  after,  at  one  sermon.  It  was 
not  Peter's  speech,  it  was  thy  prayer,  that  was  thus 
effectual.  Now  they  have  grace  to  know  and  COD- 


214  MY   SEKMON-ISTOTES. 

fess  whence  they  have  both  forgiveness  and  salva 
tion,  and  can  recompense  their  blasphemies  with 
thanksgiving.  What  sin  is  there,  Lord,  whereof  I 
can  despair  of  the  remission  ?  Or  what  offence  can 
I  be  unwilling  to  remit,  when  thou  prayest  for  the 
forgiveness  of  thy  murderers  and  blasphemers  ? 

Bishop  Hall 

To  do  him  any  wrong  was  to  beget 
A  kindness  from  him  ;  for  his  heart  was  rich, 
Of  such  fine  mould,  that  if  you  sow'd  thereim 
The  seed  of  Hate,  it  blossomed  Charity. 

It  was  a  mark  of  true  moral  grandeur  in  the  char- 
acter  of  Phocion,  that,  as  he  was  about  to  be  put  to 
death,  when  one  asked  him  whether  he  had  any  com 
mands  to  leave  for  his  son,  he  exclaimed,  "  Yes,  by 
all  means,  tell  him  from  me  to  forget  the  ill-treatment 
I  have  received  from  the  Athenians."  Such  a  spirit 
of  forgiveness,  if  it  became  a  heathen,  will  much 
more  become  a  disciple  of  the  gentle  and  loving 
Christ,  who,  in  his  dying  hour,  prayed,  "Father, 
forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  No 
one  has  a  right  to  claim  the  Christian  spirit  who  re 
fuses  to  forgive  a  foe,  and  even  cement  his  forgive 
ness  by  some  act  of  self-denying  love. 

A  great  boy  in  a  school  was  so  abusive  to  the 
younger  ones,  that  the  teacher  took  the  vote  of  the 
school  whether  he  should  be  expelled.  All  the  small 
boys  voted  to  expel  him  except  one,  who  was  scarce 
ly  five  years  old.  Yet  he  knew  very  well  that  the 
bad  boj  Tfould  continue  to  abuse  him.  "  Why,  then, 


FORGIVE   THEM."  215 

did  you  vote  for  him  to  stay?"  said  the  teacher. 
"Because,  if  he  is  expelled,  perhaps  he  will  not  learn 
any  more  about  God,  and  so  he  will  become  still 
more  wicked."  "  Do  you  forgive  him,  then  ?  "  said 
the  teacher.  "Yes,"  said  he,  "father  and  mother 
forgive  me  when  I  do  wrong;  God  forgives  me  too; 
and  I  must  do  the  same." — The  Biblical  Treasury. 


CLXVII. 


"AND     AS    THEY     THUS     SPAKE,    JESUS  HIMSELF    STOOD    IN 

MIDST     OF    THEM,    AND    SAITH     UNTO    THEM,    PEACE    BE    UNTO 

YOU."  —  Luke  xxiv.  36. 

FROM  what  a  man  has  been  it  is  usually  safe  to 
infer  what  he  is. 

This  is  eminently  the  case  with  our  Lord  Jesus, 
since  he  is  unchangeable.  What  he  was  to  his  dis 
ciples  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  he  will  be  to  his  fol 
lowers  at  this  present  hour. 

We  gather  that  he  loves  to  reveal  himself  to  his 
saints,  when  they  are  assembled  on  the  Sabbath-day, 
for  he  did  so  when  on  earth. 

Let  us  consider  the  visit  described  in  the  text. 

Uninvited,  unexpected,  undeserved,  but  most  wel 
come  was  that  visit. 

Jesus  stood  in  the  centre  to  be  near  to  them  all, 
and  that  he  might  assume  the  place  which  a  leader 
should  take  among  his  followers. 

I.  WHEN  HE  APPEARED. 

1.  When  they  had  been  acting  unworthily  by  flee 

ing  from  him  at  his  betrayal,  and  deserting 
him  at  his  trial. 

2.  When  they  were  unprepared,  and  unbelieving, 

(216) 


A,  DIVINE  VISITATION.  217 

doubting  his  express  promise,  and  refusing 
the  testimony  of  his  messengers. 

3.  When  they  greatly  needed   his   presence,   for 

they  were  like  sheep  without  a  shepherd. 

4.  When  they  were  exercising  the  little  life  they 

had  by  coining  together  in  loving  assem 
bly.  So  far  they  were  doing  well,  and  act 
ing  in  a  way  which  was  likely  to  bring 
blessing. 

5.  W^hen   they  were  lamenting  his  absence,  and 

thus  proving  their  desire  after  him.  This 
is  an  admirable  means  of  gaining  his  pres 
ence. 

6.  When  certain  among  them  were  testifying  con 

cerning  him. 

Are  not  we  in  a  similar  condition? 
May  we  not  hopefully  look  for  our  Lord's  mani 
festation  of  himself? 

II.   WHAT  HE  SAID.     "  Peace  be  unto  you." 

1.  Lt  was  a  benediction :  he  wishes  them  peace. 

2.  It  was  a  declaration :  they  were  at  peace  with 

God. 

3.  It  was  a  fiat:  he  inspired  them  with  peace. 

4.  It  was  an  absolution :  he  blotted  out  all  offen 

ces  which  might  have  spoiled  their  peace. 
The    Lord  by  his   Holy  Spirit  can  calm  our  per 
turbed  minds,  relieve  of  all  care,  discharge  from  all 
sin,  deliver  from  all  spiritual  conflict,  and  give  to 
each  one  of  us  immediate  and  perfect  peace. 


218  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

III.   WHAT  CAME  OF  HIS  APPEARING. 

1.  He  banished  their  doubts.     Even  Thomas  had 

to  shake  off  his  obstinate  unbelief. 

2.  He   revealed  and    sealed  his  love  upon   their 

hearts  by  showing  them  his  hands  and  his 
feet. 

3.  He  refreshed  their  memories.     "These  are  the 

words  which  I  spake  unto  you:"  verse  44. 

4.  He  opened  their  understandings :  verse  45. 

5.  lie  showed  them  their  position.     *'  Ye  are  wit 

nesses  of  these  things:"  verse  48. 

6.  He  filled  them  with  joy.     John  xx.  20. 

Has  the  Lord  come  into  our  midst  during  this  ser 
vice? 

Has  he  breathed  into  our  souls  a  special  peace  ? 

If  so,  let  us  wait  a  while,  and  further  enjoy  his 
company,  and  praise  his  condescending  love. 

If  we  do  not  feel  that  we  have  been  thus  favored, 
let  us  tarry  behind,  and  further  seek  his  face. 

A  special  meeting  for  praise  and  prayer  will  be 
held  during  the  next  half-hour.  0  Lord  Jesus, 
abide  with  us  ! 

RIPPLES. 

The  Master's  greeting  to  the  first  company  has 
been  in  the  word,  "  Rejoice!"  (Matt,  xxviii.  9,  10.) 
His  greeting  to  the  second  was  in  the  phrase, 
"  Peace  be  unto  you  1"  And  this  he  said  twice  over. 
(John  xx.  19,  21.)  We  should  keep  in  mind  the  dif 
ference  between  the  first  company  and  the  second 


A  DIVINE  VISITATION.  219 

The  first  was  a  small  detachment  of  the  general  so 
ciety,  and  consisted  of  women  only.  The  second 
was  the  general  society  itself,  including  ail  the  men; 
and  all  the  men  had  in  one  moment  of  panic  for 
saken  their  Master.  In  that  shameful  moment  even 
John  had  not  been  an  exception.  The  women,  when 
Christ  met  them,  had  been  true;  and  were  only  con 
scious  of  grief;  the  men  had  not  been  true;  and  be 
sides  their  grief,  were  conscious  of  deep  agitation 
and  burning  shame.  He  knew  their  thoughts.  Like 
the  young  Hebrew  in  their  national  story,  who,  years 
after  his  brethren  had  cast  him  into  a  pit,  then  sold 
him  for  a  slave,  met  them  face  to  face  again,  he  as 
their  lord,  they  as  his  supplicants,  but  who,  that 
they  might  not  fall  back  blasted,  gently  discovered 
himself  to  them  in  the  words,  UI  am  Joseph  your 
brother,"  to  the  mention  of  his  name  eagerly  adding 
the  mention  of  his  relation;  so  the  Celestial  Joseph, 
in  discovering  himself  to  those  whom  he  had  so 
grandly  loved,  but  by  whom  he  had  been  so  basely 
forsaken,  first  sent  forward  by  Mary  the  message. 
"Go  tell  my  brethren,"  then  followed  up  the  mes 
sage  by  personally  appearing  with  these  words  on 
his  lips — u Peace  to  you!" — words  meant  to  dispel 
their  fear,  to  kindle  their  tenderness,  and  to  still 
the  tempest  within  them.  Brothers  in  Christ,  this 
message  was  meant  for  our  one  whole  family. 

Charles  Stanford. 

There  are  depths  in  the  ocean,  I  am  told,  which 
no  tempest  ever  stirs  ;  they  are  beyond  the  reach  of 
all  storms,  which  sweep  and  agitate  the  surface  of 


220  MY   SEEMOX-]STOTES. 

the  sea.  And  there  are  heights  in  the  blue  sky 
above  to  which  no  cloud  ever  ascends,  where  no 
tempest  ever  rages,  where  all  is  perpetual  sunshine, 
and  naught  exists  to  disturb  the  deep  serene.  Each 
of  these  is  an  emblem  of  the  soul  which  Jesus  visits ; 
to  whom  he  speaks  peace,  whose  fear  he  dispels,  and 
whose  lamp  of  hope  he  trims.  —  Tweedie. 

In  the  life  of  Dr.  John  Duncan  there  is  a  touching 
passage  which  relates  how  much  he  suffered  from 
religious  melancholy.  His  mental  struggles  were 
often  very  distressing,  casting  a  shadow  over  his 
whole  life  and  work.  On  one  occasion,  he  went  to 
his  college-claps  in  a  state  of  extreme  dejection. 
During  the  opening  prayer,  however,  the  cloud 
passed  away.  His  eye  brightened,  his  features  re 
laxed,  and  before  beginning  his  lecture  he  said,  with 
pathetic  sympathy,  "Dear  young  gentlemen,  I 
have  just  got  a  glimpse  of  Jesus." 

We  are  the  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ.  Now,  that 
which  nerves  the  soldier's  arm,  and  strengthens  his 
heart,  as  he  goes  forth  to  battle,  is  not  so  much  the 
multitude  of  the  army  of  whicli  he  forms  a  part,  as 
the  character  of  the  chief  whom  he  is  following.  It 
is  related  that,  in  one  of  the  Duke  of  Wellington's 
battles,  a  portion  of  the  army  was  giving  way, 
under  the  charge  of  the  enemy,  when  he  rode  into 
the  midst  ol  them.  A  soldier  called  out  in  ecstasy, 
"  There s  the  Duke — God  bless  Mm!  I'd  rather  see  his 
face  than  a  whole  brigade  ;"  and  these  words,  turning 
all  eyes  to  their  chief,  so  reassured  his  comrades  that 


A  DIVINE  VISITATION.  221 

they  repulsed  the  foe  ;  they  felt,  he  is  beside  us  who 
was  never  defeated  yet,  and  who  will  not  be  defeated 
now.  A  military  friend,  with  whom  I  conversed  on 
this  subject,  said  that,  though  he  had  never  heard 
the  anecdote,  he  could  well  conceive  it  to  be  true : 
the  presence  of  the  distinguished  General,  he  added, 
was  at  any  time  worth  five  thousand  men. — Tait  (m 
the  Hebrews. 


CLXVIII. 

*'  AlfD  HE  LED  THEM  OUT  AS  FAR  AS  TO  BETHANY,  AND  HE  LIFT 
W>   UP  HIS  HANDS,   AND  BLESSED  THEM." — Luke  Xxiv.  50. 

TESUS  having  spoiled  the  grave,  and  sanctified 
*J  the  earth,  now  purified  the  air  as  he  passed 
through  it  on  his  way  to  heaven. 

He  arose  to  heaven  in  a  manner  worthy  of  special 
note. 

We  will  review  a  few  points  connected  with  his 
ascension. 

1.  The  time  he  sojourned  on  earth  after  his  resur 

rection,  namely,  forty  days,  sufficed  to  prove 
his  identity,  to  remove  doubts,  to  instruct  his 
disciples,  and  give  them  their  commission. 

2.  The  place  from  which  he  rose  was  a  mountain, 

a  mount  where  he  aforetime  had  communed 
with  them.  This  mount  looked  down  on 
Bethany,  his  dearest  earthly  rest  ;  and  was 
near  to  Gethsemaiie,  the  place  of  his  supreme 
agony. 

3.  The  witnesses  were  enough  in  number  to  con 

vince  the  candid,  persons  who  had  long  been 
familiar  with  him,  who  could  not  be  deceived 
as  to  his  identity. 

They  were  persons  of  character,  of  simplicity  of 
(222) 


OUR  LORD'S  ATTITUDE  IN  ASCENSION.      223 

nature,  of  ripe  years,  and  of  singularly  cool 
temperament. 
4.  The  scene  itself  was  very  remarkable. 

So  unlike  what  superstition  would  have  de 
vised. 

So  quiet — no  chariot  of  fire  and  horses  of  fire. 
So  majestic — no  angels,  nor  other  agents   to 
lend   imaginary  splendor  ;  but  the  Lord's 
own  power  and  Godhead  in  sublime    sim 
plicity  working  all. 

Our  chosen  theme  at  this  time  shall  be   the   last 
posture  in  which  our  ascending  Lord  was  seen. 

1.     HlS     HANDS     WERE     UPLIFTED     TO     BLESS. 

1.  This  blessing  was  no  unusual  thing.     To  stretch 

out  his  hands  in  benediction  was  his  custom 
ary  attitude.  In  that  attitude  he  departed, 
with  the  benediction  still  proceeding  from 
his  lips. 

2.  This  blessing  was  with  authority.     He  blessed 

them  while  his  Father  acknowledged  him 
by  receiving  him  to  heaven. 

3.  This  blessing  was  so  full  that,  as  it   \vere,  he 

emptied  his  hands.  They  saw  those  dear 
hands  thus  unladen  of  their  benedictions. 

4.  The  blessing  was  for  those  beneath  him,   and 

beyond  the  sound  of  his  voice  :  he  scattered 
benedictions  upon  them  all. 

5.  The  blessing  was  the  fit  finis  of  his   sojourn 

here  :  nothing  fitter,  nothing  better,  could 
have  been  thought  of- 


224  MY   SERMON -NOTES. 

II.    THOSE    HANDS    WERE    PIERCED. 

This  could  be  seen  by  them  all  as  they  gazed  up 
ward. 

1.  Thus  they  knew  that  they  were  Christ's  hands. 

2.  Thus  they  saw  the  price  of  the  blessing.     His 

crucifixion  has  purchased  continual  blessing 
for  all  his  redeemed. 

3.  Thus  they  saw  the  way  of  the  blessing  :  it  comes 

from  those  human  hands,  through  those 
sacrificial  wounds. 

4.  A  sight  of  those  hands  is  in  itself  a  blessing. 

By  that  sight  we  see  pardon  and  eternal 
life. 

5.  The  entire  action  is  an  epitome  of  the  gospel. 

This  is  the  substance  of  the  matter, — "hands 
pierced  distribute  benedictions."  Jesus, 
through  suffering  and  death,  has  power  to 
bless  us  out  of  the  highest  heaven. 

This  is  the  last  that  was  seen  of  our  Lord. 
He  has  not  changed  his  attitude  of  benediction. 
He  will  not  change  it  till  he  shall  descend  in  his 
glory. 

III.    THOSE    HANDS    SWAY   THE    SCEPTRE. 

His  hands  are  omnipotent.  Those  very  hands, 
which  blessed  his  disciples,  now  hold,  on 
their  behalf,  the  sceptre — 

1.  Of  providence  :  both  in  small  affairs  and  great 

er  matters. 

2.  Of  the  spiritual  kingdom  :  the  church  and  all 

its  work. 


OUR   LORD'S   ATTITUDE   IN   ASCENSION.       225 

3.  Of  the  future  judgment,  and  thu  eternal  reign. 

Let  us  worship  him,  for  he  has  ascended  on  high. 

Let  us  rejoice  in  all  the  fruit  of  his  ascension,  to 
him,  and  to  us. 

Let  us  continue  praising  him  and  proclaiming  his 
glory. 

GLIMPSES. 

What  spot  did  Jesus  select  as  the  place  of  his  as 
cension  ?  He  selected,  not  Bethlehem,  where  aiigelio 
hosts  had  chanted  his  praises  ;  nor  Tabor,  where  ce* 
lestial  beings  had  hovered  around  him  in  homage ;  nor 
Calvary,  where  riven  rocks  and  bursting  graves  had 
proclaimed  his  Deity  ;  nor  the  Temple-court,  in  all  its 
sumptuous  glory,  where,  for  ages,  his  own  Shekinah 
had  blazed  in  mystic  splendor:  but  he  hallows 
afresh  the  name  of  a  lowly  village,  Bethany  ;  he  con 
secrates  a  Home  of  Love. — Dr.  Macdujf's  k'  Memories 
tf  Bethany" 

The  manner  of  Christ's  ascension  into  heaven  may 
be  said  to  have  been  an  instance  of  divine  simplicity 
and  sublimity  combined,  which  scarcely  has  a  paral 
lel.  While  in  the  act  of  blessing  his  disciples,  he  was 
parted  from  them,  and  was  carried  up,  and  disappeared 
behind  a  cloud.  There  was  no  pomp  ;  nothing  could 
have  been  more  simple.  How  can  the  followers  of 
this  Lord  and  Master  rely  on  pomp  and  ceremony  to 
spread  his  religion,  when  he,  its  Founder,  gave  no 
countenance  to  such  appeals  to  the  senses  of  men? 
Had  some  good  men  been  consulted  about  the  man- 
15 


226  MY  SERMON-:NTOTES. 

ner  of  the  ascension,  we  can  imagine  the  result— 
N.  Adams. 

This  is  no  death-bed  scene.  "  Nothing  is  here  for 
tears."  We  are  not  at  the  close,  but  at  the  beginning 
of  a  life.  There  is  no  sign  of  mourning  that  a  great 
career  is  over,  that  the  lips  of  a  great  Teacher  are  for 
ever  dumb  ;  no  ground  for  that  melancholy  question 
that  twice  rang  in  the  ears  of  Elisha,  u  Knowest  thou 
that  the  Lord  will  take  away  thy  master  from  thy 
head  to  day?  And  he  said,  Yea,  I  know  it ;  hold  ye 
your  peace."  No;  the  scene  before  us  is  one  of 
calm  victory — 

"  All  the  toil,  the  sorrow,  done ; 
All  the  battle  fought  and  won." 

The  earthly  work  of  the  Redeemer  is  over  ;  the 
work  which  that  short  sojourn  on  earth  was  designed 
to  inaugurate  is  now  to  begin.  We  are  in  the  pre 
sence  of  One  who  said,  u  All  power  is  given  unto  me 
in  heaven  and  in  earth  ;  "  and  again,  "  Be  of  good 
cheer,  I  have  overcome  the  world." — Dr.  Butler, 
Head  Master  of  Harrow. 

That  wonderful  hand  of  Christ !  It  was  that  same 
hand  which  had  been  so  quickly  stretched  out  to  res 
cue  Peter  when  sinking  in  Galilee's  waves.  It  was 
that  same  hand  which  had  been  held  in  the  sight  of 
the  questioning  disciples  on  the  third  evening  after 
they  had  seen  it  laid  lifeless  in  the  tomb.  It  was 
that  same  hand  which  incredulous  Thomas  must  see 
he  would  believe  its  risen  power  ;  it  was  that 


OUB  LORD'S  ATTITUDE  IN  ASCENSION.      227 

same  hand  which  was  extended  to  him  not  only  to  see, 
but  to  touch  the  nail-prints  in  its  palm.  It  was  that 
same  hand  which  the  disciples  last  saw  uplifted  in  a 
parting  blessing  when  the  cloud  parted  him  from 
them.  It  was  only  after  ten  days  that  they  realized 
the  fulness  of  blessing  which  camo  from  that  extend 
ed,  pierced  hand  of  Christ.  Peter  at  Pentecost  must 
have  preached  with  that  last  sight  of  it  fresh  in  his 
memory,  when  he  said,  "God  hath  made  that  Barne 
Jesus,  whom  ye  have  crwifud,  both  Lord  and  Christ." 
That  hand,  with  its  nail-prints,  knocks  at  tho  heart's 
door  for  entrance.  That  hand,  with  its  deep  marks 
of  love,  beckons  on  the  weary  runner  in  the  heaven 
ly  way. — F.  B.  Puttan. 


CLXIX. 

-  TKE  NEXT  DAT  JOHN  SEETH  JESUS   COMING  UNTO  HIM,  AND 
SAITU,    BEHOLD  THE    LAMB  OP  GOD,  WHICH  TAKETH  AWAY 

THE   SIN  OF  THE  WORLD." — John  i.  29. 

PLACES  and  times  become  memorable  when  link 
ed  with  our  Lord;  hence  we  are  told  what  was 
done  at  Bethabara  on  such  a  day,  and  what  happened 
on  "the  next  day." 

Lot  ns  treasure  holy  memories  with  great  care — 
especially  memories  of  Jesus, — times  when  we  saw 
the  Lord. 

In  the  case  before  us  the  preacher  was  a  notable 
man,  and  his  theme  more  notable  still.  John  the 
Baptist  preaches  Jesus. 

We  have  here  a  model  for  every  minister  of  Christ. 

I.    TllE    TRUE    MESSENGER. 

1.   He  is  one  who  sees  Jesus  for  himself.     There 
was  a  time  when  John  did  not  know  the 
Christ,   but   in   due   time  the   Holy   Spirit 
pointed  him  out.     Verse  33. 
The  true  herald  of  Jesus  is  like  John — 

He  is  on  the  look-out  for  his  Lord's  appear 
ing. 

He  rejoices  t<?  preach  Jesus  as  one  whora 
(228) 


THE  BAPTIST'S  MESSAGE.  239 

he  has  himself  seen  and  known,  and  still 
hopes  to  see. 
He  preaches  him  as  come,  and  as  coming. 

2.  He  calls  upon  men  to  see  Jesus.     "  Behold  the 

Lamb  of  God." 

This  he  does  plainly  and  confidently. 

This  he  does  continually :  it  is  his  one  mes 
sage.  John  preached  the  same  sermon 
"  again  the  next  day  after :  "  verse  35. 

This  he  does  earnestly  and  emphatically. 
"  Behold ! " 

3.  He   leads  his  own  followers  to  Jesus.     John's 

disciples  heard  John  speak,  and  followed 
Jesus:  verse  o7. 

He  had  enough  force  1o  induce  men  to  be  his 
followers. 

He  had  enough  humility  to  induce  his  fol 
lowers  to  leave  him  for  Jesus.  This  is  the 
glory  of  John  the  Baptist. 

He  had  enough  grace  to  make  him  rejoice 
that  it  was  so. 

Our  speech  should  make  men  go  beyond  our 
selves  to  Christ.  "  We  preach  not  ourselves 
but  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord:"  2  Cor.  iv.  5. 

4.  He  loses  himself  in  Jesus. 

He  sees  the  necessity  of  this.     "  He  must  in 
crease,  but  I  must  decrease : "  John  iii.   30. 
He  sees  the  propriety  of  this :  he  knows  him 
self  to  be  only  the  Bridegroom's  friend,  and 
not  the  Bridegroom.     John  iii.  29. 
Blessed  is  that  minister  of  whom  all  these  pointg 
can  be  asserted. 


230  MY  SERMON -NOTES. 

II.    TiiB   TRUE   MESSAGE. 

John's  word  was  brief,  but  emphatic. 

1.  He  declared  Jesus  to  be  sent  and  ordained  "  of 

God." 

2.  He  declared  him  to  be  the  one  real,  divinely-ap 

pointed  sacrifice  for  sin, — "the  Lamb  of 
God." 

He  declared  him  to  be  the  only  remover  of 
human  guilt, — "  which  taketh  away  the  sin 
of  the  world." 

4.  He  declared  him  to  be  set  forth  as  the  object 
of  faith, — "  Behold  the  Lamb."  He  exhort 
ed  his  hearers  to  look  at  him  with  that  look 
which  saves. 

The  end  of  all  ministries  and  ordinances  is  to  bring 
men  to  look  to  Jesus.  Both  John,  who  ran  before, 
and  we,  who  run  after,  must  point  in  the  same  di 
rection. 

III.    THE    TRUE    RECEPTION    OF    THAT    MESSAGE. 

The  conduct  of  John's  disciples  shows  that  our 
true  wisdom  concerning  gospel  testimony  is — 

1.  To  believe  it,  and  so  to  acknowledge  Jesus  as 

our  sin-re  moving  sacrifice. 

2.  To  follow  Jesus.     See  verse  37. 

3.  To  follow  Jesus,  even  if  we  be  alone.     These 

were  the  vanguard  of  the  vast  hosts  who 
have  since  followed  Jesus.  They  knew  not 
what  suffering  it  might  involve,  but  went 
first  and  foremost. 

4.  To  abide  with  Jesus.     See  verse  39. 


THE  BAPTIST'S  MESSAGE.  231 

5.  To   go    forth   and  tell   others   of  Jesus.      See 
verses  40  and  41. 

Here,  then,  is  a  lesson  for  those  who  preach. 
John's  sermon  was  short,  but  full  of  Jesus,  and  effec 
tual  for  soul-winning.  Imitate  him. 

Here  also  is  an  example  for  those  who  have  he- 
lieved. 

Here  is  a  gospel  for  those  who  hitherto  have  not 
known  the  Saviour. 

SPECIALITIES. 

In  1857,  a  day  or  two  before  preaching  at  the  Crys 
tal  Palace,  I  went  to  decide  where  the  platform 
should  be  fixed;  and,  in  order  to  test  the  acoustic 
properties  of  the  building,  cried  in  a  loud  voice,  "Be 
hold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin 
of  the  world."  In  one  of  the  galleries,  a  workman, 
who  knew  nothing  of  what  was  being  done,  heard 
the  words,  and  they  came  like  a  message  from  heav 
en  to  his  soul.  He  was  smitten  with  conviction  on 
account  of  sin,  put  down  his  tools,  went  home,  and 
there,  after  a  season  of  spiritual  struggling,  found 
peace  and  life  by  beholding  the  Lamb  of  God.  Years 
after,  he  told  this  story  to  one  who  visited  him  on 
his  death-bed.— (7.  IL  S. 

Notice,  how  simple  the  means,  how  grand  the  re 
sult!  John  simply  declared,  u  Behold  the  Lamb  of 
God ! "  Here  is  no  vehement  appeal,  no  angry  rebuke, 
no  feverish,  would-be  impressive  urging;  it  is  a  sim 
ple,  earnest  declaration  of  God's  truth.  What  else 


232  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

have  Christ's  servants  to  do  but  to  set  forth  the  truth, 
the  gospel,  the  will  of  God,  as  revealed  in  the  person 
and  work  of  Christ  ?  How  much  more  important  to 
give  all  our  energy  and  strength  to  this,  than  to  the 
attempt  of  enforcing  and  applying,  threatening  and 
inviting,  urging  and  pressing,  in  perorations  thun 
dering  or  melting  !  The  truth  itself  thunders  and 
melts,  rouses  and  whispers,  bruises  and  comforts;  en 
tering  into  the  soul,  it  brings  with  it  light  and  pow 
er.  How  calm  and  objective  do  Christ's  sermons, 
and  those  of  the  apostles,  appear  !  How  powerful  by 
the  consciousness  which  pervades  them :  this  is  the 
truth  of  God,  light  from  heaven,  power  from  above  ! 
"  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God." — Adolph  Saphir. 

It  is  related  of  John  Wesley  that,  preaching  to  an 
audience  of  courtiers  and  noblemen,  he  used  the 
"  generation  of  vipers  "  text,  and  flung  denunciation 
right  and  left.  "  That  sermon  should  have  been 
preached  at  Newgate,"  said  a  displeased  courtier  to 
Wesley,  on  passing  out.  "  No,"  said  the  fearless 
apostle,  "  my  text  there  would  have  been,  *  Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world.' " 

Roger  Clark,  one  of  the  English  martyrs,  when  at 
the  stake,  cried  out  to  the  people,  "  Behold  the  Lamb 
of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 
How  suitable  such  a  cry  from  a  saint  about  to  seal 
his  testimony  with  his  blood  ! 

No  herald  could  live  long  in  the  wilderness  on 
locusts  and  wild  honey,  if  he  had  not  to  tell  of  a  man  or 


THE  BAPTIST'S  MESSAGE.  233 

tn  era  nobler  than  himself,  and  brighter  than  his  own 
twilight-hour.  John  lived  more  truly  on  the  pro 
phecy  he  proclaimed  than  on  the  honey  and  locusts. 
— Dr.  Parker. 

A  young  telegraph  operator  was  anxious  about  hia 
soul.  After  a  sleepless  night,  he  went  to  his  duties ; 
while  restless  and  absorbed  in  the  thought  of  being 
a  sinner,  he  heard  the  click  of  his  instrument,  and, 
with  great  astonishment  and  emotion,  spelt  out  this 
message : — 


"  From 


H-- 

Winder  mere. 


To 


B- 


Warkworth 


'  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the 
sin  of  the  world;  in  whom  we  have  redemption, 
through  his  blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  sins.'" 

This  was  sent  as  an  answer  to  a  letter  from  a 
young  man,  who  also  was  seeking  peace.  It  acted 
as  a  double  blessing,  showing  to  both  operator  and 
receiver  the  way  of  salvation. 


CLXX. 


SAW  NATHANAEL  COMING  TO  HTM,  ATCT>  BATTH  OF  HIM, 

BEHcx  />  AN  ISRAELITE  INDEED,  LNT  WHOM  IS  NO  GULLET'  —  JohK 

i.  47. 

TP  IS  is  a  chapter  of  "  beholds."  We  are  first  tc 
Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,"  and  then  to  behold 
a  man  ot  God. 

Nathanael  was  simple,  straightforward,  honest, 
"  an  Israelite  indeed." 

In  this  he  was  not  like  his  great  progenitor,  Jacob, 
who  was  a  supplanter,  and  not  a  prince  with  God, 
till  that  memorable  night  when  the  angel  wrestled 
with  him,  and  withered  his  carnal  strength.  Then, 
in  the  weakness  of  that  simplicity  which  laid  hold 
upon  the  mighty  One,  Jacob  became  Israel.  Gen. 
xxvii.  36;  xxxii.  28. 

A  sincere  and  simple  character  was  not  common 
in  onr  Lord's  clay. 

It  is  despised  by  many  at  this  day. 

It  was  greatly  appreciated  by  our  Lord,  who  has  the 
same  character  in  perfection,  and  is  truly  called  "  the 
holy  child  Jesus." 

This  characteristic  of  guilelessiiess  is  — 

I.    A   HAPPY   SIGN   IN    A   SEEKER. 

We  will  illustrate  this  by  Nathanael's  procedure. 
(234) 


THE  ISJJAELITE  INDEED.  235 

1.  He  is  the  sort  of  man  to  whom  disciples  like  to 

speak.  "Philip  findeth  Nathanael:"  verse 
45. 

2.  He  is  outspoken  with  his  difficulties,  and  there 

fore  his  friends  see  how  to  meet  them. 
"  Can  there  any  good  thing  come  out  of 
Nazareth  ?  "  verse  46. 

3.  He  is  ready  to  apply  the  proper  teats.      "  Come 

and  see :  "  verse  46. 

4.  He  is  honest  in  his  use  of  those  tests.     Our  Lord 

saw  that  Nathanael  was  no  captious  critic, 
nor  idly-curious  observer :  verso  47. 

5.  He  is  open  to  conviction  if  fair  evidence  be  sup 

plied.  As  soon  as  our  Lord  proved  his  om 
niscience  Nathanael  believed :  verso  48. 

6.  He  is  ready  to  make  confession :  verse  49. 

7.  He  is  prepared  to  proceed  far  in  the  school  of 

Christ.     The  Lord  promised  him  tho  sight 

of  greater  things  because  he  was  prepared 

to  see  them:  verses  50  and  51. 
An   Israelite   is   a  man   to   know  "the    King   of 

Israel :  "  verse  49. 
An  Israelite  is  a  man  to  understand  the  famous 

dream  of  the  father  of  all  Israelites:  verse 

61.     Gen.  xxviii.  12. 

IL    A    VITAL   POINT    IN    A    BELIEVER. 

The  truly  upright  man,  and  he  only,  can  be  a 
Christian. 

1.  A  sense  of  pardon  removes  the  temptation  to 
guile  :  we  cease  to  excuse  ourselves  when 
pardon  is  received.  See  Psalm  li. 


236  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

2.  A  reception  of  Christ  as   "the   truth"    causes 

guile  to  be  hated. 

3.  A  truthful  assurance  of  the  gospel  prevents  a 

hypocritical  faith. 

4.  A  complete  consecration  to  the  Lord  puts  an 

end  to  a  double-minded  life,   and  to  all  false 
aims  and  maxims. 

5.  A  sense  of  the  presence  of  God  makes  guile  ap 

pear  absurd. 

6.  A  brave  faith  in  God  causes  it  to  appear  mean 

and  cowardly. 

III.  A  SURE  PRODUCER  OF  OTHER  QUALITIES. 

1.  It  makes  a  man  love  his  Bible.     Nathanael  was 

familiar  with  the  law  and  the  prophets. 

2.  It  makes  him  pray.     He  is  an  Israelite.     Gen. 

xxxii.  28. 

3.  It  leads  him  to  be  much  alone.     "  Under    the 

fig-tree  :"  verse  48. 

4.  It   makes  him  wear  his  heart  in    his   counte 

nance.     "Behold  an  Israelite  indeed." 

5.  It  prepares  him  to  behold  the  pure  and   true 

glories  of  heaven. 

Who  among  us  is  renowned  for  cleverness,  craft, 
shrewdness,  and  the  critical  faculty  in  general  ? 

Let  him  be  afraid  of  the  much  admired  quality  of 
cleverness. 

The  absence  of  simplicity  is  by  no  means  a  healthy 
sign. 

Let  us  be  true  in  any  case,  and  may  the  Lord 
teach  us  his  truth  ! 


THE  ISRAELITE  INDEED.  237 

MOSAIC. 

'Twas  well  Christ  spake  among  plain  men.  Had 
the  Scribes  and  the  Pharisees  heard  him,  had  some 
men  of  these  times  heard  him,  they  would  have  said 
that  Christ  purposed  to  define  a  fool.  Who  is  not 
now  a  fool  that  is  not  false  ?  He  is  rated  as  having 
but  small  wit  that  is  not  of  great  subtilty  and  great 
wiliness.  Plainness  is  weakness,  and  solid  sincerity 
stolid  simplicity.  No  man  is  honest  but  for  want 
of  sense.  Conscience  comes  only  from  a  crazed 
brain.  He  hath  no  reach  that  doth  not  overreach. 
Only  to  disguise  is  to  be  wise  ;  and  he  is  the  pro- 
foundest  that  is  the  grandest  counterfeit.  Christ 
will  have  a  serpent  and  a  clove  coupled  together- 
wisdom  and  simplicity  ;  and  he  bids,  what  God 
hath  joined,  that  man  should  not  sever.  But  the 
world  dares  uncouple  them.  Uncouple  them  ? 
That's  little  ;  dares  divorce  them.  In  these  days 
doves  may  not  consort  with  serpents,  nor  singleness 
and  sapience  harbor  in  one  heart.  Certainly  plain- 
dealing  is  a  jewel  ;  but  the  world  dubs  him  a  fool 
that  useth  it. 

Hence  it  is  that,  nowadays,  men  dare  not  deal  up 
rightly,  lest  their  wit  be  called  in  question  ;  they 
are  afraid  of  honest  plainness  lest  they  be  held  for 
idiots.  Term  one  an  honest  man,  you  do  discredit 
him.  The  name  of  fool  is  so  disgraceful,  one  will 
rather  be  a  villain  than  be  called  a  fool.  But  here, 
God's  Word,  God's  Wisdom,  defines  a  true  Israelite, 
by  truth  and  plainness  ;  he  is  one  that  hath  no 
guile. — Eichard  Clerlce. 


238  MY   SERMON-NOTES 

"Behold  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  is  no 
The  expression  would  appear  to  be  BO  distinct  an 
allusion  to  the  thirty-second  Psalm  as  to  amount  to 
a  quotation,  and  to  imply  that  this  guilelessness  of 
spirit  was  not  mere  amiability,  but  was  the  fruit  of 
forgiven  sin,  "  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is 
forgiven,  whose  sin  is  covered  (or  atoned).  Blessed 
is  the  man  unto  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  in 
iquity,  and  in  whose  spirit  there  is  no  guile."  Na- 
thanael,  if  we  may  follow  this  clue,  was  no  stranger 
to  the  spiritual  meaning  of  atonement  ;  no  stranger, 
therefore,  to  the  consciousness  of  sin  which  made 
its  necessity  felt.  Pressed  on  the  one  Land  by  the 
sense  of  guilt,  allured  on  the  other  by  the  provision 
of  atonement  in  the  temple  sacrifices,  he  had  been 
forced  to  earn  his  first  title  by  wrestling  in  prayer 
with  God  for  pardon  ;  and,  having  prevailed,  there 
had  sprung  up  within  the  forgiven  roan  the  guile 
less  spirit  of  childlike  trustfulness  in  God,  who  had 
thus  stooped  to  his  prayer,  and  granted  the  benison 
he  sighed  for.  He  is  in  the  happiest  state  of  pre 
paration  for  the  personal  knowledge  of  Christ,  and 
we  shall  see  with  what  fulness  of  faith  he  honors  his 
Master  at  the  first  interview,  uttering  on  the  thres 
hold  of  discipleship  a  confession  more  advanced 
than  was  made  at  the  same  point  by  any  other  of 
the  twelve. — C.  A.  Davis. 

Nathanael  was  one  of  these  true  Israelites  ;  he 
was  in  reality,  as  well  as  by  profession,  one  of  the 
people  of  God ;  and  the  evidence  he  gave  of  this 
was  his  freedom  from  guile.  But  our  Saviour  does 


THE   ISRAELITE   INDEED.  239 

not  say  he  has  no  guilt.  A  man  may  be  freckled, 
or  have  spots,  and  not  be  painted.  A  Christian  is 
not  Binlessly  pure — he  has  many  unallowed  and  be 
wailed  infirmities,  but  guile  he  has  not  :  he  is  no 
hypocrite.  He  does  not  in  religion  ascend  a  stage, 
to  assume  a  character  which  does  not  belong  to  him. 
He  is  what  he  appears  to  be.  There  is  a  corres 
pondence  between  his  professions  and  actions,  his 
meanings  and  his  words.  He  is  upright  in  his  deal 
ings  with  himself,  in  his  dealings  with  his  fellow- 
creatures,  and  in  his  dealings  with  his  God.  He  is 
all  of  a  piece.  He  is  the  same  alone  as  in  company  ; 
the  same  in  his  own  house  as  in  the  house  of  God  ; 
the  same  in  prosperity  as  in  adversity. 

William  Jay. 

The  clearer  the  diamond,  the  more  it  sparkles  ; 
the  plainer  the  heart  is,  the  more  it  sparkles  in 
God's  eye.  What  a  commendation  did  Christ  give 
Nathanael — "  Behold  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom 
is  no  guile  I" — Thomas  Watson. 


CLXXI. 

"Now  JACOB'S  WELL  WAS  THERE.    JESUS  THEREFORE,  BEING 

WEARIED   WITH   HIS  JOURNEY,    SAT   THUS  ON   THE  WELL  :   AND 
IT   WAS  ABOUT   THE   SIXTH   HOUR." — John  IV.  6. 

MANY  things  may  well  remind  us  of  our  Lord. 
Chiefly  may  we  think  of  him  when  we  see  a 
well,  or  a  weary  peasant  resting  at  noon. 

How  truly  human  was  Jesus  I  To  him  a  long  walk 
brought  weariness;  his  weariness  needed  rest;  to 
rest  he  "  sat  thus  on  the  well." 

HOY/  worn  was  his  humanity  !  He  was  more  weary 
than  the  disciples. 

Pie  had  a  greater  mental  strain  than  they. 
He  had  a  weariness  that  they  knew  not  of. 
His  self-denials  were  even  then  remarkable. 

He  would  in  all  points  be  made  like  unto  his 

brethren. 

He  would  not  exempt  himself  from  fatigue. 
He  would  not  work  a  miracle  for  his  own  re 
freshment. 

He  would  not  refuse  to  bear  heat,  thirst,  ex 
haustion. 

He  has  thus  made  himself  able  to  sympathize 
with— 

The  traveller  who  rests  by  the  roadside. 
(240) 


JESUS  SITTING  ON   THE  WELL.  241 

The  laborer  who  is  worn  out  with  toil 

The  sufferer  who  feels  pain  in  bone  and  flesh. 

The  poor  man  who  must  rest  on  a  cold  stone, 
and  look  for  refreshment  to  the  public 
fountain. 

The    weary  mind,    oppressed   by   life's  long 
way,  which  has  no  luxurious  comfort  pre 
pared  for  it,  but  finds  a  measure  of  repose 
in  the  simple  arrangements  of  nature. 
Reading  this  text,  let  it  set  a  picture  before  you, 
and — 

I.  LET  TOUR  CONSCIENCE  DRAW  A  SPIRITUAL  PICTURE  OF  YOUR 

WEARIED  SAVIOUR. 

1.  He  is  wearied  with  our  sins.     Is.  xliii.  24. 

2.  He  is  weaned  with  cur  formal  worship.     Is.  i. 

14. 

3.  He  is  wearied  with  our  erring  through  unbe 

lief.      Ps.  xcv.  10. 

4.  He  is  wearied  with  our  resistance  of  his  Spirit. 

Is.  Ixiii.  10. 

5.  He  is  wearied  with  our  cavillings  and   rebel 

lions.     Mai.  ii.  17. 

Perhaps  we  have  specially  wearied  the  Lord,  as  we 
read  in  Amos  ii.  13,  where  singular  provocations  are 
mentioned. 

That  is  a  grave  question  asked  by  the  prophet 
Isaiah,  "Will  ye  weary  my  God  also?"  Is.  vii.  13. 

II.  LET     YOUR    CONSCIENCE    DRAW    A    SPIRITUAL    PICTURE  OP 

YOUR  WAITING  SAVIOUR. 

1.  He  waits  for  comers  to  the  well :  he  seizes  on 
16 


242  MY    SERMON-NOTES. 

all  occasions  to  bless,  such  as  affliction,  the 
hearing  of  the  Word,  the  recurrence  of  a 
birthday,  or  even  the  simplest  event  of  life. 
Men  have  other  errands;  they  come  to  the 
well  only  to  draw  water,  but  the  Lord  meets 
them  with  his  greater  errand. 

2.  He  waits  for  the  most  sinful;  she  that  had  had 

five  husbands. 

3.  He  waits  to  enlighten,  convince,  convert. 

4.  He  waits  to  accept,  and  to  commission. 

5.  He  waits  to  begin  by  one  convert  the  ingather 

ing  of  a  great  harvest  of  souls,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  Samaritans. 

How  long  he  has  waited  for  some  of  you  ! 

At  how  many  points  has  he  been  on  the  outlook 

for  you  ! 

Is  he  not  waiting  for  you  at  this  very  hour  ? 
Will  you  not  yield  to  his  patient  love  ? 

III.   LET  YOUR  PENITENCE  DRAW  ANOTHER  PICTURE. 

Alter  the  position  of  the  character. 

1.  Be  yourself  weary  of  your  sinful  way. 

2.  Sit  down  on  the  well  of  your  Lord's  gracious 

ordinances. 

3.  Wait  and  watch  till  your  Saviour  comes. 

4.  Ask  him  to  give  you  to  drink,  and,  in  so  doing, 

give  him  to  drink,  for  this  is  his  best  re 
freshment. 

5.  Drink  yourselves  of  the  living  water,  and  then 

run  to  tell  others. 


JESUS   SITTING   ON   THE  WELL.  343 

Will  you  not  do  this  at  once  ? 
May  his  Holy  Spirit  so  direct  you ! 

MUSINGS. 

It  was  the  hour  of  noon,  and  weary  as  he  was 
with  the  long  journey,  possibly  also  with  the  ex 
treme  heat,  our  Lord  sat  "  thus  on  the  well."  The 
expression  in  the  original  is  most  pathetically  pic- 
turesaue.  It  implies  that  the  Wayfarer  was  quite 
tired  out,  and  in  his  exhaustion  flung  his  limbs 
wearily  on  the  seat,  anxious,  if  possible,  for  com 
plete  repose. — Archdeacon  Farrar. 

When  hard-working  people  sit  down  at  mid-day 
for  their  few  minutes  of  rest  and  refreshment,  let 
them  recall  their  Master's  noon-day  rest  at  the  well. 
He  was  tired,  like  we  are,  yet  his  rest  was  short, 
and  his  work  scarcely  broken.  He  was  tired  with 
seeking  for  us.  Our  stubborn  hearts  brought  him 
all  this  way  from  heaven.  He  lias  long  sought  for 
our  love,  and  hardly  finds  it.  Think  on  this  verse. 
With  whom  did  Jesus  find  his  portion  in  this  life  ? 
Not  with  the  great  and  luxurious,  but  with  the  com 
mon  people,  sharing  their  toils. — Practical  Reflections 
on  tJie  Gospels,  Inj  a  Clergyman. 

While  we  sympathize  with  the  bodily  weariness  of 
our  Lord,  it  will  be  well  to  remember  the  soul  wear 
iness  which  sin  must  have  occasioned  him.  He  hun 
gered  to  bless  men,  and  they  refused  the  bread  of  life. 
He  would  have  gathered  them,  but  they  would  not 
be  gathered.  He  must  have  been  specially  wearied 


244:  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

with  the  ostentatious  hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisees,  and 
the  silly  legalisms  of  the  Scribes  with  their  tithing  of 
mint  and  anise.  He  was  often  wearied  with  the 
dogged  unbelief  of  the  Jews,  and  the  provoking  want 
of  faith  among  his  own  disciples.  The  sin,  the  cavil 
ling,  the  slander,  the  selfishness,  the  hardness  of 
heart  of  those  about  him,  must  have  worn  down  his 
holy  soul,  and  made  him  every  day  a  Man  of  sorrows. 
Yet  he  never  left  the  well,  never  refused  to  give  the 
living  water  to  a  thirsting  soul,  never  ceased  to  en 
treat  men  to  come  to  him  and  drink. — C.  H.  S. 

"  Jesus,  therefore,  being  wearied" — And  in  that  he 
himself  had  suffered,  he  was  the  more  able  and  apt 
to  help  this  poor  Samaritan.  So  the  apostle  bids  us 
pity  those  in  adversity,  as  being  ourselves  in  the  bo 
dy,  I.  e.,  the  body  of  flesh  and  frailty,  subject  to  like 
misery. — Trapp. 

When  wearied,  let  us  still  be  on  the  watch  to  do 
good.  Wearied,  and  sitting  on  the  well,  our  Lord  is 
still  in  the  attitude  of  observation.  "  I  am  never  too 
tired  to  pray,"  said  a  minister,  who,  after  a  hard  day's 
toil,  found  his  host  ready  to  excuse  him  from  con 
ducting  family  prayer.  When  God  is  blessing  the 
Word,  true  ministers  forget  their  fatigue,  and  hold 
on  long  into  the  night  with  inquirers.  Alas !  when 
the  Holy  Spirit  has  nothing  to  do  with  a  man's  heart, 
the  man  excuses  himself  from  "making  overtime," 
as  I  once  heard  a  professor  call  it,  when  he  quitted  the 
room  the  instant  the  service  was  over.  Another,  in 
describing  a  minister,  said,  "  Oh,  he  is  cold  !  He  is 


JESUS   SITTING  ON  THE  WELL.  245 

one  who  thinks  it  is  wrong  to  be  too  religious.  He 
cannot  endure  zeal."  Be  it  ours  to  show  a  more  ex 
cellent  way.  Holy  Brainerd,  when  he  could  not 
preach,  because  he  was  on  his  dying  bed,  called  to 
him  a  little  Indian  boy,  and  tried  to  teach  him  his 
letters.  Let  us  live  soul-saving,  and  &o  let  us  die. — 

a  H.  & 


CLXXH. 

"THE  WOMAN  SATTH  UNTO  HIM,  SlR,  THOU  HAST  NOTHING  TO 
DRAW  WITH,  AND  THE  WELL  IS  DEEP  :  FROM  WHENCE  THEN 
HAST  THOU  THAT  LIVING  WATER  V" — John  IV.  11. 

OUR  Lord's  object  was  to  bring  the  woman  to 
seek  salvation  of  him. 

Our  desire  is  the  immediate  conversion  of  all  now 
present. 

The  Samaritan  woman  accepted  the  Saviour  upon 
the  first  asking. 

Many  of  you  have  been  invited  to  Jesus  many 
times — will  you  not  at  last  comply  ? 

Our  Lord  aimed  at  her  heart  by  plain  teaching 
and  home  dealing — we  will  take  the  same  course 
with  our  hearers. 

When  his  interesting  emblem  failed  to  reach  her, 
he  fell  to  downright  literalism,  and  unveiled  her  life. 
Anything  is  better  than  allowing  a  soul  to  perish. 

I.    WE    WILL    EXPOUND    THE    PRECEDING    TEACHING. 

The  Lord  had  said  to  her,  "  If  thou  knewest  the 
gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee,  Give  me 
to  drink  ;  thou  wouldest  have  asked  of  him,  and  he 
would  have  given  thee  living  water." 

The  figure  was  that  of  living  water  in  contrast  to 
the  water  collected  in  Jacob's  well,  which  was  mere- 
(346) 


THE  SOURCE.  247 

ly  the  gatherings  of  the  surrounding   hills — land- 
water,  not  spring- water. 

He  meant  to  say  that  his  grace  is  like  water  from 
a  springing  well. 

It  is  of  the  best  and  most  refreshing  kind. 

It  is  living,  and  ministers  life. 

Jt  is  powerful,  and  finds  its  own  way. 

It  is  abiding,  and  is  never  dried  up. 

It  is  abounding,  and  free  to  all  corners. 
Furthermore,  he  intimated  to  the  woman  that — 

1.  He  had  it.     There  was  no  need  of  a  bucket  to 

draw  with. 

2.  He  had  it  to  give. 

3.  He  would  have  given  it  for  the  asking. 

4.  He  alone  could  give  it.     It  would  be  found  in 

no  earthly  well. 

II.     WE    WILL   ANSWER    THE    QUESTION    OF    THE    TEXT. 

In  ignorance  the  woman  inquired,  "  Whence  then 
hast  thou  that  living  water  ?  " 

We  can  at  this  time  give  a  fuller  reply  than  could 
have  been  given  when  our  Lord  sat  on  the  well. 

He  has  now  a  boundless  power  to  save,  and  that 
power  arises — 

1.  From  his  divine  nature,  allied  with  his  perfect 

humanity. 

2.  From  the  purpose  and  appointment  of  God. 

3.  From  the  anointing  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

4.  From,  his  redeeming  work,  which  operated  for 

good  even  before  its  actual  accomplishment, 
and  which  is  in  full  operation  now. 


248  MY   SERMON -NOTES. 

5.  From  the  power  of  his  intercession  at  the  Fa 

ther's  right  hand. 

6.  From  his  representative  life  in  glory.     Now  all 

power   is   delivered  into   his   hand.     Matt, 
xxviii.  18. 

III.    WE    WILL    DRAW    CERTAIN    INFERENCES    FROM    THE     AN 
SWER. 

1.  Then  he  is  still  able  to  bless.     Since  he  has  this 

living  water  only  from  his  unchanging  self, 
he  therefore  has  it  now  as  fully  as  ever. 

2.  Then  he  needs  nothing  from  us.     He  is  himself 

the  one  sole  Fountain,  full  and  all-sufficient 
for  ever. 

3.  Then  we  need  not  fear  exhausting  his  fulness. 

4.  Then  at  all  times  we  may  come  to  him,  and  we 

need  never  fear  that  he  will  deny  us. 

DROPS. 

When  we  see  a  great  volume  of  water  issuing 
from  a  spring,  it  is  natural  that  we  should  inquire, — 
whence  does  it  come  ?  This  is  one  of  the  mysteries 
of  nature  to  most  people.  Job  speaks  of  "  the  springs 
of  the  sea,"  and  hints  that  none  can  find  them  out. 
But  where  are  the  springs  of  salvation?  Whence 
comes  the  river,  yea,  the  boundless  ocean  of  divine 
grace?  All  fulness  is  in  Jesus;  but  how  came  it 
there  ?  He  gives  drink  to  all  who  come  to  him ; 
whence  has  he  this  inexhaustible  supply  ?  Are  not 
these  questions  worth  asking  ?  Must  not  the  reply 
be  instructive  to  ourselves,  and  glorifying  to  our 


THE  SOURCE.  243 

Lord  ?     Come,  then,  and  let  us  borrow  the  language 
of  this  Samaritan  woman,  and  talk  with  our  Lord. 

C.H.  S. 

When  I  have  ridden  through  London,  I  have  been 
overwhelmed  with  the  greatness  of  the  supply  which 
must  daily  be  necessary  to  feed  its  millions,  and  have 
wondered  that  a  famine  has  not  at  once  set  in.  But 
when  I  have  seen  the  markets  and  store-houses,  and 
have  thought  of  the  whole  earth  as  eager  to  obtain 
a  sale  for  its  produce  in  our  vast  metropolis,  I  have 
rested  in  content.  I  see  whence  the  almost  illimita 
ble  supplies  are  drawn,  and  my  wonder  henceforth 
is,  not  that  the  millions  are  fed,  but  that  they  should 
be  able  to  consume  such  immeasurable  quantities  of 
food. 

Thus,  when  I  behold  man's  spiritual  need,  I  mar 
vel  that  it  should  ever  be  met;  but  when  I  behold 
the  person  and  work  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  my  marvel 
ceases,  and  a  new  wonder  begins.  I  wonder  rather 
at  the  infinity  of  grace  than  at  the  power  of  sin. 

C.  H.  S. 

Speaking  of  Cairo,  the  author  of  "  Ragged  Life  in 
Egypt,"  says,  "  Perhaps  no  cry  is  more  striking,  after 
all,  than  the  short  and  simple  cry  of  the  water-carrier. 
'The  gift  or  God/  he  says,  as  he  goes  along  with  his 
water-skin  on  his  shoulder.  It  is  impossible  to  hear 
this  cry  without  thinking  of  the  Lord's  words  to  the 
woman  of  Samaria,  '  If  thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God, 
and  who  it  is  that  saith  to  thee,  Give  me  to  drink ; 
thou  wouldest  have  asked  of  him,  and  he  would  have 


250  MY   SERMON-STOTES. 

given  thee  living  water.'  It  is  very  likely  that 
water,  BO  invaluable,  and  so  often  scarce  in  hot  coun 
tries,  was  in  those  days  spoken  of,  as  now,  as  '  the 
gift  of  God/  to  denote  its  preciousness;  if  so,  the  ex 
pression  would  be  extremely  forcible  to  the  woman, 
and  full  of  meaning." — The  Biblical  Treasury. 

How  ready  are  men  and  women  to  go  to  this  well 
and  that  well  to  drink  water  for  the  help  and  healing 
of  bodily  distempers,  and  to  go  many  miles,  and  dis 
pense  with  all  other  affairs,  that  they  may  be  re 
covered  of  corporeal  diseases :  but  how  few  inquire 
after  the  water  of  life,  or  leave  all  their  secular  busi 
ness  for  the  good  and  health  of  their  immortal  souls! 

Benjamin  Keach. 

"  The  wdl  is  faep"  the  woman  said  to  Jesus ;  and 
so  it  was.  It  took  two-and-a-half  seconds  from  the 
time  that  the  pebble  was  dropped,  before  we  heard 
the  splash  in  the  water  below.  .  .  .  Turning  to 
the  illustration  before  us, — "living  water? — the  mean 
ing  only  dawned  upon  me  when  I  visited  the  spot, 
Jacob's  well,  deep  as  it  was,  and  cool  as  its  waters 
doubtless  were,  was  only  an  artificial  well — a  cistern 
for  the  collection  of  rain,  and  the  drainage  of  the 
land.  ...  In  seasons  of  drought,  this  well  must 
have  been  useless — it  was  a  well,  or  cistern ;  not  a 
spring. — J.  W.  Bardsley. 

The  fountain  of  living  waters  is  God  himself  (Jer. 
ii.  13).  "  With  thee  is  the  fountain  of  life "  (Ps. 
xxxvi.  9).  It  is  not  a  mere  cistern  to  hold;  it  is  a 
pouring,  running,  living  stream ;  nay,  rather  a  foun- 


THE   SOURCE.  251 

tain  that  springs  up  perpetually.  We  all  know  that 
a  jet  or  fountain  is  produced  by  a  head  of  water  that 
presses  down  from  a  great  elevation;  and  that,  the 
higher  the  spring,  the  loftier  and  more  powerful  the 
jet,  which,  however,  never  surpasses  the  height  of 
its  source.  Our  spiritual  life,  "our  well-spring  of 
life,'  has  its  source  in  heaven:  and  it  is  heavenward 
that  it  rises,  and  it  is  content  with  no  lower  level. 
It  came  from  God,  and  to  God  it  will  return. 

F.  A.  MaUeam. 


CLXXIIi. 

"ON  THE   SAME   DAY  WAS   THE    SABBATH." — John  T.   % 

CHRIST  healed  men  on  all  sorts  of  days. 
But  Sabbaths  were  high  days  of  grace. 
Six  special  cases  of  cures  wrought  on  the  Sabbath 
are  lecorded. 

1.  The  evil  spirit  cast  out.     Luke  iv.  31-35. 

2.  The  withered  hand  restored.     Luke  vi.  6-10. 

3.  The  crooked  woman  made  straight.     Luke  xiii. 

10-17. 
4   The  man  with  the  dropsy  cured.     Luke  xiv.  1-6. 

5.  The  impotent  man  made  whole.     John  v.  1-9. 

6.  The  blind  man's  eyes  opened.     John  ix.  1-14. 

As  God  rested  on  the  Sabbath,  and  hallowed  it  ; 
so  as  God  it  was  rest  to  Jesus  to  heal,  and  thus  he 
hallowed  the  day. 

As  man  he  also  rested  his  heart,  exercised  a  holy 
ministry,  glorified  God,  and  hallowed  the  day. 

I.  THESE  CURES  MEET  MANY  CASES. 

1.  Those  under  Satanic  influence.     Luke  iv.  31-35. 

Many  are  in  this  case  at  this  hour. 

2.  Those   conscious   of  spiritual   inability.     Luke 

vi.  6-10. 

3.  Those  bowed  down  with  great  distress,  despon- 

(252) 


SABBATH  WORK.  253 

dency,  despair,  etc.  Luke  xiii.  10-17.  This 
poor  woman  had  been  infirm  for  eighteen 
years. 

4.  Those  smitten  with  mortal  disease.     Luke  xiv. 

1-6.  This  typifies  the  deadly  character  of 
sin,  and  represents  the  case  of  those  upon 
whom  is  the  dread  of  the  second  death. 

5.  Those     altogether     paralyzed.      John    v.    1-9. 

This  man  had  been  impotent  for  thirty- 
eight  years.  Some  seem  specially  unable 
to  feel,  or  do,  or  1  >e  what  they  should  be. 
They  are  weak  and  irresolute,  and  though 
lying  at  the  healing  pool,  others  step  in  be 
fore  them,  and  they  derive  no  benefit  from, 
the  means  of  grace. 

6.  Those  blind  from  birth.     John  ix.  1-14.     Many 

are  in  this  condition.  They  see  no  spirit 
ual  truth,  but  abide  in  total  darkness  as  tc 
all  the  gospel  truth. 

II.  THESE    CURES  REPRESENT  USUAL  PROCESSES* 

1.  A  word  addressed   to   the   devil.     "  Hold   iby 

peace,  and  come  out  of  him :"  Luke  iv.  35. 
Satan  feels  the  power  of  the  Word  of  the 
Lord  ;  but  lie  cares  for  nothing  else. 

2.  A   word  personal   to    the    sufferer.     "Stretch 

forth  thy  hand  :"  Luke  vi.  10.  He  was 
unable,  and  yet  he  was  commanded  ;  and 
he  obeyed.  This  is  the  gospel  method. 

3.  A  word  accepted  as  clone.     "Thou  art  loosed 

from  thine  infirmity  :"  Luke  xiii.  12.    Faith 


254  MY   SEEMON-ICOTES. 

turns  promise  into  fact,  gospel-teaching 
into  actual  salvation. 

4.  Power  without  a  word.     Luke  xiv.  4. 

5.  A  word   arousing   and    commanding.      "  Rise, 

take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk  :''  John  v.  8. 
Many  are  saved  by  being  stirred  up  from 
long  inactivity  and  lethargy. 

6.  A  word  associated  with  other  means.     John  ix. 

6,  7.  The  whole  miracle  is  deeply  instruct 
ive  on  this  point. 

In  these  varied  forms  and  fashions,  Jesus  works 
on  the  Sabbath. 

III.  THESE  CURES  WERE  BOTH  IN  AND  our  OF  THE   SYNA 

GOGUE. 

1.  There,  and  misbehaving.     Luke  iv.  33. 

2.  There,  and  singled  out  from  the  crowd.     Luke 

vi.  8. 

3.  There,  and  called  to  Jesus.     Luke  xiii.  12. 

4.  After  the  synagogue  service.     Luke  xiv.  1. 

5.  Too  feeble  to  get  there.     John  v.  5. 

6.  Too  poor  to  be  there.     John  ix.  8. 

IV.  THESE  CURES  WERE  ALL  UNSOUGHT. 

This  is  one  special  feature  about  them  all. 

1.  The  possessed  man  entreated  Christ  to   leave 

him  alone.     Luke  iv.  34. 

2.  The  man  with  the  withered  hand  did  not  think 

of  cure.     Luke  vi.  6. 

3.  The  infirm  woman   did  not   hope  for   healing. 

Luke  xiii.  11. 


SABBATII-WOKK.  255 

4  The  man  with  the  dropsy  did  not  ask  for  the 
blessing.     Luke  xiv.  2. 

5.  The   infirm   man   was   too    paralyzed  to   seek 

Christ.     John  v.  5. 

6.  It  was  an  unheard-of  thing  that  the  eyes  of  a 

man    born    blind   should   be    opened,    and 
therefore  he  did  not  expect  it.    John  ix.  32. 

This  also  is  the  Sabbath  ;  let  us  look  to  the  Lord 
of  the  Sabbath. 

Will  he  not  this  day  bless  those  who  are  seekers  ? 
Will  he  not  bless  those  whom  we  bring  to  him  ? 
Will  he  not  bless  those  for  whom  we  pray  ? 

SERMON   BELLS. 

On  Sunday  heaven's  gate  stands  ope ; 
Blessings  are  plentiful  and  rife, 

More  plentiful  than  hope. 

George  Herbert. 

On  his  death-bed,  Brainerd  said :  "  I  was  born  on  a 
Sabbath-day;  I  have  reason  to  hope  1  was  new-born 
on  a  Sabbath-day;  and  I  hope  I  shall  die  on  this  Sab 
bath-day." 

Was  it  not  meet  that  the  Lord  of  the  Sabbath 
should  specially  display  his  sovereignty  upon  that 
day  ?  May  we  not  now  expect  that,  on  the  Lord's- 
day,  the  Lord  of  the  day  will  magnify  his  own  name, 
and  make  the  day  illustrious  by  his  grace  ?  The 
first  day  of  the  week  was  signalized  by  the  giving  of 
the  light  of  nature,  and  it  is  most  delightful  that  now 
it  should  be  a  chosen  day  for  bestowing  the  light  of 


256  MY   SEEMON-]STOTES. 

grace.  It  is  to  us  the  Sabbath ;  should  not  the  Lord 
give  rest  to  wearied  hearts  upon  that  day  ?  Men  call 
it  Sunday:  we  are  happy  when  the  Sun  of  righteous 
ness  then  arises  with  healing  in  his  wings.  Of  old  the 
week's  work  was  done,  and  then  the  Sabbath  dawned ; 
but  now  rest  leads  the  wray:  we  begin  the  week's 
work  with  the  Sabbath  rest,  because  we  first  find 
rest  in  Jesus,  and  then  labor  for  him.  Blessed  is 
the  Lord's-day  when  the  Lord  himself  speaks  rest  in 
his  own  finished  work,  to  those  who  otherwise  would 
have  labored  in  vain.  —  C.  H.  S. 

Christ  came  not  into  the  world  merely  to  cast  a 
mantle  over  us,  and  hide  all  our  filthy  sores  from 
God's  avenging  eye  with  his  merits,  and  righteous 
ness;  but  he  came  especially  to  be  a  chirurgeori  and 
physician  of  souls,  to  free  us  from  the  filth  and  cor 
ruption  of  them,  which  are  more  grievous  and 
burthensome,  more  noisome  to  a  true  Christian,  than 
the  guilt  of  sin  itself. — Cudworth. 

Metaphor:  Physicians  come  riot  to  the  sick  until 
they  are  sent  for;  and  though  they  come  not  far.  yet 
expect  to  be  paid  for  that,  besides  their  physic. 
Disparity  :  Christ  came  to  us,  who  sent  not  for  him, 
which  made  him  say,  "  I  am  sought  of  them  that 
asked  not  for  me  ;  I  am  found  of  them  that  sought 
me  not :  "  Isaiah  Ixv.  1.  The  patients  seek  not  first, 
come  not  first,  to  the  Physician  ;  but  the  Physician 
to  the  patients.  "  The  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek 
and  to  save  that  which  was  lost  "  (Luke  xix.  10 ;)  and, 
besides,  he  dearly  paid  all  the  charge  of  his  long 
journey. — Benjamin  Keacli. 


CLXXIV. 


THB      EWS   SOUGHT    HIM    AT  THE  FEAST,  AND   SAID, 
WHERE  is  HE?"  —  John  vii.  11. 

JESUS  went  to  the  feast  in  secret,  and  the  Jews 
sought  him. 

From  differing  motives  they  inquired  for  him,  but 
they  did  inquire. 

No  man,  having  once  heard  of  Jesus,  can  any 
longer  remain  indifferent  to  him  :  he  must  take  some 
sort  of  interest  in  the  Lord  Jesus. 

From  many  quarters  comes  the  question,  "  Where 
is  he?" 

We  will  at  this  time  — 

I.  CONSIDER   THE   WAYS    IN    WHICH    THE    QUESTION    HAS 

BEEN    ASKED. 

1.  Hate,  ferociously  desiring  to  slay  him,  and  over 

throw  his  cause.     Herod  was  the  type  of 
this  school. 

2.  Infidelity,    sneoringly   denying   his  existence, 

taunting    his   followers  because  his   cause 
does  not  make  progress  :  2  Peter  iii.  4. 

3.  Timorous    fear,    sadly   doubting   his  presence, 

power,  and  prevalence.     "  Where  is  he  that 
trod  the  sea  ?  "     Job  xxiii.  8,  9. 

4.  Penitence,  humbly  seeking  him  that  she  may 

17  (257) 


258  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

confess  her  sin,  trust  her  Lord,  and  show 
her  gratitude  to  him.     Job  xxiii.  3. 

5.  Love,  heartily  pining  for  communion  with  him, 

and  for  an  opportunity  to  serve  him.     Solo 
mon's  Song  iii.  3. 

6.  Fear,  bitterly  lamenting  his  absence,  and  crav 

ing  his  return. 

7.  Desire,   ardently   aspiring  to  meet  him  in  his 

second  advent,  and    to   behold   his   glory. 
Rev.  xxii.  20. 

II.  GIVE  THE  SAINTS'  EXPERIMENTAL  ANSWER. 

1.  He  is  at  the  mercy-seat  when  we  cry  in  secret. 

2.  He  is  in  the  Word  as  we  search  the  sacred  page. 

3.  He  is  in  the  assemblies  of  his  people,  even  with 

two  or  three. 

4.  He  is  at  his  table,  known   in  the  breaking  of 

bread. 

5.  He  is  in  the  field  of  service,  aiding,  sympathiz 

ing,  guiding,  and  prospering.     In  all  things 
glorified  before  the  eyes  of  faith. 

6.  He  is  in  the  furnace  of  trial,  revealing  himself, 

sanctifying  the  trial,  bearing  us  through. 

7.  He  is  near  us,  yea,  with  us,  and  in  us. 

£11.  RETURN  THE  QUESTION  TO  YOU. 

1.  Is  he  at  the  bottom  of  your  trust  ? 

2.  Is  he  at  the  root  of  your  joys  ? 

3.  Is  he  on  the  throne  of  your  heart  ? 

4.  Is  he  near  you  by  constant  converse  ? 

5.  Is  his  presence  manifested  in  your  spirit,  your 

words,  your  actions  ? 


"WHERE  IS   HEf 

6.  Is  he  before  you,  the  end  of  your  journey,  the 
terminus  towards  which  you  are  daily  hast 
ening  ? 

IV.    ASK    IT    OF    THE    ANGELS. 

They  with  one  voice  reply  that  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is — 

1.  In  the  bosom  of  the  Father. 

2.  In  the  centre  of  glory. 

3.  On  the  throne  of  government. 

4.  In  the  place  of  representation. 

5.  In  the  almonry  of  mercy. 

6.  Within  reach  of  you,  and  of  all  needy  sinners; 

who  will  now  seek  his  face. 

0  come,  let  us  go  and  find  him  ! 

We  Trill  hold  no  feast  till  he  is  among  us. 

ANA. 

Many  years  ago,  there  was  a  young  man  in  Bir 
mingham  whom  dissipation  and  excess  had  brought 
into  a  condition  from  which  he  endeavored  to  ex 
tricate  himself  by  crime.  The  fear  of  detection,  ex 
posure,  and  ruin  goaded  him  on  to  such  a  pitch  of 
desperation,  that  he  left  his  father's  house  resolutely 
bent  on  self-destruction.  God's  good  providence 
led  hirn  through  Bond  Street ;  and,  under  some  inex 
plicable  impulse,  he  found  himself  sitting  in  the 
Baptist  Chapel  almost  before  he  was  aware.  The 
minister,  a  Mr.  Edmonds,  was  reading  from  the  book 
of  Job,  occasionally  throwing  in  some  shrewd  paren- 
thic  remark.  Coming  to  the  following  passage,  the 


260  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

young  man's  attention  was  irresistibly  arrested:  "Be 
hold,  I  go  forward,  but  he  is  not  there;  and  back 
ward,  but  I  cannot  perceive  him;  on  the  left  hand, 
where  he  doth  work,  but  I  cannot  behold  him :  he 
hideth  himself  on  the  right  hand,  that  I  cannot 
see  him:"  Job  xxiii.  8,  9.  "Job,  Job,"  the  preacher 
cried  entreatingly,  "  why  don't  you  look  upward  ?  " 
These  words  were  as  nails  fastened  in  a  sure  place, 
and  the  young  man  ever  thanked  God  for  the  belief 
that  he  was  unconsciously  drawn  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  enter  that  place,  and  that  the  preacher  was  impel 
led  to  the  use  of  those  words,  to  the  end  that  his  life 
might  be  redeemed  from  destruction,  and  crowned 
with  loving-kindness  and  tender  mercy. 

"  It  befell  me,"  says  Henry  Ward  Beecher,  "  once  to 
visit,  a  friend,  and  to  spend  the  night  with  him  in  a 
manufacturing  village  in  New  England.  I  had  nev^ 
er  been  in  the  place.  I  supposed  that,  when  I  ar 
rived  at  the  station,  I  should  find  a  hack  that  could 
take  me  directly  to  the  clergyman's  residence.  But 
it  was  an  unusual  train  that  I  was  on,  and  there 
were  no  hacks  there;  so  I  had  to  walk.  The  dis 
tance  to  the  village  was  three  miles;  but  before  I 
reached  it  I  had  walked  at  least  thirteen  miles.  I 
got  there  at  a  time  of  night  when  all  sensible  peo 
ple  were  in  bed.  I  knew  nothing  about  the  place, 
and  did  not  know  where  to  go.  I  could  not  eee  any 
church,  or  store,  or  hotel.  I  wandered  about  for 
nearly  half-an-hour,  and  at  the  end  of  that  time  I 
knew  no  better  where  I  was  than  I  did  when  I  be 
gan  my  search  I  never  felt  so  helpless  as  I  did 


u WHERE  IS   HE?"  261 

then.  I  realized  what  it  was  for  a  man,  in  his  own 
country,  and  speaking  his  own  language,  to  be  utter 
ly  lost. .  I  knocked  at  three  or  four  houses,  and  re 
ceived  no  response.  I  went  to  a  house  where  I  saw  a 
light,  and  found  the  inmates  quarrelling.  A  minis 
ter  seemed  to  be  the  last  thing  they  knew  anything 
about.  I  began  to  think  I  should  be  obliged  to 
sleep  out  of  doors.  But,  as  I  was  shooting  down  a 
certain  street,  almost  aimless,  I  saw  a  light;  and  on 
going  to  the  house  from  which  it  proceeded,  and 
ringing  the  bell,  I  found  that  it  was  the  very  house 
which  I  was  seeking.  I  thought  a  great  many  prof 
itable  things  that  night.  Among  the  rest,  I  thought 
that  I  was,  for  all  the  world,  like  men  that  1  had 
seen  trying  to  go  about  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  at 
night,  with  nobody  to  tell  them  the  way,  and  with  no 
chart  of  the  city,  who  would  turn  first  to  the  right, 
and  then  to  the  left,  without  seeming  to  have  any 
object  except  that  of  finding  a  place  when;  their 
souls  could  put  up  and  rest.  It  is  pitiful  to  see  a 
man  whose  mind  is  troubled,  whose  conscience  is 
against  him,  and  who  yearns  for  spiritual  rest,  going 
hither  and  thither,  up  and  down,  saying,  '  Have  ye 
seen  my  Lord  and  Master  ?  Can  ye  tell  me  where  he 
tarries,  whom  my  soul  delights  in?"1 

Our  glorious  Master  is  always  at  home,  but  does 
not  always  hold  his  receptions  in  the  same  chamber. 
One  while  he  will  see  us  in  his  closet,  and  anon  in 
his  great  hall.  To-day  he  meets  us  in  the  porch, 
and  to-morrow  in  the  innermost  room.  In  reading 
the  Bible  I  meet  him  in  his  library,  in  working  for 


262  MY   SEEM  ON -NOTES. 

him  I  commune  with  him  in  the  garden.  When  full 
of  hope  I  walk  with  him  on  the  housetop,  at  another 
time  I  wait  for  him  in  the  secret  places  of  the  stairs. 
It  is  well  to  be  in  the  parlor  where  he  talks  in  ser 
mons,  or  in  his  drawing-room  where  he  converses  in 
holy-fellowship;  but  the  best  room  of  the  house  is 
that  wherein  he  spreads  his  table,  and  makes  him 
self  to  be  our  bread  and  wine.  In  any  case,  the  one 
desire  of  our  heart  is  to  find  him,  and  live  upon 
him.— (7.  H.  S. 


CLXXV. 

"SO  THERE    WAS  A  DIVISION    AMONG    THE    PEOPLE    BECAUSE    OP 

HIM." — John  vii.  43. 

EVEN  when  Jesus  preached  so  sweetly  his  meek 
and  loving  doctrine,  there  was  a  division  among 
the  people. 

Even  about  himself  there  was  a  schism. 

We  may  not,  therefore,  hope  to  please  everybody, 
however  true  may  be  our  teaching,  or  however 
peaceful  may  be  our  spirit. 

We  may  even  dread  the  unity  of  death  more  than 
the  stir  of  life. 

To  this  day  the  greatest  division  in  the  world  is 
*'  because  of  him." 

I.  THERE  WAS  A  DIVISION  AMONG  NON-DISCIPLES. 

We  may  view  the  parties  formed  in  his  day  as 
symbolical  of  those  in  our  own. 

1.  Some  admitted  none  of  his  claims. 

2.  Others  admitted  a  portion,  but  denied  the  rest. 

3.  Certain  admitted  his  claims,  but  neglected  to 

follow  out  the  legitimate   consequences  of 
them. 

4  A  few  became  his  sincere  hearers,  going  as  far 
with  him  as  they  had  yet  learned  of  him. 

(263) 


264  MY   SEEMON -NOTES. 

Let  us  view  persons  who  have  thoughts  about 
Jesus  with  considerable  hope.  Though  they  blun 
der  now,  they  may  yet  come  right.  Let  us  not 
frighten  away  the  birds  by  imprudent  haste. 

Let  us  pray  for  those  who  deny  his  claims,  and 
resist  his  kingdom. 

Let  us  aid  those  who  come  a  little  way  towards 
the  truth,  and  are  willing  to  go  all  the  way  if  they 
can  but  find  it. 

Let  us  arouse  those  who  neglect  holy  subjects 
altogether. 

II.  THERE    WAS    A    DIVISION   OF   BELIEVERS    PROM    NON- 
BELIEVERS. 

This  is  a  great  and  wide  difference,  and  the  more 
clearly  the  division  is  seen  the  better  ;  for  God  views 
it  as  very  deep  and  all-important. 

There  is  a  great  division  at  this  present  hour — 

1.  In  opinion  :  especially  as  to  the  Lord  Jesus. 

2.  In  trust  :  many  rely  on  self ;  only  the  godly  on 

Jesus. 

3.  In  love.     Differing  pleasures  and  aims  prove 

that  hearts  go  after  differing  objects. 

4.  In  obedience,  character,  and  language. 

5.  In  development,  growth,  tendency. 

6.  In  destiny.     The  directions  of  the  lines  of  life 

point  at  different  places  as  the  end  of  the 
iourney. 

This  cleavage  divides  the  dearest  friends  and 
relatives. 

This  is  the  most  real  and  deep  difference  in  the 
world. 


CHRIST  THE   CAUSE   OF  DIVISION.  265 

III.    YET     WHEN     FAITH     COMES,    UNITY    IS    PRODUCED. 

There  is  unity  among  the  people  because  of  him. 

1.  Nationalities  are  blended.     Calvary  heals  Babel. 

Jews  and  Gentiles  are  one  in  Christ. 

The  near  and  the  far-off  as  to  spiritual  things 
are  brought  nigh  in  him,  who  is  the  one 
and  only  centre  of  grace  and  truth. 

Believers  of  all  nationalities  become  one 
church. 

2.  Personal  peculiarities  cease  to  divide. 

Workers  for  Christ  are  sure  to  be  blended  in 
one  body  by  their  common  difficulties. 

Position,  rank,  and  wealth  give  way  before 
the  uniting  influence  of  grace. 

3.  Mental  specialities  feel  the  touch  of  unity. 

Saints  of  varying   creeds   have   an   essential 

union  in  Christ. 

Saints  of  all  the  changing  ages  are  alike  in  him. 
Saints  of  all  styles  of  education   are    one   in 

Jesus. 
Saints  in  heaven  will  be  many  as  the  waves, 

but  one  as  the  sea. 
Ambitions,  which  else  would  disintegrate,  are 

overcome,  and  laid  at  Jesus'  feet. 

Let  us  divide,  if  there  be  a  division. 
Let  us  closely   unite,  if  there   be  real   union   in 
Christ. 

CONFIRMATIONS. 
Christ,  who  is  properly  the  author  of  peace,  is,  on 


266  MY  SEKMOX-NOTES. 

account  of  the  wickedness  of  men,  the  occasion  of 
discord. — John  Calvin. 

There  never  lived  any  one  who  has  so  deeply 
moved  the  hearts  of  men  as  Jesus  Christ  has  done. 
The  greatest  monarchs  that  ever  reigned,  the  great 
est  warriors  that  ever  fought,  the  greatest  masters 
in  art,  or  science,  or  literature,  have  never  affected 
so  many,  and  that  to  so  great  an  extent,  as  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  has  done.  Pie  has  changed  the  course  of 
the  world's  history,  and  made  its  condition  almost 
inconceivably  different  from  what  it  would  have 
been  but  for  his  coming.  His  teachings  are  received 
by  the  foremost  nations  of  the  earth.  Millions  of 
men  call  themselves  by  his  name.  He  occupies  the 
highest  place  in  the  esteem  and  affection  of  multi 
tudes.  For  his  sake  men  have  lived  as  none  others 
were  able  or  willing  to  live  :  for  his  sake  they  have 
died  as  none  others  could  or  would  have  died. 

But  in  proportion  to  the  faith,  the  veneration,  the 
love  with  which  Christ  is  regarded  by  a  portion  of 
mankind,  are  the  unbelief,  the  contempt  and  the 
hatred,  which  others  display  towards  him.  The 
poles  are  not  more  widely  sundered  than  are  the 
sentiments  of  men  respecting  Christ.  There  is 
nothing  about  which  they  are  more  completely  at 
variance.  Do  you  sing,  "  How  sweet  the  name  of 
Jesus  sounds?"  To  this  day  the  Jew  curses  that 
name,  and  the  infidel  brands  it  as  the  name  of  an 
impostor.  Do  you  regard  Christ  as  worthy  of  your 
warmest  love  ?  There  are  those  who  regard  him 
with  a  passionate  hate.  Satan  himself  cannot  be 


CHRIST  THE   CAUSE   OF  DIVISION.  267 

more    bitterly    hostile    to    Christ  than   some   men 
are.— P. 

The  union  of  saints  results  from  union  -with  Christ, 
as  the  loadstone  not  only  attracts  the  particles  of 
iron  to  itself  by  the  magnetic  virtue,  but  by  this 
virtue  it  unites  them  to  one  another. — Richard  Cecil. 

I  have  seen  a  field  here,  and  another  there,  stand 
thick  with  corn.  A  hedge  or  two  has  parted  them. 
At  the  proper  season  the  reapers  entered.  Soon  the 
earth  was  disburdened,  and  the  grain  conveyed  to 
its  destined  place,  where,  blended  together  in  the 
barn  or  in  the  stack,  it  could  not  be  known  that  a 
hedge  once  separated  this  corn  from  that.  Thus  it 
is  with  the  church.  Here  it  grows,  as  it  were,  in 
different  fields  ;  severed,  it  may  be,  by  various 
hedges.  By-and-by,  when  the  harvest  is  come,  all 
God's  wheat  shall  be  gathered  into  the  garner,  with 
out  one  single  mark  to  distinguish  that  once  they 
differed  in  the  outward  circumstantiality  of  modes 
or  forms. — From  "  Parable,  or  Divine  Poesy" 

Originating  among  the  Jews,  the  Christian  relig 
ion  was  regarded  at  first  by  great  Rome  as  a  mere 
Jewish  sect,  and  shared  alike  in  the  impunity  and 
the  contempt  with  which  that  people  were  ever 
treated  by  their  imperial  masters.  What  did  a  Clau 
dius  or  a  Vespasian  know,  or  care  to  know,  of  this 
new  sect  of  Christians  or  Nazarenes,  any  more  than 
of  those  other  party  names  of  Pharisee,  Sadducee, 
Essene,  Libertine,  and  the  like  ?  .  .  .  Christ  was 


MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

then  only  "  one  Christus,"  and  the  controversies  be 
tween  his  followers  and  the  Jewish  priests  only  one 
of  those  paltry  squabbles  to  which  that  restless  peo 
ple  were  chronically  subject.  By-and-by,  as  the 
young  church  became  strong,  it  began  to  make  its 
existence  and  its  presence  felt  in  the  world,  and  then 
it  stood  in  its  genuine  character  and  distinctive 
spirit,  face  to  face  with  Rome.  Once  met,  they  in 
stinctively  recognized  each  the  other  as  its  natural 
and  irreconcilable  enemy,  and  straightway  a  war  of 
deadliest  hate  began  between  them,  which  was  from 
the  first  one  of  extermination,  and  could  terminate 
only  by  the  fall  of  the  one  or  the  other.  There  was 
no  room  in  the  world  for  Christ  and  Caesar,  so  one 
or  the  other  must  die. — Islay  Burns. 


CLXXVI. 

"  MY  WORD  HATH  NO  PLACE  IN  YOU." — John  viii.  37. 

WHERE  the  Word  of  Jesus  ought  at  once  to  be 
received,  it  is  often  rejected.  These  Jews 
were  Abraham's  seed,  but  they  had  not  Abraham's 
faith. 

Jesus  knows  where  his  Word  is  received,  and 
where  it  has  no  place. 

He  declares  that  all  else  is  unavailing  ;  it  was  in 
vain  that  they  were  of  the  favored  race  if  they  did 
not  admit  the  Saviour's  Word  into  their  hearts. 

The  practical  result  appeared  in  their  lives  :  they 
sought  to  kill  Jesus. 

Let  us  honestly  consider — 

I.     WHAT    PLACK    THE    WORD    SHOULD    HAVE    IN    MEN'S 

HEARTS. 

The  Word  comes  from  Jesus,  the  appointed  Mes 
senger  of  God  ;  it  is  true,  weighty,  saving  ;  and, 
therefore,  it  must  have  a  place  among  those  who 
hear  it.  It  ought  to  obtain  and  retain — 

1.  An  inside  place  :  in  the  thoughts,  the  memory, 
the  conscience,  the  affections.  "Thy  Word 
have  I  hid  in  mine  heart  :"  Psalm  cxix. 
11.  See  also  Jer.  xv.  16  ;  Col.  iii.  16- 

(269) 


270  MY   SEEMOX -NOTES. 

2.  A  place  of  honor  ;  it  should  receive  attention, 

reverence,  faith,  obedience.  Johnviii.  47  ; 
Luke  vi.  46  ;  Matt.  vii.  24,  25. 

3.  A  place  of  trust.     We  ought   in   all   things   to 

rely  upon  the  sure  Word  of  promise,  since 
God  will  neither  lie,  nor  err,  nor  change. 
Is.  vii.  9  ;  1.  Sam.  xv.  29  ;  Titus  i.  2. 

4.  A  place  of  rule.     The  Word  of  Jesus  is  the  law 

of  a  Christian. 

5.  A  place  of  love.     It  should  be  prized  above  our 

daily  food,  and  defended  with  our  lives. 
Job  xxiii.  12  ;  Jude  3. 

6.  A  permanent  place.     It  must  so  transform  us 

as  to  abide  in  us. 

II.    WHY   IT    HAS   NO    PLACE   IN   MANY   MEN. 

If  any  man  be  unconverted,  let  us  help  him  to  a 
reason  applicable  to  his  case. 

1.  You  are  too  busy,  and  so  you  cannot  admit  it. 

There  is  no  room  for  Jesus  in  the  inn  of  your 

life. 
Think  of  it, — "  You  are  too  much  occupied  to 

be  saved !" 

2.  It  does  not  come  as  a  novelty,  and  therefore  you 

refuse  it. 

You  are  weary  of  the  old,  old  story. 
Are  you  wearied  of  bread  ?  of  air  ?  of  water  ? 

of  life  ? 

3.  Another  occupies  the  place  the  Word  of  Jesus 

should  have. 

You  prefer  the  word  of  man,  of  superstition, 
of  scepticism. 


PLACE  FOE  THE  WORD.  271 

Is  this  a  wise  preference  ? 

4.  You  think  Christ's  Word  too  holy,  too  spiritual. 

This  fact  should  startle  you,  for  it  condemns 
you. 

5.  It  is  cold  comfort  to  you,  and  so  you  give  it  no 

place. 
This  shows  that  your  nature  is  depraved. 

6.  You  are  too  wise,  too  cultured,  too  genteel,  to 

yield  yourself  to  the  government  of  Jesus. 
John  v.  44  ;  Rom.  i.  22. 

7.  Is  the  reason  of  your  rejection  of  the  Word  one 

of  these  ? 

That  you  are  not  in  earnest  ? 
That  you  are  fond  of  sin  ? 
That  you  are  greedy  of  evil  gain  ? 
That  you  need  a  change  of  heart  ? 

1  I.  WHAT  WILL  COME  OF  THE  WORD  OF   CHRIST   HAVING 

NO    PLACE    IX    YOU  ? 

1.  Every  past  rejection  of  that  Word  has  involved 

you  in  sin. 

2.  The  Word  may  cease  to  ask  for  place  in  you. 

3.  You  may  yourself  become  hardened,  so  as  to  de 

cline  even  to  hear  that  Word  with  the  out 
ward  ear. 

5.  You  may  become  the  violent  opponent  of  that 
Word,  like  these  Jews. 

5.  The  Word  will  condemn  you  at  the  last  great 
day.  John  xii.  48. 

Let  us  therefore  reason  with  you  for  a  while. 
Why  do  you  not  give  place  to  it  ? 


272  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

All  that  is  asked  of  you  is  to  give  it  place.  It  will 
bring  with  it  all  that  you  need. 

Open  wide  the  door,  and  bid  it  enter ! 

It  is  the  Word  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Saviour. 

It  means  your  highest  good,  and  will  greatly  bless 

y°u- 

COMMON-PLACES. 

Eeaders  of  this  enlightened,  gold-nugget  genera 
tion  can  form  to  themselves  no  conception  of  the  spirit 
that  then  possessed  the  nobler  kingly  mind.  VER- 
BUM  DEI  MANET  IN  STERNUM  was  the  epigraph  and 
life-motto  which  John  the  Steadfast  had  adopted  for 
himself.  The  letters,  V. D.M. I.  ^E.,  were  engraved  on 
all  the  furniture  of  his  existence,  standards,  pictures, 
plate,  on  the  very  sleeves  of  his  lackeys,  and  I  can 
perceive  on  his  own  deep  heart  first  of  all. — Thomas 
Carlyle. 

O  Book!  Infinite  sweetness!  Let  my  heart 
Suck  every  letter,  and  a  honey  gain, 
Precious  for  any  grief  in  any  part; 

To  clear  the  hreast,  to  mollify  all  pain. 

George  Herbert. 

The  only  reason  why  so  many  are  against  the  Bible, 
is  because  they  know  the  Bible  is  against  them. — 
G.  S.  Bowes. 

At  one  time  the  Malagasy  did  not  know  of  any 
book  except  the  Bible.  There  was  a  Creole  trader, 
in  Antananarivo,  who  had  greatly  offended  some  of 
the  natives.  They  mobbed  his  homse,  they  seized 


PLACE  FOB  THE  WOED.  273 

his  property,  and  men  were  seen  rushing  in  all  di 
rections,  carrying  away  whatever  they  had  been 
able  to  lay  their  hands  upon.  One  man  had  got  pos 
session  of  the  trader's  ledger;  and,  holding  it  up  aloft, 
he  shouted  at  the  top  of  his  voice,  "  We  have  got 
the  big  Bible !  We  have  got  the  big  Bible !  "  It  is 
to  be  feared  that  the  trader's  ledger  is  in  too  many 
cases  his  Bible. — Mr.  Cousins,  of  Madagascar. 

The  Bible  has  been  expelled  for  centuries,  by 
atheistic  or  sacerdotal  hate,  from  the  dwellings  of 
many  of  the  European  nations.  As  a  matter  of  course, 
the  domestic  virtues  have  declined  ;  the  conjugal  re 
lation  is  disparaged ;  deception  and  intrigue  have  sup 
planted  mutual  confidence  ;  and  society  has  become 
diseased  to  its  very  core.  The  very  best  thing  we 
can  do — the  only  thing  which  will  be  efficient — to 
arrest  these  evils,  is  to  restore  to  those  nations  the 
Word  of  God  ;  to  replace  in  their  houses  that  Bible 
of  which  they  have  been  robbed.  Only  do  for  France 
and  Italy,  Belgium  and  Spain,  Portugal  and  Austria, 
Avhat  has  been  attempted,  and  to  a  great  extent  ac 
complished,  for  our  country  ;  put  a  Bible  in  every 
family,  and  a  mightier  change  will  pass  over  Europe 
than  can  be  effected  by  all  the  diplomacy  of  her  states 
men,  or  all  the  revolutions  projected  by  her  patriots. 
— The  Leisure  Hour. 

The  following  anecdote,  well  told  by  Mr.  Aitken, 
shows  that,  in  some  men,  the  Word  has  no  place, 
even  in  their  memories: — "  Only  a  short  time  ago,  a 
friend  of  mine  was  preaching  in  one  of  our  cathedral 

13 


274  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

churches.  As  he  was  going  to  select  for  his  text  a 
prominent  passage  in  one  of  the  portions  for  the  day, 
he  thought  it  expedient  to  inquire  of  the  clerk, 
'What  did  the  Canon  preach  from  this  morning?' 
The  clerk  became  very  pensive,  seemed  quite  dispos 
ed  to  cudgel  his  brains  for  the  proper  answer  ;  but, 
somehow  or  other,  he  really  could  not  think  of  it 
just  then.  All  the  men  of  the  choir  were  robing  in 
the  adjacent  vestry,  so  he  said  that  he  would  go 
and  ask  them.  Accordingly,  the  question  was  passed 
round  the  choir,  and  produced  the  same  perplexity. 
At  length  the  sagacious  clerk  returned,  with  the 
highly-explicit  answer,  '  It  was  upon  the  Christian 
religion,  sir  ! '  I  think  those  good  people  must  have 
needed  a  reminder  as  to  how  we  should  hear  ;  don't 
you?" 


CLXXYII. 


WE  KNOW  THAT  GOD  HEARETH  NOT  SINNERS:  BUT  IP 
ANY  MAN  BE  A  WORSHIPPEU  OK  GOD,  AND  DOETH  HIS  WILL, 
HIM  HE  HEARETH." — John  ix.  31. 


IT  is  ill  to  wrench  passages  of  the  Bible  out  of 
their  context,  and  treat  them  as  infallible  Scrip 
ture,  when  they  are  only  the  sayings  of  men. 

By  acting  thus  foolishly  we  could  prove  that  there 
is  no  God  (Psalm  xiv.  1),  that  God  hath  forgotten 
his  people  (Isaiah  xlix.  14),  that  Christ  was  a  wine- 
bibber  (Matt.  xi.  19),  and  that  we  ougiit  to  worship 
the  devil  (Matt.  iv.  9.) 

This  will  never  do.  We  must  inquire  who  uttered 
the  sentence  before  we  begin  to  preach  from  it. 

Our  text  is  the  saying  of  a  shrewd  blind  man,  who 
was  far  from  being  well  instructed.  It  is  to  be  tak 
en  for  what  it  is  worth ;  but  by  no  means  to  be  re 
garded  as  Christ's  teaching. 

The  Pharisees  evidently  admitted  the  force  of  it, 
and  were  puzzled  by  it.  It  was  a  good  argument 
as  against  them. 

This  remark  of  the  blind  man  is  true  or  false  as 
we  may  happen  to  view  it. 

L    IT    IS   NOT   TRUE    IN   SOME    SENSES. 

(275) 


276  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

We  could  not  say  absolutely  that  God  heareth  not 
sinners,  for — 

1.  God  does  hear  men  who  sin,  or  else  he  would 

hear  no  one;  for  there  is  not  a  man  upon 
earth  that  siimeth  not.     1  Kings  viii.  46. 
Not  a  saint  would  be  heard;  for  even  saints 
are  sinners. 

2.  God  does  sometimes  hear  and  answer  unregen- 

erate  men. 
To  show  that  he  is  truly  God,  and  make  them 

own  it.     Ps.  cvi.  44. 
To  manifest  his  great  compassion,  whereby  he 

even  hears  the  ravens'  cry.     Ps.  cxlvii.  9. 
To  lead  them  to  repentance.    1  Kings  xxi.  27. 
To  leave  them  without  excuse.    Exodus  x.  16, 

17. 
To  punish  them,  as  when  he  sent  quails  to 

the  murmurers  (Numbers  xi.  33),  and  gave 

Israel  a  king  (1  Sam.  xii.  17),  in  his  anger. 

3.  God   does  graciously  hear  sinners  when   they 

cry  for  mercy. 

Not  to  believe  this  were  to  render  the  gospel 
no  gospel. 

Not  to  believe  this  were  to  deny  facts.  David, 
Manasseh,  the  dying  thief,  the  publican, 
the  prodigal,  confirm  this  testimony. 

Not  to  believe  this  were  to  deny  promises. 
"  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the 
unrighteous  man  his  thoughts:  and  let 
him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  lie  will  have 


TRUE  AKD   NOT  TKTJE.  277 

mercy  upon  him;  and  to  our  God,  for  he 
will  abundantly  pardon :  "  Isaiah  Iv.  7. 

II.  IT  IS  TRUE  IN  OTHER  SENSES. 

The  Lord  does  not  hear  sinners  as  he  hears  his  own 
people. 

1.  He  hears  no  sinner's  prayer  apart  from  the  me 

diation  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  1  Tim.  ii.  5; 
Ephesians  ii.  18. 

2.  He   will   not  hear  a  wicked,  formal,  heartless 

prayer.     Prov.  xv.  29. 

3.  He  will  not  hear  the  man  who  wilfully  contin 

ues  in  sin,  and  abides  in  unbelief.  Jer.  xiv. 
12;  Is.  i.  15. 

4.  He   will  not  hear  the  hypocrite's  mockery  of 

prayer.     Job  xxvii.  9. 

5.  He  will  not  hear  the  unforgiving.      Mark  xi. 

25,  26. 

8.  He  will  not  hear  even  his  people  when  sin  is 
wilfully  indulged,  and  entertained  in  their 
hearts.  Ps.  Ixvi.  18. 

7.  He  will  not  hear  those  who  refuse  to  hear  his 

Word,  or  to  regard  his  ordinances.  Prov. 
xxviii.  9. 

8.  He  will  not  hear  those  who  harden  their  hearts 

against  the  monitions  of  his  Spirit,  the 
warnings  of  his  providence,  the  appeals  of 
his  ministers,  the  strivings  of  conscience, 
and  so  forth. 

9.  He  will  not  hear  those  who  refuse  to  be  saved 

by  grace,  or  who  trust  in  their  own  prayers 
as  the  cause  of  salvation. 


278  MY   SERMOIN'-^OTES. 

10.  He  will  not  hear  sinners  who  die  impenitent. 
At  the  last  he  will  close  his  ear  to  them,  as 
to  the  foolish  virgins,  who  cried,  "  Lord, 
Lord,  open  to  us!  "  Matt.  xxv.  11. 

One  or  two  things  are  very  clear  and  sure. 

He  cannot  bear  those  who  never  speak  to  him. 

He  has  never  yet  given  any  one  of  us  a  flat  refusal. 

He  permits  us  at  this  moment  to  pray,  and  it  will 
be  well  for  us  to  do  so,  and  see  if  he  does  not  hear 
us. 

OBSERVATIONS. 

Such  is  the  mercy  of  our  God,  that  he  will  wink 
at  many  infirmities  in  our  devotions,  and  will  not  re 
ject  the  prayer  of  an  honest  heart  because  of  some 
weakness  in  the  petitioner.  It  must  be  a  greater 
cause  than  all  this  that  makes  God  angry  at  our 
prayers.  In  general,  it  is  sin.  "  We  know  that 
God  heareth  not  sinners:  but  if  any  man  be  a  wor 
shipper  of  God,  and  doeth  his  will,  him  he  heareth." 
"  If  I  regard  iniquity  in  my  heart,  the  Lord  will  not 
hear  me."  It  is  our  sins  that  block  up  the  pas 
sage  of  our  prayers.  It  is  not  the  vast  distance  be 
tween  heaven  and  earth,  not  the  thick  clouds,  not 
the  threefold  regions,  not  the  sevenfold  orbs,  not  the 
firmament  of  heaven,  but  only  our  sins,  that  hinder 
the  ascent  of  our  prayers.  "  When  ye  make  many 
prayers,  I  will  not  hear  you."  Why  ?  '*  Because 
your  hands  are  full  of  blood."  God  will  have  none  of 
those  petitions  that  are  presented  to  him  with  bloody 
hands.  Our  prayers  are  our  bills  of  exchange,  and 


TKUE  AND  NOT  TRUE.  279 

they  are  allowed  in  heaven  when  they  come  from 
pious  and  humble  hearts;  but  if  we  be  broken  in 
our  religion,  and  bankrupts  of  grace,  God  will  pro 
test  our  bills;  he  will  not  be  won  with  our  prayers. 

Thomas  Adams. 

My  words  fly  up,  my  thoughts  remain  below : 
Words,  without  thoughts,  never  to  heaven  go. 

Shakespeare. 

God  is  "  neither  hard  of  hearing,  nor  hard  of  giv- 
ing." 

The  blood  of  sheep  and  the  blood  of  swine  are  both 
alike ;  yet  the  blood  of  swine  was  not  to  be  offered, 
because  it  was  the  blood  of  swine:  so  the  prayer  of 
an  unregenerate  man  may  be  as  well  framed,  both 
for  the  petitions  and  for  everything  that  is  required 
immediately  to  a  prayer,  and  yet  not  be  accepted, 
because  of  the  heart  and  person  from  whom  it  comes. 

Samud  Clark. 

It  is  difficult  to  illustrate  this  truth,  because,  in 
human  life,  nothing  ever  takes  place  corresponding 
to  what  occurs  when  an  impenitent  sinner  presumes 
to  pray  to  God.  To  every  government  many  peti 
tions  are  presented,  but  never  one  by  any  who  are  in 
rebellion  against  its  authority.  It  is  universally  re 
cognized,  that  rebellion  against  any  government  of 
itself  cuts  off  all  right  of  petition  to  it.  So  that,  for 
an  impenitent  sinner  to  pray  to  God  is  one  of  the 
most  unnatural  and  monstrous  things  that  can  be 
conceived  of. 


280  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

The  fact  that  God  is  kind,  good,  bountiful,  does 
not  excuse  the  presumption  of  any  impenitent  sinner 
in  praying  to  him.  That  only  shows  how  inexcusa 
ble  is  his  impenitence.  For  if  God  is  good,  kind, 
bountiful,  why  does  he  continue  impenitent  and  re 
bellious  ? 

The  fact  that  he  is  in  great  need  does  not  excuse 
the  presumption  or  lessen  the  folly  of  an  impenitent 
sinner  in  praying  to  God.  It  may  be  that  his  dis 
tress  is  the  punishment  of  his  sin;  and  for  him  in 
that  case  to  pray  to  God  for  deliverance  is  as  if  a 
convicted  thief  were  to  petition  Her  Majesty's  Gov 
ernment  to  release  him,  on  the  ground  that  he  found 
it  inconvenient  and  painful  to  work  the  treadmill.  Or, 
it  may  be  that  his  distresses  are  the  means  which 
God  is  employing  for  the  very  purpose  of  breaking 
down  his  obstinacy  and  impenitence :  by  them  God 
is  laying  siege  to  his  soul.  But  what  rebellious  city, 
besieged  by  the  forces  of  the  lawful  government, 
would  venture  to  ask  aid  from  the  government,  on 
the  ground  that  great  distress  prevailed  in  it,  while 
all  the  time  its  inhabitants  had  not  the  slightest  in 
tention  of  surrendering  to  the  government  ? 

Tlie  Preachers  Monthly. 


CLXXVIII. 

"  I  AM  THB  DOOR  :   BY  ME   IF   ANY   MAN  ENTER  IN,    HE  SHATX  BB 
SAVED,  AND  SHALL  GO  IN  AND  OUT,  AND  FIND  PA8TURK — John  X.  9. 

K  Lord  sets  himself  forth  very  coiidescerid- 
ingly. 

The  most  sublime  and  poetical  figures  are  none  too 
glorious  to  describe  him;  but  he  chooses  homely 
ones,  which  the  most  prosaic  minds  can  apprehend. 

A  door  is  a  common  object.  Jesus  would  have  us 
often  think  of  him. 

A  door  makes  a  very  simple  emblem.  Jesus  would 
have  the  lowliest  know  him,  and  use  him. 

A  door  to  a  sheepfold  is  the  poorest  form  of  door. 
Jesus  condescends  to  be  anything,  so  that  he  may 
serve  and  save  his  people. 

I.  THE  DOOR.     In  this  homely  illustration  we  see — 

1.  Necessity.     Suppose  there  had  been  none,  we 

could  never  have  entered  in  to  God,  peace, 
truth,  salvation,  purity,  or  heaven. 

2.  Singularity.     There  is  only  one  door;  let  us  not 

weary  ourselves  to  find  another.  Salvation 
is  by  entrance  at  that  door,  and  at  none 
other.  Acts  iv.  12. 

3.  Personality.     The   Lord  Jesus  is   himself  the 

door.     "  I  am  the  door,"  saith  he;  not  cer&- 

(281) 


282  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

monies,  doctrines,  professions,  achieve 
ments,  but  the  Lord  himself,  our  Sacrifice. 

4.  Suitability.     He  is  suited  to  be  the  communica 

tion  between  man  and  God,  seeing  he  unites 
both  in  his  own  person,  and  thus  lies  open 
both  earthward  and  heavenward.  1  Tim. 
ii.  5. 

5.  Perpetuity.     His   u  I  am "  is  for  all  times  and 

ages.  Matt,  xxviii.  20.  We  can  still  come 
to  the  Father  by  him.  John  xiv.  6 ;  Heb. 
vii.  25. 

II.  THE  USERS  OF  IT. 

1  They  are  not  mere  observers,  or  knockers  at  the 
door,  or  sitters  down  before  it,  or  guards 
marching  to  and  fro  in  front  of  it. 
But  they  enter  in  by  faith,  love,  experience, 
communion. 

2.  They  are  not  certain  persons  who  have  special 

qualifications,  such  as  those  of  race,  rank, 
education,  office,  or  wealth.  Not  lords  and 
ladies  are  spoken  of;  but  "  any  man." 

3.  They  are  persons  who  have  the  one  qualifica 

tion:  they  do  "enter  in"  The  person  is 
"  any  man,"  but  the  essential  distinction  is 
entrance. 

This  is  intended  to  exclude — 
Character  previously  acquired  as  a  fitness 

for  entrance. 

Feeling,  either  of  grief  or  joy,  as  a  prepara 
tion  for  admission. 


THE   DOOR.  283 

Action,  otherwise  than  that  of  entering  in, 
as  a  term  of  reception. 

A  door  may  be  marked  PRIVATE,  and  then  few 
will  enter. 

A  door  which  is  conspicuously  marked  as  THE 
DOOR  is  evidently  meant  to  be  used.  The 
remarkable  advertisement  of  "I  am  the 
door,"  and  the  special  promises  appended 
to  it,  are  the  most  liberal  invitation  im 
aginable. 

Come  then,  ye  who  long  to  enter  into  life ! 

III.    THE  PRIVILEGES    OF    THESE    USERS. 

They  belong  to  all  who  enter :  no  exception  is 
made. 

1.  Salvation.     "  He  shall  be  saved."     At  once,  for 

ever,  altogether. 

2.  Liberty.     He  "  shall  go  in  and  out."     This  is  no 

prison-door,  but  a  door  for  a  flock  whose 
Shepherd  gives  freedom. 

3.  Access.      "  Shall  go  in:"  for  pleading,  hiding, 

fellowship,  instruction,  enjoyment. 

4.  Egress.     "He  shall  go  out:"  for  service,  pro 

gress,  etc. 

5.  Nourishment.       "  And      find     pasture."      Our 

spiritual   food  is  found  through  Christ,  in 
Christ,  and  around  Christ. 

Let  us  enter :  a  door  is  easy  of  access ;  we  shall  not 
have  to  climb  over  some  lofty  wall. 

Let  us  enter :  it  is  a  door  for  sheep,  who  have  no 
wisdom. 

Let  us  enter :  the  door  is  Jesus ;  we  need  not  fear 


284  MY   SERMON-JNOTES. 

to  draw  nigh  to  him,  for  he  is  meek  and  lowly  in 
heart. 


KNOCKERS. 

The  work  of  the  Reformation  was  thus  described 
by  Stern,  a  German  statesman:  "Thank  heaven,  Dr. 
Luther  has  made  the  entrance  into  heaven  somewhat 
shorter,  by  dismissing  a  crowd  of  door-keepers, 
chamberlains,  and  masters  of  ceremony." 

n  olden  times,  cathedrals  were  regarded  as  places 
of  sanctuary,  where  criminals  and  others  might  take 
refuge.  Over  the  north  porch  of  Durham  Cathedral 
was  a  room,  where  two  doorkeepers  kept  watch  al 
ternately,  to  admit  any  who  at  any  time,  either  by 
day  or  by  night,  knocked  at  the  gate,  and  claimed 
the  protection  of  St.  Cuthbert.  Whoever  comes  to 
the  door  of  our  house  of  refuge,  and  at  whatever 
time,  tinds  ready  admittance. 

It  is  said  that  the  ancient  city  of  Troy  had  but  one 
way  of  entrance.  In  whatever  direction  the  travel 
ler  went,  he  would  find  no  way  to  go  into  the  city 
but  the  one  which  was  legally  appointed,  and  the  only 
one  which  was  used  by  those  who  went  in  and  out. 
There  is  only  one  right  way  to  the  favor  of  God,  to 
the  family  of  God,  to  the  presence  of  God  in  prayer, 
and,  finally,  to  the  city  of  God  in  eternity,  and  that 
one  way  is  Christ.  u  I  am  the  way,"  he  declares, 
"  and  no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me." 
— John  Bate. 

We  cannot  go  abroad  or  return  home  without  pass- 


THE   DOOE.  285 

ing  through  an  emblem  of  our  Lord.     So  near  as  he 
is  in  the  type,  so  near  let  him  be  in  reality. 

The  sheep  enters  the  fold  at  first  by  the  door,  and 
it  remains  in  the  fold  because  the  door  shuts  it  in. 
When  the  flock  go  forward,  they  proceed  by  way 
of  the  door;  and  when  they  return  to  their  united 
rest,  it  is  by  the  same  passage.  Take  away  the 
door  from  the  fold,  and  the  enemy  would  enter,  or 
the  flock  would  stray.  A  sheep-fold  without  a  door 
would  in  effect  be  no  fold  at  all. — C.  If.  S. 

There  are  not  half-a-dozen  ways  out  of  our  sin  and 
misery — not  a  choice  of  ways  over  the  steep  hills 
and  desolate  waste-places  of  this  mortal  life,  HO  that 
by  any  of  them  we  may  reach  heaven  at  last,  but 
only  one  way. 

But,  if  this  is  the  only  way,  it  is  likewise  a  perfect 
ly  secure  way.  Via  iimca,  via  ccrta,  is  a  Latin  prov 
erb  in  which  this  truth  is  stated  very  forcibly. — Dean 
Hoivson. 

Since  Jesus  glories  that  he  is  the  door,  let  us  not 
hesitate  to  use  him  in  that  capacity.  Let  us  hasten 
to  enter  in  by  him  into  peace,  life,  rest,  holiness. 
When  we  see  it  written  up  in  large  characters, 
THIS  IS  THE  WAY,  we  do  not  fear  that  we  shall 
trespass  if  we  follow  it.  What  is  a  way  for,  but  to 
be  followed  ?  What  is  a  door  for,  but  to  be  passed 
through  ?  Say  that  a  door-way  is  never  passed,  and 
you  have  said  that  it  is  useless.  Why  not  brick  it 
up  ?  It  would  be  no  honor  to  the  Lord  Jesus  for 
sinners  to  be  so  in  awe  of  him  as  never  to  come  to 
God  by  him ;  but  he  delights  in  being  evermore  our 
way  of  access. — C.  H.  S. 


CLXXIX. 

"AND  IT  WAS  AT  JERUSALEM  THE  FEAST  OF  THE  DEDICATION, 

AND  IT  WAS   WINTER." 

"  AND  JESUS  WALKED  IN  THE  TEMPLE  IN  SOLOMON'S  PORCH." — 
John  x.  22,  23. 

THE  presence  of  Jesus  brings  into  prominence — 
The  place  :  "  at  Jerusalem,  in  the  temple." 
The  exact  part  of  it :  "  Solomon's  porch." 
The   time — the   season — the  exact  date  :    "  it 

was  winter." 

The  proceedings  :    "  it  was  the  feast  of  the  de 
dication." 

The  main  feature  in  all  history,  and  in  all  the 
events  of  a  private  life,  is  the  presence  or  absence  of 
Jesus. 

At  the  time  mentioned,  the  Lord  Jesus  walked 
manifestly  among  the  people. 

We  greatly  desire  his  spiritual  presence  now. 

I.   WILL  HE  BE  HERE?     Will  he  be  in  our  assembly? 

The  place  may  be  a  very  Jerusalem  ;  but  will 

he  be  there  ? 
Cur  meeting-place  may  be  a  temple ;  but  will 

he  be  there  ? 
It  may  be  a  high  day  ;  but  will  the  Lord  be 

with  us  ? 
(286^ 


THE   LORD   IN   OUK  ASSEMBLIES.  287 

It  may  be  cold  and  wintry  ;  but  what  of  that, 

if  he  be  there  ? 
Our  one  eager  inquiry  is  about  his  presence, 

and  we  feel  sure  that  he  will  come,  for — 

1.  We  have  invited  him,  and  he  will  not  refuse 

his  friends. 

2.  We  are  prepared  for  him.     We  are   waiting  to 

welcome  him. 

3.  We  have  great  need  of  him,  and  he  is  full  of 

compassion. 

4.  We  have  some  of  his  brethren  here  among  us, 

and  these  bring  him  with  them  :  indeed,  he 
is  in  them. 

5.  We  have  those  here  whom  he  is  seeking.     He 

seeks  lost  sheep,  and  such  are  here. 

6.  He  has  promised  to  come.     Matt,  xviii.  20. 

7.  Some  declare  that  they  have  already  seen  him. 

Why  should  not  others  of  us  enjoy  the  same 
privilege  ? 

II.  WILL  HE  STAY?     He  will— 

1.  If  we  prize  his  company,  and  feel  that  we  can 

not  live  without  it.  We  must  by  earnest 
prayer  constrain  him  to  abide  with  us.  Luke 
xxiv.  29. 

2.  If  we  love  his  truth,  and  delight  to  make  it 

known. 

3.  If  we  obey  his  will,  and  walk  in  sincerity  and 

holiness. 

4.  If  we  are  diligent  in  his  service  and  worship. 

5.  If  we  are  united  in  love  to  him,  to  one  another, 

and  to  poor  sinners. 


288  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

6.  If  we  are  humbly  reverent,  and  sit  at  his  feet  in 

lowly  confession.     The  proud  he  will  never 
favor. 

7.  If  we  are  jealously  watchful. 

HI.  WHAT  WILL  HE  DO  IF  HE  COMES? 

1.  He  will  walk  among  us,  and  observe  what  we 

are  doing,   even  as  he  noticed  those  who 
went  to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem. 

2.  He  will  grieve  over  the  spiritual  condition  of 

many,  even  as  he  mourned  over  the  ruin  of 
Jerusalem. 

3.  He  will  wait  to  give  audience  to  any  who  desire 

to  speak  with  him. 

4«  He  will  teach  by  his  servant  \  and  his  Word, 
whether  received  or  rejected,  will  be  with 
great  authority  and  power. 

5.  He  will  this  day  explain  to  us  the  temple  itself, 

by  being  himself  the  Key  to  it. 
Think  of  Jesus,  who  is  the  temple  of  God  (Rev. 
xxi.  22),  in  the  temple,  and  then  understand, 
by  the  light  of  his  presence,— 
The  temple.     Heb.  ix.  11  ;  Eev.  xv.  5. 
The  altar.     Heb.  xiii.  10  ;  Rev.  viii.  3. 
The  Sacrifice.     Heb.  ix.  28  ;  1  Cor.  v.  7. 
The  shewbread.    Heb.  ix.  2. 
The  veil.     Heb.  x.  20. 
The  ark  and  mercy-seat.     Heb.  ix.  4,  5  ;  Rev. 

x.  19. 
The  Priest.     Heb.  x.  12. 

6.  He  will  to  his  own  people  reveal  his  love,  as 


THE  LOED   IN   OUE  ASSEMBLIES.  289 

once  the  Lord's  light  shone  above  the  mercy- 
seat. 

7.  He  will  take  us  where  he  always  walks,  but 
where  there  is  no  winter  :  to  the  New  Jer 
usalem,  to  the  temple,  to  a  more  beautiful 
building  than  Solomon's  Porch.  Rev.  xxi. 
10,  11. 

EXPOSITORY. 

What  is  here  called  "Solomon's  Porch,"  was,  strict 
ly  speaking,  not  a  porch  at  all  in  the  English  sense 
of  the  word,  but  one  of  the  large  open  colonnades 
that  surrounded  the  courts.  .  .  The  whole  length  of 
the  four  sides  of  the  outer  court  was  three-quarters 
of  a  mile.  The  eastern  side  was  "Solomon's  Porch." 
It  was  a  vast  gallery  of  columns  in  double  rows. 
Each  column,  thirty-five  feet  high,  consisted  of  one 
piece  of  white  marble.  The  roof  above  was  in  panels 
of  cedar-wood.  The  view,  through  the  columns, 
eastward  and  outward,  ranged  across  the  valley  over 
the  Mount  of  Olives.  The  inward  view  was  into  the 
court  itself,  which  was  planted  with  trees,  and  where, 
at  festival  times,  there  were  crowds  of  people. 

There  is  much  solemnity  in  contemplating  Jesus 
as  he  "  walked  "  among  the  pillars  of  this  famous 
colonnade  ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  compare  this 
passage  of  the  life  of  Jesus  with  a  much  earlier  one 
recorded  by  the  same  Evangelist.  We  read,  in  the 
first  chapter  of  John's  Gospel,  that  Jesus  was 
"  walking  " — in  solitude — by  the  banks  of  the  Jor 
dan,  while  John  the  Baptist  and  two  of  his  disciples 
19 


290  MY   SEEMON-NOTES. 

looked  on.  Then,  perhaps,  the  Lord  was  meditating 
on  his  great  mission,  on  the  beginning  of  his  work, 
arid  on  the  calling  of  the  first  disciples  which 
speedily  followed  in  that  place.  Now,  perhaps,  he 
was  meditating  on  the  accomplishment  of  his  work, 
on  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  the  Jewish 
temple,  and  on  the  doom  of  the  Jewish  people.  The 
impression  npon  the  mind  is  very  serious  when  we 
think  of  Jesus,  on  either  of  these  occasions,  as  walk 
ing  in  silence,  either  by  the  banks  of  the  famous 
historical  river,  or  in  this  colonnade  of  the  temple, 
which,  in  another  way,  is  equally  famous  in  the 
sacred  annals. — Dean  Howsoris  "  Thoughts  for  Saints' 
Days." 

The  Mohammedans  have  a  saying,  that,  whenever 
two  persons  meet,  there  is  always  a  third.  The 
proverb  refers  to  the  presence  of  God. — Professor 
Hocje. 

As  the  sun  is  as  ready  to  pour  its  radiance  upon 
the  daisy  on  a  village  common  as  upon  the  oaks  in 
Windsor  Park,  so  is  Christ  as  willing  to  visit  the 
heart  of  the  poorest  and  feeblest  as  well  as  the  rich 
est  and  noblest  of  earth. — Handbook  of  Illustration. 

When  Christ  saith,  "  I  will  be  with  you,"  you 
may  add  what  you  will — to  protect  you,  to  direct 
you,  to  comfort  you,  to  carry  on  the  work  of  grace 
in  you,  and  in  the  end  to  crown  you  with  immor 
tality  and  glory.  All  this  and  more  is  included  in 
this  precious  promise. — John  Trapp. 


CLXXX. 

"YE  HAVE  HEARD  HOW  I  SAID  UNTO  YOU,  I  GO  AWAY,  AND 
COME  AGAIlf  UNTO  YOU.  IF  YE  LOV^D  ME,  YE  WOULD  RE 
JOICE,  BECAUSE  I  SAID,  I  GO  UNTO  THE  FATHER  :  FOR  MY 

FATHER  is  GREATER  THAN  I." — John  xiv.  28. 

JESUS'  love  makes  him  use  the  disciples'  love  to 
himself  as  a  comfort  for  themselves  when  they 
are  distressed  about  his  going  away. 

He  appeals  to  the  warmest  feeling  in  their  hearts 
in  order  to  raise  their  spirits. 

It  is  well  when  grace  has  put  within  us  principles 
which  are  springs  of  consolation. 

0  blessed  Master,  thou  speakest  ever  with  a  view 
to  our  joy! 

From  our  text  let  us  learn — 

I.  THAT  WE   SHOULD    TRY    TO    SEE    THINGS    IN    CHRIST'S 

LIGHT. 

1.  He  sees   the    whole  of  things.     He   says   not 

only,  "  I  go  away,"  but  also,  "  I  come  again 
unto  you." 

2.  He  sees  through  things.     He  does  not  say,  "  I 

die,"  but  he  looks  beyond,  and  says,  '•  I  go 
unto  the  Father." 

3.  He  sees  the  true  bearing  of  things.     The  events 

which  were  about  to  happen  were  in  them- 

(291) 


292  MY   SERMON- NOTES. 

selves  sad,  but  they  would  lead  to   happy 
results.     ''If  ye  loved   me,    ye    would    re 
joice." 
To  see  facts  in  his  light  we  must  dwell  with  him, 

live  in  him,  grow  like  him,  and  especially  love  him 

more  and  more. 

II.  THAT  OUR  LOVE  SHOULD  GO  FORTH  TOWARDS  HIS   PER 

SON.  "If  ye  loved  me."  All  about  him  is 
amiable  ;  but  he  himself  is  altogether 
lovely.  Solomon's  Song  v,  16. 

1.  lie  is  the  source  of  all  the  benefits  he  bestows. 

2.  Loving  him,  we  have  him,  and  so  his  benefits. 

3.  Loving  him,  we  prize  his  benefits  the  more. 

4.  Loving  him,  we  sympathize  in  all  that  he  does. 

5.  Loving  him,  we  love  his  people  for  his  sake. 

6.  Loving  him,  our  love  endures  all  sorts  of  re 

buffs  for  his  sake. 

7.  Loving  him,  the  Father  loves  us.     John  xiv.  23. 

8.  Loving  him,  we  are  married  to  him.      Love  is 

the  sure  and  true  marriage-bond  whereby  the 

soul  is  united  to  Christ. 

Love  to  a  person  is  the  most  real  of  emotions. 
Love  to  a  person  is  the  most  influential  of  motives. 
Love  to  a  person  is,  in  this  case,  the  most  natural 

and  satisfying  of  affections. 

III.  THAT   OUR  SORROW  OUGHT  NOT  TO  PUT  OUR  LOVE    IN 

QUESTION. 

Yet,  in  the  case  of  the  disciples,  our  Lord  justly 

said,  "  If  y&  loved  me." 
He  might  sorrowfully  say  the  same  to 


LOVE'S  IMPORTANCE.  293 

1.  When  we  lament  inordinately  the  loss  of  creat 

ures. 

2.  When  we  repine   at  his  will,  because  of  our 

severe  afflictions. 

3.  When  we  mistrust  his  wisdom,  because  we  are 

sore  hampered  and  see  no  way  of  escape. 

4.  When  we  fear  to  die,  and  thus  display  an  un 

willingness  to  be  with  our  Lord.  Surely, 
if  we  loved  him,  we  should  rejoice  to  be 
with  him. 

5.  When  we  complain  concerning  those  who  have 

been  taken  from  us  to  be  with  him.  Ought 
we  not  to  rejoice  that  Jesus  in  them  sees  of 
the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  has  his  prayer 
answered,  "  Father,  I  will  that  they  also, 
whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me 
where  I  am  ?  "  John  xvii.  24. 

IV.    THAT   OUR   LOVE    SHOULD  MAKE   us   REJOICE   AT   OUR 

LORD'S  EXALTATION,  THOUGH  IT  LE  OUR  PERSONAL 
LOSS. 

1-  It  was  apparently  the  disciples'  loss  for  their 
Lord  to  go  to  the  Father;  and  we  may  think 
certain  dispensations  to  be  our  loss — 

When  we  are  tried  by  soul-desertion,  while 
Christ  is  magnified  in  our  esteem. 

When  we  are  afflicted,  and  he  is  glorified,  by 
our  sorrows. 

When  we  are  eclipsed,  and  in  the  result  the 
gospel  is  spread. 

When  we  are  deprived  of  privileges  for  the 
good  of  others. 


294  MY   SEEMON-KOTES. 

When  we  sink  lower  and  lower  in  our  own 
esteem,  but   the   kingdom   of  God   comes 
with  power. 
2.  It  was  greatly  to  our  Lord's  gain  to  go  to  his 

Father. 

Thus  he  left  the  field  of  suffering  for  ever. 
Thus  he  reassumed  the  glory  wnich  he  had 

laid  aside. 
Thus  he  received  the  glory  awarded  by  the 

Father. 
Thus  he  became  enthroned  for  his  church  and 

cause. 

It  will  be  well  for  us  to  look  more  to  our  love  than 
to  our  joy,  and  to  expect  our  joy  through  our  love. 

It  will  be  well  for  us  to  know  that  smallness  of 
love  may  dim  the  understanding,  and  that  growth 
in  it  may  make  us  both  wiser  and  happier. 

In  all  things  our  Lord  must  be  first.  Yes,  even  in 
those  most  spiritual  delights,  about  which  it  may 
seem  allowable  to  have  strong  personal  desires. 

STRIKING  PARAGRAPHS. 

Observe  that  Christ  does  not  say,  "  My  Father  was 
greater  than  I,"  in  reference  to  his  pre-existent  glory; 
nor,  "  My  father  ivill  be  greater  than  I,"  in  reference  to 
the  glory  which  he  was  to  resume  after  his  exaltation ; 
but  he  uses  a  style  of  expression  which  shows  that 
he  refers  to  the  present  time — to  the  time  of  his  hu 
miliation  in  the  flesh.  The  apostles  had  been  express 
ing  regret  at  the  announcement  of  his  immediate  de 
parture,  and  this  passage  contains  a  soft  rebuke  of 


LOVE'S  IMPOETANCE.  295 

the  selfishness  of  their  feelings.  "We  may  paraphrase 
it  thus :  "  If  ye  really  loved  me  on  my  own  account 
—if  the  regard  and  affection  you  profess  to  entertain 
were  purely  disinterested  in  its  nature — so  far  from 
evincing  sorrow  at  the  prospect  of  my  departure,  you 
would  rejoice  that  I  shall  leave  this  state  of  tempo 
rary  degradation ;  that  I  shall  cease  to  be  the  Man 
of  Sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief;  that  I  shall 
resume  that  original  and  essential  glory  which  I  en 
joyed  with  the  Father  from  eternity.  As  long  as  I 
continue  in  my  present  state  of  humiliation,  my  Fa 
ther  is  greater  in  glory  than  I ;  but  when  the  days 
of  my  flesh  shall  terminate,  I  shall  then  be  glorified 
with  the  Father's  own  self,  with  that  glory  which  I 
had  with  him  before  the  world  was  created"  This 
is  obviously  the  correct  paraphrase  of  the  passage ; 
no  other  interpretation  of  the  words,  "For  my  Fa 
ther  is  greater  than  I,"  could  justify,  or  attach  any 
force  to,  the  interesting  appeal  which  the  Saviour 
makes  to  the  love  and  affection  of  his  disciples. 

Dean  Bagot 

Dr.  John  Duncan,  having  heard  a  sermon  on  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  in  which  the  blessings  of  the  new 
covenant  were  compared  to  a  market,  in  which  a 
man  could  buy  everything  needed  for  eternal  life, 
met  his  friend  Dr.  Moody  Stuart,  at  the  close  of  the 
service,  and  said  to  him,  "  Dear  friend,  when  I  heard 
of  the  good  things  that  were  offered  in  the  market, 
I  said  to  myself,  I  will  marry  the  merchant,  and 
they  will  all  be  mine." — The  Christian. 

The  author  of  a  biographical  sketch  of  the  late 


296  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Rev.  W.  Robinson,  of  Cambridge,  says,  "  In  one  of 
my  last  conversations  with  him,  I  was  referring  to 
the  sadness  of  seeing  our  good  men  die;  and  he 
turned  to  me  with  the  well-known  blaze  in  his  eye, 
and  emphasis  of  his  voice,  saying,  '  I  think  it  glori 
ous.'" 

A  saint  cares  not  how  ill  it  goes  with  him  so  it 
goes  well  with  Jesus  Christ;  he  saith,  as  Mephibo- 
sheth  to  David,  "  Yea,  let  him  take  all,  forasmuch  as 
my  lord  the  king  is  corne  again  in  peace  unto  his 
own  house :  "  2  Sam.  xix.  30.  So  it  may  go  well  with 
God's  name,  Moses  cares  not  though  his  be  blotted 
out  of  the  book  of  life ;  and,  said  John  the  Baptist, 
"He  must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease;  this  my 
joy,  therefore,  is  fulfilled." — Ralph  Yenning. 


CLXXXI. 

"  AitiSE,  LET  us  GO  HENCE." — John  xiv.  31. 

WE  cannot  be  long  in  one  stay.  A  voice  ever 
sounds  in  our  ear,  "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence." 

Even  when  we  have  conversed  on  the  sweetest 
themes,  or  have  enjoyed  the  holiest  ordinances,  we 
have  not  yet  come  to  our  eternal  abode ;  still  are  we 
on  the  march,  and  the  trumpet  soundeth.  "  Arise, 
let  us  go  hence." 

Our  Lord  was  under  marching-orders,  and  he 
knew  it :  for  him  there  was  no  stay  upon  this  earth. 

Hear  how  he  calls  himself,  arid  all  his  own,  to 
move  on,  though  bloody  sweat,  and  bloody  death  be 
in  the  way. 

I.  OUR    MASTER'S    WATCHWORD.       "Arise,    let    us    go 
hence." 

By  this  stirring  word — 

1.  He  expressed   his  desire  to  obey   the   Father, 

"As  the  Father   gave   me   commandment, 

even  so  I  do.     Arise,  let  us  go  hence." 

He  was  not  hindered  by  expected  suffering. 

He  did  not  start  back,  though  in  that  suffering 

there  would  be  the  special  element  of  his 


Father's  forsaking  him. 


(297) 


298  MY   SEEMON-NOTES. 

He  did  not  hesitate,  though  death  was  in  near 
prospect. 

He  was  eager  to  do  the  will  of  the  Father, 
and  make  all  heaven  and  earth  know  how 
entirely  he  yielded  himself  to  the  Father. 

2.  He   indicated   his  readiness  to  meet  the  arch 

enemy.  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh. 
Arise,  let  us  go  hence." 

He  was  prepared  for  the  test.  He  ahath  noth 
ing  in  me." 

He  was  eager  to  overthrow  his  dominion. 

3.  He  revealed  his  practical  activity.    All  through 

the  chapter  observe  our  Lord's  energy.     He 

is  ever  on  the  move.     "  I  go.     I  will  come 

again.     I  will  do  it,     I  will  pray.     Arise, 

let  us  go  hence." 
He  prefers  action  to  the  most  sacred  rites,  and 

so  leaves  the  Supper-table  with  this  word  on 

his  lips. 
He  prefers  action  to  the  sweetest  converse. 

u  I  will  not  talk  much  with  you.     Arise,  let 

us  go  hence." 

4.  He  manifested  his  all-consuming  love  to  us. 

He  was  straitened  till  he  had  accomplished 
our  redemption. 

He  could  not  rest  in  the  company  of  his  best- 
beloved  till  their  ransom  was  paid. 

He  would  not  sit  at  God's  right  hand  till  he 
had  felt  the  shame  of  the  cross,  and  the  bit 
terness  of  death.  Heb.  xii.  2. 

II.  OUR  OWN  MOTTO.     "  Arise,  let  us  go  hence." 


A   WATCHWORD.  299 

Ever  onward,  ever  forward,  we  must  go.  Exodus 
xiv.  15 

1.  Out  of  the  world  when  first  called  by  grace. 

2  Cor.  vi.  17. 

How  clear  the  call !  How  prompt  should  be 
our  obedience  ! 

Jesus  is  without  the  camp,  we  go  fortli  unto 
Lira.  Heb.  xiii.  13. 

We  must  arouse  ourselves  to  make  the  sepa 
ration.  "Arise,  let  us  go  hence." 

2.  Out  of  forbidden  associations,  if,   as  believers, 

we     find   ourselves    like     Lot    in     Sodom. 
''Escape  for  thy  life:  "  Gen  xix.  17. 

3.  Out  of  present  attainments   when  growing  in 

grace.     Phil.  iii.  13,  11. 

4.  Out  of  all   rejoicing  in  self.     There  we   must 

never  stop  for  a  single  instant.     Self-satis 
faction  should  startle  us. 

5.  To  work,  anywhere  for  Jesus.     We  should  go 

away  from  Christian  company,  and   home 
comforts,  to  win  souls.     Mark  xvi.  15. 

6.  To  defend  the  faith  where  it  is  most  assailed. 

We  should  be  prepared  to  quit  our  quiet,  to 
contend  with  the  foe.     Jude  3. 

7.  To  suffer  when  the  Lord  lays  affliction  upon  us. 

2  Cor.  xii.  9. 

8.  To  die  when  the  voice  from  above  calls  us  home. 

2  Tim.  iv.  6. 

O  sinner,  where  would  you  go  if  suddenly  sum 
moned  ? 

0  saint,  what  better  could  happen  to  you  than  to 
arise  and  go  hence  ? 


300  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

TRUMPET  CALLS. 

It  was  well  said  once  by  a  remarkable  man,  and 
the  words  are  worth  remembering, — "Bear  in  mind 
that  you  are  just  then  beginning  to  go  wrong  when 
you  are  a  little  pleased  with  yourself  because  you 
are  going  right."  Let  us  watch  against  this  as  a 
snare  of  Satan,  and  endeavor  ever  to  maintain  the 
apostolic  attitude :  "  In  lowliness  of  mind  let  each 
esteem  other  better  than  himself."  And  let  me  cau 
tion  you  not  to  make  the  mistake  of  supposing  that 
this  self-complacency  can  be  effectually  guarded 
against  by  a  mere  use  of  the  recognized  theological 
expressions  duly  ascribing  all  the  merit  and  all  the 
praise  to  God.  These  are  too  often  merely  the  gar 
ments  of  spiritual  pride,  and  by  no  means  must  they 
be  mistaken  for  true  humility. —  W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken. 

I  heard  a  friend  of  mine,  not  long  ago,  relate  an 
incident,  which  I  will  venture  to  repeat,  as  well  as  I 
remember  it.  He  was  having  an  earnest  conversa 
tion,  upon  the  necessity  of  full  consecration,  with  a 
lady  who  professed  to  know  Christ  as  her  Saviour, 
but  shrank  from  yielding  herself  fully  to  him.  At 
last  she  said,  with  more  outspoken  honesty,  I  am 
afraid,  than  many  who  mean  exactly  the  same  thing 
display,  "  I  don't  want  to  give  myself  right  over  to 
Christ;  for,  if  I  were  to  do  so,  who  knows  what  he 
might  do  with  me  ?  For  aught  I  know,  he  might 
send  me  to  China."  Years  had  passed  away  when 
my  friend  received  a  most  deeply  interesting  letter 
from  this  very  lady,  telling  of  how  her  long  conflict 
with  God  had  come  to  an  end,  and  what  happiness 


A  WATCHWORD.  301 

and  peace  she  now  felt  in  the  complete  surrender  of 
herself  to  her  Lord;  and  referring  to  her  former 
conversation  she  said,  "  Arid  now  I  am  my  own  no 
longer,  I  have  made  myself  over  to  God,  without  re 
serve,  and  he  is  sending  me  to  China." 

W.  H.  M.  H.  Aitken. 

Pressed  on  all  sides  by  the  enemy,  the  Austrian 
General  Melas  sent  a  messenger  to  Suwarrow,  asking 
whither  he  should  "  retire."  Suwarrow  wrote  with 
a  pencil,  "Forward." 

That  pencil  wrote  a  word  immortal — a  word 
which,  in  the  memory  and  admiration  of  man 
kind,  shall  outlive  a  thousand  boastful  records  on 
stoned  marble — a  word  which  no  lapse  of  ages  can 
erase. 

The  zealous  are  impatient  of  any  hindrances.  As 
Edmund  Burke  said  to  the  electors  of  Bristol,  "Ap 
plaud  us  when  we  run  ;  console  us  when  we  fall ;  cheer 
us  when  we  recover;  but  let  us  pass  on — for  God's 
sake,  let  us  pass  on  !  " 

History  tells  us  that,  when  the  great  Roman 
Catholic  missionary — the  apostle  of  the  east — was 
lying  on  his  dying  bed,  among  the  barbarous  people 
whom  he  loved  so  well,  his  passing  spirit  was  busy 
about  his  work,  and  even  in  the  article  of  death, 
while  the  glazing  eye  saw  no  more  clearly,  and  the 
ashen  lips  had  begun  to  stiffen  into  eternal  silence, 
visions  of  further  conquests  flashed  before  him,  and 
his  last  word  was  "Amplins"  onward.  Brethren,  let 
this  be  our  motto,  and  our  cry.  "  Onward."  Until  the 
last  wandering  sheep,  far  out  upon  the  bleak  mount- 


302  31 Y   SEKMOK-JSTOTES. 

ain-side  hears  Christ's  voice,  and  is   gathered   into 
his  fold. — A.  II.  Bayncs. 

We  must  be  careful  not  to  get  out  of  the  sound  of 
the  Master's  voice.  It  is  for  us  to  watch  and  wait 
for  his  orders. 

When  adjutant  of  my  regiment  there  were  always 
orderlies  on  duty  at  the  orderly-room.  In  a  garrison 
town,  such  as  Dublin,  I  always  had  two.  Their 
place  was  just  outside  the  orderly-room  door,  within 
sound  of  my  voice.  They  were  watching  and  wait 
ing  for  orders;  they  took  letters,  messages,  etc. 
They  were  not  always  carrying  messages,  but  they 
could  not  go  away  without  my  leave,  and  it  was 
their  duty  to  be  always  ready.  They  were  doing 
their  duty  while  watching  and  waiting,  as  much  as 
when  actually  carrying  a  letter  or  message.  So  with 
the  servant  of  Christ — '4  Blessed  is  the  man  that  hear- 
eth  me,  watching  daily  .  .  .  waiting  at  the  posts 
of  my  doors." 

A  lady,  who  had  been  maid  of  honor  to  the 
Queen,  said  that  it  used  to  be  her  great  delight  to 
try  and  place  herself  near  the  Queen,  that  she  might 
have  the  opportunity  of  doing  any  little  service  for 
her  sovereign. — From  "Communion  and  Conflict^*  by 
Dawson. 


CLXXXIL 

"  HE  8AITH  UNTO  THE  JEWS.  BEHOLD  YOUR  KlNG." — John  xix.  14. 

PILATE  spake  far  more  than  he  understood,  and 
therefore  we  shall  not  confine  ourselves  to  his 
meaning. 

Everything  concerning  our  Lord  was  more  than 
ever  full  of  meaning  just  then;  the  saying  of  Caia- 
phas,  the  fleeing  of  the  disciples,  the  dividing  of  his 
garments,  the  soldier  piercing  his  side,  &c. 

It  was  to  the  Jews  that  Jesus  was  brought  forth, 
and  by  them  he  was  rejected;  yet  was  he  distinctly 
declared  to  be  their  King. 

The  same  is  repeated  at  this  day  among  those  fa 
vored  with  special  privileges;  but  whether  they  ac 
cept  him  or  not,  he  is  assuredly  in  some  sense  or 
other  their  King. 

To  the  summons  of  the  text  the  answer  was  mock 
ery. 

We  would  with  deepest  reverence  draw  near,  and 
behold  our  King. 

I.  BEHOLD  HIM  PREPARING  HIS  THRONE. 

1.  He  lays  the  foundation  of  it  in  his  suffering  na 

ture. 

2.  He  makes  it  a  throne  of  grace  by  his  atoning 

griefs, 

(303) 


304  MY    SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  He  prepares  access  to  it  through  his  ability  to 

have    compassion   on  those   who  come    to 
him,  by  partaking  in  all  their  sorrows. 

4.  He  canopies  and  glorifies  it  by   the  shame  to 

which  he  willingly  and  unreservedly  yields 
himself. 
Believe  in  the  perpetuity  of  a  throne  thus  founded. 

II.  BEHOLD  HIM  CLAIMING  OUR  HOMAGE. 
He  claims  and  wins  our  adoration — 

1.  By  the  right  of  supreme  love. 

2.  By  the  right  of  complete  purchase. 

3.  By  the  right  of  grateful  consecration,  which  we 

heartily  accord  to  him  under  a  sense  of  lov 
ing  gratitude. 
Glory  in  rendering  homage  thus  made  due. 

III.  BEHOLD  HIM  SUBDUING  HIS  DOMINIONS. 

1.  Jews  and  Gentiles  are  won  to  obedience  by  be 

holding  his  sufferings  for  them. 

2.  This  brings  in  his  own  elect  everywhere. 

3.  This   restores  backsliders.     They  look  to  him 

whom  they  have  wounded,  and  return  to 
their  allegiance. 

4.  This  holds  all  his  true  servants  captive:  they 

glory  in  yielding  their  all  to  him  who  was 
thus  put  to  shame  for  them. 

5.  This  subdues  all  things  unto  him.     By  his  cross 

and  passion  he  reigns  in  heaven,  earth,  and 
hell. 
Bow  low  before  the  sceptre  of  his  Cross. 


"BEHOLD  YOUR  KING!"  305 

IV.  BEHOLD   HIM    SETTING   FORTH   THE  PATTERN    OF    HIS 

KINGDOM. 

He  stands  there  the  Prophet  and  the  Type  of  his 
own  dominion. 

1.  It  is  no  earthly  kingdom :  the  difference  is  pal 

pable  to  all. 

2.  It  is  associated  with  shame  and  suffering,  both 

on  the  part  of  the  King  and  of  his  loyal  sub 
jects. 

3.  It  is  based  on  his  love  and  self-sacrifice :  this  is 

his  right  of  sovereignty,  this  his  force  of 
arms,  this  the  source  of  his  revenue. 

4.  It  is  made  resplendent  by  his  woes :  these  are 

the  insignia  and  ornaments  of  his  court ;  his 
glory  even  in  heaven. 
Glory  only  in  the  cross. 

V.  BEHOLD  HIM  PROVING  THE  CERTAINTY  OF  HIS  KINGDOM:. 

1.  Is  he  King  there  in  his  shame?     Then,  assured 

ly,  he  is  King  now  that  he  has  risen  from 
the  dead,  and  gone  into  the  glory. 

2.  Is  he  King  amid  shame  and  pain  ?     Then  he  is 

able  to  help  us  if  we  arc  in  like  case. 

3.  Is  he  King  while  paying  the  price  of  our  redemp 

tion  ?  Then,  certainly,  he  is  King  now  that 
it  is  paid,  and  he  has  become  the  author  of 
eternal  salvation. 

4   Is  he  King  at  Pilate's  bar  ?     Then,  truly,  he  will 
be  so  when  Pilate  stands  at  his  bar  to  be 
judged. 
20 


306  MY   SEKMON-lSrOTES. 

Come  hither,   saints,   and  pay  your   accustomed 
worship  I 

Come  hither,  sinners,  and  adore  for  the  first  time! 


GLIMPSES. 

It  is  far  worse  to  despise  a  Saviour  in  his  robes 
than  to  crucify  him  in  his  rags.  An  affront  is  more 
criminal  to  a  prince  upon  his  throne  than  when  he  is 
disguised  as  a  subject,  and  masked  in  the  clothes  of 
his  servant.  Christ  is  entered  into  glory  after  his 
sufferings;  all  who  are  his  enemies  must  enter  into 
misery  after  their  prosperity :  and  whosoever  will  not 
be  ruled  by  his  golden  sceptre  shall  be  crushed  by 
his  rod. — Stephen  CharnocL 

Did  Pilate  hope  to  melt  the  Jewish  heart  to  a  sort 
of  scornful  pity  ?  Did  he  think  that  they  would  turn 
away  from  so  wretched  an  object,  and  be  ashamed 
of  having  accused  him  of  treason  ?  Perhaps  so.  But 
he  failed.  The  sorrows  of  Jesus  do  not  of  themselves 
overcome  the  hate  of  man;  but  this  fact  proves  how 
desperately  hardened  his  heart  has  become. 

Given  the  Holy  Spirit,  there  is  nothing  more  like 
ly  to  win  men  to  Jesus  than  beholding  him  in  his 
sorrows.  Behold,  0  man,  and  see  what  thy  sin  has 
done,  what  thy  Redeemer  has  borne,  arid  what  he 
claims  of  thee !  Behold  him  not  as  another's,  but 
as  thine  !  Behold  him  not  only  as  thy  Friend,  thy 
Saviour,  but  thy  King !  Behold  him,  and  at  once 
fall  at  his  feet,  and  own  thyself  his  loving  subject! 

a  u.  s. 


"BEHOLD  YOUK  KING!"  307 

"  Behold  your  King." — This  is  neither  an  impossi 
ble  nor  a  delusive  command.  The  eye  that  looks 
away  up  to  Jesus  will  behold  him  now :  and  what 
shall  we  behold  ?  The  vision  is  all  of  beauty,  and 
glory,  and  coronation  now.  The  sorrow  and  the 
marred  visage  are  past ;  and  even  when  we  behold 
him  as  the  Lamb  of  God,  it  is  the  Lamb  "in  the 
midst  of  the  throne  "  now. 

O  daughters  of  Zion,  who  gaze  by  faith  upon  Jesus 
our  King,  what  do  you  see  ?  Oh  the  music  of  the 
answers ! — "  We  see  Jesus  crowned  with  glory  and 
honor!"  "Fairer  than  the  children  of  men." 
"  Beautiful  and  glorious ! "  "  How  great  is  his 
beauty!  "  "  His  countenance  is  as  Lebanon,  excel 
lent  as  the  cedars,"  and  uas  the  sun  shirieth  in  his 
strength ! "  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely  !  " 

Frances  Ridley  Havergcd. 


CLXXXIII. 

"  JE6U8     SATTH     UlfTO     HER,     WOMAN,     WHY     WEEPEST      THOU  T 

WHOM  SEEKEST  THOU  ?  " — John  xx.  15. 

WOMAN   has    had  many  reasons  for  weeping 
since  the  fall 

Jesus  went  to  his  death  amid  weeping  women,  and 
on  his  rising  he  met  a  little  company  of  them. 

The  first  words  of  a  risen  Saviour  are  to  a  weep 
ing  woman. 

He  who  was  born  of  woman  has  come  to  dry  up 
woman's  tears. 

Observe  the  wise  method  followed  by  the  divine 
Consoler. 

Magdalene  is  to  state  the  reason  of  her  weeping. 
"  Why  weepest  thou  ?  "  Often  sorrow  vanishes  when 
it  is  defined  It  is  wise  to  chase  away  mystery  and 
understand  the  real  cause  of  grief. 

He  helps  her  also  by  coming  nearer  to  her  grief  in 
the  second  question :  "  Whom  seekest  thou  ?  "  She 
was  seeking  him. 

He  was  himself  the  answer  to  his  own  inquiries. 

In  all  cases  Jesus  is  the  most  suitable  Comforter 
and  comfort. 

Let  us  put  this  question,  "  Why  weepest  thou  ?  " 
in  two  ways. 

(308) 


A   HANDKERCHIEF.  309 

I.  Is   IT   NATURAL   SORROW  ? 

1.  Art  thou  bereaved  ?     The  risen  Saviour  comforts 

thee;  for — 

He  assures  thee  of  the  resurrection  of  the  de 
parted. 

He  is  with  thee,  thy  living  Helper. 

He  sympathizes  with  thee,  for  he  once  lost  his 
friend  Lazarus;  yea,  he  himself  has  died. 

2.  Are    thy  beloved  ones  sick  ?     Sorrow  not  im 

patiently;  for — 

He  lives  to  hear  prayer  for  healing. 
He  waits  to  bless  them  if  they  are  dying. 

3.  Art  thou  thyself  sick  ?    Be  not  impatient;  for — 

Jesus  lives  to  moderate  thy  pains. 
Jesus  lives  to  sustain  thy  heart  under  suffering. 
Jesus  lives  to  give  life  to  thy  body,  as  he  has 
done  to  thy  soul. 

4.  Art  thou  poor  ?     Do  not  murmur,  for — 

He  lives,  and  is  rich. 

He  would  have  thee  find  thine  all  in  himself. 

He  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee. 

5.  Art  thou  of  a  sorrowful  spirit  ?     Do  not  des 

pond,  but — 

See  where  Ms  sorrows  have  brought  him. 
See  how  he  came  to  the  sorrowful,  and  how  he 

cometh  still. 
See  what  he  does  in  his  consoling  ministry, 

and  imitate  him  by  cheering  others.     Thus 

thou  shalt  thyself  be  comforted. 

II.  Is    IT    SPIRITUAL    SORROW? 


310  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

1.  Distinguish.     See    whether  it   be   good  or  ill. 

"  Why  weepest  thou  ?" 
Is  it  selfish  sorrow  ?     Be  ashamed  of  it. 
Is  it  rebellious  ?     Repent  of  it. 
Is  it  ignorant  ?     Learn  of  Jesus,  and  so  escape 

it. 
Is   it   hopeless  ?     Believe   in   God  and   hope 

ever. 
Is  it  gracious  ?     Then  thank  him  for  it. 

2.  Declare.     Tell  Jesus  all  about  it.     "  Why  weep 

est  thou  ?  " 

Is  it  sorrow  for  others  ?     lie  weeps  with  thee. 
Are  loved  ones  abiding  in  sin  ? 
Is  the  church  cold  and  dead  ? 
Is  it  the  sorrow  of  a  seeking  saint?     He  meets 

thee. 

Dost  thou  miss  his  presence  ? 
Hast  thou  grieved  his  Holy  Spirit? 
Canst  thou  not  attain  to  holiness  ? 
Canst  ihou  not  serve  him  as  much  as  thou  de- 

shv-fct  ? 

Do  thy  prayers  appear  to  fail  ? 
Does  thine  old  nature  rebel  ? 
Is   it   the   sorrow  of  one   in  doubt?     He  will 
strengthen  thee.    Come  to  Jesus  as  a  sinner. 
Is  it  the  sorrow  of  a  seeking  sinner?     He  will 

receive  thee. 

Dost  thou  weep  because  of  past  sin  ? 
Dost  thou  fear  because  of  thine  evil  nature? 
Art  thou  unable  to  understand  the  gospel  ? 
Dost   thou   weep   lest    thou   grow   hardened 
again  ? 


A  HANDKERCHIEF.  311 

Dost    thou  mourn   because   thou   canst   not 

mourn  ? 
He  is  before  thee :  believe  in  him,  and  weeping 

will  end. 
He  accepts  thee :  in  him  thou  hast  all  thou  art 

eeking  for. 

CONSOLATORY  THOUGHTS. 

A  Hindoo  woman  said  to  a  missionary,  u  Surely 
your  Bible  was  written  by  a  woman."  "Why?" 
"  Because  it  says  so  many  kind  things  for  women. 
Our  pundits  never  refer  to  us  but  in  reproach." 

"  Woman,  why  weepest  thou  ?  "  God  and  his  angels 
take  notice  of  every  tear  of  our  devotion.  The  sud 
den  wonder  hath  not  dried  her  eyes,  nor  charmed 
her  tongue :  she  freely  confesseth  the  cause  of  her 
grief  to  be  the  missing  of  her  Saviour:  "They  have 
taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I  know  not  where  they 
have  laid  him."  Alas  !  good  Mary,  how  dost  thou 
lose  thy  tears  ?  Of  whom  dost  thou  complain  but  of 
thy  best  Friend  ?  Who  hath  removed  thy  Lord  but 
himself?  WTho  but  his  own  Deity  hath  taken  away 
his  human  body  out  of  the  region  of  death  ?  Neither 
is  he  now  laid  any  more;  he  stands  by  thee,  whose 
removal  thou  complainest  of.  Thus  many  a  tender 
and  humble  soul  afflicts  itself  with  the  want  of  that 
Saviour  whom  it  hath,  and  feeleth  not. — Bishop  Hall. 

She  turns  away  from  the  angels,  like  a  Rachel 
who  will  not  be  comforted.  But  there  is  comfort  in 
store  for  her,  sorrow  as  she  may.  We  have  an  ex- 


312  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

ample  given  us  here  of  how  only  the  Lord  himself 
can  suffice  to  comfort  spirits  like  that  of  Mary  Mag 
dalene.  The  Lord  sees  the  heart,  and  none  shall 
weep  for  him  in  vain;  but  even  the  angels,  gra 
cious  though  their  sympathy  be,  must  leave  the 
task  of  comforting  the  deepest  sorrow  to  the  Lord. 

Rudolf  Slier. 

The  first  words  that  ever  Christ  spake  after  his 
resurrection  to  them  he  appeared  to,  were,  "  Woman, 
•why  weepest  thou  ? "  It  is  a  good  question  after 
Christ's  resurrection.  What  cause  of  weeping  re 
mains  now  that  Christ  is  risen  ?  Our  sins  are  for 
given,  because  he,  our  Plead  and  Surety,  hath  suf 
fered  death  for  us;  and  if  Christ  be  risen  again,  why 
weep  we?  If  we  be  broken-hearted,  humbled  sin 
ners,  that  have  interest  in  his  death  and  resurrection, 
we  have  no  cause  to  grieve. — Richard  Sibbes. 

"  Good  men  weep  easily,"  says  the  Greek  poet; 
and  the  better  any  are,  the  more  inclined  to  weep 
ing,  especially  under  affliction.  As  you  may  see  in 
David,  whose  tears,  instead  of  gems,  were  the  orna 
ments  of  his  bed;  in  Jonathan,  Job,  Ezra,  Daniel, 
etc.  "  How,"  says  one,  "  shall  God  wipe  away  my 
tears  in  heaven  if  I  shed  none  on  earth  ?  And  how 
shall  I  reap  in  joy  if  I  sow  not  in  tears  ?  I  was  born 
with  tears,  and  I  shall  die  with  tears ;  and  why  then 
should  I  live  without  them  in  this  valley  of  tears  ?  " 

Thomas  Brooks. 

Be  not  troubled,  my  soul.  God  has  for  thee  some 
thing  better  than  thy  imaginings.  It  is  with  thee 


A  HANDKERCHIEF.  313 

as  with  the  women  of  Galilee.  They  sought  only  a 
dead  form,  and  they  found  a  living  Lord.  Thou 
also  hast  been  too  eager  for  the  earthly  form  of  thy 
hope's  fulfilment.  Has  he  promised  that  all  things 
shall  work  together  for  thy  good,  and  yet  denied 
thee  the  comforts  of  the  world  ?  What  then  ?  Is  his 
promise  void  ?  May  it  not  be  that  thou  hast  found 
thy  promise  in  the  very  region  where  it  seems  to 
have  failed  thee,  in  the  privations  and  sorrows  of 
life  ?  What  matter  though  thou  hast  lost  the  form, 
if  thou  hast  found  the  sepulchre  vacant?  The  loss 
is  a  gain,  and  the  vacancy  is  fulness  of  joy.  There 
are  losses  which  mean  nothing  less  than  resurrec 
tion.  I  rise  more  by  the  discovery  of  my  wants 
than  by  the  discovery  of  my  possessions  O 

fragrance  of  the  broken  ointment  box  !  0  light  of 
resurrection  !  reached  from  human  emptiness,  I  am 
enriched  by  the  gain  of  thee. — Dr.  George  MatJiesoii. 


CLXXXIY. 

"  JESUS  SAITH  UNTO  HER,  TOUCH  ME  NOT  ;  FOR  I  AM  NOT  YET 
ASCENDED  TO  MY  FATHER:  BUT  GO  TO  MY  BRETHREN,  AND 
SAY  UNTO  THEM,  I  ASCEND  UNTO  MY  FATHER,  AND  YOUR 

FATHER;  AND  TO  MY  GOD,  AND  YOUR  GOD." — John  xx.  17. 

THE  lesson  is  to  a  soul  brought  into  the  con 
scious  presence  of  the  Lord. 

Oh,  to  be  in  that  condition  ! 

Mary  Magdalene  had  wept  because  of  her  Lord's 
absence,  and  longed  to  find  him ;  and  now  she  has 
her  desire :  he  stands  before  her. 

Oh,  that  we  knew  where  we  might  find  him !  Job 
xxiii.  3. 

Her  conduct  in  holding  him  by  the  feet  was  natu 
ral,  and  it  yet  was  forbidden  by  a  higher  wisdom 
than  that  of  mortal  men. 

I.  THE  CAUTION.      "  Touch  me  not." 

1.  We  may  blunder  even  in  our  closest  fellowship, 

and  may  need  a  prohibition.  We  have 
never  greater  need  of  caution  than  in  our 
nearest  approaches  to  God.  Courtiers  must 
be  most  careful  in  the  throne-roorn. 

2.  We  may  carnalize  the  spiritual. 

This  has  ever  been  a  tendency  with  even  the 
best  of  the  saints ;  and  it  has  misled  many  in 
(314) 


NOLI  ME  TANGEKE.  315 

whom  affection  has  been  stronger  than  in 
tellect. 

3.  We  may  seek  most  passionately  what  is  by  no 

means  essential. 
The  assurance  of  sense,  by  touch  or  otherwise : 

when  the  assurance  of  faith  is  far  better, 

and  quite  sufficient. 
The  detaining  of  one  who  has  no  intention  of 

going. 

4.  We  may  crave  what  were  better  further  on. 

When  we  are  raised  to  eternal  glory  we  shall 
be  able  to  enjoy  what  now  we  must  not  ask. 

5.  We  may  be  selfish  in  our  enjoyments. 

Staying  to  contemplate  alone  by  ourselves, 
when  we  ought  rather  to  bless  others  by 
publishing  the  blessed  news.  2  Kings  vii.  9. 

II.  THE  MISSION.     "  Go  to  my  brethren." 

She  would  have  preferred  to  stay,  but  Jesus  bids 
her  go. 

1.  This  was  better  for  her.     Contemplation  alone 

may  degenerate  into  the  sentimental,  the 
sensuous,  the  impracticable. 

2.  This  was  better  for  them.     They  heard  the  best 

of  news  from  the  most  trustworthy  of  in 
formants. 

3.  This  was  unquestioningly  done  by  this   holy 

woman.     What  she  had  seen  she  declared. 
What  she  had  heard  she  told. 
Women  are  said  to  be  communicative ;  and  so 
there  was  wisdom  in  the  choice. 


316  MY   SERMON -NOTES. 

Women  are  affectionate,  and  so  persuasive; 
and  therefore  fit  to  bear  such  a  tender  mes 
sage  as  we  have  now  to  consider. 

III.  THE  TITLE.     "  My  brethren." 

Our  Lord,  of  design,  chose  this  title  to  comfort  his 
sorrowing  ones.  They  had  so  acted  as  almost  to 
cease  to  be  his  followers,  disciples,  or  friends:  but 
brotherhood  is  an  abiding  relationship.  They  were — 

1.  His  brethren,  though  he  was  about  to  ascend 

to  his  throne. 
He  was  still  a  man,  though  no  more  to  suffer 

and  die. 

He  still  represented  them  as  their  risen  Head. 
He  was  still  one  with  them  in  all  his  objects 

arid  prospects. 

2.  His  brethren,  though  they  had  forsaken  him  in 

his  shame. 
Relationship  abiding,  for  brotherhood  cannot 

be  broken. 
Relationship  owned  more    than   ever;    since 

their  sense  of  guilt  made  them  afraid.     Pie 

was  a  true  Joseph  to  them.     Gen.  xlv.  4. 
Relationship  dwelt  upon,  that  they  might  be 

reassured. 

Never  let  us  omit  the  tender  sweetnesses  of  the 
gospel,  its  courtesies,  benedictions,  and  love-words, 
such  as  the  "  My  brethren  "  of  the  text  before  us.  If 
we  leave  out  these  precious  words  we  shall  mar  the 
Master's  message  of  grace. 


NOLI   ME   TANGEEE.  317 

IV.  THE  TIDINGS.     "  I   ascend   unto  my  Father,  and 

your  Father." 

This  message  was  meant  to  arouse  and  comfort 
them. 

1.  By  the  news  of  his  departure  they  are  to  be 

aroused. 

2.  By  the  news  of  his  ascension  they  are  to  be  con 

firmed. 

3.  By  his  ascension  to  the  common  Father  they 

are  to  be  comforted  with  the  prospect  of 
coming  there  themselves.  He  is  not  going 
into  an  unknown  country,  but  to  his  home 
and  theirs.  John  xiv.  2. 

4.  By  his  ascent  to  God  they  are  to  be  struck  with 

Bolernn  awe,  and  brought  the  more  reverent 
ly  to  look  for  his  presence  among  them. 

See  how  practical  our  Lord  is,  and  how  much 
he  values  the  usefulness  of  his  servants. 

Have  we  not  somewhat  to  tell  ? 

Whether  man  or  woman,  tell  the  Lord's  breth 
ren  what  the  Lord  hath  told  to  thee. 


TOUCHES. 

It  is  this  that  men  will  labor  after,  and  have  la 
bored  for,  even  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,— 
to  be  too  much  addicted  to  the  things  of  sight  and 
sense.  They  will  worship  Christ,  but  they  must  have 
a  picture  before  them.  They  will  adore  Christ,  but 
they  must  bring  his  body  clown  to  a  piece  of  bread. 
They  must  have  a  presence,  and  so,  instead  of  raising 


318  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

their  hearts  to  God  and  Christ  in  a  heavenly  manner, 
they  pull  down  God  and  Christ  to  them.  This  the 
pride  and  base  earthliness  of  man  will  do.  And  there 
fore  saith  Christ,  "Touch  me  not"  in  that  manner;  it 
is  not  with  me  now  as  it  was  before.  We  must  take 
heed  of  mean  and  base  conceits  of  Christ.  What  saith 
Paul  in  2  Cor.  v.  16?  "Henceforth  know  we  no 
man  after  the  flesh:  yea,  though  we  have  known 
Christ  after  the  flesh,  yet  now  henceforth  know  we 
him  no  more."  Christ  after  the  flesh  was  of  such  a 
tribe  and  of  such  a  stature,  and  had  such  gifts  and 
qualities.  What  is  that  to  me  ?  Christ  is  now  Lord 
of  lords  and  King  of  kings.  He  is  glorious  in  heav 
en,  and  so  I  conceive  of  him. — JRicJiard  Sibils. 

"  Touch  me  not." — By  which  we  are  to  understand, 
not  that  the  Lord  would  have  objected  to  this  token 
of  her  affection,  for  we  find  that  soon  after  the  Lord 
made  Thomas  put  his  hand  into  his  side  (verse  25); 
but  this  was  not  the  moment  for  Mary  to  be  so  em 
ployed.  The  Lord  had  a  message  to  send  by  her  to 
his  disciples.  It  was  time  that  they,  as  well  as  her 
self,  should  receive  the  joyful  tidings  of  his  resurrec 
tion  ;  therefore  he  would  first  send  her  to  them. 

Dr.  Hawker. 

To  whom  then  dost  thou  send  her  ?  "  Go  to  my 
brethren"  Blessed  Jesu !  who  are  these  ?  Were  they 
not  thy  followers?  Yea,  were  they  not  thy  for- 
sakers  ?  Yet  still  thou  stylest  them  thy  brethren. 
O  admirable  humanity  I  0  infinite  mercy  !  How  clost 
thou  raise  their  titles  with  thyself?  At  first  they 


NOLI   ME   TANGEBE.  319 

were  thy  servants,  and  then  thy  disciples;  a  little 
before  thy  death  they  were  thy  friends;  now,  after 
thy  resurrection,  they  were  thy  brethren.  Thou  that 
wert  exalted  infinitely  higher  from  mortal  to  immor 
tal,  descendest  so  much  lower  to  call  them  brethren 
who  were  before  friends,  disciples,  servants. 

Bishop  Hall 

While  the  going  up  of  Elias  may  be  compared  to 
the  flight  of  a  bird  which  none  can  follow,  the  ascen 
sion  of  Christ  is,  as  it  were,  a  bridge  between  heaven 
and  earth,  laid  down  for  all  who  are  drawn  to  him 
by  his  earthly  existence. — Uaitmqarten. 


CLXXXV. 

11  THEN  SAITH  HE  TO  THOMAS,  REACH  HITHER  THY  FINGER,  AM> 

BEHOLD  MY  HANDS;  AND  REACH  HITHER  THY  HAND,  AND 
THRUST  IT  INTO  MY  SIDE :  AND  BE  NOT  FAITHLESS,  BUT  BELIEV 
ING." — John  xx.  27. 

HOW  struck  must  Thomas  have  been  when  his 
Lord  addressed  to  him  the  very  words  which 
he  had  himself  usea  !  (See  verse  25.)  Jesus  knows 
how  to  send  the  word  home  to  us. 

In  the  church  of  to-day  we  have  many  a  Thomas, 
— slow,  suspicious,  critical,  full  of  doubts,  yet  true- 
hearted. 

Thomas  set  his  Lord  a  test,  and  thus  tried  his  pa 
tience. 

The  Lord  accepted  the  test,  and  so  proved  his  con 
descension. 

The  proof  sufficed  for  Thomas,  and  thus  showed 
the  Lord's  wisdom. 

Peradventure,  certain  among  us  would  desire  tests 
of  some  such  sort, 

To  those  we  would  earnestly  say, — 

I.  CRAVE  NO  SIGN. 

After  the  full  proofs  which    Christ  gave  to    his 
apostles,  we  need  no  more,  and  to  look  for  further 
signs  and  evidences  would  be  wrong.     Yet  some  are 
(320) 


SIGNS  AND  EVIDENCES.  321 

demanding  miracles,  faith-healings,  visions,  voices, 
impressions,  transports,  depressions,  etc. 

1.  It  is  dishonoring  to  your  Lord. 

2.  It   is  unreasonable,  when  the  truth  bears  its 

own  evidence. 

3.  It  is  presumptuous.     How   dare  we  stipulate 

for  proof  more  than  sufficient,  or  demand 
evidence  of  a  sort  which  pleases  our  preju 
dices  ! 

<L  It  is  damaging  to  ourselves.  Faith  must  be 
weak  while  we  demand  for  it  such  proofs; 
and  in  this  weakness  lies  incalculable  mis 
chief. 

5.  It  is  dangerous.  We  may  readily  be  driven 
either  into  infidelity  or  susperstition,  if  we 
give  way  to  this  craving  for  signs. 

Picture  what  Thomas  could  and  would  have  be 
come  under  the  influence  of  his  unbelief,  had  not  his 
Lord  interposed. 

II.  YET  TURN  TO  CHRIST'S   WOUNDS.     Let   these   stand 
to  you  instead  of  signs  and  wonders. 

Behold  in  these  wounds — 

1.  The  seals  of  his  death.     He  did  actually  and 

truly  die.  How  could  he  outlive  that  wound 
in  his  side  ? 

2.  The    identification   of  his   person   as   actually 

risen. 

3.  The   tokens   of  his  love.     He   has   graven  us 

upon  the  palms  of  his  hands. 
21 


822  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

4  The  ensigns  of  his  conflict,  of  which  he  is  not 
ashamed,  for  he  displays  them. 

5.  The  memorials  of  his  passion,  by  which  he  is 
manifested  in  glory  as  the  Lamb  that  was 
slain.  Rev.  v.  6. 

This   should  more  than  suffice  you  ;  but  should 
doubt  still  linger — 

III.    USE   SUCH    EVIDENCES   AS   YOU   POSSESS. 

1.  The   sacred  narrative  of  our   Lord's   life  and 

death,  if  carefully  studied  exhibits  a  sin 
gular  self- evidencing  power. 

2.  'I lie  regenerating  and  purifying  result  of  faith 

in  the  great  Lord  is  a  further  piece  of  evi 
dence.  -'By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
them : "  Matt.  vii.  20. 

3.  The  solace  which  faith  yields  in  sorrow  is  good 

proof. 

4.  The  strength  it  gives  in  the  hour  of  temptation 

is  further  help. 

5.  The  ardor  of  mind  and  elevation  of  aim,  which 

faith  in  Jesus  creates,  are  other  experimen 
tal  arguments. 

6.  The  visitations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  quicken 

ing  the  heart,  reviving  the  spirit,  and  guid 
ing  the  mind,  art  additional  proofs.  Thus 
the  Holy  Ghost  bears  witness  to  our  Lord. 

7.  The  actual  enjoyment  of  fellowship  with  the 

Lord  Jesus  himself  is  the  master-key  of  the 
whole  controversy.  "  We  have  known  and 
believed : "  1  John  iv.  16. 


SIGNS  AND   EVIDENCES.  328 

Does  this  seem  an  idle  tale  to  you  ? 
Should  you  not  see  cause  for  fear  if  it  be  so  ? 
Seek  now  to  view  those  wounds  believingly,  that 
you  may  live. 

NOTES. 

For  all  thy  rankling  doubts  so  sore, 

Love  thou  thy  Saviour  still ; 
Him  for  thy  Lord  and  God  adore, 

And  ever  ao  his  will. 

Though  vexing  thoughts  may  seem  to  last, 
Let  not  thy  soul  be  quite  o'ercast ; 
Soon  will  he  show  thee  all  his  wounds,  and  say, 
"  Long  have  I  known  thy  name — know  thou  my  ^aoe  alway.' 

Keble. 

We  learn  here  how  prone  we  are  to  establish  im 
proper  criteria  of  truth.  How  often  do  we  judge  of 
things  exclusively  by  our  experience,  our  reason, 
our  senses !  But  what  can  be  more  foolish  than 
this  ?  To  how  small  a  distance  do  these  powers  ex 
tend?  How  many  things  are  certainly  true,  the 
truth  of  which  falls  not  within  the  compass  of 
either  !  How  many  things  can  a  man  relate,  which 
appear  impossible  to  a  child  !  Tell  the  inhabitant 
of  the  sultry  climes,  that,  at  a  certain  season  of  the 
year,  water,  which  he  has  only  seen  in  a  fluid  state, 
becomes  solid  and  hard  enough  to  walk  upon — and 
it  will  seem  to  him  an  idle  tale :  he  has  witnessed  no 
such  thing,  and  reasoning  from  what  he  knows, 
deems  it  incredible.  If  Thomas  had  constantly 
judged  according  to  the  rule  he  professed,  how  little 
could  he  have  believed  at  all  1  .  To  believe 


324  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

no  more  than  we  can  comprehend,  or  reduce  to 
some  of  our  modes  of  knowledge,  is  not  to  honor  the 
authority  of  God  at  all ;  yea,  it  is  a  reflection  upon 
his  wisdom,  and  upon  his  veracity:  upon  his  wisdom 
— as  if  he  could  tell  us  no  more  than  we  know;  and 
upon  his  veracity — as  if  he  were  not  to  be  trusted  if 
he  could. —  William  Jay. 

Skilful  swimmers  are  not  afraid  to  go  above  their 
depth,  whereas  young  learners  feel  for  the  ground, 
and  are  loth  to  go  far  from  the  bank-side. 
Strong  faith  fears  not  when  God  carries  the  creature 
beyond  the  depths  of  his  reason.  "We  know  not 
what  to  do,"  said  good  Jehoshaphat,  "  but  our  eyes 
are  uponthee  :"  2  Chron.  xx.  As  if  he  had  said,  "  We 
are  in  a  sea  of  trouble  beyond  our  own  help,  or  any 
thought  how  we  can  wind  out  of  these  straits,  but 
our  eyes  are  upon  tlice.  We  dare  not  give  up  our 
case  for  desperate  so  long  as  there  is  strength  in 
thine  arm,  tenderness  in  thy  bowels,  and  truth  in 
thy  promise."  Whereas  weak  faith,  that  is  groping 
for  some  footing  for  reason  to  stand  on,  is  taken  up 
with  how  to  reconcile  the  promise  to  the  creature's 
understanding. —  William  Gurnatt. 


CLXXXVI. 

**  JESU8  8AITH  UNTO  HIM,  THOMAS,  BECAUSE  THOU  HAST  SEEN 
ME,  THOU  HAST  BELIEVED:  BLESSED  ARE  THEY  THAT  HAVE 
NOT  SEEN,  AND  YET  HAVE  BELIEVED." — John  XX.  29. 

r  |  ''HOSE  who  saw  and  believed  not,  were  far  from 
-*•  being  blessed. 

Those  who  saw  him  and  believed,  were  undoubt 
edly  blessed. 

Those  who  have  not  seen,  and  yet  have  believed. 
are  emphatically  blessed. 

There  remains  the  superlative  degree  of  blessed 
ness  in  seeing  Jesus  face  to  face  without  need  of  be 
lieving  in  the  same  sense  as  now. 

But  for  the  present  this  is  our  blessedness,  this  is 
our  place  in  the  gospel  history, — we  have  riot  seen, 
and  yet  have  believed.  What  a  comfort  that  so 
high  a  degree  of  blessedness  is  open  to  us ! 

I.    Do    NOT    LET    US    DIMINISH    THIS    BLESSEDNESS. 

1.  Let  us  not  diminish  it  by  wishing  to  see. 

By  pining  for  some  imaginary  voice,   or  vis 
ion,  or  revelation. 

By  craving  marvellous  providences,  and  sin 
gular  dispensations. 

By  hungering  for  despairs  or  transports. 

(325) 


326  MY  SEEMON-:NTOTES. 

By  perpetually  demanding  arguments,  and 
logical  demonstrations. 

By  clamoring  for  conspicuous  success  in  con 
nection  with  the  preaching  of  the  word 
and  the  missionary  operations  of  the  church. 

By  being  anxious  to  believe  with  the  majority. 
Truth  has  usually  been  with  the  minority. 
2.   Let  us  not  diminish  it  by  failing  to  believe. 

Believe  practically,  so  as  to  act  upon  our  faith. 

Believe  intensely,  so  as  to  laugh  at  contradic 
tions. 

Believe  livingly,  so  as  to  be  simple  as  a  child. 

Believe  continually,  so  as  to  be  evenly  confi 
dent. 

Believe  personally,  so  as  to  be  assured  alone, 
even  if  all  others  give  the  lie  to  the  doc 
trines  of  the  Lord. 

Believe  thoroughly,  so  as  to  find  the  rest  of 
faith. 

II.    Do   NOT    LET    US     THINK     THIS     BLESSEDNESS     UNATTAIN 
ABLE. 

1.  This  blessedness  is  linked  forever  with  the  faith 

which  our  Lord  accepts  :  in  fact,  it  is  the 
appointed  reward  of  it. 

2.  God  deserves  such  faith  of  us.     He  is  so  true 

that  his  unsupported  word  is  quite  enough 
for  faith  to  build  upon.  Can  we  only  be 
lieve  him  as  far  as  we  can  see  him  ? 

3.  Thousands  of  saints  have  rendered,  and  are  ren 

dering,  such  faith,  and  are  enjoying  such 
blessedness  at  this  moment.  We  are  bound 


FAITH  WITHOUT  SIGHT.  327 

to  have  fellowship  with  them  in  like  pre 
cious  faith. 

4.  Hitherto   our  own  experience   has   warranted 

such  faith.     Has  it  not  ? 

5.  Those  of  us  who  are  now  enjoying  the  blessed 

peace  of  faith  can  speak  with  great  confi 
dence  upon  the  matter. 

Why,  then,  are  so  many  cast  down  ?     Why   will 
they  not  believe  ? 

III.    Do    NOT    LET   ANY    OF   US   MISS    IT. 

The  faith  which  our  Lord  described  is  exceedingly 
precious,  and  we  ought  to  seek  after  it,  for — 

1.  It  is  the  only  true  and  saving  faith.    Faith  which 

demands  sight  is  not  faith  at  all,  and  can- 
not  save  the  soul. 

2.  It  is  in  itself  most  acceptable  with  God.     No 

thing  is  acceptable  without  it  (Heb.  xi.  6). 
It  is  the  evidence  of  the  acceptance  of  the 
man  and  his  works. 

3.  It  is  a  proof  of  grace  within :  of  a  spiritual  mind, 

a  renewed  nature,  a  reconciled  heart,  a  new 
born  spirit, 

4.  It  is  the  root-principle  of  a  glorious  character. 

5.  It  is  exceedingly  useful  toothers:  in  comforting 

the  despondent,  in  impressing  unbelievers, 
in  cheering  seekers,  etc. 

6.  It  enriches  its  possessor  to  the  utmost,  giving 

power  in  prayer,  strength  of  mind,  decision 
of  character,  firmness  under  temptation, 


338  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

boldness  in  enterprise,  joy  of  soul,  realiza 
tion  of  heaven,  etc. 

Know  you  this  faith  ? 

Blessedness  lies  that  way.     Seek  it ! 

CONTRIBUTIONS. 

But  why  specially  blessed?  Because  the  Holy 
Spirit  hath  wrought  this  faith  in  their  hearts.  They 
are  blessed  in  having  a  believing  heart;  they  are 
blessed  in  the  instrument  of  their  belief;  blessed  in 
having  an  evidence  that  they  are  passed  from  death 
unto  life:  "whom,  having  not  seen,  ye  love."  It  is 
more  blessed  to  believe  than  to  see,  because  it  puts 
more  honor  upon  God's  word.  It  is  more  blessed,  be 
cause  it  presents  us  with  a  more  invariable  object. 
He  that  can  trust  an  unseen  Saviour  may  trust  him 
in  all  circumstances:  shut  him  up  in  a  dungeon,  se 
parate  from  all  sight  and  light,  it  matters  not ;  for  he 
has  always  a  heart  to  believe  unto  righteousness,  and 
his  soul  rests  upon  a  rock  that  shall  never  be  moved. 
The  same  faith  that  takes  hold  of  an  unseen,  risen 
Saviour,  takes  hold  of  every  other  truth  in  the  gospel. 
— Richard  Cecil. 

"  With  men,"  says  Bishop  Hall,  "  it  is  a  good  rule 
to  try  first,  and  then  to  trust;  with  God  it  is  contrary. 
I  will  first  trust  him,  as  most  wise,  omnipotent, 
merciful,  and  try  him  afterwards." 

By  constant  sight,  the  effect  of  objects  seen  grows 
less ;  by  constant  faith,  the  effect  of  objects  believed 
in  grows  greater.  The  probable  reason  of  this  is  that 


FAITH   WITHOUT   SIGHT.  329 

personal  observation  does  not  admit  of  the  influence 
of  the  imagination  in  impressing  the  fact ;  while  un- 
eeen  objects,  realized  by  faith,  have  the  auxiliary  aid 
of  the  imagination,  not  to  exaggerate  them,  but  to 
clothe  them  with  living  colors,  and  impress  them 
upon  the  heart.  Whether  this  be  the  reason  or  not, 
the  fact  is  true  that,  the  more  frequently  we  see, 
the  less  we  feel  the  power  of  an  object;  while  the 
more  frequently  we  dwell  upon  an  object  by  faith, 
the  more  we  feel  its  power. — J.  B.  Walker. 

Faith  makes  invisible  things  visible,  absent  things 
present,  things  that  are  very  far  off  to  be  very  near 
unto  the  soul. — Thomas  Brooks. 

The  region  of  unbelief  is  black  with  God's  frown, 
and  filled  with  plagues  and  wrath;  but  the  region  of 
faith  is  as  the  floor  of  heaven  for  brightness.  Christ's 
righteousness  shelters  it,  the  graces  of  the  Spirit 
beautify  it,  and  the  eternal  smile  of  God  comforts  and 
glorifies  it. — Dr.  Hoge. 

It  would  grieve  an  indulgent  father  to  see  his  own 
child  come  into  court,  and  there  bear  witness  against 
him  and  charge  him  of  some  untruth  in  his  words, 
more  than  if  a  stranger  should  do  it;  because  the 
testimony  of  a  child,  though,  when  it  is  for  the  vin 
dication  of  a  parent,  it  may  lose  some  credit  in  the 
opinion  of  those  that  hear  it,  upon  the  suspicion  of 
partiality,  yet,  when  against  a  parent,  it  seems  to  car 
ry  some  more  probability  of  truth  than  what  another 
that  is  a  stranger  says  against  him ;  because  the  band 
of  natural  affection  with  which  the  child  is  bound  to 


330  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

his  parent  is  so  sacred  that  it  will  not  be  easily  sus 
pected.  He  cannot  be  supposed  to  offer  violence  to 
it,  except  upon  the  more  inviolable  necessity  of  bear 
ing  witness  to  the  truth. 

O  think  of  this,  Christian,  again  and  again — by 
thy  unbelief  thou  bearest  false  witness  against  God  ! 
And  if  thou,  a  child  of  God,  speakest  no  better  of  thy 
heavenly  Father,  and  presentest  him  with  no  fairer 
character  to  the  world,  it  will  be  no  wonder  if  it  be 
confirmed  in  its  hard  thoughts  of  God,  even  to  final 
impenitency  and  unbelief,  when  it  shall  see  how  lit 
tle  credit  he  finds  with  thee,  for  all  thy  great  profes 
sion  of  love  towards  him  and  near  relationship  to 
him. —  William  GurnaU. 


CLXXXVIL 

"WHOM  GOD  HATH  RAISED  UP,  HAVING  LOOSED  THE  PAINS  OF 
DEATH:  BECAUSE  IT  WAS  NOT  POSSIBLE  THAT  HE  SHOULD  BE 

HOLDEN  OF   IT." — Act8  ii.  24. 

OUR  Lord  felt  the  pains  of  death  truly  and  really. 
His  body  was  in  very  deed  dead,  yet  there  was 
no  corruption. 

It  was  not  needful;  it  could  have  borne  no  re 
lation  to  our  redemption. 
It  would  not  have  been  seemly. 
It  was  not  demanded  by  the  law  of  nature; 
for   he  was  sinless,  and   sin   is  the    worm 
which  causes  corruption. 

But  from  the  pains  of  death  his  body  was  loosed 
by  resurrection. 

I.    IT     WAS     IfOT     POSSIBLE     THAT     Till]      BANDS      OF     DEATH 
SHOULD   HOLD    OUR    LORD. 

He   derived   his   superiority  to  the   bondage    of 
death- 

1.  .From  the  command  of  the  Father  that  he  should 

have  power  to  take  his  life  again:  John  x. 
18. 

2.  From  the  dignity  of  his  human  person. 

As  in  union  with  Godhead. 
As  being  in  itself  absolutely  perfect. 

(331) 


332  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  From  the  completion  of  his  propitiation. 

The  debt  was  discharged:  he  must  be  freed. 

4.  From  the  plan  and  purpose  of  grace  which  in 

volved  the  life  of  the  Head  as  well  as  that 
of  the  members.  John  xiv.  19. 

5.  From  the  perpetuity  of  his  offices. 

"  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchize- 
dec:"  Heb.  vi.  20.  King— "  Thy  throne,  0 
God,  is  for  ever  and  ever :  "  Ps.  xlv.  6.  Shep 
herd — "brought  again  from  the  dead; "  Heb. 
xiii.  20. 

6.  From  the  nature  of  things,  since  without  it  we 

should  have — 
No  assurance  of  our  resurrection.     1  Cor.  xv. 

17. 

No  certainty  of  justification.     Rom.  iv.  25. 
No  representative  possession  of  heaven.     Heb. 

ix.  24. 
No  crowning  of  man  with  glory  and  honor, 

and  exaltation  of  him  over  the  works  of 

God's  hands. 

II.    IT    IS     NOT     POSSIBLE   THAT   ANY   OTHER   BANDS     SHOULD 
HOLD    HIS    KINGDOM. 

1.  The  firm  establishment  of  error  shall  not  pre 

vent  the  victory  of  truth.  The  colossal 
systems  of  Greek  philosophy  and  Roman 
priestcraft  have  passed  away ;  and  so  shall 
other  evil  powers. 

2.  The  scholarship  of  his  foes  shall  not  resist  his 

wisdom.     He  baffled  the  wise  in  his  life  on 


BOKDS   WHICH   COULD  NOT  HOLD.  333 

earth ;  much  more  will  he  do  it  by  his  Holy 
Spirit.  1  Cor.  i.  20. 

3.  The  ignorance  of  mankind  shall  not  darken  his 

light.  'The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached 
to  them :  "  Matt.  xi.  5.  Degraded  races 
receive  the  truth.  Matt.  iv.  16. 

4.  The  power,  wealth,   fashion,   and  prestige  of 

falsehood  shall  not  crush  his  kingdom. 
Acts  iv.  26. 

5.  The  evil  influence  of  the  world  upon  the  church 

shall  not  quench  the  divine  flame.  John 
xvi.  33. 

6.  The  rampant  power  of  unbelief  shall  not  destroy 

his  dominion.  Though  at  this  hour  it  seems 
to  bind  the  church  in  the  bands  of  death, 
those  fetters  shall  melt  away.  Matt.  xvi.  18. 

III.    IT     IS    NOT    POSSIBLE    TO    HOLD    IN    BONDAGE     ANYTHING 
THAT    IS    HIS. 

1.  The  poor  struggling  sinner   shall  escape  the 

bonds  of  his  guilt,  his  depravity,  his  doubts, 
Satan,  and  the  world.  Ps.  cxxiv.  7. 

2.  The  bondaged  child  of  God  shall  not  be  held 

captive  by  tribulation,  temptation,  or  de 
pression.  Ps.  xxxiv.  19.  Ps.  cxvi.  7. 

3.  The  bodies  of  his  saints  shall  not  be  held  in  the 

grave.     1  Cor.  xv.  23 ;  1  Peter  i.  3-5. 

4.  The  groaning  creation  shall  yet  burst  into  the 

glorious  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 
Rom.  viii.  21. 

Here  is  a  true  Easter  hymn  for  all  who  are  in 
Christ. 


334  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

The  Lord  is  risen  indeed,  and  the  happiest  conse 
quences  must  follow. 

Let  us  rise  in  his  rising,  and  walk  at  large  in  his 
loosing. 

FREE  THOUGHTS. 

Christ  being  imprisoned  for  our  debt,  was  thrown 
into  the  bands  of  death;  but,  divine  justice  being  sat 
isfied,  it  was  not  possible  that  he  should  be  detained 
there,  either  by  right  or  by  force,  for  he  had  life  in 
himself  and  in  his  own  power,  and  had  conquered 
the  prince  of  death. — Matthew  Henry. 

The  Emperor  Theodosius,  having  on  a  great  occa 
sion  opened  all  the  prisons,  and  released  his  priso 
ners,  is  reported  to  have  said,  "  And  now,  would  to 
God  I  could  open  all  the  tombs,  and  give  life  to  the 
dead !  "  But  there  is  no  limit  to  the  mighty  power 
and  royal  grace  of  Jesus.  Pie  opens  the  prisons  of 
justice,  and  the  prisons  of  death  with  equal  and  in 
finite  ease:  he  redeems  not  the  soul  only,  but  the 
body. — Dr.  Stanford. 


CLXXXVIIL 

"NOW  WHEN  THEY  HEARD  THIS,  THEY  WERE   PRICKED  IN  THEIB 

HEART."—  Acts  ii.  37. 

PETER'S  sermon  was  not  a  fine  display  of  elo 
quence; 

Neither  was  it  a  very  pathetic  plea ; 

Nor  a  loud  but  empty  cry  of  "  Believe,  believe  !  " 

It  was  simple,  a  plain  statement,  and  a  soberly 
earnest  argument. 

Its  power  lay  in  the  truthfulness  of  the  speaker, 
his  appeal  to  Scripture,  the  concurrence  of  his  wit 
nessing  brethren,  and  his  own  evident  faith. 

Above  all,  in  the  Holy  Spirit  who  accompanied  the 
word. 

I.   SAVING  IMPRESSION  is  A  PRICK  IN  THE  HEART. 

To  be  cut  to  the  heart  is  deadly  (Act  v.  33):  to  be 
pricked  in  the  heart  is  saving. 

1.  All  true  religion  must  be  of  the  heart. 
Without  this — 

Ceremonies  are  useless.     Is.  i.  13. 
Orthodoxy  of  head  is  in  vain.     Jer.  vii.  4. 
Profession    and   a    constrained   morality 

fail.     2  Tim.  iii.  5. 

Loud  zeal,  excited  and  sustained  by  mere 
passion,  is  useless. 

(335) 


336  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

2.  Impressions  which  do  not  prick  the  heart  may 

even  be  evil. 

They  may  excite  to  wrath  and  opposition. 
They  may  lead  to  sheer  hypocrisy. 
They  may  create  and  foster  a  spurious  hope. 

3.  Even   when    such  superficial    impressions   are 

good,  they  are  transient;  and  when  they 
have  passed  away,  they  have  often  harden 
ed  those  who  have  felt  them  for  a  season. 

4.  They   will  certainly   be  inoperative.     As  they 

have  not  touched  the  heart,  they  will  not 
affect  the  life. 
They  will  not  lead  to  confession  and  inquiry, 

nor 

to  repentance  and  change  of  life, 
to  glad  reception  of  the  word, 

nor 

to  obedience  and  steadfastness. 
Heart- work  is  the  only  real  work. 

II.   WHAT  TRUTHS  PRODUCE  SUCH  A  PRICK  ? 

1.  The  truth  of  the  gospel  has  often,  by  the  power 

of  the  Holy  Ghost,  produced  an  indelible 
wound  in  minds  sceptical  and  opposed. 

2.  A  sense  of  some  one  specially  startling  sin  has 

frequently  aroused  the  conscience.  2  Sam. 
xii.  7. 

3.  Instruction  in  the  nature  of  the  law,  and  the 

consequent  heinousness  of  sin,  has  been 
blessed  to  that  end.  Rom.  vii.  13. 

4.  The  infinite  wickedness  of  sin,  as  against  the 


LIFE-WOUNDS.  337 

very  being  of  God,  is  also  a  wounding 
thought.  Ps.  li.  4. 

5.  The  exactness,  severity,  arid  terror  of  the  judg 

ment,  and  the  consequent  punishment  of 
sin,  are  stirring  thoughts.  Acts  xvi.  25-30. 

6.  The  great  goodness  of  God  has  led  many  to  see 

the  cruel  wantonness  of  sin  against  him. 
Rom.  ii.  4. 

7.  The  death  of  Christ  as  a  Substitute  has  often 

been  the  means  of  revealing  the  greatness 
of  the  sin  which  needed  such  an  atonement, 
and  of  showing  the  true  tendency  of  sin  in 
having  slain  One  so  good  and  kind.  Zech. 
xii.  10. 

8.  The  abundant  grace  and  love  revealed  in  the 

gospel,  and  received  by  us,  are  sharp  arrows 
to  wound  the  heart. 

[It.  WHAT  HAND  MAKES  THESE  PAINFUL  PRICKS  ? 

1.  The  same  hand  which  wrote  the  piercing  truths 

also  applies  them. 

2.  He  is  well  acquainted  with  our  hearts,  and  so 

can  reach  them. 

3.  He  is  the  Quickener,  the  Comforter,  the  Spirit 

helping  our  infirmities,  showing  to  us  the 
things  of  Jesus:  his  fruit  is  love,  joy,  peace, 
etc.     We  need  not   utterly    despair   when 
wounded  by  such  a  tender  Friend. 
4  He  is  a  Spirit  to  be  sought  unto,  who  acts  in 
answer  to  his  people's  prayers.     We  turn  for 
healing  to  him  who  pricks. 
22 


338  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

IV.    HOW    CAN    THESE    PRICKS    BE    HEALED? 

1.  Only  One  who  is  divine  can  heal  a  wounded 

heart. 

2.  The  only  medicine  is  the  blood  of  his  heart. 

3.  The  only  hand  to  apply  it  is  that  which  was 

pierced. 

4.  The  only  fee  required  is  gladly  to  receive  him. 
Let  us  ask  the  question,  "  Men  and  brethren,  what 

shall  we  do?" 

Let  us  then  obey  the  gospel,  and  believe  in  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

POINTED  PASSAGES. 

Conversion  is  a  work  of  argument,  for  the  judgment 
is  gained  by  the  truth.  It  is  a  work  of  conviction,  for 
the  awakened  are  pricked  in  their  hearts.  It  is  a 
work  of  enquiry,  for  they  ask,  "  What  must  we  do  te 
Le  saved?"  And,  lastly,  it  is  a  work  of  comfort, 
for  its  subjects  have  received  remission  of  sins,  and 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost. — Joseph  Sutdiffe. 

Peter,  standing  up,  said :  "  We  heard  from  him 
whom  we  know  that  God  has  raised  from  the  dead 
the  promise  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  hath  shed  forth 
this;  therefore  let  Jerusalem  know  assuredly  that 
God  hath  made  him  Lord."  I  call  that  Peter's  colos 
sal  "therefore."  It  is  the  strongest  word  in  the  first 
oration  delivered  in  the  defence  of  Christianity.  The 
Holy  Spirit  was  promised;  he  has  been  poured  out; 
therefore  let  those  who  receive  him  know  that  the 
power  behind  natural  law — our  Lord,  who  was,  and 
is,  and  is  to  come — is  now  breathing  upon  the  cen- 


LIFE- WOUNDS.  339 

turies  as  he  breathed  upon  us  symbolically.  He  hath 
shed  forth  this;  therefore,  let  all  men  know  assuredly 
that  God  hath  made  him  Lord.  When  they  who 
were  assembled  at  Jerusalem  at  that  time  heard  this 
"therefore"  they  were  pricked  in  the  heart. — Joseph 
Cook. 

Heart- work  must  be  God's  work.  Only  the  great 
heart-Maker  can  be  the  great  heart-Breaker. — Rich 
ard  Baxter. 

The  Comforter  came  to  convince  the  world.  The 
Comforter!  Does  it  seem  a  strange  name  to  any  of 
you,  my  brethren,  for  him  who  came  on  such  an  er 
rand  ?  Does  it  seern  to  you  that,  in  convincing  you 
of  your  sins,  instead  of  comforting  you,  he  must  needs 
cover  you  with  shame  and  confusion,  and  make  you 
sink  to  the  ground  in  unutterable  anguish  and  dis 
may  ?  No,  dear  brethren,  it  is  not  so.  Those  among 
you  whom  the  Spirit  has  indeed  convinced  of  sin, 
will  avouch  that  it  is  not.  They  will  avouch  that, 
in  convincing  them  of  sin.  he  has  proved  that  he  is 
indeed  the  Comforter.  If  the  conviction  and  con 
sciousness  of  sin  arise  from  any  other  source,  then 
indeed  it  is  enough  to  crush  us  with  shame,  and  to 
harrow  us  with  unimaginable  fears.  But  when  it 
comes  from  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  comes  with  healing 
and  comfort  on  its  wings.  Remember  what  the 
sin  is,  of  which  he  convinces  us— that  we  believe 
not  in  Christ.  All  other  conviction  of  sin  would 
be  without  hope  ;  here  the  hope  accompanies  the 
conviction,  and  is  one  with  it.  If  we  have  a  deep 


340  MY    SERMON-NOTES. 

and  lively  feeling  of  the  sin  of  not  believing  in  Christ, 
we  must  feel  at  the  same  time  that  Christ  came  to 
take  away  this  along  with  all  other  sins. — J.  C.  Hare. 

When  a  man  is  wounded  with  a  barbed  arrow,  the 
agonies  he  suffers  will  cause  him  to  toss  about  in  pain  ; 
but  the  harder  he  strives  to  release  the  weapon  from 
his  flesh,  the  more  does  it  become  entangled  in  his 
sinews,  the  wound  becomes  enlarged,  and  the  torture 
is  increased.  When,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
a  man  is  wounded  on  account  of  sin,  and  the  arrows 
of  the  Most  High  tear  his  soul,  he  frequently  tries  to 
pluck  them  out  with  his  own  hand,  but  finds  that  the 
misery  becomes  worse,  and  the  inflaming  wounds  at 
last  cause  faintriess  and  despair.  Only  the  Good  Phy 
sician  knows  how  to  relieve  the  pain  without  tearing 
and  festering  the  spirit. — Handbook  of  Illustration. 


CLXXXIX. 

"  AND  BEHOLDING  THE  MAN  WHICH  WAS  HEALED  STANDING 
WITH  THEM,  THEY  COULD  SAY  NOTHING  AGAINST  IT."—  Act* 
IV.  14. 

THE  rulers  and  elders  were  opposed  to  Peter  and 
John. 

It  is  no  new  thing  for  the  gospel  to  be  opposed. 
Nor  a  strange  thing  for  the  great,  the  official,  the 
powerful,  and  the  influential  to  be  foremost  in  such 
opposition. 

The  opposition  of  ungodly  men  is — 

Natural,  seeing  that  the  heart  of  man  is  deprav 
ed. 
Endurable,  since  our  Lord  and  his  apostles 

suffered  it. 

Harmless,  if  we  commit  the  case  to  God. 
Overruled  for  good  by  divine  grace  and  wise 
providence. 

The  best  and  perhaps  the  only  way  to  silence  op 
position  is  by  exhibiting  the  blessed  results  which 
follow  from  the  gospel. 

Those  who  would  say  anything  if  they  could,  can 
say  nothing  of  what  they  would,  when  they  see  before 
their  eyes  the  cures  wrought  by  the  word  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  "The  man  that  was  healed*'  is  our  best 

(341) 


342  MY   SEEM  ON -NOTES. 

apologist.     Better  than  Paley's  "  Evidences,"  or  But 
ler's  "Analogy,"  is  the  proof  given  by  results. 

I.    THE    GOSPEL    IS    VINDICATED    BY    ITS    RESULTS. 

3.  On  a  broad  scale  in  nations.  England,  the  is 
lands  of  the  Pacific,  Jamaica,  Madagascar, 
etc. 

2.  In  individual  conversions  from  open  sin.     Some 

of  the  worst  of  men  have  become  clear  in 
stances  of  the  purifying  power  of  the  gospel. 

3.  In  restoring  to  hope  the  comfortless  arid  despair 

ing.  Very  marvellous  is  its  efficacy  in  the 
direction  of  healing  mental  maladies. 

4.  In  elevating  saints  above  selfish  aims  and  designs, 

and  inducing  heroic  consecrations.  The 
biographies  of  gracious  men  and  women  are 
demonstrations  of  the  divine  power  of  the 
Word. 

5.  In  sustaining  character  under  fierce  temptation. 

Wonderful  is  the  preserving  salt  of  grace 
amid  surrounding  putrefaction. 

6.  In  holy  and  happy  death-beds.     These  are  plen 

tiful  throughout  history,  among  all  ranks  ; 

and  they  never  fail  to  convince  the  candid. 
Many  another  catalogue  of  results  might  be  made. 
Many  a  man  is  unable  to  be  an  infidel  because  of 
what  he  has  seen  in  his  mother,  wife,  or  child. 

II.  GOSPEL- WORKS  AND  WORKERS  MUST  LOOK  FOR  LIKE  VIN 
DICATION. 

Nowadays   men   ask  for   results:  the   tree    must 


THE   GOLDEN   MUZZLE.  343 

bear  fruit,  or  the  cry  is,  "  Cut  it  down."     We  do  not 
shrink  from  this  test. 

1.  The  minister  must  find  in  his  converts  a  proof 

of  his  call,  and  a  defence  of  his  doctrines, 
methods,  peculiarities,  etc. 

2.  A  society,  college,  or  institution  must  stand  or 

fall  by  its  fruits. 

3.  The  individual  professor  must  abide  the  same 

test. 

4.  The  church  in  any  place,  and  the  church  on 

the  largest  scale,  must  be  tried  by  similar 
methods. 

5.  Even  our  Lord  himself  loses  or  gains  honor 

among  men  according  as  his  followers  be 
have  themselves. 

III.    THE  GOSPEL  AND  ITS  WORKERS  DESERVE  VINDICATION  AT 

OUR  HANDS.  Those  who  are  healed  should 
boldly  stand  with  Peter  and  John,  as  wit 
nesses  and  fellow-workers. 

This  suggests  a  series  of  practical  questions: — 

1.  Has  it  produced  blessed  results  in  us  ? 

2.  Have   we   come   forward   to    stand    with    the 

preachers  of  it  in  evidence  that  it  has 
wrought  our  cure  ?  Are  we  continually 
witnessing  to  the  truth  and  value  of  the 
Gospel  of  Christ? 

3.  Does  the  influence  of  the  gospel  upon  us  so 

continue  and  increase  unto  holiness  of  life 
as  to  be  a  credit  to  its  influence  ? 


344  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

4.  Are  there   not  points  in  our  character  which 

harm   the   repute  of  the   gospel?     Should 
not  these  be  amended  at  once  ? 

5.  Could  we  not  henceforth  so  live  as  more  effect 

ually  to  silence  the  opponents  of  the  Word? 

Let  the  Church  plainly  see  that  her  converts  are 
her  best  defence;  they  are,  in  fact,  her  reason  for 
existence. 

Let  converts  see  the  reason  why  they  should  come 
forward  and  declare  their  faith,  and  unite  with  the 
people  of  God. 

CASES  IN  POINT. 

In  the  course  of  one  of  his  journeys,  preaching  the 
word,  Mr.  Wesley  went  to  Epworth.  Having  of 
fered  to  assist  the  curate  on  the  following  day  (Sun 
day),  and  his  offer  being  refused,  he  took  his  stand 
upon  his  father's  tombstone  in  the  evening,  and 
preached  to  the  largest  congregation  Epworth  had 
ever  witnessed.  This  he  did  night  after  night.  He 
preached  also  during  his  stay  of  eight  days  at  sev 
eral  of  the  surrounding  villages,  where  societies  had 
been  formed  and  a  great  work  wrought  among  the 
people,  and  some  of  them  had  suffered  for  it.  "Their 
angry  neighbors,"  says  Wesley,  "had  carried  a 
whole  wagon-load  of  these  new  heretics  before  a 
magistrate.  But  when  he  asked  what  they  had 
done,  there  was  a  deep  silence;  for  it  was  a  point 
their  conductors  had  forgotten.  At  length  one 
said,  i  They  pretended  to  be  better  than  other  people, 
and  prayed  from  morning  to  night; "  and  another 


THE   GOLDEN    MUZZLE.  345 

said,  '  They  have  converted  my  wife.  Till  she  went 
among  them  she  had  such  a  tongue  !  and  now  she  is 
as  quiet  as  a  lamb  ! '  i  Take  them  back,  take  them 
back,'  replied  the  justice,  *  and  let  them  convert  all 
the  scolds  in  the  town.'"  —Tyermaris  Life  of  Wesley. 

Lord  Peterborough,  more  famed  for  his  wit  than 
for  his  religion,  when  he  had  lodged  with  Fenelon, 
the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  was  so  charmed  with 
his  piety  and  beautiful  character,  that  he  said  to 
him  at  parting,  "  If  I  stay  here  any  longer  I  shall 
become  a  Christian  in  suite  of  myself." — G.  S.  Bowes. 

A  person  who  had  expressed  doubts  whether  the 
negroes  received  any  real  advantage  by  hearing  the 
gospel,  was  asked  whether  he  did  not  think  one, 
named  Jack,  was  better  for  the  preaching.  He  re 
plied,  •'  ^Vhy,  I  must  confess  that  he  was  a  drunkard, 
a  liar,  and  a  thief;  but  certainly  now  he  is  a  sober 
boy,  and  I  can  trust  him  with  anything;  and  since 
he  has  talked  about  religion,  I  have  tried  to  make 
him  drunk,  but  failed  in  the  attempt." — Arv-ine. 

Certain  gentlemen  waited  upon  Rev.  Matthew 
Wilks  to  complain  of  the  eccentricities  of  his  dis 
courses.  Wilks  heard  them  through,  and  then  pro 
duced  a  long  list  of  names.  "  There,"  said  the  quaint 
divine,  "  all  those  precious  souls  profess  to  have  found 
salvation  through  what  you  are  pleased  to  call  my 
whims  and  oddities.  Can  you  produce  a  similar 
list  from  all  the  sober  brethren  you  have  been  so 
much  extolling  ?  "  This  was  conclusive :  they  with- 
drew  in  silence. 


346  MY   SEEMOX-KOTES. 

The  behavior  of  some  professors  has  often  given 
the  wicked  an  opportunity  to  reproach  religion. 
Lactantius  reports,  that  the  heathen  were  wont  to 
say,  "  The  Master  could  not  be  good,  when  his  disci 
ples  were  so  bad."  The  malice  of  sinners  is  such 
that  they  will  reproach  the  rectitude  of  the  law,  for 
the  obliquity  of  their  lives  who  swerve  from  it.  Oh 
that  yonr  pure  life  did  but  hang  a  padlock  upon 
their  impure  lips ! —  William  Seeker. 


cxc. 

••  AND   AT  THK  SECOND  TIME  JOSEPH  WAS  MADE  KNOWN  TO  HIS 
BRETHREN." — Acts  vii.  13. 

rT^HERE  is  a  plain  parallel  between  Joseph  and 
-*•  Jesus,  his  brethren  and  ourselves. 

Certain  classes  of  real  seekers  do  not  at  once  find 
peace ;  they  go  to  Jesus  after  a  fashion,  and  return 
from  him  as  they  went. 

Our  fear  is  that  they  may  grow  indifferent  or  de 
spairing. 

Our  hope  is  that  they  will  go  again,  and  before 
long  discover  the  great  secret,  and  find  food  for  their 
souls. 

To  this  end  we  would  follow  the  track  of  Joseph's 
story,  and  use  it  as  an  allegory  for  the  benefit  of  the 
seeker. 

I.  '['HERE  is  A  SOMETHING  WHICH  YOU  DO  NOT  KNOW. 

The  sons  of  Israel  did  not  know  Joseph.  Like 
them — 

1.  You  have  no  idea  of  who  and  what  Jesus  is. 

Power  and  pity  blend  in  him.     lie  is  far 
more  than  he  seems. 

2.  You  view  him  only  as  great,  lordly,  unapproach 

able  ;  a  great  and  stern  governor  and  tax- 
master. 

(347) 


848  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

3.  You  do  not  know  that  he  is  your  brother, 

with  you  in  nature,  relationship,  and  love. 

4.  You  cannot  conceive  how  he  loves :  he  yearns  to 

make  himself  known ;  his  heart  is  swollen 
big  with  compassion. 

5.  You  cannot  guess  what  he  will  do  for  you :  all 

that  he  is  and  has  shall  be  at  your  disposal. 

Picture  the  Israelitish  shepherds  in  the  presence 
of  the  exalted  Egyptian  prince,  as  he  stands  veiled 
in  mystery,  girded  with  power,  and  surrounded  with 
honor.  Little  could  they  imagine  that  this  was 
Joseph  their  brother. 

II.  THERE    is   A   REASON  WHY  AT  YOUR  FIRST  GOING    YOU 

HAVE    NOT    LEARNED    THIS. 

Joseph  was  not  made  known  to  his  brethren  on  their 
first  journey;  nor  have  you  yet  found  out  Jesus,  so 
as  to  know  his  love. 

1.  You   have  not   looked  for  him.     The   sons  of 

Jacob  went  to  Egypt  for  corn,  not  for  a 
brother.  You  are  looking  for  comfort,  etc., 
not  for  the  Saviour. 

2.  You  have  not  yet  felt  your  sin  against  Jesus, 

and  he  would  bring  you  to  repentance,  even 
as  Joseph  brought  his  brethren  to  confess 
their  great  wrong. 

3.  You  have  not  yet  gone  with  your  whole  force. 

As  the  brothers  left  Benjamin  at  home,  so 
have  you  left  some  faculty  or  capacity  dor 
mant,  or  chill,  in  your  seeking  for  grace. 


THE   SECOND   TIME.  349 

4.  You  will  have  a  larger  blessing  through  the  de 
lay  ;  and  the  Lord  Jesus  will  in  th->  most 
seasonable  hour  reveal  himself,  as  Joseph 
did.  Till  then  he  refrains. 

III.  THERE  is  GREAT  HOPE  IN  YOUR  GOING  AGAIN  TO  HIM. 
Joseph's  brethren  made  a  great  discovery  Hie  sec 
ond  time;  you  are  in  similar  circumstances  to  them. 
Go  a  second  time;  for — 

1.  You  must  go  or  perish.     There  was  corn  only 

in  Egypt,   and  there  is   salvation   only  in 
Christ. 

2.  Others  have  gone  and   speeded.      All  nations 

went   to    Egypt,    and   none    were   refVsed. 
Has  Jesus  cast  out  one  ? 

3.  You   have  lingered  too  long  already,  even  as 

did  Israel's  sons. 

4.  A  welcome  awaits  you.     Joseph  longed  to  see 

his  brethren,  and  Jesus  longs  to  see  you, 

IV.  THERE  ARE  FORECASTS  OF  WHAT  WILL  HAPPEN  ;F  YOU 

GO. 

The  story  lends  itself  to  prophecy.  As  the-  sons 
of  Israel  fared  with  Joseph,  so  shall  you  fare  With 
Jesus. 

1.  You  will  tremble  in  his  presence. 

2.  He  will  bid  you  draw  near. 

3.  He  will  comfort  you  by  revealing  himseLC  to 

you. 

4.  He  will  bless  and  enrich  you  and  send  rou 

home  rejoicing,  to  fetch  all  your  family    <v- 
him. 


350  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

5.  He  will  rule  all  the  world  for  your  sake,  and 
you  shall  be  with  him,  and  be  nourished  by 
him. 

Let  us  hasten  to  go  to  onr  Saviour  the  second 
time. 

Surely  this  is  the  season,  for  the  Holy  Ghost  saith 
"  to-day." 

LINE  UPON  LINE. 

You  take  it  hard,  that  you  are  not  answered,  ami 
that  Christ's  door  is  not  opened  at  your  first  knock. 
David  must  knock  often :  "0  rny  God,  I  cry  by  day, 
and  thou  nearest  not,  and  in  the  night  season  I  am 
not  silent:"  Psa.  xxii.  2.  The  Lord's  Church  must 
also  wait:  "  And  when  I  cry  and  shout,  he  shutteth 
out  my  prayer :"  Lam.  iii.  8.  Sweet  Jesus,  the  heir 
of  all,  prayed  with  tears  and  strong  cries,  once,  "  O 
my  Father;"  again,  "0  my  Father;"  and  the  third 
time,  "0  my  Father,"  ere  he  was  heard.  Wait  on: 
die  praying:  faint  not. 

It  is  good  to  have  the  heart  stored  with  sweet 
principles  concerning  Christ  and  his  love,  so  as  to 
rest  in  hope,  though  the  Lord  heareth  not  at  the  first. 
He  is  Christ,  and  therefore  he  will  answer  a  sinner's 
cry  ere  long.  It  is  but  Christ's  outside  that  is  un 
kind. — Samud  Rutherford. 

A  man  who  had  long  been  seeking  religion  in  a 
half-hearted  way,  one  day  lost  his  pocket-book.  He 
said  to  his  wife  :  "  I  know  it  is  in  the  barn  ;  I  had 
it  after  I  went  tli^re,  and  before  I  left  it  was  gone. 


TliE   SECOND   TIME.  351 

I  am  going  back  to  find  it  ;  and  find  it  I  will,  if  I 
have  to  move  every  straw."  Such  seeking  soon 
secured  the  prize,  and  enabled  his  wife  so  clearly  to 
illustrate  the  way  to  seek  Jesus,  that  the  man  soon 
found  him  also,  and  rejoiced  in  a  full  salvation. 

The  last  time  I  preached  upon  the  matter  of  de 
cision  in  religion  was  in  old  Farwell  Hall.  I  had 
been  for  five  nights  preaching  upon  the  life  of 
Christ.  I  took  him  from  the  cradle,  and  followed 
him  up  to  the  judgment  hall,  and  on  that  occasion  I 
consider  1  made  as  great  a  blunder  as  ever  I  made  in 
my  life.  If  I  could  recall  my  act  I  would  give  this 
right  hand.  It  was  upon  that  memorable  night  in 
October,  and  the  Court  House  bell  was  sounding  an 
alarm  of  fire,  but  I  paid  no  attention  to  it.  We 
were  accustomed  to  hear  the  fire  bell  often,  and  it 
didn't  disturb  us  much  when  it  sounded.  I  finished 
the  sermon  upon  "What  shall  I  do  with  Jesus?" 
And  I  said  to  the  audience,  "  Now,  I  want  you  to 
take  the  question  with  you  and  think  over  it,  and 
next  Sunday  I  want  you  to  come  back  and  tell  me 
what  you  are  going  to  do  with  it."  What  a  mis 
take  !  It  seems  now  as  if  Satan  was  in  my  mind 
when  I  said  this.  Since  then  I  have  never  dared  to 
give  an  audience  a  week  to  think  of  their  salvation. 
If  they  were  lost  they  might  rise  up  in.  judgment 
against  me.  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time."  We 
went  down-stairs  to  the  other  meeting,  and  [  re 
member  when  Mr.  Sankey  was  singing,  and  how  his 
voice  rang  when  he  came  to  that  pleading  verse  : — 


352  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

"  To-day  the  Saviour  calls ; 

For  refuge  fly. 
The  storni  of  justice  falls, 
And  death  is  nigh." 

After  our  meeting,  on  the  way  home,  seeing  the 
glare  of  flames,  I  said  to  my  companion,  "  This 
means  ruin  to  Chicago."  About  one  o'clock,  Far- 
well  Hall  went,  soon  the  church  in  which  I  had 
preached  went  down,  and  everything  was  scattered. 
I  never  saw  that  audience  again.  My  friends,  we 
don't  know  what  may  happen  to-morrow  ;  but  there 
is  one  thing  I  do  know,  and  that  is,  if  you  take  the 
gift  of  God,  even  Christ  Jesus,  you  are  saved. 
What  are  you  going  to  do  with  him  to-night  ?  Will 
you  decide  now  ? — D.  L.  Moody. 


CXCI. 

e'THE  WITNESSES     LAID    DOWN    THEIR    CLOTHES    AT     A     YOUNG 
MAN'S  FEET,    WHOSE   NAME   WAS  SAUL."—  Acts  vil.  58. 

THE  Holy  Spirit   records    Stephen's   martyrdom, 
but  does  not  enter  into  details  of  his  sufferings 
and  death,  as  uninspired  recorders  would  have  been 
so  apt  to  do. 

The  object  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  not  to  indulge 
curiosity  nor  to  harrow  the  feelings,  but  to  instruct 
and  move  to  imitation. 

He  tells  us  of  the  martyr's  posture, — "  lie  kneeled 
down  ;"  his  prayer, — "  Lord,  lay  not  this  sin  to  their 
charge  ;"  and  his  composure, — "  he  fell  asleep." 
Upon  each  of  these  points  volumes  might  be  written. 

Our  attention  is  now  called  to  the  incident  of 
Saul's  being  present. 

This  supplies  us  with— 

I.  A  SUGGESTED  CONTRAST.     Stephen  and  Saul. 
These  were  both  highly  earnest,  fearless  men. 
Yet  at  this  time  they  were  wide  as  the  poles  asun 
der. 

1.  Stephen  spiritual  ;  giving  in  his  address  great 
prominence   to   the  spiritual  nature  of  re 
ligion,  and  the  comparative  insignificance 
of  its  externals.     See  verses  48-50. 
23  (353) 


354  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

Saul  superstitious,  worshipping  form  and 
ritual,  full  of  reverence  for  the  temple  and 
the  priests,  and  so  forth. 

2.  Stephen,  a  humble  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus, 

saved  by  faith  alone. 

Saul,  a  self-righteous  Pharisee,  as  proud  as  he 
could  live. 

3.  Stephen  defending  and  vindicating  the  gospel 

of  Jesus. 

Saul,  giving  his  countenance,  his  vote,  his 
assistance  in  the  persecution  of  the  servant 
of  the  Lord  Christ. 

Inquire  if  a  Saul  is  now  present.  Call  him  forth 
by  name. 

Have  you  been  a  consenting  party  to  the  persecu 
tion  of  good  men  ? 

Have  you  thus  copied  this  young  man  Saul  ? 

You  do  not  object  to  making  Christian  men  the 
theme  of  ridicule. 

You-smile  when  you  hear  such  ridicule. 

By  your  indecision  in  religion  you  aid  and  abet 
the  adversary. 

In  these  ways  the  witnesses  lay  down  their  clothes 
at  your  feet,  and  you  are  the  accomplice. 

Oh,  that  grace  may  yet  convert  you ! 

II.    A  SINGULAR    INTRODUCTION    TO    TRUE    RELIGION. 

Many  have  been  brought  to  God  by  means  some 
what  similar. 

The  young  man  whose  name  was  Saul,   met  with 


Sl'EPHEN   AND   SAUL.  355 

the  religion  of  Jesus  in  the  person  of  Stephen,  and 
thus  he  saw  it  with  the  following  surroundings  : — 

1.  The  vision  of  a  shining  face. 

2.  The  hearing  of  a  noble  discourse. 

3.  The  sight  of  a  triumphant  death. 

These  did  not  convert  Saul,  but  they  made  it 
harder  for  him  to  be  unconverted,  and  were,  no  doubt, 
in  after  days  thought  of  by  him. 

Let  us  so  introduce  religion  to  men,  that  the  mem 
ory  of  its  introduction  may  be  worth  their  retaining. 

III.  A   REMARKABLE    INSTANCE  OF  THE  LORD'S  CARE  FOF1  HIS 

CHURCH. 

The  apostolical  succession  was  preserved  in  the 
church. 

1.  Stephen's   death   was   a   terrible   blow   to   the 

cause;   but  at  that  moment  his  successor 
was  close  at  hand. 

2.  That  successor  was  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy. 

3.  That  successor  was  far  greater  than  the  martyr, 

Stephen,  himself. 

There  is  no  fear  for  the  church:  her  greatest 
champions,  though  as  yet  concealed  among  her  ene 
mies,  will  be  called  in  due  time. 

The  death  of  her  best  advocates  may  assist  in  the 
conversion  of  others. 

IV.  A  GRACIOUS  MEMORIAL  OF  REPENTED    SIN. 

Did  riot  Paul  give  Luke  this  information  concern 
ing  himself?  and  cause  it  to  be  recorded  in  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles  ? 


356  MY   SEEMON-^OTES. 

It  was  well  for  Paul  to  remember  his  sin  before 
conversion. 

It  will  be  well  for  us  to  remember  ours. 

1.  To  create  and  renew  feelings  of  humility. 

2.  To  inflame  love  and  zeal 

3.  To  deepen  our  love  to  the  doctrines  of  sovereign 

grace. 

4.  To  make  us  hopeful  and  zealous  for  others. 

Let  dying  Stephen  be  cheered  by  the  hope  of 
young  Saul's  salvation. 

Let  wicked  young  Saul  repent  of  his  wrong  to 
Stephen. 

OBSERVANDA. 

A  Spanish  painter,  in  a  picture  of  Stephen  con 
ducted  to  the  place  of  execution,  has  represented 
Saul  as  walking  by  the  martyr's  side  with  melan 
choly  calmness.  He  consents  to  his  death  from  a 
sincere,  though  mistaken,  conviction  of  duty :  and  the 
expression  of  his  countenance  is  strongly  contrasted 
with  the  rage  of  the  baffled  Jewish  doctors  and  the 
ferocity  of  the  crowd  who  flock  to  the  scene  of  blood 
shed.  Literally  considered,  such  a  representation 
is  scarcely  consistent  either  with  Saul's  conduct  im 
mediately  afterwards,  or  with  his  own  expressions 
concerning  himself  at  the  later  periods  of  his  life. 
But  the  picture,  though  historically  incorrect,  is 
poetically  true.  The  painter  has  worked  according 
to  the  true  idea  of  his  art  in  throwing  upon  the  per 
secutor's  countenance  the  shadow  of  his  coming  re- 


STEPHEN   AND   SAUL.  357 

pentance.  We  cannot  dissociate  the  martyrdom  of 
Stephen  from  the  conversion  of  Paul.  The  specta 
cle  of  so  much  constancy,  so  much  faith,  so  much 
love,  could  not  be  lost.  It  is  hardly  too  much  to  say 
with  Augustine,  that  "the  church  owes  Paul  to  the 
prayer  of  Stephen."  —  Conybeare  and  Howson. 

Here  first  comes  in  view  an  individual  destined  to 
be  the  most  extraordinary  character  in  the  church  of 
God.  Had  a  prophet  stood  near  on  this  occasion,  and 
said,  "  Ah  !  Saul,  you  will  by-aud-by  be  stoned  for 
the  same  profession,  and  die  a  martyr  in  the  same 
cause  ;  "  he  would  have  been  filled  with  surprise  and 
indignation,  and  have  exclaimed,  "What,  is  thy  ser 
vant  a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  thing?  "-—William 
Jay. 

As  soon  as  Satan  heard  of  the  conversion  of  Saul, 
he  ordered  the  devils  into  deep  mourning.  —  John 

Senior. 


Among  the  leaders  of  the  great  revival  of  the 
eighteenth  century  were  Captain  Scott  and  Captain 
Toriel  Joss,  the  former  a  captain  of  dragoons,  the 
latter  a  sea-captain.  Both  became  famous  preachers. 
Whitefield  said  of  them,  "  God,  who  sitteth  upon  the 
flood,  can  bring  a  shark  from  the  ocean,  and  a  lion 
from  the  forest,  to  show  forth  his  praise." 

The  following  lines  by  WilliamHone,  author  of  the 
"  Every-day  Book,"  were  written  to  describe 
experience  — 


308  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

The  proudest  heart  that  ever  beat 

Hath  been  subdued  in  me  ; 
The  wildest  will  that  ever  rose 
To  scorn  thy  cause,  and  aid  thy  foea, 

Is  quell'd,  my  God,  by  thee. 

Thy  will,  and  not  my  will,  be  done ; 

My  heart  be  ever  thine  ; 
Confessing  thee,  the  mighty  Word, 
My  Saviour  Christ,  my  God,  my  Lord, 

Thy  cross  shall  be  my  sign. 

Might  they  not  have  been  written  by  the  young 
man,  4<  whose  name  was  Saul  ?  " 


CXCII. 

"TO  YOU  IS  THE  WORD  OP  THIS  SALVATION  SENT." — Act*  xUi.    26. 

PAUL  and  Barnabas  first  preached  the  gospel  to 
the  seed  of  Abraham. 

These  Jews  contradicted  and  blasphemed,  and 
therefore,  in  verse  46,  the  servants  of  the  Lord  bold 
ly  exclaimed,  "  We  turn  to  the  Gentiles."  A  blessed 
turning  this  for  you  and  for  me  ! 

Herein  is  a  warning  to  ourselves,  lest  we  refuse  the 
gospel,  and  find  it  taken  from  us,  and  sent  to  others. 

At  this  moment,  to  our  hearers  we  earnestly  say, 
44  To  you  is  the  word  of  this  salvation  sent." 

Let  us  then  consider — 

I.  WHAT  is  THE  WORD  OF  THIS  SALVATION? 

1.  It  is  the  testimony  that  Jesus  is  the  promised 

Saviour.     Verse  23. 

2.  The  word  which  promises  forgiveness  to  all  who 

exhibit  repentance  of  sin,  and  faith  in  the 
Lord  Jesus.     Verses  38,  39. 

3.  In  a  word,  it  is  the  proclamation  of  perfect  sal 

vation,  through  the  risen  Saviour.     Verses 
32,  33. 

It  is  comparable  to  a  word  for  conciseness  and  sim 
plicity. 

(359) 


360  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

It  is  a  word,  as  being  spoken  by  God,  and  as  being 
his  present  utterance  even  at  this  moment. 

It  is  a  word ;  for  it  reveals  Him  who  is  truly  "  the 
Word." 

It  is  a  word  of  salvation  ;  for  it  declares,  describes, 
presents,  and  presses  home  salvation. 

It  is  a  word  sent,  for  the  Gospel  dispensation  is  a 
mission  of  mercy  from  God,  the  Gospel  is  a  message, 
Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  himself  is 
sent  to  work  salvation  among  men. 

II.     IN    WHAT    MANNER    IS    THE    GOSPEL    SENT    TO    YOU  ? 

1.  In  the  general  commission,  which  ordains  that 

it  be  preached  to  every  creature. 

2.  In  the  fact  that  the  gospel  is  preached  in  our 

land,  the  Bible  is  in  every  house,  and  the 
word  is  proclaimed  in  our  streets. 

3.  In  the  providence  which  has  brought  you  this 

day  to  hoar  the  word.  Very  specially  may 
you  be  sent  to  the  preacher,  the  preacher 
sent  to  you,  and  the  special  message  be 
sent  through  the  preacher  to  you. 

4.  In  the  peculiar  adaptation  of  it  to  your  case, 

character,  and  necessity.  A  medicine 
which  suits  your  disease  is  evidently  meant 
for  you. 

5.  In  the  power  which  has  attended  it,  while  you 

have  been  hearing  it,  though  you  may  have 
resisted  that  power. 

It  would  be  a  sad  thing  if  we  had  to  single  out 
even  one,  and  say, — " This  word  is  not  sent  to  you; " 


"TO   YOU."  361 

but  we  are  under  no  such  painful  ne 
cessity. 

TIL    IN    WHAT    POSITION    DOES   IT   PLACE    YOU  ? 

In  a  position — 

1.  Of  singular  favor.     Prophets  arid  kings   died 

without  hearing  what  you  hear.  Matt, 
xiii.  16. 

2.  Of  notable  indebtedness  to  martyrs  and  men  of 

God,  in  past  ages,  and  in  these  days;  for 
these  have  lived  and  died  to  bring  you  the 
gospel. 

3.  Of  great  hopefulness;  for  we  trust  you  will  ac 

cept  it  and  live. 

4.  Of  serious  responsibility ;  for  if  you  neglect  it, 

how  will  you  escape  ?     Heb.  ii.  3. 

It  puts  it  out  of  your  power  to  remain  unaffected 
by  the  gospel. 

It  must  either  save  you,  or  increase  your  condem 
nation. 

IV.    IN    WHAT    MANNER    WILL   YOU    TREAT    THIS    WORD? 

1.  Will   you   decidedly   and   honestly   refuse   it? 

This  would  be  a  terrible  determination ;  but 
the  very  idea  of  so  doing  might  startle  you 
into  a  better  mind. 

2.  Will  you  basely  and  foolishly  delay  your  reply  ? 

This  is  a  very  dangerous  course,  and  many 
perish  in  it. 

3.  Will  you  play  the  hypocrite,  and  pretend  to  re 

ceive  it,  while  in  your  heart  you  reject  it  ? 


362  MY   SERMON-J^OTES. 

4.  Will  you  act  the  part  of  the  temporary  convert  ? 

5.  Will  you  not  rather  accept  the  word  of  salvation 

with  delight  ? 

Suppose  the  gospel  should  be  taken  from  you  by 
your  removal  to  a  place  where  it  is  not  preached,  or 
by  the  death  of  the  minister  whom  you  so  greatly 
esteem.  It  would  be  just.  It  may  happen.  It  has 
happened  to  others.  Refuse  the  heavenly  message 
no  longer,  lest  your  day  of  grace  should  end  in  an 
eternity  of  woe. 


PERSONALITIES. 

A  minister  having  to  preach  in  the  city  gaol,  was 
accompanied  by  a  young  man  of  fine  mind  and  cul 
tivated  manners,  but  who  was  not  a  Christian.  As 
the  minister  looked  at  the  audience,  he  preached  to 
them  Jesus  with  so  much  earnestness  as  deeply  to 
impress  his  companion.  On  their  return  home,  the 
young  man  said,  "  The  men  to  whom  you  preached 
to-day  must  have  been  moved  by  the  utterance  of 
such  truth.  Such  preaching  cannot  fail  to  influence." 
"  My  dear  young  friend,"  answered  the  minister, 
"  were  you  influenced  ?  Were  you  impelled  by  the 
words  you  heard  to-day  to  choose  God  as  your  por 
tion  ? "  "  You  were  not  preaching  to  me,  but  to 
your  convicts,"  was  quickly  answered.  "  You  mis 
take.  I  was  preaching  to  you  as  much  as  to  them. 
You  need  the  same  Saviour  as  they.  For  all  there 
is  but  one  way  of  salvation.  Just  as  much  for  you 
as  for  these  poor  prisoners  was  the  message  of  this 


"TO  YOU."  363 

afternoon.  Will  you  heed  it  ?  "  The  word  so  faith 
fully  spoken  was  blessed  of  God. 

Jesus  said,  "  Preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature.' 
I  can  imagine  Peter  was  asking  him:  "  What,  Lord  ! 
shall  we  offer  salvation  to  the  men  who  crucified 
you  ? "  And  I  can  imagine  Jesus  answering  him : 
"Yes,  Peter,  I  want  you  to  preach  my  gospel  to 
everybody,  beginning  at  Jerusalem.  Proclaim  sal 
vation  to  tlie  men  who  crucified  me.  Peter,  I'd  like 
you  to  find  that  man  who  put  the  crown  of  thorne 
on  my  head.  Tell  him,  if  he'll  take  salvation  as  a 
gift,  he  shall  have  a  crown  of  glory  from  me,  and 
there  sha'n't  be  a  thorn  in  it.  Look  up  that  Roman 
soldier  who  thrust  that  spear  into  my  side,  to  my 
very  heart,  and  tell  him  that  there's  a  nearer  way  to 
my  heart  than  that.  My  heart  is  full  of  love  for  his 
soul.  Proclaim  salvation  to  him." — D.  L.  Moody. 

To  whom  is  it  that  the  God  of  salvation  sent  "  the 
word  of  salvation  ?  "  He  sent  it  to  all  sinners  that 
hear  it.  It  is  a  word  that  suits  the  case  of  sinners; 
and  therefore  is  it  sent  to  them.  If  it  be  inquired, 

for  what  purpose  is  it  sent  to  sinners? It  is 

sent  as  a  word  of  pardon  to  the  condemned  sinner. 
Hence  may  every  condemned  sinner  take  hold  of  it, 
saying,  This  word  is  sent  to  me.  It  is  sent  as  a 
word  of  peace  to  the  rebellious  sinner.  It  is  sent  as 
a  word  of  life  to  the  dead.  It  is  a  word  of  liberty  to 
the  captives,  of  healing  for  the  diseased,  of  cleansing 
to  the  polluted.  It  is  a  word  of  direction  to  the  be 
wildered,  and  of  refreshment  to  the  weary.  It  is 


364  MY   SEKMON-jSTOTES. 

sent  as  a  comforting  word  to  the  disconsolate;  and  as 
a  drawing  word  and  a  strengthening  word  to  the  soul 
destitute  of  strength.  It  is  sent,  in  short,  as  a  word 
of  salvation,  and  all  sorts  of  salvation  and  redemption 
to  the  lost  soul,  saying,  "  Christ  came  to  seek  and  to 
save  that  which  was  lost."—  Condensed  from  Balph 
Erskine. 


CXCIII. 

"  AND  MANY  THAT  BELIEVED  CAME,  AND  CONFESSED,  AND  SHEWED 
THEIR  DEEDS. 

"MANY  OF  THEM  ALSO  WHICH  USED  CURIOUS  ARTS  BROUGHT 
THEIR  BOOKS  TOGETHER,  AXD  BURNED  THEM  BEFORE  ALL  MEN  : 
AND  THEY  COUNTED  THE  PRICE  OF  THEM,  AND  FOUND  IT  FIF 
TY  THOUSAND  PIECES  OF  SILVER. 

"SO   MIGHTILY   GREW   THE   WORD     OF     GOD    AND    PREVAILED." — 

Acts  xix.  18-20. 

THIS  last  verse  is  a  dispatch  from  the  seat  of  war 
announcing   a   glorious  victory  for  the  royal 
arms. 

Past  triumphs  of  the  gospel  may  he  used  as  en 
couragements. 

We,  too,  shall  see  the  Word  of  God  grow  and  pre 
vail;  for— 

The  gospel  is  the  same  as  ever. 

The  human  race  is  unchanged  at  heart. 

The  sins  to  be  overcome  are  the  same. 

The  Holy  Spirit  is  just  as  mighty  to  convince 

and  renew. 

The  trophies  of  victory  may  be  expected  to  be  the 
same. 

Men,  magic,  books,  and  the  love  of  money  shall 
all  be  subdued. 

Let  us  turn  aside  to  see — 

(365) 


MY  SERMOtf-NOTES. 

I.  THE  WORD  OP  GOD  PLANTED. 

Planted  it  was,  or  it  could  not  have  grown. 
The  work  proceeded  in  the  following  fashion — 

1.  Certain     disciples    were    further    enlightened, 

aroused,  and  led  to  seek  a  higher  degree  of 
grace.  This  was  an  admirable  beginning, 
and  revivals  thus  commenced  are  usually 
lasting. 

2.  These  became  obedient  to  an   ordinance  which 

had  been  overlooked  (verse  5),  and  also 
received  the  Holy  Ghost,  of  whom  they 
had  heard  nothing:  two  great  helps  to  re 
vival. 

3.  A  bold  ministry  proclaimed  and  defended  the 

truth. 

4.  Opposition  was  aroused.    This  is  always  a  need 

ful  sign.  God  is  not  at  work  long  without 
the  devil  working  also. 

5.  Deceitful  counterfeiting  commenced,  and  was 

speedily  ended  in  the  most  remarkable 
mariner. 

6.  Paul   preached,  pleaded,  made   the   gospel    to 

sound  forth,  and  on  departing  could  say, 
44 1  am  pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men." 
Read  this  and  the  following  chapter,  and  see  how 

three  years  were  well  spent  in  planting  the  churoh 

at  Ephesus. 

II.  THE  WORD  OF  GOD  GROWING. 

"So  mightily  grew  the  \vord  of  God."     The  meas 
ure  of  it  was  seen — . 


GROWING   AND   PREVAILING.  367 

1.  In  a  church  formed  with  many  suitable  elders. 

2.  In  a  neighborhood  fully  aware  of  the  presence* 

of  the  gospel  among  them ;  for  it  touched 
them  practically;  so  much  so,  that  import 
ant  trades  were  affected. 

3.  In  a  people  converted,  and  openly  confessing 

their  conversion. 

4.  In  a  general  respect  paid  to  the  faith.     Even 

those  who  did  not  obey  it,  yet  yielded  it 
homage  and  owned  its  power. 

Here  we  see  Paul's   work  and   God's  work.     Paul 
labored     diligently   in  planting,   and    God 
made  it  to  grow :  yet  it  was  all  of  God. 
Is  the  word  of  God  growing  among  us?     If  not, 
why  not  ? 

It  is  a  living  seed,  and  should  grow. 
It  is  a  living  seed,  and   will  grow  unless  we 
hinder  it. 

III.  THE  WORD  OF  GOD  PREVAILING. 

Growth  arouses  opposition;  but  where  the  word 
grows  with  inward  vitality  it  prevails  over  outward 
opposition. 

The  particular  proof  of  prevalence  here  given  is 
the  burning  of  magical  books. 

1.  Paul  does  not  appear  to  have  dwelt  continually 

upon  the  evil  habit  of  using  magical  arts; 
but  gospel  light  showed  the  guilt  of  witch 
craft,  and  providence  cast  contempt  on  it. 

2.  The   sin  being  exposed,  it   was   confessed   by 

those  who  had  been  guilty  of  it,  and  by 
those  who  had  commenced  its  study. 


368  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  Being  confessed,  it  was  renounced  altogether, 

and  though  there  was  no  command  to  that 
effect,  yet  in  a  voluntary  zeal  of  indigna 
tion  the  books  were  burned.  This  was 
right  because — 

If  sold,  they  would  do  harm. 

They  were  so  detestable  that  they  deserved 
burning. 

Their  public  burning  lighted  up  a  testimony. 

4.  Their  destruction  involved  expense,  which  was 

willingly  incurred,  and  that  expense  gave 
weight  to  the  testimony. 

No  other  proof  of  power  in  our  ministry  will 
equal  that  which  is  seen  in  its  practical  effect  upon 
our  hearers'  lives. 

Will  you  who  attend  our  preaching  see  to  it  that 
you  purge  yourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh 
and  of  the  spirit  ? 

SPARKS. 

It's  a  blessed  time  in  a  soul,  it's  a  blessed  time  in 
a  family,  it's  a  blessed  time  in  a  congregation,  it's  a 
blessed  time  in  a  country — when  the  word  of  God 

grows  mightily  and  prevails It's  a  blessed 

time  when  open  sinners  are  seen  leaving  their  sins 
and  seeking  the  Saviour;  when  men  are  seen  giving 
tip  their  unholy  gains;  when  tavern-keepers  take 
down  their  signs  and  burn  them — when  they  give 
up  their  licenses;  and  it's  a  blessed  time  when  card- 
players  throw  away  their  cards  and  take  the  Bible 
instead.  It's  a  blessed  time  when  the  lovers  of  gaudy 


GEOWING   AND   PREVAILING.  369 

dress  take  their  gaudy  dresses  and  destroy  them. — 
Robert  Murray  M'Cheyne. 

The  gospel,  like  a  plant  of  great  vigor,  will  grow 
almost  among  stones.  Thus  have  T  seen  it  to  grow 
among  hypocrites,  formalists,  and  worldlings;  and  I 
have  seen  it  laying  hold  of  one,  and  another,  and  in 
deed,  of  many,  however  untoward  the  surrounding 
soil.  "  So  mightily  grew  the  word  of  God  and  pre 
vailed." 

When  the  leaven  of  the  gospel  begins  to  work, 
there  will  be  no  need  of  a  train  of  arguments  to 
prove  how  inexpedient,  how  utterly  unworthy  it  is 
for  a  Christian  to  turn  aside  after  the  vain  amuse 
ments  and  trifling  books  used  by  the  world:  '*  Eph- 
raim  shall  say,  What  havo  I  to  do  any  more  with 
idols  ?  "  What  have  I  to  do  with  black  arts,  or  deal 
ing  with  a  Ho?  Those  who  first  trusted  in  Christ 
were  willing  to  forsake  all  and  follow  him.  The 
grace  of  the  gospel  produces  a  new  taste — it  alters 
everything  about  us, — our  friends,  our  pursuits,  our 
books,  &c. — Richard  (7cr.iV. 

Agesilaus,  when  he  saw  the  usurer's  bonds  and 
bills  blazing  in  the  fire,  said,  "  I  never  saw  a  better 
or  a  brighter  fire  in  all  my  life  !  "  and  it  were  hear 
tily  to  be  wished  that  all  scandalous,  blasphemous, 
and  seditious  books  and  pamphlets  were  on  the  fire? 
too. — John  Spencer. 

Yes,  God  blessed  the  self-denial,  and  gave  them 
compensation — and  a  compensation,  too,  remarkably 
24 


370  MY   SEEMOX -NOTES. 

appropriate.  They  who  burned  books  obtained 
books.  They  burned  books  for  Christ,  and  they  re 
ceived  books  from  him.  Have  you  never  heard  of 
Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  ?  Do  you  recollect 
no  such  letter  as  one  from  the  Saviour  "  to  the  An 
gel  of  the  church  at  Ephesus?" — T.  R.  Stevenson. 

The  Earl  of  Rochester,  of  whom  it  has  been  said 
that  he  was  u  a  great  wit,  a  great  scholar,  a  great 
poet,  a  great  sinner,  and  a  great  penitent,"  left  a 
strict  charge  to  the  person  in  whose  custody  his  pa 
pers  were,  to  burn  all  his  profane  and  lewd  writings, 
as  being  only  fit  to  promote  vice  and  immorality; 
by  which  he  had  so  highly  offended  God,  and 
shamed  and  blasphemed  the  holy  religion  into  which 
he  had  been  baptized. 


CXCIY. 

"  SAUL,  SAUL,  WHY  PERSECUTEST  THOU  ME  t  IT  is   HARD  FOR 

THEE  TO   KICK   AGAINST  THR  PRICKS." — Acts  XXVi.  14. 

T  ESUS  even  out  of  heaven  speaks  in  parables,  ae- 
«J  cording  to  his  wont. 

To  Paul  he  briefly  utters  the  parable  of  the  rebel 
lious  ox. 

Note  the  tenderness  of  the  appeal  :  it  is  not, 
u  Thou  art  harming  me  by  thy  persecutions,"  but, 
"  Thou  art  wounding  thyself."  He  saith  not,  "  it  is 
hard  for  me"  but  "  hard  for  thee." 

May  the  Lord  thus  speak  in  pity  to  those  who  are 
now  resisting  his  grace,  and  thus  save  them  from 
wounding  themselves. 

Listen  attentively  to  the  simple  comparison,  and 
observe — 

I.  THE  ox.     A  fallen  man  deserves  no  higher  type. 

1.  You  are  acting  like  a  brute  beast,  in  ignorance 

arid  passion.     You  are  unspiritual,  thought 
less,  unreasonable. 

2.  Yet  God  values  you  more  than  a  man  does  an 

ox. 

3.  Therefore  he  feeds  you,  and  does  not  slay  you. 

4.  You  are  useless  without  guidance,  and  yet  you 

(371) 


372  MY    SERMOINXN'OTES. 

are  unwilling  to  submit  to  your  Master's 
hand. 

5.  If  you  were  but  obedient  you  might  be  useful, 

and  might  find  content  in  your  service. 

6.  You  have  no  escape  from  the  choice  of  either 

to  obey  or  to  die,  and  it  is  useless  to  be 
stubborn. 

J I.  THE  OX-GOAD.     You  have  driven  the  Lord  to  treat 
you  as  the  husbandman  treats  a  stubborn  ox. 

1.  The  Lord  has  tried  you  with  gentle   means,  a 

word,  a  pull  of  the  rein,  etc.  :  by  parental 
love,  by  tender  admonitions  of  friends  and 
teachers,  and  by  the  gentle  promptings  of 
his  Spirit. 

2.  Now  he  uses  the  more  severe  means — 

Of  solemn  threatening  by  his  law. 
Of  terrors  of  conscience,  and  dread  of  judgment. 
Of  loss  of  relatives,  children,  friends. 
Of  sickness,  and  varied  afflictions. 
Of  approaching  death,  with  a  dark  future  be 
yond  it. 

3.  You  are  feeling  some  of  these  pricks,  and  can 

not  deny  that  they  are  sharp.  Take  heed 
lest  worse  things  come  upon  you. 

III.  THE  KICKS  AGAINST  THE   GOAD.      The se  are  given 
in  various  ways  by  those  who  are  resolved  to 
continue  in  sin. 

1.  There  are  early  childish  rebellions  against   re 
straint. 


THE   OX  AND   THE   GOAD.  373 

2.  There  are  sneers  at  the  gospel,  at  ministers,  at 

holy  things. 

3.  There  are  wilful  sins   against   conscience   and 

light. 

4.  There  are  revilings   and   persecutions   against 

God's  people. 

5.  There  are   questionings,  infidelities,  and  blas 

phemies. 

IV.    TlIE    HARDNESS    OP   ALL    THIS    TO    THE    OX.          It     hurts 

itself  against  the  goad,  and  suffers  far 
more  than  the  driver  designs. 

1.  Tn  the   present.     You   are    unhappy  :  you   are 

full  of  unrest  and  alarm,  you  are  increasing 
your  chastisement,  and  fretting  your  heart. 

2.  In  the  best  possible  future.     You  will  feel  bitter 

regrets,  have  desperate  habits  to  overcome, 
and  much  evil  to  undo.  All  this  if  you  do 
at  last  repent  and  obey. 

3.  In  the    more   probable   future.     You  are   pre 

paring  for  yourself  increased  hardness  of 
heart,  despair,  and  destruction. 
Oh,  that  you  would  know  that  no  possible   good 

can  come  of  kicking  against  God,  who  grieves  over 

your  infatuations! 

Yield  to  the  discipline  of  your  God. 

He  pities  you  now,  and  begs  you  to  consider  your 
ways. 

It  is  Jesus  who  speaks  ;  be  not  so  brutish  as  to 
refuse  him  that  speaks  from  heaven. 

You  may  yet,  like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  become  grandly 
useful,  and  plough  many  a  field  for  the  Lord  Jesus. 


374  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

STRIKING   THOUGHTS. 

Did  not  Lord  Byron  feel  the  sharpness  of  the  goad 
when  he  exclaimed,  concerning  the  gospel,  "The 
worst  of  it  is,  I  believe  it  ?" 

You  have  heard  of  the  sword-fish.  It  is  a  very 
curious  creature,  with  a  long  and  bony  beak,  or 
sword,  projecting  in  front  of  its  head.  It  is  also 
very  fierce,  attacking  other  fishes  that  come  in  its 
way,  and  trying  to  pierce  them  with  its  sword.  The 
fish  has  sometimes  been  known  to  dart  at  a  ship  in 
full  sail,  with  such  violence  as  to  pierce  the  solid 
timbers.  But  what  has  happened  ?  The  Billy  fish 
has  been  killed  outright  by  the  force  of  its  own 
blow.  The  ship  sails  on  just  as  before,  and  the 
angrv  sword-fish  falls  a  victim  to  its  own  rage.  But 
how  shall  we  describe  the  folly  of  those  who,  like 
Saul  of  Tarsus,  oppose  the  cause  of  Christ  ?  They 
cannot  succeed  :  like  the  sword-fish,  they  only  work 
their  own  destruction. — Illustrative  TeachiiKj. 

Dr.  John  Hall,  in  one  of  his  sermons,  compared 
the  attacks  of  infidelity  upon  Christianity  to  a  ser 
pent  gnawing  at  a  file.  As  he  kept  on  gnawing, 
he  was  greatly  encouraged  by  the  sight  of  the 
growing  pile  of  chips  ;  till,  feeling  pain,  and  seeing 
blood,  he  found  that  he  had  been  wearing  his  own 
teeth  away  against  the  file,  but  the  file  was  un 
harmed. 

Oh  cursdd,  cursed  Siu  !  Traitor  to  God, 
And  miner  of  man !    Mother  of  Woe, 
And  Death,  and  Hell ! 

Pollok. 


THE   OX  AND   THE  GOAD.  375 

Cowper  describes  Voltaire  as — 

"  An  infidel  in  health,  but  what  when  sick  ? 
Oh — then  a,  text  would  touch  him  at  the  quick." 

Men  complain  of  their  circumstances,  and  cry, 
"  This  is  hard — hard  as  for  the  bird  of  plumage  to 
beat  against  the  wires  of  its  cage."  Nay,  harder 
far  than  that.  It  is  hard  for  loss  of  time,  for  loss  of 
temper,  for  loss  of  strength,  for  loss  of  trusting,  lov 
ing  obedience ;  and  because  ?w  good  can  come  of  it,  no 
success  can  be  gained  in  the  vain,  Utopian,  and  worse 
than  foolish  struggle.  Let  every  man  struggle  to 
improve  himself,  and  he  will  not  fail  to  improve  his 
lot  also.  But  let  him  never  ukick"  against  his 
earthly  lot ;  for  so,  if  hurt  at  all,  he  hurts  himself  the 
more.  He  "  kicks  against  the  pricks." 

Pulpit  Commentary. 

The  Spirit  of  God  can  make  use  of  any  agency  to 
bring  sinners  to  repentance  and  faith  in  the  Redeem 
er.  Commenting  once  upon  the  words,  "The  ox 
knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib; 
but  Israel  doth  not  know,  my  people  doth  not  con 
sider,"  the  speaker  sought  to  impress  upon  his  peo 
ple  how  strangely  guilty  the  human  heart  is,  despis 
ing  the  goodness  of  God,  and  forgetting  his  very  ex 
istence.  Three  or  four  days  after,  a  farmer,  who  had 
been  present,  was  giving  provender  to  his  cattle, 
when  one  of  his  oxen,  evidently  grateful  for  his  care, 
fell  to  licking  his  bare  arm.  Instantly,  with  this 
simple  incident,  the  Holy  Spirit  flashed  conviction 
on  the  farmer's  mind.  He  burst  into  tears,  and  ex- 


376  MY   SEKMO^-NOTES. 

claimed,  "Yes,  it  is  all  true.  How  wonderful  is 
God's  word !  This  poor  dumb  brute  is  really  more 
grateful  to  me  than  I  am  to  God,  and  yet  I  am  in 
debt  to  him  for  everything.  What  a  sinner  I  am  ! " 
The  lesson  had  found  its  way  to  his  heart,  and 
wrought  there  effectually  to  lead  him  to  Christ. 


CXCY. 

'*  AJO>  THE  BARBAROUS  PEOPLE  SHEWED  US  NO  LITTLE  KIND 
NESS  :  FOR  THEY  KINDLED  A  FIRE,  AND  RECEIVED  US  EVERY 
ONE,  BECAUSE  OF  THE  PRESENT  RAIN,  AND  BECAUSE  OF  THE 

COLD." — Acts  xxviii.  2. 

HEKE  was  an  early  Shipwrecked  Mariners'  So 
ciety. 

Among  rough  people  there  is  much  of  genuine 
kindness. 

Let  not  people  of  a  gentler  mould,  greater  educa 
tion,  and  larger  possessions,  come  behind  them  in 
deeds  of  kindness. 

Their  kindness  was  thoroughly  practical.  We 
have  too  much  of  "  Be  ye  warmed,"  and  too  little 
kindling  of  fires. 

There  may  be  spiritual  as  well  as  physical  cold, 
and  for  this  last  the  kindling  of  a  fire  is  needed. 

This  is  our  present  subject. 

I.  THAT  WE  ARE  VERY  APT  TO  BE  COLD. 

1.  The  world  is  a  cold  country  for  gracious  men 

2.  By  reason  of  our  inbred  sin,  we  are  cold  subjects, 

and  far  too  apt  to  be  lukewarm,  or  frozen. 

3.  Cold  seasons  also  come,  when  all  around  lies 

bound  in  frost.     Ministers,  churches,  saints, 
are  too  often  cold  as  ice. 

f377) 


378  MY   SERMON -NOTES. 

4.  Cold  corners  are  here  and  there,  where  th«  sun 

seldom  shines.  Some  good  men  live  in 
such  cold  harbors. 

5.  Chilling   influences  are  now  abroad.     Modern 

thought,  worldliness,  depression  in  trade, 
depreciation  of  prayer,  etc. 

If  we  yield  to  the  power  of  cold,  we  become  first 
uncomfortable,  next  inactive,  and  then 
ready  to  die. 

II.  THAT  THERE  ARE  MEANS  OF  WARMTH. 

1.  The  Word  of  God  is  as  a  fire.     Heard  or  read, 

it  tends  to  warm  the  heart. 

2.  Private,  social,  and   family  prayer.     This  is  as 

coals  of  juniper. 

3.  Meditation  and  communion  with  Jesus.   "  While 

I  was  musing  the  fire  burned:"  Ps.  xxxix. 
3.  "  Did  not  our  heart  burn  within  us, 
while  he  talked  with  us  by  the  way?" 
Luke  xxiv.  32. 

4.  Fellowship  with  other  Christians.     Malachi  iii. 

16. 

Doing  good  to  others.  Job  prayed  for  his  friends, 
and  then  his  captivity  was  turned.  Job 
xlii.  10. 

6.  Returning  to  first  love  and  doing  first  works, 

would  bring  back  old  warmth.     Rev.  ii.  4,  5. 
Let  us  get  to  these  fires  ourselves,  lest  we  be  frost* 
bitten  and  benumbed. 

III.  THAT  WE  SHOULD  KINDLE  FIRES  FOR  OTHERS. 

We  need  the  fire  of  revival,  seeing  so  many  are 
washed  upon  our  shores  in  dying  circumstances. 


KINDLING  A  FIRE.  379 

Concerning  a  true  revival,  let  it  be  remembered 
that  it  both  resembles  the  fire  in  the  text,  and  differs 
from  it. 

1.  It  must  be  lighted  under  difficulties, — "  because 

of  the  present  rain."  The  sticks  are  wet, 
the  hearth  is  flooded,  the  atmosphere  is 
damp.  It  is  not  easy  to  make  a  fire  in  such 
circumstances  ;  and  yet  it  must  be  done. 

2.  The  fire  we  need  cannot,  however,  be  kindled 

by  barbarians  :  the  flame  must  come  from 
above. 

3.  Once  get  the  flame,  the  fire  begins  with  littles. 

Small  sticks  are  good  for  kindling. 
4  It  is  well  to  nourish  tho  flame  by  going  down 
on   your  knees,  and  breathing  upon  it  by 
warm  and  hearty  supplications. 

5.  It  must  be  fed  with  fuel.     Think  of  the  great 

Paul  picking  up  a  bundle  of  sticks.  Let 
each  one  bring  his  share. 

6.  This  lire  must  be  kindled  for  "  every  one.*"     We 

must  not  be  content  till  all  the  shivering 
ones  are  comforted. 

7.  The  fire  will  be  of  great  service,  and  yet  it  may 

warm  into  life  more  than  one  viper.  Thank 
God,  the  fire  which  revived  the  creature 
into  venomous  life  will  also  destroy  it. 

What  can  we  each  do  towards  this  fire  ?  Can  we 
not  each  one  either  kindle  or  feed  the  fire  ?  Bring 
a  stick. 

Let  no  one  damp  the  flame. 

Let  us  pray. 


380  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

KINDLING. 

How  to  maintain  spiritual  warmth.  Philip 
Henry  s  advice  to  his  daughter  was  :  "  If  you  would 
keep  warm  in  this  cold  season  (January,  1692),  take 
these  four  directions  :  1.  Get  into  the  sun.  Under 
his  blessed  beams  there  are  warmth  and  comfort. 
2.  Go  near  the  fire.  '  Is  not  my  word  like  a  fire  ?' 
How  many  cheering  passages  are  there !  3.  Keep 
in  motion  and  action — stirring  up  the  grace  and  gift 
of  God  that  is  in  you.  4.  Seek  Christian  communion. 
*  How  can  one  be  warm  alone  ?'  " — 

Feathers  for  Arrows. 

"  Ane  stick'll  never  burn  !  Put  more  wood  on  the 
fire,  laddie  ;  ane  stick'll  never  burn !"  my  old  Scotch 
grandfather  used  to  say  to  his  boys.  Sometimes 
when  the  fire  in  the  heart  burns  low,  and  love  to 
the  Saviour  grows  faint  ;  it  would  grow  warm  and 
bright  again,  if  it  could  only  touch  another  stick.  .  .  . 
What  we  need,  next  to  earnest  prayer  to  God  and 
communion  with  Christ,  is  communion  with  each 
other.  "  Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together," 
the  heart  burns  ;  love  kindles  to  a  fervent  heat. 
Friends,  let  us  frequent  the  society  of  those  who  are 
fellow  pilgrims  with  us  to  Canaan's  happy  land. 
"  Ane  stick'll  never  burn,"  as  a  great  generous  pile 
will  be  sure  to. — Anon. 

I  will  tell  you  a  story,  which  I  have  from  very 
good  hands,  of  two  very  eminent  men,  both  for 
learning  and  piety,  in  the  beginning  of  the  last 
century,  one  of  them  a  great  prelate  (indeed  a  pri- 


KINDLING  A  FIRE.  381 

mate),  and  the  other  a  Churchman  of  great  note. 
These  two  eminent  men  often  met  together  to  con 
sult  upon  the  interests  of  learning  and  the  affairs  of 
the  church  ;  and  when  they  had  dispatched  that 
business,  they  seldom  parted  from  one  another  with 
out  such  an  encounter  as  this  :  "  Come,  good  doc 
tor,"  said  the  bishop,  u  Let  us  talk  now  a  little  of 
Jesus  Christ  ;"  or,  on  the  other  side,  said  the  doctor, 
"  Come,  my  Lord,  let  me  hear  your  Grace  talk  of  the 
goodness  of  God  with  your  wonted  eloquence  ;  let 
us  warm  one  another's  hearts  with  heaven,  that  we 
may  better  bear  this  cold  world."  Here  is  now  an  ex 
ample  of  holy  conference  without  a  preface  and  yet 
without  exception  ;  a  precedent  easy  to  imitate 
wherever  there  is  a  like  spirit  of  piety.  A  few  such 
men  would  put  profaneness  out  of  countenance,  and 
turn  the  tide  of  conversation. —  Goodman. 

See  how  great  a  flame  aspires, 
Kindled  by  a  spark  of  grace ! 
Jesus'  love  the  nations  fires, 
Sets  the  kingdoms  in  a  blaze ; 
To  bring  fire  on  earth  he  carne, 
Kindled  in  some  heart  it  is  : 
Oh,  that  all  might  catch  the  flame, 
All  partake  the  glorious  bliss. 

C.  Wesley, 


Similes 
And  Their  Use 

By  GRENVILLE  KLEISER 

Author  of   "Fifteen   Thousand    Useful   Phrases," 
"How  to  Build  Mental  Power,"  etc. 

Every  one  is  familiar  with  such  common  similes 
as  "white  as  snow,"  "solid  as  a  rock,"  "cold  as  ice," 
"proud  as  a  peacock,"  "brave  as  a  lion,"  etc.,  and 
all  recognize  the  force  and  power  which  they  give 
to  speech  and  writing — yet  these  are  only  the  most 
ordinary  similes. 

If  you  would  make  your  speaking  and  writing 
more  impressive,  more  convincing,  and  more  beau 
tiful  you  will  find  no  better  method  of  accomplish 
ment  than  to  use  the  finer  kinds  of  similes.  In  so 
doing,  you  will  be  following  the  lead  of  the  great 
est  writers  and  speakers  of  all  times.  These 
similes  have  been  divided  into  four  groups;  Prose 
Similes,  Bible  Similes,  Poetic  Similes,  and  Miscel 
laneous  Similes. 

"All  writers  should  have  on  their  desk  a  copy  of 
'Similes  and  Their  Use*  by  Grenville  Kleiser.  You  all 
know  Roget's  'Thesaurus,'  put  'Similes  and  Their  Use' 
beside  it." — Overland  Monthly,  San  Francisco,  Calif. 

"Even  casual  acquaintance  with  this  work  should  help 
to  enrich  one's  language;  a  careful  study  of  it  will  be  of 
great  assistance."— Dcseret  News,  Salt  Lake  City,  Utah. 

"It  is  a  book  that  one  can  enjoy  with  no  definite  pur 
pose  in  mind." — Times  Star,  Cincinnati,  O. 

\2rno,  Cloth.     386  pages.     $2.00,  net;  $2.14,  post-paid. 

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY,  Publishers 
NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 


English  Synonyms,  An 
tonyms,  and  Prepositions 

By  JAMES   C.   FERNALD,   L.H.D.,   author  of  "Ex 
pressive      English,"      "Connectives      of      Englifh 
Speech,"     "Historic    English,"     "A     Working 
Grammar  of  the  English  Language,"  etc. 

WITH   this   book  in  your   possession, 
you  need  never  be  at  a  loss  for  the 
exact  word  you  want — the  one  ex 
pression  that  is  the  most  perfect  mirror  of 
your  thought. 

Much  of  the  charm  of  literary  composition, 
whether  private  correspondence  or  matter  for 
publication,  lies,  as  Dr.  Fernald  says,  "in  that 
exquisite  precision  in  the  choice  of  words  which 
never  seems  to  be  precise,  but  has  all  the  aspect 
of  absolute  freedom."  While  there  are  15 
synonyms  for  beautiful,  21  for  beginning  and 
37  for  pure,  there  is  usually  one  word  that  ex 
presses  the  shade  of  meaning  better  than  others. 

This  book  is  a  most  thoro  work  of  its  kind 
and  contains  more  than  8,000  classified  and 
discriminated  synonyms  with  nearly  4,000  an 
tonyms  ;  the  correct  use  of  prepositions  is  in 
dicated  by  illustrative  examples.  The  book  also 
contains  practical  helps  and  hints  on  the  correct 
use  of  words. 

I2mo,  Cloth.  742  pages.  $1.90,  net;  $2.00,  post 
paid.     Exquisitely    bound    in    full    crushed 
Levant,  gilt  edges,  hand  tooled,  raised 
bands,  boxed,  $10.00,  post-paid. 

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY,  Publishers 
354-360  Fourth  Avenue,  New  York,  N.  Y. 


