MY    SERMON-NOTES 


PART   IV. 


MY  SERMON-NOTES. 


A  SELECTION   FROM 


OUTLINES  OF  DISCOURSES 


DELIVERED  AX 


THE  METROPOLITAN  TABERNACLE 


!.   H.    SPURGEON. 


FROM  ROMANS  TO  REVELATION—  CXCVI.  TO  CGLWY  . 


FUNK  &  WAGNALLS 

YORK  AND  LONDON 


THF  „ 


V 


PREFACE. 


THIS  is  the  concluding  portion  of  "  My  Sermon- 
Notes."  There  are  many  more  skeletons  in  the 
tombs  from  which  these  have  been  brought  to  light, 
but  I  have  no  idea  of  summoning  any  more  of  them 
from  their  retirement.  I  have  no  desire  to  become 
the  rival  of  Mr.  Charles  Simeon ;  and  yet,  if  I  should 
copy  any  man's  outlines,  I  should  prefer  him  for  a 
model.  Notwithstanding  the  depreciatory  remarks 
which  I  have  frequently  read  from  witty  writers  who 
have  referred  to  that  great  sermonizer,  I  believe  that 
no  one  has  done  better  service  in  that  line  than  he. 
His  helps  were  needed  at  the  time  when  they  were 
prepared.  In  much  the  same  way  as  the  Homilies 
were  necessary  to  the  preachers  of  the  Reformed 
Church  in  its  infant  days,  Simeon's  outlines  were 
needed  by  a  newly-converted  clergy  who  had  begun 
to  feel  the  glow  of  the  great  Methodist  revival.  It 
may  be  that  these  Sermon-Notes  may  be  just  in  time 
for  a  return  of  zeal  for  the  doctrines  of  grace,  and  a 
restoration  of  spiritual  ardor,  when  young  men 
shall  feel  called  upon  to  speak  at  once  for  Jesus,  and 
shall  hardly  know  how  to  shape  their  thought's  ex 
pression  unless  some  man  shall  guide  them. 


VI  PREFACE. 

It  was  never  my  design  to  help  men  to  deliver  a 
message  which  is  not  their  own.  It  is  ill  when 
prophete  steal  their  prophecies  from  one  another,  for 
then  thej  are  likely — all  of  them — to  become  false 
prophets.  But  as  the  young  prophet  borrowed  an 
axe  of  a  friend,  and  was  not  censured  for  it  so  long 
as  the  strokes  he  gave  with  it  were  his  own,  so  may 
we  refrain  from  condemning  those  who  find  a  theme 
suggested  to  them,  and  a  line  of  thought  laid  before 
them,  and  with  all  their  hearts  use  them  in  speaking 
to  the  people.  This  should  not  be  their  custom: 
every  man  should  have  an  axe  of  his  own,  and  have 
no  need  to  cry,  "  Alas,  master !  it  was  borrowed " ; 
but  there  are  times  of  special  pressure,  bodily  sick 
ness,  or  mental  weariness,  wherein  a  man  is  glad  of 
brotherly  help,  and  may  use  it  without  question. 
For  such  occasions  I  have  tried  to  provide. 

I  am  more  than  ever  impressed  with  the  convic 
tion  that  men  must  not  only  preach  that  which  they 
have  themselves  thought  over,  and  prepared,  but  also 
that  which  they  have  themselves  experienced,  in  its 
life  and  power.  This  seed  of  our  teaching  must  be 
taken  alone  from  Holy  Scripture,  but  we  must  also 
plant  it  in  the  soil  of  our  own  spiritual  life,  and  pre 
sent  our  people  with  the  plants  which  come  from  it. 
Doctrines  are  well  taught  when  our  inner  life  con 
firms  them,  and  promises  are  fitly  discoursed  upon 
when  we  can  testify  that  we  have  tried  and  proved 
them.  As  precepts  can  never  be  powerfully  enforced, 
unless  they  are  carefully  practiced  by  the  preacher, 
so  high  ideals  of  spiritual  life  are  likely  to  remain 
mere  dreams,  unless  the  person  who  proposes  them 


PREFACE.  ™ 

f 

has  himself  realized  them.  It  f  s  neverwise  to  stretch 
your  arm  beyond  your  sleeve :  we  must  teach  that 
which  we  know,  and  no  more.  Experience  gives 
assurance  and  authority,  and  such  preaching  is, 
through  the  Spirit  of  God,  very  frequently  attended 
with  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,  such  as  we  do 
not  find  in  the  mere  professor  who  describes  what 
he  has  never  seen,  and  talks  of  matter  with  which 
he  has  no  acquaintance.  The  best  education  for  the 
Christian  ministry  is  a  deep  experience  of  divine 
truth  in  the  heart  and  life.  Truth  without  the  ex 
perience  of  it  is  without  dew;  and  very  little  refresh 
ment  arises  from  it  to  those  to  whom  it  comes.  Truth, 
which  we  have  made  our  own  by  experience,  will  be 
to  our  hearers  like  food  prepared  for  their  use,  roast 
ed  in  the  fire,  or  baked  in  the  oven :  apart  from  this 
it  will  be  raw  and  hard,  and  the  hearer  will  not  be 
able  to  digest  it,  and  will  lose  the  nutriment  which 
it  is  intended  to  convey. 

Oh,  that  I  may  help  some  of  my  brethren  so  to 
preach  as  to  win  souls  for  Jesus !  Warm,  personal 
testimony  is  greatly  useful  in  this  direction;  and, 
therefore,  I  trust  that,  by  adding  his  own  hearty 
witness  to  the  truths  which  I  have  here  outlined, 
many  a  believer  may  speak  successfully  for  the  Lord. 
I  commend  my  humble  labors  to  him  whom  I  desire 
to  serve  by  them.  Without  the  Holy  Spirit,  there  is 
nothing  here  but  a  valley  of  dry  bones;  but  if  the 
breath  shall  come  from  the  four  winds,  every  line 
will  become  instinct  with  life. 

Your  brother  in  Christ  Jesus, 

C.  H.  SPUBOHOR. 


CONTENTS. 


CXCVI.  Romans  ii.    4. — CONCERNING    THE 

FORBEARANCE  OF  GOD       ...       15 
CXCVII.  Romans  iv.  24. — JESUS  OUR  LORD.       21 
CXCVIII.  Romans  vi.  11,    12.— DEAD    BUT 

ALIVE 27 

CXCIX.  Romans  viii.  17. — HEIRS  OF  GOD.       33 
CC.  Romans  x.    16. — DISOBEDIENCE  TO 

THE    GOSPEL 39 

CGI.  Romans    xii.  16. — FELLOWSHIP  IN 

JOY 44 

CCII.  Romans  xv.  4. — PATIENCE,  COM 
FORT  AND  HOPE  FROM  THE  ScRIP- 
TURES 5G 

CCIII.  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20.— BOUGHT  WITH 

A  PRICE 56 

CCFV.  1  Cor.    xi.  24. — IN   REMEMBRANCE       62 
CCV.  1    Cor.   xi.    28. — EXAMINATION  BE 
FORE    COMMUNION 68 

CCVI.  1  Cor.  xv.  6.— FALLEN  ASLEEP      .       73 
CCVII.  2  Cor.    i.    3,  4.— COMFORTED    AND 

COMFORTING      .  ....       77 

CCVIII.  2  Cor.    i.    10.— THE  TENSES    .     .       82 

CCIX.  2  Cor.  i.  20.— ALL  THE    PROMISES      88 

(ix) 


;  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  PACK 

CCX.  2  Cor.     vii.    1.— THE    CLBANSIKG 

WHICH      COMES      OF      GODLINESS       .  94 

CCXI.  2  Cor.  vii.   10— SORROW  AND  SOR 
ROW      .........  99 

CCXI  I.  Gal.   i.  16. — A  CONFERENCE  TO  BE 

AVOIDED     ...          ....  104 

CCXIII.  Gal.  iii.  23.— UNDER  ARREST    .     .  110 

CCXIV.  Gal.   v.    7. — VARIOUS  HINDRANCES  116 
CCXV,  Gal.   v.  11. — THE  OFFENCE  OF  THE 

CROSS 122 

CCXVI.  Gal.    vi.    2— 5.— BURDEN-BEARING  127 
CCXVI1.  Gal.  vi.    7.  —SOWING  AND  REAPING  133 
CCXVIII.  Gal.  vi.   14.— THREE  CRUCIFIXIONS  139 
CCXIX.  Eph.  i.  13,    14.— THE  EARNEST     .  145 
CCXX.  Eph.  iii.    15.— THE  ROYAL  FAMILY  150 
CCXXI.  Eph.  iii.  16,  17,  18,  19.— MEASUR 
ING   THE    IMMEASURABLE     .     .     .  156 
CCXXII.  Eph.  iv.  15,  16.— THE  HEAD  AND 

THE   BODY 162 

CCXXIII.  Eph.  iv.  20,  21.— TRUE  LEARNING  167 
CCXXIV.  Eph.    v,     11.  — THE     CHILD     OF 
LIGHT  AND  THE  WORKS  OF  DARK 
NESS       171 

CCXXV,  Eph.    v.    25.— THE    PATTERN    OF 

LOVE 177 

CCXXVI.  Eph.  vi.  15.— HEAVENLY  SHOES     .  181 

CCXXVII.  Phil.  iv.  4.— JOY  A  DUTY     ...  187 

CCXXVIII.  Col.    i.    16.— CHRIST  THE  CREATOR  193 

CCXX1X.  Col.  ii.    6— AS  AND  SO      ...  199 

CCXXX.  Col.  iii.   11.— CHRIST  is  ALL    .     .  205 

CCXXXI.  1  Thess.   ii.    13,    14.— A    HAPPY 

MINISTER'S  MEETING      ....  211 


CONTENTS.  XI 

CHAJTB8  PAGE 

CCXXXII.  2  These,    iii.  13.— WBARINIBS    IN 

WELL-DOING        217 

CCXXXIII.  1  Tim.  i.  15— THE  FAITHFUL  SAT- 

ING 223 

CCXXXIV.  1  Tim.  i.  16.— PAUL'S  CONVERSION 

A  PATTERN 228 

CCXXXV.  2  Tim.  i.  12.— OUR  GOSPEL     .     .     234 
CCXXXVI.  2  Tim.  i.  18.— MERCY  IN  THE  DAY 

OF   JUDGMENT        239 

CCXXXVII.  2  Tim.  ii.  9.— THE  WORD  OF  GOD 

UNBOUND        245 

CCXXXVIII.  Titus  ii.  10.— GOSPEL  JEWELRY     .     250 
CCXXXIX.  Heb.  iv.  12. — THE  SWORD  OF  THE 

LORD 256 

CCXL.  Heb.    iv.    16. — BOLDNESS   AT   THE 

THRONE 262 

CCXLI.  Heb.  v.   2. — COMPASSION   ov    THE 

[GNORANT        , 268 

CCXLII.  Heb.   v.   8. — THE    EDUCATION    OF 

SONS   OF   GOD 274 

CCXLIII.  Heb.  x.  9.— THE  FIRST   AND   THE 

SECOND 279 

CCXLIV.  Heb.  xii.    13.— LAME  SHEEP    .     .     285 
CCXLV.  Heb.   xii.    25.— HEAR!  HEAR!     .     291 
CCXLVI.  Heb.  xiii.    5.— NEVER,    No  NEV 
ER,  No  NEVER 297 

CCXLYII.  James  i.    12.— THE   TRIED    MAN 

THE    BLESSED    MAN 303 

CCXLVIH.  James  iv.  6.— MORE  AND  MORE    .     309 
CCXLIX.  1  Pet.   i.    9. — SALVATION  AS   IT  is 

Now  RECEIVED 315 

OCL,  I  Pet.  iv.  18.— IF  so— WHAT  THBN ?    319 


Xll  CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER  PAG« 

CCLI.  1  Pet.  v.  1.— A  WITNESS   AND    A 

PARTAKER  ........     325 

CCLII.  2  Pet  li.  9.— THE  LORD'S   KNOW 
LEDGE    OUR   SAFEGUARD      .     .     .     329 
CCLIII.  1  John  iii.  2.— BY-AND-BT        .     .     333 
CCLIV.  1  John   iii.    3. — PURIFICATION    BT 

HOPE    .     .     .     , 339 

CCLV.  1  John   iii.  14. — LIFE  PROVED  BY 

LOVE 344 

CCLVI.  1  John   iii.  20,  21.— THB  LOWER 

COURTS 349 

CCLVII.  1  John    v.   4. —VICTORIOUS    FAITH    355 
CCLV1II.  3  John  2.— SOUL-HEALTH    ...     361 
CCLIX.  Jude   24,    25.— JUDE'S   DOXOLOGY     367 
CCLX.  Rev.   i.     7. — THE     COMING     WITH 

CLOUDS 371 

CCLXI.  Rev.    xi.    19.— THE    ARK  OF  His 

COVENANT 377 

CCLXII.  Rev.  xvi.  8,    9. — THE  REPENTANCE 

WHICH    GLORIFIES    GOD    .     .     ,     383 
CCLXII  I.  Rev.  xix.  9. — THE  MARRIAGE  SUP 
PER  OF  THE  LAMB 389 

CCLXIV.  Rev.  xix.  9. — THE  SCRIPTURES  DI 
VINELY  TRUE  .  395 


MY    SERMON-NOTES 


CXCVI-CCLXIV 


MY   SERMON-NOTES. 


CXCVL 

"  OR  DB8PISE8T  THOU  THE  RICHES  OF  HIS  GOODNESS  AND 
FORBEARANCE  AND  LONGSUFFERING ;  NOT  KNOWING  THAT 
THE  GOODNESS  OP  GOD  LKADETH  THEE  TO  REPENTANCE  f " — 

Romans  ii.  4. 

IT  is  an  instance  of  divine  condescension  that  the 
Lord  reasons  with  men,  and  asks  this  question, 
and  others  like  it.  Is.  i.  5,  Iv.  2;  Jer.  iii.  4;  Ezek. 
xxxiii.  11. 

God  not  only  acts  kindly  to  sinners,  but  when  they 
misuse  his  kindness  he  labors  to  set  them  right. 
Is.  i.  18 ;  Hosea  xi.  8. 

It  is  a  sad  thing  that  any  who  have  seen  God's 
judgments  on  others,  and  have  escaped  themselves, 
should  draw  from  this  special  mercy  a  reason  for 
adding  sin  to  sin.  Jer.  iii.  8. 

From  the  Lord's  earnest  question  let  us  learn  wis 
dom. 

I.  LET  us  HONOR  THE  LORD'S  GOODNESS  AND  FORBEARANCE 
A  reverent  sense  of  it  will  be  a  sure  safeguard 
against  despising  it. 

(15) 


18  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

1.  It  is  manifested  to  us  in  a  threefold  form — 

Goodness  which  has  borne  with  past  sin. 

Ps.  Ixxviii.  38. 
Forbearance  which  bears   with  us  in  the 

present.     Ps.  ciii.  10. 
LongsufFering  which,  in  the  future  as  in  the 

past   and    the   present,    is    prepared    to 

bear  with  the  guilty.     Luke  xiii.  7-9. 

2.  It  is  manifested  in  great  abundance :  "  riches 

of  his  goodness." 

Eiches  of  mercies  bestowed,  temporal  and 
spiritual.  Ps.  Ixviii.  19. 

Riches  of  kindness  seen  in  gracious  deliv 
erance,  measured  by  evils  averted  which 
might  have  befallen  us,  such  as  sickness, 
poverty,  insanity,  death,  and  hell.  Ps. 
Ixxxvi.  13. 

Riches  of  grace  promised  and  provided  for 
all  needs. 

3.  It  is  manifested  in  its  excellence  by  four  con 

siderations — 

The  person  who  shows  it.  It  is  "the  good 
ness  of  God"  who  is  omniscient  to  see 
sin,  just  to  hate  it,  powerful  to  punish  it, 
yet  patient  towards  the  sinner.  Ps. 
cxlv.  8. 

The  being  who  receives  it.  It  is  dealt  out 
to  man,  a  guilty,  insignificant,  base,  pro 
voking,  ungrateful  being.  Gen.  vi.  6. 

The  conduct  to  which  it  is  a  reply.  It  is 
love's  response  to  sin.  Often  God  for 
bears,  though  sins  are  many,  wanton,  ag- 


CONCERNING  THE  FOEBEAEANCE   OF   GOD.       17 

gravated,  daring,  repeated,  etc.  Mai.  iii.  6. 

The  boons   which   it   brings.     Life,    daily 

bread,   health,  gospel,  Holy  Spirit,  new 

birth,  hope  of  heaven,  etc.     Ps.  Ixviii.  19. 

4.  It  has  been  in  a  measure  manifested  to  you. 

"Despisest  thou?" 

II.  LET  US  CONSIDER  HOW  IT  MAY  BE  DESPISED. 

1.  By  allowing  it  to  remain  unnoticed:  ungrate 

fully  passing  it  over. 

2.  By  claiming  it  as  our  due,  and  talking  as  if 

God  were  bound  to  bear  with  us. 

3.  By  opposing  its  design,  and  refusing  to  repent. 

Prov.  i.  24,  25. 

4.  By  perverting  it  into  a  reason  for  hardness  of 

heart,  presumption,  infidelity,  and  further 
sin.  Zeph.  i.  12;  Eccl.  viii.  11. 

5.  By  urging  it  as  an  apology  for  procrastination. 

2  Pet.  iii.  3,  4. 

III.  LET    US    FEEL    THE    FORCE    OF    ITS    LEADINGS. 

The  forbearance  of  God  should  lead  us  to  repent 
ance. 
For  we  should  argue  thus: — 

1.  He  is  not  hard  and  unloving,  or  he  would  not 

have  spared  us. 

2.  His  great  patience  deserves  recognition  at  our 

hands.  We  are  bound  to  respond  to  it  in  a 
generous  spirit. 

3.  To  go  on  to  offend  would  be  cruel  to  him,  and 

disgraceful  to  ourselves.  Nothing  can  be 
baser  than  to  make  forbearance  a  reason 
for  provocation. 


18  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

4.  It  is  evident  from  his  forbearance  that  he  will 

rejoice  to  accept  us  if  we  will  turn  to  him. 
He  spares  that  he  may  save. 

5.  He  has  dealt  with  each  one  personally,  and  by 

this  means  he  is  able  to  put  it,  as  in  the  text, 
"  God  leadeth  tliee  to  repentance." 
He   calls  us  individually    to    himself.     Let 
each    one   personally    remember    his    own 
experience  of  sparing  mercies. 

6.  The  means  are  so  gentle,  let  us  yield  to  them 

cheerfully.     Those    who   might    refuse    to 
be  driven  should  consent  to  be  drawn. 

O  sinner,  each  gift  of  goodness  draws  thee  to 

Jesus ! 

Forbearance  would  fain  weep  thee  to  Jesus ! 
Longsuffering  waits  and  woos  thee  to  Jesus! 
Wilt  thou  not  turn  from    sin  and  return  unto  thj 
God,   or   "  despisest  thou  the   riches  of  his 
goodness  ?  " 

ARGUMENTS. 

Here  is  a  select  variety  of  admirable  words,  where 
the  critics  tell  us  that  the  first  word  signifies  the  in 
finite  goodness  and  generosity  of  the  Divine  nature, 
whereby  he  is  inclined  to  do  good  to  his  creatures, 
to  pity  and  relieve.  The  second  expresses  his  offers 
of  mercy  upon  repentance,  and  the  notices  and  warn 
ings  sinners  have  to  amend.  The  third  is  his  bear 
ing  the  manners  of  bold  sinners,  waiting  long  for 
their  reformation,  and  from  year  to  year,  deferring 
to  giye  the  final  stroke  of  vengeance.  In  what  an  apt 


OONOEENING  THE  FOBBEABANCE  OT  GOD.      19 

position  do  riches  of  Divine  goodness,  and  treasures  of 
wrath  to  come,  stand  to  one  another! — Anthony 
BlackwaU. 

The  forbearance  and  longsuffering  of  God  toward 
winners  is  truly  astonishing.  He  was  longer  in  de 
stroying  Jericho  than  in  creating  the  world. — Benja 
min  Beddome. 

According  to  the  proverb  of  the  Jews,  "  Michael 
flies  but  with  one  wing,  and  Gabriel  with  two  ";  God 
is  quick  in  sending  angels  of  peace,  and  they  fly 
apace;  but  the  messengers  of  wrath  come  slowly. 
God  is  more  hasty  to  glorifiy  his  servants  than  to 
condemn  the  wicked. — Jeremy  Taylor. 

It  is  observable  that  the  Roman  magistrates,  when 
they  gave  sentence  upon  any  one  to  be  scourged,  a 
bundle  of  rods  tied  hard  with  many  knots  was  laid 
before  them.  The  reason  was  this :  that  whilst  the 
beadle,  or  flagellifer,  was  untying  the  knots,  which 
he  was  to  do  in  a  certain  order,  and  not  in  any  other 
hasty  or  sudden  way,  the  magistrate  might  see  the 
deportment  and  carriage  of  the  delinquent,  whether 
he  were  sorry  for  his  fault,  and  showed  any  hope  of 
amendment,  that  then  he  might  recall  his  sentence, 
or  mitigate  the  punishment ;  otherwise  he  was  to  be 
corrected  the  more  severely.  Thus  God,  in  the  pun 
ishment  of  sinners,  how  patient  is  he  !  how  loath  to 
strike !  how  slow  to  anger  if  there  be  but  any  hopes 
of  recovery !  How  many  knots  doth  he  untie !  How 
many  rubs  doth  he  make  in  his  way  to  justice  !  He 
doth  not  try  us  by  martial  law,  but  pleads  the  case 
with  us,  "  Why  will  ye  die,  0  house  of  Israel  ?  * 


90  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

And  all  this  to  see  whether  the  poor  sinner  will 
throw  himself  down  at  his  feet,  whether  he  will  come 
in  and  make  his  peace,  and  be  saved. —  Thomas  Fut- 

ler. 

To  sin  against  law  is  daring,  but  to  sin  against 
love  is  dastardly.  To  rebel  against  justice  is  inex 
cusable,  but  to  fight  against  mercy  is  abominable. 
He  who  can  sting  the  hand  which  nourishes  him  is 
nothing  less  than  a  viper.  When  a  dog  bites  his 
own  master,  and  bites  him  when  he  is  feeding  him, 
and  fondling  him,  no  one  will  wonder  if  his  owner 
becomes  his  executioner. 


cxcvn. 

"  JESUS  OUR  LORD." — Romans  iv.  24. 

IT  is  the  part  of  faith  to  accept  great  contrasts,  if 
laid  down  in  the  Word,  and  to  make  them  a  part 
of  her  daily  speech. 

This  name,  Lord,  is  a  great  contrast  to  incarnation, 
and  humiliation. 

In  the  manger,  in  poverty,  shame,  and  death,  Jesus 
was  still  Lord. 

These  strange  conditions  for  "  our  Lord "  to  be 
found  in  are  no  difficulties  to  that  faith  which  is  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit. 

For  she  sees  in  the  death  of  Jesus  a  choice  reason 
for  his  being  our  Lord.  Phil.  ii.  7-11.  "  Wherefore 
God  hath  highly  exalted  him." 

She  delights  in  that  Lordship  as  the  fruit  of  resur 
rection;  but  there  could  have  been  no  resurrection 
without  death.  Acts  ii.  32-36. 

She  hears  the  voice  of  Jehovah  behind  all  the  op 
position  endured  by  Jesus,  proclaiming  him  Lord  of 
all.  Ps.  ii. ;  ex. 

It  never  happens  that  our  faith  in  Jesus  for  salva> 
tion  makes  us  less  reverently  behold  in  him  the  Lord 
of  all.  He  is  "  Jesus  "  and  also  "  our  Lord."  "Born 
a  child,  and  yet  a  King."  "My  Beloved,"  and  yet 
"  My  Lord  and  my  God." 

(21) 


22  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

Our  simple  trust  in  him,  our  familiar  love  to  him, 
our  bold  approaches  to  him  in  prayer,  our  near  and 
dear  communion  with  him,  and,  most  of  all,  our  mar 
riage  union  with  him,  still  leave  him  "  our  Lord." 

I.    HlS      TBNDER       CONDESCENSIONS      ENDEAR       THB      TITLB. 

"  Jesus  our  Lord  "  is  a  very  sweet  name  to  a 
believer's  heart. 

1.  We  claim  to  render  it  to  him  specially  as  man, 

"who  was  delivered  for  our  offences,  and 
was  raised  again  for  our  justification  " :  verse 
25.  As  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  lie  is  Lord. 

2.  We  acknowledge  him  as  Lord  the  more  fully 

and  unreservedly,  because  he  loved  us,  and 

gave  himself  for  us. 
&  In  all  the  privileges  accorded  to  us  in  him  he 

is  Lord  :— 
In  our  salvation,  we  have   "received   Christ 

Jesus  the  Lord  " :  Col.  ii.  6. 
In  entering  the  church  we  find  him  the  head  of 

the  bodv,  to  whom  all  are  subject.     Eph.  v. 

23. 
In  our  life-work  he  is  Lord.     "  We  live  unto 

the  Lord":  Rom.  xiv.  8.     We  glorify  God  in 

his  name.     Eph.  v.  20. 
In  resurrection  he  is  the  firstborn  from  the 

dead.     Col.  i.  18. 
At   the  Advent   his   appearing    will   be   the 

chief  glory.     Titus  ii.  13. 
In  eternal  glory  he  is  worshipped  for  ever. 

Rev.  v.  12,  13. 
4.  In  our  dearest  fellowship   at  the  table  he  ic 

"Jesus  our  Lord." 


"JESUS  OUE  LOKD."  28 

It  is  the  Lord's  table,  the  Lord's  supper,  the 
cup  of  the  Lord,  the  body  and  blood  of  the 
Lord;  and  our  object  is  to  show  the  Lord's 
death.  1  Cor.  xi.  20,  26,  27,  29. 

II.    OUB    LOVING    HEARTS   READ   THE    TITLE     WITH    PECULIAR 
EMPHASIS. 

1.  We  yield  it  to  him  only.     Moses  is  a  servant, 

but  Jesus  alone  is  Lord.  "  One  is  your 
Master":  Matt,  xxiii.  8,  10. 

2.  To  him  most  willingly.     Ours  is  delighted  hom 

age. 

3.  To  him  unreservedly.     We  wish  our  obedience 

to  be  perfect. 

4  To  him  in  all  matters  of  law-making  and  truth- 
teaching.  He  is  Master  and  Lord:  his 
word  decides  practice  and  doctrine. 

5.  To  him  in  all  matters  of  administration  in  the 

church,  and  in  providence.  "  It  is  the 
Lord,  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good  ": 
1  Sam.  iii.  18. 

6.  To  him  trustfully,  feeling  that  he   will  act  a 

Lord's  part  right  well.  No  king  can  be  so 
wise,  good,  great  as  he.  Job  i.  21. 

7.  To  him  forever.     He  reigns  in  the  church  with 

out  successor.  Now,  as  in  the  first  days, 
we  call  him  Master  and  Lord.  Heb.  vii.  3. 

III.    WE  FIND  MUCH  SWEETNESS  IN  THE  WORD  "  OUR." 

1.  It  makes  us  remember  our  personal  interest  in 

the  Lord. 

Each  believer  uses  this  title  in  the  singular, 
and  calls  him  from  his  heart,  "  My  Lord." 


MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

David   wrote,    "Jehovah  said  unto   my 

Lord." 
Elizabeth  spoke  of  "The  mother  of  my 

Lord." 
Magdalene  said,  "  They  have  taken  away 

my  Lord." 

Thomas  said,  "  My  Lord  and  my  God." 
Paul  wrote,    "  The  knowledge  of  Christ 

Jesus  my  Lord,"  etc. 

2.  It  brings  a  host  of  brethren  before  our  minds; 

for  it  is  in  union  with  them  that  we  say 
"our  Lord";  and  so  it  makes  us  remember 
each  other.  Eph.  iii.  14,  15. 

3.  It  fosters  unity,  and  creates  a  holy  clanship,  as 

we  all  rally  around  our  "  one  Lord."  Saints 
of  all  ages  are  one  in  this. 

4.  His   example  as    Lord  fosters  practical   love. 

Remember  the  foot-washing  and  his  words 
on  that  occasion.  John  xiii.  14. 

5.  Our  zeal  to  make  him  Lord  forbids  all  self-exal 

tation.  "  Be  not  ye  called  Rabbi :  for  one 
is  your  Master,  even  Christ.  Neither  be  ye 
called  masters,"  etc. :  Matt,  xxiii.  8,  10. 

6.  His  position  as  Lord  reminds  us  of  the  confi 

dence  of  the  church  in  doing  his  work. 
"  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and 
in  earth.  Go  ye,  therefore,  and  teach,"  etc. : 
Matt,  xxviii.  18,  19.  "  The  Lord  working 
with  them  ":  Mark  xvi.  20. 

7.  Our  common  joy  in  Jesus  as  our  Lord  becomes 

an  evidence  of  grace,  and  thus  of  union 
with  each  other.  1  Cor.  xii.  3. 


"JESUS   OUR  LORD."  26 

Let  us  worship  Jesus  as  our  Lord  and  God. 

Let  us  imitate  him,  copying  our  Lord's  humilitj 

and  love. 
Let  us  serve  him,  obeying  his  every  command. 

GEMS. 

It  ought  to  be  the  great  care  of  every  one  of  us  to 
follow  the  Lord  fully.  We  must  in  a  course  of  obe 
dience  to  God's  will,  and  service  to  his  honor,  follow 
him  universally,  without  dividing;  uprightly,  with 
out  dissembling;  cheerfully,  without  disputing;  arid 
constantly,  without  declining:  and  this  is  following 
him  fully. — Matthew  Henry. 

A  disciple  of  Christ  is  one  that  gives  up  himself  to 
be  wholly  at  Christ's  disposing;  to  learn  what  he 
teaches,  to  believe  what  he  reveals,  to  do  what  he 
commands,  to  avoid  what  he  forbids,  to  suffer  what 
is  inflicted  by  him  or  for  him,  in  expectation  of 
that  reward  which  he  hath  promised.  Such  a  one  is 
a  disciple  of  Christ,  and  he,  and  none  else,  is  a  Chris 
tian. — David  Glarkson. 

It  was  thought  a  wondrous  act  of  condescension 
when  King  George  III.  visited  the  tent  of  the  dying 
gipsy  woman  in  Windsor  forest,  and  entered  into 
religious  conversation  with  her.  What  shall  we 
think  of  him,  who,  though  he  was  the  King  of  glory, 
came  down  to  us,  and  took  our  sins  and  sorrows  upon 
himself,  that  he  might  bring  us  into  fellowship  with 
himself  for  ever  ? 

A  little  child  hearing  others  speak  of  the  Lord 


96  MY  SEBMON-NOTES. 

Jesus,  asked,  "  Father,  was  it  our  Jesus  ?  **  In  the 
same  sweet  simplicity  of  faith  let  us  speak  of  "  Jesus 
our  Lord." 

Some  years  ago,  an  aged  minister,  who  had  long 
and  lovingly  known  Christ,  was  on  his  death-bed. 
Memory  had  gone.  In  relation  to  those  he  loved 
best  it  was  a  perfect  blank.  But  some  one  whispered 
in  his  ear,  "Brother,  do  you  know  Jesus  Christ?" 
With  a  voice  of  rapture  he  exclaimed, 

"  Jesus,  my  Lord !    I  know  his  name ; 

His  name  is  all  my  trust; 
Nor  will  he  put  my  hope  to  shame, 
Nor  let  my  soul  be  lost." 


CXCVIIL 

"  LIKEWISE  RECKON  YE  ALSO  YOURSELVES  TO  BE  DEAD  INDKIED 
UNTO  SIN,  BUT  ALIVE  UNTO  GOD  THROUGH  JE8U8  CHRIST  OUR 
LORD." 

"  LET  NOT  SIN  THEREFORE  REIGN  IN  YOUR  MORTAL  BODY,  THAT 

YE    SHOULD  OBEY  IT  IN  THE   LUSTS    THEREOF."— .Rjmatt*    VJ. 
11,12. 

HOW  intimately  the  believer's  duties  are  inter 
woven  with  his  privileges !  Because  he  is 
alive  unto  God,  he  is  to  renounce  sin,  since  that  cor 
rupt  thing  belongs  to  his  estate  of  death. 

How  intimately  both  his  duties  and  his  privileges 
are  bound  up  with  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord  ! 

How  thoughtful  ought  we  to  be  upon  these  mat 
ters;  reckoning  what  is  right  and  fit;  and  carrying  out 
that  reckoning  to  its  practical  issues. 

We  have  in  our  text, — • 

I.    A   GREAT   FACT     TO   BE     RECKONED     UPON.        l<  Likewise 

reckon  ye  yourselves  to  be  dead  indeed  unto 
sin,  but  alive  unto  God,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord." 

1.  We  are  dead  with  Christ  to  sin  by  having  borne 

the  punishment  in  him.  In  Christ  we  have 
endured  the  death  penalty,  and  are  regarded 
as  dead  by  the  law  (verses  6  and  7). 

2.  We  are  risen  with  him  into  a  justified  condi 

tion,  and  have  reached  a  new  life  (verse  8). 

(27) 


28  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  We  can  no  more  come  under  sin  again  than  b« 

can  (verse  9). 

4.  We  are  therefore  for  ever  dead  to  its  guilt  and 

reigning  power:  "  Sin   shall  not  have  do 
minion  over  you  "  (verses  12-14). 

This  reckoning  is  based  on  truth,  or  we  should  not 
be  exhorted  to  it. 

To  reckon  yourself  to  be  dead  to  sin,  so  that  you 
boast  that  you  do  not  sin  at  all,  would  be  a  reckon 
ing  based  on  falsehood,  and  would  be  exceedingly 
mischievous.  "There  is  no  man  that  sinneth  not." 
1  Kings  viii.  46;  1  John  i.  8.  None  are  so  provok 
ing  to  God,  as  sinners  who  boast  their  own  fancied 
perfection. 

The  reckoning  that  we  do  not  sin,  must  either  go 
upon  the  Antinomian  theory,  that  sin  in  the  believer 
is  no  sin.  which  is  a  shocking  notion, 

Or  else  our  conscience  must  tell  us  that  we  do 
sin  in  many  ways;  in  omission  or  commission,  in 
transgression  or  short-coming,  in  temper  or  in  spirit. 
James  hi.  2;  Ecc.  vii.  20;  Rom.  iii.  23. 

To  reckon  yourself  dead  to  sin  in  the  spiritual 
sense  is  full  of  benefit  both  to  heart  and  life.  Be  a 
ready  reckoner  in  this  fashion. 

II.     A     GREAT     LESSON     TO    BE    PUT    IN     PRACTICE.        "  Let 

not  sin  therefore  reign  in  your  mortal  body, 
that  ye  should  obey  it  in  the  lusts  thereof." 
1.  Sin  has  great  power;  it  is  in  you,  and   will 

strive  to  reign. 
It  remains  as  an  outlaw,  hiding  away  in  your 

nature. 


BEAD   BUT   ALIVE.  20 

It  remains  as  a  plotter,  planning  your  over 
throw. 

It  remains  as  an  enemy,  warring  against  the 
law  of  your  mind. 

It  remains  as  a  tyrant,  worrying  and  oppress 
ing-  the  true  life. 

2.  Its  field  of  battle  is  the  body. 

Its  wants,  hunger,  thirst,  cold,  &c.,  may  be 
come  occasions  of  sin,  by  leading  to  mur 
muring,  envy,  covetousness,  robbery,  etc. 

Its  appetites  may  crave  excessive  indulgence, 
and  unless  continually  curbed,  will  easily 
lead  to  evil. 

Its  pains  and  infirmities,  though  engendering 
impatience  and  other  faults,  may  produce  sin. 

Its  pleasures,  also,  can  readily  become  incite 
ments  to  sin. 

Its  influence  upon  the  mind  and  spirit  may 
drag  our  noble  nature  down  to  the  grovel 
ling  materialism  of  earth. 

3.  The  body  is  mortal,  and  we  shall  be  completely 

delivered  from  sin,  when  set  free  from  our 
present  material  frame,  if  indeed,  grace 
reigns  within.  Till  then  we  shall  find  sin 
lurking  in  one  member  or  another  of  "  this 
vile  body." 

4.  Meanwhile  we  must  not  let  it  reign. 

If  it  reigned  over  us  it  would  be  our  god.  It 
would  prove  us  to  be  under  death,  and  not 
alive  unto  God. 

It  would  cause  us  unbounded  pain  and  injury 
if  it  ruled  only  for  a  moment. 


80  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

Sin  is  within  us,  aiming  at  dominion;  and  this 
knowledge,  together  with  the  fact  that  we  are  nev 
ertheless  alive  unto  God,  should — 

Help  our  peace;  for  we  perceive  that  men 
may  be  truly  the  Lord's,  even  though  sin 
struggles  within  them. 

Aid  our  caution;  for  our  divine  life  is  well 
worth  preserving,  and  needs  to  be  guarded 
with  constant  care. 

Draw  us  to  use  the  means  of  grace,  since  in 
these  the  Lord  meets  with  us  and  refreshes 
our  new  life. 

Let  us  come  to  the  table  of  communion  and  to  all 
other  ordinances,  as  alive  unto  God;  and  in  that 
manner,  let  us  feed  on  Christ. 

INSTRUCTIVE  WORDS. 

In  the  fourth  century,  when  the  Christian  faith 
was  preached  in  its  power  in  Egypt,  a  young  brother 
sought  out  the  great  Macarius.  "  Father,"  said  he, 
"  what  is  the  meaning  of  being  dead  and  buried  with 
Christ?" 

"  My  son,"  answered  Macarius,  "  you  remember 
our  dear  brother  who  died,  and  was  buried  a  short 
time  since  ?  Go  now  to  his  grave,  and  tell  him  all 
the  unkind  things  that  you  ever  heard  of  him,  and 
that  we  are  glad  he  is  dead,  and  thankful  to  be  rid 
of  him,  for  he  was  such  a  worry  to  us,  and  caused 
so  much  discomfort  in  the  church.  Go,  my  son,  and 
say  that,  and  hear  what  he  will  answer." 

The  young  man  was  surprised,  and  doubted 
whether  he  reallv  understood:  but  Macarius  only 


DEAD  BUT  ALIVE.  31 

gaid,  "  Do  as  I  bid  you,  my  son,  and  come  and  tell 
me  what  our  departed  brother  says." 

The  young  man  did  as  he  was  commanded,  and 
returned. 

"  Well,  and  what  did  our  brother  say  ? "  asked 
Macarius. 

"  Say.  father  !  "  he  exclaimed;  "  how  could  he  say 
anything  ?  He  is  dead." 

"  Go  now  again,  my  son,  and  repeat  every  kind 
and  flattering  thing  you  have  ever  heard  of  him ; 
tell  him  how  much  we  miss  him ;  how  great  a  saint 
h«  was;  what  noble  work  he  did;  how  the  whole 
church  depended  upon  him;  and  come  again  and 
tell  me  what  he  says." 

The  young  man  began  to  see  the  lesson  Macarius 
would  teach  him.  He  went  again  to  the  grave,  and 
addressed  many  flattering  things  to  the  dead  man, 
and  then  returned  to  Macarius. 

"He  answers  nothing,  father;  he  is  dead  and 
buried." 

"You  know  now,  my  son,"  said  the  old  father, 
"what  it  is  to  be  dead  with  Christ.  Praise  and 
blame  equally  are  nothing  to  him  who  is  really  dead 
and  buried  with  Christ." — Anon. 

Though  the  lowest  believer  be  above  the  power 
of  sin,  yet  the  highest  believer  is  not  above  the 
presence  of  sin.  Sin  never  ruins  but  where  it  reigns. 
It  is  not  destroying  where  it  is  disturbing.  The  more 
evil  it  receives  from  us,  the  less  evil  it  does  to  us. — 
Williarrt~Becker. 


33  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Sin  may  rebel,  but  it  shall  never  reign,  in  a  saint. 
It  fareth  with  sin  in  the  regenerate  as  with  those 
beasts  that  Daniel  speaks  of,  "  that  had  their  domin 
ion  taken  away,  yet  their  lives  were  prolonged  for  a 
season  and  a  time." — Thomas  Brooks. 

Men  must  not  suffer  a  single  sin  to  survive.  If 
Saul  had  destroyed  all  the  Amale kites,  no  Amalekite 
would  have  lived  to  destroy  him. — David  Boland. 


CXCIX. 

*AND  IF  CHTLEREN,    THEN    HEIRS;   HEIRS  OF  GOD,   AND  JOINT- 
HEIRS  WITH  CHRIST  ;  IF  so  BE  THAT  WE  SUFFER  WITH  HIM, 

THAT  WE  MAY  BE  ALSO  GLORIFIED  TOGETHER." — Eom.  viii.  17. 

THIS  chapter  is  like  the  garden  of  Eden,  which 
had  in  it  all  manner  of  delights.  If  one  were 
shut  up  to  preach  only  from  the  eighth  of  Romans 
he  would  have  a  subject  which  might  last  a  life 
time.  Every  line  of  the  chapter  serves  for  a  text. 
It  is  an  inexhaustible  mine.  Paul  sets  before  us  a 
golden  ladder,  and  from  every  step  he  climbs  to 
something  yet  higher:  from  sonship  he  rises  to 
heirship,  and  from  heirship  to  joint-heirslrp  with 
the  Lord  Jesus. 

I.  THE  GROUND  OP  HEmsHip.     "If  children,  then  heirs." 

1.  It  does  not  follow  from  ordinary  creation.     It  is 

not  written — if  creatures,  then  heirs. 

2.  Neither  is  it  found  in  natural  descent.     It  is 

not  written — if  children  of  Abraham,  then 
heirs.     Rom.  ix.  7 — 13. 

3.  Nor  can  it  come  by  meritorious  service.     It  is 

not   written — if  servants,  then  heirs      Gal. 
iv.  30. 

4.  Nor    by    ceremonial    observances.     It   is    not 

written — if  circumcised  or  baptized,  then 
heirs.    Bom  iv.  9 — 12. 

S  «3gf 


34  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Our  being  regenerated  or  born  again  unto  God  by 
his  Holy  Spirit  is  our  one  ground  of  heir- 
ship. 
Let  us  enquire — 

Have  we  been  born  again  ?     John  iii.  3. 
Have  we  the  spirit  of  adoption  ?     Gal.  iv.  6. 
Are  we  fashioned  in  the  likeness  of  God  ?     Col. 

iii.  10. 
Have  we  believed  on  Jesus  ?     John  i.  12. 

II.  THE  UNIVERSALITY  OF  THE  HEiRSHiP.     "Children,  then 

heirs." 

1.  The  principle  of  priority  as  to  time  cannot  enter 

into  this  question.  The  elder  and  the 
younger  in  the  divine  family  are  equally 
heirs. 

2.  The  love  of  God  is  the  same  to  them  all. 

3.  They  are  all  blessed  under  the  same  promise. 

Heb.  vi.  17. 

4.  They  are  all  equally  related  to  that  great  First 

born  Son  through  whom  their  heirship 
conies  to  them.  He  is  the  first-born  among 
many  brethren. 

5.  The  inheritance  is  large  enough  for  them  all. 
They  are  not  all  prophets,  preachers,  apostle.*,  or 

even  well-instructed  and  eminent  saints;  they  are 
not  all  rich  and  influential;  they  are  not  all  strong 
and  useful;  but  they  are  all  heirs. 

Let  us,  then,  all  live  as  such,  and  rejoice  in  our 
portion. 

III.  THE    INHERITANCE    WHICH   IS  THE  SUBJECT  OP  HEIRSHIP 

"  Heirs  of  God." 


HEIRS   OF   GOD.  36 

Our  inheritance  is  divinely  great.     We  are — 

Heirs  of  all  things.  "  tie  that  overcorneth 
shall  inherit  all  things:  "  Rev.  xxi.  7.  "  All 
things  are  yours : ''  2  Cor.  iii.  21. 

Heirs  of  salvation.     Heb.  i.  14. 

Heirs  of  eternal  life.     Tit.  iii.  7. 

Heirs  of  promise.     Heb.  vi.  17. 

Heirs  of  the  grace  of  life.     1  Pet.  iii.  7. 

Heirs  of  righteousness.     Heb.  XL  7. 

Heirs  of  the  kingdom.     James  ii.  5. 
Whereas  we  are  said  to  be  "heirs  of  God,"  it  must 

mean  that  we  are — 

1.  Heirs  of  all  that  God  possesses. 

2.  Heirs  of  all  that  God  is.     Of  his  love;  for  God 

is  love.     Hence  heirs  of  all  possible  good; 
for  God  is  good. 

3.  Heirs  of  God  himself.     What  an  infinite  portion! 

4.  Heirs  of  all  that  Jesus  has  and  is,  as  God  and 

man. 

IV.       THE    PARTNERSHIP   OF    THE   CLAIMANTS    TO    HEIRSHIP. 

"  And  joint-heirs  with  Christ." 

1.  This  is  the  test  of  our   heirship.     We  are  not 

heirs  except  with  Christ,  through  Christ, 
and  in  Christ. 

2.  This  sweetens  it  all.     Fellowship  with  Jesus  is 

our  best  portion. 

3.  This  shows  the    greatness  of  the  inheritance. 

Worthy  of  Jesus.     Such  an  inheritance  as 
the  Father  gives  to  the  Well-beloved. 

4.  This  ensures  it  to  us ;  for  Jesus  will  not  lose  it, 

and  his  title-deed  and  ours  are  one  and  in 
divisible. 


36  MY   SERMON -NOTES. 

5.  This  reveals  and  endears   his  lore.     That  he 

should  become  a  partner  with  us  in  all 
things  is  love  unbounded. 

His  taking  us  into  union  with  himself  secures 
our  inheritance. 

His  prayer  for  us  attains  it. 

His  going  into  heaven  before  us  prepares  it. 

His  coming  again  will  bring  us  the  full  enjoy 
ment  of  it. 

6.  This  joint   heirship  binds  us  faster  to  Jesus, 

since  we  are  nothing,  and  have  nothing 
apart  from  him. 

Let  us  joyfully  accept  the  present  suffering  with 
Christ,  for  it  is  part  of  the  heritage. 

Let  us  believe  in  the  glorification  which  is  sure  to 
follow  in  due  time,  and  let  us  anticipate  it  with  im 
mediate  rejoicing. 

NOTES. 

How  God  treats  men.  "  He  pardons  them  and 
receives  them  into  his  house,  he  makes  them  all 
children,  and  all  his  children  are  his  heirs,  and  all 
his  heirs  are  princes,  and  all  his  princes  are  crowned.'' 
— John  Pus8;'ord. 

As  a  dead  man  cannot  inherit  an  estate,  no  more 
can  a  dead  soul  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God. — Sailer. 

It  is  not  easy  to  imagine  a  more  cautious,  lawyer- 
like  record  than  the  following:  entry  in  a  MS.  book 


HEIRS   OF   GOD.  37 

written  by  the  celebrated  Lord  Eldon:  "  I  was  born, 
I  believe,  on  the  4th  June,  1751."  We  may  suppose 
that  this  hesitating  statement  refers  to  the  date,  and 
not  to  the  fact,  of  his  birth.  Many,  however,  are 
just  as  uncertain  about  their  spiritual  birth.  It  is  a 
grand  thing  to  be  able  to  say,  "  We  know  that  we 
have  passed  from  death  unto  life,"  even  though  we 
may  not  be  able  to  put  a  date  to  it. 

As  justification  is  union  and  communion  with 
Christ  in  his  righteousness;  and  sanctificatiori  is 
union  and  communion  with  Christ  in  his  holiness,  or 
his  holy  character  and  nature;  so,  by  parity  of  rea 
soning,  adoption  must  be  held  to  be  union  and  com 
munion  with  Christ  in  his  Sonship ;  surely  the  high 
est  and  best  union  and  communion  of  the  three. — 
Dr.  Cancttish. 

Inheritance. — What  is  it  ?  The  pay  of  a  soldier  is 
not  inheritance;  neither  are  the  fees  of  a  lawyer,  nor 
of  a  physician;  nor  the  gains  of  trade;  nor  the  wages 
of  labor.  The  rewards  of  toil  or  skill,  these  are 
earned  by  the  hands  that  receive  them.  What  is  in 
herited,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  the  property  of  a 
new-born  babe;  and  so  the  coronet,  won  long  ago  by 
the  stout  arm  of  valor,  and  first  blazoned  on  a  batter 
ed  shield,  now  stands  above  the  cradle  of  a  wailing 
infant. — Dr.  Chtthrie. 

The  question  lies  in  that  first  word  "«/"."  Can  you 
cast  out  all  uncertainty  from  that  matter  by  proving 
your  sonship  ?  "  Then  " — ah !  then,  no  doubt  remains 
as  to  your  heirship.  No  man  need  question  that  heav- 


38  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

en  will  be  his  if  be  is  the  Lord's.  The  inheritance  is 
— to  be  glorifiel  together  with  Christ.  What  more 
could  a  child  desire  than  to  inherit  as  much  as  his 
eldest  brother  ?  If  we  are  as  favored  as  Jesus,  what 
more  can  we  be  ? 


CO. 


"  BUT  THEY  HAVE  NOT  ALL  OBEYED  THE    GOSPEL.      FOR    ESAIAS 
8AITH,    LORD,   WHO    HATH   BELIEVED   OUR  REPORT?" — tfomailS 

X.    16. 

MAN  is  the  same  disobedient  creature  under  all 
dispensations.  We  bemoan  his  rejection  of 
the  gospel,  and  so  did  Isaiah,  who  spoke  in  the  name 
o±  the  whole  company  of  the  prophets. 

It  is  one  of  the  greatest  proofs  of  the  depravity  of 
man's  heart  that  he  will  no  more  obey  the  gospel 
than  the  law,  but  disobeys  his  God,  whether  he  speaks 
to  him  in  love  or  in  law. 

Men  will  sooner  be  lost  than  trust  their  God. 

When  any  receive  the  gospel  it  is  a  work  of  grace 
— "  the  arm  of  the  Lord  is  revealed  " ;  but  when  they 
refuse  it,  it  is  their  own  sin — "they  have  not  obeyed 
the  gospel." 

I.    THE   GOSPEL  COMES   TO  MEN  WITH    THE    FORCE   OP   A   COM 
MAND. 

It  is  not  optional  to  men  to  accept  or  refuse  it  at 
pleasure.  "  God  now  commandeth  all  men  every 
where  to  repent " :  Acts  xvii.  30.  He  also  com  mands 
them  to  repent  and  believe  the  gospel.  Mark 
i.  15. 

To  refuse  to  believe  is  to  incur  great  sin.  John 
xvi.  8. 


40  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

There  is  a  death  penalty  attached  to  disobedience. 
Mark  xvi.  16. 
It  is  so  put — 

1.  To  secure  the  honor  of  God.     Jt  is  not  the  offer 

of  an  equal  to  an  equal,  but  of  the  great 
God  to  a  condemned  sinner. 

2.  To  embolden  the  proclaimer  of  it.     The  minis 

ter  now  speaks  boldly  with  his  Master's  au 
thority. 

3.  To  remind  man  of  his  obligations.     Repentance 

and  faith  are  natural  duties  from  which  the 
gospel  does  not  exonerate  a  man,  although 
it  blesses  him  by  bestowing  them  upon  him 

4.  To  encourage  the  humble  seeker.     He  must  be 

at  full  liberty  to  believe  in  Jesus,  since 
he  is  commanded  to  do  so,  and  threatened 
if  he  does  not  do  so. 

5.  To  suggest  to   men  the  urgent  duty  of  seeing 

to  their  soul's  welfare.  Suicide,  whether 
of  the  body  or  of  the  soul,  is  always  a  great 
crime.  To  neglect  the  great  salvation  is  a 
grave  offence. 

The  gospel  is  set  forth  as  a  feast,  to  which  men 
are  bound  to  come,  under  penalty  of  the  King's 
displeasure.  Matt.  xxii.  1 — 7. 

The  prodigal  was  right  in  returning  to  his  father; 
and  if  he  was  rignt  in  doing  so,  so  would  each  one 
of  us  be  in  doing  the  same. 

II.   WHAT,  THEN,  ARE  THE  CLAIMS  OP  THB  «OSPBL  TO  OBE 
DIENCE  ? 

1.  The  authority  of  the  sender.      Whatever  God 
commands,  man  is  under  bonds  to  do. 


DISOBEDIENCE  TO   THE   GOSPEL.  41 

2.  The  motive  of  the  sender.     Love  shines  in  the 

gospel  command,  and  no  man  should  slight 
infinite  love.  To  refuse  to  obey  the  gospel 
of  salvation  is  an  insult  to  divine  love. 

3.  The  great  gift  of  the  sender:  he  has  given  us 

his  only  begotten  Son.  To  refuse  Jesus  is 
a  high  affront  to  measureless  love. 

4.  The  reasonableness  of  the  demand  of  the  sender. 

Should  not  men  believe  their  God,  and  trust 
their  Saviour  ? 

5.  The  earnestness  of  the  sender.     His  whole  heart 

is  in  the  gospel.  Note  the  high  position 
which  the  scheme  of  salvation  occupies  in 
the  esteem  of  God.  Shall  we  not  obey  an 
appeal  put  before  us  with  such  energy  of 
compassion  ? 

Ask  your  own  consciences  whether  you  do  right 
to  refuse  or  neglect  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 
Ask  those  who  are  now  saved  what  they  think  of 
their  long  unbelief. 

Do  not  incur  a  world  of  regrets  in  after  years  by 
long  delays. 

Do  not  jeopardize  your  souls  by  refusing  the  gos 
pel. 

III.  WHAT  is  THE  OBEDIENCE   REQUIRED  BY  THE  GOSPEL? 

Not  mere  hearing,  crediting,  liking,  professing,  or 
proclaiming;  but  a  hearty  obedience  to  its  cor^and. 
It  claims, 

1.  Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  • 

2.  Renunciation  of  self-righteousness,  and  confess 

ion  of  guilt. 


42  MY   SEEMOJf-lSrOTES. 

3.  Repentance  and  practical  quittance  of  sin. 

4.  Discipleship  under   the  Lord  Jesus;  and   this 

means  obedience  both  to  his  teaching  and 
his  example. 

5.  Public  confession  of  his  name,  in  his  own  way, 

namely,  by  baptism. 

If  you  refuse  to  obey  the  gospel — 

Your  hearts  will  harden  to  a  deeper  unbelief. 

Others  will  obtain  the  blessing  which  you 
refuse;  and  this  will  deepen  your  own  con 
demnation.  Rom.  x.  19. 

You  will  die  in  your  sins,  with  your  blood  on 
your  own  heads. 


ENFORCEMENTS. 

A  powerful  argument  to  prove  the  enmity  of 
man's  heart  against  God  is  the  unsuccessfulness  of 
the  gospel;  which  can  be  resolvable  into  nothing 
else  but  such  an  enmity.  The  design  of  the  gospel 
is  to  bring  us  into  a  union  with  the  Son  of  God,  and 
to  believe  on  him  whom  the  Father  hath  sent.  Christ 
seeks  to  gather  in  souls  to  God,  but  they  will  not  be 
gathered.  This  is  a  matter  of  fearful  consideration, 
that  when  God  is  calling  after  men  by  his  own  Son, 
there  be  so  few  that  will  come  to  him.  How  few 
there  are  that  say,  "  Give  me  Christ,  or  I  am  lost ! 
None  can  reconcile  me  to  God,  but  Christ"!  You 
are  daily  besought  in  Christ's  stead,  to  be  reconciled, 
but  in  vain  !  What  does  this  signify,  but  obstinate, 
invincible  enmity  ? — John  Howe. 

*•  All  God's  biddings  are  enablings,"  says  an  old 
writer. 


DISOBEDIENCE  TO   THE  GOSPEL.  43 

Obedience  is  faith  incarnate. 

To  disobey  the  gospel  is  far  worse  than  to  break 
the  law.  For  disobedience  to  the  law  there  is  reme 
dy  in  the  gospel,  but  for  disobedience  to  the  gospel 
no  remedy  can  be  found.  "  There  remaineth  no 
more  sacrifice  for  sins." 

It  is  reported  of  the  old  kings  of  Peru,  that  they 
were  wont  to  use  a  tassel,  or  fringe  made  of  red 
wool,  which  they  wore  upon  their  heads,  and  when 
they  sent  any  governor  to  rule  as  viceroy  in  any  part 
of  their  country,  they  delivered  unto  him  one  of  the 
threads  of  their  tassel,  and,  for  one  of  those  simple 
threads,  he  was  as  much  obeyed  as  if  he  had  been 
the  king  himself — yea,  it  hath  so  happened  that  the 
king  hath  sent  a  governor  only  with  this  thread  to 
slay  men  and  women  of  a  whole  province,  without 
any  further  commission :  for  of  such  power  and  au 
thority  was  the  king's  tassel  with  them,  that  they 
willingly  submitted  thereunto,  even  at  the  sight  of 
one  thread  of  it.  Now,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  if  one 
thread  shall  be  so  forcible  to  draw  heathen  obe 
dience,  there  will  be  no  need  of  cart-ropes  to  haul  on 
that  which  is  Christian.  Exemplary  was  that  obe 
dience  of  the  Romans  which  was  said  to  have  come 
abroad  to  all  men.  And  certainly  gospel  obedience 
is  a  grace  of  much  worth,  and  of  great  force  upon 
the  whole  man;  for  when  it  is  once  wrought  in  the 
heart,  it  worketh  a  conformity  to  all  God's  will.  Be 
it  for  life  or  death,  one  word  from  God  will  command 
the  whole  soul  as  soon  as  obedience  hath  found  admit 
tance  into  the  heart. — Spencer's  Things  New  and  Old. 


CGI. 

"REJOICE  WITH  THEM  THAT  DO  REJOICE."— Romans  xii.  15, 

IT  is  supposed  that  some  are  rejoicing,  and  this  is 
a  happy  supposition :  you  are  invited  to  sympa 
thize  with  them,  and  this  is  a  happy  duty. 

Sympathy  is  a  duty  of  our  common  humanity, 
but  far  more  of  our  regenerated  manhood.  Those 
who  are  one  in  the  higher  life  should  show  their 
holy  unity  by  true  fellow-feeling. 

Joyful  sympathy  is  doubly  due  when  the  joy  is 
spiritual  and  eternal. 

I  invite  you  to  this  joy  because  of  those  who  have 
lately  been  brought  to  Jesus,  and  are  now  to  be  add 
ed  to  the  church.  The  occasion  is  joyous;  let  the 
joy  spread  all  around. 

I.    KEJOICE    WITH    THE    CONVERTS. 

1.  Some  delivered  from  lives  of  grievous  sin.     All 

saved  from  that  which  would  have  ruined 
them  eternally,  but  certain  of  them  from 
faults  which  injure  men  in  society. 

2.  Some  of  them  rescued  from  agonizing  fear  and 

deep  despair.     Could  you  have  seen  them 
under  conviction  you  would  indeed  rejoice 
to  behold  them  free  and  happy. 
(44) 


FELLOWSHIP   IN   JOY  45 

3.  Some   of  them  have  been  brought  into  great 

peace  and  joy.  The  blissful  experience  of 
their  first  love  should  charm  us  into  sympa 
thetic  delight. 

4.  Some  of  them  are  aged.     These  are  called  at 

the  eleventh  hour.  Rejoice  that  they  are 
saved  from  imminent  peril. 

5.  Some  of  them  are  young,  with  years  of  happy 

service  before  them. 

6.  Each  case  is  special,     in  some  we  think  of  what 

they  would   have  been,  and  in  others  of 

what  they  will  be. 

There  is  great  gladness  in  these  new-born  ones, 
and  shall  we  be  indifferent  ?  Let  us  welcome  them 
with  hearty  joy. 

II.    REJOICE    WITH    THEIR    FRIENDS. 

1.  Some  have  prayed  long  for  them,  and  now  their 

prayers  are  heard. 

2.  Some  have  been  very  anxious,  have  seen  much 

to  mourn  over  in  the  past,  and  feared  much 
of  evil  in  the  future. 

3.  Some  are  relatives  with  a  peculiar  interest  in 

these  saved  ones.  Parents,  children,  broth 
ers,  etc. 

4.  Some  are  expecting,   and  in  certain  cases  al 

ready  receiving,  much  comfort  from  these 
newly-saved     ones.      They     have     already 
brightened    the    family    circle,   and  made 
heavy  hearts  glad. 
Holy  parents  have  no  greater  joy  than  to  see  their 

children  walking  in  the  truth.     Do  we  not  share 

their  joy  ? 


46  MY   SERMON  -NOTES. 

III.  REJOICE    WITH   THOSE    WHO    BROUGHT   THEM    TO   JfiSUa 

The  spiritual  parents  of  these  con  verts  are  glad. 

The  Pastor,  Evangelist,  Missionary,  Author. 
The  Parent,  elder  sister,  or  other  loving  re 
lation. 
The  teacher  in  the  Sabbath  School  or  Bible 

Class. 
The  Friend  who  wrote  or  spoke  to  them  of 

Jesus. 

What  a  joy  belongs  to  those  who  by  personal  effort 
win  souls ! 

Endeavor  to  win  the  same  joy   for  yourself,  and 
meanwhile  be  glad  that  others  have  it. 

IV.  REJOICE  WITH  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT. 

1.  He  sees  his  strivings  successful. 

2.  He  sees  his  instructions  accepted. 

3.  He  sees  his  quickening  power  operating  in  new 

life. 

4.  He  sees  the  renewed  mind  yielding  to  his  divine 

guidance. 

5.  He  sees  the  heart  comforted  by  his  grace. 
Let  us  rejoice  in  the  love  of  the  Spirit. 

V.  REJOICE    WITH    THE    ANGELS. 

They  have  noted  the  repentance  of  the  re 
turning  sinner. 

They  will  henceforth  joyfully  guard  the 
footsteps  of  the  pilgrim. 

They  expect  his  life-long  perseverance,  or 
their  joy  would  be  premature.  He  is  and 
will  be  for  ever  their  fellow-servant 


FELLOWSHIP   IN   JOY.  47 

They  look  one  day  to  bear  him  home  to  glory. 

The  evil  angel  makes  us  groan ;  should  not  the 
joy  of  good  angels  make  us  sing  in  harmony  with 
their  delight  ? 

VI.  REJOICE  WITH  THE  LORD  JESUS. 

1.  His  joy  is  proportioned  to  the  ruin  from  which 

he  has  saved  his  redeemed  ones. 

2.  His  joy  is  proportioned  to  the  cost  of  their  re 

demption. 

3.  His  joy  is  proportioned  to  the  love   which  he 

bears  to  them. 

4.  His  joy  is  proportioned   to  their  future  happi 

ness,  and  to  the  glory  which  their  salvation 
will  bring  to  him. 

Do  you  find  it  hard  to  rejoice  with  these  newlr 
baptized  believers  ?     Let  me  urge  you  to  do  so,  for— 
You  have  your  own  sorrows,  and  this  com 
munion   of  joy   will  prevent  brooding  too 

much  over  them. 
You  will  renew  the  love  of  your  espousals  by 

communion  with  these  young  ones. 
It  will  comfort  you  for  your  own  erring  ones 

if  you  rejoice  with  the  friends  of  converts. 
It  will  forbid  envy  if  you  rejoice  with  worlcc  .< 

who  are  successful. 
It  will  elevate  your  spirit  if  you  endeavor  to 

rejoice  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  the  angels. 
It  will  fit  you  to  partake  in  a  like  success  if 

you  rejoice  with  Jesus,  the  Sinner's  Friend. 


48  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

SYMPATHETICS. 

About  three  hundred  years  after  the  time  of  the 
Apostles,  Cains  Marius  Victorius,  an  old  pagan,  was 
converted  from  his  impiety  and  brought  over  to  the 
Christian  faith;  and  when  the  people  of  God  heard 
this,  there  was  a  wonderful  rejoicing,  and  shouting, 
and  leaping  for  gladness,  and  psalms  were  sung  in 
every  church,  while  the  people  joyously  said  one  to 
another,  "  Gains  Marius  Victorius  is  become  a 
Christian!  Caius  Marius  Victorius  is  become  a 
Christian !  " 

Mr.  Haslam,  telling  the  story  of  his  conversion, 
says:  "  [  do  not  remember  all  I  said,  but  I  felt  a 
wonderful  light  and  joy  coming  into  my  soul. 
Whether  it  was  something  in  my  words,  or  my  man 
ner,  or  my  look,  1  know  not;  but  all  of  a  sudden  a 
local  preacher,  who  happened  to  be  in  the  congrega 
tion,  stood  up,  and  putting  up  his  arms,  shouted  out 
in  Cornish  manner,  •  The  parson  is  converted !  the 
parson  is  converted  !  Hallelujah  ! '  And  in  another 
moment  his  voice  was  lost  in  the  shouts  and  praises 
of  three  or  four  hundred  of  the  congregation.  In 
stead  of  rebuking  this  extraordinary  '  brawling,'  as  I 
should  have  done  in  a  former  time,  I  joined  in  the 
outburst  of  praise:  and  to  make  it  more  orderly,  I 
I  gave  out  the  Doxology — '  Praise  God  from  whom 
all  blessings  flow  ' — which  the  people  sung  with  heart 
and  voice,  over  and  over  again." 

An  ungodly  youth  accompanied  his  parents  to 
hear  a  certain  minister.  The  subject  of  the  discourse 
was  the  heavenly  state.  On  returning  home,  the 


FELLOWSHIP   IIST   JOY.  49 

joungman  expressed  his  admiration  of  the  preacher's 
talents;  "But,1'  said  he,  turning  to  his  mother,  "I 
was  surprised  that  you  and  my  father  were  in  tears." 
"Ah,  my  son  !  "  replied  the  anxious  mother,  "  I  did 
weep,  not  because  I  feared  my  own  personal  interest 
in  the  subject,  or  that  of  your  father ;  but  I  wept  for 
fear  that  you,  my  beloved  child,  would  be  for  ever 
banished  from  the  blessedness  of  heaven."  "  I  sup 
posed,1'  said  the  father,  turning  to  his  wife,  "  that 
those  were  your  reflections,  the  same  concern  for  our 
dear  son  made  me  weep  also."  These  tender  remarks 
found  their  way  to  the  young  man's  heart,  and  led 
him  to  repentance. — Arvine. 


con. 

4<  FOR  WHATSOEVER  THINGS  WERE  WRITTEN  AFORETIME  WERE 
WRITTEN  FOR  OUR  LEARNING,  THAT  WE  THROUGH  PATIENCE 
AND  COMFORT  OF  THE  SCRIPTURES  MIGHT  HAVE  HOPE." — Ro 
mans  XV.  4. 

THIS  is  the  text  from  which  old  Hugh  Latimer 
was  wont  to  preach  continually  in  his  latter 
days.  Certainly  it  gave  him  plenty  of  sea-room. 

The  apostle  declares  that  the  Old  Testament  Scrip 
tures  are  meant  to  teach  New  Testament  believers. 

Things  written  aforetime  were  written  for  our  time. 

The  Old  Testament  is  not  outworn;  apostles  learn 
ed  from  it. 

Nor  has  its  authority  ceased ;  it  still  teaches  with 
certainty 

Nor  has  its  divine  power  departed ;  for  it  works 
the  graces  of  the  Spirit  in  those  who  receive  it;  pa 
tience,  com  fort,  hope. 

In  this  verse  the  Holy  Ghost  sets  his  seal  upon  the 
Old  Testament,  and  for  ever  enters  his  protest  against 
all  undervaluing  of  that  sacred  volume. 

The  Holy  Scriptures  produce  and  ripen  the  noblest 
graces. 

Let  us  carefully  consider — 

I     THE    PaTlEXCK    OF   THE    SCRIPTURES. 

1    Such  as  they  inculcate. 
(50) 


PATIENCE,    COMFORT   A^D   HOPE.  51 

Patience  under  every  appointment  of  the  di 
vine  will. 

Patience  under  human  persecution  and  satanic 
opposition. 

Patience  under  brotherly  burdens.     Gal  vi.  2. 

Patience  in  waiting  for  divine  promises  to  be 
fulfilled. 

2.  Such  as  they  exhibit  in  examples. 

Job  under  divers  afflictions  triumphantly  pa 
tient. 

Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob  patiently  wai ting- 
as  sojourners  with  God,  embracing  the  cov 
enant  promise  in  a  strange  land. 

Joseph  patientl}-  forgiving  the  unkindness  of 
his  brethren,  and  bearing  the  false  accusa 
tion  of  his  master. 

David  in  many  trials  and  under  many  re 
proaches,  patiently  waiting  for  the  crown, 
and  refusing  to  injure  his  persecutor. 

Our  Saviour  patient  under  all  the  many  forms 
of  trial. 

3.  Such  as  they  produce  by  their  influence. 

By  calling  us  to  the  holiness  which  involves 
trial. 

By  revealing  the  design  of  God  in  our  tribu 
lations,  and  so  sustaining  the  soul  in  stead 
fast  resolve. 

By  declaring  to  us  promises  as  to  the  future 
which  make  us  cheerfully  endure  present 
griefs. 


62  MY   SERMON -NOTES. 

II.  THE    COMFORT    OF  THE    SCRIPTURES, 

1 .  Such  as  they  inculcate. 

They  bid  us  to  rise  above  fear      Ps.  xlri   1-3. 
They  urge  us  to  think  little  of  all  transient 

things. 

They  command  us  to  find  our  joy  in  God. 
They  stimulate  us  to  rejoice  under  tribulations, 

because  they  make  us  like  the  prophets  of 

old. 

2.  Such  as  they  exhibit, 

Enoch  walking  with  God. 
Abraham  finding  God  his  shield  and  exceed 
ing  great  reward. 

David  strengthening  himself  in  God. 
Hezekiah    spreading    his   letter    before  the 

Lord. 

Many  other  cases  are  recorded,  and  these  stimulate 
our  courage. 

3.  Such  as  they  produce. 

The  Holy  Spirit  as  the  Comforter  uses  them 
to  that  end. 

Their  own  character  adapts  them  to  that  end. 

They  comfort  us  by  their  gentleness,  certainty, 
fulness,  graciousness,  adaptation,  personali 
ty,  etc. 

Our  joyous  experience  is  the  best  testimony 
to  the  consoling  power  ot  the  Holy  Scrip 
tures. 

III.  THE  HOPE  OF  THE  SCRIPTURES. 

Scripture  is  intended  to  work  in  us  a  good 
hope. 


PATIENCE,    COMFORT  AND   HOPE  53 

A  people  with  a  hope  will  purify  themselves, 
and  will  in  many  other  ways  rise  to  a  high 
and  noble  character 

By  the  hope  of  the  Scriptures  we  understand — 

1.  Such  a  hope  as  they  hold  forth. 

The  hope  of  salvation      1  Thess.  v  8. 

"The  blessed  hope,  and  the  appearing  c*  our 

Lord    .  Titus  ii  13. 
The  hope   of  the   resurrection  ol  the    dead. 

Acts  xxiii.  6 

The  hope  of  glory      Col  i.  27. 

This  is  a  good  hope,  a  lively    hope,    the  hope  set 
before  us  in  the  gospel. 

2.  Such  a  hope   as   they  exhibit   in  the  lives  of 

saints.     A  whole  martyrology  will  be  found 
in  Heb.  xi. 

3.  Such  a  hope  as  they  produce. 

We  see  what  God  has  done  for  his  people,  and 

therefore  hope. 
We  believe  the   promises  through  the  Word, 

and  therefore  hope. 
We  enjoy   present   blessings,    and  therefore 

hope. 

Let  us  hold  constant  fellowship  with  the  God  ot 
patience  and  consolation,  who  is  also  the  God  of  hope ; 
and  let  us  rise  from  stage  to  stage  of  joy  as  the  or 
der  of  the  words  suggests, 

COMFORTS. 

How  much  important  matter  do  we  find  condensed 
in  this  single  verse  !     What  a  light  and  glory  does 


64  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

it  throw  on  the  Word  of  God  !  It  has  been  well 
noted,  that  we  have  here  its  authority,  as  it  is  a  written 
word,  Us  antiquity,  as  it  was  written  aforetime;  its 
utility,  as  it  is  written  for  our  learning.  We  may 
also  infer  from  what  immediately  follows,  its  Divine 
origin,  for,  if  by  means  of  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and 
the  accompanying  lively  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
(Isaiah  lix.  21),  God  imparts  to  our  soul  patience, 
and  comfort,  and  hope,  it  is  because  he  is  himself,  as 
the  apostle  here  expressly  teaches,  tlie  God  of  patience 
and  comfort,  and  tJie  God  of  hope  (verse  13).  He  is 
the  fountain  of  these  gifts  and  graces,  which  by  the 
channel  of  his  inspired  Word  flow  down  into  our 
hearts  and  lives,  to  strengthen  them  for  his  service. 
Nor  must  we  fail  to  notice  the  gracious  method  of 
their  communication,  their  regular  development 
within  us,  as  we  find  this  to  be  the  order  of  their 
course — 1,  patience,  2,  comfort;  3,  hope.  From  a 
cal  rn  sense  of  inward  peace  and  comfort  we  are  led 
by  the  same  spirit  to  feel  a  blessed,  and,  it  may  be, 
a  joyous  hope.  But,  in  order  to  this,  there  must  al 
ways  be  in  us  the  groundwork  of  patience,  in  our 
suffering  or  doing  the  will  of  God, — James  Ford. 

Oliver  Cromwell  once  read  aloud  Phil,  iv  11 — 13, 
and  then  remarked,  4-  There,  in  the  day  when  my 
poor  child  died,  this  Scripture  did  go  nigh  to  save 
my  life.1 

When  George  Peabody  was  staying  at  Sir  Charles 
Reed's  house,  he  saw  the  youngest  child  bringing 
to  his  father  a  large  Bible  for  family  prayers.  Mr. 
Peabody  said,  "Ah!  my  boy,  you  carry  the  Bible 


PATIENCE,    COMFOBT  AND  HOPE-  55 

now;  but  the  time  is  coming  when  you  will  find 
that  the  Bible  must  carry  you.'' 

"  Speak  to  me  now  in  Scripture  language  alone," 
said  a  dying  Christian.  "  1  can  trust  the  words  01 
God ;  but  when  they  are  the  words  of  man,  it  costs 
me  an  effort  to  think  whether  I  may  trust  them." 

G.  S-  Bowes. 

As  an  instance  of  the  patience,  comfort,  and  hope, 
which  come  from  the  gospel,  note  the  following  from 
Dr  Payson: — Christians  might  avoid  much  trouble 
if  they  would  believe  that  God  is  able  to  make  them 
happy  without  anything  else.  God  has  been  depriv 
ing  me  of  one  blessing  after  another;  but  as  every 
one  was  removed,  he  has  come  in  and  tilled  up  its 
place ;  and  now,  when  I  am  a  cripple,  and  not  able 
to  move,  I  am  happier  than  ever  I  was  in  my  life 
before,  or  ever  expected  to  be.  If  1  bad  believed 
this  twenty  years  ago,  I  might  have  Deen  spared 
much  anxiety. 


CCHL 

"AND  YE  ARE  NOT  YOUR  OWN,  FOR  YE  ARE  BOUGHT  WITH  A 
PRICE:  THEREFORE  GLORIFY  GOD  IN  YOUR  BODY,  AND  IN 

YOUR   SPIRIT,  WHICH  ARE   GOD'S,''—  1    Cor.  vi.  19,  20. 

WITH  what  ardor  does  the  apostle  pursue  sin  to 
destroy  it ! 

He  is  not  so  prudish  as  to  let  sin  alone,  but  cries 
out,  in  plainest  language,  "  Flee  fornication."  The 
shame  is  not  in  the  rebuke,  but  in  the  sin  which  calls 
for  it. 

He  chases  this  foul  wickedness  with  arguments. 
See  verse  18. 

He  drags  it  into  the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
''  What  ?  Know  ye  not  that  your  body  is  the  tem 
ple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?''  Verse  19. 

He  slays  it  at  the  cross.  <;  Ye  are  bought  with  a 
price." 

Let  us  consider  this  last  argument,  that  we  may 
find  therein  death  for  our  sins. 

I.  A  BLESSED  PACT.     "Ye  are  bought  with  a  price." 

"  Ye  are  bought."  This  is  that  idea  of  Redemption 
which  modern  heretics  dare  to  style  mercantile.  The 
mercantile  redemption  is  the  Scriptual  one;  for  the 
expression.  "  bought  with  a  price/'  is  a  double  de 
claration  of  that  idea. 
(56) 


BOUGHT   WITH   A    PEICE.  57 

Redemption  is  a  greater  source  of  obligation  than 
creation  or  preservation.  Hence  it  is  a  well-spring 
of  holiness. 

"  With  a  price/'  This  iridicatesthe  greatness  of 
the  cost.  The  Father  gave  the  Son.  The  Son  gave 
himself;  his  happiness,  Ilia  glory,  his  repose,  his  body, 
his  soul,  his  life. 

Measure  the  price  by  the  bloody  sweat,  the  desert 
ion,  the  betrayal,  the  scourging,  the  cross,  the  heart 
break. 

Our  body  and  spirit  are  both  bought  with  the 
body  and  spirit  of  Jesus. 

1.  This  is  either  a  fact  or  not.     "Ye  are  bought,' 

or  ye  are  unredeemed.     Terrible  alternative. 

2.  If  a  fact,  it  is  the  fact  of  your  life.     A  wonder 

of  wonders. 

3.  It  will  remain  to  you  eternally  the  greatest  of 

all  facts.  If  true  at  all,  it  will  never  cease 
to  be  true,  and  it  will  never  be  outdone  in 
importance  by  any  other  event. 

4.  It  should  therefore  operate  powerfully  upon  us 

both  now  and  ever. 

II.  A  PLAIN  CONSEQUENCE.     'fc  Ye  are  not  your  own.'' 

NEGATIVE.     It  is  clear  that  if  bought,  ye  are  noi 

your  own. 
1.  This  involves  privilege. 

You  are  not  your  own  provider:  sheep  are 

fed  by  their  shepherd. 

You  are  not  your  own  guide  •  ships  are  steered 
by  their  pilot. 


53  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

You  are  not  your  own  father:  children  loved 

by  parents. 
2.  This  also  involves  responsibility. 

We  are  not  onr  own  to  injure.     Neither  body 

nor  soul. 
Not  our  own  to  waste,  in  idleness,  amusement, 

or  speculation. 
Not  our  own  to  exercise  caprice,   and  follow 

our   own    prejudices,    depraved   affections, 

wayward  wills,  or  irregular  appetites. 
Not  our  own  to   lend  our  service  to  another 

master. 
Not  our  own  to  serve  self.     Self  is  a  dethroned 

tyrant.     Jesus  is  a  blessed  husband,  and  we 

are  his. 

POSITIVE.     "  Your  body  and  your  spirit,  which  are 
God's." 

We  are  altogether  God's.     Body  and  spirit  in 
clude  the  whole  man. 

We  are  always  God's.     The  price  once  paid, 

we  are  for  ever  his. 
We  rejoice  that  we  know  we  are  God's,  for  thus 

We  have  a  beloved  owner. 

We  pursue  an  honored  service. 

We  fill  a  blessed  position.     We  are  in  Christ's 
keeping. 

III.  A    PRACTICAL  CONCLUSION.     "Glorify  God  in  y em 
body,  and  in  your  spirit,  which  are  God's." 
Glorify  God  in  your  body. 

By  cleanliness,  chastity,  temperance,  indus 
try,  cheerfulness,  self-denial,  patience,  etc. 


BOUGHT   WITH   A   PRICE.  69 

Glorify  God — 

In   a   suffering  body   by   patience  unto 

death. 

In  a  working  body  by  holy  diligence. 
In    a    worshipping  body  by  bowing   in 

prayer. 

In  a  well-governed  body  by  self-denial. 
In  an  obedient  body  by  doing  the  Lord's 

will  with  delight. 
Glorify  God  in  your  spirit 

By  holiness,  faith,  zeal,  love,  heavenliness, 
cheerfulness,  fervor,  humility,  expectan 
cy,  etc. 
Remember,  0  redeemed  one,  that — 

1.  You  will  be  closely  watched  by  Christ's  enemies. 

2.  You  will  be  expected  to  be  more  gracious  than 

others ;  and  rightly  so,  since  you  claim  to  be 
Christ's  own. 

3.  If  you  are  not  holy,  the   sacred  name  of  your 

Redeemer,  your  Proprietor,  and  your  Indwell 
er  will  be  compromised. 

4.  But  if  you  live  a  redeemed  life,  your  God  will 

be  honored. 

Let  the  world  see  what  Redemption  can  do. 
Let  the  world  see  what  sort  of  men  "  God's  Own  " 

are. 

PIECES  OF  MONEY. 

But  why  should  so  vast  a  price  be  required  ?  Is 
man  worth  the  cost  ?  A  man  may  be  bought  in 
parts  of  the  world  for  the  value  of  an  ox.  It  was 
not  man  simply,  but  man  in  a  certain  relation,  that 


60  MY    SERMON-NOTES. 

had  to  be  redeemed.  See  one  who  has  been  all  his 
days  a  drunken,  idle,  worthless  fellow.  All  appro 
priate  to  him  the  epiphet  "  worthless  " — worth  noth 
ing.  But  that  man  commits  a  crime  for  which  he  is 
sentenced  to  be  hanged,  or  to  be  imprisoned  for  life. 
Go  and  try  to  buy  him  now.  Redeem  him  and  make 
him  your  servant.  Let  the  richest  man  in  Cam 
bridge  offer  every  shilling  he  possesses  for  that 
worthless  man,  and  his  offer  would  be  wholly  vain. 
Why  ?  Because  now  there  is  not  only  the  man  to 
be  considered,  but  the  law.  It  needs  a  very  great 
price  to  redeem  one  man  from  the  curse  of  the  law 
of  England;  but  Christ  came  to  redeem  all  men 
from  the  curse  of  the  Divine  law. —  William  Robinson. 

Does  not  justice  demand  the  dedication  of  your 
self  to  your  Lord  ?  God  has  not  only  procured  a  ti 
tle  for  you,  but  a  title  to  you:  and  unless  you  devote 
yourself  to  his  service,  you  rob  him  of  his  right. 
What  a  man  has  bought,  he  deems  his  own ;  and  es 
pecially  when  the  purchase  has  been  costly.  And 
has  not  God  bought  you  with  a  price  of  infinite  val 
ue?  And  would  you  rob  him  of  a  servant  from  his 
family ;  of  a  vessel  from  his  sanctuary  ?  To  take 
what  belongs  to  a  man  is  robbery,  but  to  take  what 
belongs  to  God  is  sacrilege.  —  William  Jay. 

The  Lord  Jesus  is  everything  in  redemption,  for 
he  is  both  the  Buyer  and  the  price. 

A  silly  child  when  he  plays  at  selling  would  like 
to  take  the  price  and  keep  the  article  too ;  but  every 
body  knows  that  this  cannot  be.  If  you  keep  the 


BOUGHT   WITH   A   PRICE.  61 

goods  you  cannot  have  the  price,  and  if  you  accept 
the  price  the  goods  are  no  longer  yours.  You  may 
have  either  the  one  or  the  other,  but  not  both.  So 
you  may  be  your  own,  if  you  wish ;  but  then  the 
redemption  price  is  not  yours.  If  you  accept  the 
ransom,  then  the  thing  redeemed  is  no  longer 
yours,  but  belongs  to  him  who  bought  it.  If  I  am 
redeemed,  I  am  Christ's.  If  I  am  resolved  to  be  my 
own,  I  must  renounce  ray  Kedeemer,  and  die  unran- 
somed. 


CCIV. 

"  AND  WHEN  HE  HAD  GIVEN  THANKS,   HE  BRAKE  IT,   AND  SAID, 

TAKE,  EAT:  THIS  is  MY  BODY,  WHICH  is  BROKEN  FOR  YOU: 

THIS  PO  IN  REMEMBRANCE   OF   ME."— 1   Cor.  xi.    24. 

MEN  have  made  evil  use  of  this  most  blessed 
ordinance. 

Yet  they  have  no  excuse  from  any  obscurity  of 
Scripture. 

Nothing  is  said  of  a  sacrifice  or  an  altar,  but  every 
thing  is  plain. 

The  Supper,  as  we  find  it  in  Holy  Scripture,  is  a 
service  of  remembrance,  testimony,  and  communion, 
and  nothing  more. 

No  pompous  ceremony  is  arranged  for.  Not  even  a 
posture  is  prescribed;  but  merely  the  providing  of 
bread  and  the  juice  of  the  vine ;  taking,  breaking, 
eating,  drinking,  and  no  more. 

The  spiritual  action  is  specially  prescribed;  the 
remembrance  oi'  our  Lord  must  be  there,  or  we  fail 
to  keep  the  feast. 

I.  OTHER  MEMORIES  WILL  COME,  BUT  MUST  :*OT  CROWD  OUT 

THE  ONE  MEMORY 

The  following  remembrances  may  be  natural,  al 
lowable,  and  profitable,  but  they  must  be  kept  in  a 
secondary  place:— 

(62) 


IN   KEMEMBKANCE.  63 

1.  Of  ourselves  when  we  were  strangers  and  for 

eigners. 

2.  Of  our  former  onlooking  and  wishing  to  be  at 

the  table. 

3.  Of  our  first  time  of  coming,  and  the  grace  re 

ceived  since  then. 

4.  Of  the  dear  departed  who  once  were  with  us  at 

the  table. 

5.  Of  beloved  ones  who  cannot  be  with  us  at  thiw 

time,  because  they  are  kept  at  home  by  sick 
ness. 

6.  Of  many  present  with  us,  and  what  grace  has 

done   in   their  cases.     We    may    think  ot 
their  needs  and  of  their  holy  lives,  etc. 

7.  Of  the  apostates  who  have  proved  their  false 

ness,  like  Judas. 

However  these  memories  may  press  upon  us,  we 
must  mainly  remember  him  for  whose  honor  the 
feast  is  ordained. 

1J.    THE  ORDINANCE  IS  HELPFUL  TO  THAT  ONE  SACRED  MEMORY. 

1.  Set  forth,   the  signs  display  the  person  of  our 

Lord  as  really  man,  substantial  flesh  and 
blood. 

2.  Placed  on  the  table,  their  presence   betokens 

our    Lord's   dear  familiarity  with  us,    and 
our  nearness  to  him. 

3.  Broken  and  poured  forth,  they  show  his  suffer 

ings. 

4.  Separated,  bread  apart  from  wine,  the  flesh  di 

vided  from  the  blood,  they  declare  his  death 
for  us. 


64  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

5.  Eating,  we  symbolize  tbe  life-sustaining  power 

of  Jesus  and  our  reception  of  him  into  our 
innermost  selves. 

6.  Remaining  when  the  Supper  is  ended,  the  frag 

ments  suggest  that  there  is  yet  more  bread 
and  wine  for  other  feasts;  and,  even  so,  our 
Lord  is  all-sufficient  for  all  time. 
Every  particle  of  the  ordinance  points  at  Jesus, 
and  we  must  therein  behold  the  Lamb  of 
God. 

III.  THAT  SACRED  MEMORY  is  IN  ITSELF  MOST  NEEDFUL  FOR 

us. 

It  is  needful  to  remember  our  crucified  Lord,  for — 

1.  It  is  the  continual  sustenance  of  faith. 

2.  It  is  the  stimulus  of  love. 

3.  It  is  the  fountain  of  hope. 

4.  It  is  a  recall,   from  the  world,  from  self,  from 

controversy,  from  labor,  from  our  fellows — 
to  our  Lord. 

5.  It  is  the  reveille,  the  up-and-away.     It  is  the  pre 

lude  oi  the  marriage  supper,  and  makes  us 
long  for  ki  the  bridal  feast  above.' 
Above  all  things,  it  behoves  us  to  keep  the  name 
of  our  Lord  engraven  on  our  hearts. 

IV.  THIS    SYMBOLIC  FESTIVAL   IS    HIGHLY  BENEFICIAL    IN    RE 

FRESHING  OUR  MEMORIES,  AND  IN  OTHER  WAYS. 

1.  We  are  yet  in  the  body,  and  materialism  is  a 
most  real  and  potent  force ;  we  need  that 
there  be  a  set  sign  and  form  to  incarnate 
the  spiritual  and  make  it  vivid  to  the  mind. 


IN    REMEMBRANCE.  65 

Moreover,  as  the  Lord  actually  took  upon  him 
our  flesh  and  blood,  and  as  he  means  to 
save  even  the  material  part  of  us,  he  skives 
us  this  link  with  materialism,  lest  we  spirit 
thiogs  away  as  well  as  spiritualize  them. 

2.  Jesus,  who  knew  our  forgetfulness,  appointed 

this  festival  of  love;  and  we  may  be  sure 
he  will  bless  it  to  the  end  designed. 

3.  Experience   has    ofttimes   proved   its   eminent 

value. 

4.  While  reviving  the  memories  of  the  saints,  it 

has  also  been  sealed  by  the  Holy  Spirit; 
for  he  has  very  frequently  used  it  to  arouse 
and  convince  the  spectators  of  our  solemn 
feast. 

To  observe  the  Supper  is  binding  on  all  be 
lievers, 

It  is  binding  to  the  extent  of  "  oft." 
Only  as  it  assists  remembrance  can  it  be  use 
ful.     Seek  grace  lovingly  to  remember  your 
Lord. 

MEMORIALS. 

It  is  common  enough  in  human  history  to  meet 
with  periodical  celebrations,  anniversaries  of  the  day 
of  their  birth,  or  of  their  death,  held  in  honor  of  those 
who  have  greatly  distinguished  themselves  by  their 
virtues,  their  genius,  or  their  high  services  to  their 
country  or  to  mankind.  But  where  except  here  do 
we  read  of  any  one  in  his  own  lifetime  originating 
and  appointing  the  method  by  which  he  was  to  be 
5 


6b  MY   SERMON -NOTES. 

remembered,  himself  presiding  at  the  first  celebra 
tion  of  the  rite,  and  laying  an  injunction  upon  all 
his  followers  regularly  to  meet  for  its  observance  ? 
Who  among  all  those  who  have  been  the  greatest 
ornaments  of  our  race,  the  greatest  benefactors  of 
humanity,  would  ever  have  risked  his  reputation,  his 
prospect  of  being  remembered  by  the  ages  that 
were  to  come,  by  exhibiting  such  an  eager  and  pre 
mature  desire  to  preserve  and  perpetuate  the  remem 
brance  of  his  name,  his  character,  his  deeds  ?  They 
have  left  it  to  others  after  them  to  devise  the  means 
for  doing  so ;  neither  vain  enough,  nor  bold  enough, 
nor  foolish  enough  to  be  themselves  the  framers  of 
those  means.  Who,  then,  is  he  who  ventures  to  do 
what  none  else  ever  did  ?  Who  is  this,  who,  ere  he 
dies,  by  his  own  act  and  deed  sets  up  the  memorial 
institution  by  which  his  death  is  to  be  shown  forth  ? 
Surely  he  must  be  one  who  knows  and  feels  that  he 
has  claims  to  be  remembered  such  as  none  other  ever 
had — claims  of  such  a  kind  that,  in  pressing  them  in 
each  a  way  upon  the  notice  of  his  followers,  he  has 
no  fear  whatever  of  what  he  does  being  attributed  to 
any  other,  any  lesser  motive  than  the  purest,  deep 
est,  most  unselfish  love  !  Does  not  Jesus  Christ  in 
the  very  act  of  instituting  in  his  own  lifetime  this 
memorial  rite,  step  at  once  above  the  level  of  ordi 
nary  humanity,  and  assert  for  himself  a  position 
toward  mankind  utterly  and  absolutely  unique? 

Dr  Hanna. 

Miss  Edgeworth,  in  one  of  her  tales,  relates  an  an 
ecdote  of  a  Spanish  artist,  who  was  employed  to  de 
pict  the  "  Last  Supper."  It  was  his  object  to  throw 


JOT  EEMEMBRAISTCE.  67 

all  the  sublimity  of  his  art  into  the  figure  and  coun 
tenance  of  the  Master;  but  he  put  on  the  table  in 
the  foreground  some  chased  cups,  the  workmanship 
of  which  was  exceedingly  beautiful,  and  when  his 
friends  came  to  see  the  picture  on  the  easel,  every 
one  said,  "What  beautiful  cups  they  are  !  "  "  Ah  !" 
said  he,  "1  have  made  a  mistake;  these  cups  di 
vert  the  eyes  of  the  spectator  from  the  Master,  to 
whom  I  wished  to  direct  the  attention  of  the  observ 
er";  and  he  took  his  brush  and  rubbed  them  from 
the  canvas,  that  the  strength  and  vigor  of  the  chief 
object  might  be  seen  as  it  should. —  G.  S.  Bowes. 

He  that  remembers  not  Christ's  death,  so  as  to  en 
deavor  to  be  like  him,  forgets  the  end  of  his  redemp 
tion,  and  dishonors  the  cross,  on  which  his  satisfac 
tion  was  wrought. — Anthony  Horneck. 


ccv. 

"BUT  LET  A  MAN  EXAMINE  HIMSELF,  AND  SO  L«T  HIM  EAT  OF 
THAT   BREAD,  AND  DRINK   OF   THAT   COP." — 1  COT.  xi.  28. 

r  I  ^HE  Lord's  Supper  is  not  for  all  men,  but  only 
X  for  those  who  are  able  spiritually  to  discern 
the  Lord's  body. 

It  is  not  meant  for  the  conversion  of  sinners,  but 
for  the  edification  of  disciples. 

Hence  the  need  of  examination,  lest  we  intrude 
ourselves  where  we  have  no  right  to  be. 

I.    THE    OBJECT    OF    THE    EXAMINATION. 

1.  That  the  communicant  may  eat  and  drink. 
"  Examine,  and  so  let  him  eat."  He.  is  not 
to  examine  in  order  to  justify  his  stopping 
away. 

2  That  he  may  know  that  the  responsibility  rests 
with  himself.  The  examination  is  not  by 
priest  or  minister:  he  examines  himself. 

3.  That  he  may  communicate  solemnly,  and  riot 
come  to  the  table  carelessly,  and  as  a  mat 
ter  of  course.  He  is  to  make  heart-search 
ing  enquiry,  and  so  approach  the  table  with 
self-humiliation. 

i.  That  he  may  come  to  tho  table  intelligently, 
(68) 


EXAMINATION   BEFORE   COMMUNION.  69 

knowing  to  what  he  comes,  and  why,  and 
wherefore. 

5.  That  he  may    do    so  with  appreciative  confi 
dence  and  joy.     After  examination  he  will 
know  his  right  to  come,  and  feel  at  ease. 
Many  good  results  would  follow  if  this  examina 
tion  were  universally  practised.     "A  man"  in  this 
text  means  u  any  man,"  and  "  every  man." 

The  examination  should  be  as  frequent  as  the 
eating  of  the  bread.  No  man  has  reached  a  point  at 
which  he  is  beyond  the  need  of  further  self-searching. 

II.    THE    MATTER   OF    THE    EXAMINATION. 

Points  of  examination  may  be  suggested  by  the 
following  thoughts: — 

1.  It  is  a  feast. 

Have  I  life  ?     The  dead  sit  not  at  banquets. 
Have  I  appetite  ?     Else  how  can  I  eat  ? 
Have   I  a  friendship  toward  the  Lord  who  is 

the  Host  ? 
Have  I  put  on  the  wedding  garment  ? 

2.  Jesus  bids  us  show  forth  his  death. 

Have  I  faith  in  his  death  ? 
Do  I  live  by  his  death  ? 

3.  Jesus  bids  us  do  this  by  eating  bread. 

Is  this  eating  a  symbol  of  a  fact,   or  is  it  a 

mere  mockery  ? 
Is  Jesus  really  and  truly  the  food  of  my  soul? 

4.  Jesus  bids  each  believer  do  this  in  union  with 

others. 

Am  I  truly  one  of  his  people,  and  one  with 
them? 


70  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Am  I  dwelling  in  love  with  them  all? 

5.  This  cup  is  the  New  Covenant  in  Christ's  blood. 

Am  I  in  covenant  with  God  in  Christ  Jesus  ? 
Do  I  rest  in  that  covenant  for  all  my  hopes  ? 

6.  Jesus  calls  his  people  to  remember  him  in  this 

Supper. 
Can  I  remember  Christ  ?    Or  am  I  attempting 

a  vain  thing  ? 
Do  I  know  him  ?     How  else  can  1  remember 

him  ? 
Are  my  past  dealings  with  him  such  as  I  wish 

to  remember  ? 
Is  he  so  loved  by  me  that  I  wish  to  bear  him 

in  my  memory  ? 

Our  profession,  experience,  conduct,  hopes,  and 
designs,  should  all  pass  the  test  of  this  self-exami 
nation. 

III.    THE   DUTY   AFTER   EXAMINATION. 

1.  To  eat  of  the  bread. 

Not  to  neglect  communion,  or  postpone  it,  or 
go  away  trembling  from  the  table  ;  but  to 
partake  reverently. 

2.  To  drink  of  the  cup. 

This  is  specially  commanded.  Hence  we  can 
not  go  to  Popish  mass,  where  there  is  no 
cup. 

3.  To  eat  and  drink  so  as  to  discern  the  Lord's 

body.     Having  the  mind  awake  to  see  Jesus 
symbolized  in  this  ordinance. 

4.  To  give  thanks  unto  the   Lord   for  so  great  a 

privilege.     Twice  did  our  Lord  give  thanks 


EXAMINATION   BEFUEE   COMMUNION.  73 

during  the  Supper,  and  at  the  close  he  sang. 
It  is  not  a  funeral,  but  a  festival. 

Ye  who  have  come  to  this  table  heedlessly,  repent 
of  your  wicked  intrusion^  and  keep  away  till  ye  can 
corne  aright. 

Ye  who  have  never  come  at  all,  remember,  if  you 
are  not  fit  for  the  communion  below,  you  are  not  fit 
for  heaven  above. 

All  of  you,  bethink  yourselves  of  Jesus,  and  hav 
ing  examined  yourselves  to  your  humbling,  behold 
him  to  your  consolation. 

OBSERVATIONS. 

The  three  questions  which  Philip  Henry  advised 
people  to  put  to  themselves  in  self-examination  be 
fore  the  sacrament  were,  What  am  1?  What  have  I 
done  ?  and,  What  do  I  want  ? — John  WTiitecross. 

It  is  every  man's  duty  solemnly  and  seriously  to 
examine  himself  about  his  interest  in  Christ,  his 
habitual  grace,  his  actual  right  and  fitness  for  the 
Lord's  Supper,  before  his  approach  to  it.  It  is  not 
said  as  to  the  first  time  of  our  partaking,  but  as  to 
every  time,  "  so  let  him  eat."  Now,  the  second  and 
third  time,  as  well  as  before,  we  are  so  to  eat.  Great 
preparations  are  necessary  for  great  duties.  The 
particle  .90  bars  men  from  coming  without  this  previ 
ous  work  of  examination.  Let  a  man  come  only  in 
such  a  manner  ;  if  he  neglects  this  self-examination, 
let  him  not  venture  upon  this  great  mystery.  Thus 
Ps.  xxvi.  6,  "  I  will  wash  my  hands  in  innocency,  so 


72  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

will  I  compass  thy  altar,  0  Lord,"  alluding  to  the  an 
cient  custom  of  testifying  the  purity  of  their  souls  by 
the  cleansing  of  their  hands,  or  to  the  washings  used 
before  sacrifices.  If  we  take  the  gloss  of  Ambrose, 
it  will  read — 1  will  with  a  purity  of  heart  embrace 
the  Messiah,  signified  both  by  the  altar  and  sacrifice 
'•  So  will  1  compass  thy  altar "  ;  without  such  an 
inward  purification,  I  dare  not  presume  upon  an  ap 
proach  unto  it. — Stephen  Charnock. 

The  duty  required  for  preventing  the  sin  and  dan 
ger  of  unworthy  communicating  is  the  great  and 
necessary  duty  of  self-examination.  It  is  a  metaphor 
taken  from  goldsmiths,  who  try  the  truth  of  their 
gold  by  the  touchstone,  the  purity  of  their  gold  by 
the  fire,  and  the  weight  of  it  by  the  scale.  We  have 
here,  1.  The  person  examining  :  "  Let  a  man  exam 
ine.  '  2.  The  person  examined  ;  it  is  "himself"  ;  he 
is  to  call  himself  to  the  bar  of  conscience,  and  to  put 
questions  to  himself.  (1)  Concerning  his  state, 
whether  he  has  a  right  to  come  or  not.  (2)  His  sins 
and  shortcomings.  (3)  His  wants  and  necessities. 
(4)  His  ends  and  designs  ;  whether  it  be  to  obey  the 
charge  of  his  dying  Saviour,  to  show  forth  his  death, 
renew  and  seal  his  covenant  with  God,  get  nearness 
and  communion  with  him,  nourishment  to  his  soul, 
and  supply  to  his  wants.  And  (5)  concerning  his 
graces  and  qualifications,  particularly  as  to  knowl 
edge,  faith,  repentance,  fear,  love,  thankfulness,  holy 
desires,  and  new  obedience. — John 


CCVI 

"SOME  ARE  FALLEX  ASLEEP." — 1  Cor.  XV.  8. 

YES,  the  companions  of  Jesus  died  one  by  one. 
Consider  the  great  value  of  such  men  and  of 
all  good  men  to  the  church,  and  the  loss 
caused  by  their  removal. 

Yet  no  word  of  lamentation  is  used.     It  is  not  said 

that  they  have  perished,  or  passed  into  the 

land  of  shades,  but  that  "  they  are  fallen 

asleep." 

The  spirit  is  with  Jesus  in  glory ;  the  body  rests 

till  his  appearing. 

"  Fallen  asleep  "  suggests  a  very  different  idea  from 
that  which  distressed  the  minds  of  the 
heathen  when  they  thought  of  death. 

I.    THE    FIGURE    HERE    USED. 

1.  Au  act  of  the  most  natural  kind :  "  fallen  asleep." 

It  is  the  fit  ending  of  a  weary  day. 

It  is  not  painful,  but  the  end  of  pain. 

It  is  so  desirable  that,  if  denied,  we  should 

pray  for  it. 
It  is  most  sweet  when  the  place  of  our  sleep 

is  Jesus. 

2.  A  state  of  which  rest  is  the  main  ingredient. 

3.  A  position  of  safety  from  a  thousand  dangers, 

(73) 


74  MY   SEKMON -NOTES. 

such  as  beset  the  pilgrim,  the  worker,  the 

warrior. 
4  A  condition  by  no  means  destructive. 

Neither   sleep  nor  death  destroys  existence, 

nor  even  injures  it. 
Neither  sleep  nor  death  should  be  viewed  as 

an  evil. 
5.  A  posture  full  of  hope. 

We  shall  awake  from  this  sleep. 
We  shall  awake  without  difficulty. 
We  shall  arise  greatly  refreshed. 

II.    THE   THOUGHTS    AROUSED    BY    THAT    FIGURE. 

1.  How  did  we  treat  those  who  are  now  asleep  ? 

Did  we  value  their  living  presence,  work,  and 

testimony? 
Ought  we  not  to  be  more  kind  to  those  who 

are  yet  alive  ? 

2.  How  can  we  make  up  for  the  loss  caused  by 

their  sleep? 

Should  we  not  nil  their  vacant  places? 
Should  we  not  profit  by  their  examples? 

3.  How  fit  that  we  also  should  be  prepared  to  fall 

asleep ! 

Is  our  house  in  order  ? 
Is  our  heart  in  order  ? 
Is  our  Christian  work  in  order  ? 
4  How  much  better  that  the  faithful  should  fall 
asleep  than  that  the  wicked  should  die  in 
their  sins ! 
5.  How  patiently  should  we  bear  up  under  the  la- 


FALLEN   ASLEEP.  75 

bors  and  sufferings  of  the  day,  since  there 
remaineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God  ! 

III.    THE    HOPES    CONFIRMED    BY    THAT    FIGURE. 

1.  The  sleepers  are  yet  ours,  even  as  those  in  the 

house  who  are  asleep  are  numbered  with  the 

rest  of  the  inhabitants. 
They  have  the  same  life  in  them  which  dwells 

in  us. 
They  are  part  of  the  same  family.     "  We  are 

seven.'' 
They   make   up   one   church.     "  One  church 

above,  beneath." 

2.  The  sleepers  will  yet  awake. 

Their  Father's  voice  will  arouse  them. 

They  shall   be  awake  indeed:  full  of  health 

and  energy 

They  shall  have  new  clothes  to  dress  in. 
They  shall  not  again  fall  asleep. 

3.  The  sleepers  and  ourselves  will  enjoy  sweet  fel 

lowship. 
Sleep  does  not  destroy  the  love  of  brothers 

and  sisters  now. 
We  shall  arise  as  one  unbroken  family,  saved 

in  the  Lord. 

Let  us  not  hopelessly  sorrow  over  those  asleep. 
Let  us  not  ourselves  sleep  till  bed-time  comes, 
Let  us  not  fear  to  sleep  in  such  good  company. 


XlGHT   THOUGHTS. 

A  pious  Scotch  minister  being  asked  by  a  friend 
during  his  last  illness,  whether  he  thought  himself 


MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

dying,  answered  :  "  Really,  friend,  I  care  not 
whether  I  am  or  not  ;  for  if  I  die,  I  shall  be  with 
God  ;  if  I  live,  he  will  be  with  me." — Arvine. 

God's  finger  touched  him,  arid  he  slept. — Tennyson. 

S.  T.  Coleridge,  speaking  of  a  dear  friend's  death, 
said,  "  It  is  recovery,  and  not  death.  Blessed  are  they 
that  sleep  in  the  Lord  ;  his  life  is  hidden  in  Christ. 
In  his  Redeemer's  life  it  is  hidden,  and  in  his  glory 
will  it  be  disclosed.  Physiologists  hold  that  it  is 
during  sleep  chiefly  that  we  grow  ;  what  may  we 
not  hope  of  such  a  sleep  in  such  a  bosom  ? '' 

There  must  be  life  in  Christ  before  death  can  be 
come  sleep  in  him.  "  Louis,  the  beloved,  sleeps  in 
the  Lord,"  said  the  priest  who  announced  the  death 
of  Louis  the  Fifteenth.  "  If,"  was  Thomas  Carlyles 
stern  comment,  "if  such  a  mass  of  laziness  and  lust 
sleeps  in  the  Lord,  who,  think  you,  sleeps  elsewhere  ?" 


CCVII. 

"BLESSED  BB  GOD,  EVEN  THE  FATHER  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS 
CHRIST,  THB  FATHER  OF  MERCIES,  AND  THE  GOD  OF  ALL  COM- 
FOBT  ; 

"WHO  COMFORTETH  US  IN  ALL  OUR  TRIBULATION,  THAT  WE 
MAY  BE  ABLE  TO  COMFORT  THEM  WHICH  ARE  IN  ANY  TROUBLE, 
BY  THE  COMFORT  WHEREWITH  WE  OURSELVES  ARE  COMFORT 
ED  OF  GOD."— 2  Cor.  i.  3,  4. 

THE  apostle  began  with  invoking  the  blessing 
of  God.     Verse  1. 
He  then  went  on  to  bless  God. 
He  was  much  tried,  but  he  was  in  a  grateful  and 
cheerful  humor,  for  he   wrote  of  most  comfortable 
things. 

Here  we  have — 

I.  THE  COMFORTABLE  OCCUPATION.    Blessing  God.  "  Bless 
ed  be  God." 
If  a  man  under  affliction  blesses  the  Lord — 

1.  It  argues  that  his  heart  is  riot  vanquished, 

So  as  to  gratify  Satan  by  murmuring,  or 
So  as  to  kill  his  own  soul  with  despair. 

2.  It  prophesies  that  God  will  send  to  him  speedy 

deliverances  to  call  forth  new  praises.     It  is 
natural   to  lend  more  to  a  man  when  the 
interest  on  what  he  has  is  duly  paid. 
Never  did  man  bless  God  but  sooner  or  later 
God  blessed  him. 

(77) 


78  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  It  profits  the  believer  above  measure. 

It  takes  the  mind  oft  from  present  trouble. 
It  lifts  the  heart  to  heavenly  thoughts  and 

considerations. 
It  gives  a  taste  of  heaven,  for  heaven  largely 

consists  in  adoring  and  blessing  God. 
It  destroys  distress  by  bringing  God  upon  the 

scene. 

4.  It  is  the  Lord's  due  in  whatsoever  state  we  may 

be. 

II.  THE    COMFORTABLE    TITLES. 

1.  A  name  of  affinity,  "  The  Father  of  our  Lord 

Jesus  Christ. ' 

2.  A  name  of  gratitude,  "  The  Father  of  mercies." 

3.  A  name  of  hope,  "  The  God  of  all  comfort." 

4.  A   name  of  discrimination,    "  Who  comforteth 

ws."     The  Lord  has  a  special  care  for  those 
who  trust  in  him. 

III.  THS  COMFORTABLE  FACT.     "The  God  of  all  com 

fort  comforteth  us  in  all  our  tribulation. ' 

1.  God   personally    condescends    to    comfort   the 

saints 

2.  God  habitually  does  this.     He  has  always  been 

near  to  comfort   us  in   all  past  time,  never 
once  leaving  us  alone. 

3.  God  effectually  does  this.     He  has  always  been 

able  to  comfort  us  in  all  tribulation.     No 
trial  has  baffled  his  skill. 

4.  God  everlastingly  does  this,  he  will  comfort  us 

to  the  end.  for  he  is  "  the  God  of  all  com 
fort,"  and  he  cannot  change. 


COMFORTED   AXD   COMFORTING.  79 

Should  we  not  be  always  happy,  since  God  always 
comforts  us  ? 

IV.  THE  COMFORTABLE  DESIGN.     "  That  we  may  be  able 
to  comfort." 

1.  To  make  us  comforters  of  others.     The    Lord 

aims  at  this:  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Comforter, 
trains  us  up  to  be  comforters.  There  is 
great  need  for  this  holy  service  in  this  sin- 
smitten  world. 

2.  To  make  us  comforters  on  a  large  scale.     ' '  To 

comfort  them  which  are  in  any  trouble." 
We  are  to  be  conversant  with  all  kinds  of 
grief,  and  ready  to  sympathize  with  all  suf 
ferers. 

3.  To  make  us  experts  in   consolation — "able  to 

comfort'';  because  of  our  own  experience 
of  divine  comfort. 

4.  To  make  us  willing  and  sympathetic,  so  that 

we  may  through  personal  experience  in 
stinctively  care  for  the  state  of  others. 

Let  us  now  unite  in  special  thanksgiving  to  the 
God  of  all  comfort. 

Let  us  drink  in  comfort  from  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
and  be  ourselves  happy  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Let  us  be  on  the  watch  to  minister  consolation  to 
all  tried  ones. 

COMFORTABLE  WORDS. 

Music  is  sweetest  near  or  over  rivers,  where  the 
echo  thereof  is  best  rebounded  by  the  water.  Praise 
for  pensiveness,  thanks  for  tears,  and  blessing  God 


80  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

over  the  floods  of  affliction,  make  the  most  melodi 
ous  music  in  the  ear  of  heaven. — Tltomas  Fuller. 

Many  an  alleluia 

That  rings  through  the  Father's  home, 
Sobbed  out  its  first  rehearsal 

In  the  shades  of  a  darkened  room. 

When  we  try  to  comfort  one  another,  let  it  be 
God's  comfort  that  we  give. —  T.  T.  Lynch. 

We  have  no  more  religion  than  what  we  have  in 
times  of  trial. — Andrew  Fuller. 

Away  over  in  India  a  poor  native  woman — like 
Naomi — "  was  left  of  her  two  sons."  She  did  not, 
perhaps,  know  enough  to  think  about  God  at  all  in 
her  grief;  but  she  would  take  no  comfort.  To  every 
thing  that  could  be  said  she  had  one  answer:  "I 
had  but  two,  and  they  are  both  gone." 

Day  after  day  she  pined  and  fretted,  going  list 
lessly  about,  her  life  "  empty  "  of  all  but  a  blank 
despair.  One  morning,  as  she  wandered  here  and 
there  among  the  people  of  the  mission,  one  of  them 
again  remonstrated:  but  the  poor  thing  gave  her 
old  reply:  "  I  had  but  two,  and  they  are  both  gone." 
"  Look,"  said  the  worker,  turning,  and  pointing  to 
wards  a  group  near  t>y,  where  a  white  lady  of  the 
mission  stood  directing  some  dusky  natives:  "Do 
you  see  her  ? "  The  woman  looked,  and  saw  a 
sweet,  pale  face;  patient,  gentle,  glad,  as  clear  as 
a  sky  washed  blue  with  storms,  but  wearing  that 
unmistakable  look  which  tells  that  storms  have  been. 
"  Yes,"  she  said,  "  I  see  her."  "  Well,"  said  the  other, 
"  she  has  lost  her  sons,  too  !  " 


COMFORTED   AND   COMFORTING.  81 

The  poor  native  mother  gazed  for  a  minute,  spell 
bound,  then  she  sprang  towards  her.  "  Oh,  lady,"  she 
cried,  "  did  you  have  two  sons  ?  are  they  both  gone  ?  " 

And  now  the  white  mother  on  her  part  turned 
and  looked.  "  Yes,"  she  said,  "  I  had  two." 

lt  And  are  they  both  gone  ?  " 

"  Both." 

"  But  they  were  all  I  had,"  cried  the  other,  "  and 
they  are  both  gone !  " 

"  And  mine  are  both  gone,"  said  the  white  lady, 
clasping  the  hands  of  her  poor  sister  in  sorrow. 
"But  Jesus  took  them;  and  they  are  with  Jesus, 
and  Jesus  is  with  me.  And  by-and-by  I  shall  have 
them  again." 

From  that  hour  the  native  woman  sat  at  her 
white  sister's  feet,  followed  her  about,  hung  on  her 
words,  and  from  her  would  take  comfort — "  the  com 
fort  wherein  she  herself  was  comforted  of  God." 
—From  "  What  Ailcth  Tlwe  ?  " 

He  would  put  off  a  meditated  journey,  rather  than 
leave  a  poor  parishioner  who  required  his  services; 
and  from  his  knowledge  of  human  nature,  he  was 
able,  and  in  a  remarkable  manner,  to  throw  himself 
into  the  circumstances  of  those  who  needed  his  help. 
No  sympathy  was  like  his. — Chambers,  on  George 
Crabbe. 


CCVIII. 

"WHO    DELIVERED     US     FROM  SO    GREAT  A  DEATH,   AND     DOTH 
DELIVER  :  IN  WHOM  WE  TRUST  THAT    HE  WILL    YET  DELIVER 

us."— 2  Cor.  i.  10. 

GRAMMARIANS  have  here  a  lesson  in  the  tenses; 
and  Christians  may  profitably  join  in  the  ex 
ercise. 

We  may  consider  the  past,  present,  and  future, 
each  one  by  itself. 

We  may  also  view  them  in  their  relation  to  each 
other. 

Our  text  points  out  the  delivering  mercy  of  God  as 
at  all  times  working  out  the  safety  of  his  people. 
The  case  of  Paul  did  not  stand  alone :  hence  he  uses 
the  plural:  "who  delivered  us";  "we  trust." 

We  shall  take  the  words  out  of  the  apostle's  mouth 
and  apply  them  to  our  own  cases. 

I.    THE   TEXT    SUGGESTS    THREE    TRAINS   OF   THOUGHT. 

1.  Memory  tells  of  deliverances  in  the  past — 

From   violent   death.      In    Paul's    case,    "  so 

great  a  death "  may  mean  death  by  fierce 

mobs,  or  by  the  emperor. 
From  our  death  in  sin :  "So   great  a  death " 

indeed. 
From  fierce  despair  when  under  conviction. 

(82) 


THE   TENSES. 


83 


From  total  overthrow  when  tempted  by  Sa 
tan. 

From  faintness  under  daily  tribulation. 
From  destruction  by  slander  and  the  like. 
The  Lord  has  most  graciously  delivered  us  hither 
to.     Let  us  express  our  gratitude. 

2.  Observation   calls  attention  to  present  deliver 
ance. 

By  the  good  hand  of  the  Lord,  we  are  at  this 

time  preserved — 
From  unseen  dangers  to  life. 
From  the  subtle  assaults  of  Satan. 
From  the  rampant  errors  of  the  times. 
From   inbred  sin  and  natural    corruption. 
From    the    sentence  of  death   within,  and 

from  the  greater  danger  of  self-trust.     See 

the  preceding  verse. 

Our  present  standing  is  wholly  due  to  the 
grace  of  God,  and,  trusting  in  that  grace, 
we  may  indulge  a  happy  confidence. 

3.  Expectation  looks  out  of  the  window  upon  the 

future. 

Faith  rests  alone  in  God,  "in  whom  we  trust," 
and  through  him  she  looks  for  future  de 
liverance — 

From  all  future  common  trials. 
From  coining  losses  and  afflictions,  and  from 
sicknesses,  which  may  be  coming  upon   us. 
From  the  infirmities  and  wants  of  age. 
From  the  peculiar  glooms  of  death. 
This  expectation  makes  us  march  on  with  cheer 
fulness. 


84  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

II.    THE    TEXT    SUPPLIES    THREE    LINES    OP   ARGUMENT. 

That  the  Lord  will  preserve  us  to  the  end  is 
most  sure.  We  can  say  of  him,  "  In  whom 
we  trust  that  he  will  yet  deliver  us." 

1.  From  the  Lord's  beginning  to  deliver  we  argue 

that  he  will  yet  deliver,  for 

There  was  no  reason  in  us  for  his  beginning 
to  love  us.  If  his  love  arises  out  of  his  own 
nature  it  will  continue. 

He  has  obtained  no  fresh  knowledge.  He 
foreknew  all  our  misbehaviors :  hence,  there 
is  no  reason  for  casting  us  off. 

The  reason  which  moved  him  at  first  is  oper 
ating  now,  and  none  better  can  be  required. 

2.  From  the  Lord's  continuing  to  deliver  we  argue 

that  he  will  yet  deliver  ;  for 
His  deliverances  have  been  so  many  ; 
They  have  displayed  such  wisdom  and  power ; 
They  have  come  to  us  when  we  have  been  so 

unworthy ; 
They    have   continued  in  such  an  unbroken 

line; 
That  we  feel  sure  he  will  never  leave  nor  forsake 

us. 

3.  From  the  Lord  himself — "In  whom  we  trust"  : 

we  argue  that  he  will  yet  deliver  ;  for 
He  is  as  loving  and  strong  now  as  aforetime. 
He  will  be  the  same  in  the  future. 
His  purpose  never  changes,  and  it  is  to  his 
glory  to  complete  what  he  has  begun.    Ver 
ily,  "  he  will  yet  deliver  us." 


THE   TENSES.  85 

III.    THE   TEXT   IS   OPEN   TO   THREE   INFERENCES. 

1.  We  infer  that  we  shall  always  be  so  in  danger 

as  to  need  to  be  delivered  :  wherefore  we 
are  not  high-minded,  but  fear. 

2.  We  infer  our  constant  need  of  God's  own  inter 

position.  He  alone  has  met  our  case  in  the 
past,  and  he  only  can  meet  it  in  the  future: 
wherefore,  we  would  ever  abide  near  our 
Lord. 

3.  We  infer  that  our  whole   life  should  be  filled 

with  the  praise  of  God,  w  ho,  for  past,  pres 
ent,  and  future,  is  our  Deliverer. 


FOR  THE  TIMES. 

First,  God  hath  a  time,  as  for  all  things,  so  for  our 
deliverance.  Secondly,  God's  time  is  the  best  time. 
He  is  the  best  discerner  of  opportunities.  Thirdly, 
this  shall  be  when  he  hath  wrought  his  work  upon 
our  souls,  specially  when  he  hath  made  us  to  trust 
in  him.  As  here,  when  Paul  had  learned  to  trust  in 
God,  then  he  delivered  him. — Ricfiard  Sibbes. 

The  Roman  noblemen  could  give  no  greater  proof 
of  their  confidence  in  their  city  and  army,  than  when 
they  bought  the  land  on  which  their  Carthaginian 
enemies  were  encamped  around  the  city.  And  we 
can  give  no  greater  proof  of  our  confidence  in  God, 
than  by  trusting  him  in  the  land  which  our  enemies, 
darkness,  and  sickness,  and  trouble,  seem  to  possess, 
and  acting  as  if  God  were  their  master,  and  mightier 
than  they  all.  This  is  but  to  act  upon  the  truth- 


86  3IY    SERMON- NOTES. 

There  is  an  ante-war  incident  which  illustrates  the 
power  for  despair  which  lies  in  forgetf  ulness  of  God, 
and  the  hope  which  leaps  up  when  God  is  fully  be 
lieved  in.  A  dark  cloud  hung  over  the  interests  of 
the  African  race  in  our  land.  There  seemed  no  way 
of  deliverance.  Frederick  Douglas,  at  a  crowded 
meeting,  depicted  the  terrible  condition.  Every 
thing  was  against  his  people.  One  political  party 
had  gone  down  on  its  knees  to  slavery  ;  the  other 
proposed  not  to  abolish  it  anywhere,  but  only  to  re 
strict  it.  The  Supreme  Court  had  given  judgment 
against  black  men  as  such.  He  drew  a  picture  of 
his  race  writhing  under  the  lash  of  the  overseer,  and 
trampled  upon  by  brutal  and  lascivious  men.  As  he 
went  on  with  his  despairing  words,  a  great  horror  of 
darkness  seemed  to  settle  down  upon  the  audience. 
The  orator  even  uttered  the  cry  for  blood.  There 
was  no  other  relief.  And  then  he  showed  that  there 
was  no  relief  even  in  that.  Everything,  every  influ 
ence,  every  event,  was  gathering,  not  for  good,  but 
for  evil,  about  the  doomed  race.  It  seemed  as  if  they 
were  fated  to  destruction.  Just  at  the  instant  when 
the  cloud  was  most  heavy  over  the  audience,  there 
/slowly  rose,  in  the  front  seat,  an  old  black  woman. 
Her  name.  "Sojourner  Truth."  She  had  given  it  to 
herself.  Far  and  wide  she  was  known  as  an  African 
prophetess.  Every  eye  was  on  her.  The  orator 
paused.  Reaching  out  towards  him  her  long  bony 
finger,  as  every  eye  followed  her  pointing,  she  cried 
out,  "  Frederick,  is  God  dead  ?  "  It  was  a  lightning- 
flash  upon  that  darkness.  The  cloud  began  to  break, 


THE  TENSES.  87 

and  faith,  and  hope,  and  patience,  returned  with  the 
idea  of  a  personal  and  ever-living  God. — Sword  and 
Trowel,  1887, 

Who  murmurs  that  in  these  dark  days 

ITifl  lot  is  cast  ? 

God's  hand  within  the  shadow  lays 
The  stones  whereon  his  gates  of  praise 

blia.il  rise  at  last. — J.  G.  WMiiier 


CC1X. 

"  FOR  ALL  THE   PROMISES  OF  GOT>  IN   HIM  ARE  YEA,  AND   IN   HIM 

AMEN,  UNTJ  THE  GLORY  OF  GOD  BY  us." — 2  Cor.  i.  20. 

PAUL  had  altered  his  mind  about  visiting  Cor 
inth. 

He  had  done  this  from  the  best  of  reasons. 

The  prejudices  of  certain  Corinthians  made  them 
misconstrue  his  conduct,  and  speak  of  him  as  one 
whose  word  was  not  to  be  relied  on. 

He  asserted  that  he  did  not  use  lightness,  and  that 
his  mind  was  not  of  the  "yea  and  nay"  order,  even 
upon  so  small  a  matter  as  a  journey  to  Corinth  at  a 
certain  date. 

This  led  him  to  say  that  his  preaching  "  was  not 
yea  and  nay." 

This  further  brought  out  the  declaration  that  the 
promises  of  God  are  not  "yea  and  nay." 

Thus  a  trivial  circumstance  and  an  ungenerous  re 
mark  led  to  the  utterance  of  a  most  precious  truth. 
This  has  often  been  the  case. 

From  these  words  let  us  be  led  carefully  to  con 
sider — 

I.  THE  DIGNITY  OF  THE  PROMISES.     They  are  "  the  prom 
ises  of  God." 

1.  They  were  each  one  made  by  him  according  to 
the  purpose  of  his  own  will. 

(88) 


ALL  THE   PROMISES.  89 

2.  They  are  links   between  his   decrees   and  his 

acts;  being  the  voice  of  the  decree,  and  the 
herald  of  the  act. 

3.  They  display  the  qualities  of  him  who  uttered 

them.     They  are  true,  immutable,  powerful, 
eternal,  etc. 

4.  They  remain  in  union  with    God.     After  the 

lapse  of  ages,  they  are  still  Ms  promises  as 
much  as  when  he  first  uttered  them. 

5.  They  are  guaranteed  by  the  character  of  God 

who  spoke  them. 

6.  They  will  glorify  him  as  he  works  out  their  ful 

filment. 

II.  THE  RANGE  OP  THE  PROMISES:  "All  the  promises." 

It  will  be  instructive  to  note  the  breadth  of  the 
promises  by  observing  that — 

1.  They  are  found  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testa 

ments;  from  Genesis  to  Revelation,  running 
through  centuries  of  time. 

2.  They  are  of  both  sorts — conditional  and  uncon 

ditional:  promises   to   certain   works,    and 
promises  of  an  absolute  order. 

3.  They   are  of  all  kinds   of  things — bodily  and 

spiritual,  personal  and  general,  eternal  and 
temporal. 

4.  They  contain   blessings  to  varied   characters, 

such  as — 
The  Penitent:   Lev.   xxvi.    40-42;  Isa.  IT.    7, 

Ivii.  15;  Jer.  iii.  12,  13. 
The  Believing:  John  iii.   16,  18,  vi.  47;  Acts 

xvi  31 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  6. 


90  MY   SEEMON-ZSTOTES. 

The  Serving:  Ps.  xxxvii.  3,  ix.  40;  Prov.  iii. 
9,  10;  Acts  x.  35. 

The  Praying:  Isa.  xlv.  11;  Lam.  iii.  25;  Matt. 
vi.  6;  Ps-  cxlv.  18. 

The  Obeying:  Ex.  xix.  5;  Ps.  cxix.  1-3;  Isa. 
i.  19. 

The  Suffering:  Matt.  v.  10-12;  Rom.  via.  17; 

1  Pet.  iv.  12  14. 

5.  They  bring  us  the  richest  boons:  pardon,  justi 
fication,  sanctification,  instruction,  preser 
vation,  etc. 

What  a  marvellous  wealth  lies  in  promises — "  All 
the  promises  " ! 

III.  THE  STABILITY  OP  THE  PROMISES  :     "  All  the  prom 
ises  in  him  are  yea,  and  in  him  Amen." 

A  Greek  word  "Yea,"  and  a  Hebrew  word 
"  Amen,"  are  used  to  mark  certainty,  both 
to  Gentile  and  Jew. 

1.  They  are  established  beyond  all  doubt  as  being 

assuredly  the  mind  and  purpose  of  the  eter 
nal  God. 

2.  They  are  confirmed  beyond  all  alteration.     The 

Lord  hath  said  "  Amen,"  and  so  must  it  be 
for  ever 

3.  Their  stability  is  in    Christ  Jesus  beyond  all 

hazard;  for  he  is — 
The  witness  of  the  promise  of  God, 
The  surety  of  the  covenant, 
The  sum  and  substance  of  all  the  promises, 
The  fulfilment  of  the  promises,  by  his  actual 


ALL  THE  PROMISES.  91 

incarnation,   his  atoning  death,    his  living 
plea,  his  ascension  power,  etc. 
The  security  and  guarantee  of  the  promises, 
since  all  power  is  in  his  hand  to  fulfil  them. 

IV.  THE  RESULT  OF  THE   PROMISES:     "The   glory   of 
God  by  us." 

By  us,  his  ministers  and  his  believing  people,  the 
God  of  the  promises  is  made  glorious. 

1.  We  glorify  his  condescending  love  in  making 

the  promise. 

2.  We  glorify  his  power  as  we  see  him  keeping 

the  promise. 

3.  We  glorify  him  by  our  faith,  which  honors  his 

veracity,  by  expecting  the  boons  which  he 
has  promised. 

4.  We  glorify  him  in  our  experience  which  proves 

the  promise  true. 

Let  us  confidently  rest  in  his  sure  word. 
Let  us  plead  the  special  promise  applicable  to  the 
hour  now  passing. 

GATHERINGS. 

A  speaker  at  the  Fulton  Street  prayer-meeting 
said,  "I  count  all  cheques  as  cash  when  I  am  mak 
ing  up  my  money  and  striking  a  balance;1'  and  so, 
when  we  feel  that  we  have  not  much  of  this  world's 
goods,  we  can  at  least  take  hold  of  God's  promises, 
for  they  are  just  so  many  drafts  at  sight  upon  divine 
mercy,  and  we  may  count  them  among  our  possess 
ions.  Then  we  shall  feel  rich,  and  the  soul  is  rich 


92  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

who  trusts  God's  word  and  takes  his  promises  as 
something  for  present  use. 

In  the  streets  of  ancient  Pompeii  there  still  remain 
the  three  stepping-stones,  placed  here  and  there,  bj 
which  men  crossed  over  the  street  when  the  water 
was  high.  The  promises  are  such  stepping-stones 
on  which  "  the  wayfaring  man  "  may  place  his  foot 
step  and  be  enabled  the  better  to  cross  some  stream 
of  trouble  or  doubt,  or,  perhaps,  with  more  ease  and 
safety  to  escape  the  mire  of  some  Slough  of  Despond 

Promises  are  like  the  clothes  we  wear;  if  there  is 
life  in  the  body  they  warm  us,  but  not  otherwise. 
When  there  is  living  faith  the  promise  will  afford 
warm  comfort,  but  on  a  dead,  unbelieving  heart  it 
lies  cold  and  ineffectual.  It  has  no  more  effect  than 
pouring  a  cordial  down  the  throat  of  a  corpse.— 
William  Gurnett. 

If  thou  lean  upon  the  promises  of  God  themselves, 
and  not  upon  Jesus  Christ  in  them,  all  will  come  to 

nothing Whence  is   it  that  so  many 

souls  bring  a  promise  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and 
carry  so  little  away  from  it  ?  They  lean  upon  the 
promises  without  leaning  on  Christ  in  the  promise. 
—Faithful  Teate. 

"  By  us  "  as  ministers — publishing,  explaining,  ap 
plying  them.  A  promise  is  often  like  a  box  of  oint 
ment,  very  precious;  but  the  fragrance  does  not  fill 
the  room  till  the  preacher  breaks  it.  Or  it  is  like 
the  water  that  was  near  Hagar,  which  she  saw  not, 
till  the  angel  of  the  Lord  opens  our  eyes  and  shows 


ALL   THE   PROMISES,, 

as  the  well.  "By  us"  as  believers  realizing  the  ex 
celleucy  and  efficacy  of  them  in  our  character  and 
conduct.  Jt  is  when  these  promises  are  reduced  to 
experience — when  they  are  seen  cleansing  us  from 
all  filthiness  ot  flesh  and  spirit,  making  us  partakers 
of  the  divine  nature,  leading  us  to  walk  worthy  ot 
the  vocation  wherewith  we  are  called,  tilling  us  with 
kindness  and  benevolence,  supporting  us  cheerfully 
under  all  our  trials  -  it  is  men  they  glorify  God  "  by 
us." — William  Jay. 


OCX. 

'HAVING  THEREFORE  THESE  PROMISES,  DEARLY  BELOVED, 
LET  US  CLEANSE  OURSELVES  FROM  ALL  FILTHINESS  OF  THE 
FLESH  AND  SPIRIT,  PERFECTING  HOLINESS  IN  THE  FEAR  OF 
GOD,"— 2  Cor.  vii.  1. 

KINDLING  with  strong  emotion,  constrained  by 
the  love  of  Christ,  and  animated  by  the  fellow 
ship  of  all  spiritual  blessings,  the  apostle  here  strikes 
out  an  exhortation,  in  which  he  appeals  to  the  noblest 
passions  of  the  children  of  God,  to  their  possession 
of  divine  lineage,  a  present  endowment,  and  their 
expectation  of  an  exalted  destiny.  These  he  uses  as 
incentives  to  holiness  of  life. 

To  stir  up  in  us  this  godly  ambition  he  sets  before 
us  the  Christian  in  various  lights — 

I.    As   POSSESSED    OF    MOST    GLORIOUS    PRIVILEGES.         "  HaV- 

ing  these  promises."  Not  promises  in  re 
version  merely,  but  in  actual  possession,  re 
ceived,  embraced,  enjoyed. 

The  promises  referred  to  are  mentioned  in  the  pre 
vious  chapter. 

1.  Divine    indwelling:    "I  will  dwell  in  them." 

(Chap.  vi.  16.) 

2.  Divine    manifestation-  il  I  will  wallc  in  them.' 

3.  Divine  covenanting:  "  I  will  be  their  God,  and 

they  shall  be  my  people." 
(94) 


CLEANSING  WHICH   COMES   OF   GODLINESS.      95 

4.  Divine    acceptance:    "I     will     receive     you." 

(Chap.  vi.  17.) 

5.  Divine  adoption:  "I  will  be  a  Father  unto  you, 

and  ye  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters,  saith 
the  Lord  Almighty."     (Chap.  vi.  18.) 
These  promises  are  already  fulfilled  in  our  experi 
ence. 

II.  As   LABORING   TO   BE   RID   OF   OBNOXIOUS   EVILS.       "  Let 

us  cleanse  ourselves."     The  matter  has  in 
it— 

1.  Personality :  "  Let  us  cleanse  ourselves.1' 

2.  Activity:    we    must    continue    vigorously    to 

cleanse  both  body  and  mind. 

3.  Universality :  "  From  all  filthiness." 

4.  Thoroughness:  "  Of  the  flesh  and  spirit." 

If  God  dwells  in  us,  let  us  make  the  house  clean 
for  so  pure  a  God. 

Has  the  Lord  entered  into  covenant  with  us  that 
we  should  be  his  people?  Does  not  this  involve  a 
call  upon  us  to  live  as  becometh  godliness  ? 

Are  we  his  children  ?  Let  us  not  grieve  our  Fa 
ther,  but  imitate  him  as  dear  children. 

III.  As  AIMING   AT   A    MOST  EXALTED   POSITION.       "  Perfect 

ing  holiness." 

1.  We   must  set  before  us  perfect  holiness  as  a 

thing  to  be  reached. 

2.  We  must  blame  ourselves  if  we  fall  short  of  it. 

3.  We  must  continue  in  any  degree  of  holiness 

which  we  have  reached. 

4.  We  must  agonize  after  the  perfecting  of  our 

character. 


90  MY   SERMOX-NOTES. 

IV.      As  PROMPTED  BY  THE  MOST  SACRED  OP  MOTIVES.      "  Per 
fecting  holiness  in  tfiefear  of  God." 
L  The  fear  of  God  casts  out  the  fear  of  man,  and 
thus  saves  us  from  one  prolific  cause1  of  sin. 

2.  The  fear  of  God  casts  out  the  love  of  sin,  and 

with  the  root  the  fruit  is  sure  to  go. 

3.  The  fear  of  God  works  in  and  through  love  to 

him,  and  this  is  a  great  factor  of  holiness. 

4.  The  fear  of  God  is  the  root  of  faith,  worship, 

obedience,  and  so  it  produces  all  manner  of 
holy  service. 

See  how  promises  supply  arguments  for  precepts. 
See  how  precepts  naturally  grow  out  of  promises. 

OUTPOURINGS. 

"  Cleanse  ourselves."  It  is  the  Lord  that  is  the  sanc- 
tifier  of  his  people,  he  purges  away  their  dross  and 
sin.  He  pours  clean  water,  according  to  his  promi 
ses,  yet  doth  he  call  us  to  cleanse  ourselves  ;  having 
such  promises,  let  us  cleanse  ourselves.  He  puts  a 
new  life  into  us,  and  causes  us  to  act,  and  excites  us 
to  excite  it,  and  call  it  up  to  act  in  the  progress  of 
sanctification  Men  are  strangely  inclined  to  a  per 
verse  construction  of  things:  tell  them  that  we  are 
to  act,  and  work,  and  give  diligence,  then  they  would 
fancy  a  doing  in  their  own  strength,  and  be  their 
own  saviours.  Again,  tell  them  that  God  works  all 
our  works  in  us,  and  for  us,  then  they  would  take 
the  ease  of  doing  nothing:  if  they  cannot  have  the 
praise  of  doing  all,  they  will  sit  still  with  folded 
hands,  and  use  no  diligence  at  all.  But  this  is  the 


CLEANSING  WHICH  COMES  OF  GODLINESS.      97 

corrupt  logic  of  the  flesh ;  its  base  sophistry.  The 
apostle  reasons  just  contrary,  Phil.  ii.  13:  "It  is  God 
that  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do."  There 
fore,  would  a  carnal  heart  say,  we  need  not  work,  or 
at  least,  may  work  very  carelessly.  But  he  infers, 
"  Therefore  let  us  work  out  our  salvation  with  fear 
and  trembling,''  i.  e.,  in  the  more  humble  obedience 
to  God,  and  dependence  on  him,  not  obstructing  the 
influences  of  his  grace,  and,  by  sloth  and  negligence, 
provoking  him  to  withdraw  or  abate  it.  Certainly 
many  in  whom  there  is  truth  of  grace,  are  kept  low 
in  the  growth  of  it  by  their  own  slothfulness,  sitting 
still,  and  not  bestirring  themselves,  and  exercising 
the  proper  actions  of  that  spiritual  life,  by  which  it 
is  entertained  and  advanced. — Archbishop  Leighton. 

Virtue,  for  ever  frail,  as  fair,  below, 
Her  tender  nature  suffers  in  the  crowd, 
Nor  touches  on  the  world  without  a  stain : 
The  world's  infectious;  few  bring  bac\  at  eve, 
Immaculate,  the  manners  of  the  raorn — 
Something  we  thought,  is  blotted ;  we  resolved, 
Is  shaken ;  we  renounc'd,  returns  again, 

Edward  Young. 

"  Let  us  go  on  to  perfection/'  (Heb.  vi.  1,)  should 
rather  be  rendered,  "  Let  us  be  carried  on.       . 
If  we  are  unable  to  go  on,  we  are  surely  able  to  be 
carried  on  to  perfection. — diaries  Stanford. 

The  promises,  as  they  have  a  quickening,  so  they 
have  a  purging  power  ;  and  that  upon  sound  reason 
ing.  Doth  God  promise  that  he  will  be  my  Father, 
and  I  shall  be  his  son  ?  and  doth  ho  promise  me  life 
everlasting  ?  and  doth  that  estate  require  purity  ? 
7 


98  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

and  no  unclean  thing  shall  come  there  ?  Certainly, 
these  promises  being  apprehended  by  faith,  as  they 
have  a  quickening  power  to  comfort,  so  they  purge 
with  holiness.  We  may  not  think  to  carry  our  filth- 
iness  to  heaven.  Doth  the  swearer  think  to  carry 
his  blasphemies  thither  ?  Filthy  persons  and  liars 
are  banished  thence,  there  is  "  no  unclean  thing,'' 
He  that  hath  these  promises  purgeth  himself,  and 
"  perfecteth  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God."  "  He  that 
hath  this  hope  purifieth  himself,  as  he  is  pure  "  :  1 
John  iii.  3. — Richard  Sibbes. 

A  spiritual  mind  has  something  of  the  nature  of 
the  sensitive  plant:  a  holy  shrinking  from  the  touch 
of  evil.—  Richard  Cecil. 


CCXL 

''  FOR  GODLY  SORROW  WORKETII  REPENTANCE  TO  SALVATION 
NOT  TO  BE  REPENTED  OF  :  BUT  THE  SORROW  OF  THE  WORLD 
WORKETH  DEATH." — 2  Cor.  vii.  10. 

TIME  was  when  inner  experience  was  considered 
to  be  everything,  and  experimental  preaching 
was  the  order  of  the  dayc 

Now  it  is  apt  to  be  too  much  slighted. 

Introspection  was  formerly  pushed  to  the  extreme 
of  morbid  self-searching ;  yet  it  ought  not  now  to  be 
utterly  abandoned. 

A  correct  diagnosis  of  disease  is  not  everything, 
but  yet  it  is  valuable 

A  sonse  of  poverty  cannot  by  itself  enrich,  but  it 
may  stimulate. 

Sinners  were  unwisely  influenced  by  certain  min 
istries  to  look  to  their  own  feelings,  many  began  to 
seek  comfort  from  their  own  misery. 

Now  it  is  "  only  believe.''  Arid  rightly  so :  but  we 
must  discriminate. 

There  must  be  sorrow  for  sin  working  repentance. 

Upon  this  point  we  must — 

I.  REMOVE  CERTAIN  ERRONEOUS  IDEAS  WITH  REGARD  TO  RE« 

PENTANCE  AND  SORROW  FOR  SIN 

Among  popular  delusions  we  must  mention  the 
suppositions — 


100  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

1.  That  mere  sorrow  of  mind  in  reference  to  sin  is 

repentance. 

2.  That  there  can  be  repentance  without  sorrow 

for  sin. 

3.  That  we  must  reach  a  certain  point  of  wretch 

edness  and  horror,  or  else  we  are  not  truly 
penitent. 

4.  That  repentance  happens  to  us  once,  and  is  then 

over. 

5.  That  repentance  is  a  most  unhappy  feeling. 

6.  That  repentance  must  be  mixed  with  unbelief, 

and  embittered  by  the  fear  that  mercy  will 
be  unable  to  meet  our  wretched  case. 

II.  DISTINGUISH  BETWEEN  THE  TWO  SORROWS  MENTIONED  IN 

THE    TEXT. 

1.  The  godly  sorrow  which  worketh  repentance  to 

salvation  is — 

Sorrow  for  sin  as  committed  against  God. 

Sorrow  for  sin  arising  out  of  an  entire  change 
of  mind. 

Sorrow  for  sin  which  joyfully  accepts  salva 
tion  by  grace. 

Sorrow  for  sin  leading  to  future  obedience. 

Sorrow  for  sin  which  leads  to  perpetual  per 
severance  in  the  ways  of  God.     The  ways 
of  sin  are  forsaken  because  abhorred. 
This  kind  of  repentance  is  never  repented  o£ 

2.  The  sorrow  of  the  world  is 

Caused  by  shame  at  being  found  out; 
Is  attended  by  hard  thoughts  of  God; 
Leads  to  vexation  and  sullenness; 


SORROW  AND   SORROW.  101 

Incites  to  hardening  of  heart ; 
Lands  the  soul  in  despair. 
Works  death  of  the  worst  kind. 
This  needs  to  be  repented  of,  for  it  is  in  itself  sin- 
fu]  and  terribly  prolific  of  more  sin. 

III.  INDULGE  OURSELVES  IN  GODLY  SORROW  FOR  SIN. 

Come,  let  us  be  filled  with  a  wholesome  grief  that 
we 

1.  Have  broken  a  law,  pure  and  perfect. 

2.  Have  disobeyed  a  gospel,  divine  and  gracious. 

3.  Have  grieved  a  God,  good  and  glorious. 

4.  Have  slighted  Jesus,  whose  love  is  tender  and 

boundless. 

5.  Have  been  ungrateful,  though  loved,  elected, 

redeemed,  forgiven,  justified,  and  soon  to  be 
glorified. 

6.  Have  been  so  foolish  as  to  lose  the  joyous  fel 

lowship  of  the  Spirit,  the  raptures  of  com 
munion  with  Jesus. 

Let  us  confess  all  this,  lie  low  at  Jesus'  feet,  wash 
his  feet  with  tears,  and  love,  yea,  love  our 
selves  away. 


FOR  DISCRIMINATION. 

A  cognate  text  in  Rom.  ii.  2,  4,  will  help  us  here. 
These  two  allied  but  distinct  intimations  may  be 
placed  in  parallel  lines,  and  treated  like  an  equa 
tion;  thus — 

"  The  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee  to  repentance." 

"  Godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance/' 

We  lefl^,  as  the  result  of  the  comparison,  that  the 


102  MY   SEEMON-NOTES. 

goodness  of  God  leads  to  repentance  by  the  way  of 
godly  sorrow.  The  series  of  cause  and  effect  runs 
thus:  goodness  of  God ;  godly  sorrow;  repentance. 

Do  not  mistake ;  a  fear  of  hell  is  not  sorrow  for 
sin:  it  may  be  nothing  more  than  a  regret  that  God 
is  holy. 

So  hard  is  a  heart  long  accustomed  to  evil,  that 
nothing  can  melt  it  but  goodness ;  and  no  goodness 
but  God's;  and  no  goodness  of  his  but  the  greatest. 
Thanks  be  to  God  for  his  unspeakable  gift.  "Look 
ing  unto  Jesus  ''  is  the  grand  specific  for  producing 
godly  sorrow  in  a  human  heart.  It  was  a  hard  heart 
that  quivered  under  the  beams  of  his  loving  eye  on 
the  threshold  of  Pilate's  judgment  hall.  When  Jesus 
looked  on  Peter,  Peter  went  out  and  wept.  Emman 
uel's  love  has  lost  none  of  its  melting  power;  the 
hardest  hearts  laid  fairly  open  to  it  must  ere  long 
flow  down.  God's  goodness,  embodied  in  Christ 
crucified,  becomes,  under  the  ministry  of  the  Spirit, 
the  cause  of  godly  sorrow  in  believing  men. 

William  Arnot 

The  mind  that  broods  o'er  guilty  woes, 

Is  like  the  scorpion  girt  by  fire ; 
In  circle  narrowing  as  it  glows, 
The  flames  around  their  captive  close, 
Till  inly  searched  by  thousand  throes, 

And  maddening  in  her  ire, 
One  sad  and  sole  relief  she  knows, 
The  sting  she  nourished  for  her  foes, 
Whose  venom  never  yet  was  vain. 
Gives  but  one  pang  and  cures  all  pain, 
And  darts  into  her  desperate  brain ; 
So  do  the  dark  in  soul  expire,. 
Or  live  like  scorpion  girt  by  fire. 


SORROW   AND   SORROW.  103 

So  writhes  the  mind  Remorse  has  riven, 
Unfit  for  earth,  undoouied  for  heaven, 
Darkness  above,  despair  beneath, 
Around  it  flame,  within  it  Death. — Byron. 

Once  a  mother  told  her  pastor  that  she  was  troubled 
about  her  daughter,  who  was  going  to  join  the 
church.  "  She  has  not  conviction  enough,"  was  the 
complaint:  "and  yet  I  have  talked  to  her  about  her 
sins  over  and  over  again,  setting  them  all  in  order 
before  her  till  both  of  us  were  in  tears;  oh,  what 
can  I  do  more  ? "  Then  he  gave  her  in  her  own 
hands  a  Bible,  and  he  read  aloud  to  her  slowly  Isaiah 
vi.  1-5.  She  saw,  without  any  word  of  his,  that 
the  prophet  became  intelligent  as  the  sight  of  God 
flashed  upon  him,  and  grew  penitent  at  the  moment 
when  the  seraphim  cried  "Holy.''  Then  he  turned 
to  Job  xlii.  5,  6.  She  saw  in  silence  that  the  patri 
arch  repented,  not  when  his  exasperating  friends 
pelted  him  with  accusations,  but  when  his  eyes  were 
opened  to  see  God.  She  went  away  quietly  to  talk, 
with  a  wondering  and  awe-struck  heart,  about  the 
holiness  of  Jehovah;  thus  her  child  melted  into  con 
trition  before  the  vision,  and  wept. — C.  8.  Robinson. 

Sin,  repentance,  and  pardon  are  like  to  the  three 
vernal  months  of  the  year,  March,  April,  and  May. 
Sin  comes  in  like  March,  blustering,  stormy,  and  full 
of  bold  violence.  Repentance  succeeds  like  April, 
showering,  weeping,  and  full  of  tears.  Pardon  fol 
lows  like  May,  springing,  singing,  full  of  joys  and 
flowers.  Our  eyes  must  be  full  of  April,  with  the 
sorrow  of  repentance;  and  then  our  hearts  shall 
be  full  of  May,  with  the  true  joy  of  forgiveness. 

Thomas  Adams. 


CCXII. 

"IMMEDIATELY  I  CONFERRED  NOT  WITH  FLESH  AND  BLOOD." 
Gal.  i.  16. 

THE  conversion  of  Paul  is  a  memorable  proof  of 
the  truth  of  Christianity.     A  consideration  of 
it  has  been  the  means  of  the  conversion  of  many 
thoughtful  persons. 

His  case  is  a  noble  instance  of  the  gospel's  power 
over  men  of  mark,  men  of  learning,  men  of  zealous 
mind,  and  men  of  energetic  character. 

Paul,  being  converted,  took  an  independent  course. 
Being  taught  of  God, 

He  did  not  consult  those  who  were  already 
believers,  lest  he  should  seem  to  have  re 
ceived  his  religion  at  second-hand. 

He  did  not  consult  his  relatives,  who  would 
have  advised  caution. 

He  did  not  consult  his  own  interests,  which 
all  lay  in  the  opposite  direction.  These  he 
counted  loss  for  Christ. 

He  did  riot  consult  his  own  safety,  but  risked 
life  itself  for  Jesus. 

In  this  independent  course  he  was  justified,  and 
should  be  imitated. 

(104) 


A   C01SrFEEE]STCE  TO  BE   AVOIDED.  105 

I.  FAITH  NEEDS  NO  WAKRANT  BUT  THE  WILL  OF  GOD. 

1.  Good  men  in  all  ages  have  acted  upon  this  con 

viction. 

Noah,  Abraham,  Jacob,  Moses,  Samson,  David, 
Elijah,  Daniel,  the  three  who  were  cast  into 
the  furnace,  etc. 

2.  To  ask  more  is  virtually  to  renounce  the  Lord 

as  our  Commander  and  Guide,  and  to  lift 
man  into  his  place. 

3.  To  hesitate  from  self-interest  is   openly  to  defy 

the  Lord. 

4.  To  submit  the  claims  of  duty  to  the  judgment 

of  the  flesh  is  diametrically  opposed  to  the 
character  and  claims  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who 
gave  himself  to  us,  and  expects  us  to  give 
ourselves  to  him  without  question  or  re 
serve. 

5.  To  delay  duty  until  we  have  held  such  consul 

tation  almost  always  ends  in  not  doing  the 
right  thing  at  all.  Too  often  it  is  sought 
after  that  an  excuse  may  be  found  for  avoid 
ing  an  unpleasant  duty. 

II.    THE   PRINCIPLE   HAS    A   WIDE   RANGE   OP   APPLICATION. 

1.  To  known  duties. 

In  forsaking  sin  we  are  not  to  consult  society. 
In  upright  dealing  we  are  not  to  consult  the 

custom  of  trade. 
In  consecration  to  Christ  we  are  not  to  follow 

the  lower  standard  so  common  among  our 

fellow  Christians. 
In  service  we  are  not  to  consult  personal  lik- 


106  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

ing,  ease,  honor,  prospect  of  advancement, 
or  remuneration. 

2.  To  needful  sacrifices.     We  are  not  to  shrink 

from — 

Losses  of  situation  through  honesty  or  holi 
ness. 

Losses  in  trade  through  religion. 

Losses  of  friendship  and  kindly  feeling 
through  faithfulness. 

Losses  of  position  and  worldly  honor  through 
inability  to  lie,  bribe,  cringe,  flatter,  com 
promise,  conceal,  or  change. 

We  had  better  not  confer  with  flesh  and  blood  ; 
for — 

Good  men  may  be  self-indulgent,  and  so  con 
sult  their  own  flesh. 

Bad  men  may  practically  be  consulted  by  our 
fearing  that  they  will  ridicule  us,  and  by 
our  acting  on  that  fear. 

Our  own  flesh  and  blood  may  be  consulted  by 
unduly  considering  wife,  husband,  brother, 
child,  friend,  etc. 

3.  To  special  service.     We  are  not  to  be  held  back 

from  this  by — 

Considerations  of  personal  weakness. 
Considerations  of  want  of  visible  means. 
Considerations  of  how  others  will  interpret  our 

actions. 

Consult  not  even  your  brethren  here ;  for — 
Good  men  may  not  have  your  faith. 
They  cannot  judge  your  call. 
They  cannot  remove  your  responsibility. 


A   CONFERENCE  TO   BE   AVOIDED.  107 

4.  To  an  open  avowal  of  Christ.  We  must  not  be 
deterred  from  it  by — 

The  wishes  of  others,  who  think  themselves 
involved  in  our  act. 

The  dread  of  contempt  from  those  who  deride 
godliness. 

The  fear  of  not  holding  on,  and  of  thus  dis 
gracing  religion. 

Reluctance  to  give  up  the  world,  and  a  secret 
clinging  to  its  ways.  This  is  a  very  peril 
ous  vice.  "  Remember  Lot's  wife." 

III.    THE     PRINCIPLE     COMMENDS    ITSELF    TO    OUR   BEST    JUDG 
MENT. 

It  is  justified  by — 

].  The  judgment  which  we  exercise  upon  others. 

We  blame  them  if  they  have  no  mind  of  their 
own. 

We  applaud  them  if  they  are  bravely  faithful. 
•2.  The  judgment  of  an  enlightened  conscience. 

3.  The  judgment  of  a  dying  bed. 

4.  The  judgment  of  an  eternal  world. 

Let  us  be  in  such  communion  with  God  that  we 
need  not  confer  with  flesh  and  blood. 

Let  us  not  wait  for  second  thoughts,  but  at  once 
carry  out  convictions  of  duty,  and  obey  calls  for  help, 
or  impulses  of  love. 

CONFIRMATIONS. 

An  Indian  missionary  says  that  the  Hindoos  do 
not  act  on  their  own  convictions,  but  according  to 
their  own  phrase,  "  I  do  as  ten  men  do."  Let  the 


108  MY  SERMON-NOTES, 

maxim  of  the  Christian  be,  "  I  do  as  my  God  would 
have  me  do." 

"  Sir,"  said  the  Duke  of  Wellington  to  an  officer  of 
engineers,  who  urged  the  impossibility  of  executing 
the  directions  he  had  received,  "  I  did  not  ask  your 
opinion,  I  gave  you  my  orders,  and  I  expect  them  to 
be  obeyed."  Such  should  be  the  obedience  of  every 
follower  of  Jesus.  The  words  which  he  has  spoken 
are  our  law.  We  are  not  permitted  to  oppose  there 
to  our  judgments  or  fancies.  Even  if  death  were  in 
the  way,  it  is— 

"  Not  ours  to  reason  why — 
Ours  but  to  dare  and  die" ; 

and,  at  our  Master's  bidding,  advance  through  flood 
or  flame. — "  Feathers  for  Arrows." 

But  this  is  a  hard  lesson  to  learn.  I  read  some 
time  ago  of  a  German  captain  who  found  this  out. 
He  was  drilling  a  company  of  volunteers.  The  pa 
rade  ground  was  a  field  by  the  seaside.  The  men 
were  going  through  their  exercises  very  nicely,  but 
the  captain  thought  he  would  give  them  a  lesson 
about  obeying  orders.  They  were  marching  up  and 
down  in  the  line  of  the  water  at  some  distance  from 
it.  He  concluded  to  give  them  an  order  to  march 
directly  towards  the  water,  and  see  how  far  they 
would  go.  The  men  are  marching  along.  "Halt, 
company,"  says  the  captain.  In  a  moment  they  halt. 
"  Right  face,"  is  the  next  word,  and  instantly  they 
wheel  round.  "  Fonvart  martch"  is  then  the  order. 
At  once  they  begin  to  march  directly  towards  the 


A   CONFERENCE  TO   BE  AVOIDED.  109 

water  ;  on  they  go,  nearer  and  nearer  to  it.  Soon 
they  reach  the  edge  of  the  water.  Then  there  is  a 
Sudden  halt.  "  Vat  for  you  stop  ?  I  no  say  halt," 
cried  the  captain.  "  Why,  captain,  here  is  the  wa 
ter,"  said  one  of  the  men.  "  Veil,  vot  of  it,"  cried  he, 
greatly  excited,  "  Vater  is  nothing  ;  tire  is  nothing; 
everything  is  nothing.  Ven  I  say,  Forwart  martch, 
then  you  must  forwart  martch."  The  captain  was 
right ;  the  first  duty  of  a  soldier  is  to  learn  to  obey. 

Dr.  Richard  Newton. 

What  God  calls  a  man  to  do  he  will  carry  him 
through.  I  would  undertake  to  govern  half-a-dozen 
worlds  if  God  called  me  to  do  it  ;  but  if  he  did  not 
call  me  to  do  it,  I  would  not  undertake  to  govern 
half-a-dozen  sheep. — Dr.  Pay  son. 


ccxin. 

"BUT  BEFOKE  FAITH  CAME,  WE  WERE  KEPT  UNDER  THE  LAW, 
SHUT  UP  UNTO  THE  FAITH  WHICH  SHOULD  AFTERWARDS  BE 

REVEALED." — Gal.  iii.  23. 

HERE  we  have  a  condensed  history  of  the  world 
before  the  gospel  was  fully  revealed  by  the 
coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus. 

The  history  of  each  saved  soul  is  a  miniature  like 
ness  of  the  story  of  the  ages.  God  acts  upon  the 
same  principles  both  with  the  race  and  with  individ 
uals. 

I.  THE  UNHAPPY  PERIOD  :  "  Before  faith  came." 

1.  We  had  no  idea  of  faith  by  nature.     It  would 

never  occur  to  the  human  mind  that  we 
could  be  saved  by  believing  in  Jesus. 

2.  When  we  heard  of  faith  as  the  way  of  salvation 

we  did  not  understand  it.  We  could  not 
persuade  ourselves  that  the  words  used  by 
the  preacher  had  their  common  and  usual 
meaning. 

3.  We  saw  faith  in  others,  and  wondered  at  its 

results;  but  we  could  not  exercise  it  for  our 
selves. 

4.  We  could  not  reach  to  faith,  even  when  we  be 

gan  to  see  its  necessity,  admitted  its  effi 
cacy,  and  desired  to  exercise  it. 

(110) 


UNDER   ARREST.  Ill 

The  reason  of  this  inability  was  moral,  not  men 
tal: 

We  were  proud,  and  did  not  care  to  renounce 
self-righteou  sness. 

We  could  not  grasp  the  notion  of  salvation  by 
faith,  because  it  was  contrary  to  the  usual 
run  of  our  opinions. 

We  were  bewildered,  because  faith  is  a  spirit 
ual  act,  and  we  are  not  spiritual. 
5.  We  were  without  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  there 
fore  incapable. 

We  do  not  wish  to  go  back  to  the  state  in  which 
we  were  "  before  faith  came,"  for  it  was  one  of  dark 
ness,  misery,  impotence,  hopelessness,  sinful  rebel- 
lion,  self-conceit,  and  condemnation. 

II.  THE  CUSTODY  WE  WERE  IN:  "  Kept  under  the  law, 
shut  up." 

1.  We  were  always  within  the  sphere  of  law.     In 

fact,  there  is  no  getting  out  of  it.  As  all 
the  world  was  only  one  prison  for  a  man 
who  offended  Caesar,  so  is  the  whole  uni 
verse  no  better  than  a  prison  for  a  sinner. 

2.  We  were  always  kicking  against  the  bounds  of 

the  law,  sinning,  and  pining  because  we 
could  not  sin  more. 

3.  We  dared  not  overleap  it  altogether,  and  defy 

its  power.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  many  of  us, 
it  checked  us,  and  held  us  captive  with  its 
irksome  forbiddings  and  commandings. 

4.  We   could  not  find  rest.     The  law  awakened 


112  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

conscience,  and  fear  and  shame  attend  such 
an  awakening. 

5.  We  could   not    discover  a  hope;   for,    indeed, 

there  is  none  to  discover  while  we  abide 
under  the  law. 

6.  We  could  not  even  fall  into  the  stupor  of  des 

pair;  for  the  law  excited  life,  though  it  for 
bade  hope. 

Among  the  considerations  which  held  us  in  bon 
dage  were  these : 
The  spirituality  of  the  law,  touching  thoughts, 

motives,  desires. 
The  need   of  perfect  obedience,   making  one 

sin  fatal  to  all  hope  of  salvation  by  works. 
The  requirement  that  each  act  of  obedience 

should  be  perfect. 

The  necessity  that  perfect  obedience  should 
be  continual  throughout  the  whole  of  life. 

III.  THE  REVELATION   WHICH  SET  us  FREE:    "The   faith 
which   should  afterwards  be  revealed."     The 
only  thing  which  could  bring  us  out  of  prison 
was  faith.     Faith  came,  and  then  we  under 
stood — 

1.  What  was  to  be  believed. 

Salvation  by  another. 

Salvation  of  a  most  blessed  sort,  gloriously 

sure,  and  complete. 
Salvation  by  a  most  glorious  person. 

2.  What  it  was  to  believe. 

We  saw  that  it  was  *'  trust,"  implicit  and  sin 
cere. 


UNDER  AEEEST.  113 

We  saw  that  it  was  ceasing  from  self,  and 

obeying  Christ. 
3.  Why  we  believed. 

We  were  shut  up  to  this  one  way  of  salvation. 

We  were  shut  out  of  every  other. 

We  were  compelled  to  accept  free  grace,  or 

perish. 

Our  duty  is  to  show  men  how  the  way  of  human 
merit  is  closed. 

We  must  shut  them  up  to  simple  faith  only,  and 
show  them  that  the  way  of  faith  is  available. 

To   ARREST   ATTENTION. 

The  Law  and  the  Gospel  are  two  keys.  The  law 
is  the  key  that  shutteth  up  all  men  under  condemna 
tion,  and  the  gospel  is  the  key  which  opens  the  door 
and  lets  them  out.  —  WiUlam  Tyndale. 

"  Shut  up  unto  the  faith."  To  let  you  more  effect 
ually  into  the  meaning  of  this  expression,  it  may  be 
right  to  state  that  in  the  preceding  clause,  "  kept 
under  the  law,"  the  term,  kept,  is,  in  the  original 
Greek,  derived  from  a  word  which  signifies  a  senti 
nel.  The  mode  of  conception  is  altogether  military. 
The  law  is  made  to  act  the  part  of  a  sentry,  guard 
ing  every  avenue  but  one,  and  that  one  leads  those 
who  are  compelled  to  take  it  to  the  faith  of  the  gos 
pel.  They  are  shut  up  to  this  faith  as  their  only  al 
ternative — like  an  enemy  driven  by  the  superior 
tactics  of  an  opposing  general,  to  take  up  the  only 
position  in  which  they  can  maintain  themselves,  or 


>IY   SEKMON-^OTES 

fly  to  the  only  town  in  which  they  can  find  a  refuge 
or  a  security.     This  seems  to  have  been  a  favorite 
style  of  argument  with  Paul,  and  the  way  in  which 
he  often  carried  on  an  intellectual  warfare  with  the 
enemies  of  his  Master's  cause.     It  forms  the  basis  of 
that  masterly  and  decisive  train  of  reasoning  which 
we  have  in  his  epistle  to  the  Romans.     By  the  oper 
ation  of  skilful  tactics,  he  (if  we  may  be  allowed  the 
expression)  manoeuvred  them,  and  shut  them  up  to 
the  faith  of  the  gospel.    It  gave  prodigious  effect  to  hi^ 
argument,  when  he  reasoned  with  them,  as  he  ofter 
does,  upon  their  own  principles,   and  turned  their1 
into  instruments  of  conviction  against  themselves 
With  the  Jews  he  reasoned  as  a  Jew.     He  made  use 
of  the  Jewish  law  as  a  sentinel  to  shut  them  out  of 
every  other  refuge,  and  to  shut  them  up  to  the  ref 
uge  laid  before  them  in  the  gospel.     He  led  them  to 
Christ  by  a  schoolmaster  whom  they  could  not  re 
fuse;  and  the  lesson  of  this  schoolmaster,  though  a 
very  decisive,  was  a  very  short  one — "  Cursed  be  he 
that  continueth  not  in  all  the  "words  of  the  law  to  do 
them."     But  in  point  of  fact,  they  had  not  done  them. 
To  them,   then,    belonged  the  curse  of  the  violated 
law.     The  awful  severity  of  its  sanctions  was  upon 
them.     They  found  the  faith  and  the  free  offer  of  the 
gospel  to  be  the  only  avenue  open  to  receive  them. 
They  were  shut  up  unto  this  avenue ;  and  the  law, 
by  concluding  them  all  to  be  under  sin,  left  them  no 
other  outlet  but  the  free  act  of  grace  and  of  mercy 
laid  before  us  in  the  New  Testament. — Dr.  Chalmers. 
The  law  was  meant  to  prepare  men  for  Christ,  by 
showing  them  that  there  is  no  other  way  of  salvation 


UNDER  ARREST.  115 

except  through  him.  It  had  two  especial  ends :  the 
first  was  to  bring  the  people  who  lived  under  it  into 
a  consciousness  of  the  deadly  dominion  of  sin,  to 
shut  them  up,  as  it  were,  into  a  prison-house  out  of 
which  only  one  door  of  escape  should  be  visible, 
namely,  the  door  of  faith  in  Jesus ;  the  second  inten 
tion  was  to  fence  about  and  guard  the  chosen  race 
to  whom  the  law  was  given — to  keep  them  as  a  pe 
culiar  people  separate  from  all  the  world,  so  that  at 
the  proper  time  the  gospel  of  Christ  might  spring 
forth,  and  go  out  from  them  as  the  joy  and  comfort 

G.  Eooke. 


CCXIV. 

"  YE  DID  RUN  WELL  ;  WHO  DID  HINDER  YOU  THAT  YE  SHOULD 
NOT  OBEY  THE  TRUTH  ?  " — Gal.  V.  7. 

NEVER  censure  indiscriminately  ;  admit  and 
praise  that  which  is  good,  that  you  may  the 
more  effectually  rebuke  the  evil.  Paul  did  not  hesi 
tate  to  praise  the  Galatians,  and  say,  "  Ye  did  run 
well." 

It  is  a  source  of  much  pleasure  to  see  saints  run 
ning  well.  To  do  this  they  must  run  in  the  right 
road,  straight  forward,  perseveringly,  at  the  top  of 
their  pace,  with  their  eye  on  Christ,  &c. 

It  is  a  great  grief  when  such  are  hindered,  or  put 
off  the  road. 

The  way  is  the  truth,  and  the  running  is  obedi 
ence:  men  are  hindered  when  they  cease  to  obey  the 
truth. 

It  may  be  helpful  to  try  and  find  out  who  has  hin 
dered  us  in  our  race. 

I.    WE     SHALL    USE     THE    TEXT   IN    REFERENCE   TO    HINDERED 
BELIEVERS. 

1.   You  are  evidently  hindered. 

You  are  not  so  loving  and  zealous  as  you  were. 
You  are  quitting  the  old  faith  for  new  notions. 
You  are  losing  your  first  joy  and  peace. 
(116) 


VARIOUS  HINDRANCES  117 

You  are  not  now  leaving  the   world  and  self 

behind. 
You  are  not  now  abiding   all  the  day  with 

your  Lord. 

2.  Who  has  hindered  you  ? 

Did  I  do  it  ?     Pray,  then,  for  your  minister. 
Did  your  fellow-members  do  it?     You  ought 
to  have  been  proof  against  them ;  they  could 
not  have  intended  it.      Pray  for  them. 
Did  the  world  do  it  ?     Why  so  much  in  it  ? 
Did  the  devil  do  it  ?     Resist  him. 
Did  you  not  do  it  yourself?     This  is  highly 
probable. 
Did  you  not  overload  yourself  with  worldly 

care  ? 

Did  you  not  indulge  carnal  ease  ? 
Did  you  not  by  pride  become  self-satisfied  ? 
Did  you  not  neglect  prayer,  Bible  reading, 
the  public  means  of  grace,  the  Lord's  Ta 
ble,  &c.  ? 
Mend  your  ways,  and  do  not  hinder  your 

own  soul. 

Did  not  false  teachers  do  it,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  Galatians  ? 

If  so,  quit  them  at  once,  and  listen  only  to 
the  gospel  of  Christ. 

3.  You  must  look  to  it,  and  mend  your  pace. 

Your  loss  has  been  already  great.  You  might 
by  this  time  have  been  far  on  upon  the 
road. 

Your  natural  tendency  will  be  to  slacken  still 
more. 


118  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Your  danger  is  great  of  being  overtaken  by 

error  and  sin. 
Your  death  would  come  of  ceasing  to  obey  the 

truth. 
Your  wisdom  is  to  cry  for  help,  that  you  may 

run  aright. 

II.    WB    SHALL    USE    THE   TEXT    IN    REFERENCE   TO    DELAYING 

SINNERS. 

1.  You  have  sometimes  been  set  a-running. 

God  has  blessed  his  word  to  your  arousing. 
God  has  not  yet  given  you  up;  this  is  evident. 
God's  way  of  salvation  still  lies  open  before 
you. 

2.  What  has  hindered  you  ? 

Self-righteousness  and  trust  in  yourself? 
Carelessness,  procrastination,  and  neglect  ? 
Love  of  self-indulgence,  or  the  secret  prac 
tice  of  pleasurable  sins  ? 
Frivolous,  sceptical,  or  wicked  companions  ? 
Unbelief  and  mistrust  of  God's  mercy  ? 

3.  The  worst  evils  will  come  of  being  hindered. 

Those  who  will  not  obey  truth  will  become 

the  dupes  of  lies. 
Truth  not  obeyed  is  disobeyed,  and  so  sin  is 

multiplied. 
Truth   disregarded  becomes  an  accuser,   and 

its  witness  secures  our  condemnation. 

God  have  mercy  on  hindcrers.  We  must  rebuke 
them. 

God  have  mercy  on  the  hindered.  We  would 
arouse  them. 


VARIOUS   HINDRANCES.  119 

SPURS. 

Cecil  says  that  some  adopt  the  Indian  maxim,  that 
it  is  better  to  walk  than  to  run,  and  better  to  stand 
than  to  walk,  and  better  to  sit  than  to  stand,  and 
better  to  lie  than  to  sit.  Such  is  not  the  teaching 
of  the  gospel.  It  is  a  good  thing  to  be  walking  in 
the  ways  of  God,  but  it  is  better  to  be  running — 
making  real  and  visible  progress,  day  by  day  advanc 
ing  in  experience  and  attainments.  David  likens 
the  sun  to  a  strong  man  rejoicing  to  run  a  race; 
not  dreading  it  and  shrinking  back  from  it,  but  de 
lighting  in  the  opportunity  of  putting  forth  all  his 
powers.  Who  so  runs,  runs  well. —  The  Christian. 

The  Christian  race  is  by  no  means  easy.  We  are 
sore  let  and  hindered  in  running  "the  race  that  is 
set  before  us,"  because  of — (1.)  Our  sinful  nature 
still  remaining  in  the  holiest  saints.  (2,)  Some  easily- 
besetting  sin  (Heb.  xii.  1).  (3.)  The  entanglements 
of  the  world,  like  heavy  and  close-fitting  garments, 
impeding  the  racer's  speed.  (4.)  Our  weakness  and 
infirmity,  soon  tired  and  exhausted,  when  the  race 
is  long,  or  the  road  is  rough. — "  In  prospect  of  Sun 
day,"  by  G.  S.  Sowes. 

Some  are  too  busy,  they  run  about  too  much  to 
run  well;  some  run  too  fast  at  the  outset;  they  run 
themselves  out  of  breath. —  T.  T.  Lynch. 

Henry  Ward  Beecher,  in  a  sermon  on  this  text,  de 
scribes  one  of  the  hindrances  to  Christian  progress 
thus:  "We  have  fallen  off  immensely  on  the  side  of 
religious  culture — earnest,  prolonged,  habitual,  do- 


120  MY  SEBMON -NOTES. 

mestic,  religious  culture,  conducted  by  the  reading 
of  God's  Word,  and  by  prayer,  and  its  family  influ 
ences.  And  this  tendency  is  still  further  augmented 
by  the  increase  of  religious  books,  or  tracts,  of  bio 
graphies  and  histories,  of  commentaries,  which  tend 
to  envelop  and  hide  the  Word  of  God  from  our  minds, 
la  other  words,  these  things,  which  are  called 
'  helps,'  have  been  increased  to  such  a  degree,  and 
have  come  to  occupy  so  much  of  our  attention,  that 
when  we  have  read  our  helps,  we  have  no  time 
left  to  read  the  things  to  be  helped;  and  the  Bible 
is  covered  down  and  lost  under  its  'helps.'  " 

It  is  possible  that  fellow-professors  may  hinder. 
We  are  often  obliged  to  accommodate  our  pace  to 
that  of  our  fellow-travellers.  If  they  are  laggards 
we  are  very  likely  to  be  so  too.  We  are  apt  to  sleep 
as  do  others.  We  are  stimulated  or  depressed,  urged 
on  or  held  back,  by  those  with  whom  we  are  asso 
ciated  in  Christian  fellowship,  There  is  still  greater 
reason  to  fear  that  in  many  cases  loorldly  friends  and 
companions  are  the  hinderers.  Indeed,  they  can  be 
nothing  else.  None  can  help  us  in  the  race  but 
those  who  are  themselves  running  it:  all  others 
must  hinder.  Let  a  Christian  form  an  intimate 
friendship  with  an  ungodly  person,  and  from  that 
moment  all  progress  is  stayed ;  he  must  go  back ;  for 
when  his  companion  is  going  in  the  opposite  direc 
tion,  how  can  he  walk  with  him  except  by  turning 
his  back  upon  the  path  which  he  has  formerly  trod 
den  ?— P. 


VARIOUS  HIJSDKANCES.  121 

A  sailor  remarks — "  Sailing  from  Cuba,  we  thought 
we  had  gained  sixty  miles  one  day  in  our  course; 
but  at  the  next  observation  we  found  we  had 
lost  more  than  thirty.  It  was  an  under-current. 
The  ship  had  been  going  forward  by  the  wind,  but 
going  back  by  the  current."  So  a  man's  course  in 
religion  may  often  seem  to  be  right  and  progressive, 
but  the  under-current  of  his  besetting  sins  is  driving 
him  the  very  contrary  way  to  what  he  thinks. 

Cheever. 


ccxv. 

"  THEN  is  THE  OFFENCE  OF  THE  CROSS  CEASED."— Gal.  v.  11 

PAUL  intends  here  to  declare  that  the  offence  of 
the  cross  never  has  ceased,  and  never  can  cease. 
To  suppose  it  to  have  ceased  is  folly. 

The  religion  of  Jesus  is  most  peaceful,  mild  and 
benevolent. 

Yet  its  history  shows  it  to  have  been  assailed  with 
bitterest  hate  all  along.  It  is  clearly  offensive  to 
the  unregenerate  mind. 

There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  it  is  one  jot 
more  palatable  to  the  world  than  it  used  to  be. 
The  world  and  the  gospel  are  both  unchanged. 

I.   WHEREIN   LIES  THE  OFFENCE  OF  THE  CROSS? 

1.  Its  doctrine  of  atonement  offends  man's  pride. 

2.  Its  simple  teaching  offends  man's  wisdom,  and 

artificial  taste. 

3.  Its  being  a  remedy  for  man's  ruin  offends  his 

fancied  power  to  save  himself. 

4.  Its  addressing  all  as  sinners  offends  the  dignity 

of  Pharisees. 

5.  Its  coming  as  a  revelation   offends  "modern 

thought." 

6.  Its  loft    holiness  offends  man's  love  of  sin. 


THE  OFFENCE   OF  TIIE   CEOSS.  123 

II.  HOW   IS    THIS   OFFENCE    SHOWN? 

1.  Frequently  by  the  actual  persecution  of  believ 

ers, 

2.  More  often  by  slandering  believers,  and  sneer 

ing  at  them  as  old-fashioned,  foolish,  weak- 
mindeJ,  morose,  self-conceited,  etc. 

3.  Often  by  omitting  to  preach  the  cross.     Many 

nowadays    preach   a   Christless,     bloodless 
gospel. 

4.  Or  by  importing  new  meanings  into  orthodox 

terms. 

5.  Or  by  mixing  the  truth  of  Christ  with  errors. 

6.  Or  by  openly  denying  the  Deity  of  Him    who 

died  on  the  cross,  and  the  substitutionary 
character  of  His  sufferings. 

Indeed,  there  are  a  thousand  ways  of  showing  that 
the  cross  offends  us  in  one  respect  or  another. 

III.  WHAT  THEN? 

1.  Herein  is  folly,  that  men  are  offended 

With  that  which  God  ordains; 
With  that  which  must  win  the  day; 
With  the  only  thing  which  can  save  them; 
With  that  which  is  full  of  wisdom  and  beauty 

2.  Herein  is  grace, 

That  we  who  once  were  offended  by  the  cross, 

now  find  it  to  be 
The  one  hope  of  our  hearts, 
The  great  delight  of  our  souls, 
The  jovful  boast  of  our  tongues. 
8.  Heroin  is  heart-searching. 


124  MY   SERMON-NOTES 

Perhaps    we    are    secretly    offended  at  the 

cross. 
Perhaps  we  give  no  offence  to  haters  of  the 

cross.     Many  professed    Christians    never 

cause  offence  to  the  most  godless. 
Is  this  because  they  bear  no  testimony  to  the 

cross  ? 
Is  this  because   they  are  not  crucified  to  the 

world  ? 
Is  this  because  there  is  no  real  trust  in  the 

cross,  and  no  true  knowledge  of  Christ  ? 

Let  us  not.  follow  those  preachers  who  are  not 
friends  to  the  cross. 

Let  us  have  no  fellowship  with  those  who  have  no 
fellowship  with  Christ. 

Preachers  who  have  caught  the  spirit  of  the  age 
are  of  the  world,  and  the  world  loves  its  own;  but 
we  must  disown  them. 

Let  us  not  be  distressed  by  the  offence  of  the 
cross,  even  when  it  comes  upon  us  with  bitterest 
scorn. 

Let  us  look  for  it  and  accept  it  as  a  token  that  we 
are  in  the  right. 

ANNOTATIONS. 

There  is  a  want  in  the  human  mind  which  noth 
ing  but  the  Atonement  can  satisfy,  though  it  may 
be  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jew,  and  foolishness 
to  the  Greek.  In  the  words  of  Henry  Rogers:  "  It  is 
adapted  to  human  nature,  as  a  bitter  medicine  may 


THE   OFFENCE   OF   THE   CROSS.  125 

be  to  a  patient.  Those  who  have  taken  it,  tried  its 
efficacy,  and  recovered  spiritual  health,  gladly  pro 
claim  its  value.  But  to  those  who  have  not,  and 
will  not  try  it,  it  is  an  unpalatable  potion  still.'' 

I  open  an  ancient  book,  written  in  opposition  to 
Christianity  by  Arnobius,  and  I  read:  "Our  gods 
are  not  displeased  with  you  Christians  for  worship 
ping  the  Almighty  God:  but  you  maintain  the  deity 
of  one  who  was  put  to  death  on  the  cross,  you  be 
lieve  him  to  be  yet  alive,  and  you  adore  him  with 
daily  supplications."  Men  showed  me  at  Rome,  in  the 
Kircherian  Museum,  a  square  foot  of  the  plaster  of  a 
wall  of  a  palace  not  many  years  ago  uncovered  on  the 
Palatine  Hill.  On  the  poor  clay  was  traced  a  cross 
bearing  a  human  figure  with  a  brute's  head.  The 
figure  was  nailed  to  the  cross,  and  before  it  a  soldier 
was  represented  kneeling,  and  extending  his  hands 
in  the  Greek  posture  of  devotion.  Underneath  all 
was  scratched  in  rude  lettering  in  Greek,  "Alexa- 
menos  adores  Ms  God."  That  representation  of  the  cen 
tral  thought  of  Christianity  was  made  in  a  jeering 
moment  by  some  rude  soldier  in  the  days  of  Cara 
cal  la;  but  it  blazes  there  now  in  Rome,  the  most 
majestic  monument  of  its  age  in  the  world. — Joseph 
Cook. 

If  any  part  of  the  truth  which  I  am  bound  to 
communicate  be  concealed,  this  is  sinful  artifice. 
The  Jesuits  in  China,  in  order  to  remove  the  offence 
of  the  cross,  declared  that  it  was  a  falsehood  invent 
ed  by  the  Jews  that  Christ  was  crucified;  but  they 
were  expelled  from  the  empire,  and  this  was  de- 


126  MY    SERMOX-XOTES. 

signed,  perhaps,  to  be  held  up  as  a  warning  to  all 
missionaries  that  no  good  end  is  to  be  answered  by 
artifice. — Richard  Cecil. 

The  cross  is  the  strength  of  a  minister.  I,  ,for  one, 
would  not  be  without  it  for  the  world.  I  should  feel 
like  a  soldier  without  weapons,  like  an  artist  with 
out  his  pencil,  like  a  pilot  without  his  compass,  like 
a  laborer  without  his  tools.  Let  others,  if  they  will, 
preach  the  law  and  morality.  Let  others  hold  forth 
the  terrors  of  hell  and  the  joys  of  heaven.  Let 
others  drench  their  congregations  with  teachings 
about  the  sacraments  and  the  churcli.  Give  me  the 
cross  of  Christ.  This  is  the  only  lever  which  has 
ever  turned  the  world  upside  down,  hitherto,  and 
made  men  forsake  their  sins.  And  if  this  will  not 
do  it,  nothing  will.  A  man  may  begin  preaching 
with  a  perfect  knowledge  of  Latin,  Greek,  and  He 
brew;  but  he  will  do  little  or  no  good  among  his 
hearers  unless  he  knows  something  of  the  cross. 
Never  was  there  a  minister  who  did  much  for  the 
conversion  of  souls  who  did  not  dwell  much  on  Christ 
crucified.  Luther,  Rutherford,  Whitefield,  M'Cheyne, 
were  all  most  eminent  preachers  of  the  cross.  This 
is  the  preaching  that  the  Holy  Ghost  delights  to 
bless.  He  loves  to  honor  those  who  honor  the  cross. 

J.  C.  Byle. 

My  thoughts  once  prompt  round  hurtful  things  to  twine, 

What  are  they  now,  when  two  dread  deaths  are  near  ? 

The  one  impends,  the  other  shakes  his  spear. 

Painting  and  sculpture's  aid  in  vain  I  crave : 

My  one  sole  refuge  is  that  love  Divine, 

Which  from  the  cross  stretched  forth  its  arms  to  save. 

Last  lines  written  fy/  Michael  Angela,  when  o/-er  eighty. 


CCXVI. 

"  BEAR    YE  ONE  ANOTHER'S   BURDENS,    AND   so  FULFIL   THE 
LAW  OF  CHRIST. 

"  FOR  EVERY  MAN  SHALL  BEAR  HIS  OWN  BURDEN."  —  Gal.  vi.  2,  5. 


ALATIANS  apparently  were  fond  of  the  law  and 
its  burdens  :  at  least,  they  appeared  to  be  ready 
to  load  themselves  with  ceremonies,  and  so  fulfil  the 
law  of  Moses. 

Paul  would  have  them  think  of  other  burdens,  by 
the  bearing  of  which  they  would  fulfil  the  law  of 
Christ. 

We  are  not  under  law,  but  under  love. 

But  love  is  also  law,  in  the  best  sense.  The  law 
of  Christ  is  love. 

Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law.  "Bear  ye  one 
another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ." 

Lest  this  principle  should  be  presumed  upon,  he 
mentions  the  principle  of  individual  responsibility. 
"  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden." 

I.  COMMUNITY.     "  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens.  " 
1.  NEGATIVELY. 

It  tacitly  forbids  certain  modes  of  action. 

We  are  not  to  burden  others.  Some  take  a 
liberty  to  do  so  from  this  very  text,  as  if  it 
said,  "  Let  others  bear  your  burdens,"  which 
is  just  the  reverse  of  what  it  urges. 

(127) 


126  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

We  are  not  to  spy  out  others'  burdens,   and 

report  thereon. 
We  are  not  to  despise  them  for  having  such 

loads  to  bear. 
We   are   not  to   act  as  if  all  things  existed 

for  ourselves,  and  we  were  to  bend  all  to 

our  own  purposes. 
We  are  not  to  go  through  the  world  oblivious 

of  the  sorrows  of  others.     We  may  not  shut 

our  eyes  to  the  woes  of  mankind. 

2.  Positively. 

We  are  to  share  the  burdens  of  others. 

By  compassion   bear  with  their  former  sins. 

'  Verse  1. 
By  patience  bear  with  their  infirmities,  and 

even  with  their  conceit.     Verse  3. 
By  sympathy  bear  their  sorrows.     Verses  2,  3. 
By  assistance  bear  their  wants.     Verses  6,  10. 
By   communion,   in  love   and   comfort,    bear 

their  struggles. 
By  prayer  and  practical  help  bear  the  burden 

of  their  labors,  and  thus  lighten  it.     Verse  6. 

3.  Specially:  We  ought  to  consider — 

The  erring  brother.  Referred  to  in  verse  1 
as  "  overtaken  in  a  fault."  We  must  ten 
derly  restore  him. 

The  provoking  brother,  who  thinks  himself  to 
be  something.  See  verse  3.  Bear  with 
him:  his  mistake  will  bring  him  many  a 
burden  before  he  has  done  with  it. 

The  brother  who  is  peculiarly  trying  is  to  b« 


BUEDEN-BEAEING.  129 

borne  with  to  seventy  times  seven,  even  to 
the  measure  of  the  law  of  Christ. 

The  greatly  tried  is  to  have  our  greatest  sym 
pathy. 

The  minister  of  Christ  should  be  released 
from  temporal  burdens,  that  he  may  give 
himself  wholly  to  the  burden  of  the  Lord. 

II.  IMMUNITY.     "  For  every  man   shall  bear  his  own 

burden." 

We  shall  not  bear  all  the  burdens  of  others. 

We  are  not  so  bound  to  each  other  that  we  are 
partakers  in  wilful  transgression,  or  negligence,  or 
rebellion. 

1.  Each  must  bear  his  own  sin  if  he  persists  in  it. 

2.  Each  must  bear  his  own  shame,  which  results 

from  his  sin. 

3.  Each  must  bear  his  own  responsibility  in  his 

own  sphere. 

4.  Each  must  bear  his  own  judgment  at  the  last. 

III.  PERSONALITY.     "  Every  man  ...  his   own   bur 

den." 

True  godliness  is  a  personal  affair,  and  we  can 
not  cast  off  our  individuality:  therefore,  let  us  ask 
for  grace  to  look  well  to  ourselves  in  the  following 
matters : — 

1.  Personal  religion.     The  new  birth,  repentance, 

faith,  love,  holiness,  fellowship  with  God, 
etc.,  are  all  personal. 

2.  Personal  self-examination.     We   cannot    leave 

9 


130  MY   SERMON-XOTES. 

the  question  of  our  soul's  condition  to  the 
judgment  of  others. 

3.  Personal  service.     We  have  to  do  what  no  one 

else  can  do. 

4.  Personal  responsibility.     Obligations  cannot  be 

transferred. 

5.  Personal  effort.     Nothing  can  be  a  substitute 

for  this. 

6.  Personal  sorrow.     "  The  heart  knoweth  its  own 

bitterness." 

7.  Personal  comfort.     We  need  the  Comforter  for 

ourselves,  and  we  must  personally  look  up 
to  the  Lord  for  his  operations. 

All  this  belongs  to  the  Christian,  and  we  may- 
judge  ourselves  by  it. 

So  bear  your  own  burden  as  not  to  forget  others. 
So  live  as  not  to  come  under  the  guilt  of  other 
men's  sina, 

So  help  others  as  not  to  destroy  their  self-reliance. 

PITHY  BREVITIES. 

An  old  anecdote  of  the  great  Napoleon  records 
that,  while  walking  along  a  country  road  attended 
by  some  of  his  officers,  he  encountered  a  peasant 
heavily  laden  with  fagots  for  fuel.  The  peasant 
was  about  to  be  jostled  aside,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
by  his  social  superiors,  when  the  Emperor,  laying 
his  hand  on  the  arm  of  the  foremost  member  of  his 
escort,  arrested  the  whole  party,  and  gave  the  la 
boring  man  the  use  of  the  road,  with  the  remark, 
"  Messieurs,  respect  the  burden." 


BUKDEN-B  EARING.  131 

Let  him  who  expects  one  class  in  society  to  pros 
per  to  the  highest  degree,  while  others  are  in  dis 
tress,  try  whether  one  side  of  his  face  can  smile 
while  the  other  is  pinched. — Thomas  Fuller. 

There  is  a  proverb,  but  none  of  Solomon's,  "  Every 
man  for  himself,  and  God  for  us  all."  But  where 
every  man  is  for  himself,  the  devil  will  have  all. 

William  Seeker. 

"  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden  " ;  this  is 
the  law  of  necessity.  "  Bear  ye  one  another's  bur 
dens";  this  is  the  law  of  Christ.  Let  a  man  lighten 
his  own  load  by  sharing  his  neighbor's  burden. 

T.  T.  Lynch. 

There  is  a  gateway  at  the  entrance  of  a  narrow 
passage  in  London,  over  which  is  written,  "  No  bur 
dens  allowed  to  pass  through."  "  And  yet  we  do 
pass  constantly  with  ours,''  said  one  friend  to  another, 
as  they  turned  up  this  passage  out  of  a  more  fre 
quented  and  broader  thoroughfare.  They  carried 
no  visible  burdens,  but  they  were  like  many  who, 
although  they  have  no  outward  pack  upon  their 
shoulders,  often  stoop  inwardly  beneath  the  pressure 
of  a  heavy  load  upon  the  heart.  The  worst  bur 
dens  are  those  which  never  meet  the  eye. 

Bishop  Burnst.  in  his  charges  to  the  clergy  of  his 
diocese,  used  to  t>e  extremely  vehement  in  his  de 
clamations  against  pluralities.  In  his  first  visitation 
to  Salisbury,  he  urged  the  authority  of  St.  Bernard, 
who  being  consulted  by  one  of  his  followers,  whether 
he  might  accept  of  two  benefices,  replied,  "And  how 


132  MY   SEKMOJx-NOTES. 

will  you  be  able  to  serve  them  both  ?  "  "  I  intend," 
answered  the  priest,  ''to  officiate  in  one  oi  them  by 
a  deputy."  "  Will  your  deputy  suffer  eternal  pun 
ishment  tor  you,  too?"  asked  the  saint.  "Believe 
me,  you  may  serve  your  cure  by  proxy,  but  you 
must  suffer  the  penalty  in  person."  This  anecdote 
made  such  an  impression  on  Mr.  Kelsey,  a  pious  and 
wealthy  clergyman  then  present,  that  he  immedi 
ately  resigned  the  rectory  of  Bernerton,  in  Berk 
shire,  worth  two  hundred  a  year,  which  he  then  held 
with  another  of  great  value. —  WTiitecross. 

With  many  personal  service  in  the  cause  of  hu 
manity  is  commuted  for  a  money  payment.  But  we 
are  to  be  soldiers  in  the  campaign  against  evil,  and 
not  merely  to  pay  the  war-tax. — "  Ecce Homo" 


CCXYII. 

"  BE  NOT  DECEIVED  ;   GOD  IS  NOT    MOCKED :   FOR  WHATSOEVER 
A  MAN  SOWETH,   THAT  SHALL  HE   ALSO   REAP," — Gal.  VI.  7. 

BOTH  Luther  and  Calvin  confine  these  words  to 
the  support  of  the  ministers  of  the  Word,  and 
certainly  therein  they  have  weighty  meaning. 

Churches  that   starve   ministers  will   be    starved 
themselves. 

But  we  prefer  to  take  the  words  as  expressing  a 
general  principle. 

I.    GOD   IS   NOT   TO    BE    TRIFLED   WITH. 

1.  Either  by  the  notion  that  there  will  be  no  re 

wards  and  punishments. 

2.  Or  by  the  idea  that  a  bare  profession  will  suf 

fice  to  save  us. 

3.  Or  by  the  fancy  that  we  shall  escape  in  the 

crowd. 

4.  Or  by  the  superstitious  supposition  that  certain 

rites  will  set  all  straight  at  last,  whatever 
our  lives  may  be. 

5.  Or  by  a  reliance  upon   an  orthodox   creed,    a 

supposed  conversion,  a  presumptuous  faith, 
and  a  little  alms-giving. 

(133) 


134  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

II.  THE  LAWS  OP  HIS  GOVERNMENT  CANNOT  BE  SET  ASIDE. 

1.  It  is  so  in  nature.     Law  is  inexorable.     Gravi 

tation  crushes  the  man  who  opposes  it. 

2.  It  is  so  in  providence.     Evil  results  surely  fol 

low  social  wrong. 

3.  Conscience  tells  us  it  must  be  so.     Sin  must  be 

punished. 

4.  The   Word   of  God   is   very    clear    upon   this 

point. 

5.  To  alter  laws  would  disarrange  the  universe, 

and  remove  the  foundation  fo  the  hopes  of 
the  righteous. 

III.  EVIL   SOWING    WILL   BRING   EVIL   REAPING 

1.  This  is  seen  in  the  present  result  of  certain 

sins. 

Sins  of  lust  bring  disease  into  the  bodily 
frame. 

Sins  of  idolatry  have  led  men  to  cruel  and  de 
grading  practices. 

oins  of  temper  have  caused  murders,  wars, 
strifes,  and  misery. 

Sins  of  appetite,  especially  drunkenness, 
cause  want,  misery,  delirium,  etc. 

2.  This  is  seen  in   the  mind  becoming  more  and 

more  corrupt,  and  less  able  to  see  the  evil 
of  sin,  or  toresist  temptation. 

3.  This  is  seen  when  the  man  becomes  evidently 

obnoxious  to  God  and  man,  so  as  to  need  re 
straint,  and  invite  punishment. 

4.  This  is  seen  when  the  sinner  becomes  himself 

disappointed  in  the  result  of  his  conduct. 


SOWING   AND   REAPING.  136 

His  malice  eats  his  heart;  his  greed  devours 
his  soul;  his  infidelity  destroys  his  comfort; 
his  raging  passions  agitate  his  spirit. 

5.  This  is  seen  when  the  impenitent  is  confirmed 
in  evil,  and  eternally  punished  with  re 
morse.  Hell  will  be  the  harvest  of  a  man's 
own  sin.  Conscience  is  the  worm  which 
gnaws  him. 

IV.    GOOD   SOWING   WILL    BRING    GOOD    REAPING.      . 

The  rule  holds  good  both  ways. 
Let   us,  therefore,  enquire  as  to  this  good  sow 
ing: 

1.  In  what  power  is  it  to  be  done  ? 

2.  In  what  manner  and  spirit  shall  we  set  about 

it? 

3.  What  are  its  seeds  ? 

Towards  God,  we  sow  in  the  Spirit,  faith  and 

obedience. 
Towards  men,  love,  truth,  justice,   kindness, 

forbearance. 
Towards  self,  control  of  appetite,  purity,  etc. 

4.  What  is  the  reaping  of  the  Spirit? 

Life  everlasting  dwelling  within  us  and  abid 
ing  there  forever. 

Let  us  sow  good  seed  always. 

Let  us  sow  it  plentifully,   that   we   may   reap  in 
proportion. 

Let  us  begin  to  sow  it  at  once. 


136  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

SEEDS. 

They  that  would  mock  God  mock  themselves 
much  more. — John  Trapp. 

It  is  not  an  open  question  at  all  whether  I  shall 
sow  or  not  to-day ;  the  only  question  to  be  decided 
is :  Shall  I  sow  good  seed  or  bad  ?  Every  man  al 
ways  is  sowing  for  his  own  harvest  in  eternity  either 
tares  or  wheat.  According  as  a  man  soweth,  so 
shall  he  also  reap;  he  that  sows  the  wind  of  vanity 
shall  reap  the  whirlwind  of  wrath.  Suppose  a  man 
should  collect  a  quantity  of  small  gravel  and  dye  it 
carefully,  so  that  it  should  resemble  wheat,  and  sow 
it  in  his  fields  in  spring,  expecting  that  he  would 
reap  a  crop  of  wheat  like  his  neighbor's  in  the  har 
vest.  The  man  is  mad ;  he  is  a  fool  to  think  that  by 
his  silly  trick  he  can  evade  the  laws  of  nature,  and 
mock  nature's  God.  Yet  equally  foolish  is  the  con 
duct,  and  far  heavier  the  punishment,  of  the  man 
who  sows  wickedness  now,  and  expects  to  reap 
safety  at  last.  Sin  is  not  only  profitless  and  disas 
trous;  it  is  eminently  a  deceitful  work.  Men  do  not 
of  set  purpose  cast  themselves  away:  sin  cheats  a 
sinner  out  of  his  soul. 

But  sowing  righteousness  is  never,  and  nowhere, 
lost  labor.  Every  act  done  by  God's  grace,  and  at 
his  bidding,  is  living  and  fruitful.  It  may  appear 
to  go  out  of  sight,  like  seed  beneath  the  furrow; 
but  it  will  rise  again.  Sow  on,  Christians!  Sight 
will  not  follow  the  seed  far;  but  when  sight  fails, 
sow  in  faith,  and  you  will  reap  in  joy  soon. —  William 
Arnot. 


SOWING   AND   REAPING.  137 

"Whatsoever  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  also 
reap,"  etc. — No  blight,  nor  mildew,  nor  scorching 
sun,  nor  rain  deluge,  can  turn  that  harvest  into  fail 
ure. 

Cast  forth  thy  act,  thy  word,  into  the  ever-living, 
ever- working  universe :  it  is  a  seed-grain  that  can 
not  die:  unnoticed  to-day,  it  will  be  found  flourish 
ing  as  a  Banyan  grove  (perhaps,  alas !  as  a  Hem 
lock  forest)  after  a  thousand  years. — Thomas  Carlyk. 

So  it  is  with  all  temptations  and  lusts.  They  are 
ever  scattering  seeds — as  weeds  do.  What  a  power 
there  is  in  seeds  !  How  long-lived  they  are  ! — as  we 
see  in  the  mummies  of  Egypt,  where  they  may  have 
lain  for  thousands  of  years  in  darkness,  but  now 
come  forth  to  grow.  What  contrivances  they  have 
to  continue  and  to  propagate  themselves !  They 
have  wings,  and  they  fly  for  miles.  They  may  float 
over  wide  oceans,  and  rest  themselves  in  foreign 
countries.  They  have  hooks  and  attach  themselves 
to  objects.  Often  they  are  taken  up  by  birds,  which 
transport  them  to  'distant  places.  As  it  is  with  the 
seeds  of  weeds,  so  it  is  with  every  evil  propensity 
and  habit.  It  propagates  itself  and  spreads  over  the 
whole  soul,  and  goes  down  from  generation  to  gen 
eration. — Dr.  James  McCosh. 

Doth  any  think  he  shall  lose  by  his  charity  ?  No 
worldling,  when  he  sows  his  seed,  thinks  he  shall 
lose  his  seed;  he  hopes  for  increase  at  harvest. 
Darest  thou  trust  the  ground,  and  not  God?  Sure 
God  is  a  better  paymaster  than  the  earth;  grace 
doth  give  a  larger  recompense  than  nature.  Below, 


138  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

thou  mayest  receive  forty  grains  for  one;  but  in 
heaven  (by  the  promise  of  Christ)  a  hundred-fold: 
a  measure  heapen,  and  shaken,  and  thrust  together, 
and  yet  running  over.  "  Blessed  is  he  that  consid- 
ereth  the  poor";  there  is  the  seeding:  "The  Lord 
shall  deliver  him  in  the  time  of  trouble"  (Ps.  xli.  1); 
there  is  the  harvest.  Is  that  all  ?  No;  Matt.  xxv. 
35:  "Ye  fed  me  when  I  was  hungry,  and  gave  me 
drink  when  thirsty  " — comforted  me  in  misery ;  there 
is  the  sowing.  Venite,  beati.  "  Come,  ye  blessed  of 
my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you"; 
there  is  the  harvest. — Thomas  Adams. 


CCXVIII. 

"  BUT  GOD  FORBID  THAT  I  SHOULD  GLORY,  SAVE  IN  THE   CROSS 

OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST,  BY  WHOM  THE  WORLD  is  CRUCI 
FIED  UNTO  ME,  AND  I  UNTO  THE  WORLD." — Gal.  vi.  14. 

PAUL  vigorously  rebuked  those  who  went  aside 
from  the  doctrine  of  the  Cross.  Verses  12,  13. 

When  we  rebuke  others,  we  must  take  care  to  go 
right  ourselves;  hence  he  says,  "  God  forbid  that  I 
should  glory,  save  in  the  cross." 

Our  own  resolute  adherence  to  truth,  when  prac 
tically  carried  out,  is  a  very  powerful  argument 
against  opponents. 

Paul  rises  to  warmth  when  he  thinks  of  the  oppo 
nents  of  the  cross.  He  no  sooner  touches  the  sub 
ject  than  he  glows  and  burns. 

Yet  he  has  his  reasons,  and  states  them  clearly 
and  forcibly  in  the  latter  words  of  the  text. 

litre  are  three  crucifixions: — 

I.  CHRIST  CRUCIFIED:  "The  cross  of  our    Lord  Jesus 

Christ." 

He  mentions  the  atoning  death  of  Jesus  in  the 
plainest  and  most  obnoxious  terms.  The  cross  was 
shameful  as  the  gallows  tree. 

Yet  with  the  clearest  contrast  as  to  the  person 
enduring  it;  for  to  him  he  gives  his  full  honors  in 
the  glorious  title— "our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

(139) 


140  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

He  refers  to  the  doctrine  of  free  justification  and 
full  atonement  by  the  death  of  Jesus  upon  the  cross. 

In  this  he  gloried  so  as  to  glory  in  nothing  else, 
for  he  viewed  it— 

1.  As  a  display  of  the  divine  character.     "  God 

was  in  Christ":  2  Cor.  v.  19. 

2.  As  the  manifestation  of  the  love  of  the  Saviour. 

John  xv.  13. 

3.  As  the  putting   away    of  sin  by  atonement. 

Heb.  ix.  26. 

4.  As  the  breathing  of  hope,  peace,  and  joy  to  the 

desponding  soul. 

5.  As  the  great  means   of  touching  hearts  and 

changing  lives. 

6.  As   depriving   death    of  terror,    seeing  Jesus 

died. 

7.  As  ensuring  heaven  to  all  believers. 

In  any  one  of  these  points  of  view  the  cross  is  a 
pillar  of  light,  flaming  with  unutterable  glory. 

II.  THE  WORLD  CRUCIFIED:  "  The  world  is  crucified  un 
to  me." 

As  the  result  of  seeing  all  things  in  the  light  of  the 
Cross,  he  saw  the  world  to  be  like  a  felon  executed 
upon  a  cross. 

1.  Its  character  condemned.     John  xii.  31. 

2.  Its  judgment  contemned.     Who  cares  for  the 

opinion  of  a  gibbeted  felon  ? 

3.  Its  teachings  despised.      What  authority  can  it 

have? 

4.  Its  pleasures,  honors,  treasures,  rejected. 

5.  Its  pursuits,  maxims,  and  spirit  cast  out. 


THREE   CRUCIFIXIONS.  141 

6,  Its  threatenings  and  blandishments  made  noth- 

ing  of. 

7.  Itself  soon  to  pass  away,  its  glory  and  its  fash 

ion  fading. 

III.  THE    BELIEVER    CRUCIFIED:    "  And     I     unto     the 
world." 

To  the1  world  Paul  was  no  better  than  a  man  cru 
cified. 

If  faithful,  a  Christian  may  expect  to  be  treated 
as  only  fit  to  be  put  to  a  shameful  death. 

He  will  probably  find — 

1.  Himself  at   first  bullied,  threatened,  and  ridi 

culed. 

2.  His  name  and  honor  held  in  small  repute  be 

cause   of  his  association    with   the    godly 
poor. 

3.  His  actions  and  motives  misrepresented. 

4.  Himself  despised  as  a  sort  of  madman,  or  of 

doubtful  intellect. 

5.  His  teachings    described    as   exploded,    dying 

out,  &c. 

6.  His  ways  and  habits  reckoned  to  be  Puritanic 

and  hypocritical. 

7.  Himself  given  up  as  irreclaimable,  and  there 

fore  dead  to  society. 

Let  us  glory  in  the  cross,  because  it  gibbets  the 
world's  glory,  and  honor,  and  power. 

Let  us  glory  in  the  cross  when  men  take  from  us 
all  other  glory. 


142  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

MEMORANDA. 

It  is  the  subject  of  rejoicing  and  glorying  that  we 
have  such  a  Saviour.  The  world  looked  upon  him 
with  contempt;  and  the  cross  was  a  stumbling-block 
to  the  Jew,  and  folly  to  the  Greek.  But  to  the 
Christian  that  cross  is  the  subject  of  glorying.  It  is 
so  because — (1)  of  the  love  of  him  who  suffered 
there ;  (2)  of  the  purity  and  holiness  of  his  charac 
ter,  for  the  innocent  died  there  for  the  guilty;  (3)  of 
the  honor  there  put  on  the  law  of  God  by  his  dying 
to  maintain  it  unsullied;  (4)  of  the  reconciliation 
there  made  for  sin,  accomplishing  what  could  be  done 
by  no  other  oblation,  and  by  no  power  of  man ;  (5)  of 
the  pardon  there  procured  for  the  guilty ;  (6)  of  the 
fact  that  through  it  we  become  dead  to  the  world, 
and  are  made  alive  unto  God;  (7)  of  the  support  and 
consolation  which  go  from  that  cross  to  sustain  us 
in  trial ;  and  (8)  of  the  fact  that  it  procured  for  us 
admission  into  heaven,  a  title  to  the  world  of  glory. 
All  glory  is  around  the  cross.  It  was  a  glorious  Sa 
viour  who  died;  it  was  glorious  love  that  led  him  to 
die;  it  was  a  glorious  object  to  redeem  a  world;  and 
it  is  unspeakable  glory  to  which  he  will  raise  lost 
and  ruined  sinners  by  his  death.  Oh,  who  would 
not  glory  in  such  a  Saviour  ! — Albert  Barnes. 

If  you  have  not  found  out  that  Christ  crucified  is 
the  foundation  of  the  whole  volume,  you  have  hith 
erto  read  your  Bible  to  very  little  profit.  Your  re 
ligion  is  a  heaven  without  a  sun,  an  arch  without  a 
keystone,  a  compass  without  a  needle,  a  clock  with 
out  spring  or  weights,  a  lamp  without  oil.  It  will 


TIIKEE   CRUCIFIXIONS.  143 

not  comfort  you,  it  will  not  deliver  your  soul  from 
hell— J.  C.  Ryk. 

Do  not  be  satisfied,  with  so  many  others,  only  to 
know  the  cross  in  its  power  to  atone.  The  glory  of  the 
cross  is,  that  it  was  not  only  to  Jesus  the  path  to  life, 
but  that  each  moment  it  can  become  to  us  the  power 
that  destroys  sin  and  death,  and  keeps  us  in  the 
power  of  the  eternal  life.  Learn  from  your  Saviour  the 
holy  art  of  using  it  for  this.  Faith  in  the  power  of 
the  cross  and  its  victory  will  day  by  day  make  dead 
the  deeds  of  the  body,  the  lusts  of  the  flesh. 
This  faith  will  teach  you  to  count  the  cross,  with  its 
continual  death  to  self,  all  your  glory.  Because 
you  regard  the  cross  not  as  one  who  is  still  on  the  way 
to  crucifixion,  with  the  prospect  of  a  painful  death, 
but  as  one  to  whom,  the  crucifixion  is  past,  who 
already  lives  in  Christ,  and  now  only  bears  the  cross 
as  the  blessed  instrument  through  which  the  body  of 
sin  is  done  away  (Rom.  vi.  6,  R.  V  ),  The  banner 
under  which  complete  victory  over  sin  and  the 
world  is  to  be  won  is  the  cross. — Andrew  Murray. 

When  Ignatius,  pastor  of  the  church  at  Antioch, 
was  condemned  by  the  emperor  Trajan  to  suffer 
death  at  Rome,  he  was  apprehensive  that  the  Christ 
ians  there,  out  of  their  great  affection  for  him,  might 
endeavor  to  prevent  his  martyrdom  •  and  therefore 
wrote  a  letter  from  Smyrna  to  the  Roman  Christians, 
which  he  sent  on  before  him,  wherein  he  earnestly 
besought  them  to  take  no  measures  for  the  continu 
ance  of  his  life;  and,  amongst  other  things,  said,  "  I 
long  for  death,"  adding  as  a  reason  why  he  was  de- 


144  MY    SERMON-NOTES. 

sirous  of  thus  testifying  his  love  to  Christ,  "My  love 
is  crucified." 

Love  makes  the  cross  easy,  amiable,  admirable, 
delicious. 

Brethren,  the  cross  of  Christ  is  your  crown,  the 
reproach  of  Christ  your  riches;  the  shame  of  Christ 
your  glory. — Joseph  Atteine,  written  from  "  The  Com 
mon  Prison." 


CCXIX. 

"THAT  HOLY  SPIRIT  OF  PROMISE,  WHICH  is  THE  EARNEST  OF 

OUR  INHERITANCE ." — Eph.  i.  13,  14. 

HEAVEN  is  ours  by  inheritance.  It  is  not  pur 
chased  by  merit,  nor  won  by  strength,  but 
obtained  by  birthright. 

Of  this  inheritance  we  have  a  foretaste  here  be 
low  ;  and  that  foretaste  is  of  the  nature  of  a  pledge 
or  earnest,  guaranteeing  our  coming  to  full  pos 
session. 

An  earnest  is  of  the  same  nature  as  the  ultimate 
blessing  of  which  it  is  an  earnest.  A  pledge  is  re 
turned,  but  an  earnest  is  retained  as  part  of  the 
thing  promised. 

Great  enjoyment  attends  the  possession  of  the 
earnest  of  our  inheritance  when  rightly  understood. 

I.  THE  HOLY   SPIRIT   is   HIMSELF   THE   EARNEST   OF   THE 

HEAVENLY    INHERITANCE. 

He  is  not  only  the  pledge,  but  the  foretaste  of 
everlasting  bliss. 

1.  His  entrance  into  the  soul  brings  with  it  that 

same  life  which  enters  heaven,  namely,  the 
eternal  life. 

2.  His  abiding  in  us  consecrates  us  to  the  same 

purpose    to    which   we    shall    be   devoted 

10  (145) 


146  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

throughout  eternity,  namely,  the  service  of 
the  Lord  our  God. 

3.  His  work  in  us  creates   that    same  holiness 

which   is   essential   to    the   enjoyment   of 
heaven. 

4.  His  influence  over  us  brings  us  that  same  com 

munion  with  God  which  we  shall  enjoy  for 
ever  in  heaven. 

5.  His  being  ours  is  as  much  as  heaven  being  ours, 

if  not  more;  for  if  we  possess  the  God  of 
heaven  we  possess  heaven,  and  more. 

The  possession  of  the  Spirit  is  the  dawn  of  glory. 
II.  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT  BRINGS  TO  us  MANY  THINGS   WHICH 

ARE    BLESSED     FORETASTES    OF    THE    HEAVENLY     IN 
HERITANCE. 

1.  Rest.     This  is  a  leading  idea  of  heaven,  and  we 

have  rest  at  this  moment  in  Jesus  Christ. 
Heb.  iv.  3. 

2.  Delight  in   service.     We  serve  the  Lord  with 

gladness  even  now. 

3.  Joy  over  repenting  sinners.     This  we  can  now 

attain. 

4.  Communion   with  saints.     How  sweet  even  in 

this  imperfect  state ! 

5.  Enlarged    knowledge  of  God  and  of  all  divine 

things.      Here  also  we    know  in  part   the 
same  things  which  are  known  above. 

6.  Victory  over  sin,  Satan,  and  the  woild. 

7.  Security  in  Christ  Jesus. 

8.  Nearness  to  our  Beloved. 


THE   EARNEST.  147 

By  these  windows  we  look  into  the  things  which 
God  has  prepared  for  them  that  love  him.  "He  hath 
revealed  them  unto  us  by  his  Spirit." 

III.  THERE   is   A   VERY  DARK  CONTRAST   TO   THIS   BRIGHT 

THEME. 

There  are  "  evident  tokens  of  perdition,"'  pledges 
of  woe. 

There  are  also  earnests  and  foretastes  of  the  eter 
nal  state  of  misery. 

Ungodly  men  may  pretty  clearly  guess  what  sin 
will  bring  them  to  when  it  has  ripened.  Let  them 
learn  from — 

1.  The  fruit  of  some  sins  in  this  life :  shame,  rags, 

disease,  etc. 

2.  Their  fear  of  death,  alarm  at  the  thought  of  it. 

3.  Their  frequent  unrest  and  foreboding.      "  They 

flee  when  no  man  pursueth  " ;  they  are 
"tossed  to  and  fro  as  the  locust." 

4.  Their   disappointments    in   their     companions; 

their  mutual  quarrels  and  hates.  What 
will  it  be  to  be  shut  up  with  such  persons 
for  ever  ? 

5.  Their  distaste   for   good    things,    inability  to 

pray,  etc.,  all  earnests  of  the  impossibility 
of  their  joining  saints  and  angels  in  heav 
en. 

Oh,  to  be  filled  by  the  Spirit,  so  as  to  find  heaven 
begun  below ! 


348  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

STRIKING  EXTRACTS. 

There  is  great  resemblance  betwixt  an  earnest  and 
the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  with  the  graces  which 
he  works  in  us.  1st.  The  earnest  is  part  of  the 
whole  sum,  which  is  on  a  certain  account  to  be  paid 
at  the  time  appointed;  so  the  Spirit  we  have,  and 
his  grace,  are  the  beginning  of  that  glorious  being 
which  we  shall  ultimately  receive — the  same  for 
substance,  though  differing  in  degree.  2nd.  An 
earnest  is  but  little  in  comparison  of  the  whole. 
Twenty  shillings  is  earnest  sufficient  to  make  sure 
of  a  hundred  pounds;  thus,  all  the  grace  we  have  is 
but  a  small  thing  in  comparison  of  the  fulness  we 
look  for,  even  as  the  first-fruits  were  in  comparison 
of  the  full  harvest.  3rd.  An  earnest  doth  assure 
him  that  receiveth  it  of  the  honest  meaning  of  him 
with  whom  he  contracteth ;  so  the  Spirit  and  grace 
which  we  receive  from  God  do  assure  us  of  his  set 
tled  purpose  of  bringing  us  to  eternal  glory. — Paul 
Bayne. 

Christians !  God  is  nearer  to  us  than  our  nearest 
friend;  nearer  to  us  than  Christ  himself  would  be, 
if  we  only  felt  the  touch  of  his  hand  and  the  sweep 
of  his  vesture ;  for  he  takes  up  his  abode  witliin  us. 
Plato  seemed  to  have  a  glimpse  of  this  glorious 
truth  when  he  said,  "  God  is  more  inward  to  us  than 
we  are  to  ourselves."  What  was  to  him  a  beautiful 
speculation,  is  to  us  an  inspiring  reality ;  for  we  are 
the  "  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost." — Dr.  Charles 
Stanford. 


THE   EARNEST.  149 

As  soon  as  we  have  set  out  on  our  journey  to  go 
home,  our  home,  by  foretastes,  comes  to  meet  us; 
the  peace  of  our  home  embraces  us;  the  Spirit,  like  a 
dove,  rests  upon  our  hearts ;  the  glory  of  our  home 
allures  us;  and  angel-servants  from  our  home  bear 
us  company  and  help  us  on  our  road.  Oh,  what  a 
sweet  home  ours  must  be,  that  can  send  us  such 
pledges  of  its  sweetness  while  we  are  yet  a  great  way 
off! — John  Pulsford. 

"  The  earnest"'  The  Greek  word  is  arrhdbbn.  It 
is  Hebrew  (at  least,  Shemitic)  by  derivation;  the 
identical  Hebrew  word  appearing  in  Gen.  xxxviii. 
By  derivation  it  has  to  do  with  exchange,  and  so  at 
first  means  a  pledge ;  but  usage  brought  it  to  the 
kindred  meaning  of  an  earnest.  It  was  used  for  the 
bridegroom's  betrothal-gifts  to  the  bride,  a  case  ex 
actly  in  point  here.  In  ecclesiastical  Latin  it  ap 
pears  usually  in  the  shortened  form,  arra.  It  survives 
in  the  French  arrhes,  the  money  paid  to  strike  a  bar 
gain.  Arrhdbbn  occurs  elsewhere  in  the  New  Tes 
tament;  2  Cor.  i.  22;  v.  5.  There,  as  here,  it  de 
notes  the  gifts  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  given  to  the  saints 
as  the  part  payment  of  the  "  coming  weight  of 
glory,"  the  inmost  essence  of  which  is  the  complete 
attainment  (1  John  iii.  2)  of  that  likeness  to  the 
Lord  which  the  Spirit  begins  and  develops  here  (2 
Cor.  iii.  18).  A  kindred  expression  is  "  The 
first-fruits  of  the  Spirit  '  (Rom.  viii.  23,) — "  Cam,' 
bridge  Bible  for  Schools  and  Families"  A  work  which 
we  commend  to  all  ministers. 


ccxx. 

"OF  WHOM  THE  WHOLE   FAMILY    IN    HEAVEN    AND    KARTH     IS 
NAMED. — Eph.  ill.  15. 

MANY  are  the  weights  which  drag  us  towards 
earth  and  the  cords  which  bind  us  to  it. 
Among  these  last  oar  families  are  not  the  least. 
We  need  an  upward  impulse.     Oh  that  we  may 
find  it  in  the  text ! 

There  is  a  blessed  connection  between  saints  be 
low  and  saints  above. 

Oh  to  feel  that  we  are  one  family  ! 

I.  LET  US  UNDERSTAND  THE  LANGUAGE  OF  THE  TEXT. 

1.  The  fc'/word  is  "family." 

A  building  sets  forth  the  unity  of  the  build 
er's  design. 

A  flock,  unity  of  the  shepherd's  possession. 
1  he  title  of  citizen  implies  unity  of  privilege. 
The  idea  of  an  army  displays  unity  of  object 

and  pursuit. 

Here  we  have  something  closer  and  more  instruc 
tive  still:  "  family." 

The  same  Father,  and  thus  unity  of  relation 
ship. 

The  same  life,  and  so  unity  of  nature. 
(150) 


THE   KOYAL   FAMILY.  151 

The  same  mutual  love  growing  out  of  nature 
and  relations. 

The  same  desires,  interests,  joys,  and  cares. 

The  same  home  for  abode,  security,  and  en 
joyment. 

The  same  inheritance  to  be  soon  possessed. 

2.  The   link-word  is  "ivhole"     ''Whole  family  in 

heaven  and  earth." 
There  it  but  one  family,  and  it  is  a  whole. 

On  earth  we  find  a  portion  of  the  family — 
Sinning  and  repenting:  not  yet  made  per 
fect. 
Suffering     and     despised:     strangers    and 

foreigners  among  men. 
Dying  and  groaning,   because  yet    in   the 

body. 

In  heaven  we  find  another  part  of  the  family- 
Serving  and  rejoicing.  Sinless  and  free 

from  all  infirmity. 

Honoring  God  and  honored  by  him. 
Free  from  sighing,  and  engrossed  in  sing 
ing. 

The    militant    and    the    triumphant    are  one  un 
divided  family. 

3.  The  crowning  word  is  '•'•named.'" 

We  are  named  after  the    first-born,    even    Jesus 

Christ. 
Thus  are  we  all  acknowledged  to  be  as  truly  sons 

as  the  Lord  Jesus;  for  the  same  name  is 

named  on  us. 
Thus    is    he    greatly   honored    among    us.      His 


162  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

name   is  glorified  by  each  one  who   truly 

bears  it. 
Thus  are  wo  greatly  honored  in  him  by  bearing 

so  august  a  name. 
Thus  are  we  taught  whom  to  imitate.     We  must 

justify  the  name. 
Thus  are  we  forcibly  reminded  of  his  great  love  to 

us,  his  great  gift  to  us,  his  union  with  us, 

and  his  value  of  us. 

II.  LET  us  CATCH  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE  TEXT. 

Let  us  now  endeavor  to  feel  and  display  a  family 
feeling. 

1.  As  members  of  one  family  let  us  enjoy  the 

things  we  have  in  common.     We  all  have — 

The  same  occupations.  It  is  our  meat  and 
drink  to  serve  the  Lord,  to  bless  the  broth 
erhood,  and  win  souls. 

The  same  delights;  communion,  assurance, 
expectation,  &c. 

The  same  love  from  the  Father. 

The  same  justification  and  acceptance  with 
our  God. 

The  same  rights  to  the  throne  of  grace,  an 
gelic  ministration,  divine  provision,  spirit 
ual  illumination,  &c. 

The  same  anticipations.  Growth  in  grace, 
perseverance  to  the  end,  and  glory  at  the 
end. 

2.  As  members  of  one  family,  let  us  be  familiar 

with  each  other. 


THE   EOYAL   FAMILY.  153 

3.  As  members  of  one  family,  let   us  practically 

help  each  other. 

4.  As  members  of  one  family,   let  us  lay  aside  all 

dividing  names,  aims,  feelings,  ambitions, 
and  beliefs. 

5.  As  members  of  one  family,   let  us  strive  for  the 

honor  and  kingdom  of  our  Father  who  is  in 
heaven. 

Let  us  seek  out  the  lost  members  of  the  family. 
Let  us  cherish  the  forgotten  members  of  the  fam- 

. 

Let  us  strive  for  the  peace  and  unity  of  the  family. 


CHOICE  WORDS. 

The  Scripture  knows  but  two  places  for  the  re 
ceipt  of  all  believers,  either  heaven  or  earth.  So 
when  the  apostle  will  tell  us  where  all  they  were 
who  were  gathered  under  Christ  as  their  Head  and 
Redeemer,  he  rangeth  them  in  these  orders,  "  things 
in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth "  (Eph.  i.  10) ;  the 
apostle  forgot  limbo  there,  and  purgatory  here.  As 
the  Scripture  doth  know  but  two  sorts  of  saints,  so 
but  two  places,  heaven  for  the  triumphant,  earth  for 
the  militant. — Paul  Bayne. 

"  The  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth,"  not  the 
two  families,  nor  the  divided  family,  but  the  whole 
family  in  heaven  and  earth.  It  appears,  at  first 
sight,  as  if  we  were  very  effectually  divided  by  the 
hand  of  death.  Can  it  be  that  we  are  one  family 
when  some  of  us  labor  on,  and  others  sleep  beneath 


164  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

the  greensward?  There  was  a  great  truth  in  the 
sentence  which  Wordsworth  put  into  the  month  of 
the  little  child,  when  she  said,  "  0  master,  we  are 
seven." 

"  But  they  are  dead :  those  two  are  dead! 
Their  spirits  are  in  heaven  ! " 
'Twas  throwing  words  away  ;  for  still 
The  little  maid  would  have  her  will, 
And  said :  "Nay,  we  are  seven." 

Should  we  not  thus  speak  of  the  divine  family  ?  for 
death  assuredly  has  no  separating  power  in  the 
household  of  God.— a  H.  S. 

"  When  I  was  a  boy,"  says  one,  "  I  thought  of 
heaven  as  a  great  shining  city,  with  vast  walls  and 
domes  and  spires,  and  with  nobody  in  it  except 
white  tenuous  angels,  who  were  strangers  to  me. 
By-and-by  my  little  brother  died;  and  I  thought  of 
a  great  city  with  walls  and  domes  and  spires,  and  a 
flock  of  cold  unknown  angels,  and  one  little  fellow 
that  1  was  acquainted  with,  he  was  the  only  I  knew 
in  that  tirna.  Then  another  brother  died,  and  there 
were  two  that  I  knew.  Then  my  acquaintances  be 
gan  to  die,  and  the  flock  continually  grew.  But  it 
was  not  till  [  had  sent  one  of  my  little  children  to 
his  Grandparent  — God— that  I  began  to  think  I  had 
got  a  little  in  myself.  A  second  went,  a  third  went, 
a  fourth  went;  and  by  that  time  I  had  so  many  ac 
quaintances  in  heaven,  that  T  did  not  see  any  more 
walls  and  domes  and  spires.  1  began  to  think  of 
the  residents  of  the  celestial  city.  And  now  there 
have  so  many  of  my  acquaintance  gone  there,  that 


THE  ROYAL   FAMILY.  155 

it  sometimes  seems  to  me  that  I  know  more  in  heav 
en  than  I  do  on  earth." — Handbook  of  Illustration. 

Stein,  a  great  German  statesman,  head  of  the  Prus 
sian  government  in  1807,  wrote  in  1812  to  Count 
Miiuster: — "I  am  sorry  your  excellency  suspects 
a  Prussian  in  me,  and  betrays  a  Hanoverian  in  your 
self.  I  have  but  one  Fatherland,  and  that  is  Ger 
many;  and  as  under  the  old  constitution  I  belonged 
to  Germany  alone,  and  not  to  any  part  of  Germany, 
so  to  Germany  alone,  and  not  to  any  part  of  it,  [  am 
devoted  with  my  whole  heart." 

Thomas  Brooks  mentions  a  woman  who  lived  near 
Lewes,  in  Sussex,  who  was  ill,  and  therefore  was 
visited  by  one  of  her  neighbors,  who  to  cheer  her, 
told  her  that  if  she  died  she  would  go  to  heaven,  and 
be  with  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  saints  and 
angels.  To  this  the  sick  woman  in  all  simplicity 
replied,  "Ah,  mistress,  T  have  no  relations  there ! 
Nay,  not  so  much  as  a  gossip,  or  acquaintance;  arid 
as  I  know  nobody,  I  had  a  great  deal  sooner  stop 
with  you  and  the  other  neighbors,  than  go  and  live 
among  strangers."  It  is  to  be  feared  that  if  a  good 
many  were  to  speak  their  thoughts  they  would  say 
much  the  same. 


CCXXI. 

"  THAT  HE  WOULD  GRANT  YOU,  ACCORDING  TO  THE  RIOHES  OF 
HIS  GLORY,  TO  BE  STRENGTHENED  WITH  MIGHT  BY  HIS 
SPIRIT  IN  THE  INNER  MAN 

"THAT  CHRIST  MAY  DWELL  IA  YOUR  HEARTS  BY  FAITH;  THAT 
YE,  BKING  ROOTED  AND  GROUNDED  IN  LOVE, 

"  MAY  BE  ABLE  TO  COMPREHEND  WITH  ALL  SAINTS  WHAT  IS 
THE  BREADTH,  AND  LENGTH,  AND  DEPTH,  AND  HEIGHT  ; 

"AND  TO  KNOW  THE  LOVE  OF  CHRIST.  WHICH  PA88ETH  KNOW 
LEDGE,  THAT  YE  MIGHT  BE  FILLED  WITH  ALL  THE  FULNESS 
OF  GOD."—  Eph.  iii.  16,  17,  18,  19. 

THE  ability  to  comprehend  and  measure  de 
scribed  in  our  text,  was  the  subject  of  the  apos 
tle's  prayer,  and  therefore,  we  may  be  quite  sure  that 
it  is  a  most  desirable  attainment. 

Observe  how  he  prays,  and  how  wisely  he  arranges 
his  petitions. 

He  would  have  us  measure  the  immeasurable,  but 
he  would  first  have  us  made  fit  to  do  so. 

We  shall  make  our  chief  point  the  fourfold  meas 
urement,  but  we  shall  note  that  which  comes  before, 
and  that  which  follows  after. 

I.  THE  PREVIOUS  TRAINING    REQUIRED  FOR   THIS    MEASURE 
MENT. 

1.  He  would   have  their  spiritual  faculties  vigor 
ous. 
(156) 


MEASURING  THE  IMMEASURABLE.  157 

"Your  inner  man":  understanding,  faith, 
hope,  love,  all  need  power  from  a  divine 
source. 

"  Strengthened,"  made  vigorous,  active,  heal 
thy,  capacious. 

"With  might:"  no  low  degree  of  force  will 
suffice. 

"  By  his  Spirit."  The  power  required  is  spir 
itual,  holy,  heavenly,  divine,  actually  im. 
parted  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

2.  He  would  have  the  subject  always  before  them, 

"  That  Christ  may  dwell  in  your  heart  by 

faith." 

"In  your  heart.''  Love  must  learn  to  meas 
ure  Christ's  love.  It  is  revealed  to  the 

heart  rather  than  to  the  head. 
"By   faith."      A    carnal    man    measures    by 

sight,  a  saint  by  faith. 
"  May  dwell."     He  must  be  ever  near,  th^t 

we  may  learn  to  measure  him.     Communion 

is  the  basis  of  this  knowledge. 

3.  He  would  have  them  exercised  in  the  art  of 

measurement.  "  That  ye,  being  rooted  and 
grounded  in  love,"  &c. 

We  must  love  him  ourselves,  if  we  would 
measure  Christ's  love. 

We  must,  by  experience  of  his  love,  be  con 
firmed  in  our  own  Jove  to  him,  or  we  can 
not  measure  his  love. 

We  must  also  have  a  vital  grip  of  Christ. 
We  must  be  rooted  as  a  tree,  which  takes 
many  a  hold  upon  the  soil. 


158  MY   SEEMOK-NOTES. 

We  must  settle  down  on  his  love  as  our  foun 
dation,  on  which  we  are  grounded,  as  a 
building. 

We  must  also  show  fixedness,  certainty,  and 
perseverance  in  our  character,  belief,  and 
aim ;  for  thus  only  shall  we  learn. 

II.    THE   MENSURATION    ITSELF. 

This  implies  a  sense  of  the  reality  of  the  matter. 

It  includes  a  coming  near  to  the  object  of  our 
study. 

It  indicates  an  intimate  study,  and  a  careful  sur 
vey 

It  necessitates  a  view  from  all  sides  of  the  subject. 

The  order  of  the  measurement  is  the  usual  order 
of  our  own  growth  in  grace.  Breadth  and  length 
before  depth  and  height. 

1.  The  breadth.     Immense. 

Comprehending  all  nations.  "  Preach  the  gos 
pel  to  every  creature." 

Covering  hosts  of  iniquities.  "  All  manner 
of  sin.'' 

Compassing  all  needs,  cares,  &c. 

Conferring  boundless  boons  for  this  life  and 
worlds  to  come. 

It  were  well  to  sail  across  this  river  and  survey  its 
broad  surface. 

2.  The  length.     Eternal. 

We  wonder  that  God  should  love  us  at  all.  Let 
us  meditate  upon — 


MEASURING  THE   IMMEASURABLE.  159 

Eternal  love  in  the  fountain.  Election  and 
the  covenant. 

Ceaseless  love  in  the  flow  Redemption,  call 
ing,  perseverance. 

Endless  love  in  endurance.  Long  suffering, 
forgiveness,  faithfulness,  patience,  immu 
tability. 

Boundless  love,  in  length  exceeding  our 
length  of  sin,  suffering,  backsliding,  age,  or 
temptation. 

3.  The  depth.     Incomprehensible. 

Stoop  of  divine  love,  condescending  to  consider  us, 
to  commune  with  us,  to  receive  us  in  love,  to 
bear  with  our  faults,  and  to  take  us  up  from 
our  low  estate. 
Stoop  of  love  personified  in  Christ. 

He  stoops,  and  becomes  incarnate;  endures 
our  sorrows ;  bears  our  sins ;  and  suffers  our 
shame  and  death. 

Where  is  the  measure  for  all  this  ? 

Our  weakness,  meanness,  sinfulness,  despair,  make 
one  factor  of  the  measurement. 

His  glory,  holiness,  greatness,  Deity,  make  up  the 
other. 

4.  The  height.    Infinite. 

As  developed  in  present  privilege,  as  one 
with  Jesus. 

As  to  be  revealed  in  future  glory. 

As  never  to  be  fully  comprehended  through 
out  the  ages. 


180  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

III.    THE  PRACTICAL,  RESULT  OF  THIS  MENSURATION.       "'  That 

ye  might  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of 
God." 

Here  are  words  full  of  mystery,  worthy  to  be  pon 
dered. 

Be  filled.     What  great  things  man  can  hold  ! 

Filled  ivith  God.     What  exaltation  ! 

Filled  with  ike  fulness  of  God.  What  must  this 
be? 

Filled  with  oil  thefidness  of  God.  What  more  can 
be  imagined  ? 

This  love  and  this  fulness  will  lead  to  the  imita 
tion  of  Christ's  love. 

Our  love  to  him  will  be  broad,  long,  deep,  high. 

INSERTIONS. 

In  the  gospel  history  we  find  that  Christ  had  a 
fourfold  entertainment  amongst  the  sons  of  men; 
some  received  him  into  house,  not  into  heart,  as  Si 
mon  the  Pharisee,  who  gave  him  no  kiss,  nor  water 
to  his  feet;  some  received  him  into  heart,  but  not 
into  house,  as  Nicodemus,  and  others;  some  neither 
into  heart  nor  house,  as  the  graceless,  swinish  Ger- 
gesenes ;  some  both  into  house  and  heart,  as  Laza 
rus,  Mary,  Martha.  And  thus  let  all  good  Chris 
tians  do ;  endeavor  that  Christ  may  dwell  in  their 
hearts  by  faith,  that  their  bodies  may  be  fit  temples 
of  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  now  in  this  life,  whilst  Christ 
stands  at  the  door  of  their  hearts,  knocking  for  ad 
mission,  they  will  lift  up  the  latch  of  their  souls, 
and  let  him  in ;  for  if  ever  they  expect  to  enter  into 


MEASURING  THE  IMMEASURABLE.  161 

the  gates  of  the  city  of  God  hereafter,  they  must 
open  their  hearts,  the  gates  of  their  own  city,  to 
him  here  in  this  world. — John  Spencer. 

Faith  makes  man's  heart 

That  dark,  low,  ruin'd  thing, 
By  its  rare  i^\>, 

A  palace  for  a  king. 

Higher  than  proud  Babel's  tower  by  many  a  story  ; 
By  faith  Christ  dwells  in  us,  the  hope  of  glory. — F.  Tate. 

The  more  we  know  the  more  are  we  conscious  of 
our  ignorance  of  that  which  is  unknown,  or,  as  Dr. 
Chalmers  used  to  put  it  in  his  class — borrowing  an 
illustration  from  his  favorite  mathematics — "  The 
wider  the  diameter  of  light,  the  greater  is  the  cir 
cumference  of  darkness."  The  more  a  man  knows, 
he  comes  at  more  points  into  contact  with  the  un 
known. 

'Tis  hard  to  find  God  ;  but  to  comprehend 

Him  as  he  is,  is  labor  without  end. — Robert  Herrick. 

A  gentleman  passing  a  church  with  Daniel  Web 
ster,  asked  him,  "  How  can  you  reconcile  the  doctrine 
of  the  Trinity  with  reason  ?"  The  statesman  replied 
by  asking,  "  Do  you  understand  the  arithmetic  of 
heaven  ?" 

11 


ccxxn. 

"  THE  HEAD,    EVEN  CHRIST  : 

"  FROM  WHOM  THE  WHOLE  BODY  FITLY  JOINED  TOGETHER  AND 
COMPACTED  BY  THAT  WHICH  EVERY  JOINT  SUPPLIETH,  ACCORD 
ING  TO  THE  EFFECTUAL  WORKING  IN  THE  MEASURE  OF  EVERY 
PART,  MAKETH  INCREASE  OF  THE  BODY  UNTO  THE  EDIFYING 
OF  ITSELF  IN  LOVE." — Eph.  iv.  15,  16. 

r~T*HE  words  are  as  "compacted"  as  the  body  it- 
1  self. 

We  shall  not  attempt  full  or  even  accurate  exposi 
tion  of  the  original,  but  dwell  on  the  figure  of  the 
English  text,  undoubtedly  a  Scriptural  one,  and  full 
of  profitable  instruction. 

Four  subjects  are  brought  before  us  in  the  text. 

I.  OUR  UNION  TO  CHRIST:  "The  Head,  even  Christ." 

1.  Essential    to    life.     Severed  from  him  we  are 

dead. 

2.  Essential  to   growth.      We  grow  up  into  him 

who  is  the  head. 

3.  Essential   to   perfection.     What  should  we  be 

without  a  head  ? 

4.  Essential     to    every    member.     The   strongest 

needs   union  to  the   head    as   much   as  the 
weakest. 
run 


THE  HEAD  AND  THE  BODY.        163 

II.  OUR  INDIVIDUALITY:  "  Every  joint  "  ;  "  everj  part." 
Ejicli  one  must  mind  his  own  office. 

1.  We  must  each   one  personally  see  to  his  own 

vital  union  with  the  body,   and  chiefly   with 
the  head. 

2.  We  must  be  careful  to  find  and  keep  our  fit 

position  in  the  body. 

3.  We  must  be  careful  of  our  personal  health,    for 

the  sake  of  the  whole  body  ;  for  one  ailing 
member  injures  the  whole. 

4  We  must  be  careful  of  our  growth,  for  the  sake 
of  the  whole  body. 

The  most  careful  self- watch  will  not  be  a  selfish 
measure,  but  a  sanitary  duty  involved  by  our  rela 
tionship  to  the  rest. 

III.  OUR   RELATIONSHIP    TO    EACH   OTHER:  "Joined  to 

gether";    "that  which  every  joint  suppli- 

eth." 
1.  We  should  in   desire   and   spirit   be   fitted   to 

work  with  others.     We  are  to  have  joints. 

How  could  there  be  a  body  without  them  ? 
<J.  We  should  supply  the  joint-oil  of  love  when  so 

doing ;   indeed,    each    one    must  yield  his 

own  peculiar  influence  to  the  rest. 

3.  We  should  aid  the  compactness  of  the  whole  by 

our  own  solidity,  and  healthy  firmness  in 
our  place. 

4.  We  should  perform    our   service  for  all.     We 

should  guard,  guide,  support,  nourish,  and 
comfort  the  rest  of  the  members,  as  our 
function  may  be. 


164  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

IV    OCR  COMPACT  UNITY  AS  A  CHURCH:  "  The  body  edi 
fying  itself  in  love." 

1.  There  is  but  one  body  of  Christ,  even  as  he  is 

the  one  head. 

2.  It  is  an  actual,  living  union.     Not  a  mere  pro 

fessed  unity,  but  a  body  quickened  by  "  the 
effectual  working  "  of  God's  Spirit  in  every 
part. 

3.  It  is  a  growing  corporation.     It  increases  by 

mutual  edification.  Not  by  being  puffed 
up,  but  by  being  built  up.  It  grows  as  the 
result  of  its  own  life,  sustained  by  suitable 
food. 

4.  It  is  an  immortal  body     Because  the  Head  lives, 

the  body  must  live  also. 

Are  we  in  the  body  of  Christ? 
Are  we  not  concerned  to  see  it  made  perfect  ? 
Are  we  ministering  the  supply  which  the  body 
may  fairly  expect  from  us  as  members? 


To  FIT  IN. 

There  is  great  fitness  in  the  figure  of  the  head  and 
the  memoers.  The  head  is — (1.)  The  highest  part 
of  the  body,  the  most  exalted.  (2.)  The  most  sensi 
tive  part,  the  seat  of  nerve  and  sensation,  of  pleasure 
and  pain.  (3.)  The  most  honorable  part,  the  glory 
of  man,  the  part  of  man's  body  that  receives  the 
blessing,  wears  the  crown,  and  is  anointed  with  the 
oil  of  joy  and  of  consecration.  (4.)  The  most  ex 
posed  part,  especially  assailed  in  battle,  and  liable  to 
be  injured,  and  where  injury  would  be  most  danger 
ous,  (5. )  The  most  expressive  part,  the  seat  of  ex- 


THE  HEAD   AND  THE  BODY.  165 

pression,  whether  in  the  smile  of  approval,  the  frown 
of  displeasure,  the  tear  of  sympathy,  the  look  of 
love. —  G.  S.  Bowes. 

Every  one  knows  that  it  would  be  far  better  to 
lose  our  feet  than  our  head.  Adam  had  feet  to  stand 
with,  but  we  have  lost  them  by  his  disobedience, 
yet,  glory  be  to  God,  we  have  found  a  Head,  in  whom 
we  abide  eternally  secure,  a  Head  which  we  shall 
never  lose. — "  Feathers  for  Arrows." 

The  moment  I  make  of  myself  and  Christ  two,  I 
am  all  wrong.  But  when  I  see  that  we  are  one,  all 
is  rest  and  peace. — Luther. 

What  a  happy  condition  the  Church  and  members 
of  Christ  are  in  !  (1.)  Interested  in  the  same  love 
as  the  Head.  (2.)  Under  the  same  decree  of  election 
with  the  Head.  (3. )  Allied  to  the  same  relations, 
interested  in  the  same  riches,  and  assured  by  mem 
bership  of  the  same  life  and  immortality  in  the  world 
to  come :  "  Because  1  live,  ye  shall  live  also. ' 

Benjamin  Keach. 

Of  all  the  symbols  which  set  forth  Christ's  church, 
I  prefer  this.  Bringing  out,  as  well  as  any  other, 
our  relationship  to  Christ,  and  better  than  any  other, 
our  relationship  to  each  other,  it  teaches  us  lessons 
of  love,  and  charity,  and  tender  sympathy  When 
bill -hook  or  pruning-kmfe  lops  a  branch  from  the 
tree,  the  stem  bends;  it  seems  for  a  while  to  drop 
some  tears,  but  they  are  soon  dried  up ;  and  the  other 
boughs  suffer  no  pain,  show  no  sympathy — tiieir 
leaves  dancing  merrily  in  the  wind  over  the  poor 
dead  branch  that  lies  withering  below.  But  a  ten- 


166  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

der  sympathy  pervades  the  body  and  its  members. 
Touch  my  finger  roughly,  arid  the  whole  body  feels 
it;  wound  this  foot,  and  thrilling  through  my  frame, 
the  pang  shoots  upward  to  the  head;  let  the  heart, 
or  even  a  tooth,  ache,  and  all  the  system  suffers  dis 
order.  With  what  care  is  a  diseased  member 
touched !  What  anxious  efforts  do  we  make  to  save 
a  limb !  With  what  slow  reluctance  does  a  patient, 
after  long  months  or  years  of  suffering,  consent  to 
the  last  remedy,  the  surgeon's  knife!  Many  holy 
lessons  of  love,  charity,  and  sympathy,  our  Lord 
teaches  by  this  figure. — Dr.  Gittkrie. 

We  must  work  in  concert.  Stress  is  laid  on  this 
in  Scripture,  as  may  be  seen  from  such  expressions 
as  these: — "If  two  of  you  shall  agree,"  "Fellow- 
helpers  to  the  truth,"  "  With  one  mind  striving  to 
gether  for  the  faith  of  the  gospel."  It  is  as  with  the 
human  hand.  Take  one  of  the  fingers,  the  forefin 
ger,  for  example;  it  can  do  many  things  by  itself 
separately.  I  lay  it  on  my  pulse,  to  know  how  my 
heart  beats ;  I  turn  over  the  leaf  of  a  book  with  it ; 
I  use  it  to  point  a  stranger  the  way;  I  place  it  on 
my  lips  to  signify  silence ;  I  single  out  the  individ 
ual  to  whom  I  would  say,  "  Thou  art  the  man";  I 
shake  it  in  warning  or  remonstrance.  But  the  hand 
can  do,  not  five  times  as  much  as  a  single  finger,  not 
fifty  times  as  much,  not  five  hundred  times  as  much, 
but  five  thousand  times — and  more.  So  with  Christ 
ian  churches;  there  must  not  merely  be  individual 
effort,  but  combined  and  united  effort,  on  the  New 
Testament  principle,  "  As  every  man  hath  received 
the  gift,  even  so  let  him  minister." — Dr.  Cidross. 


CCXXIII. 

"  BUT  YE  HAVE  NOT  SO  LEARNED  CHEIST, 

"IF  SO  BE  THAT  YE  HAVE  HEARD  HIM,  AND  HAVE  BEEN  TAUGHT 
BY  HIM,  AS  THE  TRUTH  IS  IN  JESUS."— Eph.  iv.  20,  21. 

THE  distinction  between  the  Christian  and 
others.  "  But  ye." 

There  must  be  this  separation  as  long  as  the  world 
is  "the  world. ' 

The  means  of  this  distinction  is  our  discipleship : 
we  have  learned  Christ,  and  learned  him  in  a  differ 
ent  way  from  that  which  satisfies  many  who  profess 
to  know  him. 

We  have  not  so  learned  Christ  as  to  be  able  to 
profess  his  name,  and  yet  practice  lasciviousness. 

We  are  converted  into  learners,  and  are  under  the 
tutelage  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  How  we  learn  is  a 
test  question.  Some  have  learned  Christ,  and  yet 
are  not  saved,  and  others  have  riot  so  learned  him, 
but  are  truly  his  disciples. 

I.     OUE  LESSON.     "  Learned  Christ.*' 

This  learning  Christ  is — 

Much  more  than  learning  doctrine,  precept, 

or  ceremony. 

Much  more  than  knowing  about  Christ,  or 
learning  from  Christ. 

(167) 


168  MY   SEEMON-NOTES. 

It  includes  several  forms  of  knowledge. 

1.  To  know  him  as  a  personal  Christ. 

2.  To   know  his  nature,  and  to  treat  him  accord 

ingly. 

3.  To  know  his  offices,  and  how  to  use  them. 

4.  To  know  his  finished  work  for  God  and  for  us. 

5.  To  know  his  influence  over  men,  and  to  test  it. 

6.  To  know  by  learning   Christ,  the  way  to  live 

like  him. 

II.  HOW    WE    HAVE   NOT   LEARNED   IT. 

1.  So  as  to  remain  as  we  were  before.     Unchang 

ed,  and  yet  at  peace. 

2.  So  as  to  excuse  sin,  because  of  his  atonement. 

3.  So  as  to  feel  a  freedom  to  sin  because  of  par 

don. 

4.  So  as  even  to  commit  sin  in  Christ's  name. 

5.  So  as  to  reckon  that  we  cannot  conquer  sin,  and 

so  sit  down  under  the  dominion  of  some 
constitutional  temptation. 

6.  So   as  to  profess  reverence  for  his  name  and 

character,  and  then  think  little  of  the  truth 
which  he  reveals. 

III.  HOW    WE    HAVE    LEARNED  IT. 

We   know  the   truth,   and   know  it  in  its   best 
light- 

1.  As  directly  taught  by  his  own  self,  and  by  his 

own  Spirit. 

2.  As  distinctly  embodied  in  his  life  and  charac 

ter. 

3.  As  it  relates  to  him  and  honors  him. 


TRUE   LEARNING.  169 

4.  Consequently  as  it  is  in  him.    Truth  is  in  Jesus^ 

indeed  and  of  a  truth,  for  in  him  everything 
is  real. 

5.  Consequently,  as  it  works  a  total  change  in  us, 

and  makes  us  like  to  him  in  whom  truth  is 
embodied. 

See,  then,  that  we  not  only  learn  of  Jesus,  but  we 
learn  Jesus. 

It  is  not  enough  to  hear  him,  and  to  be  taught  by 
him ;  we  want  to  know  himself. 

Knowing  him,  we  know  the  truth;  for  it  is  in  him 

THOUGHTS. 

Instead  of  "if  so  be  that,"  many  very  competent 
scholars  propose  to  render  the  original  "inasmuch 
as,"  or,  "  since  we  have  heard,"  &c. ;  for  the  apostle 
is  not  referring  to  a  supposed  case,  but  stating  a  fact, 
as  verse  20  proves. —  W.  O'Neill. 

He  exhorts  not  to  an  outward  reformation  of  their 
converse  only,  but  to  that  truth  and  sincerity  of 
sanctification,  which  the  doctrine  and  power  of  grace 
in  Christ  teacheth  and  worketh  in  all  true  Christians' 
*'  If  so  be,"  saith  he,  "  ye  have  learned  the  truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus."  Which  doeth  not,  as  other  doctrines 
of  philosophers,  &c.  teach  you  to  put  off  the  evils  of 
your  outward  converse  only,  and  to  put  on  a  new 
conversation  over  an  old  nature,  as  a  sheep-skin 
over  a  wolfish  nature;  he  that  doth  no  more  falls 
short  of  that  truth  of  grace  which  Christ  requires; 
but  it  teacheth  principally  to  put  off  the  old  man,  as 


170  MY  SERMON- NOTES. 

the  cause  of  all  the  evils  in  the  outward  converse; 
and  that  is  his  meaning,  when  he  saith,  "  As  con 
cerning  the  outward  converse,  put  off  the  old  man," 
without  which  it  is  impossible  to  reform  the  con. 
verse. — Thomas  Goodwin. 

An  illustration  of  the  foregoing  remarks  is  found 
in  Lord  Chesterfield,  who  trained  his  only  son,  not  to 
abandon  vice,  but  to  be  a  gentleman  in  the  practice 
of  it 

Some  persons,  instead  of  "  putting  off  the  old  man," 
dress  him  up  in  a  new  shape. — St.  Bernard. 

TJnsanctified  wisdom  is  the  devil's  greatest  tool. 

A  handful  of  good  life  is  worth  a  bushel  of  learn 
ing. 


ccxxiy. 

"  AND  HAVE    NO    FELLOWSHIP    WITH  THE  UNFRUITFUL  WORKS 
OF  DARKNESS,    BUT  RATHER  REPROVE   THEM."— Eph.  V.  11. 

DIRECTIONS  how  to  live  while  here  below,  are 
very  needful. 

We  constantly  come  into  contact  with  ungodly  men : 
this  is  unavoidable;  but  here  we  are  taught  to  avoid 
such  communion  with  them  as  would  make  us  par 
takers  in  their  evil  deeds. 

Three  truths  are  incidentally  mentioned :  evil  works 
are  sterile,  they  are  works  of  darkness,  and  they  de 
serve  reproof. 

We  must  have  no  fellowship  with  them ;  neither 
at  any  time,  nor  in  any  manner,  nor  in  any  degree. 

I.  WHAT  is  FORBIDDEN?     " Fellowship  with  works  of 

darkness." 
This  fellowship  may  be  produced  in  several  ways : 

1.  By  personally  committing  the  sins  so  described, 

or  by  joining  with  others  in  bringing  them 
about. 

2.  By  teaching  wrong  doing,  either  by  plain  word 

or  by  just  inference. 

3.  By  constraining,  commanding,  or  tempting:  by 

threat,    request,    persuasion,    inducement, 
compulsion,  bribery,  or  influence. 

(171) 


172  MY   SERMOX-NOTES. 

4.  By  provoking,  through  exciting  anger,  emula 

tion,  or  discouragement. 

5.  By  neglecting  to  rebuke:  especially  by  parents 

and  masters  misusing  their  office  and  allow 
ing  known  evils  in  the  family. 

6.  By  counselling,  and  advising,  or  by  guiding  by 

example. 

7.  By  consenting,  agreeing,  and  co-operating.    By 

smiling  at  an  evil  attempt,  and,  in  the  end, 
partaking  in  the  spoil.  Those  who  join 
with  churches  in  error  come  under  this 
head. 

8.  By  conniving  at    sin:    tolerating,    concealing, 

and  making  light  of  it. 

9.  By    commending,    countenancing,    defending, 

and  excusing  the  wrong  already  done;  and 
contending  against  those  who  would  expose, 
denounce,  an.d  punish  it. 

II.   WHAT  is  COMMANDED  ?     "  Reprove  them." 

"  Reprove  "  in  the  original  is  a  word  of  large  mean, 
ing. 

1.  Rebuke.     Declare  the  wrong  of  it,  and  show 

your  hatred  thereof. 

2.  Convict.     As  the  Holy  Spirit  reproves  the  world 

of  sin,  so  aim  at  proving  the  world  guilty 
by  your  holy  life  and  bold  witness. 

3.  Convert.     This  is  to  be  your  continual  aim  with 

those  about  you.     You  are  so  to  reprove  as 
to  win  men  from  ways  of  evil. 
Oh  that  we  had  more  of  honest  and  loving  reproof 
of  all  evil! 


THE   WORKS   OF   DAEKNES8.  173 

III.  WHY   IT    IS    COMMANDED   TO    ME  ? 

It  is  specially  ray  duty  to  be  clear  of  other  men's 
sins. 

1.  As  an  imitator  of  God  and  a  dear  child.    Verse  1. 

2.  As  one  who  is  an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of 

God.     Verses  5,  6. 

3.  As  one  who  has   come  out  of  darkness   into 

marvellous  light  in  the  Lord.     Verse  8. 

4.  As  one  who  bears  fruit,  even  the  fruit  of  the 

Spirit,  which  is  in  all  goodness,  righteous 
ness  and  truth.      Verse  9. 

5.  As  one  who  would  not  be  associated  with  that 

which  is  either  shameful  or  foolish.     Verses 
12,  15. 

If  our  fellowship  is  with  God,  we  must  quit  the 
ways  of  darkness. 

IV.  WHAT  MAT  COME  OF  OBEDIENCE  TO  THE   COMMAND. 
Even  if  we  could  see  no  good  result,  yet  our  duty 

would  be  plain  enough ;  but  much  benefit  may  re 
sult. 

1.  We  shall  be  clear  of  complicity  with  deeds  of 

darkness. 

2.  We  shall  be  honored  in  the  consciences  of  the 

ungodly. 

3.  We  may  thus  lead  them    to   repentance   and 

eternal  life. 

4.  We  shall  glorify  God  by  our  separated  walk  and 

by  the  godly  perseverance  with  which  we 
adhere  to  it. 

5.  We  may  thus  establish  others  in  holy  noncon 

formity  to  the  world. 


174  MY   SEEMON-NOTES. 

Let  us  use  the  text  as  a  warning  to  worldly  pro 
fessors. 

Let  us  take  it  as  a  directory  in  our  conversation 
with  the  ungodly. 

EXAMPLES. 

A  member  of  his  congregation  was  in  the  habit  of 
going  to  the  theatre.  Mr.  Hill  went  to  him  and 
said,  "This  will  never  do — a  member  of  my  church 
in  the  habit  of  attending  the  theatre  !  "  Mr.  So-and- 
so  replied  that  it  surely  must  be  a  mistake,  as  he 
was  not  in  the  habit  of  going  there,  although  it  was 
true  he  did  go  now  and  then  for  a  treat.  "  Oh ! " 
said  Rowland  Hill,  "  then  you  are  a  worse  hypocrite 
than  ever,  sir.  Suppose  any  one  spread  the  report 
that  I  ate  carrion,  and  I  answered,  '  Well,  there  is 
no  wrong  in  that;  I  don't  eat  carrion  everyday  in 
the  week,  but  I  have  a  dish  now  and  then  for  a  treat !  ' 
Why,  you  would  say,  '  What  a  nasty,  foul,  and  filthy 
appetite  Rowland  Hill  has,  to  have  to  go  to  carrion 
for  a  treat ! ;  Religion  is  the  Christian's  truest  treat, 
Christ  is  his  enjoyment." — Charleswortli s  Life  of 
Rowland  Hill. 

On  one  occasion,  travelling  in  the  Portsmouth 
mail,  Andrew  Fuller  was  much  annoyed  by  the  pro 
fane  conversation  of  two  young  men  who  sat  oppo 
site.  After  a  time,  one  of  them,  observing  his  grav 
ity,  accosted  him  with  an  air  of  impertinence,  inquir 
ing,  in  rude  and  indelicate  language,  whether  on  his 
arrival  at  Portsmouth  he  should  not  indulge  him 
self  in  a  manner  evidently  corresponding  with  their 


THE   WOEKS   OF  DARKNESS.  175 

own  intentions.  Mr.  Fuller,  lowering  his  ample 
brows,  and  looking  the  inquirer  full  in  the  face,  re 
plied  in  measured  tones:  "  Sir,  I  am  a  man  that  fears 
God."  Scarcely  a  word  was  uttered  during  the  re 
mainder  of  the  journey. — Memoir  of  Andrew  Fuller. 

Matthew  Wilks  once  rode  by  coach  with  a  young 
nobleman  and  a  female  passenger.  The  nobleman 
entered  upon  an  improper  conversation  with  the 
coachman  and  the  woman.  At  a  favorable  oppor 
tunity  Mr.  Wilks  attracted  his  attention,  and  said, 
"  My  Lord,  maintain  your  rank  !  "  The  reproof  was 
felt  and  acted  upon.  Let  the  Christian  ever  main 
tain  his  rank. 

A  distinguished  Christian  lady  was  recently  spend 
ing  a  few  weeks  in  a  hotel  at  Long  Branch,  and  an 
attempt  was  made  to  induce  her  to  attend  a  dance, 
in  order  that  the  affair  might  have  the  prestige  be 
stowed  by  her  presence,  as  she  stood  high  in  society. 
She  declined  all  the  importunities  of  her  friends,  and 
finally  an  honorable  senator  tried  to  persuade  her  to 
attend,  saying,  "Miss  B.,  this  is  quite  a  harmless 
affair,  and  we  want  to  have  the  exceptional  honor  of 
your  presence."  "  Senator,"  said  the  lady,  "lean- 
not  do  it,  I  am  a  Christian.  I  never  do  anything  in 
my  summer  vacation,  or  wherever  I  go,  that  will  in 
jure  the  influence  I  have  over  the  girls  of  my  Sun 
day-school  class."  The  senator  bowed,  and  said,  "  I 
honor  you ;  if  there  were  more  Christians  like  you, 
more  men  like  myself  would  become  Christians. " 

Dr.  Pentecost. 


176  MY   SERMON -NOTBo. 

Rebuke  should  always  be  dealt  in  love:  never 
wash  a  man's  face  in  vitriol.  Some  persons  would 
burn  a  house  down  to  get  rid  ot  a  mouse :  the  small 
est  fault  is  denounced  as  a  great  crime,  and  a  good 
brother  is  cut  off  from  fellowship,  and  bad  feeling  is 
raised,  when  a  gentle  hint  would  have  done  the  work 
much  more  effectually. — 0.  H.  8. 


ccxxv. 

"  HUSBANDS,  LOVE  YOUR  WIVES,  EVEN  AS  CHRIST  ALSO  LOVKD 
THE  CHURCH,  AND  GAVE  HIMSELF  FOR  IT." — Epk.  V.  25. 

rTHHE  love  of  Christ  to  his  church  is  the  pattern 
-*-  for  husbands. 

It  should  be  a  pure,  fervent,  constant,  self-sac 
rificing  love. 

The  conduct  of  Jesus  was  the  best  proof  of  his  love. 
"  He  loved  the  church,  and  gave  himself  for  it." 

Our  conduct  should  be  the  genuine  outcome  of 
our  love. 

I.  How  CHRIST  LOVED  HIS  CHURCH. 

He  loved  his  own  church  with — 

1.  A  love  of  choice,  and  special  regard. 

2.  A  love  of  unselfishness :  he  loved  not  hers,  but 

her. 

3.  A  love  of  complacency.     He  calls  her  "  Heph- 

zibah,  my  delight  is  in  her." 

4.  A  love  of  sympathy.     Her  interests  are  his  in 

terests. 

5.  A  love  of  communion.     He  manifests  himself  to 

his  chosen  bride. 

6.  A  love  of  unity.    A  loving,  living,  lasting  union 

is  established. 
Ifl  (177) 


178  MY    SERMON-NOTES. 

7.  A  love  of  immutable  constancy.     He  loves  unto 

the  end. 

II.  How  HE  PROVED  HIS  LOVE.     "  Gave  himself  for  it." 

1.  He  gave  himself  to  his  church  by  leaving  heav 

en  and  becoming  incarnate  that  he  might 
assume  her  nature. 

2.  He  gave  himself  throughout  his  life  on  earth 

by  spending  all  his  strength  to  bless  his  be 
loved. 

3.  He  gave  himself  in  death;  the  ransom  for  his 

church. 

4.  He  gave  himself  in  his  eternal  life;  rising,  as 

cending,    reigning,    pleading;   and   all  for 
the  church  of  his  choice. 

5.  He  gave  himself  in  all  that  he  now  is  as  God 

and  man,  exalted  to  the  throne,  for  the  end 
less  benefit  of  his  beloved  church. 

III.  HOW    WE    SHOULD   THIXK    OF    IT. 

It  is  set  before  us  as  a  love  which  should  influence 
our  hearts. 

We  should  think  of  it — 

1    In  a  way  of  gratitude,  wondering  more  and 

more  at  such  love. 
2.  In  a  way  of  obedience,  as  the  wife  obeys  the 

husband. 

8.  In  a  way  of  reverence.     Looking  up  to  love  so 

great,  so  heavenly,  so  perfect,  so  divine. 
4.  In  a  way  of  holiness.     Rejoicing  to  be  like  our 
Holy  Husband. 


THE  PATTERN   OF  LOVE.  179 

5.  In  a  way  of  love.     Yielding  our  whole  heart  to 

him. 

6.  In  a  way  of  imitation.     Loving  him,  and  others 

for  his  sake. 

Let  us  enter  into  the  love  of  Jesus,   enjoy  it  in 
our  own  hearts,  and  then  imitate  it  in  our  families. 


CONCERNING  LOVE. 

Rowland  Hill  often  felt  much  grieved  at  the  false 
reports  which  were  circulated  of  many  of  his  say 
ings,  especially  those  respecting  his  publicly  men 
tioning  Mrs.  Hill.  His  attentions  to  her  till  the 
close  of  life  were  of  the  most  gentlemanly  and  affec 
tionate  kind.  The  high  view  he  entertained  of  her 
may  be  seen  from  the  following  fact: — A  friend  hav 
ing  informed  Mr.  Hill  of  the  sudden  death  of  a  lady, 
the  wife  of  a  minister,  remarked,  "  I  am  afraid  our 
dear  minister  loved  his  wife  too  well,  and  the  Lord 
in  wisdom  has  removed  her."  "  What,  sir  ?"  replied 
Mr.  Hill,  with  the  deepest  feeling,  "  can  a  man  love 
a  good  wife  too  much  ?  Impossible,  sir,  unless  he 
can  love  her  better  than  Christ  loves  the  church : 
'  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  even  as  Christ  also 
loved  the  church  and  gave  himself  for  it.' " 

"  Let  all  things  be  done  in  love,"  said  the  apostle. 
If  all  thy  actions  towards  others,  then,  much  more 
all  things  that  concern  thy  wife,  should  be  done  in 
love.  Thy  thoughts  should  be  thoughts  of  love ;  thy 
looks  should  be  looks  of  love;  thy  lips,  like  the 
honeycomb,  should  drop  nothing  but  sweetness  and 


180  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

love;  thy  instructions  should  be  edged  with  love; 
thy  reprehensions  should  be  sweetened  with  love  ; 
thy  carriage  and  whole  conversation  towards  her 
should  be  but  the  fruit  and  demonstration  of  thy 
love.  Oil,  how  did  Christ,  who  is  thy  pattern,  love 
his  spouse  !  His  birth,  life,  and  death  were  but,  as 
it  were,  a  stage  whereon  the  hottest  love  imaginable, 
from  first  to  last,  acted  its  part  to  the  life,  it  was  a 
known,  unknown  love.  Tiberius  Gracchus,  the 
Ro.nan,  finding  two  snakes  in  his  bed,  arid  consult 
ing  with  the  soothsayers,  was  told  that  one  of  them 
must  be  killed  ;  yet,  if  he  killed  the  male,  he  him 
self  would  die  shortly ;  if  the  female,  his  wife  would 
die.  His  love  to  his  wife,  Cornelia,  was  so  great, 
that  lie  killed  the  male,  saith  Plutarch,  and  died 
quickly. — George  Swinnock. 

The  Spanish  poet  Calderon,  in  one  of  his  dramas, 
describes  a  beautiful  Roman  girl,  Daria  by  name, 
eventually  a  Christian  convert  and  martyr,  who  de 
clares,  while  yet  a  pagan,  that  she  will  never  love 
nntil  she  finds  some  one  who  has  died  to  prove  his 
love  to  her,  She  hears  of  Christ,  and  her  heart  is 
won. 


CCXXVL 

tl  AlCD  TOUK  FEET  SHOD  WITH  THE  PREPARATION  OF  THB  OOS 
PEL  OF  PEACE."  —  Eph.  vi.  15. 


are  meant  to  be  steadfast,  active, 
moving,   progressing,  ascending,  hence    their 
feet  are  carefully  provided  for. 

They  are  feeble  in  themselves,  and  need  protec 
tion:  their  road  also  is  rough,  and  hence  they  need 
the  shoe  which  grace  provides. 


1.  They  come  from  the  blessed  Maker.     One  who 

is  skilful  in  all  arts,  and  knows  by  expe 
rience  what  is  wanted,  since  he  has  himself 
journeyed  through  life's  roughest  ways. 

2,  They  are  made  of  excellent  material :  "  the  prep 

aration  of  the  gospel  of  peace."  Well  sea 
soned,  soft  in  wear,  lasting  long. 

Peace  with  God  as  to   the  past,  the  future, 
the  present. 

Peace  of  full  submission   to  the  divine  mind 
and  will. 

Peace  with  the  Word  and  all  its  teachings. 

Peace  with  one's  inner  self,  conscience,   fears, 
desires,  etc. 

(181) 


182  MY   SERMOTST-^OTES. 

Peace  with   brethren  in  the  church  and  the 

iamily. 
Peace  with  all  mankind :   "  as  much  as  lieth 

in  you  live  peaceably  with  all  men  ":  Rom. 

xii.  18. 

3.  They  are  such  as  none  can  make  except  the 

Lord,  who  both  sends  the  gospel,  and  pre 
pares  the  peace. 

4.  They  are  such  shoes  as  Jesus  wore,  and  all  the 

saints. 

5.  They  are  such  as  will  never  wear  out :  they  are 

old,  yet  ever  new ;  we  may  wear  them  at 
all  ages  and  in  all  places. 

II.    LET    US   TRY    THEM   ON. 

Observe  with  delight — 

1.  Their  perfect  fitness.     They  are  made  to  suit 

each  one  of  us. 

2.  Their  excellent  foothold:   we  can  tread  with 

holy   boldness   upon  our  high  places  with 
these  shoes. 

3.  Their  marching  powers  for  daily  duty.     No  one 

grows  weary  or  footsore  when  he  is  thug 
shod. 

4.  Their    wonderful   protection  against  trials  by 

the  way.      "  Thou  shalt  tread  on  the  lion, 
and  adder":  Ps.  xci.  13. 

5.  Their  pleasantness  of  wear,   giving  rest  to  the 

whole  man. 

6.  Thair  adaptation  for  hard  work,  climbing,  plow* 

ing,  etc. 


HEAVENLY   SHOES.  183 

7.  Their  endurance  of  fire  and  water :  Isa.  xliii.  2. 

By  peace  of  mind  we  learn  to  pass  through 
every  form  of  trial. 

8.  Their  fighting   qualities.     They  are   really    a 

part  of  "  the  whole  armor  of  God."     See 
the  chapter  in  which  the  text  is  found. 

III.  LET  us  LOOK  AT  THE  BAREFOOTED  AROUND  us. 

The  sinner  is  unshod.  Yet  he  kicks  against 
the  pricks.  How  can  he  hope  to  fulfil  the 
heavenly  pilgrimage  ? 

The  professor  is  slipshod,  or  else  he  wears 
tight  shoes.  His  fine  slippers  will  soon  be 
•worn  out.  He  loves  not  the  gospel,  knows 
not  its  peace,  seeks  not  its  preparation. 

The  gospel  alone  supplies  a  fit  shoe  for  all  feet. 
To  the  gospel  let  us  fly  at  once.     Come,  poor  shoe 
less  beggar ! 

FASTENINGS. 

"  Put  shoes  on  his  feet "  were  among  the  first  words 
of  welcome  to  the  returning  prodigal.  To  be  shoe 
less  was  in  Israel  a  mark  of  great  disgrace,  indicat 
ing  a  lost  inheritance,  a  state  of  misery  and  penury. 
(See  Deut.  xxv.  10.) 

The  Chinese  advertise  shoes  which  enable  the 
wearer  to  walk  on  the  clouds.  Compare  Isa.  xl.  31 : 
"  They  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  renew  their 
strength.  They  shall  run,  and  not  be  weary;  they 
ehall  watte,  and  not  faint."  "  Bun  with  patienca 
looking  unto  Jesus."  (Heb.  xii.  1 — 3.) 


184:  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

"  Your  feet  shod  with  the  preparation  of  the  gos 
pel  of  peace."  (Eph.  vi.  15.)  The  passage  has  been 
paraphrased,  "  Shod  with  the  firm  footing  of  the 
solid  knowledge  of  the  gospel."  The  word  "prepar 
ation  signifies  preparedness  or  readiness.  Compare  2 
Tim.  iv.  2:  "  Instant  in  season,  out  of  season";  also 
Rom.  i.  15 :  "I  am  ready  to  preach  the  gospel."  This 
preparedness  is  well-pleasing  to  God.  "  How  beauti 
ful  are  thy  feet  with  shoes,  O  prince's  daughter ! " 
(Cant  vii.  1;  Isa.  Hi.  7.) — Mrs.  Gordon. 

Christian  in  the  palace  Beautiful. — "  The  next  day 
they  took  him,  and  had  him  into  the  armory,  where 
they  showed  him  all  manner  of  furniture  which  their 
Lord  had  provided  for  pilgrims,  as  sword,  shield, 
helmet,  breast-plate,  all-prayer,  and  shoes  that  would 
not  wear  out.  And  there  was  here  enough  of  this 
to  harness  out  as  many  men  for  the  service  of  their 
Lord  as  there  be  stars  in  the  heaven  for  multitude." 

Bunyan. 

None  can  make  a  shoe  to  the  creature's  foot,  so 
that  he  shall  go  easy  on  a  hard  way,  but  Christ;  he 
can  do  it  to  the  creature's  full  content.  And  how 
doth  he  do  it  ?  Truly,  no  other  way  than  by  under 
laying  it;  or,  if  you  will,  lining  it  with  the  peace  of 
the  gospel.  What  though  the  way  be  set  with  sharp 
stones  ?  if  this  shoe  go  between  the  Christian's  foot 
and  them,  they  cannot  much  be  felt. 

It  is  the  soldier's  shoe  that  is  meant,  which,  if 
right,  is  to  be  of  the  strongest  make,  being  not  so 
much  intended  for  finery  as  for  defence. 


HEAVENLY   SHOES.  185 


The  gospel  shoe  will  not  come  on  thy  foot  so  long 
as  thy  foot  is  swelled  with  any  sinful  humor  (I  mean 
<iny  unrighteous  or  unholy  practice).  This  evil  must 
be  purged  out  by  repentance,  or  thou  canst  not  wear 
the  shoe  of  peace. 

The  Jews  were  to  eat  their  passover  with  their 
loins  girded,  their  shoes  on  their  feet,  and  their  staff" 
in  their  hand,  and  all  in  haste.  (Exod.  xii.  11.) 
When  God  is  feasting  the  Christian  with  present 
comforts,  he  must  have  this  gospel  shoe  on;  he  must 
not  sit  down  as  if  he  were  feasting  at  home,  but 
stand  and  eat  even  as  he  takes  a  running  meal  in  an 
inn  on  his  way.  willing  to  be  gone  as  soon  as  ever 
he  is  a  little  refreshed  for  his  journey. 

The  conceited  professor,  who  hath  a  high  opinion 
of  himself,  is  a  man  shod  and  prepared,  he  thinks  ; 
but  not  with  the  right  gospel  shoe.  He  that  cannot 
take  the  length  of  his  foot,  how  can  he  of  himself  fit 
a  shoe  to  it  ? 

Is  not  thy  shoe,  Christian,  yet  on  ?  art  thou  not 
yet  ready  to  march  ?  If  thou  hast  it,  what  hast  thou 
to  dread  ?  Canst  fear  that  any  stone  can  hurt  thy 
foot  through  so  thick  a  sole  ?  —  William  Gurnall. 

Paul  was  thus  shod:  Rom.  viii.  38,  "  I  am  per 
suaded,  nothing  shall  separate  me  from  the  lovu  of 
God."  "  All  things.  1  know,  work  together  for  the 
good  of  them  that  are  beloved  of  God.''  (Rom.  viii 
28.)  And  this  furniture  made  him  go  such  hard 
ways  cheerfully,  in  which  showers  of  afflictions  did 
fall  as  thick  as  hailstones.  This  doth  make  God'* 


186  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

children,  though  not  in  the  letter,  yet  in  some  sort, 
tread  upon  the  adder  and  the  basilisk ;  yea,  to  defy 
vipers,  and  receive  no  hurt;  whereas,  if  the  feet  be 
bared  a  little  with  the  absence  of  this  peace,  any 
thing  causeth  us  sore  smart." — Paid  Bayne. 


CCXXVII. 

"  REJOICE  m  THE  LORD  ALWAY  :  AND  AGAIN  I  SAY,  REJOICE." 
— Phil.  iv.  4. 

JOY  drives  out  discord.     See  how  our  text,  follows 
as  a  remedy  upon  the  case  of  disagreement  in  the 
church,  verses  1  and  2. 

Joy  helps  against  the  trials  of  life.  Hence  it  is 
mentioned  as  a  preparation  for  the  rest  of  faith 
which  is  prescribed  in  verse  6. 

I.  THE  GRACE  COMMANDED.     u  Rejoice." 

1.  It  is   delightful:   our  soul's  jubilee  has  come 

when  joy  enters. 

2.  It  is  demonstrative :  it  is  more  than  peace  ;  it 

sparkles,  shines,  sings.  Why  should  it 
not  ?  Joy  is  a  bird ;  let  it  fly  in  the  open 
heavens,  and  let  its  music  be  heard  of  all 
men, 

3.  It  is   stimulating,  and  urges  its  possessor  to 

brave  deeds. 

4.  It  is  influential  for  good.     Sinners  are  attract 

ed  to  Jesus  by  the  joy  of  saints.  More 
flies  are  caught  with  a  spoonful  of  honey 
than  a  barrel  of  vinegar. 

5.  It  is  contagious.     Others  are  gladdened  by  our 

rejoicing. 

(187) 


188  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

6.  It  is  commanded.     It  is  not  left  optional,   but 
made  imperative.     We  are  as  much  com 
manded    to    rejoice   as   to   keep   the   Sab 
bath. 
It  is  commanded  because  joy  makes  us  like 

God. 

It  is  commanded  because  it  is  for  our  prof 
it. 

It  is  commanded  because  it  is   good   for 
others. 

II.  THB  JOT  DISCRIMINATED.     "  In  the  Lord." 

1.  As  to  sphere.     "  In  the  Lord."    This  is  that 

sacred    circle    wherein    a    Christian's   life 
should  be  always  spent. 

2.  As  to  object.     "  In  the  Lord." 

We  should  rejoice  in  the  Lord  God,   Father,  Son, 
and  Spirit. 

We  should  rejoice  in  the  Lord  Jesus,   dead,   risen, 
&c. 

Not  in  temporals,  personal,  political,  or  pe 
cuniary. 

Nor  in  special  privileges,  which  involve  great 
er  responsibility. 

Nor  even  in  religious  successes.  "  In  this  re 
joice  not,  that  the  devils  are  subject  unto 
you  through  my  word,  but  rather  rejoice 
that  your  names  are  written  in  heaven": 
Luke  x.  20. 
Nor  in  self  and  its  doings.  Phil.  iii.  3. 


JOY   A  DUTY.  189 

III.  THE  TIME  APPOINTED.     "  Always." 

1.  Wheii  you  cannot  rejoice  in  any  other,    rejoice 

in  God. 

2.  When  you  can  rejoice  in  other  things,  sanctify 

all  with  joy  in  God. 

3.  When  you  have  not  before  rejoiced,   begin  at 

once. 

4.  When  you  have  long  rejoiced,  do  not  cease  for 

a  moment. 

5.  When  others  are  with  you,  lead  them  in  this 

direction. 

6.  When  you  are  alone,  enjoy  to  the  full  this  re 

joicing. 

IV.  THE   EMPHASIS    LAID     ON    THE    COMMAND.       "Again     I 

say,  Rejoice." 
Paul  repeats  his  exhortation, 

1.  To  show  his  love  to  them.     He  is  intensely  anx 

ious  that  they  should  share  his  joy. 

2.  To  suggest  the  difficulty  of  continual  joy.     He 

twice  commands,   because  we  are  slow  to 
obey. 

3.  To  assert  the  possibility  of  it.     After  second 

thoughts,  he  feels  that  he  may  fitly  repeat 
the  exhortation. 

4.  To  impress  the  importance  of  the  duty.     What 

ever   else  you   forget,  remember  this:    Be 
sure  to  rejoice. 

5.  To     allow     of     special     personal      testimony. 

"  Again  I  say,  Rejoice." 

Paul   rejoiced.     He    was  habitually  a  happy 
man. 


190  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

This   epistle  to  the  Philippians  is  peculiarly 

joyous. 

Let  us  look  it  through.     The  apostle  is  joyful 
throughout : 

He  sweetens  prayer  with  joy:  i.  4. 
He  rejoices  that  Christ  is  preached  :  i.  18. 
He  wishes  to  live  to  gladden  the  church :  i. 

25. 
To  see  the  members  like-minded  with  his 

joy  :  ii.  2. 
It  was  his  joy  that  he  should  not   run  in 

vain  :  ii.  16. 
His  farewell  to  them  was,  "  Rejoice  in  the 

Lord":  iii.  1. 
He  speaks  of  those   who  rejoice  in  Christ 

Jesus:  iii.  3. 
He  calls  his  converts  his  joy  and  his  crown : 

iv.  1. 
He  expresses  his  joy  in  their  kindness :  iv. 

4,  10,  18. 

To  all  our  friends  let  us  use  this  as  a  blessing : 
"  Rejoice  in  the  Lord." 

This  is  only  a  choicer  way  of  saying,  Be  happy; 
Fare  ye  well. 

"  Fare  ye  well,  and  if  for  ever, 
Still  for  ever  fare  ye  well." 


JOY-BELLS. 

It  is  not  an  indifferent  thing  to  rejoice,  or  not  to 
rejoice ;  but  we  are  commanded  to  rejoice,  to  show 
that  we  break  a  commandment  if  we  rejoice  not, 


JOY   A  DUTY.  191 

Oh,  what  a  comfort  is  this,  when  the  Comforter  him 
self  shall  command  us  to  rejoice !  God  was  want  to 
say,  Repent,  and  not  rejoice,  because  men  rejoice  too 
much;  but  God  here  commandeth  to  rejoice,  as 
though  some  men  did  not  rejoice  enough:  therefore 
you  must  understand  to  whom  he  speaketh.  In 
Ps.  cxlix.  5,  it  is  said,  "  Let  the  saints  be  glad  "; 
not,  let  the  wicked  be  glad.  And  in  Isa.  xl.  1,  he 
saith,  "  Comfort  my  people,"  not,  comfort  mine  ene 
mies,  showing  to  whom  this  commandment  of  Paul 
is  sent,  "  Rejoice  evermore." — Henry  Smith. 

The  thing  whereunto  he  exhorteth,  as  ye  see,  is 
to  rejoice;  a  thing  which  the  sensual  man  can  quick 
ly  lay  hold  on,  who  loves  to  rejoice,  and  to  cheer 
himself  in  the  days  of  his  flesh ;  which  yet  might 
now  seem  unreasonable  to  the  Philippians,  who  lived 
in  the  midst  of  a  naughty  and  crooked  nation,  by 
whom  they  were  even  hated  for  the  truth's  sake 
which  they  professed.  Mark,  therefore,  wherein  the 
apostle  would  they  should  rejoice,  namely,  in  the 
Lord ;  and  here  the  sensual  man,  that  haply  would 
catch  hold  when  it  is  said,  Rejoice,  by-and-by  when 
it  is  added,  in  the  Lord,  will  let  go  his  hold.  But 
they  that  by  reason  of  the  billows  and  waves  of  the 
troublesome  sea  of  this  world,  cannot  brook  the 
speech  when  it  is  said,  Rejjice,  are  to  lay  sure  hold 
fast  upon  it  when  it  is  added,  Rejoice  in  the  Lord; 
which  holdfast  once  taken,  that  they  might  for  ever 
keep  it  sure,  in  the  third  place  it  is  added,  Rejoice  in 
the  Lordalway,  to  note  the  constancy  that  should  be 
in  Christian  joy. — Henry  Airay. 


192  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Another  note  to  distinguish  this  joy  in  the  Lord 
from  all  other  joys  is  the  fulness  and  exuberancy  of 
it;  for  it  is  more  joy  than  if  corn  and  wine  and  oil 
increased.  Else  what  needed  the  apostle,  having 
said,  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway,"  to  add,  "  and 
again  1  say,  Rejoice"?  What  can  be  more  than 
always,  but  still  adding  to  the  fulness  of  our  joy,  till 
our  cup  do  overflow  ? 

Upon  working  days  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  who  giv- 
eth  thee  strength  to  labor,  and  feedeth  thee  with 
the  labor  of  thy  hands.  On  holidays  rejoice  in  the 
Lord,  who  feasteth  thee  with  the  marrow  and  fatness 
of  his  house.  In  plenty,  rejoice  again  and  again,  be 
cause  the  Lord  giveth;  in  want  rejoice,  because  the 
Lord  taketh  away,  and  as  it  pleaseth  the  Lord,  so 
come  things  to  pass. — Edward  Marbury. 

The  calendar  of  the  sinner  has  only  a  few  days  in 
the  year  marked  as  festival  days ;  but  every  day  of 
the  Christian's  calendar  is  marked  by  the  hand  of 
God  as  a  day  of  rejoicing. — Anon. 

'Tis  impious  in  a  good  man  to  be  sad. 

Edward  Young. 

Napoleon,  when  sent  to  Elba,  adopted,  in  proud 
defiance  of  his  fate,  the  motto,  "  Ubicunque  fdix" 
It  was  not  true  in  his  case ;  but  the  Christian  may 
be  truly  "  happy  everywhere"  and  always. 


ccxxvm. 

'FOR  BY  HTM  WERE  AUL  THINGS  CREATED,  THAT  ARE  IN  HEAVEN, 
AND  THAT  ARE  IN  EARTH,  VISIBLE  AND  INVISIBLE,  WHETHER 
THEY  BE  THRONES,  OR  DOMINIONS,  OR  PRINCIPALITIES,  OR 
POWERS  :  ALL  THINGS  WERE  CREATED  BY  HIM,  AND  FOR  HIM." 

Col.  i.  16. 

ANY  theme  which  exalts  the  Saviour  is  precious 
to  the  saints. 

This  is  oue  in  which  the  preacher  cannot  hope  to 
do  more  than  to  show  how  vastly  his  theme  is  above 
him. 

All  things  were  created  by  God  and  for  him,  yet 
by  Jesus  and  for  him,  because  he  is  truly  vjod  and 
one  with  the  Father. 

I.  CONSIDER  THE  STATEMENT  ITSELF. 

1.  Heaven  itself  was  created  by  and  for  CLrist 
Jesus. 

There  is  such  a  place,  as  well  as  such  a  state, 
and  of  that  place  Jesus  is  the  centre.  Enoch 
and  Elijah  in  their  bodies  are  there,  Jesus 
as  man  is  there,  and  there  all  his  people 
will  be.  God,  as  a  pure  Spirit,  needed  no 
such  place;  nor  angels,  for  everywhere 
they  would  see  God. 

It  was  created  for  Jesus,  and  for  the  people 
13  (193) 


194  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

whom  he  will  bring  there  to  be  one  for  ever 
with  himself. 
It  exists  by  Jesus  and  for  Jesus. 

Everything  in  heaven  is  prepared  by  Jesus. 

He  is  the  designer  of  it. 
Everything  in  heaven  reflects  Jesus.     He 

is  the  soul  of  it. 
Everything  in  heaven  praises  Jesus.     He 

is  the  King  of  it. 

2.  The  angels.     All  their   ranks   were  made   by 

him  arid  for  him. 
To  worship  him,  and  glorify  him  with  their 

adoration. 
To  rejoice  with  him  and  in  him,  as  they  do 

when  sinners  repent. 
To  guard  Christ's  people  in  life,  and  bring 

them  to  him  in  death. 
To  carry  out   his  purposes  of  judgment,  as 

with  Pharaoh,  etc. 
To  achieve    his  purposes  of  deliverance,   as 

Peter  from  prison. 

*   This  world  was  made  by  him  to  be — 
A  place  for  him  to  live  and  die  upon. 
A  stage  for  his  people  to  live  arid  act  upon. 
A  province  to  be  fully  restored  to  his  domin 
ion.- 

A  new  world  in  the  ages  to  come,  to  bless 
other  worlds,  if  such  there  be ;  and  to  dis 
play,  for  ever,  the  glories  of  Jesus. 

4.  All  the  lower  creatures  are  for  Jesus.     "  And 
that  are  in  earth." 


CHRIST  THE  CEEATOR.  195 

They  are  needful  to  man,  and  so  to  our  Lord's 
system  of  grace. 

They  are  illustrations  of  Christ's  wisdom,  pow 
er,  and  goodness. 

They  are  to  be  treated  kindly  for  his  sake. 

5.  Men  were  created  by  and  for  Christ. 

That  he  might  display  a  special  phase  of  pow 
er  and  skill,  in  creating  spiritual  beings 
embodied  in  material  forms. 

That  he  might  become  himself  one  of  them. 

That  he  might  himself  be  the  head  of  a  re 
markable  order  of  beings  who  know  both 
good  and  evil,  are  children  of  God,  are 
bound  to  God  by  ties  of  gratitude,  and  are 
one  with  his  Son. 

That  for  these  he  might  die:  to  save  them, 
and  to  make  them  his  companions,  friends, 
and  worshippers  for  ever. 

That  human  thrones,  even  when  occupied  by 
wicked  men,  might  be  made  to  subserve 
his  purpose  by  restraint  or  by  overruling. 

II.    REVIEW    THE    REFLECTIONS     HENCE    ARISING. 

1.  Jesus  then  is  God.     "  By  him  were  all  things 

created," 

2.  Jesus  is  the  clue  of  the  universe;  its  centre  and 

explanation.  All  things  are  to  be  seen  in 
the  light  of  the  cross,  and  all  things  reflect 
light  on  the  cross.  For  him  all  things 
exist. 

3.  To  live  to  Jesus,  then,  is  to  find  out  the  true 


196  MT   SERMOK -NOTES. 

object  of  our  being,  and  to  be  in  accord 
with  all  creation. 

4.  Not  living  to  Jesus,  we  can  have  no  blessing. 

5.  We  can  only  live  for  him  as  we  live  by  him,  for 

so  all  things  do. 

6.  It  is  clear  that  he  must  triumph.     All  is  going 

well.  If  we  look  at  history  from  his  throne, 
all  things  are  "  for  him."  "  He  must  reign." 
Let  us  comfort  one  another  with  these 
words. 

What  an  honor  to  be  the  smallest  page  in  the 
retinue  of  such  a  prince ! 

WORDS  OF  HOMAGE. 

When  the  Christian  martyr  Pionius  was  asked  by 
his  judges,  "  What  God  dost  thou  worship  ?  "  he  re 
plied:  "  I  worship  him  who  made  the  heavens,  and 
who  beautified  them  with  stars,  and  who  has  en 
riched  the  earth  with  flowers  and  trees."  "  Dost 
thou  mean,"  asked  the  magistrates,  "  Him  who  was 
crucified  (ilium  dicis  qui  crucifixus esf)  ?  "  "Certainly," 
replied  Pionius,  "  Him  whom  the  Father  sent  for  the 
salvation  of  the  world."  As  Pionius  died,  so  died 
Blandina  and  the  whole  host  of  those  who,  in  the 
first  three  centuries,  without  knowing  anything  of 
the  Xicene  Creed,  held  it  implicitly,  if  not  explicitly, 
and  proclaimed  it  in  flames  and  in  dungeons,  in 
famine  and  in  nakedness,  under  the  rack  and  under 
the  sword. — Joseph  Cook. 

In  creation  God  shows  us  his  hand,  but  in  redemp 
tion  God  gives  us  his  heart. — Adolphe  Monod 


CHRIST  THE   CREATOR.  197 

What  sublime  views  does  this  subject  (the  creation 
of  angels)  furnish  us  of  the  greatness  of  Christ !  By 
him,  says  the  apostle,  were  all  those  illustrious 
beings  created,  together  with  all  their  attributes, 
importance,  and  dignity.  The  character  of  every 
workman  is  seen,  of  course,  in  the  nature  of  the  work 
which  he  has  made.  If  this  be  insignificant  and 
worthless,  it  exhibits  nothing  but  the  insignificance 
and  worthlessness  of  the  maker.  If  curious  and  ex 
cellent,  if  sublime  and  wonderful,  it  unfolds  strongly 
and  certainly  his  greatness,  wisdom,  and  glory.  Of 
what  faculties  are  angels  the  subjects  !  Of  what 
intelligence,  purity,  power,  loveliness,  and  elevation 
of  mind  !  What,  then,  must  be  the  perfections  of 
him  who  contrived  and  formed  angels;  who  with 
a  word  called  them  into  being;  who  preserves,  in 
forms,  directs,  controls,  and  blesses  them  for  ever ! 
Great  and  excellent  as  they  are,  they  are  exhibited 
as  "unclean  in  his  sight,"  and  as  "charged  with 
folly,"  before  him.  How  amazing,  then,  must  be 
the  perfection  of  his  character!  how  great,  how  wise, 
how  good  ! — Timothy  I) wight. 

Paul  would  prevent  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  cross 
ing  our  minds  about  our  Lord  having  a  right  to  the 
divine  honors  of  the  Creator.  "  By  him,''  he  says, 
"  all  things  were  created";  and  as  if  an  angel,  stand* 
ing  at  his  side  when  he  penned  these  words,  had 
stooped  down  to  whisper  in  his  ear  that  men,  attempt 
ing  to  rob  Jesus  of  his  honor,  would  rise  to  throw 
doubt  upon  that  truth,  and  explain  it  away — to  make 
the  truth  still  more  plain,  he  adds,  "  that  are  in 


198  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

heaven,  and  that  are  in  earth."  Not  content  with 
that,  he  uses  yet  more  comprehensive  terms;  and  to 
embrace  all  the  regions  of  God's  universe  above  the 
earth  and  beyond  the  starry  bounds  of  heaven,  he 
adds,  "  visible  and  invisible."  Nor  leaves  his  task 
till,  sweeping  the  highest  and  the  lowest  things, 
men  and  worms,  angels  and  insects,  all  into  Christ's 
hands,  he  adds,  "whether  they  be  thrones,  or  domin 
ions,  or  principalities,  or  powers." — Dr.  Guthrie. 

It  was  well  said  of  a  heathen,  Si  essem  luscinia — if  I 
were  a  nightingale  I  would  sing  as  a  nightingale; 
si  alauda — if  I  were  a  lark  I  would  soar  as  a  lark. 
Since  I  am  a  man,  what  should  I  do  but  know,  love, 
and  praise  God  without  ceasing,  and  glorify  my 
Creator  ?  Things  are  unprofitable  or  misplaced  when 
they  do  not  seek  or  serve  their  end;  therefore,  for 
what  use  are  we  meet,  if  we  are  unmeet  for  our  pro 
per  end  ?  We  are  like  the  wood  of  the  vine,  good 
for  nothing,  not  so  much  as  to  make  a  pin  whereon 
to  hang  anything  (Ezek.  xv.  2);  good  for  nothing 
but  to  be  cast  into  the  fire,  unless  it  be  fruitful. 
What  are  we  good  for  if  we  be  not  serviceable  to  the 
ends  for  which  we  were  created  ? — Thomas  Mantan. 


CCXXIX. 

"  AS  YE  HAVE  THEREFORE  RECEIVED  CHRIST   JESUS   THE   LORD, 
SO   WALK  YE   IN  HIM." — Col.  ii.  6. 

THERE  is  great  safety  in    going    back  to  first 
principles. 

To  make  sure  of  being  in  the  right  way,  it  is 
good  to  look  back  at  the  entrance  gate.  Well  be 
gun  is  half  done. 

The  text  is  addressed,  not  to  the  ungodly,  nor  to 
strangers,  but  to  those  who  have  received  "  Christ 
Jesus   the  Lord."     They  have  commenced  well,  let 
them  go  on  as  they  have  begun. 

For  the  spiritual  good  and  establishment  of  such 
in  the  faith,  the  apostle  longs,  and  to  this  end  he 
gives  the  exhortation. 

I.  Notice  in  the  text  THE  FACT  STATED.  Sincere  be 
lievers  have  in  very  deed  "received  Christ 
Jesns  the  Lord." 

This  is  the  old  gospel  word.  Here  is  no  evolu 
tion  from  "within,  but  a  gift  from  without,  heartily 
accepted  by  the  soul. 

This  is  free-grace  language :  "received,"  not  earn 
ed  or  purchased. 

It  is  not  said  that  they  received  Christ's  word$, 

(199) 


200  MY   SEKMOIST-NOTES. 

though  that  is  true,  for  they  prize   every   precept 
and  doctrine;  but  they  received  Christ. 

Carefully  observe: 

1.  The   personality  of  him  whom  they  received, 

"  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord  "  :  his  person,  his 
Godhead,  his  humanity ;  himself. 

Received  him  into  their  knowledge. 

Received  him  into  their  understanding. 

Received  him  into  their  affections. 

Received  him  into  their  trust. 

Received  him  as  their  life  at  their  new  birth; 
for  when  they  received  him  he  gave  them 
power  to  become  the  sons  of  God. 

2.  The  threefold  character  in  which  they  received 

him. 

The  words  of  the  text,  "  Christ  Jesus  the   Lord," 
indicate  this. 

They  received  him 

As  Christ,  anointed  and  commissioned  of  God. 
As  Jesus,  the  Saviour,  to  redeem  and  sanctify 

them. 

As  the  Lord,  to  reign  and  rule  over  them  with 
undivided  sway. 

3.  The  looking  away  from  self  in  this  saving  act 

of  reception. 

It  is  not  said,  as  ye  have  fought  for  Jesus  and 
won  him  ;  or,  studied  the  truth  and  discov 
ered  Christ  Jesus  ;  but,  as  ye  have  "receiv 
ed  "  him.  This  strips  us  of  everything  like 
boasting,  for  all  we  do  is  to  receive. 
4  The  blessed  certainty  of  the  experience  of  those 


AS  AND  SO.  201 

to  whom  Paul  wrote:  "As  ye  have  received 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord."  They  had  really 
received  Jesus;  they  had  found  the  blessing 
to  be  real:  no  doubt  remained  as  to  their 
possession  of  it. 

II.  Notice,  next,  THE  COUNSEL  GIVEN:  "So  walk  vein 

him." 

There   are  four  things  suggested  by   that  word 
"  walk." 

1.  Life.     Vitally  enjoy  the  Lord  Jesus. 

2.  Continuance.     Remain  in    Christ:    make    him 

your  constant  place  of  daily  movement  and 
occupation. 

3.  Activity.     Busy  yourselves,  but  not  with  a  new 

way   of  salvation.     Work   for   Jesus,    and 
with  him,  and  in  obedience  to  him. 
4  Progress.      Advance,    but    ever  let  your  most 
advanced  thought  remain  in  him. 

III.  Notice,  lastly,  THE  MODEL  WHICH    is  PRESENTED   TO 

us.     We  are  to  walk  in  Christ  Jesus  the 
Lord  "as  we  received  him." 
And  how  was  that  ? 

1.  We  received  him  gratefully.     How  we  blessed 

his  name  for  regarding  our  low  estate  ! 

2.  We  received  him  humbly.     We  had  no   claim 

to  his  grace,  and  we  confessed  this  and 
were  lowly. 

3.  We  received  him  joyfully.     Our  first  joy  was 

bright  as  the  dew  of  the  morning.  Have 
we  lost  it  ? 


202  MY  SEEMON-NOTES. 

4.  We   received    him    effectually.     We    brought 

forth  many  spiritual  fruits,  and  abounded 
in  life,  faith,  love,  and  every  grace. 

5.  We  received  him  unreservedly.     We  made  no 

conditions  with  him,  and  we  reserved  noth 
ing  for  the  flesh. 

Thus  we  should  continue  to  walk  in  him,  ever 
more  in  our  daily  life  excelling  in  all  these  points. 

Alas,  some  have  never  received  Jesus  ! 

Our  closing  words  must  be  addressed  to  such. 

If  you  will  not  receive  Jesus,  you  refuse  mercy 
here  and  heaven  hereafter.  What !  will  you  not  re 
ceive  so  great  a  boon  ? 

EXPLANATORY. 

Inquirers  are  not  infrequently  counselled  to  give 
their  hearts  to  Christ,  or  to  consecrate  themselves  to 
the  Lord.  We  would  not  be  over-critical  with  what 
is  well  meant;  but  really  this  is  not  the  gospel. 
The  good  news  of  grace  is,  that  God  hath  given  to  us 
eternal  life  and  redemption  through  his  Son,  and 
that  in  order  to  be  saved  the  sinner  has  naught  to 
do  but  to  accept  it. 

But  having  received  the  gift  of  God,  and  having 
become  partakers  of  his  converting  grace,  then  and 
therefore  the  divine  obligation  for  service  begins  to 
press  upon  us.  The  Lord  becomes  an  asker  as  soon 
as  we  have  become  recipients.  "As  ye  have  there" 
fore  received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  so  walk  ye  in  him  "; 
let  consecration  crown  conversion,  let  self-devote- 


AS  AND  SO.  203 

ment  to  Christ  answer  to  his  self-devotement  for 
you. — Dr.  A.  J.  Gordon. 

If  you  would  know  how  faith  is  to  be  exercised  in 
thus  abiding  in  Jesus,  to  be  rooted  more  deeply  and 
firmly  in  him,  you  have  only  to  look  back  to  the 
time  when  rirst  you  received  him.  You  remember 
well  what  obstacles  at  that  time  there  appeared  to 
be  in  the  way  of  your  believing.  There  was  first 
your  vileness  and  guilt;  it  appeared  impossible  that 
the  promise  of  pardon  and  love  could  be  for  such  a 
sinner.  Then  there  was  the  sense  of  weakness  and 
death:  you  felt  not  the  power  for  the  surrender  and 
the  trust  to  which  you  were  called.  And  then  there 
was  the  future:  you  dared  not  undertake  to  be  a 
disciple  of  Jesus  while  you  felt  so  sure  that  you 
could  not  remain  standing,  but  would  speedily 
again  be  unfaithful  and  fall.  These  difficulties  were 
as  mountains  in  your  way.  And  how  were  they  re 
moved  ?  Simply  by  the  word  of  God.  That  word, 
as  it  were,  compelled  you  to  believe  that,  notwith 
standing  guilt  in  the  past,  and  weakness  in  the  pres 
ent,  and  unfaithfulness  in  the  future,  the  promise 
was  sure  that  Jesus  would  accept  and  save  you.  On 
that  word  you  ventured  to  come,  and  were  not  de 
ceived  :  you  found  that  Jesus  did  indeed  accept  and 
save  you. 

Apply  this,  your  experience  in  coming  to  Jesus,  to 
the  abiding  in  him.  By  faith  you  became  partakers 
of  the  initial  grace;  by  that  same  faith  you  can  en 
joy  the  continuous  grace  of  abiding  in  him. — Andrew 
Murray. 


204  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

Since  they  had  received  the  doctrine  of  Christ, 
they  could  not  again  part  with  it  without  convicting 
themselves  either  of  imprudence,  in  having  mistak 
en  a  false  doctrine  for  a  true  one;  or  of  instability, 
in  quitting  and  altering  a  doctrine  which  they 
knew  to  be  good  and  sufficient  when  they  received 
it.  If  your  belief  be  good,  why  do  you  change  it  ? 
If  it  be  otherwise,  why  did  you  entertain  it  ?  Though 
it  be  a  heinous  sin  not  to  receive  the  Lord  Jesus 
when  he  represents  himself  to  us  in  his  gospel,  yet 
it  is  much  more  evil  to  cast  him  out  after  having  re 
ceived  him ;  as  it  is  a  greater  outrage  to  thrust  a 
man  from  your  house  when  you  have  admitted  him, 
than  to  shut  your  doors  against  him  at  the  first. 

Jean 


ccxxx. 

"WHERE  THERE  is  NEITHER  GREEK  NOR  JEW,   CIRCUMCISION 

NOR    UNC1RCUMCISION,      BARBARIAN,      SCYTHIAN,       BOND     NOR 

FREE  :  BUT  CHRIST  is  ALL,  AND  IN  ALL." — Col.  iii.  11. 

THERE  are  two  worlds,  the  old  and  the  new. 
These  are  peopled  by  two  sorts  of  manhood, 
the  old  man,   and  the  new  man,  concerning  whom, 
see  verses  9,  10. 

In  the  first  are  many  things  which  are  not  in  the 
second. 

In  the  second  are  many  things  which  are  not  in 
the  first. 

Our  text  tells  us  what  there  is  not,  and  what  there 
is,  in  the  new  man. 

Let  us  begin  by  asking  whether  he  knows  wJiere 
he  is;  for  the  text  turns  on  that  word  "  where." 

I.  WHAT  THERE  is  NOT  IN  THE  NEW. 

When  we  come  to  be  renewed  after  the  image  of 
him  that  created  us,  we  find  an  obliteration  of 

1.  National  distinctions:   u  Where  there  is  neither 

Greek  nor  Jew." 

Jesus  is  a  man.  In  the  broadest  sense  he  is 
neither  Jew  nor  Gentile.  We  see  in  him 
no  restrictive  nationality:  and  our  own  pe- 

(205) 


206  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

culiar  nationality  sinks  before  union  with 
him. 

Jesus  is  now  our  nationality,  our  charter,  and 
our  fatherland. 

Jesus  is  our  hero,  legislator,  ancestor,  leader, 
etc. 

Jesus  gives  us  laws,  customs,  history,  geneal 
ogy,  prestige,  privilege,  reliance,  power, 
heritage,  conquest,  etc. 

Jesus  furnishes  us  with  a  new  patriotism,  loy 
alty,  and  clanship,  which  we  may  safely  in 
dulge  to  the  utmost. 

2.  Ceremonial  distinctions:  "There  is  neither  cir 

cumcision  nor  uncircumcision."  The  typi 
cal  separation  is  removed. 

The  separating  rite  is  abolished,  and  the  pe 
culiar  privilege  of  a  nation  born  after  the 
flesh  is  gone  with  it. 

Those  who  were  reckoned  far  off  are  brought 
nigh. 

Both  Jew  and  Gentile  are  united  in  one  body 
by  the  cross. 

3.  Social  distinctions:  "  There  is  neither  bond  nor 

free." 

We  are  enabled  through  divine  grace  to  see 
that 

These  distinctions  are  transient. 
These  distinctions  are  superficial. 
These  distinctions  are  of  small  value. 
These  distinctions  are  non-existent  in  the 
spiritual  realm. 


CUEIST   IS  ALL.  207 

What  a  blessed  blending  of  all  men  in  one  body 
is  brought  about  by  our  Lord  Jesus !  Let  us  all 
work  in  the  direction  of  unity. 

II.   WHAT  THERE  is  IN  THE  NEW. 

"Christ  is  all  and  in   all;"   and   that  in   many 

senses. 

1.  Christ  is  all  our  culture.     In  him  we  emulate 

and  excel  the  "  Greek." 

2.  Christ  is  all  our  revelation.     We  glory  in  him 

even  as  the  "  Jew "  gloried  in  receiving 
the  oracles  of  God. 

3.  Christ  is  all  our  ritual.     We  have  no  "  circum 

cision,"  neither  have  we  seven  sacraments, 
nor  a  heap  of  carnal  ordinances:  he  is  far 
more  than  these.  All  Scriptural  ordinances 
are  of  him. 

4.  Christ  is  all  our  simplicity.     We  place  no  con 

fidence  in  the  bare  Puritanism  which  may 
be  called  "  un  circumcision." 

5.  Christ  is  all  our  natural  traditions.     He  is  more 

to  us  than  the  freshest  ideas  which  cross 
the  mind  of  the  "Barbarian." 

6.  Christ  is  all  our  unconquerableness  and  liberty. 

The  "  Scythian "  had  not  such  boundless 
independence  as  we  find  in  him. 

7.  Christ  is  all  as  our  Master,  if  we  be  "  bond." 

Happy  servitude  of  which  he  is  the  head  ! 

8.  Christ  is  our  Magna  Charta:  yea,  our   liberty 

itself  if  we  be  u  free." 


208  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

In  closing  we  will  use  the  words  "  Christ  is  all 
and  in  all  "  as  our  text  for  application  to  ourselves. 
It  furnishes  a  test  question  for  us. 

Is  Christ  so  great  with  us  that  he  is  our  all? 

Is  Christ  so  broadly  and  fully  with  us  that  he  is 
all  in  our  all  ? 

Is  he,  then,  all  in  our  trust,  our  hope,  our  assur 
ance,  our  joy,  our  aim,  our  strength,  our  wisdom — in 
a  word,  "all  in  all"? 

If  so,  are  we  living  in  all  for  him  ? 

Are  we  doing  all  for  him,  because  he  is  all  to  us  ? 

EMBROIDERIES. 

What  a  rich  inheritance  have  all  those  who  are 
truly  interested  in  Jesus  Christ !  Christus  mem  et 
omnia.  They  possess  him  that  is  all  in  all,  and  in 
possessing  him  they  possess  all.  "  I  have  all  things, 
my  brother,"  saith  Jacob  to  Esau:  Gen.  xxxiii.  11 
(Margin).  He  that  hath  him  that  is  all  in  all  can 
not  want  anything.  "All  things  are  yours."  saith 
the  apostle,  "  whether  things  present  or  things  to 
come,  and  ye  are  Christ's":  1  Cor.  iii.  22,  23.  A 
true  believer,  let  him  be  never  so  poor  outwardly,  is 
in  truth  the  richest  man  in  all  the  world;  he  hath 
all  in  all,  and  what  can  be  added  to  all  ? — Ralph 
Robinson. 

Christ  is  not  valued  at  all  unless  he  be  valued 
above  all. — Augustine. 

He  is  a  path,  if  any  be  misled; 

lie  is  a  robe,  if  any  naked  be  ; 
If  any  chance  to  hunger,  he  is  bread ; 

If  any  be  a  bouihaau,  he  is  free; 


CHEI8T  IS  ALL.  209 

If  any  be  but  weak,  how  strong  is  he! 
To  dead  men  life  he  is,  to  sick  men  health, 
To  blind  men  sight,  and  to  the  needy  wealth ; 
A  pleasure  without  loss,  a  treasure  without  stealth. 

Giles  Fletcher. 

All,  then,  let  him  be  in  all  our  desires  and  wishes. 
Who  is  that  wise  merchant  that  hath  heart  large 
enough  to  conceive  and  believe  as  to  this  ?  Let  him 
go  sell  all  his  nothings,  that  he  may  compass  this 
pearl,  barter  his  bugles  for  this  diamond.  Verily, 
all  the  haberdash  stuff  the  whole  pack  of  the  world 
hath,  is  not  worthy  to  be  valued  with  this  jewel. 

I  cannot  but  reverence  the  memory  of  that  rever 
end  divine  (Mr.  Welsh)  who,  being  in  a  deep  muse 
after  some  discourse  that  had  passed  of  Christ,  and 
tears  trickling  abundantly  from  his  eyes  before  he 
was  aware,  being  urged  for  the  cause  thereof,  he  hon 
estly  confessed  that  he  wept  because  he  could  not 
draw  his  dull  heart  to  prize  Christ  aright.  1  fear 
this  is  a  rare  mind  in  Christians,  for  many  think  a 
very  little  to  be  quite  enough  for  Jesus,  arid  even  too 
much  for  him  ! — Samuel  Ward. 

"At  length,  one  evening,  while  engaged  in  a 
prayer-meeting,  the  great  deliverance  came.  1  re 
ceived  the  full  witness  of  the  Spirit  that  the  blood 
of  Jesus  had  cleansed  me  from  all  sin.  I  felt  I  was 
nothing,  and  Christ  was  all  in  all.  Him  I  now  cheer 
fully  received  in  all  his  offices:  my  Prophet,  to  teach 
me;  my  Priest,  to  atone  for  me;  my  King,  to  reign 
over  me.  Oh  what  boundless,  boundless  happiness 
there  is  in  Christ,  and  all  for  such  a  poor  sinner  as 
I  am!  This  happy  change  took  place  in  my  soul 
March  13th,  1772."—  William  Carvosso. 
14 


210  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

Dannecker,  the  German  sculptor,  spent  eight  years 
in  producing  a  face  of  Christ;  and  at  last  wrought 
out  one  in  which  the  emotions  of  love  and  sorrow 
were  so  perfectly  blended  that  beholders  wept  as 
they  looked  upon  it.  Subsequently,  being  solicited 
to  employ  his  great  talent  on  a  statue  of  Venus,  he 
replied,  "  After  gazing  so  long  into  the  face  of  Christ, 
think  you  that  I  can  now  turn  my  attention  to  a 
heathen  goddess  ? "  Here  is  the  true  secret  of 
weanedness  from  worldly  idols,  "  the  expulsive  pow 
er  of  a  new  affection." 

"I  have  heard  the  voice  of  Jesus, 
Tell  me  not  of  aught  beside ; 
I  have  seen  the  face  of  Jesus, 
All  my  soul  is  satisfied." 

Dr.  A.  J.  Gordon. 


CCXXXI. 

"  FOR  THIS  CAUSE  ALSO  THANK  WE  GOD  WITHOUT  CEASING,  BE 
CAUSE,  WHEN  YE  RECEIVED  THE  WORD  OF  GOD  WHICH  YE  HEARD 
OF  U8,  YE  RECEIVED  IT  NOT  AS  THE  WORD  OF  MEN,  BUT  AS  IT 
IS  IN  TRUTH,  THE  WORD  OF  GOD,  WHICH  EFFECTUALLY  WORK- 
ETH  ALSO  IN  YOU  THAT  BELIEVE. 

"  FOR  YE,  BRETHREN,  BECAME  FOLLOWERS  OF  THE  CHURCHES 
OF  COD,  WHICH  IN  JUDEA  ARE  IN  CHRIST  JESUS  :  FOR  YE 
ALSO  HAVE  SUFFERED  LIKE  THINGS  OF  YOUR  OWN  COUNTRYMEN, 
EVEN  AS  THEY  HAVE  OF  THE  JEWS." — 1  The88.  11,  13,  14. 

PAUL  unbosoms  his  heart  to  the  loving  church  at 
Thessalonica. 

He  knew  what  it  was  to  be  worried  by  the  Corin 
thians  and  the  Galatians,  but  he  found  rest  when 
thinking  of  the  Thessalonians. 

The  most  tried  ministers  have  some  bright  spots. 
In  setting  forth  his  joyful  memories  of  Thessalon 
ica,  Paul  gives  us  a  sight  of  three  things. 

I.  MINISTERS  GIVING  THANKS.     "We  also  thank  God." 

Ministers  are  not  always  groaning  and  weeping, 
though  they  often  do  so.  They  have  their  time  of 
thanksgiving,  as  in  Paul's  case. 

1.  This  followed  upon   sore  travail.      See  verse 
9.     Only  as  we  sow  in  tears  do  we  reap  in 

joy- 

(211) 


212  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

2.  This  was  backed  by  holy  living.     Dwell  upon 

each  point  in  verses  10  and  11.  Unholy 
ministers  will  have  scant  cause  for  joy. 

3.  It  prevented  all  self-laudation.     They  thanked 

God,  and  this  is  the  opposite  of  glorifying 
self. 

4.  It  was  of  a  social  character.     "  We  thank  God ;" 

Paul,  and  Silas,  and  Timothy.  We  hold  a 
fraternal  meeting  of  joy  when  God  blesses 
us  among  our  beloved  people. 

5.  It  was  of  an  abiding  character, — "  without  ceas 

ing."  We  can  never  cease  praising  the 
Lord  for  his  goodness  in  saving  souls. 

6.  It   cheered    them    for   further   service.      They 

wished,  according  to  verse  17,  to  visit  the 
friends  again,  and  further  benefit  them. 
What  a  mercy  for  us  all  when  God's  servants  are 
glad  about  us  !     Their  joy  is  in  our  salvation. 

II.  HEARERS  RECEIVING  THE  WORD.  "Ye  received  the 
word  of  God. " 

Not  all  received  it.  How  badly  do  some  treat  the 
gospel  ! 

Not  all  receive  it  as  did  the  Thessalonians,  for 

1.  They  received  the  word  of  God:  they  heard  it 

calmly,  attended  to  it  candidly,  considered 
it  carefully. 

2.  They  received  the  word  of  God  with  a  hearty 

welcome.  They  accepted  it  by  faith,  with 
personal  confidence  and  joy. 

3.  They  did  not  receive  the  word  of  man.     It  is 

well  to  keep  the  doors  locked  in  that  di- 


A  HAPPY   MINISTER' S   MEETING.  213 

rection.  We  cannot  receive  everything; 
let  us  reject  merely  human  teaching,  and 
leave  the  more  room  in  our  minds  for  the 
Lord's  word. 

4  They  did  not  receive  the  gospel  as  the  word  of 
men.  Their  faith  was  not  based  on  the 
clever,  eloquent,  logical,  dogmatical,  or  af 
fectionate  way  in  which  it  was  preached. 

5.  They  received  it  as  God's  revealed  word,  and 

therefore  received  it 
With  reverence  of  its  divine  character. 
With  assurance  of  its  infallibility. 
With  obedience  to  its  authority. 
With  experience  of  its  sacred  power. 

6.  They  received  it  so  that  it  effectually  worked  in 

them.  It  was  practical,  efficient,  and  man 
ifestly  operative  upon  their  lives  and  char 
acters. 

III.  CONVERTS  EXHIBITING  THE  FAMILY  LIKENESS. 

1.  They  were  like  Judean  Christians,  the  best  of 

them, 
In  faith ;  in  experience ;  in  afflictions. 

2.  Yet  many  of  them  as  heathen  began  at  a  great 

disadvantage. 

3.  They  had  never  seen  the  church  of  God  in  Ju- 

dea,  and  were  no  copyists,  yet  they  came  to 
be  fac-similes  of  them. 

4.  This  is  a  singular  confirmation  of  the  divine 

character  of  the  work. 

The  same   Lord  works  in  all  believers,  and  in 
the  main  the  same  experience  occurs  in  all 


214  MY   SEKMON-  NOTES. 

the  saints,   even  though  they   may  never 
have  seen  each  other. 

This  similarity  of  all  regenerated  men  furnish 
es  a  valuable  set  of  experimental  evidences 
of  the  divine  origin  of  conversion. 

Let  us  not  be  daunted  by  opposition,  for  at  Thes- 
salonica  Paul  was  persecuted  and  yet  triumphant. 

Let  us  rejoice  in  the  effects  of  the  Word  every 
where. 

MEMORANDA. 

There  was  a  minister  of  the  gospel  once,  a  true 
preacher,  a  faithful,  loving  man,  whose  ministry  was 
supposed  to  be  exceedingly  unsuccessful.  After 
twenty  years'  labor,  he  was  known  to  have  brought 
only  one  soul  to  Christ.  So  said  his  congregation. 
Poor  worker  in  the  trench  !  his  toil  was  not  seen  by 
men,  but  the  eye  of  God  rested  upon  it.  To  him, 
one  day,  came  a  deputation  from  his  people,  repre 
senting  to  him,  respectfully  enough,  that,  inasmuch 
as  God  had  not  seen  fit  to  bless  his  labors  among 
them,  it  were  better  for  him  to  remove  to  another 
sphere.  They  said  that  he  had  only  been  instru 
mental  in  the  conversion  of  one  sinner.  He  might 
do  more  elsewhere.  "  What  do  you  say  ?  "  said  he. 
"  Have  I  really  brought  one  sinner  to  Christ  ? " 
"  Yes,"  was  the  reply ;  "  one,  but  only  one."  "  Thank 
God,"  cried  he,  "for  that!  Thank  God!  I  have 
brought  one  soul  to  Christ !  Now  for  twenty  years' 
more  labor  among  you  !  God  sparing  me,  perhaps  I 
may  be  the  honored  instrument  of  bringing  two." 

Catthrop- 


A  HAPPY  MINTSTEB'S  MEETING.  215 

"  Whoever  made  this  book,"  said  a  Chinese  con 
vert,  "made  me;  it  tells  me  the  thoughts  of  my 
heart." 

A  celebrated  Frenchman  said,  "  I  know  the  Word 
of  God  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  because  it  has  pierc 
ed  me  through." 

Loskiel's  "Account  of  the  Moravian  Missions 
among  the  North  American  Indians,"  has  taught  me 
two  things.  I  have  found  in  it  a  striking  illustra 
tion  of  the  uniformity  with  which  the  grace  of  God 
operates  on  men.  Crantz,  in  his  "  Account  of  the 
Missions  in  Greenland,"  has  shown  the  grace  of  God 
working  on  a  man-fish — on  a  stupid,  sottish,  sense 
less  creature,  scarcely  a  remove  from  the  fish  on 
which  he  lived.  Loskiel  shows  the  same  grace  work 
ing  on  a  man-devil — a  fierce,  bloody,  revengeful  war 
rior,  dancing  his  infernal  war-dance  with  the  mind 
of  a  fury.  Divine  grace  brings  these  men  to  the 
same  point:  it  quickens,  stimulates,  and  elevates  the 
Greenlander — it  raises  him  to  a  sort  of  new  life — it 
seem?  almost  to  bestow  on  him  new  senses — it  opens 
his  eye,  and  bends  his  ear,  and  rouses  his  heart ; 
and  what  it  adds,  it  sanctifies.  The  same  grace 
tames  the  high  spirit  of  the  Indian — it  reduces  him 
to  the  meekness,  and  the  docility,  and  simplicity  of 
a  child.  The  evidence  arising  to  Christianity  from 
these  facts  is  perhaps  seldom  sufficient,  by  itself,  to 
convince  the  gainsayer;  but,  to  a  man  who  already 
believes,  it  greatly  strengthens  the  reason  of  his  be 
lief.  I  have  seen,  also,  in  these  books,  that  the  fish- 


216  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

boat,  and  the  oil,  and  the  tomahawk,  and  the  cap  of 
feathers  excepted,  a  Christian  minister  has  to  deal 
with  just  the  same  sort  of  creatures  as  the  Green- 
lander  and  the  Indian  among  civilized  nations. 

Richard  Cecil. 

The  Edition  of  those  living  Epistles  is  the  same 
the  world  over  ;  the  binding  only  may  differ. 


CCXXXII. 

"  BUT     YE,     BRETHREN,     BE     NOT    WEARY     IN  WELL-DOING." — 
2  Thesa.  iii.  13. 

READ  the  two  previous  verses,   and  mark  the 
apostle's  censure  of  those  who  are  busy-bodies, 
"working  not  at  all." 

A  church  should  be  like  a  hive  of  working  bees. 
There   should    be  order,  and  there  will  be  order 
where  all   are   at  work.     The  apostle  con 
demns  disorder  in  verse  11. 
There  should  be  quietness;  and  work  promotes  it: 

verse  12. 

There  should  be  honesty ;  and  work  fosters  it. 
The  danger  is,  lest  we  first  tire  of  work,  and  then 
fancy  that  we  have  done  enough,  or  are  discharged 
from  service  by  our  superior  importance,  or  by  our 
subscribing  to  pay  a  substitute.  While  any  strength 
remains  we  may  not  cease  from  personal  work  for 
Jesus. 

Moreover,  some  will  come  in  who  are  not  busy- 
bees,  but  busy-bodies;  they  do  not  work  for  their 
own  bread,  but  are  surprisingly  eager  to  eat  that 
of  others;  these  soon  cause  disturbance  and  desola 
tion,  but  they  know  nothing  of  "well  doing." 

The  apostle  endeavors  to  cure  this  disease,  and 
therefore  gives — 

1217) 


218  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

I.  A  SUMMARY  OF  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.     He  calls  it  "  well 
doing." 

1.  Religious     work     is     well-doing.     Preaching, 

teaching,  writing  books  and  letters,  tem 
perance  meetings,  Bible-classes,  tract-dis 
tributing,  personal  conversation,  private 
prayer,  praise,  &c. 

2.  Charitable  work   is  "  well-doing."     The    poor, 

the  widow  and  the  fatherless,  the  ignor 
ant,  the  sick,  the  fallen,  and  the  despond 
ing,  are  to  be  looked  after  with  tender 
care. 

3.  Common  labor  is  "  well-doing." 

This  will  be  seen  to  be  the  point  in  the  text, 
if  we  read  the  previous  verses.  Well-doing 
takes  many  forms;  among  the  rest — 

Support  of  family  by  the  husband. 

Management  of  house  by  the  wife. 

Assistance  in  house-work  by  the  daughters. 

Diligence  in  his  trade  by  the  }Toung  man. 

Study  of  his  books  by  the  child  at  school. 

Faithful  service  by  domestics  in  the  home. 

Honest  toil  by  the  day-laborer. 

4.  Certain    labor    is    "well-doing"  in    all  these 

senses,  since  it  is  common  labor  used  for 

charitable  and  religious  ends. 

Support  of  aged  persons  by  those  who  work 

for  them. 

Watching  over  infirm  or  sick  relatives. 
Bringing  up   children  in  the   fear  of  the 

Lord 


WEARINESS   IN   WELL-DOING.  219 

Work  done  in  connection  with  the  church 
of  God,  to  enable  others  to  preach  the 
gospel  in  comfort. 

Everything  is  "well-doing"  which  is  done  from  a 
sense  of  duty,  with  dependence  upon  God,  and  faith 
in  his  word;  out  of  love  to  Christ,  in  good-will  to 
other  workers,  with  prayer  for  direction,  acceptance, 
and  blessing. 

Common  actions  become  holy,  and  drudgery 
grows  divine  when  the  motive  is  pure  and  high. 

We  now  think  it  will  be  wise  to  gather  from  the 
episth 


II.    A   WARNING     AS    TO    CAUSES    OF    WEARINESS    IN    WELL 
DOING. 

1.  Unworthy  receivers  of  charity  weary  generous 

workers:  verse  10. 

2.  Idle  examples   tempt  the  industrious   to  idle 

ness:  verse  11. 

3.  Busy-bodies,    and    disorderly    persons   in   the 

church,    hinder   many  from  their  diligent 
service:  verses  11,  12. 

4.  Trou biers,  such  as    "unreasonable  and  wicked 

men,"  dispirit  those  who  would  serve  the 
Lord:  verse  2. 

5.  Our  own  flesh  is  apt  to  crave  ease,   and  shun 

difficulties. 

We  can  make  too  much  of  works,  and  it  is  equally 
easy  to  have  too  few  of  them.  Let  us  watch  against 
weariness. 


220  MY   SERMON-JSTOTES. 

Let  us  now  conclude  with — 

III.    AN     ARGUMENT     AGAINST      WEARINESS     IN     WELL-DOING. 

"  But   ye,   brethren,   be  not  weary  in  well 
doing." 

1.  Lose  not  what  you  have  already  wrought. 

2.  Consider  what   self-denials  others  practise  for 

inferior  things:  soldiers,  wrestlers,   rowers 
in  boat-race,  &c. 

3.  Remember  that  the  eye  of  God  is  upon  you,  his 

hand  with  you,  his  smile  on  you,  his  com 
mand  over  you. 

4.  Reflect  upon  the  grandeur  of  the  service  in  it 

self  as  done  unto  the  Lord,  and  to  his  glori 
ous  cause. 

5.  Think  upon  the  sublime  lives  of  those  who  have 

preceded  you  in  this  heavenly  service. 

6.  Fix  your  eye  on  Jesus,  and  what  he  endured. 

7.  Behold  the  recompense  of  reward:  the  crown, 

the  palm. 

If  others  tire  and  faint,  be  not  ye  weary. 

If  others  meanly  loaf  upon  their  fellows,  be  it 
yours  rather  to  give  than  to  receive. 

If  others  break  the  peace  of  the  church,  be  it  yours 
to  maintain  it  by  diligent  service,  and  so  to  enjoy 
the  blessing  of  verse  16. 

WHETSTONES. 

A  true  Christian  must  be  a  worker.  Industry,  or 
diligence  in  business,  is  a  prime  element  in  piety ; 
and  the  industry  God  demands  is  the  activity  of  our 


WEARINESS   IN    WELL-DOING.  221 

whole  complex  nature.  Without  this  a  man  may 
be  a  dreamer,  but  not  a  "  doer  " ;  and  just  so  far  as 
any  faculty  of  our  nature  is  left  unemployed,  do  we 
come  short  of  a  complete  Christian  character.  I 
must  be  doing,  I — I,  rny  entire  self,  my  hand,  my 
foot,  my  eye.  my  tongue,  my  understanding,  my 
affections — must  be  all,  not  only  resolving,  purpos 
ing,  feeling,  willing,  but  actively  doing.  "  Let  us 
be  doing." 

But  more  than  this.  I  must  be  "well-doing." 
The  Greek  word  expresses  beauty,  and  this  enters 
into  the  apostolic  thought.  True  piety  is  lovely. 
Just  so  far  as  it  comes  short  in  the  beautiful,  it  be 
comes  monstrous.  But,  as  used  by  Paul,  it  goes  far 
beyond  this,  and  signifies  all  moral  excellence. 
Activity  is  not  enough;  for  activity  the  intensest 
may  be  evil.  Lucifer  is  as  active,  as  constant,  and 
earnest  as  Gabriel.  But  the  one  is  a  fiend,  and  the 
other  a  seraph.  Any  activity  that  is  not  good  is  a 
curse  always  and  only.  Better  be  dead,  inert  mat 
ter — a  stone,  a  clod — than  a  stinging  reptile,  or  a 
destroying  demon;  aud  herein  lies  the  great  practi 
cal  change  in  regeneration.  It  transforms  the  mere 
doer  into  a  well-doer.  It  is  not  so  much  a  change 
in  the  energy  as  in  the  direction. 

Charles  Wadsivorth,  D.  D. 

The  Hebrews  have  a  saying,  that  God  is  more  de 
lighted  in  adverbs  than  in  nouns :  'tis  not  so  much 
the  matter  that's  done,  but  the  matter  how  'tis  done, 
that  God  minds.  Not  how  much,  but  how  wdl !  Tis 
the  well-doing  that  meets  with  a  well-done.  Let  us 


222  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

therefore  serve  God,  not  nominally  or  verbially,  but 
adverbially. — Ralph  Yenning. 

Think  nothing  done  while  aught  remains  to  do. 

Samuel  Rogers. 

D'Israeii  tells  the  following  story  of  two  mem 
bers  of  the  Port  Royal  Society.  Arnauld  wished 
Nicolle  to  assist  him  in  a  new  work,  when  the  lat 
ter  replied,  "We  are  now  old;  is  it  not  time  to 
rest  ?  "  '•  Rest !  "  returned  Arnauld,  "  have  we  not 
all  eternity  to  rest  in  ?  "  So  Gerald  Massey  sings — 

"  Let  me  work  now,  for  all  eternity, 
With  its  immortal  leisure,  waiteth  me." 


CCXXXIIL 

*'  THIS  IS  A  FAITHFUL  SAYING,   AND  WORTHY     OF  ALL  ACCEPTA 
TION,  THAT  CHRIST  JESUS  CAME  INTO  THE   WORLD    TO  SAVE 

SINNERS  :   OF  WHOM  I  AM  CHIEF." — 1  Tim.  i.  15. 

PAUL  had  described  his  ordination  in  verse  12. 
He  then  went  on  to  speak  of  the  grace  mani 
fested  in  the  call  of  such  a  person  to  the  ministry 
(verse  13),  and  of  the  further  grace  by  which  he  was 
sustained  in  that  ministry. 

Incidentally  he  was  led  to  mention  the  message  of 
his  ministry. 

We  may  profitably  use  the  text  on  this  occasion.* 

I.    HOW    WE    PREACH    THE    GOSPEL. 

1.  As  a  certainty.     It  is  a  "  faithful  saying."      We 

do  not  doubt  the  truth  of  our  message,  or 
how  could  we  expect  you  to  believe  it.  We 
believe,  and  are  sure,  because 

It  is  a  revelation  of  God. 

It  is  attested  by  miracles. 

It  bears  its  witness  within  itself. 

It  has  proved  its  power  upon  our  hearts. 

2.  As  an  everyday  truth.     It  is  to  us  a  "  saying" 

or  proverb. 

*  Preached  at  the  opening  of  a  mission  hall.    A  simple,  pop 
ular  address  was  most  desirable. 

(223) 


224  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

The  gospel  affects  us  at  home,  in  business,  in 
sickness,  in  health,  in  life,  in  youth,  and 
age,  in  death,  &c. 

3.  As  having  a    common    bearing.     Therefore    a 

k'  saying  "  to  be  heard  by  all  kinds  of  peo 
ple,  especially  the  most  sinful. 

All  have  sinned,  and  need  a  Saviour. 

All  who  believe  in  Jesus  have  a  Saviour. 

All  believers  show  by  their  lives  that  Jesus 
has  saved  them. 

4.  As  claiming   your  attention.     "Worthy  of  all 

acceptation." 

You  must  believe  it  to  be  true. 
You  must  appropriate  it  to  yourself. 
You  ought  to  do  so,  for  it  is  worthy  of  your 

acceptance." 

1 1.   WHAT  GOSPEL  DO  WE  PREACH  ? 

1.  The  gospel  of  a  person :  "  Christ  Jesus." 

He  is  the  anointed  of  God :  "  Christ." 
He  is  the  Saviour  of  men :  "  Jesus." 
He  is  God  and  man  in  one  person. 
He  died,  and  yet  he  lives  for  ever. 

2.  The  gospel  of  divine  visitation.     Jesus  came 

into  the  world — 
By  his  birth  as  a  man. 
By  his  mingling  with  men. 
By  his  bearing  our  sorrows  and  our  sins  for  us. 

3.  The  gospel  for  sinners. 

For  such  Jesus  lived  and  labored. 
For  such  he  died  and  made  atonement. 


THE  FAITHFUL   SAYING.  225 

For  such  he  has  sent  the  gospel  of  pardon. 
For  such  he  pleads  in  heaven. 
4  The  gospel  of  a  finished  work. 

He  finished  the  work  of  salvation   before  he 

left  the  world. 

That  work  continues  complete  to  this  day. 
He  is  ready  to  apply  it  to  all  who  come  to 

him. 
5.  The  gospel  of  effectual  deliverance.     "  To  save 

sinners. " 

Not  to  half  save  them. 
Nor  to  make  them  salvable. 
Nor  to  help  them  to  save  themselves. 
Nor  to  save  them  as  righteous. 
But  to  save  them  wholly  and  effectually  from 

their  sins. 

III.    WHY   DO   WE   PKEACH   IT  ? 

1.  Because  we  have  been  saved  by  it. 

2.  Because  we  are  now  in  sympathy  with  Jesus, 

and  wish  to  save  sinners,  even  the  chief  of 
them. 

3.  Because  we  believe  it  will  be  a  blessing  to  all 

of  you  who  hear  it. 

If  you  are  saved  by  it,  you  will  be  happy, 
and  so  shall  we. 

4.  Because  we  cannot  help  it,  for  an  inward  im 

pulse  compels  us  to  tell  of  the  miracle  of 
mercy  wrought  upon  us. 

Will  you  not  believe  a  saying  so  sure? 
Will  you  not  accept  a  truth  so  gladsome  ? 
Will  you  not  come  to  a  Saviour  so  suitable  ? 
15 


228  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

SAYINGS. 

A  visitor  to  Rome  says,  "  1  was  struck  with  the  fre 
quency  with  which  the  priests  and  other  exhibitors  of 
church  curiosities  use  the  phrase,  "  It  is  said" — on 
flit — when  describing  relics  and  rarities.  They  do 
not  vouch  for  their  being  what  they  are  reputed  to 
be.  "  It  is  said."  Are  they  ashamed  of  their  curi 
osities?  Do  they  thus  try  to  satisfy  their  con 
sciences  ?  They  do  not  express  their  personal  belief ; 
but—  it  is  said.  Not  thus  do  gospel  preachers  speak. 
"That  which  we  have  seen  and  heard  declare  we 
unto  you." 

There's  a  nice  word  in  the  text — it  is  the  word 
"  acceptation."  It's  all  provided  for  you.  It's  very 
much  like  a  supper.  You'll  find  the  table  laid,  and 
everything  all  ready.  You're  not  expected  to  bring 
anything  at  all.  I  was  once  invited  out  to  tea  by  a 
poor  widow,  and  I  took  something  in  my  pocket. 
But  I'll  never  do  it  again.  It  was  two  cakes;  and 
when  I  brought  them  out  and  laid  them  on  the  table, 
she  picked  them  up  and  flung  them  out  into  the 
street,  and  said,  '•  I  asked  you  to  tea;  I  didn't  ask  you 
to  provide  tea  for  me.''  And  so  with  Christ;  he  asks, 
he  provides,  and  he  wants  nothing  but  ourselves; 
and  if  we  take  aught  else,  he'll  reject  it.  We  can 
only  sup  with  him  when  we  come  as  we  are.  Who 
will  accept  salvation  ?  Who'll  say, 

"  I  take  the  blessing  from  above, 
And  wonder  at  thy  boundless  love  MT 

John  Wold  Ackrill,  in  "  The  Sword,  and  the  Trowel" 


THE   FAITHFUL   SAYING.  227 

Mr.  Moody  said,  "  I  remember  preaching  on  this 
subject — Christ  as  a  Deliverer — and  walking  away,  I 
said  to  a  Scochman,  'I  didn't  finish  the  subject.' 
'Ah  man  !  you  didn't  expect  to  finish,  did  ye  ?  It'll 
take  all  eternity  to  finish  telling  what  Christ  has 
done  for  man.'" 

Luther  says,  "  Once  upon  a  time  the  devil  said  to 
me,  'Martin  Luther,  you  are  a  great  sinner,  and 
you  will  be  damned!'  'Stop!  Stop!'  said  I;  'one 
thing  at  a  time;  I  am  a  great  sinner,  it  is  true, 
though  you  have  no  right  to  tell  me  of  it.  [  confess 
it.  What  next?'  'Therefore  you  will  be  damned.' 
'  That  is  not  good  reasoning.  It  is  true  that  I  am  a 
great  sinner,  but  it  is  written,  "  Jesus  Christ  came 
to  save  sinners;  "  therefore  IsJwdl  be  saved  /  Now  go 
your  way.'  So  1  cut  the  devil  off  with  his  own  sword, 
and  he  went  away  mourning  because  he  could  not 
cast  me  down  by  calling  me  a  sinner." 

The  Jews  have  a  saying  that  the  manna  tasted  to 
each  one  precisely  like  that  which  he  liked  best. 
The  gospel  is  suited  to  every  man,  whatever  his 
needs  or  desires  may  be. 

One  ot  William  Carey's  last  visitors,  was  the  Rev. 
Alexander  Duff,  who  talked  with  him  of  his  past 
life,  and  then  knelt  down  and  prayed  by  his  bedside. 
Leaving  the  room  Mr.  Duff  thought  he  heard  him 
self  recalled.  He  turned  back,  and  the  dying  man 
addressed  him  in  a  whisper,  "Mr.  Duff,  you  have 
been  talking  about  Doctor  Carey,  Doctor  Carey; 
when  I  am  gone,  say  nothing  about  Doctor  Carey — 
speak  about  Doctor  Carey's  Saviour." 


CCXXXIV. 

"  HOWBEIT  FOR  THIS  CAUSE  I  OBTAINED  MERCY,  THAT  IN  ME 
FIRST  JESUS  CHRIST  MIGHT  SHEW  FORTH  ALL  LONGSUFFER- 
ING,  FOR  A  PATTERN  TO  THEM  WHICH  SHOULD  HEREAFTER 
BELIEVE  ON  HIM  TO  LIFE  EVERLASTING."—!  Tim.  1.  16. 

THE  notion  is  common  that  Paul's  conversion  was 
something  uncommon,  and  not  at  all  to  be  ex 
pected  in  the  usual  order  of  things. 

The  text  flatly  contradicts  such  a  supposition:  the 
very  reason  for  his  salvation  was  that  he  might  be  a 
type  of  other  conversions. 

I.  IN  THE  CONVERSION  OF  PAUL  THE  LORD  HAD  AN  EYE 
TO  OTHERS. 

The  fact  of  his  conversion  and  the  mode  of  it: 

1.  Would   tend   to   interest    and  convince   other 

Pharisees  and  Jews. 

2.  Would  be  used  by  himself  in  his  preaching  as 

an   argument   to   convert    and    encourage 
others. 

3.  Would  encourage  Paul  as  a  preacher  to  hope 

for  others. 

4.  Would  become  a  powerful  argument  with  him 

for  seeking  others. 

5.  Would,  long  after  Paul's  death,   remain  on  re 

cord  to  be  the  means  of  bringing  many  to 
Jesus. 
(228) 


PAUL'S  CONVEESIO^  A  PATTEKN.         229 

We  are  each  one  saved  with  an  eye  to  others. 
For  whose  sake  are  you  saved  ? 
Are  you  making  the  fullest  use  of  your  conversion 
to  this  end  ? 

II.    IN    HIS    ENTIRE    LIFE    PAUL    SPEAKS   TO    OTHERS. 

He  was  foremost  in  sin  and  also  in  grace,  and  thus 
his  life  speaks  to  the  extremes  on  each 
side. 

1.  In  sin.     His  conversion  proves  that  Jesus  re 

ceives  great  sinners. 

He  was  a  blasphemer,  a  persecutor,  and  inju 
rious. 

He  went  as  far  as  he  could,  in  hatred  to  Christ 
and  his  people. 

Yet  the  grace  of  God  changed  him  and  for 
gave  him. 

2.  In   grace.     He   proved   the   power  of  God  to 

sanctify  and  preserve. 

He  was  faithful  in  ministry,  ctear  in  knowl 
edge,  fervent  in  spirit,  patient  in  suffering, 
diligent  in  service. 

And  all  this  notwithstanding  what  he  once 
was. 

The  foremost  in  sin  may  be  saved,  and  so  none 
are  shut  out. 

These  should  be  and  may  be  foremost  in  faith  and 
love  when  saved. 

III.    IN    HIS    WHOLE     CASE     HE     PRESENTS     A     CARTOON     OP 
OTHERS. 

1.  As  .to  God's  longsuffering  to  him.    In  his  case — 


230  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Longsnffering    was    carried    to    its    highest 

pitch. 

Loagraffering  so  great  that  aU  the  patience 
of  God  seemed  to  be  revealed  in  his  one  in 
stance. 

Longsuffering  concentrated:  all  the  longsuf- 
fering  that  has  ever  been  seen,  or  ever  will 
be  seen  in  others,  met  in  him. 
Longsuffering  which  displayed  itself  in  many 
ways,  so  as 

To  let  him  live  when  persecuting  saints. 
To  allow  him  the  possibility  of  pardon. 
To  call  him  effectually  by  grace. 
To  give  him  fulness  of  personal  blessing. 
To  put  him  into  the  ministry  and  send 

to  the  Gentiles. 
To  keep  and  support  him  even  unto  the 

end. 

2.  As  to  the  mode  of  his  conversion. 
He  was  saved  remarkably,  but  others  will  be  seen 
to  be  saved  in  like  manner  if  we  look  be 
low  the  surface  of  things. 
Saved  without  previous    preparation  on  his 

own  part. 

Saved  at  once  out  of  darkness  and  death. 
Saved  by  divine  power  alone. 
Saved  by  faith  wrought  in  him  by  God's  own 

Spirit, 

Saved  distinctly,  and  beyond  all  doubt. 
Are  we  not  also  saved  in  precisely  the  same  way  ? 

It  is  possible  for  us  to  realize  in  ourselves  a  full 
parallel  with  Paul. 


PAUL'S  CONVERSION  A  PATTERN.         231 

There  is  a  sad  resemblance  in  our  sin. 

There  is  a  similarity  in  the  divine  longsuffer-! 
ing  towards  us. 

There  is  a  likeness  in  some  degree  in  the  re 
velation,  for  the  Lord  Jesus  asks  us  from 
heaven,  "  Why  persecutest  thou  me  ?" 

Shall  there  not  be  a  similarity  also  in  the 
faith  ? 

Will  we  not  ask,  "  Who  art  thou,  Lord  ?"  and 
"  What  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?" 


PROOF  IMPRESSIONS. 

The  word  "pattern,"  in  the  original,  is  expressive 
— a  pattern  from  which  endless  copies  may  be  tak 
en.  You  have  heard  of  stereotype  printing:  when 
the  types  are  set  up,  they  are  cast— made  a  fixed 
thing,  so  that  from  one  plate  you  can  strike  off  hun 
dreds  of  thousands  of  pages  in  succession,  without  the 
trouble  of  setting  up  the  types  again.  Paul  says, 
"That  I  might  be  a  plate  never  worn  out — never 
destroyed ;  from  which  proof  impressions  may  be 
taken  to  the  very  end  of  time."  What  a  splen 
did  thought,  that  the  apostle  Paul,  having  portrayed 
himself  as  the  chief  of  sinners,  then  portrays  him 
self  as  having  received  forgiveness  for  a  grand  arid 
specific  end,  that  he  might  be  a  standing  plate, 
from  which  impressions  might  be  taken  for  ever, 
that  no  man  might  despair  who  had  read  his  biog 
raphy  ! — Dr.  Camming. 

An  infidel,  during  his  sickness,  became  convinced 
of  his  wretched  condition,  and,  bv  the  assistance  of 


232  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

a  Sabbath-school  teacher,  was  led  to  the  Saviour, 
and  found  salvation  in  his  blood.  After  the  change 
which  had  passed  in  his  heart,  he  often  spoke  of 
the  Saviour's  love,  and  the  heaven  into  which  he 
hoped  soon  to  enter.  Finding  his  life  drawing  rapid 
ly  to  a  close,  he  urged  the  teacher  to  proceed  in  his 
glorious  work  of  doing  good;  then,  opening  his  bed 
room  window,  which  overlooked  a  bustling  and 
crowded  thoroughfare,  as  he  gazed  upon  the  human 
forms  beneath,  summoning  his  last  remaining 
strength,  he  cried  at  the  top  of  his  voice,  "There  is 
mercy  for  all !  None  need  despair,  since  I,  a  poor 
infidel,  have  obtained  mercy."  This,  his  last  work, 
accomplished,  exhausted  by  the  effort,  he  fell  back 
on  his  bed,  and  instantly  died. — Haughton,  in  Bate's 
Cylcopcedia. 

John  Newton,  speaking  of  the  sudden  death  of 
Robinson,  of  Cambridge,  in  the  house  of  Dr.  Priest 
ly,  said :  "  I  think  Dr.  Priestly  is  out  of  the  reach 
of  human  convictions;  but  the  Lord  can  convince 
him.  And  who  can  tell  but  this  unexpected  stroke 
may  make  some  salutary  impression  upon  his  mind  ? 
I  can  set  no  limits  to  the  mercy  or  the  power  of  our 
Lord,  and  therefore  I  continue  to  pray  for  him.  I 
am  persuaded  he  is  not  further  from  the  truth  now 
than  I  was  once."  In  the  same  spirit  Newton  wrote 
the  lines — 

"  Come,  my  fellow  sinners,  try, 
Jesus'  heart  is  full  of  love ; 
Oh  that  you,  as  well  as  I, 
May  his  wondrous  mercy  prove  I 


PAUL'S  CONVERSION  A  PATTERN.        233 

He  has  sent  me  to  declare, 
All  is  ready,  all  is  free ; 
Why  should  any  soul  despair, 
When  he  saved  a  wretch  like  me !" 

Every  conversion  of  a  great  sinner  is  a  new  copy 
of  God's  love  ;  it  is  a  repeated  proclamation  of  the 
transcendency  of  his  grace.  This  was  his  design  in 
Paul's  conversion.  He  sets  up  this  apostle  as  a 
white  flag  to  invite  rebels  to  treat  with  him,  and 
return  to  their  loyalty.  As  every  great  judgment 
upon  a  grand  sinner  is  as  the  hanging  a  man  in  chains, 
to  deter  others  from  a  like  practice,  so  every  con 
version  is  not  only  an  act  of  God's  mercy  to  the  con 
vert,  but  an  invitation  to  the  spectators. — Stephen 
Charnock. 


ccxxxv. 

"  FOR  THE  WHICH  CAUSE  I  ALSO  SUFFER  THESE  THIKGS  J  NEV 
ERTHELESS  I  AM  NOT  ASHAMED  :  FOR  I  KNOW  WHOM  I  HAVE 
BELIEVED,  AND  AM  PERSUADED  THAT  HE  18  ABLE  TO  KEEP 
THAT  WHICH  I  HAVE  COMMITTED  UNTO  HIM  AGAINST  THAT 

DAY."— 2  Tim.  i.  12. 

PAUL,  much  buffeted  and  persecuted,  is  sustained 
by  faith,  and  by  a  sense  of  personal  security  in 
Christ  Jesus. 

The  meaning  which  may  be  in  the  text :  the  gos 
pel  deposited  with  Paul  the  Lord  Jesus  was  able  to 
keep  until  the  judgment.  This  is  well  worthy  of 
being  explained.  The  gospel  is  safe  in  the  care  of 
Jesus. 

Paul  felt  great  comfort  as  the  result  of  committing 
his  soul  to  Jesus. 

Let  us  consider — 

I.  WHAT  HE  HAD  DONE. 

Feeling  the  value  of  his  soul,  knowing  its  danger, 
conscious  of  his  own  weakness,  believing  in  the  grace 
and  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  he  had  placed  his  soul 
in  his  hands. 

1.  His  soul's  case  was  there  for  Jesus  to  heal  him 

as  a  Physician. 

2.  His   soul's  calls  were  there  to  be  supplied  by 

Jesus  as  a  Shepherd. 
(234) 


OUR   GOSPEL.  23H 

3.  His  soul's  course  was  there  to  be  directed  by 

Jesus  as  a  Pilot 

4.  His  soul's  cause  was  there  to  be  pleaded   by 

Jesus  as  an  Advocate. 

5.  His  soul's    care   was   there  to  be  guarded  by 

Jesus  as  a  Protector. 

He  had  committed  his  soul  to  Jesus  by  an  act  of 
faith,  which  act  he  persevered  in  continually. 

II.  WHAT   HE   KNEW.     "  I    know   whom    I   have   be 
lieved.*' 

He  speaks  not  of  believing  in  him,  but  of  believing 
him, — a  personal  faith  in  a  personal  Saviour.  This 
trusted  One  he  knew. 

1.  He  knew  the  Lord  Jesus  by  his  personal  meet 

ing  with  him  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  and 
at  other  times. 

2.  By  what  he  had  read  and  heard  concerning  him, 

and  made  his  own  by  meditation  thereon. 

3.  By  communion  with  him.     This  way  is  open  to 

all  the  saints. 

4.  By  experience,  through  which  he  had  tried  and 

proved  his  love  and  faithfulness.  He  had 
received  a  practical  education,  by  which  he 
was  made  to  know  his  Lord,  by  entering 
into  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings  and 
death. 

Have  we  this  personal  acquaintance  with  the 
Lord? 

If  so,  we  shall  gladly  commit  our  all  to  him. 


MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

III.  WHAT   HE   WAS  SURE  OF.     "That  he  is  able   to 

keep,"  &c. 

His  assurance  was  reasonable  and  deliberate,  hence 
he  says,  "I  am  persuaded." 

Our  apostle  was  persuaded  of — 

1.  The  ability  of  Jesus  to  keep  all  souls  committed 

to  him. 

He  is  divine,  and  therefore  omnipotent  to  save. 

His  work  is  finished,  so  that  he  meets  all  the 
demands  of  the  law. 

His  wisdom  is  perfect,  so  that  he  will  ward 
off  all  dangers. 

His  plea  is  constant,  and  ever  prevails  to  pre 
serve  his  own. 

2.  The  ability  of  Jesus  to  keep  Paul's  own  soul. 

3.  The  ability  of  Jesus  to  keep  his  soul  under  the 

heavy  trials  which  were  then  pressing  upon 
him.  "  I  suffer  ...  I  am  not  ashamed,  for 
I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  able  to  keep." 

4.  The  ability  of  Jesus  to  keep  his  soul  even  to 

the  close  of  all  things :  "  against  that  day." 
Of  this  Paul  was  persuaded.     Be  this  our  persua 
sion. 

Many  would  persuade  us  to  the  contrary;  but  we 
know,  and  are  not  therefore  to  be  persuaded  into  a 
doubt  upon  the  matter. 

IV.  WHAT,  THEREFORE,  HE  WAS. 

1.  Very  cheerful.     He  had  all  the  tone  and  air  of 

a  thoroughly  happy  man. 

2.  Very  confident.     Though  a  prisoner,  he  says, 

"I  am  not  ashamed."     Neither  of  his  condi- 


OUE  GOSPEL.  237 

tion,  nor  of  the  cause  of  Christ,  nor  of  the 
cross,  was  he  ashamed. 
3.  Very  thankful.     He  gladly  praised  the  Lord  in 

whom  he  trusted. 

The  text  is  a  confession  of  faith,  or  a  form  of 
adoration. 

Let  us  seek  more  knowledge  of  our  Lord,  as  the 
Keeper  of  our  souls. 

Let  us  be  of  that  brave  persuasion  which  trusts 
and  is  not  afraid. 

INSTANCES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

When  Dr.  James  W.  Alexander  was  dying,  his 
wife  sought  to  comfort  him  with  precious  words,  as 
she  quoted  them  to  him :  "  1  know  in  whom  I  have 
believed."  Dr.  Alexander  at  once  corrected  her  by 
saying,  "  Not  in  whom  I  have  believed ;  but,  'I  know 
whom  I  have  believed.'  "  He  would  not  even  suffer 
a  little  preposition  to  be  between  his  soul  and  his 
Saviour. 

"  I  have  lost  that  weary  bondage  of  doubt,  and 
almost  despair,  which  chained  me  for  so  many  years. 
I  have  the  same  sins  and  temptations  as  before,  and 
I  do  not  strive  against  them  more  than  before,  and 
it  is  often  just  as  hard  work.  But  whereas  I  could 
not  before  see  why  I  should  be  saved,  I  cannot  now 
see  why  I  should  not  be  saved  if  Christ  died  for  sin 
ners.  On  that  word  I  take  my  stand,  and  rest  there" 

F.  R.  Havergal. 

Justyn  Martyr  was  asked  ironically  by  the  Roman 
prefect  if  he  believed  that  after  his  decapitation  he 


238  MY   SERMON-ISTOTES. 

would  ascend  to  heaven.  He  replied:  "  I  am  so  sure 
of  the  grace  which  Jesus  Christ  hath  obtained  for  me, 
that  not  a  shadow  of  doubt  can  enter  my  mind." 

Donald  Cargill,  on  the  scaffold,  July  27th,  1681,  as 
he  handed  his  well-used  Bible  to  one  of  his  friends 
that  stood  near,  gave  his  testimony:  ''  I  bless  the 
Lord  that  these  thirty  years  and  more  I  have  been 
at  peace  with  God,  and  was  never  shaken  loose  of  it. 
And  now  I  am  as  sure  of  my  interest  "in  Christ,  and 
peacs  with  God,  as  all  within  this  Bible,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  can  make  me.  And  I  am  no  more 
terrified  at  death,  or  afraid  of  hell  because  of 
sin,  than  if  I  had  never  had  sin :  for  all  my  sins  were 
freely  pardoned  and  washed  thoroughly  away  through 
the  precious  blood  and  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ." 

Faith,  Hope,  and  Love  were  questioned  what  they  thought 
Of  future  glory,  which  religion  taught : 
Now  Faith  believed  it  firmly  to  be  true, 
And  Hope  expected  so  to  find  it,  too  : 
Love  answered,  smiling,  with  a  conscious  glow, 
"  Believe  ?    Expect  ?    I  know  it  to  be  so ! " 

John  Byrom. 

A  child  that  hath  any  precious  thing  given  him 
cannot  better  secure  it  than  by  putting  it  into  his 
father's  hands  to  keep :  so  neither  can  we  better  pro 
vide  for  our  souls'  safety  than  by  committing  them 
to  God. — John  Trapp. 


CCXXXVI. 

"THE  LORD  GRANT  UNTO  HIM  THAT  HE  MAT  FIND  MERCY  OF 
THE  LORD  IN  THAT  DAY." — 2  Tim.  i.  18, 

*~  I  ^HE  best  method  of  showing  our  gratitude  to 

-L  some  men  for  their  kindness  would  be  to  pray 
for  them. 

Even  the  best  of  men  will  be  the  better  for  our 
prayers. 

Paul  had  already  prayed  for  the  household  of  One- 
siphorus,  and  now  he  concludes  by  a  specially  hearty 
prayer  for  the  good  man  himself.  The  repetition  of 
the  word  "Lord"  makes  the  prayer  peculiarly  sol 
emn. 

Onesiphorus  had  remembered  Paul  in  his  day  of 
peril,  and  Paul  begs  the  Lord  to  give  him  a  gracious 
return  in  the  day  of  judgment. 

Yet  the  utmost  he  can  ask  even  for  so  excellent  a 
man  is  mercy.  Even  the  merciful  need  mercy;  and 
it  is  their  benediction  from  the  Lord  himself  that 
"  they  shall  obtain  mercy." 

Let  us  consider  this  prayer  under  three  heads : — 

I.     "THAT    DAY." 

"  That  day  " :  it  is  not  specifically  described,  because 
well  known  and  much  thought  of  among 
Christians.  Do  we  sufficiently  think  of  that 

(239) 


240  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

day  ?  If  so,  we  shall  feel  our  great  need 
to  find  of  the  Lord  mercy  when  it  comes. 

Its  date  is  not  given.  It  would  but  gratify 
curiosity. 

Its  length  is  not  specified.  Will  it  be  a  com 
mon  day  ?  It  will  be  long  enough  for  the 
deliberate  judgment  of  all  men. 

Its  coming  will  be  solemnly  proclaimed.  We 
shall  know  it.  Ushered  in  with  pomp  of 
angels,  sound  of  trumpet,  &c.,  none  will  be 
ignorant  of  it. 

Its  glory,  the  revelation  of  Jesus  from  heaven 
upon  the  throne  of  judgment.  This  will 
make  it  most  memorable. 

Its  event,  the  assembly  of  quick  and  dead,  and 
the  last  assize. 

Its  character,  excitement  of  joy  or  terror.  It 
will  be  the  day  of  days,  for  which  all  other 
days  were  made. 

Its  personal  interest  to  each  one  of  us  will  be 
paramount. 

Its  revealing  of  secrets  of  thought,  word,  deed, 
&c.,  for  good  or  for  evil,  will  be  most  as 
tounding. 

Its  decisions  will  be  strictly  just,  indisputable, 
unchangeable,  &c. 

It  will  be  the  last  day,  and  henceforth  the 
state  of  men  will  be  fixed  for  joy  or  woe. 

How  much  we  shall  need  mercy  in  the  judgment ! 
Every  thought  connected  with  it  makes  us  feel  this. 
Let  us  pray  about  it. 


MEECY  IN  THE   DAY   OF  JUDGMENT.          241 

II.  THE  MERCY. 

All  will  need  it.     Assuredly  we  shall  need  it  our 
selves. 

To  arouse  us,   let  us  think  of  those  who  will  find 
no  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day : 

Those  who  had  no  mercy  on  others. 

Those  who  lived  and  died  impenitent. 

Those  who  neglected  salvation.     How  shall 

they  escape  ? 
Those  who  said  they  needed  no  mercy :  the 

self-righteous. 
Those  who  sought  no  mercy:  procrastinators, 

and  the  indifferent. 
Those  who  scoffed  at  Christ,  and  refused  the 

gospel. 
Those  who  sold  their  Lord,   and  apostatized 

from  him. 

Those  who  made  a  false  and  hypocritical  pro 
fession. 

III.  TO-DAY. 

Our  address  at  this  moment  is  to  those  for  whom 
we  would  specially  breathe  the  prayer  of 
the  text. 

The  prospect  of  judgment  for  preacher  and  hear 
ers  leads  us  at  once  to  pray  for  you,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  urge  you  to  seek  the  Lord 
while  he  may  be  found. 

We  would  not  have  you  despair  as  to  the  future, 
but  hope  to  find  mercy  in  the  present,  that 
you  may  find  it  in  "  that  day." 

Remember  that  now  is  the  accepted  time,  for — 
16 


242  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

You  are  not  yet  standing  at  the  judgment 
bar. 

You  are  yet  where  prayer  is  heard. 

You  are  where  faith  will  save  all  who  exer 
cise  it  towards  Christ. 

You  are  where  the  Spirit  strives. 

You  are  where  sin  may  be  forgiven,  at  once, 
and  for  ever. 

You  are  where  grace  reigns,  even  though  sin 
abounds. 

To-day  is  the  day  of  grace ;  to-morrow  may  be  a 
day  of  another  sort,  for  you  at  least,  and  possibly  for 
all  mankind  The  judge  is  at  the  door. 

Seek  mercy  immediately,  that  mercy  may  be  yours 
for  ever. 

TRUMPET  NOTES. 

1  would  rather  have  the  gift  of  a  brother's  faithful 
prayers  than  of  his  plentiful  substance.  And  I  feel 
that  when  I  have  given  to  a  brother  my  faithful 
prayers,  I  have  given  him  rny  best  and  greatest  gift. 

Edward  Irving. 

There  is  a  machine  in  the  Bank  of  England  which 
receives  sovereigns,  as  a  mill  receives  grain,  for  the 
purpose  of  determining  wholesale  whether  they  are 
of  full  weight.  As  they  pass  through,  the  machin 
ery,  by  unerring  laws,  throws  all  that  are  light  to 
one  side,  and  all  that  are  of  full  weight  to  another. 
That  process  is  a  silent  but  solemn  parable  for  me. 
Founded  as  it  is  upon  the  laws  of  nature,  it  affords 
the  most  vivid  similitude  of  the  certainty  which 


HEKCY    IN   THE  DAY   OF   JUDGMENT.          243 

characterizes  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  There 
are  no  mistakes  or  partialities  to  which  the  light 
may  trust;  the  only  hope  lies  in  being  of  standard 
weight  before  they  go  in. —  William  Arnot. 

An  infidel  was  introduced  by  a  gentleman  to  a 
minister  with  a  remark,  "  He  never  attends  public 
worship."  "  Ah  !  "  said  the  minister,  "  I  hope  yon 
are  mistaken."  -'By  no  means,"  said  the  stranger; 
"  I  always  spend  Sunday  in  settling  my  accounts." 
"  Then,  alas  ! "  was  the  calm,  but  solemn  reply,  uyou 
will  find,  sir,  that  the  day  of  judgment  will  be  spent 
in  the  same  manner." — G.  S.  Bowes. 

When  Thomas  Hooker  was  dying,  one  said  to  him, 
"  Brother,  you  are  going  to  receive  the  reward  of 
your  labors."  He  humbly  replied,  "Brother,  1  am 
going  to  receive  mercy? 

By  that  tremendous  phrase,  "eternal  judgment," 
consider  your  ways  and  be  wise  !  If  its  true  mean 
ing  could  lighten  upon  you  at  this  moment,  what 
consternation  would  strike  upon  each  spirit  !  Every 
man,  though  serene  as  death  before,  would  spring  to 
his  feet,  and  cry,  Tell  me,  tell  me  this  moment,  what 
I  must  do ! — Charles  Stanford,  D.  D. 

It  is  a  pathetic  tale  to  tell,  and  1  do  not  vouch  for 
its  absolute  truth,  that  once  a  famous  composer 
wrote  a  great  anthem  to  be  sung  at  a  festival.  He 
sought  to  picture  the  scenes  of  the  final  judgment, 
and  introduced  a  strain  of  music  representing  the 
solemn  lamentations  of  the  lost.  But  no  singer  was 
found  willing  to  take  such  a  part.  So  the  wailiugs 


244  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

and  woes  were  omitted;  and  when  the  passage  was 
reached,  the  leader  simply  beat  the  time  in  silence 
till  the  awful  chasm  was  passed,  and  the  musicians 
took  up  gloriously  the  strains  of  celestial  unison  ly 
ing  on  the  other  side  of  it — "  the  shout  of  them  that 
triumph,  and  the  song  of  them  who  feast." — Dr.  G.  S. 
Robinson. 


CCXXXVII. 

"  WHEREIN  I  SUFFER  TROUBLE,  AS  AN  EVIL-DOER,  EVEN  UNTO 

BONDS  ;  BUT  THE  WORD  OF  GOD  IS  NOT  BOUND." — 2  Tim.  ii.  9. 

THE  Resurrection  of  Christ  was  Paul's  sheet-an 
chor.     Enlarge  upon  verse  8,  wherein  he  men 
tions  it  as  the  essence  of  the  gospel. 

He  himself  is  suffering  and  bound,  but  he  is  not 
without  comfort. 

His  great  joy  is  that  the    Word  of  God  is  not 
bound. 

I.    IN   WHAT   SENSES   THIS    IS    TRUE. 

The  Word  of  God  is  not  bound — 

1.  So  that  it  cannot  be  made  known. 

The  ministers  who  preach  it  may  be  impris 
oned,  but  not  the  Word. 

The  Book  which  contains  it  may  be  burned, 
but  the  truth  abides. 

The  doctrine  may  become  almost  extinct  as 
to  open  testimony,  and  yet  it  will  revive. 

2.  So  that  it  cannot  reach  the  heart. 

It  will  not  be  hindered  of  its  divine  purpose 
Through  the  obduracy  of  the  sinner,  for  grace 

is  omnipotent. 

Through  absence  of  the  means.     The    Holy 

(245) 


MY   SERMOX-NOTES. 

Spirit  can  reach  the  conscience  without  the 
hearing  or  reading  of  the  Word. 

Through  actual  derision  of  it.     Even  the  scof 
fer  and  sceptic  can  yet  be  convinced  and 
converted. 
'&.  So  that  it  cannot  comfort  the  soul. 

Conviction  of  sin  will  not  hinder  consolation 
when  faith  is  given. 

Constitutional  despondency  will  give  way  be 
fore  the  light  of  the  Word. 

Confirmed  despair  shall  be  overcome,  even  as 
Samson  snapped  the  cords  wherewith  he 
had  been  bound. 

4.  So  that  it  cannot  be  fulfilled. 

Providence  will  carry  out  the  promise  to  the 
individual. 

Providence  will  perform  the  threat  to  the  re 
bellious. 

Providence  will  achieve  the  prophesies  of  the 
millennial  future. 

5.  So  that  it  cannot  prevail  over  error. 

Infidelity,  Ritualism,  Popery,  fanaticism,  &c., 
shall  not  bind  the  gospel  so  as  to  retain 
their  mischievous  power  over  men.  The 
gospel  must  and  will  accomplish  the  pur 
poses  of  God. 

II.    FOR   WHAT    REASONS    THIS   IS   TRUE. 

The  Word  of  God  cannot  be  bound,  since — 

1.  ft  is  the  voice  of  the  Almighty. 

2.  It  is  attended  by  the  energetic  working  of  the 

Holy  Ghost. 


THE   WOKD   OF   GOD   UNBOUND.  247 

3.  It  is  so  needful  to  men.     As  men   will   have 

bread,  and  you  cannot  keep  it  from  them, 
so  must  they  have  the  truth.  The  gospel 
is  in  such  demand  that  there  must  be  free 
trade  in  it. 

4.  It  is  in  itself  a  free  and  unbound  thing,  the 

very  essence  of  liberty. 

5.  It  creates  such  enthusiasm  in  the  hearts  where 

in  it  dwells,  that  men  must  declare  it  abroad : 
it  must  be  free. 

III.  WHAT  OTHER  FACTS  ARE  PARALLEL  WITH  THIS  ? 

As  the  binding  of  Paul  was  not  the  binding  of  the 
Word  of  God,  so — 

The  death  of  ministers  is  not  the  death  of  the 
gospel. 

The  feebleness  of  workers  is  not  its  feeble 
ness. 

The  bondage  of  the  preacher's  mind  is  not  its 
bondage. 

The  coldness  of  men  is  not  its  coldness. 

The  falsehood  of  hypocrites  does  not  falsify  it. 

The  spiritual  ruin  of  sinners  is  not  the  defeat 
of  the  gospel. 

The  rejection  of  it  by  unbelievers  is  not  its 
overthrow. 

Rejoice,  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  has  free  course. 
Arouse  yourselves  to  work  with  it  and  by  it. 
Accept  its  free  power,  and  be  yourself  free  at 
once. 


248  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

ILLUSTRATIONS. 

"  But  the  Word  of  God  is  not  bound."  It  runs  and 
is  glorified  (2  Tbess.  iii.  1),  being  free  and  not  fetter- 
ad.  "I  preach,  though  a  prisoner,"  saith  Paul;  so 
did  Bradford  and  other  martyrs.  "Within  a  few 
days  of  Queen  Mary's  reign,  almost  all  the  prisons 
in  England  were  become  right  Christian  schools 
and  churches,"  saith  Mr.  Fox,  "  so  that  there  was  no 
greater  comfort  for  Christian  hearts  than  to  come  to 
the  prisons  to  behold  their  virtuous  conversation, 
and  to  hear  their  prayers,  preachings,  &c."  The  Earl 
of  Derby's  accusation  in  the  Parliament  House  against 
Mr.  Bradford  was,  that  he  did  more  hurt  (so  he 
called  good  evil)  by  letters  and  conferences  in  pris 
on,  than  ever  he  did  when  he  was  abroad  by  preach 
ing. — John  Trapp. 

In  a  portrait  of  Tyndale,  still  preserved  in  this 
country,  beside  the  heroic  man  is  a  device :  a  burn 
ing  book  is  tied  to  a  stake,  while  a  number  of  simi 
lar  books  are  seen  flying  out  of  the  fire.  The  mean 
ing  is  an  historic  fact.  Tonsta!,  the  Bishop  of  Lon 
don,  had  bought  up  some  scores  of  Tyndale's  Testa 
ments,  and  burned  them.  The  money  paid  for  them 
enabled  Tyndale  to  bring  out  a  new  and  more  cor 
rect  edition. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  last  century,  before  the 
days  of  the  great  Bible  Societies,  there  was,  for  a 
season,  a  woful  want  of  Bibles  in  America,  caused 
partly  by  the  prevalence  of  French  infidelity,  and 
partly  by  the  general  religious  apathy  which  followed 
the  Revolutionary  War.  In  that  period  a  man  went 
into  a  book-store  in  Philadelphia  and  asked  to  buy 


THE  WOED   OF   GOD   UNBOUND.  249 

a  Bible.  "  I  have  none,"  said  the  bookseller. 
"  There  is  not  a  copy  for  sale  in  the  city :  and  I  can 
tell  you  i'urther,"  said  he  (for  he  was  of  the  French 
way  of  thinking),  "in  fifty  years  there  will  not  be  a 
Bible  in  the  world."  The  rough  answer  of  the  cus 
tomer  was,  "  There  will  be  plenty  of  Bibles  in  the 
world  a  thousand  years  after  you  are  dead  and  gone 
to  hell." — The  Christian  Age. 

When  the  daughter  of  the  Mayor  of  Baune  had 
lost  her  canary  bird,  her  wise  parent  gave  strict 
orders  that  all  the  gates  of  the  town  should  be  shut, 
that  the  creature  might  not  escape.  The  bird  was 
soon  over  the  hills  and  far  away,  despite  the  lock 
ing  of  the  gates.  When  a  truth  is  once  known,  no 
human  power  can  prevent  its  spreading;  attempts 
to  hinder  its  progress  will  be  as  ineffectual  as  the 
mayor's  proclamation.  As  a  bird  of  the  air,  truth 
flies  abroad  on  swift  wings  ;  as  a  ray  of  light  it 
enters  palaces  and  cottages;  as  the  unfettered  wind  it 
laughs  at  laws  and  prohibitions.  Walls  cannot  con 
fine  it,  nor  iron  bars  imprison  it;  it  is  free,  and 
maketh  free.  Let  every  freeman  be  upon  its  side, 
and  being  so,  let  him  never  allow  a  doubt  of  its 
ultimate  success  to  darken  his  soul.  —  C.  H.  S. 

The  monument  in  Westminster  Abbey  to  the 
memory  of  the  two  Wesleys,  bears  the  sentence, 
"  God  buries  his  workmen,  but  carries  on  his  work." 

The  truth  is  more  incompressible  than  water.  If 
compressed  in  one  way,  it  will  exude  through  the 
compressing  mass,  the  more  visible  through  the  at 
tempts  to  compress  it. — Dr.  Pusey. 


ccxxxvm. 

"THAT  THEY     MAY    ADORN    THK     DOCTRINE    OF    GOD  OUR     SA« 
V1OTTR  IN  ALL  THINGS." — Titus  ii.  10. 

THE  apostle  greatly  values  the  doctrine  of  the 
gospel,  or  he  would  not  care  so  much  to  have  it 
adorned. 

The  apostle  highly  esteems  the  practical  part  of 
religion,  hence  he  regards  it  as  the  beauty  and  or 
nament  of  the  gospel. 

What  a  wide  range  of  practical  instruction  we 
find  in  this  short  letter  ! 

With  what  holy  ingenuity  is  this  interwoven  with 
the  doctrine ! 

We  are  bidden  to  obey  the  precept,  that  we  may 
adorn  the  doctrine. 

We  have  in  our  text — 

I.    A   NAME   OF    ADORNMENT    FOB   THE    GOSPEL.       ''The  doC- 

trine  of  God  our  Saviour." 

1.  It  sets  forth  its  greatness:  "doctrine  of  God." 

Our  fall,  ruin,  sin,  and  punishment  were  great 
Our  salvation  and  redemption  are  great. 
Our  safety,  happiness,  and  hopes  are  great. 

2.  It  aets  forth  its  certainty.     It  is  "  of  God." 

It  comes  by  revelation  of  God. 

(250) 


GOSPEL  JEWELLEEY. 

It  is  guaranteed  by  the  fidelity  of  God. 

It  is  as  immutable  as  God  himself. 
&  It  sets  forth  its  relation  to  Christ  Jesus :  "  of 
God  our  Saviour." 

He  is  the  author  of  it. 

He  is  the  substance  of  it. 

He  is  the  proclairner  of  it, 

He  is  the  object  of  it.     The  gospel  glorifies 

Jesus. 
4.  It  sets  forth  its  authority. 

The  whole  system  of  revealed  truth  is  of  God. 

The  Saviour  himself  is  God,  and  hence  he 
must  be  accepted. 

The  gospel  itself  is  divine.  God's  mind  is  em 
bodied  in  the  doctrine  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  to  reject  it  is  to  reject  God. 

Let  us  believe,  honor,  defend  and  propagate  this 
44  doctrine  of  God  our  Saviour."  What  else  is  so 
worthy  of  our  love  and  zeal  ? 

II.    A   METHOD   OF   ADORNMENT   FOR   THE   GOSPEL. 

This  is  a  remarkable  verse.     Observe 

1.  The  persons  who  are  to  adorn  the  gospel. 
In  Paul's  day,  bond-servants  or  slaves. 
In  our  day,  poor  servants  of  the  humblest  or 
der. 

Strange  that  these  should  be  set  to  such  a  task ! 

Yet  the  women  slaves  adorned  their  mistresses, 
and  both  men  and  women  of  the  poorest  class  were 
quite  ready  to  adorn  themselves. 


MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

From  none    does  the  gospel  receive  more  honor 
than  from  the  poor. 

2.  The  way  in  which  these  persons  could  specially 

adorn  the  gospel. 

By  obedience  to  their  masters.     Verse  9. 

By  endeavors  to  please  them:  "please  them 
well."  . 

By  restraining  their  tongues :  "  not  answer 
ing  again." 

By  scrupulous  honesty:  "not  purloining," 
verse  10. 

By  trustworthy  character :  "  showing  all  good 
fidelity." 

All  this  would  make  their  masters  admire  the  re 
ligion  of  Jesus. 

3.  The  way  of  adornment  of  the  doctrine  in  gen 

eral. 
Negatively :  it  is  found. 

Not  in  the  decoration  of  the  building,   the 

priest,  the  choir,  or  the  worshippers. 
Nor  in  the  attraction  of  peculiar   garb  and 

speech. 

Nor  in  the  finery  of  philosophical  thought. 
Nor  in  the  tawdriness  of  rhetorical  speech. 
Positively :  it  lies  in  another  direction. 
We  must  adorn  it  by  our  godly  lives. 
Adornment,  if  really  so,  is  suitable  to  beauty. 

Holiness,  mercifulne«»  ^eerfulness,  etc.,  are 

congruous  with  the  gospel. 
Adornment  is  often  a  tribute  to  beauty.     Such  is 

a  godly  conversation :  it  honors  the  gospeL 


GOSPEL   JEWELLERY.  253 

Adornment  is  an  advertisement  of  beauty.  Holi 
ness  calls  attention  to  the  natural  beauty 
of  the  gospel. 

Adornment  is  an  enhancement  of  beauty.  God 
liness  gives  emphasis  to  the  excellence  of 
doctrine. 

Let  us  all  endeavor  to  adorn  the  gospel,  by 
Strict  integrity  in  business. 
Constant  courtesy  of  behavior. 
Unselfish  love  to  all  around  us. 
Quick  forgiveness  of  injuries. 
Abundant  patience  under  trials. 
Holy  calm  and  self-possession  at  all  times. 

GEMS. 

Yes,  and  mark  you,  this  is  to  be  done  not  as  the 
prerogative  of  a  few  grandly  gifted  spirits,  and  on 
some  occasion  which  may  lift  them  proudly  up  to 
the  gaze  of  the  universe.  As  found  in  the  text,  it 
was  of  the  power  of  the  poor  Cretan  slaves  the  apos 
tle  was  writing;  of  their  power,  too,  not  in  some 
tremendous  trial,  as  of  torture  or  martyrdom,  to 
which  the  cruelty  of  their  masters  sometimes  sub 
jected  their  faith,  but  of  their  power  to  do  it  "  in  all 
things  " — in  the  daily,  lowly,  degrading  service  of 
a  menial — in  the  small  things  as  well  as  the  great, 
in  the  squalid  stall  and  fold  as  well  as  in  the  splen 
dor  of  the  palace;  absolutely,  in  "all  things"  to 
adorn  the  glorious  gospel  of  God.  O  blessed  bonds 
men  of  Crete !  going  forth  under  the  lash  and  the 
chain,  yet  with  hearts  of  faith  under  their  burdens, 


364  MY   SERM  OX-NOTES. 

and  smiles  of  love  amid  their  tears,  doing  work  for 
God  impossible  to  an  angel ! 

Charles  Wadsworth,  D.  D. 

We  have  all  heard  the  story  of  the  girl  who  said 
she  had  been  converted,  for  she  now  "  swept  under 
the  mats."  Koba,  an  Indian  warrior,  recently  gave 
evidence  of  his  conversion  by  saying,  "  I  pray  every 
day,  and  hoe  onions."  An  Indian  could  not  give  a 
much  better  evidence  of  his  sincerity  than  that. 
Manual  labor  is  not  the  chief  joy  or  pride  of  an  In 
dian  warrior. 

Fox  says,  "  When  people  came  to  have  experience 
of  Friends'  honesty  and  faithfulness,  and  found  that 
their  yea  was  yea,  and  their  nay  was  nay ;  and  that 
they  kept  to  a  word  in  their  dealings,  and  that  they 
could  not  cozen  and  cheat  them;  but  that  if  they 
sent  a  child  to  their  shops  for  anything  they  were  as 
well  used  as  if  they  had  come  themselves,  the  lives 
and  conversations  of  Friends  did  preach.  All  the 
enquiry  was,  Where  was  a  draper,  or  shopkeeper,  or 
tailor,  or  shoemaker,  or  any  other  tradesman  that 
was  a  Quaker  ?  " 

A  Brahmin  wrote  to  a  missionary :  "  We  are  find 
ing  you  out.  You  are  not  as  good  as  your  Book.  If 
your  people  were  only  as  good  as  your  Book,  you 
would  conquer  India  for  Christ  in  five  years." 

Light  conceits  and  flowers  of  rhetoric  wrong  the 
Word  more  than  they  can  please  the  hearers;  the 
weeds  among  the  corn  make  it  look  gay,  but  it  were 
all  the  better  they  were  not  amongst  it. — Leighton. 


GOSPEL   JEWELLERY.  255 

All  may  of  thee  partake: 

Nothing  can  be  so  mean, 
Which  with  this  tincture  (for  thy  sake) 

Will  not  grow  bright  and  clean. 

A  servant  with  this  clause 

Makes  drudgery  divine: 
Who  sweeps  a  room,  as  for  thy  laws, 

Makes  that  and  th'  action  fine. 

George  Herbert, 


CCXXXIX. 

"  FOR  THE  WORD  OF  GOD  IS  QUICK,  AND  POWERFUL,,  AND 
SHARPER  THAN  ANY  TWO-EDGED  SWORD,  PIERCING  EVEN  TO 
THE  DIVIDING  ASUNDER  OF  SOUL  AND  SPIRIT,  AND  OF  THE 
JOINTS  AND  MARROW,  AND  IS  A  DISCERNER  OF  THE  THOUGHTS 
AND  INTENTS  OF  THE  HEART." — HeT).  iv.  12. 

THE  Word  of  God  is  a  name  for  Christ  as  well  as 
for  the  Scriptures. 

The  Scriptures  are  meant  in  this  place,  but  the 
Lord  Jesus  is  never  dissevered  therefrom :  indeed,  he 
is  the  substance  of  the  written  Word. 

Scripture  is  what  it  is  because  the  Lord  Jesus  em 
bodies  himself  in  it. 

Let  us  consider  from  this  text — 

I.    THE    QUALITIES    OP    THE    WORD. 

1.  It  is  divine.     It  is  the  word  of  God. 

2.  It  is  living.     "  The  word  of  God  is  quick." 

In  contrast  to  our  words,  which  pass  away, 
God's  word  lives  on. 

It  has  life  in  itself.  It  is  "  the  living  and  in 
corruptible  seed." 

It  creates  life  where  it  comes. 

It  can  never  be  destroyed  and  exterminated. 

3.  It  is  effectual.    "  Quick,  and  powerful." 

It  carries  conviction  and  conversion. 
(256) 


THE  SWOED   OF  THE   LOED.  257 

It  works  comfort  and  confirmation. 
It  has  power  to  raise  us  to  great  heights  of 
holiness  and  happiness. 

4.  It  is  cutting,      "  Sharper  than  any  two-edged 

sword." 

It  cuts  all  over.  It  is  all  edge.  It  is  sharp 
ness  itself. 

It  wounds  more  or  less  all  who  touch  it. 

It  kills  self-righteousness,  sin,  unbelief  &c. 

5.  It  is  piercing.     "  Even   to   the  dividing  asun 

der." 

It  forces  its  way  into  the  hard  heart. 
It  penetrates  the  smallest  opening,  like  the 

arrow  which  entered  between  the  joints  of 

the  harness. 

6.  It  is  discriminating.      "  To  the  dividing  asun 

der  of  soul  and  spirit." 

It  separates  things  much  alike:  natural  and 
spiritual  religion. 

It  divides  the  outer  from  the  inner :  external 
and  internal  religion,  "joints  and  marrow." 

It  does  this  by  its  own  penetrating  and  dis 
cerning  qualities. 

7.  It  is  revealing.     "  A  discerner  of  the  thoughts 

and  intents  of  the  heart." 
It  cleaves  the  man  as  the  butcher  cleaves  the 

carcase,  and  opens  up  the  secret  faculties 

and  tendencies  of  the  soul. 
Laying  bare  thoughts,  and  intents,  and  inner 

workings. 
Criticising  them,   and  putting  a  right  esti 

mate  on  them. 
17 


268  MY   SERMO1ST-NOTES. 

Tracing  their  win  dings,  and  showing  their  dii. 

bious  character. 
Approving  that  which  is  good,  and  condemn- 

ing  the  evil. 

All  this  we  have  seen  in  the  preaching  of  the 
Word  of  God. 

Have  you  not  felt  it  to  be  so  ? 

II.  THE  LESSONS  WE  SHOULD  LEARN  THEREFROM. 

That  we  do  greatly  reverence  the  Word,  as 

truly  spoken  of  God. 
That  we  come  to  it  for  quickening  for  our 

own  souls. 
That  we  come  to  it  for  power  when  fighting 

the  battles  of  truth. 
That  we  come  to  it  for  cutting  force  to  kill 

our  own  sins  and  to  help  us  in  destroying 

the  evils  of  the  day. 
That  we  come  to  it  for  piercing  force  when 

men's  consciences  and  hearts  are  hard  to 

reach. 
That  we  use  it  to  the  most  obstinate,  to  arouse 

their  consciences  and  convict  them  of  sin. 
That  we  discriminate  by  its  means  between 

truth  and  falsehood. 
That  we  let  it  criticise  us,  and  our  opinions, 

and  projects,  and  acts,  and  all  about  us. 

Let  us  beep  to  this  Sword  of  the  Lord,  for  none 
other  is  living  and  powerful  as  this  is. 

Let  us  grasp  its  hilt  with  firmer  grip  than  ever. 


THE  SWORD   OF  THE   LOUD.  259 

SHARPENERS. 

All  the  great  conquests  which  Christ  and  his  saints 
achieve  in  this  world  are  got  with  this  sword;  when 
Christ  comes  forth  against  his  enemies,  this  sword  is 
girded  on  his  thigh  (Ps.  xlv.  3):  "  Gird  thy  sword 
upon  thy  thigh,  O  most  mighty '' ;  and  his  victory 
over  them  is  ascribed  to  it  (verse  4),  u  And  in  thy 
majesty  ride  prosperously  because  of  truth  ";  that  is, 
the  word  of  truth. 

We  read  of  Apollos  (Acts  xviii.  28),  that  he 
"mightily  convinced  the  Jews":  he  did,  as  it  were, 
knock  them  down  with  the  weight  of  his  reasoning. 
And  out  of  what  armory  fetched  he  the  sword  with 
which  he  so  prevailed  ?  See  the  same  verse,  "  Show, 
ing  by  the  Scriptures  that  Jesus  was  Christ":  and 
he  therefore  is  said  to  be  "mighty  in  the  Scrip 
tures  "  (ver.  24). 

Bless  God  for  the  efficacy  of  the  word  upon  thy 
soul.  Did  ever  its  point  prick  thy  heart,  its  edge 
fetch  blood  of  thy  lusts?  Bless  God  for  it;  you 
would  do  as  much  to  a  surgeon  for  lancing  a  sore 
and  severing  a  putrified  part  from  thy  body,  though- 
he  put  thee  to  exquisite  torture  in  doing  it.  And 
I  hope  thou  thinkest  God  hath  done  thee  a  great 
kindness.  .  .  .  There  is  not  another  sword  like 
this  in  all  the  world,  that  can  cure  with  cutting;  not 
another  arm  could  use  this  sword,  to  have  done  thus 
with  it,  besides  the  Spirit  of  God.  None  could  do 
such  feats  with  Scanderberg's  as  himself. 

The  word  of  God  is  too  sacred  a  thing,  and 
preaching  too  solemn  a  work,  to  be  toyed  and  play 
ed  with,  as  is  the  usage  of  some,  who  make  a  ser 


260  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

mon  but  matter  of  wit  and  fine  oratory.  If  we 
mean  to  do  good,  we  must  come  unto  men's  hearts, 
not  in  word  only,  but  with  power.  Satan  moves 
not  for  a  thousand  squibs  and  wit-cracks  of  rhetoric. 
Draw,  therefore,  this  sword  out  of  your  scabbard, 
and  strike  with  its  naked  edge ;  this,  you  will  find, 
the  only  way  to  pierce  your  people's  consciences, 
and  fetch  blood  of  their  sins.  —  WiUiain  Gurnatt. 

When  the  heathen  saw  the  converts  reading  the 
book  which  had  produced  the  change,  they  enquired 
if  they  talked  to  it.  "  No,"  they  answered,  "  it 
talks  to  us;  for  it  is  the  Word  of  God."  "What 
then !"  replied  the  strangers,  "  does  it  speak  ?" 
"Yes,"  rejoined  the  Christians,  "it  speaks  to  the 
heart."— Life  of  Mo/at 

Miss  Whateley  says,  "  To  rouse  the  torpid  and  un- 
exercised  mind  of  a  Moslem  woman  is  wonderful, 
for  they  are  sunk  in  ignorance  and  degradation; 
but  while  I  was  reading  to  one  of  them  a  few  weeks 
ago,  she  exclaimed,  '  Why,  it  is  just  as  if  I  were  out 
in  the  dark  and  you  held  a  lamp  to  me,  that  I  might 
see  my  way.' " 

The  Rev.  James  Wall,  of  Rome,  relates  the 
following  instances  of  conversion  through  the 
reading  of  the  Scriptures: — One  of  the  converts, 
when  first  presented  with  a  New  Testament,  said, 
"  Very  well ;  it  is  the  very  size  for  me  to  make  my 
cigarettes,"  and  so  he  began  to  smoke  it  away.  He 
smoked  away  all  the  Evangelists,  till  he  was  at  the 
tenth  Chapter  of  John,  when  it  struck  him  that  he 


THE  SWOED   OF   THE  LOED.  261 

must  read  a  bit  of  it,  for  if  lie  didn't  there  would 
soon  be  no  more  left  to  read.  The  first  word  struck 
home,  and  the  man  read  himself  into  Christ. 

A  secret  society  of  political  conspirators,  who 
sought  to  achieve  their  purposes  by  assassination, 
were  in  the  habit  of  placing  a  Bible  (as  a  blind)  on 
the  table  of  the  room  where  they  met  for  delibera 
tion  ;  and  one  night,  when  there  happened  to  be  little 
business  to  transact,  and  they  were  all  rather  sleepy, 
a  member  of  the  society  opened  the  Bible,  and  saw 
a  verse  that  went  right  to  his  heart.  He  soon  re 
turned  to  the  book,  and  read  more  of  it ;  and  now  he 
was  a  very  earnest  follower  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Missionary  Herald. 


CCXL. 

ft  LET  US  THEREFORE  COME  BOLDLY  UNTO  THE  THRONE  OP 
GRACE,  THAT  WE  MAY  OBTAIN  MERCY,  AND  FIND  GRACE  TO 
HELP  IN  TIME  OF  NEED."— Heb.  iv.  16. 

PRAYER  occupies  a  most  important  place  in  the 
life  of  the  Christian. 

His  vigor,  happiness,  growth,  and  usefulness  de 
pend  thereon. 

In  scripture  the  utmost  encouragements  are  held 
out  to  prayer. 

This  verse  is  one  of  the  sweetest  of  invitations  to 
prayer. 

I.  HERB     is     OUR    GREAT     RESORT     DESCRIBED: — "The 
throne  of  grace." 

Once    it  was  called  "  the  mercy  -seat"  but    now 
'the  throne." 
In  drawing  near  to  God  in  prayer,  we  come — 

1.  To  God  as  a  King,  with  reverence,  confidence, 

and  submission. 

2.  To  one  who  gives  as  a  King:  therefore  we  ask 

largely  and  expectantly.     He  has  riches  of 
grace  and  power. 

3.  To  one  who  sits  upon  a  throne  "  of  grace,"  on 

purpose  to  dispense  grace.     It  is  his  design, 
his  object  in  displaying  himself  as  King. 
(262) 


BOLDNESS   AT  THE   THRONE.  263 

4.  To   one  who  in  hearing  prayer  is   enthroned 

and  glorified.     Grace  is  at  its  utmost  when 
believers  pray:  it  is  grace  on  the  throne. 

5.  To  one  who  even  in  hearing  prayer  acts  as  a 

sovereign,  but  whose  sovereignty  is   all  of 

grace. 

To  the  throne  of  the  great  God  poor  sinners  are 
invited  to  come.  Oh,  the  privilege  of  having 
audience  with  the  King  of  Grace  ! 

II.  HERE  is  A  LOVING  EXHORTATION: — "  Let  us  come." 

It  is  the  voice  of  one  who  goes  with  us.  It  is  an 
invitation — 

1.  From  Paul,  a  man  like  ourselves,  but  an  ex 

perienced    believer,    who    had  much  tried 
the  power  of  prayer. 

2.  From  the  whole  church  speaking  in  him. 

3.  From  the  Holy  Spirit ;  for  the  apostle  spoke  by 

inspiration.     The    Spirit,   making  interces 
sion  in  us,  says,  "  Let  us  come." 

Let  us  not  be  indifferent  to  this  sympathetic  call 
At  once  let  us  draw  near  to  God. 

Ill  HERE  is  A  QUALIFYING  ADVERB: — "Let  us  come 
boldly." 

Not  proudly,  presumptuously,  nor  with  the  tone 
of  demand,  for  it  is  the  throne;  yet  "  boldly,"  for  it 
is  the  throne  of  grace. 

By  this  adverb,  "  boldly,"  is  meant — 

1.  We  may  come  constantly,  at  all 

2.  We  may  come  unreservedly,  with  all  sorts  of 

petitions. 


264  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  We  may  come  freely,  with  simple  words. 

4.  We  may   come  hopefully,  with  full  confidence 

of  being  heard. 

5.  We  may  come   fervently,  with  importunity  of 

pleading. 

IV.  HERE  is  A  REASON  GIVEN  FOR  BOLDNESS: — "Let  us 
therefore  come/' 

1.  "  That  we  may  obtain  mercy,  and  find  grace:  " 

not  that    we  may    utter  good  words;  but 

may  actually  obtain  blessings. 
We  may   come  when  we  need  great  mercy, 

because  of  our  sin. 

We   may  come  when  we  have  little  grace. 
We  may  come  when  we  are  in  great  need  of 

more  grace. 

2.  There  are   many  other  reasons  for  coming  at 

once,  and  boldly. 
Our  character  may  urge  us.     We  are  invited 

to  come   for  "  mercy,"  and  therefore  unde 
serving  sinners  may  come. 
The  character  of  God  encourages  us  to  be  bold. 
Our  relation  to  him  as  children  gives  us  great 

freedom. 
The  Holy  Spirit's  guidance  draws  us  near  the 

throne. 
The   promises  invite  us  by  their   greatness, 

freeness,  sureness,  &c. 
Christ  is  already  given  to  us,   and  therefore 

God  will  deny  us  nothing. 
Our  former  successes  at  the  throne  give  us 

solid  confidence. 


BOLDNESS  AT  THE  THKONE.  265 

3.  The  great  reason  of  all  for  bold  approach  is  in 
Jesus. 

He  once  was  slain,  and  the  mercy-seat  is 
sprinkled  with  his  blood. 

He  is  risen  and  has  justified  us  by  his  right 
eousness. 

He  has  ascended  and  taken  possession  of  all 
covenant  blessings  on  our  behalf.  Let  us 
ask  for  that  which  is  our  own. 

He  is  sympathetic,  tender,  and  careful  for  us; 
we  miJLst  be  heard. 

Let  us  come  to  the  throne,  when  we  are  sinful,  to 
find  mercy. 

Let  us  come  to  the  throne,  when  we  are  weak,  to 
find  help. 

Let  us  come  to  the  throne,  when  we  are  tempted, 
to  find  grace. 

EXPOSITIONS. 

When  God  enacts  laws,  he  is  on  a  throne  of  legis 
lation  :  when  he  administers  these  laws,  he  is  on  a 
throne  of  government:  when  he  tries  his  creatures 
by  these  laws,  he  is  on  a  throne  of  judgment:  but 
when  he  receives  petitions,  and  dispenses  favors,  he 
is  on  a  throne  of  grace. 

The  idea  of  a  throne  inspires  awe,  bordering  upon 
terror.  It  repels  rather  than  invites.  Few  of  us 
could  approach  it  without  trembling.  But  what  is 
the  throne  of  the  greatest  earthly  monarch  that  ever 
swayed  a  sceptre  ?  The  God  we  address  is  the  King 
of  kings.  In  his  eye  an  Alexander  is  a  worm ;  yea, 


266  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

all  nations  before  him  are  less  than  nothing  and 
vanity.  How  can  we  approach  his  infinite  majesty? 
Blessed  be  his  name,  he  is  on  a  throne  of  grace ;  and 
we  are  allowed,  and  even  commanded,  to  come  to  it 
bddbj. —  William  Jay. 

It  is  styled  a  throne  of  grace,  because  God's  gra 
cious  and  free  favor  doth  there  accompany  his  glori 
ous  majesty.  Majesty  and  mercy  do  there  meet  to 
gether.  This  was,  under  the  law,  typified  by  the 
ark.  At  each  end  thereof  was  an  angel,  to  set  forth 
God's  glorious  majesty.  The  cover  of  it  is  styled  a 
'•mercy-seat":  Exodus xxv.  17,  18. —  William  Gouge. 

A  holy  boldness,  a  chastened  familiarity,  is  the 
true  spirit  of  right  prayer.  It  was  said  of  Luther 
that,  when  he  prayed,  it  was  with  as  much  rever 
ence  as  if  he  were  praying  to  an  infinite  God,  and 
with  as  much  familiarity  as  if  he  were  speaking  to 
his  nearest  friend. —  G.  S.  Bowes. 

This  word  boldly  signifies  liberty  without  restraint. 
You  may  be  free,  for  you  are  welcome.  You  may 
use  freedom  of  speech.  The  word  is  so  used,  Acts 
ii.  29,  and  iv.  13.  You  have  liberty  to  speak  your 
minds  freely;  to  speak  all  your  heart,  your  ails,  and 
wants,  and  fears,  and  grievances.  As  others  may 
not  fetter  you  in  speaking  to  God  by  prescribing 
what  words  you  should  use ;  so  you  need  not  restrain 
yourselves,  but  freely  speak  all  that  your  condition 
requires.  -David  Clarkson. 

A  petitioner  once  approached  Augustus  with  so 
much  fear  and  trembling  that  the  emperor  cried, 


BOLDNESS   AT  THE  THRONE.  267 

"  What,  man  !  do  you  think  you  are  giving  a  sop  tc 
an  elephant?"  He  did  not  care  to  be  thought  a 
hard  and  cruel  ruler.  When  men  pray  with  a  slav 
ish  bondage  upon  them,  with  cold,  set  phrases,  and 
a  crouching  solemnity,  the  free  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
may  well  rebuke  them.  Art  thou  coming  to  a  ty 
rant  ?  Holy  boldness,  or  at  least  a  childlike  hope, 
is  most  becoming  in  a  Christian. 

Obtaining  mercy  comes  first;  then  finding  grace 
to  help  in  time  of  need.  You  cannot  reverse  God's 
order.  You  will  not  find  grace  to  help  in  time  of 
need  till  you  have  sought  and  found  mercy  to  save. 
You  have  no  right  to  reckon  on  God's  help  arid  pro 
tection  and  guidance,  and  all  the  other  splendid 
privileges  which  he  promises  to  "  the  children  of 
God  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,"  until  you  have  this 
first  blessing,  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus;  for 
it  is  "  in  "  Jesus  Christ  that  all  the  promises  of  God 
are  yea  and  Amen. — F.  R.  HavergaL 


CCXLI 

''  WHO    CAN    HAVE    COMPASSION    ON    THE    IGNORANT,    AND  ON 
THEM   THAT  ARE   OUT   OF   THE   WAY." — Heb.  V.  2. 

MEN  who  are  ignorant  should  not  be  met  with 
scorn,  nor  fault-finding,  nor  neglect,  for  they 
need  compassion. 

We  should  lay  ourselves  out  to  bear  with  such  for 
their  good 

A  disciple  who  has  been  taught  all  that  he  knows 
by  a  gracious  Saviour,  should  have  compassion  on 
"  the  ignorant." 

A  wanderer  who  has  been  restored  should  have 
compassion  on  "them  that  are  out  of  the  way." 

A  priest  should  have  compassion  on  the  people 
with  whom  he  is  one  flesh  and  blood,  and  assuredly 
our  Lord,  who  is  our  great  High  Priest,  has  abun 
dant  compassion  upon  the  ignorant. 

Let  us  think  of  his  great  pity  towards  them. 

I.  WHAT  is  THIS  IGNORANCE? 

It  is  moral  and  spiritual,  and  deals  with  eternal 
things. 

1.  It  is  fearfully  common  among  all  ranks. 

2.  It  leaves  them  strangers  to  themselves. 

They  know  not  their  own  ignorance. 
They  are  unaware  of  the  heart's  depravity. 
(268) 


COMPASSION   ON   THE  IGNOKANT.  269 

They  are  unconscious  of  the  heinousness  of 

their  actual  sin. 
They  dream  not  of  their  present  and  eternal 

danger. 
They  have  not  discovered  their  inability  for 

all  that  is  good. 

3.  It  leaves  them  unacquainted  with  the  way  of 

salvation. 

They  choose  other  ways. 
They  have  a  mixed  and  injurious  notion  of 

the  one  way. 
They  often  question  and  cavil  at  this  one  and 

only  way. 

4.  It  leaves  them  without  the  knowledge  of  Jesus. 

They  know  not  his  person,  his  offices,  his 
work,  his  character,  his  ability,  his  readi 
ness  to  save  them. 

5.  It  leaves  them  strangers  to  the  Holy  Spirit. 

They  perceive  not  his  inward  strivings. 

They  are  ignorant  of  regeneration. 

They  cannot  comprehend  the  truth  which  he 

teaches. 
They  cannot  receive  his  sanctification. 

6.  It  is  most  ruinous  in  its  consequences. 

It  keeps  men  out  of  Christ. 
It    does  not  excuse  them  when  it  is  wilful,  as 
it  usually  is. 

II.  WHAT  is  THERE  IN  THIS  IGNORANCE    WHICH  is  LIABLE 

TO   PROVOKE   US,    AND   THEREFORE   DEMANDS   COMPAS 
SION  ? 

1.  Its  folly.     Wisdom  is  worried  with  the  absurdi 
ties  of  ignorance. 


270  MY    SERMON-NOTES. 

2.  Its  pride.     Anger  is  excited  by  the  vanity  of 

self-conceit. 

3.  Its  prejudice.     It  will  not  hear  nor  learn ;  and 

this  is  vexatious. 

4.  Its  obstinacy.     It  refuses  reason;  and   this  is 

very  exasperating 

5.  Its  opposition.     It  contends  against  plain  truth, 

and  this  is  trying. 

6.  Its  density.     It  cannot  be   enlightened:  it   is 

profoundly  foolish. 

7.  Its  unbelief    Witnesses  to  divine  truth,  are  de 

nied  credence. 

8.  Its  wilfnlness.     It  chooses  not  to  know.     It  is 

hard  teaching  such. 

9.  Its  relapses.     It  returns  to  folly,  forgets  and  re 

fuses  wisdom,   and  this  is  a  sore  affliction  to 
true  love 

III.  How    OUR   LORD'S    COMPASSION    TOWARDS   THB   IGNO 
RANT  is  SHOWN.     "  He  can  have  compassion 
on  the  ignorant." 
This  he  clearly  shows — 

1.  By  offering  to  teach  them. 

2.  By  actually  receiving  them  as  disciples. 

3.  By  instructing  them  little  by  little,  most  conde 

scendingly. 

4.  By  teaching  them  the  same  things  over  again, 

patiently. 

5.  By    never     despising    them,    notwithstanding 

their  dulness. 

6.  By  never  casting  them  off  through  weariness  of 

their  stupidity. 


COMPASSION   ON   THE  IGNORANT.  271 

To  such  a  compassionate  Lord  let  us  come,  igno 
rant  as  we  are. 

For  such  a  compassionate  Lord  let  us  labor  among 
the  most  ignorant,  and  never  cease  to  pity  them. 

NOTES. 

It  is  a  sad  thing  for  the  blind  man  who  has  to 
read  the  raised  type  when  the  tips  of  his  fingers  har 
den,  for  then  he  cannot  read  the  thoughts  of  men 
which  stand  out  upon  the  page ;  but  it  is  far  worse 
to  lose  sensibility  of  soul,  for  then  you  cannot  pe 
ruse  the  book  of  human  nature,  but  must  remain  un 
taught  in  the  sacred  literature  of  the  heart.  You 
have  heard  of  the  "  iron  duke,"  but  an  iron  Chris 
tian  would  be  a  very  terrible  person:  a  heart  of 
flesh  is  the  gift  of  divine  grace,  and  one  of  its  sure 
results  is  the  power  to  be  very  pitiful,  tender,  and 
full  of  compassion . — C.  H.  S. 

Ignorance  is  the  devil's  college. — Christmas  Evans. 

What  the  Papists  cry  up  as  the  mother  of  devotion, 
we  cry  down  as  the  father  of  superstition. —  William 
Seeker. 

That  there  should  one  man  die  ignorant  who 
had  capacity  for  knowledge,  this  I  call  a  tragedy. 
Were  it  to  happen  more  than  twenty  times  in  the 
minute,  as  by  some  computations  it  does,  what  a 
line  of  tragedies ! 

The  miserable  fraction  of  science  which  our  united 
mankind,  in  a  wide  universe  of  nescience,  has  ac- 


272  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

quired,  why  is  not  this,  with  all  diligence,  imparted 
to  all  ? — Thomas  Cartyle. 

Utter  ignorance  is  a  most  effectual  fortification  to 
a  bad  state  of  the  mind.  Prejudice  may  perhaps  be 
removed ;  unbelief  may  be  reasoned  with ;  even  de 
moniacs  have  been  compelled  to  bear  witness  to  the 
truth;  but  the  stupidity  of  confirmed  ignorance  not 
only  defeats  the  ultimate  efficacy  of  the  means  for 
making  men  wiser  and  better,  but  stands  in  prelimi 
nary  defiance  to  the  very  act  of  their  application. 
It  reminds  us  of  an  account,  in  one  of  the  relations 
of  the  French  Egyptian  Campaigns,  of  the  attempt 
to  reduce  a  garrison  posted  in  a  bulky  fort  of  mud. 
Had  the  defences  been  of  timber,  the  besiegers  might 
have  set  fire  to  and  burnt  them ;  had  they  been  of 
stone,  they  might  have  shaken  and  ultimately 
breached  them  by  the  battery  of  their  cannon,  or 
they  might  have  undermined  and  blown  them  up. 
But  the  huge  mound  of  mud  had  nothing  suscepti 
ble  of  fire  or  any  other  force ;  the  missiles  from  the 
artillery  were  discharged  but  to  be  buried  in  the 
dull  mass;  and  all  the  means  of  demolition  were  baf 
fled. — John  Foster. 

In  Eyesight,  Good  and  Bod,  by  Dr.  E.  B.  Carter,  the 
writer  says,  "Nothing  is  more  common  than  for  de 
fective  sight  to  be  punished  as  obstinacy  or  stupidi 
ty.  For  my  own  part,  I  have  long  learned  to  look 
upon  obstinate  and  stupid  children  as  mainly  artifi 
cial  productions,  and  shall  not  readily  forget  the 
pleasure  with  which  I  heard  from  the  master  of  the 


COMPASSION   ON  THE  IGNOEANT.  273 

great  elementary  school  at  Edinburgh,  where  twelve 
hundred  children  attend  daily,  that  his  fundamental 
principle  of  management  was  that  there  was  no 
naughty  boys  and  no  boobies." 

I  used  to  reproach  myself  for  religious  stupidity 
when  I  was  not  well;  but  I  see  now  that  God  is  my 
kind  Father,  not  my  hard  taskmaster,  expecting  me 
to  be  full  of  life  and  zeal  when  physically  exhausted. 
It  takes  long  to  learn  such  lessons.  One  has  to  pen 
etrate  deeply  into  the  heart  of  Christ  to  begin  to 
know  its  tenderness  and  sympathy  and  forbearance. 

The  love  of  Jesus — what  it  is 
Only  His  sufferers  know. 

Elizabeth  Prentist, 


CCXLII. 

"  THOUGH  HE  WEEK  A  SON,  YET  LEARNED  HE  OBEDIENCE  BY 
THE  THINGS  WHICH  HE  SUFFERED." — Heb.  V.  8. 

IT  is  always  consoling  to  us  to  behold  the  footsteps 
of  our  Lord. 

When  we  see  him  tried,  we  cheerfully  submit  to 
the  like  trial. 

When  we  perceive  that  in  his  case  an  exception 
to  the  rule  of  chastening  might  have  been  expected, 
and  yet  none  was  made,  we  are  encouraged  to  bear 
our  sufferings  patiently. 

When  we  see  the  great  Elder  Brother  put  to  more 
rather  than  less  of  trial,  we  are  fully  drawn  to  obey 
the  will  of  God  by  submission. 

I.    SONSHIP    DOES    NOT    EXEMPT    PROM    SUFFERING. 

1.  Not  even  Jesus,  as  a  Son,  escaped  suffering. 

He  was  the  Son,  peculiarly,  and  above  all 
others. 

He  was  the  honored  and  beloved  first-born. 

He  was  the  faithful  and  sinless  Son. 

He  was  soon  to  be  the  glorified  Son  in  an  em 
inent  sense. 

2.  No  honor  put  upon  the  sons  of  God  will  ex 

empt  them  from  suffering. 
(274) 


THE   EDUCATION   OF   SOXS   OF   GOD.  275 

3.  No  holiness  of  character,  nor  completeness  of 

obedience  can  exempt  the  children  of  God 
from  the  school  of  suffering. 

4.  No  prayer  of  God's  sons,  however  earnest,  will 

remove  every  thorn  in  the  flesh  from  them. 

5.  No  love  in  God's  child,  however  fervent,  will 

prevent  his  being  tried. 

The  love  and  wisdom  of  God  ensure  the  discipline 
of  the  house  for  all  the  heirs  of  heaven  without  a 
single  exception. 

II.  SUFFERING  DOES  NOT  MAR  SONSHIP. 

The  case  of  our  Lord  is  set  forth  as  a  model  for  all 
the  sons  of  God. 

1.  His  poverty  did  not  disprove  his  Sonship.  Luke 

ii.  12. 

2.  His  temptations   did   not   shake  his   Sonship. 

Matt.  iv.  3. 

3.  His  endurance  of  slander  did  not  jeopardize  it 

John  x.  36. 
4  His  fear  and  sorrow  did  not  put  it  in  dispute. 

Matt.  XXVL  39. 
5,,  His   desertion  by  men    did  not  invalidate  il 

John  xvi.  32. 

6.  His  being  forsaken  of  God   did   not  alter  it. 

Luke  xxiii.  46. 

7.  His  death  cast  no  doubt  thereon.     Mark  xv.  39. 

He  arose  again,  and  thus  proved  his  Fa 
ther's  pleasure  in  him,     John  xx.  17. 

Never  was  there  a  truer,  or  lovelier,  or  more  be^ 
loved  Son,  than  the  chief  of  all  sufferers,  "  A  man 
of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief." 


276  MY  SERMON-NOTES, 

III.  OBEDIENCE  HAS  TO  BE  LEARNED  EVEN  BY  SONS. 

Even  he  in  whom  there  was  no  natural  depravity, 
but  perfect,  inherent  purity,  had  to  learn  obedienca 

1.  It  must  be  learned  experimentally. 

What  is  to  be  done  and  suffered  can  only  be 

learned  in  the  actual  exercise  of  obedience. 

How  it  is  done  must  be  discovered  by  practice. 

The  actual  doing  of  it  is  only  possible  in  trial. 

2.  Jt  must  be  learned  by  suffering. 

Not  by  words  from  the  most  instructive  of 

teachers. 

Nor   by  observation  of  the    lives  of  others, 
Nor  even  by  perpetual  activity  on  our  own 
part.     This   might   make  us   fussy   rather 
than  obedient :  we  must  suffer. 

3.  It  must  be  learned   for  use  in  earth   and  in 

heaven. 

On  earth  by  sympathy  with  others. 
In  heaven  by  perfect  praise  to  God  growing 

out  of  experience. 

IV.  SUFFERING   HAS  A   PECULIAR  POWER   TO  TEACH   TRUE 

SONS. 

It  is  a  better  tutor  than  all  else,  because— 

1.  It  touches  the  man's  self;  his  bone,  his  flesh, 

his  heart, 

2.  It  tests  his  graces,  and  sweeps  away  those  shams 

which  are  not  proofs  of  obedience,  but  pre 
tences  of  self-will. 

3.  It  goes  to  the  root,  and  tests  the  truth  of  our 

new  nature.     It  shows  whether  repentance, 


THE  EDUCATION   OF  SONS   OF  GOD.  277 

faith,  prayer,  etc.,  are  mere  importations,  or 
home-grown  fruits,, 

4.  It  tests  our  endurance,  and  makes  us  see  how 
far  we  are  established  in  the  obedience 
which  we  think  we  possess.  Can  we  say, 
"  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  in 
him  "  ? 

The  anxious  question — Am  I  a  son? 

The  aspiring  desire — Let  me  learn  obedience. 

The  accepted  discipline — I  submit  to  suffer. 

BLOSSOMINGS  OP  THE  ROD. 

Corrections  are  pledges  of  our  adoption,  and  badges 
of  our  sonship.  One  Son  God  hath  without  sin,  but 
none  without  sorrow.  As  God  corrects  none  but  his 
own,  so  all  that  are  his  shall  be  sure  to  have  it;  and 
they  shall  take  it  for  a  favor  too.  1  Cor.  xi.  32. 

John  Trapp. 

1  bear  my  willing  witness  that  I  owe  more  to  the 
fire,  and  the  hammer,  and  the  file,  than  to  anything 
else  in  my  Lord's  workshop.  I  sometimes  question 
whether  I  have  ever  learned  anything  except  through 
the  rod.  When  my  school-room  is  darkened,  I  see 
most— C.  H.  S. 

If  aught  can  teach  us  aught,  Affliction's  looks, 
Making  us  look  unto  ourselves  so  near, 

Teach  us  to  know  ourselves  beyond  all  books, 
Or  all  the  learned  schools  that  ever  were. 

This  mistress  lately  pluck'd  me  by  the  ear, 
And  many  a  golden  lesson  hath  me  taught ; 

Hath  made  my  senses  quick,  and  reason  clear 
Keform'd  my  will,  and  rectified  my  thought. 

Sir  John  Daviee. 


278  MY   SKKMONOsOTib 

"  I  never,"  said  Luther,  "  knew  the  meaning  of 
God's  word,  until  I  came  into  affliction.  I  have  al 
ways  found  it  one  of  ray  best  school-masters/'  On 
another  occasion,  referring  to  some  spiritual  tempta 
tion  on  the  morning  of  the  preceding  day,  he  said  to 
a  friend  (Justin  Jonas),  "  Doctor,  I  must  mark  the 
day;  I  was  yesterday  at  school."  In  one  of  his  works, 
he  most  accurately  calls  affliction  "  the  theology  of 
Christians" — "Theologium  Christianorum,"  "I  have 
learned  more  divinity,"  said  Dr.  Rivet,  confessing  to 
God  of  his  last  days  of  affliction — "  in  these  ten  days 
that  thou  art  come  to  visit  me,  than  I  did  in  fifty 
years  before.  Thou  teachest  me  after  a  better  man 
ner  than  all  those  doctors,  in  reading  whom  I  spent 
so  much  time." — Charles  Bridges, 

A  minister  was  recovering  from  a  dangerous  ill 
ness,  when  one  of  his  friends  addressed  him  thus: 
"  Sir,  though  God  seems  to  be  bringing  you  up  from 
the  gates  of  death,  yet  it  will  be  a  long  time  before 
you  will  sufficiently  retrieve  your  strength,  and  re 
gain  vigor  enough  of  mind  to  preach  as  usual,"  The 
good  man  answered:  "  You  are  mistaken,  my  friend, 
for  this  six  weeks'  illness  has  taught  me  more  divin 
ity  than  all  my  past  studies  and  all  my  ten  years' 
ministry  put  together." — New  Cyclopedia  of  Anecdote. 

Not  to  be  unhappy  is  unhappinesa, 
And  misery  not  to  have  known  misery , 
For  the  best  way  unto  discretion  is 
The  way  that  leads  us  by  adversity  t 
And  men  are  better  showed  what  is  amiss 
By  the  expert  linger  of  calamity 
Than  they  can  be  with  all  that  fortune  brings, 
Who  never  shows  them  the  true  face  of  tilings 

Samuel  Daniel, 


CCXLIII. 

"  HE   TAKETH   AWAY  THE   FIRST     THAT  HE   MAY  ESTABLISH  THE 
SECOND." — Heb.  X.  9. 

THE  way  of  God  is  to  go  from  good  to  better. 
This  excites  growing  wonder  and  gratitude, 
This  makes  men   desire,   and  pray,   and  believe, 
and  expect. 

This  aids  man  in  his  capacity  to  receive  the  best 
things. 

The  first  good  thing  is  removed,  that  the  second 
may  the  more  fitly  come. 

Upon  this  last  fact  we  will  meditate,  noticing — 

I.  THE  GRAND  INSTANCE.  First  came  the  Jewish  sacri 
fices,  and  then  came  Jesus  to  do  the  will  of 
God. 

1.  The  removal  of  instructive  arid  consoling  or 
dinances. 

While  they  lasted  they  were  of  great  value,  and 
they  were  removed  because,  when  Jesus  came — 
They  were  needless  as  types. 
They  would  have  proved  burdensome  as  ser. 

vices. 

They  might  have  been  dangerous  as  tempta 
tions  to  formalism 

(279-) 


280  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

They  would  have  taken  off  the  mind  from  the 
substance  which  they  had  formerly  shadow 
ed  forth. 

2.  The  establishment  of  the  real,  perfect,  everlast 
ing  atonement. 
This  is  a  blessed  advance;  for 

No  one  who  sees  Jesus  regrets  Aaron. 
No  one  who  knows  the  simplicity  of  the  gos 
pel  wishes  to  be  brought  under  the  perplex 
ities  of  the  ceremonial  law. 
No  one  who  feels  the  libert^y  of  Zion  desires 

to  return  to  the  bondage  of  Sinai. 
Beware  of  setting  up  any  other  ordinances;  for 
this  would  be  to  build  again  what  God  has   cast 
down ;  if  not  to  do  even  worse. 

Beware  of  imagining  that  the  second  can  fail  as 
the  first  did.  The  one  was  "  taken  away  " ;  but  the 
other  is  established  by  God  himself. 

II.  INSTANCES  IN  HISTORY.     These   are   many.       Here 
are  a  few — 

1.  The  earthly  paradise  has  been  taken  away  by 

sin;  but  the  Lord  has  given  us  salvation  in 
Christ,  and  heaven. 

2.  The  first  man  has  failed;   behold  the   Second 

Adam. 

3.  The  first  covenant  is   broken,  and  the  second 

gloriously  takes  its  place. 

4.  The  first  temple,  with  its  transient  glories,  has 

melted  away;  but  the  second  and  spiritual 
house  rises  beneath  the  eye  and  hand  of  the 
Great  Architect. 


THE  FIRST  AND   THE   SECOND.  381 

[II.  INSTANCES  IN  EXPERIENCE. 

1.  Our  first  righteousness  is  taken  away  by  con 

viction  of  sin;  but  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
is  established. 

2.  Our  first  peace  has  been  blown  down  as  a  tot 

tering  fence ;  but  we  shelter  in  the  Rock  of 
Ages. 

3.  Our  first  strength  has  proved  worse  than  weak 

ness;  but  the  Lord  is  our  strength  and  our 
song,  he  also  has  become  our  salvation. 

4.  Our  first  guidance  led  us  into  darkness ;  now 

we  give  up  self,  superstition,  and  philosophy, 
and  trust  in  the  Spirit  of  our  God. 

5.  Our  first  joy  died  out  like  thorns  which  crackle 

under  a  pot;  but  now  we  joy  in  God. 

[V.  INSTANCES  TO  BE  EXPECTED. 

1.  Our  body  decaying  shall  be  renewed  in  the  im 

age  of  our  risen  Lord. 

2.  Our  earth  passing  away,  and  its  elements  being 

dissolved,  there  shall  be  new  heavens  and  a 
new  earth. 

3.  Our  family  removed,  one  by  one,  we  shall  be 

charmed  by  the  grand  reunion  in  the  Father's 
house  above. 

4.  Our  all  being  taken  away,   we  find  more  than 

all  in  God. 

5.  Our  life  ebbing  out,  the  eternal  life  comes  roll 

ing  up  in  a  full  tide  of  glory. 

Ler  us  not  grieve  at  the  taking  away  of  the  first. 
Let  us  expect  the  establishment  of  the  second. 


382  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

MELIORA. 

The  Law  is  a  Gospel  pre-figured,  and  the  Gospel  a 
Law  consummated. — Bishop  Hall. 

The  sin-destroyer  being  come,  we  are  no  longer 
under  the  sin-revealer. — Martin  Boos. 

No  need  of  prophets  to  inquire  : 
The  Sun  is  risen—  the  stars  retire  : 
The  Comforter  is  come,  and  sheds 
His  holy  unction  on  our  heads. 

Josiah  Gander. 

When  Alexander  went  upon  a  hopeful  expedition, 
he  gave  away  his  gold;  and  when  he  was  asked 
what  he  kept  for  himself,  he  answered,  "  Spem  ma- 
jorum  et  meliorum  " — the  hope  of  greater  and  bettor 
things.  ...  A  Christian's  motto  always  is,  or 
always  should  be,  Spero  meliora — I  hope  for  better 
things.  — Thomas  Brooks,  in  "  The  Best  Things  reserv 
ed  tiU  Last" 

On  a  cold,  windy  March  day,  a  gentleman  stopped 
at  an  apple-stand,  whose  proprietor  was  a  rough- 
looking  Italian.  He  alluded  to  the  severe  weather, 
when,  with  a  cheerful  smile  and  tone,  the  Italian  re 
plied:  4'Yes,  pretty  cold;  but  by-and-by — tink  of 
dat ! "  In  other  words,  the  time  of  warm  skies, 
flowers,  and  songs,  was  near,  and  was  to  be  thought 
o£  The  humble  vendor  little  thought  of  the  impres 
sion  made  by  his  few  words.  "Bv-and-by—  think 
of  that!" 

The  Jewish  rabbins  report  (how  truly  is  uncer 
tain)  that  when  Joseph,  in  the  times  of  plenty,  had 


THE   FIRST    AND   THE   SECOND.  283 

gathered  much  corn  in  Egypt,  he  threw  the  chaff 
into  the  river  Nile,  that  so,  flowing  to  the  neighbor 
ing  cities  and  nations  more  remote,  they  might 
know  what  abundance  was  laid  up,  not  for  them 
selves  alone,  but  for  others  also.  So  God,  in  his  abun 
dant  goodness,  to  make  us  know  what  glory  there  is 
in  heaven,  hath  thrown  some  husks  to  us  here  in 
this  world,  that  so,  tasting  the  sweetness  thereof,  we 
might  aspire  to  his  bounty  that  is  above,  and  draw 
out  this  happy  conclusion  to  the  great  comfort  of 
our  precious  souls — that  if  a  little  earthly  glory  do 
so  much  amaze  us,  what  will  the  heavenly  do  ?  If 
there  be  such  glory  iu  God's  footstool,  what  is  there 
in  his  throne  ?  If  he  give  us  so  much  in  the  land 
of  our  pilgrimage,  what  will  he  not  give  us  in  our 
own  country?  If  he  bestoweth  so  much  on  his  ene 
mies,  what  will  he  not  give  to  his  friends  ? — John 
Spencer. 

There  are  certain  words  which,  occurring  frequent 
ly,  are  like  a  bunch  of  keys,  and  enable  us  to  unlock 
the  treasures  in  this  epistle.  Such  a  key  is  "  better"  ; 
and  we  find  the  Lord  Jesus  described  as  being  better 
than  angels  (i.  4;  illustrated  in  John  v.  4 — 6),  bet 
ter  than  Moses  (iii.),  Joshua  (iv.),  arid  Aaron  (vii.); 
his  blood  speaking  better  things  than  that  of  Abel 
(xii.  24);  himself  the  Surety  of  a  better  testament, 
established  upon  better  promises  (vii.  22;  viii.  6). 
The  old  covenant  based  upon  man's  promise  (Exod. 
xix.  8;  xxiv.  7,  8)  was  broken  irx  forty  days;  but 
the  performance  by  the  Son  of  God  was  the  founda 
tion  of  the  better  covenant  'kThe  two  tables  of  the 


284  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

testimony  were  in  the  hand  of  Moses  "  (Exod.  xxxii 
15;  Gal.  Hi.  19),  but  God's  law  is  within  the  heart 
of  our  Surety  (Ps.  xl.  8;  compare  Deut.  x.  1,  2). 
That  word  was  spoken  by  angels  (Heb.  ii.  2;  Acts 
vii.  53) ;  but  this  by  him  who  is  "  so  much  better  than 
angels." — E.  A.  H.  (Mrs.  Gordon). 


CCXLIV. 

"  AND  MAKE  STRAIGHT  PATHS  FOR  YOUR  FEET,  LEST  THAT  WHICH 
IS  LAME  BE  TURNED  OUT  OF  THE  WAY;  BUT  LET  IT  RATHER 
BE  HEALED." — Heb.  xii.  13. 

WE  sometimes  meet  with  those  who  are  fleet  of 
foot  and  joyous  of  spirit.     Would   to    God 
that  all  were  so !     But  as  they  are  not,  the  lame 
must  be  considered. 

The  road  should  be  cleared  for  tottering  steps. 
Our  desire  is  that  the  whole  band  may  reach  the 
journey's  end  in  safety. 

J-    IN   ALL   FLOCKS   THERE   ARE    LAME   SHEEP. 

1.  Some  are  so  from  their  very  nature  and  birth. 

Ready  to  despond  and  doubt. 

Ready  to  disbelieve  and  fall  into  error. 

Ready  to  yield  to  temptation,  and  so  to  prove 

unstable. 
Unready  and  feeble  in  all  practical  duties. 

2.  Some  have  been  ill-fed.     This  brings  on  a  foot- 

rot  and  lameness. 
Many  are  taught  false  doctrine. 
Many  more  receive  indefinite,  hazy  doctrine. 
Many  others  hear  light,  unsubstantial,  chaffy 

doctrine. 

3.  Some  have  been  worried,  and  so  driven  to  lame 

ness. 


386  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

By  Satan,  with  his  insinuations  and  tempta 
tions. 

By  persecutors,  with  their  slander,  taunting, 
ridicule,  etc. 

By  proud  professors,  unkindly  pious,  severely 
critical,  etc. 

By  a  morbid  conscience,  seeing  evil  where 
there  is  none. 

4.  Some  have  grown  weary  through  the  roughness 

of  the  road. 

Exceeding  much  ignorance  has  enfeebled 
them. 

Exceeding  much  worldly  trouble  lias  de 
pressed  them. 

Exceeding  much  inward  conflict  has  grieved 
them. 

Exceeding  much  controversy  has  worried 
them. 

5.  Some  have  gradually  become  weak. 

Backsliding  by  neglect  of  the  means  of  grace. 

Backsliding  through  the  evil  influence  of 
others. 

Backsliding  through  pride  of  heart  and  self- 
satisfaction. 

Backsliding  through  general  coldness  of 
heart. 

6.  Some  have  had  a  terrible  fall. 

This  has  broken  their  bones  so  as  to  prevent 
progress. 

This  has  snapped  the  sinew  of  their  useful 
ness. 

This  has  crippled  them  as  to  holy  joy 


LAME   SHEEP.  287 

II.  THE    REST   OP   THE   FLOCK   MUST   SEEK   THEIR    HEALING. 

1.  By  seeking  their  company,  and  not  leaving  them. 

to  perish  by  the  way  through  neglect,  con 
tempt  and  despair. 

2.  By  endeavoring  to  comfort  them  and  to  restore 

them.  This  can  be  done  by  the  more  ex 
perienced  among  us;  and  those  who  are  un 
fit  for  such  difficult  work,  can  try  the  next 
plan,  which  is  so  plainly  mentioned  in  our 
text. 

3.  By  making  straight  paths  for  our  own  feet. 

By  unquestionable  holiness  of  life. 

By  plain  gospel  teaching  in  our  own  simple 

way. 

By  manifest  joy  in  the  Lord. 
By  avoiding  all  crooked  customs  which  might 

perplex  them. 
By  thus   showing  them  that  Jesus   is  to  us 

"  The  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life."    No  path 

can  be  more  straight  than  that  of  simple 

faith  in  Jesus. 

III.  THE  SHEPHERD  OF  THE  FLOCK  CARES  FOR  SUCH. 

1.  Their  fears:  they  conclude   that  he  will  leave 

them. 

2.  The  reason :  to  do  so  would  be  by  far  the  easier 

plan  for  him. 

3.  Their  dread:  if  he  did  so,  they  must  inevitably 

perish. 

4.  Their  comfort:  he   has  provided  all  the  means 

of  healing  the  lame. 


288  MY 

5.  Their  hope :  he  is  very  gentle  and  tender,  and 

wills  not  that  any  one  of  them  should  wan 
der  and  perish. 

6.  Their  confidence:  healing  will  win  him  much 

honor  and  grateful  affection :  wherefore  we 
conclude  that  he  will  keep  them. 

Let  us  be  careful  to  cause  no  offence  or  injury  to 
the  weakest. 

Let  us  endeavor  to  restore  such  as  are  out  of  the 
way,  and  comfort  those  who  are  sorely  afflicted. 

SHEEP-LORE. 

Sheep  are  liable  to  many  diseases,  many  of  them 
are  weak  and  feeble ;  these  a  good  shepherd  taketh 
pity  of,  and  endeavors  to  heal  and  strengthen.  So 
the  saints  of  God  are  subject  to  manifold  weaknesses, 
temptations,  and  afflictions,  which  moved  the  Al 
mighty  to  great  compassion,  and  sorely  to  rebuke 
the  shepherds  of  Israel  for  their  cruelty  and  great 
remissness  towards  his  flock :  "  The  diseased  have  ye 
not  strengthened,  neither  have  ye  healed  that  which 
was  sick,"  etc.  And  therefore  he  saith  he  would 
himself  take  the  work  into  his  own  hands;  "  I  will 
bind  up  that  which  was  broken,  and  will  strengthen 
that  which  was  sick,"  etc. — Benjamin  Keach. 

Many  preachers  in  our  days  are  like  Heraclitus, 
who  was  called  "the  dark  doctor"  They  affect  sub 
lime  notions,  obscure  expressions,  uncouth  phrases, 
making  plain  truths  difficult,  and  easy  truths  hard. 
"  They  darken  counsel  with  words  without  knowl- 


LAME   SHEEP.  289 

edge":  Job  xxxviii.  2.  Studied  expressions  and 
high  notions  in  a  sermon,  are  like  Asahel's  carcase 
in  the  way,  that  did  only  stop  men  and  make  them 
gaze,  but  did  no  ways  profit  them  or  better  them. 
It  is  better  to  present  Truth  in  her  native  plainness 
than  to  hang  her  ears  with  counterfeit  pearls. 

Thomas  Brooks. 

Now  Mr.  Feeble-mind,  when  they  were  going  out 
at  the  door,  made  as  if  he  intended  to  linger ;  the 
which,  when  Mr.  Great-heart  espied,  lie  said,  "  Come, 
Mr.  Feeble-mind,  pray  do  you  go  along  with  us;  I 
will  be  your  conductor,  and  you  shall  fare  as  the  rest." 

Feeble-mind:  "Alas!  I  want  a  suitable  compan 
ion:  you  are  all  lusty  and  strong;  but  I,  as  you  see, 
am  weak :  I  choose,  therefore,  rather  to  come  behind, 
lest,  by  reason  of  my  many  infirmities,  I  should  be 
both  a  burden  to  myself  and  to  you.  I  am,  as  I  said, 
a  man  of  a  weak  and  feeble  mind,  and  shall  be  of 
fended  and  made  weak  at  that  which  others  can 
bear.  I  shall  like  no  laughing;  I  shall  like  no  gay 
attire :  I  shall  like  no  unprofitable  questions.  Nay, 
I  am  so  weak  a  man  as  to  be  offended  with  that 
which  others  have  a  liberty  to  do.  I  do  not  know 
all  the  truth  :  I  am  a  very  ignorant  Christian  man. 
Sometimes,  if  I  hear  any  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  it 
troubles  me  because  I  cannot  do  so  too.  It  is  with 
me  as  it  is  with  a  weak  man  among  the  strong,  or  as 
with  a  sick  man  among  the  healthy,  or  as  *  a  lamp 
despised';  so  that  I  know  not  what  to  do.  'He 
that  is  ready  to  slip  with  his  feet  is  as  a  lamp  de 
spised  in  the  thought  of  him  that  is  at  ease ' :  Job. 
xii.5." 

18 


290  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

"  But,  brother,"  said  Mr.  Great-heart,  "  I  have  it  in 
commission  to  '  comfort  the  feeble-minded,'  and  to 
'support  the  weak.'  You  must  needs  go  along  with 
us:  we  will  wait  for  you;  we  will  lend  you  our  help; 
we  will  deny  ourselves  of  some  things,  both  opinion- 
ate  and  practical,  for  your  sake;  we  will  not  enter 
into  '  doubtful  disputations '  before  you ;  we  will  be 
'  made  all  things '  to  you,  rather  than  you  shall  be 
left  behind." — John  Bunyan. 

It  should  be  between  a  strong  saint  and  a  weak 
as  it  is  between  two  lute  strings  that  are  tuned  one 
to  another:  no  sooner  one  is  struck  but  the  other 
trembles ;  no  sooner  should  a  weak  saint  be  struck, 
but  the  strong  should  tremble.  "  Remember  them 
that  are  in  bonds,  as  bound  with  them  " :  Heb.  xiii.  3. 

Thomas  Brooks- 


CCXLV. 

"  SEE  THAT  YE  REFUSE  NOT  HIM  THAT  8PEAKETH.  FOR  IP  THEY 
ESCAPE  NOT  WHO  REFUSED  HIM  THAT  SPAKE  ON  EA.RTH,  MUCH 
MORE  SHALL  NOT  WE  ESCAPE,  IF  WE  TURN  AWAY  FROM  HIM 
THAT  SPEAKETH  FROM  HEAVEN." — Heb.  xii.  25. 

JESUS  still  speaks  to  us  in  the  gospel. 
What  a  privilege  to  hear  such   a  voice,  with 
such  a  message  ! 

What  cruel  sin  to  refuse  Jesus  a  hearing! 
Here  is  a  most  urgent  exhortation  to  yield  him  rev 
erent  attention. 

I.  THERE  is  NEED  OP  THIS  ESBORTATION  FROM  MANY  CON 
SIDERATIONS. 

1.  The  excellence  of  the  word.     It  claims  obedient 

attention. 

2.  The  readiness  of  Satan  to  prevent  our  receiving 

the  divine  word. 

3.  Our    own   indisposition   to   receive   the   holy, 

heavenly  message. 

4.  We  have  rejected  too  long  already.     It  is  to  be 

feared  that  we  may  continue  to  do  so;   but 
our  right  course  is  to  hearken  at  once. 

5.  The   word    comes  in  love  to  our  souls;  let  us 

therefore  heed  it,  and  render  love  for  love. 

(291) 


292  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

II.  THERE  ARE  MANY  WAYS  OF  REFUSING  HIM  THAT  SPEAK- 

ETH. 

1.  Not   hearing.     Absence  from  public  worship, 

neglect    of   Bible    reading.     "  Turn   away 
from  him." 

2.  Hearing    listlessly,    as  if  half  asleep,  and   un 

concerned. 

3.  Refusing  to  believe.     Intellectually  believing, 

but  not  with  the  heart. 

4.  Raising    quibbles.      Hunting     up     difficulties, 

favoring  unbelief. 

5.  Being    offended.     Angry   with  the  gospel,  in 

dignant  at  plain  speech,   opposing  honest 
personal  rebuke. 

6.  Perverting  his  words.     Twisting  and  wrestling 

Scripture. 

7.  Bidding  him  depart.     Steeling  the  conscience, 

trifling   with  conviction,  resorting  to  frivo 
lous  company  for  relief. 

8.  Reviling  him.     Denying  his  Deity,  hating  his 

gospel,  and  his  holy  way. 

9.  Persecuting    him.     Turning  upon    his   people 

as  a  whole,  or  assailing  them  as  individu 
als. 

III.  THERE  ARE  MANY  CAUSES  FOR  THIS  REFUSING. 

1.  Stolid  indifference,  which  causes  a  contempt  of 

all  good  things. 

2.  Self-righteousness,  which   makes  self  an   idol, 

and  therefore  rejects  the  living  Saviour. 

3.  Self-reliant  wisdom,  which  is  too  proud  to  hear 

the  voice  of  God. 


HEAR  !   HEAR  I  293 

4.  Hatred  of  holiness,   which  prefers  the  wilful  to 

the  obedient,  the  lustful  to  the  pure,  the 
selfish  to  the  divine. 

5.  Fear  of  the   world,  which   listens   to  threats, 

or   bribes,    or  flatteries,  and  dares  not  act 
aright 

6.  Procrastination,  which  cries  "  to-morrow,77  but 

means  "  never." 

7.  Dospair  and  unbelief,   which  declare  the  gos 

pel  to  be  powerless  to  save,  and  unavailable 
as  a  consolation. 

IV.  DEPOSING   TO   HEAR    CHRIST,    THE     HIGHEST    AUTHORITY 

is    DESPISED.       "Him    that    speaketh    from 
heaven." 

1.  He  is  of  heavenly  nature,   and  reveals  to  us 

what  he  has  known  of  God  and  heaven. 

2.  He   came  from  heaven,  armed  with  heavenly 

authority. 

3.  He  speaks  from  heaven  at  this  moment  by  his 

eternal  Spirit  in   Holy  Scripture,  the  ordi 
nances  and  the  preaching  of  the  gospel. 

4.  Ho  will  speak  from  heaven  at  the  judgment. 

He  is  himself  God,  and  therefore  all  that  he 
saith  hath  divinity  within  it 

V.  THE    DOOM   TO   BE    FEARED   IF    WE    REFUSE    CHRIST. 

Those  to  whom  Moses  spake  on  earth,  who  refus 
ed  him,  escaped  not. 

1.  Let  us  think  of  their  doom,  and  learn  that 
equally  sure  destruction  will  happen  to  all 

who  refuse  Christ. 


294  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Pharaoh  and  the  Egyptians. 

The  murmurers  dying  in  the  wilderness. 

Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram. 

2.  Let  us   see  how  some  have   perished  in   the 

church. 
Judas,  Ananias  and  Sapphira,  etc. 

3.  Let  us  see  how  others  perish  who  remain  in 

the  world,  and  refuse  to  quit  it  for  the  fold 
of  Christ. 

They  shall  not  escape  by  Annihilation,  nor 
by  Purgatory,  nor  by  Universal  Restitu 
tions. 

They  shall  not  escape  by  infidelity,  hardness 
of  heart,  cunning,  or  hypocrisy.  They  have 
refused  the  only  way  of  escape,  and  there 
fore  they  must  perish  for  ever. 

Instead  of  refusing,  listen,  learn,  obey. 
Instead  of  the  curse,  you  shall  gain  a  blessing. 

WARNING  WORDS. 

Our  blessed  Lord  is  represented  as  "  now  speaking 
from  heaven  "  to  Christians  generally ;  and  even  if 
we  were,  contrary  to  all  just  reason,  to  confine  the 
reference  to  the  persons  to  whom  the  Epistle  was 
immediately  written,  he  is  said  to  speak  to  multi 
tudes  who  never  saw  or  heard  him  in  the  days  of 
his  flesh.  This  could  be  only  by  the  agency  of  in 
spired  men,  whose  commission  to  teach  and  com 
mand  "in  the  name  of  Christ"  was  proved  by  mira 
cles.  Those  miracles  they  attributed  to  him,  as  is 
plain  from  many  passages  in  the  Acts  and  the  Epis- 


HEAR  !   HEAR  !  295 

ties.  Thus  Christ  stands  in  the  very  position  of 
power,  authority,  and  action,  continually  ascribed  to 
Jehovah  in  the  Old  Testament,  speaking  by  his  proph 
ets.  "  This,"  observes  Michaelis,  "  is  saying  of  Christ 
the  greatest  thing  that  can  be  said." — Dr.  J.  Pye 
Smith. 

We  seem  to  have  done  with  the  Word  as  it  has 
passed  through  our  ears ;  but  the  Word,  be  it  remem 
bered,  will  never  have  done  with  us,  till  it  has  judged 
us  at  the  last  day. — Judge  Hale. 

A  nobleman,  skilled  in  music,  who  had  often  ob 
served  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  Mr.  Cadogan's  inattention 
to  his  performance,  said  to  him  one  day,  "Come,  I 
am  determined  to  make  you  feel  the  force  of  music; 
pay  particular  attention  to  this  piece."  It  was  ac 
cordingly  played.  "  Well,  what  do  you  say  now?  " 
"  Why,  just  what  I  said  before."  "  What !  can  you 
hear  this  and  not  be  charmed  ?  Well,  I  am  quite 
surprised  at  your  insensibility.  Where  are  your 
ears  ? "  "  Bear  with  me,  my  Lord,"  replied  Mr. 
Cadogan,  "  since  I,  too,  have  had  my  surprise.  I 
have  often,  from  the  pulpit,  set  before  you  the  most 
striking  and  affecting  truths ;  I  have  sounded  notes 
that  might  have  raised  the  dead ;  I  have  said,  '  Surely 
he  will  feel  now,'  but  you  never  seem  to  be  charmed 
with  my  music,  though  infinitely  more  interesting 
than  yours.  I,  too,  have  been  ready  to  say,  with 
astonishment,  '  Where  are  his  ears  ?  ' ' 

One  of  the  modern  thinkers  had  been  upholding 
the  doctrine  of  universal  salvation  at  a  certain  house 


296  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

with  much  zeal.  A  child  who  had  listened  to  his 
pestilent  talk,  was  heard  to  say  to  his  companion, 
"  We  can  now  steal,  and  lie,  and  do  wicked  things, 
for  there  is  no  hell  when  we  die."  If  such  preachers 
gain  much  power  in  this  country,  we  shall  not  need 
to  raise  the  question  of  a  hell  hereafter,  for  we  shall 
have  one  here. — C-  H.  S. 


CCXLVI. 

lt  HE   HATH    SAID,    I    WILL  NEVER   LEAVE    THEE,    NOR    FORSAKE 

THEE." — Heb.  xiii.  5. 

HERE  is  a  divine  word,  directly  from  God's  own 
mouth:  "For  himself  hath  said."  (See  Re 
vised  Version.) 

Here  is  a  promise  which  has  been  frequently 
made.  "  He  hath  said  "  :  This  promise  occurs  again 
and  again. 

Here  are  some  of  the  fat  things  full  of  marrow. 
The  sentence  is  as  full  of  meaning  as  it  is  free  from 
verbiage. 

Here  is  the  essence  of  meat,  the  quintessence  of 
medicine. 

May  the  Holy  Spirit  show  us  the  treasure  hid  in 
this  matchless  sentence ! 

I.    VlEW    THE  WORDS    AS    A    QUOTATION. 

The  Holy  Spirit  led  Paul  to  quote  from  the  Script 
ures,  though  he  could  have  spoken  fresh  words. 

Thus  he  put  honor  on  the  Old  Testament. 

Thus  he  taught  that  words  spoken  to  ancient  saints 
belong  to  us. 

Our  apostle  quotes  the  sense,  not  the  exact  words, 
and  thus  he  teaches  us  that  the  spirit  of  a  text  is  the 
main  thing. 

(297) 


298  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

We  find  the  words  which  Paul  has  quoted — 

In  Gen.  xxviii.  15,  "I  will  not  leave  thee,  un 
til  I  have  done  that  which  I  have  spoken 
to  thee  of."  Spoken  to  Jacob  when  quitting 
home,  and  thus  to  young  saints  setting  out 
in  life. 

In  Deut.  xxxi.  8,  "  He  will  be  with  thee,  he 
will  not  fail  thee,  neither  forsake  thee."  To 
Joshua,  and  so  to  those  who  have  lost  a 
leader,  and  are  about  to  take  the  lead  them 
selves,  and  to  enter  upon  great  wars  and 
fightings,  in  which  courage  will  be  tried. 

In  1  Chron.  xxviii.  20,  "  He  will  not  fail  thee, 
nor  forsake  thee,  until  thou  hast  finished  all 
the  work."  To  Solomon,  and  thus  to  those 
who  have  a  weighty  charge  upon  them,  re 
quiring  much  wisdom.  We  build  a  spirit 
ual  temple. 

In  Isa.  xli.  10,  "Fear thou  not;  for  I  am  with 
thee."  To  Israel,  and  so  to  the  Lord's  tried 
and  afflicted  people. 

II.    VlEW   THEM   AS   A   HOUSEHOLD   WORD   FROM   GoD. 

1.  They  are  peculiarly  a  saying  of  God :  "  He  hath 

said."     This  has  been  said,  not  so  much  by 
inspiration  as  by  God  himself. 

2.  They  are  remarkably  forcible  from  having  five 

negatives  in  them  in  the  Greek. 

3.  They  relate  to  God  himself  and  his  people.     "  I M 

.     .     .     "thee." 

4.  They  ensure  his  presence   and  his  help.     He 

would  not  be  with  us,  and  be  inactive. 


NEVER,  NO  NEVER,  NO  NEVER.      299 

5.  They  guarantee  the  greatest  good.     God  with 

us,  means  all  good. 

6.  They  avert  a  dreadful  evil  which  we  deserve, 

and  might  justly  fear;  namely,  to  be  desert 
ed  of  God. 

7.  They  are  such  as  he  only  could  utter  and  make 

true.  Nobody  else  can  be  with  us  effectu 
ally  in  agony,  in  death,  in  judgment. 

8.  They  provide  for  all  troubles,  losses,  desertions, 

weaknesses,  difficulties,  places,  seasons,  dan 
gers,  etc.,  in  time  and  eternity. 

9.  They  are  substantiated  by  the  divine  love,  im 

mutability,  and  faithfulness. 

10.  They  are  further  confirmed  by  our  observation 

of  the  divine  proceeding  to  others  and  to 
ourselves. 

III.    VlEW    THEM   AS   A   MOTIVE   FOR   CONTENTMENT.       "  Let 

your  conversation  be  without  covetousness, 
and  be  content  with  such  things  as  ye 
have." 

These  most  gracious  words — 

Lead  us  to  live  above  visible  things  when  we 
have  stores  in  hand. 

Lead  us  to  present  satisfaction,  however  low 
our  stores  may  be. 

Lead  us  to  see  provision  for  all  future  emer 
gencies. 

Lead  us  into  a  security  more  satisfactory,  sure, 
ennobling,  and  divine,  than  all  the  wealth 
of  the  Indies  could  bestow. 


300  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Lead  us  to  reckon  discontent  a  kind  of  blas 
phemy  of  God. 

Since  God  is  always  with  us,  what  can  we  want 
besides  ? 

IV.  VlEW  THEM  AS  A  REASON  FOR  COURAGE.   "  So  that 

we  may  boldly  say,  The  Lord  is  my  helper, 
and  I  will  not  fear  what  man  shall  do  unto 
me." 

1.  Our  Helper  is  greater  than  our  foes.    "Jehovah 

is  my  helper." 

2.  Our  foes  are  entirely  in  his  hand.     "  I  will  not 

fear  what  man  shall  do." 

3.  If  permitted  to  afflict  us,  God  will  sustain  us 

under  their  malice. 

What  a  blessed  deliverance  from  fretting  and  from 
fearing  have  \re  in  these  few  words  ! 

Let  us  not  be  slow  to  follow  in  the  line  of  things 
which  the  Spirit  evidently  points  out  to  us. 

NOTES  ON  "NoTS." 

Lord,  the  apostle  dissuadeth  the  Hebrews  from 
covetousness  with  this  argument,  because  God  said, 
"  I  will  not  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee."  Yet  I  find 
not  that  God  ever  gave  this  promise  to  all  the  Jews; 
but  he  spake  it  only  to  Joshua,  when  first  made 
commander  against  the  Canaanites:  yet  this  (with 
out  violence  to  the  analogy  of  faith)  the  apostle  ap- 
plieth  to  all  good  men  in  general.  Is  it  so,  that  we 
are  heirs  apparent  to  all  promises  made  to  thy  ser 
vants  in  Scripture?  Are  the  charters  of  grace 


NEVEK,  NO  NEVER,  NO  NEVER.      301 

granted  to  them  good  to  me  also  ?  Then  will  I  say 
with  Jacob,  "  I  have  enough."  But  because  I  can 
not  entitle  myself  to  thy  promises  to  them  except  I 
imitate  their  piety  to  thee,  grant  I  may  take  as  much 
care  in  following  the  one  as  comfort  in  the  other. 

Thomas  Flitter. 

Our  friend,  Dr.  William  Graham,  of  Bonn,  has 
lately  departed  this  life,  and  we  are  told  that  on 
his  death-bed  one  said  to  him,  "  He  hath  said,  '  I 
will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee,' "  to  which  the 
good  man  replied,  with  his  dying  breath,  "Not  a 
doubt  of  it!  Not  a  doubt  of  it  !  "— <7.  H.  S.,  in  the 
Sword  and  the  Trowel,  1884. 

It  is  right  to  be  contented  with  what  we  have, 
never  with  what  we  are. — Mackintosh. 

I  have  read,  says  Brooks,  of  a  company  of  poor 
Christians  who  were  banished  into  some  remote  part ; 
and  one  standing  by,  seeing  them  pass  along,  said 
that  it  was  a  very  sad  condition  these  poor  people 
were  in,  to  be  thus  hurried  from  the  society  of  men, 
and  made  companions  with  the  beasts  of  the  field. 
"True,  "said  another,  "it  were  a  sad  condition  in 
deed  if  they  were  carried  to  a  place  where  they 
should  not  find  their  God.  But  let  them  be  of  good 
cheer,  God  goes  along  with  them,  and  will  exhibit 
the  comforts  of  his  presence  whithersoever  they  go." 

A  heathen  sage  said  to  one  of  his  friends,  "  Do 
not  complain  of  thy  misfortunes,  as  long  as  Caesar  is 
thy  friend ! "  What  shall  we  say  to  those  whom  the 


302 


MY   SERMON-NOTES. 


Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  calls  his  sons  and 
his  brethren  ?  "  1  will  never  leave  thee,  nor  forsake 
thee  !  "  Ought  not  these  words  to  cast  all  fear  and 
care  forever  to  the  ground?  He  who  possesses  him, 
to  whom  all  things  belong,  possesseth  all  things. 

F.  W.  Krummach&r. 

The  soul  that  on  Jesus  has  leaned  for  repose 

I  will  not,  I  will  not  desert  to  his  foes ; 

That  soul,  though  all  hell  should  endeavor  to  shake, 

I'll  never,  no  never,  no  never  forsake. 

George  Keitk. 


CCXLYII. 

"  BLESSED  is  THE    MAN  THAT  ENDURETH    TEMPTATION  :  FOR 

WHEN  HE  IS  TRIED,    HE  SHALL  RECEIVE   THE   CROWN  OF  LIFE, 
WHICH  THE  LORD   HATH  PROMISED  TO  THEM  THAT  LOVE   HIM." 

— James  i.  12. 

TO  be  blessed  is  to  be  happy,  favored,  prosperous, 
etc. 

But  it  has  a  secret,  sacred  emphasis  all  its  own; 
for  the  favor  and  prosperity  are  such  as  only  God 
himself  can  bestow. 

Who  would  not  desire  to  be  blessed  of  God  ? 

Most  men  mistake  the  whereabouts  of  blessedness. 

It  is  not  bound  up  with  wealth,  rank,  power,  talent, 
admiration,  friendship,  health,  pleasure,  or  even  with 
a  combination  of  all  these. 

It  is  often  found  where  least  expected :  amid  trials, 
temptations,  etc. 

I.    THE   BLESSED   IN  THIS   LIFE. 

1.  Blessedness  is  not  in  our  text  connected  with 
ease,  freedom  from  trial,  or  absence  of  temp 
tation. 

Untested  treasures  may  be  worthless;  not  so 
those  which  have  endured  the  fire.  No 
man  may  reckon  himself  blessed  if  he  has 
to  fear  that  a  trial  would  wither  all  his  ex 
cellence. 

(308) 


304  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

2.  Blessedness  belongs  to  those  who  endure  tests. 

These  have  faith,  or  it  would  not  be  tried; 
and  faith  is  blessed. 

These  have  life  which  bears  trials;  and  the 
spiritual  life  is  blessed. 

These  possess  uprightness,  purity,  truth,  pa 
tience  ;  and  all  these  are  blessed  things. 

3.  Blessedness  belongs  to  those  who  endure  trials 

out  of  love  to  God.     The  text  speaks   of 

"them  that  love  him." 

He  that  has  love  to  God  finds  joy  in  that  love. 
He  also  finds  blessedness  in  suffering  for  that 

love. 

4.  Blessedness  belongs  to  those  who  are  proved 

true  by  trial. 

After  the  test  comes  approval  "When  he 
hath  been  approved "  is  the  rendering  of 
the  Revised  Version. 

After  the  test  comes  assurance  of  our  being 
right.  Certainty  is  a  most  precious  com 
modity. 

5.  Blessedness  comes  out  of  patient  experience. 

Blessedness  of  thankfulness  for  being  sus 
tained. 

Blessedness  of  holy  dependence  tinder  con 
scious  weakness. 

Blessedness  of  peace  and  submission  under 
God's  hand. 

Blessedness  of  fearlessness  as  to  result  of 
further  trial. 

Blessedness  of  familiarity  with  God  enjoyed  in 
the  affliction. 


THE  TRIED   MAN   THE   BLESSED   MAN.         305 

Blessedness  of  growth  in  grace  through  the 

trial. 

He  who,  being  tested,  is  supported  in  the  ordeal, 
and  comes  out  of  the  trial  approved,  is  the  blessed 
man. 

II.    THE   BLESSED   IN   THE    LIFE   TO    COME. 

Those  who  have  endured  trial  inherit  the  peculiar 
blessedness — 

1.  Of  being  crowned.     How  crowned  if  never  in 

the  wars? 

Crowned  because  victorious  over  enemies. 

Crowned  because  appreciated  by  their  God. 

Crowned  because  honored  of  their  fellows. 

Crowned  because  they  have  kept  the  condi 
tions  of  the  award. 

2.  Of  attaining  the  glory  and  "  crown  of  life  "  by 

enduring  trial,  thus  only  can  life  be  devel 
oped  till  its  flower  and  crown  appear. 

By  trial  brought  to  purest  health  of  mind. 

By  trial  trained  to  utmost  vigor  of  grace. 

By  trial  developed  in  every  part  of  their  na 
ture. 

By  trial  made  capable  of  the  highest  glory  in 
eternity. 

3.  Of  possessing  a  living  crown   of  endless  joy. 

"  Crown  of  life  "  or  living  crown:  amaran 
thine,  unfading. 

If  such  fierce  trials  do  not  kill  them,  nothing 
will. 

If  they  have  spiritual  bliss,  it  can  never  die. 
20 


306  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

If  they  have  heavenly  life,  it  will  always  be 

at  its  crowning  point. 
4.  Of  receiving  this  life-crown  from  God. 

His  own  promise  reveals  and  displays  it. 
His  peculiar  regard  to  those  who  love   him 

doubly  ensures  it. 
His  own  hand  shall  give  it. 

Let  us  encounter  trial  cheerfully. 
Let  us  wait  for  the  time  of  approval  patiently. 
Let  us  expect  the  crown  of  life  most  joyfully,  and 
gather  courage  from  the  assurance  of  it. 

EXTRACTS. 

"Blessed";  that  is,  already  blessed.  They  are  not 
miserable  as  the  world  judgeth  them.  It  is  a  Christ 
ian  paradox,  wherein  there  is  an  allusion  to  what  is 
said  (Job  v.  17).  "  Behold,  happy  is  the  man  whom 
God  correcteth";  it  is  a  wonder,  and  therefore  he 
calleth  the  world  to  see  it.  BeluM  !  So  the  apostle, 
in  an  opposition  to  the  judgment  of  the  world,  saith, 
Blessed. 

Afflictions  do  not  make  the  people  of  God  miserable. 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  difference  between  a  Christ 
ian  and  a  man  of  the  world:  his  best  estate  is  van 
ity  (Psalm  xxxix.  5);  and  a  Christian's  worst  is  hap 
piness.  He  that  loveth  God  is  like  a  die :  cast  him 
high  or  low,  he  is  still  upon  a  square:  he  may  be 
sometimes  afflicted,  but  he  is  always  happy. — Thomas 
Manton. 

Times  of  affliction  often  prove  times  of  great  temp- 


THE  TRIED   MAN  THE  BLESSED   MAN.         307 

tations,  and  therefore  afflictions  are   called  tempta 
tions. —  Thomas  Brooks. 

The  most  durable  and  precious  metal  in  the  ancient 
arts  was  the  Corinthian  bronze,  which  was  said  to 
have  first  been  caused  by  the  fusing  of  all  the  precious 
metals  when  Corinth  was  burned.  The  most  prec 
ious  products  of  experience  are  got  in  the  fire  of 
trial. — John  Legge. 

An  old  sailor  was  asked  for  what  purpose  shoals  arid 
rocks  were  created,  and  the  reply  was,  "  That  sail 
ors  may  avoid  them."  A  Christian  philosopher,  us 
ing  that  axiom,  upon  being  asked  for  what  purpose 
trials  and  temptations  are  sent,  answered,  "That  we 
may  overcome  and  use  them."  The  true  dignity  of 
life  is  not  found  in  escaping  difficulties,  but  in  mas 
tering  them  for  Christ's  sake  and  in  Christ's  strength. 

Dean  Stanley. 

Many  were  the  sorts  of  crowns  which  were  in  use 
amongst  the  Roman  victors;  at  first,  corona  civica,  a 
crown  made  of  oaken  boughs,  which  was  given  by 
the  Romans  to  him  that  saved  the  life  of  any  citizen 
in  battle  against  his  enemies.  2.  Obsidionalis,  which 
was  of  grass,  given  to  him  that  delivered  a  town  or 
city  from  siege.  3.  Muralis,  which  was  of  gold,  giv 
en  to  him  that  first  scaled  the  wall  of  any  town  or 
castle.  4.  Castralis,  which  was  likewise  of  gold, 
given  to  him  that  first  entered  the  camp  of  the  ene 
my.  5.  Navalis,  and  that  also  of  gold,  given  to  him 
that  first  boarded  the  ship  of  an  enemy.  6.  Ovalis 
(and  that  of  myrtle),  which  was  given  to  those  cap 
tains  that  subdued  any  town  or  city,  or  that  won  any 


308  MY   SEEMON-NOTES. 

field  easily,  without  blood.  7.  Triumpkalis,  which 
was  of  laurel,  given  to  the  chief  general  or  consul 
who,  after  some  signal  victory,  came  home  triumph 
ing.  These,  with  many  others,  as  imperial,  regal, 
and  princely  crowns  (rather  garlands  or  coronets  than 
crowns),  are  not  to  be  compared  to  the  crown  of 
glory  which  God  hath  prepared  for  those  that  love 
him.  Who  is  able  to  express  the  glory  of  it ;  or  to 
what  glorious  thing  shall  it  be  likened  ?  If  I  had 
the  tongue  of  men  and  angels,  1  should  be  unable  to 
decipher  it  as  it  worthily  deserveth.  It  is  not  only 
a  crown  of  glory,  but  hath  divers  other  titles  of  pre- 
emineucy  given  unto  it,  of  which  all  shall  be  true 
partakers  that  are  godly;  a  crown  of  righteousness 
by  the  imputation  of  Christ's  righteousness ;  a  crown 
of  life,  because  those  that  have  it  shall  be  made  cap 
able  of  life  eternal;  a  crown  of  stars,  because  they 
that  receive  it  shall  shine  as  stars  for  ever  and  ever. 

John  Spencer. 

The  eame  who  crowns  the  conqueror,  will  be 
A  coadjutor  in  the  agony. 

Robert  Herriok. 


CCXLYIII. 

"BUT  HE  GIVETH  MORE   GRACE." — James  iv.  6. 

T)RACTICAL  as  is  the  Epistle  of  James,  the  apos- 
J.  tie  does  not  neglect  to  extol  the  grace  of  God,  as 
unevangelical  preachers  do  in  these  times. 

We  err  if  we  commend  the  fruits  regardless  of  the 
root  from  which  they  spring.  Every  virtue  should 
be  traced  to  grace. 

We  must  clearly  point  out  the  fountain  of  inward 
grace  as  well  as  the  stream  of  manifest  service  which 
flows  from  it. 

The  principle  of  grace  produces  the  practice  of 
goodness,  and  none  can  create  or  preserve  that  prin 
ciple  but  the  God  of  all  grace. 

If  we  fail  anywhere,  it  will  be  our  wisdom  to  get 
more  grace. 

See  the  bounty  of  God — ever  giving,  and  ever 
ready  to  give  more  ! 

I.  OBSERVE  THE  TEXT  IN  ITS  CONNECTION. 

1.  It  presents  a  contrast.     "  But  he  giveth  more 

grace." 

Two  potent  motives  are  confronted.  "  The 
spirit  that  dwelleth  in  us  lusteth  to  envy  "; 
on  God's  part  this  is  met  by  "  but  he  giveth 
more  grace." 

(309) 


310  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

2.  It  suggests  a  note  of  admiration. 

What  a  wonder  that  when    sin   aboundetht 

grace  still  more  abounds  ! 
When   we  discover   more   of  our   weakness, 

God  gives  more  grace. 

3.  It  hints  at  a  direction  for  spiritual  conflict. 

We  learn  where  to  obtain  the  weapons  of  our 
warfare :  we  must  look  to  him  who  gives 
grace. 

We  learn  the  nature  of  those  weapons :  they 
are  not  legal,  nor  fanciful,  nor  ascetical,  but 
gracious — "  he  giveth  more  grace." 

We  learn  that  lusting  after  evil  must  be  met 
by  the  fulfilment  of  spiritual  desires  and 
obtaining  more  grace. 

4.  It  encourages  us  in  continuing  the  conflict. 

As  long  as  there  is  one  passion  in  the  believ 
ing  soul  that  dares  to  rise,  God  will  give 
grace  to  struggle  with  it. 

The  more  painfully  we  mourn  the  power  of 
sin,  the  more  certainly  will  grace  increase 
if  we  believe  in  Jesus  for  salvation. 

5.  It  plainly  indicates  a  victory. 

"  He   giveth  more  grace "  is   a  plain   promise 

that— 

God  will  not  give  us  up;  but  that  he  will 
more  and  more  augment  the  force  of  grace, 
so  that  sin  must  and  shall  ultimately  yield 
to  its  sanctifying  dominion. 

Glory  be  to  God,  who,  having  given  grace,  still 
goes  on  to  give  more  and  more  grace  till  we  enter 


MOEE  AND  MORE.  311 

into  glory  !     There  is  no  stint  or  limit  to  the  Lord's 
increasing  gifts  of  grace. 

II.  OBSERVE  THE  GENERAL  TRUTH  OF  THE  TEXT. 

God  is  ever  on  the  giving  hand.  The  text  speaks 
of  it  as  the  Lord's  way  and  habit:  "He  giveth  more 
grace." 

1.  He  giveth  new  supplies  of  grace. 

2.  He  giveth  larger  supplies  of  grace. 

3.  He  giveth  higher  orders  of  grace. 

4.  He  giveth  more  largely  as  the  old  nature  works 

more  powerfully. 
This  should  be — 

1.  A  truth  of  daily  use  for  ourselves. 

2.  A  promise  daily  pleaded  for  others. 

3.  A  stimulus  in  the  contemplation  of  higher  or 

sterner  duties,    and  an  encouragement  to 
enter  on  wider  fields. 

4.  A  solace  under  forebodings  of  deeper  trouble  in 

common  life. 

5.  An  assurance  in  prospect  of  the  severe  tests  of 

sickness  and  death. 

Seeing  it  is  the  nature  of  God  to  give  more  and 
more  grace,  let  us  have  growing  confidence  in  him. 

III.  BRING  IT  HOME  BY  SPECIAL  APPROPRIATION. 

1.  My  spiritual  poverty,  then,  is  my  own  fault,  for 

the  Lord  giveth  more  grace  to  all  who  be 
lieve  for  it. 

2.  My  spiritual  growth  will  be  to  his  glory,  for  I 

can  only  grow  because  he  gives  more  grace. 
Oh,  to  grow  constantly  1 


312  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  What  a  good  God  I  have  to  go  to !  Let  me  re 
joice  in  the  present  and  hope  for  the  future. 
Since  the  further  I  go  the  more  grace  shall 
I  know,  let  me  proceed  with  dauntless  cour 
age. 

Brethren,  let  us  trust  the  liberality  of  God,  try  it 
by  prayer,  prove  it  by  faith,  bear  witness  to  it  with 
zeal,  and  praise  it  with  grateful  joy. 

ENCOURAGEMENTS. 

When  Lord  North,  during  the  American  war,  sent 
to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Fletcher,  of  Madeley  (who  had  writ 
ten  on  that  unfortunate  war,  in  a  manner  that  had 
pleased  the  minister),  to  know  what  he  wanted,  he 
sent  him  word,  that  he  wanted  but  one  thing,  which 
it  was  not  in  his  lordship's  power  to  give  him,  and 
that  was  more  grace. — John  Whitecross. 

When  a  man  gives  a  flower,  it  is  a  perfect  gift ; 
but  the  gift  of  grace  is  rather  the  gift  of  a  flower 


When  Matthew  Henry  was  a  child  he  received 
much  impression  from  a  sermon  on  the  parable  ot 
the  "mustard-seed."  On  returning  home,  he  said 
to  his  child  sister,  '"  I  think  I  have  received  a  grain 
of  grace."  It  was  the  seed  of  the  Commentary 
"  cast  upon  the  waters."  Charles  Stanford. 

I  have  grace  every  day  !  every  hour!  When  the 
rebel  is  brought,  nine  times  a-day,  twenty  times 
a-day,  for  the  space  of  forty  years,  by  his  prince's 


MORE  AND   MORE.  313 

grace,  from  tinder  the  axe,  how  fair  and  sweet  are 
the  multiplied  pardons  and  reprievals  of  grace  to 
him!  In  my  case  here  are  multitudes  of  multiplied 
redemptions  !  Here  is  plenteous  redemption  !  I  de 
file  every  hour,  Christ  washeth  ;  I  fall,  grace  raiseth 
me;  I  come  this  day,  this  morning,  under  the  rebuke 
of  justice,  but  grace  pardoneth  me  ;  and  so  it  is  all 
along,  till  grace  puts  me  into  heaven. — Samuel 
Rutherford. 

Were  you  to  rest  satisfied  with  any  present  attain 
ments  to  which  you  have  reached,  it  would  be  an 
abuse  of  encouragement.  It  would  be  an  evidence 
that  you  know  nothing  of  the  power  of  divine  grace 
in  reality,  for 

"  Whoever  says,  I  want  no  more, 
Confesses  lie  has  none." 

Those  who  have  seen  seen  their  Lord,  will  always 
pray,  '*  I  beseech  thee,  show  me  thy  glory."  Those 
that  have  once  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  will 
always  cry,  "  Evermore  give  us  this  bread  to  eat." 

William  Jay. 

A  little  grace  will  bring  us  to  heaven  hereafter, 
but  great  grace  will  bring  heaven  to  us  now. — An 

old  Divine. 

Oh,  what  a  sad  thing  it  is  when  Christians  are 
what  they  always  were !  You  should  have  more 
grace  ;  your  word  should  be,  ego  non  sum  ego — I  am 
not  the  same  I,  or,  nunc  oblita  mihi — now  my  old 
courses  are  forgotten ;  or,  as  the  apostle,  1  Peter  iv. 


314  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

3,  "  The  time  past  may  suffice  to  have  walked  in  the 
lusts  of  the  flesh." — Thomas  Manton. 

"Have  you  on  the  Lord  believed  T 

Still  there's  more  to  follow ; 
Of  his  grace  have  you  received  ? 

Still  there's  more  to  follow ; 
Oh,  the  grace  the  Father  shows ! 

Still  there's  more  to  follow  I 
Freely  he  his  grace  bestows ; 

Still  there's  more  to  follow ! " 


CCXLIX. 

"RECEIVING  THE  END  OF  YOUR  FAITH,  EVEN  THE  SALVATION 
OF  YOUR  SOULS." — 1  Peter  i.  9. 

THE   greater    benefits  of  salvation  are  usually 
classed  among  things  to  come,  but  indeed  a 
large  portion  of  them  may  be  received  here  now. 

I.   WHAT  OF  SALVATION  is  RECEIVED  HERE  ? 

1.  The  whole  of  it  by  the  grip  of  faith,  and  the 

grace  of  hope. 

2.  The  absolute  and  final  pardon  of  sin  is  ours  at 

this  moment. 

3.  Deliverance  from  slavish  bondage,  and  from  a 

sense  of  awful  distance  from  God  is  a  pres 
ent  relief. 

Peace,  reconciliation,  contentment,  fellowship 
with  God,  and  delight  in  God,  we  enjoy  at 
this  hour. 

4  Rescue  from  the  condemning  power  of  sin  is 
now  complete. 

5.  Release  from  its  dominion  is  ours.     It  can  no 

longer  command  us  at  its  will,  nor  lull  us  to 
sleep  by  its  soothing  strains. 

6.  Conquest   over   evil  is  given  to  us  in   great 

measure  at  once. 

Sins  are  conquerable.     No  one  should  imagine 

(315) 


316  MY   SERMCXN-NOTES. 

that  he  must  necessarily  sin  because  of  his 
constitutional  surroundings. 
Holy  living  is  possible.     Some  have  reached 

a  high  degree  of  it.     Why  not  others  ? 
7.  Joy  may  become  permanent  in  the  midst  of 

sorrow. 

The  immediate  heritage  of  believers  is  exceeding 
ly  great. 

Salvation  is  ours  at  this  day,   and  with  it   "  all 
things." 

II.  HOW    IS    IT   RECEIVED  ? 

1.  Entirely  from  Jesus,  as  a  gift  of  divine  grace. 

2.  By  faith,  not  by  sight  or  feeling.     We  believe 

to  see,  and  this  is  good.  To  require  to  see 
in  order  to  believe  is  vicious. 

3.  By  fervent   love    to  God.     This  excites  to  re 

venge  against  sin,  and  so  gives  present 
purification.  This  also  nerves  us  for  con 
secrated  living,  and  thus  produces  holi 
ness. 

4.  By  joy  in  the  Lord.     This  causes  us  to  receive 

peace  unspeakable,  not  to  be  exaggerated, 
nor  even  uttered.  Too  great,  too  deep  to 
be  understood,  even  by  those  who  enjoy  it. 

Much  of  heaven  may  be  enjoyed  before  we  reach  it. 

III.  HAVE    YOU   RECEIVED   IT,    AND    HOW    MUCH? 

1.  You  have  heard  of  salvation,  but  hearing  will 

not  do. 

2.  You  profess  to  know  it,  but  mere  profession  will 

not  do. 


SALVATION    AS   IT   IS   NOW   EECEIVED.        317 

3.  Have  you  received  pardon  ?     Are  you  sure  of 

it? 

4.  Have  you    been    made  holy?     Are  you   daily 

cleansed  in  your  walk  ? 

5.  Have  you  obtained  rest  by  faith  and  hope  and 

love  ? 

Make  these  inquiries  as  in  God's  sight. 

If  the  result  is  unsatisfactory,  begin  at  once  to 
seek  the  Lord. 

Look  for  the  appearing  of  the  Lord  as  the  time 
for  receiving  in  a  fuller  sense  "  the  end  of  your 
faith." 

BREVIATES. 

An  evangelist  said  in  my  hearing  :  "  He  that 
belie veth  hath  everlasting  life.  HAT  H — that 
spells  '  got  it.' "  It  is  an  odd  way  of  spelling,  but 
it  is  sound  divLiity. — C.  H.  S. 

This  is  the  certainty  of  their  hope,  that  it  is  as 
if  they  had  already  received  it.  If  the  promise  of 
God  and  the  merit  of  Christ  hold  good,  then  they 
who  believe  in  him,  and  love  him,  are  made  sure  of 
salvation.  The  promises  of  God  in  Christ  "  are  not 
yea  and  nay;  but  they  are  in  him  yea  and  amen." 
Sooner  may  the  rivers  run  backward,  and  the  course 
of  the  heavens  change,  and  the  frame  of  nature 
be  dissolved,  than  any  one  soul  that  is  united  to 
Jesus  Christ  by  faith  and  love  can  be  severed  from 
him,  and  so  fall  short  of  the  salvation  hoped  for  in 
him ;  and  this  is  the  matter  of  their  rejoicing. 

Archbishop  Leighton. 


318  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

To  fall  into  sin  is  a  serious  thing,  even  though  the 
guilt  of  it  be  forgiven.  A  boy  who  had  often  been 
disobedient  was  made  by  his  father  to  drive  a  nail  into 
a  post  for  each  offence.  When  he  was  well-behaved 
for  a  day  he  was  allowed  to  draw  out  one  of  the 
nails.  He  fought  against  his  temper  bravely,  and 
at  last  all  the  nails  were  gone  from  the  post,  and 
his  father  praised  him.  "  Alas,  father,"  said  the  lad, 
"  the  nails  are  all  gone,  but  the  holes  are  left !" 
Even  after  forgiveness  it  will  require  a  miracle  of 
grace  to  recover  us  from  the  ill  effects  of  sin. 

In  St.  Peter's,  at  Rome,  I  saw  monuments  to 
James  III.,  Charles  III.,  and  Henry  IX.,  kings  of 
England.  These  potentates  were  quite  unknown  to 
me.  They  had  evidently  a  name  to  reign,  but 
reign  they  did  not ;  they  never  received  the  end  of 
their  faith.  Are  not  many  professed  Christians  in 
the  same  condition? — C.  H.  S. 


CCL. 


*'  IF    THE  RIGHTEOUS  SCARCELY  BE  SAVED,   WHERE   SHALL  THE 
UNGODLY  AND  THE   SINNER  APPEAR  ?"— 1  Peter  iv.  18. 


"  QCARCELY  saved"  points  out  the  difficulty  of 

O  salvation. 

Some  think  it  easy  to  begin  by  believing ;  but  the 
prophet  cries,  "  Who  hath  believed  ?  "  and  Jesus  asks, 
"  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh,  shall  he  find  faith  on 
the  earth  ?  " 

Some  may  also  think  it  easy  to  persevere  to  the 
end,  but  the  godly  are  hard  put  to  it  to  keep  their 
faces  Zionward. 

It  is  no  light  thing  to  be  saved:  omnipotent  grace 
is  needed. 

It  is  no  trifling  thing  to  be  lost,  but  it  can  be  done 
by  neglect. 

I.  THE  FACT  :  "  The  righteous  scarcely  are  saved" 

1.  From  the  connection  we  conclude  that  the 
righteous  are  saved  with  difficulty  because 
of  the  strictness  of  divine  rule.  "  The  time 
is  come  that  judgment  must  begin  at  the 
house  of  God." 

There  is  equity  and  fitness  in  this  speciality 
of  examination. 

(319) 


390  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

These  tests  are  many,  varied,  repeated,  ap 
plied  by  God  himself. 

Good  com  endures  the  sickle,  the  flail,  the 
fan,  the  sieve,  the  mill,  the  oven. 

The  great  test  of  all  is  the  omniscient  judg 
ment  of  the  jealous  God.     What  grace  will 
be  needed  to  pass  that  ordeal ! 
2.  From  the  experience  of  saints  \ve  come  to  the 

same  conclusion. 

They  find  many  saving  acts  to  be  hard,  as  for 
instance — 

To  lay  hold  on  Christ  simply,  and  as  sinners. 

To  overcome  the  flesh  from  day  to  day. 

To  resist  the  world  with  its  blandishments, 
threats,  and  customs. 

To  vanquish  Satan  and  his  horrible  tempta 
tions. 

To  perform  needful  duties  in  a  humble  and 
holy  spirit. 

To  reach  to  gracious  attainments  and  to  con 
tinue  in  them. 

To  pass  the  tribunal  of  their  own  awakened 
and  purified  conscience,  and  to  receive  a 
verdict  of  acquittal  there. 

3.  From  the  testimony  of  those  who  are  safe 
ly  lauded. 

"These  are  they  which  came  out  of  great 
tribulation." 

II.  THE  INFERENCE  FROM  THE  FACT:    "  Where  shaU  the 

ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear  ?  " 
1.  If  even  the  true  coin  is  so  severely  tested,  what 
will  become  of  "  reprobate  silver  "  ? 


IF   SO — WHAT  THEN?  821 

2.  If  saints  scarcely  reach  heaven,  what  of  the  un 

godly  ? 

What  can  they  do  who  have  no  God  ? 

What  can  they  do  who  have  no  Saviour  ? 

What  can  they  do  who  are  without  the  Spirit 
of  God? 

What  without  prayer,  the  Word,  the  promise 
of  God,  &c.  ? 

What  without  diligence  ?  When  the  trades 
man,  though  careful,  is  losing  all  his  capi 
tal,  what  of  the  spendthrift  ? 

What  without  truth?  When  the  fire  con 
sumes  houses  strongly  built,  what  must  be 
come  of  wood,  hay,  stubble  ? 

3.  If  saints  are  so  sorely  chastened,  what  will  justice 

mete  out  to  the  openly  defiant  sinner  ? 

III.  ANOTHER  INFERENCE.      Where  icitt  ike,  mere  profess 

or  appear  ? 
If  the  truly  godly  have  a  hard  fight  for  it — 

The  formalist  will  find  ceremonies  a  poor 
solace. 

The  false  professor  will  be  ruined  by  his  hy 
pocrisy. 

The  presumptuous  will  find  his  daring  pride  a 
poor  help. 

He  who  trusted  to  mere  orthodoxy  of  creed 
will  come  to  a  fall. 

Height  of  office  will  do  no  more  than  increase 
responsibility. 

IV.  ANOTHER  INFERENCE.     Then  the  tempted  sold  may 

be  saved. 
21 


322  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

It  seema  that  even  those  who  are  truly  saints  are 
saved  with  difficulty:  then  we  may  be  saved,  though 
we  have  a  hard  struggle  for  it. 

Uprising  corruption  makes  us  stagger. 
A  persecuting  world  tries  us  sorely. 
Fierce  temptations  from  without  cause  us  per 
plexity. 

Loss  of  inward  joys  bring  us  to  a  stand. 
Failure  in  holy  efforts  tests  our  faith. 
But  in  all  this  we  have  fellowship  with  the  right- 
cons  of  all  ages. 
They  are  saved,  and  so  shall  we  be. 

V.  ANOTHER  INFERENCE.     How  sweet  loiU  heaven  be  ! 

There  the  difficulties  will  be  ended  for  ever. 

There  the  former  trials  will  contribute  to  the  eter 
nal  bliss. 

ENFORCEMENTS. 

When  the  apostle  uses  the  phrase — "  If  the  right 
eous  scarcely  be  saved"  he  does  not,  assuredly,  mean 
that  there  is  any  doubt  about  the  absolute  and  infi 
nite  sufficiency  of  the  ground  of  their  salvation :  or 
that  there  is  any  uncertainty  in  the  result;  or  that 
there  is  any  stintedness  or  imperfection  in  the  final 
enjoyment;  or  that,  when  believers  come  to  stand 
before  the  judgment-seat  at  last,  it  will  go  hard  with 
them,  so  that  they  may  barely  come  off  with  acquit 
tal,  the  poised  balance  vibrating  in  long  uncertainty, 
and  barely  turning  on  the  favorable  side,  the  justify 
ing  righteousness  of  their  Lord  forming  no  more 
than  a  counterpoise,  and  hardly  that,  to  their  de- 


IF   SO — WHAT  THEN  ?  323 

merits.  He  means  none  of  these  things.  His  lan 
guage  refers  to  the  difficulty  in  bringing  them  through  to 
their  final  salvation ;  to  the  necessity  of  employing 
the  rod  and  furnace ;  the  process,  in  many  instances 
severe,  of  correction  and  purification;  of  bringing 
them  "  to  the  wealthy  place  through  the  fire  and  the 
water";  of  their  "entering  the  kingdom  through 
much  tribulation  ";  of  their  being  "  chastened  of  the 
Lord,  that  they  might  not  be  condemned  with  the 
world."  If  "  fiery  trial "  be  required,  and  his  hatred 
of  sin  and  his  love  to  his  children  will  not  allow  him 
to  withhold  it,  to  purge  out  the  remaining  alloy  of 
their  holiness,  what  must  his  enemies  have  to  look 
for  from  his  abhorrence  of  evil,  in  whom  sin  is  not 
the  mere  alloy  of  a  better  material,  but  all  is  sin  to 
gether  ? — Dr.  Wardlaiv. 

There  is  much  ado  to  get  Lot  out  of  Sodom,  to  get 
Israel  out  of  Egypt.  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  get  a 
man  out  of  the  state  of  corruption. — Richard  Sibbes. 

Of  this  I  am  assured,  that  no  less  devotion  than 
that  which  carried  the  martyrs  through  the  flames, 
will  carry  us  unpolluted  through  this  present  world. 

Mrs.  Palmer. 

Do  you  grieve  and  murmur  that  you  must  be 
saved  with  difficulty  ?  Ungrateful  creatures !  you 
had  deserved  certain  damnation.  The  vengeance 
of  God  might  have  appeared  armed  for  your  destruc 
tion;  and  he  might  long  ago  have  sworn  in  his 
wrath  that  you  should  never  enter  into  his  rest. 


324  MY   SERMO^-NOTEft. 

And  will  you  complain  of  the  Lord's  leadings  because 
he  does  not  always  strew  your  path  with  roses  ? 

Dr  Doddridge, 

"  Where  shall  the  ungodly  and  the  sinner  appear? 
Surely  nowhere.  Not  before  saints  and  angels,  for 
holiness  is  their  trade.  Not  before  God,  for  he  is  ot 
"more  pure  eyes  than  to  behold  them."  Not  before 
Christ,  for  he  shall  come  in  flaming  fire,  rendering 
vengeance.  Not  in  heaven,  for  it  is  an  undefiled 
inheritan  ce. — John  Trapp. 

Where  shall  he  appear,  when  to  the  end  that  he 
might  not  appear,  he  would  be  glad  to  be  smothered 
under  the  weight  of  the  hills  and  mountains,  if  they 
could  shelter  him  from  appearing? 

Archbishop  Ldghton. 


CCLI. 

"THE  ELDKRS  WHICH  ARE  AMONG  YOU  I  EXHORT,  WHO  AM 
ALSO  AX  ELDER,  AND  A  WITNESS  OF  THE  SUFFERINGS  OF 
CHRIST,  AND  ALSO  A  PARTAKER  OF  THE  GLORY  THAT  SHALL 
BE  REVEALED." — 1  Peter  v.  1. 

THE  apostle's  care.     He   was  anxious  that  the 
elders  should  tend  the  flock  of  God,  and  make 
themselves  ensamples  to  it. 

The  apostle's  gentleness.  "I  exhort":  not  com 
mand,  &c. 

The  apostle's  humility — "  also  an  elder."  He  does 
not  insist  upon  his  apostleship,  though  this  was 
much  the  greater  office. 

The  apostle's  wisdom — "also  an  elder."  In  this 
capacity  he  would  have  most  weight  with  them  in 
his  exhortation. 

Besides  this,  he  mentioned  two  other  characters, 
and  calls  himself  "  a  witness  of  the  sufferings  of 
Christ,  and  a  partaker  of  the  glory  that  shall  be  re 
vealed." 

I.    A  WITNESS    OF    THE    SUFFERINGS   OF    CHRIST. 

So  far  as  possible,  let  us  be  witnesses  with  Peter. 
1.  An  eje- witness  of  those  sufferings.     Apostles 

must  have  seen  Jesus. 

He  had  seen  the  passion  and  death  of  our 
Lord. 

(325) 


326  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

In  this  we  cannot  participate,  nor  need  we  desire 
to  do  so. 

2.  A  faith- witness  of  those  sufferings. 

He  had  personally  believed  on  Jesus  at  the 
first. 

He  had  further  believed  through  after-com 
munion  with  him. 

3.  A  testifying  witness  of  those  sufferings. 

He  bore  witness  to  their  bitterness  when 
borne  by  Jesus. 

He  bore  witness  to  their  importance  as  an 
atonement. 

He  bore  witness  to  their  completeness  as  a 
satisfaction. 

He  bore  witness  to  their  effect  in  perfect  sal 
vation. 

4.  A  partaking  witness  of  those  sufferings. 

In  defence  of  truth  he  suffered  from  opposes. 

In  winning  others  he  suffered  in  the  anguish 
of  his  heart. 

In  serving  his  Lord  he  suffered  exile,  perse 
cution,  death. 

What  he  witnessed  in  all  these  ways  became  a 
motive  and  a  stimulus  for  his  whole  life. 

IT.  A  PARTAKER  OF  THE  GLORY  TO  BE  REVEALED. 

Tt  is  important  to  partake  in  all  that  we  preach, 
or  else  we  preach  without  vividness  and  assurance. 
1.  Peter  had   enjoyed  a  liberal   foretaste  of  the 

glory  on  the  holy  mount. 
We,  too,  have  our  earnests  of  eternal  joy. 


A  WITNESS  AND  A  PAETAKEK.  327 

2.  Peter  had  not  yet  seen  the  glory  which  shall  be 

revealed,  and  yet  he  had  partaken  of  it  in 
a  spiritual  sense:  our  participation  must 
also  be  spiritual.  Peter  had  been  a  spir 
itual  partaker  in  the  following  ways — 

By  faith  in  the  certainty  of  the  glory. 

By  anticipation  of  the  joy  of  the  glory. 

By  sympathy  with  our  Lord,  who  has  entered 
into  glory. 

3.  Peter  had  felt  the  result  of  faith  in  that  glory — 

In  the  comfort  which  it  yielded  him. 

In  the  heavenliness  which  it  wrought  in  him. 

In  the  courage  with  which  it  endowed  him. 

These  two  things,  his  witnessing  and  his  partak 
ing,  made  our  apostle  intense  in  his  zeal  for  the 
glory  of  God.  Because  he  had  seen  and  tasted  of 
the  good  word,  he  preached  it  with  living  power  and 
vivid  speech.  All  preachers  need  to  be  witnesses  and 
partakers. 

These  made  him  urgent  with  others  to  "feed  the 
flock  of  God."  Such  a  man  could  not  endure  toilers. 

These  are  the  essentials  for  all  eminently  useful 
and  acceptable  service.  The  Lord  will  only  bless 
witnesses  and  partakers. 


HINTS. 

I  remember  a  story  which  runs  thus: — To  a  saint 
who  was  praying  the  evil  spirit  showed  himself  radi 
ant  with  royal  robes,  and  crowned  with  a  jewelled 
diadem,  and  said,  "  I  am  Christ — I  am  descending 
on  the  earth — and  I  desire  iirst  to  manifest  myself 


MY 

to  thee."  The  saint  kept  silence,  and  looked  on  the 
apparition ;  and  then  said,  "  I  will  not  believe  that 
Christ  is  come  to  me  save  in  that  state  and  form  in 
which  he  suffered;  he  must  wear  the  marks  of  the 
wounds  and  the  cross."  The  false  apparition  van 
ished.  The  application  is  this:  Christ  comes  not  in 
pride  of  intellect  or  reputation  for  ability.  These 
are  the  glittering  robes  in  which  Satan  is  now  array 
ing  himself.  Many  false  spirits  are  abroad,  more  are 
issuing  from  the  pit :  the  credentials  which  they  dis 
play  are  the  precious  gifts  of  mind,  beauty,  richness, 
depth,  originality.  Christian,  with  the  saint,  look 
hard  at  them  in  silence,  and  ask  them  for  the  print 
of  the  nails.  — Dr.  J.  S.  Howson. 

Tis  a  very  sad  thing  when  preachers  are  like 
printers,  who  compose  and  print  off  many  things, 
which  they  neither  understand,  nor  love,  nor  exper 
ience  ;  all  they  aim  at  is  money  for  printing,  which 
is  their  trade.  It  is  also  sad  when  ministers  are  like 
gentlemen  ushers,  who  bring  ladies  to  their  pews, 
but  go  not  in  themselves — bring  others  to  heaven 
and  themselves  stay  without. — Ralph  Fenmng. 


CCLH. 

"THE  LORD  KNOWETH  HOW  10  DELIVER  THE  GODLY  our  OP 

TEMPTATIONS,    ANft  TO  RESERVE   THE   UNJUST   UNTO  THE   DAY 
OF  JUDGMENT  TO  BE   PUNISHED."  —  2  Peter  ii.  9. 


Lord  knoweth."     Our  faith  in  the  supe- 
-I-     rior  knowledge  of  God  is  a  great  source  of 
comfort  to  us  — 

In  reference  to  perplexing  doctrines. 
In  reference  to  puzzling  prophecies. 
In  reference  to  amazing  promises. 
In  reference  to  distressing  providences. 
In  reference  to  grievous  temptations. 
In  our  entrance  upon   an  unknown  world  in 
the  last  solemn  article  in  death. 

The  government  of  this  world  and  the  next  is  in 
the  hands  of  the  all-knowing  One,  who  cannot  be 
mistaken,  nor  taken  at  unawares. 

I.  THE  LORD'S  KNOWLEDGE  IN  REFERENCE  TO  CHARACTER. 

1.  He  knows  the  godly  — 

Under    trial,    when  they  are   not   known  to 

others. 
Under  temptation,  when  scarcely  known  to 

themselves. 

2.  He  knows  the  unjust  — 

OEM 


330  MY   SEKMON-lSrOTES. 

Though  they  may  make  loud  professions  of 

piety. 
Though  they  may  be  honored  for  their  great 

possessions. 

No  error  either  as  to  partiality  or  severity  is  made 
by  God. 

II.  THE  LORD'S  KNOWLEDGE  IN  REFERENCE  TO  THE  GODLY. 

A  people  knowing,  fearing,  trusting,  loving  God. 

He  knows  how  to  let  them  suffer,  and  yet  to  de 
liver  them  in  the  most  complete  and  glorious  man 
ner. 

1.  His    knowledge    answers    better   than    theirs 

would  do. 

2.  His  knowledge  of  their  case  is  perfect.     Before, 

in,  and  after  temptation  he  knows  their  sor 
rows. 

3.  He  knows  in  every  case  how  to  deliver  them. 

4.  In  every  case  there  must  therefore  be  a  way  of 

escape. 

5.  He  knows  the  most  profitable  way  of  deliver 

ance  for  themselves. 

6.  He  knows  the  way  which  will  be  most  glorify 

ing  to  himself. 

7.  His  knowledge   should  cause  them  to  trust  in 

him  with  holy  confidence,  and  never  to  sin 
in  order  to  escape. 

III.  THE   LORD'S  KNOWLEDGE   IN  REFERENCE  TO  THE   UN 

JUST. 

They  are  unjust  in  all  senses,  for  they  are — 
Not  legally  just  by  keeping  the  law ; 


THE  LORD'S  KNOWLEDGE  OUR  SAFEGUARD.      33] 

Nor  evangelically  just  through  faith  in  Jesus; 
Nor  practically  jast  in  their  daily  lives. 

The  Lord  knows  best — 

1.  How  to  deal  with  them  from  day  to  day. 

2.  How   to    reserve    them    under   restraints.     He 

makes  it  possible  to  reprieve  them,  and  yet 
to  maintain  law  and  order. 

3.  How  to  punish  them  with  unrest  and  fears  even 

now. 

4.  How   and   when   to   strike   them  down    when 

their  iniquities  are  full. 

5.  How   to    deal    w^ith    them    in  judgment,   and 

throughout     the    future   state.     The    mys 
teries  of  eternal  doom  are  safe  in  his  hand. 

Two  fine  illustrations  of  the  Lord's  dealings  with 
the  righteous  and  the  wicked  may  be  found  in  Acts 
xii.,  in  connection  with  Peter's  life. 

Peter  in  prison  was  unexpectedly  set  free. 

Herod  on  the  throne  was  eaten  of  worms. 

BREVIA. 

On  the  headstone  of  a  little  grave  containing  a  little 
child  which  was  washed  ashore  during  the  gales, 
without  any  clue  to  birth,  name,  or  parentage,  was 
placed  the  epitaph:  "God  knows.'' — Leisure  Hour. 

"  T/ie  Lord  knowcth  how."  It  is  set  down  indefi 
nitely;  no  man,  no  apostle,  no  angel,  can  know  all 
the  means  of  God's  delivering  his:  it  is  enough  that 
he  himself  knows.  This  gives  a  check  to  all  saucy 
inquirers  that  will  not  believe  help  from  the  Lord, 


332  MY   SEEMON-NOTES. 

unless  he  tells  them  how  .  .  .  Deliverance  we 
look  for:  how  or  when  the  Lord  will  deliver  thee  or 
me,  that  is  in  his  own  bosom,  and  in  the  breast  of 
his  Privy  Counsellor,  Jesus  Christ. 

Tluomas  Adams. 

In  tne  Life  and  Letters  of  G.  Ticknor,  a  remark  is 
made  to  the  effect,  that  when  in  Brussels,  and  con 
versing  with  some  of  the  elite  of  society  there,  he 
could  not  avoid  constantly  remembering  that  two  of 
the  high-minded  intellectual  persons  with  whom  he 
was  sitting  were  under  sentence  of  death  if  found 
within  the  grasp  of  Austria.  We  cannot  forget  that 
many  around  us  are  now  "  under  condemnation,"  and 
are  "  reserved  until  the  day  of  judgment." 


CCL1II. 

"IT  I>OTH  NOT  TET  APPEAR  WHAT  WE  SHALL  BE:  BUT  WR 
KNOW  THAT  WHEN  II R  SHALL  APPEAR,  WE  SHALL  BK  LIKE 
HIM ;  FOR  WE  SHALL  SEE  HIM  AS  HE  18." — 1  John  ill.  2. 

THE  present  condition  of  a   believer,   notwith 
standing  its  imperfection,  is  a  state  of  much  joy 
and  honor.      Looked  at  in  the  light  of  faith,  it  is  sub 
lime,  for  "  now  are  we  the  sons  of  God." 

We  are  near  to  God's  heart  as  his  children. 

Wo  nestle  under  the  wings  of  God  for  protection. 

We  abide  in  his  pavilion  for  communion. 

We  are  fed  in  his  pasture  for  provision. 
For  all  this,  our  earthly  existence  is  not  a  life  which 
we  would  desire  to  be  perpetual.  It  is  as  a  travel 
ler's  pilgrimage,  a  sailor's  voyage,  a  soldier's  war 
fare:  and  we  look  forward  to  its  end  with  joyful  ex 
pectation. 

Wo  will  let  the  text  divide  itself  verbally. 

I.    "  IT    DOTH    NOT    TET    APPEAR   WHAT    WE    SHALL    BE." 

At  present  we  are  veiled,  and  travel  through  the 
world  incognito. 

1.  Our  Master  was  not  made  manifest  here  below. 
His  glory  was  veiled  in  flesh. 
His  Deity  was  concealed  in  infirmity. 

(333) 


334  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

His  power   was   hidden  under   sorrow    and 

weakness. 
His  riches  were  buried  under  poverty   and 

shame. 
The  world  knew  him  not,  for  he  was  made  flesh. 

2.  We  are  not  fit  to  appear  in  full  figure  as  yet. 

The  son  is  treated  as  a  servant  while  under 

age. 

The  heir  is  kept  a  pensioner  till  his  majority. 
The  prince  serves  as  a  soldier  before  he  reaches 

the  throne. 

We  must  needs  have  an  evening  before  our  morn 
ing,  a  schooling  before  our  college,  a  tuning  before 
the  music  is  ready. 

3.  This  is  not  the  world  to  appear  in. 

There  are  none  to  appreciate  us,  and  it  would 
be  as  though  kings  showed  their  royalty  at 
a  wake,  or  wise  men  discoursed  philosophy 
before  fools. 

A  warring  and  waiting  condition  like  the 
present  would  not  be  a  fit  opportunity  for 
unveiling. 

4.  This  is  not  the  time  in  which  to  appear  in  our 

glory. 
The  winter  prepares  flowers,  but  does  not  call 

them  forth. 
The  ebb-tide  reveals  the  secrets  of  the  sea,  but 

many   of   our  rivers   no  gallant  ship    can 

then  sail. 
To  everything  there  is  a  season,   and  this  if 

not  the  time  of  glory. 


BY-A1STD-BY.  335 

II.  "  BUT   WE    KNOW    THAT    WHEN    HE    SHALL   APPEAR." 

1.  We  speak  of  our  Lord's  manifestation  without 

doubt.     "  We  know." 

2.  Our  faith  is  so  assured  that  it  becomes  know 

ledge. 

He  will  be  manifest  upon  this  earth  in  per 
son. 

He  will  be  manifest  in  perfect  happiness. 

He  will  be  manifest  in  highest  gljry. 

He  will  appear  surely,  and  so  we  speak  of  it  as 
a  date  for  our  own  manifesting — "When  he 
shall  appear." 

Oh  the  hope,  the  glory,  the  bliss,  the  fulness  of 
delight  which  cluster  around  this  great  appearing  ! 

III.  "  WE   SHALL    BE  LIKE   HIM." 

We  shall  then   be  as  manifested,  and  as  clearly 

seen,  as  he  will  be. 
The  time  of  our  open  presentation  at  court  will 

have  come. 

1.  Having  a  body  like  his  body. 

Sinless,  incorruptible,  painless,  spiritual, 
clothed  with  beauty  and  power,  and  yet 
most  real  and  true: 

2.  Having  a  soul  like  his  soul. 

Perfect,  holy,  instructed,  developed,  strength 
ened,  active,  delivered  from  temptation, 
conflict,  and  suffering. 

3.  Having  such  dignities  and  glories  as  he  wears. 

Kings,  priests,  conquerors,  judges,  eons  of 
God. 


336  MY   SEHMON-NOTES. 

We  must  be  made  in  a  measure  like  him  now,  or 
else  we  shall  not  be  found  so  at  his  appearing. 

IV.    "  WE   SHALL    SEE    HIM   AS    HE    IS." 

1.  This  glorious  sight  will  perfect  our  likeness. 

2.  This  will  be  the  result  of  our  being  like  him. 

3.  This  will  be  evidence  of  our  being  like  him, 
since  none  but  the  pure  in  heart  can  see  God. 

The  sight  will  be  ravishing. 

The  sight  will  be  transforming  and  transfiguring. 
The  sight  will  be  abiding,   and  a  source  of  bliss 
for  ever. 

Behold  what  glories  come  out  of  our  being  the 
sons  of  God ! 

Let  us  not  rest  till  by  faith  in  Jesus  we  receive 
power  to  become  sons  of  God,  and  then  let  us  go  on 
to  enjoy  the  privileges  of  sonship. 


LIGHTS. 

God  showed  power  in  making  us  creatures,  but 
love  in  making  us  sons.  Plato  gave  God  thanks 
that  he  had  made  him  a  man,  and  not  a  beast;  but 
what  cause  have  they  to  adore  God's  love,  who  hath 
made  them  children  !  The  apostle  puts  an  ecce  to  it, 
Behold  I — Thomas  Watscn. 

And  here,  reader,  wonder  not  if  I  be  at  a  loss; 
and  if  my  apprehensions  receive  but  little  of  that 
which  is  in  my  expressions.  If  to  the  beloved  dis 
ciple  that  durst  speak  and  inquire  into  Christ's  se 
crets,  and  was  rilled  with  his  revelations,  and  saw  the 


BY-AND-BY.  337 

New  Jerusalem  in  her  glory,  and  had  seen  Christ, 
Moses,  and  Elias  in  part  of  theirs;  if  it  did  not  ap 
pear  to  him  what  we  shall  be,  but  only  in  general, 
that  when  Christ  appears,  we  shall  be  like  him,  no 
wonder  if  I  know  little. — Richard  Baxter,  in  "  The 
Saint's  Everlasting  Rest" 

Such  divine,  God-given  glimpses  into  the  future 
reveal  to  us  more  than  all  our  thinking.  What  in 
tense  truth,  what  divine  meaning  there  is  in  God's 
creative  word:  "Let  us  make  man  in  our  image, 
after  our  likeness  P  To  show  forth  the  likeness  of 
the  Invisible,  to  be  partaker  of  the  divine  nature, 
to  share  with  God  his  rule  of  the  universe,  is  man's 
destiny.  His  place  is  indeed  one  of  unspeakable 
glory.  Standing  between  two  eternities,  the  eternal 
purpose  in  which  we  were  predestinated  to  be  con 
formed  to  the  image  of  the  first-born  Son,  and  the 
eternal  realization  of  that  purpose,  when  we  shall 
be  like  him  in  his  glory.  We  hear  the  voice  from 
every  side :  O  ye  image-bearers  of  God  !  on  the  way 
to  share  the  glory  of  God  and  of  Christ,  live  a  God 
like,  live  a  Christlike  life  ! — Andrew  Murray. 

A  converted  blind  man  once  said,  "Jesus  Christ 
will  be  the  first  person  I  shall  ever  see,  for  my  eyes 
will  be  opened  in  heaven." 

Then  shall  we  see  Thee  as  Thou  art, 

For  ever  fixed  in  no  unfruitful  gaze, 
But  such  as  lifts  the  new-created  heart, 
Age  after  age,  in  worthier  love  and  praise. 

John  K<*le, 
22 


338  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

"  You  are  going  to  be  with  Jesus,  and  to  see  him 
as  he  is,"  said  a  friend  to  Rowland  Hill  on  his  death 
bed.  "  Yes,"  replied  Mr.  Hill,  with  emphasis,  "  and 
I  shall  be  like  him;  that  is  the  crowning  point." 

To  see  him  as  he  is,  and  in  himself,  is  reserved  till 
we  shall  have  better  eyes;  these  eyes  we  have  are 
carnal  and  corruptible,  and  cannot  see  God  till  they 
have  put  on  incorruption. — Sir  Richard  Baker. 

One  view  of  Jesus  as  lie  is 
Will  strike  all  sin  for  ever  dead. 

W. 


CCLIV. 

AND   EVERY  MAN  THAT  HATH  THIS  HOPE    IN    HIM    PURIFIKTH 
HIMSELF,    EVEN   AS   HE   IS   PURE." — 1  Jolm  ill.  3. 


TH 
H 


I  HE  Christian  is  a  man  whose  main  possessions 
lie  in  reversion. 
Most  men  have  a  hope,  but  his  is  a  peculiar  one; 
and  its  effect  is  special,  for  it  causes  him  to  purify 
himself. 

I.  THE  BELIEVER'S  HOPE.     "  Every  one  that  hath  this 

hope  in  him." 

1.  It  is  the  hope  of  being-  like  Jesus. 

Perfect,   Glorious,  Conqueror  over  sin,  death 
and  hell. 

2.  It  is  based  upon  divine  love.     See  verse  1. 

3.  It  arises  out  of  sonship.     "  Called  the  sons  of 

God." 

4.  It  rests  upon  our  union  to  Jesus.     "  When  he 

shall  appear." 

5.  It  is  distinctly   hope  in  Him.     "  We  shall  bf 

like  him,"  etc. 

6.  It  is  the  hope  of  his  second  Advent. 

II.  THE    OPERATION    OF    THAT   HOPE.       "  Purifietll." 

It  does  not  puff  up  like  the  conceit  of  Pharisees. 
It  does  not  lead  to  loose  living,  like  the  presump 
tion  of  Antinornians. 

(339) 


340  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

It  shows  us  what  course  is  grateful,  is  congruous  to 
grace,  is  according  to  the  new  nature,  and  is  prepa 
ratory  to  the  perfect  future. 

1.  The  believer  purifies  himself  from — 

His  grosser  sins.     From  evil  company,  etc. 

His  secret  sins,  neglects,  imaginings,  desires, 
murmu rings,  etc. 

His  besetting  sins  of  heart,  temper,  body, 
relationship,  etc. 

His  relative  sins  in  the  family,  the  shop,  the 
church,  etc. 

His  sins  arising  out  of  nationality,  education, 
profession,  etc. 

His  sins  of  word,  thought,  action,  and  omis 
sion. 

2.  He  does  this  in  a  perfectly  natural  way. 

By  getting  a  clear  notion  of  what  purity  real 
ly  is. 

By  keeping  a  tender  conscience,  and  bewail 
ing  his  faults. 

By  having  an  eye  to  God  and  his  continual 
presence. 

By  making  others  his  beacons  or  examples. 

By  hearing  rebukes  for  himself,  and  laying 
them  to  heart. 

By  asking  the  Lord  to  search  him,  and  prac 
tising  self-examination. 

By  distinctly  and  vigorously  fighting  with 
every  known  sin. 

3.  He  sets   before  him  Jesus   as  his  model.     "  He 

purifieth  himself,  even  as  HE  is  pure." 


PURIFICATION  BY    HOPE.  341 

Hence  he  does  not  cultivate  one  grace  only. 
Hence  he  is  never  afraid  of  being  too  precise. 
Hence  he  is  simple,  natural,  and  unconstrained. 
Hence  he  is  evermore  aspiring  after  more  and 
more  holiness. 

III.  THE  TEST    OF   THAT   HOPE.     "  He  purifieth    him 
self." 

Actively,  personally,  prayerfully,  intensely,  con 
tinually,  he  aims  at  the  purification  of  himself,  look 
ing  to  God  for  aid. 

Some  defile  themselves  wilfully. 

Some  take  things  as  they  are. 

Some  believe  that  they  need  no  purifying. 

Some  talk  about  purity,  but  never  strive  after 

it. 

Some  glory  in  that  which  is  a  mere  counter 
feit  of  it, 

The  genuine  Hoper  does  not  belong  to  any  of 
these  classes:  he  really  and  successfully  purifies 
himself. 

What  must  it  be  to  be  without  a  good  hope  ? 

How  can  there  be  hope  where  there  is  no  faith  ? 

Grace  adopts  us;  adoption  gives  us  hope;  hope 
purifies  us,  till  we  are  like  the  Firstborn. 

ANIMATING  WORDS. 

1.  First,  TJie  Workman.  "Every  one  that  hath 
this  hope  in  him."  every  one  that  looks  to  be  like  the 
Lord  Jesus  in  the  kingdom  of  Glory  is  the  man  that 
must  set  about  this  task.  2.  Secondly,  The  work  is 


342  MY   SEEMON-IfOTES. 

a  work  to  be  wrought  by  himself.  He  is  a  part  of 
the  Lord's  husbandry,  and  he  must  take  pains  as  it 
were  to  plough  his  own  ground,  to  weed  his  own 
corn,  he  must  purify  himself;  this  is  his  present  and 
personal  work.  3.  Thirdly,  the  pattern  by  which  he 
must  be  directed  is  the  Lord  Jesus:  his  purity. 
Take  him  for  a  pattern  and  instance;  look  unto  him 
that  is  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith;  as  you 
have  seen  him  do,  so  do  you ;  as  he  is  pure,  so  labor 
you  to  express  in  your  lives  the  virtue  of  him  who 
hath  redeemed  you, — Bhhard  Sibbes. 

Then  thou  comportest  with  thy  hopes  of  salvation 
when  thou  laborest  to  be  as  holy  in  thy  conversation 
as  thou  art  high  in  thy  expectation.  This  the  apos 
tle  urgeth  from  the  evident  fitness  of  the  thing,  2  Pet, 
iii.  11:  "  What  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  in 
all  holy  conversation  and  godliness,  looking  for  and 
hastening  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of  God?" 
Certainly,  it  becomes  such  to  be  holy,  even  to  ad 
miration,  who  look  for  such  a  blessed  day :  we  hope 
then  to  be  like  the  angels  in  glory,  and  therefore 
should,  if  possible,  live  now  like  angels  in  holiness. 
Every  believing  soul  is  Christ's  spouse.  The  day  of 
conversion  is  the  day  of  espousals,  wherein  she  is  be 
trothed  by  faith  to  Christ,  and,  as  such,  lives  in 
hopes  for  the  marriage-day,  when  he  shall  come  and 
fetch  her  home  to  his  father's  house,  as  Isaac  did 
Rebekah  to  his  mother's  tent,  there  to  dwell  with 
him,  and  live  in  his  sweet  embraces  of  love,  world 
without  en<l.  Now,  would  the  bride  have  the  bride 
groom  find  her  in  sluttery  and  vile  raiment  ?  No, 


PURIFICATION   BY   HOPE.  343 

surely :  "  Can  a  bride  forget  her  attire  ?  "  Jer.  ii.  32. 
Was  it  ever  known  that  a  bride  forgot  to  have  her 
wedding  clothes  made  against  the  marriage-day,  or 
to  put  them  on  when  she  looks  for  her  bridegroom's 
coining?  Holiness  is  the  raiment  of  needlework  in 
which,  Christian,  thou  art  to  be  brought  to  thy  King 
and  husband:  Ps.  xlv.  14.  Wherefore  is  the  wed 
ding-day  put  off  so  long,  but  because  this  garment 
is  so  long  a-making  ?  When  this  is  once  wrought, 
and  thou  art  ready  dressed,  then  that  joyful  day 
cornes.  Remember  how  the  Holy  Spirit  wordeth  it 
in  the  Book  of  Revelation,  "  the  marriage  of  the 
Lamb  is  come,  and  his  wife  hath  made  herself 
ready :  "  Rev.  xix.  7.  —  William  Gurnall 

A  good  hope,  through  grace,  animates  and  gives 
life  to  action,  and  purifies  as  it  goes:  like  the  high 
land  stream  that  dashes  from  the  rock,  and  purifies 
itself  as  it  pursues  its  course  to  the  ocean. 

H.  G.  Salter. 

The  Christian  needs  Christ  in  his  redemption  as 
the  object  of  Faith,  for  salvation;  Christ  himself  the 
object  of  Love,  for  devotion  and  service;  and  Christ 
in  his  coming  glory,  the  object  of  Hope,  for  separa 
tion  from  the  world. —  W.  Haslam. 

The  biographer  of  Hewitson  says  of  him :  "  He  not 
only  believed  in  the  speedy  appearing,  but  loved  it. 
waited  for  it,  watched  for  it.  So  mighty  a  motive 
power  did  it  become,  that  he  ever  used  to  speak  of 
it  afterwards  as  bringing  with  it  a  kind  of  second  con- 
version" — A.  J.  Gordon,  D.  D. 


CCLV. 

"  WE  KNOW  THAT  WE  HAVE   "A3SED  FROM  DEATH   UNTO  LIFE, 
BECAUSE    WE   LOVE   THE   BRETHREN."—!  John  ill.  14. 

THE  spiritual  things  which  we  speak  of  are  mat 
ters  of  knowledge. 

John,  in  almost  every  verse  of  this  epistle,  uses 
the  words  "  we  know." 

The  philosophical  distinction  between  believing 
and  knowing  is  mere  theory.  "  We  know  and  have 
believed." 

I.  WE    KNOW   THAT   WE    WERE  DEAD. 

1.  We  were  without  feeling  when  law  and  gospel 

were  addressing  us. 

2.  Without  hunger  and  thirst  rfter  righteousness. 

3.  Without  power  of  movement  towards  God  in 

repentance. 

4.  Without  the  breath  of  prayer,  or  pulse  of  desire. 

5.  With  signs  of  corruption ;  some  of  them  most 

offensive. 

II.  WE     KNOW     THAT    WE    HAVE    UNDERGONE    A    SINGULAR 

CHANGE. 

1.  The  reverse  of  the  natural  change  from  life  to 

death. 

2.  No  more  easy  to  describe  than  the  death  change 

would  be. 
(344) 


LIFE  PROVED   BY   LOVE.  346 

3.  This  change  varies  in  each  case  as  to  its  out 

ward  phenomena,   but  it  is  essentially  the 
same  in  all. 

4.  As  a  general  rule  its  course  is  as  follows — 

It  commences  with  painful  sensations. 

It  leads  to  a  sad  discovery  of  our  natural  weak 
ness. 

It  is  made  manifest  by  personal  faith  in  Jesus. 

It  operates  on  the  man  by  repentance  and 
purification. 

It  is  continued  by  perseverance  in  sauctifiea- 
tion. 

It  is  completed  in  joy,  infinite,  eternal. 

5.  The  period  of  this  change  is  an  era  to  be  looked 

back   upon   in  time  and  through  eternity 
with  grateful  praise. 

III.    WB   KNOW   THAT   WE   LIVE. 

1.  We  know  that  we  are  not  under  condemnation. 

2.  We  know  that  faith  has  given  us  new  senses, 

grasping  a  new  world,  enjoying  a  realm  of 
spiritual  things. 

3.  We  know  that  we  have  new  hopes,  fears,  de 

sires,  delights,  etc. 

4.  We  know  that  we  have  been  introduced  into 

new    surroundings    and    a   new    spiritual 
society:  God,  saints,  angels,  etc. 

5.  We  know  that  we    have  new  needs;  such   as 

heavenly  breath,  food,  instruction,   correc 
tion,  etc. 

6.  We  know  that  this  life  guarantees  eternal  bliss. 


346  MY   SEEMOX-SOTES. 

IV.    WE   KNOW   THAT   WE   LIVE,  BECAUSE    WE   LOVE.      "  We 

love  the  brethren." 

1.  We  love  them  for  Christ's  sake. 

2.  We  love  them  for  the  truth's  sake. 

3.  We  love  them  for  their  own  sake. 

4.  We  love  them  when  the  world  hates  them. 

5.  We  love  their  company,  their  example,  their 

exhortations. 

6.  We  love  them  despite  the  drawbacks  of  infirm 

ity,  inferiority,  etc. 

Let  us  prove  our  love  by  our  generosity. 
Thus  shall  we  supply  ourselves  with  growing  evi 
dences  of  grace. 

LOVE-LINES. 

Just  as  in  the  gospel  he  rescues  the  word  logos 
from  antichristian  uses,  so  in  this  Epistle  he  rescues 
the  word  "knoiv,"  and  aims  at  making  his  "little 
children  "  Gnostics  in  the  divine  sense.  Knowledge 
is  excellent,  but  the  path  to  it  is  not  through  intel 
lectual  speculation,  however  keen  and  subtle,  but 
through  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  and  subjection  to  him, 
according  to  those  most  Johannine  words  iu  the  Gos 
pel  of  Matthew:  "Neither  knoweth  any  man  the 
Father  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son 
will  reveal  him." — Dr.  Cvlross. 

The  Christian  apologist  never  further  misses  the 
mark  than  when  he  refuses  the  testimony  of  the  Ag 
nostic  to  himself.  When  the  Agnostic  tells  me  he 
is  blind  and  deaf,  dumb,  torpid,  and  dead  to  the 


LIFE  PROVED   BY   LOVE.  347 

spiritual  Avorld,  I  must  believe  him.  Jesus  tells  me 
that.  Paul  tells  me  that.  Science  tells  me  that. 
He  knows  nothing  of  this  outermost  circle;  and  we 
are  compelled  to  trust  his  sincerity  as  readily  when 
he  deplores  it,  as  if,  being  a  man  without  an  ear,  he 
professed  to  know  nothing  of  a  musical  world,  or 
being  without  taste,  of  a  world  of  art.  The  nescience 
of  the  Agnostic  philosophy  is  the  proof  from  expe 
rience  that  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death. 

Professor  Henry  Drummond. 

The  world  always  loves  to  believe  that  it  is  impossi 
ble  to  know  that  we  are  converted.  If  you  ask  them, 
they  will  say,  "  1  am  not  sure;  I  cannot  tell";  but  the 
whole  Bible  declares  we  may  receive,  and  know 
that  we  have  received,  the  forgiveness  of  sins. 

R.  M.  McCheyne. 

In  the  writings  of  Paul,  "  Faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  love  to  all  the  saints,"  constitute  a  well-understood 
and  oft-reciirririg  sequence.  It  is  a  straitening 
about  that  upper  spring  of  faith  that  makes  the 
streams  of  love  fail  in  their  channels. —  W.  Arnot, 

No  outward  mark  Lave  we  to  know 

Who  thine,  O  Christ,  may  be, 
Until  a  Christian  love  doth  show 

Who  appertains  to  thee : 
For  knowledge  may  be  reached  unto, 

And  formal  justice  gained, 
Bnt  till  each  other  love  we  doe, 

Both  faith  and  workes  are  feigned. 

George  Wither,  1588-1667. 

Yes,  brethren  in  Christ  have  all  one  common  Fa 
ther,  one  common  likeness,  one  object  of  faith,  lovo, 


318  MY  SEKMON-NOTES. 

and  adoration ;  one  blessed  hope,  one  present  em 
ployment;  alike  in  trials,  alike  in  prayer.  They  lean 
upon  the  same  hand,  appear  daily  before  the  same 
mercy-seat,  feed  at  the  same  table.  How  much  all 
these  things  link  them  together,  not  in  profession 
only,  but  in  heart !  Hence  this  is  a  decisive  test : 
"  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto 
life,  because  we  love  the  brethren." — D.  Kattems. 

In  the  early  days  of  Christianity,  when  it  triumph 
ed  over  the  old  heathenism  of  the  Roman  world,  it 
founded  a  new  society  bound  together  by  this  holy 
mutual  love.  The  catacombs  of  Home  bear  remark 
able  testimony  to  this  gracious  brotherhood.  There 
were  laid  the  bodies  of  members  of  the  highest  Ro 
man  aristocracy,  some  even  of  the  family  of  the 
Caesars,  side  by  side  with  the  remains  of  obscure 
slaves  and  laborers.  And  in  the  case  of  the  earliest 
graves  the  inscriptions  are  without  a  single  allusion 
to  the  position  in  society  of  him  who  was  buried 
there :  they  did  not  trouble  themselves  whether  he 
had  been  a  consul  or  a  slave,  a  tribune  of  the  legion 
or  a  common  soldier,  a  patrician  or  an  artisan.  It 
sufficed  that  they  knew  him  to  have  been  a  believer 
in  Christ,  a  man  who  feared  God.  They  cared  not  to 
perpetuate  in  death  the  vain  distinctions  of  the 
world;  thay, had  mastered  the  glorious  teaching  of 
the  Lord,  "  One  is  your  master,  even  Christ,  and  all 
ye  are  brethren." — E.  De  Pressense. 


CCLYI. 

"  FOR  IF  OUR  HKART  CONDEMN  US,  GoD   IS  GREATER  THAJf  OUR 

HEART,    AND   KNOWETH   ALL  THINGS. 
"BELOVED,    IF   OUR  HEART   CONDEMN   US  NOT,    THEN   HAVE  WB 

CONFIDENCE  TOWARD  GOD." — Uohn  III.  20,  21. 

r  I  "'HE  fault  of  many  is  that  they  will  not  lay  spirit- 
J-  n al  things  to  heart  at  all,  but  treat  them  in  a 
superficial  manner.  This  is  foolish,  sinful,  deadly. 
We  ought  to  put  our  case  upon  serious  trial  in  the 
court  of  our  own  conscience. 

Certain  of  a  better  class  are  satisfied  with  the  ver 
dict  of  their  hearts,  and  do  not  remember  the  high 
er  courts;  and  therefore  either  become  presumptuous, 
or  are  needlessly  distressed.  We  are  about  to  con 
sider  the  judgments  of  this  lower  court.  Here  wo 
may  have — 

I.  A  CORRECT  VERDICT  AGAINST  OURSELVES. 

Let  us  sum  up  the  process. 

1.  The  court  sits  under  the  King's  arms,  to  judge 

by  royal  authority.  The  charge  against  the 
prisoner  is  read.  Conscience  accuses,  and 
quotes  the  law  as  applicable  to  the  points 
alleged. 

2.  Memory  gives  evidence.     As  to  the  fact  of  sin 

in  years  past,  and  of  sin  move  lately  eom- 

(349) 


350  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

mitted.  Items  mentioned.  Sabbath  sins. 
Transgressions  of  each  one  of  the  ten  com 
mandments.  Rejection  of  the  gospel.  Omis 
sions  in  a  thousand  ways.  Failure  in  mo 
tive,  spirit,  temper,  etc. 

3.  Knowledge  gives   evidence   that  the   present 

state  of  mind  and  heart  and  will  is  not  ac 
cording  to  the  Word. 

4.  Self-love  and  pride  urge  good  intents  and  pious 

acts  in  stay  of  proceedings.  Hear  the  de 
fence  !  But  alas !  it  is  not  worth  hearing. 
The  defence  is  but  one  of  "  the  refuges  of 
lies." 

5.  The   heart,    judging    by    the   law,   condemns. 

Henceforth  the  man  lives  as  in  a  condemned 
cell  under  fear  of  death  and  hell. 

If  even  our  partial,  half-enlightened  heart  con 
demns,  we  may  well  tremble  at  the  thought  of  appear 
ing  before  the  Lord  God. 

The  higher  court  is  more  strictly  just,  better  in 
formed,  more  authoritative,  and  more  able  to  pun 
ish.  God  knows  all.  Forgotten  sin,  sins  of  ig 
norance,  sins  half  seen  are  all  before  the  Lord. 

What  a  terrible  case  is  this !  Condemned  in  the 
lower  court,  and  sure  to  be  condemned  in  the 
higher ! 

II.    AN  INCORRECT   VERDICT   AGAINST   OURSELVES. 

The  case  as  before.  The  sentence  apparently 
most  clear. 

But  when  revised  by  the  higher  court  it  is  re 
versed,  for  good  reasona 


THE   LOWER  COURTS.  351 

1.  The  debt  has  been   discharged   by  the  man's 

glorious  Surety. 

2.  The  man  is  not  the  same  man;  though  he  sinned 

he  has  died  to  sin,  and  he  now  lives  as  one 
born  from  above. 

3.  A  ne  evidences  in  his  favor,  such  as  the  atone 

ment  and  the  new  birth,  were  forgotten, 
undervalued,  or  misjudged  in  the  lower 
court;  hence  he  was  condemned.  Sentence 
of  condemnation  does  not  stand  when  these 
matters  are  duly  noted. 

4.  The  evidence  looked  for  by  a  sickly  conscience 

was  what  it  could  not  find,  for  it  did  not 
exist,  namely,  natural  goodness,  perfection, 
unbroken  joy,  etc.  The  judge  was  ignor 
ant,  and  legally  inclined.  The  verdict  was 
therefore  a  mistaken  one.  An  appeal  clears 
the  case :  "  God  is  greater  than  our  heart, 
and  knoweth  all  things." 

III.    A    CORRECT    VERDICT    OF   ACQUITTAL. 

Our  heart  sometimes  justly  "condemns  us  not." 
The  argument  for  non-condemnation  is  good:  the 

following  are  the  chief  items  of  evidence  in  proof  of 

our  being  gracious — 

1.  We  are  sincere  in  our  profession  of  love  to  God. 

2.  We  are  filled  with  love  to  the  brethren. 

3.  We  are  resting  upon  Christ,  and  on  him  alone. 

4.  We  are  longing  after  holiness. 

The  result  of  this  happy  verdict   of  the  heart  is 
that  we  have — 

Confidence  towards  God  that  we  are  really  his. 


352  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Confidence  as  to  cur  reconciliation  with  God 

by  Jesus  Christ. 
Confidence  that  he  will  not  harm  us,  but  will 

bless  us. 
Confidence  in  prayer  that  he  will  accept  and 

answer. 
Confidence   as  to  future  judgment    that   we 

shall  receive  the  gracious  reward  at  the  last 

great  day. 

IV.    AN    INCORRECT    VERDICT    OF   ACQUITTAL. 

1.  A  deceived  heart  may  refuse  to  condemn,  but 

God  will  judge  us  all   the  same.     He  will 
not  allow  self-conceit  to  stand. 

2.  A  false  heart  may  acquit,  but  this  gives  no  con 

fidence  God  ward. 

3.  A  deceitful  heart  pretends  to  acquit  while  in  its 

centre  it  condemns. 

If  we  shrink  now,  what  shall  we  do  in  judgment  ? 
What  a  waking,   to  find  ourselves  condemned  at 
the  last ! 

QUOTATIONS. 

When  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  had  laid  his  head  upon 
the  block,  says  an  eloquent  divine,  he  was  asked  by 
the  executioner  whether  it  lay  aright.  Whereupon, 
with  the  calmness  of  a  hero  and  the  faith  of  a  Chris 
tian,  he  returned  an  answer,  the  power  of  which  we 
all  shall  feel  when  our  head  is  tossing  and  turning 
on  death's  uneasy  pillow — "  It  matters  little,  ray 
friend,  how  the  head  lies,  providing  the  heart  be 
right."— Stede. 


THE  LOWER  COURTS.  353 

As  Luther  says:  "Though  conscience  weigh  us 
down,  and  tell  us  God  is  angry,  yet  God  is  greater 
than  our  heart.  The  conscience  is  but  one  drop;  the 
reconciled  God  is  an  ocean  of  consolation." 

Critical  English  Testament. 

A  seared  conscience  thinks  better  of  itself  a 
wounded  worse  than  it  ought:  the  former  may  ac 
count  all  sin  a  sport,  the  latter  all  sport  a  sin ;  mel 
ancholy  men,  when  sick,  are  ready  to  conceive  any 
cold  to  be  the  cough  of  the  lungs,  and  an  ordinary 
pustule  to  be  no  less  than  a  plague-sore.  So  wound 
ed  consciences  conceive  sins  of  infirmity  to  be  sins 
of  presumption,  sins  of  ignorance  to  be  sins  of  knowl 
edge,  apprehending  their  case  to  be  far  more  danger 
ous  than  it  is  indeed. —  Thomas  Fuller. 

Conscience  works  after  the  manner  so  beautifully 
set  forth  in  the  ring  that  a  great  magician,  according 
to  an  Eastern  tale,  presented  to  his  prince.  The 
gift  was  of  inestimable  value,  not  for  the  diamonds 
and  rabies  and  pearls  that  gemmed  it,  but  for  a  rare 
and  mystic  property  in  the  metal.  It  set  easily 
enough  011  the  finger  in  ordinary  circumstances,  but 
as  soon  as  its  wearer  formed  a  bad  thought,  designed 
01  committed  a  bad  action,  the  ring  became  a  mon 
itor.  Suddenly  contracting,  it  pressed  painfully  on 
his  finger,  warning  him  of  sin.  Such  a  ring,  thank 
God,  is  not  the  peculiar  property  of  kings;  the 
poorest  of  us,  those  that  wear  none  other,  may  pos 
sess  and  wear  this  inestimable  jewel;  for  the  ring 
of  the  fable  is  just  that  conscience  which  is  the  voice 
23 


354  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

of  God  within  us,  which  is  his  law,  engraven  by  the 
finger  of  God,  not  on  Sinai's  granite  tables,  but  on 
the  fleshy  tablets  of  the  heart,  which,  enthroned  as 
a  sovereign  in  every  bosom,  commends  us  when  we 
do  right,  and  condemns  us  when  we  do  wrong. 

Dr.  Guthrie. 

The  spirit  of  man,  that  candle  of  the  Lord,  often 
gives  but  a  faint  and  glimmering  light;  but  the 
Spirit  of  God  snufis  it,  that  it  may  burn  brighter. 

Benjamin  Beddome. 


CCLVII. 

"  FOR  WHAT6OETKR  IS  BORN  OF   GOD   OVERCOMETH   TUB 

WORLD:   AND  THIS  is  THK  VICTORY  THAT  OVERCOMETU  THE 

WOKLD,   EVEN  OUR  FAITH." — 1  John  V.  4. 

WHAT  is  meant  by  this  world  ? 
The  power  of  sin  all  around  us:  the  influ 
ence  which  operates  towards  evil,  and  makes  the 
commandments  and  purposes  of  God  grievous  to  so 
ciety.  The  Prince  of  this  world  has  much  to  do 
with  this  evil  power. 

This  world  is  our  foe,  and  we  must  fight  with  it. 
We  must  contend  till  we  overcome  the  world,  or  it 
will  overcome  us. 

I.  THE  CONQUEST  ITSELF:  " overcometh  the  world." 
We  are  not  to  be  litigious,  eager  to  contradict 

everybody. 

We  are  not,  however,  to  be  cowardly,  and  anxious 

to  flee  the  fight. 

We  mingle  among  men  of  the  world,  but  it  must 

be  as  warriors  who  are  ever  on  the  watch,  and  are 

aiming  at  victor}1".     Therefore — 

1.  We  break  loose  from  the  world's  customs. 

2.  We  maintain  our  freedom  to  obey   a   higher 

Master  in  all  things. 

We  are  not  enslaved  by  dread  of  poverty, 

(355) 


35Q  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

greed  of  riches,  official  command,  personal 
ambition,  love  of  honor,  fear  of  shame,  or 
force  of  numbers. 

3.  We  are  raised  above  circumstances,  and  find  our 

happiness  in  invisible  things:  thus  we  over 
come  the  world. 

4.  We  are  above  the  world's  authority.     Its  an 

cient  customs  or  novel  edicts  are  for  its  own 
children :  we  do  not  own  it  as  a  ruler,  or  as 
ajudge. 

5.  We  are  above  its  example,  influence,  and  spirit. 

We  are  crucified  to  the  world,  and  the 
world  is  crucified  to  us. 

6.  We   are   above    its  religion.     We    gather   our 

religion  from  God  and  his  Word,   not  from 

human  sources. 

As  one  in  whom  this  conquest  was  seen,  read 
the  story  of  Abraham.  Think  of  him  in  connection 
with  his  quitting  home,  his  lonely  wanderings,  his 
conduct  towards  Lot,  Sodom  and  her  king,  Isaac,  etc. 

II.  THE  CONQUERING  NATURE. — "  Whatsoever  is  born  of 
God." 

1.  This  nature  alone  will   undertake  the  contest 

with  the  world. 

2.  This  nature  alone  can  continue   it.     All   else 

wearies  in  the  fray. 

This  nature  is  born  to  conquer.  God  is  the 
Lord,  and  that  which  is  born  of  him  is  royal 
and  ruling. 

It  is  not  an  amendment  of  the  former  crea 
tion. 


VICTOEIOUS   FAITH.  357 

It  is  not  even  a  new  creation  without  relation 
ship  to  its  Creator;  but  it  is  a  birth  from 
God,  with  eminence  of  descent,  infusing 
similarity  of  nature,  and  conferring  rights 
of  heirship. 

The  Creator  cannot  be  overcome,  nor  those 
born  of  him. 

Jesus,  the  firstborn,  never  was  defeated,  nor 
will  those  conformed  to  him  fail  of  ultimate 
triumph. 

The  Holy  Spirit  in  us  must  be  victorious,  for 
how  should  he  be  vanquished  ?  The  idea 
would  be  blasphemous. 

III.  THE  CONQUERING  WEAPON:  " even  our  faith." 

We  are  enabled  to  be  conquerors  through  regard 
ing— 

1.  The  unseen  reward  which  awaits  us. 

2.  The  unseen  presence  which  surrounds  us.     God 

and  a  cloud  of  witnesses  hold  us  in   full 
survey. 

3.  The   mystic  union  to  Christ  which  grace  has 

wrought  in  us.      Resting  in  Jesus  we  over 
come  the  world. 

4.  The  sanctifying  communion   which   we  enjoy 

with  the  unseen  God. 

In  these  ways  faith  operates  towards  overcoming 
sin. 

IV.  THE  SPECIALITY  OP  IT — "  This  is  the  victory." 

1.  For  salvation,  finding  the  rest  of  faith. 

2.  For  imitation,  finding  the  wisdom  of  Jesus,  the 
Son  of  God. 


358  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  For  consolation,  seeing  victory  secured  to  us  in 
Jesus. 

Behold  your  conflict — born  to  battle. 
Behold  your  triumph — bound  to  conquer. 

WAR-CRIES. 

When  a  traveller  was  asked  whether  he  did  not 
admire  the  admirable  structure  of  some  stately  build 
ing,  "No"  said  he,  "for  I  have  been  at  Home,  ivliere 
better  are  to  be  seen  every  day."  O  believer,  if  the 
world  tempt  thee  with  rare  sights  and  curious  pros 
pects,  thou  mayest  well  scorn  them,  having  been,  by 
contemplation,  in  heaven,  and  being  able,  by  faith, 
to  see  infinitely  better  delights  every  hour  of  the  day  ! 
"This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world, 
even  our  faith." — Feathers  for  Arrows. 

The  danger  to  which  Christians  are  exposed  from 
the  influence  of  the  visible  course  of  things,  or  the 
world  (as  it  is  called  in  Scripture),  is  a  principal  sub 
ject  of  St.  John's  General  Epistle.  He  seems  to 
speak  of  the  world  as  some  False  Prophet,  promising 
what  it  cannot  fulfil,  and  gaining  credit  by  its  con 
fident  tone.  Viewing  it  as  resisting  Christianity, 
he  calls  it  the  "  Spirit  of  Antichrist,"  the  parent  of 
a  numerous  progeny  of  evil,  false  spirits  like  itself, 
the  teachers  of  all  lying  doctrines,  by  which  the 
multitude  of  men  are  led  captive.  The  antagonist 
of  this  great  tempter  is  the  Spirit  of  Truth,  which  is 
"  greater  than  he  that  is  in  the  world  " ;  its  victorious 
antagonist,  because  gifted  with  those  piercing  Eyes 


VICTORIOUS   FAITH.  859 

of  Faith  which  are  able  to  scan  the  worlds  shallow- 
ness,  and  to  see  through  the  mists  of  error  into  the 
glorious  kingdom  of  God  beyond  them.  "  This  is  the 
victory  that  overcometh  the  world,"  says  the  text, 
"  even  our  faith." — J.  H.  Newman. 

The  believer  not  only  overcomes  the  world  in  its 
deformities,  but  in  its  seeming  excellences.  Not  in 
the  way  that  Alexander  and  other  conquerors  over 
came  it,  but  in  a  much  nobler  way ;  for  they,  so  far 
from  overcoming  the  world,  were  slaves  to  the  world. 
The  man  who  puts  ten  thousand  other  mer  to  death, 
does  not  overcome  the  world.  The  true  conqueror 
is  he  who  can  say.  with  Paul,  "Thanks  be  to  God, 
who  giveth  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  and,  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  Christ  ?  Shall  tribulation  ?  "  etc.  "  Nay,  in  all 
these  things  we  are  more  than  conquerors,  through 
him  that  loved  us."  Such  an  one  has  recourse,  by 
faith,  to  an  infallible  standard — the  Word  of  God : 
indeed,  there  is  no  other.  He  detects  the  world,  and 
will  not  be  imposed  upon  by  it.  When  he  is  tempt 
ed  to  take  the  world's  good  things  as  his  portion,  he 
rejects  them;  because  he  has  something  better  in 
hand.  Thus,  faith  in  Christ  overcometh  the  corrupt 
influence,  the  inordinate  love,  the  slavish  fear,  the 
idolatry,  the  friendship,  the  false  wisdom,  and  the 
maxims  of  the  world:  it  overcometh  not  only  the 
folly,  but  the  very  religion  of  the  world,  as  far  as  it 
is  a  false  religion.  The  Christian  has  hold  of  a  su 
perior  influence,  and  engages  a  superior  strength. 
Doubtless,  says  he,  1  have  great  enemies  to  attack, 


360 


MY   SERMON-NOTES. 


but  greater  is  he  that  is  with  me  than  he  that  is  in 
the  world. — Riclwrd  Cecil. 

It  is  asserted  of  this  elegant  creature  (the  Bird  of 
Paradise)  that  it  always  flies  against  the  wind;  as, 
otherwise,  its  beautiful,  but  delicate  plumage  would 
be  ruffled  and  spoiled.  Those  only  are  the  Birds  of 
Paradise,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  who  make  good  their 
way  against  the  wind  of  worldliness;  a  wind  always 
blowing  in  an  opposite  direction  to  that  of  heaven. 

J.  D.  IMl 

Believers,  forget  it  not !  yon  are  the  soldiers  of  the 
Over  comer. — J.  H.  Evans. 


CCLVIII. 

"  BELOVED,   I  WISH  ABOVE  ALL  THINGS  THAT  THOU  MAYEST 

PROSPER  AND  BE   IN  HEALTH,    EVEN    AS    THY  SOUL  PROSPER- 
ETH."— 3  John  2. 

THE  gospel  made  a  marvellous  change  in  John. 
Once  he  could  call  fire  from  heaven  on  opposers; 
now,  having  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  he  is  full  of 
love  and  kind  desires. 

The  gospel  makes  the  morose,  cheerful;  the  gay, 
serious ;  the  revengeful,  loving.  Coming  to  such  an 
one  as  John,  it  made  him  the  mirror  of  love. 

A  man's  private  letters  often  let  you  into  the  se 
crets  of  his  heart. 

Instance  Rutherford,  Kirke  White,  Cowper,  and 
John  Newton. 

In  this  letter,  John  gratefully  wishes  Gaius  every 
blessing,  and  above  all  things  better  health. 

Health  is  an  invaluable  mercy  ;  it  is  never  prop 
erly  valued  till  lost. 

But  John  puts  soul-prosperity  side  by  side  with  it. 

Man  has  two  parts;  the  one  corporeal  and  earthy, 
the  other  immaterial  and  spiritual.  How  foolish  is 
the  man  who  thinks  of  his  body,  and  forgets  his 
soul ;  neglects  the  tenant,  and  repairs  the  house  ; 
prizes  the  earthern  vessel,  and  despises  the  treasure  ! 

(361) 


362  MY   SEEMON-NOTES. 

I.  WE    WILL    EXAMINE    THE    WORDS   OP   THE   TEXT. 

1.  "Iwishr;  more  correctly,   as  in  the  margin, 

"I  pray."  Prayer  is  a  wish  sanctified. 
Turn  your  wishes  into  prayers. 

2.  "  That  thou  mayest  prosper."     We  may  ask  for 

prosperity  for  our  friends;  especially  if,  like 
Gaius,  they  serve  God  and  his  cause  with 
their  substance. 

3.  "  And  be  in  health."     This  is  necessary  to  the 

enjoyment  of  prosperity.  What  would  all 
else  be  without  it  ? 

4.  "Even  as  thy  soul  prospereth."     We  are  startled 

at  this  wish :  the  spiritual  health  of  Gaius 
is  made  the  standard  of  his  outward  pros 
perity  !  Dare  we  pray  thus  for  many  of  our 
friends  ? 

Dare  we  pray  thus  for  ourselves  ?  What  would 
be  the  result  if  such  a  prayer  were  answered? 
Picture  our  bodies  made  like  our  souls. 

Some  would  have  fever,  others  paralysis,  others 
ague,  etc. 

Let  us  bless  God  that  the  body  is  not  the  invaria 
ble  index  of  the  soul. 

Few  would  care  to  have  their  spiritual  condition 
expressed  in  their  external  condition. 

II.  WE   WILL   MENTION   THE  SYMPTOMS    OP   ILL-HKALTH. 

1.  A  low  temperature. 

Luke  war  mn  ess  is  an  ill  sign.  In  business, 
such  a  man  will  make  but  little  way ;  in 
religion,  none  at  all. 


SOUL-HEALTH.  363 

This  is  terrible  in  the  case  of  a  minister. 
This  is  dangerous  in  the  case  of  a  hearer. 
2.  A  contracted  heart. 

While  some  are  latitudinarian,  others  are  in 
tolerant,  and  cut  off  all  who  do  not  utter 
their  Shibboleth. 

If  we  do  not  love  the  brethren,  there  is  some 
thing  wrong  with  us. 
-     3.  A  failing  appetite  as  to  spiritual  food. 

4.  A  difficulty  in  breathing. 

When  prayer  is  an  irksome  duty,  everything 
is  wrong  with  us. 

5.  A  general  lethargy:  unwillingness  for  holy  ser 

vice,  want  of  heart,  etc. 

6.  An  ungovernable  craving  for  unhealthy  things. 

Some  poor  creatures  will  eat  dirt,  ashes,  etc. 
Some  professors  are  ill  in  a  like  way,  for 
they  seek  grovelling  amusements  and  pur 
suits. 

III.    Wfl   WILL   SUGGEST   MEANS    OF   RECOVERY. 

We  will  not  here  dwell  upon  the  means  God  uses, 
though  he  is  the  great  Physician ;  but  we  will  think 
of  the  regimen  we  must  use  for  ourselves. 

1.  Seek   good    food.     Hear    a    gospel    preacher. 

Study  the  Word. 

2.  Breathe  freely.     Do  not  restrain  prayer. 

3.  Exercise   yourself  unto  godliness.     Labor   for 

God. 

4  Return  to  your   native  air:  breathe  the  atmos 
phere  of  Calvary. 


364  MY   SEBMON-NOTES. 

5.  Live  by  the  sea.     Dwell  near  to  God's  all-suffi 

ciency. 

6.  If  these  things  fail,  here  is  an  old  prescription  : 

"  Carnis  et  Sanguinis  Christi."     This  taken 
several  times  a  day,  in  a  draught  of  the 
tears  of  repentance,  is  a  sure  cure. 
God  help  you  to  practise  the  rules  of  the  heavenly 
Physician  ! 

IV.    WE    WILL   CONCLUDE   WITH   AN  EXHORTATION. 

Brother  Christian,  is  it  a  small  matter  to  be  weak 
and  feeble?  Thou  needest  all  thy  vigor.  Go  to 
Calvary,  and  recruit  thyself. 

Sinner,  thou  art  dead,  but  life  and  health  are  in 
Christ  I 


NOTA  MEDICA. 

An  ancient  Koman  wished  that  he  had  a  window 
in  his  breast  that  all  might  see  his  heart,  but  a  sage 
suggested  that  in  such  a  case  he  would  have  urgent 
need  of  shutters,  and  would  keep  them  closed.  We 
could  not  afford  to  wear  the  signs  of  our  spiritual 
condition  where  all  could  soe.  We  should  then  need 
all  our  blood  for  blushing. — C.  H.  S* 

Sin  is  called  in  Scripture  by  the  names  of  diseases. 
It  is  called  the  plague  of  the  heart:  1  Kings  viii.  38. 
There  are  as  many  diseases  of  the  soul  as  there  are 
of  the  body.  Drunkenness  is  a  spiritual  dropsy; 
security  is  a  spiritual  lethargy;  envy  is  a  spiritual 
canker ;  lust  is  a  spiritual  fever :  Hos.  vii.  4.  Apos 
tasy  or  backsliding  is  the  spiritual  falling  sickness; 


SOUL-HEALTH.  365 

hardness  of  heart  is  the  spiritual  stone;  searedness 
of  conscience  is  a  spiritual  apoplexy;  unsettleduess 
of  judgment  is  a  spiritual  palsy ;  pride  is  a  spiritual 
tumor ;  vainglory  is  a  spiritual  itch.  There  is  not 
any  sickness  of  the  body  but  there  is  some  distem 
per  of  the  soul  that  might  be  paralleled  with  it,  and 
bear  the  name  of  it. — Ralph  Robinson. 

The  fact  of  the  Scriptures  furnishing  nutriment 
and  upbuilding  to  the  soul  is  the  most  real  experi 
ence  of  which  we  have  knowledge.  None  of  us  "  by 
taking  thought,  can  add  one  cubit  unto  his  stature." 
But  how  many,  by  taking  in  God's  great  thoughts, 
feeding  on  them,  and  inwardly  digesting  them,  have 
added  vastly  to  their  spiritual  stature  ! 

A.  J.  Gordon,  D.  D. 

If  a  portrait  were  taken  of  a  person  in  strong,  vig 
orous  health,  and  another  was  taken  of  the  same  man 
after  a  severe  illness,  or  when  he  had  been  almost 
starved  to  death,  or  weakened  by  confinement,  we 
should  scarcely  recognize  them  as  the  likeness  of  the 
same  man,  the  dear  old  friend  we  loved!  Still 
greater  would  be  the  change  could  we  draw  the 
spiritual'  portrait  of  many  a  once  hearty,  vigorous 
saint  of  God,  whose  soul  has  been  starved  for  want 
of  the  proper  spiritual  nourishment,  or  by  feeding 
upon  "ashes"  instead  of  bread  — G.  8.  Bowes. 

Oh.  that  our  friends  were  well  in  soul !  We  are 
not  sufficiently  concerned  about  this  best  of  health  ! 
When  they  are  well  in  soul,  we  are  grieved  to  see 


366 


MY   SERMON-NOTES. 


them  ailing  in  body ;  and  yet  this  is  often  the  case. 
The  soul  is  healed,  and  the  body  is  still  sutfering ! 
Well,  it  is  by  far  the  smaller  evil  of  the  two !  If  I 
must  be  sick,  Lord,  let  the  mischief  light  on  my 
coarser  nature,  and  not  on  my  higher  and  diviner 
part!—  C.H.& 


CCLIX. 

"NOW  UNTO  HIM  THAT  IS  ABLE  TO  KKEP  YOU  FROM  FALLING 
AND  TO  PRESENT  YOU  FAULTLESS  BEFORE  THE  PRESENCE  OF 
HIS  GLORY  WITH  EXCEEDING  JOY, 

"  TO  THE  ONLY  WISE  GOD  OUR  SAVIOUR,  BE  GLORY  AND  MA 
JESTY,  DOMINION  AND  POWER,  BOTH  NOW  AND  EVER.  AMEN." 

Jude  24,  25. 

WE  will  joyfully  praise  the  Lord  with  Jude's 
doxology. 

It  is  well  to  be  called  full  often  to  adoring  praise, 
and  the  specific  statement  of  the  reason  for  praise  is 
helpful  to  fervor  of  gratitude. 

Our  great  danger  is  falling  and  faultiness. 
Our  great  safety  is  divine  ability  and  faithfulness, 
by  which  we  are  kept  from  stumbling,  so  as  to  dis 
honor  our  Lord. 

I.  LET  US  ADORE  HIM  WHO  CAN  KEEP  US  FROM  FALLING. 

1.  We  need  keeping  from  falling,  in  the  sense  of 

preservation  from — 
Error  of  doctrine;  which  is   rife  enough    in 

this  age. 
Error  of  spirit :  such  as  want  of  love,  or  want 

uf  discernment,  or  unbelief,  or  credulity,  or 

fanaticism,  or  conceit. 
Outward  sin.     Alas,   how  low  may  the  best 

fell! 


368  MY  SERMON-NOTES. 

Neglect  of  duty :  ignorance,  idleness,  want  of 
thought. 

Backsliding.  Into  this  state  we  may  insensi 
bly  descend. 

2.  None  but  the  Lord  can  keep  us  from  falling. 

We  cannot  keep  ourselves  without  him. 

No  place  guarantees  security:  the  church,  the 
closet,  the  communion-table — all  are  invad 
ed  by  temptation. 

No  rules  and  regulations  will  secure  us  from 
stumbling.  Stereotyped  habits  may  only 
conceal  deadly  sins. 

No  experience  can  eradicate  evil,  or  protect  us 
from  it. 

B.  The  Lord  can  do  it.  He  is  "  able  to  keep,"  and 
he  is  "  the  only  wise  God,  our  Saviour." 
His  wisdom  is  part  of  his  ability. 

By  teaching  us  so  that  we  fall  not  into  sins 
by  ignorance. 

By  warning  us:  this   may  be   done   by  our 

noting  the  falls  of  others,  or  by  inward  mo 
nitions,  or  by  the  Word. 

By  providence,  affliction,  etc.,  which  remove 
occasions  of  sinning. 

By  a  bitter  sense  of  sin,  which  makes  us 
dread  ir,  as  a  burnt  child  dreads  the  fire.- 

By  his  Holy  Spirit,  renewing  in  us  desires 
after  holiness. 

4.  The  Lord  will  do  it.  Acco-rding  to  the  Revised 
Version  he  is  "  The  only  God  our  Saviour.' 
He  will  assuredly  save. 


JUDE'S  DOXOLOGY.  369 

From  final  falls,  and  even  from  stumblings  (see  R. 
7^),  hie  divine  power  can  and  will  keep  us. 

If.    LET     US     ADORE     HIM     WHO     WILL    PRESENT     US     IN     HIS 

COURTS    FAULTLESS. 

1.  None  can  stand  in  those  courts  who  are  cov 

ered  with  fault. 

2.  None  can  deliver  us  from  former  guilt,  or  keep 

us  from   daily  faultiness  in  the  future,  but 
the  Saviour  himself. 

3.  He  can   do  it   as  our  Saviour.     He  is  divinely 

wise  to  sanctify. 

4.  He  will  do  it.     We  should  not  be  exhorted  to 

praise  him  for  an  ability  which  he   would 
not  use. 

5.  He  will  do  it   "  with  exceeding  joy,"  both  to 

himself  and  to  us. 

III.    LET     US    ADORE     HIM     WITH     HIGHEST    ASCRIPTIONS     OP 
PRAISE. 

1.  Presenting  our  praise  through  Jesus,  who  is 

himself  our  Lord.  (JR.  V.) 

2.  Wishing    him    glory,    majesty,  dominion   and 

power. 
'<    Ascribing  these  to  him  as  to  the  past,  for  he  i« 

"  before  all  time."     (B.  F.) 
4    Ascribing  them  to  him  "now." 

5.  Ascribing  them  to  him  "  for  ever." 

6.  Adding  to  this  adoration,  and  to  the  adoration 

of  all  his  saints,  our  own  fervent  "Amen." 
Heartily  consenting  to  all  his  praise 
24 


370  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

Come  let  us  praise  our  Guardian  now,  in  memory 
of  past  upholdings. 

Let  us  praise  him  in  foretaste  of  what  he  will  do 
for  us. 

Let  us  praise  him  with  "  exceeding  joy." 

A  STATEMENT  AND  AN  INSTANCE 

We  cannot  stand  a  moment  longer  than  God  up- 
holdeth  us;  we  are  as  a  staff  in  the  hand  of  a  man  ; 
take  away  the  hand,  and  the  staff  falleth  to  the 
ground:  or  rather,  as  a  little  infant  in  the  nurse's 
hand  (Hosea  xi.  3) ;  if  we  are  left  to  our  own  feet, 
we  shall  soon  fall.  Created  grace  will  never  hold 
out  against  so  many  difficulties.  One  of  the  fathers 
bringeth  in  the  flesh,  saying,  ego  deficiam,  I  shall  fail; 
the  world,  ego  dedpiam,  I  will  deceive  them;  the 
devil.  Ego  eripiam,  I  will  sweep  them  away;  but 
God  saith,  Ego  custodiam,  I  will  keep  them,  I  will 
never  fail  them,  nor  forsake  them.  There  lieth  our 
safety. — Thomas  Manton. 

Philip  Dickerson,  an  aged  Baptist  minister,  who 
died  October  22nd,  1882,  just  before  his  death,  said, 
"  Seventy  years  ago  the  Lord  took  me  into  his  ser 
vice  without  a  character.  He  gave  me  a  good  char 
acter,  and  by  his  grace  I  have  kept  it." 


CCLX. 

* {  BEHOLD,  HE  COMETH  WITH  CLOUDS  ;  AND  EVERY  EYE  SHALL 
SEE  HIM,  AND  THEY  ALSO  WHICH  PIERCED  HIM:  AND  ALL 

KINDREDS    OF    THE      EARTH    SHALL    WAIL    BECAUSE    OP     HIM. 

EVEN  so,  AMEN." — Rev.  i.  7. 

THE  doxology  which  precedes  our  text  is  most 
glorious. 

It  runs  well  in  the  Revised  Version :  "  To  him  that 
loved  us  and  loosed  us." 

Keeping  to  our  Authorized  Version,  we  can  get 
the  alliteration  by  reading  "  loved  us  and  laved  us." 

To  him  who  has  made  us  kings,  is  himself  a  King, 
and  is  coming  into  his  kingdom:  to  him  be  glory. 

Our  adoration  is  increased  by  our  expectation. 
"  He  cometh." 

Our  solemnity  in  praise  is  deepened  by  the  hope 
that  our  expectation  will  be  speedily  realized.  The 
coming  is  in  the  present  tense. 

John,  who  once  heard  the  voice,  "  Behold  the  Lamb 
of  God !  "  now  utters  the  voice,  "Behold,  he  cometh  ! " 

I.  OUR  LORD  JESUS  COMES. 

1.  This  fact  is  worthy  of  a  note  of  admiration— 

"Behold!" 

2.  It  should  be  vividly  realized  till  we  cry,  "  Be 

hold,  he  cometh ! " 

(371) 


372  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  It  should  be  zealously  proclaimed.     We  should 

use  the  herald's  cry,  "  Behold  !  " 

4.  It  is  to  be  unquestiouiugly  asserted  as  true 

Assuredly  he  cometh. 

It  has  been  long  foretold.     Enoch.     Jude  14. 
He  has  himself  warned  us  of  it.     "  Behold,  I 

come  quickly ! " 
He  has  made  the  sacred  supper  a  token  of  it. 

"  Till  he  come." 
What  is  to  hinder  his  coming  ?     Are  there 

not  many  reasons  for  it  ? 

6.  It  is  to  be  viewed  with  immediate  interest. 

"Behold!"    for   this   is  the  grandest   of  all 

events. 

"  He  cometh,"  the  t-v^nt  is  at  the  door. 
"He,"    who   is  your    Lord  and    Bridegroom, 

comes. 
He  is  coming  even  now,  lor  he  is  preparing  all 

things  for  his  advent,  and  thus  may  be  said 

to  be  on  the  road. 

6.  It  is  to  be  attended  with  a  peculiar  sign — "  with 

clouds." 
The  clouds  are  the  distinctive  tokens  of  his 

Second  Advent. 
The   tokens   of  the   divine  presence.     "  The 

dust  of  his  feet." 

The  pillar  of  cloud  was  such  in  the  wilder 
ness. 

The  emblems  of  his  majesty. 
The  ensigns  of  his  power. 
The    warnings    of   his  judgment     Charged 


THE   COMING   WITH    CLOUDS.  373 

with    darkness    and     tempest     are     these 
gathered  clouds. 

II.  OUR  LORD'S  COMING  WILL  BE  SEEN  OF  ALL. 

1.  It  will   be  a  literal  appearance.     Not  merely 

every  mind  shall  think  of  him,  but  "  Every 
eye  shall  see  him." 

2.  It  will  be  beheld  by  all  sorts  and  kinds  of  liv 

ing  men. 

3.  It  will  l)e  seen  by  those  long  dead. 

4.  It  will  be   seen  by  his  actual  murderers,   and 

others  like  them. 

5.  It  will  be  manifest  to  those  who  desire  not  to 

see  the  Lord. 

6.  It  will  be  a  sight  in  which  you  will  have  a 

share. 

Since  you  must  see  him,  why  not  at  once  look  to 
him  and  live  ? 

III.  His  COMING  WILL  CAUSE    SORROW.     "All  kindreds 

of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  him." 

1.  The  sorrow  will   be  very  general.     "  All  kin 

dreds  of  the  earth." 

2.  The  sorrow  will  be  very  bitter.     "  Wail." 

3.  The  sorrow  proves  that  men  will  not  be  univer 

sally  converted. 

4.  The  sorrow  also  shows  that  men   will  not  ex 

pect  from  Christ's  coming  a  great  deliver 
ance. 

They  will   not  look   to  escape  from  punish 
ment. 


374  MY   SEKMON-NOTES. 

They  will  not  look  for  Annihilation. 
They  will  not  look  for  Restoration. 
If  they  did  so,   his  coming  would  not  cause 
them  to  wail. 

5.  The  sorrow  will,  in  a  measure,  arise  out  of  hie 

glory,  seeing  they  rejected  and  resisted 
him.  That  glory  will  be  against  them. 

6.  The  sorrow  will  be  justified  by   the  dread  re 

sult.  Their  fears  of  punishment  will  be 
well  grounded.  Their  horror  at  the  sight 
of  the  great  Judge  will  be  no  idle  fright. 

To  his  Lord's  coming  the  believer  gives  his  un 
feigned  assent,  whatever  the  consequences. 
Can  you  say,  "  Even  so,  Amen  ?" 

ADVENT  THOUGHTS. 

Even  so,  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly  !  In  the 
mean  while,  it  is  not  heaven  that  can  keep  thee  from 
me;  it  is  not  earth  that  can  keep  me  from  thee:  raise 
thou  up  my  soul  to  a  life  of  faith  with  thee :  let  me 
even  enjoy  thy  conversation,  whilst  I  expect  thy  re 
turn. — Bishop  Hall. 

"  Every  eye  shall  see  him."  Every  eye;  the  eye  of 
every  living  man,  whoever  he  is.  None  will  be  able 
to  prevent  it.  The  voice  of  the  trumpet,  the  bright 
ness  of  the  flame,  shall  direct  all  eyes  to  HIM,  shall  fix 
all  eyes  upon  him.  Be  it  ever  so  busy  a  a  eye,  or  ever  so 
vain  an  eye,  whatever  employment,  whatever  amuse 
ment  it  had  the  moment  before,  will  then  no  longer  be 
able  to  employ  it,  or  to  amuse  it.  The  eye  will  be  lift- 


THE  COMING   WITH   CLOUDS.  375 

ed  up  to  Christ,  and  will  no  more  look  down  upon  mon 
ey,  upon  books,  upon  land,  upon  houses,  upon  gardens. 
Alas !  these  things  will  then  all  pass  away  in  a  mo 
ment;  and  not  the  eyes  of  the  living  alone,  but  also 
all  the  eyes  that  have  ever  beheld  the  sun,  though 
but  for  a  moment:  the  eyes  of  all  the  sleeping  dead 
will  be  awakened  and  opened.  The  eyes  of  saints 
and  sinners  of  former  generations.  The  eyes  of  Job, 
according  to  those  rapturous  words  of  his,  which 
had  so  deep  and  so  sublime  a  sense,  "  I  know  that 
my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he  shall  stand  in  the 
last  day  on  the  earth:  in  my  flesh  I  shall  see  God, 
whom  my  eyes  shall  behold,  and  not  another."  The 
eyes  of  Balaam,  of  which  he  seems  to  have  had  an 
awful  foreknowledge  when  he  said,  "  I  shall  see  him, 
but  not  now;  I  shall  behold  him,  but  not  nigh." 
Your  eyes  and  mine.  0  awful  thought !  Blessed 
Jesus !  May  we  not  see  thee  as  through  tears;  may 
we  not  then  tremble  at  the  sight ! — Dr.  Doddridge. 

"  And  the  Lord  turned  and  looked  upon  Peter.  . 
.  .  And  Peter  went  out  and  wept  bitterly."  So 
shall  it  be,  but  in  a  different  sense,  with  sinners  at 
the  day  of  judgment.  The  eye  of  Jesus  as  their 
judge  shall  be  fixed  upon  them,  and  the  look  shall 
awake  their  sleeping  memories,  and  reveal  their  bur 
dens  of  sin  and  shame — countless  and  cursed  crimes, 
denials  worse  that  Peter's,  since  life-long  and  unre- 
pented  of,  scoffings  at  love  that  wooed  them,  and 
despisings  of  mercy  that  called  them — all  these  shall 
pierce  their  hearts  as  they  behold  the  look  of  Jesus. 
And  they  shall  go  out  and  flee  from  the  presence  of 


376  MY   SEEMOlSr-NOTES. 

the  Lord — go  out  never  to  return,  flee  even  into  the 
outer  darkness,  if  so  be  they  may  hide  them  from 
that  terrible  gaze.  And  they  shall  weep  bitterly — 
weep  as  they  never  wept  before,  burning,  scalding 
tears,  such  as  earth's  sorrow  never  drew  —  weep 
never  to  be  comforted,  tears  never  to  be  wiped  away. 
Their  eyes  shall  be  fountains  of  tears,  not  penitential 
and  healing,  but  bitter  and  remorseful — tears  of 
blood — tears  that  shall  rend  the  heart  in  twain,  and 
deluge  the  soul  in  fathomless  woe. — Anon. 


CCLXI. 

AND  THE  TEMPLE  OF  GOD  WAS  OPENED  IN  HEAVEN,  AND 
THERE  WAS  SEEN  IN  HIS  TEMPLE  THE  ARK  OF  HIS  TESTA 
MENT:  AND  THERE  WERtt  LIGHTNINGS,  AND  VOICES,  AND 
THUNDERINGS,  AND  AN  EARTHQUAKE,  AND  GREAT  HAIL." — 

Eev.  xi.  19. 

IT  may  not  be  easy  to  work  out  the  connection  of 
the  text;  but  taken  by  itself  it  is  eminently  in 
structive. 

Muoii  that  is  of  God  we  fail  to  see:  to  us  the  tem 
ple  of  God  in  heaven  is  still  in  a  measure  closed. 

There  is  need  that  it  be  opened  to  us  by  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

Jesus  has  rent  the  veil,  and  so  laid  open,  not  only 
the  holy  place,  but  the  Holy  of  holies;  and  yet  by 
reason  of  our  blindness  it  still  needs  laying  open,  so 
that  its  treasures  may  be  seen. 

There  are  minds  that  even  now  see  the  secret  of 
the  Lord.  We  all  shall  do  so  above:  and  we  may  do 
so  in  a  measure  while  below. 

Among  the  chief  objects  which  are  to  be  seen  in  the 
heavenly  temple  is  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  God. 
This  means  that  the  covenant  is  always  in  the  rnirid 
of  God,  and  that  his  most  holy  and  most  secret  pur 
poses  have  a  reference  to  that  covenant. 

It  is  "  covenant,"  not  testament  (see  the  Revised 
Version,  which  is  the  better  translation  in  this  place.) 

(377) 


378  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

I.  THE   COVENANT   is   ALWAYS   NEAR  TO  GOD.      "  There 

was  seen  in  his  temple  the  ark  of  his  cove 
nant." 

Whatever  happens,  the  covenant  stands  secure. 

Whether  we  see  it  or  not,  the  covenant  is  in  its 
place,  near  to  God. 

The  covenant  of  grace  is  forever  the  same,  for — 

1.  The  God  who  made  it  changes  not. 

2.  The  Christ  who  is    its  Surety   and   Substance 

changes  not. 

3.  The  love  which  suggested  it  changes  not. 

4.  The  principles  on    which  it  is  settled  change 

not. 

5.  The  promises  contained  in  it  change  not;  and, 

best  of  all, 

6.  The  force  and  binding  power  of  the  covenant 

change  not. 

It  is,  it  must  be,  forever  where  God  at  first  placed 
it 

II.  THB  COVENANT  is  SEEN  OF  SAINTS.    "  There  was  seen 

in  his  temple." 

We  see  in  part,   and  blessed  are  we  when  we  see 

the  covenant. 
We  see  it  when — 

1.  By  faith  we  believe  in  Jesus  as  our  Covenant- 

head. 

2.  By  instruction  we  understand  the  system  and 

plan  of  grace. 

S.  By  confidence  we  depend  upon  the  Lord's 
faithfulness,  and  the  promises  which  he  hae 
made  in  the  fovenant. 


THE  ARK   OF   HIS   COVENANT.  379 

4.  By  prayer  we  plead  the  covenant. 

5.  By  experience  we  come  to  perceive  the  coye- 

nant-love  running  as  a  silver  thread  through 
all  the  dispensations  of  providence. 

6.  By  a  wonderful  retrospect  we  look  back  whom 

we  arrive  in   heaven,   and  see  all  the  deal 
ings  of  our  faithful  covenant  God. 

III.  THE     COVENANT    CONTAINS     MUCH    THAT   IS    WORTH    8BB- 

ING. 

The  ark  of  the  covenant  may  serve  ua  as  a  sym 
bol. 

In  it  typically,  and  in  the  covenant  actually,  we 

see — 

1.  God   dwelling  among  men:  as  the  ark  in  the 

tabernacle,  in  the  centre  of  the  camp. 

2.  God  reconciled,  and  communing  with  men  upon 

the  mercy -seat. 

3.  The  Law  fulfilled  in  Christ:  the  two  tablee  in 

the  ark. 

4.  The  kingdom  established  and  flourishing  in  him : 

Aaron's  rod. 

5.  The  provision  made  for  the  wilderness:  for  in  the 

ark  was  laid  up  the  golden  pot  which  had 
manna. 

6.  The  universe  united  in  carrying  out  the  cove 

nant  purposes,  as  typified  by  the  cherubim 
on  the  mercy-seat. 

IV.  THE  COVENANT  HAS   SOLEMN  SURROUNDINGS.     "There 

were  lightnings,    and  voices,   and  thunder- 
ings,"  etc. 


880  MY  SEEMO^-NOTES. 

It  is  attended  by — 

1.  The  sanctions  of  divine  power — confirming. 

2.  The  supports  of  eternal  might — accomplishing. 

3.  The  movements  of  spiritual  energy — applying 

its  grace. 

4.  The   terrors  of  eternal  law — overthrowing  its 

adversaries. 

Study  the  covenant  of  grace. 

Fly  to  Jesus,  who  is  the  Surety  of  it. 

KEMARKS  OF  SOUND  DIVINES. 

The  great  glory  of  the  covenant  is  the  certainty  of 
the  covenant;  and  this  is  the  top  of  God's  glory,  and  of 
a  Christian's  comfort,  that  all  the  mercies  that  are  in 
the  covenant  of  grace  are  "•  the  sure  mercies  of  Da 
vid,"  and  that  all  the  grace  that  is  in  the  covenant 
is  sure  grace,  and  that  all  the  glory  that  is  in  the 
covenant  is  sure  glory,  and  that  all  the  external,  in 
ternal,  and  eternal  blessings  of  the  covenant  are  sure 
blessings. —  Thomas  Brooks, 

The  covenant  stands  unchangeable.  Mutable  crea 
tures  break  their  leagues  and  covenants,  and  when 
they  are  not  accommodated  to.  their  interests,  snap 
them  asunder,  like  Samson's  cords.  But  an  un 
changeable  God  keeps  his:  "The  mountains  shall 
depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed;  but  my  kindness 
shall  not  depart  from  thee,  nor  shall  the  covenant  of 
my  peace  be  removed."  (Isa.  liv.  10.) — Stephen 
Chamodc. 


THE  ARK   OF   HIS   COVENANT.  381 

The  ark  was  an  especial  type  of  Christ,  arid  it  is 
a  very  fit  one;  for  in  a  chest  or  coffer  men  put  their 
jewels,  plate,  coin,  treasure,  and  whatsoever  is  pre 
cious,  and  whereof  they  make  high  account.  Such 
a  coffer  men  use  to  have  in  the  house,  where  they 
dwell  continually,  in  the  chamber  where  they  lie, 
even  by  their  bedside:  because  his  treasure  is  in  his 
coffer,  his  heart  is  there  also.  Thus  in  Christ  "are 
hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge'1  (Col. 
ii.  3).  He  is  "  full  of  grace  and  truth  "  (John  i.  14). 
"It  pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness 
dwell "  (Col.  i.  19).  Hereupon  Christ  is  "  the  Son  of 
God's  love  "  (Col.  i.  13) ;  ''his  elect  in  whom  his  soul 
delighteth  ''  (Isa.  xlii.  1);  and  he  is  "ever  at  the 
right  hand  of  God"  (Heb.  x.  12). —  William  Gouge. 

A  friend  calling  on  the  Rev.  Ebenezer  Erskine, 
during  his  last  illness,  said  to  him,  "  Sir,  you  have 
given  us  many  good  advices;  pray,  what  are  you 
now  doing  with  your  own  soul  ?  "  "I  am  doing  with 
it,"  said  he,  lt  what  I  did  forty  years  ago;  I  am  rest 
ing  on  that  word,  'I am  the  Lord  thy  God' ;  and  on 
this  I  mean  to  die."  To  another  he  said,  "  The  cov 
enant  is  my  charter,  and  if  it  had  not  been  for  that 
blessed  word,  '  1  am  the  Lord  thy  God?  my  hope  and 
strength  had  perished  from  the  Lord." — Whitecross. 

The  rainbow  of  the  covenant  glitters  above,  light 
nings  of  wrath  issue  from  below.  This  is  the  fire 
that  breaks  forth  from  the  sanctuary  to  consume 
those  who  profane  its  laws.  It  is  the  wrath  of  the 
Lamb  that  bursts  from  the  altar  upon  those  who 
trample  under  foot  his  blood.  It  is  the  savor  of 


MY    SEEMOJVT-iN'OTES. 

death  unto  death  to  those  who  have  rejected  the 
gospel  as  a  savor  of  life  unto  life.  It  is  the  reply 
of  Christ  to  those  who  command  him  upon  their  own 
authority  to  come  down  from  his  lofty  elevation,  and 
commit  himself  into  their  hands.  "  If  I  be  a  man 
of  God,  let  fire  come  down  from  heaven  and  consume 
you."  Humiliation  brings  Christ  himself  from  heav 
en  to  earth;  imperiousness  brings  down  consuming 
fire.  From  the  same  temple,  in  which  some  behold 
the  ark  of  the  covenant,  lightnings,  voices,  thunder- 
ings,  earthquake,  and  great  hail,  descend  upon  those 
who  have  profaned  its  courts  with  their  abomina 
tions, —  George  Rog&rs. 


CCLXII. 

"  AND  THE  FOURTH  ANGEL  POURED  OUT  HIS  VIAL  UPON  THE 
SUN  J  AND  POWER  WAS  GIVEN  UNTO  HIM  TO  SCORCH  MEN  WITH 
FIRE. 

"  AND  MEN  WERE  SCORCHED  WITH  GREAT  HEAT,  AND  BLAS 
PHEMED  THE  NAME  OF  GOD,  WHICH  HATH  POWER  OVER  THESE 
PLAGUES;  AND  THEY  REPENTED  NOT  TO  GIVE  HIM  GLORY." 
Rev.  xvi.  8,  9. 

WHAT  forces  God  has  at  his  disposal,  since  all 
angels  serve  him  !  These  bring  forth,  the 
vials  of  his  wrath. 

What  power  these  beings  have  over  nature;  for 
on  the  sun  the  angel  empties  his  bowl,  and  men  are 
scorched  with  fire  ! 

No  men  are  beyond  the  power  of  the  judgments 
of  God.  He  can  reach  them  by  any  medium.  He 
can  make  ill  effects  flow  from  our  best  blessings:  in 
this  case  burning  heat  poured  from  the  sun. 

The  judgments  of  God  do  not  of  themselves  pro 
duce  true  repentance;  for  these  men  "repented  not 
to  give  him  glory." 

I.  THEY  MAY  PRODUCE  a  REPENTANCE. 

1.  A  carnal  repentance,  caused  by  fear  of  punish 

ment.     Cain. 

2.  A  transient  repentance,  which  subsides  with  the 

judgment.     Pharaoh. 

(383) 


384  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

3.  A  superficial  repentance,  which  retains  the  sin 

Herod. 

4.  A  despairing  repentance,  which  ends  in  death. 

Judas. 

There  is  nothing  about  any  of  these  which  gives 
glory  to  God. 

II.  THEY  DO  NOT   PRODUCE  the  REPENTANCE  WHICH  GIVES 

GOD   GLORY. 

True  repentance  glorifies  God — 

1.  By  acknowledging   his   omniscience,    and  the 

wisdom  of  his  warnings,   when  we  confess 
the  fact  and  folly  of  sin. 

2.  By  admitting  the  righteousness  of  his  law,  and 

the  evil  of  sin. 

3.  By  confessing  the  justice  of  the  Lord's  threat- 

enings,  and  bowing   before  his   throne   in 
reverent  submission. 

4.  By  owning  that  it  lies  with  the  sovereign  mercy 

of  God  further  to  punish  us,  or  graciously 
to  forgive  us. 

5.  By  accepting  the  grace  of  God  as  presented  in 

the  Lord  Jesus. 

6.  By  seeking  sanctification  so  as  to  live  in  holy 

gratitude,    in   accordance    with    favor    re 
ceived. 

In  the  case  before  us  in  the  chapter,  the  men  un 
der  the  plague  went  from  bad  to  worse,  from  im 
penitence  to  blasphemy;  but  where  there  is  godly 
sorrow,  sin  is  forsaken. 


THE    REPENTANCE    WHICH   GLORIFIES    GOD.       385 

III.  THEY  INVOLVE  MEN  IN  GREATER  SIN  vniEX  THEY 

DO    NOT    SOFTEN. 

1.  Their  sin  becomes  more  a  sin  of  knowledge. 

2.  Their  sin  becomes  more  a  sin  of  defiance. 

3.  Their  sin  becomes  a  sin  of  falsehood  before  God. 

Vows  broken,  resolutions  forgotten;  all  this 
is  lying  unto  the  Holy  Ghost. 

4.  Their  sin  becomes  a  sin   of   hate  towards  God. 

They  even  sacrifice  themselves  to  spite  their 
God. 

5.  Their  sin    becomes    more   and    more    deliberate, 

costly,  and  stubborn. 

6.  Their  sin  is  thus  proven  to  be  engrained  in  their 

nature. 

IV.  THEY  ARE  TO  BE  LOOKED  UPON  WITH  DISCRETION. 

Hasty  generalization  will  lead  us  into  great  errors  in 
reference  to  divine  judgments. 

1.  Used  by  the  grace  of  God,  they  tend  to  arouse, 

impress,   subdue,   humble,    and   lead   to  re 
pentance. 

2.  They  may  not  be  regarded  as  of  themselves  bene 

ficial. 

Satan  is  not  bettered  by  his  misery. 

The  lost  in  hell  grow  more  obdurate  through 
their  pains. 

Many  wicked  men  are  the  worse  for  their  pov 
erty. 

Many  sick  are  not  really  penitent,  but  are  hyp 
ocritical. 

3.  When  we  are  not  under  judgment  and  terror,  we 

should  repent. 
25 


386  MY    SEKilON-KOTES. 

Because  of  God's  long-suffering  and  good 
ness. 

Because  we  are  not  now  distracted  by  pain. 

Because  now  we  can  think  of  the  siu  apart 
from  the  judgment,  and  are  more  likely  to 
be  honest  in  repentance. 

Because  we  shall  find  it  sweeter  and  nobler 
to  be  drawn  than  to  be  like  "  dumb  driven 
cattle." 

Be  it  our  one  aim  "  to  give  HIM  glory." 

Begin  with  this  object  in  repentance,  continue  in 

it  by  faith,  rise  nearer  to  it  in  hope,  abide  in  it  by 

zeal  and  love. 

FROU    GREAT    AUTHORS. 

Trees  may  blossom  fairly  in  the  spring,  on  which 
no  fruit  is  to  be  found  in  the  harvest;  and  some 
have  sharp  soul  exercises  which  are  nothing  but 
foretastes  of  hell. — Boston. 

Richard  Sibbes  says,  "  We  see,  by  many  that  have 
recovered  again,  that  have  promised  great  matters 
in  their  sickness,  that  it  is  hypocritical  repentance, 
for  they  have  been  worse  after  than  they  were  be 
fore."  Dr.  Grosart  adds,  by  way  of  illustration,  the 
testimony  of  a  prison  chaplain,  to  the  effect  that  of 
"reprieved"  criminals  who,  in  the  shadow  of  the 
gallows,  had  manifested  every  token  of  apparent 
penitence  and  heart-change,  the  number  whose  sub 
sequent  career  gave  evidence  of  reality  is  as  1  to 
500,  perhaps  as  awful  a  fact  as  recent  criminal  statis 
tics  reveal. 


THE  REPENTANCE  WHICH  GLORIFIES  GOD.      387 

I  believe  it  will  be  found  that  the  repentance  of 
most  men  is  not  so  much  sorrow  for  sin  as  sin,  or  real 
hatred  of  it,  as  sullen  sorrow  that  they  are  not  al 
lowed  to  sin. — Adams  Private  Thoughts. 

There  ia  no  repentance  in  hell.  They  are  scorch 
ed  with  heat,  and  blaspheme  God's  name,  but  re 
pent  not  to  give  him  glory.  They  curse  him  for 
their  pains  and  sores,  but  repent  not  of  their  deeds. 
True  repentance  ariseth  from  faith  and  hope  ;  but 
there  can  be  no  faith  of  releasement  where  is  cer 
tain  knowledge  of  eternal  punishment ;  knowledge 
and  sense  exclude  faith.  There  can.  be  rio  hope 
of  termination  where  be  chains  of  desperation. 
There  shall  be  a  desperate  sorrow  for  pain,  no  peni 
tent  sorrow  for  sin.  None  are  now  saved  but  by  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb ;  but  when  the  world  is  ended, 
that  fountain  is  dried  up.  The  worm  of  conscience 
shall  £,:^w  them  with  this  remorse,  bringing  to 
their  minds  the  cause  of  their  present  calami 
ties  :  how  often  they  have  been  invited  to  heaven, 
how  easily  they  might  have  escaped  hell.  They 
shall  weep  for  the  loss  of  the  one  and  gain  of  the 
other,  not  for  the  cause  of  either,  which  were  repent 
ance.  .  .  .  They  suffer,  and  they  blaspheme. 

Thomas  Adams. 

How  awful  to  read.  u  men  blasphemed  God  because 
of  the  plague  of  the  hail !''  How  true  it  is  that  afflic 
tion  makes  good  men  better,  arid  bad  men  worse ! 
Wrath  converts  no  man.  It  is  grace  that  saves. 
The  chastisement  that  does  not  soften  hardens. 


388  MY  SERMON-TSTOTES. 

Judgments  lead  men  to  blaspheme ;  and  the  greater 
the  plague,  the  more  they  blaspheme.  What  a 
solemn,  but  truthful,  representation  of  the  conse 
quence  of  oft-neglected  warnings !  See  the  em 
ployment  of  man  in  the  future  state — in  heaven,  to 
praise ;  in  hell,  to  blaspheme. —  George  Rogers. 


CCLXIII. 

"  AND   HE  SA1TH   UNTO  ME,  WRITE,    BLESSED   ARE   THEY  WHICH 
ARE    CALLED     UNTO    THE    MARRIAGE   SUPPER  OF  THE   LA.MB." 

Rev.  xix.  9. 

A  MAZED  by  what  he  saw  and  heard,  John  might 
,/JL   have  failed  to  write ;  but  he  was  warned  to  do 

so  on  this  occasion,  because  of— 
The  value  of  the  statements  herein  recorded. 
Their  absolute  certainty,  as  sure  promises  and 

true  sayings  of  God. 

The  necessity  of  keeping  such  facts  in  remem 
brance  throughout  all  time  for  the  comfort 
of  all  those  who  look  for  the  Lord's  appear 
ing. 

This  fact,  that  men  shall  partake  of  the  mar 
riage  supper  of  the  Lamb,  might  seem  too  good  to 
be  true,  if  it  were  not  specially  certified  by  order  of 
the  Lord,  under  the  head  arid  seal  of  the  Spirit  of 
God. 

In  the  historical  order,  the  false  harlot-church  is 
to  be  judged  (see  previous  chapter),  and  then  the 
true  bride  of  Christ  is  to  be  acknowledged  and  hon 
ored. 

In  meditating  upon  this  august  marriage  festival, 
we  shall  note— 

(389) 


390  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

I.    TEH    DESCRIPTION    OF    THE    BRIDEGROOM. 

The  inspired  apostle  speaks  of  him  as  "  the 
Lamb." 

This  is  John's  special  name  for  his  Lord.  Perhaps 
he  learned  it  from  hearing  the  Baptist  cry,  by  the 
Jordan,  "Behold  the  Lamb." 

What  we  learn  early  abides  with  us  late. 

John  uses  this  name  continually  in  the  Book  of 
the  Eevelatiou. 

The  last  book  of  the  Bible  still  reveals  Jesus  in 
this  character  as  the  Lamb  of  God. 

In  this  passage  the  marriage  of  the  Lamb  may 
even  seem  incongruous  as  a  figure:  but  John  looks 
at  the  sense  and  not  at  the  language. 

He  wishes  us  above  all  things  to  remember  that 
as  the  sacrifice  for  sin  our  Lord  appears  in  his  glory; 
and  that  as  a  Lamb  he  will  manifest  himself  in  the 
consummation  of  all  things  when  his  church  is  per 
fected. 

1.  As  the  Lamb  he  is  the  one  everlasting  sacrifice 

for  sin :  he  will  not  be  other  than  this  in 
his  glory. 

2.  As  the  Lamb,  suffering  for  sin,  he  is  specially 

glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the  angels  and  all 
other  holy  intelligences;  and  so  in  his  joy 
ous  day  he  wears  that  character. 

3.  As  the  Lamb  he  most  fully  displays  his  love  to 

his  church;  and  so  he  appears  in  this  form 
on  the  day  of  his  love's  triumph. 

4.  As  the  Lamb  he  is  the  best  loved  of  our  souls. 

Behold,  how  he  loved  us  even  to  the  death  ! 


THE   MAURI  AGE   S  OFFER  OF  THE  LAMB.      391 

Ever  as  a  victim  for   sin  he  rejoices  to  display 
himself  to  the  universe. 

II.  THE    MEANING   OF    THE    MARRIAGE    SUPPER. 

In  the  evening  of  time,  in  the  end  of  the  gospel 
day,  there  shall  be — 

1.  The  completion  and  perfection   of  the  church. 

"  His  bride  hath  made  herself  ready." 

2.  The  rising  of  the  church  into  the  nearest  and 

happiest  communion  with  Christ  in  his 
glory.  "  The  marriage  of  the  Lamb  is 
come."  The  espousals  lead  up  to  this. 

3.  The   fulfilment    of   the   long   expectations   of 

both. 

4.  The  open  publication  of  the  great  fact  of  mutu 

al  love  and  union. 

5.  The  overflowing  of  mutual  delight  and  joy.  "  Be 

glad  and  rejoice." 

6.  The  grandest  display  of  magnificent   munifi 

cence  in  a  banquet. 

7.  The  commencement  of  an   eternally  unbroken 

rest.  "  He  shall  rest  in  his  love."  The 
church,  like  Euth,  shall  find  rest  in  the 
house  of  her  husband. 

III.  THE   PERSONS    WHO    ARE    CALLED   TO   IT. 

Not  those  who  have  the  common  call,  and  reject 
it,  but — 

1.  Those   who  are  so  called  as  to  accept  the  invi 

tation. 

2.  Those   who   now   possess   the   faith    which    is 

the  token  of  admission. 


392  MY   SERMO^-XOTES. 

3.  Those  who  love  the  Bridegroom  and  bride. 

4.  Those  who  have  on  the  wedding  garment  of 

sanctificatiou. 

5.  Those  who  watch  with  lamps  burning. 

These  are  they  which  are  called  to  the  marriage 
supper. 

IV.    THE  BLESSEDNESS    WHICH    IS   ASCRIBED    TO   THEM. 

1.  They  have  a  prospect  which  blesses  them  even 

now. 

2.  They  have  great  honor  in  being  called  to  such 

a  future. 

3.  They  will  be  blessed  indeed  when  at  that  feast, 

for — 

Those  who  are  called  will  be  admitted. 

Those  who  are  admitted  will  be  married. 

Those  who  are  married  to  Jesus  will  be  end 
lessly  happy.  How  many  a  marriage  leads 
to  misery !  but  it  is  not  so  in  this  case. 

Alas,  some  are  not  thus  blessed ! 
To  be  un blest  is  to  be  accursed. 

MARRIAGE  Music. 

As  they  that  have  invited  a  company  of  strangers 
to  a  feast  do  stay  till  the  last  be  come,  so  there  will 
not  be  a  glorious  coming  of  Christ  until  all  the  elect 
be  gathered  into  one  body.  And  then  shall  be  the 
coming  of  all  comings,  which  is  the  glorious  coming 
of  Christ,  to  take  us  to  himself. — Richard  Sibbes. 

How  blessed  it  will  be  to  those  "called  "  ones,  to 
"sit  down"  at  "  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb !" 


THE   MARRIAGE   SUPPER   OF   THE   LAMB.        393 

Then  will  '•  the  King  sit  indeed  at  his  table,"  and 
"the  spikenard  will  send  forth  the  smell  thereof." 

He  who  once  hung  so  sad  upon  the  cross  for  every 
one,  will  look  around  that  bright  company,  and  in. 
every  white  robe,  and  in  every  lighted  countenance, 
he  will  behold  the  fruit  of  his  sufferings.  He  will 
"  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  will  be  satisfied." 
It  will  be  the  eternal  union  of  God  fulfilled  in  its 
deepest  counsel — a  people  given  to  Christ  from  be 
fore  all  worlds;  and  that  they  are,  that  day,  all 
chosen — all  gathered — all  washed — all  saved — and 
not  one  of  them  is  lost ! — James  Vaughan. 

We  dare  not  say  that  our  Lord  will  love  us  more 
than  he  loves  us  now,  but  he  will  indulge  his  love 
for  us  more;  he  will  manifest  it  more,  we  shall  see 
more  of  it,  we  shall  understand  it  better;  it  will  ap 
pear  to  us  as  though  he  loved  us  more.  He  will  lay 
open  his  whole  heart  and  soul  to  us,  with  all  its 
feelings,  and  secrets,  and  purposes,  and  allow  us  to 
know  them,  as  far  at  least  as  we  can  understand 
them,  and  it  will  conduce  to  our  happiness  to  know 
them.  The  love  of  tiiis  hour  will  be  the  perfection 
of  love.  This  marriage-feast  will  be  the  feast,  the 
triumph,  of  love — the  exalted  Saviour  showing  to  the 
whole  universe  that  he  loves  us  to  the  utmost  bound 
love  can  go,  and  we  loving  him  with  a  fervor,  a  grati 
tude  and  adoration,  a  delight,  that  are  new  even  in 
heaven. 

The  provisions  made  by  him  for  our  enjoyment 
will  astonish  us.  Conceive  of  a  beggar  taken  for  the 
first  time  to  a  splendid  monarch's  table,  and  this  at  a 


394  MY   SEKMON-XOTES. 

season  of  unusual  splendor  and  rejoicing.  How 
would  he  wonder  at  the  magnificence  he  would  see 
around  him,  and  the  profusion  of  things  prepared  for 
hi*  gratification ;  some  altogether  new  to  him,  and 
others  in  an  abundance  and  an  excellence  he  had 
never  thought  of!  So  will  it  be  with  us  in  heaven. 
We  shall  find  it  a  feast  and  a  monarch's  feast.  It 
will  have  delights  for  us,  of  which  we  have  no  con 
ception;  and  the  pleasures  we  anticipate  in  it  will 
be  far  higher  and  more  abundant  than  our  highest 
expectations  have  ever  gone.  We  shall  have  a  pro 
vision  made  for  us,  which  will  befit,  not  our  rank 
and  condition,  but  the  rank  and  condition,  the  great 
ness,  the  magnificence,  of  a  glorious  God. — Charles 
Bradley, 


CCLXIV. 

"AND  HE   SA1TH   UNTO  ME,   THESE  ARE  THE  TRUE  SAYINGS    OF 

Goo."— Rev.  xix.  9. 

THESE  words  relate  to  that  which  immediately 
precedes  them. 

The  judgment  of  the  harlot  church.     Verse  2. 
The  glorious   and  universal  reign  of  Christ. 

Verse  6. 

The  sure  reward  and  glory  of  Christ  with  his 
saved  ones  in  the  glorious   period  at  the 
last.     Verses  7,  8. 
The  existence,  beauty,  purity,  simplicity,  and 

glory  of  the  church. 
The  union  of  Christ  and  the  church  in  love, 

joy,  glory. 
The  blessedness  of  all  who  have  to  do  with 

this  union. 

The  subjects  thus  referred  to  make  up  a  summary 
of  what  the  Lord  has  said  upon  future  human  his 
tory. 
The  words  before  us  we  shall  use  as  expressing — 

I.    A    RIGHT    ESTIMATE    OF    HoLY    SCRIPTURE. 

1.  These  words  which  we  find  in  the  Old  and  New 
Testaments  are  true.  Free  from  error,  cer 
tain,  enduring,  infallible. 

(395) 


396  MY   SEKMOX-IfOTES. 

2.  These  are  divine  words.     Infallibly  inspired,  so 

as  to  be,  in    very  truth,   "the  sayings  of 
God." 

3.  These  words  are  thus  true  and  divine  in  oppo 

sition  to 
Words  of  man.     These  may  or  may  not  be 

true. 
Pretended  words  of  God.     False  prophets  and 

men  with  addled  intellects  profess  to  speak 

in  the  name  of  God ;  but  they  lie. 

4.  These    words    are   all   of  them   truly    divine. 

"  These  are  the  true  sayings  of  God." 
Neither  too  severe  to  be  true,  nor  too  terrible 

to  be  uttered  by  a  God  of  love,  as  some  dare 

to  say. 

Nor  too  good  to  be  true,  as  tremblers  fear. 
Nor  too   old  to   be  true,  as  novelty-hunters 

affirm. 
Nor   too  simple   to    be   truly  divine,    as   the 

worldly-wise  insinuate. 

5.  These  words  are  a  blessing  to  us  for  that  rea 

son. 
What  else  can  guide  us  if  we  have  no  sure 

revelation  from  God? 
How  can  we  understand  the  revelation  if  it  is 

not  all  true  ?     Plow  could  we  discriminate 

between  the  truth  and  the  error  on  subjects 

so  much  beyond  us  ? 

II.    TnE   RESULT    OP   FORMING  SUCH    AN    ESTIMATE. 

If  you  believe  that  "  these  are  the  true  sayings  of 
God," 


THE  SCRIPTURES  DIVIXELY  TRUE.  397 

1.  You  will  listen  to  them    with  attention,   and 

judge  what  you  hear  from   preachers   by 
this  infallible  standard. 

2.  You  will  receive  these  words  with  assurance. 

This  will  produce    confidence  of  understand 
ing. 
This  will  produce  rest  of  heart. 

3.  You  will  submit  with  reverence  to  these  words, 

obey  their  precepts,  believe  their  teachings, 
and  value  their  prophesies. 

4  You  will  expect  fulfillment  of  divine  promises 
under  difficulties. 

5.  You  will  cling  to  revealed   truth  with  perti 

nacity. 

6.  1  ou  will  proclaim  it  with  boldness. 

III.    OUR   JUSTIFICATION    FOR   FOROTNG    SUCH    AN   ESTIMATE. 

In  these  days  we  may  be  accused  of  bibliolatry, 
and  other  new  crimes;  but  we  shall  hold  to  our  be 
lief  in  inspiration,  for — 

1.  The  Scriptures  aro  what  they  profess  to  be — the 

word  of  God. 

2.  There   is   a  singular   majesty   and    power    in 

them;  and  we  see  this  when  the  truth  of 
God  is  preached. 

3.  There  is  a  marvellous  omniscience  in  Scripture, 

which  is  perceived  by  us  when  it  unveils 
our  inmost  souls. 

4.  They  have  proven  themselves  true  to  us. 

They  warned  us  of  the  bitter  fruit  of  sin,  and 
we  have  tasted  it. 


398  MY   SERMON-NOTES. 

They  told  us  of  the  evil  of  the  heart,  and  we 
have  seen  it. 

They  told  us  of  the  peace-giving  power  of  the 
blood,  and  we  have  proved  it  by  faith  in 
Jesus. 

They  told  us  of  the  purifying  energy  of  di 
vine  grace :  we  are  already  instances  of  it, 
and  desire  to  be  more  so. 

They  assured  us  of  the  efficacy  of  prayer,  and 
it  is  true. 

They  assured  us  of  the  upholding  power  of 
faith  in  God,  and  by  faith  we  have  been  up 
held  in  trial. 

They  assured  us  of  the  faithfulness  of  God  to 
his  people  as  shown  in  providence,  and  we 
have  experienced  it.  All  things  have 
worked  together  for  our  good  hitherto. 
5.  The  witness  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  our  hearts 
confirms  our  faith  in  Holy  Scripture.  We 
believe,  and  are  saved  from  sin  by  believing. 
Those  words  must  be  truly  divine  which 
have  wrought  in  us  such  gracious  results. 

Wluit  follows  upon  this?      We   believe  all   the 
Scripture. 

We  now  accept  as  true  sayings  of  God — 

The  proclamation  that  our  Lord  is  coming. 
The  doctrine  that  the  dead  will  be  raised  at 

his  call. 
The  fact  that  there  will  be  a  judgment  of  the 

quick  and  dead. 


THE   SCRIPTURES  DIVINELY   TRUE.  399 

The  truth  that  saints  will  enjoy  eternal  life, 
and  that 

Sinners  will  go  away  into  everlasting  punish 
ment. 

WORTH  QTTOTENG. 

Whence  but  from  heaven  could  men  unskill'd  in  arts, 
In  several  ages  bom,  iii  several  parts, 
Weave  such  agreeing  truths  ?  or  how,  or  why 
Should  all  conspire  to  cheat  us  with  a  lie  ? 
Unasked  their  pains,  ungrateful  their  advice, 
Starving  their  gain,  and  martyrdom  their  price. 

Drydcn. 

Of  most  things  it  may  be  said,  "Vanity  of  vanity, 
all  is  vanity  ";  but  of  the  Bible  it  may  be  truly  said, 
"Verity  of  verity,  all  is  verity." — ArrowsmitJu 

The  Trua  is  the  one  asbestos  which  survives  all 
fire,  and  comes  out  purified. — Thomas  Carlyle, 

A  young  man  had  fallen  into  loose  habits,  and  was 
living  a  wild,  fast  life.  Late  hours  were  frequent  with 
him,  and  he  would  pay  no  regard  to  the  remonstrances 
of  a  Christian  father.  At  lust  it  came  to  a  point. 
The  father  told  his  eon  that  he  must  either  leave  his 
home  or  conform  to  rules.  lie  followed  his  old  ways, 
went  into  lodgings,  and  was  rather  pleased  to  be 
free  from  the  restraint  he  felt  at  home.  After  a 
while  he  picked  up  with  some  young  companions 
who  professed  infidel  opinions,  and  soon,  like  thorn, 
he  even  scoffed  at  religion,  and  made  light  of  all  his 
rnrp»nts  had  taught  him.  But  tho  pravers  of  his  fa- 


400  MY   SKKMO^-KOTES 

ther  and  mother  followed  him,  and  in  a  remarkable 
way  were  abundantly  answered.  One  night  the 
young  fellow  lay  awake  and  began  to  think.  "  I  tell 
people,"  said  he  to  himself,  "that  there  is  no  truth  in 
the  Bible,  but  there  must  be  truth  somewhere,  and 
if  not  there,  where  is  it  ?  I  wonder  what  the  Bible 
says  about  truth  ? 

In  this  way  he  was  led  to  go  to  the  Scriptures, 
and  read  every  passage  where  truth  is  spoken  of. 
The  Bible  became  its  own  witness.  It  so  took  hold 
of  him  that  he  was  persuaded  that  it  was  the  very 
Word  of  the  living  God.  He  was  convinced  of  the 
evil  of  his  past  life,  and  was  led  to  see  Jesus  as  the 
Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life.  His  whole  future 
was  the  reverse  of  his  former  course. —  G  Everard. 


INDEX 

TO   THE    FOUR   VOLUMES. 


'  All  Hail,"  iii.  103. 
Altar,  Clinging  to  the,  i.  105. 
Apart,  ii.  361. 
Ark,  The,  of  His  Covenant,  iv. 

377. 

Arrest,  Under,  iv.  110. 
AS  and  SO,  iv.  199. 
At  His  Feet,  iii.  167. 

Battle,  The,  is  the  Lord's,  i.  84. 

"  Behold  your  King,"  iii.  303. 

Better  than  at  your  Begin 
nings,  ii.  173. 

Bitter  and  the  Sweet,  The,  ii. 
60. 

Bitterness,  The,  of  the  Cross, 
ii.  357. 

Blind  Beggar  of  Jericho,  The, 
iii.  137. 

Boldness  at  the  Throne,  iv.  262. 

Bonds  which  could  not  hold, 
iii.  331. 

Bought  with  a  Price,  iv.  56. 

Burden-bearing,  iv.   127. 

By-and-By,  iv.  333. 

Child,  The,  of  Light,  and  the 
Works  of  Darkness,  iv.  171. 
26 


Christ  is  All,  iv.  205. 

Christ  the  Cause  of  Division, 

iii.  263. 

Christ  the  Creator,  iv.  193. 
Christopathy,  ii.  96. 
Church  Increase,  ii.  78. 
Cleansing,   The,   which   conies 

from  Godliness,  iv.  94. 
Clock,  The  stroke  of  the,  ii.  233. 
Cloud  of  Doves,  The,  ii.  121. 
Comfort,  What  is  your,  i.  245. 
Comforted  and  Comforting,  iv. 

<  7. 
Coming,  The,  with  Clouds,  iv. 

371. 
Compassion   on  the   Ignorant, 

iv.  268. 

Conceit  Rebuked,  i.  202. 
Conference,  A,  to  be  avoided, 

iv.  104. 
Conference,  Invitation  to  a,  ii. 

25. 
Conquest  of  a  Holy  Eye,  The, 

ii.  19. 
Constraining   the   Beloved,   ii. 

13. 

Cross-bearing,  iii.  58. 
Crucifixions,  Three,  iv.  139. 
(401) 


402 


INDEX  TO  THE  FOUR  VOLUMES. 


David's  Spoil,  i.  95. 
Dead,  but  Alive,  iv.  27. 
Defiled  and  Defiling,  ii.  318. 
Desire,  Those  who,  i.  164. 
Disobedience  to  the  Gospel,  iv. 

39. 

Disowned,  The,  iii.  23. 
Divine  Visitation,  A,  iii.  216. 
Door,  The,  iii.  281. 
Doubt,    The     why     and     the 

wherefore  of,  iii.  74. 

Earnest,  The,  iv.  145. 

Education,  The,  of  Sons  of 
God,  iv,  274. 

Elijah  Fainting,  i.  118. 

Enemies,  The  worst  of,  ii.  274. 

Enough,  I  have,  i.  23. 

Enquirers  Answered,  ii.  42. 

En  trance  and  Exclusion,  iii.  92. 

Ethiopian,  The,  ii.  149. 

Examination  before  Commu 
nion,  iv.  OS. 

Excuse,  A  Frivolous,  i.   125. 

Extremity,  Man's,  God's  Op 
portunity,  i.  65. 

Eyes  opened,  i.  135. 

Faith,  Life,  ii.  303. 
Faithful  Saying,  The,  iv.  223. 
Faith  \vithout  Sight,  iii.  325. 
Fallen  Asleep,  iv.  73. 
"Father  forgive  them,"  iii.  210. 
Fear    of    Man    destroyed    by 

Trust,   i.   295. 
Feeble   Faith   appealing   to   a 

Strong  Saviour,  iii.  131. 
Fellowship  in  Joy,  iv.  44. 


First,  The,  and  the  Second,  iv. 
279. 

Flight  to  God,  i.  254. 

Forbearance  of  God,  Concern 
ing,  iv.  15. 

Fountains  of  Repentant  Tears, 
iii.  153. 

Fourfold  Fault,  ii.  314. 

Free-agency,  The,  of  Christ,  iii. 
125. 

Friend,  The  Best,  i.  287. 

Gentleness,  i.  26. 

Gethsemane,  iii.  148. 

God's  Glory  in  Hiding  Sin,  i. 

280. 

Golden  Muzzle,  The,  iii.  341. 
Good  Cheer  for  the  Needy,  i. 

215. 

Good  News,  i.  284. 
Good  Shepherd,  The,  in  three 

Positions,  iii.  189. 
Gospel  Jewelry,  iv.  250. 
Gospel,  Our,  iv.  234. 
Growing    and    Prevailing,    iii. 

365. 
Guests  for  the  Wedding  Feast, 

iii.  86. 

Hairs,  The,  Numbered,  iii.  52. 
Half-breeds,  i.  140. 
Handkerchief,  A,  iii.  308. 
Harvest,  What    will  the,  be? 

ii.  221. 

Hastening  Lot,  i.  9. 
He  Blessed  him  there,   i.  19. 
He  ran  and  HE  ran,  iii.  116. 
Head,  The,  and  the  Body,  iv. 

182. 


INDEX  TO  THE  FOUR  VOLUMES. 


403 


Hear!  hear!  iv.  291. 
Hearing  with  Heed,  iii.  109. 
Heart-communing,  i.  113. 
Heart-disease,  ii.  227. 
Heavenly  Merchantmen,  i.  272. 
Heavenly  Shoes,  iv.   181. 
Heirs  of  God,  iv.  33. 
Hiding-place,  Our,  ii.  48. 
Hindrances,  various,  iv.   116. 
Hypocrite,  The,  Discovered,  i. 
198. 

If  so— What  then?  iv.  319. 

Inability,  Moral,  i.  70. 

Interrogation  and  Exclama 
tion,  ii.  133. 

Inward  more  than  Outward, 
ii.  245. 

Israelite,  The,  Indeed,  iii.  234. 

Jesus,  A  Portrait  of,  iii.  41. 
Jesus  Calling,  iii.  70. 
Jesus  our  Lord,  iv.  21. 
Jesus  sitting  on  the  well,  iii. 

240. 

Job's  Sure  Knowledge,  i.  188. 
Joy  a  Duty,  iv.  187. 
Joy  of  the  Lord,  The,  i.  168. 
Juclah,  i.  36. 
Jude's  Doxology,  iv.  367. 

Kindling  a  Fire,  iii.  377. 
King,  The  word  of  a,  ii.  1. 

Lamb,  Too  little  for  the,  i.  41. 
Lame  Sheep,  iv.  285. 
Learning  in   Private  what  to 

Teach  in  Public,  iii.  47. 
Learning,  True,  iv.  167. 


Life-look,  The,  ii.  66. 

Life  Proved  by  Love,  iv.  344. 

Life-wounds,  iii.  335. 

Living  Praise,  i.  240. 

Lord's  Appeal,  The,  to  his  own 
People,  ii.  279. 

Lord's,  Our,  Attitude  in  Ascen 
sion,  iii.  222. 

Lord's  Side?  Who  is  on  the,  i. 
50. 

Lord,  The,  in  our  Assemblies, 
iii.  286. 

Lord's,  The,  Knowledge  our 
Safeguard,  iv.  329. 

Love  at  Home,  iii.  183. 

Love  plighting  Troth,  i.  89. 

Love  Questioned  and  Vindica 
ted,  ii.  367. 

Love,  Strange  Ways  of,  ii.  209. 

Love's  Foremost,  iii.  173. 

Love's  Importance,  iii.  291. 

Lower  Courts,  The,  iv.  349. 

Man,     A,     troubled     by     his 

thoughts,  ii.  191. 
Maroth,  or  the  Disappointed, 

ii.  268. 
Marriage  Supper  of  the  Lamb, 

iv.  389. 

Marshes,  ii.  185. 
Matthew,  A  Man  named,  iii.  35. 
May  be,  ii.  308. 
Measuring  the  Immeasurable, 

iv.  156. 
Memorial,    The   Ordained,    iii. 

199. 

Memories,  Sacred,  ii.  167. 
Men-catchers,  The  Making  of, 

iii.  17. 


404 


INDEX  TO  THE  FOUR  VOLUMES. 


Mercy  in  the  Day  of  Judgment, 

iv.  239. 

Message,  The  Baptist's,  iii.  228. 
Minister's,  A  Happy,  Meeting, 

iv.  211. 

Mocked  of  the  Soldiers,  iii.  98. 
More  and  More,  iv.  309. 
Mourning  at  the  Cross,  ii.  353. 
Murmuring,  Against,  i.  60. 
Must  he?     iii.  195. 

Never,  No  Never,  No  Never,  iv. 

297. 
Ninevites '    Repentance,    The, 

ii.  262. 
Noli  Me  Tangere,  iii.  314. 

Offence  of  the  Cross,  The,  iv. 

122. 

Olive-tree,  The  Faithful,  i.  75. 
Ox,  The,  and  the  Goad,  iii.  371. 

Pardon,  Abundant,  ii.  115. 

Patience,  Comfort,  and  Hope  in 
the  Scriptures,  iv.  50. 

Pattern,  The,  of  Love,  iv.  177. 

Paul's  Conversion  a  Pattern, 
iv.  228. 

People,  A,  who  were  no  People, 
ii.  215. 

Perfect  Restoration,  ii.  342. 

Place  for  the  Word,  iii.  269. 

Plumb-line,   The,  ii.  251. 

Pondering  Hearts,  i.  268. 

Power  with  God,  i.  14. 

Praise  Open,  and  Public  Con 
fession,  i.  249. 

Prayer  Encouraged,  ii.  161. 

Prayer  for  the  Church,  ii.  197. 


Prayer,  found  in  the  heart,  i. 
100. 

Prayer,  Unseasonable,  i.  45. 

Pride  Catechized,  i.  207. 

Pride  the  Destroyer,  ii.  297. 

Prisoners  of  Hope,  ii.  336. 

Promises,  All  the,  iv.  88. 

Protection,  Angelic,  in  ap 
pointed  Ways,  i.  235. 

Purification  by  Hope,  iv.  339. 

Rain  and  Grace,  i.  210. 

Rain,  No,  ii.  37. 

Rebelling  against  the  Light,  i. 

194. 
Redeemer's    Face    set    like    a 

Flint,  ii.  90. 
Redeemer,  The,  Described  by 

Himself,  ii.  84. 
Rehoboam,    The    Unready,    i. 

151. 

Ptcmembrance,  In,  iv.  62. 
Repentance,  ii.  109. 
Repentance,  Individual,  ii.  155. 
Repentance,  Mistaken  Notions 

about,  ii.  179. 

Repentance,  The,  which  Glori 
fies  God,  iv.  383. 
Resistance  to  Salvation,  iii.  120. 
Rest,  as  a  Test  of  the  Gospel, 

ii.  143. 

Rest  for  the  Restless,  iii.  64. 
Return!    Return!    ii.   127. 
Revelation  and  Conversion,  i. 

284. 

Rivers  in  the  Desert,  ii.  54. 
Rose  and  the  Lily,  The,  ii.  7. 
Royal  Family,  The,  iv.  150. 
Ruins,  i.  159. 


INDEX  TO  THE  FOUR  VOLUMES. 


405 


Ruth  deciding  for  God,  i.  79. 

Sabbath-work,  iii.  252. 
Sacrifice,  Laying  the  Hand  on 

the,  i.  55. 
Sad    Interior    and    a    Cheery 

Messenger,  iii.  159. 
Salus  Jehovse,  i.  225. 
Salvation  as  it  is  now  Received, 

iv.  315. 

Satan  among  the  Saints,  i.  221. 
Scriptures,  The,  Divinely  True, 

iv.  395. 

Second  Time,  The,  iii.  347. 
Self-deceived,  ii.  257. 
Self  or  God,  ii.  330. 
Sermon  for  the  Aged,  ii.  72. 
Servant,  The  Honored,  i.  291. 
Servus  Servorum,  iii.  204. 
Signs  and  Evidences,  iii   320. 
Sinner's  Surrender,  The,  i.  181. 
Small  Things  not  to  be  De 
spised,  ii.  324. 
So  near,  iii.  142. 
Sonship  Questioned,  iii.   11. 
Sorrow  and  Sorrow,  iv.  99. 
Sorrowful  Man's  Question,  The, 

i.  177. 

Soul-health,  iv.  361. 
Source,  The,  iii.  246. 
Sowing  and  Reaping,  iv.  133. 
SpaiTows  and  Swallows,  i.  230. 
Spiritual  Convalescence,  ii.  347. 
Stephen  and  Saul,  iii.  353. 
Storehouses,    Joseph    opening 

the,  i.  31. 

Strange  Things,  iii.  163. 
Stronghold,  The,  ii.  285. 


Sunshine,  ii.  373. 
Sword  of  the  Lord,  The,  iv. 
256. 

Tenses,  The,  iv.  82. 

Theocracy,  ii.  239. 

Things  are  not  what  they  seem, 
i.  263. 

Thorn  Hedge,  The,  i.  259. 

"To  You,"  iii.  359. 

Tried  Man,  The,  the  Blessed 
Man,  iv.  303. 

True  and  Not  True,  iii.  275. 

Twenty-five,  from,  to  Thirty- 
five,  iii.  80. 

Ungodliness  Decided,  ii.  139. 
Uzza,  The  lesson  of,  i.  143. 

Victorious  Faith,  iv.  355. 

Walking  in  the  Light,  ii.  31. 
Watching,    Waiting,    Writing, 

ii.  291. 

WTatchwrord,  A,  iii.  297. 
Ways  Hedged  up,  ii.  203. 
Weariness   in    Well-doing,    iv. 

217. 

Welcome,  A,  for  Jesus,  iii.  1 79. 
"Where  is  He?"  iii.  257. 
Witness,  A,  and  a  Partaker,  iv. 

325. 
Word  of  God,  The,  Unbound, 

iv.  245. 

Word,  Thy,  Suffices  me,  iii.  29. 
Wrath,    The    Little    and   the 

Great,  ii.  104. 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 


VOL.  I. 


GENESIS. 
Chap.  &  Ver. 
xix   15           ... 

Page 
9 
14 
19 
23 
26 
31 
36 

41 
45 
50 

55 

2  SAMUEL. 
Chap.  &  Ver.           ] 
vii.  27  

100 

105 
109 
113 
118 
125 

130 
134 
140 

143 
143 

148 
151 
157 
159 

164 
168 
168 

172 
177 
181 
185 

xxxii.  28  
xxxii.  29  
xxxiii.  9,  11  .  .  .  . 
\\xiii.  13         .  . 

1  KINGS. 
ii.  28,  30  

x.  1    

x.  2  

xii   56 

xix.  4  

xlix.  8  
EXODUS. 
xii.  3,  4  

xx.  40  

2  KINGS. 
ii.  14  
vi.  17  

xiv   15 

xxxii.  26  

xvii.  25,  33,  34.  . 
1  CHRONICLES. 
xiii.  8,  12  

LEVITICUS. 
iv   29 

NUMBERS. 
xi    1          

60 

Y. 

65 
70 

xv.  25  

2  CHRONICLES 
ii.  1  1  

DEUTERONOM 
xxxii.  36   

xii.  14  
xx.  4  

JOSHUA. 
xxiv   19 

xxvii  i.  23  .    . 

JUDGES. 
ix  9             ... 

NEHEMIAII. 
i.  11  

RUTH. 
i   16 

79 

84 
88 
88 
95 

viii.  10 

xii.  43  

1  SAMUEL. 
xvii   47   

Jon. 
i.  6  
iii.  23  

xviii   3  • 

xx   17   

vii.  20  

xxx.  20  .  . 

xiv.  4  .  . 

JOB  (contd.). 
Chap.  &  Ver.  Page 

xix.  25 188 

xxiv.  13 194 

xxvii.  10 1 98 

xxxiv.  33 202 

xxxiv.  33 207 

xxxviii.    25-27.. 210 

PSALMS. 

ix.  18 21.3 

xix.  7 219 

xxxvii.  39 225 

Ixxxiv.  3 230 

xci.  11 235 

cxv.  17,  18 240 

cxix.  60 245 

cxxxviii.  1,  3. .  249 

cxliii.  9... 254 

PROVERBS. 

xv.  19 259 

xvi.  2 263 

xxi.  2 268 

xxiii.  23 272 

xxiii.  26 276 

xxv.  2 280 

xxv.  25 284 

xxvii.  10 2S7 

xxvii.  18 '_'<)0 

xxix.  25 ..  .  2'.»5 


(406) 


INDEX  OF  TEXTS. 

Y 

VOL,    II. 


407 


ECCLESIASTE! 
Chap.  &  Ver. 
viii.  4  

3. 
Page 
1 
ON. 
7 
13 
19 

25 
31 
37 
42 
48 
54 
60 
66 
72 
78 
84 
90 
96 
104 
109 
115 
121 

127 
133 
139 
143 
149 
155 
161 

Page 
11 
17 
23 
29 
35 
41 
47 
52 
58 
64 
70 

JEREMIAH  (contd.) 

Chap.  &  Ver.               Page 
H.  50     167 

HABAKKTTK. 

Chap   &  Ver. 
ii    1-4 

Page 

291 
297 
303 

308 
314 

318 

324 
330 
336 
342 
347 
353 
357 
361 

367 
373 

262 

303 

ilu 

303 
303 

P.:sr- 

131 
137 
142 
118 
153 
159 

163 
29 
167 
173 

SONG  OF  SOLON 
ii.  1  

EZEKIEL. 

ii.  4  

ii.  4 

iii.  4  

xxxvi.  30,  31  179 
xlvii   11                    185 

ZEFIIANIAH. 
ii.  3  
iii.  2  

vi.  5  

ISAIAH. 
i.  18  
ii.  5  

DANIEL. 
v.  6  191 

HAGGAI. 

v.  6  
xiv.  32  

ix.  17  197 
HOSEA. 
ii.  6.  7  203 

ii.  13,  14  

ZECHARIAII 
iv.  10.       ... 

xxxii.  2  

ii.  14  209 
ii.  23  215 

vii.  5,6  

ix.  11,  12 

xiv  22 

viii.  7  221 

x.  6  

xlvi    4 

x.  2  227 

x.  12 

xlix   20  21 

x.  12  233 

xii.  10 

1.  2-6.  .  ' 
1.  7. 

xiii.  10  239 

xii.  10 

JOEL. 
ii.  13  245 

xii.  12-14  

liii  5 

MALACHI. 
i.  2  

liv.  7-9  
Iv.  7. 

AMOS. 
vii.  7  251 

iv  2 

lv.  7.  . 

OB  ADI  AH. 

i.  3  257 

MATTHEW. 

vii     4.1 

Ix.  8.  

JEHKJ:;AH. 
iii.  12,  14,  22.  .  .  . 
j;;   i  Q 

JONAH. 
iii.  4.       .  .               262 

ROMANS. 
i.  17  

MlCAH. 

i.  12.                    .   268 

v.  3         

ix.  25,  26  

GALATIANS. 
iii.  11  

vi.  16  

|  ii.  8  274 

xiii.23  
xviii.  11.        .... 

vi.  3  279 
NAHUM. 
1.7  285 

HEBREWS. 
x.  38. 

xxxiii.  3  

MATTHEW. 

Chap.  &  Vcr. 

iv.  3     

VOL.    III. 

MATTHEW  (contd.") 

Chap.  &  Ver.                1'age 

xiv.  31  74 

MARK  (contd. 

Chap.  &  Ver. 

ix.  24. 

iv.  19  

xx.  3,  4  80 

x.  49,  50 

vii.  21-23  

xxii.  8-10  86 

xii.  34  ... 

viii.  7  

xxv.  10  92 
xxv".  29   98 
xxvui.  9,  10  103 
MARK. 
iv.  24  109 

xiv.  32  
xiv.  72  . 

ix.  9    

ix.  36  

xvi.  10 

x.  27  

LUKE. 

v.  26  

x.  30      

x.  38        

v.  6  116 

vii.  7  

xi.  28-30     .... 

j  v.  7  120 

vii.  38.  .  . 

xi.  28.  .. 

viii.  22-25...      .  125 

vii.  42  . 

408 


INDEX   OF  TEXTS. 


LUKE  (contd.) 

Chap,  &  Ver.               Pasre 
viii   40                    179 

JOHN  (contd.) 

<  hn  -•.  &  Ver.               Page 
iv.   fi                            24-0 

JOHN  (contd.) 

Chap.  &  Ver.               Page 
xx.  17     314 

x.  39         183   iv.  11  246 

xx.  27  320 

xv.  40               .  .   189  •  v.  9  252 

xx.  29  325 

xv.  20  115    vii.  11  257 

ACTS. 
ii.  24  331 

xix.  ?>                .  .   195 

vii.  43  263 

xxii    IP,    0  199 
xxii.  2i                   204 

viii.  37       269 

ii   37  335 

iv.  SI                     .  975 

iv.  14  341 

xxiii.  34                  210   •*•   9                         981 

vii.  13       347 

xxiv.  HS  216 
xxiv.  50                 222 

x.  22.  23  286 

vii.  58  353 
xiii.  26     359 

xiv.  28     ....     291 

JOHN. 
i  29                         228 

xiv.  31       .         .  297 

xix.  18-20.    .  .    .   365 

VIY    14.                    303 

xxvi.  14  371 

i.  47.                     .  234   -xv-  15                   .   308 

xxviii.  2  377 

ROMANS. 

Chap.  &  Ver.               Page 

i,  17  (vol.  ii.)...  303 
ii.  4  15 

VOL.   IV. 

EPHESIANS  (contd.) 

Chap.  &  Ver.               Pas?e 

iii.  15                      150 

HEBREWS  (contd.) 

Chap.  &  Ver.               Page 
x.  9       279 

iii.  16,17,18,  19.   156 
iv.  15,  16     .        .   162 

x.  38  (vol.  ii.)..   303 
xii.  13  285 

iv   24                        21 

vi   11   12                  27 

iv.  20,  21  .        .    .   167 

xii.  25  291 

viii   17                     33 

v.  11  171 

xiii.  5  297 

ix.  25  (vol.  iij.  215 
x.  16  39 

v.  25     177 

JAMES. 
i  12                        303 

vi.  15  181 

xii.  15  44 

PHILIPPIANS. 

iv.  4  187 

COLOSSIANS. 

i.  16  193 

iv  6                       309 

xv.  4   50 

1  PETER. 
i.  9  315 

1  CORINTHIANS. 

vi.  19,  20  56 

i-sr     IS                                 S1Q 

xi.  24  62 

ii.  6  199 

TT      1                                                     Wl 

xi.  28  68 

iii.  11  205 

2  PETER. 
ii.  9  329 

xv.  6           ...     73 

1  THESSALONIANS. 

2  CORINTHIANS. 
i.  3,  4  77 

2  THESSALONIANS. 
iii.  13                    217 

1  JOHN. 

iii.  2  333 

i  10                           82 

i   90                          88 

1  TIMOTHY. 
i.  15               223 

iii.  3  339 

vii    1                        94 

iii.  14    .      344 

vii   10                       99 

i.  16                        228 

iii.  20,21  349 

GALATIANS. 
i.  16  104 
iii.  11  (vol.  ii.)..  303 
iii.  23  110 
v  7                        116 

2  TIMOTHY. 
i.  12  234 
i  18                        239 

v.  4  355 

3  JOHN. 
2  361 

ii.  9  245 

JUDE. 

24,  25  367 

TITUS. 
ii.  10  250 

v.  11                        122 

REVELATION. 
i.  7....  371 

vi.  2   5                    127 

HEBREWS. 
iv.  12  256 

vi  7                         133 

xi.  19  377 

vi.  14  139 
EPHKSIANS. 
i.  13.  14  ..          .  145 

iv.  16  262 
v.  2  268 

xvi.  8,  9  383 

xix.  9  389 

v.  8..                  .  274 

xix.  9  39S 

A     new    Creation    From     Cover    to    Cover 
THE  FUNK  &  WAGNALLS 

NEW 
Standard  Dictionary 

Completed  after  nearly  four  years  of  time  and 
more  than  a  million  and  a  half  of  dollars  had 
been  spent  in  its  production.  The  work  of  over 
380  Editors  and  Specialists.  Has  nearly  3,000 
pages;  more  than  7,000  illustrations;  contains  over 
455,000  living  vocabulary  terms — more  than  125,- 
000  of  these  being  new;  has  many  exclusive  dis 
tinguishing  features  not  found  in  any  other  similar 
work ;  and  has  been  revised  since  the  World  War 
so  as  to  include  all  the  important  new  terms  that 
have  come  into  the  language. 

The  Superlative  Achievement  in  Lexicography 

STYLES  AND  PRICES 

(All   editions   supplied  with   Thumb    Index — These    prices 
subject  to  change,  without  notice.) 

ONE  VOLUME  EDITION  (Sold  in  book  stores) 

Buckram,  Regular  Paper $16.00 

Sheep,    Regular    Paper 20.00 

SUBSCRIPTION  EDITION  (.Sold  only  by  subscription) 

One  Volume  Style,  Buckram  or  Full  Morocco. 
Two  Volume  Style,  Three-quarter  Morocco. 
Bible    Paper,    One    Volume    Style,    Three-quarter    or 
Full   Morocco,   Flexible  or    Stiff   Cover. 

Sample  pages  and  prices  of  Subscription  Edition  sent  on 
application. 

FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY,    Publishers 
NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 


A  Booh  That  Answers  a  Million  Questions! 
FUNK  &  WAGNALLS 

PRACTICAL  STANDARD 

DICTIONARY 

Edited  by  FRANK   H.  VIZETEULY,  latt.D.,  I/L.D. 

New  From  Cover  to  Cover 


1,325  Plages,  6^x9^ 
inches.  Weight,  about  C 
pounds. 

140,000  Words  with  their 
meanings,  all  in  one  al 
phabetical  vocabulary. 
1-5,000  Proper  Names  of 
Prominent  Persons, 
Places,  etc. 

<MMK>  Synonymic  Treat 
ments  comparing  and 
contrasting  related. 
O'.OCO  Antonyms  showing 
meanings  opposite  of 
Bynonyms. 

3,000  Lines  Faulty  Diction 
to  point  common  errors 
in  speaking  and  writing. 
3,500  Pictorial  Illustra 
tions,  many  being  full- 
page  engravings. 

1,900      Foreign      Phrases 

used  in  English,  litera 
ture. 


New   Words   adopted  by 

the  English  language  in 
late  years. 

Most  Kecent  Census  Sta 
tistics  of  population  of 
the  United  States  and  all 
the  principal  countries 
of  the  world. 

Coinage  of  the  World  as 

reported  by  the  Director 
of  the  United  State?; 
Mint. 

Personal  Names  of  fa 
mous  men  and  women — 
presidents,  sovereigns, 
pontiffs,  etatesmon, 
poets,  and  others. 

Geographical  Names  in 
dicating  world  recon 
struction  resulting  from 
the  War. 

Scientific  TJp-to-Date  Ma 
terial  specially  edited  £or 
this  volume. 


REGULAR  PAPER  EDITION 

Cloth,  with  thumb-notch  index,  $5,  net;  Library  Buck 
ram,  $6,  net.  Postage,  34c  sxtra, 

BIBLE  PAPER  EDITION  (THIN) 

Cloth,  colored  edges,  with  thumb-notch  index,  $5,  net; 
Fabrikoid,  marbled  edges,  thumb-notch  index,  $6,  net; 
Full  Flexible  Leather,  gilt  edges,  thumb-notch  index,  boxed, 
§7.50,  net;  postage  2dc  extra.  Exquisitely  bound  in  full- 
crushed  Levant,  gilt  edges,  hand  tooled,  raised  bands, 
boxed,  $17.50. 

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY,  Publishers 


334-360  Fourth  Avenue 


New  York,  N.  Y. 


THE  JUGfrEST  LITTLE  DICTIONARY  IN  THE   WOULD 


THE  VEST-POCKET 

Standard  L)ictionary 

Edited  by  JAMES  C.  FERNALD,  L.H.D. 

Abridged  from  the  Funk  &  W agnails  Standard  Dictionary. 

Contains  the  correct  spelling,  pronunciation,  syllabication, 

and  definition  of  about  26,000  vocabulary  terms 

DISTINGUISHING   FEATURES 

This  is  the  smallest  publication  of  the  Standard 
Dictionary  series.  The  vocabulary  includes  all 
words  of  disputed  spellings  and  such  words  as 
have  irregular  plural  formation.  In  addition  to 
the  vocabulary  are  given:  Key  to  Scientific  Alpha 
bet;  Parliamentary  Law  at  Sight;  Legal  Holidays 
in  all  the  States  of  the  American  Union;  Interest 
Tables;  Rates  of  Interest  in  all  States  of  the  Amer 
ican  Union;  Chart  of  (a)  States  of  the  Union,  (b) 
Population,  (c)  Capitals,  (d)  Dates  of  Admission, 
(e)  Total  Population  of  the  United  States;  Presi 
dents  cf  the  United  States ;  Postal  Information ; 
Telegraph  and  Cable  Rates ;  Domestic  and  Foreign 
Weights  and  Measures;  The  Metric  System;  Rules 
for  Pronunciation;  Rules  for  Spelling;  Rules  for 
Punctuation;  Abbreviations;  Foreign  Words  and 
Phrases ;  Rulers  of  the  World ;  Foreign  Possessions 
of  the  United  States;  The  Largest  Cities  of  the 
World;  Countries  of  the  Postal  Union;  Tables  of 
Moneys  of  the  World ;  Standard  Time. 

Cloth  40  cents.    Blue  Moroccoette  (Imitation  Leather)  Col 
ored  Edges,  60  cents.    Red  English  Paste   Grain  Leather, 
Gold  Edges,  90  cents.    Indexed,  10  cents  per  copy  extra 
Postage  4  cents  extra. 

FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY,    Publishers 
NEW  YORK  and  LONDON 


An  Indispensable  Volume    for  those  who  would  write 
and  speak  pure  English. 


A   Desk-Book  of 
Errors  in  English 

By  FRANK  H.  VIZETELLY,  Litt.D.,  LL.D. 

Author  of  "The  Preparation  of  Manuscripts  for  the  Printer.  " 
Managing  Editor  of  the  "New  Standard  Dictionary,  "  etc 

This  compact  volume  deals  with  the  hundred 
and  one  questions  that  arise  in  daily  speech  and  cor 
respondence,  and  which  are  not  usually  treated  in 
the  dictionary  in  the  same  manner  as  in  this  handy 
and  time-saving  book. 

"The  scope  and  plan  of  the  volume,  which  is  of  handy  size 
and  alphabetical  arrangement,  strike  one  as  pleasantly  sane  and 
sound."— The  New  York  Times, 

"It  is  a  book  that  should  be  on  every  writer's  desk.  If 
studied  in  season  and  out  of  season  it  will  correct  numerous 
inelegancies  and  vulgarities  of  speech." — The  Union,  Spring 
field,  Mass. 

''The  book  is  admirably  arranged  to  facilitate  search  for  a 
decision  on  a  moot  point  or  a  doubtful  usage,  and  is  invaluable 
for  the  writer  who  lacks  the  leisure  for  extended  and  thoughtful 
research. "—Star,  Washington,  D.  C. 

12mo,  Chth,  243  pases.  Price  tl.SO,  Net.  Exquisitely 
bound  in  full  crushed  Levant,  gilt  edges,  hand  tooled, 
raised  bands,  boxed,  $10.00.  Postage  14  cents  extra. 

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY,  Publishers 

NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 


Just  u'fiat  you  want  to  know  about  the  correct  use  of 
Prepositions,  Conjunctions,  Relative  Pronouns,  and  Ad 
verbs  is  prowded  in  concise,  handy  form,  with  illustrative 
examples,  in  this  work. 

Connectives  §f 
English  Speech 

Companion  Volume  to  "English  Synonyms, 
Antonyms,   and  Prepositions" 

By  JAMES   C.   FERNALD,   L.H.D. 

Author   of   "English   Synonyms,   Antonyms,    and   Preposi 
tions,"    "Expressive    English,"    "Historic    English," 
"A   Working  Grammar  of  the  English,  Language," 
"English  Grammar  Simplified,"  etc. 

Giving  the  definitions  with  the  correct 
usage  of  these  parts  of  speech  so  far  as  pertains 
to  their  office  as  connectives  in  the  construc 
tion  of  English  phrases  and  sentences;  indicat 
ing  such  prepositions  as  should  be  used  after 
verbs  and  those  concerning  which  questions 
are  likely  to  arise;  with  numerous  quotations 
sustaining  the  decisions  as  to  correct  or  incor 
rect  usage. 

"The  topic  of  connecting  words  is  one  of  extreme  impor 
tance  in  the  study  of  language,  and  Mr.  Fernald's  book  is 
decidedly  worth  while." — The  Republican,  Springfield. 

"In  this  valuable  manual  the  reader,  the  writer,  and  the 
teacher  will  find  on  the  instant  an  admirable  solution  for 
ten  thousand  difficulties.  The  arrangement  is  simplicity 
itself,  and  the  treatment  lucid  and  convenient." — Public 
Ledger,  Philadelphia. 

12mo,  Cloth.  324pp.  $1.90,  net;  by  mail,  $2.00. 

FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY,    Publishers 
NEW  YORK  and  LONDON 


A  Working  Grammar 

OF  THE 

English  Language 

By  JAMES   C.   FERNALD,   L.H.D. 

Author   of    "English   Synonyms,    Antonyms,   and   Preposi 
tions,"    "Connectives   of   English   Speech,"   Etc.,   Etc. 

In  this  book  Dr.  Fernald  has  covered  the 
field  «of  English  grammar  in  an  extremely 
practical  and  entirely  new  and  popular  man 
ner.  Recognizing  the  large  number  of  persons 
who  have  not  the  time  to  study  ponderous 
definitions  and  arguments,  he  has  prepared 
what  is,  in  every  sense,  a  very  concise  and  use 
ful  "working  grammar."  Herein  the  business 
man,  stenographer,  clerk,  lawyer,  physician, 
clergyman,  teacher — every  one  who  would 
refresh  and  enrich  his  knowledge  of  English — 
will  find,  in  simple  statement,  a  clear  and  lucid 
explanation  of  the  principles  of  English  gram 
mar.  All  that  makes  the  study  of  grammar  a 
mystery  is  eliminated,  and  the  whole  book  is 
written  so  as  to  enable  any  intelligent  person  to 
find  his  own  way,  by  its  teachings,  to  a  correct 
working  knowledge  of  English. 

12mo  Cloth,  342  pages,  $1.50,  net;  post-paid,  $1.64 

FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY,    Publishers 
NEW  YORK  and  LONDON 


HOW  TO 
SPEAK  IN  PUBLIC 

A  Most  Suggestive  and  Practical  Self -Instructor 

By  GRENVILLE  KLEISER 
Author  of  "Power  and  Personality  in   Speaking,"  etc. 

This  new  book  is  a  complete  elocutionary  man 
ual  comprizing  numerous  exercises  for  developing 
the  speaking  voice,  deep  breathing,  pronunciation, 
vocal  expression,  and  gesture;  also  selections  for 
practise  from  masterpieces  of  ancient  and  modern 
eloquence.  It  is  intended  for  students,  teachers, 
business  men,  lawyers,  clergymen,  politicians, 
clubs,  debating  societies,  and,  in  fact,  every  one 
interested  in  the  art  of  public  speaking. 

OUTLINE  OF  CONTENTS 


Iviechanics  of  Elocution 
Mental  Aspects 
Public  Speaking 
Selections    for  Practise 


Previous   Preparation 
Physical  Preparation 
Mental  Preparation 
Moral  Preparation 


Preparation  of  Speech 

"It  is  admirable  and  practical  instruction  in  the  tech- 
nic  of  speaking,  and  I  congratulate  you  u^on  your  thor 
ough  work." — Hon.  Albert  J.  Bereridge. 

"The  work  has  been  very  carefully  and  well  compiled 
from  a  large  number  of  our  best  works  on  the  subject  of 
elocution.  It  contains  many  admirable  suggestions  for 
those  who  are  interested  in  becoming  better  speaker*.  As 
a  general  text  for  use  in  teaching  public  speaking,  it  may 
be  used  with  great  success." — John  IV.  Wetzel,  formerly 
Instructor  in  Public  Speaking,  Yale  University,  New 
Haven,  Conn. 

\2rno,   Cloth.      $1.60,   net;   post-paid,   $1.74 

FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY,    Publishers 
NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 


How  TO  DEVELOP 

Power  and 

Personality 

IN  SPEAKING 

By  GRENVILLE  KLEISER 

Author  of    "How   to    Speak   in   Public."     Introduction   by 

Lewis  O.  Brastow,  D.D.,  Professor  Emeritus, 

Yale  Diz'inity   School 

This  new  book  gives  practical  suggestions  and 
exercises  for  Developing  Power  and  Personality  in 
Speaking.  It  has  many  selections  for  practise. 

POWER.— Power  of  Voice— Power  of  Gesture- 
Power  of  Vocabularv — Power  of  Imagination — 
Power  of  English  Style — Power  of  Illustration 
—  Power  of  Memory — Power  of  Extempore 
Speech  —  Power  of  Conversation  —  Power  of 
Silence — Power  of  a  Whisper — Power  of  the  Eye. 

PERSONALITY.  — More  Personality  for  the 
Lawyer — The  Salesman — The  Preacher — The 
Politician — The  Physician — The  Congressman 
—The  Alert  Citizen. 

"I  give  it  my  hearty  commendation.  It  should  take  ita 
place  upon  the  library  shelves  of  every  public  speaker; 
be  read  carefully,  consulted  frequently,  and  held  as 
worthy  of  faithful  obedience.  For  lack  of  the  useful  hints 
that  here  abound,  many  men-  murder  the  truth  by  their 
method  of  presenting  it." — S.  PARKES  CADMAN,  D.D., 
Brooklyn,  N.  Y. 

\2rno,  Cloth,  443  Pages.    $1.60,  Net;  by  mail,  $1.74 

FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY,    Publishers 
NEW  YORK  AND  LONDON 


