Pn Tee 


a et 


NEW SERMONS, 


ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


BY 


DWIGHT LYMAN MOODY, 
ILLUSTRATED. 


SOLD ONLY BY SUBSCRIPTION. 


ST, JOHN, N.B.; 
JONES'& MORRISON, PUBLISHERS. 


Mntered, according to Act of Congress, in the vear S77, be 
HENRY §&. GOODSPEED, 


Th the Office of the Librarian of Congresa, at Washington 


oa 


| 


Sp eg AE UE ah aa er i Bt eH ede uaa 


Pie ea 


RES Re ita i a ats a 


ine haiti ME 


ie 


ther 
also 


paig 
after 
the 
servi 
and 
onst! 
popu 
of L 
Sank. 
The 
ment 
strea 
soul. 

M 
to si 
work 
those 


Whi 


“ergs seria IAD ati cic aiaac ei te ea SI LOC - 


Late See 


INTRODUCTION. 


ISTORY informs us that labor-saving machinery, when first 

4 introduced, was viewed with bitter hatred by working peo- 

ple, who feared that their wages would be reduced because 

there would be less demand for human muscle and skill. It was 

also supposed that steam would supersede the necessity for horses 

and beasts of burden, and that these would greatly decline in value. 

Not only were these ideas ill-founded, but the very opposite state 

of things prevailed. Labor became more honorable and valuable, 
and all kinds of stock advanced in price. 

Since the printing press became improved to so great an extent 
during the last century, men argued that it would supersede 
public speaking, and “the power of the press” is a household 
phrase. But what have we beheld during the late political cam- 
paign in this country? Monster meetings day after day, and night 
after night, at which the issues before the people were discussed in 
the presence of enthusiastic and tireless assemblies. The orator’s 
services seemed never in so great demand as now, when newspapers 
and books are multiplied in countless profusion. A grander dem- 
onstration of the power of the human voice to call out and hold 
popular assemblies, has been furnished by the victorious progress 
of D. L. Moody, the Evangelist, and his singing coadjutor, Ira D. 
Sankey, in the most enlightened countries of the civilized world. 
The press can never meet the wants of man, but must be supple- 
mented by the living eloquence of the speaker, from whose lips flow 
streams of burning words that find their way into the depths of the 
soul, 

Mr. Moody’s campaigns are not hackneyed and mechanical 
to such a degree as might be expected, but are the hearty, living 
work of a wonderful evangelist, whose resources seem, indeed, like 
those of the artesian well, to employ one of his own comparisons. 
While he preaches on the same general subjects, and pursues similar 


ee 


RR IT 


iv INTRODUCTION, 


lines of thought, and uses the same illustrations to a large extent, it 
is also true that he has a wonderful facility of adapting his discourses 
to the occasion, and thus gives them a freshness that extempora- 
neous speakers, repeating themselves, often lack. And not only so, 
but his mental activity and spiritual growth impart newness and 
power to his addresses and prayers, which men who speak much, 
and live upon themselves, as it were, are apt to want. 

These sermons, addresses, and prayers, now offered to the public 
in this beautiful volume, are the best efforts of his genius among a 
host of old friends and new, and in the most trying situations, and 
under the noblest inspirations, and deserve to be widely circulated, 
and read by millions of people who want to know the Gospel in its 
simple, Scriptural purity, and how it is proclaimed by one whom 
God has placed at the head of evangelists. 

Those who have heard Mr. Moody in the delivery of these dis- 
courses, will feel again the thrill that electrified them when the tor- 
rent of Gospel enthusiasm poured from his lips. The old earnestness 
and fire will glow again in the printed page, and they will almost seem 
to be sitting under the sound of his voice. The reader who has only 
the book to represent the man, will be charmed with the tenderness 
of his language, the picturesqueness of his style, the graphic fervor of 
statement, the grandeur of the truths he reiterates and illustrates, 
and the directness, faith, and zeal with which he urges and persuades 
men to renew the battle or enlist under the banner of Christ. 

Records of his life and work are omitted from this volume, and 
may be found fully presented in the “‘ Wonderful Career of Moody 
and Sankey in Great Britain and America,” by the same publishers. 


IE GEES CBee EE HEN Sgt RE EES 


a 


SEAS MERE RE Th 


i 


nt, it 
urses 


pora- 
ly so, 
; and 
nuch, 


public 
ong a 
3s, and 
lated, 
in its 
whom 


se dis- 
le tor- 
stness 
t seem 
s only 
erness 
‘vor of 
trates, 
suades 


ne, and 
loody 
ishers. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


PAGER: 
INTRODUCTION , : : ‘ , : : : : : 3 
TABLE OF CONTENTS . . e . : : . : : 5 
List OF ILLUSTRATIONS . : : : : ‘ : : ; 7 
SERMONS. 
I.—STonrs TO BE ROLLED AWAY : : ; : 9 
II.—REAPING AND GATHERING FRUIT  . ; , ‘ 16 
I1I.—CourAGE IN THE Lorp’s WoRK . ‘ ‘ : 25 
IV.—PoweR OF FAITH. : : : : : . 31 
V.—CoMPASSION AND SYMPATHY. ‘ : : : 38 
VI.—FUuUNERAL SERMON OF SAMUEL Moopy . . ‘ 46 
VII.—A STARTLING QUESTION ° ; ; : ° 52 
VIII.—Curist SEEKING THE LOST ‘ : : : : 62 
IX.—LostT AND SAVED ‘ ; : . ° , 70 
X.—HEAVEN, AND WHO ARE ‘THERE : : ‘ : 78 
XI.—Layinc up TREASURES IN HEAVEN. ; . 86 
XII.—GRACE ‘ ; ; . F i . . ‘ 95 
XIII.—SEconD SERMON ON GRACE ° ho ; 105 
XIV.—ENTHUSIASM. ‘ ‘ . : : : » 115 
XV.—On BEING Born AGAIN : . : : : 121 
XVI.—THE BRAZEN SERPENT . ; ‘ ° ‘ ~ way 
XVII.—FaiItH, AND How To GET IT ; ‘ A 2 136 
XVIII.—TRAcING THE SCARLET THREAD ‘ ‘ ; . 146 
XIX.—THE BLooD oF THE NEW TESTAMENT . . . 156 
XX.—How Gop Loves Men. ; : . : » 165 
XXI.—Gop HATES SIN AND LoVES THE SINNER. ‘ 173 
XXII.—Tue DEATH oF JESUS : ‘ ‘ . : » F82 
XXIII.—THE SINNER’s Excuses Swept AWAy ‘ : 189 
XXIV.—TuHeE GLorious GOSPEL . ‘ ° ‘ 4 » @0% 
XXV.—THE FRIEND OF THE SORROWING : ; : 211 
XXVI.—DELIVERANCE FORCAPTIVES . : : . ». 819 
XXVII.—Tue BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL . : 227 
XXVITI.—ON SEEKING AND FINDING THE LorD . ‘ ; 337 
XXIX.—A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUGHT HOME . 245 


XXX.—REPENTANCE . . : ; ; : : +» 268 
XXXI.—WuaT CHRIST IS TO US ; : ‘ ‘ . 263 


CONTENTS. 


XXXII.—Tue Hoty Spirit anD His Work , , 
XXXIII.—Man’s RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT ° 
XXXIV.—PrERSONAL REMINISCENCES ‘ ° ° 
XXXV.—Gop wants EVERYBODY SAVED . ° ° 
XXXVI.—THE PRODIGAL Son . ‘ A P ° 
XXXVII.—LeEssONS FROM SAUL’S CONVERSION . ° 
XXXVIII.—Conressinc CurRIsT . : ‘ ‘ ‘ 


XXXIX,—NAAMAN : P ‘ 
XL.—How Memory Poeun THE boss SouL 
XLIi.—How To Stubpy THE BIBLE . ‘ ° 

XLII.—Five One THINGS . ‘ é ‘ 
XLIII.— REGENERATION IS Fist dvannote P ; 


XLIV.—Tue ‘“ BEHOLDs ” : ‘ 
XLV.—Best MEtrHuops WITH INQUIRERS 
XLVI.-—Jrsus Curist THE Gop-MAN 
XLVII.—WALKING WITH Gop ; 
XLVIIL.—Younc Men URGED To Dreine: FOR Gop 
XLIX.—PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF POWER. 
T..—WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THE LAW 
LI.—Tue Eicut “I Witis” or Curist 
LII.—Lor 1n Sopom . 


LV.—THE Ricu Foou 


LVII.—“ WHat SHALL THE HARVEST BE?” 
LVIII.--SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN ; . ; 


LIX.—Ture Ten “ Comes” , ‘ . ; 
LX.—How To BE SAVED F : ‘. 7 F 
LXI.— THE RESURRECTION . - . 


; | LXII.—Ovur Lorp’s RETURN . ‘ ; ; j 
I LXJII—Tue Propuer DANIEL. ; A 
LXIV.—Jesus IN PROPHECY. ° . . 
LXV.—Curist THE WONDERFUL. 
LXVI.—NotT WorKING AND WORKING 
LXVII.—WuHo ARECHRISTIANS? . : é A 
LXVIII.—INsTANT SALVATION 
LXIX.— PRACTICAL ADDRESS TO Riecnsis Men ‘ 
LXX.—JEsus AND JOHN THE BAPTIST  . 
LXXI.—A NoTABLE MIRACLE 
LXXII.—RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS 
LXXIII.—FareweE..t SERMON. Gop ABLE TO KEEP 


LIII.—THE RELIGION OF JESUS BETTER THAN ALL Isms. 
LIV.—Jrsus CHRIST MUST BE RECEIVED OR REJECTED 


LVI.—PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN; OR, PRIDE AND Piwitenct: 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


ADDRESSES. 


INTRODUCTORY AT CHICAGO . , ‘ 
I.—Firty-rirst PSALM ‘ ‘ 
II.—Power or FAITH 
III.— HEART SEARCHING F ‘ . 
IV.—TueE Lorp’s PRAYER MISNAMED 
V.—DANIEL’s PRAYER ‘ , , ‘ ; 
VI—ON THE COMMITTEE'S CIRCULAR CALLING TO PRAYER 
VII.—Hvumitity . 
VIII.—CaLL ror WORKERS 
IX.—TuHeE CuHRISTIAN’S FAME , ‘ ‘ 
X.— LESSONS FROM THE RAISING OF LAZARUS . 
XI.—WuatT To po witH Dousts , ° 
XII.—On WITNESSING FOR CHRIST 
XIII.—TuHE MARRIAGE AT CANA ‘ ‘ ‘ e 
XIV.—DRUNKARDS SAVED BY REGENERATION 
XV.—MEN FALL By PRIDE ; ‘ F , , 
XVI.—Drink1NG OF Gop’s FULLNESS 
XVII.—Cominc TO CHRIST. 
XVIII.—THANKSGIVING AND PRAISE 
XIX.—ComPASSION 
XX.—THE Hoty Spirit 
XXI.—GIFrTs OF THE HOLy SPIRIT 
XXII.—NoOAun’s CARPENTERS 
XXIII.—How To Stupy THE BIBLE 
XXIV.—TRustT. , , 
XXV.—Jacos’s LIFE AND CHARACTER 
XXVI.—THE LIFE oF PETER 
XXVII.—WALKING WITH Gop 
XXVIII.—Tur Two Apams 


XXIX.—THE PRAYERS OF 111E CHURCH STRONGER THAN HErop 


7020 


793 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


PAGE 
PORTRAIT OF D. L. MooDY . . .«. «© «© «© «© «© 6 I 
cl “ TRA D. SANKEY i Nike Po ae ae 16 te 
“ “ Pp, P, BLISS Be oN Hs. “Sate CRE. - Ge ae Es ee . 
INTERIOR OF THE TABERNACLE AT CHICAGO ’ ‘ ‘ P ° 97 Py 
THE MOODY AND SANKEY TABERNACLE, BOSTON ‘ » 209 
BUILDING OF THE Y. M. C. ASSOCIATION, PHILADELPHIA » 209 
Mr. Moopy’s NEw CHURCH AT CHICAGO . . . ‘ . + $21 ! 
THE PEOPLE GATHERING AT THE BROOKLYN RINK . . . «= OI : 
Mr. Moopy’s First SUNDAY AT THE DEPOT CHURCH PHILADEL- zz 
PRIA. © «ww. 4 : G.) <3 rr er er (> , 
EXTERIOR VIEW OF THE HIPPODROME, NEW YORK . ©  « 529 q : 
zz 
" 
5 : 
; 
% 
3 ( 
Eg 
£ 


EL 


MOOD Y’S 
SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND 
PRAYERS, 


I. 
STONES TO BE ROLLED AWAY. 


JOHN xi. 39: “Jesus said, Take ye away the stune.” 


OW I have not any doubt but that nearly all this congregation 
are looking for a blessing in this city. I’ve no doubt that 
hundreds of you are expecting a great workhere. If youare 

not so expecting you ought to be; and if God does not do a great 
and mighty work here, it will not be His fault, but it will be our 
own. I find a class of people who say, Well, we must wait until 
God works, and when God is ready we will see a great work. Now, 
if I read my Bible and understand Scripture, God is always ready. 
We talk about the “set time” for God to favor us. The set 
time is when you and I get ready to let God work for us, just when 
we choose to roll away the stones that prevent His coming to our 
souls. Some one must take away these stones, some one must roll 
them off so the Lord, Redeemer, and Saviour can get at us. There 
is no doubt but that He Himself could send down legions of angels 
to clear away every single stone. If even the word of His mouth 
should go out, every stone-like obstacle in His path would suddenly 
disappear, just as Setan did from His presence in the wilderness. 
But God does not we « in that way. He works through others. 
He did not Himself roll away the stone from Lazarus’ grave; He 
said to His disciples surrounding Him, and to His disciples in all] 


10 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


times, “ Take ye away the stone.” Now I find a grcat many men 
and a great many wives, and a great many Christians, too, who ask 
God to roll away the stone, and because He does not answer their 
prayer, they throw the blame on God. Why, the blame is not His; 
it is theirs. God always works in partnership. When He is asked 
to do a thing, He can only do it when He first sees an active dispo- 
sition in the asker to help to get the blessing. This failure to 
second God’s work for us comes from unbelief. Such a half-hearted 
man does not believe God will grant his prayer, and so fails to carry 
out his own part of the programme. The mother that prays for the 
reclaiming of a drunken son or a dissolute husband, must faithfully 
do her part to this end, and then must have full belief that God will 
do the rest. There is something for us all to do for our fellow- 
creatures, and it is the stone of unbelief that blocks up the way if 
wedonotdoit. And it isjust this great stone that must first be rolled 
out of the way in this city. Let us believe that God can do a great 
work here, and that practical belief will make us work as we ought 
to. It will be a hard work, but with this lever of faith it can be 
done, and in short order. There must be honest work, a lifting up of 
oneself first as far as may be, and then a leaving of the rest to God, 
whose word will completely roll the stone away and raise the dead. 
And what a need there is for this resurrection in all our souls. How 
dead our sense of sin! E ~ forgetful that iniquity can not live in 
our heart, and word, and « .| How careless, and indifferent even, 
to have things anywise ditie. »* than they are! Is the fault God’s? 
No, the only trouble is with ourselves; we will not ask Him that 
He will help us to do better things. We do not want to do them. 
How lukewarm the love of God in our hearts, and how selfish and 
cold, in consequence, our thought toward our neighbor! It is a 
wonder to me how low our standard can fly, and yet we can profess 
to be Christians. Do we not need to cry that God will revive us? 
Yes, it is we ourselves that must first be quickened. Our own 
hearts—those of us who profess to be Christians—must feel anew 
the joys of sin forgiven, and a rekindling of the earlier fires of faith 
and holy living. Only thus can good influences be made effectual 
on those outside. I have heard many complain of the answer of 
prayer being withheld, when the secret lay just here. A woman, 
though a professing Christian, need not pray for her husband’s con- 
version if she be governed by an evil temper. She need not talk 
even to God about her husband until she gets command of her rail- 


S. 


any men 
who ask 
wer their 
not His; 
- is asked 
ve dispo- 
‘ailure to 
f-hearted 
3 to carry 
vs for the 
faithfully 
God will 
ir fellow- 
1e way if 
be rolled 
0 a great 
we ought 
t can be 
ing up of 
t to God, 
he dead. 
s. How 
bt live in 
pnt even, 
t God’s? 
im that 
Ho them. 
lfish and 
It is a 

h profess 
vive us? 
Dur own 
el anew 
of faith 
effectual 
swer of 


woman, 
d’s con- 

ot talk 
her rail- 


4 


ieee Wea ihies Seeles es: 


STONES TO BE ROLLED A.VAY. Il 


ing tongue and wicked looks. If you are not Christ-like in your 
behavior, you need not expect to be taken for an example by your 
godless neighbor. He will not imitate you, even if he does not 
despise you for your hollow professions. I recall an illustration 
used by my dear friend, Morehouse, when he was in this city. The 
Apostle Paul stood with the gathering crowd about the fire warming 
himself after the shipwreck, when, as he piled the wood on the fire, 
a viper sprang from the flame and fastened itself on his hand. Im- 
mediately the gaping crowd cried out that he was a reprobate whom, 
though he had escaped the waves, vengeance would not let live. 
But presently Paul shook the viper from his hand into the fire, when 
they, seeing that he did not die, changed their opinion entirely, and 
Paul preached to them the saving word of life. The apostle shook 
off the viper, and the confidence of men flowed out to him. Let us 
Christians all imitate this grand ensample; let us shake off, with 
God's help, the vipers of evil temper, and all the evil things that 
make our Christianity a nullity, and, too often, a reproach in the 
eyes of those we would call to a like name and inheritance with 
ourselves. And as a community, as well, we must shake off the 
venomous beast whose poison not only repels others, but kills or 
enfeebles ourselves. 

The vipers of London are different from those of New York; 
and, again, our own are unlike either of these. Covetousness, the 
inordinate greed for gain, has fastened on the hand of Chicago, 
along with many another Western city, and the sting will be worse 
and worse unless a remedy is found for us. We talk with an appe- 
tite much too keen about getting gain and the chances for money- 
making. And yet this very trait, confessedly an evil, is an argument 
to our hand. There is a cry in commercial circles, loud and pro- 
longed, for a revival in business—all classes of business. In this 
country, during the past twenty years, I never heard any one cry- 
ing out against it. But if you talk about getting a revival in God’s 
business, there is a class of people who at once shake their heads. 
They do not know about it; they are afraid it won't work. A 
strange inconsistency; a thing is all right in their own concerns, 
but all wrong in God’s. The two things are not Ccifferent at all for 
the purposes of this comparison. God’s work, like man’s work, 
may have stages of activity; and the Christian, just as much as the 
merchant, should seek earnestly for a revival in trade. Oh, let us 


roll away this stone of unbelief and indifference, and we will. soon: 


» 


{2 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


hear a voice from the place of the stone crying, “ Lazarus, come 
forth.” Let us only cry as earnestly and loud for a revival as our 
business men have done and are now doing, and the powers and 
affections of our souls will spring up and bloom to eternal life. Our 
quickened souls and those of our friends will be made glad thereat, 
and rejoice together in time and eternity. Should no right time 
come in God’s ficlds, when can the farmer have his harvest time ? 
How active the farmers are in getting hands to help them through 
the rush. The right time does come periodically in the kingdom 
of heaven upon earth—a ripening time, when God calls His reapers 
to put in their sickles. 

Three stones I will especially refer to this morning, or mountains 
if you prefer—for that is what they are—to be rolled from our caves 
before the dead Lazarus, quickened to life, can come forth. A great 
stone to be rolled away is unbelief, already spoken of. If I ask the 
Christian man in Chicago, “Do you believe God can revive His 
work?” I do not want him to say, “Ido not believe He can; I 
have been here about fifteen years, and during all that time there 
has not been a successful attempt at reviving His work.” Well, it 
may be so that the work has not got on well. What was the 
trouble? Well, I believe it was simply because people did not 
‘believe the work could really be done. But surely there is no per- 
‘son in the town but knows that everything is possible with God. 
Let us take this stand, to believe that God is going actually to do 
something. There is no drunkard who should despair, for I believe 
‘God is going to save hundreds of them. He can and he will destroy 
his love of strong drink, root and branch, and I believe there is to 
be a cleansing thunderstorm in his atmosphere here before many 
days. 

When in Glasgow, a skeptic insisted that all my converts were 
women and old men verging on the grave. At the next meeting in 
that city there were present in the hall thirty-three hundred men, 
and of these twenty-seven hundred were young men. The skeptic 
next insisted that not a wild or reckless or drunken man came under 
‘God's reviving influence. At the very next meeting a gambler, and 
a short time after the most notorious drunkard in town, experienced 
‘saving grace. And so let it be here. We want to see thieves, gam- 
‘blers anc harlots saved. Let us have faith, for according to our 
faith shall it be done to us; just as Martha saw Lazarus alive 
ithrough trust in Jesus’ words. If we believe, we are told we may 


NE 


= 
4 
: 
4 
ih 
we 
4 
& 
o 
i) 
a 


DS la aoe Se ee 


ee nee 


RCE 


<u! 


RS, 


ius, come 
val as our 
ywers and 
life. Our 
d thereat, 
ight time 
est time? 
a through 
kingdom 
is reapers 


nountains 
our Caves 

A great 
I ask the 
vive His 
fe can; I 
me there 

Well, it 
was the 

did not 
is no per- 
ith God. 
uly to do 
I believe 
1 destroy 
ere is to 
re many 


irts were 
eeting in 
ed men, 
P skeptic 
ne under 
bler, and 
erienced 
es, gam- 
ry to our 
us alive 
ve may 


ee ee eee ee 


Se SE fer Se niin De ee ess Sere ea eer en PATA eae SOS 


STONES TO BE ROLLED AWAY. 13 


order mountains to be removed and they will be cast into the sea. 
Oh, may God strike down our unbelief to the resurrection to life of 
even the vilest.sinners in this city. 

The next terrible stone to be rolled away is prejudice. Oh, how 
thet came in among the churches against revivals. How many men 
you hear say, “ Well, I am prejudiced against revivals; I do not be- 
lieve in them.” They believe in revivals in everything else. They 
say, “ Agitate politics and trade, and let us have a revival in every- 
thing else but religion.” So, many whom I have addressed here on 
this subject have inveighed against revivals in religion, shaking their 
heads and saying no good can come out of revivals. Well, my dear 
friends, when Philip, the sage deacon, went to Nathaniel to tell him 
about Jesus, and Nathaniel objected, could any good come out of 
Nazareth, he just answered, come and see. So I answer you, come 
and see. Spend a week waiting on God, and see if the work is not 
to be a power of God to the saving of many. “Oh,” but some one 
may say, “I can not countenance these unhealthy excitements. I 
know far too much bad about them for that.” My friend, I know 
far more of the possible evils you would shun, and know them to 
be sometimes real ones, but what of it? Because some revivals 
turn out to be useless, or in some developments positively bad, 
must the system be thrown aside? No. The Democrat does not 
desert his politics for some minor flaw about them; and the Repub- 
lican does not either, if some of his standard-bearers have done 
corruptly. Professional and business men are not degraded by the 
shortcomings of individuals, and all through and through there is 
seen to be no limit in this principle. God’s mighty engine in reviv- 
als is not to be thrown aside for even considerable defects. Under 
its operations, time was when 3,000 men were added to the church 
inone day. Wecan not speak against these special meetings, finally, 
for they are planned in Scripture. The Bible is full of chronicles 
of their workings. They are developments of the Christian idea, 
no innovation whatever, and the, best possible agencies for work for 
sinners, which is work for God. * 

And then this miserable sectarian spirit that once held despotic 
hold on men. There was a time when its grasp was that of iron; 
but, blessed be God, that time is past. I remember that fifteen 
years ago the Methodist insisted that he was a Methodist, although 
lending a hand to the revival then in progress; the Congregation. 
alist was nothing else, through and through, though he, too, co-op- 


14 VWOODY'’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


erated in the good work, and the Presbyterian and the Baptist, and 
all, were first of all their denominational selves, though condescend- 
ing for a few days to work in yoke ina common cause. Yet it was 
really and necessarily, condescension; and there was enough of it in 
those meetings to kill them, and it nearly did it. And this sectarian 
stone is a real stone, though nothing like the boulder it used to be. 
The rolling-away process must be pushed vigorously; let us heave 
it away altogether out of sight. Let us have none of that spirit in 
this meeting. Talk not of this sect and that sect, of this party and 
that party, but solely and exclusively of the great comprehensive 
cause of Jesus Christ. When Christ came into the world, had He 
allied Himself with the Sadducees, they would have warmly upheld 
Him ; if He had joined the Ph: risees, they would not have let Him 
be crucified; but He kept clear of them, and just so we should do in 
this glorious work opening before us. In this ideal brotherhood 
there should be one faith, one mind, one spirit, and in this city let us 
starve it out for a season, to actualize this glorious truth. You 
remember how, in the Old Testament, Eldad and Medad took upon 
themselves priestly duties, and how excited, for once in his life, 
Joshua became at the irregularity, and ran and told the scandal to 
Moses; but you also remember how Moses reproved his informant, 
who was then engaged in perhaps the only small business of his life, 
and told him to rebuke them not; they prophesied well, however 
irregularly. It was just so with Christ, when word was carried by 
over-serviceable followers, that men were casting out devils “who 
were not of us,” He rebuked, not those who were thus benefiting 
their kind, but the tale-bearers. Oh, yes, let us sink this party 
feeling and contend for Christ only. Oh, that God may so fill us 
with His love, and the love of souls, that no thought of minor secta- 
rian parties can come in; that there may be no room for them in our 
atmosphere whatever; and that the Spirit of God may give us one 
mind and one spirit here to glorify His holy name. 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we thank Thee for bringing us back to 
Chicago. We thank Thee for the privilege of again meeting friends, 
with many of whom we have labored these past twenty years. O 
God, the Holy Ghost, descend upon such as are still out of Thy fold, 
that yet they may come to the higher and better life; that yet they 
may come to themselves and come to Christ. And to such as are 


RS. 


iptist, and 
ndescend- 
Yet it was 
th of it in 
sectarian 
sed to be. 
us heave 
t spirit in 
Darty and 
rehensive 
, had He 
y upheld 
let Him 
uld do in 
therhood 
ity let us 
h. You 
ok upon 
his life, 
andal to 
formant, 
his life, 
however 
rried by 
ls “who 
nefiting 
is party 
0 fill us 
or secta- 
nN in our 
> us one 


back to 
friends, 
ars. O 
ny fold, 
et they 
1 as are 


STONES TU BE ROLLED AWAY, 15 


Thy children, O God, do Thou draw very near, that they may be 
revived by Thy work in our midst. Forgive our lukewarmness, for- 
give our coldness of heart, forgive our backsliding, forgive our want 
of faith. Oh, help us, on this morning, to take away this dreadful 
stone of unbelief; help us to roll it away, so that the dead may 
come forth. May we be prejudiced against Thy work no longer. 
May we no more view Thee with narrow, sectarian vision, Thou 
God of all souls. Bless all Thy people of every name, and 
strengthen them to work to-day, for Thee, as they have never worked 
before. And those men of God who stand in the pulpit and pro- 
claim a precious Saviour, may there be riches opened up to them 
abundantly beyond what we can ask; may they preach with an 
unction from on high, and with a God-the-Holy-Ghost power—not 
with intellectual power so much as with Holy Ghost power, and 
may they be endued everywhere and always with power from on 
high. And pour out Thy grace upon those in Sabbath-schools and 
pews as well as pulpit, and may the work of Christ be blessed to-day 
in all the churches, and to-morrow, at 12 o’clock, when we again 
come together to pray, do Thou, O Christ, look down upon us, and 
may we know that a mighty work of Thine is now beginning. Oh, 
Son of God, hear our cry and save our souls; and to Thy name 
shall be the praise and the glory forever. Amen. 


IT. 


REAPING AND GATHERING FRUIT. 


JOHN iv. 36: “And he that reapeth receiveth wages and gathereth fruit unto life 
eternal,” 


WANT you to get the text into your hearts. We havea thou- 
sand texts to every sermon, but they slip over the hearts of 
men and women. If I can get this text into your hearts to- 

jay, with the Spirit of God, these meetings will be the brightest 
and most glorious ever held in Chicago, for it is the word of the 
Lord, and His word is worth more than ten thousand sermons. 
“Fle that reapeth receiveth wages.” I can speak from experience. 
I have been in the Lord’s service twenty-one years, and I want to 
testify that He is a good paymaster—that He pays promptly. Oh, 
I think I see faces before me light up at these words. You have 
been out in the harvest-fields of the Lord, and you know this to be 
true. To go out and labor for Him is a thing to be proud of—to 
guide a poor, weary soul to the way of life, and turn his face toward 
the golden gates of Zion. The Lord’s wages are better than silver 
and gold, because He says that the loyal soul shall receive a crown 
of glory. If the Mayor of Chicago gave out a proclamation stating 
that he had work for the men, women, and children of the city, and 
he would give them $1 a day, people would say this was very good 
of the Mayor. This money, however, would fade away in a short 
time. But here is a proclamation coming directly from the throne 
of grace to every man, woman, and child in the wide world to gather 
into God’s vineyard, where they will find treasures that will never 
fade; and these treasures will be crowns of everlasting life; and the 
laborer will find treasures laid up in his Father’s house, and when, 
after serving faithfully here, he will be greeted by friends assembled 
there. Work for tens of thousands of men, women, and children. 
Think of it and the reward. These little children, my friends, are 
apt to be overlooked; but they must be led to Christ. Children 
(16) 


4 
al 
rf) 


(T. 


fruit unto life 


ave a thou- 
» hearts of 
‘hearts to- 
e brightest 
ord of the 
d sermons. 
experience. 
I want to 
iptly. Oh, 
You have 
this to be 
oud of—to 
ace toward 
than silver 
ve a crown 
ion stating 
e city, and 
very good 
in a short 
he throne 
l to gather 
will never 
b; and the 
and when, 
assembled 
children. 
iends, are 
Children 


V4 oo Poe RN 
Wy YY MN \ 


Yi “iy 
Uff ’/ 


am 


emer 


Uae 


IRA D. SANKEY. 


P. P. BLISS. 


tennant nnn eee 


NNER ET i —— 
eae ae eeeepaceemnanmsnenenennennenenon Sn 


REAPING AND GATHERING FRUIT, 17 


nave done a great deal in the vineyard. They have led parents to 
Jesus. It was a little girl that led Naaman to Christ. . Christ can 
find useful work for these little ones. He can see little things, and 
we ought to pay great attention to them. As I was coming along 
the street to-day I thought that if I could only impress upon you 
all that we have come here as to a vineyard, to reap and to gather, 
we shall have a glorious harvest, and we want every class to assist 
us. The first class we want is the ministers. There was one thing 
that pleased me this morning, and that was the eight thousand peo- 
ple who came to this building, and the large number of ministers who 
seized me by the hand, with the tears trickling down their cheeks, 
and who gave me a‘“‘God bless you!” It gave mea light heart. 
There are some ministers who get behind the posts, as if they were 
ashamed of being seen in our company and at our meetings. They 
come to criticise the sermon and pick it to pieces. No effort is re- 
quired to do this. We don’t want the ministers to criticise, but to 
help us, and tell us when we are wrong. There was one minister in 
this city who did me a great deal of good when I first started out. 
When I commenced to teach the word of God I made very many 
blunders. I have learned that in acquiring anything a man must 
make many blunders. If a man is going to learn any kind of 
trade—carpenter’s, plumber’s, painter’s—he will make any amount 
of mistakes. Well, this minister, an old man, used to take me aside 
and tell me myerrors. So we want the ministers to come to us and 
tell us of our blunders; and if we get them to do this and join 
hands with us, a spiritual fountain will break over every church in 
the city. Many ministers have said to me, “ What do you want us 
todo?” The Lord must teach us what our work shall be. Let 
every child of God come up to these meetings and say, “ Teach me, 
O God, what I can do to help these men and women who are in- 
quiring the way to be saved,” and at the close of the meetings draw 
near to them and point out the way. If men and women are to be 
converted in great meetings, it is by personal dealings with them. 
What we want is personal contact with them. Ifa number of peo- 
ple were sick, and a doctor prescribed one kind of medicine for them 
all, you would think this was wrong. This audience is spiritually 
diseased, and what we want is that Christian workers will go to 
them and find out their trouble. Five minutes’ private consultation 
will teach them. What we want is to get at the people. Every one 
has his own particular burden; every family has a different story to 
2 


4 


18 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


tell. Take the Gospel of the Lord to them, and show its applica: - 
tion; tell them what to do with it, so as to answer their own cases; 
let the minister come into the inquiry-room. 

An old man, a minister in Glasgow, Scotland, was one of the 
most active in our meetings. When he would be preaching else- 
where he would drive up in a cab, with his Bible in his hand. It 
made no difference what part of Glasgow he was preaching in, he 
managed to attend nearly every one of our services. The old man 
would come in and tenderly speak to those assembled, and let one 
soul after another see the light. His congregation was compara- 
tively small when we got there, but, by his painstaking efforts to 
minister to those in search of the word, when we left Glasgow his 
church could not hold the people who sought admission, and I do 
not know of any man who helped us like Dr. Andrew Bonar. 
He was always ready to give counsel to the weak and point the way 
out to the soul seeking Christ. If we have not ministers enough, 
let those we have come forward, and their elders and deacons will 
follow them. 

The next class we want to help us to reach the people is the 
Sunday-school teachers, and I value their experience next to that 
of the ministers. In the cities where we have been, teachers have 
come to me and said, “Mr. Moody, pray for my Sunday-school 
scholars,” and I just took them aside and pointed out their duties, 
and showed how they themselves ought to be able to pray for their 
pupils. Next meeting very often they would come, and the prayer 
would go up from them, “ God bless my scholars.” 

In one city we went to, a Sunday-school superintendent came to 


his minister and said: “I am not fit to gather sinners to life 
eternal; I can not be superintendent any longer.” The minister 
asked: “ What is the reason?” and the man said: “I am not 


right with God.” Then the minister advised him that the best 
thing instead of resigning was to get right with God. So he prayed 
with that teacher that the truth would shine upon him, and God 
lit up his soul with the word. Before I left that town the minister 
told me all doubt had fled from that superintendent’s mind, and 
he had gone earnestly to work and gathered, from the time of 
his conversion, over 609 scholars into the Sunday-school of his 
church. The Lord can bless, of course, in spite of schools and 
teachers, but they are the channels of salvation. Bring your 
classes together, and pray to God to convert them. We have 


ERS, 


its applica: 
r OWN Cases; 


one of the 
aching else- 
s hand. It 
ching in, he 
‘he old man 
and let one 
is Compara. 
s efforts to 
Glasgow his 
n, and I do 
rew Bonar. 
int the way 
ers enough, 
leacons will 


ople is the 
xt to that 
chers have 
day-school 
eir duties, 
ny for their 
the prayer 


nt came to 
ers to life 
e€ minister 
I am not 

the best 
he prayed 
, and God 
e minister 
mind, and 

time of 
bol of his 
100ls and 
ing your 
We have 


REAPING AND GATHERING FRUIT, 19 


from 3,000 to 5,000 teachers here. Suppose they said: “TI will 
try to bring my children to Christ,” what a reformation we 
should have. Don't say that that boy is too small, or that girl 
is too puny or insignificant. Every one is valuable to the Lord. 
A teacher, whom I found at our services when she ought to have 
been attending to her class, upon my asking why she was at our 
meeting, said: “Well, I have a very small class—only five little 
boys.” ‘ What,” said I, “ you have come here and neglected the 
little ones! Why, in that little tow-head may be the seeds of a 
reformation. There may be a Luther, a Whitefield, a Wesley, ora 
Bunyan among them. You may be neglecting a chance for them 
the effects of which will follow them through life.” If you do not 
look to those things, teachers, some one will step into your vine- 
yard and gather the riches which you would have. 

Look what that teacher did in Southern Illinois. She had 
taught a little girl to love the Saviour, and the teacher said to her: 
“Can't you get your father to come to the Sunday-school?” This 
father was a swearing, drinking man, and the love of God was not in 
his heart. But under the tuition of that teacher the little girl went 
to her father and told him of Jesus’ love, and led him to that 
Sunday-school. What was the result? I heard before leaving for 
Europe that he had been instrumental in founding over 780 
Sabbath-schools in Southern Illinois. And what a privilege a 
teacher has—a privilege of leading souls to Christ. Let every 
Sabbath-school teacher say, “By the help of God I will try to 
lead my scholars to Christ.” 

It seems to me that we have more help in our revivals from 
young men, except from mothers, than from any other class. The 
young men are pushing, energetic workers. O!d men are good for 
counsel, and they should help, by their good words, the young men 
in making Christianity aggressive. These billiard halls have been 
open long enough. There is many a gem in those places, that only 
needs the way pointed out to fill their souls with love of Him. 
Let the young men go plead with them, bring them to the Taber- 
nacle, and don’t let them go out without presenting the claims 
of Christ, and showing them His never-dying love. Take them by 
the hand and say, “1 want you to become a Christian.” What we 
want is a hand-to-hand conflict with the billiard-saloons and drink- 
ing halls. Do not fear, but enter them and ask the young men 
tocome. I know that some of you say in a scornful way “We 


20 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


will never be allowed to enter; the people who go there will cast 
us out.” This isa mistake. I know that I have gone to them and 
remonstrated, and have never been unkindly treated. And some of 
the best workers have been men who have been proprietors of 
these places, and men who have been constant frequenters. There 
are young men there breaking their mothers’ hearts and losing 
themselves for all eternity. The Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ 
asks you to seek them out. If we can not get them to come here, 
let the building be thrown aside and let us go down and hunt 
them up and tell them of Christ and heaven. If we can not get 
a multitude to preach to, let us ‘preach, even if it be to one person. 
Christ preached one of His most wonderful sermons to that woman 
at the well; and shall we not be willing to go to one as He did, 
and tell that one of salvation? And let us preach to men even if 
they are under the influence of liquor. 

I may relate a little experience. In Philadelphia, at one of 
our meetings, a drunken man rose up. Till that time I had no 
faith that a drunken man could be converted. When any one 
approached, he was generally taken out. This man got up and 
shouted, ‘I want to be prayed for.” The friends who were 
with him tried to draw him away, but he shouted only louder, and 
three times he repeated the request. His call was attended to 
and he was converted. God has power to convert a man even if 
he is drunk. 

I have still another lesson. I met a man in New York who 
was an earnest worker, and I asked him to tell me his experience. 
He said he had been a drunkard for over twenty years. His 
parents had forsaken him, and his wife had cast him off and 
married some one else. He went into a lawyer’s office in Pough- 
keepsie, mad with drink. This lawyer proved a good Samaritan, 
and reasoned with him, and told him he could be saved. The 
man scouted the idea. He said: “I must be pretty low when 
my father and mother, my wife and kindred, cast me off, and there 
is no hope for me here or hereafter.” But this good Samaritan 
showed him how it was possible to secure salvation, got him on his 
feet, got him on his beast, like the good Samaritan of old, and 
guided his face towards Zion. And this man said to me: “I have 
not drank a glass of liquor since.” He is now leader of a young 
men’s meeting in New York. I asked him to come last Saturday 
night to Northfield, my native town, where there are a good many 


mata wert halen tee ehcp cameos eh 


ERS. 


sre will cast 
o them and 
nd some of 
prietors of 
ors. There 
and losing 
esus Christ 
come here, 
1 and hunt 
can not get 
one person. 
chat woman 
as He did, 
nen even if 


at one of 
e I had no 
en any one 
sot up and 
who were 
louder, and 
ttended to 
an even if 


York whio 
experience. 
years. His 
m off and 
p in Pough- 
Samaritan, 
hved. The 
low when 
, and there 
Samaritan 
him on his 
bf old, and 

: “T have 
bf a young 
t Saturday 
yood many 


REAPING AND GATHERING FRUIT. 21 


drunkards, thinking he might encourage them to seek salvation. 
He came and brought a young man with him. They held a meet- 
ing, and it seemed as if the power of God rested upon that meeting 
when these two men went on telling what God had done for them 
—how He had destroyed the works of the devil in their hearts, and 
brought peace and unalloyed happiness to their souls. These grog 
shops here are the works of the devil—they are ruining men’s souls 
every hour. Let us fight against them, and let our prayers go up 
in our battle: “ Lord, manifest Thy power in Chicago this coming 
month.” It may seem a very difficult thing for us, but it is a very 
easy thing for God to convert rumsellers. 

A young man in New York got up and thrilled the meeting with 
his experience. “I want to tell you,” he said, “that nine months 
ago a Christian came to my house and said he wanted me to become 
a Christian. He talked to me kindly and encouragingly, pointing 
out the error of my ways, and I became converted. I had been a 
hard drinker, but since that time I have not t.uched a drop of 
liquor. If any one had asked who the most hopeless man in that 
town was, they would have pointed to me.” To-day this young 
man is the superintendent of a Sabbath-school. Eleven years ago, 
when I went to Boston, I had a cousin who wanted a little of my 
experience; I gave him all the help I could, and he became a 
Christian. He did not know how near death was to him. He 
wrote to his brother and said: “I am very anxious to get your soul 
to Jesus.” The letter, somehow, went to another city, and lay from 
the 28th of February to the 28th of March—just one month. He 


. saw it was in his brother’s handwriting, and tore it open and read 


the above words. It struck a chord in his heart, and was the means 
of converting him. And this was the Christian who led this drunken 


; young man to Christ. 


This young man had a neighbor who had drank for forty years, 
and he went to that neighbor and told him what God had done for’ 
him, and the result was another conversion. 

I tell you these things to encourage you to believe that the drunk- 
ards and saloon-keepers can be saved. There is work for you to do, 
and by and by the harvest shall be gathered, and what a scene will 
be on the shore when we hear the Master on the throne shout: 
“Well done! Well done!” 


Let me say a word to you, mothers. We depend a good deal 


upon you. It seems to me that there is not a father and mother in 


22 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


all Chicago who should not be in sympathy with this work. You 
have daughters and sons, and if work is done now they will be able 
to steer clear of many temptations, and will be able to lead better 
lives here. It seems to me selfishness if they sit down inactive and 
say: ‘There is no use in this. We are safe ourselves, what is the 
use of troubling?” If the mothers and fathers of the whole 
community would unite their prayers, and send up one appeal to 
God to manifest His power, in answer to them there would be 
mighty work. 

I remember, in Philadelphia, we wanted to see certain results, and 
we called a meeting of mothers. There were from five to eight 
thousand mothers present, and each of them had a particular burden 
upon her heart. There was a mother who had a wayward daughter, 
another a reckless son, another a bad husband. We spoke to them 
confidently, and we bared our hearts to one another. They prayed 
for aid from the Lord, and that grace might be shown to these sons, 
and daughters, and husbands, and the result was that our inquiry- 
rooms were soon filled with anxious and earnest inquirers. 

Let me tell you about a mother in Philadelphia. She had two 
wayward sons. They were wild, dissipated youths. They were to 
meet on a certain night and join in dissipation. The rendezvous 
was at the corner of Market and Thirteenth streets, where our meet- 
ings were held. One of the young men entered the large meeting, 
and when it was over, went to the young men’s meeting near at 
hand, and was quickened, and there prayed that the Lord might 
save him. His mother had gone to the meeting that night, and, 
arriving too late, found the door closed. When that young man 
went home he found his mother praying for him, and the two 
mingled their prayers together. While they were praying together, 
the other brother came from the other meeting, and brought tidings 
of being converted, and at the next meeting the three got up and 
told their experience, and I never heard an audience so thrilled 
before or since. 

Another incident. A wayward boy in London, whose mother was 
very anxious for his salvation, said to her: “Iam not going to be 
bothered with your prayers any longer; I will go to America and 
be rid of them.” “ But, my boy,” she said, “ God is on the sea and 
in America, and He hears my prayers for you.” Well, he came to 
this country, and as they sailed into the port of New York, some of 
the sailors told him that Moody and Sankey were holding meetings 


ore bh hs elem let 


no -Q 90a 0 3 ' A. 


ERS. 


vork. You 
will be able 
lead better 
nactive and 
what is the 
the whole 
e appeal to 
2 would be 


results, and 
ve to eight 
ular burden 
d daughter, 
oke to them 
“hey prayed 
y these sons, 
our inquiry- 
Ss. 
he had two 
hey were to 
rendezvous 
re our meet- 
ge meeting, 
ing near at 
Lord might 
night, and, 
young man 
nd the two 
g together, 
ight tidings 
got up and 
so thrilled 


mother was 
going to be 
kmerica and 
the sea and 
he came to 
brk, some of 
ng meetings 


Ps ee ek en 
(SO 


aT S ie po OR Sait ao a ea Se 


REAPING AND GATHERING FRUIT. 23 


in the Hippodrome. The moment he landed he started for our 
place of meeting, and there he found Christ. He became a most 
earnest worker, and he wrote to his mother and told her that her 
prayers had been answered, that he had been saved, and that he had 
found his mother’s God. 

Mothers and fathers, lift up your hearts in prayer, that there may 
Le hundreds and thousands saved in this city. 

When I was in London, there was one lady dressed in black, up in 
the gallery. All the rest were ministers. I wondered who that lady 
could be. At the close of the meeting I stepped up to her, and she 
asked me if I did not remember her. I did not, but she told me 
who she was, and her story came to my mind. 

When we were preaching in Dundee, Scotland, a mother came up 
with her two sons, 16 and 17 years old. She said to me: “ Will 
you talk to my boys?” I asked her if she would talk to the inqui- 
rers, and told her there were more inquirers than workers. She 
said she was not a good enough Christian—was not prepared 
enough. I told her I could not talk to her then. Next night she 
came to me and asked me again, and the following night she 
repeated her request. Five hundred miles she journeyed to get 
God's blessing for her boys. Wou.ito God we had more mothers 
like her. She came to London, and the first night I was there I saw 
her in Agricultural Hall. She was accompanied by only one of her 
boys—the other had died. Towards the close of the meetings I 
received this letter from her: 

“DEAR Mr. Moopy: For months I have never considered the 
day’s work ended unless you and your work had been specially prayed 
for. Now it appears before us more and more. What in our little 
measure we have found, has no doubt been the happy experience 
of many others in London. My husband and I have sought as our 
greatest privilege to take unconverted friends, one by one, into Agri- 
cultural Hall, and I thank God that, with a single exception, those 
brought under the preaching from your lips have accepted Christ as 
their Saviour, and are rejoicing in His love.” 

That lady was a lady of wealth and position. She lived a little 
way out of London: gave up her beautiful home and took lodgings 
near Agricultural Hall, so as to be useful in the inquiry-room. When 
we went down to the Opera House she was there; when we went 
down ta the east end there she was again, and when I left London 
she had the names of 150 who had accepted Christ from her. Some 


24 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


have said that our work in Londan was a failure. Ask her if the 
work was a failure, and she will tell you. If we had a thousand 
such mothers in Chicago we would lift it. Go and bring your friends 
here to the meetings. Think of the privilege, my friends, of saving 
asoul. If we are going to work for good, we must be up and about 
it. Men say, “I have not the time.” Take it. Ten minutes every 
day for Christ will give you good wages. There is many a man who 
is working for you. Take them by the hand. Some of you with 
silver locks, I think I hear you saying, “I wish I was young, how I 
would rush into the battle.” Well, if you can not be a fighter, you 
can pray and lead on the others. There are two kinds of old peo- 
ple in the world. One grows chilled and sour, and there are others 
who light up every meeting with ther genial presence and cheer on 
the workers. Draw near, old age, and cheer on the others, and take 
them by the hand and encourage them. There was a building on 
fire. The flames leaped around the staircase, and from a three-story 
window a little child was seen who cried for help. The only way to 
reach it was by a ladder. One was obtained and a fireman ascend- 
ed, but when he had almost reached the child, the flames broke from 
the window and leaped around him. He faltered and seemed afraid 
to go further. Suddenly some one in the crowd shouted, “Give 
him a cheer,” and cheer after cheer went up. The fireman was 
nerved with new energy, and rescued the child. Just so with our 
young men. Whenever you see them wavering, cheer them on. If 
you can not work yourself, give them cheers to nerve them on in 
their glorious work. May the blessing of God fall upon us this af- 
ternoon, and let every man and woman be up and doing. 


i 
4 
a 


+ 


ERS. 


k her if the 
a thousand 
your friends 
ds, of saving 
ip and about 
inutes every 
ya man who 
of you with 
oung, how I 
fighter, you 
of old peo- 
e are others 
nd cheer on 
ors, and take 
building on 
. three-story 
only way to 
man ascend- 
s broke from 
-emed afraid 
uted, “ Give 
reman was 
so with our 
emon. If 
them on in 

us this af- 


ITI. 


COURAGE IN THE LORD'S WORK. 


JosHuA i. 6: “Be strong and of good courage.” 


“UST one word. I want you to have the courage spoken of in the 
chapter of Joshua I read to you to-night. The Lord tells him to 

“be strong and of good courage.” He says to Joshua: “If you 

have this, no man will be able to stand before you all the days of 
your life. As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee. I will not 
forsake thee or fail thee.” That is, if Joshua goes into the battle 
not thinking of himself or depending upon somebody clse, but re- 
lying upon the Lord. He was not to be weakened, but to have the 
courage of a lion with his faith in the Lord. So with us here. If 
we go into the battle we are beginning, and look on the weak side, 
we are going to lose. We must fight with the courage of a Joshua. 
I have learned one thing since I went into the school of Christ, and 
that is, that God never takes a man for His purposes who is weak ; 
he must have confidence in himself through Christ, must not hang 
on his own strength, but must have courage, and must believe that 
God is willing and ready to aid him. God will not have a man in 
His service that He can not control, and who is thrown down by the 
slightest opposition. We must act as Joshua did when he went 
out, I suppose to view the lines. All at once a man stood before 
him with a drawn sword. If he had not heard the words of the 
Lord, and had the fear of God in his heart, he would have ran away. 
He stood boldly and confronted God’s messenger, and asked, “ Art 
thou for us or against us?” “Nay,” said the man, “I come as the 
captain of the host of the Lord, to lead you to victory.” And se 
if obstacles stand before us we must have courage if we wish suc- 
cess. Some one said to me to-day, “ Were you not greatly encour- 
aged by the large crowd you had yesterday?” My friends, it is not 
large crowds that encourage us, nor talk in newspapers, but earnest- 
(25) 


26 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND FRAYERS, 


ness even in a few. We want a few broken hearts so that we can 
give them consolation. It is very gratifying to see so many people 
here on a Monday night, but we don’t want weak folks to come for- 
ward—only those with strong courage for the cause of Christ. If 
we can get the people full of it, a religious wave will break through 
the streets, and the tide of death and misery shall soon be driven 
back, and work to the glory of the Son of God will be done that 
was never done before. But we don’t want men among us to pre- 
dict defeat. There are a great many people who always see difficul- 
ties in the way, and many of those people are just the ones who try 
to call you to Christ. There are people who are discouraged at the 
slightest thing that sends a cloud on their path. 

Look at Elijah’s courage when he stood before Ahab, when he 
defied the priests of Baal on Mount Carmel. Ido not know what 
came over him when Jezebel sent him that messenger and nearly 
scared him out of his wits. He stood like a lion on Mount Carmel, 
but look at him when he received the letter—how he ran away into 
the wilderness, and sat down under a juniper tree. He despaired 
utterly. Hethought he had lived long enough, and asked the Lord 
to let him die. So it is with some of us. The least thing frightens 
us, and we fly under a juniper tree. When God’s children get there 
He can not see them. He wants them to have courage and to have 
faith in Him. 

Look again at Peter. He was not going to die if all the rest 
died. He was going to trust to his own strength. So when he was 
put into the judgment hall, and he was confronted with the judges, 
a little maid said, “There is one of His disciples,” his courage fail- 
ed him, and he was afraid to speak for Christ. You laugh at this, 
but how many Peters are there in Chicago who are ashamed to lift 
up their voice for God. There are skeptics and doubters and luke- 
warm Christians who have not the moral courage to come out for 
Christ. See how Peter shrank back, and, full of doubt, denied his 
Lord. But again, see what courage he had when the Spirit of the 
Lord came upon him at the Pentecost, when he stood betore the 
Jews. I have often thought if that little maid had seen him she 
would not have known him to be the same man who in the judg- 
ment hall was so terror-stricken. Here was a man, scared out of his 
life by a little girl merely charging him with being a disciple, con- 
fronting the whole crowd of Jews and shouting out, “ Ye have taken 
and by wicked hands have crucified and slain, ’ my Redeemer 


eat 


Pai 


ee ee A RS Spa 


i 


ae 
rao 


RS. 


hat we can 
any people 
> come for- 
Christ. If 
ak through 
_ be driven 
done that 
us to pre- 
see difficul- 
es who try 
ged at the 


», when he 
know what 
and nearly 
int Carmel, 
away into 

despaired 
d the Lord 
g frightens 
n get there 
nd to have 


ll the rest 
1en he was 
he judges, 
burage fail- 
gh at this, 
ed to lift 
and luke- 
e out for 
denied his 
irit of the 
betore the 
n him she 
the judg- 
out of his 
ciple, con- 
ave taken 
emer 


COURAGE IN THE LORD'S WORK. a7 


I have got discouraged in my life. Here in Chicago I have been 
discouraged. I remember some years ago I was greatly cast down, 
and, sitting in my study gloomily, one of my Sunday-school teach- 
ers came in that Monday afternoon. He was in the best of spirits, 
and I was despondent; he was up on the mountain and I was down 
in the valley. We used to compare notes of what we did on the 
Sunday, and he asked me what I had preached about. I told him, 
and he said he had preached about Noah, and he asked me if I had 
ever studied up Noah’s character. Well, I had read about Noah, 
but not with any particular attention. After he had gone out I 
thought I would read up Noah. I took up my Bible, and after a 
little careful reading I began to think that Noah must have been a 
man of extraordinary courage. There he was for 150 years building 
his ark, without any sign of ever needing it but the word of the 
Lord, and he had not become discouraged. I closed my Bible and 
felt new strength. I came down to the noonday prayer-meeting 
and was happy. There I heard a man say he had just come up from 
somewhere in Southern Illinois, and had converted 100 people, and 
the man had not been a Christian very long. I wondered what 
Noah would have given if he could have got as much to encourage 
him as this man. Another man asked to be prayed for, and I won. 
dered what Noah would have said to this. He labored for 159 
years and never heard a man asking to be prayed for. During all 
these years he labored and he never got discouraged or dishearten- 
ed, and I have often thought of this as a great lesson to the Chris- 
tian worker. 

Another thing I have noticed. If a minister gets discouraged, 
God does not use him. If he does not live on the mountain-top. 
God puts some one else there. Many of our meetings have been 
spoiled by the leaders talking very discouragingly—by speaking in 
faltering tones, and not trying to give the people strength by 
their wovds. If we have courage, there is no such thing as defeat. 
We ought to have courage, for prayers are going up all over the 
land for this city of Chicago. I received a telegram from Philadel- 
phia this morning from people who attended our meetings there 
last winter and were converted. They met on Sunday morn- 
ing at 8 o'clock, and prayed that God would bless our revival in 
Chicago. 

When this same Joshua came up to Kadesh-Barnea on the way 
to the Promised Land, he picked out twelve men to go and bring 


ae en 


28 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


back reports before they entered. They were gone forty days, and 
brought back what we would call in these days a majority and a 
minority report. If you send out twelve men on a similar errand, 
and they did not come back in four days, you would say that they 
had not done the work. But Joshua had patience, and one after- 
noon—TI can think of the time as being in the twilight of the day— 
they came back, saying it was a land of plenty—a land flowing with 
milk and honey; but others said it was a land full of wild beasts 
and great giants, and everywhere the people were zating them- 
selves up. Yes, it was a land with great warriors, and great walls 
about the cities that went clear up to heaven. They were dis- 
couraged at the prospect, forgetting that God had brought them 
through the Red Sea, out of the land of bondage, and preserved 
them in all their troubles; forgetting that all things were possible 
with God; forgetting that God could encompass all those high walls 
and overcome all the giants. 

You will find the same thing in the Church to-day. Some people 
will come and say, “I wonder what is going to become of our 
church; we are in debt, and how are we going to get overit?” Up 
and pay it. That is the way to get overit. If Joshua and Caleb 
had thought of as many obstacles when they stood before the walls 
as these people find in the management of church affairs, they 
would never have accomplished anything. But they said, “ We 
are able to doit. We are able to take from these people their 
defenses—God is with us.” These twelve men looked at that 
country and these walls, and I can fancy them bringing back charts 
and maps as we would do, and said, “We marked well its nature 
and its bulwarks, and we are not able to take it.” They looked up 
at those giants towering above them, they looking like grasshop- 
pers alongside of those big fellows, and were nearly scared out 
of their lives. But Joshua and Caleb did not look at the giants; 
they were looking to the Lord, and they said in answer to all these 
stories, ‘ Let us go; we are willing to march up and take the land.” 
But there were a good many in that camp who were in a lukewarm 
state, as there are now, who would rather live for themselves 
than make a complete consecration to the cause and march to the 
Promised Land. But Joshua was determined to march courage- 
ously on in spite of their report. 

Again, look at Gideon, with his 32,000 men; 32,000 men when 
you see them looks a large army. And the Lord said, You have too 
many men there. He wanted the force cut down. A great many 


PP ee ee on 


— rh — As As 


AS 


oRS, 


y days, and 
ority anda 
ilar errand, 
y that they 
| one after- 
“the day— 
owing with 
vild beasts 
‘ing them- 
great walls 
- were dis- 
ught them 
. preserved 
re possible 
high walls 


me people 
me of our 
ite’ Up 
and Caleb 
e the walls 
airs, they 
said, “ We 
ople their 
d at that 
ack charts 
its nature 
looked up 
grasshop- 
scared out 
he giants; 
b all these 
the land.” 
lukewarm 
1emselves 
ch to the 

courage- 


nen when 
have too 
eat many 


a speak to them in the name of the Master. 


4 
ty 
Kt 


. old Gospel of Jesus Christ. 


COURAGE IN THE LORD'S WORK. 29 


of them had fears and doubts—did not feel confident in God's 
power. God does not work in this way, and so Gideon drew his 
army up to a line and said: “ All those who are afraid, step out of 
this line.” I can imagine the weak ones saying, “ “here is a good 
chance to get home, and we will not get shot.” And 22,000 
stepped out. But the Lord said, “ Too many yet.” And Gideon 
drew them up again and said: “ All you who are afraid, step out ;” 
and his army was reduced to 300. I can imagine some of them 
saying, Gideon has made a mistake in doing this, but Gideon knew 
what he was about. 

What would you think if I said right here: “ All you who are 
not for Christ, go home; we don’t want you here.” You would 
say: ‘Mr. Moody has made a mistake;” but I almost think it 
would be a wise course. I would rather fight with a handful who 
were strong and faithful than with a host who are weak and un- 
faithful. We don’t want those people who say to us: “You 
can not expect any meetings this month. We have got our politics 

, to attend to; we havea fair.” If we could just whittle down our 
numbers like Gideon, and believe that if the Lord is present, a few 
is just as good as many. Small numbers make no difference to 
God. There is nothing small that God is in. That small cloud 
that came up from the sea was very small; but it proved very 
powerful, for He was in it. People would say, Gideon must have 
trembled when he saw his army reduced to 300 men; but he knew 

that if God was with that little band, it was more powerful than 
100,000 men. 

Dear friends, let us have courage, and believe that God can 
accomplish all things; and if the Spirit of God prompts you to go 
and speak to that young man—if the Spirit urges you to write a 
letter to a friend about Christ—have the courage to do it. Go and 

If 300 men like Gideon’s 

band are found in this audience, Chicago will be converted—300 who 
are willing to keep in rank, and make David king; 300 who are 
willing to lay everything upon the altar, and take up the cross 
of Christ, He will take us up and use us. John Wesley used to say 
if he had 100 men who feared God, and were true to Jesus, he could 
shake the gates of hell. Wewant men who have confidence in the 

There is as much power in the Word 

to-day as ever there was, ana men need the Gospel just as much as 
they ever needed it. 
I remember seeing a story some time ago in print. 


It has been 


30 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


in the papers, but it will not hurt us to hear it again. <A family 
ina Southern city were stricken down with yellow fever. It was 
raging there, and there were very stringent sanitary rules. The 
moment anybody died, a cart went around and took the coffin away. 
The father was taken sick and died and was buried, and the mother 
was at last stricken down. The neighbors were afraid of the 
plague, and none dared go into that house. The mother hada 
little son and was anxious about her boy, and afraid he would be 
neglected when she was called away, so she called the little fellow 
to her bedside, and said, “ My boy, I am going to leave you, but 
Jesus will come to you when Iam gone.” The mother died, the 
cart came along, and she was laid in the grave. The neighbors 
would have liked to take the boy, but were afraid of the pestilence. 
He wandered about, and finally started up to the place where they 
had laid his mother, and sat down on the grave and wept himself to 
sleep. Next morning he awoke and realized his position—alone 
and hungry. A stranger came along, and, seeing the little fellow 
sitting on the ground, asked him what he was waiting for. The 
boy remembered what his mother had told him, and answered, “I 
am waiting for Jesus,” and told him the whole story. The man’s 
heart was touched, tears trickled down his cheeks, and he said, 
“ Jesus has sent me;”’ to which the boy replied, “ You have been 
a good while coming.” 

So it is with us. To wait for results we must have patience, we 
must have courage, and God will help us. Pray to God that He 
will give us moral courage to fight the glorious battle. The 
greatest want in the Church to-day is the want of courage. 


RS. 


A family 
er, It was 
ules. The 
offin away. 
the mother 
1id of the 
ther had a 
> would be 
ittle fellow 
e you, but 
“+ died, the 
- neighbors 

pestilence. 

where they 
t himself to 
tion—alone 
little fellow 
x for. The 
swered, “I 
The man’s 
nd he said, 

have been 


batience, we 


bd that He 
ttle. The 
be, 


q IV. 


q POWER OF FAITH. 


LUKE v. 20: “ When He saw their faith.” 


” OW, I just like to take a sentence like this alone from the lips 
| of Christ and go all round it, and find out all its surroundings. 
He was in acertain city—had just come from the country. He 
had been down there, and they didn’t want to be converted—didn’t 
want a revival. When He found they wouldn’t have His Gospel 
there, He left and came to this city, where a great revival had 
broken out. The people gathered there in such numbers as to 
make one believe it was an invasion. The Spirit was in the work, 
and all were on fire. This was Christ’s first great revival, and His 
wonderful works had been heard of far and near. The news of the 
__ way He was reclaiming men, casting out devils, making the deaf 
a hear, and the blind see, how He was curing leprosy and palsy, had 
) reached clear up to Jerusalem, and all through Judea. The Chief 
~~ Priests and Pharisees had heard of His fame, and they probably 
thought of sending men down to see what it all amounted to. You 
» know, when John was preaching at first, the Pharisees, when they 
~ heard of him, sent a man down to see who he was. The man went 
to him and asked, ‘‘Are you the Messiah?” and he answered, “I 
» am not.” Their curiosity was excited and they wanted to find out. 
~ And so, when the Pharisees and doctors had heard of Christ’s fame, 
they sent men down probably to report, and on hearing of the fame 
He had got in the country—how lepers were being cleansed, and 
how miraculous cures were being made-—they came down in a body 
to see for themselves. 
_ This poor man, spoken of in the chapter, came to Christ to be 
_» cleansed, and the Lord found faith in the leper. He looked at the 
) man, and no sooner did He find faith there than He touched him, 
| and the leprosy was gone. This gave Him great influence. The 
(31) 


32 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


man published it far and near, and all the country was astir. So 
the learned doctors of the law and the Pharisees came down, a great 
company of them, like the wise men whe came from the East ; like 
a great many people who will likely be coming from the different 
towns of the North-west, to look into the revival that was going on 
and the wonderful cures that were being effected. They came to 
look into the philosophy of this thing; they wanted to get at the 
secret of His power: to see if He had any false motive. Perhaps 
He was after fame; perhaps He was after money, or position, or 
influence. The doctors and Pharisees could not believe that He 
could be after anything else, and so they came down in a body 
from Jerusalem to fathom this thing. This house was crowded with 
them. I can imagine the people flocking in from every part, and 
the streets blockaded, and in that house the people everywhere 
sitting and listening to His wonderful speeches, and I can see the 
Pharisees and the doctors, who came, not to ask a blessing, but 
to philosophize. There will be young men in this building to-night 
who come for the same purpose—to criticize. May the Lord open 
their eyes and show them their folly, and may they depart from here 
with the fear of God in their hearts. Well, these m:.1 do not come 
down from Jerusalem to ask a blessing, and I can ims gine the crowd 
sitting there listening to Him. 

There are four men coming down the streets of Capernaum. ] 
never knew them, but if I met them in the streets of Chicago, I 
should feel like grasping them by the hand. Perhaps one of them 
was he who was converted not long before; perhaps the other was 
the leper who went to Jesus and got cured, and when he came home 
his wife didn’t know who he was, and couldn’t believe he was her 
husband; and another had been cured, perhaps, .. blindness, and 
here was the man with the palsy, who had nearly shaken himself 
into his grave. The doctors of Jerusalem had all given him up asa 
hopeless case. ‘“ Why,” they said, “ he can not get his food to his 
mouth, he shakes so. We can’t do anything with him.” Well, 
these young converts came along —I suppose they were young; 
they have more faith than any one else—and they see this man with 
the palsy and instantly say that one word from Him will put it 
away. But they can not get him there —they don’t see how they 
can carry him, and finally one of them goes to a neighbor and says, 
“Here is a man with the palsy; if we can get him up to where 
Christ is, He can just heal him at once.” I think he would be 


tir, So 
|, a great 
ast ; like 
different 
going on 
came to 
et at the 
Perhaps 
sition, or 
that He 
n a body 
yvded with 
part, and 
rerywhere 
n see the 
ssing, but 
g to-night 
uord open 
from here 
.not come 
the crowd 


brnaum. 1 
Chicago, I 
e of them 
other was 
ame home 
e was het 
dness, and 
n himself 
him up as a 
ood to his 
Well, 
ere young; 
s man with 
will put it 
e how they 
pr and says, 
p to where 
b would be 


POWER OF FAITH. 33 


astonished and say, “What! save that man; impossible! he can't 
be cured.” But the young convert persists, and tells him of those 
who had been made to see, and the deaf to hear, and the !ame to 
walk, and so convinced the neighbor that at last he said, “ Well, I 
will help you, and go and see this wonderful physician,” and away 
they go and hunt up another young convert who had been lame for 
years. He is not strong enough to help them, however, and they 
find another man. He has been deaf and dumb for years. And 
these four young converts take this man with the palsy and put 
him, I can suppose, on what we called, during the war, a stretcher, 
and away they go to Christ. They had faith in what they were 
about. I can imagine the young men saying as they carry him 
along: “ We will not have to carry him back again; the palsy will 
be gone; it will be cured then.” On they go with their load, and 
when they get to the house, they find it crowded inside and a multi- 
tude standing outside. They say to the people, “ Let us pass; we 
want to take the poor man to Christ.” But they say, “ Why, there 
is no hope for him; he is past all cure.” “Ah!” say the young 
converts, “that is nothing. Jesus of Nazareth can cure him; all 
things are possible to Him.” But they wouldn’t stand aside. They 
woulda’t allow him to get in. But these four men are not going to 
take this man back. They are determined not to fail. They hesi- 
tate a moment, then go to the next house; it is a neighbor's. 
There were no bells in those days, and so they knock. When the 
neighbor comes to the door, they say: ‘We want to get into the 
next house; let us go through yours.” ‘Oh, yes,” says the man, 
and they ascend the staircase, and get on the roof, and get over to 
the next house. There’s no entrance through there, so they dig 
a hole, they tear up this roof. A great many people here in 
Chicago would be opposed to this kind of thing. They would say: 
“If you want to get into the house, you want things to be done de- 
cently; don’t tear up the roof in that way.” But, my friends, if we 
want to go to work for Christ, we want to tear off the top of the house, 
if it’s necessary. We must use vigorous means. These young men 
had good faith, and that’s what we want here. But when they had 
‘orn off the roof, they had nothing to let the man down by. So 
they looked about and made a rope of their own clothing, and down 
they laid him right among the Pharisees and learned doctors, right 
at the feet of Jesus. And it is a good place to put a poor sinner. 
And we are not told whether that man with the palsy had any faith 
3 


34 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


But the Son of God looked up and saw their faith—the faith of the 
four men—and it pleased Him. It was like a cup of refreshment 
that satisfied the longings of His soul—He saw the brightness of 
their faith when He looked upon them. And He said to the sick 
man, “Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.” The 
Pharisees were aghast, and began to reason: ‘“ What does He say? 
Thy sins are forgiven? That is blasphemy! Who can forgive 
sins but God alone?” They even doubted His power, now. They 
were skeptical, although they had seen with their own eyes His 
wonderful cure. But Christ knew them all. And God knows every 
skeptic and infidel here in this building to-night. He knows the 
number of your house and the street where you live. And they 
wanted to know why Christ should say, “Son, thy sins are forgiven 
thee.” I can im-gine how these men looked when Christ said this. 
They could not comprehend it. But the Son of Man has power to 
forgive now as well as then. The man rose, and the old Pharisees 
made room for him. And I can see them as they looked in amaze- 
ment, as they said one to another: “ We have seen strange things to- 
day.” There was no reasoning away what they had seen that time. 
There are a great many people who say: “Oh, we can reason out 
all the miracles of Christ,” and they tell us that there is nothing of 
the supernatural that can not beexplained. Everything is in accord- 
ance with scientific laws. These doctors of the law who had come 
down from Jerusalem, and Galilee, and Judea, they attempted this, 
but they had to admit, “We have seen strange things to-day.” 
They had seen this man who was stricken down with the palsy, ata 
touch from Christ, walking down the streets. I would like to have 
seen him going home to his wife and children, and they looking 
with amazement at him laying down his bed and saying, “ Here, 
wife, I’ve used that bed a good while; it’s carried me long enough; 
I don’t need it any longer,” and the children clap their hands with 
joy. For the Son of Man has cleansed him, and not only that, but 
has forgiven his sins. These four men had taken him to Christ to 
get rid of his palsy, but he had got rid of all his sins besid+s. 

Te thought I want to call your attention to is this, and I think 
it is tie key-note of the whole story—the faith of those four men 
did the whole thing. You ought to think of this. And those who 
are infidels and skeptics in this audience, let us remember that if 
we have faith, God can win them through our faith. The Lord can 
bless through our faith even those who have no faith. And another 


1 of the 
‘sshment 
‘ness of 
the sick 
ee The 
Ile say? 
forgive 
, They 
eyes His 
ws every 
10 VS the 
snd they 
forgiven 
said this. 
power to 
Pharisees 
in amaze- 
things to- 
that time. 
eason out 
vothing of 
in accord- 
had come 


to-day. 
palsy, at a 
Ike to have 
by looking 
g, “ Here, 
g enough ; 
ands with 


yy that, but 
5 Christ to 


2S 


nd I think 
e four men 
those who 
ber that if 
e Lord can 
nd another 


Ne ery 
Sree eee | 
Fé ‘ 


Se 


POWER OF FAITH. 38 


thought that occurs to me is, if we can not succeed in bringing our 
neighbors ourselves, let us take another man with us, and if two 
can not do it, let three go, but let them bring him to Christ. I 
don’t know anything better to bring a man to Christ than for four 
Christians to go to him in one day. Go to aman at breakfast and 


say: “I want to bri.g you to Christ.” Probably he passes the 


, request by lightly—oh, it is nothing. But before dinner another 


man comes and says: “ My friend, I want to bring you to Christ.” 
“What does this mean? This is strange.” At tea-time a third 
man makes his appearance and says the same thing. He begins to 
talk to his wife about it. He says: “Three men have been after 
me to-day; I don’t know what to make out of it.” But before he 
goes to bed, a fourth man comes, and I guarantee he won’t sleep 
much that night. So let us go three, four, five times, if necessary, 
to a man, and when he sees our faith he will soon be impressed. 
When I was in Edinburgh, at the inquiry-meeting in Assembly 
Hall, one of the ushers came around and said, “ Mr. Moody, I’d 
like to put that man out; he’s one of the greatest infidels in 
Edinburgh.” He had been the chairman of an infidel club for 
years. I went around to where he was and sat down by him. 
“How is it with you, my friend?” I asked, and then he laughed 
and said, “ You say God answers prayer; I tell you He doesn’t. I 
don’t believe ina God. Try itonme.” “Will you get down with 
me and pray?” I asked him; but he wouldn’t. So I got down 
on my knees beside him and prayed. Next night he was there 
again. I prayed, and quite a number of others prayed for him. <A 
few months after that, way up in the north of Scotland, at Wick, I 
was preaching in the open air, and while I stood there I saw the 
infidel standing on the outskirts of the crowd. I went up te-him 
at the close of the meeting and said: “How is it with you, my 
friend?” He laughed and said, “I told you your praying is all 
false; God hasn’t answered your prayers; go and talk to these 
deluded people.” He had just the same spirit as before, but I 
relied on faith. Shortly after, I got a letter from. a barrister—a 
Christian. He was preaching one night in Edinburgh, when this 
infidel went up to him and said: “I want you to pray for me; I 
am troubled.” The barrister asked, ‘“ What is the trouble?” and 
he replied: “I don’t know what’s the matter; but I don’t have 
any peace, and I want you to pray for me.” Next day he went 
round to that lawyer's office and said that he had found Christ. 


36 MOOD Y’S SERM INS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


This man is now doing good work, and I heard that out of thirty 
inquirers there, ten or twelve of his old associates and friends were 
among them. So, if you have God with you, and you go to work 
for Him and you meet infidels and skeptics, just bear in mind that 
you can win through faith. When Christ saw the faith of those 
four men, He said to the man: “Thy sins are forgiven you.” 
My friends, if you have faith, all things are possible; if we are 
going to be successful in this revival we must have faith; faith in 
prayer, faith in God’s power. 

I remember at one of the meetings at Nashville, during the war, 
a young man came to me, trembling from head to foot. “ What is 
the trouble?” I asked. “ There is a letter I got from iny sister, and 
she tells me every night as the sun goes down she goes on her knees 
and prays for me.” This man was brave, had been in a number of 
battles, could stand before the cannon’s mouth, but yet this letter 
completely upset him. “I have been trembling ever since I re- 
ceived it.” Six hundred miles away, the faith of this girl went to 
work, and its influence was felt by the brother. He did not believe 
in prayer: he did not believe in Christianity ; he did not believe in 
his mother’s Bib!l<«. This mother was a praying woman, and when 
she died, she lett on earth a praying daughter. And when God saw 
ther faith and heard that prayer, He answered her. How many sons 
and daughters could be saved if their mothers and fathers had but 
faith. 

At Murfreesboro another illustration of this occurred. A young 
‘man received a letter from his mother, in which she said something 
like this: ‘““My dear boy. You do not know how I am burdened 
for your salvation. Every morning and evening I go into my closet 
and pray for you, that you may be led to the cross of Christ. You 
may die in battle, or in the hospital, and, oh, my son, I want you to 
become a Christian. I do not know but that this will be my last 
letter to you.” Well, this young lieutenant came to me and said, 
“TI have just heard of my mother’s death, and I have prayed for 
forgiveness of my sins.” This young man was converted just 
througk his mother’s faith. Although she was in glory, her voice 
was heard here. 

In one of the towns in England there is a beautiful little chapel, 
and a very touching story is told in connection with it. It was built 
‘by an infidel. He had a praying wife, but he would not listen to 
her; would not allow her pastor even to take dinner with them; 


’ thirty 
ds were 
-o work 
nd that 
f those 
n you.” 
we are 
faith in 


the war, 
What is 
ster, and 
.er knees 
umber of 
1is letter 
ice I re- 
1 went to 
st believe 
believe in 
and when 
God saw 
any sons 
5 had but 


A young 
Lomething 
burdened 
my closet 
rist. You 
nt you to 
he my last 
b and said, 
rayed for 
rted just 
| her voice 


tle chapel, 
t was built 
t listen to 
ith them ; 


POWER OF FAITH. 


would not look at the Bible; would not allow religion even to be 
talked of. She made up her mind, seeing she could not influence 
him by her voice, that every day she would pray to God at 12 o'clock 
for his salvation. She said nothing to him, but every day at that 
hour she told the Lord about her husband. At the end of twelve 
months there was no change in him. But she did not give it up. 
Six months more went past. Her faith began to waver, and she 
said, “ Will I have to give him up at Jast? Perhaps when I am 
dead He will answer my prayers.” When she had got at that point, 
it seemed just as if God had got her where He wanted her. The 
man came home to dinner one day. His wife was in the dining- 
room waiting for him, but he didn’t come in. She waited some 
time, and finally looked for him all through the house. At last she 
thought of going into that little room where she had prayed so of- 
ten. There he was, praying a: the same bed with agony where she 
had prayed for so many months, asking forgiveness 1>r his sins. And 
this is a lessen to you, wives, who have infidel husbands. The Lord 
saw that woman’s faith and answered her prayer. 

God looks for faith among all who work for Him. He can not 
do mighty things without it. With it He is able to do everything. 
Do you believe that He is able to shake the world? Do you be- 
lieve that He is able to shake this country? Do you believe that 
He is able to revive this North-west ? Do you believe that He is 
able to bring thousands into the kingdom of heaven? 


V. 


COMPASSION AND SYMPATHY. 


LUKE x, 29: “ And who is my neighbor?” 


VAY are told that as Christ stood with His disciples, a man, 
a lawyer, stood up and tempted Him, and said, “ Master, 

what shall I do to inherit eternal life?” He asked what 
he could do to inherit eternal life—what he could do to buy salva- 
tion. And the Lord answered his question, “ What is written in 
the law: How readest thou?” To which the lawyer answered, 
“Thou shalt love the Lord God with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy 
neighbor as thyself.” “Thou hast answered right ;” but “ who is thy 
neighbor?” and He drew a vivid picture, which has been told for 
the last eighteen hundred years, and I do not know anything that 
brings out more truthfully the wonderful power of the Gospel than 
this story, which we have heard read to-night—the story of the man 
who went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and who fell among 
thieves. Jerusalem was called the city of peace. Jericho and the 
road leading to it were infested with thieves. Probably it had been 
taken possession of by the worst of Adam’s sons. I do not know 
how far the man got from Jerusalem to Jericho, but the thieves had 
come out and fallen upon him, and had taken all his money, and 
stripped him of his clothes, and left him wounded—left him, I sup- 
pose, for dead. By and by a priest came down the road from Jeru- 
salem. Weare told that he came bychance. Perhaps he was going 
dcwn to dedicate some synagogue, or preach a -ermon on some im- 
portant subject, and had the manuscript in his pocket. As he was 
going along on the other side he heard a groan, and he turned 
around and saw the poor fellow lying bleeding on the ground, and 
pitied him. He went up close, took a look at him and said, ‘“ Why, 
that man’s a Jew, he belongs to the seed of Abraham. If 1 remem: 
(38) 


a man, 
Master, 
d what 
y salva- 
itten in 
swered, 
all thy 
und thy 
10 is thy 
told for 
ng that 
pel than 
he man 
| among 
and the 
ad been 
ot know 
eves had 
ney, and 
, | sup- 
om Jeru- 
as going 
some im- 
1s he was 
e turned 
bund, and 
, * Why, 
I remem: 


COMPASSION AND SYMPATHY. 


ber aright I saw him in the synagogue last Sunday. I pity him. 
But I have too much business, and I can not attend to him.” He 
felt a pity for him, and looked on him, and probably wondered why 
God allowed such men as those thieves to come into the world, and 
passed by. There are a good many men just like him. They stop 
to discuss and wonder why sin came into the world, and look upon 
a wounded man, but do not stop to pick up a poor sinner, forgetting 
the fact that sin is in the world already, and it has to be rooted out. 
But another man came along, a Levite, and he heard the groans; 
he turned and looked on him with pity, too. He felt compassion 
for him. He was one of those men that if we had here we should 
probably make him elder or deacon. He looked at him and said, 
“Poor fellow ! he’s all covered with blood; he has been badly hurt ; 
he is nearly dead, and they have taken all his money and stripped 
him naked. Ah, well, I pity him!’ He would like to help him, 
but he, too, has pressing business, and passes by on the other side. 
But he has scarcely got out of sight when another comes along, 
riding on a beast. He heard the groans of the wounded man, 
went over and took a good look at him. The traveler was a Sa- 
maritan. When he looked down he saw the man was a Jew. Ah, 
how the Jews looked down upon the Samaritans. There was a 
great, high partition-wall between the Jews and the Samaritans. 
The Jews would not allow them into the temple. They would not 
have any dealings with them. They would not associate with them. 
f can see him coming along that road, with his good, benevolent 
face; and as he passes he hears a groan from this poor fellow. He 
draws in his beast and pauses to listen. “And he came to where he 
was.” This is the sweetest thing to my mind in the whole story. 
A good many people would like to help a poor man if he was on 
the platform—if it cost them no trouble. They want him to come 
to them. They are afraid to touch the wounded man; he is all 
blood, and they will get their hands soiled. And that was just the ’ 
way with the priest and the Levite. This poor man, perhaps, had 
paid half of all his means to help the service of the Temple, and 
might have been a constant worshiper, but they only felt pity for 
him. This good Samaritan “came to where he was,” and after he 
saw him he had compassion on him. That word “ compassion ”—- 
how sweet it sounds! The first thing he did on hearing him cry 
for water—the hot sun had been pouring down upon his head—was 
to go and get it from a brook. Then he goes and gets a bag that 


40 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


he had witin him—what we might call a carpet-bag or a saddle-bag 
in the West—and pours in oil on his wounds. Then he thinks 
“The poor fellow is weak,” and he goes and gets a little wine. He 
has been lying so long in the burning sun that he is nearly dead 
now—he was left half dead—and the wine revives him. He looks 
him over, and he sees his wounds that want to be bound up. But 
he has nothing to do this with. I can see him now tearing the lin- 
ing out of his coat and with it binding up his wounds. Then he 
takes him up and lays him on his bosom till he revives; and, when 
the poor fellow gets strength enough, the good Samaritan puts him 
on his own beast. If the Jew had not been half dead he weuld 
never have allowed him to put his hands on him. He would have 
treated him with scorn. But he is half dead and he can not pre- 
vent the good Samaritan treating him kindly and putting him on 
his beast. 

Did you ever stop to think what a strong picture it would have 
been if the Samaritan had not been able himself to get the man on 
the beast—if he had had to call any assistance? Perhaps a man 
would have come along, and he would have asked him to help him 
with the wounded man. “What are you?” he might have said. 
“Tama Samaritan.” “You are a Samaritan,are you? I can nct 
help you, Iama Jew.” There is a good deal of that spirit now, 
just as strong as it was then. When we are trying to get a poor 
man on the right way, when we are tugging at him to get his face 
toward Zion, we ask some one to help us, and he says, “I am 
a Roman Catholic.” “Well,” you say, “Iam a Protestant.” So 
they give no assistance to one another. The same party spirit of 
old is present to-day. The Protestants will have nothing to do 
with the Catholics, the Jews will have nothing to do with the 
Gentiles. And there was a time—but, thank God, we are getting 
over it—when a Methodist would not touch a Baptist (a veice— 
“Amen’”), or a Presbyterian a Congregationalist, and if we saw a 
Methodist taking a man out of the ditch a Baptist would say, 
“Well, what are you going to do with him?” “Take him toa 
Methodist church.” “ Well, I'll have nothing to do with him.” A 
great deal of this has gone by, and the time is coming when, if we 
are trying to get a man out of the ditch, and they see us tugging 
at him, and we are so weak that we can not get him on the beast, 
they wil’ help him. And that is what Christ wants. 

Well, the Samaritan gets him on his beast, and says to him 


es 


eae aise 


le-bag 
Hinks 
. He 


7 dead 
+ looks 


. But 
the lin- 
‘hen he 
1, when 
uts him 
e would 
ld have 
not pre- 
him on 


uld have 
> man on 
ps a man 
help him 
ave said. 
can nct 
pirit now, 
ret a poor 
t his face 
S, “T am 
ant.” So 
. spirit of 
ing to do 
with the 
re getting 
(a veice— 
we saw a 
rould say) 
him toa 
him.” A 
hen, if we 
us tugging 


the beast, 


eee 


isbn 


re emore) 


Z 
cae 


Soe) 


COMPASSION AND SYMPATHY. 4) 


“Vou are very weak; my beast is sure-footed, he will take you to 
the inn, and I will hold you.” He held him firmly, and God is able 
to hold every one He takes out of the pit. 
that road, he holding him on, and he gets him to the inn. He 
gets him there, and he says to the innkeeper: “ Here is a wounded 
man; the thieves have been after him; give him the best attention 
you can; nothing is too good for him.” And I can imagine the 
good Samaritan as stopping there all night, sitting up with him 
and attending to his wants. And the next morning, he gets up, 
and says to the landlord, “I must be off;” leaving a little money 
to pay for what the man has had. “And if that is not enough, | 
will pay what is necessary when I return from my business in 
Jericho.” This good Sa:naritan gave this landlord twopence to pay 
for what he had got, and promised to come again and repay what- 
ever had been spent to take care of the man, and he had given him 
besides all his sympathy and compassion. And Christ tells this 
story in answer to the lawyer who came to tempt Him, and showed 
that the Samaritan was the neighbor. Now this story is brought 
out here to teach the church-goers this thing: that it is not creeds 
or doctrines that we want so much as compassion and sympathy. 
I have been talking about the qualifications which we require in 
working for Christ. First night I took “ Courage,’ chen “ Love,” 
and last night “Faith,” and now it is “Compassion and Sym- 
pathy.” 

If we have not compassion and sympathy, our efforts will ¢% 
1aught. 


I see them going along 


There are hundreds of Christians who work here who do 
very little because they have not sympathy. If they go to lift up 
aman, they must put themselves into his place. If you place 
yourself in sympathy with a man you are trying to do good to, you 
will soon lift him up. 

When at the Hippodrome in New York, a young man came up 
to me; he looked very sad, his face was troubled. I asked him 
what was the matter, and he said: “I am a fugitive from justice. 
When in England, when I was young, my father used to take me 
into the public house with him, and I learned the habit of drinking, 
and liquor has become to me like water. A few months ago I was 
‘in England, where I was head clerk in a large firm; I was doing 
well—I had $50 a week. Well, one night I was out and I had some 
money of my employers’ with me, and I got to gambling and lost 
it. I ran away from England and left a wife and two lovely 


42 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYER, 


children. Here I am; I can not get anything to do; } have no 
letters of recommendation; and what shall I do?” “Believe in 
the Lord Jesus Christ,” said I. “I can not become a Christian 
with that record behind me; there is no hope for me,” he replied. 
“There is hope; seek Jesus, and leave everything behind,” I told 
him. ‘ Well,” said he, “I can not do that until I make restitu- 
tion.” But I kept him to that one thing. He wrote me a letter, 
and said that the sermon, “ He must be born again,” had made a 
great impression on him. He could not sleep that night, and he 
finally passed from darkness into light. He came to me, and he 
said: “I am willing to go back to England and surrender myself, 
and go into prison, if Christ wants it.” I said to him: “ Don’t do 
that; but write to your employers and say that if Christ helps you, 
you will make restitution. Live as economically as you can, and 
be industrious, and you will soon find all well.” The man wrote to 
his employers, and I got a letter from him shortly afterward, and 
he told me that his wife was coming out to New York. When I 
was last there I made inquiry about him, and found that he was 
doing well. He only wanted sympathy—some one to take him 
by the hand and help him. I believe there are not less than 
10,000 young men in Chicago who are just waiting for some one to 
come to them with sympathy. You do not know how far a loving 
word will go. When I came to this city twenty years ago, I re- 
member I walked up and down the streets trying to find a situa 
tion, and I recollect how, when they roughly answered me, their 
treatment would chill my soul. But when some one would say: 
“T feel for you; I would like to help you, but I can’t; but you'll 
be all right soon,” I went away happy and light-hearted. That 
man’s sympathy did me good. 

When I first went away from home, and to a place some thirteen 
miles away, it seemed as if I could never be any further away. My 
brother had gone to live at that town a year and a half before. I 
recollect as I walked down the street with him I was very homesick, 
and could hardly keep down the tears. My brother said to: me: 
“ There’s a man here will give you a cent; he gives a cent to every 
new boy that comes here.” I thought that would be the best man 
I had ever met. By and by he came along, and I thought he was 
going to pass me. My brother stopped him, thinking, I suppose, 
I was going to lose the cent, and the old gentleman—he was an old 
gentleman—looked at me and said, “ Why, I have never seen you 


SF SSE 


ive no 
eve in 
ristian 
eplied. 
I told 
restitu- 
1. letter, 
made a 
and he 
and he 
mysclf, 
Jon’t do 
[lps you, 
can, and 
wrote to 
ard, and 
When I 
t he was 
ake him 
ess than 
e one to 
a loving 
pgo, I re- 
a situa 
e, their 
buld say: 
ut you'll 
d. That 


thirteen 
ray. My 
before. I 
10mesick, 
d to: me: 
to every 
best man 
it he was 
suppose, 
as an old 
seen you 


a Ee 


COMPASSION AND SYMPATAY., 43 


before; you must bea new boy.” “Yes,” said my b1.ther, “he 
has just come.” The old man put his trembling hand upon my 
head, and patted it and told me that I had a Father in heaven, al- 
though my earthly father was dead, and he gave me a new cent. I 
don’t know where that cent went to, but the kindly touch of that 
old man’s hand upon my head has been felt by ine all these years. 
What we want is sympathy from men. There are hundreds of men 
with hearts full of love, who, if they received but words of sympa- 
thy, their hearts would be won toa higher life. But I can imagine 
men saying, “ How are you going to reach them? How are you 
going to do it? How are you going to get into sympathy with 
these people?” It is very easily done. Put yourself into their 
places. There isa young man, a great drunkard; perhaps his fa- 
ther was a drunkard. If you had been surrounded with influences 
like his, perhaps you would kave been a worse drunkard than he is. 
Well, just put yourself into his place, and go and speak to him lov- 
ingly and kindly. 

I want to tell you a lesson taught me in Chicago a few years ago. 
In the months of August and July a great many deaths occurred 
among children, you all know. I remember I attended a great 
many funcrals; sometimes I would go to two or three funcrals a 
day. I got so used to it that it did not trouble me to see a mother 
take the last kiss and the last look at her child, and see the coffin- 
lid closed. I got accustomed to it, as in the war we got accustomed 
to the great battles, and to see the wounded and the dead never 
troub'ed us. When I got home one night I heard that one of my 
Sunday-school pupils was dead, and her mother wanted me to come 
to the house. I went to the poor home, and saw the father drunk. 
_ Adelaide had been brought from the river. The mother told me 
_ she washed for a living, the father earned no money, and poor Ade- 
laide’s work was to get wood for the fire. She had gone to the 
river that day, and seeing a piece floating on the water, had stretched 
out for it, had lost her balance and fullen in. The poor woman was 
very much distressed. “ I would lik> you to help me, Mr. Moody,” 
she said, “to bury my child. I have no lot. I have no money.” 
Well, I took the measure for the coffin and came away. I had my 
little girl with me, and she said: “ Papa, s ippose we were very, very 
poor, and mamma had to work for a living, and I had to get sticks 
for the fire, and was to fall into the river, would you be very sorry?” 
This question reached my heart. “ Why my child, it would break 


ii 


: i ss 


44 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


my heart to lose you,” I said, and I drew her to my bosom. ‘ Pa- 
pa, do you feel bad for that mother?” she said; and this word woke 
my sympathy for the woman, and I started and went back to the 
house, and prayed that the Lord might bind up that wounded heart. 
When the day came for the funeral I went to Graceland. I had al- 
ways thought my time too precious to go out there, but I went, 
The drunken father was there and the poor mother. I bought a 
lot, the grave was dug, and the child laid among strangers. Tiere 
was another funeral coming up, and the corpse was laid near the 
grave of little Adelaide. And I thought how I would feel if it had 
been my little girl that I had been laying there among strangers. 
I went to my Sabbath-school thinking this, and suggested that the 
children should contribute and buy a lot in which we might bury a 
hundred poor little children. We soon got it, and the papers had 
scarcely been made out when a lady came and said, “ Mr. Moody, 
my little girl died this morning; let me bury her ir the iot you 
have got for the Sunday-school children.” The request was grant- 
ed, and she asked me to go to the lot and say prayers over her 
child. I went to the grave—it was a beautiful day in June, and I 
remember asking her what the name of her child was. She said 
Emma. That was the name of my little girl, and I thought what 
if it had been my own child. We should put ourselves in the places 
of others. I could not help shedding a tear. Another woman 
came shortly after and wanted to put another one into the grave. 
I asked his name. It was Willie, and it happened to be the name 
of my little boy—the first two laid there were called by the same 
names as my two children, and I felt sympathy and compassion for 
tnose two women. 

If you want to get into sympathy, put yourself into a man’s 
place. Chicago needs Christians whose hearts are full of compassion 
and sympathy. If we haven't got it, pray that we may have it, so 
that we may be able to reach those men and women that need kind- 
ly words and kindly actions far more than sermons. The mistake is 
that we have been preaching too much and sympathizing too little. 
The Gospel of Jesus Christ is a gospel of deeds and not of words. 
May the Spirit of the Lord come upon us this night. May we re- 
member that Christ was moved with compassion for us, and may we, 
if we find some poor man going down among thieves, or lying 
wounded and bleeding, iook upon him with sympathy, and get be- 
low him and raise him up. Let us pray. 


an 


ORE 
‘oe 
ie 
2 
ae 
7 
r? a 
ve 


ys 


n. ° Pa 
ord woke 
‘k to the 
led heart. 
I had al- 
t I went. 
bought a 
s, There 
near the 
1 if it had 
strangers. 
1 that the 
rht bury a 
apers had 
ir. Moody, 
1e jot you 
was grant- 
s over her 
une, and I 
She said 
ucht what 
the places 
er woman 
the grave. 
e the name 
the same 
passion for 


o a man’s 
compassion 
have it, so 
need kind- 
» mistake is 
~ too little. 
t of words. 
May we re- 
nd may we, 
es, or lying 
und get be- 


COMPASSION AND SYMPATHY. 45 


MR. MOODY'S PRAYEh. 


We want to thank Thee, O Lord, for the pleasant time we have 
spent together this week, We want to thank Thee for the blessed 
meeting yesterday, and ask Thee again to hear our prayers; and, 
O Lord, before we go hence we ask Thee to give us a fresh revela- 
tion of Thy Holy Spirit. Purge us of all jealousy, all envy, all 
evil desire, so that we may receive the great blessing of the Holy 
(host, and feel its power among us. We want the power of Thy. 
Son to be felt among us; we want the spirit of love and faith to 
appear to us here to-day. O Lord, our cry to-day is that Thou 
may help us, that the spirit of evil may be put far from us to-day. 
© God, help us to do great things for Christ. May that be the 
prominent thing in our hearts—how we shall glorify Him; how we 
shall bring glory to the blessed name of Him who gave Himself for 
us. Take out the want of love; take out the coldness of our hearts, 
and may they be ever filled with a burning love. May Christ reign 
in every corner of our hearts, and overcome all inclination to way- 
wardness. And now, O Blessed Master, help us to forget the spirit 
of rebellion, and grant that we may have Thy forgiveness for all 
our sins. O God, grant that we may have Christ, so as to be fit 
for the Master. Bless these dear ministers who asked us to pray for 
them yesterday. May there not be one of them who will not re- 
ceive a blessing. And may they go into their pulpits next Sunday 
feeling that they have indeed received Thy blessing, and that they 
have received a sacred unction from on high. Bless them, O Lord, 
and may they feel that they stand on the walls of Zion: and on 
the coming Sabbath may they feel strong in Thy service, and may 
they come here on Monday feeling that Thy influence has been 
manifested in their churches. Bless not only the churches, but the 
Sabbath-schools. Grant us Thy blessing in all our work, and we will 
give all tothe glory of Thy name through Jesus our Lcrd. Amen, 


VI. 


FUNERAL SERMON OF SAMUEL MOODY. 


JOHN i. 41, 42: “He first findeth his own brother,...and he brought him to 
Jesus.” 


THE PRAYER. 


UR Heavenly Father, we thank Thee for the sight of this 
beautiful Sabbath morning. We thank Thee for the sweet 
privilege we have of coming here, in the name of the 

blessed Saviour, to break the bread of life to the people. And 
now we look up to Thee and ask that Thou wilt give us power to 
speak the Word this morning, that the Word be accompanied by the 
Holy Spirit, and may it sink down deep into our hearts. May every 
one of us who hear the name of Christ, may every one of us who 
have professed to be Thy disciples, may our love be strengthened, 
may our hopes be made brighter this morning than they have been 
before. And we pray Thee that Thou wilt give us the burden of 
souls. May it come home to each one of us. May our hands stretch 
out to the souls that are without God and hope in this dark world, 
that are living without the Saviour. O God, help us to go to 
them with loving words and speak to them the Word of Christ in 
such a way, that they shall be won to Christ. And may this open- 
ing week be blessed in Chicago. May it be blessed above any wecl. 
that is past. May it be a week in which the Son of God shall work 
mightily, and the Holy Spirit be found out without stint, and may 
many be brought to the cross of Christ. We want to thank Thee, 
O Father, for the blessings of the past week. We want to thank 
Thee for the interest Thou hast created in this city in the hearts of 
Thy people. We want to thank Thee again for the bond of unity 
that is among the brethren. O God, wilt Thou keep us close to 
each other; keep us close to the cross. May we see eye to eye; 
may our hearts be drops of water running together. May the 
Spirit of God come in mighty power, and may there be a great 
(46) 


DY. 


ht him to 


+ of this 
he sweet 
e of the 
le. And 
power to 
ied by the 
lay every 
of us who 
ngthened, 
have been 
burden of 
ds stretch 
hrk world, 
to go to 
Christ in 
this open- 
any wecl. 
shall work 
, and may 
ank Thee, 
to thank 
b hearts of 
d of unity 
hs close to 
e to eye; 
May the 


be a great 


od 


FUNERAL SERMON OF SAMUEL MOODY, 


47 


turning unto Thee. And we pray Thee that Thy blessing may rest 
on these ministers who shall go hence to their pulpits to preach the 
Gospel of Jesus Christ. Oh, Spirit of God, will Thou go with them; 
may they speak with power from Thee, and their words echo and 
re-echo the mighty truth as it is in Jesus. And when we come 
together, if it be our privilege, to-morrow in Farwell Hall, may 
there be a mighty work for Christ. Bless the Sabbath-school teachers 
when they go to their classes to-day. May they all be burdened 
with the souls of their scholars till they bring them safe into the ark 
of Christ. May there be a glorious work in the Sabbath-schools to- 
day. And Christ shall have the praise of the glory. Amen. 


THE SERMON. 


I thought this morning I would like to just take a leaf out of my 
own life in the past, that it may help some of those present in this 
hali who have brothers that are very dear to them, but who are out 
of Christ. Twenty-one years ago last March, when God converted 
me, the very first thing that came into my mind was my six broth- 
ers. Then and there, I began to pray for them, I had never 
prayed for them before; and I began to cry to God that these six 
brothers and two sisters might be led home to peace. And for 
twenty-one years that has been my prayer; that has been my cry 
to God. I remember the first time I went home after my conver- 
sion. I thought I could tell them what God had done for me. I 
thought I had only to explain it, to have them all see the light. 
How disappointed I was when I left home that first time, after 
~ remaining for a few days, to find that they did not see it. I was 
~~ not very experienced in pleading for souls then. Perhaps I did not 
go at it in the right way. But I kept on as best I could. And a 
few years after, when I was in this city—three years after I was ina 
store on Lake street—a postman came one day and brought a letter 
that told me my youngest brother was given up by the physician to die. 
On the day I got the letter he was dying, I went into the fifth story 
of that building, and if ever I prayed earnestly in my life I did then, 
» that my brother might be spared. He was the Benjamin of the fam- 
lly. He was born after my father died. I thought I could give him 
up then if only he was a Christian. But I had not any hope. The 
> thought that my brother, who was very dear to me—dearer to me 
than my life, it seemed—~should die thus in his sins, was too much 
for me to stand, and I wrestled with God in prayer. It seemed 


‘ 
ee ee a cee 


SS 


P 
ee By tna rn Ee. Scat Ee 


ee ag ee epee mo aa Dene 


a 


° 
y $C DE CL LAN eC ttt as — 


48 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


God answered my prayer. The next letter sent, he was better. He 
had a run of typhoid fever that lasted forty-two days. And when 
he got off that bed, I felt in answer to prayer, the boy was dearer 
to me than ever before. But he never was well during sixteen or 
eighteen years. I remember fourteen years ago he came to me to 
this city. I have that dear boy in my heart now. I thought then 
my opportunity had surely come, and I could lead him to Christ. 
But he was taken sick again. I cou'l not keep him here. The 
doctor said he might live a number of years, but could not be cured. 
Naturally very ambitious and proud-spirited, he did not want to go 
back home. But the doctor said it was the best I could do, and 
I took him back to Massachusetts. I took him home from Chicago 
to Northfield, all the way preaching Christ to him. But he took 
no interest in my speech. Everything I said failed to infiuence 
him, although he seemed to love me very much. And for fourteen 
vears I kept that dear boy on my heart. I just kept on praying 
for him. Year after year I went back to the old home just to 
spend a few days with him that I might win him to Christ. He 
knew I wanted him to be a Christian, but it seemed he would not 
comply. He took no interest in the Bible, no interest in Christian- 
ity. He would talk politics, he would talk everything else, but 
vou could not get him to talk of Christ or Christianity. I went 
back home a year ago with a heart just burdened for the salvation 
of my family. My heart burned to draw them to Christ. I went 
to preaching in that town. In the last month, my heart going out 
to that dear boy, I asked all those present in the church willing 
to become Christians to rise, and he, my long-sought brother, rose 
for prayers. What a precious relief for my heart! He became an 
earnest Christian. He turned his face toward Heaven that very 
night. He became an active Christian. And when they soon 
after decided to have a Young Men’s Christian Association for that 
town, the young men wanted a president, and they elected him for 
president. Oh, that was a blessed day for me, when my brother, 
converted to God, after twenty years’ prayer, took charge of 
that little band. I heard him make his first speech, and that 
seemed the happiest day of my life. He was a young man 
of great talents; he was the star of the family—the most prom. 
ising one of the family. No one of us could have done as 
much for Christ had he gone to Him in his earliest m nhood., 
And he went to work. He took a leading part in religious meet. 


etter. He 
And when 
was dearer 
sixteen or 
> to me to 
sught then 
to Christ. 
yere. The 
rt be cured. 
want to go 
ild do, and 
ym Chicago 
ut he took 
o infiuence 
or fourtecn 
on praying 
me just to 
Christ. He 
» would not 
n Christian- 
g else, but 
ty. I went 
1e salvation 
ist. I went 
rt going out 
urch willing 
brother, rose 
became an 
n that very 
they soon 
ion for that 
ted him for 
my brother, 
charge of 
, and that 
young man 
most proms 
e done as 
t m nhood. 


igious meet, 


FUNERAL SERMON OF SAMUEL MOODY. 49 


ings. He went and talked with weak brothers and set them on 
their feet again. He searched for souls on both sides of the Con- 
~ necticut River, in both sides of the valley. More conversions took 
~ place after I left than when I was there. Every Sunday «afternoon 
; a he would go out into the country and take charge of meetings, and 
as I used to stand in the pulpit, sometimes, and look down on that 
a young brother in his zealous work, no one but God knows how I 
~ loved him and rejoiced with great joy. And when God took him 
he was in the midst of his work bringing others to Christ. Oh, I 
‘want to tell you my thoughts after I left you suddenly. The first 
‘thought as I went toward my home, Oh, how deep the sorrow ! 
_ The dear boy was gone forever, and in the first moments grief 
will have its way. That text in Scripture, the expression that 
‘David used when he !ost Jonathan, kept coming into my mind: “I 
am very much distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan; very 
pleasant hast thou been unto me; thy love to me was wonderful.” 
Yes, thy love to me was wonderful. For these twenty years I 
always knew he was going to meet me at the depot. I always 
found him waiting for me there. I never missed him. Sometimes 
I was three or four trains behind, but he was always watching and 
waiting for me. And that sadly beautiful hymn also kept coming 
into my mind: 


“We shall meet, but we shall miss him 
There will be one vacant chair.” 


But over and above all these the voice from Heaven at last made 
“itself heard to my heart: “Thy brother shall rise again.” The 
cloud was lifted, and for about 500 miles on my way to my 
ome that verse rung in my ears. It seemed to echo and re-echo 
hrough all the journey: “Thy brother shall rise again.” Oh, the 
recious Bible! It never seemed to me so precious as it did that 
day. My call to mourning was the deepest I have ever known, for 
ext, perhaps, to my wife, my two children, and my aged mother, ’ 
loved none so dearly as this youngest brother. But that precious 
promise gives the heart cause to rejoice even in the sorrow of 
Ydeath. And again in the fifteenth chapter of Corinthians what 
divine sustaining words I took to my soul: 
‘‘But some men will say, how are the dead raised up? and with 
what body do they come? 


“Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except 
die. 


4 


~ 
= ay 


t 
REE 
Sse = 


Seen te ee ne 


2 


50 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


“ And that which thou sowest thou sowest not that body that shall 
be, but bare grain; it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain. 

“But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased Him, and to every 
seed his own body. 

“So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corrup- 
tion; it is raised in incorruption. 

“Tt is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It issown in weak- 
ness; it is raised in power.” 

Dishonor. Oh, as we laid him down in the cold grave—I thought, 
as we laid him away, of the worms that would come to his body, and 
of the dishonor. But with what power the Word of God came to my 
soul then in these words, “It is raised in glory.” We sowed it in 
weakness, but it shall be raised in power. It seemed there was victory 
even in that trying hour. It was sown in corruption, but it shall 
be raised incorruptible. It was sown mortal, Fut it shall be raised 
immortal. It was sown a natural body, it shall be raised a spiritual 
body. And, as it had borne the image of the earthy, it shall also 
bear the image of the heavenly. I sheli see that brother by and 
by; then shali he be glorified. Yes, my friends, I could even 
rejoice as I read these blessed assurances of Scripture. The Word 
of God came to my soul as never before. Blessed Bible, how dark 
it would have been but for that blessed book. But by its beams 
all darkness was driven away. It seemed I could even thank God 
for the triumphant death of my dear brother, and almost envied him. 
No, I would not have God call him back from Heaven into this dark 
world. Yon happy home beyond the grave is far better. What joy 
to tell of good deeds done. A minister down home told me that he 
did not know,a short time back, of a solitary young man in his 
neighborhood who would offer prayer, but now a numerous and 
zealous band of praying Christians were the fruits of my brother's 
life. And that text came forcibly to my mind: ‘ Blessed are the 
dead that die in the Lord; even so saith the Spirit, and their works 
do follow them.” There were these dear young Christian converts 
following him to his grave; his works did follow him. In the 
graveyard of the church that funeral day I saw fifty of these young 
men converted mostly in the past year. I shouted even there by 
the grave—I could not help it: ‘Oh, death, where is thy sting? 
Oh, grave, where is thy victory?” And I seemed to hear a voice as 
from the bosom of the Son of God: “ Because I live, ye shall live 
also.” 


VERS. 


ody that shall 
e other grain. 
and to every 


wn in corrup- 
sown in weak- 


re—I thought, 
his body, and 
»>d came to my 
Ve sowed it in 
sre was victory 
n, but it shall 
shall be raised 
ised a spiritual 
y, it shall also 
brother by and 
I could even 
‘-e. The Word 
sible, how dark 
t by its beams 
en thank God 
st envied him. 
into this dark 
ter. What joy 
old me that he 
ng man in his 
numerous and 
pf my brother's 
Blessed are the 
hnd their works 
istian converts 
him. In the 
of these young 
even there by 
is thy sting? 
hear a voice as 
e, ye shall live 


KUNERAL SERMON OF SAMUEL MOODY. 


51 


And on my way back from Northfield to Chicago this has been 
my thought; if you, my dear Christian friend, have a brother out 

of Christ go bring him in. You will by and by have to stand b 
the open grave of some dear brother, and to be without Christ hoy 
can you bear it? And so, my friends, let me urge upon va first 
of all, to go and find your own brother. If you have a brace ae 
of Christ, go to him to-day, tell him how you love him, how you w XS 
him to be a Christian, how you are burdened and Weighed pak 6 
his salvation. And then go to your sister, to your cousin, to a 
friend; oh, do you, each one of you, write to some alisent fi a 
to-day, beseeching that Christ may be accepted just now! I me 
God from the bottom of my heart that mv dear protien t iE 
stand for Christ, and went to work. I tnank God that He his 
_works do tollow him. The young Christian men met medi ly 
after he died; a hundred of them came together to choose : He 
os to ae his place. snd how it rejoiced my heart that eee 
Tete ge alia ara 3 ae set himself earnestly io 
: said: now, I wili try to follow more faith- 
Sas irreed Shae 7 ae Si when pe met Wednesday Non eae 

1 im away—another i 
i wie in the Le of the ies buried sce Cn ae 
. weigh on our earts, let us go and bring 1! 
_ write to them beseeching letters, if our lips a a ae 
i Be ee as pos Let us this morning go out and ane 7 
e i fe 
ris et us commence with our own families; let us 


: 
while you may. Exhort by word of mouth; exhort by fervent and 


2 find 
ie our brothers. If 
a friends. If they are pea asiving nave yielded, let us go to our 
a gers to Christ, oh, go bring them now 
a ae erent Pb i at once your mission, lest it be too late for. 
os ) praise God for the d ivi ingi 
ain, ear privilege of bringing others to 


VIL. 


A STARTLING QUESTION. 
GEN, iii.g: ‘“ Where art thou?” 


. 7 OU see I have got a very personal text this afternoon. All 
those ministers in this audience will bear me out in this 
statement, that it is the hardest kind of work to get their 

congregations to apply this text to themselves. When they hear 
it, one man passes it on to another, and away it goes, text and ser- 
mon. ‘his afternoon, I want you to understand that it means me, 
you, and every one of us—that it points to us; that it applies to us 
personally—that it ought to come home to every soul here—to these 
merchants, to these ministers, to these reporters, to these great- 
hearted men, to these women, to these little boys and girls—as a 
personal question. It was the first question God put to man after 
his fall, and in the 6,000 years that have rolled away, all of Adam’s 
children have heard it. It has come to them all. In the silent 
watches of the night, in the busy hours of the day, it has come upon 
us many a time—the question, “ Where am I, whither am I going?” 
and I vant you to look at it now as a personal question. So let us 
be solemn for a few minutes while we try to answer it. Some men 
look with great anxiety as to how they appear in the sight of their 
fellow-men. It is of very little account what the world thinks of us, 
The world is not worth heeding; public opinion is of very little 
account. We should not pay any attention to its opinion. ‘“ Where 
art thou going?” is the question that ought to trouble you—“ what is 
to be your hereafter?’’ May the question strike home to us, and 
may a heart-searching take place in us, and the Holy Spirit search 
us, so that we may know before we sleep to-night where we are now 
in the sight of God, and where we are going to in eternity. I 
remember when preaching in New York City, at the Hippodrome, a 
man coming up to me and telling mea story that thrilled my soul 
(52) 


pon. All 
it in this 
get their 
they hear 
t and ser- 
leans me, 
lies to us 
to these 
‘se-great= 
irls—as a 
an after 
Adam’s 
he silent 
me upon 
going?” 
So let us 
ome men 
of their 
ks of us, 
sry little 
“Where 
‘what is 

b us, and 
it search 
are now 
nity. I 
drome, a 
my soul 


{ete 


IS 
aE 


eee 


Bees ee 


é 


a 


A STARTLING QUESTION. 53 


One night,. he said, he had been gambling —had gambled away 
all the money he had. When he went home to the hotel that night 
he did not sleep much—half drunk, and with a sort of remorse for 
what he had done. The next morning happened to be Sunday. 
He got up, felt bad, couldn’t eat anything, didn’t touch his break- 
fast, was miserable, and thought about putting an end to his exist- 
ence. That afternoon he took a walk up Broadway, and when he 
came to the Hippodrome he saw great crowds going in, and thought 
of entering too. But a policeman at the door told him he couldn’t 
come in, as it was a woman’s meeting. He turned from it and 
strolled on, came back to his hotel and had dinner. At night he 
walked up the street until he reached the Hippodrome again, and 
this time he saw a lot of men going in. When inside, he listened to 
the singing and heard the text: “Where art thou?” and he 
thought he would go out; he rose to go, and the text came 
upon his ears again, “ Where art thou?” This was too personal, 
he thought; it was disagreeable, and he made for the door, but 
as he got to the third row from the entrance the words came to 
him again, “ Where art thou?” He stood still, for the question had 
come to him with irresistible force, and God had found him right 
there. He went to his hotel and prayed all that night, and now he 
is a bright and shining light. And this young man, who was a 
commercial traveler, went back to the village in which he had been 
reared, and in which he had been one of the fastest young men— 
went back there, and went around among his friends and acquaint- 
ances and testified for Christ, as earnestly and beneficially for Him 
as his conduct had been against Him. I hope the text will find out 
some young man here who has strayed away from God, and come 
upon him with such force personally, as will turn him from his 
present course to take the offers of salvation. Won’t you believe 
we are here for you?—won't you believe we are preaching for you? 
—won't you believe that this enterprise has been carried out for 
you, and that this assembly has been drawn together for you ?—and 
may you ask your heart solemnly and candidly this question: 
“Where art thou?” 

Iam going to divide this audience into three classes. Don’t let 
this startle you, I am not going to make three divisions among you. 
The first class is the class who profess to be Christians. I don’t 
know who you are, or whether you are sincere. It rests between 
you and God, The other class are the backsliders—those who have 


a i 


54 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


been good children, but who have turned their backs upon Him, and 
have gone into the regions of sin. And the next class is that one 
that has never been saved, who have never been born of the Spirit, 
who have never sought to reach Christ. 

And now, my friends, as to you who profess to be Christians. We 
who profess to be Christians, are we living up to what we preach? 
God forgive me, I feel I am not doing as much as I should for Him. 
I don’t except myself. You who profess to be Christians, this 
question is personal to you: “ Where art thou?” Do you believe 
what you are preaching ?—do you live the life you ought to be living 
as professed Christians? If you were doing this, tens of thousands 
of people would be converted in Chicago within thirty days. By 
your neglect to practice what you preach, men have got sick of you, 
the world has become tired of you. They say, if we really feel what 
we talk about and profess, we would be more earnest about their 
salvation. And I say they are right. If Christians felt as they 
should, every church in Chicago, every church in the North-west 
would be on fire for the salvation of souls. They are lukewarm. Is 
the Church to-day in its right position P—is it true to its teachings? 
—ar2 we not mingling with the world in our professed Christian 
lives, so that the world has become tired of our shamming profes- 
‘sions? If the world does not see us act according to our profes- 
sions, they say Christianity is not real. Why, a young man, some 
time ago a professed Christian, spoke to another young man upon the 
subject, and the Christian was answered with the words: “I don’t 
‘believe a word of your Christianity; I don’t believe a word of what 
you talk about; I don’t believe your Bible.” “You don’t mean 
that?” asked the Christian. ‘“ Yes, I do,” said the young man, “it’s 
all a sham; you are all hypocrites.” The Christian said to him, 
knowing he had a mother who was a professed Christian, “ You 
don’t mean to say that your mother is a hypocrite?” “Well, no,” 
said the young fellow, not willing to admit his mother was one; 
“she is not exactly a hypocrite, but she don’t believe what she pro- 
fesses. If she did, she would have talked to me about my soul long 
ago.” That young man, my friends, had the best of it. And this 
is the condition of nine-tenths of us—we don’t practice what we 
profess to believe. We have not really taken the cross of Christ ; we 
have not put off the old man and taken on the new; we are not living 
truly in Christ Jesus, and the world is sick of us, and goes stum- 
‘bling over us. If we don’t practice in every particular the profes- 


S. 


Him, and 
/that one 
he Spirit, 


ans. We 
: preach ? 
for Him. 
ians, this 
yu believe 
be living 
thousands 
jays. By 
ck of you, 
feel what 
pout their 
t as they 
lorth-west 
warm. Is 
eachings ? 
Christian 
ng profes- 
yur profes- 
an, some 
upon the 
“T don’t 
d of what 
pn’t mean 
man, ‘‘it’s 
d to him, 
an, * You 
Vell, no,” 
was one; 
t she pro- 
soul long 
And this 
what we 
hrist ; we 
not living 
oes stum- 
1e profes- 


A STARTLING QUESTION. 55 


sions we make, and try to influence the lives of others, and lead the 
lives of Christians according to Christian precept, the world will go 
on stumbling over us. A few years ago, ina town somewhere in 
this State, a merchant died, and while he was lying a corpse I was 
told a story I will never forget. When the physician that attended 
him saw there was no chance for him here, he thought it would be 
time to talk about Christ to the dying man. And there are a great 
many Christians just like this physician. They wait till a man is 
just entering the other world—just till he is about nearing the 
throne, till the sands of life are about run out, till the death-rattle 
is in his throat—before they commence to speak of Christ. The 
physician stepped up to the dying merchant and began to speak of 
Jesus, the beauties of Christianity, and the salvation He had offered 
to all the world. The merchant listened quietly to him, and then 
asked him, “ How long have you known of these things?” “I 
have been a Christian since I came from the East,” he replied. 
“You have been a Christian so long and have known all this, and 
have been in my store every day. You have been in my home; 
have associated with me; you knew all these things, and why didn’t 
you tell me before?” The doctor went home and retired to rest, 
but could not sleep. The question of the dying man rang in his 
ears. He could not explain why he had not spoken before, but he 
saw he had neglected his duty to his principles. He went back to 
his dying friend, intendi-g to urge upon him acceptance of Christ’s 
salvation, but when he began to speak to him the merchant only re- 
plied in a sad whisper, “Oh, why didn’t you tell me before?’ Oh, my 
friends, how many of us act like this physician. You must go to 
your neighbor and tell him who does not know Christ, of what He 
has done for us. If you do not tell the glad tidings, they are lis- 
tening to the promptings of the devil, and we make people believe 
that Christianity is hypocrisy, and that Christ is not the Saviour of 
the world. If we believe it, shall we not publish it, and speak out 
the glorious truth to all for Christ—that He is the Redeemer of the 
world ? Some time ago I read a little account that went through the 
press, and it burned into my soul. A father took his little child 
into the fields one day. He lay down while the child was amusing 
itself picking up little blades of grass and flowers. While the child 
was thus engaged the father fell asleep, and when he awoke, the first 
thought that occurred to him was, ‘“ Where is my child?” He 
looked around everywhere, but nowhere could he see the child. He 


56 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS., 


looked all around the fields, over the mountains, but cou!d not sce 
her, and finally he came to a precipice and looked down among the 
stones and rocks, and there he saw his little child lying down at the 
bottom, and ran down, took the child up, and kissed it tenderly, but 
it was dead. He was filled with remorse, and accused himself of 
being the murderer of his child. And this story applies to Chris 
tians in their watchful care of their fellow-creatures. 

It was not long ago that I heard of a mother making all sorts of 
fun and jeering at our preaching; not in Chicago, but in another 
town, She was laughing and scoffing at the meetings; she was 
scorning the preachers; and yet she had a drunken son. It might 
have been, if she had helped to support the meetings, the meetings 
would have been the means of saving that son from a drunkard’s 
grave; and mothers and fathers here to-day, you have the respon- 
sibility upon you of turning the faces of your children toward Zion. 
Ah, my friends, it is 2 solemn question to you to-day, and may you 
ask yourself where you are in the sight of God. The next class I 
want to speak to fora few moments, for I can not help believing 
that in this assembly there must be a number of backsliders who 
have gone away from the wayside. You have probably come from 
an Eastern town to this one, and you have come to some church 
with a letter—to some Presbyterian, or Methodist, or Episcopalian 
church. And when you came to that church you did not find the 
love you expected; you didn’t find the cordiality you looked for, 
and you did not go near it again. So you kept the letter in your 
pocket for weeks, for years; might have been thrown in your trunk, 
might have been burned up in the Chicago fire; and you have for- 
gotten all about your church life, and the letter has disappeared. You 
Iead an ungodly life, but you are not happy. I have traveled about 
a good deal in the last five years, and I never knew a man who had 
turned away from religion to be a happy man. That man’s con- 
science is always troubling him. He may come to Chicago and be- 
come prosperous and wealthy, but his weaith and position in the 
world can not fill his heart. If there is a poor backslider in this 
building to-day, let him come back. Hear the Voice that calls you 
to come back. There is nothing you have done which God is not 
ready and able to forgive. I! there is a poor wanderer on the moun- 
tains of sin, turn right round and face Him. He will hear your 
transgressions, and forgive your backsliding, and take you to His 
loving bosom, and this will be a happy night to you Look at the 


5 a 


See 


a2 
nas Fo) 


Shee 


cet 


as 


Se tae 


rot iy is 


Sen ot nt Yee 


aes 


ERS. 


ould not see 
1 among the 
down at the 
enderly, but 

himself of 
es to Chris 


r all sorts of 

in another 
igs; she was 
. It might 
he meetings 
a drunkard’s 
the respon- 
coward Zion. 
nd may you 
next class I 
Ip believing 
ksliders who 
y come from 
some church 
“piscopalian 
not find the 
uu looked for, 
ttter in your 
your trunk, 
ou have for- 
peared. You 
veled about 
an who had 
t man’s con- 
ago and be- 
sition in the 
lider in this 
iat calls you 
God is not 
bn the moun- 
1 hear your 
you to His 
Look at the 


SIRS ee 


a 


| 
ty 


ng 


fee 

au 
Kd 
: 


Sih pie ale aa See 


A STARTLING QUESTION. 37 
home of the backslider. No prayers, no family altar there. As im 
the days of Elijah, they have put up the image of Baal in the place 
of their God. They have no peace; their conscience troubles them ; 
they know they are not bringing their family up as they should, 
Is not that the condition of a good many here to-day? Oh, back- 
slider, you know what your life is, but what will be your eternity if 
you fight against the Lord, who is only waiting to do you good ? 

I heard of a young man who came to Chicago to sell his father’s 
grain. His father was a minister somewhere down here. The boy 
arrived in Chicago and sold the grain; and when the time came for 
him to return home, the boy did not come. The father and mother 
were up all night, expecting to hear the sound of the wagon every 
minute, but they waited and waited, and still he did not come. 
The father became so uneasy that he went into the stable and 
saddled his horse and came to Chicago. When he reached 
here he found that his son had sold the grain, but had not 
been seen since the sale, and concluded that he was mur- 
dere’. After making investigation, however, he found that 
the boy had gone into a gambling-house and lost all his money. 
After they had taken all his money from him they told him to sell 
his horse and wagon, and he would recover his money, which he did. 
He was like the poor man who came down from Jericho to Jerusa- 
lem, and who fell among thieves, and after they had stripped him 
of everything, cast him off. And a great many of you think as this 
young man thought. You think that rumsellers and gamblers are 
your best friends, when they will take from you your peace, your 
health, your soul, your money—-everything you have, and then rut 
away. Well, the father, after looking about for him fruitlessly, 
went home and told his wife what he had learned. But he did not 
settle down, but just took his carpet-bag in his hand and went from 
one place to another, getting ministers to let him preach for them, 
and he always told the congregation that he had a boy dearer to 
him than life, and left his address with them, and urged them if 
ever they heard anything about his boy to let him know. At last, 
after going around a good deal, he got on his track and learned that 
he had gone to California. It was during the time of the gold ex- 
citement. He went home, but he did not write a letter to him. 
No; he just arranged his business affairs and started for the Pacific 
coast to find his boy. This is but an illustration of what God has 
been doing for you. There has not been a day, an hour, a moment, 


) gli wh 


58 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


but God has been searching for you. When the father got to San 
Francisco he got permission to preach, and he had a notice put in 
the papers in the hope that it m‘ ia reach the mining districts, 
trusting that if his son were there it might reach him. He preached 
a sermon on the Sunday, and when he pronounced the benediction 
the audience went away. But he saw ina corner, one who remained. 
He went up to him and found that it was his boy. He did not 
reprimand him, he did not deliver judgment upon him, but put his 
loving arms around him, drew him to his bosom, and took him back 
to his home. This is an illustration of what God wants to do to us, 
what He wants to do to-day. He offers us His love and His for- 
giveness. 

There is one peculiarity about a backslider. You must get back 
to Him as you went away. It is you who have gone away by turn- 
ing, by leaving Him; not He by leaving you. And the way to get 
back to Him is to turn your face toward Him, and he will receive 
you with joy and forgiveness. There will be joy in your heart and 
there will be joy in Heaven this afternoon if you return to Him. 
If you treated God as a personal friend, there would not be a back- 
slider. A rule I have had for years is to treat the Lord Jesus Christ 
as a personal friend. He is not a creed, a me** empty doctrine, but 
it is He Himself we have. The moment we have received Christ 
we should receive Him as a friend. When I go away from home I 
bid my wife and children good-bye, I bid my friends and acquaint- 
ances good-bye, but I never heard of a poor backslider going down 
on his knees and saying, “I have been near You for ten years; 
Your service has become tedious and monotonous; I have come to 
bid You farewell; good-bye, Lord Jesus Christ.” I never heard of 
one doing this. I will tell you how they go away; they just run 
away. Where are you, you backslider? Just look upon your con- 
dition during the past ten years. Have they been years of happi- 
ness? Have they been years of peace? Echo answers ten thou- 
sand times, “ No.” Return to Him at once; never mind what your 
past has been, He will give you salvation. 

But I must hasten on to the next class—the unsaved. I will 
admit that professed Christians have got their failings; we are far 
from being what we ought to be. But is that any reason why you 
should not come to Him? We do not preach ourselves, we do not 
set ourselves up as the Saviour; if we did you might make this an 
excuse. But we preach Christ. Now, you who are unsaved, won't 


.S. 


ot to San 
ce put in 
districts, 
preached 
nediction 
remained. 
> did not 
it put his 
him back 
do to us, 
1 His for- 


get back 
y by turn- 
vay to get 
ill receive 
heart and 
. to Him. 
be a back- 
‘sus Christ 
ctrine, but 
ved Christ 
m home I 
acquaint- 
bing down 
fen years; 
e come to 
heard of 
y just run 
your con- 
of happi- 
ten thou- 
vhat your 


d. I will 
ve are far 
h why you 
ve do not 
ce this an 
red, won't 


A STARTLING QUESTION, 59 


you come? I do not know who you are in this audience, but if the 
Spirit of God is not born in you, and does not tell you that you are 
the children of God, this is an evidence that you have not been born 
of God. Do you love your enemies? Do you love those who 
slander you? Do you love those who hate you? Have you joy, 
peace, long-suffering, courage, charity? If you have got the fruit 
of the Spirit, you have those qualities; if you have not, you have 
not been born of the Spirit. Now, friends, just ask yourself this. 
question, “Where am 1?” Here I am in this hall to-day, sur- 
1ounded with praying friends. It seemed sometimes to me as if 
the words came to me and fell to the floor; and at other times the 
words fell on the heart. We can feel it in this hall to-day in the 
atmosphere; we feel its influence all around. It may be that that 
mother is praying for the return of an erring son; it may be that 
that brother has been praying all the afternoon, “Oh, my God, may 
the Spirit come to my brother!’ Dear friends, let us ask each 
other to-day, “ Where art thou?” Resisting earnest, trembling 
prayers of some loving mother, of some loving wife—trampling 
them under-foot? Now, be honest. Have I not been talking to 
many in this audience who made promises five, ten, fifteen, twenty 
years ago—who made a promise to serve Him? Those promises 
have faded away, and those five, ten, fifteen, twenty years have 
rolled on and you are no nearer. Oh, sinner, where art thou? Are 
you making light of all offers of mercy? Are you turning your 
back and ridiculing Him and laughing at Him? If you are, may 
He, the God of mercy, arrest you and have mercy on your soul and 
save you. The last three years have been the most solemn years of 
my life. A man’s life is just like going up and downahill. If I 
live the allotted time, I am going down the hill. Many of you are 
on the top of the hill and are not saved. Suppose you pause a 
moment and look down the hill on the road from whence you came 
—look back toward the cradle. Don’t you remember that the 
sermons you heard ten or fifteen years ago moved you? You 
say, when you look back at those times, “ We used to have good 
sermons, better and more carnest ministers than now.” Don’t you 
make any mistake. The Gospel is the same as it was then, as pow- 
erful to-day as ever. The fault is not with the ministers or the 
Gospel; it is with yourself; your heart has become hard. Then, as 
you look down into the valley, don’t you see a little mound anda 
tombstcne? It marks the resting-place of a loving father, or a 


60 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


loving mother. Ten years ago you had a praying mother. Every 
morning and evening she went down on her knees in her closet and 
prayed for you. Her prayers are ended now, and yet you are not 
saved. It may be, as you look down the stream of time, you see a 
little grave that marks the resting-place of your child. It may be 
tha: child took you by the hand, and asked you, “ Will you meet 
me in that land?” And you promised her that you would meet her 
there. As you looked down into that little grave and heard the 
damp, cold earth falling down, you repeated that promise. Five, 
ten, fifteen years ago you promised this; have you kept it? Some 
of you are far down the hill and hastening to judgment. May God 
open your eyes to-day as you look back upon your lives and look 
into the future. It may be that you will live the allotted time, but 
the end is soonto come. The average age is thirty-three years. 
There are a number of you in this hall this afternoon who will be 
in eternity inside of thirty days. Ask yourselves where you are; 
resisting the offer of mercy, turning back the offer of God. May 
the loving God show you the Saviour standing at the door of your 
heart, and knocking and telling you He wants to come in and save 
you. 

In London, when I was there in 1867, I was told a story which 
made a very deep impression upon me. A young French noble- 
man came there to see a doctor, bringing letters from the French 
Emperor. The Emperor Napoleon III. had a great regard for this 
young man, and the doctor wanted to save him. He examined the 
young man, and saw there was something upon his mind. ‘“ Have 
you lost any property? What is troubling: you? You have some. 
thing weighing upon your mind,” said the doctor. ‘Oh, there is 
nothing particular.” “I know better; have you lost any rela- 
tions?” asked the doctor. ‘No, none within the last three years.” 
“Have you lost any reputation in your country?” “No.” The 
doctor studied for a few minutes, and then said, “ I must know what 
is on your mind; I must know what is troubling you.” And the 
young man said, “ My father was an infidel; my grandfather was 
an infidel, and I was brought up an infidel, and for the last three 
years these words have haunted me, ‘Eternity, and where shall it 
find me?’” “ Ah,” said the doctor, “you have come to the wrong 
physician.” “Is there no hope for me?” cried the young man. 
“T walk about in the daytime; I lie down at night, and it comes 
upon me continually ; ‘ Eternity, and where shall I spend it?’ Tell 


ERS, 


fer. Every 
r closet and 
you are not 
rf, you see a 
It may be 
you meet 
d meet her 
heard the 
hise. Five, 
it? Some 
May God 
‘ts and look 
d time, but 
hree years, 
vho will be 
e you are; 
30d. May 
or of your 
n and save 


tory which 
nch noble- 
the French 
itd for this 
amined the 
d. “ Have 
have some. 
Yh, there is 
any rela- 
ree years.” 
No.” The 
know what 
And the 
father was 
last three 
ere shall it 
the wrong 
Dung man. 
1 it comes 
dit?’ Tell 


A STARTLING QUESTION. 61 


me, is there any hope for me?” The doctor said: “ Now just sit 
down and be quiet. A few years ago I was an infidel. I did not 
believe in God, and was in the same condition in which you are.” 
The doctor took down his Bible and turned to the fifty-third 
chapter of Isaiah and read: “ He was wounded for our transgres- 
sions; He was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our 
peace was upon Him, and with His stripes we are healed.” And 
he read on through this chapter. When he had finished, the young 
man said: “Do you believe this, that He voluntarily left Heaven, 
came down to this earth, and suffered and died that we might be 
saved?” ‘Yes, I believe it. That brought me out of infidelity, out 
of darkness into light.” And he preached Christ and His salvation 
and told him of Heaven, and then suggested that they get down 
on their knees and pray. And when I went there in 1867 a letter 
had been received from that young nobleman, who wrote to Dr. 
Whinston in London, telling him that question of “eternity, and 
where he should spend it,” was settled and troubled him no more. 
My friends, this question of eternity, and where we are going to 
spend it, forces itself upon every one of us. We are staying here for 
alittle day. Our life is but a fibre, and it will soon be snapped. I 
may be preaching my last sermon. To-night may find me in 
eternity. By the grace of God say that you will spend it in Heaven. 
All the hosts of hell can not hinder you if you make up your mind 
to come to Heaven, because if God says, “ Let him come,” who can 
resist you? If that little child sitting yonder says it will enter 
Heaven, all the hosts of hell can not keep it out. May God help 
you to spend your eternity in Heaven, and may jou say: “ By the 
grace of God I accept Jesus as my Redeemer.” 


VII. 


CHRIST SEEKING THE LOST. 


LUKE xix, 10: “ Forthe Sonof Manis come toseek and to save that which was lost.” 


WANT you to get the text in your memory to-night. It is 

very short, and you may forget all about the sermon, but this 

text is sweet enough to save every soul here to-night that wants 
to be saved; just in that little short sentence He tells us what He 
came to the world for. “le came to seek and to save that which 
was lost.” I very often meet people that say they are seeking to 
be saved, and they are seeking Christ and can’t find Him. Now 
there is a great mistake there. We just want to reverse it. There 
is not a man or woman in the hearing of my voice to-night but 
Christ has sought long and often for. He takes the place of the 
first seeker. There is not a redeemed soul in Heaven that first 
sought God. God came down after Adam. After he had trans- 
gressed and sinned, he ought to have taken the place of the seeker; 
but instead of that, we find God coming right down that very day 
and calling to him. It was the voice of grace and mercy that rung 
through the garden of Eden: “ Adam, where art thou?” and from 
that to the present time He is seeking after sinners. He seeks you 
to-night, my friends. I don’t know who you are, but He knows 
you and has sought you often, and is seeking you again to-night. 
That parable we have just read tells of a shepherd who had a hun- 
dred sheep. We are told by Eastern travelers that it is the custom 
for the sheep when being counted at night to pass under the rod. 
I can see the shepherd bringing them back to the fold. He counts 
them, “one, two, three,” and so on till he gets to ninety-nine. He 
says, “I must have made a mistake in counting them.” So he 
counts them over the second time. He then says, “I am afraid I 
Nave lost one.” So the third time he counts them, and sees that 
one is lost. Now he goes out and seeks it. It don’t say that the 
(62) 


ich was lost.” 


ight. It is 
n, but this 
that wants 
; what He 
that which 
seeking to 
lim. Now 
it. There 
-night but 
lace of the 

that first 
had trans- 
he seeker; 
t very day 
r that rung 

and from 
seeks you 
He knows 

to-night. 
had a hun- 
he custom 
r the rod. 
He counts 
nine. He 
.”’ So he 
m afraid I 

sees that 
y that the 


CHRIST SEEKING THE LOST. 63 
sheep sought the shepherd, but the shepherd sought the sheep, 
and sought till he found it. This illustrates the truth that our 
Saviour came into the world to seek and to save the lost. And 
again, take the other parable. A woman has ten pieces of silver. 
She had got the money, perhaps, for some butter she sold. When 
night comes and she’s about to retire to rest, she says, “I'll put 
away that money.” She counts it over and finds only nine pieccs. 
She counts it over the second time and the third time, and says, 
“Why, I must have lost one piece. Where have I been? I have 
only been around the house since I got it!” I can see her with the 
broom, sweeping every corner of the room and shaking the furni- 
ture upside down trying to get it. Now, all the time it was the 
woman seeking the money. The parable teaches this great truth 
that Christ Himself takes the place of the seeker. In this fifteenth 
chapter of Luke, we find the Pharisees murmuring because He re- 
ceived and ate with publicans and sinners. These sinners found 
something in His preaching which would help them. They knew 
they were sinners and wanted to get rid of their sins, and Christ 
showed them how they could roll them into the sea of forgetfulness. 
They liked that kind of preaching, but the Pharisees objected. Oh, 
it would have been a good thing if they had all died out in that gen- 
eration. I am sorry to say there’s a good many of them living now. 
They don’t like this Gospel. They don’t like to take up the poor 
drunkard, and gambler, and put his feet on the rock. Thanks be to 
God, the good old Gospel has got the same power to-day. The 
great trouble we have is to make men believe they are lost. 
I was talking to a drunkard the other day. He said: ‘Oh, 
I’m not so bad after all. I can stop drinking when I have a 
mind to.” Oh, how sweet to speak to men who wake up to 
the fact that they are lost. How delightful to offer them a 
Saviour. The great trouble is, people are drawing their misera- 
ble rags of self-righteousness about them and don’t really believe 
they are lost. Now take the surroundings of this text. A few 
days before, > man came down from Jerusalem to Jericho, anda 
blind man in Jericho asks him for a farthing. He told the blind 
man he knew of one who could cure him. “ My friend,” says the 
blind man, “He can’t cure me, Iwas born blind.” “ Well,” said 
the other, “I have just come down from Jerusalem and I saw aman 
that was born blind, and I don’t know any man that has got better 
eyes than he has.” “How is that?” says Bartimeus. ‘ Why,” 


54 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


said the man, “Jesus of Nazareth happened to be in Jerusaiem, 
and He said He was the light of the world. He came to this blind 
man and just took clay and spit on it and anointed his eyes and 
sent him off to the pool of Siloam, and while he was washing he 
got two good eyes.” “ Well, I'll go to Jerusalem,” says Bartimeus. 
“You needn’t go to Jerusalem at all, He’s coming here; and when 
He comes, you just ask Him and He'll give you your sight.” 
“What does He charge?” says Bartimeus. ‘Why, He don't 
charge anything, you can just go and ask Him. You don’t need 
any bishops, priests, or potentates, He'll cure you if you ask Him.” 
“Well, then, if he comes this way I'll ask Him.” Only the day 
after, as he was Ict out, perhaps by a faithful dog or his little son, 
and as he was crying out for a farthing, all at once he hears the 
footsteps of a great crowd. ‘Who is coming?” he cries out. I 
fancy he gets no answer. Again he cries out, and they tell him 
“Jesus of Nazareth is passing by.”” He was not ashamed of pray- 
ing for what he wanted. Oh, how many in Chicago are afraid to 
cry to the God of Heaven to take away their sins; but Bartimeus 
began to pray, “ Jesus, Thou Son of David, have mercy on me.” 
Some one in advance cried that He would not be disturbed on 
account of a poor blind beggar. “ Hush,” says he, “don’t disturb 
the Master. Bartimeus was not going to be put off in that way, 
but cricd the more—‘ Thou Son of David, have mercy on me.” 
My friends, Christ would hush every harp in Heaven to hear a poor 
sinner pray. He stopped, and commanded them to go and fetch 
him. Ah, Christ was seeking after the lost. He came to Jericho 
to seek after the lost. The disciples now said: “ Be of good cheer, 
the Master calleth for thee,” and, my friends, if God calls you, He 
has something good for you. So they take him by the hand and 
lead him up to the Son of God. I see a great crowd now. They 
gather closer and closer. Every eye is fixed upon Him. “ What 
can I do for you?” the Lord says. “Lord, that I may receive my 
sight.” “You have got it,” was the reply. No sooner did the 
prayer reach the ears of the Son of God than the answer came. 
I'd like to have been beside that poor blind beggar then. The first 
object that met his gaze was the Son of God Himself. I can 
imagine he could then sing sweeter than Mr. Sankey; for who can 
sing swecter thn a redeemed soul? Perhaps you would call 
him a Methodist nowadays—no one could shout louder than he. 
I can just imagine he said: “I'd like to step down to yonder street 


Ss 


erusaiem, 
this blind 
eyes and 
hing he 
Jartimeus. 
and when 
ir sight.” 
He don't 
lon’t need 
isk Him.” 
r the day 
little son, 
hears the 
es out. I 
y tell him 
d of pray- 
afraid to 
Bartimeus 
yon me.” 
turbed on 
’t disturb 
that way, 
on me.” 
ear a poor 
and fetch 
to Jericho 
ood cheer, 
s you, He 
hand and 
bw. They 
. “What 
eceive my 
r did the 
wer came, 
The first 
lf. I can 
br who can 
ould call 
than he. 
der street 


CHRIST SEEKING THE LOST, 65 


and see my family. I never saw the wife of my bosom, or my 
mother, or my children.’”’ As he goes along down the street, I can 
just imagine he meets quite a prominent man—a great politician, 
a man that has much influence—is the Lord Mayor of Jericho, 
Isuppose. Ashe passes he turns around and says: “ Bartimeus, 
is that you?” “Yes, that’s me.” ‘Where did you get these 
eyes?” “TI asked Jesus of Nazareth to have mercy on me.” 
“Why, is Jesus of Nazareth near here?” “ He's in Jericho.” I can 
just imagine the man says: “I have heard a great deal of Him, 
and I’d like to see Him.” He was not a very tall man. I can see 
him on tiptoe trying to get a glimpse of the stranger. I can imagine 
he runs along outside df the crowd toward a sycamore tree, and 
says: “If I can just get up in that tree, He can’t get by without 
my secing Him.” Ihave no doubt but it was idle curiosity that 
took him up there. There he is—his eyes fixed on that eastern gate, 
and all at once the crowds come bursting out. He looks and gets 
a glimpse of all of them. He sees Peter, and says, “ That’s not 
Him.” He looks at John; “That’s not Him.” By and by he 
looks at one who is fairer than the sons of men, and he says, 
“That’s Him.” The crowd go sweeping by, but his eye is fixed 
on the Master until He gets right under him. Then He steps. 
There is a poor lost one up in that tree, one of Adam’s degenerate 
sons, a chief publican of Jericho. He says: “ Zaccheus, come 
down.” Zaccheus wondered how He knew his name, but he knew 
all about him. He had come to seek and to save the lost one. He 
received the J.ord joyfully. Now, there are a great many people 
who do not believe in sudden conversions. Tell me when Zac- 
cheus was converted. He must have been converted between the 
branches and the ground. But a class of men say: “ Well, if 
people are converted suddenly they won't hold out.” Well, I wish 
we had a few Zaccheuses in Chicago. To those he had wronged 
he made restitution by returning them four-fold. By going to his 
house the Lord wanted to show those Pharisees that “ He had 
come to seek and to save that which was lost.” 

It made a great stir in Jericho. The people said, “ There is a true 
disciple.” It was like a flashing meteor; and how sudden it was. 
You must remember one thing; if you don’t give half your goods to 
the poor, you must make restitution. If you have lied about a man, 
if you have slandered a man, if you have abused a man, go and tell 
him that you have done him an injustice; go and make a restitution. 


5 


SS 


66 MOCDY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


I felt much encouraged last night; a man came into the inquiry 
room and said: “ Mr. Moody, I want you to forgive me.” “ Why,’ 
said I, “I have nothing to forgive you for; I never met you be: 
fore.” “ Well,” said the man, “I have been abusing you for about 
ayear. I was here last night and I got converted, and I want to ask 
your forgiveness.” He had been abusing me and slandering me, 
and had been talking about something he didn’t know anything 
about. There was aman who said about restitution: “ There is a 
shoe-maker’s bill I have been owing, and I have owed it for nine 
years.” So he went round next day and paid it. The shoe-maker 
said, “ Well, I believe in those kind of meetings now.” He didn’t 
believe in them before. What we want is to have men become dis- 
ciples of Jesus Christ. I may be speaking to some clerk to-night 
who has taken money from his employer falsely. It may be that he 
has covered up his track, and no one knows it but the all-seeing eye 
of Ged. But you can’t look up, and you can’t have the sympathies 
of God, and you can’t be converted unless you make restitution, It 
may be that you have squandered the money and can’t make resti- 
tution; but go right to that man you have injured and confess it. 
There was a man who had robbed his employer of $500, and the 
Spirit of God aroused him, and he went to one of our ministers and 
told the story. He wanted to become a Christian, but there was 
the $500 right in his mina all the while. ‘ Well,” said the minister, 
“your path is very clear; you must pay back the money.” “ But,” 
said the man, “I can’t pay it back.” “Then,” said the minister, 
“you must go back to your employer and confess it.” But the man 
said, “ My employer is a hard-hearted man, and if I confess it he will 
put me in prison.” And the man couldn’t do it, he thought. 
“Well,” said the minister, “I will go and see your employer.” 
And he went ito the office of the man and told the story. 
“Now,” said the minister, ‘“ I have reason to believe that that man has 
been converted of his sin. I believe, if you will forgive it, and if 
you give him a chance, you may save the soul of the man, and he 
will work and pay back the money.” The man said, “ He shall 
never heara word from me,” and the result is that the clerk has now 
become a joyful Christian. And so, if you want to become follow- 
ers of the Lord Jesus Christ, you must make restitution. Zaccheus 
made restitution. Hewent into his office and made out a check for 
neighbor So-and-so, and for neighbor So, for $100, and then sent his 
clerk around and offered and urged these different men to take this 


RS. 


e inquiry 
“Why, 
t you be: 
for about 
ant to ask 
lering me, 
anything 
There is a 
t for nine 
hoe-maker 
He didn’t 
ecome dis- 
¢ to-night 
be that he 
seeing eye 
sympathies 
itution. It 
nake resti- 
confess it. 
yo, and the 
nisters and 
there was 
e minister, 
» Oe Rut,” 
le minister, 
ut the man 
ks it he will 
thought. 
>mployer.” 
the story. 
at man has 
it, and if 
an, and he 
“ He shall 
rk has now 
me follow- 
Zaccheus 
a check for 
hen sent his 
o take this 


CHRIST SEEKING THE LOST. 67 


money; and do you think these men that had been robbed thought 
his conversion wasn’t genuine? He paid back not only what he had 
taken, but he restored them four-fold. Do you think those men 
didn’t have confidence in Zaccheus? There wasn’t a man in all 
Jericho that didn’t believe in his conversion. I can imagine a man 
saying, “ Your master didn’t owe me anything.” But the clerk 
answers, “ My master told me to tell you that he had taxed you too 
much.” What a smile came over his face. ‘What has come over 
this man? There was a time when he was unreasonable. He is 
giving money to the poor, and he is making restitution; that is a 
genuine conversion !” That is an evidence of a man who had the 
Son of God. That is an evidence of the Son of God breathing life 
into a man’s soul. 

If we could only get the confession of a man that he is lost, it 
wouldn't be long before he is saved. Ifa man ain’t lost, why has he 
need of a Saviour? But oh, how refreshing it is to find one who 
will admit that he is lost. If you will admit that you are a sinner, I 
can tell you there’s One mighty to save—One who came to save 
sinners. I was invited to preach in the Tombs a few years ago. I 
supposed there was a chapel, as there are in most of our prisons, in 
which the prisoners would be gathered for me to talk to them. But 
I found they were in their cells, and I had to speak to them there. 
There were two tiers of cells above me, one below, and one on a 
level with me. There were three or four hundred prisoners, but I 
couldn’t see a face; it seemed as if I were talking to a wall, or to 
the air. And when I got through I thought I'd like to see who and 
what I had been talking to. When I looked in the first cell, I saw 
the prisoners playing cards, and I said, “ How is it with you?” 
And they hesitated, and then said there had been false witnesses in 
the case, and they ought not to be there. In the second cell, when 
I spoke to them they said, “ Well, we'll tell you, Chaplain, we got 
into bad company, and those that were with us got away, and we 
got caught. We hadn’t done anything wrong.” And the prisoner 
in the next cell had an excuse: “ The man that did it looked just 
like me, but they took me for him although I am innocent.” And 
in the next cell they hadn’t had their trial yet, but next Sunday 
they would be out. So I went from cell to cell, and I never found 
so many innocent men in one day in my life The only guilty ones, 
they said, were the officers who put them there. So you say to- 
night, “I’m not lost, but the man in the seat next behind me is.” 


a 


58 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA\’EK§. 


You are drawing the rags of self-righteousness around you, and 
think you are not bad. But God says, “ He that breaks the least of 
these commandments is guilty of all.” If you were taken away, 
what would become of your soul? Every soul that is not born of 
God shall be lost for time and eternity. Don’t let the infidels make 
you believe you are all right. Well, I went on through the cells, 
and at last in one I saw a man sitting with his head resting on his 
hands, and I could see tears falling from his eyes. How refreshing 
it was to see that. I asked him what his trouble was. He said, 
‘“‘ My sins are greater than I can bear.” And I said, “ Thank God for 
that!’’ And he said, ‘Thank God for that? Ain’t you the man’s 
that’s been preaching to us?” “Yes,” I said, “I am your friend, 
and I am glad you feel your sins.” ‘ Well,” he says, “you are a 
queer friend.” And I said, “If your sins are more than you can 
bear, you can cast them on One who is able to bear them. I’ve 
been hunting for you for 2 long time.” ‘ What?” he says, “ hunt- 
ing for me?” AndI said: “You are lost, and I am glad I have 
found one man who will admit that he is lost.” And I preached 
Christ to him. I told him of Him who came to seek and save the 
lost, who came to open the prison doors and set the captive free, 
‘who gives life, and light, and peace, and joy. I must have talked to 
‘chim for half an hour, and then 1 said I would pray with him. So we 
‘knelt down, I on the outside and he on the inside. And after I had 
‘prayed I said: “ Now, you pray.” And he said it would be blas- 
phemy tor him to pray. But I told him that the blood of Jesus 
‘Christ cleansed from all sin, and he bowed his head down to the 
floor, and could only say without so much as lifting his eyes toward 
Heaven, “ God be merciful to me, a poor, miserable wretch.” No 
man sends up such a cry that God doesn’t hear him. And I put my 
hand through the little window and I felt a tear drop on it; and I 
said, “I'll be praying for you to-night, between 9 and Io o'clock, at 
the hotel, and I want you to meet me at the Throne of Grace.” 
That night it seemed as if the Spirit of God came upon me. I went 
to see him next morning and the moment my eyes rested on him, I 
saw a great change. Remorse and despair were gone, and the light 
‘from yon world had come upon him. He seemed to me to be the 
happiest man in New York. He said, “I thought I could never 
‘bear to see my old friends, but God came and set my soul free. I 
think it was about midnight, I cried and He heard me, and I am 


(happy ” 


KS. 


| you, and 
he least of 
ken away, 
ot born of 
fidels make 
1 the cells, 
ting on his 
refreshing 
He said, 
ink God for 
1 the man’s 
our friend, 
‘you are a 
an you can 
them. I’ve 
ays, “ hunt- 
slad I have 
I preached 
nd save the 
captive free, 
ve talked to 
1im. So we 
| after I had 
ld be blas- 
od of Jesus 
own to the 
eyes toward 
retch.” No 
d I put my 
nit; and I 
0 o'clock, at 
of Grace.” 
me. I went 
d on him, I 
nd the light 
me to be the 
could never 
boul free. I 
e, and I am 


CHRIST SEEKING THE LOST. 


69 


Do you see why Christ came to that one captive? It was because 
he took his place among lost sinners. O, sinner, cry, “ Thou Son of 
David, have mercy upon me.” Take your place among the lost. 
Let the cry go up from every soul—‘ Be merciful to me a sinner.” 
Don’t you want to be saved? Won’t all the Christians unite in the 
prayer that God would save every lost soul? I want to say a word 
to the lost—and I mean all the sinners who have not been converted 
While the Christians pray, close your eyes and lift up your hearts to 
God and ask Him to have mercy. These are solemn days. I never 
felt more power than in the meeting last night. God is near us, and 
His Spirit is here to-night. He is answering the prayers of the 
Christians of Chicago. I believe the answer is come, and God is 
moving mightily in this city. Young men and young women, don’t 
laugh at your praying friends who are anxious for your souls. If you 
have friends who pray and weep for you, treat them kindly. They 
are worth more to you than is the world. Go home and tell your 
anxious mother that you are saved, and make her heart glad that 
her God has become yours. 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we pray Thee that Thy blessing may rest 
on every letter that shall be written to-day in Thy na.ae, to some 
brother, to some friend, to some child, to some sister. May the 
Spirit of God accompany these letters. May they bring many to 
Christ And now, may great grace be upon all men. Amen. 


IX. 
4 | LOST AND SAVED. 7 


LUKE xix. 10: ‘ For the Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was 
lost.”" 


GREAT many people te) vou, “1 will become a Christian 

when Christ comes and sees tie.” I was talking to a gray- 

haired man, 55 years of age, in my ©: ‘ve town not long ago, 
who, when I spoke to him about his soul, suggested that he would 
become a Christian when the Lord Jesus Christ came to him. He 
was waiting till He hunted him personally. And there is a class 
like him in every community. What more would you like Him to 
do for you—what more than He has done already? I would like 
to ask you just what you would like God to do more for us. He 
sent to us the prophets and we murdered them. He sent down His 
Son from heaven, who was sacrificed by us, and then He sent us the 
Holy Ghost, who has been in the world for the last 1,800 years, to 
try and give us peace and happiness. Would you like Him to send 
His Son again to earth to suffer for your sins? My dear friends, what 
are you waiting for more? He has been looking for you and hunt- 
ae 
| 


ing for you from your cradle, and I would just like to tell you how 
He seeks. There was never a sermon which you have listened to 
but in it the Lord was seeking for you. That is one way. Some 
of you might have been asleep while the preaching has been going 
on, but He has been seeking you while asleep. Have not some of 4 
you heard a sermon in which you were offered asa sinner to the a 
Lord Jesus Christ, and your conscience was troubled? You went 
away, but you came back again, and the Spirit of God came upon 
you again and again, and you were troubled. Haven’t you passed 
through that experience? Don’t you remember something like 
iy that happening to you? That was the Son of God seeking for 

your soul. You might have had atract presented to you. You 

might have turned it off. It might have been headed with this text. 
(70) 


which was 


Christian 
fo a gray- 
long ago, 
he would 
him. He 
is a Class 
e Him to 
‘ould like 
rus. He 
down His 
ent us the 
years, to 
Im to send 
bnds, what 
and hunt- 
you how 
stened to 
y. Some 
een going 
t some of 
er to the 
You went 
ame upon 
ou passed 
hing like 
eking for 
ou. You 
) this text. 


* 


; 
: 


} 
5 


ty 


LOST AND SAVED. 71 


That was the Son of God seeking for your soul. He has used a 
four-page tract—sometimes just one page-—to seek to convert a 
man, and he is seeking through the Bible. I contend that a man 
can not but find in every page of this book that He is seeking him 
through His blessed Word. This is what the Bible is for—to seck 


out the! st. He seeks them (through His works; He seeks them 
through ese ministers; through this building. What is this build- 


ing for? Why, that you may come and |.y your sins right in this 
Tabernac:¢—here where Christ is seeking for your souls. Do you 
think that the devil put it into the heads of those business men, in 
those times of great ¢ »miiiercial depression, to put this building up? 
Do you think Satan put it into their heads? It has not been put 
up to catch you: money—no collection has been taken up as yet. 
It is not your money we are after: it is to catch your soul. Do 
you believe that i! was Satan who put it into the hearts of those 
ministers to preac’: the Word, and to come here night after nigh 
Do you believe :hat was the devil’s work? It is the Son of }’1n 
secking for your souls. And this building and these crowds of .e 
ple ought to act asa reminder and a warning to every mau and 
woman walking these streets. This is another way He seeks you. 
Many of you in the silent midnight hour have been troublec vou 
could not sleep and your reason has been at work, and the Son of 
Man has come into that chamber, and you have felt Him knocking 
at the door of your hearts, and you knew it was just to save you. 
Many of you have passed through that experience. I: that hour 
the Son of God has sought you. Many of you have gone into the 
sick-chamber of the loved mother, or loved wife, or dear child, and 
you have felt the knock at your heart. You have been summoned 
from your room in the stillness of the night, and you have been 
told your loved ones have passed away—many of you recollect an 
incident like this in your lives. At that moment your heart has 
told you you ought to be a Christian. That was the Son of Man’ 
who sought you. At the grave of some lost one, too, you have 
heard a voice whispering, ‘‘ Consecrate yourself to Him.” That was 
the Son of God seeking you. Many of you must have experienced 
this. There has not been a day in your lives that He has not sought 
for you, and He still seeks for you. 

Now, forget fora moment the preacher, forget for a moment all 
your surroundings, and pause to ask yourselves this question: “ Has 
not the Son of Man sought for my soul?” I will tell you again 


72 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


when He seeks for you. He seeks for you when He is abroad in 
the community. Has not the Son of Man been abroad in this com- 
munity? Go up to Farwell Hall and see the crowds of people who 
go there every day; look at the multitudes that nightly assemble 
here. They don’t all come to hear Mr. Sankey sing, for there are 
many better singers in Chicago. It isnot to hear me preach, for 
there are many far better preachers in the city. It is the Spirit of 
God that brings them. Many of you in your experience have, while 
in church listening to the preaching, got mad at something said in 
the sermon, which you thought very personal, and have gone out. 
That was the Son of Man seeking your soul. 

I remember, while in Philadelphia, a man with his wife came to 
our meetings. When he went out he wouldn’t speak to his wife. 
She thought it was very queer, but said nothing, and went to bed 
thinking that in the morning he would be all right. At breakfast, 
however, he would not speak a word. Well, she thought this 
strange, but she was sure he would have got all over whatever was 
wrong with him by dinner. The dinner hour arrived, and it passed 
away without his saying a word. At supper not a word escaped 
him, and he would not go with her to the mecting. Every day for 
a whole week the same thing went on. But at the end of the 
week he could not stand it any longer, and he said to his wife: 
“Why did you go and write to Mr. Moody and tell him all about 
me?” “TI never wrote to Mr. Moody in my life,” said the wife. 
“You did,’ he answered. ‘“ You’re mistaken; why do you think 
that?” “Well, then, I wronged you; but when I saw Mr. Moody 
picking me out among all those people, and telling all about me, I 
was sure you must have written to him.” It was the Son of Man 
seeking for him, my friends, and I hope there will be a man here to- 
night—that man in the gallery yonder, that one before me—who 
will feel that I am talking personally to him. May you feel that 
you are lost, and that the Lord is seeking for you, and when you 
feel this, there will be some chance of your being saved. 

When I was taking my family South last summer, I heard of a 
man who would not go to church, but would go toatheatre. He 
was a hard case—he was a drinking, swearing, gambling man. He 
heard that a minister was going to preach in a theatre, and he went. 
When he heard the preacher talking, the man was convinced that he 
was preaching at him, and he went out swearing and stamping, and 
told all the people outside that he had been insulted by the minis- 


RS, 


; abroad in 
1 this com- 
xeople who 
y assemble 
- there are 
preach, for 
eC Spirit of 
have, while 
ing said in 
> gone out, 


ife came to 
to his wife. 
ent to bed 
- breakfast, 
ought this 
latever was 
id it passed 
rd escaped 
ery day for 
nd of the 
» his wife: 
m all about 
1 the wife. 
you think 
fr. Moody 
bout me, I 
on of Man 
an here to- 

me—who 

feel that 
when you 


1eard of a 
patre. He 
man. Fle 

he went. 
d that he 
ping, and 
the minis- 


LOST AND SAVED. 73 


ter, and he intended to wait for him and give him a good licking. 
When the minister came out he was seized by the collar, and the 
man greeted him by saying, “ Why, sir, you have insulted me!” 
“JT don’t know you, sir,’ said the minister. “ Why,” replied the 
man, “you have picked me out among all those people, and told 
them all about me.” It was the Spirit of God seeking him, and the 
result was that the Spirit got hold of him, and lately I heard of 
him, and he was going all through the South, telling the people 
what God had done for him. And, my friends, to-night, if you be- 
lieve that anything I am saying applies to you personally—if you 
feel in your hearts that you are a great sinner, it is the Son of God 
who is after you—who is secking for your lost soul. 

There is one word in this text I wish you to observe, and that is 
the word “lost.” I wish you could realize its meaning thoroughly. 
If it was really understood I don’t think there would be a dry eye 
in this assembly, and one wail would go up from this hall to Heaven. 
You pity men who have lost wealth; you pity men who have lost 
goods in the Chicago fire; you pity men who, once wealthy, are 
now almost starving. Such things naturally excite our sympathy. 
But what is all this loss of wealth to the loss of the soul? You 
pity the men who once occupied a great position in the world and 
who are now reduced to beggary—your heart goes out to those un- 
fortunate men. But what is the loss of position in comparison to 
the loss of the soul? If a man loses wealth, character, reputation 
in the world, he may gain it again; but oh, friends, if he loses his 
soul he can never regain it. You pity those who have lost their 
children. You have, perhaps, been called to a funeral to-day where 
the father and mother have been laying away their little child. 
You pity them; it is a terrible loss. But what is that loss in com- 
parison to the loss of the soul? A little child born and taken into 
the loving bosom of Jesus is far better off than to have been reared 
and run the risk of losing its soul. 

I was in an infirmary not long since, and a mother brought a lit- 
tle child in. She said, ‘ Doctor, my little child’s eyes have not been 
opened for several days, and I would just like you to do something 
for them.” The doctor got some ointment and put it first on one 
and then on the other, and just pulled them open. ‘ Your child is 
blind,” said the doctor; “perfectly blind; it will never see again.” 
At first the mother couldn’t take it in, but after a little she cast an 
appealing look upon that physician, and in a voice full of emotion, 


74 MOOD \"S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


said, “ Doctor, you don’t mean to say that my child will never see 
again? ’ “Yes,” replied the doctor, “ your child has lost its sight, 
and it will never see again.” And that mother just gave a scream, 
and drew that child to her bosom. “Oh, my darling child,” sobbed 
the woman, “are you never to sce the mother that gave you birth ? 
never to see the world again?” I could not keep back the tears 
when I saw the terrible agony of that woman when she realized the 
misfortune that had come upon her child. That was a terrible 
calamity, to grope in total darkness through the world; never to 
look upon the bright sky, the green fields; never to see the faces 
of loved ones; but what was it in comparison to the loss of a soul? 
I would rather have my eyes plucked out of my head, and go down 
to my grave in total blindness, than lose my soul. 

In my native town, one afternoon a man went out to see to his 
stock. Seven o'clock came and he did not return; eight o'clock 
came and there was no sign of him; nine o'clock came and still he 
did not come. It was a dark night, and the news spread through 
the streets that the deacon must have been killed. When the news 
was flashed around they did not fold their arms and say they would 
wait till daylight and start out and seek for him; but the old and the 
young men saddled their horses instantly, and lighted their torches, 
and went forth into the darkness to find the lost one. They found 
him in the pasture, killed, and brought him into the little village, 
and I never saw a community so excited and so grieved. But what 
was that—the cutting from a man’s life of say twenty years—to the 
loss of a soul? The whole village mourned over the deacon’s 
death. A drunkard may go on through life in his mad career and 
go down to the grave, and no one will weep for him. His life is 
one long day of misery. None care for him while living, and none 
notice his ending. He came to save that soul; He stooped from 
the throne of glory to the manger to bring that lost soul back 
again. Oh, that you could realize what a lost soul is. He wants 
you to take the title of lost sinner. That’s what he wants you to 
do. “He came to seek and to save that which was lost ;” and if a 
man will only know he is a sinner, and cry from the depths of his 
heart, the Lord will come right to where you are. 

Mr. Needham told me, this afternoon, a little incident that hap. 
pened to himself and wife while in Massachusetts. While at Essex, 
in that State, some one told him that if they went up to a point on 
a mountain they would get a view of the country for twenty miles 


RS, 


1 never see 
st its sight, 
e a scream, 
ld,” sobbed 
you birth ? 
k the tears 
‘ealized the 
_a terrible 
'; never to 
> the faces 
s of a soul? 
id go down 


see to his 
oht o'clock 
ind still he 
id through 
n the news 
they would 
old and the 
eir torches, 
hey found 
tle village, 

But what 
hrs—to the 
e deacon’s 
career and 
His life is 
and none 
ped from 
soul back 
He wants 
its you to 
and if a 
ths of his 


that hap. 
at [ssex, 
A point on 
onty miles 


LOST AND SAVED. 75 


around. They went up to the rock, and came down, and started 
for home. They got out of their path, but they treated this 
lightly—thought it was a good joke, and went on laughing. I 
suppose if any one had come and warned them of danger they 
would not have heeded the warning. But they went on, and six 
o'clock came, and at last darkness settled down upo: them, and 
there they were in the wilderness, and they found they had lost 
their road altogether. For some time they groped their way 
through the woods, the darkness growing deeper and deeper, but 
only found themselves more and more bewildered. At last he got 
to the top of a tree and shouted, “ Lost! lost!” and his cry of dis- 
tress reached the villagers, who came out with their lanterns and 
torches and rescued them. Oh, that some poor soul will feel that 
he has wandered out of the true pathway and will cry, “ Lost! 
lost!” and the Lord Jesus will hear you and come right down to 
where you sit. He is looking for you, and if there is one here who 
has got into the wilderness, but let Him hear your cry and He will 
find you. He came to this earth expressly to rescue you. Is there 
a poor drunkard here to-night who wants to come? He can save a 
drunkard just as easy as I can turn my hand. He can turn that 
cup of liquor from you as easy as you turn to it now. Is there a 
poor libertine here to-night who wants to curb his evil passions ? 
He can save you. Oh, may the Son of Man find some poor victim 
here to-night, and there will be joy in Heaven over that poor wan- 
derer who shall come home. 

I remember while in a town East at the time of the loss of the 
Atlantic on the banks of Newfoundland there was a business man 
in the town who was reported lost. His store was closed, and all 
his friends mourned him as among those who went down on that 
vessel. But a telegram was received from him by his partner with 
the word “ Saved,” and that partner was filled with joy. The store 
was opened and the telegram was framed, and if you go into that 
store to-day you will see that little bit of paper hanging on the 
wall, with the word “Say d” upon it. Let the news go over the 
wires to Heaven to-night from you. Let that word “Saved” go 
from every one of you, and there will be joy in Heaven. You can 
be saved—the Son of Man wants to save you; it will refiesh the 
heart of the Son of God to-night. He wants to save every soul 
within these walls—every one who is willing to be saved. 

There was among those who came to our meetings in New York 


pit 


76 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


a man who used to come every night, and he never seemed to get 
any light—never seemed to come any nearer God. I almost got 
tired of sp saking with him at last. But one night when some young 
men were giving their experiences he got up. I wondered what he 
got up for, because the very last time I spoke to him he seemed 
more hopeless thanever. He got up and he told how he had become 
a Christian. He said one day he was walking down Broadway ; 
the street was crowded with people and carriages and horses, and 
while he was thinking, this thought came to him, that if he only 
gave his consent the Lord would save him, and he gave it at once, 
and it was accepted. He was, too, one of the most hopeless cases 
in the city. But give your consent and let the Lord save you in 
His own way. Give your consent and He will meet you. Just 
say, ‘ Oh, Lord, I consent to be saved; will You save me ?”’ 

There is a very good story told of Rowland Hill and Lady Ann 
Erskine. You have seen it, perhaps, in print, but I would like to 
tell it you. While he was preaching in a park in London to a 
large assemblage, she was passing in her carriage. She said to 
her footman when she saw Rowland Hill in the midst of the 
people: “Why, who is that man?” “That is Rowland Hill, my 
lady.’ She had heard a good deal about the man, and she thought 
she would like to sce him, so she directed her coachman to drive 
her near the platform. When the carriage came near he saw the 
insignia of nobility, and he asked who that noble lady was. Upon 
being told, he said: “Stop, my friends, I have got something to 
sell.” The idea of the preacher becoming suddenly an auctioneer 
made the people wonder, and in the midst of a dead silence he 
said: “I have more than a title to scll—I have more than the 
crown of Europe to sell; it is the soul of Lady Ann Erskine. Is 
there any one here who bids for it? Yes, I hear a bid. Satan, 
Satan, what will you give? ‘I will give pleasure, honor, riches— 
yea, I will give the whole world for her soul.’ Do you hear another 
bid? Is there any other one? Do I hear another bid? Ah, I 
thought so; 1 hear another bid. The Lord Jesus Christ, what will 
You give for this soul? ‘I will give peace, joy, comfort, that the 
world knows not of—yea, I will give eternal life.” Lady Ann 
Erskine, you have heard the two bidders for your soul, which will 
you accept?” And she ordered the door of her carriage to be 
opened, and came weeping from it, and accepted the Lord Jesus 
Christ. He, the great and mighty Saviour, is a bidder for your 


ERS, 


emed to get 
almost got 
some young 
red what he 
he seemed 
had become 
Broadway ; 
horses, and 
if he only 
it at once, 
peless cases 
save you in 
you. Just 
ne?” 
|} Lady Ann 
ould like to 
ondon to a 
he said to 
idst of the 
nd Hill, my 
she thought 
un to drive 
he saw the 
vas. Upon 
mething to 
auctioneer 
silence he 
e than the 
Lrskine. Is 
id. Satan, 
or, riches— 
ar another 
id? Ah,I 
, What will 
rt, that the 
Lady Ann 
which will 
iage to be 
ord Jesus 
r for your 


LOST AND SAVED. 79 


soul to-night. He offers you riches and comfort, and joy, peace 
here and eternal life hereafter, while Satan offers you what he can 
not give. Poor lost soul, which will you have? He will ransom 
your soul if you but put your burden upon Him. Twenty-one 
years ago I made up my mind that Jesus would have my soul, and 
I have never regretted the step, and no man has ever felt sorry for 
coming to Him. When we accept Him we must like Him. Your 
sins may rise up as a mountain, but the Son of Man can purge you. 
of all evil and take you right into the palaces of Heaven if you will 
only allow Him to save you. 

A lady had a little child who was dying. She thought it was 
resting sweetly in the arms of Jesus. She went into the room and 
the child asked her: ‘ What are those clouds and mountains that 
I see so dark?” “Why, Eddy,” said his mother, ‘“ there are no 
clouds or mountains, you must be mistaken.” “ Why, yes, I see 
great mountains and dark clouds, and I want you to take me in 
your arms and carry me over the mountains.” “Ah,” said the 
mother, “you must pray to Jesus: He will carry you safely,” and, 
my friends, the sainted mother, the praying wife may come to 
your bedside and wipe the damp sweat from your brow, but they 
can not carry you over the Jordan when the hour comes. This 
mother said to her little boy: “I am afraid that it is unbelief that 
is coming upon you, my child, and you must pray that the Lord 
will be with you in your dying moments.” And the two prayed; 
but the boy turned to her and said: “ Don't you hear the angels, 
mother, over the mountains, calling for me,and I can not go?” 
“My dear boy, pray to Jesus and He will come; He only can take 
you.” And the boy closed his eyes and prayed, and when he 
opened them a heavenly smile overspread his face as he saia, 
“Jesus has come to carry me over the mountains.” Dear sinner, 
Jesus is ready and willing to carry you over the mountains of sin, 
and over your mountains of unbelief. Give yourselves to Him; 
only grant your consent. It lies with your own will, and, if you 
but accept His offer, from the clouds of your transgressions you 
shall be lifted into the heaven of joy and peace that the world 
knows not of. 


x 


HEAVEN AND WHO ARE THERE. 


WAS on my way to a meeting one night with a friend, and he 
asked, as we were drawing near the church, “ Mr. Moody, what 
are you going to preach about?” “I am going to preach 

He, about IHfeaven,” I said. I noticed a scowl passing over his face, and 

i I said, “What makes you look so?” “Why, your subject of 
Heaven. What's the use of talking upon a subject that’s all specu- 

lation? It’s only wasting time on a subject about which you can 

only speculate.” My answer to that friend was, “If the Lord 
doesn’t want us to speak about Heaven, He would never have told 
us about such a place in the Scriptures; and, as Timothy says, ‘ All 
the Scriptures are given by inspiration, and all parts are profitable.’ ”’ 
There’s no part of the Word of God that is not profitable, and I 
believe if men would read more carefully these Scriptures they 
would think more of Heaven. If we want to get men to fix their 
hearts and attention upon Heaven, we must get them to read more 
about it. Men who say that Heaven is a speculation have not read 
their Bibles. In the blessed Bible there are allusions scattered all 
through it. If I were to read to you all the passages upon Heaven 
from Genesis to Revelation, it would take me all night and to- 
morrow to do it. When I took some of the passages lately and 
showed them to a lady, ‘ Why,” said she, “I didn’t think there was 
so much about Heaven in the Bible.” If I were to go into a foreign 
land and spend my days there, I would like to know all about it; 
NA | I would like to read all about it. I would want to know all about 
its climate, its inhabitants, their customs, their privileges, their gov 
ernment. I would find nothing about that land that would not in- 
terest me. Suppose you all were going away to Africa, to Germany, 
| to China, and were going to make one of those places your home, 
anu suppose that I had just come from one of those countries, how 
eagerly you would listen to what I had to say. I can imagine how 
(78) 


RE. 


end, and he 
fLoody, what 
x to preach 
his face, and 
subject of 
’s all specu- 
ich you can 
f the Lord 
er have told 
ly says, ‘All 
profitable.’ ”’ 
able, and I 
tures they 
to fix their 
» read more 
ve not read 
cattered all 
bon Heaven 
mt and -to- 
lately and 
kk there was 
toa foreign 
1 about it; 
v all about 
, their gov 
uld not in- 
» Germany, 
our home, 
itries, how 
agine how 


HEAVEN AND W1H0 ARE TiftR.. mi 
the old, gray-haired men and the young men and the deaf would 
crowd around and put up their hands to learn something about it. 
But there is a country in which you are going to spend your whole 
future, and you are listless about what kind of a country it is. My 
friends, where are you going to spend eternity? Your life here is 
very brief. Life is but an inch of time; it is but a span, but a fibre, 
which will soon be snapped, and you will be ushered into eternity. 
Where are you going to spend it? If I were to ask you who were 
going to spend your eternity in Heaven to stand up, nearly every 
one of you would rise. There is not a man here, not one in Chi- 
cago, who has not some hope of reaching Heaven. Now, if we are 
yoing to spend our future there, it becomes us to go to work and 
find out all about it. I call your attention to this truth that Heaven 
is just as much a place as Chicago. It is a destination—it is a 
locality. Some people say there is no Heaven. Some men will tell 
you this earth is all the heaven we have. Queer kind of heaven 
this. Look at the poverty, the disease in the city; look at the men 
out of employment walking around our streets, and then say this is 
Heaven. How low a man has got when he comes to think in this 
way. There is a land where the weary are at rest; there is a land 
where there is peace and joy—where no sorrow dwells, and as we 
think of it, and speak about it, how sweet it looms up before us. 

J remember soon after I got converted, a pantheist got hold of 
me, and just tried to draw me back to the world. Those men who 
try to get hold of a young convert are the worst set of men. I 
don’t know a worse man than he who tries to pull young Christians 
down. He is nearer the borders of hell than any man I know. 
When this man knew I had found Jesus he just tried to pull me 
down. He tried to argue with me, and I did not know the Bible 
very well then, and he got the best of me. The only way to get 
the best of those atheists, panthcists, or infidels is to have a good 
knowledge of the Bible. Well, this pantheist told me God was 
every where—in the air, in the sun, in the moon, in the earth, in the 
stars, but really he meant nowhere. And the next time I went to 
pray it seemed as if I was not praying anywhere or to any one. 

We have ample evidence in the Bible that there is such a place 
as Heaven, and we have abundant manifestation that His influence 
from Heaven is felt among us. He is not in person among us; 
only ‘n spirit. The sun is 95,000,000 miles from the earth, yet we 
feel its rays. In Second Chronicles we read: “If My people which 


80 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


are called by My name shall humble themselves and pray and sec’x 
My face and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from 
Heaven and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.” Here 
is one reference, and when it is read,a great many people might 
ask: ‘ How far is Heaven away? can you tell us that?” I don't 
know how far it is away, but there is one thing I can tell you. He 
can hear prayer as soon as the words are uttered. There has 
not been a prayer said that He has not heard; not a tear shed 
that He has not seen. We don’t want to learn the distance. 
What we want to know is that God is there, and Scripture tells 
us that. Turn to First Kings and we read: “And hearken thou 
to the supplication cf Thy servant, and of Thy people Isracl, when 
they shall pray toward this place, and hear Thou in Heaven, Thy 
dwelling-place, and when Thou hearest, forgive.” Now, it is clearly 
taught in the Word of God that the Father dwells there. It is His 
dwelling-place, and in Acts we see that Jesus is there too. ‘ But 
he being full of the Holy Ghost looked up steadfastly into Heaven 
and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of 
God,” and by the eye of faith we can see ‘lim there to-night too, 
And by faith we shall be brought into His presence, and we shall 
be satisfied when we gaze upon Him. Stephen, when he was sur- 
rounded by the howling multitude, saw the Son of Man there, 
and when Jesus looked down upon earth and saw this first martyr 
in the midst of his persecutors, He looked down and gave hima 
welcome. We'll sce Him by and by. It is not the jasper streets 
and golden gates that attract us to Heaven. What are your golden 
palaces on earth—what is it that makes them so sweet? It is the 
presence of some loving wife or fond children. Let them be taken 
away and the charm of your home is gone. And so it is Christ 
that is the charm of Heaven to the Christian. Yes, we shall sce 
Him there. How sweet the thought that we shall dwell with Him 
forever, and shall see the nails in His hands and in His feet which 
He received for us. 

I read a little story not long since which went to my heart. A 
mother was on the point of death, and the child was taken away 
from her in case it would annoy her. It was crying continually to 
be taken to its mother’s, and teased the neighbors. By and by the 
mother diec, and the neighbors thought it was better to bury the 
mother without le‘ting the child see her dead face. They thought 
the sight of the dead mother would not do the child any good, and 


RS, 


y and sec’ 
hear from 
d." Here 
ple might 
edo 
lTe 


has 


you. 
There 

tear shed 
» distance. 
pture tells 
urken thou 
sracl, when 
saven, Thy 
it is clearly 
It is His 
tao.‘ But 
ito Heaven 
ht hand of 
9-night too. 
id we shall 
Ye was sur- 
Man there, 
first martyr 
pave him a 
sper strects 
rour golden 
? Itis the 
m be taken 
it is Christ 
re shall see 
1 with Him 

feet which 


Weart, A 
aken away 
tinually to 
and by the 
» bury the 
sy thought 
good, and 


HEAVEN ANDY WHO ARE THERE. SI 


so they kept it away. When the mother was buried and the child 
was taken back to the house, the first thing she did was to run into 
her mother’s sitting-room and look all round it, and from there to 
the bed-room, but no mother was there, and she went al! over the 
house crying, “ Mother, mother!” but the child could not find her, 
and coming to the neighbor, said: ‘“‘ Take me back, I don’t want to 
stay here if I can not see my mother.” It wasn’t the home that 
made it so sweet to the child. It was the presence of the mother. 
And so it is not Heaven that is alone attractive to us; it is the 
knowledge that Jesus, our leader, our brother, our Lord, is there. 
And the spirits of loved ones, whose bodies we have laid in the 
earth, will be there. We shall be in good company there. When 
we reach that land we shail meet all the Christians who have gone 
Lefore us. We are told in Matthew, too, that we shall meet angels 
there: ‘Take heed lest ye despise not one of these little ones, for 
I say unto you that in Heaven their angels do always behold the 
face of my Father which is in Heaven,” 
and we shall see them when we get home. 
He is there, and where Ele is, His disciples shall be, for He has 
said: “I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am there 
ye may be also.” I believe that when we die the spirit leaves 
the body and goes to the mansion above, and by and by the 
body will be resurrected and it shall see Jesus. 


Yes, the angels are there, 


Very often people 
come to me and say: “ Mr. Moody, do you think we shall know 
each other in Heaven?” Very often it isa mother who has lost a 
dear child, and who wishes to see it again. Sometimes it is a child 
who has lost a mother, a father, and who wants to recognize them 
in Heaven. There is just one verse in Scripture in answer to this, 
and that is: “We shall be satisfied.” It is all I want to know. 
My brother wao went up there the other day I shall see, because | 
will be satisfied. We will see all those we loved on earth up there 
and if we loved them here we will love them ten thousand timc 
more when we meet them there. 

Another thought. In the tenth chapter of Luke we are told o1 
names are written there if we are Christians. Christ just cal 
His disciples up and paired them off and sent them out to preach 
the Gospel. Two of us—Mr. Sankey and myself—going about and 
preaching the Gospel, is nothing new. You will find them away 
back eighteen hundred years ago, going off two by two, like 
Brothers Bliss and Whittle, nd Brothers Needham and Stebbins, 
6 


= 


hy 
a 
fi 
ft. 
- 
¢ 
+ 


r= am eg cath alil ae 


82 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


to different towns and villages. They had gone out, and there 
had been great revivals in all the cities, towns, and villages they 
had entered. Everywhere they had met with the greatest success. 
Even the very devils were subject to them. Disease had fled 
before them. When they met a lame man they said to him, © You 
don’t want to be lame any longer,” and he walked. When they 
met a blind man they but told him to open his eyes, and behold, 
he could see. Andthey came to Christ and rejoiced over their 
great success, and He just said to them, “I will give you some. 
thing to rejoice over. Rejoice that your names are written in 
Heaven.” Now there are a great many people who do not believe 
in such an assurance as this: “ Rejoice, because your names are 
written in Heaven.” How are you going to rejoice if your names 
are not written there? While speaking about this some time ago, 
a man told me we were preaching a very ridiculous doctrine when 
we preached this doctrine of assurance. I ask you in all candor, 
what are you going to do with this assurance if we don’t preach it ¢ 
It is stated that our names are written there; blotted out of the 
Book of Death and transferred to the Book of Life. 

1 remember, while in Europe, I was traveling with a friend—she 
is in this hall to-night. On one occasion, we were journeying from 
London to Liverpool, and the question was put as to where we 
would stop. We said we would go to the North-western, at Lime 
street, as that was the hotel where Americans generally stopped at. 
When we got there the house was full; could not let usin. Every 
room was engaged. But this friend said, “ I am going to stay here, 
I engaged a room ahead. I sent a telegram on.” My friends, that 
is just what the Christians are doing—sending their names in ahead. 
They are sending a message up saying: ‘ Lord Jesus, I want one 
of those mansions You are preparing; Iwant to be there.” That’s 
what they're doing. And every man and woman here who wants 
one if you have not already got one, had better make up your mind, 
Send your names up now. I would rather a thousand times have 
my name written in the Lamb’s Book than have all the wealth of the 
woild rolling at my feet. A man may get station in this world—it 
will fade away; he may get wealth, but it will prove a bauble— 
“What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his 
own soul?” It is a solumn question, and lect it go around the hall 
to-night: “Is my name written in the Book of Life?’ I can 
imagine that man down there saying, “ Yes; I belong to the Pres 


S. 


and there 
ages they 
st SUCCESS. 
had fled 
im, ‘ you 
Vhen they 
nd behold, 
over tlicir 
you some: 
written in 
not believe 
names are 
your names 
e time ago, 
ctrine when 
. all candor, 
't preach it’ 
4d out of the 


1 friend—she 
rneying from 
to where we 
ern, at Liimie 
y stopped at. 
isin. Every 
to stay here, 
| friends, that 
nes in ahead. 
s, L want one 
ere.’ That's 
‘e who wants 
ip your mind. 


d times have 
wealth of the 
his world—it 
e a bauble— 
d and lose his 
ound the hall 
I can 
> to the Pres 


ife?”” 


HEAVEN AND WHO ARE THERE, 83 


byterian Church; my name’s on the church’s books.’ It may be, 
but God keeps His books in a different fashion than that in which 
the church records of this city are kept. You may belong to a good 
many churches; you may be an elder or a deacon, and be a bright 
light in your Church, and yet you may not have your name written 
in the Book of Life. Judas was one of the twelve, and yet he 
hadn't his aame written in the Book of Life. Satan was among the 
elect—he dwelt among the angels, and yet he was cast from the 
high hallelujahs. Is your name written in the Book of Life? A 
man told me, while speaking upon this subject, “ That is all non- 
sense you are speaking.’ And a great many men here aie of the 
same opinion; but I would like them to turn to Daniel, twelfth 
chapter, “ And there shall be a time of trouble, such as never 
was since there was a nation, even to that same time, and at that 
time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found 
written in the Book.” Every one shall be delivered whose names 
shall be found written in the Book. And we find Paul, in the letters 
which he wrote to the Philippians, addressing them as those “ dear 
vokefellows, whose names were written in the Book of Life.” If it 
is not our privilege to know that our names are written in the Book 
of Life, here is Paul sending greeting to his yokefellows, © wi.ose 
names were written in the Book.” Let us not be deceived iii this. 
We see it too plainly throughout the Holy Word. In the chapter 
of Revelations which we have just read, we have three different 
passages referring to it, and in the twenty-first verse, almost the last 
words in the Scriptures, we read: “ And there shall in nowise enter 
into it anything which defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomi- 
nation, or maketh a lie; but they which are written in the Lamb’s 
Book of Life.” My friends, you will never see that city unless your 
names are written in that Book of Life. It is asolemn truth. Let 
it go home to every one, and sink into the hearts of all here to-night. 
Don’t build your hopes on a false foundation; don’t build your 
hopes on an empty profession. Be sure your name is written there 
And the next thing after your own names are written there, is to see 
that the names of the children God has given you, are recorded 
there. Let the fathers and mothers assembled to-night hear this 
and take it to their hearts. See that your children’s names are 
there. Ask your conscience if the name of your John, your Willie, 
your Mary, your Alice—ask yourselves whether their names are 
recorded in the Book of Life. lf not, make it the business of your 


atte Aenean 


84 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


life, rather than to pile up wealth for them; make it the one object 
of your existence to secure for them eternal life, rather than to pave 
the way to their death and ruin. 

I read some time ago of a mother in an Eastern city who was 
stricken with consumption. At her dying hour she requested her 
husband to bring the children to her. The oldest one was brought 
first, and she laid her hand on his head and gave him her blessing 
and dying message. The next one was brought, and she gave him 
the same; and one after another came to her bedside until the little 
infant was brought in. She took it and pressed it to her bosom, 
and the people in the room, fearing that she was straining her 
strength, took the child away from her. As this was done she 
turned to th ‘ usband and said, “I charge you, sir, bring all those 
children home with you.” And so God charges us. The promise 
is to ourselves and to our children. We can have our names written 
there, and then, by the grace of God, we can call our children to us 
and know that their names are also recorded there. That great roll 
is being called, and those bearing the names are summoned every 
day—every hour; that great roll is being called to-night, and if 
voor name were shouted, could you answer with joy? You have 
heard of a soldier who fell in our war. While he lay dying, he 
was heard to cry, “Here! here.” Some of his comrades went 
up to him, thinking he wanted water, but he said, ‘ They are call- 
ing the roll of Heaven, and I am amswering,” and in a faint voice he 
whispered ‘“ Here!” and passed away to Heaven. If that roll was 
called to-night, woula you be ready to answer, “Here!” I am 
afraid not. Let us wake up; may every child of God wake up to- 
night. There is work to do. Fathers and mothers, look to your 
children. If I could only speak to one class, I would preach to par- 
ents, and try to show them the great responsibility that rests upon 
them—try to teach them how much more they should devote their 
lives to secure the immortal treasure of Heaven for their children, 
than to spend their lives in scraping together worldly goods for 
them. 

There is a man living on the bank of the Mississippi River. The 
world calls him rich, but if he could call back his first-born son he 
would give up all his wealth. The boy was brought home one day 
unconscious. When the doctor examined him he turned to the 
father, who stood at the bedside, ard said, “ There is no hope.” 
‘What !” exclaimed the father, “ is ossible my boy has got to 


S. 


ne object 
nto pave 


/who was 
ested her 
s brought 
ry blessing 
gave him 
| the little 
er bosom, 
ining her 
done she 
x all those 
¢ promise 
yes written 
dren to us 
t great roll 
yned every 
rht, and if 
You have 
dying, he 
ades went 
ey are call- 
nt voice he 
at roll was 
st” Tam 
rake up to- 
5k to your 
ach to par- 
rests upon 
evote their 
ir children, 


iver. The 
yorn son he 
ne one day 
ned to the 
no hope.” 


has got to 


HEAVEN AND WHO ARE THEKE. 


fy 


die?" “There is no hope,” replied the doctor. “ Will he not 
come to?” asked the father. ‘“ He may resume consciousness, but 
he can not live. =“ Try all your skill, doctor; I don’t want my boy 
to die.” Byw: by the boy regained a glimmering of conscious- 
ness, and whe le was told that his death was approaching, he said 
to his father, ‘“ Won't you pray for my lost soul, father? You have 
never prayed for me.” The old man only wept. It was true. Dur- 
ing the seventeen years that God had given him his boy he had never 
spent an hour in prayer for his soul, but the object of his life had 
been to accumulate wealth for that first-born. Am I speaking toa 
prayerless father or mother to-night ? Settle the question of your 
soul’s salvation and pray for the son or daughter God has given 
you. 

But I have another anecdote to tell. It was Ralph Wells who 
told me of this one. A certain geatleman had been a member of 
the Presbyterian Church. His little boy was sick. When he went 
home his wife was weeping, and she said, “Our boy is dying. He 
has had a change for the worse. I wish you would go in and see 
him.” The father went into the room and placed his hand on the 
brow of his dying boy, and could feel that the cold, damp sweat 
was gathering there; that the cold, icy hand of death was feeling 
for the chords of life. “Do you know, my boy, that you are dy- 
ing?’ asked the father. “AmI? Is this death? Do you really 
think I am dying?” “Yes, my son, your end on earth is near.” 
“And will I be with Jesus to-night, father?” “Yes, you will be 
with the Saviour.” “Father, don’t you weep, for when I get there 
I will go right straight to Jesus and tell Him you have been trying 
all my life to lead me to Him.’ God has given me two little chil- 
dren, and ever since I can remember I have directed them to Christ, 
and I would rather they carried this message to Jesus—that I had 
tried all my life to lead them to Him—than have all the crowns of 
the earth; and I would rather lead them to Jesus than give them 
the wealth of the world. If you have got a child, go and point the 
way. I challenge any man to speak of Heaven without speaking 
of children. “ For of such is the kingdom of Heaven.’’ Fathers and 
mothers and professed Christians ignore this sometimes, They go 
along themselves and never try to get any to Heaven with them. 
Let us see to this at once, and let us pray that there may be many 
names written in the Lamb’s Book of Life to-night. 


Sa eS a On 


XI. 


LAYING UP TREASURES IN HEAVEN. 


MAT, vi. 20, “ But lay up for yourselves treasures in Heaven,” 


I’ we are living as God would have us live, we are doing this, 
There are a great many people who forget that there are 
eleven commandments. They think there are only ten. The 

eleventh commandment is: “Lay up for yourselves treasures in 
Heaven.” How many of us remember—ah! how many people in 
Chicago forget the words of the Lord now in His wonderful 
sermon on the mount: “ Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon 
earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break 
through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in Heaven, 
where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do 
not break through nor steal.” How few of our people pay any 
heed to these words. That’s why there are so many broken hearts 
among us; that’s why so many men and women are disappointed and 
going through the streets with shattered hopes; it’s because they 
have not been laying up treasures in Heaven. They pile up treas- 
ures on earth, and some calamity comes upon them and sweeps 
all away. The Chicago fire burned up a good many of these treas- 
ures. A great number of people put their treasures in banks which 
dissolve, and away they go. Some have put their treasures in railway 
shares which have all disappeared like a vapor; and that is why so 
many are broken-hearted to-day and in great distress, and do not 
know what is before them. If they had taken heed to the words ot 
this commandment this thing would not have happened to them. 
“Lay up your treasures in Heaven.” Instead of noticing this com 
mandment they have let their heart go out to the things of the 
world. It don’t take long in conversation with a man to find out 
where his heart is. Wherever it is, there is his treasure. Go to 


a political man and talk to him about Hayes and Wheeler, o 
(86) 


= 


oing this, 
there are 
ren. The 
~asures in 
people in 
wonderful 
ures upon 
‘ves break 

Heaven, 
hieves do 
le pay any 
en hearts 
yinted and 
ause they 
up treas- 
id sweeps 
hese treas- 
nks which 
in railway 
is why so 
d do not 
> words ot 

to them. 
this com 
ngs of the 
o find out 
e. Goto 
heeler, o! 


_— 


LAYING UP TREASURES IN HEAVEN, 87 


Tilden and Hendricks, on any political question, and how h:s heart 
gets ablaze and his eye sparkles. [lis treasure is in politic. Go 
talk about a new play to a man who loves the theatre and see how 
his eye glistens. His heart is set upon pleasure—upon the world. 
And yet another class, whose heart is set on business. Go to one of 
them and talk to him about some new speculation, and show him 
where he can make a few thousand dollars, and you will soon tell 
where his treasure lies. But talk about Heaven and all interest 
is lost. I could not help that thought coming to me last night 
when I saw before me some dozing—some almost asleep, as if they 
thought I was talking about a myth; and others were sitting with 
eyes aglow and all attention when I mentioned Heaven. Ah! 
they expected to go there, and were glad to hear about it. 

Some men think it is too far away to lay up their treasures. I was 
talking to a business man before the fire about laying up treasures 
in Heaven, and he said, “I like to have my treasure where I can see 
it.” And that is the way with a great many people—they like to 
have their treasures here so that they can see them. It is a great 
mistake. People go on accumulating what they must leave behind 
them. How many here do not devote five minutes to anything 
else than money-making. It is money, money, money. And if 
they get it they are satisfied. You will see occasionally in the 
newspapers an account of a man dying who is worth so many mil- 
lions. It isa great mistake. Hecan not take it with him. If it 
is in business, it ain’t his. Ifit is in banks, it ain’t his. If in real 
estate, he can not take it. It ain’t his. Now, ask yourselves to- 
night, “‘ Where is my treasure?” “Is my heart set upon things down 
here?” If it is set upon wealth, it will by and by take to itself 
wings and fly away. Oh, think of this. If your heart is set upon 
pleasure, it will melt away; if your heart is set upon station, repu- 
tation, some tongue may blast it ina moment and it is gone. If 
your hopes and heart are set upon some loved wife or dear children, 
whom you have set up in your hearts as an idol in place of your 
God, death may come and snatch your god from your life. It is 
wrong to set up anything, however dear to us, in the place of 
our God. And so it is wrong “to lay up treasures for yourselves 
upon earth.” 

Now are you-—are the people of Chicago heeding this com- 
mandment? Ask yourselves this as you are passing through the 
street to-morrow: ‘‘ How many of the people of this city are obey 


. 


> 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


4> 


a> 


2 


il 


14 


ll 


1.25 


~ 


M. 
TS 
y ng 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 


WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 
(716) 872-4503 


ocaeade 


STANT settee — 


88 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


ing this commandment, ‘Lay up for yourselves treasures in 
Heaven ?’”’ 

t remember before the Chicago fire, hearing of a minister coming 
up tosee hisson. He found him completely absorbed in real estate 
You remember before the fire how every one was mad about real 
estate. It wasa mania with all of us. If we could get a corner 
lot, no matter whether we threw ourselves in debt or smothered 
it with mortgages, we were confident that in time when prices 
went up, we would make our fortune. This minister came 
up, and when he saw his son he tried to talk about his soul, 
but it was no use. Real estate was there. He talked about real 
estate in the morning, in the afternoon, and night. No use of 
trying to talk of Heaven to him. His only Heaven was real estate. 
The son had a boy in his store, but he being absent, the father was left 
to mind the business one day. Whenacustoimer came in and started 
upon the subject of real estate, it was not long before the minister 
slipped off and was speaking to the customer about his soul, and 
telling him he would rather have a corner lot in the New Jerusalem 
than all the corner lots in Chicago. And the people used to say 
that no real estate could be sold when the father was around. The 
trouble was, that the son had real estate in his heart—that was his 
god; he lived to pile up earthly treasures, while his father lived as 
a pilgrim and a stranger here, with a knowledge of his treasures in 
Heaven. If we have anything in our hearts which we put up as our 
god, let us ask Him to come to us and take it away from us. 

I remember, when I went to California, just to try and get a few 
souls saved on the Pacific coast; I went into a school and asked: 
“Have you got some one who can write a plain hand?” “Yes.” 
Well, we got up the blackboard, and the lesson upon it proved to be 
the very text we have to-night: “Lay up for yourselves treasures 
in Heaven.” And I said: “Suppose we write upon that board some 
of the earthly treasures? And we will begin with gold.” The 
teacher readily put down gold, and they all comprehended it, for all 
had run to that country in the hope of finding it. “ Well, we will 
put down ‘houses’ next, and then ‘land.’ Next, we will put down 
fast ‘horses.’”” They all understood what fast horses were—they 
knew a great deal more about fast horses than they knew about the 
kingdom of God. Some of them, I think, actually made fast horses 
serve as gods. “ Next we will put down ‘tobacco.’” The teacher 
seemed to shrink at this. “Put it down,” said I, “many a man 


LAYING UP TREASURES IN HEAVEN, 


8g 


es in 4 thinks more of tobacco than he does of God. Well, then, we will 
4 put down ‘rum.’” He objected to this—didn’t like to put it down 
oming 4 at all. ‘“ Down with it. Many aman will sell his reputation, will 
state 4 sell his home, his wife, children, everything he has. It is the god of 
it real : some men.” Many here in Chicago will sell their present and their 
-orner eternal welfare for it. “ Put it down,” and down it went. ‘“ Now,” 
hered said I, ‘suppose we put down some of the heavenly treasures. Put 
prices down ‘ Jesus’ to head the list; then ‘heaven,’ then ‘river of life, 
came then ‘crown of glory,’” and went on till the column was filled, and 
- soul, then just drew a line and showed the heavenly and the earthly 
t real things in contrast. My friends, they could not stand comparison. 
se of If a man just does that, he can not but see the superiority of the 
state, heavenly over the earthly treasures. Well, it turned out that the 
as left teacher was not a Christian. He had gone to California on the 
tarted | usual hunt—gold; and when he saw the two columns placed side by } 
nister 5 side, the excellence of the one over the other was irresistible, and he '] 
1, and | was the first soul God gave me on the Pacific coast. He accepted 
salem Christ, and that man came to the station when I was coming away, 
‘O Say and blessed me for coming to that place. 
The Those of you who do not lay up your treasures in Heaven will 
as his be sure to be disappointed. You can not find a man who has 
ed as devoted his life to the treasures of this life—not one in the wide, 
res in wide world—but who has been disappointed. Something arises in 
AS Our life to sweep all away, or the amount of joy which they expect to 
obtain from their riches, falls short of their anticipations. If men 
a few center their affections on Heaven, they will have no disappoint- 
sked: ment; all is joy and comfort from that source, and the whole cur- 
Yes.” rent of their lives will be drifting toward Heaven. 
to be Some one has heard of a farmer who, when a friend of mine 
chads called upon him to give something for the Christian Commission, 
poe promptly drew a check for $10,000. He wanted the agent to have iI 
The dinner with him, and after they had dined, the farmer took the man ql | 
or all out on the veranda and pointed to the rich lands sweeping far 
e will away, laden with rich products. ‘ Look over these lands,” said the 
down farmer, “they are all mine.” He took him to the pasture and 
they showed the agent the choice stock, the fine horses he had, and then 
t the pointed to a little town, and then to a large hall where he lived; 
aie he wrew himself up, and his face lit up with pride as he said, 
acher 


“They are all mine. I came here when a poor boy and I have 
When he got through, my friend asked 


man } 


earned all that you see.” 


fore) STOOD Y'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


him: “ Well, what have you got up yonder?” “ Where?” replied 
the farmer, who evidently knew where my friend meant. “ What 
have you got in Heaven?” “Well,” said the farmer, “I haven't 
anything there.” “What!” replied my friend, “you, a man of 
your discretion, wisdom, business ability, have made no provision 
for your future!” He hadn’t, and in a few weeks he died—a rich 
man here and a beggar in eternity. A man may be wise in the 
eyes of the world to pursue this course, but he is a fool in the sight 
of God. Wealth to most men proves nothing more or less than a 
great rock upon which their eternity is wrecked. 

A great many Christians wonder how it is they don’t get on 
better—how it is that they don’t get on. It is because you have 
got your heart on things down here. When they look toward 
Heaven they don’t have any love for the world. We are then 
living for another world. We are pilgrims and strangers upon the 
earth. It is easy to have love for God when we have our treasures 
there. The reason, then, why so many of us do not grow in 
Christianity is because we have our treasures here. 

Mr. Moorehouse told me he was looking down the harbor of 
Liverpool one day, when he saw a vessel coming up, and she was 
being towed up by atug. The vessel was sunk in the water nearly 
to her edge, and he wondered it did not sink altogether. Upon 
inquiry be found that it was loaded with lumber and that it was 
waterlogged. Another vessel came up, her sails set, no tug assist- 
ing her, and she soon darted past the waterlogged vessel. And so 
it is with some Christians. They are waterlogged. They may 
belong to a church, and if they find anything in the church dis- 
agreeing with them they won’t go back. They want the whole 
church to come out and look for them, and tow them in. Ifthe 


“church don’t, they think they are not getting the attention due 


them. My friends, they are waterlogged, and that’s what kceps 
them from rising in Christianity. When men go up in balloons 
they take bags of sand with them, and when they want to rise 
higher they throw them out. There are a great many Christians 
who have got too many bags of sand, and to rise they want to 
throw some out. Look at the poor men here in the city—the rich 
Christians can relieve themselves by giving some of their bags of 
sand to them. A great many Christians would feel much better 
if they -elieved themselves of their bags of sand. “He that giveth 
to the poor lendeth to the Lord,” and if you want to be rich in 


AR SR FS ETD a 1 Ae 


Ay 


” replied 

“ What 
I haven't 
1 man of 
provision 
I—a rich 
se in the 
the sight 
ss than a 


t get on 
rou have 
© toward 
are then 
upon the 
treasures 
grow in 


arbor of 
she was 
er nearly 
Upon 

nt it was 
o assist- 
And so 
ey may 
ch dis- 
whole 
If the 
fon due 
keeps 
balloons 
to rise 
ristians 
ant to 
he rich 
bags of 
better 
giveth 


rich in 


ease gee 


LAYING UP TREASURES IN HEAVEN. gl 


eternity, just give to the poor with your heart, and the Lord will 
bless not only you, but all connected with you. 

The next thing is our rest in Heaven. A great many people have 
got a false idea about the Church. They have got an idea that the 
Church is a place to rest in. Instead of thinking that it is a place 
of work, they turn it into a resting-place. To get into a nicely- 
cushioned pew, and contribute to the charities, listen to the minis- 
ter, and do their share to keep the Church out of bankruptcy, is all 
they want. The idea of work for them—actual work in the Church 
—never enters’their mind. In Hebrews we see the words: “ There 
is a rest for the people of God.” We have got all eternity to rest 
in. Here is the place for work. We must work till Jesus comes. 
This is the place of toil—eternity—of repose. ‘“ Blessed are they 
that die in the Lord, for their works shall follow them.” Let us do 
the work that God gives us to-day. Don’t think that you have to 
rest in the world where God sent His Son, who was murdered. I 
remember hearing a man who had worked successfully for the Lorc 
complaining that he didn’t have the success he used to, and one 
night he threw himself on his bed, sick of life, and wanting to die. 
While in this state of mind he dreamed that he was dead, and that 
he had ascended to Heaven, and as he was walking down the crystal 
pavement of Paradise, he saw all at once, three friends in a chariot, 
and when the chariot came opposite to where he was, one of them 
stepped out and came to him. He noticed that his face was illumi- 
nated with a heavenly radiance, and he came to this man and took 
him to the battlements of Heaven. ‘ Look down,” said he, “ what 
do you see?” “T see the dark world, ’ replied the dreamer. “ Look 
down again, and tell me what you see.” “I see men walking blind- 
folded over bridges, and below them are bottomless pits,” was the 
dreamer’s reply. “ Will you prepare to stay here, or go back to 
earth and tell those men of their danger—tell them of the bottom- 
less pits over which they walk?” At this, the man awoke from his 
sleep and said he didn’t want to die any more. He just wanted to 
remain down here and warn his fellow-men from the dangers which 
surrounded them. When we turn a soul to Christ we do not know 
what will turn up—what will be the result of it. It may be the 
means of saving a million souls. The one man may convert another 
inan, and those two may convert a hundred, and that hundred may 
convert a thousand, and the current keeps widening and widening» 
deepening and deepening, and as time rolls on the fruit will be 


SSS SSS 


92 LIGCQDI"S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


ripening which you have gathered for God. It is a great privilege, 
my friends, to work for God. 

I want to call your attention to the eleventh chapter of Hebrews. 
After Paul mentions Jacob, and Isaac, and Enoch, he says: “ They 
all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen 
them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and 
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.” Are 
the Christians of Chicago living like pilgrims and strangers, and by 
their faith do they show “that they seek another country?” Do 
they show by their fruits and their deeds that they are pilgrims and 
strangers here? When I get intoa man’s mind the beauties of that 
country beyond the grave, it looks as if his only thought was for it. 
We are to be pilgrims and strangers passing through this world on 
our way to a better land. he moment Abraham, by faith, got 
sight of that land, he declared himself a pilgrim and a stranger 
This earth had no charm for him then. Lot might go down to that 
city of Sodom or Gomorrah, and that city might be burned up. We 
might fix our affections on this city. Chicago has been burned 
twice, and it will be burned again —this whole world shall pass 
away with all its boasted riches and glory, and where shall we be 
then? If we build our hopes here, we shall be disappointed ; if we 
build our hopes upon that foundation whose builder and maker is 
God, we shall not be disappointed. 

We are told in Matthew to set our affections on things above, 
and that “there shall be joy in Heaven over one sinner that re- 
penteth.” There are rumors of war in Europe, and if war were 
declared, probably it would excite the whole civilized world. Trade 
would be affected, and relations of all kinds. I don’t know whether 
it would excite Heaven at all. If the President of the United 
States issued a proclamation, I don’t know whether it would be 
noticed in Heaven or not, but the papers would speak of it, the 
people would be excited, and great changes might take place over 
it. If Queen Victoria died, telegrams would go all over the world, 
newspapers would speak of it, the whole world would be excited— 
I don’t know if it would be noticed in Heaven at all. But if that 
little girl there should repent, there would be joy in Heaven. Just 
think of it—think of a little girl or a little boy being the cause of 
joy in Heaven. I don’t think the papers would record it—they 
would never notice it. There woule be no paragraph in the morn- 
ing telling the people that there had been joy in Heaven over 


See Se 


es 
as 
3 
at 

vy 

oe 


ay 
ie 
| 
A 
Gt 
ae 
eo 
3 
Kea 
Bi 
i 
BS 
ey 
Ne 
OH 
: 


si 


tRS, 
it privilege, 


f Hebrews. 
rs: * They 
laving seen 
Ithem, and 
rth.” Are 
ers, and by 
try?” Do 
lgrims and 
ties of that 
was for it. 
s world on 
faith, got 
4 stranger 
wn to that 
dup. We 
en burned 
shall pass 
all we be 
ted; if we 

maker is 


gs above, 
r that re- 
war were 
ld. Trade 
whether 
United 
would be 
of it, the 
blace over 
he world, 
xcited— 
t if that 
n. Jnst 
cause of 
it—they 
he morn- 
ven over 


LAYING Ul TREASURES IN HEAVEN. 93 


the repentance of a little girl in the Tabernacle. ‘“ There is joy 
over one sinner that repenteth.” I have been wondering who it is 
that rejoiced in Heaven when He brought back that lost sheep. 
We are told that there is joy in the presence of the angels; but 
who else is it that rejoices? It may be that I am going a littie too 
far, but I think that I have a right to believe that the redeemed 
saints who have gone up from earth may be led to rejoice when 
they hear in Heaven of the conversion of some living ones here. 
Perhaps while Iam speaking some loving mother may be looking 
over the battlements of Heaven on her boy in the gallery yonder, 
and it may be that while she was on earth she prayed earnestly 
and constantly, and when she got there she pleaded at the throne 
for mercy to her son. It may be that as she is watching, some 
angel will swiftly carry the news to her of that boy’s conversion, 
and take his name there to be recorded in the Book of Life. Per- 
haps that mother and the Lord Jesus Christ will rejoice over that 
son, or it may be some daughter. Perhaps it is some child who 
is looking from that country down to her mother in this hall, and 
when the news of her acceptance of salvation reaches that little 
child, she will strike her golden harp and shout: “ Mother, mother 
is coming!” While I was touching on this topic in Manchester I 
remember a man getting up and shouting: “Oh, mother, I am 
coming!” The mother had been fruitless in her endeavors to 
convert that man while on earth, but her intercession there, and the 
influence of her prayers here, touched his heart and he decided 
while I was speaking. 

I remember in the Exposition building in Dublin, while I was 
speaking about Heaven, I said something to the effect that at this 
moment a mother is looking down from Heaven expecting the 
salvation of her daughter here to-night, and I pointed down toa 
young lady in the audience! Next morning I received this letter: 

“On Wednesday, when you were speaking of Heaven you said, 
‘It may be this moment there is a mother looking down from 
Heaven expecting the salvation of her child who is here. You 
were apparently looking at the very spot where my child was sit- 
ting. My heart said, ‘That is my child. That is er mother.’ 
Tears sprany to mry eyes. I bowed my head and prayed: ‘ Lord, 
Cirect that word to my darling child’s heart; Lord, save my child.’ 
I was then anxious till the close of the meeting, when I went to 
her; she was bathed in tears. She rose, put her arms round me, 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


94 


and kissed me. When walking down to you she tc'd me it was 
that same remark (about the mother looking down from Heaven) 
that found the way home to her, and asked me, ‘ Papa, what can I 
do for Jesus?’” 


May the Spirit of God bring hundreds to the cross of Christ 
to-night. 


ah 


Perea 


at. 


Seek 


Sa 


Rese aes 


ERS. 


1 me it was 
om Heaven) 
, what can I 


ss of Christ 


eu ee 
Se Pa 


XII. 


GRACE. 


WANT to call your attention to-night, to just one word. You will 
find it ina great many places in the Bible. Itisaword that you 
hear, perhaps, as frequently as any other. You hear it repeated 

in the church Sabbath after Sabbath. You hear professed Christians 
continually talking about it, and that is the word Grace, and yet it 
is a question whether there is another word in the English language 
so little understood as the word Grace. I believe I was a partaker 
of it years before J knew what it was, and I believe there are hun. 
dreds of Christians in Chicago who do not know what it means; and 
I believe if it were understood more thoroughly, there are hundreds 
of unbelievers in the city who, within the next twenty-four hours, 
would be unbelievers no longer. I often think it would be a good 
thing if some of us would get down Webster’s Dictionary and see 
what some words mean. Grace means undeserved kindness. It is 
the gift of God to man the moment he sees he is unworthy of God’s 
favor. Whenever we discover this, God will bless us with His grace. 
And this is free to all. There is not a man or woman in this build- 
ing to-night, who need go out of it without taking it away with him 
or her, if they are willing to take it as God gives it to them. We 
often hear about the discovery of the source of the Nile. Men have 
been sent out after it, and many have been lost in searching for it ; 
but here is a river that has been flowing for 6,000 years—the river 
of grace—because it pertains to our eternal welfare. The source of 
the Nile is of very little consequence in comparison with the river 
of grace, and yet a great many people give the Nile more attention 
than they do the other. 

Now, you will find in the first chapter of John, fourteenth verse, 
that “the Word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld 
His glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of 
grace and truth;” and in the seventeenth verse, “For the law 
(95) 


96 MOOD \"S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.” 
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. Also in the fifth of 
Romans, fifteenth verse, “But not as the offense, so also is 
the free gift ’’— mark the little word “free.” “Free gift.” <A 
great many men want to buy the gift; they want to work their way 
to Heaven—“ for, if through the offense of one many be dead, much 
more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, 
Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many.” There we have the source 
of this wonderful stream of grace that has been flowing through the 
world for 6,000 years; it comes from the heart of the Son of God. 
“Tt was full of grace and truth.” He came into the world to bless 
men—not to curse them, not to make them miserable, not to work 
men’s ruin. He came to give the grace of the Son of Man to us, to 
perfect our happiness. We see this in First of Peter, v. 10: “ But 
the God of all grace, who hath called us unto His eternal glory by 
Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered awhile, make you perfect, 
stablish, strengthen, settle you.” Now, men talk much about 
grace nowadays, but they don’t know what it means. We love a 
man for a little while, and when circumstances arise to make him 
independent of us our love cools. It is the very reverse with God. 
He loves those who are independent of Him—those who are at 
enmity with Him. There is not a rebellious son on this earth whom 
God does not love, and whom He does not seek to bless. See a 
n:an’s idea of grace. Let a business man go to a bank here, to- 
morrow, and borrow a thousand dollars at thirty days, and he gives 
a note, “I promise to pay.” If he is not able to pay at the end of 
thirty days, he gets three days’ grace; and if at the end of that time 
he can not pay, they seize and sell his store, his house, and every- 
thing he’s got. Queer kind of grace, that. That is not God’s grace. 
He would cancel the debt; give the man principal and all. God 
says: “It is more blessed to give than to receive.” Men try tc 
carry their idea of grace into effect by accepting the grace of God. 
They try to give Him something for His grace, instead of taking 
their places like poor beggars at the feet of Jesus and accepting the 
gift. It is free. Let us come to God to-night and ask Him to give 
us of His grace in fullness. 

Who are partakers of this grace? Any man who is willing to 
repent of his sins—I don’t care who he is.) He may be the worst 
man in the city; if he but repents he can have it. Let us turn to 
Matthew xxi. 28: 


‘sus Christ.” 
he fifth of 
so also is 
e gift.” A 
‘k their way 
dead, much 
yy Onc man, 
e the source 
through the 
son of God. 
orld to bless 
not to work 
an to us, to 
~ 10: “But 
ial glory by 
you perfect, 
nuch about 
We love a 
. make him 
e with God. 
who are at 
arth whom 
ess. See a 
k here, to- 
nd he gives 
the end of 
f that time 
and every- 
od’s grace, 
all. God 
Ten try tc 
ce of God. 
of taking 
epting the 
im to give 


willing to 
the worst 
s turn to 


2 


INTERIOR OF THE TABERNACLE FOR MOODY AND SANKEY MEETINGS, CHICAGO. 


34 
ye E at ( 
wats} at 

ANZ 
ast 
Aah 


GRACE, 97 


“ But what think ye? A certain man had two sons: and he came 
to the first, and said, Son, go work to-day in my vineyard. 

‘“ He answered and said, I will not; but afterward he repented, 
and went. 

And he came to the second, and said likewise. And he answered 
and said, I go, sir, and went not. 

“ Whether of them twain did the will of his father? They say 
unto him, The first. Jesus saith unto them, Verily I say unto 
you, That the publicans and the harlots go into the kingdom of 
God before you.” 

It didn’t matter whether they were publicans or harlots; if they 
only took their places as poor sinners at the feet of Jesus, they re- 
ceived the blessing. They took their gift because they took their 
places as poor sinners. The chief priests tried to get grace upon 
their own works. Perhaps they wouldn't associate with these pub- 
licans and harlots—they thought they were beyond redemption ; 
wouldn’t be seen with them. You, in your self-righteousness would 
not be seen walking down the streets with that drunkard; he 
would disgrace you. But if that drunkard but repents and takes 
his seat at the feet of Christ, the grace of God will flow into his 
heart. Those who repent are partakers of grace, and that was the 
lesson He wanted to teach the Jews. They thought themselves a 
great deal better than the publicans and harlots, and when they 
crowded around Him, He just wanted to teach them how they. 
could become partakers of eternal life. 

I remember preaching one night in winter—one of the coldest 
winters we had—the winter after the Chicago fire. I had been 
studying up grace, and it was the first time I had spoken of it, and 
I was just full of it. I started out of the house, I remember, and 
the first man I met I asked him if he knew anything about the 
grace of God, and I tried to preach to him. This man thought I 
was crazy. I ran on and met another, and finally got up to the 
meeting. That night I thought perhaps I was speaking to a lot 
of people who felt as I did about grace, and when I got through I 
asked any one who would like to hear about grace—who had any 
interest in it—to stay. I expected some would have stayed, but 
what was my mortification to see the whole audience rise up and go 
away. .They hadn’t any interest in grace; they didn’t want to 
learn anything about grace. I put my coat and hat on and was go- 
ing out of the hall, when I saw a poor fellow. at. the back. of. the 
7 


Sea ar 


Fern someone pinraangfeaanasaprrane 


en 


nt 


ara saeesnenpereenseyeeemesinitpsinocnppibineneapeinoan 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


08 


furnace crying. ‘I want to hear about the grace of God,” said he 
“You're the very man I want then,” said I. ‘‘ Yes,” the poor fellow 
said, “you said in your sermon that it was free, and I want you to 
tell me something about it.” Well, I got talking to him, and he 
told me a pitiful story. He had drank away twenty thousand dol- 
lars; his home had been broken up, and his wife and children had 
left him. I spoke to him, and it was not long before we were down 
together praying. That night I got him a night’s lodging in the 
Bethel, and next day we got him on his feet, and when I went to 
Europe he was one of the most earnest workers we had. He was 
just a partaker of grace—believed that the peace of God was suffi- 
cient for him, and he took God at His word and he was a saved 
man. I hope some poor wanderer will come here to-night and will 
see the force of this lesson. It may be that your home has been all 
broken up; that your wife has cast you off; that your friends have 
forsaken you. God will take you and bless you if you but repent. 
He can do great things; He can raise you from darkness to light, 
from lowness to highness, and He will go to the corners of the 
world for a man, if he has sunk into the pit, and will raise him up. 
He brought me out of the pit and set me up. It was His grace— 
His grace that did it. 

If you have your Bibles with you just turn to Mark vii. 24: 
‘““ And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and 
Sidon, and entered into a house, and would have no man know it, 
but he could not be hid.” I tell you, when a man is full of Christ 
he can not be hid. Your light can not be hid if your life is filled 
with truth. “ For a certain woman, whose daughter had an unclean 
spirit, heard of Him and came and fell at His feet. The woman 
was a Greek, a Syrophenician by nation”—that is, a Gentile — 
“and she besought Him that He would cast forth the devil out of 
her daughter. But Jesus said unto her, Let the children first be 
filled, for it is not meet to take the children’s bread and to cast it 
unto dogs. And she answered and said unto Him, Yes, Lord, 
yet the dogs under the table eat of the children’s crumbs: and 
He said unto her, For this saying, go thy way, the devil is gone 
out of thy daughter.” Now, I can just imagine how some here 
would have looked if He had said this to them. He was sur- 
rounded by Jews, and He wanted to teach them a lesson; but if 
‘that woman had been like some of us here she would have said: 
“T am as good as a Jew; Iam no dog. I know a woman who lives 


oh S, 


1,” said he 

poor fellow 

rant you to 

im, and he 

ousand dol. 
hildren had 

were down 
ging in the 
n I went to 
d. He was 
»d was suffi- 
vas a saved 
cht and will 
has been all 
friends have 
but repent. 
ess to light, 
rners of the 
‘aise him up. 
His grace— 


[ark vii. 24. 
of Tyre and 
an know it, 

ull of Christ 

r life is filled 

d an unclean 

The woman 

a Gentile — 

devil out of 

dren first be 
nd to cast it 
| Yes, Lord, 
crumbs: and 

Hevil is gone 

some here 

tie was sur- 
esson; but if 

d have said: 

an who lives 


GRACE, 99 


next door tome. She is avery good woman, but I’m as good as 
she, and I don’t want to be treated like a dog. I know lots ot 
Jews who were no better than me,” and so she might have gone 
off and lost her gift. But what does she do? She merely said, 
“Ves, Iam aGentile dog, but the crumbs that fall under the table 
the dogs eat.” She asked for the crumbs, and He gave her a whole 
loaf. She knew how to get a blessing. She came and fell at His 
feet. She wanted a blessing, and she took an humble position. It 
pleased Him. He went clear up to Tyre and Sidon just to find 
that woman. He wanted just to find that woman to show the 
Jews how to get grace. And so, my friends, you must take your 
blessing in the same way. We must become as beggars—we must 
be stripped of every particle of self-righteousness. Whenever 
we do ihat, the God of grace will meet us and deal bountifully 
with us. 

Turn to the seventh chapter of Luke. You know when He was 
here He was always trying to teach the Jews how to accept grace. 
They wanted to get it by their own works—wanted to do some- 
thing for it. There are a great many people here who do not 
believe in the doctrine as a gift, as something for nothing—as a gift 
from God. 

“ Now, when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the 
people, he entered into Capernaum. 

“ And a certain centurion’s servant, who was dear unto him, was 
sick and ready to die. 

“ And when he heard of Jesus he sent unto Him the elders of the 
Jews, beseeching Him that He would come and heal his servant. 

“And when they came to Jesus they besought Him instantly, 
saying, That he was worthy for whom He should do this.” 

Now that was the Jews’ idea, and it is ours. We went a bless- 
ing, because we have done something worthy of it. They said, 
“Now, Lord, You must give this centurion a blessing; he has been 
a good servant to the nation, and he is worthy of Your blessing. 
For he loveth our nation and he hath built a synagogue.” So you 
say this and that man is worthy of the grace of God. He has 
giver. $100 to such a charity and $500 to another one. It don’t 
matter where he got it. He might have made it by distilling 
whiskey—it don’t matter; might have made it in stock gambling— 
oh, he is worthy. He gave a thousand dollars to build that church 
on the West Side; he has been liberal to the poor; he contributes 


100 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


to all the charities—he is worthy. You will hear people say, “If 
anybody will go to Heaven, so-and-so will.” Why? Because he 
has built a church. And so they said the centurion had built a 
synagogue, and was worthy of grace. Jesus wanted to teach the 
Jews a lesson. ‘Then Jesus went with them ’—left His work, and 
away He went. “And when He was row not far from the house, 
the centurion sent friends to Him, saying unto Him, Lord, trouble 
not Thyself, for I am not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under 
my roof; wherefore, neither thought I myself worthy to come unto 
Thee; but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed.” See 
that. ‘Lord, don’t you trouble yourself, 1 am not worthy that 
Thou shouldst enter under my roof.” He was not worthy that 
Christ should come under his roof, and because he felt he was not 
worthy of grace he got it. This attitude was sweet to Him—it 
was like a cup of refreshment to find one man who felt that he 
needed grace, and he got the blessing. The Jews gathered around, 
and Jesus marveled at the centurion, and told them that He “had 
not found so great faith—no, not in Israel.” He had but faith and 
his servant was all right. That is grace, my friends. If you want 
to be saved, don’t you go and say, I am as good as other people, 
and I am worthy of grace. A good many people speak like this, 
but the Lord does not save them. A man does not get grace till 
he comes down to the ground—till he sees he needs grace. When 
a man sto. )» the dust and acknowledges that he needs mercy, 
then it is‘. .ne ”.ord will give him a blessing. If you are ready 
to partake of zrace, you have not to atone for your sin—you have 
merely to accept of the atonement. All that you want to do 
is to cry, “God have mercy upon me,” and you will receive the 
blessing. 

There were one or two women in the inquiry-room last night who 
said to me, “I am going to try and become a Christian.” ‘ Well,” 
said I, “ you may as well not try at all.” ‘“ What,” said they, “you 
would not have us try?” ‘ No,” said I, “as soon as you stop try- 
ing you will become a Christian.” In the north of England, at a 
meeting, I urged all the men and women to stop trying to save 
themselves, and told them that whenever they did then there was 
some hope. Down came a woman from the gallery at the close of 
the meeting, and said, “Mr. Moody, you have made me more 
wretched than ever. You told us in your sermon that we had bet- 
ter stop trying to save ourselves, and I have been trying to save 


CRS. 


> say, “If 
Because he 
had built a 

teach the 
s work, and 
the house, 
ord, trouble 
snter under 
»come unto 
aled.” See 
vorthy that 
worthy that 
he was not 
to Him—it 
felt that he 
red around, 
at He “had 
ut faith and 
If you want 
her people, 
ak like this, 
ret grace till 
ace. When 
eds mercy, 
bu are ready 
—you have 
want to do 
receive the 


st night who 
COW ell,” 
they, “you 
lou stop try- 
gland, at a 
ing to save 
n there was 
the close of 
e me more 
ve had _ bet- 
ing to save 


GRACE. I0l 


myself for many years. I was in hopes of becoming a Christian 
some day, but now if I stop trying, what will become of me?” 
“The Lord will save you when you stop trying to save yourself,” 
I told her; “for salvation is a gift, and you must take it as a gift. 
And then I got her attention to a few passages of Scripture, and 
she saw what grace was. And if there is a man or woman here 
to-night who have been trying to save themselves, they may as well 
stop, and accept Him who came to save you. 

As I told you last night, by grace are you saved, not by good 
deeds or good works. We work from the cross, not toward it; we 
work because we are saved, not to be saved. No man or woman 
has ever been saved who has been trying to save themselves. 

I remember when I was a boy, and went to Boston, I went to the 
post-office two or three times a day to see if there was a letter for me. 
I knew there was not, as there was but one mailaday. I had not 
had any employment and was very homesick, and so went constantly 
to the post-office, thinking perhaps when the mail did come in, my 
letter had been mislaid. At last, however, I got a letter. It was 
from my youngest sister, the first letter she ever wrote me. I 
opened it with a light heart, thinking there was some good news 
from home, but the burden of the whole letter was that she had 
heard there were pickpockets in Bost’ , and warned me to take 
care of them. I thought I would better get some money in hand 
first, and then I might take care of pickpockets. And so you must 
take care to remember salvation is a gift. You don’t work for sal- 
vation, but work day and night after you have got it Get it first 
before you do anything, but don’t try to get it yourself. Look at 
what Paul says in Ephesians: “ For by grace are ye saved through 
faith, and that not of yourself, it is the gift of God ”’— it is the gift 
of God —“ Not of works, lest any man should boast.” There is 
one thing we know—we have all got to get into Heaven the same 
way. We can not work our way there; we have to take our salva- 
tion from God. Turn again to Timothy, and ‘ve read: “ Who hath 
saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our 
works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which was 
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.” 

I want to call your attention to the passage, “ Not according to 
your works.” Not because a man has given liberally to the poor; 
not because he has built a church or endowed a university or a sem- 
inary not because of our works shall we receive grace—it is a free 


ics 


102 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESS 2S AND PRAYERS. 


gift. If aman is unsaved, it is not because he has done few good 
works, or because he has no money, but because he would not 
accept the gift. 

In the days of Paul, the Jews were stumbling over their own sal- 
vation, as many people are now, for we see, in Romans, he says: 
“And if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no 
more of grace. But if it be of works, then it is no more of grace, 
otherwise work is no more work.” Now, the reasoning is this: If 
you work out your salvation, you take yourself right off the ground 
of grace. Suppose I say, “ Any man or woman can have that book 
(Mr. Moody holding up his Bible), they can have it for nothing; I 
will give it to any of you as a gift,” and at the close a young man 
comes up and says, “ Mr. Moody, I have heard a great deal about 
that Book; I would like to have it.” “ Well,’ I say, “there it is— 
take it away.” “Ah, but,” he might say, “I don’t want it that 
way; I will give you a little something for it—just a little.” “I’m 
not selling Bibles, I give it away,” I say. “ Well, but I don’t like to 
take it that way,” and he takes his pocket-book out and says, “I 
know that Bible is worth a great deal more than I will give you, but 
here’s a dollar for you.” Suppose I take that dollar, and he goes 
home, and when his wife asks him where he got that Bible he says, 
“T bought it.” It is not a gift at all. Salvation is the same; it isa 
gift, and if you try to buy it you don’t get the gift. We must go 
like poor beggars, and take it as a gift. We can not get it by deeds, 
It is worth walking round this world bare-foot for, worth climbing 
the highest mountains and swimming the roughest rivers. But this 
can not get it. It is offered as a gift—salvation is offered to the 
whole world. Suppose Queen Victoria gives a man a pardon, and 
when he hears about it he says, “ That is very good of the Queen— 
very good of her. Here’s a penny; I will send it to her.” You 
smile at that; but the King of Heaven has been down here and 
offered you a pardon—offered you salvation as a free gift. Who will 
take it as a gift? Who will have it as a gift? Will you? (pointing 
to one in the audience). You can be saved right here, sitting in 
that chair. He came to the Jews and offered them pardon, but they 
said, “ We don’t want You here.” Only a few accepted Him, and 
‘to as many as received Him, these have the power to become the 
sons of God.” 

‘The grace of God hath power to bring salvation to all men;”’ and 
if a man is unsaved, it is because he wants to work it out; he wants 


AYERS. 


done few good 
he would not 


‘their own sal- 
nans, he says: 
yise grace is no 
more of grace, 
ling is this: If 
off the ground 
1ave that book 
for nothing; I 
2a young man 
eat deal about 
, “there it is— 
t want it that 
Aitties” “Em 
-I don’t like to 
t and says, “I 
1 give you, but 
r,and he goes 
Bible he says, 
e same; it isa 
We must go 
ret it by deeds. 
rorth climbing 
ers. But this 
offered to the 
a pardon, and 
f the Queen— 
o her.” You 
own here and 
bift. Who will 
you ? (pointing 
ere, sitting in 
rdon, but they 
bted Him, and 
o become the 


ll men;” and 
out; he wants 


GRACE 103 


to receive salvation in some other way than God’s way; but we are 
told that “he that climbeth up another way, the same is a thief and a 
robber.” I remember hearing of a man who dreamt that he built 
a ladder from earth to Heaven, and when he did a good deed, 
up went his ladder a few feet. When he did a very good deed his 
ladder went higher, and when he gave away large sums of money to 
the poor, up it went further still. By and by it went out of sight, 
and years rolled on, and it went up; he thought past the clomds, 
clear into Heaven. When he died he thought he would step off his 
ladder into Heaven, but he heard a voice roll out from Paradise: 
“He that climbeth up another way, the same is a thief and a rob- 
ber,” and down he came, ladder and all, and he awoke. He said if 
he wanted to get salvation he must get it another way than by good 
deeds, and he took the other way. Who will take this gift? If 
Gabriel was to wing his way from the throne of God, and come 
down here and say he had been sent from Heaven to give you any 
gift you chose, what would you ask for? Would you ask for money ? 
No; you will soon leave the world. Would you ask for position, 
glory? No; they are mere baubles. But ask for eternal life. 
Eternal life! Gabriel has not come to-night, but the Son of Man 
has come, and offers you eternal life for nothing. Is there one here 
to-night who will accept it as a gift? Rowland Hill used to say 
that auctioneers had hard work to get people to come up to their 
prices, but he had hard work to get people to come down to his. 
It costs nothing—free to all. Is there no one here who will 
take it? ; 

One more point. There was never a man or woman who par- 
took of the grace of God that would part with it again for all the 
world. I never knew one. Did you, Mr. (turning to some 
one on the platform)? No; never. You never will hear of one 
who has taken the gift repenting of it. A man told me the other 
day about a lady who came to him and said she had nearly lost her 
hope. She was ina sad state of mind. “ Lost all your hope?” he 
asked. “No, not all; I’ve a little left.” “Well,” said he, “how 
much would you take for the little you have left? Now, would 
you take a thousand dollars for what hope you have left?” That 
is the way to put it. No one would part with any portion of their 
hope; and when it was put to this lady, she was like every other one 
who has got grace. 

All things of earth will die and the world will float away; but a 


104 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


place in a world which will last for eternity is offered you in the 
Tabernacle to-night, and just go home and thank God for it—you 
needn't go home, you can take it here. Is there any one who will 
take it to-night? In New York City, during a meeting one night, 
I pointed to a man and asked him, “ Will you take the gift of the 
grace of God?” and he simply bowed his head. I met him in the 
inquiry-room, and asked him, “ How long have you been a Christian, 
my friend?” He said, “ While in the meeting to-night you pointed 
at me and asked me to accept grace, and I just took it when I 
bowed my head.” 

My friends, the world goes stumbling over works and deeds tc 
get at grace. It is right here—the grace of God which bringeth 
salvation t~ all men, and you need not go around the world after it. 
The gift lies at the very door of your heart. May God bless every 
soul in the room to-night, and may they be led to accept the gift 
of grace offered to them. Let us bow our heads in silent prayer. 


1Y ERS. 


ed you in the 
od for it—you 
y one who will 
ing one night, 
the gift of the 
1et him in the 
en a Christian, 
it you pointed 
ok it when I 


and deeds tc 
hich bringeth 
world after it. 
d bless every 
ccept the gift 
lent prayer. 


XIII. 


SECOND SERMON ON GRACE. 


AST evening you will recollect my subject was “Grace,” but 
I only said half what I wished to say, and so would just like 
to commence where I left off. I find a great many people 
saying they would like to become Christians if they had strength 
to lead Christian lives—they would become Christians if they 
thought they could hold out; they are afraid that they can not 
maintain their conversion. My friends, that is what the grace of 
God is for—to give you strength. After it is accepted there is no 
trouble about us not standing firm. If we only take it, I don’t care 
how broken you are; I don’t care how weak you are; don’t care 
how liable to fall—God’s grace will keep you from falling. Just 
turn to Romans v.: “Therefore, being justified by faith, we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we 
have access by faith into this grace’”—access into this gracc— 
“wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.” In 
these two verses t -re are three precious words, peace, grace, and 
glory. We look back to Calvary and there, by faith, see the Son ot 
God bleeding and dying for our sins, and the blood brings peace to 
our guilty conscience. Then we have grace for the present, grace 
from day to day, and then the next thing is glory, which we will 
have in eternity. They are three precious words—peace for the 
past, grace for the present, and glory for the future. Why, my 
brethren, the best is in store for us. We shall see the King in 
His glory by and by, when we reach those realms of eternal de- 
light, after we have passed through the land. A great many people 
are satisfied with the finished work of Calvary ; they don’t see—they 
forget about the glory that is coming. Until that time He has 
left grace to sustain us. If you get this grand and glorious truth 
in your heart you will not be doubting God; you will not be 
thinking He can not keep you. He has plenty of power—plenty 
of grace to keep you all—to keep every one of the sons of Adam. 
(105) 


106 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES 14ND PRAYERS, 


There is another thing. Turn to the twenty-first verse of fifth 
Romans, and you'll read: “ That as sin hath reigned unto death, 
even so might grace reign throu h righteousness unto eternal life 
by Jesus Christ our Lord.” Death reigns now. “ Sin hath reigned 
unto death,” and this is like the old saying, “ The end of the rope 
is the end of the law.” If I commit a murder and am taken into 
the court, tried, and condemned to be hung, when that sentence is 
carried out, the moment my life left my body, it would be the end 
of the law. They would give my body to my friends, who would 
bury it. That would be the end of the law. The grace of God is 
not like that. “Sin reigned unto death,” but the grace of God 
reigns to life eternal. It carries the body to the promised land, 
and gives us a crown of glory. “Sin reigned unto death;” but the 
grace reigns unto life eternal through Jesus Christ. Moses was the 
representative of God, and he brought the people of Israel to the 
banks of the Jordan, which means death; but he could not take 
them over. God took him to the top of Pisgah and showed him 
the promised land, but He would not permit him to enter. But 
after he died God called Joshua, which means Jesus, and He led 
them through death and judgment to the promised land. And 
John the Baptist led them to the Jordan and baptized the people, 
but that was all he could do. Jesus Christ came and put them on 
the resurrection ground. If we have Jesus Christ we are not going 
to perish. All that the grave can do is to shelter our body; there 
is a life beyond for every true believer who accepts grace. Oh, the 
glorious grace, the matchless grace of God, how it ought to lift us 
up, and how each one ought to praise God day and night. 

One of the best things in the hymn-book we use I think is No. 16, 
which begins: 

“Free from the law, oh happy condition, 
Jesus hath bled, and there is remission ; 


Cursed by the law, and bruised by the fall, 
Grace hath redeemed us, once for all.” 


Grace hath redeemed us. We are brought out from under the curse 
of the law. Grace was the end of the law. Therefore, if Iam in 
Christ the law has spent its force, and I am free from it. See in 
Romans vi. 14-15, it says, “For sin shall not have dominion over 
you, for ye are not under the law, but under grace. What then? 
Shall we sin because we are not under the law, but under grace ? 


RS, 


se of fifth 
nto death, 
eternal life 
ith reigned 
»f the rope 
taken into 
sentence is 
be the end 
who would 
> of God is 
ce of God 
nised land, 
;” but the 
ses was the 
srael to the 
1 not take 
10wed him 
nter. But 
ind He led 
and. And 
he people, 
t them on 
not going 
ody; there 
Oh, the 

t to lift us 


cis No. 16, 


r the curse 
if Iam in 
t. See in 
hinion over 
That then ? 
der grace ? 


SECOND SERMON ON GRACE, 107 


God forbid.” Now, there are a great many people who are not liv- 
ing above the law, but who are still living under it. Why, Christ 
died to redeem us from the curse of the law. All the way from 
Heaven He came, and that’s what he came for. He wants to bring 
you out from under the law, and if we accept grace our freedom is 
accomplished. 

Just turn to Deuteronomy xxi. 18. If we were under the law as 
those people were we would see strange things in Chicago. Ifa 
man was a drunkard or a thief, instead of going after the poor sin- 
ner and trying to show him the pardon he is offered, we would just 
take him to the Court House square and stone him. It says here: 

“If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not 
obey the voice »f his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, 
when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them; 

“Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him and bring 
him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place; 

“And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son 
is stubborn and rebellious; he will not obey our voice; he is a glut- 
ton and a drunkard. 

“ And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he 
die; so shalt thou put evil away from among you, and all Israel 
shall hear and fear.” 

Ah! if this were the law now there would be a strange state of 
things in Chicago. If they were taking all the drunkards out and 
stoning them, what would become of the rum-sellers? Their trade 
would be gone ina week. We are not free from the law till we are 
in Christ Jesus. If we disobey the law and spurn the grace of God 
—spurn the gift of God—judgment will come upon us. It is only 
a question of time. . 

But the thought I want to call your attention to is this: There is 
agreat difference between grace and law. The law makes a man 
see his guilt, and grace takes the guilt away. About the first 
miracle Moses performed was by just stretching his rod over the 
waters and turning them into blood, or death. Christ turned the 
water into wine—life. When the law was given through Moses at 
Mount Sinai three thousand men lost their lives; but at Pentecost 
three thousand men got life. The law is to stone him; grace to 
forgive him. The law to smite him; grace to sustain him. The 
Prodigal, after wasting his life in riotous living, came home to his 
father’s house. He expected law, but he got grace. Instead of his 


108 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


father smiting him, he kissed him. The law says, cast him out; 
grace, receive and bless him, 

I remember, when a boy, I used to go to an old school in New 
England. We used to have a quick-tempered master, who used al- 
ways to keep a rattan, and it was, If you will not do this and that you 
will be punished. I remember many a time of this rattan being laid 
on my back. I think I can almost feel it now. He used to rule 
that school by the law. But there was somebody who began to get 
up a movement in favor of controlling the school by love. A great 
many said, You can never do that with those unruly boys; but after 
some talk it was at last decided to try it. I remember how we thought 
of the good time we would have that winter, when the rattan would 
be out of the school. We thought we would then have all the fun we 
wanted. I remember who the teacher was—it was a lady—and she 
opened the school with prayer. We hadn’t seen it done before, and 
we were impressed, especially when she prayed that she might have 
grace and strength to rule the school with love. Well, the school 
went on for several weeks and we saw no rattan; but at last the 
rules were broken, and I think I was the first boy to break them. 
She told me to wait until after school, and then she would see me. 
I thought the rattan was coming out, sure, and stretched myself up 
ina warlike attitude. After school, however, I didn’t see the rattan, 
but she sat down by me and told me how she loved me, and how 
she had prayed to be able to rule that school by love, and concluded 
by saying, “I want to ask you one favor, that is, if you love me, try 
and be a good boy,” and I never gave her trouble again. She put 
me under grace. That is what the Lord does. Accept eternal life, 
if you love me. That is the difference between law and grace. 

Take another illustration. A boy goes to school. He is with a 
schoolmaster called Mr. Law. The master comes to him and says, 
“Charlie, wouldn’t you like to go into the other room, into Miss 
Grace’s class?”” “Yes, I don’t mind if I do;” and he is put into 
Miss Grace’s class. That is the teacher for the boy. He is behaving 
himself now—he is behaving from a different motive. By and by the 
old teacher comes to him and says, You must do so and so. “No, 
I won’t; Iam under Miss Grace now, and I won’t do it unless she 
says so.” He has got out from under the law—from the school- 
master with the rattan—by grace, and he likes his new system so 
well that he wouldn’t go back. That is grace. We are under the 
curse, and every man and woman under the curse, is brought out 


VERS, 
ast him out; 


school in New 
who used al- 
and that you 
tan being laid 
used to rule 
began to get 
ve. A great 
ys; but after 
v we thought 
rattan would 
all the fun we 
udy—and she 
e before, and 
e might have 
ll, the school 
t at last the 
break them. 
vould see me. 
d myself up 
e the rattan, 
e, and how 
d concluded 
love me, try 
in. She put 
eternal life, 
H grace. 
e is with a 
m and says, 
, into Miss 
is put into 
is behaving 
y and by the 
Hso. “No, 
t unless she 
the school- 
system so 
e under the 
brought out 


SECOND SERMON ON GRACE, 109 


from under it only by grace. I would rather a thousand times be 
under grace than under the law, and every one who partakes of it 
will be of the same opinion. 

The next thought that suggests itself is, how am I going to get this 
grace? Idon't know how many people have come to me during the 
past few days and said, “ Mr. Moody, I don’t feel able to go into the 
inquiry-room and talk to men and women about Jesus; I don’t feel 
that Iam good enough to talk to my husband about his soul. Lam not 
a strong enough Christian.” They haven't got grace. That's the 
condition of many of us. We don’t want it. We are half-starved 
Christians; we’re not fit to go out and work. Therefore, it is a very 
important truth that should come home to every heart here, that if 
we have taken God's grace—that if our hearts are filled with it, only 
then will we have a surplus, and be ready to go out and preach to 
others. 

Dr. Bonar used to illustrate this by saying that if we filled a 
tumbler with water, and got it perfectly full, and then touched the 
surface with our finger, it would flow over. So it is with grace. If 
our hearts are filled with grace the slightest pressure in His cause 
will make it flow over, and we will only be anxious to do battle for 
Him. That woman who came to Jesus Christ—that woman who had 
had an issue of blood for many years—but came and touched Him, 
and she received grace. How are you going to get it? Come 
boldly to the throne of grace and take it. There is not a poor 
wanderer here who can not come to the throne of grace and get it. 
And you can take an abundance of it. There is an inexhaustible 
fountain of it. Fathers and mothers will tell their sons to be care. 
ful—not to spend all they get; keep something for a rainy day. 
This is all very well, but don’t apply to the grace of God. You can 
be extravagant. You needn’t think that you won’t have any to- 
morrow. Go boldly and take all you want. 

There is a story told of Alexander the Great. A general in his 
army was a great favorite with him, and he told him to draw any- 
thing from his treasury that he wanted. Well, he presented a bill 
to the treasurer, and the treasurer wouldn’t honor it. It was for 
such an enormous amount that the treasurer was astonished. ‘The 
General went rushing to the Emperor and told him, and he called 
the treasurer and said, ‘“ Didn’t I tell you to honor the draft of the 
General?” “But,” replied the treasurer, “do you undetstand its 
amount?” ‘ Never mind what it is,” replied the Emperor, “he 


(10 MOID'"S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


honors me and my kingdom by making a great draft.” And so we 
honor God by asking for grace in abundance. I tell you, my 
friends, it isa pity there are so many half-starved, mean Christians 
around when God says, “ Come and get all you want.” 

I remember when Dr. Arnott, who has gone to God, was in this 
city. While delivering a sermon he used an illustration. The 
sermon and text have all gone, but that illustration is fresh upon 
my mind to-night and brings home the truth. He said: “ You 
have been sometimes out at dinner with a friend, and you have 
seen the faithful household dog standing watching every mouthful 
his master takes. All the crumbs that fall on the floor he picks up 
and seems eager for them, but when his master takes a plate of 
beef and puts it on the floor and says, ‘ Rover, here’s something 
for you,’ he comes up and smells it, looks at his master, and goes 
away to acorner of the room. He was willing to eat the crumbs, 
but he wouldn’t touch the roast beef—-thought it was too good for 
him.” That is the way with a good many Christians. They are 
willing to take the crumbs, but not willing to take all God wants. 
Come boldly to the throne of grace and get the help we need; 
there is an abundance for every man, woman, and child in this as- 
semblage. 

While Mr. Sankey and myself were in Europe I remember we 
got Chicago papers, and read about a great panic here. If I recol- 
lect right, it broke nearly every bank in Chicago. For 6,000 years 
God has been trying to get a run upon the Bank of Heaven, but 
He can not get it. That’s just what He wants. So, mother, if 
you have a wayward or a drunken son, go boldly to the throne of 
grace for your boy and He will give you mercy; He will hear your 
prayers and answer them. 

There are a good many Christians who are continually brooding 
over their misfortunes. They turn them over and over, and look at 
them from all sides. They look at the past in sorrow, and look 
down to the future and imagine it has great trials and troubles in 
store for them, and just sling them on their back and go recling 
under their burden. They are not fit to carry them, and they are 
not fit to work forGod. A man said some time ago to me: “ Would 
you be willing to go to the stake and be burned?” “I don’t know 
that I should. No;’ I replied, “if I were going to die at the stake 
God would give me grace to die. Time enough to think about that 
when the time came. I would rather have grace to do the work ] 


LIVERS, 
” And so we 
tell you, my 
ean Christians 
” 
rd, was in this 
ration. The 
is fresh upon 
said; “You 
nd you have 
ery mouthful 
or he picks up 
es a plate of 
2's something 
ter, and goes 
the crumbs, 
too good for 
s. They are 
1 God wants. 
Ip we need; 
Id in this as- 


member we 

If I recol- 
6,000 years 
eaven, but 
mother, if 
e throne of 
ll hear your 


ly brooding 
and look at 
Vv, and look 
troubles in 
go recling 
nd they are 
: “ Would 
don’t know 
the stake 


about that 
the work ] 


phy 


SECOND SERMON ON GRACE, IIT 


am doing. I do not want to die a martyr’s death; but if 1 had . 
dic, God would give me grace to doit.” And soa great many age e 
are afraid when they look forward to their dying hour. When : hid 
die, if they are Christians, the grace of God will be given Oe oe 
My friends, God will hold you, for He says: “I, thy God, will ho 
rright hand.” 

sa 5 6 get so full of this grace, we want to see every 
blessed—we want to see all the churches blessed—not only all t e 
churches here, but in the whole country. That was the trouble with 
Christ’s disciples. He had hard work to make them understand a 
His Gospel was for every one, that it was a stream to flow out toa 
nations of the earth. They wanted to confine it to the Jews, and 
He had to convince them that it was for every living being. We 
mist not limit the mighty grace of God. Turn to 2 Corinthians, 
ix. 8: “And God is able to make all grace abound toward you, 
that ye, always having all-sufficiency in all things, may abound to 
every good work.” He has got grace enough so that each one of us 
can be clothed for His service. It is not because God can not use us, 
it is not because God has not enough to clothe us for His service, that 
we can not work, but because we do not come and ask Him. Now, 
He bids every man and woman in this assembly to take it to-night. 
Suppose a man came to me and said : 6 Mr. Moody, there is a mil- 
lion dollars for you deposited at the First National Bank of Chicago ; 
take it all.” Well, Iam a poor man, and I accept it. And suppose 
I go to-morrow and draw a dollar, and take it home and say, “ Wife, 
a man gave mea million dollars—here’s a dollar for you, take care 
of it; times are hard, and money is scarce.” “ Why, she would 
say, ‘Moody has gone mad.” That’s your condition. Ninety- 
nine men out of a hundred are drawing a dollar when God wants 
them to drawathousand. He wants you to take all you need, while 
you are living like half-starved Christians, just as if you were dwelling 
in a land with a famine. 

Then there is another verse I want to call your attention to 
in Second Corinthians, xii. 7: “And lest I should be exalted 
above measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was 
given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet 
me, lest I should be exalted above measure.” Now a great many 
people are continually praying God to take the thorn out of their 
flesh. These thorns in the flesh are put there for a purpose—for 
our good. They are put there “lest we be exalted above measure.” 


en) 


a nn 


eee 


112 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


I think there will be more men who will rise up at judgment and 
thank God for persecution and misfortune than for prosperity. 
Prosperity has done less to benefit men than misfortune, and we can 
find that out by just looking around. I believe that Paul felt more 
thankful for his stripes than for anything else on earth. If we ask 
God for more grace, we can bear all the thorns of the flesh. Let us 
go boldly and get all the strength we need. 

I remember when my little girl was four years old, how she teased 
her mother to buy her a muff. At last she got her one. I remem- 
ber it was in the winter; and when I got home, she said: ‘“ Papa, 
won't you go out with me, I have got a new muff.’ Well, I went 
ont, and I said, the ground being covered with ice, “ Let me take 
your hand, Emma; the ground is very slippery, and you will fall.” 
“Q, no,” she said, “I want to walk by myself, and put my hands in 
my muff, as other people do.” Well, she went along a little piece, 
when she slipped and fell. She got up again, and I again wanted 
to take hold of her hand, but she wouldn’t, and went along for a 
little, when down she went again. She got up a second time and 
walked along. But by and by her feet went from under her once 
more, and away she went. Then she said: “ Papa, just let me take 
hold of your little finger.” ‘ Well,” said I, “Emma, let me give 
you my whole hand.” But she wouldn’t; she would have it her 
own way. And that is the way with a good many of us; we want 
to follow our own way, and God just lets us have it. By and by her 
fect went from under her again, and down she went. Then she asked 
me to give her my hand, and I slipped it over her wrist, and we went 
along all right. So we must accept grace fully, and it will keep us 
up. We must not take a little to lean on—we must take abundance. 
Let us take it abundantly, for there is plenty of it. 

There is a story in Kings, one of the sweetest in the whole Bible. 
It would be a good thing if we knew our Bibles from back to back 
better than we do. There would not be so much talk of backsliding. 

In the days of Elijah, one of the prophets died and left his wife in 
debt. He was something like one of the students in our theologi- 
cal seminaries might be. The law was very rigid in those days. 
This woman did not only lose her husband, but had a family of 
two boys, and I suppose her household goods were to be sold, and 
her boys sent to slavery. She knew the man of God, and went to 
Elijah and told him her story. When she got through, he might 
have said: “ What have you got to pay the debt with?” “I haven't 


LYERS, 


judgment and 
or prosperity, 
ne, and we can 
Paul felt more 
h. If we ask 
flesh. Let us 


ow she teased 
ie. I remem- 
said: ‘ Papa, 
Well, I went 
Let me take 
you will fall.” 
- my hands in 
a little piece, 
again wanted 
t along for a 
ynd time and 
der her once 
st let me take 
let me give 

have it her 
us; we want 
by and by her 
en she asked 
and we went 
will keep us 
bP abundance. 


whole Bible. 
back to back 
backsliding. 
t his wife in 
ur theologi- 
those days. 
a family of 
be sold, and 
nd went to 
h, he might 
“T haven't 


SECOND SERMON ON GRACE, II, 


got anything,” was the answer. “ Well, how many pots of oil have 
you inthe house?” “There is only one pot of oil in the house, not 
another thing.” “Go home, borrow all the vessels you can, borrow 
not a few.” I like that phrase—“ not a few.” ‘ Borrow these and 
put the oil into the empty vessels.” The woman took him at his 
word. I can imagine her going to her next door neighbor and 
knocking, and when her neighbor came to the door, asking, “ Have 
you got any vessels you can lend?” “ How many do you want?” 
“Want all you’ve got.” Well, I can just see her taking away those 
vessels, and her boys—some of the vessels as big as the boys— 
dragging them along to the house. Then she went to another 
house, and knocked at the door, and said: “ How many vessels 
have you got tolend?” “Oh, I have a few, but some of them are 
not very clean.” ‘ Well, never mind that, I will wash them.” And 
away they went to the house. I suppose in a short time she had a 
room packed full of vessels, and all the neighbors, if they liked gos- 
sip as well as people do in these days, were all turned out to see 
what was the matter. When she had got all the vessels in the neigh- 
borhood gathered there, she just said: “ Now, my sons ””—perhaps 
the two boys were named Johnny and Jimmy—“ you just take up 
the pot of oil and fill those vessels.” They fill one, and then they 
look into the pot, and find, to their amazement, it is as full as ever. 
The boys never saw such oil as that. And they kept filling the 
vessels with the oil, and it didn’t seem to get any lower. When 
they had got through with all the vessels, the boys said: “ Mother, 
that is the last one,” and there was as much in the jar as ever. 
And she started out to the man of God and told him the story, and 
he said to her: “Go home and sell your oil and pay your debts.” 
God not only comes down to us and forgives our sins, but He gives 
us grace. He did not come down here only to pardon us and then 
leave us in prison. He did not leave us to fight the battle alone. 
He gives us grace to overcome all our difficulties. God’s grace is 
offered freely, and every man and woman can be saved if they will. 

I remember hearing about a man who had a wayward boy in Cali- 
fornia, who ran away from home, and he never heard anything that 
was good about him. Two reports that came said he was dissipated, 
gambling, and drinking. He was a prodigal. Letters sent by the 
father were unheeded. But at last one of the neighbors was going 
out to the Pacific coast, and the father called on him and said, “If 
you find my boy tell him that my love for him is unchanged; tell 

8 


114 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


him to come home and all will be forgiven.” The neighbor went 
out to California, and found him, after searching some? time—found 
him one night past midnight in a gambling den. He took him 
aside and told the message from his father, and he said to him, “I 
have just come from your father, and he wanted me to find you and 
tell you that his love was as strong as ever; and if you will only 
come home, all will be forgiven.” The boy was completely melted, 
and tears trickled down his cheeks. And that is the way with a 
great many sinners. They doubt that God is willing to save them, 
when His love is as strong as ever, in spite of their many transgres- 
sions. We have been praying for intemperate men at this after- 
noon’s prayer-meeting. Some of you, perhaps, will think that God 
can not save you, but God’s grace is able to give you victory, and, 
though a besotted drunkard, to snap your thirst for liquor. 

I remember going into a young converts’ meeting in Philadelphia, 
where I heard a story that thrilled my soul. A young man said he 
had been a great drunkard. He had lost one situation after another, 
till finally he came to the very dregs. He left Philadelphia, and went 
first to Washington, and then to Baltimore. One night he came 
back to Philadelphia. He had lost his key and could not get into 
his home. He was afraid to go into the house while the people 
were stirring, so he staid outside watching till all had retired. He 
knew that after that there would be at least one who would hear 
him and come to the door. He went, he knocked; when he heard 
the footsteps of his mother. “Oh, Edward,” said she, “I am so glad 
to see you.” She did not reprove him; did not rebuke him. He 
went up-stairs and did not come down for two days. When he 
came down, the servants were walking about the house very softly ; 
everything was quiet. They told him that his mother was at the 
point of death. His brother was a physician, and he went to him 
and asked him if it was so. ‘ Yes, Ned,” said he, “ mother can not 
live.” He immediately went up-stairs, and asked his mother’s for- 
giveness, and prayed to his mother’s God to have mercy upon him. 
“And God,” said he, “my mother’s God, heard my prayers.” And 
as the tears trickled down his face he said, “God has kept me straight 
these four years in the face of all trials.” Oh, sinner, ask for His 
grace and might; do not turn Him away. Oh, to-night let Him 
save you. 


} 
t 
a 
' 


VERS, 


ieighbor went 
- time—found 
He took him 
id to him, “I 
find you and 
you will only 
etely melted, 
e way with a 
to save them, 
ny transgres- 
at this after- 
ink that God 
victory, and, 
uor. 
Philadelphia, 
man said he 
after another, 
hia, and went 
tht he came 
not get into 
> the people 
retired. He 
> would hear 
hen he heard 
I am so glad 
ehim. He 
When he 
very softly ; 
was at the 
vent to him 
ther can not 
other’s for- 
y upon him. 
ers.” And 
me straight 
ask for His 
ht let Him 


' 
i 
Hq 
5 


XIV. 


ENTHUSIASM. 


PSALM Ixix. 9: “ For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up.” 


OU that were here on Sunday night will remember that } was 
talking about Courage, a necessary qualification to work for 
the Lord, and last night we had Love. To-night I wart to 

talk on another word that I think is very important, and that is— 
Enthusiasm. You area little afraid of it down here in New En- 
gland, but it won’t hurt you to havea little more. I know there 
are a great ma..y very wise men shaking their heads; they are afraid 
of a movement of this kind. They already begin to cry: “ Undue 
excitement!” “i uarge meetings!” It is astonishing to hear some 
people talk. When their meetings are very small, then they are 
mourning for the smallness, and when the Spirit of God does come, 
and the people have ears to hear, and great crowds do come, then 
they shake their heads and say: “ Ah, we are afraid of these great 
crowds; now, we must be very careful.” We heart no complaint 
about the politicians. They wake up a good deal of enthusiasm. 
But just the moment we talk about getting a little feeling into the 
churches, and a little enthusiasm into the Lord’s work, a good many 
shake their gray heads and say: “I am afraid.” Now, be careful 
how you jump on to the safety-valve to keep down the steam. I 
have yet to find a man that didn’t succeed in his ministry if he had 
enthusiasm about him. I have yet to find the successful Sunday- 
school teacher that didn’t take up the work of God with enthusi- 
asta. For years I was superintendent of a Sunday-school in Chicago, 
and I learned one thing, that any man or woman who ever tock hold 
of a class without some enthusiasm, didn’t succeed. You will find 
that every business man in Boston gets enthusiastic in his business 
if he succeeds. All men who succeed have enthusiasm. I believe 
that Joshua and Caleb were called enthusiasts after they came back 
(115) 


116 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


from viewing the land. I believe that this man Gideon was called 
an enthusiast in the camp of Israel. The idea of his going out to 
meet a hundred thousand men with pitchers, and lanterns in the 
pitchers! How many people there are in Boston who would have 
said: “The man has gone clean mad.” Yes, he was an enthusiast, 
but the Lord God was with him; and what we want is this godly 
enthusiasm, and then there will be holy fire; and if we get this into 
our hearts, then we shall see the work of God advance. Some one 
has said to me: “ When are you going to preach to the uncon- 
verted?” Well, I don’t know that I shall preach to them at all. I 
will get you to preach to them. We want five or six or seven thou- 
sand sermons preached to the unconverted every day. We want 
thousands of men and women going out to tell the story of the 
cross. It is very easy when we get enthusiasm and are full of love 
for God and His work. A great many will cry out: “ He has zeal 
without knowledge.” I would a good deal rather have zeal without 
knowledge than knowledge without zeal. There is a good deal of 
knowledge without zeal here in Boston, and if we are enthusiasts for 
Christ, as we ought to be, there will be some who will call us fanatics 
and say we are mad. I don’t believe a man is worth much for Christ 
util he is mad. And when we hear that cry raised, it is a sure sign 
we are getting into the footsteps of the Master. They said He had 
got beside Himself, if you remember, and on the day of Pentecost 
they said they were full of new wine. ..nd when Paul stood before 
Festus, Festus said to him: “ Much learning doth make thee mad ;” 
and Paul said: “No, most noble Festus, I am not mad.” The 
Spirit of God had moved on his heart and he was full of godly en- 
thusiasm. 

There is aman that I admire very much. I don’t know that I 
admire his judgment. That is Garibaldi; and I am no Italian 
either. But I admire that man. When he was going to Rome they 
took him captive and threw him inte prison. And he wrote to the 
people outside this: “If fifty Garibaldis be thrown into prison, let 
Rome be free.” That’s enthusiasm. He didn’t care anything about 
Garibaldi; it was the cause he was looking at. And when this cause 
of Christ sinks deep into our hearts, and we want only to see Christ 
exalted and to save a perishing world, then the Church will have 
power and all the hosts of death and hell can not stand before it. 
Well, my friends, the question is, have you got it? Have you got 
enthusiasm for Christ? Has the Spirit of God moved on your 


Cd? ee 


> Qe ~~ AS rh =e TH ay rH we a — rn —t* Law 


~ 


wi 


ENTHUSIASM. 17 


a 


s called 

out to 
S in the 
Id have 
husiast, 
is godly 
his into 
me one 
F uncon- 
talk. 


en thou- 


heart yet? Are you ready to be called a fool for Christ’s sake? 
Are you ready to be called beside yourself? Are you ready to bear 
the scoffs and jeers of the world for Christ’s sake? A man once 
said to an enthusiast for Christ that he was mad. ‘“ Well,” he said, 
“T have got a good asylum to go to anda good keeper on the way!" 
Remember, my friends, God can not use you until you are willing to 
have the world point the finger of scorn at you. If the world hasn't 
got anything to say against us, it is pretty sure that Christ won't 
have much to say for us. Because, if we love God in Jesus Christ 
we shall surely suffer persecution; and if we are afraid of our dig- 
; nity and reputation and standing, we are not fit for Christ’s service. 
poe Somebody spoke once to a young convert who got up in the streets 
y of the and tried to preach, and said: “ You ought to be ashamed of your- 
| of love self.” ‘“ Well,” he said, “I am, but I am not ashamed of my Sav- 
has zeal iour.”’ So let us be ashamed of ourselves, but not of Christ, but 
AERO speak out in our business and in our homes, everywhere where we 
deal of are, for Christ. This is the way to have a true revival—work for 
ALONE for Christ, talk for Christ, speak to those who are about you, and don’t 
| fanatics you see that if this whole audience here was full of holy enthusi- 
bas Christ asm, Boston would feel our influence within twenty-four hours?” 
ARES REN “One shall chase a thousand and two shall put ten thousand <5 
| ite Had flight.” There is a story told of a man back in the ninth century, 
cheese ont I think, that he came up with a little handful of men to attack a 
d before king with a large army; and when the king heard that he hadn't 
te Mads but five hundred men, and he had an army of thirty thousand men, 
The he sent a message to this young general—perhaps he thought he 
jodly en- was an enthusiast and was mad—that if he would surrender he 
would be very merciful to him and spare his life. And the young 
general heard the messenger; and when he got through he said to 
one of his privates: “Go leap over into yonder chasm ;” and over 
he went into the jaws of death. Then he called another and handed 
him a dagger, and said: “Take that and drive it into your heart.” 
And he drove it into his heart, staggered forward, and fell dead. 
Then he turned to the messenger and said: “Go back and tell your 
king that I have five hundred such men; tel. him we die, but never sur- 
render.” And when the king heard that five hundred such men were 
before him, his army got demoralized and fled. The young general 
said to the messenger: “ Tell your king I will have him chained with 
my dogs within twenty-four hours ;” and he did it. Ah! my friends, 
if we are ready to go and do whatever the Master asks us, then one 


ee 
= 


w that I 
» Italian 
yme they 
te to the 
rison, let 
ng about 
nis cause 
2e Christ 
vill have 
vefore it. 
you got 
on your 


118 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


shall chase a thousand, and two shall put ten thousand to flight. 
The trouble is, a great many are looking at the obstacles and the 
army that is against us. Those men who are talking against this 
work can not oppose it if we have that spirit, and I expect to seea 
yreat many of them converted themselves if we get this enthusiasm. 
Yes, it is enthusiasm the Church of God wants, and let us pray for 
it, so that we may get it and improve the talents He has given us. 
If every man and woman born into the Spirit in this assembly 
to-night should say, “ By the grace of God I will try to lead some 
soul to Christ this week,” how many would be converted! Now, 
haven't we got that desire? Hasn’t that come upon the hearts of 
this people? Or are we only ready to hear? It is very easy to 
come here twice a day, but we want to preach off these chairs; we 
want to get you so full of enthusiasm that you must go out and 
preach Christ ; must go out of here and call your neighbors together 
and pray with them. It won’t do to have all the work done in this 
Tabernacle, but we must carry it into every street and every alley 
and every cellar; and if the Spirit of God comes upon us we can do 
it. Let us put up one united prayer that the Spirit of God may 
come upon us, and that there may be a revival in every church in 
Boston, and that when they stand up in their pulpits next Sunday 
the Spirit that came upon Joshua and Elijah and Daniel and 
Gideon, may come upon the ministry of Boston, and then we will 
have the work we have prayed for, and Christianity will be like a 
red-hot ball rolling over the face of the earth, and all the hosts of 
death and hell can not stop it. Have we got the fire, or are we still 
asleep? Some of you think you are awake, but really you are 
sound asleep. If a man has no desire to go out and win some soul 
to Christ ; no desire to see his own son converted, or to see his own 
relatives brought to the Saviour, he is sound asleep spiritually, isn’t 
he? What we want to do is to wake up and get this building filled 
with non-church-goers. I don’t feel that I have a mission to come 
and preach to you people who have been sitting here under able 
ministers for twenty or thirty years. We want you to go out of 
this building, and the men who haven't heard the Gospel for twenty, 
thirty, or forty years to come in. We are not going to do it by 
advertising in the papers, nor by notices, but by having every one 
go out as a missionary. I would like to see this Tabernacle filled 
with the rum-sellers of Boston. I would like to have the fallen 
women come here. I would like to have them know that faith in 


RS, 


to flight. 
s and the 
rainst this 
tt to see a 
ithusiasm. 
is pray for 
; given us. 
assembly 
lead some 
d! Now, 
hearts of 
ry easy to 
hairs; we 
» out and 
s together 
ne in this 
very alley 
we can do 
God may 
church in 
t Sunday 
aniel and 
en we will 
be like a 
hosts of 
re we still 
you are 
ome soul 
e his own 
ally, isn’t 
ding filled 
to come 
nder able 
ro out of 
br twenty, 
b do it by 
every one 
Acle filled 
he fallen 
t faith in 


ENTHUSIASM. 11g 


Christ is power unto salvation. The devil has deceived them, and 
they don’t know it. Now, we send a lot of men abroad as mission- 
aries, and God forbid that I should say one word against missions. 
God bless the missionaries. I wish we had thousands more going 
round the world for Christ. But don’t let us forget the people at 
our own doors. What are we doing for them? Sha’n’t we have 
some enthusiasm to go and reach these men who are right here by 
our side? When I was in Philadelphia in 1867, on my way to 
Europe, Mr. George H. Stuart told me of a meeting he attended in 
Edinburgh of the General Assembly, where an old missionary who 
had been in India twenty-five years and had come back to die, was 
asked to plead for India. They had money, but couldn’t get men 
to go there. And the old returned missionary spoke an hour and 
a half and then fainted away, and he was carried out and doctors 
called in. When he came round he said: “ Where am I?” and 
then he said: “ Oh, I was making my plea for India; take me back 
and let me finish it.” The doctors told him he must be taken 
home; but no he said, he must finish it. ‘I must finish that 
speech for India—they won’t meet again for twelve months, and 
then I shall be dead. I must finish it.’ And so he insisted on it, 
and they brought the old man in again, and Mr. Stuart said there 
never was such a sight. When they saw him being brought in, 
the whole body rose as one man, not a word was said, and tears 
were flowing on every side. And the old man stood there with his 
hand on the rail, faint and exhausted, and closing up that speech 
he said: “Is it true, fathers and mothers of Scotland; is it true, 
elders of Scotland, that you have no more sons to go to India? IEf 
Queen Victoria sends out a call for her army you are always ready 
to send your sons to fight her battles, and all the sons of Scotland 
are ready to go. But the Lord Jesus has called and no one answers. 
Is it true, Mr. Moderator, that Scotland has no son for India? 
Well, then, let it be announced, and although my health is. shat- 
tered, I will go back to the shores of the Ganges and: let them know 
there is one poor old Scotchman ready to die for them if he can not 
live for them.” Oh, may God waken up Boston; and may every 
child of God go forth into the vineyard and work for Him with 
enthusiasm. Let us not be afraid of enthusiasm, or to carry 
it into the work of the Lord. Why should we be afraid of it? 
Christ died for us. Shall not we be ready, to live for Him and work 
for Him? Let us pray. 


120 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we pray Thee to forgive our lack of 
enthusiasm. We pray Thee to forgive us for our coldness. We 
pray Thee to forgive us for loving Thee so little and serving Thee 
so poorly. O God, help us to-night to reconsecrate ourselves to 
Thee and Thy service. May the Spirit that came upon Gideon and 
Joshua and Elijah, and that came on the day of Pentecost, come 
upon us here to-night. O Spirit of the living God, fall upon us 
here to-night, and may our hearts be all on fire for the Son of 
God. And may we be willing to lay aside our dignity and posi- 
tion and standing, and go forth into the vineyard and work for 
Thee. O Spirit of the living God, come upon us to-night; Lord 
Jesus, byveathe upon us one breath from that upper world, and 
grant that hundreds now, while we are praying, may lift their 
hearts to Thee in silent prayer for the blessing of Almighty God ; 
and while we are praying may the Spirit that came on the day 
of Pentecost come upon us. Oh, let it fall upon us now, and may 
there be hundreds of thousands of Christians go forth from this 
Tabernacle to work for Thee. May the Spirit of God ccme upon 
the ministers, and as they go into their pulpits next Sabbath-day 
may their people see that they have been with Jesus; and may 
elders and deacons and church officers be quickened into new life. 
_May teachers and superintendents of Sunday-schools be set on fire 
with new zeal to-night, and as they go to their classes may they go 
‘with the influence of the Holy One. O Spirit of God, come upon 
‘us to-night and give us power to work for Christ ; power to preach 
the Gospel, power to tell the story of the Cross. Oh, grant that 
the next three months we may see signs and wonders following the 
ministry in this place, and may tidings come in before long from 
all around New England of mighty work done for Thee. We ask 
it.all in the name of Thy beloved Son. Amen. 


~ cena 


a 


a Seas PTE 


DEERE TEE IE ERE 


- 


ERS, 


ur lack of 
Iness. We 
rving Thee 
urselves to 
sideon and 
‘cost, come 
ll upon us 
he Son of 
' and posi- 
d work for 
ght; Lord 
world, and 
- lift their 
ghty God ; 
n the day 
, and may 
from this 
cme upon 
ibbath-day 
and may 
0 new life. 
set on fire 
uy they go 
ome upon 
to preach 
grant that 
owing the 
long from 

We ask 


Se ee 


XV. 
ON BEING BORN AGAIN. 


JOHN iii, 3: ‘‘Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, 
Except a man be born again, he can not see the kingdom of God,” 


UPPOSE I put the question to this audience, and ask how 
many believe in the Word of God, I have no doubt every man 
and every woman would rise and say, “I believe.” There 

might be an infidel or skeptic here and there, but undoubtedly the 
great mass would say they believed. Then what are you going to 
do with this solemn truth, “ Except a man be born again, he can not 
see the kingdom of God,” much less inherit it? There are a great 
many mysteries in the Word of God. There are a great many dark 
sayings of which we have not yet discovered the depth. But God 
has put that issue so plainly and simply that he who runs may read 
if he will. This third chapter of St. John makes the way to Heaven 
plainer than any other chapter in the Bible; yet there is no truth so 
much misunderstood, and the church and the world are so troubled 
about, as this. Let me just say, before I go any further, what regen- 
eration is not. It is not going to church. How many men think 
they are converted because they go to church! I come in contact 
with many men who say they are Christians because they go to 
church regularly. It is a wrong idea that the devil never frequents 
any place but billiard-halls, saloons, and theatres; wherever the 
Word of God is preached, He is there. He is in this audience to- 
day. You may go to church all the days of your life, and yet not be 
converted. Going to church is not being born again. But there is 
another class who say, “I don’t place my hopes in going to church. 
I have been baptized, and I think I was regenerated when that took 
place.” Where do those persons get their evidence? Certainly not 
in the Bible. You can not baptize men into regeneration. If you 
could, I would go up and down the world and baptize every man, 
woman, and child; and if I could not do it when they were awake, 
I would do it while they slept. But the Word says, “Except a man 
(121) 


122 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


be born again”—born in the Spirit, born in righteousness from 
above—“ he can not see the kingdom of God.” 

There is another class who say, “I was born again when I was 
confirmed. I was confirmed when I was five years old.” But con- 
firmation is not regeneration. A new birth must be the work of 
God, and not the work of man. Baptism, confirmation, and other 
ordinances are right in their place, but the moment you build hope 
on them instead of on new birth, you are being deceived by Satan. 
Another man says, ‘ That is not what my hope is based upon; I say 
my prayers regularly.” I suppose there was no man prayed more 
regularly than Paul did before Christ met him; he was a praying 
man. But saying prayers is one thing, and praying isanother. Say- 
ing prayers is not conversion. You may pray from education; your 
mother may have taught you when you were a little boy. I remem- 
ber that I could not go to sleep when I was a little boy unless I said 
my prayers, and yet perhaps the very next word I uttered might be 
an oath. There is just as much virtue in counting beads as in 
saying prayers, unless the heart has been regenerated and born 
again. 

There is another class who say, “I read the Bible regularly.’ 
Well, reading the Bible is very good, and prayer is very good in 
its place; but you don’t see anything in the Scriptures which says, 
“Except a man read the Bible he can not see the kingdom of God.’ 
There is still another class who say, “I am trying to do the best I 
ca>, and I will come out all right.” That is not new birth at all; 
that is not being born of God. Trying to do the best you can 
is not regeneration. This question of new birth is the most im- 
portant that ever came before the world, and it ought to be settled 
in every man’s mind. Every one should inquire, Have I been born 
of the Spirit >—have I passed from death unto life ?—or am I building 
my hopes of Heaven on some form? In the first chapter of Genesis 
we find God working alone; He went on creating the world all alone. 
Then we find Christ coming to Calvary alone. His disciples for- 
sook Him, and in redernption He was alone. And when we get to 
the third chapter of John we find that the work of regeneration is 
the work of God alone. The Ethiopian can not change his spots; 
we are born in sin, and the change of heart must come from God. 
We believe in the good old Gospel. 

What man wants is to come to God for this new heart. The mo- 
ment he gets it he will work for the Lord. He can not help it; it 


AG TSS WM ORR ws 


a aN SRA 


Pe eee 0 a ee hee eh ee ae NY ee ee Oe 


ERS, 
sness from 


vhen I was 
’ But con- 
he work of 
, and other 
build hope 
1 by Satan. 
ipon; I say 
rayed more 
a praying 
other. Say- 
ition; your 

I remem- 
nless I said 
d might be 
beads as in 

and born 


regularly,’ 
sry good in 
which says, 
m of God.’ 
9 the best I 
irth at all; 
st you can 
> most im- 
» be settled 
been born 
1 I building 
of Genesis 
d all alone. 
sciples for- 
we get to 
neration is 
: his spots; 
from God. 


The mo- 
help it ; it 


SOR “Met TUNA Ao ASNT TUS OI a dN Re 
ners ‘ eae 5 2 Wiss: Dine hae ne ars a, 
; ‘i Rnb RRS Be 


ON BEING BORN AGAIN, 123 


becomes his second nature. Some say, “1 would like to have you 
explain this new birth.” Well, I might as well be honest, and own 
right up that I can not explain it. I have read a great many books 
and sermons trying to explain the philosophy of it, but they all fail 
to do it. I don’t understand how it is done. I can not understand 
how God created earth. It staggers me and bewilders me when I 
think how God created nature out of nothing. But, say the infidels, 
He did not do it. Then how did He doit? A man came to me in 
Scotland, and said he could explain it, and I asked him how those 
rocks are made. He said, “ They are made from sand.” “ What 
makes the sand?” “Oh!” he replied, “rocks.” “Then,” I asked 
him, “what made the first sand?” He couldn’t tell. Notwith- 
standing the philosophy of some people, we do believe that God did 
create the world. We believe in redemption. We believe that 
Christ came from the Father, and that He grew up and taught men. 
We believe He went into the sepulchre and burst the bands of 
death. You may ask me to explain all this; but I don’t know how 
todo it. You ask me to explain regeneration. I can not do it. 
But one thing I know—that I have been regenerated. All the infi- 
dels and skeptics could not make me believe differently. I feel a 
different man than I did twenty-one years ago last March, when 
God gave me a new heart. I have not sworn since that night, and 
I have no desire to swear. I delight to labor for God, and all the 
influences of the world can not convince me that I am not a differ- 
ent man. I heard some time ago about four or five commercial 
travelers going to hear a minister preach. When they got back to 
their hotel, they began to discuss the sermon. A good many peo- 
ple just go to church for the purpose of discussing those things, but 
they should remember that they must be spiritually inclined to un- 
derstand spiritual things. Those travelers came to the wise conclu- 
sion that the minister did not know what he was talking about. An 
old man heard them say they would not believe anything unless 
they could reason it out, and he went up to them and said: “ While 
I was coming down in the train this morning I noticed in a field some 
sheep, some geese, some swine, and cattle eating grass. Can you 
tell me by what process that grass is turned into hair, feath- 
ers, wool, and horns?” “No,” they answered, “not exacily.” 


“Well, do you believe it is done?” ‘Oh, yes, we believe that.” 
“ But,” said the old man, “ you said you could not believe anything 
unless you understood it.” “Oh,” they ansv ered, “we can not help 


(24 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


believing that; we sce it.” Well, I can not help believing that I 
am regenerated, because I feel it. Christ could not explain it to 
Nicodemus, but said to him, ‘“ The wind bloweth where it listeth, and 
thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh 
and whither it goeth.” Can you tell all about the currents of the air? 
He says it is every one that is born of the Spirit. Suppose, because 
I never saw the wind, I say it was all false. I have lived nearly 
forty years, and I never saw the wind. I never saw a man that ever 
did see it. I can imagine that little girl down there saying, “ That 
man don’t know as much as I do. Didn't the wind blow my hat off 
the other day? Haven't I felt the effects of the wind? Haven't I 
felt it beating against my face?” And I say you never saw the 
effects of the wind any more than a child of God felt the Spirit 
working in his heart. He knows that his eyes have been opened; 
that he has been born of the Spirit; that he has got another nature, 
a heart that goes up to God, after he has been born of the Spirit. 
It seems to me this is perfectly reasonable. 

We have a law that no man shall be elected President unless he 
was born on American soil. I never heard any one complain of 
that law. We have Germans, Scar iinavians, foreigners coming here 
from all parts of the world, and I never heard a man complain of 
that law. Haven't we gota right to say who shall reign? Had Iany 
right when I was in England, where a Queen reigns, to interfere ? 
Has a foreigner any right to interfere here? Has not the God of 
Heaven a right to say how a man shall come into His kingdom, and 
who shall come? And He says: “ Except a man be born again, he 
can not see the kingdom.” How are you going to get in? Going 
to try to educate men? That is what men are trying to do, but it 
is not God’s way. A man is not much better after he is educated if 
he hasn’t got God in his heart. Other men say, “I will work my 
way up.” That is not God’s way, and the only way is God’s way— 
to be born again. Heaven isa prepared place fora prepared people. 
You take an unregenerated man in Chicago and put him on the crys- 
tal pavements of Heaven, and it would be hell! A man that can’t 
bear to spend one Sunday among God’s people on earth, with all 
their imperfections, what is he going to do among those who have 
made their robes white in the blood of the Lamb? He would say 
that was hell for him. Take the unregenerated man and put him 
into the very shadow of the Tree of Life, and he wouldn’t want to 
sit there. A man who is born of the Sririt becomes a citizen of 


RR a SS 
7 


> ee oe > a oe ee ed, 


—-P) 


"ERS, 


eving that I 
xplain it to 
t listeth, and 
ce it cometh 
ts of the air? 
ose, because 
lived nearly 
an that ever 
ying, “ That 
v my hat off 
» Haven't I 
ver saw the 
It the Spirit 
een opened; 
other nature, 
yf the Spirit. 


nt unless he 
complain of 
coming here 
complain of 
? HadITany 
o interfere? 

the God of 
ingdom, and 
brn again, he 
in? Going 
to do, but it 
educated if 
ill work my 
God’s way— 
bared people. 
on the crys- 
An that can’t 
rth, with all 
se who have 
e would say 
nnd put him 
dn’t want to 
a citizen of 


- 


ON BEING BORN AGAIN, 125 


another world. He has been translated into new life, taken out of 
the power of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of Light. 
Haven't you seen all around you men who had become suddenly 
and entirely changed ? 

Just draw a picture: Suppose we go down into one of these 
alleys—and I have been into some pretty dark holes down here in 
this alley that used to lie back of Madison street, and I have seen 
some pretty wretched homes. Go to one of those rooms, and you 
find a wife, with her four or five children. The woman is heart- 
broken. She is discouraged. When she married that man he 
swore to protect, love, and care for her, and provide for all her 
wants. He made good promises and kept them, for a few years, 
and did love her. But he got led away into one of these drinking 
saloons. He was a noble-hearted man by nature, and those are 
just the ones that are led astray. He has now become a confirmed 
drunkard. His children can tell by his footfall that he comes home 
drunk. They look upon him asa monster. The wife has many a 
scar on her body that she has received from that man’s arm who 
swore to love and protect her. Instead of being a kind-hearted 
husband, he has become a demon. He don’t provide for that poor 
woman. What a struggle there is! And may God have mercy 
upon the poor drunkard and his family is my prayer constantly! 
Suppose he is here in that gallery up there, or in the dark back 
there, and you can’t see him. May be he is so ashamed of himself 
that he has got behind a post. He hears that he may be regen- 
erated; that God will take away the love of strong drink, and snap 
the fetters that have been binding him, and make him a free man, 
and he says, “ By the grace of God I will ask Him to give mea 
new heart.” And he says, ““O God, save me!” Then he goes 
home. His wife says, “I never saw my husband look so happy for 
years. What has come over him?” He says, “Ihave been up 
there to hear these strangers. I heard Mr. Sankey singing ‘ Jesus 
of Nazareth passeth by,’ and it touched my heart. The sermon 
about being born again touched my heart, and, wife, I just prayed 
right there, and asked God to give me a new heart, and I believe 
He has done it. Come, wife, pray with me!” And there they 
kneel down and erect the family altar. 

Three months hence you go to that home, and what do you 
find? All is changed. He is singing “ Rock of Ages, cleft for 


me,” or that other hymn his mother once taught him, “ There is 


126 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


a fountain filled with blood.” His children have their arms 
upon his neck. That is Heaven upon earth. The Lord God 
dwells there. That man is passed from death unto life. That 
is the conversion we are aiming at. The man is made better, 
and that is what God does when a man has the spirit of Heaven 
upon him. He regenerates them, re-creates them in His own 
image. Let us pray that every man here who has the love of 
strong drink may be converted. Unite in prayer with me now 
and ask God to save these men that are rushing on to death 
and ruin. 


ee 


ERS. 


their arms 
Lord God 
life. That 
ade_ better, 
of Heaven 
1 His own 
the love of 
th me now 
1 to death 


ni oT Aa Se RO In SN 


XVI. 


THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 


JOHN iii. 14, 15: “ And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so 
must the Son of Man be lifted up; that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have eternal life.” 


DIDN'T get through with the subject—Being born again—and 

I will just continue it. Iwas trying to show from Scripture that 
anew birth is not a reformation—is not a turning over a new leaf, 

as some Call it, is not a making up your mind to simply lead better 
lives. They must be born of the Spirit, and then they will live ac- 
cording to the Spirit. Unless they do this, reformation will be worth- 
less. Tobe born again does not merely mean a resolve to be better. 
The fountain from which these resolves spring must be good—must be 
of the Spirit, and the tree will be good. If you havea fountain which 
contains bitter water, you can not expect sweet water to flow from 
it. Men try to make their lives sweet, and they have an undercur- 
rent of bitter water. That undercurrent must be sweetened first if 
they have to lead pure lives, and that is the meaning of the text, 
“Except a man be born again.” Now, I have found a good many 
men who believed that this passage referred to drunkards and _ har- 
lots. “They need to be reformed, and that’s what’s meant by it,” 
they say. Oh, they need to be regenerated. But who was this that 
Christ talked regeneration to? It was Nicodemus. We are told 
that he was a nobleman, a counselor, one of the chief rulers, and 
there were none higher among the Jews for integrity and honor 
than this same Nicodemus. He was at the very top round of the 
ladder. He had believed in the teachings of Moses, and lived ac- 
cording to them. He had heard of Jesus, and one night he came to 
Him and said, “ We know that Thou art a teacher come from God, 
for no man can do these miracles that Thou doest except God be 
with him.” I don’t know whether anything was said after that, but 
the next verse we see Jesus telling him, “Except a man be boin 
again he can not enter the kingdom of God,” and he met him with 

(127) 


128 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


a “how.” I don’t know if a man has ever come to Christ without 
first coming with a “how;” they want to know the how and the 
wherefore. And so Nicodemus asked him, ‘How can a man be 
born again when he is old?” and Christ goes on to tell him how he 
can be reborn. ‘That which is born of the flesh is flesh,” and it 
will remain so till it crumbles away in the grave. We may try to 
patch up our old Adam nature, but it is of no use. It will be a fail- 
ure. Men have tried to do it for six thousand years, and what God 
can not do, men need notitry. By the birth Christ offers us He 
makes a new creation. He does not put anew piece upon an old 
pyearment; He does not put new wine into old bottles. He makes a 
hew garment, and it is new wine into new bottles. Men may as 
well give up the idea of making the old into a new nature. God has 
said it is bad, and that it can never come into His sight unless there 
is a new birth. 

When I was born of my parents, in 1837, I received my human 
nature from them, and it was a very bad nature too. The nature 
they received from their forefathers was bad also, and we might 
trace it right back to Adam. When I was born of the Spirit, in 
1857, there was a struggle between the Adam nature and the new 
nature; a conflict between the Spirit and the flesh. And this takes 
place with every one who accepts the birth of the Spirit. It has to 
fight against lust, idolatry, and the other works of the flesh spoken 
of in the chapter we read in Galatians. When these works of the 
flesh are overcome, we put on anew man and walk into a new life. 
The child of God is one of the most remarkable of human beings, 
He has two natures. The one is love and the other is enmity 
toward God. Christ told Nicodemus he must be born again, and 
did not leave him in darkness on the subject. He showed him how 
he might bé born again. He gave him a remedy to change his nat- 
ure given him by Adam. You may say that the earth is a vast hos- 
pital. Every man and woman coming into it needs a physician. 
If you search you will find every one wounded. By nature we are 
sinners, and there is just one Physician who can come in, and 
that is Christ Himself. While in Belfast I learned of a surgeon 
who had a custom, when he went into the hospital and found a 
patient who had broken his arm or leg, or whatever the wound 
might be, of saying to that patient, ‘ Now, take a good look at 
your wound,” and after that was done he would say, “ Now, take 
your eyes off the wound and look at me.’” And that is the way 


RS. 


st without 
v and the 
a man be 
im how he 
hy” and. it 
nay try to 
1 be a fail- 
what God 
ers us He 
on an old 
[e makes a 
en may as 
. God has 
nless there 


my human 
The nature 
we might 
e Spirit, in 
d the new 
| this takes 
It has to 
sh spoken 
rks of the 
a new life. 
1an beings. 
is enmity 
again, and 
d him how 
ge his nat- 
a vast hos- 
physician. 
ure we are 
e in, and 
a surgeon 
d found a 
he wound 
od look at 
Now, take 
is the way 


Nn 


THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 129 


with the great Physician. He wants us to take a look at our 
wounds—at the badness of our heart—and then take our eyes off 
and fix them on Him. He has given us a remedy and directions 
how to take it. In the third chapter of John at the beginning He 
tells you what you have to get before you can enter the kingdom ; 
and away down in the fourteenth verse He tells you how to get it: 
‘And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so 
must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in Him 
should nct perish, but have eternal life.” Here is the remedy, and, 
thank God, it is a universal remedy. We have not got to pick a 
man here and there—that man in the gallery there, or that woman 
yonder, and say, “ You can be saved.” It is for all, all! Some one 
may say, “ That is Universalism.” Call it what you like. God has 
offered the blessing to every wounded one, to every one who groans 
under the curse of the flesh, and thus I can prove that any man 
born on the earth has got a Saviour. ‘Ye must be born again,” 
and “ He must be lifted up.” He ha. done His part—He has given 
us the remedy, and we must lift Him up. 

A great many people complain of the justice of God. They say, 
“What a piece of injustice it is in God to condemn us because 
Adam sinned six thousand years ago; because somebody else 
sinned we are to be punished.” We hear this every day—we hear 
it in the streets of Chicago. “We don’t believe the Bible if it con- 
demns us for the sins of a man who lived six thousand years ago.” 
Now if you hear this or say this, let me tell you if any of you are 
stumbling over this mistake, it is a lie. Ifyou are lost it is because 
you are spurning the remedy—not because God don’t want to save 
you. Well, you will say, it is because of Adam’s sin that there is 
the necessity of being saved. I say it is, and I also say it ain’t. Ah, 
you will say, “ That is a contradiction.” Let me give you an illus- 
tration. Suppose I am just living my last days on earth, and con- 
sumption is my disease. I have had the leading physicians around 
me, 2nd they say I can not live thirty days. Well, somebody comes 
along and says: “ Moody, you have consumption.” “Well, you 
needn’t tell me that,” I respond. “But, Moody, I’ve got a 
remedy,” he says. ‘“There’s no remedy for me,” I tell him; “I 
have been to all the physicians of Europe and America, and they 
tell me there is no hope for me. They all say my lungs are clean 
gone, and it’s impossible for me to live. “But I tell you you 
needn’t die,” this man says, “there’s a remedy. Ten years ago I 

9 


130 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


was on the verge of the grave. Doctors told me I couldn't live, 
that iny lungs were gone, and all that, but a friend came to me and 
gave me the medicine and I took it. It cured me.” ‘“ That is a 
very strange story,” I might reply; “I have known you for a good 
many years, and if you were before a jury I would believe your 
testimony before almost any man I know; but when you tell me 
you were as far gone asl am, and that you were saved by that 
medicine, I can not believe you.” Well, off he goes and brings a 
friend, and he testifies that he himself was as bad as I am and was 
cured. I have known the man for years and never doubted his 
word. Here are two instances. You can establish anything in 
court if you can get them to agree on any one point. Well, those 
two witnesses testify to me, but I don’t believe them. So they go 
and get others to testify, and then the first cne says: “ Now, 
Moody, you have the testimony of these friends. The medicine 
cost me a great deal, but I would like to see you recover, and I 
give it to you for nothing.” This is the way with salvation. It is 
as free as the air we breathe, and it cost God all that He could give. 
It cost Heaven its richest jewel. And so this friend says to me, 
“Moody, that medicine cost me everything I had; take it, it is 
free.” Itake the remedy, and, instead of using it, dash it to the 
ground, and die of consumption. ‘The fact of my having consump- 
tion was not the reason of my death. It was because J spurned the 
remedy. If you men and women are lost it is because we have 
spurned the remedy, not because we are the sons of Adam and 
have inherited his nature. Salvation is a gift. Take God’s Son as 
a Saviour. ‘As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even 
so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in 
Him should not perish, but have eternal life.’ Now He has been 
lifted up, and we have just to take salvation as a gift. 

Let us look into the camp of Israel when Moses lifted up that 
serpent. There are three millions of people coming up out of Egypt, 
out of bondage. When they had come to a certain length they had 
disobeyed God. He brought them safely through the Red Sea, and 
now they turn aside from "tim and He has brought judgment upon 
them, just as He has brought judgment upon this city. The people 
were dying everywhere, and a petition went up to God to have mercy 
upon them. You could hear the groans of the wounded and the 
dying from one end of the camp to the other. There is a mother 
hearing away her loved child to the grave and lamenting over her 


iaenitintnienientees tae eT 


RS. 


ldin’t live, 
to me and 
That is a 
for a good 
lieve your 
yu tell me 
-d by that 
id brings a 
m and was 
subted his 
ything in 
Vell, those 
50 they go 
3s: “ Now, 
» medicine 
over, and I 
ion. It is 
could give. 
tys to me, 
ike it, it is 
1 it to the 
y consump- 
purned the 
se we have 
Adam and 
\d’s Son as 
rness, even 
velieveth in 
e has been 


ed up that 
t of Egypt, 
h they had 
ed Sea, and 
ment upon 
The people 
have mercy 
ed and the 
is a mother 
g over her 


rer errr TERT ENN NEAT ETN RET Sa Aen 


THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 131 
lost one. At another corner we see a son mourning over the death 
of amother. Again, we see a family group plunged in affliction. The 
father has died and left a widow and a large family, and they are 
bearing the body away to that grave in the wilderness. There is a 
young man who has just been cut down. He was in the bloom and 


- flush of manhood, and here is a young lady who has received the 


fatal sting, and is being laid in her narrow bed, her friends mourn- 
ing that they have to leave her in that desert forever. Not a family 
but who has lost some loved one; all is despair and desolation. 
And what a picture of the world to-day! Look over the audience. 
Yonder a father who has just lost a son who was the pride of his 
heart ; here again is a young widow who is mourning over the loss 
of her husband ; there a child who has just seen her mother or father 
laid at rest forever. There is mourning all over. Ah, there is many 
a dark and desolate home in the city to-night which but reflects the 
picture of the wilderness. These serpents were very busy, and the 
moment a man or woman was bitten, they were gone. There was 
no physician who could heal them. It was sure death, and when 
Moses lifted up that serpent as a remedy, how the news spread. I 
can see a mother whose boy has been bitten. Ah, I can imagine 
how that mother felt toward that boy. Mothers, you know how 
you love your onlv child. There she is leaning over her boy, and 
she says: ‘Oh, my son, those beautiful eyes will soon be closed in. 
death and you will be gone forever.” She sees the glaring film 
gathering over them; she feels the cold hand of death stealing over 
her darling; she hears the death-rattle in his throat, and all. 
at once there isa great noise. Some one at that moment rushes 
past her tent, and she stops him and asks, “ What is. all that 
noise?” “Why,” says the man, “God has provided a remedy, 
and all those who have been bitten by the fiery serpent can live if 
they but take the remedy.” “Tell me what it is. Where is it?” 
eagerly inquires the woman. ‘ Well,” responds the man, “God has 
told Moses to make a brass serpent and lift it up with prayer, 
and that shout was the shout of all Israel when the serpent was 
lifted up.” ‘Where is it?” she inquires with eagerness. “ Right 
up yonder, on the hill.” And she goes a little way and sees the 
serpent, and comes running back to her boy and says, “ You haven’t 
got to die, my boy, God has provided a remedy.” “A remedy?” 
ejaculates the boy. “Yes,” says the mother, “God has told Moses 
to make a brass serpent and put it. up, and if the people who have 


132 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


been bitten but look at it, they will be cured.” “Is it true, mother? 

asks the boy, with a little incredulity. “Why, certainly it is true, 
my dear; I saw some persons running about who had been bitten.” 
“How I wish I could walk to it; but I can’t; I am too weak.” So 
the mother just takes the boy in her arms and runs with him to the 
foot of the hill, and turns his face to the serpent and tells him to 
look. There is a film almost over his eyes, and he says, “ Mother, I 
can’t see it.” “Keep on looking, my boy,” urges the mother, and 
he strains his eyes in the direction of the serpent, and at last he 
catches a faint glimpse of it, and leaps from. his mother’s arms per- 
fectly well. He trusted his mother, and he took the remedy she 
told him of. He is a young convert now, and I can see him now 
running about and telling every one what the Lord had done for 
him. Said a Scotch woman, who had been converted ‘The Lord 
will never hear the last of this,” and so a convert can not keep his 
peace. He must run about and tell what he has found—try and 
share his joy with others. This boy was a convert, and tells every 
one he meets what has been done to him by looking on the ser- 
pent—how he has been healed. He hears of a man who has been 
bitten, and rushes to his tent and shouts, “I’ve got good news for 
you. Youcan be saved.” ‘“That’s nonsense,’ says the man, “I 
never knew of a man who had been bitten but who died.” “Oh, 
‘but God has provided a remedy,” replies the boy. ‘God has 
told Moses to lift up a brass serpent, and tell every one who has 
been bitten to look on it and they will be saved. I was bitten as 
bad as you are and I have been saved.” ‘ Why,” replies the man, 
“you don’t think I am fool enough to believe that a man as near 
death as I am can be saved by merely looking at a brass serpent on 
a pole?” He couldn’t believe it-—he didn’t see the philosophy of 
it. That is a type of a class of people here in Chicago. They want 
to know the philosophy of salvation. “If they had some remedy 
to take out the poison of the sting,” says the man, “I might believe 
you; but the idea of looking at a brazen serpent on a pole is pre- 
posterous.” ‘Well, I tell you,” urges the boy, “twenty minutes 
ago I was as nearly dead as you are now. My mother came and 
told me of it, and I was too weak to go, but she carried me where 
I could catch a glimpse of it, and in a minute—yes, in the twin- 
kling of an eye, I was made perfectly well.” “You don’t say,” 
he responds, rather curiously. ‘ Yes, I do say so,” rejoins the boy 
The man does not know what to make of this. And let me say 


—EE 
ee eee + RE aa Ie ay ic , 


ee 


aieieieeinaunhnkene a 


RS. 


,mother ? 
it is true, 
en bitten.” 
veak.” So 
him to the 
ells him to 
‘Mother, I 
other, and 
at last he 
$ arms per- 
emedy she 
e him now 
d done for 
‘The Lord 
t keep his 
d—try and 
tells every 
yn the ser- 
> has been 
d news for 
e man, “I 
dy FOR, 
““God_ has 
e who has 
s bitten as 
s the man, 
an as near 
serpent on 
losophy of 
They want 
ne remedy 
cht believe 
ole is pre- 
ty minutes 
‘came and 
me where 
the twin- 
lon’t say,” 
is the boy 
let me say 


ee a I tcc Rng eae tah ee 


Saisie lintel sis this atta ica oe ata a mene Rs a ee 


THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 133 


here that there is nothing that upsets an infidel or a scoffer more 
than a conversion. It is better than all books; better than scores 
of sermons on the subject. This man heard this young convert, but 
he wanted to know the philosophy of it—even after he tells him he 
had been bitten himself, and explains how he had been cured. The 
young convert urges him to come to the door of the tent and lock, 
and but to look, and he will be cured. “Why, you don’t think I 
am going to make such a fool of myself unless you can show me the 
philosophy of it?” Away the young convert goes and brings one 
of his friends to the man and says to him: “ Wasn’t you bitten as 
bad as this man?” The friend tells how he was only a few minutes 
from death, and how he only looked at that serpent and became as 
well as ever he was in his life. “I can hardly believe your cases 
were as bad as mine. There must be some mistake. I can’t believe 
it!’”” But while they are speaking, this man’s mother rushes in and 
tells how hundreds of men who were bitten have been cured by 
simply looking at the serpent set up by Moses. ‘ Why,” says the 
man, ‘that is just what these young men have been trying to tell 
me; but I can not believe it.” “It’s true,” responds the mother; 
“just come to the door of the tent and you will be cured.” “I can 
not do it,” says the son. “It is hard to die in the camp and be put 
in a grave in the desert; but, other, I can not understand this—I 
can’t see the philosophy of it; I can’t reason it out.” And the 
young man dies in his unbelief. Now, whese fault was it? Tell me 
whose fault it was? God offered a cure to .*at young man, and he 
wouldn’t take it. God has offered a remedy tous. He has offered 
salvation. The way of this young man is but the way of hundreds 
in Chicago. They are unwilling to take the salvation offered. They 
are unwilling to take it without adding something to it. They want 
to add something to the finished work of Jesus Christ. These 
young men were not saved by holding up the pole or looking at the 
pole. All the churches in Christendom never saved a Christian, 
They are but poles on which is seen salvation. Look, look clear to 
the top of the pole, look to the brazen serpent ; loox and live for- 
ever! Look to the top, fur “ As Moses lifted up the serpent in the 
wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whoso- 
ever believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal life.” 
There are a great many people who say, “I wish I could feel the 
bite more.” If you don’t feel the bite, it is evident that you are 
pretty severely bitten. If then you don't feel that the punishment is 


134 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


hanging over you, you are pretty far gone; if you don’t feel that 
you have committed a sin, you are pretty far gone. Some say to 
us: “I wish I had your faith”—you don’t want our experience. 
Look toward your Saviour. He is offered free to all. I never 
preach upon the third chapter of John without telling an incident 
that occurred after the battles of Pittsburgh Landing and Murfrees- 
boro. I had been talking one night to the soldiers, and telling them 
to drink of the waters of life, and they would never die. I was very 
tired, and when I went to bed, I soon fell asleep. Soon after I had 
retired, a soldier came and aroused me, and wished me to come toa 
man who was dying. I soon was at his bedside, and he said, 
“Chaplain ”’—he called me chaplain, although I was only a member 
of the Christian Commission—“ Chaplain, I wish you would help 
me to die.” “ My friend, I would willingly carry you unto the 
kingdom of God, but I can not; Christ can only do that,” 
and I preached Jesus to him. “ But,” said the soldier, ‘““ He won't 
help me; I've been fighting Him all my life. I had a praying 
mother, and I disregarded her prayers always; but I told her when 
I joined the army that if I got through the war I would become a 
Christian. But I am dying now.” I looked at the man and said he 
was dying, and thought how anxious that mother must have been, 
and how happy it would make her if he could just get a sight of 
Heaven. So I quoted promise after promise; but he could not see 
them, and I got nearly discouraged. His condition seemed to grow 
darker and darker, and I didn’t know what to do. At last the 
thought occurred to me to read the story of Nicodemus, and I said, 
“My friend, I am going to read you a story, and I want you to pay 
attention.”” When I commenced, I noticed how eagerly he listened, 
how greedily he seemed to devour every word. It seemed as if he 
drank in every letter of the verses. When I got to the verse, “As 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son 
of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth on Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life,” the dying man stopped. ‘“ What 
is that?” he asked. “Is that true? I want you just to read that 
again,’ and I read the two verses over carefully, and as I finished, he 
rose in his bed and shut his eyes, and said: “ Bless God for that,” 
and the cloud that had rested on his face gave place to a look of 
gladness. ‘Won't you please read that again?” I did so, and as 
I finished, he folded his arms across his breast and closed his eyes, 
When I had read it the third time, I went on to the next verse, 


ry 


pS. 


feel that 
e say to 
perience. 
I never 
incident 

IM urfrees- 
ing them 
was very 
ter I had 
ome toa 
he said, 

h member 
buld help 
unto the 
Ho that,” 
He won't 
praying 
her when 
become a 
d said he 
ave been, 
. sight of 
d not see 
d to grow 
- last the 
nd I said, 
ou to pay 
> listened, 
das if he 
erse, “As 
t the Son 
iould not 
“What 
read that 
1ished, he 
for that,” 
a look of 
30, and ag 
his eyes, 
>xt verse, 


THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 135 


“For God so loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son 
that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have ever- 
lasting life.” I read on through the whole chapter, and when I got 
through, he turned to me and said, “I understand it now; write to 
my mother and tell her I died trusting in Christ,” and in a whisper- 
ing voice repeated the fourteenth and fifteenth verses; and out of 
that hospital he arose and took his seat in the kingdom of God. 
There is enough in those verses to save every one here, and all that 
you have to do is to look on Him and be saved. 


XVII. 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET IT. 


MAT. xv. 28: “ Great is thy faith.” 


WANT to call your attention to what many call a very dry sub- 
ject. I can imagine some of you saying, “If I had known that, 
I wouldn’t | ave come here.” The subject is “ Faith,” and it is 
avery important subject, if it is dry, because we read that it is im- 
possible to please God without it, and it is by it that we are really 
led to Christ. We never really wilt see the kingdom of God with- 
out it. In Hebrews xi. Paul tells us, if he wrote this epistle to the 
Iiebrews : 

“ Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of 
things not seen. 

“ For by it the elders obtained a good report. 

“Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by 
the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of 
things which do appear. 

“ By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than 
Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God 
testifying of his gifts: and by it he being dead yet speaketh. 

“ By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death; 
and was not found, because God had translated him: for before his 
translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God. 

“ But without faith it is impossible to please Him; for he that 
cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder 
of them that diligently seek Him. 

“ By faitg Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, 
moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house ; by the 
which he condemned the world and became heir of the righteous- 
ness which is by faith. 

“ By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place 
which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed; and he 
went out not knowing whither he went.” 

(136) 


ry dry sub- 
‘cnown that, 
1,” and it is 
1at it is im- 
e are really 
’ God with- 
istle to the 


-vidence of 


framed by 
ot made of 


hcrifice than 
iteous, God 
keth. 

see death ; 
r before his 


for he that 
b a rewarder 


seen as yet, 
use ; by the 
e righteous- 


nto a place 
ed; and he 


ENTS 


aoe ree corer penal 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET 7/7, 137 


And so it goes on tm ‘’ the chapter, and I think the word 
*faith” occurs fourteen tim... It is by faith these men did so and 
so; by faith these men overcame the world; by faith they received 
courage, and, in fact, every successful man in the whole Bible has 
obtained his success by faith. Without faith it is impossible to 
please God. Many pcople don’t rightly understand what faith is, 
and they want to get a correct definition of it. It is the dependence 
upon the veracity of another, and the dependence is composed of 
three things. The first is knowledge. The second is assent. Many 
have got these two, yet they are not saved men. They say “I 
believe ’—they give their assent, but they are not Christians until 
they have the third, and that is laying hold. That is the kind of 
faith we want here to-night. Faith says, “ God has got that, and I 
am going to have it;” unbelief says, “ You sha’n't.” 

Faith is the foundation of all society. We have only to look 
around and see this. You and I could not live in this community if 
it weren't for faith; commercial relations couldn’t exist. Let men 
lose confidence—which is faith—in one another, and there would 
be such a run upon the banks to-morrow that would cause general 
bankruptcy. Men have faith in one another. A great many 
people think that the faith spoken of in the Bible is not of the 
right sort—they don’t think they have got the proper kind of faith, 
and they are waiting for some new kind of faith to come out of 
Heaven. The faith spoken of in the Bible is no miraculous kind 
of faith. It is the same kind of faith we have in one another. 
Faith has an outward look and an inward look. Many people 
never look any other way than inward. They are like a horse 
working a treadmill, going round and round and never get out 
of the circuit—never look beyond it. Faith says, Look to God— 
take Him at His word. They don’t do this, and their path is 
shadowed by clouds; but the moment they take Him at His word 
the clouds of darkness disappear and they walk under an unclouded 
sky. 

There is just one thousht here I want to call your attention to. 
The reason so many men are doubtful about faith is because they 
have put confidence in men and have been deceived, and they put 
God in the same category. Now the Lord warns us about this: 
“Thus saith the Lord. Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, 
and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the 
Lord. For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not 


138 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


see when good cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places in the 
wilderness in a salt land and not inhabited.” How true that is. If 
aman has not got faith in God, but in man, he gets no blessing, no 
good comes to him. Many in this assemblage will get the blessing, 
and others sitting by their side will get no blessing. And then the 
next verses are: “Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord 
and whose hope the Lord is. For he shall be as a tree planted by 
the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall 
not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not 
be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding 
fruit.” And it goes on to say: “The heart is deceitful above all 
things and desperately wicked ; who can know it?” Or, in other 
words, don’t trust in your heart. Do not listen to your own heart ; 
I would sooner trust to God than to the promptings of my own 
treacherous heart. If you like to speak honestly, you will indorse 
this. There is not a man here but who, if he is frank, can testify 
that his heart has led him into wickedness. ‘ The heart is deceit- 
ful above all things and desperately wicked.” It is a good deal 
better to put our trust in God than in ourselves, because He has 
never yet failed. I never knew aman who put faith in his own 
heart, who trusted to the arm of the flesh, but who failed. We 
don’t want to put any trust in ourselves, but put our trust in God, 
and then we shall be established and receive strength from Him. 
The Psalmist says: “ Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son 
of man, in whom there is no help. His breath goeth forth, he 
returneth to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish. Happy 
is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the 
Lord his God.” Now my experience has been this, that whenever I 
found a man or woman in any part of the world who put their trust 
in God and not in themselves, they were flled with peace and joy 
all the time; but if they put their trust in any church, any creed, 
orany minister they were disappointed. If they put it in a minister 
and he dies, they say, we can not get any other preacher like him; 
“We can not find one to fill his place;” but if they have looked 
beyond the minister and put their trust in God, they were never 
disappointed. That is one reason why so many Christians are in 
sorrow. They have put their trust in preachers or in some institu- 
tion of man. 

In the days of the war a great many men started from Indiana, 
you recollect. Many of them had been propped up by some church, 


vs, 


ces in the 
hat is. If 
lessing, no 
. blessing, 
then the 
the Lord 
blanted by 
, and shall 
d shall not 
yielding 

1 above all 
r, in other 
pwn heart ; 
bf my own 
ill indorse 
an testify 
t is deceit- 
good deal 
se He has 
n his own 
riled. We 
ist in God, 
from Him. 
‘in the son 
1 forth, he 
sh. Happy 
e is in the 
vhenever I 
their trust 
ce and joy 
any creed, 
1 a Minister 
r like him; 
ave looked 
vere never 
‘ians are in 
me institu- 


n Indiana, 
me church, 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET IT. 139 


or they were wrapped up i some minister, and how many of them 
feli simply because they hadn't learned that lesson to trust in the 
Lord. But those who had learned the lesson in the eleventh chapter 
of Mark, “ Have faith in God,” how firm they stood amid all temp- 
tation. The trust we put in God when we accept Him in faith— 
the moment we do it we stand before the face of hell—we triumph 
amid all difficulties. We are never disappointed. When Christ was 
here you know how sweet faith was to Him when He found it, and 
those who came to Him with it received whatever they asked. Mr. 
Morehouse said the other day at the noonday meeting that faith 
was everything for him; and if men could only get their eyes off 
themselves and put them on Him, all blessings would come. Now 
let us get our eyes off one another and fix them upon Christ, and 
have faith in Him and His works. 

The eleventh chapter of Hebrews takes up Abel, and Enoch, and 
Noah, and Abraham, and goes on down the whole line. Paul com- 
mences the twelfth chapter by saying: “ Wherefore, seeing we are 
also compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses,” we must 
look “unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith.” He says: 
“Take your eyes off Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham.” These are 
very good men; but we can not afford to trust in them. We have 
got something better than them—‘ looking unto Jesus.” 

Now, a great many people tell us it don’t matter what kind of a 
god man believes in, so long as he is sincere in his belief. My 
friends, there is no more delusive idea—no more pernicious doc- 
trine ever came out of hell. Why, the most sincere men I ever 
heard of were the followers of Baal. How they cut themselves 
with knives and stones, and tore themselves to pieces, and how 
they jumped upon their altars and cried in their agony, “ Baal, 
Baal!” They believed in their god, but he did not answer them, 
Any creed is good, as I say, with some people, if they only believe 
it. What folly that is—what foolish men. I remember reading 
about two men who intended starting in a balloon. One of the 
men had got into the car, and thought it was fastened at each side, 
so he cut one rope, and that was the only fastening, and he was 
swept up through the heavens, but the other remained on the earth. 
The man that went up was terribly in earnest as he cut that rope, 
but he was lost. And so aman may believe an error and be lost. 
We must believe the truth as given us. It isn’t our error, or a lie. 

And how many people go wandering about without any definite 


* 


140 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


belief—who don t know what they believe? I remember meeting a 
man in Europe, and I asked him, “ What do you believe?”’ “ Well,” 
said he, “I go to the church and I believe what the church 
believes.” He didn’t know exactly what he did believe; and there 
arc a great many people just like that man. If you ask them what 
they believe, they will say they believe as the church they attend 
believes, but they don’t know really what that is. They never 
realize that it is o: the utmost importance to know in whom we 
trust. We must be sure of what we have faith in. How are we 
going to get that faith? I don’t know how many times I have been 
asked this question. I did not get faith in a minute—I was months 
in getting it. Why? Because I didn’t understand the Word of 
God. We must first acquaint ourselves with Him, and faith will 
come to us. ‘“Acquaint thyself with Him, and He will come after.” 
When I first got acquainted with my friend Mr. Sankey, I had not 
large faith in him, because I was not acquainted with him. But at 
the end of the first year I had more faith in him, and at the end of 
the second year I had still more; and now five years have gone by, 
and I have a great deal of faithin him. Why? Because I find 
him a true man. If God had proved untrue to those who have 
trusted in Him in adversity, amid the billows of persecution, we might 
not trust Him. But all testimony goes to show that when men 
trusted God as the waves of trouble dashed against them with their 
fiercest fury, He never forsook them. God has never deceived; 
man has. 

I contend that those infidels who assail us, have no weight with 
us, and have no right to speak about our faith, because they are 
talking about something they know nothing about. They have no 
knowledge upon the subject. Not forty-eight hours ago, a man 
came to me and began to talk against a public man 1am acquainted 
with. I just said to him, “ Did you ever know him?” “No.” 
“ ever hear him speak?” “No.” ‘Well,’ said I, “I contend you 
have no right to speak about him at all.” He had a feeling of prej- 
udice against that man, and he was willing to condemn him upon 
the strength of that feeling. And so it is about God. Infidels and 
scoffers who are filled with prejudice condemn God. If you want 
to know about God, read His blessed Word. The more you read 
about Him the more faith you will feel toward Him. When I was 
converted, twenty years ago, | felt a faith in God; but five years 
after I had a hundred times more faith, and five years ago I had 


at SEE 


meeting a 
* « Well,” 
he church 
and there 
them what 
hey attend 
hey never 
whom we 
ow are we 
have been 
yas months 
b Word of 
faith will 
ome after.” 
, 1 had not 
But at 

the end of 
e gone by, 
ause I find 
who have 
n, we might 
when men 
1 with their 
- deceived; 


veight with 
e they are 
ey have no 
io, a man 
acquainted 
i Eo 
ontend you 
ing of prej- 
| him upon 
infidels and 
f you want 
e you read 
Vhen I was 
: five years 
ago I had 


STE es — 


——————— 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET IT. 141 


more than ever, because I became better acquainted with Him. I 
have read up the Word, and I see that the Lord has done so and 
so, atid then I have turned to where He has promised to perform it, 
and when I see this I have reason to believe in Him. 

Suppose a man in this audience made a hundred promises, and 
said to me: “I will fulfill those promises in ten years.” At the end 
of nine years ninety-nine of those promises have been fulfilled, and 
one year remains for the fulfillment of the last promise. Well, I 
have known that man all those years, and he has fulfilled those 
ninety-nine promises and his disposition is unchanged. Have I any 
reason to believe that he will not fulfill that last promise during the 
remaining year? No. And no man who knows God and reads of 
the promises He has fulfilled can help having faith in Him. It is 
culy those men who do not know Him that doubt Him. I remem- 
ber, while in Mobile attending meetings, a little incident occurred, 
which I will relate. It was a beautiful evening, and just before the 
meeting some neighbors and myself were sitting on the front piaz- 
za enjoying the evening. One of the neighbors put one of his 
children upon a ledge eight feet high, and he put out his hands and 
told him to jump. Without the slightest hesitation he sprang into 
his father’s arms. Another child was lifted up, and he, too, readily 
sprang into the arms of his father. He picked up another boy, 
larger than the others, and held out his arms, but he wouldn’t jump. 
He cried and screamed to be taken down. The man begged the 
boy to jump, but it was no use; he couldn’t be induced to jump. 
The incident made me curious, and I stepped up to him and asked, 
“ How was it that those two little fellows jumped so readily into 
your arms and the other boy wouldn’t?” “Why,” said the man, 
“those two boys are my children and the other boy isn’t. He 
didn’t know me.” My friends, can you draw the inference? These 
infidels will not trust God. 

How are you going to get faith? Read your Bibles. Instead of 
trying to get faith by talking about it, read your Bibles. Take those 
people who read their Bibles-—-who know them back to back, and see 
how they stand—they are not shaken by doubts. They know in 
whom they believe. They have got their Bibles well read. They 
are not carried away by any doubt. My friends, take your Bibles 
and tun to John xx. 31, and read: “ But these are written that ye 
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that 
believing ye might have life through His name.” These things are 


142 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


written that ye might believe in Christ and have life through Him. 
The whole Gospel of John is written for one purpose—that man 
“might believe tha: Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that 
believing ye might have life through His name.” And in another 
part we read that He came unto His own, and as many as believed 
in Him gave He power to become the sons of God. There are 
several other passages in John where He speaks of believing. Now, 
if you want to have faith in Christ, read the Gospel of John. Read 
it carefully. There is not a book in the Bible from which you can 
derive greater faith than the Gospel according to John. Why? 
Because he knew Him who came to seek that which was Jost better 
than any one else. And I do not know any book in the werid that 
will scatter men’s disbelief in Christ, that will break down infidelity, 
like the book of John. A man came to me and said, “I want to be 
well read, well posted in the life «f Christ. What would you advise 
meto read?” “ Well,” I said, i couldn’t advise you to read a bet- 
ter work than that written by his old friend John.” I think if peo- 
ple read it oftener—read it on their knees—they would have more 
faith in Christ. 

I would like to direct your attention to the tenth chapter of 
Romans, and will commence at the ninth verse: 

“That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, 
and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised Him from the 
dead, thou shalt be saved. 

“For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and 
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. 

“For the Scripture saith, Whosoever believeth on Him shall 
not be ashamed. 

“For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek; 
for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon Him. 

“For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall 
be saved. 

“ How, then, shall they call upon Him in whom they have 
not believed? and how shall they believe in Him of whom they 
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher ? 

“And how shall they preach except they be sent? as it is 
written, How beautiful cre the feet of them that preach the Gospel 
of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things ! 

“But they have not all obeyed the Gospel; for Esaias saith, 
Lord, who hath believed our report ? 


OTSA) ic. 


QO ech = ap TD ch hm CT 


ERS, 


ough Him. 
-that man 
, and that 
in another 
as believed 
There are 
ing. Now, 
bhn. Read 
ch you can 
in. Why? 
Jost better 
werid that 

infidelity, 
want to be 
you advise 
read a bet- 
link if peo- 
have more 


chapter of 


ord Jesus, 
m from the 


Isness, and 
Him shall 


he Greek; 
Him. 
Lord shall 


they have 
vhom they 
cher ? 

? as it is 


the Gospel 


saias saith, 


ea eee ee 


FAITH, AND HO\ TO GET IT. 143 


“So, then, faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word 
of God.” 

“So, then, faith cometh by hearing the Word of God.” That’s 
how you get faith; and when we come to a promise in it and see 
that God say's it, that should be enough for us. If He has said it, 
He will keep His word. Men have tried to prove that He has 
broken it; the devil and all hell have been in league for ages to try 
and get God to tell a lie, but they have failed, for, as John says in 
his gospel, roth chapter, 35th verse, “The Scripture can not be 
broken.” If you want evidence for your faith, go to the Word of 
God, and believe the evidence you sce. There is a story told of 
Napoleon—Napoleon the First. His horse, a very high-spirited 
animal, became frightened, and away went the horse. A young man 
in the ranks saw the Emperor’s peril—saw that his life was in danger, 
and, at the risk of his own life, caught the horse. When the 
Emperor saw the man, he asked him what he was, and he touched 
his hat and told him his rank. “I will make you captain of my 
body-guard,” replied the Emperor. The man took him at his word. 
He didn’t go back to the ranks, but took a position at the head of 
the column. The captain stationed there ordered him back. He 
smiled and replied: “I am a captain.” ‘Who said so?” “The 
Emperor.” That was enough. The Emperor’s word was taken. So, 
if God says He will do anything or commands us to do anything, 
that ought to be enough. I fix my standard then against the devil 
and all hell combined. 

He says “Come.” Take Him at His word to-night. He is 
worthy of being trusted. Some people—a great many people they 
see it all—-they near the word “Come,” but still they have a little 
doubt. That has been the condemning sin of the world. Christ 
found it on both sides of the cross. He had to contend with that 
all the time He was here. It is the thing that has kept back the 
blessing in the churches—the doubt, the unbelief of the heart of the 
people in the churches. You've got no reason to doubt the Word 
of God. Suppose you are working with a man, and you find him 
dealing with you with the utmost honesty, and you turn round and 
call him a liar. That’s what you are doing. By your showing of 
disbelief you tell to every one, “God is a liar.” Unbelief—doubt 
is the bane of the world. Oh, let it be swept out of this building 
to-night, and may every one, in the p'ace of doubt and unbelief, have 
faith in the living God. 


144 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


I have met many people who have said to me: “Mr. Moody, I 
am glad to see you with such faith; very glad to see you have that 
child-like trust in God—very; but I am not so constituted. I can 
not have it.” You believe it,do you? I believe there is no man 
in the world so constituted but who can believe in God’s Word. 
He simply tells you to believe in Him, and He will save you. Sup. 
pose a doctor said to me: “I want you to come to dinner with me 
to-morrow, Mr. Moody.” “Well,” I reply, “I would feel great 
pleasure in accepting your invitation, but I don’t know how I will 
feel to-morrow.” ‘ What is the matter?” he asks. ‘ Well, the 
fact is, I don’t know how I will feel to-morrow,” is my reply. “ Why; 
you ain’t sick, are you?” “No, but—ah, the fact is, I am so con- 
stituted I can not believe you mean to invite me.” [Laughter]. 
You laugh at that; but you treat God’s invitation in a similar way. 
You are under the power of the devil. You can believe it if you 
will. There’s no ground for your doubting. What we want to do 
is each one of us just to take God at His word. He has offered 
salvation to every soul here; tell Him you will reach out your hand 
to-night and accept faith in Him. 

There is another class of people who are always ee to find out 
the proper kind of faith. They want to search and discover a par- 
ticular kind of faith. Any kind of faith that brings you to Christ 
is the proper kind of faith; is the right kind of faith. I remember 
Mr. Morehouse, while here four years ago, used an illustration 
which has fastened itself on my mind. He said, Suppose you go up 
the street and meet a man whom you have known for the last ten 
years to be a beggar, and you notice a change in his appearance, 
and you say, “Hallo, beggar, what’s come over you?” “I ain't 
no beggar. Don’t call me a beggar!” “Why,” you say, “I saw 
you the other day begging in the street.” “Ah, but a change has 
taken place,” he replies. “Is that so; how did it come about?” 
you inquire. “ Well,” he says, “I came out this morning and got 
down here, intending to catch the business men and get all the 
money out of them, when one of them came up to me and said 
there was ten thousand dollars deposited for me.” “How do you 
know this is true?’”’ you say. “I went to the bank and they put 
the money in my hand.” “Are you sure of that?” you ask; 
“how do you know it was the right kind of a hand?” But he 
says, “I don’t care whether it was the right kind of a hand or not; 
I got the money, and that’s all I wanted.” And so people are 


RS, 


Moody, I 
have that 
sd. Iocan 
is no man 
od’s Word. 
you. Sup. 
er with me 
feel great 
how I will 
‘Well, the 
ly. “Why; 
am so con- 
Laughter]. 
imilar way. 
e it if you 
vant to do 
has offered 
your hand 


to find out 
over a par- 

to Christ 
remember 
illustration 
you go up 
e last ten 
ppearance, 
* #T ain't 
hy, “I saw 
hange has 
e about?” 
g and got 
pet all the 
e and said 
ow do you 
d they put 
you ask; 
” But he 
nd or not; 
people are 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET /7. 145 


looking to see if they’ve got the right kind of a hand before they 
accept God by it. They have but to accept His testimony and they 
are saved, for, as John says, “ He that hath received His testimony 
hath set his seal that God is true.” Is there a man in this assem- 
blage who will receive His testimony and set his seal that God is 
true? Proclaim that God speaks the truth. Make yourself a liar, 
but make God’s testimony truthful. Take Him at His word. 

Some time ago I remember reading an incident that occurred 
between a prince in a foreign land and one of his subjects. This 
man for rebellion against the government was going to be ex- 
ecuted. He was taken to the guillotine block. When the poor 
fellow reached the place of execution he was trembling with fear. 
The prince was present and asked him if he wished anything before 
judgment was carried out. The culprit replied: “A glass of 
water.” It was brought to him, but he was so nervous he couldn’t 
drink it. “Do not fear,” said the prince to him, “judgment will 
not be carried out till you drink that water,” and in an instant the 
glass was dashed to the ground and broken into a thousand pieces. 
He took that prince at his word. 

Oh, sinner, take God at His word. He has promised to save 
you—to save all who trust Him. Now let us put away every false 
refuge, and just take the Prince of Heaven at His word. Is 
there a man or woman in this assemblage who will take Him at 
His word? 


) fe) 


XVIII. 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD - 


HEBREWS ix. 22 “ And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and 
without shedding of blood is no remission,” 


HE subject will be “The Precious Blood.” I want to call 
your attention, first, to the second chapter and sixteenth verse 
of Genesis: “And the Lord God commanded the man, say- 

ing, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat; but of the 
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it; 
for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.” 
There can not be a law without a penalty. There is not a law in 
our land but has a penalty attached to it. If our legislative repre- 
sentatives, or m>mbers in Congress, were to make a lawand have no 
penalty appended to it, it would be worthless. We might make a 
law forbidding men to steal; but if we had no penalty to that law, 
I don’t think we could go home without having our watches stolen 
from us. We could not live without law, and God put Adam into 
the garden under law, attached to which was a penalty. Well, we 
know how he disobeyed, and how he fell, and so the penalty of death 
came upon him. Many people stumble over this. I used to 
wonder how it was that the penalty of death fell upon him when he 
lived so many years after he broke the law; but when I understood 
my Bible better, I learned that it was death to the soul—not phys- 
ical death, but spiritual death. When God came to seek him in the 
garden, we are told that he hid himself; he was ashamed of his 
iniquity, just like hundreds of his sons in Chicago; and then we 
find Him dealing with Adam by showing him grace. This was 
the very first thing He did. A great many people think Ged was 
vety severe in His treatment of Adam; but He, whenever the 
offence was committed, whenever the law was broken, showed 
mercy, showed grace; and by this grace a way of escape was pre- 
sented tothem. Ah, that little hymn expresses it: ‘ Grace, friend, 
(146) 


lood; and 


it to call 
nth verse 
man, say- 
ut of the 
rat of it; 
rely die.” 
+ a law @ 
ive repre- 
d have no 
ht make a 
that law, 
hes stolen 
\dam into 
Well, we 
7 of death 
[ used to 
n when he 
nderstood 
-not phys- 
him in the 
red of his 
1 then we 
This was 
k Ged was 
‘never the 
n, showed 
ye was pre- 
ace, friend, 


4 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD, 147 


contrived a way” by which Adam could regain the life he had for- 
feited And so we read that the Lord made “coats of skin” to 
clothe them, before He drove them out of Paradise. They received 
grace before, as we sce in the twenty-fourth verse: “ He drove out 
the man, and He placed at the east end of the Garden of Eden 
cherubim and a flaming sword, which turned every way, to keep 
the way of the tree of life.” There’s grace and government; and 
from that day till the present, God has been dealing with us in 
that way. He rides, we may say, in a chariot with two wheels— 
one, grace, and the other, government. We can see in this world 
how it would be if we had no government. There would be no 
living init. Adam broke the divine law, and so he had to suffer 
the penalty; but He gave him grace to be redeemed by. He 
showed Adam and Eve grace by killing the animals and then cover- 
ing their nakedness with coats made from the skins. I can imagine 
Adam's turning to Eve and saying, “ Well, in spite of what we’ve 
done, God loves us after all. He has clothed us; He has given us 
grace for our sin.”” And here we find the first glimpse of the doc- 
trine of substitution—the substitution of the just for the unjust— 
the great doctrine of atonement and substitution foreshadowed in 
Genesis. 

Then as we go on we find the story of Cain and Abel, and we are 
told that “in process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of 
the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he 
3 30 brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof, 
and the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering; but unto 
Cain and his offering He had not respect. And Cain was very 
wroth, and his countenance fell.” Now we find that Cain brought 
a bloodless sacrifice —‘he brought of the fruit of the ground ’’— 
and Abel brought a bleeding lamb. Right on the morning of grace 
we see here that God had marked a way for men to come to Him, 
and that way was the way that Abel took, and Cain came to God © 
with a sacrifice of his own—in his own way. So we find men and 
women in the churches of to-day coming to God with a sacrifice, 
not in God’s way, but in their own—coming with their own good 
deeds, or their works, or their righteousness, and ignoring the Lamb 
altogether--ignoring the blood completely. They don’t want to 
come that way; they want to come in their own fashion. Cain 
perhaps reasoned that he didn’t see why the products of the earth, 
why the fruit shouldn't be as acceptable to God as a bleeding 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


148 


lamb. He didn’t like a bleeding lamb, and so he brought his fruit. 
Now we don’t know how there was any difference between those 
two boys. Both must have been brought up in the same way ; 
both came from the same parents; yet we find in the offering there 
was a difference between them. One came with the blood, and the 
other without the blood; and the one with the blood had the ac- 
ceptable sacrifice to God. 

We pass over to the second dispensation—to the eighth chapter 
of Genesis, where we find Noah coming out of the ark and putting 
blood between him and his sins. “ And Noah builded an altar unto 
the Lord, and took of every clean beast and of every clean fowl 
and offered burnt-offerings on the altar.” God had Noah bring 
those animals clear through the flood that he could offer them as a 
sacrifice when he came from the ark. He took a coup'e of each 
kind into the ark, and when he came out we find him making a 
blood-offering the very first thing. He was a man of God; he 
walked in the fear of the Lord, and so he made the offering of 
blood. The first thing in the first dispensation we see is blood, and 
the first thing in the second dispensation is blood. 

In the twenty-second chapter of Genesis we find the story of 
Abraham and his only son, Isaac. Abraham was a follower of 
God; aman who loved and feared God, and He commanded him to 
make a blood sacrifice. We read in this chapter that He com- 
manded Abraham to make the sacrifice of his only son. And we 
read that the next morning the old man saddled his ass and 
started. He didn’t tell his wife anything about it. If he had she 
would likely have persuaded him to remain where he was. But he 
has heard the voice of God and he obeys the command; he has 
heard God’s wish and he is going to do it. So early in the morn- 
ing—he didn’t wait till tem o’clock or twelve o'clock, but went 
early in the morning—he takes two of his young men with hir 
and his son Isaac, and you can see him starting out on the three 
days’ journey. They have the wood and the fire, for he is going 
to worship his God. As he goes on he looks at his boy and says, 
“Tt is a strange commandment that Goa has given. I love this boy 
dearly. I don’t understand it; but I know it’s all right, for the 
Judge of all the earth makes no mistakes.” Amn order from the 
Judge of Heaven is enough for him. The first night comes and 
their little camp is made and Isaa is asleep. But the old mar 


doesn't sleep. He looks into his face sadly and says, “I will have 


ER S. 


rht his fruit. 
ween those 
same way ; 
fering there 
od, and the 
had the ac- 


rhth chapter 
and putting 
An altar unto 
y clean fowl 
Noah bring 
fer them asa 
up‘e of each 
m making a 
of God; he 
> offering of 
is blood, and 


the story of 
follower of 
anded him to 
iat He com- 
on. And we 
his ass and 
If he had she 
was. But he 
nand; he has 
in the morn- 
ck, but went 
en with him 
on the three 
or he is going 
boy and says, 
love this boy 
right, for the 
der from the 
rht comes and 
the old mat 
«YT will have 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD. 149 


no boy soon; I shall never see him on earth again; but I must 
obey God.” Icansee him marching on the next day, and you 
might have seen him drying his tears as he glanced upon that 
only son and thought upon what he had been called upon to do. 
The second night comes; to-morrow is the day for the sacrifice. 
What a night that must have been to Abraham. “To-morrow,” 
he says, sadly, “I must take the life of that boy—my only son, 
dearer to me than my life—dearer to me than anything on earth.” 
And the third day comes, and as they go along they see the moun- 
tain in the distance, when he says to the young men: “ You 
stay here with the beasts.” He takes the wood and the fire, and 
along with his boy prepares to ascend Mount Moriah, from which 
could be seen the spot where a few hundred years later the Son of 
Man was offered up. As they ascend the mountain ‘saac says: 
“ There’s the wood and the fire, father, but where’s the sacrifice ?”’ 
thus showing that the boy knew nothing of what was in store. 
How the question must have sunk down into the old man’s heart. 
And he answers: “The Lord will provide a sacrifice.” It was not 
time to tell him, and they gc on until they come to the place ap- 
pointed by God, and built the altar, and lay the wood upon it 
Everything is ready, and I can just imagine the old man take the 
boy by the hand, and leading him toa rock, sitting down there and 
telling him how God had called upon him to come out of his native 
land ; how God had been in communion with him for fifty years ; 
what God had done for him. ‘And now,” he says, ‘“ my boy, 
wnen I was in my bed three nights ago, God came to me witha 
strange message, in which He told me to offer my child as a sacri- 
fice. I love you, my son, but God has told me to do this, and I 
must obey Him. So let us both go down on our knees and pray to 
Him.” After they hav: sent up a petition to God, Abraham lays 
him on the altar and kisses him for the last time. He lifts the 
knife to drive it into his son’s heart, when all at once he hears a 
voice, “ Abraham, Abraham! spare thine only son.” Ah, there was 
no voice heard on Calvary to save the Son of Man. God showed 
mercy to the son of Abraham. You fathers and mothers, just 
picture to yourselves how you would suffer if you had to sacrifice 
your only son, and think what it must have caused God to give up 
His only Son. We are told that Abraham was glad. The maai- 
festation of Abraham’s faith so pleased God that He showed him 
the grace of Heaven and lifted the curtain of time to let him look 


150 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


down into the future and see the Son of God offered bearing 
the sins of the world. From the peak of this very mountain 
might have been been the very spot where died the Saviour of 
the world. 

We find Abel the first man who went to Heaven, and he went by 
way of blood, and we find it in all the worships of God from the 
earliest times. Mr. Sankey sings solos upon the redeeming blood. 
I can imagine when Abel got there how he sang the song of re- 
demption. How the angels gathered around him and listened to 
that song; it was the first time they hal ever heard that song before ; 
but six thousand years have gone and there's a great chorus of saints 
redeemed by the atoning blood. The first man that went to Heaven 
went by the way of blood, and the last man who passes through 
those pearly gates must go the same way. We find not only Abel and 
Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, but all of them, went there through 
an atonement. Now, we find in the twelfth chapter and second 
verse of Exodus—the most important chapter in the Word of God: 
“This month shall be unto you the beginning of months; it shall 
be the first month of the yea: to you,” and then in the fourth verse, 
“And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his 
neighbor next unto his house take it according to the number of the 
souls; every man according to his eating sha!l make your count for 
the lamb.” Now it don’t say, “if the lamb be too small for the 
household,” but “if the household be too little for the lamb.” You 
may have some pretty large households; your houses may be too 
small for them, but Christ has plenty of room. We don’t start from 
the cradle to Heaven, but from the cross. That's where eternal life 
begins—when we come to Calvary; when we come to Christ and 
get grace. We don’t come to Heaven when we are born into the 
natural world, but into the spiritual world. Thats where we date 
our spiritual lives from. Before that our lives are a blank so far as 
grace is concerned. Adam dated from the time of the blood, and 
Noah, when he came from the ark, dated from the blood-offering, 
and so the children of Israel when they came out of Egypt. And 
even to-day when they take up their pens and date 1876 years, 
when do they date from? Why, from the blood of Christ. Every- 
thing dates from blood. In this chapter we see the command to 
sacrifice. They slew the lamb. God didn’t say, “Put a lamb to 
your front door and I will spare you,” but on the houses. 

Some classes of people say preach anything but the death, preach 


Ss 


S. 


bearing 
1ountain 
hviour of 


went by 
from the 
g blood. 
ig of re. 
stened to 
g before ; 
5 of saints 
b Heaven 

through 
Abel and 

through 
d second 

of God: 
; it shall 
rth verse, 
n and his 
ber of the 
count for 
Il for the 
ib.” You 
ty be too 
start from 
ternal life 
hrist and 
into the 
‘we date 
> so far as 
lood, and 
|-offering, 
pt. And 
76 years, 

Every- 
mand to 
. lamb to 


h, preach 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD, 151 


the life of Christ. You may preach that and you'll never save a 
soul. It is not Christ’s sympathy—His life—we preach, it is His 
sacrifice. That’s what brings men out of darkness, I can imagine 
some proud Egyptians that day who, when they heard the bleating 
of the lambs—there must have been over two hundred thousand 
lambs—saying, “ What an absurd performance. Every man has got 
a lamb, and they have got the best lambs out of the flock, too, and 
they are going to cover their houses with the blood.” They looked 
upon this as an absurd proceeding—a flaw in their character. You 
may find a good many flaws in your character, but you can not find 
a flaw in the Lamb of God. When the hour came you could see 
them all slaying their lamb, and not only that, but putting the blood 
on the door-posts. To those Egyptians, or to the men of the world, 
how absurd it looked. They probably said, “Why are you dis- 
figuring your houses in that way?” It was not upon the threshold. 
God didn’t want that, but they were to put it upon the lintels and 
door-posts-—where God could see it that night so that (thirteenth 
verse) He might see it asatoken. This blood was to be a substi- 
tution for death, and all who hadn't that token in the land of Egypt 
had their first-born smitten at midnight. There was a wail from 
Egypt from one end to the other. But death didn’t come near the 
homes where was the token. It was death that kept death out of the 
dwelling. 

Many people say, “I wish I was as good as that woman who has 
been ministering to the sick for the last fifty years. I would feel 
sure of Heaven.” My friends, if you have the blood behind you, 
you are as safe as anybody on this earth. It is not because that 
woman has been living a life of sacrifice in her ministrations to the 
poor that she will enter the kingdom of God. It is not our life of 
good deeds or our righteousness that will take us to Heaven, but 
the atonement. And the question ought to come to every one to- 
night, “ Are we sheltered behind the blood?” If not, death will 
come by and by, and you will be separated from.God for eternity. 
If you have not a substitute you will die. Death is passed upon 
all of us. Why?- Because of our sin. If we have not a substitute 
we have no hope. 

Not only were they to have a token, but they were to do some- 
thing else. We read in the eleventh verse: “ And thus shall ye eat 
it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff 
in your hand; and ye shall eat it. in haste; it is. the Lord’s pass- 


% 


152 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


over.” Now a great many people wonder why they haven't got 
more spiritual power, and have not the joy of the Lord with them 
all the time. It is because they haven't got the blood of the Lamb 
with them. These pilgrims had a long journey before them, and 
the Lord told them to eat the lamb. If we feed upon the Lamb 
we will get strength in proportion. My friends, be sure before you 
commence on your pilgrimage that you are sheltered behind the 
blood, for when He sees the blood, death will pass over you. And 
let me ask this assemblage to-night if every one of you have the 
token? Iwas speaking to a man some time ago, who, when I asked 
him if he had the token, said, “I have prayer,” and when he got to 
Heaven he would pray, and he thought that would admit him. I 
said to him, “You won’t get in that way. You must be cleansed 
by the blood of Christ. That is the only power that will open the 
gates of Heaven—the only countersign.” 

When I went East the other night the conductor came around 
and called for tickets. I pulled out my ticket and he punched it. 
He didn’t know whether it was a white or a black man who pre- 
sented it, I believe. He didn’t care who it was; all he wanted was 
the token. So all that God wants is the token of our salvation. It 
doesn’t depend upon our deeds, our righteousness, or upon our 
lives; it depends upon whether or not we are sheltered behind the 
‘blood. That is the question. It didn’t matter in that land of 
Goshen whether the child was six months or six years old if it was 
‘behind the blood. It was not their moral character, nor their con- 
nections, but the blood that saved them. It is the atonement that 
saves, and that is the teaching all through your Bible. 

There is another verse in the twenty-ninth chapter of Exodus I 
want to call your attention to: “Thou shalt slay the ram, and thou 
shalt take his blood and sprinkle it round about the altar.”” Now 
we see that Aaron, the high-priest, could not come to God with his 
prayers alone. He had to sprinkle the blood upon the altar. There 
was a time when I didn’t believe in the substitution and in the 
‘blood, and my prayers went no higher than my head; but when I 
came to God by Jesus Christ—by the way of blood—it was different. 
I never knew a man who came to God really but who came this 
way. That great high-priest had to come this way too. 

Then again, in the thirtieth chapter, tenth verse, we see: “And 
Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a year, 
with the blood of the sin-offering of atonements; once in the year 


S. 


ven't got 
‘ith them 
he Lamb 
hem, and 
ne Lamb 
efore you 
hind the 
yu. And 
have the 
n I asked 
he got to 
‘him. I 
cleansed 
open the 


e around 
nched it. 
who pre- 
nted was 
ition. It 
upon our 
‘hind the 
land of 
if it was 
their con- 
nent that 


Exodus I 
and thou 
” Now 
with his 

There 
d in the 
t when I 
different. 
ame this 


: “And 
in a year, 
the year 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD, 153 


shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations; it 
is most holy unto the Lord.” Now, an atonement is the only 
thing that makes a sinner and God one—is the only thing that will 
bring God and the sinner together. I would like, if I had time, to 
give you all the passages touching upon atonement in the Old Tes- 
tament, but it would take too long. Turn again to the eighth 
chapter of Leviticus. This book of Leviticus is one of the most 
valuable, because it relates all about the worship of God. I re-, 
member when I used to read this book, I wondered what it was all 
about—a verse like this, for instance: “ And he slew it; and Moses 
took of the blood of it, and put it upon the tip of Aaron’s right ear, 
and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of 
his right foot.” I would say, “ What does this mean? ‘ Put it upon 
the tip of Aaron’s right ear.’”” What for? I think I have got a 
little light upon the subject since those days. “ Blood upon the 
ear?’ So that a man might hear the voice of God, of course. 
And so a man who has accepted the atonement can hear the Word 
rightly. Blood upon the hand of a man, so that he who works for 
God can work rightly. Hundreds of men think they are working 
out their salvation, and they are only deceiving themselves. Bear in 
mind, then, that a man can not do anything until he is sheltered be- 
hind the blood. Whena man is in this position, then he can go and 
be acceptable to God. Then blood upon the feet, so that a man 
can walk with God. You know when God came to Adam he hid 
himself. He hadn’t the blood, and he couldn’t walk with God. He 
put those people in question behind the blood, and he walked among 
‘them. When they came to the Red Sea the mighty waters eoened, 
and God walked with them. In the wilderness they wanted water, 
and a rod struck the rock, and a crystal stream gushed forth. Why? 
Because they had had the substitution. 

Many people say this is a very mysterious thing. We don’t un- 
derstand why God wants blood as an atonement. A man said to 
me: “1 detest your religion; I hate your God.” “Why?” Iasked. 
“T detest a God who demands blood,” he replied. Now, God is not 
an unjust God. He don’t demand it without giving us a reason. 
He tells us in His Word that “ the life of the flesh is in the blood.” 
Take the blood out of me and I am a dead man. Life has been 
forfeited, the law has been broken, and the penalty must come 
upon us, and this blood He gives us is life; it is the life of our 
flesh. Three times we see “ blood” mentioned in the twenty-third 


154 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


and twenty-fourth verses, and the reason is that it is life. You and 
I have lost life by the fall, and what we want is to get back that life 
we lost, and we have it offered to us by the atonement of Clrist. I 
have often thought I would far rather be out of Eden and have the 
blood than be in Eden without it. Adam might have been there 
ten years, and Satan might have come and got him. But some 
can’t see why God permitted Adam to fall. They begin to discern 
the philosophy of it. They can’t see why God ever permitted origi- 
nal sin to come into the world. The best answer to that was given 
by the Rev. Andrew Bonar, who said, “It was a great deal more 
wonderful that God should send His Son down to bear the brunt of 
it.” Let us thank God we have a refuge, a substitute for the sin we 
are groaning under. 

Turn to the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah. You hear a good many 
people saying, “I don’t believe in the Old Testament, I believe in 
the New.” My friends, both are inseparable. <A scarlet thread 
runs through the two and binds them together. We, like sheep, 
have gone astray, but “ He was wounded for our transgressions, He 
was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was 
upon Him; and with His stripes we are healed.” My friends, in 
the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, we see it prophesied seven hundred 
years before it took place, that He would die and be a substitute 
for you and me, that we might live. And now, my friends, let us 
accept Him. It seems base ingratitude not to praise God every 
hour of our lives that He has given sucha Saviour. Let us take 
time. Many a young man thinks it noble to scoff at this; I think it 
the basest ingratitude. This atonement is the only hope of my 
eternal life. Take the doctrine of substitution out of my Bible, and 
I would not take it home with me to-night. Let us praise God 
that He loved us so as to give us His only Son so that we might 
be saved. 

I remember some years ago reading about a New York family. 
A young man, during the gold fever, went out to the Pacific, and 
left his wife and little boy. Just as soon as he was successful he 
was going to send money. A long time elapsed, but at last a letter 
came enclosing a draft, and telling his wife to come on. The woman 
took a passage in one of the fine steamers of the Pacific line, full of 
hope and joy at the prospect of soon being united to her husband. 
They had not been out many days when a voice went ringing 
through the ship, “Fire! fire!’”” The pumps were set to work and 


PRS. 


You and 
ick that life 
{Christ 2 
nd have the 
been there 

Sut some 

to discern 
uitted origi- 
was given 
deal more 
he brunt of 
r the sin we 


good many 
I believe in 
rlet thread 
, like sheep, 
ressions, He 
r peace was 
y friends, in 
ven hundred 
a substitute 
iends, let us 
> God every 
Let us take 
s; I think it 
hope of my 
y Bible, and 
praise God 
it we might 


York family. 
Pacific, and 
uccessful he 
last a letter 
The womai 
line, full of 
her husband. 
vent ringing 
to work and 


TRACING TITE SCARLET THREAD, 155 


the buckets were brought into operation, but the fire gained upon 
them. There was a powder magazine on board, and the captain 
ordered all the boats to be instantly lowered. He knew whenever 
the fire reached the powder they would all be lost. The people 
scrambled into the boats, and the mother and boy were left on 
deck. As the last boat was being pushed off, the woman begged to 
be taken in. The majority insisted the boat was too full, and wanted 
to push off, but one man put in a word for her, and they said they 
could allow one more on board, but no more. What did the 
mother do? Did she go on board and leave her son? No. She 
put her boy into that life-boat, and told him if he ever lived to sce 
his father to tell him, “I died to save you.” And the boat pulled 
away from that ship, and left the mother standing there. The 
vessel went on burning. Presently an explosion was heard, and all 
was buried inthe ocean. Suppose that young man was here to-night. 
Suppose you spoke to him about the act of his mother, ard he 
turned around and scoffed at it. “Why,” you would say, “that un- 
grateful wretch don’t deserve to live.” And this is what you are 
doing. He laid down His life for you. Now will you speak con- 
temptuously about Him? Will you speak lightly of the blood laid 
down on Calvary for you? Let us rather all thank God we have 
such a Saviour. Let us live for Him when He died for us. Let us 


pray. 


pe net ees 
penne ae eae 


ee 
ene nk 


XIX. 


THE BLOOD OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 


MATTHEW xxvi. 28: “For this is My blood of the New Testament, which is shed 
for many, for the remission of sins.” 


WANT to take up some passages referring to the subject of the 
Precious Blood in the New Testament. Soon after we came 
back from Europe to this country, I received a letter from a 
lady saying that she had looked forward to our coming back to this 
country with a great deal of interest, and that her interest remained 
after we had commenced our services until I came to the lecture on 
the blood, when she gave up all hope of our doing any good. In 
closing that letter she said: ‘“ Where did Jesus ever teach the peril- 
ous and barbarous doctrine that men were to be redeemed by the 
shedding of His blood? Never! never did Jesus teach that monstrous 
idea.” Let us turn to the fourteenth chapter of Mark, twenty-fourth 
verse, and we will find: “ And He said unto them, This is My blood 
of the New Testament, which is shed for many ;” and alsoin Matthew 
xxvi. 28: “For this is My blood of the New Testament, which 
is shed for many for the remission of sins.” There are a good 
many passages, but it is not necessary to refer to more. If Christ 
did not teach it, and also the Apostles—if Christ did not preach it, 
then I have read my Bible, all these years, wrong. I haven’t got 
the key to the Scriptures; it is a sealed book to me, and if I don’t 
preach it—if I give it up, I’ve nothing left to preach. Take the 
blessed doctrine of the blood out of my Bible and my capital is 
gone, and I’ve got to take to something else. 
I remember when in the old country a young man came to me— 
a minister came around to me, and said he wanted to ta! with me. 
IIe said to me: “ Mr. Moody, you are either all right and I am all 
wrong, or else I am right and you are all wrong.” ‘ Well, sir,” said 
I, “you have the advantage of me. You have heard me preach, and 
know what doctrines I hold, whereas I hav« not heard you, and don't 
(156) 


ENT. 


vhich is shed 


ject of the 
r we came 
ter from a 
ack to this 
t remained 
lecture on 
good. In 
h the peril- 
ned by the 
monstrous 
enty-fourth 
s My blood 
in Matthew 
ent, which 
ire a good 

If Christ 
t preach it, 
haven’t got 
1 if I don’t 
Take the 
y capital is 


e to me— 
k with me. 
id Iam all 
ll, sir,” said 
preach, and 
,and don’t 


THE BLOOD OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 157 


know what you preach.” ‘ Well,” said he, “the difference between 
your preaching and mine is, that you make out that salvation is got 
by Christ’s death, and I make out that it is attained by His life.” 
“ Now, what do you do with the passages bearing upon the death?” 
and I quoted the passages, “ Without the shedding of blood there 
is no remission,” and “ He Himself bore our sins in His own body 
on the tree,” and asked him what he did with them, for instance. 
“Never preach on them at all.” I quoted a number of passages 
more, and he gave me the same answer. “ Well, what do you preach ?” 
I finally asked. ‘ Moral essays,” he replied. Said I, “ Did you ever 
know anybody to be saved by that kind of thing—did you ever con- 
vert anybody by them?” “TI never aimed at that kind of conver- 
sion; I mean to get men to Heaven by culture—by refinement.” 
“Well,” said I, “if I didn’t preach those texts, and only preached 
culture, the whole thing would be a sham.” “And it is a sham to 
me,” was his reply. I tell you the moment a man breaks away from 
this doctrine of blocd, religion becomes a sham, because the whole 
teaching of this book is of one story, and this is that Christ came 
into the world and died for our sins. 

I want to call your attention to the nineteenth chapter of John 
and the thirty-fourth verse: “ But one of the soldiers with a spear 
pierced his side, and forthwith came thereout blood and water.” 
“Came thereout blood and water.” Now, it was prophesied years 
before that there should open a fountain which should wash away 
sin and uncleanness, and it seems that this fountain was opened 
here by the spear of the soldier, and out of the fountain came blood 
and water. It was the breaking of the crown of hell and the giving 
of the crown to Heaven. When the Roman soldier drove out the 
blood, out came the water, and it touched that spear, and it was not 
long before Christ had that Roinan government. It is a throne aad 
a footstool now, and by and by it will sway the earth from pole to 
pole. This carth has been redeemed by the blessed blood of Christ. 
Peter says in his first Epistle i. 18: ‘“ Forasmuch as ye know that 
ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from 
your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers; But 
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and 
without spot.” You are not redeemed by such corruptible things 
as gold or silver, but by the precious blood of the Liamb—* the pre- 
cious blood of Christ-—as of a lamb without blemish.” If silver and 
gold could have redeemed us, it would have been the easiest thing 


oe 


tae 


— 


oe 


= 


7 ae 


SS 


—— 


a ea ee es Seas ae ae 


53 


188 MOOD A"S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 

to have made a pile of gold ten thousand times larger than the bulk 
of the earth. Why, the poorest thing is gold in Heaven. But gold 
couldn’t do it. The law had been broken, and the penalty of death 
had come upon us, and it required life to redeem us. Nov, it says 
we shall be redeemed. My friends, redemption is to me one of the 
most precious treasures in the Word of God—to think that Christ 
has bought me by His blood. Iam no longer my own, I am His. 
He has ransomed me. 

A friend of mine once told me that he was going out from Dublin 
one day, and met a boy who had one of those English sparrows in 
his hand. It was frightened, and just seemed to sit as if it pined for 
liberty, but the boy held it so tight that it could not get away. The 
boy’s strength was too much forthe bird. My friend said: “ Open your 
hand and let the bird go. You will never tame him; he is wild.” But 
the boy replied, “ Faith, an’ I'll not; I’ve beena whole hour trying to 
catch him, an’ now I’ve got him I’m going to keep him.” So the 
man took out his purse and asked the boy if he would sell it. A 
bargain was made, and the sparrow was transferred to the man’s hand. 
He opened his hand, and at first the bird did not seem to realize it 
had liberty, but by and by it flew away, and as it went it chirped, 
as much as to say, “You have redeemed me.” And so Christ 
has come down and offered to redeem us and give us liberty when 
we were bound with sin. Satan was stronger than we were. He 
has had six thousand years’ experience. He did not come to buy 
us from Satan, but from the penalty of our sin. 

Another thought about the blood. It makes us all cne. The 
blood F-ings us into one family, into the household of faith. I re- 
member during the war Dr. Kirk, one of the most eloquent men I 
ever heard, was speaking in Boston. At that time, you recoilect, 
there was a good deal said about the Irish and the black man, and 
what an amount of talk about the war of races. He said while 
preaching one night: ‘I saw a poor Irishman and a black man and 
an Englishman, and the blood of Christ came down and fell upon 
them and made them one.” My friends, it brings nationalities to- 
gether; it brings those scattered with the seeds of discord together 
and makes them one. Let us turn to Acts xvii. 26, and we read: 
“ And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on 
all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before 
appointed and the bounds of their habitation.” That’s what the 
blood of Christ does. It just makes us one. I can tell a man that 


Ae 


the bulk 
But gold 
of death 
w, it says 
ne of the 
hat Christ 
am His. 


m Dublin 
arrows in 
pined for 
vay. The 
pen your 
ild.” But 
trying to 
iia fate do 
sell it. A 
an’s hand. 
D realize it 
it chirped, 
so Christ 
erty when 
were. He 
me to buy 


cne. The 
ith. I re- 
lent men I 
1 recoilect, 
sy man, and 
said while 
k man and 
fell upon 
nalities to- 
d together 
lwe read: 
o dwell on 
nes before 
; what the 
a man that 


THE BLOOD O: THE NEW TESTAMENT, 159 


has been redeemed by the blood; they speak all the same 
language. I don’t require to be in his company ten minutes before 
I can tell whether or not he has been redeemed. They have only 
one language, and you can tell when they speak whether they are 
outside the blood or sheltered by it. The blood has two voices— 
one is for salvation and the other for condemnation. The blood 
to-night cries out for my salvation or for my condemnation. If we 
are sheltered behind the blood, it cries for our salvation, for we see 
in Galatians: “It cries for our peace.” There is no peace tilla 
man has been sheltered by that blood. 

Again, I would like to call your attention to the twenty-sixth 
chapter of Matthew, twenty-eighth verse, where we find Christ 
speaking of His blood: “For this is My blood of the New Testa- 
ment, which is shed for the remission of sins.’ This blood was 
“shed for the remission of sins.’ Then in Hebrews ninth and 
twenty-second, where it says, ‘ Without the shedding of blood is 
no remission of sins.” Men don’t realize that this is God’s plan of 
salvation. Said aman to me last night after the meeting: “ Why, 
God has got a plan to save us.” Certainly He has. You must be 
saved by God's plan. It was love that prompted God to send His 
Son to save us and shed His blood. That was the plan. And 
without the blood what hope have you? There is not a sin from 
your childhood—from your cradle—up till now that can be for- 
given. unless by the blood. Let us take God at His word: “ With- 
out the shedding of blood there is no remission of sins.” Without 
th: blood no remission whatever. I don’t see how a man can fail 
to comprehend this. That’s what Christ died for; that’s what 
Christ died on Calvary for. If aman makes light of that blood 
what hope has he? How are you going to get into the kingdom 
of God? You can not join in the song of the saints if you don't go 
into Heaven that way. You can not sing the song of redemption. 
If you did, I suppose you would be off in some corner with a harp 
of your own, and singing, “ I saved myself; I saved myself.” You 
can’t get in that way. You must accept the plan of redemption 
and come in through it. ‘“ He that climbeth up some other way 
the same is a thief and a robber.” 

Then, in the tenth chapter of Hebrews, we find Paul, if he wrote 
this, just taking up the very thought: “He that despised Moses’ 
law died without mercy under two or three witnesses.” You know 
when a man made light of the law under the Mosaic dispensation, 


ee 


ee oe ene 


I te ares ——— - = 


Wee Diy 
ae 


ae 


— 


ft 
i 

' 

‘ } 


RENE corre 


oF gn oF 
ow emote Se — * 


160 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


whenever two witnesses came into court and swore that he hadn't 
kept the law, they just took him out and stoned him to death. 
Take up the next verse: ‘Of how much surer punishment suppose 
ye, shall be thought worthy who hath trodden under foot the Son 
of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant wherewith He 
was sanctified an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the 
spirit of grace.” My friends, what hope is there if a man tramples 
the blood of Christ under his foot if he says, “I will have nothing to 
do with that blood?” I ask, in all candor, what mercy is there? 
What hope has he if he “hath trodden under foot the Son of God; 
and hath counted the blood of the covenant wherewith He was sanc- 
tified an unholy thing?” This is the only way to get to Heaven—no 
other way. Turn again to the eleventh verse of the same chapter, 
and we see: “But the Man after He had offered one sacrifice for 
sin "’—mark that, He had settled the question of sin—‘ forever sat 
down on the right hand of God.” The high-priests could never sit 
down; their work was never done. But our High-Priest had put 
sin away by one sacrifice and then ascended to God. And in this 
same chapter of Hebrews we see again: ‘“ Having therefore, breth- 
ren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a 
new and living way, which He hath consecrated for us through the 
veil, that is to say, His flesh, and having a High-Priest over the 
house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance 
of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our 
bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the profession of 
our faith without wavering, for He is faithful that promised.’ I 
want to call your attention to the twentieth verse more particularly 
-—“ by a new and living way.” Now Christ has opened a new and 
living way. We can not get to Heaven by our own deeds now. He 
has opened “a new and living way.” We don’t need a high-priest 
to go once a yearand praytoGod. Thank God, we are all kings and 
high-priests. We can go right straight to the Father in the name 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. When Christ died that veil was rent from 
the top to the bottom—not from the bottom to the top—and every 
poor son of Adam can walk right in and worship—right into the 
presence of God, if ie only comes by the way of the blood. Yes, 
thank God, He has opened a new and living way whereby we can come 
to Him. Let us thank Him for a new and living way. We don't 
need any bishop, we don’t need any pope, we don’t need any priest or 
prophet now; but every one can be made king and priest and we 


AF 


ie hadn’t 
-o death. 
- suppose 
the Son 
swith He 
unto the 
tramples 
othing to 
is there? 
1 of God, 
was sanc- 
aven—no 
> chapter, 
crifice for 
orever sat 
never sit 
had put 
nd in this 
re, breth- 
esus, by a 
rough the 
over the 
assurance 
e, and our 
fession of 
ised. I 
articularly 
new and 
now. He 
highi-priest 
kings and 
the name 
rent from 
and every 
into the 
bod. Yes, 
can come 
We don't 
y priest or 
st and we 


THE BLOOD OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 161 


can come through this living way to His presence and ask Him to 
take away our sins. There’s not a man in this assemblage but can 
come to Him to-night. 

There’s a good deal about the blood in Hebrews that I would like 
to bring up; time passes, and I have just to fly through the subject. 
Now I don’t know any doctrine I have preached that has been 
talked about more than the doctrine of blood. Why, the moment 
Satan gets a man to leave out this doctrine of blood, he has gained 
all he wants. It is the most pernicious idea to leave it out. A man 
may be a brilliant preacher, he may have a brilliant intellect, and 
may have large crowds of people; but if he leaves this out, no one 
will be blest under his ministry, no one will be born in God’s king- 
dom. Ifa man leaves out this blood he may as well go and whistle 
in the streets, and try to convert people that way, for all the good 
he will do in saving souls. It is said that old Dr. Alexander, of 
Princeton College, when a young student used to start out to preach 
always gave them a piece of advice. The old man would stand with 
his gray locks and his venerable face and say, “ Young man, make 
much of the blood in your ministry.” Now, I have traveled consid- 
erably during the past few years, and never met a minister who 
made much of the blood and much of the atonement, but God had 
blessed his ministry, and souls weiz born into the light by it. But 
a man who leaves it out--the moment he goes, his church falls to 
pieces like a rope of sand, and his preaching has been barren of 
good results. And so if you find a man preaching w hohas covered 
up this doctrine of blood, don’t sit under his ministry; I don’t care 
what denomination he belongs to, get out of it. Fly from it as those 
who flew from Sodom. Never mind how you get out of it—leave 
it. It isawhited sepulchre. There is no life if they don’t preach 
the blood. It is the only way we’ve got to conquer Satan—the 
only way we can enter Heaven, and we can not get there unless we 


have washed our robes in the blood of the Lamb. If we expect to ' 


conquer, we must first be washed by that blood. A man who has 
not realized what the blood has done for him, has not the token of 
salvation. It is told of Julian, the apostate, that while he was fight- 
ing, he received an arrow in his side. He pulled it out, and taking 
a handful of blood, threw it into the air, and cried, “Galilean, Galilean, 
thou hast conquered!” Yes, the Galilean is going to conquer, and 
you must bear in mind if you don’t accept the blood—don't submit 
to it and let it cleanse ycu—the rock will fall on you, because the 
II 


ee eer ee eee ne oe ee 


Fe 5 ener 


— SS 
Cee eee he a reeiste e 


~ ee oer ee 


162 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS 


decree of Heaven is that every knee shall bow to the will of Heaven. 
The blood is a call of mercy now. He wants you.to come-—He 
beseeches you to accept and be saved. 

I heard of an old minister who had preached the Gospel for fifty 
years faithfully. “Ah!” many here will say, “I wish I was as safe 
to go to Heaven as him.” When he was reaching his end he askec 
that his Bible should be brought to him. His eyes were growin 
dim in death, and he said to one of those about him, “17 wish you 
would turn to the first epistle of John i. 7,” and when it was foun. 
the old man put his dying finger on the passage where it says: “ Bu 
if we wal': in the light as He is in the light we have fe!lowship oue 


with another. o: 2 the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us 
from all si, «1 he said, “I die in the hope of that.” It was the 
blood in his »iuistvy that cleansed him. And so it is the only way 


by which our sins cai }xe washed away. Why, there was a question 
once asked in Heaven when a great crowd were gathering there, 
“Who are those?” and the answer was, “ They are those who have 
come up through great tribulation, and have been washed by the 
blood of the Lamb.” 

Now, the question is, what are you going to do with that blood ? 
I would like to ask you, what are you going to do about it? You 
must do either of two things—take it or reject it. Trample it under 
foot or cleanse your sins by it. I heard of a lady who told a serv- 
ant tocooka lamb. She told him how to do it up and all about 
it, but she didn’t tell him what to do with the blood. So he went 
to her and asked, “ What are you going to do with the blood of the 
lamb?” She had been under conviction for some time, and such a 
question went like an arrow to her soul. She went to her room and 
felt uneasy, and the question kept continually coming to her, “‘ What 
are you going to do with the blood of the lamb?” and before morn- 
ing she was on her knees asking for the mercy of the blood of the 
Lamb. 

Now the most solemn truth in the Gospel is that the only thing 
He left down here is His blood. His body and bones He took 
away, but He left His blood on Calvary. There is either of two 
things we must do. One is to send back the message to Heaven 
that we don’t want the blood of Christ to cleanse us of our sin, or 
else accept it. Why, when we come to our dying hour the blood 
will be worth more than all the kingdoms of the world to us. Can 
you afford to turn your back upon it and make light of it? Dr. 


/,_ —- —. 


(oli ols oo Ee ee ee eee ee eee 


Heaven. 
me-—He 


for fifty 
s as safe 
1e askec 
growih 
vish you 
$s foun. 
ys: “ B 
ship oue 
hnseth us 
t was the 
only way 
question 
ng there, 
vho have 
d by the 


at blood ? 
it? You 
e it under 
yd a serv- 
all about 
o he went 
ood of the 
ind such a 
room and 
er, “ What 
fore morn- 


»0d of the 


only thing 
; He took 
her of two 
to Heaven 
our sin, or 
the blood 
ous. Can 
of it? Dr. 


THE BLOOD OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, 163 


King, when the war was going on, went down to the field with the 
Christian Commission. He used to go around among the soldiers, 
and during one of his visits he heard a man cry, “ Blood! blood! 
blood!” He thought that, as the man had just been taken off che 
battle-field, the scene of carnage and blood was still upon his mind. 
The doctor went to him and tried to talk to the man about Chris’. 
and tried to divert his mind from the scenes of the fiela. “ Al. 
doctor,” said the ran feebly, “I was not thinking of the batti>- 
field, but of the blood of Christ ;’ and he whispered the wore 
“blood’”’ once more and was gone. 

Jear friends, do you want all your sins washed away from you ? 
It was shed for the remission of sins, and without the shedding of 
blood there would be no remission. There is blood on the mercy- 
seat. ‘I am not looking to your sins now,’ God says, “ but come 
and press in, press in and receive remission.” Thank God, the 
blood is still on the mercy-seat. It is ther’. .-d He beseeches you 
to accept it. What more can He do for veur: vation? Now,my 
friends, don’t go out of this Tabernacle lru,“hiny and scoffing at the 
precious offering made to you, but jus’ wow your head and lift up 
your voice, “Oh, God of Heaven, may ‘ne blood of Thy Son 
cleanse me from all sin.” The blood *: -uf*sient. 

Some years ago I was journeying to tne Pacific coast, and nearly 
every stage-driver I met was talking about a prominent stage-driver 
who had just died. You know that in driving over those rocky 
roads they depend a good deal ».»on the brake. This poor man, 
when he was dying, was heard to say: “I am on the down grade 
and can not keep the brake.” Just about that time one of the most 
faithful men of God, Alfred Cookman, passed away. His wife and 
friends gathered around his death-bed, and when his last moments 
arrived, it scemed as if Heaven had opened before him, as with a 
shout he cried, “I am sweeping through the gates washed by the 
blood of the Lamb.” What a comfort this must have been to his 
friends; what a comfort it must have been to him, the blood of the 
atonement in his last hours. 

My friends, if you want a glorious end like the end of that sainted 
man, you must come to the blood of Christ. Let us bow our heads 
in prayer; let us have a few moments of silent prayer, and let us 
ask the Lord to let us see this great truth. 

Mr. Sankey sang the following hymn, as a song-translation of the 
story told by Mr. Moody, at the conclusion of his sermon: 


A 
fo 


164 


MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


I am now a child of God, 
For I'm washed in Jesus’ blood 
I am watching, and I’m longing while I wait. 
Soon on wings of love I'll fly 
To my home beyond the sky, 
To my welcome, as I'm sweeping thro’ the gate. 


Refrain—In the blood of yonder Lamb, 
Washed from every stain I am; 
Robed in whiteness, clad in brightness, 
I am sweeping thro’ the gates, 


Oh! the blessed Lord of light, 
IJoved Him with my might ; 

Now His arms enfold and comfort while I wait. 
I am leaning on His breast, 
Oh! the sweetness of His rest. 

And I’m thinking of my sweeping thro’ the gate. 


Burst are all my prison bars, 
And I soar beyond the stars ; 
To my Father’s house, the bright and blest estate. 
Lo! the morn eternal breaks 
And the song immortal wakes, 
Robed in whiteness, 1 am sweeping thro’ the gate. 


XX. 


HOW GOD LOVES MEN. 


I JOHN iv. 16: ‘“ God is love,” 


ia is a text on fire, and I hope it will burn down into your souls, 
“God is love.” Now, if you can not remember a word of the 
sermon, and your friends ask you what I preached about, just 
bear in mind that text— God is love.” I don’t believe there is a 
truth in the Word of God that tells us so thoroughly that God will 
blot out our sins as the text. I remember the rebuilding of a church 
on the North Side, by a friend of mine, after the fire, and he was 
very anxious to make the people believe this truth. To do this he 
had the text put up in the church like this. One night a man going 
by—the door was ajar a little—happened to look in, and there he 
saw this text, “God is love.” He said to himself, “I don’t believe 
that ; God don’t love me;” and he tried to pass the words from. his 


mind, but couldn’t. He kept thinking of them and turning them. 


over in his mind until it seemed as if they had burned. into his soul. 
He went a few blocks away, and after a little hesitation, thought he 
would just go back and see what was going on.in that church. At 
the conclusion of the services I found a man. sitting away back in a 
pew weeping. ‘What is the matter?’ I asked him. ‘“ Weil,” said 
he, “that text up yonder has broke my heart—God is love.” I asked 
him if he was willing to accept His love, and spoke about it to him, 
and ina little time I had him on his knees, and he accepted the 
text. I hope there are some, I say some—I hope there are hundreds 
here who will believe this in spite of what the devil says, who is con- 
tinually striving to make men believe it isn’t tru>. 

My friends, “ God is-love,” and He wants you all to receive this 
truth. You may ask, “ Why does God love me?” It is a. mystery, 
and always has been, to me why He loves the rebellious sons ot 
Adam ; but, I suppose, it is upon the same principle as the shining 
of the sun—can not help it. The trouble is with us; we are all the 
time trying to measure God’s love with our own. If aman proves 
(168) 


——— 
cis SS OEE 


|. 


166 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


treacherous, if he proves a traitor to us, we turn our back upon him 
and cast him off. Our love may have been very strong toward this 
man, but whenever we find the bad traits in his character we throw 
him off. It is not so with the divine love. God's love is unchange- 
able. Ifa man goes down to hell, it is because he has turned from 
that love himself. God hates sin, mark you; but He loves the sin- 
ner. Kecp this in your minds—it is sin that He hates with a per- 
fect hatred, but He loves the sinner. ‘ Now before the feast of the 
passover, when Jesus knew that His hour was come that He 
should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved His 
own which were in the world, He loved them unto the end.” 
He loved them that very night. He knew that one of those dis- 
ciples would betray Him for thirty pieces of silver, and yet He 
loved them. If there is anything that makes hell unendurable to 
Judas Iscariot it is the knowledge that He loved him even when he 
betrayed Him—-that He loved him even while he kissed Him. 
That very night when He knew Peter was to forsake Him— 
that very night when He was hastening to the cross, He loved him. 
He loved them all to the end. Let us not be guilty of measuring 
God's love with our own. God loves us when we do not love Him. 
God loves us when we are at enmity with Him—when we are at 
war with Him. Just turn to the forty-ninth chapter of Isaiah and 
fifteenth verse: “Cana woman forget her sucking child, that she 
should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they 
may forget, yet I will not forget thee.” Now what an illustration 
that is. How the prophet just draws on this scene with which we 
are so familiar in our homes. Cana mother forget the child of her 
ibosom? There are unnatural mothers in Chicago, of course. They 
have drank so much whiskey that they have lost all love for their 
children. But they are very few. The most devoted love on 
earth is the love of a mother for her child; but what is it in com- 
parison to God’s love? Mothers “may forget, yet I will not 
forget thee.” This is what God was saying to Israel. My friends, 
just picture to yourself the love of a mother. Why, there is no 
love so strong as the love of a mother for her child. There are a 
great many things to separate a man from his wife, or one friend 
from another but the mother’s love is generally unchangeable. 
Her son may be a murderer; public opinion may be against him ; 
‘the daily journals may write him down; his friends may forsake 
him; but that mother will take her stand in the court beside her 


ard this 
e throw 
change- 
ed from 
the sin- 
h a per- 
bt of the 
hat He 
ved His 
e end,” 
hose dis- 
yet He 
rable to 
when he 
ed Him. 
» Him— 
ved him. 
easuring 
ve Him. 
ve are at 
aiah and 
that she 
fea, they 
ustration 
vhich we 
ild of her 
ee. They 
for their 
love on 
t in com- 
will not 
y friends, 
ere is no 
ere are a 
ne friend 
angeable. 
inst him; 
y forsake 
yeside her 


HOW GOD LOVES MEN. 167 


boy. The jury may give a verdict against him, and he may be 
sentenced to death; but you will find that mother going down to 
his cell, and she will love him through it all. She doesn’t care for 
public opinion ; she doesn't heed the sentiments of the press. Every- 
thing may be gone from her, but love for her son will remain. And 
when that son has been executed, and life has left his body she 
will go down to his grave and water it with tears, and will cherish 
the memory of that boy as long as she lives. But all this is not to 
be compared with the love of God. God’s love is not confined 
to one man; it is universal and is unfailing and unchangeable. 

Let us turn to Jeremiah and we read: “ His love is everlasting.’ 
He loves us with an everlasting love, and if you are lost, it is be- 
cause you despise this everlasting love. It is not because He doesn’t 
love you, for we see here He loves you with an everlasting love. It 
was sheer love which gave Christ for us, and every man and woman 
in this house can be a partaker of it. He said this to Israel when 
they were in a backslidden state. He gave them blessings. 
He gave them prophets. He led them through dangers and diffi- 
culties, and they had now forsaken His law, and He said to Jere- 
miah go and tell them that “ His love is everlasting.” But even 
after that they despised His love and affection, and ruin came upon 
them. 

I can imagine some of you saying, “Well, if God loves with an 
unfailing love, with an unchangeable love, with an everlasting love, we 
are all right.” Some men say, “I ignore the doctrines you have been 
preaching the last two nights—I don’t believe in your blood doc- 
trine; but I believe in the love of God. He is a God of love, and 
by His love He will save me.” 

I had a lady come to me while in England, and if ever I saw a 
woman whose heart was broken it was she. She told me a very 
sad story. She had a family of five children, and one of them was in 
exile in Australia. The parents loved that boy, it seemed, almost 
more than all the others; but they had to banish him from home. 
He had written to his parents to allow him to come home, but his 
father had replied, ‘“ No; if you only repent of your sins you may come 
home; but if not, you can not come.” They told me that they 
yearned to have him home, but they couldn’t have him. When he 
was beside them he made their house a perfect hell. If he came, it 
would ruin all the other children; and so, don’t you see, if an unre- 
generated man came into the kingdom of Heaven, he would snake a 


, 


titans hice rast - 


168 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


perfect hell ofit. There would be another warin Heaven. He isa God 
of love, but He can not let an unregenerated man into His king- 
dom. If He did, there would soon be no more joy in Heaven than 
there is on earth now. Before a man enters there, he must be regen- 
erated. And so that Saviour offers you that salvation through His 
love; wants to bless you to-night; and I say again if you do not 
accept this love you will trample the mercy of God under your feet. 

I was told by a prominent man in Boston of a young man in 
New Vork. He had put his mother into the grave by his conduct, 
and he was fast bringing his father to an untimely end. One night 
while he was going out his father met him in the hall, and said to 
him kindly, “You have not, my son, spent a night with me since 
your poor mother was buried. It is very lonely here now. There 
are none but the servants in the house; now won’t you spend this 
night with me? I want to talk to you;” and the old man stood 
there with his gray hairs and appealed to his son. But the answer 
was, “No, I won't.” “ You have killed your mother through your 
conduct; these gray hairs will soon be lying beside her, and I must 
tell you of your peril. You shall not go; or if you will go to your 
ruin you must go over my body,” and the old father lay down at 
the door and the young man leaped over his father-—leaped to his 


‘ruin. The old man loved him, but he trampled his love under his 


feet. What are you doing, sinner? “I have no pleasure in the 
death of the wicked; turn ye, turn ye, oh House of Israel.” 
God does not come down here without giving us a token of His 
love. Many people profess great love for us, but they give us no 
token. It isn’t so with God. Find here in the thirty-eighth chap- 
ter of Isaiah, seventeenth verse: ‘“ Behold, for peace I had great 
bitterness, but Thou hast in love for my soul delivered it from the 
pit of corruption, for Thou hast cast all my sins behind Thy back.” 
Out of love for my soul He has cast all my sins behind His back. 
[hat is the way He shows His love by taking all our sins and cast- 
ing them behind His back. Could you want them put in any safer 
place than behind His back? Not behind my back, where Satan 
might get at them, but behind God’s back, where Satan can not get 
them. He says: “ Thou hast cast all”-—TI like that little word all-- 
“behind thy back.” They are there for time and eternity, and I can go 
on my way shouting for glory. There are two or three ways of ex- 
pressing the taking away of our sins by God. There is this one, 
and we are told that He puts them “into the sca of forgetfulness,’ 


and s 
them 
takes 
sinne! 


time | 

Th 
which 
fou 
prese: 
them 
But t 
turne 
loves 
He fe 
have 
nine 
loving 
disea; 


would 
He \ 
ilis 
who 
yet t 
all th 
sins { 
and g 
witha 

Nq 
pitie 
God’ 
thin 


His 


od 
ing- 
han 
ben- 
His 
not 
eet. 
1 in 
uct, 
ight 
d to 
ince 
ere 
this 
ood 
swer 
vour 

ust 
your 
rn at 
9 his 
r his 
the 
ael,” 
His 
s no 
hap- 
treat 
i the 
ek,” 
ack. 
cast- 
safer 
atan 
t get 
all-— 
in go 
f ex- 
one, 
ess,’ 


HOW GOD LOVES MEN, 169 


and some others, but this one is the best of them all. He casts 
them all behind His back. Let us rejoice insuch a Redeemer. He 
takes our sins right out of the way, and the road is clear for the 
sinner to come to Him. 

Now, it is out of pure love for us that He takes ours sins and puts 
them away. A great many people are trying to put away their own 
sins, but they can’t do it. Suppose you stole a thousand dollars 
from aman, and you said, “I forgive the man I stole that money 
from.” You can not do that, for he has got something against you. 
It is he that has to forgive, because you have sinned against him. 
So men go on sinning against God; and if we want our sins can- 
celed for time and eternity, we must accept God's forgiveness for 
time and eternity. 

There is another verse in the sixty-third chapter of Isaiah, in 
which He shows His love for us, which I want to call your attention 
to: “In all their affliction He was afflicted, and the angel of His 
presence saved them: in His love and in His pity He redeemed 
them; and He bare them, and carried them all the days of old. 
But they rebelled and vexed His Holy Spirit; therefore He was 
turned to be their enemy, and He fought against them.” Now God 
loves every one of His children. None of them can be afflicted but 
He feels it, just as a mother feels for her child. How many times 
have you seen a mother sitting up with her child seven, eight, or 
nine weeks? She won't let a stranger come in her place. With 
loving care she ministers to her sick child, and if she could take the 
disease out of the bosom of that child and transfer it to her own, she 
would do it. God takes that place with us. In all their afflictions 
He was afflicted, “and the angel of His presence saved them; in 
ilis love and in His pity He redeemed them.” Here is the God 
who pitied and redeemed Israel in spite of their transgressions, and 
yet they turn right round and condemn Him, charge back upon Him 
all their troubles. Just so with people here; they charge back their 
sins te God, and blame God for bringing them into the world at all, 
and some even blame Him for giving them salvatioi., and yet it ‘is 
without price. They spurn His offers and they spurn His love. 

Now let me touch upon this verse. He says, “in His pity.” He 
pities us.) When Adam fell from his high estate, it brought out 
God’s love and pity and He showed him mercy. A great many 
think that God does not love them because they have turned from 
His law. My friends, that is false; that is the very thing that is 


170 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


shown in God’s love. No sooner did the news reach Heaven of 
Adam’s fall, than Heaven came down to reach him. A friend of 
mine, before the fire, went to Manchester, England, and used to tell 
the people of the greatness of Chicago—of its lumber, ofits elevators, 
of its manufactures; but he said the people of Manchester didn’t 
seem to take any interest in what he said. But one day a dispatch 
came over the cable saying that in Chicago a large fire was going on, 
and the people became a little interested. By and by, a telegram 
came saying that the city was burning, and that 10,000 people were 
homeless, and the people began to gather around the teiegraph 
offices, and there was great interest. But after a little, a message 
came across saying the city was burned and that 100,000 people 
were homeless, and the people flocked to the rescue and gave their 
thousands. It was Chicago’s calamity that brought out their love. 
So it was Adam’s calamity that brought out God’s love. And so, 
don’t say that because a man is a sinner, He does not love him. 
He remembers our afflictions, and He comes and says: “If 
you will, I will take your affliction away; I will take your sorrow 
from you; I will take away all your suspense and troubles, 
and I will take you by the right hand and lead you through 
this dark world to my kingdom in the Heavens.” Ho! ho! sinner! 
let the Lord take your right hand and lead you to Paradise. I 
don’t know who you may be—I don’t care whether you are a poor 
tramp who has been wandering about from door to door to-day, 
seeking a crust of bread—I tell you that God loves you. Say yes. 
He wants to save you. He wants to get His arm under your body 
and take you to His kingdom. Won’t you have Him? 

Many people say: “If I could get.rid of my sius I would come.” 
Come to “ Him that loved us and then washed us in His blood.” 
That’s the plan of Christ’s redemption. And so He takes sin from 
us and loves the sinner, and wants to wash you to-night in His 
blood. There is nothing to hinder you from being saved; you have 
just to come, as Paul says, “unto Him that loved and gave Him- 
self for us.” He does not love one man, but He loves the world. 
It was in His great love for us that He came down from Fleaven. 
What we want to know is, that He is for each and every one of us 
—He is not a national Christ; He is a personal Saviour. Suppose 
England gave America $100,000, and J wanted two or three thou- 
sand dollars, that money given to the American government would 
net help me any. What I want is a personal Christ, and I find this 


in the 
Himse 
of pers: 
may b 
throw | 
Ther 
to relat 
sermon 
could r 
said: ‘ 
was no 
a youn 
who wi 
you co 
assente 
of thos 
found 
bent o 
man, tt 
son, I 
mistak« 
too go 
every 
Dawso 
-—told 
At fi 
pel be 
heart \ 
one o 
sinner. 
but for 
see yo 
the sac 
father 
record: 
any of 
Howe 
West 
rang tl 
him to 


n of 
d of 
> tell 
tors, 
lidn’t 
yatch 
x on, 
gram 
were 
rraph 
ssage 
eople 
their 
love, 
id so, 
him. 
6“ if 
Orrow 
ubles, 
rough 
nner! 
se. I 
| poor 
9-day, 
y yes. 


body 


ome.” 
lood.” 
from 
n His 
1 have 
Him- 
world. 
eaven, 
of us 
Ippose 
thou- 
would 


? 4 


1G. this 


HOW GOD LOVES MEN, 171 


in the passage of Galatians: “Unto Him that loved us and gave 
Himself for us.” Let me tell you to-night that He is no respecter 
of persons; He loves every one, no matter what he has been. You 
may be despised by your father and mother. Your friends may 
throw you off; but Christ will not, for God loves you. 

There is a story told of Mr. William Dawson, which I would like 
to relate. While preaching in London, one night at the close of his 
sermon, he said that there was not one in all London whom Christ 
could not save. In the morning a young lady called upon him and 
said: “ Mr. Dawson, in your sermon last night you said that ‘ there 
was no man in all London whom Christ could not save.’ I find 
a young man in my district who says he can not be saved, and 
who will not listen to me. Won’t you go and see him? Iam sure 
you could do more with him than I can.” Mr. Dawson readily 
assented, and went with the young lady to the East End—up one 
of those narrow streets there, and at the top of a rickety staircase 
found a garret, in which a man was stretched upon straw. He 
bent over him and said, “Friend.” “Friend?” said the young 
man, turning upon him; “you must take me for some other per- 
son. I have no friends.” ‘ Ah,” replied the Christian, “you are 
mistaken. Christ is the sinner’s friend.” The man thought this 
too good. ‘ Why,” said he, “my whole family have cast me off; 
every friend I had has left me, and no one cares for me.” Mr. 
Dawson spoke to him kindly, and quoted promise after promise 
-—told him what Christ had suffered to give him eternal life. 

At first his efforts were fruitless, but finally the light of the Gos- 
pel began to break on the young man, and the first sign was his 
heart went out to those he had injured. And, my friends, this is 
one of the first indications of the acceptance of Christ with the 
sinner. He said: “I could die in peace now if my father would 
but forgive me.” “ Well,” replied the man of God, “TI will go and 
see your father and ask him for his forgiveness.” ‘No, no,” was 
the sad answer of the young man, “you can not go near him. My 
father has disinherited me; he has taken my aame from the family 
records; he has forbidden the mention of my name in the house by 
any of the family or servants in his presence, and you needn’t go.” 
However, Mr. Dawson obtained the address, and went away to the 
West End of London, ascended the steps of a beautiful villa, and 
rang the bell. A servant in livery came to the door and conducted 
him to the drawing-room There was everything in that house for 


Sg ee fete taereeeeengunee 
- : < é radios 


172 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


comfort and luxury that money could purchase. He could not help 
contrasting the scene of poverty in that garret with the scene of 
luxurious elegance everywhere around him. Presently a proud, 
haughty-looking merchant came in, and as he stepped forward to 
shake hands with Mr. Dawson, that gentleman said, “I believe you 
have a son named Joseph?” and the merchant threw back his hand 
and drew himself up. “If you come to speak of him—that repro- 
bate—I want you to go away. I have no son of that name. I dis- 
own him. If he has been talking to you he has been only deceiv- 
ing you.” “Well,” replied Mr. Dawson, “he is your boy now, but 
he won't be long.” The father stood for a minute looking at the 
Christian, and then asked, “Is Joseph sick?” “Yes,” was the 
reply; “he is at the point of death. I only came to ask your for- 
giveness for him that he may die in peace. I don’t ask any favor; 
when he dies we will bury him.” The father put his hands to his 
face, and great tears rolled down his cheeks, as he asked, “ Can you 
take me to him?” In a very short time he was in that narrow 
street where his son was dying, and as he mounted the filthy stairs 
it hardly seemed possible that the boy could be in such a place. 
When he entered the garret he could hardly recognize his son, and 
when he bent over him, the boy opened his eyes and said, “ Oh, 
father, cin you—will you forgive me?” and the father answered, 
“Oh, Joseph, I would have forgiven you long ago if you had wanted 
me to.” That haughty man laid his boy’s head on his bosom and 
the son told him what Christ had done for him; how He had for- 
given his sins and brought peace to his soul ; how that the Son of God 
had found him in that poor garret and had done all for him. The 
father wanted the servant to take him home. “ No, father,” said 
the boy, “I have but a short time to live, and I would rather die 
here.” He lingered a few hours, and passed from that garret in the 
East End to the everlasting hills. 

If there is a poor prodigal here to-night, God wants to bless you. 
The world may cast you off, the world may treat you with scorn, 
and I come to-night with the loving message of God: He wants to 
bless you. Oh, may the God of all grace draw you who are out of 
the kingdom to Himself; may He draw you to the throne of grace 
to night. Let us bow our heads in silent prayer. 


GOD 


WOT 

6“ Fx 

Jesu 
“Of w 
“That 
to be str 
“ That 
rooted ai 
“ May 
and leng 
“ And 
ye might 
That 
height” 
tians in 
depth, a 
brings o 
breadth, 
want to 
to find d 
say, “T 
doesn’t 
but ifa 
say this. 
the Scri 
same in 
knee so 
for the 


you 
and 
ro- 
dis- 
eiv- 
but 
the 
the 
for- 
yor; 
. his 
you 
TOW 
fairs 
lace. 
and 
Oh, 
red, 
nted 
and 
for- 
God 
The 
said 
die 
. the 


you. 
‘orn, 
ts to 
it of 
race 


XXI. 


GOD HATES SIN AND LOVES THE SINNER. 


I JOHN iv. 16: “God is iove,” 


WOULD like to call your attention to Ephesians iii. 14: 
“For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father c/ our Lord 
Jesus Christ, | 

“ Of whom the whole family in Heaven and earth is named, Ne | 
“That He would grant you, according to the riches of His glory, : 
to be strengthened with might by His Spirit in the inner man; 
“That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being 
rooted and grounded in love, i 
“Nay be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, 
and length, and depth, and height: 
“ And to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that 
ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.” 
That ye may know “the breadth, and length, and depth, and 

height” of the love of Christ. That was Paul’s prayer forthe Chris- 

tians in Ephesus that they might know the breadth, and length, and 

depth, and height of Christ’s love. There is nothing, my friends, that 

brings out the love of God like the cross of Christ; it tells of the 

breadth, and length, and depth, and height His love. If you 

want to know how much God loves you, yo must go to Calvary 

to find out. A man going out of this hall (ast night was heard to 

say, “That’s not true; God doesn’t love me.” Now, if a man 

doesn’t know his Bible, that may account such an expression; 

but ifa man has his Bible open before hi don’t see how he can 

say this. How aman can speak in this way if he has looked into 

the Scriptures is a mystery to me. This idea probably was the 

same in Paul’s days as it is in ours, and that’s why he bowed his 

knee so that they might comprehend the extent of God’s love 

for them. 

(173) 


SSS eee 


a EE er ee 6 


174 MOODY'S SLRAONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS 


I am told that during the war in France—when France was fight. 
ing with Germany—when the trouble broke out in Paris, the Com- 
munists had a number of citizens in prison. Amony the number 
there was an archbishop. In the window of his little cell he had a 
cross, and before he was led to execution he cut at the head of thie 
cross, “height,” at the bottom, “depth,” and at each of the arms, 
“length” and “breadth.” Ah, he knew something about the love 
of God—he had discovered the great love of Christ. It reaches 
from north to south, from east to west; it reaches from Heaven to 
hell—-to all the corners of the earth; it has height, it has depth, it 
has length, it has breadth. Oh, may God open cur eyes to this 
truth—show us the greatness of this love, and ma, He not Jet a 
man go out of this building saying, “God does not love me,” for 
He does. I wish I had time to read to you all the passages in the 
Scriptures that speak of His love; to show you that He did not 
come down from Heaven to curse you, but to bless you; not to do 
you harm, but to do you good. He seeks to deal with you only for 
your happiness. I can imagine you saying as some one said to me 
lately, “If He loves us so much, why does He let us have so much 
sorrow?” He answers this in the Scriptures—‘* Whom the Lord 
loveth He chasteneth.” Did you ever hear of a man who loved his 
child neglecting to chasten it? If you spare the rod it is sure ruin 
to your child. Why, this very passage is proof of God’s love. Look 
at a father who has a child who lies and steals, and does everything 
that’s bad; if he don’t chasten that child it is a sure proof that the 
father doesn’t love that child. God loves us, and whenever He sees 
we require it, He chasteneth. Because you receive stripes, my friend, 
don’t listen to the devil’s whisper in your ear that God’s love is not 
for you. If we got everything we wanted in this world in the shape 
of property, my friends, it would be our ruin. It is prosperity that 
ruins more men than anything else. When affliction and misfortune 
come upon us we ought to thank God, for it is an evidence of His 
love. He doesn’t chasten us because He loves to do it, but because 
we have sinned before Him. And if there is a poor sinner here who 
has felt the chastisement of the Father, who is suffering affliction 
rather than murmur, we should kiss the rod, because it is a strong 
proof of His love. 

I remember my little girl had a habit of getting up in the morn- 
ing very cross. I don’t know whether your children are like that. 
She used to get up in the morning speaking cross, and it made the 


family 
said to 
you; F 
for a fe 
and sli¢ 
but one 
to be k 
to her 1 
not go 
but she 
The lit 
her wee 
then th 
her goi 
repress 
in Chic: 
came in 
I kissec 
her tha 
lieve, w 

In R 
them tl 
pose.” 
tune, r 
remem 
very al 
went ri 
stuff frq 
dif‘erer 
it prov 
and aff 
work a 

I ¢ 
felt w 
him it 
things 
stones 
togeth 
Paul 
fortung 


rht. 


Diti~ 


ber 
da 
thi 
ms, 
ove 
hes 
h to 
h, it 
this 
st a 
’ for 
the 
not 
do 
V for 
me 
auch 
ord 
d his 
ruin 
Look 
hing 
t the 
sees 
iend, 
s not 
hape 
that 
rtune 
’ His 
cause 
»who 
ction 
‘rong 


norn- 
that. 
e the 


GOD HAVES SIN AND LOVES THE SINNER. 175 


family very uncomfortable. So I took her aside one morning and 
said to her, “ Emma, if you go on that way I shall have to correct 
you; Fdon’t want to do it, but I will have to.” She looked at me 
for a few moments—I had never spoken that way to her before— 
and sle went away. She behaved herself for a few weeks all right, 
but one morning she was as cross as ever, and when she came to me 
(o be kissed before going to school, I wouldn’t do it. Off she went 
to her mother, and said, “ Mamma, papa refused to kiss me; I can 
not go to school, because he won't kiss me.’”’ Her mother came in, 
but she didn’t say much; she knew the child had been doing wrong. 
The little one went off, and as she was going down-stairs I heard 
her weeping, and it seemed to me as if that child was dearer to me 
then than ever she had been before. I went to the window and saw 
her going down the street crying, and as I looked on her I couldn't 
repress my tears. That seemed to be the longest day I ever spent 
in Chicago. Before the school was out I was home, and when she 
came in, her first words were: “ Papa, won’t you forgive me?” and 
I kissed her and she went away singing. It was because I loved 
her that I punished her. My friends, don’t let Satan make you be- 
lieve, when you have any trouble, that God does not love you. 

In Romans we read: “For all things work together for good to 
them that love God, tothem who are | |ic galled according to His pur- 
pose.’ So, when you have crosses, affiction, and sorrow, and misfor- 
tune, remember that all those things “work together for good.” I 
remember when the same child was taken with scarlet fever I was 
very anxious that the prescription should be filled carefully, and I 
went right to the head clerk of a drug store and he took first a little 
stuff from one bottle and a little from another until he had a lot of 
different medicine in one jar; and he stirred them all up, and 
it proved to be the right remedy. So God gives us a little sorrow 
and affliction and misfortune; it is only a remedy for us. If things 
work against you it is only for your good. 

I can imagine Paul when he got on that platform, how he 
felt when his misfortunes came upon him. When they threw 
him into prison and gave him stripes he would shout, “ All 
things work together for my good.” When they took up great 
stones and stoned him and stripped him: ‘ All things work 
together for my good—everything is for the Lord.” Satan, while 
Paul was suffering, could not make him disbelieve that all this mis- 
fortune was for good; he believed that all things worked together 


+ Qh reer UEn LB: 


= 
oe 


\ 


if 

BE 

rat 
Ni 
| 
¥ 


176 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


for good. That’s what made him so mighty; it was this fact that 
made him carry everything before him; it was this knowledge that 
enabled him, instead of giving way to despair, to take up his pen in 
that prison, and write those great epistles—those epistles which 
have done so much good to man. Men who have received bless- 
ings from his teachings are constantly going there, and I can 
imagine them, when they reach the golden gates, meeting Paul and 
taking him by the right hand and saying: “ Paul, Iam glad you 
wrote that epistle to the Ephesians ; I was saved by it.” “ Paul, I 
am glad you wrote that epistle to the Corinthians; I received sal- 
vation by it.” “ Paul, your epistle to the Hebrews was the means 
of giving me a crown of glory.” The sermons he preached, most 
of them, have gone, but these epistles come down to us as living 
testimony of God’s goodness to us. It was Paul’s affliction that 
gave usthem. So, if the world is dark around us, and we are sur- 
rounded, remember that “all things work together for our good,” 
and be sure that you love Him. 

God loves the Christian—“those that serve Him.” I can hear 
some ene saying: “I never served God; I never prayed to Him in 
my life ; Inever sought for a knowledge of God. He doesn’t love me. 
He’s angry with me.” I know a great many people have got this 
idea. I swppose they got it from some of our preachers. I re- 
member I used to do this too—say that God was angry with the 
sinner, and I thought it was true; but that time has passed away. 
This very text might have shown me I was wrong. If I have a son 
wiio is a drunkard, or a gambler, or a thief, I love him still—I am 
angry with his sim. 

I will tell you how I got my eyes open to the truth that God 
loves the sinner. When I went over to Europe, I was preaching in 
Dublin, when a young fellow came up to the platform and said to 
me that he wanted to come to America and preach. He had a 
boyish appearance; did not seem to be over 17 years old. I 
measured him all over, and he repeated his request, and asked me 
when I was going back. J told him I didn’t know, probably I 
wouldn’t if I had known. J thought he was too young and inexpe- 
rienced to be able to preach. In course of time I sailed for 
America, and hadn’t been here long before I got a letter from him, 
dated New York, saying that he had arrived there. I wrote him 
a note and thou “ht I would hear no more about him; but soon 
I got snather let er from him, saying that he was coming soon to 


Chicago 
ing him 
place ret 
no more 
ance. I 
Iowa, ar 
man (I 

Ireland), 
try him, 
back.” 

morning 
meeting: 
him very 
you; he 
God hat 
with a di 
So I co 
like him. 
that nig! 
thought 
coming 
young 
chapter 
that He 
Him sh 
divide uy 
ing proo 
or three 
since. 
flocking 
of John, 
His onl 
perish, 
sermon 
throw it 
six tho 
this. I 
life. It 
are som 
nights. 


GOD HATES SIN AND LOVES THE SINNER, 177 


tS 


Chicago, and would like to preach. I sent him another letter tell- 
ing him if he came, to call on me, and closed with a few common- 
place remarks. I thought that would settle him, and I would hear 
no more from him. But in a very few days after, he made his appear- 
ance. I didn’t know what to do with him. I was just going off to 
Iowa, and I went to a friend and said: “I have got a young Irish- 
man (I thought he was an Irishman because I had met him in 
Ireland), and he wants to preach. Let him preach at the meetings—- 
try him, and if he fails I will take him off your hands when I come 
back.” When I got home—I remember it was on a Saturday 
morning—lI said to my wife: “ Did that young man preach at the 
meetings?” “Yes.” ‘How did they like him?” ‘They liked 
him very much,” she replied; “he preaches a little different from 
you; he preaches that God loves sinners.”” I had been preaching that 
God hated sinners; that He had been standing behind the sinners 
with a double-edged sword, ready to cut off the heads of the sinners. 
So I concluded if he preached different from me I would not 
like him. My prejudice was up. Well, I went down to the meeting 
that night, and saw them coming in with their Bibles with them. I 
thought it was curious. It was something strange to see the people 
coming in with Bibles, and listen to the flutter of the leaves. The 
young man gave out his text, saying: ‘Let us turn to the third 
chapter of John, and sixteenth verse, ‘ For God so loved the world 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in 
Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.’” He didn’t 
divide up the text at all. He went from Genesis to Revelations, giv- 
ing proof that God loved the sinner, and before he got through two 
or three of my sermons were spoiled. I have never preached them 
since. The following day (Sunday) there was an immense crowd 
flocking into the hall; and he sa‘d: “ Let us turn to the third chapter 
of John, sixteenth verse, ‘For God so loved the world that He gave 
His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life;’” and he preached the fourth 
sermon from this verse. He just seemed to take the whole text and 
throw it at them, to prove that God loved the sinner, and that for 
six thousand years He had been trying to convince the world of 
this. I think I thought I had never heard a better sermon in my 
life. It seemed to be a new revelation to all. Ah, I notice there 
are some of you here who remember those times, remember those 
nights. I got a new idea of the blessed Bible. On that Monday 
12 


. 


178 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


night I went down and the young man said, “ Turn to the third 
chapter of John, sixteenth verse,” and he seemed to preach better 
than ever. Proof after proof was quoted from Scripture to show 
how God loved us. I thought sure he had exhausted that text, 
but on Tuesday he took his Bible in his hand and said: “ Tura to 
the third chapter of John, sixteenth verse;” and he preached the 
sixth sermon from that text. He just seemed to climb over his 
subject, while he proved that there was nothing on earth like the 
love of Christ, and he said, “If I can but convince men of this love, 
if | can but bring them to believe in the text, t' whole world will 
be saved.” On the Thursday he selected the old text, John iii. 
16, and at the conclusion of the sermon he said, “I have been 
trying to tell you for seven nights how much God loves you, but I 
can not do it. If I could borrow Jacob’s ladder and climb up to 
Heaven, and could see Gabriel there and ask him to tell me how 
much God loves me, he would only say, ‘God so loved the world 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in 
Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.’” 

My friends, I hope none here will go down to hell who has 
heard this text of Scripture. If he does, he will have trampled it 
under his feet—he will have flung away God’s goodr ess. His hell 
will be two hells if he remembers that “God so loved the world 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.’ How a man 
can go out of this Tabernacle after hearing this text, saying, “ God 
does not love me,” is a mystery to me. 

I want to turn your attention to Romans v. 8: “ But God com- 
mendeth His love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners 
Christ died for us.” Men have an idea that He did not come to 
rid men of their sins. That is not true. He didn’t come to call 
the righteous, to call the just to His kingdom, but sinners. IJ 
there had been no sin in the world He needn't have come here. It 
was the fact of sin being in the world that brought Him from the 
bosom of His Father—it was that that brought Him to Calvary— 
Christ’s love fora perishing world. He wants to cover us with 
His love. Look at that beautiful passage in the song of Solomon: 
“His left hand is under my head, and His right hand doth 
embrace me,” and “ His banner over me is love.”” Yes, His banner 
is love. There is a story told of a man who came to this country 


from E 
became 
the war 
island y 
te be 
and Ar 
was in! 
“Why, 
they rey 
guilty, 
those d 
brought 
end tot 
and the 
spangle 
you dar 
tion of | 
sented y 
banner « 
banner « 
under tl 
world. 
sary, to 
May 
out of 
the love 
to the 
brought 
loved tl 
ever bel 
Will you 
the doo 
And wh 
this lovi 
knock ? 
hold Is 
languag¢ 
thief, a ¢ 
and he y 


third 
setter 
show 
text, 
ira to 
d the 
er his 
ce the 
, love, 
d will 
hn iii. 
been 
but I 
up to 
e how 
world 
eth in 


10 has 
pled it 
is hell 
world 
ieveth 
a man 


“God 


1 com- 
sinners 
yme to 
to call 
rs. 
ere. It 
om the 
lvary— 
is with 
lomon: 
d doth 
banner 
country 


GOD HATES SIN AND LOVES THE SINNER. 179 


from England, and who became naturalized. Soon afterward he 
became restless for a change, and wen. to Cuba. It was when 
the war broke out there in 1867. He had not been long in that 
island when he was arrested asa spy. He was tried and sentenced 
te be executed—ordered to be shot. He sent for the British 
and American Ministers, who looked into his case and found he 
was innocent. They went to the Spanish authorities and said: 
“Why, this man is innocent; you can not execute this man,” but 
they replied that he had been tried under Spanish laws, and found 
guilty, and must die. They hadn't time (there was no cable in 
those days) to send to their government. The man was finally 
brought to be shot, and the Spanish soldiers were ordered to put an 
end to that young man. At that point a carriage drove rapidly up, 
and the two Ministers leaped out and flung the British flag and star- 
spangled banner before the man, and said to the soldiers, “ Fire, if 
you dare!” and they didn’t. Those flags gave that man the protec- 
tion of the government; the governments of those countries repre- 
sented were behind those flags. Ah, my friends, come under the 
banner of Heaven; the government of Heaven is behind it. His 
banner offers us His love—it is a banner of love. You will then be 
under the protection of high Heaven as you journey through the 
world. If you are assailed, He will send legions of angels, if neces- 
sary, to fight your way up to Heaven. 

May the God of grace break your hearts, and may no man go 
out of this building saying, “God does not love me.” It was 
the love of God that broke my heart years ago, and if I put it 
to the vote of the Christians in this assemblage to testify what 
brought them to Christ, they would turn to this text: “ For God so 
loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whoso-. 
ever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” 
Will you take His love to-night? Bear in mind that He stands at 
the door of your heart with His locks wet with the dew of night. 
And what does He do? He knocks; just listen! Can you hear 
this loving Saviour calling you to Him? Can you heara gentle 
knock? That is Christ knocking at the door of your heart. “ Be- 
hold I stand at the door and knock, and if any man”—mark the 
language of the Scripture—“ any man,” he may be a drunkard, a 
thief, a gambler—“ open the door I will come in and sup with him 
and he with Me.” I have been in homes in Chicago where I couldn’t 


=a oo ae SSR trea nergy a , 
vy <* ey 
ww »\ ay é & .& 
“aay % <¢* ve <° 
S) "8, \W. Vg & 
es Vi ov . 
6? FFEER © 
cs 4 = os 
: © oll] <i) om Eas = 
ae SE sit 
Oo; SS = = BA S 
35 E 


180 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


stay five minutes—they were so dark and gloomy, just like some of 
our hearts. Won't you pull back the bolts and open the door ot 
your heart, and He will come in and reign and give you peace and 
joy all the rest of your days? Is there one here to-night who will 
let Him in? May the God of all grace lead to the cross any 
wanderer here to-night. Let us pray. 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we pray Thee that Thou wilt help each one 
of us, that we may know what to do with Thy Holy Son that Thou 
hast given us. May these men and women give up their wayward 
life, and may these that are old in a life of sin give up that life, and 
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. And, our Saviour, may many feed 
on Thy Spirit as the bread of their life. May we have the joy of 
seeing many turning from their sins and enriched with Thy Holy 
Spirit. May we see many this night coming to God and acknowl- 
edge that the glorious Spirit of Christ saveth. May all in this meet- 
ing to-night be found lifting up their hearts to the Lord. And this 
night may there be no criticisms upon the work that is going on, 
but may all work together for the glory of God, and we will give 
Thee all the praise. And may Thy blessing rest on the songs we 
shall sing and the Gospel we shall preach. Amen. 


T isa 
lieve 
if tk 

loving F 
has beet 
don’t be 
any goo 
world a: 
His ow 
His ow 
therefor 
trouble 
and suff¢ 
the acco 
then we 
it. We 
I rem 
paper a 
men had 
and forg 
my sad 
of dying 
saw the 
pened t 
been ki 
it.. Si 
seems t¢ 
this co 


me of 
oor ot 
e and 
ho will 
BS any 


h one 

Thou 
hyward 
fe, and 
1y feed 
joy of 
y Holy 
knowl- 
mect- 
nd this 
ing on, 
ill give 


ngs we 


XXII, 


THE DEATH OF JESUS. 


1 Cor. xv. 3: “Christ died for our sins.” 


T is a mystery to me how anybody can read that Bible and be- 
lieve it, and yet find no reason for loving Christ. And I think 
if these friends here to-day can think of a good reason for not 

loving Him, I think that they will find a reason that no one else 
has been able to find during these last eighteen hundred years. I 
don’t believe there was a man or woman ever lived that could give 
any good reason for not loving and following Him. He loved this 
world and died to save it. “Christ died for our sins,” not for 
His own. If Christ had had one sin He would have had to die for 
His own sin. But our Lamb of God was without spot or blemish,. 
therefore He could become the sinner’s substitute. The great 
trouble about this question is that we have before us Christ’s death: 
and suffering, but we don’t realize it. We take up the Bible, read 
the account of His crucifixion and death, and how He suffered, and 
then we lay the Bible down and don’t think anything more about 
it. We don’t realize what it means, that “ Christ died for our sins.” 
I remember during the first part of the war I used to take up a 
paper and read an account of a battle, how perhaps ten thousand 
men had been killed or wounded ; and I would lay the paper down 
and forget all about it. At last I went into the army, and it was 
my sad duty to be upon some battle-fields. I could hear the groans 
of dying men, and I helped bear away some of the wounded, and I 
saw the scene in all its terrible reality. When I got home and hap- 
pened to take up a paper, and if I read that ten thousand men had 
been killed and wounded, I could see the scene—could not forget 
it. Similar scenes had made a deep impression upon my mind. It 
seems to me that if I could make this story of Christ’s death real to 
this congregation, there would not be a heart here but that would 
(x81) 


182 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


be drawn towards Him; there would not one go out from this place 
and say that they knew of any reason why they should not love 
Him. I think every one could give a reason why they should fol- 
low and serve Him. This afternoon let us forget that we are living 
in Boston in this nineteenth century. Let us imagine that we are 
living in Palestine, and in the days of Christ upon earth. Let us 
imagine that we are present there the last Thursday before He is 
crucified. We are passing down one of the streets of Jerusalem, 
and we notice that every one in that street is looking upon some 
one that is coming down the street; every eye is turned in one 
direction. We look and see the Galilean prophet. He has got His 
little band of twelve disciples around Him, and as He walks along 
every eye is bent upom Him; men, women, and children are look- 
ing at Him. He has made a great stir in that country during the 
past three years. It was a great feast-day, and thousands of people 
had come from all parts of the land to the city. Let us follow Him 
down the street. He enters a common-looking house, the disciples 
follow Him, and they ascend to a chamber, and His twelve disciples 
gathered around Him to take supper, the last He was to have with 
them. He was even then under the shadow of the cross; he was 
hastening tc calvary. As they sat around that table we are told 
‘that He looked exceedingly sorrowful. His heart was sorrowful. Pres- 
ently He said: “One of you shall this night betray me.” Then each 
of them wondered if he were the one of whom the Master spoke, and 
‘they said: “Isic I?” They distrusted themselves. At last Judas, that 
awful traitor, that had already been planning in his heart to betray 
Him, said: “Isit I?” Jesus gave him to understand that it was. 
Presently Christ turned to him and said: “ What thou doest, do 
quickly.””, You would have thought that would have broken Judas’ 
heart. And Judas got up that Thursday night and left that scene. 
I think there is nothing recorded in history that is so sad as that 
parting. For three years he had been a disciple of that band; 
three years associated with the Son of God, and heard only words 
of sympathy and love from those lips. Now he got up and leaves, 
never to see that Master again. You can hear him as he goes down 
those stairs and goes out in the darkness of the night to the Sanhe- 
drim and to the ruler of the Jews, and asks him how much he will 
give for the Son.of God. And he made a bargain with them to 
sell the Son of God, and how much do you think for? Only fifteen 
or twenty dollars in our money. He sold the Son of God very 


: 
| 


Cattsaes Cacia 


cheap ;_ 
for ever 
Him ju: 
to betre 
your hes 
my Fatl 
have to 
prepare 
self, that 
fort and 
Let us | 
eastern | 
Taking | 
down in 
we are 
trickled 
fering fe 
shadow 
Him. ] 
the sins 
praying 
was a | 
and we 
seeking 
“ Jesus 
so myst 
voice tk 
had said 
the ma 
thought 
a short 
When 
Master 
broken 
hands t 
to bless 
The « 
to Caia 
didn’t v 
blood. 


place 
love 

d fol- 
living 
re are 
et us 
He is 
salem, 
some 
one 

bt His 
along 
look- 
g the 
people 
Him 
ciples 
sciples 
e with 
e€ was 
e told 
Pres- 
n each 
e,and 
s, that 
etray 
it was. 
st, do 
Judas’ 
scene. 
s that 
band ; 
words 
eaves, 
down 
anhe- 
le will 
em to 
ifteen 
1 very 


: 
4 
i; 


THE DEATH OF FESUS. 183 


cheap; but huw many there are in the city of Boston selling Him 
for even less than that; how many are turning their backs upon 
Him just for the trifles of this world. While Judas had gone out 
to betray Him, Christ was comforting His disciples. “Let not 
your hearts be troubled ; ye believe in God, believe also in me. In 
my Father’s house are many mansions; if it were not so, I would 
have told you. I go to prepare a place for you; and if I go to 
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto my- 
self, that where I am there ye may be also.” He was trying to com- 
fort and cheer them, while Judas was betraying Him. They go out. 
Let us follow them down through the street. They go out by the 
eastern gates, over the brook, where was the Garden of Gethsemane. 
Taking Peter, James, and John away from the rest, Christ kneeled 
down in that garden and began to pray, and while He was praying 
we are told that great drops of blood came out of His pores and 
trickled down over His bosom. There behold the Son of God suf- 
fering for your sin and mine. There He is coming under the very 
shadow of the cross; the sins of the world were to be laid upon 
Him. We that had never transgressed the law was soon to take 
the sins of the world upon Himself as a substitute. While He was 
praying, the disciples fell asleep. At last He awoke them. There 
was a band of men hunting in that garden with lanterns, torches, 
and weapons for something. He knew well enough what they were 
seeking; and called to them, “ Whom seek ye?” And they said, 
“ Jesus of Nazareth.” He said, “I am He.” There was something 
so mysterious in His presence and something so powerful in that 
voice that they had not the power to arrest Him at first. Judas 
had said, “When you see me step up and kiss a man, that will be 
the man.” And he stepped up and kissed Christ. What a terrible 
thought. He had been professing to be His faithful disciple only 
a short time previous, and here he was betraying Him with a kiss. 
When the Master turned to him and said: “ Betrayest thou your 
Master with a kiss?” I should have thought that would have 
broken his heart. The moment he kissed Him they seized those 
hands that had wrought so many miracles and had ever been raised 
to bless people, and bound them and took Him back to Jerusalem. 

The disciples forsook Him. He was led before Annas, and then 
to Caiaphas, his son-in-law. He was brought that night. They 
didn’t wait until morning ; they seemed to have been thirsting for His 
blood. There were seventy that belonged to that Sanhedrim. They 


7 
| 
i 
{ 
i 
4 
i 
} 
i 
i 
a 
if 
4 
j 


184 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


took Him into the Council Chamber before those rulers of the 
Jews, and tried to find witnesses that would swear to a lie; false 
witnesses. The law required that two witnesses that were agreed 
must appear against a person on trial before he could be convicted. 
They found two that were agreed, and they brought in the Son of 
God before that Sanhedrim, and put Him on trial for His life. 
These witnesses came in and testified to what was false, and then 
the high-priest asks Jesus what He had to say. “Art thou the 
Christ, the Son of the Blessed?” At last He opened His lips and 
said: “‘] am, and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right 
hand of Power and coming in the clouds of heaven.” Caiaphas 
said that was enough; what further testimony did they want, and 
tore His mantle with rage, and they said: ‘“ He is guilty of death.” 
Only a few days before they had raised the cry, ‘‘ Hosannah to the 
Son of David,” and now the verdict is, “ He is guilty of death.” 
One of the soldiers strikes Him in the face with the palm of his 
hand. Another spits upon Him. That is what the prophet Isaiah 
means when he says: “ He was wounded for our transgressions, he 
was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was 
upon him; and with his stripes we are healed.” And, while this 
trial was going on, there was Peter out in the judgment hall swear- 
ing that he never knew Him; Peter had denied Him. He slept 
that night until early Friday morning, when, if we had been in Je- 
rusalem, we could have seen those Roman soldiers leading Him 
down to Pilate; they could not take His life without the consent 
of the Roman government. Now Pilate never had such a prisoner 
before him. Pilate looked at and talked with Him, and then said, 
“T find no fault in this man.” They urged him to put Him to 
death, and he said, “ Well, I will chastise Him, and let Him go.” 
“But,” they said, “if you chastise and let Him go, you will do 
wrong; He is a Galilean.” They told him that He was brought up 
in Nazareth, and Pilate wanted to get rid of the responsibility of 
nutting Him to death, so he said, “I will send Him to Herod.” He 
was quickly brought before Herod, who was glad to see Him, think- 
ing perhaps that Jesus would give some evidence of His power or 
perform some miracle. Herod was a bloodthirsty man; he had 
taken the life of Christ’s loved disciple, John the Baptist. Those 
Roman soldiers still tormented the Saviour. They blindfolded 
Him, and then told Him to show His great power; struck Him 
with their hands and spit upon Him. MHerod’s warriors taunted 


Jesus, « 
haps, a 
thirsty 
taken t 
Him, v 
had, ar 
instead 
that, b: 
Jesus g 
they w 
know tk 
And Pi 
or Bare 
“ Baral 
“ What 
to deci 
will do 
this ca: 
cify Hi 
lem. | 
of this 
and up 
knew v 
know \ 
scourg¢ 
the Lo 
hard tl 
individ 
have h 
here w 
down \ 


reason 
very h 


THE DEATH OF FESUS., 185 


Jesus, dressed Him up in some cast-off clothing of their king, per- 
haps, and cried, “ Hail, King of the Jews.” But even the blood- 
thirsty Herod had no desire to take His life, and ordered Him to be 
taken back to Pilate, and he was. Pilate thought of a way to save 
Him, which was to take Barabbas, the most notable prisoner they 
had, and deliver him to the crowd, who wanted to destroy Jesus 
instead of him. Now, Barabbas was a highwayman, and not only 
that, but a murderer—one of the most notable prisoners they had. 
Jesus gave life, and Barabbas took life. I suppose Pilate thought that 
they would rather have Christ released than Barabbas, and I don't 
know but that they brought out the two men and put it to a vote. 
And Pilate said to the crowd, “ Which shall I release unto you, Jesus 
or Barabbas?” And you could hear it ring out through Jerusalem, 
‘“‘ Barabbas, Barabbas.” But then Pilate had Jesus left, and he said, 
“ What shall I do with Jesus, that is called Christ ?”’ Pilate had got 
to decide. Sinner, you have got Christ, and must decide what you 
will do with Him; either you must receive Him or reject Him. In 
this case the multitude cried out, “ Let Him be crucified.” “ Cru- 
cify Him!” was the cry that rang out through the streets of Jerusa- 
lem. Pilate, disappointed, wrung his hands, saying, “ I am innocent 
of this just man’s blood.” And they answered, “ Let it be upon us 
and upon our children.” I had been a Christian some time before I 
knew what that meant. “By His stripes we are healed.” I didn't 
know what that Roman custom was. But when I learned how they 
scourged our Lord and Saviour, I remember how I wept and asked 
the Lord to forgive me for not loving Him more, for any impure or 
hard thoughts I had had towards Him. Some of you have heard 
individuals speaking against Him, and you know sometimes you 
have had some unkind thoughts against Him. If there is any one 
here who has any unkind thoughts of Him, don’t let the sun go 
down without getting right with God. That scourging sometimes 
took fifteen minutes, and the prisoner often died in the process, 
The wrists were bound with thongs, and the man placed in a stoop- 
ing position with his back bare, and the blows cut clear through the 
skin and flesh to the bone. That is what Isaiah referred to. The 
heart must be very hard to witness such a scene. Can you find no 
reason why you should not love and serve Him? A heart must be 
very hard to read of that and say that it can find no reason to love 
Him. And yet that is what the prophet Isaiah says: “ He was 
wounded for our transgressions and bruised for our iniquities.” Af 


186 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


ter they had scourged Jesus, instead of pouring oil into those wounds 
—for that is what He did, healed wounds and comforted broken 
hearts—instead of pouring oil on them, some cruel wretch placed a 
crown of thorns upon His brow. The Queen of England wears a 
crown of gold filled with diamonds and other precious stones, but 
when they came to crown the Prince of Heaven, they gave Him a 
crown of thorns and in His hand they put a stick for a sceptre. Can 
you say that you see any reason why you should not love Him? May 
God break every hard heart here to-day, and may we all ask God to 
forgive us for not loving and serving Him better. They have put 
on His clothes. If we had been there we would have seen three 
men coming out of the gates of the city, each one bearing a rugged 
cross. And He carried a cross between the two thieves. Some of 
you ladies wear small crosses made of gold and stone around your 
necks, but the cross that the Son of God carried was a rude, rugged 
one. They led Him away to crucify Him. Look at that scene! 
On each side of Him was a thief. The devil wanted to blacken His 
character every way he could. They are leading Him up to Mount 
Calvary to crucify Him. As He is going up I can imagine that He 
has lost so much blood that His strength gives out, and He reels 

d staggers under His burden, and it is taken upon the shoulders 
_. astranger for Him. Now they are leading the Lamb of God, 
bleeding, up Mount Calvary. Sinner, gaze upon Him! Behold the 
Lamb of God that is going to take away the sins of the world. I 
can imagine them binding Him to the cross, and then comes a Ro- 
man soldier with a hammer and drives the nails into His hands. He 
puts a nail into those hands that have always been raised to bless 
people, that have brought the dead to life, cured the leper, given 
sight to the blind, made the deaf hear; those hands that had ever 
been blessing the people; those hands that were laid upon little 
children, accompanied by that Divine voice which said: “ Suffer lit- 
tle children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of such is 
the kingdom of heaven.” Now we hear that hammer going down, 
blow by blow, driving the nails into His feet and flesh. Say you, 
my friends, that you see no reason why you should love Him? Is 
there anybody in this house that don’t love Him? “ Christ died for 
our sins.” Now He is upon the cross, and it is put in position in 
the hole, and he hangs there between heaven and earth. 

But, look! Hark! He speaks as He hangs on that cross. What 
is it that He says? Does He call down fire from heaven to con- 


sume 
and s 
thieve 
and t 
what 
break 
have 
broke 
he he 
be th 
me w 
dies n 
act. 
How 
spoke 
back | 
It wa: 
out of 
and si 
And tr 
with 
veiled 
three 
not hi 
heave 
hell h 
world 
earth 
the o 
the w 
rolled 
fury 3 
waveg 
Son O 
over 
hear 
cangq 
lion o 
the li 
and t 


THE DEATH OF 3ESUS. y 


sine these rebels? for the passers, we are told, wagged their heads 
and said: He saved others; let Him save Himself! and the two 
thieves there at either side mocked at Him; and now He speaks, 
and the crowd is hushed: “ Father, forgive them, for they know not 
what they do.” There is love for you. Oh! sinner, that ought to 
break your heart. In the very agonies of death He cried to God to 
have mercy for them. I can imagine that it was that prayer that 
broke the heart of one of the thieves so that he said, the moment 
he heard those marvelous words, “ This can not be man, this must 
be the Saviour of the world,” and he cried out, “ Lord, remember 
me when thou comest into thy kingdom.” When a great man 
dies now, we are anxious to get his last words and to know his last 
act. How we linger around his dying bed to catch’his last words! 
How anxious the people of this country were to know the last word 
spoken and the last act done by Abraham Lincoln! Ah! let us go 
back to Calvary and see what was the last act of the Son of God. 
It was to save a poor sinner, to take him from the power of death, 
out of the very jaws of hell, to snatch him from the grasp of Satan, 
and say to him, “ This very day shalt thou be with me in Paradise!” 
And now He cries again, “I thirst,” and they give Him gall mixed 
with vinegar. At last the sun refused to shine upon the scene, and 
veiled its face, and there was darkness over the face of the earth for 
three hours. And at last He cried with a loud voice—there may 
not have been many on earth that heard it, but every angel in 
heaven heard it :—“ It is finished,” and I have no doubt the fiends in 
hell heard it. I have no doubt, if we could have seen into that other 
world, that the fiends gathered around that cross. Yes, hell and 
earth were in league to put Him away. You have been down by 
the ocean’s shore and seen a great boulder lifting itself up out of 
the water, and the waves came up and dashed against it and were 
rolled back, and then returned again and dashed against it with such 
fury as would seem to be breaking it in pieces. Just so the dark 
waves of death and hell came dashing up against the bosom of the 
Son of God. There He hung and the dark billows went rolling 
over Him. He met those billows and hurled them back, and I can 
hear that voice of victory, that cry of triumph, that shout of the 
canqueror, “It is finished!” He had overcome the lion of hell. The 
lion of Judah and the lion of hell had a battle on Calvary, and at last 
the lion of Judah shouted, “It is finished; I have conquered him,” 
and the fiends went howling back into hell. What does it mean? 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


155 


g 
4 


It means Ile has died to redeem a lost world; and all sinners have 
got to do is to look to Calvary—look on Him—just to look to Him 
who was offered up a sacrifice on Calvary. And I can imagine that 
if they had bells in heaven, they all pealed forth their anthems as 
they had never pealed before, and the angels swept their harps as 
never they had been swept before, and the shouts of triumph went 
through all the streets of heaven, “It is finished!’’ Reconciliation 
is made between God and man and all a poor lost world has got to 7 
do now is to believe and be saved. My friends, will you believe Him 

and take Him to-night ? Will you take Him as your Saviour? Will 

you take Him as your Redeemer? Will you take Him as your substi- | 
tute? Who will take Him now? Who will believe on Him now? C 
Who will receive Him as their Lord and Saviour? May God help 
every man in this assembly to believe in the Lord Jesus is the 


prayer of my heart. A mi 


they 
and s 
to he 
fear | 
Chris 
any | 
strai¢ 
the 
The 
Whe 
one t 
first 
she ¢ 
man 
the 
thei 
these 
cuse 
next 
few 


XXIII. 


THE SINNER’S EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY. 


LUKE xiv. 19: “I pray thee have me excused,’ 


HRIST had been invited to dine with a rich Pharisee, and it 
seemed as though this man had gathered his friends together 
in a kind of conspiracy to catch Christ. They watched Him. 

A man who had had dropsy was placed before Jesus, as though 
they wanted to see what He would do. Christ read their hearts, 
and so before He healed the man He asked them if it was lawful 
to heal on the Sabbath day. But they didn’t want to answer, for 
fear they’d betray themselves, and so they held their peace. Then 
Christ put the question to them in another way, and asked them if 
any of them had an ox or an ass fall into a pit, should he not 
straightway pull him out on the Sabbath day, and then he healed 
the man, as the Pharisees and lawyers weren’t able to answer Him. 
Then he told them about the feast, and told them to be humble. 
When a man prepares a feast, men rush in; but when God prepares 
one they all begin to make excuses, and don’t want to go. The 
first excuse was that made by Adam, “ The woman Thou gavest me, 
she gave me to eat.” These men that excused themselves made 
manufactured excuses; they didn’t really have any. The drunkard, 
the libertine, the business man, the citizen, the harlot, all had 
their excuses. If God were to take men at their word about 
these excuses, and swept every one into his grave who had an ex- 
cuse, there would be a very small congregation in the Tabernacle 
next Sunday, there would be little business in Chicago, and ina 
few weeks the grass would be growing on these busy streets. 
Every man who was nursing asin had an excuse, as though God 
had asked them to go into a plague-stricken city, or a hospital, or 
to hear a dry lecture, or something repelling and objectionable, 
something that wasn't for their greatest good. 

Take the excuses. There wasn’t one that wasn’t a lie. The 
devil made them all ; and if the sinner hadn’t one already, the devil 

(189) 


190 MOOPY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


was there at his elbow to suggest one, about the truth of the Bible, 
or something of that sort. One of the excuses mentioned was that 
the man invited had bought a piece of ground, and had to look at 
it. Real estate and corner lots were keeping a good many men out 
of God’s kingdom. It was a lie to say that he had to go and sce it 
then, for he ought to have looked at it before he bought it. Then 
the next man said he’d bought some oxen, and must prove them. 
That was another lie; for if he hadn’t proved them before he 
bought them he ought to have done, and could have done, it after 
the supper just as well as before it. But the third man had the 
silliest, the worst excuse of all; he said he had married a wife, 
and couldn’t come. Why didn’t he bring her with him? She 
would have liked the supper just as well as he, and would have en- 
joyed a supper, as almost any young bride would. 

These seemed to be foolish excuses, but they were not any more 
so than the excuses of to-day. Indeed, the excuses of men are 
getting v. srse and worse all the time. They say they can’t believe 
the Bible; it’s so mysterious. Well, what of it? Infidels, skeptics, 
pantheists, deists, said they didn’t believe the Bible. Had they 
ever used it? Did they read it as carefully as they read any other 
book? This was their excuse. If everybody could understand 
everything the Bible said, it wouldn’t be God’s book; if Christians, 
if theologians had studied it for forty, fifty, sixty years, and then 
only began to understand it, how could a man expect to understand 
it by one reading? A child the first day at school couldn’t even 
know the alphabet, and yet it wasn’t a sign that it was a poor 
school because he didn’t learn the first day all about grammar, 
arithmetic, and geometry. Another said God was a hard Master. 
No; that was one of Satan’s lies. The devil’s the hard master. 
In the Tombs in New York there is over the door the remark, 
“The way of the transgressor is hard.” God’s yoke is easy, His 
burden light. Ask prisoners, ask gamblers, ask sinners, if Satan’s 
yoke is easy. It’s the hardest of all. God's service a hard one! 
How will that sound in the judgment? Many said it wasn’t that, 
but there is such a struggle. Wasn’t all life a struggle? Some said 
they were wicked. Those are just the kind Jesus came to save. 
They weren’t too wicked to be saved. They were so worldly- 
minded. so hard-hearted; that was another falsehood. Look at 
what God did for Bunyan and John Newton and many others who 
were the wickedest, and even the thief on the cross. God is already 


Serna Pan 


recon 
The I 
Yet 
not ir 
tell y 
word | 
reconc¢ 
that. 
that 1 
well a: 
only s 
and c 
willed, 
anythi 
like h: 
them, 
wrong 
leave | 
boy (a: 
house 
inah 
up the 
under 
separa 
in the 
A jur 
agains 
paper 
the bo 
symp 
his fat 
puts h 
the ti 
him. 
she ha 
The s 
few m 
him ? 
and w 
love. 


ei a ge a D 


THE SINNER'S EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY, 19! 


reconciled; He doesn’t need the sinner to be reconciled to Ilim. 
The Lord prepares the sinner, 

Yet vou hear people say they can’t understand that; they can 
not imagine but ¢A/ey have to do something to satisfy God. But | 
tell you that God is satisfied, God is reconciled. You have the 
word of Paul that God is reconciled to us. Yes, thank God, He is 
reconciled to the world. Can you reconcile God? Christ has done 
that. The moment a sinner takes this to heart, and comes to Jesus, 
that moment he is saved. Perhaps a story will illustrate this as 
well as anything. In England I was told about an only son—these 
only sons are hard to bring up properly; they have every whim 
and caprice gratified; they generally grow up headstrong, self- 
willed, and obstinate, and make it miserable for any one to have 
anything to do with them. Well, this son had a father something 
like himself in disposition. And one day a quarrel arose between 
them, and at last, as the son would not give in and own he was 
wrong, the father, in a fit of anger, said that he wished his son would 
leave his house and never come back again. ‘ Well,” rejoined the 
boy (as angry as his father), “I will leave, and I never will enter your 
house again until you ask me.” ‘ Well, then, you won't come back 
in a hurry,” replied his father. The boy then left. The father gave 
up the boy, but the mother did not. Perhaps these men here won't 
understand that, but you women do. A great many things will 
separate a man from his wife, a father from his son, but nothing 
in the wide, wide world will ever separate a mother from her child. 
A jury can bring in a verdict against her son; the hisses may go up 
against him; he is condemned to be hanged; there is not a friendly 
paper to write an article in his favor. But if his mother be there, 
the boy has at least one eye to rest upon him, one heart to beat in 
sympathy with him. He is taken to the cold, damp cell and left to 
his fate. All forsake him but his mother. She comes there; she 
puts her arms around his neck; she kisses him; she would spend all 
the time with him if the officers would allow it. She can not save 
him. The day before his execution she sees him for the last time; 
she has not the courage to see him in the shadow of the gallows. 
The supreme moment at length arrives; he is led forth, and in a 
few moments he dangles a corpse. Does the mother then forget 
him? No; even now she goes to his grave, strews flowers upon it, 
and waters them with her tears. A mother’s love is next to God’s 
love. Death is stronger than everything else; yes, but with the 


192 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


exception of one thing—a mother’s love. Death and decay may 
wreck this city, buildings may cease to exist, everything yields be- 
fore them but a mother’s love. To refer to the illustration again: 
When the father had given the boy up, he thought he would never 
come back. The mother was taken very sick. She had been trying 
by every means in her power to effect a reconciliation between the 
father and son. When she found she could not recover from her 
illness she again renewed her efforts with all the power of a mother’s 
love. She wrote to her son, imploring him to ask his father’s for- 
giveness. He sent word back that he would not write to his father 
unless his father first wrote to him. “TI will never come home until 
he asks me,” he said. The mother began to get lower and lower. 
Her husband at this time came to the bedside and asked if there 
was anything he could do forher. ‘Yes, yes,” she cried, “ there is 
one thing—you can send for my boy. That is the only wish I have 
on earth that is not gratified. If you do not care for him while I 
am alive, who will care for him when Iam gone? I can not bear to 
die and leave my child among strangers. Just let me see him ana 
speak to him and I will die in peace.” The father said he could not 
send for him. He could, but he wouldn’t. He did not want to. 
The mother has but a few hours now to live. She again beseeches 
ber husband that he will send for their son. The father said he 
would send a dispatch to him, but in her name. “No, no; that 
would not do.” Well, he can stand it no longer, and he signs his 
own at the foot of the telegram. It was sent, and the moment the 
boy received it he took the first train home. The father was stand- 
ine by the side of the bed when the son arrived. But when he 
saw the door open he turned his back upon him and walked away. 
The mother grasped the hand of her boy and pressed it again and 
again, and kissed him fervently. “Oh! just speak to your father, 
won’t you? Just speak the first word.” ‘No, mother, I will not 
speak to him until he speaks to me.” The excitement was too much 
and she was rapidly sinking. She told her husband she was dying. 
She now took his hand in hers, and held the hand of her boy in the 
other, and sought and strove to bring about a reconciliation. But 
neither would speak. With her last strength she then placed the 
hand of the son into the hand of the father and sank down into the 
arms of death, and was borne by the angels into the kingdom of 
God. The father looked at the wife and then at the boy, he caught 
his eye; they fell upon each other’s necks, and there stood weeping 


by the 
but it i 
us. W 
Christ | 
put the 
they mi 
a recon 
us. “B 
I have 
one I w 
have th 
down w 
invitatic 
from th 
—-the ir 
not a p 
highway 
may be 
the halt 
expense 
Peopl 
anity, a1 
rolled a 
we very 
Christia 
on long 
through 
pleasure 
thank G 
world s 
source o 
“ Christ 
think ot 
deceivin 
Saw a Sif 
they thij 
must co 
God; t 
God ca 
for som 


THE SINNER'S EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY, 193 

by the bed of the departed. That is the illustration I have given, 
but it is not a fair illustration in this respect : God is not angry with 
us. With that exception it is a good illustration of reconciliation. 
Christ brought the hand of the Father clear down to the world; He 
put the hand of the sinner into the hand of His Father and died that 
they might be reconciled. You have nothing to do then to bring about © 
a reconciliation. God is already reconciled to us and is ready to save 
us. “ Blessed is he who shall be at the marriage supper of the Lamb.” 
I have missed a good many appointments in my life, but there is 
one I will not miss. I would rather be at the marriage feast than 
have the whole world rolled at my feet. I want to be there and sit 
down with Isaac and Jacob, and Abraham, at that supper. It is an 
invitation for joy and gladness that comes from the King of kings, 
from the Lord of glory, to every man and woman in this assembly 
—-the invitation to be at the marriage supper of the Lamb. It is 
not a personal invitation, but a universal one--“ Go out into the 
highways and hedges and compel them to come in, that my house 
may be filled.” Bid them come, “the poor and the maimed, and 
the halt, and the blind,” to the marriage feast prepared at great 
expense by our blessed Redeemer. 

People began to make excuses very early in the history of Christi- 
anity, and they are still at it. Nineteen hundred years have nearly 
rolled away, and still there are excuses. One of the excuses that 
we very often hear people giving is, that they don’t want to become 
Christians because it will make them gloomy—they will have to put 
on long faces and button their coats up, cut off all joy and walk 
through the world till they get to Heaven, where they will have 
pleasure forevermore. We look forward to that happy future, but, 
thank God, we have some pleasure here; indeed, no man in the 
world should be so happy as a man of God. It is one continual 
source of gladness. He can look up and say, “ God is my Father,” 
“Christ is my Saviour,” and “the Church is my mother.” All who 
think otherwise than that a Christian life is one of unceasing joy are 
deceiving themselves. I was going by a saloon the other day and 
saw a sign, “ Drink and i.» merry.” Poor, blind, deluded fellows, if 
they think this will make the mmerry. If you want to be merry, ycu 
must come to the living fountain that bursts from the throne of 
God; then you will have true pleasure. A man away from 
God can not have true pleasure. He is continually thirsting 
for something he can not get—thirsting for something that can 

13 


194 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS, 


quench his thirst—he can not get it until he comes to the living 
fountain. My friends, that is just another wile of the devil to keep 
men from grace. It is false. The more a man is lifted up to Heaven, 
the more joy and peace and gladness he has. He is lifted av y from 
gloom. Look at a man on his way to execution. Suppose I ran up 
to him, holding out my hand and saying: “There is a pardon that 
has been signed by the Governor,” and I give it him. Would he be 
gloomy and joyless? That is Christ. He comes down with a 
pardon to us poor men and women, on our way to execution. 
Yonder is a man starving. I go to him and give him bread. Is 
that going to make him gloomy? A poor man comes along crying 
with thirst, and I sive him a glass of ice water; would that make 
him gloomy? That’s what Christ is doing for us. He has a well 
of living water, and He asks every thirsty soul to drink freely. 
Don’t you believe for a moment that Christianity is going to make 
you gloomy. 

I remember when I was a boy I thought I would wait till I died 
and then become a Christian. I thought if I had the consump- 
tion, or some lingering disease, I would have plenty of time to be- 
come one, and in the meantime I would enjoy the best of the pleas- 
ures of the world. My frien.’ “ was at that time under the power 
of the devil. The idea tha, .. -n has more pleasure away from 
church is one of the devil’s li, . Do not believe it, but accept of 
this universal invitation to the marriage feast. 

I can imagine some men saying, “ Mr. Moody has not touched 
my case at all. That is not the reason why I won’t accept Christ. 
I don’t know if I am one of the elect.” How often am I met with 
this excuse—how often do I hear it in the inquiry-room! How 
many men fold their arms and say, “If I am one of the elect I will 
be saved; and if I ain’t, I won’t. No use of your bothering about 
it.” Why don’t some of those merchants say, “If God intends to 
make me a successful merchant in Chicago, I will be one whether I 
like it or not; and if He doesn’t, I won't.” If you are sick, if a doctor 
prescribes for you, don’t take the medicine ; throw it out of the door, 
it don’t matter, for if God has decreed you are going to die you 
will, and if he hasn’t you will get better. If you use that argu- 
ment you may as well not walk home from this Tabernacle. If 
God has said you'll get home, you'll get there—you'll fly through the 
air, if you have been ciected to go home. These illustrations are 
just the same as the excuse. You can not go up there and give 


that ex 
unconv 
the do 
govern: 
men. | 
the dez 
the oth 
man. 
churche 
to take 
freely.” 
to Johr 
broad tl] 
men mz 
water o 
won't, 
salvatio 
demn yt 
power, ¢ 
over ele 
lamatio1 
freely,” 
saying, 
believe 
alone I 
this larg 
crites i 
church, 
this invi 
friend, 
won't be 
associat¢ 
vitation 
apostles 
to Hea 
They h 
probabl 
dividual 
are hypc 
(f% Ah, 


THE SINNER’S EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY. 195 


that excuse. The water of life is offered freely to every one. No 
unconverted man in the wide, wide world has anything to do with 
the doctrine of election any more than I have to do with the 
government of China. That epistle of Paul was written to godly 
men. Suppose I pick up a letter and open it, and it tells me about 
the death of my wife. Dear me—my wife dead. But I look on 
the other side of the letter and find that it is directed to another 
man. And so a great many people take Paul’s letter to the 
churches and take it asa personal letter. This is what you have 
to take up: ‘“‘ Whosoever will, let him drink of the water of life 
freely.” He came down sixty years after His resurrection and said 
to John, put it so broad that no one will mistake it—put it so 
broad that no one in Chicago can be stumbling over it—so that al- 
men may see it plainly—‘ Whosoever will, let him drink of the 
water of life freely.” If you will, you will; if you won’t, you 
won't. Do you think that God would come down here to give you 
salvation without giving you the power to take it, and then con- 
demn you to eternity for not taking it? With the gift comes the 
power, and you can take it and live if you will. Don’t stumble 
over election any more. You have to deal with that bro: * proc- 
lamation: ‘ Whosoever will, let him drink of the waters of life 
freely.” I can imagine some one in the gallery clear up there 
saying, “I never have bothered my head about election; I don’t 
believe men are gloomy when they become Christians. If I was 
alone I would tell you my reason, but I do not like to get up in 
this large assemblage and talk here. The fact is, there are hypo- 
crites in the churches. I know a man, a prominent man in the 
church, who cheated me out of twenty-five dollars. I won’t accept 
this invitation because of those hypocrites in the churches.” My 
friznd, you will find very few there if you get to Heaven. There 
won't be a hypocrite in the next world, and if you don’t want to be 
associated with hypocrites in the next world, you wiil take this in- 
vitation. Why, you will find hypocrites everywhere. One of the 
apostles was himself the very prince of hypocrites, but he didn’t get 
to Heaven. You will find plenty of hypocrites in the church. 
They have been there for the last eighteen hundred years, and will 
probably remain there. But what is that to you? This is an in- 
dividual matter between you and your God. Is it because there 
are hypocrites you are not going to accept the invitation ? 

“ Ah, well, Mr. Moody, that is not my case. I am a business mam 


196 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS 


and Ihave notime. Since the Chicago fire I have had as imuch 
as I could attend to in recovering what I lost.” If I stood at 
the door and asked any one who went out to accept the invita. 
tion, I believe hundreds of you would say, “Mr. Moody, you will 
have to excuse me to-night; time is very precious with me, and 
you'll have to excuse me.” What have you been doing the last 
twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years that you haven’t had a moment to 
devote to the acceptance of this invitation? That is the cry of the 
world to-day: “Time is precious; business must be attended to, 
and we have no time to spare.” Some of you women will say, “I 
can not wait; I have to go home and put the children to bed; this 
is more important.” My friends, to accept this invitation is more 
important than anything else in this world. There is nothing in the 
world that is so important as the question of accepting the invita- 
tion. How many mechanics in this building have spent five years 
learning your trade, in order to support your families and support 
vourselves a few years—forty or fifty years at the longest? How 
many professional men have toiled and worked hard for years to 
get an education that they might go out to the world and cope 
with it, and during all these years have not had a minute to seek 
their salvation? Is that a legitimate excuse? Tell Him to-night 
that you haven't time, or let this be the night—the hour—cost you 
what it will, when you shall say, “ By the grace of God I will accept 
the invitation and press up to the marriage supper of the Lamb.” 
“Oh, but that is not my case,” says another, “I have time. If I 
thought I could become a Christian I would sit here all night and 
let business and everything else go, and press into the kingdom of 
God. Iam not fit to become a Christian; that’s the trouble with 
me.” He says: “Go into the highways and hedges,” and “ bring 
in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind ’”’— 
just invite them all, without distinction of sect or creed, station or 
nationality; never mind whether they are rich or poor. If the Lord 
don’t complain about your fitness, you shouldn’t look to see if you 
have the right kind of clothes. I had to notice during the war 
when enlisting was going on, sometimes a man would come up with 
a nice silk hat on, patent-leather boots, nice kid gloves, and a fine 
suit of clothes, which, probably, cost him a hundred dollars; per- 
haps the next man who came along would be a hod-carrier, dressed 
in the poorest kind of clothes. Both had to strip alike and put on 
the regimental uniform. So when you come and say you ain't fit, 


haven 
ber th 
will bi 
how b 
tion o 
the re 


are far 
of the 
Then sg 
won't ; 
before : 
themse 
bids yc 
make n 
wanted 
went d 
one. C 
man, a 
the stud 
gave hi 
the beg 
keep th 
with 
appoint 
that be 
before 
reply, “ 
with th 
Why, sq 
God’s y 
from a | 
rememb 
shortly 
with th 
his busi 


uch 
at 
ita 
will 
and 
last 
. to 
the 
to, 
] “ft 
this 
10re 
the 
‘ita- 
ears 
port 
Tow 
s to 
cope 
seek 
you 
cept 
If I 
and 
of 
with 
bring 
Dn or 
Lord 
you 
war 
with 
h fine 
per- 
assed 
it on 
eit 


ie 
4 
ey 


THE SINNER'S EXCUSES SWEP1 AWAY. 1Q7 


haven’t got good clothes, haven’t got righteousness enough, remem- 
ber that He will furnish you with the uniform of Heaven, and you 
will be set down at the marriage feast of the Lamb. I don’t care 
how black and vile your heart may be, only accept the invita- 
tion of Jesus Christ and He will make you fit to sit down with 
the rest at that feast. How many are continually crying out, 
“T am too bad; no use of me trying to become a Christian.” 
This is the way the devil works. Sometimes he will say to a 
man, “You don’t want to be saved; you are good enough al- 
ready; and he will point to some black-hearted hypocrite and 
say: “ Look at him and see how you appear in comparison; you 
are far better than he is.” But, by and by, the man gets a glimpse 
of the blackness of his heart, and his conscience troubles him. 
Then says the devil: “You are too bad to be saved; the Lord 
won't save such as you; you are too vile; you must get better 
before you try to get God to save you.” And so men try to make 
themselves better, and instead, get worse all the time. The Gospel 
bids you come as you are. Seek first the kingdom of Heaven— 
make no delay; come just as you are. I heard of an artist who 
wanted to get a man to sit for a painting of the prodigal son. He 
went down to the almshouses and the prisons, but couldn’t get 
one. Going through the streets one day, he found a poor, wretched 
man, a beggar, coming along, and he asked him if he would sit for 
the study. He said he would. A bargain was made and the artist 
gave him his address. The time for the appointment arrived, and 
the beggar promptly arrived and said to the artist: “I have come to 
keep that appointment which I made with you.” “An appointment 
with me?” replied the artist; “you are mistaken: I have an 
appointment with a beggar to-day.” “ Well,” said the man, “I am 
that beggar, but I thought I would put on a new suit of clothes 
before I came to see you.” “I don’t want you,” was the artist’s 
reply, “ I want a beggar.” And soa great many people come to God 
with their self-righteousness, instead of coming in their raggedness. 
Why, some one has said, “It is only the ragged sinners that open 
God's wardrobe.”’ If you want to start out to get a pair of shoes 
from a passer-by, you would start out bare-footed, wouldn’t you? I 
remember a boy to whom I gave a pair of boots, and I found him 
shortly after in his bare feet again. I asked him what he had done 
with them, and he replied that when he was dressed up it spoiled 
his brsiness; when he was dressed up no one would give him any- 


198 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADLIRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


thing. By keeping his feet naked he got as many as five pairs of 
boots a day. So, if you want to come to God, don’t dress yourself 
up. It is the naked sinners God wants to save. Come to Him after 
you have cast off your self-righteousness and the Son of God will 
receive you. 

I remember, some years ago, of a man who had gone to sea. He 
led a wild, reckless life. When his mother was alive she was a 
praying mother. Ah, how many men have been saved by their 
mothers after they have gone up to Heaven, and perhaps her influ- 
ence made him think sometimes. When at sea, a desire of leading 
a better life came over him, and when he got on shore, he thought 
he would join the Freemasons. He made application, but upon 
investigation, his character proved he was only a drunken sailor, and 
he was black-balled. He next thought of joining the Odd Fellows, 
and applied, but his application met with a like result. While he 
was walking up Fulton street, one day, a little tract was given him 
—an invitation to the prayer-meeting. He came and Christ 
received him. I remember him getting up in the meeting and 
telling how the Freemasons had black-balled him, how the Odd 
Fellows had black-balled him, and how Christ had received him as 
he was. A great many orders and societies will not receive you, 
but I tell you, He will receive you, vile as you are—He, the Saviour 
of sinners—He, the Redeemer of the lost world—He bids you come 
just as you are. 

Ah, but there is another voice coming down from the gallery 
yonder: “TI have intellectual difficulties; I can not believe.” A man 
came to me some time ago and said: “I cannot.” “Can not what?” 
I asked. “Well,” said he, “I can not believe.” “Who?” 
“Well,” he repeated, “I can not believe.’ “Who?” I asked. 
“ Well-I-can’t-believe-myself.” “Well, you don’t wan’t to.” Make 
yourself out false every time, but believe in the truth of Christ. If 
a man says to me, “Mr. Moody, you have lied to me; you have 
dealt falsely with me,’—it may be so, but no man on the face of 
the earth can ever say that God ever dealt unfairly, or that He lied 
to him. If God saysa thing, it is true. We don’t ask you to believe 
in any man on the face of the earth, but we ask you to believe in 
Jesus Christ, who never lied—who never deceived any one. If a 
man says he can not believe Him, he says what is untrue. 

“ Ah, well, all those excuses don’t apply to me,” says another, 
“T can’t feel.” That is the very last excuse. When a man comes 


with 
a bor 
I thi: 
With 
feelir 


got % 
gentl 
“ Sic] 
is no! 
The « 
Ther 
come 
the p 
e€xcus 
Tabe: 
ing w 
of fee 
you f 
the R 
Word 


loving 
you q 
Sata 
now, 
tatio 
not l¢ 


s of 
‘self 
after 
will 


Te 
as a 
their 
nflu- 
ding 
ught 
upon 
, and 
lows, 
le he 
. him 
vhrist 
and 
Odd 
im as 
you, 
viour 
come 


ullery 

man 
bag a 
ho?” 
isked. 
Make 


THE SINNER'’S EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY. 199 


with this excuse he is getting pretty near the Lord. We are having 
a body of men in England giving a new translation of the Scriptures. 
I think we should get them to put in a passage relating to feeling. 
With some people it is feel, feel, feel all the time. What kind of 
feeling have you got ? Have you got a desire to be saved ?—have you 
got a desire to be present at the marriage supper? Suppose a 
gentleman asked me to dinner, I say, “I will see how I feel.’ 
“Sick?” he might ask. “No; it depends on how I feel.” That 
is not the question—it is whether I will accept the invitation or not, 
The question with us is, Will we accept salvation—will you believer 
There is not a word about feelings in the Scriptures. When you 
come to your end, and you know that in a few days you will be in 
the presence of the Judge of all the earth, you will remember this 
excuse about feelings. You will be saying, “I went up to the 
Tabernacle, I remember, and I felt very good, and before the meet- 
ing was over I felt very bad, and I didn’t feel I had the right kind 
of feeling to accept the invitation.” Satan will then say, “I made 
you feel so.” Suppose you build your hopes and fix yourself upon 
the Rock of Ages, the devil can not come to you. Stand upon the 
Word of God and the waves of unbelief can not touch you; the 
waves of persecution can not assail you; the devil and all the fiends 
of hell can not approach you if you only build your hopes upon 
God’s word. Say, “I will trust Him, though He slay me—I will take 
God at His word.” 

I haven’t exhausted all the excuses. If I had, you would make 
more before to-morrow morning. What has to be done with all the 
excuses is to bundle them all up and label them “Satan’s lies.” 
There is not an excuse but is a lie. When you stand at the throne 
of God no man can give an excuse. If you have got a good ex- 
cuse, don’t gi’e it up for anything I have said; don’t give it up for 
anything your mother may have said; don’t give it up for anything 
your friend may have said. Take it up to the bar of God and state 
it to Him; but if you have not got a good excuse—an excuse that 
will stand eternity—let it go to-night, and flee to the arms of a 
loving Saviour. It is easy enough to excuse yourself to hell, but 
you can not excuse yourself to Heaven. If you want an excuse 
Satan will always find one ready for you. Accept the invitation 
now, my friends. Let your stores be closed till you accept this invi- 
tation; let your households go till you accept this invitation. Do 
not let the light come, do not eat, do not drink, till you accept the 


200 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


most important thing to you in this wide world. Will you stay to- 
night and accept this invitation? Don’t make light of it. I can 
imagine some of you saying, “ Well, I never get so low as to make 
light of religion.” Suppose I got an invitation to dinner from a 
citizen of Chicago for to-morrow and I don’t answer it; I tear the 
invitation up. Would not that be making light of it? Suppose 
you pay no attention to the invitation to-night; is not that making 
light of it? Would any one here be willing to write out an excuse 
something like this: “ The Tabernacle, October 29. To the King 
of Heaven: While sitting in the Tabernacle to-day I received a 
very pressing invitation from one of your servants to sit at the mar- 
riage ceremony of the Son of God. I pray you have me excused.” 
Is there a man or woman in this assembly would take their pen and 
write their name at the bottom of it? Is there a man or woman 
whose right hand would not forget its cunning, and whose tongue 
would not cleave to their mouth, if they were trying to do it? 
Well, you are doing this if you get up and go right out after you 
have heard the invitation. Who will write this: “To the Lord of 
lords and King of Glory: While sitting in the Tabernacle this beau- 
tiful Sabbath evening, October 29, 1876, I received a pressing invi- 
tation from one of your servants to be present at the marriage sup- 
per. I hasten to accept.” Will any one sign this? Who will put 
their name to it? Is there not a man or woman saying down deep 
in their soul, “ By the grace of God I will sign it;” “I will sign it 
by the grace of God, and will meet that sainted mother who has 
gone there;” “TI will sign and accept that invitation and meet that 
loving wife or dear child.” Are there not some here to-night who 
will accept that invitation ? 

I remember while preaching in Glasgow an incident occurred 
which I will relate. I had been preaching there several weeks, and 
the night was my last one, and I pleaded with them as I had never 
pleaded there before. I urged those people to meet me in that 
land. It is a very solemn thing to stand before a vast audience for 
the last time and think you may never have another chance of ask- 
ing them to come to Christ. I told them I would not have another 
opportunity, and urged them to accept, and just asked them to 
meet me at that marriage supper. At the conclusion I soon saw a 
tall young lady coming into the inquiry-room. She had scarcely 
come in when another tall young lady came in, and she went up to 
the first and put her arms around her and wept. Pretty soon an- 


other 3 
her arn 


found » 
buildin 
brough 
down f 
Christi: 
went h 
for her 
present 
father © 
child. 
unwell, 
and a f 
“Mr. 
to you 
has bee 
has bec 
‘going 
told us 
happy 
Whe 
have b 
we hav 
(13 My 
needed 
our tw 
Father 


“ This 
dear g 
on Fri 
tian. 


THE SINNERS EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY. 201 


other young lady came and went up to the first two and just put 
her arms around them both. I went over to see what it was, and 
found that although they had been sitting in different parts of the 
building the sure arrow of conviction went down to their souls and 
brought them to the inquiry-room. Another young lady came 
down from the gallery and said, ‘“ Mr. Moody, I want to become a 
Christian.” I asked a young Christian to talk to her, and when she 
went home that night, about ten o’clock—her mother was sitting up 
for her—she said, ‘ Mother, I have accepted the invitation to be 
present at the marriage supper of the Lamb.” Her mother and 
father laid awake that night talking about the salvation of their 
child. That was Friday night, an‘ next day (Saturday) she was 
unwell, and before long her sickness developed into scarlet fever, 
and a few days after I got this letter: 

“Mr. MoopYy—Dear Sir: It is now my painful duty to intimate 
to you that the dear girl concerning whom I wrote you on Monday 
has been taken away from us by death. Her departure, however, 
has been signally softened to us, for she told us yesterday she was 
‘going home to be with Jesus,’ and after giving messages to many, 
told us to let Mr. Moody and Mr. Sankey know that she died a 
happy Christian.” 

When I read this I said to Mr. Sankey, “If we do nothing else we 
have been paid for coming across the Atlantic. There is one soul 
we have saved, whom we will meet on the resurrection morn.” 

“My dear sir, let us have your prayers that consolation and 
needed resignation and strength may be continued to us, and that 
our two dear remaining little ones may be kept in health if our 
Father wills. I repeated a line of the hymn— 


“In the Christian’s home in glory, 
There remains a land of rest,— 


“When she took it up at once and tried to sing, 


“¢There the Saviour’s gone before me, 
To fulfill my soul’s request,’ 


“This was the last conscious thing she said. I should say that my 
dear girl also expressed a wish that the lady she conversed with 
on Friday evening should also know that she died a happy Chris- 
tian. 


—— —————— > a er ce re 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


202 


Oh, my dear friends, are there not some here to-night who will 
decide this question? Do accept this invitation; let sickness come, 
let sorrow come, you will be sure of meeting at the marriage sup- 
per of the Lamb. Blessed is he who shall be found at that mar- 


riage feast. 


LUKE: 
me | 
hear 
blind 


WA 


after I 
own t 
had bi 
had re 
the Jo 
Was t 
I don’ 
on Fri 
On the 
where 
wheth 
of Jos 
probal 
hande 
have t 
their 
called 
might 
Couns 
Passed 
fifth 
with si 
millen 
a Victi 


XXIV. 


THE GLORIOUS GOSPEL. 


LUKE iv. 18; “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed 
me to preach the Gospel to the poor; He hath sent me to heal the broken- 
hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the 
blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised,” 


W * are told that after He had read this verse He closed. 
the book and sat down. This, we might say, was Christ’s 

inaugural sermon. It was the first sermon He preached 
after He had been baptized in the Jordan by John, and it was to His 
own townsmen in the synagogue at Nazareth that He spoke. He 
had been away from Nazareth for a few weeks, and strange rumors 
had reached that place of what had taken place on the banks of 
the Jordan; and the proclamation that John had made, that He 
was the Lamb of God, the true Messiah, had excited their curiosity. 
I don’t know on what day He arrived. It might have been late 
on Friday evening when the Jewish Sabbath was just coming on. 
On the following day, the Sabbath, He went into the synagogue, 
where He found the townsmen gazing at Him curiously to see 
whether He was the same one as the one they knew to be the son 
of Joseph the carpenter. And when He had gone in—it was 
probably nothing unusual for Him to go into the synagogue—they 
handed Him the book of the prophet Isaiah to read. He might 
have turned to the first chapter, but that would have stirred up 
their Jewish pride; He might have read that chapter where He is 
called the Prince of Peace and the Everlasting Father, but that 
might have made them mad, to think that He was the Wonderful 
Counsellor, the mighty God spoken of there, and He didn't. He 
passed over the ninth chapter. He might have read the thirty- 
fifth where it tells of the ransomed of the Lord returning to Zion 
with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads. That meant the 
millennium, and the time was not yet come. Calvary had to have 
a victim first. Hemight have turned to the fifty-fifth chapter, but 

(203) 


204 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


the crucifixion had to take place before that chapter could be 
literally true. And so He turned to the sixty-first chapter of 
Isaiah and read, “ The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because the 
Lord hath anointed Me to preach good tidings unto the meek ; 
He hath sent Me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty 
to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are 
bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.” Now, 
if you will turn to the sixty-first chapter of Isaiah you will find 
that He closed right in the middle of the sentence, and left out 
the remaining part—“the day of vengeance is at hand.” He 
didn’t read that because it hadn’t come. When the prophet Isaiah 
wrote that he might have gone on and written all about the two 
comings, but he only mentioned the day of vengeance, which 
meant the second coming. Nearly nineteen hundred years have 
rolled away since the first coming, and the day of vengeance has 
not come yet. But it will come. No man knoweth the day nor 
the hour when the Son of Man cometh. When He comes again 
He will not come with grace, but He will open the book at the 
place where He left off, and then there will be no more hope for 
those who have sat and listened to the preaching of the Gospel. 
Thank God, this day has not yet come. We can still preach grace 
as the means by which God saves sinners, as the means by which 
He forgives the wanderer. 

You will find that there are seven things which Christ came to do, 
six of which He read to those men of Nazareth before He closed 
the book. And how sweet those six things are. The world ought 
to rejoice in them. When the Spirit came to Moses, the plagues 
came upon Egypt, and he had power to destroy men’s lives; when 
the Spirit came upon Elijah, fire came down from Heaven; when 
the Spirit came upon Gideon, no man could stand before him; and 
when it came upon Joshua, he moved around the city of Jericho, 
and the whole city fell into his hands; but when the Spirit came 
upon the Son of Man, He gave life; He healed the broken-hearted, 
He set at liberty those that were bruised. The only man who ever 
suffered before Christ was that servant who had his ear cut off. But 
most likely ina moment afterward he had it on, and very likely it 
was a better ear than ever, because whatever the Lord does He 
does well. No man ever lost his life with Him when the Spirit 
came upon Him, but received it from Him. He came to heal, give 
liberty and proclaim the Gospel. 


lw 


grace 
langu: 
the w 
so litt 
before 
here t 
it meé 
night, 
think 
like tl 
me be 
good 

“T br 
no be 
reache 
Gospe 
men y 
their f 
fore a 
whetl 
going 
they ¢ 
I am 

delive 
son, Vv 
comil 
see hq 
soon 

to his 
keep 

go an 
that 

them 
them 
those 
they 

of thg 
God 

herdg 


THE GLORIOUS GOSPEL. 205 


ye I want to call your attention to the word Gospel. I said about 

of grace that there was, probably, not another word in the English 

1c language so little understood. There is one exception, and that is 
cy the word Gospel. I don’t think there is another word about which 
ty so little is known. I was a partaker of it for more than ten years 
re before I understood its meaning. I think if I picked many out 
v, here they would blush if I asked them to state in this building what 

d it means. If the correct definition of it was known in Chicago to- 

ut night, ten thousand men would believe it. A great many people 
le think the Gospel means death; and when you go to them they say, 
h like the poor man at the tombs: “ Why do you come to torment 

vO me before my time?” The Gospel means “ God spares,” it means 
h good tidings. When that angel came down from Heaven and said, 

ve “I bring you good tidings, for unto you this day is born a Saviour,” 
as no better news ever fell upon the ears of men. No news ever 
or reached men, no news so sweet ever came out of Heaven as the 
in Gospel of the Son of God. It is the Gospel of good tidings. If 
1e men will only believe it, instead of looking so sad and melancholy, 
or 4 their faces will be lit up with joy and gladness. When I preach be- 
el. fore an assemblage I can tell by the faces of those before me 
ce whether they believe it or not. Some look as cross as if they were 
ch going to be led to an execution. They can not hear good things ; 
they can not believe good news when they hear it. Suppose, while 

lo, I am talking, a boy comes running in with a telegraph message and 
ed delivers it to that gray-haired man yonder. It tells him that a prodigal 
ht son, who had gone to California years ago, has repented, and is 
1es coming home, and asks that father to meet him at the train. I can 
en see how that father’s face would light up with joy at the prospect of 
en soon meeting that boy. He goes home elated, and hands the message 
nd to his wife. The news is too good to keep all to himself; no man can 
10; keep good news, and that is the way with young converts. They must 
me go and spread it, publish it to all men. But if the dispatch reads 
“C; that a son is dead, how the man is cast down. People—many of 
ue them—just look when we preach the Gospel as if we were reading 
jut them some bad news, because they can’t believe it; but how do 
at those who believe it look? Their faces are aglow with pleasure; 
He they drink in every word, because they rejoice to hear the Gospel 
rit of the Son of God Just let every one here to-night believe what 
VS God says is good news—believe what the angel said to the shep- 


” 


herds: “It bring: good tidings,” the best tidings you can ever 


oan 


206 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


hear, for “unto you is born a Saviour,” to save you from your sins 
And, my friends, this is the only way out of our sins—the way o 
Christ. How are we going to get to Heaven if not by Christ? No 
angel from Heaven ever preached another Gospel. If a man tells 
you he is going to get to Heaven without Christ don’t you believe 
him. That is man’s gospel. Paul tells us Christ died for our sins, 
and that is Paul’s doctrine-—that is the good news of the Gospel 
and just let us believe it. 

I will tell you why I like the Gospel. It has taken four of the 
bitterest enemies out of my path that I had, and if you accept it, 
it will take them out of your path—simply receive Him. You 
will all admit that death is a great enemy. You hear some men in 
a boastful way say that they don’t fear it—let it come when it may. 
But if you notice when death comes near and takes a good look at 
them, they are not so boastful. Men are not so fluent and flippant 
when they are coming near God. When danger comes to them 
they take it very different from what they do when it is far away. 
I have been out at sea when the storm was raging and the ship was 
tossing wildly. Some men looked very different than they did in 
a calm day. They didn’t know how soon they might go to the 
bottom. How many times have you read of sailors who, when out 
of danger, were swearing men, in an instant during a storm they 
have become praying men. I remember while in New England it 
was the custom to toll the bell of the village church when any one 
died. When the bell tolled for an old man or woman I used to 
listen and think that death was far away; but when it came down 
to the teens, I used to think it was coming very near. I recollect 
acting as one of the pall-bearers at the funeral of one of my young 
friends, and how solemn it made me feel. It used to make me 
afraid that something would happen and take me away as that 
young friend was taken away. But that terror has passed away, 
and I look forward to death as one of the most beautiful features 
of this earthly pilgrimage. If you take the sting out of a hornet or 
a wasp you are not afraid of it. Christ has taken the sting out of 
death. He has pursued him into the grave and cast him into the 
bottomless pit, so that a man can shout, “Oh, death, where is 
thy sting?” and a voice comes down from Heaven, “ Buried in the 
bosom of the Lord.” Yes, my friends, there is no fear of death to 
a man who has accepted the Son of God. 

' There is : portion of Scripture in the Twenty-third Psalm that is 


as oft 
throu 
the § 
Thou 
in the 
his sl 
you 
give 
An 
the o 
world 
me } 
have 
cloud 
gone. 
Chris 
troub 
have 


THE GLORIOUS GOSPEL. 207 


as often misquoted as any in the Bible, and that is where, “I walk 
through the dark valley ’’—man put that word dark in; it isn’t in 
the Scripture—“ of the shadow of death I will fear no evil, for 
Thou art with me.” You have stood in the shadow of a man cast 
in the sunlight; that is all that death can do to us—can just throw 
his shadow upon us, and if you want to get victory over death 
you must believe in the Gospel—believe in Christ, that He came to 
give you liberty—that He died for your sins. 

Another thing issin. That is the story of death. As I told you 
the other night, the blessed Gospel tells us that sin is out of the 
world. If aman is in Christ he is perfectly safe. Out of love to 
me He has taken my sins and put them behind His back. You 
have seen at night a great cloud in the sky, but in the morning that 
cloud was gone. You can’t find it—you don’t know where it has 
gone. Our sins are blotted out as a cloud; after we have accepted 
Christ they are gone—we can not find them. How that used to 
trouble me. But I have found, since I accepted Christ, that they 
have been taken from me, and He has put them behind His back. 
By the death of Himself He has taken them all away, and, therefore 
I can shout in my liberty, for if He has taken them He is not going 
to bring them up against us. They are swept out of our way for 
ever. 

I used to think the grave was a terrible thing. To think of lying 
one day in that cold, narrow house of earth, and the worms 
creeping through me, used to fill my heart with terror. When I 
used to stand at a grave and hear the earth rattling on the coffin-lid, 
and think of the time when I would be lying there, it seemed as if 
death had every terror. But now, if my friend dies, I know that 
there is a glorious hope. “I will raise him up at the last day.” He 
will come forth from the grave and shout, “I am he that died and 
is alive forevermore.” All that death can get from me is that old 
clay temple when I die. I shall rise again, by and by, with a new 
body-—a body that can not be drawn away from Jesus Christ; I 
shall be transformed into His own image. 

And the last thought. The fourth thing that used to trouble me 
was the judgment day. I used to think I may slip and fall; didn’t 
know whether I would be accepted when I came to be judged or 
not. I suppose I got this idea from Christians, and a great many 
people here have got this idea from the same source. They don’t 
know whether they will stumble before they get there, and when 


208 MOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


they stand before the Great Judge they don’t know whether their 
place will be on the right hand or the left. I used to wonder whether 
I would be among those whom He would tell to “ Depart from Me, 
ye cursed.” But that is passed. Christ was judged forme. He was 
condemned for me—and by His death on the tree, ransomed me. 
God is not going to demand double payment for me. That judg- 
ment is not a judgment of our sin; it is already passed. Not one 
of the sins of the believer will come up against him. My friends, 
dont think for a moment that you are to be at the throne to be 
judged—it is to judge the world. You are among the chosen—your 
place is by the Lamb. This thought, as I go toward Heaven, makes 
me shout and triumph over death and the grave; I am filled with 
joy that my sins are behind His back, and that the judgment is 
already passed, and my course to Heaven is clear. We haven't got 
to wait till we reach Heaven to know whether we are a child of God 
or not. When we accept this Gospel we all become sons and 
daughters of God, and are safe from all danger. 

You know when men go out hunting, the long grass of the prai- 
ries being dry and parched, very often catches fire, and when there 
is a high wind the flames will roll twenty feet high sometimes, and 
the fire will travel at the rate of thirty miles an hour. The fastest 
horse can not run as fast. What do these frontiermen do? They 
set fire to a portion of the grass near them. After it has been 
burned they get inside of this spot, and when the fire comes rushing 
toward them, although they hear the roar of the flames all around, 
they stand perfectly secure. There is one spot on earth that the 
Lamb of God has cleared for mankind, and that is Calvary; and if 
we but stand here, we are safe for eternity. Let us proclaim this 
glorious truth of the Gospel. I don’t blame that man who said he 
wished every hair of his head was a man, so that he could send them 
out to proclaim this glorious Gospel. How can men say that God 
is not willing to save them, when the Gospel tells us that Christ 
tasted death for every man, and all we have to do is to take this 
truth. There is a young man, I think, in the meeting to-night, whe 
called on me, while I was getting my tea this evening, at the hotel 
He said he had been trying for a long time to become a Christian. 
“My friend,” said I, “ probably you have been working too hard. 
Just receive it as a gift. Ifit is a gift we can not get it by our tears. 
We can not get it by efforts of ourown. Cease your efforts and just 
accept Him, and He will come to you if you will accept His gift. 


YAY - 
“Ki ie 


MOODY AND SANKEY’S TABERNACLE, BOSTON, 


yar SS 


BUILDING OF THE YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION, PHILADELPHIA 


The \ 
believ 
his w 
went | 
admit 
the ea 
it—it 
the ea 
three | 
a grea 
said tc 
he ret 
“Wha 
unders 
mind t 
punish 
he saic 
coming 
and th 
pickin 
and pr 
could 
the fig 
didn’t 
by. S 
him, a 
when 
the Go 
If you 
Christ 
rescued 
Christ, 
you ta 
wrap al 
believe 
can be 
I re 
away o 
father, 
reform 


THE GLORIOUS GOSPEL. 209 


The will had a terrible battle at first with that young man. Idon’'t 
believe any man ever comes to Christ without having a fight with 
his will. But, ‘xy and by, he said he would accept, and down we 
went on our knees, and victory was won. The hardest thing, I will 
admit, ever a man had to do, is to become a Christian, and yet it is 
the easiest. This seems to many to be a paradox, but I will repeat 
it—it is the most difficult thing to become a Christian, and yet it is 
the easiest. I have a little nephew in this city; when he was about 
three or four years of age, he threw that Bible on the floor. I think 
agreat dea of that Bible, and I did not like to see this. His mother 
said to him, “Go pick up uncle’s Bible from the floor.” “I won't,” 
he replied. “Go and pick up that Bible, directly.” “I \on’t.” 
“What did you say?” asked his mother. She thought he didn’t 
understand; but he understood well enough, and had made up his 
mind that he wouldn't. She told the boy that she would have to 
punish him if he didn’t, and then he said he couldn’t, and by and by 
he said he didn’t want to. And that is the way with people in 
coming to Christ. At first they say they won’t; then, they can’t; 
and then, they don’t want to. The mother insisted upon the boy 
picking up the Bible, and he got down and put his arms around it 
and pretended he couldn’t lift it. He was a great, healthy boy, and 
could have picked it up easily enough. I was very anxious to see 
the fight carried on because she was a young mother, and if she 
didn’t break that boy’s will, he was going to break her heart by and 
by. So she told him again if he didn’t pick it up she would punish: 
him, and the child just picked it up. It was very easy to do it 
when he made up his mind. So it is perfectly easy for men to accept 
the Gospel. The trouble is, they don’t want to give up their will. 
If you want to be saved you must just accept that Gospel—that 
Christ is your Saviour, that He is your Redeemer, and that He has 
rescued you from the curse of the law. Just say, “ Lord Jesus 
Christ, I trust you from this hour to save me,” and the nioment 
you take that stand, He will put His loving arms around you, and 
wrap about you the robe of righteousness. May God help you to 
believe that Gospel. It is so simple, that men can not believe they 
can be saved for nothing. 

I remember hearing, a few years ago, a story about a young man 
away off in Russia. He was a wild, reckless, dissipated youth. His 
father, thinking that if he could get him away from his associates, a: 
reform would be worked, procured a commission in the army for: 

14 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


210 


him. And this is a mistake a great many Christian people fall into 
in dealing with their sons. It is not a change of place they require, 
it is a change of heart. A change of place will not take them away 
from the tempter. Well, off to the army this young man went, and, 
instead of reforming, he gambled, and borrowed, and took to drink- 
ing as vigorously as ever. At length he had borrowed all the money 
he could, and, as we say here, he “had come to the end of his rope.” 
A certain sum of money had to be paid the next day, and he did 
not see how it could be done without selling his commission, and if 
he did that he would be compelled to leave the army and go home 
to his father disgraced. The laws were very rigid in Russia upon 
the matter of debt, and if he couldn’t pay he knew he would have 
to go to prison. That night, as he sat in his barracks, heart-broken 
at the prospect before him, he thought he would take up paper and 
figure up his debts, and see how he stood. And here, let me say, 
it would be well if the sinner would pause occasionally, try and 
figure up his sin, and see where he stood with God. Well, this 
young man put down one debt after another until they made a long 
column. The total completely disheartened him; and he just put 
at the bottom of the figures, “‘Who is to pay this?” He laid his 
head upon his desk wearied, and fell asleep. That night the Czar, 
according to his custom, was walking through the barracks while the 
soldiers slept, and happened to come to that spot where the young 
soldier slept. He saw upon the desk the column of debts, and when 
he came to the bottom saw the question: “ Who’s to pay them?” 
and wrote underneath the name “ Nicholas.” When the young 
man awoke he took up the paper and found written at the bottom 
the signature of the Czar of all the Russias. What did it mean? 
Had an angel dropped down and canceled the debt ? It was too good 
‘to be true. He couldn’t believe it. But by and by the money came 
from the Emperor himself. This story may be true or not. I don’t 
care whether it is or not; but there is one thing I do know is true, 
and that is, that the great Emperor of Heaven is here to-night, and 
if you put down all your sins and multiply them by ten thousand, 
He will pay it and shelter you underneath the blood of Jesus Christ, 
which cleanseth us from all sin. Thank God for the glorious Gos- 
pel of Jesus Christ; thank God that every man and woman in this 
assembly can be saved. As the rain is coming down on this build- 
ing, so God will shower His blessings upon us if we will only receive 
the truth. Let us pray. 


i . 
was 
here 
men 
cam¢ 
Prin 
privé 
but 

the t 
myst 
the 

cian. 
gTave 
weig 
the § 


into 
uire, 


Way 
and, 
‘ink. 
ney 
pes. 
did 
id if 
ome 
ipon 
have 
oken 
-and 
say, 
and 
this 
long 
put 
d his 
zar, 
2 the 
DUN: 
hen 
m?” 
oung 
ttom 
ean? 
ood 
ame 
on’t 
true, 
, and 
sand, 
hrist, 
Gos- 
this 
build- 
ceive 


XXV. 


THE FRIEND OF THE SORROWING. 


LUKE iv. 18: “He hath sent Me to heal the broken-hearted.” 


WANT to take up this one thought—that Christ was sent into 
the world to heal the broken-hearted. When the Prince of 
Wales came to this country a few years ago, the whole country 

was excited as to his purpose. What was his object in coming 
here? Had he come to look into our republican form of govern- 
ment, or our institutions, or was it simply to see and be seen? He 
came and he went without telling us what he came for. When the 
Prince of Peace came into this dark world He did not come in any 
private way. He tells us that He came not to see and to be seen, 
but to “seek and to save that which was lost,” and also “to heal 
the broken-hearted.” And in the face of this announcement it is a 
mystery to me why those who have broken hearts will rather carry 
them year in and year out than just bring them to the great Physi- 
cian. How many men in Chicago are just going down to their 
graves with a broken heart? They have carried their hearts 
weighted with trouble for years and years, and yet when they open 
the Scriptures they can see the passage telling us that He came 
here for the purpose of healing the broken-hearted. He left 
Heaven and all its glory to come to the world—sent by the Father, 
He tells us, for the purpose of healing the broken-hearted. 

You will find, my friends, that there is no class of people exempt 
from broken hearts. The rich and the poor suffer alike. There 
was a time when I used to visit the poor, that I thought all the 
broken hearts were to be found among them; but within the last 
few years I have found there are as many broken hearts among the 
learned as the unlearned, the cultured as the uncultured, the rich as 
the poor. If you could but go up one of our avenues and down 
another and reach the hearts of the people, and get them to tell 
you their whole story, you would be astonished at the wonderful 
history of every family. I remember a few years ago I had been 
(211) 


212 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


out of the city for some weeks. When I returned I started out to 
make some calls. The first place I went to I found a mother, her 
eyes red with weeping. I tried to find out what was troubling her, 
and she reluctantly opened her heart and told me all. She said, 
“Last night my only boy came home about midnight drunk. I 
didn’t know that he was addicted to drunkenness, but this morning 
I found out that he has been drinking for weeks, anc,” she con- 
tinued, “I would rather have seen him laid in the grave than have 
had him brought home in the condition I saw him in last night.” 
I tried to comfort her as best I could when she told me her sad 
story. When I went away from that house I didn’t want to go into 
any other house where there was family trouble. The very next 
house I went to, however, where some of the children who attended 
my Sunday-school resided, I found that death had been there and 
laid his hand on one of them. The mother spoke to me of her 
affliction, and brought to me the playthings and the little shoes of 
the child, and the tears trickled down that mother’s cheeks as she 
related to me her sorrow. I got out as soon as possible, and hoped 
I would see no more family trouble that day. The next visit I 
made was to a home where I found a wife with a bitter story. Her 
husband had been neglecting her for a long time, “and now,” she 
said, ‘he has left me, and I don’t know where he has gone. Winter 
is coming on, and I don’t know what is going to become of my 
family.” I tried to comfort her, and prayed with her, and endeav- 
ored to get her to lay all her sorrows on Christ. The next home i 
entered I found a woman crushed and broken-hearted. She told 
me her boy had forsaken her, and she had no idea where he had 
gone. That afternoon I made five calls, and in every home I found 
a broken heart. Every one had a sad tale to tell, and if you visited 
any home in Chicago you would find the truth of the saying that 
“there is a skeleton in every house.’”’ I suppose while I am talking 
you are thinking of the great sorrow in your own bosom. I do not 
know anything about you, but if I came round to every one of you, 
and you were to tell me the truth, I would hear a tale of sorrow. 
The very last man I spoke to last night was a young mercantile 
man, who told me his load of sorrow had been so great that many 
times during the last few weeks he had gone down to the lake and 
had been tempted to plunge in and end his existence. His burden 
seemed too much for him. Think of the broken hearts in Chicago 
to-night! They could be numbered by hundreds—yea, by thou. 


THE FRIEND OF THE SORROWING 213 


sands. All over this city are broken hearts. If all the sorrow rep- 
resented in this great city was written in a book, this building 
couldn't hold that book, and you couldn’t read it in a long lifetime. 
This earth is not a stranger to tears, neither is the present the only 
time when they could be found in abundance. From Adam’s days 
to ours tears have been shed, and a wail has been going up to 
Heaven from the broken-hearted. And I say it again, it is a mys- 
tery to me how all those broken hearts can keep away from Him 
who has come to heal them. For six thousand years that cry of 
sorrow has been going up to God. We find the tears of Jacob 
put on record when he was told that his own son was no more. 
His sons and daughters tried to give him comfort, but he refused 
to be comforted. Weare also told of the tears of King David. I can 
see him, as the messenger brings the news to him of the death of 
his son, exclaiming in anguish, “Oh, Absalom, my son, would that 
I had died for thee.” And when Christ came into the world the 
first sound He heard was woe—the wail of those mothers in Beth- 
lehem, and from the manger to the cross He was surrounded with 
sorrow. We are told that He often looked up to Heaven ana 
sighed. I believe it was because there was so much suffering 
around Him. It was on His right hand and on His left—every- 
where on earth; and the thought that He had come to relieve the 
people of the earth of their burdens, and so few would accept Him, 
made Him sorrowful. He came for that purpose. Let the hun- 
dreds of thousands just cast their burdens on Him. He has 
come to bear them as well as our sins. He will bear our griefs 
and carry our sorrow. There is not a burdened son of Adam in 
Chicago who can not but be freed if he will only come to Him. 
Let me call your attention to this little word “sent’”—*“ He hath 
sent Me.” Take your Bibles and read about those who have been 
sent by God, and one thought will come to you—that no man who 
has ever been sent by God to do His work has ever failed. No 
matter how great the work, how mighty the undertaking; no 
matter how many difficulties had to be encountered, when they 
were sent from God they were sure to succeed. God sent Moses 
down to Egypt to bring three million people out of bondage. The 
idea would have seemed absurd to most people. Fancy a man 
with an impediment in his speech, without an army, without 
generals, with no record, bringing three million people from the 
power of a great nation like that of the Egyptians. But God sent 


214 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


him, and what was the result? Pharaoh said they should not go, 
and the great king and all his army were going to prevent them, 
But did he succeed? God sent Moses and he didn’t fail. We find 
that God sent Joshua to the walls of Jericho, and he marched 
around the walls, and at the proper time these walls came tumbling 
down and the city fell into his hands. God sent Elijah to stand 
before Ahab, and we read the result. Samson and Gideon were 
sent by God, and we are told in the Scriptures what they accom- 
plished ; and so all through the Word we find that when God sent 
men they have never failed. Now, do you think for a moment that 
God’s own Son, sent to us, is going to fail? If Moses, Elijah, 
Joshua, Gideon, Samson, and all those mighty men sent by God 
succeeded in doing their work, do you think the Son of Man is 
going to fail? Do you think, if He has come to heal broken hearts, 
He is going to fail? Do you think there is a heart so bruised and 
broken that can’t be healed by Him? He can heal them all, but 
the great trouble is that men won’t come. If there is a broken 
heart here to-night just bring it to the Great Physician. If you 
break an arm or a leg, you run off and get the best physician. If 
you have a broken heart you needn't go toa doctor or minister 
with it; the best physician is the Great Physician. In the days of 
Christ they didn’t have hospitals or physicians as we have now. 
When a man was sick he was taken to the door, and the passers. 
by prescribed for him. If a man came along who had had the 
same disease as the sufferer, he just told him what he had done 
to get cured. I remember I had a disease for a few months, and 
when I recovered if I met a man with the same disease I had to 
tell him what cured me; I could not keep the prescription all to 
myself. When He came there and found the sick at their cottage 
doors the sufferers found more medicine in His words than there 
was in all the prescriptions of that country. He is a mighty Phy- 
sician who has come to heal every wounded heart in this building 
and in Chicago to-night. You needn’t run to any other physician. 
The great difficulty is that people try to get some other physician 
—they goto this creed and that creed, to this doctor of divinity 
and that one, instead of coming directly to the Master. He 
has told us that His mission is to heal the broken hearts, and if 
He has said this, let us take Him at His word and just ask Him 
to heal. 

I was thinking to-day of the difference between those who know 


Chiis' 
not. 
stuml 
Chica 
husba 
stead 
night. 
their 
take | 
his w: 
were 
ran in 
ing il 
every 
upon 
see t 
preac 
the tr 
tatior 
of th 
Ther 
spoke 
the p 
night 
quitt 
the qd 
her. 
there 
me. 
the s 
child 
had ¢ 
long¢ 
meet 
the 
some 
fathe 
God 
So 


THE FRIEND OF THE SORROWING, 215 


8%, Christ when trouble comes upon them and those who know Him 
em, not. I know several members of families in this city who are just 
nd stumbling into their graves over trouble. I know two widows in 
1ed Chicago who are weeping and moaning over the death of their 
ing husbands, and their grief is just taking them to their graves. In- 
and stead of bringing their burdens to Christ, they mourn day and 
SES night, and the result will be that in a few weeks or years at most 
oM- their sorrow will take them to their graves when they ought to 
bent take it all to the Great Physician. Three years ago a father took 
hat his wife and family on board that ill-fated French steamer. They 
jah, were going to Europe, and when out on the ocean another vessel 
10d ran into her and she went down. That mother, when I was preach- 
n is | ing in Chicago, used to bring her two children to the meetings 
rts, . every night. It was one of the most beautiful sights I ever looked 
and upon to see how those little children used to sit and listen, and to 
but | see the tears trickling down their cheeks when the Saviour was 
ken : preached. It seemed as if nobody else in that meeting drank in 
you the truth as eagerly as those little ones. One night when an invi- 
If tation had been extended to all to go into the inquiry-room, one 
ster of these little children said: “Mamma, why can’t I go in too?” 
s of The mother allowed them to come into the room, and some friend 
OW. , spoke to them, and to all appearances they seemed to understand 
SETS . the plan of salvation as well as their elders. When that memorable 
the 7 night came, that mother went down and came vp without her two 
lone children. Upon reading the news, I said: “It will kill her,” and I 
and a quitted my post in Edinburgh—the only time I left my post on 
1 to the other side—and went down to Liverpool to try and comfort 
| to ; her. But when I got there I found that the Son of God had been 
tage there before me, and instead of me comforting her, she comforted 
here me. She told me she could not think of those children as being in 
*hy- the sea; it seemed as ii Christ had permitted her to take those 
ling - children on that vessel only that they might be wafted to Him, and 
Ths ; had saved her life only that she might come back and work a little 
iar longer for Him. When she got up the other day at a mothers’ 
nity meeting it: Farwell Hall, and told her story, I thought I would tell 
He the mothers of it the first chance I got. So if any of you have had 
d if E some great affliction, ifany of you have lost a loved and loving 
Him father, mother, brother, husband, or wife, come to Christ, because 
God has sent Him to heal the broken-hearted. 
now 


Some of you, I can imagine, will say, “Ah, I could stand that 


; — reece ane | 
PK» 


216 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYRES, 


affliction; I have soinething harder than that.” I remember a 
mother coming to me and saying, “It is easy enough for you to 
speak in that way; if you had the burden that I’ve got, you couldn't 
cast it on the Lord.” “Why, is your burden so great that Christ 
can’t carry it?” Iasked. “No, it isn’t too great for Him to carry, 
but I can’t put it on Him.” “That is your fault,” I replied, and I 
find a great many people with burdens who, rather than just come 
to Him with them, strap them tighter on their backs and go away 
staggering under their load. I asked her the nature of her trouble, 
and she told me, “I have an only boy who is a wanderer on the 
face of the earth. I don’t know where he is. If I only knew where 
he was I would go round the world to find him. You don’t know 
how I love that boy. This sorrow is killing me.” “ Why can’t you 
take him to Christ ? You can reach Him at the throne, even though 
He be at the uttermost part of the world. Go tell God all about 
your trouble, and He will take away his sin, and not only that, but 
if you never see him on earth, God can give you faith that you will 
see your boy in Heaven.” And then I told her of 1 mother who 
lived down in the southern part of Indiana. Some years ago her 
boy came up to this city. The boy was a moralist. My frienas, a 
man has to have more than morality to lean upon in this great city. 
He hadn’t been here long before he was led astray. A neighbor 
happened to come up here and found him one night in the streets 
drunk. When that neighbor went home, at first he thought he 
wouldn’t say anything about it to the boy’s father, but afterward he 
thought it was his duty to tell. So in a crowd ia the street of their 
little town, he just took that father aside, and told ‘i'm what he had 
seen in Chicago. It wasa terrible blow. When the children had 
been put to bed that night he said to his wife, ‘“ Wife, I have bad 
news. I have heard from Chicago to-day.” The mother dropped her 
work in an instant, and said, “ Tell me what it is.” “ Well, our son 
has been seen on the streets of Chicago drunk.” Neither of them 
slept that night, but they took their burden to Christ, and about 
daylight the mother said: “I don’t know how, I don’t know when 
or where, but God has given me faith to believe that our son will be 
saved, and will never come to a drunkard’s grave.” One week after, 
that boy left Chicago. He couldn’t tell why—an unseen power 
seemed to lead him to his mother’s home, and the first thing he said 
on coming over the threshold was, “ Mother, I have come home to 
ask you to pray for me;” and soon after, he came back to Chicago 


a brigh 
fathers 
Great 
I car 
My fri 
What | 
If you 
some | 
If you 
will te! 
your S 
Oh, if 
tell yc 
bind y 
Dur 
court-! 
story 
oblige: 
what 
ordere 
him. 
awake 
and fe 
right « 
would 
come 
the fa 
thoug 
had n 
But t 
Linco 
“ If A 
broth 
over, 
Whit 
passe 
priva 
refus¢ 
surro 
little 


er a 

to 
dn’t 
hrist 


rry, 
id I 
pme 
Way 
ble, 
the 
ere 
now 
you 
ugh 
bout 
but 
will 
vho 
her 
1S, a 
city. 
ibor 
eets 
> he 
1 he 
heir 
had 
had 
bad 
her 
son 
1em 
out 
hen 
l be 
ter, 
wer 
aid 
to 
AZO 


THE FRIEND OF THE SORROWING, 217 


abright and a shining light. If you have got a burden like this, 
fathers, mothers, bring it to Him and cast it on Him, and Fle, the 
Great Physician, will heal your broken hearts. 

I can imagine, again, some of you saying, “ How am I to do it ?” 
My friends, go to Him as a personal friend. He is not a myth. 
What we want to do is to treat Christ as we treat an earthly friend. 
If you have sins, just go and tell Him all about them; if you have 
some great burden, “Go bury thy sorrow,” bury it in His bosom, 
If you go to people and tell them of your cares, your sorrows, they 
will tell you they haven’t time to listen. But He will not only hear 
your story, however long it be, but will bind up your broken heart. 
Oh, if there is a broken heart here to-night, bring it to Jesus, and I 
tell you upon authority He will heal you. He has said He will 
bind your wounds up—not only that, He will heal them. 

During the war I remember of a young man not twenty, who was 
court-martialed, down in the front, and sentenced to be shot. The 
story was this: The young fellow had enlisted. He was not 
obliged to, but he went off with another young man. They were 
what we would call “chums.” One night this companion was 
ordered out on picket duty, and he asked the young man to go for 
him. The next night he was ordered out himself; and having been 
awake two nights, and not being used to it, fell asleep at his post, 
and for the offence he was tried and sentenced to death. It was 
right after the order issued by the President that no interference 
would be allowed in cases of this kind. This sort of thing had be- 
come too frequent, and it must be stopped. When the news reached 
the father and mother in Vermont it nearly broke their hearts. The 
thought that their son should be shot was too great for them. They 
had no hope that he would be saved by anything they could do. 
But they had a little daughter who had read the life of Abraham 
Lincoln, and knew how he loved his own children, and she said: 
“If Abraham Lincoln knew how my father and mother loved my 
brother he wouldn't let him be shot.” That little girl thought this 
over,and made up her mind to see the President. She went to the 
White House, and the sentinel, when he saw her imploring looks, 
passed her in, and when she came up to the door and told the 
private secretary that she wanted to see the President, he could not 
refuse her. She came into the chamber and found Abraham Lincoin 
surrounded by his generals and counselors, and when he saw the 
little country girl he asked her what she wanted. The little maid 


218 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


told her plain, simple story—how her brother, whom her mother 
and father loved very dearly, had been sentenced to be shot. How 
they were mourning for him, and if he was to die in that way it would 
_ break their hearts. The President’s heart was touched with com- 
passion, and he immediately sent a dispatch canceling the sentence 
and giving the boy a parole so that he could come home and see 
that father and mother. I just tell you this to show you how 
Abraham Lincoln’s heart was moved by compassion for the sorrow 
of that father and mother; and if he showed so much, do you think 
the Son of God will not have compassion upon you, sinner, if you 
only take that crushed, bruised heart to Him? He will heal it. 
Have you got adrunken husband? Go tell Him. He can make 
him a blessing to the Church and to the world. Have you a profli- 
sate son? Go take your story to Him, and He will comfort you, 
and bind up and heal your sorrow. What a blessing it is to have 
such a Saviour. He has been sent to heal the broken-hearted. 
May the text, if the sermon doesn’t, reach every one here to-night, 
and may every crushed, broken, and bruised heart be brought to 
that Saviour, and they will hear His comforting words. He will 
comfort you, as a mother comforts her child, if you will only come 
in prayer and lay all your burdens before Him. 


NO 
eh 
ca 

came t 
forty-n 
erance. 
captive 
the mis 
deliver 
ful cap 
he deli 
himself 
If am 
He re 
broken 
himsell 
comes 
Supy 
who hd 
perish 
buildi 
go out 
tight t 
Thank 
to you 
Stewa 
sail, “ 
man fo 
there ig 
he mug 


ther 
How 
ould 
[om- 
ence 
| see 
how 
rrow 
hink 
you 
ul it. 
nake 
rofli- 
you, 
have 
rted, 
ight, 
it to 
- will 
come 


XXVI. 


DELIVERANCE FOR CAPTIVES. 


LUKE iv. 18: ‘To preach deliverance to the captives.” 


NOW take up the words, “ To preach deliverance to the captives.’ 
That is what I want to call your attention to. He-not only 
came to preach the Gospel and heal the broken-hearted, but He 

came to preach deliverance. There is a verse, I think it is in the 
forty-ninth chapter of Isaiah, which shows us our necessity of deliv- 
erance. “Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful 
captive delivered? But thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of 
the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shal! be 
delivered.” Now, every man who has broken the law of God is a law- 
ful captive ; he has been taken into captivity, and the question is, can 
he deliver himself? Can aman who has broken the law of God save 
himself? Ifa man breaks the laws of our land, can he save himself? 
If a man commit murder, can he save himself from punishment ? 
He requires some power outside of himself. So if a man _ has 
broken the law of God, he must be saved by some means outside of 
himself, and this text states the way this power has to be got. He 
comes to proclaim liberty to the captive. 

Suppose I come here and say there is no hope to-night for a man 
who has broken the law of God—all who have disobeyed God must 
perish; there is no hope. How many of you would stay in this 
building and listen to me—how many of you would just rise up and 
go out? Why, every gambler and drinker would say, “ He has no 
tight to stand up and preach this. We know better than that.” 
Thank God, we don’t need to tell you that. We can preach Christ 
to you as a deliverer. I remember hearing a story of Mr. George 
Stewart. One day, the Governor of Pennsylvania came to him and 
said, “Mr. Stewart, I want you to go to such a prison and tell that 
man for whose execution I signed the warrant the other day, that 
there is not a ray of hope for him. When the day and hour comes 
he must be executed, His mother has been tormenting the life out 

(219) 


220 ATOOD ¥"5 SERJICNS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYFRS. 


of me, and all his friends have been running after me day and night, 
and they are giving the poor fellow a false hope.” ‘That is a very 
disagreeable thing to do, Governor,” answered Mr. Stewart. “Well, 
I want you to goand tell him, so that he can be settled in his mind.” 
The story goes, that when the doors of the cell were opened, that 
prisoner seized Mr. Stewart’s hands, and in his joy cried, “ You are 
a good man. I know you have come with a pardon from the 
Governor.” But when Mr. Stewart told him the Governor had sent 
him to say there was not a ray of hope for him, upon the day and 
hour he must be executed, the man completely broke down and fainted 
away. The thought that at such a day and such an hour he was going 
to be ushered into eternity, was too much for the poor fellow. Sup- 
pose I come to you to-night and tell you there is net a ray of hope— 
that you have broken the law of God, and have not one ray of hope for 
pardon. How many would say, “I know a great deal better; the 
blackest sinner on earth, Christ can save to the utmost. He says so.” 
But, my friends, there is no hope without the deliverance to be free 
from the bondaye of sin, because He says you are “lawful captives.” 
Who are you scing to be delivered by? Why, you must be by 
Christ. He was the only one who ever preached this. No other 
one ever announced himself a deliverer. If you read your Bibles 
carefully you will find that was what He came to do--what He 
preached all His life, that He came to deliver men from the cap- 
tivity of sin. And you will find, too, that He was the mosi extra- 
ordinary preacher that ever was on the earth. He didn’t come to 
preach fine sermons; He didn’t come to preach up the greatness 
and goodness of man—you have enough of that kind of preaching 
in the churches; but He came to give a groaning world assistance 
and power to be saved; He came to tell men to come out of their 
sins, and show them the way. It was not <o preach in eloquent 
words—not to preach sermons on science, and with literary skill 
that He came; it was to proclaim liberty to the captive, and every 
burdened sinner will be free if he only comes to Him. For six 
thousand years, all along the stream of time—from Adam’s till our 
own day—Satan has been at men, binding them hand and foot. 
That’s what he has been doing to some of you. He has just been 
Linding you hand and foo. until you can’t move from him. He 
commences, to be sure, in a very little way. The bond is so small 
and delicate at first that you might blow it away with a breath. 
But by and by it becomes a little thread no bigger than a spider's 


web—y‘ 
can’t ha 
a thread 
whenevs 
and the 
by Sata 
Chicago 
Mr. § 
thought 
“There 
presenc 
—that 1 
When i 
and he 
He bro 
double 
tyrant 
man ha 
prison. 
men. 
hand a 
friends, 
blasphe 
God, w 
break e 
Now 
knows 
If a m 
upon C 
that. 
“How 
and re: 
a short 
a hund 
be you 
up you 
could | 
there \ 
habit. 
pose € 


night, 


a very 
Well, 
ind.” 
, that 

ou are 

m the 

d sent 
y and 

ainted 

s going 
Sup- 
ope— 

Dpe for 

r; the 

Ws so.” 

be free 

ives,” 
be by 
other 

Bibles 

at He 

e cap- 

extra- 

me to 
atness 
iching 
stance 

’ their 

quent 

y skill 

every 

or Six 

i] our 
foot. 
been 

He 
small 
reath. 
ider’s 


DELIVERANCE FOR CAPTIVES, 221 


web—you can hardly see it. “Oh,” you say, “that is nothing; that 
can’t have any hold on me.” It grows a little stronger and becomes 
athread. ‘I can break that any time,” you say; “I can snap that 
whenever I like.” But it grows stronger and stronger and stronger, 
and then you find that you have been taken captive, like Samson, 
by Satan, and then he laughs at you. How many men are there in 
Chicago who have been bound hand and fooi in this way ? 

Mr. Spurgeon, a number of years ago, made a parable. He 
thought he had a right to make one, and he did it. He said, 
“ There was once a tyrant who ordered one of his subjects into his 
presence, and ordered him to make a chain. The poor blacksmith 
—that was his occupation—had to go to work and forge the chain. 
When it was done he brought it into the presence of the tyrant, 
and he was ordered to take it a: ay and make it twice the length. 
He brought it again to the tyrant, and again he wes ordered to 
double it. Back he came when he had obeyed the order, and the 
tyrant looked at it and then commanded the servants to bind the 
man hand and foot with the chain he had made, and cast him into 
prison. And,” Mr. Spurgeon said, “that is what the devil does with 
men. He makes them forge their own chain, and then binds them 
hand and foot with it and casts them into outer darkness.” My 
friends, that is just what these drunkards, these gamblers, these 
blasphemers—that is just what cvery sinner is doing. But, thank 
God, we can tell you of a Deliverer. The Son of God has power to 
break every one of these fetters if you will only come to Him. 

Now I notice there is not a hope for a man to be delivered till he 
knows that he has become a captive and that he needs a deliverer. 
If aman thinks he can deliver himself, of course he will not call 
upon God for assistance. But a man can’t—every one here knows 
that. If you doubt it, just ask this, ask yourselves this question, 
“How many times have I determined to break off this and that sin, 
and resolved to become better, and the resolution has only lasted for 
ashort time?” Young man in the gallery yonder, haven’t you said 
a hundred times I will stop doing this and that evil habit? It may 
be you are a great swearer—a great blasphemer; haven’t you made 
up your mir d to stop swearing, and after a little time you found you 
could not keep back the oaths as they rose to your lips? You sit 
there with your arms folded, as much as to say you can break the 
habit. Well,suppose you can. I willtake it onthat ground. Sup- 
pose every man can break himself away from his sin. What are 


222 MOOD i" S SERJONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


you going to dowith your sin? Nature won't deliver you from the 
sins you have committed, even if you can break yourself from them. 
The mightiest man that ever lived could not deliver himself from 
his sins. If aman could have saved himself, Christ would never 
have come into the world. If man could save himself, there would 
have been no need of a deliverer. Now I just want to tell you, 
swearing men, you, blasphemers, if you want to stop, I will tell you 
of a way by which you can be delivered and by which your habit 
can be broken. Just come to the Great Deliverer; ask Him to save 
you, and He will put a new tongue into your mouth. I tell you as 
soon as Christ comes into a man he is a changed man every way. 
Temper, language, disposition is all changed. I remember before I 
came to Christ how I used to get into a passion at nothing at all, 
and how I used to wish myself dead—-which is just murder in the 
sight of God—whenever anything displeased me. But since I came 
to Christ He has kept me—kept me for twenty years from my evil 
temper. I tell you if a manor woman here is troubled with a bitter 
temper the T.ord will deliver you from it. He came to deliver us 
from our sinful dispositions and create in us pure hearts, and when 
we have Him with us it will not be hard for us. Then the service 
of Christ will be delightful to us. A man to get salvation must 
come to Him; he can not deliver himself. I hope every one in this 
meeting to-night will give up all hope of saving themselves. If you 
stop here to-night, right where you are, and just cry, “ On, God, de. 
liver me from my sin; deliver me from this terrible temper; deliver 
me from this awful sin of blasphemy ; deliver me from the passion ot 
strong drink; Alinighty God, reach out Thy hand and deliver me’— 
just send up this cry, and see how quick God will be by your side. 
Why, He calls Himself our elder brother. We ought to be proud 
of such an elder brother. Why, look at the two boys coming from 
school. One is a big boy and he wants to fight the little one. The 
little fellow knows he will be beaten, so he says: “ Just wait till I 
get my big brother,” and he runs away to get him; but when he 
comes back the big boy is gone. He was n- match for the big fel- 
Icw, and so we are no match for Satan; but when we bring our big 
brother to him, he runs away. There is not a poor slave of Satan 
here but can be delivered if he will. 
A great many of you will say, “I am no slave of Satan.” Are 
you a child of God? If you are not, then you are a slave of Satan; 
not only that, but you ave a lawful slave. The fact is, we are born 


under 
man ig 
before 
the wa 
and tl 
cultur 
on Ca 
sets. 
were 
stood 
every 
may b 
disobe¢ 
are n¢ 
dom 
isam 
are nc 
If yor 
just g 
Sat 
you g 
He w 
churc 
and u 
powe 
tive— 
care 1 
you t 
do th 
night 
conte 
at on 
be su 
out « 
to al 
to ir 
pow 
the 
the | 
Him 


bm the 
b them. 
f from 


never 
would 
! you, 
ll you 
habit 
O save 
Vou as 
y Way, 
bfore I 
at all, 
in the 
l came 
y evil 
bitter 
er us 
when 
ervice 
1 must 
in this 
If you 
id, de.. 
leliver 
ion of 
ne’— 
' side. 
proud 
from 
The 
till I 
2n he 
> fel- 
ir big 
Satan 


Are 
atan ; 
born 


under Satan’s power. In sin my mother conceived me. By nature 
man is born away from God; therefore we have to be born of God 
before we can be delivered from that sin. We divide the people of 
the world into different classes—the rich and the poor, the learned 
and the ignorant, the refined and the rude, the cultured and the un- 
cultured ; but God has only got men placed into two classes. Christ 
on Calvary divided the world eighteen hundred years ago into two 
sets. On one side of the cross were the believers, on the other side 
were the unbelievers. And from that day to this the world has 
stood—those with Him and those against Him, and Satan controls 
every man and woman in this assembly who is not with Christ. You 
may believe it ornot. But I tell you that you must be either a child of 
disobedience or a child of God; and unless you are born of God, you 
are not free from the slavery of sin, and can not come into the king- 
dom of God. I can not decide on which side you will be. That 
isa matter between you and God. If you area child of God, you 
are no longer under the slavery of sin; you have been delivered. 
If you haven’t been born of Him, oh let Him reach you to-night— 
just go with your burdens to Him and He will deliver you. 

Satan holds men to his kingdom by various means. He will let 
you go to hell through wealth, through position, through pleasure. 
He will let you go to hell through one of the pews of our Christian 
churches. He will give you anything to get you into his kingdom ; 
and unless you are a child of God, and one led by a supernatural 
power—by the power of Him who preached deliverance to the cap. 
tive—you will be dragged into Satan’s army, and he will take good 
care not to let you get out. He will give you everything and bind 
you tighter and tighter. A great many persons say, “ How am I to 
do this ?>—how am I to get the deliverance?” As I said the other 
night, it is the easiest thing to do. Suppose I was interested in this 
contest very much, and was a member of one of the parties, and all 
at once I awoke to the fact that if my party got into power it would 
be sure ruin to the country, wouldn’t I go to the other party with- 
out delay? All at once, I become interested in that party, and go 
to all my friends, and all my associates, and use every power I know 
to induce them to leave my original party. Now, there are two 
powers in the world—the power of God and the power of Satan— 
the power of good and the power of evil. If you are under 
the power of evil, and want to get under the power of God, cry to 
Him to bring you over to His service; cry to Him to take you into 


MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND) PRAYERS. 


His army. He will hear you; He will come to you, and, if need be, 
He will send a legion of angels to help you to fight your way up to 
Heaven. God will take you by the right hand and lead you 
through this wilderness over death, and take you right into His 
kingdom. That’s what the Son of Man came to do. He has never 
deceived us; just say here, “Christ is my Deliverer.” A great 
many people think that churches are the true deliverers. Mark 
me, all the churches in Christendom never saved a soul. I am not 
speaking without consideration when I say this. I repeat it, al’ the 
churches in Christendom never saved a soul. They haven’t the 
power to doit; andthe moment a man puts his faith in churches, he 
has taken the wrong road to get deliverance. Every soul delivered 
from sin must be delivered by the Master. All the ministers, all 
the learning, all the friends you have can not save you. That is the 
reason so many are stumbling all the time. They are continually 
looking to this man and that man, this church and that church, and 
when the tempter comes they are overcome. The moment a man 
puts his trust in Christ, and He enters into his heart, that moment 
he finds a power given him to resist temptation. I not only want 
my sins forgiven, but I want power to resist sin. That’s what I 
want. If there is a poor one here who wants to get victory over 
the tempter, all that you have todo is to believe in the Lord Jesus 
Christ. By just coming to Him you will receive a power such as 
man never felt before—a power by which victory shall succeed vic- 
tory with you, and day by day you will walk in your strength. If 
you go to this man and that man for deliverance, you will just 
stumble. Man can not save you. Sin will overtake you. Only one 
man ever overcame the lion of hell, and that was the Lion of Judea. 
Amid the waves of opposition, amid the waves of persecution, He 
stood erect. You have been down at the lake, and you have seen 
the great wave gathering in its strength, and come rolling on, and 
dashing on a rock, and it was just broken into pieces; another comes 
on in all its fury and dashes on that rock, and its power is smashed ; 
another and another comes rolling on in all their fierceness, and 
spend their fury on that rock, and the old rock has stood for ages, 
and for centuries that sea has been trying to batter it down. Look 
at those friends, in the lost world, asthcy linger around that cross, 
and the billows of persecution and fury dash against it; hear the 
jibes and the sneers hurled at Him, when all at once He cried, “ It 
is finished.” He had overcome the lion of hell, and from that tree 


He wert 
to us, ‘ 
but cor 
Him ar 
get doy 
tive cry 
If there 
erance, 
it appe 
ter met 
seems % 
the sta 
Ther 
Indian 
and we 
fiends | 
this for 
face ag 
them « 
them c 
of her 
that w: 
to the 
Oh, my 
membg 
to be 
once tl 
Spang] 
it was 
lows 
doors 
They 
had co 
You 
to set 
it as it 
just b 
dragged 
of Ma 


sweet 


1 be, 
p to 
you 


His 


ever 
Preat 
fark 
h not 
"the 
the 
s, he 
ered 
s, all 
5 the 
lally 
and 
man 
ent 
vant 
at I 
over 
Jesus 
ch as 
| vic- 
If 
just 
- one 
idea. 
, He 
seen 
, and 
omes 
hed; 
and 
Ages, 
,ook 
ross, 
r the 
cs It 
tree 


DELIVERANCE FOR CAPTIVES, 225 


He went and took His seat at the right hand of God, and now calls 
to us, “I will deliver you from all the sins inherited from Adam-- 
but come to Me and I will save you.” My friends, cry to-night to 
Him and He will come to you. I don’t know if I ever saw a man 
get down on his knees who was not saved. I never saw a poor cap- 
tive crying, ‘‘ My God, my God, save me!” but the deliverance came. 
If there is one here to-night—I don’t care who he is—who wants deliv- 
erance, the Son of God is here to give it you to-night. Sometimes 
it appears to me in this Tabernacle—where we have had many bet- 
ter meetings than ever we had anywhere on opening—sometimes it 
seems as if we could almost hear the footsteps of the Son of God, 
the stately stepping of Jesus. And He is here to-night. 

There is a story told of an incident that occurred during the last 
Indian mutiny. The English were besieged in the city of Lucknow, 
and were in momentary expectation of perishing at the hands of the 
fiends that surrounded them. There was a little Scotch lassie in 
this fort, and, while lying on the ground, she suddenly shouted, her 
face aglow with joy, “ Dinna ye hear them comin’; dinna ye hear 
them comin’?” ‘“ Hear what?” they asked. “ Dinna ye hear 
them comin’?” And she sprang to her feet. It was the bagpipes 
of her native Scotland she heard. It was a native air she heard 
that was being played by a regiment of her count ymen marching 
to the relief of those captives, and these deliverers made them free. 
Oh, my friends, don’t you hear Him crying to you to-night? I re- 
member when General Grant was at Richmond it was my priv: : ve 
to be there. Libby Prison was crowded with captives. All at 
once the bands came marching into the place playing ‘‘ The Star- 
Spangled Banner.” Those poor prisoners heard their native air, and 
it was sweet music to them—it filled the hearts of those poor fel- 
lows with joy, and they knew that the iron bolts of their prison 
doors would soon be drawn and they would be captives no longer. 
They knew that by the music they heard that tueir countrymen 
had come to give them liberty. Christ has come to set you free. 
You may be bound by the chains of sin, and you have tried in vain 
to set yourselves free. Christ can do it. It isas easy for Him todo 
itasit is for meto put my hand on the Bible. How many of you are 
just being drawn down by passion, by lusts, by drink—just being 
dragged down to the pit, and you feel yourself powerless. The Son 
of Man can deliver you. He will deliver you. Thank God for this 
sweet Gospel; thank God for this doctrine of deliverance. Thank 
15 


226 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


God, we can preach it. I want to tell you, again, that Christ came 
for this purpose—to set the poor captives free. 

Look at that prison. See that poor prisoner who has been sen. 
tenced to be hung. His friends have been to the Governor to 
obtain a pardon, but the Governor has refused. Every means has 
been tried and he knows that he is adoomed man. The last day 
comes and he says: “ To-morrow I am going to die; to-morrow I 
must go into the presence of Almighty God; to-morrow I must 
stand before my Creator.” He hears those carpenters busy with 
their hammers erecting the scaffold on which he has to die. I can 
see that poor man tremble at the sound. He doesn’t sleep any 
that night. Inthe morning he can not eat. The hour comes and 
he hears the town bell tolling his death-knell. By and by he hears 
foot-falls near his door and he now knows that his time has come, 
He thinks it is the sheriff who has come to lead him forth. The 
door is unlocked and aman says to that prisoner: “You can go 
free.” “ What! what’s that?” exclaims the criminal. “ You can 
go free.” ‘What do you mean?” inquires the culprit. “ Why, the 
Governor has not only saved your life, but given you freedom.” My 
dear friends, that is the Gospel; that’s the Gospel of Christ. He 
opens the prison doors of sin and sets the captive free and pardons 
his sins. If there is a poor soul here to-night, Christ will break 
your captivity, if you only open the door of your heart and let Him 
in. Is there a poor drunkard, is there a poor blasphemer, is there 
one of you who are in sin who wants to get victory to-night? The 
Son of God has come to preach deliverance of the captives. He 
will set your captive soul free; He will snap the fetters which bind 
you. May God help you to-night to seek Christ ; lay your burdens 
before Him, and He will deliver you. Let us pray. 


st came 


en sen- 
rnor to 
ins has 
ast day 
orrow | 
I must 
sy with 
I can 
ee]) any 
nes and 
1e hears 
is come. 
h. The 
can go 
You can 
Jhy, the 
m.” My 
ist. He 
pardons 
ill break 
let Him 
is there 
it? The 
ves. He 
hich bind 
+ burdens 


XXVII. 


THE BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL. 
LUKE iv. 18: “ And recovering of sight to the blind.” 


HE Lord Jesus tells us that He came to give sight to the blind. 
Paul says in his Epist!<e to the Corinthians, fourth chapter and 
third verse: “ But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that 

are lost; in whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of 
them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of 
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.” 
“If the Gospel be hid;” “In whom the god of this world 
hath blinded.” Now you may see this world is just one large blind 
asylum—it is full of blind people. I tried to tell you that the world 
was full of broken hearts ; that the world was full of captives, bound 
hand and foot in sin, and now I teil you that it is full of blind peo- 
ple. Not only blind people, but they are bound and broken-hearted. 
You might say that nearly all those in the world come under the 
three heads. Now just look at the contrast between Satan and 
Christ. Satan breaks men’s hearts, but Christ binds them up; Satan 
binds the people of this earth hand and foot, but Christ breaks the 
fetters and sets them free; Satan makes us blind, but Christ opens 
our eyes. He came to do this, and just see how He was received. 
He went into that synagogue at Nazareth and preached this glorious 
Gospel, and commenced by telling them that ti.e Spirit of the Lord 
was upon Him, and went on to tell them that He had come to save 
them, and what did they do? They thrust Him out of the city, and 
took Him to the brow of the hill, and would have hurled Him into 
hell if they could. And men have been as bitter toward the Gospel 
all along these eighteen hundred years. Why, some men would 
tear the preachers of it limb from limb if it wasn’t for the law. Then 
we find when He goes to Bethany, and raising up the mother of 
(227) 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS 


228 


Martha and Mary, and binding up broken hearts as He went along, 
and preaching mercy, they want to kill Him. We find Him in 
the third chapter of Mark setting the captive free. Here we find a 
man possessed of demons, whom no one could cure, set at liberty by 
the Son of Man; and in the healing because they lost a few swine 
they told Him to depart from their coasts. Then we find Him just 
a few days before His death, almost on His way to Calvary, giving 
sight to that blind man. And for all this they take Him to that 
mount and nail Him to across. Oh, what blindness! 

We are told there are three million people in the world who are 
called blind. Every one calls them blind because they haven’t their 
natural sight. But do you ev2r think how many are spiritually 
blind in this world? Why, if there are three million people in the 
world who have not their natural sight, how many do you suppose 
are spiritually blind? We sympathize with those who have lost 
their sight. Nothing appeals to our sympathy so readily. I believe 
I could raise thousands of dollars among you by telling you about 
some blind one who is suffering for the necessaries of life through 
their affliction. How many of you wouldn’t put your hands in 
your pockets and give liberally? How it moves our compassion— 
how it moves our hearts as we see the blind men, women, and chil- 
dren in the streets. How your heart goes out to those poor un- 
fortunates. I was at a meeting in London, when I was there, and I 
heard a man speaking with wonderful power and earnestness. ‘“ Who 
isthis man?” I asked, my curiosity being excited. ‘‘ Why, that is Dr. 
-—. Heis blind.” I felt some interest in this man, and at the close 
of the meeting I sought an interview, and he told me that he 
had been stricken blind when very young. His mother took him to 
a doctor, and asked him about his sight. ‘“ You must give up all 
hope,” the doctor said. ‘Your boy is blind, and will be forever.” 
“What, do you think my boy will never see?” asked his mother. 
“Never again.” The mother took her boy to her bosom and cried, 
“Oh, my boy, who will take care of you when I am gone—who will 
look to you!” forgetting the faithfulness of that God she had 
learned him to love. He became a servant of the Lord, and was 
permitted to print the Bible in twelve different languages, printed 
in the raised letters, so that all the blind people could read the 
Scriptures themselves. He had acongregation, my friends, of three 
million people, and I think that blind man was one of the happiest 
beings in all London. He was naturally blind, but he had eyes to 


his s 
built 
not tl 
spirit 
city ! 
nothii 
men 
chure. 
could 
get H 
And t 
I tl 
are b 
city, 
men ¢ 
man j 
is mo: 
the G 
“ Mor 
don’t 
etern 
agrea 
has g 
of so 
death 
that ‘ 
thing 
leave 
away 
unde 
you ¢ 
down 
away 
mone 
was fi 
could 
this v 
they 
poor 
don’t 


along, 
lim in 
find a 
arty by 
swine 
im just 
giving 
o that 


ho are 
't their 
‘itually 
in the 
uppose 
ve lost 
believe 
| about 
hrough 
inds in 
ssion— 
d chil- 
oor un- 
, and I 
“Who 
tis Dr. 
e close 
hat he 
him to 
up all 
rever.” 
nother. 
1 cried, 
tho will 
he had 
nd was 
printed 
ad the 
»f three 
appiest 
eyes to 


THE BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL, 229 


his soul, and could see a bright eternity . ‘ec future. He had 
built his fourdation upon the living God. We pity those who have 
not their natural sight ; but how you should pi-y yourself, if you are 
spiritually blind. If we could get all the blind, spiritually, in this 
city! You talk about those great political meetings—they would be 
nothing to the crowd you would collect. Why, just look at all the 
men in this city who are blind, and many of them are in the 
churches. This has been the trouble with men always. Christ 
couldn’t get men to understand they were blind—He couldn't even 
get His disciples to open their eyes until after He went up to Heaven. 
And then they received the spiritual truth. 

I think to-night I might pick up some of the different classes who 
are blind. I am somewhat acquainted with the rich men of this 
city, and I don’t think it would take long to prove that the leading 
men of this city are blind—blind to their own interests. Take a 
man just spending all his strength and energies to get money. He 
is money blind. He is so blind in his pursuit that he can not see 
the God of Heaven. Money is his god. His cry is continually, 
“Money, money,” and it is the cry of many here in Chicago. They 
don’t care about God, don’t care about salvation, don’t heed their 
eternal condition so long as they get money, money, money. And 
agreat many of them have got it. But how lean their souls are. God 
has given the desire of their heart, but He has given them leanness 
of soul. I heard of a man who had accumulated great wealth, and 
death came upon him suddenly, and he realized, as the saying is, 
that “there was no bank in the shroud,” that he couldn’t take any- 
thing with him; we may have all the money on earth, but we must 
leave it behind us. He called a lawyer in and commenced to will 
away his property before he went away. His little girl couldn’t 
understand exactly where he was going, and she said, “ Father, have 
you got a home in that land you are going to?” The arrow went 
down to his soul. ‘Got ahome there?” The rich man had hurled 
away God and neglected to secure a home there for the sake of his 
money, and he found it was now too late. He was money mad, he 
was money blind. It wouldn’t be right for me to give names, but I 
could tell you of a good many here in Chicago who are going on in 
this way—just spending all their lives in the accumulation of what 
they can not take with them. This is going on while very many 
poor people are suffering for the necessaries of life. These men 
don’t know they are blind—money is their god. 


230 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


There is another class who don’t care so much for money. We 
might call them business blind. It is business, business, business 
with them all the time. Inthe morning they haven't time to worship. 
They must attend to business; must get down tothe store. Down 
they run, and haven’t time to get home to dinner. They mustn't 
let any one get ahead of them; and they get home late at night and 
their families have gone to bed. They scarcely ever see their chil- 
dren. It is all business with them. A man told me not long ago, 
“TI must attend to my business. That is my first consideration, 
and see that none get ahead of me.” That is his god. I don't 
care if he is an elder or a deacon in the church. That is his god. 
The god of business has blinded him. Look at the merchant prince 
who died the other day. Men called him a clever, shrewd man. 
Call that shrewdness—to pile up wealth for a lifetime and leave no 
record behind so that we know he has gone to Heaven? He rose 
above men in his business; he devoted his whole soul to it, and the 


' world called him a power among men; the world called him great. 


But let the Son of God write his obituary; let Him put an epitaph 
on his tomb-stone, and it would be, ‘“ Thou fool.” Man says, “I 
must actend to business first ;’’ God says, “Seek first the kingdom 
of God.” I don’t care what your business may be; it may be hon- 
orable, legitimate, and all that, and you think you must attend to it 
first; bear in mind that God tells every man to seek His kingdom 
first. 

There is another class of people who are blind. They don’t care 
so much about riches; they are not very ambitious to become rich; 
they don’t spend their lives in business matters. They are politi- 
‘cally blind. They are mad over politics; they are bound up in the 
subject. There will be a great many broken hearts in a week hence. 
They have got their favorite candidate to attend to, and they can 
not find time to worship God. How little prayer there has been 
about the election. There has been a good deal of work, but how 
much praying has been done? We want a prayer to go up all over 
‘our land that honest men may rule us. But they are so excited 
over this election that they have no time to pray to the God of 
Ileaven. They are politically blind. How many men within our 
recollection who have set their hearts upon the Presidential chair 
‘have gone down to the grave with disappointment? They were 
‘poor, blind men, and the world called them great. Oh, how fool- 
‘ish; how blind. They didn’t seek God; they only sought one 


thing- 
clever 
their ( 
influet 
the pe 
ness 1 
lived { 
But 
they o 
menh 
room 
comin 
ball. 
For th 
over, f 
usher. 
are ju 
money 
forfeit 
toa lz 
speaki 
to give 
iny nc 
what 
Lord’s 
leadin 
would 
Christ 
The 
their 1 
the lag 
me, rT 
down 
You t 
and fa 
lift o 
many 
thing 
always 
butte 


We 
isiness 
prship. 
Down 
hustn't 
ht and 
ir chil- 
g ago, 
ration, 

don't 
s god, 
prince 
| man. 
ave no 
e rose 
nd the 
great, 
pitaph 
ys, “I 
ng¢dom 
e hon- 
d to it 
ngdom 


"t care 
e rich; 
politi- 
in the 
hence. 
ey can 
s been 
it how 
ll over 
xcited 
30d of 
in our 
| chair 
y were 
w fool- 
it one 


THE BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL, 231 


thing —greatness, position, and office. They were great, brilliant, 
clever men, but when they were summoned into the presence of 
their God, what a wreck. Men so brilliant might have yielded an 
influence for the Son of God that would have lived in the hearts of 
the people for generations to come, and the streams of their good- 
ness might have flowed long after they went to Heaven. But they 
lived for the world and their works went to dust. 

But w great number of people don’t care for business or politics, 
they only want a little money so as to get pleasure. Tlow many 
men have been blinded by pleasure. A lady told me in the inquiry- 
room she would like to become a Christian, but there was a ball 
coming on, and she didn’t want to become a Christian till after the 
ball. The ball was worth more to her than the kingdom of God. 
For this ball she would put off the kingdom of God until it was 
over, forgetting that death might come to her in the meantime and 
usher her into the presence of God. How blind she was, and many 
are just like her. The kingdom of God is offered to them without 
money and without price, and yet for a few days of pleasure they 
forfeit Heaven and everything dear to their eternity. I was talking 
toa lady who, with the tears running down her cheeks, upon my 
speaking to her, said, “‘ The fact is, if I become a Christian I have 
to give up all pleasure. I can not go toa theatre; I can not read 
iny novels; I can not play cards, I have nothing else to do.” Oh, 
what blindness! Look at the pleasure of being taken into the 
Lord's vineyard, and the joy and luxury of working for Him and 
leading souls to Christ. And people with their eyes wide open 
would rather bend down to the god of pleasure than become a 
Christian. 

Then there is a god of fashion. How many women just devote 
their lives to it. They want to see the last bonnet, the last cloak, 
the last dress. They can’t think of anything else. Said a lady to 
me, “I am always thinking of fashion; it don’t matter if I get 
down on my knees to pray, I am always thinking of a new dress.” 
You may laugh at this, but it’s true. Pleasure in the ball-room 
and fashion is the god of a great many people. Oh, that we may 
lift our eyes to something nobler. Suppose you don’t have so 
many dresses and give something to the poor, you will have some- 
thing then which will give you joy and comfort that will last you 
always. I pity the man or woman who lives for the day like the 
butterfly—those whose minds are fixed upon fashion and pleasure, 


232 MOODY'S SERMONS, .'.DDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


and have no time to look to their perishing soul. A good many 
people don’t know they are hid. Look at that young man. You 
cali him a fast young man. He has got a salary of $1,000, and it 
costs him $3,000 to live. Where does he get the money? Where 
does it come from? His father can not give it to him, because he 
is poor. The employer begins to get suspicious. ‘I only give 
him $1,000 a year and he is living at the rate of $3,000.” By and 
by he looks into his account and finds it overdrawn. Thus he is 
ruined—charatter blasted. Oh, how many are of this stamp in 
Chicago! It is only a question of time. How many young men 
have we got just living beyond their income—taking money out of 
their employer’s drawer. They say, “Well, I am going to the 
theatre to-night, and I will just take a dollar; will put it back 
next week.” But when next week comes, he hasn’t put it back, 
and takes another dollar. He has taken two dollars now. He keeps 
on drawing, drawing, drawing, when by and by it allcomes out. He 
loses his piace; don’t get any letters of recommendation, and the 
poor man is ruined. My friends, this is not a description of an iso- 
lated case. This class is all over the country. I wish I could send 
you the letters I get about just such cases. I got one the other day 
from a young mother with a family of beautiful children. She told 
me how happy they had lived—husband, wife, and children—and 
how one night her husband came home excited, his face white with 
terror, and said, “I’ve got to fly from justice. Good-bye.” He has 
gone from her, and she said it seemed as if she could die; her hus- 
band disgraced and starving ; couldn’t get anything todo. Her 
cry seemed to be, “ Help, help me.” Is not the country full of 
such cases? Is it not blindness and madness for men to go on in 
this way? If any one is here to-night following in the way of these 
men, I pray God your eyes may be opened before you are led to 
death and ruin. 

I noticed a young man while I was coming down to-night pretty 
blind. I will just read what Solomon says about him: 

“ My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee. 


“ Keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the apple 
of thine eye. 

“ Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thy 
heart. 

“Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister, and call understanding 
thy kinswoman. 


6“ T 
stran 
6 if 
ment 
(T f 
yout! 
(<3 I 
way 
66 I 
66 
and s 
EG 
(3 } 
ever) 
7} C 
said 
6c I 
vows 
6s al 
face, 
66 J 
work 
“a | 
6c ( 
solac 
(t3 J 
(7 | 
at th 
66) 
flatt 
“ } 
ora 


Ti 


snar 


many 
You 
and it 
Where 
use he 
y give 
y and 
s he is 
mp in 
ig men 
out of 
to the 
it back 
t back, 
e keeps 
t. He 
nd the 
an iso- 
Id send 
er day 
he told 
n—and 
ite with 
He has 
er hus- 
.» Her 
full of 
oO on in 
»f these 
- led to 


pretty 


th thee. 
> apple 


of thy 


sanding 


THE BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL. 233 


“That they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the 
stranger which flattereth with her words. 

“For at the window of my house I looked through my case- 
ment. 

“And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the 
youths, a young man void of understanding, 

“ Passing through the street near her corner: and he went the 
way to her house. 

“In the twilight in the evening, in the -lack and dark night, 

“ And behold, there met him a woman with theattire of a harlot, 
and subtle of heart. 

“(She is loud and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house ; 

“ Now is she witnout, now in the streets, and lieth in wait at 
every corner.) 

“So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face 
said unto him, 

“T have peace offerings with me; this day have I paid my 
vows. 

“Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy 
face, and I have found thee. 

“T have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved 
works, with fine linen of Egypt. 

“ T have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. 

“Come, let us. take our fill of love untii the morning; let us 
solace ourselves with loves. 

“For the good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey. 

“ He hath taken a bag of money with him, and will come home 
at the day appointed. 

“With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the 
flattering of her lips she forced him. 

“He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter, 
or a fool to the correction of the stocks ; 

“Till a dart strike through his liver; as a bird hasteth to the 
snare, and knoweth not it is for his life. 

“ Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to 
the words of my mouth. 

“Let not thy heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her 
paths. 

“For she hath cast down many wounded; yea, many strong men 
have been slain by her. 


234 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


“ Her house is tne way to hell, going down to the chambers of 
death.” 

My friends, I don’t know amuch quicker way down to ruin than 
that ; I don’t know a much quicker way down to hell than that. How 
many young men in this city—in this audicnce—have been led 
astray by the harlot. A young man comes up from the country 
who has left a mother and sister pure as angels, and by and by news 
reaches them that he is on his way to hell by this road. I beg of 
you, young men, don’t take this way. May God give you strength 
and power to say, “ By the grace of God I will not.” 

How many young men are there who spend their time in the 
saloons of this city. I always dread an election day—I generally 
see so many young men beastly drunk. They are led away, and 
that is another quick road down to hell. May te young men sec 
the folly of this, and on that day stand firm. May God open your 
eyes. How many young men are there whose characters have 
been blasted by strong drink. How mnany brilliant men in the 
Chicago bar have gone down to death by it. Some of the noblest 
statesmen, some of the most brilliant orators and men of all pro- 
fessions have been borne down to the drunkard’s grave. May God 
open your eyes to show the folly of tampering with strong drink. 
Now, many men say, “I am not going down to the grave of a 
drunkard.” They think they have strength to stop when they like. 
When it gets hold there is nothing within us by which we can save 
ourselves. He alone can give you power te resist the cup of temp. 
tation; He alone can give you power to overcome its influence, 
if you only will believe Him. The god of this world has been try- 
ing to make you believe that man can do it himself, and Christ will 
have nothing to do with him. The god of this world isa liar. 1 
come with authority to tell you—I don’t care how far gone you 
are; don’t care how bestial you may be—that the Son of God can 
and will save you if you only believe Him. If there is one here to- 
night under the power of strong drink, come to-night. We lift up 
our voice to warn you. 

Look at that man in a boat on Niagara River. He is only about 
a mile from the rapids. A man on the bank shouts to him, “ Young 
man, young man, the rapids are not far away, you'd better pull for the 
shore.” “You attend to your own business; I will take care of my- 
self,” he replies. Like a great many people here, and ministers, too, 
they don’t want any evangelist here—don’t want any help, however 


great 
he ha 
his da 


you g 
“ Min 
of my 
that’s 
drinki 
are in 
will g 
laugh: 
he lift 
if you 
him— 
you § 
you. 

them 
but tl 
to tha 
Ah, 
are in 
to the 
their 


wild ¢ 
reapi 
and fc 
runnil 
an un 
right 
push 
them 
away 
was C 
arrow 
saying 
take 

taken 
had c 


7 news 
reg of 
‘ength 


in the 
erally 
y, and 
en see 
n your 
; have 
in the 
oblest 
ll pro- 
y God 
drink. 
e of a 
y like. 
n save 
temp- 
uence, 
en try- 
st will 


le you 
bd can 


for the 
lof my- 
s, too, 
bwever 


THE BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL, 235 


great the danger ahead. On he goes, sitting coolly in his boat. Now 
he has got a little nearer, and a man from the bank of the river sees 
his danger, and shouts: “ Stranger, you’d better pull for the shore; if 
you go further you'll be lost. You can be saved now if you pull in.” 
“ Mind your business, and you'll have enough to do. I'll take care 
of myself.” Like a good many men, they are asleep to the danger 
that’s hanging over them while they are in the current. And I say, 
drinking young man, don’t think you are standing still. You 
are in the current, and if you don’t pull fora rock of safety, you 
will go over the precipice. On he goes. I can see him in the boat 
laughing at the danger. A man on the bank is looking at him, and 
he lifts up his voice and cries, “ Stranger, stranger, pull for the shore; 
if you don’t you will lose your life,” and the young man laughs at 
him—mocks him. That is the way with hundreds in Chicago. If 
you go to them and point out their danger they will jest and joke at 
you. By and by he says: “Tf think I hear the rapids—yes, I hear 
them roar;” and he seizes his oars and pulls with all his strength, 
but the current is too great, and nearer and nearer he is drawn on 
to that abyss, until he gives one unearthly scream, and over he goes. 
Ah, my friends, this is the case with hundreds in this city. They 
are in the current of riches, of pleasure, of drink, that will take them 
to the whirlpool. Satan has got them blindfolded, and they are on 
their road to the bottomless pit. 

We hear men say in a jesting way, “Oh, we are sowing our wild 
oats; we will get over this by and by.” I have seen men reap their 
wild oats. It’s all well enough sowing, but when it comes to the 
reaping it’s a different thing. I remember I went home one night 
and found all the people in alarm. They had seen a man coming 
running down the street, and as he approached the house he gave 
an unearthly roar, and, in terror, they had bolted the door. He came 
tight up to my door, and, instead of ringing the bell, just tried to 
push the door in. They asked him what he wanted, and he told 
them he wanted to see me. They said I was at the meeting, and 
away he ran, and they could hear him groan as he disappeared. I 
was coming along North Clark street, and he shot past ine like an 
arrow. But he had seen me, and turned and seized me by the arm, 
saying eagerly, “Can I be saved to-night? The devil is coming to 
take me to hell at one o'clock to-night.” ‘My friend, you are mis- 
taken.” I thought the man was sick. But he persisted that the devil 
had came and laid his hand upon him, and told him he might have 


236 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


till one o’clock, and said he: “ Won’t you go up to my room and 
sit with me?” I got some men up to his room to see to him. At 
one o'clock the devils came into that room, and all the men in that 
room could not hold him. He was reaping what he had sown. 
When the angel of Death came and laid his cold hand on him, oh, 
how he cried for mercy—how he beseeched for pardon. Ah, yes, 
young men, you may say, in a laughing and jesting way, you are 
sowing your wild oats, but the reaping time is coming. May God 
show you, to-night, what folly it is—what a miserable life you are 
leading. May we lift our heart here to the God of all grace, so 
that we may see our lost and ruined condition if we do not come 
to Him. Christ stands ready and willing to save—to save to-night 
ail those who are willing to be saved. Let us pray. 


ee 


*- m ~ ~ 
page hires deacon seciasas cape, : 
ie en ee 
= et ent Re 


O] 


ISAIAH 
while 
thoug! 
and tc 


HA 
th 
m. 
“ Seek 
while I 
that th 
with al. 
that th 
meet p 
to be s 
found ¢ 
beyond 
the da 
you w 
althoug 
would 
self.” 
and se 
chapte 
seek 
heart.’ 
I wish 
world. 
will ge 
in, “1 
last ni 
ent; s 


and 


At 
that 
own. | 
h, oh, 
, yes, xX XVI I I . 
are i 
God ON SEEKING AND FINDING THE LORD. 
are 
e, so | ISAIAH lv. 6, 7: “*Seck ye the Lord while He may be found, call ye upon Him 
come while He is near: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his 
night thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord and He will have mercy upon him, 


and to our God, for He will abundantly pardon,” 


HAVE been talking about God—as to how God is seeking for 
the sinner. To-night I want to turn the question, and talk of 
man’s state. Under this text man is told to seek the Lord. 

“Seek ye the Lord while He may be found, and call ye upon Him 
while He is near.” Now, I have learned this in dealing with men, 
that there isn’t much hope cf being saved until they seek the Lord 
with all their heart. One reason that men do not find the Lord is 
that they don’t seek for Him with all their heart. Very often you 
meet people who say, “ Well, I don’t know as I have any objections 
to be saved.” Well, I don’t know as I ever knew of any one that 
found Christ that had that spirit. You have got to have something 
beyond that. I said to a man some time ago, that I could tell him 
the day he was going to be converted. I said to him, “I can tell 
you when you will be converted, although I ain’t a prophet, and 
although I don’t pretend to bea prophet.” “Well,” he said, “I 
would like to have you tell me that, for I would like to know my- 
self.” ‘ Well,” I said, “ you shall find Him when you seek for Him, 
and search for Him with all your heart.” In the twenty-ninth 
chapter of Jeremiah, thirteenth verse, it says, “And ye shall 
seck Me and find Me when ye shall search for Me with all your 
heart.” I wish men would seek for Christ as they seek for wealth. 
I wish men would seek for Christ as they seek for position in this 
world. Man prepares his feast, and there is a great rush to see who 
will get there first. God prepares His feast, and the excuses come 
in, “I pray thee have me excused.” Suppose I should state that 
last night a man came into this place and lost a very valuable pres- 
ent; something he valued a great deal more than the value of the 
(237) 


238 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VTLRS., 


present, because it was the gift of his dying mother. Suppose he 
should send up a note to me saying, “ Mr. Moody, I lost last night 
a very valuable diamond, and I am willing to give any one that 
can find that diamond twenty thousand dollars.” I am sure there 
would be a great search. How many do you suppose would be 
seeking for that diamond? I would not give much for my sermon, 
A man might say, “I am poor, and if I could find that diamond, 
wouldn’t ‘that take me out of poverty and out of want?” You 
wouldn’t wait until I got through my sermon, but you would be 
looking down at your feet and under the benches. My friend, isn’t 
the salvation of your soul worth more than all the diamonds that 
the world has seen? Isn’t it worth more than the whole world 
itself, and isn’t it the best thing you can do to seek the Lord? 

Not only that, but it is a command to seek the Lord while He 
may be found, and call ye upon Him while He is near. It is just 
as much a command for you to seek the Lord as it is that you 
sha’n’t swear. It is just as much a command as it is that you 
sha’n’t steal. It is a command. There are a great many com- 
mandments. Some people have got an idea that there are only 
ten commandments in the sible. There are thousands of them, 
and this is one of them. It is the voice of the Lord Himself. 
Seek Him with all your heart. Now just see how men seek for 
wealth. When the California fever—the gold fever—broke out, 
men left their wives, and left their children, and left their parents 
and their homes and luxury, and went out to the Pacific coast and 
slept out in the open air and under tents, and endured want. What 
for? That they might get wealth. They could not make too great 
a sacrifice to get wealth, and when I was out there in business I was 
amazed when news came that gold was found one hundred miles 
away. They would pack up, men, women, and children, and away 
they would go. A whole town would move just to seek wealth. 
Then they went out to Australia in the time of the gold fever in 
that country. They were willing to make almost any sacrifice. 
Look and see how these politicians work. Let one of them be 
nominated for alderman or some position under the government, 
and how they will seek your vote. They will come around to your 
house early in the morning just to seek your vote. They don’t 
sleep at night; they are willing to do everything to accomplish 
their purpose. 

Let us go and learn a lesson from that. If there is no reality in 


this 
true, 
Ama 
and ¢ 
God, 
You | 
shall 
Now, 
take < 
man n 
is to g 
the gi 
“Wha 
own si 
true t 
just s 
the L 
for Hi 
more » 
not se 
I re 
The lit 
who w 
that w 
him, b 
one of 
But th 
was te 
the bo 
did no 
teeth. 
drew h 
you w 
salvati 
kingdo 
gcod tj 
commu 
found | 
but th 
private 


se he 
night 
that 
there 
ld be 
rmon, 
nond, 
You 
Id be 
|, isn’t 
; that 
world 
? 
le He 
is just 
it you 
it you 
- com- 
e only 
them, 
imself. 
ek for 
e out, 
parents 
hst and 
What 
D great 
I was 
l miles 
away 
vealth. 
bver in 
ncrifice. 
em be 
Nnment, 
o your 
ty don’t 
bmplish 


ality in 


ON SEEKING AND FINDING THE LORD, 239 


this gift of God, if it is alla myth, then let us dismiss it. If it is 
true, and we can find the Lord by seeking Him, let us seek Him. 
A man will go around this world for his health; he will cross oceans 
and climb steep mountains, just to get his health. Thanks be to 
God, you haven't got to go around the world to get salvation. 
You haven't got to go out of this building to find salvation. “Ye 
shall find Me when ye shall search for Me with all your heart.’ 
Now, there isn’t anything a man values as he does his life. You 
take a man ona wrecked vessel; that vessel is going down; that 
man may be worth a million, and the only way he can save his life 
is to give up that million—he would do it as quick asa flash. Now, 
the gift of God is eternal life; it is life without end. Christ says, 
“What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his 
own soul?” I would like to ask this audience a question. Is it 
true that a man can find the Lord here at once? Now won't you 
just stop and think a moment ? Young man, do you believe that 
the Lord can be found here? If He can be found, why not seek 
for Him, and why not look? If it is true that the Lord is worth 
more than the whole world, and He can be found by seeking, why 
not seek for Him—not with half a heart, but with all your heart ? 

I read, a number of years ago, of a vessel that was wrecked. 
The life-boats were not enough to take all the passengers. A man 
who was swimmin ; in the water, swam up to one of the life-boats 
that were full and seized it with his hand. They tried to prevent 
him, but the man was terribly in earnest about saving his life, and 
one of the men in the boat just drew a sword and cut off his hand 
But the man didn’t give up; he reached out the other hand. He 
was terribly in earnest ; he wanted to save his life. But the man in 
the boat took the sword and cut off his other hand. But the man 
did not give up. He swain up to the boat and seized it with his 
teeth. Some of them said, “Let us not cut his head off,” and they 
drew him in. That man was terribly in earnest, and, my friends, if 
you want to get into the kingdom of God you will seek your soul’s 
salvation now. Be in earnest once as for your life, and seek the 
kingdom of God with all your heart, and you shall find it. It is a 
gcod time to seek the Lord while the Spirit of God is abroad in the 
community. I contend that this isa proof that the Lord can be 
found here now, because I don’t believe there has been a meeting 
but that some have found Him. Last night a brother came to my 
private room and called me, and said, ‘I want to introduce you to 


240 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


some one,” and there stood a wife, her face lit up with joy. She 
wanted to tell me that her husband was converted. She said, “I 
have been praying for him these twenty years, and he has found the 
Lord to-night.” ‘“ Seek ye the Lord while He may be found, call 
ye upon Him while He is near.” 

How many men were there that were converted in the great revi- 
val of '57 and ’58, and yet some people cry out against revivals— 
they had rather be converted at any time than during a revival. It 
was not long after the revival of ’57 and ’58 that the nation was 
deluged with blood, and half a million of men laid down their lives. 
Wasn't it the best thing they could have done, to seek the Lord 
then? It was my privilege to be in the army at ihat time; I was 
by their cots when I saw them die. I never saw a man all through 
the war that regretted that he became a Christian. The best 
thing they could do was to call upon the Lord. It was a great 
calamity, and came right home to the heart of the nation. We are 
just now, I am afraid, going to have some of this sad work. I be. 
lieve that we are even now on the eve of just such work. I believe 
that judgments are going to happen upon this nation again; grace 
always precedes judgments. A great revival is in progress all over 
the country. So there was in Jerusalem a day of grace, but the 
opportunity was spurned. Jerusalem and the country took no heed 
to their ways, and soon Titus appeared with a great army and be- 
sieged it, and more than one million, ome hundred thousand people 
perished. Those men rejected the Gospel and the Word of God. 
So at the present day men won’t call upon Christ when He may be 
found, or seek Him when He is near. All along, in the history of 
the Church, it is remarked, that before some great calamity has 
fallen upon the earth, there has been a great day of grace, offering 
salvation to those who will accept it. Before God punishes:people He 
holds out before them a chance to repent and to escape His wrath. 

And now we hear Jesus calling to repentance throughout all the 
land. It is time, my friends, to be up and doing. Seve yourseives, 
and then plead with your friends and bring them to Jesus. Tell 
them the glad tidin¢s and bring them into the fold of the Good 
Shepherd. If we are faithful now and watch for souls, we shall 
see in every town andi city thousands who will accept Christ. It is 
time for us to go out and say to our friends and :elatives, “ Come 
in, the Lord is coming; the Lord is at work. Jesus of Nazareth 
is passing through the city. Let us call upon Him while He may 


be for 
very t 
off its 
near a 
are ne. 
seek fe 
upon | 
We rez 
time tl 
when, 
slumbe 
door wz 
same w 
you toa 
time, ' 
prophec 
shalt di 
seck Hi 
Spirit of 
time to s 
people ¢ 
in. Bu 1 
You will 
children 
day of g 
the day 
on the d 
shall th 
Save yo 
deemed, 
the ten 
call upo 
away oO 
and got 
pretty d 
way alo 
before fy 
did not 
commen 
they cay 


She 
is | 
d the 
1, call 


 revi- 
vals— 
bd 
n was 
‘lives. 
Lord 

1 was 
rough 
e best 
. great 
We are 

I be- 
believe 
; grace 
all over 
but the 
no heed 
and be- 
people 
of God. 
may be 
story of 
nity has 
offering 
ople He 
5 wrath. 
bt all the 
purseives, 
us. Tell 
he Good 
We shall 
st. It is 
s, ‘* Come 
Wazareth 
He may 


ON SEEK!NG AND FINDING THE LORD 241 


be found ; let us implore Him to save us while He is near.” The 
very text implies that the time is come when the world should throw 
off its sloth and wake to repentance. The text implies that God is 
near and pleads with His people; that the time and the Son of God 
are near now. Isn’t it true that He is seeking for you when you 
seek for Him? Seek, then, the Lord while He may be found; call 
upon Him while He is near. Mr. Sankey sang about those virgins. 
We read that five sought to gain admission too late. There was a 
time that they might have called upon the Lord; there was a time 
when, had they sought, they weuld have found Him. But they 
slumbered and slept until it was too late. Then they cried, but the 
door was shut—the day of grace was over. And so it may be the 
sume withyou. The day of grace may be drawing to a close with 
you too. It may be that I am speaking to many here for the last 
time. This may be the last year they may have on earth. The 
prophecy may be true in regard to you and me—“ This year thou 
shalt die.” Is it, or isn’t it a time to seek the kingdom of God, to 
seck His face while Christ is calling upon us to repent, while the 
Spirit of God is moving upon our hearts? isn’t it the very best 
time to seek the Lord while He may be found? Those antediluvian 
people called upon Noah to open the door of the ark and take them 
in. But it was too late. God wil] shut the door against you, too. 
You will soon be without hope. Undoubtedly those men, women, and 
children called upon God to save them on that terrible day; but the 
day of grace was overforthem. The day of wrath then had come, and 
the day of judgment had fallen upon them. Oh, who shall stand 
on the day of wrath? When the Lord shall shake the earth, what 
shall then save the souls of men? The day of grace is here. 
Save yourselves; wash yourselves in His precious blood and be re- 
deemed. Oh, this very hour, let there be a cry for salvation. In 
the tenth chapter of Romans it is written, “ For whc-oever shall 
call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.” I heard of a man 
away off in the mining district, who had wandered from his house 
and got lost. In that region the ground is full of holes, and some 
pretty deep ones, too. But it was night, and he could not make his 
way along. Had he undertaken to move on, there were the holes 
before him, and any step might precipitate him into a cavern. He 
did not know what to do, and he could not stir a step. At last he 
commenced to cry out, “ Help, help, help,” and his cry was heard ; 
they came with lanterns and brought him safely out of his danger 
16 


242 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADLRESSES AND RIVERS, 


The depths of sin are survonding you; the next step may land 
you into darkness and death. Oldman, doyou hear? Young lady, 
do not laugh at it. Don’t make light of this warning voice. “Seek 
the Lord while He may be found, call upon Him while He is 
near.” 

Let me warn you against the next verse. A great many people 
put the seventh verse ahead of the sixth. “ Let the wicked forsake 
his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts.” If ye would be 
saved, call upon God first, and then God will give you help, and by 
His power you can then turn away from sin, and from your evil 
thoughts, and will get pardon. But you haven’t power to give up 
your evil courses until you call upon God, and until He gives you 
strength. After you have called upon the Lord, you must receive 
Him when He comes; you must make room for Him. He has 
gone to make room for you, and you must make room for Him. I 
once found a man in the inquiry-room who was puzzled to know 
how there would be room for the saved in Heaven. I tell you, my 
friends, as I told him, you needn't borrow trouble on that account. 
‘f He finds He will not have room for you or me, or for any of His 
chosen people in the Heaven tha. He now has, He will make 
another. Can He not make another Heaven by a word? Can He 
not make another place of happiness as easy as He made the 
present one? The Lord God of Heaven can make plenty of room 
for you. You must not give that as an excuse. The Lord can 
make all the room He wants. Now, my friends, let me ask you this 
question: In all candor, why don’t you settle the question now? 
Will the Son of God ever have more power? Will He be more 
ready to use it for your salvation at any other time than now? 
Hasn’t He said that, “All power is given unto Him both in Heaven 
and on earth?” Has He not the power to save every one here? Is 
He not able to save unto the uttermost? Hasn’t He the power, 
and hasn’t He the will? Hasr.’t He said, “As I live, saith the Lord, 
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Oh, turn ye! turn 
ye! Why should ye die, oh House of Israel?” If you turn now 
and call upon Him, He will forgive your sins; He will forgive every 
one all his sins, no matter how many they are. He will save you, 
if you truly repent and write your name in the Book of Life. But 
you must call upon Him with the heart. 

As Spurgeon remarks, the Bible does not say you must have new 
heads, or that you must seek Him with your head; but it says you 


must ] 
meant 
with y 
your h 
it. If 
heart | 
emptie 
one he 
sinner | 
Him ? 
mind t] 
eternity 
Don’t : 
done ?” 
you wil 
boat. | 
hands fe 
the rapic 
He will 
to do is 
do any 
from Gd 
begins a 
growth. 
Christ. 
woke t 
came th 
word in 
put it of 
Was a gq 
man in 
working 
While 
in the cq 
to rema 
him and 
mind nad 
The eldd 
made hi 
before n 


iy land 
g lady, 
“ Seek 
He is 


people 
forsake 
puld be 
and by 
our evil 
give up 
ves you 
t receive 
He has 
Him. | 
to know 
you, my 
account, 
y of His 
ill make 
Can He 
ade the 
r of room 
Lord can 
you this 
ion now? 
be more 
han now? 
n Heaven 
here? Is 
he power, 
the Lord, 
ye! turn 
turn now 
give every 
save you, 


Life. But 


t have new 
it says you 


ON SEEKING AND FINDING THE LORD, 243 
must have new hearts, and must seek Him with your heart. If it 
meant head it would have said so. Seek ye the Lord, therefore, 
with your hearts, and Christ will enter into your hearts and not into 
your heads. Give Christ your whole heart, and He will enter into 
it. If your heart is all right, your head will be also. For out of the 
heart proceeds all evil; let that reservoir of sin be broken up and 
emptied, and all the rest of you will come around right. Is there 
one here to-night who will not cry out, “God be merciful to me, a 
sinner!’’ “Lord, have mercy upon me!” Why not call upon 
Him? Why not seek the Lord now? Why not make up your 
mind that you will not leave the room until the great question of 
eternity has been settled? Don’t put it off until it is too late. 
Don’t neglect salvation. Some people say, “Why, what have I 
done?” I tell you, if you have done nothing but neglect salvation, 
you will go to death and ruin. Look at the man on the river in his 
boat. He is not rowing; he is making no effort; but he has his 
hands folded, and is letting his boat drift down the stream toward 
the rapids. Thecurrent is taking him on without any help from him, 
He will soon go over the rapids into the jaws of death. All he has 
to do is to sit still and be lost. Yes, I tell you, if you don’t actually 
do any sin, yet if you neglect Christ, and neglect salvation as a gift 
from God, you must perish. Salvation is a free gift; conversion 
begins at some particular minute, although the Christian’s life is a 
growth. Many who have attended these meetings have found 
Christ. Two young ladies went home a few evenings ago and 
woke their mother to tell her they had found the Lord. Then 
came the question: “ When can I be saved?” There is only one 
word in God’s book about it, and that word is, “ Now.” If any one 
put it off for a year, he might be dead and damned before that. It 
was a good time to seek Christ in a revival. It’s hard to convert a 
man in a dead church, away from where the Spirit is moving and 
working. 

While we were in Europe, a man came into one of the meetings, 
in the coal region, and when the audience was dismissed he was seen 
to remain, standing against a post. One of the elders approached 
him and asked why he remained. He said he had made up his 
mind not to leave that church until he found the kingdom of God. 
The elder remained with h'm for a long time, and at last the miner 
made his surrender. The next day he went into the coal pit, and 
before night the mine fell in and buried him. He was taken from the 


244 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 
ruins just before life became extinct, and was heard to wade Nie 
a good thing; I settled it last night.” Wasn't a goo ae 
Young lady, what say you? Young man, what ) gi 
When Mr. Sankey and I were in the north of Englan ‘ ' 
preaching one evening, and before me sat a lady who was as F ic, 
When I had finished, I asked all who were greets - hi gris 
Nearly all remained, herself among the number. I aske id d 
was a Christian, and she said she was not, nor did she care : , , 
prayed for her there. On inquiry, I learned that she eos seid ce 
good social position, but very worldly. She eoaeree i . 
the meetings, and in a week after I saw her in tears. sh e 
i sermon I went to her and asked if she was of the apa fe as 
( before. She replied that Christ had come to her an sh : was 
| happy. Last autumn I had a note from her husband ee ae 
dead, that her love for the Master had continually onage ; sa 
I read that note, I felt paid for crossing the Atlantic. _She worke 
sweetly after her conversion, and was the means of petite. so 
of her fashionable friends to Christ. Oh, may you oT e Lor 
while He may be found, and may you call upon Him while you may. 


A FL 


"VE 
fir: 
vel 

about f 
He saw 
Lamb c 
and foll 
seek ye 
and He 
John as 
I thoug 
man and 
“What 
Him jug 
sign. Q 
loaves a 
to-day 
themsel 
will we 4 
think th 
they wil 
soon bet 
had co 
Some o 
or Secre 
not to s¢ 
was one 
wanted 
bore do 
what we 


It was 
thing ? 
think ? 
I was 
keptic. 
‘emain, 
r if she 
y be. I 
lady of 
attend 
fter the 
nind as 
she was 
she was 
When 
worked 
i many 
he Lord 
rou may. 


XXIX. 


A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUGHT HOME, 


MAT. vi. 33: ‘ But seek ye first the kingdom of God.’ 


"VE got two texts to which I want to call your attention. The 
first is in the first chapter of John and part of the thirty-eighth 
verse. It was one day after He had been baptized by John, 

about four o’clock in the afternoon, when, as He was going along, 
He saw John with two of his disciples, and he said, “ Behold the 
Lamb of God.” Those two disciples of John left their own master 
and followed Christ, and He turned round and asked them, “ What 
seek ye?” To which they said, “ Rabbi, where dwellest Thou?” 
and He answered, “Come and see.” These words are recorded by 
John as having been uttered by his Master: ‘“ What scek ye?” and 
I thought I would like this question passed around and have cvery 
man and woman assembled here ask themselves, “ What seek I?’” 
“What brought me here?” In the days of Christ many sought 
Him just fora sign. The Jews were constantly asking Him for a 
sign. Others came just out of sole curiosity. Others came for the 
loaves and fishes, and He accused them of this. There is a class 
to-day who are continually after the loaves and fishes. They ask 
themselves: “ Will it pay us to become a Christian?” “ How much 
will we gain by becoming a disciple of Jesus Christ?” and if they 
think they are going to get a good share of the loaves and fishes 
they will follow Him. But this call doesn’t follow Him long; they 
soon betray Him. Others thought it was a temporal kingdom He 
had come to set up, and that He would put some of them into office. 
Some of them probably thought they would. be made Prime Minister 
or Secretary of State, and as soon as they found that He had come 
not to set up a temporal kingdom, they turned from Him. Judas 
was one of that kind. Others sought Him for temporal aid; they 
wanted to get rid of their burdens and troubles, in this world, which 
bore down upon them. Well, that was a good motive. That is 
what we want people to do. When they once get His aid and com- 
(245) 


SPS Seas ess 


246 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


fort they will never leave Him. Others wanted to entangle Him in 
conversation so that they could get something against Him between 
the chief priests in order to put Him to death and get rid of Him. 
They just wanted to get into a discussion with Him—some of them 
--merely for the sake of discussion; and there are many of this class 
around us to-day. They want, immediately, to get into a discussion 
and investigate who God is, and find out all about Him, and where 
Heaven is. Whenever they saw Him they wanted to get into an 
argument. But how quick He silenced those men. If they asked 
Him one question, His answer made them never ask another. But, 
thank God, there were some who sought God for what He was. 
To-night I would like to ask this assembly—bring it right down 
to you-—“ What brought you here to-night ?”’ That is the question 
I would like to press upon you. “ What brought you here to-night?” 
Let it be a personal question. Let it go to the conscience of every 
one of you here. Now, young lady yonder, “What brought you 
here to-night ?”” Young man over there, “ What brought you to 
the Tabernacle to-night? What is your motive for coming here?” 
It is interesting, sometimes, to hear the young converts get up and 
tell the motives that brought them first to the meetings. I have 
had young converts come to me and say: “ Mr. Moody, I came to 
‘the meeting to make light of it—to make sport of it; but, thank 
ithe Lord, He opened our eyes.” One man told me, in Phila- 
‘delphia, that his motive was to come and see the empty chairs. One 
of his friends had told him that he had been at the hall, and that it 
was the most wonderful sight to see ten thousand empty chairs. So 
he thought he would just come and see this sight, and he was about 
the first man in the building that night. Thank God, he got caught, 
and the Gospel took him. I suppose some here to-night have no 
higher motive for coming. Some think it would be a wonderful 
sight to see so many people gathered together, and have just come 
to see the crowd. They didn’t know anything about the Gospel; 
don’t care anything about the sermon; they have just come to see 
the crowd. Thank God you have, even with that motive, for maybe 
you'll get caught. But what brought you here? Some say, “ My 
mother has been very anxious that I should come here. She has 
been botiicring me for weeks, and I’ve just come. I know she is 
praying for me.” Perhaps some have come owing to the letter of 
some relative or friend. A man told me, last week, that in a letter 
.a young convert in London had asked him to come to these meet- 


ings. 
meeti 
he go 
meeti 
it, anc 
come 
reache 
if we 
come - 
bonne 
good 1 
to you 
those ° 
for tha 
there < 
no oth 
You 
Isaiah ; 
couple 
of God 
unto 
mandt 
and do 
“you'd 
are the 
New 
that is 
if you 
the fac 
God u 
are tra 
and H 
shall b 
that tl 
wonde 
Ifl ha 
that cl 
away, 
thousa 
getting 


Him in 
between 
bof Him. 
of them 
his class 
scussion 
d where 
into an 
ry asked 
rr. But, 
was. 
ht down 
question 
night?” 
of every 
ght you 
f you to 
+ here?” 
t up and 
I have 
camc to 
it, thank 
in Phila- 
rirs. One 
id that it 
1airs, So 
vas about 
t caught, 
have no 
vonderful 
ust come 
> Gospel; 
ne to see 
‘or maybe 
say, “ My 
She has 
ow she is 
letter of 
in a letter 
ese meet: 


A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUGHT HOME, 247 


ings. He said he had determined to receive no blessings from the 
meetings, and he would j 1st come out of curiosity; but, thank God, 
he got caught in the Gospel-net. Even if you have come to the 
meeting with no higher motive than to satisfy a friend, I am glad of 
it, and I hope that God will catch you here to-night. Some have 
come only to hear the singing. We don’t care if they only are 
reached ; we only want to catch men. We would stop preaching 
if we could sing the Gospel down to the hearts of men. Some have 
come for no other motive than to be seen. They have got a new 
bonnet—they want people to see it. You may laugh at this, but a 
good many have come for no other purpose. Let the question come 
to you, to every one here, “What seek ye?” And let me say to 
those who have come to seek the kingdom of God, if you have come 
for that motive, the God of Heaven will be found here. Grant that 
there are hundreds who have come here with no other motive—with 
no other desire—only to be saved. 

You remember me reading a passage from the prophecies of 
Isaiah: “ Seek the Lord while He may be found;” and I want to 
couple it with another in Matthew: “ But seek ye first the kingdom 
of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added 
unto you.” A man asked me the other day: “ How many com- 
mandments are there?” I said I didn’t know. ‘“ You a preacher, 
and don’t know how many commandments there are?” he replied ; 
“you'd better give up preaching till you find out.” ‘“ How many 
are there?’ ‘Why, ten.” “Ah, indeed; just turn over to the 
New Testament, and you will find many more.” I’ve got one here 
that is just as much a commandment as any given by Moses, and 
ifyou go out of this hall without seeking the kingdom of God in 
the face of this commandment, you are trampling the kingdom of 
God under your feet; you are disobeying the voice of God; you 
are trampling this commandment. “Seek first the kingdom of God 
and His righteousness,” and then we are told that “all these things 
shall be added unto you.” A great many people wonder why it is 
that they don’t prosper, and are not blessed in the world. It is no 
wonder to me. The wonder is that God blesses them as He does. 
If 1 had a child in constant rebellion toward me, I wouldn’t want 
that child to prosper until that spirit of rebellion would be swept 
away, because prosperity would ruin him. Look at the tens of 
thousands of men who come up to Chicago only for the purpose of 
getting money —trarm pling this commandment continually under 


2438 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AN.? PRAYERS. 
their feet. Their first consideration is money. God says, “Seek 
first the kingdom of God.” Man says, “The most important thing 
to seek is position, wealth, temporal blessings first, and after I get 
these blessings I will seek the kingdom of God.” “Seek first the 
kingdom of God”—that is what God says—“ and all these things 
shall be added.” Now, I have lived in Chicago most of the last 
twenty years. I came here in 1856, and during those twenty years I 
have been a member of three different churches, and during all that 
time I have not found a member of these churches who has lived a 
consistent Christian life who has ever come to want. Now, mark 
me: I have never. known one Christian man or woman who has 
been a consistent member of the Christian church who has ever come 
to want. I will tell you why so many men come to want. They 
are living in rebellion to God; they have turned their backs to 
God. They are living ignoring Him and His kingdom, not caring 
anything at all for Him. I can imagine some of you saying, “It is 
easy for you, Mr. Moody, to say this. If you had a family in want 
and were out of employment-—had nothing to do—you would talk 
differently ; you would talk about something else.” I would talk 
about nothing of the kind. If I did, I would have to reverse 
God’s word. If there is a young man out of a situation—can not pay 
his board bill, whose outlook is very dark indeed, may be in actual 
want, and struggling against poverty, | say to that young man, 
“Seek first the kingdom of God’’—press into the kingdom of God 
before you do anything else. No one has ever seen a true child of 
God starving in the street; no one ever saw a child of God coming 
to the poor-house. Suppose you did come to the poorhouse. I 
would rather go into the kingdom of Heaven through the poor- 
house than go down to hell in a golden chariot ; I would rather be 
poor and lean in the world’s goods than lose my place in the king- 
dom of Heaven. 

I can imagine some of you saying, “It is all good enough to say 
this; if you were struggling in poverty you would think differently. 
You have no sympathy with us.” If you are in want to-night, my 
friend, I tell you I sympathize with you; I could weep with you. 
But I tell you the first thing to do is to seek the kingdom of God. 
I have known what it was to struggle against poverty, and I ama 
thousand times more in sympathy with that class of people than 
with those who have got abundance. My dear frieuds, “Lis words 
are first to seek the kingdom of God, and “all these things will be 


adde 
ment 
He t 
glory 
of thi 
will t 
of lo 
pros 
mand 
to ge’ 
turne 
went 
have 
Ma 
sympé 
“ Ah, 
the st 
be wit 
opene 
fishes, 
be pra 
neces¢ 
and tl 
aries 
But I 
the re 
a ima 
would 
fish, a 
hand 
want 
come 
No 
plied 
Him ; 
—-as a 
Heav4 
come 
to get 
of Eg 


Seek 
| thing 
r I get 
rst the 
things 
ie last 
years I 
ll that 
lived a 
, mark 
ho has 
r come 
They 
icks to 
caring 
‘eT tis 
n want 
ld talk 
ld talk 
reverse 
not pay 
1 actual 
g man, 
of God 
child of 
coming 
yuse. I 
€ poor- 
ither be 
1c king- 


h to say 
ferently. 
ght, my 
ith you. 
of God. 
dilama 
ple than 
is words 
s will be 


A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUGHT HOME, 249 


added.’ He will provide for you if you only obey His command- 
ment. He will take care of all who put their trust in Him. Don’t 
He take care of the lily? We are told tht Solomon, in all his 
glory, was not arrayed like one of them. Look how He takes care 
of the sparrow; and if you but depend on Him don’t you think He 
will take care of you? If your way is rugged, believe that it is out 
of love to you, so that He will reveal Himself to you. If we are 
prosperous we do not care for His laws; we don’t care for His com- 
mandments. How many men in Chicago for whom I have worked 
to get a situation, the moment they became prosperous they have 
turned around and don’t care for the church or the Bible. They 
went on for a time, but generally came to ruin. How many men 
have been untrue to all those who have helped them up. 

Many of you are doubtless saying, ‘“‘ You are very harsh and un- 
sympathetic.” Some of you young men are, I can imagine, saying, 
“ Ah, you can’t appreciate my position.” My friends, I have walked 
the streets of Boston without a situation, and I know what it is to 
be without money and homeless, and I believe it was that that first 
opened my eyes to the truth. If you won't look to the loaves and 
fishes, and trust in Him, I believe within twenty-four hours you will 
be provided for. I remember a few years ago I used to think it was 
necessary for a man to preach the Gospel with a loaf in one hand 
and the Bible in the other. Dr. Chalmers used to tell the mission- 
aries never to give money at first, and I used to think he was wrong. 
But I have since found that the old Doctor was right. We got up 
the relief society, and we found that whenever we went into a house 
a man would get his eye on the loaves and fishes, and no sooner 
would he be supplied than he would look for another loaf and a 
fish, and so I came to the conclusion that a loaf of bread in one 
hand and the Gospel in the other was not right. If men are in 
want it is because they are not in the kingdom of God. Don’t 
come for the loaves and fishes, but seek Him for what He is. 

Now these two men, when they were asked, “ What seek ye?”’ re- 
plied with a question, “‘ Rabbi, where dwellest Thou?” They took 
Him as a personal Christ. The moment you seek Him in this way 
--as a personal Christ—that moment you will find the fullness of 
Heaven flowing to your soul. You can not get a blessing till you 
come to Christ. When they went down to the kingdom of Egypt 
to get corn, they had to go to Joseph to get it. All the blessings 
of Egypt came through Joseph. He was the channel for all the 


250 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


blessings to flow through. So we can not get blessings until we 
come to Christ—all our blessings must flow through that channel, 
and I have never seen the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging 
bread. If a man be true to God, God will be true to him. Now, 
let me ask you again, What are you really seeking in coming here? 
What is your motive? This audience must have come here seeking 
something. Every man in Chicago is seeking something. Walk 
into the busy thoroughfares—Madison, Clark, or Washington streets 
—all these busy men and women are seeking something. The mo- 
ment a man seeks the kingdom of God with all his might, that mv- 
ment the kingdom of God is set up in his heart. Now, seek first 
that kingdom before anything else. I heard of a man who, when 
dying, told his son—what a blind man that father was—“ James, 
take my advice, and whatever you do, don’t give your time and at- 
tention to religion. I tell you, get established in business, and 
when you are established and comfortable, then you may have time 
to attend to religious matters.” What a blind father to tell his son 
to lay aside the order of Heaven, to lay aside the Word of God. 
The eternal God says, “ First seek the kingdom.” What right had 
the father to tel] his son to seek wealth before the kingdom of God? 
Before he got esiablished in business death might come. Suppose 
when that man had got his wealth, and the Lord had come and said, 
“ To-night thy soul shall be required of thee,” ali his wealth would 
have to be left, and he would go to the judgment without a place in 
God’s kingdom. Refore you get established in business, my friends, 
seek the kingdom of God and His-righteousness. Be obedient, and 
do what He tells you. 

And tet me say here, in seeking the kingdom of God don’t seek 
empty forms. We have a great many people here who are just 
living on empty forms, and that is why they see no living reality in 
the kingdom of Christ. Some have just the form without any pow- 
er. If the kingdom of God is set up in our heart, why, the Gospel 
becomes a fire in our bones, and we have to go and work for it. 
But these men who are living a mere empty form, are like that Ro- 
man soldier, who, upon finding a bag filled with precious diamonds, 
turned the diamonds out and took the bag. So some people here 
are just throwing away the cream of the Gospel and taking the 
empty form. They don’t live in the power of the Gospel, and 
therefore the world is full of struggling men, living on form and not 
on the living Christ. Don’t look to forms, but seek first the king- 


den 

the 

why 

in p 

eter 

up t 

T 

“ De 

talke 

not | 
alon 
her, 
supp 
more 
Scot 
be sa 
befor 
say SI 
so,” \ 
little 
to pu 
off at 
afforc 
said, 
there 
her h 
after 
found 
that 
one 
whose 
tries { 
care 
your 
he is 
Youn 
excus 
do,a 
cf on 
first d 


til we 
unnel, 
gging 
Now, 
here? 
eking 
Walk 
streets 
e mo- 
at mou- 
k first 
, when 
James, 
ind at- 
ss, and 
ye time 
his son 
yf God. 
ht had 
if God? 
suppose 
nd said, 
would 
place in 
friends, 
bnt, and 


’t seek 
re just 
ality in 
y pow- 
Gospel 

for it. 
hat Ro- 
monds, 
ble here 
ing the 
spel, and 
and not 
he king- 


A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUSHT HOME, 251 
dem of God. And you can not wait till I get through this sermon; 
the command is to seek the kingdom of God now. Young man, 
why not seek it now, where you sit? Let your soul go out to God 
in prayer; let your soul cry, “God save me now! Bless me with 
eternal life. Set up Thy kingdom in my heart.” Let that cry go 
up to Heaven and He will come. 

There is a story of Dr. Chalmers. A lady came to him and said, 
“Doctor, I can not bring my child to Christ. I’ve talked, and 
talked, and talked, but it’s no use.” The doctor thought she had 
not much skill, and said, ‘‘ Now you be quiet, and I will talk to her 
alone.” When the doctor got the Scotch lassie alone he said to 
her, ‘‘ They are bothering you a great deal with this question; now 
suppose I just tell your mother you don’t want to be talked to any 
more upon this subject for a year. How will that do?” Well, the 

Scotch lassie hesitated a little, and then said she “ didn’t think it would 
be safe to wait fora year. Something might turn up. She might die 
before then.” “ Well, that’s so,” replied the doctor; ‘“ but suppose we 
say six months.” She didn’t even think this would be safe. “ That’s 
so,” was the doctor’s reply; “ well, let’s say three months.” Aftera 
little hesitation, the gir! finally said, “I don’t think it would be safe 
to put it off for three months—don’t think it would be safe to put it 
off at all,” and they went down on their knees and found it. Can you 
afford to put it off for one night? A minister in the South once 

said, while addressing a meeting, “ Look around this audience; is 

there one here who dares to take the risk?” A young lady took 
her hymn-book and wrote on it, “I will take that risk.” Two weeks 
after she was a corpse. The hymn-book was found, and this was 
found on it. Can you say, “I will put it off; I can afford to take 
that risk?’’ Ask every true friend you have on this earth—every 
one who loves you—what you should do; not a professed friend 
whose love is not very deep, but a sincere one. Any man who 
tries to stand between you and God is your worst enemy. I don’t 
care who he is. He may be a dearly-loved relative—he may be 
your father. If he interferes between you and the kingdom of God, 
he is your worst enemy. Take a friend who really loves you. 

Young man, perhaps you are sitting beside your mother; I will 

excuse you whispering to that mother. Just ask her what you will 

do, and I venture to say that the reply of ninety-nine mothers out 
cf one hundred will be: “ My son, seek first the kingdom of God ; 
first do ‘-vhat God tells you.” If I could ask Jesus, who sits at the 


252 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


right hand of God—if I could just say: “ Lord Jesus, speak to this 
audience in the Tabernacle to-night; just tell them what to do.” 
Don’t you hear the voice coming away down from Heaven this 
very moment, “Seek first the kingdom of God?” If I could ask 
those redeemed saints up yonder—perhaps one of them is a loved 
mother looking at her boy here—and I say, “Your boy is in the 
gallery yonder—mother, mother, what shall I tell him ?’—‘ First 
seck the kingdom of God.’” If the redeemed saints could speak 
back to earth from that world, their cry would be, “ Seek first the 
kingdom of God.” Iwill go further. If I could go down to the 
spirits of the damned and put’this question, a wail would come up, 
“Tell them to seek first the kingdom of God. Go to my home and 
tell my five brothers not to come to this place of torment. Go and 
tell them to seek and be saved.’”’ Heaven and hell would all unite 
in telling you to forego everything until you have found the king- 
dom. Will you say, “I will seek the kingdom of God first?” or 
will you say, “I will go out of this building without seeking it?” 
Do you say you have a darling sin which you would rather indulge 
than seek the kingdom? If you are a drunkard, would you rather 
have the bottle than the kingdom? If you are a gambler, would 
you rather waste your time in gaming than seek it? If you area 


libertine, would you rather spend your life in lasciviousness than look 


1o your eternal happiness? If you would, go on. You area free 
agent. You can choose life or death. I set before you life and 
death, Heaven and hell. Go, seek the kingdom, if you would 
have life—press into it. You can do it if you will. When that 
niill fell in at Lawrence, the superintendent told me that three girls 
were confined in a little room, and escape :or them was impossible, 
The citizens gathered round, but could not get them out. The 
flames were gradually gaining upon their place of captivity, but 
rescue was impossible. The friends kept bringing them coffee and 
tea, to make their last hours as pleasant as they could. When they 
saw their end approaching they commenced to sing that beautiful 
hymn, “ My Heavenly Home is Bright and Fair;” and when they 
came to the last verse : 
“Let others seek a home below 
Where flames destroy and waves o’erflow 


Be nine the happier lot to own 
A heavenly mansion near the throne.” 


These were the !ast words heard from them. By the grace of 


Goc 
plac 
a pl 
of L 
that 
—th 


this 1 
to it. 
mone 
king 
nothi 
and \ 
text, 
down 
folloy 
him. 
he <q 
that 
he hq 
dom 
motl 
wealt 
few 

third 
drow 
mind 
and 

died, 
said 

chee] 
heart 
unde 
to Bd 
Was ¢ 


» this 
do.” 
this 

l ask 
oved 

1 the 
First 

speak 

st the 

o the 

ne up, 

e and 

fo and 

unite 
king- 
fr of 
ei Se 
idulge 
rather 
would 
1area 

n look 

a free 
fe and 
would 

n that 

ee girls 

ossible, 

The 
ty, but 
fee and 

n they 

sautiful 

on they 


race of 


A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUGHT HOME, 253 


God I mean to go to the kingdom of God. I would rather have a 
place in the kingdom of God than all Chicago. I would rather have 
a place in the kingdom of God—have my name written in the Book 
of Life, and know that I am an heir of Christ; I would rather know 
that by and by I am sure of entering into those heavenly mansions 
—than have all the wealth of Chicago rolled at my feet. You who 
are seeking fame, position, wealth, get a hope of salvation; it is 
worth all the world. 

Let me tell, in closing, an incident. When I was a young boy— 
before I was a Christian—I was in a field, one day, with a man who 
was hocing. He was weeping, and he told mea strange story, which 
I have never forgotten. When he left home his mother gave him 
this text: “Seek first the kingdom of God.” But he paid no heed 
to it. He said when he got settled in life, and his ambition to get 
money was gratified, it would be time enough then to seek the 
kingdom of God. He went from one village to another and got 
nothing to do. When Sunday came he went into a village church, 
and what was his great surprise to hear the minister give out the 
text, “Seek first the kingdom of God.” He said the text went 
down to his heart. He thought that it was but his mother’s prayer 
following him. Some one must have written to taat minister about 
him. He felt very uncomfortable, and when the meeting was over 
he could not get that sermon out of his mind. He went away from 
that town, and at the end of a week went into another church and 
he heard the minister give out the same text, ‘Seek first the king- 
dom of God.” He felt sure this time that it was the prayer of his 
mother, but he said calmly and deliberatel,, “No, I wil! first get 
wealthy.” He said he went on and did not go into a church for a 
few months, but the first place of worship he went into he heard a 
third minister preaching a sermon from the same text. He tried to 
drown, to stifle his feelings; tried to get the sermon out of his 
mind, and resolved that he would keep away from church altogether, 
and for a few years did keep out of God’s house. ‘My mother 
died,” he said, “and the text kept coming up in my mind, and I 
said I will try to become a Christian.” The tears rolled down his 
cheeks as he said, “I could not; no sermon ever touches me; my 
heart is as hard as that stone,” pointing to one in the field. I couldn’t 
understand what it was all about—it was fresh to me then. I went 
to Boston and got converted, and the first thought that came to me 
was about this man. When I got back I asked my mother, “Is Mr. 


254 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


L living in sucha place?” “ Didn’t I write to you about him?” 
she asked. “They have taken him to an insane asylum, and every 
one who goes up there he points with his finger up there and tells 
him to ‘Seek first the kingdom of God.’” There was that man with 
his eyes dull with the loss of reason, but the text had sunk into his 
soul—it had burned down deep. Oh, may the Spirit of God burn 
the text into your hearts to-night. When I got home again my 
mother told me he was in her house, and I went tosee him. Found 
him in a rocking-chair, with that vacant, idiotic look upon him. 
Whenever he saw me he point.d 2t me, and said, “ Young man, 


seule first the kingdom «! Go. + eason was gone, but the text 
was there. When I was °s,.»° my brother down in his grave I 
could not help thinking o! ‘ia: poor man who was lying so near 


him, and wishing that the prayer o! \::s; mother had been heard, and 
that he had found the kingdom of God. 

Young man, young woman, won’t you seek the kingdom of God 
when He tells you to? May every man and woman assembled here 
seek the kincdom of God. 


| 


ing u 
pente 
good: 
have 
much 
came 
repen 
the L 
“The 
talk a 
ing, “cc 
He td 
God t 
they 
pent, 
preac] 
was, ‘ 
clearly 
of tre 
ask p 
youa 
feel s¢ 
more 
forsak 
Isaia 
tighte 
turn 


m?” 


very 
tells 
with 
o his XX X. 
burn e 
ee / REPENTANCE. 
ped Ac?rs xvii, 30 ‘‘ But now commandeth all men everywhere to repent.” 
an, 
> text HAVE heard a number of complaints about the preaching here 
ave I in th- Tabernacle, that repentance has not been touched upon. 
) near The fac: is, that I have never had very great success in preach- 
d, and ing upon repentance. When I have preached it, people haven't re- 
pented. I’v2 had far more success when I’ve preached |. “rist’s 
f God goodness. ‘3ut to-night I will preach about repentance, so you ill 
d here have no more cause of complaint. I believe in repentar. > ju. as 


much as I believe in the Word of God. When John °.. i ’aptist 
came to preach to that Jewish nation, his one cry was, ‘.epent! 
repent!”’ But when Christ came He changed it to “'! «> blood of 
the Lamb taketh away the sin of the world.” I woula rather cry, 
“The blood of the Lamb taketh away the sin of the world” than 
talk about repentance. And when Christ came we find Him say- 
ing, ‘“ Repent ye,” but He soon pointed them to something higher-- 
He told them about the goodness of God. It is the goodness of 
God that produces repentance. When, upon the day of Pentecost, 
they asked what to do to be saved, we find Him telling men, “ Re- 
pent, every one of you.” When Christ sent His disciples out to 
preach, two by two, we find the message He gave them to deliver 
was, ‘Repent ye, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand.” It is 
clearly preached throughout the Scriptures. There is a great deal 
of trouble among people about what repentance really is. If you 
ask people what it is, they will tell you, “It is feeling sorry.” If 
you ask a man if he repents, he will tell you, “Oh, yes; I generally 
feel sorry for my sins.” That is not repentance. It is something 
more than feeling sorry. Repentance is turning right about and 
forsaking sin. I wanted to speak on Sunday about that verse in 
Isaiah, which says, “ Let the wicked forsake his way, and the un- 
righteous man his thoughts.” That is what it is. If a man don’t 
turn from h's sir he won’t be accepted of God; and if righteous- 
(255) 


256 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


i | / ’ . ‘ 
| ness don’t produce a turning about—a turning from bad to good— and st 


it isn’t true righteousness. “Joh 

Unconverted people have got an idea that God is their enemy. mone} 

Now, let me impress this: God hates sin with a perfect hatred; He appare 

will punish sin wherever He finds it, yet He at the same time loves consci 

the sinner, and wants him to repent and turn to Him. If men will unless 

only turn, they will find mercy, and find it just the moment they he say: 

turn to Him. You will find men sorry for their misdeeds. Cain, The m 

no doubt, was sorry, but that was not true repentance. There is no he has 

‘ cry recorded in the Scriptures as coming from him, “O my God, O with ¢ 
: my God, forgive me.” There was no repentance in his only feeling His co 
5 sorry. Look at Judas, There is no sign that he turned to God— sine ha 
) no sign that he came to Christ asking forgiveness. Yet, probably, will rer 
he felt sorry. He was, very likely, filled with remorse and despair ; God, fo 

but he didn’t repent. Repentance is turning to Him who loved us out of 

and gave Himself for us. Took at King Saul, and see the differ- sin tha 
ence between him and King David. David fell as low as Saul, and “it's ye 
a good deal lower-—he fell from a higher pinnacle; but what was the forgives 
difference between the two? David turned back to God and con- Men ar 
fessed his sin and got forgiven. But look at King Saul. There was Ged. £ 

no repentance there, and God couldn’t save him till he repented. can not 


£ You will find all through the Scriptures where men have repented, don't 
zz. God has forgiven them. Look at that publican when he went up inede 
i to pray; he felt his sin so great that he couldn’t look up to Heaven ag ei 
fi —all he could do was to smite his heart and cry, “God forgive me, can lay 

| a sinner.” There was turning to God—repentance, and that man hawde. 
went down to his home forgiven. Look at that prodigal. His Roan ae 


father couldn’t forgive him while he was still in a foreign land and S Keekio 
squandering his money in riotous living; but the moment he came but so 


home repentant, how soon that father forgave him—how quick he would 1 
came to meet him with the word of forgiveness. It wouldn’t have ing his 
done any good to forgive the boy while he was in that foreign coun- he eens 
try unrepentant. He would have despised all favors and blessings coe 


from his father. That is the position the sinner stands in toward Wag few 

God. He can not be forgiven and get His blessing until he comes +e forgii 
to God repenting of all his sins and asking the blessing. fromy +h 

Now, we read in Scripture that God deals with us as a father Heaven 


\ 
i deals with a son. Fathers and mothers, you who have children, let tear the 
j me ask, by way of illustration, Suppose you go home, and find that kingdon 
| 
i 


while you have been here your boy has gone to your private drawer “Ah? 
’ 


od—- 


lemy. 
: He 
loves 
n will 
they 
Cain, 
-is no 
od, O 
ecling 
30d— 
bably, 
sspair ; 
ved us 
differ- 
ul, and 
yas the 
d con- 
re was 
pented. 
yented, 
ent up 
eaven 
ive me, 
at man 
| 3 3 
nd and 
e came 
ick he 
n't have 
n coun- 
lessings 
toward 
e comes 


a father 
tren, let 
nd that 
b drawe! 


REPENTANCE, 257 
and stolen five dollars of your money. You go to him and say: 
“John, did you take that money?” ‘“ Yes, father, I took that 
money,’ he replies. When you hear him saying this without any 
apparent regret you won't forgive him. You want to get at his 
conscience; you know it would do him an injury to forgive him 
unless he confesses his wrong. Suppose he won't do it. “ Yes,” 
he says, “I stole your money, but I don't think I’ve done wrong.” 
The mother can not, the father can not forgive him unless he sees 
he has done wrong, and wants forgiveness. That's the trouble 
with the sinners in Chicago. They've turned against God, broken 
His commandments, trampled His law under their feet, and their 
sins hang upon them; until they show signs of repentance their sin 
will remain. But the moment they see their iniquity and come to 
God, forgiveness will be given them and their iniquity will be taken 
out of their way. Said a person to me the other day, “ It is my 
sin that stands between me and Christ.” ‘It isn’t,” I replied, 
“it's your own will.” That’s what stands between the sinner and 
forgiveness. Christ will take all your iniquitiecs away if you will. 
Men are so proud that they won’t acknowledge and cor.fess before 
God. Don’t you see on the face of it, if your boy won’t repent, yor 
can not forgive him ? and how is God going to forgive a sinner if he 
don’t repent? If He was allowing an unrepentant sinner into His 
kingdom there would be war in Heaven in twenty-four hours. 
You can not live in a house with a boy who steals everything he 
can lay his hands on. You would have to banish him from your 
house. Look at King David with his son, Absalom. After he had 
been sent away he got his friends to intercede for him to get him 
back to Jerusalem. They succeeded in getting him back to the city, 
but some one told the king that he hadn’t repented, and his father 
would not see him. After he had been in Jerusalem some time, try- 
ing his best to get into favor and position again without repentance, 
he sent a friend, Joab, to the king, and told him to say to his father: 
“Examine me, and if you find no iniquity in me, take me in.” He 
was forgiven, but the most foolish thing King David ever did was 
to forgive that young prince. What was the result? He drove him 
from the throne. That’s what the sinner would do if he got into 
Heaven unrepentant. He would just drive God from the throne— 
tear the crown from Him. No unrepentant sinner can get into the 
kingdom of Heaven. 

“Ah,” some people say, “I believe in the mercy of God ;. I. don’t 


17 


a ee = 


~ 


— Sms = ae = a saumaincs ~. 
Pes ear ete Sane 2 


TSTRESs 


ea 


Se 


eS te 


258 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 
believe God will allow one to perish; I believe every one will get 
to Heaven.” Look at those antediluvians. Do you think He swept 
all those sinners, all those men and women who were too wicked to 
live on earth—do you believe He swept them all into Heaven, and 
left the only righteous man to wade through the flood? Do you 
think He would do this? and yet many men believe all will gu into 
Heaven. The day will come when you will wake up and know that 
you have been deceived by the devil. No unrepentant sinner will 
ever get into Heaven; unless they forsake their sin they can not 
enter there. The Law of God is very plain on this point : “ Except 
aman repent.” That's the language of Scripture. And when this 
is so plainly set down, why is it that men fold their arms and say, 
“God will take me into Heaven, anyway?” Suppose a Governor, 
elected to-day, comes into office in a few months and he finds a 
great number of criminals in prison, and he goes and says, “I feel 
for those prisoners; they can not stay in jail any longer ;” suppose 
some murders have been committed, and he says, “I am tender- 
hearted, I can’t punish those men,” and he opens the prison door 
and lets them all out—how long would that Governor be in his 
position? These very men who are depending on the mercy of God 
would be the first to raise their voice against that Governor. These 
‘men would say, “These murderers must be punished, or society will 
ibe imperiled ; life will not be safe,” and yet they believe in the 
mercy of God, whether they repent or not. My dear friends, don't 
go on under that delusion; it is a snare of the devil. I tell you, the 
Word of God is true, and it tells us, “ Except a man repent ” there 
‘is not one ray of hope held out. May the Spirit of God open your 
eyes to-night and show you the truth—let it go into your hearts. 
Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous his thoughts. 
Now, my friends, repentance is not fear. A great many people 
say I don’t preach up the terrors of religion. I don’t want to— 
don’t want to scare men into the kingdom of God. I don’t believe 
in preaching that way. If I did get some in that way they would 
soon get out. If I wanted to scare men into Heaven I would just 
hold the terror of hell over their heads and say, “Go right in.” 
But that is not the way to win men. They don’t have any slaves 
‘in Heaven; they are all sons, and they must accept salvation volun- 
‘tarily. Terrornever brought a man in yet. Lookat a vessel tossed 
mpon the billows, and sailors think it is going to the bottom and 
death isupon them. They fall down on their knees, and you would 


thinl 
scare 
over, 
terro 
habit 
thou 
resol 
mom 
was ¢ 
is one 
Holy 
the F 
lost ¢c 
If | 
you e 
can in 
of.” 
mon \ 
could 
those 
I certi 
find a 
estly ? 
last t 
repent 
are so 
from ( 
there 
I nee 
men s 
those 
one, y 
anothe 
Ama 
who h 
pentar 
hope. 
Don't 
I hear 
him if 


will get 
le swept 
icked to 
ven, and 
Do you 
| gu into 
10w that 
nrier will 
can not 
“ Except 
‘hen this 
and say, 
sovernor, 
» finds a 
» “I feel 
suppose 
1 tender- 
son door 
be in his 
cy of God 
These 
ciety will 
e in the 
ids, don’t 
1 you, the 
t”’ there 
pen your 
ir hearts. 
oughts. 
1y people 
vant to— 
’t believe 
1ey would 
rould just 
right in.” 
any slaves 
ion volun- 
ssel tossed 
ttom and 
you would 


REPENTANCE, 259 


think they were all converted. They ain't converted, they’re only 
scared, There’s no repentance there, and as soon as the storm is 
over, and they get on shore, they are the same as ever. All their 
terror has left them—they've forgotten it, and they fall into their old 
habits. How many men have, while lying on a sick bed, and they 
thought they saw the terrors of death gathering around them, made 
resolutions to live a new life if they only get well again, but the 
moment they get better they forget all about their resolutions. It 
was only a scare with them; that’s not what we want to feel. Fear 
is one thing, and repentance is another. True repentance is the 
Holy Ghost showing sinners their sin. That’s what we want. May 
the Holy Ghost reveal to each one here to-night out of Christ their 
lost condition unless they repent. 

If God threw Adam out of Eden on account of one sin, how can 
you expect to get into the heavenly paradise with ten thousand? I 
can imagine some one saying, “I haven't got anything to repent 
of.” If you are one of those Pharisees, I can tell you that this ser- 
mon will not reach your heart. I would like to find one man who 
could come up here and say, “I have no sin.” If I was one of 
those who thought I had no sin to repent of, I’d never go to church; 
I certainly would not come up to the Tabernacle. But could you 
find a man walking the streets of Chicago who could say this hon- 
estly? I don’t believe there’s a day passed over my head the 
last twenty years but when night came I found I had some sin to 
repent of. It is impossible for a man to live without sinning, there 
are so many things to draw away the heart and affections of men 
from God. I feel as if I ought to be repenting all the time. Is 
there a man here who can say honestly, “I have not got a sin that 
I need ask forgiveness for. I haven’t one thing to repent of?” Some 
men seem to think that God has got ten different laws for each of 
those ten commandments; but if you have been guilty of breaking 
one, you are guilty of breaking all. Ifa man steals five dollars, and 
another steals five hundred, the one is as guilty of theft as the other. 
A man who has bre <en one commandment of God is as guilty as he 
who has broken ten. If a man don’t feel this, and come to Him re- 
pentant and turn his face from sin toward God, there is not a ray of 
hope. Nowhere can you find one ray from Genesis to Revelation. 
Don’t go out of this Tabernacle saying, “I have nothing to repent.” 
I heard of a man who said he had been converted. A friend asked 
him if he had repented. “No,” said he, “I never troubled my 


RE TMG aS SR oe 


aan ee es 


t= 


DD Saas nae me oat = 


260 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


head about it.” My friends, when a man becomes converted, the 
work has to bea little deeper than that. He has to become re. 
pentant, and try to atone for what he has done. If he is at war with 
any one, he has to go and be reconciled to his enemy. If he doesn't, 
his conversion is the work of Satan. When a man turns to God he 
is made a new creature—a new man. His impulses, all the time, 
are guided by love. He loves his enemies, and tries to repair all 
wrong he has done. This is a true sign of conversion. If this sign 
is not apparent, his conversion has never got from his head to his 
heart. We must be born of the Spirit, hearts must be regenerated 
—-born again. When a man repents and turns to the God of Heaven, 
then the work is deep and thorough. I hope that every one will sce 
the necessity of true repentance when they come to God for a bless- 
ing, and may the Spirit move you to ask it now. 

I can imagine some of you saying, ‘“‘ How am I to repent?” My 
friends, there are only two parties in the world. There has been a 
great political contest here to-day, and there have been two sides. 
We wii! not know before forty-eight hours which side has triumphed. 
There is great interest now to know which side has been the 
stronger. Now, there are two parties in this world —those for 
Christ and those against Him; and to change to Christ’s party is 
only moving from the old party to the new. You know that the 
old party is bad, and the new one is good, and yet you don't 
change. Suppose I was called to New York, and went down to the 
Illinois Central Depot to catch the ten o'clock train. I go on the 
train, and a friend should see me and say, “ You are on the wrong 
train for New York. You are on the Burlington train.” “Oh, no,” 
I say, “you are wrong; I asked some one and he told me this was 
the right train.” “Why,” this friend replies, “ I’ve been in Chicago 
for twenty years, and know that you are on the wrong train,” and 
the man talks, and at last convinces me, but I sit still, although | 
believe I am in the wrong train for New York, and I go on to Bur- 
lington. If you don’t get off the wrong train and get on the right 
one you will not reach Heaven. If you have not repented, seizc 
your baggage and go to the other train. 

If aman is not repentant his face is turned away from God, and 
the moment his face is turned toward God, peace and joy follow. 
There are a great many people hunting after joy, after peace. Dear 
friends, if you want to find it to-night, just turn to God, and you 
will get it. You need not hunt for it any longer; only come and 


get it 
shado 
memk 
see Wl 
to be 
and sa 
the wz 
joy wi 
these | 
all the 
in you 
only y 
My | 
naught 
and ash 
“Tf you 
It was. 
boy dic 
undress 
noon e3 
see’ hit 
Sohe y 
“Sam 
answer 
induce 
pecting 
have g 
found tl 
went to 
no use. 
father a 
every m 
Now th 
just as 
through 


“Now, ; 
turned ] 
home a 
though H 
boy that 


d, the 
ne re- 
yr with 
oesn t, 
rod he 
time, 
air all 
is sign 
to his 
erated 
[eaven, 
vill see 
a bless- 
” My 
been a 
o sides. 
mphed, 
een the 
nose for 
party is 
hat the 
bu don't 
n to the 
lo on the 
e wrong 
hy 10; 
this was 
Chicago 
hin,” and 
hough | 
h to Bur- 
the right 
ed, seize 


od, and 
by follow. 
ce, Dear 
and you 
rome and 


REPENTANCE. 261 


get it. When I was a little boy I remember I tried to catch my 
shadow. I don’t know if any of you were ever foolish; but I re- 
member running after it and trying to get ahead of it. I could not 
see why the shadow always kept ahead of me. Once I happened 
to be racing with my face to the sun, and I looked over my head 
and saw my shadow coming back of me, and it kept behind me all 
the way. It is the same with the Sun of Righteousness—peace and 
joy will go with you while you go with your face toward Him, and 
these people who are getting at the back of the Son are in darkness 
all the time. Turn to the light of God and the reflection will flash 
in your heart. Don’t say that God will not forgive you. It is 
only your will which keeps His forgiveness from you. 

My sister, I remember, told me her little boy said something 
naughty one morning, when his father said to him, “ Sammy, go 
and ask your mother’s forgiveness.” ‘I won't,” replied the child. 
“If you don’t ask your mother’s forgiveness I'll put you to bed.” 
It was early in the morning—-before he went to business, and the 
boy didn’t think he would do it. He said “I won’t” again. They 
undressed him and put him to bed. The father came home at 
noon expecting to find his boy playing about the house. He didn’t 
see him about, and asked his wife where he was. ‘In bed still.” 
Sohe went up to the room, and sat down by the bed, and said: 
“Sammy, I want you to ask your mother’s forgiveness.” But the 
answer was “ No.” The father coaxed and begged, but could not 
induce the child to ask forgiveness. The father went away, ex- 
pecting certainly that when he came home at night the chila ‘vould 
have got all over it. At night, however, when he got home he 
found the little fellow stili in bed. He had lain there all day. He 
went to him and tried to get him to come to his mother, but it was 
no use. His mother went, and was equally unsuccessful. That 
father and mother could not sleep any that night. They expected 
every moment to hear the knock at their door by their little son. 
Now they wanted to forgive the boy. My sister told me it was 
just as if death had come into their home. She never passed 
through such a night. In the morning she went to him and said: 
“Now, Sammy, you are going to ask my forgiveness,” but the boy 
turned his face to the wall and wouldn’t speak. The father came 
home at noon and the boy was as stubborn as ever. It looked as 
though the child was going to conquer. It was for the good of the 
boy that they didn't want to give him his own way. It is a great 


262 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


deal better for us to submit to God than have our +n way. Our 
own way will lead us to ruin; God’s way leads to life everlasting, 
The father went off to his office, and that afternoon my sister went 
in to her son about four o'clock and began to reason with him, and 
after talking for some time, she said, “ Now, Sammy, say ‘ mother.’” 
“Mother,” said the boy. “ Now say ‘for.’” “ For.” “ Now just 
say ‘give.’” And the boy repeated “give.” ‘ Me,” said the 
mother. “Me,” and the little fellow fairly leaped out of bed. “J 
have said it,” he cried ; “take me down to papa so that I can say it 
to him.” Oh, sinner, go to Him and ask His forgiveness. This 
is repentance. It is coming in with a broken heart and asking the 
King of Heaven to forgive you. Don’t say you can’t. It isa lie, 
it is your stubborn will—it is your stubborn heart. 

Now let me say here to-night you are in a position to be recon- 
ciled toGod now. You are not in a position to delay this reconcili- 
ation a week, a day, an hour. God tells you now. Look at that 
beautiful steamer A¢/antic. There she is in the bay groping her 
way along arocky coast. The captain don’t know, as his vessel 
plows through that ocean, that in a few moments it will strike 
a rock and hundreds of those on board will perish in a watery 
grave. If he knew, in a minute he could strike a bell and the 
steamer would be turned from that rock and the people would be 
saved. The vessel has struck, but he knows now too late. You 
have time now. In five minutes, for all you and I know, you 
may be in eternity. God hangs a mist over our eyes as to our 
summons. So now God calls—now every one repent, and al! your 
sins will be taken from you. I have come in the name of the 
Master to ask you to turn to God now. May God help you to turn 
and live. 


many 
saves 


N 


to mz 
becat 
make 
ina fi 
l rem 
of En 
got th 
was Cc 
only 
to me 
d’ ye: 
could 
I'm nq 
would 
elever 
David 
offers 
Him t 
gave | 
che we 


as oul 
Savio 
Savio 
Savio 
takes 


Our 
lasting. 
or went 
im, and 


yop 


other. 
ow just 
aid the 
ed. se | 
in say it 
s. This 
king the 


t is a lie. 


Ye recon- 
reconcili- 
; at that 
yping her 
iis vessel 
‘ill strike 
a watery 
l and the 
would be 
ite. You 
now, you 
as to our 
d all your 
me of the 
ou to turn 


XXXLI. 


WHAT CHRIST IS TO US. 


OW Iam not going to take a text. I am going to take a sub- 
N ject, and that subject will be, “ What Christ is to us;” and 
if you say when I get through that Christ is not what I try 

to make Him out to be, it will be your own fault and no one else’s, 
because He is a thousand times more to every soul here than I can 
make Him out to be to-night. A man can not tell what Christ is 
in a few moments—can not begin to express what Christ is to us, 
lremember talking on the same subject at a meeting in the north 
of England. I felt that I had not said enough about Him when I 
got through. When I went home I went with a Scotchman, and I 
was complaining and groaning over the meeting, and told him I had 
only got half through with my subject, when the Scotchman turned 
to me and said, “ Ye dinna expect to tell a’ aboot Christ in one hour, 
dye? Why, ’twould tak a’ eternity to do it, man.” I thought I 
could gct through in an hour; but, my friends, it can not be done. 
I'm not going to talk to you an hour to-night, however, and now I 
would like to call your attention to the second chapter of Luke, 
eleventh verse: “For unto you is born this day in the city of 
David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.” That’s what Christ 
offers to be to every soul that comes into this world. God gives 
Him to the world. “Unto you is born this day a Saviour.” God 
gave Him to free us from our sins; that is what Christ came into 
the world todo. To get Him we must first meet Him at Calvary 
as our Jesus, our Purifier, our Sanctification, our Redemption, our 
Saviour. We must first pass Calvary before we can see Him as our 
Saviour. And He wants you to come there—He wants to be a 
Saviour to every soul in Chicago. He is not only a Saviour who 
takes us from the pit of hell, but He delivers us from sin. A great 
many people have a wrong idea of Christ. They think He only 
saves us from hell, but He keeps us from sin day by day. God 

(263) 


ane ee ae 


SRE MRR mere pee. 0s. 


264 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


knew a great deal better what the world needed than ourselves, 
Therefore, He gave us Christ, not only to save us from death, but to 
free us from sin. He is not only a Saviour; He is a Redeemer. 
Redemption is more real than salvation. I asked a man some time 
ago why he thought so much about a certain man. I noticed that 
he could not speak of him but tears came into his eyes, and so I 
asked him, “ Why is it that you love that man as youdo?” “Why, 
Mr. Moody,” he said, “that man saved me.” He told me in confi- 
dence how he got involved; how he took what did not belong to 
him, thinking he could replace it ina few weeks; but when the time 
came, found he could not. In aweek or two exposures would come 
and it would be sure ruin to him, wife, and family. How he went 
to a friend and poured out his heart, and how that friend advanced 
him the money and paid the debt, and he added, “I would be will- 
ing to lay down my life for that friend. He saved me.” It was 
out of gratitude to that man that he was willing to give his life for 
him. When we appreciate what redemption is, and what Christ 
has done for us, we are willing to lay down our life for Him—sacri- 
fice everything for His sake. 

Redemption is more. It is buying back, for we are told in Gal- 
atians, ‘He hath redeemed us from the curse.” The curse of the 
law rests upon every son of Adam—‘“ He hath redeemed us from 
the curse of the law.” Redemption is buying back. He has bought 
us back from the sentence of justice. We belong to Him—“ He 
hath redeemed us by His blood.” I remember, I was going from 
my home to preach in a neighboring village. My brother was with 
me, and I saw a young man driving before us. I said to my brother, 
“ Who is that young man? I’ve never seen him before.”” “ Do you 
see that farm, those beautiful buildings; do you see all! these fields, 
and the pasture? That is his farm. His father was a drunkard and 
squandered his money, buried his home in debt, and died. His 
mother had to go to the poor-house. That young man went away, 
earned money, came back, and redeemed the farin and took his aged 
mother from the poor-house ; and he is looked upon as one of the 
noblest young men in the country.” That’s what Christ is doing 
for us. Adam sold us very cheap, and Christ comes and redeems us 
—does it without any cost. He is more than a Saviour and a 
Redcemer—he is a Deliverer. A great many people go to Calvary 
and believe Tie is their Redecmer, but they forget that He came to 
deli,c: ys trom all temptation, from all appetite, and from all lust. 


Now, 
Gosh 
heard 
his cl 
the G 
Mose: 
peopl 
whats 
will di 
In 1 
not th 
there. 
them i 
look a 
to tan 
They t 
his gar 
everyb 
men he 
he was, 
country 
him; 


deliver 


countr 


to see \ 
their sv 
than th 
see wh 
to sav 


They c: 
man sif 
When t 
Saviou 
him. | 
this ma 
go I wil 
friends 
started 
came th 
saw hin 


selves, 
but to 
>emer. 
e time 
d that 
1 so I 
‘Why, 
. confi- 
ong to 
1e time 
d come 
ie went 
vanced 
be will- 
lt was 
; life for 
t Christ 
I—-sacri- 


1 in Gal- 
e of the 
us from 
; bought 
m—“ He 
ng from 
vas with 
brother, 
K Do you 
se fields, 
kard and 
‘d. His 
ht away, 
his aged 
ne of the 
is doing 
deems us 
ur and a 
Calvary 
e came to 
m all lust. 


WHAT CHRIST IS TO US, 265 


Now, when God put the children of Israel behind the blood at 
Goshen, they were safe. When they came to the Ked Sea, and they 
heard the King of Egypt with his mighty army, his horsemen, and 
his chariots come rolling on to their destruction, it was then that 
the God of Heaven showed His power as a Deliverer. He said to 
Moses, “Stretch out thy rod,” and the sea opened and His chosen 
people passed over in safety. God is a deliverer to all His children, 
whatsoever you may be. He is a great Physician to us all, and He 
will deliver you from all your difficulties. 

In the fifth chapter of Mark, we see Him as a Deliverer. I do 
not think God ever found harder cases in Chicago than those were 
there. We have got hospitals for the incurables, and if they had had 
them in those days, these cases would have been put there. First, 
look at that man who had his dwelling in the tombs. They tried 
to tame him, but he snapped the chains as Samson did the pillars. 
They tried to bind him, they tried to keep him clothed, but he tore 
his garments into shreds. There he was, a wild man, <nd a terror to 
everybody. The children were afraid of him, and the women and 
men hearing his cries at night, dreaded to go near that spot. There 
he was, a slave of the devils. But Christ came to that part of the 
country. Sce how they tried to chain him, to bind him, to tame 
him; but they all failed. But Christ came and with one word 
delivered him. One word, and these devils forsook him. And his 
countrymen hearing of the incident, came out. They did not go out 
to see what Christ had been doing, but they came out to look for 
their swine. A good many men here in Chicago value swine more 
than they do the salvation of souls. Let pork go up or down, and 
see what a commotion there would be. But if there are souls 


to save here to-night, they would never trouble them: ves, 
They came out to look tor their swine, and there they found t) wild 
man sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his righ’ mind. 


When the man found himself delivered he wanted to go w 4 the 
Saviour. That was gratitude. Christ had saved him, had re. eemed 
him. He had delivered him from the hand of the ene And 
this man cried: “ Let me follow You round the world; where You 
gol will go.” But the Lord said: “ You go home and tell your 
friends what good things the Lord has done for you.” And he 
started home. I wold like to have been in that house when he 
came there. I can imagine how the children would look when they 
saw him, and say: “I‘ather is coming.” ‘Shut the door,” the 


SS agree 0 siti = 


‘ mets ma 
TERR pease 


a 


AS Natal Pacem Sg oe om 


OP aaa ome cat 


266 MOOD Y"S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


mother would cry; “look out; fasten the windows; bolt every door 
in the house.” Many times he, very likely, hed come home anid 
abused his family, and broken the chairs and tables, and turned the 
mother into the street, and alarmed all the neighbors. ‘They sce 
him now coming down the street. Down he comes till he gets to 
the door, and then gently knocks. You don’t hear a sound as he 
stands there. At last he sees his wife at the window, and he says, 
“Mary!” “Why,” she says, “why, he speaks as he did when 1] 
first married him; I wonder if he has got well?” So she looks out, 
and asks: “ John, is that you?” ‘Yes, Mary,” he replies, ‘it’s me 
don’t be afraid any more, I’m well now.” I see that mother, how 
she pulis back the bolts of that door, and looks at him. The first 
look is sufficient, and she springs into his arms, and clings about his 
neck. She takes him in, and asks him a hundred questions—how it 
all happened—all about it. “ Well, just take a chair and I'll tell you 
how | got cured.” The children hang back and look amazed. He 
says: “I was there in the tombs, you know, cutting myself with 
stones, and running about in my nakedness, when Jesus of Nazareth 
came that way. Mary, did you ever hear of Him? He is the most 
wonderful man. I’ve never seen a man like Him. He just ran in 
and told those devils to leave me, and they left me. When he had 
cured me I wanted te follow Him, but He told me to come home 
and tell you all about it.” The children, by and by, gather about 
his knee, and the elder ones run to tell their playmates what wonder- 
ful things Jesus has done for their father. Ah, my friends, we have 
got a mighty Deliverer—don’t care what affliction you have, He will 
deliver you from it. The Son of God, who cast out those devils, can 
deliver you from your besetting sin. A man told me, last night, in 
speaking about drunkards, the trouble is that the passion for drink 
becomes a disease, and when it does, there is no hope. That man 
didn’t know the Gospel, my friend. Christ is a physician who has 
never lost a case yet. We've got a great many fine physicians— 
how many of them can say, “I have never lost a case ?”’ Christ has 
never failed, and He has had some pretty hard cases. Just look at 
the woman suffering for years from an issue of blood. Probably 
she had visited all the physicians around—had gone clear up to 
Damascus and down to Egypt. Perhaps she had spent all her money 
in trying to get better, but instead, had only grown worse. That's 
just the case with Christians to-day. Instead of her coming to 
Christ, she went to the physicians around. 1 can imagine one of 


h CI 
of 
ney 
WOl 
and 
wer 
frict 
won 


toucl 
How 
this i 
they 
in ret 
don't 
who c 
in my 
By an 
prepa 
not tc 


ning 


gives 
what { 
come 
doctor 
When 
haps 
that w 
self, * 
bless 
able-b 
don't 
plent 
on, an 
about 
the S; 
comes 


door 


and 

d the 

y sce 
ts to 
as he 
Say Sy 
hen 1 

‘5 Out, 

’s me 

r, how 

e first 
ut his 
how it 
ell you 

; he 
lf with 
azareth 
1e most 
fan in 
he had 
c home 
r about 
vonder- 
ve have 
He will 
vils, can 
right, in 
or drink 
1at man 
who has 
sicians— 
hrist has 
t look at 
Probably 
ar up to 
ler money 
. Thats 
oming to 
e one of 


WHAT CHRIST IS TO US. 267 


her friends coming in and saying, “ Have you ever heard of Jesus 
of Nazareth?” “No.” “Well, He is a great prophet. I have 
never seen Him myself, but they tell me He is in Jerusalem doing 
wonderful things. I iieard of a man who was troubled with leprosy, 
and andther with palsy, and they went to Him, and, in a moment, 
were cured, They say, too, He gives sight to blind men.” As her 
friend tells her those things, a ray of hope breaks upon that poor 
woman’s soul, and she questions the friend further. ‘“ Yes, and 
I heaid of another cure of a poor cripple who had been lame 
for years, so lame that he had to be carried to the prophet. When 
they got there they found such a crowd that they had to cut a hole 
in the roof and let him down, and whenever He saw him, just 
touched him, and he was healed.” ‘ He must be a great physician. 
How much does He charge?” “ Don't charge you anything.” And 
this is the trouble with a great many people to-day. They think 
they have something to do for the Lord—something to give Him 
in return for the salvation He offers. ‘ Do you mean to tell me He 
don’t charge anything?” ‘ Yes, I tell you, He cures all the people 
who come to Him for nothing!”’ “I never heard of such a thing 
in my life. Whenever He comes here lam going ‘o see Him.” 
By and by she hears that He is passing through her »own, and she 
prepares to go. Her children probably come to her and urge her 
not to go. ‘Don’t go to any more physicians. You’ve been run- 
ning after too many, and they've only made you worse.” But she 
gives them a deaf ear. She wants to be blessed. I don’t know 
what they called the woman's garments in those days, but we will 
come down to the present. She gets down her old shawl. The 
doctor took all her money, and she can't afford to buy a new one. 
When she gets to where He is, she finds a crowd around Him—per- 
haps four or five times as many people as we have here. I can see 
that woman elbowing her way through the crowd as she says to her- 
self, “If I can only get near that man I know by His looks He can 
bless me.” There she goes, pushing her way among the crowd of 
able-bodied men standing between her and the Saviour. “ Why 
don’t you go away or stand still?” they say to her; “there are 
plenty more beside you who want to get near Him.” But she keeps 
on, and by and by she gets near enough to touch Him. She is just 
about to touch Him, when some one is thrust in between her and 
the Saviour, and she is driven back. But she works her way on, and 
comes near enough again, and I can see that thin, pale hand as it 


oa 1 WAR rm ea TE | 


eae nero sgl aiestpes once 


ent Sy 


268 MOOD V'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


comes from under that shawl, and it creeps to His garment—lo, in 
a moment she is well. Some one has said that He has got more 
medicine in this garment than there is in all the apothecaries’ stores 
in the world. A mighty physician! If you have a sick soul, come 
up to Him. ‘There is no case too bad for Him. I don’t care if you 
have some sin to which you are a slave—He can heal you of it. 
Yes, my friends, He is a mighty physician, and can save all who 
come and seek His aid. I can imagine some of you say, “I am a 
good deal worse than any of you have spoken of; I am dead to 
everything that is pure and holy; I come here night after night and 
those re rks never touch me; those sweet songs never thrill me; 
Iam dead.” Well, right here we find the story of one who was 
dead—Jairus’ daughter. When He came to the house they said He 
was too late. You and I have been too late, but Christ never. 
They forgot He was the resurrection and the life. When He went 
into that room with Peter and John among the weeping mourners, 
He just said to that dead girl, ‘“ Damsel, I say unto thee, arise,” and 
she was awakened from the sleep of death. If there is a dead soul 
here to-night, He can save you. He said at the creation, ‘ Let there 
be ligt,” and lo! the light appeared. If He commands your dead 
souls to live, they will surely live. Let your prayers be going up to 
God that your dead souls may be filled with the light of His pres- 
ence. He said to that woman's son, “ Young man, arise.” Why, 
He could raise ncn out of the stones in the street. There is no 
limit to the power of the Lord God of Israel. If there is a dead 
soul here, He can fill it with pwrity. Our Saviour, our Redeemer, 
our Deliverer, our Physician is able to do this. He can quicken 
dead souls; He can make them alive. 

You know when He took the children of Israel through the Red 
Sea and into the wilderness He became their Way. You hear people 
sometimes saying: “If I become a Christiam I don’t know what 
Church I will join. I find the Roman Catholic Church saying they 
are the only true Church—the only apostolic Church; and unless I 
join it they say I can not enter Heaven. Then the Baptists tell me 
I can not get into Heaven unless I become immersed; the Epis- 
copalian Church claims to be the only true Church. So with the Pres- 
byterians, Methodists; and I don’t know really what way to take.” 
Thank God, we need not be i» darkness as tothat. He tells us, 
“T amthe way.” The greates' mistake of the present day is the 
following of this creed and that one, and this and that Church, and 


agr 
of ( 
The 
Jesu 
Savi 
eyes 
child 
clouc 
it stz 
Way, 
Who 
bette: 
ties. 
it the 
a rock 
lead t 
Heave 
our fa 
didn’t 
slaver 
better 
for an 
ture n 
Now, 
ever o 
Bible. 
infidel 
away t 
They ¢ 
ones j 


Away 
mothe 
and tri 
the de 
men o 
the sur 


and ga 


take ay 
I don’t 
Look 


lo, in 
more 
tores 
come 
f you 
of it. 
| who 
am a 
ad to 
it and 
1 me; 
Oo was 
id He 
never. 
> went 
urners, 
2,” and 
id soul 
t there 
ir dead 
7 up to 
s pres- 
Why, 
is no 
a dead 
cemer, 
quicken 


he Red 

people 
w what 
ng they 
unless I 
t tell me 
1e Epis- 
he Pres- 
o take.” 
tells us, 
y is the 
rch, and 


WHAT CHRIST IS TO US. 269 


a great man’ listen to the voice of the Church instead of the voice 
of God. . ° Catholic Church or any other never saved a soul. 
The Son o. \.od is the Saviour of the world. The very name of 
Jesus can save His people from their sins. He is a real personal 
Saviour, and if a man wants to become a Christian, let him put his 
eyes on that Saviour and he will be saved. You know that the 
children of Israel had a cloud going ahead of them. When the 
cloud moved they moved, when it stopped they stopped, and when 
it started they followed it. So, my friends, it is Jesus that is our 
way, and if we follow His footsteps we will be in the right Church, 
Who could have led those chosen people through that wilderness 
better than God Almighty? He knew of all dangers and difficul- 
ties. When they wanted bread, He opened His hand and gave 
it them; when they wanted water, He commanded Moses to strike 
a rock, and lo, the crystal stream gushed forth. Who could better 
lead them through the wilderness, and who could better lead us to 
Heaven than Jesus? A great many people don’t like the old way 
our fathers taught. Well, the people in the days of Jeremiah 
didn’t like the old way; they hated it, and so He put them in 
slavery for seventy years. The good old way our fathers taught is 
better than our own way. People say this Bible was good enough 
for ancient days, but we have men of culture, of science, of litera- 
ture now, and its value has decreased to the people of our day. 
Now, give mea better book and I will throw it away. Has the world 
ever offered us a better book? These men want us to give up the 
Bible. What are you going to give us in its place? Oh, how cruel 
infidelity is to tell us to give up all the hope we have—to throw 
away the only book which tells us the story of the resurrection. 
They try to tell us it is all a fiction, so that when we lay our loved 
ones in the grave we bid them farewell for time and eternity. 
Away with this terrible doctrine. The Bible of our fathers and 
mothers is true, and the good old way is true. When man comes 
and tries to draw us from the old to the new way, it is the work of 
the devil. But men say we have outgrown this way. Why don't 
men outgrow the light of the sun? They shouldn’t let the light of 
the sun come into their buildings—should have gas; the sun is old, 
and gas is a new light. There is just as much sense in this as to 
take away the Bible. How much we owe the blessed Bible. Why, 
I don’t think human life would be safe in this city if it wasn’t for it. 
Look at the history of the nations where the Bible has been 


i 
! 
! 
i 
' 
i 
} 


es 


270 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


Only a few years ago France and England 
were pretty nearly equal. [England threw the Bible open to the 
world, and France tried to trample it. Now the English language 
is spoken around the world, and its prosperity has increased, while 
it stands foremost among nations. But look at France. It has 
gone down and down with anarchy and revolution. Let us not 
forsake the old way. The Chief Shepherd has gone in through 
the gates, and tells us to come in through Him. When I was in 
Dublin I heard of a little boy who, while being taught in one of 
the mission schools, had found Christ. When he got home xe 
tried to talk to his father and mother about his Redeemer. The 
little fellow sickened and died, and when I was there, four years 
after the death of that boy, the father might have been seen night 
after night reading his Bible. If you had asked him what he was 
looking for, he would have told you he was looking for the way his 
little son had taken to get into Heaven. He was trying to find 
the way. My friends, our Elder Brother has gone before us and has 
taken His seat at the right hand of His God, and He won't leave us 


trampled under foot. 


in darkness. 

I remember a number of years ago I went out of Chicago to try 
to preach. I went down to a little town where was being held a 
Sunday-school convention. I was a perfect stranger in the place, 
and upon my arrival a man stepped up to me and asked me if my 
name was Moody. I told him it was, and he invited me to his 
house. When I arrived, he said he had to goto the convention, 
and asked me to excuse his wife, as she, not having a servant, had 
to attend to her household duties. He put me into the parlor, and 
told me to amuse myself as best I could till he came back. I sat 
there, but the room was dark, and I could not read, and I got tired. 
So I thought I would try and get the children and play with them. 
I listened for some sound of childhood in the house, but could not 
hear a single evidence of the presence of little ones. When my 
friend came back, I said: “ Haven’t you any children?” “ Yes,” he 
replied, “I have one, but she’s in Heaven, and I am glad she is t here 
Moody.” “ Are you glad that your child is dead?” I inquired. He 
went on to tell me how he had worshiped that child; how his whole 
life had been bound up in her, to the neglect of his Saviour. One 
day he had come home and found her dying. Upon her death he 
accused God of being unjust. He saw some of his neighbors with 
their children around them. Why hadn’t He taken some of them 


aw 

he 
but 
tho 
int 
thre 

I sh 
thor 
dark 
once 
look 
lovel 

and 
ange 
thou, 
my d 
founc 
it wor 
to tal 
trying 
at on 
truth, 
The v 
calling 
[am1 
conve 
as the 
Am 
yonde 
one in 
would 
some |] 
if he c 
right { 
Nearly 
but H 

there, 
to this 
erer, as 
May th 


sland 
o the 
UATE 
while 
t has 
is not 
rough 
was in 
yne of 
me lc 
, The 
- years 
1 night 
he was 
way his 
to find 
and has 
leave us 


ro to try 
x held a 
ne place, 
e if my 
e to his 
vention, 
ant, had 
rlor, and 
k. Isat 
ot tired. 
th them. 
ould not 
Then my 
Yes,” he 
>is there, 
ired. He 
his whole 
ur. One 
death he 
bors with 
b of them 


WHAT CHRIST IS TO US, 271 
away? He was rebellious. After he came home froi, her funeral 
he said, “ All at once I thought I heard her little voice calling me, 
but the truth came to my heart that she was gone. Then I 
thought I heard her feet upon the stairs; but I knew she was lying 
inthe grave. The thought of her loss made me almost mad. I 
threw myself on my bed and wept bitterly. 1 fell asleep, and while 
I slept | had a dream, but it almost seems to me like a vision. I 
thought I was going over a barren field, and I came to a river, so 
dark and chill-looking that I was going to turn away, when, all at 
once, I saw, on the opposite bank, the most beautiful sight I ever 
looked at. I thought death and sorrow could never enter into that 
lovely region. Then I began to see beings, all so happy-looking, 
and among them I saw my little child. She waved her little 
angel hand to me and cried, ‘Father, father, come this way.’ I 
thought her voice sounded much sweeter than it did on earth. In 
my dream I thought I went to the water and tried to cross it, but 
found it deep and the current so rapid that I thought if I entered, 
it would carry me away from her forever. I tried to find a boatman 
to take me over, but couldn't, and I walked up and down the river 
trying to find a crossing, and still she cried, ‘Come this way.’ All 
at once I heard a voice coming rolling down, ‘I am the way, the 
truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the Father but by Me.’ 
The voice awoke me from my sleep, and I knew it was my Saviour 
calling me, and pointing the way for me to reach my darling child. 
[am now superintendent of a Sunday-school; I have made many 
converts; my wife has been converted, and we will, through Jesus 
as the way, see one day our child.” 

Am I not speaking to some father who has some loved one in 
yonder land? Am I not speaking to some mother who has a little 
one in that happy land? And if you could but hear their voice 
would it not be, “Come right this way?” Am I not speaking to 
some here who have representatives there? There’s not a son here, 
if he could hear his mother’s voice, but who would be told to come 
right that way. Thank God, we have all an Elder Brother there. 
Nearly nineteen hundred years have passed since He went there, 
but He is as constant to us now as He was when first He went 
there. Dear friends, as He calls us up to Him, let us turn our back 
to this world. Let us take Christ as our Redeemer, as our Deliv- 
erer, as our Physician, as our Way, as our Truth, and as our Light. 
May the blessing of Heaven fall upon us all, and may every man 


% kk, <0 


ww, 
Ye a» se 
ae. a G S& & 
YY | ee Oe 
Ys Sy 4k 
Yo W hi <a Vl 
WY ; NZ v 
\F IMAGE EVALUATION W 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 
eo ee 
See st pz 
| A = Me [20 
nani U8. 
W224 Wes, 
~ ‘ 
y 4 
N A) 
BAN wr ‘x 
OD mr C; GA of Z 
4 »” ee a 
ENG 4 A So, > 
9 ‘SS Le) 4%, a® 


7 Photographic GO € 
¢ Samos sa “S 
Corporation 


272 MOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


and woman here who is out of the kingdom accept Him and press 
into His dominions. 

I want to speak of Christ now as our Keeper. Many people in 
the inquiry-rooms complained that they could not hold out; they 
commenced all right, but could not hold out. Of course they could 
not if they tried to do so of themselves. But, thank God, they had 
a Keeper. A man when asked what persuasion he was, replied that 
he was of the same as St. Paul was, and he said, “I believe that 
He is able to keep that which is committed to Him.” That isa 
good denomination, and I recommend it to your attention. What 
is this keeping? What does it consist of? If one of you had one 
hundred thousand dollars in your pocket, and knew that fifteen or 
twenty thieves had their eyes on you, and wanted to rob you, what 
would you do? You would find a safe bank and put it there 
and feel safe. Now, every one of you has a precious soul, which 
the devil is striving to rob you of, and you can not be safe until 
you have given it into Christ’s keeping. The Lion of the tribe of 
Judah is the only one that can safely keep us. What does the 
Word say? “Iam the light of the world; if any man follow Me, he 
shall have the light of life.” Why are so many of us in darkness? 
Because we will not follow the light, will not follow Christ. It does 
not matter who it is; a man of talent and intellect is no better than 
any one else if he does not walk in the light. I remember, during 
the second year of the war, when things looked very bad for the 
country, they had a meeting, and every one spoke gloomily, and 
hung their heads like so many bulrushes. One old man, though 
gray-bearded, and with a face that literally shone-—he was a man 
who looked like Moses—commenced to upbraid them that they did 
not look toward the light ; that they should remember that if it was 
dark around them it was light higher up, where their Elder Brother 
was, and it only rested with them to climb higher. There is no 
darkness where Jesus is. Let us ask ourselves, let each one ask: 
“Am 1a light in my family, among my companions?” The Word 
said, “Ye are the light of the world.” Are you, brethren? Just 
consider over it. Let us keep our loins girded and our lamps burn- 
ing, or people will stumble over us. Oh, my friends, if the light in 
us be darkness, how great is that darkness. If we would light the 
world up, we must borrow the light; we must take no glory to our- 
selves, but merely reflect the light of Jesus Christ. The Bible does 
not say, ‘“ Make your light shine before men,” but “ Let your light 


‘ He is co 


freat me 
look to 


who c 
carefu 
what ¢ 
the m 
search 
for the 
and w. 
Shephe 
accept 
name vy 
sO mucl 
several 
torn ea 
see the 
$0 with 
yet, wit 
why dog 
looking 
his dog 
the way 
it was v 
before a 
beautifu 
Then I 
unkind, 
Stream ij 
to somet 


pastures 
Shepher 
Come u p 


press 


ple in 
* they 
- could 
ey had 
od that 
re that 
lat is a 
What 
iad one 
fteen or 
uu, what 
it. there 
1, which 
ife until 
tribe of 
does the 
w Me, he 
larkness? 
It does 
tter than 
r, during 
HW for the 
ily, and 
, though 
as a man 
they did 
if it was 
r Brother 
ere is no 
one ask: 
he Word 
en? Just 
mps burn- 
re light in 
light the 
ory to our- 
Bible does 
your light 


. 
WHAT CHRIST IS TO US. 273 
shine.” Let it shine. God supplies us with it for the asking. Oh, 
my friends, will you not ask for it? and when you once have it, 
hundreds of thousands of others will see it and want it as well. 
Keep your lower lights burning, as Mr. Sankey has sung to you. 
Now I also like to think of Christ asa Shepherd. The duty of a 
shepherd is to take care of his sheep. When a bear attacked David's 
flock, he seized his spear and slew the intruder, and your Shepherd 
will take as much care of you. Oh, what joy in the news to those 
who can say, “The Lord is my Shepherd.” Think of the shepherd 
carefully counting his sheep at the close of the day. One is missing; 
what does he do? Is he content with his ninety and nine, and leave 
the missing? No, he safely houses the others, and then goes in 
search of the other which is missing. Can you not see him hunting 
for the lost one, going over mountains and rocks, and crossing brooks, 
and what joy there is when the wanderer is found? Oh, what a 
Shepherd is that. He wants to be a Shepherd to all. Will you not 
accept Him? The man who saw a shepherd calling his sheep by 
name wondered if he could tell one from another, they all looked 
so much alike. When he inquired on the matter he was pointed to 
several little defects on the sheep; one had a black spot, another a 
torn ear, another a bad toe. One was cross-eyed, and so on. You 
see the shepherd knew his sheep by their defects, and I think it is 
so with our Heavenly Father. He knows us all by our defects; and. 
yet, with all our faults, He loves us. You may ask, “If He loves me,, 
why does He afflict me?” Well, now, I once saw a drove of sheep 
looking very tired and weary, being hurried on by a shepherd’ and 
his dogs, and when they wanted to stop and drink at the brook by 
the wayside, they were not allowed to, but driven on. I felt that 
it was very unkind of that shepherd; but, by and by, they stopped 
before a pair of handsome gates, and the flocks were turned into 
beautiful green pastures, with a clear stream running through them. 
Then I knew that I had been hasty; that the shepherd. had not been 
unkind, but kind, in not allowing his sheep to drink from that muddy 
stream in the road, for he had been saving them and taking them on 
to something better. So with our Heavenly Father, our Shepherd; 


| He is compelled to afflict us sometimes while leading us into green 


pastures. Oh, brethren, let us give thanks that we have such a good 
Shepherd to guide and protect us, and though, these afflictions may 
cone upon us and seem hard at the time, let us remember His 


great mercy and loving-kindness, and bow and kiss the rod. Let. us: 
look to God for His blessing. 


XXXIT. 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK. 


ACTS xix. 2: “ Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed ?’’ 


OW many people in this audience would know how to 
answer that question if it was put to them personally? 
“Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?” 

A great many of us, if we were asked, would not know what it 
meant. I was a Christian some years before I knew anything about 
it. I remember once in Brooklyn, speaking at a Sunday-schvol 
meeting. I thought there was a good deal of feeling in the meeting, 
and on going out, feeling perfectly satisfied, an old man touched 
me on the shoulder, and in a trembling voice and with tears in his 
eyes said, “Young man, when you speak again, honor the Holy 
Ghost.” I didn’t know what he meant, and went to other schools, 
‘but this always kept ringing in my ears, “ Young man, when you 
‘speak again, honor the Holy Ghost.” Months went, and still I kept 
thinking about this, and wondering what the old man meant. | 
think I have found it out. My friends, there is a good deal of 
work among us that goes for naught, because we don’t honor the 
‘Holy Ghost. Let me say right here, that I have never stood be- 
fore an audience honoring the Holy Ghost but He has heard me 
and the work has been deep and thorough, because the work has 
been done in the spirit. All that is done in the spirit will be lasting, 
but all that is done in the flesh will pass away. The workers should 
‘be led in all their efforts by the Spirit or the Holy Ghost and their 
work will then be successful. 

I want to call your attention to what the Holy Spirit is. He is 
one with the Father and the Son, and the way to honor Him is to 
look upon Him as equal with the Father and Son. We heara 
great deal about Christ, and many of us honor Him—many of us 
honor the Father, but how many of us honor the Holy Spirit ? Are 
~vwe honoring the Holy Spirit when we talk about Him as an influ 
ence, or as a Spirit only? Now, in the twenty-eighth chapter of 

(274) 


Ag 
Gho. 
but | 
c An 
not s 
Ghos 
Peter 
of mz 
Holy 
runni 
You C 
Spirit 
men 
and o 
by th 
that’s 
a Chr 
an old 
tians 
thoug 
soon | 
of Joh 
Father 
abide 
Would 
abide y 
Christ, 
Neither 


de?” 


how to 
rsonally? 
elieved?” 
y what it 
ing about 
Jay-schvol 
e meeting, 
n touched 
rears in his 
the Holy 
er schools, 
, when you 
still I kept 
meant. | 
od deal of 
t honor the 
r stood be- 
S heard me 
e work has 
il be lasting, 
kers should 
bst and theit 


‘tis. Heis 
or Him is to 


We heara 


many of us 
Spirit ? Are 
as an influ 

h chapter of 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK. 275 


Matthew and nineteenth verse we see these words: “ Go ye, there- 
fore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” They are almost 
the last words that fell from the lips of the Son of God as He as- 
cended and went back to Heaven, and they seem to linger on the 
earth yet. Hehad passed over Calvary, had been through the grave, 
and was now about to ascend and sit at the right hand of God, the 
Father, where all power was to be given Him, and we find Him 
sending out His disciples, saying: ‘Go ye, therefore, and teach all 
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost.” 

The next thought is, that He wasin the world before Christ was. 
A great many people have got a false impression about the Holy 
Ghost. They think He didn’t come before the day of Pentecost, 
but He was in the world long before that. Just turn to Luke ii. 26: 
“ And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should 
not see death before he had seen the Lord’s Christ.” The Holy 
Ghost revealed it unto him. Then we read in the second epistle of 
Peter i. 21: “ For the prophecy came not in old time by the will 
of man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the 
Holy Ghost.” You will find from Genesis to Revelations one Spirit 
running through the Bible, and that’s the Spirit of the Holy Ghost. 
You don’t find one doctrine in Exodus and another in Kings: one 
Spirit pervades the Word of God. Why? Because all the holy 
men were prompted by God. Therefore we have but one doctrine 
and one Bible, which contains writings executed by men inspired 
by the Holy Ghost, and that Holy Ghost is a person. Now, 
that’s one thing a good many Christians don’t understand. I was 
a Christian about ten years before I found it out. I remember 
an old divine getting up in Farwell Hall, and he spoke about Chris- 
tians honoring the Holy Ghost. He said that very few people 
thought He was as much a person as Christ. I got my Bible, and 
soon I saw he was right. Now, just turn to the fourteenth chapter 
of John and the sixteenth verse, and we read, “I will pray the 
Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, that He may 
abide with you forever.” If the Spirit was not a person, Christ 
would not have spoken about Him as He did. “ That He may 
abide with you forever.” Then we go on: “Even the Spirit of 
Christ, whom the world can not receive because it seeth Him not, 
neither knoweth Him ; for He dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.” 


SS eerie 


SR PORES SG RR 


276 MOOD)"S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


Three times in that verse Christ speaks of the Holy Spirit as “ Him,’ 
and in the two verses we find Him referred to three times as “ He.’ 
It is He, Him, Him, He, all through those two verses. The Son of 
Man knew Him; that’s the reason. Again, we read in the twenty- 
sixth verse: “ But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom 
the Father will send in My name, He shall teach you all things, and 
bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto 
you.” We find the Spirit again referred to as “ He” in sixteenth 
John, and it is just repeated over and over again in Scripture. If 
you have got your Bible, just turn to the sixteenth chapter of John, 
eighth verse: “ And when He is come He will reprove the world of 
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment.” He wouldn’t speak 
about the Holy Ghost in that way if He was only an influence, a 
breath of God, as some people believe. He wouldn’t speak about 
the Spirit as “ Himself” if He was only this: “ Howbeit when He 
the Spirit of Truth is come; He will guide you into the truth, for 
He shall not speak of Himself, but whatsoever He shall hear that 
shall He speak, and He will show you things to come.” “ He will 
show you things to come.” 

Again, I want to call your attention to averse in First Peter: 
“For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, 
that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but 
quickened by the Spirit.” Now, every dead soul brought to life 
must be brought to life by the power of the Holy Spirit. No soul 
has ever been brought to life unless it has been quickened by the 
Holy Ghost. The moment the Spirit of God quickens a soul and 
brings it into life, from that moment they have a love to serve God, 
and a power to save people. Till then it is impossible—that’s the 
only way of receiving salvation. And let me say here, that the idea 
of educating people into the kingdom of God is not the way. You 
may educate them and educate them, but they will be as far from 
conversion as ever. Men have all to be quickened by the Holy 
Ghost; as Christ tells us. So I suppose some of you have found 
in the inquiry-room that you could get a certain length with people 
and then stopped ; couldn’t get any further. How manv people have 
come to me and said of some one, “I can not bring him into the 
light of Christ!” ‘You can’t? that’s not extraordinary.” My 
friend, you can only bring people to a certain length, and then the 
Spirit of the Holy Ghost must show them light; and when He does 
it, He will do it thoroughly. We can not force inquirers into the king. 


dor 
Chr 
T 
inR 
the 
whic 
a be 
chur 
work 
more 
dwel. 
gentl 
sum 1 
writir 
copy 
exalte 
gentle 
love o 
ance, | 
expres 
my he 
thinks 
those 
the Sy 
comes 
forgive 
minuté 
mon ig 
each o 
But if 
is finis 
much ¢ 
and te] 
are pra 
and a 
great w 
the lo 
Ghost. 
His lo 
ne; © 


Him, 
73 He.’ 
Son of 


wenty- 
, whom 
igs, and 
id unto 
xteenth 
ure. If 
of John, 
vorld of 
t speak 
uence, a 
ik about 
vhen He 
ruth, for 
1ear that 
“ He will 


st Peter: 
e unjust, 
flesh, but 
t to life 
No soul 
led by the 
soul and 
serve God, 
that’s the 
int the idea 
ay. You 
s far from 
the Holy 
ave found 
rith people 
people have 
into the 
ary.” My 
d then the 
en He does 
to the king: 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK. 277 


dom of God The Holy Spirit must quicken, and the ].ord Jesus 
Christ must do the rest. 

The next thing I want to speak to you about is Hiswork. We find 
in Romans, fifth chapter: ‘““And hope maketh not ashamed, because 
the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost 
which is given unto us.” His work is to impart love. There is not 
a better evangelist in the world than the Holy Spirit. If the 
churches would just let Him come in, there would soon be mighty 
work for Christ. You may say that what the Church wants to-day 
more than anything else, is love. In Galatians we find what should 
dwell in the churches. There are nine different qualities—peace; 
gentleness, long-suffering, hope, patience, charity, etc., but you can 
sum them all into one, and you have love. I saw something ina 
writing the other day, bearing upon the subject, which I just took a 
copy of: “ The fruit of the Spirit is in one word—love. Joy, is love 
exalted ; peace, is love in repose; long-suffering, is love-enduring ; 
gentleness, is love in society; goodness, is love in action; faith, is 
love on the battle-field; meekness, is love in school; and temper- 
ance, is love in training. And so, you can say that the fruit is all 
expressed by one word—love. When the fruit of the Spirit is in 
my heart, I can love them that hate me. To love a man who 
thinks a great deal of you is natural love with every one, but to love 
those who hate you is a different thing, and whenever a man gets 
the Spirit he loves his enemies. The Spirit of Christ on Calvary 
comes to my soul. When they reviled Him, He cried, “ Father, 
forgive them, they know not what they do.” I can tell you in a 
minute if the church has got it. When it isn’t there, when the ser- 
mon is over, the people rise up and walk out. They don’t speak to 
each other. They do just as if they were at the theatre or a concert. 
But if the love of God is there, you will see, whenever the sermon 
is finished, the people gather in little groups and talk about how 
much good it did them, and they will carry it home to their families 
and tell it to their neighbors. While the preaching is going on they 
are praying all the time for Him. Theyare in sympathy with Him, 
and a bond of love is apparent among them all. My friends, the 
great want of the present day in American churches, is the want of 
the love of God in the hearts of their members, shed by the Holy 
Ghost. We can not love Him, we can not serve Him till we have 
His love in our hearts. Said a young lady, in the inquiry-room, to 
me: ‘ I am going to try my very best to become a Christian.” “I 


PRE ESS Ste ep = 


—— 
— . es se 
PA CA eee one . = ~ 


if 


ALLE SORNR alae aa Tatler ent 


278 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSLS AND PRAYERS, 


don’t like that,” I said; “have you got a mother?” “No, 
“Have you got a father?” “Yes.” “Are you going to try to love 
him?’ “No; there is no use of my trying; I love him already,” 
She couldn’t help loving her father, because it was spontaneous. 
The moment the love of God is shed in our hearts, my friends, we 
can not help loving Him and working for Him. 

People you sometimes hear say on hearing a sermon, “It is a 
wonder to me that it, so powerful, didn’t convict hundreds.” Some. 
times the discourse would be full of apparently overwhelming and 
convincing argument, and they can not see why it shouldn’t have a 
very powerful influence. The trouble was, there was no love in it, 
If there was no love in it, it will fail of getting any fruit. We've 
got—if I may use the expression—to pepper our discourse with 
love, salt it with love, and we will walk into the affections of the 
people and turn them toward God. If we don’t, our words will be 
as sounding brass and tinkling cymbals—no power where there is 
want of love. A remark made by Dr. Gibson the other day has 
been in my mind ever since. It was when we had the seventh 
chapter of John, when he told us how to find out the thirsty ones. 
“Why, let some one bring in the water, and see how quick the 
thirsty ones will reach out their hands. We ministers must first 
show our friends that we have the water, and then the people will 
drink.” My friends, the reason why there is so little power in the 
churches is because the ministers are carrying around empty buck- 
ets. The people won’t come near them. But when the minister 
of God has a bucket filled with sparkling water, see how quick the 
people will come to him. If we are not successful, the cause is 
want of love. Whenever we have the Spirit, love is very quickly 
seen. Why, when an inquirer gets up from his knees, the first 
thing he says is, “ Will you pray for my father?” His love goes 
right out. Last night a young lady came and said, “ Won't you 
pray for my brother?” For several nights she ‘had been on her 
knee:s—couldn’t think of any one else but herself; but the moment 
she got the Spirit the love was seen, and went out toward her 
brother. Our love should be sincere. Now the world is pretty 
keen to detect between the true and the false. People can tell very 
quickly whether we have love in our hearts or not. God don't 
want any shams. I remember I went to see a man at his place of 
business. The moment he saw me he sprang up from his seat and 
seized my hand as if I was his twin brother. Pretty soon another 


anc 

his 

mai 
clos 

ble. 
love 
treat 
hous 
have 
and 
heart 
Th 
I 3) Ww 
peace 
of the 
churcl 
is lifte 
minist 
soon 4g 
not ho 
love, b 
of the 
one C] 
mount 
a man 
Wheng 
trees, d 
time. 
every { 
lasting 
fill you 
The 
Paul se 
is that 
What ( 
Ministe 
got the 


és No 

to love 
ready.” 
uneous. 
nds, we 


It isa 
Some- 
ing and 
t have a 
ve in it. 
We've 
rse with 
is of the 
is will be 
there is 
day has 
> seventh 
rsty ones. 
quick the 
must first 
people will 
wer in the 
pty buck- 
e minister 
y quick the 
e cause is 
ry quickly 
s, the first 
s love goes 
Won't you 
een on her 
he moment 
toward her 
d is pretty 
an tell very 
God don't 
his place of 
his seat and 
Loon another 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK, 279 


man came in, and he jumped up and shook his hand with th 
most cordiality apparently. The man couldn’t stay, and t id te 
man of business he would have to go. The busines m b is 
and entreated him to stay, to sit down. He wanted to ii hth 
his wife was, and all his children, and his friends. He eae i 
mat however, and excused himself. The warnent the d ital 
closed he said, “ He’s an awful bore.” I got out as soon ue 
ae A La 7 would be saying the same of me. He ovetatea 
, but it was alla sham. How man 
treat with the greatest cordiality, ils Ce a ca ne 
oe i ae ee to be sincere, and it will not be he 
e Spirit. the Holy Spirit is i i 
and thorough, and we will eae a es eee, 
hearts of the people. pee 
The next thing the Holy Spirit imparts is hope. In Romans 
13, We find, if Now the God of hope will fill you with all jo td 
se ay ee that ye may abound in hope through the ahee 
1e Holy Ghost.” You just iri i i 
churches and see how hopeful ie is Bis miele pee ini pie 
is lifted up, the people are lifted up—all are faioiein ; Take a 
minister who has lost hope in his church—he is Weeanee d dan 
soon as he gets discouraged there’s no power there if oor “ 
not hopeful the Lord don’t help them. The Spirit nat only i hi 
love, but He gives hope. I never sawa Christian who nea 
of the Holy Ghost who was ever discouraged. I have yet uns 
one Christian with the Spirit who is not hopeful Why, the an 
mounting up on wings of hope, higher, higher, all tie ae aide 
a I heard of who had two bags of gas on either as a hi : 
Vhenever he touched the ground he would leap over a hill a 
ul oe sage e when we are full of hope we rise Gwaun 
- He has come here now. He is just knocking at the d 
every church in Chicago, and it will be shar i seem 
hey Here chs will p, and thorough, and 
He sh aye in ee Let Him into your heart, and let Him 
RA _ Nae ge i Spirit gives us. See what 
a econd Corinthians iii. 17: “ 
ae Spirit, and where the Spirit of the pels Meee Ee 
hat do the workers want any more than liberty? What ie 
ministers require more than liberty? It is easy to stead ie ; sie 
got the Spirit of God with us. We're not afraid of public aatiien 


280 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


at all—we'’ve perfect liberty. The meeting last Monday night in 
Farwell Hall was one of the best I ever attended. Why? Because 
we had perfect liberty there. The Spirit of the Lord was there, 
The rich and poor, the educated and ignorant, high and low, as- 
sembled, were all free. I don’t know anything that retards the 
cause of Christ in the churches more than the stiffness, the coldness 
in them. There’s no liberty where there’s stiffness. If a young 
convert got up he would be chilled through. When we have the 
Spirit we are noi afraid of the opinion of our neighbor, of the opinion 
of this man or that man. We say, “ What can I do for the Son of 
God?” What do we want more than love, hope, and charity? 
Before the Chicago fire I used to preach in this hall. If it was pretty 
nearly full I used to be lifted up at the sight of so many people be- 
fore me. I remember an old woman coming to me, and saying, “I 
am praying for you; you haven’t got liberty yet.” I thought I had 
—thought I was all right; but she knew better. I feel more in- 
debted to that old woman than to almost anything else. So, ministers, 
if you have got some old saint in your churches, look to her. How 
often have I thanked God for sending that woman to pray for my 
liberty. Why, a few years ago I could not stand before an assem- 
blage of ministers for trembling. I was always afraid I would say 
something wrong. But I’ve got liberty now. Ifa man is bound hand 
and foot, like Lazarus, when he came out of the grave, he can not have 
any freedom. He will be spluttering and splashing in his sermon, and 
the church don’t take any interest in it. What we want is liberty. 
What we want is to know that we are sons. and daughters of God. 
Sons have always liberty. A man once said he could always tell 
who were the boarders and who were members of the family in a 
house. A boarder would come in, eat, and then walk out to the 
theatre; but the son would come in and sit down, and inquire all 
the news from his mother. My friends, the church is full of board- 
ers. You see them in the church, but you never see them at any 
of the meetings. If they do come and you ask them to pray, “Oh, 
don’t call upon me; I haven't liberty.” They’re bound hand and 
foot. Loosen their bands and let them go; give them freedom and 
liberty, and see how they will take an interest in everything con- 
nected with the church. Two young men went from Yale College 
down to Natchez to teach, some years ago, before the slave law was 
repealed. As they went along a road one day, a venerable colored 
man was coming toward them. Says one of them, “ Let’s have 


som 
road 
the 1 
one | 
you! 
eight 
ain’t 
what 
says 
don’t 
it poi 
point 
The ; 
Chris' 
He oj 


ght in 
ecause 
there. 
OW, as- 
‘ds the 
oldness 
young 
ive the 
opinion 
Son of 
harity ? 
s pretty 
ople be- 
‘ing, “1 
nt I had 
nore in- 
linisters, 
r, How 
> for my 
n assem- 
ould say 
nd hand 
not have 
on, and 
s liberty. 
of God. 
ays tell 
ily in a 
t to the 
quire all 
of board- 
hm at any 
ay, “Oh, 
hand and 
edom and 
hing con- 
e College 
e law was 
e colored 


et’s have 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK. 281 


some fun with old Sambo.” There was a guide-post upon the 
road—one of those old red posts—pointing the way, and on it was 
the notice, ‘“‘ Forty miles to Liberty.” When the old man came up 
one of the young fellows said to him, “ Well, uncle, how old are 
you?” “Don't know; guess I’m pretty old; must be ‘bout 
eighty.” ‘Can you read, uncle?” “No; can’t read; black men 
ain't lowed to read,” replied the darkey. “ Well, can you tell us 
what’s on that post?” ‘Oh, yes; I knows what’s on de post; it 
says ‘Forty miles to Liberty.’” “Well,” said the young man, “why 
don’t you go and get liberty, it’s only forty miles?” ‘Ah, massa, 
it points down that road to Liberty, but it’s all a sham; but if it 
pointed up there it would point to Christ, and it would be true.” 
The arrow went down to that young man’s soul. The liberty that 
Christ offers means freedom. Is there any bound, here? Oh, may 
He open your eyes and set you free. 


XXXII. 


MAN’S RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT. 
JOHN xiv. 17: “ He dwelleth with you and shall be in you.” 


\ A7E very often hear people asking, What is a sin against 
the Holy Spirit? They have been told that there is no 


hope for them because they have sinned away the day of 
grace; they have committed an unpardonable sin, and there is no 
chance of their being saved. Let us read what it says in the Scrip- 
tures vnon the question of an unpardonable sin. Turn to Matthew 
xii. 23. If you just turn to those passages it will help you to bear 
them in mind: 

“And all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the Son 
of David? 

“ But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow doth 
not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub, the prince of the devils. 

“And Jesus knew their thoughts and said unto them, Every 
kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every 
city or house divided against itself shall not stand: 

“ And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how 
shall then his kingdom stand ? 

“ And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your chil- 
dren cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges. 

“But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom 
of God is come unto yau. 

“Or else, how can one enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil 
his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will 
spoil his house. 

“He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth 
not with me, scattereth abroad. 

“Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy 
shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy 
Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. 

“ And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of Man it shall 
(282) 


be 
it s 
wo: 
} 
don 
find 
the 
ligh 
the 
6é 
stan 
6“ ] 
exce 
his h 
oN 


powel 
works 
been { 
no ho 
was 
peopl 
youe 
devil ; 
sin, tu 
not .] 
Not st 
sin. 
verse 
fact th 
that it 
He sa 
get th 


(T. 


gainst 
» is no 
day of 
. is no 
. Scrip- 
atthew 
to bear 


the Son 

»w doth 
ils. 

), Every 
d every 
lf; how 
our chil- 


ingdom 


and spoil 


n he will 
p athereth 


aspheimny 
the Holy 


hn it shall 


MAN'S RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT, 283 


be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, 
it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the 
world to come.” 

Now Matthew leaves us in darkness about what it means—he 
don’t explain it; but turn over to Mark’s gospel, where you will 
find Christ explaining it Himself. If people would but turn to 
the Scriptures and read them more carefully, they would soon get 
light on many of those passages which appear dark to them. In 
the third chapter of Mark and twenty-sixth verse we read : 

“ And if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he can not 
stand, but hath an end. 

“ No man can enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil his goods, 
except he will first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil 
his house. 

“Verily, I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the 
sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blas- 
pheme. 

“ But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never 
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation.” 

A great many people stop right there. They don’t read the next 
verse at all, which explains all that has gone before: ‘ Because they 
said he hath an unclean spirit.” 

Now, the reasoning is this, that if He cast out devils by the 
power of the prince of devils, and was a devil Himself, and all His 
works that had been done by the power of the Holy Ghost had 
been done really by the power of the devil, why, of course there is 
no hope. There is no hope; for if a man believes that the devil 
was working through Christ he wouldn’t come to Christ. Scme 
people believe they have committed an unpardonable sin; but have 
you ever met a man who said that Christ was working through the 
devil? Those who think they have committed an unpardonable 
sin, turn over to Genesis and give out that verse: ‘“ My Spirit shall 
not .lways strive with men.” They think that because the Spirit is 
not striving with them now, they have committed an unpardonable 
sin. A man in New York was approached, and, after quoting the 
verse in Genesis, said there was no hope for him. Why, the very 
fact that the Spirit spoke through this Christian man to him showed , 
that it was striving with him. That is the way the devil speaks. 
He says first, “ You don’t need the Holy Spirit,” and if he can not 
get them to believe that, he tells them the Holy Ghost has given 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


284 


them up, they don’t need to try to come. But if they believed this 
verse in Genesis, they might as well believe that they will live one 
hundred and twenty years, for in the next verse we read: “Yet his 
days will be one hundred and twenty years.” He strove with those 
antediluvians one hundred and twenty years to get them to repent. 
He strove with them all their lives. It is a question with me 
whether the Holy Ghost does not strive with a man from his cradle 
to his grave. So don’t let any man go away from here saying that 
he has committed an unpardonable sin, and that the Spirit of God 
has left him. It is this influence that has brought you here. A 
man would be deaf and blind to all heavenly truths if His Spirit 
had left him. He wouldn’t want to talk about any religious sub- 
ject; he wouldn’t want to hear anything about religion. The very 
fact of your coming to this meeting is conclusive evidence that the 
Spirit is striving with you. The devil wouldn’t bring you here; it 
is the Spirit of God working with you. 

The next thought I would direct your attention to is, “ How 
shall we know we have been born of the Spirit?” A great many 
people say, “ Mr. Moody, I would like to know whether I am a 
Christian or not. I would like to know if I am saved.” The longer 
I live the more I am convinced that it is one of the greatest 
privileges of a child of God to know—to be able tc say, “I am 
saved.” The idea of walking through life wichout knowing this 
until we get to the great white throne is exploded. If the Bible 
don’t teach assurance, it don’t teach justification by faith; if 
it don’t teach assurance, it don’t teach redemption. The doc- 
trine of assurance is as clear as any doctrine in the Bible. 
How many people in the Tabernacle, when I ask them if they are 
Christians, say, “ Well, I hope so,” in a sort of hesitating way. 
Another class say, “I am trying to be.” This is a queer kind of 
testimony, my friends. I notice no man is willing to go into the 
inquiry-room till he has got a step beyond that. That class of 
Christians don’t amount to much. The real Christian puts it, “I 
believe; I believe that my Redeerner liveth; I believe that if this 
building of flesh were destroyed, 1 have a building not made with 
hands, eternal in the Heavens.” No hoping and trusting with them. 
It is, “I know why hope is assured to the Christian. It is a sure 
hope; it isn’t a doubting hope.” Suppose a man asked me if my 
name was Moody, and I said, “ Well, I hope so,” wouldn’t it sound 
rather strange? “I hope it is;” or “I’m trying to be Moody.” 


Nc 

to | 

the 

the 
you 
His 
that 
fifty 

he | 
ques 
we h 
foots 
of G 
See 

the S 

3 BR 
dwell 
quick 

(t9 T 

the fl 
‘6 F 
Spirit 
“cc F 

of Go 
AY 
God.” 
or not 
of Go 
darkn 
Lot |] 
Sodo 
are go 
we ard 
“ Fa 
and dg 
6“ Fqd 
ye ha 
Fathe 
The 
Spirit 


this 
» one 
t his 
those 
pent. 
l1 me 
-radle 
x that 
. God 
e A 
Spirit 
s sub- 
e very 
at the 
ere; it 


“ How 
/ many 
[ am a 
longer 
sreatest 
“T am 
ng this 
e Bible 
ith; if 
e doc- 
Bible. 
hey ar¢ 
g way. 
kind of 
nto the 
class of 
git, $1 
ht if this 
ade with 
th them. 
is a sure 
me if my 
it sound 
Moody.” 


MAN'S RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT, 285 
Now, if a man asks you if you are a Christian, you ought to be able 
to give areason. How do you know you are a Christian? Turn to 
the eighth chapter of Romans and ninth verse: “ But ye are not in 
the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in 
you. Now, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of 
His’”’—a meek, gentle, loving, forbearing Spirit. If aman has not 
that Spirit he is not a Christian. I don’t care if he is a member of 
fifty churches, or has his name on one hundred church records; if 
he hasn't the Spirit of Christ he isn’t a Christian. That is the 
question, has he the same Spirit as Christ had? We can soon tell if 
we have His Spirit. If we have the Spirit we will follow in His 
footsteps. We won’t be in darkness at all if we only take the Word , 
of God as our examiner as to whether we have it or not: 

“ And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but 
the Spirit is life because of righteousness. 

“But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead 
dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also 
quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth in you. 

“ Therefore, brethren, we are debtors not to the flesh, to live after 
the flesh. 

“For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the 
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. 

“For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons 
of God.” 

“As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of 
God.” Now you can tell whether you are led by the Spirit of God 
or not. How happy this world would be if it was led by the Spirit 
of God. Do you think the Spirit of God would lead men intc 
darkness, into sorrow or trouble, into iniquity? Do you think ir 
Lot had not been led by the Spirit of God he would have left 
Sodom? Do you think the sons and daughters of the earth who 
are going down to death are being led by the Spirit of God? When 
we are led by the Spirit, there is peace, and joy, and light. 

“For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons 
and daughters of God. 

“For ye have not receivea ‘he spirit of bondage again to fear; but 
ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, 
Father.” 

There’s another point I want to call your attention to. The 
Spirit of the Holy Ghost bears witness to us that we are the 


286 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


children of God. That’s how we know we are children of God, 
Don’t let any unconverted person look here for a witness of the 
Spirit. We find many in the inquiry-room saying, ‘“ Mr. Moody, I 
haven’t found the Spirit.” That’s not the first thing to look fon, 
The first thing to look for is Christ, then the Holy Ghost comes into 
our hearts and shows us we are children of God. John, the 
favorite disciple, says, “ Now we know we are the children of God.” 
We are as much children of God when we have the Spirit, as if we 
were in Heaven this afternoon. There is not an inch of ground to 
stand upon for this doubting. Our doubts ought to be swept out 
of the way, and we should be able to say, “I know that my 
Redeemer liveth.” Suppose you go into the inquiry-room to-night 
and commence talking to a weeping man about his being saved. If 
you feel yourself that you are only trying, and you can’t just say 
whether you are saved or not, you can’t talk to that man. You can 
not go to ariver and try to get a man out if you are in the river 
yourself. If you are in the ditch yourself, you must get out first 
before you try to get anybody else out. If any child of God 1s 
here to-day who doesn’t know whether he is saved, it is your 
privilege to know definitely before you leave here; to be able to 
say, “Christ is my faithful Saviour, Heaven is my beautiful home.” 
Christians have been doubi , 1nd hoping long enough. Now, 
know that you have been bu. -. th: Holy Ghost. In Ephesians 
i. 13, we find how we are sealed ty the Holy Ghost : 

“In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the werd of truth, 
the Gospel of your salvation; in whom also, after that ye believed, 
ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise.” 

And in the fourth chapter, thirtieth verse, we read: 

“ And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed 
unto the day of redemption.” 

Now, when we are washed by the blood, we become a teinple for 
the Holy Ghost to dwell in. When we are cleansed by the blood, 
we become a temple for Him, and are sealed till the day of 
redemption, and neither devil nor man can break God’s seal. And 
when we are cleansed, the Holy Ghost comes and dwells with the 
believer. You haven’t to go up and bring Him down, or go down 
and bring Him up. He dwel!s with us, and seals us for the day of 
redemption. There was a poor man who had been a servant of 
God and died in the poor-house. The people were hurrying him 
off, and a gentleman happening to pass, said, “Tread softly, for you 


Hea 
saw 
cam 
day 
told 
That 
serm 
ing. 
we Ci 
ious | 
male: 
Gree] 
derst 
ninet 
Savi 
remel 
how « 
deat! 
could 
Ghost 
derstd 
I can 
saint 
come 
speak 
have 
friend 
groun 
ises j 
John 
“ H 


God. 
of the 
ody, | 
1% fo1. 
‘§ into 
1, the 
God.” 
s if we 
und to 
pt out 
at my 
)-night 
ed. If 
ust say 
Tou can 
1e river 
ut first 
God 1s 
is your 
able to 
home.” 
Now, 
bhesians 


bf truth, 
believed, 


e sealed 


inple for 
e blood, 

day of 
]. And 
with the 
go down 
e day of 
brvant of 
ving him 
, for you 


MAN'S RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT, 287 


are carrying a temple of the Holy Ghost.” By the Redeemer’s 
grace we become a temple, my friends, and are sealed for the day 
of redemption. 

The work of the Holy Ghost is the next point I wish to call your 
attention to. Turn to John xv. 26: 

“ But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you 
from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth from 
the Father, He shall testify of Me.” 

“He shall testify of me.” He saw Him when He went into © 
Heaven, when He came home after being down on this earth. He 
saw Him when He swept through the pearly gates, and then he 
came to testify of Him; and so when Peter came to speak of the 
day of Pentecost, and addressed those unbelievers of Jerusalem and 
told them He had ascended into Heaven, He indorsed Peter. 
That’s so. I suppose there were more converts made from that 
sermon of Peter than were made from the years of Christ’s teach- 
ing. Don’t you see, if He didn’t come and testify to men of Christ, 
we couldn’t convince men that He who had died such an ignomin- 
ious death outside the walls of Jerusalem—the death of a common 
malefactor—we couldn’t convince men that He wasa Saviovr The 
Greeks, in all their wisdom, couldn’t see this. The Jews can’t un 
derstand why His name has been heralded through the worid for 
nineteen centuries. It is the Holy Ghost convincing men that this 
Saviour is a living reality, and when we speak to inquirers we should 
remember that it is the Holy Ghost testifying this truth. Why, 
how quick they forgot His birth! They would have forgotten His 
death in thirty years if it hadn’t been for the Holy Ghost. We 
couldn’t convince men of Him as a Saviour if it wasn’t for the Holy 
Ghost. Said an old man some time ago in Chicago: “I don’t un- 
derstand the Holy Ghost. He's never revealed Himself to me. 
I can’t just get Him right in my mind.” ‘“ Well,” said the old 
saint he was talking to, “He don’t intend you should. He has 
come to testify of Christ; He don’t speak about Himself, He 
speaks of Christ.” This remark has helped me wonderfully when I 
have stood up and preached to the perishing multitude. My 
friends, if we but keep Christ up and put ourselves in the back- 
ground, He will be true to His mission. He will fulfill His prom- 
ises if we proclaim Him. Upon this point let me turn to 
John xvi. 13: 

“ Howbeit, when He, the Spirit of Truth, is conre, He will guide 


Se Ss SS Ee 


288 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


you into all truth; for He shall not speak of Himself; but what. 
soever He shall hear, that shall He speak; and He will show you 
things to come.” 

He don’t speak about Himself, but about the Master. In Genesis 
we find Abraham sending his faithful servant off into another coun- 
try for a bride for his only son Isaac. The servant went, and 
he found Rebekah at the well. He told her what his mission was; 
showed her jewels, and talked about his master’s son. He didn’t 
talk about himself. He came to get a bride for his master’s son. 
He represented the absent one to her, and his position, and at last 
she consented to go. Her parents wanted her to remain ten dave, 
Ah, those ten days! How many say they want to become Chnis- 
tians, but they must wait—wait just a few days more. The servant 
said, “ Call the damsel, and leave it with her.” Rebekah was called, 
and she was asked, “Wilt thou go with this man?” and she an- 
swered, “I will go.” I can see them starting off on their joyful 
journey, the servant talking to Rebekah all the time about Abraham’s 
son. It was that that prompted Rebekah to go with him. When 
they come home they see a man standing at the door of the house, 
and she asks, “ Whois that man?” ‘“ That’s my master’s son,” and 
he just handed the bride over to him. He brought her through the 
wilderness and then handed her over to his master’s son. That's 
the work of the Holy Ghost with the Church. He conducts the 
Church through the wilderness, and then will hand it over to the 
Bridegroom. Suppose a man came to me and said, “ Moody, I’m 
going down to Connecticut. You've an old mother on the Connect- 
icut River, and as I’m going near her place I will take any message 
you want to send her.” I give him a message, and when he gets to my 
mother’s home, he says, “‘ Mrs. Moody, I’ve just come from Chicago. 
Would you like to hear from your absent boy?” ‘Yes, I would; 
tell me all about him.” Well, he commences ‘o talk about nothing 
except what concerns himself. That’s not what she wants. She 
wants to hear from her absent boy. That’s what the bride wants to 
hear in this wilderness. He wants to hear about us, not about His 
servants. 

The next thought is, that the Holy Ghost is a teacher. The past 
and the future are all alike to God, and the Spirit will teach us all 
about the future. We can see what is before us in the misty future, 
and He will bring to remembrance all things past. If a man filled 
with the Spirit takes up this book and opens it, it seems as if it was 


fille 

anc 

the 

us, | 

we f 

have 

You 

was | 

in th 

futur 
ians, 

6c B 

have « 
pared 
But 

next y 

“ Bu 

Spirit : 

We 1 

lation y 
things, 

the king 

teaches 

unto us 

deep th 

they sa 
of it.” 

your kn 

of Hea 

inthe § 

the Spir 

find the 

wiil find 

churches 

after this 

won't fin 

can’t exp 

tures, 

Heaven, 

A great 


hat-. 
you 


nesis 
oun- 
and 
was } 
lidn’t 
s son. 
it last 
dave. 
Chris- 
ervant 
called, 
he an- 
joyful 
-aham’s 
When 
» house, 
yn,” and 
yugh the 
That's 
cts the 
ir to the 
ody, I'm 
onnect- 
message 
ets to my 
Chicago. 
I would; 
t nothing 
ts. She 
wants to 
bout His 


The past 
hch us all 
pty future, 
man filled 
AS if it was 


MAN'S RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT, 


289 


filled with light. You know before they lighted the hall how dim 
and dark everything luoked, but the moment the light was put to 
the gas, everything wasclear. So,when the Spirit of God falls upon 
us, we are filled with light and see wonderful things. Then, when 
we take up this Bible we will see things in a new way. We find we 
have everything in it—-it is the greatest book that was ever written. 
You talk about your newspapers—this is the only newspaper that 
was ever written in the world. It tells you all that has taken place 
in the past, and you will see all about the wonderful things in the 
future, if you study it with the Spirit. Turn over to First Corinth- 
ians, ii. 9, and we read: 

“But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither 
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath pre- 
pared for them that love Him.” 

But when people get here, then they stop, But let them read the 
next verse: 

“But God hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit; for the 
Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.” 

We need not be in darkness about our future home, for in Reve- 
lation we get a full description of it. By the Spirit we can see all 
things. Look at Stephen, how he, when filled with the Spirit, saw 
the kingdom of God. When the Spirit of God comes upon us He 
teaches us all about our future home, for “God hath revealed them 
unto us by His Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the 
deep things of God.” Many people when they come to some verse, 
they say, ‘It’s so dark and mysterious I can’t understand one word 
of it.” Suppose, if that’s the case with you, you just get down on 
your knees and cry, “ May the Spirit open my eyes; may the God 
of Heaven help me to dig out this deeptruth.” There are passages 
in the Scriptures deep and dark that we can not solve unless we have 
the Spirit. You can not find all about them in a day; you can’t 
find them all at once; but if the Spirit of God is our teacher, we 
will find out wonderful things. And I have not much hope in the 
churches till the ministers understand them. If a man is running 
after this or that minister, especially if he preaches moral essays, he 
won't find it out. If the Church of God teach by the Spirit, you 
can’t expect it to know much about the deep things in the Scrip- 
tures; When we have the Spirit of God we learn the secrets of 
Heaven. 

A great difficulty with us is that the Spirit of God is not sufficiently 
19 


290 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


alone with us. If we want to get the secrets of Heaven we have to 
be alone with God an hour or two a day. If we are continually in 
the buzz of the world, and don’t give God a chance to tell them to 
us, we can’t expect to learn them. Why, it is when I am alone with 
my wife that I talk about my secrets, and so when the children of 
God are alone with Him it is then that He will tell them the secrets 
of Heaven. May the Spirit of the living God show us the deep 
things of the Scriptures. My friends, the Gospel of Jesus Christ is 
not a matter of investigation, but a matter of revelation, and when 
the Spirit shows Himself to us in His beauty and loveliness, this 
world will look very small. 


(Mr. Moody’s Bible-readings on the Holy Spirit will be found 
among the Addresses. ] 


ve to 
lly in 
em to 
e with 
‘en of 
secrets 
e deep 
hrist is 
d when 
ass, this 


e found 


XXXIV. 


PERSONAL REMINISCENCES OF CHRISTIAN 
WORK. 


DAN. xi. 32: “ The people that do know their God shall be strong and do exploits.” 


SHOULD like to go on talking about Daniel. We find in the 

ninth, and tenth, and eleventh chapters that three times a mes- 

senger from Heaven came to him, and told him he was beloved 
of the Lord. He might have been unpopular on earth, but he 
was very popular in Heaven. But I must call your attention to 
the matter of Christian work, and, in doing so, we will take a text 
out of this same book of Daniel, the twelfth chapter, the second and 
third verses : 

“And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall 
awake, some tc everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting 
contempt. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of 
the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars 
forever and ever.” 

This was the angel’s comfort to Daniel, and a great comfort it 
was. The fact with all of us is, that we like to shine. There is 
no doubt about that. Every mother likes her childto shine. If her 
boy shines at school by getting to the head of his class, the proud 
mother tells all the neighbors, and she has a right to. But it is not 
the great of this world that will shine the brightest. For a few 
years they may shed bright light; but they go out in darkness ; with- 
out an inner light supplying the brightness, they go out in black 
darkness. Where are the great men who did not know Daniel's 
God? Did they shine long? Why, we know of Nebuchadnezzar 
and the rest of them scarcely a thing, except as they fill in the story 
about these humble men of God. We are not told that statesmen 
shall shine. They may for a few years or days, but they are soon 
forgotten. Look at those great ones whe pissed away in the days 
of Daniel. How wise in council they were, how mighty and victo- 
tious over hundreds of nations; what gods upon earth they were! 
(291) 


292 MVOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYEAS, 


Yet their names are forgotten and written in the grave. Philoso. 
phers, falsely so-called, do they live? Behold men of science—scien- 
. tific men they call themselves—going down into the bowels of the 
carth, digging away at some carcass, and trying to make it talk 
against the voice of God. They shall go down to death by and 
by, and their names shall rot. But the man of God shines. Yes, 
he it is who shall shine as the stars forever and ever. This Daniel has 
been gone for twenty-five hundred years, but still increasing millions 
read of his life and actions. And so it shall be to the end; he will only 
get better known and better loved; he shall only shine the brighter 
as the world grows older. Of a truth, they that be wise and tun 
many to righteousness shall shine on, like stars, to eternity. 

And this blessed, thrice blessed happiness, like all the blessings 
of God’s kingdom, is for every one. Even without the first claim 
to education or refinement you can shine, if you will. One of you 
sailors there can shine forever if you only go to work for the king. 
dom. The Bible don’t say the grext shall shine, but they that turn 
many to righteousness. A false impression has got hold of many 
of God’s people. They have got the idea that only a few can talk 
about God’s affairs. Nine-tenths of people say, if anything is to 
be done for the souls of men, “Oh, the ministers must do it.” It 
doesn’t enter into the hearts of the people that they have any part in 
the matter. It is the devil’s work to keep Christians from the blessed 
luxury of winning souls to God. Any onecan dothis work. A little 
girl, only eleven years old, once came to me in a Sunday-school and 
said: “ Won’t you please pray that God will make me a winner of 
souls?” I felt so proud of her, and my pride was justified, for she has 
become one of the best winners of souls in this country. Oh, sup- 
pose she lives three-score years and goes on winning four or five 
souls every year; at the end of her journey there will be three hun- 
dred souls on the way to glory. And how long will it be before 
that little company swells to a great army? Don’t you sce how that 
little mountain rill keeps swelling till it carries everything before it? 
Little trickling streams have run into it, till now, a mighty river, it 
has great cities on its banks, and the commerce of all nations float- 
ing on its waters. So when a single soul is won to Christ you can 
not see the result. A single one multiplies to a thousand, and that 
into ten thousand. Perhaps a million shall be the fruit; we can 
not tell. We only know that the Christian who has turned so many 
to righteousness shall indeed shine forever and ever. Look at 


prayed 
all of 4 
boy wd 
used b 


' re 


day pag 
And it 
If wea 
Says, “ ¢ 


‘iloso. 
scien- 
of the 
t talk 
yy and 
Yes, 
iel has 
nillions 
ill only 
yrighter 
ad turn 


lessings 
st claim 
2 of you 
he king- 
hat turn 
of many 
can talk 
ing is to 
ite ss oe 
ny part in 
e blessed 
A little 
hool and 
vinner of 
or she has 
Oh, sup- 
bur or five 
hree hun- 
be before 
p how that 
before it? 
ty river, it 


ions float- 
t you can 
H, and that 
t; we can 
d so many 

Look at 


PERSONAL REMINISCENCES OF CHRISTIAN WORK. 293 


those poor fishermen, Jesus’ disciples, how unlettered. They were 
not learned men, but great in winning souls. So not a child here 
but can work for God. 

The one thing that keeps people from work is that they don’t 
have the desire. If a man has this desire, God soon qualifies him; 
and what we want is God’s qualification; it must come from Him. 
I have been thinking what shall be done the next thirty days that I 
continue to preach here. If I should just put. it to vote, and asked 
all Christians who wanted prayers to rise, all of you, I know, would 
rise. There are at least three thousand Christians here. Now, is it 
too much to ask that three thousan | Christians will each lead one 
soul to Christ this coming week? The Son of God died on the 
cross for you. Right here in this Tabernacle you can tell those 
weeping over their sins about God and Heaven. How many times 
I have watched, just to see if Christians would speak to these sor- 
rowing ones. If we only had open-eyed watchers for souls, there 
wouldn’t be a night but five hundred or a thousand inquirers would 
crowd into the inquiry-rooms. These anxious inquirers are at every 
meeting, just waiting to have warm-hearted Christians bring them 
to Christ. They’re timid, but will always listen to one speaking to 
them about Christ. Suppose each one of you now prayed: “Give 
me some soul this week for my hire;” what would be the result ? 
This room would not hold the multitude sending up shouts of praise: 
to God and making Heaven glad. Where there is an anxiousisin-. 
ner there is the place for the Christian. 

A little bed-ridden boy I knew kept mourning that he couldn't 
work for Jesus. The minister told him to pray, and pray he did’;. 
and the persons he prayed for one by one felt the load of their sins 
and professed Christ. When he heard that such. a: one had not 
given in, he just turned his face to the wall and. prayed harder. 
Well, he died, when, by his little memorandum, it was;found he had 
prayed for fifty-six persons daily by name, and before-he was buried, 
all of them had given their hearts to Jesus. Tell me that little 
boy won’t shine in the kingdom of God! These little ones can be 
used by God. 

' remember a good many years ago. I resolved I wouldn’t let a 
day pass without talking to some one about their soul’s salvation. 
And it was in that school God qualified. me to speak the Gospel. 
If we are faithful over small things God will. promote us. If God 
says, “Speak to that young man,” ebey the-word, and you will be 


294 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


given by and by plenty of souls. I went down past the corner of 
Clark and Lake streets one day, and, fulfilling my vow, on seeing a 
man leaning up against a lamp-post, I went up to him and said, “ Are 
you a Christian?"’ He damned me and cursed me, and said to 
mind my own business. He knew me, but I didn’t know him. He 
said to a friend of his that afternoon that he had never been so in- 
sulted in his life, and told him to say to me that I was damning the 
cause I pretended to. represent. Well, the friend came and deliv- 
ered the message. ‘ May be I am doing more hurt than good,” | 
said; “may be I’m mistaken, and God hasn’t shown me the right 
way.” That was the time I was sleeping and living in the Young 
Men’s Christian Association’ rooms, where I was then president, 
secretary, janitor, and everything else. Well, one night after mid- 
night I heard a knock at the door. And there on the step leading 
into the street stood this stranger I had made so mad at the lamp- 
post, and he said he wanted to talk to me about his soul’s salvation. 
He said, ‘Do you remember the man you met about three months 
ago at a lamp-post, and how he cursed you? I have had no peace 
since that night; I couldn’t sleep. Oh, tell me what to do to be 
saved.” And we just fell down on our knees, and I prayed; and 
‘that day he went to the noon prayer-meeting and openly confessed 
‘the Saviour, and soon after went to the war a Christian man. I do 
mot know but he died on some Southern battle-field or in a hos. 
jpital, but I expect to see him in the kingdom of God. Oh, how 
‘often have I thanked God for that word to that dying sinner that 
He put into my mouth ! : 

And I have just been engaged in this personal work all my life. 
‘God’s business is not to be done wholesale. Think of the Master 
Himself talking just to Nicodemus; and then how He talked to that 
‘poor woman at the well of Samaria. Christ’s greatest utterances 
were delivered to congregations of one or two. How many are 
willing to speak to tens of thousands, but not to speak to a few. 
I knew a man who was going to get rich and do large things for 
God, but he never did anything; he wouldn’t do little things—that 
was the secret. Oh, be willing, Christians, to be built into the tem- 
iple, as a polished cap-stone, or just a single brick—no matter just 
‘how, but somehow. Say to yourself in your homes, in your Sunday- 
school classes, in your daily rounds, “I'll not let this sun go down 
'till I lead one soul to Christ.” And then, having done all, shall you 
shine as gems in the great white throne forever and ever. 


my. 
the: 
soul 
you 
bloo 
ter? 
give 
ques 
stand 
one { 
have 
He y 
man 
andt 
come 
as J 
some 
ten d 
Full 
tors sj 
It wag 
they 1 
and t 
ful nig 
down 
gathe 
seemed 


ver of 
sing a 

“ Are 
rid to 
.. He 
so in- 
ng the 

deliv- 
90d,” I 
e right 
Young 
esident, 
er mid- 
leading 
1e lamp- 
alvation. 
. months 
no peace 
do to be 
ved; and 
onfessed 
shew I do 
in a hos- 
Oh, how 
nner that 


1 my life. 
e Master 
ed to that 
tterances 
many are 
to a few. 
hings for 
ngs—that 
bh the tem- 
atter just 
r Sunday- 
go down 
, shall you 


PERSONAL REMINISCENCES OF CHRISTIAN WORK. 295 

I want to tell you how I got the first impulse to work solely for 
the conversion of men. For a long time after my conversion I 
didn’t accomplish anything. I hadn’t got into my right place, that 
was it. I hadn’t thought enough of this personal work. I’d get up 
in prayer-meeting, and I’d pray with the others, but just to go up 
to a man and take hold of his coat and get him down on his knees, 
I hadn’t yet got round to that. It was in 1860 the change came. 
In the Sunday-school I had a pale, delicate young man as one of the 
teachers. I knew his burning piety, and assigned him to the worst 
class in the school. They were all girls, and it was an awful class. 
They kept gadding around in the school-room, and were laughing 
and carrying on all the while. And this young man had better 
success than any one else. One Sunday he was absent, and I tried 
myself to teach the class, but couldn’t do anything with them; 
they seemed farther off than ever from any concern about their 
souls. Well, the day after his absence, early Monday morning, the 
young man came into the store where I worked, and, tottering and 
bloodless, threw himself down on some boxes. ‘ What’s the mat- 
ter?” I said. “I have been bleeding at the lungs, and they have 
given me up to die,” hesaid. “But you are not afraid to die?” I 
questioned. “No,” said he, “I am not afraid to die, but I have got to 
stand before God and give an account of my stewardship, and not 
one of my Sabbath-school scholars has been brought to Jesus. I 
have failed to bring one, and haven’t any strength to do it now.” 
He was so weighed down that I got a carriage and took that dying 
man in it, and we called at the homes of every one of his scholars, 
and to each one he said, as best his faint voice would let him, “I have 
come to just ask you to come to the Saviour,” and then he prayed 
as I never heard before. And for ten days he labored in that way, 
sometimes walking to the nearest houses; and at the end of that 
ten days every one of that large class had yielded to the Saviour. 
Full well I remember the night before he went away (for the doc- 
tors said he must hurry to the South), how we held a true love-feast. 
It was the very gate of Heaven, that meeting. He prayed and 
they prayed; he didn’t ask them, he didn’t think they could pray ; 
and then we sang “ Blest be the tie that binds.” It was a beauti- 
ful night in June that he left on the Michigan Southern, and I was 
down to the train to help him off. And those girls, every one, 
gathered there again, all unknown to each other; and the depot 
seemed a second gate to Heaven, in the joyful, yet tearful, commun- 


296 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


ion and farewells between these newly-redeemed souls and him whose 
crown of rejoicing it will be that he led them to Jesus. At last the 
gong sounded, and, supported on the platform, the dying man shook 
hands with each one and whispered, “I will meet you yonder,” 
Some of the very best, most constant teachers I had, before going to 
Europe, were converted at that time, and they in their turn have 
gathered many sheaves, and I myself was led by this incident—this 
wonderful blessing of God on individual effort—to throw up my 
business and give my whole strength to God’s work. 


| Shall not that young man have a high place, a place very near the MAI 
i Saviour of men, in the day when He makes up His jewels? Oh, th 
friends, if you want to shine in the kingdom of God, work for Him sa 


to-day. Shall not every one go out of this building saying, “I will 
try to bring one soul to Christ to-day ?” 


tellin; 
utes 
ofar 
dept 
lion o 
ye int 
that D 
Not s 
No 
would 
unless 
would 


vhose 
st the 
shook 
nder.” 


ing to 
. have 
—this 
ip my 


ear the 
? Oh, 
or Him 
“T will 


XXXV. 
GOD WANTS EVERYBODY SAVED. 


MARK xvi. 15, 16: “‘ And He said unto them, Go ye into all the world and preach 
the Gospel to every creature; and he that believeth and is baptized, shall be 
saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.” 


LIKE these texts —they’ve got sucha sweep in them; they 

take in everybody. You know the great difficulty is to make 

all people believe that you are preaching to them individ- 
ually. A text like this takes in every one. It says, “Go ye into 
all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature; don’t leave 
out one.” When He delivered this command to His followers 
He was on His way home—to the land where all knew Him 
and all loved Him. Gethsemane, with its hours of agony and 
blood, was over. He could now look beyond it. He had been 
brought before Pilate and also before the Sanhedrim, and had 
been tried and condemned. All that was past. Calvary, with 
ail its horrors, was over, and the empty sepulchre lay behind Him, 
and He stood with a little body of believers around Him, witha 
little handful of men, who had stood by Him in His conflict with 
the Pharisees and priests, and now He was giving them His parting 
words—a mission, as it were. It was the Captain of our salvation, 
telling His warriors what to do after He was gone. Ina few min- 
utes He was to be caught up into Heaven. They were the words 
of a resurrected man—a man who had gone down and sounded the 
depths of the grave; a man who had gone down and conquered the 
lion of hell, and now stood on resurrection ground as He said, “Go 
ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature. He 
that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth 
not shall be damned.” 

Now I want to ask you the question, Do you believe that He 
would send those men ot to preach the Gospel to every creature 
unless He vanted every creature to be saved? Do you believe He 
would tell them to preach it to people without giving people the 

(297) 


298 YUOOD t’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


power to accept it? Do you believe that the God cf Heaven is 
mocking men by offering them this Gospel and not giving them the 
power to take hold of it ? Do you believe He will not give men power 
to accept this salvation as a gift? Man might do that, but God 
never mocks men. And when He says, “ Preach the Gospel to 
every creature,” every creature can be saved if he will. For 
eighteen hundred years the heralds of the cross have been crossing 
seas and fording rivers, have been enduring hardships and persecu- 
tion, in testifying to the people these glorious truths of the Gospel. 
Their spirits have gone up amid flames and tortures, and they have 
died in prison because of their preaching of the Gospel. To-day 
we live in an open land, where the Gospel is as free as the air. 
Remember that it cost all God had to give it, and every poor, miser- 
able sinner on the earth can be saved for nothing. It is free to all, 
but don’t forget that it cost God the Son of His love, the Son of 
His bosom, to redeem a rebellious world. If you are saved, bear 
this in mind, that it is a free gift, but it cost God everything. Its 
reading is that whosoever believes it within the sound of my voice 
can have it. Some people come to me and say, “ Mr. Moody, 
don’t you feel a great responsibility when you come before an 
audience like this—don’t you feel a great weight upon your 
shoulders?” “ Well,” I say, “no; I can not convert men; I can 
only proclaim the Gospel.” Not only that, but I tell you that God 
gives me a mission to preach it to every creature. I don’t care to what 
nationality you belong, what has been your early training, how far 
you are sunk in iniquity—I don’t care who or what you may be—I 
tell you, you have to receive the Gospel and be saved, or reject it 
and be damned. That’s the Scripture. I was talking to a man, and 
I asked him, ‘“ Would you like to become a Christian?” “ No, sir.” 
“You would rather be damned, eh?” “Well, I wouldn’t exactly 
like to put it that way,” he replied. “Well,” I said, “that’s the way 
you're putting it.” My friends, let’s put it in plain English, so that 
we can get hold of it. Are there any here who are willing to say 
coolly, and calmly, and deliberately, “I don’t want salvation as a 
gift, I don’t want to be saved?”” Would you rather go down fight- 
ing God and the Son of His love, than accept them and be saved? 
Now, the invitation is to every one. “Go ye into all the world and 
preach the Gospel to every creature.” It is so hard to make people 
believe it ‘s for them—to make them take it right home. Mr. Spur 
geon told me that he once went to his orphanage ona visit. He 


en is 
1 the 
ower 
God 
vel to 
For 
ssing 
rsecu- 
ospel. 
7 have 
‘o-day 
he air. 
miser- 
to all, 
Son of 
d, bear 
g. Its 
y voice 
Moody, 
ore an 
yn your 
; I can 
at God 
to what 
how far 
y be—I 
reject it 
an, and 
No, sit.” 
exactly 
the way 
, SO that 
p to say 
ion as a 
n fight- 
e saved? 
orld and 
e people 
r. Spur 
isit. He 


GOD WANTS EVERYBODY SAVED. 299 


said that a great many of those orphans had uncles and aunts, and 
cousins and sisters, who brought them Christmas presents. While 
he was on this visit, a little boy came to him and said, “ Mr. Spur- 
geon, will you let me talk to you a minute?”’ “ Yes, my boy; what 
is it you want?” “Well,” said the boy, “Mr. Spurgeon, suppose 
you were a poor little boy and had no aunts, or cousins, or sisters, 
or brothers, and had nobody to bring you any presents, and you saw 
others who had uncles and aunts, and cousins and sisters, and who 
brought presents to them, wouldn’t you feel bad?” “Why, yes,” 
replied Mr. Spurgeon. ‘“ That’s me; that’s me,” said the boy. 
He got Mr. Spurgeon right down to the point; and so, if men 
would just say: “This Gospel is for us; I believe it is for myself,” 
there would be hope for them being saved. Now, I don’t see how 
you can get away from this text, it is put so plain. Don’t reject it 
any longer, my friends; every time you hear it your heart is getting 
harder and harder, and you will, the longer you keep away, have 
more difficulty in bending your will to its acceptance. I tell you, you 
will have to do either of two things to-night—reject it or receive it. 
I remember a man, upon hearing this, getting up in a furious pas- 
sion, and stamping up and down. “The idea of any one saying: 
we've got to receive it or reject it.” He didn’t like the plain state- 
ment. Well, my friends, can we tell you anything else? The 
audience must be divided into two classes, those who will receive it 
and those who will reject it. It is for you to decide on which side 
you will be. As many as receive it He will give power to become 
the sons and daughters of God. 

The question now is, what are you going to do with God’s gift ? 
The question comes home to every one within this building. What 
are you going to do with the gift of God’s love? You must either 
trample Him under your feet and make light of what He has offered 
us, or you must receive Him as our Way, our Truth, our Light. I was 
down at the Ohio Penitentiary a few years ago, and the chaplain 
said to me, “1 want to tell you a scene that occurred some time 
ago. Our commissioner went to the Governor of the State and 
asked him if he wouldn’t pardon out five men at the end of six 
months, who stood highest on the list for good behavior. The 
Governor consented, and the record was to be kept secret; the men 
were not to know anything about it. The six months rolled away 
and the prisoners were all brought up—eleven hundred of them— 
and the president of the commission came up and said: “I hold in 


set. annua rat 


IRANIAN 


- ; es : ; : 
a neni casein rater consent trennSe: nee iS eaesorneaseln se sae 


300 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


my hand pardons for five men.” I never witnessed anything like it. 
Every man held his breath, and you could almost hear the throbbing 
of every man’s heart. “ Pardons for five men;” and the commis- 
sioner went on to tell the men how they had got these pardons— 
how the Governor had given them; but the chaplain said the sur- 
prise was so great that he told the commissioner to read first the 
names and tell the reason afterward. The first name was called— 
“Reuben Johnson”—and he held out the pardon, but not a man 
moved. He looked all around, expecting to see a man spring to 
his feet at once; but no one moved. The commissioner turned to 
the officer of the prison and inquired: “ Are all the convicts here?” 
“Yes,” was the reply. “Reuben Johnson, come forward and get 
your pardon; you are no longer a criminal.” Still no one moved. 
The real Reuben Johnson was looking, all the time, behind him 
and around him to see where Reuben was. The chaplain saw him 
standing right in front of the commissioner, and beckoned to him; 
but he only turned and looked around him, thinking that the chap. 
lain must mean some other Reuben. A second time he beckoned 
to Reuben and called to him, and a second time the man looked 
around. At last the chaplain said to him: ‘“ You are the Reuben.” 
He had been there for nineteen years, having been placed there for 
life, and he could not conceive it would be for him. At last it be- 
gan to dawn upon him, and he took the pardon from the commis 
sioner’s hand, saw his name attached to it, and wept like a child. 
This is the way that men make out pardons for men; but, thank 
God, we have not to come and say we have pardons only for five 
meéen—for those who behaved themselves. We have assurance of 
pardon for every man. ‘“ Whosoever will, let him drink of the water 
of life’’—it is offered to every thief and harlot, to every gambler 
and drunkard; salvation for every one. Salvation is offered to every 
man, woman, and child. 

I can just imagine the scene, as those warriors of the Cross stood 
around Christ, the tears trickling down the cheeks of Peter as he 
says, upon hearing the command, “ You don’t mean, when you com- 
mand us to preach to every creature, that we are to tell the Gospel 
to those unbelievers—to those murderers in Jerusalem?” “Yes; go 
first to those Jerusalem sinners.” And at that scene of Pentecost I can 
imagine a man coming up and saying, “ Peter, Iam the man that 
spat in His face; you don’t mean to say I can be saved?” “Yes, 
every one of you, for He te!d me before He left, to preach the Gospel 


e it. 
bing 
mis- 
ns-— 
sur- 
: the 
led— 
/man 
ig to 
ed to 
ere?” 
d get 
1oved. 
d him 
w him 
> him; 
. chap- 
*koned 
looked 
uben.” 
vere for 
it be- 
ommis 
h child. 
, thank 
for five 
ance of 
he water 
gambler 
o every 


bss stood 
r as he 

ou com- 
le Gospel 
Yes; go 

ost Ican 

an that 
«Yes, 

e Gospel 


GOD WANTS EVERYBODY SA}! ED, 301 


to every creature.” Another man comes up and says: “ Peter, lam 
the one who made a crown of thorns; do you think I can be saved ?” 
“Yes, He will give you, in return, the crown of life.” “Iam the 
man,” says another, “who drove the spear into His side.” ‘Yes, I 
know it,” replies Peter, “for I saw you doing it; but even you can 
be saved.” My friends, if those Jerusalem sinners can be saved, 
there is hope for the sinners of Chicago. One man, in drawing that 
scene, said he could fancy Peter saying, ‘Surely you don’t mean that 
we are to go back to Jerusalem and preach to those men who sacrificed 
You—who spat in Your face?” “Yes, hunt them up; hunt up that 
man who drove the spear into My side, and tell him in its place I 
will put a sceptre in his hand if he will accept salvation from Me; 
unto that man who made a crown of thorns for My head, say I will 
give a crown of glory; tell them there is forgiveness for all.” Oh, 
my friends, the Gospel is for every creature. Take salvation as a 
gift. It is for you. God says plainly He does not will any one to 
death—He wants all to be saved. 

When I was East, a few years ago, Mr. Geo. H. Stewart told me 
of a scene that occurred in a Pennsylvania prison, when Governor 
Pollock, a Christian man, was Governor of that State. A man was 
tried for murder, and the judge had pronounced sentence upon him. 
His friends had tried every means in their power to procure his 
pardon. They had sent dept tation after deputation to the Governor, 
but he had told them all that the law must take its course. When 
they began to give up hope, the Governor went down to the prison 
aid asked the Sheriff to take him to the cell of the condemned man. 
The Governor was conducted into the presence of the criminal, and 
he sat down by the side of his bed and began to talk to him kindly 
—spoke to him of Christ and Heaven, and showed him that although 
he was condemned to die on the morrow by earthly judges, he would 
receive eternal life from the Divine Judge if he would accept salva- 
tion. He explained the plan of salvation, and when he left him he 
committed him to God. When he was gone the Sheriff was called 
to the cell by the condemned man. “Who was that man,’ asked 
the criminal, ‘“ who was in here and talked so kind to me?” “ Why,” 
said the Sheriff, “that was Governor Pollock.” “ Was that Governor 
Pollock? O, Sheriff, why didn’t you tell me who it was? If I had 
known that was him I wouldn’t have let him go out till he had given 
me pardon. The Go,crnor has been here—in my cell—and I didn’t 
know it,’ and the man wrung his hands and wept bitterly. My 


302 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


friends, there is one greater than a Governor here. He sent His Son 
to redeem you—to bring you out of the prison house of sin, 
I come to tell you He is here. You haven't got to go to Heaven 
to bring Him down. He is here now waiting for your acceptance. 
You can be saved for time and eternity if you will. My friends, 
what will you do? Accept Him and receive the crown of glory, or 
reject Him and be lost? It rests with you to decide. 


7, OF 


XXXVI. 


THE PRODIGAL SON. 


LURE xv. 32: ‘This thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, 
and is found.” 


W * have for our text to-night a man, and that man is the 
one we have been singing about—that one who watidered 

off from the fold. The trouble with that young man 
was that he started wrong, and I think you will find that that is 
the trouble with nine-tenths of the young men who start out in 
this life. They start with wrong ideas of life, and when a man 
starts with wrong ideas of life, the battle goes against him, and 
there is nothing but the grace of God will help him—in fact, 
there is nothing but the grace of God will help any of us. If you 
had talked to this young man and pointed out to him the proper 
way, and put before him the grace of God, he would have told you 
he could get along well enough without the grace of God; he was 
all right. We are not told what led himtoleave his home. Perhaps 
it was restraint; perhaps he had had a difficulty with his brother; 
perhaps his father wanted to keep him in too much, and he thought 
if he could only get away from his father’s influence into a far land, 
then he would have no one to trouble him. It might have been 
that his mother went down to her grave praying for him, and he 
thought perhaps that if he could only get away to a foreign land 
he could forget her entreaties and her counsel. So one day he said 
to that father, “ Just divide my inheritance, and I will go away 
altogether,” and his wish was granted. I think it wasa mistak’. on the 
father’s part. If I had a wayward boy, and I wasrich, and he wanted 
a large sum of money to go away, I wouldn’t give it to him. It 
would be his ruin. I would tell him to go away and work. It 
would be a curse instead of a blessing to the boy to be in idleness 
and have plenty of money. That’s the reason why so many rich 
men’s sons are ruined. We hear people saying, “ Oh, that’s a self- 
made man,” and pointing to him with admiration; but a rich man 


(303) 


- eee 


304 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


who has nothing to do, if he lives a righteous life, deserves far more 
credit. A rich man has temptation dogging his footsteps through 
life. Money will bring a man to ruin soon enough if he has not 
righteousness. Well, the boy got his money, and away he went. 
He feels very independent; he can take care of himself; he can 
work his own way. I don’t know where he went to. Perhaps he 
went away down to Memphis, and perhaps he went to Egypt —got 
as far away from home as he could. When he went away he soon 
commenced to go down to ruin. When he gets down to that part of 
the country he suddenly becomes very popular with a certain class of 
men. Perhaps he was very popular with the men who hung around 
the opera house, or the theatre, or the billiard halls. A great 
many courted his company. Perhaps he was a good talker; per- 
haps he was a good singer, and could sing a comic song; perhaps 
he was a literary man, and entertained them with his wit, and all 
were delighted with him. But as we would say, he got at the‘end 
of his rope, and when his money gave out, his friends disappeared. 
The poor fellow was in a blaze of glory while his money lasted, but 
when it had gone he woke up to find himself without friends. A 
man in New England said while his money lasted he had friends, 
but when he was ruined and in prison he found out who his real 
friends were. Not one of his old friends came near him, but the 
Christian people came and spoke to him words of kindness and 
comfort, and it was then he made the discovery who his true friends 
were, So this young prodigal didn’t get his eyes open til! his 
money was all gone. No one in that foreign country loved him 
then, no one in that land cared for him; but away off over those 
green hills there was one who loved him still. 

Some one has tried tosum up what that young man had lost, his 
friends and his money, and he had to go to work to take care of 
swine. That was about the meanest occupation he could have 
taken to. The Jews detested swine. Why, in our day a Jew won't 
lo_-x at swine’s flesh. He went to work, however, instead of beg- 
ging, and that was something in his favor. I’ve a good deal more 
respect fora man who will work, however mean the occupation, 
than if he begs. A man who won't work is a most hopeless case. 
I’ve tried to help that class, but I’ve about given up all hope for 
alazy man. A lazy man isa good deal worse than this prodigal, 
even at his work. This was one redeeming trait in his character. 
He sunk all pride and took to this despised occupation. The next 


with 
try c 
and t 
ness, 
“You 
clothe 
you tl 
igal w 
the sk 
God. 
in tha 
home} 
He ha 
poor p 
been, < 
to hell 
pitiful 
in want 
had wri 
and hig 
come w 
At las 
his sense 
of natio 
turned ; 
heen rvj 
times y 
aman ha 


nore 
ugh 
; not 
vent. 
> can 
ps he 
—got 
» soon 
art of 
lass of 
round 
_ great 
ir, per- 
yerhaps 
and all 
the‘end 
peared. 
ted, but 
nds. A 
friends, 
his real 
but the 
ess and 
e friends 
till his 
ed him 
er those 


lost, his 
b care of 
ld have 
ew won't 
1 of beg- 
eal more 
cupation, 
less case. 
hope for 
prodigal, 
haracter. 
The next 


THE PRODIGAL SON. 308 
thing he lost was his food. His father might have a gocd, full 
table, but it was not long enough to reach him. He was starving; 
he could not even get the husks with which they fed the swine. 
There he was away from his father in the devil’s country, starving. 
My friends, that’s the way the devil treats all who come into his 
country. Oh, I pity any here who have got into that country. 
When he gets you there, you go down, down, and then he tells you 
to put a revolver to your head and blow your brains out. That’s 
the way the devil treats his followers. He lost his friends and food 
and then he lost his testimony. No one would believe him. Why, 
when he told them he was the son of a wealthy man, who among 
them would believe him? [can see him standing without his coat, 
without his hat, or his shoes, as some fast young men of that coun- 
try came along who had helped him to gamble his money away, 
and they point at him with scorn and laugh at him in his wretched- 
ness. I can see his look of indignation rising in him as he says: 
“You laugh at me; why, my father’s servants have more good 
clothes than you have; he’s got more money than you all.” But do 
you think they believe him? Not they. It is just like that prod- 
igal who turns his back upon God. Who will believe him? Even 
the skeptics and infidels laugh at the men who have betrayed their 
God. So this poor fellow loses his testimony. He has no home 
in that part of the country. His associates, did they offer him a: 
home? Did they stretch out the hand of pity? Not one of them,. 
He had lost everything but a father’s love; and let me say to you, 
poor prodigal, God loves you still, in spite of all you have done and 
been, and there is one thing, if you do persist you must go.down 
to hell trampling on love. A man in want wrote to me to-night a 
pitiful letter. He asked, “If God loves me, why does He keep me 
inwant?”’ The reason is very plain tome. Why, if that prodigal 
had written to his father for money without any sign of repentance, 
and his father had given him the money, he would.only have be- 
come worse. God loves men too much to give them,their desires. 
At last a famine struck that land, and it brought the prodigal to 
hissenses. Prosperity was his ruination, as it has been the ruination’ 
of nations. Why, it was when Jerusalem. got prosperous that it 
turned against the Lord. How many men in this country have 
heen ruined by the prosperity we have had! Now we have hard 
times upon us, and we should thank God for these hard times. If 


aman has prosperity and turns from.God, he comes to want. All 
20 


— > - 4 
=e 
SN eee 


— Se —— = — 


nO 
Hit 


306 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


the wealth of the world can not satisfy any one who has ever known 
God. There is a void in his breast that can not be filled till the 
love of God comes in. Look at him now, as he stands in his miser- 
able condition. Perhaps a neighbor comes along the streets and 
sees him; perhaps he has lived next door to his father. He comes 
up to him. and he says, ‘“ Why, have you been here since you left 
home?” “Yes.” “You don’t seem to be getting on very well. 
Before I came away I told your father I was coming here, and he 
told me if I met you, to say he loves you still, and wants you to 
come back.” I can see the prodigal’s eye light up as he asks, ‘‘ Does 
my father ever speak about me?” ‘“ Everspeak of you! He doesn't 
speak about any one else. He dreams of you at night; he’s had no 
peace since you left, and I believe if you stay away much longer his 
grief will bring him to his grave.” His father loves him as much as 
ever! Hedoesn’t say much, but goes away to the field and begins to 
think. It would be a good thing if we could get men to think, 
If we could get the people of Chicago to rest for twenty-four hours, 
and just think where they are, whither they are going; to look into 
the future, they would soon come to their Father. Well, the young 
man got down on his knees and buried his face in his hands, like 
Elijah on Mount Carmel, and began to think of that home over 
ithose green hills and under that blue sky; he thinks of his father’s 
‘love and kindness to him, and takes a look at his condition, and the 
thought comes to him, “I perish if I stay here.” Sinner, take a 
look at your condition. Think what is going to become of you if 
you remain as you are. O prodigal, O harlot, O thief, O wanderer, 
ask yourself what is your eternity to be—what is going to be the 
end of your miserable existence. He looks to the past, and re. 
members how that mother went down to her grave praying for him, 
and, perhaps, recollects how she left him with her blessing. He 
might have been wealthy enough to purchase a manuscr'pt Bible, 
and he recollects how his father used to turn to that beautiful psalm 
and read to them, “ The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.” 
That psalm comes into his mind, and as he thinks of his starving 
condition he says, “ There’s bread enough in my father’s house, and 
to spare. His servants are a great deal better off than I am,” and 
he keeps thinking of what that neighbor told him about his father's 
‘love. He remembers the morning he left him, he can see his father 
as he stood at the door bidding him good-bye, nearly overcome with 
grief. -All the incidents of kindness in his early life come before 


place 
with 
prodi 
child 
alive, 
old md 
return 
mourn 
mothe 
writte 
is it si 
half.” 
teplied 
If I we 
heart.” 
tell her 
glad I 
and mo 
parents 
father’s 
or whet 
father’s 
the cool 


r known 
till thie 

is miser- 

eets and 

fe comes 
you left 

very well. 

e, and he 

ts you to 

ks, ‘‘ Does 

Je doesn't 

1e’s had no 

longer his 

as much as 

d begins to 

n to think. 

-four hours, 

to look into 

1, the young 
hands, like 
home overt 
his father’s 
ion, and the 
nner, take a 
e of you if 
O wanderer, 

g to be the 

hast, and re- 

ing for him, 

lessing. He 

scrpt Bible, 

autiful psalm 

1 not want.” 
his starving 

’s house, and 
I am,” ard 

t his father’s 

bee his father 

ercome with 

come before 


THE PRODIGAL SON. 307 


him, and at last he says, “I will arise and go to my father; if I stay 
here longer I will perish with hunger.” That was the turning point 
in that prodigal’s life; it was when he came to himself. I can im. 
agine an angel hovering over him, and the moment he said “I will,’ 
that angel flew up faster than the morning light, and there was joy 
around the throne of Heaven over one sinner that repenteth. Nine- 
tenths of the battle of becoming a Christian is to make up your 
mind. So it waswith him. But I can see him now he has resolved. 
His old associates laugh at him, but what does he care for public 
opinion. “I have made up my mind,” he says. He doesn’t stay to 
get a new suit of clothes, as some men do in coming to Christ. 
They want to do some good deeds before they come; he just start- 
ed as he was. I see him walking on through dusty roads and over 
hills, and fording brooks and rivers. It didn’t take him long to go 
home when he made up his mind. Then the prodigal is nearing 
the homestead—see him. I remember going home after being away 
fora few months. How I longed to catch a glimpse of that old 
place! As I neared it, I remembered the sweet hours I had spent 
with my brother, and the pleasant days of childhood. Here is the 
prodigal as he comes near his old home; all his days of happy 
childhood come before him. He wonders if the old man is still 
alive, and as he comes near the home he says, “It may be that the 
old man is dead.” Ah! what a sad thing it would have been, if, on 
returning, he had found that his father had gone down to-his grave 
mourning for him. Is there any one here who has a father and 
mother, whose love you are scorning, and to whom you have not 
written for years? I said toa prodigal the other night, “ How long 
is it since you have written to your mother?” “Four years and a 
half.” “Don’t you believe your mother loves you?” “Yes,” he 
replied. ‘It is because ske dces love me that I den’t write to her. 
If I was telling her the life I’ve been leading, it would break her 
heart.” “If you love her,” I said, “ go and write her to-night and 
tell her all.” I got his promise, and Iam happy. I can’t tell how 
glad I feel when I get those young prodigals to turn to their fathers 
and mothers, because I know what joy will be in the hearts of those 
parents when they hear from their prodigal son. As he nears his 
father’s home, he wonders again if his heart has turned against him, 
or whether he will receive a welcome. Ah, he doesn’t know his 
father’s heart. I can see the old man up there on the flat roof, in 
the cool of the day, waiting for his boy. Every day he has been 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


308 


there, every day straining his eyes over the country to catch the first 
glimpse of his son, should he return. This evening he is there, 
still hoping to see the wanderer coming back. By and by he secs 
a form in the distance coming toward the house. As he comes 
nearer and nearer, he can tell it is the form of a young man. He 
can not tell who it is by his dress; his robe is gone, his ring is gone, 
his shoes are gone, but the old man catches sight of the face. I see 
him as he comes running down, as if the spirit of youth had come 
upon him, his long, white hair floating through the air. He rushes 
past his servants, out the door, and up to his son, whom he takes to 
his bosom. He rejoices over him. The young man tries to make 
a speech—tries to ask him to be one of his servants, but the father 
won't listen to it. When he gets him to the house, he cries to one 
servant, “ Go get the best robe for him ;” to another, “ You go and 
get a ring and put it on his finger;” ‘Get shoes for him,” he cries 
to another; “ Gokill the fatted calf,” is the order given to another, 
“for my son has returned.” Ah, there was joy there. “My boy 
who was dead is alive again.” There was joy in that house. 

Ah, sinner, it is a faint picture I have been giving you—I wish I 
could tell you how God loves you, how He wants to receive you. 
Come to Him, won’t you? I can imagine some of you saying, “I 
am afraid if I come I won’t hold out.” Well, now, look at that 
prodigal. He has come home. They have killed a fatted calf, and 
there is a banquet spread before him. He hadn’t seen such a meal 
of victuals for many a long day. While the old man is looking in 
at his son he sees the tears trickling down his cheeks. ‘“ My boy, 
what’s the matter? You don’t feel bad because you are here, I 
hope?” “No, father; I’m glad I’ve got home—I’m thankful to be 
once more with you.” ‘ Why are you weeping, then?” “I’m 
weeping because I may go off to that foreign country again.” How 
absurd. That is just similar to the case of these objectors. My 
friends, does sin—does the billiard hall and the rumseller satisfy 
you? Whoare the best friends you have? Are not your mother 
and father, who have been praying for you from your cradle up, the 
best friends you have on earth? Is not the God of Heaven who 
has offered you eternal life the best friend you have? Just like 
the prodigal say, “I will arise and go to my Father’s house; I will 
set my face like flint toward Heaven; I don’t care for the opinion 
of my associates.” 

There is another thing. When the prodigal said, “TI will,” there 


sayir 
quesi 
praye 
more 
home 
with 
with ] 
great 
not fe 
he has 
take u 
and b 
Whe 
home, 
“Ty pel 
large 3 
tell hi 
had ha 
photog 
came t 
Arthur 
loves 
Tam n¢ 
who h 
shame 
dispate 
and by 
May thi 
Wwanderg 
brought 


‘he first 

there, 

he secs 

- comes 

in. THe 

is gone, 

2, Isee 

ad come 

e rushes 
takes to 

to make 

ne father 

es to one 

u go and 

’ he cries 

. another, 

66 My boy 

3e. 

—I wish I 

ceive you. 

saying, “I 

bk at that 

d calf, and 
ch a meal 

looking in 
66 My boy, 
hre here, | 
kful to be 
ae elt 
in.” How 
tors. My 
ller satisfy 
our mother 
dle up, the 
eaven who 

Just like 

DUSE 5 I will 
the opinion 


will,” there 


THE PRODIGAL SON, 309 


was very likely a struggle. He didn’t like to go back in his tat- 
tered garments. He remembered his schoolmates, and how well he 
used to be dressed in comparison to them. There was not a boy 
in the whole neighborhood who had such an appearance, and he 
could hardly think of coming before them in his condition. But 
he conquered his pride and came to his father like a man and was 
forgiven. Let every man crush his pride and arise like a hero and 
start for the kingdom of God. There is not a man or woman here 
but who can press into the kingdom if they will. 

Some time ago I received a letter from Manchester, England, 
saying: “ When you were in Manchestcr I sent several special re- 
quests for prayer, and we have had some merciful answers; but one 
prayer still remains apparently unanswered. Will you offer it once 
more? Will you pray once again that my dear brother, who left his 
home and wife and child above a year ago, may, if in accordance 
with the will of God, either return to his house or communicate 
with his friends? His father’s health is failing, and it would bea 
great comfort to him if he could see his dear son again. He need 
not fear reproaches—only love awaits him.” I don’t know whether 
he has ever returned, but I thought I would read it and he might 
take up some of the papers and read the reports of these SRO ETRE 
and bring joy to his sister’s heart. 

When I was in Liverpool an educated lady, who had a beautiful 
home, came to me, and, sobbing, told me a pitiful story. She said, 
“I perhaps am asking an unreasonable thing, but you preach to 
large audiences. You may meet my son, and if you find my boy 
tell him his mother loves him still.” Her son was a young lad, who 
had had a little difficulty at home, and just fled. She gave me his 
photograph, and wrote his name on the back, and implored me if I 
came to America to try and find him and take her message. If 
Arthur is here he will know wiio I mean. O Arthur, your mother 


loves you; and she told me to say her heart loves you dearly. If ' 


Iam not speaking to that Arthur, are there not many Arthurs here 
who have fled from their mother’s love, and are living a life of 
shame and dissipation? Go and write to that mother, or send a 
dispatch, saying you are coming home to see her. If you don’t, by 
and by you will hear that that mother has gone down to her grave. 
May the voice of the Shepherd be heard by many, and may the 
wanderer come home. Let us pray that every wanderer may be 
brought back to God before they leave this building. 


XXXVII. 


LESSONS FROM SAUL’S CONVERSION, 


WANT to take up another man for my text—the one we have 

been speaking about—a much harder case than the prodigal, 

because he didn’t think he needed a Saviour. You needn't 
have talked a great while to that prodigal before you could have 
convinced him that he needed a Saviour. It is easy to reach 
a prodigal’s heart when he has reached the end of his rope. 
This man, he stood high in the estimation of the people—he stood, 
as it were, at the top round of the ladder, while the prodigal was at 
the lowest. This man was full of self-righteousne ss, and if you had 
tried to pick out a man in Jerusalem as a hopeless case, so far as accept- 
ing Jesus of Nazareth asa Saviour, you would have picked out Saul. 
He was the most utterly hopeless case you could have found. I 
would sooner have thought of the conversion of Pilate than of this 
man. When they were putting to death the martyrs to the cross, 
he had cheered on the murderers; but in spite of all this, we found 
the Son of God coming and knocking at his heart, and it was not 
long before he received Him as his Saviour. You can see him as he 
goes to the chief-priests of Jerusalem, getting the necessary docu- 
ments that he might go to Damascus, that he might go to the syna- 
gogue there and get all who were calling upon the Lord Jesus 
Christ cast into prison. He was going to stamp out the teachers of 
the new Gospel. One thing that made him so mad, probably, was, 
that when the disciples were turned out of Jerusalem, instead of 
stopping, they went all around and preached. Philip went down 
to Samaria, and probably there was a great revival there, and 
the news had come from Damascus that the preachers had actually 
reached that place. This man was full of zeal, and full of religion. 
He was a religious man, and no doubt he could say a prayer as long 
as any one in Jerusalem. He had kept the laws faithfully, and been 
an honest and upright man. The people, then, would never have 
(310) 


IN. 


2 we have 
. prodigal, 
u needn't 
ould have 
r to reach 
his rope. 
—he stood, 
jigal was at 
if you had 
ur as accept- 
d out Saul, 
e found. I 
han of this 
o the cross, 
s, we found 
H it was not 
he him as he 
ssary docu- 
to the syna- 
Lord Jesus 
teachers of 
obably, was, 
, instead of 
went down 
there, and 
had actually 
1 of religion. 
rayer as long 
lly, and been 
never have 


LESSONS FROM SAUL'S CONVERSION. 311 


dreamed of him requiring a Saviour. A great many people right 
here in Chicago would say, “ He is good enough. To be sure, he 
doesn’t believe in Jesus Christ, but he isa good man.” And there’s 
a great many in Chicago who don’t believe in Him. They think if 
they pay their debts and live a moral life, they don’t need to 
be converted. They don’t want to call upon Him; they want to 
get Christ and all His teachings out of the way, as this man 
did. That’s what they have been trying to do for eighteen centu- 
ries. He just wanted to stamp it out with one swoop. So he got 
the necessary papers, and away he went down to Damascus. Sup- 
pose, as he rode out of the gate of Jerusalem on his mission, any one 
had said to him: “You are going down to persecute the preachers 
of Christ, but you'll come back a preacher yourself.” Ifa man said 
this he would not have had his head on his shoulders five minutes, 
He would have said, “~ hate Him; I abhor Him; that’s me.” He 
wants to get Christ and His disciples out of the way. He was no 
stranger to Christ; he knew His working; for as Paul said of 
Agrippa, “ This thing was not done in a corner.” He knew all 
about Christ’s death. Probably he was acquainted with Nicodemus 
and the members of the Sanhedrim who were against Christ. Per- 
haps he was acquainted with Christ’s disciples, and with all their 
good deeds. Yet he had a perfect hatred for the Gospel and its 
teachers, and he was going down to Damascus just to have all 
those Christians put in prison. You see him as he rides out 
of Jerusalem with his brilliant escort, and away he goes through 
Samaria, where Philip was. He wouldn’t speak to a Samaritan, 
however. The Jews detested the Samaritans. The idea of him 
speaking to an adulterous Samaritan would have been ridiculous to 
him. So he rode proudly through the nation, with his head raised, 
breathing slaughter to the children of God. Damascus was about 
one hundred and thirty-eight miles from Jerusalem ; but we are not 
told how long he took for that journey. Little did he think that 
nineteen hundred years after, in this country, then wild, there would 
be thousands of people gathered just to hear the story of his journey 
down to Damascus. He has arrived at the gates of the city, and he 
has not got cooled off, as we say. He is still breathing revenge. 
See him as he stands before that beautiful city. Some one has said 
that this is the most beautiful city in the world, and we are told 
that when Mohammed came to it he turned his head away from it, 
lest the beauty of it would take him from his God. So this young 


12 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 
3 


man comes to the city, and he tells us the hour when he reached it. 
He never forgets the hour, for it was then that Christ met him. 
He says he “saw in the way a light from Heaven above the bright- 
ness of the sun;” he saw the light of Heaven, and a glimpse of that 
light struck him to the ground. And when God speaks to the sin- 
ner, that’s where he ought to be. Every man ought to fall on his 
face. From that light a voice called, “Saul, Saul.” Yes, the Son 
of God knows his name. Sinner, God knows your name. He 
knows all about you. He knows the street you live in, the number 
of your house, because He told where Ananias lived when Paul 
went there. ‘‘ Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?” How the 
words must have gone down to his soul. He stopped. The words 
were tohim. And I find preaching is not attended with much good 
till men just stop and take the Gospel to themselves. May every 
sinner hear Christ calling you by name. We want a personal 
Christ. Well, when the question was put to him, “ Why persecutest 
thou Me?” could he give a reason? Is there any sinner can 
give a reason for persecuting Christ? Oh, why do you persecute 
Christ? I can imagine some of you saying, “I never persecuted 
Christ. I have a great many sins; I swear sometimes, some- 
times drink, but I always speak respectfully of Christ.” Do 
your Do you never speak disrespectfully of His disciples 
and God’s children? Remember, if you speak disrespectfully 
of them, you treat Him with disrespect. When Christ asked him 
this question, “‘ Why persecutest thou Me?” He might have added, 

I lived on the earth thirty years, and I never did you any hurt. 
I never did you any injury; I never even injured your friends. I 
came into the world to bless you. Why persecutest thou Me?” 
Why, my friends, all the blessings you ever got came from Him; 
why can’t you live for Him? why do you go on hating Christ? Is 
there a man in this assembly who can give a reason why he doesn’t 
love Him? Is there any reason to be found in the wide, wide 
world why men and women should not love Christ ? 

I remember hearing of a Sabbath-school teacher why had led 
every one of her children to Christ. She was a faithful teacher. 
Ther she tried to get her children to go out and bring other children 
into the school. One day one of them came and said she had been 
trying to get the children of a family to come to the school, but 
the father was an infidel, and he wouldn’t allow it. “ What is an 
infidel?” asked the child. She had never heard of an infidel before. 


Th 
pet 
goi 
fatl 
lov 
he: 
on. 
Jest 
whe 
you 
Wh 
min 
All 
love 
wor 
strec 
hear 
He t 
woul 
well, 
that 
coulc 
will § 
I'll i 
if yo 
kney 
John 
found 
reaso| 
was ¢ 
to h 
not 4 
shoul 
as I 3 
Chris 
ask tl 
My fi 
earth 
night 
to C 


che:d it. 
et him. 
bright- 
of that 
the sin- 
1 on his 
the Son 
ne. He 
number 
en Paul 
low the 
1e words 
ich good 
ay every 
personal 
rsecutest 
qner can 
persecute 
ersecuted 
's, some- 
Bt; = Wa 
disciples 
spectfully 
sked him 
ve added, 
any hurt. 
iends. I 
Ou Me?” 
bm Him; 
rist? Is 
e doesn’t 
ide, wide 


» had led 
l_ teacher. 
r children 
had been 
hool, but 
hat is an 
lel before. 


LESSONS FROM SAUL'S CONVERSION, 313 


The teacher went on to tell her what an infidel. meant, and she was 
perfectly shocked. A few mornings after, the girl happened to be 
going past a post-office on her way to school, and she saw the infidel 
father coming out. She went up to him and said, “ Why don’t you 
fove Jesus?” If it had beena man who had said that to him probably 
he would have knocked Fim down. He looked at her and walked 
on. A second time she put the question, ‘Why don’t you love 
Jesus?” He put out his hand to put her gently away from him, 
when, on looking down, he saw her tears. “ Please, sir, tell me why 
you don’t love Jesus?’’ He pushed her aside, and away he went. 
When he got to his office he couldn’t get this question out of his 
mind. All the letters seemed to read, “ Why don’t you love Jesus?” 
All men in his place of business seemed to say, ‘“‘ Why don't you 
love Jesus?”” When he tried to write, his pen seemed to shape the 
words, “ Why don’t you love Jesus?” He couldn’t rest, but on the 
street he went to mingle with the business men, but he seemed to 
hear a voice continually asking him, “‘ Why don’t you love Jesus ?”’ 
He thought when night came, and he got home with his family, he 
would forget it; but he couldn’t. He complained that he wasn’t 
well, and went to bed. But when he laid his head on the pillow, 
that voice kept whispering, ‘“ Why don’t you love Jesus?” He 
couldn’t sleep. By and by, about midnight, he got up and said, “I 
will get a Bible and find where Christ contradicts Himself, and then 
I'll have a reason,” and he turned to the book of John. My friends, 
if you want a reason for not loving Christ, don’t turnto John. He 
knew Him too long. I don’t believe a man can read the Gospel of 
John without being turned to Christ. Well, he read it through and 
found no reason why he shouldn’t love Him, but he found many 
reasons why he should. Heread this book, and before morning he 
was on his knees, and that question, put by that little child, led 
to his conversion. My friends, if you make up your minds 
not to go to sleep to-night without a good reason why you 
shouldn’t love Him, you will love Him. There is no reason, 
as I said before, in the wide, wide world, why you shouldn't love 
Christ. Godown to the dark corners of the earth—even to hell, and 
ask them there if they can give you any reason for not loving Christ. 
My friends, the lost spirits can give you no reason. Neither on 
earth or in hell can any reason be found for not loving Him. To- 
night put this question to yourselves, “‘ What keeps me from coming 
to Christ?” “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?” Oh, may 


Co wap ss = - 


: 
re . 
aE, EE 


‘ - 7 + 
oe oa : Se 
= : oe = oe = : eo 


Sara ee 
‘ 


nae fe Sees bee 


~ 


eee ee SAA na Yn Ln ed atecee rem Onna nicnene ‘ 
wy 


314 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND P XAYERS 


the question go down to our hearts to-night, and may you not sleep | 


till you can look up and say, “ Christ is my Saviour, He is my Re. ] 
deemer,” and until you can see your title clear for one of those t 
mansions He has gone to prepare. : 

When this question was put to Saul, “ Why persecutest thou Me?” f 
he supplemented it by saying, “It is hard for thee to kick against t 
the pricks.” The thought I want to call attention to is this: “It A 
is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.” You and I would not O 
have had any compassion upon Saul if we had been in Christ’s tr 
place. We would have said the hardship is upon these poor Chris- is 
tians in Damascus. But the Lord saw differently. He said, “It W 
is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.” In those days, when H 
they didn’t drive their camels with whips, they had a piece of stick he 
with a sharp piece of steel at the end called a prick, and it was ap. ; 1} 
plied to the animal. A lady said to me some time ago, “ It is easy fo. 
to sin, but it is hard to do right ;” or, in other words, it is hard to he; 
serve God and easy to serve the devil. I think you will find hun. Th 
dreds of people in Chicago who think this way. There is not a lie wa. 
which ever came from hell so deceptive as this. It is as false as aay , he 
lie the devil evr uttered. We want to drive that lie back where it aro 
came from. My friends, it ain’t true. God is not a hard Master. 


He is a lenient one. What did Christ say to Saul? “It is hard hi 
for thee to kick against the prick:.” There is a period at which the 
sinner arrives when he sees the truth of this. How many men have 
said to me, “Mr. Moody, the way of the transgressor is pretty in 
hard.” It isa common expression. I have been with men in court S 


and in prison who have said this. It is not a hard thing to serve 
God if you are born of God; but, my friends, it isa hard thing to J at u 
serve Satan. The way of sin grows darker and harder to a man the tion 
longer he is in it. Before I came down I took up a paper, and the . sons 
first thing I saw was an account of a Boston man who had forged, begg 
and it closed by saying his path was a hard, flinty one. his # 
Now. take up any class of sinners in Chicago. We've representa- one 
tives here to-night. Take the harlot. Do you think her life is an ' But 
easv one? It is very short. The average one is seven years, Just God 
look at her as she comes up to the city from the home where she soevé 
has left sisters and a mother as pure as the morning air. She came reap 
down to the city and is now in a low brothel. Sometimes her mind J will 


goes back to the pure home where her mother prayed for her; where 
she used to lay down her head on that mother’s bosom, and she 


yours 
tice, 


t sleep 
ny Re- 
. those 


1Me?” 
against 
fer SSEe 
uld not 
Christ’s 
yr Chris- 
aid, “ It 
7s, when 
of stick 
Was ap- 
it is easy 
hard to 
ind hun- 
not a lie 
seas aay 
- where it 
1 Master. 
t is hard 
vhich the 
men have 
is pretty 
n in court 
> to serve 
h thing to 
a man the 
r, and the 
hd forged, 


epresenta- 
r life is an 
ars. Just 
where she 
She came 

her mind 
her; where 
, and she 


LESSONS FROM SAUVL'S CONVERSION. 315 


used to press the sweet face of her child to her own. She remem- 
bers when she went to Sunday-school; remembers when her mother 
tried to teach her to serve God, and now she is an exile. She don’t 
want to go home. She is full of shame. She takes a look into the 
future and sees darkness before her. Ina few short years she dies 
the death of a harlot, and she is laid away in an unknown grave. 
All the flattery of her lovers is hollow and false. Is her life a happy 
one? Aska harlot to-night, and she will tell you the way of the 
transgrressor is hard; and then ask the pure and virtuous if Christ 
isa hard Master. Go ask that drunkard if his way is an easy one. 
Why, there was a man whom I knew who was an inveterate drinker. 
He had a wife and children. He thought he could stop whenever 
he felt inclined, but he went the way of most moderate drinkers. 
I had not been gone more than three years, and when I returned I 
found that that mother had gone down to her grave with a broken 
heart, and that man was the murderer of the wife of his bosom. 
These children have all been taken away from him, and he is now 
walking up and down those streets homeless. But four years ago 
he had a beautiful and a happy home, with his wife and children 
around him. They are gone; probably he will never see them 
again. Perhaps he has come in here to-night. If he has, I ask 
him, “Is not the way of the transgressor hard?” Is it not hard to 
fight against Him? Do not go against your Maker. Don't believe 
the devil’s lies; don’t think God is a hard Master. If you persist 
in wrong-doing, you will find out the truth of what was said to 
Saul, “It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.” 

Look again at that rumseller. When we talk to him he laughs 
at us. He tells you there is no hell, no future—there is no retribu- 
tion. I’ve got one man in my mind now who ruined nearly all the 
sons in his neighborhood. Mothers and fathers went to him and 
begged him not to sell their children liquor. Tle told them it was 
his business to sell liquor, and he was going to sell liquor to every 
oue who came. The place was a blot upon the place as dark as hell. 
But that man had a father’s heart. He hadason. He didn’t worship 
God, but he worshiped that boy. He didn’t remember that what- 
soever a man soweth so shall he reap. My friends, they generally 
reap what they sow. It may not come soon, but the retribution 
will come. Ifyou ruin other men’s sons, some other man will ruin 
yours. Bear in mind God is a God of equity ; God is a God of jus- 
tie. He is not going to allow you to ruin men and then escape 


Re ene whit a artemis eins vane te Nd Ge ne te 
\ I 


316 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


yourself. If we go against His laws we suffer. Time rolled on and pr 
that young man became a slave to drink, and his life became such a Sy me 
burden to him that he put a revolver to his head and blew his to 
brains out. The father lived a few years, but his life was as bitter an 
as gall, and then went down to his grave in sorrow. Ah, my friends, he 
it is hard to kick against the pricks. You may go out of the Taber- an 
nacle laughing at everything I say, but it is as true as the God in In 
Heaven that the day of retribution will come. It is only a question Pe 
of time. See that false-hearted libertine! The day is coming when anc 
he will reap what he is sowing. He may not be called to reap it in of | 
this world, but he will be brought up before that bar of Heaven, hat 
and there the harvest will be seen. These men who have got smooth, har 
oily tongues go into society and play their part, and still walk around, Tal 


If a poor woman falls, she’s ruled out, but these false-hearted liber- 
tines still go up and down the world. The eyes of justice may not 
find them out. They think themselves secure, but they are deceiving 
themselves. By and by the God of Heaven will summon them to 
give an account. They say then that God will not punish them, but 
the decree of Heaven has gone forth, ‘ Whatsoever a man soweth 

so shall he reap.” 
One week ago I preached on the text, “ Christ came to heal the 
broken-hearted.” I told you just before I came down that I had 
received a letter from a broken-hearted wife. Her husband one 
night came in, to her surprise, and said he was a defaulter and must 
fly, and he went, she knew not where. He forscok her and two 
children. It was a pitiful letter, and the wail of that poor woman 
seems to ring in my ears yet. That night up in that gallery was a 
man whose heart began to beat when I told the story, thinking it 
was him I meant, till I came to the two children. When I got 
through I found that he had taken money which did not belong to 
him, intending to replace it, but he failed to do so, and fled. He 
, Said : “T have a beautiful wife and three children, but I had to 
‘leave her and come to Chicago, where I have been hiding. The 
Governor of the State has offered a reward for me.” My friends, a 
week ago this poor fellow found out the truth of this text. He 
was in great agony. He felt as if he could not carry the burden, 
and he said, “ Mr. Moody, I want you to pray with me. Ask God 
for mercy for me.” And down we went on our knees. I don’t 
know if ever I felt so bad for a man in my life. He asked me if I 
thought he should go back. I told him to ask the Lord and we 


on and 

-such a 

lew his 

s bitter 

friends, 

- Taber- 
God in 
juestion 
ig when 
sap it in 
Heaven, 
smooth, 
around, 
-d liber- 
may not 
eceiving 
them to 
hem, but 
1 soweth 


heal the 
at I had 
and one 
nnd must 
and two 
r woman 
Pry was a 
inking it 
n I got 
belong to 
led. He 
It had to 
g. The 
riends, a 
pxt. He 
burden, 
Ask God 
I don’t 

d me if I 


d and we 


i 


LESSONS FROM SAUL'S CONVERSION. 317 


prayed over it. That was Sunday evening, and I asked him to 
meet me on the Monday evening. He told me how hard it was 
to go back to that town and give himself up, and disgrace his wife 
and children. They would give him ten years. Monday came and 
he met me and said, “ Mr. Moody, I have prayed over this matter, 
and I think Christ has forgiven me, but I don’t belong to myself. 
I must go back and give myself up. I expect to be sent to the 
Penitentiary; but I must go.” He asked me to pray for his wite 
and children, and he went off. He will be there now in the hands 
of justice. My friends, don’t say the way of the transgressor is not 
hard. It is hard to fight against sin, but it is a thousand times 
harder to die without hope. Will you not just accept Christ ? 
Take Christ as your hope, your life, your truth. 


XXXVIII. 


CONFESSING CHRIST. 


ROMANS x. 9, 10, 11: ‘That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord 
Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised Hirn from the dead 
thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and 

with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. For the Scripture saith, 

Whosoever believeth in Him shall not be ashamed.” 


OW I think we are the only people who are ashamed of our 
religion. If a man goes among the Mohammedans, or 
among the Chinese, he will find that they are not ashamed 

of their religion. Even if he has a false hope, he is not ashamed 
of confessing it. Yet we who have the only religion worth having 
on the face of the earth, are the only people who are ashamed to 
own it, and to confess our Lord and Saviour. Why,I may say with 
truth, that there is only about one in ten, who profess Christianity, 
who will turn round and glorify God with a loud voice. Nine out 
of ten are still-born Christians. You never hear of them. If you 
press them hard with the question whether they are Christians, they 
might say, “‘ Well, I hope so.” We never see it in their actions; 
we never see it in their lives. They might belong to the church 
you go to, but you never see them at the praye*-meetings, or taking 
any interest in the church affairs. They don’t profess it among 
their tellows or in their business, and the result is that there are 
hundreds going on with a half hope, not sure whether their religion 
will stand them or not. Now, we must believe with the heart, and 
confess, not simply profess, with the mouth. We must not be 
ashamed to speak of Him. I heard of a man who came here the 

a other night who got the Spirit of Christ. He made up his mind 

va not to swear again. When he went down to his store he was just 

about to swear, when he caught himself and stopped. His associ- 
ates noticed this and said, “Oh, he’s been down to Moody and 

Sankey s.” That man hadn’t the courage to confess that he had 

received Christ, and he shut his mouth up. If he had had courage, 

(318) 


wh 
“ y 
the 
the 
if t 
con 
till 
roo 
clea 
Chr 
frie) 
it ir 
toge 
take 
tion 
this 
they 
tion. 
take 
were 
to ta 
party 
takir 
and 
othe 
we C 
You 
I’ h 
Rept 
you ¢ 
him, 
body 


friend 


the Lord 
the dead 
isness, and 
ture saith, 


d of our 
dans, or 
ashamed 
ashamed 
h having 
1amed to 
say with 
istianity, 
INine out 
If you 
ians, they 
actions ; 
e church 
or taking 
it among 
there are 
r religion 
eart, and 
st not be 
here the 
his mind 
was just 
is associ- 
oody and 
t he had 


courage, 


CONFESSING CHRIST, 319 


what an opportunity he had then to confess. He might have said, 
“Yes, sir, I have, and I hope to take my stand from this time on 
the Lord’s side.” But he was ashamed. Why, the men that serve 
the devil are not ashamed. They are not ashamed to swear, and 
if they are not ashamed to swear, we should not be ashamed to 
confess the Lord our Saviour. I don’t believe people will get light 
till they take a firm stand. People who have come into the inquiry- 
room, wonder why they are still in darkness. The thing is very 
clear to me—they are ashamed to confess what great things 
Christ has done for them. They are ashamed to confess it to 
friends or parents when they go home, and ashamed to confess 
it in their business. Now, my friends, believing and confessing go 
together; the two go together, and you can not be saved unless you 
take them both. ‘“ With the mouth confession is made unto salva- 
tion.” If you ever see the kingdom of Heaven you have to take 
this way. How was it two weeks ago when the Republicans thought 
they were going to lose the country. They went around with peti- 
tions to get men to put their names down in order that they might 
take a stand on one side or the other. The bankers and merchants 
were not ashamed to show which side they were on—not ashamed 
to take a firm stand. There are two parties in .is world. The 
party of sin going down to death and ruin, rushing down to hell and 
taking hundreds with it, and there is a party of truth, and justice, 
and honor, and Ged wants us to take our stand on one side 0: «ne 
other. This great idea of being on both sides is ridiculous. Now 
we can not but have a great disrespect to men who are on two sides, 
You find a man and you say you are a Democrat. “Oh yes, so am 
I,” he replies, but another man comes along and he says, “I am a 
Republican,” ‘I am a Republican, too,” says thissame man. Why, 
you detest a man of this kind. If you bring out a sentiment before 
him, he will tell you, “ That’s just my sentiment,” .nd when some- 
body comes to him with an entirely different one, he says, ‘“‘ My 
friend, | agree with you.” You can not but detest that man. A 
great many men are trying to serve the devil and God at the same 
time. The time is coming when the line will be drawn, and we will 
find out who are Christ’s friends, and who are the devil's. Why, I 
would rather ke an out and out infidel than one in this condition. 
If Christ has redeemed us, let us not try to be on both sides at the 
same time. Let the world know that we are for Him or against 
Him. How was it during our war with the men who lived on the 


320 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


borders? When a Union soldier came along, they were Union men, 
and when a Southern soldier came to them, “ Oh, we are Southern 
people; we believe in the Confederacy,” and they would run up the 
Confederate flag. What was the result? Both the Southern and 
Union men had a contempt for those fellows. They stripped them 
of everything. There are a great many Christians in this condition. 
My friends, if you want joy and peace to flow like a river into your 
soul, come out and confess Christ. How many men and women, 
during the past few weeks, have felt improved by these services, 
and have felt that it would be just the very best thing they could 
do to go into that inquiry-room and have a talk with a Christian 
man or woman, but they hadn’t the moral courage. They look 
around to see if there are any of their companions laughing at them. 
My friends, if you want the great gift of salvation, you have got to 
believe with your heart and confess with your mouth. If you don’t 
do this you will never see the kingdom of God. 

“With the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and with the 
mouth confession is made unto salvation. For the Scripture saith, 
Whosoever believeth in Him shall not be ashamed.” If Christ 
comes into our heart we are not ashamed. The trouble is, we have 
got too many head professors—too many believers with their head. 
What we want is to get it down in our hearts. Just look at those 
ten men who were cured of leprosy. Their leprosy was taken away 
and their flesh, probably, became like a little child’s; but only one 
of them had his heart touched. He was full of prayer and glory, 
and when He looked down at him, and asked, ‘‘ Where are the 
nine?” he didn’t know. Never heard of them. Joined some 
church, probably. Just like some here; after they have been cured 
they join a church, and you never hear of them. They don’t go to 
work for Him. A great many people say, “I belong to Christ, but 
I can not work for Him.” You can tell your friends and compan- 
ions what He has done for you; and that is the most powerful 
preaching we have. I believe the recitation of Saul’s conversion 
has done more to convert infidels than anything else. When a 
Christian has Christ in his heart, he will confess. Look at that man 
talked about in the fifth chapter of Mark, from whom Christ cast 
out devils; when he was clothed and in his right mind his heart was 
full of gratitude, and he wanted to follow Christ. He wouldn't let 
him; but told him to go home and tell his friends what good things 
the Lord had done for him. Now, there is a class who tell you to 


ion men, 
Southern 
n up the 
hern and 
ed them 
ondition. 
into your 
J women, 

services, 
hey could 
Christian 
Chey look 
¢ at them. 
ive got to 
you don't 


1 with the 
ture saith, 
If Christ 
s, we have 
heir head. 
bk at those 
aken away 
t only one 
and glory, 
re are the 
ined some 
been cured 

on’t go to 
Christ, but fee (oem } Tt 
d compan- ise |: cesses i 
t powerful | 
conversion 
When a 
t that man 
Christ cast 
5 heart was 
ouldn’t let 
rood things 
ell you to 


Mr. MOODY’S NEW CHURCH AT CHICAGO. 


CONFESSING CHR)». 321 


take religion, but don’t make much ado about it. Don’t speak 
about it. Keep quiet for a few years and see if you hold out. But 
see how it was with this man. When he was cured, I suppose he 
came back; he was so overjoyed that he couldn’t keep quiet. I 
suppose he got up at some corner on the top of a barrel or dry- 
goods box and confessed Christ. Probably he did more in that 
town than Christ Himself did. He was a living witness, and the 
love within him made him preach like an angel. As he stood on 
that corner preaching, probably, two men were coming along. 
“Who is that man?” they said. ‘Why, he looks like the man 
who was running among the tombs the other day.” “Yes, he does; 
the voice sounds very much like his.” They examine closely, and, 
lo and behold! this is the very man who was possessed by devils; 
and they might have been converted right there. Perhaps there 
was an inquiry-meeting, and they entered and got converted. My 
friends, a great many homes would be blessed if people would but 
testify. Tell the tidings to your neighbor; get up prayer.mcetings 
and call your neighbors in, and try to bring them to Christ. The 
time will come when we will have hundreds of prayer-meetings all 
over the city. Get your friends together, and in this way tell the 
glorious news, and let it be spread. If you have been converted, 
try to give the news to every man, woman, and child. 

A great many people wonder why God does not bless them: 
The reason is, that they are asleep. You want to wake up. I want 
to call your attention to Luke ix. 23: “ And He said unto them all, 
If any man will come after Me let him deny himself and take up 
the cross daily and follow Me.” Now I find there are a great many 
people who want to become Christians, but they don’t want to take 
up that cross. They are willing to go to Heaven, but they don’t 
want to take the cross. If there is a by-way where the cross is not 
on, they want to find it. My friends, there is no other way to the 
kingdom of God but by the way of the cross, and it will be easier 
for you to take it now than it will be afterward. The devil has de- 
ceived men about the cross, too. He has made it into a mountain, 
or led them to believe that it is made of iron and they can not lift 
it. Why, the devil’s mountains are just smoke. The lions he sets 
in the way of the Christian are all tame. The moment you take up 
the cross you get a blessing, and you see how the devil has been 
trying to deceive you. I remember while in Boston:I attended one 
of the daily prayer-mectings. The meetings we had. been holding 
21 


322 MOVODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


had been most always addressed by young men. I listened with 
considerable interest to the recital of experiences of these venera. 
ble saints, when a little tow-headed boy, a Norwegian by birth, who, 
I believe, could scarcely speak English, said, “If I tell the world 
about Jesus, Jesus will tell the world about me.” Why, he said 
more than all of them put together. The words burned down to 


my soul. “If I tell the world about Jesus, He will tell the world 
about me.” If you will confess Him here, He will confess you 
yonder. Now, when you accept Him you should be willing to con. 


fess Him. You should not be ashamed to own that He forgave 
your sins. You should work for Him. If you are ashamed to con. 
fess Him, you are just practically denying Him, and the world is 
stumbling over you. I do not know anything that would wake up 
Chicago better than for every man and woman here who loves Him 
to begin to talk about Him to their friends, and just to tell them 
what He has done for you. You have got a circle of friends. Go 
and tell them of Him. Some of you business men have got clerks, 
and you have more influence over them than any minister, and if 
you don’t use your influence over these clerks for good you will be 
called upon to answer. At that day you will be called to give an 
account of your stewardship. How many are ashamed to confess 
‘Christ as a Saviour. They are willing to become Christians, but 
ithey are not willing to put on the uniform. What would you say 
‘of a soldier in our war who would not put onthe uniform? Ifa 
‘recruiting officer had been told by a man, “I would like to go and 
defend my country, but I won’t put on the uniform; I want to keep 
‘the citizen’s dress,” do you think that officer would have enlisted 
ihim? There is a great number of Christians, my friends, who pro- 
‘fess, .but who don’t want to put on the uniform. Some of you 
wealthy men have got servants. Suppose you want a coachman, 
and a man comes to you and says, “I would like to be your driver, 
but I can not put on the livery.”” You wouldn’t have him. If you 
are on Christ’s side you have to put on His livery and show which 
‘side you are.on. By Christian people doing this there are hundreds 
of thousands who would be influenced. I can’t help thinking of 
the old woman who started out, when the war commenced, with a 
poker in her hand. When asked what she was going to do with it, 
she said, “I can’t do much with it, but I can show what side I'm 
on.” My friends, even if you can’t do much, show on which side 
‘you belong. 


L 
you, 
Man 
befo 
are | 
great 
to m: 
heart 
they 

at the 
The t 
Christ 
a thou 
the Ge 
you? 
confes: 
are doi 
One 
The m 
God w 
into the 
nephe 
state, tq 
peared 
really y 
Stairs, a 
of their 
parlor s] 
put on a 
Suppose 
convert 
him to ni 
avery j 
to any o 
She talke 
thinking 
but wher 
with his 
Converted 
talk to t 


S. 


ned with 
» venera- 
rth, who, 
he world 
, he said 
down to 
the world 
nfess you 
ng to con- 
le forgave 
ed to con- 
e world is 
d wake up 
loves Him 
> tell them 
4ends. Go 
. got clerks, 
ster, and if 
you will be 
to give an 
1 to confess 
ristians, but 
hild you say 
form? lfa 
e to go and 
vant to keep 
ave enlisted 
ds, who pro- 
Frome of you 
a coachman, 
your driver, 
him. If you 
1 show which 
are hundreds 
thinking of 
enced, with a 
to do with it, 
hat side I'm 
on which side 


CONFESSING CHRIST, 323 
Let me direct your attention to Luke xii 8 
you, Whosoever shall confess Me before aoe him ck vi 
Man confess before the angels of Heaven; but he that dan : Tie 
before men shall be denied before the angels of God.” bow Tide 
are a great many professing Christians who are doin ‘hats rie 
great injury, and also the cause of Christ. Some thin Shee ce 
to my ears during the past few days that have pret wet rida 
heart. When some have come home, and told their parents te ; 
ws cae tgs aes have made light of the meetings; aiaied 
at them. , mothers, be careful how you ahi 
The time may come when you will be uate his hie nega 
Christian vestry and pray that he may be improved Would it if 
a thousand times better have a son come here and be im soled ‘5h 
id Fe a g° ie those brothels and drinking halls ? haa ie 
ou? And yet hundreds of pr isti 
confess that they or their Ay es ante ry egg Me 
“ oe all they can to keep them away from Christ gual 
ne place we were in, in England, I re : i 
The meeting was held ina Methodist ie Seen at 
God La ee aber were being saved; multieudes were Pete 
into the kingdom. She had a brother i 
nephew who had just come to the Dae Sie a r 
state, too. They came to the meeting with her. Eve phi 
peared strange to her, and when she went home she did. n ‘: k ee 
really what to say. She and her brother and nephew a eae. 
stairs, and coming down she thought, “It may be, that th a iy 
of their souls depends on what I say now.” When she “ae ie 
parlor she found them laughing and joking about the saute is 
put on a serious face and said, ‘I don’t think we should lau 3 t i. 
Suppose Mr. Moody had come to you and asked you if ne 
alae what would you have told him?” “I would Have ‘ate 
ba to mind his own business,” replied one of them. “I think it is 
: bie dee a Gani ee eat a Christian ought to put 
She talked with them, SaaGabeh pen i chert al 
thinking and thinking. He had ticket "f ee Tec teeeae 
but when next night came he said he ei San EPL 
ene o to i 
ee pt and, to make a long story Hole’ he ae Pee 
aie . e came to me—he was a mechanic—and asked me to 
0 the laborers and have them come to the meetings He had 


324 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


got such a blessing himself that he wanted them to share it. That 
man brought me a list of the names of the mechanics about half as 
long as this room, and we got up a meeting in the theatre, and we 
had that theatre packed. That was the first meeting of work. 
ingmen I ever had, and the work of grace broke out among them. 
This was but the result of the woman taking her stand. She went 
into the inquiry-room and became an earnest worker. I get letters 
from her frequently now, and I do not believe there is a happier 
woman in ali England. If she had taken another course she might 
have been the means of ruining these young men. There is one 
thing the Christians ought to ask themselves. Ask your heart, 
“Is this the work of the devil?” That’s the plain question. If 
it’s the work of the devil, turn your back against it. I would if I 
thought it was. If it is the work of God, be careful what you do. 
You may repent of speaking against it. My friends, it is a terrible 
thing to fight against God. If it is the Lord’s wish, come out and 
take your stand and let there be one united column of people com- 
ing up to Heaven. Let every man, woman, and child be not 
afraid to confess the Lord Jesus Christ. The angels were not 
afraid te confess when they came down to those shepherds, “ Be- 
hold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all 
people. For unto you is born this day, in the city of David,a 
Saviour which is Christ the Lord,” and when He came up from 
Jordan, :a voice from Heaven confessed, “This is my beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased.” The God of Heaven was not ashamed 
to own Him, and all the great men in the Bible were not ashamed 
to own Him. If he had said to Peter, “ Who do you think I am?” 
he might have said, “ Well, some call you Elias, or one of the 
prophets.” “But who do you think Iam?” “You are the Son 
of the living God.” Blessed are you, Peter. He wasn’t ashamed 
to own Him. When they put Christ under oath to testify who He 
was, He confessed He was the Son of the living God. He, my 
friends, confessed He was the Son of God. A great many people 
are trying to make out that He was not; trying to say that the 
Saviour never came from Heaven. When Caiaphas asked Himif 
He was the Son of God, He was not afraid to confess it, and the 
priest rent His clothes and shouted, “ He hath blasphemed.” It 
was because of the confession that they put Him to death. My 
friends, shall we be ashamed to confess our Lord and Saviour who 
confessed for us? 


N 
fess 
resu 
fath 
I re 

and 
the | 
ever 
thou; 
alway 
got te 
with ] 
him, < 
away, 
better 
after, ¢ 
Christi 
and a ¢ 
old ten 
dered y 
mothe 
asked, 
with hd 
had an ¢ 
I said, 
had bee 
to talk 
When 
he sat 
for him 
a step, s 
ran to h 
his face 
he Was gs 
weeks, h 
ing; hoy 
Would b 
She Sat 

room, 


ing, “Oh 


S. 


it. That 
ut half as 
‘ and we 
of work- 
yng them. 
She went 
get letters 
a happier 
she might 
ere is one 
your heart, 
estion. If 
would if I 
iat you do. 
is a terrible 
me out and 
people com- 
hild be not 
ls were not 
herds, “ Be- 
all be to all 
of David, a 
me up from 
beloved Son, 
not ashamed 
not ashamed 
hink I am?” 
r one of the 
h are the Son 
sn’t ashamed 
bstify who He 
od. He, my 
many people 
say that the 
asked Himif 
ess it, and the 
sphemed.” It 
o death. My 
4 Saviour who 


CONFESSING CHRIST, 32 


Gat 


Now, I believe every one who loves Him, will commence to con- 
fess Him to-night, and if we begin to do this we will see mighty 
results. These little children can confess Him, and how many 
fathers and mothers have been brought to Christ by their children. 
I remember when on the North Side, I tried to reach a family time 
and again and failed. One night in the meeting, I noticed one of 
the little boys of that family. He hadn’t come for any good, how- 
ever: he was sticking pins in the backs of the other boys. 1 
thought if I could get hold of him it would do good. I used 
always go to the door and shake hands with the boys, and when I 
got to the door and saw this little boy coming out, I shook hands 
with him, and patted him on the head, and said I was glad to see 
him, and hoped he would come again. He hung his head and went 
away. The next night, however, he came back, and he behaved 
better than he did the previous night. He came two or three times 
after, and then asxed us to pray for him, that he might become a 
Christian. That was a happy night for me. He became a Christian, 
anda good one. One night I saw him weeping. I wondered if his 
old temper had got hold of him again, and when he got up, I won- 
dered what he was going to say. “I wish you would pray for my 
mother,” he said. When the meeting was over, I went to him and 
asked, “‘ Have you ever spoken to your mother, or tried to pray 
with her?” Well, you know, Mr. Moody,” he replied, “I never 
had an opportunity; she don’t believe, and won’t hear me.” “ Now,” 
I said, “I want you to talk to your mother to-night.” For years I 
had been trying to reach her, and I couldn’t do it; so I urged him 
to talk to her that night, and I said, “I will pray for you both.” 
When he got to the sitting-room he found some people there, and 
he sat waiting for an opportunity, when his mother said it was time 
forhim to go to bed. He went to the door undecided. He took 
a step, stopped, and turned around, and hesitated for a minute, then 
ran to his mother and threw his arms around her neck, and buried © 
his face in her bosom. ‘ What is the matter?” she asked—-thought 
he was sick. Between his sobs he told his mother how, for five 
weeks, he had wanted to be a Christian ; how he had stopped swear- 
ing; how he was trying to be obedient to her, and how happy he 
would be if she would be a Christian, and then went off to bed. 
She sat for a few minutes, but couldn’t stand it, and went up to his 
toom. When she got to the door she heard him weeping and pray- 
ing, “Oh, God, convert my dear mother.” She came down again, but 


RNC ARE RS i ve 


326 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


couldn't sleep that night. Next day she tuld the boy to go and 
ask Mr. Moody to come over and see her. He called at my place 
of business—I was in business ther—and I went over as quiet as | 
could. I found her sitting in a rocking-chair, weeping. “Mr. 
Moody,” she said, “I want to become a Christian.” ‘ What has 
brought that change over you; I thought you didn’t believe in it?” 
Then she told me how her boy had come to her, and how she hadn't 
slept any all night, and how her sin rose up before her like a dark 
mountain. The next Sunday that boy came and led that mother 
into the Sabbath-school, and she became a Christian worker. Oh, 
little chiidren, if you find Christ tell it to your fathers and mothers, 
Throw your arms around their necks ard lead them to Jesus. Let 
no one here, who loves the Lord Jesus Christ, be ashamed to 
confess, 


S. 


» go and 
my place 
juiet as I 
g. Mr, 


ke a dark 
at mother 
ker. Oh, 
d mothers. 
jesus. Let 
shamed to 


XXXIX. 


NAAMAN. 


2 KINGS v. 


E are told in this chapter, that we have just read, that he 
was a great man, but he was a lencx, and that spoiled 
him. He was a successful man, yet he was a leper; he 

was a very valiant man, but he was a leper; he was a very noble 
man, yet he was a leper. What a blight that must have cast on his 
path. It must have haunted him day and night. He was a leper, 
and there was no physician in Syria that could help him. It was 
an incurable disease, and I suppose he thought he would have to 
go down to the grave with that loathsome disease. We read that 
several companies had gone down to the land of Israel and brought 
down to Syria some poor captives, and among them was a little 
girl, who was sent to wait on Mrs. Naaman. I can imagine the little 
maid had a praying mother who had taught her to love the Lord, 
and when she got down there she was not ashamed to own 
her religion—she was not ashamed to acknowledge her Lord. 
One day, while waiting on her mistress, I can think of her 
saying, ““Would to God your husband was in Samaria. There 
isa prophet there who could cure him.” I can imagine her looking 
at the girl when she said this: “ What! a man in Israel can cure my 
husband? you must be dreaming. Did you ever hear of a man being 
cured of the leprosy?” “No,” the girl might have said; “but that 
is nothing. Why, the prophet in Samaria has cured many people 
worse than your husband.” And perhaps she told hiri about the 
poor woman who had such an increase of oil, and how her two boys 
were saved from slavery by the prophet; and how he had raised the 
child of that poor woman from the dead, and “if the prophet can 
taise anybody from the dead he can cure your husband.” This girl 
must have had something about her to make those people listen to 


| her; she must have shown her religion in her life; her life must have 


been cens/stent with her religion to make them believe her. We 
(327) 


= 


See 


‘MOOD Y's SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


328 


read that Naaman has faith in her word, and he goes to the Ling 
and tells him what he intends to do. And the king says: “TI will 
tell you what I will do. I will give you letters to the king of Israel, 
and, of course, if any cure is to be effected, the king will know how 
to obtain it.” Like a great many men nowadays, they think if 
there is anything to be got, it is to be got from the king and not 
from his subjects. And so you see this man starting out to the 
king of Israel with all his letters and a large doctor’s bill. I can not 
find just how much it was, but it must have been something like 
five hundred thousand dollars. The sum was a very large one likely, 
He was going to be liberal. He was not going to be small. Well, 
he got all his money and letters together, and started. There was 
no small stir as Naaman swept through the gates of Syria that 
day with his escort. He reaches Samaria, and sends a messenger 
to th: king, announcing his arrival. The messenger delivers the let- 
ter to the king, and the first thing he does is to open the letter and 
begin to read it. I can see his brow knit as he goes on. ‘“ What is 
this?’ he exclaims. ‘“ What does this mean? This man means 
war—-this Assyrian king means to have a war with me. Who. 
ever heard of such a thing as a man cured of leprosy?” and 
he rent his mantle. Every one knew something was wrong 
when the king rent his mantle, and the news spread through 
the streets that they were on the eve of a war. The air 
was filled with war; everybody was talking about it. No doubt 
the news had gone abroad that the great general of Assyria was in 
the city, and he was the cause of the rumors; and by and by it 
reached the prophet Elisha that he (the king) had rent his mantle, 
and he wanted to know the cause. When he had heard what it 
was, he just told the king to “send him to me.” Now you see the 
major-general riding up in grand style to the prophet’s house. He 
probably lived in a small and obscure dwelling. Perhaps Naaman 
thought he was doing Elisha a great favor by calling on him. He 
had an idea that he was honoring this man, who had no influence or 
position. So he rides up. A messenger is sent in to announce 
Major-General Naaman, of Damascus. But the prophet doesn’t even 
see him. He simply tells the servant to say to him, “ Go and wash 
in the Jordan seven times.” When the messenger comes to Naa- 
man and tells him this, he is as mad as anything. He considers it 
a reflection upon him—as if he hadn’t kept his person clean. ‘“ Does 
the man mean to insinuate that I haven’t kept my body clean? 


eS, 


. the Ling 
3: “T will 
of Israel, 
know how 
r think if 
y and not 
ut to the 
I can not 
ething like 
one likely. 
all. Well, 
There was 
Syria that 
messenger 
ers the let- 
. letter and 
“What is 
nan means 
me. Who. 
osy?” and 
was wrong 
ad through 
The air 
No doubt 
syria was in 
by and by it 
his mantle, 
eard what it 
you see the 
house. He 
aps Naaman 
bn him. He 
b influence or 
to announce 
doesn’t even 
Go and wash 
omes to Naa- 
b considers it 
ean. ‘“ Does 
body clean? 


NAAMAN, 329 


can’t I wash myself in waters of Damascus? We ve much better 
waters than they have here. Why, if we had the Jordan in Syria, 
we'd look upon it as a ditch. The idea—wash in that contemptible 
river.” He's as full of rage as he can be; and he said, “ Behold, I 
thought.” That’s the way with sinners; they always say they 
thought. In this expression we can see he had thought of some 
plan, had marked out a way for the Lord to heal him. That is the 
way with nearly every man and woman in Chicago. They've got a 
plan drawn out, and because God does not come and save them ac- 
cording to their plan, they don’t take Him. Keep this in mind: 
“My ways are not your ways, nor my thoughts your thoughts.” If 
you look for Him to come in that direction, He will come the other 
way. “My ways are not your ways.” He thought. My friends, 
no man gets into the kingdom of God till he gives up his thoughts. 
God never saved a man till he gave up his own thoughts and took 
up God’s. Yes, Naaman thought that the moment the prophet 
knew he was outside, he would come out and bow and scrape, and 
say he was glad to see such a great and honorable man from Syria. 
Instead of that, he merely sent out a messenger to tell him to go 
and wash in Jordan seven times. 

When we were in Glasgow we had an employer converted, and he 
wanted to get a man in his employ to come to our meetings, but he 
wouldn’t come. If he was going to be converted he wouldn't be 
converted by those meetings. You know when a Scotchman gets 
an idea into his head he is the most stubborn man you can find. 
He was determined he wouldn’t be converted by Moody and San- 
key. Like a good many here, they say, “If I am going to be con- 
verted I ain’t going to be converted dewn in that old Tabernacle.” 
The employer talked and talked to this man, but couldn’t get him 
tocome. Well, we left Glasgow and got away up to the north of 
Scotland—in Inverness, and he sent this man up there on business, 
thinking he might be induced to go into the meetings. One night 
we were singing, “On the banks of that beautiful river,” and he 
happened to be passing and wondered where the sweet sounds were 
coming from. He came up finally, and I happened to be preach- 
ing that night on the very text, “I thought.” He listened, and 
soon did not know exactly where he was. He was convicted; he 
was converted and became a Christian. “I thought” how many 
people have said, “I'll never be converted by these meetings;” “I'll 
never be converted in the Baptist Church;” “I'll never be con. 


330 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


verted in the Presbyterian Church.” A man makes up his mind not 
to go there, and he goes. A man must yield his own way to that 
of God. Now, you can see all along that Naaman’s thoughts were 
altogether different from those of God's. He was going to get the 
grace of God by showing favors, and a good many men now think 
they can buy their way into the kingdom of God. My friends, we 
san not buy the favor of Heaven with money. If you get a seat 
in the kingdom of Heaven, you have to accept salvation as a gift. 
Then another thing he thought. He thought he could get what 
he wanted by taking letters to the king, not the prophet. The lit- 
tle maid told him of the prophet, yet he was going to pass the 
prophet by. How many people would go into the kingdom of God 
if it wasn’t for pride? He was too proud to go to the prophet. 
But Pride, if you will allow me the expression, got a knock on the 
head on this occasion. It was a terrible thing for him to think of 
obeying—going down to the Jordan and dipping seven times. He 
had got better rivers in Damascus, in his own wisdom, and says, 
“Can I not wash there and be clean?” He was angry, but when 
he got over it he listened to his servants. I would rather see peo- 
ple mad than see them go to sleep. I would rather see a man get 
as mad as possible at anything that I may say than send him to 
sleep. When a man’s asleep there’s no chance of reaching him, 
but if he is mad we may get at him. It is a good thing for a 
man to get mad sometimes, for when he cools off he generally 
listens to reason. So his servant came to him and said, “ Suppose 
he had bid thee do some great thing, wouldst thou not have 
done it?” Probably had he told him to take cod liver oil for 
ten years he’d have done it. If he had told him that he 
wanted as much money as Naaman had brought up, that would 
have been all right. But the idea of literally doing nothing-- 
just to go down to Jordan and wash himself—it was so far be- 
low his calculations that he thought he was being imposed upon. It 
is so in our days. How many people expect to get salvation by 
some sudden shock, some great event happening to them, or some 
sudden flash of light to break upon them. Some think that God's 
plan of salvation requires months to find out. They go on stum- 
bling over its simplicity. And so his servant said, “If the prophet 
had bid thee do some great thing, wouldst thou not have done it? 
Wouldn t you just better go down and wash yourself in the Jordan?” 
Perhaps he said, “ If I go down to the Jordan and am not cured, what 


nd not 
to that 
‘§ were 
ret the. 
v think 
ids, we 
a seat 
a gift. 
et what 
The lit- 
ass the 
of God 
orophet. 
< on the 
think of 
es. He 
nd says, 
ut when 
see peo- 
man get 
him to 
ing him, 
ng for a 
renerally 
Suppose 
ot have 
r oil for 
that he 
at would 
othing-- 
bo far be- 
upon. It 
vation by 
, or some 
hat God's 
b on stum- 
he prophet 
e done it? 
Jordan?” 
red, what 


NAAMAN. R31 


will my enemies say when I go back to Damascus?” But he was 
influenced by the servant, and he went. That was one good thing 
in Naaman’s character—he was influenced by a humble messenger. 
A good many people won’t accept a messenger because he is not 
refined, and cultured, and educated. My friends, never mind who 
brings the message. It is the message you want, not the messenger. 
If a boy was to bring me a telegraphic message with good news, I 
wouldn't notice the boy, wouldn’t look to see whether he was white 
or black. It would be the message I would want. And so it was 
with Naaman. It was a little Hebrew girl that first told him to 
come to Samaria, and now he was told to wash by his servant. So 
down he goes and dips into the waters. The first time he rose he 
says, “I’d just like to see how much my leprosy has gone.” And 
he looks, but not a bit has left him. ‘“ Why, I’m not going to get 
rid of my leprosy in this way; this is absurd.” “ Well,” said the 
servant, “do just as the man of God tells you; obey him.” And 
this is just what we are told to do in the Scriptures, to obey Him. 
The first thing we have to learn is obedience. Disobedience was 
the pit that Adam fell into, and we have to get out of it by obedi- 
ence. Well, he goes into the water a second time. If some 
Chicago Christians had been there, they would have asked, sneer- 
ingly, ‘“‘ Well, how do you feel now?”’ He didn’t see that he was 
any better, and down he went a third time; but when he looked at 
himself he had just as much leprosy as ever. Down he goes a 
fourth, fifth, and sixth time. He looks at himself, but not a speck 
of it is removed. “I told you this,” he says to his servant; “look ’e 
here; I’m just the same as ever.” ‘“ But,” says the servant, “ you 
must just do what the man of God tells you to do—go down seven 
times.” He takes the seventh plunge, and comes out. He looks 
at himself, and behold, his flesh is as that of alittle child. He says 
to his servant, “ Why, I never felt as good as I do to-day. I feel 
better than if I had won a great battle. Look! I’m perfectly 
cleansed. Oh, what a great day this is for me. The leprosy has 
gone.” The waters to him had been as death and judgment, and 
he had come out resurrected—his flesh as that of a little child. I 
suppose he got into his chariot, a.d away he went to the man of 
God. He had lost his temper, he had lost his pride, and he had 
lost his leprosy. That is the way now. Ifa man will only lose his 
pride, he vill soon see his leprosy disappear. The leprosy will go 
away with his pride. I believe the greatest enemies of men in this 


332 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


world are unbelief and pride. I believe hundreds and thousands /1 
Chicago would press into the kingdom of God if it were not for thei: 
pride, He goes back to the man of God, and takes his silver and gold. 
He offers him money. “I don’t want your money,” replies the proph- 
et. If he had taken money it would have spoiled the beautiful 
story. Naaman had to take back everything he brought from Damas- 
cus but his leprosy. The only thing that the sinner has got that God 
wants is his sins, and if you let Him take them to-night, He will. 
Get rid of your leprosy; He will take it. Never mind your feelings, 
No soul in this audience will go down to the dark caverns if he is 
willing to obey God. And now the question comes to you all, 
Will you obey Him? You haven’t got to go a thousand miles away 
and dip into a Jordan, but just believe where you sit—believe on 
the Lord Jesus Christ. ‘Come unto Me all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” 1s there anything to hinder 
you from obeying God now? He will give you power to accept 
Him. Do you believe He would offer you salvation without giving 
you the power to obey Him? Don’t go from this hall with any 
such delusion, my friends. Don’t go home with this leprosy, think- 
ing that you can not get rid of it. If sin is better to you, then, of 
course, hold on to it—if leprosy is worth more to you than to be 
purified, then keep it. Naaman could have gone back with his 
leprosy if he hadn’t met that prophet, and gone down to Jordan. 
If you go out without accepting Him, you go out as a sinner, and 
if death comes, as it may, suddenly upon you, there is no assurance 
in the Bible that you can pass through the pearly gates. There is 
no leprosy there. You must leave it here. If a leper was to get 
into the kingdom of Heaven, all Heaven would be affected by him. 
There is a fountain opened in the House of David for the lepers. 
This night you can be saved if you will. The door is open—on the 
hinge; the battle is fought on this fact, if you will—not because you 
can’t. 

Oh, but you say, “I’ve tried.’ Naaman might have said, “1 
have tried,” too. Probably he had tried ali the physicians in his 
country, but Naaman couldn’t get cured. He couldn't cure himszit. 
When Christ said to that man who had a withered hand hanging at 


his side, “Stretch out thy hand,” he might have said, “I've tried’ 


to stretch it out for twenty years, and I can’t do it.” But when the 
command was given him, the power came also. All that was waited 
was the will of the man. My friends, if you don’t accept the Gos- 


ands iq 
or thei; 
id gold. 
» proph- 
eautiful 
Damas- 
1at God 
He will. 
feelings. 
if he is 
you all, 
es away 
lieve on 
and are 
o hinder 
» accept 
it giving 
vith any 
y, think- 
then, of 
in to be 
with his 

Jordan. 
mer, and 
ssurance 
There is 
as to get 
i by him. 
ie lepers. 
—on the 
‘amuse you 


smn, “I 
ns in his 
e himscit. 
anging at 
I’ve tried’ 
when the 
as waiited 
- the Gos- 


NAAMAN. 333 
pel and obey it, and you go down to death, there is not a ray of hope 
that you will escape the punishment held out in the Bible. There 
is not a word in the Bible to lead you to believe that you will escape 
condemnation if you go down to the grave with that leprosy. Do 
you think, I ask again, that He will ask you to repent and accept 
eternal life without giving you the power? The moment you obey, 
that moment the blessing comes. Who will accept Him? I wish 
I could believe for you all, but Ican not. I would have you all come 
into the kingdom of God. One of two things you have got to do 
—either accept the remedy He offers you, and be saved, or spurn 
the remedy as Naaman was going to do, and go home with your 
sins. May God open your eyes to see the necessity of being saved 
by this great remedy. 


REE = 


XL. 


HOW MEMORY TORMENTS THE LOST SOUL. 


LUKE xvi. 25: “Son, remember.” 


MAN came to me the other day and said, “I like your 

preaching, because you don’t preach hell. I suppose you 

don’t believe in that doctrine?” I don’t want any ran to 
tise up in judgment and say that I was not faithful while here— 
that I only preached one side of the truth. Ifaman isa messenger 
of God he must tell His truth as He gives it to him; he must not 
pick out some passages and say they are true, and pick out others 
and say they are not true. Now, the same Bible that pictures to 
me Fleaven, with all its beauty and glory, tells me of hell; and 
there is no picture of hell so vividly drawn anywhere as the one in 
this sixteenth chapter of Luke, drawn by the Son of God. No man 
could draw such a picture—-no one but .he Master Himself, for no 
man could look into the future as He could. He knewall about the 
future when He came here. He didn’t keep this terrible doctrine 
back. He gave it all up tous. Ifa mother loves ason very much 
and sees him going into sin, out of pure love for the boy she will 
tell him of his danger; and I contend that it was the pure love 
of the Master for this perishing world that He warned them of the 
danger. 

There is one thing clearly proved by Scripture, and that is, that 
our memory follows us intothe other world. When He says, “ Son, 
remember,” we have got to remember, whether we will or not. We 
do a great many things in this world which we would give a good 
deal to forget—if they could be blotted out eternally. I heard 
John Gough say he would give his right arm if he could forget 
how he treated his mother. The memory of this will follow him 
to his grave; he can not forget it. A good many things we have 
done have been forgotten, but they lie only buried in our memory. 
They will by and by be called up by God, and they will all come back 
again. When He says, “Son, remember,” He touches a secret 
(334) 


OUL. 


ke your 
ose you 
> rnan to 
e here— 
essenger 
must not 
it others 
ictures to 
hell; and 
he one in 
No man 
elf, for no 
nbout the 
doctrine 
ery much 
y she will 
pure love 
em of the 


at is, that 
ys, “ Son, 
not. We 
ive a good 
I heard 
uld forget 
ollow him 
bs we have 
r memory. 
come back 
es a secret 


HOW MEMORY TORMENTS THE LOST SOUL. 335 


spring in our memory, and all those things were rushing back upon us, 
We can not forget; we must remember, and I think it is taught in 
that Word that this is the worm that will never die—our memory. 
I have been twice at the point of death. Once I was nearly 
drowned; I had gone down for the first and second times, and, in 
the twinkling of an eye, everything I had done, everything I had 
thought—all came flashing across my mind like a panorama. If you 
ask me to explain it, I can not do so. The second time, when I got, 
caught in the Wells street bridge, I thought I was gone, and in an 
instant everything flashed to me—things that I had long forgotten 

came back, back, back, vividly to my mind. This clearly teaches 
me that when God says ‘ Remember,” we will have to remember. 

Everything will come back. Why, scientific men tell us now that 

it isan established fact, that everything a person hears they will 

remember. It isstored away in our memory, and will come back 

sometime. I heard of a servant girl who overheard her master 

reading Hebrew; she was taken sick shortly afterward, and talked 

Hebrew for hours and hours. She merely heard him read it, but it 

was there. So, my friends, if we think we have forgotten, bear in 

mind that the time is rolling on when we must remember, and when, 

perhaps, we would give worlds if we could forget it. The things 

done and said now, by and by will come up when God says, “ Son, 

remember.” In other words, God makes every man write his own 

biography. You may try and read it in a different way, but God 

will make you read it just as you have written it. 

Now, my friends, just ask the Lord God of Heaven to teach you 
these truths, if true, because some of you may be under the power 
of the devil, who is trying to make you believe there’s not a word 
of truth init. If we believe the Bible, we can not disbelieve in hell. 
The same book tells me of Heaven which tells me of hell. The 
idea of no retribution comes from the devil, not from God. Adam, 
when he sinned, was told by Satan that he wouldn't die, but God 
said he would. God has offered His life, and if we are not willing 
to accept salvation and escape the damnation of hell, what is going 
to become of our souls? A man in an insane asylum, that I heard 
of a few years ago—he may be alive now-—kept continually crying, 
“If I only had! If I only had!” That was his only cry. The 
story was this: He was employed by a railway company, and had 
charge of a swing bridge. Some of the company sent word 
they were coming past in an express train at a certain hour. Sev- 


Eee 


sheen 


od 


336 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


eral boatmen asked him to open near the time when the train was 
due. At first he resisted their requests, but at last he listened to them, 
and opened the bridge. Scarcely was it opened when he heard the 
train coming tearing along, and it leaped into the jaws of death. Many 
of the people were killed. The man reeled and tottered, and went 
mad, and his cry was, “If I only had.” I believe many a one in 
the prison house of hell are shrieking, “If I only had yielded to 
the power of the Gospel; if I only had accepted salvation when 
offered ; if I only had listened to the warning words.” I read, some 
time ago, of a man who, while mounting his horse at the door of a 
saloon, saw the deacon of a church pass by. He said, in a sneering 
way, “Say, can you tell me how far it is to hell?” The deacon 
wouldn’t answer the scoffer, and passed on, thinking he would never 
hear of him again. Ata corner not far off, when the deacon came 
up he found a crowd, and in the midst of the crowd lay that young 
man. He had been thrown from his horse and had his neck 
broken, and had gone to eternity. Some men trifle with eternal 
things; laugh and scoff about them; but I would rather give my 
right hand than speak a light word about eternity. It may be that 
next Sunday night you will be in eternity, and your memory will 
follow you. You may forget this text, but it will come to you 
when He says remember. May the Spirit of God burn the text 
down into your souls. Do you think that Cain has forgotten the cry 
of that loved brother Abel? Do you think that that cry, and the 
sight of that blood, and the memory of that murder has not fol- 
lowed him through these six thousand years? Do you believe Judas 
has forgotten that kiss—forgotten the look of that loving Saviour 
as He said, “ Judas, betrayest thou thy Master with a kiss?” Ah, 
my friends, do you believe that the antediluvians have forgotten 
how Noah pleaded with them? Thousands of years have rolled 
away, but do you believe they have forgotten? No, they have 
taken their memory into the next world. You remember you may 
forget in this world, but in a few years the worms will have eaten 
the body, but the things done in it will be remembered. You may 
forget all the golden opportunities you have had, but they will all 
come up. Bear in mind that those men who are making light of 
these meetings, and saying in a sneering and contemptuous manner 
they are all excitement—bear in mind that the time is coming when 
there will be no special meetings to make fun of. You make fun 
of your praying mothers, but remember there will be no praying 


mot 
may 
no b 
no C 
urge 
God, 
wher 
comi 
you | 
you | 
comit 
have 
you | 
came 
mothe 
There 
and ui 
the d< 
passet 
of Na: 
heard 
hear i 
mothe 
you w 
will b 
must 
of Go 
ing md 
the ve 
those 
Yes, 
some o 
in hell, 
gamble 
comma 
spect t 
be swe] 
think t 
not let 
Noah ld 


ain was 
o them, 
ard the 
. Many 
nd went 
one in 
Ided to 
yn when 
ad, some 
oor of a 
sneering 
> deacon 
ild never 
>on came 
at young 
his neck 
h eternal 
give my 
y be that 
mory will 
ie to you 
the text 
en the cry 
, and the 
s not fol- 
ieve Judas 
g Saviour 
ts?” = Ah, 
forgotten 
ave rolled 
they have 
ir you may 
ave eaten 
You may 
ney will all 
g light of 
bus manner 
ming when 
make fun 
no praying 


HOW MEMORY TORMENTS THE LOST SOUL, 337 


mothers in the lost world—no mothers pleading for you there. You 
may make light of that Bible, but bear in mind that there will be 
no blessed Bibles there—no Bibles to make fun of and to ridicule; 
no Gospel preachers to offer you salvation; no praying wives to 
urge you and plead with you to accept salvation. Thanks be to 
God, you may accept it. You are in the land of an open Bible, 
where the Gospel is proclaimed freely to you all. You have men 
coming to you in your shops and stores telling you of it kindly, and 
you make light of the comfort offered. When they come to you, 
you say they are mad, and laugh at them. But, ah! the time is 
coming, and it may come quicker than you imagine, when you will 
have no friends to come and urge you to come to Christ. Some of 
you have praying children, and you ignore them. A little child 
came to me the other day, and asked me to pray for her father and 
mother. She was very anxious that they should become Christians. 
There will be no little children there who will come to you then 
and urge you to accept Christ. No blessed Jesus will come then to 
the door of your heart and plead with you. “ Jesus of Nazareth 
passeth by ’’ now, but there will be no song in hell like that. Jesus 
of Nazareth passeth by. He don’t pass by that way. You have 
heard Mr. Sankey singing, “The Ninety and Nine;” you won't 
hear it there. You have heard that good old song which your 
mothers have taught you, “Guide Me, oh, Thou Great Jehovah ;” 
you will not hear that blessed hymn in that world. If you do, it 
will be the taunting by some fiend. If you wish to sing it, you 
must accept salvation here. If you want to come into the kingdom 
of God, you have to accept the salvation urged upon you by pray- 
ing mothers, pleading ministers, young converts. Yes, my friends, 
the very angels are hovering over this assembly, waiting to. receive 
those who are willing and ready to accept salvation. 

Yes, I can imagine the skeptic saying, “Just go and. tell this to 
some one else. Don’t talk about future retribution; I don’t believe 
in hell.” Let me ask you a question: Do you think that those 
gamblers, thieves, harlots, and drunkards, who are trampling the ten 
commandments under their feet, they who have never given any re- 
spect to God’s word or to His instructions—do you think they will 
be swept into the kingdom of Heaven against their will? Do you 
think that those antediluvians, who were so sinful that God could 
not let them live on the earth, would be swept into Paradise, and 
Noah left to wade through the deluge?) Do you think that these 
22 


Pym 


I 


= — 


“Ee2B.-83 


= 
so 


2 SRO 
= A staan > 


358 ATOODY'’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


people, too corrupt for earth, would go there? As I have said be. 
fore, an unregenerated man in Heaven would make a hell of it. An 
unregenerated man couldn’t stay there. Why, some of you can not 
wait an hour here to lister to the Word of God. Before the hour 
expires you want to go cut. Some of you just wish it was over so 
that you could go and get a drink in some of those saloons. I tell 
you, from the very depths of my heart, I believe Heaven would be 
a hell to an unregenerated man. “I don’t want to be here,” he 
would say. My friends, Heaven is a prepared place for prepared 
people, and no one will ever see the kingdom of God without being 
born of God. 

When I visited the Paris Exposition in 1868, I saw a picture with 
a little piece of paper underneath it on which were the words, 
“ Sowing tares.” It was the picture of a man with the most hellish. 
looking countenance I ever beheld. It seemed the face of a very 
fiend. He hada basket in his hand which held seed, and every time a 
seed went down from his hand, up came a serpent, crawling and twist. 
ing all over him, and away off in the distance, among the trees, were 
all kinds of wild beasts. The picture fastened itself upon my mind. 
“Sowing tares.” My friends, if you sow tares you'll have to reap 
them. Do you think those libertines, those gamblers, those rumsell- 
‘ers, who are ruining others, who are striking men down to death—do 
you think they are going into Heaven without being regenerated? 
No, my friends, they are sowing tares, and they must reap them. 

“Son, remember!” If you forget the sermon, remember the text. 
‘Remember this scene. Look all around you—look up there. “God 
is love.” Away off on the shores of eternity you will remember it 
all. You will remember that you came into this Tabernacle one 
November Sunday night in 1876; you will recollect just how the 
choir looked, just how and what Mr. Sankey sang; you will re- 
member how he sang“ The Ninety and Nine,” and how the preacher 
‘spoke upon the text, “Son, remember.” May God wake up your 
memory, that you may escape the damnation of hell and flee to the 
bosom of the Saviour. My friends, don’t trifle with eternal things. 
Trifle with the forked lightning, trifle with some terrible disease, 
but don’t trifle with the eternal judgment. Remember that His 
ways are not like your ways. As the Heavens are higher than the 
earth, so are His ways than ours. If a man does not escape by 
‘Calvary there is no hope for him. If the Word of God don't teach 
ithat it don’t teach anything. 


stand 
sick 
Mich 
beco: 
He y 
unco 
next 
6c Do 
take t 
you n 
Just 
to the 
hada 
said, § 
bear ¢ 
He di 
and ag 


nS, 


> said be. 
of it. An 
yu can not 
the hour 
as over so 
ns. I tell 
1 would be 
here,” he 
r prepared 
hout being 


yicture with 
the words, 
10st hellish. 
e of avery 
svery timea 
g and twist- 
e trees, were 
yn my mind. 
lave to reap 
ose rumsell- 
o death—do 
egenerated ? 
eap them. 
ber the text. 
here. ‘God 
remember it 
bernacle one 
ust how the 
you will re- 
the preacher 
ake up your 
d flee to the 
ernal things. 
ible disease, 
ber that His 
her than the 
ot escape by 
don’t teach 


HOW MEMORY TORMENTS THE LOST SOUL. 339 


I remember a few years ago I felt very anxious for a man who 
was present at a meeting like this. At the close of the meeting I 
asked all to rise, and he rose among the oiiers. I took him aside 
and said, “ Now, you are going to become a Christian—you will 
come out for the Lord now?” He said he was wanting to very 
much. The man was trembling from head to foot, and I thought 
sure he was going to accept Him. I spoke to him in his hesitating 
condition, and found out what was standing between him and Christ 
He was afraid of his companions. Nearly every day and night 
news comes to me that some of these employers and clerks make 
light of these meetings, and make fun of all who attend them, and 
so many give the same reason as this man did. I said to him ; a 
Heaven is what we are led to believe it is, I would be willing to 
accept it and bear their fun.” I talked with him, but he wouldn’t 
accept it. He went off, but for weeks he came every night, and 
went away as he came, without accepting it. One day I received 
a message to come and see him. He was sick, and I went to his 
chamber. He wanted to know if there was hope for him in the 
eleventh hour. I spoke to him, and gave him every hope I could. 
Day after day I visited him, and, contrary to all expectation, I saw 
him gradually recovering. When he had got pretty well he was 
sitting on the front porch, and I sat down by him and said: “ You 
will be going now to confess Christ ; you'll be going to take you 
stand for Him now?” “ Well,” said he, “I promised God on my 
sick bed that I woulc; but I will wait a little. I am going over to 
Michigan, where I am going to buy a farm and settle down and 
become aChristian.” “If God can not make you a Christian here 
He will not do it there,” I replied. I tried to get him to make as 
unconditional surrender, but he wouldn’t; he would put it off till 
next spring. ‘ Why,” I said, “ you may not live till next spring.” 
“Don’t you see I am getting quite well?” “ But are you willing to 
take the risk till next spring?” “Oh yes, I’ll take it; Mr. Moody 
you needn’t trouble yourself any more about my soul; I'll risk it,” 
Just one week froin that day his wife sent for me. When I went 
to their home I found her in great trouble and learned that he had 
hada relapse. I asked if he had expressed a desire to see me. She 
said, “ No; he is always saying ‘there is no hope’ and I can not 
bear to have him die in that cendition.” I went into the room. 
He did not speak to me, but I went down to the foot of the bed 
and asked him how it was with him. What a look he gave me! 


Cony a 
SSS 


= 
Pe Oe Sees or 


340 HOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


He said: “ You needn’t talk to me any inore; go talk to my wife 
and children, there’s no hope for me.” He pointed to the stove as 
he continued: “ My heart is as hard as that stove now. When J 
was sick He came to the door of my heart, and I p:omised to serve 
Him, but I broke that promise, and now I must die without Him.” 
I got down to pray. “You needn’t pray for me;” he said. [ 
prayed, but it seemed as if my prayer went no higher than my head. 
He lingered till that night, repeating, “The harvest is past, the 
summer is ended, and I am not saved.” There he lay in agony, 
every few minutes this lamentation breaking from him. Just as 
the sun was going down behind those western prairies his wife 
leaned over him, and in an almost inaudible voice he whispered, 
“The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and I am not saved,” 
and he died. He had lived a Christiess life, he died a Christless 
death, he was wrapped in a Christless shroud, and he was buried in 
a Christless grave. Dear friends, the harvest is passing; the sum- 
mer will socn be ended; won’t you let Him redeem you? Accept 
His precious blood. Sinner, He comes to the very door of your 
heart. He, the God of all grace, will save every soul here. 

There was handed to me a little piece of poetry to-day. I am 
not much given to poetry, but it seems to me to fit in here: 


I sat alone with my conscience 
In a place where time had ceased, 
And we talked of my former living 
In the land where the years increased. 
And I felt I should have to answer 
The question it put to me, 
And to face the answer and question 
Throughout an eternity. 
The ghosts of forgotten actions 
Came floating before my sight, 
And things that I thought were dead things 
Were alive with a terrible might. 
And the vision of all my past life 
Was an awful thing to face— 
Alone with my conscience, sitting 
In that solemnly silent place, 
And I thought of a far-away warning, 
Of a sorrow that was to be mine, 
In a land that then was the future, 
But now is the present time, 


Ah, 
your 
reme1 
every § 


my wife 
stove as 
When J 
to serve 
it Him.” 
said. | 
my head. 
past, the 
in agony, 
Just as 
; his wife 
vhispered, 
ot saved,” 
-Christless 
5 buried in 
- the sum- 
? Accept 
yor of your 
re. 
day. Iam 
Pre: 


Ah, sinner, take Him. 
your memory will condemn you. 
remember that to-night is a night of mercy. Let us all pray for 
every soul in the assembly. 


AOW MEMORY TORMENTS THE LOST SOUVTI., 


And I thought of my former thinking 
Of the Judgment Day to he ; 

But sitting alone with my conscience 
Seerned judgment enough for me. 

And I wondered if there was a future 
To this land beyond the grave ; 

But no one gave me an answer, 
And no one came to save, 

Then I felt that the future was present, 
And the present would never go by, 

For it was but the thought of my past life 
Grown into eternity. 

Then I woke from my timely dreaming, 
And the vision passed away, 

And I knew the far-away warning 
Was a warning of yesterday— 

And I pray that I may not forget it, 
In this land before the grave, 

That | may not cry in the future, 
And no one come to save. 

And so I have learnt a lesson 
Which I ought to have known before, 

And which, though I learnt it dreaming, 
I hope to forget no more. 

So I sit uione with my conscience 
In the place where the years increase, 

And I try to remember the future 
In the land where time will cease. 

And I know of the future judgment, 
How dreadful soe’er it be, 

That to sit alone with my conscience 
Will be judgment enough for me. 


Your own conscience will condemn you; 


“Son, remember.” May you all 


fe mr no ee 


3 chee apap. 


BE St 


Nc A AT A NEESER RN OI a BE A aa ae, 


XLI. 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 


ha ActTs £:30: “ Understandest thou what thou readest ?” 


NE thing I have noticed in studying the Word of God, and 
that is, when a man is filled with the Spirit he deals largely 
with the Word of God; whereas the man who is filled with 
his own ideas refers rarely to the Word of God. He gets along 

Ne without it, and you seldom see it mentioned in his discourses. A 

great many use it only as a text-book. They get their text from 

| the Bible, and go on without any further allusion to it; they ignore 

i it; but when a man is filled with the Word, as Stephen was, he can 

not help speaking Scripture. You will find that Moses was von. 

{ stantly repeating the commandments; you will find, too, that 

Joshua, when he came across the Jordan with his people, there they 

i stood and the I.:w of the Lord God was read to them, and you will 

find all through Scripture the men of God dealing much with His 

Word. Why, you will find Christ constantly referring to them, and 

th saying, “ Thus saith the Scriptures.” Now, as old Dr. Bonar, of 

i Glasgow, said, “ The Lord didn’t tell Joshua how to use the sword, 

! but He told him how he should meditate on the Lord day and 

night, and then he would have good success.’’ When we find a 

man meditating on the words of God, my friends, that man is full 

of boldness and is successful. And the reason why we have so little 

success in our teaching is because we know so little of the Word of 

God. You must know it and have it in your heart. A great many 

have it in their head and not in their heart. If we have the Spirit 

Mt of God in our heart, then we have something to work upon. He 

} . does not use us because He is not in us. Know, as we come to 
this word to-day, as Mr. Sankey has been singing: 


oe “No word He hath spoken 
! Was ever yet broken.” 


Let us take this thought in John x. 35: “And the Scripture can 
(342) 


read 


an 
of 
Wo 
wo 
col 
tak 
try 
to u 
bacl 
we 
the 
N 
the 
kno 
the 1 
false 
has 
all tl 
Chri 
knew 
they 
they 
the b 
world 
N 
man 
a rule 
didn’t 
them 


yf God, and 
eals largely 
; filled with 
_ gets along 
scourses. A 
ir text from 
- they ignore 
1 was, he can 
ses Was <On- 
d, too, that 
le, there they 
and you will 
uch with His 
to them, and 
Dr. Bonar, of 
se the sword, 
ord day and 
hen we find a 
at man is full 
p have so little 
f the Word of 
A great many 
have the Spirit 
brk upon. He 


s we come t0 


le Scripture cal 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 343 


not be broken.” Thereis a great deal of infidelity around, and it 
has crept into many of the churches, too. These doubters take up 
the Bible and wonder if they can believe it all—if it is true from 
back to back, and a good many things in it they believe are not 
true. I have a good deal of admiration for that colored man who 
was approached by some infidel—some skeptical man, and who told 
him, “ Why, the Bible is not true; all scientific men tell us that 
now; it’s only a bundle of fables.’”’ “ Bible ain’t true®”’ replied the 
colored man. “Why, I was a blasphemer an’ a drinker, an’ dat 
book jest made me stop swearin’, drinkin’, lyin’, and blasphemin’, 
an’ you say ’tain’t true.” My friends, the black man had the best 
of the argument. Do you think if the Bible was a bad book it 
would make men good? Do you think if it was a false book it 
would make men good? And so let us take our stand on the 
colored man’s platform, and be convinced that it is true. Whenwe 
take it into our hands let us know that it is the Word of God, and 
try to understand it. Many of the passages appear to us difficult 
to understand, but if we could understand it clearly from back to 
back at first, it would be as a human book; but the very fact that 
we can not understand it all at once, is the highest proof that it is 
the Word of God. 

Now, another thought is, that a great many people read it, but 
they read it as a task. They say, “ Well, I’ve read it through, I 
know all that’s in it,” and lay it aside. How many people prefer 
the morning paper in order to get news. They prefer it, but it is a 
false idea. This Bible is the only newspaper; it tells you all that 
has taken place for the last six thousand years, and it tells you 
all the news of the future. Why, seventeen hundred years before 
Christ, the people were told in it of the coming of Christ. They 
knew He was coming. The daily paper could not tell us of this; 
they may be written by learned men, brilliant editorial writers, but 
they couldn’t have told this. If you want news, study the Bible— 
the blessed old Bible, and you will find it has all the news of the 
world. 

Now, we come up to the question, How to study it. A great 
many read it as I used to read it, just to ease my conscience. I had 
a rule, before I was converted, to read two chapters a day. If I 
didn’t do it before I retired, J] used to jump out of bed and read 
them; but if you had asked me fifteen minutes after what I had 
read I could not have told you. Now thisis the trouble with many 


A Te 


344. MOODY'S SERMONS, AL DRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


—they read with the head and not with the heart. A man may 
read his Bible, but when he has closed it you may ask him what 
chapter he read last, and he can not tell you. He sometimes puts a 
mark in it to tell him; without the mark he don’t know, his reading 
has been so careless. It isto keep him from reading it again. Just 
as I used to do when hoeing corn; I used to put a stick in the fur- 
row to know where I had hoed last. A good many people 
are just like this; they pick up a chapter here, and there is 
no connection in their reading, and consequently don’t know any. 
thing about the Word of God. If we want to understand it, we’ve 
got to study it—read it on our knees, asking the Holy Ghost to give 
us the understanding to see what the Word of God is; and if we 
go about it that way, and turn our face, as Joshua did, in prayer, 
and set ourselves to study these blessed and heavenly truths, the 
Lord will not disappoint us, and we will soon know our Bible; and 
when we know our Bible, then it is that God can use us. 

Let me say there are three books which every Christian ought to 
have, and if you haven’t them, go and buy them before you get 
your tea. The first is a good Bible—a good large-print Bible. | 
don’t like those little-print ones, which you can scarcely see—get 
one in large print. A good many object to a large Bible because 
they can’t carry it in their pocket. Well, if you can’t carry it in 
your pocket, it is a good way to carry it under your arm. It is 
showing what you are—it is showing your flag. Now,a great many 
of you are coming in from the country to these meetings, and when 
you get onthe cars you see people who are not ashamed to sit 
down and play cards. I don’t see why the children of God should 
be ashamed of carrying their Bibles under their arms in the cars. 
“ Ah,” some say, “that is the spirit of a Pharisee.” It would be 
the pharisaical spirit if you hadn’t dipped down into heavenly 
truths—if you haven't the Spirit of God with you. Some say, “I 
haven’t it.” Suppose you don’t read so many of these daily papers, 
and read a little oftener the Bible. Some say, “I haven't time.” 
Take time. I don’t believe there is a business man in Chicago who 
couldn’t find an hour a day to read his Bible if he wanted to. Get 
a good Bible, then a good concordance, and then a scriptural text. 
book. Whenever you come to soinething in the Word of God that 
you don’t know, hunt for its meaning in those books. Suppose 
after the meeting I am looking all over the platform and Dr. Kit- 
redge say's, “ What are you looking for?” and I answer, “ Oh, noth- 


Se 


nan may 
1im what 
es puts a 
is reading 
‘in. Just 
1 the fur- 
ry people 
1 there is 
cnoW any- 
J it, we've 
st to give 
and if we 
in prayer, 
truths, the 
Bible; and 


n ought to 
re you get 
t Bible. I 
ly sec—get 
ble because 
carry it in 
arm. It is 
great many 
s, aud when 
hmed to sit 
God should 
in the cars. 
t would be 
o heavenly 
bme say, “I 
aily papers, 
en’t time.” 
hicago who 
ed to. Get 
ptural text- 
of God that 
S. Suppose 
hnd Dr. Kit- 


| “ Oh, noth 


WOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE, 345 


ing, nothing,” he would go off. If he thought I hadn’t dropped 
something he wouldn’t stay. But suppose I had lost a very valuable 
ring, which some esteemed friend had given me, and I told him this. 
He would stay with me, and we would move this organ, and those 
chairs, and look all over, and by looking carefully we would find it. 
If a man hunts for truths in the Word of God, and reads it as if he 
was looking for nothing in particular, he will get nothing. When the 
men went to California in the gold excitement they went to dig for 
gold, and they worked day and night with a terrible energy just to 
get a little gold. Now, my friends, if they wanted to get the pure 
gold they had to dig for it, and when I was there I was told that 
the best gold was got by digging deep for it. Sothe best truths 
are got by digging deep for them. 

When I was in Boston I went into Mr. Prang’s chromo establish- 
ment. I wanted to know how the work was done. He took me to 
a stone several feet square, where he took the first impression, but 
when he took the paper off the stone I could see no sign of a man’s 
face; the paper was just tinged. I said I couldn’t see any sign of 
aman's face there. ‘“ Wait a little,” he said. He took me to an- 
other stone, but when the paper was lifted I couldn’t see any im- 
pression yet. He took me up—up to eight, nine, ten stones, and 
then I could see just the faintest outlines of a man’s face. He 
went on till he got up to about the twentieth stone, and I could see 
the impression of a face, but he said it was not very correct yet. 
Well, he went on until he got up, I think, to the twenty-eighth 
stone, and a perfect face appeared, and it looked as if all it had to 
do was to speak, and it would be human. If you read a chapter of 
the Bible and don’t see anything in it, read it a second time; and if 
you can not see anything in it, read it a third time. Dig deep. 
Read it again and again, and even if you have to read it twenty- 
eight times do so, and you will see the man Christ Jesus, for He is 
in every page of the Word; and if you take Christ out of the Old 
Testament you will take the key out of the Word. 

Many men in the churches nowadays are saying that the teachings 
in the New Testament are to be believed, but those in the Old are 
not. Those who say this don’t know anything about the New. 
There is nothing in the Old Testament that God has not put His 
seal upon. ‘ Why,’ some people say to me, “ Moody, you don’t 
believe in the flood? All the scientific men tell us it is absurd.” 
Let tlfein tell us. Jesus tells us of it, and I would rather take the 


= oe 


ina a -_ 
iia a5 
iy nh 
le 4 
nit 


i 


So 


4 - 
ee ee ae. 


a a at le nk erent 8 


346 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


word of Jesus than that of any other one. I haven’t got much re. 
spect for those men who dig down for stones with shovels, in order 
to take away the Word of God. Men don’t believe in the siu.y of 
Sodom and Gomorrah, but we have it sealed in the New Testament, 
“ As it was in the days of Sodom and Gomorrah.” They don’t be- 
lieve in Lot’s wife, but He says, ‘‘ Remember Lot’s wife.” So there 
is not a thing that men to-day cavil at but the Son of God indorses, 
They don’t believe in the swallowing of Jonah. They say it is im- 
possible that a whale could swallow Jonah—its throat is too small, 
They forget that the whale was prepared for Jonah; as the colored 
woman said, “ Why, God could p:epare a man to swallow a whale, let 
alu»e a whale to swallow a mou.’ We find that He indorses all 
the points in the Old Tes: «: from Genesis to Revelation. We 
have only one book—we heve i ivo. The moment a man begins 
to cut and slash, away ii all goes. me don’t believe in the first 
ive books. They would do well to look into the third chapter of 
John, where they will see the Samaritan woman at the well looking 
for the coming of Christ from the first five books of Moses. I tell 
you, my friends, if you look for Him you will find Him all through 
the Old Testament. You will find Him in Genesis—in every 
book in the Bible. Just turn to Luke xxiv. 27, you will find 
Him, after He had risen again, speaking about the Old Testa- 
ment prophets: “ And beginning at Moses, and all the prophets, 
He expounded unto them in all the Scripture the things concern- 
ing Himself.” Concerning Himself. Don’t that settle the question? 
I tell you, I am convinced in my mind that the Old Testament is as 
true as the New. ‘And He began at Moses and all the prophets.” 
Mark that, “all the prophets.” Then in the forty-fourth verse: 
“ And He said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto 
you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled which 
were written in the law of Moses and in the prophets and in the 
psalms concerning Me. Then opened He their understanding that 
they might understand the Scripture.” If we take Christ out of the 
Old Testament, what are you going to do with the psalms and 
prophets? The book is a sealed book, if we take away the New 
from it. Christ unlocks the Old and Jesus the New. Philip, in 
teaching the people, found Christ in the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah: 
“ All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to 
his own way, and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.” 
Why, the early Christians had nothing but the Old Testament to 


uch re- 
in order 
z1 wy of 
stament, 
ion't be- 
So there 
indorses. 
it is im- 
yo small, 
e colored 
whale, let 
dorses all 
ion. We 
an begins 
1 the first 
shapter of 
ell looking 
es. I tell 
ull through 
—jin every 
u will find 
Old Testa- 
‘ prophets, 
os, concern- 
e question? 
ament is as 
prophets.” 
urth verse: 
spake unto 
filled which 
and in the 
anding that 
st out of the 
psalms and 
ray the New 
Philip, 0 
er of Isaiah: 
every one to 
” 
y of us all. 
estament to 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 347 


preach the Gospel from—at Pentecost they had nothing else. So 
if there is any man or woman in this assembly who believes in the 
New Testament, and not in the Old, dear friends, you are deluded 
by Satan, because if you read the Word of God you will find Him 
spoken of throughout both books. I notice if a man goes to cut 
up the Bible and comes to you with one truth and says, “I don’t 
bei. ve this and I don’t believe that’””—I notice when he begins to 
loult portions of the Word of God \:e soon doubts it all. 

yw, the question is, how to study the Bible. Of course, I can 
not .ell you how you are to study it; but I can tell you how I have 
studied it, and tat iiay help you. I have found it a good plan to 
take up one book at atime. It is a good deal better to study one 
book at a ‘‘me than to run through the Bible. If we study one 
book and get its key, it will, perhaps, open up others. Take up the 
book of Genesis, and you will find eight beginnings; or, ir sther 
words, you rick up the key of several books. The Gospy! » +s 
written that nan might believe on Jesus Christ, and every -hap..r 
speaks of it. Now, take the book of Genesis; it says it is ‘e ‘ook 
of beginnings. That is the key; then the book of Exodu..--i! is 
the book of redemption; that is the key word of the wh 'e. Take 
un the book of Leviticus, and we find that it is the boo.. ci sacri- 
fices. And so on through all the different books; you will find each 
one with a key. Another thing: we must study it unbiased. A 
great many people believe certain things. They believe in certain 
creeds and doctrines, and they run through the booi to get Scrip- 
ture in accordance with them. If a man is a Calvinistic man, he 
wants to find something in accordance with his doctrine. But if we 
seek truth, the Spirit of God will come. Don’t seek it in the blue 
light of Presbyterianism, in the red light of Methodism, or in the 
light of Episcopalianism, but study it in the light of Calvary. 
Another way to study it is, not oniy to take one book at a time; 
but I have been wonderfully blessed by taking up one word at a 
time. Take up the word, and go to your concordance and find out 
all about it. I remember I took up the word “ love,” and turned 
to the Scriptures and studied it, and got so that I felt I loved every- 
body. I got full of it. When I went on the street I felt as if I 
loved everybody I saw. It ran out of my fingers. Suppose you 
take the subject of love and study it up. You will get so full of 
it that all you have got to do is to open your lips and a flood of 
the love of God flows upon the meeting. If you go into a court, 


348 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 
you will find a lawyer pleading a case. He gets everything beariig 
upon one point heaped up so as to carry his argument with 
all the force he can, in order to convince the jury. Now, it seems 
to me a man should do the same in talking to an audience; just 
think that he has a jury before him, and he wants to convict a sin- 
ner. If it is love, get all you can upon the subject, and talk love, 
love. 

Take up the word grace. I didn’t know what Calvary was till I 
studied grace. I got so full of the wonderful grace that I had to 
speak. I had to run out and tell people about it. If you want to 
find out those Heavenly truths, take up the concordance and heap 
up the evidence, and you can not help but preach. Take Heaven, 
there are people all the time wonderiag what it is, and where it is. 
Take your concordance and see what the Word of God says it is, 
Let these men who are talking against blood look into the Word of 
God, and they will find if it don’t teach that, it teaches nothing else. 
When we preach about that, some people are thinking we are 
taking our own views. But the Word says, “ The life of all flesh 
is in the blood, and without blood there is no remission.” 
The moment a man talks against blood he throws out the Bible. 
Take up Saul, study him. You will find hundreds of men in Chicago 
just like him. Take up Lot, study that character. Let me say 
right here, that if we are going to have—and I firmly believe in my 
soul that we are going to have, a revival in the North-west—if we 
are going to have it, you must bring the people to the study of the 
Word of God. I have been out here for a good number of years, 
and I am tired and sick of these spasmodic meetings, tired of the 
bonfires which, after a little, are reduced to a bundle of shavings. 
When I see men speaking to inquirers in the inquiry-room without 
holding the Word of God up to them, I think their work will not 
be lasting. What we want to do is to get people to study the 
Word of God, in order that the work may be thorough and lasting. 
I notice when a man is brought coolly, and calmly, and intelligently, 
that man will have a reason for being a Christian. We must do 
that ; we must bring a man to the Word of God if we don’t want 
this Western country filled with backsliders. Let us pray that we 
will have a Scriptural revival, and if we preach only the Word in 
our churches and in our Sunday-schools, we will have a revival that 
will last to eternity. Let us turn back to one of the Old Testament 
revivals, when the people had been brought up from Babylon. Look 


beari.ig 
it with 
r seems 
ce; just 
ct a sin- 
ilk love, 


as till I 
had to 
want to 
ind heap 
Heaven, 
iere it is. 
ays it is. 
Word of 
hing else. 
x we are 
all flesh 
mission.” 
the Bible. 
n Chicago 
t me say 
eve in my 
bst—if we 
dy of the 
of years, 
ed of the 
shavings. 
without 
Kk will not 
study the 
d lasting. 
elligently, 
b must do 
Hon’t want 
ny that we 
p Word in 
vival that 
estament 
on. Look 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE, 349 


at the eighth chapter of Nehemiah: “ And Ezra, the priest, brought 
the Law before the congregation, both of men and women, and 
all that could hear with understanding, upon the first day of 
the seventh month, and he read therein, before the street that was 
before the water gate, from morning until midday, before the men 
and women and those that could understand, and the ears of the 
people were attentive unto the Book of the Law.” No preaching 
there, he merely read the Word of God—that is, God’s word—not 
man’s. A great many of us prefer man’s word to that of God. 
We are running after eloquent preachers—after men who can get 
up eloquent moral essays. They leave out the Word of God. We 
want to get back to the Word of God. They had an all-day meet- 
ing there, something like this, “ And Ezra opened the Book in the 
sight of all the people, for he was above all the people; and 
when he opened it, all the people stood up.” I can see the 
great crowd standing up to listen to the prophet, just like 
young robins taking in what the old robin brings them. ‘“ And 
Ezra blessed the Lord, the great God, and all the people 
answered, Amen, Amen. With lifting up their hands they bowed 
their heads and worshiped the Lord with their faces to the 
ground.” ‘So they read in the Book in the Law of God distinctly, 
and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the reading.” 
Now, it strikes me that it is about the height of preaching to get 
people to understand the reading of the Word. It would be a 
great deal better if a preacher would sometimes stop when he had 
made a remark, and say, “ Mr. Jones, do you understand that?” 
“No, I don’t ;” and then the preacher might make it a little plainer, 
so that he could understand it. There would be a great difference 
in the preaching in some of the churches. He would talk a little 
less about metaphysics and science, and speak about something else. 
“Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat and drink the 
sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared, 
for this day is holy unto our Lord, neither be ye sorry, for the joy 
of the Lord is your strength.” “For the joy of the Lord is your 
strength.” If you will show me a Bible Christian living on the 
Word of God, I will show you a joyful man. He is mounting up 
allthe time. He has got new truths that lift him up over every 
obstacle, and he mounts over difficulties higher and higher, like a 
man I once heard of who had a bag of gas fastened on either side, 
and if he just touched the ground with his foot, over a wall or a 


oa ae ee oe ’ 


8 Rag RS Bers 


350 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PLAYERS. 


hedge he would go; and so these truths make us so light that 
we bound over every obstacle. 

And when we have those truths our work will be successful. Just 
turn over to Jeremiah xx. 9, to this blessed old prophet. There 
was a time when he was not going to speak about the Word of God 
any more. Now I just want to show you this, when a man is filled 
with the Word of God you can not keep him still. If aman has got 
the Word, he must speak or die. ‘ Then I said, I will not make 
mention of Him, nor speak any more in His name, but His Word 
was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was 
weary with forbearing, and I could not stay.” It set him on fire, 
and so a man filled with the Word of God is filled as with a burn. 
ing fire, and it is so easy for a man to work when he is filled with 
the Word of God. I heard of a man the other week who was going 
to preach against the blood. I was very anxious to see what he 
would say about it, and I got the paper next morning and found 
there was nothing else there than Scriptural quotations. I said 
that was the very best thing he could do. As we see in the twenty- 
third chapter of Jeremiah: “ Is not my Word like as a fire, saith the 
Lord, that breaketh the rock in pieces?” Those hard, flinty rocks 
will be broken if we give them the word of God. Those men in the 
Northwest that we can not reach by our own words, give them this 
and see if they can not be reached. Not only that, if we are full of 
Scripture ourselves, give them what God says, you will find it easy 
to preach—you will say we haven't to get up so many sermons. It 
seems to me if we had more of the Word of God in our services 
and give up more of our own thoughts, there would be a hundred 
times more converted than there are. A preacher, if he wants to 
give his people the Word, must have fed on the Word himself. A 
man must get water out of a well when there is water. He may 
dip his bucket in if it is empty, but he will get nothing. I think 
the best thing I have heard in Chicago, I heard the other day, and 
it has fastened itself upon my mind, and I must tell it to you 
ministers. We had for our subject in Farwell Hall the other day 
the seventh chapter of John, when the Rev. Mr. Gibson said ifa 
man was to come among a lot of thirsty men with an empty bucket 
they wouldn’t come to him to drink. He said he believed that 
was the trouble with most of the ministers, as that had been the 
trouble with himself. He hadn’ got a bucket of living water, and 
the people wouldn’t come to him. Just look at an audience of 


reac 
the 

I 
ing 
said 
ed 
child 
like 
but 
comy 
folk.’ 
like U 


a rod 


ht that 


ul. Just 
There 
1 of God 
1 is filled 
. has got 
ot make 
is Word 
nd I was 
1 on fire, 
h a burn- 
illed with 
was going 
» what he 
ind found 
s. I said 
ne twenty- 
, saith the 
linty rocks 
men in the 
them this 
are full of 
nd it easy 
rmons. It 
bur services 
a hundred 
e wants to 
imself. A 
He may 
et, od think 
er day, and 
it to you 
other day 
on said ifa 
upty bucket 
lieved that 
d been the 
y water, and 
hudience of 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 35t 


thirsty men, and you bring in a bucket of clear, sparkling water and 
sve how they will go for it. If you go into your Sunday-schools and 
the children look into your buckets and see them empty, there is 
nothing for them there. So, my friends, if we attempt to feed others 
we must first be fed ourselves. 

There is another thing which has wonderfully helped me. That 
is, to mark my Bible whenever I hear anything that strikes me. If 
a minister has been preaching to me a good sermon, I put his name 
down next to the text, and then it recalls what has been said, and I 
can show it to others. You know we laymen have the right to 
take what we hear to one another. If ministers saw people doing 
this they would preach a good deal better sermons. Not only that, 
but if we understood our Bibles better the ministers would preach 
better. I think if people knew more about the Word than they do, 
so many of them would not be carried away with false doctrine. 
There is no place I have ever been in where people so thoroughly 
understand their Bibles as in Scotland. Why, little boys could 
quote Scripture and take me up on a text. They have the whole 
nation just educated, as it were, with the Word of God. Infidelity 
can not come there. A man got up, in Glasgow, at a corner and 
began to preach universal salvation. ‘Oh, sir,” said an old woman, 
“that will never save the like of me.’ She had heard enough 
preaching to know that it would never save her. If a man comes 
among them with any false doctrine, these Scotchmen instantly 
draw their Bibles on him. I had to keep my eyes open, and be 
careful what I said there. They knew their Bibles a good deal 
better than I did. And so if the preachers could get the people to 
read the Word of God more carefully, and note what they heard, 
there would not be so much infidelity among us. 

I want to tell you how I was blessed a few years ago, upon hear- 
ing a discourse upon the thirtieth chapter of Proverbs. The speaker 
said the children of God were like four things. The first thiag was, 
“The ants are a people not strong,” and he went on to compare the 
children of God to the ants. He said the people of God were 
like ants. They pay no attention to the things of the present, 
but go on steadily preparing for the future. The next thing he 
compared them to was the conies. ‘The conies are but a feeble 
folk.” It is a very weak little thing. “Well,” said I, “I wouldn't 
like to be as a coney.” But he went on to say that it built upon 
arock The children of God were very weak, but they laid their 


352 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


foundation upon a rock. “ Well,” said I, “I will be like a coney 
and Luild my hopes upon a rock.” Like the Irishman who said he 
trembled himself, but the rock upon which his house was _ built 
never did. The next thing the speaker compared them to was a 
locust. I didn’t think much of locusts, and I thought I wouldn't 
care about being like one. But he went on to read they have “no 
king, yet they go forth, all of them, by bands.” There were the 
Congregationalists, the Presbyterians, the Methodist bands going 
forth without a king, but, by and by, our King will come back again, 
and these bands will fly to them. “ Well, I will be like a locust; my 
King’s away,’ I thought. The next comparison was a spider. | 
don’t like this at ail; but he said if we went into a gilded palace 
filled with luxury, we might see a spider holding on to something, 
oblivious to all the luxury below. It was laying hold on the things 
above. ‘ Well,” said I, “I would like to be a spider.” [| 
heard this a good many years ago, and [ just put the speaker's 
name to it and it makes the sermon. But take your Bibles and 
mark them. Don’t think of wearing it out. It is a rare thing 
to find a man wearing his Bible out nowadays—and Bibles are 
cheap tco. You are living in a land where there are plenty. 
Study them and mark them, and don’t be afraid of wearing them. 
Now don’t you see how much k-etter it would be to study it? And 
if you are talking to a man, instead of talking about your neigh- 
bors, just talk about the Bible; and when Christian men come 
together, just compare niotes, and ask one another: “ What have 
you found new in the Word of God since I saw you last?” Some 
men come to me and ask me if I have picked up anything new, and 
I give them what I have and they give me what they have. An 
Englishman asked me some time ago, “Do you know much about 
Job?” “Well, I know a little,” I replied. “If you’ve got the key 
of Job you've got the key to the whole Bible.” “ What,” I replied, 
“T thought it was a poetical book.” ‘ Well,” says he, “TI will just 
divide Job into seven heads. The first is the perfect man—untried 
—and that is Adam and Eve before they fell. The second head is 
tried by adversity—Adam after the fall. The third is the wisdom 
of the world—the three friends who came to try to help Job out of 
his difficulties. They had no power to help him at all.” He could 
stand his scolding wife, but he couldn’t stand them. The fourth 
head takes the form of the Mediator, and in the fifth head God 
speaks at last. He heard Him before by the ear, but he hears Him 


for 
ask 
this 
than 
stren 


wor 
plac 
churd 
havi 
our 
cye; 
ceive 
go to 
down 
them 
Prais 


1 coney 
said he 
is built 
Oo was a 
vouldn't 
ive “no 
vere the 
Is going 
ck again, 
cust; my 
pider. I 
:d_ palace 
ymething, 
he things 
ider.” I 
speaker's 
sibles and 
rare thing 
Bibles are 
re plenty. 
‘ing them. 
it? And 
our neigh- 
men come 
Vhat have 
?” Some 
g new, and 
have. An 
uch about 
rot the key 
” 1 replied, 
‘T will just 
n—untried 
bnd head is 
he wisdom 
Job out of 
He could 
The fourth 
head God 


» hears Him 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 


2? 
me) 


fs 


now by the soul, and he fell down flat upon his face. A good many 
men in Chicago are like Job. They think they are mighty good 
men, but the moment they hear the voice of God they know they 
are sinners—they are in the dust. There isn’t much talk about 
their goodness then. Here he was with his face down. Job learned 
his lesson. That was the sixth head, and in these heads were the 
burdens of Adam’s sin. The seventh head was when God showed 
him His face. Well, I learned the key to the Bible; I can not tell 
how this helped me. I told it to another man, and he asked me if 
I ever thought of how he got his property back and his sheep back. 
He gave Job double what he had, and gave him ten children besides, 
so that he should have ten in Heaven besides his ten on earth. 


PRAYER. 


Our heavenly Father, may we look fora blessing ere we go hence, 
for precious blessings before we go out of this place. We would 
ask Thee to bless every minister and every church who have ente-ed 
this alliance. Next Sunday may they enter their pulpits weaker 
than they have ever been before. May they lose all their own 
strength and receive from Thee that which is so necessary to the 
work. May Thy blessing descend on us as we pray here in one 
place and with one accord. May it please Thee to bless all these 
churches, not missing one, and may the news come of great things 
having been done through the medium of this gathering. Increase 
our faith; take away our miserable unbelicf. May we see eye to 
eye; may every heart beat true to Christ. May all these men re- 
ceive from on high the power they need so much. And now as we 
go to the Tabernacle to speak to the drunkard who is being dragyed 
down to hell, may it please Thee to give us the power to reclaim 
then—to set the captives tree—and we will give to Christ all the 
praise and glory. Amen. 


23 


XLII. 


FIVE ONE THINGS. 


HE first thing is: One thing thou lackest. Now, it is a very 
common expression that that man would be a splendid man 
if it was not for one thing. How many times have wives 

come to me and said about their husbands, “ He is almost perfect, 
but is not a Christian.” Why, if he is not a Christian he lacks 
everything. Ifa man is a beggar, all he lacks to become a rich man 
is wealth; all that a blind man lacks in order to see is his sight; 
and, as I said the other day, if a dead man had life he would bea 
dead man no longer—he lacks life and he lacks everything. So ifa 
man lacks Christianity he lacks salvation, and that is everything. 
Now, in the nineteenth chapter of Matthew the man who spoke to 
Christ was a formalist. He said, ‘‘Good Master, what shall I do to 
inherit eternal life?’’ And he was told if he was to get into Heaven 
by doing anything, he was to get there by keeping the command- 
ments, and He commenced to enumerate them. When he had 
heard Him through, the young man said unto Him, “ All these 
things have I kept from my youth up.” But the Lord could read 
his heart. He thought he had complied with all God’s require- 
ments, like thousands of formalists now. He saw his heart was 
given to wealth. He said to him, “ If thou wilt be perfect, go and 
sell what thou hast got and give to the poor, and thou shalt have 
treasure in Heaven,” and he went away sorrowfully. His heart was 
set upon things here. He lacked one thing; in that one thing he 
lacked everything. Hundreds of thousands lack everything. They 
expect to save themselves by their good deeds. They go on doing 
good deeds, and thinking that will save them, but they must take 
salvation. Uniess a man becomes converted, is borr again, and be- 
comes a child of God, he can not enter the kingdom of God. 
Another thing I want to call your attention to—* There is one 
thing I know.” If a man has been saved, he has to know it. A 
great many people have not got assurance. Many think that as 
(354) 


Os ss See Ao 6 


it isa very 
lendid man 
have wives 
ost perfect, 
ian he lacks 
ea rich man 
s his sight; 
» would bea 
ing. Soifa 
everything, 
vho spoke to 
shall I do to 
into Heaven 
he command- 
hen he had 
, “All these 
rd could read 
od’s require: 
is heart was 
rfect, go and 
u shalt have 
His heart was 
one thing he 
thing. They 
y go on doing 
ey must take 
gain, and be- 
bf God. 
‘ There is one 
y know it. A 
think that a& 


FIVE ONE THINGS. v 


surance is not to be had while traveling through the world—they 
must wait till they get before the terrible judgment-seat to know 
whether they are accepted or not. And I find some ministers 
preach this precious doctrine from their pulpits. I heard of a 
minister who, while on his way to the burial of a man, began to 
talk upon the subject of assurance. ‘ Why,” said he, “if I knew 
for a certainty that I was saved, the carriage couldn’t hold me. 
I would have to jump out with joy.” A man should be convinced 
that he has the Gospel before he preaches it to any one else. Why,a 
man need not try to pull a man out of the river if he is in it himself. 
A man need not try to lift a man out ofa pit if he is there too. No man 
can preach salvation till he knows he is saved. Not only that, but 
we must, as Paul says, be absent from the body and present with 
the Lord in order to preach effectively. Look at Job in his trials, 
when the waves of affliction were rolling over him. You can hear 
his voice shouting above the billows, “I know that my Redeemer 
liveth ;”" and if Job knew, then the children of God away down in 
this generation, with an open Bible before them, ought to know. 
Now there can not be any peace where there is uncertainty. He 
gives peace and joy that flow like a river over the soul. Now, how 
are you going to have peace and joy if we do not know we have 
salvation ; if we do not know for a certainty that we have been born 
of God? Look at that mother at the sick bed of her child; with 
what anxiety does she not hover over that little one just balancing 
between life and death. There is no comfort, there is no sleep for 
that mother. She is filled with uncertainty, and so we can have no 
rest, we can have no peace, if we are uncertain whether or not we 
have salvation. Suppose aman is going to Cincinnati, and he gets 
on the cars, but he feels uneasy lest the train will take him to St. 
Louis instead of his destination. He will not rest till he knows he 
is on the right road, and we should not rest until we know we 
are on the right road to salvation. Not to know our destination 
is contrary to Scripture. If we want peace, we must know it, and 
we can know it; it is the Word of God. Hear what Peter says: 
“We know we have an incorruptible dwelling.” Then in Paul's 
epistle to the Colossians i. 12: “Giving thanks unto the Father 
which hath made us meet ’’—hath made us, not going to—‘to be 
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light. Who hath de- 
livered us’”—not going to deliver us, but He hath delivered us; 
this is an assurance—“ from the power of darkness, and hath trans- 


ad 


= 


re ee ee - = Sides 


= 
FE ig AS ec ETD NRO OT RR CER 


ve 


ae 


2 ERNE 


356 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS, 


lated us into the kingdom of His dear Son.” A person came to 
me some time ago and said, “ Mr. Moody, I wish you would give 
me a book that preaches assurance, and that tells the children of 
God it is their privilege to know they are accepted.” I said, “ Here 
is a book; it is very orthodox. It was written by John, the most 
intimate friend of Jesus while He was on earth ; the man who laid 
his head upon His bosom. Turn to John and see what he says in 
the 5th chapter, “For in them ye think ye have eternal life.” 
Why, that whole epistle, I believe, was written with this one object, 
that we might know we have eternal life. There is no doubt about 
assurance in the Word of God. <A person said to me some time 
ago: “I think it is great presumption for a person to say she is 
saved.” I asked her if she was saved. “I belong to a church,” 
she sobbed. “ But are you saved?” “T believe it would be pre- 
sumption in me to say that I was saved.” “ Well, I think it is a 
greater piece of presumption for any*one to say: ‘I don’t know if 
they believe inthe Lord Jesus Christ,’ because it is written, ‘ He that 
believeth on Me hath everlasting life.’”’ It is clearly stated that we 
have assurance then. Now, I finda great many people who want 
some evidence that they have accepted the Son of God. My 
friends, if you want any evidence take God's word for it. You 
can’t find better evidence than that. You know that when the 
Angel Gabriel came down and told Zachariah he should have a son, 
he wanted a further token than the angel’s word. He asked 
Gabriel for it and he answered, “I am Gabriel who stands in the 
presence of the Lord.” He had never been doubted, and he 
thundered out this to Zachariah. 

But he wanted a further token, and Gabriel said, ‘ You shall have 
a token; you shall be dumb till your son shall be given you.” And 
so, many people want a further token than His Word, and that is 
the reason there are so many dumb Christians. If He said we 
should have eternal life, He did not mean life for two years or 
months, it is for all eternity; and if the gift of God is not everlast- 
ing life, what is it? When we partake of salvation, we partake of 
the incorruptible seed which never perishes. My friends, it i the 
privilege of every child of God to know for a certainty that you are 
saved, and if you don’t know you are saved, you are spending your 
time in nought. You can say like that blind beggar, “I know.” 
Why, all the scoffers and infidels at Jerusalem tried to make him 
believe he did not know. Probably they tried to make him believe 


Scyt 
have 
the 1 
effort 


dull 


ne to 
| give 
en of 
Here 
/ most 
10 laid 
ays in 
life.” 
object, 
about 
e time 
she is 
nurch,” 
be pre- 
it isa 
cnow if 
He that 
that we 
10 want 
d. My 
t. You 
hen the 
rea son, 
e asked 
s in the 
and he 


yall have 
” And 
d that is 
said we 
years of 
everlast- 
rtake of 
it ic the 
you are 
ing your 
I know.” 
ake him 
believe 


FIVE ONE THINGS. 357 


he was some other woman’s son than his mother’s. They tried to 
tell him that he was not cured of his blindness, but he said, “I 
know.” He was convinced that he had got his sight that day. 
And the man of God who has fixed his feet on the rock of salvation, 
he can say with certaiuty, “I know.” If you have not got as- 
surance, and want it, just believe God’s Word. If you go down 
South and ask those three million colored people how they think 
they are free, they won't talk about their feelings; they just believe 
that Abraham Lincoln made them free. They belicve the proclama- 
tion, and so we must believe the proclamation God has made in the 
Bible. ‘One thing thou teachest,” that is salvation. The next 
thing is to be sure that we have it—to know it beyond doubt; not 
building our hopes upon some rotten vision; not building our hopes 
of salvation upon some form or creed ; not building our hopes upon 
the fact of our belonging to this or that church; but to base our 
hopes upon the sure knowledge that we have passed from death 
unto life. 

The next “one thing” I want to tell you of is what Mary chose. 
A great many women wonder why the Lord commended Mary and not 
Martha. Why, Mary just sat at the feet of Jesus and learned of 
Him. Before we can be successful in the ministry and bring peo- 
ple to Christ we must learn humility. We live in a very rapid age, 
when everything is in business—in the aye of telegraph and steam 
—but we must have time to learn to sit at the feet of Jesus. You 
may go through Harvard or Princeton or Yale Colleges, but if you 
have not learned this, your efforts will not be blessed. If you have 
learned, you will be brimful of His Spirit. When I was in Glasgow 
I heard Dr. Bonar say, he got a tumbler of water just filled to the 
brim, and whenever he merely dipped his finger into it the water 


overflowed. Now every child of God wants to have his hea ist 
as full of the love of God as that tumbler was of water, a1 hat 
was what Mary had. She had a fullness and could then go ook 
for Him. May you who have come up to this convention turn 
brimful of His Spirit. May they go back with their scythes wetted, 
and you know you can mow more in ten minutes wit] sharp 


scythe than you can in an hour with a dull one. How many times 
have I tried to mow with a dull scythe and could do nothing, but 
the moment I got it sharpened I could cut the grass without any 
effort. That is the trouble with us; we are trying to mow with 
dull scythes. We want to be filled with the Spirit—we want to 


ena s 


‘ 
| 


358 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


learn humility—to sit at the feet of Jesus. If we have not learned 
this lesson we are like men with dingy lanterns ; people can not see 
our light, but if we have learned this lesson we will be as living 
epistles, and we will be read by all. Yes, the third “ one thing” is 
to learn to sit at the feet of Jesus. 

The fourth “one thing” is to know that He is your Master. I find 
a great many people with a good many masters. <A great many of 
them work for the public, but they don’t get much for their work. 
Ask these politicians, and they will tell you they don’t get much for 
their service. Go and ask those who have been in the House of 
Representatives, or in the Senate, or in the Legislature, what they 
get for their public service. Why, they get nothing but sneers. 
The man who serves the public, when he goes down to his old age, 
how soon he is forgotten. A great many work for only selfish aims 
-—working for the accumulation of money. Others are working to 
gratify ambition ; they want to make a name for themselves in letters ; 
and others again are serving the world; but all those who are not 
serving God are serving the devil, and he is binding them hand and 
foot. But if we serve Jesus Christ, He is our Master, and ] want 
to testify to you that He is a good Master—that He is a kind and 
forbearing Master. If a public man makes a mistake, the world 
mever forgives him. Look at the public man who has made a mis- 
take—why, he is shut out ever after; the world has written him 
down. But if the servant of the Lord Jesus Christ makes a mistake, 
all he has to do is just to come to Him and tell Him, and He will 
forgive him. He is a good Master, and if we but trust Him we will 
have success in His service. If we do not work so much for this 
society or that society, this or that public institution, but for Him, 
and remember that in Him we have our only Master, then the 
churches will be built up, because then we will be working only to 
glorify Him. We can not serve two masters. That has been de- 
creed by Heaven already. Scripture has settled that forever. Well, 
now, who is your Master? Can you say to-night you have got only 
one Master? Some men are trying to serve both Him and another 
master. Can you say He is your Master? If you can, you have but 
one, and will be working for Him alone, and your work will be suc- 
cessful. Look at these mighty men working for King David. They 
left Saul. They did not try to serve both Saul and David. They 
left nim and went with David to the cave of Adullam, and when 
‘David cried, “Oh, for a draught of water,” they cut their way 


go 


me 
the 


que 
bec 
ent 

‘] 
in « 
mat 


ide: 


a ni 
mat 
onl) 
if h 
doy 
you 
you 
sery 


fore 


tee, 
whe 
com 
abot 
atter 
my ¢ 
an it 


than 
hims 


earned 
1ot see 

living 
ng” is 


I find 
any of 
ir work. 
uch for 
ouse of 
at they 
sneers. 
old age, 
ish aims 
rking to 
1 letters | 
are not 
and and 
d 1 want 
kind and 
he world 
de a mis- 
tten him 
mistake, 
He will 
m we will 
» for this 
for Him, 
then the 
g only to 
been de- 
r. Well, 
got only 
another 
have but 
ill] be suc- 
id. They 
d. They 
and when 
their way 


FIVE ONE THINGS. 359 


through the Philistines, in the face of death, to serve him. They 
were Willing to die for him. And so if we recognize Christ as our 
Master we will be willing to sacrifice everything for Him, will be 
ready to die for Him. Let us look up to Him whom God has raised 
from the grave—He who was raised from the sepulchre and placed 
on His right hand. Look at those nails in His feet, look at those 
nails in His hands, see that crown of thorns on His head, and re- 
member that He is the Captain of our salvation, and let us feel that 
we are willing to die for Him. I remember hearing of a general who 
was taken off the battle-field in a dying condition, and when they 
were bearing him away he said: ‘ Take me back to tlie battle-field 
and let the men see my wounds, and that will give them courage to 
go to the battle.” He was taken back to the field, and when the 
men saw their dying general pierced by the enemy’s bullets, it filled 
them with courage, and they tore down upon the enemy and con- 
quered. Remember that Christ is our Captain, and that He has 
been pierced and wounded in our cause, and we will be filled with 
enthusiasm. 

The fifth ‘one thing”’ I want to call your attention to is found 
in one of the texts which I like. It was Paul’s motto. He was a 
man of one idea. Now the world looks down upon a man with one 
idea. And especially if that idea is for Christ Jesus, ‘1c i3 a bigot, 
a narrow-minded man in the eyes of the world. But i tell you, ifa 
man has got one idea he is aterrible man. It is those men who have 
only one idea who thoroughly succeed. Take a man of business ; 
if he goes into several things it won’t be long before he will go 
down; he keeps to one thing and then he is successful. And so 
you ministers, if you want to serve Christ, have fewer ideas than 
you have; get off some of those committees. Some of you are 
serving on educational committees; some of you are serving on 
foreign committees. You are bound up with this and that commit- 
tee, and you have no time to devote to saving souls. 1 remember 
when I was in Chicago, before the fire, I was on some ten or twelve 
committees; my hands were full. If a man came to me to talk 
about his soul, I would say, “I haven’t time; got a committee to 
attend to.” But now I have turned my back on everything—turned 
my attention to saving souls, and God has blessed me and made me 
an instrument to save more souls during the last four or five years 
than during all my previous life. And so if a minister will devote 
himself to this undivided werk, God will bless him. Take that 


360 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


motto of Paul’s: “One thing I do. Forgetting the things which 
are behind, and pressing forward to those things which are before, 
1 press forward toward the mark of the high calling of God in Christ 
Jesus.” Some of these dear men who have come down to this con- 
vention, think they have got all the blessing wanted. Some of 
them say, “ We are full;” but it is a question what fullness is. I 
tell you, if a man is full of the Holy Spirit, what a mighty man he 
becomes. When he gets this idea down in his soul, he forgets every- 
thing behind him and reaches out to the things above. Do you say: 
“There is one thing I have got to do—press toward the mark of 
my higher calling?” Does everything sink beside this idea? If 
you will allow me an expression, Satan got a match when he got 
Paul. He tried to get him away from God, but he never switched 
off. t..vk how they tortured him; look how they stripped and 
beat him. Not only did the Romans do this, but the Jews also. 
How the Jews tried to drag him from his high calling; how they 
stripped him, and laid upon the back of the apostle blow after blow. 
And you know that the scourge in those days was no light thing; 
sometimes men died under that punishment. If one of us got 
one of the stripes that Paul got, how the papers would talk 
about it. But it was nothing to Paul. He just looked at it 
as °° it were a trivial thing—as if it were a light affliction. When 
he was scourged and striped by his persecutors you might have gone 
and asked him, “ Well, Paul, what are you going to do now?” 
“Why, press toward the mark of the high calling of God 
in Christ Jesus.” Take yowr stamd before him and ask him, as 
they bring the ->d down wpom his head, “ What are you going to 
do now, Paul?” ‘“ Do? I am going to press toward the mark of 
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” He had one idea, and 
that was it. Look at him as they stoned him. The Jews took up 
great stones to throw upon the great apostle. They left him for 
dead, and I suppose he was dead, but God raised him up. Come 
up and look at him, all bruised and bleedimg as he lies. “ Well, 
Paul, you've had a narrow escape this time. Don't you think you 
had better give up? Go off into Arabia and rest for six wecks. 
What will you do if you remain here? They mean to kill you.” 
*“Do!” he cries, as he raises himself like a mighty giant, “I am go- 
ing to press toward the mark of the high calling of God.” And he 
goes forth and preaches the Gospel. Jf am ashamed of Christianity 
in the nineteenth century whe» I| think of those early Christians. 


~* 


xs which 
» before. 
in Christ 
this con- 
Some of 
sss is. | 
>man he 
sts evecry- 
you say: 
mark of 
idea? If 
n he got 
switched 
pped and 
ews also. 
how they 
iufter blow. 
rht thing ; 
of us got 
rould talk 
yked at it 
n. When 
have gone 
o now?” 
r of God 
‘k him, as 
1 going to 
e mark of 
idea, and 
vs took up 
ft him for 
Ip. Come 
“ Well, 
think you 
six weeks. 
kill you.” 
“TJ am go 
And he 
hristianity 
Christians. 


FIVE ONE THINGS. 361 


Why, it would take all the Christians in the Northwest to make one 
Paul. Look at his heroism everywhere he went. Talk about your 
Alexander‘, why, the mighty power of God rested upon Paul. 
“Why,” ‘d he, “thrice was I shipwrecked while going off to 
preach tl » sospel.” Wha‘ did he care about that ? Cold churches 
wouldn’t trouble him, although they trouble us. What would lying 
elders and false deacons be to him? That wouldn’t stop him. He 
had but one idea, and over all obstacles he triumphed for that one 
idea. Look at him as he comes back from his punishment. Te 
goes up some side street and gets lodgings. He works during the 
day and preaches at night on the street. He had no building like 
this; no committee to wait on him; no carriage to carry him from 
the meeting; no one waiting to pay his board bills. There he 
was toiling and preaching; and, after preaching for eighteen months, 
they say, “ We'll have to pay you for all this preaching, Paul,” and 
they take him to the corner of the street and pay him with thirty- 
nine stripes. That is the way they paid him. Oh, my friends, 
when you look at the lives of such men, doesn’t it make you feel 
ashamed of yourselves? I confess I feel like hanging my head. 
Go to him in that Philippian jail and ask him what he is going to 
do now. “Do? press forward for the mark of my high calling.” 
And so he went on, looking toward one point, and no man could 
stand before him. May the spirit of consecration come upon all 
these ministers, and may they go back to their churches and hold 
up only Christ, because it is Christ only that the perishing world 
wants. Hold Him up to your people and your efforts will be suc- 
cessful, and your preaching will be only to the glory of Him and to 
the salvation of a perishing world. 


Se 


i ee re 
he aoe 


aa eat 


tei 


XLIHI. 


REGENERATION IS INSTANTANEOUS. 


NE reason why I am led to take up this subject is, because ] 
have received a large number of letters asking me how it ist it 
I can teach such a pernicious doctrine that a man can be saved 
all at once—that salvation is instantaneous. One of the writers goes 
on to state that it is clearly taught in the Word of God that conver- 
sion is a gradual thing—that it is a life-work—and that it is a dan- 
gerous thing to teach that a man can come into this Tabernacle a 
sinner and go out a saved man. Now, let us see what is taught in 
the Word of God, and if it don’t teach instantaneous salvation, let 
us give up the idea. I hold to it as I do to my life, and I would as 
quickly give up my life as give up this doctrine, unless it can be 
proved that it is not according to the Word of God. Now, I will 
admit that light is one thing and birth is another. A soul must be 
born before it can see light. A child must be born before it can be 
taught; it must be born before it can walk; it must be born before 
it can be educated. I think the greatest mistake among ministers 
is, that they are talking to dead men; that they are talking to men 
in the flesh instead of men born of God. Now, let us get them 
into Christ, and then educate them and build them up to the high. 
est faith. Let us not try to teach men who are not born of God. 
The Scripture is very clear on this point. It gives no uncertain 
sound. Ifa man is dead in sin, you may as well talk to a corpse as 
talk to him about spiritual things. To tell an unrenewed man— 
an unregenerated man to worship, serve, and love God is absurd; 
you may as well tell a man to leap over Lake Michigan, as to tell a 
man not born of God to serve Him. 

Now, the first illustration I want to call your attention to is, when 
the voice came down from Heaven to Noah, ‘Come thou and all 
thy house into the ark, for thee have I seen righteous before Me in 
this generation.” Now, there was a minute when Noah was outside 
‘to ark and another when he was inside, and by being inside he was 
(352) 


say 
wre 
out 
swe 
his 
frier 
yea 
us, é 
are i 
are ¢ 
you 
may 
of th 
some 
a mal 
man, 
didn’t 
tears { 
he wa 
talking 
would 
him if 
and as 
I used 
He to 
of God 
your fe 
saved ] 
his pray 
This w; 
the Sur 
man cay 
him. | 
spoke t 
to save 
been tht 
illustrati 
night, a 
your tea 
man who 


cause | 

tist 1 

ne saved 

ers goes 

F conver- 

is a dan- 

srnacle a 

faught in 

ation, let 

would as 

it can be 

ow, | will 

1 must be 
it can be 

orn before 
ministers 
g to men 
get them 
the high- 
n of God. 
uncertain 
corpse as 
ed man— 
is absurd; 

s to tella 


o is, when 


u and all 
ore Me in 
ras outside 
‘ide he was 


REGENERATION IS INSTANTANEOUS, 363 


saved. As long as he was outside of the ark he was exposed to the 
wrath of God, just like the rest of those antediluvians, 1: he stayed 
out, and remained with those antediluvians, he would have been 
swept away, as they were. It was not his righteousness, it was not 
his faith, nor his works that saved him, it was the ark. And, my 
friends, we have not, like Noah, to be one hundred and twenty 
years making an ark for our safety. God has provided an ark for 
us, and the question is, Are you inside or outside this ark? If you 
are inside you are safe; if you are outside you are not safe. If you 
are outside you are exposed to the wrath of God continually, and 
you can not tell the day, nor the hour, nor the minute when you 
may be swept into eternity. When I was in Manchester, in one 
of the inquiry-meetings, I went up to the gallery to speak to 
some people there. While we were standing in a little group, 
aman came up and stood near us. He was a respectable-looking 
man, and I thought by his general appearance he was skeptical. I 
didn’t think he had come up as an inquirer, but as I stood I noticed 
tears trickling down his face, and I went to him and asked him if 
he wanted to seek Christ, and he answered, “Yes.” I went on 
talking to him, but he could not see what I meant. I thought I 
would use an illustration; and after 1 had put it to him, I asked 
him if he sawit. He said, “No.” I gave him another illustration, 
and asked him, “ Do you see it now?” But he again replied, “ No.” 
I used two or three more illustrations, but he could not see them. 
He told me, “ Mr. Moody, the fact is, Ido not feel the evidence 
of God.” “ But,” I said, “I tell you you are not to be saved by 
your feelings,” and I gave him this illustration: ‘“ What was it that 
saved Noah? Was it his ark, or was it his feelings, or his life, or 
his prayers?” “I see it now; it’s all right,” and he went away. 
This was Thursday night, and he had to leave on a night train. On 
the Sunday afternoon, while preaching in the Free Trade Hall, a 
man came and tapped me on the shoulder, and asked me if I knew 
him. I said, “ No.” And he said, “Do you remember when you 
spoke to me on Thursday, and used the illustration of Noah’s ark 
tosave me?” “Yes,” I answered. ‘“ Well, I got in then, and have 
been there ever since. The ark keeps me. Thank God for that 
illustration of the ark.” May God help you to see this illustration to 
night, and may you not be trying to save yourselves by your feelings, 
your tears, by your wounds. God has provided an ark, and every 
man who is in it is saved, and every one who is out of it is lost. 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


Mis Was 
3.2 


lo 
le oe 
| R.. 
= 
1 
UL22 Ws WLS 


Photog phic 23 WEST MAIN STREET “n* 
Sciences —_ wasn uy. st 
Corporation 


q 

I. 
i 
/ 
2 
y 


364 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND P®AVERS. 


Let us take another Bible illustration. Look at those two angels 
coming down to Sodom. They knew that God was going to destroy 
it utterly, and they led Lot out. What was it that saved his life? 
Was it his feelings, his tears? It was by obeying the call, “ Escape 
for your life.” And now God says escape for your life—escape to 
Mount Calvary. Don’t delay, because He is going to destroy this 
world as He did Sodom. While Lot was in Sodom he was liable to 
the wrath of God, but the moment he got outside of Sodom he was 
safe. As long asa man remains out of God he is liable to the wrath 
of God and the fire of Heaven. Look again; look at those chil- 
dren of Israel when they were commanded to put the blood on the 
door-posts and they would be saved from the hand of death. What 
was it that saved them? Was it the blood or was it their feelings? 
The moment the blood was there they were saved; and if a man is 
behind the blood he is as safe as if he was walking the crystal pave- 
ment of Heaven. “ When the blood was there, the angel of death 
passed over.” One moment the blood was off the posts and the 
next moment it was on. It was instantaneous salvation. You 
know Joshua received a command from God that he should erect 
six cities, three on each side of the Jordan, which were to be cities 
of refuge. There were to be great turnpikes and highways to these 
cities, which were to be kept in proper repair, and the gates of the 
cities were to be kept open day and night, and sign-posts were to 
be placed along the road to provide for the man’s guidance to those 
cities of refuge. 

The moment a man got inside of those cities he was safe. His 
safety was instantaneous—the moment he stepped over the boundary 
line. Just look at two men out in the woods chopping wood. As 
one of the men brings his ax down on the tree, it splits and flies from 
his hand and kills his companion. He knows what the consequences 
will be when the killing is discovered. He knows that it will be sure 
death the moment the news reaches the nearest relative of the de. 
ceased. For the man who will rot avenge the death of his relative 
is not considered a true man. If a relative would not avenge the 
blood of his kinsman, it was considered very dishonorable among the 
Israelites. The man knows that there is a city of refuge ten miles 
away, and if he can but reach it he is safe. Thank God, our city of 
refuge is not ten miles away. That man just leaps upon the high- 
way. He does not take time to argue or think; he just leaps upon 
the highway and makes for the city of refuge. The news soon 


sp! 
the 
has 
ave 
anc 
and 
has: 
life. 
you 
the 
afte 
utm: 
lies, 
see | 
sees | 
they 
hind 
he is 
ment 
us ho 
is inst 


Ss 


vo angels 

o destroy 
| his life? 

“ Escape 
escape to 
stroy this 
s liable to 
9m he was 
the wrath 
hose chil- 
50d on the 
ath. What 
ir feelings? 
if a man is 
rystal pave- 
el of death 
sts and the 
ution. You 
should erect 
to be cities 
ays to these 
gates of the 
osts were to 
nce to those 


s safe. His 
he boundary 
2 wood. As 
hnd flies from 
onsequences 
t will be sure 
re of the de: 
bf his relative 
avenge the 
le among the 
ige ten miles 
d, our city of 
hon the high- 
st leaps upon 


he news soon 


REGENERATION IS INSTANTANEOUS, 365 


spreads that a man has been killed, and the murderer is making for 
the city of refuge. Whenever the brother learns that his kinsman 
has been killed, he starts after that poor fugitive. On they go—the 
avenger and the fugitive—flying to his haven of hope. It is a life 
and death struggle. Look at him! See him, as he leaps ditches 
and speeds along the road. Some people see him flying past. “ Make 
haste,” they cry, ‘‘ because the avenger is upon you. Fly for your 
life.’ Ah, sinner, you do not know how far the avenger is behind 
you. To-night he may be upon you. We do not know the day, 
the hour, when he will overtake us. The avenger, he knows now, is 
after him. On he goes, bounding over every obstacle, his speed at its 
utmost, and his face resolutely set toward the gate wherein his safety 
lies. He is terribly in earnest. See him leap over the highway; 
see his bruises, and on he goes, panting and nearly exhausted. He 
sees the gates of the city. The officers see him from the walls, and 
they shout, “ Hasten on, for the avenger is drawing near; he is be- 
hind thee.” One moment he is outside the walls—the next moment 
he is inside. Heisasaved man. One moment out, the next mo- 
nent in. What are these illustrations in the Bible for, unless to show 
us how we are to be saved? Don't you see from this that conversion 
isinstantaneous? One minute you may be outside, and the next 
minute you are inside. 

I will give you another illustration, which I think you will be able 
to get hold of. You will remember when we had slavery we used 
tohave men come up from Kentucky, Tennessee, and other slave 
States, in order to escape from slavery. I hope if there are any 
Southern people here they will not think, in this allusion, I am try- 
ing to wound their feelings. We all remember when these colored 
men came here how they used to be afraid lest some one should 
come and take them back. Why, I remember, in the store we had 
a poor fugitive, and he used to be quaking all the time. Sometimes 
acustomer would come in, and he would be uneasy all the time. 
He was afraid it was some one to take him back to slavery. But 
somebody tells him if he was in Canada he would be perfectly 
safe, and he says: “If I could only get into Canada; if I could 
only get under the Union Jack I would be free.’ There are 
no slaves under the Union Jack, he has been told—that is the 
flag of freedom; the moment he gets under it he is a free man. 
So he starts. We'll say there are no railways, and the poor fellow 
has got ten miles ahead when his master comes up, and he hears 


z ane ew a noel en 
eaten = — > = 


366 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


that his slave has fled for Canada and sets off in pursuit. Some 
one tells the poor fugitive that his master is after him. What docs 
the poor fugitive do? What does he do? He redoubles his exer. 
tions and presses on, on, on, on. He isa slave born, and he knew 
a slave belongs to his master. Faster he goes. He knows his 
master is after him and he will be taken if he comes up with him 
before he reaches the lines. He says, “If I can only hold out and 
get under the English flag, the English Government will protect 
me. The whole English army will come to protect me if need be.” 
On he presses. He is now near the boundary line. One minute 
he is a slave, and in an instant he isa free man. My friends, don’t 
mistake. These men can be saved to-night if they cross the line. 
Your old master, Satan, may be pressing down upon you, but there 
is a land of liberty up there, and the banner of Heaven is the flag 
of love, and under that flag you are protected from all danger; 
and if an enemy comes near you, God says: “If you touch him you 
touch the apple of My eye.” And He will hold you in His right 
hand and keep you for the day of redemption. Will you go out 
of this hall to-night and doubt sudden conversion? Will you say 
a man can not be saved all at once? Look what He said to Moses, 
IIe told him to put a brazen serpent on a pole, and whenever a 
man looked at that serpent he would live. If some preachers had 
lived then they would have said a man may look six thousand 
years at that and he wouldn’t be saved. A man would die while 
they were discussing it. A few days ago I heard of a minister who 
said I was preaching a most pernicious doctrine when I preached 
sudden conversion. But point out to me one single conversion in 
this blessed Bible that was not a sudden conversion. Why, every 
conversion recorded in the Bible was instantaneous, and if preachers 
tell men conversion is a life-work, they are keeping men out of the 
kingdom of God. We can have instant conversion. ‘“ Now is the 
day of salvation.” I tell you, sinners, escape for your lives; fly to 
the haven of safety—look, look, look, at the crucified One, and you 
will be saved to-night. Look and live. You will become a child 
of God for time and eternity. The blessing will come upon you- 
whenever we look we can be saved. Just go back to that camp of 
Israel. Every one who looked at that brazen serpent was well. It 
was instantaneous. 

When I was in England they were at me all the time about this 
sudder. conversion. They said it was a life-work from the cradle 


ye 


it. some 
Vhat docs 
s his excr- 
d he knew 
knows his 
» with him 
ld out and 
vill protect 
f need be.” 
Yne minute 
iends, don’t 
yss_ the line. 
uu, but there 
on is the flag 
all danger; 
uch him you 
in His right 
| you go out 
Will you say 
aid to Moses. 
d whénever a 
preachers had 
six thousand 
buld die while 
minister who 
en I preached 
conversion in 
Why, every 
ind if preachers 
en out of the 
«“ Now is the 
ur lives; fly to 
1 One, and you 
become a child 
e upon you- 
o that camp of 
t was well. It 


rom the cradle 


REGENERATION IS INSTANTANEOUS. 367 


down to the grave. I did all I could to show them it. One day 
I was walking down the streets of York, when I saw a soldier com- 
ing down. You can tell a soldier in England in an instant by his 
coat. I stepped up to him and said: “ My friend, I am a stranger 
in this country, and you will pardon me if I ask you a question, 
How long did it take you to become a soldier?” Well, he laughed 
in my face. I suppose he thought I was very green, to ask him 
such a question. But he told me that he made up his mind to 
enlist in Queen Victoria’s army, and he went toa recruiting ser- 
geant, and he put an English shilling into the palm of his hand, and 
from that moment he was a soldier. When he has taken that shil- 
ling, from that moment he becomes one of the Queen’s army, and if 
he goes back he becomes a deserter, and if caught, is put into prison. 
He first made up his mind to enlist, and that is the way to become 
a Christian. Make up your mind. The next thing he did was to 
take the shilling, and from that moment he became a soldier. 
When we make up our mind to bea Christian the next thing we 
have to do is to accept His terms—take salvation as a gift. You 
wonder how a man can become a Christian as that man became a 
soldier. He was a citizen one moment; the next moment he was 
asoldier. He was no longer his own master when he had accepted 
that shilling. He belonged to the English army. So the moment 
you enlist in Christ’s army you belong to Him. If you want to be- 
come a Christian, take Christ’s shilling as a gift. The minute you 
take that gift, that minute you area child of God. See what He 
says: “To as many as received Him gave He power to become the 
sons and daughters of God.” When you accept Him He becomes 
your Way, your Truth, your Light, your all in all. You can have 
His gift if you will receive Him. While I was in New York an 
Irishman stood up in a young converts’ meeting and told how he had 
been saved. He said in his broken Irish brogue that I used an illus- 
tration, and that illustration saved him. And I declare that that is 
the only man I ever knew who was converted without being spoken 
to. He said I used an illustration of a wrecked vessel, and said that 
all would perish unless some assistance came. Presently a lifeboat 
came alongside, and the captain shouted, “ Leap into the lifeboat— 
leap for your lives, or you will perish!” and when I came to the 
point, I said, “ Leap into the lifeboat ; Christ is your lifeboat,” and 
he just leaped into the lifeboat of salvation and was saved. If a 
man goes out without salvation, it won’t be my fault; it will be your 


eRe once. = 


REGAN. ile Vee OE en ss 


AST SN MR ONE RE 


rt 
ed | 
- by a 
} i 
i 
} 
% 
’ aH 
246 
4 
¢ 4 bi it 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


own. It will not be because the ark is not open, but because you 
will not accept the invitation to enter; it will not be because the 
blessing is not there, but because you will not take it, for it’s there, 
May God open your eyes to accept Him before you leave this build- 
ing—to accept salvation as a gift. 


PRAYER. 


Oh, our Heavenly Father, we pray Thee that Thou wilt help us 
to understand the passages we have just read. We thank Thee, 
Father, for Thy precious blessings; for the faith Thou hast im- 
bedded in our hearts; for the work we have beheld within these 
walls; and for the precious work that is being done in the homes 
of the people. We are not worthy that Thou shouldst bless us 
so much. And now we come to pray Thy blessing on this weck’s 
service, and may thousands come to the Lord, and may there be 
streams of salvation flowing through this city; and as we shall 
come to Farwell Hall to-morrow night, may we hear a great deal 
that will please us. We ask it all through the name of Immanuel 
Thy Son. Amen. 


use you 
1use the 
’s there. 


is build- 


- help us 
nk Thee, 
hast im- 
hin these 
he homes 
- bless us 
lis week's 
> there be 
we shall 
great deal 
Immanuel 


XLIV. 


THE “BEHOLDS.” 


il WANT to call your attention to this little word ‘“ behold.” 
“ Behold, I was shapen in iniquity.” I want to speak to you 

for a few minutes about this one word, and you can not forget 
a simple text with only one word in it. The first thing a man has 
to learn in coming for salvation is that he has fallen in the sight of 
God; to know that none are pure in His sight. You have to learn 
that you are born bad before you can ever approach Him. “ Behold, 
I was shapen in iniquity.” Now, aman needn't live a great number 
of years before he finds that out. Whenever he comes to God he 
will discover this. Every one who has ever taken a prominent 
place in the Bible has found this out. They might have thought 
themselves good enough before they came to God, but the moment 
they came to Him they discovered that they were shapen in iniquity. 
I suppose Isaiah thought he was as good as most men in his day, 
and, perhaps, he was a good deal better than most men; but when 
he saw the Lord he cried, ‘‘ Woe is me, for I am undone, because I 
am a man of unclean lips.” When he saw the Lord, he saw his own 
deformity, and he fell in the dust before the Lord. And that is the 
proper place for a sinner. As I have said before, until men realize 
their uncleanness they talk of their own righteousness, but the 
moment they catch a sight of Him their mouth is stopped. If we 
hear a man talking about himself, we may be sure that he has not 
seen God. Look at that man Daniel. Not a thing can be found 
against him; but see when he came within sight of God. He found 
that his comeliness turned to corruption. And look at Job. One 
would have thought he was all right. He was good to the poor, 
liberal to all charities—not a better man within a thousand miles. 
If they wanted to get a thousand dollars to endow a university, a 
thousand dollars to build a synagogue, if they wanted to have a 
thousand dollars for any charitable object, why, he was the man. 
Why, you would have liked to get him into your Presbyterian, or 
24 (369) 


2 eT A PSTD OI 
RMR saa 


——— 


370 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


Methodist, or Baptist Churches; if you wanted a chairm:n of a 
benevolent society, you couldn’t have found a better man. Yet 
look at him when God came near him. It is altogether different 
when He comes within our sight. It is one thing to hear Him, and 
another thing to see Him. He had heard Him with his ears, but 
now he saw Him with his eyes, and then he was silent. You 
couldn’t get another word from him. Before he saw Him he could 
argue and talk about Him to his friends—could argue as well as 
they could; but the moment Job saw Him he was silent. When 
He said, “ Gird up thy loins like a man,” from that time he put no 
more questions to Him. He had got a lesson. No man can come 
into His kingdom till he knows he is vile, till he sees Him. He 
must come down to that. That is God’s alphabet. Many men 
want to begin at Z, and don’t want to begin at.A, B. A man must 
commence at the beginning, and learn there is not one thing good 
in the flesh. It is corrupt. As Paul said, “ There is nothing good 
in it.” We have Adam’s flesh, and it is bad. God has said so. He 
can not find anything good in it, and if He can not, let us give up 
trying to find good spots in it. It is guilty, it is corrupt, it is false, 
it is at enmity with God. There is evil in it all through. 

My friends, if you have learned the lesson I have good tidings 
for you. You best know if you have. There is good tidings for 
you. The voice comes down from Heaven, “ Unto you is born this 
day, in the city of David, a Saviour.” That is the best news that 
ever came down from Heaven—the best news that ever fell on the 
ears of men. Of course, if a man does not believe, he is ruined, 
he can not appreciate the news; but to the man who knows he is 
ruined, this is the best tidings that can come to him. The Gospel 
tells you plainly that you are lost, but let me tell every one in this 
hall to-night that I bring you good news. It is the Gospel of peace, 
it is a Gospel of glad tidings, it is a Gospel of joy, it is a Gospel of 
reconciliation. And all a man has got to do is to believe this Gos- 
pel and be saved. <A great many people have got a false idea from 
the preaching of the Gospel. Some think when we preach the 
Gospel it means condemnation. They shout as did those men in 
the tombs, when he came to them, “ Have ye come to torment us 
before our time?” So men don’t believe we bring good tidings. 

When I was in Glasgow I heard a story of old Dr. Arnot. He 
heard of a poor woman in great distress. She was poor, and her 
landlord was after her for the rent. He put some money in his 


“n of a 
n. Yet 
different 
lim, and 
2ars, but 
it. You 
he could 
is well as 
When 
ie put no 
can come 
lim. He 
lany men 
man must 
hing good 
hing good 
dso. He 
us give up 
it is false, 


yod tidings 
tidings for 
is born this 
news that 
fell on the 
b is ruined, 
nows he is 
he Gospel 
one in this 
el of peace, 
nh Gospel of 
e this Gos- 
le idea from 
preach the 
ose men 
torment us 
H tidings. 
Arnot. He 
bor, and her 
oney in his 


THE “ BEHOLDS: 371 


pocket and started for her house. When he reached it he knocked 
at the door, but got no answer. He knocked again, but none came. 
He waited, and waited, and knocked, but could not get any one to 
come, and left. A day or two afterward he met the woman on the 
street, and said, “I heard you were in distress, and could not pay’ 
your rent. I came to the door the other day, but I found no one 
in your house.” The woman threw up both her hands. “ Why, I 
thought it was the landlord; I had the door locked and bolted.” 
She thought it was the landlord after her rent. And people think 
when Jesus Christ comes to them He comes to demand something. 
“Why,” said a young man, “I would like to become a Christian, 
but I would have to give up so much.” Why, that is a ridiculous 
idea. When you receive Christ you receive everything. You are 
in the position of a beggar; you give up your rags and put on a 
bran-new suit. You give up nothing and receive everything. The 
idea of a man being so deceived! Do you think the Lord Jesus 
Christ comes to you to torment you? Ask those men who have 
received Him if this is so. Ask those who have been deceived 
for forty or fifty years by Satan, and who have accepted Him. 
They will tell you they have enjoyed more peace and happiness 
in the last few days than they have in all those years put 
together. I heard a Christian saying that he had enjoyed 
more happiness the first day he accepted Christ than he did in all: 
the previous years of his life. Now, my friends, God doesn’t want 
to take anything from you; He wants to give you everything 
that is good for your happiness. Now, I have two little children, 
and I wouldn’t like to give them anything but what would be good 
forthem. So the God of Heaven wants to keep nothing from us 
but that which will ruin us. The Son of God has come into the 
world to bless us. Look at that Sermon on the Mount. It is filled 
with the word blessed, blessed, blessed. I think it occurs nine times. 
His heart was full of blessings for the people.. He had to get it out. 
before He gave His sermon. Don’t believe He came to make you 
miserable. That is one of the devil’s lies. Don’t believe He has come 
totorment you. I heard some time ago of.a, little book upon a 
passage of Scripture—I didn’t know there was such.a passage—which 
occurred in the story of David and Mephibosheth. You know, one 
day Jonathan and David were together, and Jonathan said: “ David, 
I want you to make a vow.” I: suppose it had been revealed to 
Jonathan that he was.to.take his,place. Instead of his heart being 


Se Sic ea oe ee 


372 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


filled with jealousy he loved him as a brother. “Now I want you 
to make a vow that when you get my father’s throne, if any of my 
father’s house are alive, that you will show them kindness.” “ Why, 
yes, Jonathan,” replies David, “I will; I would do it for your sake 
alone.” Well, time went on. You know how Saul persecuted 
David, and drove him into the cave of Adullam, and if he could 
have caught him you know how he would have slain him. News 
came to him that the Israelites were routed, and that Saul and Jona- 
than were slain, and David came up to Hebron and reigned for seven 
and a half years, and came after this up to Jerusalem. I can see 
him in his palace in the height of his power, and the recollection 
of the old vow he made to Jonathan suddenly comes upon him. 
His conscience tells him he has made a vow to his old friend, Jona 
than, which he has not kept. I can see him order in one of his serv. 
ants. ‘*Do you know if there are any of Saul’s house alive?” 
“Well, I don’t know, but there is an old servant of Saul’s, Ziba.” 
David orders him in, and asks: “ Are any of Saul’s house alive, be- 
cause, if there is, I want to show kindness to them.” I can imagine 
the expression of his face. The idea of David showing kindness to 
any of Saul’s house—to Saul, who wanted to slay him, and who 
persecuted him. ‘“ Well, yes,” the servant answers, “there is a son 
of Jonathan living.” “What!” he cries, “ason of my old friend, 
Jonathan; where is he?” “He was at Lo-debar the last I heard of 
‘him.” Now, you may have been a great traveler, and yet you have 
‘never heard of Lo-debar. You may have been all around the world 
and still you have not heard of Lo-debar. You may work in the 
post-office and you have never heard of Lo-debar—-never saw a let- 
‘ter directed to that place. Still that is the place where every one of 
Adam’s sons have been. Every one has been in Lo-debar. Every 
‘backslider is there. When David heard where he was, he sent down 
to bring up Jonathan’s son, Mephibosheth. See that chariot sweep- 
‘ing through the town. ‘“ Why, the king’s chariot is here,” the peo- 
ple say. ‘‘ What does it mean?” We are told that this poor prince 
was lame, and I can see the poor, lame prince as he comes out to 
meet the servant. “ What is it?” he inquires. “King David has 
sent for you,” the servant replies. I can see the prince trembling 
from head to foot, when he hears this. He thinks King David wants 
to slay him; he thinks he is just going to cut cff his head. That's 
‘the way with sinners. They think that God stands behind them 
with a double-edged sword ready to annihilate them. The servant 


ant you 

y of my 
“ Why, 

‘our sake 

~rsecuted 

he could 

n. News 

and Jona- 

for seven 

I can see 

‘collection 

ypon him. 

end, Jona 

yf his serv- 

se alive?” 

ul’s, Ziba.” 

e alive, be- 

an imagine 

kindness to 

n, and who 
ere is a son 

+ old friend, 

t | heard of 
et you have 
d the world 
york in the 
r saw a let- 
very one of 
bar. Every 
e sent down 

ariot sweep- 
re,” the peo- 

5 poor prince 

omes out to 

> David has 
e trembling 

David wants 

ead. That's 

behind them 

The servant 


THE “ BEHOLDS.” 373 


says: “I want you to come down and see tne king.” “ But,” re- 
plies the prince, “I tell you that means death to me.” Just as a 
good many sinners in Chicago think. ‘“ But,” continues the servant, 
“he has sent me, and wants you to come,” and he gets him into the 
carriage and onto the highway, through the streets and unto the 
palace of the king. Whenever he enters he is brought into the 
presence of the king. The king looks upon him and sees upon his 
brow the image of Jonathan, and says. to Mephibosheth, “1 will 
show thee kindness for thy father’s sake, and I will restore unto you 
all Saul’s possessions, and you shall sit at the king’s table.” He re- 
stores to the lame prince the inheritance he lost, and then gives him 
a place at the king’s table. That is the Gospel. God wants you to 
come up from Lo-debar to Jerusalem and take your inheritance. 
The moment you come from your Lo-debar to the city of peace, that 
moment you will learn the glad tidings. 

Now, there is another “behold.” We find it here in the first 
chapter of John, and I want to call your attention to it. ‘ Behold 
the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world.” Now, 
every sin which you have committed can be forgotten—every sin 
which has been committed during the past eighteen hundred years 
can be forgiven by Him. Now look at His life—look at Him from 
the manger to Calvary and see if you can find any flaw in Him. 
You hear people talking about the imperfections of Christians, and 
making this an excuse for not accepting Him. They point to some 
of them and say they have done this and that; but, my friends, it 
is impossible to find a perfect Christian. They will not be perfect 
till they arrive in the kingdom of the Master and they are washed 
in the blood of the Lamb. Lift your eyes from off these puny 
Christians—from off these human ministers, and look to Christ. 
He is the Saviour of the world. He came from the throne to this 
earth; He came from the very bosom of the Father. God gave 
Him up freely for us, and all we have to do is to accept Him as our 
Saviour. Look at Him at Gethsemane, sweating, as it were, great 
drops of blood; look at Him on the cross, crucified between two 
thieves; hear that piercing cry, “ Father, Father, forgive them, they 
know not what they do;” and as you look into that face—as you 
look into those wounds on His feet or His hands, will you say He 
has not the power to save you? Will you say He has not the power 
toredeem you? Look into His face. Can you say the Lamb of 
God will not take away your sins? All you have to do is to accept 


7 


| WW 
Hid) 
; ii 


ae es —_ - 


ees 


— a 


PE I ag RE AW “an “ 
ae I alge 


Nm *. a 


— 


374 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


Him, and they are all forgiven. A great many people want to 
bring their faith, their works, their good deeds to Him for salva. 
tion. Bring your sins and He will bear them away into the wilder- 
ness of forgetfulness and you will never see them again. 

There is another “behold,” and a very important one. It is a 
“behold” of Paul. ‘“ Behold, now is the accepted time.” Now 
some people may listen to this carelessly. “ Why, we have heard 
that from childhood up. ‘Now is the accepted time.’ We don't 
like that forced upon us as if this was the only time to be saved.” 
Suppose I say, “ Behold, ten years hence will be the accepted time,” 
wouldn't you think I had gone mad? You would say, “I might 
die before that time.” You know that it is now. You can not roll 
back the wheel of time. Every hour that passes is gone forever. 
You can not look forward ten years. You may be in eternity then. 
You can not say the future is yours. The only time we have is 
now. “Behold, now is the accepted time,” and salvation is offered 
you to-night, and God wants you to take it. How many have been 
swept into eternity since we began to hold our meetings in the 
Tabernacle? Not less than eight or nine to my knowledge have 
been taken away. How many will go in the coming eight weeks? 
Only think of it. Some of them now move through those man- 
sions Christ has prepared for them; they are now walking down the 
crystal pavements of Heaven; they may be walking to the tree of 
life and plucking its fruit. They are now with the redeemed and 
the Redeemer. They are now singing the sweet hallelujahs of 
Heaven—a sweeter song than they ever heard on earth. But think 
of those who have gone to the dark caverns of hell—now with the 
fiends of darkness, now in the land where there is no hope, now lis- 


' tening to the wail of despair. You can accept salvation now. The 


idea of standing still, thinking you have time to accept Christ, is a 
delusion of the devil. Don’t be deceived by Satan. We are in 
the current of time that is bearing us on to eternity. While we 
sleep and are unconscious, we are being borne swiftly to the judg- 
ment seat, and we may be there before we know. Look at that 
man on the river that runs to the rapids! Look at him as he drifts 
with the current on to death! Ina few minutes he will be in eter- 
nity, and he is not aware of it. There are thousands here sweeping 
on to death and judgment. ‘“ Now is the accepted time.” Escape 
to-night and accept the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved. 

But there is another “behold.” “Behold, I stand at the door 


want to 
yr salva. 
> wilder- 


It is a 
” Now 
ve heard 
Ve don't 
e saved.” 
ed time,” 
“T might 
n not roll 
e forever. 
nity then. 
‘e have is 
is offered 
have been 
ngs in the 
edge have 
ht weeks ? 
hose man- 
ir down the 
the tree of 
eemed and 
lelujahs of 
But think 
bw with the 
pe, now lis- 
now. The 
Christ, is a 
We are in 
While we 
o the judg- 
bok at that 
as he drifts 
l be in eter- 
re sweeping 
e,” Escape 
hilt be saved. 
at the doot 


THE “ BEHOLDS.” 378 


~ 


and knock.” He stands at the door of the sinne~’s heart and knocks. 
Does your heart thrill to-night, my friends? That is the Son of 
God knocking at your heart. You haven’t to go down and bring 
Him up, nor go up and bring Him down. He is right here to-night. 
Is there a skeptical one doubts His presence here? What man 
could hold this immense audience during the past eight weeks but 
Him. Is there any political subject that could keep an audience 
every night for eight weeks as this has been kept? Or if a man 
came here to talk poetry or science, could he have such an as- 
semblage? Surely it can not be the singer or the preacher. There 
is an unseen power—a supernatural agency. It is the Son of God, 
my friends, and He is here to-night and stands at your heart and 
says, “ Behold, I stand at the door and knock.” If any one here 
hearkens to His voice and opens the door He says to him, “I 
will come unto him and sup with him and he with Me.” And no 
man, if he only enters to Him, will go down to the caverns of death 
and damnation; but if you reject Him, and shut and lock and bolt 
the door of your heart, He can not come in, and, of course, you 
must perish. In one part of Scripture He says, He “stands with 
His locks wet with the dew of the night.” Hestands now. A 
man in the inquiry-room said he made a vow some years ago to 
come to Christ. He was knocking at his heart then, but for thirty 
years he kept Him out. This week he let Him in. Think how 
merciful God is. He might have called that man away to eternity 
during those thirty years. Listen, sinners; perhaps He is making 
His last call to you. A friend of mine once said when Christ came 
first He knocked pretty loud. The second time, conscience was not 
so keen, and it was not so loud. When He came a third time, 
His knock was fainter, and the fourth time fainter still, and the fifth 
time almost inaudible, till by and by He could not be heard at all. 
Is not that the case with some here? Christ stands knocking now. 
You may put Christ off—that is man’s free will, but you can not put 
death off. When he comes and puts his cold hand upon you, 
feeling for the cords of life, you can not put him off. The question 
will be then settled for time and eternity, and then you must 
answer at the judgment-seat. ‘ Behold, I stand at the door and 
knock.” Sinner, what will you do to-night? Young man, don’t 
laugh. Don’t make light of this question. One of two things you 
must do—either reject Him or receive Him; either keep Him out 
of your heart or take Him in. 


376 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


And there is another “behold.” It isa behold they heard of in the 
days of Paul. You know when they heard that Paul was praying, it 
did not come from Damascus, from Rome, or Jerusalem, but it came 
from Heaven. “ Behold, he is praying.” I hope some are praying here 
to-night. Let the news go up to Heaven, “ Behold, he prays,” and 
“ Behold, she prays,” and an answer will come. If you pray from 
the depths of your soul, an answer will come to-night. If you want 
to accept on this, the last night of our meetings this week, the 
waters of life, you can. Just lift up your heart and the message 
will go up, “ Behold, he prays.” Let all Christians here pray. Let 
a silent wave of prayer go up to Heaven, and let those who have 
never prayed, ask God for mercy. Let these little children pray. I 
like to hear children praying. Sometimes a child’s prayers have 
more effect than any others. How many infidel fathers and mothers 
have been brought to Christ by their praying children? I remem- 
ber while out in Kansas, while holding a meeting, I saw a little boy 
who came to the window crying. I went to him, and said, “ My 
little boy, what is your trouble?” ‘ Why, Mr. Moody, my mother’s 
dead, and my father drinks, and they don’t love me, and the Lord 
won't have anything to do with me because I am a poor drunkard’s 
boy.” “You have got a wrong idea, my boy; Jisus will love you 
and save you and your father, too,” and I told him a story of a little 
boy in an Eastern city. The boy said his father would never allow 
the canting hypocrites of Christians to come into his house, and 
would never allow his child to go to Sunday-school. A _ kind- 
hearted man got his little boy and brought him to Christ. When 
Christ gets into a man’s heart, he can not help but pray. This father 
had been drinking one day, and coming home, he heard the boy 
praying. He went to him and said, “1 don’t want you to pray any 
more. You've been along with some of those Christians. If I catch 
you praying again I'll flog you.” But the boy was filled with God, 
and he couldn't help prayiag. The door of communication was opened 
between him and Christ, and his father caught him praying again. 
He went to him. “Didn’t I tell you never to pray again? Ifl 
catch you at it once more, you leave my house.” He thought he 
would stop him. One day the old temper came upon the boy, and 
he did something wrong and got flogged. When he got over his 
mad fit he forgot the threats of his father and went to pray. His 
father had been drinking more than usual, and coming in, found the 
boy offering a prayer. He caught the boy with a push, and said, 


5S. 


1 of in the 
raying, it 
t it came 
ying here 
ays,’ and 
pray from 
you want 
week, the 
> message 
ray. Let 
who have 
n pray. I 
uyers have 
1d mothers 
I remem- 
a little boy 
said, “ My 
yy mother’s 
d the Lord 
drunkard’s 
ll love you 
y of a little 
never allow 
house, and 
A kind- 
ist. When 
This father 
rd the boy 
to pray any 
If I catch 
d with God, 
was opened 
hying again. 
again? Ifl 
thought he 
he boy, and 
got over his 
b pray. His 
n, found the 
h, and said, 


THE “ BEHOLDS.” 377 


“Didn't I tell you never to pray again? Leave this house. Get 
vour things packed up and go.” The little fellow hadn’t many 
things to get together—a drunkard’s boy never has—and went up 
to his mother’s room. ‘Good-bye, mother.” ‘ Where are you 
going?” “I don’t know where I’ll go, but father says I can not 
stay here any longer; I’ve been praying again,” he said. The 
mother knew it wouldn’t do to try and keep the boy when her 
husband had ordered him away, so she drew him to her bosom and 
kissed him, and bade him good-bye. He went to his brothers and 
sisters, and kissed them good-bye. When he came to the door his 
father was there, and the little fellow reached out his hand—“ Good- 
bye, father; as long as I live I will pray for you,” and left the house. 
He hadn’t been gone many minutes when that father rushed after 
him. “My hov, if that is religion; if it can drive you away from 
father and mother and home, I want it.” Yes, may be some little 
boy here has got a drinking father and mother. Lift your voice to 
Heaven, and the news will be carried up to Heaven, “ He prays.” 
Yes, Paul prayed, and the news went, “ He prayeth,” and let all 
Christians lift their voices up to Heaven, and let all who have not 
accepted Christ, cry, and He will hear you, “ God be merciful to me 
a sinner.” 


XLV. 


BEST METHODS WITH INQUIRERS. 


ee chosen as my subject, ‘“ How to hold an inquiry-meeting; 
or, What are the best-adapted texts of Scripture to be dwelt 
upon at these meetings?” And what I want first to call your 
attention to, if you are going to be successful in winning souls to 
Christ, is the need for discrimination in finding out people’s differ. 
ences. People are not the same in their wants, spiritual more than 
temporal. What is good for one is rank poison for another. You 
can’t treat all alike. I’ve a friend that always, when he is sick, 
drinks a lot of hot water and goes to bed; another says to me, “ Just 
take this dose and you will get well.” It don’t make any difference 
what’s the matter with you, this friend has one single remedy. So, 
many have just one verse of Scripture. He’s always quoting it. It 
fits his case, and he thinks it does everybody else’s. A man I knew 
up in Wisco: © was converted under a railway bridge, and to this 
day he keeps = :g neople to go right down under that bridge, if 
they want to get :onverted sure. But God never repeats Himself, 
No two thoughts are just alike, no two needs are just alike, no two 
sinners are going to come to Christ in the same precise way. In- 
stead of looking for others’ experiences, look for one for yourself. 
So, when talking to persons in the inquiry-room, you must find out 
just these differences. Now, I am going to divide inquirers into 
classes or divisions this morning, and point out a few passages suit 
able for each. 

The first class, I think, in point of numbers, is that of the doubt- 
ers, those who are always in doubting castle. And these generally 
are among professing Christians. Oh, I think we shall make a 
different start with these when we get to Boston from what we did 
here. I’m convinced we made a mistake here in not opening the 
inquiry-rooms for professing Christians first. For twenty or thirty 
years they have been living on, making empty professions. Now, 
they just want to get off their crutches and get to walking and run 

(278) 


back 
for t 
at th 
can 
Wha 
from 
Now, 


ye 


meeting ; 
be dwelt 
call your 
y souls to 
le’s differ- 
more than 
her. You 
he is sick, 
me, “ Just 
difference 
1edy. So, 
ing it. It 
an I knew 
und to this 
bridge, if 
s Himself, 
e, no two 
way. In- 
r yourself, 
st find out 
uirers into 
ssages suit 


the doubt- 
e generally 
all make a 
hat we did 
pening the 
y or thirty 
ons. Now 


g and run. 


BEST METHODS WITH INQUIRERS. 379 


ning for Christ. I don’t believe they can accomplish much ; I know 
they can't, if they continue in this half-dead state. If Christians 
haven't assurance, they are just stumbling-blocks, they are in the 
way of the work. How many hurts these professing Christians 
give, who show no sign of their faith. They have no joy in serving 
the Lord, and their children with reason say, “I don’t want that 
kind of arcligion.” And here I want to call your attention to a 
proper remedy for this class, to be found in the book of John. 
That whole book was written for this one thing, to help people out 
of doubting castle, and teach them, that they may know they are 
saved. Very recently I met a woman, a prominent member of a 
prominent church, who said it was presumption to say with certainty 
that we are saved. I said it was presumption to say that we are 
not saved, when we have the very word of the Lord Jesus Christ 
for it. Oh, if you will just read those precious words, “ He that hear- 
eth My words and believeth on Him that sent Me hath everlasting 
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death 
unto life;”’ and then turn to those other divine words: ‘These 
things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son 
of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may 
believe on the name of the Son of God;” if v~ 1 will just read these 
sure words of God you will not talk about having no assurance as to 
your salvation. Just believe in the words of the Son of God, and 
you know right now that you are saved. You know right now, I 
say, and don’t have to put it off till you are going to die. There- 
fore I would talk to these doubting citizens about the epistle of 
John. I would say to you, persuade them to just take these words 
of Jesus. ‘They have passed from death to life.” Oh, yes, it is 
the privilege of every child of God to know that they are saved. 
The next class are the backsliding. They do not want so much 
assurance as reviving. I know a lady who has a homeopathic doctor’s 
book, and whenever she is at all out of sorts she goes right to it. 
In spiritual things there is a good remedy for ali sorts, and for the 
backsliders as well. Though they have left God, He makes a way 
for them to return. 1 have just turned down the leaves of my Bible 
at the second and third chapters of Jeremiah. I don’t think any one 
can feel this way with that Bible in hand. “Thus saith the Lord, 
What iniquity have your fathers found in Me that they are gone far 
from Me, and have walked after vanity and are become vain?” 
Now, what did Christ ever do against you? Did He ever lie to you? 


Sie coe, 


a 


MNS natecniieeaeie ne 


380 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


Did He ever abuse you? Did He ever deceive you? Only one 
man ever said that and he was out of his head, and any one would 
know he was. No man can accuse Christ of any bias or offense. 
“ What iniquity have you found in Me?” Noneatall. The trouble 
has been with ourselves. It was He that brought the early Church 
through the wilderness, through all the dangers of the way, and in- 
to the promised land. It is He that gives you power and lifts you 
up. Oh, say, then, what evil or iniquity have you found in Him” 
The trouble is with you, O backsliders, who “have forsaken the 
fountain of living waters and hewed out cisterns—broken cisterns, 
that can hold no water.” The nineteenth verse says, “ Thine own 
wickedness shall convict thee, and thy backsliding shall reprove thee; 
know, therefore, and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou 
hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that My fear is not in thee, 
saith the Lord of hosts.” Enforce the miseries of this text, and 
then use the exhortation of the third chapter, twenty-second verse: 
“Return, ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backsliding. 
Behold, we come unto Thee, for Thou art the Lord our God,” and 
then the fourteenth verse: “Only acknowledge thine iniquity that 
thou hast transgressed against the Lord thy God.” I remember 
repeating these promises to a backslider, and he couldn't believe 
them at first for joy. How tender these words of Scripture to the 
backslider. Bring these words right to bear on them, and tell how 
God pleads with them. Read to them the opening words of Hosea, 
fourteenth chapter: ‘ Return unto the Lord thy God, for thou hast 
fallen by thine iniquity; say unto Him, Take away all iniquity and 
receive us graciously. * * I (God) will heal their backsliding, I will 
love them freely; for Mine anger is turned away.” Then bring up 
the story of the prodigal for illustration; also the Apostle Peter, 
how he was drawn to God after grievously backsliding, and how he 
was even admitted to the blessings of Pentecost. Then say, “ You, 
too, can be restored if you only believe, and God will yet make you 
a blessing to believers.” 

The third class are those who are not stricken by their sins, who 
have no deep conviction of guilt. Just bring the law of God to 
bear on these and show them themselves in their own true light. 
Repeat Romans, third chapter, tenth verse: ‘There is none right- 
cous; no, not one;” also the succeeding verses; and then repeat 
from Isaiah: ‘The whole head is sick and the whole heart faint; 
from tke sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness, 


am 
wil 
nex 
tra 


. 


Ynly one 
1e would 
offense. 
e trouble 
y Church 
, and in- 
lifts you 
in Him” 
aken the 
cisterns, 
hine own 
‘ove thee; 
that thou 
t in thee, 
text, and 
ynd verse: 
icksliding. 
sod,” and 
quity that 
remember 
1't believe 
ure to the 
1 tell how 
s of Hosea, 
thou hast 
iquity and 
ding, I will 
n bring up 
bstle Peter, 
nd how he 
Bay, “ You, 
make you 


r sins, who 
of God to 
true light. 
none right- 
hen repeat 
1eart faint; 
soundness, 


BEST METHODS WITH INQUIRERS. 381 


’ 


but wounds and bruises and putrefying sores;” and then bring in 
that verse: “The heart is deceitful above all things and desperately 
wicked.” Don’t try to heal the wound before the hurt is felt. You 
may perhaps get but few satisfactory inquirers in this way, but what 
you do get are worth something. If a man don’t see his guilt, he 
won't be a valuable or true convert. Read him the first chapter of 
First John, tenth verse: “If we say that we have not sinned, we 
make Him a liar, and His Word is not in us,” and hold Him right 
to it. Don’t attempt to give the consolations of the Gospel until 
your converts see they have sinned—see it and feel it. I met a man 
who expressed doubts of his being much ofa sinner. ‘“ Well,” said 
I, “let’s find out if you have sinned. Do you swear?” “ Well, as 
a general rule, I only swear when I get mad.” “Yes, yes; but 
what does the Lord say about not holding a man guiltless that 
swears? Believe me, He will hold you responsible for that; bear 
that in mind; you must be able to hold your temper, but if not, 
beware to take the name of God in vain. Are you not now a sin- 
ner?” And the man was convinced. Sometimes, too, I’ve found a 
merchant this way, and yet one openly confesses to me that he did 
cheat sometimes. ‘“ You lie, then, don’t you?” said I. He didn’t 
want to put it quite so plainly, but pretty soon saw it in my light. 
Oh, yes; enforce this truth kindly, but firmly, that our natural 
hearts are as black and deceitful as hell. Man must say from his 
heart, “I have sinned and come short of the glory of God.” 

The fourth class are those completely broken down by a sense of 
sin—those who have too much conviction of sin distinguished from 
the preceding inquirers, who haven’t enough. One of these tells 
you that God can’t save such as he. Then you have to prove his 
mistake, and show that God can save to the uttermost. Take the 
first chapter of Isaiah, eighteenth verse: “Come now, and let us 
reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they 
shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they 
shall be as wool.” Just turn your Bible right over to that passage, 
and many such passages in Isaiah; they will all help in the inquiry- 
room. The forty-third chapter, twenty-fifth verse, says: ‘I, even I, 
am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for Mine own sake, and 
will not remember thy sins.” And the twenty-second verse of ihe 
next chapter is stronger: “I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy 
transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins; return unto Me, for I have 
tedeemed thee. Make the anxious soul believe that God has 


382 MOOD !"°S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


blotted out his sins as a thick cloud; make him see the dense cloud 
vanishing, as it were, from the face of the sun, vanishing forever: 
that cloud can never come up again; others may, but that old cloud 
of the past guilt is dissolved forever; the Lord Himself has blotted 
it out. Use the two verses, John i. 11,12: “He came unto His 
own, and His own received Him not. But as many as received 
Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to 
thein that believe on His name.” The idea is that those fearing 
ones can not serve God until they receive Christ fully as their salva- 
tion; it won't do for them to merely take up with some minister or 
church or creed. The minister dies or moves away; the only last- 
ing resource is in Christ at the right hand of God, where He will 
never forsake His own. Yes, press Jesus upon these anxious 
souls. Tell them, ‘God so loved the world that He gave His 
only begotten Son,” etc. “So loved the world;” that includes 
them; if they inhabited some other land they might tremble, 
but they are in this earth, for all the sons and daughters of which 
Christ died, the just for the unjust. Use, also, the text: “ Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, he that heareth My words and believeth 
on Him that sent Me shall not come into condemnation, but has 
passed from death into life.’”’ Now, some people do not just under- 
stand believing in Christ. They believe Christ came as an histori- 
cal being, as Moses and Elijah came. They believe the Cunard 
line of steamers will take them to Liverpool in twelve or fourteen 
days. But these beliefs don’t make men good; they are head be- 
liefs only. They are not what your inquirers want. What you and 
they want is heart belief, or, in other words, to just trust Christ to 
save you. Sometimes people can’t digest the word “belief ;” then 
let them take this sweet word “trust.” From Isaiah xxvi. 3, 4, read 
to them, “Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is 
stayed on Thee; because he trusteth in Thee. Trust ye in the 
Lord forever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.” 
By trusting in Him, you see, we have everlasting strength. You 
must get them to trust and believe entirely in Christ, and not try 
to save themselves. They can not save themselves by their feel- 
ings; assure them of that. There is not a word of warrant for such 
a thought from the first of Genesis to the last of Revelation. Oh, 
it is much better to trust in the precious, changeless Word of God 
than in our own changing feelings; thank God that this is also out 


duty. 


se cloud 
forever} 
ld cloud 
blotted 
nto His 
received 
, even to 
> fearing 
eir salva- 
inister or 
only last- 
e He will 
» anxious 
gave His 
- includes 
~ tremble, 
; of which 
: “Verily, 
believeth 
n, but has 
‘ust under- 
an histori- 
e Cunard 
br fourteen 
p head _ be- 
at you and 
Christ to 
lief ;” then 
i. 3, 4, read 
se mind is 
ye in the 
strength.” 
gth. You 
hnd not try 
their feel- 
hnt for such 
ation. Oh, 
ord of God 
s is also out 


BEST METHODS WITH INQUIRERS. 383 


Then you hear some inquirers say, “I 1aven’t got strength suff. 
cient’ But Christ died to be their strength. A loving hand will 
support them in the Christian journey, and “his strength will be 
made perfect in weakness.” Bid such be strong in the Lord, and in 
the power of His might. 

And then another class that can not be saved in this way, they 
think, because doubting instantaneous conversion. Read to such 
from Romans, sixth chapter, twenty-third verse, “The wages of sin 
is death, but the gift of God is eternal life.’”’ Salvation is a gift, 
and so must have a definite point in time. I say, “ Will you take 
this Bible?”” You must first make up your mind to cake it, and 
then reach out and—the work of an instant—grasp the gift. Just 
so with God’s best gift, salvation; to take it is the work of an in- 
stant, and your inquirers may have it for the asking. ‘Let him 
that heareth say come;” “ Whosoever will, let himcome and drink 
of the water of life freely.” With the gift, God gives the power to 
take it. When we get before the tribunal of the great white throne 
we will have to answer for it, if we refuse to take it. This is the 
richest jewel that Heaven has; God gives up His Son for our 
Saviour. 

Another class say to you and me, when, in the inquiry-room, we 
press them to openly confess Christ, “ We're afraid we won’t hold 
out.” Say to these repeatedly that blessed text, “ Now unto Him 
that is able to keep you from falling.” Think, and tell them to 
think, of the thousands who never fall. The idea that it is neces- 
sary to fall into sin is wrong. Then take those passages: “I, the 
Lord thy God, will take thy right hand;” “ Fear not, I will lead 
thee,” and “I am persuaded that I will be able to keep them that 
are committed unto Me against that day.” Let a man just trust 
the Lord to keep him from falling and He will do it. Suppose 
I have a hundred thousand dollars with me; it’s all I have in 
the world; thieves are after it, and I’m quaking every minute 
lest they get it. I find my banker here, and I say, “ Here, take it 
quick; I can’t keep my money but by your help; I wish you would 
hurry and put it in the vault; when it’s deposited there, and not 
before, I shall be safe.” Is not this the way to give our all into 
God’s keeping? Is not this the way to live secure from temptation 
and backsliding? In God’s keeping we are safe. ‘ Our life is hid 
with Christ in God.” Oh, let us each make this deposit of our 
personal trust this morning; trust Him entirely, and then we can 


a jp anna = 


= 


384 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


the better lead inquirers in the same way. Jesus can hold us close 
to Himself. ‘“ Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall 
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus 
our Lord.” If you just take up the words of Christ in the book of 
Romans, love, and peace, and joy flow out. One verse tells of love; 
the next of joy; the next and next of the peace that comes from 
believing. Romans, fourth chapter and twenty-eighth verse, and 
all those verses along there, might be read. The result of believing 
is joy, rest, and peace. John xv. 11—that is joy. Matthew xi. 28 
—that is rest. John xiv. 27—that is peace. Never, however, tell 
aman he is converted. Never tell him he is saved. Let him find 
that out from Heaven. You can’t afford to deceive one about this 
great question. But you can help his faith and trust, and lead him 
right. I find that those in the inquiry-room do best who do not 
run about from one to another, offering words of encouragement 
everywhere. They would better go to but one or two of an after- 
noon or evening. We are building for eternity, and can take time. 
The work will not then be superficial. If it is so, it will not be the 
fault of the workers or preachers. And then, to do all our duty, we 
must talk more of restitution. I don’t think we preach enough the 
need of our making good to one another injuries to person, property, 
or feeling. If you have done one a detriment, you must go and 
pay it back or make it up, if it is a tangible loss; and if it is a wound 
to the feelings, fully apologize. It is a good deal better to go up 
and do the fair thing, whatever the result. It may be that some 
will refuse such amends, but it is our duty to offerthem. But in 
the end a complete reconciliation from such a course is almost sure 
to result. The antipathy supposed to exist on the other side is 
often only imagined. You need not expect that God is going to 
forgive you if you don’t forgive others. We say daily, * Forgive us 
our debts as we forgive our debtors,” and we must show that we 
understand this conditional request. What if God should take us 
at our word, and just forgive us to the extent to which our small 
grievances are forgiven! And this He surely will do; so let us be 
wise. A young lady in Michigan at a recent revival service was 
troubled greatly, and to kind inquiries at last confessed that her un- 
willingness to confess Christ resulted from a school-room quarrel 
which was still unsettled. She felt she couldn’t forgive her enemy, 
but at last told her trouble and asked for advice, “‘ Must she forgive 
her mate?” ‘Certainly, if you want God’s forgive ess,” was the 


0 ee. ae 


Ang 
infid 
tho: 
in 
pat} 
thei 
the 
"0 
have 
whe 
is g4 
“We 
your 
and 4 
tured 
humd 
Chris 
mode 


us close 
ure shall 
‘ist Jesus 
book of 
of love; 
mes from 
erse, and 
believing 
1ew Xi. 28 
vever, tell 
~him find 
about this 
1 lead him 
ho do not 
uragement 
yf an after- 
take time. 
not be the 
ur duty, we 
enough the 
n, property, 
ust go and 
is a wound 
er to go up 
p that some 
m. But in 
almost sure 
ther side is 
is going to 
‘ Forgive us 
ow that we 
buld take us 
h our small 
so let us be 
service was 
that her un- 
oom quarrel 
b her enemy, 


t she forgive 
bss,” was the 


BEST METHODS WITH INQUTIRERS., 385 


answer of the minister ; and immediately she ran with all her might 
to her old friend, and, instead of meeting a cold reception, they 
were soon crying on each other’s necks. And so it always should 
be, and most always there will be the same prompt half-way meet- 
ing between those aggrieved. My wife was laboring in the inquiry- 
room recently with a lady who was in just this state of mind, and very 
soon reparation and complete reconciliation were effected, and two 
old friends walked off arm in arm, happier than ever before this little 
misunderstanding. And one of those ladies felt so strong in het 
new-found charity for all, that she won over her husband, and last 
Sunday he openly, in the Tabernacle, confessed Christ, remembering 
that “ With the mouth confession is made unto salvation.” Many 
more texts, did time allow, might be cited, all applicable to anxious 
inquirers. 

But one word more. Do not let aman go out of the inquiry- 
recom without praying with Him. Fear not, but do the work 
boldly. There was a man the other day who said, “I don’t believe 
there’s any God.” The resolute Christian worker to whom he 
spoke answered impetuously, “ I will just ask God to shake you— 
to just shake this demon out of you.” And down he fell on his 
knees by the poor infidel and prayed with loud earnestness. The 
man began to shake from head to foot. It was God shaking him. 
And by just these means, more than any others, skeptics and 
infidels will know there is a God. Let me say a word to 
those ministers who do not go into the inquiry-room. Many 
in your flocks, never seeing you there, think you are not in sym- 
pathy with this work, and think you don’t care anything about 
their salvation. They feel in bondage, and you do not go to help 
them. Well, there was a minister in a city we visited who did not 
“condescend” to be seen in our humble Tabeinacie. He would 
have nothing to do with us. One day he was at a dinner party 
where they were discussing our work. Said he, “That sort of thing 
is good enough for those people, but it would never do for me.” 
“Well,” said another clergyman of the same belief, “ fifty-seven of 
your congregation stood up in the Tabernacle for prayers to-day, 
and all of them afterward went into the inquiry-room.” The cul- 
tured and popular pastor of those Christians could not kill the 
humane promptings to be charitable to all professing the name of 
Christ, and to worship along with such even in perhaps irregular 
modes. But with the cordial co-operation of every Christian pas- 
25 


a = 


386 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


tor in the Tabernacle and inquiry-room, what limit would there be 
to the Christian inroads on the citadels of sin. Oh, make it a duty, 
all of you, to talk to some soul at every meeting in these blessed 
inquiry-rooms. Don’t take those ina position in life above your 
own, but take those on the same footing. Bend all your endeavors 
to answer for poor, struggling souls that question of all importance 
to them, “ What must I do to be saved?” Yes, this is the ques- 
tion. What else but to answer it brought out these thousands at 
this early hour! My friends, God is with you in this work; go on 
more diligently and implicitly trusting in Him ; go on toa more 
and more glorious harvest. 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, for Jesus’ sake wilt Thou hear our 
prayer. May we all be of one mind and of one spirit; and grant 
that in each of these meetings we may dwell closely by Thy side. 
May this meeting be one of profit. And oh, now we pray Thee 
for these young converts. May they learn the power of salva- 
tion and come to Thee in the spirit of the Master and believe. Help 
them, O Lord, to cast all their burdens upon Thee. May they learn 
that even in gaining the whole world, if they lose their own soul, it 
profiteth them nothing. We ask it all for Jesus’ sake. Amen. 


ere be 
1 duty, 

blessed 

fe your 

deavors 
ortance 
1e ques- 
sands at 
¢; go on 
ya more 


hear our 
und grant 
Thy side. 
ray Thee 
of salva- 
sve. Help 
they learn 
n soul, it 
\men. 


XLVI. 


JESUS CHRIST THE GOD-MAN. 


MATT. xxii, 42: “ What think ye of Christ? Whose son is he? ’ 


HE Jews, most of them, in Christ’s day, did not believe that 
Christ was what He claimed to be; they did not believe that 

He was God; they did not believe that He was the Son of 

man; they did not believe that He was the true Messiah, and many of 
the Jews to-day are still looking forthe Messiah. They rejected Him. 
He came in contradiction of the way in which they had been looking 
for Him. The thought that God’s Son, the Prince of Glory, should 
come in humiliation and be born in a manger, was very contrary to 
all they had been taught, so they just rejected Him, and they were 
all the time attacking Him, and in this chapter He had had three 
attacks, two made by the Sadducees, and one by the Pharisees. And 
while these doctors of divinity, these Scribes and Pharisees, were 
gathered together, he put this question, What think ye of Christ? 
“Why,” they said, “ He is the son of David.” ‘ Well, then, if He 
is the son of David, how did David call his own son Lord?” And 
they couldn’t answer him, and the question has never yet been 
answered by them. It was really this question, What think ye of 
the divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ? Was He the Christ ? 
Was He the God-man? Did He come from heaven? Was 
He sent from the bcsom of His Father as He claimed to be 
sent? And, really, that is the question that is troubling Bos- 
ton to-day. Now, it is of little account to know what you 
think of the preaching here at the Tabernacle. It is quite amus- 
ing to me to hear men criticising the preacher; some think they 
could preach better themselves—and there have been some very free 
to express their opinions in Boston the past two months. It is really 
of very little account what you think of the preaching or the singing 
here in this Tabernacle, or what you think of this denomination or 
(387) 


sister haa eS 


338 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


that—we find men are willing to talk of denominational differences 
from morning to night, but that is like dust in the balance in com. 
parison with this question. It is of little account what you think 
of this minister or that, of this public man or that; the question of 
questions is: What think ye of Christ? Because, if we do not think 
right toward Him, we do not know how to act right toward Him. If 
He was only a man, the quicker we know it the better; if He was the 
God-man, the quicker we know it the better. And I believe there is 
no man who is really an honest inquirer and wants to get light on 
this question but will get it. If a man is full of conceit, and is not 
willing to reason, of course he won't get it; because a man must be 
willing to do the will of God before he can know the doctrine. [ 
would like to take up Christ as a teacher, and call your attention to 
the wonderful things that fell from His lips. You talk about your 
teachers to-day, but where is the teacher that can compare with Him? 
Whoever spoke as He spake, or taught as He taught ? Go into that 
room in Jerusalem where He talked with Nicodemus, and hear the 
words that fell from His lips when He told him he must be born of 
God—born again—and told him that wonderful secret, that ‘ God so 
loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth on him might not perish, but have everlasting life. For God 
sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the 
world through him might be saved.” Follow Him up through 
Samaria and hear Him preaching the doctrine to that poor, fallen, 
adulterous woman at the well. The woman was amazed to heat 
Him talk, and said: “Come and see a man who told me all things 
that I ever did.” Whata preacher He was! Talk about your great 
preachers in Boston; Boston never saw such a preacher as the Lord 
Jesus Christ. He preached so plain that little children could un 
derstand Him. If He was here to-night preaching, He would talk 
so plainly that these little boys could take it in, and yet the deepest 
theologians couldn’t fathom its depths. He did not have any men 
to take down His sermons, but He buried them down into men’s 
hearts so that they couldn't forget them. Who could forget the 
story of the prodigal son? How it has been told over and over 
again these nineteen hundred years, and still it is as fresh to-night 
as when first told in Palestine. You can not forget that story of that 
poor Samaritan, who fell among thieves on the way down to Jeri- 
cho. There are a good many men in this assembly just in the posi: 
tion of that poor fellow: they have fallen among thieves, who have 


thin} 
For 
that 
Ido 
what 
divin 
He sj 
the 
noon 
whic 
was 
all thy 
heavy 


S. 


fferences 
> in com- 
rou think 
estion of 
not think 
Him. If 
fe was the 
ve there is 
t light on 
and is not 
in must be 
octrine. I 
ttention to 
about your 
. with Him? 
xo into that 
ind hear the 
- be born of 
hat “God so 
1t whosoever 
ife. For God 
but that the 
up through 
poor, fallen, 
azed to heat 
e all things 
ut your great 
ras the Lord 
en could un 
e would talk 
ht the deepest 
yave any men 
n into men’s 
ld forget the 
yver and ovet 
fresh to-night 
t story of that 
down to Jer 
nst in the post 
ves, who have 


FESUS CHRIST THE GOD-MAN. 389 
stripped them and left them dead in their trespasses and sins One 
day I see Him preaching in the spring of the year, and He sees the 
sower, and says: “ Behold, a sower went forth to sow,” and hung 
divine truth around that simple fact; and as the farmers go forth 
this spring to sow their seed, they can not forget that lesson. I 
would like to take Him up as a teacher, and as a physician. He 
had some pretty hard cases—men born blind, and lame, and with a 
word He made them perfectly whole. He cleansed lepers of their 
leprosy with a word; disease fled before Him. I would like to ask 
you what you think of Him as a quickener, when He called the 
dead to life. I would like to ask you what you think of Him asa 
comforter, you who have been called upon to mourn for one torn from 
you by death. Nobody has ever wiped away so many tears in all 
their life as the Lord Jesus does every day. He binds up the broken 
heart and He heals those that mourn. But that is not the object 
of my sermon this afternoon. My question is this: What do you 
think of Him? Because I suppose you are all thinking of 
Him. What do you think of Him? Was He the Son of God? 
Was He more than human? Now what is the opinion of this meet- 
ing this afternoon? Let us be fair in deciding the question. The 
President of this country has sent men down South to inquire into 
the political troubles there, and it would be very unfair if they 
heard only one side. 

Now, what we want is to hear both sides, and I am willing to be 
perfectly fair, and I will put every one of you here on the jury, and 
Iam going to bring in these witnesses to testify what they know 
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and at the close I will ask you what you 
think—was He what He claimed to be, or was He an impostor? 
For we are forced into this, that He was either the vilest impostor 
that ever trod this earth, or else He was the Son of God from heaven. 
I don’t believe there is any neutral ground here; I don’t believe 
what some people say when they tell us: “I don’t believe He was 
divine, but He was a very good man.” I don’t believe a word of it. 
He says: “Thou shalt have no other gods before me.” Look at 
the millions that have been worshiping Him as Lord, and this after- 
noon how many at this hour are lifting up their hearts to Him, 
which is all mockery and we are guilty of idolatry if Jesus Christ 
was not God manifest in the flesh. What right had He to say to 
all the world as He did: “Come unto me all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden and I will give you rest.” No man ever dared tu say 


390 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


that. Moses couldn’t say that; Elijah couldn’t say that; John the 
Baptist couldn’t say that; no other man that ever trod the earth 
has said that. Yet Christ said it. When others, His disciples, per- 
formed miracles, they called on the name of Christ. He performed 
them in His own name: “I say unto thee, arise!” and the dead 
damsel sprung to life. And when He raised Lazarus, He didn’t 
call on God to raise him, but Lazarus heard the voice of God and 
came forth. The bitterest enemies He had were the Sadducees and 
Pharisees while He was here. Many times they came with stones 
in their hands to put Him to death, and at last they did—they cru- 
cified Him. Now, what did they bring against Him? “This man 
receiveth sinners and eateth with them!” Thank God for that. If 
He hadn’t received them what would become of us? That is the 
very thing we gloryin. That was all they could bring against Him. 
Now, this afternoon, suppose we bring out individuals instead of a 
whole community. Suppose, in this room, back of the platform, 
are the witnesses, and you know in a court of justice they bring in 
witnesses one at a time, so that they can not know what the others 
say. Suppose we have some one here acting as officer of the court, 
and he brings in any witness you like to call out, any one that had 
to do with Jesus Christ. We will take Caiaphas; that was the high- 
priest that presided over the council that tried and gave the sentence 
of death on Jesus, that was sitting in the piace of Aaron, with his 
flowing robes. Here he stands. Ask him the question: Come, tell 
us, you acted as judge, you passed the sentence of death, what is 
your testimony? Hear what he says: “We had witness that He 
said, ‘ Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up with- 
out hands.’ And when I put it to Him,” says Caiaphas, “you have 
heard what these witnesses testify, what sayest Thou? Have you 
anything to say for yourself? He held His peace; and then I put 
it to Him plainly, ‘Art Thou the Son of the Blessed?’ and He 
said, ‘I am!’” And bear in mind that, if He was not, He ought 
to have been put to death, according to the law of the Jews. What 
more did Christ say to Caiaphas? ‘“ You shall see me sitting at the 
right hand of God, coming in the clouds of heaven,” and then Caia- 
phas rent his mantle and said: ‘We don’t want any more witnesses. 
We have heard the blasphemy from His own lips. What think ye? 
He is guilty of death.” That was all they had against Him—that 
was what His enemies said, and they condemned Him then and 
there to death. The jews couldn’t put Him to death without the 


ohn the 
he earth 
les, per- 
-rformed 
he dead 
le didn’t 
God and 
icees and 
th stones 
they cru- 
This man 
‘that. If 
nat is the 
inst Him. 
stead of a 
platform, 
y bring in 
the others 
‘the court, 
e that had 
s the high- 
ne sentence 
n, with his 
Come, tell 
th, what is 
ss that He 
it up with- 
“you have 
Have you 
then I put 
?’ and He 
, He ought 
ews. What 
itting at the 
1 then Caia- 
e witnesses. 
at think ye? 
Him—that 
then and 
without the 


GESUS CHRIST THE GOD-MAN, 391 


consent of the Roman governor, and so they took Him to Pilate; 
and now we have got Pilate. He isn’t a Jew; but let us hear both 
sides. He heard Christ and talked with Him, and heard all they 
brought against Him. That is an unbiased witness. Let Pilate be 
brought on here. Do you hear what he says? ‘TI find no fault in 
him.” That’s what Pilate says. He examined Him, and he knew 
it was for envy that the Jews had delivered Him. “I find no fault 
in him. I will chastise him and Jet him go.” But the crowd cried 
out: “If you let that man go you are not Cesar’s friend!”’ And 
then Pilate gave way; he hadn’t the moral courage to stand up 
there for what was right, and so he gave consent that He should be 
put to death. We have got another witness—the governor’s wife. 
What does she say—she couldn’t have been biased? ‘“ Have thou 
nothing to do with that just person, for I have suffered much ina 
dream concerning him.” That was her testimony. Every one 
that had to do with Jesus Christ, sod has made them testify that 
His Son was innocent. And among all the infidels in these eighteen 
hundred years, not one has ever found a flaw in His character. You 
can find flaws in our characters, but not in the Master’s. <A great 
many men in Boston are worse than Pilate; they find fault with 
Christ. Pilate could find none. Here is another witness—J udas, 
that sold Him for thirty pieces of silver. Let Judas be brought in 
to testify. “Come, Judas, you sold Him ,to the chief priest for 
thirty pieces of silver. Tell us, what think ye of Christ? You 
were with Him for three years; you associated with Him. Did you 
ever find any flaw in His character? Did you ever find Him trans- 
gressing the law? Did He sin?” Hear him: “I betrayed inno- 
cent blood.” That is his testimony. What think you of Him, 
young man? Do you think as well of Him as Judas did? I have 
other witnesses I want to bring in here, and that is even the very 
devils themselves. When they met Him in Galilee they said: “Thou 
5on of God, art Thou come to torment us before the time?” Even 
the very devils knew Him. Then I want to call in that centurion 
that had charge of His execution. He had charge of the Roman 
band cf soldiers that put Christ to death. He couldn’t have been 
biased. What does he testify? ‘Truly, this was the Son of God.” 
God wouldn’t let that man put Him to death. without giving that 
testimony. Now, these are all His enemies that I have called up, 
and not a solitary one can say anything against Him. Bear that: in 
mind. Now, let us take up His forerunner. We are told that John 


392 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


was sent into the world to introduce Christ. John knew Him not, 
John was brought up in one part of the country and Christ in an- 
other. And John says that it was revealed to him by God; that he 
got his message from on high; and what does he say? As he went 
down and was baptized, and came up out of Jordan, this was his 
testimony: “ Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins 
of the world!” You couldn’t say that of a man. You couldn't 
say that Moses took away the sins of the world, or that Elisha or 
Elijah took away the sins of the world. ‘“ His name shall be called 
Jesus, because he shall save his people from their sins.” And how 
could Jesus save them from their sins if He was not the God-man ? 
Then John says: “I bear record that this i$ the Son of God.” And 
when he was right in the zenith of his glory, and the crowds were 
flocking to hear him in hundreds of thousands, he began to cry 
down himself. “I must decrease and he must increase.” That is 
the very height of preaching. Let us call up some other witnesses, 
Let us bring up Peter. Peter, you know, denied Him thrice. Bring 
him here now and I can imagine, as the tears would trickle down 
his cheeks at the remembrance of it, he would say: “I was under 
the power of Satan.” And this is what he said on the day of Pen- 
tecost: ‘“ This Jesus whom you have crucified, God hath made both 
_ Lord and Christ.” And again, when Peter came to Christ and told 
'Him how some said He was of Elias, and some of John the Baptist, 
‘and some one thing and some another, Christ said to him: ‘“ Whom 
‘dost thou say Iam?” and Peter answered: “ Thou art the Son of 
the living God.” And Jesus blessed him right there. “ Blessed art 
‘thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto 
‘thee, but my Father which is in heaven.” 

We may bring in that thief. Those two thieves were brought 
out and they both reviled Him and cast it in His teeth, but one of 
them, perhaps, when he heard that wonderful prayer, “ Father, for- 
give them, for they know not what they do,” was convinced, and 
said: “This must be more than a man. If I had the power, I 
‘would call down fire from heaven to consume these men who are 
‘putting us to death.” He must be, he felt, more than man. 
“Lord,” he said, “remember me when thou comest into thy king- 
dom.” Like many men that scoff now, there was that thief on the 
ery borders of hell scoffing. But this one said: ‘“ This man hath 
done nothing amiss!” That is the testimony of this dying thief. 
‘So, my friends, if you will just call up one witness after another, you 


Co 
slau 
has 
no! 
all ( 
mu 
him 

me. 

all t 

and 

may 


im not. 
t in an- 
that he 
he went 
was his 
the sins 
couldn't 
elisha or 
be called 
\nd how 
od-man ? 
d.” And 
wads were 
an to cry 
That is 
witnesses. 
ce. Bring 
ckle down 
was under 
ay of Pen- 
made both 
st and told 
lhe Baptist, 
: “ Whom 
he Son of 
Blessed art 
led it unto 


re brought 
but one of 
Father, for- 
inced, and 
e power, I 
bn who are 
than man. 
o thy king- 
hief on the 
fs man hath 
dying thief. 
nother, you 


YESUS CHRIST THE GOD-MAN. 393 


will find they all thought well of Him. They all believed He was 
what He claimed to be. Thomas doubted it. He couldn’t believe 
He had risen, and wouldn’t believe it, and the next Sabbath the 
Lord revealed Himself to His disciples and said: ‘Thomas, reach 
hither thy hand and put it into these wounds.” And he knew that 
voice, and Thomas said: ‘My Lord and my God.” That is what 
he thought of Him. O! may every soul in this assembly cry out 
this afternoon: “ My Lord and my God.” Let us take the ground 
that Thomas did. Let us ask for no more evidence; we have evidence 
enough, but let us cry out: “My Lord and my God.” Some peo- 
ple are jealous of offending the Father. Don’t be troubled about 
that. Speak well of the Son and you will please the Father. But 
suppose we bring in John, the beloved disciple, who knew more of 
that heart than any other of the twelve. Let him come in and tes- 
tify. If I was to examine that witness carefully, it would take all 
the rest of the afternoon. What does he say? In one place he 
calls Him “the root, and the offspring of David,” and “the bright 
and morning star.’’ You want to spend days reading that blessed 
Gospel of his if you want to find out what John thought of Him. 
You can not find anything more lovely in the Scriptures than John’s 
thoughts of Christ. There is a true friend writing what he thought 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. I would like to have time to take up one 
of Christ’s bitterest enemies that was going to stamp out Christianity 
in its infancy. I would like to bring that persecuting Saul here 
and ask him what he thinks of Jesus. When he got a sight of Him, 
he cried out: “ Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?” and from 
that day he was a different man. 

If some friend of his happened to be up at Damascus on business, 
Ican imagine him going up to Paul, and saying: “ Paul, what has 
come over you? you are not the same man you were, breathing out 
slaughter and threatenings against this sect a few days ago; what 
has come over you? You have gone mad, haven’t you?” “Mad, 
no!” says Paul, “I have just come to my senses.” It would take 
all day to tell you what Paul thought of Him. He thought so 
much of Him he was willing to let the world scoff at him and call 
him mad. ‘Let them laugh, let them scoff; Christ has redeemed 
me. What dolI care? What dol think of Him? Heis more than 
all the world to me. I am willing to leave father and mother, home 
and friends, if only I can be found with Him in the dying hour.” O! 
may God reveal Christ to every one of us here, that we may go out 


394 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


and take our stand for Him. But I can go beyond these witnesses, 
The angels—their testimony is on record. They were there in glory 
when He left heaven; they saw Him lay aside the honor and glory 
He had with the Father; they saw Him go down to that manger, 
and we are told that the angels desired to look into the mysteries, 
and I can not but think that was one of them; how that Father 
could give up that Son, and how that Son could leave the bosom of 
the Father and come down to this dark world, to be despised of 
men, to be hated, and cast out as an impostor—it must have been 
the wonder of wonders to the angels. Thank God, we have their 
testimony! He permitted them to speak once, when He was born 
in Bethlehem. Some shepherds were over there on the plains, and 
an angel of light dropped down and said: “ Behold, I bring you 
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people, for unto you 
this day is born, in the city of David, a Saviour.” And then a great 
company of angels burst out and sang in chorus: “ Glory to God in 
the highest, peace on earth and good-will toward men.” 

Yes, He is the Saviour. God gave Him to save the world. And 
if I could shout now from this platform to that world of light and 
ask: ‘What do you think of Christ ?”? you know what the answer 
would be. John heard their voices singing: “ Worthy is the Lamb,” 
And will not this audience join with the heavenly choir, and cry: 
“Worthy, worthy is the Lamb?” J! let us get into sympathy 
with the heavenly choir. But I want to introduce another witness— 
and I do so with all reverence—we have one witness that is more 
than all the others put together. It is supposed that God the 
Father never spoke until Christ was on earth. Look at that won- 
derful scene as Christ came up out of Jordan. John had thrilled 
the whole audience when he declared that he was not worthy to 
unlatch His shoes. But as He came up out of the water. Listen! 
O, may God open every deaf ear to hear that voice. What does it 
say? “This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear 
Him.” Will you not hear Him this afternoon? Hear Him, believe 
Him, receive Him; lay hold of Him by faith, and say: “ By the 
grace of God I will lift up my voice for Jesus henceforth and forever. 
I renounce my past sins and iniquity, and, by God’s grace, I will live 
for Him who gave His life for me.” 


itnesses, 
in glory 
id glory 
manger, 
ysteries, 
t Father 
yosom of 
ised of 
ave been 
ave their 
was born 
lains, and 
pring you 
unto you 
on a great 
to God in 


rid. And 
light and 
he answer 
he Lamb.” 
, and cry: 
sympathy 
r witness— 
at is more 
t God the 
that won- 
ad thrilled 
worthy to 
r. Listen! 
hat does it 
ased ; hear 
im, believe 
: “ By the 
and forever. 
b, I will live 


XLVII. 


WALKING WITH GOD. 


GEN. v. 24: “ And Enoch walked with God.” 


UR subject this afternoon is “ Walking with God.” Of course 
this sermon is for those that have been redeemed by the pre- 
cious blood of Christ, for no man has a jus\ right to walk with 

God until he is saved. For six thousand years, since Adam fell out 
of communion with God, God has been trying to win back the sons 
and daughters of Adam into communion with Himself, that th 

might walk with Him. When Adam was innocent, he could waik 
with God in that garden, but the moment he fell he was out of com- 
munion with God; but he didn’t want to see the Lord, and ran 
away from Him. When a man is going away from God and into sin 
he don’t desire to walk with God. But after we have become His 
children, the sweetest lesson we can learn is to learn to walk with Him 
to be in fellowship and communion with Him. God came down 
and visited men. He visited Abraham, Jacob, and Moses, but He 
did not walk with man until He had first put behind them the blood 
in Goshen. Then He became their king, walked with them, and 
was with them several hundred years; and He would have been 
with that nation to-day, and made it a blessing to all the world, 
but they rejected Him. They said: “We want a king like the 
nations around us,” and yet because He had said that He was God, 
they, as it were, turned away and said: “ We will have a king,” and 
God granted their request. Now, if nations will not walk with 
God, it is a privilege of individuals, and each one in this house can 
be brought into communion with God and walk with God the rest 
of their days if we will. It says in the first of Peter, second chap- 
ter, twentieth verse: “ For what glory is it if, when ye be buffeted 
for your faults, ye shall take it patiently? but if, when ye do well, 
and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God.” 
(395) 


Sipe crore mei 


TT diners 


396 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


And the twenty-first verse: “For even hereunto were ye called 
because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye 
should follow in his footsteps.” Iam told by a man that has bcen 
out in the Indian country that they very often find out what they 
call an “Indian trail’ over the mountain, and you only find one 
footprint as if one man had trod that path. I am told by some who 
are acquainted with the customs of the Indians that the chief goes 
on before and then the tribe follow and put their feet right in his 
footsteps. Now our Chief has gone on before to heaven and left 
His footprints and we are to follow in His footsteps, and we will 
have a blessed journey if we do not get out of the path, but keep 
right in His footsteps and not get into the world. But whenever 
any of us think that our way is better than His way, and are not 
willing to follow in His footsteps, then it is that we will get into 
trouble and darkness. In the twenty-sixth chapter of Leviticus, 
the second, third, fourth, and fifth verses, we find that if we keep 
His statutes and walk with Him, that God will bless us: 

“Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary: I am 
the Lord. 

“If ye walk in my statutes and keep my commandments, and do 
them ; 

“Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shal! yield 
her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit. 

“ And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vin- 
tage shall reach unto the sowing time; and ye shall eat your bread 
to the full, and dwell in your land safely.” 

If you read the history of that nation you will find that just as 
long as they kept the statutes and the law of God, that they were 
blessed above all nations around them. No one could lift a sword 
successfully against them. God gave them rain in season, and the 
land brought forth fruit in abundance. And He blessed and 
smiled upon them. But when they turned away from Him, from 
His law, His statutes, then it was that they brought calamity 
upon themselves, and nations came upon them and took them 
into bondage and servitude. You know Nebuchadnezzar came 
and took them down into Babylon and kept them there seventy 
years, and it was because they would not keep the law of God, 
they would not keep His statutes or the Sabbath day. They 
said, as Pharoah, “ Who is God that we should obey Him?” and 
they turned away from Him. He promised them, in Leviticus, 


. called 
that ye 
as bcen 
at they 
ind one 
yme who 
ief goes 
it in his 
and left 
1 we will 
put keep 
vhenever 
{ are not 
get into 
Leviticus, 
we keep 


ary: Lam 
ts, and do 


shall yield 
it. 

d the vin- 
our bread 


at just as 
they were 
ift a sword 
yn, and the 
essed and 
Him, from 
calamity 
ook them 
zzar came 
bre seventy 
W of God, 
ay. They 
fim?” and 
Leviticus, 


WALKING WITH GOD. 397 


twenty-six, twelve: “ And I will walk among you and be your God 
and ye shall be my people.”” What a blessing! What nation had 
a God like that? What nation was blessed like that nation when 
God was walking with them? The shout of the king was heard in 
the camp. God could protect them, and send legions of angels to 
help them in battle if they only put their trust in Him. He warns 
them in Leviticus, twenty-sixth chapter, twenty-first verse: “ And 
if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me, I will 
bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.” 
What causes so much sin now in the city of Boston? Why, it is 
because men are walking contrary to God. God says if you walk 
contrary to Him, He will walk contrary to you. “I will turn your 
ways upside down.” There is no peace for the wicked. You may 
try to find peace, but you can not away from God. If men will 
only walk in God’s way, keep God's law and statutes; if they will 
only reverence the sanctuary and the Word of God, and be ‘tod’s 
followers, they will have peace. They will be blessed as they were 
in olden times. Our God is unchangeable, the same to-day as ever; 
but we are walking contrary to God and bringing all our troubles 
upon ourselves. We find in the days of Joshua that no man was 
able to stand before him all the days of his life. Why? Because 


he studied the Word of God. He meditated upon the desires, — 


and the whole of the Word of God; and the result was that he 
prospered. In the twenty-second chapter and fifth verse of Joshua, 
we find that he gave orders to those that he left, who were to take 
his place, charging those elders of Israel in these words: “ But take 
diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which Moses 
the servant of the Lord charged you, to love the Lord your God, 
and to walk in all His ways, and to keep His commandments, and 
to cleave unto Him, and to serve Him with all your heart and with 
all your soul.” And so Joshua blessed them and sent them away, 
and we are told they did not depart from his precepts during all the 
days of Joshua; he had such an influence over all those Judges. 
But a few hundred years after, we are told that they turned away 
and were brought into captivity by Satan. In the sixth of Jeremiah 
you find what Israel did, although it had said in the days of Joshua 
that it would never depart from the statutes of the Lord. In the 
sixteenth verse: “Thus saith the Lord, Stand ye in the ways and 
see, and ask for the old paths; there is the good way, and walk 
therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said, We will 


Re oe 


a oe 


oem 


esr reer eepeneenr meen 


SO? 2S 


Sa 


398 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


not walk therein,” we will not do any such thing; that was very 
good for those heathens coming out of Egypt. We have got sci- 
entific men now that know a good deal more than Moses, Caleb, 
and Joshua; it has been four thousand years since Joshua’s day, 
but we have grown wiser. They and the whole nation turned away. 
God gave them a weeping prophet, Jeremiah, who wept and prayed 
over them; the Lord gives him his mission and he warns the people. 
“Also I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of 
the trumpet. But they said, We wil. not hearken.” People say: 
“Give us some other book than the Bible; the idea of men stand- 
ing up in the nineteenth century and accepting that as true; I 
think we are wiser than the Bible; I don’t believe that.” Men were 
saying that in the days of Jeremiah, as now. It is the same old 
human heart, the same old enemy; you find it in every climate and 
age. Pride isa plant that grows in all kinds of soil, in the dead 
of winter as well as in the summer, in all kinds of climate and soil, 
wherever the foot of man has touched this earth. Men have just 
risen to be wiser than the Almighty, in their own estimation. 
“ Therefore, hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what is 
among them. Hear, O earth: Behold, I will bring evil upon this 
people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not 
hearkened unto my words, nor to my law, but rejected it.” And 
yet they just laughed at Jeremiah, until at last the king said, “ Put 
him into prison, into a dungeon,” and they cast him into a filthy 
pit. But the Lord was with him. The God sitting upon the high 
heavens, as a punishment for the king, took Zedediah, put out his 
eyes, bound him with chains, and he was carried into Babylon to 
let the king see his sin. They found out that the Word of God was 
true. And these men that are trying to fight against the Bible and 
this Word of God will find that it is true, will find out by and by, 
just as Pharoah did when he cried, ““Who is God that I should 
obey Him?” that there isa God. When God comes to deal with 
them in judgment, these men will find out who He is. God has a 
controversy with man on account of sin. Until man turns from sin 
and hates it, and turns to God, there can be no fellowship or com- 
munion with God. In the eighty-fourth Psalm, eleventh verse— 
and to me it is one of the sweetest verses in the Bible—it is said: 
“For the Lord God is a sun and shield; the Lord will give grace 
and glory; no good thing will He withhold from them that walk 
uprightly.” No good thing. Now if a man is willing to walk up- 


syn 
ene 
hav 
to J 
wh e 
let 
fro1 


get 
Stan 
well 
you 
One 
to w 
his y 
up 
hors4 
hard 
a yo 
man 
But ¢ 
they 
bad ; 


; very 
ot sci- 
Caleb, 
s day, 
away. 
prayed 
people. 
ind of 
le say: 
stand- 
true; I 
n were 
me old 
ate and 
1e dead 
nd soil, 
ave just 
imation. 
what is 
pon this 
1ave not 
2” And 
id, “ Put 
b a filthy 
the high 
out his 
bylon to 
God was 
Bible and 
and by, 
I should 
deal with 
rod has a 
5 from sin 
bh or com- 
h verse— 
t is said: 
ive grace 
that walk 
b walk up- 


WALKING WITH GOD. 399 


rightly, the Lord has promised that no good thing will be withheld 
from him, and that He will bless him. How many can say that is 
true? When we are ready to obey God fully and walk uprightly, 
then He will smile upon us, and a Slessing come upon our soul, and 
we will mount up, as it were, on wings heavenward. I want to 
come upon something that is practical now, and touch upon some- 
thing that keeps us out of communion with God. I believe that there 
is one truth that ought to be preached all over Christendom, and 
that is, separation from the world. If the Church was only separated 
from unbelievers—that is, have the line drawn and take its stand—I 
believe that it would have more power than at the present time. I 
don’t fear those infidels who talk about the Church of God. But 
there are so many men that profess to be Christians that are not. 
They will pat you on the shoulder, tell you how glad they are to 
see the work going on, profess great interest, and then they will go 
behind your back and give you a stab in the dark. They will meet 
you and say it is a very fine work, are much interested, have a deep 
sympathy with it, and the very next day, perhaps, they are your 
enemy and don’t believe in your work. They have two faces. We 
have got too many of that kind of men. If men who are opposed 
to Jesus Christ will only come out and fight it, then we will know 
where they are. Those that have the Son of God as their leader, 
let them come out and confess it. What we want is separation 
from the world, and the quicker the better. 

He says in Amos, third chapter, verse third: ‘Can two walk to- 
gether except they be agreed?” If you see a man that is in con- 
stant communion with another man, you say these men agree pretty 
well. You see two business men walking down to the store together, 
you say those men agree. But if they don’t have fellowship with 
one another, you don’t have the same impression. If aman is going 
to walk with God, he has got to agree with God; has got to give up 
his ways and thoughts, and take God’s, for God is not going to give 
up His thoughts and ways in order to walk with us. I was in a 
horse-car some time ago, and I saw two young men. One of them 
hardly spoke a word without cursing. I don’t know as I ever heard 
a young man in fifteen minutes swear so much. The other young 
man didn’t swear at all. Perhaps he had a praying father or mother. 
But as soon as they yoked arms together and went to the theatre, 
they were agreed, and the young man who had not sworn was as 
bad as the other. He was in fellowship with him. If we are going 


extrniae adding ee 


eRe em nn en 


400 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


to be hand and glove with the ungodly, with unbelievers, with un- 
converted people and those who do not know Jesus, we are going 
to lose our power; like Samson with his hair cut off, we lose our 
power. We want to be separated. If a man speaks contemptu. 
ously of my wife or my mother, he is no companion for me, “ Good. 
bye, sir.”” I would do all I could to lead him to Christ. And if a 
man speaks contemptuously of the Son of God, who has redeemed 
us, ‘ Good-day, sir, you and I do not agree,” and the quicker I am 
alone the better. 

If we walk with God we have got to be separated from the world, 
and if not, we make Goda party to oursin. He says, you know, when 
He brought them up from Egypt, it was their sins that separated 
them from Him. If we are going to live in sin, and God walked with 
us, He would be a party to our sin. I want to call your attention 
to a passage in the second Corinthians, sixth chapter, fourteenth 
verse: “ Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers; for 
what fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? And 
what communion hath light with darkness? And what concord 
hath Christ with Belial? Or what part hath he that believeth with 
an infidel?’’ What part? ‘And what agreement hath the temple 
of God with idols? For ye are the temple of the living God, 
as God hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, 
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Wherefore, 
come out from among them and be ye separate, saith the Lord, 
and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be 
a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the 
Lord Almighty.” Now He says He will be with you, and “ ye shall 
be my sons and daughters,” if you come out and separate yourselves 
from unbelievers. I know this isn’t going to be a very popular 
thing for me to say, but when you come to the Lord God, you have 
got to let the truth come right out. I believe that comes down with 
every-day life. I believe if 1 am a Christian man, I ought not to be 
yoked up with the ungodly. A man came to me some time ago and 
said he was in great distress. He had two partners who had voted 
to do something that compromised his Christian character, and 
asked: “ What shall I do?” He said he had been a Christian, I 
think, for fifteen years, and the partnership had only been formed 
three or four years. I told him the mistake was back yonder when 
ne formed that partnership. “God told you not to do it. ‘Be 
ye not unequally yoked; you can not go in with those ungodly 


SS ee 


ye 


S. 4 


with un- 
re going 
lose our 
ntemptu- 
es Good- 

And if a | 
redeemed } 

ker 1 am 


the world, 


now, when 
separated : | 
alked with : : 
- attention : | 
fourteenth : 

z 


jevers; for 
ess? And 
at concord 
ieveth with 
the temple 
living God, 
k in them, 
Wherefore, 
h the Lord, 
and will be 
rs, saith the 
d “ye shall 
e yourselves 
ery popular 
od, you have 
s down with 
ht not to be 
ime ago and 
o had voted 
aracter, and 
h Christian, I 
been formed 
yonder when 
do it. ‘Be 
ose ungodly 


THE FEOPLE GATHERING AT THE RINK 


WALKING WITH GOD. 401 


men.’ And they have now voted todo something that compromises 
you, and you have not the power to avert it.” A great many men 
think if they can make money a little faster, even if they do go con- 
trary to the Word of God, that is all right. It comes again in mat- 
rimony. What right has a godly, sainted woman to give herself 
away to a scoffing man because he is rich? What right has a pray- 
ing man to marry a frivolous, scoffing young lady that hates Jesus 
Christ, the Bride of the Church of God? “Be ye not unequally 
yoked together.” It means more than that. What right has a 
Christian man to be in some of those lodges where there are infidels 
and skeptics that care not and scoff at the Word of God. The Word 
of God pumps right through such a profession of faith. 

People want me to join reform clubs, lodges, etc.; not I. I will 
not yoke myself up to anything of the sort. Separation is what we 
want if we would have power. We may be unpopular down here, 
but we will be popular up there if we doright. Let us not vacillate 
here and there or be catering for public opinion. I had rather be 
rejoicing in Christ with God leading me alone, than to have all Bos- 
ton applauding me, and not walking with God. I know there are a 
great many young men scoffing and saying: ‘‘ What do I care about 
what the Word of God says?” You can say so, but bear in mind if 
you go contrary to the Word of God, you will not have the blessing 
of Heaven upon you. Many ayoung lady has given herself away to 
some scoffing infidel, and will have a miserable life. It will not be 
long before her husband will trample her feelings under-foot, just as 
he does God’s Word. He won’t care much about your feelings. He 
may profess to love and care for you, but he will prove untrue to 
you by and by. It is a good deal better for us to do right. There 
was a lady in Chicago that came to me in great distress, and says: 
“What shall I do? I am engaged to be married to a young man 
who is not a Christian.” I said: ‘“Ican not give you any advice 
about that; he has got your heart; your course is very plain. I 
should tell that young man faithfully, just your feelings; just give 
him the Word of God, and say that it tells you that you, who are a 
professed child of God, can not marry him while he is unconverted, 
for it says: ‘Be ye not unequally yoked.’” She did so. The 
young man gave her up, but it was not a week before he was in the 
inquiry-room. He said he had a great respect for that young lady. 
She took her stand, and he said he had more respect for her and for 


herGod. O, my friends, I know this doctrine isn’t just what you like, 
26 


402 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


but it is a good deal better to have the truth and to know what God 
would have us do. They that go contrary to the Word of God, He 
will go contrary to. Let us just ask ourselves this question: “Am 
I unequally yoked with unbelievers? am I yoked up with some un- 
believer?” Perhaps somebody may say here: “I have been con- 
verted since I got married.” The Word of God guards that; you 
are not to leave your husband. I am talking to those that have not 
formed the alliance, and if you will read your Bibles carefully on this 
point, you will find that God gives us no uncertain sound. Yet some 
of you think that by marrying you might save that person. I had 
rather be saved than be living in hopes of being saved. If the young 
man you want to marry won’t accept God before you are united, you 
can feel pretty sure he won’t afterwards. If he won’t reason with 
y ou, take your word, and allow you to talk to him about Christ be- 
fore marriage, I haven't much hope to believe that he will after you 
are married. You will find a good many say: “ He is a narrow, 
bigoted man; I believe if I am united to an unbeliever, I can lift 
him up toward God.” I suppose Lot reasoned so about Sodom. 
But it lifted him down instead of up. Instead of our lifting the 
world, we find the world pulling the Church of God down. 

If you want to be right with the world, you want to testify against 
the sins of the world. There is too much compromise between a 
religious wife and an unconverted husband. She will let him per- 
suade her to go to the theatre sometimes in order to get him to go 
to.church with her, and then he will take her to a church where the 
Word of God isn’t preached, which is even worse than the theatre 
sometimes. A friend of mine in England purchased a gold chain 
for a friend, and carried it in his pocket for some time, and a lead 
whistle that it rubbed against made it black. The lead affected the 
gold, but the gold did not affect the lead. And so you will find the 
world gets us down, but we don’t get itup. The gold will not go 
into the lead, but the lead will go into the gold. What we want is 
to be separated, and if we want power with God and man, we must 
be separated. A short time ago a man told me he had a canary, 
which, being placed beside some English sparrows, lost its song, 
and afterward would do nothing but chirp, chirp, chirp. That is the 
trouble with Christians who have not got separated from the world. 
They can not sing songs of praise without going chirp, chirp, chirp, 
and if they go into prayer-meetings they do the same, and make 
empty prayer. If he wants power with God, a man must be sepa- 


t God 
d, He 

66 Am 
ne un- 

n con- 
t; you 
ave not 
on this 
et some 

T had 

e young 
ted, you 
on with 
‘hrist be- 
after you 
1 narrow, 
I can lift 
t Sodom. 
ifting the 


| 


ify against 
between a 
him per- 
him to g0 
where the 
he theatre 
old chain 
ind a lead 
ffected the 
ill find the 
vill not g° 
we want is 
n, we must 
a canary, 
bt its song, 
That is the 
the world. 
hirp, chirp, 
and make 
st be sepa 


WALKING WITH GOD. 403 
rated. If not, you will lose your song and sweetness out of your 
heart. Withdraw from the world, and then God will bless you. 
Look again at the eleventh chapter of Numbers, fourth verse. I 
think that gives us another view of this truth and how it is that we 
lose our power. You know the children of Israel, when they 
came out of Egypt were followed by some Egyptians. It says: 
“‘ Nevertheless, these shall ye not eat of, them that chew the cud, or 
of them that divide the hoof, as the camel, because he cheweth the 
cud, but divideth not the hoof; he is unclean unto-you.” What a 
picture that was. They loathed the manna of heaven. God gave 
them angels’ food, bread of heaven. Men loathe the Bible. They 
run after operas and theatres, and they follow the world, and the 
world has come into the Church. Yet they loathed the manna 
of heaven. We find that Enoch walked with God, and conquered 
death with one bound. As old Dr. Bonner, of Scotland, expressed 
it: “ Enoch took a long walk one day, and he has not got back 
yet.” Enoch is walking up there with God, and by and by we shall 
see Him. May God help us to walk with Him. 


oa Tar, 


a 


ees 


XLVIILI. 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD. 


1 KINGS xviii. 21: “ And Elijah came unto all the people and said, How long halt 
ve between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow Him; but if Baal, then 
follow him, And the people answered him not a word.” 


WV * found in this portion of the Word of God that Elijah was 
calling the people of Israel back, or he was calling them to 

a decision as to whether they were for God or Baal, anda 
great many were wavering—just halting between two opinions, like 
the people of Clicago at the present time. During the last eight 
weeks a great deal has been said upon the subject of religion. Men 
have talked about it all over the city. A great many are talking— 
a great many are taking their stand for, and a great many against 
Him. Now, what will you do? Iwill just divide this audience into 
two portions—-one against and cne for Him. It seems to me a 
practical question to ask an audience like this, “‘ How long halt ye 
between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow Him; but if 
Baal, then follow him.” A man who is undecided about any ques- 
tion of any magnitude never has any comfort; never has any peace. 
Not only that, but we don’t like a man who can not decide upon a 
question. I like men of decision, and firmly believe that more men 
are lost by indecision than by anything else. It is a question 
whether I am not talking to many men who intend some day to 
settle this question. Probably every one here intends to make 
Heaven his home; but Satan is trying to get you to put off the 
settlement of the question till it will be too late. If he can only 
get men to put off till the “to-morrow,” which never comes, he has 
accomplished all he wants. How many in this audience have prom- 
ised some friend years ago that they would settle this question. 
May be you said you would do it when you came of age. That time 
has gone with some of you, and it has not been settled yet. Some 
have reached thirty, some forty, and others have reached fifty years, 
their eyes are grow'ng dim, and they are hastening toward eternity, 
(404) 


GOD. 


y long halt 
Baal, then 


‘lijah was 
g them to 
aal, anda 
nions, like 
last eight 
ion. Men 
> talking— 
ny against 
ience into 
is to me a 
ng halt ye 
im; but if 
t any ques- 
any peace. 
ide upon a 
more men 
a question 
ome day to 
is to make 
put off the 
he can only 
bmes, he has 
have prom- 
his question. 
That time 
yet. Some 
H fifty years, 
ard eternity, 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD. 405 
and this is not settled with them yet. Some of you have promised 
dying brothers that you would meet them in that world; some have 
promised dying wives that you would see them in that land of light, 
and again others have given their word to dying children that you 
would meet them in Heaven. Years have rolled away, and still 
you have not decided. You have kept putting it off week by week 
and year by year. My friends, why not decide to-night? ‘ How 
long halt ye between two cpinionsr” Ifthe Lord be good, serve 
Him; if not, turn your backs upon Him. It seems to me a question 
every man can settle if he will. You like those grand old charac- 
ters in the Bible who have made a decisive stand. Look at Mcses! 
The turning point in his life was when he decided to give up the 
gilded court of Pharaoh and cast his lot with God’s people. You 
will find that every man who has left a record in the Bible have 
been men of ‘‘ecision. What made Daniel great? It was because 
he was a man of decision. What s.ved the prodigal? It was not 
that he got into his father’s arins, it was not his coming home. The 
turning point was when he decided the question: “I will arise and 
go to my father.” lt was the decision of the young man that 
saved him. Many a man has been lost because of indecision. Look 
at Felix, look at Agrippa. Felix said, “Go Thy way for this time, 
when I have a convenient season I will call for Thee.” See what 
Agrippa said: “/.Jmost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.” 
Look at Pilate-—all lost ; lost because of their indecision. His 
mind was thoroughly convinced that Jesus was the true Christ; he 
said, “I find no fault in Him,” but he hadn’t the courage to take 
his stand for Him. Thousands have gone down to the caverns of 
death for want of courage. My friends, let us look this question in 
the face. If there is anything at all in the religion of Christ, give 
everything for it. If there is nothing in it—if it is a myth, if our 
mothers who have prayed over us have been deceived, if the pray- 
ing people of the last eighteen hundred years have been deluded— 
let us find it out. The quicker the better. Imfthere is nothing in the 
religion of Christ, let us throw it over and eat, drink, and be merry, for 
time will soon be gone. If there is no devil to deceive us; no hell to 
receive us; if Christianity is a sham, let us come out like men and 
say so. I hope to live to see the time when there will only be two 
classes in this world —Christians and infidels—-those who take 
their stand bravely for Him and those who take their stand against 
Him. This idea of men standing still and saying, “ Well, I don’t 


4c6 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


know but I think there must be something in it,” is absurd. If 
there is anything in it, there is everything in it. Ifthe Bible of 
our mothers is not true, let us burn it. Is there one in this audi- 
ence willing to say and do this? If it isa myth, why spend so 
much money in publishing it? Why send out millions of Bibles to 
the nations of the earth? Let us destroy it if it is false, and all 
those institutions giving the Gospel to the world. What is the 
use of all this waste of money? Are we mad, are we lunatics 
who have been deluded? Let us burn the book and send upa 
shout over its ashes. ‘“‘ There is no God; there is no hell; there is 
no Heaven; there is no hereafter. When men die, they die like 
dogs in the street!” But, my friends, if it is true—if Heaven, if a 
hereafter, if the Bible is true, let us come out boldly, like men, for 
Christ. Let us take our stand, and not be ashamed of the Gospel 
of Jesus Christ. Why, it seems to me a question that ought to be 
settled in this nineteenth century easy enough, whether you are for 
or against Him or not. Why, if Baal be God, follow him; but if 
the Lord be God, follow Him. If there is no truth in the religion 
of Jesus Christ, you may as well tear down all your churches, de- 
stroy your hospitals, your blind asylums. It’s a waste of money to 
build them. Baalites don’t build blind asylums, don’t build hos- 
pitals, don’t build orphan asylums. 

If there hadn’t been any Christians in the world, there would have 
been no charitable institutions. If it hadn’t been for Christianity 
you would have had no praying mothers. Is it true that their prayers 
have exercised a pernicious influence? Is it true that a boy who 
had a praying father and mother, or a good teacher, is no better off 
than a boy who has been brought up amid blasphemy and infamy? 
Is it true? It must be either one way or the other. Did bad men 
write the Bible? Certainly not, or they wouldn’t have consigned 
themselves to eternal perdition. The very fact that the Bible has 
lived and grown during these eighteen hundred years is a strong 
proof that it came from God. Men have tried to put it out of the 
world; they have tried to burn it out of the world, but they have 
failed. It has come down to us—down these eighteen hundred 
years amid persecution, and now we are ina land where it is open 
to all,and no man need be without one. What put it into the minds 
of those men to give money liberally to print and circulate this 
book? Bad men wouldn't dothis. ‘This is a question that, it seems 
to me, could be decided to-night. If it is not good, then take your 


a ee oe ea 


rd. If 
ible of 

s audi- 
end so 
bles to 
and all 
is the 
unatics 
nd up a 
there is 
die like 
ven, if a 
men, for 
> Gospel 
ht to be 
u are for 
1; but if 
. religion 
ches, de- 
noney to 
uild hos- 


puld have 
ristianity 
ir prayers 
boy who 
better off 
infamy ? 
bad men 
onsigned 
Bible has 
a strong 
ut of the 
hey have 
hundred 
it is open 
he minds 
late this 
, it seems 
take your 


Aone 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD. 407 


stand. Ifthe Lord be God, follow Him; but if God be Baal, then 
follow him. Some one asked Alexander how he conquered the 
world, and he replied that he conquered it by not delaying. If you 
want to conquer the devil you must not delay—uccept eternal life 
as a gift. 

Let us take the surroundings of this text. We are told that 
Elijah stood before Ahab and told him, because of the evil deeds of 
Israei and the king, there would no rain come upon the land for 
three years and a half. After that Elijah went off to Brook Cherith, 
where he was fed by the ravens, after which he went to Zarephath, 
and there dwelt with a poor widow for months and months. Three 
years and a half rolled away, and not one drop of rain or dew had come 
from Heaven. Probably when Elijah told the king there would be 
no rain he laughed at him. The idea that he should have the key 
of Heaven! He scouted the very idea at first. But after a little it 
became a very serious matter. The brooks began to dry up, the 
cattle could not get water, the crops failed the first year, the next 
year they were worse, the third year they were even a worse failure, 
and the people began to flee out of his kingdom to get food, and 
yet they did not call upon Elijah’s God. They had four hundred 
and fifty prophets of Baal and four hundred prophets of the groves, 
and yet all their prayers did not bring rain. Why did they ask God 
for rain? Baal was not an answerer of prayer. The devil never 
answers prayer. If prayer has ever been answered, it has been an- 
swered by the God of our fathers, by the God of our mothers. After 
Elijah had been gone three and a half years he returns and meets 
Obadiah, the governor of the king’s house, and Ahab says: “You 
go down that way and I'll go down this way, and see if we can’t dis- 
cover water.” They hadn’t been separated long when Obadiah meets 
Elijah and asks him to cometothe king. The prophet tells him to go 
and say to Ahab, “ Elijah is here. But Obadiah don’t want to leave 
him. If I lose sight of you this time, when the king: knows you have 
stepped through my lands it may cost me my life. Don’t you know 
l’ve been a servant of the true God all the time, and I’ve had a 
hundred of the prophets of the Lord ina cave? If you don’t come 
I will lose my life.” Elijah tells him to go and bring Ahab, and 
instead of Elijah going to Ahab, Ahab comes to him. Whenever the 
king comes he says, “ Art thou he that troubleth Israel?”” That is 
the way with men; they bring down the wrath of God upon them- 
selves and then blame God’s people. A great many people are blam- 


» 


pt 


408 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAY\'ERS, 


ing Ged for these hard times. Look on the millions and millions of 
money spent for whiskey. Why, it is about time for faminc to strike 
the land. If men had millions of money it wouldn’t be long before 
all the manhood would be struck out of them. Now, the people 
of Israel had gone over to Baal; they had forgetten the God that 
brought them out of Egypt, the God of Jacob and Abraham, and 
of their fathers. ‘“ Now,” says Elijah, “let’s have this settled. 
Let some of your people make an offering to their god on Mount 
Carmel, and I will make an offering to my God, and the God that 
answers by fire will be the God.” The king agreed, and the day 
arrives. You can see a great stir among the people that day; they 
are moving up to Mount Carmel. By and by Ahab comes up in 
his royal carriage, and those four hundred and fifty prophets of 
Baal, and four hundred prophets of the groves, made a great im- 
pression. Dressed in priestly robes, they move solemnly up that 
mountain. The king has swept along in his chariot, and perhaps 
passed by the poor priest Elijah, who comes slowly up, leaning upon 
his staff, his long, white hair streaming about his shoulders. Peo- 
ple don’t believe in sensations. That was one of the greatest sen- 
sations of their age. What is going to happen? No doubt the 
whole nation had been talking about this Elijah, and when he came 
to that mountain the crowd looked upon him as the man who held 
‘the key of Heaven. When he came up he addressed the children 
‘of Israel. Perhaps there were hundreds of thousands. “ How long 
halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow Him; 
‘but if he be Baal, then follow him; and the people answered not 
aword.” These eight hundred and fifty prophets made a great im- 
pression upon them, and the king was afraid, too. These people are 
just like a great many now; they are afraid to go into the inquiry- 
room for what people will say. If they do go in, they get behind a 
post, so that they can’t be seen. They are afraid the people in the 
store will find it out and make fun of them. Moral courage is 
wanted by them, as it was wanted by those people. How many 
among us have rot the moral courage to come out for the God of 
their mothers? They know these black-hearted hypocrites around 
them are not to be believed. They know these men who scoff at 
their religion are not their friends, while their mothers will do every- 
thing for them. The truest friends we can have are those who be 
lieve in Christ. “And the people answered not aword. Then said 
Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of the Lord 


arse Sie hee ee ale Meg 


S. 


illions of 
to strike 
ng before 
ie people 
God that 
ham, and 
s settled. 
yn Mount 
God that 
i the day 
day ; they 
mes up in 
ophets of 
great im- 
ly up that 
ad perhaps 
aning upon 
ders. Peo- 
reatest sen- 
, doubt the 
1en he came 
n who held 
he children 
“ How long 
ollow Him: 
swered not 
a great im- 
se people are 
he inquiry- 
ret behind a 
eople in the 
courage 1s 
How many 
the God of 
rites around 
vho scoff at 
ill do every- 
ose who be 
Then said 
of the Lord 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD, 4°9 


but Baal’s prophets are four hundred and fifty men. Let them, 
therefore, give us two bullocks; and let them choose one bullock 
for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no 
fire under it; and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, 
and put no fire under it. And call ye on the name of your god, 
and I will call on the name of the Lord; and the God that answer- 
eth by fire let him be God. And all the people answered and said, 
It is well spoken.” “Yes, sir, that’s right. We'll stand by that de- 
cision.” They built an altar and laid their bullock on it, and began to 
cry to Baal, “O Baal! O Baal! Baal! Baal!” No answer. They cry 
louder and louder, but no answercomes. They pray from morning till 
noon, but notasound. Elijah says, ‘‘ Louder; you must pray louder. 
He must be on a journey. He must be asleep; he must be ona 
journey orasleep.” They cry louder and louder. Some people say it 
don’t matter what a man believes so long as he is in earnest. These 
men were terribly in earnest. No Methodists shout as they did. 
They cry as loud as their voices will let them, but no answer. 
They take their knives and cut themselves in their earnestness. 
Look at those four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal, and 
four hundred prophets of the grove, all covered with blood as 
they cry out in their agony. They have no God. Young man, 
who is your master? Whomdo y : serve? If you are serving 
Baal, I tell you if ever you get into trouble he will not answer you. 
No answer came. Three o'clock came, the hour for the evening 
sacrifice, and Elijah prepared his altar. He wou’. have nothing to 
do with the altar of Baal. He merely took twelve stones, repre- 
senting the twelve tribes of Israel, and built his altar, and laid his 
bullock on. No doubt some skeptic said he had some fire concealed 
in his garment, for he digs a trench all around it to hold water. 
Then he tells them to bring four barrels of water, and empties them 
over his sacrifice. Four more barrels are brought and thrown on 
the bullock, making eight, and then four barrels more are added, 
making twelve in all. Then there lies that bullock, dripping with 
water, and Elijah comes forward. Every ear and eye is open. 
Those bleeding Baalites look at him. What is going to be the end 
of it? He comes forward, calm as a summer evening. He prays 
to the God of Isaac and Abraham—when, behold, look! look! down 
it comes—fire from. the very throne of God and consumed the wood, 
and the stones, ana the sacrifice, and the people cry, “ The Lord is 
the God.” The question is decided. The God that answereth by 


410 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


fire is the God of man. My friends, who is your God now? The 
God who answers prayer, or have you got no God? 

I can imagine some of you saying, “If I had been on Mount 
Carmel and seen that, I would have believed that.” But I will tell 
you of a mount on which occurred another scene. That was a won- 
derful scene, but it does not compare with the scene on Calvary, 
Look there! God’s own beloved Son hanging between two thieves 
and crying, “ Father, forgive them, for they know not what they 
do.” Talk about wonderful things. This has been the wonccr of 
ages. A man once gave me a book of wonderful things. I sawa 
good many wonders in it, but I did not see anything so wonderfu 
in it as the story of the cross. My friends, see His expiring look; 
see what happened. The very rocks were rent; the walls of the 
temple were rent; and all nature owned its God. The sun veiled 
its face and darkness fell over the earth when the Son of Man ex- 
pired on Mount Calvary. Where can you find a more wonderful 
sight than this? Those Israelites lived on the other side of the 
cross; we live on this side of it. If a man wants proof of His 
Gospel, look around this assembly. See men who thirty days ago 
were slaves, bound hand and foot to some hellish passion which was 
drawing them to hell. What a transformation there is, All things 
seem changed to them. They have got a new naiure. Is not this 
the power of God? Said a young convert to me to-day: “It seems 
as if we were living in the days of miracles, and the Son of God is 
coming down and giving men complete victory over lusts and pas- 
sions.” That is what the Son of God does for men, and yet, with 
all the proofs before their eyes, men are undecided. 

What is it that keeps you from your decision? I wish I had time 
to tell you many of the reasons. Hundreds of thousands of men 
are thoroughly convinced, but they lack moral courage to come out 
and confess their sins. Others are being led captive by some sin. 
They have got some darling sin, and as long as they hold on to it 
there is no hope. A man, the other day, said he would like to be- 
‘come a Christian, but he had a bet upon the election, and he 
wanted that settled first. He did not think that he might die be- 
fore that was decided. Eternity is drawing on. Suppose we die 
without God, without hope, without everlasting life; it seems to 
me it would have been better never to have been born. My friends, 
I ask you, why not come out like men? Say, “Cost what it will, 1 
will accept Jesus.’ Now, have moral courage. Come. How many 


S. 
w? The 


n Mount 
I will tell 
‘as a Won- 
n Calvary. 
vo thieves 
what they 
wonccr of 
I saw a 
wonderfui 
iring look; 
alls of the 
sun veiled 
of Man ex- 
> wonderful 
side of the 
‘oof of His 
ty days ago 
n which was 
All things 
Ts not this 
; “It seems 
n of God is 
ts and pas- 
d yet, with 


T had time 
nds of men 
to come out 
by some sin. 

old on to it 
d like to be- 
ion, and he 

ight die be- 
bpose we die 
it seems to 

My friends, 
hat it will, I 


How many 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD, 4It 


4 ie thoroughly convinced in your minds that you ought to 
aes aio Now, just ask yourselves the question, “What 
ers me; what stands in my way?” Ican imagine sor f 
looking behind you to see how the one sitting here tole “If he 
seems serious, you look serious; if he laughs, you will 1 ¢ } et 
come to the conclusion that you'll not accept Him Sk sgt 
ey pal ger Rete he de ee a stand their jeers. Is not 
Lord, cost what it will. Say, “By ‘ke a Ae a as ie me 
Him from this hour.” Turn your bez Dae ca 
faces toward Heaven, and it will i oy AS adi at eo) ae 
Have you ever seen a man who accepted Cheist: re ae You 
can not find a man who has changed masters ae fe) é 
Christ who has regretted it. This is one of the stron ay on of 
Christianity. Those who have never followed Him Gal ane Hi 
I Have ep hundreds dying, when in the army and Wess Alin. 
cee I never saw a man who died conscious but who regretted if 
e ha not lived a Christian life. My friends, if you i i 
to-night, it will be the best hour of your life. Let fils ce oa 
best night of your lives. Let me bring this to your ae if a 
are lost it will be because you do not decide. ‘ How fies hi a 
ca ee If the Lord be Ged, follow Him: ce 

aal, then follow him.” How many men in this as 
sh aes te de sembly want to 
Se fi ‘ei PO who want to take their stand on the 


SL OE ee 


=" 


ana cage ora aoe 


XLIX. 


PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF POWER IN THE 
CHURCH. 


ae 


NEHEMIAH viii, 10: “ The joy of the Lord is your strength.” 


OW, p aise is astep in advance of thanksgiving. If you re. 
ceive blessings from a man, you may thank him, yet you may 
not praise him. Now, praise is not only speaking to the 

Lord on our own account, but it is praising Him for what He has 

done for others. We have had a great many prayers going up in 

this Tabernacle during the past eight weeks for others, and hundreds, 
and I may say thousands of them have been answered. We should 
give praise for this. We have in our churches a great deal of prayer, 
but I think it would be a good thing if we had a praise-mecting 
occasionally. If we could only get people to praise God for what 

He has done, it would be a good deal better than asking Him con- 

tinually for something. We like to have our children ask us for 

things; but if they keep on asking without ever giving thanks, we 
become discouraged. Bear this in mind: God expects us to praise 

Him for what He has done; and, if our heart is full of gratitude ard 

we will praise the Lord, He will do a great deal more for us. And 

I want to say here, a praise church is what the Lord wants now. A 

cold church—a church that is full of formalism—will never be full 

of praise; but a church that is full of joy, full of gladness, is prais- 
ing God all the time. ‘ Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation, 
and uphold me with Thy free spirit, then will I teach transgressors 

Thy ways.” It seems to me that if we had that text all over 

Christendom at the present time, the ministers holding it up to the 

people till the Church is filled with peace, till it is filled with rest, 

till it is filled with gladness, with promise—it seems to me that we 
would then see a revival as lasting as eternity itself. Now, as I said 
one night here before, the world is after the best thing. If a man 
wants tc buy a horse, he goes where he can get the best horse for 
(412) 


N THE 


eth,” 


If you re- 
yet you may 
aking to the 
what He has 
; going up in 
and hundreds, 

We should 
jeal of prayer, 
praise-mecting 
God for what 
ing Him con- 
en ask us for 
ng thanks, we 
s us to praise 

gratitude and 
b for us. And 
ants now. A 
never be full 
dness, is prais- 
hy salvation, 
transgressors 
text all ove! 
g it up to the 
lled with rest, 
o me that we 

Now, as I said 

g. If a man 

best horse fot 


PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF POWER IN THE CHURCH, § 413 


his money. If a woman ,. to get a dress, she'll hunt till she 
gets the very best she can. V _, I’ve heard of a woman going for 
half a day from store to store te get the best piece of ribbon she 
could. It’s a universal law; the world wants to get the very best 
thing it can. Now, if we can show the world that the religion of 
Jesus Christ is the best thing in it, the world will take it; but if we 
are despondent or cast down, look gloomy, are not full of praise, if 
we are not full of joy, the world will not want it. We will only drive 
men out of the kingdom of God. If we have a praise church we 
will have people converted, I don’t care where it is, what part of 
the world it’s in, if we have a praise church we'll have a successful 
Christianity. 

A young man went down toa church in the East, the pastor of 
which had become an old man. The people got asleep. The new 
man came and tried to rouse them, but it was of no use. He 
preached and preached, and tried to get them aroused and to goto 
the prayer-meetings, but he could not. One night, he said: “ To- 
night we'll have no prayer-meeting.” They wondered what it 
meant—the idea that this young minister should do away with this 
prayer-meeting which they had had for fifty years. They were 
astonished. ‘“ But,” said he, ‘we will have a praise-meeting.. At 
the close of the meeting one old elder came to another one. 
“What’s he going to give up the prayer-meeting for? Has he 
consulted you about it?” “No.” “Well,” replied the former, 
“that’s a very serious matter; what is the meaning of a praise- 
meeting?” They had been going along without any praise-meet- 
ing, and they did not know what a praise-meeting meant. They 
went to ask him, but he wouldn't tell them, but said to wait till 
Friday night and then they would see. They began to talk about 
it, and out of curiosity a great many came to see what it was. The 
young minister read some of those good old psalms. ‘“ Now,” said 
he, “if you can think of anything in your past life that you have 
received from God, praise God for it. You have been asking God 
for everything, and it chills the church through. Now, if you can 
think of any benefits you have received, praise God for them.” 
They began to think, and they found they had a good many things 
to praise God for. One man got up and praised God for a praying 
mother who had led him to Christ. Another man got up and 


praised God for the Bible. Another praised God for this and that, 


and the result was that when the meeting was over, instead of get- 


i> ant 


4°4 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


ting up and walking out, they stopped and shook hands with one 
another and spoke to one another, and said, “I believe we are 
going to have a revival.” My friends, if we don’t thank God for 
what He has done for us, and be full of joy and gladness, the world 
wili not come to Christ. Would to God that we had a praise 
church all over Christendom. Let Christ’s name be in the churches, 
Let them praise Him for what He has done, and the world will 
come. Let the world know that that is the name in which we trust, 
that that is the name we speak well of, and when His disciples 
begin to do this, then the world will realize the goodness of His 
Gospel. Thank God, the people of Chicago begin to talk about 
Christ, and if we can get men to talk about Christ in the steam 
cars, in the places of business, in the horse cars, in the streets—if 
we can get them to talk about Christ and His loveliness, it won't 
be long before thousands are converted ina day. May God wake up 
Christians to praise Him for what He has done. Did you ever 
stop to think that the heart of man is the only thing that does not 
praise the Lord ? 

The Heavens declare His glory, the sun praises Him, the moon 
and stars praise Him; as the rain falls from Heaven it praises God; 
all nature praises God—the very dumb creatures give Him praise, 
and it is only the heart of man that won’t praise Him. Oh, how 
deceitful is the heart of man. He who gets the most temporal 
blessings is the man that praises God least. A man may be thank- 
ful for those blessings, yet he does not praise Him. In fact, I don’t 
believe that any man can praise God till he is born of God. You 
may be thankful for His blessings, but praising Him is another 
thing; praise is the occupation of Heaven. Those people who don't 
praise God here, I don’t know what they will do when they get 
into Heaven; they wili be strangely out of place there, because 
that is the occupation of Heaven. The redeemed praise Him all the 
time. There was a little boy converted and he was full of praise. 
When God converts a boy or man his heart is full of joy—can't help 
praising. His father was a professed Christian. The boy wondered 
why he didn’t talk about Christ, and didn't go down to the special 
meetings. One day, as the father was reading the papers, the boy 
came to him and put his hand on his shoulder, and said, “ Why 
don’t you praise God? Why don’t you sing about Christ? Why 
don’t you go down to those meetings that are being held?” The 
father opened his eyes and looked at him, and said, gruffly, “I am 


SOW’ t ose = 


cRS, 


s with one 

sve we are 

nk God for 

, the world 

id a praise 

ie churches, 
- world will 
ch we trust, 
lis disciples 
Iness of His 
talk about 
1 the steam 
: streets—if 
ss, it won't 
10d wake up 
id you ever 
hat does not 


m, the moon 
praises God, 
Him praise, 
Oh, how 
ost temporal 
ay be thank- 
fact, I don’t 
f God. You 
is another 
ble who don't 
en they get 
ere, because 
e Him all the 
ull of praise. 
y—can't help 
oy wondered 
o the special 
ers, the boy 
said, “ Why 
hrist ? Why 
eld?” The 
uffly, “T am 


PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF TOWER IN THE CHURCH. 4:8 
not carried away with any of those doctrines. I am established.” 
A few days after they were out getting a load of wood. They put 
it on the cart. The father and the boy got on top of the load and 
tried to get the horse to go. They used the whip, but the horse 
wouldn't move. They got off and tried to roll the wagon along, 
but they could neither move wagon nor horse. “I wonder what’s 
the matter?” said the father. ‘ He’s established,” replied the boy. 
You may laugh at that, but this is the way with a good many 
Christians. The reason is, they are not born of God, or else they 
have got so far away that they don’t exactly know where they are. 
Now, if we are really born of God, if our heart is really filled with 
the Spirit of God, we can not help praising Him. I pity the Chris- 
tian that has no praise in his heart. You are living a life of formal- 
ism—you are living on doctrines. You haven’t got Christ in your 
soul if you don’t praise Him. Now, that ought to be the text. 
Ask yourself have you praised God this peaceful day of thanks- 
giving. You say, “Oh, yes, I've thanked Him.” But have you 
spoken well of Christ? Have you spoken well of what He has 
done? Have you sang, “ Hallelujah! hallelujah!” for these six 
months or a year, for this is what they say in Heaven. Ifa man is 
born of God, he can’t help praising God. Fill this building with 
young converts and see how they will sing, 


“Oh! happy day, happy day, 
When Jesus washed my sins away.’ 


They can not hear such songs without praising God. The 
first impulse of a young convert is to praise, and if he don’t 
feel like praising the God who saved him, it is a true sign 
that he hasn't been converted by the grace of God; he has 
been born to some creed or proyession, some tnan or some 
church, and not to the loving Son of God, because when 
Christ comes into the heart He brings joy. Now, take a servant of 
the devil, he don’t praise. Fill this building full of unregenerated 
men, and try to get them to sing praises. You can’t do it; their 
mouths are sealed; there is no praise in their heart. But you get 
this building filled with men with the Lord Jesus Christ in their 
hearts, they can not help praising Him. How can a man whose 
master is the devil praise Him? Have you ever heard a man rejoice 
in his service? I never heard one. 

Now a great many of you say, “It is all very well for him to 


i 


FE oe Ee 


416 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


stand up there and talk about praise. If I was in a comfortable 
condition, good health, and everything I wanted like a good many 
others I see, I would praise God.” It is circumstances with a good 
many, but I have found people who were poor in this world’s goods, 
in bad health, and yet continually praising God. I can take you to 
a poor, burdened one who has not been off her bed for ten years, 
and yet she praises Him more than hundreds of thousands of Chris- 
tians. Her chamber seems to be just the ante-room of Heaven. It 
seems as if that woman had just all the secrets of Heaven. Her 
soul is full of the love of God, full of gladness, and she is poor. 
Like Elijah at the brook Cherith, she is just fed by the Almighty ; 
God provides for all her wants. Any man that knows God can 
trust Him and praise Him. He knows that the Word of God is 
true, for he knows that He will care for him. Hewhocares for the 
lilies of the field—He, without whose knowledge not a sparrow 
can fall to the ground—He who knows every hair of our heads— 
any man who knows this, can not he rejoice? Is there any one 
here who, although he is poor, can find no reason to praise God? 
Some of those Christians who are so poor, but who have the love 
of God, would not give up their place for that of princes. Now 
my experience is that a man who lives nearest to God, praises Him 
most, whether he is rich or poor. The nearer he gets to Heaven 
the more he praises Him. The man who is furthest from God 
praises Him least. Now, if there is any Christian here who can not 
praise God, there is something between you and God, and take my 
advice and have it removed before you go to bed to-night. What 
the world wants is joyful Christianity, and if we have not that, we 
are not going to see a saved world. A backslider can not see God. 
Fill this building with backsliders and see if they will sing praises, 
That prodigal off there in that foreign land would sing strangely, 
“ Rock of Ages, cleft for me.” Men astray from God can not praise. 
Do you think that Peter, when he had denied Christ, could sing a 
song of praise to Him? The moment a man turns his back on God 
there is no praise. I think that is the reason there are so many 
quartette choirs in the churches. The people can not sing them- 
selves, and they have to hire people to sing for them, giving them 
four or five thousand dollars per year to sing the songs of praises. 
Look at acchurch filied with the children of God. The momenta 
minister gives out the song, their hearts burst with praise; they 
don’t want anybody to sing for them. . 


of | 
the 


suns 
God 
how 
lock 
But, 
back 
wher 
Now 
only 
churc 
Up, al 
praise 
when 


fortable 
»d many 
1 a good 
*s goods, 
‘e you to 
mn years, 
of Chris- 
aven. It 
en. Her 
2 is poor. 
\Imighty ; 
; God can 
of God is 
res for the 
a sparrow 
ir heads— 
e any one 
raise God? 
ye the love 
ces. Now 
yraises Him 
to Heaven 
from God 
ho can not 
nd take my 
pht. What 
ot that, we 
ot see God. 
ing praises. 
io strangely, 
not praise. 
ould sing a 
ack on God 
re so many 
sing them- 
biving them 
of praiscs. 
moment a 
braise ; they 


PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF POWER IN Tilt, CHURCH, 417 


If they can’t sing with their mouths, songs will bubble out of 
their hearts; but when a man is backslidden he wants artistic 
sounds—wants fine music to touch his ears—don’t want it to affect 
his heart. Now, Israel could not sing there in Egypt when they 
were making bricks with straw; they could not sing with the crack 
of the slave-driver’s whip in their ears; but when they got through 
the Red Sea they struck up the song of redemption, and when a 
man is redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, he can not 
help praising God. Do you know I believe the devil is very wise 
in this. He don’t want a singing church; he don’t want a praise 
church. If we have a praise church—a singing church—he knows 
there will be a good many joining us. He knows that is the native 
air of Heaven; and the moment a child is born in Heaven he 
catches the enthusiasm. I am told that once during a campaign 
the general of an army forbade the playing of the soldiers’ native 
airs, because it made them so homesick and despondent that they 
could not fight. So when we hear the songs of Zion we are weaned 
from this world and want to go home. We feel that we are pil- 
grims and strangers here and we have a better world yonder. 

Now, how is it that the Church does not praise God more? I tell 
you I think it is very plain. The trouble is, we have got settled 
down and gone to sleep. I never heard of a bird that sung in its 
nest, and I don’t believe that any man ever did, and when a church 
gets settled down it goes tosleep. It is when the bird is on the 
wing that it sings, and so it is when the church is up it sings songs 
of praise. And it can sing in the dark; a nightingale can sing in 
the dark. Paul and Silas in the darkness of that Philippian jail 
sung songs of praises. When they put them into that jail, Almighty 
God was with them. You know when joseph went down to Egypt 
how God was with him. When they put him in prison they had to 
lock God Almighty up with him, and Joseph sung songs of praise. 
But, my friends, if we are down in Egypt and have turned our 
backs on God and been taken captive, we are dumb. It is only 
when we have been true to God that we can sing in the darkness. 
Now, I am told that an English lark never sings when coming down; 
only when mounting up. That may be true or not; but when a 
church is coming down, it is not a praise church. When mounting 
up, and it knows it is coming nearer and nearer to God, it is full of 
praise. It can not help it. When the lark is mounting up, up, up— 
when it is nearly out of sight, so that you can scarcely see it, it sings 
27 


=a aan iaamee 
SOE ao eee nee ee 


= a a = . , 
fe ae - ——s nan aera “s er —— oo 
oS a hee SE a Ry My Ae ar a Apa eee eee gee ame ee Te 


418 MOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


sweetest. And so when the Christian is rising up near to Christ, so 
that you can not see him, he gives out the sweetest notes of praise 
from his heart. 

Now, I can imagiue some of you saying, “I have got a good 
many things going against me; I’ve got a good many reasons for 
not praising God.” I find there is no reason in the world why you 
should not praise God. If we have troubles, if we have sorrows or 
afflictions, we have brought them upon ourselves. They are only to 
wean us toGod. Every good gift we have had, from the cradle up, 
has come from God. If a man just stops to think what he has to 
praise God for, he will find there is enough to keep him singing 
praises for a week. As the flakes of snow come down from the 
heavens, He showers His blessings upon us, and if we praise Him 
abundantly for them He will bless us more abundantly. Now, there 
are people always praising. If vou are sick, it is like good medicine 
tosee them. Then there are otner people always looking on the dark 
side. There was a man converted here some years ago, and he was 
just full of praise. He was living in the light all the time. We might 
be in the darkness, but he was aiways in the light. He used to 
preface everything he said inthe meeting with “ Praise God.” One 
night he came to the meeting with his finger all bound up. He had 
cut it, and cut it pretty bad, too. Well, I wondered how he would 
praise God for this; but he got up and said, “I have cut my finger, 
but, praise God, I didn’t cut it off.” And so, if things go against 
you, just think they might be a good deal worse. A soldier who 
came from the war, always used to say he could tell when a Chris. 
tian addressed a soldier. One man would say, “ You lost your leg. 
Where did you lose it?”’’ ‘Inthe army.” ‘ What a pity you ever 
went into the war,” he would reply; “I feel sorry for you.” An- 
other would come along, “ You've lost an urm; have you been in 
the army?” “Yes.” “Well, that is a pity; but, bless God, you 
didn’t lose the other arm.” There was aman on the North Side, 
and I never came out of his house without praising God. He was 
deaf, he was dumb, blind, and had the lockjaw. He had a hole in 
his throat, and all the food he took was put through that hole. My 
friend, do you ever thank God for your senses? Do you ever thank 
God for your eyes, by which you can read His Word? Think of 
the three millions of people in this world who haven't any sight at 
all. Hundreds of thousands of them never saw the mother that 
gave them birth; never saw their own offspring; never saw nature 


hrist, so 
yf praise 


. a good 
asons for 

why you 
orrows OF 
re only to 
cradle up, 
he has to 
m singing 

1 from the 
raise Him 
Now, there 
d medicine 
yn the dark 
and he was 
. We might 
He used to 
God.” One 

He had 

bw he would 
t my finger, 
5 go against 

soldier who 
hen a Chris 
pst your leg. 
bity you ever 


ss God, you 
North Side, 
od. He was 
ad a hole in 
at hole. My 
bu ever thank 
? Think of 
any sight at 

mother that 


r Saw nature 


PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF POWER IN THE CHURCH. 419 
in all its glory; never saw that beautiful sun and all the stars. Do 
you ever praise God for the ears by which you can hear the voice 
of man, by which you hear the Gospel preached, by which you 
hear the songs of Zion? Did you ever praise Him for your 
hearing and for your reason? Go down to yonder mad-house; I 
never come out of it without feeling full of praise to God. There 
you will find fathers, and mothers, and children without the light 
of reason. Now, my friends, let us praise God we have a home in 
this Gospel land; let us praise God for this blessed Bible; let us 
praise God for the gift of His only Son; let us praise Him that He 
gave up that Son freely for us all; let us praise Him to-night for 


the Son of His love, and let us go out of this building with our 
hearts full of joy. 


L. 


WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THE LAW. 


DAN. v.27: ‘ TEKEL; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting,” 


HE history of this king, Belshazzar, is very short. Only one 
chapter tells us all we know about him. One short sight of 
his career is all we see. He just seems to burst upon the stage 

and then disappears. We are told that he gave a great feast, and at 
this feast he had a thousand of his lords, and they were drinking 
and praising the gods of silver, of gold, of brass, of iron, and of wood, 
out of the vessels which had been brought from the Temple at 
Jerusalem. As they were drinking out of these vessels of gold and 
silver from the house of God—-I don’t know but what it was at the 
midnight hour—all at once came forth the fingers of a man’s hand 
and began to write upon the wall of the hall. The king turns 
deathly pale, his knees shake together, and he trembles from head 
to foot. Perhaps if some one had told him the time was coming 
when he would be put into the balance and weighed, he would have 
laughed at him. But he knows the fatal hour has come, and that 
hand has written his doom in the words, “ Mene, mene, tekel, up- 
harsin.” He calls the wise men of his kingdom, and the man who 
can interpret this will be made the third ruler of his kingdom, and 
be clothed in scarlet, and have a chain about his neck. One after 
another tried, but no uncircumcised eye could make it out. He was 
greatly troubled. At last one was spoken of who had been able to 
interpret the dream of his father, Nebuchadnezzar. He was told if 
he would send for Daniel he might interpret the writing. And now 
the prophet came in and looked upon the handwriting, and told him 
how his father had gone against God, and how he, Belshazzar, had 
gone against the Lord of Heaven, and how his reign was finished. 
And this was the writing: “ Mene: God hath numbered thy king- 
dom and finished it; Tekel: Thou art weighed in the balances and 
art found wanting; Peres: thy kingdom is divided, and given to 
(420) 


LAW. 


{ wanting.” 


Only one 

sight of 

1 the stage 

ast, and at 

‘e drinking 

id of wood, 
Temple at 

of gold and 

- was at the 

man’s hand 

p king turns 

s from head 
was coming 
would have 
e, and that 
e, tekel, up- 
Ihe man who 
ingdom, and 

One after 

out. He was 

been able to 

e was told if 

_ And now 

and told him 

Ishazzar, had 

was finished: 

ed thy king- 

balances and 

and given to 


PNG AN NEL) PORTILLO PRN 


WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES UF THE LAW, 42t 


the Medes and Persians.” The trial is over, the verdict is rendered, 
and the sentence brought out. That very night the king was hurled 
from his throne. That very night the army of Darius came tearing 
down the streets, and you might have heard the clash of arms, 
shouts of war, and have seen the king’s blood mingling with the 
wine in that banquet hall. 

Now I want to call your attention to that word “tekel.’”’ We 
are weighed in the balance. Now you cavil at the Word of God ; 
you make light when all is going well in the hour of your pros- 
perity. But when the time of trial comes, and we are called into 
judgment, it will be altogether different. Suppose the sentence 
should come down from Heaven upon every man and woman in 
this Tabernacle to be weighed in the balance to-night, how would 
it be with you? Come, my friends, are you ready to be weighed 
to-night ? Not in our own scales, but in God’s balance. Suppose 
the scales were dropped now from the kingdom of God; are you 
ready to step into the balance and be weighed? Are you willing te 
be weighed by the law? I can imagine some of you saying, “I 
wouldn't be weighed by that law (meaning the decalogue) ; I don’t 
believe it.” Some men think we are away beyond the Mosaic law; 
we have got out of it. Why, Christ said in the fifth chapter of 
Matthew: “Think not that Iam come to destroy the law, or the 
prophets; Iam not come to destroy, but to fulfill.” “ Heaven and 
earth may pass away, but My law shall never pass away;” but not 
until Heaven and earth shall be removed will the Word of God be 
removed. Now the commandments that I read to you to-night 
are as binding as ever they have been. Many men say that we 
have no need of the commandments, only the sermon on the 
mount. ‘Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the 
prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill”” Now, my 
friends, are you ready to be weighed by the law of God—by that 
majestic law? What is the first commandment? “Thou shalt 
have no other gods but Me.” Are you ready to be weighed by 
this commandment? Now, the question is, have you fulfilled, or 
are you ready to fulfill all the requirements of this law? A great 
many people say if they keep the commandments they don’t need 
Christ. But have you kept them? I will admit if you keep the 
commandments you can be saved by them; but is there a man in 
this audience who can truly say that he has done this? Young 
lady, can you say: “I am ready to be weighed by the law to- 


a pe $2557; 


422 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


night?” Can you, young man? Now, suppose we have these 
commandments written upon pieces of iron. You know when you 
go intoa grocery store you see them taking a weight and putting 
it into the scales against what you have bought. Now, suppose 
the pieces of iron as weights, and the law of God written on them, 
Take this first commandment, “Thou shalt have no other god but 
Me,” upon one of the weights. Put it in one of the scales and just 
step on the other. ‘“ Thou art weighed in the balances.” Is your 
heart set upon God to-night? Have you no other idol? Do you 
love Him above father or mother, the wife of your bosom, your 
children, home or land, wealth or pleasure? Have you got another 
god before Him? If you have, surely you are not ready to step in 
and be weighed against that commandment, “ Thou shalt have no 
other god before Me.” That is the commandment of God, and it 
is binding to-night. Then take another. You will say there is no 
trouble about thisone. We might go off to other ages or other lands, 
and we can find people who worship idols, but we have none here. 
But how many evils have we in our hearts? Many a man says, 
“Give me money and I will give you Heaven; what care I for all 
the glories and treasures of Heaven; give me treasures here. I 
don’t care for Heaven; I want to be a successful business man.” 
They make money and business their god. Although they don’t 
make gods of silver and gold, they bow before them. There are 
more men who worship si!ver and gold in Chicago than any other 
god. But take another one: “Thou shalt not take the name of the 
Lord thy God in vain.” Is there a swearing man ready to put the 
weight into the scales and step in? Young man, have you been 
taking the name of the Lord in vain to-day? What does He say? 
“The Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in 
vain.” I don’t believe men would ever have been guilty of swear- 
ing unless God had told them not to. They don’t swear by their 
friends, by their fathers and mothers, by their wives, by their chil- 
dien; but because God has forbidden it, man wants to show how 
he despises His law. ‘Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord 
thy God in vain.” Blasphemer, go into the scales, and see how 
quick you will fly out. You will be like a feather in the balance. 
A great many men think there is nothing very serious in swearing; 
they don’t think there’s much wrong in it. Bear in mind that Hie 
sees something in it when He says, “ Thou shalt not take the name 
of the Lord thy God in vain.” You can not trifle with God. Some 


prett 
preacl 
the ap 
it and 


these 
n you 
utting 
ippose 
them. 
od but 
nd just 
[s your 
Do you 
m, your 
another 
step in 
have no 
d, and it 
are is no 
ier lands. 
yne here. 
nan says, 
I for all 
. here. I 
ess man.” 
hey don't 
There are 
any other 
hme of the 
o put the 
you been 
5 He sayt 
5 name in 
of swear- 
r by their 
their chil- 
show how 
the Lord 
H see how 
e balance. 
swearing } 
1 that lie 
z the name 
od. Some 


WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THE LAW? 423 

men say they never swear except when they get angry. Suppose 
you swear only once in six months, or a year—suppose you swear 
once in ten years, do you think God will hold you guiltless for ‘that 
one act? A man that swears once shows that his heart is rebellious 
to God. What are you going to do, blasphemer? If the balances 
were here, and God told you to step in, what would you do? 

But take the fourth commandment: “Remember the Sabbath 
day to keep it holy.”” Suppose you could see the law written over 
those walls, “ Remember to keep the Sabbath day holy,” could you 
say that you had observed it? Are you ready to be weighed by the 
weight, “ Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy?” Some of 
us may be professed Christians, but do we observe the Sabbath? 
If this country fail to keep the Sabbath holy, it will go the way of 
France, Mexico, and Spain. Every nation that gives up the Sab- 
bath must go down. It is only a question of time with them. 
Look, when the children of Israel refused to obey the injunctions 
of the Lord in regard to the cultivation of their land, how He took 
them into bondage and kept them for seventy years, to let them 
know that God’s law was not to be trampled under their feet. 
Are you guilty or innocent in regard to this law: ‘‘ Thou shalt keep 
the Sabbath day holy?””, When I was in France, in 1867, I could 
not tell one day from another. On Sunday stores were open; 
buildings were being erected the same as on other days. See 
how quick that country went down. Only a few years ago it 
stood abreast of other nations, it stood side by side almost 
with England. But it didn’t have any respect for the Sab- 
bath; it trampled God’s message under foot, and when the hour 
of battle came, God left them alone. My friends, every nation that 
tramples the Sabbath under its feet must go to ruin. Are you in- 
nocent or guilty? Do you keep the Sabbath day holy or not? I 
have been talking to those car conductors—and if there’s one class 
of men I pity more than another it is them—and they have to work 
on the Sabbath. Some of you are breaking this law by coming 
down here on Sunday in the cars. What will you do? Foot it—it 
will be better for you. I make a point of never allowing myself to 
break the Sabbath of any man. When I was in London—and it’s a 
pretty big city, you know—in my ignorance-I made arrangements to 
preach four times at different places one Sunday. After I had made 
the appointments I found I had to walk sixteen miles, and I walked 
it. and I slept that night with a clear conscience. I want no hack 


ee ee a 
SS ee == 
" — = or: — ~ 
2 - 


———— 


ee Se Soa 


cpeeonee a ssa — 
jr ae 


424 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


man to rise up in judgment against me. My friend:, if we want to 
help the Sabbath, let business men and Christians neve1 patronize 
cars on the Sabbath. I would hate to own stock in those horse-car 
companies, to be the means of taking the Sabbath from these men, 
and then have to answer for it at the day of judgment. No man 
can work seven days a week and save his soul. And the very best 
thing we have is being taken from these men by us Christians. Are 
you willing to step into the balance and be weighed against “ Thou 
shalt keep the Sabbath day holy?” 

Well, here is the fifth: “Honor thy father and mother.” Are 
you ready to be weighed against this? Have you honored them? 
Is there any one here to-night who is dishonoring father or mother? 
Now, I’ve lived nearly forty years, and I’ve learned one thing if I’ve 
learned nothing else: that no man or woman who treats disrespect- 
fully father or mother ever prospers. How many young ladies have 
married against their father’s wishes, and gone off and just made 
their own ruin. I never knew one case that did not turn out bad 
They brought ruin upon themselves. This isa commandment from 
Heaven: “Honor thy father and mother.” In the last days men 
shall be disobedient to parenis, void of natural affection, and it seems 
as if we were living in those days now. How many sons treat their 
mothers with contempt—make light of their entreaties. God says, 
“Honor thy father and mother.” If the balances were placed in 
‘this hall, would you be ready to step into them against this com- 
‘mandment? You may make light of it and laugh at it, but, young 
‘man, remember that God will hedge your way. No man shall suc- 
ceed that disobeys this commandment. But bear in mind, you are 
not going to be weighed only against this solitary commandment— 
every weight will be put in. 

“Thou shalt not kill.” Most of you say, ‘‘ That don’t touch me 
at all; I never kilicd any one; I’m no murderer.” Look at that 
sermon on the mount, which men think so much of. Look at it. 
Did you never ia your heart wish a man dead who had done you an 
injury? That’s murder. How are you? Innocent or guilty? If 
you have, you are a murderer at heart. Nuw, come, my friends, are 
you ready to be weighed against the law? Ah, if most of us were 
weighed t --night we would find this word written against us, 
“Tekel; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.” 

But let us take another, “Thou shalt not commit adultery.” I 
don’t know any sin that afflicts us like this. It is a very delicate 


S. 


‘want to 
patronize 
horse-car 
1ese men, 

No man 
very best 
ians. Are 
ist “ Thou 


ier.” Are 
red them: 
yr mother? 
ning if I’ve 
disrespect- 
ladies have 
_ just made 
n out bad 
iment from 
t days men 
und it seems 
; treat their 
God says, 
e placed in 
t this com- 
but, young 
n shall suc- 
ind, you are 
andment— 


‘t touch me 
ook at that 
Look at it. 
Hone you atl 
guilty? If 

friends, are 
t of us were 

against gid 

d wanting. 
ultery.” I 
ery delicate 


WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THE LAW", 425 


subject to approach, but I never preach without being compelled to 
touch upon it. Young men among us are being bound hand and 
foot with this evil. Young men, hear this law to-night, “Thou 
shalt not commit adultery.” Are you guilty even in thought? 
How many men have come into this Tabernacle but they are tied 
hand and foot, but who have been in the halls of vice, and some 
harlot, whose feet are fastened in hell, clings to him, and says, “ If 
you give me up, I will expose you.” Can you step on the scales 
and take that harlot with you? Thou shalt not commit adultery.” 
You may think that no one knows your doings; you may think 
that they are all concealed, but God knows it. He that covers his 
sins shall not prosper. Out with it to-night. Confess it to vour 
God. Ask Him to snap the fetters that bind you to this sin, ask 
Him to give you victory over your passions, and shake yourself like 
Samson, and say, “ By the grace of God I will not go down to hell 
with a harlot,” and God will give you power. “Thou shalt not 
commit adultery.” As I said the other night, I don’t know a 
quicker way to hell. How many men have by their lecherous life 
broken their mothers’ hearts, and gone down to their grave rotten, 
leaving the effect of sin to posierity ! 

Well, let us take up the next, “Thou shalt not steal.” How 
many have been stealing to-day? I may be speaking to some clerk, 
who, perhaps, to-day has taken five cents out of his employer’s 
drawer to buy a cigar; perhaps he took ten cents to get a shave, 
and thinks he will put it back to-morrow; no one will ever know it. 
If you have taken a penny, you area thief. Do you ever think how 
those little stealings may bring you to ruin? Let an employer find 
it out. Ifhe don’t take you into the courts, he will discharge you. 
Your hopes will be blasted, and it will be hard work to get up again. 
Whatever condition you are in, do not take a cent that does not 
belong to you. Rather than steal, go up to Heaven in poverty—go 
up to Heaven from the poor-house—and be honest rather than go 
through the world in a gilded chariot of stolen riches. A man who 
takes money that does not belong to him, never gets any comfort. 
He never has any pleasure, for he has a guilty conscience. ‘Thou 
shalt not steal.” Are you ready to be weighed to-night in the 
balances ? 

Then let us take the ninth commandment, “Thou shalt not bear 
false witness against thy neighbor;” or, in other words, thou shalt 
not be guilty of lying. If you had a chance to make two or three 


ae 


ii ra i neem eran s 


=. eee nae 


Fs 


a 


426 MOOD 3"S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


hundred dollars, are you not willing to go into a court and lie to 
get it? “Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor,” 
Are you ready t« ..cp ito the balances against this ? 

Then take another, “Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's 
goods.” Are you innocent or guilty? How many times I used to 
covet that which belonged to other people before I was converted. 
I believe that is one of the greatest sins among us. My friends, 
how is it? Innocent or guilty? But suppose you are innocent of 
all these ten commandments, let us take that eleventh command- 
ment of Christ’s, “A new commandment I give unto you; thou 
shalt love one another.” My friends, how is it to-night? Is love 
reigning in your hearts? Do you love your neighbors? Do you 
try to do them good, or are you living a life of selfishness, merely 
for yourself? all 

Now, I can imagine that nearly every man or woman is saying to 
himself or herself, “If we are to be judged by these laws how are 
we going to be saved?’’ Every one of them has been broken by 
all people. The moral man is just as guilty as the rest. There is 
not a moralist in Chicago who, if he steps into those scales, can be 
saved except he has been born again. ‘Except a man be born 
again he can not see the kin, ‘om of God.” “Except ye repent ye 
shall all perish.” That is on one side of the scales, and he will sce 
on the other, ‘Except ye be converted ye shall not enter the 
kingdom of God.” I have heard a good many pharisees saying, 
“These meetings are reaching the drunkards, and gamblers, and 
harlots; they are doing good ;” but they don’t think they need these 
meetings. They are all right; they are moral men. ‘“ Except a 
man be born again he can not see the kingdom of God.” I don’t 
care how moral he is. Nicodemus was probably one of the most 
moral men of his day. He was a teacher of the law; yet Christ 
said: ‘“ Except a man be born again he can not see the kingdom of 
God.” I would a good deal rather preach to thieves, and drunk- 
ards, and vagabonds, than preach to self-righteous pharisees. You 
don’t have to preach to those men weeks and months to convince 
them that they are sinners. When a man learns that he has need 
of God, and that he is a sinner, it is very easy to reach him. But, 
my friends, the self-righteous pharisee needs salvation as much as 
any drunkard that walks the streets of Chicago. There is another 
class [ want to speak of. If I had time I would just like to take 
up the different classes in the city. That class is the rum-sellers. 


Witho 
man 

Weigh 
to be 


1 lie to 
shbor.” 


ghbor’s 
used to 
averted. 
friends, 
scent of 
mmand- 
yu; thou 
Is love 
Do you 
Sy merely 


saying to 
; how are 
yroken by 
There is 
les, can be 
n be born 
. repent ye 
he will sce 
enter the 
ees saying, 
blers, and 
need these 
‘Except a 
” JT don't 
f the most 
yet Christ 
kingdom of 
nd drunk- 
sees, You 
o convince 
te has need 
him. But, 
as much as 
is another 
ike to take 
rum-sellers. 


WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THE LAW. 427 
I'ut the rum-sellers in the balances. ‘They ignore God’s laws; but 
by and by He will say to them: ‘ Tekel,”’ “ Woe be to the man that 
put the bottle to his neighbor's lips.” My friends, I would rather 
have that right hand cut off before 1 would give the bottle to a man; 
I would rather have my right arm cut off than deal out death and 
damnation to my fellow-men. If there is a poor drunkard sum- 
moned into eternity to-night, weighed in the balances, what would 
he hear? “No drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of God.” I 
can see how he would reel and stagger when he heard that. ‘“ No 
drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of Heaven.” 

My friends, if you don’t repent of your sins and ask Him for 
mercy, there is no hope for you. Let me ask you to take this ques- 
tion home to yourself. If a summons should come at midnight to 
be weighed in the balances, what would become of your souls, because 
the law of God must be kept? Now, there are many of you only 
making professions. You belong to the First Methodist church, or 
you may be a member of a Baptist church, but are you ready to 
be weighed—ready to step into those scales? I think a great many 
would be found like those five foolish virgins. When the hour came 
they would be found with no oil in their lamps. If there is a per- 
son here to-night who has only an empty lamp, or is living on mere 
formalism, I beg of you to give it up. Give up that dead, cold, 
miserable lukewarmness. God will spit it out of His mouth. He 
will have none of it. Wake up. Some of you have almost gone 
to sleep while I have been trying to weigh you in the balances. 
God will weigh you, and then if you have not Christ, it will be 
“ Tekel.” 

I can imagine some of you saying: “I would just like Moody 
to put those tests to himself. I wonder what would become of 
him.” My dear friends, if God was to ask me I would tell Him, 
“Tam ready.” I don’t say this in any spirit of egotism, of sclf- 
righteousness, remember. If you ask me if I have broken the law 
of Moses, I would answer, “ Yes, sir.” Ask me if I have broken the 
commandments: “Yes, sir.” You may ask me then how I am 
ready to be weighed. If I step into the scales, the Son of God will 
step into the scales with me. I would not dare to go into them 
without Him. If I did, how quick the scales would go up. Ifa 
man has not got Christ, when the hour comes for him to be 
weighed, it will be “ Tekel, tekel, tekel.” Are you, my friend, ready 
to be weighed? Suppose I put the question to every man and 


428 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


woman in this audience. How quick many of them would begin te 
color up. Oh, my friends, if you haven’t got Him, get Him. May 
God open your eyes and your minds to receive Him before you leave 
this Tabernacle. Christ kept the law; Christ was the end of the 
law. If He had broken the law He would have had to die for © 
Himself; but He kept it, and we are enabled to be clothed in 
righteousness. My friends, it is the height of madness to go out 
of this hall to-night and run the risk of being called by God and 
have to answer without Him. Now is the day and hour to 
accept salvation, and then He will be with us. Then there will be 
no alarm with us. I pity those Christian people who are afraid of 
death. They need not be afraid of death if they have Him. When 
He is with us it is only a translation. We are absent from the 
body to be present with the Lord. Here is the Gospel of Jesus 
Christ. Will you be saved? If you do not, when by and by God 
summons you into these scales, it will be written over you, “ Tekel, 
tekel; thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.” 
My friends, what will you do? Remain as you are and be lost, or 
accept salvation and be saved? 


RS, 


1 begin te 
im. May 
you leave 
snd of the 
to die for 
clothed in 
to go out 
yy God and 
d hour to 
nere will be 
re afraid of 
lim. When 
nt from the 
el of Jesus 
and by God 
ou, “ Tekel, 
.\d wanting.” 
d be lost, or 


LI. 
THE EIGHT “I WILLS” OF CHRIST. 


W* very often say “I will” when we don’t mean to fulfill 
what we say ; but when we come tothe “I will” of Christ, 

He means to fulfill it; everything He has promised to do 
He is able and willing to accomplish, and He is going to do it. I 
can not find any passage in Scripture, in which He say's “1 will” do 
this, or “I will” dothat, but it will be done. The first “I will” I 
want to call your attention to occurs in Matthew xi. 28, “Come 
unto Me all ye that labor and I will give you rest. Take My yoke 
upon you and learn of Me, for 1 am meek and lowly in heart, and 
ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy and My 
burden is light.”” Now what is it that man wants more than rest ? 
What is it that the world is in pursuit of? What are all the men 
in Chicago after, if it isn’t rest? What do business men toil for, if 
it isn’t for rest? What do men spend their lives in hunting for 
wealth, if it is not for rest? But, my friends, that is not the 
way to get rest. A man can not find it in wealth; he can not fina 
it in pleasure. Take the pleasure-seekers of Chicago, and ask them 
if they have rest. They are like the waves of the sea, perpetually 
troubled. My friends, the man who is away from God never knows 
what rest is. You can see this in their faces—in the wrinkles of 
their brow. They don’t know what rest is. What does Christ say ? 
“Come unto Me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will 
give you rest.” It isn’t in the market for sale) How many 
men in Chicago would not gladly go up to the Board of Trade 
to-morrow morning and give thousands for it, if it was for sale? 
They would give thousands of dollars for it if they could buy 
it. But it ain’t for sale. If you get it you must take it as a 
gift from Him who came from Heaven to give it. The moment 
a man is willing to take it as a gift, it is his. There is one thing 
I noice, that a man goes in every direction, seeks every means, 
(429) 


Neer ramet ARID 


ARI ag HE 


430 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDCESSES AND PRAVEAS. 


tries every person for rest before he comes to the true Source 
He will try to get rest in the world, he will try to find it in business, 
in honor, in pleasure, in politics, but he don’t get it. You can not 
find one of these politicians who knows what rest is; you can not 
find one of those business men who knows what rest is unless he 
has Christ. Ask any man who is after the things of the world, if 
he really knows what rest is, and he will answer you, “No.” If you 
come to Christ He tells you, “I will” give it. I like this “I will;” 
He means it; and if you want rest, go to-night and say you are 
weary and your soul is seeking rest, and He will give it. He will 
give it without money and without price. Takeit. ‘“O man, thou 
hast destroyed thyself, but in Me is thine help.” In Him is your 
help, and in Him will you find rest. If there is a poor, mangled 
one here, come to Christ and confess to Him. Come to Christ and 
He will take your burden away and put it behind His back, and He 
will give that weary soul rest. Now just test it. Let every one 
who is weary and heavy laden come to Him. 

The next “I will” is in John, sixth chapter: “ Him that cometh 
tc Me I willin no wise cast out.” That is as broad as the world itself. 
It takes that man in the gallery yonder; it may be there is a poor, 
afflicted one hidden behind that post, it takes him; it just sweeps 
around this building, taking rich and poor alike-—‘ He that cometh 
to Me I will in no wise cast out.”” He is so anxious to save sinners 
He will take every one who comes. He will take those who are so 
full of sin that they are despised by all who know them; who have 
been rejected by their fathers and mothers, who have been cast off 
by the wives of their bosoms. He will take those who have sunk 
so low that upon them no eye of pity is cast. “ Him that cometh 
to Me I will in no wise cast out.” Now, why not take Him at Iis 
word? I remember a few years ago aman in Farwell Hall was 
greatly troubled about his soul. ‘ Now,” said I, “take that verse; 
what does the Lord mean when He says, ‘ Him that cometh to Me 
I will in no wise cast out ?’ When He says that, He means it.” The 
man replied, “I will just take Him at His word.” He started home, 
and while going over the Clark street bridge something whispered 
to him: ‘‘ How do you know but that is a wrong translation?” He 
was just laying right hold of it when this was whispered to him. 
The poor fellow didn’t sleep any that night. He was greatly 
troubled, but at last he made up his mind that he would just believe 
it, and when he got to the Lamb of God he would tell Him of it, 


LS. 


e Source 
business, 
u can not 
1 can not 
unless he 
> world, if 
~ Tteyou 
.¢T wills” 
ly you are 
He will 
man, thou 
m is your 
r, mangled 
Christ and 
ick, and He 
every one 


hat cometh 
vorld itself. 
‘e is a poor, 
just sweeps 
hat cometh 
bave sinners 
who are so 
; who have 
en cast off 
have sunk 
hat cometh 
Him at Iis 
ll Hall was 
that verse; 
eth to Me 
ANS it.’ The 
arted home, 
¢ whispered 
tion?” He 
red to him. 
as greatly 
just believe 
Him of it, 


THE EIGHT “I WILLS” OF CHRIST, 431 


and the devil left him. Now, my friends, just tak¢ it. Some men 
say: “I am not worthy to come.” I never knew a mai yet go to 
church that was worthy. He doesn’t save worthy men; He saves 
sinners. As a man said in the inquiry-room, He didn’t come to save 
make-believe sinners—painted sinners, but real sinners. A man don't 
want to draw his filthy rags of self-righteousness about him when 
he comes to Him. The only thing a sinner has that God wants is 
his sin. You need not bring your tears, your prayers, your good 
works, or deeds; you must come to Him as a sinner, and He will 
clothe you in a garment fit to come before Him. Now, the kings of 
this earth call around them the wealthy and influential men of their 
kingdom ; but when Christ came down here, He called the outcasts, 
the publicans, and sinners around Him. And that was the princi- 
pal fault the people found with Him. Those self-righteous Phari- 
sees were not going to associate with harlots and publicans. The 
principal charge against Him was: “ This man receiveth sinners and 
eateth with them.” Who would have such a man around him as 
John Bunyan, in his time. He, a Bedford tinker, why, he couldn't 
get inside one of the princely castles. I was very much amused 
when I was over on the other side. They had erected a monument 
to John Bunyan, and it was unveiled by lords and dukes and great 
men. Why, while he was on earth they wouldn't allow him 
inside the walls of their castles. Yet he was made one of the 
mightiest instruments in the spread of the Gospel; no book that 
has ever been written comes so near the Bible as John Bun. 
yan’s “ Pilgrim’s Progress.” And he was a poor Bedford tinker. 
So it is with God. He picks up some poor, lost tramp, and makes 
him an instrument to turn hundreds and thousands to Christ. It is 
a question whether, in all Chicago, there is a man who is exercising 
such an influence for good as this man Sawyer. Four years ago he 
was a tramp; he had been cast off by his own mother, by his own 
sisters, by his wife, and he hadn’t seen his own son for fifteen years. 
Then ine was a lost man—cast off by every one, but the Son of 
God stooped low enough to save him. I doubt, as I said before, 
whether there is a man who has so much influence as that man has 
to-day. ‘Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.” Is 
there some poor outcast, some poor tramp here? I've got a good 
message for you. May be you are hiding away behind that post. 
I've got a good message for you—the best message you ever heard: 
“Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.” Come all— 


432 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


just as you are. Don’t wait. He will take you as you sit, into His 
loving bosom; He will make you a champion ot the cross, and you 
will become an instrument in His hand to build up His kingdom. 
Thank God for such a book; thank God for such a Gospel; thank 
the God of Heaven for such a text: “ Him that cometh to Me I will 
in no wise cast out.” 

The next “I will” is found in Luke. We are told of a man who 
was full of leprosy; he was just rotten with it. Perhaps his fingers 
had rotted off; it might have been that his nose was eaten off. 
That is the way leprosy affects a man. Well, there is a man full 
of leprosy, and he comes to Christ just as he was. A good many 
people, if they had been in his place, would have waited till they 
got a little better before they came before Him; but this man 
wanted to get the leprosy away. If he had waited to sce if he got 
better, there would have been no sense in it. A man might as well, 
it he had a sick child, say, ‘“‘ When it gets better I will send for the 
doctor.” It is because your child is sick that you want the doctor. 
It was because this man had the leprosy that he wanted Christ. 
The leper came to Him and said: “ Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst 
make me clean.” There’s faith for you; and the Lord touched him, 
saying, “I will; be thou clean,” and away went the leprosy as if it 
had been struck by lightning. I have often wondered it he ever 
turned around to see where it had gone. No doubt, like ‘aaman, 
his flesh became as the flesh of a little child. He didn’t wait to sce 
whether the leprosy would improve, because he was conviiced it 
was growing worse and worse every day. So it is with you. You 
will never have a night so favorable for coming to Christ as this one. 
If you put off till to-morrow, your sins will have become more nu- 
merous. If you wait till Sunday next, a whole week’s sins will be 
built up upon those you have already. Therefore, the sooner you 
come, the fewer sins you will have to be forgiven. Come to Him 
to-night. If you say to Him, “ Lord, I am full of sin; Thou canst 
make me clean.” “Lord, I have a terrible temper; Thou canst 
make me clean.” ‘“ Lord, I have a deceitful heart; cleanse me, OQ 
God; give me a new heart, O God; give me power to overcome 
the flesh and the snares of the devil’ —if you come to Him witha 
sincere spirit, you will hear the voice, “I will; be thou clean.” It 
will be done. Do you think that the God who created this world 
out of nothing—who, by a breath, put life into the world—do you 
think that if He says, “ Thou wilt be clean,” you will not? A great 


At 


soeve 
also } 
don t 


yea ts 
his so 
don »@ 


to His 
nd you 
ngdom. 
- thank 
e Iwill 


an who 
; fingers 
ten off. 
man full 
id many 
till they 
his man 
if he got 
t as well, 
d for the 
1e doctor. 
.d Chirist. 
hou canst 
ched him, 
cy as if it 
ii he ever 
STaaman, 
vait to sce 
avirced it 
ou. You 


s this one. 
. more nu- 


ns will be 
ooner you 
e to Him 
hou canst 
hou canst 
ase me, O 
overcome 
im with a 
lean.” It 
this world 
\—do you 


>? A great 


at 


THE EIGHT “I WILLS" OF CHRIST, 433 


many people say, “If I become converted, I am afraid I will not 
hold out.” Why, don’t jou see that we can not serve God with 
our own strength? When you accept Him, He gives you strength to 
serve Him. When He has taken away the leprosy of sin, it is easy 
to live for Him—it is easy to serve Him. And I want to call your 
attention to the fact that even if you are bad, He don’t care. It 
may be that some one here has disgraced his or her father or 
mother; it may be they have disgraced every friend they ever had, 
and that they just despise themselves. Come to Him and He will 
cleanse you. It is to youl am speaking. He can save you to the 
utmost. 

The next “I will” I want to call your attention to is the “I 
will” of confession in Matthew: “ Whosoever, therefore, shall con- 
fess Me before men, him will I confess also before My Father which 
is in Heaven.” Let me say right here that this is the very verse 
up to which men in Chicago have come. Men come to me and 
say: “Do you mean to affirm, Mr. Moody, that I’ve got to make 
a public confession when I accept Christ; do you mean to say I've 
got to confess Him in my place of business, in my family; am 
I to let the whole world know I am on His side?” A great 
many are willing to accept Christ, but they are not willing to pub- 
lish it, to confess it. A great many are looking at the lions 
and the bears in the mountains. Now, my friends, the devil’s 
mountains are only made of smoke. Why, he can throw a straw 
into your path and make a mountain of it. He says to you: 
“You can not confess and pray to your family; why, you'll break 
down. You can not tell it to your shop-mate; he will laugh at 
you.” But when you accept Him you will have power to confess 
Him. He has said: “If any man will come after Me, let him deny 
himself, and take up his cross and follow Me.” It is the way to 
Heaven—by the way of the cross, and I believe in my soul that 
more men are stumbling upon this verse than upon any other. 
They are willing to do everything necessary except take up the 
cross and follow Him. Now let me read this verse again: “ Who- 
soever, therefore, shall confess Me before men, him will I confess 
also before My Father which is in Heaven.” When I was in Lon- 
don there was a leading doctor in that city, upwards of seventy 
years of age, wrote me a note to come and see him privately about 
his soui. He was living at a country seat a little way out of Lon- 


don, and he only came into town two or three times a weck. He 
28 


434 MOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


was wealthy and was nearly retired. I received the note right in 
the midst of the London work, and told him I could not see him. 
I received a note a day or two after from a member of his family 
urging me tocome. The letter said his wife had been praying for 
him for fifty years, and all the children had become Christians by 
her prayers. She had prayed for him all those years, but no im- 
pression had been made upon him. Upon his desk they had found 
the letter from me, and they came up to London to see what it 
meant, and I said I would see him. When we met, I asked him if 
he wanted to become a Christian, and he seemed every way willing, 
but when it came to confession to his family he halted. “I tell 
you,” said he, “I can not do that; my life has been such that I 
would not like to confess before my family.” ‘ Now there is the 
point; if you are not willing to confess Christ, He will not confess 
you; you can not be His disciple.” We talked for some time, and 
he accepted. I found while I had been in one room, the daughter 
and some friends, anxious forthe salvation of that aged father, 
were in the other room praying to God, and when he started 
out willing to go home and confess Christ, I cpened the door 
of the other room, not knowing the daughter was there, and the 
first words she said were, “Is my father saved?” “Yes, I think he 
is,’ I answered, and ran down to the front door and called him 
back. “ Your daughter is here,” I said; “this is the time to com. 
mence your confession.” The father, with tears trickling down his 
cheeks, embraced his child. “My dear daughter, I have accepted 
Christ,” and a great flood of light broke upon him at that confession, 
A great many here in Chicago are ashamed to come out and take 
their stand for Christ. If you want peace and joy, my friends, vou 
must be willing to confess. I am told that in China the height of 
a Chinaman’s ambition is to have his name put in the house of Con- 
fucius. He must have performed some great act of valor, or done 
the State some great service before he can have his name there. 
That is the highest point of a Chinaman’s ambition. It ought to 
be the height of our ambition to have our name registered in 
Heaven, and have Christ to confess us in the courts of Heaven. 
How excited we used to be during the war when some general did 
something extraordinary, and some one got up in Congress to con 
fess his exploits. How the papers used to talk about it. If we 
come out for Christ here, He will confess us in Heaven before the 
throne and the angels. May God help you to contess Him to-night. 


we 


ain 

1): 

in ¢ 

old 
reli 
ever 
becc 
and 
tear, 
me t 
than 
Ifa y 
wil] 
that 
preac 
May { 
likes, 
relatid 
than ] 
accep 
don’t y 
“Vou 
The 
comfor 
dark W 


5. 


right in 
see him. 
is family 
aying for 
istians by 
ut no im- 
1ad found 
ee what it 
ed him if 
ay willing, 
j, “I tell 
such that I 
there is the 
1ot confess 
e time, and 
ie daughter 
aged father, 
he started 
ed the door 
ere, and the 
»5, 1 think he 
called him 
time to com- 
ing down his 
ave accepted 
at confession. 
ut and take 
\ friends, you 
the height of 
souse of Con- 
alor, or done 
s name there. 
It ought to 
registered in 
s of Heaven. 
he general did 


ngress to cole 
out it. Ifwe 
en before the 


Him to-night. 


THE EIGHT “I WILLS" OF CHRIST. 435 


Another “I will ’—to me a very precious “I will ””—was given to 
those early fishermen. He said, “If you will follow Me, I will make 
you fishers of men.” That is the “I will” of service. I pity those 
Christians from the very depth of my heart, who have only made a 
profession of religion, and stopped there. My friends, they don’t 
have the joy of salvation. I tell you, the only happy Christians are 
those who are fishers of men. If aman bea true Christian, he wins 
souls. He can not help it, for He says, “If you will follow Me, I 
will make you fishers of men.” Peter caught more men at Pente- 
cost than he ever caught fish in his nets. I have often thought of 
the remark one of the disciples made to Him as they were standing 
together one day, “ Lord, we have left all to follow Thee.” What 
did they leave? A few old fishing-boats and broken nets. They 
were looking to those they had left behind, and a great many peo- 
ple here are looking to what thev will leave if they serve Him. It 
ain’t necessary to leave the things of this life when you follow Him. 
It is not necessary to give up your business, if it’s a legitimate one, 
in order to accept Christ. But you mustn't set your heart on the 
old nets, by a good deal. Now, my friends, if you want to be a 
religious Christian, follow Him fully. No man follows Christ and 
ever regrets it, and the nearer we get to Him, the more useful we 
become. Then we will save men. It seems to me after I am dead 
and gone I would rather have a man come to my grave and drop a 
tear, and say, “ Here lies the man who converted me; who brought 
me to the cross of Christ ”’—it seems to me I would rather have this 
than a column of pure gold reaching to the skies, built in my honor. 
Ifa man wants to be useful, follow Him. You will succeed if you 
will follow Him. Whenever you find a man who follows Christ, 
that man you will find a successful one. He doesn’t need to bea 
preacher; he doesn’t need to be an evangelist to be useful. They 
may be useful in business. See what power an employer has if he 
likes. How he could labor with his employés and in his business 
relations. Often a man can be far more useful in a business sphere 
than he could in another. If we want to spend a life of usefulness, 
accept Him, and He “ will make you fishers of men.” Young man, 
don’t you want to win souls to Christ? Well, then, just follow Him. 
“You follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men.” 

The next “I will,” a very precious one, is, “I will not leave you 
comfortless.” “ I will not leave you comfortless” down here in this 
dark world. Now, some people think they have a very hard battle 


Sa 


PS ae 


436 MOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


before them when they accept Him. A lady came to me lately, and 
said, ‘“‘I am the only one of my family who is a Christian, and I feel 
lonely.” ‘“ Why,” said I, “Christ is with you; if you have got an 
Elder Brother sitting at the right hand of God, what more do you 
want?” Qh, this precious “I will;” this comfort and joy, “I will 
be with you to the end of the world;” “I will never forsake you.’ 
You may take comfort to-night. He will be with you always. You 
may not see Him with the eye of flesh, but you will see Him by 
the eye of faith. 

The next “I will” is found in the fourth chapter of John: “I will 
raise him up at the last day.” These bodies of ours are going down 
to the grave, but they are not going to lie there long; the Son of 
God will wake them up. When He was here He raised up three 
bodies ; and let me say to you, young children, that the first one He 
raised was a little child. Ah, there will be many little children 
there, “ for of such is the kingdom of Heaven.” He gave us three 
instances. The first was the little girl. When the people heard He 
had raised up some one from the dead, they thought it was a mistake. 
She wasn’t dead—only asleep; it wasn’t a real miracle. The next 
one was a young man. “Qh, no,” they thought; “that’s no mira. 
cle; if they had left him alone he’d awoke up; he was only asleep.” 
But the next case that came along was that of Lazarus, and Mat- 
thew tells us he had been dead four days—had been laid away in 
the sepulchre, and the Son of God merely said: “ Lazarus, come 
forth.” Now, I like a religion that gives me such comfort, that 
when I lay away loved ones in the grave, I know they will by and 
by hear the voice of the Son of God calling them forth. I used to 
wonder how Christians had so much comfort in affliction, and used 
to question whether I could lave as much; but I have learned that 
God gives us comfort when we need it. A few weeks ago I stood 
at the grave of a man I loved more than any one on earth, except 
my wife and family. As he was laid down in the narrow bed, and 
the earth dropped upon the coffin-lid, it seemed as if a voice came 
to me saying, “ He will rise again.” I like a religion by which we can 
go io the grave of our loved ones and feel that they will rise again; 
I like a religion that tells us, although we sow them in corruption, 
they will rise incorruptible; that, although we sow them in weak 
ness, they will rise in power and glory and ascend to the kingdom 
of light. This is the comfort for Christians. Thank God for this 
*T will not leave you comfortless.” 


upo 
We 
ma 
tran 
agai 
mot] 
noth 
Wives 
take 
this 
lath 
the S 
May 
into t 
and y 


ely, and 
id i feel 


got an 
do you 
_ © Ty will 
ike you.’ 
ys. You 


n: “1 will 
oing down 
he Son of 
| up three 
rst one He 
le children 
ve us three 
ie heard He 
s a mistake. 
The next 
t’s no mira- 
only asleep.” 
s, and Mat- 
laid away in 
azarus, come 
omfort, that 
will by and 
». Lused to 
on, and used 
learned that 
ago stood 
earth, except 
row bed, and 
a voice came 
which we can 
1 rise again 
n corruption, 
hem in yreak 
the kingdom 
God for this 


THE EIGHT “I WILLS” OF CHRIST. 437 


“1 will that thou may be with Me” is the sweetest of all. The 
thought that I will see Him in His beauty; the thought that I will 
meet Him there, that I will spend eternity with Him, is the sweet- 
est of them all. This last week we had Thanksgiving Day. How 
many families gathered together, perhaps the first time in many 
years, and the thought would come stealing over some of them, Who 
will be the first to break the circle? Perhaps many of these circles of 
friends will never meet again. Thank God, yonder the circles shall 
never be broken—when the fathers, and mothers, and children 
gather around Him in those mansions into which death never enters, 
where sickness and sorrow never enter through yon pearly gates. 
Oh, thank God for this blessed religion—thank God for the blessed 
Christ—thank God for those blessed eight “I wills ’’—‘ Come unto 
Me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest ;” 
“Him that cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast out;’ ‘‘ Whoso- 
ever, therefore, shall confess Me before men, him will I confess also 
before My Father which is in Heaven;” “If you will follow Me I 
will make you fishers of men;” “I will, be thou clean;” “T will not 
leave you comfortless ;” “I will that thou may be with Me.” May 
God bless every soul in this building, and bring you to the Cross. 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we pray that Thy blessing may rest 
upon all of these friends that have arisen here to-night for prayers. 
We pray Thee that they may take hold on eternal life, and may 
many of them lift up their hearts to-night to Thee. May they be 
transformed to-night from death unto life. May they be born 
again. May they be born of the Spirit. Many of them have 
mothers that are praying for them. May the prayers of their 
mothers, of their fathers, of their sisters, of their brothers, of their 
wives, of their children, avail for them. May they from this hour 
take hold on eternal life. May they not leave this building until 
this question of salvation has removed them from their sins. Holy 
Father, accept them. Help, accept, and strengthen us all. May 
the Spirit of God take hold of every one in this building to-night. 
May they move from death unto life this night. And when we go 
into the inquiry-room, may they confess their sins and find Jesus 
and unto Christ shall be the praise and the glory. Amen. 


LIT. 


LOT IN SODOM. 


GEN. xiii, 12: “And Lot dwelt in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent 
toward Sodom,” 


NE resson » y? take up this character is because I believe 
C) he is a 1 entative man, and perhaps there is no Bible char- 
acter tii. icpresents so many Chicago men at the present day 

as Lot of Sodom. Wi:.i* youcan find one Abraham, or one Daniel, 
or one Joshua, you can find a thousand Lots. He started very well; 
he got rich, and that was the beginning of his troubles. He and 
Abraham, his uncle, went down to Egypt, and they came out of 
Egypt with great wealth, and the next thing we hear of is strife 
among their herdsmen. He could not get up a quarrel with Abra- 
ham. Abraham said to him, “ You are my nephew, and I can not 
quarrel with you; but take your goods and go to the right and 1 
will go to the left, or I will go to the right and you go to the left,” 
and they separated. Right here Lot made his mistake. He should 
have said, ‘‘ No, I don’t want to leave you; the Lord has blessed 
me with you and I don’t want to leave you;” or, if he had been 
determined to leave his uncle, he should have asked Abraham to 
choose for him. Instead of that he lifted up his eyes and saw 
the well-watered plains of Sodom, and that decided him. No 
doubt he was very ambitious; he probably wanted to become 
richer. Perhaps there was a little spirit of rivalry toward his 
uncle. He wanted to excel Abraham in worldly goods, to be- 
come rich faster. So he saw and determined upon the well-watered 
plains of Sodom. If he had asked Abraham he would not have 
gone there. If he had asked God, Lot would never have 
entered Sodom; no man ever goes into Sodom by God's advice. 
He determined himself and pitched his tent toward Sodom. I 
don’t know how long he lived on these well-watered plains, but no 
doubt the men of those days said of him when he had settled down: 
There is a shrewd man; he’s a smart man. Why, I can predict 
(438) 


ed his tent 


I believe 
Jible char- 
resent day 
ne Daniel, 
very well; 
He and 
me out of 
of is strife 
with Abra- 
I can not 
ight and 1 
o the left,” 
He should 
has blessed 
e had been 
braham to 
es and saw 
1 him. No 
to become 
toward his 
bods, to be- 
ell-watered 
Hd not have 
never have 
rod’s advice. 
1 Sodom. I 
blains, but no 
settled down! 
I can predict 


LOT IN SODOM. 439 


that in a very short time he will be a wealthier man than h.s uncle 
Abraham. Look at these well-watered plains; why, he is a great 
deal better off than Abraham now.” He is in a position in which 
he can soon become rich. How long he remained on these plains 1 
don’t know, but the next thing we know is that he got into Sodom. 
We are told that Sodom was very wicked. He lived near it, aad he 
went into it with his eyes open, and he knew all about it. The 
wickec aess of Sodom was coming up to God; He was going to de- 
s{-oy it soon. And de you think, if Lot had asked Him, He would 
have allowed Lot to enter that city? I think one of the greatest 
mistakes the people of the present day make is that they won't let 
God choose for them; He would not choose ruin for them. All 
the years Lot was in Sodom we don’t read that he had any family 
iltar. He thought it would be ruin for his family to take them in 
tiere. He did not look at that, however. It was business that 
tvok him in there. He might have said, “We',, ‘’ve got a large 
fimily; I’ve got a great many dependent upon trc, a ji I must get 
‘ich faster, so I will go into Sodom. Business ': the ‘vst considera- 
tion, and it must be attended to.” So he gore’ .xtce Sodom, and the 
next thing we hear he is in trouble. Sodoin hod 2 war on hand, 
and when he went into the city he had to ta! : its side. In the war 
he was taken captive. It is a great mercy he wasn't killed in the 
battle. The first thing his uncle did when he heard of his nephew’s 
trouble he set out after him. When he was taken in battle he was 
liable to be taken into slavery, and his children also. He might 
have died in slavery if Abraham hadn’t gene after him. But Abra- 
ham takes his servants, and sets out and overtakes the warriors who 
had taken Lot captive, and brought him and all the property back 
that had been taken. Now, you would have thought that he would 
have kept out of Sodom; you'd have thought that he would have 
said, “ I’ve had enough of Sodom; I won’t go near it again.” You 
would think that men, when they get into this and that difficulty 
and affliction, would strike out of Sodom; but they won't. It is 
one of the greatest mysteries to me why men will remain in their 
Sodom when they have continual trouble. So he went back. 
Probably he said, “I’ve lost a good deal, and I must go back and 
try and recover it; I must go back and make it up for my children.” 
And he prospered in Sodom. If you had gone into Sodom before 
these angels came down, you would probably have found that no 
man had got on so well. If they had a Congress, perhaps they sent 


440 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


him to represent Sodom, because no man had done better in busi- 
ness. That is the way of the world. Perhaps they might have 
made him Mayor of Sodom. If you could have seen his “ turn- 
out” it would have been one of the very best. Mrs. Lot must 
have moved in the very best society of the city. The Misses Lot 
were looked upon as the most fashionable people there. They got 
on well, Oh, yes; that is the way the men talk now. Men thou- 
sands of miles from God take their children right into the whirlpool 
that takes them to sure ruin. Perhaps he was a judge and had 
great influence. When the angels got to the gate they might have 
heard of the name of the honorable Judge Lot. It sounded pretty 
well. He might have owned a good many corner-lots; he might 
have owned a good mapry buildings with “ Lot, Lot,” painted all 
over them; and on account of his property he might have beena 
very high man in Sodom. That is the way the world looks at it. 
No doubt the dispositions of the people were exactly as they are 
to-day; human nature has been pretty much the same always. 

But time rolls on, and Lot, while sitting at the gate one evening, 
saw two strangers upon the highway. They are coming toward 
Sodom. Likely these Sodomites did not know them, but twenty 
years before, Lot had been in the company of Abraham, and he had 
seen these men at his uncle’s home, had seen them sitting at his 
uncle's table, and he knew these angels when they approached, and 
bowed down and worshiped them, and bowed down to the ground 
and invited them into his house. But it was a sink of iniquity and 
they would not go in; they preferred to walk about the streets. 
But he pressed his invitation upon them and they accepted. It 
soon got noised around the streets that he had two strangers there, 
and it wasn't long before a crowd was around the door, and wanted 
to know who he had inside. And he came out to try and pacify 
them, but they received him with cries of “Who made this fellow 
a judge over us?” and Lot was dragged into the house and the 
door was shut against the mob. His influence was gone; he had 
been in the city twenty years and hadn’t made a convert. My 
friends, no man ever goes down to Sodom and retains his influence. 
Talk about men of influence whose hearts are not with God! What 
is their influence? Some one said to me to-night, ‘‘ You have been 
preaching to drunkards and vagabonds; why don’t you preach to 
those sinners who live in marble-front houses and have influence?” 
Why, I would rather preach to harlots and drunkards, because it is 


nian 
as H ¢ 
my 


The 


in busi- 
ht have 
s “turn. 
ot must 
sses Lot 
They got 
en thou- 
whirlpool 
and had 
ight have 
ed pretty 
he might 
ainted all 
ve beena 
yoks at it. 
s they are 
ways. 
e evening, 
ng toward 
yut twenty 
and he had 
ting at his 
hached, and 
he ground 
iquity and 
the streets. 
cepted. It 
gers there, 
nd wanted 
and pacify 
this fellow 
se and the 
ne; he had 
nvert. My 
is influence. 
od! What 
have been 
preach to 
influence?” 
because it is 


LOT IN SODOM., 441 
easier to get them into the kingdom of God than those sinners who 
live in marble-front houses; we can reach them sooner; it doesn’t 
take so long to convince them they are sinners. I suppose Lot 
lived in a marble-front house there, and his heart was away from 
God. Then these men said to Lot, ‘Who have you got here be- 
sides yourself? What is your family? Have you got any others 
besides yourself in this town?” Well, the father and mother had to 
own up that they had married their children to some of the Sodom- 
ites; that was the result of his going into the city. You go into the 
world, and live like the world, and see what the result will be. 
How many mothers and fathers are now mourning on account of 
marrying their sons and daughters to Sodomites, marrying them to 
death and ruin. ‘“ Now,” they say, “if you have any, get them out 
of this place, for God is going to burn it up. Tell them this, and 
if they won’t come, escape for your lives and leave them, for He 
will destroy the city.” People say, “ Why are we so afflicted ? Why 
have we so many sorrows?” I believe it is because our hearts are 
from God. They have gone down to Sodom and left the God of 
their fathers, Now, all these twenty years we do not know that he 
had ever a family altar. He could not call his children around him 
and pray to his God. They had become identified with Sodom and 
its people. Look at that scene. There are the men at the outside 
of the door groping about to find it, and the door opens and 
Lot starts out to tell his son-in-law of the coming destruction, 
I can see the old man’s head bowed down passing through the 
streets of Sodom at midnight. He goes to a house and knocks. 
No sound; all are asleep. He knocks again, and, perhaps, too, 
shouts at the top of his voice, and the man gets up and opens 
the window. He puts his head out. “Who's there?” “Your 
father-in-law,” answers the old man. “ What has brought you out of 
bed at this hour? What’sup?” “Why,” says Lot, “two angels are at 
my house, who say that God is going to destroy Sodom and every 
one who remains.” ‘“ Why, you go home and go to bed,” replies 
the son-in-law, and mocks him. They mock him. He had lost his 
testimony, my friends. They think he is deluded. I can see him 
now going off to another daughter’s house. I don’t know how 
many daughters he had. He might have had as many daughters 
as Job; and he goes to them, and they mock him too, I tell you, 
my friends, if we have got into Sodom our children will mock us, 
There is that old man in that midnight hour, plodding along those 


442 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSE'S AND PRA\ ERS, 


streets of Sodom to urge them to flee from the city, and they mock 
him. Ie had been long enough with Abraham to know that every- 
thing that came from God could be relied upon. Now, he starts 
back home. You can see him, his head bowed down, his long white 
hair flowing over his bosom, and the tears flowing from those aged 
eyes. The world calls him a successful man; but what a miserable 
end is his. Look at him to-night. He had got wealth; that’s what 
he was after. He obtained what he wanted, but he got leanness of 
soul. You can see him go back bowed down with grief. Next 
morning the angels take him by the hand, and he, his wife, and two 
daughters are led out of the city. And they lingered. How could 
they do otherwise than linger, when they had left their sons and 
daughters in the city, and knew they would be destroyed? Where 
are your sons and daughters now? Have you taken them down to 
Sodom, saying they must live in the pleasures of society—they must 
get on in the world? Where are they now? Have you got them 
into some store or some office where they will hear nothing but in- 
fidelity? If you have, those gray hairs will come down to an un- 
timely grave. You will learn the folly of your course when it is too 
late. Take your children from that city; urge them to come from 
the Sodom in which they are living; tell them to flee before it is 
too late, for the city will be destroyed. Yes, they linger. I don’t 
blame them. They probably had a lingering hope that the storm 
might be stayed, and they could get their children out. But the 
angels took them by the hand and hastened them out of the city, 
Poor mother! Ah! how sad when God came in judgment! I can 
see that mother hesitating, but God orders her not to look back. 
“Flee for thy life; escape or you will be destroyed.” ‘No man 
having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the 
kingdom of God.” She gets out of Sodom, but she looks back, and 
judgment falls upon her. And I believe that the condition of Lot's 
wife is the condition of hundreds in Chicago. They have come out 
of Sodom, but their heart is in the world. They say, “ Have I to 
give up the world? have I to give up all and follow Christ ?’” They 
linger and look back, and judgment will fall upon them. 

We are told in that portion of Scripture which was read to-night 
that they were eating, drinking, buying and selling, planting and 
building till the very moment Lot went out of Sodom. Perhaps 
not a man in all Sodom took any account of his going out. It 
might have got rumored around that he was going because he be- 


hu 


it ig 
the 
chil 
US ff 
His 
flee 
me j 
me,’ 
She 
all 
Tha 
killir 


/mock 
every- 
» starts 
x white 
se aged 
serable 
*s what 
ness of 
Next 
and two 
w could 
ons and 
Where 
down to 
hey must 
sot them 
ig but in- 
to an un- 
n it is too 
ome from 
fore it is 
I don’t 
the storm 
But the 
f the city. 
t! Iocan 


look back. 
“No man 
fit for the 
| back, and 
bn of Lot's 


h come OU 


t 


Have | to 
a" - They 


d to-night 
nting and 
Perhaps 


ng out. 


It 


use he be- 


LOT IN SODOM, 443 


lieved the city was to be destroyed, but no man believed it. His 
sons and daughters didn’t believe what their father said to them, 
and so destruction fell upon them; and the Son of God says they 
were all destroyed—great and small, learned and unlearned, rich 
and poor, all perished alike. Bear in mind that if you live in Sodom, 
destruction will come upon you. The world may call you success 
ful, but the only way to test success is to take a man’s whole life; 
not the beginning or the middle, but the whole of it. If a man is 


in Sodom, as Mr. Sankey sang to-night, he will find at last the fruits 
of his life to be 


“ Nothing but leaves, nothing but leaves,” 


Lot spent his life in gaining worldly goods for his children, and 
he lost all and his children besides. How many men in Chicago 
are there who can only say they have the same object in view that 
Lot had? They have come to this city to make money. They 
haven’t any family altar. They recognize only two things—moncey, 
money, business, business. ‘ My sons,’ they say, ‘may become 
gamblers and drunkards; my daughters may go off into ungodly 
society and marry drunkards and make their lives miserable ; but I 
want money, and I'll have all I want if I can get it.” That is the 
condition of thousands of people. My friends, was Lot’s life a suc- 
cessful one? It was a stupendous failure. He lost his sons and 
daughters, he lost his property, his wealth, his hold on the society 
and friendship of his uncle Abraham. Is not that the condition of 
hundreds here to-night? Let us strike for a higher plane; let us 
go up to Bethel; let us call upon God to save our children before 
it is too late. If your children have wandered off and got among 
the Sodomites, let one piercing cry go up: “O God, save my 
children! forgive me, O Lord, for taking them into Sodom.” Let 
us turn from our lukewarmness, our worldly-mindedness, and seek 
His face. Oh, may the Spirit of God come upon you, and may you 
flee from the doomed city before it is too late. A mother came to 
me a few days ago and said, “ Mr. Moody, I want you to pray for 
me.” “ell,” I asked, “ why do you want to be prayed for?” 
She said, “ I feel am toblame. I’ve got three sons and they have 
all gone astray, and Iam the most wretched woman living. ! feel 
I haven’t been true to the charge God gave me, and the thought is 
killing me. I want you to pray for me, and if God will forgive me, 
and if 1 get right in His sight, with His grace and by my prayers and 


444 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


faith they may be brought back.” Are there not hundreds here in 
the same condition as this poorwoman? You have been ambitious 
for your children; you were after great things for them, and you 
have led them into Sodom, and now ruin has come upon them; 
darkness and misery cover them. Let us humble ourselves before 
God that He may forgive us our lukewarmness for His cause in 
our ambition to obtain great things in this world. Let us not 
follow in the footsteps of this man Lot. Look at a representative 
of Lot here. I can imagine him starting as a moderate drinker, but 
the passion grows, and his children are infected, and he becomes, as 
it were the father of a whole army of backsliders. He becomes 
the fati:er of backsliding and worldly-mindedness by turning away 
from God himself. If you are in the city of Sodom, flee from it at 
once—escape for your lives, for destruction will come. May God 
bring every one in this hall out of Sodom, is the prayer of my 
heart. 
PRAYER. 

Oh, Thou most gracious Saviour, we thank Thee that Thou art 
not far off, but that Thou art nigh; and, Lord, we know that Thou 
art here to-night. We rejoice in Thy presence. For all of the 
mercies that have gone out from these walls and blessed so many 
homes, we thank Thee. O Lord, we would come before Thee 
now and thank Thee for all the blessings we have received under 
this roof. Many a soul Thou hast redeemed in Thy grace within 
this house. O Lord, now we pray Thee that Thou wouldst come 
this night and remove everything from our hearts that can hinder 
us from coming to Christ. We pray that Thou wouldst appear here 
in this great assembly, and give us all a heart to listen to the things 
that shall be spoken here. We knowthat the wages of sin is 
death, but that the gift of Thy Son is life eternal through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. May there be many here to-night that shall know 
and believe, and who shall ask of Him the gift of God, the loving 
Saviour; who shall drink and never thirst again. We pray that Thou 
wouldst give the stream of salvation to many a soul here to-night. 
Bless the songs that have been sung by Thy servant. May the 
Gospel be a source of rest to rnany a weary soul. We shall never 
forg2t Thy goodness through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


here in 
bitious 
nd you 
them ; 
; before 
‘ause in 
- us not 
entative 
ker, but 
omes, as 
becomes 
ing away 
rom it at 
May God 
er of my 


Thou art 
hat Thou 
all of the 
$0 many 
fore Thee 
ved under 
ace within 
Idst come 
an hinder 
ppear here 
the things 
of sin is 
bugh Jesus 
shall know 
the loving 
that Thou 
e to-night. 
May the 
shall never 
men. 


LIT. 


THE RELIGION OF JESUS BETTER THAN ALL 
ISMS. 


DEUT. xxxii. 31: “ For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves 
being judges.” 


WISH that this audience, for about thirty minutes, would just 
imagine they are sitting in judgment—that each one is sitting 
upon the case brought up. We want every man, woman, and 
child in this building to decide the question brouyht before them, 
“For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themscives 
being judges.” This was uttered by Moses in his farewell address 
to Israel. He had been with them forty years, day and night. He 
had been the king, or president, or judge, or whatever you may call 
it; he had been their leader or instructor; in other words, he had 
been a god to them, for all the blessings of Heaven came through 
him. And the old man was about leaving them. He had taken 
them to the borders of the promised land, and all who had had left 
Egypt with him but Joshua and Caleb, had been laid in that wilder- 
ness. Now he is making his farewell address; and, young man, if 
you have never read it, read it to-night. It is tue best sermon in 
print. I do not know any other sermon in the New or Old Testa- 
ment that compares with it. His natural activity hadn't abated— 
he had still the vigor of youth. I can see him as he delivers it; his 
long white hair flowing over his shoulders, and his venerable beard 
covering his breast as he gives them the wholesome instruction, 
The old man was giving his farewell address, in which he said, 
“Their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being 
judges.” Now I am not going to call upon Christians to settle this 
question; but the ungodly, the unconverted must decide this ques- 
tion, and if you be fair with the argument you will have to admit 
that “ your rock is not as our Rock;” your peace is not as our peace; 
because we have got our feet on the rock of Jesus. 
(445) 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


446 


You know, in the first place, that the atheist does not believe in 
any God. He denies the existence of a God. Now, I contend that 
his rock is not as our Rock, and will let those atheists be the judges, 
What does an atheist look forward to? Nothing. He is taking a 
very crooked path in this worl’. His life has been dark; it has 
been full of disappointments. When he was a young man, ambition 
beckoned him on to a certain height. He has attained to that 
height, but he is not satisfied. He climbs a little higher, and, per- 
haps, he has got as far as he can get, but he is not contented. He 
is dissatisfied, and if he takes a look into the future, he sees nothing. 
Man’s life is full of trouble. Afflictions are as numerous as the 
hairs of our head; but when the billows of affliction are rising and 
rolling over him, he has no God to call upon; therefore, I contend 
his “rock is not as our Rock.” Lookat him. Hehasachild. That 
atheist has all the natural affection for that child possible. He has 
a son—a noble young man—who starts out in life full of promise, 
but he goes astray. He has not the will-power of his father, and 
can not resist the temptations of the world. That father can not 
call upon God to save his son. He sees that son go down to ruin 
step by step, and by and by he plunges into a hopeless, Godless, 
Christless grave. And as that father looks into that grave, he has 
no hope. His “rock is not as our Rock.” Look at himagain. He 
has a child laid low with fever, racked with pain and torture, but 
the poor atheist can not offer any consolation to that child. As he 
stands by the bedside of chat child, she says, “ Father, I am dying; 
in a little while I will go into another world. What is going to be- 
come of me? Am I going to die like a dumb beast?” ‘“ Yes,” 
the poor atheist says; “I love you, my daughter: but you willsoon 
be in the grave, and eaten up by worms, and that will be all. 
There is no Heaven, no hereafter; it is alla myth. People have 
been telling you there is a hereafter, but they have been deluding 
you.” Did you ever hear an atheist going to their dying children 
and telling them this? My friends, when the hour of affliction 
comes, they call in a minister to give consolation. Why don’t the 
atheist preach no hereafter, no Heaven, no God in the hour of 
affliction? This very fact is an admission that their “rock is not 
as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being the judges.” But 
look again. That little child dies, and that atheist father follows 
the body to the grave, and lays it down in its resting-place, and 
says, “ All that is left of my child is there; it will soon become the 


CP © ef ass - 


lie 
wh 
wh 
bec 
ans 
the 
con 
I ar 
the 
Wh 
was 
find 
that 
witl 
In t 
Isaa 
theig 


eve in 
d that 
udges, 
king a 
it has 
ibition 
o that 
d, per- 
1. He 
othing. 
as the 
ng and 
contend 
. That 
He has 
promise, 
her, and 
can not 
to ruin 
Godless, 
e, he has 
in. He 
ture, but 
As he 
dying ; 
g to be- 
“ Ves,” 
will soon 
1 be all. 
ple have 
deluding 
children 
affliction 
don’t the 
hour of 
ck is not 
es.” But 
er follows 
slace, and 
come the 


THE RELIGION OF FESUS BETTER THAN ALL ISMS. 447 


companion of worms, who will feed upon it. That is all there is.” 
Why, the poor man’s heart is broken, and he will admit his “ rock is 
not as our Rock.” A prominent atheist went to the grave with the 
body of his friend. He pronounced a eulogy, and committed all 
that was left of his friend to the winds—to nature—and bade the 
remains farewell forever. Oh, my friends, had he any consolation 
then? His “ rock was not as our Rock.” 

A good many years ago there was a convention held in France 
and those who held it wanted to get the country to deny a God, to 
burn the Bible—wanted to say that men passed away like a dog and 
adumb animal. What was the result? Not long since, that coun- 
try was filled with blood. Did you ever think what would take 
place if we could vote the Bible, and the ministers of the Gospel, 
and God out from among the people? My friends, the country 
would be deluged with blood. Your life and mine would not be 
safe in this city to-night. We could not walk through these streets 
with safety. We don’t know how much we owe God and the influ- 
ence of His Gospel among even ungodly men. I can imagine some 
of you saying, “Why this talk about atheists? There are none 
here.” Well, I hope there isn’t; but I find a great number who 
come into the inquiry-rooms! just to look on, who confess they 
don’t believe in any God or any hereafter. 

But there is another class called deists, who, you know, don’t be- 
lieve in revelation—who don’t believe in Jesus Christ. Ask a deist 
who is his God. ‘“ Well,” he will say, “He is the beginning—He 
who caused all things.” These deists say there is no use to pray, 
because nothing can change the decrees of their deity; God never 
answers prayer. ‘ Their rock is not as our Rock.” In the hour of 
their affliction they, too, send off for some Christian to administer 
consolation. But there is another class. They say, “I am no deist ; 
I ama pantheist; I believe that God is in the air; He is in the sun, 
the stars, in the rain, in the water ’’— they say God is in this wood. 
Why, a pantheist the other night told me God was in that post; He 
was in the floor. When we come to talk to those pantheists, we 
find them no better than the deists and atheists. There was one of 
that sort that Sir Isaac Newton went to talk to. He used to argue 
with him, and try to get the pantheist into his belief, but he couldn't. 
In the hour of his distress, however, he cried out to the God of Sir 
Isaac Newton. Why don’t they cry to their god in the hour of 
their trouble? When I used to be in tnis city I used to be calied 


. 
- * 
pEeE “ — = 
. 5 ~ 
Tc a — 
= ————— ——————— 
Pete es Sa Ro I —— ba naiteanaill 


448 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


on to attend a good many funerals. I would inquire what the man 
was in his belief, and if I found out he was an atheist, or a deist, or 
a pantheist, and when I would go to the funeral, and in the presence 
of his friends said one word about that man’s doctrine, they would 
feel insulted. Why is it that in a trying hour, when they have been 
talking all the time against God—why is it that in the darkness 
ef affliction they call in believers in that God to administer consola- 
tion ? 

The next class I want to call attention to is the infidel. I con- 
tend that his “rock is not as our Rock.” Look at an infidel. An 
infidel is one who doesn’t believe in the inspiration of Scripture. 
These men are very numerous, and they feel insulted when we call 
them infidels; but a man who doesn’t believe in the inspirations of 
Scripture is an infidel. A good many of them are in the church, 
and not a few of them have crept into the pulpit. These men would 
feel insulted if we called them infidels, but if a man says—I don't 
care who he is or where he preaches—if he tries to say that the Bible 
is not inspired from back to back, he is an infidel. That is their true 
name, although they don’t like to be called that. Now, in that 
blessed Pook there are five or six hundred prophecies, and every one 
of them has been fulfilled to the letter; and yet men try to say they 
can not believe the Bible is inspired. As I said the other night, 
those who can not believe it have never read it. I hear a great many 
infidels talk against the Bible, but I haven't found the first man who 
ever read the Bible from back to back carefully and remained an 
infidel. My friends, the Bible of our mothers and fathers is true. 
How many men have said to me, “ Mr. Moody, I would give the 
world if I had your faith, your consolation, the hope you have from 
your religion.” Is not that a proof that “their rock is not as our 
Rock?”’ Now look at these prophecies in regard to Nineveh, in re- 
gard to Babylon, to Egypt, to the Jewish nation, and see how literally 
they have been fulfilled to the letter. Every promise God makes He 
will carry out. Although the infidel professes his disbelief in the in- 
spiration of Scripture, they do not believe what they declare in their 
hearts, else why, when we talk with them, if they have any children, do 
they send them out of the room? Now, not long ago I went in‘o a 
man’s house, and when I commenced to talk about religion, he turned 
to his daughter and said: “ You had better go out of the room; I 
wan! \o say a few words to Mr. Moody.” When she had gone, he 
orpcned a perfect torrent of infidelity upon me. ‘“ Why,” said I, 


it wa: 

of Sa 
annih 
man gs 
one F 
along 
to us, 
insteac 
whelm 
of the 
The lig 
Word ¢ 
And 
the con 
and he 
audienc 
vinced ¢ 
said a ¢ 
Princip] 
have ma 


man 
st, or 
sence 
vould 
» been 
rknes3 
ynsola- 


I con- 
1; AN 
ripture. 
we call 
ions of 
church, 
n would 
_J don't 
he Bible 
heir true 
in that 
very one 
say they 
er night, 
eat many 
man who 
ained an 
s is true. 
give the 
have from 
ot as our 
eh, in re- 
v literally 
makes He 
in the in- 
re in their 
ildren, do 
ent inio 4 
he turned 
> room; j 


gone, he 
wae said i 


THE RELIGION OF FESUS BETTER THAN ALL ISMS. 449 


‘did you send your daughter out of the room before you said this?” 
Well,” he replied, “I did not think it would do her any good to 
hear what I said.” My friends, his “ rock is not as our Rock.” Why 
did he send his daughter out of the room if he believed what he 
said? When these infidels are in trouble, why do they not get some 
of their infidel friends to administer consolation? When they make 
a will, why do they call in a follower of the Lord Jesus Christ to 
carry it out? Why, it is because they can not trust their infidel 
friends. ‘“ Their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies them- 
selves being judges.” 

Now, did you ever hear of a Christian in his dying hour recant- 
ing? Did you ever hear of them regretting that they had accepted 
Christianity, and in their dying hour embracing infidelity? I would 
like to see the man who could stand and say he had. But how 
many times have Christians been called to the bedside of an atheist 
or deist, or infidel, in his dying hours, and heard him crying for 
mercy. In that hour infidelity is gone, and he wants the Gad of his 
father and mother to take the place of his black infidelity. It is 
said of West, an eminent man, that he was going to take up the 
doctrine of the resurrection, and just show the world what a fraud 
it was, while Lord Lyttleton was going to take up the conversion 
of Saul, and just show the folly of it. These men were going to 
annihilate that doctrine and that incident of the Gospel. A French- 
man said it took twelve fishermen to build up Christ’s religion, but 
one Frenchman pulled it down. From Calvary this doctrine rolled 
along the stream of time, through the eighteen hundred years, down 
to us, and West got at it and began to look at the evidence; but 
instead of his being able to cope with it, he found it perfectly over. 
whelming—the proof that Christ had risen, that He had come out 
of the sepulchre and ascended to Heaven and led ec» ‘ivity captive. 
The light dawned upon him, and he became an © ounder of the 
Word of God and a champion of Christianity. 

And Lord Lyttleton, that infidel and skeptic, ha» t been long at 
the conversion of Saul before the God of Saul bro! upon his sight, 
and he too began to preach. I don’t believe th © is a man in the 
audience wha, if he will take his Bible and read .t, but will be con- 
vinced of its truth. What does infidelity do for a man? ‘“ Why,” 
sid a dying infidel, “my principles have lost me my friends, my 
principles have sent my wife to her grave with a broken heart; they 
have made’my children beggars, and I go down to my grave with- 
29 


450 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVFRS. 


out peace or consolation.” I never heard of an infidel going down 
fo his grave happily. But not only do they go on without peace, 
but how many youths do they turn away from God. How many 
young men are turned away from Christ by these infidels and dey- 
ils. Let them remember that God will hold them responsible if 
they are guilty of turning men away from Heaven. A few infidels 
gathered around a dying friend lately, and they wanted him to hold 
out to the end, to die like a man. They were trying te cheer him, 
but the poor infidel turned to them. ‘ Ah,” said he, “ what have | 
got to holdonto?” My friends, let me ask you what you have got 
to hold on to. Every Christian has Christ to hold on to—the res- 
urrected man. “Iam He that liveth and was dead; and, behold, I 
am alive for evermore.” Thank God, we have some one to carry us 
through death and the grave, and into the promised laid. Yes, the 
Son of God wipes away more tears in this world of soriow than all 
the infidels put together ina lifetime. Infidels never take away sor- 
row. What can those false gods of infidelity do for them in the hour 
of trial? They are like the false gods of the Hebrews; they never 
hear theircry. Whereas, if we have the God of Daniel, of Abraham, f 
He is always ready to succor us when in distress, and we can make , 
Him our fortress, and we have a refuge in the storm of adversity, I 
There we can anchor safely, free from danger and disaster. I was a 
reading to-night almost the last words of Lord Byron, and I want 
to draw a comparison between the sorrowful words of Byron and 
those of St. Paul. He died very young—he was only thirty-six— 
after leading an ungodly life. 


ielipieaetinicaee en ~= Se 


a 


“My days are in the sere and yellow leaf, 
The flower and fruit of love are gone; 
The worm, the canker, and the grave me 
Are mine alone.” 


Compare those words with the words of St. Paul, ‘I have fought 


a good fight: I have finished my course; I have kept the faith. ber 
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which eter 


the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day.” What last 
a contrast! What a difference! My friends, there is as much r 
difference between them as there is between Heaven and hell, be- | 
tween death and life. Be judges which is the most glorious— 
atheism, deism, infidelity, or the Christianity St. Paul practiced. 
May God take all these isms and sweep them from the world. 


RS. 


oing down 
gut peace, 
dow many 
ls and dev- 
yonsible if 
few infidels 
im to hold 
cheer him, 
vhat have I 
nu have got 
o—the res- 
d, behold, I 
» to carry us 
d. Yes, the 
ow than all 
se away Sor- 
in the hour 
. they never 
of Abraham, 
ve can make 
of adversity. 
ster. I was 
, and | want 
f Byron and 
r thirty-six— 


I have fought 
‘pt the faith, 
usness, which 
day.” What 
is as much 


and hell, be- | 


st glorious 


aul practiced. 
e world. 


THE RELIGION OF FESUS BETTER THAN ALL SSMS, 


I want to read to you a letter which | received some time 
I read this to you because | fet letters from infidels w 
not an infidel has repented during our meeti 


days ago J 80t a letter from an infidel, who accused me of be 


ing a 

not been an infidel converted during our 

meetings, My friends, 8° up to the young converts meeting any 
Monday night, and YOu will see the 


have accepted Christ. Why, nearly every 
Poor infidel who me read this letter 

get many le Prayer, and, my friends, you d 
know the Stories that lie behind those letters. The lette 


‘ead was not received here, but Ww 
Phia. When] received it | put 


it away, intending to use it at a 
future day. 


“ DEAR Sir —Allow addressing you with a few 
words, The Cause of Writing js, indeed, a serious one. J am the 
son of an aristocratic family of GétMany— wae expensively educated, 
and at college at Leipsic, was ruined by drinking, etc.; was expelled 
for gambling ; My parents Were greatly grieved at 
My conduct, and | did not dare 


return home, but sailed for America. 
I went to St. Louis, and remained there {;). want of money to get 


away. TJ finally obtained a Situation as Cookkeeper in a dry-goods 
house; heard from home, and of the death of My parents. This 
made me more sinful than ever before, J] heard one of your ser. 

€p impression on me. I was taken Sick, and 
text came ed me. I have tried 
to find peace With God, but have not succeeded, My friends, by 
feasoning with me that there was no God, endeavored to comfort 
me. The thought of my sinfulness and approaching 
blaspheray, My bad ex e, ed me to Mourn 


think God is too just to forgive me MY sins, 
aclose. I have 


not yet received God’s fay 
ber me in your 


Prayers, and beseech God 
eternal destruction ? Ux 


last I sha] 


the grave, my 
and weep, J 
My life is drawing to 
or. Will you not remem- 

to save My soul from 
is, but it will be the 


“his rock Was not as our Rock, even Our enemies 
ave two more letters | would like to 


tters, but on this 


read, [| am not 
occasion I w 


speaking of a 


accustomed t 
ill read them to you. 


451 


. We 
on’t 
tlam 
hile we were in Philadel. 


452 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


tice. The Governor of the State from which he came had offered 
a reward for him, and he came into this Tabernacle. He received 
Christ, and returned to his State. This morning I received the 
following letter : 

“ DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:—Owing to the law's slow delay I am 
yet a prisoner of hope. By Thursday or Friday my case will be 
reached, and I’ll be committed to the Penitentiary, for how long I do 
not know. This condition is voluntary, or of my own seeking, be- 
cause I feel it due the cause of God, or the only evidence I can 
give of my repentance and desire to do better. My family and 
friends hope ultimately to obtain a pardon. I desire to thank you 
for the interest you have taken in me, and I ask your prayers, and 
those of God’s people in Chicago, that I may have strength and 
grace to live under these calamities; that my poor heart-broken 
wife and children may be sustained; and, further, that God’s bless- 
ing may rest on all efforts being made for my future. After it is all 
over, and I am ina felon’s cell, I'll write: you. In your efforts to 
warn men to do better and lead a new life, bid them beware of am- 
bition to accomplish an undertaking at all hazards. Such is my 
condition. Had I left off speculation in an invention I might now 
be happy. Step by step I yielded until my forgeries reached over 
thirty thousand dollars. My aim was not to defraud, but to suc- 
ceed, and pay it all back. Oh, pray for me—for all who suffer with 
me. While in Chicago I was under an assumed name. Here I am, 
in my native village, in my father’s home, a prisoner, not daring to 
go >it, or even to see my children (we have three, two boys and 
one girl). 1 hear their voices, and when they sleep I silently go in 
their little room and look at them in innocent slumber. My crimes 
are in another cownty, whither I go Thursday. May our heavenly 


Father bless your labors. Humbly and repentant, I am, 
* & #” 


To-morrow probably he will go into the penitentiary to suffer for 
his crime, but now his Rock is owr Rock. 

Last week a beautiful-looking yowng man came into the inquiry- 
room. He had been brought up in a happy home with a good 
father and mother. He had gone astray. When he came into the 
inquiry-room, he said he intended to become a Christian, but he 
could not because he knew what it would make him do. He had 
robbed an expres: company, and that sin came between him and 
God. He had bee» heard and received a verdict in his favor, but 
he knew he was guilty. He had gone into the witness box and 


yffered 
ceived 
ed the 


y Iam 
will be 
ng I do 
ing, be- 
e I can 
ily and 
ink you 
ers, and 
eth and 
t-broken 
\’s_bless- 
it is all 
efforts to 
re of am- 
ch is my 
ight now 
ched over 
t to suc- 
buffer with 
ere | am, 
daring to 
boys and 
ntly go in 
Ty crimes 
r heavenly 


% %? 


5 suffer for 


1e inquiry- 
th a good 
e into the 
an, but he 

He had 


In him and 
. favor, but 
bs box and 


THE RELIGION OF FESUS BETTER THAN ALL ‘SMS. 453 


committed perjury. He turned away and left the building. Last 
Friday, however, he was at the noonday meeting; he was in my 
private room for a while, and I never felt so much pity for a man in 
my life. Hewanted to become a Christian, but the thought of hav- 
ing to go Lack and tell his father that he was guilty, after his father 
had paid two thousand dollars to conduct his trial. After a great 
struggle he got down on his knees and cried out, “ O God, help me; 
forgive me my sins;” and at last he got up and straightened him- 
self and said, “ Well, sir, I will go back.” A friend went down to 
the railway station and saw him off, and shortly after I got this 
dispatch from him: 

“ Mr. Moopy :—God has told me what todo. The future is as 
clear as crystal. 1 am happier than ever before.” 

He went on his way, reached his native village, and I received 
this letter from him this morning, and I have felt my soul filled with 
sorrow ever since it came. Let me say here, if there is any one in 
this hall, who has taken money from his employer, go and tell him 
of it at once. It is a good deal better for you to confess it than 
have it on your mind—than to try to cover it up. “He that cov- 
ereth his sins shall not prosper.” If you have taken any money 
that doesn’t belong to you, make restitution by confession at least. 
If any one here is being tempted to commit a forgery or any crime, 
let this be a warning to them: 

““My BELOVED FRIEND AND BROTHER :—I am firm in the cause. 
I have started, and feel that God is with me in it. And, oh, dear 
brother, do never cease praying for my dear father and praying 
mother, and I wish you would some day write them and tell them 
that God will make this all for the best. If I live for ages I will 
never cease praying for them, and I never can forgive myself for 
my ungratefulness to my dear broken-hearted sisters and brothers and 
dear good parents. Oh, that link that held the once happy home is 
severed. O God! may it not be forever. Would that I had been 
a Christian for life; that I had taken my mother’s hand when a 
child and walked from there, hand in hand, straight to Heaven; and 
then the stains would not have been. But we know, O God, that 
they can’t follow me into Heaven, for then I will be washed of all 
my sins, and the things that are on this earth will stay here. 

‘Oh, my dear Christian brother, my heart almost failed me when I 
was approaching my dear, happy home, and the thought that I was 
the one out of eight: brothers and sisters to break the chain of 


linetia=. 9:4 


Ee oe 


454 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


which is now shaded with misery, and the beautiful sunshine that 
once lit that happy, that dearest of homes, is now overshadowed 
with darkness. Ch, I fear it will take my dear parents; it is more 
than they can bear. When I reached home, and they all greeted 
me with a kiss, and I told them I had started for Heaven, and God 
sent me home to tell them, my mother shed tears of happiness, and 
when I was forced io bring the death-stroke upon her, the tears 
ceased to flow, and God only can describe the scene that took 
place. I called them all around me, and I thought I could not pray 
if 1 were to attempt it. But when I knelt with them in prayer, God 
just told me what to say, and I found it the will of .;od; and after 
I had prayed, I kissed them all, and asked their pardon for my un- 
gratefulness, which I received from them all. Then I made my 
preparations to leave home, for how long God only knows; but I got 
grace to leave in a cheerful way, and it appeared fora short time; 
and if God lets me live to return home, I will join my mother’s side, 
take her to church, and bring my brothers and sisters and father to 
God. We will all go to Heaven together. My beloved brother, J 
must see you some day, and just tell you what God has done for 
me, and I,know He will never forsake me, when I am shut up in 
those prison walls for a crime I justly deserve. When I can’t com- 
municate with any one else, I know I will not be shut off from God. 
Oh, glory! 

“T came to Cleveland last night, and was going to get that money 
and return it to the General Superintendent, but my attorney had 
made that arrangement already. I find there is an indictment ut 
Akron against me now for perjury, and I am going to take the 
morning train and go to Akron. Court is in progress now, and | 
am going to ask the court if there is an indictment against me, and 

there is, I will hear it and then plead guilty. I will write you 
again soon, and give you all the particulars, and the length of my 
sentence.” 

I want to urge this letter upon your consideration as a warning. 
Think of the punishment that young man has brought upon him- 
self; think of the agony of that father and mother when he broke 
the news to them—when he told them of his guilt. His “rock was 
not as our Rock.” May God bless every young man here, and may 
they be brought to the acceptance of salvation. May they turn to 
Thee, God of their fathers and of their mothers, so that they can 
say, “ Your Rock is our Rock—we are servants of God.” 


» that 
lowed 
more 
reeted 
id God 
ss, and 
e tears 
it took 
ot pray 
rer, God 
nd after 
my un- 
ade my 
put I got 
rt time; 
er’s side, 
father to 
prother, J 
; done for 
hut up in 
an’t com- 
trom God. 


at money 
orney had 
ctment ut 
5 take the 
ow, and | 
st me, and 
write you 


oth of my 


a warning. 
upon him- 
he broke 

“ rock was 

e,and may 
ey turn to 
t they can 


LIV. 


JESUS CHRIST MUST BE RECEIVED OR 
REJECTED. 


MATT. xxvii, 22: “ Pilate saith unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus 
which is called Christ? They ali say unto him, Let Him be crucified.” 


ILATE was in difficulty. Pilate had the question sprung 
suddenly upon him— not like the citizens of Chicago before 
whom the question has been from their cradle up, and to 

whom it has been present continually. One morning—I suppose it 
was about six o’clock—the governor was aroused by a mob in front 
of his palace, clamoring for a decision about this man. Pilate 
examined the case, and he wavered. There he made his first mis- 
take. Instead of taking his place like a man, saying, “ I will never 
sanction this injustice; I have been placed here by the Roman 
Emperor to administer justice to men, and I can not deliver this 
innocent man to you.” Instead of that he compromised with 
them; he wanted to be on both sides at once. “I will chastise 
Him,” he says, and that will shift the responsibility on to the Jews. 
But he found they were enraged at this, and wanted His life. 
When he found He was from Galilee he thought he would shift the 
responsibility onto Herod, and imagined he could in this way get 
rid of this great question—that question which appeals to every 
man and woman here to-night —“ What are we going to do with 
the Son that God gave up, with the gift He gave for us?” Well, 
he sent them off to Herod. I don’t know how long they were 
gone—perhaps about an hour; but back they came again to Pilate, 
after finding that even Herod, that blood-thirsty governor, had re- 
. fused to judge Him, to get him to decide the case and have Him cruci- 
fied. He again wants to release Him. He is thoroughly convinced 
that He is a just man—an innocent man; in fact, it is said it was envy 
that prompted them to seek His life. Pilate knew deep down in 
his heart that it was envy and malice that prompted them to bring 
(455) 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


us ie 
== FE iz ‘ 
yu, i le 
me 
MM2S tt enema : 
a 
RAN 
a” L”™ \ 
&. =, GS 
O“o% ° 
P hotographic 23 WEST MAIN STREET « © 


sciences ata" 
Corporation 


aa ea SS 


456 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


Christ before him, yet instead of taking his stand like a man and de- 
ciding for himself, as he ought to have done, he tricd to be on the 
side of every party. He took the most notable prisoner of the time 
along with Jesus and said to the multitude, “I will release one of 
them; which will you have?” I suppose he thought sure they would 
say, “ Release Jesus of Nazareth;” he thought they would keep a 
man who gave life to the people and did good everywhere. He 
went. But the chief priests ran through the crowd and got them to 
be all of one mind, and they cried, “ Barabbas, Barabbas, give us 
Barabbas.” Then he said, ‘‘ What shall 1 do with Jesus which is 
called Christ?” And they cried, “Let Him be crucified.” The 
poor, blind, heathen governor then turned to them and said, “ What 
evil hath He done?” But they cried the more, and he turned Him 
over, and he took water and washed his hands of the iniquity—the 
poor, blind, deceived man. He thought he was freed from his de- 
cision by the act, but bear in mind that God held Pilate responsible 
for that decision, as he holds every man and woman responsible for 
the manner in which they treat the gift of His Son. It is an indi- 
vidual matter with us as it was with Pilate. God gave Him to 
every one here just as He was given to Paul when he says, ‘ He 
loved me and gave Himself for me.” 

Now, look at this man Pilate. His judgment was convinced that 
Jesus was the Saviour of the world. How many men and women 
are just convinced in their judgment that Jesus Christ was sent into 
the world for the express purpose of saving them. You believe it, 
don’t you? If I were to put it to every one here to-night and ask 
them to rise and give their conviction, probably every one would 
say, “I believe Christ was sent to save the world.” Well, you are 
like Pilate; you are convinced. But not only was his judgment 
reached, but his conscience was reached. He knew, deep down in 
his own conscience, he ought to let Him go free, but he didn’t come 
up to his conscience. His conscience was telling him to release this 
man; even his black, treacherous heart was telling him to release 
Him. He ought to have bowed before Him and called Him as his 
Lord and Saviour. Not only his conscience and his heart were tell- 
ing him this, but his wife sent to him, saying, ‘“ Have nothing to do 
with this just man, for I have suffered many things in a dream this 
day because of Him.’ And with all this the man was lost for want of 
decision—-lost owing to a vacillating character, like hundreds and 
thousands of people who will be lost in Chicago. How many are 


S. 


n and de- 
be on the 

f the time 
ise one of 
hey would 
ld keep a 
here. He 
yt them to 
is, give us 
s which is 
ied.” The 
id, “ What 
urned Him 
iquity—the 
‘om his de- 
responsible 
ponsible for 
t is an indi- 
ive Him to 
> says, “ He 


vinced that 
and women 
ras sent into 
bu believe it, 
ight and ask 
y one would 
ell, you are 
is judgment 
sep down in 
didn’t come 
5 release this 
to release 
Him as his 
art were tell- 
othing to do 
a dream this 
Lt for want of 
undreds and 
ow many are 


FESUS CHRIST MUST BE RECEIVED OR REFECTED,. — 457 


thoroughly convinced that Jesus Christ can save, that He will save, 
yet they are not willing to let Christ save them. Just like poor 
Pilate. What was the trouble that kept him back? The trouble 
was, he wanted the applause of men. He knew that He was Jesus 
Christ of Nazareth, that in Him there was no guile; he knew that 
He was pure as the angels of Heaven, yet poor Pilate wanted the 
applause of his fellow-men, he wanted to keep his office, and de- 
cided against Christ, and so you can say he was lost by his decision ; 
and you are in the position of Pilate to-night—for or against Hlim. 
I don’t know but some of you will get angry at this, as you did the 
other night, but I like to put men in a corner and hold them till 
they answer the great question. I made a remark the other night 
that every man and woman in this assembly had got to decide that 
night ‘ What they were going to do with God’s Son.” A great many 
have an idea that they have got plenty of time to decide the ques- 
tion as to receiving or rejecting Him. This isa delusion. Christ has 
been presented to us from our earliest years—since the time we first 
knew what salvation was 


and during all these years we have been 
guilty of either rejecting or else recciving Him. Fvery time He is 
offered we must do either of the two things. Pilate came very near 
the kingdom of God. The Son of God was beside him; he talked 
with Him. No doubt he was in the presence of Jesus Christ for 
two hours, and he could have called upon Him and would have 
been saved. Yet he neglected to do so, and he was lost. 

Then look again. He was false to his own convictions. He was 
convicted of the fact that Jesus was put into his hands through 
envy. He was probably convicted that Jesus was what He 
claimed to be—the King of the Jews, the Saviour of the world— 
not only that, but he was unstable; he didn’t dare to have a mind 
of his own; he didn’t dare to decide this question according to his 
convictions, on account of public clamor; not only that, but he 
allowed others to decide for him. Young lady, is it not that which 
keeps you out of the kingdom of God? Do you not let other 
people decide for your Are you not looking around to see what 
other people will say—what they will think if you accept Him, when 
you know deep down in your heart that He is your only salvation? 
You look to see what your companions will say, and if they lift up 
their voices in derision, you haven’t the moral courage to decide 
according to your convictions. You let them decide for you. Pilate 
never ought to have let this question go from him. All those 


aerate ~~ ————— Spores 


eo et 


458 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 
judges against Him looked to worldly interests in their decision 
but did you ever glance through the Scriptures to see what those 
people gained by fighting against Christ? Did you ever take a look 
into profane history to see what those men gained? Guo and see 
what calamities befel them who fought against Christ. You all 
know what became of Judas. Look at him when he came back 
with the money. His conscience became a hell, and he came back 
to the Tempie into the office where the chief priests were and threw 
down the thirty pieces of silver. Look at the picture of despair. 
He had for thirty pieces of silver, bought his own eternal damnation 

He couldn’t keep the money, because he had been the means of 

shedding innocent blood, and threw it down before the men who 
gave it to him and went out and committed suicide. Judas was 
dead and damned before Christ died on the cross. Look at Caiaphas, 
Before the end of the year he was deposed. Then that wicked 
Herod had him dressed up like a mock king, and said, “ Hail, King 
of the Jews,” in derision, and his soldiers spat upon him. Herod 
died an infamous death after he had been hurled from his throne, 
and banished to a foreign country. And this man who gave his 
sentence was banished, and he, too, committed suicide. I don’t 
know what made him commit suicide, but I can imagine. When 
they took his office from him, and sent him off to a foreign land, his 
conscience began to smite him. He thought of that day when 
Christ was brought before him. That was his day of decision—that 
was the crisis in his life. I believe there is a day of decision in our 
lives ; a day upon which the crisis of our lives occurs. There isa 
day when the Son of Man comes and stands at our heart and knocks 
and knocks for the last time and leaves us forever. I can imagine 
when Pilate was banished how this recollection troubled him day 
and night. He remembered how that Saviour had looked on him 
—how innocent He was; he remembered how, when the Jews were 
clamoring for His death, and the cry echoed through the streets of 
Jerusalem, “ Crucify Him! crucify Him!” it seemed as if He had 
nothing but love for them. Probably some one told him the story 
of the crucifixion, and how, when nailed to the cross, and the howl- 
ing mob around Him, He cried: “Father, forgive them; they 
know not what they do;” he remembered how they clamored for 
His life, and now he hadn’t the moral courage to stand up for the 
despised Nazarene, and that preyed upon his mind, and he put an 
end to his miserable existence. My friends, what did these men 


Gr Sete RO owe a ee 


Q 


ision 

those 

a look 

nd see 

‘ou all 

e back 

ie back 

1 threw 

lespair. 

nation. 

eans of 

1en who 

das was 

aiaphas. 

- wicked 

ruil, King 
Herod 

s throne, 

gave his 
I don’t 

When 

land, his 

hay when 

jion—that 

ion in our 
here is a 

ad knocks 

in imagine 
him day 
d on him 
Jews were 
streets of 
if He had 
the story 
the howl- 
em; they 
tmored for 
up for the 
he put an 
these men 


JESUS CHRIST MUST BE RECEIVED OR REFECTED. 459 


widow. +e. 


Ses, 


gain by fighting against Christ? Let me ask you to-night, What 
does a man gain by fighting against Him? Does the devil pay you 
for your service? You men who make light of everything pure and 
holy; you men who make light of salvation’s gift—of the gift of 
God’s only Son, what do you gain by it? I have to find the first 
man who ever gained anything by fighting against Christ. My 
friends, “It is hard to kick against the pricks. It is hard to contend 
against God Almighty.” 

Now, it seems to me, the best thing that every man and woman 
in this audience can do to-night, is to make an unconditional sur- 
render of your soul and body to Jesus Christ. Decide this question 
to-night, “ What shall I do with this Jesus?” and it may be that an 
angel is hovering over you—hovering over that young man as he 
says, “ What shall I do?”—waiting to carry the answer back to 
Heaven. I beg of you, settle this solemn question. Say, “I ac- 
cept.” I don’t know whether Herod was touched, but Pilate, 
Agrippa, and Felix were; but they preferred a worthless bauble to 
salvation. They have come almost to a decision to accept Him, 
but, on account of unholy influences, they reject Him. As I said 
before, men don’t like this idea of being forced to a decision. A 
man the other day got offended at me when I asked him, “ Do you 
cooily, calmly, and deliberately reject the Son of God?” “TI do.” 
“Do you know what it is to reject the Son of God? it is condemna- 
tion.” “I deny it, sir.” “ Well, ‘He that believeth in Him is not 
condemned, but he that believeth not is condemned already.’” 
“Well, I don’t like you to put it so plain,” he answered. ‘God has 
put it plain, so that we can understand it, and if we reject it we are 
condemned.” Why, people in this audience have got a good 
deal more light than Pilate had; yet because he didn’t take his 
stand and believe, he was condemned. Now, are you going to take 
your stand beside Pilate, and spend eternity with him, or are you 
going to take your stand with Herod and mock Him? From what 
I hear, many people on going out of this building mock every- 
thing about the meetings. They mock the singers, they mock the 
preaching, the Christian people they see. Well, you can mock and 
go down with Herod. Yes, mocker, you can come into this build- 
ing and take a chair yonder, and trifle and mock everything you 
hear. You can do it; but, my friends, if you trifle with His offer 
He will condemn you. The devil, who prompts you to trifle with 
sacred things, will by and by become your tormentor. Go trifle 


aera Z 


MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


460 
with the forked lightning, trifle with small-pox, with yellow fever 
but don’t, I pray you, trifle with the Son of God. I beg of you 
don’t get up and leave this building laughing and scoffing at the 
text to-night. I don’t care how much sport you make of the min- 
ister, but I beseech you don’t make sport of the solemn question, 
‘What shall I do then with Jesus, which is called Christ?” Don’t 
trifle with this gift of God for a wicked world. It was an unspeakable 
gift; it cost God all He had. There was once a Welsh minister who 
read out the passage of Scripture: “ How shall we escape if we 
neglect so great salvation?” And he paused and leaned over his 
pulpit and said: “ My friends, this is a question I can not answer; 
it is a question that the angels from Heaven can not answer.” 
“ How shall you escape if you neglect so great salvation?” What 
will you do with the gift to-night? Will you hurl it from you 
—trample it under your feet ? will you send back the insult- 
ing message, “I don’t want it?” O, man of pleasure, what 
will you do? Look at Solomon, how he took up mirth, and 
then wine, and then another and another pleasure, and after he 
had got to the end of the whole catalogue of pleasures he 
just bundled them together and said: “ All is vanity and vex- 
ation of spirit.” O, man of pleasure, what are you going to do? 
You may be after honor or position—that was what Pilate wanted ; 
you may seek to be governor of men, but if you seek pleasure and 
happiness in position, or in the attainment of great things, you will 
be disappointed. If you want solid comfort and peace, decide to- 
night to take Him as your Saviour—to take Him as your Redeemer, 
as your way, your light, your righteousness, your justification— 
decide to-night to take Him as your all-in-all. My friends, what 
will you do with Him? As I said before, an angel of light may be 
here—may be bending over that man in the gallery yonder. He 
may be scoffing; I don’t know. He may have a mother in the East 
who is praying for him now, or he may have a mother in the celes- 
tial kingdom. I don’t know; there may be more angels than people 
in this room waiting for your decisions. May this young man and 
that young lady say, “I will decide this question to-night ; I will 
not go out of this world without Him; I can not reject again; I 
may not have another opportunity.” How many of those who 
were'lost in the Brooklyn Theatre if they had been spoken to last 
Sunday about Christ and Heaven would have rejected Him? but 
how much would they give now if they could have the opportunity 


LA a 


Sf Ou ttp te eu, 


S. 


»w fever 
x of you 
g at the 
the min- 
question, 
” Don't 
speakable 
ister who 
upe if we 
1 over his 
yt answer ; 
answer.” 
2” What 
from you 
the insult- 
sure, what 
nirth, and 
d after he 
easures he 
>and vex- 
ng to do? 
te wanted ; 
easure and 
ps, you will 
, decide to- 
Redeemer, 
tification— 
iends, what 
ght may be 
onder. He 
in the East 
n the celes- 
than people 
g man and 
ight ; I will 
ct again; I 
those who 
bken to last 
h Him? but 
opportunity 


GESUS CHRIST MUST BE RECEIVED OR REFECTED. 461 


you have to-night? Angels may be hovering over every one of 
you, waiting for your answer. “I will, I will receive Him, cost 
what it may; I will break through every obstacle and take salvation 
as a gift to-night.” And how that angel will wing his way to the 
mansions of Heaven, and how the bells of Heaven will peal forth 
their anthems, and songs will go up. “ There are men and women 
in the Tabernacle to-night deciding the question,” My friends, let 
this blessed Sabbath evening be the night of your salvation. Do 
not be like Caiaphas, or Pilate, or Agrippa, or any of those men 
who despised or trifled with the question. 

. The last time I preached upon this question was in old Farwell 
Hall. I had been for five nights preaching upon the life of Christ. 
I took Him from the cradle and followed Him up to the point in 
the judgment-hall, and on that occasion I consider I made as great 
a blunder as ever I made in my life. If I could recall my act I 
would give this right hand. It was upon that memorable night in 
October, and the Court-house bell was sounding an alarm of fire, 
but I paid no attention to it. You know we were accustomed to 
hear the fire bel! often, and it didn’t disturb us much when it 
sounded. I finished the sermon upon “What shall I do with 
Jesus?” And I said to that audience, “ Now, I want you to take 
the question with you, think over it, and next Sunday I want you 
to come back and tell me what you are going to do with it.” What 
a mistake. It seems now as if Satan was in my mind when I said 
this. Since then I never have dared give an audience a week to 
think of their salvation. If they were lost, they might rise up in 
judgment against me. ‘“ Now is the accepted time.’”’ We went 
down-stairs to the other meeting, and I remember what Mr. Sankey 
was singing, and how his voice rang when he came to that pleading 
verse : 

“ To-day the Saviour calls ; 
For refuge fly. 
The storm of justice falls, 
And death is nigh.” 


After the meeting we went home. I remember going down La 
Salle street with a young man, who is probably in the hall to-night, 
ind saw the glare of the flames. I said to the young man, “ This 
means ruin to Chicago.” Avout one o'clock Farwell Hall went ; 
soon the church in which I had preached went down, and every- 
thing was scattered. I never saw that audience again. My friends, 


462 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


we don’t know what may happen to-morrow; but there is one thing 
I do know, and that is, if you take the gift you are saved. If you 
have eternal life you need not fear fire, death, or sickness. Let 
disease or death come, you can shout triumphantly over the grave 
if you have Christ. My friends, what are you going to do with 
Him to-night ? Will you receive Him? Or put it this way: How 
many will reject Him? Suppose I was to put it to the vote, is there 
any one here who would rise and reject Him as their Saviour? Say, 
friend, what are you going to do to-night ? It is a solemn question, 
and may God drive it home to your heart: “ What shall I do with 
Jesus?” How many are there here who will say, “I will receive 
Him; I believe it; from this time I will trust Him to save my 
soul?” He will save you if you but say this sincerely. May God 
bring you to a decision, and may this be the happy hour when you 
shall receive the Son of God as your Saviour and Redeemer. 


PRAYER. 


Our Father in Heaven, as we come this night we pray Thee to 
bless these men. Save them. We have come up here to pray for 
their souls’ salvation. May they realize the gift of Thy holy Son, 
Jesus Christ, and accept Him as their Saviour before they leave this 
building. May they realize the awful end that awaits them if they 
continue in theirsins. May they realize the sweet influence of Christ’s 
love, and turn and serve Him to-night. May these fathers, these 
brothers, these sons, be converted and go from this house to their 
homes and erect there the family altar. May the prayers of their moth- 
ers, their sisters, their daughters, their wives, avail much, and may 
they be brought to see Christ their Saviour in the true light. And 
when many of them have grown old, may they look back to this 
night, and realize that it was the happiest of their life. We thank 
Thee for the great assembly within these walls to-night, for when 
we see this, we know that the Spirit of the Lord is here. Tarry 
with us, O Father, through this meeting, and may we all go home 
blessing Thee because we have found the Lord... We ask it all in 
Jesus’ name. Amen. 


¢ 


yne thing 
If you 
ess. Let 
the grave 
. do with 
ay: How 
e, is there 
ur? Say, 
question, 
I do with 
ill receive 
y save my 
May God 
when you 
mer. 


ay Thee to 
to pray for 
y holy Son, 
ry leave this 
hem if they 
e of Christ’s 
thers, these 
buse to their 
their moth- 
h, and may 
light. And 
back to this 
We thank 
t, for when 
here. ‘Tarry 
all go home 
ask it all in 


' 
. 


LV. 


THE RICH FOOL. 


LUKE xii, 20: “But God said unto him: Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be 
required of thee.” 


OU will see by reading this portion of Scripture that he was 

what we would call nowadays a successful business man—a 

man that many parents would hold up to their sons as a 
model. I don’t think he was a drinking man; there’s nothing in 
the story that would lead us to suppose he was. He hadn’t made 
his money in getting up corners on grain; he didn’t get it by any 
acts of usury by which he drew twenty percent.; he didn’t get it 
by making a corner on gold or getting up a Black Friday; he didn’t 
make his money by betting on elections or buying stocks, but he got 
it lawfully. No doubt he was a moralist ; certainly there is nothing 
in what we have read to-night against his character. That was not 
his fault. He didn’t rent his property for billiard halls, for liquor 
saloons, or to harlots; he was a farmer. I don’t know of a more 
lawful occupation than that of a farmer. He was a successful man. 
I don’t believe he ever compromised with his creditors by paying 
fifty cents on the dollar when he could pay a hundred. He didn’t 
get his money that way. He didn’t get it by shaving notes, or by 
taking advantage of the widow and orphan, or those who were poor, 
but he got it lawfully. He was an upright man. I presume if he was 
here we would send him to Congress, or if we could not send him 
to Congress, we would make him Mayor. He was a thoroughly 
good business man, who paid all he promised to pay. He was what 
we would call a shrewd man—a long-headed man, just deluged with 
business, and, undoubtedly, if you had spoken to him about his 
soul’s welfare he would have turned to Scripture and said, “ Be not 
slothful in business.” Business must be attended to first; that’s 
what Scripture teaches. And I think that Chicago men have got 
as far as that in Scripture, and there they stop. A man came out 
here from the Est, and a minister asked him to preach in his pulpit, 
(463) 


464 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


and he picked out the text, “ Not slothful in business,” but went no 
further. “‘ Why,” said the minister to him, “don’t you know that all 
Chicago have got that down in their soul; why don’t you preach 
upon the whole of the text, and not a part?” “Not slothful in 
business.”” Chicago doesn’t want that kind of preaching. He forgot 
the rest—“ fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.” This man was 
earnest with business. He had got off that part of the text. Un- 
doubtedly he moved in the best society of his time. He had the 
best turnout in that part of the country. He had the best farm 
in that section of the country, and the best horses and cattle. 
If he had been living to-day, probably he would have had the best 
short-horn cattle and the very finest-wool sheep. He had the very 
best, undoubtedly, in his time, and had been called a great success. 
No doubt, in those days they had revival-meetings; of course they 
had, because one of the greatest revivals that ever took place occur- 
red in those days under John the Baptist. Perhaps it took place 
near his farm; but he could not leave his business to attend it. 
Great multitudes flocked past his house from early morn till late at 
night on their way to the banks of the Jordan to hear the greatest 
revivalist that ever lived, except Jesus Christ. But he didn’t leave 
his business to go; he probably thought they were fanatics. The 
idea of a business man turning from his legitimate business, from his 
merchandise—should waste his time to hear that preacher. No 
doubt he belonged to the synagogue. He believed in set doctrines, 
and walked accordingly. He would not hear of those innovations, 
The idea of spending his time in going to listen to a man who was 
clothed with a leather girdle, and fed on locusts and wild-honey! 
No, sir; he wouldn’t hear him. Undoubtedly, Jesus and His 
apostles passed by that way; and he might have, one night, enter- 
tained Him. Perhaps he had heard about the dead being raised 
by this man, as these drunkards are being raised in Chicago to-day 
—men who are being lifted from sin and degradation, and a new 
song put into their mouth. Like a great many of these business 
men to-day, perhaps, he said, “ Oh, it’s only a nine-days’ wonder, 
and the excitement will be gone soon.” Christ came and went; 
but he was so pressed with business that he hadn’t time to attend 
to what that Heavenly preacher said. He hadn’t time to go to 
those meetings on the banks of the Jordan. So it is with men to- 
day. They haven’t time to look into this great question of Jesus 
Christ. They have heard of Him, but can’t stop to see how He 


tie 


rent no 
that all 
preach 
Aful in 
e forgot 
an was 
t. Un- 
had the 
st farm 
cattle. 
the best 
the very 
success. 
irse they 
ce occur- 
ok place 
attend it. 
ill late at 
a greatest 
In’t leave 
ics. The 
s, from his 
cher. No 
doctrines, 
ovations. 
who was 
|d-honey ! 
and His 
cht, enter- 
ping raised 
Wexe) to-day 
and a new 
e business 
rs’ wonder, 
and went; 
p to attend 
ep to go to 
h men to- 
yn of Jesus 
be how He 


THE RICH FOOL. 465 


came, why He came, or what He has done. Business is so pressing. 
Undoubtedly he had the very best wine there was in the land, and 
it was always on his table, although he wasn’t a drunkard. He had 
the very best fruit, the very best fish and game upon his table. The 
very best material he wore-—perhaps he sent all the way down to 
Egypt to buy clothing for his wife and daughters. His turnout 
was the most stylish—probably he was often seen with a four-in- 
hand on the highway. Everybody said he was getting along nicely. 
If a friend came to see him, he would take him all around, and 
show him his land and his barns, and point to this and that part that 
he was going to pull down and make larger; business was increas- 
ing. He would show him all through his grand house, and tell how 
he was once a poor boy, how his father died, and how the creditors 
came and took everything—how he had commenced life with 
nothing, and he had made all his friend saw. Just like a great many 
men here. They will tell how they came to Chicago poor boys, 
how by hard work, by incessant toiling, they have gained what they 
have now, taking all the glory to themselves, instead of giving it to 
God. 

Look at him! If aman cheated him out of five dollars how he 
would resent it. Shrewd, practical business man: and yet the 
devil was cheating him out of his soul. That is the way to-day. 
The world calls successful men—though they neglect their eternal 
welfare—shrewd, practical men. Oh, how blind—how short-sighted 
they are! They are just living for time. The great trouble with 
this man was, he was blind—he was just living from the cradle to the 
grave. He didn’t want to take death into his plans. “In every 
man’s garden there is a sepulchre.” My friends, in every man’s 
home there is a sepulchre. Death is inevitable, and is not a man 
mad who does not take it into his plans? 

Look at him! One night he is in the drawing-room of this 
beautiful palatial home, and he stands with an architect looking 
over plans. He is going to have a new barn built. It is going to 
be the best that money can erect. He doesn’t want any of his neigh- 
bors to approach him. It is going to be the very best. The archi- 
tect has gone away, and he stands there looking over the plans. 
His family have retired, and all the servants have gone to bed. 
The doors and windows are all double-locked, double-barred, sealed, 
chained—fastened securely ; but a stranger comes in slowly and lays 
a cold hand upon him, and says, “Come! I must take thee away.” 


3° 


406 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


‘Who art thou, stranger?” “Iam Death.” He should not have 
been any stranger to him. The idea of Death being a stranger to 
any of us. Why, death is all around us. No doubt he had attended 
many funerals, and, perhaps, acted as pall-bearer. Perhaps he was 
like some people in Chicago ; he never heard a sermon except when 
he attended a funeral. He had heard a sermon then and had seen 
the body laid in the ground, and now his time has come. He 
wants to bribe Death, and offers him thousands of dollars to give 
him a little more time; but he can not bribe Death. You can 
bribe politicians, you may bribe these business men, but there is an 
officer that never can be bought, never can be bribed, and when he 
comes, we have to obey his summons. When Death says, ‘ Come, 
you must go with me,” we have to obey him. When Death entered 
that chamber and said, “ Come, I want thee,” he might have cried, 
“ Let me live a little longer; let me have these places finished ; 
just a few years longer.” ‘ Come,” says Death, “come.” ‘ Why, 
what are you going to do with me? Where are you going to take 
me?” “You have had time enough to see to that; you must 
come now.” The man weeps and cries, “I’ve got a loving wife, I 
have loving children, I have got a perfect palace—a beautiful home, 
which I have been all my life preparing; I’ve just got it fixed up now; 
don’t summon me away now; oh, Death, spare me a little longer.” 
Like that queen he crias, “O foraninch of time!’’ But says Death, 
“Come!” and lays his cold hand upon that heart, and it ceases to 
beat. Perhaps when the servants come in they find him sitting at his 
desk dead. The news spreads through the house, and that wife learns 
that she is a widow. I see that widow and those children gathering 
around the body of that father. The family physician comes. He 
looks at that body and puts his hand on that pulse, but the pulse that 
told the man how fast he was traveling toward eternity has ceased to 
beat. There is a stir in that community next morning—“ Squire so- 
and-so is dead; he was a shrewd man; practical, successful man.” 
Perhaps, at the funeral, the whole community turned out, and prob- 
ably got a minister, as they get them in our day, to come to the 
funeral and deliver a eulogy over him, and say he was very benevo- 
lent to the poor; he was very philanthropic, and held him up as an 
example. It seems to me there is more lying at funerals than any- 
where else. Men stand up and pronounce a eulogy over men who 
have lived a churchless, Godless life—who have gone down to a 
Christless, Godless grave, and hope, because they have been wise and 


xt have 
iger to 
tended 
he was 
ot when 
ad seen 
ie. He 
to give 
You can 
ere is an 
when he 
66 Come, 
1 entered 
ve cried, 
finished ; 
“Why, 
x to take 
you must 
ng wife, I 
‘ful home, 
dup now ; 
e longer.” 
bys Death, 
ceases to 
ting at his 
vife learns 


gathering 
ymes. He 
pulse that 
ceased to 
Squire so- 
Isful man.” 
and prob- 
me to the 
ry benevo- 
up as an 
than any- 
men who 
down to 4 
en wise and 


THE RICH FOOL, 467 


good to the poor, they have gone to a better world. God sees Jiffer- 
ently. You and I maytry to make out this man as a shrewd man, a 
wise man, a man to be held up as an example, but just see what the 
Son of Man says about him. He says such a man is an abomination 
to God. The Son of Man says, “ Thou fool.” He wrote his epitaph, 
and it has been handed down to us as a warning—handed down for 
eighteen hundred years. 

I can imagine some of you saying, “If I had known that he 
would have talked about death to-night, I would not have come. 
Why doesn’t he talk about life, about happiness? Why doesn’t he tell 
us about how to get on in business—how to get through the battle 
of life? Why does he speak about death only?” I will tell you 
why it is. It is because nine out of every ten die unexpectedly; it 
is because nine out of every ten die wholly unprepared. They may 
have been warned, death may have come very near, it might have 
entered their house and taken away a loved wife, loved children, a 
loved father or mother—death may have come into their homes 
four, five, six, seven, ten times, and taken relatives from their midst, 
yet they’re unprepared. Do you know that six millions of people 
die annually in this world? Since I came here and began preaching 
in this Tabernacle, death has thrown its mantle around many a one. 
Do you remember that Death, in this cold, dark, bleak night, 1s do- 
ing his work? I am speaking to some who may be in eternity to- 
morrow. I come to tell you to be prepared. Is not it downright 
folly to spend your lives in piling up wealth, and to die as this man 
died, without hope, without Christ, without eternal life? Let me 
call your attention to this. The sin of this man was simply neglect, 
it is clear. We can not condemn his business; it was honest, legiti- 
mate. But the thing we do condemn is, that he neglected to secure 
his soul’s salvation. A great many say, “Am I not kind to the 
poor, am I not honorable in all my transactions, do I not paya 
hundred cents on the dollar always?” But are you honest to your 
soul’s salvation? You may fold your arms and depend upon your 
deeds, but if you do not seek salvation in this world, you will be lost. 
You know that there are three steps down the hill, and they are 
to neglect, to refuse, and to despise. Now all in this audience are 
standing on some of the steps of this ladder. You can see if a man 
neglects his salvation he will be lost. All you men, if you neglect 
your business, leave it to itself, you know you will soon become 
bankrupt. And if a man wants to die, all he has to do is. ta 


468 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


neglect to call in a doctor. Look at a general of an army 
of ten thousand men. He knows that there is an army of 
ten thousand coming to meet him, but he goes and takes his glass 
and sees in the distance another army of ten thousand men who are 
coming up to reinforce his enemy. He knows he can not delay; if 
he does he will soon be overwhelmed by the twenty thousand men 
ahead of him. A man who neglects his soul’s salvation does not 
look at what is ahead of him, and the enemy comes up and over- 
whelms him. Death comes, as it probably came to this man, at the 
midnight hour, unexpectedly and unbidden. You know more men 
die at night than in the day—from twelve to three o’clock in the 
morning. How many die unexpectedly. Look at the millions and 
millions who die unexpectedly. Although we live the allotted time 
—three-score and ten—when death comes it comes unexpectedly, 
This man had provided for his family; he had built up a great busi- 
ness, had provided for his own wants, but he made no provision for 
his own soul. You might have gone to his house and taken up a 
pencil and written on everything he possessed, “Thou fool.” He 
spent all his life in accumulating money, and then he had to leave it 
all. A sailor was telling a man that his father and his grandfather 
and his great-grandfather were all drowned at sea, and th> man said, 
“Why don’t you get prepared to die, then; you may be drowned any 
day, too?”” “Where did your father die?” inquired the sailor. 
“On land.” “And your grandfather?” “On land.” “And your 
great-grandfather?’”’ “On land, too.” “Are you prepared to 
die?” “Well, no.” “Why don’t you get prepared?” asked the 
sailor. He didn’t think he was in danger continually himself, but 
‘that the sailor was. 

I think the greatest text that is given to us is, “ Prepare te meet 
thy God.” Are you ready? Why do you neglect any longer te ac- 
cept salvation? All the children of Israel had to do to be cured 
was to look on that brazen serpent; they were healed instantly. If 
they neglected to look upon that serpent they died. All you have 
gat to do is to look upon Christ and receive life. Look at that In- 
dian who is in his canoe. He has gone to sleep. Perhaps he may 
‘be dreaming about the hunting-grounds, perhaps he may be dream- 
ing of his friends in the Indian village. Yet he is in the rapids 
which are taking him over the cataract. He is not rowing toward 
(it; he is sound asleep, the paddle lies in the bottom of that canoe. 
Without any effort af his own, the current is taking him toward the 


in army 
rmy of 
his glass 
who are 
lelay ; if 
and men 
does not 
ind over- 
un, at the 
nore men 
ck in the 
llions and 
otted time 
xpectedly, 
reat busi- 
ovision for 
raken up a 
fool.” He 
to leave it 
srandfather 
> man said, 
owned any 
the sailor. 
‘And your 
prepared to 
’ asked the 
himself, but 


are to meet 
onger tu ac- 
o be cured 
stantly. If 
ll you have 
at that In- 
aps he may 
y be dream- 
the rapids 
wing toward 
that canoe. 
toward the 


1) 


THE RICH FOOL. 469 


falls. By and by the poor man wakes up, he sees he is on the brink 
of the cataract. In afew moments he will plunge over. He gives 
an unearthly cry, and down he goes into the jaws of death. How 
many men are here to-night who are in the current that is carrying 
them to the cataract—rushing on to judgment. A great many things 
in this land are not sure. You may buy grain, you may buy land, you 
are not sure whether the value will go up or down; but there is one 
thing that you are sure of, and that is death. ‘For it is appointed 
unto men once to die, but after this the judgment.” After that the 
judgment. You can be sure of that. 

Now the question is, Are you ready? I can imagine some of you 
saying, “I’ve got time enough; I don’t propose to settle this ques- 
tion just yet; there’s a good many years before me.” Is there 
a man who can say this? Is there a man who can say, “To- 
morrow is mine?” We are on a journey toward the judg- 
ment. Have you got a hope in the future—have you that 
which will take you over the grave—have you that power which 
will carry you through death and judgment? You go to Graceland 
and summon up the dead. Bring them into this hall in the midst 
of this audience with their ghastly winding-sheets and see how many 
of them died old. You will find that more have died young than 
old. Why, whole populations are swept into eternity before they 
reach their allotted age. Instead of three-score and ten, the allotted 
age nowadays is about thirty years. My friends, we will soon be in 
eternity. What are you doing? Are you reflecting? 

Some of you are on the second round of the ladder. You are 
refusing. I was talking to a lady last night, and she said calmly, 
coolly, and deliberately, “I don’t want Him; I don’t want Christ.” 
“Do you really mean this?” I asked. “ Yes, I don’t want Him.” 
I presume a few years ago she would not have saic this, but she had 
got on the second round of the ladder; and some now despise it. 
If you get a tract upon the streets you will just tear it up. You mock 
or make light of the God of your father or your mother. You have 
got on the bottom round of the ladder and you despise the gift of 
God. My friends, that is the last round. A man has sunk pretty 
low when he despises the gift of God—when he hurls it back to 
God and sa, >, “I will not have it.” 

Now, I want to ask you this question, What are you going to do? 
Will you think a few minutes, young men? Will you stop for a 
few minutes and just think? I wish I could wake this audience up 


SecatenenS ree coe tee i ee me Se 


470 MOODY S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


for nve minutes. Just ask yourselves where you are; or to make it 
more personal, “ What am I? Where am I going?” A dying man 
called a Hindoo priest to his bedside, and asked him where he was 
going. The priest said he was going into an animal. “ Well, after 
that where am I going?” “Going into another animal.” “ Where 
next?” “Into another animal ;” and he went o.: telling the man 
he would enter into this and that animal until he stopped. Then 
the man asked, “ Where shall I go after that?” The poor heathen 
priest could not tell him. Ah, won’t you settle this question to- 
night? “ What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world 
and lose his own soul?”’ Suppose a man has the whole wealth 
of Chicago rolled at his feet, and then he dies, what has he gained? 

A father was on his death-bed lately, and he called in his son. 
The boy was careless; he would not take death into account. He 
‘vanted to enjoy the pleasures of life, and he took no heed for a 
future. The old man said, “ My son, I want to ask you one favor, 
_and that is, when I am dead I want you to promise me you will 
come into this room for five minutes every day for thirty days. 
You are to come alone; not to bring a book with you, and sit 
gere.” The thoughtless young man promised todoit. The father 
died. 

The first thing when he went into that room that he thought of 
was his father’s pray) _—-his father’s words, and his father’s God, and 
before the five minut =  .pired he was crying out, “ God, be merci- 
ful to me.” It seems .. mest I could get men to ask themselves, 
“What is going to be my end?” “Where am I going to spend 
eternity ?” it would not be long before they would come to Christ. 
You may be moralists, you may be proprietors of a successful busi- 
ness, you may be what the world calls successful business men, yet 
“Where are you going to spend eternity?” Can you tell me where 
you will be next year?—can you tell me where you are going to be 
ten years hence? Can you tell me? I want to read a little notice 
on a card which is headed, “I have missed it at last.” 

A few months ago, in New York, a physician called upon a young 
man who was ill. He sat for a little by the bedside, examining his 
patient, and then he honestly told him the sad intelligence that he 
had but a short time to live. The young man was astonished; he 
did not expect it would come to that so soon. He forgot that 
death comes “in such an hour as ye think not.” At length he 
looked up in the face of the doctor, and with a most despairing 


make it 
ng man 
he was 
ll, after 
‘Where 
he man 
Then 
heathen 
tion to- 
le world 
> wealth 
gained ? 
his son. 
nt. He 
ed for a 
ne favor, 
you will 
rty days. 
1, and sit 
he father 


ought of 
God, and 
be merci- 
emselves, 
to spend 
o Christ. 
ssful busi- 
men, yet 

e where 
ing to be 
tle notice 


a young 
ining his 
e that he 
ished; he 
rgot that 
length he 
Hespairing 


THE RICH FOOL. 471 


countenance repeated the expression, “I have missed it—at fast.” 
““What have you missed?” inquired the tender-hearted, sympathiz- 
ing physician. “I have missed it—at last,” again the young man 
replied. The doctor, not in the least comprehending what the poor 
young man meant, said, ‘“‘ My dear young man, will you be so good 
as to tell me what you—” He instantly interrupted, saying, “Oh, 
doctor! it is a sad story—a sad, sad story that I have to tell. But 
I have missed it.” ‘ Missed what?” ‘ Doctor, I have missed the 
salvation of my soul.” “Oh! say not so. It is not so. Do you 
remember the thief on the cross?” ‘Yes, I remember the thief 
on the cross. And I remember that /e never said to the Holy 
Spirit, Go thy way. But Jad. And now He is saying to me, Go 
your way.’ He lay gasping awhile, and looking up with a vacant, 
staring eye, he said, “I was awakened and was anxious about my 
soul a little time ago; but I did not want religion then. Some- 
thing seemed to say to me, ‘Don’t postpone it.’ I knew I ought 
not to doit. I knew I was a great sinner and needed a Saviour. I 
resolved, however, to dismiss the subject for the present. Yet I 
could not get my own consent to do it until I had promised that | 
would take it up again, at a time not remote and more favorable. 
I bargained away, insulted, and grieved awav the Holy Spirit. 1 
never thought of'coming to this. I meant to have religion, and 
make my salvation sure. And now I have missed it—at last.’ 
“You remember,” said the doctor, “that there were some who came 
at the eleventh hour.” “My eleventh hour,” he rejoined, “was 
when I had that call of the Spirit. I have had none sin-e—shall 
not have. I am given over to be lost.” ‘Not lost,” said the doc- 
tor, “you may yet be saved.” “ No—not saved—never. He tells 
me I may go my way now. I know it—I feel it here,” laying his 
hand upon his heart. Then he burst out in despairing agony, 
“Oh, I have missed it! I have sold my soul for nothing—a feather, 
a straw—undone forever.” This was said with such unutterable, 
indescribable despondency, that no words were said in reply. After 
lying a few moments he raised his head, and looking all around the 
room as if for some desired object—turning his eyes in every direc- 
tion—then burying his face in the pillow, he again exclaimed, in 
agony and horror, “Oh! I have missed it at last,” and he died. 
Dear friends, you may not hear my voice again. I may be speak- 
ing to you for the last time. You may never come into this Taber- 
nacle again, and I beg of you, as a friend, and as a brother, do not 


472 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


go out of this Tabernacle without salvation. Let this night be the 
night that you will accept everlasting life. Let this be the night on 
which you will cry from the depth of your heart, “Let me have 
Christ—let me have salvation.” “Though it cost me my right 
hand or my right eye I will have Christ to-night.’”’ May that be 
the cry of every one here to-night, and salvation be accepted for 
time and eternity by every soul in this building. May God wake 
up every soul here to-night, and when the summons comes, may 
you go to triumph over the grave and so enter into a glorious im- 
mortality. 


- be the 
ight on 
ne have 
ry right 
that be 
pted for 
od wake 
nes, may 
‘ious im- 


LVI. 


PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN; or, PRIDE AND 
PENITENCE. 


LUKE xviii, 9-14. 


WO men went up to the Temple—one to pray to himself, and 
the other to pray to God, and I think it wil! be safe to divide 
the audience into two bodies, and put them under these two 

heads. I think, however, whether we divide the audience or not, 
we come under these two heads—those who have the spirit of the 
publican, and those who have the spirit of the Pharisee. You can 
find that the whole community may be divided into these two 
classes. The spirit of the prodigal and the spirit of an elder brother 
are still in the world; the spirits of Cain and Abel are still in the 
world, and these two are representative men. One of them trusted 
in his own righteousness, and the other didn’t have any trust in it; 
and I say I think all men will come under these two heads. They 
have either given up all their self-righteousness—renounced it all, 
and turned their back upon it—or else they are clinging to their 
own righteousness; and you will find that these self-righteous men 
who are always clinging to their own righteousness, are continually 
measuring themselves by their neighbors. “I thank God that I am 
not as other men are.” That was the spirit of that Pharisee, and 
that is the spirit to-day of one class in this community, and the 
other class comes under the head of this other man. 

Now, let us look at the man Christ pictured first. It is evident 
that he was full of egotism, full of conceit, full of pride; and I 
believe, as I have said before on this platform, that is one of the 
greatest enemies the Son of God has to-day; and I believe it keeps 
more men from the kingdom of God than anything else. Pride can 
grow on any soil, in any climate—no place is too hot for it, and no 
place is too cold for its growth. How much miserv has it caused 
in this world! How many men here are kept from salvation by 
(473) 


474 MOOD VS SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


pride! Why, it sprung up into Heaven, and for it Lucifer 
was cast out; by pride, Nebuchadnezzar lost his throne. As 
he walked through Babylon, he cried, “Is not this a_ great 
Babylon which I have built?” and he was hurled from his throne. 
How many men who have become drunkards, who are all broken up 
—will gone, health gone—are just as full of pride as the sun is of 
light. It won’t let them come to Christ and be saved. A great 
many live like this Pharisee—only in the form of religion; they 
don’t want the wheat, only the husk; they don’t want the kernel, 
only the shell. How many men are there in Chicago who are just 
living on empty form. They say their prayers, but they don’t mean 
anything. Why, this Pharisee said plenty of prayers, but how did 
he pray? He prayed with himself. He might as well pray to this 
post. He didn't pray to God, who knew his heart a thousand times 
better than he did himself. He thought he knew himself. He for- 
got that he was as a sepulchre, full of dead men’s bones; forgot that 
his heart was rotten, corrupt, and vile, and he comes and spreads 
out his hands and looks up to Heaven. Why, the very angels in 
Heaven veil their faces before God as they cry, “ Holy, holy, holy.” 
But this Pharisee comes into the temple and spreads out his hands, 
and says, “ Lord, I thank Thee that Iam not as other men are; 1 
fast twice a week.” He set before God what he had done in com. 
parison with other men, and was striking a balance and making out 
God to be his debtor, as thousands in Chicago are doing to-day ; 
and then he says, “I give one-tenth of all I possess.” I suppose 
if he was living in Chicago now, and we had gone to him. and asked 
him for a donation to put up this Tabernacle, he would have said: 
“Well, I think it will do good; yes, I think it will—it may reach 
the vagabonds and outcasts—I don’t need it, of course—but if it 
will reach that class it will do good. I will give fifty dollars, 
especially if you can get it in the morning papers; if you can have 
it announced, ‘John Jones gave fifty dollars to build the Taber- 
nacle.’” That’s the way some of the people give donations to God’s 
cause; they give in a patronizing way, but in this manner God won't 
accept it. If your heart don’t go with your gift, God will not accept 
it. This Pharisee says, “I give one-tenth of all I have; I keep up 
the services in the Temple; I fast twice a week.” Tle fasted twice 
a week, although once was only called for, and he thought because 
of this he was far above other men. A great many people now- 
adays think because they don’t eat meat, only fis, on Fridays, they 


Lucifes 
ne. As 

a great 
_ throne. 
roken up 
un is of 

A great 
on; they 
e kernel, 
y are just 
yn’t mean 

how did 
ry to this 
and times 

He for- 

yrgot that 
d spreads 
angels in 
sly, holy.” 
his hands, 
ven are; | 
je in com- 
aking out 
g to-day ; 
I suppose 
and asked 
have said: 
may reach 
—but if it 
ty dollars, 
h can have 
he Taber- 
s to God’s 
God won't 
not accept 
I keep up 
hsted twice 
ht because 
rople now- 
days, they 


PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN, 475 


deserve great credit, although they go on sinning all the week. Look 
at this prayer; there’s no confession there. He had got so bad and 
the devil had so covered up his sins that he was above confession. 
The first thing we have to do when we come to God is to con- 
fess. If there is any sin clustering around the heart, bear in 
mind we can have no communion with God. It is because we 
have sin about our hearts that our prayers don’t go any higher 
than our head. We can not get God’s favor if we have any iniquity in 
our heart. People, like the Pharisee, have only been educated to 
pray. If they didn’t pray every night their conscience would 
trouble them, and they would get out of bed and say their prayers ; 
but the moment they get off their knees, perhaps you may hear 
them swearing. A man may just as well get a string of beads and 
pray tothem. It would do him as much good. This Pharisee’s 
prayer showed no spirit of contrition; there was no petition; he 
didn’t ask anything from God. That is a queer kind of prayer 
“Lord, I thank Thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, 
unjust, adulterous, or even as the poor publican.” Not a petition 
in his prayer. It was a prayerless prayer —it was downright 
mockery. But how many men have just got into that cradle and 
been rocked to sleep by the devil. A short time ago I said toa 
man, “ Are you a Christian?” “Of course lam; I say my prayers 
every night.” “But do you ever pray?” “Didn't I tell you I 
prayed?” he answered. “But do you ever pray?” ‘Why, of 
course I do; haven’t I said 1?” was his reply. I found that he 
prayed, but he only went through the form, and after a little I 
found that he had been in the habit of swearing. ‘“ How is this?” 
I asked, “swearing and praying! Do your prayers ever go any 
higher than your head?” “ Well,” he replied, “I have sometimes 
thought that they didn’t.” My friends, if you are not in com- 
munion with God, your prayers are but forms; you are living in 
formalism, and your prayers will go no higher than your head. 
How many people in this assembly just go through the form. 
They can not rest until they say their prayers. How many are 
there with whom it is only a matter of education. 

But this man trusted in his own righteousness; he ignored the 
mercy of God, the love of Jesus Christ. He was measuring himself 
by his own rule. Now, if you want to measure yourself, do it by 
God’s law; by God’s requirements. A great many people have a 
tule of their own by which they measure themselves, and by that 


<—— —= = = 


See : 


— 


Soret 


476 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


rule are perfectly ready and willing to forgive themselves. Soit was 
with this Pharisee. The idea of coming to God and ask His forgive. 
ness never enters his mind. While talking to a man—one of those 
Pharisees—some time ago about God and his need of Christ, he 
said, “I can do without Christ; I don’t want Him; I am ready to 
stand before God any time.” That man was trusting in his own 
righteousness. There are a good many in Chicago like this man; 
they think they can get on without Christ—without a mediator. 
Now take a good look at thisman. You know I have an idea that the 
Bible is like an album. 1 go into a man’s house, and, while waiting for 
him, I take up an album froma table and open it. I lookata picture. 
‘Why, that looks like a man I know.” I turn over and look at an- 
other. “ Well, I know that man.” By and by I come upon another, 
“Why, that man looks like my brother.” Iam getting pretty near 
home; I keep turning over the leaves. ‘ Well, I declare, there isa 
man who lives in the street I do—why, he is my next-door neigh- 
bor.’ And then I come upon another, and I see myself. My 
friends, if you read your Bibles you will find your own pictures 
there. It will just describe you. Now it may be there is some 
Pharisee here to-night ; if there is, let him turn to the third chapter 
of John, and see what Christ said to that Pharisee: ‘“ Except a 
man be born again he can not enter the kingdom of God.” Nico- 
demus, no doubt, was one of the fairest specimens of a man in 
Jerusalem in those days, yet he had to be born again, else he 
couldn’t see the kingdom of God. But you may say, “Iam not a 
Pharisee ; I am a poor, miserable sinner, too bad to come to Him.” 
Well, turn to the woman of Samaria, and see what He said to her. 

See what a difference there was between that publican and that 
Pharisee. There was as great a distance between them as between 
the sun and the moon. One was in the very highest station, and 
the other occupied the very worst. One had only himself and his 
sins to bring to God, and the other was trying to bring in his posi- 
tion and his aristocracy. I tell you, when a man gets a true sight 
of himself, ail his position, and station, and excellences drop. See 
this prayer: “I thank God,” “I am not,” “I fast.” “TI give,” “I 
possess.” Why, if he had delivered a long prayer, and it had been 
put into the hands of printers, they would have had to send out 
for some “I’s.” “I thank God,” “I,” “1,” “I.” When a man 
prays, not with himself, but to God, he does not exalt himself, he 
doesn’t pass a eulogy upon himself. He falls flat down in the dust 


0 it was 
forgive- 
of those 
irist, he 
eady to 
his own 
is man; 
\ediator. 
that the 
iting for 
picture. 
ok at an- 
another. 
tty near 
here isa 
yr neigh- 
elf. My 
pictures 
is some 
d chapter 
Except a 
.’ Nico- 
a man in 
, else he 
am not a 
to Him.” 
id to her. 
and that 
between 
ation, and 
lf and his 
his posi- 
true sight 
Hrop. See 
give,” “I 
had been 
send out 
en a man 
himself, he 
in the dust 


before God. In that prayer you don’t find him thanking God for 
what He had done for him. It was a heathen, prayerless prayer— 
merely a form. I hope the day will come when formal prayers will 
be a thing of the past. I think the reason why we can not get more 
people out to the meetings is, because we have too many formal 
prayers in the churches. These formal Christians get up like this 
Pharisee, and thank God they are better than other men; but when 
a man gets a look at himself, he comes in the spirit of the publican. 
You see this man standing praying with himself, but God could not 
give him anything. He was too full of egotism—too full of him- 
self. There was no religion in it. God could not bless him. 

Now, for a moment, take a look at that poor publican. Just give his 
prayer your attention. There was no capital “1” there, no exalting 
of himself—“ God, be merciful to this Pharisee ; God, be merciful to 
other people who have injured me; God, be merciful to the church 
members who have not been true to their belief.’ Was that his 
prayer? Thank God he got to himself. ‘God, be merciful to me, a 
sinner.” It was very short. He had got his eye upon himself; he 
saw that his heart was vile; he could not lift his eyes to Heaven, 
but, thank God, he could lift his heart to Heaven. There is not a 
poor publican in the audience to-night but can send up this prayer. 
No matter what your past life has been—no matter if it has been as 
black as hell—if you but send up the prayer, it will be heard. He 
didn’t buy his own righteousness; and God heard his prayer. 
Spurgeon, speaking of that publican, said he had the soundest the- 
ology of any man in all England. He came before God, struck his 
hand on his heart. and cried, ‘‘God, be merciful to me, a sinner.” 

There was a man at one of our meetings in New York City, who 
was moved by the Spirit of God. He said, “I am going home, and 
I am not going to sleep to-night till Christ takes away my sin; if I 
have to stay up all night and pray, I'll doit.” He had a good dis- 
tance to walk, and as he went along he thought, “ Why can’t I pray 
now as I go along, instead of waiting to go home?” But he did not 
know a prayer. His mother had taught him to pray, but it was so 
long since he had uttered a prayer that he had forgotten. However, 
the publican’s prayer came to his mind. Everybody can say this 
prayer. That man in the gallery yonder, that young lady over 
there, “God, be merciful to me, a sinner.’ May God write it on 
your hearts to-night. If you forget the sermon, don’t forget that 
prayer. It is a very short prayer, and it has brought joy—salvation 


PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN, 477 


5 ER a ae 
a ints 7 - + + 


478 AMTOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESS.SS AND PRAYERS, 


—to many asoul. Well, this prayer came to the man, and he be. 
gan, “God, be merciful to me, a ——,’’ but before he had got to 
sinner God had blessed him. He got up in the young converts’ 
meeting and told us that as he said those words the light of eternal 
truth broke upon his soul—the light from the celestial regions of 
glory broke upon him—and when we left New York City he was 
walking in the righteousness of God. 

In a meeting recently a man got up. I didn’t know him at first. 
When I was here he was a rum-seller, and broke up his business and 
went to the mountains. This is how it happened. When I was 
here before, he opened a saloon and a grand billiard hall. It was 
one of the most magnificent billiard halls on the West Side, all ele- 
gantly gilded and frescoed. For the opening he sent me an invita- 
tion to be present, which I accepted, and went around before he open- 
edit. I sawthe partners, and asked them if they would allow me to 
bring a friend. They said certainly, but asked me who it was. 
Well, I said it wasn’t necessary to tell who it was; but I said, “I 
never go without him.” They began to mistrust me. ‘ Who is it ?” 
they again inquired. ‘“ Well, I'll come with him, and if I see any- 
thing wrong, I'll ask him to forgive you.” “Come,” said they; 


“we don’t want any praying.” ‘“ You've given me an invitation, 
and I’m going to come.” “ But if you do come, you needn’t pray.” 
“Well,” said I, “I'll tell you what we'll do, we'll compromise the 
matter, and if you don’t want me to come and pray for you when 


’ 


you open, let me pray for both of you now,” which they agreed to. 
It turned out that one of them had a praying mother, and the 
prayer touched his heart, and the other had a sister in Heaven. I 
asked God to bless their souls, and just to break their business to 
pieces. In afew months their business did go all to pieces. The 
man who got up in the prayer-meeting told me a story that touched 
my soul. He said with his business he hadn’t prospered—he failed, 
and went away to the Rocky Mountains. Life became a burden to 
him, and he made up his mind that he would go to some part of 
the mountains and put an end to his days. He took a sharp 
knife with him which he proposed driving into his heart. He 
sought a part of the mountains to kill himself. He had the knife 
ready to plunge into his heart, when he heard a voice—it was the 
voice of his mother. He remembered her words when she was 
dying, even though he were a boy. He heard her say, “ Johnny, if 
ever you get into trouble, pray.” That knife dropped from his 


1 he be. 
1 got to 
converts’ 
f eternal 
gions of 
y he was 


n at first. 
iness and 
ien I was 
It was 
e, all ele- 
an invita- 
he open- 
low me to 
io it was. 
I said, “I 
ho is it?” 
| see any- 
aid they; 
invitation, 
In’t pray.” 
omise the 
you when 
agreed to. 
, and the 
eaven. I 
usiness to 
bces. The 
ht touched 
he failed, 
burden to 
ne part of 
a sharp 
eart. He 
the knife 
it was the 
n she was 


Johnny, if 


d from his 


PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN. 479 


hand, and he asked God to be merciful to him. He was accepted, 
and he came back to Chicago and lifted up his voice for Him. He 
may be in this Tabernacle to-night. Just the moment he cried for 
mercy he got it. If you only cry, “ God, be merciful to me, a sin- 
ner,” He will hear you. Is there anything to hinder you from do- 
ing this to-night? is there anything to hinder any man, woman, or 
child in this hall to-night from sending up this prayer? What a 
glorious thing it would be if every soul it, this hall would but lift 
up their hearts with the prayer, ‘“‘ God, me merciful to me, a sinner.” 

Now, a man asked me the other day, “ How is it that a man who 
has lived an ungodly life can come in here and be saved all at once?” 
Why, God so loves the sinner that He is willing to give them salva- 
tion instantly—He wants to save every one now in Chicago. The 
trouble is that we don’t want God to be merciful; we don’t want 
His forgiveness. God is full of compassion and love. It is the 
spirit of the devil that makes you believe the sins committed during 
the past twenty years can not be forgiven to-night. My friends, 
won't you try Him? But I will take you who believe this way, 
upon your own ground. Here is a father down here. He is full of 
self-righteousness; he is a Pharisee. He has a boy whom he has 
not seen for twenty years. Well, as he goes home to-night his 
servants tell him, ‘ Your absent son has returned.” “What!” he 
exclaims ; ‘‘my absent boy, Johnny, here—in this house?” “Yes; 
he is down in the kitchen; we wanted him to go into the parlor, 
but he wouldn’t; he said the kitchen was good enough for him.” 
He tells those servants to take him to his son; and for a moment 
the boy looks at him. ‘“ Father, father,” he cries, “I have been bad; 
I haven't done a good act intwenty years; I have been very unkind 
to you; but, father, won’t you forgive me?” Say, father, wouldn't you 
forgive him? Wouldn’t you? I would like to seea man in Chicago who 
would not. I can give you a little experience of my own familv. Be- 
fore I was fourteen years old the first thing I remember was the 
death of my father. He had been unfortunate in business and 
failed. Soon after his death the creditors came in and took every- 
thing. My mother was left with a large family of children. One 
calamity after another swept over the entire household. Twins 
were added to the family, and my mother was taken sick. The eld- 
est boy was fifteen years of age, and to him my mother looked 
asa stay in her calamity, but all at once that boy became a wan- 


480 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


derer. He had been reading some of the trashy novels, and the 
belief had seized him that he had only to go away and make a for- 
tune. Away he went. I can remember how eagerly she used to 
look for tidings of that boy; how she used to send us to the post- 
office to see if there was a letter from him, and I recollect how we 
used to come back with the sad news, “No letter.” I remember 
how, in the evenings, we would sit beside her in that New England 
home, and we would talk about our father; but the moment the 
name of that boy was mentioned, she would hush us into silence. 
Some nights when the wind was very high, and the house, which 
was upon a hill, would tremble at every gust, the voice of my mother 
was raised in prayer for that wanderer who had treated her so un- 
kindly. I used to think she loved him more than all the rest of us 
put together, and I believe she did. Ona Thanksgiving day—you 
know that is a family day in New England—she used to set a chair 
for him, thinking he would return home. Her family grew up and 
her boys left home. When I got so that I could write, I sent let- 
ters all over the country, but could find no trace of him. One day 
while in Boston the news reached me that he had returned. While 
in that city I remember how I used to look for him in every store— 
he had a mark on his face—but I never got any trace. One day 
while my mother was sitting at the door, a stranger was seen com- 
ing toward the house, and when he came to the door he stopped. 
My mother didn’t know her boy. He stood there with folded arms 
and great beard flowing down his breast, the tears trickling down his 
face. When my mother saw those tears she cried, “ Oh, it’s my lost 
son,” and entreated him to come in. But he stood still. ‘No, 
mother,” he said, “ I will not come in till I hear first you have for- 
given me.” Do you believe that she was not willing to forgive him? 
Do you think she was likely to keep him standing long there? She 
rushed to the threshold and threw her arms around him, and 
breathed forgiveness. Ah, sinner, if you but ask God to be merci- 
ful to you, a sinner—ask Him for forgiveness, although your life has 
been bad—ask Him for mercy, He will not keep you long wait- 
ing for an answer. May that be the cry of every lost soul in this 
Tabernacle to-night: “God, be merciful to me, a sinner.” Now, do 
you want to have mercy? Say, young man, will you ask Him to- 
night? Young lady, will this be your cry to-night: “God, be mer- 
ciful to me, a sinner?” May the love of God break every obdu- 


VY IG it SY Au A 


7 


SST ik HS 


— ~ ——— 
We 


ATHY 


YERS. 


vels, and the 


a for- 


1 make 
‘she 


d to 


use 


; to the post- 


a1] 


ect how we 


ember 


I rem 
w | 


Ne 


and 


ong] 


. 
4 


“VIHdTAGV IIHd 


‘HOUNHD 10adNG AHL LV 


Se 
\ N 


a ak 8. eS OS 
Seegeces 
we Yio eS 
ie 
= & « — 
> 8s Se 
Eo fee 
Ef&usde 


sob wo uy AY a 
SH#eee2l FE 
ee enn eee 

=) 

ace ee 22 < 
~o7o 2” mo & 
aoe Se 
-— ge ie — les, a 


-snnvyv oye owt. 
i @ } nm nn O & “es 
SER oOAZSER SES 
et ae ~ eee 5 eo 
Soe a” 2 pe 2 & 
os ao S> 05 
9pFdGV ns HH Zao 
eam wris i 
° pea 3 

aes ‘So es os 
ese. Bo mee 


AVGNOAS LSuld S AGOOW “UN 


your life has 
you long wait- 
t soul in this 


” Now, do 
u ask Him to- 
‘God, be mer- 


er. 


every obdu- 


PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN. 481 


rate heart here to-night, and may this be the cry of every sinner. 
Don’t have so much pride; don’t have the spirit of the Pharisee— 
that’s the spirit that keeps you from entering the inquiry-room and 
coming to the God of love, the God of compassion, the God of 
mercy, of peace, of joy, of everlasting happiness. Let every man 
and woman in this assemblage out of Christ take the place of this 
publican and go into the inquiry-room. 


KP! 


LVI. 


“WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE?” 


GAL. vi. 7, 8, 9: ‘“‘ Be not deceived ; God is not mocked ; for whatsoever a man 
soweth, that also shall he reap. For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh 
reap corruption ; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life ever- 
lasting. And let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, 
if we faint not.” ‘ 


HERE are some passages which we do not have to prove by 
the Word of God, but merely by our own experience. Your 
own lives will prove many passages of Scripture. You can 

take up the daily papers and see them fulfilled under your own eyes. 
This is one of them. Perhaps there has not been a text of Scripture 
run out in this Tabernacle as this one has. Night after night we 
have spoken about it. Night after night Mr. Sankey has sung out, 
“Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he reap.” My friends, 
we can not quote it too often. We want to quote it, and 
preach it till it gets down to the hearts of the people. Now 
it is very natural to be deceived. I suppose there is not a man 
or woman here but who has been deceived by his or her most 
intimate friends. You have been deceived by your own friends, 
and you have been deceived by your enemies, and how many couid 
rise up here and say they have not been deceived by themselves. 
How many of us have found our own heart more treacherous than 
anything else. How many of us have not found the truth of that 
passage, “ The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and des- 
perately wicked.’ 

We can be deceitful to each other, to our friends and to our- 
selves, but bear in mind, we can not deceive God. How often does 
man find that Satan has deceived him? But has he ever found 
God deceiving him? I have never found a man who has said that 
he has seen or that he has heard of anybody whom God has de- 
ceived. How many times has man said he has been deceived by 
his fellows-—by his own treacherous heart ; and or experience 


BE?” 


itsoever a man 
hall of the flesh 
it reap life ever- 
n we shall reap, 


to prove by 
fence. Your 
re. You can 
‘our own eyes. 
<t of Scripture 
ufter night we 
has sung out, 
My friends, 
huote it, and 
people. Now 
is not a man 
s or her most 
own friends, 
bw many couid 
by themselves. 
acherous than 
truth of that 
ings, and des- 


is and to our- 
Low often does 
he ever found 
5 has said that 
im God has de- 
n deceived by 
bor experience 


“WHAT SHALL THE HARV&ST BE?” 483 


in this direction only shows that we can not rely upon man, upon 
ourselves, but only upon God. 

Now, it is a law of nature that if a man sows he will reap what he 
sows. If a man sows watermelons, he doesn’t look for cauliflower ; if 
a man sows potatoes, he doesn’t look for cabbages ; if he sows onions, 
he doesn’t look for corn. If he plants potatoes, he expects potatoes ; 
if he sows corn, he looks for corn; or wheat, he expects to reap 
wheat. Soin the natural world a man expects to reap what he sows. 
Ii a man learns a carpenter's or a builder’s trade, he expects to 
put up buildings for a living. If a man toils and studies hard for a 
profession, if he is a lawyer, he expects to practice law. He doesn't 
expect to have to preach the Gospel for a living. He has been 
sowing for years, and he expects to reap. As a man sows, so he 
expects to reap. This is the law in the natural world, and so it is 
with the spiritual. ‘ Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be 
comforted ;” “‘ Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called 
the children of God;” “ Blessed are they which hunger and thirst 
for righteousness’ sake.” Why? Because they shall get rich? No; 
“for they shall be filled.” Now you see this is the result of spiritual 
conditions, and you will find it carried out all through this world. 
If a man is drunken and dissipated we look as a natural consequence 
of his dissipation to see him go to ruin. A friend of mine who was 
coming down with me to-night said, “ When I look back I can see 
that I started wrong when I came here. It seems as if I must have 
been blind. I did not see this till within the last two or three 
weeks.” My friends, that’s what Satan does with a man—he just 
blinds him, and when he has got a man blinded, he does anything 
he wants with him. It is very hard to make men understand this 
simple truth, that they will have to reap what they sow, especially 
young men from seventeen to twenty-one. That, you know, is the 
ugly stage. There is more trouble with them then that at any other 
stage. I knew a good deal more than my mother or any of my 
friends. You take a young man at that age, and you'll find he 
knows a great deal more than his father, his grandfather, or even 
his great-grandfather, all put together. “He is wise in his own 
conceit.” It is during that ugly age that characters are forming for 
good or evil, and bear in mind, young men, that ‘‘ Whatsoever a 
man soweth, that shall he also reap.”’ If a man sows tares, he has 
got to reap them. It may not be to-morrow, or next week, or next 
year, but the time of reaping wil assuredly come; and when the 


484 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


reaping time comes, you will moan bitterly; then you will like to 
change places with those Christians whom you despise now. When 
the reaping time comes, you would give a good deal if you could 
exchange places with the humblest-looking Christian. I suppose 
that Cain would give a good deal to exchange places with Abel to- 
night. Do you think Pilate would not like to change places with 
Elijah, with Obadiah, or Peter to-night? Don’t you think King 
Nero would like to exchange places now with Paul? Paul is reap- 
ing what he sowed, and so is Nero. All through Scripture you can 
see the proof of this text. Don’t you think that the rich man at 
whose door the beggar Lazarus lay, would like to exchange places 
with the poor Christian now? And bear in mind that you may 
look upon Christians with contempt, but the time is coming when 
you will give anything to exchange places with the meanest Chris- 
tian that walks the streets of Chicago. 

I used to believe twenty years ago in this text, but I believe it 
more now than ever I did. The longer I live, the more I become 
convinced of its awful truth. You know, I used to live in Chicago, 
and I used to go from house to house among the poor; and in go- 
ing among the poor, I gained no little experience of the rich people. 
In visiting the poor, I became acquainted with a good many rich 
families, and there is scarcely a week passes now but I hear of rich 
families who have gone down to ruin. Just inis afternoon I heard 
of a family who twenty years ago occupied a position among the 
best. They had a beutiful daughter, who could have adorned any 
station, and a lovely home, and I heard to-day that they had gone 
down toruin. They looked upon Christianity with scorn and con- 
tempt. The father brought his children up to treat all religion with 
contempt, and his sons have gone down to their graves drunkards, 
and his daughter has died of a broken heart. Yes, a man who sows 
tares must reap them, and sometimes the harvest is a whirlwind. 

Now, just let us divide that text up; not that I want to preach 
under different heads, but just for the sake of greater clearness. 
When a man sows, he expects to reap. This truth must be admitted 
first. A farmer that planted grain and never reaped his fields, you 
would say had gone clear mad. No man sows who doesn’t expect 
to reap. That is just what he does expect todo. The next point: 
A man always expects to reap more than he sowed. If he sows a 
handful of grain he expects to get from that handful a bushel, and 
if he sows a bushel he expects a harvest of five hundred bushels. 


S. 


ill like to 
When 
ou could 
suppose 
Abel to- 
aces with 
ink King 
il is reap- 
‘e you can 
h man at 
nge places 
, you may 
ning when 
yest Chris- 


I believe it 
e ] become 
in Chicago, 
and in go- 
rich people. 
many rich 
sear of rich 
bon I heard 
among the 
dorned any 
py had gone 
rn and con- 
eligion with 
drunkards, 
1n who sows 
hirlwind. 
t to preach 
br clearness. 
be admitted 
s fields, you 
bsn’t expect 
next point: 
f he sows a 
bushel, and 
red bushels. 


“WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE?” 48s 


And just so it is in spiritual matters. Ifa man scatters handfuls of 
tares in spiritual things his spiritual harvest will be bushels of tares, 
and not wheat. Whatever he sows he shall reap; just that, and 
nothing more; and if he sows the wind he must reap the whirlwind. 
AV man must expect a harvest of just the kind that his seed is, and 
this great law is even more true of spiritual growth than of natural 
growth. Ifa man is bad and corrupt in his thoughts, you can tell 
precisely what his deeds will be. If he has lying, thieving thoughts 
and wishes, look out for him, for he is going to turn out a liar anda 
thief. And the seeds of his bad character spring up even beyond 
his life, and choke all good from the lives of his children. His little 
children grow up to lie and deceive him just as he has deceived 
others. A bad boy is too often the living penalty of the sins of his 
parents; they have sown and watered, and now he is reaping the 
punishment. Another point: If a man sows, he must reap the fruit, 
no matter how ignorant he may claim to be, or really be, of the 
nature of the seed. A plea of ignorance won’t do. You sow tares 
and think it wheat, but nothing but tares will spring up. You may 
call it wheat, or rye, or grain of whatever name you please, but you 
get nothing but weeds and tares. You must look to what kind of 
seed you are sowing, for neither ignorance nor any other excuse can 
make tares bring forth wheat. And now, see how that is true in 
regard, not only to individuals, but to nations. Nations are only 
collections of individuals, and what is true of the part in regard to 
character is always true of the whole. In this country our fore- 
fathers planted slavery and an open Bible together, and didn’t we 
have to reap? Didn’t God make this nation weep in the hour of 
gathering the harvest, when we had to give up our young men, both 
North and South, to death, and every household almost had an 
empty chair, and blood, blood, blood, flowed like water for four long 
years? Ah, our nation sowed, and in tears and groans she had to 
reap ! 

Then look at the King in Egypt. He made a decree that all 
the male infants should be put to death, and to death they 
were put with all the horrors that hatred and jeaiousy could 
invent. It was terrible. Well, now, I suppose some people 
think it strange that God didn’t punish Egypt with swift destruc- 
tion. But look, the punishment only tarried. “The mills of the 
gods grind slow, but they grind exceedingly small ;” in eighty years 
cast your eyes on that miserable land. God’s vengeance at length 


. 
SS 
Se = 
Se ee = 


486 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


came down, and ruin along with it. In every house in Egypt the 
first-born was slain, from palace to the lowest hovel. There still 
lived a God, and this immutable law of His had still to be executed. 
They had to reap just what they had sown. Sometimes the hand 
of God comes down slow, but sometimes as rapidly as thunder 
follows lightning. In the very act of transgression the sinner 
perhaps is cut off. The fruit ripens in an hour, and it is death. 
Think of Judas ; how straightway his conscience tormented him till 
he rushed for relief and went out and hung himself. Ah, he reaped 
the betrayer’s fruit very quickly. And so did Cain. The swift 
punishment did not tarry, but cast him headlong. Often, very 
often, judgment and retribution descend out of Heaven like a flash ; 
God’s judgments have not tarried. 

I remember in the north of England a prominent citizen 
told me asad case that happened there in the city of Newcastle- 
on-Tyne. It was about a young boy. He was very young, but he 
said he was too young to go to Sunday-school. He was an 
only child. The father and mother thought everything of him, 
and did all they could for him. But he fell irto bad ways. 
He took up with evil characters, and finally got to running with 
thieves. He didn’t let his parents know about it. By and by 
‘tthe gang he was with broke into the house, and he with them. 
Yes; he had to do it all. They stopped outside the building, 
while he crept in and started to rob the till. He was caught in the 
act, taken into court, tried, convicted, and sent to the penitentiary 
‘for ten years. He worked on and on inthe convict’s cell, till at 
last his term was out. And at once he started for home. And 
when he came back to the town he started down the street where 
his father and mother used to live. He went to the house and 
rapped. A stranger came to the door and stared him in the 
face. ‘No, there’s no such person lives here, and where your 
parents are I don’t know,” was the only welcome he received. 
Then he turned through the gate, and went down the street, asking 
even the children that he met about his folks, where they were liv- 
ing, and if they were well. But everybody looked blank. The 
years had rolled by, and though that seemed perhaps a short time, 
how many changes had taken place. There where he was born and 
brought up he was now an alien, and unknown even in his old 
haunts. But at last he found a couple of townsmen that remem- 
ibered his father and mother, and they told him the old house had 


RS, 


Egypt the 
There still 
executed. 
; the hand 
is thunder 
the sinner 
t is death. 
ed him till 
, he reaped 
The swift 
Yften, very 
like a flash ; 


ent citizen 
Newcastle- 
ung, but he 
He was an 
ing of him, 
_ bad ways. 
unning with 
By and by 
with them. 
he building, 
aught in the 
penitentiary 
5 cell, till at 
home. And 
street where 
e house and 
him in the 
where your 
he received. 
treet, asking 
hey were liv- 
blank. The 
h short time, 
was born and 
in his old 
hat remem- 
d house had 


“WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE? 487 


been deserted long years ago; that he had been gone but a few 
months before his father was confined to his house, and very soon after 
died broken-hearted, and that his mother had gone out of her 
mind. He went to the mad-house where his mother was, and went 
up to her and said, “ Mother, mother, don’t you know me? I am 
your son.” But she raved and slapped him in the face and shrieked : 
“You're not my boy!” and then raved again and tore her hair. 
He left the asylum more dead than alive, so completely broken- 
hearted that he died in a few months. Yes, the fruit was long 
growing, but at last it ripened to the harvest like a whirlwind, and 
vengeance made quick work of it. The death-harvest was reaped. 

But bear in mind what I have said to-night, and be not doubters, 
even if the harvest is slow. Let me read to you the passage: “ Be- 
cause sentence against their evil deeds is not executed speedily, 
therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do 
evil. Though a sinner do evil a hundred times and his days be pro- 
longed, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear 
God-—which fear before Him; but it shall not be well with the 
wicked, neither shall He prolong his days, which are as a shadow, 
because he feareth not before God.” My friends, if you sow of the 
flesh you will of the flesh reap corruption; you will sometime or 
other reap despair; you will reap ruin; you will reap death; but if 
you sow of the Spirit you will reap joy, peace, happiness, and life 
everlasting—for God has said it. 

There are some that say, “Oh, yes; but what is the use of has- 
tening the harvest by an act of ours; what is the use of confes- 
sion?”’ Now, we are sure of few things earthly, but there is one 
thing we can be sure of. God says, “ Be sure your sins will find you 
out;” bear that in mind. God says, “ He that covereth his sin shall 
not prosper.” 

But let me say that if you are willing to confess your sins-—I 
don’t care what the sin may be—God is willing and ready to take 
it away. There has been a gocd deal of talk about my interfering 
with those prisoners lately. Some one has said, in speaking about 
that man in Ohio, “ Well, that is a queer kind of Christianity, to 
send a man back to the penitentiary to suffer.” Let me say here 
that that young man has said in his last letter: “I think I am hap- 
pier than you are, Mr. Moody; God is helping me to bear the bur- 
den; God is answering my prayers.” My friends, it was a great 
deal better for that man to confess his crime than to try to hide it 


488. 4 «9 MOODY'S SER./ONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


away. If a man commits a crime he should suffer the penalty. 1 
must suffer the penalty if I break my arm in fighting. The man 
whom I fought may forgive me for fighting with him, but I have to 
suffer all the same with my arm. A man got into a quarrel and got 
crippled, and some time ago he became converted, but although 
God has forgiven him his sin, he has to remain a cripple all his life. 
So a man must reap what he sows. I heard of an illustration that 
just helps me out here. Suppose I have a field, and I say toa man, 
“TI want you to sow that field with wheat.” The man has become 
very angry—out of sorts with me, and when he sows that wheat he 
puts in a lot of tares. When the wheat has come up I see among 
it a great many tares. I say to him, “ Did you sow these tares?” 
“Well,” he says, “I will confess; yes, sir, 1 did it; I sowed these 
tares; I will confess it instead of covering it up; I am very sorry;” 
and I forgive him. But when the wheat has to be harvested I make 
the man reap the tares also. 

You know how David fell. No man rose so high and fell so far, 
I think. God took him fron: the sheepfold and put him upon a 
throne. He took him from obscurity and made him King of Israel 
and Judea; gave him lands in abundance, and would have given him 
more if he had wanted them. He was on the pinnacle of glory, and 
honored among men. But one day, while looking out of a window, 
he saw a woman with whom he became enamored. He yielded to 
the temptation and ordered her to be brought into the palace, and 
committed the terrible sin of adultery. After that, as is the case 
with all men who commit a sin, he had to commit another to cover 
it up, so he laid plans to kill her husband, and ordered him to be 
put in a position in the ranks of his army so that he could be killed. 
Months rolled away, and one day Nathan came into the palace of 
the king. I can imagine that David was glad to see him. Nathan 
began to tell him about two men who dwelt in a certain city. The 
one was rich and the other poor; one had herds and flocks, and the 
other had only a little ewe lamb; and he went on to tell how this 
rich man seized this ewe lamb, all that the poor man had, and slew 
it. Icansee the anger of David as it flashed from his eve when 
he heard the story, and he cried, “As the Lord liveth, the man 
that hath done this thing shall surely die.” He turned to Nathan, 
and in tones of thunder demanded who the man was. “ Thou art 
the man,” was the reply of Nathan. David had convicted himself. 
* The man who did this thing shall die.” Then the Lord said, “I 


RS. 


enalty. 1 
The man 
- I have to 
rel and yot 
t although 
all his life. 
ration that 
y toa man, 
has become 
1t wheat he 
see among 
se tares?” 
owed these 
yery sorry ;” 
sted I make 


d fell so far, 
him upon a 
ing of Israel 
ve given him 
of glory, and 
bf a window, 
e yielded to 
p palace, and 
g is the case 
her to cover 
bd him to be 
ld be killed. 
e palace of 
m. Nathan 
in city. The 
bcks, and the 
tell how this 
ad, and slew 
is eve when 
Mth, the man 
H to Nathan, 
“ Thou art 
cted himself. 
ord said, “I 


“ WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE?" 489 


will raise up evil against you out of thine own house because thou 
hast kept this thing secret.” Soon after, the hand of death was put 
upon that house; not only did deach enter his house, but it wasn’t 
long before his eldest son committed adultery, and another com- 
mitted murder—murdered his own brothers, and went off into a 
foreign land into exile. Then he got up a rebellion and drove the 
king from the throne, and at last died and was buried like a dog, 
and they heaped stones upon his resting-place. ‘ Whatsover a 
man soweth, that shall he also reap.” David committed adultery, 
so did his son. David committed murder; his son did the same. 
He was paid back in his own coin. He learned the truth of this 
passage, “‘ Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” 
Why, I hear things every day in this city of Chicago that 
make my ears tingle. I heard of three cases, within the last six 
hours, where men who have gone to the altar and sworn before God 
to love, cherish, and protect the women who became their wives— 
who have become, some of them, mothers of children—and because 
these men have seen other women they like better, they cast off 
these women whom they have sworn before God to love. Do you 
think there is a God in Heaven? Do you think that God is not 
going to punish these men? They may go on in their career—pun- 
ishment may not come for a little while, but the wheels of judg- 
ment are going on, and retribution will come. Some of these heart- 
broken wives say it is hard. Wait a little while. His eyes cover 
all the earth, and man can not deceive Him. He has said: ‘“ What- 
soever a man soweth, that shal! he also reap.” High Heaven has 
decreed it, and I beg of you, if you have committed this sin, go and 
cry to the God of mercy; go confess it; don’t try to cover it up. 
Let every sin be brought out; if you don’t, your own conscience will 
turn against you by and by. 

When I was in London I went into Tussaud’s wax-works gallery, 
and I went into the chamber of horror. There were wax figures 
of all kinds of murderers in that room. There was Booth, who 
killed Lincoln, and many of that class; but there was one figure 
that I got interested in, who killed his wife because he loved another 
woman, and the law didn’t find him out. He married this woman 
and had a family of seven children, and twenty years passed away. 
Then his conscience began to trouble him. He had no rest; he 
would hear his murdered wife pleading continually for her life. 
His friends began to think he was going out of his mind; he be- 


490 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES A.¢D PRAVERS. 


came haggard, and his conscience haunted him till, at last, he went 
to the officers of the law and told them that he was guilty of mur- 
der. He wanted to die, life was so much of an agonyto him. His 
conscience turned against him. My friends, if you have done 
wrong, may your conscience be woke up, and may you testify 
against yourself. It isa great deal better to judge our own acts 
and confess them, than go through the world with this curse upon 
you. And if you to-night will judge your own sin, and confess it, 
He is faithful to forgive. He will forgive every sinner here, if you 
but come to Him in faith, and will blot out all your iniquities. 

I was telling of a young man who spoke up in the Association 
one night. He got up at the close of the meeting and said: “ Mr. 
Moody, may I saya few words?” Well, Ithought I would refuse, but 
then I thought perhaps he had a message from God, and I told him 
to speak. He went on and urged these young men to accept salva- 
tion. “If you have friends praying for you, if you have mothers 
praying for you, treat them kindly, for you will not always have 
them with you.” Then he went on to tell how he had once a father 
and mother who loved him dearly, and who prayed continually 
for him. Hewas an only son. His father died, and after the 
burial, his mother became more anxious than ever for his salvation. 
Sometimes she would come to him and put her arms around his 
neck and say with kindness, “Oh, my boy, I would be so happy if you 
would only be a Christian, and could pray with me.” He would put 
her away: ‘“ No, mother, I am not going to become a Christian yet ; 
Il am going to wait a little longer and see the world.” He would 
try to banish the subject from his mind altogether. Sometimes he 
would wake up at the midnight hour, and would hear the voice of 
that mother raised in supplication for her boy, ‘“‘O God, save my 
boy; have mercy upon him.” At last—this is the way he put it— 
“Tt got too hot for him.” He saw that he had either to become a 
Christian or run away. And away he ran, and became a prodigal 
andawanderer. He heard from her indirectly; he could not let his 
mother know where he was, because he knew she would have gone 
to the end of the world to find him. One day he got word that his 
mother was very sick. He began to think, “ Suppose mother should 
die, I would never forgive myself,” and he said, “I will go home,” 
but then he thought, “Well, if I go home she will be praying at me 
again, and I can’t stay under her roof and listen to her prayers ;” and 
his proud, stubborn heart would not let him go. Months went on, and 


EKS. 


ist, he went 
Ity of mur- 
yhim. His 
have done 
you testify 
ir own acts 
curse upon 
1 confess it, 
here, if you 
quities. 
Association 
said: “ Mr. 
id refuse, but 
.d I told him 
accept salva- 
ave mothers 
always have 
once a father 
d continually 
ind after the 
his salvation. 
ns. around his 
> happy if you 
He would put 
hristian yet ; 
” He would 
Sometimes he 
the voice of 
od, save my 
RY he put it— 
to become a 
e a prodigal 
uld not let his 
ld have gone 
word that his 
other should 
ill go home;” 
praying at me 
prayers ;”” and 
s went on, and 


‘WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE?" 491 


again he heard indirectly that his mother was very sick. [is consci- 
ence began to trouble him. He knew he would never forgive himsef if 
he didn’t go home, and he finally determined. There were no rail- 
roads, and he had to go in a stage-coach. At night he got into the 
town. The moon was shining, and he could see the little village 
before him. The mother’s home was about a mile from where he 
landed, and on his way he had to pass the village grocery; and as 
he went along, he thought he would pass through the graveyard | 
and see his father’s grave. ‘ What,” he thought, “if my mother 
has been laid there!’’ When he got up to the grave, he saw by 
the light of the moon a new-made grave. He felt the turf, and the 

earth was fresh and soft. He knew who had been laid there, and 

for once in his life the thought flashed upon him, ‘ Who will pray 

now for my lost soul? My mother and father lie there, and they are 

the only ones who ever prayed for me.” ‘ Young men,” said he, 

“T spent that night at my mother’s grave, and before the sun rose, 

my mother’s God had become my God. But I can never forgive 

myself for murdering my mother, although Christ has forgiven me.” 

My friends, that poor fellow had to reap what he sowed. 

I may be speaking to-night to some young man whose mother, 
perhaps, just now is in her closet wrestling in prayer for you. Do 
not treat that mother contemptuously; do not deny her prayer to- 
night ; do not make light of your mother’s cries to God this night. 
God's best gift on earth to you is that praying mother. She is your 
dearest, most unselfish friend in the world. Will you not heed her 
pleading prayer? Come out like a man; come down to your 
mother’s Saviour, and take Him to be your God. May the God of 
Heaven convict you of sin, and draw you to Himself, and this will 
be the best night you’ve had on earth. 


LVIII. 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN. 


LUKE v. 32: “I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. 


VV HENEVER you find a passage recorded by all three of the 
evangelists, you may know that it is one of those important 

truths which He wants to impress upon people. “I came 
not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.” It was 
when He first came down to Capernaum that He uttered these 
words. He had been cast out of Nazareth; they didn’t want Him; 
they wouldn’t have salvation, and He came down to Capernaum, 
and there He found Levi sitting at the receipt of customs, and He 
called him to become one of His disci-les. Levi was so full of joy 
when he had found Christ—as all you.ig converts are—-that he got 
up a great feast, and he invited all the publicans and sinners to it. 
I suppose he wanted to get them all converted—that was the reason 
he prepared a sumptuous feast. It was not to hear Jesus, but just 
to partake of the feast that Levi had prepared for them. And 
Jesus was there, too, among these publicans and sinners. The 
Pharisees were there too, and they began to murmur against His 
disciples, saying, ‘Why do these men eat with publicans and sin- 
ners?” and it was on this occasion ‘>t Christ uttered this wonder- 
ful text, “I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to re- 
pentance.” That’s what He came into this world for—He came into 
this world just for the very purpose of saving sinners. Now, a good 
many men come to Boston to do a certain work. Some come to 
practice law, that’s their profession; others come to practice medi- 
cine, because that’s their business; some are business men, and 
some are mechanics; and when Christ came into this world He 
came for a purpose; He had a profession, if you will allow me the 
expression—He came to call sinners to repentance. You know 
when He was going down to the Samaritan town, His disciples 
went down to see whether they would let Him come there. We 
find Him on His way from Galilee to Jerusalem. You know 

(492) 


i, 


‘epentance. 


I three of the 
yse important 
le. “I came 
ce.” It was 
ittered these 
‘t want Him ; 
» Capernaum, 
roms, and He 
so full of joy 
—-that he got 
sinners to it. 
vas the reason 
Jesus, but just 
r them. And 
sinners. The 
r against His 
icans and sin- 
this wonder- 
sinners to re- 
He came into 
Now, a good 
Some come to 
practice medi- 
ess men, and 
his world He 
allow me the 
e. You know 
His disciples 
e there. We 
m. .You know 


SERMON TO ERRING WUMEN, 493 


there was such a hatred between the Jews and the Samaritans that 
they would have no dealings with each other, and He sent His dis- 
ciples on to sce if He would be allowed to enter. The Samaritans 
would not allow Him there, and His disciples were so i: censed that 
James and John asked Jesus to “ command fire to come down from 
Heaven and consume them, even as Elias did.” ‘“ Why,” said the 
Son of Man, “I didn’t come to destroy men’s lives, but to save 
them.” That’s what He came for. He came to bless men; He 
came to do men good, and there is not a sinner here to-night whe 
can not be saved, and will be saved to-night, if they wish. You 
may call this world a great hospital, and all the people are born 
sick. A great many people imagine their souls are never diseased, 
who think they don’t need a physician; but when people wake 
up to the fact that their souls are diseased, then they find the 
need of a physician. But there is no need of the physician un- 
less you feel you are sick. You know you could not send a physi- 
cian to a man who was well. Suppose I go on the West Side and 
ask a celebrated physician to come over and see Mr. White. Sup- 
pose he comes round and finds Mr. White sitting in his drawing- 
room perfectly well. “ Why, how is this? Mr. Moody told me you 
were sick, and bade me make a professional call.” Not only is the 
physician disgusted, but the patient is too. The world don’t send 
for a physican till sickness comes. When it feels sick, then it sends 
for a doctor, and the doctor comes. And whenever a man feels his 
need of Christ and calls, that moment He comes and is healed. 
There is a Physican here to-night for every sinner, I don’t care what 
your sins may be, or how long you have been living in sin; I don’t 
care if your life has been as black as hell, the Great Physician is 
here. What for? Just to heal every man and woman that wants 
to be healed. 

Now, the great trouble is to make people believe they are sick; 
but the moment you believe that you are, then it is that you are 
willing to take the remedy. I remember some years ago a patent 
medicine came out, and the whole of the city was placarded about 
it. I could not turn my head but I saw “ Paine’s Pain Killer.” On 
the walls, on the curbstones, everywhere was “ pain killer,” “ pain 
killer.” I felt disgusted at the sight of these bills constantly telling 
me about this patent medicine. But one day I had a terrible head- 
ache, so bad that I could hardly see, and was walking down the 
streets and siw the bills again, and went and bought some. When 


Sess 


Sa 


eee 


494 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


I was well I didn’t care for it, but when I got sick I found it was the 
very thing I wanted. If there is one here who feels the need of a 
Saviour, remember the greater the sin the greater the need of a 
Saviour. I remember when I was coming back from Europe ona 
steamer there was a young officer aboard. I felt greatly drawn toward 
him, because I could see he was dying. It didn’t seem to him as if 
he was dying, but you know death is very deceitful. He seemed to 
be joyous and light-hearted. He would talk about his plans, and 
take out his guns and tell how he intended to go hunting when he ar- 
rived; but it seemed to me as if he would not live to see this coun- 
try. By and by he was taken down on his bed, and then the truth 
came to him that death was upon him. He got a friend to write 
out a telegram which this friend was to send to his mother when 
they arrived. It read: ‘ Mother, I am real sick. Charlie.” As 
sc on as the boat touched the shore he was to send it. “ But,” said 
some one, “ why not tell her in the telegram, ‘Come?’”’ “Ah,” he 
replied, ‘she will come.” He knew whenever she read it and saw 
that he wanted help, she would come. It was the knowledge of his 
need that would bring her. So Christ is waiting to hear our need, 
and man’s need brings out the help of God. As I said hefore, the 
real trouble is that men don’t think they need Him. You know that 
in one place in the fifteenth chapter of Luke they brought this 
charge against Him, “ This man receiveth sinners and eateth with 
them.” This charge was brought against Him again and again. I 
am told by Hebrew scholars that instead of “receiveth” it should 
be rendered, “ He is looking out for them.” And that’s what He 
was doing. He was looking out for them. He didn’t care how 
black in sin they might be, He was ready to take them. 

Now, a great many say, “Iam too great a sinner to be saved.” 
That is like a hungry man saying he istoo hungry to eat, ora sick 
may saying he is too sick to send for a doctor, or a beggar saying, 
“T am too poor to beg; I’ll wait till I get some money first.” If a 
man is hungry and perishing, you must relieve him. 

Now, there is not a sinner in Boston but has his representative 
in the Bible. Take, for instance, the publicans. You know the 
Jews thought this class about the lowest in the world. They put 
them lower than any other kind of sinner. They always placed 
them along with the publicans—“ publicans and sinners.” The pub- 
licans were the tax collectors, and they defrauded the people at every 
turn. For instance, a man in South Boston will pay over perhaps 


ERS. 


d it was the 
e need of a 
» need of a 
Zurope on a 
awn toward 
to him as if 
‘e seemed to 
is plans, and 
; when he ar- 
ee this coun- 
nen the truth 
end to write 
mother when 
Charlie.” As 
“ But,” said 
yy 6 Ah,” he 
ad it and saw 
owledge of his 
hear our need, 
aid before, the 
You know that 
y brought this 
d eateth with 
and again. | 
eth” it should 
yat’s what He 
idn’t care how 
bm. ° 
to be saved.” 
bh eat, or a sick 
beggar saying, 
ey first.” If a 


representative 
ou know the 
rid. They put 
always placed 
ers.” The pub- 
people at every 
y over perhaps 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN, 495 


a hundred thousand dollars for the privilege of just collecting the 
taxes, and then he goes to work and screws the people out of a hun- 
dred and fifty thousand dollars. He doesn’t care a straw for justice 
or appearances. He comes into the cottage of the widow and takes 
half she has. At every house the tax collector puts the blocks to 
his victims, and famine often comes in when he goes out. ‘The peo- 
ple detzst him; they hate him with a perfect hatred. They always 
find him a drag on them, ai.d have no sympathy with them. Their 
money, they find, is taken without warrant. Their homes are broken 
up and trouble and starvation come on them. And so the publican 
is hated wherever he turns. He is the agent of the Roman tyrant, 
and the people are brought up to shun him. He has deserved it 
all, and even more, by his heartless exactions, and yet Christ for- 
gave evenhim. And just so rum-sellers can be saved. And another 
class that Christ had mercy on was the thieves. When on the cross 
He saved a thief. There may be some thief here to-night. I tell 
you, my friends, you may be saved if you only will. There may be 
some one here who is persecuting a good wife and making her home 
a perfect hell on earth. But you, too, may be saved. When Saul 
was persecuting the Christians from city to city, he was stopped 
short by the voice of God; he was converted. And those high- 
headed Pharisees, so well versed in the law of Moses, even they 
were converted. Joseph of Arimathea was a Pharisee, and so was 
Nicodemus. But to-night I want to talk about another class that 
Jesus dealt with and led to a higher life. I want to talk about fallen 
women. There are some people who believe that these have fallen 
so low that Christ will passthem by. But, my friends, that thought 
comes from the evil one. In all this blessed Book there is not one, 
not a solitary one of this class mentioned, that ever came to Him 
but that He received them. Yes, He even went out of His way and 
sought her out. Now I want to take three representative cases where 
these women had to do with Christ. One is the case of an awakened 
one. The Spirit of God had dealt with her anxious, awakened soul. 
The Lord was one day at Jerusalem and a banquet was given Him by 
Simeon. There was a banquet table in the house, arranged according 
to the fashion of that day. Instead of chairs for the guests, as was 
customary, the guests sat reclining on lounges. Well, it was just 
at one of the repasts that our Lord sat down to, along with the 
wealthy Simeon and his many guests. But no sooner had He 
entered than this woman followed Him into the house, and falls 


496 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


down at His feet, and begins to wash them with her tears. It was 

the custom in those days to wash one’s feet on entering the house. 

Sandals were worn and the practice was necessary. Well, this wom- 

an had got into the house, and once inside, had quietly stolen up 

to the feet of Jesus. And in her hands she brought a box, but her 

heart, too, was just as full of ointment as the box she carried. And 

there was the sweetest perfume as she stole to His feet. And her 

tears started to fall down on those sact:d feet, hot, scalding tears, 

that gushed out like water. She said nothing while doing this, and 

then she ivook down her long, black hair and wiped His feet with 

the hair of her head. And after that she poured out the ointment 

on His feet. Then straightway the Pharisees began talking to- 

gether. How all through the New Testament these Pharisees kept 

whispering and talking together. They said, shaking their heads, 

“This Man receiveth sinners;” and then, “ This Man, if He were 

a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this y 

is that toucheth His, ror she isa sinner.” No prophet, they insisted, 

would allow that kind of a woman near him, but would push her 

away. And then the Saviour read these thoughts and quickly re- 

buked them. He said, ‘ Simeon, I have something to say to thee.” 

Aad he said, “ Master, say on.” And He said, “Seest thou this | 

i woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest Me no water to 

1 wash My feet; but she has washed My feet with tears, and wiped 

! them with the hairs of her head. Thou gavest Me no kiss, but this 

woman, since I came in, hath not ceased to kiss “Ly feet. My head 

with oil thou didst not anoint, but this woman hath anointed My 

; feet with ointment.” Simeon was like a great many Pharisees 

nowadays, who say, “Oh, well, we will entertain that minister if 
we must. We don’t want to; he’s a dreadful nuisance; but we will 
have to put up with him; it’s our duty to be patronizing.” Well, 

| the Master said more to His ertertainer. ‘There was a certain 

: creditor,” He said, “which had two debtors; the one owed five 

hundred pence, and the other fifty, and when he had nothing tc 

| pay ” —mark that, sinner; the debtor had nothing to pay. There 

| is no sinner in the world that can pay anything to cancel his debt 
to God. The great trouble is that sinners think they can pay, some 
of them seventy-five cents on the dollar, some even feel able to pay 

Fy ninety-nine cen‘s on the dollar, and the one cent that they are short, 

they think they can make that up some way. That is not the way; 

| it is all wrong; you must throw all the debt on God. Some few, 


RS. 


s, It was 
‘he house. 
this wom- 
stolen up 
yx, but her 
‘ried. And 
And her 
ding tears, 
ng this, and 
's feet with 
1e ointment 
talking to- 
arisees kept 
their heads, 
, if He were 
> woman this 
chey insisted, 
ld push het 
d quickly re- 
say to thee.” 
est thou this 
no water to 
s, and wiped 
kiss, but this 
et. My head 
anointed My 
any Pharisees 
it minister if 
b+ but we will 
zing.” Well, 
as a certain 
ne owed five 
d nothing tc 
pay. There 
ncel his debt 
an pay; some 
el able to pay 
they are short, 
| not the way; 
1. Some few. 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN. 497 


perhaps, will only claim to pay twenty-five cents on the dollar, but 

they are not humble enough, they can’t begin to carry out their 

bargain. Why, sinner, you couldn’t pay one-tenth part of a single 

mill of the debt you are under to Almighty God. Now it says in 

this parable that they could not pay him anything—they had noth- 

ing to give and the creditor frankly forgave them both. “ Now, Sim- 
eon,” the Master asked, “which should love that man the most?” 
“T suppose,’ was the reply, “he that was forgiven the most.” 
“Thou hast rightly judged; this woman loves much because she 
hath been forgiven much,” and went on to tell Simeon all about 
her. I suppose He wanted to make it plainer to Simeon and He 
turned to the poor woman and said, “ Thy sins are forgiven ”—all 
forgiven ; not part of them—not half of them, but every sin from 
the cradle up, every impure desire or thought is blotted out for 
time and eternity, and He said, “Go in peace.” Yes, truly, she 
went out in peace, for she went out in the light of Heaven. With 
what brightness the light must have come down to her from those 
eternal hills—with what beauty it must have flashed on her soul. 
‘Yes, she came to the feet of the Master for a blessing, and she got 
it, and if there is a poor woman here who wants a blessing, she will 
get it. 

I want to call your attention to a thought right here. You have 
not got the name of one of those poor women. The three women 
who had fallen, who had been guilty of adultery, and had been 
blessed by Him, not one of them has been named. It seems to me 
as if it had been intended that when they got to Heaven we should 
not know them—they will just mingle with the rest. Their names 
have not been handed down for eighteen hundred years. They 
have called Mary Magdalene a fa!len woman, but bear in mind there 
is nothing in Scripture to make us understand that she was a poor, 
fallen woman; and, I believe if she had, her name would not have 
been handed down. 

Now, the next woman was altogether different fron the woman 
in Luke. She didn’t come with an alabaster box, seeking a blessing. 
She was perfectly indifferent; she was a careless sinner. Perhaps 
there are some poor, fallen women who have come to-night in a 
careless spirit—only out of curiosity; they don’t want a Saviour; 
they don’t want their sins blotted out; they don t want any forgive- 
ness Perhaps she had heard that at Mocdy and Sankey’s they 
were going to preach repentance, and that a great many fallen 

32 


498 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


women were likely to be there, and thought she would just come 
down to see how they took it. Now you have a representative 
here. After Christ had that interview with Nicodemus, we are 
told He went up to Galilee by Samaria. He could have gone up to 
Galilee without going to Samaria, but He knew there was a fallen 
woman there. He got to the well, and sent off His disciples to get 
bread. Why did He not keep one with Him? Because He knew 
the woman was coming that way, and she would not probably like 
to see so many. While He is sitting on the curbstone of the well, 
a poor, fallen woman of Samaria comes along for water. You know 
the people in those days used to come out in the morning and even- 
ing to get their water, not in the blaze of the noonday sun. No 
doubt she was ashamed to come out there to meet the pure and the 
virtuous at the well, and that was the reason why she stole out at 
that hour. She brought her water-pot to get water, and when she 
came up, the Master stopped her and asked her for a drink, just to 
draw her out. She saw He was a Jew. We can always tell a Jew; 
God has put a mark upon them. “How isthis? You, a Jew, and 
ask a Samaritan fora drink? The Jews have no dealings with the 
Samaritans.” “ Ah, you don’t know Me,” He replied. “If you 
had asked Me for drink, I would have given you living water.” 
“ How could you give me living water? Why, you have no vessel 
to draw water with.” ‘ Whosoever drinketh of this water shall 
thirst again; but whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall 
give him, will have a well spring up in his heart into everlasting 
life.” ‘ Well,” probably she thought, “that is a good thing. One 
draught of water will give me a well—one draught of water for 
the rest of my days.” She asked Him for this living water, 
and He told her, “Go, bring thy husband.” He was just drawing 
her out, just got her up to the point of confession. “I have no 
husband,” she said. “ For thou hast had five husbands, and he whom 
thou now hast is not thy husband; in that saidst thou truly.” I 
can see that woman’s astonishment. She looks all around to see 
who had told Him all about her. Like a man who came up from 
Vermont lately, who came int» the Tabernacle and listened to the 
sermon, which, as he told me, seemed all to be preached at him. 
He wondered who had told me all about him. He got Christ, and 
is going back to Vermont to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 
The word of God reacted, and she saw she was detected. “Sir, 
I perceive Thou art a prophet ;” then she went on the old religious 


just come 
resentative 


us, we are 
gone up to 
vas a fallen 
iples to get 
se He knew 
robably like 
of the well, 
You know 
ng and even- 
jay sun. No 
pure and the 
» stole out at 
and when she 
drink, just to 
ys tell a Jew; 
yu, a Jew, and 
lings with the 
feu, ete ven 
living water.” 
have no vessel 
his water shall 
er that I shall 
to everlasting 
bd thing. One 
t of water for 
living water, 
as just drawing 
‘ oy have no 
5, and he whom 
thou truly.” I 
1 around to see 
bh came up from 
listened to the 
eached at him. 
got Christ, and 
of Jesus Christ. 
Hetected. SoM, 
He old religious 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN, 499 
discussion, but the Lord turned her from that, and told her that the 
hour had come when the people must worship the Father in spirit 
and in truth, not in this or that particular mountain, nor yet at 
Jerusalem. And she said, “ When the Messiah cometh He wiil tell 
us all things,” and when she had said this she was ready for the 
truth. Then Jesus said, “I am the Messiah.” Just then she saw 
His disciples coming, and probably she thought these men might 
know who she was, and she got up her pot, and away she went to 
the city. The moment she got within the gates she shouted, 
“Come and see this man I have met at the well. Is not this the 
Messiah? Why, He has told me everything I ever did.” And 
you can see all the men, women, and children running out of that 
city up to the well. As He stands in the midst of His disciples and 
He sees the multitudes coming running toward them, He says, 
“Look yonder; look at the fields, for they are already white with 
the harvest ; look what that poor fallen woman has done;” and He 
went into that town as an invited guest, and many believed 9n 
account of the woman’s testimony, and many more believed on 
account of His own word. 

Now, my friends, He did not condemn the poor adulteress. The 
Son of God was not ashamed to talk with her and tell her of that 
living water, those who drank of which, He said, would never die. 
He did not condemn her. He came to save her, came to tell how 
to be blessed here and blessed hereafter. 

The next case is still much worse. You may say it is like black 
blacker, blackest, compared with the other two. I want to speak 
about, this time, the eighth chapter of John. One woman I have 
spoken of was in the house of a Pharisee, at a dinner party; the 
other by the well of Sychar. And now we come to the Temple 
porch. They had taken a woman in adultery—had caught her in 
the very act. They had not got the man; they had hold only of 
the poor woman. What a commotion there would be here to-night 
if such a scene should take place in this Tabernacle, as a woman 
dragged in by her hair. The law against these poor sinners was 
most severe; a fallen woman was to be put to death—she was to be 
stoned to death. And now the Pharisees that were about to exe- 
cute the poor wretch, thought to catch the Master. They began to 
put questions to Him, tempting Him, and hoping to take Him in 
His speech. They told Him how they had surprised the wretched 
creature in the very act of sin, and then passed on to tell what the 


500 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


law of Moses hid fixed as the penalty. To be stoned to death was 
the only atonement. “But what sayest Thou?” they weut on, 
and then eagerly listened. But Jesus stooped down, and \,,ote on 
the ground, as though He hadn’t heard them. We don’t know 
what He wrote. Perhaps, “Grace and truth come by Jesus Christ ;” 
perhaps He wrote that; but while He thus busied Himself, they 
cried out the louder, demanding an answer to their question. So at 
length He lifted Himself up, and said, “ He that is without sin 
among you, let him first cast a stone at her.” Never did an answer 
more completely serve its purpose; you who never were guilty of 
this offence, just you cast the first stone. And amid the strangest 
silence, He again stooped and wrote with His finger on the ground. 
This time, perhaps, He wrote, “I am not come to call the righteous, 
but sinners to repentance.” And soon He rose again, but ere He 
did so, He heard the patter of retreating feet on the pavement, and 
when now He glanced up, He saw none but the woman. One by 
one they had been convicted by their own conscience, and slunk 
away; not one of them there could throw the stone. And the 
Saviour looked at the woman. I can just imagine the tears coming 
trickling down her cheeks as Jesus Christ, in kindest tones, asked 
her, “‘ Woman, where are those, thine accusers? Hath no man con- 
demned thee?” And for an instant she could not answer. Who 
knows how that poor soul had reached her sad plight? One of 
those very Pharisees who had left her, perhaps had led her astray. 
The very man who clamored loudest to condemn her was likely the 
guilty one. And there she stood alone; the betrayer was left un- 
touched, as too often he is to-day; a miserable, unjust, untrue 
sentiment, by which the man, who is equally guilty, is received in 
society, and the woman is condemned. But at last she gained her 
voice, and said, “No man, Lord,” and then, perhaps, told how her 
parents had died when she was very young. A stepmother, per- 
haps, had taken her and treated her harshly, and then had turned 
her adrift on the world. Or, perhaps, a drunken father had turned 
home into darkness, and she had been driven from it almost broken- 
hearted; and so in her helplessness, her innocent affections were 
gained, and then she had been led astray. The Master knew it all, 
and when He heard her reply, He said, “ Neither do I condemn 
thee; go and sin no more.” She had been dragged into the Temple 
to be stoned, but now Christ has delivered her. She came -to be 
put to death, but she received life everlasting. 


ath was 

ret on, 
,,.ote on 

it know 
Christ ;” 

self, they 

n. Soat 
thout sin 

an answer 
guilty of 
strangest 

1e ground. 
righteous, 

yut ere He 

ment, and 

1. One by 
and slunk 

And the 

ears coming 

ones, asked 

o man con- 

bwer. Who 
t? One of 

1 her astray. 
as likely the 
was left un- 
just, untrue 
| received in 
e gained her 
old how het 
pmother, per 
in had turned 
+ had turned 
most broken- 
fections were 
br knew it all, 

O J condemn 

o the Temple 

le came -to be 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN, 501 


My friends, the Son of God will not now condemn any poor fallen 
woman that leaves off her sins and just casts herself down at His 
feet. He will take you up just as you are. When in Philadelphia, 
a fallen woman came into the inquiry-room and threw herself down 
on the floor. The Christian helpers talked and talked to her, but 
could get nothing out of her; they couldn’t do a thing with her. 
The Hon. George H. Stewart came to me, and said, ‘‘ We wish you 
would come, we don’t know what to make of her.” She was weep- 
ing bitterly, and as far off as I was, I could hear her sobs all over 
the room. So I went and said,“ What is the trouble?” At last 
she spoke, and the bitterness of her despairing voice went to my 
heart. “J have fallen from everything pure, and God can not save 
me; there is no hope.” I told her tenderly that God could still 
lift her up and save her. I said, “ Are you only just willing to be for- 
given? <A merciful Father is waiting and longing to pardon.”’ She 
said at last she could not abandon her course, as no one would give 
hera home. But that difficulty was got round by my assuring her 
kind friends would provide for her; and then she yielded, and that 
same day was given a pleasant place in the home of a Presbyterian 
minister. But for forty-eight hours after entering her new home 
that poor reclaimed woman cried, day .d night, and we went for her 
mother, and on hearing our story, she clasped her hands and cried, 
“Has my daughter really repented? thank God for His mercy, my 
heart has just been breaking. I’ve prayed so lor. ‘or her without 
result; take me to her.” And that reformed daughter of sin has 
lived consistently ever since, and when I was last in Philadelphia 
she was one of the most esteemed members in that Presbyterian 
Church. And so every one of you can begin anew, and God will 
help and man will help you. Oh, turn, and do not die. Seven 
short years is the allotted life of a fallen woman. Oh, escape your 
early doom, escape your infamy, and hear God’s voice calling you 
to repent. Your resolution to amend will be borne up by hosts of 
friends; never fear for that. Just take the decided step, and you 
will be helped by every good man and woman in the community. 
Oh, I beseech you to act right now, and settle this great question 
for time and eternity. 

Let me say here, if there is any person in this Tabernacle who 
keeps a brothel, if you will but let in Christian ladies, and allow 
them to hold meetings, they will go. This idea that Christian 
ladies don’t care for your class is false—as false as one of the 


502 MOOD Y'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


blackest lies that ever came out of hell. Why, some of the first 
ladies of this city during the past few weeks have been visiting 
those brothels. Some time ago a few of them came to me to sce 
how they could get the names and locations of some of those 
brothels, and I called at police headquarters and obtained a list, and 
since then they have been visiting. And these charges that Chris- 
tian women will not have you, after your reformation, in their homes 
is equally false. I know a lady of culture who was not long ago in 
the inquiry-room on her knees, and when she got up, the girl in 
tears told her she was one of the fallen. ‘Come and stay at my 
house ; I will take care of you.” She was a poor colored girl, and 
kept her in her house till she got a situation. Let me ask you not 
to believe that we are cruel and hard-hearted—that we do not care 
for the fallen women, only the abandoned men. We have a place 
to put you, and if that is not large enough, why, the business men 
will put up another for you. There is abundance of protection and 
assistance if you only show that you are repentant. The Christian 
men and women will do all for you; they won’t try to help you 
down or cast you off. If you but repent, there are hundreds and 
thousands of people in this city whose hearts will go out to you. 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we pray for every poor fallen girl in this 
city ; Thine eye is upon them at this hour; they are strangers to us, 
but, O God, they are not strangers to Thee. Many of them may 
have praying hearts; it may be some of them may have praying 
fathers and mothers. O God, hear our prayers for them to-day. 
May the Spirit of God go abroad through this city between now 
and to-morrow night, and may we meet with hundreds and thou- 
sands of them; may they be drawn to the Tabernacle. And, O God, 
give us some word for them; give us a tender, loving message for 
them. May we speak to them as if the Master Himself was there 
in person. May the Word of God that shall be read fall down into 
their hearts and save them from a life of sin, from a life of disgrace, 
from a life of ruin, to a life of purity and holiness. Do Thou, O 
Lord, hear our prayers to-day especially for this one who has written 
this letter. O God, we pray that to-day she may be convicted of 
sin, that she may be converted, that her heart may be turned to the 
God of all grace, that she may be won to Thee, and become a bright 
and shining light in this city. It may be she has come into this 


'S. 


the first 
1 visiting 
ne to sce 
of those 
a list, and 
hat Chris- 
1eir homes 
yng ago in 
che girl in 
tay at my 
d girl, and 
sk you not 
Jo not care 
ave a place 
isiness men 
tection and 
1e Christian 
o help you 
indreds and 
t to you. 


girl in this 
angers to Us, 

f them may 

ave praying 

hem to-day. 

hetween now 

Is and thou- 

And, O God, 
message for 
lf was there 
411 down into 
t of disgrace, 
Do Thou, O 
o has written 
convicted of 
urned to the 
ome a bright 
me into this 


SERMON 70 ERRING WOMEN. 
503 


meetin i : ‘ 
ties es ee hour in hopes that something would be 
ike meres aeeere ses the prayers of this people be heard, that 
be saved of this 1 ae chee she may be one of hundreds that shall 
try here; and O God + this city in these closing days of our minis- 
but may the i lk od, help them not to go back to their old liv 

y walk humbly and pray erfully all their days. pea 


LIX. 
THE TEN “COMES.” 


WANT to call your attention first, to the “Come” in the fifty- 
fifth chapter c* the prophecies of Isaiah: “Incline your ear 
and come unto Me; hear, and your souls shall live; andI will 

make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of 
David.” 

“Incline your ear and come unto Me; hear, and your soul shall 
live.” Now, I find if we get people to listen—to pause and hear 
the voice of God—it isn’t long before they are willing to follow that 
voice; but it is so hard to get people to stop and listen for a mo- 
ment. The din of the world makes such a noise that the people 
don’t hear the voice—that still, small voice. He says, “Incline your 
ear and come unto Me.” Now, if we could only get all the friends 
in this audience to incline their ears this afternoon—not only your 
natural ears, but the ears of your soul—you could be saved to-day, 
But Satan does not want you to do this; he does all he can to keep 
your ears from hearing. He makes you think about yourself, about 
your sons, your homes; but, my friends, let us forget all those things 
to-day—let us forget all our surroundings and close our eyes to the 
world and just try and listen to the Word of God, and come and 
hear what He has to say. “Incline your ear and come unto Me; 
hear, and your soul shall live.” Now, let us turn to the tenth chap- 
ter of Romans, where we see, “ Faith cometh by hearing, and hear- 
ing by the Word of God.” Now, it is not my words I want to have 
you listen to—it is not my words I want you to hear this afternoon, 
but I want you to hear the words of this loving King who calls you 
to Himself. What does He say? In another place He says: “ Be- 
hold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear My voice and 
open the door, I will come in to him and sup with him, and he with 
Me;” or, “if any woman ”--or any one; that’s what it means, my 
friends—“ hear My voice and open the door, and I will come in to 
(504) 


* in the fifty- 
ine your ear 
e; and I will 
re mercies of 


our soul shall 
use and hear 
to follow that 
ren for a mo- 
at the people 
“Jncline your 
all the friends 
not only your 
e saved to-day. 
he can to keep 
yourself, about 
all those things 
our eyes to the 
and come and 
ome unto Me; 
the tenth chap- 
aring, and hear- 
s I want to have 
r this afternoon, 
g who calls you 
b He says: “ Be- 
ar My voice and 
im, and he with 
at it means, My 
will come in to 


geen am 


Mate ste 


THE TEN ‘ COMES. 505 


her, and will sup with her, anu ie with Me.” I heard of a little 
child, some time ago, who was burned. The mother had gone out and 
left her three children at home. The eldest left the room, and the 
remaining two began to play with the fire, and set the place ina 
blaze. When the youngest of the two saw what she had done, she 
went into a little cupboard and fastened herself in. The remaining 
child went to the door and knocked and knocked, crying to her to 
open the door and let her take her out of the burning building, but 
she was too frightened to do it. It seems to me as if this was the 
way of hundreds and thousands in this city. He stands and knocks, 
but they’ve got their hearts barred and bolted, because they don’t 
know that He has come only to bless them. May God help you to 
hear, and if you listen to Him and bring your burdens to Him, He 
will bless you. Heis able to open the ears of every one here if you 
but let Him in. I was up here at the hotel the other night, and I 
had the door locked and bolted, and some one came and rapped. 
I shouted, “ Come in!” The man tried tocome in, but he ceuldn't; 
I had to get up and unlock the door before he could enter. That's 
the way with many people to-day. They’ve got the door bolted 
and barred; but if you only open it to Him, He will come in. 

“If any man hear My voice and open the door, I will come in and 
sup with him and he with Me.” Now, my friends, can you hear it? 
Can you hear God’s voice speaking through His own Word? “ In- 
cline your ear and come unto Me.” Just listen. You know some- 
times, when you hear a man speaking whose voice you don’t hear 
very well, and you want to hear every word the man says, you put 
your hand up to your ear to catch the sound clearer. Now, listen. 
God says, “Incline your ear and come unto Me; hear, and your 
souls shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you.” 
Now, is it not true? Can’t you hear that loving voice speaking to 
you, and won’t you obey that voice and let Him save your But 
I can imagine some of you saying, “I can’t hear anything.” Take 
your ears to Him and He will make you hear. 

Now, let me take you to another “come.” While John and his 
disciples were standing, Jesus came along, and John said, “ Behold 
the Lamb of God!” and Jesus said, “What seek ye?” ‘“ Where 
dwellest Thou?” he asked; to which He replied, ‘Come and see;” 
and they just obeyed Him, and never left Him. My friends, if I 
could introduce you to Christ—could just get you to catch one 
glimpse of Him; if you could but see the King in all His beauty 


t06 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


if you could but see Him in all His loveliness—you would never for- 
sake Him, for He “ shall grow up before Him as a tender plant, and 
as a root out of dry ground; He hath no form nor comeliness, and 
when we shall see Him, there is no beauty that we should desire 
Him.” Follow Him as your Saviour. In order to appreciate Him 
you have to be brought to Him; but if sin has come between you 
and Him, I can not tell you anything about Him. It is just like 
telling a blind man about the beauties of nature, the loveliness of 
the flowers, or of the world. That is the way, if sin stands between 
you and Him; and when Christians try to tell you about the beau- 
ties of Christianity, they fail; but if you come and have an inter- 
view with Him, you will see that you can not help but love Him; 
you will see that you can not but forsake all and follow Him. I re- 
member once hearing of a child that was born blind. He grew up 
to be almost a man, when a skillful physician thought he could give 
the man his sight. He was put under the doctor's treatment, and 
for a long time he worked, till at last he succeeded. But he wouldn't 
let the man see the light of the sun all at once, lest it would strike 
him blind. It had to be done gradually. So he put a lot of band- 
ages upon his eyes, and removed one after another until the last 
one was reached, and when it was taken off, the young man began 
to see. When he saw the beauties of the world, he upbraided his 
friends for not telling him of the beauties of nature. “Why, we 
tried to tell you about the beauties of the world, but we could not,” 
they said. And so it is with us. All that we can do is to tell you 
to come and see—come and see the loveliness of Christ. 

I can imagine some of you saying, “I am blind; I can not see any 
beauty in Him.” Bring your blind men to Him as you bring your 
deaf men and He will give you sight, as He did with blind Barti- 
meus—as He did with all the blind men on earth. There never was 
a blind man who came to Him requesting his sight whose request 
was not granted, and there is not a blind soul in this assembly but 
will be healed if you come to Him. He says that’s what He came 
for, to give sight tothe blind. If you can not see any beauty in 
Him, pray to God to give you sight. 

The next “come” is in the prophecies of Isaiah. “ Come, now, and 
let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins be as scar- 
let, they shall be white as snow; though they be as crimson, they 
shall be as wool.” I find a great many people say their reason stands 
between them and God. Now, let me say here, the religion of Je- 


ERS. 


ld never for- 
er plant, and 
neliness, and 
should desire 
oreciate Him 
between you 
t is just like 
loveliness of 
nds between 
yut the beau- 
ave an inter- 
t love Him; 
y Him. I re- 
He grew up 
he could give 
‘eatment, and 
it he wouldn't 
would strike 
1 lot of band- 
until the last 
g man began 
upbraided his 
“Why, we 
e could not,” 
is to tell you 
st. 
n not see any 
ou bring your 
blind Barti- 
here never was 
"hose request 
assembly but 
vhat He came 
any beauty in 


ome, now, and 
ins be as scar- 
crimson, they 
reason stands 
eligion of Je- 


THE TEN “COMES.” 


507 


sus isa matter of revelation, not of investigation. No one ever found 


out Christ by reason. It is a matter of revelation. 


Now see what 


He says, ‘ Come, now "—that means this afternoon—‘ though your 


sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow.” 
pardon in the sinner’s face. 
shall be white as snow.” 
is a fast color. 
tried you would only destroy the shawl. 


Now He puts a 
“Your sins may be as scarlet, they 
Take the scarlet in the lady’s shawl. It 
You can not wash it out and make it white; if you 
But He will make your 


sins white as snow, though they be as scarlet, if you come to Him. 
Just come to Him as you are, and instead of reasoning, ask Him to 


take them away. Then He will reason it out with you. 


The nat- 


ural man does not understand spiritual things; but when a man is 
born of the Spirit, then it is that spiritual things are brought out to 
him. A great many people want to investigate—want to reason out 
the Bible from back to back, but He wants us first to take a par- 


don. That’s God’s method of reason. 
face of the sinner. ‘Come, now.” 


He puts a pardon in the 
Do you think there is not rea- 


son in this? Suppose the whole plan of salvation was reasoned out 
to you, why, death might step in before the end of the reasoning 
was reached. So God puts a pardon first. If you will be influenced 
to-day you will just bring your reason to Him, and ask Him to give 


you wisdom to see divine things, and He will do it. 


“If any of 


you lack wisdom, let him ask of God that giveth to all men liberal- 


ly and upbraideth not, and it shall be given liberally.” 


The idea 


that this reason that God hath given man, should keep him from 


Christ. 


A number of years ago, as I was coming out of a daily prayer. 
meeting, in one of our western cities, a lady came up to me and 
said, “I want to have you see my husband and ask him to come to 


Christ.” 


Says she, “I want to have you go and see him.” She 


told me his name, and it was that of a man I had heard of before. 


“Why,” said I, “I can’t go and see your husband. 
infidel. 
am, and it would be out of place. 
argument.” 
wants. He’s got enough of that. 
Saviour.” 
to go. 
and teld him what I had come for. 
very foolish,” he said, and began to argue with mc. 


He isa booked 


I can’t argue with him. He is a good deal older than I 
Then, I am not much for infidel 
“Well, Mr. Moody,” she says, “that ain’t what he 
Just ask him to come to the 
She urged me so hard and so strong, that 1 consented 
I went to the office where the Judge was doing business, 
He laughed at me. 


“You are 
I said, “I don’t 


2) ie ta ee aoe 


saint Spats Scares gest 


eS 


Nara 


508 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


think it will be profitable for me to hold an argument with you. 1 
have just one favor I want to ask of you, and that is, that when 
you are converted you will let me know.” “ Yes,” said he, “I will do 
that. When Iam converted I will let you know ”’—with a good 
deai of sarcasm. 

I went off, and requests for prayer were sent here and to Fulton 
street, New York, and I thought the prayer there and of that wife 
would be answered if mine were not. A year and a half after, I 
was in that city, and a servant came to the door and said: “There 
is a man in the front parlor who wishes to see you.” I found 
the Judge there. He said: “I promised I would let you 
know when I was converted.” ‘Well,’ said I, “tell me all 
about it. I heard it from other lips, but I want to hear it 
from your own.” He said that his wife had gone out to a meet- 
ing one night and he was home alone, and while he was sitting there 
by the fire he thought, “Supposing my wife is right, and my chil- 
dren are right; suppose there is a Heaven and a hell, and I shall be 
separated from them.” His first thought was: “I don’t believe a 
word of it.’”’ The second thought came: ‘“ You believe in the God 
that created you, and that the God that created you is able to teach 
you. You believe that God can give you life.” “Yes, the God 
that created me can give me life. I was too proud to get down on 
my knees by the fire, and I said, ‘O God, teach me.’ And as | 
prayed, I didn’t understand it, but it began to get very dark, and iny 
heart got very heavy. I was afraid to tell my wife, and I pretended 
to be asleep. She kneeled down beside that bed, and I knew she 
was praying forme. I kept crying, ‘O God, teach me.’ I had to 
change my prayer, ‘O God, save me; O God, take away this bur- 
den.’ But it grew darker and darker, and the load grew heavier 
and heavier. All the way to my office I kept crying, ‘O God, take 
away this load of guilt.’ 1 gave my clerks a holiday, and just 
closed my office and locked the door. I fell down on my face. | 
cried in agony to my Lord, ‘O Lord, for Christ’s sake, take away 
this guilt.’ I don’t know how it was, but it began to grow very 
light. I said, ‘I wonder if this isn’t what they call conversion. I 
think I will go and ask the minister if I am not converted.’ I met 
my wife at the door and said, ‘ My dear, I’ve been converted.’ She 
looked in amazement. ‘Oh, it’s a fact; I’ve been converted!’ We 
went inta that drawing-room, and knelt down by the sofa, and 
prayed to God to bless us.” The old Judge said to me, the tears 


VERS. 


with you. 1 
is, that when 
he, “I will do 
-with a good 


nd to Fulton 
J of that wife 
a half after, | 
said: “ There 
bu.” I found 
ould let you 
“tell me all 
it to hear it 
ut to a meet- 
is sitting there 
, and my chil- 
and I shall be 
jon’t believe a 
eve in the God 
is able to teach 
“Ves, the God 
o get down on 
e.” And as I 
y dark, and imy 
d I pretended 
d I knew she 
e.” I had to 
away this bur- 
} grew heavier 
, ‘O God, take 
iday, and just 
on my face. I 
hke, take awa) 
to grow very 
conversion. I 
erted.’ I met 
nverted.’ She 
verted!’ We 
the sofa, and 
b me, the tears 


THE TEN “COMES.” 509 


trickling down his cheeks, “ Mr. Moody, I’ve enjoyed life more in 
the last three months than in all the years of my life put together.” 
If there is an infidel here—if there is a skeptical one here—ask God 
to give you wisdom to come now. Let us reason together, and if 
you become acquainted with God, the day will not go before you 
receive light from Him. 

The next “come” I want to call your attention to is a very 
sweet one. He _ says, “Come and reason,” “Come and see,” 
and now we have “Come and rest.” What this world wants is 
rest. Every man, every woman, is in pursuit of it, and how many 
of us have found it. How many are bearing burdens about our 
hearts always—how many have come into this hall to-day with a 
great burden on their hearts? What does he say: “Come unto Me 
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” 
Now, a great many people have an idea that they must get rid of 
their burdens themselves, but they must come to Him if they want 
to be relieved. That’s what Christ came for. Come to Him. “He 
hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows.” There could not be 
asweeter “come” than this. How many mothers are bearing burdens 
for their children—how many because of their sons; or perhaps you 
have husbands who have proved unfaithful, or may be you are 
widows who have been left without support. The future may look 
dark to you; but hear the loving voice of the Saviour, “Come unto 
Me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” 
There is not a soul here—I don’t care what the burden may be— 
in this vast audience, but can lay their burden on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and He will bear it for you. Wecan be released; we have 
found a resting-place, and that is in the loving bosom of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

Oh, my friends, if you want rest to-day, come to Him. He stands 
with His arms outstretched, and says, “Come to Me and rest.” 
Does the world satisfy you? Are not the griefs of the world crush- 
ing many a heart here? Hear the voice of Jesus, “ Come and rest.” 
The world can not take it from you; the world’s crosses and trials 
will not tear them from you; He will give you peace, and comfort, 
and rest if you but come. 

The next “come” is, “Come and drink and eat.” You don’t 
have to pay anything. You know it is hard for a man to get a tax 
on water, unless when it has to be brought into the city. But this 
water is always without price, and salvation is like a river, flowing 


. 


_— 


x - { 
Sees 


510 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


at the feet of every one; and all you have to do is to stoop dowr 
and drink of this living water, and never die. The world can not 
give you comfort—can aot give you water to satisfy your thirst, 
and every man and woman in this world is thirsty. That’s the way 
our places of amusement are filled. People are constantly thirsting 
fo. something. But how are they filled with these amusements? 
They are as thirsty as ever. But if they drink the water that He 
offers, they will have a fountain of water springing up into everlast- 
ing life. I remember coming down a river with some wounded 
soldiers. The water was very muddy, and as we had no filters, they 
had to drink the dirty water, which did not satisfy their thirst. 7 re- 
member a soldier saying, “ Oh, that I had a draught of water froma my 
father’s well.” Oh, that every woman here to-day would cry,“ Oh, that 
I had a draught of water from my Futher’s well. If you drink of 
the iiving water your soul will never thirst again. Not only does He 
say, “ Come and drink of that living water,” but He says, “Come and 
eat.” In the 55th chapter of Isaiah you are invited to come and 
eat. You know all that the children of Israel had to do in the wil- 
derness was just to pick up the manna and eat. They didn’t have 
to make it. And people had just'to stoop down and pick up the 
manna and eat, and drink from the flinty rock when the water 
flowed. And to-day the provision is brought to the door of your 
hearts. You haven’t to go down to the earth for it, or to go up to 
the skies for it. It is here, and all you have to do is to eat it. 

You know almost the last words of Christ after His resurrection, 
when having a little fish, He said, “Come and dine.” O, what a 
sweet invitation—the invitation of the Master to His disciples. 
“Come and dine.” I invite you now to come and dine with Him; 
He will quench that thirst; He will satisfy your hunger, and all 
that you’ve got to do is to take Him at His word. 

“The Spirit and the bride say come. * * And let him that is 
athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life 
freely.” Will you take it to-day? “The Spirit and the bride say 
come ;” ‘ Whosoever will, iet him take the water of life freely.” 
Now I want to ask you what are you going to do with these ten 
loving invitations to-day — ‘Come and hear,” “Come and see,” 
“Come and reason,” “ Come and rest,” ‘‘Come and eat and drink,” 
“ome and dine,” “Come and find grace,” “Come unto the mar- 
riage,” “ Come and inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world.” “Whosoever will, let him come.” Ask 


"ERS. 


stoop dow! 
yrld can not 
, your thirst, 
iat’s the way 
itly thirsting 
imusements ? 
iter that He 
into everlast- 
me wounded 
o filters, they 
r thirst. 7 re- 
rater fron’ my 
ery,‘ Oh, that 
you drink of 
only does He 
s, “Come and 
to come and 
do in the wil- 
xy didn’t have 
d pick up the 
en the water 
» door of your 
or to go up to 
o eat it. 

5 resurrection, 
”’ O, what a 
His disciples. 
ne with Him ; 
unger, and all 


t him that is 
water of life 
the bride say 
bf life freely.” 
ith these ten 
me and see,” 
at and drink,” 
unto the mar- 
you from the 


b come.” Ask 


THE TEN “COMES.” Sil 


God to help you come to-day. If I were in your place I would sct- 
tle this question before I left this building; I would just press up 
to the kingdom of God and take Him at His word. 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we pray Thee that Thy blessings may rest 
upon all these dear friends that have arisen and said, by this act, 
“Pray for us.” Give us the spirit of prayer, and teach us how to 
pray. May they not leave this hall until they have left all their sins 
with Thee. Dear Saviour, may they come to-day, and leave their 
sins all behind them, for the sake of Christ; and may they begin 
now to follow Him. We pray that no one that has arisen here to- 
day may be lost, but that «very one of them may pass from death 
unto life; and we pray Thee to help these young converts; may 
not one of them who have put their hand to the plow turn back, 
but may they remember the example of Lot’s wife; and may every 
woman in this assembly that has arisen, say, “ Pray for me.” We 
pray, O God, that they may drink of the living water of salvation 
to-day; that they may have their eyes opened to live wholly for 
Christ. We pray for these mothers. May they only go home to 
erect a family altar, and bring their homes to the throne of Christ. 
We pray Thee for these sisters, and for these young wives, and may 
they be a power in the home-circle, and may they look back in 
years to come and think of this stormy Sabbath afternoon and re- 
member it as one of the happiest of their life. Blot out all their 
sins and their iniquities, and may Christ write their names in the 
great book of life, and when they have done influencing their fami- 
lies for good on this earth, bring them, O God, all to bless Thee on 
high, and Thine shall be the glory and the praise forever. Amen. 


 catipeet Se aS a = re = Se ~~ —— 
. = =—T SS SSS ee Sas oe 


16 SIE RETT SPER et mcrae 


feo aacnalinalae dese Sxl Rng aR —amealcte 


= wae ieee ee 
id ems. ey, 3 
— - ete cashes ge 


LX. 


HOW TO BE SAVED. 
AcTs xvi. 30: ‘“ What must I do to be saved?” 


i Gave must I do is a very common question, and doubtless 
there is not a man or woman in this assembly that has 

not said a thousand times, “ What must Ido?” A great 
many merchants have asked that question often during these hard 
times: “ What must I do to succeed in business, to keep from going 
into bankruptcy?” A good many lawyers, when they have had 
hard cases that they were very anxious about, have asked this ques- 
tion: “What must Ido?” Some doctors, who have had patients 
that seemed beyond the control of their skill, have asked this same 
question: “ What must I do?” And this question is a very im- 
portant one. It is important to the business man that he should 
not fail in his business. Many of you are no doubt out of work, 
and your families are actually in want to-night, and you have asked 
this question: “ What must Ido?” It is very important to a man 
that he should take care of his family; but important as that is, im- 
portant as all these questions are, take them all together and put 
them in one and they are not to be compared with this question 
that we have to-night: ‘ What raust I do to be saved ?” 

All in this assembly are either lost or saved. We are already 
lost, for we have not been saved. That Philippian jailor was in 
great trouble when he asked that question: “ What shall I do to be 
saved ?”? What was Paul’s answer? Was it that he was to weep 
or pray? or that he was to work for the Lord for fifteen or twenty 
years? or give money to the poor? or was he to build churches? or 
endow colleges or seminaries ? was there any work about it at all? 
No; he was to “ believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be 
saved.” But people in reading this very often stop right here. But 
in the next verse we read: “ And they spake unto him the word of 
(512) 


aE ee 


PAE, 


Heed aiadapat ke eC ise 


nd doubtless 
\bly that has 
5?” Agreat 
ig these hard 
ep from going 
yey have had 
ked this ques- 
. had patients 
sked this same 
is a very im- 
hat he should 
out of work, 
ou have asked 
tant to a man 
as that is, im- 
ether and put 
this question 
ee 
e are already 
jailor was in 
shall I do to be 
14e was to weep 
teen or twenty 
d churches ? or 
bout it at all? 
d thou shalt be 
ight here. But 
‘m the word of 


SS a EAE vans eae Eanes 


uo cian cea 


necumennerenmeen 
See dani 


me? 


HOW TO BE SAVED. 313 


the Lord, and to all that were in his house.” We are told ia the 
twelfth chapter of Acts that Peter told Cornelius how to be saved. 
Paul speaks of being saved by the “Word” of God. If men will 
only lay hold of that they will be saved. God has offered salvation 
to all who want it. In the second of Acts, when there were three 
thousand converted, what was the word that Peter used? In the 
second chapter and in the twentieth verse it says: “And it shall 
come to pass that whoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall 
be saved.” That is the only way. It was so there, and ft has been 
so here in Boston. People here have tried a good many physicians, 
and they have not helped them, and then they have come and cried 
out to God. 

God is right at work in this city. “Ye men of Israel, hear these 
words;” that is what He said. “ Lord and Christ ;” that is the kind 
of preaching they had in those days. When they heard these words, 
they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and the rest 
of the apostles: “Men and brethren, what shall we do?” I wish 
I could wake this audience up so that it would cry out like that. 
Talk about too much excitement; I tell you, there is not enongh of 
it. I wish I could have this assembly so moved that people all over 
the house would be crying out: ‘What shall I do to be saved ?” 
We have not got one-half waked up yet. “Save yourselves!” 
Those were among the words that he used, and th 2 thousand 
right there were born of God and converted. Turn toward Christ. 
They laid hold of the life right there in the word that was preached 
to them. That jailor was not only convicted of sin, but he was con- 
verted and baptized. He went to bed a careless, indifferent man. 
He had treated Paul harder than he had any need to. He had 
stripped him and put him ina close cell, and yet this wretch, this 
hard-hearted man, was in Christ the day after. And yet people 
stand up here with open Bibles, and say they do not believe in in- 
stant conversion. They say they believe that if a man is faithful 
and works hard he can be saved in a few years. I once knew of a 
man who was in the habit of going down a stream to relieve a miller 
at midnight. He would take his boat and hitch it near the dam. 
One night the miller fell asleep, and he floated down until, when he 
awoke, he was nearly over the dam, and he was startled, and tried 
to seize the oars and pull, but he was too late. But he managed to 
get hold of a twig and to hold on to that, and it began to give way 
and to come up by the roots, and he felt around for another twig. 


ie ties eae SE 


eR None Be an 


514 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


But he found that when he tried to pull himself up he was loosen. 
ing the twigs at the roots, so he just held on and cried, “ Help, 
help !’* and this he did for a long time, and by and by his cries for 
assistance were heard. They threw a rope and he laid hold of that, 
and they pulled him up from the jaws of death. If you want to be 
saved, let go of all your good resolutions, let go of all but God, and 
lay hold of eternal life. You can be saved to-night while I am 
preaching, if you will lay hold of God’s strength. He has offered 
this for you, and all you have to do is to just say you will take Him. 
When I was preaching in the North of England, I was, after the 
meeting one day, taking a lunch, and the landlady, a very good old 
lady, said: “Mr. Moody, is there anything you would like that is 
not on the table?” and I was very thirsty, and I said that I would 
like some water; and she brought it in one of those large jugs that 
they have in that part of the country, and when she brought it 
I noticed that there was a fly in it, and I was afraid that she 
would be cross if I mentioned it, and I set it down. She no. 
ticed it and said: “I thought you said you were thirsty?” I 
said: “Yes, I was; but there is a fly in the water;” and she 
said: “If Idith were up she would not see the poor thing suffer.” 
So I said that I would do as much as Edith, and I got a pickle-fork 
down into the water. The fly had about given up the point and 
was about to cease struggling, but the moment I put that fork there, 
it laid right hold of it and I drew it up from the jaws of death. I 
don’t doubt that if the little thing could have spoken it would have 
said: “I thank thee.” It could not have been saved of itself. Sin- 
ner, you must save yourself; but you can not save yourself by your 
own exertions. God offers you His help. Will you not accept it? 
In the sixth of Hebrews and the eighteenth verse, we read that it 
is impossible for God to lie, and we have a hope spoken of. Now 
we are saved by just laying hold of that hope. I have yet to find 
a man or woman that laid hold of that hope, the Word of God, 
that was ever disappointed. It brings peace, comfort, joy, rest to 
the weary soul. If every man will say, “I will trust the Lord,” 
there will be light, and there will be peace there. Let me give you 
another word. You know what it is to look. Well, you are to 
look unto Jesus as the author and finisher of your faith. I once 
heard of a woman who was greatly troubled by her sins, and she 
never could find out what the matter was. Why? Because she 
was always looking within; and one night when she went to bed 


ERS. 


was loosen- 
ried, “ Help, 
his cries for 
hold of that, 
1 want to be 
yut God, and 
while 1 am 
e has offered 
ill take Him. 
vas, after the 
rery good old 
1 like that is 
that I would 
urge jugs that 
ne brought it 
raid that she 
wn. She no- 
thirsty?” I 
er;” and she 
‘thing suffer.” 
t a pickle-fork 
he point and 
hat fork there, 
sof death. I 
it would have 
of itself. Sin- 
burself by your 
not accept it? 
fe read that it 
bken of. Now 
kve yet to find 
ord of God, 
rt, joy, rest to 
st the Lord,” 
t me give you 
pl], you are to 
faith. I once 
sins, and she 
Because she 
went to bed 


HOW TO BE SAVED. 515 


greatly troubled, she had a dream, and she dreamt that she was 
down in a deep pit, and that she was trying to get out. And she 
would step up, and when she had nearly got up to the top she 
would slip back. And she would climb up again, and then she 
would slip back again. And she tried and failed, and tried and 
failed, and she gave up all hope, and she lay down there to die; 
and she looked up and saw a little star, and it seemed in the dream 
as if that little star lifted her up, and she kept her eye upon it, and 
she was nearly out when she took her eyes off it and looked at herself, 
and then she went down again, and again this happened; but the 
third time she did not take her eyes off the star, and she soon was lifted 
up higher and higher, until she felt her feet upon the rocks above, 
and she saw that if she were to be saved she must look to the Star 
of Bethlehem. No minister can save you. Nothing in the world can 
save you. You can not save yourself. There is no other way but 
through Jesus. What does He say: “ Look unto me, all the ends 
of the earth.” Will you look to-night ? You need not look any- 


-where else. You are saved by just looking. An old man got up 


in one of our meetings and said he was for forty-two years finding 
out three things: First, that he could not do anything toward his 
own salvation; next, that God did not require him to do anything; 
third, that Christ had done it all Himself. These are three things 
he had been forty-two years learning. That little child can learn 
it to-night if she will. But you say: “ Don’t I have to do anything?” 
No, God does not require it. He doesn’t want you to do anything. 
If it is a new birth, it is the work of God. We can not give a new 
birth. We can not create. The greatest philosopher you have in 
Boston can not give life to a little insect. God only can create life ; 
God only is the author of life, and it is a new life when we are born 
of God. God will save us if we will only let Him. If we will only 
stop trying and just let Him save us. I kept trying and trying 
and it did no good until I just stopped and gave mysclf up to God. 
That was my experience, and it is the experience of all. Some 
one asked an Indian how he was saved; how God saved him; and 
he took a lot of leaves and he placed them in a circle and he set 
them on fire, and he placed a little worm in the center; and the 
worm tried to get out, and he went to one side and he was turned 
back by the fire; and he went to another side and was driven back ; 
and he ran this way and that way and was driven back every time* 
and then he curled up in the center of the circle and gave himself 


516 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


up for lost. And then the Indian took hold of him and lifted him 
out. That was how the Lord saved him. The Lord took him 
right up when he himself gave up everything. 

You see a cloud upon the sky to-night and in the morning it is 
not there. You can not tell what has become of that cloud. If 
God has put away your sins they are blotted out, and there is not 
a devil in hell that can get at them. All sin is against God, and 
God must forgive sin. It is through Christ that we must be justi- 
ficd. Come and taste salvation as a gift. You can not buy it. 
The Gospel is free as the air you breathe, and every man has an 
invitation to come and take of it. He says: “I have no pleasure 
in the death of the wicked.” It is the sinner that God wants. 
There will be no peace for a man until his sin is put away. You 
may go off to the theatre; you may try to drown it in drink in the 
saloon to kill your feelings and keep your conscience quiet ; but 
there is no peace, for God has decreed that “there is no peace to 
the wicked.” I sometimes hear of men who say that they are 
Christians, that they are members of churches, but that they are 
not at peace. When I hear a man say that he is a Christian, but 
is not at peace, I am always suspicious of his conversion. ‘ My 
peace I leave with you.” It ism’t your peace, but the peace of God 
that you have. There are a great many men who want peace, but 
want to cover up some sin. You can not have peace until you have 
brought that sin to Christ and He has put it away. M.y little boy 
had some trouble with his sister on Saturday, and he did not want 
to forgive her. And at night he was going to say his prayers, and 
I wanted to see how he would say his prayers, and he knelt down 
by his mother and said his prayers, and then I went up to him and 
I said: “ Willie, did you pray?” “I said my prayers.” “ Yes, 
but did you pray?” “I said my prayers.” “I know you said 
them, but did you pray?” He hung his lead. “You are angry 
with your sister?” ‘ Well, she had no business to do thus and so.” 
“That has nothing to do with it; you have thewrone iaea, my boy, 
if you think that you prayed to-night.” You see he was trying to get 
over it by saying “I said my prayers to-night.” I find people that 
say their p.ayers every night, just to ease theirconscience. And then 
Isaid: ‘“ Willie, if you don’t forgive your sister you will not sleep to- 
night. Ask her to forgive you.” Hedidn’t want todo that. He loves 
the country, and he has been talking a great deal about the time when 
he can go into the country aud play out-doors. So he said: “O 


VERS. 


nd lifted him 
yd took him 


morning it is 
hat cloud. If 
1 there is not 
inst God, and 
must be justi- 
in not buy it. 
y man has an 
re no pleasure 
at God wants. 
it away. You 
in drink in the 
ice quiet ; but 
is no peace to 
that they are 
that they are 
. Christian, but 
version. ‘“ My 
e peace of God 
ant peace, but 
bp until you have 
My little boy 
e did not want 
his prayers, and 
he knelt down 
up to him and 
ayers.” “Yes, 
know you said 
You are angry 
o thus and so.’ 
= idea, my boy, 
as trying to get 
nd people that 
ence. And then 
ill not sleep to- 
that. He loves 
t the time when 


o he said: “O 


HOW TO BE SAVED. 517 


yes, I will sleep well enough; I am going to think about being 
out there in the country!” That is the way that we are trying to 
do; we are trying to think of something else to get rid of the 
thought of these sins, but we can not. I said nothing more to him. 
I went on studying, and his mother came down-stairs. But soon 
he called his mother and said: “ Mother, won’t you please go up 
and ask Emma if she won’t forgive me?”’ Then I afterward heard 
him murmuring in bed, and he was saying his prayers. And he 
said to me: “ Papa, you are right. I could not sleep, and I can not 
tell you how happy Iam now.” Don’t you think there is any peace 
until your sins are put away. My dear friends, the Gospel of the 
Lord Jesus Christ is the Gospel of peace. If men could buy »eace 
how much they would be willing to give for it! Iheard a man the 
other day say that he would give a hundred thousand dollars if he 
could buy peace with that. We have got to take it as a gift if we 
would have it. The moment we are reconciled to God that momer'' 
we have peace and are made glad. We find in the inquiry-room a 
great many that are looking for feeling. They are anxious to be 
anxious. There are two ways cf coming to Christ. One is to come 
to the cross and cast your burden of sin there, like Bunyan; and an- 
other is to feel your need, and cry out for something that you want. 
If you desire to be saved you can be saved, but you must be saved 
through Christ. You can not work out your own salvation unless 
you are first saved. During the siege of Paris, one dark night a 
troop of soldiers went out to pick up the wounded, and they were 
afraid to make any noise for fear the enemy would hear them. And 
they called softly, but loud enough for the wounded to hear them. 
“Tf there are any wounded they will be brought into Paris in the 
ambulances ;”’ and from all sices came the responses. If there is 
any one in this assembly that will cry out, “I am wounded; I need 
a Saviour,’ He will come and help them to-night. It was Chica- 
go’s need that brought out the sympathy of St. Louis, Cincinnati, 
and Boston, and it is your need, your misfortune, your sin that calls 
out the sympathy and aid of God. There was a story told me 
while I was in Philadelphia by Chaplain Henry Clay Trumbull. He 
said when he was in Libby Prison the news came that his wife was 
in Washington and his little child was dying, and the next news 
that came was that his child was dead, and the mother remained in 
Washington in hopes that her husband could come with her and 
take that child off to New England and bury it, vut that was the 


518 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


last he heard. One day the news came into the prison that there was 
a boat up from “13 Point, and there were over nine hundred men 
in the prison rejoicing at once. They expected to get good news, 
Then came the news that there was only one man in that whole 
number that was to be let go, and they all began to say: “ Who is 
it?” It was some one who had some influential friend at Wash. 
ington that had persuaded the Government to take an interest in 
him and get him out. The whole prison was excited. At last 
an officer came and shouted at the top of his voice: “ Henry Clay 
Trumbull!” The chaplain told me his name never sounded so 
sweet to him as it did that day. God will deliver you. He gives 
out a universal call; not for one, but for all. Christ calls you to 
Him. He will forgive all your sins. He will redeem your lives if 
you will only take Him as God's gift to you. 


“ERS. 


1at there was 
undred men 
t good news. 
n that whole 
y : “ Who is 
nd at Wash. 
n interest in 
ed. At last 
‘Henry Clay 
sounded so 
1. He gives 
calls you to 
your lives if 


LXI. 
THE RESURRECTION. 


HE resurrection is spoken of forty-two times in the New Tes- 
tament. It is one of the chief corner-stones of the religion 
of Jesus Christ. There are two principal truths taught all 

through the New Testament, and they are, the Death and Resurrec- 
tion of Jesus Christ. You touch one, and you touch them both. 
In fact, if you take them out of the New Testament, you take out 
the key of the whole Gospel of Jesus Christ. Christ said about His 
own resurrection, in the sixteenth chapter of Matthew and the 
twenty-first verse : 

“From that time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples, 
how that he must go into Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the 
elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and be raised 
again the third day.” 

When He was talking with His disciples after the Transfiguration, 
we find in the gth verse of the 17th chapter of Matthew : 

“And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged 
them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man be 
risen again from the dead.” 

Until the Son of man be risen again from the dead. Then, in the 
ninth chapter of Mark and the thirty-first verse, it says: 

“For he taught his disciples, and said unto them, The Son of 
man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; 
and after that he is killed he shall rise the third day.” 

He shall rise again the third day. Over and over again He told 
His disciples that He was going to rise. And there is one thing 
here very singular, it strikes me—that His enemies seem to remem- 
ber what He said about His resurrection, while His disciples seem 
to have forgotten it, because after He was dead, His enemies went 
to Pilate and wanted to have the sepulchre made secure, and a guard 
put around it, because they said, “When this deceiver was alive, 
(519) 


seins Fe ne SR a ee ae 


§20 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


He said He should rise again.” But we can’t find a word that tells 
us that His disciples thought He was going to rise again. When 
they laid Him away at night, Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, 
Mary Magdalene and Mary, the mother of Joses, of James and 
Salome, and those few women who followed Him to His resting-place, 
there is not one single word that tells us they thought He was going 
to rise again. They seem to have forgotten that, and yet Christ 
told them plainly over and over again that He should rise again. 
We read here in the twelfth chapter of Matthew and thirty-eighth 
verse that they wanted a sign of His resurrection. 

“Then certain of the Scribes and Pharisees answered, saying, 
Master, we would see a sign from thee. 

“ But he answered and said unto them, An evil and adulterous gen- 
eration seeketh after a sign, and there shall no sign be given to it, 
but the sign of the prophet Jonas.” 

And then He went on and told them that as Jonah was three 
days and three nights in the whale’s belly, so should the Son of man 
be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth; that that 
should be a sign of His death and resurrection. Now, that was the 
sign. I was very much interested some time ago in hearing a 
Welshman tell me he was preaching once on that subject of Jonah 
being the sign, and he said he could just imagine that the news had 
got to Nineveh about this man’s being sent there, and how, when 
the captain got on shore, the people all rushed down to meet him, 
and how he told them about the great tempest that arose, how the 
ship was about to sink, and how Jonah told them that the great 
tempest had come upon them on his account, and how, at his 
own request, he was thrown overboard. Why, the idea of a man 
being sent to Nineveh with a message who had been slain on the 
way for refusing to go to Nineveh—who had been swallowed up in 
the whale’s belly! There was death, and no resurrection, as far as 
they knew then. But, thank God, he was “ resurrected,” and sent 
into Nineveh again; and what must have been the stir in Nineveh 
afterwards, when this “resurrected” man came there to preach! 
Christ said this was a sign: 

“For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the whale’s 
belly, so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the 
heart of the earth, and shall come forth again.” 

Let me say at this present time that there are a great many who 
don’t believe that Christ has risen. They say His spirit has risen, 


ERS. 


rd that tells 
ain. When 
Nicodemus, 
James and 
esting-place, 
fe was going 
d yet Christ 
1 rise again. 
thirty-eighth 


ered, saying, 


ulterous gen- 
e given to it, 


rah was three 
1e Son of man 
rth; that that 
y, that was the 
in hearing a 
bject of Jonah 
the news had 
nd how, when 
to meet him, 
arose, how the 
that the great 
d how, at his 
idea of a man 
n slain on the 
yvallowed up in 
ction, as far as 
ted,” and sent 
ktir in Nineveh 
re to preach! 


in the whale’s 
Le nights in the 


reat many who 
spirit has risen, 


THE RESURRECTION, §2t 


but His body lies inthe grave. There He lay from Friday night 
and up through the Jewish Sabbath, His disciples moaning and 
weeping, They had given up all hope of ever seeing Him again, 
and you can see Him lying there cold in death on that Friday night, 
and Death saying, “I hold the victim in my embrace. I have con- 
quered Him.” But the hour had come for Christ to conquer death. 
That's just what He went into the grave for. Death didn’t follow 
Him there. He pursued Death into the grave, bound him hand 
and foot, and brought up a few captives to show His mighty power. 
Yes, my friends, Christ went down into the grave not for Himself, 
but for you and for me. O, it seems one of the most precious 
truths in the Word of God that Christ does not lie there dead, but 
has risen. Men and soldiers, bear in mind, guarded that sepulchre ; 
they were going to make sure that He shouldn't rise. They had 
gone to Pilate and got him to put soldiers there day and night to 
guard that sepulchre. And they rolled a large stone to the door of 
the sepulchre and put a seal upon it, and then they thought they 
had the body perfectly secure; but early in the morning we are told 
by two or three of the evangelists that these men and women went 
to the sepulchre to anoint His body, not thinking to find Him 
risen. Why, if they had thought and knew and really believed He 
was going to rise, do you think they would have gone away from 
the tomb while He was in there? Why, it would have taken more 
than five hundred soldiers to have kept them away if they had be- 
lieved that. You can see them going to the sepulchre. They hod 
got those spices to anoint His body. And you can see them, as 
they draw nearer and nearer to the sepulchre, the sun just driving 
away the darkness of the night, and that beautiful morning just 
bursting upon the earth—the most beautiful morning the world has 
ever seen; that blessed, glorious Easter morning. Who is going to 
roll away that stone? A messenger came down from heaven who 
flew faster than the morning light. He rolled away that stone, and 
the men who had been sent to guard and watch that sepulchre began 
to tremble and quake with fear, and became as dead men. One 
angel was enough! He didn’t need to let Christ out. Thank God! 
it was for you and me that Christ had gone down into the tomb, 
burst the bonds of death, hell, and the grave, and rose again. 

It was to light up the sepulchre, that they might know He had 
risen, that God’s messenger came down. Yes, thank God, He has 
tisen; He has conquered death and the grave; and you can shout 


‘* 


ere 


cin ne © Sea Bae 
dino 2 ane Reka aed aD 


“* 


i oe 


s 


§22 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


now: “QO grave, where is thy victory? O death, where is thy 
sting?” He went down into the grave to conquer death, and came 
up out of the grave conqueror! Now He says, “ Because I have 
been down into the grave, and have risen and live again, ye shall 
live also.” Well, they look in and find nothing but these spreads. 
They soon find out that the sepulchre is empty, and they run back 
and tell His disciples that the enemy had stolen His body. Peter 
and John start a-running. Peter gets there first. He outruns John. 
Probably John couldn’t run as fast as Peter. They go up to the 
sepulchre and find the body isn’t there. They linger awhile, and 
finally go back home. “It’s no use,” they say, “the enemy have 
stolen His body.” There were those Romans, and all the leading 
men of the Jewish nation that were opposed to them. What could 
they do against them? But there was one who loved Him, who 
went to see what they had done with His body; and that was Mary 
Magdalene. She stood there watching, and all at once she saw two 
angels, and they said: “ Why seek ye the living among the dead? 
he is not here; he has risen; he has come up out of the sepul- 
chre.” And while these angels were talking to her, there was an 
angel behind her that talked to her, and said: 

“Woman, why weepest thou? She saith unto them, Because 
they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have 
laid him.” 

Then He spoke to her with that old familiar voice and said, 
“Mary ;” and the moment He says that, she recognizes Him. She 
says unto Him, “ Rabboni,” which signifies Master. He that was 
dead was alive. There was her Saviour standing right before her. 
Now He says, “Go and tell my brethren I have risen.” He had 
got on resurrection ground. He calls them brethren; He puts them 
on a level with Himself. What joyful news! What a blessed priv- 
ilege to go and bear the tidings of His resurrection! That very one 
He had cast seven devils out of; and now she is here to take the 
glad tidings of His resurrection, thanking God that He had risen— 
that He had spokento her. It wasn’t His spirit that had risen, but 
it was His own body, and the disciples wouldn’t believe it. But 
she went on spreading the news, and others took it up to tell the 
story. And as the two Marys were going to tell His disciples, all 
at once Christ appeared before them and said, “ All hail,” and told 
them to go back into Jerusalem and tell His disciples that it was a 
fact that He had risen. Now, if you will take your Bibles and care: 


RS. 


ere is thy 
,and came 
ise I have 
in, ye shall 
se spreads. 
y run back 
dy. Peter 
truns John. 

. up to the 
awhile, and 
enemy have 
the leading 
What could 
d Him, who 
at was Mary 
she saw two 
ig the dead? 
of the sepul- 
there was an 


1em, Because 
bre they have 


ice and said, 
es Him. She 
He that was 
t before her. 
bn.” He had 
He puts them 
| blessed priv- 
hat very one 
e to take the 
fe had risen— 
had risen, but 
lieve it. But 
up to tell the 
is disciples, all 
hail,” and told 
k that it was a 
ibles and care: 


THE RESURRECTION. $23 


fully read them over, I think you will find that there were ten dif- 
ferent times that He appeared to His disciples, not in spirit, but in 
body. I want to get this thing fixed in your minds, that Christ has 
risen personally. His own body, the very same body that laid in 
the sepulchre, has come up out of that sepulchre and passed through 
the heavens, and He has gone on high. Weare told that He had 
an interview with Peter. I think it is very pretty to bring out that 
He saw Peter that Sunday. He appeared unto Peter. There is 
nothing told us in Scripture as to what took place at that interview; 
but I can imagine something of the way He met Peter—almost the 
same as if He had met Mary. He had sent back these two to tell 
His disciples that He had risen; and now He appears to Peter, and 
that old difficulty is settled. Peter, you know, denied his Lord. 
And there they had an interview, and there the Lord forgave him. 
What a bright day it must have been for Peter. What a miserable 
night he must have spent when they had laid his Saviour in the sep- 
ulchre. I can imagine that he didn’t sleep; that he didn’t eat. 
What a blessed interview it must have been! Blessed day for that 
poor backslider! I hope there is some poor backslider here who 
will come and have an interview with God. He will forgive you 
this Easter morning. If you will come and have an interview with 
God to-day, take Him to-day, it will be a joyful day for you. Well, 
late in the afternoon of that same day—for He has now appeared 
three different times—two men started back for Emmaus, about 
eight miles from Jerusalem, and as they are going from there we 
are told that they communed together. Their words are just 
broken, and their faces are clouded with sorrow. You can see them 
as they talk together with their heads bowed down. 

We are told they are talking about the Lord Jesus, when a stran- 
ger, a third man, starts up beside the two men, and He enters into 
conversation with them, and says: “ What are you talking about ? 
What is this conversation that makes you look so sad?” ‘“ Why,” 
they say, “you must bea stranger. Haven’t you heard what has 
taken place?”’ “Why, no, what has taken place?” And they go 
on to tell him about the death of their Saviour; about His trial; 
about His crucifixion; how the Jews on Friday had put Him to 
death; how they put Him in the tomb; how some of the women 
had come and told them that He had risen, and how they couldn't 
believe it. And ther He began with Moses and all the prophets, 
and expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning 


= = = 


ES 9 re 
i i esemmanian 


et ete eee : 


574 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


Himself. What a blessed Sunday afternoon it must have been for 
those two men. And as He talked He just unfolded to them the 
Word of the living God; and as they got near to the little town 
He made as though He would leave them there at the gate. You 
can sce those two men; perhaps one of them lived there. You 
can see them constraining Him to go in, and as they censtrain 
Him He goes in; and I can imagine that one of them said to the 
stranger, after they had sat down to supper: “Will you ask a 
blessing ?”” And while He was just blessing the bread their eyes 
were opened, and they knew that the Lord God of Glory had been 
walking and talking with them, and He vanished out of their 
sight, and one of them said: “ Did not our hearts burn within us 
while He talked with us by the way, and while He opened to us 
the Scriptures?” I can imagine they didn’t stop to eat anything, 
but started right back. “We must go back again,” they say. 
“ We must walk eight miles more and tell them that He has risen ; 
that we have seen Him.” And the two men started and went to 
Jerusalem, and found the eleven disciples together, and the first 
thing they said was: “ He has risen!” And then they went on and 
told He had made Himself known to them; how He had talked 
by the way; how He had made Himself known to them while 
He was breaking the bread. Different ones had come and told 
them. Mary had come in the morning, and the other disciples 
had told them, and Peter had also said so, and now these two 
men come and tell them. “We have met Him. He walked 
with us and talked with us by the way, and He sat down at 
the table with us. He has risen.” And while they were talking, 
Jesus appeared to them. You can see Him. He says: “ Don't be 
frightened ; handle me; put your hands into my side; put your 
fingers ii to those wounds that were made on Mount Calvary. It is 
I. It isn’t a spirit.” He wanted to convince them that it was His 
body, not His spirit. ‘“ Have you anything here to eat?” He 
says. <A spirit doesn't eat; flesh and blood eat. And they gave 
Him some fish and honeycomb to eat. He appeared to His dis- 
ciples five times. The first on the Sunday that He rose—that first 
Easter Sunday ; blessed, glorious day! Now there was one man that 
doubted—Thomas. Of course, the news went all through the city 
before the next day, and they didn’t sleep at all that night. Some 
one mects Thomas and says: “I have got good news.” What 
is it?’’ “The Lord has risen.” “Oh, no; I heard that before 


"RS. 


ve been for 
» them the 
little town 
gate. You 
here. You 
y constrain 
said to the 
you ask a 
d their eyes 
ry had been 
ut of their 
rn within us 
pened to us 
at anything, 
,’ they say. 
Je has risen ; 
and went to 
and the first 
-went on and 
‘e had talked 
them while 
bme and told 
ther disciples 
bw these two 
He walked 
sat down at 
were talking, 
bs: Don't be 
de; put your 
alvary. It is 
rat it was His 
to eat?” He 
And they gave 
d to His dis- 
ose—that first 
| one man that 
‘ough the city 
night. Some 
ws.” “What 
d that before 


THE RESURRECTION. 525 


through Mary Magdalene.” He says: “I would believe you if you 
told me anything else.” Peter says: “It’s a fact.” “I'd believe 
you,” says Thomas, “if I could put my finger into the print of the 
nails and thrust my hand into His side.” Hewouldn’t believe. By 
and by he goes down the streets of Jerusalem on a Monday morn- 
ing, and the first thing he hears is: “Good news! The Lord is 
risen!” But he don’t believe it. If Thomas had been to the 
prayer-meeting he would have met the Lord. He wouldn’t have 
been in doubt. I tell you that these people that stay away from 
prayer-meeting don’t believe that the Lord is “ resurrected.” They 
keep away and doubt, and that’s the way with these doubters and 
sceptics nowadays. While these disciples were rejoicing, Thomas 
wouldn't believe a word of it. The next day He came and instead 
of ten disciples, there were eleven in the room. The doors were 
locked and fastened, for the Jews were greatly stirred up, and I can 
imagine those Scribes and Pharisees said to the guards: “ Why 
didn’t you keep Him in? Why did you let Him rise?” Why, 
they might as well have tried to keep the sun from rising! My 
friends, they couldn’t keep Him in that sepulchre. Now, they 
come and say: “They came and stole Him away.” They didn’t 
dare to speak out boldly: “The Holy Ghost had come.” Yet to 
make them speak out boldly all the doors were locked. Memora- 
ble night! And Thomas was among them, and all at once the 
Lord stood right there with them again, and He spoke to Thomas: 
“Thomas, put your finger in the wound in my side. Thrust your 
hand into my side. Come, Thomas; now, you said you wouldn’t 
believe unless you did so.” And Thomas cried out: “ My Lord and 
my God!” His infidelity vanished then. He believed those 
wounds then. The Saviour pronounced a blessing and benediction 
upon him, and I hear him say: “ Blessed are they that have not 
seen, and yet have believed.” The next thing they are all in Gali- 
lee. I don’t know how many days had passed since they had seen 
Him. And Peter said: “I goa fishing.” And John and James 
said they would go with him. “There were together Simon Peter, 
and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and 
the sons of Zebedee, and two other of His disciples.” I don’t 
know who the two others were. So they went forth and entered 
into their vessel and toiled all night, and caught nothing. And in 
the morning when it got to be daybreak a man was seen on the 
shore, who asked them if they had caught anything, and they said: 


526 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


“No, we have toiled all night and caught nothing.” Then He tod 
them to cast their net on ‘the right side of the ship, and they did 
so, and hauled in one hundred and fifty-three fishes and the net did 
not break, and John says: “ Peter, this is the Lord.” They had 
cast their net into the sea by His word, and it was under His power 
that they were successful. And Peter was so anxicus to get to 
Him—for Peter so loved the Lord—that he leaped out of the ship 
and went and met Him. And they had a resurrection breakfast on 
that resurrection shore. That was the time the Lord said to Peter 
three times: “ Peter, lovest thou me more than these? Do you love 
me more than John and Thomas and the rest of them?” And 
Peter couldn’t say a word. He couldn't get anything out of Peter. 
His self-confidence was all gone. And He sent him out to feed His 
sheep and His lambs. O, blessed interview at that breakfast! He 
had come and dined with them. O, may every one of us hear His 
blessed voice saying: ‘Come and dine with me,” so that we may 
be filled ourselves and then go out and feed others. O, may every 
Christian get some of this food of life. The next time that His 
appearance took place we don’t know exactly. It is supposed to be 
off in the Mountain of Galilee. He told them to go into Galilee and 
there they should see Him. There were 500 saw Him there at one 
time. He talked with His disciples there, and it might have been 
the time that He told them to go and preach the Gospel to every 
creature. “I will leave you,” He said. “It is expedient that I go 
away. If I go I will send the Holy Ghost, and greater works will 
be done then than I can do.” He was going away then. Some 
one says that a good many reformations die out with the reformer; 
but this reformer has gone up on high, and, thank God, He is not 
dead, and we are not dead to Him, and His work is going on just 
the same. By-the-by, we are told that He appeared to James. We 
have no glimpse of that interview. We are not told what took 
place. That is the ninth time. In that last interview He met 
them again in Jerusalern, and He took the little band of believers 
out of the city through the eastern gate, down through a little vil- 
wage ; over the brook and into the Garden of Gethsemane, where he 
sweat great drops of blessed blood, and passed over to Bethany, 
where Mary and Lazarus lived, and, I don’t know where, perhaps be- 
fore He got into the city, right under a bunch of olive trees, He car- 
ried His disciples and gave them His parting message: “ Now | am 
going home.” He had been out of the grave forty days. “I am going 


ERS. 


1en He totd 
nd they did 
the net did 
They had 
+ His power 
is to get to 
t of the ship 
breakfast on 
said to Peter 
Do you love 
rem?” And 
out of Peter. 
it to feed His 
eakfast ! He 
f us hear His 
that we may 
O, may every 
time that His 
upposed to be 
‘to Galilee and 
there at one 
sht have been 
ospel to every 
ient that I go 
hter works will 
then. Some 
the reformer; 
od, He is not 
going on just 
o James. We 
bld what took 
rview He met 
hd of believers 
igh a little vil- 
ane, where he 
r to Bethany, 
re, perhaps be- 
trees, He car- 
a: “Now lam 
5, “Tam going 


nie nana Ct 


THE RESURRECTION. 527 


to God.” The first thing He said on that memorable morning when 
He preached that wonderful sermon on the Mount He pronounced 
nine blessings: “ Blessed are the poor,” “ Blessed are the peace- 
makers,” etc., nine different blessings; and while He was blessing 
them He rose higher and higher, His voice grew fainter and fainter, 
and the clouds received Him out of their sight. I can just imagine 
there was a chariot up there to take Him up home. I can imagine 
Him as He leaps into His golden chariot and sweeps away to His 
home. Look at Himon His way up! He had left them, but as He 
was sweeping up, He didn’t forget His little charge on earth. He 
looked back. They could not see Him, but He could see them. I 
can see them watching to see if they can catch a little glimpse of 
their Lord, and while they are watching you see tears trickling 
down their cheeks. He looks back and sees His little charge and 
He says to the angels—-they might have been with Him conveying 
Him home—“ Go back and teil them I will come back.” And I 
can see them speeding back and saying: “ Men of Galilee, why stand 
ye gazing and weeping here? Christ is gone, but He will come 
again.” Thank God, He is coming back. He has only gone off, 
but such a day and hour as you think not He will come back. Lift 
up your hands and bless Him. We don’t worship a dead Saviour, 
He has gone up on high. He has led captivity captive. Paul says: 
“T saw Him.” Stephen, when the heavens were parted, saw Him 
standing at the right hand of God. Thank God, He is not where 
they laid Him in Joseph’s sepulchre. He is risen. He is up 
beyond. He says: “If I go, I will send the Holy Ghost.” After 
He had been gone ten days, the Holy Ghost came. Jesus fulfilled 
His word. Do you think this audience would have been here, if 
it hadn’t been for the Holy Ghost? Ah, my friends, it is the 
Holy Ghost that He sent down after He had been in heaven ten 
days, and while they were praying. You know the place was 
shaken because the Holy Ghost came. And now, my friends, let 
me say, in closing, if we just preach more about the resurrection ; 
if we will think more about Him, try to realize the power that we 
get in Him and through Him, why, I think the Holy Ghost will 


_descend upon us and bless us. Why, we have been blessed more 


this last month in the city of Boston than we have been blessed in 
all our lives. O, may God warm our hearts that we may realize the 
importance of this truth we have to preach; that He is not a dead 
Saviour, but a living, resurrected Saviour. He will come in power, 


i 


Soci: ann 
pe ain 


soit ia DR ie ROE aaa eae sate 


‘. — — 
Secretion wise ae aes a ee 
‘Lilopaisapaand ation BME ps ascent 2S aa 
see kaeeony on’ ee 


| 


Si Wea dt tlle sa 


528 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


and the day is not far distant. We have but a little while to work, 
and as some one says, the psalms of these Christians when Christ 
shall come will be sweeter than the songs of the morning stars. We 
shall come out of the grave with shouts. I will close and say, May 
God wake up the slumbering Christians. Jesus slept a little while 
in the grave; but He came up with life in His body. O,I pity 
those people who think Christ does not live; who think Christ was 
a mere man and perished in the grave of Joseph. What a gloom 
and darkness would settle down upon this world if it was not for 
the hope of a resurrection; if it were not that those that have 
been sown in dishonor shall be raised in glory and honor; shall 
come up out of the grave, and go on high. O, may this blessed 
truth take hold of our hearts and may we go out and say: “ Glory, 
the Lord has risen.” 


i. tome 


“GONAAY NOSIGVN WOW ‘MAOA MAN , ANoNdoddIAv « GTHL JO MAIA AOIMALXA 


> 


PCOLESCOCHKO es & g oe ©eéé@ 


a a eo eee eames a ae: 


Lb Wher and D> Ja 
oe 8 WhO PDS >a O 
22> ee eske 2228 
a ee ee EO 
~ —_— 
5 fee ee eee 
: Ont es geo S38 a ge ee 
= ocean oe > Oia Is one = 


wea 


LXII. 


OUR LORD’S RETURN. 


2 TIMO’. \1Y iii. 16: “ All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable 
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,” 


OME people tell us when we take up prophecy that it is 
all very well to be believed, but that there is no use in one 
trying to understand it ; these future ev. i> are things that 

the Church does not agree about, and it is bet‘cr tc :2t them alone, 
and deal only with those prophecies which l..ve «ieady been ful- 
filled. But Paul doesn’t talk that way; he ~.,3: ‘‘ All Scripture is 
* * * profitable for doctrine.” If these pecple «re right, he ought 
to have said: ‘Some Scripture is profitabic but you can’t under- 
stand the prophecies, so you had better let inem alone.” If God 
didn’t mean to have us study the prophecies, He wouldn’t have put 
them into the Bible. Some of them are fulfilled, and He is at work 
fulfilling the rest, so that if we do not see them all completed in this 
life, we shall in the world to come. 

I don’t want to teach anything to-day, dogmatically, on my own 
authority, but to my mind this precious doctrine—for such I must 
call it—of the return of the Lord to this earth is taught in the New 
Testament as clearly as any other doctrine in it; yet I was in the 
Church fifteen or sixteen years before I ever heard a sermon on it. 
There is hardly any church that doesn’t make a great deal of baptism, 
but the New Testament only speaks about baptism thirteen times, 
while it speaks of the return of our Lord fifty times; and yet the 
Church has had very little to say about it. Now, I cansee a reason 
for this: the devil does not want us to see this truth, for nothing 
would wake up the Church so much. The moment a man takes 
hold of the truth that Jesus Christ is coming back again to receive 
His friends to Himself, this world loses its hold upon Him; gas- 
stocks and water-stocks, and stocks in banks and in horse-railroads, 
are of very much less consequence to him then. His heart is free, 
(529) 


530 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


and he looks for the blessed appearing of his Lord, who at His 
coming will take him into His blessed kingdom. 

In 2 Peter i. 20, we read: ‘No prophecy of the Scripture is of 
any private interpretation.” Some people say, “ Oh, yes, the proph- 
ecies are all well enough for the priests and doctors, but not for the 
rank and file of the Church.” But Peter says, ‘The prophecy came 
not by the will of man, but holy men spake as they were moved by 
the Holy Ghost,” and those men are the very ones who tell us of 
the return of our Lord. Look at Daniel ii. 45, where he tells the 
meaning of that stone which the king saw in his dream that was 
cut out of the mountain without hands, and that broke in pieces the 
iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold. “The dream is 
certain and the interpretation thereof sure,” says Daniel. Now we 
have seen the fulfillment of that prophecy all but the closing part 
of it. The kingdoms of Babylon, and Medo-Persia, and Greece, and 
Rome have all been broken in pieces, and now it only remains for 
this stone cut out of the mountain without hands to smite the im- 
age and break it in pieces till it becomes like the dust of the sum- 
mer threshing-floor, and for this stone to become a great mountain 
and fill the whole earth. But how is He going to come? We are 
told how He is going to come. When those disciples stood looking up 
into Heaven at the time of His ascension, there appeared two angels, 
who said unto them (Acts i. 11), ““ Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye 
gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from 
you into Heaven shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him 
go into Heaven.” How did He go up? He took His flesh and 
bones up with Him. “ Lookat me; handle me; give me something 
to eat; a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have; I am the 
identical one whom they crucified and laid in the grave. Now I 
am risen from the dead and am going up to Heaven.” He is gone, 
say the angels, but He will come again just as He went. An angel 
was sent to announce His birth of the Virgin; angels sang of His 
advent in Bethlehem; an angel told the women of His resurrec- 
tion; and two angels told the disciples of His coming again. It is 
the same testimony in all these cases. 

I don’t know why people shouldn’t like to study the Bible, and 
find out all about this precious doctrine of our Lord’s return. 
Some have gone beyond prophecy, and tried to tell the very day 
He would come. Perhaps that is one reason why people don’t be- 
lieve this doctrine. He is coming, we know that; but just when 


VERS. 
who at His 


ripture is of 
es, the proph- 
ut not for the 
rophecy came 
ere moved by 
vho tell us of 
re he tells the 
eam that was 
-e in pieces the 
The dream is 
niel. Now we 
1e closing part 
nd Greece, and 
aly remains for 
» smite the im- 
ist of the sum- 
sreat mountain 
ome? Weare 
ood looking up 
red two angels, 
, why stand ye 
taken up from 
have seen Him 
His flesh and 
> me something 
save; Iam the 
grave. Nowl 
” He is gone, 
ent. An angel 
els sang of His 
f His resurrec- 
g again. It is 


the Bible, and 
Lord’s return. 
Hl the very day 
eople don’t be- 
but just when 


OUR LORD'S RETURN. §31 


He is coming we don’t know. Matthew xxiv. 36 settles that. 
The angels don’t know, and Christ says that even He doesn’t know, 
but that is something the Father keeps to Himself. If Christ had 
said, “I will not come back for 2,000 years,” none of His disciples 
would have begun to watch for Him, but it is the proper attitude 
of a Christian to be always looking for his Lord’s return. So God 
does not tell us when He is to come, but Christ tells us to watch. 
In this same chapter we find that He is to come unexpectedly and 
suddenly. In the twenty-seventh verse we have these words, “ For 
as the lightning cometh out of the east and shineth unto the west, 
even so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be.” And again, 
in the forty-fourth verse, “ Therefore be ye also ready, for in such 
an hour as ye think not the Son of Man cometh.” 

Some people say that means death; but the Word of God does 
not say it means death. Death is our enemy, but our Lord hath 
the keys of death; He has conquered death, hell, and the grave, 
and at any moment He may come to set us free from death and 
destroy our last enemy for us; so the proper state for a believer in 
Christ is waiting and watching for our Lord’s return. 

In the last chapter of John there is a text that seems to settle 
this matter. Peter asks the question about John, “Lord, what 
shall this man do? Jesus said unto him, If I will that he tarry 
till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou Me. Then went 
this saying abroad among the brethren that that disciple should not 
die.” They did not think that the coming of the Lord meant 
death; there was a great difference between these two things in 
their minds. Christ is the Prince of Life; there is no death where 
He is; death flees at His coming; dead bodies sprang to life when 
He touched them or spoke tothem. His coming is not death; He 
is the resurrection and the life; when he sets up His kingdom 
there is to be no death, but life forevermore. 

There is another mistake, as you will find if you read your Bibles 
carefully. Some people think that at the coming of Christ every- 
thing is to be all done up in a few minutes; but I do not so under- 
stand it. The first thing He is to do is to take His Church out of 
the world. He calls the Church His bride, and He says He is going 
to prepare a place for her. We may judge, says one, what a glori- 
ous place it will be, from the length of time He is in preparing it, 


and when the place is ready. He will come and. take the Church to 
Himself, 


§32 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


In the closing verses of the fourth chapter of 1 Thessalonians, 
Paul says: “If we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so 
also them which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. * * * 
We which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall 
not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord Himself shall 
descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, 
and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first. 
Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together 
with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall 
we ever be with the Lord. Wherefore comfort one another with 
these words.” That is, the comforted of the Church. There was 
a time when I used to mourn that I should not be alive in the mil- 
lennium; but now I expect to be in the millennium. Dean Alford 
says—almost everybody bows to him in the matter of interpreta- 
tion—that he must insist that this coming of Christ to take His 
Church to Himself in the clouds is not the same event as His com- 
ing to judge the world at the last day. The deliverance of the 
Church is one thing, judgment is another. Now, I can’t find any 
place in the Bible where it tells me to wait for signs of the coming 
of the millennium, as the return of the Jews, and such like; but it 
tells me to look for the coming of the Lord; to watch for it; to be 
ready at midnight to meet Him, like those five wise virgins. The 
trump of God may be sounded, for anything we know, before I 
finish this sermon—at any rate, we are told that He will come asa 
thief in the night, and at an hour when many look not for Him. 

Some of you may shake your heads and say, “Oh, well, that is 
too deep for the most of us; such things ought not to be said be- 
fore these young converts; only the very wisest characters, such as 
the ministers and the professors in the theological seminaries, can 
understand them.” But, my friends, you find that Paul wrote 
about these things to those young converts among the Thessalo. 
nians, and he tells them to comfort one another with those words. 
Here, in the first chapter of First Thessalonians, Paul says: “ Ye 
turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God, and tc 
wait for His Son from Heaven, whom He raised from the dead, even 
Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.” To wait for 
His Son; that is the true attitude of every child of God. If he is 
doing that, he is ready for the duties of life—ready for God’s work; 
aye, that makes him feel that he is just ready to begin to work for 
God. Then over in the next chapter (1 Thessalonians ii. 19.) he 


eS eS ee ae Y : a = 


SR ene <a 
Fe cies ie ean lion ~atlen 


VERS. 


hessalonians, 
gain, even so 
im * * * 
he Lord shall 
Himself shall 
he archangel, 
hall rise first. 
t up together 
,and so shall 
another with 
. There was 
ve in the mil- 
Dean Alford 
of interpreta- 
t to take His 
it as His com- 
rerance of the 
can’t find any 
of the coming 
ich like; but it 
h for it; to be 
virgins. The 
cnow, before | 
will come as a 
not for Him. 
h, well, that is 
to be said be- 
racters, such as 
seminaries, can 
at Paul wrote 
r the Thessalo- 
h those words. 
aul says: “Yc 
e God, and tc 
the dead, even 
” To wait for 
God. If he is 
or God’s work; 
gin to work for 
rians ii. 19.) he 


OUR LORD'S RETURN. 533 


says: “ For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are 
not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at His com- 
ing?” And again, in the third chapter, at the thirteenth verse: 
“ To the end that He may stablish your hearts unblamable in holi- 
ness before God, even our Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ with all His saints.” Still again, in the fifth chapter: “ For 
ye yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as 
a thief in the night.” He has something to say about this same 
thing in every chapter. Indeed, I have thought this epistle to the 
Thessalonians might be called the Gospel of Christ’s coming again. 

There are three great facts foretold in the Word of God: First, 
that Christ should come; that has been fulfilled. Second, that the 
Holy Ghost should come; that was fulfilled at Pentecost, and the 
Church is able to testify to it by its experience of His saving 
grace. Third, the return of our Lord again from Heaven—for this 
we are told to watch and wait “till He come.” Look at that 
account of the last hours of Christ with His disciples. What does 
Christ say tothem? “If I go away I will send death after you to 
bring you to Me? I will send an angel after you?” Not at all. 
He says: “I will come again and receive you unto Myself.” If my 
wife were in a foreign country, and I had a beautiful mansion all 
ready for her, she would a good deal rather I should come and 
bring her unto it than to have me send some one else to bring her. 
So the Church is the Lamb’s wife. He has prepared a mansion for 
His bride, and He promises for our joy and comfort that He will 
come Himself and bring us to the place He has been all this while 
preparing. 

My friends, it is perfectly safe to take the Word of God just as 
we find it. If He tells us to watch, then watch! If He tells us to 
pray, ‘then pray! If He tells us He will come again, wait for Him! 
Let the Church bow to the Word of God, rather than trying to find 
out how these things can be. “Behold, 1 come quickly,” said 
Christ. ‘ Even so come, Lord Jesus,” should be the prayer of the 
Chuich 

Take the account of the words of Christ at the communion-table. 
It seems to me that the devil has covered up the most precious 
thing about it. “For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this 
cup ye do show forth the Lord’s death ¢7// He come.” But most 
people seem to think that the Lord’s table is the piace for self-c»- 
amination and repentance, and making good resvulutions. Not at 


534 MOODYV'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


all; you spoil it that way; it is to show forth the Lord's death, and 
we are to keep it up till He comes. 

Some people say, “I believe Christ will come on the other side 
of the millennium.” Where do you get it? Ican’t find it. The 
Word of God nowhere tells me to watch and wait for the coming 
of the millennium, but for the coming of the Lord. I don’t find 
any place where God says the world is to grow better and better, 
and that Christ is to have a spiritual reign on earth of a thousand 
years. I find that the earth is to grow worse and worse, and that 
at length there is going to be aseparation. ‘Two women grinding 
at a mill—one taken and the other left; two men in one bed—one 
taken and the other left.” The Church is to be translated out of the 
world, and if this fail, we have two examples already, two repre- 
sentatives, as we might say, in Christ’s kingdom, of what is te be 
done for all His true believers. Enoch is the representative of the 
first dispensation, Elijah of the second, and, asa representative of 
the third dispensation, we have the Saviour Himself, who is entered 
into the heavens for us, and became the first fruits of them that 
slept. Weare not to wait for the great white throne judgment, but 
the glorified Church is set on the throne with Christ, and to help to 
judge the world. 

Now some of you think this is a new and strange doctrine, 
and that they who preach it are speckled birds. But let me tell 
you that most of the spiritual men in the pulpits of Great Britain 
are firm in this faith. Spurgeon preaches it. I have heard New. 
man Hall say that he knew no reason why Christ might not come 
before he got through with his sermon. J] ut in certain wealthy and 
fashionable churches, where they have the form of godliness, but 
deny the power thereof—just the state of things which Paul de- 
clares shall be in the last days—this doctrine is not preached or 
believed. They do not want sinners to cry out in their meeting, 
“What must I do to be saved?”” They want intellectual preachers 
who will cultivate their taste, brilliant preachers who will rouse their 
imagination, but they don’t want the preaching that has in it the 
power of the Holy Ghost. We live in the day of shams in relig- 
ion. The Church is cold and formal; may God wake us up! And 
i know of no better way to do it than to get the Church to looking 
for the return of our Lord. 

Some people say, “Oh, you will discourage the young converts 
if you preach that doctrine.” Well, my friends, that hasn’t been 


4VERS. 
‘d's death, and 


the other side 
-find it. The 
or the coming 

I don’t find 
rer and better, 
of a thousand 
rorse, and that 
omen grinding 
1 one bed—one 
lated out of the 
idy, two repre- 
what is te be 
entative of the 
presentative of 
who is entered 
s of them that 
> judgment, but 
, and to help to 


range doctrine, 
But let me tell 
bf Great Britain 
ve heard New. 
ight not come 
ain wealthy and 
f godliness, but 
which Paul de- 
ot preached or 
their meeting, 
ctual preachers 
will rouse their 
at has in it the 
shams in relig- 
eusup! And 
urch to looking 


young converts 
at hasn’t been 


OUR LORD'S RETURN. 535 


my experience. I have felt like working three times as hard ever 
since I came to understand that my Lord was coming back again. 
I look on this world as a wrecked vessel. God has given mea 
life-boat, and said to me, ‘“ Moody, save all you can.”” God 
will come in judgment and burn up this world, but the children 
of God don’t belong to this world; they are in it, but not of it, 
like a ship in the water. This world is getting darker and darker; 
its ruin is coming nearer and nearer. If you have any friends 
on this wreck unsaved, you had better lose no time in get- 
ting them off. But some one will say, “Do you, then, make the 
grace of God a failure?” No; grace is not a failure, but man 
is. The antediluvian world was a failure; the Jewish world 
was a failure; man has been a failure everywhere, when he has 
had his own way and been left to himself. Christ will save His 
Church, but He will save them finally by taking them out of the 
world. Now, don’t take my word for it; look this doctrine up in 
your Bibles, and, if you find it there, bow down to it and receive it 
as the word of God. Take Matthew xxiv. 50: “The Lord of that 
servant shall come when he looketh not for Him, and in an hour 
that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder and appoint him 
his portion with the hypocrites ; there shall be weeping and gnash- 
ing of teeth.” Take 2 Peter, third chapter, third and fourth verses: 
“There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own 
lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of His coming? for since 
the Fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from the 
beginning of the creation.” Go out on the streets of Chicago and 
ask men about the return of our Lord, and that is just what they 
would say: “ Ah, yes, the Lord delayeth His coming!”’ 

“ Behold, I come quickly,” said Christ to John, and the last prayer 
in the Bible is, “ Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly.” Were the 
early Christians disappointed then? No; no man is disappointed 
who obeys the voice of God. The world waited for the first coming 
of the Lord ; waited for 4,000 vears and then He came. He was 
here only thirty-three years and then he went away; but He left us 
a promise that He would come again; and as the world watched 
and waiced for His first coming and did not watch in vain, so now 
to them who wait for His appearing shall He appear a second time 
unto salvation. Now let the question go round, “Am I ready to 
meet the Lord if He comes to-night?” “Be ye also ready, for in 
such an hour as ye think not the Son of Man cometh.” 


SS — 


530 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


There is another thought I want to call your attention to, and 
that is: Christ will bring all our friends with Him when He comes. 
All who have died in the Lord are to be with Him when He comes 
in the clouds of Heaven. “ Blessed and holy is he that hath part in 
the first resurrection; on such the second death has no power, but 
they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with Him 
a thousand years.” (Rev. xx. 6). “But the rest of the dead lived 
not again until the thousand years were finished ; this is the first res- 
urrection” (verse v). That looks as if the Church were to have a 
thousand years with Christ before His return to the final judgment, 
when Satan shall be cast out, and there shall be new heavens and 
new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness. 

Now, I want to give you some texts to study at home: 1 Cor. ii. 
26; Luke xix. 13; 1 Tim. vi. 12; 1 Thess.i.7; Jamesv.8; 1 Thess. 
iv. 17-18. And so let us watch and wait till He comes. 


1YERS. 


ention to, and 
1en He comes. 
then He comes 
at hath part in 
no power, but 
eign with Him 
the dead lived 
s is the first res- 
vere to have a 
final judgment, 
»w heavens and 


home: I Cor. il. 
23v.8; 1 Thess. 


mes. 


LXII. 
THE PROPHET DANIEL. 


T is a very common question, nowadays, when we see a success- 
ful man, to ask what has been the secret of that man’s success. 
Now when we hear of a successful man in the Bible, it is well 

for us to inquire the secret of this man’s success. I think you will 
find the secret of a Christian man’s success in the eighth verse of 
the first chapter of that prophet Daniel: “ But Daniel purposed in 
his heart that he would not defile himself with a portion of the 
king’s meat nor with the wine which he drank. Therefore he re- 
quested of the prince of the eunuchs that he might not defile him- 
self.” 

That’s a good place to purpose—in the heart. A great many 
persons purpose in the head, and never get into the heart. What 
we want to do is to purpose in the heart, and when we do that it 
turns the current of our whole life. Our life is right if our heart is 
tight. This young man was taken down to Babylon in early life. 
I do not know just how young, but somewhere about twenty years 
old, I suppose. He was a poor Hebrew slave, and with others had 
been taken to the capital by Nebuchadnezzar, who had taken about 
ten thousand of the best men captive. After he had got them into 
Babylon, he told the eunuchs to pick out some of the best slaves— 
those that were skillful and good-looking, and had some natural 
ability—and ordered that they be educated in the wisdom of the 
Chaldeans, and in two years they were to stand before him and have 
some of the meat and wine that he himself partook of. But there 
was something in the law of their Lord which taught them that 
they were not to partake of those things, and they could not touch 
that wine or that meat without violating the law of their God. I 
am afraid if they had been like a good many Christians of the pres- 
ent time they would have said, “ Well, of course, now down in 
Jerusalem it would have been diiferent. If we were there we would 
(537) 


538 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


do as the people of Jerusalem, but now we are in Babylon we 
must do as the people do;” the same as people say, “ When you 
are in Rome do as the Romans do.” People are all the time com- 
promising with what is popular and forgetting their God. Now, if 
any young man ever had any good excuse for obeying Neouchad- 
nezzar, these young men had. They could have said, We are in 
exile, in bondage, in slavery, and why can not we do these things? 
Not only that, but if they had refused to partake of the meat and 
the wine, the same as Nebuchadnezzar drank, and it came to his 
ears, he would get angry and could take their heads off. But, thank 
God, these young men and Daniel had a purpose. He purposed in 
his heart that he would not defile himself with a portion of the 
king’s meat nor with the wine which he drank. If you will allow 
me the expression, I say that that young man had some bacicbone. 
He could say No! at the right time. There are a good many men 
lost because they can not say No! at the right time. I believe 
there are more young men who corne to Boston who are lost be- 
cause they can not say No, than for any other reason. A young 
man invites another to the theatre, and perhaps he has promised 
his mother that he would not go to such a place, but he has not the 
courage to say “No.” Or perhaps the young man has a room-mate 
who is a scoffer and he does not dare to get down and pray before 
that room-mate, simply because he has not got the moral courage. 
I like moral courage. I think there are hundreds and thousands 
to-day who are lost for want of moral courage. They dare not 
take their stand for God. Thank God that these young men had 
a purpose and dared to proclaim it. Daniel said to the officer who 
proffered him the wine: “1 can not drink that wine or eat that 
meat.” I can see that officer looking in perfect amazement at the 
man and saying: “ How is it that you can not eat it?” And 
Daniel saying, probably: “ Well, there is something in the law of 
my God forbidding it.” They did not know anything about any 
other God in Babylon and it must have been a surprise to hear 
this. 

These Chaldeans had no knowledge of any other God. These 
Hebrew captives might have said: “If we talk of some unseen God, 
some strange religious feeling that we have, some unknown religion, 
we will become unpopular and the butt and ridicule of the men 
rhat know us. I think that we had better not say anything about 
gr veligion, and keep it covered up, and nobody will know any- 


1YERS. 


n Babylon we 
When you 
the time com- 
God. Now, if 
ng Nebuchad- 
aid, We are in 
these things? 
the meat and 
it came to his 
off. But, thank 
He purposed in 
portion of the 
you will allow 
some bacizbone. 
ood many men 
ime. I believe 
tho are lost be- 
son. A young 
e has promised 
t he has not the 
las a room-mate 
and pray before 
moral courage. 
and thousands 
They dare not 
young men had 
the officer who 
ine or eat that 
azement at the 
eat it?” And 
in the law of 
1ing about any 
burprise to hear 


r God. These 
me unseen God, 
known religion, 
ule of the men 
anything about 
will know any- 


THLE PROPHET DANIEL, 530 
thing about it.” But, thank God, these men took their stand on 
God's side; and whenever a man takes his stand on God’s side, 
God will not forsake him. You honor Him and He will honor you. 
And they said, “ Take away that wine and that meat and give us 
pulse in place of it.” It seems that God had already brought them 
into friendship with the officer, for he feelingly said, “I can not do 
that, for when you come to stand before the king, you will look 
lean and not as fat as others, and he will inquire into it and want 
to know the cause; and when I tell him that you have not drank 
wine or eaten meat he will be angry and want to know why.”” Now 
some men have got the idea that it makes them look well to drink 
wine and have red noses; but these men said, “ Give us pulse in 
place of wine and meat,” and at the end of ten days no one looked 
so fair and well as these four men, for Daniel carried three uther men 
with him. The man that is right with God and has got a religion, 
always has an influence with somebody else, and these three men 
had a purpose in their hearts to go with this man Daniel. I will 
say right here that I think nine-tenths of the people who over- 
come the first temptations are the ones that are successful. You 
take a man who comes to a great city, and if he overcomes the first 
temptation he has, he is more liable to overcome others. If nine- 
tenths of them would only overcome the first they had, they would 
overcome others; but if they give way to the first temptation, then 
comes a second and a third, and so on, and the man goes down to 
ruin, just for want of moral courage to overcome his temptations. 
Look at the young men in this city who go down to untimely graves 
on account of their not overcoming their first temptation, and not 
having the moral courage to say no at the right time. Now the 
second year there is a great fear in Babylon, and Nebuchadnezzar 


has got angry and ordered all the wise mento! put to death. [| 
suppose that the first this young prince knew ot the officer came 
around to him and said that he must put him leath, that he was 
to execute him, and probably Daniel said, “ \\ :at have I done?” 
and the officer said, ““‘ Have you not heard of he decree of Nebu- 
chadnezzar? He has had a dream, and all t! ise men can not in- 


terpret that dream, and therefore he has orcered that they should 
all be put to death. We must take you out and execute you.” 
“Well,” says the young man, “he is very hasty; let me see the 
king,” and he is taken into the presence of the king, and he says 
to him, “ Give me a little time and I will tell you your dream.” 


Poe = 


re rat 


st a i oS ae SEE the = opal eRe Coes a scmeari ~ 
> = z . i z ae SpA Bye ae $6 Se ae 


540 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


There is faith for you. He knew that the secrets belonging to his 
God might be answered through prayer. The time is granted. It 
must have been good news to these wise men, and how they must 
have looked upon that one min in hopes that he could solve it 
And Daniel and his comrades pray to the God of heaven, to their 
God, that the Almighty might reveal the interpretation of thi 
dream, and if no answer came their faith would not be unshaken. 
And after they had prayed they went to sleep. Now I don't 
think many men of our time, who knew they were to be put to 
death in the morning, could sleep the night before. They would 
sit up all night to pray to their God. While he was sleeping, God 
revealed to Daniel the interpretation, and we find h'm praising God 
and magnifying Him. God heard his prayers; and when he rose in 
the morning he was taken to the king, and he said: ‘ 9 king, I will 
tell you the interpretation of your dream.” There mu.t have been 
great joy throughout that kingdom. It must have been noised 
around that he had found the interpretation. And now the young 
prince stands before that great monarch and goes on to tell him the 
interpretation: “O king, while thou dost lie with thy head on thy 
pillow thou dost dream, and in thy dream thou seest a great image.” 
I can imagine at these words the king’s eyes flash, and how he 
cried out with joy. And Daniel said: ‘ This image’s head was ot 
fine gold, his breast and arms of silver, his belly and thighs of brass, 
his legs of iron, his feet part of iron and part of clay. Thou sawest 
till that a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image 
upon his fect that were of iron and clay and brake them to pieces. 
Then was the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold 
broken to pieces together and became like the chaff of the summer 
threshing-foors; and the wind carried them away and no place was 
found for them, and the stone that smote the image became a great 
mountain and fi.ted the whole earth.” “ Yes!” cries Nebuchad- 
nezzar, “that is my dream. I saw that image; now tell me the 
interpretation.” “Well,” says Daniel, “the golden head of the 
great image represents your own government.” I suppose Babylon 
was the largest city in the world. It was sixty milesaround. Some 
say the walls were from sixty-five to eighty-five feet high, and eighty- 
five feet wide, and that it was one of the most magnificent cities 
ever seen. That Chaldean Government extended all over the 
world. We talk about the importance of the present day, but I 
suppose Babylon was in its glory one of the most magnificent cities 


AVERS. 


longing to his 
is granted. It 
how they must 
could solve it. 
eaven, to their 
station of this 
oe unshaken. 
Now I don't 
e to be put to 
». They would 
s sleeping, God 
m praising God 
when he rose in 
) king, I will 
mu.t have been 
ve been noised 
now the young 
n to tell him the 
hy head on thy 
ta great image.” 
sh, and how he 
e’s head was of 
thighs of brass, 
y. Thou sawest 
smote the image 
them to pieces. 
r, and the gold 
f of the summer 
hnd no place was 
became a4 great 
ries Nebuchad- 
row tell me the 
len head of the 
suppose Babylon 
psaround, Some 
righ, and eighty- 
agnificent cities 
»d all over the 
‘sent day, but I 
1agnificent cities 


THE PROPHET DANIEL. 541 


ever scen. It opened into streets one hundred and fifty feet wide 
and fifty miles long. It was built in a perfect square; the beautiful 
Euphrates ran right through it, and there was a hanging garden built 
to please Nebuchadnezzar’s wife, who came from a mountainous 
country. And there was a mountain in it also just to please her. 
The wealth of the world had been brought into this city. The 
wealth of the world seemed to be centred in this great city. This 
Chaldean Government, Daniel told the king, was to be destroyed 
by another, and afterwards by a third and fourth kingdom, when 
at last the God of heaven was to set up His kingdom. Tor some 
time Rome ruled the world, and then it was divided into ten king- 
doms, and these ten kingdoms have existed ever since. And Daniel 
himself lived to see the first overthrow, when the Medes and Per- 
sians came in. And centuries after came Alexander, and then the 
Romans. ‘These dreams, he says, are true. God is coming to set 
up His own kingdom. When Christ sets up His kingdom on earth 
and reigns, then there will be satisfaction. Daniel was put into 
office, made a great man, and had a great many gifts given him, and 
became very popular, and was made a ruler or governor of the 
provinces ; and his three comrades, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego, were also put into office, like 'ossph down there in Egypt, 
and Daniel was even greater than a kin: 

The next thing that Nubuchadnezzar did that tried the faith of 
these men, was to put up a golden image on the plain of Dura. I don't 
know but what this very image that he had been dreaming about 
induced him to put this one up. His purpose was to have an idol 
that the world might worship, and thus pass his name down to pos- 
terity. The image, I believe, was one hundred and ten feet in 
height, and some think it was really built of gold. It looked like 
gold anyway. It was nine feet wide. There were hundreds and 
thousands and tens of thousands that came to see it, and then there 
was a proclamation sent forth to the corners of the world, and all 
nations and languages and tribes were summoned to the dedication 
or unveiling of it, as we say now of monuments. They came up 
to worship the image that Nebuchadnezzar had put up on that 
plain. And the decree had gone forth that every one should come 
and bow down and worship that golden image. And, therefore, 
there came another time when the law of God came into conflict 
with the law of Nebuchadnezzar. Now at this time, perhaps, Dan- 
iel was in Egypt or in some other empire on important business. We 


542 MOODY & SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


know that he was not then at the dedication of this image to bow 
down to it; but then, his three friends were there, and his influence 
was there. The hour had come, and you can see the governors, the 
sheriffs, the princes, and the wise men of the whole realm gathered 
there to worship this golden image. And when they hear the sign, 
the music, the cornet, or the flute, they are to bow down and wor- 
ship that image. But these men do not. Of course they had ene- 
mies. You can not find a man who serves God in any age but he 
has enemies. The man that loves Christ will be persecuted. The 
man that stands up to honor God will have enemies, and these three 
men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, had enemies, but they had 
taken their stand already that they would not eat of the meat or 
drink of the wine of Nebuchadnezzar, and they were not going to 
bow down to this image, although the whole world was going to. 
I suppose that if you and I had been there we would have been so 
weak-kneed that we would have first dropped down and worshiped 
it; that we would not have had the moral courage to take our stand 
for God. But, thank God, these men had the moral courage. The 
hour had come, and all of them were on their knees, but they could 
not all have kept their heads down, becaus2 some must have had their 
heads up to have seen these men who did not bow down. They 
were jealows of them and wanted to get rid of them. They knew 
they were not going to worship that image. Of course these three 
men sat there. They had gone as far as they could and obeyed the 
king as far as the law of their God allowed. But they would not 
be. down; they could not do it. They had the law of Sinai in 
theiv minds. The Lord God had said that they should not bow 
down to any graven image or have any other God but Him. Af- 
terwards their enemies came to Nebuchadnezzar and told him how 
these men had not obeyed his decree, and Nebuchadnezzar prob- 
ably said, “ Who are they?” and they said, “ Why, these three men, 
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.” The king ordered them into 
his presence, and they are brought to him, and he says to them, “Is 
it true that you will not bow down to that image I have put up on 
the plain? I will give you ome more opportunity, and when you 
hear the sound of the cornet, or the fluce, if you bow down you will 
save your lives, and if mot I will cast you into the furnace, and who 
is the God that is able to deliver you from my hands?” I do not 
spokesman on the occasion; perhaps it was 
as calm as a summer evening, and he said, “ My 


know who was t 
Shadrach, and he vy 


VERS. 


mage to bow 
his influence 
rovernors, the 
alm gathered 
hear the sign, 
ywn and wor- 
they had ene- 
y age but he 
ecuted. The 
nd these three 
, but they had 
yf the meat or 
not going to 
was going to. 
have been so 
and worshiped 
take our stand 
courage. The 
but they could 
have had their 
down. They 
They knew 
rse these three 
nd obeyed the 
hey would not 
aw of Sinai in 
nould not bow 
but Him. Af- 
told him how 
adnezzar prob- 
1ese three men, 
ered them into 
rs to them, “Is 
nave put up on 
and when you 
down you will 
rnace, and who 
Is?” Ido not 
yerhaps it was 


d he said, “ My 


THE PROPHET DANIEL, 543 


God is able to deliver us.” There is faith for you. “Our God is 
able.” Thank God for such moral courage. If we had a few men 
in Boston like that, that dared to take their stand and have a pur. 
pose, it would be the best thing we could have. Let them stand by 
God, and let infidels say what they may. J.et these men catering 
for popularity take their stand for God and say: We will 
not bow down to images. Well, that settles it! The king gets 
angry and says: “ Let the furnace be heated seven times hotter than 
ever, and cast these men into it, clothes and all. We don't want 
anything left of them.” The fire leaped up and about them, but 
yonder was sitting the Great Shepherd, and He sees three of His 
little lambs in trouble, and He came from His throne and looked 
after them, and they came forth unharmed. And the king said, 
“Ye sons of the Living God, come forth.” And he ordered them 
to be brought out at once, and they came without even the smell 
of fire upon them. All that the fire had done was to burn off their 
chains. The devil can not make a fire so hot that it will scorch one 
hair of our heads when the living God interposes His hand. He 
will take care ot His own. And they came walking, not running. 
Perhaps they said, with the prophet Isaiah: “ Though I am encom- 
passed with fire or pass through the valley of the shadow of death, 
yet will I trust in the Lord.” Let us bear in mind this thing, that 
there is never anything lost by standing to what is right. Let us 
not be ashamed of our God. If we take our stand on God's side, 
He will help us. Look at Joseph. They cast him into prison, but 
he had the Lord with him. He had rather be put into prison if he 
had God with him, than to be outside without God. I wish that I 
had time to go on with this subject, but I must come to King 
Nebuchadnezzar’s second dream. When he had his first dream, his 
wise men told him that if he could tell them that dream, they would 
give him its interpretation. Now this dream he remembered, and 
he told it to them, but they were not able to tell him the interpre- 
tation thereof. Therefore, Daniel was sent for, and the dream was told 
to him, but he was astounded at it, The Scripture says that Daniel for 
one hour was astonished. But the king told him to tell him all abc 

it, and then Daniel told it. The king had a dream that he saw a 
tree in the earth whose branches reached to heaven, whose leaves 
were fair, and the fruit thereof large, under which the beasts of the 
field dwelt, and upon whose branches the fowls of heaven had their 
habitation. And their king saw a messenger coming down from 


544 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


heaven and he hewed down the tree and destroyed it; and the king 
wanted Daniel to tell him what it meant. And Daniel told him 
that that tree represented his government, his empire, his kingdom, 
that then extended over the known world, and that God was going to 
destroy it on account of his sin and iniquity, and then the prophet 
began to preach righteousness right there to the king, Nebuchad- 
nezzar, in which he told him how the king of Nineveh repented, 
and how God heard his prayer, and he returned from his captivity. 
He preached to this great king righteousness, and we are told that 
on account of his exhortations with him, this great calamity was 
averted for one year. But at the end of twelve munths Nebuchad- 
nezzar, walking in the palace of his kingdom, said: “Is not this 
great Babylon which I have built for the house of the kingdom by 
the might of my power and for the honor of my majesty?” And 
even while he said this, a voice fell from heaven, saying: ‘“ Oh, 
King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken, the kingdom is departed 
from thee.” It is supposed that his reason reeled, and that he tot- 
tered from his throne and left the palace and went into the field, 
and he lived there with the beasts, “and seven days passed ovet 
him.” How many that is we do not know. 

It might have been seven years until his reason retu’ aed to him, 
and at the end of this time his reason returned to him again. And 
he blessed the Most High and praised and honored Him. And he 
gathered around him his counselors and lords, and he sends out 
another proclamation. He had sent out a good many before, but 
it seems he had never got home to himself. He had said what 
other people should do, but had never subjected himself to any high 
authority. It was altogether different from any other he had sent 
out. He says in the fourth chapter of Daniel, 34th, 35th, and 36th 
verses : 

“And at the end of the days I, Nebichadnezzar, lifted up mine 
eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I 
blessed the Most High, and I praised and honored Him that liveth 
forever—Whose dominion is an everlasting dominion and His king- 
dom is from generation to generation. 

“And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing; 
and he doeth according to his will in the army of heaven and 
among the inhabitants of the earth, and none can stay his hand or 
say unto him, ‘ What doest thou ?’ 

“At the same time my reason returned unto me, and for the 


—_ 


ages peas get 
ALS FS A Tees: 


1YERS. 


: and the king 
nie! told him 
his kingdom, 
yd was going to 
*n the prophet 
ng, Nebuchad- 
eveh repented, 
n his captivity. 
ve are told that 
it calamity was 
iths Nebuchad- 
+ “Ts not this 
he kingdom by 
rajesty ?” And 
, saying: “ Oh, 
‘dom is departed 
and that he tot- 
it into the field, 
ays passed ove! 


retu’ aed to him, 
nim again. And 
Him. And he 
d he sends out 
any before, but 
had said what 
self to any high 
her he had sent 
h, 35th, and 36th 


r, lifted up mine 
d unto me, and I 
Him that liveth 
on and His king- 


ted as nothing; 
| of heaven and 


stay his hand or 


me, and for the 


THE PROPHET DANIEL. 545 


glory of my kingdom, mine honor and brightness returned unto me, 
and my counselors and my lords sought nto me and I was estab- 
lished in my kingdom, and excellent majesty was added unto me.” 

Now these are the last words we hear of that great king that are 
on record : 

“ Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and honor the King 
of heaven, all whose works are truth and his ways judgment, and 
those that walk in pride he is able to abase.” 

Those are the last words we have recorded of him, but it gives 
us, it seems to me, an insight into what had taken place in his 
heart—that he had become a new man; that he was altogether 
different, and no doubt it was all through the efforts of the faithful 
Daniel, and no doubt in that heavenly world, Nebuchadnezzar and 
Daniel now walk together, It was because of this man Daniel being 
firm and standing by his God—that was the secret of his success. 
For it is said that if we are wise, and win many to Christ, we shall 
shine like the firmament of heaven, and like the stars in the night. 
God gave him the privilege of leading that first monarch and ruler 
‘of the whole world at that time to Him. We lose sight of Daniel 
now for about fifteen years; where he was or what he was doing 
we do not know. The next time we hear of him is at the feast of 
Belshazzar. Belshazzar is supposed to be a grandson of Nebuchad- 
nezzar. In the Bible he is called the son, but they used to call 
grandsons, sons. Now we read of his having a great feast, and 
thousands being called together from different parts of his empire 
to attend it. We have only one short chapter in the Book of 
Daniel which tells us his history, but that gives the whole story. 
The wicked, you know, don’t live out half their days, and Belshaz- 
zar died, and did not reign a great while. While he was feasting 
and rioting with the people, Cyrus’ army was besieging the city. 
I suppose Belshazzar thought his army was strong enough. While 
they wer.. besieging him he kept right on drinking and carousing in 
the banquet hall. But in the midst of the feast all at once the 
audience is hushed; there is no more blaspheming now, no more 
cursing, no more drinking, no more praising of the gods of gold 
and of silver, of brass and of iron, of wood and of stone. It was all 
hushed. What has caused it? I can see the king turn deathly 
pale, his knees smite together, as he looks yonder on the writing. 
Over against the king upon the wall of the palace there is a finger 
writing upon that wall. It is the same finger that wrote at Sinai, 


~ e 
Pe siti 
7G 
“y ¥,,* LY 4: 
*9, W ‘4, 
Y \ = VW A <®. ¢& 
ae N 2, & 
~ ond ©. Bete, 
VY 
4 N 
<* 
50 Ez. : 
=e sine 7 oo. 
Ww aa set 
=e | oe 
wi oll] — — a oe 
oe ol] =I) 3 2 28 
2 8. 
SAS 
a> = 
\ G A\ 
5? N 7 > . N JS 
ws re, TS 
e “2 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


= 
Ps 
54-0) 


It is the writing of the God of Sinai. He sends for the wise men 
of Babylon to tell him the interpretation and offers them a great 
reward, and he offers to make the man that can read it the third 
officer in his kingdom. They come and look and try to interpret 
that handwriting, but no uncircumcised eye can read God’s writing. 
That is the reason so many infidels and scoffers to-day can not un- 
derstand the Bible; they try to make it out, but fail. At last the 
king tells the queen that there is no man in the kingdom that can 
read that writing unless it is Daniel, who interpreted the dreams of 
Belshazzar’s grandfather. And Daniel was sent for, and I can 
imagine as his eyes glanced upon that writing that it appeared very 
familiar to him. He did not have any trouble to read it. ‘ Mene, 
mene, tekel, upharsin.” “Tell me the interpretation,” the king 
cries, “and I will give you anything you want, and make you the 
third ruler in my kingdom.” But Daniel says: “Give your gifts to 
another; I will interpret it. Mene means: ‘Thy God hath depart- 
ed from thee.’ Tekel—‘ Thou art weighed in the balance and found 
wanting.’” Sinner, suppose God put you in the balance of the 
sanctuary this morning and weighed you, and you found you had 
not God and Christ in your soul. “ Upharsin—‘ Thy kingdom is 
divided.’”’ It is given over to the Medes and Persians. And that 
night Belshazzar’s blood flowed with the wine. That very night 
Cyrus’ army was turning the river Euphrates off into another chan- 
nel, and battering away at the walls of the city; and Darius, the 
king of the Medes and Persians, succeeded to Belshazzar’s throne. 
And Darius put one hundred and twenty men over the different 
provinces of this empire. How he knew Daniel we do not know. 
Perhaps he had met him when he was Prime Minister for Nebu- 
chadnezzar, and perhaps he had met him on some official business. 
We know that Darius had great confidence in Daniel. And after 
he puts one hundred and twenty princes over the different prov- 
inces, he puts over them three presidents, of whom Daniel was the 
first. Daniel was to rule the men in the whole empire, and was 
really the ruler. There was no one greater in the empire except 
Darius. We find that another great trial came across Daniel’s path. 
But he had been tried when he first came to Babylon, and God was 
not going to desert him now. These one hundred and twenty princes 
had become jealous of Daniel. You never found a successful man, 
in the history of the world, but he had some enemies! Why, 
George Washington had enemies! We have been commemorating 


ERS. 


e wise men 
nem a great 
it the third 
to interpret 
od’s writing. 
/can not un- 

At last the 
om that can 
he dreams of 
r, and I can 
appeared very 
iit. ‘“ Mene, 

n,” the king 
make you the 

s your gifts to 

d hath depart- 
ance and found 
balance of the 
found you had 
‘hy kingdom is 
ans. And that 
hat very night 

> another chan- 
hnd Darius, the 
hazzar’s throne. 
er the different 
b do not know. 
ister for Nebu- 
hfficial business. 
Niel. And after 
e different prov- 
| Daniel was the 
bmpire, and was 
empire except 
Ls Daniel’s path. 
bn, and God was 
4 twenty princes 
successful man, 
nemies! Why, 
commemorating 


THE PROPHET DANIEL, 547 


his life and celebrating his birthday, but he had a great many 
enemies in his day. Many were jealous of him. There was no 
reason for it; the man stood all right. He was true to God; but 
he had enemies, and we find that these princes had become jealous 
of Daniel. He looked over their accounts, and I do not know but 
he saw that they did not cheat the government. I do not know 
but they might have had some Indian contracts and could not 
make so much money out of the government as they could desire. 
They could not defraud the government because of Daniel’s watch- 
ing them. No doubt they argued that if they could have some 
one in place of this old Hebrew here they could make enough ina 
few years out of the kingdom to retire from business; but now 
they could not, on the salary the king gave them. 

They could never get rich. Of course, if they could get rid of 
this man they could plunder the Government. A great many think 
it is not dishonest to take what belongs to the Government, and it 
don’t trouble their consciences; and these princes wanted to get 
this man Daniel out of their way, and so they formed a conspiracy 
to destroy him. They raked up his whole past life when he had 
been with Nebuchadnezzar, but they came to the conclusion that 
they could not find anything against him, except touching the law 
of his God. I consider that a greater encomium for him, that he 
stayed by the law of his God, than could be given to any statesman 
of the country. He had kept the accounts right and had not com- 
mitted any peculations; he had not put any nephews or brothers 
into office that had defrauded the Government, and there he was 
standing alone in that great city for God and the majesty of the 
law. They found no occasion to condemn him. There was not a 
solitary man that could injure his reputation. He had been true to 
the Government and to his God. They could only say that he had 
abided by the law of his God. These wicked princes, knowing that 
Daniel would worship no one but the God of Israel, thought if they 
could get Daniel to do something to trap him, so that he would be 
destroyed, it would be just the thing. They were not going to 
have Daniel cast into a furnace, as his disciples were in the days of 
Nebuchadnezzar, but they thought if they could get him cast into 
the den of lions they would soon make way with him. I suppose 
they had a secret council together. Perhaps it was all night. When 
men want to do something mean, they want to do it in the dark. 
You can see these princes having a meeting and conspiring to- 


548 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


gether, and perhaps one of them was a lawyer acquainted with the 
laws of the Medes and Persians, and they thought if they could 
only get a decree signed by Darius, that no man should worship 
any God or anybody else for thirty days but Darius, he should be 
cast into the den of lions. ‘“ Remember,” they said to one an. 
other, “and don’t tell your wives and daughters, because if you 
want to keep it private, don’t let the women know it.” They gota 
decree drawn up to be signed by the king, and the penalty was that 
the one who violated it should be cast into the lions’ den. I can 
see these one hundred and twenty princes writing that document 
carcfully, line by line, sentence by sentence, so that there should be 
no mistake, because they knew that Darius loved Daniel, and if 
there was any chance by which he could save him and keep the law 
he would do it. And they decreed that Darius should sign it with- 
out calling upon his prime minister or chief secretary, because they 
knew if he read it he would not sign it. And they also knew that 
Daniel worshiped the God of the Hebrews, and was not going to 
disobey the law of his God. Probably they sent three or four 
princes to the palace, and they probably told Darius what a mighty 
man he was, and how the whole population loved him. They knew 
his weak point, and they probably told him if he signed the decree 
for nobody to call upon any other God but him it would hand his 
name down to posterity, and that mothers would teach their chil- 
dren to pray to Darius, and instil his name into their minds and 
make him their God, and that it would lift him up from the position 
he held to make him a god, and all in the kingdom would bow 
down and worship him. 

And they might have argued that if it was kept thirty days it 
would become the universal religion and hand his name down to 
generations. If you want a man to do a mean thing just touch his 
vanity. These princes had touched Darius’ vanity. He thought 
he would like to have all the people worship him. He thought it 
was a very fine suggestion. They did not wait for him to read it 
all. He could see no objection, and put his signet of the Govern- 
ment upon it, and one of the princes might have said after he had 
done that, in a tone of mockery: “The laws of the Medes and Per- 
sians alter not. They can not be changed.” Darius, of course, 
approved of them all. And you can see this man going out of the 
palace elated, saying: “ Daniel has looked over our accounts long 
enough.” He had watched their accounts to see that uo damage 


4YERS. 


inted with the 

_ if they could 
should worship 

s, he should be 
1id to one an- 
because if you 
2’ They gota 
enalty was that 
yns’ den. I can 
that document 
there should be 

| Daniel, and if 
nd keep the law 
uld sign it with- 
ry, because they 
y also knew that 
vas not going to 
nt three or four 
us what a mighty 
iim. They knew 
signed the decree 
t would hand his 
1 teach their chil- 
) their minds and 
from the position 
iodom would bow 


ept thirty days it 
his name down to 
ing just touch his 
ity. He thought 
He thought it 
or him to read it 
et of the Govern- 
said after he had 
e Medes and Per- 
Darius, of course, 
going out of the 
bur accounts long 
be that uo damage 


THE PROPHET DANIEL. 549 


came to the Government. The news soon spread that Darius had 
signed such a decree. I can just see the man going into the office 
of the secretary. I can see his gray locks and beautiful white beard, 
as he sat there at his desk, and, perhaps, looking over the accounts 
of these very men who have been conspiring against him. This 
messenger comes to Daniel and says: ‘“ Have you heard of the con- 
spiracy to destroy you?” “No; what is it?” ‘ Why, these one 
hundred and twenty princes have got Darius to sign a decree that 
every man that shall ask a petition of any God or any man within 
thirty days, save of the king, shall be cast into the den of lions.” I 
am afraid if some of us had been there, some of the Christians of the 
nineteenth century, we would have said: “ Now, look you, don’t be 
too religious; don’t be too conscientious; don’t you let them catch 
you praying for the next thirty days on your knees at your open 
window. (You know it was the custom to pray with an open win- 
dow towards Jerusalem). These princes have spies and will report 
it to the king.” Or they might have said: “It will be ruinous to 
the Government. Don’t you pray to the God of the Hebrews, or 
if you do, don’t you do it at an open window. If you are deter- 
mined to pray, hadn’t you better pray with your shutters closed? 
Put some paper in the key-hole so that nobody can peek in and see 
you. Get into your bed and pray silently and they won’t hear you. 
Call upon your God secretly, and it will be just as well as to pray 
at an open window.” I am afraid that that would have been our 
advice, but do you think that this man who had served God all 
these years was going to deviate a hair’s breadth from his custom ? 
He had taken his stand on the Lord’s side, and he was not going to 
deviate from it. Let all the devils in hell form a conspiracy against 
him, he would not. If he had got to go into the lions’ den, his God 
was going there with him. I can just imagine how indignant he was 
at the suggestion. The Scripture tells that after the decree was 
signed, the old man went to his room three times a day and prayed 
to his God three times a day. He had time to pray. There area 
good many business men nowadays in Boston who have not got 
time, they think. Statesmen and politicians have not got time to 
pray. You go to Washington and start a prayer-meeting there, and 
they would laugh at the idea, and say, We are Senators and Repre- 
sentatives; we have so much business we have not time to pray; 
but this person found time. This man, who was the chief man in 
that kingdom, found time—you might say a ruler of the whole 


350 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


world at that time. I doubt whether or no there was a man living 
in his day so busy as this man, and he found time. He had not 
only the king’s business to attend to, but his own private affairs 
also, and had to watch these one hundred and twenty rascals to 
keep them from stealing from the Government, and yet he prayed 
three times a day as aforetime, and he prayed with his windows 
open towards Jerusalem. When that temple was dedicated in the 
days of Solomon, we are informed that God had promised to answer 
the prayers of those who prayed with their windows open towards 
Jerusalem. What cared Daniel for the lions’ den! He was on his 
way to heaven, and that den had no terror for him. He is not go. 
ing to lose his soul, and so he prays; and if there had been any 
reporters in those days they would probably have got that prayer 
in the next edition. These princes were watching. They had two 
men there probably to take it down. “ Now listen, now see if he 
prays to Darius.” He goes down on his knees and lifts up his voice 
towards heaven, and prays to the God of Abraham, the God of 
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, and to the God of his fathers, but be- 
fore he gets through he prays for that kingdom, he prays for Darius, 
but not to him. It is all right to pray for kings, and we ought to 
pray more for this country. Let us pray for our rulers. We ought 
to find time. This prophet found time to pray every day. I have 
no doubt he prayed every day for the king and for that nation. 
While he is praying his enemies are taking down his prayer, and 
after he gets through they go to the princes and say: “ Here is the 
prayer; we heard the prayer; he prayed for ten minutes, but never 
called upon Daryius at all. He prayed for the Hebrew God to bless 
the kingdom, but he did not pray to the king.” And away these 
men go to tell the king of it, saying: “Oh, Darius, live forever! 
Do you know there is a man in your kingdom who won’t obey?” 
“Won't obey me! Whois it?” “Why, that man Daniel.” And 
the king says: “Of course he won’t bow down and worship me. I 
might have known he would not have done it. How could I have 
done suchathing?” Instead of condemning Daniel, he condemns 
himself. He walks up and down in great agony and begins to 
realize what the effect of that decree is to be. But these princes 
say, sardonically: “ The laws of the Medes and Persians alter not.” 
They perhaps twit him of it. They have got him. Darius loved 
Daniel very much, but he did not love him so much as your Darius 
and mine, our Christ, loves us. Our Christ went down into the 


YERS. 


s a man living 
He had not 
private affairs 
nty rascals to 
yet he prayed 
1 his windows 
sdicated in the 
1ised to answer 
s open towards 
He was on his 
He is not go- 
. had been any 
sot that prayer 
They had two 
n, now see if he 
lifts up his voice 
im, the God of 
; fathers, but be- 
prays for Darius, 
and we ought to 
lers. We ought 
ery day. I have 
for that nation. 
h his prayer, and 
y: “Here is the 
inutes, but never 
rew God to bless 
And away these 
ius, live forever! 
to won't obey?” 
in Daniel.” And 
H worship me. I 
tow could I have 
iel, he condemns 
y and begins to 
But these princes 
Lrsians alter not.” 
Darius loved 
h as your Darius 
t down into the 


THE PROPHET DANIEL. 551 


lions’ den and kept His law, and for hours Darius set his face against 
delivering up Daniel; but these wicked princes held him to his de- 
cree, and he would not break the law. They probably said: “If 
you break that, your kingdom will pass from you. The law must be 
kept. The law of the Medes and Persians does not alter.” So the 
king gave the command to the princes to cast Daniel into the lions’ 
den. You might see, if you had been there, that old man led along 
the streets of Babylon and guided by some mighty men of the 
Chaldean army. He is cast into the den, and they put a stone upon 
the mouth of the den. Then these princes probably rejoiced that 
they had got Daniel out of the way. But Daniel had confidence in 
his God, and we can see him sleeping calmly with his head on one 
of the lions for a pillow. He slept more calmly than the king. 
When morning came, the king orders out his chariot and rolls 
through the streets of the city until he comes to the den. There 
he calls out to Daniel and asks him if his God has delivered him. 
And hark! there is his voice. God has sent down His angel and 
saved T)aniel, and he came forth unharmed. And the king is ex- 
ceedingly glad, and takes him in his chariot back to the ‘palace, and 
they were two joyful men. God stood by him. He was on the 
Lord’s side. Oh, who is on the Lord’s side here to-day? If you 
will take your stand on His side He will deliver you from tempta- 
tion, trial, and darkness. When Daniel died he went to heaven. 
I do not believe he was a stranger there; for all knew him, for he 
was greatly beloved of God. If we stand up for what is right in 
the sight of God, God will bless us, and we will be in constant com- 
munion with Him. Let us pray to Daniel’s God. 


LXIV. 


JESUS IN PROPHECY. 


REV. xix. 10: “ For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.” 
INTRODUCTORY. 


S the time begins to draw near for us to leave you, one feeling 
comes over me more and more, and that is, I would like to 
get all these young converts in love with their Bible, and 

especially with the person of Christ. It seems to me, as I look back, 
if I had had some one when I was first converted to teach me more 
about Christ and about His person, and my standing with Him, that 
it would have saved me many a dark hour and many a fearful con- 
flict that I had with myself during the first eight or ten years of my 
Christian experience. Then I was all the time thinking and doubt- 
ing about the Bible. I think, perhaps, there is no city in this coun- 
try where the Bible has been attacked as much as it has in Boston; 
and I pity those young converts who do not get in love with their 
Bible. If you hear these skeptics and scoffers all the time attack- 
ing it, before you know it you will begin to believe what they say 
and be just like them; but if you do love your Bible, the more they 
attack it, the more they scoff at it, the more you will love it; and 
if I could be instrumental in saying something that would get these 
professors of religion, especially the young converts, in love with 
God, in a personal knowledge of Jesus Christ, to know Him person- 
ally as their Lord and Saviour, and as their Redeemer, I should feel 
that this work would go right straight on, and that it would not 
stop during these summer months, nor next year, nor five years 
hence; but, if we should come back here forty years from now, we 
would find these men that have been brought out at the present 
time still serving the Lord—these young converts still serving the 
Lord. I have noticed a great many that have been brought out 
commence right off to study their Bible; but those who have been 
(552) 


Y. 


f prophecy.” 


you, one feeling 
, | would like to 
their Bible, and 
e,as I look back, 
o teach me more 
ig with Him, that 
any a fearful con- 
r ten years of my 
nking and doubt- 
city in this coun- 
it has in Boston; 
in love with their 
1 the time attack- 
bve what they say 
ble, the more they 
will love it; and 
t would get these 
erts, in love with 
now Him person- 
mer, I should feel 
hat it would not 
hr, nor five years 
bars from now, We 
but at the present 
s still serving the 
been brought out 
e who have been 


FESUS IN PROPHECY. 553 


brought out, and do not study their Bible, do not love their Bible. 
I have noticed that they have turned back. I rejoice to see so 
many bringing their Bibles, and yet one out of ten don’t bring them, 
or, if they do, don’t turn to them when the sacred passages are read. 
If you get that habit, if you just take your Bible, and when the 
minister preaches, take down notes, that will encourage the 
preacher; it will stir him up to greater zeal when he knows that 
his hearers are interested in what he says. 


SERMON. 


Since we have been here, we have preached nothing but Jesus 
Christ; and it is well for us to know what He is, where He came 
from, and what He came for. Now if I had come here to talk or 
lecture about Paris or London, you would expect me to talk about 
them—to tell you all about them that I could. If I came here to 
lecture on Knox, or Bunyan, or Whitefield, you would expect me to 
talk about them. Now, we have come here to speak about the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and you naturally want to know who He was, 
and what He came for. He came to declare His Father and reveal 
Him to the world. Let me call your attention to the second epistle 
of Peter—the last words that he wrote—the first chapter and four- 
teenth verse: 

“Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle, even 
as our Lord Jesus Christ hath showed me. 

“ Moreover, I will endeavor that ye may be able after my decease 
to have these things always in remembrance. 

“For we have not followed cunningly-devised fables, when we 
made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, but were eye-witnesses of his majesty. 

“For he received from God the Father honor and glory, when 
there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is 
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. 

“ And this voice which came from heaven we heard when we were 
with him in the holy mount. 

“We have also a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do 
well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, 
until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in your hearts. 

“ Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any 
private interpretation. 

“For the prophecy came not in the old time by the will of man; 


554 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy 
Ghost.” 

The thought I want to call your attention to is this: that when 
we take up this Bible, let us bear in mind that it is true. Neverthe- 
less, hundreds of men tell us it is not. Let us just bear in mind that 
the Word of God is true, and that we can rely upon it. It has been 
written by different men covering over the space of fifteen hundred 
years; but you will find the same doctrine taught in Genesis that 
you will in Revelation. You will find the same spirit in Exodus 
that you will in the Epistle to the Romans. It is not two different 
books. It is one book written by one hand—by holy men, who 
speak as if they were moved by the Holy Ghost. Nature has been 
the same all these ages, and sin has been the same all these years. 
Man by nature has been the same all these years—been corrupt by 
nature. Grace has been the same. God has been the same God of Love 
all these six thousand years. So when we take up this work, although 
it has been written by different classes of men—men high and low— 
for although Moses had all the education of the Egyptians, yet God 
took him off forty years and put him in the desert in Horeb. He 
wrote the first five Books of the Bible; yet we find that Amos wrote 
also, and he was taken from a sheep-fold. We find that Peter wrote 
as sweetly as any one, yet he was a simple fisherman, and so with 
John, Paul, and the rest of them. There was no conflict between them 
and Moses, although hundreds of years intervened between the peri- 
od of their writings. There is no difference. They wrote this book. 
And when we take it up, let us bear in mind it istrue. You will 
find, if you take up the Old Testament, that every word concerning 
the Lord Jesus Christ has been literally fulfilled. I once read of 
two Jewish rabbis that were going up to Jerusalem, after it had 
been laid waste, and they saw a fox there upon the walls of Jeru- 
salem; one rabbi burst into tears, and the other burst out laughing. 
One rebuked the other, saying: “ Howcan you laugh when you see 
Jerusalem given over to the Gentiles? He predicted this, and 
His prophecy has been fulfilled, and now I know that God’s word 
is true. It makes me believe the word of God.” And if you take 
notice how God has dealt with that nation, you will find that every: 
thing He said about this nation has been fulfilled literally. Every 
promise that He made to Abraham has been literally fulfilled, just 
as God said it should be. He said His seed should be as the sands 
of the sea-shore and stars of the heaven, and His prophecy has 


RAYERS., 
ed by the Holy 


; this: that when 
;true. Neverthe- 
bear in mind that 
yn it. It has been 
f fifteen hundred 
ht in Genesis that 
spirit in Exodus 
; not two different 
yy holy men, who 
Nature has been 
me all these years. 
—been corrupt by 
same God of Love 
his work, although 
1en high and low— 
Egyptians, yet God 
sert in Horeb. He 
1d that Amos wrote 
d that Peter wrote 
erman, and so with 
flict between them 
d between the peri- 
ey wrote this book. 
t istrue. You will 
ry word concerning 
d. I once read of 
salem, after it had 
the walls of Jeru- 
burst out laughing. 
laugh when you see 
predicted this, and 
bw that God’s word 
> And if you take 
ill find that every: 
ed literally. Every 
erally fulfilled, just 
uld be as the sands 
His prophecy has 


YESUS IN PROPHECY. 555 


been fulfilled. Iwas reading some time ago in the prophecy of 
Jeremiah—and I have spent six months in studying that book— 
and I came across one verse that struck me. When God made the 
promise to David that he should never want a man to sit upon his 
throne, I said: “Is that true? Hasn’t that promise been broken?” 
And I began to read up to see whether it was ever broken, and I 
found that two hundred years after he had promised that, the 
usurper took the throne and swayed over Israel. Ah! but when I 
came to study the Bible I found God took care of His promise. 
There was an old prophet, when they were slaying the royal family, 
who took a little child belonging to the royal family and hid him in 
the temple, and he reigned thereafter, and the skeptics say now; 
“Where is He who is to sit upon David’s throne? God said he 
never should want a man to sit on his throne.” I will tell you 
where He is. He is away up there in the temple, and He will come 
back by and by. The usurper has got the throne now; but He will 
come back by and by and possess it. It doesn’t mean a man, but 
in the fullness of the time Christ will take the throne of David and 

“rule here. Another prophecy was—I shall not read it—I think it is 
in the twenty-ninth chapter of Ezekiel—that Egypt shall never lift 
up its head over the nations of the earth. Here a few years ago 
Egypt was at war with Turkey, and it looked as if Egypt was go- 
ing to prevail; but Russia, England, and Austria interfered, and 
Egypt never got its head up. There it is, an abased nation—it 
can’t lift its head up; and that is just what God said. So you will 
find all through the Scripture that all that God has said has been 
fulfilled. There are about two hundred prophecies in the Old Tes- 
tament referring to Jesus Christ, and every one of them has been 
literally fulfilled. 

“ And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh: as it 
is said to this day, in the mount of the Lord it shall be seen. 

“And the angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven 
the second time, 

“And said, ‘By myself have I sworn,’ saith the Lord, for be- 
cause thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son, 
thine only son: 

“That in .blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will 
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which 


is upon the sea-shore; and thy seed shall possess the gate of his 
enemies ; 


seeeieetimiecaeimeececeeeecee ee nee 


556 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


“And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, 
because thou hast obeyed my voice.” 

Now, here is a man standing on a mountain alone with just one 
son—an old man hard on to one hundred and twenty-five years of 
age—and now God makes him a promise: “ Thy seed shall be like 
the sands upon the sea-shore, like the stars of the heaven; and thy 
seed shall possess the gate of his enemies; and in thy seed shall all 
the nations of the earth be blessed.” Now, let me ask you, hasn’t 
that prophecy been fulfilled? Hasn’t God made that a great and 
mighty nation? Where is there any nation that has ever produced 
such men as have come from the seed of Abraham? There is no 
nation that has or can produce such men. Just look at Joseph 
down there in the court of Egypt. Look at Daniel going down 
into Babylon and swaying his scepter over the whole world, taking 
almost the place of Nebuchadnezzar. Look at Esther in the court 
at Shushan, where God placed her. And you will find when God 
exalted them, that He not only put a mark upon the seed of Abra- 
ham, but that it was impressed upon them so deep that they haven't 
been able to erase it. That promise was made nearly four thousand 
years ago, and even now you can see that the Jews are a separate 
and distinct nation, in their language, in their habits, and in every 
respect. You can bring almost every nation here, and in fifty years 
they will become extinct, merged into another; but bring a Jew 
here, and in fifty years, a hundred years, or a thousand years, he is 
stilla Jew. When I meet a Jew I can’t help thinking of the prom- 
ise that God made to Abraham. I can’t help having a profound 
respect for them, for they are God’s people. I have an idea that 
they are a nation that are to be born in a day, and when they are 
converted and brought back to Christ, what a mighty power they 
will be in the land, what missionaries to carry the glad tidings 
around this world. They are distinct and separate. When they 
take the census of a country the Jews are all kept separate. They 
are not reckoned in among the other classes. They are distinct and 
separate over all the world. Put them away off in China and leave 
them there—after a thousand years they would be Jews still. They 
have the mark upon them. You can tell a Jew almost a mile off. 
See how God has blessed that nation. Our Lord and Saviour was 
a Jew Himself. He came from the seed of Abraham, and all na- 
tions through Him, the seed of Abraham, shall be blessed. Let me 
call your attention to a verse you will find in the forty-ninth chap- 
ter of Genesis, tenth verse: 


RA YERS, 


earth be blessed, 


one with just one 
enty-five years of 
seed shall be like 
heaven; and thy 
thy seed shall all 
ne ask you, hasn't 
. that a great and 
has ever produced 
1am? There is no 
ist look at Joseph 
yaniel going down 
vhole world, taking 
Esther in the court 
will find when God 
1 the seed of Abra- 
p that they haven't 
early four thousand 
Jews are a separate 
abits, and in every 
e, and in fifty years 
r; but bring a Jew 
ousand years, he is 
inking of the prom- 
having a profound 
I have an idea that 
and when they are 
mighty power they 
y the glad tidings 
arate. When they 
ppt separate. They 
hey are distinct and 
in China and leave 
be Jews still. They 
w almost a mile off. 
brd and Saviour was 
braham, and all na- 
be blessed. Let me 
he forty-ninth chap- 


FESUS IN PROPHECY. 557 


“The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a law-giver from 
between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gather. 
ing of the people be.” 

Now let me ask you what name under heaven is there that will 
draw the gathering of the people like Jesus? That was seventeen 
hundred years before Christ was born, and what would have brought 
out this large audience, of all shades of belief, and of all nationali- 
ties—what has brought you here? It is not eloquence, for there is 
no eloquence here. It is not excitement, for there is no excitement 
here. What has brought them and you here but the name of Jesus? 

“The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a law-giver from 
between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gather- 
ing of the people be.” 

And when Ee comes He will gather the people together. For eight- 
een hundred years they have been gathering around Him, and yet 
there will be millions and millions gathering around the Cross, singing 
the sweet songs of Zion. There is a prophecy given seventeen hun- 
dred years before Christ came. Now, His history doesn’t begin 
back at Bethlehem, as you may think. If you want to get at His 
nativity you don’t want to go to Nazareth. He came from the 
bosom of His Father before the morning stars sang together. Look 
and see what Balaam said of Him—God speaking through him, 
though he hadn’t been all right with God: 

“T shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh; 
there shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of 
Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the 
children of Sheth.” 

He has said it, and the Star has risen and He shall be called a 
bright and morning star, as it says in Revelation: “I am the root 
and the offspring of David and the bright and morning star.” 
That Star has risen, and how it is lighting up this dark world. 
Then, if you turn to Psalms, you will find that everything concern- 
ing the sufferings of Christ has been foretold, and then you turn 
over to the New Testament and you will find that He said that 
these things need be, in order that the Scriptures might be fulfilled. 
So the word was all fulfilled just as it had been prophesied by the 
holy men. 

“ All they that see me laugh me to scorn; they shoot out the lip, 
they shake the head, saying: 

“He trusted in the Lord that he would deliver him; let him de- 
liver him, seeing he delighted in him. 


z 


Perey Sra = * =¥, 


aa 


558 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


“But thou art he that took me out of the womb; thou didst 
make me hope when I was upon my mother’s breasts. 

“T was cast upon thee from the womb; thou art my God from 
my mother’s belly. 

“Be not far from me, for trouble is near; for there is none to 
help. 

“Many bulls have compassed me; strong bulls of Bashan have 
beset me round. 

“They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a roar- 
ing lion. 

“I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint; 
my heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels. 

“My strength is dried up like a potsherd; and my tongue cleav- 
eth to my jaws; and thou hast brought me into the dust of death. 

“For dogs have compassed me; the assembly of the wicked have 
enclosed me; they pierced my hands and my feet. 

‘“‘T may tell all my bones; they look and stare upon me. 

“They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my 
vesture.”’ 

Then, in the sixty-ninth Psalm, it says: 

“They gave me also gall for my meat; and in m7 thirst they 
gave me vinegar to drink.” 

And when He cried on the cross: “I thirst,” they refused Him a 
draught of water from one of His own springs; they gave Him gall 
mixed with vinegar, as had been prophesied. Then, take up the 
prophecy of Isaiah; I haven’t time to read all I wish to; but my 
object is to call your attention to this one thought: that every- 
thing that was said in these two hundred prophecies in regard to the 
Lord Jesus Christ has been literally fulfilled, as it was prophesied 
thousands of years and hundreds of years before they came. 

It says here in Isaiah vii. 14, that He shall be born of a virgin. 

“Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; behold, 
a virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name 
Immanuel.” 

God with us. Seven hundred years before He came, Isaiah made 
this prophecy. He looked down the stream of time, and God 
showed him His Son—how He was going to be born of a virgin, 
and was to be called “Immanuel—God with us.” It seems to me 
that ought to settle the divinity of the Lord Jesus Christ—‘ God 
with us.” Then again, in the ninth chapter, sixth verse, it says: 


RA YVERS. 


omb; thou didst 


sts. 
rt my God from 


there is none to 
; of Bashan have 
vening and a roar- 


; are out of joint; 
my bowels. 

my tongue cleav- 
the dust of death. 
of the wicked have 


upon me. 
cast lots upon my 


in m.’ thirst they 


hey refused Him a 
hey gave Him gail 
Then, take up the 
I wish to; but my 
bught : that every- 
ies in regard to the 
it was prophesied 
they came. 
born of a virgin. 
ua sign; behold, 
hall call his name 


came, Isaiah made 
of time, and God 
» born of a virgin, 
” It seems to me 
bsus Christ—‘‘ God 
h verse, it says: 


1) 


FESUS IN PROPHECY, 559 


“For unto us a child is born, unto usa son is given; and the gov- 
ernment shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called 
Wonderful, Counsellor, The Mighty God, The Everlasting Father, 
The Prince of Peace. 

“Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no 
end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom, to order it, 
and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth 
even forever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.” 

His government has no end. You know, a great many reformers 
die, and their reforms die out with them; but this Reformer will 
live forever to carry out His reformation. Those infidels and skep- 
tics that write down Christ, die, and others come up and die; but 
Christ forever lives, and His government is growing daily, and will 
keep on growing an4 growing until it fills the whole earth. 

“Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no 
end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom, to order it 
and to establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth 
even forever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.” 

“The Lord sent a word unto Jacob, and it hath lighted upon 
Israel.” The Lord sent a word into Israel and it has lighted up 
Israel. Then, turn to the fortieth chapter of Isaiah, and third verse, 
you will find that John the Baptist was to precede Him. 

“The voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, Prepare ye the 
way of the Lord make straight in the desert a highway for our 
God.” 

And so in the fullness of time his voice was heard in the wilder- 
ness, ‘‘ Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight,” 
and he stirred up the whole nation. They were looking for him, 
because the prophet Isaiah had prophesied that He had told them 
they should hear his voice in the wilderness, saying: ‘ Prepare ye 
the way of the Lord.” Then in the forty-second chapter, third 
verse, it says He was to be a man of compassion. 

“A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he 
not quench; he shall bring forth judgment unto truth.” 

He was to be a man of compassion. That tells what kind of a 
minister He shuld be. Then, in the fifty-second chapter and four- 
teenth verse, it sa_’s: 

“His visage was so marred more than any man, and his form 
more than the sons of men.” 

In the fifty-third chapter His birth is spoken of; His sufferings; 


560 MOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


how He should bear the sins of many; that He should be poor in 
His death, and yet make His grave with the rich. And God fulfilled 
that prophecy and put it in the heart of that rich man, Joseph of 
Arimathea, to go and beg His body of Pilate and put it in 
his sepulchre, that His prophecy might be fulfilled. So when 
John was cast into prison, I don’t know b.‘ perhaps his faith 
began to waver, and he might have said it was a very sin- 
gular thing that he should be cast into prison when He was his 
Messiah, and so he sent two messengers to the Lord Jesus, who came 
to Him when He was healing the sick and casting out devils, and 
the Messiah told them, “Go and tell John what you have heard 
and seen,” and I can just imagine John thanked God. He left all to 
preach the Gospel. You know when the wise men got into Jerusa- 
lem, they wanted to know where He that was born King of the 
Jews was, for they had seen His Star in the East and had come to 
worship Him; and Herod was filled with trouble and all Jerusalem 
with him, because the prophets had prophesied it and Israel had 
been looking for Him for four thousand years, and now instead of 
bells pealing joyfully forth their anthems, and shouts of triumph 
arising at His coming, we find these in trouble. Herod takes them 
into his counsel to find out where this Messiah was coming, and 
they go and hunt up the prophecies and find out that they said He 
was to be borni “‘tethlehem of Judea. Now, bear in mind, they 
found it inthe w .- .of the Old Testament that there should come 
alaw-giveranda, .e over Israel, and though the virgin was seventy 
miles off from Bethlenem just before our Saviour’s birth, yet we find 
that she was brought clear to Bethlehem in order that the prophecy 
that Christ should be born in Bethlehem might be fulfilled. It was 
prophesied that Christ should enter Jerusalem sitting on a colt, the 
foal of an ass. He walked to Jerusalem a good many times. He 
walked every time but once, and then He had to ride in, in order that 
the prophecy of the Scriptures might be fulfilled. So were the 
prophecies that He should be met with rejoicing on His entry into 
Jerusalem with shouts of “ Hosanna, Hosanna, the Son of David,” 
and that He should be sold for thirty pieces of silver, fulfilled. And 
there was another prophecy that that money should go for a pot- 
ter’s field. Judas hadn’t had it a great while before he threw 
it down and says: “It is the price of innocent blood.” And they 
took it and bought a potter’s field with it. Isaiah says He died 
not for His own sins, but for our transgressions. Now, it seems to 


RA VERS. 


ould be poor in 
And God fulfilled 
1 man, Joseph of 
- and put it in 
filled. So when 
erhaps his faith 
was a very sin- 
yhen He was his 
Jesus, who came 
r out devils, and 
you have heard 
d. He left all to 
| got into Jerusa- 
orn King of the 
and had come to 
ind all Jerusalem 
t and Israel had 
1 now instead of 
outs of triumph 
ferod takes them 
vas coming, and 
hat they said He 
ur in mind, they 
ere should come 
irgin was seventy 
birth, yet we find 
hat the prophecy 
fulfilled. It was 
ng on a colt, the 
nany times. He 
2 in, in order that 
1. So were the 
n His entry into 
Son of David,” 
er, fulfilled. And 
Id go for a pot- 
before he threw 
od.” And they 
h says He died 
Now, it seems to 


FESUS IN PROPHECY, 


5 ay come to know a 
ord Jesus Christ, And may we not set ty 
Ww in the law of our Saviour, hs 


our own law, but follo 


LXV. 


CHRIST THE WONDERFUL. 


ISAIAH ix, 6: “ And his name shall be called Wonderful.” 


HIS morning I want to show that everything about Christ was 
wonderful. All these prophecies in the Old Testament con- 
cerning Christ were wonderful. Everything about His birth, 

about His life, and about His death was wonderful. We find a 
great many people now who tell us that they don’t see anything 
wonderful in Christ; that He was like ordinary men—like other 
men ; and a great many say they see no reason why they should be- 
lieve in Him as being more than human; they can’t see anything 
about Him more than about an ordinary man. Now, I want to call 
your attention to what Gabriel said about Him. Gabriel’s name ap- 
pears three times in the Scriptures, and every time that he comes to 
earth he comes to bring some tidings about the Lord Jesus Christ. 
He first came to Babylon when Daniel was praying, to tell him that 
he was not only greatly beloved ; but he also came to give him the 
secret that was in heaven—that the Messiah should come, and that 
He should be cut off for the transgressions of God’s people. Now 
four hundred years had rolled away since the last prophet’s voice 
had been heard in the land. For a great many years—for four 
hundred years—before Christ came the last prophecy was given. 
An old priest by the name of Zacharias was burning incense in the 
temple in his regular course. We are told that he and his wife, 
Elizabeth, were good people, that they were righteous, but they 
had a crook in their path like a great many now—they had no chil- 
dren. And it was considered in those days a great dishonor not to 
have children. We are told that they had been praying that they 
might have children, and God promised to bless them; but I sup- 
pose they had grown faint-hearted and given up all hope. Perhaps 
they had forgotten how God answered the prayers of Abraham and 
(562) 


FUL. 


rderful.” 


about Christ was 
1 Testament con- 
about His birth, 
‘ful. We find a 
yn’t see anything 
> men—like other 
y they should be- 
an’t see anything 
low, 1 want to call 
abriel’s name ap- 
b that he comes to 
Lord Jesus Christ. 
g, to tell him that 
e to give him the 
1d come, and that 
bd’s people. Now 
st prophet’s voice 
y years—for fout 
ophecy was given. 
sing incense in the 
he and his wile, 
shteous, but they 
they had no chil- 
at dishonor not to 
praying that they 
them; but | sup- 
all hope. Perhaps 
rs of Abraham and 


CHRIST THE WONDERFUL, 


563 


Sarah and gave them a child in their old age; and how Hannah 
had a child in her old age; and also how Samson’s father and 
mother had been honored by a child in their old age. And now 
we find that this priest was not in the Holy of Holies, but in the 
place where they burnt incense, just outside of the curtain that was 
rent when Christ died. There was an altar there, and he went in 
twice a day to burn incense to God; and while he was so engaged 
the people were in the outer court waiting for him to come out and 
bless them. When he came out I suppose he blessed them as we 
do here in pronouncing the benediction, only in those days they 
waited for the benediction in the outer court. But the old priest 
didn’t come out. He tarried in there Jonger than usual. And 
while he was there at the altar who should meet him but this same 
man, Gabriel, and Zacharias was filled with fear when he saw him; 
but Gabriel told him to fear not, that he had brought him good 
news, that his prayer was answered. Let me just read what Gabriel 
said to the old priest : 

“ And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on 
the right side of the altar of incense. 

“ And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell 
upon him. 

“But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy 
prayer is heard; and thy wife Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, and 
thou shalt call his name John. 

“ And thou shalt have joy and gladness, and many shall rejoice at 
his birth. 

“For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink 
neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy 
Ghost, even from his mother’s womb. 

“ And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord 
their God. ; 

“ And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to 
turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient 
to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the 
Lord.” 

He was not only to have a child, but his child was to become 
great in the sight of God, and he was not only to become great, but 
he was to be full of the Holy Ghost from his mother’s womb, and 
he should turn many to righteousness. How exalted, how blessed 
this old priest was! But Zacharias was like a good many men now. 


564 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


Instead of remembering how God had answered the prayers ot 
Abraham and Sarah, he begins to doubt this promise. He couldn't 
believe it. “Howcan this be?” he says. “How am I going to 
have a child, now I am so old ?” 

“ And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? 
for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years. 

“And the angel answering, said unto him: I am Gabriel, that 
stand in the presence of God.” 

“T am Gabriel that stand in the presence of God.” I suppose 
Gabriel had never doubted it. And where is there an angel who 
ever told a lie? All the prophecies that have appeared in the Word 
have been literally fulfilled. Now Gabriel was perhaps amazed for 
the first time in his life. The angel had come from a world where 
unbelief is a stranger, where doubt is unknown and where every one 
believes everything that God has said. Now he finds this old priest, 
who ought to have known better than to have doubted the Word 
of God. Now, he wanted a token—he wanted a token. 

“ And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? 
for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years,” 

And, as some one says, that is the trouble now in the churches; 
a great many Christians want a token outside of what God has said. 
Why, if God has said He will do a thing, shall we turn round and 
insult Him by doubting and asking fora token? God said: “You 
shall have atoken. You shall be dumb for the next nine months.” He 
got token enough! He was made dumb for the next nine months, 
And that’s the reason we have got so many dumb Christians now. 
They can’t believe that what God says is true. They are looking 
for tokens. Now we find that he came out, and the people noticed 
what a change there was. The old priest had the tidings and he 
was so happy that his face was shining. He couldn’t have given 
the benediction then if he had tried to, for he couldn’t speak. There 
was no small stir in Jerusalem when they found he could not speak; 
when they found what had happened, that he had seen Gabriel, 
who had told him that he was to be the father of that child who 
was to be the forerunner of the coming of the Messiah. When the 
time came for him to retire from his office, he took his wife and 
went into the hilly country of Judea, where he remained until the 
child was born. But six months from that time Gabriel made his 
third visit, and he brought better news than ever. It was good 
news when he told Daniel, in Babylon, that a Messiah should come 


VERS. 


e prayers of 
He couldn't 


m I going to 


1 know this? 


irs. 
Gabriel, that 


|.” T suppose 
an angel who 
sd in the Word 
\ps amazed for 
a world where 
vyhere every one 
this old priest, 
sted the Word 
cen. 
all I know this? 
ears.” 
1 the churches; 
at God has said. 
urn round and 
od said: “ You 
Ine months.” He 
xt nine months. 
Christians now. 
hey are looking 
b people noticed 
tidings and he 
dn’t have given 
’t speak. There 
ould not speak ; 
hd seen Gabriel, 
that child who 
siah, When the 
ok his wife and 
ained until the 


rabriel made his 
r. It was good 
iah should comé 


CHRIST THE WONDERFUL, 565 


and be cut off for the transgression of His people. It was still 
better news that John, the forerunner of the coming Messiah, was 
to come, and that at the end of nine months she, Elizabeth, should 
bring him into the world. Now he comes up into Nazareth and 
tells Mary that she was to be the mother of that child, that Israel 
had been looking for for three thousand years. A great many 
mothers in Israel had been praying that they might be the mother 
of that child. But here was a young country virgin, poor and hum- 
ble, that was to be the mother of that child. Let us read what 
Gabriel said to her: 

“ And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God 
unto a city of Galilee named Nazareth, 

“To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph of the 
house of David; and the virgin’s name was Mary. 

“ And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art 
highly favored, the Lord is with thee; blessed art thou among 
women. 

“And whem she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and 
cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be. 

“And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary, for thou hast 
found favor with God. 

“ And behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth 
a son, and shalt call his name TESUS. 

“He shall be great, and sliall be called the Son of the High- 
est.” 

That is what Gabriel said about Him. “He shall be called the 
Son of the Highest.” 

3 “ And the Lord God shall give unto him the throne 
of his father, David. 

“ And he shall reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of his 
kingdom there shall be no end.” 

Now, that has been fulfilled. Eighteen hundred years have rolled 
away, and He has got the kingdom of this world. And there are 
millions and millions who would lay down their lives for this king- 
dom for Christ’s sake. There are many loyal sons in this world to- 
day who are loyal to the King of heaven. 

“Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know 
not a man? 

“And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost 
shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow 


566 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, 
shall be called the Son of God. 

“And behold, thy cousin Elizabeth, she hath also conceived a 
son in her old age; and this is the sixth month with her, who was 
called barren. 

“ For with God nothing shall be impossible.” 

Now, bear in mind what Gabriel said to Mary about this child. 
He shall not only be great. This is what he says: “ His name shall 
be great, and He shall be called Jesus.” He has two hundred and 
fifty-six names that you can find in the Bible, but yet He still bears 
that name—Jesus. We like it better than any other. It was the 
name that came from heaven, the sweetest name that mortal ever 
had; the name that Gabriel gave Him. It came direct from God. 
And when Saul met Him, He said: “I am Jesus.” There was not 
a name that could fire up the people like the name of Jesus. When 
Joshua delivered the children of Israel they rejoiced. He was their 
Saviour. And now how they hail the name of Jesus with joy and 
gladness. They had got another Joshua—had got another deliverer 
to set the captives free. Mary started at once, left her home at 
Nazareth, and went into the country where her cousin Elizabeth 
was, and the moment they met, that child leaped in her womb. 
Everything about Christ is wonderful. He was unlike other men. 
Now, we find that Elizabeth breaks out into praise, and so does 
Mary. I should judge, as nigh as I can find out, that just before 
John was born, Mary returns to her own country, and right here 
it seems singular to me that this last prophet that was to be given 
to the nation under the old dispensation should be born of an 
old woman, and, while the old dispensation was fading out, that 
Jesus should be born under the new dispensation and be be- 
gotten of a young virgin. In the fullness of time John was born. 
They all came there in great joy that Elizabeth had become the 
mother of this child. There had been a good deal said about it. 
Of course, the whole country was turned up, anxious to know all 
about his birth. They gather there, and on the eighth day they 
gather around the child and call him Zacharias. That is what the 
relatives and neighbors who came in after his birth wanted to call 
him. They wanted to call him Zacharias after his father. ‘ No,” 
says his mother, “I want him called John. Name him John.” 
They couldn’t get her to consent to have him called Zacharias, and 
they said: “ We will ask the old prophet.” But they couldn't get 


AYERS. 


born of thee, 


so conceived a 
h her, who was 


bout this child. 
‘His name shall 
ro hundred and 
+t He still bears 
er. It was the 
hat mortal ever 
lirect from God. 
There was not 
f Jesus. When 
1. He was their 
us with joy and 
nother deliverer 
eft her home at 
‘ousin Elizabeth 
in her womb. 
like other men. 
ise, and so does 
that just before 
, and right here 
as to be given 
be born of an 
fading out, that 
ion and be be- 
John was born. 
ad become the 
al said about it. 
ous to know all 
eighth day they 
hat is what the 
wanted to call 
| father. ‘‘ No,” 
me him John.” 
H Zacharias, and 


hey couldn't get 


CHRIST THE WONDERFUL, 567 
him to speak a word. So he just called for a writing-table, a slate, 
and a pencil, and he wrote on it: “ He shall be called John.” That 
name came from heaven. They couldn’t change it, because the 
angel had brought that name; God had sent the name. He sent 
Gabriel to.name the child. Let me say, all this wasn’t done in a 
corner. It says in the sixty-fifth verse of the first chapter of Luke: 

“And fear came on all that dwelt round about them; and all 
these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of 
Judea.” 

It was noised abroad. Everybody was talking about it. 

“And all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts, 
saying, What manner of child shall this be? And the hand of the 
Lord was with him.” 

John means “the grace of God,” and the grace of God was given 
this child. About three months from this time there was another 
stir about Bethlehem. The town was full. That wasn’t done ina 
corner. It wasn’t confined to only a few shepherds, as some people 
have the impression. No, there was a great stir in Bethlehem. 
Let us read in the second chapter of Luke, the seventeenth verse: 

“ And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying 
which was told them concerning this child.” 

What saying? Why, that an angel had come to them on the 
plains of Bethlehem and told them where this child should be born ; 
that a Saviour had been given to the world, and now they come 
into Bethlehem and find it is so, and then begin to noise it abroad. 

“ And all they that heard it wondered at those things which were 
told them by the shepherds. 

“But Mary kept all these things and pondered them in her heart.” 

Now, you will find that they made haste to find the child, and 
when they had found Him they made haste to proclaim Him to the 
world. Just so every child of God should make haste to find 
Christ, and when they find Him they should make haste to tell 
where they have found Him. 

“ And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all 
the things that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto 
them. 

“ And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of 
the child, his name was called Jesus, which was so named of the 
angel before he was conceived in the womb.” 

In another place it says: “He shall be called Jesus because he 


568 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


shall save his people from their sins.” Now, isn’t He able to save 
His people from their sins? Isn’t Christ able to save every sinner 
if he puts his trust in Him? ‘He shall be called Jesus for he is 
able to save his people from their sins.” Now, can any man save 
man from sin? Suppose we had come here aiid begun to preach 
some other man than Christ during the last eleven weeks that we 
have been here. Do you think there would have been so many 
people here this morning ? What other name could we have preached? 
Suppose we had preached anything but Jesus Christ. Would this 
crowd be here this morning? Could we have kept them here these 
last eleven weeks? Why, that very fact shows the power of Jesus’ 
name. You may preach other names, their virtues, their merits, but 
if you don’t tell them where they can get the power to get rid of 
their sins, you will preach in vain; but the very moment you go on 
and preach about Christ, you show them where they can get the 
power. “He shall be called great,” says the Scripture. Is not His 
name great? Where is there a name to be compared withit? The 
kings of the earth looked down on Him when He was here. Al. 
though He was great, He became weak; although He was rich, He 
became poor for our sakes; and now look and see how His kingdom 
is being extended, and how the heralds of the Cross are going over 
mountains—all over this dark earth—to proclaim His word, and 
wherever heathen nations lift up their hearts to receive Him how 
quickly they become exalted. And yet men stand up and say; 
“ We want a token. We want some evidence that the Bible is true.” 
What greater evidence do you want? Look around you and see 
what Christ is doing. See how He is saving the oppressed. See 
how He is lifting up His arm to save the drunkard, the outcast, and 
the unfortunate. Thank God for this day. Thank God that He 
sent Christ into the world. O, what a dark world this would have 
been if Christ had not come! Then we find that they take Him 
into the temple and there something else wonderful takes place. 
People talk about Christ being like other ordinary men! Why, as 
I said before, if you take Him at His birth, His life, His death and 
resurrection, it is all wonderful. You can’t touch His life anywhere 
but that it is wonderful. He is not like other men. God sent Him 
to be a mediator between Him and man, and He had to be born of 
woman that He might be in sympathy with you and me. There 
was a time when England wanted to conquer Wales, but they 
wouldn’t be conquered. They couldn’t subdue these Welsh people. 


RAYERS. 


He able to save 
save every sinner 
1 Jesus for he is 
an any man save 
begun to preach 
on weeks that we 
re been so many 
ve have preached? 
\rist. Would this 
t them here these 
1e power of Jesus’ 
.s, their merits, but 
wer to get rid of 
noment you go on 
they can get the 
ipture. Is not His 
ared with it? The 
He was here. Al- 
ch He was rich, He 
e how His kingdom 
‘ross are going over 
aim His word, and 
o receive Him how 
stand up and say: 
ht the Bible is true.” 
round you and see 
he oppressed. See 
rd, the outcast, and 
ank God that He 
rid this would have 
hat they take Him 
derful takes place. 
ary men! Why, as 
| life, His death and 
h His life anywhere 
en. God sent Him 
> had to be born of 
bu and me. ‘There 
er Wales, but they 


hese Welsh people. 


CHRIST THE WONDERFUL, 569 


They didn’t want to be ruled by England. They wanted a king of 
their own. They wanted a king born on Welsh soil. So the queen 
went down to Wales, to the Castle Caernarvon, and when the child 
was born, the king took the little child in his arms and carried it 
out to the gates, and the people in the town gathered around that 
castle, and he says: “ Behold your prince! He can’t speak a word 
of English. He was born among you—born on Welsh soil.” And 
so they called him the Prince of Wales, and so the Crown Prince 
has ever since been called the Prince of Wales; but the moment he 
takes the throne he drops that name and becomes the King of 
England. Here is the Prince of Heaven, who came down here 
and was born of woman, so that He might be in sympathy with 
you and me, and be a mediator between God and man. He that was 
rich became poor for our sakes. He was born in this world. This 
is the land of His nativity, but He belongs to heaven. Thank 
God He belongs in heaven. So, my friends, to-day let us bear in 
mind that God did send Christ into this world, that He might bring 
about the grand result—that He might be mediator between God 
and man. But now they take Him into the Temple, and there is « 
wonderful thing takes place. Turn to Luke ii. 25: 

“And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was 
Simeon; and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the 
consolation of Israel; and the Holy Ghost was upon him.” 

Now, I want to call your attention to one thought. Whenever 
the Holy Ghost is upon a man, he is always speaking well of Christ. 
You can’t find a man who is full of the Holy Ghost but he will 
speak well of Christ. A man may be an orator, he may have all 
the eloquence in the world, and he may be great in the sight of 
man, but if he hasn’t the Holy Ghost upon him he is not great in 
the sight of God. I tell you, when a man has got the Holy Ghost 
he can’t help speaking well of Christ. Now, let us turn to the 
twenty-sixth verse : 

“And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he 
should not see death, before he had seen the Lord’s Christ. 

“And he came by the Spirit into the temple; and when the 
parents brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom 
of the law, 

“Then took he him up in his arms and blessed God, and said, 


“Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according 
to thy word : 


$70 MOVUDY’'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


“ For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, 

“Which thou hast prepared before the face of all people ; 

“A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people 
Israel.” 

That was predicted. The light had not gone out even to the 
Gentiles. They were considered by the Jews outcasts. They 
were not allowed to come into the Temple —not into the outer 
court. 

“And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which 
were spoken of him. 

“ And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Be- 
hold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel , 
and for a sign which shall be spoken against.” 

See that! How true that was, that that man’s coming into the 
Temple was a sign that shall be spoken against. Wherever you 
preach Christ, there will be something said against Him. Just bear 
that in mind—there will be opposition. There is something down 
in the human heart that is so under the power of the devil that 
men begin to resist when you preach Christ; but you may preach 
everything else but that, and there is no opposition, and when a 
man opposes the preaching of ministers, you may know they are 
preaching the Word of God. But when men applaud and are 
pleased, and say, “ That is my style,” you may know that they are 
not giving them the Word of God. It’s a true sign you are preach- 
ing the Word of God if men don’t like it. 

“(Yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also ;) that the 
thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.” 

Now that’s what the old man said. Then there came in an old 
widow, the finest-looking woman, I believe, in all Jerusalem. Her 
face just shone. I don’t doubt that. She had been a widow for 
eighty-four years. That’s a long time to be a widow. She just 
stayed right there in the Temple most of the time praising God. 
She always had a heart to sympathize with those that were in 
trouble, with the outcasts and afflicted. These people that live 
near God get the secrets of the Lord. This old woman had been a 
widow for eighty-four years, and she was the consolation of Israel. 
A great many thought she was a fanatic. The idea that she was 
going to see Christ—see the child Christ! But this old woman had 
been praying and in communion with God, and she had got at the 
secret of heaven, and she came in about the time that the wise men 


RS. 


yle ; 
thy people 


sven to the 
sts. They 
» the outer 


hings which 


mother, Be- 
ny in Israel , 


ing into the 
Jherever you 
n. Just bear 
iething down 
he devil that 
1 may preach 
, and when a 
now they are 
laud and are 
that they are 
ou are preach- 


niso ;) that the 


hme in an old 
usalem. Her 
a widow for 
ow. She just 
praising God. 
that were in 
ople that live 
an had been a 
Ltion of Israel. 
a that she was 
bld woman had 
ad got at the 


t the wise men 


CHRIST THE WONDERFUL, 57t 


of the East had come to worship the child. Look at that old man, 
with his white, flowing hair, holding the child in his arms. Look 
at this beautiful woman, with her glorious wealth of flowing white 
hair, and see what she says about Him : 

“And she coming in that instant, gave thanks likewise unto 
the Lord, and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption 
in Jerusalem.” 

There was the whole city to hear and see this young child 
When He was first brought into the Temple they recognized Him 
as their Lord—their Redeemer ; He was come to bring redemption 
to Israel. Now they drop outside a little, and the next thing we 
hear is that there is a great stir in Jerusalem again. The story of 
Zacharias had been forgotten. The story of the birth of John the 
Baptist seems to have been forgotten, and the stories of the old 
prophets had been forgotten; but all at once Jerusalem is stirred 
up. Some wise men coming from the East—I don’t know where 
they came from—but those wise men came into the city and wanted 
to know where He was that was born King of the Jews, for they 
had seen His star in the East, and had come to worship Him. 
Now, people say they can’t see anything wonderful about Christ. 
Wasn’t that wonderful? These wise men came and commenced to 
cry, “Holy! Holy! Our Lord and King!” But the people of 
Jerusalem, instead of lifting up their voices in joy, instead of 
sending forth peans of praise from their bells, instead of shout- 
ing with joy and gladness, we are told that all Jerusalem is 
thrown into trouble. And if they had had papers in those 
days, how busy the reporters would nave been in trying to find 
out what it all meant! After those wise men had come to find 
out where Christ was, they went to king Herod. He was full of 
jealousy. The fires of hell were burning in his breast; but he 
kept his secret buried there. He didn’t let them know it. He 
was one of the greatest hypocrites ever known in this world. He 
called in the wise men and said: “ Look and see where the young 
child is to be born.” And they looked into the prophecies and 
found that He was to be born in Bethlehem of Judea. Then he 
said: “ Seek him and find him, and let me know so that I may go 
down and worship him.” <A lying hypocrite! He wanted to go 
down and kill the child. He didn’t want to worship Him. They 
then went into Nazareth, and we find the wise men coming to wor- 
ship this little babe. Men say they see nothing wonderful about 


572 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


Christ—nothing strange about Him. He sent them there, He 
brought them there, and they just bow down and worship the little 
child. What a God He was! A God in the flesh. He was the 
Son of God. He came from heaven to redeem the world. And 
now we find next that instead of their coming back, God told them 
not to; but bear in mind, everything is wonderful. God warned 
them not to go back that way. So they went back another way ; 
and when the king found he was mocked, he sent down and had all 
those little children from two years and under put to death. They 
were the first martyrs. Our Saviour says: “ Suffer little children 
to come unto me, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” Herod 
was the first who lifted up his sword against Christ, and history tells 
us that he didn’t live thirty days after he had lifted up his sword 
against our Saviour. A stone fell on him and crushed him to 
powder. Instead of yielding to Him, he took up his sword against 
Him. But how God took care of that little child down in Egypt ! 
Herod was called Herod the Great. But, oh, how small he appeared 
in God’s sight. Herod wouldn’t consent to look at Christ, he was 
so great. What the world calls great Christ calls small. To be 
sure, he built a temple for the heathen. He was one of those men 
that want to patronize all kinds of religion. He had a beautiful 
wife, but he was jealous, and had her put to death. He had three 
sons, but he had them executed. The world called him great ; but 
how small his name has gone down to posterity, rotten with the 
sins of his body. Oh, I tell you it is hard to kick against the 
pricks. A stone cut out of the mountain is going to fall and crush 
all who war against Christ. Oh, may God heip us to preach the 
coming of Christ. May He help each one of us to receive the 
Saviour. 


AYERS. 


em there, He 
orship the little 
1. He was the 
1e world. And 
, God told them 
1. God warned 
‘+k another way ; 
own and had all 
-o death. They 
r little children 
eaven.” Herod 
and history tells 
ed up his sword 
crushed him to 
his sword against 
down in Egypt! 
mall he appeared 
at Christ, he was 
Hs small. To be 
one of those men 
» had a beautiful 
He had three 
bd him great ; but 
, rotten with the 
kick against the 
+ to fall and crush 
lus to preach the 
5 to receive the 


XLVI. 


NOT WORKING AND WORKING. 


2 THESS. x.17: “In every good word and work.” 


WANT to speak about work, for fear that some of you who are 
not Christians will think that Iam trying to stir you up. I want 
to call your attention to a few passages to show that you 

have not got any work to do, that you can not get salvation by 
your own work. First in the second of Galatians and the sixteenth 
verse : 

“Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law, 
but by the faith of Jesus Christ, even we have believed in Jesus 
Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by 
the works of the law; for by the works of the law shall no flesh be 
justified.” 

Then in the second of Ephesians and the seventh and eighth 
verses and also the ninth verse: 

“That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches 
of his grace in his kindness towards us, through Christ Jesus. 

“For by grace are ye saved, through faith; and that not of your- 
selves: it is the gift of God: 

“Not of works, lest any man should boast.” 

There is one thing that you will notice if you are very observing. 
That is, that the man who ignores salvation through Christ as a 
gift and is going to work for himself, is always boasting about his 
work, Heaven would be unbearable if they got there by their own 
exertions, for they would be always talking about it. You couldn't 
stand them. It is always “I” with them—capital “I.” J tell you 
what I think about it. Jdon’t believe that. That is my opinion. 
But we are not saved by works, but by grace, for there is no chance 
for boasting in God’s grace. In the second of Timothy, in the first 
chapter and in the eighth verse: 

(573) 


574 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


“ Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, 
nor of me his prisoner: but be thou partaker of the afflictions of 
the gospel according to the power of God; 

“Who hath saved us and called us with a holy calling, not accord- 
ing to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, 
which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.” 

“Not according to your own works, but according to His own 
purpose and grace.” That is how it is. Then in the fourth chap- 
ter of Romans and the third, fourth, and fifth verses : 

“For what saith the Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it 
was counted unto him for righteousness. 

“Now to him that worketh is the reward not reckoned of grace, 
but of debt. 

“But to him that worketh not, but believeth on him that justi. 
fieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.” 

I have read these few verses that each one of you who are not 
Christians may know that what I say about work don’t apply to you 
at all. I can not find any place in the New Testament where a man 
is sent out to work. God never called upon the ungodly man to 
go to work when they asked Him what they shoulddo. He told 
them “to believe.” If you don’t believe, you can not do anything, 
I want to talk a few moments to you Christians and stir you up to 
work. There is an impression abroad that when the work stops in 
the Tabernacle the revival is going to end. You are not going to 
let this revival end? they say to me. The idea that a man can start 
a revival and stopone. Then they say that where we are going next 
the revival is going to start in such atime. We don’t start the re- 
vival. That is not according to the Word of God. I believe that 
that revival unon the day of Pentecost is going on still. If men have 
been born of God and of the Spirit, it is going to live in their hearts 
as long as anything in the world lasts. It would not be a good 
thing to have the work going on in this Tabernacle all the year 
round. It is a good thing to have the work scattered, to have the 
work going on in different parts of the city. It is better that these 
men should carry the fire which they got in these meetings into the 
different churches, and in that way rouse up the other churches 
You can in this way reach the outlying masses; and bear this in 
mind, that if these meetings have accomplished what we trust they 
have, the work is just commenced. We have in these three months 
only been getting ready for work, and now instead of coming here 


AYERS. 


yy of our Lord, 
e afflictions of 


ling, not accord- 
yose and grace, 
began.” 

ing to His own 
the fourth chap- 


S: 
ved God, and it 
ckoned of grace, 


1 him that justi- 
ness.” 
you who are not 
on’t apply to you 
nent where a man 
> ungodly man to 
ulddo. He told 
not do anything. 
nnd stir you up to 
the work stops in 
are not going to 
at a man can start 
we are going next 
don’t start the re- 
4. I believe that 
still. If men have 
ive in their hearts 
ld not be a good 
acle all the year 
tered, to have the 
| better that these 
meetings into the 
e other churches 
and bear this in 
hat we trust they 
hese three months 
hd of coming here 


NOT WORKING AND WORKING. 575 


to hear, go out and be a doer of work. Take the work of salvation 
and carry it out with you to your associates. If you have a hun- 
dred meetings in the city of Boston, in the churches, in the chapels, 
children’s mectings, meetings in your homes and others, and out of 
each of these you should have five inquirers a week, that would be 
500; don’t you see how the work would get on? We will do this 
and do it with spirit if we live as God would have us live. I do not 
see why we should not live in a state of revival all the time. I do 
not want to live any longer when revivals die out. The church 
ought to be in a revived condition all the time. If we do as we 
ought, we will be ready for every good word and work. Let me say 
that any Christian man who talks about the revival stopping is dis- 
honoring the Holy Ghost. He is as ready to work in the summer 
as in the winter. There is no calendar in heaven. Now, in the 
summer you are going into country homes. Well, they need you 
there. There are many of these country churches that need new 
life. They want to hear the voice of the stranger, and you can 
work there. A soul is as precious in one place as another. If your 
lot is cast in another part, if you are in a new corner of the vine- 
yard, you can get work there todo. Now, in the second of Titus 
and the eleventh verse : 

“ For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to 
ali men, 

“Teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we 
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world ; 

“ Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the 
great God and our Saviour, Jesus Christ ; 

“Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all ini- 
quity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good 
works. 

“These things speak and exhort and rebuke with all authority. 
Let no man despise thee.” 

I want to call your attention to that fourteenth verse. “And 
purify unto Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.” 
Now the trouble is that a great many people don’t want to be 
called “peculiar.” They are afraid that earthly Christians will raise 
that cry: “ He is a peculiar man or woman.” I have heard that 
said. ‘How is Mr. So-and-so?” ‘Oh, he is a good man, but—--he 
is very peculiar.” Well, now, if we have been redeemed by the 
precious blood of Christ we ought to be “peculiar.” 1 don’t be- 


576 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


lieve a man or woman is worth much to Christ until the world calls 
them “ peculiar.” There was a reporter wlio got up in one of the 
meetings, a few days ago, and he said that there was a man who 
worked in the office with him, ind he said to him, “ Why, are you a 
Christian?” and he said: “Yes, he had been a Christian for some 
time.” And yet this young man only found it out in the last few 
days. Well, he was not a “peculiar” Christian; and there are a 
good many of that style. If God is going to do a good work, He 
calls a peculiar man to do it. Elijah was a most peculiar man, and 
I don’t doubt that if you had asked Ahab about him, he would have 
said he was a “ peculiar” man, a narrow-minded man, a “ bigot,” but, 
thank God, he was so “ peculiar” that God sent him upon an errand 
when He had it to be done. If you had asked Nebuchadnezzar 
what kind of a man Daniel was, he probably would have said: “ He 
is an able man, but he is ‘peculiar,’ very ‘peculiar.’”’ But, thank 
God, Daniel was not like other men. If the world can not tell the 
difference between us and other men, it is a pretty good sign 
that we have not been redeemed by the precious blood of 
Christ. He redeemed us that He might make of us a “ peculiar 
people, zealous of good works.’’ Whenever you find a man that 
is among the Christians, the world will raise that cry, “ pecul- 
iar.” There are so many Christians that do nor want to be called 
“peculiar.” I am a pretty poor sailor, but I would be willing 
to go around this world with a church of peculiar people. We 
are suffering more to-day from professed Christians, who have 
either gone to sleep or who have never waked up, than from 
any one cause. Young men when they begin consider this the first 
thing. They begin to look at the professed Christians, and they 
say: “If there is so much in Christ and Christianity, why don’t 
these men act different?” And I tell you there is a good deal in 
that kind of argument. If we are living as Christ would have us 
live, we would be zealous of all good work. Now this work ought 
and will go on all summer. Let me say to some of these young 
converts, I have heard it said that they are not going to unite them- 
selves to any church. They think that they will sustain themselves 
outside of the church. They can not find a perfect church to go 
into. Now let me say that if you do not join a church until you 
find a perfect one, you will never find it. I have got done looking 
for a perfect church, a perfect minister, or a perfect anything upon 
earth. But they are all good, and there is nothing so dear to the 


"ERS. 


e world calls 
one of the 
a man who 
hy, are you a 
ian for some 
the last few 
| there are a 
od work, He 
iar man, and 
e would have 
“bigot,” but, 
pon an errand 
‘buchadnezzar 
ive said: “ He 
» But, thank 
an not tell the 
tty good sign 
ous blood of 
us a “peculiar 
d a man that 
ery, “! pecul- 
t to be called 
uld be willing 
people. We 
ns, who have 
p, than from 
r this the first 
ians, and they 
ty, why don’t 
p good deal in 
vould have us 
is work ought 
f these young 
to unite them- 
ain themselves 
church to go 
rch until you 
t done looking 
anything upon 
so dear to the 


NOT WORKING AND WORKING. 377 


Son of Go i 
hae mea a a hee very sympathy with those 
Lk church, There are a good 
ee, pst Aue grumbling. I Wish that we could 
Fi spi pueeenit, call it a church for grumblers. 
sisi , instead of going into the church and reforiing it 
utside and find fault with the church and throw stones re 
vee try to make it better. Let us say, young ARUN 
LAE a aR wv faults we will go in and pray for it 
a 0 : ° , " 
with some church at once. ae en NN a Ca 
preaching at the door of that church until they do So ae 
churches are not particular enough about whom the Wi i i 
that is what breaks up some of the churches. If NG we Ns i 
you some time just let them do it, but stick to them until th i N 
you join. A man told me that he would not stay here | We " 
apt HOt more than a year or two, and it would frat be Ain rhe 
to joinachurch here. Well, can’t you move your letter te \ NN 
as you can move your trunk? If I was going into fift different 
towns I would carry a traveling letter, or take fifty letter : I oi 
belong to fifty churches. Now, if you want to bea eat I His 
Christian, just get to work and do not go to slee Ww ia 
enough of sleepy Christians. If a church has nothin ON ip 
. do not go into it. Find some church where you ae ANY ca 
be . do. If you want to be a healthy Christian you have got 
o work. Job’s captivity was turned when he began to work f 
others. If you will get to work you will be islessed, If a man li a 
in himself, for himself, with himself, he will not oiet the bl 2 i 
God. ‘Find some definite work to do. Do not Ay HO do Ahe 
a ae I do not care if your work is taking up little et in is 
et; you can get a great blessing in that. It is just as import 
that you sow as that you should reap. What would you : aN 
farmer that spent his time reaping and he did not care to s 3 ‘We 
ae sow with one hand and reap with the other. If he ohh 
eae ae 7 ae to Ga you can go into some 
» yo out upon the streets and gathe 
pin boys and bring them into the Sabbath-school. ep at 
’ A years that I attempted to talk in the meeting I saw that 
the older people did not like it. I had sense enough to know that 
rh a bore to them. Well, I went out upon the street and I got 
eighteen little children to follow me the first Sunday and [ led vials 


578 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


into the Sunday-school. I found that I had something todo. I 
was encouraged and I kept at that work. And if I am worth any. 
thing to the Christian Church to-day, it is as much due to that work 
as to anything else. I could not explain these Scriptural passages 
to them, for I did not then comprehend them, but I could tell them 
stories; I could tell them that Christ loved them and that He died for 
them. I didthe best I could. I used the little talent I had, and God 
kept giving me more talents, and so, let me say, find some work. See 
if you can get a Sabbath-school class to teach. If you can not get 
that, go down into the dark lanes and byways of the city, and get 
some women around the wash-board, and talk to them while they 
are washing, if need be, and sing some gospel hymns; or, if you 
can not sing, take some one with you that can sing these songs 
of praise. Sing or read the twenty-third psalm, or pray, and you 
can get a blessing in that way. When you have won one soul to 
Christ you will want to win two, and when you get into the luxury 
of winning souls it will be a new world to you, and you will not 
think of going back to the world at all. You will not be thinking 
how much of the world you can have. There are a great many 
that profess Christianity that are just looking around to see how 
much of the world is permitted to them. I had a man ask me the 
other day, and a good many people write to me about the same 
way: “Do you think it is wrong for me, now that I am converted, 
to go to the theater?” If you get into this work for Christ, if you 
are really converted, you can answer this question for yourself. I 
do not get time to go to the theater. A good many people think 
they have become Christians. They make the profession and then 
they look around to see how much of the world is left to them. 
They ask can they do this and can they dothat. If you get into 
this blessed work you will have no taste for the world. Get to 
work at some good work; that is the quickest way for you to get 
this love of the world out of your hearts. There are a number of 
ways in which you-can work. You can have a children’s prayer- 
meeting. I used to be wonderfully blessed that way. Some of the 
happiest nights I ever had I had in these children’s meetings. Some 
people do not believe in early conversion. “If they have a father 
and mother let them take care of them.” But many of these 
fathers and mothers can not take care of them. Take these little 
street Arabs that have no one to take care of them and look after 
‘them and teach them to love Christ. But these people say: “If 


R.4YERS. 


ething to do. I 
I am worth any- 
due to that work 
riptural passages 
{ could tell them 
that He died for 
t I had, and God 
1 some work. See 
fF you can not get 
the city, and get 
. them while they 
yymns; of, if you 
sing these songs 
or pray, and you 
e won one soul to 
et into the luxury 
, and you will not 
1] not be thinking 
are a great many 
round to see how 
a man ask me the 
e about the same 
at I am converted, 
kk for Christ, if you 
bn for yourself. I 
many people think 
profession and then 
d is left to them. 
If you get into 
he world. Get to 
vay for you to get 
e are a number of 
children’s prayer- 
ay. Some of the 
s meetings. Some 
they have a father 
t many of these 


Take these little 
em and look after 
people say: “ If 


NOT WORKING AND WORKING. 5 
e 79. 


an Ly me po oe ra will not hold out.” 
. Some of the mos i 
ee ek me in Chicago were little hon ont ae aie 
she : Tee and the byways. Some of the most site 
eae there to-day were boys that went to that church 
ener ee a mother that lay dying. She had been mar- 
fees oe he and she had a boy that her second husband 
pier Hote H i en like, and this mother sent for me, atid. ae 
eee am oe from consumption. I have been sick a 
4 i a a: ae na lying here I have neglected that 
and he is given to swearing ; ath Me nede iano ale er 
ae that when I am gone and he has no ane to us ee F him, 
you will look after him.” I promised that I i Ane 
an after, that mother died, and no sooner was Pe tunes th 
at boy ran away and they didn’t know where he went ' : The 
net Sunday I spoke to the children in my Sabbath-scho Hi 
eee to look for him, and if they found him to let . ie 
or some time I did not hear of him; but one day o : ae 
pet told me that the boy was a bell-boy ina eh betel ae 
80 went there and I found him, and talked with him. I ae 
it perfectly well—it was the third of July. He Rear ay 3 
mother, but a step-father who did not care for him; and a t note 
to him kindly about Christ and what He had anne f hi er 
Behe loved himn, the tears trickled down his cheeks ates: me 
i ue : he wanted to know Christ, he told me he did sae 
he went up on the flat roof, dee C4 eee Sse 
rockets, and there upon that roof at midni ee pba 
hotel, that boy was praying and calling u ” G a f ar ie te 
and for comfort, and now he is an neck sti eae 
ec of Pisa eetoanae Rabe os ne 
eld on, and he is leading others to Christ. It i it 
these orphan boys, but there are ‘ good m h ! tees 
off than these. There is the boy wi cd ante ce 
mother—who is going to lead him ae Gd HeLa OL - 
Bah ts bees see go down to death? Are we going ne is 
1 enitentiaries, and these dau i 
of ill-fame? There is a work for you. a ke Ae aes 


580: MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


hand and lead them to the Cross of Christ. They can be gathered 
into our churches, and be a blessing to the Church of God. I want 
to call your attention to another verse in Titus, the eighth verse of 
the third chapter : 

“ This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm 
constantly, that they which have believed in God might be careful 
to maintain good works. These things ure good and profitable 
unto men. : 

“ But avoid foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, 
and strivings about the law, for they are unprofitable and vain.” 

Now, they say you do not believe in works. Not before salvation, 
not before conversion, for you are saved by the merits of Another, 
and not by any work of your own. After a man is converted he 
should get to work at once, if he wants to hold on. Laziness be- 
longs to the old creation, not the new. There is not a lazy hair in 
the head of a true Christian. If he is truly converted, he will want 
to do good works; he will want to be useful. If you are not care. 
ful.to maintain good works, it is a good sign that you have not been 
born of God. ‘Be careful to maintain good works.” Aid every 
society that is trying to give Christ to a dying, perishing world. If 
you'can not give money, give words of comfort and cheer. Ifa 
man is not working in your little corner of the vineyard, don’t you 
be jealous of him, and try to harm him and retard him. Wherever 
there is a society that is trying to give Christ to this perishing world, 
give it all the aid you can, with all that it means. [If it is a tract 
society, if it isa temperance reform club, if it is a Young Men’s 
Christian Association, whatever it is, if it is a society for helping up 
the poor, fallen ones, let us give them God-speed, and let us not be 
narrow and bigoted. But if they don’t preach the Gospel of Jesus 
Christ, go for them; give them no quarter at all! There are many 
that are trying to do the devil’s work by preaching that we can be 
saved in our sins, that we do not need to be born again, and that 
there is no need of regeneration, and with them we do not have any 
fellowship. When men are trying to work by the Gospel of Jesus 
Christ, let us pray that heaven’s blessing may rest upon them. 
Now you know that there is many and many a place where you can 
be useful in this city and out of it, and you need not go very far to 
find it. If each one of you would only find something to do in the 
next thirty days how useful you could be. When we were leaving 
Glasgow a good many thought that the work would stop, as so many 


»A VERS. 


san be gathered 
of God. 1 want 
eighth verse of 


that thou affirm 
night be careful 
1 and profitable 


ind contentions, 
le and vain.” 
before salvation, 
erits of Another, 
is converted he 
on. Laziness be- 
not a lazy hair in 
rted, he will want 
you are not care. 
you have not been 
orks.” Aid every 
rishing world. If 
and cheer. Ifa 
ineyard, don’t you 
him. Wherever 
is perishing world, 
s. If it is a tract 
s a Young Men's 
ety for helping up 
and let us not be 
he Gospel of jesus 
There are many 
ng that we can be 
n again, and that 
ve do not have any 
e Gospel of Jesus 
rest upon them. 
ace where you can 
not go very far to 
thing to do in the 
bn we were leaving 
ld stop, as so many 


NOT WORKING AND WORKING, 581 


were going to leave the city at that time of the year. And we 
tried to tell them, as we have told you here to-day, to take the fire 
off with them. Well, a good many went off, up and down the Clyde, 
and they started prayer-meetings all up and down the Clyde, and 
there was a mighty work of grace in Glasgow and all around it, and 
I do not see why it should not be so around Boston. Right there 
in the country, if we watch for souls, God will give them to us. In 
2 Thessalonians, the second chapter and fifteenth and seventeenth 
verses, it says: 

“Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which 
ye have been taught, whether by word or our epistle.” 

“Comfort your hearts, and stablish you in every good word and 
work,” 

“Stablish you in every good word and work.” I want to call 
your attention to these two “Ws.” We have got to feed upon the 
Word. We can not live upon these meetings; we have got some- 
thing todo. We have got to feed upon the Word, and then we 
can not help working. We will then surely win some souls to the 
Master. A great many Christians have not the spirit of work. If 
you feed upon the Word, it will begin to burnin your bones. Jere- 
miah was so abused that he said he was not going to speak any 
more, but he says that “his bones began to burn,” and he couldn’t 
help it. If we are real, true Christians we can not help but work 
for God. We don’t have to do it because He commands us; we do 
it naturally and gladly. We are told in Titus to be ready for every 
good word and work. If this building was to get afire and we could 
only get out by using a fire-escape, what would it be good for 
five miles off? What is the soldier good for if he is not ready with 
his arms to march or to fight? Now the question is, are you ready ? 
Are you making excuses as some do, saying, I have not been ap- 
pointed to do this. If I was to see a poor fellow fall into the water 
out here upon the Back Bay, what would you think if I was to say: 
“If I was appointed to get him out I would, but I think I will wait 
until some one authorizes me.” We get our appointment from on 
high. “Let him that heareth say come.” O, may the Spirit of God 
come upon us that every one of us may go out and find some soul 
that we may lead to the Lord Jesus Christ. Let us pray. 


LXVII. 


WHO ARE CHRISTIANS? 


1 JOHN iii. 14: “ We know that we have passed from death unto life because 
we love the brethren.” 


HERE was a lady came into the inquiry-room and wanted me 
to tell her if she were a Christian. I said I would be very 
happy to tell her if I knew, but I did not know. I would 

like to have had time to tell her how she might know, for the Scrip. 
ture is very plain about it and is not dark concerning it. I want to 
call your attention this afternoon to nine new things that we are 
promised, and that are tests of whether or not we are Christians, 
Now, here we have “ Except a man be born again he shall not enter 
the kingdom of heaven.” Born again, born from above, born of 
the Spirit. Now this is not the work of man. God is the author 
of life, and no earthly change or condition will answer for this new 
birth. A great many people that we meet in the inquiry-room tell 
us that this is a great mystery. Well, it isa great mystery. We will 
admit that it is a great mystery; but, nevertheless, it is one of the 
most important truths in the whole Word of God. I have no doubt 
that there are some in this assembly that have seen some one that 
has been born again, and they know that they seemed different. It 
was not going to confession; it was not being confirmed some 
Easter morning; it was not going to the Lord’s table and partak- 
ing communion; it was not by being baptized; but it was a new 
birth, a new life in Christ. Profession is one thing, conversion is 
another. A leper may conceal his leprosy and be a leper still. A 
beggar may get himself into a new suit of clothes, and yet he would 
still be a beggar. Now, here in the first epistle of John, and the 
fifth chapter, and the fourth verse, we are told what will happen if 
we are born of God: 

“For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this 
is the victury that overcometh the world, even our faith. 

(582) 


? 


1th unto life because 


.m and wanted me 

I would be very 
t know. I would 
now, for the Scrip- 
ning it. I want to 
things that we are 
we are Christians. 
n he shall not enter 
om above, born of 
God is the author 
hnswer for this new 
ne inquiry-room tell 
t mystery. We will 
ess, it is one of the 
d. I have no doubt 
been some one that 
eemed different. It 
ng confirmed some 
5 table and partak- 
* but it was a new 
thing, conversion 1s 
be a leper still. A 
s, and yet he would 
e of John, and the 
that will happen if 


the world : and this 
bur faith. 


WHO ARE CHRISTIANS? 583 


“Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth 
that Jesus is the Son of God?” 

If we “ overcome the world” that is a sign of conversion; that is 
a sign that we have been born again. But if we are all the time 
striving and struggling, that is a sign that we have not been “ born 
again.” In the sixth of Galatians and the fifteenth verse, it says: 

“ For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor 
uncircumcision, but a new creature.” 

Forms and ordinances are all very good, but they do not make a 
new creature. If we are born of God, then we have the power and 
will to overcome the world. There are a great many people that 
the moment we speak of regeneration say: ‘These people can tell 
the very hour and the very minute that God met them. Now, I 
can not point back to the day that God met me and to the time 
when the old things passed away.” And they are in trouble, and 
think because they can not do this that they are not Christians. 
Now, let me say it is of little account where or how it took place, 
if you are only converted. Some people have been converted like 
the flash of a meteor, and others like the rising of the sun, gradually. 
But if you have the evidences; if you have the fruits of the Spirit, 
then you are children of God. It is not necessary that we should 
be able to tell where or how we have been converted, but it is im- 
portant that we should be able to tell that we are converted. 
Christ says: “ Except a man become as a little child he shall not 
see the kingdom of God.” We have got to become little children 
of God. “Except ye repent.” He says: “Except ye be born 
again.” It is very important that we search the Scriptures. The 
next thing that we get is a “new creature.” In the fifth chapter 
and seventeenth verse of the Second Corinthians it says: 

“Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old 
things are passed away ; behold, all thi gs are become new.” 

There was a man converted when we were in New York. He was 
a Canadian Frenchman. He had been a great drunkard. He had 
been brought up to drink from a child, and he never saw any great 
harm in it until he had drank away all his family from him. He was 
converted, and he said that “the moment he asked God to take 
away this terrible appetite from him he did it.” He knelt down to 
pray, and when he rose up he felt like a new man; he said he “ felt 
like a new man in his old clothes.” He has conquered his appetite 
and held right on. He wrote me the other day to tell me that his 


eT 


er 


584 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


appetite had all gone. That is just what the new birth does. It not 
only takes away the sin, but it takes away the desire and gives you 
victory. There was a lady converted in Scotland, not in our place 
of worship, but in one of the churches there, and she said that when 
she got out of the church she had to stop to drink in the pure Scot- 
tish air. It never seemed half so sweet before. Everything seemed 
to have changed to her. Ah! the Lord had blessed her and she 
had become a child of grace. We can not receive the spiritual 
blessings that God wants us to have until we are born of the 
Spirit. In the first of Corinthians, second chapter and fourteenth 
verse it says: 

“But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of 
God; for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, 
because they are spiritually discerned.” 

Now, nearly every week I find that literally fulfilled. People say 
of these words: “I don’t understand them.” Well, of course you 
don’t, for you have not been born of the Spirit of God. I can tell 
them when I am preaching and know that they don’t understand a 
word that Iam saying. People come he; and they go out and 
say: “It is foolishness, that kind of preachi:.g.” You read the Word 
of God. They say: ‘‘ That is foolish.” That is just what the Bible 
says the Word is to them. 

By receiving the Word of God they get powerand strength. Iwas 
in the inquiry-room one night talking to a skeptic. He didn’t come 
in to inquire, but to have a discussion with some one. You know 
there are a great many people that are fond of discussing; and he 
said he didn’t believe in the Bible. He didn’t agree with it. But 
I said : “ Why, my dear friend, the Bible aj:ces with you. You and 
the Bible agree.” He said: “O, no, I don’t believe in it at all.” 
“Why, yes you do; the Bible says: ‘The natural man can not 
receive spiritual things.’” The poor fellow didn’t know what to 
do, so he hung his head. The moment we become spiritually- 
minded, then it is that we have the blessing of God. The next 
thing is a new nature. Now, there are plenty of evidences of this 
new nature. If you have a nature that longs for spiritual things, 
that is an evidence. If we have a new heart we get a new nature. 
God is a Spirit, and those who serve Him must do so in spirit. 
Now we have a new nature, that new nature must have a new God. 
Every one in Boston has a god of some kind that he worships. 
With this new birth, with this new life in God, we have new ambi- 


AYERS. 


th does. It not 
e and gives you 
ot in our place 
said that when 
n the pure Scot- 
srything scemed 
ed her and she 
ve the spiritual 
re born of the 
and fourteenth 


of the Spirit of 
1 he know them, 


led. People say 
ll, of course you 
‘God, I can tell 
yn’t understand a 
they go out and 
ou read the Word 
st what the Bible 


i strength. Iwas 
He didn’t come 
one. You know 
scussing; and he 
ree with it. But 
h you. You and 
eve in it at all.” 
ral man can not 
’* know what to 
come spiritually- 
God. The next 
evidences of this 
spiritual things, 
ret a new nature. 
do so in spirit. 
have a new God. 
hat he worships. 
have new ambi- 


WHO ARE CHRISTIANS? 585 


tions, new hopes, new joys, new pez ever hi i 
myself until I found God, I Sete cout ene ii big: 
eh as I found God, a conflict sprung up between the iseieic een 
~ eee pthiices in himself you may know that 
: ena an is i 
with a mean, contemptible passes ornate aes cee heb std 
she is a partaker of the Divine nature. I have got a a 1 al 
more respect for a woman who is trying to overcome ce cil We 
victory over a mean, contemptible disposition, than for chase He 
are naturally pretty good and don’t want to be any bett The . 
people come into the world with these mean, contem tible dis ‘oat 
tions and they try to conquer them and they eau in b mors 
quite respectable, so that we can get along with the ihe 
mold themselves over, as it were. A fish can not live a? bee 
roe! ne i i live in the water, and so the pata bit 
ive for God. Inthe seventh and ei eof R 
oy ie find grt Paul had this eset Baa a ae ene 
1e old man. You just read these tw oI 

you will see that he had the same bab roe Ge aa Ted. He 
hn ia ene eo of the seventh chapter you will aud thie 
and you should read carefully. Ho i 
say with the Apostle that “ oe have te area 4” 
We have said some things that we ought not iohave said th 
have had to beg some one’s pardon. A good man - ie va 
got the idea that the “old man” is dead. Satan has ‘blinded bean 
We are continually watching now. If the “old man” '< We 
cast out, we ought not to have to watch. He is not dead ie 
don’t know when he will rise up. There is no need to Me mae 
dead man. He won’t get up and run away. We don't bes : 
one remain with the dead in the cemeteries. Paul says: “R an 
yourself dead.” I want to call your attention to this ante a a 
the two natures. I want you to take time to look up this subj 3 
In the first ten years of my experience as a Christian I had a ae 
many conflicts, and the question used to come up: “If I have hes 
converted, why is it that I still long to do the things that I us ee 
do?” IT didn’t find out until after reading often my Bible Pane 4 
gave me a new nature, but did not take away my old Hrabuine AAG 
a cuild is born we give ita name. In the sixty-second cha ter of 
Isaiah and the second verse it says: ane: 
“And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy 


. a 5 ; 2 en —— - 
= 7 on 5 ns yah ~aee " . ” : 
sunt Rtn ao * = o a - i - — : een ——o 
¥ ——- = y iam aeeueoncereee me 2 cance = : snamegoseoneny ~ 
on -~ ae Sod : a Brees a ys = ee — — - = 

7 See = ae SEE 

i. ~- — = eee 5, === —== 
b2 Pee 4 Ts * Eee “Ses ee poner = E x a es 


on ct 
Parenti 


& 


a i 


aientaneteme occas 
Sa 


586 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


glory; and thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth 
of the Lord shall naine.” 

And in Revelation, ii. 17: 

“He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saitl: unto the 
churches: To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden 
manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new 
name written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it.” 

Now, after we are brought into the family of God, He gives usa 
new name. After we become sons and daughters of God, we have 
a birthright. If I were to take a street-boy and adopt him he would 
take my name, so when we become sons and daughters of God we 
take His name. This is not a matter of education, it is the work 
of God, aud when He takes us into His family it is that we become 
heirs to the kingdom and peace of God. Another thing we get; 
we get into a new way. We do not walk in the same way. In He. 
brews x. 20 it says: “We are brought into the new and living 
way.” We give up our own way and take His way. We are led 
not in darkness, but in light; not in bondage, but in the wav of 
peace and joy. We read that the way of the transgressor is hard. 
Not only that, but “the way of peace they have not known.” A 
great many people tell us that they don’t believe the Old Testa. 
ment, but they do believe the sermon upon the Mount. And when 
you come to read that to them and the ten commandments, you 
find that they don’t believe that either. I asked a woman in the 
inquiry-room if she was a Christian, and she said: “ You will have 
to ask my minister.” 

“T might ask him.” But he was hundreds of milesaway. There 
are a good many people in just that condition. They know just 
what their minister knows and nothing more. You who believe the 
sermon on the Mount, do you believe what is said about the broad 
and narrow way? What way are your feet traveling to-day? Are 
you in that narrow way or are you in that brbad way? These peo- 
ple like churches where they are told that they car. be saved in their 
sins. But there are churches in the broad way as well as theaters. 
A great many people think that all harlots and thieves and unright- 
eous are to be swept into heaven whether they want to or not. Is 
there happiness in this broad way? These young men that are liv- 
ing fast lives, are they happy? They lead miserable lives, for they 
have to trample their mothers’ prayers under-foot ; they have to go 
over the feelings of their loved ones. The old way is not a good 


VERS. 


1 the mouth 


ait: unto the 
of the hidden 
stone a new 
receiveth it.” 
He gives usa 
God, we have 
- him he would 
ers of God we 
it is the work 
hat we become 
thing we get; 
eway. In He- 
new and living 
y. We are led 
- in the way of 
sgressor 1S hard. 
ot known.” A 
the Old Testa- 
unt. And when 
mandments, you 
a woman in the 
“ You will have 


les away. There 
They know just 
who believe the 
about the broad 
ing to-day? Are 
ay ? These peo- 
be saved in their 
well as theaters. 
eves and unright- 
ant to or not. Is 
f+ men that are liv- 
ble lives, for they 
- they have to go 
ay is not a goo 


WHO ARF CHRISTIANS? 587 


way. God does not call upon us to give upa single thing that adds 
to our happiness; all He wants us to give up are the things which 
are the blight of our lives. When I was at Wellesley College the 
other day, a young lady said: “Is it true, Mr. Moody, as so many 
tell us, that these are the best days of our lives?” I said: “No, not 
if you are children of God.” I have served Christ for twenty-one 
years and this last year has been the best. It grows better and bet- 
ter. I mount up higher and higher every year. I have had more 
peace, more strength, more rest the past year, than I ever had in 
my life. I want now to call your attention to the sixteenth chapter 
and the seventeenth verse of Mark: 

“And these signs shall follow them that believe; in my name 
shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues.” 

With all these new things we get also new tongues. There is a 
great deal of mischief done by slanderous tongues. I think we 
don’t preach enough about this. If our hearts are right with God, 
we will not go about backbiting people. Many a man has gone to 
the grave with a broken heart, on account of a few abusive words 
uttered by a professed friend. Christ said to His disciples when He 
was leaving them: “ These signs shall follow them; they shall speak 
with new tongues.” I heard the story of a young man who abused 
his mother and finally knocked her down, because she would not 
give him money to gamble with. She did not mind this; she only 
prayed for him. She did not care for the money, but she did for 
his soul. He came back and he asked his mother to forgive him, 
and she did it gladly, and he praised God, and he erected a family 
altar. When I'was in London, in eighteen hundred and seventy- 
two, I was acquainted with a very wealthy young man who had 
thirteen servants, and they were all Christians but one. At last I 
converted that one, by the grace of God, and then, when all the 
servants were at prayer with the family, the young man said: “ Now 
we can sing, ‘O happy Day that fixed my Choice.’”” They couldn't 
sing it while that one was unconverted. I don’t know but it would 
be well for us to be more careful how we sing. I don’t know why 
it is not as bad to sing a lie as to speak one. There are some ladies 
here that sing; can they truly sing, ““O happy Day that fixed my 
Choice?” I can not sing. I could not start ‘“ Rock of Ages,” but 
I suppose I have heard it once a day for six years. I can not sing 
with my lips. I can not get it out of these thick lips of mine, but 
way down in my heart I sing just as well as Mr. Sankey, and it is 


588 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


just as acceptable to God. But when we all get to heaven I expect 
to sing with Moses and the Lamb. A real Christian Church is a church 
of song, and it aint going to hire two or three men or women to do 
the singing for them, not by a good deal. I don’t know all they doin 
heaven, but they sing there, and by and by we shall be there and 
join with them. Good Christians are not going to live upon the 
New York Ledger. But there are a good many people the old Adam 
clings to. Do not let us feed upon this new literature, this misera- 
ble stuff that is printed. Do not let us feed our minds upon this, 
but let us read this Word through two or three times and we shall 
have no taste for any other bool. Another thing we get, we get 
new friends. I thank God for the new friends Christ has given me. 
The truest friends are Christians. A young man came to me and 
said: “ Mr. Moody, I have been converted, shall I give up all my 
old friends?” I said: “No, go for them. Keep telling them about 
Christ and they will either come to God or give you up.” <A gam- 
bler told me one day that he gambled away all his money, and then he 
gambled away some of his employer’s money, and he knew that if 
he did not replace it he would be dismissed and perhaps arrested. 
He tol nis friends, as he thought them, and he wanted to borrow 
money enough to replace his employer’s money. But his supposed 
friends laughed at him, so he went to a Christian man and told him 
all, and he lent him the money, and he gave his heart to Christ and 
he has never gone near those gamblers since. If vou want true 
friends you want the friends of Christ. I wish I had time to go on, 
but my time is up. Let us just sum up all these new things. I 
want to say right here that when I was converted I thought I had 
got a great boon, the greatest I had ever received. I wondered if 
it would seem as pleasant to me after a few years, and if these new 
things would not come to be old thinys. But Christ is a thousand 
times more to me now than He was then. If you will just come 
to Christ now, to-day, He will receive you and bless you. Now, 
let us see what tliese new things are. There is the new birth, have 
you got that? The new creature, are you that? The new nature, 
have you got that? A new name, have you got that given you? 
Can you say that you are children of God? We know what we are, 
but it don’t appear what we shall be by and by when we shall see 
Him as Heis. My little boy was just as much mine the day he 
was born as he is now, when he is eight years old. Have you got 
into the new way? Have you got anew tongue? Do you singa 


1YERS. 


eaven | expect 
irch is a church 
r women to do 
v all they doin 
be there and 
live upon the 
e the old Adam 
ire, this misera- 
inds upon this, 
es and we shall 
we get, we get 
t has given me. 
ame to me and 
give up all my 
ling them about 
1 up.” A gam- 
1ey, and then he 
he knew that if 
erhaps arrested. 
inted to borrow 
ut his supposed 
an and told him 
art to Christ and 
f vou want true 
lad time to go on, 
b new things. I 
I thought I had 
I wondered if 
hnd if these new 
ist is a thousand 
will just come 
less you. Now, 
new birth, have 
The new nature, 
hat given you? 
now what we are, 
hen we shall see 
ine the day he 
Have you got 


P Do you sing a 


WHO ARE CHRISTAINS? 389 


new song? Do you have new spiritual food? Have you got new 
friends ? 

I can’t tell you about this new birth; no living man can; you 
must feel it. AsItold you a few nights ago, that if you took a 
man right from the dirtiest streets of Boston and placed him in the 
crystal streets of heaven, he wouldn’t want to stay there long; he 
would immediately become homesick. In such a place he would be 
a natural man, and a natural man who can’t find any whisky or any- 
thing of a worldly character in heaven wants to get out of that 
beautiful place as soon as possible. If you men here to-night know 
what the old nature really is, if you know what God wants you to 
do, then He will very easily find a place for you. Why, my friends, 
I have had as much trouble with the old Moody as any of you ever 
experienced with yourselves, but I don’t have any trouble with the 
new Mocdy now that I have found Christ. ! tell you, when any of 
you begin to lie it is a sure sign that you have not the Spirit of God in 
you. I tell you, if a man is once converted he will not lie, but will 
find infinite pleasure in singing the praises of God. The song of 
the drunkard won’t do when you are once converted. I don’t know 
how it is with you to-day, but when I was engaged in business in 
this city counterfeit money was being pretty freely circulated. Now, 
my friends, how could it be discovered that this money was not 
genuine? Why, simply by the ring in it when it was dropped on 
the counter or table. So, in a like manner, we can tell a Christian. 
Worldly language represents the ring of the ungodly; but divine 
language represents the ring of the Christian. You know that some 
men grow smaller and smaller on an intimate acquaintance ; but my 
experience is that the more and more you know of Christ the larger 
He becomes. 


LXVIII. 


INSTANT SALVATION. 


OU will find my text most anywhere in the Bible. If 

you look carefully you can find it written on every page. 

Now what I want to say is this: Every man that wants to 

be saved can be saved before he leaves this building if he wiil. No 
matter how great a sinner you have been, you can trust God. It’s 
His work to save you; you can’t do it if you would, but He is able. 
Some people once tried to trouble an old Scotchwoman about this 
matter of salvation, and asked her how she knew God had saved 
her. “Ah!” she said, “God can’t afford to break His word about 
a poor old Scotchwoman like me.” That was it. She was sure. 
I know a good many earnest Christian people who can’t tell the day 
or the hour, nor the week or the year, when they became Chris- 
tians. But, nevertheless, there was a point in their lives when they 
did accept Jesus, a moment when their names were written in the 
Lamb’s book of life. Now, if there are one or one hundred or five 
hundred tiat have come into this assembly determined not to go 
out until they are saved, they can be saved. I believe that as surely 
as that I am standing here before you to-day. I have preached to 
you a number of times in the past twelve weeks upon sudden con- 
version. I believe that this truth of sudden conversion has met 
with more opposition than any other truth that we have preached. 
I don’t think we have been in any city where there has been so 
much downright opposition to this doctrine as there has been in 
Boston. Now let us look, and if the Word does not teach this, let 
us give it up; but if it does, then let us cling to it. I want to give 
you a number of illustraiions. The first illustration is the ark. It 
was the ark that saved Noah and his family. There was a moment 
when he and his family were outside the ark, and there was another 
when he was inside. That is sudden conversion. When God called 
him into the ark, all he had to do was to come into the ark. It was 
(590) 


the Bible. If 
on every page. 
1 that wants to 
x if he wiil. No 
trust God. It’s 
1, but He is able. 
yman about this 
God had saved 
His word about 
She was sure. 
can’t tell the day 
y became Chris- 
r lives when they 
e written in the 
s hundred or five 
ined not to go 
eve that as surely 
ave preached to 
pon sudden con- 
version has met 
e have preached. 
ere has been so 
ere has been in 
ot teach this, let 
I want to give 
n isthe ark. It 
re was a moment 
here was anothet 
Vhen God called 
bh the ark. It was 


INSTANT SALVATION, 5 
go! 


Bote Ts called him. It was finished and the door was 
ea se ane na sympathy for this notion that man is 
come ii, That i Poh ivedeeerlae ha has Nea et 
ore a ‘ e Son of God standet 
ea knocketh at the door of your heart for fas 
ee ee into you. The Son of God wants to save 
i ceniee pi ea 7 you should let Him save you, and you are not 
pista ci . Some of you say that you have tried to under- 
tas i cae 7 ag not. It isnot that; you can understand it 
pat A tN ae : : ack, corrupt hearts that will not let you aaelere 
RL coli: MAC HESAIRL aa sleslds kaye ce stant psigtie, 
° . i 
ath knocking for God, the blessed, GELUGE E Ere 
\. ready to give you salvation when you are ready to receive i 
_ anchester, after one of our meetings, we had a meeting a he 
s ela inquiry-meeting, and I had a little company of ater 
die e ahaha an I noticed one gentleman who took his seat 
ees rts of the group, in the rear. I thought at first that h 
ay skeptic, and then I saw him weeping earnest tears, and that he 
oe ia troubled with something. I went a to 
ana : “Why can not you receive salvation now ?” 
said: “ I don’t feel as if I could have it here now.” mee oe 
et flee was no need to wait for feeling ; ae 
ae ihe ‘a ce 6 Ve it; that if he would just let his feelings 
him that the ward alings ae ee ei phe eit 
there was no command to any one to rar eee G. ey ieee 
iv abe eee is not attached to nalyations chests aan 
cain pas ees That feeling may change, but that of a 
Ma ete ie t. I used one illustration after another, but 
epee at “he didn t see how it was.” And finally I thought of 
is i ustration about the ark, and I said: “‘ Was it Noah’s Ay li : 
Paring him safe, or was it the ark?” Then he cried: “ Why. oe 
as - case astonished me, he got it so quick. He afd i I 
ie tages Gali a igi you very much, Mr. 
quick, so sudden. A few ee pean oe Pee ae anne 
, ing 
ies holon aman stepped up to me and said: “ Mr. ice 
ahh er me?” and I said: “ Well, no,I don’t particularly ; 
a good many faces and I can not remember them all, but ae 


® 


592 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


seems very familiar to me.” And then he said: “Do you remem- 
ber the illustration about the ark?” and I said: “O, yes, I shall not 
forget that very soon.” And then he said: “Iam the man,” ard I 
said : “ Well, how is it with you?” And then he said: “I went right 
into the ark then; I let the feelings take care of themselves.” And 
when I left Manchester he was about the last man to say good-bye 
to me. The Word of God saved him, and if you will just take the 
Word of God to-day it will save you and you will find peace and 
joy. In the twelfth chapter of Exodus the Israelites are told: 

“And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood 
that is in the basin, and strike the lintel and the two side-posts 
with the blood that is in the basin: and none of you shall go out 
at the door of his house until the morning. 

“For the Lord will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and 
when he seeth the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side-posts, 
the Lord will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer 
to come in unto your houses to smite you. 

“ And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to 
thy sons forever.” 

What was it made these people safe? It was the blood upon the 
door-posts. It was not their prayers, their tears, their weeping that 
saved them and made them feel secure, it was the blood. ‘ When 
I see the blood, that shall be the token for you.” If we are shel- 
tered behind the blood we shall be safe. Now there must have 
been a moment when that blood was not there. When it was not 
there, there was a moment when they were exposed to death; but 
the moment the blood was put there, that moment they were shel- 
tered. They had then security and safety. There was a legend told 
about a first-born child, and it ran that if the blood was not there 
she would die that night, and she wanted to know that it was there. 
She asked her father if the blood was there. He said: “ O, yes, it is 
there. I told the servants to put it there.” But she said: “ Father, 
are you sure it is there?” And he answered her again: “I told the 
servants to put it there and they have, of course, done so.” But, said 
she: “I wish you would take me to the door and show me if it 
is there.” And he took her out and lo, and behold, it was not 
there. But the servants had time enough to kill the lamb and put 
the blood there, and she saw it and rested quietly in that word of 
the living God. It is only a legend, but it is an illustration that we 
can afford to take God at His word. The blood of Christ is given 


1YERS. 


o you remem- 
yes, I shall not 

1e man,” ard I 

. “T went right 

aselves.” And 

o say good-bye 
I just take the 
find peace and 
s are told: 

it in the blood 
. two side-posts 
ou shall go out 


Egyptians; and 
e two side-posts, 
fer the destroyer 


ce to thee and to 


e blood upon the 

heir weeping that 

, blood. ‘ When 

> Tf we are shel- 
there must have 
When it was not 
Led to death; but 
t they were shel- 
was a legend told 
od was not there 
that it was there. 
aid :  O, yes, it is 
he said: “ Father, 
ngain: “I told the 
one so.” But, said 
nd show me if it 
chold, it was not 
the lamb and put 
y in that word of 

lustration that we 

of Christ is given 


INSTANT SALVATION, 593 


us in mercy, and if I believe upon God I am safe. It is not my 
prayers, it is not my tears, it is not my feelings, but the Word of God 
that saves me. I find a good many people that are substituting feel- 
ing in the place of belief. They are substituting before Christ 
ordinances and forms, instead of taking the Word of God as the 
word that sets us free, that gives us liberty in Christ. The next 
illustration that I want to give you is these six cities of refuge. 
And the Lord told Moses that there should be six cities of refuge, 
three upon this side of the Jordan, and three in the land of Canaan; 
and that their gates should be open day and night ; and these cities 
should be in a conspicuous place; and their leading men, like our 
selectmen or our officers connected with the Government, should 
keep all the roads in good repair, and the bridges in good order; 
and sign-posts in red were set up, pointing the way to these cities. 
Now, suppose I have unwittingly killed a man. In those days it 
was the law that the next relation of the man who had been killed 
could draw his sword and slay that murderer when he met him. 
The moment that this nearest relative heard of it he could come 
upon the murderer and slay him, and the law would not touch him; 
it would justify the act. So the nearest relative of this man could 
slay me. But if I once got behind the w: 's of one of these cities I 
am safe. If I am innocent, I am tried and am acquitted; but if I 
am guilty, then I am condemned and put to death. Look at that in 
regard to salvation. Iam ten miles away. There « ten miles 
between me and that city. I do not stop to discuss the question. 
I have only one thing to do, and that is to get in there. I have no 
other hope. I leap into the highway, and I go towards that city 
just as fast asI can. It isn’t long before I hear some one upon 
my track. He comes closer and closer. I redouble my speed and 
fly as fast as I can. He comes nearer and nearer. I can hear him 
breathe. IfI do not escape into that city I must perish if he over- 
takes me. He hounds me down. I am exposed to death—to 
judgment. I am now within a hundred yards of that city. Notice 
is given to the citizens. The men rush to the walls to see me. 
They cry: “ Escape, escape for thy life, he is hard upon thee.” I 
leap over the highway ; I bound along the road. I have not time 
to discuss; I must escape into that city. I am exposed to that 
man’s sword. Now I am leaping through the walls; one moment 
Iam in danger, in the next I am safe. That is sudden, isn’t it? 
That is a Bible illustration, isn’t it? But a great many people think 


594 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


that they are not condemned yet. But how many should cry out 
“T have broken the law; death is upon my track; I do not know 
how far off he may be; it may be years, it may be months; it may 
be days, it may be hours, and he is fast bearing down upon me,” 
God has provided a city of refuge for you. If you flee there you 
shall not die, you will not perish. That ought to be the first occu- 
pation. “I can not tell what will happen to me.” “Boast not of 
to-morrow.” “I must pass to that city.” That is what we should 
say. Thank God, we have not to go ten miles. We have not to 
wait ten minutes. All you have to do is to believe, and salvation 
is yours. Will you have it now? It is yours if you will just take 
it. But let me give you another illustration that you will under. 
stand better. We will go back to the days before the war. There 
is a slave in Kentucky. He has heard a good deal about liberty, 
and he says: “If I could only get across the Ohio River—if I could 
only get into the land of liberty, would I not rejoice? Oh, if I was 
only a free man.’”’ He can not read, perhaps, but some one has 
told him about liberty. He knows that all those people upon the 
other side of the river are free. But he knows that he is not safe 
there. He knows that there is a fugitive slave law there. “If I 
could get there and stay there, my master would come over and 
take me back again. But if I could swim that river and get 
through Michigan into Canada I would be safe. I would be a free 
man, for not a slave can breathe under the English flag. There is 
not a slave in Queen Victoria’s dominions.” This man wants to be 
free. This man swims that river, but he knows that he is not safe. 
He has not been gone but a little time when his master is upon 
his track. The poor man runs as fast as he can. He hides in the 
woods in the daytime, and at night all the time he pushes along, 
avoiding the highways, toward that Canada line. If he crosses that 
he will be forever a free man. He crosses into Michigan. He says: 
“Oh, if I can only get across the Canada line I will be a free man.” 
Now he is within a few feet of that line. His master is fifty yards 
behind him. “If I can make the line now, I am safe; I am a free 
man.” He is still nearer to it—his master is within a few feet of him. 
He goes bounding over the line and he is a free man. That is sudden, 
isn’t it? Ifyou do not see how you can be converted, cross the 
line. You can stay where you are and be lost, or you can turn your 
face to Him and come to His loving bosom and He will adopt you. 
You will become the bride of the Lamb, a child of God for all time 


9RAYERS. 


y should cry out 
<; Ido not know 
> months; it may 
down upon me.” 
‘ou flee there you 
be the first occu- 
» «Boast not of 
‘is what we should 
We have not to 
eve, and salvation 
you will just take 
at you will under- 
-e the war. There 
Jeal about liberty, 
‘o River—if I could 
oice? Oh, if I was 
but some one has 
yse people upon the 
‘that he is not safe 
fe law there. “If I 
uld come over and 
that river and get 
I would be a free 
lish flag. There is 
his man wants to be 
s that he is not safe. 
his master is upot 
|. He hides in the 
e he pushes along, 
If he crosses that 
Michigan. He says: 
will be a free man. 
master is fifty yards 
m safe; lam a free 
hin a few feet of him. 
an. That is sudden, 
converted, cross the 
or you can tura yout 
4d He will adopt you: 
4 of God for all time 


INSTANT SALVATION, 


595 
and eternity. Oh, may God help you to cross the line. But you 
say: “I still do not see how it can be done all at once.” Some of 


you have looked at Naaman. He was a leper, and he went down 
into the Jordan as he was told to do. He goes in six times a leper 
and he washes and comes out a leper, but the seventh time he 
washed in the Jordan and he was made clean. He obeyed and he 
was made clean. That is what God wants. He wants obedience. 
He was to be saved by obeying. He goes in six times. There 
is one moment when Naaman was a leper. But he goes in the 
seventh time and he comes out ina moment clean. These are all 
Bible illustrations. But you still say: “I don’t see how a person 
can be saved all at once.” You may not be just what you ought 
to be, but you will be a child of God. When my little boy was a 
day old he was just as :nuch my boy as he is now, when he is seven 
years old. Just as Naaman got rid of his leprosy, so you can get 
rid of your leprosy of sin to-day. If you will just obey God, if you 
will just receive Him to-day, you can go home from this house justi- 
fied. Look at that poor man who was to have been executed a few 
days ago. The last day had come, the scaffold had been made. I 
don’t know whether it was the same as in another case, for I did 
not read the papers to see, but I suppose his cell was where he 
could hear the hammers upon the scaffold driving the nails or bolts. 
There is that poor condemned man. In a few hours he is to be 
executed. Then comes a telegram from the Governor, and he is 
reprieved. One moment he was condemned and the next has got a 
reprieve. It was in a town in England, and there was a man in jail 
there that was to be hanged upon a Monday. Sunday all the min- 
isters were preaching about him. The flag was over the prison. It 
was like a funeral in that town. There never was such a day seen 
there. The next morning he was to executed. Hecan hear them 
at work upon the scaffold at midnight. He could not sleep. His 
friends had come and taker: their last fare-ycli of him, and the next 
morning he was to be launched into eternity. He hears the foot- 
steps upon the corridor, and he thought it was the officer come to 
tell him that his time had come. But he came to the poor con- 
demned man, and he told him that he had a pardon for him from 
the Queen. One moment he might be hanged; one moment con- 
demned, another pardoned! So, my friends, you can be saved, all 
at once. If God is going to forgive you He isn’t going to be six 
months or six years about it. If your child does wrong, mothers, 


Ak : 


596 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


and is sorry for it, is it six months or six years that you take in 
which to forgive it? When you forgive it, it is instantaneous, isn’t 
it? If this man who had got the pardon from the Queen had said 
he did not want it, he would not take it, he would not have got the 
benefit of what the Queen had done. 

“Come now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord: though 
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though 
they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.” 

Scarlet and red—two fast colors. You could not get the scarlet 
out of that lady’s shawl without spoiling the shawl. “ Yes, but 
what is the philosophy of it ?’”” Don’t you mind the philosophy of it, 
Pardon is offered you, and you want to inquire into it? You want 
to know all about it? You want to understand the philosophy of 
it? Just take the pardon that is offered and thank Him for it. | 
firmly believe that Christ stands here with a pardon for every soul 
that wants it. All you have to do is just to take it. I want to cal! 
your attention to a verse here in Numbers—the twenty-first chap- 
ter of Numbers and the fifth verse: 

“And the people spake against God, and against Moses, Where. 
fore have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? 
for there is no bread, neither is there any water; and our soul loath- 
eth this light bread. 

“And the Lord sent fiery serpents among the people, and they 
bit the people; and much people of Israel died. 

‘“‘ Therefore the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned, 
for we have spoken against the Lord, and against thee; pray unto 
the Lord that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses 
prayed for the people. 

“ And the Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and 
set it upon a pole; and it shall come to pass that every one that is 
bitten, when he looketh upon it shall live. 

“And Moses made a serpent of brass, and put it upon a pole, and 
it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he be- 
held the serpent of brass, he lived.” 

“When he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived.” Not six weeks 
after, he beheld it. Not because they had been looking at it six 
months were they saved. At once they were saved. That was 
God’s remedy. You want to know the philosophy of it? I don't 


* know. I don’t know what there was in an old brass serpent to give 


them life. But I know what He said. Hear His word: 


PRAYERS. 


that you take in 
istantaneous, isn’t 
e Queen had said 
d not have got the 


the Lord: though 
as snow; though 


yot get the scarlet 
shawl. ‘Yes, but 
he philosophy of it. 
nto it? You want 
the philosophy of 
ank Him for it. I 
rdon for every soul 
eit. I want to call 
e twenty-first chap- 


ainst Moses, Where- 
ie in the wilderness? 
- and our soul loath- 


he people, and they 
aid, We have sinned, 
nst thee; pray unto 


bm us. And Moses 


| a fiery serpent, and 
hat every one that is 


1t it upon a pole, and 
ny man, when he be- 


ed.” Not six weeks 
een looking at it six 
re saved. That was 
ophy of it? 1 dont 
brass serpent to give 
is word: 


INSTANT “ “VATION. 507 


“ Make a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole; and it shall come 
to pass that every one that is bitten, when he looketh upon it shall 
be saved.” 

That is enough for me. And now we find men that are looking 
to Christ, and they get light. It is being fulfilled in Boston at the 
present day. But some men dislike to believe in it. They say: 
“There is no common sense in it. What an idea to tell Moses to 
make an old brass serpent and set it up upon a pole for people to 
look at. Now, if He had told him to take the brass and rub it in, 
there might have been some sense in it. I could understand how 
that might do, but such foolishness as sticking up a brass serpent 
upon a pole just for people to look at—why, I couldn't believe that 
ifI wanted to. You don’t think that we enlightened Bostonians are 
going to believe that, do you?” Thank God, a good many people 
here are believing it, and you don’t have to go through a college or 
a seminary to learn how to look. You can look without being cult- 
ured. All you have ‘to do is to look and you can be saved by look- 
ing. “Look unto me, all ye ends of the earth.” Jesus is the author 
of all life, and if you are going to get it, you have got to look to 
Him. It is not looking at the pole, it is looking at the serpent. It 
is not looking at the minister holding the pole up or at the pole 
itself. Some people do not like the looks of brass, and they are gild- 
ing up the cross of Christ to suit themselves. But it is the brass 
serpent that we are to look at. Christ says: “ As Moses lifted up 
the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted 
up.” All we have to do now is to look. There were some friends 
of mine that were talking to a poor Scottish lassie, and they gave 
her some advice that I never would have given to any one. They 
told her to go home and read her Bible. They did not know what 
might happen upon the way. She looked at them and said: “I 
canna read, I can only pray Jesus to tak’ me asI am.” My friends, 
you just say that to-day and see how quickly He will take you. I 
don’t care if you can not read or write. I don’t care if you never 
heard of Him before to-day. ‘‘ Whosoever believeth upon me shall 
not perish.” The question is, will you take Him? Will you take 
God’s gift to-day? A lady said to me: “ You tell me just to receive 
Him; well, I do and I am the same woman. I try to believe and 
it isn’t any different.” “Ah! it isn’t trying, it is doing.” I took 
her pocket-book, which she carried in her hand, and I said: “ Sup. 
pose chere are fifty thousand dollars in that pocket-book. If I 


Tab MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


give it to you, you are the same woman, yet a moment ago you 
were a beggar and now you are rich. You have got a gift. If you 
get the new birth you get a gift; you get Christ. That ma! esa 
difference. You may not realize what you have got.” I got Christ 
twenty-one years ago, and He was more to me after ten years than 
He was at first, and He is more to me now than He was ten years 
ago. I keep growing in Him, and I do not know what I shall be in 
time. When I was in England this doctrine was talked about a good 
deal there. One day I was going down a street and 1 saw a soldier 
coming toward me. You know they all wear red coats there and 
you can tell them a good way off. I had heard something about how 
they enlisted there, but I wanted to be sure and get the whole story 
from one whoknew. So whenhe came up I said: “I wish you would 
answer me a few questions. I am an American, and you know that 
we Americans— especially when we come from Yankeedom —are 
very inquisitive.” He said: “Certainly.” I said: “I would like 
to have you tell me how long it took you to become a soldier?” 
He laughed at me. ‘“ Why, just no time at all,” he told me. | 
had heard it before. This is the custom when a man enlists. 
When he says he will enlist, the recruiting officer puts an English 
shilling into the palm of his hand, and that moment he is a soldier. 
He comes up a citizen, and says: “I want to enlist.” He can go 
wherever he pleases. He can go to Australia, America, Africa, 
anywhere. Next that shilling is put in his hand and he ceases to 
be a citizen. He is a soldier. He is under the government of 
Queen Victoria. He is commanded by officers, and he has to go 
where they order him. He has lost his liberty. Now do you want 
to know how you can be a soldier of God? It aint the English 
shilling, it is the Saviour. You come in here a sinner, and you 
take Christ, and He is yours, and all you have to do is to trust 
‘Him. The question is, will you receive Him? I was asking that 
question, and I thought I would wait for an answer. I thought | 
would get an answer. Andaman said: “Iwill take Him.” Who 
will receive Him to-day? Who will enlist to-day? You can 
receive Him and live forever; you can reject Him and die. In 
John’s first epistle, the fifth chapter, the ninth verse: 

“Tf we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is 
greater, for this is the witness of God which he hath testified of his 
Son. 

“ He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in him- 


PRAYERS. 


moment ago you 
rot a gift. If you 
‘t. That ma! esa 
rot.” I got Christ 
fter ten years than 
He was ten years 
-what I shall be in 
alked about a good 
and 1 saw a soldier 
sd coats there and 
mething about how 
get the whole story 
«J wish you would 
and you know that 
a Yankeedom — are 
aid: “1 would like 
become a soldier?” 
all,” he told me. I 
hen a man enlists. 
cer puts an English 
ment he is a soldier. 
enlist.” He can go 
ia, America, Africa, 
nd and he ceases to 
the government of 
s, and he has to ¢° 
Now do you want 
It aint the English 
e a sinner, and you 
e to do is to trust 
> = was asking that 
nswer. I thought ! 
‘Il take Him.” Who 
to-day? You cat 
t Him and die. In 
verse : 
witness of God 3 
» hath testified of his 


the witness in him- 


INSTANT SALVATION. 599 


self; he that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he 
believeth not the record that God gave of his Son. 

“And this is the record, that God has given to us eternal life, 
and this life is in his Son.” 

He gives us eternal life, and if we get it we have got to get it 
“in this Son.” A man ignores Christ and he can not get it. If 
you won't receive Him you will not get it. You can not get it 
independent of Him. “ He that hath the Son hath life, and he that 
hath not the Son hath not life.’ Have you got Him? that’s the 
question. Answer the question to-day. Have you got Him? If 
you will take Him, He is yours. Can you say to-day, I have re- 
ceived Him, and He has received me? You that have not got 
Him, won’t you just take Him to-day ? Won't you just have Him 
now? When I was in Glasgow, a lady said to me: “ You are all 
the time talking about ‘ take, take.’ Do you find it in the Bible?” 
I told her I had found it, and I wished I had time to speak about 
one-half the places where it was blessed to me. The word is near 
the end of the Revelation : 

“The Spirit and the Bride say come. And let him that heareth, 
say come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let 
him take the water of life freely.” 

Won't some one take Him to-day? Won’t you take this cup 
that is offered you? If you be Christians, pass it to your next neigh- 
bor and ask her if she is saved. You ladies, just pass the cup 
around, and if they do not take it, the blood of their souls will not 
be required at your hands. Everybody who has taken of it, pass 
the cup to some one else and ask them to take it as a gift. 


LXIX. 


PRACTICAL ADDRESS TO REFORMED MEN. 


AST Friday I was to have a question drawer to receive ques- 
tions which I was to answer, and some of these questions are 
constantly arising now. As to this question that has been 

before us every Friday since we have been in the city: “Oughta 
reformed drunkard, whose family is in want, give any of his money 
for charitable purposes outside of his own family?” perhaps some 
were here last night and felt as if they would like to give, because 
they have been so blessed by this Tabernacle, and perhaps they felt 
as if they did not show true gratitude if they did not give. Let me 
suy right here that your first work is to take care of your family. 
Your money belongs at home. If your wife has had a hard struggle, 
and you have been squandering your money in saloons and billiard 
halls and rum-shops, you want to take it home now; your aim 
should be to make your home just as comfortable for your dear 
ones as you possibly can. We read in the fifth chapter of Timothy 
and the eighth verse: 

“If any provide not for his own, and especially for those of his 
own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.” 

There is what Paul says to you upon that subject: “ He is worse 
than an infidel.” 

Let your first earnings go to that home. Clothe your children, 
and don’t let them be hooted at on the street as sons and daughters 
of adrunkard. Give them comfortable clothes and a comfortable 
home; that is where you want to put your money. Now, here is 
another question that has been asked: “ Ought a man to pay his liq- 
uor bills after he is converted?” “ Render unto Cesar the things 
that belong to Cesar.” If you want to have any influence with 
these rum-sellers go and pay up your bills. The mistake is made; 
you never ought to have contracted the bill or run into debt, but 
if you have, go and pay your debt. In the thirteenth chapter of 
Romans, and in the seventh and eighth verses, we read: 

(600) 


YRMED MEN. 


rer to receive ques- 
these questions are 
tion that has been 
the city: “Ought a 
e any of his money 
ily?” perhaps some 
like to give, because 
nd perhaps they felt 
id not give. Let me 
care of your family. 
had a hard struggle, 
saloons and billiard 
ome now; your aim 
brtable for your dear 
chapter of Timothy 


ially for those of his 
orse than an infidel.” 
nbject: “‘ He is worse 


lothe your children, 
s sons and daughters 
es and a comfortable 


oney. Now, here is 


a man to pay his liq- 
to Cesar the things 
e any influence with 
he mistake is made; 
or run into debt, but 
thirteenth chapter of 
, we read: 


‘a 
Rs 
za 
oe 
& 
= 
via 
fe 
x 
# 
opt 
Big 
“ 
3 

r 


ata S 


segs al: “So es fhe sat “ene we line 
FE EME oe ET 


Keates 


PRACTICAL ADDRESS TO REFORMED MEN, 601 


6“ 
: one therefore to all their dues; tribute to whom tribute is 
ue; custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; hon 
ae or to whom 
“Owe no man anythi 
ything, but to love one an ' 
loveth another hath fulfilled the law.” sO ae 
ne sh a right to go into debt for one thing—that is love. I 
ue hat a great many peopie are now suffering, and are sutiere 
; g2 pares times more than they would if they had not run into 
"i , not only for liquor, but for other things. And I want to sa 
oe oe oe that if you will take my advice, you will ees 
ebt. riends want to advance 
you money to help you u 
aan oi es ve ae Don't you take it ; I would hes have 
-fire cents that I have earned by the sv 
reat of my b h 
twenty-five dollars that I hav Vike FEARS Ss 
e borrowed and that I wi 
f at I will have to pa 
ie uk EON to the top of the ladder and you will like 
t ere; but if you are lifted up there b 
: i y somebody you 
babi _ ee tumbling back and you will get sieneaeiorae sad 
ged. lere are a great many of these i 
make restitution, and because Ge ae 
se they have not id i 
paid their debts 
ihe as ue a good many of these enemies of religion that will 
8 i‘ : ney have not been truly born again; that they have not 
en truly regenerated. It may be that i ; 
at it will take years for 
some of these men to pay their debts. They have bik runnin 
vy a pretty sood account, but that is not going to keep hee 
fa Christ. If their hearts are right and their purpose right, and 
sine mean to pay their bills, and they pay them just as oon as 
es can, that is just as acceptable to God as if they paid them 
: at a aha of these reformed men are hundreds of dol 
ars in debt, and they have not a pe ‘ 
penny to pay them with, thei 
creditors must wait. That ougl a Ge 
Bite. it to be your first ai 
those debts and ie i ee 
get out of it as quickly as | 
eat pate possible. I have great 
oe in those men that profess to be reclaimed, if they 4 to 
vot . If you can not get what you want, get what youcan. If 
a pon not get as much for your work as you think you ought to 
“i » get whatever you can. One of these men that had been re 
ee wanted to find work right off, and that was a very good sign 
: is conversion. But some of these men have not done anythin 
i years but drink liquor, and they are not adapted to hardly ae 
Oo aYy ’ 
Ai they are not fit for much at first. It is difficult to get them 
situations, and if we do succeed in getting them work they ought to 


602 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


take it, and thank God for it. If it isnot what you like, thank God that 
it issomething. Something ‘sa good deal better than nothing. There 
was one of these converted men in Chicago that could not get what 
he wanted to do, but he got a man that would board mim and give 
him twenty-five cents a week. He took up the offer and went to 
work. Twenty-five cents a week! Well, that wasn’t much, but he 
got his board, and that was a good deal. Pretty soon a business 
man heard of it, and he said: “ That is the man for me; that is just 
the man I want;” and he hired him and gave him four dollars a 
day. There is many a man that will help you up if you will show a 
disposition to help yourself. There is a man upon this platform 
who is going to speak to you that 1 admire very much, because he 
went to work for three dollars a week and boarded himself. You 
say that three dollars a week won’t pay vour board, but it will help, 
and it is a good deal better than nothisg. Nothing won’t if three 
dollars don’t. That is better than running up and down the street 
idle and getting into debt. If you do this and work faithfully for 
three dollars a week, it won’t be long before you have six dollars a 
week, and then you will get ten, and then twelve dollars a week. 
You want to get these employers always under an obligation to you. 
You must be such true men and be so helpful to your employers 
that they can not get along without you, and then you will work up, 
and your employer will increase your wages. Ifa man works in the 
interest of his employer, he will be sure to keep him and treat him 
well, but if he only works for money and don’t take any interest in 
his employer’s business, he will let him go at any time. They can get 
any quantity of such men. But if they get a man that takes an in- 
terest in his work, they can not spare him, for such men are scarce, 
Let me say to these reformed men that, if you will take my advice, 
you will get something todo. If you can not earn more than a 
dollar a week, earn that. That is better than nothing, and you can 
pray to God for more. Here is another: ‘Would you advise one 
that has been converted to go to lecturing at once, or wait?” It is 
a good thing to confess. We read in the Scriptures: “Go home 
and tell your friends what the Lord God has done for you.” “ Let 
the redeemed of the Lord say 30.” “ Would you advise them to go 
lecturing?” That is the mistake a great many make. A great 
many men have the idea that they can make their Christianity pay. 
They think they are going to make their living by lecturing. 
We have enough of that. We have been lectured to death in 


2A VERS. 


, thank God that 
nothing. There 
id not get what 
rd nim and give 
fer and went to 
n’t much, but he 
soon a business 
‘me; that is just 
iim four dollars a 
f you will show a 
on this platform 
much, because he 
ed himself. You 
d, but it will help, 
ing won't if three 
1d down the street 
work faithfully for 
have six dollars a 
ve dollars a week. 
obligation to yeu. 
o your employers 
you will work up, 
a man works in the 
him and treat him 
ake any interest in 
ime. They can get 
hn that takes an in- 
ch men are scarce. 
ill take my advice, 
earn more than 4 
thing, and you can 
uld you advise one 
ce, or wait ?” It is 
‘tures: ‘Go home 
efor you.” “Let 
advise them to go 
y make. A great 
eir Christianity pay: 
iving by lecturing. 
ctured to death in 


PRACTICAL ADDRESS TO REFORMEL MEN. 603 


this country, and we can get along without any more. Don’t try 
to get your living by your brains and your wits; we haven’t any 
too much, the greatest of us. Work like a man, and then 
you will have more influence than if you are trying to lecture 
for money. I do not think all men are called to lecture, by a good 
deal. I say to you, don’t give your whole time to the Lord’s 
work unless you are forced into it by the Spirit of God. If 
Ged sends you, you will succeed, and you won't be all the time 
complaining and running after this man and that man for his en 
dorsement, and trying to get his name and his influence. Earn your 
own money. These are hard times, I know, and it is hard co get 
work, but spring has come, and if you can not get work in the city, 
strike out into the country. A great many farmers want men now. 
It is not degrading to go out and hoe and shovel in the field. It is 
noble, I think. JI do not believe there is a man in this city that 
really wants work but can get it in the country. If you haven't 
money to ride, walk out. You can foot it on a good, pleasant day 
like this, ten or fifteen miles a day. Besides, you will have a better 
chance walking than if you passed the farmers’ places on a train. 
If you are looking for work do not beg. Ask for something to do. 
If you are offered anything without work do not take it. They will 
give you some wood to saw or some work to do that will pay for 
what you get. Your meals will taste a good deal sweeter when you 
have earned them by the sweat of your brow. There was one good 
thing about that prodigal, he would not beg, and he would not 
steal. He would not even steal the swine’s food. That is the kind 
of men we want now. If you will not beg or steal, men will respect 
and help you. What we want to-day is true men; and if people 
find that you are a true man, they will make room for you. It may 
be a hard chance to get the first footing, but if you hold right on, 
God will open a way for you, and, if need be, send down a legion of 
angels to help you. ‘What would you do with a man that would 
not work?” There is the same thing. I think Paul has it right. 
If a man will not work, he shall not eat. I think we are doing 
these men a great injury if we help them when they won't work. 
Some of these men have professed; but there is a difference be- 
tween conversion and being born of God—-being regenerated. We 
are living ‘n days of sham—and they see others come out, and that 
they are getting fed, and getting new clothes, and they say: ‘These 
men are making a good thing out of it; I guess I'll reform too.” 


° 
Ns ee tec sc 
< 
id Ser Ae == 


604 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


But it is easy to tell thu. They are a blight in the hollow; they 
are not whole in the root. And if they will not work, that is a 
pretty good sign that they have not been born of God. When I 
was President of the Young Men’s Christian Association of Chicago 
we used to have those men coming in all the time. They would 
tell about their sufferings and how they had no work and wanted 
help. At last I got two or three hundred cords of wood and put it 
in a vacant lot, and got some saws and sawbucks, and kept them 
out of sight. A man would come and ask forhelp. ‘Why don’t 
you work?” “Ican’t get any.” ‘ Would you do it if you could 
get any?” “Qh, yes, anything.” ‘Would you really work in the 
street?” “Yes.” “Would you saw wood?” “Yes.” “All 
right ;” and then we would bring out the saw and sawbuck and 
send them out, but we would have a boy to watch and see that they 
did not steal the saw. Then the fellow would say: “I will go 
home and tell my wife I have got some work;” and that would be 
the last we would see of him. Out of the whole winter I never got 
more than three or four cords of wood sawed. We heard from cur 
friend, Dr. Tyng, last week, that we want a good deal of mother in 
this work. Yes; and we want some father, too. If you are always 
showering money on these men, and giving them clothing and rai- 
ment, they will live in idleness, and not only ruin themselves, but 
their children. It is not charity at all to help them when they will 
not work. Ifa man will not work, let him starve. They never die. 
I never heard of them really starving to death. You may say that 
it is harsh, but we need a little of that now. If the coat does not 
suit, don’t put it on; and if it does, put it right on and button it 
up close around you. It says in the fifteenth chapter of Proverbs: 
“The way of the slothful man is hedged with thorns.” I never 
knew them to get out till they worked their way out. I have been 
educated in this school. I had charge of the relief in Chicago for a 
number of years, and I was brought into contact with these lazy 
men, and I say there is no hope of a man that will not work. Talk 
about their conversion, it is only just put on to get a little money 
out of you without work. They are willing to do anything to 
get on, but they will not work; and these men are the ones we 
have so much difficulty with in these cities. There was a man I 
knew in Chicago; he did not drink, but he was always poor. 
What kept him down I could not tell. He had five beautiful 
children. I do not believe his furniture was worth five dollars, 


AYERS. 


e hollow; they 
work, that is a 
God. Whenl 
tion of Chicago 
.. They would 
yrk and wanted 
vood and put it 
and kept them 
», “Why don’t 
it if you could 
ally work in the 
“Yes.” “All 
1d sawbuck and 
nd see that they 
say: “I will go 
d that would be 
inter I never got 
e heard from cur 
leal of mother in 
f you are always 
clothing and rai- 
1 themselves, but 
when they will 
They never die. 
You may say that 
he coat does not 
on and button it 
bter of Proverbs: 
horns.” I never 
but. I have been 
f in Chicago for a 
t with these lazy 
not work. Talk 
ret a little money 
do anything to 
are the ones we 
here was a man I 
was always poor. 
ad five beautiful 
orth five dollars, 


PRACTICAL ADDRESS TO REFORMED MEN. 605 


and he had no beds. One cold day in November he came to see 
me. He said the landlord had put his family out on the prairie. 
I said: “McDonald, you are a mystery to me; I have known you 
for years; what do you do with your money? I begin to think, 
McDonald, you are lazy.” “I think you hit it there,” he said. 
“Well, you must go,” I said. “I pity your wife and children, but 
I am not going to take care of a lazy man all winter.” “ That’s 
pretty hard,” he said. “TI know it is,” I said, “ but I can not help 
it.” That was in the morning. About five o’clock in the afternoon 
he came back. He knew I wouldn’t let those children stay out all 
night ; he knew he had me. He asked for a place for his children 
to sleep. I said: “ What have you been doing all day?” He used 
a great many big words, and said he had been studying the philoso- 
phy of pauperism. There he is now, I suppose, starving his family 
because he will not work. We have got to take care of these chil- 
dren ; but these men, if they will not work, must starve. Some of 
you ladies think you are doing God's service by giving them money, 
but you are really injuring them. You are injuring them and their 
children, for as long as they can get along they will go on that way 
without work. It says in Ecclesiastes, tenth chapter and eighteenth 
verse: “ By much slothfulness the building decayeth.” You see 
many young men in Boston rotten, decayed from idleness. You 
can not keep the body healthy without work. ‘ By muc.. slothful- 
ness the building decayeth, and through idleness of the hands the 
house droppeth through.” If you want to keep the body in a good 
healthy state you have got to work. We are commanded to earn 
our bread by the sweat of our brows. Get something to do. If it 
is for fifteen hours a day, all the better, for while you are at work 
Satan does not have so much chance to tempt you. It is these 
men that are out of work that Satan tempts. 

“Do you think it best for a reformed man to give up tobacco?” 
Yes; I would let that go with the whisky; it is part of the old 
nature. “Have you any passage of Scripture against this?” I 
think it is clearly taught that these bodies are the temples for the 
Holy Ghost, and we ought to be careful to keep them pure. I do 
not think it is becoming for a son of the Most High to be using 
that filthy weed. I don’t know how it is, for I never used it, but 1 
have an ‘idea that it whets up the appetite for strong drink. It be- 
longs to the old creation. How is it with men who have no work 
using tobacco? I don’t see how they can afford it—put it on that 


606 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


ground. I do not think it keeps the body in a healthy state. | 
think we ought to be very careful about the body because it is so 
identified with the soul. “Iam so poor that I can not afford to go 
to church; what shall I do?” Give up your tobacco. There are 
plenty of churches in this city that are perfectly free. You are wel- 
comed, you are invited, you are urged to come, and there is not a 
minister in this town but would like to see his church filled. There 
may be some fashionable churches that are crowded without you, 
where you would not receive so warm a welcome as at others. If 
you can not afford to pay a pew rent, tell them so, and you will find 
scores of churches in this city of Boston that will be glad to wel- 
come you. I hope you reformed men will find homes in churches 
soon, where the godly people will gather around you. You will 
find many of the very best friends in these churches, and they will 
be more than glad to have you come. Let all these reformed men 
find some church at once, and in that way others will be of great 
good to you and you to them. 

“Tf a man has fallen twice, shall we give him up?” The Lord 
answers that question when He says: “Tell Peter to forgive his 
brother, not only seven times, but seventy times seven.” Suppose 
a man has tumbled once or twice, you aint going to cast him off, 
are you? Ifa man should, in an unguarded moment, fall, would 
you say that he had not been reclaimed? How many of us have 
fallen? Here is a man with a saiserable, wretched temper, and, in 
an unguarded moment, he says some foolish thing; isn’t he just as 
bad as this man who drinks again? Suppose these men that have 
been slaves to Satan twenty or thirty years should be tripped up 
by Satan, would you give them up and say there was no hope? 
How many of us have been troubled with besetting sins after our 
conversion? If Satan gets one of those men down, instead of 
publishing it to the world, in the name of God let us help him up. 
If he tumbles a second time, go after him; if he tumbles a third 
time, go after him; and keep going after him as often as he falls. 
Why, Dr. Newman Hall’s f ther, I don’t know how many times he 
fell; he kept falling and falling, and rising and rising; and at last 
he passed through the pearly gates shouting: “Glory to the Lamb!” 
He got victory at last. And so if these young converts fall, let us 
not go out and publish it to the world, but take them off and talk 
with them alone, and tell them we sympathize with them. They 
are apt to get discouraged and say: “There is no hope for 


AYERS. 


althy state. I 
yecause it is so 
10t afford to go 
co. There are 
You are wel- 
there is not a 
h filled. There 
»d without you, 
sat others. If 
nd you will find 
be glad to wel- 
mes in churches 
you. You will 
es, and they will 
se reformed men 
will be of great 


ip?” The Lord 
er to forgive his 
seven.” Suppose 
r to cast him off, 
bment, fall, would 
many of us have 
d temper, and, in 
- isn’t he just as 
fe men that have 
ld be tripped up 
re was no hope? 
ing sins after our 
down, instead of 
tt us help him up. 
e tumbles a third 
often as he falls. 
bw many times he 
sing; and at last 
to the Lamb!” 
onverts fall, let us 
them off and talk 
ith them. They 
is no hope fot 


PRACTICAL ADDRESS TO REFORMED MEN, 607 


me; I have turned my back upon Christ; I have been betrayed 
into my old sin, and I can not stand.” This question is answered 
in Paul's letter to the Galatians. Some of these Galatian Christians 
had thorns. A great many people are watching ; that is their busi- 
ness to watch; they have set themselves against this work. All 
the while we have been working for thirteen weeks, some people in 
Boston have been working against us; they have been prophesying 
against us all the time, and they must find something against the 
work to justify themselves. Let them do it; the world has been 
doing that for eighteen hundred years, and will keep on doing it as 
long as there is a church on earth. These men have set themselves 
against God’s work, and they are finding flaws in it to justify 
their own acts. If they see a man fall, they say: “I told you so; 
ha, ha!” and they rejoice and are glad. “ Brethren, if a man be 
overtaken in a fault.” “Overtaken!” There is the poor man 
running away from Satan and Satan is after him; he is not stopping 
by the way and loitering, but the tempter has overtaken him and 
has got him down. Ye which are spiritual, would you go and jump 
on to him and keep him down, and say: “ You are a pretty Chris- 
tian. You profess to be a Christian. You have done that.” 
“Ves.” Did Paul tell you to do that? Is that the spirit of Christ ? 
Is that the spirit of our Master? Is that what the Lord will have 
us todo? “Ye which are spiritual, restore such a one in the spirit 
of meekness, considering thyself lest thou also be tempted.” Let 
him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall. I tell you, 
when I see a poor man that has fallen I can not help but feel sorry 
for him; my heart goes out to him, for I don’t know but I may be 
the next. And if a man gets strong in his own strength and con- 
ceited, and thinks because he has been a professed Christian and done 
so much good, there is no danger of his falling, it will not be long 
before he is down. He may not fall from strong drink, but some 
sin as bad in the sight of God; and if a man has fallen, let us go 
and help him, and lift him up and restore him. 

There is one more thing I want to call your attention to, and 
that is, after a man has been in the devil’s service a long time he 
gets into the habit of not only drinking and swearing, but he gets 
into the habit of lying, and sometimes that old sin comes back upon 
them, and before they know it they are using deception. I want to 
say to you men that have become Christians, if you want to get on, 
be perfectly truthful. I have noticed that some men because they 


De cons te AB sittin Tone 


ee es 


608 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYVE WS. 


have given up drink think that that is all they have got todo; 
they use deception and go on lying. You can not prosper if you 
attempt that. It says in the sixth chapter of Proverbs and the 
sixteenth verse: 

“These six things doth the Lord hate; yea, seven are an abomi- 
nation unto him.” 

“A proud look, a lying tongue.” How they go together! As 
soon as a man gets puffed up and conceited you may look for his 
fall. You hear men praying to God to keep them humble. Let 
us pray to God to make us humble first; that is what we want. 
Pride always goes before a fall, and if a man gets proud he will 
fall. One of the greatest dangers you men will have will be spiritual 
pride. Some of these good men and good women may be a 
snare to you; they may say, when a young convert has spoken: 
“That is a real good speech you made;” the devil will tell you 
that quick enough. That is not going to help them; that is going 
to lift them up and fill them full of pride. Spiritual pride is one 
of the worst enemies these young converts have. Be careful about 
that terrible enemy, and be careful, Christian people, how you flat- 
ter these young converts. Pray God to keep them humble, and 
don’t you go and stuff them full of vanity, and tell them they have 
made a good speech. Life is too short for us to be flattering one 
another. 

Lying is just as bad as drinking. Don’t think that because you 
have given up drinking, that yow can go om lying. God hates it. 
He speaks about lying lips in the twelfth chapter of Proverbs 
and the twenty-second verse : 

“ Lying lips are an abomination to the Lord; but they that deal 
truly are his delight.” 

What we want is to be real. Let us not appear to be more than 
we are. Don’t let us put on any cant, any assumed humility, but 
let us be real; that is the deligiit of God. ‘od wants us tc be real 
men and women, and if we profess to be what we are not, God 
knows al! about us. God hates a sham. 

“A proud lock, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent 
blood. 

“A heart that deviseth wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in 
running to mischief. 

“ A false witness that speaketh lies, and him that soweth discord 
among brethren.” 


VELS. 


ve got to do; 
prosper if you 
verbs and the 


, are an abomi- 


together ! As 
nay look for his 

. humble. Let 
what we want. 

; proud he will 
will be spiritual 
smen may be a 
ert has spoken: 
svil will tell you 
m; that is going 
tual pride is one 
Be careful about 
ple, how you flat- 
hem humble, and 
11 them they have 
be flattering one 


that because you 
ng. God hates it. 
ppter of Proverbs 
but they that deal 
rto be more than 
med humility, but 
yants us to be real 
we are not, God 
hat shed innocent 


eet that be swift in 


hat soweth discord 


LXX. 


JESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST. 


MATTHEW iii. 13: “ Then cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John, to be 
baptized of him.” 


LEEING from the murderous Herod, Joseph and Mary bore 

the Infant Redeemer out of their own country into Egypt. 

On hearing of the death of the king, they return to Nazareth, 
where Jesus remained for thirty years. 

I once read of the founder of the Russian Empire going down to 
a Dutch seaport as a stranger, in disguise, that he might learn how 
to build ships; that he might go back and teach it to his own sub- 
jects. People have wondered at that; but this is a greater wonder, 
that the Prince of Glory should come down here and learn the car- 
penter’s trade. He was not only the son of a carpenter, but He 
was a carpenter Himself. His father was a carpenter, and He was 
acarpenter too, for we read that they brought it up against Him 
that He was a carpenter. We read: 

“ And when he was come into his own country, he taught them 
in their synagogue, insomuch that they were astonished, and said: 
Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works? 

“Ts not this the carpenter’s son?” 

And right here is one lesson that we ought to learn, and that is, 
when Christ was here He was an industrious man, and I have often 
said on this platform that I never knew yet a lazy man to be con- 
verted. If he was, he soon gave up his laziness. I tell you, laziness 
does not belong to Christ’s kingdom. I don’t believe a man would 
have a lazy hair in his head if he was converted to the Lord Jesus 
Christ. If a man has really been born of the Spirit of Christ, he 
isn’t lazy; he wants to find something to do, and any manual labor 
is not degrading; it is honorable. And if our Master, who was the 
Prince of Peace, and the King of Glory, could leave heave and 
(609) 


610 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


come down here an work as a village carpenter, don’t let us think 
that manual labur 1s beneath our notice. Let us be willing to go 
out and work. If we can’t find what we want, let us do what we 
can. If we can earn only twenty-five cents a day let us earn that 
rather than do nothing. A good many men are always waiting for 
something to turn up, instead of going out and turning up some- 
thing—looking for it and finding it. Let me say to the young con. 
verts right here, if you want to get power and strength from God, 
you have got to find something to do, something to occupy your 
minds. A great many people are all the time in darkness and in 
trouble about spiritual matters, because they haven’t got anything 
to do spiritually. Now, we not only want something to occupy our 
hands, but our minds. But that is not the point of the sermon 
this morning. I want to go back to these two wonderful men. The 
thirty years have rolled away, and it is now time that this wonder- 
ful Messiah should come unto the nation. The Scripture has been 
fulfilled, and the first sound we hear of His coming is that strange 
voice crying in the wilderness. Those thirty years that have just 
expired were nothing to the nation. Undoubtedly, these rumors 
about those two children that created a great sensation at the time, 
had died out. The story of the shepherds on the plains of Bethle- 
hem had gone out of their recollection—faded away. The story 
of this Child being brought into the temple, and that old man and 
that old woman coming in there just at the time—that wonderful 
scene had faded away. Many that were there at the Temple at the 
time had gone. Zacharias and Elizabeth had passed away, and the 
Roman Emperor had also died, after sending out this decree—that 
the country should be taxed. Herod was also dead. A great 
change had taken place in thirty years. You just carry your minds 
back through thirty years, agd see how many that stood with you 
thirty years ago, with whom you were acquainted, have gone, and 
are now sleeping in their graves. It the Holy Ghost hadn’t come 
after Christ went to heaven, the story of His death and His resur- 
rection would have been forgotten as soon as His birth and His 
life. No doubt about that. It is that which has kept the memory 
of Christ in the world, and His name so fresh and fragrant. The 
Holy Ghost has come down here to keep in our minds the glory 
and beauty of Christ. Now, we find His forerunner comes. Mat- 
thew says: “In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the 
wilderness”” Mark says: “The voice of one crying in the wilder- 


2A VERS. 


n't let us think 
be willing to go 
t us do what we 
‘Jet us earn that 
lways waiting for 
urning up some- 
o the young con- 
rength from God, 
x to occupy your 
, darkness and in 
en't got anything 
ing to occupy Our 
int of the sermon 
nderful men. The 
that this wonder- 
Scripture has been 
ing is that strange 
sars that have just 
tedly, these rumors 
sysation at the time, 
he plains of Bethle- 
away. The story 
d that old man and 
me—that wonderful 
At the Temple at the 
assed away; and the 
t this decree—that 
Iso dead. A great 
ust carry your minds 
hat stood with you 
ted, have gone, and 
Ghost hadn't come 
eath and His resut- 
His birth and His 
as kept the memory 
and fragrant. The 
bur minds the glory 
nner comes. Mat- 
ist, preaching in the 
rying in the wilder- 


FESUS AND FYOHN THE BAPTIS.. 61r 


ness.” Luke says: “ The word of God came unto John the son of 
Zacharias in the wilderness.” And John’s account is: “ There was 
a man sent from God, whose name was John.” The last prophet 
had closed up His prophecy by saying that John should come be- 
fore the Messiah; that he should be the herald who should come to 
introduce Him. Now, these four evangelists all take up their pens, 
and all notice it. You know if you let any four men write up any 
one thing, they will not all write about it alike. Why, just the last 
year, when men went to the Centennial, not any four of them wrote 
about it alike. Let a man come in here and let any four of us look 
at him—one will get a side view of him, one a front view, and so 
on, and not any of the four will see him alike. So these evangelists 
wrote about John; but not one of the four used the same language. 
You know it was said he was to be like Elijah. Well, he looked 
like him, dressed like him, and his preaching was like him. He 
came suddenly, unexpectedly, upon the world, and it was not long 
before his voice rang clear through the whole nation, and the whole 
nation was stirred. 

He stood between the two dispensations. He was the last 
prophet the new dispensation was to have. They had had some 
mighty prophets—wonderful men; but this man was to be the last 
one. Now we find this man standing there, as it were, between 
these two dispensations, and when he first commenced to preach, 
it was very much like Elijah’s. He was a reformer. “Repent! 
Repent !” that was his cry. “Reform! Reform!” that was his 
cry. But if he had stopped there his reform would have died out 
with him. A great many reformations die out with the reformers 
because they cry “ Repent! Repent! Reform! Reform!” but they 
do not get any further than that. But, thank God, John had 
something else to tell them. He didn’t stop at “Repent! Re- 
pent!” but he kept telling them there was One coming mightier 
than he himself. That’s the way to preach the Gospel now. We ' 
are to preach not only that Christ has come, and gone back to 
heaven, but is coming back again. That though He died He is 
going to return. Undoubtedly that was what thrilled the nation. 
Talk about sensation. There was never a nation moved as that 
one nation was moved by John the Baptist. Now, people, if they 
want to stir a town or city, they want to influence the leading 
men of the city to stand around them, help them, and pray for 
them. But here stood this man preaching in the wilderness without 


en «< — 
ecitiinendenees atte wea . 


ee 
seb neeeeeenteipaineniamnesie 


612 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


any influence of a committee. He didn’t have Mr. Sankey to sing 
for him to draw the people. No, he stood there on the banks of 
the Jordan alone preaching the glorious tidings that the Messiah 
was coming after him, and he probably was preaching this to the 
lowest beggar in the land. There he was in the wilderness dressed 
like his predecessor, Elijah. There he was preaching in the wilder- 
ness, and just bear in mind it wasn’t any milk and water preaching, 
He gave the message just as God gave it tohim. I suppose if he 
had had some of the present Christians in Boston there they would 
have said: “ Don’t be so bold; be mild about it. You know you 
must use a little moderation, don’t you, about this? Come, if you 
talk against these Pharisees they will cut your head off.” But that 
didn’t enter his mind. It wasn’t what they wanted. It was what 
God gave him to deliver; and if any man just takes the message and 
believes it as God gives it to him, I tell you God will stand by him. 
He is going to succeed, mind that. He may be unsuccessful at 
first, his labor may seem to be unprofitable for a time and people 
may turn away, but the time will come when his words will cut deep 
down into their hearts and lead them to salvation. Then the people 
began to tremble. They didn’t have any newspapers then to print 
the sermons; they didn’t have any telegraph wires to flash it over 
the country; but one man just took it up and passed it to the next, 
and so on, and very soon it was over the whole country. “ There 
he is,” they said; ‘dressed just like Elijah, with his leathern girdle 
and his raiment of camel’s hair.” He comes out about nine o’clock 
in the morning, and there he stands on the banks of the Jordan, 
and there he speaks. Day after day he is seen there, and his cry is: 
“Repent! Repent!” And that was his cry. Well, it is not long 
before every town and every city and every village has heard of this 
wonder. He preached the law just as it was given Him, and asa 
specimen of his preaching just read this. See how bold he was: 

“Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized 
of him, O generation of vipers!” 

O generation of vipers. Pretty hard talk, wasn’t it? I don't 
know as you could get many people into this Tabernacle by such 
talk as that. But he knew what he was doing. He knew they 
hated his Master. He knew that away down in their hearts they 
were at enmity with God. Some men preach now that men are 
born in the grace of God, and that therefore they don’t need to re. 
ceive any grace from on high; that everybody is going to be saved 


PRAYERS. 


‘Ir. Sankey to sing 
e on the banks of 
; that the Messiah 
saching this to the 
. wilderness dressed 
ching in the wilder- 
ad water preaching, 
m. I suppose if he 
yn there they would 
it. You know you 
this? Come, if you 
head off” But that 
anted. It was what 
akes the message and 
5d will stand by him. 
y be unsuccessful at 
or a time and people 
is words will cut deep 
ion. Then the peop! 
yspapers then to print 
wires to flash it over 
passed it to the next, 
ole country. “ There 
ith his leathern girdle 
out about nine o'clock 
banks of the Jordan, 
there, and his cry is: 
Well, it is not long 
llage has heard of this 
s given Him, and as a 
how bold he was: 
e forth to be baptized 


, wasn’t it? I don't 
Lis Tabernacle by such 
bing. He knew they 


YESUS AND JOHN THE BAPTIST. 6 
. 13 


and God isn’t goin 
: g to send a man . 
sie 8 read a little further and see schon oti iA ie ta 
generation of vipe nites 
wrath to come? pers, who hath warned you to flee from the 
“ Bring forth therefore frui 
Bey ruits worthy of repe 
to y of repenta . 
eas teeta cate dil have Abiahantin dis rie i 
’ od isa ; for 1 say 
Abraham.” e of these stones to raise up children ‘ats 
He knew the men 
pretty well; I don’t k 
nodes years; but he had found sak She hie peers ct 
saahiediy Sid ee pretty well. And AS aoe 
: e belong to the seed of e un- 
ae we e Abraham ; we don’t solar geod Be aii spe 
eet w from Moses, and we obey that. Let th erted; we've 
hanes be converted. It isn’t for us.” ; these poor dogs 
Pcs dase s just the doctrine now. “ We don’t need 
ake Me yi was a first-rate reformer. Oh, yes; but iS ” hain 
acter Serer i : church regularly. It is for these sialic ri 
sacienouil ¢ in of preaching is not for us. Oh it’s all cane 
sphate fe hen oath And no doubt they would put u : oo 
rio eaa: —for the harlots and drunkards to go to ee sii 
ihe gb cy is not for us. It’s good enough for the ca ae 
Nitin ane o go. We are the seed of Abraham. We bel sili 
one ie are not such bad men. What do you me eae a 
be born a sy oe need to be born again. What do ie : rae 
On bidet or? We pay our debts. We are good men Ne to 
setae nce spirit. Eighteen hundred years have roll d val 
y nd human nature the same. 1 petheibe £ 
well. John knew them pretty 


“T say unto you th i 
at God is 
Scere sect able of these stones to raise up chil 
You needn’t flatt 
er yourselves that 
eople. ; : you are better th 
y ple. God can make children right out of these st ages tie 
em the seed of Abraham stones, and make 
“And now also th 
e axe is laid unto tl 
tree, the . ‘ 1e root of the tree; 
, therefore, which bringeth not forth good fruit is phd saw 
wn 


n in their hearts they 
ch now that men ar 
hey don't need to fe: 
y is going to be saved 


and cast into the fire. 


“And i 
the people asked him, saying: What shall we do then?” 


See; they had an inqui dag ut 
Jordan, y an inquiry-meeting right there on the banks of the 


x ae acme 
« 2 
aeeleeec ener re 


te 


ithe copa z 


- « 
+ —aeph 
a = ee ? ee nr 


. ellaiiaieialitiaiecieemaie ade aakemenietinemenmmenea=nenene ree enan tee 
sect we eesetare 
a 


SSS A he 


614 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


“ He answereth and saith unto them: He that hath two coats, let 
him impart to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him 
do likewise. 

“Then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him: 
Master, what shall we do? 

“And he said unto them: Exact no more than that which is ap- 
pointed you. 

“And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying: And what 
shall we do? And he said unto them: Do violence to no man, nei- 
ther accuse any falsely; and be content with your wages.” 

Now, that was his preaching up to the time that Christ came. As 
I said before, it was “Repent! repent! Reform! reform!” And 
you may tell these men they ought to do better; but if you don’t 
tell them how, you can’t save them. Now we find here, in this fif- 
teenth verse, that they were looking for something more: 

“And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in 
their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ or not; 

“John answered, saying unto them all: I, indeed, baptize you 
with water; but one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose 
shoes I am not worthy to unloose: he shall baptize you with the 
Holy Ghost and with fire: 

“Whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, 
and will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn 
with fire unquenchable. 

“ And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the 
people.” 

Now, what a chance there was for John to have let self come in. 
When people were wondering in their hearts if he was not the true 
Messiah, if he wasn’t Christ, he might have been tempted to come 
out and say he was more than himself—that he was Christ. But 
there is one thing about this man, he never preached up self. He 
was preparing the nation to receive the Lord of Glory. He had 
come just merely to introduce Him. He was nothing. Just asa 
man comes and introduces a friend to you, he barely introduces him 
and steps aside. He doesn’t put himself forward. So John intro- 
duces the Son of God, and then begins to fade away, and soon he 
was gone. He hadn’t come to introduce himself, but to preach 
Christ. And let me say right here, that is the very height of preach- 
ing. If we can only get our eyes off of self and get them fixed on 
Christ, if people would only stop thinking about their minister and 


RAYERS. 


ath two coats, let 
ith meat, let him 


d said unto him: 
that which is ap- 


aying: And what 

‘e to no man, necl- 

wages.” 

t Christ came. As 
! reform!” And 
- but if you don't 
.d here, in this fif- 
g more: 

| all men mused in 
or not; 

deed, baptize you 
e latchet of whose 
ptize you with the 


hly purge his floor, 
chaff he will burn 


sached he unto the 


re let self come in. 

he was not the true 

tempted to come 

e was Christ. But 

hched up self. He 
of Glory. He had 
othing. Just asa 
ely introduces him 
d. So John intro- 
away, and soon he 
self, but to preach 
y height of preach- 
get them fixed on 
their minister and 


9ESUS AND ¥OHN THE BAPTIST. 615 


look at God, then we could do what we wish to accomplish. Oh, 
I hate to hear people saying: “ Oh, what an eloquent sermon! Did 
you ever hear anything like it ?”-—talking about the preacher's clo- 
quence, and not about the sermon. Away with it! What we want 
to get at is our Master. When they begin to wonder who he is, he 
just comes right out and says: “I am not Jesus. I am only just 
one sent to introduce him. I have come for that purpose. I have 
not come to preach up myself, but him that is mighty to save.” 
And then we find that while his star was just at its height, while he 
was just about in the zenith of his glory, while people were flocking 
in from the towns and villages to hear him, the chief rulers of Jeru- 
salem sent down a deputation, the same as the Pope of Rome, to 
inquire what this religion meant. They appointed some influential 
men to find him out, and they said to him: ‘“ We have been sent 
by the chief priest of Jerusalem to find out who youare. Are you 
Christ?” And John told them no. “Well, who are you? Are 
you this man or that man?” “No.” “Are you this prophet or 
that prophet?” “No.” “Well, who are you?” Did he say: “I 
am Jesus?” No. ‘Merely Mr. Nobody; merely a voice crying 
in the wilderness.” What a message that was to send back to Je- 
rusalem! He was not trying to put himself forward. He was all 
the time trying to get out of self. In the nineteenth verse, first 
chapter of John, it says: 

“ And this is the record of John, when the Jews sent priests and 
Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Who art thou ? 

“ And he confessed and denied not; but confessed, Iam not the 
Christ. 

“And they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? And he 
saith, I am not. Art thou the prophet? And he answered, No. 

“Then said they unto him, Who art thou that we may give an 
answer to them that sent us. What sayest thou of thyself? 

“He said, Iam the voice of one crying in the wilderness, make 
straight the way of the Lord, as said the prophet Esaias. 

“ And they which were sent were of the Pharisces. 

“ And they asked him, and said unto him, Why baptizest thou, 
then, if thou be not Christ, nor Elias, neither that prophet ? 

“John answered them, saying, I baptize with water; but there 
standeth one among you whom ye know not; 

“He it is who, coming after me, is preferred before me, whose 
shoe's latchet I am unworthy to unloose. 


etait 
Erie 


OSS = <= ase : 
Se a eng ee HLeadinee st 
Sec ences Sree aac = 


= ot 
=a axe 
Sain he es in aman asi 


eget SH 


— ee 


Sosa Se: 


SS SS. 


616 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


“These things were done in Bethabara, beyond Jordan, where 
John was baptizing.” 

Now, this was the day, I say, when John was at the very zenith 
of his glory; but see how noble he stood. He didn’t take any 
honor or glory to himself, and in two different places he declared 
that he knew not this Stranger that he was the herald of—his Mes- 
siah. Some are trying to make out that this was all planned 
by John and Jesus, that he should say he didn’t know Him. 
But he declares in two places that he didn’t know Him. They 
were brought up in two extremes of the country—one in the north- 
ern part of it and the other in the southern part of it ; one was born 
at Nazareth and the other at Hebron. Talk about eloquence! 
John was one of the most eloquent men, I suppose, that ever lived. 
He was the herald of God, and when the nation was in a terrible 
state of excitement, and the chief priests of Jerusalem, and even the 
king himself, went to hear him. There he stood on the banks of 
the Jordan. I can see the men and women on both sides of the 
river, little children, mothers with babes in their arms, all intensely 
excited, all leaning forward to catch what he says. ‘“ Now,” he 
says, “if you believe what I say, that if you have broken the law 
given at Sinai you have sinned, and to be forgiven you must repent 
and come down into this Jordan, and I will baptize you in the name 
of the God of Hebron.” Anc they go im by scores and hundreds, 
and there he baptized them, and as he stood there baptizing I can 
imagine about twenty thousand people hanging upon his lips. There 
was a man came down through the crowd. I can imagine that John 
‘was a man who looked as though he was more like a mountain 
eagle, but his wings seemed to droop; that eye that had been so 
keen and so severe on the Israelites when he called them a genera- 
tion of vipers; his face fell, and he shook his head as this Stranger 
came. I suppose as He came walking along toward John, God re- 
vealed it to him: “ This is my Son; this is the Saviour of the World; 
this is the Prince of Peace.” And when John saw Him he quailed 
before Him, and he said: “I have need to be baptized of thee.” 
What excitement! How it must have thrilled the audience as John 
drew back and said: “I have need to be baptized of thee.” John 
knew Him. John recognized Him. He knew He was the promised 
One of the law. John said: ‘I have need to be baptized of thee, 
and comest thou to me?” But Jesus said: “ Suffer it to be so 
now that the law may be fulfilled.” Now, what excitement as these 


PRAYERS. 


ynd Jordan, where 


at the very zenith 
[e didn’t take any 
places he declared 
rerald of—his Mes- 
ic was all planned 
didn’t know Him. 
know Him. They 
—one in the north- 
of it ; one was born 
- about eloquence! 
ose, that ever lived. 
yn was in a terrible 
salem, and even the 
od on the banks of 
n both sides of the 
'¢ arms, all intensely 
» says. “Now,” he 
ave broken the law 
ven you must repent 
tize you in the name 
cores and hundreds, 
ere baptizing I can 
upon his lips. There 
n imagine that John 
ore like a mountain 
ve that had been so 
alled them a genera- 
head as this Stranger 
oward John, God re- 
aviour of the World; 
saw Him he quailed 
be baptized of thee.” 
the audience as John 
zed of thee.” John 
e was the promised 
be baptized of thee, 
“Suffer it to be so 
excitement as these 


FESUS AND FOHN THE BAPTIST, 617 


two men went down in the river together. Oh, if Jordan could speak, 
it could tell some wonderful stories. Wonderful scenes had taken 
place there. Naaman had gone into that river and washed, and 
come forth clean. Elijah going up with his mantle struck the water 
and went over dry-shod, as also did Elisha after Elijah had ascended. 
But a more wonderful scene was taking place in Jordan than ever 
took place before. Our Lord was going down in Jordan to be bap- 
tized, and He was going to come up on resurrection ground. So 
He goes down with John the Baptist, and the moment He was 
baptized and came up out of the water, the heavens were opened 
unto Him, and the Spirit of God descended upon Him like a dove, 
and lighted upon Him. Heaven witnessed the scene. God the 
Father spoke then. He broke the silence of ages. The God of the 
Old Testament was the Christ of the New. And he heard a voice 
from heaven saying: “ This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased.” Some one says that that was the first time that God 
could look down on earth since Adam fell, and say that He was 
well pleased. In Hebrews, tenth chapter, seventh verse, it says: 

“Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do 
thy will, O God.” 

He was the Son that was born above. He hadn’t broken the 
law. He had no need to go down there. He went for us, and 
when He came up out of the water a voice came out of heaven: 
“This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.” Now, some 
tell us they see nothing supernatural about Christ. As I tried to 
show last Sunday morning, everything that took place from His 
birth right along up was supernatural. Just look at it. The heav- 
ens opened and the Holy Ghost descended upon Him. The Spirit 
of the Lord came down on Him, and God owns Him, recognizes Him. 

Now, another thought I want to call your attention to. John’s 
preaching changed, but he was not like a good many men nowa- 
days, who want to reform the world without Christ, who set a good 
example, and tell men to sign pledges, and to do this or that, and 
trust in their own strength. The moment he got his eye on Christ, 
he had one text: “ Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the 
sins of the world.” That's how you are going to get rid of your 
sins. Says he: “I bear record that this is the Son of God.” 
And he told his disciples: “ Now, you follow Him. Go with Him.” 
And one afternoon as he sat there with his disciples, he said: “ Be- 
hold the Lamb of God,” and they left him to follow Him—two of 


618 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


his own disciples. I tell you that’s something you don’t like to do-- 
to have your friends leave you; to preach them away—your own 
congregation. But now this man begins to ask his disciples to leave 
him. “ Why,” said he, “I tell you I am not worthy to just unloose 
His shoes. He is more worthy than I am. Follow Him.” He 
began to preach up Christ. ‘ He must increase ; I must decrease.” 
Would to God we had ten thousand such preachers in America to. 
day. ‘He must increase, but I must decrease. If I am not lifted 
up, I will hold up his Gospel.” But the trouble is, we want to lift up 
ourselves. We want to lift up this creed, this party, this doctrine. Oh, 
may God sweep it away, and help us to lift up the Gospel of Christ. 
That’s what this world wants, and John knew it. So he cried: 
“ Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sins of the world.” 
Some of his disciples came to him one day, and said: “ You know 
that man you baptized there over in Jordan? More men are com- 
ing to Him than are to you.” That was jealousy—old envy rank- 
ling in those men’s bosoms. But what did he say? “i told you 
that I wasn't he. Why, he must increase and I must decrease. 
That’s right. I would rather see the crowd flocking to hear him.” 
O, that we had more such men—more of such feeling, that we might 
be just nothing, and Christ everything! And then John, I think, 
was terribly abused by some one. He was cast into prison, and he 
sent two of his disciples to inquire of Christ if He was the true 
Messiah, or should he look for another. I don’t know, but I have 
an idea that he wanted his disciples to leave him and go over to 
Jesus. So he called two of his most influential disciples, and told 
them: “ Now, you go and ask Him if He is the true Messiah.” I 
can’t believe in his faith wavering; but if he was wavering, he took 
the best way, and sent these men to ask our Saviour. I see his 
deputation arrive, and when He got through preaching, these disci- 
ples come upand say: ‘“ Our master has sent us to ask if you are 
the true Messiah ; and shall he look for another?” 

Jesus goes on healing the sick, causing the lame to leap, giving 
sight to the blind, inaking the deaf to hear, and after He had gone 
on performing these miracles, says He: “ You go back and tell your 
master what you have seen and what you have heard. Go back and 
tell John that the blind see; that the deaf hear; that the lame walk, 
and that the poor have the Gospel preached to them.”” When John 
heard that in prison, that settled all his doubts. His disciples be- 
lieved, and the poor had the Gospel preached to them. That was 


2A VERS. 


on’t like to do-- 
way—your own 
disciples to leave 
y to just unloose 
low Him.” He 
must decrease.” 
rs in America to- 
f I am not lifted 
we want to lift up 
his doctrine. Oh, 
. Gospel of Christ. 
it. So he cried: 
ins of the world.” 
aid: ‘“ You know 
[ore men are com- 
y—old envy rank- 
say? “i told you 
J must decrease. 
king to hear him.” 
Jing, that we might 
hen John, I think, 
into prison, and he 
f He was the true 
t know, but I have 
im and go over to 
1 disciples, and told 
> true Messiah.” I 
. wavering, he took 
Saviour. I see his 
aching, these disci- 
s to ask if you are 
>” 
hme to leap, giving 
after He had gone 
b back and tell your 
ard. Go back and 
that the lame walk, 
hem.” When John 
His disciples be- 
o them. That was 


YESUS AND YOHN THE BAPTIST 6 
19 


the test, < ’s disci 
st, and John’s disciples one after another left him 


we find him thrown into prison And now 


Seen ; rson There he is in pris ait} ‘ 
mpsintd time. Just bern mind God ad sent hin, His work va 
Shabaiiece Ape come to announce the Saviour—only for 
rather harsh; but tl ae scuba, of John was rather hard 
; ne greatest tribute ever paid ; ie 
paid by Jesus to John. paid to any man, was 
6c 
ae at ge Rai for to see? A man clothed in soft rai- 
ER se . He me so clothing are in kings’ houses. 
he more than a sae sect A prophet h Yea, Tsay unto 
‘For this is he of whom it is written: 
ger haa cel face, which shall tue fe ae Sree 
ri ‘ - ee. 
ans inc rae ane Dare them that are born of women 
standing he that is least in the Reese el Baptist ; notwith 
he.” S leaven is greater than 
There was none greater than this s 
that Jo i : same John. Our Saviour k 
ie oe ae He knew he was soon to die, ae Boe 
soeaata then tie fe) i that they would soon be together in 
ENE 7 could talk it over; that John must stile out of 
teas eneciiiha os of Glory must be the central object. John and 
nike aeeen e ue and moon in comparison with the sat 
pla lhe Sebo He the stars in comparison with have seve 
greater. Moses was ae ee like John. None born of woman was 
Hee cieive gueuiaid ri be ty prophet. Elijah was the son of thun- 
were not to be com cit prophet, and so was Elisha, But they 
sight of himself eae with John. What acharacter! He lost 
Fecal thie Bien as y. Christ was uppermost; Christ was the all. 
=P ak oi ie beheaded outside of the promised land 
The first and last a A ict eeue near where Moses was uanied: 
pethsn: andy sed are ret of that nation were buried near iis 
their Bowles b ie es ay outside of the promised land; but 
most grand th m hah be resurrected, and they will be the 
would give ws the titer et Ske salt dade Oh, that God 
sisratina amibenees ts amine exalt God, forget 


4 


pisces, einai » 


eerie ce 
sani 
a 


LXXI. 


A NOTABLE MIRACLE. 


ACTS ix. 11: “Saul of Tarsus; for, behold, he prayeth.” 


HAVE selected for our subject the conversion of Saul. I con. 
sider the conversion of Saul a greater miracle than Christ’s 
raising of Lazarus. That was power over dead matter; but 

here was a man whose whole current of life was against Christ; one 
that hated Him with a perfect hatred; one whose heart was on fire 
with hatred against Christ. If you had asked any of the inhabit- 
ants of Jerusalem on the day that Saul left that city for Damascus, 
or if you had asked the Christians of Jerusalem whom they con- 
sidered the most hopeless case there, and the last man to have been 
reached by the power of Christ, undoubtedly they would have 
united in saying that Saul was the bitterest enemy that Christ had, 
But there is one thing about Saul’s character that we can not but 
admire, and that is, we always know where to find him. Before he 
became a disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ he came out boldly 
-against Him, and gave his reasons why. He didn’t profess one 
thing and love something else. He acted out his conviction. He 
didn’t believe that Jesus was divine; he didn’t believe that He was 
the Saviour; he didn’t believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God; 
he didn’t believe that Jesus Christ was the Jewish Messiah; he 
didn’t believe that He was what He claimed to be. Saul was thor- 
oughly convinced that Jesus Christ was an impostor; and on that 
ground he persecuted him. For that reason he wanted to stamp 
out this new sect. He was right. If Jesus Christ was not the Soa 
cf God in the flesh, if He didn’t come from heaven, as He said He 
did, if He was not the God-man, if He was not the Saviour of the 
world, then let ine say just here that He was the greatest impostor 
that ever came into it—that he has deceived millions upon millions, 
and there are thousands in this congregation that are guilty of idol- 
(620) 


. prayeth.” 


n of Saul. I con- 

‘acle than Christ’s 

dead matter; but 

igainst Christ ; one 
se heart was on fire 
any of the inhabit- 
city for Damascus, 

m whom they con- 

t man to have been 
they would have 
y that Christ had, 

hat we can not but 

nd him. Before he 

e came out boldly 
didn’t profess one 

his conviction. He 

believe that He was 
ras the Son of God; 
ewish Messiah; he 
be. Saul was thor- 
ostor; and on that 
he wanted to stamp 
ist was not the Soi 
ven, as He said He 
the Saviour of the 

p greatest impostor 

lions upon millions, 

nt are guilty of idol- 


A NOTABLE MIRACLE, 621 
atry. Every one of us that believes in Christ—every one that bows 
to His name—and every one that calls upon Him, is guilty of 
breaking thé first commandment: “ Thou shalt have no other gods 
before me.” 

I don’t know whether Christ and Saul had ever met. They were 
of the same age. No doubt Saul was in Jerusalem when Christ was 
there; but he was one of those proud-hearted Pharisees that 
wouldn’t consent to listen to any such doctrine. He was one of 
the very strictest of the Jews. He tells us that he was of the tribe of 
Benjamin; that he was circumcised on the eighth day. He says he 
was a Pharisee of the Pharisees; that he was blameless, touching 
the law. <A great many people say he didn’t need to be converted. 
He didn’t swear; he didn’t lie; he didn’t steal; he didn’t murder; 
he wasn’t a covetous man; he was a very just man. Undoubtedly 
before he met Christ he made a great many longer prayers than he 
did afterwards. He wasa formalist. He was a religious man. He 
said he was blameless, touching the law; and yet this man, like all 
the rest, needed to be converted. I was reading the other day of a 
man who said that the revival in Pentecust was all through in one 
day. What a blind man he was! If he had read the whole Acts 
through, he would have found that it went right on; that it never 
stopped. Here were thousands being drawn daily to Christ, and 
they said: “We must stop it.” So they began to scatter them like 
fire-brands. They didn’t like their carrying the torch of salvation 
around; and the news came to Jerusalem that there was a revival 
going on in Damascus. Then Saul got mad. A great many now 
get mad when they hear of revivals. Undoubtedly, a great many 
men in Boston to-day are terribly mad on account of this revival. 
A wife told me the other day that her husband had never been cross 
to her until we commenced these revival meetings in the Taber- 
nacle, and he has been mad ever since. 

It is a good sign. I tell you, when the Spirit wakes up a man, 
so that he can’t sleep nights, so that he can't rest, it’s a good sign, 
and I thank God for it. While Saul was on the road, breathing 
out threatenings and slaughter, just one flame bursts upon his path. 
It comes flashing across his path. It comes brighter than the sun, 
and strikes him blind. I don’t know whether he was on a horse or 
not, but if he was, he was dismounted very quick, and he hears a 
voice: “Saul, Saul, why persecutist thou me?” Do you know he 
couldn’t answer? I will defy any man in this city to give an answer 


622 ALOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


to that question. There is not a man or woman that hates Christ 
that can give a reason for it. Christ said: “ They hated me with- 
out a cause.” I have yet to find the first man or woman that has 
got enmity against Christ, that can give a reason. Christ might 
have said to Saul: “I was on the earth thirty years. What harm 
did Ido you? Did I ever do you any injury? Did you ever hear 
of any one down here en earth that I injured? Do you know of 
any one that was not blessed by me that came fora blessing? [| 
didn’t come into the world to curse it—I want to bless it ; and now 
Saul, Saul, wh» pers:oite 't thou me?” Saul says: “ Who art 
thou?” “Iam Jesus hank God, He didn’t change His name. 
It was the sane i, | at Gabriel gave Him before He was born— 
the name that was give: Jim in heaven. I like that name. I 
think it is the sweetest name in the world. Let me say that the 
conversion of Saul has done more to upset infidelity than anything 
else in the Bible. I have talked with a good many infidels and 
skeptics, but they don’t know how to get over it; they have to 
throw it out. The Lord said unto Saul: “It is hard for thee to 
kick against the pricks.” In those days when they didn’t drive 
their oxen with whips they had a piece of stick with a sharp piece 
of iron or steel at the end called a prick, and it was applied to the 
animal, and if it kicked against the pricks it would only hurt itself; 
and so the Lord used that illustration: “It is hard for thee to 
kick against the pricks.” And here let me say that there is not a 
man in this room to-night that is living a life of sin, that is at 
enmity against God, that is contending with his Maker, that is 
fighting against the God of Heaven, but that if he hasn’t already 
found out that it is hard for him to kick against the pricks, it is 
only a question of time when he will find it out. But now I want 
you to just take, for a moment or two, into consideration that 
prayer that Saul made when Christ met him. And I would like to 
ask every man and woman in this assembly if it isn’t a most reason- 
able thing for a man to do to just repeat that prayer. It is a very 
short prayer. There isn’t a man or woman in this room that can’t 
remember it. It contains only eight words; but it was long enough 
to reach from that highway there in Damascus clear up to the 
throne of Heaven. It doesn’t take long for a prayer to reach 
heaven, and the shortest ones sometimes get there the quickest. 
Some say they can’t make a prayer themselves, and yet they object 
to printed prayers; but you can find one in the Bible that will just 


AYERS. 


iat hates Christ 
hated me with- 
roman that has 
Christ might 
‘5, What harm 
4 you ever hear 
Yo you know of 
ra blessing? I 
ess it; anc now 
ays: “ Who art 
range His name. 
e He was born— 
> that name. I 
me say that the 
ty than anything 
any infidels and 
it; they have to 
hard for thee to 
they didn’t drive 
ith a sharp piece 
‘as applied to the 
1 only hurt itself; 
hard for thee to 
at there is nota 
of sin, that is at 
is Maker, that is 
ne hasn’t already 
the pricks, it is 
But now I want 
onsideration that 
d I would like to 
in’t a most reason- 
yer. It isa very 
s room that can’t 
was long enough 
clear up to the 
prayer to reach 
ere the quickest. 
d yet they object 
sible that will just 


af 


A NOTABLE MIRACLE, 623 


express the prayer of your heart, and that is the fifty-first psalm— 
David's prayer; where he cries to God to have mercy upon him, 
Then there is Saul’s prayer: “ Lord, what wilt thou have mc ta 
do?” There's « prayer right there for any man or woman to make. 
You, perhaps, would like to know what God would have you do— 
how you can become Christians. Well, just ask Him what He will 
have you to do, and see how quick He will answer you. I don’t ask 
you to believe as | do, to think as I do, to do asI do. I don't 
come aid ask you to just believe what I say, unless it is 
in accordance with the Word of God; but if you will only be 
uv..est with God, and let your cry go up: “ Lord, what wilt thou 
hav: me to do?” an answer will come from heaven. Now, let 
us tike the prayer of the publican—only seven wes “ Lord, be 
mer :iful to me, a sinner.’ I tell you, if you want ine: God will 
And there is not a man in this . om that can’t 
make that prayer. Then take Peter’s prayer, mv five words: 
“ Lord, save me, or I perish.” He was sinking in thuse waters, and 
he cried for help in only five words. You tell «:* «ou can’t make 
a prayer! Is there a man or woman in this rooin that can not cry 
out as Peter did: “ Lord, save me, or I perish?” Then take the 
prayer of the thief on the cross, with nine words in it. 


giv; it to you. 


It was very 
sbort in length, yet it was long enough to bring an answer from 
heaven and save him: “ Lord, remember me when thou comest into 
thy kingdom.” Then and there, God answered his prayer: “ This 
day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.” A quick answer, wasn’t 
it? Yet there were only nine words in that prayer. You haven't 
got to make along prayer. If you really want salvation, let that 
be the cry of your heart. ‘ Lord, remember me when thou comest 
into thy kingdom.” There was a man told me, some time ago, 
how he went to God in prayer. He had been an infidel. He didn’t 
believe in prayer. He was a drunkard, a blasphemer, and his little 
boy was dying—a sweet little boy that had just twined himself all 
around his heart. That little boy was dying and he called his 
father to his dying bedside and said: “ Father, I want you to make 
me a promise. 
want you to meet me in heaven. Won't you turn away from your 
sins? Won’t you call on Eddie’s God? Won't you call upon Him 
to have mercy upon you?” The little fellow said: “I have prayed 
for you ever since I have been sick. Will you pray, father?” And 
that father, although an infidel, promised his little boy that he would 


I am going away with Jesus, and when I am gone, I 


624 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


meet him in heaven, and the little boy died with a smile upon his 
face, with the thought that his father was going to meet him. The 
father said after he had promised to meet his little boy in heaven, 
when he looked upon his face, so peaceful, so pleasant, his heart was 
nearly broken, and after he had laid him in his grave in the cemetery, 
when he came back, the house was so dark, so cheerless, that it 
seemed that the light of that home had gone out. For days and 
months, he said, he didn’t pray; but he couldn’t get the promise 
out of his mind, and he said: “I don’t know, perhaps there is 
something in prayer, after all. I have never believed it, I have 
talked against it, but I will just try and see what it is.’ He went 
into his room, locked the door, got down on his knees, and he just 
cried to the God of his little boy that if there was such a God that He 
would just answer his prayer, just reveal Himself to him. He said he 
spent hours in that room before he left it, and the God of his little 
boy met him and blessed him, and has been with him ever since. 
I tell you, if you will be honest with God, He will be honest with 
you. If there is an atheist or infidel that wants to know if God will 
answer his prayer, let him be honest with Him; go into your closet 
on your knees and cry to God to reveal Himself to you, and He will 
give His answer to you. Oh, I thank God that I came to Bos- 
ton; I have got more faith in it than I ever had before. I have got 
more faith in prayer than I ever had before. I tell you, God is an- 
swering prayer in a marvelous way. Oh, skeptic, pray honestly and 
earnestly to God that the thorn in your flesh may be removed, that 
the scales may drop from your eyes, and that you may walk in the 
light and in the faith and power of God. 


4 VERS. 


smile upon his 
meet him. The 

. boy in heaven, 
nt, his heart was 

in the cemetery, 
heerless, that it 

- For days and 
get the promise 
perhaps there 1s 
ieved it, I have 
itis.” He went 
cnees, and he just 
ich a God that He 
ohim. He said he 
e God of his little 
h him ever since. 
41] be honest with 
.o know if God will 
go into your closet 
-o you, and He will 
at I came to Bos- 
before. I have got 
ell you, God is an- 
, pray honestly and 
ly be removed, that 
bu may walk in the 


LXXIL. 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS. 


DEUTERONOMY v. 29: “O that there were such an heart in them that they would 
fear Me, and keep all My commandments always, that it might be well with them, 
and with their children forever,” 


Also, vi. 7: ‘And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt 
talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, 
and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.” 


USED to think when I was superintendent on the North Side, 

when I was laboring among the children, and trying to get the 

parents interested to save their children, that if ever I did be- 
come a preacher I would have but one text and one sermon, and 
that should be addressed to parents, because when we get them in- 
terested, their interest will be apparent in the children. We used to 
say, if we get the lambs in, the old sheep will follow, but I didn’t 
find that to be the case. When we got the children interested one 
Sunday, the parents would be, sometimes, pulling the other way all 
the week, and before Sunday came again the impression that had 
been made was gone, and I came to the conclusion that, unless we 
could get the parents interested, or could get some kind Christian 
friend to look after those children, it is almost a sin to bring them 
to Christ. If there is no one to nurse them, to care for them, and 
just to water the seed, why, they are liable to be drawn away; and 
when they grow up, to be far more difficult to reach. I wish to say 
to-night that Iam as strong as ever upon sudden conversion, and 
there are a great many ministers, a great many parents who scoff 
and laugh when they hear of children who have been brought unto 
Christ at these meetings. Now, in many of the churches the sermons 
go over their heads; they don’t do the young any good; they don’t 
understand the preaching, and if they are impressed here, we ought 
not to discourage them. My friends, the best thing we can do is to 
bring them early to Christ. There earliest impressions nev. , never 
leave them, and I do not know why they should not gro.. ..y in the 
(625) 


= Se SS TS te i HY ¥ 


aot eer ee 
er wae 
— 


Sess 
eae 
a etn tS SRP 


626 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


service of Christ. I contend that those who are converted early are 
the best Christians. Take a man who is converted at fifty. He has 
continually to fight against his old habits ; but take a young man or 
a young girl and they get a character to form and a whole long life to 
give to Christ. An old man unconverted got up in an inquiry-meet- 
ing recently, and said he thought we were very hard-hearted down 
in the Tabernacle; we went right by when we saw some young per- 
son. He thought, as he was old, he might be snatched away before 
these young people; but with us it seemed as if Christ was of more 
importance to the young than the old. I confess, truly, that I have 
that feeling. If a young man is converted, he, perhaps, has a long 
life of fifty years to devote to Christ, but an old man is not worth 
much. Of course his soul is worth much, but he is not worth much 
for labor. 

While down at a convention in Illinois, an old man got up, past 
seventy years; he said he remembered but one thing about his 
father, and that one thing followed him all through life. He could 
not remember his death; he had no recollection of his funeral, but 
he recollected his father one winter night taking a little chip, and 
with his pocket-knife whittling out a cross, and with the tears in his 
eyes he held up that cross and told how God in His infinite love 
sent His Son down here to redeem us, how He had died on the cross 
for us. The story of the cross followed him through life; and I tell 
you, if you teach these children truths, they will follow them through 
life. We have got so much unbelief among us, like those disciples 
when they rebuked the people for bringing the children to Christ ; 
but He said, “ Suffer little children to come unto Me, and forbid 
them not, for of such is the kingdom of Heaven.” I heard of a 
Sunday-school concert at which a little child of eight was going to 
recite. Her mother had taught her, and when the night came, the 
little thing was trembling so she could scarcely speak. She com- 
menced, “ Jesus said,’ and completely broke down. Again she 
tried it, “‘ Jesus said, ‘ Suffer,’”’ but she stopped once more. A third 
attempt was made by her, “ ‘ Suffer little children—and don’t any- 
body stop them, for He wants them all to come,’” and that is the 
truth. There is not a child who has a parent in the Tabernacle but 
He wants, and if you but bring them in the arms of your faith, and 
ask the Son of God to bless them and train them in the knowledge 
of God, and teach them as you walk your way, as you lie down at 
night, as you rise up in the morning, they will be blessed. But I can 


AYERS. 


verted early are 
t fifty. He has 
a young man of 
vyhole long life to 
an inquiry-mect- 
-d-hearted down 
some young per- 
ched away before 
hrist was of more 
truly, that I have 
srhaps, has a long 
man is not worth 
5 not worth much 


man got up; past 
e thing about his 
gh life. He could 
of his funeral, but 
, a little chip, and 
vith the tears in his 
n His infinite love 
hd died on the cross 
bugh life ; and pee 
llow them throug! 
like those disciples 
children to Christ ; 
ato Me, and forbid 
ven.” I heard of a 
eight was going to 
the night came, the 
ly speak. She com- 
down. Again she 
once more. A third 
ren—and don’t any- 
e,” and that is the 
1 the Tabernacle but 
s of your faith, and 
m in the knowledge 
,as you lie down at 
e blessed. But | can 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS. 


imagine some skeptic in yonder gallery saying, “ That's well enough, 
but it’s all talk. Why, I have known children of ministers and 
Christian people who have turned out worse than any others.” I've 
heard that all my life, but I tell you that is one of the devil's lies. 
I will admit I’ve heard of many Christian people having bad children, 
but they are not the worst children. That was tested once. A 
whole territory was taken in which fathers and mothers were 
Christians, and it was found that two-thirds of the children were 
members of churches; but they took a portion of country where all 
the fathers and mothers were not Christians, and it was found that 
not one in twelve of the children attended churches. That was the 
proportion. Look at a good man who has a bad son. Do you 
want to know the reason? In the first place, children do not in- 
herit grace. Because fathers and mothers are good, that is no 
reason why their children should be good. Children are not born 
good. Men may talk of natural goodness, but I don’t find it. 
Goodness must come down from the Father of Light. To havea 
good nature, aman must be born of God. There is anotlier reason : 
A father may be a very good man, but the mother may be pulling in 
another way. She may be ambitious, and may want her children 
to occupy a high worldly position. She has some high ambition, 
and trains the child for the world. Again, it may be the reverse— 
a holy, pious mother and a worldly father, and it is pretty hard 
when father and mother do not pull together. Another reason is 
—and you will excuse me the expression-—a great many people 
have got very little sense about bringing up children. Now, I’ve 
known mothers to punish their children by making them read the 
Bible. Do not be guilty of such a thing. If you want children not 
to hate the Rible, do not punish them by making them read it. It 
is the most attractive book in the world. But that is the way tc 
spoil its attractiveness, and make them hate it with a perfect hate. 
There is another reason: A good many people are engaged in look- 
ing after other people’s children and neglecting their own. No 
father or mother has a right to do this, whatever may be the position 
they hold in the world. The father may be a statesman or a great 
business man, but he is responsible for his children. If they do not 
look after their children, they will have to answer for it some day. 
There will be a blight in their paths, and their last days will be 
very bitter. 

There are a great many reasons which I might bring forward if I 


627 


Soars ee ee 


628 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


had time, why good people’s children turn out bad, but let me say 
one word about bringing up these children—how to trai them in 
Christian ways. The word is very plain: “ Teach them diligently.” 
In the street cars, as we go about our business, night and morning, 
talk of Christ and Heavenly things. It seems to me as if these 
things were the last things many of us think about, and as if Christ 
was banished from our homes. A great many people have a good 
mame as Chiristians. They talk about ministers and Sunday- 
schools, and will come down and give a dinner to the bootblacks 
and seem to be strong patrons of the cause of Christ ; but when it 
comes to talking to children personally about Christ, that is another 
thing. The word is very plain, “ Teach them diligently,” and if we 
want them to grow up a blessing to the Church of God and to the 
world, we must teach them. I can imagine some of you saying, 
“Tt may be very well for Mr. Moody to lay down theories, but 
there are a great many difficulties in the way.” I heard of a min- 
ister who said he had the grandest theory upon the bringing up of 
children. God gave him seven children and he found that his 
theory was all wrong. They were all differently constituted. I 
will adtait that this is one difficulty; but if our heart is set upon 
this one thing—to have our children in glory—God will give us all 
the light we need. He is not going to leave us in darkness. If 
that is not the aim of your heart, make it this very night. I would 
rather, if I went to-night, leave my children in the hope of Christ 
than leave them millions of money. It seems to meas if we were too 
ambitious to have them make a name, instead of to train them for 
the life they are to lead forever. And another thing about gov- 
ernment. Never teach them revenge. Ifa baby falls down on the 
floor, don’t give it a book with which to strike the floor, They 
have enovgh of revenge in them without being taught it. Then 
don’t teach them to lie. You don’t like that; but how many 
parents have told their children to go to the door, when they did 
not want to see the visitor, and say, ‘“ Mother is not in.” That 
is a lie. Children are very keen to detect. They very soon 
see those lies, and this lays the foundation fora great deal of trouble 
afterward. “Ah,” some of you say, “I never do this.” Well, sup- 
pose some one comes in that you don’t want to see. You give him 
a welcome, and when he goes, you entreat him to stay; but the mo- 
ment he is out of the door you say, “What a bore!” The chil- 
dren wonder at first, but they very soon begin to imitate the father 


vA VERS. 


but let me say 

to tra them in 
hem diligently.” 

ht and morning, 
»me as if these 
and as if Christ 
yple have a good 

rs and Sunday- 

9 the bootblacks 

rist ; but when it 

st, that is another 

rently,” and if we 

yf God and to the 

e of you saying, 

own theories, but 

I heard of a min- 

the bringing up of 

ne found that his 

tly constituted. I 

r heart is set upon 

sod will give us all 

s in darkness. If 
ry night. I would 
the hope of Christ 
je as if we were too 
£ to train them for 
r thing about gov- 
y falls down on the 
e the floor, They 
g taught it. Then 
it; but how many 
oor, when they did 
rig not in.” That 

They very soon 

breat deal of trouble 
B this.” Well, sup- 
see. You give him 
b stay; but the mo- 

pore!” The chil- 

o imitate the father 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS. 629 


and mother. Children are very good imitators. A father and 


mother never ought to doa thing that they don’t want their chil- 
dren to do. If you don’t want them to smoke, don’t you smoke ; 
if you don’t want them to chew, don’t you chew; if you don’t want 
them to play billiards, don’t you play billiards; if you don’t want 
them to drink, don’t you drink, because children are grand imitators. 
A lady once to!d me she was in her pantry on one occasion and she 
was surprised by the ringing of the bell. As she whirled round to 
see who it was she broke atumbler. Her little child was standing 
there and she thought her mother was doing a very correct thing, 
and the moment the lady left the pantry the child commenced to 
break all the tumblers she could get hold of. You may laugh, but 
children are very good imitators. If you don’t want them to break 
the Sabbath day, keep it holy yourself; if you want them to go to 
church, go to church yourself. It is very often by imitation that 
they utter their first oath; that they tell their first lie; and then 
they grow upon them, and when they try to quit the habit, it has 
grown so strong upon them that they can not doit. ‘“ Ah,” some 
say, “we do not believe in children being converted. Let them 
grow up to manhood and womanhood and then talk of converting 
them.” They forget that in the meantime their characters are 
formed, and perhaps they have begun to enter those dens of 
infamy, and when they have arrived at manhood or womanhood we 
find it is too late to alter their character. How unfaithful we are. 
“Teach them diligently.” How many parents in this vast assembly 
know where their sons are? Their sons may be in the halls of vice. 
Where does your son spend his evenings? You don’t care enough 
for him to ascertain what kind of company he keeps; what kind of 
books he reads; don’t care whether he is reading those miserable, 
trashy novels or not, and getting false ideas of life. You don’t 
know till it is too late. Oh, may God wake us up and teach us the 
responsibility devolving upon us in the training of our children. 
While in London, an officer in the Indian army hearing of us being 
over there, said, ‘ Lord, now is the time for my son to be saved.” 
He got a furlough, and left India, and came to London. 

When he came there for that purpose, of course God was not go- 
ing to let him go away without the blessing. How many men who 
are interested in their sons would do as this man did? How many 
men are sufficiently interested in them to bring them here? How 
many parents stand in the way of the salvation of their children? I 


= igs aa a 


ae. 


REM he 2 Me orcs eG te tee es 


SS es 


630 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


don’t know anything that discouraged me more when I was super- 
intendent on the North Side, than when after begging with parents 
to allow their children to come to Sunday-school—and how few of 
them came; whenever spring arrived these parents would take their 
children from the school, and lead them into those Germat gardens, 
And now a great many are reaping the consequences. I remember 
one mother who heard that her boy was impressed at our meeting 
She said her son was a good enough boy, and he didn’t need to be 
converted. I pleaded with that mother, but all my pleading was of 
no account. I tried my influence with the boy; but while I was 
pulling one way, she was pulling the other, and, of course, her in- 
fluence prevailed. Naturally it would. Well, to make a long story 
short, some time after I happened to be in the County Jail, and I 
saw him there. ‘“ How did you come here?” I asked; “does your 
mother know where you are?” “No, don’t tell her; I came in 
under an assumed name, and I am going to Joliet for four years, 
Do not let my mother know of this,” he pleaded ; “she thinks I am 
in the army.” I used to call on that mother, but I had promised 
her boy I would not tell her, and for four years she mourned over 
that boy. She thought he had died on the battle-field or in a 
Southern hospital. What a blessing he might have been to that 
mother, if she had only helped us to bring him to Christ. But the 
mother is only a specimen of hundreds and thousands of parents in 
Chicago. If we would have more family altars in our homes and 
train them to follow Christ, why, the Son of God would lead them 
into “green pastures,” and instead of having sons who curse the 
mothers who gave them birth, they would bless their fathers and 
mothers. In the Indiana Penitentiary I was told of a man who had 
come there under an assumed name. His mother heard where he 
was. She was too poor to ride there, and she walked. Upon 
her arrival at the prison she at first did not recognize her son 
in his prison suit and short hair, but when she did see who it 
was, that mother threw her arms about that boy, and said: “I 
am to blame for this; if I had only taught you to obey God 
and keep the Sabbath you would not have been here.” How 
many mothers, if they were honest, could attribute the ruina- 
tion of their children to their early training. God has said, if we 
don’t teach them those blessed commandments, He will destroy us, 
and the law of God never changes. It does not only apply to those 


RAYERS. 


hen I was super- 
ing with parents 
-and how few of 
would take their 
Germaut gardens. 
ces. I remember 
d at our meeting 
didn’t need to be 
y pleading was of 
- but while I was 
of course, her in- 
make a long story 
County Jail, and I 
sked; ‘‘ does your 
ll her; I came in 
liet for four years. 
. “she thinks I am 
ut I had promised 
she mourned over 
battle-field or in a 
have been to that 
to Christ. But the 
sands of parents in 
| in our homes and 
d would lead them 
kons who curse the 
ks their fathers and 
of a man who had 
er heard where he 
he walked. Upon 
recognize her son 
he did see who it 
boy, and said: wy 
you to obey God 
been here.” How 
tribute the ruina- 
od has said, if we 
He will destroy us, 


only apply to those 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS. 


631 


callous men who make no profession of religion, but to those who 
stand high in the Church, if they make the same mistake. Look 
at that high-priest, Eli. He was a good man and a kind one, but 
one thing he neglected to do—to train his children for God. The 
Lord gave him warning, and at last destruction came upon his 
house. Look at that old man, nincty-eight years old, with his white 
hair, like some of the men on the platform, sitting in the town of 
Shiloh, waiting to hear the result of the battle. The people of 
Israel come into the town and take out the ark of God, and when 
it comes into the camp, a great shout goes upto Heaven, for they 
have the ark of their God among them. They thought they were 
going to succeed, but they had disobeyed God. When the battle 
came on, they fought manfully, but no less than thirty thousand of 
the Israelites fell by the sword of their enemies, and a messenger 
comes running from the field through the streets of Shiloh, to where 
Eli was, crying, ‘‘ Israel is defeated, the ark is taken, and Hophni 
and Phineas have been slain in battle,” and there the old priest, 
when he heard it, fell backward by the side of the gate, and his neck 
broke and he died. Oh, what a sad ending to that man! And 
when his daughter-in-law heard the news, there was another death 
in that family recorded. In that house destruction was complete. 
My friends, God is true, and if we do not obey Him in this respect 
He will punish us. It is only a question of time. Look at King 
David; see him waiting for the tidings of the battle; he had been 
driven from his throne by his own son, whom he loved; but when 
the news came that he was slain, see how he cried, “Oh, my son 
Absalom, would God I had died for thee.” It was worse than death 
to him, but God had to punish him because he did not train his son 
to love the Lord. My friends, if He punished Eli and David, He 
will punish you and me. May God forgive us for the past, and may 
we commence a new record to-night. My friends, if you have not 
a family altar, erect one to-night. Let us labor that our children 
may be brought to glory. Don’t say children are too young. 
Mothers and fathers, if you hear your children have veen impressed 
with religion, don’t stand in the way of their conversion, but en- 
-courage them all you can. 
While I was attending a meeting in a certain city, some time ago, 
a lady came to me, and said, “I want you to go home with 
me; I have something to say to you.” When we reached her 


26 


632 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


home, there were some friends there. After they had retired, she 
put her arms on the table, and tears began to come into her cyes; 
but with an effort she repressed her emotion. After a struggle, she 
went on to say that she was going to tell me something which she 
had never told any other living person. I should not tell it now, 
but she has gone to another world. She said she had a son in 
Chicago, and she was very anxious about him. When he was young 
he got interested in religion at the rooms of the Young Mens 
Christian Association. He used to go out in the streets and circu- 
late tracts. He was her only son, and she was very ambitious he 
should make a name in the world, and wanted him to get into ihe 
very highest circles. Oh, what a mistake people make about these 
highest circles. Society is false; it is a sham. She was deceived, 
like a good many more votaries of fashion and hunters after wealth 
at the present time. She thought it was beneath her son to go 
down and associate with those young men who hadn’t much money. 
She tried to get him away from them, but they had more influence 
than she had, and finally, to break his whole association, she packed 
him off to a boarding-school. He went soon to Yale College, and she 
supposed he got into one of those miserable secret societies there 
that have ruined so many young men; and the next thing she heard 
was that the boy had gone astray. She began to write letters urging 
him to come into the kingdom of God, but she heard that he tore 
the letters up without reading them. She went to him to try and 
regain whatever influence she possessed over him, but her efforts 
were useless, and she came home with a broken heart. Heleft New 
Haven, and for two years they heard nothing of him. At last they 
heard he was in Chicago; and his father found him and gave him 
thirty thousand dollars to start in business. They thought it would 
change him, but it didn’t. They asked me when I went back to 
Chicago to try and use my influence with him. I got a friend to 
invite him to his house one night, where I intended to meet him; 
but he heard I was to be there, and did not come near. Likea 
good many other young men, who seem to be afraid of me, I tried 
many times to reach him, but could not. While I was traveling one 
day cn the New Haven Railroad, I bought a New York paper, and 
in it 1 sewa dispatch saying he had been drowned in Lake Michigan. 
Sis father came on to find his body, and after considerable search 
iy, they discovered ic, all the clothes and his body covered with 


AYERS. 


iad retired, she 
. into her cyes; 
a struggle, she 
hing which she 
not tell it now, 
> had a son in 
n he was young 
e Young Mens 
rreets and circu- 
sry ambitious he 
a to get into ihe 
ake about vhese 
he was deceived, 
ters after wealth 
th her son to go 
n’t much money. 
d more influence 
ation, she packed 
+ College, and she 
+t societies there 
+ thing she heard 
rite letters urging 
eard that he tore 
o him to try and 
in, but her efforts 
rt. Heleft New 
im. At last they 
im and gave him 
thought it would 
I went back to 
I got a friend to 
ed to meet him; 
e near. Likea 
aid of me, I tried 
was traveling one 
- York paper, and 
n Lake Michigan. 
siderable search 
ody covered with 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS, 633 


one ane was taken home to that broken-hearted mother. 
ls es ‘ thought he was in Heaven, I would have peace.” 
fle ee be to God’s law came back uponher. So, my riends 
a boy impressed with the Gospel, help hi ‘ 
Christ. Bring him in the ar Sadhvi ee 
ms of your faith, and he will uni 
. . : , 
ai to Him. Let us have faith in Him; and let us pray d ‘ sh 
night that our children may be born of the Spirit sis 


< 


CoS eee eh a ~ 


be gS Mali 


LX XIII. 
FAREWELL SERMON. GOD ABLE TO KEEP 


ROMANS xiv. 4: “ For God is able to make him stand.” 


YY HEN I first became a Christian it was predicted by those 
who knew me that I would not hold out; that I would 
fall away in a few months. I used to fear and tremble 

myself; I was afraid I should fall. I knew nothing of the Bible. I 

was not acquainted with this precious Word. I do not think there 

were a dozen passages in the whole Word of God that I had com- 
mitted to memory, and that I could quote. I did not know this 
blessed truth I have just read to you to-night, that God was able to 
make me stand. Then if there sre any young converts here to- 
night who have been full of fear, full of doubt, and at times have 
actually trembled in view of the temptations surrounding them, if 
you just lay hold of this precious word “able” it will hold you up 
in all your pilgrimage, in all your journey, no matter how rough and 
hard. “God is able to make you stand.” The God that can create 

a world like this, ard can call it from nothing into existence—the 

God that can create life with a word—He certainly can make a poor 

sinner like you and me “stand” by His mighty power. He was 

able to make Moses stand when exposed to the mighty temptations 
of Egypt. God enabled that other prophet to stand unterrified be- 
fore the wicked Ahab. God enabled Daniel to stand in Babylon 
when the whole city was against him. There he stood like a rock 
in the current of a river; the high, angry waves dashed up against 
him, but there he stood; stood upright in that great city, with all 
the world against him. God did, indeed, make him to stand. And 

Paul, I believe, wrote this blessed text out of his experience of 

God’s power to establish and uphold His people in their work. 

The God of Paul still lives, and He is your God. Oh, put your 

love in God; look to Him and pray to Him, and He will give you 

strength, and He will make you to stand. Let no one fall; God 

(634) 


* TO KEEP 
n stand.” 


ysredicted by those 
out ; that I would 
o fear and tremble 
ng of the Bible. I 
do not think there 
od that I had com- 
did not know this 
,at God was able to 
x converts here to- 
and at times have 
trrounding them, if 
it will hold you up 
itter how rough and 
God that can create 
into existence—the 
aly can make a poor 
ty power. He was 
mighty temptations 
tand unterrified be- 
b stand in Babylon 
e stood like a rock 
| dashed up against 
great city, with all 
rim to stand. And 
his experience of 
pple in their work. 
od. Oh, put your 
d He will give you 
t no one fall; God 


(634) 


find in reading my Bible that some of the m« 


FAREWELL SERMON, GOD ABLE TO KEEP, 635 
has power enough, God has grace enough, God has strength enough 
to keep every young convert in the straight path, if only you will 
look to Him, if only you will pray to Him daily for strength. 

Oh, let me warn you to put not your strength in yourself. When 
you are strong—when you think you are strong—then you are very 
weak; that is the very time you are weakest. Paul says, ‘‘ When I 
am weak, then am | strong.” Our strength doesn’t lie in ourselves; 
it lies in our Redeemer. If my strength is in God, He will give me 
all power. If my strength is in myself, I will be constantly tumbling, 


constantly falling down. Therefore keep a fast hold on God, who 


alone is able to make you stand. I do not think a young convert 


will be able to stand by himself in a few years, or in many years. 
The stronger he gets, the stronger, too, grows the danger of his fall- 
ing. The longer I live—the nearer I get to Christ—the more 
danger I see. The nearer a man gets to God, the more he con- 
sciously needs Him. Man never becomes independent of God, but 
the longer he lives the less confidence he should have in himself. I 
cminent men have 
fallen. They got self-confident, and when thc, became strong in 
themselves they fell. Let no young convert become spiritually 
proud and lifted up; he can come to no victory in his own strength. 
Let him pray, and then the tempter will go from him. You find 
that men who have stood highest in this world have been men that 
have fallen at different times in their lives; and I think you will 
find they stumbled on this stone of trusting in their own strength. 
Peter, how confident he was. Though all the rest denied their 
Lord, he never would; but in a few hours he denied his Lord, and 
swore he never knew Him. Oh, how self-confident he was! And 
so, always, when a man is self-confident, satisfied with himself and 
lifted up, he can not hope to stand; he is standing on dangerous 
ground; look out, he will slip and tumble headlong. We find men 
failing in their very strongest points. I don’t know how it is, un- 
less even in their citadel God wants to show them their weakness— 
that they can not stand alone. Thus you remember the meck and 
humble Moses; and yet it was his very lack of his vaunted humility 
that kept him from the promised land. His lack of humility did it, 
although that was just his strong point. Again, take Elisha, the 
valiant man. In the Old Testament you find hardly any one more 
exalted, unless it was Joshua, Daniel, and Joseph. But you find 
this very man, Elisha, getting afraid, and frightened almost out of 


eee 


SS OL MOO EE 


Pelt GOT, 


636 MOOD WS SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


his life, just at a simple message. He was cast down by alarm, and 
could not stand before Ahab; in the midst of his strength he was 
weak. So men fail in the strongest points of their character; for 
if men get to thinking they are able to stand alone, their strength 
becomes sudden weakness. If we put our confidence in character, 
in habit, in anything but the might of God, our fall is not far off, 
Now, what the text says is this: “God is able to make us stand.” 
You can’t stand alone, young converts; but God can and will give 
you the power, and will keep your feet from falling. 

I want to call your attention to a verse in the second chapter of 
Hebrews, the eighteenth verse: “ For in that He Himself hath suf- 
fered being tempted, He is abie to succor them that are tempted.” 
Let me read those words again. ‘“ Heis able to succor them that are 
tempted.” Oh, blessed thought, that God has Himself stood these 
temptations, and so can realize our needs. I believe these very 
trials and temptations are sent to us to give us character. Men 
who never have temptations, never have trials, are not good for 
much as Christians. I count these things as most of a Christian's 
discipline ; and the more of these thorns in his side he gets the best 
of, the better and stronger a Christian he becomes. We don’t want 
any hot-house Christians, shut up from the world and never tempted, 
never tried; but battling bravely with these powers which Christ 
came ¢cwn from Heaven to bear in His person and to overcome. 
God Hi-aself was towched with a feeling of our infirmities, coming 
down to this world amd being one of us. He took upon Him your 
nature and mine; therefore He can appreciate our frailties, and is 
able —yes, abundantly able—to succor them that are tempted. 
What we want is not to pray God to deliver us from temptations; 
that is not it; but we want to pray that we may overcome them. 
Thus, whenever the great tempter of souls comes down upon us, 
God will give us the will, the power, and the grace to overcome 
him, and to grow stronger for the victory. Of himself a man has 
not power, but God will give him the better over all temptations if 
He is only asked to do it. Now, let me say right here that if you 
are tempted, my friends, don’t think that that is sin. It is not a sin 
to be tempted; it is only sin when you yield to temptation; it is 
only sin when you liste» to the tempter. He may come---we car't 
help that; but we want © resist him, and pray God to give us grace 
to overcome him and trample him under our feet. And every 
temptation we overcome ves us more strength to overcome the 


PRAYERS. 


own by alarm, and 
is strength he was 
heir character; for 
one, their strength 
Jence in character, 
‘fall is not far off. 
to make us stand.” 
d can and will give 
ing. 
e second chapter of 
fe Himself hath suf- 
‘that are tempted.” 
succor them that are 
Himself stood these 
believe these very 
‘us character. Men 
ls, are not good for 
most of a Christian's 
side he gets the best 
mes. We don’t want 
d and never tempted, 
powers which Christ 
on and to overcome. 
r infirmities, coming 
took upon Him your 
> our frailties, and is 
that are tempted. 
s from temptations; 
ay overcome them. 
omes down upon Us, 
grace to overcome 
f himself a man has 
er all temptations if 
ight here that if you 
ssin. It is not sin 
to temptation; it is 
may come---we car t 
God to give us grace 
r feet. And every 
eth to overcome the 


FAREWELL SERMON. GOD ABLE TO KEEP, 637 


ct one. So little by little we go on toward the fullness of the 
t..cure of Christ. 

A great many temptations will assail you in Boston, my dear 
young converts; a great many dangers await you; many who 
should help you may perhaps make sport of you, and possibly 
point the finger of ridicule at you instead of sympathizing with 
you as they ought. I pray you not to get discouraged. Instead 
of getting downhearted, go to God in prayer; go to Jesus, for He 
is able to succor you in the hour of temptation. He Himself has 
gone through it all. No one was more laughed at; no one was 
more ridiculed, more scoffed at, more jeered at, than the Son of 
God was; and He can sympathize with you in all your hours of 
trial. Just ask of Him help and He will succor yon speedily and 
give you a glorious victory. 

The next text I want to call your attention to is in Second Tim- 
othy i. 12: “For I know whom I have believed and am persuaded 
that He is able to keep that which I have committed unto Him 
against that day.’’ Now, bear in mind that you can not keep your 
own soul; but He will keep it for us if we can believe the language 
of this text: “Am persuaded that He is able to keep that which I 
have committed unto Him against that day.’”’ Some men may 
come to you and ask you what denomination you belong to—what 
persuasion you are of. Tell them you are of Paul’s persuasion; 
say, “I am persuaded that He is able to keep that which I have 
committed unto Him against that day.” I would advise you to 
belong to Paul’s persuasion. I would rather be of Paul’s persuasion 
than be in the Methodist, Presbyterian, or Baptist churches and not 
have the truth of Paul’s words sunk down in my heart. Denom- 
inations can not keep you. A man may be a Presbyterian, an Epis- 
copalian, a Methodist, or Congregationalist, and still not be a Chris- 
tian at heart. Remember, we can't keep ourselves, neither can 
churches help us. The Son of God can only help us. He is able 
to do it. The Son of God, who stooped from the throne of Heaven 
and came into this world, is able to keep that which is committed 
unto Him. Now, if a man lives in England, he wants to have his 
money in the Bank of England, He thinks that bank is the safest 
in the land. I know a great mafiy people in this country who send 
money there; they keep a regular bank account there. They think 
that that bank is safe should anything happen. If anything should 
occur with this government, they are sure their deposits are all 


FRR gh NE RE PTS Sa 


638 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDR2SSES AND PRAYERS. 


right there. The Son of God is better able to keep your souls than 
the Bank of England is able to keep one pound of your money 
And if we commit ourselves to Him, and trust Him to keep us, He 
will kcep us. Now, if you go to the Tower of London you will see 
the crown of England. Men watch it day and night. There is not 
one minute in the hour, nor hour in the twenty-four, but a soldier 
in the [nglish army has his eye on that crown. Suppose that 
crown should be taken to Buckingham Palace, and . was then 
only under the protection of the Queen, how long would Queen 
Victoria hold it? Why, some thief would have it in twenty-four 
hours. That weak woman would not be able to hold it herself. 
But she could keep it a great deal better than we can keep our 
souls. We have three enemies to contend against—the world, the 
flesh, and the devil—who are always striving to obtain the mastery 
over our souls. What can we do? There is one thing we can do, 
We can call upon our Elder Brother and He will keep it from all 
harm. <And if you young converts just trust Him to keep your 
souls, He will keep them. 

Then the next text is in the Second of Corinthians ix. 8: “ And 
God is able to make all grace abound toward you; that ye always 
having all sufficiency in all things may abound to every good work.” 
Now, that brings us into the vineyard. He first tells us He “is able 
to make us abound;” then He “is able to succor us in the day of 
temptation.’”’ The next tells us He is able to keep us; and now He 
tells us we are able to go out and work in His vineyard. Why? 
Because ‘‘God is able to make all grace abound toward you.” 
There is nothing that God calls us to do but that He will give us 
grace to do it. All we have got to do is to come to the throne of 
God and get all the grace we need. I hope you young converts 
have gone into the church to work. I hope that’s what you pro- 
pose todo. I hope you haven’t gone into the church to rest and 
go to sleep. What you want is to find some work in your churches. 
Let every young convert cry, ““O God, give me a soul.” ‘Try to 
win others to Christ. Suppose you commence to-night and go 
right to work. I believe there is not a young convert in this build- 
ing that can not win at least one soul to Christ within thirty days, 
if they will. If they do this every thirty days, that will be twelve 
souls in twelve months. Suppose every young convert here led 
twelve souls to Christ in the next year, what would be the state of 
affairs in Boston at the end of the year? Why, what a host of 


PRAYERS. 


‘ep your souls than 

id of your money 

lim to keep us, He 
ondon you will see 
ight. There is not 
y-four, but a soldier 
wn. Suppose that 
e, and . was then 
long would Queen 
re it in twenty-four 
to hold it herself. 
in we can keep our 
inst—the world, the 
» obtain the mastery 
yne thing we can do. 
vill keep it from all 
- Him to keep your 


nthians ix. 8: “ And 
you; that ye always 
to every good work.” 
tt tells us He “is able 
cor us in the day of 
eep us; and now He 
is vineyard. Why? 
ound toward you.” 
that He will give us 
ome to the throne of 
you young converts 
that’s what you pro- 
e church to rest and 
ork in your churches. 
me a soul.” ‘Try to 
ce to-night and go 
convert in this build- 
t within thirty days, 
, that will be twelve 
ng convert here led 
ould be the state of 
hy, what a host of 


FAREWELL SERMON, GOD ABLE TO KEEP, 639 


new-born souls!) What a shout of hallelujahs would be going up 
to the throne of God. It seems to mean easy thing todo. He 
has got plenty of grace for you. Lift up your voices for the Son 
of God. Go into the lanes and alleys of the city; into the garrets 
and down in the slums; into the places where sin abounds. Find 
a poor, lost one, and tell him of Christ and Heaven. I pity from 
the depths of my heart that Christian who can’t help his brother to 
obtain salvation. He tells us to enter His vineyard and work for 
Him. I remember I had a picture that I thought a good deal of. 
It was of a woman coming up out of water, with both arms around 
the cross. I thought it was beautiful. But one day I was going 
along the street and I saw in a window another picture. It was of 

a woman coming up from the waters of death. She had one arm 
around the cross, and with the other she was helping the struggling 
people around her up to where she was. I didn’t think much of 

the first picture then. I thought it was like a good many Chris- 

tians. They had both arms tightly clasped around the cross, and 

gave no assistance to those struggling around them. If the Son of 

God pulls you out of the pit of darkness and puts a new song into 
your mouth, don’t you hold your peace. He said to the man from 

whom He cast out the devils, ‘Go home, and tell your friends what 

great things the Lord has done for you.” That man had a mighty 

power in that little town, and the young converts here have a power 

as great. I don’t know any class who have more power for good in 

Boston to-day than those young converts. One of those men who 

were dead in trespasses and sin, by his testimony can do an immense 

amount of good. I see many young converts in this audience who, 

by their testimony, have led scores to Christ. I was some months 

a Christian before I led any one to Christ. I didn’t know anybody 

to tell me how to set about it. But after a while I got led out into 

the vineyard, and I thanked God I was led out. I say to you, my 

dear young converts, go out into the world and bear witness of 

what He has done for you, and your reward in winning souls will be 

great. 

Go to a minister and to a church where you can find something 
todo. If you don’t find it in the first ore, go somewhere else ; 
and if it isn’t to be found in that church, with that minister, you 
just go to a third church. Keep going until you find a home where 
they will put you to work. Don’t stand on ceremony, but pitch in. 
And don’t despise doing humble work; whatever is done for the 


r VF 
> Vf Vf : 
299 “y. 
aro ZG 4} \ Kee 
, Se” KES 


a 


SN 
& 
\ 
4 


z= af I ll Sl =| bee 
=r SPEER 7 

So 44 aagaas3 =i % 2 se 
a FE a85 
2h = = Sl | Bes 
=u ae a ae ge. 
i ais 


MOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


640 


Lord Jesus is honorable. One of the holiest and most successful 
missionaries wanted to he sent out to preach. But some objected, 
thinking ill of his talents. Finally, at his persistent requests, they 
asked him if he would go out and teach school among the heathen 
instead of preaching tothem. He gladly went, and soon his mar- 
velous talent for winning souls asserted itself, and every one did 
him honor. Yes, the temple of God is worth working for in any 
capacity: if meed be, do not despise being hewers of wood and 
drawers of water, and in due time promotion will come. The 
trouble is, too many are willing to do some great things. Go out 
to the streets and take up the dirty little ragged boys, the poor 
children of some poor mother who has gone down to her grave, 
perhaps, with a broken heart over a husband’s drunkenness. Take 
the little urchins by the hand and take them to the Sabbath-school. 
By and by, if you earn it, God will promote you; or that little boy 
you have saved may become a Martin Luther, a Summerfield, a 
Wesley; who can tell; and so through your humble effort the 
brightest jewels shall shine in the Lord’s crown as eternal ages roll 
on. Inconceivable results may reach out from your poor efforts. 
Millions yet unborn may be brought to the kingdom of God. My 
friends, labor! Let that be your watchword. We have no higher 
privilege than to thus toil for others; it saves them and keeps our- 
selves true to our God. I do assure you I have had a new joy since 
I began working for souls. And the more I work and preach, the 
more joy and satisfaction come to my soul. Wherefore let us all 
labor diligently, if we would have the full benefit of our religion— 
if we would keep alive and bright our own faith and devotion. 

The next thing I call your attention to is in the fourth chapter 
of Romans, and the twentieth verse: “ He staggered not at the 
promise of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving 
glory to God. And being fully persuaded that what He has prom. 
ised He is able also to perform.” This is another “able” I want 
to impress upon you, and this is that God is able to do all He has 
promised. He promised when He left this world to send down the 
Comforter, and told the disciples to wait at Jerusalem for power 
from on high. And lo, when they had tarried there three days, the 
Holy Ghost came as Christ had promised. And He promises still 
to send the Comforter to all that pray for that best of gifts. Then 
think of Joshua, how, when he was going to die, he gathered the 
elders before him and reviewed the forty years of his life in Egypt, 


PRAVERS. 


d most successful 
Sut some objected, 
ent requests, they 
mong the heathen 
and soon his mar- 
and every one did 
vorking for in any 
wers of wood and 
1 will come. The 
it things. Go out 
sed boys, the poor 
own to her grave, 
irunkenness. Take 
‘he Sabbath-school. 
-; or that little boy 
r,a Summerfield, a 
humble effort the 
as eternal ages roll 
1 your poor efforts. 
gdom of God. My 
We have no higher 
hem and keeps our- 
had a new joy since 
ork and preach, the 
Vherefore let us all 
fit of our religion— 
and devotion. 

the fourth chapter 
aggered not at the 
ong in faith, giving 
what He has prom: 
bther “able ” I want 
ble to do all He has 
ld to send down the 
erusalem for power 
there three days, the 
Ind He promises still 
best of gifts. Then 
die, he gathered the 
of his life in Egypt, 


FAREWELL SERMON. GOD ABLE TO KEEP. O41 
the forty in the desert, and then the thirty in the land of promise ; 
how he lifted up his voice and testified to the full and complete 
fulfillment of the promises of God: “ Behold, this day I am going 
the way of all the earth ; and ye know in all your hearts and in all 
your souls that not one good thing hath failed of all the good things 
which the Lord your God spake concerning you; all are come to 
pass unto you, and ye know that not one thing hath failed thereof.” 
And just as in the days of Joshua, God bringeth to pass all His 
Word ; not one of His promises shall fail, but He is fulfilling them 
all to-day. Whenever you begin to doubt God’s word think of all 
His prophets and their testimony, and then trust in Him always. 
Now, let me say to these young converts, I hope you will rely im- 
plicitly on the precious promises of God’s Word. Make them your 
stay and support in all your warfare. 

Then the next time this blessed word comes is in the third chap- 
ter of Ephesians, twentieth verse: “Now unto Him that is able to 
do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according 
to the power that worketh in us.” When we first came to Boston 
we did not dare expect half the good things that God had in store 
for us; we did not dare to hope. 

Again, I would call your attention to another text. You will 
find it in the twenty-fourth verse of Jude: “ Now unto Him that is 
able to keep you from falling.” Let me say right here that some 
young converts have an idea that there is such a thing as worldli- 
ness and backsliding in their heart, because they have heard of 
other men who have been converted drifting back. But it is a 
privilege of every child of God to know that you can be kept from 
falling from this night, from this hour. Our Saviour is able to help 
every one of you. I have taken a motto for the year, and I would 
like to have every one of you young converts take it also. It is 
in Isaiah xli. 13: “ For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right 
hand.” Now, if the God of Heaven has got hold of my right hand, 
how am I going to fall? May this sink deep down into the heart 
of every young convert here, “ For I the Lord thy God will hold 
thy right hand.” As you go along don’t you forget where you 
cane fom. It does usa great deal of good to look into the pit 
from whence we came. The text in Deuteronomy xxxii. Io, will 
apply to you then: “He found him in a desert land, and in the 
waste ho vling wilderness ; he led him about, he instructed him, he 
kept him as the apple of his eye.” 


642 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


There is an institution in London, in connection with which a 
gentleman of wealth has done a great deal of good. He went down 
to the Seven Dials, one of the worst places in London, and there he 
used to stay until two o’clock in the morning, picking up young 
street Arabs, and taking them into the house of shelter. That man 
has spent thousands of pounds in that quarter of London. When 
I was there he had upwards of three hundred young men, whom he 
had brought from those slums, some of whom are in China, others in 
Australia, and some in this country. When he would take them 
from the horrible pit he would go and get their photographs taken 
in their rags and dirt. Then they were taken toa bath and given 
new clothes. They were put into an institution, taught a trade, and 
not only the rules of life, but every one of them was taught to read 
his Bible. After keeping them a few years and educating them, be. 
fore they left they were taken to a photograph gallery and had 
their picture taken, and both were given them. This was to show 
them the condition in which the institution found them and that in 
which it left them. So, my friends, remember where God found 
you. Remember that He found some of you as a gambler, a drunk. 
ard, some of you standing on the very borders of hell, with all its 
horrors upon you; remember that some of you were in such a con- 
dition that you could see snakes all around you, and that He lifted 
you from the pit and placed you on a rock of safety, and put a new 
song in your mouth. And let there go up from you a song of grat- 
itude, thanking God that He has stooped down and lifted you out 
from the darkness of hell. Praise God and work for Him. I think 
it is one of the greatest privileges of Christian life that we can go 
out and work for the Son of God. 

In leaving you, young converts, I would like to leave with you 
two “w’s,’—the one is “ work” and the other is the “word,” or 
rather the first is the word and the other is work. Go out and work 
for Him and you will become strong Christians. There are two 
lives you want to lead. The one is your inner life, that the world 
knows nothing of, that the wife of your bosom knows nothing of. 
That life is between yourself and God, and if you don’t lead this 
life the outer life will not be long right. Let me say to you, young 
converts, to read your Bibles, and you will be strong. If you don't 
you will fall, and the men who are now scoffing at this movement 
will say, “I told you you would fall back again; the meetings have 
been only an emotional excitement ; only asensation.” I pray that 


PRAYERS. 


jon with which a 
d. Hewent down 
ndon, and there he 
picking up young 
helter. That man 
f London. When 
ung men, whom he 
in China, others in 
> would take them 
photographs taken 
-a bath and given 
taught a trade, and 
was taught to read 
>ducating them, be- 
h gallery and had 
This was to show 
1d them and that in 
- where God found 
a gambler, a drunk- 
of hell, with all its 
were in such a con- 
land that He lifted 
nfety, and put a new 
you a song of grat- 
and lifted you out 
k for Him. I think 
life that we can go 


b to leave with you 
is the “word,” of 
Go out and work 

s. There are two 
life, that the world 
knows nothing of. 
you don’t lead this 
e say to you, young 
rong. If you don't 
x at this movement 
- the meetings have 
sation.” I pray that 


FAREWELL SERMON. GOD ABLE TO KEEP. 643 
Almighty God may keep you. Just have those tivo “w’s” before 
you—the word and work, and make that your banner. I would 
pray the young converts not to bring disgrace to the family of God, 
into which they have entered. Let them be faithful. You are no 
longer your own, but you have been bought by Christ. If you do 
anything wrong, go and take it to Christ. In Him we have an ad- 
vocate with the Father. It does not follow that because you have 
committed a sin that you are not a Christian. It is only when you 
sin and want to remain in sin that you cease to be a Christian. If 
you see one of those young converts overtaken by sin, go and try 
to lift him out of it. Don’t try to help the devil to keep him down. 
Try to get that young convert on his feet. If you see ore of those 
saved drunkards falling back again, go and try to wean him from 
his danger. Go and tell him Christ is full of mercy and love, and 
wants to take him back again. Peter asked Him if he should for- 
give his brother seven times. I can imagine the expression on His 
face as He answered, “Seven times, Peter? Why, forgive him seven 
times seventy times.” Ifthe Lord forgives so freely, sha’n’t we for: 
give every man? If any man among you is led astray let his brother 
try to get him back again. 

I hate to say farewell. I can not tell you how I have enjoyed 
myself here during the past three months. When we came back 
from Europe I wanted to come here first, but, to be honest with you, 
I was rather afraid. I was afraid the ministers would not come to- 
gether as they did in London, Edinburgh, Glasgow, and other places 
we had visited ; but since I have been here I have never had such 
a band of ministers standing so close by me. The first Sunday 
morning I had a perfect host of ministers come to me and shake me 
by the hand, and when my brother was taken from me they gave 
me the kindest sympathy. I want to thank God for the co-opera- 
tion of the ministry, for if we had not had such co-operation our 
work would not have been near so great. While we are away there 
will be many a prayer going up for the ministers in Boston. Let 
me thank you, dear ministers of God, for your sympathy and 
prayers. 

The next class I want to thank is the press. I can not tell you 
how grateful I feel toward that body. I have to hear the first un- 
kind word said against me by the daily papers. May the blessings 
of Heaven rest upon every member of the pressof Buston. Thank 
God that the daily papers are assisting in the spread of the Gospel, 


MOODY S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


644 


and I hope that the day is not far distant when the people of the 
Northwestern country will look to the daily papers to see what is 
doing for the cause of Christ. 

Twenty-one years ago, I gave myself to work for souls and bring 
them to the Lord Jesus Christ. And I tell you from experience, do 
not neglect private or public prayer; only so can you fit yourself 
for work to become effective Christians. This is my experience, 
By this power we have done what we have in this city; and by this 
power we look for a more wonderful work in Boston. Let me say, 
in closing, go on to higher and higher things. Continue to get 
nearer and nearer to God. I remember a few years ago a little child 
died, and just before his soul went home, he asked his father to lift 
him up, and the father put his hand under the head of his child and 
raised it up. But the child only said, “That is not enough; that is 
not what I want; lift me right up.” The child was wasted ali to 
skin and bones, but still its father complied and lifted the dying 
child out of his bed. But the little fellow kept whispering, fainter 
and fainter, “ Lift me higher, higher, higher!” And the father lifted 
him higher and higher, till he lifted hitm as far as he could reach. 
Yet, still the barely audible whisper came, “ Higher, father, higher,” 
till at last his head fell back, and his spirit passed up to the eternal 
King—high at last. So, my dear friends, let your constant cry be, 
Higher, higher, more near the cross of the Son of God. Now, as 
an old gentleman attending a convention in the Western country 
could not bring himself to say farewell to his beloved hearers—the 
word seemed to choke him—and could only manage to falter out, 
“T bid you good-night,” just so I can not say good-bye, farewell to 
you-—and yet we must part. I must leave you, and in his words I 
merely say to you “Good-night.” A dawn will come up yonder, 
and though never perhaps before that, I expect to meet you all there 
in the resurrection hour. So I bid you “ Good-night,” and by the 
grace of God we will meet in the morning. 


MR. MOODY’S CLOSING PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we want to thank Thee for all the blessings 
that we have received during the last three months in this city. 
We want to thank Thee for the spirit of union which has prevailed 
during these three months among the Christians and the Christian 
churches in this city during that time. We would thank Thee alsc 
for the spirit of harmony which has prevailed among the various 


) PRAVERS. 


1 the people of the 
pers to see what is 


< for souls and bring 
from experience, do 
can you fit yourself 
is is my experience. 
his city; and by this 
Soston. Let me say, 
ss, Continue to get 
ears ago a little child 
sked his father to lift 
head of his child and 
; not enough; that is 
ild was wasted ali to 
and lifted the dying 
pt whispering, fainter 
And the father lifted 
r as he could reach. 
ligher, father, higher,” 
ssed up to the eternal 
your constant cry be, 
fon of God. Now, as 
the Western country 
beloved hearers—the 
manage to falter out, 
good-bye, farewell to 
u, and in his words | 
vill come up yonder, 
t to meet you all there 
od-night,” and by the 


ER. 


ee for all the blessings 
months in this city. 
bn which has prevailed 
ians and the Christian 
ould thank Thee alsc 
»d among the various 


MR. MOOD Y’S CLOSING PRAYER 645 
; 4 


denominations, and that the hearts of their members h bee 
bound together in the carrying on of the great work of th ae i ah 
and we thank Thee that there has been only one spirit ' ae 
meetings that have been held during those three avails Pn a 
And now that the time has come for us to se sais 
2 ca ee of labor, to another place to work iy haber ‘0 
od, go with me and with my co-lz S setnihiet 
and this people follow us aun eiecaces ; a Reale sa 
come back to this city of the great work in ‘that ae ssitiehore 
are going in answer to their prayers. May we hear, O Lord 4 nd 
may we ask that they will be kept in this blessed wank aiid stat 
they may have more and more grace and vigor in carr ne tl ; 
of Thy Gospel to the multitude. oe eee 
We would pray to Thee for all those men that have been brought 
to Thee at these meetings. We pray that not one of them A ll 
be missing from the great meeting at the last day; that the wi ae 
been with us here shall meet with us there in glory We nm r “all 
these ushers who have come here self-denyingly niet sfier ich 
and that Thou may look upon them with Thy aide Ma Heave : 
blessing rest upon them to-night. We pray Heaven's Siesdascs ; 
rest upon those committees that have been so kind es i, and vito 
have been so successful in their difficult work. May they “oat ‘ 
in this great work; and we pray that the power of God may ee 
upon them here to-night. May they continue to be a teal O a 
in the meetings that may hereafter be held. May the fs so 
with them ever be, “ What shall we do to save?”” We ae for ihe 
business men of Boston. We hope that in this work the ihe m : 
come when they shall unite together in forwarding this great v a 
of spreading the Gospel; that they shall be the eteeee a wes 
going forth that shall spread over the whole world; and if this is 
the last meeting, the last time that we shall be called topsthar ae 
permitted to meet together,O God, may we meet at Th + ht 
hand. O God, grant that there shall not one be missi ane 
ae sing at that 
O God, grant that Thy new converts may continue constant, and 


- declare bravely for Thee, for Thou art able to keep them from fall- 


ing. And now we present them to Thee for safe keeping. It is 
the last act here to-night, and we present them, O Son of Ged to 
Thee. Grant that they may be gathered within the walls of Th 

celestial city. May they be kept from falling by Thy mighty ba 


{ 
ti 
| 

; ' 


646 MOUDY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


and grace. O hear our prayer as we pray for those who have been 
almost persuaded. May the fear of the Lord come to them this night. 
May they repent of their sins and come to Thee. If any have not 
settled this question, may this be the night and this the hour that 
they shall look up to Thee and turn a new leaf. And Christ shall 
have the praise and the glory forever. Amen. 


D PRAYERS. 


those who have been 
ne to them this night. 
ee. If any have not 
id this the hour that 


acct st MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


INTRODUCTORY AT CHICAGO. 


N opening the work in the Northwest, I would like to give 
just one of the Scripture texts as our watchword: “ Not by 
might nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith the Lord of 

Hosts.” I say this is our watchword ; we are nothing at all except 
through Christ Jesus, who says: “All power is given unto Me in 
Heaven and in earth.” If we are to be a blessing in the Northwest 
it must be through the power of God. Now let us all rise and sing 
the 110th hymn. It is one of the sweetest we have. It is not on 
the slips you have, but I think we have it in our hearts, and that 
is much better. 


I. 


FIFTY-FIRST PSALM. 


NP Abraham, said Mr. Moody, came into God’s pres- 
ence, it was on his face, and in all the other instances 

where the patriarchs and prophet came to God they 
came to Him the same way. David was on his face in the psalm. 
He’d been away from God. Here he was getting back again. 
They had at first to get back to God, and the blessing would come. 
Then the right spirit would come into them. They must have just 
a clean heart, then the blessing was theirs. Had they a right 
spirit? Had they got to where they could say as the Psalmist did, 
that they had sinned against God and were waiting for forgive- 
ness? They must be able to teach transgressors God’s way. How 
could they teach the wicked God’s way? They had to get the 
Holy Spirit, and then came the joy of God’s salvation. If they 

(647) 


648 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


would convert sinners, they must have this spirit. How should the 
world know God? The world wouldn’t read the Bible; but what 
did the apostle say of Christians? They were known and read of 
all men. This was the way the world read God in them, read 
Christ in them. If he knew his own heart, it was to have God's 
spirit. With it they could do all things; without it their work was 
as sounding brass and asa tinkling cymbal. Over in the book of 
Nehemiah it was said that there was joy in the hearts and lives of 
God’s children. There were too many long-faced Christians. They 
always seemed to him to be under the lash. They’d never got 
away from the law. They wanted more joy. They needed greater 
gladness in their lives. “ Then will I teach transgressors the way, 
and sinners shall be converted unto Thee.” “Then.” This is when 
God had restored to them the joy of His salvation. They didn’t 
place enough stress on the word “then.” It was the turning point 
in their work. This was what Chicago wanted. <A few hundred 
live Christians that had this spirit, could do a mighty work. The 
king could have given a good many sheep if God had wanted them, 
but He didn’t. The Lord didn’t want his money. What does He 
say? Why, to obey was better than sacrifice. This is what was 
wanted-—obedience. The human heart didn’t want to obey. They 
must have a broken and a contrite heart. An incident of an 
Illinois minister whose labors had been unblessed for a time was 
recited, and it was related how his heart had been broken by love 
through a little three-year-old daughter of his, and a revival in the 
church followed. So, here in Chicago, said Mr. Moody, before we 
can have any great blessing, or any blessing at all, the hearts of the 
people have got to be broken, and then the blessing will come. 


IT. 


POWER OF FAITH. 


R. MOODY read the ninth chapter of Mark, beginning at the 
fourteenth verse. The lesson for the day recounted the cir- 
cumstances attending the healing of the young man pos- 

sessed of the dumb spirit, ““ And wheresoever he taketh him he teareth 
him ; and he foameth and gnashed with his teeth.” The young man 


rit. How should the 
the Bible; but what 
‘e known and read of 
. God in them, read 
: was to have God's 
out it their work was 
Over in the book of 
1e hearts and lives of 
ced Christians. They 
. They'd never got 
They needed greater 
ransgressors the way, 
Then.” This is when 
vation. They didn’t 
was the turning point 
ited. A few hundred 
atmighty work. The 
x0d had wanted them, 
oney. What does He 
ce. This is what was 
want toobey. They 
An incident of an 
blessed for a time was 
H been broken by love 
s, and a revival in the 
r. Moody, before we 
all, the hearts of the 
lessing will come. 


ark, beginning at the 
day recounted the cir- 
the young man pos- 
taketh him he teareth 
h.” The young man 


POWER OF FAITH. 649 
was taken to the disciples by his father, but they could not cure him, 
because as Jesus said, they did not have faith. The disciples were 
in great trouble. The Master, Peter, James, and John, had gone 
up to the mountain to pray, and the rest of the disciples left with- 
out their leaders, and the chief of the twelve were beset by scribes, 
who began to discuss matters with them. And so it was in Chicago 
to-day; a great many began to question about the success of these 
revival meetings. If they proved unsuccessful, there would be 
many who would mock as the scribes did when the disciples 
couldn’t cast out the dumb spirit. And so the disciples were glad 
when Jesus came. There was no passage of Scripture that better 
described the state of the Church to-day than this—without faith, 
as the disciples were. Their leader was away, and they had got 
their eyes off the Master. God never did anything, except those 
who asked His blessing had faith. There were not many Chris- 
tians who believed God could cast out the rum-devil as well as the 
dumb-devil. The Lord Jesus could save the drunkard as well as 
cast out the evil spirit from this young man. How long had any 
drunkard been addicted to the use of spirituous liquors? This 
young man had had this spirit from a child. There was apparently 
no hope, but Jesus cast it out. When they were bringing the 
young man to Christ, even then the spirit threw him down. No 
soul ever went to Christ that was not assailed, thrown down, even 
at the Saviour’s feet. The father brought his son to Christ, and 
mothers and fathers might bring their sons, and brothers their 
brothers, and friends their friends expecting a blessing. Churches, 
‘emperance societies, pledges availed nothing unless God converted 
the soul of the drunkard. After reciting several cases of drunkards 
being cured of their appetite for liquor, Mr. Moody concluded his 
address by saying that the Lord would keep anything the sinner 
committed to His trust. All needed a keeper, and if they didn’t 
give the Lord Jesus their lives, their all, to keep, they weren’t sure 
but that they’d fall inside of twenty-four hours. 


650 MOODY'S ADDRESSES 


IIT. 


HEART-SEARCHING. 


““ EARCH me, O God, and know my heart; try me and know 
my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me, 
and lead me in the way everlasting.” “Search me”—not 

my neighbor, nor my brother, nor my sister, but “search me.” You 
who have been here during the week will have seen that I have been 
trying to instil into all the system of heart-searching, that every 
one will go down to the bottom of his own heart. Try and get all 
to say, “O Lord, know my heart.” If God searches us through 
He will make quick work of Chicago. The great trouble is, that 
people search themselves and do not ask God’s aid. We want to 
ask God to come to us with His searching power, that our hearts 
may be bared. What is it that keeps away from us this searching 
of our hearts? It is not the world, it is not the devil, for he has 
not the power. The only thing that keeps it from us is our own 
will, and the only thing that keeps the blessing of God back from 
Chicago is the people. A great many of us wonder how it is that 
our prayers have done no good—how it is that they have gone no 
higher than our heads. The truth would be discovered if we ex- 
amined, that we are not living in communion with God. Some of 
us think that we are in communion with God, but it is a false 
thought. A false hope is worse than no hope at all, because in it a 
man is at rest and happy, and they can not do any work. If we get 
that heart-searching truly, we will know just where we stand. We 
must not look at what people think of us, but what we look like in 
God’s sight. Therefore, we must beware that we have only a false 
hope, and ask God to give us the true searching power. If we 
falsely believe that we have it, may God take it from us to-day, so 
that the work may be deep in Chicago. I have been praying all 
along that the work might be deeper here than anywhere else, but 
unless we get this searching power we won’t do much good. 

I was out on my brother’s farm a short time ago, and he was 
plowing. He could not go very deep, owing to the roots in the 
ground. So it is in Chicago—the roots have got to be taken out 
before our work can goon, Let the prayer of David, “Teach me, 


—_ 


> 5 


rt; try me and know 
y wicked way in me, 
“Search me”’—not 
it “search me.” You 
seen that I have been 
searching, that every 
eart. Try and get all 
searches us through 
great trouble is, that 
d’s aid. We want to 
ower, that our hearts 
from us this searching 
- the devil, for he has 
it from us is our own 
ing of God back from 
wonder how it is that 
hat they have gone no 
pb discovered if we ex- 
with God. Some of 
God, but it is a false 
at all, because in it a 
b any work. If we get 
where we stand. We 
t what we look like in 
t we have only a false 
arching power. If we 
it from us to-day, so 
ave been praying all 
an anywhere else, but 
do much good. 
time ago, and he was 
g to the roots in the 
t got to be taken out 
of David, “Teach me, 


HEART-SEARCHING, 651 


O Lord, and know my heart,” sink deep into us. Let us pray that 
this hour may be a heart-searching time, and if our hope is a false 
one, let us be willing to give it up. I have heard of a lady who 
would not attend our meetings when everything was pleasant. If I 
was ill with an incurable disease, and called a doctor in, and he was 
to say, “ Well, you are all right, you will soon be around again,” 
although he knew I should die in thirty days, I shouldn't like him. 
But there are a great many people whom this would suit. Those 
people do not like to come here and listen to us telling them that 
their souls are sick and diseased, and prescribing just what will cure 
them. It is better to know the truth, that unless we search those 
hearts of ours and take out the disease there is no hope for us. So 
let us pray, and let it be an honest prayer from us, “O God, search 
our hearts.” And if, when you go home, you feel troubled, don’t 
say that you won't came back to the meetings, but ask God for 
more searching power, and then you will be ready to work. 

A doctor comes to a man who has broken his arm. The doctor 
feels around at first and he says, “ Does that hurt you?” touching 
the arm. The man answers, “No.” The physician goes a little 
higher and says, “ Does that hurt your” “No, it don’t.” But by 
and by he touches the broken part, and the man cries out, “ Oh, 
that hurts me!” And so with God. He touches our broken spot 
and we don’t like it. 

Now, I have been thinking that there is ‘a passage in Christ’s 
sermon on the mount that might point out our hindrances in Chi- 
cago—“ Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there re- 
memberest that thy brother has aught against thee, leave there thy 
gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled to thy 
brother, and then come and offer thy gift.” Now, I don’t want you 
to think me personal, but I hope the Spirit of God may be present 
to-day to carry the truth to every one who has a quarrel going on. 
I believe the difficulty with us is the trouble in the Church, the 
strife, the dissension going on among the brethren. If you have 
come to the altar with a quarrel between you and your brother, 
leave there thy gift and go out and be reconciled to him. If you 
have any malice or hatred toward any one, your prayers will go for 
nothing—they will go no higher than your head. I believe this is 
the reason there is so much work lost among us—that you have 
something against some one, or some one has something against you. 
I know of two brothers who had a quarrel—a regular Cain and 


632 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


Abel over again. The mother could not get them reconciled. She 
could not sleep. Her prayers went up night after night. One of 
the brothers saw how his mother felt, and was sorry for her. To 
please her he bought a very costly gift and took it toher. ‘I don’t 
want any gift,” she said. ‘I want you to be reconciled to your 
brother.” If he had been reconciled first, and then brought the gift 
to his mother, it would have been ail right. So it is with God. 
You take your gifts to the altar and keep in your heart hatred to. 
ward your brother. God don’t want your gift until you are recon- 
ciled. 

Now think for a moment. Think of any one who believes you 
are a hypocrite, any one who says you are black-hearted, and who 
does not believe in anything you say in the meetings. Go and 
seek him out and be reconciled to him. That is the Gospel of the 
New Testament. “Oh!” you say, “he will not believe me—he, 
with whom I have a quarrel will not forgive me.” Go and speak 
kindly to him; show him a forgiving spirit yourself, and be recon- 
ciled. Go tell him that you want his forgiveness—that you do not 
want him to stumble in the way of his salvation over you. Ido not 
think of anything that would lift Chicago more than the fact of 
every one here taking this truth to their hearts. We would make 
quick work with it. 

There is a passage in the 11th chapter of Mark, if I know it cor- 
rectly. I hear it quoted very often, in the prayers at the meetings. 
““Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall receive 
them, and ye shall have them.” But they stop there and do not go 
on to the next verse, and they say, ‘God has not answered my 
prayer,” when nothing comes from their supplication. They should 
read the next verse for the reason: ‘‘ When ye stand praying, forgive 
if ye have aught against any, that your Father which is in Heaven 
may forgive your trespasses. But if ye do not forgive, neither will 
your Father which is in Heaven forgive your trespasses.’’ When 
they pray, they want God to forgive them, but they are not willing 
to forgive others. Suppose I was a minister, and I had trouble with 
a brother, and some pretty hard words arose from the quarrel. Well, 
I get up and go to a man and pray with him. I find he has a great 
deal of trouble, and I say to him: “Won't you just cast your 
troubles on the Lord?” He says: “ Well, the fact is, I have had a 
quarrel with a man, and I feel bitter toward him.” Then I say: 
‘Go and forgive the man, and be reconciled toward him.” But he 


hem reconciled. She 
after night. One of 
as sorry for her. To 
kittoher. “I don't 
e reconciled to your 
then brought the gift 

So it is with God. 
your heart hatred to. 
until you are recon. 


one who believes you 
ack-hearted, and who 
> meetings. Go and 
is the Gospel of the 
not believe me—he, 
me.” Go and speak 
surself, and be recon- 
ess—that you do not 
mn over you. Ido not 
ore than the fact of 
rts. We would make 


fark, if I know it cor- 
yers at the meetings. 

that ye shall receive 
p there and do not go 
las not answered my 
ication. They should 
stand praying, forgive 
sr which is in Heaven 
xt forgive, neither will 
r trespasses.”” When 
t they are not willing 
nd I had trouble with 
om the quarrel. Well, 

I find he has a great 
t you just cast your 
e fact is, I have had a 

him.” Then I say: 
oward him.” But he 


THE LORD'S PRAYER MISNAMED., 653 


asks me: ‘You had a quarrel with a man, did you go to him and 


forgive him?” So we can not go to men and preach Christ if we: 


have hard feelings ourselves for anybody. If there is any worker 
here to-day who has a quarrel with his brother, let him go at once 
and seek a reconciliation. 

Let us havea heart-searching here to-day. Let us ask God’s and 
our own efforts, so that the car of salvation will rush along in the 
city. I tried to reconcile two men who stood very high in the com- 
munity, who had had a quarrel, and in their churches ihe wheels of 
salvation’s car were clogged. I said to one of them, “ Don’t you 
know that God is not going to bless your church as long as this 
quarrel is going on? Now, I would like you to go to that other 
man and say, ‘If you think I have done you an injustice, I want 
you to forgive me.’”” “ Well,” saia ne, “I don’t know that I can put 
it in that way. I fear I am a little to blame, and I don’t think he 
would receive me.” The other man said the same thing, but I just 
reasoned with them and got them together, and they were soon 
down on their knees, asking God to bless the church. It was pride 
that kept these two men separate and hindered the work of their 
churches, and whenever that was reached and cut out, everything 
went on smoothly. 

There are a great many things that have to be rooted out in 
Chicago before the work goes on prosperously. If there is any 
secret sin clustering around our hearth, we must draw that sin out 
before our work will be blessed by fruit. 


IV. 


THE LORD’S PRAYER MISNAMED. 


HIS prayer had been called by a good many “The Lord’s 
Prayer,” but it wasn’t; it was the disciples’ prayer. The dis- 
ciples had been with ‘esus, and He was praying. And when 

He finished, they said to H.i., “Teach us, Lord, how to pray.” 

They didn’t ask Him to teach them how to preach ; man knows how 

to do that; but they wanted to know how to pray. They'd all soon 

know how to preach if they only knew how to pray. He believed 
he spoke the feelings of thousands of Christians when he said they 


654 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


hadn’t known what it was to pray. “Teach us” should be the 
prayer of every Christian heart. If the disciples nearest Jesus needed 
to be taught how to pray, how much more did Christians to-day, as 
lukewarm as the Church is now, need this spirit and teaching. What 
they wanted was heartfelt, heart-searching prayer. He had 1 ver 
been more impressed with the lesson than in the warning when he 
was reading over the chapter before the meeting. In the twentieth 
chapter of Matthew, at the twentieth verse, it was said that the 
mother of James and John came to Jesus and asked Him that her 
two sons, Zebedee’s children, might sit, the one on Christ’s right 
hand, the other on His left, in His kingdom, And Jesus answered, 
“Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that 
I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am bap- 
tized with? They say unto Him, We are able. And He saith unto 
them, Ye shall drink indeed of My cup, and be baptized with the bap. 
tism that I am baptized with: but to sit on My right hand, and on 
My left, is not Mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom 
it is prepared of My Father. And when the ten heard it they were 
moved with indignation against the two brethren.” John was near- 
est Jesus, and yet, like the others, though he knew how to preach, 
he did not know how to pray. These words were uttered by Jesus 
in the evening of His ministry. ‘e mother of James and John 
came to Him with this prayer, ! : ‘cause it was prompted bya 
desire to be great in His kingdom, .r > Huly Spirit didn’t put it into 
her heart, and Jesus didn’t answer it. The ten disciples when 
they heard it were indignant—jealous. There would have been 
trouble if Christ hadn't been there. Jesus then went on to speak 
about humility in Mat. xx. 25, and said to His disciples that whoso. 
ever would be chief among them, let him be the servant. ‘“ Even,” 
said Jesus, “as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but 
to minister, and to give His life a ransom for many.” In other 
words, Christ taught His disciples not to be ambitious. Probably 
the mother of James and John wanted her sons to be made prime 
minister, or chief secretary, or to be appointed to some high office 
in Christ’s kingdom, when it was established, as many thought it 
would be. Christians to-day ought to pray and ask to be taught 
how to pray. In the ninth chapter of Luke it is related that when 
Jesus steadfastly set His face to go to Jerusalem, He sent on some 
of His disciples to a village of the Samaritans to make ready for 
Him. The people wouldn’t receive Him because [is face was as 


s” should be the 
arest Jesus needed 
hristians to-day, as 
nd teaching. What 
or, He had 1cver 
> warning when he 
In the twentieth 
was said that the 
ked Him that her 
e on Christ’s right 
nd Jesus answered, 
nk of the cup that 
tism that I am bap- 
And He saith unto 
ptized with the bap- 
right hand, and on 
nto them for whom 
n heard it they were 
n.” John was near- 
new how to preach, 
re uttered by Jesus 
of James and John 
was prompted bya 
frit didn’t put it into 
ten disciples when 
e would have been 
n went on to speak 
lisciples that whoso- 
servant. “ Even,” 
ministered unto, but 
r many.” In other 
nbitious. Probably 
s to be made prime 
to some high office 
as many thought it 
d ask to be taught 
is related that when 
m, He sent on some 
; to make ready for 
huse [lis face was as 


DANIEL'S PRAYER. 655 
though He would go to Jerusalem. And when these same disciples 
saw it, they wanted Jesus to send down fire from Heaven and de- 
stroy the village. But Christ rebuked them, and told them they 
didn't know of what manner of spirit they were, “for the Son of 
Man came not to destroy men’s lives, but to save them.” These 
disciples were closest to Christ, had been with Him all through His 
ministry, and yet, even when it was about to close, they chean't 
learned how to pray. The Lord's prayer to His Father was given 
in the seventeenth chapter of John, but what was commonly called 
the Lord’s prayer, was the disciples’ prayer, the one Jesus taught 
them. There was no difference between a disciple’s prayer and a 
sinner’s prayer. One spoke to God as “Our Father,” the other as 
the great God who ruled this world and all the worlds. The cight- 
een hundred years since Jesus taught His disciples how to ota 
had rolled away, but it hadn't been changed, it hadn't been im. 
proved. “Thy will be done.” The ungodly man couldn't say that. 
The sinner’s stumbling-block is that he isn’t willing to give up his 
will for God’s. The ungodly man can’t forgive others, and so he 
can’t ask God to forgive him. God’s grace only can make man do 
this. Many men stumble over this prayer into perdition. Many 
say their prayers like the man who counts his beads—there’s no soul 
in it. No man out of communion with God can say, “ Thy will be 
done,” or “ Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who have 
trespassed against us.” 


WA 


DANIEL’S PRAYER. 


HERE is an impression abroad now that it has always been 
women and a few weak men who have prayed; but you can 
scarcely find a bolder nor a wiser man than Daniel. He was 

prime minister of that great nation fora long while. He was a wiser 

ruler and had more influence than any other man living on earth, 
and yet he was a man of prayer, and was not afraid to pray publicly. 

We are told that when he was taken down to Babylon the great 

king had a dream, and no man in his realm could interpret it. The 

king thought of his captive, Danicl, and brought him and asked him 


636 MOOD Y’S ADDRESSES, 


what it meant. The young man, if he had not believed in God’ 
power, might have turned away. But he didn’t. He boldly told 
Nebuchadnezzar what God had written there. 

But not only was Daniel a praying man, but he had faith that 
God would answer his prayers. Some people pray enough, but do 
not have faith that the Lord will hear them. They are lukewarm. 
There are a good many people of this sort here to-day. Daniel 
spoke to God with every confidence of being answered. Look at 
him when he went down into the den of lions how he prayed. 
Prayer was with everything he did. I think we would have a good 
deal better government in this country if our rulers prayed more. 
There would be a good many sneers at first, but the result would be 
a good government and a wise one. 

This man believed in prophecies, too, and I can fancy how the old 
man’s eyes opened on turning away back to Jeremiah’s writing, 
seventy years before, and reading, “I will punish them; the young 
men shall die by the sword, their sons and their daughters shall die 
by famine,” and then looking around him and seeing how all the 
words pronounced had been fulfilled. They disobeyed the Lord. 
When they were in Palestine, He said to His people that they must 
rest on the Sabbath day, but for four hundred and ninety years 
they disobeyed God’s command, and the Lord said, “If they won't 
do what I want them, I will make them.” So he sent Nebuchad- 
nezzar out after them, and he captured them, and held them for 
seventy years. If they would not give the Lord this, He said He 
would take it; and so if we do not give up what God wants us to, 
He will not forgive us our sins, but keep us in bondage, and we will 
never hang our harps upon the willow, or sing the songs of Zion. 

I will just read: “We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, 
and have done wickedly, and have rebelled even by departing from 
Thy precepts and from Thy judgments. 

“Neither have we harkened unto Thy servants the prophets, 
which spake in Thy name to our kings, our princes, our fathers, and 
to all the people of the land. 

‘ O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto Thee, but unto us con- 
fusion of faces, as at this day, to the men of Judah, and to the in- 
habitants of Jerusalem, and unto all Israel that are near and that 
are far off, through all the countries whither Thou hast driven them, 
because of their trespass that they have trespassed against us. 

“O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our kings, to 


- believed in God’ 
t. He boldly told 


t he had faith that 
yray enough, but do 
They are lukewarm. 
ere to-day. Daniel 
xznswered. Look at 
ns how he prayed. 
. would have a good 
rulers prayed more. 
the result would be 


an fancy how the old 
. Jeremiah’s writing, 
ish them; the young 
ir daughters shall die 
d seeing how all the 
disobeyed the Lord. 
eople that they must 
ed and ninety years 
said, “If they won't 
b he sent Nebuchad- 
, and held them for 
ord this, He said He 
that God wants us to, 
bondage, and we will 
the songs of Zion. 
e committed iniquity, 
en by departing from 


rvants the prophets, 
Inces, our fathers, and 


ee, but unto us con- 
fudah, and to the in- 
ht are near and that 
hou hast driven them, 
ssed against us. 

ce, to our kings, to 


DANIEL’S PRAYER, 


af 


Thee. 

“To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though 
we have rebelled against Him.” * i 

You will see by his prayer he believes in God’s power to for- 
give. He believes implicitly in the God he says his prayers to 
Oh, that we had a lot of men in Chicago who believed Tike thts 
Daniel! It is not preachers we want—we can get plenty Bf then 
it is men who can help us by their prayers. Heat how he pra red: 

“ Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God ne gall 
in His laws, which He set before us by His servants the bro shets 

“Yea, all Israel have transgressed Thy law, even by a avtine 
that they might not obey Thy voice; therefore Thy curse Uae 
upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses ike se 
ant of God, because we have sinned against Him. a 

“ And He hath confirmed His words which He spake against us 
and against our judges that judged us by bringing upon iis a pict 
evil, for under the whole Heaven hast not been done as hast } 2e 
‘done upon Jerusalem. nee ahs 

“ And it is written in the law of Moses all this evil is come upon 
us: yet made we not one prayer before the Lord our God ae we 
might turn from our iniquities and understand the truth. 

“ Therefore hath the Lord watched upon the evil and brought it 
upon us, for the Lord our God is righteous in all His works vwiitels 
He doeth, for we obeyed not His voice. 

“ And now, O Lord our God, Thou hast brought Thy people forth 
out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast gotten Thee 
renown as at this day, we have sinned; we have done wickedly. 

Lord, according to all Thy righteousness, I beseech Thee let 
Thine anger and Thy fury be turned away from the city of Jerusa- 
lem, Thy holy mountain, because for our sins and the iniquities of 
our fathers, Jerusalem and Thy people are become a reproach to all 
that are about us. 

“1 Now, therefore, O, our God, hear the prayer of Thy servant and 
his supplications, and cause Thy face to shine upon Thy sanctuar 
that is desolate for the Lord’s sake.” ie 

He had not Christ to pray to like us. Daniel asks: ‘For the 
Lord's sake.” He lived on the other side of Christ, and could not 
like us, say, “For Christ’s sake.” Oh, what a power we have ti 
prayer in Jesus. And he goes on: 


our princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against 


658 MOOD Y’S ADDRESSES 


“O Lord, incline Thine ear and hear; open Thine eyes and be. 
hold our desolation and the city which is called by Thy name, for 
we do not present our supplication before Thee for our righteous. 
ness, but for Thy great mercies. 

“O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; hearken and do; defer not, for 
Thine own sake, O my God; for Thy city and Thy people are called 
by Thy name. 

“And while I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin 

Mark that—“ And confessing my sin ”’— 

—“And the sin of my people, Israel, and presenting my supplica. 
tion before the Lord my God for the holy mountain of my God; 

“Yea, while I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom 
I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, 
touched me about the time of the evening oblation. 

“And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O, Daniel, I 
am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding.” 

Before he got off his knees Daniel’s message was answered. I don't 
know how far Heaven is off, but the Angel Gabriel, the messenger 
of God, came to him while he was praying. Think of that. Here 
was a man who could not look at God for the sins of his people, who 
only prayed earnestly, and before he was through, his prayer was 
answered, and Gabriel appeared. We know of only three visits that 
Gabriel ever made. This one, when he came to bring God’s people 
to the Promised Land. Daniel was told that God was able to do 
everything, and the messenger not only told him that the children 
of Israel were going to the Promised Land, but he let Daniel into 
the secret of the Messiah’s coming. The second time he came to 
Zecharias. At first Zecharias doubted him, but he said: “I am he 
who sits in the presence of God.” And then he came to the young 
maiden who bore the Christ, and that was the third visit. 

There are a great many young Christians in Chicago who have got 
into the way of the world, who are falling into the way of thinking 
and believing that God has given over answering prayer. God an- 
swers prayers to-day as readily as He did of old. Infidels, and scoffers, 
and scientists may tell us that the world must move along in a cer- 
tain way, and a divine answer to a prayer is absurd—the affairs of 
the world are, and always have been, going along in a regular way. 
There were infidels and scoffers, doubtless, in Babylon, who very 
likely langhed at this answer to the prayer of Daniel. 

But we have in this book a long list of promises to answer prayer, 


Thine eyes and be. 
led by Thy name, for 
ee for our righteous. 


ind do; defer not, for 
Thy people are called 


1d confessing my sin-- 


-esenting my supplica- 
untain of my God; 
+he man Gabriel, whom 
ig caused to fly swiftly, 
ylation. 
, and said, O, Daniel, | 
dJerstanding.” 
> was answered. I don't 
Gabriel, the messenger 
Think of that. Here 
> sins of his people, who 
hrough, his prayer was 
of only three visits that 
e to bring God’s people 
ht God was able to do 
him that the children 
but he let Daniel into 
fecond time he came to 
but he said: “I am he 
he came to the young 
he third visit. 
n Chicago who have got 
ato the way of thinking 
rering prayer. God an- 
id. Infidels, and scoffers, 
st move along in a cet- 
5 absurd—the affairs of 
along in a regular way. 
, in Babylon, who very 
bf Daniel. 
bmises to answer prayer, 


ON THE CIRCULAR CALLING TO PRAYER. 659 
and let us unite in asking God’s blessing on our meetings in Farwell 
Hall, and that the harvest of converts will be abundant. Ask it sin- 
cerely and earnestly, and you will see how quick the Lord will come 
and revive His work in this city. 


VI. 


ON THE COMMITTEE'S CIRCULAR CALLING 
TO PRAYER. 


HEN I left the ministers yesterday, I turned to the 30th 
chapter of the Second of Chronicles. I thought I had 
read it pretty thoroughly already, but began to think 

about it and that circular, and I found there was just the same 

scene enacted 2,500 years ago in Jerusalem, that was being gone 
over in Chicago to-day. Hezekiah had cleared the temple and 
invited all to come and worship. His father was one of the worst 
kings Jerusalem ever had. Not only did he set up images for 
worship in place of the Lord, but he closed the gates of the 
temple of Jerusalem to all religious services, burned the young 
children, and through his cruelty was a terror to all. And he was 
the descendant of David—Jerusalem’s king. hen he died, after 
reigning nearly sixteen years, his son Hezekiah took the throne, and 
the very first thing he did, in the very first year, in the very first 
month, was to open the temple. It took him eight days to clean it 
from all its filth and uncleanness, to thoroughly purge it. It would 
be a good thing to clean out a few of the churches of Chicago in the 
same way. Clean out the fairs, the shows, the lyceums, the concerts 
that are held there. “Ah,” some of you will say, “ how are we going 
to pay our debts, set ourselves on our feet? It will be pretty hard 

to do this if we put out all our fairs.” If there is going to be a 

revival, we must do this; and if there is a revival, your debts will soon 

be paid. I think we have been working in the wrong way. We 
want more earnestness and fewer fairs. 

It is said in the thirty-sixth verse of the icant chapter 
of Chronicles, that “ Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that God 
had prepared the people, for the thing was done suddenly.” 

God will work mightily when we get ready; but we must be com- 
pletely ready. We are not all of one mind yet. Some say, “ Why 


660 MOOD Y’S ADDRESSES. 


don’t you open the inquiry-room?” Wearenot ready. Let us wait 
for a month if necessary; but let us be ready. God can do more in 
a day than we can do in all time. And we must bear in mind that 
more attention must be given to getting ready. It goes on: 

“And Hezekiah sent to all lsrael and Judah, and wrote letters 
also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the 
house of the Lord at Jerusalem, to keep the passover unto the Lord 
God of Israel. 

“For the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the 
congregation in Jerusalem, to keep the passover in the second 
month. 

“Tor they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had 
not sanctified themselves sufficiently ’— 

The ministers were not ready, neither were the people, for we 
read, “ Neither had the people gathered themselves together to 
Jerusalem.” 

So it is with us. We don’t see eye to eye, toe to toe, heart to 
heart; we don’t run together like drops of water. When we do, 
the Lord will come suddenly. 

“And the thing pleased the king and all the congregation. 

“So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout 
all Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, that they should come to 
keep the passover unto the Lord God of Israel at Jerusalem; for 
they had not done it of a long time in such sort as it was written.” 

They had not kept the Word of the Lord. It was commanded-— 
given in the law of Moses—that they should keep the passover. It 
had been neglected for a long time, and so posts were sent out to 
tell the people to come into the temple now. 

‘So the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes 
throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the command- 
ment of the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto 
the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and He will return to 
the remnant of you that are escaped out of the hand of the kings 
of Assyria.” 

When the faith of this king was seen by the Lord, He turned His 
. judgment from his people, and the sons and daughters of those who 
had been held in Assyria, by reason of their transgression, were 
invited to the sanctuary. And I thought when I read this chapter 
how the judgment of God for the last sixteen years had been turned 
against Chicago. Do you remember about sixteen years ago how 


5. 


not ready. Let us wait 
God can do more in 
nust bear in mind that 
ly. It goes on: 

idah, and wrote letters 
7 should come to the 
passover unto the Lord 


1is princes, and all the 
assover in the second 


because the priests had 


vere the people, for we 
themselves together to 


ye, toe to toe, heart to 
f water. When we do, 


the congregation. 
proclamation throughout 
t they should come to 
Israel at Jerusalem ; for 
sort as it was written.” 
1. It was commanded-- 
d keep the passover. It 
b posts were sent out to 


the king and his princes 
brding to the command- 
Israel, turn again unto 
l, and He will return to 
pf the hand of the kings 


he Lord, He turned His 
| daughters of those who 
heir transgression, were 
when I read this chapter 
n years had been turned 
sixteen years ago how 


ON THE CIRCULAR CALLING TO PRAYER. 661 


the spirit seemed to be stirred within us? How, when the war 
came, we gathered together, and how earnestly we learned to pray ? 
It seemed as if the war had done more in teaching us to pray than 
anything else. But see how we have been afflicted since then. 
You know how, after that, people—Sunday-school teachers and all 
—got a few straws and dollars together, and then they became care- 
less, went out riding on Sunday, and enjoyed the world after their 
fashion, and forgot God; how the fire came and swept away what 
they had, and then they said, “ We have no time to think of Christ ; 
we must go in and make what we have lost.” And then the panic 
came and made us more worldly, and so we see how we have been 
turned off the path. No city has had such an experience, and yet 
it seems to me no city has had such blessings. We had great ad- 
vantages. Ten years ago you had your theatres shut on Sundays. 
There was a law against this thing then. Ten years ago the people 
used to go to church, but now they have their Sunday newspapers, 
and their printed sermons, and keep out of church. They read the 
polished sermons and criticise them. When people look for the 
qualification of a minister now, they say, “Oh, he’s an orator.” 
They don’t look at his faith at all—don’t ask if he has the Spirit of 
God. What we want is earnestness and faith in the sermons, and 
then their power will sweep through the whole Northwest. 

In the ninth verse we read, “ For if ye turn again unto the Lord, 
your brethren and your children shall find compassion before them 
that lead them captive, so that they shall come again into this land: 
for the Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn 
away His face from you, if ye return unto Him.” 

They were ground down by their captivity, but if they turned 
unto the Lord they would find compassion. There may be fathers 
and mothers in this audience who have sons, now spending their 
time in the billiard saloons and drinking halls, who have been swept 
into this captivity by the letting down of our principles and morals. 
Oh, my God, show us the way to come down to days of peace and 
purity, and forgive our sins. 

The posts were sent out all over the country with the proclama- 
tion to the people. “So the posts passed from city to city through 
the country of Ephraim and Manasseh even unto Zebulon; but 
they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them.” 

And the people who saw the proclamation laughed at it. Ah, 
how many men in the Northwest, when they see our circular, will 


662 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


take it up and say, ‘What! a day of fasting and prayer; that kinc 
of thing has gone by,” and will treat it with scorn. Why, my 
friends, we don’t need to go back twenty-five hundred years to find 
people who will scoff at a proclamation of this kind. But, than 
God, they did not all mock. People came in crowds to Jerusalem 
to attend the services. Jerusalem was the center of that country, 
as Chicayo is of the Northwest. All through Judea the hand of 
God was seen, and they assembled, through its influence, at Jeru- 
salem, to keep the feast of unleavened bread. 

‘And they arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem, 
and all the altars for incense took they away, and cast them into the 
brook Kidron.,” 

By the king’s faith they gathered there and smote the idols and 
broke the altars. Let us act like Hezekiah here; let us lead the 
people by our faith into true worship. Let us be of one mind and 
one spirit—eye to eye and heart to heart for God—and see how 
quick the blessing will come. 


VII. 


HUMILITY. 


HEY had been at these noon meetings for four days now, and 
it didn’t often happen that they’d had such an opportunity 
for self-examination. They hadn't often had such a heart- 

moving and such an overturning of themselves. It should trouble 
them, this question should, why God didn’t use Christians more. 
They'd had this thought before them all the week. Now, what was 
the motive they had? Was it God’s glory or their own they’re 
working for? Was it Christ’s name or their own? The longer he 
lived the more he was convinced that the greatest enemy he had 
was spiritual pride. The soul that wasn’t renewed had enough of 
pride, God knew; but when it came to the Christian, he had it too. 
It was spiritual pride. He wanted all this rubbish in the heart 
cleared away. They’d got to live in the power of God, and feel the 
truth of the hymn, “Oh, to be nothing!” The subject he’d read, 
he said, was in the tenth chapter of First Corinthians, and at the 
thirty-first verse: “ Do all to the glory of God.” They’d got to get 
se'f out of the way. They'd got to feel just as the apostle did when 


* 
Ye 


and prayer; that kind 
vith scorn. Why, my 
-hundred years to find 
this kind. But, thank 
n crowds to Jerusalem 
‘enter of that country, 
gh Judea the hand of 
its influence, at Jeru- 


that were in Jerusalem, 
and cast them into the 


nd smote the idols and 
1 here; let us lead the 
us be of one mind and 
for God—and see how 


for four days now, and 
d such an opportunity 
ten had such a heart- 
es. It should trouble 
ft use Christians more. 
week. Now, what was 
or their own they're 
own? The longer he 
preatest enemy he had 
bnewed had enough of 
hristian, he had it too. 
5 rubbish in the heart 
rer of God, and feel the 
he subject he’d read, 
orinthians, and at the 
H.”” They'd got to get 
hs the apostle did when 


HUMILITY, 663 


he wrote this. Whatever they did had to be done to the glory 
of God. How quick God would come into their hearts when they 
got self out of the way. In another place Paul says that Christians 
are not to give this glory to men. They had got to empty them- 
selves of self, and come to Him. They weren't fountains, they're 
only channels the streams flowed through; they weren't light, but 
merely the pipes the gas came through. John the Baptist was only 
“a voice” in the wilderness. And when Elijah was under the juni- 
per-tree he got to be jealous and wanted to die, and said he wasn't 
any better than his father. It was the same with Jonah. He couldn't 
do anything until he let God use him just as He wanted to. It 
wasn't the glory of God he was seeking. They had got to get out 
of self, then it would be easy enough for God to use them. It 
seemed strange that twelve men had been with Jesus for three whole 
years and yet hadn’t got out of self. But they hadn’t. In the ninth 
chapter of Mark at the thirty-first verse we read that He told His 
disciples that He’d have to be delivered into the hands of sinful men 
and be killed, and then rise again, on the third day. They could 
not understand Him, and were afraid to ask Him. But a little 
further on, Mark says, when they got to Capernaum Jesus asked His 
disciples why they disputed on the way, and then when they were 
silent He told them that they’d been talking about who'd be great- 
est. Then Jesus taught them humility. They were ashamed of 
themselves. This was why they did not speak when He asked them. 
He prayed God would make each one ashamed of himself. They 
might have an unholy ambition. It was their own glory, not 
Christ’s, they were looking after and thinking of. ‘Who should be 
greatest ?”” He puta little child where they could see it in their 
midst. Jesus wanted to show them their sin and folly. John wasn’t 
humble enough, and yet was the most loving. They might be 
jealous because they didn’t belong to some clique or party. They 
shouldn’t have any such feeling. Then, again, in the tenth chapter 
of Mark, at the thirty-third verse, He had to reprove the same thing. 
He was now coming to the cross, Jesus was, and His heart was sor- 
rowful, and He was on His way up to Jerusalem. James and John 
«came to Him in the midst of all this, and after He had been talking 
about His suffering, how He’d be killed and cast out, these two dis- 
ciples nearest to Him wanted to sit the one on His right hand, the 
other on His left in the kingdom. This is what comes in the churches 
when there are strifes among the brethren. And even at His death, 


664 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


in the twenty-second chapter of Luke, nineteenth verse, when He 
was at the last supper, the disciples were again discussing who 
should be greatest. Here we had it in a Baptist minister going 
across the way to see how a Methodist minister was getting on. He 
didn’t “thank God” for the work. Until they were ready to do 
that, they wouldn’t be vessels fit for the Master’s use. They hadn't 
got deep enough yet. They must be emptied of self. God must 
show them the sins that clustered around their hearts. Could they 
rejoice when God blessed some one else? Then they had got down 
where God wanted them. If it was God’s glory they were after, all 
will be willing to be nothing. 


VIII. 


CALL FOR WORKERS. 


R. MOODY said the sixth week of the meetings had been 
reached. The political excitement would be over Tuesday 
night, and it was about time that some Christian work was 

done. It seemed as if for five weeks the army had been getting 
ready for a regular campaign. He wanted every man and woman 
who loved the Lord Jesus to begin to do something for Christ. He 
had noticed that a good many really honest, conscientious Chris- 
tians came to the Tabernacle frequently, but always came alone. 
Why should Christians come alone when the streets are full of peo- 
ple who would come if they were asked? One Sunday morning re- 
cently, as a man was on his way to the morning meeting at the 
Tabernacle, he met five Swedes who asked him if he could tell them 
where they could leave their baggage. They had just come into the 
city and were going out on a night train, and wanted to be relieved 
of their baggage so that they could see the place. He told them that 
he could take them to a place where their bags could be left, and 
brought them to the Tabernacle, where he found a room for their 
things, and they stayed to the meeting and seemed to enjoy it. On 
the way the man noticed that one of the Swedes had a very heavy 
bag, so he took hold of one side and helped him carry it. The 
Swede was gratified and surprised at this attention, and asked the 
man if he knew the eleventh commandment. The man was a little 
taken aback, and the Swede repeated it, “ A new commandment give 


enth verse, when He 
again discussing who 
aptist minister going 
er was getting on. He 
ney were ready to do 
er’s use. They hadn't 
d of self. God must 
ir hearts. Could they 
en they had got down 
ry they were after, all 


ERS. 


he meetings had been 
vould be over Tuesday 
ne Christian work was 
rmy had been getting 
very man and woman 
ething for Christ. He 
t, conscientious Chris- 
t always came alone. 
streets are full of peo- 
e Sunday morning re- 
orning meeting at the 
m if he could tell them 
had just come into the 
wanted to be relieved 
e. He told them that 
ngs could be left, and 
pund a room for their 
emed to enjoy it. On 
edes had a very heavy 
fd him carry it. The 
ention, and asked the 
The man was a little 
bw commandment give 


THE CHRISTIAN'S FAME, 665 


I unto you, that ye love one another.” “ Oh, yes,” the man said, he 
knew that. The Swede said a good many who preach the ex com- 
mandments never give the e/eventh, but he thought from this man’s 
kindness that he must know that commandment. Now, said Mr. 
Moody, we want to get into the spirit of that eleventh command- 
ment. Let us go into these dens of infamy and saloons, and 
bring men in from the by-ways and hedges. I think three classes 
of people come to these meetings. The first class come to criticise. 
They sit in the gallery and get behind a post and peck around. 
They say, “Oh, there’s nothing interesting here. It won't last. 
Pretty soon they'll tear down the building and that'll be the last 
you'll hear of these meetings. Um, ah!” We're glad to have these 
people come even if they come to criticise, but they don’t help us 
any. The second class come just to inquiry meetings. They are 
sponges. They take in, but they don’t give out anything. The 
third class are workers. If we only had one thousand workers here, 
we could work a great reformation. Go out and bring people in 
from all sorts of places. 


IX. 


CHRISTIAN’S FAME. 


THE 


ARY anointed Christ’s feet with the ointment. <A great 
many people have lived in all ages who were ambitious of 
leaving a great name on record. We find men in this 

country, and in Europe, who would give anything to have a town or 
an institution named after them. Think of the numbers of people 
who have lived during the past 6,000 years, ambitious to attain dis- 
tinction. Think of those who lived in the time of Mary who had 
this desire. Where are they? Why, in fifty years, their names are 
blotted out. Their memory has faded away. Their names are soon 
forgotten; but when a man or woman does anything for Christ, 
that deed lives forever. There was a woman who merely anointed 
Christ’s feet, and her name has come down to us through eighteen 
centuries. Some one has said, By that act, she has chained her 
name to ‘!:e Gospel. She did not know what a great thing she was 
doing; she did it out of he great love for the Master. Look at 
that woman who cast her mite into the treasury-box in the temple. 
Her donation was so small that, in the morning, probably the 


666 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


papers of Jerusalem, if there had been any, would have taken no 
notice of sucha small sum. But the Master saw it, and, not looking 
at the amount as we do in banks on earth, judged it from what it 
cost her to give it. He judged it from the standard of the Bank of 
Heaven. The speaker concluded by urging all to be more zealous 
in the service of Jesus and less ambitious of worldly affairs. 


X. 


LESSONS FROM THE RAISING OF LAZARUS. 


LIJAH, when he wanted to raise up the woman’s child, called 
upon God; whereas, when Christ brought Jairus’ daughter to 

_ life, He simply said, “ Daughter, I say unto thee arise.” His 

was the voice of God. He meets a crowd of mourners bearing 
away that young man to the grave, and He steps up to the coffin and 
simply says, ‘“ Young man, I say unto thee arise,” and he rises at once. 
Look at Lazarus—how, when he was commanded, he came forth. 
The circumstances in connection with the raising of Lazarus should 
be borne in mind. A great many people wonder why it was that 
Chest did not come at once to Martha and Mary, whom He loved, 
whenever He heard of their affliction. It was to try them; and it is 
the same with His dealings toward us. If He seems not to come 
to us in our affliction, it is only to test us. There was one thought 
in connection with the story which he (Mr. Moody) wished to 
impress upon their minds. He told these two weeping sisters to 
perform three things—lead Him to the sepulchre, then to take away 
that stone, and then, when he got life, to loose him and let him go. 
A great many people in Chicago have received Christ, but they are 
still bound with the grave-clothes, and consequently have no power. 
If Christ had power to raise that young man who had been in the 
grave four days, He had power to put the grave-clothes from him in 
a word, and remove that stone from the sepulchre, and He must 
have known where he was placed. He gave him life, but he must 
disentangle himself of what kept him from walking. The speaker 
then urged upon ail to come to Him who had power, with a word, 
to fill all hearts—whether they were the hearts of gamblers or 
harlots or drunkards—with purity. If He had power to raise the 
dead from the grave, He has power to raise souls from the sink of 


would have taken no 
aw it, and, not looking 
idged it from what it 
undard of the Bank of 
Il to be more zealous 
vorldly affairs. 


- OF LAZARUS. 


-woman’s child, called 
rht Jairus’ daughter to 
unto thee arise.” His 
1 of mourners bearing 
eps up to the coffin and 
e,”’ and he rises at once. 
anded, he came forth. 
sing of Lazarus should 
yonder why it was that 
lary, whom He loved, 
>to try them; and it is 
He seems not to come 
[here was one thought 
r. Moody) wished to 
two weeping sisters to 
hre, then to take away 
bse him and let him go. 
ed Christ, but they are 
juently have no power. 
n who had been in the 
wve-clothes from him in 
pulchre, and He must 
him life, but he must 
valking. The speaker 
nd power, with a word, 
earts of gamblers or 
ad power to raise the 
souls from the sink of 


WHAT TO DO WITH DOUBTS. 667 


iniquity. He tells every man and woman in Farwell Hall that He 


can do it, for He says, “ I am the Redeemer and the life.” 


XI. 


WHAT TO DO WITH DOUBTS. 


E said that he had beer. asked the other day by a man if 
there was any truth in Scripture—if Jesus Christ ever said 
Himself that He was more than man. He (Mr. Moody) did 

not see how any man could read the Gospel of John without being 

thoroughly convinced that Jesus was God in the flesh. Let us dake 
the sixth chapter, and we find, “I am the bread of life;” in the 
seventh chapter, “I am from Him”—speaking of the Father. 

Then, in the eighth chapter, He proclaims Himself “the light of 

the world.” In the ninth chapter we find another aliaston to His 


, divinity, and in the tenth chapter He says, “I am the door,” and 


again, ‘“‘I am the good shepherd.” Do you ever think how Jews 
would have been justified in putting Christ to death if He had not 
been more than human? If He had only been a man, the Jews 
had a perfect right to put Him to death. It seemed to the speaker 
as if the book of John should forever put at rest any question of 
Christ’s divinity. In this tenth chapter we find the word “I” 
repeated some twenty-eight times. The preacher quoted several 
verses from the tenth chapter, proving indisputably the divine 
nature of Christ, and then drew attention to the last part of the 
thirty-fifth verse: “And the Scriptures can not be broken.” The 
present age was a skeptical age, and we frequently heard the question 
put, “Is the Word of God true?” He (Mr. Moody) recommended 
the doubters to take this thirty-fifth verse, and then run through 
the Bible from Genesis to Revelations, and see if the Word of God 
had ever been broken. No one could ever find in a single par- 
ticular where the Word had ever been broken. Many persons came 
and said: “ Mr. Moody, you surely do not believe in such a thing 
as the flood? Surely you have got beyond that?” If you dont 
believe that you must throw out Christ, for He indorsed it. So 
with the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, so with Lot’s wife 
being turned into a pillar of salt, so with Jonah, who was swallowed 
by the whale. There was not a prophecy ever made—not a prom- 


668 MOOD Y’S ADDRESSES. 


ise ever given to the people of this earth but what has been 
fulfilled. The Son of God has promised to come by and by, and it 
is only a question of time. He will be here, for the Scripture can 
not be broken.” Mr. Moody then advised any of his hearers who 
had doubts, to keep them to themselves, aid they would not do so 
much harm as they did by making them public, and to take them 
to the closet and tell them to the Lord. He wished all the doubts 
in the churches could just be cast into oblivion. The speaker con- 
cluded by urging upon his hearers the desirability of never listen- 
ing toa breath against Him, for we had no right to doubt Hie 
promises or His power to fulfill them, because He has shown u: 
that “the Scripture can not be broken.” 


XII. 


ON WITNESSING FOR CHRIST. 


E read the ninth chapter of the Gospel according to John, 
which relates the giving of sight to the man who had been 
blind from his birth. In the previous chapter the Lord had 

said: “ Before Abraham was I am,” claiming to be divine, when the 
Jews took up stones to cast at Him. The Jews didn’t believe that 
Christ was divine, like a great many people of to-day, and so they 
were angry, and would have killed Him had He not hid Himself 
and passed through their midst, and so have gone. It was right af- 
ter this that it is related He saw this blind man. Then the disciples 
asked Jesus who sinned, the blind man or his parents, that he was 
born sightless. Then when Christ had said what His work in the 
world was, He spat on the ground and made clay, and anointed 
the eyes of the blind man with it, and told him to go and wash at 
the pool of Siloam, which he did, and was given sight. No blind 
soul ever came to Christ, and was sent away without sight. The 
blind man did what Christ commanded; he was obedient and ob- 
tained the blessing. His neighbors and friends were astonished 
when they saw him, and some were afraid, and said they did not know 
whether the man was the one who had been blind or not. But the 
man said, “I am he.” They asked him how he came to get his 
sielt, and then he related his experience to them—just the very 
tysug every young convert should do. This was what made the tem- 


but what has been 
ime by and by, and it 
for the Scripture can 
ny of his hearers who 
they would not do so 
lic, and to take them 
wished all the doubts 
yn. The speaker con- 
bility of never listen- 
» right to doubt Hic 
ise He has shown us 


CHRIST. 


vel according to John, 
the man who had been 
; chapter the Lord had 
to be divine, when the 
ews didn’t believe that 
of to-day, and so they 
He not hid Himself 
gone. It was right af- 
an. Then the disciples 
is parents, that he was 
hat His work in the 
de clay, and anointed 
im to go and wash at 
Fiven sight. No blind 
/ without sight. The 
was obedient and ob- 
ends were astonished 
aid they did not know 
blind or not. But the 
he came to get his 
them—just the very 
hs what made the tem- 


THE MARRIAGE AT CANA. 669 


perance meeting of such power. The men who spoke merely told 
what the Lord had done for them. His testiinony was: ‘1 went 
and washed, and I received sight.” Christ took His own way to cure 
this man, and He didn’t cure Him by simply saying that he should 
receive sight, but He told him to do a certain thing, and the man 
obeyed. And when he was healed, he told all he leaibee and didn’t 
tell any more. Young converts should tell only what they know 
and they should be like this blind man, not afraid to tell what they 
know, Here were the steps in the narrative: First, the blind man 
identified himself by saying, “I am he;” then he related what the 
Lord had done for him; and then he reached the point where he 
was able to say, “ He is a prophet.” Mr. Moody closed his brief 
Bible reading by saying, ‘“ May God help every one of us to have 
the moral courage of the blind man in the ninth chapter of John.” 


XII. 


THE MARRIAGE AT CANA. 


R. MOODY read the first eleven verses of John ii., where 

the Apostle tells of the first miracle Jesus pietfonned, 

This was the third day after He had been with Nathaniel 

whom He saw under the fig-tree, and with whom He chaveieds 
who called Him the Son of God. Jesus had traveled sinety 
miles to be present at the wedding. The disciples believed 
in Him when they saw this miracle. The eleventh verse aus 
a good place to stop, for there we come to the word “ believe” 
again. They believed in Him, because of the miracle. A public 
speaker had said a few days before, Mr. Moody said, that there 
wasn't a miracle that Jesus performed that couldn’t be ex- 
plained on natural causes. A miracle was a wonder, and one that 
performed a miracle was a wonder-worker. Jesus wouldn’t have 
consented for a moment to have been a party to any deception 
and so this wasn’t the work of a medium, as many people woud 
have Christians believe. There was Lazarus. This public speaker 
had said that Lazarus wasn’t dead—he was only in a swoon, in a 
Trance, But the Scriptures said he was dead, and that Jesus raised 
him from the dead. If the religion of Christ had been built on a 
sham it wouldn’t have lived and grown these 1,800 years as it did. 


670 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


The first miracle that Jesus wrought was at a marriage. The first 
event in Eden was a marriage, and the Jast thing that the Revela- 
tion spoke of was the marriage in Heaven, where the bride, the 
Lamb’s wife, would be prepared for the bridegroom. It seemed that 
when any one nowadays spoke in public of marriage there wasa 
titter all over the house. He thought that marriage was the most 
solemn contract that any one could make. People spoke of death 
asa solemn thing, but that was joyful, for the Christian was then 
taken to Jesus. But here was a contract that either was to make 
a life useful and happy or miserable and wretched. It should 
only be after great care and thought that any should be married. 
All should remember what the apostle Paul said about being un- 
equally yoked. Christ would never have been at this wedding if 
these people had been unequally yoked. Then the next step was 
obedience. Christ’s mother told them to do whatever He com- 
manded. Doas He says. What does He say? “ Seek first the 
kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all other things shall 
be added unto you.” “Come unto Me all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden.” ‘ Whosoever will, let him come and take of the water 
of life freely.” The best wine was kept to the last. The Christian 
has the Cross here; he will have the Crown by and by. All the 
devil’s front rooms are gilded, but the back ones are terrible. 
Satan gave his sweets first; he just reversed God’s order. Look 
at the end of the gambler, the atheist, the infidel, the wicked, 
the blasphemous, the outcast: it is disease, darkness, death, 
hell. Look at the Christian’s: it is life, peace, joy, hope, salvation ; 
the last is the best; it grows brighter and brighter unto the 


perfect day. 
XIV. 


DRUNKARDS SAVED BY REGENERATION, 


R. MOODY said, in opening, that they wanted it dis- 
tinctly understood that the hour was not to be taken up in 
discussing the evils of intemperance; they were all agreed 

on that; what was needed, then, at the noon meeting, was earnest 
prayer for those who were in the bonds of this great evil. A great 
many people were discussing the origin of sin, when what they 
should do was to try to ston it in the world. It was a good deal 


.marriage. The first 
ling that the Revela- 
where the bride, the 
‘oom. It seemed that 
marriage there was a 
arriage was the most 
eople spoke of death 
e Christian was then 
it either was to make 
vretched. It should 
y should be married. 
said about being un- 
en at this wedding if 
1en the next step was 
lo whatever He com- 
say? “ Seek first the 
all other things shall 
ye that labor and are 
> and take of the water 
1e last. The Christian 

by and by. All the 
ick ones are terrible. 
d God’s order. Look 
e infidel, the wicked, 
ase, darkness, death, 
p, joy, hope, salvation ; 
nd brighter unto the 


ENERATION. 


they wanted it dis- 
not to be taken up in 
- they were all agreed 
meeting, was earnest 
s great evil. A great 
sin, when what they 
It was a good deal 


DRUNKARDS SAVED BY REGENERATION. 671 


like a drowning man in the river, who needed help to take him out ; 
instead of helping him, a good many gathered around while he was 
drowning, and began to discuss how he fell in. They were called to 
work then, not to philosophize. He called attention to but one 
verse of the third chapter of John, the sixth verse, “That which is 
born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is 
spirit.” He said he had no faith in good resolutions, in pledges 
that did not come from a regenerated soul. They must come to the 
Saviour. After these resolutions they were not saved, they had no 
help outside of themselves. Everything had to be tried by the 
sinner before he would come to Christ. He had to feel that there 
was nothing that could save him but Christ, then he would come. 
Drop a grain of corn into the ground, it must first die before it 
grew again. And the sinner must be first dead to sin before he 
could become alive unto righteousness. When a man stopped 
trying to become better, he turned to God. Then the appetite was 
taken away; a man didn’t have to try to stop—it stops itself. In 
Corinthians the Apostle said that the first man was of the earth, 
earthy. And again: “If any man be in Christ he is a new creature; 
old things are passed away, and all things are become new.” This 
came from regeneration; it was a new creation, a new creature. 
God didn’t patch up the old Adam like an old coat; it was a new 
creature throughout. What we wanted in this city were some resur- 
rected men. Men had got to stop patching themsclves, and be 
regenerated by God’s Spirit and power. It was like what a friend 
showed him in Philadelphia. A man there had a house built when he 
was out of town, and the contractor built it with a brown-stone front, 
but made the sides an imitation, just on the surface. This stood for 
awhile ; but when the winter came it began to crack, and in the 
spring he had to have it repaired, and every year he’d had to have 
it fixed over until he put in a wall like the front. And that was lik: 
the sinner trying to make himself better, when what he needed was 
to be made over again, a new creature. How many who heard him 
had taken their oaths that they wouldn't drink again, had taken 
pledges, had written their names with their own blood, had promised 
their wives, and mothers, and friends, they would stop the use of 
the intoxicating cup, and yet who didn’t keep them. It was like 
painting the pump, expecting by that to get pure water. They 
must stop trying and come to God. Heaven is filled with twice. 
born people. Men must be born again. 


672 MOOD Y’S ADDRESSES. 


XV. 
MEN FALL BY PRIDE. 


N encouraging words he urged those who were addicted to in- 
temperate habits to accept the only sure remedy for the slavery 
that had taken possession of them. He said they had been 

looking into several chapters of John during the past few days, and 
now they had come to the thirteenth, in which the great lesson of 
humility is taught. The fall of Judas and Peter is here related— 
their fall through their self-confidence. There was hardly a grace 
in the Christian character more difficult to attain than this one of 
humility. As it was with Peter, we have a great deal more 
confidence in our own strength than we ought to have, and so when 
trials come we fall. The speaker said the fall of the greatest men 
in the Bible could be attributed to their reliance upon the appar. 
ently strongest point in their character. Abraham, Moses, and all 
the great men, when they failed, did so from an over-estimated 
reliance upon their own abilities. The only time the Edinburgh 
Castle was ever taken was by its strongest point. The besieged 
trusted to its precipitous and rugged rocks in the rear to keep it, 
and concentrated all their energies upon the gates; but while they 
were keeping their foe from the entrance, the enemy climbed the 
rocks, and scaled the walls, and obtained possession of the fortress, 
A man might think he has every power to resist the cup, but he will 
be disappointed. The only power that could overcome the passion 
for strong drink was to be obtained from the Gospel, and Mr. 
Moody closed with an urgent appeal to every one within the range 
of his voice to partake of the spirit of the Gospel, which would lead 
them in the way of truth and purity. 


XVI. 


DRINKING OF GOD’S FULLNESS. 


E read the first sixteen verses of the first chapter of John. 

The difference between John and the other evangelists, is 

that he treats of Christ as the Son of God. Matthew treats 

of Him as the Son of David, Mark as the servant of God, Luke as 


E. 


vere addicted to in- 
medy for the slavery 
said they had been 
1e past few days, and 
the great lesson of 
ter is here related— 
e was hardly a grace 
ain than this one of 

a great deal more 
to have, and so when 
of the greatest men 
ance upon the appar- 
‘aham, Moses, and all 
ym an over-estimated 
time the Edinburgh 
point. The besieged 
n the rear to keep it, 
gates; but while they 
e enemy climbed the 
session of the fortress. 
st the cup, but he will 
overcome the passion 
the Gospel, and Mr. 

one within the range 
pel, which would lead 


ILLNESS. 


first chapter of John. 
e other evangelists, is 
God. Matthew treats 
ant of God, Luke as 


COMING TO CHRIST. 673 


the Son of Man. John has, with one stroke, settled the question 
of the divinity of Christ; that Christ was in the beginning with the 
Father, and came out from Him. John wrote for the single object 
that all might believe and have eternal life. Christ is the light of 
the world. If men are in darkness it is their own fault. They are 
away from the light. Whoever ignores Christ he is in darkness 
Whoever is near Christ is in the light. We can’t make light in our 
hearts, we must let the light in. It would be ridiculous to try to 
bail out the darkness from Farwell Hall. If you want to get power 
over sin, over temper, over habit, receive Christ. Those who re- 
ceive Him receive power to become sons of God. In the twentieth 
verse it says that a!l who have received Christ receive His fullness 

Many people think when they are converted, that they receive eeiee 
enough to last a lifetime. They are wrong. They must draw from 
God and receive of His fullness. Enoch and Abraham, and Joshua 
and Elijah were men of like passions with us, but they deceived of the 
fullness of God. Look at Bunyan, and Luther, and Knox, and tie other 
reformers, they received of God’s fullness. The disciples were ignorant 
men, but they received of God’s fullness. Think of a Galilean fisher- 
man writing the book of John! He had received of God’s fullness 

Dr. Andrew Bonar said that some Christians bring forth thirty-fold 
and some sixty! but it is the privilege of all to bring forth a hundred- 
fold. If you haven’t all you want, go to Christ and drink deeply of 

His fullness. If the spring you have been drinking of dries up, go 
farther up the mountain to Christ. At God’s feet there is a spring 
that never dries up. May God fill us all with the living water, that 

we may go forth and work in His service. 


XVII. 


COMING TO CHRIST. 


WANT tv .all your attention to the three last verses of the 
eleventh chapter of Matthew: “Come unto Me all ye that are 
weary and heavy laden and I will give you rest; take My yoke 

upon you, and learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and 
ye shall find rest unto your souls, for My yoke is easy and Aisehiees 
den is light.” Also this verse from the Gospel of John: “Him 
that comet.1 unto Me I will in no wise cast out.” I understand that 


674 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


there are quite a number of people who come to these nvor 
meetings that can not come to the Tabernacle. There is one wh 
says this is his last meeting with us, and who is in trouble and dar 
ness of mind, because he has not found the Saviour, so to-day I a 
going to try to tell you how to come to Christ, and let all thes 
Christians pray that God’s Spirit may help me make it piain. 

A dying man once said, “ Father, tell me the way to Christ, an 
make it very simple, for I have but a little while to live.” That i 
true of all of us. This life is short at the longest, but it is lon 
enough for us to come to Christ and be saved. The first thing yo 
want to do is to accept this invitation: “Come unto Me a// ye tha 
labor.” There is no man but has some burden of his own; ever 
“heart knoweth his own bitterness.” Now the very first thing t 
do is to bring that burden to Christ. The only thing that is need 
ful in order to claim this invitation of Christ is to prove that we ar 
sinners, for if any man isa sinner he is one of those whom Chris 
came to save. 

Suppose the Mayor of Chicago were to make a great feast, an 
send out an invitation to every man by the name of Smith. Whe 
the time comes I go up to the door of the banquet-hall and tell th 
policeman who stands there that I ama friend of the Mayor, on 
of his great admirers, in fact, and tell him I want to come in. 

“Ts your name Smith?” 

“No; my name is Moody.” 

“ Well, sir, you can’t come in; you are not invited.” 

By and by Mr. Sankey comes along and wants to goin. He says 
he will entertain the company with some singing if they will let 
him in. 

“Ts your name Smith ?” says the policeman. 

“ No; my name is Sankey.” 

“Well, then, you can’t come in; you are not invited.” 

The next man who comes up is a politician; next is a newspaper 
man; next is a member of Congress, all particular friends of the 
Mayor. The policeman asks them the same questions, and keeps 
them all out because their 1.ames are not “Smith.” By and by 
there comes along a common-looking man whom nobody knows, 
and the policeman says, “ What’s your name?” The man answered, 
“My name is Smith.” “All right,” says the policeman, and in he 
goes. He is one of those who were invited. 

Now, my friends, if you want to know whether you are invited to 


come to these nvon- 

le. There is one who 

is in trouble and dark. 

aviour, so to-day I am 

irist, and let all these 

e make it piain. 

the way to Christ, and 
thile to live.” That is 
longest, but it is long 
d. The first thing you 
me unto Me ad/ ye that 
rden of his own; every 
, the very first thing to 
only thing that is need- 
is to prove that we are 
e of those whom Christ 


make a great feast, and 
name of Smith. When 
banquet-hall and tell the 
riend of the Mayor, one 
[ want to come in. 


ot invited.” 
vants to goin. He says 
singing if they will let 


han. 


not invited.” 

An; next is a newspaper 

harticular friends of the 
e questions, and keeps 
“Smith.” By and by 
whom nobody knows, 
2” The man answered, 
e policeman, and in he 


ether you are invited to 


COMING TO CHRIST. 675 


come to Christ, all you have to do is to find out whether you are a 
sinner. If you are not, you are not invited; but if you can prove 
that you area sinner, that is a sure title to a share of the Lord’s 
invitation. 

Some people want to know what they shall bring when they 
come to Christ. They bring praycrs, and tears, and promises, and 
faith. These are all well enough in their place, but when a man 
starts to come to Christ, the only thing he wants to take with him 
is his sins. Are youa sinner? Then come to Christ and bring 
your sins along with you, for they are the only things you have 
which the Lord wants. Let me illustrate this. I have a little boy 
over on the West Side, and we will suppose when I go home to- 
nicht I find out by his mother that he had been telling a lie. Of 
course I am greatly troubled. The little fellow comes and climbs 
up into my lap, tells me how much he loves me, but that isn’t what 
I want. Somebody has given him a nice present, and he brings it 
and offers to give it to me. No, I don’t want that, either. The 
only thing that I want him to bring me is that lie. Let him come 
to me and say, “ Papa, I told a lie; I own it and am sorry for it.” 
That would make me happier than anything else. Just so it is 
with the Lord. The reason why so many of you can’t come to 
Him is because you can’t bring your sins with you; you try to 
hide them away somewhere. 

But some one will say, “ Haven’t I got to repent of my sins 
before I come to Christ? Mustn’t I have misery, despair, and con- 
viction?” Well, I don’t know. Sometimes people have these 
things before they come to Christ, and sometimes afterward. The 
Bible don’t say when it shall be, but it says the first thing to be 
done for a sinner is to put Christ before him. Let him come to 
Christ at once, and Christ will make him feel all the penitence 
he needs to feel. If the soul is dead in sins, the first thing it 
wants is to come to Christ fc. life. A man can’t have a sense 
of his sins until Christ puts life into him. You may put a hundred. 
pound weight on the breast of a dead man, and he won’t mind 
anything about it, but if the man is alive he feels the weight bear- 
ing him down. 

People imagine they have got to feel their sins about so much, 
but I will tell you what I think about this matter of feeling. You 
want to feel your sins enough to give them up. Perhaps you have 
a sense of want, way down in yur heart. Very well, come along 


676 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


and bring your want to Christ. He is able to supply all wants; 
that is just the very thing He likes to do. 

There are three words in the Scriptures which may help you at 
this point; the first is “Believe.” ‘“ Believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ and thou shalt be saved.” “When shall I be saved?” 
When you believe. But somebody says, “I don’t understand this 
word.” Well, drop it, and I will give you another. “ Trust in the 
Lord.” You know what it is to trust anybody. I have heard people 
say, “ There is a man I won't trust farther than I can see him,” and 
that is just the way many of you are treating the Lord. You don't 
understand it yet? Well, I will give you another word: “ As many 
as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of 
God.” You know what it is to receive a gift. Very well, the thing 
to do is to receive Christ, not as a doctrine, but asa person. Here 
in the thirtieth verse Christ says, ‘“ My yoke is easy and my burden 
is light.” A Scotchman came to our meeting once and heard me 
read that verse. ‘ Very good,” says he, “I will try and see whether 
it is easy or not,” so he went home and told his wife he was going 
to be a Christian. The next day he went down to his place of 
business determined to put the Bible to a test, but he had about 
the hardest day he had ever had in all his life. That night he went 
home to his wife and said, “‘ Wife, the Bible isn’t true. It says the 
yoke of Christ is easy and His burden is light, but I have had a very 
bad day of it trying to be a Christian. It is the heaviest burden | 
ever tried to carry.” 

His good wife was in great trouble, and wanted I should see him. 
When I came to him, I said: “ My friend, have you been converted?” 

“No!” said he; “I don’t know as I have.” 

“ Well, there is no use of your trying to wear the Lord’s yoke. It 
will not fit unconverted people. You can’t wear God’s yoke until 
you are born of God. The first thing you have to do is to receive 
Christ and let Him give you a new heart, then you can wear His 
yoke and find it easy, and carry His burden and find it light.” 

“As many as received Him.” How many are there who will 
receive Christ to-day? 


to supply all wants; 


ich may help you at 
e on the Lord Jesus 
shall I be saved?” 
don’t understand this 
other. ‘“ Trust in the 
I have heard people 
in I can see him,” and 
the Lord. You don't 
ther word: “ As many 
o become the sons of 
Very well, the thing 
ut asa person. Here 
is easy and my burden 
ig once and heard me 
ill try and see whether 
his wife he was going 
down to his place of 
test, but he had about 
e. That night he went 
isn’t true. It says the 
, but I have had a very 
| the heaviest burden | 


anted I should see him. 

e you been converted?” 
” 

bar the Lord’s yoke. It 
wear God’s yoke until 
ave to do is to receive 
hen you can wear His 
and find it light.” 

ny are there who will 


THANKSGIVING AND PRAISE, 


XVIII. 


THANKSGIVING AND PRAISE. 


R. MOODY gave out as the Scripture lesson the 1osth 
Psalm, commencing, “Oh give thanks unto the Lord; call 
upon His name: make known His deeds among the people. 

Sing unto Him, sing psalms unto Him: talk ye of all His wondrous 

works,” 

We are now beginning the fourth week of these meetings, and 
while we have been talking about prayer, and consecration, and 
heart-searching, we haven’t had a single day of thanksgiving and 
praise. If you look through your Bibles you will find more said 
about praise than prayer, or most anything else. This psalm was 
written by the king at the time when they were bringing the Ark 
back from Jerusalem. The whole city was full of joy, they felt so 
glad to have the Ark of the Lord with them once more. I suppose 
you might say they were having a revival. 

When our friends give us anything which is very valuable, the 
least thing they can expect of us is to thank them; they wvill feel 
very much mortified if we do not do it. Well, here we have been 
receiving blessings from God all the three weeks past, and it is time 
we should look over the blessings we have received and return Him 
our thanks for them. Some people forget the duty of thanksgiving ; 
they just go to God for prayer, and just ask, ask, ask, without stop- 
ping to give thanks unto the Lord. Now, the Lord isn’t pleased with 
us for that. He gives us freely and bountifully, and keeps giving us 
all the time, and has a right to expect our thanks in return. 

The next thing this psalm tells us to do is to make known His 
deeds among the people. His deeds, not your deeds. I have seen 
a great many prayer-meetings spoiled by some man, who would get 
up and tell all the wonderful things he had said or done. Then the 
thermometer would immediately begin to go down, and the meeting 
would become cold and dead. What we want to do is to keep our- 
selves out of sight, and make known the deeds of the Lord. 

There is another thing to be done. Sing unto the Lord: sing 
psalms unto Him. It is one of the sure signs of a revival when the 
churches begin to sing. You take one of these fashionable, formal, 
stylish congregations, and they don’t sing to any good purpose, 


TBE 

Hae: 
| 
t 
i 


678 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


They hire a quartette, and put them up in the gallery to sing for 
them, and get a big organ to help the quartette, and amuse the 
congregation with all sorts of strange noises in the house of God, 
But you just let a revival break out in that church, and see how they 
all begin to sing, men, women, and children, old and young, all to- 
gether, and they are singing unto God, mind you, not to one another, 
I always feel greatly encouraged when we go to a new place, and 
the people take up these Gospel songs, and sing them in their homes, 
and the boys pick them up and whistle them on the streets. I sup- 
pose everybody in Jerusalem was singing psalms when the Ark was 
brought home, and so it ought to be with us in these days. The 
Ark of the Lord is moving on, and people are beginning to: come 
into it to be saved. Therefore, we ought to sing unto the Lord, 
and praise Him with psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs. 

The next thing we are told to do is to talk of all His wondrous 
works. God likes to have us talk about Him, and about what He 
is doing. That is the way the great revival of 1857 swe pt all over 
this country. A man would come on from New York to Chicago 
and tell what the Lord had been doing in that city, and then Chicago 
would take courage, and pretty soon there would be a revival here. 
Then somebody would go down to St. Louis, and declare the Lord’s 
doings in Chicago, and St. Louis people would say, “ Well, if the 
Lord can bless such a hard place as Chicago, maybe He can even 
bless St. Louis.” I have been thinking over this morning, before I 
came here, some of the things I have to be thankful for, and one of 
the things I thought of was this Farwell Hall. We have had two 
buildings burned on this spot, and now we are in the third one, and 
if we should never have any more good out of it than we have had 
for the last three weeks, I think the hall has paid for itself very well. 
Then I feel like thanking God for the Tabernacle. We have had no 
better place anywhere to preach the Gospel in, and already the Lord 
has blessed us greatly there. What unity there has been among the 
ministry! Why, it seems to me we are on the eve of the millenium. 
Five years ago I could not believe what I have seen since these 
meetings have commenced. When we were over in England I used 
to say to Mr. Sankey, “If we could just see such a work as this in 
Chicago I would be perfectly happy.” Well, here we are, and the 
Lord is with us. I think yesterday was the best day I ever saw. 
The power of the Lord was with us in preaching and singing, and in 
the afternoon and evening, when the people crowded into the in- 


he gallery to sing for 
tette, and amuse the 
in the house of God. 
ich, and see how they 
ld and young, all to- 
u, not to one another. 
. to a new place, and 
g¢ them in their homes, 
on the streets. I sup- 
ms when the Ark was 
; in these days. The 
re beginning to: come 
» sing unto the Lord, 
spiritual songs. 
lk of all His wondrous 
n, and about what He 
of 1857 swept all over 
New York to Chicago 
city, and then Chicago 
ould be a revival here. 
-and declare the Lord’s 
nuld say, “ Well, if the 
o, maybe He can even 
this morning, before I 
hankful for, and one of 
hll. We have had two 
re in the third one, and 
lof it than we have had 
paid for itself very well. 
acle. We have had no 
in, and already the Lord 
re has been among the 
ne eve of the millenium. 
have seen since these 
over in England I used 
such a work as this in 
1, here we are, and the 
p best day I ever saw. 
ing and singing, and in 


e crowded into the in- 


COMPASSION. 679 
quiry-rooms, and we were all busy in pointing sinners to Christ, and 
some of them were finding Him and beginning to praise Him it 
seemed to me I never got nearer to Heaven in all my life. : 

Then hear the newspapers speaking kindly of us. I thank God for 
that. They are helping to make known the Lord’s deeds among the 
people. Now let us call upon our souls and all that is within us to 
praise the Lord for what He has done for us already, and for what 
He is going to do. If He can save one soul He can save 10,000 just 
as easily. The Holy Spirit is at work; let us rejoice that He has 
power to save to-day. 

In closing his remarks, Mr. Moody said, “ Let us give thanks.” 
He then offered a prayer of thanksgiving, full of joy and oisdnais, 


praising the Lord especially fer the converts who found Christ in the 
inquiry-rooms. 


XIX. 
“ COMPASSION.” 


E hear it told over and over again in the Bible that “ He 
was moved with compassion.” We read that He lifted 
up His eyes and saw an immense multitude, and He was 

moved with compassion. Perhaps that multitude was four or five 
times as great as that present here, yet He knew their hearts, knew 
all their trials, all their sorrows, and He was, accordingly, craved 
to compassion. So when the leper came to Him, what coda story 
he could have told. I can see that man going home and saying to 
his wife, “I feel very queer. I’ve got something coming out on my 
body that looks like leprosy ;” and she says, “ Well, my dear, it 
does look like it,” and they are both sorrowful, and their children 
are broken-hearted, for they know what it means if their father is 
sent away from them. He does not die, but it is worse than that; 
he is condemned to a living sepulchre. Well, he goes to the pilest, 
and is told that he is unclean, and must leave his home iiaver: 
He goes home for the last time, and kisses little Johnny, and then 
goes away for good. He must remain without the city walls, and 
if ever any one comes near him, he must shout out, * Unclean! un- 
clean !” and warn them to keep away. Perhaps some one called to 
him that his favorite child was dead or dying; but it was of no use, he 
could not return home to bury his child. Think of this, mothers 


680 MOODY’S ADDRESSES. 


and fathers; you know how you love your children. Now, if an 
of you here are afflicted with the leprosy of sin, all you have to dc 
is to go to Jesus with your troubles, and He will heal all. The 
leper cried, “If Thou wilt, Thou canst heal me;” only do the same 
and He will be moved with compassion. Look at the widow of Nain 
her husband was gone, the boy had been her mainstay, and she 
hoped that he would close her eyes in death. But he, too, was 
stricken down; the physicians gave him up; she felt that she woul 
never look into his bright, blue eyes again, never see another bright 
smile on that once happy face; she saw the icy hand of death feel 
ing for the cords of life, and wiped the damp sweat of night off his 
clammy brow. What must have been her feelings. Some of us 
have passed through the trial of burying those near and dear to us. 
Well, the poor widow was following the bier on which lay the re- 
mains of her dear boy, when the procession was met by Jesus, who 
was entering the village. He was moved with compassion, and 
said, ““Young man, I say unto you arise.” Fancy the joy of that 
poor old mother as she walked with her son back again to their 
home. Oh, mothers, if any of you have a son dead, or dying, or 
sinful, take all your sorrows to Jesus. He is full of compassion, 
and will help you as He alone can. Qh, think, just think what it is 
to have such a Saviour. Then, again, see His weeping over 
Jerusalem, but a short time before His crucifixion. Listen to that 
plaintive cry, “Oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the 
prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often 
would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth 
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not.” And ye would 
not. Is it not so with some of you to-day? Ye will not. Think 
of this, all of you here; He weeps over you to-day as He once wept 
over that city. Will you refuse Him? Will you not love and obey 
Him? Will you be damned or saved? Thatis the question. You 
can have no trouble and no sorrow that He can not and will not 
relieve you of. He was always unchaageable. Look at Him even 
on the cross; forgetting His own great grief and agony, He said to 
the dying thief, “This day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise.” 
He only wants to say so to you to-day. Can you refuse to hear it? 
I remember during the war a poor mother heard that her boy had 
been wounded, and she got away to the Wilderness and found the 
hospital, and managed, after much trouble, to get to his cot. He 
was sleeping, but had been-calling for her. As soon as she saw him 


hildren. Now, if any 
sin, all you have to do 
Je will heal all. The 
1e;”” only do the same, 
-at the widow of Nain; 
her mainstay, and she 
ath. But he, too, was 
she felt that she would 
ever see another bright 
icy hand of death feel- 
» sweat of night off his 
feelings. Some of us 
yse near and dear to us. 
er on which lay the re- 
was met by Jesus, who 
with compassion, and 
Fancy the joy of that 
son back again to their 
- gon dead, or dying, or 
eis full of compassion, 
ink, just think what it is 
see His weeping over 
ifixion. Listen to that 
thou that killest the 
it unto thee, how often 
even as a hen gathereth 
h not.” And ye would 
? Yewill not. Think 
to-day as He once wept 
1 you not love and obey 
ht is the question. You 
e can not and will not 
le. Look at Him even 
and agony, He said to 
with Me in Paradise.” 
n you refuse to hear it? 
heard that her boy had 
derness and found the 
o get to his cot. He 
As soon as she saw him 


THE HOLY SPIRIT. 681 


she could not help putting her hand on his head. There was virtue 
in that touch; he woke, and before he could see, he knew who it 
was, and said, “Oh, mother, have you come?” Jesus is waiting 
to receive us, to take us in His arms, and heal all our wounds; 
there is virtue in the touch. He can heal every crushed, bleeding, 
and broken heart. May He go through this meeting to-day, and 
touch the hearts of many. 


XX. 
THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


HE first line of Bible reading which was turned to was sug- 
gested by a note Mr. Moody received at the opening of the 
meeting. Some one asked if they could grieve the Holy 

Spirit by not believing they had grieved the Spirit. He read a 

passage of Thessalonians, to show that those who were urged not 

to grieve the Holy Spirit were believers, not unbelievers. Then 
there was another passage in the first chapter of the same epistle, 
where it was shown that there were certain things which quenched 
the Spirit. Theatrical performances, and fairs, and fashions were 
driving out the Spirit, were quenching the Spirit. Churches were 
looking after men who were possessed of natural gifts, of eloquence, 
and of pulpit power, but didn’t have Holy Ghost power. Then the 
third step was, that the world was resisting the Holy Ghost; the 
believer grieved the Holy Spirit; the church quenched the Spirit, 
and the world resisted the Spirit. The one reason why so many 
men in Chicago to-day didn’t have power with God, was because 
they were resisting the Holy Ghost. One reason why man resists 
the Holy Ghost was that it showed man what he was, that he was 
corrupt, that he was vile, and that he had a heart as dark as hell 
itself. He related the early experiences of his own life, 
which illustrated the power of personal Holy Ghost preaching. 
The Spirit of God will tell men where the wrong is before he 
commits a wrong, whereas conscience never tells a man of it until 
it’s done. And then when the sinner comes to God he shall 
know of the truth, whether it be of God. He then read the 
sixth verse of the second chapter of Second Corinthians, where the 
apostle said that the “letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.” 
This was what he termed “ dead orthodoxy,” which was killing the 


682 MOOD)’'S ADDRESSES, 


churches. This was not where God would work. <A minister might 
have all the eloquence and all the argument of a great preacher, 
but if he didn’t have the Spirit. he was powerless. In the sixth 
chapter of Ephesians the Word of God was called the “ sword of the 
Spirit.” He found that there were many workers in the inquiry-100m 
who went there without their Bible, and reminded him of a great 
army that had no weapons of warfare. The Word was the “sword 
of the Spirit.” Every one should come to this work prepared. 
Thece was another passage of Scripture—the fourteenth of John— 
where it is said, in the seventeenth verse, thai the Spirit of God 
filled the new man, and tren had His abode with the new man. 
There were many Christians who, like Lot in the valleys of that 
rich land, could not be recognized as Christians from the world. 
There were three places where the Holy Ghost came in and filled the 
new abode prepared for them; first, »:en Moses erected the tab. 
ernacle in the wilderness, as will be seen in the fortieth chapter of 
Exodus, third verse; and, second, the time when Solomon builded 
the temple and the Spirit rushed in; and, third, at the day of Pen- 
tecost, when the Sp‘..t entered into the disciples and made them a 
power. It was the same old trouble with the boy whose head was 
filled with play, and, of course could not learn his lessons; they 
should sing that hymn, “O to be nothing!” as though they meant 
and felt it. They should be like the pipe that conveyed the light 
to the world; it was merely a conductor of light; this was what 
they learn to do with themselves. In the second Epistle of Tim- 
othy, second chapter and nineteenth verse, there was another side 
to this, namely, that Christians should be emptied of self and fitted 
to the Master’s use. The speaker read the twelfth chapter of First 
Corinthians on the theme of the diversity of gifts. They should 
remember what Wesley said, “ All at it, and always at it.” This 
was to be their watch-word. All could not be preachers or minis- 
ters ; that was not what was meant; and no one should say that be- 
cause they were not great preachers they could do nothing. It was 
the same Spirit which fitted the man and the woman to do the 
work to which God had called them. The Scripture had typified 
the Spirit and called it water, which had been clear, purifying, fer- 
tilizing, abundant, and freely given. It was the Rock in the wil- 
derness that followed the Israelites all through their wanderings. 
The Spirit was fire, was oil, was rain and dew, was a dove, was a 
voice, and was a seal of redemption. 


+, A minister might 
t of a great preacher, 
rerless. In the sixth 
led the “ sword of the 
rs in the inquiry-100m 
inded him of a great 
Word was the “sword 
this work prepared. 
fourteenth of John— 
hai the Spirit of God 
e with the new man. 
in the valleys of that 
tians from the world. 
t came in and filled the 
loses erected the tab- 
the fortieth chapter of 
vhen Solomon buiided 
ird, at the day of Pen- 
iples and made them a 
he boy whose head was 
earn his lessons; they 
as though they meant 
hat conveyed the light 
f light ; this was what 
second Epistle of Tim- 
here was another side 
uptied of self and fitted 
welfth chapter of First 
of gifts. They should 
d always at it.” This 
be preachers or minis- 
one should say that be- 
ld do nothing. It was 
the woman to do the 
Scripture had typified 
en clear, purifying, fer- 
5 the Rock in the wil- 
bugh their wanderings. 
ew, was a dove, was 4 


“GIFTS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT." 


XXI. 
“GIFTS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT.” 


HESE were altogether different from conversion. Many min. 
isters would bear him out when he said that nine-tenths of 
the church members were without power, because they 

didn’t have these gifts. No one would ever think of sending them 

to converse with inquirers, but when they probed deep they'd find 
these Christians true believers, but they didn’t live up to their high- 
est light. The eleventh chapter of the Gospel according to Luke, 
spoke about the way the disciples asked the “ Lord how to vray as 

Jolin also taught his disciples.” Here was where the Saviour said, 

“ask,” “seek,” and “knock” and it “shall be opened unto you.” 

Elisha was just as much of a disciple before he got Elijah’s mantle, 

but he got God’s Spirit when the mantle fell on him, and he did the 

work which he’d been callec to do. In the third chapter of the 
same Gospel we found that Jesus, before He commenced His min- 
istry, was anointed of the Holy Ghost, and then He went out to do 

His work. If in every one of the theological seminaries, after all 

the young students had got all the learning man could give them, 

it they’d just spend ten days in waiting on God, and then go out 
into the world, they’d be better prepared for their work than they 
were. He liked to divide Christians sometimes into five classes, 
sometimes into three, and sometimes into four classes. Here they 
were: First, in the third chapter of the Gospel of John, there was 
one class that just gave a little light, like Nicodemus; and then, in 
the fourth chapter, there was the woman of Samaria, who bubbled 
right up and went right off and told all the men in the city what 
she had tuund; and the third class was to be found in the seventh 
chapter of the same Gospel, where it was said of the one who was 
converted and had these gifts, that “ Out of his belly should flow 
fountains of living water.” There were two kinds of wells in this 
country, as many of those present knew; there was one kind of* 
wells where they had to pump to draw the water. Many a time his 
arm had ached when he was watering the cattle. That was just the 
way with nany Christians to-day. Whenever they did anything or 
said anything for God, they had to be pumped by some one, per- 
haps the ministers, and that was the reason there were so many men 


684 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


and women who could do so little for God and for His glory. Then 
the second kind of wells were these artesian wells, where the waters 
welled up without pumping. So many men—ministers—were break. 
ing down in this pumping process, while they were trying to get men 
to be alive for God and for His work. In the twentieth chapter and 
twenty-second verse of the Gospel of John, we found another step; 
and then, again, in the third chapter of Acts, where the disciples were 
waiting for the blessing of God, the Spirit of God ; nothing was done 
until they got this Holy Ghost power. He’d rather have one drop of 
this power than all the learing, all the power, all the eloguence of the 
world. After Peter got filled with the Holy Ghost, he began to 
preach Christ ; then followed that passage, and “ they were pricked 
to the heart ’—-these same men, who, a few days before, had cruci- 
fied the Lord. Then they asked, ‘“ Men and brethren, what shall 
we do'to be saved?” They were converted and were baptized, and 
then came the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were separate from 
conversion, and which had been covered up by the Church. A great 
many people thought that because they got this power with God 
once, that they’d live on it all their lives. They’d got to have this 
food every day. The Israelites had to be taken every day. That 
was the reason so many men and women didn’t have the power to- 
day which they had twenty years ago, when they were converted. 
We were leaky vessels, and had to keep coming to the fountains of 
God every day. In the second chapter, and again in the fourth 
chapter of John, the apostles were filled with the Holy Ghost. A 
minister asked him that day, “‘ How can I keep from being tram- 
meled?” If he’d had the Spirit he’d have boldness to preach. 
This was the case with all the old apostles and prophets, who went 
before kings and rulers, and when the Jewish rulers told the apostles 
not to preach, they went together, and then asked God what they 
should do; and then they went out to preach, even against the 
order of the Sanhedrim. He couldn’t carry on a work in Chicago 
with the grace he had got in Boston. They must aly ays be hungry 
and thirsty after righteousness, for they shall be filled. Then, again, 
in the Acts of the Apostles, it was shown how the gifts of the Holy 
Ghost were altogether different from conversion. This was what 
was meant when it was said they received gifts. The Holy Ghost 
was in them when they were converted, but they should have It 
rest on them. Then, again, he said, that when the apostles went 
down to Samaria, they found many that were preaching, and the 


for His glory. Then 
Ils, where the waters 
inisters—were break- 
ere trying to get men 
-wentieth chapter and 
e found another step ; 
1ere the disciples were 
yd ; nothing was done 
ther have one drop of 
| the eloguence of the 
, Ghost, he began to 
d “they were pricked 
ays before, had cruci- 
brethren, what shall 
nd were baptized, and 
hh were separate from 
‘the Church. A great 
this power with God 
hey’d got to have this 
‘ken every day. That 
n’t have the power to- 
they were converted. 
g to the fountains of 
d again in the fourth 
the Holy Ghost. A 
eep from being tram- 
e boldness to preach. 
d prophets, who went 
ulers told the apostles 
asked God what they 
ich, even against the 
on a work in Chicago 
ust aly ays be hungry 
e filled. Then, again, 
the gifts of the Holy 
sion. This was what 
ts. The Holy Ghost 
they should have It 
en the apostles went 
e preaching, and the 


NOAF’S CARPENTERS, O35 
disciples asked them, “‘ Have you received the Holy Ghost since ye 
believed ?”’—that is, since you were converted. Here were these 
men, such as Paul, who were turned to God by the preaching of 
Jesus Christ Himself; and yet he didn’t get the Holy Ghost until the 
servant Ananias went to him, and then he went out and preached 
the Word all over the world. He recited the case of a lady in 
Philadelphia who had been a Christian for many years, and yet who 
had never turned any one to God; and when she got this blessing 
of the Holy Ghost, she aided a number in coming to Christ. A 
gentleman in England, a Presbyterian minister, had got this anoint- 
ing and had preached with great power. And another in Edin- 
burgh, who first was hardly able to preach one sermon a Sunday, 
and then he hadn’t much power, and felt sick after he delivered 
this address. But when he got this Spirit he was able to forget his 
inability to preach, and preached daily, and had appointments to 
preach every day until next March; and when his wife died, he was 
given power from God to bear the burden. He said of his wife, 
that “she lived so near Heaven and God that she didn’t have far 
to go.” Mr. Moody summed up this Holy Ghost power as follows: 
“In Luke, first chapter and fifteenth and sixteenth verses, it was 
said that John would be filled with the Holy Ghost. Elizabeth, 
also, was filled with the Holy Ghost, and when Zechariah was filled 
with the Holy Ghost he prophesied and witnessed. Simon testified 
inthe temple; Luke, fourth chapter, fourth verse, where Jesus resisted 
Satan, and overcame him; then in Acts, first chapter, eighth verse ; 
second chapter, fourth verse; fourth chapter and eighth verse; 
fourth chapter and thirty-first verse; sixth chapter and fifth and tenth 
verses ; ninth chapter, seventeenth, twentieth, and twenty-second 
verses; eleventh chapter and twenty-fourth verse; and thirteenth 
chapter and fifty-second verse. 


XXII. 
NOAH’S CARPENTERS. 


GENESIS vii. 1: “ And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house in- 
to the ark,” 

E remarked that he would like to repeat the different passages 
of Scripture where the word “come” was used, but would 
defer it to some other time. This was the first time that 

God used the word “come” in the Bible. Man had never had such 


Siete’ en anaes ee 


686 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


i communication, before Noah’s day, with God as that. The com 
munion which had once existed between God and man was broke: 
by the fall of Adam and Eve. The human race had entered th¢ 
world with high hopes, but had wofully fallen short of the glory of 
God. The first man born into the world became a murderer; he be 
came the killer of his own brother; and all the way down throug 
the ages man had been piling up sins against God and against him 
self. It didn’t take the Bible to prove that man was entirely de 
praved. All the experience of every age proved it. There was 
nothing good in man. Man and nations were altogether bad, and 
it didn’t need Scripture to prove it. In all this age of wickedness 
in which he lived, Noah was a man who braved public opinion, who 
dared public opinion. Then the men lived to be eight hundred or 
nine hundred years old, and had a chance to be awfully wicked, and 
from the Scripture it would seem that they improved their oppor- 
tunitics. Then Noah began to build the ark; the dimensions of 
the ark were such that it took over a hundred years to build it. 
Noah did it at the command of God, and because he believed in 
God’s Word. Noah worked all those hundred years, and there 
didn’t seem to be any sign of the flood. No doubt if there had 
been any insane asylums in his day, they would have put him in one 
of them. The idea that God was going to destroy the world was 
preposterous to the men of his day. No doubt forty-eight hours 
before the flood he couldn’t have sold the ark for much more than 
kindling-wood. The men of that generation scoffed at him, ridiculed 
his work, and, doubtless, a good many of them asked him why he 
didn’t build it on the water and not away up on dryland. They didn’t 
believe that God would come with a flood to sweep them from the 
earth. Men, to-day, said that God wouldn't destroy the earth, just 
as they said in Noah’sday. They said that God wouldn’t, then that 
God couldn’t, and then some went so far as to say that there 
was no God. Some say, perhaps Noah left off building, and there 
was no sound of the hammer in the ark. He may have gone tc 
these antediluvians and preached to them of the coming flood. But 
their banking-houses were open as usual, their saloons and billiard 
halls were as busy as ever. No one minded him, except to rail at 
him. But Neh turned a deaf ear to their railings, but, as some 
one said, Noah didn’t turn a deaf ear to God when He spoke. The 
world went on. There were no doubt many preachers in those days 
who scoffed and turned his sayings to ridicule. There was nothing, 


d asthat. The com- 
and man was broken 
race had entered the 
short of the glory of 
ne a murderer; he be- 
he way down through 
God and against him- 
man was entirely de- 
yroved it. There was 
re altogether bad, and 
this age of wickedness 
ed public opinion, who 
o be eight hundred or 
be awfully wicked, and 
improved their oppor- 
rk; the dimensions of 
ired years to build it. 
because he believed in 
ndred years, and there 
No doubt if there had 
ld have put him in one 
destroy the world was 
oubt forty-eight hours 
k for much more than 
scoffed at him, ridiculed 
hem asked him why he 
dryland. They didn’t 
> sweep them from the 
destroy the earth, just 
od wouldn't, then that 
as to say that there 
off building, and there 
e may have gone tc 
the coming flood. But 
r saloons and billiard 
him, except to rail at 
railings, but, as some 
when He spoke. The 
preachers in those days 
There was nothing, 


NOAH’S CARPENTERS. 687 
perhaps, they said, but fanaticism in what old Noah said. And the 
astronomers began to look at the stars, and couldn’t tell that any 
flood was coming; and the geologists were examining and digging 
down into the earth, only to discover that there was no God—ard 
so they all went on. And the scientific men said that God didn’t 
create man; that he came from a monkey, and they talked of evo- 
lution, and scoffed at the words of Noah. 

But the last day came. The last year came. Perhaps the car- 
penters were drinking in some antediluvian saloon, and men were 
scoffing at them for working for such amanas Noah. But no doubt 
they said that his money was as good as anybody’s, and they didn’t 
take any stock in it, only as it gave them something to do. Perhaps 
the songs of the drunkard, which have been forgotten, and been 
drowned by the flood, were about old Noah’s ark. But the spring 
came, and Noah didn’t plant any that spring. This was a curious 
thing. Then the voice came, “Come.” There was no window in 
the ark, only on the top, so that Noah had to look right up to God. 

Noah couldn’t see the destruction that came on the wer'd, when 
there was not one left to tell the story. There was one door in the 
side of the ark. On that day Noah left the old homestead that 
perhaps his grandfather Methuselah dwelt in. Then the people be- 
gan to ask where was the promise of the storm. But God gave 
them seven days of grace. Christ said when the flood came they 
were marrying and being given in marriage. The lambs were skip- 
ping on a thousand hills. The politicians of those days were put- 
ting men in office and fixing things to suit their ends; and yet there 
was no sign of the flood, no sign of fire. And as it was in the days 
of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the Son of Man. All were 
counseled to be ready, for, in an hour they didn’t think of, the Son 
of Man should come. 

Then, one can imagine how much sport the antediluvians made 
of Noah when they saw him get ready to get into the ark. They 
may have asked him how he was going to catch the beasts of the 
forests and get them all in; how he was going to catch the lion and 
the tiger. But perhaps, while they were speaking, the clephants, 
two by two, the lions came two by two, and the tigers two by two, 
and the insects the same, and the air was dark with wings. Merci- 
ful God, what could it mean? Then the Tyndalls and their scien- 
tific men were consulted, and they may have said it was curious, 
but there isn’t anything supernatural about it ; it’s strange, but there’s 

nothing in it ; it don’t mean anything. 


| 
i 
it 
4 SH 
He 
{ 
} 
ie 


688 MOOD Y’S ADDRESSES, 


The next thing that was supernatural was that God shut the door. 
This set the people to thinking that there might be something su- 
pernatural in it. They began to wonder if it was the last day. But 
the door was shut and they didn’t think any more abcut it, for the 
flood didn’t come for seven days. Men and women were marrying, 
and all was merry. But there came a little cloud, like Elijah’s, not 
larger than a man’s hand; but it grew larger and larger, until it 
covered the sky. The antediluvians looked at their homes for the 
last time. Then the ark was worth all the world beside. There 
will be a time when Christ will be worth all the riches of ten thou- 
sand worlds; when it will be more than stocks, and business, and 
gold. He asked what the Tabernacle was builded for but to benefit 
man; make him escape the impending flood. It would rise in 
judgment against many. 


XXIII. 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 


GREAT many are asking the questions, Will this work hold 

out? Are these young converts going to stand? Now I 

am no prophet, nor the son of a prophet, but one thing I can 
predict: that every one of these new converts that goes to studying 
his Bible, and loves this Book above every other book, is sure to 
hold out. The world will have no charm for him; he will get the 
world under his feet, because in this Book he will find something 
better than the world can give him. Now what I want to say to 
these young converts, and to old converts, is to love the Word of 
God. Set more and more store by it. Then the troubles in your 
Christian life will pass away like a morning cloud. You will feed 
and live on the Word of God, and it will become the joy of your soul. 
Now, to help some of you to a right course in studying God's 
Word, I want to point out a number of texts that you might begin 
with, and then, in the same way, you can collect others. I want to 
call your attention first to a part of the fourth chapter of Matthew 
A little boy in the seat there, while giving his experience the other 
day, felt so sure about his strength that he defied Satan. I trem- 
bled. Those of us who are older, and know more about the devil's 
power, know we cafi only meet him with the Word of God. We 
can’t willistand him by our feelings or by our being converted ; he only 
laughs at such weapons. Read in this fourth chapter, from the third 


it God shut the door. 
ht be something su- 
vas the last day. But 
ore abcut it, for the 
omen were marrying, 
sud, like Elijah’s, not 
r and larger, until it 
‘t their homes for the 
vorld beside. There 
e riches of ten thou- 
ks, and business, and 
ded for but to benefit 
d, It would rise in 


BIBLE. 


ns, Will this work hold 
ng to stand? Now I 
et, but one thing I can 
5 that goes to studying 
other book, is sure to 
him; he will get the 
e will find something 
hat I want to say to 

s to love the Word of 

h the troubles in your 
cloud. You will feed 
e the joy of your soul. 
rse in studying God's 
that you might begin 
ect others. I want to 
chapter of Matthew 
s experience the other 
Hefied Satan. I trem- 
more about the devil's 
e Word of God. We 
ing converted ; he only 
hapter, from the third 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 689 


verse on, and see how Christ overcame Satan. Not by His feelings 
not because He had been baptized of John in Jordan, but by the 
word of the living God. Three times Satan advanced to the charge, 
but every time he was thrust through by the sword of the Spirit. 
And that must be your sword. Don’t say, like the little boy in 
Scotland, “ Old Nick, just you get behind me,” but say, “ O Lord, just 
put him behind me.” You can’t do anything against Satan of your- 
self; you can only overcome him through Christ and by the word 
of the living God. 

Then take Romans x. 15. It shows there was a ‘work done for 
you on Calvary, but that there is ancther work quite distinct from 
that. “ How shall they preach exceri they be sent?”’ “ Faith com- 
eth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.” How many 
mourning Christians there are who know little about God, and the 
reason is just that they do not study the Word of God. You are 
little acquainted with this precious book. I don’t see how Chris- 
tians can habitually read the newspapers on Sunday. I wouldn’t 
advise you even to read your religious weeklies on that day. ! find 
too many are making these take the place of the Bible. Let us 
have one day exclusively to study and read the Word of God. If 
we can’t take time during the week, we will have Sunday uninter. 
rupted. What can botanists tell you of the lily of the valley? you 
must study this book for that. What can geologists tell you of the 
Kock of Ages, or mere astronomers about the Bright Morning Star? 
In these pages we find all knowledge unto salvation; here we read 
of the ruin of man by nature, redemption by the blood, and re- 
generation by the Holy Ghost. These three things run all through 
and through them. 

But let us stick to the thought, how to study this Bible. A fa- 
vorite way with me is just to take up one word or expression, and 
run through the different places where they are. Take the “I ams”’ 
of John; “I am the bread of life ;” “I am the water of life ;” “Iam 
the way, the truth, and the life ;” “Iam the resurrection ;” “I am 
all, and in all.” God gives to His children a blank, and on it they 
can write whatever they most want, and He will fill the bill. 

And then the promises A Scotchman found out thirty-one thou- 
sand distinct promises in the Word of God. There is not a despond- 
ent soul in this Tabernacle, this morning, but God has a promise 


just to suit him. They abound, even in the books of Job and 
Jonah. 


690 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 

And now let us follow on the thought, “ What is God able to do.” 
Just get all the blessed texts on that subject to heart, and you can’t 
help speaking for God. Then you can indeed say, “ God is my Father, 
Jesus is my Saviour, and Heaven is my home.” There is a blessed 
verse in the Gospel of John. There is no more fruitful subject in 
the Bible than is opened up there. The conversions there and all 
through the Bible, notice, are different from each other, though all 
redounding to the glory of God. Think of Nicodemus, the woman 
at the well, and Matthew the publican. And then the conversions 
in the Acts, and those of the Philippian juilor and Cornelius. We 
make a great deal more ado about this simple act than the Bible 
teaches. Conversion is just to believe on Christ and follow Him, 
and may be but the work of a minute. 

Many people do not believe in assurance as to salvation. Turn to 
the third chapter of the first epistle of John, “ Beloved, now are we the 
sons of God.” The fifth verse of that chapter says, ‘And ye know 
that He was manifested to take away our sins,” and then we come 
to, “I know that my Redeemer liveth.” All the Bible puts it in that 
way. When it speaks of hope, it means a certain hope, not a doubt- 
ful hope. The “hope of a glorious resurrection” was a sure hope. 
Then the nineteenth verse, “‘ Hereby we know that we are of the 
truth;” and then, “ We know that we have passed from death into 
life,” and “Ye know that no murderer hath eternal life,” and also, 
“ Hereby we know that He abideth in us by the Spirit which He 
hath given us.” There is no reason, nay, there is no excuse, for 
Christians doubting that they are saved; it is presumptuous not to 
take God at His word. Again, the second verse of the third chap. 
ter of the first epistle of John says, “ Beloved, now are we the sons 
of God, it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that 
when He shall appear we shall be like Him.” 

So I find great comfort and advantage in just taking up the Word 
of God in this way, and studying it with a view to some single 
truth. Take up in this way a single name, or life, or character. 
Thus Lazarus, in his different stages, is the type of the dead soul— 
the soul dead in trespasses and sin; then he is the saved soul; then 
the feasting, rejoicing soul; then he testifies to the goodness of God. 
Galatians shows how we are first called, then justified, then sancti- 
fied; all through there is a beautiful connection, and you have only 
to stand right with one of these thoughts, and follow the trail out. 
And then take up the Christian’s growth in grace, Psalm xxiii, 


God able to do.” 

rt, and you can’t 

God ismy Father, 
here is a blessed 
ruitful subject in 
ons there and all 
other, though all 
lemus, the woman 
»n the conversions 
d Cornelius. We 
ct than the Bible 
t and follow Him, 


salvation. Turn to 
ved, now are we the 
ys, “And ye know 
and then we come 
Bible puts it in that 
. hope, not a doubt- 
n’? was a sure hope. 
that we are of the 
sed from death into 
rnal life,” and also, 
he Spirit which He 
re is no excuse, for 
presumptuous not to 
e of the third chap- 
now are we the sons 
bp; but we know that 


taking up the Word 

iew to some single 

or life, or character. 
e of the dead soul— 
he saved soul; then 
he goodness of God. 
ustified, then sanctt- 
1), and you have only 
follow the trail out. 

grace, Psalm xxiii. 


TRUST, 691 


verse 2, “Lie down in green pastures;” “Sitting at the feet of 
Jesus;” Ephesians, chapter vi., verses 13 and 14, “ He is able to 
make us stand ;’’ Psalms, “ Walk through the valley of the shadow 
of death;”” Hebrews, chapter xii., verse 1, “Run with patience 
the race that is set before us;’’ Psalm xviii., verse 21, and in Isaiah 
chapter xl., verse 31, “ They shall mount up with wings as eagles.” 
The Christian, these verses show, goes up higher and higher, like a 
balioon, till the world is lost to sight; till he becomes like Christ, 
and possessed of eyes that can gaze unblinded on the glory of the 


City of God. 
XXIV. 
TRUST. 


OME who had counted the verses in the Bible found that the 

eighth and ninth verses of the one hundred and eighteenth 

Psalm were the middle verses of the Bible. “It is better to 
trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man. It is better to 
trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes.” And also he 
read the third and fourth verses of the twenty-sixth chapter of 
Isaiah: “ Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed 
on Thee; because he trusteth in Thee. Trust ye in the Lord for- 
ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.” A boy 
whose mother promises him anything knows how to trust her. If 
she promises him a pair of skates at Christmas, he doesn’t begin to: 
analyze what trust is; he doesn’t begin to ask what his feeling is.. 
He simply says, ‘ Mother said so, and that’s enough.” There was 
nothing miraculous about it; it was simply trust. This was the 
idea of trusting in God. They must trust God, even if they didn’t 
know what the result would be. In the sixty-second Psalm, eighth 
verse, it said: “Trust in Him at all times, ye people; pour out 
your heart before Him; God is a refuge for us.” It was the same 
in the midnight darkness as in the daylight. It was the child in the 
light whose father was in the dark. The child leaped: into: its 
father’s arms though it didn’t see him. It was the simple trust 
that the father was there. Trust God at all times.. Trust Him:as 
one would trust a banker whom he had tried; a dcctor whom. he 
had confidence in; or a lawyer who had been tried.and had never 
lost a case. They had an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus 
Christ the Righteous. How to trust Him was: shown in. Proverbs. 


2 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


to be with “all the heart;” not a little, but with the whole heart, 
Don’t trust the minister with the soul’s salvation, but God. God 
wants the whole heart ; God hates half-heartedness; God detests 
half-heartedness. An incident of Alexander illustrated this, where 
the Emperor was warned to beware of his physician, and to beware 
of his medicine. The Emperor took the note of warning in one 
hand and the medicine in the other, and, because he trusted in his 
physician, took his draught. That was perfect trust. Paul said: 
“T am persuaded that He is able to keep that which I have com- 
mitted unto Him.” The next step was: “ Who will trust Him?” 
This is answered in the ninth Psalm, at the tenth verse: “ They 
that know Thy name will put their trust in Thee.” He must be 
known to be trusted; He must be believed to be trusted. No infi- 
del could trust God, because he didn’t know Him. No one could 
go down to hell trusting inGod. Then came the trust: “ Thou wilt 
keep them in perfect peace that trust Thee.’ In the sixteenth 
chapter of Proverbs, at the twentieth verse, was described the joy 
of the one who trusted God: “ Whoso trusteth in the Lord, happy 
ishe.” In the thirty-second Psalm, at the tenth verse, again it was 
said: ‘ Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, but he that trustcth in 
the Lord, mercy shall compass him about.” The joy is thus de- 
‘scribed in the fifth Psalm, at the eleventh verse: “ But let all those 
ithat put their trust in Thee rejoice; let them ever shout for joy, 
‘because Thou defendest them; let them also that love Thy name be 
joyful in Thee.” The inquirer asked about feeling—how should he 
ifeel? He would say, “Let your feelings take care of themselves, 
you have only to come to God.” They couldn’t be saved by their 
feelings, nor by their good morals, by trying to break off their sins 
here and there; it was like lopping off the twigs of a tree, while 
Christ laid the ax to the root. In the twenty-ninth chapter of Prov- 
erbs it was said: ‘ Whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be 
gafe;"’ .or.in the margin, “set on high.” 


XXV. 
JACOB’S LIFE AND CHARACTER. 


, HE key to all Jacob’s difficulties will be found in the twentieth 
chapter of Matthew, from which Mr. Moody read an illustra 
tion. It iis the story of the laborers in the vineyard. The 


vith the whole heart, 
tion, but God, God 
edness; God detests 
Hustrated this, where 
‘sician, and to beware 
te of warning in one 
ause he trusted in his 
ct trust. Paul said: 
at which I have com- 
Vho will trust Him?” 
tenth verse: “ They 
Thee.” He must be 
> be trusted. No infi- 
» Him. No one could 
the trust: “ Thou wilt 
e’ In the sixteenth 
was described the joy 
th in the Lord, happy 
nth verse, again it was 
but he that trustcth in 
’ The joy is thus de- 
rse: “ But let all those 
hem ever shout for joy, 
that love Thy name be 
feeling—how should he 
hke care of themselves, 
ldn’t be saved by their 
to break off their sins 
twigs of a tree, while 
veninth chapter of Prov- 
tt in the Lord shall be 


ARACTER. 


> found in the twentieth 
Moody read an illustra 
5 in the vineyard. The 


YACOB'S LIFE AND CHARACTER, 693 


thought is in the second verse. The first man hired agreed to the 
bargain. The men would not go until the owner of the vineyard 
had made a bargain with them. He told them that he would pay 
them what was right. They got a penny. He gave them the law- 
fulwages. “Is that all you're going to giveme?” they probably said. 
Jacob was all the time making bargains. The Christians who are 
making bargains with the Lord do not get as much as those who 
trust Him. It does not pay to make bargains with the Lord. 
Jacob is twin brother of most of us. Where you will find one 
Joseph or one Daniel, you will find a hundred Jacobs. We are not 
willing, all of us, to take God at His word and trust Him. There is 
a strong contrast between the character of Joseph and Jacob. The 
one trusted God implicitly ; but Jacob wanted to trust Him no far- 
ther than he could see God. There would have been a great deal 
of murmuring if Jacob had been thrown into jail in Egypt. Jacob 
no doubt got a great deal of his weakness from his mother. There 
was a division in that home. Isaac favored Esau, and Rebekah 
favored Jacob. Such dissensions are just the thing to stir up the 
old Adam in the man. A mother and a father have no right to take 
this course. Rebekah planned continually to keep Jacob at home. 
The very thing that Rebekah tries to achieve, in that she fails. 
By nature Esau was the better of the two. If such a mean, con- 
temptible nature as Jacob’s can be saveu, then there is hope for all 
of us. The Lord promised to Jacob from the top of the ladder what 
he should have. Jacob gets up and says, “If God will be with me 
and keep and clothe me, then shall the Lord be my God.” What a 
low, contemptible idea he had. God had promised him all from 
Dan to Beersheba. That’s the difficulty with the people at the 
present time. If God will bless us in our basket and store we shall 
have Him for our God. We find Jacob after this in Haran driving 
bargains all the time, and the worst of it is, he gets beat every time. 
He had to work seven years for his wife, and then gets another woman 
inher place. He gets paid back in hisown coin. We must not think 
that God will allow us to deceive without punishing us for it. He for- 
got all the vows he made at Bethel, but God did not forget His. Some 
of God’s promises are unconditional. The promise he made at Bethel 
was unconditional. God chose Jacob rather than Esau. Some peo- 
ple say that God hated Esau before he was born. That is not the 
teaching of Scripture, even though one of the minor prophets long 
years after mentioned it. God says to Jacob, after he had been in 


' 

; 
an 
iat 

H 
“id 
ry 
ea 
ad 


694 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


Haran for so many years, “I am the God of Bethel; arise and 
dwell there.” He ought to have been proud, and instead of leaving 
Tiaran like a prince, he steals away like a thief. He starts oti, and 
his uncle and father-in-law pursue. God took care of him; God 
was going to keep His vows, and there is no doubt that had not 
God interfered, Jacob would have been slaia. We find that Jacob 
stays behind like a miserable coward, after he had sent his effects 
away. A man out of communication with God is a coward always. 
There was a man wrestled with Jacob. It was Christ. When did 
he prevail? When his thigh was out of joint all he could do was to 
hold on and get the blessing. The man who is the lowest down is 
the man that God lifts up the highest. The man that has the 
greatest humility wil! be the most exalted. A great many say that 
Jacob was a different man. Would to God his thigh had been left 
out of joint so that there was no more of the flesh in him. The 
next thing, we find Jacob and Esau embracing, and we would sup- 
pose that he would be filled with gratitude. But no; he goes down 
to Shechem and builds an altar and calls it by a high-sounding name. 
Jacob in Shechem with this altar with a high-sounding name was 
no better than he was in Haran without an altar. It would be a 
good day if we people in Boston would bury our idols, rum bottles, 
tobacco and cigars, beneath an oak in Shechem. The trouble is, 
that we have slipped down to Shechem. There his sons fell. It is 
wen men go down to Haran and Shechem, instead of staying in 
Bethel, that they fall into sin. Let the Church of God come out 
and stand before the world free from idols, there would be no need 
for idols. The only thing that keeps back the blessing of God are 
the church members. He built an altar finally at Bethel. He said 
that he would go to Bethel and build an altar to his God, as if the 
Shechem altar was no altar. He called it El-Bethel. Just the mo- 
ment he came to Bethel the Lord God met him, and just as soon 
as the Church leaves Shechem and comes to Bethel, then the Lord 
God will meet it. The next thing we hear is the saddest episode 
in Jacob’s life—the death of Rachel, his favorite wife. His sons go 
back to Shechem and hunt up the old idols. His sons bring him 
back news from there that his beloved son was dead. Do you see 
how he begins to reap the sins of his own earlier days? For twenty 
long years he mourned that beloved boy. He deceived his own 
father, anc: his own sons deceived him. What a bitter life. What 
was Jacob’s dying testimony to Pharaoh? It would take ten thou- 


f Bethel; arise and 
nd instead of leaving 
He starts oli, and 
< care of him; God 
doubt that had not 
We find that Jacob 
had sent his effects 
d is a coward always. 
; Christ. When did 
Il he could do was to 
s the lowest down is 
e man that has the 
. great many say that 
s thigh had been left 
e flesh in him. The 
gs, and we would sup- 
3ut no; he goes down 
 high-sounding name. 
h-sounding name was 
altar. It would be a 
our idols, rum bottles, 
1em. The trouble is, 
re his sons fell. It is 
instead of staying in 
ch of God come out 
ere would be no need 
e blessing of God are 
at Bethel. He said 
to his God, as if the 
Bethel. Just the mo- 
im, and just as soon 
Bethel, then the Lord 
s the saddest episode 
ite wife. His sons go 
His sons bring him 
s dead. Do you see 
er days? For twenty 
He deceived his own 
ta bitter life. What 
would take ten thou- 


THE LIFE OF PETER. 695 


sand Jacobs to get one convert like Pharaoh. ‘“ Few and evil, 
Jacob said, “had is days been.” He started with a lie in his mouth. 
He died in exile. He died in Egypt, not in the land God promised 
him. He would not let God choose forhim. He was saved by fire 
or as Job said, by the skin of his teeth. We must walk less by steiet 
and more by faith. It is safer for God to choose and to do the stan 
ning. It is for us to be satisfied with God’s writ. Let us be satis- 
fied and wait upon Him, saying: “ Thy will be done, and not ours.” 


XXVI. 


THE I.{FE OF PETER. 


HE first glimpse we had of him was when Andrew called him. 
He was first called as a disciple, not as an apostle. The 
second call was when he was called to the work of the ministry. 

The next glimpse we had was :elated in the fifth chapter of the 

Gospel of Luke, when the Lord spoke to the people the words of 

God from the boat at the seaside, and then follows the miraculous 

draught of fishes. Then it was that Peter said: “Depart from me 

for I am a sinful man, O God.” Then Jesus said that thereafter 

Peter would catch men. The thought he wanted to call attention 

to was, that when Peter was called he didn’t leave his work until 

called twice. There were too many unprepared men in the Lord’s 
work; there were too many men made ministers in the world to- 
day. He said this because there were a good many young men, 
young converts, who were looking to the work of the ministry and 
thinking they were called to that. John Wesley used to say to 
young men, candidates for the ministry, when they preached, 
“Did you make any one mad?” “No.” “Did you convert 
anybody?” and then they would say “no.” “Then,” Wesley 
said, “that’s a very good evidence you're not called.” Men 
need to have souls before they begin this work. The Lord 
first made these men go to the lake and take a great haul of 
fish, and then when they were called, they had something to leave. 

They didn’t have much to leave, but they left what they had. 

What had they to leave? A few broken nets and a haul of fish. 

And that’s the way with a great many Christians of the present day ; 

they didn’t want to leave their little draught of fishes and their 

broken nets. The next time we get a glimpse of Peter is in the fouz 


66 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


teenth chapter of Matthew, where the Lord tells Peter to walk on 
the water. Here we find Peter in “ Doubting Castle.” And that 
was where Peter got his eye off the Lord, and he saw the waves and 
heard the wind; then his eyes wandered away from Christ. But 
Peter’s prayer was to the point; it didn’t begin with a long pream- 
ble, which would have put him forty feet under water before the 
Lord heard it. But it was tothe point : “ Lord, save me; I perish.” 
Again, in the sixteenth chapter we find that Christ is saying, 
‘“Whem say men that I am?” and then He asked Peter, and Peter 
said, “ Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God.” This 
shows the power there was in confessing Christ. Peter was a true 
Trinitarian; he got square on the rock. Again we fir.a him indulg. 
ing in man-worship, the first beginningsof Rome. This was on the 
Mount of Transfiguration. Peter said, “ Let us make three Taber- 
nacles;” and as soon as he said this, why, God just snatched Moses 
and Elias away and left them only Jesus. There was too much of 
this minister-worship, of this church-worship at the present day. 
This was illustrated in the twenty-second chapter of Revelations, 
ninth verse, where the angel said, “‘ Worship God.” If Christ was 
not the Son of God, then Christians were the greatest idolaters that 
ever lived. Again, we found Peter in the twenty-sixth chapter of 
Matthew, at the twenty-third verse, where Peter’s fall was recited. 
He became self-confident and spiritually proud. The Lord couldn t 
use him until he had been humbled, and here he stood up among 
the Lord’s disciples, just as though he was all-powerful. This 
lesson of humility must be learned by every man whom God uses. 
“ Let him that standeth take heed lest he fall.” The greatest Bible 
characters fell because they failed in their strongest points. Moses, 
the meekest man, was not allowed to see the promised land, and 
there were Saul, and David, and Jacob, and Peter, at this very time 
when he was boasting of his own power. He was always sure that 
young converts who say they’re safe were where the devil will trip 
them up. Again, Peter was asleep in the garden when the Lord 
told them to watch. That was the time vhen Satan had these 
Christians in the churches asleep, and then troubles came in the 
churches. Then came the next step—“he followed him afar off.” 
And this was the graclual downward course. No one would find a 
Christian man in the theatre; those Christians who are in such 
places are all asleep. Men of the world said they liked “ liberal 
Christians,” but these men were never sent for by dying men 


is Peter to walk on 
Castle.” And that 
saw the waves and 
>from Christ. But 
with a long pream- 
sr water before the 
save me; | perish.” 
at Christ is saying, 
ed Peter, and Peter 
Living God.” This 
Peter was a true 
we fir. him indulg- 
ie. This was on the 
5 make three Taber- 
just snatched Moses 
44e was too much of 
at the present day. 
apter of Revelations, 
God.” If Christ was 
rreatest idolaters that 
‘enty-sixth chapter of 
pter’s fall was recited. 
H. The Lord couldn t 
e he stood up among 
« all-powerful. This 
man whom God uses. 
” The greatest Bible 
ngest points. Moses, 
e promised land, and 
eter, at this very time 
was always sure that 
tere the devil will trip 
arden when the Lord 
hen Satan had these 
troubles came in the 
ollowed him afar oft. 
No one would find a 
‘ans who are in such 
id they liked “ liberal 
t for by dying mem 


WALKING WITH GOD. 697 


They would never find a card-playing, a smoking and chewing, a 
horse-raci1ig, and a dancing Christian who ever amounted to anything. 
Then the next step was when Peter drew his sword and cut off the 
ear of the High Priest’s servant; and then, again, Peter denied the 
Lord—first to the young maid, and then to another servant. But 
so here were two denials by the very man who but a few hours 
before had said he would never betray or forsake the Lord. Then, 
again, the third time the servant said, ‘ Thy speech betrayeth thee,” 
tut Peter answered with oaths that he never knew Him. It’s hard 
for a Christian to forget the speech of the Lord’s people, even after 
he has long departed from the way of God and Christ. But one 
look brought Peter back, one word undid all that Satan had been 
doing for hours, and he went out and wept bitterly. One of the 
first words that Christ said after the crucifixion and resurrection 
was, “ Tell the disciples and Peter,”’ and Peter had a personal inter- 
view with the Lord. And then, when Christ was leaving him, He 
asked him, “ Lovest thou Me more than these?”’ But Peter didn’t 
answer; he had learned humility, and after the Lord asked him 
again, Peter, now humble, already meet for the Master's use, said, 
“Lord, thou knowest.” 


XAVIT. 
WALKING WITH GOD. 


CHILD had to be born before it can walk, and a soul has to 
believe on God before it could be with Him. God once 
walked with man in the Garden of Eden, but He forsook 
that after the fall, and caly here and there walked with men. Mr. 
Moody said that he had been told that the Indians n the West had 
a peculiar way of making a trail. The chief, or head man, rode 
ahead, and ali the others followed in his footsteps, anc it was one 
trail. And so the Christian had Jesus in whose footsteps to 
tread and to walk the journey of life, and His example. He read 
the first quotation from the first epistle of Peter, second chapter and 
twenty-first verse: ‘‘For even hereunto were ye called; because 
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should 
follow His steps.” He was at a railway station once, and not 
knowirg the time the train left, he asked a man who said he thought 
it was g o'clock; another he asked said he thought it was 8:45 


G98 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


o'clock ; and still another said it was 9:15 o’clock, so the only thing 
left that was safe to do was to consult the railway guide, and he 
did so, and found the desired information. And when any one was 
wanting to know anything about God, the best way was not to 
consult men, but to go to the Great Guide, the Bible, and that was 
the only way to learn of a surety. In the twenty-sixth chapter of 
Leviticus at the second verse, God promises to be the God of those 
who keep His Sabbaths and reverence His sanctuary; and in the 
twelfth verse: “I will walk among you and will be your God, and 
ye shail be My people;” and in the twenty-seventh and twenty- 
eighth verses: “ And if ye will not for all this hearken unto Me, but 
walk contrey unto Me, then I will walk contrary unto you also 
in fury ; and I, even I, will chasten you seven times for your sins.” 
A great many persons never went to the Bible to know what God’s 
way was, but like Balaam, waited for the Lord to hedge up their 
way, instead of studying the Bible to find out. A man might get 
wea!th and position and power, but he’d never have perfect peace 
until he was first at peace with God and walked in God’s way. 
There was a leanness of soul which would be his until he was filled 
with the contentment God gave His children. The pile of stones 
on the highway was just as good as a heap of gold if the man who 
owned the gold was not contented. 

One class of Christians who were to be met with, were those who 
wanted any way but God’s way, and were never willing to take what 
God had chosen for them. This class was referred to in the sixth 
chapter of Jeremiah, and the sixteenth verse. This class was always 
looking after new ways. They were never willing to take the “ old 
paths” referred to in Jeremiah, in the sixth chapter. If an angel 
came and gave them their own way, they would not be able to 
make any better choice than what God had made for them. This 
was seen in what was called “liberal Christianity.” He never saw 
a “liberal Christian’ who was perfectly contented. No greater de- 
lusion, he believed, was ever in the world than that of these so- 
called Christians. The standard of Christians must be raised to 
where the Bible had it. They might be called Puritans, but they 
were living where the Bible would have them. There was a great 
curse abroad in the land, called “German infidelity.” He prayed 
that there were such men to-day as Martin Luther, and Knox, and 
Whitfield, and the reformers to hold high the banner of the Cross, 
The skeptics rejected the Word of God, and did just as the Israel- 


so the only thing 

ray guide, and he 

vhen any one was 

- way was not to 

ible, and that was 

y-sixth chapter of 

the God of those 
tuary ; and in the 

be your God, and 
renth and twenty- 
rken unto Me, but 
ary unto you also 
nes for your sins.” 
y know what God's 
to hedge up their 
A man might get 
have perfect peace 
sed in God’s way. 
s until he was filled 
The pile of stones 
old if the man who 


ith, were those who 
willing to take what 
red to in the sixth 
his class was always 
g to take the “ old 
apter. If an angel 
uld not be able to 
de for them. This 
y.” He never saw 
ed. No greater de- 
In that of these so- 

must be raised to 

Puritans, but they 
There was a great 
elity.” He prayed 
er, and Knox, and 
anner of the Cross. 

just as the Israel- 


WALKING WITH GOD. 699 


ites did before they went into captivity for seventy years in Baby- 
lor. The old way was better than the new. 

In the ecighty-fourth Psalm were the words, “No good thing will 
be withheld from them that walk uprightly.” He had another thing 
to call attention to, namely, separation. If a Christian man walked 
hand in hand with another who was not, he was dishonoring God. 
In Ephesians, the question was asked, “Can two walk together un- 
less they are agreed?” In Luke, it was related how the disciples 
walked to Emmaus, and Jesus walked and talked with them. Those 
who walk together must be of one mind. He had seen two young 
men together on the way to the theatre once; one swore horribly, 
the other didn’t, but laughed at what was said. They were agreed. 
If one man abused another man’s wife to the husband, that husband 
couldn’t walk with his wife’s enemy if they were not agreed; and 
if a Christian heard a man reviling God, he couldn't walk with him. 

Mr. Moody then called attention to another point, from Second 
Corinthians, sixth chapter, fourteenth verse: “ Be ye not unequally 
yoked together with unbelievers;” and in the seventeenth verse: 
“Come out from among them, and be ye separate.” He lamented 
that so many Christians were married to persons who were not 
Christians. Many went into partnership with unchristian men, and 
the results were disastrous. A woman who marries an unbeliever 
is chained to a corpse for life. The trouble was that Christian 
women married saying they would influence their husbands; but if 
they couldn’t do it before marriage, they certainly could not after 
marriage. The Bible never counseled any one to leave a_hus- 
band or wife because of this; but the fault was theirs, if they have 
misery now, in not seeing to it before they were yoked for life. 
Several instances were related illustrating this. Then there was 
another thing he called attention to, and he spoke of it, he said, 
feeling that he might be stepping on some one’s toes, perhaps some 
in the audience, and perhaps some of the ministers; he referred to 
lodges, no matter whether they were temperance, or anything else. 
Abraham had more influence in Sodom than Lot had, and Abraham 
knew the city was to be destroyed before Lot did; and when men 
said they did this or that to gain others’ influence, they were to re- 
member never to do evil that good might come of it. He wouldn’t 


yoke himself with anything where God wasn’t to be found and hon 
ored, 


700 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


XXVIII. 
THE TWO ADAMS. 


OD really dealt with two men; the first and the second Adam, 
the two federal heads. As a sort of primary examples of his 
meaning, he referred to the cases of Cain and Abel, Esau 

and Jacob, Saul and David—how the house of Saul grew weaker 
and weaker, and that of the latter stronger and stronger. He said 
he would endeavor during the afternoon—and, in fact, it was his aim 
in life—to turn the listener against this first man, which the first 
chapter said was made in God’s own image, after His own likeness. 
He then went on to say that man was made the lord over all the 
creation, as found in the twentieth verse of the second chapter of 
Genesis, but further on in the same book, God commanded him not 
to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, for he would 
surely die. Moody said he bothered himself for many years over 
these words, “In the day thou eatest thou diest,’’ but had finally 
succeeded in unravelling the mystery. He found it in the 
sixth verse of the third chapter of Genesis, where Eve saw 
that the fruit of the tree was good aud ate and gave it to 
Adam, and he also did eat. This was the first Adam, who 
sinned and fell. The second Adam came, and as the fifth 
chapter of the Second Corinthians, twenty-first verse, says, the 
God made Him, His Son, “to be sin for us,” that we might rise 
again. There are the two Adams: the first Adam reduced us, the 
second raised us up. 

To further illustrate his meaning, Mr. Moody then read two 
verses from Romans, showing that by one man sin entered into the 
world, and death by sin. Some people could see no justice in 
making all men, as late as the present generation, suffer for the sin 
of one man, but Mr. Moody would say to such, that they look at 
but one side of the issue. He then requested them to take a glance 
at the other side of Adam. They forget that there are two Adams, 
and that the second Adam gives them an easy method to be back 
again where the first Adam was before he fell. They forget that if 
they would give their second Adam a trial, that they would be at 
peace and in joy with themselves. The first Adam was flesh; the 
second isthe soul. The first dies; the second lives through eternity 


id the second Adam, 
mary examples of his 
‘ain and Abel, Esau 
of Saul grew weaker 
1 stronger. He said 
n fact, it was his aim 
man, which the first 
rer His own likeness. 
the lord over all the 
.e second chapter of 
commanded him not 
d evil, for he would 
for many years over 
diest,’”” but had finally 
Ie found it in the 
ssis, where Eve saw 
ate and gave it to 
he first Adam, who 
e, and as the fifth 
first verse, says, the 
s,” that we might rise 
Adam reduced us, the 


Ioody then read two 
n sin entered into the 
ild see no justice in 
tion, suffer for the sin 
ch, that they look at 
them to take a glance 
there are two Adams, 
by method to be back 
They forget that if 
hat they would be at 
Adam was flesh; the 
lives through eternity 


THE TWO ADAMS, 701 


The first reigns supreme till it dies, but after that the second is 
ruler. Control the first, therefore, while it lives, and all flourishes 
well. Though there is death, there is life. We get death in the 
third of Genesis, and life in the third of St. John. 

He then quoted Dr. Andrew Bonar’s words, who said, “It was a 
great mystery that God ever permitted man to sin, but it was a 
greater mystery that He ever allowed His Son to stand the brunt 
of it.” He would advise his hearers to remember this when in 
doubt. God was just. He was compelled to banish Adam from 
Eden, and place a guard on it. If He did not, what a perfect hell 
it would be now. He had ordained that man should die, but in 
justice He gave us a second Adam, who saved us. The first Adam 
introduced sin; the second is all that is good. Man is both, and he 
must, therefore, banish the first and encourage the second. All our 
burdens are those of the first Adam; but if we come to the Lord, 
He will carry them for us. The first gave a good many of these 
burdens, and hard ones they are to bear, but we can go to the 
second Adam. God is grace enough to carry all. Goto Him. 

Mr. Moody then told of the wealthy lady in the old country, 
whom a virtuous, Christ.an woman was endeavoring to interest in a 
poor bedridden woman. They called together at the tenement- 
house, and commenced to climb the rickety stairs. At the first 
landing, the dismal appearance rather appalled the wealthy being, 
who was unaccustomed to such darkness, and she asked if there was 
no danger. The friend replied, “It is better higher up.” Up to 
the next flight they continued their way, but it was getting darker 
and darker. Another frightened question only elicited the same 
reply, “It is better higher up.” Another flight and surroundings 
were simply terrible to the unaccustomed wealthy being, but her 
friend still insisted “it was better higher up.” The fifth floor was 
finally reached, and the visitors entered a plain, but home-like and 
happy home, though the woman was bedridden for four years, and 
there were evidences of many privations. The lady asked if she 
must not suffer much; but with the true spirit of the second Adam, 
she replied, “It is better higher up.” Be like the wayfarer wearily 
treading the road with the bundle over his shoulder, whom a farmer 
gave a ride, but could not induce to drop his bundle. He was 
thankful enough that he could ride himself. Mr. Moody exhorted 
them to carry their burdens with good will, and ride happily to 
Heaven. 


702 MOOD ?'S ADDRESSES. 


The forty-seventh verse of the fifteenth chapter of First Corinth- 
ians says, “ The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second man is 
the Lord from Heaven.” So it is with many after they have been 
converted, when they feel their old desires returning. He said his 
time was occupied in preventing the first Moody from assuming 
control of him that it hardly gave him time to do anything else, or 
ever gratify the most petty luxury. He then went on to show that 
if the Lord had banished man from Eden for one sin, and could de- 
liver him from his bondage by a sacrifice of His Son, how can we 
expect without the aid of God to reach Heaven with the thousands 
of sins which many of us are responsible for. Many claim it is the 
flesh which sins. Peter claimed so when he denied Christ. He did 
not want to, but could not help it. There is no good in the flesh, 
and only one way to battle. Don’t feed it, is Mr. Moody’s recom- 
mendation. But if you feed him by visiting the theatres, reading 
trashy novels, and in many other foolish ways feeding him, you can 
not expect to control him, and if you don’t control the flesh, it will 
still be the first Adam. God holds you personally responsible for 
the flesh. You must control it. A culprit in England pleaded that 
he did not want to commit the crime, but that the flesh did it. 
The judge says, “ All right. We will put the flesh in jail, and the 
spirit may go where it pleases.” A few more chapters were then 
read, showing that it is necessary also to control the flesh because 
of its testimony. Mr. Moody says thé devil attacks in three differ- 
ent ways. First, he does all he can to keep you from reaching the 
second Adam; then, if you have reached it, he blackens your in- 
tentions; and should all prove futile, he will then do all he can to 
prevent you from talking. The flesh, the world, and the devil are 
man’s three great enemies, and Mr. Moody thinks flesh is the great- 
est of the three evils, for the devil will flee from you, but che flesh 
will not; it clings and incites. But on the other side, he invuked 
the audience to remember that man has three great friends, “ God 
the Father, God the Son, and God the Spirit,” and if they wouid 
go to them, all would be well. 


“¢ of First Corinth- 
the second man is 
ter they have been 
ning. He said his 
dy from assuming 
o anything else, or 
nt on to show that 
» sin, and could de- 
is Son, how can we 
with the thousands 
‘any claim it is the 
ied Christ. He did 
o good in the flesh, 
ir. Moody's recom- 
he theatres, reading 
ceding him, you can 
trol the flesh, it will 
1ally responsible for 
ngland pleaded that 
at the flesh did it. 
flesh in jail, and the 
chapters were then 
rol the flesh because 
acks in three differ- 
w from reaching the 
e blackens your in- 
hen do all he can to 
,and the devil are 
bks flesh is the great- 
you, but ihe flesh 
rer side, he invuked 
great friends, “ God 
” and if they wouid 


XXIX. 


THE PRAYERS OF THE CHURCH STRONGER 
THAN HEROD. 


N the twelfth of Acts we see the Church in straits. In this case 
the early Christians made their appeal directly to God. Things 
looked very dark for Peter. Herod had put him in prison, in- 

tending, after Easter, to deliver him over to the pecple to be 

killed, and, in order to make sure that he did not escape, there 
were sixteen soldiers, four at a time, set to keep guard over him. 

In our day we should get up an indignation meeting and protest 

against such treatment of a man who had committed no crime, and 

had not even been accused of any. We should probably get up a 

committee, composed of Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea, and 

Gamaliel, to go and represent the case to Herod and ask that Peter 

might be set at liberty; but those Christians did not commit the 

mistake which we have been making in this temperance movement 

all along, of looking to men instead of God. They appointed a 

prayer-meeting, and, to judge by the record, we may suppose they 

kept it up day and night for six days. On the seventh day, which 
was the time when Peter wag to have been brought forth to dre, 
they were still praying. No doubt some of us would have been dis- 
couraged the first day when we did not get any answer, an” would 
have given it up; but not they. I suppose they thought that God 
would soften the heart of Herod and that he would let Peter go. 

They certainly didn’t expect God was going to send an angel and 

bring him out of that prison. But while Peter is sleeping between 

two soldiers, bound with two chains, and the keepers without kept 
the prison, the angel of the Lord came in and a light shined in the 
prison. God does not work in the dark, but in the light. Then, as 

Peter arose at the bidding of the angel, his chains fell off. If we 

had been there, we should have taken off the chains and laid them 

down softly for fear of waking up the soldiers. 
“Bind on the sandals,” says the angel. If we had been doing it, 
we would have taken him out barefoot, so as not to make any noise. 

(703) 


=~ 


X 


4 


| 
| 
| 
i 
| 
| 
T 


704 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


“Cast thy garment about thee,” says the angel. Then they 
past one ward and another, and when they come to the great ir 
gate, it opens of its own accord, and out they go; and when Pet 
realizes that he is out of prison, he goes straight to where they a 
praying for him, and lets them know that their prayers have be 
answered. How many men are there here chained by lust, and pa 
sion, and appetite, to whom God has sent His angel, and delivere 
them? He has not only sent His angel, but He has sent His So 
to redeem them, and now there is no excuse for any one who is n 
saved. ‘There are hundreds of prisoners who were bound hand an 
foot, whom God has brought out of prison and set free during th 
past few weeks. And what will you say to their testimony? Wi 
you call them all liars when they tell you that the grace of Go 
through faith in Jesus Christ has taken the appetite for strong drin 
away from them? Let the Church do as it did in the case of Pete 
pray to God to deliver these captives of Satan and help them ou 
of all their difficulties, and He will do it. 


SES, 


he angel. Then they go 
‘y come to the great iron 
they go; and when Peter 
itraight to where they are 
their prayers have been 
chained by lust, and pas- 
His angel, and delivered 
ut He has sent His Son 
se for any one who is not 
ho were bound hand and 
n and set free during the 
> their testimony? Will 
u that the grace of God 
appetite for strong drink 
did in the case of Peter, 
atan and help them out 


