oa 
Q 
) 
fe) 
a 
J 
A 


ra eenihdarast iene ti fate 


NEW SERMON 3 


ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


BY 


DWIGHT LYMAN MOODY. 
ILLUSTRATED. 


SOLD ONLy BY SUBSCRIPTION. 


TORONTO: / 
JOHN B. MAGURN, PUBLISHER. 


Entered, according to Act of Congress, 


HENRY 8. GOODSPE 
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress 


in the year 1877, by 


‘J 


» at Washington, 


«x 


* 
et 4 bing 


Pe se rom est 


ISTORY informs us that labor-saving machinery, when first . Le 
, y fossa 
bitter hatred by working peo. ait 
ple, who feared that their wages would be reduced because | 
there would be less demand for human muscle and skill, 


of things prevailed. Labor became more honorable ae 
aid all kinds of stock advanced in price. 
Since the printing press became improved to so great an extent 
during the last century, men argued that it would supersede 
“Public speaking, and “the power of the press” is a household 
Phrase. But what have we beheld during the late political cam. | 
paign in this country? — Monster meetings day after day, and night 
after night, at which the issues before the people were discussed in * 
the presence of enthusiastic and tireless assemblies. The orator’s 
services seemed never in so. great demand as now 
and books are multiplied in countless profusion. 
onstration of the power of the human voice to call out and hold 


Sankey, in the most enlightened countries of the civilized world. | |. 
but must be supple fe 


mented by the living eloquence of the speaker, from whose lips flow 1 


streams of burning words that find their way into the depths of thi | 


a 
oO 
eS 
9°) 
wn 
G 
ie] 
ist) 
=) 
=] 
oO 
< 
if) 
“t 
s 
oO 
o@ 
ct 
cr 
= 
ie) 
= 
pe) 
=] 
cr 
n 
(2) 
> 
5 
cd 


soul, 


ed ai 
Mr. Moody’s campaigns are not hackneyed and mechanicd 2 | | 
to such a degree as might be expected, but are the hearty, livin ea 1 


work of a wonderful evangelist, whose resources seem, indeed, liki > 


pate ‘4 e 
those of the artesian well, to employ one of his own comparisons 
While he preaches on the sam 


€ general subjects, and pursues simila! 


a 


* 


al purity, and how it is 
at the head of evangelist 


ave heard Mr. Moody in the delivery of these dis- 
Courses, will fee] i ill 


\. | God has placed 


Proclaimed by one whom 
\ |) Those who h 


Ss. 


fe extent, it 
Ss discourses 


extempora- | TABLE OF CONTEN TS. We: ae 
ot only so, / Ae i 
‘wness and | He: 
eak much, ‘RODUCTION . ‘ . . : : . ° 
|LE OF ConTENTs ; ‘ . . ‘ é ‘ ° 
the public * OF In.ustrations. SO a ia a fb 
3 among a 
tions, and SERMONS. 
‘irculated, I 


—STONES To BE ROLLED Away 
spel in its 


TI,—Reapine AND GATHERING Fruit , : ‘ . 
ne whom ‘UI.—Courace in tug Lorv’s Worx oe tae 
hese dis. ‘V.—Power OF Fairny , ; ; ‘ ‘ ; ‘ ° 
1 the tor. V.—Compassion AND Symparny : r : 
rnestness VI.—Funerat SERMON OF SAMUEL Moopy ‘ : ‘ 
Ost seem | II—A Starting QUEsTION 4 é : : ° 
has only IT-—Curist SEEKING THE Lost Pee haga : 
ndernesg {X.—Lost anp SAVED | ‘ Na eats 
ervor of 'X.—Heaven, ann wxo APR Tee 3s pec 
istrates, ; XL—Layine up TREASURES IN Heaven . See 
‘Tsuades a HiGRkey . er ee 
oe aia \ IL—Szconp SERMON ONGrack . |. : 
Moody (§ / -V.—Work For Every Man te Meese 
lishers, | / rv. 


-—On Betne Born AGAIN 
a VI.—Tuer BRAZEN SERPENT 
1] IL—Faity, 


AND How To cer 1 ae ‘ 
II.—Tracine THE SCARLET THREAD 


‘X.—Tur BLoop or THE New TESTAMENT 


.X.—How Gop Loves Men . ‘ ‘ 

Ri.—Gon Hares Sin awn Loves tur SINNER, ; 
TI.—Tue PROPHET Danizr , ; ‘ ‘ ;: ‘ : 
U—~Teg SINNER’s Excussgs Swepr Away | 

Vee ‘OrtOUS GospEy 


eee ee eS 


i 


vs CONTENTS, 


XXVII —Tur BLIND wHom Curist 


XXVIII.-€On Serxing AND 
XXIX.-€A FUNDAMENTAL 
~XXX.—REPENTANCE 


WOULD Hear 
FINDING THE Lorp ., 


COMMAND BROUGHT HomeE 


e 


XXXIL—Wuar CHRIST Is To yg P 
XXXII.—Tue Hoty Spirit anp His Worx , 
XXXIII.—Man’s RELATIONS To THE Hoty Spirit 
XXXIV.—Prrsonaz REMINISCENCEs . 
XXV.-€Gop WANTS Everysopy SAVED 
XXVI.—Tue Propicat Son ‘ a : 
XXXVII.—Lessons FROM ‘ 


SAUL’s “ONVERSION 
XXX VITI.—Conressing CurRIstT 


od t 


XAXIX.—N AAMAN , 7 


XL.—How Memory TORMENTS THE Lost Sort 
XLI.—How to STUDY THE Bipte ; 
XLII.—Five One THINGS 

XLIII.—Receneration Is INs 

XLIV.—Tue “ BEHOLDs ” 


XLV.—Besr METHODs witH INQUIRERS , , ‘ 


XLVI.—Curist Savep THE BeLievinc RopBer 2 
XLVII.—Responsipiirirs OF PARENTS 
XLVIIU.—Younc MEN URGED To 


Si) | e O) e ¢ eee 

be vy 
) 

. 


> 


TANTANEOUS 


DECIDE FoR Gop 

XLIX.—Pratse an ELEMENT oF POWER ; ‘ 
‘sae L.— WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THE Law 
| LI.—Tue Eicur “J WILLs ” 

LII.—Lor 1n Sopom ; 
LII.—Tue Reticion OF JESUS BET 
LIV.—Jzsus CHRIST MUST BE RECE 
ALV.—Tue Ricu Foo. . 3 


LVI.—Puariser anp PUBLIGAN ; OR, PRIDE AND PenirE.: > 
LVIL@“ Wuar Syaty rue Harvest BE?” 
LVII.—Sermon ro ERRINGiWomEN . 

UIX.—Tur TEN “ComeEs” 

: LX.~-A Curistaas SERMON LOE ae ae 
re LF" =Our Lorn’s Rerurn : 


ty Oe Ve 7 
“EA OMS ®ROM: AnAB’s ILi-Juncep Manrtace 


e+ 


OF CHRIsT 


TER THAN ALL Ismg. 
IVED OR REJECTED ! 


e e e 


es a a rian snack ave ies 


X' 


4 


ADDRESSEs., 


INTRODUCTORY AT CHICAGO . 


PAGR 

ee he | 

I.—Firty-rirst Psaty ; . ‘ 543 
II.—Power or Fairy OO CN a Bed 
III.—Heart Srarcuing bane Fup ees 546 
IV.—TuHE Lorp’s PRAYER MIsNaMED ’ ; - 549 
— V.—Dantew’s PRAYER er ae ” 551 


VI.—On THE ComMMITTEE’s CIRCULAR 
VII.—Huniurry ‘ 
VIII.—Cauu ror WorKERS 

IX.—Tue Curistian’s Fame ; 


CALLING TO Prayer 555 
° rie . ° 558, 
‘ ; ‘ 569 


e ° e ° . 561 
X.—LEssons From THE Raisinec or Lazarus , ; 


562 
XI.—Wuart to vo wirn Dovsts . 56; 
XI.—On Wirnassine ror Curist iia ge Co 364 


XTII—TuHe Marricr AT CANA : ; ‘ ne a, 56 
XIV.—Drunxkarps SAVED By. REGENERATION 


56 
XV.—MEn Fatt sy Pripg ae . 56% 
XVI.—Drivkine or Gop’s FULUNEss . 568 
XVII.—Comine To Curisr , ee 
XVIII.—Tuanxscivinc anp PRAISE ee 
; XIX.—Compassion ye OR ho ee eee 
; XX.—Tur Hoty Spreir oe : 57° 
f XXI.—Grrts or tue Hony SPIRIT : 570 
. XXII.—Noan’s Carrenters ‘ 58) 
XXIII.—How to Stupy THE BIBLE : 58. 
XXIV.—Trusrt . ‘ . : ‘ 58 
XXV.—Jacon’s Lire anp CHARACTER ‘ me! 
XXVI—Tue Lire or Peter ee 
XXVII.—Warkine wit Gop + Be 592 
XXVII—Tur Two ADAMS eee 3 = o.  5p° 
XXIX.—TuHE PRAYERS OF THE CHURCH STRONGER THAN FlrRop igo 
nf XXX.—Tue Resurrection Becca MR Pe eh Ae 
{ " Sec Oe Riencucmeent pre) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS, 4 


st : AM Satine a ae 
bc atacand 8 gy Bie ti alii : ? 
ie ad > 
— S= = Se 


ms] 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


FA PAGE 
_ Portrait or D. L. Moopy . ‘ ‘ ‘ , ‘ : I 
Ye 
¥ “Tra D. Sankey . : y ; ‘ 16 


Iwrerior OF THE TABERNACLE AT CHICAGO 
it 3 


e ry e e 2 48 
“ FARWELL HAL, Cuicaco 


Mr. Moopy’s New CHURCH AT CHICAGO 


; ‘ ° > : 128 


° : ; p « 208 
THE PEOPLE GATHERING AT THE BROOKLYN RINK 


, . , 288 

Mr. Moopy’s First Sunpay AT THE sisi CHURCH, PHILADEL- 
. ae a eres “6 6 368 
‘ EXTERIOR VIEW OF THE Hiproprome, New York . te 2 ee 


BN \ ‘oy 


. Said to His disciples surrounding Him, and to His disciples in al} 


MOODY’S | 
SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND 


abe rar ee a 
STONES TO BE ROLLED AWAY. «© 
JOHN xi. 39: “ Jesus said, Take ye away the stone,” 

h OW I have not any doubt but that nearly all this congregation 
are looking for a blessing in Chicago. I’ve no doubt that 
hundreds of you are expecting a great work here. If you are 

and mighty work here, it will not be His fault, but it will be our 
own. I find a class of People who say, Well, we must wait until 


God works, and when God is ready we will see a great work. Now, 
if I read my Bible and understand Scripture, God is alw 


He did not Himself roll away the stone from Lazarus’ grave; He 


ife) MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


it is theirs. God always works in p 
to de a thing, He can only do it wh 
sition in the asker to hel 


man does not believe God 


out his own part of the programme. The mother that 
reclaiming of a drunken son or a dissolute husband, saust faithfully 
do her part to this end, and then must have full be! 


“ef that God will 
do the rest. There is something for us all to do for our fellow. 


ork, a lifting up of 
oneself first as far as may be, and then a leaving of the rest to God, 


whose word will completely roll the stone away and raise the dead. 
And what a need ther 2 is fo: this resurrection in all our souls. How 
dead our sense of sin ! How forgetful that iniquity can not live in 
our heart, and word, and act! How careless, and indifferent even, 
to have things anywise different than they are! Is the fault God's? 
No, the only trouble is with ourselves; we will not ask Him that 
_ He will help us to do better things. We do not want to do them. 
How lukewarm the love of God in our ’ » tts, and how selfish and 
cold, in consequence, our thought tow 14 our neighbor! It is a 
wonder to me how low our standard can fly, 
to be Christians. Do we not. need to'cry t 
Yes, it is we ourselves that must first 
hearts—those of us who profess to be C 


vemper She need not talk 
she gets command of her rail- 


nany men 
, who ask 
wer their 
not His; 
- is asked 
ve dispo- 
ailure to 
f-hearted 
to carry 
Ss for the 
aithfully 
God will 
r fellow- 
° Way if 
De rolled 
a great 
e ought 
can be 
Is up of 
to God, 
e dead. 
How 
live in 
t even, 
God’s? 
m that 
» them. 
sh and 
It isa 
orofess 
ve usP 
r own 
anew 
f faith 
ectual 
yer of 
oman, 
3 con. 
t talk 
t rail- 


_the purposes of this comparison. 
_ May have stages of activity; and th 
_ Merchant, should seek e 


STONES ‘TO BE ROLLED ASVAY, II 


waves, vengeance would not let live. 
viper from his hand into the fire, when 


they, seeing that he did not die, changed their 0 


Pinion entirely, and 
Paul preached to them the saving word of life. 


The apostle shook 


Christians all imitate this grand ensample; let us shake off, with 
God’s help, the Vipers of evil temper, and all the evil things that 
make our Christianity a nullity, and, too often, a reproach in the 
a like name and inheritance with 
ourselves. And as a community, as well, we must shake off the 
venomous beast whose poison not only repels others, but kills or 
enfeebles ourselves, 

The vipers of London are different from those of New York; 
and, again, our own are unlike either of these. Covetousness, the 
inordinate greed for gain, has fastened on the hand of Chicago, 
along with many another Western city, and the sting will be worse 
and worse unless a remedy is found for us. We talk with an appe- 
tite much too keen about getting gain and the chances for money- 
making. And yet this very trait, confessedly an evil, is an argument 
to our hand. There is a cry in commercial circles, loud and pro- 


asses of business. In this 


» I never heard any one cry- 
ing out against it. But if you talk about getting a revival in God’s 


business, there is a class of people who at once shake their heads. 
They do not know about it; they are afraid it won’t work, A 
strange inconsistency; a thing is all right in their Own concerns, 
but all wrong in God's, The two things are not different at all for 


God’s work, like man’s work, 
e Christian, just as much as the 


arnestly for a revival in trade. Oh, Jet us 
roll away this stone of unbelief and indifference, and we will soon 


12 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


hear a voice from the 
forth.” Let us only c 
business men have done and are now doing, 
affections of our souls will spring up and bloo 
quickened souls and those of our friends will 


; i can revive His 


“I do not believe He can; I 
nd during all that time there 
has not been a successful attempt at reviving His work.” Well, it 
What was the 
mply because people did not 


When jin Glasgow, a skeptic insisted that all my converts were 
women and old men verging on the grave. At the next 
that city there were present in the hall thirty- 
and of these twenty-seven hundred were youn 


meeting in 
three hundred men, 
g§ men. The skeptic 
nken man came under 
eeting a gambler, and 
nkard in town, experienced 
We want to sce thieves, gam. 
e faith, for according to our 

azarus alive 
If we believe, we are told we may 


God’s reviving influence. At the very next m 
a short time after the most notorious dru 
saving grace. And s0 let it be here. 

blers, and harlots Saved. Let us hav 


faith shall it be done to us; just as Martha saw L 
through trust in Jesus’ words. 


place of the stone crying, “ Lazarus, come 
Ty as earnestly and loud fora revival as our 
and the powers and 
m to eternal life. Our 


years 
lendit 
alist \ 


eS. 


rus, come 
‘al as our 
wers and 
ife. Our 
| thereat, 
cht time 
st time ? 
through 
kingdom 
3 reapers 


Iuntains 
ur Caves 
A great 
ask the 
ive His 
can; I 
e there 
Well, it 
yas the 
lid not 
no per- 
h God. 
7 todo 
elieve 
lestroy 
eis to 

many 


} were 
ing in 
men, 
keptic 
under 
r, and 
onced 
gam. 
> our 
alive 
may 


STONES TO BE ROLLED AWA Y, 13 


order mountains to be removed and they will be cast into the sea.’ 
Oh, may God strike down our unbelief to the resurrection to life of 
even the vilest sinners in this city. 

The next terrible stone to be rolled away is prejudice. Oh, how 
that came in among the churches against revivals. How many men’ 
you hear say, “ Well, Iam prejudiced against revivals; I do not be-. 
lieve in them.” They believe in revivals in everything else, They: 
say, “ Agitate politics and trade, and let us have a revival in every- 
thing else but religion.” So, many whom I have addressed here on 
this subject have inveighed against revivals in religion, shaking their 
heads and saying no good can come out of revivals. Well, my dear 
friends, when Philip, the sage deacon, went to Nathaniel to tell him 
about Jesus, and Nathaniel objected, could any good come out of 
Nazareth, he just answered, come and see. So I answer you, come 
and see. Spend a week waiting on God, and see if the work is not 
to be a power of God to the saving of many. “Oh,” but some one 
may say, “I can not countenance these unhealthy excitements. I 
know far too much bad about them for that.” My friend, I know 
far more of the possible evils you would shun, and know them to 
be sometimes real ones, but what of it ? Because some revivals 
turn out to be useless, or in some developments Positively bad, 
must the system be thrown aside? No. The Democrat does not. 
desert his politics for some minor flaw about them; and the Repub. 
lican does not either, if some of his standard-bearers have done 
corruptly. Professional and business men are not degraded by the 
shortcomings of individuals, and all through and through there is 
seen to be no limit in this principle. God’s mighty engine in reviv- 
als is not to be thrown aside for even considerable defects. Under 
its operations, time was when 3,000 men were added to the church 
in one day. Wecan not speak against these special meetings, finally, 
for they are planned in Scripture. The Bible is full of chronicles 
of their workings, They are developments of the Christian idea, 
no innovation whatever, and the best possible agencies for work for 
sinners, which is work for God. 

And then this miserable sectarian spirit that once held despotic 
hold on men. There was a time when its grasp was that of iron; 
but, blessed be God, that time is past. I remember that fifteen 
years ago the Methodist insisted that he was a Methodist, although 
lending a hand to the revival then in progress; the Congregation. 
alist was nothing else, through and through, though he, too, co-op- 


! 
{ 


iy, 


SS aeatte 


oa 


14 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


eee a 


eae, 


| erated in the good work, and the Presbyterian and the Baptist, and Th 
all, were first of all their denominational selves, though condescend- ed 
ing for a few days to work in yoke ina common cause. Yet it was 81V 
really and necessarily, condescension; and there was enough of it in of 
those meetings to kill them, and it nearly did it. And this sectarian sto 
stone is a real stone, though nothing like the boulder it used to be. Cor 
The rolling-away process must be Pushed vigorously; let us heave Ma 
it away altogether out of sight. Let us have none of that spirit in Go 
this meeting, Talk not of this sect and that sect, of this party and stre 
that party, but solely and exclusively of the great comprehensive bef 
cause of Jesus Christ. When Christ came into the world, had He clai 
allied Himself with the Sadducees, they would have warmly upheld abv 
Him ; if He had joined the Pharisees, they would not have let Him ie 
be crucified; but He kept clear of them, and just so we should do in wit. 
this glorious work opening before us. In this ideal brotherhood ne 
there should be one faith, one mind, one spirit, and in this city let us hig 
starve it out for a season, to actualize this glorious truth. You pew 
remember how, in the Old Testament, Eldad and Medad took upon In 
themselves priestly duties, and how excited, for once in his life, com 
Joshua became at the irregularity, and ran and told the scandal to Ma) 
Moses; but you also remember how Moses reproved his informant, Son 
who was then engaged in perhaps the only small business of his life, shal 


and told him to rebuke them not; they prophesied well, however 
irregularly. It was just so with Christ, when word was carried by 
over-serviceable followers, that men were casting out devils “who 
were not of us,” He rebuked, not those who were thus benefiting 
their kind, but the tale-bearers. Oh, yes, 


atmosphere whatever; and that the Spirit of God may give us one 
mind and one spirit her 


PRAYER. 


: Our Heavenly Father, we thank Thee for bringing us back t+ 
. Chicago. We thank Thee for i i 


e higher and 
may come to themselves and come to Ch 


STONES TU BE ROLLED AWAY, 15 


Thy children, O. God, do Thou draw very near, that they may be | 


re revived by Thy work in our midst. F orgive our lukewarmness, for- 
rab ilies give our ‘coldness of heart, forgive our backsliding, forgive our Mr 
rh of it in of faith. Oh, help us, on this morning, to take away this dreadful 
i stone of unbelief; help us to roll it away, so that the dead may 
bite come forth. May we be prejudiced against Thy work no longer. 
say eaie May we no more view Thee with Narrow, sectarian vision, Thou 
e i God of all souls. Bless all Thy people of every name, and 

ed d Strengthen them to work to-day, for Thee, as they have never worked 
ea a before. .And those men of God who stand in the pulpit and pro~ 
ite claim a precious Saviour, may there be riches opened up to them 
» iphela abundantly beyond what we can ask; may they preach with an 
let Him unction from on high, and with a God-the-Holy-Ghost Pa 
ild do in with intellectual power so much as with Holy Ghost igh an 
herhood may they be endued everywhere and always with power i " 
ty let us high. And pour out Thy grace upon those in Sabbath-schoo s rE 

. You pews as well as pulpit, and may the work of Christ be blessed to. ay 
sk upon in all the churches, and to-morrow, at 120 clock, when we again 
his life come together to pray, do Thou, O Christ, look down upon us, and 
indal te may we know that a mighty work of Thine is now beginning. Oh, 
ormant Son of God, hear our cry and save our souls; and to Thy name 
his ine: shall be the praise and the glory forever. Amen. 

iowever 

ried by 

> “who 

1efiting 

3 party 

fill us 

’ secta- 

in our 

us one 

ack t+ 

rienus, 

a © 

y foid, 

t they 


aS are 


II. 


REAPING AND GATHERING FRUIT. 


JOHN iv. 36: “And he that reapeth receiveth wages and 


eternal,” 


| WANT you to get the text into your hearts, We have a thou- 
sand texts to every sermon, 


er the hearts of 
men and women. 


gathereth fruit unto life 


“He that reapeth receiy 


I have been in the Lord’s service twenty- 


ood paymaster—that 


guide a poor, weary 
the golden gates of 


€n, women, and children of the city, 
ay, 


, i are 
apt to be overlooked: but they must be led to Christ. Children 
(16) 


it unto life 


‘a thou- 
earts of 
arts to- 
rightest 
| of the 
ermons, 
erience. 
vant to 
y. Oh, 
u have 
is to be 
of—to 
toward 
1 silver 
crown 
stating 
y, and 
7 good 
short 
hrone 
sather 
never 
id the 
when, 
nbled 
dren. 
S, are 
Idren 


IRA D. SANKEY. 


P, P. BLISS. 


' 


REAPING AND GA THERING FRUIT. 


have done a great deal in the vineyard. They have led parents to 
Jesus. It was a little gitl that led Naaman to Christ. Christ can 
find useful work for these little ones. He can see little things, and 
we ought to pay great attention to them. As I was coming,along 


could only impress upon you 
eyard, to reap and to gather, 


‘ we want every class to assist 
us. The first class we want is the ministers, There was one thing 


that pleased me this morning, and that was the eight thousand peo- 
ple who came to this building, and the large number of ministers who 
seized me by the hand, with the tears trickling down their cheeks, 
and who gave me a “God bless you!” It gave mea light heart. 
There are some ministers who get behind the posts, as if they were 
ashamed of being seen in our company and at our meetings, They 
come to criticise the sermon and Pick it to pieces. No effort is re- 
quired to do this. We don’t want the ministers to criticise, but to 
help us, and tell us when we are wrong. There was one minister in 
this city who did mea great deal of good when I first started out. 
When I commenced to teach the word of God I 
blunders. I have learned that in acquiring anything a man must 
make many blunders. If a man is going to learn any kind of 
trade—carpenter’s, plumber’s, painter’s—he will make any amount 
of mistakes. Well, this minister, an old man, used to take me aside 
and tell me myerrors. So we want the ministers to come to us and 
tell us of our blunders; and if we get them to do this and join 
hands with us, a spiritual fountain will break over every church in 


the city. Many ministers have said to me, “What do you want us 
to do?” 


quiring the way to be saved,” and at the close of the meetings draw 
near to them and point out the w 


them and find out their trouble. 
will teach them. What we want j 


has his own particular burden; every family has a different story to 
2 


a 
i = 
shee 


made very many 


a ee 
“a nD Cy 


18 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


tell. Take the Gospel of the Lord to them, and show its applica- 
tion ; tell them what to do with it, So as to answer their own cases; 
lect the minister come into the inquiry-room. 

An old man, a minister in Glasgow, Scotland, was one of the 
most active in our meetings. When he would be preaching else- 
where he would drive up in a cab, with his Bible in his hand. It 
made no difference what part of Glasgow he was preaching in, he 
managed to attend nearly every one of our services. The old man 


would come in and tenderly speak to those assembled, and let one | 


soul after another see the light. His congregation was compara- 
tively small when we got there, but, by his painstaking efforts to 
minister to those in search of the word, when we left Glasgow his 
church could not hold the people who sought admission, and I do 
not know of any man who helped us like Dr. Andrew Bonar. 
He was always ready to give counsel to the weak and point the way 
out to the soul seeking Christ. If we have not ministers enough, 
let those we have come forward, and their elders and deacons will 
follow them. 

The next class we want to help us to reach the people is the 
Sunday-school teachers, and I value their experience next to that 


of the ministers. In the cities where we have been, teachers have , 


Come to me and: said, “Mr. Moody, pray for my Sunday-school 
scholars,” and I just took them aside and pointed out their duties, 
and showed how they themselves ought to be able to pray for their 


pupils. Next meeting very often they would come, and the prayer 


would go up from them, “God bless my scholars.” 

In one city we went to, a Sunday-school superintendent came to 
his minister and said: “I am not fit to gather sinners to life 
eternal ; I-can not be superintendent any longer.” The minister 
asked : “What is the reason?” and the man said: “I am not 
right with God.” Then the minister advised him that the best 
thing instead of resigning was to get right with God. So he prayed 

with that teacher that the truth would shine upon him, and God 
“ lit up his soul with the word. Before I left that town the minister 
told me all doubt had fled from that superintendent’s mind, and 
he had gone earnestly to work and gathered, from the time of 
his conversion, over 600 scholars into the Sunday-school of his 
church. The Lord can bless, of course, in spite of schools and 
teachsrs, but they are the channels of salvation. Bring your 
classes together, and Pray to God to convert them. ‘We have 


‘Ay 


S applica- 
wn Cases; 


1e of the 
ling else- 
aand. It 
ng in, he 


Old man 


d let one 
compara- 
fforts to 
sgow his 
and I do 
+ Bonar. 
the way 
enough, 
cons will 


e is the 
to that 


srs have , 


y-school 
t duties, 
for their 


> prayer 


came to 
; to life 
ninister 
am not 
he best 
prayed 
nd God 
ninister 


REAPING AND GA THERING FRUIT, 19 
from 3,000 to 5,000 teachers here. Suppose they said: “TI will 
try to bring my children to Christ,” what a reformation we 
should have. Don’t say that that boy is too small, or that girl 
is too puny or insignificant. Every one is valuable to the Lord, 
A teacher, whom I found at our services when she ought to have 
been attending to her class, upon my asking why she was at our 
meeting, said: “Well, I have a very small class—only five little 
boys.” “What,” said I, “you have come here and neglected the 
little ones! Why, in that little tow-head may be the seeds of a 
reformation. There may be a Luther, a Whitefield, a Wesley, ora 
Bunyan among them. You may be neglecting a chance for them, 
the effects of which will follow them through life.” If you do not 
look to those things, teachers, some one will step into your vine. 
yard and gather the riches which you would have. 

Look what that teacher did in Southern Illinois. She had 
taught a little girl to love the Saviour, and the teacher said to her: 
“Can’t you get your father to come to the Sunday-school?” This 
father wasa swearing, drinking man, and the love of God was not in 
his heart. But under the tuition of that teacher the little girl went 
to her father and told him of Jesus’ love, and led him to that 
Sunday-school. What was the result? I heard before leaving for 
Europe that he had been instrumental in founding over 780 
Sabbath-schools in Southern Illinois. And what a privilege a 
teacher has—a Privilege of leading souls to Christ. Let every 
Sabbath-school teacher say, “By the help of God I will ‘try to 
lead my scholars to Christ.” 

It seems to me that we have more help in our revivals from 
young men, except from mothers, than from any other class. The 
young men are pushing, energetic workers. Old men are good for 
counsel, and they. should help, by their good words, the young men 
in making Christianity aggressive. These billiard halls have been 
open long enough. There is many a gem in those places, that only 
needs the way pointed out to fill their souls with love of Him. 
Let the young men go plead with them, bring them to the Taber- 
nacle, and don’t let them go out wituout presenting the claims ~ 

of Christ, and showing them His never-dying love. Take them by 
the hand and say, “I want you to become a Christian.” What we 
want is a hand-to-hand conflict with the billiard-saloons and drink- 
ing halls. Do not fear, but enter them and ask the young men 
tocome. I know that some of you say in a scornful way, “We 


20 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


will never be allowed to enter; the people who go there will cast 
us out.” This isa mistake. I know that I have gone to them and 
remonstrated, and have never been unkindly treated. And some of 
the best workers have been men who have been Proprietors of 
these places, and men who have been constant frequenters. There 
are young men there breaking their mothers’ hearts and losing 
themselves for all eternity. The Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ 
asks you to seek them out. If ‘we cam not get them to come here, 
let the building be thrown aside and let us go down and hunt 
them up and tell them of Christ and heaven. If we can not get 

a multitude to preach to, let us preach, even if it be to one person. 

Christ preached one of His most wonderful sermons to that woman 

at the well; and shall we not be willing to go to one as He did, 

and tell that one of salvation ? And let us preach to men even if 

they are under the influence of liquor. 

I may relate a little experience. In Philadelphia, at one of 
our meetings, a drunken man rose up. Till that time I had no 
faith that a drunken man could be converted. When any one 
approached, he was generally taken out. This man got up and 
shouted, “I want to be prayed for.” The friends who were 
with him tried to draw him away, but he shouted only louder, and 
three times he repeated the request. His call was attended to 
and he was converted. God has power to convert a man even if 
he is drunk. 

I have still another lesson. I met aman in New York who 
Was an earnest worker, and I asked him to tell me his experience. 
He said he had been a drunkard for over twenty years, His 
parents had forsaken him, and his wife had cast him off and 
married some one else. He went into a lawyer's office in Pough- 
keepsie, mad with drink. This lawyer proved a good Samaritan, 
and reasoned with him, and told him he covld be saved. The 
man scouted the icles, He said: “I must be pretty low when 
my father and mother, my wife and kindred, cast me off, and there 
is no hope for me here or hereafter,” But this good Samaritan 
showed him how it was possible to secure salvation, got him on his 
feet, got him on his beast, like the good Samaritan of old, and 
guided his face towards Zion. And this man said to me: “TI have 
not drank a glass of liquor since.” He is now leader of a young 
_ men’s meeting in New York. I asked him to come last Saturday 
night to Northfield, my native town, where there are a good many 


RS, 


e will cast 
them and 
d some of 
rietors of 
3» There 
1d losing 
us Christ 
me here, 
ind hunt 
| not get 
e person, 
t woman 
He did, 
1 even if 


one of 
had no 
any one 
up and 
iO were 
Jer, and 
ded to 
even if 


rk who 
srience. 
3. His 
ff and 
Pough- 
aritan, 

The 
' when 
| there 
aritan 
on his 
1, and 
[ have 
young 
urday 


many 


REAPING AND GATHERING FRUIT, 2I 


drunkards, thinking he might encourage them to seek salvation. 
He came and brought a young man with him. They held a meet- 
ing, and it seemed as if the power of God rested upon that meeting 
when these two men went on telling what God had done for them 
-——how He had destroyed the works of the devil in their hearts, and 
brought peace and unalloyed happiness to their souls, These grog 
shops here are*the works of the devil—they are ruining men’s souls 
every hour. Let us fight against them, and let our prayers go up 
in our battle: « Lord, manifest Thy power in Chicago this coming 
month.” It may seem a very difficult thing for us, but it is a very 
easy thing for God to convert rumsellers, 

A young man in New York got up and thrilled the meeting with 
his experience, ‘“] want to tell you,” he said, “that nine months 
ago a Christian came to my house and said he wanted me to become 
a Christian. He talked to me kindly and encouragingly, pointing 
out the error of my ways, and I became converted. I had been a 
hard drinker, but since that time I have not touched a drop of 
liquor. If any one had asked who the most hopeless man in that 
town was, they would have pointed to me.” To-day this young 
man is the superintendent of a Sabbath-school. Eleven years ago, 
when I went to Boston, I had a cousin who wanted a little of my 
experience; I gave him all the help I could, and he became a 
Christian. He did not know how near death was to him. He 
wrote to his brother and said: “J am very anxious to get your soul 
to Jesus.” The letter, somehow, went to another city, and lay from 
the 28th of February to the 28th of March—just one month. He 
saw it was in his brother's handwriting, and tore it open and read 
the above words, It struck a chord in his heart, and was the means 
of converting him. And this was the Christian who led this drunken 


_young man to Christ. 


This young man had a neighbor who had drank for forty years, 


and he went to that neighbor and told him what God had done for 


him, and the result was another conversion. 

I tell you these things to encourage you to believe that the drunk. 
ards and saloon-keepers can be saved. There is work for you to do, 
and by and by the harvest shall be gathered, and what a scene wil] 
be on the shore when we hear the Master on the throne shout : 
“Well done! Well done!” 

Let me say a word to you, mothers. We depend a good deal 
upon you. It seems to me that there js not a father and mother in 


22 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


all Chicago who should not be in sympath 
have daughters and sons, and if work is do; 
to steer clear of many temptations, and will be able to lead better 
lives here. It seems to me selfishness if th 
say: “There is no use in this, We are safe 
use of troubling?” If the mothers and 
community would unite their prayers, 
God to manifest His Power, in answe 
mighty work. 

I remember, in Philadeiphia, we wanted to see 
we called a meeting of mothers, There were 
thousand mothers present, and each 
upon her heart. There was a mother who had a wayward daughter, 
another a reckless son, another a bad husband. We spoke to them 
confidently, and we bared our hearts to one another, 
for aid from the Lord, and that grace might be shown t 
and daughters, and husbands, and the result was that 


y with this work, Yoy 


ourselves, what is the 
fathers of the whole 
and send up $ne appeal to 
t to them there would be 


certain results, and 


They prayed 
oO these sons, 
our inquiry- 


She had two 
They were to 
The rendezvous 
where our meet- 
e large mecting, 
over, went to the young men’s meeting near at 
hand, and was quickened, and there prayed that the Lord might 


save him. His mother had gone to the meeting that night, and, 


hat young man 


m, and the two 
mingled their Prayers together. While they were Praying together, 


the other brother came from the other meeting, and brought tidings 


, and at the next meeting the three got up and 
told their experience, and I never heard an audience so thrilled 


before or since, 

Arother incident. A wayward boy in London, whose mother was 
very anxious for his. salvation, said to her: « I am not going to be 
bothered with your prayers any longer; I will go to America and 
be rid of them.” « But, my boy,” she said, “ God is on the sea and 
in America, and He hears my prayers for you.” Well, he came to 
this country, and as they sailed into the port of New York, some of 
the sailors told him that Moody and Sankey were kolding meetings 


f~\ = fA A Th we ut vw 


RS. 


ork, You 
ill be able 
ad better 
\ctive and 
hat is the 
he whole 
ippeal to 
vould be 


sults, and 
to eight 
r burden 
aughter, 
to them 
y prayed 
se sons, 
inquiry- 


iad two 
were to 
lezvous 
Yr meet- 
lecting, 
near at 
might 
it, and, 
¢ man 
ie two 
tether, 
idings 
Pp and 
1rilled 


or was 
to be 
2 and 
2 and 
ne to 
ne of 
tings 


REAPING AND GATHERING FR UIT. 23 


in the Hippodrome. The moment he landed he started for our 
place of meeting, and there he found Christ. He became a most 
earnest worker, and he wrote to his mother and told her that her 
prayers had been answered, that he had been saved, and that he had 
found his mother’s God. 

Mothers and fathers, lift up your hearts in prayer, that there may 
be hundreds amd thousands saved in this city. 

When I was in London, there was one lady dressed in black, up in 
the gallery. All the rest were ministers. I wondered who that lady 
could be. At the close of the meeting I stepped up to her, and she 
asked me if I did not remember her. I did not, but she told me 
who she was, and her story came to my mind, 

When we were preaching in Dundee, Scotland, a mother came up 


with her two sons, 16 and 17 years old. She said to me: “ Will _ 


you talk to my boys?” I asked her if she would talk to the inqui- 
rers, and told her there were more inquirers than workers. She 
said she was not a good enough Christian—was not prepared 
enough. I told her I could not talk to her then. Next night she 


came to me and asked me again, and the following night she. 


repeated her request. Five hundred miles she journeyed to get 
God's blessing for her boys. Would to God we had more mothers 
like her. She came to London, and the first night I was there I saw 
her in Agricultural Hall. She was accompanied by only one of her 
boys—the other had died. Towards the close of the meetings I 
received this letter from her: 

“DEAR Mr. Moopy: For months I have never considered the 
day’s work ended unless you and your work had been specially prayed 
for. Now it appears before us more and more. What in our dittle 
measure we have found, has no doubt been the happy experience 
of many others in London. My husband and I have sought as our 


greatest privilege to take unconverted friends, one by one, into Agri- . 


cultural Hall, and I thank God that, with a single exception, those 
brought under the preaching from your lips have accepted Christ as 
their Saviour, and are rejoicing in His Icve.” 

That lady was a lady of wealth and position. She lived a little 
way out of London: gave up her beautiful home and took lodgings 


near Agricultural Hall, so as to be useful in the inquiry-room. When | 


we went down to the Opera House she was there; when we went 
down to the east end there she wes again, and when I left London 
she had the names of 150 who had accepted Christ from her. Some 


24 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


have said that our work in London was a failure. Ask her if the 
work was a failure, and she will tell you, If we had a thousand 
such mothers in Chicago we would lift it. Go and bring your friends 
here to the meetings. Think of the privilege, my friends, of saving 
asoul. If we are going to work for good, we must be up and about 
it. Men say, “TI have not the time,” Take it. Ten minutes every 
day for Christ will give you good wages. There is many a man who 
is working for you. Take them by the hand. Some of you with 
silver locks, [ think I hear you saying, “I wish J was young, how I 
Would rush into the battle.” Well, if you can not be a fighter, you 
can pray and lead on the others. There are two kinds of old peo- 
ple in the world, One grows chilled and sour, and there are others 
who light up every meeting with «her genial presence and cheer on 
the workers, Draw near, old age, and cheer on the others, and take 
them by the hand and encourage them. There was a building on 
fire. The flames leaped around the staircase, and from a three-story 
window a little child was seen who cried for help. The only way to 
reach it was by a ladder. One Was obtained and a fireman ascend- 
ed, but when he had almost reached the child, the flames broke from 
the window and leaped around him, He faltered and seemed afraid 
to go further, Suddenly some one in the crowd shouted, “Give 
him a cheer,” and cheer after cheer went up. The fireman was 
nerved with new energy, and rescued the child. Just so with our 
young men. Whenever you see them wavering, cheer them on. If 
you can not work yourself, give them cheers to nerve them on in 
their glorious work. May the blessing of God fal] upon us this af. 
ternoon, and let every man and woman be up and doing. 


RS, 


her if the 
thousand 
ur friends 
of saving 
nd about 
tes every 
man who 
you with 
g, how I 
iter, you 
old peo- 
e others 
heer on 
nd take 
ling on 
e-story 
way to 
iscend. 
ce from 

| afraid 
“Give 

nN was 
h our 
n. IE£f 
on in 
is af. 


ITT. 
COURAGE IN THE LORD'S WORK. 


JOSHUA i. 6: “Be strong and of good courage.” 


UST one word. I want you to have the courage spoken of in the 

al chapter of Joshua I read to you to-night. The Lord tells him to 

“be strong and of good courage.” He says to Joshua: “If you 

have this, no man will be able to stand before you all the days of 

your life. As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee. I will not 

forsake thee or fail thee.” That is, if Joshua goes into the battle 

not thinking of himself or depending upon somebody clse, but re- 

lying upon the Lord. He was not to be weakened, but to have the 

courage of a lion with his faith in the Lord. So with us here, If 

we go into the battle we are beginning, and look on the weak side, 
we are going to lose. We must fight with the courage of a Joshua. 
I have learned one thing since I went into the school of Christ, and 

that is, that God never takes aman for His purposes who is weak ; 
he must have confidence in himself through Christ; must not hang 
on his own strength, but must have courage, and must believe that 
God is willing and ready to aid him. God will not have a man in 
His service that He can not control, and who is thrown down by the 
slightest opposition. We must act as Joshua did when he went 
out, I suppose to view the lines. All at once a man stood before’ 
him with a drawn sword. If he had not heard the words of the 
Lord, and had the fear of God in his heart, he would have ran away. 
He stood boldly and confronted God’s messenger, and asked, “ Art 
thou for us or against us?” Nay,” said the man, “I come as the 
captain of the host of the Lord, to lead you to victory.” And so 
if obstacles stand before us we must have courage if we wish suc. 
cess. Some one said to me to-day, “Were you not greatly encour- 
aged by the large crowd you had yesterday?” My friends, it is not 
large crowds that encourage us, nor talk in newspapers, but earnest. 
(25) 


26 MOOD Y's SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


ness even in a few. W 
give them consolation, 


( 
1 
l 
I 
I 
came over him when I 
scared him out of f 
He despaired : 
utterly. He thought he had lived long enough, and asked the Lord t 
to let him die. So it is with some of us, The least thing frightens nN 
us, and we fly under a juniper tree. When God’s children get there h 
He can not see them. He wants them to have courage and to have d 
faith in Him. y 
tl 
eC 
all, and he was ti 
here is one of His 

ed him, and he was afraid to speak for G 
G 
SP 
warm Christians wh fa 
Christ. th 
W 
lai 
2 ph 
wn him to be the same man who in the judg. las 
ment hall was so terror-stricken. Here.was a man, scared out of his ing 
life by a little gitl merely charging him with being a disciple, con- Ch 
fronting the whole crowd of Jews and shouting out, “ Ye have taken, 

and by wicked han 


ds have crucified and slain,” my Redeemer 


milk and honey; but others Sai 
and great giants, and everywhere 


selves up. Yes, it was a land with i 
about. the cities 


the giants, 
You will find the s day. Some people 
will come and Say, ‘ i i 


to become of our 
church; we are in debt, and how are we going to get over it?” U 


and pay it. That is the way to get over it. If Joshua and Caleb 
had thought of as many obstacles when they stood before the walls 
d in the Management of 


are able to do it. 


defenses—God is with us.” These twelve men looked at that 


can fancy them bringing back charts 
and maps as we would do, and said, “We marked well its nature 


ot able to take it.” 


of their lives. 


RS, 


7 days, and 
rity and a 
lar errand, 
that they 
one after- 
the day— 
wing with 
ild beasts 
ng them- 
reat walls 
were dis. 
tht them 
reserved 
' possible 
igh walls 


€ people 
- of our 
pe Up 
d Caleb 
he walls 
's, they 
, rT We.- 
e their 
at_ that 
‘ charts 
nature 
ced up 
isshop- 
ed out 
tiants ; 
| these 
land,” 
warm 
selves 
0 the 
Irage. 


when 
e too — 
nany 


COURAGE IN THE LORD'S WORK. 29 
of them had fears and doubts—did not feel confident in God's 
power. God does not work in this way, and so Gideon drew his 
army up to a line and said: “ All those who are afraid, step out of 
this line.” I can imagine the weak ones saying, “There is a good 
chance to get home, and we will not get shot.” And 22,000 
stepped out. But the Lord said, “ Too many yet.” And Gideon 
drew them Up again and said: “ All you who are afraid, step out;” 
and his army was reduced to 300. Ican imagine some of them 
Saying, Gideon has made a mistake in doing this, but Gideon knew 
what he was about. 

What would you think if I said right here: “ Al] you who are 
not for Christ, go home; we don’t want you here.” You would 
say: “Mr. Moody has made a mistake ;” but I almost think it 
would be a wise course, | would rather fight with a handful who 
were strong and faithful than with a host who are weak and un- 
faithful. We don’t want those people who say to us: “You 
can not expect any meetings this month. We have got our politics 
to attend to; we havea fair.”’ 
numbers like Gideon, and believe that if the Lord is present, a few 
is just as good as many. Small numbers make no difference to 
God. There is nothing small that God is in. That small cloud 
that came up from the sea was very small; but it proved very 
powerful, for He was in it. People would say, Gideon must have 
trembled when he saw his army reduced to 300 men; but he knew 
that if God was with that little band, it was more powerful than 
100,000 men. 

Dear friends, let us have courage, and believe that God can 
accomplish all things; and if the Spiri 


nd take up the cross 
of Christ, He will take us up and use us. John Wesley used to say 
if he had 100 men who feared God, and were true to Jesus, he could 
shake the gates of hell. We want men who have confidence in the 
old Gospel of Jesus Christ. There is as much power in the Word 
to-day as ever there was, ana men need the Gospel just as much ag 


» they ever needed it, 


I remember seeing a story some time ago in print. 


It has been 


30 MOOD YS SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


in the Papers, but it 
in a Southern city were stricken d 
raging there, an 


was at last stricken down. The neighbors were afraid of the 
Plague, and none dared go into that house. 


little son and was anxious about her boy, and afraid he would be 
neglected when she was called away, so she called the little fellow 
to her bedside, and said, “ My boy, } am going to leave you, but 
Jesus will come to you when I am g0ne.” The mother died, the 
cart came along, and she was laid in the grave. The neighbors 
would have liked to take the boy, but were afraid of the pestilence, 


The mother had a 


ground, asked him 
boy remembered what his mother 
am waiting for Jesus,” and told hi 
heart was touched, tears trickled 
“ Jesus has sent me;” to which th 
a good while coming.” 
- So it is with us. To wait for results we 
must have courage, and God will help ve, 
will give us moral courage to fight the 
greatest want in the Church to-dav 


down his cheeks, and he said, 
€ boy replied, “ You have been 


must have patience, we 
Pray to God that He 


glorious battle. The 
is the want of courage, 


VERS, 


n. A family 
ver. It was 
rules, The 
coffin away. 
| the mother 
raid of the 
other hada 
© would be 
little fellow 
fe you, but 
*r died, tlie 
’ neighbors 
pestilence. 
Where they 
himself to 
ion—alone 
ttle fellow 
for. The 
vered, “J 
The man’s 
1 he said, 
have been 


ience, we 
that He 
le. The 


IV. 


POWER OF FAITH. 


LUKE v. 20: “ When He saw their faith.” 


OW, I just like to take a sentence like this alone from the lips 
N of Christ and go all round it, and find out all its surroundings, 
He was in a certain city—had just come from the country. He 

had been down there, and they didn’t want to be converted—didn’t 


_ want.a revival’ When He found they wouldn’t have His Gospel 


there, He left and.came to this city, where a great revival had 
broken out. The people gathered there in such numbers as to 
make one believe it was an invasion. The Spirit was in the work, 
and all were on fire. This was Christ’s first great revival, and His 
wonderful works had been heard of far and near. The news of the 
way He was reclaiming men, casting out devils, making the deaf 
hear, and the blind see, how He was curing leprosy and palsy, had 


know, when John was preaching at first, the Pharisees, when they 
heard of him, sent a man down to see who he was. The man went 


And so, when the Pharisees and doctors had heard of Christ’s fame, 
they sent men down probably to report, and on hearing of the fame 


to see for themselves, 
This poor man, spoken of in the chapter, came to Christ to be 
cleansed, and the Lord found faith in the leper. He looked at the 
man, and no sooner did He find faith there than He touched him, 
and the leprosy was gone. This gave Him great’ influence. The 
(31) 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


man published it far and near, and all the country was astir. So 
the learned doctors of the law and the Pharisees came down, a great 
company of them, like the wise men who came from the East ; like 
a great many people who will likely be coming from the different 
towns of the North-west, to look into the revival that was going on 
and the wonderful cures that were being effected. They came to 
look into the philosophy of this thing; they wanted to get at the 
secret of His power: to see if He had any false motive. Perhaps 
He was after fame; perhaps He was after money, or position, or 
influence. The doctors and Pharisees could not believe that He 
could be after anything else, and so they came down in a body 
from Jerusalém to fathom this thing. This house was crowded with 
them. I can imagine the people flocking in from every part, and 
the streets blockaded, and in that house the people everywhere 
sitting and listening to His wonderful speeches, and I can see the 
Pharisees and the doctors, who came, not to ask a blessing, but 
to philosophize. There will be young men in this building to-night 
who come for the same purpose—to criticize. May the Lord open 
their eyes and show them their folly, and may they depart from here 
with the fear of God in their hearts. Well, these men do not come 
down from Jerusalem to ask a blessing, and I can imagine the crowd 
sitting there listening to Him. 

There are four men coming down the streets of Capernaum. I 
never knew them, but if I met them in the streets of Chicago, I 
should feel like grasping them by the hand. Perhaps one of them 
was he who was converted not long before; perhaps the other was 
the leper who went to Jesus and got cured, and when he came home 
his wife didn’t know who he was, and couldn’t believe he was her 
husband; and another had been cured, perhaps, of blindness, and 
here was the man with the palsy, who had nearly shaken himself 
into his grave. The doctors of Jerusalem had all given him up asa 
hopeless case. “Why,” they said, “he can not get his food to his 
mouth, he shakes so. We can’t do anything with him.” Well, 
these young converts came along —I suppose they were young ; 
they have more faith than any one else—and they see this man with 
the palsy and instantly say that one word from Him will put it 
away. But they can not get him there—they don’t see how they 
can carry him, and finally one of them goes toa neighbor and says, 
“Here is a man with the palsy; if we can get him up to where 
Christ is, He can just heal him at once.” I think he would be 


PS, 


astir. So 
n, a great 
vast ; like 
different 
going on 
came to 
et at the 

Perhaps 
sition, or 
that He 
1 a body 
‘ded with 
part, and 
2rywhere 
| see the 
sing, but 
to-night 
ord open 
‘om here 
ot come 
le crowd 


aum. I 
licago, I 
of them 
ther was 
1e home 
was her 
ess, and 
himself 
up asa 
d to his 
Well, 
young ; 
an with 
1 put it 
ow they 
id says, 
> where 
ould be 


POWER OF FAITH. 33 


astonished and say, “What! save that man; impossible! he can’t 
be cured.” But the young convert persists, and tells him of those 
who had been made to see, and the deaf to hear, and the lame to 
walk, and so convinced the neighbor that at last he said; “ Well, I 
will help you, and go and see -this wonderful physician,” and away 
they go and hunt up another young convert who had been lame for 
years. He is not strong enough to help them, however, and they 
find another man. He has been deaf and dumb for years. And 


these four young converts take this man with the palsy and put 


him, I can suppose, on what we called, during the war, a stretcher, 
and away they go to Christ. They had faith in what they were 
about. I can imagine the young men saying as they carry him 
along: “ We will not have to carry him back again; the palsy will 
be gone; it will be cured then.” On they go with their load, and 
when they get to the house, they find it crowded inside and a multi- 
tude standing outside. They say to the people, “ Let us pass; we 
want to take the poor man to Christ.” But they say, “ Why, there 
is no hope for him; he is past all cure.” “Ah!” say the young 
canverts, “that is nothing. Jesus of Nazareth can cure him; all 
things are possible to Him.” But they wouldn’t stand aside. They 
wouldn't allow him to get in. But these four men are not going to 
take this man back. They are determined not to fail. They hesi- 
tate a moment, then go to the next house; it is a neighbor’s. 
There were no bells in those days, and so they knock. When the 
neighbor comes to the door, they say: “We want to get into the 
next house; let us go through yours.” «“ Oh, yes,” says the man, 
and they ascend the staircase, and get on the roof, and get over to 
the next house. There’s no entrance through there, so they dig 
a hole, they tear up this roof. <A great many people here in 
Chicago would be opposed to this kind of thing. They would say: 
“If you want to get into the house, you want things to be done de. 
cently; don’t tear up the roof in that way.” But, my friends, if we 
want to go to work for Christ, we want to tear off the top of the house, 
if it’s necessary. We must use vigorous means. These young men 
had good faith, and that’s what we want here. But when they had 
torn off the roof, they. had nothing to let the man down by. So 
they looked about and made a rope of their own clothing, and down 
they laid him right among the Pharisees and learned doctors, right 
at the feet of Jesus. And it is a good place to put a poor sinner, 
And we are not told whether that man with the palsy had any faith. 
3 


34 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


But the Son of God looked up and saw their faith—the faith of the 
four men—and it pleased Him. It was like a cup of refreshment 
that satisfied the longings of His soul—He saw the brightness of 
their faith when He looked upon them. And He said to the sick 
man, “Son, be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.” The 
Pharisees were aghast, and began to reason: ‘ What does He say? 
Thy sins are forgiven? That is blasphemy! Who can forgive 
sins but God alone?” They even doubted His power, now. They 
were skeptical, although they had seen with their own eyes His 
wonderful cure. But Christ knew them all. And God knows every 
skeptic and infidel here in this building to-night. He knows the 
number of your house and the street where you live. And they 
wanted to know why Christ should say, “Son, thy sins are forgiven 
thee.” I-can imagine how these men looked when Christ said this. 
They could not comprehend it. But the Son of Man has power to 
forgive now as well as then. The man rose, and the old Pharisees 
made room for him. And I can see them as they looked in amaze- 
ment, as they said one to another: “ We have seen strange things to- 
day.” There was no reasoning away what they had seen that time. 
There are a great many people who say: “Oh, we can reason out 
all the miracles of Christ,” and they tell us that there is nothing of 
the supernatural that can not be explained. Everything is in accord- 
ance with scientific laws. These doctors of the law who had come 
down from Jerusalem, and Galilee, and Judea, they attempted this, 
but they had to admit, ‘““We have seen strange things to-day.” 
They had seen this man who was stricken down with the palsy, at a 
touch from Christ, walking down the streets. I would like to have 
seen him going home to his wife and children, and they looking 
with amazement at him laying down his bed and saying, “ Here, 
wife, I’ve used that bed a good while; it’s carried me long enough; 
I don’t need it any longer,” and the children clap their hands with 
joy. For the Son of Man has cleansed him, and not only that, but 
has forgiven his sins. These four men had taken him to Christ to 
get rid of his palsy, but he had got rid of all his sins besides. 

The thought I want to call your attention to is this, and I think 
it is the key-noté of the whole story—the faith of those four men 
did the whole thing. You ought to think of this. And those who 
are infidels and skeptics in this audience, let us remember that if 
we have faith, God can win them through our faith. The Lord can 
bless through our faith even those who have no faith. And another 


RS, 


aith of the 
*freshment 
ghtness of 
o the sick 
ee.” The 
s He say? 
an forgive 
ww. They 
_ eyes His 
ows every 
knows the 
And they 
e forgiven 
t said this. 
} power to 
Pharisees 
in amaze- 
things to- 
that time. 
eason out 
iothing of 
in accord- 
had come 
pted this, 
to-day.” 
palsy, at a 
se to have 
y looking 
g, “ Here, 
x enough; 
ands with 
that, but 
. Christ to 
es. 
id I think 
four men 
those who 
yer that if 
Lord can 
id another 


Found to that lawyer's office and said that h 


POWER OF FAITH. 35 


thought that occurs to me is, if we can not succeed in bringing our 
neighbors ourselves, let us take another man with us, and if two 
can not do it, let three go, but let them bring him to Christ, I 
don’t know anything better to bring a man to Christ than for four 
Christians to go to him in one day. Go toaman at breakfast and 
say: “I want to bring you to Christ.” Probably he passes the 
request by lightly—oh, it is nothing. But before dinner another 
man comes and says: “ My friend, I want to bring you to Christ,” 
“What does this mean? This is strange.” At tea-time a third 
man makes his appearance and says the same thing. He begins to 
talk to his wife about it. He says: “Three men have been after 
me to-day; I don’t know what to make out of it.” But before he 
goes to bed, a fourth man comes, and I guarantee he won’t sleep 
much that night. So let us go three, four, five times, if necessary, 
to a man, and when he sees our faith he will soon be impressed. 
When I was in Edinburgh, at the inquiry-meeting in Assembly 
Hall, one of the ushers came around and said, “Mr, Moody, I’d 


like to put that man out; he’s one of the greatest infidels in 


Edinburgh.” He had been the chairman of an infidel club for 
years. I went around to where he was and sat down by him. 
“ How is it with you, my friend?” I asked, and then he laughed 
and said, “ You say God answers Prayer; I tell you He doesn’t. I 
don’t believe in a God, Try it on me.” “ Will you get down with 
me and pray?” I asked him; but he wouldn’t. So I got down 
on my knees beside him and prayed. Next night he was there 
again. I prayed, and quite a number of others prayed for him. A 
few months after that, way up in the north of Scotland, at Wick, I 
was preaching in the open air, and while I stood there I saw the 
infidel standing on the outskirts of the crowd. I went up to him 
at the close of the meeting and said: “How is it with you, my 
friend?” He laughed and said, “I told you your praying is all 
false; God hasn’t answered your prayers; go and talk to these 
deluded people.” He had just the same spirit as before, but I 
relied on faith. Shortly after, I got a letter from a barrister—a 
Christian. He was Preaching one night in Edinburgh, when this 
infidel went up to him and said: “I want you to pray for me; I 
am troubled.” The barrister asked, “What is the trouble?” and 
he replied: “I don’t know what's the matter, but I don’t have 
any peace, and I want you to pray for me.” Next day he went 


e had found Christ. 


Seo sae 


coat 


EI oer a ae a 


36 MOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 
This man is now doing good work, and I heard that out of thirty 
inquirers there, ten or twelve of his old associates and friends were 
among them. So, if you have God with you, and you go to work 
for Him and you meet infidels and skeptics, just bear in mind that 
you can win through faith. When Christ saw the faith of those 
four men, He said to the man: “ Thy sins are forgiven you.” 
My friends, if you have faith, all things are possible; if we are 
going to be successful in this revival we must have faith; faith in 
prayer, faith in God’s power. 


I remember at oneof the meetings at Nashville, during the war, 


a young man came to me, trembling from head to foot. “ What is 
the trouble?” I asked. “There is a letter I got from my sister, and 
she tells me every night as the sun goes down she goes on her knees 
and prays for me.” This man was brave, had been in a number of 
battles, could stand before the cannon’s mouth, but yet this letter 
completely upset him. “I have been trembling ever since I re- 
ceived it.” Six hundred miles away, the faith of this girl went to 
work, and its influence was felt by the brother. He did not believe 
in prayer; he did not believe in Christianity ; he did not believe in 
his mother’s Bible. This mother was a praying woman, and when 
she died, she left on earth a praying daughter. And when God saw 
her faith and heard that prayer, He answered her. How many sons 
and daughters could be saved if their mothers and fathers had but 
faith. 

At Murfreesboro another illustration of this occurred. A young 
man received a letter from his mother, in which she said something 
like this: “My dear boy. You do not know how I am burdened 
for your salvation. Every morning and evening I go into my closet 
and pray for you, that you may be led to the cross of Christ. You 
may die in battle, or in the hospital, and, oh, my son, I want you to 
become a Christian. Ido not know but that this will be my last 
lettcr to you.” Well, this young lieutenant came to me and said, 
“TI have just heard of my mother’s death, and I have prayed for 
forgiveness of my sins.” This young man was converted just 
through his mother’s faith. Although she was in glory, her voice 
was heard here. 

In one of the towns in England there is a beautiful little chapel, 
and a very touching story is told in connection with it. It was built 
by an infidel. He had a praying wife, but he would not listen to 
her; would not allow her pastor even to take dinner with them; 


RS, 


t of thirty 
riends were 
go to work 
1 mind that 
h of those 
iven you.” 
if we are 
th; faith in 


ig the war, 


“What is 
sister, and 
n her knees 

number of 
this letter 
since I re- 
irl went to 
10t believe 

believe in 
-and when 
n God saw 
many sons 
rs had but 


A young 
something 
burdened 
my closet 
rist. You 
ant you to 
ye my last 
‘and said, 
yrayed for 
rted just 
her voice 


‘le chapel, 
was built 

listen to 
ith them; 


POWER OF FAITH. 37 


would not look at the Bible; would not allow religion even to be; 


talked of. She made up her mind, seeing she could not influence 
him by her voice, that every day she would pray to God at 12 o'clock 
for his salvation. She said nothing to him, but every day at that 
hour she told the Lord about her husband. At the end of twelve 
months there was no change in him. But she did not give it up. 
Six months more went past. Her faith began to waver, and she 
said, “ Will I have to give him up at last? Perhaps when I am 
dead He will answer my prayers.” When she had got at that point, 
it seemed just as if God had got her where He wanted her. The 
man came home to dinner one day. His wife was in the dining- 
room waiting for him, but he didn’t come in. She waited some 
time, and finally looked for him all through the house. At last she 
thought of going into that little room where she had prayed so of. 
ten. There he was, praying at the same bed with agony where she 
had prayed for so many months, asking forgiveness for his sins. And 
this is a lesson to you, wives, who have infidel husbands. The Lord 
saw that woman’s faith and answered her prayer. 

God looks for faith among all who work for Him. He can not 
do mighty things without it. With it He is able to do everything. 
Do you believe that He is able to shake the world? Do you be- 
lieve that He is able to shake this country? Do you believe that 
He is able to revive this North-west ? Do you believe that He is 
able to bring thousands into the kingdom of heaven? 


V. 


COMPASSION AND SYMPATHY. 


LUKE x, 29: “ And who is my neighbor?” 


W* are told that as Christ stood with His disciples, a man, 
a lawyer, stood up and tempted Him, and said, “ Master, 

what shall I do to inherit eternal life?” He asked what 
he could do to inherit eternal life—what he could do to buy salva- 
tion. And the Lord answered his question, “ What is written in 
the law? How readest thou?” To which the lawyer answered, 
“Thou shalt love the Lord God with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy 
neighbor as thyself.” “Thou hast answered right ;” but “ who is thy 
neighbor?” and He drew a vivid picture, which has been told for 
the last eighteen hundred years, and I do not know anything that 
brings out more truthfully the wonderful power of the Gospel than 
this story, which we have heard read to-night—the story of the man 
who went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and’ who fell among 
thieves. Jerusalem was called the city of peace. Jericho and the 
road leading to it were infested with thieves. Probably it had been 
taken possession of by the worst of Adam’s sons. I do not know 
how far the man got from Jerusalem to Jericho, but the thieves had 
come out and fallen upon him, and had taken all his money, and 
stripped him of his clothes, and left him wounded—left him, I sup- 
pose, for dead. By and bya priest came down the road from Jeru- 
salem. Weare told that he came bychance. Perhaps he vas going 
dewn to dedicate some synagogue, or preach a sermon on some im- 
portant subject, and had the manuscript in his pocket. As he was 
going along on the other side he heard a groan, and he turned 
around and saw the poor fellow lying bleeding on the ground, and 
pitied him. He went up close, took a look at him and said, “ Why, 
that man’s a Jew, he belongs to the seed of Abraham. If I remem: 

(38) 


*S, 2 Man, 
“ Master, 
ked what 
uy salva- 
vritten in 


inswered, 
th all thy 
and thy 
ho is thy 
told for 
ling that 
pel than 
the man 
1 among 
and the 
1ad been 
ot know 
eves had 
ney, and 
n, I sup- 
ym. Jeru- 
as going 
ome im- 
s he was 
: turned 
ind, and 
“Why, 

remem- 


COMPASSION AND SYMPATHY. ~ 39 


ber aright I saw him in the synagogue last Sunday. I pity him. 


But I have too much business, and I can not attend to him.” He : 


felt a pity for him, and looked on him, and probably wondered why 
God allowed such men as those thieves to come into the world, and 
passed by. There are a good many men just like him. They stop 
to discuss and wonder why sin came into the world, and look upon 


a wounded man, but do not stop to pick up a poor sinner, forgetting’ 


the fact that sin is in the world already, and it has to be rooted out. 
But another man came along, a Levite, and he heard the groans; 
he turned and looked on him with pity, too. He felt compassion 
for him. He was one of those men that if we had here we should 
probably make him elder or deacon. He looked at him and said, 
“ Poor fellow ! he’s all covered with blood; he has been badly hurt; 
he is nearly dead, and they have taken all his money and stripped 
him naked. Ah, well, I pity him!” He would like to help him, 
but he, too, has pressing business, and passes by on the other side. 
But he has scarcely got out of sight when another comes along, 
riding on a beast. He heard the groans of the wounded man, 
went over and took a good look at him. The traveler was a Sa- 
maritan. When he looked down he saw the man was a Jew. Ah, 
how the Jews looked down upon the Samaritans. There was a 
great, high partition-wall between the Jews and the Samaritans. 
The Jews would not allow them into the temple. They would not 
have any dealings with them. They would not associate with them. 
I can see him coming along that road, with his good, benevolent 
face ; and as he passes he hears a groan from this poor fellow. He 
draws in his beast and pauses to listen. “And he came to where he 
was.” This is the sweetest thing to my mind in the whole story. 
A good many people would like to help a poor man if he was on 
the platform—if it cost them no trouble. They want him to come 
to them. They are afraid to touch the wounded man; he is all 
blood, and they will get their hands soiled. And that was just the 
way with the priest and the Levite. This poor man, perhaps, had 
paid half of all his means to help the service of the Temple, and 
might have been a constant worshiper, but they only felt pity for 
him. This good Samaritan “came to where he was,” and after he 
saw him he had compassion on him. That word “compassion ”’—. 
how sweet it sounds! The first thing he did on hearing him cry 
for water—the hot sun had been pouring down upon his head—was 
to go and get it froma brook. Then he goes and gets a bag that 


40 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


he had with him—what we might call a carpet-bag or a saddle-bag 
in the West—and pours in oil on his wounds. Then he thinks, 
“The poor fellow is weak,” and he goes and gets a little wine. He 
has been lying so long inthe burning sun that he is nearly dead 
now—he was left half dead—and the wine revives him. He looks 
him over, and he sees his wounds that want to be bound up. But 
he kas nothing to do this with. I can see him now tearing the lin- 
ing out of his coat and with it binding up his wounds. Then he 
takes him up and lays him on his bosom till he revives; and, when 
the poor fellow gets strength enough, the good Samaritan puts him 
on his own beast. If the Jew had not been half dead he would 
never have allowed him to put his hands on him. He would have 
treated him with scorn. But he is half dead and he can not pre- 
vent the good Samaritan treating him kindly and putting him on 
his beast. 

Did you ever stop to think what a strong picture it would have 
been if the Samaritan had not been able himself to get the man on 
the beast—if he had had to call any assistance? Perhaps a man 
would have come along, and he would have asked him to help him 
with the wounded man. “What are you?” he might have said. 
“Tam a Samaritan.” “You are a Samaritan, are you? I can nct 
help you, I ama Jew.” There is a good deal of that spirit now, 
just as strong as it was then. When we are trying to get a poor 
man on the right way, when we are tugging at him to get his face 
toward Zion, we ask some one to help us, and he says, “I am 
a Roman Catholic.” “ Well,” you say, “I ama Protestant.” So 
they give no assistance to one another. The same party spirit. of 
old is present to-day. The Protestants will have nothing to do 
with the Catholics, the Jews will have nothing to do with the 
Gentiles. And there was a time—but, thank God, we are getting 
over it—when a Methodist would not touch a Baptist (a veice— 
“Amen”), or a Presbyterian a Congregationalist, and if we saw a 
Methodist taking a man out of the ditch a Baptist would say, 
“Well, what are you going to do with him?” « Take him toa 
Methodist church.” “Well, I’ll have nothing to do with him.” A 
great deal of this has gone by, and the time is coming when, if we 
are trying to get a man out of the ditch, and they see us tugging 
at him, and we are so weak that we can not get him on the beast, 
they will help him, And that is what Christ wants. 

Well, the Samaritan gets him on his beast, and says to him, 


ERS, 


saddle-bag 
he thinks, 
wine. He 
early dead 

He looks 
dup. But 
ng the lin- 

Then he 
and, when 
1 puts him 

he would 
ould have 
Nn not pre- 
1g him on 


ould have 
1€ Man on 
aps a man 
help him 
have said. 
I can net 
dirit now, 
yet a poor 
*t his face 
s, “I am 
ant.”’ So 
’ spirit of 
ing to do 
with the 
e getting 
a voice— 
ve sawa 
uld say, 
him toa 
lim.” A 
en, if we 
tugging 
1¢ beast, 


to him, 


COMPASSION AND SYMPA THY, 4! 


“You are very weak; my beast is sure-footed, he will take you to 
the inn, and I will hold you.” He held him firmly, and God is able 
to hold every one He takes out of the pit. Isee them going along 
that road, he holding him on, and he gets him to the inn. He 
gets him there, and he says to the innkeeper: “Here is a wounded 
man; the thieves have been after him; give him the best attention | 
you can; nothing is too good for him.” And I can imagine the 
good Samaritan as stopping there all night, sitting up with him 
and attending to his wants. And the next niorning, he gets up, 
and says to the landlord, “I must be off;” leaving a little money 
to pay for what the man has had, “And if that is not enough, I 
will pay what is necessary when I return from my business in 
Jericho.” This good Samaritan gave this landlord twopence to pay 
for what he had got, and Promised to come again and repay what- ° 
ever had been spent to take care of the man, and he had given him 
besides all his sympathy and compassion. And Christ tells this 
story in answer to the lawyer who came to tempt Him, and showed 
that the Samaritan was the neighbor. Now this story is brought 
out here to teach the church-goers this thing: that it is not creeds 
or doctrines that we want so much as compassion and sympathy. 
I have been talking about the qualifications which we require in 
working for Christ. First night I took “Courage,” then « Love,” 
and last night “Faith,” and now it is « Compassion and Sym- 
pathy.” 

If we have not compassion and sympathy, our efforts will go for 
naught. There are hundreds of Christians who work here who do 
very little because they have not sympathy. If they go to lift up 
aman, they must put themselves into his place. If you place 
yourself in sympathy with a man you are trying to do good to, you 
will soon lift him up. 

When at the Hippodrome in New York, a young man came up 
to me; he looked very sad, his face was troubled, | asked him 
what was the matter, and he said: “Tam a fugitive from justice, 
When in England, when I was young, my father used to take me 
into the public house with him, and I learned the habit of drinking, 


_ and liquor has become to me like water. A few months ago I was 


in England, where I was head clerk in a large firm; I was doing | 
well—I had $50 a week. Well, one night I was out and I had some 
money of my employers’ with me, and I got to gambling and lost 
it. Iran away from England and left a wife and two lovely - 


42 . MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


children. Here I am; I can not get anything to do; I have no 
letters of recommendation; and what shall J do?” “Believe in 
the Lord Jesus Christ,” said I. “TI can not become a Christian 
with that record behind me; there is no hope for me,” he replied. 
“There is hope; seek Jesus, and leave everything behind,” I told 
~ him. “Well,” said he, “I can not do that until I make restitu- 
tion.” But I kept him to that one thing. He wrote mea letter, 
and said that the sermon, “He must be born again,” had made a 
‘great impression on him. He could not sleep that night, and he 
finally assed from darkness into light. He came to me, and he 

id: “T am willing to go back to England and surrender myself, 

and go into prison, if Christ wants it.” I said to him: “Don’t do 
that; but write to your employers and say that if Christ helps you, 
you will make restitution. Live as economically as you can, and 
_be industrious, and you will soon find all well.” The man wrote to 
his employers, and I got a letter from him shortly afterward, and 
he told me that his wife was coming out to New York. When I 
was last there I made inquiry about him, and found that he was 
doing well. He only wanted sympathy—some one to take him 
by the hand and help him. I believe there are not less than 
10,000 young men in Chicago who are just waiting for some one to 
come to them with sympathy. You do not know how far a loving 
word will go. When I came to this city twenty years ago, I re- 
member I walked up and down the streets trying to find a situa- 
tion, and I recollect how, when they roughly answered me, their 
treatment would chill my soul. But when some one would say: 
“TI feel for you; I would like to help you, but I can’t; but you’ll 
be all right soon,” i went away happy and light-hearted, T hat 
man’s sympathy did me good. 

When I first went away from home, and to a place some thirteen 
miles away, it seemed as if I could never be any further away. My 
brother had gone to live at that town a year and a half before, | 
recollect as I walked down the street with him I was very homesick, 
and could hardly keep down the tears, My brother said to me: 
“There’s a man here will give you acent; he gives a cent to every 
new boy that comes here.” | thought that would be the best man 
Thad ever met. By and by he came along, and I thought he was 
going to pass me. My brother stopped him, thinking, I suppose, 
I was going to lose the cent, and the old gentleman—he was an old 
gentleman—looked at me and said, “Why, I have never seen you 


Ye 


have no 
lieve in 
hristian 
replied, 
” T told 
restitu- 
a letter, 
made a 
and he 
and he 
myself, 
on’t do 
9S you, 
an, and 
rote to 
rd, and 
Vhen I 
he was 
ce him 
s than 
one to 
loving 
), I re- 
situa- 

_ their 
1 say: 
you'll 
That 


irteen 
My 
re, I 
esick, 
. me: 
every 
man 
> was 
pose, 
n old 


you 


COMPASSION AND SYMPATHY. 43 


before; you must bea new boy.” “Yes,” said my brother, “he 
has just come.” The old man put his trembling hand upon my 
head, and patted it and told me that I had a Father in heaven, al- 
though my earthly father was dead, and he gave me a new cent. I 
don’t know where that cent went to, but the kindly touch of that 
old man’s hand upon my head has been felt by me all these years, . 
What we want is sympathy from men. There are hundreds of men 
with hearts full of love, who, if they received but words of sympa- 
thy, their hearts would be won to a higher life. But I can imagine 
men saying, “ How are you going to reach them? How are you 
going to do it? How are you going to get into sympathy with 
these people?” It is very easily done. Put yourself into their 
places. There is a young man, a great drunkard: perhaps his fa- 
ther was a drunkard. If you had been surrounded with in ces 
like his, perhaps you would have been a worse drunkard nal is. 
Well, just put yourself into his place, and go and speak to him lov- 
ingly and kindly. 

I want to tell you a lesson taught me in Chicago a few years ago. 
In the months of August and July a great many deaths occurred 
among children, you all know. I remember I attended a great 
many funerals; sometimes I would go to two or three funerals a 
day. I got so used to it that it did not trouble me to see a mother 
take the last kiss and the last look at her child, and see the coffin- 
lid closed. I got accustomed to it, as in the war we got accustomed 
to the great battles, and to see the wounded and the dead never 
troubled us. When I got home one night I heard that one of my 
Sunday-school pupils was dead, and her mother wanted me to come 
to the house. I went to the poor home, and saw the father drunk, 
Adelaide had been brought from the river. The mother told me 
she washed for a living, the father earned no money, and poor Ade- 
laide’s work was to get wood for the fire. She had gone to the 
river that day, and seeing a piece floating on the water, had stretched 
out for it, had lost her balance and fallen in. The poor woman was 
very much distressed. “TI would like you to help me, Mr. Moody,” 
she said, “to bury my child. I have no lot. I have no money,” 
Well, I took the measure for the coffin and came away. I had my 
little girl with me, and she said: « Papa, sippose we were very, very 
poor, and mamma had to work for a living, and I had to get sticks 
for the fire, and was to fall into the river, would you be very sorry?” 
This question reached my heart. “ Why, my child, it would break 


44 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


my heart to lose you,” I said, and I drew her to my bosom. + Pa- 
pa, do you feel bad for that mother?” she said; and this word woke 


funeral I went to Graceland. I had al. 
ways thought my time too Precious to go out there, but I went, 
The drunken father was there and the poor mother, J bought a 
lot, the grave was dug, and the child laid among strangers. There 
was another funeral coming up, and the corpse was laid near the 
grave of little Adelaide. And I thought how I would fee] if it had 
been my little girl that I had been laying there among strangers, 
I went to my Sabbath-school thinking this, and suggested that the 
children should contribute and buy a lot in which we might bury a 
hundred poor little children, We soon got it, and the Papers had 
scarcely been made out when a lady came and said, “ Mr, Moody, 
my little girl died this morning; let me bury her in the lot you 
have got for the Sunday-school children,” The request was grant- 
ed, and she asked me to go to the lot and say Prayers over her 
child. I went to the grave—it was a beautiful day in June, and I 
remember asking her what the name of her child was. She said 
Emma. That was the name of my little girl, and I thought what 
if it had been my own child. We should put ourselves in the places 
of others. I could not help shedding a tear, Another woman 
came shortly after and wanted to put another one into the grave, 
Tasked his name. It was Willie, and it happened to be the name 
of my little boy—the first two laid there were called by the same 
names as my two children, and I felt sympathy and compassion for 
those two women. 
If you want to get into sympathy, put yourself into a man’s 
place. Chicago needs Christians whose hearts are full of compassion 
and sympathy. 


The mistake is 
that we have been preaching too much and sympathizing too little. 
The Gospel of Jesus Christ is a gospel of deeds and not of words. : 

May the Spirit of the Lord come upon us this night, 


wounded and bleeding, look upon him with sy 
low him and raisé him up. Let us pray, 


a aan T~ he A eas ~~ 


5. 


. oe 
rd woke 
¢ to the 
-d heart. 
had al- 
I went. 
ought a 
There 
ear the 
f it had 
‘angers, 
hat the 
bury a 
rs had 
Moody, 
at you 
grant- 
er her 
and I 
e said 
what 
places 
oman 
rave, 
name 
same 
yn for 


nan’s 
ssion 
it, so 
kind- 
ke is 
ittle, 
rds. 
e re. 
we, 
ying 
be- 


/ COMPASSION AND SYMPATHY. 


45 


MR. MOODY’S PRAYER. 


We want to thank Thee, O Lord, for the pleasant time we have: 
spent together this week. 


y, all envy, all 
evil desire, so that we may receive the great blessing of the Holy 


Ghost, and feel its power among us. We want the power of Thy 
Son to be felt among us; we want the spirit of love and faith to 
appear to us here to-day. O Lord, our cry to-day is that Thou 
may help us, that the spirit of evil may be put far from us to-day, 
O God, help us to do great things for Chris¢. May that be the 
Prominent thing in our hearts—how we shall glorify Him; how we 


shall bring glory to the blessed name of Him who 
us, 


ulpits next Sunday ai. 
feeling that they have indeed received Thy blessing, and that they We 


have received a sacred unction from on high. Bless them, O Lord, ik 
and may they feel that they stand on the walls of Zion: and on he 
the coming Sabbath may they feel strong in Thy service, and may ee 
they come here on Monday feeling that Thy influence has been 

Bless not only the churches, but the ~ i 
y blessing in all our work, and we will a 
give all to the glory of Thy name through Jesus our Lord, Amen. le 


VI. 
FUNERAL SERMON OF SAMUEL MOODY. 


JOHN i. 41, 42: “He first findeth his own brother, , 


- and he brought him to 
Jesus,” 


THE PRAYER, 


burden of 


May our hands stretch 
out to the souls that are without God and hope in this dark world, 


that are living without the Saviour. O God, help us to go to 
them with loving words and speak to them the Word of Christ in 
such a way, that they shall be won to Christ. 

ing week be blessed in Chicago, May 

that is past. May it be a week in 

mightily, and 


that is among the brethren. 


€p us close to 
each other ; keep us close to 


May we see eye to eye; 
ing together. 


babes eee aa UL catenin Mie aga 


of this 
e€ sweet 
of the 

And 


Iwer to 
| by the 
y every 
us who 


hened, ° 


e been 
den of 
stretch 
world, 
go to 
rist in 
open- 
-weck 
work 
| may 
Thee, 
thank 
rts of 
unity 
se to 
eye; 
’ the 
great 


FUNERAL SERMON OF SAMUEL MOODY. 47 
turning unto Thee. And we pray Thee that Thy blessing may rest 
on these ministers who shall go hence to their pulpits to preach the 
Gospel of Jesus Christ. Oh, Spirit of God, will Thou go with them; 
may they speak with power from Thee, and their words echo and 
re-echo the mighty truth as it is in Jesus.. And when we come 
together, if it be our Privilege, to-morrow in F arwell Hall, may 
there be a mighty work for Christ. Bless the Sabbath-school teachers 
when they go to their classes to-day, May they all be burdened 
with the souls of their scholars till they bring then safe into the ark 
of Christ. May there be a glorious work in he Sabbath-schools to. 
day. And Christ shall have the praise of the glory. Amen. 


THE SERMON, 


I thought this morning I would like to just take a leaf out of my 
own life in the past, that it may help some of those present in this 


of Christ. Twenty-one years ago last March, when God converted 
me, the very first thing that came into my mind was my six broth- 
ers. Then and there, | began to pray for them. I had never 
prayed for them before; and I began to cry to God that these six 
brothers and two sisters might be led home to peace. <And for 
twenty-one years that has been my prayer; that has been my cry 
to God. I remember the first time I went home after my conver. 
sion. I thought I could tell them what God had done for me. I 
thought I had only to explain it, to have them all see the light. 
How disappointed I was when I left home that first time, after 
remaining for a few days, to find that they did not see it, I was 
not very experienced in pleading for souls then. Perhaps I did not 
go at it in the right way. But I kept on as best J could. Anda 
few years after, when I was in this city—three years after I was ina 
store on Lake street—a Postman came one day and brought a letter 
that told me my youngest brother was given up by the physician to die. 
On the day J got the letter he was dying, I went into the fifth story 
of that building, and if ever I Prayed earnestly in my life I did then, 
that my brother might be spared. He was the Benjamin of the fam- 
ily. He was born after my father died. [| thought I could give him 
up then if only he was a Christian. But I had not any hope. The 
thought that my brother, who was very dear to me—dearer to me 
than my life, it seemed—should die thus in his sins, was too much 
for me to stand, and I wrestled with God in prayer. It seemed 


48 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


God answered my prayer. The next letter sent, he was better. He 
had a run of typhoid fever that lasted forty-two days. And when 
he got off that bed, I felt in answer to prayer, the boy was dearer 
to me than ever before. But he never was well during sixteen or 
eighteen years. I remember fourteen years ago he came to me to 
this city. I have that dear boy in my heart now. I thought then 
my opportunity had surely come, and I could lead him to Christ. 
But he was taken sick again. I could not keep him here. The 
doctor said he might live a number of years, but could not be cured. 
Naturally very ambitious and proud-spirited, he did not want to gO 
back home. But the doctor said it was the best I could do, and 
I took him back to Massachusetts. I took him home from Chicago 
to Northfield, all the way preaching Christ to him. But he took 
no interest in my speech. Everything I said failed to influence 
him, although he seemed to love me very much. And for fourteen 
years I kept that dear boy on my heart. I just kept on praying 
for him. Year after year I went back to the old home just to 
spend a few days with him that I might win him to Christ. He 
knew I wanted him to be a Christian, but it seemed he would not 
comply. He took no interest in the Bible, no interest in Christian- 
ity. He would talk politics, he would talk everything else, but 
you could not get him to talk of Christ or Christianity. I went 
back home a year ago with a heart just burdened for the salvation 
of my family. My heart burned to draw them to Christ. I went 
to preaching in that town. In the last month, my heart going out 
to that dear boy, I asked all those present in the church willing 
to become Christians to rise, and he, my long-sought brother, rose 
for prayers. What a precious relief for my heart! He became an 
earnest Christian. He turned his face toward Heaven that very 
night. He became an active Christian. And when they soon 
after decided to have a Young Men’s Christian Association for that 
town, the young men wanted a president, and they elected him for 
President. Oh, that was a blessed day for me, when my brother, 
converted to God, after twenty years’ prayer, took charge ot 
that little band. I heard him make his first speech, and that 
seemed the happiest day of my life. He was a young man 
of great talents; he was the star of the family—the most prom. 
ising one of the family. No one of us could have done as 
much for Christ had he gone to Him in his earliest manhood. 
And he went to work. He took a leading part in religious meet- 


ter. He 
nd when 
s dearer 
xteen or 
o me to 
rht then 
» Christ. 
e. rhe 
e cured. 
it to go 
do, and 
chicago 
1e took 
fluence 
durteen 
praying 
just to 
t. He 
ld nat 
ristian- 
se, but 
I went 
lvation 
I went 
ng out 
willing 
‘r, rose 
me an 
t very 
7 soon 
r that 
im for 
‘other, 
ge of 

| that 

' man 
prom. 
ne. as 
hood. 
meet- 


ell : a 


= a » 
=7- a 


» CHICAGO, 


el peu! 
Lele Morel 8) re 


Petal tel 


Pe ok 


lately 


riaie\ har .al44a\ah ea 
oes (SE be Pere Belg ens \\ Z 
ania ull ae AAG =A \ ANN 
I yay 464 (4 A\A\ 12 tA =i a ) 
es y 
Aalee ce 3 3! KA\s Ny 
z Aa 


FUNERAL SERMON OF SAMUEL MOODY. 


ings. He went and talked with weak brothers and set them on 
their feet again. He searched for souls on both sides of the Con- 


of the valley. More conversions took 
place after I left than when I was there, 


>; thy love to me was wonderful,” 
For these twenty years | 
always knew he was going to meet me at the depot. I always 

ere. I never missed him. Sometimes 
I was three or four trains behind, but he was always watching and 
waiting for me. And that sadly beautiful hymn also kept coming 
into my mind: 

“We shail meet, but we shal! miss hin,, 
There will be one vacant chair,” 

But over and above all th 


ese the voice from Heaven at last made 
itself heard to my heart : 


“Thy brother shall rise again.” The 
cloud was lifted, and for about 500 miles on my way to my 
hotne that verse. rung in my ears. It seemed to echo and re-echo 
hrough all the journey: « Thy brother shall rise again.” Oh, the 
precious Bible! It never seemed to me: so precious as it did that 
day. My call to mourning was the deepest I have ever known, for 
next, perhaps, to my wife, my two children, and my aged mother, 
‘T loved none so dearly as this youngest brother. But that precious 
-romise gives the heart Cause to rejoice even in the sorrow of 
death. And again in the fifteenth chapter of Corinthians what 
divine sustaining words I took to my soul: 
_ “But some men will say, how are the dead raised up? and with 
what body do they come ? 
_ “Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except 
t die. : 


4 


49 


deen escent aac 


MRE Li ean Rainer ay = 


Fy ¢ 
we 4 . & z 


; 


50 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


“And that which thou sowegt thou sowest not that body that shall 


be, but bare grain; it may cljncd of wheat, or of some other grain. 

“But God giveth it a body as it hath pleased Him, and to every 
seed his own body. — 

“So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corrup- 
tion ; it is raised in incorruption. 

“It is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It is sown in weak- 

‘ness; it is raised in power.” 

Dishonor. Oh, as we laid him down in the cold grave—I thought, 
as we laid him away, of the worms that would come to his body, and 
of the dishonor. But with what power the Word of God came to my 
soul then in these words, “It is raised in glory.” We sowed it in 
weakness, but it shall be raised in power. It seemed there was victory 
even in that trying hour. It was sown in corruption, but it shall 
be raised incorruptible. It was sown mortal, but it shall be raised 
immortal. It was sown a natural body, it shall be raised a spiritual 
body. And, as it had borne the image of the earthy, it shall also 
bear the image of the heavenly. I shall see that brother by and 
by; then shall he be glorified. Yes, my friends, I could even 
rejoice as I read these blessed assurances of Scripture. The Word 
of God came to my soul as never before. Blessed Bible, how dark 
it would have been but for that blessed book. But by its beams 
all darkness was driven away. It seemed I could even thank God 
for the triumphant death of my dear brother, and almost envied him. 
No, I would not have God call him back from Heaven into this dark 
world. Yon happy home beyond the grave is far better. What jey 
to tell of good deeds done. A minister down home told me that he 
did not know, a short time back, of a solitary young man in his 
neighborhood who would offer prayer, but now a numerous and 
zealous band of praying Christians were the fruits of my brother's 
life. And that text came forcibly to my mind: “Blessed are th 
dead that die in the Lord; even so saith the Spirit, and their work 
do follow them.” There were these dear young Christian convert 
following him to his grave; his works did follow him. In th 
graveyard of the church that funeral day I saw fifty of these youn’ 
men converted mostly in the past year. I shouted even there b 
the grave—I could not help it: “Oh, death, where is thy sting 
Oh, grave, where is thy victory?” And I seemed to hear a voice é| 
from the bosom of the Son of God: “ Because I live, ye shall liv 
also.” 


OO A ee cee 


sy 


VERS. 


ody that shall. 
> other grain. 
and to every 


vn in corrup- 
own in weak- 


—I thought, 
nis body, and 
|came to my 
> sowed it in 
e was victory 
but it shall 
all be raised 
-d a spiritual 
it shall also 
ther by and 
could even 
The Word 
le, how dark 
by its beams 
. thank God 
envied him. 
ito this dark 
. What jcy 
| me that he 
man in bis 
merous and 
ny brother's 
sed are th 
their work 
an convert 
n. In th 
hese youn 
en there b 
thy sting 
ir a voice z) 
e shall liv 
) 


| 


Ln TON Se = ney 
ma - ree Stine ee 


FUNERAL SERMON Oh i sates MOODY. - gy 
And on my way back from OW 7 d to Chicago this has been 
my thought; if you, my dear Chris friend, have a brother out Hess 
of Christ, go bring him in. You oh by and by have to stand by die 
the open grave of some dear brother, did to be without Christ, how 
can you bear it? And so, my friends, let me urge upon you, first 
cf ali, to go and find your own brother, If you have a brother out 
of Christ, go to him to-day, tell him how you love him, how you want 


him to be a Christian, how you are burdened and weighed down for 
his salvation. And then go to your sist 


“From now, I will try to follow more faith- 
And when we 


work in the place of the dear buried one. Oh, dear friend, if souls 
weigh on our hearts, let us g0 and bring t 
write to them beseeching letters, 
us not rest day or night. 
friends to Christ. Let us commence with ili 
find our brothers, 
friends. 


repeated letters. Begin at once your mission, lest it be too late for- 
€ver, and praise God for the dear Privilege 


Him. 


VII. 


A STARTLING QUESTION. 
GEN. iii.g: “Where art thou?” 


OU see I have got a very personal text this afternoon. All 


those ministers in this audience will bear me out in this : 


statement, that it is the hardest kind of work to get their 
congregations to apply this text to themselves. When they hear 
it, one man passes it on to another, and away it goes, text and ser- 
mon. This afternoon, I want you to understand that it means me, 
you, and every one of us—that it points to us; that it applies to us 
personally—that it ought to come home to every soul here—to these 
merchants, to these ministers, to these reporters, to nese great- 
hearted men, to these women, to these little boys and girls—as a 
personal question. It was the first question God put to man after 


/ his fall, and in the 6,000 years that have rolled away, all of Adam’s 
' children have heard it. 


It has come to them all. In the silent 
watches of the night, in the busy hours of the day, it has come upon 
us many a time—the question, “ Where am I, whither am I going?” 
and I want you to look at it now as a personal question. So let us 
be solemn for a few minutes while we try to answer it. Some men 
look with great anxiety as to how they appear in the sight of their 
fellow-men. It is of very little account what the world thinks of us. 
The world is not worth heeding; public opinion is of very little 
account. We should not pay any attention to its opinion. ‘“ Where 
art thou going?” is the question that ought to trouble you—“ what is 
to be your hereafter?’”’ May the question strike home to us, and 
may a heart-searching take place in us, and the Holy Spirit search 
us, so that we may know before we sleep to-night where we are now 


in the sight of God, and where we are going to in eternity. I | 


remember when preaching in New York City, at the Hippodrome, a 
man coming up to me and telling me a story that thrilled my soul 
(52) 


53 


what he had done. The next morning happened to be Sunday. 
He got up, felt bad, couldn’t eat anything, didn’t touch his break. 
fast, was miserable, and thought about putting an end to his exist- 
ence. That afternoon he took a walk up Broadway, and when he 
came to the Hippodrome he saw great crowds going in, and thought 
of entering too. But a policeman at the door told him he couldn’t 
come in, as it was a woman’s meeting. He turned from it and 
strolled on, came ‘back to his hotel and had dinner. At night he 


All walked up the street until he reached the Hippodrome again, and 

ternoon. his : this time he saw a lot of men going in. When inside, he listened to 

nig ve ioe § the singing and heard the text: « Where art thou?” and he 
o get ¢t 


1en they hear 
, text and ser- 
it means me, 


thought he would go out; he rose to go, and the text came 
upon his ears again, “ Where art thou ?” This was too personal, 
he thought; it was disagreeable, and he made for the door, but 
4 as he got to the third row from the entrance the words came to 
applies to us him again, “Where art thou?” He stood still, for the question had 
erento thene come to him with irresistible force, and God had found him right 
rengee Greate there. He went to his hotel and prayed all that night, and now he 
id girls—as a 


ft is a bright and shir‘ng light. And this young man, who was a 
to Toh a commercial traveler, went back to the village in which he had been 
is h “Wee reared, and in which he had been one of the fastest young men— 

n the 


pon , and went around among his friends and acquaint- 
as come u 


: ” ances and testified for Christ, as earnestly and beneficially for Him 
am I going? as his conduct had been against Him. I hope the text will find out \ 
Mn. O90 let us some young man here who has strayed away from God, and come | 

; Some eked upon him with such force personally, as will turn him from his 
sight ol Steer Present course to take the offers of salvation. Won't you believe 
| thinks of gone we are here for you ?—won’t you believe we are Preaching for you ? 
cn Te —won't you believe that this enterprise has been carried out for 


ti hat te you, and that this assembly has been drawn together for you ’—and 
a oe d may you ask your heart solemnly and candidly this question: 
se to Me “Where art thon?” | 
Spirit search I ; he : : ; : ‘| 
am going to divide this audience into three classes. Don’t let fi - 
‘e we are now , we ; : a iL 
+ 1} this startle you, I am not going to make three divisions among you. I} & 
hhane a : The first class is the class who profess to be Christians. I don’t Hy iy 
eof inde know who you are, or whether you are sincere. tT 
illed my soul 


It rests between | 
you and God. The other class are the backsliders—those who have i 


f 


54 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


been good children, but who have turned their backs upon Him, and 

have gone into the regions of sin. And the next class is that one 

that has never been saved, who have never been born of the Spirit, 
’ who have never sought to reach Christ. 

And now, my friends, as to you who profess to be Christians. We 
who profess to be Christians, are we living up to what we preach ? 
God forgive me, I feel I am not doing as muchas I should for Him. 
I don’t except myself. You who profess to be Christians, this 
question is personal to you: “Where art thou?” Do you believe 
what you are preaching ?—do you live the life you ought to be living 
as professed Christians? If you were doing this, tens of thousands 
of people would be converted in Chicago within thirty days. By 
your neglect to practice what you preach, men have got sick of you, 
the world has become tired of you. They say, if we really feel what 
we talk about and profess, we would be more earnest about their 
salvation. And I say they are right. If Christians felt as they 
should, every church in Chicago, every church in the North-west 
would be on fire for the salvation of souls. They are lukewarm. Is 
the Church to-day in its right position ?P—is it true to its teachings ? 
~~ar2 we not mingling with the world in our professed Christian 
lives, hat the world has become tired of our shamming profes- 
sone? WP che world does not see us act according to our profes- 
sions, they say Christianity is not real. Why, a young man, some 
time ago a professed Christian, spoke to another young man upon the 
subject, and the Christian was answered with the words: “I don’t 
believe a word of your Christianity; I don’t believe a word of what 

you talk about; I don’t believe your Bible.” “You don’t mean 
that ?” asked the Christian. “ Yes, I do,’ said the young man, “‘it’s 
all a sham; you are all hypocrites.” The Christian said to him, 
knowing he had a mother who was a professed Christian, “ You 
don’t mean to say that your mother is a hypocrite?” “Well, no,” 
said the young fellow, not willing to admit his mother was one; 
“she is not exactly a hypocrite, but she don’t believe what she pro- 
fesses. If she did, she would have talked to me about my soul long 
ago.” That young man, my friends, had the best of it. And this 
is the condition of nine-tenths of us—we don’t practice what we 
profess to believe. We have not really taken the cross of Christ ; we 
have not put off the old man and taken on the new } we are not living 
truly in Christ Jesus, and the world is sick of us, and goes stum- 
bling over us. If we don’t practice in every particular the profes- 


AYERS, 


upon Him, and | 


lass is that one 
1 of the Spirit, 


hristians. We 
at we preach ? 
iould for Him. 
hristians, this 
0 you believe 
ht to be living 
; of thousands 
rty days. By 
ot sick of you, 
sally feel what 
st about their 
| felt as they 
e North-west 
ukewarm. Is 
its teachings ? 
sed Christian 
aming profes- 
oO our profes- 
g man, some 
man upon the 
ds: “I don’t 
word of what 
don’t mean 
1g man, “it’s 
said to him, 
stian, “ You 
“Well, no,” 
ler Was one; 
hat she pro- 
my soul long 
t. And this 
ice what we 
f Christ ; we 
re not living 
goes stum- 
the profes- 


A STARTLING QUESTION. 


sions we make, and try to influence the lives of others, and lead the: 
lives of Christians according to Christian Precept, the world will go 


on stumbling over us. A few years ago, 
this State, a merchant died, and while he 
told a story I will never forget. 


time to talk about Christ to the dying man. 
many Christians just like this physician. 
just entering the other world—just till h 


is in his throat—before they commence to speak of Christ. 


to all the world. The merchant ]j 
asked him, “ How long have you 
have been a Christian since I came from the East,” he replied. 
“You have been a Christian so long and have known all this, and 
have been in my store every day. You have been in my home; 
have associated with me; you knew all these things, and why didn’t 
you teil me before?” 
but could not sleep. The question of the dying man rang in hj 
ears. He could not explain why he had not spoken befo he 


saw he had neglected his duty to his principles. He Went back to | 


his dying friend, intending to urge upon him acce 


plied in a sad whisper, “ Oh, why didn’t you tell me before?” Oh, my 
friends, how many of us act like this physician. You must go to 
your neighbor and tell him who does not know Christ, of what He 
has done for us. If you do not tell the glad tidings, they are lis- 
tening to the Promptings of the devil, and we make pecple believe 
that Christianity jis hypocrisy, and that Christ is not the Saviour of 
the world. If we believe it, shall we not publish it, anc! speak out 
the glorious truth to all for Christ—that He is the Redezmer of the 
world ?JSome time ago I read a little account that went through the 
press, and it burned into my soul. A father took his little child. 
into the fields one day. He lay down while the child was amusing 
itself picking up little blades of grass and flowcrs. While the child 
was thus engaged the father fell asleep, and wi.en he awoke, the first 
thought that occurred to him was, “ Where is my child?” He 
looked around everywhere, but nowhere could he see the child.. He 


ina town somewhere in 
was lying a corpse I was | 
When the physician that attended | 
him saw there was no chance for him here, he thought ii would be 
And there are a great 
They wait till a man is - 
e is about nearing the 
throne, till the sands of life are about run out, till the death-ratile 
The 
physician stepped up to the dying merchant and began to speak of 
Jesus, the beauties of Christianity, and the salvation Te had offered | 
stened quietly to him, and then | 
known of these things?” “J 


The doctor went home and retired to rest, — 


ptance of Christ’s | 
salvation, but when he began to speak to him the merchant only re- | 


a 
¢ 


* 


| 


56 MOOD YS SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 
looked all around the fields, over the mountains, but could not sce 
her, and finally he came to a precipice and looked down among the 
stones and rocks, and there he saw his little child lying down at the 
bottom, and ran down, took the child up, and kissed it tenderly, but 
it was dead. He was filled with remorse, and accused himself nf 
being the murderer of his child. And this story applies to Chris. 
tians in their watchful care of their fellow-creatures, 

It was not long ago that I heard of a mother making all sorts of 
fun and jeering at our preaching; not in Chicago, but in another 
town. She was laughing and scoffing at the meetings; she was 
scorning the preachers; and yet she had a drunken son. It might 
have been, if she had helped to support the meetings, the meetings 
would have been the means of saving that son from a drunkard’s 
grave; and mothers and fathers here to-day, you have the respon- 


sibility upon you of turning the faces of your children toward Zion, 
Ah, my friends, it is a solemn question to you 


that in this assembly there must be a number of backsli 
have gone 


or Episcopalian 
at church you did not find the 
d the cordiality you looked for, 
So you kept the letter in your 
have been thrown in your trunk, 
Chicago fire; and you have for. 
gotten all about your church life, and the letter has disappeared.” You 
t happy. I have traveled about 
nd I never knew a man who had 
a happy man. That man’s con- 


him. He may come to Chicago and be. 
come prosperous and wealthy, but his wealth and position in the 


world can not fill his heart. If there is a poor backslider in this 
building to-day, let him come back. Hear the Voice that calls you 
to come back. There is nothing you have done which God is not 
ready and able to forgive. If there is a poor wanderer on the moun- 
tains of sin, turn right round and face Him. He will hear your 
transgressions, and forgive yur backsliding, and take you to His 
loving bosom, and this will be a happy night to you. Look at the 


1 VERS, 


could not see 
wn among the 
g down at the 
, tenderly, but 
-d himself of 
lies to Chris- 


ig all sorts of 
it in another 
ngs; she was 
n. It might 
the meetings 
a drunkard’s 
: the respon- 
toward Zion. 
ind may you 
next class I 
Ip believing 
‘sliders who 
y come from 
ome church 
“piscopalian 
not find the 
| looked for, 
ter in your 
your trunk, 
u have-for- 
eared." You 
veled abour 
in who had 
man’s con- 
go and be. 
ion in the 
ler in this” 
t calls you 
70d is not . 
the moun- 
hear your 
ou to His 
00k at the 


f 


A STARTLING QUESTION. 


Is not that the condition of a good many here to-day? Oh, back. eS 
slider, you know what your life is, but what 


rain; and when the time came for 
him to return home, the boy did not come. The father and mother 


» €xpecting to hear the sound of the wa 


been seen since the sale, and concluded 
After making investigation, however, 
the boy had gone into a gambling-house 
After they had taken all his money from h 
his horse and wagon, and he would recover 
He was like the poor man 


lem, and who fell among thieves, and after they had 
of everything, cast him off. An 


him than life, and left his address with them, and urged them if aa | 
ever they heard anything about his boy to let him know. At last, | a 
after going around a good deal, he got on his track and learned that j | i 
he had gone to California, 


citement. , but he did not write a letter to him. 


No; he just arranged his business aftairs and started for the Pacific | 


ration of what God has a 
day, an hour, a moment, ! j 


There has not been a 


58 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


but God has been searching for you. When the father got to San 
Francisco he got permission to preach, and he had a notice put in 
the papers in the hope that it might reach the mining districts, 
trusting that if his son were there it might reach him. He preached 
, 4 sermon on the Sunday, and when he pronounced the benediction 
the audience went away. But he saw ina corner, one who remained. 
He went up to him and found that it was his boy. He did not 
reprimand him, he did not deliver judgment upon him, 
loving arms around him, drew him to his bosom, and took him back 
to his home. This is an illustration of what God wants to do tous, 
what He wants to do to-day. He offers us His love and His for- 


giveness. 


There is one peculiarity about a backslider. You must get back 
to Him as you went away. It is you who have gone away by turn- 
ing, by leaving Him; not He by leaving you. And the way to get 
back to Him is to turn your face toward Him, and he will receive 
you with joy and forgiveness. There will be joy in your heart and 


there will be joy in Heaven thi§ afternoon if you return to Him. 


If you treated God as a personal friend, there would not be a back- 


slider. A rule I have had for years is to treat the Lord Jesus Christ 
as a personal friend. He is not a creed, a mere empty doctrine, but 
it is He Himself we have. The moment we have received Christ 


we should receive Him asa friend. When I go 


away from home I 


bid my wife and children good-bye, I bid my friends and acquaint- 


ances good-bye, but I never heard of a poor backslider going down 


on his knees and saying, “I have been near You for-ten years; 
Your service has become tedious and monotonous; I have come to 


bid You farewell; good-bye, Lord Jesus Christ.” 


I never heard of 


one doing this. I will tell you how they go away; they just run 
away. Where are you, you backslider? Just look upon your con- 
dition during the past ten years. Have they been years of happi- 


ness? Have they been years of peace? Echo 
sand times, “No.” Return to Him at once; nev 
past has been, He will give you salvation. 


But I must hasten on to the next class—the unsaved, I will’ 


answers ten thou- 
er mind what your 


admit that professed Christians have got their failings; we are far 
from being whzt we ought to be. But is that any reason why you 


should not come to Him? W 


¢ do not preach ourselves, we do not 


set ourselves up as the Saviour; if we did you might make this an 


excuse. But we preach Christ. Now, you who are unsaved, won’t 


but put his 


say, 1 
serm« 
make 
erful 

Gosps 
vou | 
tombs 


LIVERS. 


er got to San 
notice put in 
ling districts, 
He preached 
e benediction 
vho remained. 

He did not 
, but put his 
00k him back 
s to do tous, 
and His for- 


lust get back 
way by turn- 
le way to get 
: will receive 
ur heart and 
urn to Him. 
it be a back- 

Jesus Christ 
doctrine, but 
seived Christ 
from home I 
nd acquaint- 


going down’ 


r-ten years; 
ave come to 
ver heard of 
hey just ruri 
Nn your con- 
rs of happi- 
s ten thou- 
1 what your 


jem. Tt will: 
; we are far 
on why you 
, we do not 
ake this an 
aved, won’t 


you joy, 
y? If you have got the fruit 
ies; if you have not, you have 

Now, friends, just ask yourself this 
Here I am in this hall to-day, sur. 


It seemed sometimes to me as if 
the words came to me and fell to the floor; and at other times the 


words fe!] on the heart. We can feel it in this hall to-day in the 
atmosphere; we feel its influence all around, It may be that that 


son; it may be that 
» “Oh, my God, may 
Dear friends, let us ask each 


Resisting earnest, trembling 
prayers of some loving mother, of some 


them under-foot ? Now, be honest. 
many in this audience who made pro 
years ago—who made a promise to 
have faded away, and those five, te 
rolled on and you are no nearer, 
you making light of all Offers o 


back and ridiculing Him and laughin 
He, the God of mercy, 


Save you. ‘The last thr 
my life. A man’s life is just like going up and down a hill. 
live the allotted time, I am going down the hill. 
on the top of the hill and are n 
moment and look down the hill o 
—look back toward the cradle. 
sermons you heard ten or fifteen 
say, when you look back at those t 
sermoris, better and more earnest mi 
make any mistake. 

erful to-day as ever. 


of the Spirit, you have those qualit 
not been born of the Spirit. 
question, “Where am I?” 

rounded with praying friends. 


If I 
Many of you are 
ot saved. Suppose you pause a 
n the road from whence you came 
Don’t you remember that the 
years ago moved you? You 
imes, “ We used to have good 
nisters than now.” Don’t you 
The Gospel is the same as it was then, as pow- 


The fault is not with the ministers or the 
Gospel ; it is with yourself; your heart has 
you look down into the valley, 


tombstone? It marks the res 


become hard. Then, as 
don’t you sez a little mound anda 
ting-place of a loving father, or a 


"+ young man, and the doctor wanted to save him. 


60 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


loving mother. Ten years ag \ ou had a praying mother. Every 
morning and evening she went down on her knees in her closet and 
prayed for you. Her prayers are ended now, and yet you are not 
saved. ‘It may be, as you look down the stream of time, you see a 
little grave that marks the resting-place of your child. It may be 
that child took you by the hand, and asked you, “ Will you meet 
me in that land?” And you promised her that you would meet her 
there. As you looked down into that little grave and heard the 
damp, cold earth falling down, you repeated that promise. Five, 
ten, fifteen years ago you promised this; have you kept it? Some 
of you are far down the hill and hastening to judgment. May God 
open your eyes to-day as you look back upon your lives and look 
into the future. It may be that you will live the allotted time, but 
the end is soon to come. The average age is thirty-three years. 
There are a number of you in this hall this afternoon who will be 
in eternity inside of thirty days. Ask yourselves where you are; 
resisting the offer of mercy, turning back the offer of God. May 
the loving God show you the Saviour standing at the door of your 
heart, and knocking and telling you He wants to come in and save 
you. 

In London, when I was there in 1867, I was told a story which 
made a very deep impression upon me. A young French noble- 
man came there to see a doctor, bringing letters from the French 
Emperor. The Emperor Napoleon III. had a great regard for this 
He examined the 
young man, and saw there was something upon his mind. ‘“ Have 
you lost any property? What is troubling you? You have some- 
thing weighing upon your mind,” said the doctor. “Oh, there is 
nothing particular.” “I know better; have you lost any rela- 
tions?” asked the doctor. ‘“ No, none within the last three years.” 
“Have you lost any reputation in your country?” “No.” The 
doctor studied for a few minutes, and then said, “I must know what 
is on your mind; I must know what is troubling you.” And the 
young man said, “ My father was an infidel; my grandfather was 
an infidel, and I was brought up an infidel, and for the last three 
years these words have haunted me, ‘Eternity, and where shall it 
find me?’” “ Ah,” said the doctor, “you have come to the wrong 


physician.” “Is there no hope for me?” cried the young man. Jj 


“TI walk about in the daytime; I lie down at night, and it comes 
upon me continually ; ‘ Eternity, and where shall I spend it?’ Tell 


to cc 
resist 
Heay 
you | 
grace 


VERS. 


ther. Every 
her closet and 
t you are not 
me, you see a 
. It may be 
Jill you meet 
ould meet her 
nd heard the 
omise. Five, 
pt it? Some 
it. May God 
ives and look 
ted time, but 
y-three years. 
1 who will be 
ere you are; 
f God. May 
door of your 
ein and save 


a story which 
‘rench noble- 
n the French 
egard for this 
examined the 
ind. ‘“ Have 
yu have some. 
“Oh, there is 
ost any rela- 
three years.” 
Nig; The 
1st know what 
1” And the 
ndfather was 
he last three 
where shall it 
to the wrong 


young man. § 


and it comes 


end it?’ Tell 


i 


4 STARTLING QUESTION. 


61 
me, is there any hope for me?” The doctor said: « Now just sit 
down and be quiet. A few years ago I was an infidel. I did not 
believe in God, and was in th 


€ same condition in 
Bible and turned to 
“He was wounded for 


which you are.” 


The doctor took down his the fifty-thirg 


chapter of Isaiah and read: 


he read on through this chap 


man said: “Do you believe this, that He voluntaril 


came down to this earth, and suffered and died th 
Saved?” « Yes, I believe it. 


of darkness into light.” 


ed, the young 
y left Heaven, 
at we might be 
of infidelity, out 
nd His salvation 


| » Who wrote to Dr. 
telling him that question of “ eternity, and 


>” was settled and troubled him no more, 
eternity, and where we are going to 


- Weare staying here for 
a fibre, and it wil] soon b 


sermon. 


VIII. 


CHRIST SEEKING THE LOST. 


LUKExix. 10: “ For the Son of Man is come toseek and to save that which was lost.” 


if WANT you to get the text in your memory to-night. It is | 
| very short, and you may forget all about the sermon, but this 
ia text is sweet enough to save every soul here to-night that wants 
to be saved; just in that little short sentence He tells us what He * ' 
came to the world for. “He came to seek and to save that which” ~ ' 
was lost.” I very often meet people that say they are seeking to : 
be saved, and they are seeking Christ and can’t find Him. Now | : 

T 


there is a great mistake there. We just want to reverse it. There 
is not a man or woman in the hearing of my voice to-night but 


Christ has sought long and often for. He takes the place of the % 

| first seeker. There is not a redeemed soul in Heaven that first it 

1 sought God. God came down after Adam. After he had trans- ; 

a gressed and sinned, he ought to have taken the place of the seeker ; é 
if but instead of that, we find God coming right down that very day 

and calling to him. It was the voice of grace and mercy that rung 4 

through the garden of Eden: “ Adam, where art thou ?” and from r 

that to the present time He is seeking after sinners. He seeks you 

to-night, my friends. I don’t know who you are, but He knows ” 

nt) you and has sought you often, and is seeking you again to-night. th 

A! That parable we have just read tells of a shepherd who had a hun- ity 

) dred sheep. We are told by Eastern travelers that it is the custom if 

if for the sheep when being counted at night to pass under the rod. . 

| I can see the shepherd bringing them back to the fold. He counts ae) 

| them, “one, two, three,” and so on till he gets to ninety-nine. He bli 


\\ says, “I must have made a mistake in counting them.” So he Sit 
1 | counts them over the second time. He then says, “I am afraid I | a 
s have lost one.” So the third time he counts them, and sees that ff - 
one is lost. Now he goes out and seeks it. It don’t say that the| ie 

(62) 


6G wy 


= 


iy 


t which was lost.” 


o-night. lt is 
mon, but this 
tht that wants 
sus what He 


ve that which” 


ie seeking to 
1 Him. Now 
rse it. There 
to-night but 
> place of the 
ven that first 
he had trans- 
of the seeker ; 
that very day 
rey that rung 
1?” and from 
He seeks you 
it He knows 
sain to-night. 
10 had a hun- 
is the custom 
ider the rod. 
He counts 
ty-nine. He 
em.” So he 


[am afraid If 


nd sees that 


say that the| 


CHRIST SEEKING THE LOST. 


and sought till he found it. 
Saviour came into the world t 
again, take the other parable. 
She had got the money, perhaps, for some butter she sold. 


night comes and she’s about to retire to rest, she says, “]’ 
away that money.” 


She counts it over the second time and the third time an 
Where have I been? I have 
tit!” Ican'see her with the 


This illustrates the truth that our 


Oh, how sweet to speak to men who wake up to 
the fact that they are lost. 


Saviour. The great trouble is, 


ble rags of self-righteousness about them and don’t really believe 
they are lost. 


“Well,” said 
the other, “I have just come down from Jerusalem and I saw a man 
that was born blind, and I don’t know any man that has got better 


“ How is that?” says Bartimeus, 


' (sheep sought the shepherd, but the shepherd sought the sheep, 


¥ 
f 
I 


G4. MOODY'S SERMONS: ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


© comes, you just ask Him and ‘He'll 
“What does He charge ?” 


and as he was crying out for a farthing, al] at 


take away their sins; but Bartimeus 
began to Pray, “ Jesus, Thou ' Son of David 


Some one in advance cried th 
account uf a Poor blind beggar. “ Hush” 
the Master.” Bartimeus Was not goj 


but cried the more——Thou Son of David, have 


Ow said: “ Be of good cheer, 


and, my friends, if Gog calls you, He 
has Something good for you. So they take hj 


lead him up to the Son of God. 
gather closer and closer, Every e 


can I do for you?” the Lord Says. “Lord 
sight.” “Voy have got it,” 


sing sweeter then a redeemed soy! ? 
him a Methodist no 


Once he hears the 
“Who is Coming?” he Cries out, J 


PRAYERS. 


» be in Jerusale 


came to this bli 
inted his eyes and 
> Was washing he 


9 


Says Bartimeus, 
s here; and when 
you your sight,” 
Why, He don’t 
You don’t need 
if you ask Him,” 
Only the day 
or his little son, 
-€ he hears the 
he cries out. [ 
1 they tel] him 
hamed of pray- 
0, are afraid to 
but Bartimeus 
nercy on me,” 
> disturbed on 
‘don’t disturb 
ff in that Way, 
‘ercy on me.” 
© hear a poor 
80 and fetch 
ne to Jericho 
fF good cheer, 
alls you, He 
he hand and 
now. They 
m. “ What 
’ receive my 
1er did the 
iswer came, 
The first 
elf. I can 
or who can 
would call 
* than he, 
ider street 


CHRIST SEERING THE LOST. 


and see my family. I never saw the 
mother, or my children,” As he goes a 


Isuppose. As he Passes he turns aro 
is that you?” « Yes, that’s me,” 

eyes?” “T asked Jesus of Nazare 
“Why, is Jesus of Nazareth near here 
just imagine the man says: 
and I’d like to see Him.” 

him on tiptoe trying to get 
he runs along outside of the crowd toward a 


says: “If I can just get up in that tree 
my seeing Him.” I haye 


?” « He's in Jericho.” I can 
“T have heard a great deal of Him, 
I can see 


he is—his eyes fixed on that eastern gate, 
come bursting out. He looks and gets 
He sees Peter, and Says, “ That’s not 
“That’s not Him,” By and by he 
han the sons of men, and he says, 


§° sweeping by, but his eye is fixed 
on the Master until He gets right under hi 


He says: « Zaccheus, come 
knew his hame, but he knew 
and to save the lost one. He 
there area great many people 
Nversions. Tell me when Zac. 
ve been converted between the 
a class of men say: “Well, if 


y won't hold out.” Well, I wish 
we had a few Zaccheuses in Chicago. To those he had wronged 


he made restitution by returning them four-fold, By going to his 
those Pharisees that « He had 
h was lost.” 

The people said, “ There is a true ig 
meteor; and how sudden it was, ie 
you don’t give half your goods to oi 
n. If you have lied about a man, ie 

u have abused a man, go and tell 
ustice; go and make a restitution, 


down.” Zaccheus wondered how He 
all about him. He had come to seek 


the poor, you must make restitutio 

if you have slandered a man, if yo 

him that you have done him an inj 
5 ‘ 


66 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


I felt much encouraged last night; a man came into the inquiry- 
room and said: “ Mr. Moody, I want you to forgive me.” “ Why,’ 
said I, “I have nothing to forgive you for; I never met you be- 
fore.” “ Well,” said the man, “I have been abusing you for about 
ayear. I was here last night and I got converted, and I want to ask 
your forgiveness.” He had been abusing me and slandering me, 
and had been talking about something he didn’t know anything 
about. There was a man who said about restitution: “There is a 
Shoe-maker’s bill I have been owing, and I have owed it for nine 
years.” So he went round next day and paid it. The shoe-maker 
said, “ Well, I believe in those kind of meetings now.” He didn’t 
believe in them before. What we want is to have men become dis- 
ciples of Jesus Christ. I may be speaking to some clerk to-night, 
who has taken money from his employer falsely. It may be that he 
has covered up his track, and no one knows it but the all-seeing eye 
of God. But you can’t look up, and you can’t have the sympathies 
of God, and you can’t be converted unless you make restitution. It 
may be that you have squandered the money, and can’t make resti- 
tution; but go right to that man you have injured and confess it. 
There was a man who had robbed his employer of $500, and the 
Spirit of God aroused him, and he went to one of our ministers and 
told the story. He wanted to become a Christian, but there was 
the $500 right in his mind a!l the while. « Well,” said the minister, 
“your path is very clear; you must pay back the money.” “ But,” 
said the man, “I can’t pay it back.” “Then,” said the minister, 
“you must go back to your employer and confess it.” But the man 
said, ‘“‘ My employer is a hard-hearted man, and if I confess it he will 
put me in prison.” And the man couldn’t do it, he thought. 
“Well,” said the minister, “I will go and see your employer.” 
And he went into the office of the man and told the story. 
“Now,” said the minister, “I have reason to believe that that man has 
been converted of his sin. I believe, if you will forgive it, and if 
you give him a chance, you may save the soul of the man, and he 
will work and pay back the money.” The man said, “He shall 
never heara word from me,” and the result is that the clerk has now 
become a joyful Christian. And so, if you want to become follow- 
ers of the Lord Jesus Christ, you must make restitution, Zaccheus 
made restitution. He went into his office and made out a check for 
neighbor So-and-so, and for neighbor So, for $100, and then sent his 
‘clerk around and offered and urged these different men to take this 


AYERS. 


o the inquiry. 
me.” ¢“ Why,’ 
r met you be- 
you for about 
| I want to ask 
landering me, 
now anything 
: “There isa 
od it for nine 
ie shoe-maker 
”” He didn’t 
n become dis- 
lerk to-night, 
ay be that he 
all-seeing eye 
ie sympathies 
stitution. It 
't make resti- 
nd confess it, 
500, and the 
ninisters and 
ut there was 
the minister, 
ve But,” 
che minister, 
But the man 
ess it he will 
he thought. 
employer.” 
| the story. 
chat man has 
e it, and if 
nan, and he 
_ “He shall 
erk has now 
ome follow- 
Zaccheus 
a check for 
hen sent his 
to take this 


CHRIST SEEKING THE LOST, 67 


n that had been robbed thought 
paid back not only what he had 


Money; and do you think these me 
his conversion wasn’t genuine? He 
taken, but he restored them four-f, 


rsion. I can imagine a man 
But the clerk 


answers, “ My master told taxed you too 


much.” What a smile ca “What has come over 


this man? There was a time when he was unreasonable. He jis 
giving money to the poor, 
genuine conversion !” 
Son of God. That is a i 
into a man’s soul. 
If we could only get the confessj 
wouldn’t be long before he is saved, 
need of a Saviour? But o 


couldn’t see qa fa 
the air. And when I o 


I spoke to them they said, « Well, we'll tel] you, Chaplain, we got 
into bad company, and those that were with us got away, and we 
got caught. We hadn't done anything wrong.” And the prisoner 


in the next cell had an excuse: “The man that did it looked just 
like me, but they took me for him although I am innocent.” And 
in the next cell they hadn’t had their tri 


‘lal yet, but next Sunday 
they would be out. So I went from cell t 


© cell, and I never found 
The only guilty ones, 


ere. So you Say to. - 
next behind. me is,” 


68 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


You are drawing the rags of self-righteousness around you, and 
think you are not bad. But God says, “ He that breaks the least of 
these commandments is guilty of all.” If you were taken away, 
what would become of your soul? Every soul that is not born of 
God shall be lost for time and eternity. Don’t let the infidels make 
you believe you are all right. Well, I went on through the cells, 
and at last in one I saw a man sitting with his head resting on his 
hands, and I could see tears falling from his eyes. How refreshing 
it was to see that. I asked him what his trouble was. He said, 
“My sins are greater than I can bear.” And I said, “ Thank God for 
that!” And he said, “Thank God for that? Ain’t you the man’s 
that’s been preaching to us?” ‘Yes,’ I said, “I am your friend, 
and I am glad you feel your sins.” ‘ Well,” he says, “you are a 
queer friend.” And I said, “If your sins are more than you can 
bear, you can cast them on One who is able to bear them. I've 
been hunting for you for along time.” “What?” he says, “ hunt- 
ing for me?” AndI-said: “You are lost, and I am glad I have 
found one man who will admit that he is lost.” And I preached 
Christ to him. I told him of Him who came to seek and save the 
lost, who came to open the prison doors and set the captive free, 
who gives life, and light, and peace, and joy. I must have talked to 
him for half an hour, and then I said I would pray with him. So we 
knelt down, I on the outside and he on the inside. And after I had 
prayed I said: “ Now, you pray.” And he said it would be blas- 
phemy for him to pray. But I told him that the blood of Jesus 
Christ cleansed from all sin, and he bowed his head down to the 
floor, and could only say without so much as lifting his eyes toward 
Heaven, “God be merciful to me, a poor, miserable wretch.” No 
man sends up such a cry that God doesn’t hear him. snd I put my 
hand through the little window and I felt a tear drop on it; and I 
said, “I'll be praying for you to-night, between 9 and Io o'clock, at 
the hotel, and I want you to meet me at the Throne of Grace.” 
That night it seemed as if the Spirit of God came upon me. I went 
to see him next morning and the moment my eyes rested on him, I 
saw a great change. Remorse and despair were gone, and the light 
from yon world had come upon him. He seemed to me to be the 
happiest man in New York. He said, “I thought I could never 
' bear to see my old friends, but God came and set my soul free. I 
thin it was about midnight, I cried and He hea 1 me, and I am 
happy.” 


ERS. 


d you, and 
the least of 
aken away, 
lot born of 
fidels make 
h the cells, 
ting on his 
vy refreshing 
_ He said, 
ank God for 
1 the man’s 
rour friend, 
“you are a 
an you can 
them. I’ve 
ays, “ hunt- 
slad I have 
I preached 
nd save the 
aptive free, 
ve talked to 
lim. Sowe 
| after I had 
Id be blas- 
od of Jesus 
own to the 
eyes toward 
etch.” No 
id I put my 
nit; and I 
9 o'clock, at 
of Grace.” 
me. I went 
don him, I 
nd the light 
1e to be the 
could never 
oul free. I 
e, and I am 


CHRIST SEEKING THE LOS Z. 69 


Do you see why Christ came to that one captive? It was because 
he took his place among lost sinners. O, sinner, cry, “ Thou Son of 
David, have mercy upon me.” Take your place among the lost. 
Let the cry go up from every soul—“ Be merciful to me a sinner.” 
Don’t you want to be saved ? Won’t all the Christians unite in the 
prayer that God would save every ivst soul? I want to say a word 
to the lost—and I mean all the sinners who have not been converted, 
While the Christians pray, close your eyes and lift up your hearts to 
God and ask Him to have mercy. These are solemn days. I never 
felt more power than in the meeting last night. God is near us, and 
His Spirit is here to-night. He is answering the prayers of the 
Christians of Chicago. I believe the answer is come, and God is 

moving mightily in this city, Young men and young women, don’t 
laugh at your praying friends who are anxious for your souls. If you 
have friends who pray and weep for you, treat them kindly. They’ 
are worth more to you than is the world. Go home and tell your 


anxious mother that you are saved, and make her heart glad that 
her God has ‘become yours. 


PRAYER. 
Our Heavenly Father, we pray Thee that Thy blessing may rest | 
day in Thy name, to some 
May the 


May they bring many to 
may great grace be upon all men. Amen. 


on every letter that shall be written to- 
brother, to some friend, to some child, to some sister. 


Spirit of God accompany these letters, 
Christ And now, 


IX. 
LOST AND SAVED, 


LUKE xix, 10: ‘ For the Son of Man is come to seck and to save that which was 
lost.’’ 


GREAT many people tell you, “I will become a Christian 

when Christ comes and seeks me.” I was talking to a gray- 

haired man, 55 years of age, in my native town not long ago, 

who, when I spoke to him about his soul, suggested that he would 
become a Christian when the Lord Jesus Christ came to him. He 
was waiting till He hunted him personally. And there is a class 
like him in every community, What more would you like Him to 
do for you—what more than He has done already? I would like 
to ask you just what you would like God to do more forus. He 
sent to us the prophets and we murdered them. He sent down His 
Son from heaven, who was sacrificed by us, and then He sent us the 
Holy Ghost, who has been in the world for the last 1,800 years, to 
try and give us peace and happiness. Would you like Him to send 
His Son again to earth te suffer for your sins? My dear friends, what 
are you wailing for more? He has been looking for you and hunt- 
ing for you from your cradle, and I would just like to tell you how 
He seeks. There was never a sermon which you have listened to 
but in it the Lord was seeking for you. That is one way. Some 
of you might have been asleep while the preaching has been going 
on, but He has been seeking you while asleep. Have not some of 
you heard a sermon in which you were offered asa sinner to the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and your conscience was troubled? You went 
away, but you came back again, and the Spirit of God came upon 
you again and again, and you were troubled. Haven't you passed 
through that experience? Don’t you remember something like 
that happening to you? That was the Son of God seeking for 
your soul. You might have had a tract preseited to you. You 
might have turned it off. It might have been eaded with this text. 
(70) 


te es root 


22 VS U0 2 mew wee me eo 


it which was 


Christian 
to a gray- 
t long ago, 
-he would 
him. He 
- is a class 
‘e Him to 
vould like 
rus. He 
down His 
ent us the 

years, to 
m to send 
nds, what 
and hunt- 

you how 
stened to 
y. Some 
sen going 

- some of 
er to the 
You went 
ime upon 
U passed 
hing like 
sking for 
su. You 

this text. 


LOST AND SAVED. 7 
That was the Son of God seeking for your soul. He has used a 
four-page tract—sometimes just one page-—to seek to convert a 
man, and he is seeking through the Bible. | contend that a man 
can not but find in every page of this book that He is seeking him 
through His blessed Word. This is what the Bible is for—to seek 
out the lost. He seeks them through His works; He seeks them 
through these ministers ; through this building. What is this build. 
ing for? Why, that you may come and lay your sins right in this 
Tabetnacle—here where Christ is seeking for your souls, 
think that the devil put it into the heads of those business 
those times of great commercial depression, to put this build 
Do you think Satan put it into their heads? It has not been put 
up to catch your money—no collection has been taken up as yet. 
It is not your money we are after: it is to catch your soul. Do 
you believe that it was Satan who put it into the hearts of those 
ministers to preach the Word, and to come here night after night? 
Do you believe that was the devil’s work? It is the Son of Man 
seeking for your souls. And this building and these crowds of peo- 
ple ought to act asa reminder and a warning to every man and 
woman walking these streets. This is another wa 


Many of you in the silent midnight hour h 


could :iot sleep and your reason has been at work, and the Son of 


men, in 


» and you knew it was just to save you. 
Many of you have passed through that experience. In that hour 
the Son of God has sought you. Many of you have gone into the 
sick-chamber of the loved mother, or loved wife, or dear child, and 
you have felt the knock at your heart. You have been summoned 
from your room in the stillness of the night, and you have been 
told your loved ones have passed away—many of you recollect aa 
incident like this in your lives. At that moment your heart has 
told you you ought to be a Christian. That was the Son of Man 
who sought you. At the grave of some lost one, too, you have 
heard a voice whispering, “Consecrate yourself to Him.” That was 
the Son of God seeking you. Many of you must have experienced 
this. There has not been a day in your lives that He has not sought 
for you, and He still seeks for you. 

Now, forget for a moment the preacher, forget for a moment all 
your surroundings, and pause to ask yourselves this question: “ Has 


not the Son of Man sought for my soul?” 1 wil] tell you again 


ing up? , 


Ponte ec 


Sieh ae , 


¢ 
- Slee a Se 


72 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


when He seeks for you. He seeks for you when He is abroad in 
the community. Has not the Son of Man been abroad in this com. 
munity? Go up to Farwell Hall and see the crowds of people who 
go there every day; look at the multitudes that nightly assemble 
here. They don’t all come to hear Mr. Sankey sing, for there are 
many better singers in Chicago. It is not to hear me preach, for 
there are many far better preachers in the city. It is the Spirit of 
Gow that brings them. Many of you in your experience have, while 
in church listening to the preaching, got mad at something said in 
the sermon, which you thought very personal, and have gone out. 
That was the Son of Man seeking your soul. 
I remember, while in Philadelphia, a man with his wife came to 
sur meetings. When he went out he wouldn’t speak to his wife. 
She thought it was very queer, but said nothing, and went to bed 
thinking that in the morning he would be all right. At breakfast, 
however, he would not speak a word. Well, she thought this 
strange, but she was sure he would have got all over whatever was 
wrong with him by dinner. The dinner hour arrived, and it passed 
away without his saying a word. At supper not a word escaped 
him, and he would not go with her to the meeting. Every day for 
a whole week the same thing went on. But at the end of the 
week he could not stand .it any longer, and he said to his wife: 
“Why did you go and write to Mr. Moody and tell him all about 
me?” “T never wrote to i\!r, Moody in my life,” said the wife. 
“You did,” he answered. “ You’re mistaken ; why do you think 
that?” “Well, then, I wronged you; but when I saw Mr. Moody 
picking me out among all those people, and telling all about me, I 
was sure you must have written to him.” It was the Son of Man 
seeking for him, my friends, and I hope there will be a man here to- 
night—that man in the gallery yonder, that one before me—who 
will feel that I am talking personally to him. May you feel that 
you are lost, and that the Lord is seeking ‘or you, and when you 
feel this, there will be some chance of your being saved. 


was preaching at him, and he went out swearing and stamping, and 
told all the people outside that he had been insulted by the minis- 


fe Oe ae ae ee 


"ERS, 


is abroad in 
in this com. 
’ people who 
tly assemble 
or there are 
> preach, for 
he Spirit of 
> have, while 
hing said in 
ye gone out. 


vife came to 
to his wife. 
rent to bed 
t breakfast, 
lought this 
hatever was 
id it passed 
ord escaped 
rery day for 
end of the 
o his wife: 
m all about 
d the wife. 
you think 
Mr. Moody 
bout me, I 
on of Man 
an here to- 
> me—who 
1 feel that 
when you 


heard of a 
eatre. He 
man. He 
id he went. 
‘ed that he 
nping, and 
the minis- 


LOST AND SAVED, 73 


ter, and he intended to wait for him and give hima good licking, 
When the minister came out he was seized by the collar, and the 
man greeted him by saying, “ Why, sir, you have insulted me!” 
“I don’t know you, sir,” said the minister, « Why,” replied the 
man, “you have picked me out among all those 
them all about me.” It was the Spirit of God see 
result was that the Spirit got hold of him, and 
him, and he was going all through the South, t 
what God had done for him. And my friends, t 


personally—if you 
a great sinner, it is the Son of God 
who is after you—who is seeking for your lost soul. 


There is one word in this text I wish you to observe, and that is 
the word “lost.” J] wish you could realize its meaning thoroughly, 
t think there would be a dry eye 
in this assembly, and one wail would go up from this hall to Heaven. 


; you pity men who have lost 


@ great position in the world and 
who are now reduced to beggary—your heart goes out to those un- 
fortunate men. But what is the loss of Position in comparison to 
the loss of the soul? If a man loses wealth, character, reputation 
in the world, he may gain it again; but oh, friends, if he loses his 
soul he can never regain it. You pity those who have lost their 
children. You have, perhaps, been called to.a funeral to-day where 
the father and mother have been laying away their little child. 
You pity them; itis a terrible loss. But what is that loss in com- 
parison to the loss of the soul? A little child born and taken into 
the lovin bosom of Jesus is far better off than to have been reared 
and run .e risk of losing its soul. 

I was in an infirmary not long since, and a mother brought a lit- 
tle child in. She said, “ Doctor, my little child’s eyes have not been 
opened for several days, and I would just like you to do something 
for them.” The doctor got some ointment and put it first on one 
and then on the other, and just pulled them open. “Your child is 


biind,” said the doctor; “ perfectly blind; it will never see again.” 


At first the mother couldn’t take it in, but after a little she cast an 


and in a voice full of emotion, 


, 
ETE ee 
X 
ree 


Prenton 


74 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


said, “ Doctor, you don’t mean to say that my child will never see 
again?’ “Yes,” replied the doctor, “ your child has lost its sight, 
and it will never see again.” And that mother just gave a scream, 
and drew that child to her bosom. “ Oh, my darling child,” sobbed 


the woman, “are you never to see the mother that gave you birth?” 


never to see the world again?” I could not keep back the tears 
when I saw the terrible agony of that woman when she realized the 
misfortune that had come upon her child. That was a terrible 
calamity, to grope in total darkness through the world; never to 
look upon the bright sky, the green fields; never to see the faces 
of loved ones; but what was it in comparison to the loss of a soul? 
I would rather have my eyes plucked out of my head, and go down 
to my grave in total blindness, than lose my soul, 

In my native town, one afternoon a man went out to see to his 
stock. Seven o’clock came and he did not return; eight o'clock 
came and there was no sign of him; nine o’clock came and still he 
did not come. It was a dark night, and the news spread through 
the streets that the deacon must have been killed. When the news 
was flashed around they did not fold their arms and say they would 
wait till daylight and start out and seek for him ; but the old and the 
young men saddled their horses instantly, and lighted their torches, 
and went forth into the darkness to find the lost one. They found 
him in the pasture, killed, and brought him into the little village, 
and I never sawa community so excited and so grieved. But what 


' was that—the cutting from a man’s life of say twenty years—to the 


loss of a soul? The whole village mourned over the deacon’s 
death. A drunkard may go on through life in his mad career and 
go down to the grave, and no one will weep for him. His life is 
one long day of misery. None care for him while living, and none 
notice his ending. He came to save that soul; He stooped from 
the throne of glory to the manger to bring that lost soul back 
again. Oh, that you could realize what a lost soul is. He wants 
you to take the title of lost sinner. That’s what he wants you to 
do. “He came to seek and to save that which was lost ;” and if a 
man will only know he is a sinner, and cry from the depths of his 
heart, the Lord will come right to where you are. . 

' Mr. Needham told me, this afternoon, a little incident that hap- 
pened to himself and wife while in Massachusetts, While at Essex, 
in that State, some one told him that if they went up to a point on 
& mountain they would get a view of the country for twenty miles 


VERS, 


vill never see 
lost its sight, 
ive a scream, 
hild,” sobbed 


‘e you birth ?° 


ick the tears 
realized the 
is a terrible 
id; never to 
ee the faces 
ss of a soul? 
ind go down 


Oo see to his 
ight o’clock 
and still he 
ad through 
en the news 
they would 
old and the 
1eir torches, 
They found 
ittle village, 
But what 
‘ars—to the 
1e deacon’s 
career and 
His life is 
and none 
soped from 
- soul back 
He wants 
nts you to 
;’ and ifa 
pths of his 
that hap- 
> at Essex, 
a point on 
renty miles 


a heart of the Son of God to-night, 
J, Within these walls—ey 


LOST AND SAVED, 75 
k, and came down, and started 


* path, but they treated this 
lightly—thought it was a good joke, and went on lay 


Suppose if any one had come and warned* 


more bewildered. At last he got 
to the top of a tree and shouted, “Lost! lost!” and his cry of dis. 


tress reached the villagers, who came out with their lanterns and 
Oh, that some poor soul will feel that 


find you. He came to this earth expressly to rescue you. Is there 
a poor drunkard here to-night who wants to come? He can save a 
drunkard just as easy as I can turn my hand. He can turn that 
cup of liquor from you as easy as you turn to it now. Is therea 
poor libertine here to-night who wants to curb his evil passions? 
He can save you. Qh, may the Son of Man find some poor victim 


here to-night, and there will be joy in Heaven over that poor wan- 
derer who shall come home. 


I remember while in a town E 
Atlantic on the banks of Newfo 
in the town who was reported lost, 
his friends mourned him as among t 
vessel. Buta telegram wa 
the word “ Saved,” and th 
was opened and the telegram was framed 
store to-day you will see that little bit of paper hanging on the 
wall, with the word “ Saved” upon it. Let the News go over the 
wires to Heaven to-night from you. Let that word “Saved” go 
from every one of you, and there will be joy in Heaven. You can 
be saved—the Son of Man wants to save you; it will refresh the 
He wants to save every soul 
€ry one who is willing to be saved, 

Theve was among those who came to our mectings in New York 


76 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


a man who used to come every night, and he never seemed to get 
any light—never seemed to come any nearer God. I almost got 
tired of speaking with him at last. But one night when some young 
men were giving their experiences he got up. I wondered what he 
got up for, because the very last time I spoke to him he seemed 
more hopeless thanever. He got up and he toid how he had become 
a Christian. He said one day he was walking down Broadway ; 
the street was crowded with people and carriages and horses, and 
while he was thinking, this thought came to him, that if he only 
gave his consent the Lord would save him, and he gave it at once, 
and it was accepted. He was, too, one of the most hopeless cases 
in the city. But give your consent and let the Lord save you in 
His own way. Give your consent and He will meet you. Just 
say, “Oh, Lord, I consent to be saved; will You save me?” 

There is a very good story told of Rowland Hill and Lady Ann 
Erskine. You have seen it, perhaps, in print, but I would like to 
tell it you. While he was preaching in a park in London toa 
large assemblage, she was passing in her carriage. She said to 
her footman when she saw Rowland Hill in the midst of the 
_ people: “Why, who is that man?” “That is Rowland Hill, my 
lady.” She had heard a good deal about the man, and she thought 
she would like to see him, so she directed her coachman to drive 
her near the platform. When the carriage came near he saw the 
insignia of nobility, and he asked who that noble lady was. Upon 
being told, he said: “Stop, my friends, I have got something to 
sell.” The idea of the preacher becoming suddenly an auctioneer 
made the people wonder, and in the midst of a dead silence he 
said: “I have more than a title to sell—I have more than the 
crown of Europe to sell; it is the soul of Lady Ann Erskine. Is 
there any one here who bids for it? Yes, I hear a bid. Satan, 
Satan, what will you give? ‘I will give pleasure, honor, riches— 
yea, I will give the whole world for her soul.’ Do you hear another 


bid? Is there any other one? Do I hear another bid? Ah,I | 


thought so; I hear another bid. The Lord Jesus Christ, what will 
You give for this soul? ‘I will give peace, joy, comfort, that the 
world knows not of—yea, I will give eternal life.’ Lady Ann 
Erskine, you have heard the two bidders for your soul, which will 
you accept?” And she ordered the door of her carriage to be 
opened, and came weeping from it, and accepted the Lord Jesus 
Christ. He, the great and mighty Saviour, is a bidder for your 


VERS. 


seemed to get 
I almost got 
1 some young 
lered what he 
m he seemed 
e had become 
1 Broadway ; 
d horses, and 
at if he only 
‘e it at once, 
opeless cases 
_ Save you in 


t you. Just 
me?” 
id Lady Ann 


would like to 
.ondon toa 
She said to 
nidst of the 
and Hill, my 
she thought 
1an to drive 
‘he saw the 
was. Upon 
omething to 
n auctioneer 
d silence he 
re than the 
Erskine. Is 
bid. Satan, 
nor, riches— 
hear another 
bid? Ah,I 
st, what will 
ort, that the 

Lady Ann 
, which will 
‘riage to be 
Lord Jesus 
er for your 


Wet s 
v/ 


LOST AND SAVED, 77 


soul to-night. He offers you riches and comfort, and joy, peace 
here and eternal life hereafter, while Satan offers you what he can 
not give. Poor lost soul, which will you have? He will ransom 
your soul if you but put your burden upon Him. Twenty-one 
years ago I made up my mind that Jesus would have my soul, and 
I have never regretted the step, and no man has ever felt sorry for 
coming to Him. When we accept Him we must like Him: Your 
sins may rise up as a mountain, but the Son of Man can purge you 
of all evil and take you right into the palaces of Heaven if you will 
only allow Him to save you. 

A lady had a little child who was dying. She thought it was 
resting sweetly in the arms of Jesus. She went into the room and 
the child asked her: “What are those clouds and mountains that 
I see so dark?” « Why, Eddy,” said his mother, “ there are no 
clouds or mountains, you must be mistaken.” “Why, yes, I see 
great mountains and dark clouds, and I want you to take mein 
your arms and carry me over the mountains.” « Ah,” said the 
mother, “you must pray to Jesus: He will carry you safely,” and, 
my friends, the sainted mother, the praying wife may come to 
your bedside and wipe the damp sweat from your brow, but they 
can not carry you over the Jordan when the hour comes. Thisse 
mother said to her little boy: “Iam afraid that it is unbelief that 
is coming upon you, my child, and you must pray that the Lord 
will be with you in your dying moments.” And the two prayed; 
but the boy turned to her and said: « Don’t you hear the angels, 
mother, over the mountains, calling for me,and I can not gop” 
“My dear boy, pray to Jesus and He will come; He only can take 
you.” And the boy closed his eyes and prayed, and when he 
opened them a heavenly smile overspread his face as he said, 
“Jesus has come to carry me over the mountains.” Dear sinner, 
Jesus is ready and willing to carry you over the mountains of sin, 
and over your mountains of unbelief. Give yourselves to Him ; 
only grant your consent. It lies with your own will, and, if you 
but accept His offer, from the clouds of your transgressions you 


shall be lifted into the heaven of joy and peace that the world 
knows not of. 


1.0 
| = 


EB 
f 
y 


— DG SRE cry - = ee. aa 
ss ’ MT AAAS TN aubepathastiersnooehvanienenneoamcimdeneaaaghoamee eae 
eadiiijiuntenatiteate es 


cosets peennryn 


=a Ny. 


saisieieatieeeiatiiesmeiiiniieeariccaiecis ee 


of Daa ear ee ae 


HEAVEN AND WHO ARE THERE. 


| WAS on my way to a meeting one night with a friend, and he 

asked, as we were drawing near the church, “ Mr, Moody, what 

ams yeu come to preach atoutp’” (9) on going to preach 
about Heaven,” I said, I noticed a scowl Passing over his face, and 
I said, “What makes you look sop” « Why, your subject of 
Heaven. What’s the use of talking upon a subject that’s all specu- 
lation? It’s only wasting time ona subject about which you can 
only speculate.” My answer to that friend was, “If the Lord 
doesn’t want us to speak about Heaven, He would never have told 
us about such a place in the Scriptures; and, as Timothy says, ‘All 
the Scriptures are given by inspiration, and all parts are profitable,’ ”’ 
There’s no part of the Word of God that is not profitable, and I 
believe if men would read More carefully these Scriptures they 
would think more of Heaven. If we want to get men to fix their 


hearts and attention upon Heaven, we must get them to read more . 


about it. Men who say that Heaven is a speculation have not read 
their Bibles. In the blessed Bible there are allusions scattered all 
through it. If I were to read to you all the passages upon Heaven 
from Genesis to Revelation, it would take me all night and to. 
morrow to do it. When I took some of the passages lately and 
showed them to a lady, “ Why,” said she, “I didn’t think there was 
so much about Heaven in the Bible.” If I were to go intoa foreign 
land and spend my days there, I would like to know all about it; 
I would like to read all shout it. I would want to know all about 
its climate, its inhabitants, their customs, their privileges, their gov- 
ernment. I would find nothing about that land that would not in- 
terest me. Suppose you all were going away to Africa, to Germany, 
to China, and were going to make one of those places your home, 
and suppose that I had just come from one of those countries, how 


eagerly you would listen to what I had to say. I can imagine how 
(78) 


RE. 


end, and he 
Loody, what 
> to preach 
his face, and 
subject of 
’s all specu- 
ch you can 
f the Lord 
rt have told 
y says, ‘ All 
rofitable,’ ” 
able, and I 
tures they 
to fix their 


read more . 


re not read 
attered all 
on Heaven 
it and to- 
lately and 
there was 
> a foreign 
about it; 
all about 
their gov- 
id not in- 
Germany, 
ur home, 
tries, how 
gine how 


‘ 
Md 


HEAVEN AND WHO ARE THERE. 79 


the old, gray-haired men and the young! men and the deaf would 
crowd around and put up their hands to learn something about it, 
But there is a country in which you are going to spend your whole 
future, and you are listless about what kind of a country itis. My 
friends, where aye you going to spend eternity >- Your life here is 
very brief. Life is but an inch of time; it is but a span, but a fibre, 
which will soon be snapped, and you 


will be ushered into eternity. 
Where are you going to spend it? If I were to ask you who were 


going to spend your eternity in Heaven to stand up, nearly every 
One of you would rise. There is not a man here, not one in Chiz 
cago, wo has not some hope of reaching Heaven. Now, if we are 
going to spend our future there, it becomes us to go to work and 
find out all about it. J] call your attention to this truth that Heaven 
is just as much a place as Chicago. It is a destination—it is a 
locality. Some people say there is no Heaven, Some men will tell 
you this earth is all the heaven we have. Queer kind of heaven 
this. Look at the poverty, the disease in the city; look at 


out of employment walking around our streets, and then 
Heaven. How low a man h 


the men 
say this is 
as got when he comes to think in this 


very well then, and he got the best of me, 
the best of those atheists, pantheists, 
knowledge of the Bible. 


everywhere—in the air, in the sun, in the moon, in the 


earth, in the 
stars, but really he meant nowhere. 


And the next time I went to 


from Heaven is felt among us. He is not in person among us; 


only in spirit. The sun is 95,000,000 miles from the ear 
feel its rays. In Second Chronicles we read : 


th, yet we 
“If My people which 


80 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


are called by My name shall humble themselves and pray and seek 
My face and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from 
Heaven and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.” Here 
is one reference, and when it is read, a great many people might 
ask: ‘“ How far is Heaven away? can you tell us that?” I don’t 
know how far it is away, but there is one thing I can tell you. He 
can hear prayer as soon as the words are uttered. ‘There has 
not been a prayer said that He has not heard; not a tear shed 
that He has not seen. We don’t want to learn the distance. 
What we want to know is that God is there, and Scripture tells 
us that. Turn to First Kings and we read: “And hearken thou 
to the supplication of Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel, when 
they shall pray toward this place, and hear Thou in Heaven, Thy 
dwelling-place, and when Thou hearest, forgive.” Now, it is clearly 
taught in the Word cf God that the Father dwells there. It is His 
dwelling-place, and in Acts we see that Jesus is there too. “But 
he being full of the Holy Ghost looked up steadfastly irto Heaven 
and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of 
God,” and by the eye of faith we can see Him there to-night too. 
And by faith we shall be brought into His presence, and we shall 
be satisfied when we gaze upon Him. Stephen, when he was sur- 
rounded by the howling multitude, saw the Son of Man there, 
and when Jesus looked down upon earth and saw this first martyr 
in the midst of his persecutors, He looked down and gave hima 
welcome. We'll see Him by and by. It is not the jasper streets 
and golden gates that attract us to Heaven. What are your golden 
palaces on earth—what is it that makes them so sweet? I+ is the 
presence of some loving wife or fond children. Let them be taken 
away and the charm of 3~ur home is gone. And so it is Christ 
that is the charm of Heaven to the Christian. Yes, we shall see 
Him there. How sweet the thought that we shall dwell with Him 
forever, and shall see the nails in His hands and in His feet which 
He received for us. 

I read a little story not long since which wen" to my heart. A 
mother was on the point of death, and the child was taken away 
from her in case it would annoy her. It was crying continually to 
be taken to its mother’s, and teased the neighbors. By and by the 
mother died, and the neighbors thought it was better to bury the 
mother without letting the child see her dead face. They thought 
the sight of the dead mother would not do the child any good, and 


ERS. 


ay and seek 
I hear from 
nd.” Here 
ople might 
?” IT don’t 
iyou. He 
There has 
1 tear shed 
e distance. 
ipture tells 
arken thou 
srael, when 
eaven, Thy 
it is clearly 
It is His 
too. “ But 
‘to Heaven 
ht hand of 
)-night too. 
d we shall 
e€ was sur- 
Man there, 
irst martyr 
rave him a 
per streets 
our golden 
> ~It is the 
n be taken 
it is Christ 
e shall see 
| with Him 
feet which 


heart. A 
aken away 
tinually to 
ind by the 
) bury the 
y thought 
good, and 


HEAVEN AND WHO ARE THERE, 


81 


so they kept it away. When the 


mothe? was buried and the child 
was taken back to the 


house, the first thing she did was to run into 
her mother’s sitting-room and look all round it, and from there to 
the bed-room, but no mother was there, and she went all-over the 
house crying, “ Mother, mother!” but the child could not find 
and coming to the neighbor, said: “Take m 
stay here if I can not see my mother.” 
made it so sweet to the child. 


her, 
e back, I don’t want to 
It wasn’t the home that 


It was the presence of the mother, 
And so it is not Heaven that is alone attractive to us; it is the 


knowledge that Jesus, our leader, our brother, our Lord, is there. 
And the spirits of loved ones, whose bodies we have laid in the 
earth, will be there. We shall be in good company there. When 
we reach that land we shall meet all the Christians who have gone 
before us. Weare told in Matthew, too, that we shall meet angels 
there: “Take heed lest ye despise not one of these little ones, for 
I say unto you that in Heaven their angels do always behold the 
face of my Father which is in Heaven.” Yes, the angels are there, 
and we shall see them when we get home. 
He is there, and where He is, His disciples shall be, for He has 
said: “I go to Prepare a place for you, that where I am there 
ye may be also.” I believe that when we die the spirit leaves 
the body and goes to the mansion above, and by and by the 
body will be resurrected and it shall see Jesus, Very often people 
come to me and say: “ Mr, Moody, do you think we shall know 
each other in Heaven ?” Very often it isa mother who has lost a 
dear child, and who wishes to see it again. Sometimes it ig a child 
who has fost a mother, a father, and who wants to recognize them 
in Heaven. There is just one verse in Scripture in answer to this, 
and that is: “We shall be satisfied.” 
My brother who went up there the other day I shall see, because { 
will be satisfied. We will see ai 
and if we loved them here we 
more when we meet them there. 


Another thought. In the tenth chapter of Luke we are told our 
mames are written there if we are Christians. Christ just called 
His disciples up and paired them off and sent them out to preach 


yself—going about and 

new. You wii! find them away 
ars ago, going off two by two, like 
and Brothers Needham and Stebbins, 


the Gospel. Two of us—Mr. Sankey and m 

Preaching the Gospel, is nothine ney 

back eighteen hundred ye 

Brothers Bliss and Whittle, 
6 


82 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


to different towns antl viHages. They had gone out, and there 
had been great revivals in all the cities, towns, and villages they 
had entered. Everywhere they had met with the greatest success. 
Even the very devils were subject to them. Disease had fled 
before them. When they met a lame man they said to him, “You 
don’t want to be lame any longer,” and he walked. When they 
met a blind man they but told him to open his eyes, and behold, 
he could see. And they came to Christ and rejoiced over their 
great success, and He just said to them, “I will give you some- 
thing to rejoice over. Rejoice that your names are written in 
Heaven.” Now there are a great many people who do not believe 
in such an assurance as this: “ Rejoice, because your names are 
written in Heaven.” How are you going to rejoice if your names 
are not written there? While speaking about this some time ago, 
aman told me we were preaching a very ridiculous doctrine when 
we preached this doctrine of assurance. I ask you in all candor, 
what are you going to do with this assurance if we don’t preach it ? 
It is stated that our names are written there; blotted out of the 
Book of Death and transferred to the Book of Life. 

I remember, while in Europe, I was traveling with a friend—she 
is in this hall to-night. On one occasion, we were journeying from 
London to Liverpool, and the question was put as to where we 
would stop. We said we would go to the North-western, at Lime 
Street, as that was the hotel where Americans generally stopped at. 
When we got there the house was full; could not let us in, Every 
room was engaged. But this friend said, “I am going to stay here, 
I engaged a room ahead. I sent a telegram on.” My friends, that 
is just what the Christians are doing—sending their names in ahead. 
They are sending a message up saying: “Lord Jesus, I want one 
of those mansions You are preparing; Iwant to be there.” That’s 
what they’re doing. And every man and woman here who wants 
one, if you have not already got one, had better make up your mind. 
Send your names up now. I would rather a thousand times have 
my name written in the Lamb’s Book than have all the wealth of the 
world rolling at my feet. A man may get station in this world—it 
will fade away; he may get wealth, but it will prove a bauble— 
“What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his 
own soul?” It is a solemn question, and let it go around the hall 
to-night: “is my name written in the Book of Life?” I can 
imagine that man down there saying, “Yes; { belong to the Pres- 


nam 
it gc 
Don 
hope 
And 
that 

there 
and | 
there 


your 
recor 


ERS, 


, and there 
llages they 
‘est success. 
e had fled 
him, “ You 
When they 
ind behold, 
over their 
you some- 
written in 
not believe 
names are 
your names 
time ago, 
trine when 
all candor, 
preach it? 
out of the 


riend—she 
eying from 
where we 
n, at Lime 
stopped at. 
in. Every 
stay here, 
iends, that 
s in ahead, 
[ want one 
:” ‘That's 
vho wants 
your mind. 
imes have 
alth of the 
; world—it 
_ bauble— 
id lose his 
id the hall 
pT ean 
the Pres- 


HEAVEN AND WHO ARE THERE, 


83 
byterian Church; my name’s on the chyrch’s books.” It may be; 
but God keeps His books in a different fashion than that in which 


the church records of this city are kept. 


in the Book of Life. Judas was one of the twe 
hadn’t his name written in the Book of Life. 
elect—he dwelt among the angels, and yet he was cast from the 
high hallelujahs. Is your name written in the Book of Life? A 
man told me, while speaking upon this subject, “That is all non. 
sense you are speaking.” Anda great many men here are of the 
Same opinion; but I would like them to turn to Daniel, twelfth 
chapter, “ And there shall be a time of trouble, such as never 
was since there was a nation, even to that same time, and at that 
time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found 
written in the Book,” Every one shall be delivered whose names 
shall be found written in the Book. And we find Paul, in the letters 
which he Wrote to the Philippians, addressing them as those « dear 
yokefellows, whose names were written in the Book of Life.” If it 
is not our Privilege to know that our names are written in the Book 
of Life, here is Paul sending greeting to his yokefellows, “whose 
names were written, in the Book.” Let us not be deceived in this, 
We see it too plainly throughout the Holy Word. In the chapter 
of Revelations Which we have just read, we have three different 
passages referring to it, and in the twenty-first verse, almost the last 
words in the Scriptures, we read: “And there shall in nowise enter 
into it anything which defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomi- 
nation, or maketh a lie; but they which are written in the Lamb’s 
Book of Life.” My friends, you will never see that city unless your 
names are written in that Book of Life. It is a solemn truth. Let 
it go home to every one, and sink into the hearts of al] here to-night, 
Don’t build your hopes on a false foundation; don’t build your 
hopes on an empty profession. Be sure your name is written there. 
And the next thing after your own names are written there, is to see 
that the names of the children God has given you, are recorded 
there. Let the fathers and mothers assembled to-night hear this 
and take it to their hearts. See that: your children’s names are 
there. Ask your conscience if the name of your john, your Willie, 
your Mary, your Alice—ask yourselves whether their names are 
recorded in the Book of Life. If not, make it the business of your 


Ive, and yet he 
Satan was ainong the 


84 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 
life, rather than to pile upswealth for them; make it the one object 
of your existence to secure for them eternal life, rather than to pave 
the way to their death and ruin. 

I read some time ago of a mother in an Eastern city who was 
stricken with consumption. At her dying hour she requested her 
husband to bring the children to her. The oldest one was brought 
first, and she laid her hand on his head and gave him her blessing 
and dying message. The next one was brought, and she gave him 
the same; and one after another came to her bedside until the little 
infant was brought in. She took it and pressed it to her bosom, 
and the people in the room, fearing that she was straining her 
strength, took the child away from her. As this was done she 
turned to the husband and said, “I charge you, sir, bring all those. 


es! dt Aeched Haden 2 
children home with you.” And so God charges. us. The promise 


is to ourselves and to ourchildren. We can have our names written 
there, and then, by the grace of God, we can call our children to us 
and know that their names are also recorded there. That great roll 
is being called, and those bearing the names are summoned every 
day—every hour; that great roll is being called to-night, and if 
your name were shouted, could you answer with joy? You have 
heard of a soldier who fell in our war. While he lay dying, he 
was heard to cry, “Here! here.” Some of his comrades went 
up to him, thinking he wanted water, but he said, “ They are call- 
ing the roll of Heaven, and I am answering,” and in a faint voice hé 
whispered “ Here!” and passed away to Heaven. If that roll was 
called to-night, would you be ready to answer, “Here!” I am 
afraid not. Let us wake up; may every child of God wake up to- 
night. There is work todo. Fathers and mothers, look to your 
children. If I could only speak to one class, I would preach to par- 
ents, and try to show them the great responsibility that rests upon 
them—try to teach them how much more they should devote their 
lives to secure the immortal treasure of Heaven for their children, 
than to spend their lives in scraping together worldly goods for 
them. 

There is a man living on the bank of the Mississippi River. The 
world calls him rich, but if he could cal’ back his first-born son he 
would give up all his wealth. The boy was brought home one day 
unconscious. When the doctor examined him he turned to the 
father, who stood at the bedside, and said, “There is no hope.” 
‘What !” exclaimed the father, “is it possible my boy has got to 


ERS, 


e one object 
than to pave 


ity who was 
quested her 
vas brought 
her blessing 
he gave him 
til the little 
her bosom, 
raining her 
s done she 
ig all those. 
he promise 
mes written 
ildren to us 
it great roll 
oned every 
ght, and if 

You have 
' dying, he 
rades went 
ey are call- 
nt voice hé 
at roll was 
el” I am 
yake up to- 
ok to your 
ach to par- 
rests upon 
evote their 
ir children, 

goods for 


iver. The 
orn son he 
1e one day 
1ed to the 
no hope.” 
has got to 


_all my life to lead me to Him,” 


HEAVEN AND WHO ARE THERE. &% 


die?” “There is no hope,” replied the doctor. “Will he not’ 
come to?” asked the father. “He may resume consciousness, but 
he can not live.” « Try all your skill, doctor; I don’t want my boy 
to die.” By and by the boy regained a glimmering of conscious- 
ness, and when he was told that his death was approaching, he said 
to his father, “ Won't you pray for my lost soul, father? You have 
never prayed for me.” The old man only wept. It was true. Dur- 
ing the seventeen years that God had given him his boy he had never 
spent an hour in prayer for his soul, but the object of his life had 
been to accumulate wealth for that first-born. Am I speaking toa 
Prayerless father or mother to-night? Settle the question of your 
soul’s salvation and pray for the son or daughter God has given 
you. 

But I have another anecdote to tell. It was Ralph Wells who 
told me of this one. A certain gentleman had been a member of 
the Presbyterian Church. His little boy was sick. When he went 
home his wife was weeping, and she said, “Our boy is dying. He 
has had a change for the worse. I wish you would go in and see 
him.” The father went into the room and placed his hand on the 
brow of his dying boy, and could feel that the cold, damp sweat 
was gathering there; that the cold, icy hand of death was feeling 
for the chords of life. « Do you know, my boy, that you are dy- 
ing?” asked the father. « AmTI? Is this death? Do you really 
think I am dying?” “Yes, My son, your end on earth is near.” 
“And will I be with Jesus to-night, father?” « Yes, you will be 
with the Saviour.” « Father, don’t you weep, for when I get there 
I will go right straight to Jesus and tell Him you have been trying 
God has given me two little chil- 
dren, and ever since J can remember I have directed them to Christ, 
and I would rather they carried this message to Jesus—that I hed 
tried all my life to lead them to Him—than have all the crowns of 
the earth; and I would rather lead them to Jesus than give them 
the wealth of the world. If you have got a child, go and point the 
way. I challenge any man to speak of Heaven without speaking 
of children. “ For of such is the kingdom of Heaven.” Fathers and 
mothers and professed Christians ignore this sometimes, They go 
along themselves and never try to get any to Heaven with them 
Let us sce to this at once, and let us pray that there may be many 
hames written in the Lamb’s Book of Life to-night. . 


eA. 


LAYING UP TREASURES IN HEAVEN, 


MAT, vi. 20: “ But lay up for yourselves { casures in Heaven,”’ 

F we are living as God would have us live, we are doing this, 
There are'a great many people who forget that there are 
eleven commandments, They think there are only ten. The 

eleventh commandment is: « Lay up for yourselves treasures in 
Heaven.” How many of us remember—ah! how many people in 
Chicago forget the words of the Lord now in His wonderful 
sermon on the mount: « Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon 
earth, “here moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break 
through and steal; but lay up for yourselves treasures in Heaven, 
where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do 
not break through nor steal.” How few of our people pay any 
heed to these words, That’s why there are so many broken hearts 
among us; that’s why so many men and women are disappointed and 
going through the streets with shattered hopes; it’s because they 
have not been laying up treasures in Heaven. They pile up treas- 
ures on earth, and some calamity comes upon them and sweeps 
allaway. The Chicago fire burned up a good m 
ures. A great number of people 
dissolve, and away chey go. Some 
shares which have all disappeared 
many are broken-hearted ¢ 


put their treasures in banks which 
have put their treasures in railway 
like a vapor; and that is why so 


o-day and in great distress, and do not 
know what is before them. If they had taken heed to the words ot 


this commandment this thing would not have happened to them. 
“Lay up your treasures in Heaven.” Instead of noticing this com. 
mandment they have let their heart go out to the things of the 
world. It don’t take long in conversation with a man to find out 
where his heart is, Wherever it is, there is his treasure. Go to 


a political man and talk to him about Hayes and Wheeler, 01 
(86) 


any of these treas- - 


loing this, 
there are 
ten. The 
asures in 
people in 
vonderful 


ires upon 
ves break 

Heaven, 
hieves do 
| pay any 
on hearts 
inted and 
use they 
up treas- 
d sweeps 


‘Se treas. © 


ks which 
1 railway 
_ why so 

do not 
words ot 
(0 them. 
his com. 
s of the 
find out 

Go to 
eler, o1 


LAYING UP TREASURES IN HEA VEN, 87 


Tilden and Hendricks, on any political question, and how his heart 
gets ablaze and his eye sparkles. His treasure is in politics. Go 
talk about a new play to a man who loves the theatre and see how 
his eye glistens. His heart is set upon pleasure—upon the world, 
And yet another class, whose heart is set on business. Go to one of 
them and talk to him about some new speculation, and show him 
where he can make a few thousand dollars, and you will soon tell 
where his treasure lies. But talk about Heaven and all interest 
is lost. I could not help that thought coming to me last night 
when I saw before me some dozing—some almost asleep, as if they 
thought I was talking about a myth; and others were sitting with 
eyes aglow and all attention when I mentioned Heaven. Ah! 
they expected to go there, and were glad to hear about it. 

Some men think it is too far away to lay up their treasures. Iwas 
talking to a business man before the fire about laying up treasures 
in Heaven, and he said, “TI like to have my treasure where I can see 
it.” And that is the way with a great many people—they like to 
have their treasures here so that they can see them. It isa great 
mistake. People go on accumulating what they must leave behind 
them. How many here do not devote five minutes to anything 
else than money-making. It is money, money, money. And if 
they get it they are satisfied. You will see occasionally in the 
newspapers an account of a man dying who is worth so many mil- 
lions. It isa great mistake. He can not take it with him. If it 
is in business, it ain’t his. If itis in banks, it ain’t his, If in real 
estate, he can not take it. It ain’t his. Now, ask yourselves to- 
night, “Where is my treasure ?” “Is my heart set upon things down 
here?” If it is set upon wealth, it will by and by take to itself 
wings and fly away. Oh, think of this. If your heart is set upon 
pleasure, it will melt away; if your heart is set upon station, repu- 
tation, some tongue may blast it in a moment and it is gone. If 
your hopes and heart are set upon some loved wife or dear children, 
whom you have set up in your hearts as an idol in place of your 
God, death may come and snatch your god from your life. It is 
wrong to set up anything, however dear to us, in the place of 
our God. And s50 it is wrong “to lay up treasures for yourselves 
upon earth.” 

Now are you—are the people of Chicago heeding this com- 
imandment? Ask yourselves this as you are passing through the 
street to-morrow: “How many of the people of this cicy are obey- 


SS 


aaa 


= ——— 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


ee, |, : 
one + 
2] =I) 34 EE 
= = ae 
<= 
N g 
~~’ fs. 
GS FS 
) Ta hs 
“& wo 
Oe 


4 PA 
‘Ve a 


A 
Oy %" Wy aw 


pe te Pe ae 


3 88 | MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA YERS, 


ing this commandment,, ‘] 
Heaven ?’”’ 


I remember before the Chicago f re, hearing of a minister coming 
up tosee hisson. He found him completely absorbed in real estate. 
You remember before the fire ho 
estate. It was a mania with all of us. If we could get a corner 
lot, no matter whether we threw ourselves in debt or smothered 
it with mortgages, we were confident that in time when prices 
went up, we would make our fortune. This minister came 
up, and when he saw his son he tried to talk about his soul, 
but it was no use. Real estate was there. He talked about real 


“ay up for yourselves treasures in 


slipped off and was speaking to the customer about his soul, and 
telling him he would rather have a corner lot in the New Jerusalem 


And the people used to say 


that no real estate could be sold when the father was around. The © 


trouble was, that the son had real estate in his heart—that was his 
god; he lived to pile up earthly treasures, while his father lived as 
a pilgrim and a stranger here, with a knowledge of his treasures in 
Heaven. If we have anything in our hearts which we put up as our 
god, let us ask Him to come to usand take it away from us. 

I remember, when I went to California, just to try and get a few 
souls saved on the Pacific coast; I went into a school and asked: 
“Have you got some one who can write a plain hand?” “Yes.” 
Well, we got up the blackboard, and the lesson upon it proved to be 


in Heaven.” And I said: « Suppose we write upon that board some 
of the earthly treasures? And we will begin with gold.” The 
teacher readily put down gold, and they all comprehended it, for all 
had run to that country in the hope of finding it. “ Well, we will 
put down ‘houses’ next, and then ‘land.’ Next, we will put down 
fast ‘horses,’” They all understood what fast horses were—they 
knew a great deal more about fast horses than they knew about the 
kingdom of God. Some of them, I think, actually made fast horses 
Serve as gods. “ Next we will put down ‘tobacco,.’” Tse teacher 
seemed to shrink at this, “Put it down,” said I, « many = 


W every one was mad about real- 


“Lay up for yourselves treasures ' 


2 man | i a 


RS. 


asures in 


er coming 
eal estate, 


ibout real. 


t a corner 
mothered 
en prices 
ter came 
his soul, 
out real 
> use of 
al estate, 
r was left 
d started 
minister 
soul, and 
erusalem 
d to say 


d. The - 


t was his 
lived as 
asures in 
p as our 
et a few 
| asked: 
“Yes,” 
-d to be 


reasures 


we will 
t down 
>—they 
out the 
horses 
teacher 


3 man | ia 


LAYING UP TREASURES IN HEAVEN. 89 
thinks more of tobacco than he does of God. Well, then, we will 
put down ‘rum.’” He objected to this—didn’t like to put it down 
at all. . “ Down with it. Many a man will sell his reputation, will 
sell his home, his wife, children, everything he has. It is the god of 
some men.” Many here in Chicago will sell their present and their 
eternal welfare for it. “Put it down,” and down it went. “ Now,” 
said I, “ suppose we put down some of the heavenly treasures. Put 
down ‘Jesus’ to head the list; then ‘heaven,’ then ‘river of life,’ 
then ‘crown of glory,’” and went on till the column was filled, and 
then just drew a line and showed the heavenly and the earthly 
things in contrast. My friends, they could not stand comparison, 
If a man just does that, he can not but see the superiority of the 
heavenly over the earthly treasures. Well, it turned out that the 
teacher was not a Christian. He had gone to California on the 
usual hunt—gold; and when he saw the two columns placed side by 
side, the excellence of the one over the other was irresistible, and he 
was the first soul God gave me on the Pacific coast. He accepted 
Christ, and that man came to the station when I was coming away, 
and blessed me for coming to that place. 

Those of you who do not lay up your treasures in Heaven will 
be sure to be disappointed. You can not find a man who has 
devoted his life to the treasures of this life—not one in the wide, 
wide world—but who has been disappointed. Something arises in 
life to sweep all away, or the amount of joy which they expect to 
obtain from their riches, falls short of their anticipations. If men 
center their affections on Heaven, they will have no disappoint- 
ment; all is joy and comfort from that source, and the whole cur. 
rent of their lives will be drifting toward Heaven. 

Some one has heard of a farmer who, when a friend of mine 
called upon him to give something for the Christian Commission, 
promptly drew a check for $10,000. He wanted the agent to have 
dinner with him, and after they had dined, the farmer took the man 
out on the veranda and pointed to the rich lands sweeping far 


_ away, laden with rich products. “ Look over these lands,” said the 


farmer, “they are all mine.”. He took him to the pasture and 
showed the agent the choice stock, the fine horses he had, and then 
pointed to a little town, and then to a large hall where he lived ; 
he ilrew himself up, and his face lit up with pride as he said, 
“They are all mine. I came here when a poor boy and I have 
earned all that you see.” When he got through, my friend asked 


aoe 
Te 


sd 


go MOOD Y's SERMONS; ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


him: “ Well, what have you got up yonder?” “ Where?” replied / 
the farmer, who evidently knew where my friend meant. ‘What 
have you got in Heaven?” “Well,” said the farmer, “TI haven’t 


anything there.” “What!” replied my friend, “you, a man of 
your discretion, wisdom, business ability, have made no provision 
for your future!” He hadn’t, and in a few weeks he died—a rich 


man here and a beggar in eternity. A man may be wise in the 
eyes of the world to pursue this course, but he is a fool in the sight 
of God. Wealth to most men proves nothing more or less than a 
great rock upon which their eternity is wrecked. 

_ A great many Christians wonder how it is they don’t get on i 
better—how it is that they don’t get on. It is because you have i 
got your heart on things down here. When they look toward 
Heaven they don’t have any love for the world. We are then t 
living for another world. We are pilgrims and strangers upon the. t 
earth. It is easy to have love for God when we have our treasures 


there. The reason, then, why so many of us do not grow in r 
Christianity is because we have our'treasures here. re 
Mr. Moorehouse told me he was looking down the harbor of n 
Liverpool one day, when he saw a vessel coming up, and she was . V 
being towed up by a tug. The vessel was sunk in the water nearly h 
to her edge, and he wondered it did not sink altogether. Upon pi 
inquiry be found that it was loaded with lumber and that it was . ar 
waterlogged. Another vessel came up, her sails set, no tug assist- st 
ing her, and she soon darted past the waterlogged vessel. And so na 
it is with some Christians. They are waterlogged. They may hi 
belong to a church, and if they find anything in the church dis- dc 
agreeing with them they won’t go back. They want the wa.. e dc 
church to come out and look for them, and tow them in. Ifthe fo! 
church don’t, they think they are not geiting the attention due dr 
them. My friends, they are waterlogged, and that’s what keeps ea: 
them from rising in Christianity. When men go up in balloons les 
they take bags of sand with them, and when they want to rise 1 sle 
higher they throw them out. There are a great many Christians ren 
\ who have got too many bags of sand, and to rise they want to ! sur 
é throw some out. Look at the poor men here in the city—the rich wh 
Christians can relieve themselves by giving some of their bags of me 
sand to them. A great many Christians would feel much better ma: 
if they relieved themselves of their bags of sand. “ He that giveth con 


to the poor lendeth to the Lord,” and if you want to be rich in 


ang 


RS, LAYING UP TREASURES IN HEAVEN. 


or 


lg assist- 


?” replied | eternity, just give to the poor with your-heart, and the Lord will 
“ What bless not only. you, but all connected with you, 

“T haven’t The next thing is our rest in Heaven. A great many people have 
a man of got a false idea about the Church. They have got an idea that the 
provision Church is a place to rest in. Instead of thinking that it is a place 

>d—a rich of work, they turn it into a resting-place. To get into a nicely- 

ise in the cushioned pew, and contribute to the charities, listen to the minis- 

1 the sight ter, and do their share to keep the Church out of bankruptcy, is all 
ess than a they want. The idea of work for them—actual work in the Church 

never enters their mind. In Hebrews we see the words: “ There 

’t get on is a rest for the people of God.” We have got all eternity to rest 
you have in. Here is the place for work. We must work till Jesus comes, 
k toward This is the place of toil—eternity—of repose. ‘“ Blessed are they 
are then that die in the Lord, for their works shall follow them.” Let us do 
upon the. the work that God. gives us to-day. Don’t think that you have to 
treasures rest in the world where God sent His Son, who was murdered, J] 

grow in remember hearing a man who had worked successfully for the Lore | 
complaining that he didn’t have the success he used to, and one 
arbor of night he threw himself on his bed sick of life, and wantin 
1 she was 
er nearly 
Upon pavement of Paradise, he saw all at once, three friends in a chariot, 
at it was . and when the chariot 


And so nated with a heavenly radiance, and he came to this man and took é 
ley may him to the battlements of Heaven. “Look down,” said he, “what 
irch dis- do you see?” “TI see the dark world, ’ replied the dreamer, « Look 
e€ W... e down again, and tell me what you see.” “TI see men walking blind- 

If the folded over bridges, and below them are bottomless pits,” was the 

tion due dreamer’s reply. “ Will you prepare to stay here, or go back to 
it keeps earth and tell those men of 
balloons 

to rise 
hristians 
want to 
the rich t. It may be the 

bags of means of saving a million souls. The one man may convert another if 
| better | man, and those two may convert a hundred, and that hundred may tt 
t giveth convert a thousand, and the current keeps widening and widenings ji 
rich in: 


deepening and deepening, and as time rolls on the fruit will be 


92 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


ripening which you have gathered for God. It isa great privilege, 
my friends, to work for God. 

I want to call your attention to the eleventh chapter of Hebrews. 
After Paul mentions Jacob, and Isaac, and Enoch, he says: “ They 
all died in faith, not having received the Promises, but having seen 
them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and 
confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.” Are 

‘the Christians of Chicago living like pilgrims and strangers, and by 
their faith do they show “that they seek another country?” Do 
they show by their fruits and their deeds that they are pilgrims and 


strangers here? When I get intoa man’s mind the beauties of that. 


country beyond the grave, it looks as if his only thought was for it. 
We are to be pilgrims and strangers passing through this world on 
our way to a better land. The moment Abraham, by faith, got 
sight of that land, he declared himself a pilgrim and a stranger, 
This earth had no charm for him then. Lot might go down to that 
city of Sodom or Gomorrah, and that city might be burned up. We 
might fix our affections on this city. Chicago has been burned 
twice, and it will be burned again —this whole world shall pass 
away with all its boasted riches and glory, and where shall we be 
then? If we build our hopes here, we shall be disappointed ; if we 
build our hopes upon that foundation whose builder and maker is 
God, we shall not be disappointed. 

_ We are told in Matthew to set our affections on things above, 
and that “there shall be joy in Heaven over one sinner that re- 
penteth.” There are ramors of war in Europe, and if war were 
declared, probably it would excite the whole civilized world. Trade 
would be affected, and relations of all kinds. I don’t know whether 
it would excite Heaven at all. If the President of the United 
States issued a proclamation, I don’t know whether it would be 
noticed in Heaven or not, but the papers would speak of it, the 
people would be excited, and great changes might take place over 
it. If Queen Victoria died, telegrams would go all over the world, 
newspapers would speak of it, the whole world would be excited— 
I don’t know if it would be noticed in Heaven at all. But if that 
little girl there should repent, there would be joy in Heaven. Just 
think of it—think of a little girl or a little boy being the cause of 
joy in Heaven. I don’t think the Papers would record it—they 
would never notice it. There would be no paragraph in the morn- 
ing telling the people that there had been joy in Heaven over 


ey CRE 


RS, 
t privilege, 


f Hebrews. 
s: “They 
aving seen 
them, and 
rth.” Are 
rs, and by 
ry?” Do 
igrims and 
ies of that: 
was for it. 
world on 
faith, got 

stranger, 
mn to that 
up. We 
n burned 
hall pass 
all we be 
od; if we 
maker is 


xs above, 
that re- 
var were 
1. Trade 
whether 

United 
rould be 
of it, the 
ace over 
e world, 
xcited— 
; if that 
n. Just 
‘ause of 
t—they 
e€ morn- 
en over 


/ 


LAYING UP TREAS URES IN HEAVEN, 


93 


be that as she is watching, some 
angel will swiftly carry the news to her of that boy’s conversion, 


and take his name there to be recorded in the Book of Life. Per. 
haps that mother and the Lord 


remember a man gettin 
coming!” The mother 


Position building in Dublin, while I was ia 
speaking about Heaven, I said something to the effect that at this if 
moment a mother is looking down from Heaven expecting the he 
salvation of her daughter here to-night, and I pointed down toa ! 
young lady in the audience! Next morning I received this letter: 
“On Wednesday, when you were speaking of Heaven you said, 


‘It may be this moment there is a mother looking down from 
Heaven expecting 


ting. My heart said, ‘ i 
Tears sprang to my eyes, ‘Lord, i 
direct that word to my darling child’s heart; Lord, save my child,’ | 

I was then anxious ti the close of the meeting, when I went to 
her; she was bathed in tears, She rose, put her arms round me, 


94 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


and kissed me. When walking down to you she told me it was 
that same remark (about the mother looking down from Heaven) 
that found the way home to her, and asked me, ‘ Papa, what can I 
do for Jesus?’” 


May the Spirit of God bring hundreds to the cross of Christ 
to-night. 


RS, 


me it was 
n Heaven) 
what can I 


; of Christ 


XII. 


GRACE, 


WANT tocall your attention to-night, to just one word. You will 
| find it in agreat many places in the Bible, It is a word that you 
hear, perhaps, as frequently as anyother. You hear it repeated 
in the church Sabbath after Sabbath. You hear professed Christians 


ing to-night, who need go out of i ing it away with him 
or her, if they are willing to take j ives i 


Now, you will find 
that “the Word was 
His glory, the glory 
grace and truth,” 


in the first chapter of John, fourteenth verse, 
made flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld 


as of the only begotten of the F ather, full of 


and in the seventeenth verse, “For the law 


(95) 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


96 


was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.” 
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. Also in the fifth of 
Romans, fifteenth verse, “But not as the offense, so also is 
the free gift’”— mark the little word “free.” Free gift.” A 
great many men want to buy the gift; they want to work their way 
to Heaven—“ for, if through the offense of one many be dead, much 
more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, 
Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many.” There we have the source 
of this wonderful stream of grace that has been flowing through the 
world for 6,000 years; it comes from the heart of the Son of God. 
“It was full of grace and truth.” He came into the world to bless 
men—not to curse them, not to make them miserable, not to work 
men’s ruin. He came to give the grace of the Son of Man to us, to 
perfect our happiness. We see this in First of Peter, v. 10: “But 
the God of all grace, who hath called us unto His eternal glory by 
Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered awhile, make you perfect, 
stablish, strengthen, settle you.” Now, men talk much about 
grace nowadays, but they don’t know what it means. We love a 
man for a little while, and when circumstances arise to make him 
independent of us our love cools. It is the very reverse with God. 
He loves those who are independent of Him—those who are at 
enmity with Him. There is not a rebellious son on this earth whom 
God does not love, and whom He does not seek to bless. See a 
man’s idea of grace. Let a business man go to a bank here, to- 
morrow, and borrow a thousand dollars at thirty days, and he gives 
a note, “I promise to pay.” If he is not able to pay at the end of 
thirty days, he gets three days’ grace; and if at the end of that time 
he can not pay, they seize ‘and sell his store, his house, and every- 
thing he’s got. Queer kind of grace, that. That is not God’s grace. 
He wouid cancel the debt; give the man principal and all. God 
says: “It is more blessed to give than to receive.” Men try to 
carry their idea of grace into effect by accepting the grace of God. 
They try to give Him something for His grace, instead of taking 
their places like poor beggars at the feet of Jesus and accepting the 
gift. It is free. Let us come to God to-night and ask Him to give 
us of His grace in fullness, 

Who are partakers of this grace? Any man who is willing to 
repent of his sins—I don’t care who he is. He may be the worst 
man in the city; if he but repents he can have it. Let us turn to 
Matthew xxi. 28: 


ERS. 


sus Christ.” 
he fifth of 
so also is 
: gift.” A 
k their way 
dead, much 
y one man, 
the source 
hrough the 
on of God. 
rld to bless 
10t to work 
in to us, to 

Io: “But 
al glory by 
ou perfect, 
uch about 
We love a 
make him 

with God. 
vho are at 
arth whom 
ss. Seea 
k here, to- 
id he gives 
the end of 
that time 
ind every- 
od’s grace. 

all. God 
fen try to 
-e of God. 

of taking 
epting the 
im to give 


willing to 
the worst 
us turn to 


, and said, Son, §9 work to-day in my vineyard. 
“He answered and said, I will not ; 
and went. 

“And he came to the second, and said likewise. An 
and said, I go, sir, and went not. 

“ Whether of them twain 
unto him, The first. Jesus 
you, That the publicans and 
God before you.” 


It didn’t matter whe 


’ 


hem. You, in your self-righteousness would 
not be seen walking down the streets with that drunkard; he 


would disgrace you. But if that drunkard but repents and takes 
his seat at the feet of Christ, the grace of G 
heart. Those who repent are partakers of gra 
lesson He wanted to teach the Jews, 
great deal better than the publicans 
crowded around Him, He just wante 
could become partakers of eternal life, 
I remember Preaching one night in winter—one of the coldest 
winters we had—the winter after the Chicago fire. I had been 
studying up grace, and it was the first time I had spoken of it, and 
I was just full of it, [ started out of the house, I remember, and 
the first man I met I asked him if he knew anything about the 


ce, and that was the 
They thought themselves a 
and harlots, and when they 
d to teach them how they 


interest in it—to Stay. I expected some would have stayed, but 
what was my mortification to see the whole audience rise up and go 
away. They hadn’t any interest in Stace; they didn’t want to 
learn anything about grace. I put my coat and hat on and was go- 
ing out of the hall, when I saw a poor fellow at the back of the 


7 


d he answered 


ther they were publicans or harlots ; if they 


98 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


furnace crying. “I want to hear about the grace of God,” said he. 
“You're the very man I want then,” said I, « Yes,” the poor fellow 
said, “you said in your sermon that it was free, and I want you to 
tell me something about it.” Well, I got talking to him, and he 
told me a pitiful story, He had drank away twenty thousand dol- 
lars; his home had been broken up, and his wife and children had 
left him. I spoke to him, and it was not long before we were down: 
together praying. That night I got him a night's lodging in the 
Bethel, and next day we got him on his feet, and when I went to 
Europe he was one of the most earnest workers we had. He was 
just a partaker of grace—believed that the peace of God was suffi- 
cient for him, and he took God at His word and he was a saved 
man. I hope some poor wanderer will come here to-night and will 
see the force of this lesson. It may be that your home has been all 
broken up; that your wife has cast you off; that your friends have 
forsaken you. God will take you and bless you if you but repent. 
He can do great things; He can raise you from darkness to light, 
from lowness to highness, and He will go to the corners of the 
world for a man, if he has sunk into the pit, and will raise him up. 
He brought me out of the pit and set me up. It was His grace— 
His grace that did it. 

If you have your Bibles with you just turn to Mark vii. 24: 
“And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and 
Sidon, and entered into a house, and would have no man know it, 
but he could not be hid.” T tell you, when a man is full of Christ 
he can not be hid. Your light can not be hid if your life is filled 
with truth. “Fora certain woman, whose daughter had an unclean 
spirit, heard of Him and came and fell at His feet. The woman 
was a Greek, a Syrophenician by nation ”—that is, a Gentile— 
“and she besought Him that He would cast forth the devil out of 
her daughter. But Jesus said unto her, Let the children first be 
filled, for it is not meet to take the children’s bread and to cast it 
unto dogs. And she answered and said unto Him, Yes, Lord, 
yet the dogs under the table eat of the children’s crumbs: and 
He said unto her, For this saying, go thy way, the devil is gone 
out of thy daughter.” Now, I can just imagine how some here 
would have looked if He had said this to them. He was sur- 
rounded by Jews, and He wanted to teach them a lesson; but if 
that woman had been like some of us here she would have said: 
“Tam as good as a Jew; Iam no dog. I know a woman who lives 


j 


ct r= ey me pe 


fee oown 


‘ERS. 


od,” said he, 
> poor fellow 
Want you to 
him, and he 
1ousand dol- 
children had 


‘were down 


ging in the 
n I went to 
d. He was 
d was suffi- 
yas a saved 
tht and will 
1as been all 
riends have 
Dut repent. 
ss to light, 
ers of the 
ise him up. 
lis grace— 


tk vii. 24: 
f Tyre and 
in know it, 
l of Christ 
ife is filled 
in unclean 
he woman 
Gentile — 
vil out of 
2n first be 
to cast it 
es, Lord, 
mbs: and 
il is gone 
ome here 

was sur- 
n; but if 
ave said: 


GRACE, 99 
She is a very good woman, but I’m as good as 
she, and I don’t want to be treated like a dog. I know lots of 
Jews who were no better than me,” and so she might have gone 
off and lost her gift. But what does she do? She merely said, 
“Yes, I am a Gentile dog, but the crumbs that fall under the table 
the dogs eat.” She asked for the crumbs, and He gave her a whole 
loaf. She knew how to get a blessing. She came and fell at His 
feet. She wanted a blessing, and she took an humble position, It 
pleased Him. He went clear up to Tyre and Sidon just to find 
that woman. He wanted just to find that woman to show the 
Jews how to get grace. And so, my friends, you must take your 
blessing in the same way. We must become as beggars—we must 
be stripped of every particle of self-righteousness, Whenever 


we do that, the God of grace will meet us and deal bountifully 
with us, 


next door to me. 


thing for it. There are a great many people here who do not 


believe in the doctrine as a gift, as something for nothing—as a gift 
from God. 

“ Now, when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the 
people, he entered into Capernaum. 

“And a certain centurion’s servant, who was dear unto him, was 
sick and ready to die. 


“And when he heard of Jesus he sent unto Him the elders of the 
s, b 


saying, That he was worthy for whom He should do this,” 

Now that was the Jews’ idea, and it is ours. We went a bless- 
ing, because we have done something worthy of it. They said, 
“Now, Lord, You must give this centurion a blessing; he has been 


For he loveth our nation and he hath built a Synagogue.” So you 
say this and that man is worthy of the grace of God He has 
given $100 to such a charity and $s00 to another one. It don’t 


matter where he got it. He might have made it by distilling 
whiskey—it don’t matter; might have made it in stock gambling— 


, oh, he is worthy. He gavea thousand dollars to build that church 
who lives | on the West Side; he has been liberal to the Poor; he contributes 


ie 


100 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


to all tne charities—he is worthy. You will hear people say, “If 
anybody will go to Heaven, so-and-so will.” Why? Because he 
has built a church. And so they said the centurion had built a 
Synagogue, and was worthy of grace. Jesus wanted to teach the 
Jews alesson. “Then Jesus went with them "—left His work, and 
away He went. “And when He was now not far from the house, 
the centurion sent friends to Him, saying unto Him, Lord, trouble 
not Thyself, for 1 am not worthy that Thou shouldst enter under 
my roof; wherefore, neither thought I myself worthy to come unto 
Thee; but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed.” See 
that. “Lord, don’t you trouble yourself, I am not worthy that 
Thou shouldst enter under my roof.’ He was not worthy that 
Christ should come under his roof, and because he felt he was not 
worthy of grace he got it. This attitude was sweet to Him—it 
was like a cup of refreshment to find one man who felt that he 
needed grace, and he got the blessing. The Jews gathered around, 
and Jesus marveled at the centurion, and told them that He “had 
not found so great faith—no, not in Israel.” He had bui faith and 


his servant was all right. That is grace, my friends. If you want . 


to be saved, don’t you go and say, I am as good as other people, 
and I am worthy of grace. A good many people speak like this, 
‘but the Lord does not save them. A man does not get grace till 
he comes down to the gruund—till he sees he needs grace. When 
a man stoops to the dust and acknowledges that he needs mercy, 
then it is that the Lord will give him a blessing. If you are ready 
to partake of grace, you have not to atone for your sin--you have 
merely to accept of the atonement. All that you want to do 
is to cry, “God have mercy upon me,” and you will receive the 
blessing. 

There were one or two women in the inquiry-room last night who 
saia to me, ‘I am going to try and become a Christian.” © Well,” 
said I, “ you may as well not try at all.” “What,” said they, “you 
would not have us try?” “No,” said 1, “as soon as you stop try-. 
ing you will become a Christian.” In the north of England, at a 
meeting, I urged all the men and women to stop trying to save 
themselves, and told them that whenever they did then there was 
some hope. Down came a woman from the gallery at the close of 
the meeting, and said, “Mr. Moody, you have made me more 
wretched than ever. Y-su told us in your sermon that we had bet- 
ter stop trying to save ourselves, and I have been trying to save 


= ee 


oRS, 


say, “Tf 
Because he 
iad built a 
teach the 
; work, and 
the house, 
rd, trouble 
nter under 
come unto 
led.” See 
orthy that 
rorthy that 
he was not 
o Him—it 
It that he 
ed around, 
t He “had 
i faith and 


you want . 


er people, 
: like this, 
t grace till 
ce. When 
ds mercy, 
are ready 
-you have 
ant to do 
eceive the 


night who 

“ Well,” 
hey, “you 
1 stop try-. 
land, at a 
g to save 
there was 
e close of 
me more 
> had bet- 
g to save 


= eee 


“ 


GRACE. IOl 


myself for many years. I was in hopes of becoming a Christian 
some day, but now if I stop trying, whai will become of me?” 
“The Lord will save you when you stop trying to save yourself,” 
I told her; “for salvation is a gift, and you must take it as a gift. 
And then I got her attention to a few passages of Scripture, and 
she saw what grace was, And if there is a man or woman here 
to-night who have been trying to save themselves, they may as well 
stop, and accept Him who came to save you. 

As I told you last night, by grace are you saved, not by good 
deeds or good works. We work from the cross, not toward it; we 
work because we are saved, not to be saved. No man or woman 
has ever been saved who has been trying to save themselves. 

I remember when I was a boy, and went to Boston, I went to the 

post-office two or three times a day to see if there was a letter for me. 
I knew there was not, as there was but one mail a day. I had not 
had any employment and was very homesick, and so went constantly 
to the post-office, thinking perhaps when the mai! did come in, my 
letter had been mislaid. At last, however, I got a letter. It was 
from my youngest sister, the first letter she ever wrote me. J 
opened it with a light heart, thinking there was some good news 
from home, but the burden of the whole letter was that she had 
heard there were pickpockets in Boston, and warned me to take 
care of them. I thought I would better get some money in hand 
first, and then I might take care of pickpockets. And so you must 
take care to remember salvation is a gift. You don’t work for sal- 
vat.on, but work day and night after you have got it. Get it first 
before you do anything, br’ sn’t try to get it yourself. Look at 
what Paul says in Ephesian-. “ For by grace are ye saved through 
faith, and that not of yourself, it is the gift of God”—it is the gift 
of God— Not of works, lest any man should boast.” There is 
one thing we know—we have all got to get into Heaven the same 
way. We can not work our way there ; we have to take our salva. 
tion from God. Turn again to Timothy, and we read: « Who hath 
saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our 
works, but according to His own purpose and grace, which was 
given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.” 

I want to call your attention to the passage, “ Not according to 
your works.” Not be zause a man has’ given liberally to the poor; 
not because he has built a church or endowed a university or a sem- 
inary; not because of our works shall we receive grace—it is a free 


102 MOOD ¥’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


gift. If a man is unsaved, it is not because he has done few good 
works, or because he has no money, but because he would not 
accept the gift. 

In the days of Paul, the Jews were stumbling over their own sal- 
vation, as many people are now, for we see, in Romans, he says: 
‘And if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no 
more of grace. But if it be of works, then it is no more of grace, 
otherwise work is no more work.” Now, the reasoning is this : If 
you work out your salvation, you take yourself right off the ground 
of grace. Suppose I say, “ Any man or woman can have that book 
(Mr. Moody holding up his Bible), they can have it for nothing; I 
will give it to any of you as a gift,” and at the close a young man 
comes up and says, “ Mr. Moody, I have heard a great deal about 
that Book; I would like to have it.” “ Well,” I say, “there it is— 
take it away.” “Ah, but,” he might say, “I don’t want it that 
way; I will give you a little something for it-—just a little.’ “I’m 
not selling Bibles, I give it away,” I say. “Well, but I don’t like to 
take it that way,” and he takes his pocket-book out and says, “I 
know that Bible is werth a great deal more than I will give you, but 
here’s a dollar for you.” Suppose I take that dollar, and he goes 
home, and when his wife asks him where he got that Bible he says, 
“TI bought it.” It is not a gift at all. Salvation is the same: it isa 
gift, and if you try to buy it you don’t get the gift. We must go 
like poor beggars, and take it as a gift. We can not get it by deeds. 
It is worth walking round this world bare-foot for, worth climbing 
the highest mountains and swimming the roughest rivers. But this 
can not get it. It is offered as a gift—salvation is offered to the 
whole world. Suppose Queen Victoria gives a man a pardon, and 
when he hears about it he says, “That is very good of the Queen— 
very good of her. Here’s a penny; I will send it to her.” You 
smile at that; but the King of Heaven has been down here and 
offered you a pardon—offered you salvation as a free gift. Who will 
take it as a gift? Who will have it as a gift? Will you? (pointing 
to one in the audience). You can be saved right here, sitting in 
that chair. He came to the Jews and offered them pardon, but they 
said, “ We don’t want You here.” Only a few accepted Him, and 
“to as many as received Him, these have the power to become the 
sons of God.” 

“The grace of God hath power to bring salvation to all men;” and 
if a man is unsaved, it is because he wants to work it out; he wants 


RS, 


> few good 
vould not 


ir own sal- 
, he says: 
rrace is no 
> of grace, 
is this : If 
he ground 
that book 
othing; I 
oung man 
eal about 
ere it is— 
nt it that 
Ags (73 I’m 
n’t like to 
| says, “I 
> you, but 
| he goes 
e he says, 
le; itisa 
> must go 
by deeds, 
climbing 

But this 
-d to the 
rdon, and 
Queen— 
r )  -You 
here and 
Who will 
(pointing 
sitting in 
but they 
tim, and 
come the 


> 
~ 


on;” and 
he wants 


GRACE, 103 


to receive salvation in some other way than God’s way; but we are 
told that “he that climbeth up another way, the same is a thief anda 
robber.” I. remember hearing of a man who dreamt that he built 
a ladder from earth to Heaven, and when he did a good deed, 
up went his ladder a few feet. When he did a very good deed his 
ladder went higher, and when he gave away large sums of money to 
the poor, up it went further still. By and by it went out of sight; 
and years rolled on, and it went up; he thought past the clouds, 
clear into Heaven. When he died he thought he would step off his 
ladder into Heaven, but he heard a voice roll out from Paradise: 
“He that climbeth up another way, the same isa thief and a rob- 
ber,” and down he came, ladder and all, and he awoke. He said if 
he wanted to get salvation he must get it another way than by good 
deeds, and he took the other way. Who will take this gift? If 
Gabriel was to wing his way from the throne of God, and come 
down here and say he had been sent from Heaven to give you any 
gift you chose, what would you ask for? Would you ask for money? 
No; you will soon leave the world. Would you ask for position, 
glory? No; they are mere baubles, But ask for eternal life, 
Eternal life! Gabriel has not come to-night, but the Son of Man 
has come, and offers you eternal life for nothing. Is there one here 
to-night who will accept it as a gift? Rowland Hill used to say 
that auctioneers had hard work to get people to come up to their 
prices, but he had hard work to get people to come down to his. 
It costs nothing—free to all. Is there no one here who will 
take it? 

One more point. There was never a man or woman who par- 
took of the grace of God that would part with it again for all the 
world. I never knew one. Did you, Mr. (turning to some 
one on the platform)? No; never. You never will hear of one 
who has taken the gift repenting of it. A man told me the other 
day about a lady who came to him and said she had nearly lost her 
hope. She was in a sad state of mind. “Lost all your hope?” he 
asked. “No, not all; I’ve a little left.” « Well,” said he, “how 
much would you take for the little you have left? Now, would 
you take a thousand dollars for what hope you have left?” That 
is the way to put it. No one would part with any portion of their 
hope; and when it was put to this lady, she was like every other one 
who has got grace. 

All things of earth will die and the world will float away; buta 


104. MOOD VS SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


place in a world which will last for eternity is offered you in the 
Tabernacle to-night, and just go home and thank God for it—you 
needn’t go home, you can take it+here. Is there any one who will 
take it to-night? In New York City, during a meeting one night, 
I pointed to a man and asked him, “ Will you take the gift of the 
grace‘of God?” and he simply bowed his head. I met him in the 
inquiry-room, and asked him, “ How long have you been a Christian, 
my friend?” He said, “ While in the meeting to-night you pointed 
at me and asked me to accept grace, and I just took it when I 
bowed my head.” . 

My friends, the world goes stumbling over works and deeds to 
get at grace. It is right here—the grace of God which bringeth 
salvation to all men, and you need not go around the world after it. 
The gift lies at the very door of your heart. May God bless every 
soul in the room to-night, and may they be led to accept the gift 
of grace offered to them. Let us bow our heads in silent prayer. 


RS. 


ou in the 
or it—you 
> who will 
ne night, 
rift of the 
lim in the 
Christian, 
u pointed 
t when I 


deeds to 
bringeth 
d after it. 
ess every 
the gift 
prayer. 


XIII. 


SECOND SERMON ON GRACE. 


Lo evening you will recollect my subject was “ Grace,” but 
I only said half what I wished to say, and so would just like 
to commence where I left off. I find a great many people 
saying they would like to become Christians if they had strength 
to lead Christian lives—they would become Christians if they 
thought they could hold out; they are afraid that they can not 
maintain their conversion. My friends, that is what the grace of 
God is for—to give you strength. After it is accepted there is no 
trouble about us not standing firm. If we only take it, I don’t care 
how broken you are; I don’t care how weak you are; don’t care 
how liable to fall—God’s grace will keep you from falling. Just 
turn to Romanis v.: “ Therefore, being justified by faith, we have 
peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. By whom also we 
have access by faith into this grace’’—access into this grace— 
“wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.” In 
these two verses there are three precious words, peace, grace, and 
glory. We look back to Calvary and there, by faith, see the Son ot 
God bleeding and dying for our sins, and the blood brings peace to 
our guilty conscience. Then we have grace for the present, grace 
from day to day, and then the next thing is glory, which we will 
have in eternity. They are three precious words—peace for the 
past, grace for the present, and glory for the future. Why, my 
brethren, the best is in store for us. We shall see the King in 
His glory by and by, when we reach those realms of eternal de- 
light, after we have passed through the land. A great many people 
are satisfied with the finished work of Calvary; they ¢:.»"! see—they 
forget about the glory that is coming. Until that time He has 
left grace to sustain us. If you get this grand and glorious truth 
in your heart you will not be doubting God; you will not be 
thinking He can not keep you. He has plenty of power—plenty 
of grace to keep you all—to keep every one of the sons of Adam. 
(105) 


106 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


There is another thing. Turn to the twenty-first verse of fifth 
Romans, and you'll read: “That as sin hath reigned unto death, 
even so might grace reign throu-h righteousness unto eternal life 
by Jesus Christ our Lord.” Death reigns now. “ Sin hath reigned 
unto death,” and this is like the old saying, “ The end of the rope 
is the end of the law.” If I commit a murder and am taken into 
the court, tried, and condemned to be hung, when that sentence is 
carried out, the moment my life left my body, it would be the end 
of the law. They would give my body to my friends, who would 
bury it. That would be the end of the law. The grace of God is 
not like that. “Sin reigned unto death,” but the grace of God 
reigns to life eternal. It carries the body to the promised land, 
and gives us a crown of glory. “Sin reigned unto death;” but the 
grace reigns unto life eternal through Jesus Christ. Moses was the 
representative of God, and he brought the people of Israel to the 
banks of the Jordan, which means death; but he could not take 
them over. God took him to the top of Pisgah and showed him 
the promised land, but He would not permit him to enter. But 
after he died God called Joshua, which means Jesus, and He led 
them through death and judgment to the promised land. And 
John the Baptist led them to the Jerdan and baptized the people, 
but that was all he could do. Jesus Christ came and put them on 
the resurrection ground. If we have Jesus Christ we are not going 
to perish, All that the grave can do is to shelter our body; there 
is a life beyond for every true believer who accepts grace. Oh, the 
glorious grace, the matchless grace of God, how it ought to lift us 
up, and how each one ought to praise God day and night. 

One of the best things in the hymn-book we use I think is No. 16, 
which begins : 


“Free from the law, oh happy condition, 
Jesus hath bled, and there is remission ; 
Cursed by the law, and bruised by the fall, 
Grace hath redeemed us, once for all.” 


Grace hath redeemed us. We are brought out from under the curse 
of the law. Grace was the end of the law. Therefore, if I am in 
Christ the law has spent its force, and I am free from it. See in 
Romans vi. 14-15, it says, “For sin shall not have dominion over 
you, for ye are not under the law, but under grace. What then? 
Shall we sin because we are not under the law, but under grace ? 


S. 


- of fifth 
o death, 
ernal life 
1 reigned 
the rope 
ken into 
ntence is 
the end 
io would 
f God is 
of God 
ed land, 
but the 
was the 
21 to the 
ot take 
ved him 
rr. But 
| He led 
I. And 
people, 
hhem on 
ot going 
r; there 
Oh, the 
o lift us 


No. 16, 


e curse 
-am in 
See in 
on over 

then ? 
grace ? 


SECOND SERMON ON GRACE, 107 


God forbid.” Now, there are a great many people who are not liv- 
ing above the law, but who are still living under it. Why, Christ 
died to redeem us from the curse of the law. All the way from 
Heaven He came, and that’s what he came for. He wants to bring 
you out from under the law, and if we accept grace our freedom is 
accomplished. 

Just turn to Deuteronomy xxi. 18. If we were under the law as 
those people were we would sce strange things in Chicago. If a 
man was a drunkard or a thief, instead of going after the poor sin- 
ner and trying to show him the pardon he is offered, we would just 
take him to the Court House square and stone him. It says here: 

“Tf a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not 
obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and that, 
when they have chastened him, will not hearken unto them; 

“Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him and bring 
him out unto the elders of his city, and unto the gate of his place ; 

“And they shall say unto the elders of his city, This our son 
is stubborn and rebellious; he will not obey our voice; he isa glut- 
ton and a drunkard. 

‘And all the men of his city shall stone him with stones, that he 
die; so shalt thou put evil away from among you, and all Israel 
shall hear and fear,” 

Ah! if this were the law now there would be a strange state of 
things in Chicago. If they were taking all the drunkards out and 
stoning them, what would become of the rum-sellers? Their trade 
would be gone in a week. We are not free from the law till we are 
in Christ Jesus. If we disobey the law and spurn the grace of God 
—spurn the gift of God—judgment will come upon us. It is only 
a question of time. 

But the thought I want to call your attention to is this: There is 
a great difference between grace and law. The law makes a man 
see his guilt, and grace takes the guilt away. About the first 
miracle Moses performed was by just stretching his rod over the 
waters and turning them into blood, or death. Christ turned the 
water into wine—life. When the law was given through Moses at 
Mount Sinai three thousand men lost their lives; but at Pentecost 
three thousand men got life. The law is to stone him; grace to 
forgive him. The law to smite him; grace to sustain him. The 
Prodigal, after wasting his life in riotous living, came home to his 
father's house. He expected law, but he got grace. Instead of his 


108 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


father smiting him, he kissed him. The law says, cast him out; 
grace, receive and bless him. 

f remember, when a boy, I used to go to an old school in New 
England. We used to have a quick-tempered master, who used al- 
ways to keep a rattan, and it was, If you will not do this and that you 
will be punished. I remember many a time of this rattan being laid 
on my back. I think I can almost feel it now. He used to rule 
that school by the law. But there was somebody who began to get 
up a movement in favor of controlling the school by love. A great 
many said, You can never do that with those unruly boys; but after 
some talk it was at last decided to try it. I remember how we thought 
of the good time we would have that winter, when the rattan would 
de out of the school. We thought we would then have all the fun we 
wanted. I remember who the teacher was—it was a lady—and she 
opened the school with prayer. We hadn’t seen it done before, and 
we were impressed, especially when she prayed that she might have 
grace and strength to rule the schgol with love. Well, the school 
went on for several weeks and we saw no rattan; but at last the 
rules were broken, and I think I'was the first boy to break them. 
She told me to wait until after school, and then she would see me. 
I thought the rattan was coming out, sure, and stretched myself up 
in a warlike attitude. After school, however, I didn’t see the rattan, 
but she sat down by me and told me how she loved me, and how 
she had prayed to be able to rule that school by love, and concluded 
by saying, “I want to ask you one favor, that is, if you love me, try 
and be a good boy,” and I never gave her trouble again. She put 
me under grace. That is what the Lord does. Accept eternal life, 
if you love me. That is the difference between law and grace. 

Take another illustration. A boy goes to school. He is with a 
schoolmaster called Mr. Law. The master comes to him and says, 
“Charlie, wouldn’t you like to go into the other room, into Miss 
Grace’s class?” “Yes, I don’t mind if I do;” and he is put into 
Miss Grace’s class. That is the teacher for the boy. He is behaving 
himself now—he is behaving from a different motive. By and by the 
old teacher comes to him and says, You must do so and so. “No, 
I won’t; I am under Miss Grace now, and I won’t do it unless she 
Says so.” He has got out from under the law—from the school- 
master with the rattan—by grace, and he likes his new system so 
well that he wouldn’t go back. That is grace. We are under the 
curse, and every man and woman under the curse, is brought out 


Ss. 
him out; 


1 in New 
> used al- 
‘that you 
dyeing laid 
1 to rule 
an to get 
A great 
but after 
thought 
an would 
1e fun we 
—and she 
fore, and 
cht have 
e school 
last the 
ik them. 
1 see me. 
self up 
e rattan, 
ind how 
yncluded 
> me, try 
She put 
rnal life, 
ice. 
s with a 
nd says, 
ito Miss 
put into 
ehaving 
d by the 
6 No, 
less she 
school- 
stem so 
ider the 
ght out 


SECOND SERMON ON GRACE, 109 
from under it only by grace. ' I would rather a thousand times be 
under grace than under the law, and every one who partakes of it 
will be of the same Opinion. 

The next thought that suggests itself is, how am I going to get this 
grace? I don’t know how many people have come to me during the 
past few days and said, “ Mr. Moody, 1 don’t feel able to go into the 
inquiry-room and talk to men and women about Jesus; I don’t feel 
that Iam good enough to talk to my husband about his soul. Iam not 
a strong enough Christian.” They haven’t got grace. That’s the 
condition of many of us. We don’t want it. We are half-starved 
Christians; we're not fit to go out and work. Therefore, it is avery 
important truth that should come home to every heart here, that if 
we have taken God’s grace—that if our hearts are filled with it, only 
then will we have a surplus, and be ready to go out and preach to 
others. 

Dr. Bonar used to illustrate this by saying that if we filled a 
tumbler with water, and got it perfectly full, and then touched the 
surface with our finger, it would flow over. So it is with grace. If 
our hearts are filled with gtace the slightest pressure in His cause 
will make it flow over, and we will only be anxious to do battle for 
Him. That woman who came to Jesus Christ—that woman who had 
had an issue of blood for many years—but came and touched Him, 
and she received grace. How are you going to get it? Come 
boldly to the throne of grace and take it. There is not a poor 
wanderer here who can not come to the throne of grace and get it. 
And you can take an abundance of it. There is an inexhaustible 
fountain of it. Fathers and mothers will tell their sons to be Ccare- 
ful—not to spend all they get; keep something for a rainy day. 
This is all very well, but don’t apply to the grace of God. You can 
be extravagant. You needn’t think that you won’t have any to- 
morrow. Go boldly and take all you want. 

There is a story told of Alexander the Great. A general in his 
army was a great favorite with him, and he told him to draw any- 
thing from his treasury that he wanted. Well, he presented a bill 
to the treasurer, and the treasurer wouldn’t honor it. It was for 
such an enormous amount that the treasurer was astonished. The 
General went rushing to the Emperor and told him, and he called 
the treasurer and said, “ Didn’t I tell you to honor the draft of the 
General?” “But,” replied the treasurer, “do you unde-tand its 
amount?” “Never mind what it is,” replied the Empcor, “he 


So RN A AST: i oR 


IIO MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


honors me and my kingdom by making a great draft.” And so we 
honor God by asking for grace in abundance. TI tell you, my 
friends, it isa pity there are so many half-starved, mean Christians 
around when God says, “Come and get all you want.” 

I remember when Dr. Arnott, who has gone to God, was in this 
city. While delivering a sermon he used an illustration. The 
sermon and text have all gone, but that illustration is fresh upon 
my mind to-night and brings home the truth. He said: “You 
have been sometimes out at dinner with a friend, and you have 
seen the faithful household dog standing watching every mouthful 


his master takes. All the crumbs that fall on the floor he picks up ° 


and seems eager for them, but when his master takes a plate of 
beef and puts it on the floor and says, ‘ Rover, here’s something 
for you,’ he comes up and smells it, looks at his master, and goes 
away to a corner of the room. He was willing to eat the crumbs, 
but he wouldn’t touch the roast beef—-thought it was too good for 
him.” That is the way with a good many Christians. They are 
willing to take the crumbs, but not willing to take all God wants. 
Come boldly to the throne of grace and get the help we need; 
there is an abundance for every man, woman, and child in this as- 
semblage. 

While Mr. Sankey and myself were in Europe I remember we 
got Chicago papers, and read about a great panic here. If I recol- 
lect right, it broke nearly every bank in Chicago. For 6,000 years 
God has been trying to get a run upon the Bank of Heaven, but 
He can not get it. That’s just what He wants. So, mother, if 
you have a wayward or a drunken son, go boldly to the throne of 
grace for your boy and He will give you mercy; He will hear your 
prayers and answer them. 

There are a good many Christians who are continually brooding 
over their misfortunes. They turn them over and over, and look at 
them from all sides. They look at the past in sorrow, and look 
down to the future and imagine it has great trials and troubles in 
store for them, and just sling them on their back and go reeling 
under their burden. They are not fit to carry them, and they are 
not fit to work forGod. A man said some time ago to me: “ Would 
you be willing to go to the stake and be burned?” “I don’t know 
that I should. No;” I replied, “if I were going to die at the stake 
God would give me grace to die. Time enough to think about that 
when the time came. I would rather have grace to do the work ] 


RS, 


And so we 
you, my 
Christians 


was in this 
ion. The 
resh upon 
id: “ You 
you have 
‘mouthful 


e picks up : 


a plate of 
something 
,and goes 
e crumbs, 
» good for 
They are 
od wants. 
we need ; 
in this as- 


ember we 
If I recol- 
000 years 
aven, but 
other, if 
throne of 
hear your 


brooding 
d look at 
and look 
oubles in 
o reeling 
they are 
“ Would 
n’t know 
he stake 
oout that 
ie work ] 


SECOND SERMON ON GRACE, IIT 


am doing. I do not want to die a martyr’s death; but if I had to 
dic, God would give me grace to doit.” And soa great many people 
are afraid when they look forward to their dying hour. When they 
die, if they are Christians, the grace of God will be given to them. 
My friends, God will hold you, for He says: “I, thy God, will hold 
thy right hand.” 
When we get so full of this grace, we want to see every one 
blessed—we want to see all the churches blessed—not only all the 
churches here, but inthe whole country. That was the trouble with 
Christ’s disciples. He had hard work to make them understand that 
His Gospel was for every one, that it was a stream to flow out to all 
nations of the earth. They wanted to confine it to the Jews, and 
He had to convince them that it was for every living being. We 
must not limit the mighty grace of God. Turn to 2 Corinthians, 
ix. 8: “And God is able to make all grace abound toward you, 
that ye, always having all-sufficiency in all things, may abound to 
every good work.” He has got grace enough so that each one of us 
can be clothed for Hisservice. It is not because God can not use us, 
it is not because God has not enough to clothe us for His service, that 
we can not work, but because we do not come and ask Him. Now, 
He bids every man and woman in this assembly to take it to-night. 
Suppose a man came to me and said: “Mr. Moody, there is a mil- 
lion dollars for you deposited at the First National Bank of Chicago ; 
take it all.” Well, Iam a poor man, and I accept it. And suppose 
I go to-morrow and draw a dollar, and take it home and say, “ Wife, 
a man gave me a million dollars—here’s a dollar for you, take care 
of it; times are hard, and money is scarce.” ‘ Why,” she would 
say, “Moody has gone mad.” That’s your condition. Ninety- 
nine men out of a hundred are drawing a dollar when God wants 
them to drawathousand. He wants you to take all you need, while 
you are living like half-starved Christians, just as if you were dwelling 
in a land with a famine. 

Then there is another ve:se I want to call your attention to 
in Second Corinthians, xii. 7: “And lest I should be exalted 
above measure through the abundance of the revelations, there was 
given to me a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet 
xe, lest I should be exalted above measure.” Nowa great many 
people are continually praying God to take the thorn out of their 
flesh. These thorns in the flesh are put there for a purpose—for 
our good. They are put there “lest we be exalted above measure.” 


Sew 
RS A A ae 


112 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


I think there will be more men who will rise up at judgment and 
thank God for Persecution and misfortune than for prosperity, 
Prosperity has done less to benefit men than misfortune, and we can 
find that out by just looking around. I believe that Paul felt more 
thankful for his stripes than for anything else on earth. If we ask 
God for more grace, we can bear all the thorns of the flesh. Let us 
go boldly and get all the strength we need. 

I remember when my little girl was four years old, how she teased 
her mother to buy her a muff. At last she got her one. I remem- 
ber it was in the winter; and when I got home, she said: “ Papa, 
won't you go out with me, I have got a new muff.” Well, I went 
out, and I said, the ground being covered with ice, “Let me take 
your hand, Emma; the ground is very slippery, and you will fall.” 
“O, no,” she said, “I want to walk by myself, and put my hands in 
my muff, as other people do.” Well, she went along a little piece, 
when she slipped and fell. She got up again, and I again wanted 
to take hold of her hand, but she wouldn’t, and went along for a 
little, when down she went again. She got up a second time and 
walked along. But by and by her feet went from under her once 
more, and away she went. Then she said: “ Papa, just let me take 
hold of your little finger.” “Well,” said I, “Emma, let me give 
you my whole hand.” But she wouldn’t; she would have it her 
Own way. And that is the way with a good many of us; we want 
to follow our own way, and God just lets us have it. By and by her 
feet went from under her again, and down she went. Then she asked 
me to give her my hand, and I slipped it over her wrist, and we went 
along all right. So we must accept grace fully, and it will keep us 
up. We must not take a little to lean on—we must take abundance. 
Let us take it abundantly, for there is plenty of it. 

There is a story in Kings, one of the sweetest in the whole Bible. 
It would be a good thing if we knew our Bibles from back to back 
better than we do. There would not be so much talk of backsliding, 


two boys, and I suppose her household Goce “vere ta be sold, and 
her boys sent to slavery. She knew the man of God, and went to 
Elijah and told him her story. When she got through, he might 
have said: “What have you got to pay the debt with?” “T haven't 


He g 
offere 

I re 
fornia 
was g 
gambl 
father 
out tc 
you fi 


S. 


nent and 
‘osperity, 
d we can 
felt more 
' we ask 

Let us 


e teased 
remem- 
“ Papa, 
I went 
ne take 
ill fall.” 
ands in 
> piece, 
wanted 
o fora 
ne and 
rr once 
1e take 
ie give 
it her 
€ want 
by her 
asked 
e went 
cep us 
dance. 


Bible. 
) back 
iding. 
rife in 
ologi- 
days. 
ly of 
, and 
nt to 
light 
ven’t 


SECOND SERMON ON GRACE, 113 


got anything,” was the answer, “ Well, how many pots of oil have 
you in the house?” “There is only one pot of oil in the house, not 
another thing.” “Go home, borrow all the vessels you can, borrow 
not a few.” I like that phrase—“ not a few.” “ Borrow these and 
put the oil into the empty vessels.” The woman took him at his 
word. I can imagine her going to her next door neighbor and 
knocking, and when her neighbor came to the door, asking, “ Have 
you got any vessels you can lend?” « How many do you want?” 
“Want all you’ve got.” Well, I can just see her taking away those 
vessels, and her boys—some of the vessels as big as the boys— 
dragging them along to the house. Then she went to another 
house, and knocked at the door, and said: “How many vessels 
have you got to lend?” “Oh, I have a few, but some of them are 
not very clean.” “ Well, never mind that, I will wash them.” And 
away ‘they went to the house. I suppose in a short time she had a 
room packed full of vessels, and all the neighbors, if they liked gos. 
sip as well as people do in these days, were all turned out to see 
what was the matter. When she had got all the vessels in the neigh- 
borhood gathered there, she just said: “N ow, my sons ’—perhaps 
the two boys were named Johnny and Jimmy—“ you just take up 
the pot of oil and fill those vessels.” They fill one, and then they 
look into the pot, and find, to their amazement, it is as full as ever. 
The boys never saw such oil as that. And they kept filling the 
vessels with the oil, and it didn’t seem to get any lower. When 
they had got through with all the vessels, the boys said: « Mother, 
that is the last one,” and there was as much in the jar as ever, 
And she started out to the man of God and told him the story, and 
he said to her: “Go home and sell your oil and Pay your debts,” 
God not only comes down to us and forgives our sins, but He gives 
us grace. He did not come down here only to pardon us and then 
leave us in prison. He did not leave us to fight the battle alone, 
He gives us grace to overcome all our difficulties. God’s grace is 
offered freely, and ¢very man and woman can be saved if they will. 
I remember hearing about a man who had a wayward boy in Cali- 
fornia, who ran away from home, and he never heard anything that 
was good about him. Two reports that came said he was dissipated, 
gambling, and drinking. He was a prodigal. Letters sent by the 
father were unheeded. But at last one of the neighbors was going 
out to the Pacific coast, and the father called on him and said, “If 
you find my boy tell him that my love for him is unchanged ; tell 
8 


a Tia cee eae ad 


114 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


him to come home and all will be forgiven.” The neighbor went 
out to California, and found him, after searching some time—found 
him one night past midnight in a gambling den. He took hiin 
aside and told the message from his father, and he said to him, “I 
have just come from your father, and he wanted me to find you and 
tell you that his love was as strong as ever; and if you will only 
come home, all will be forgiven.” The boy was completely inelted, 
and tears trickled down his cheeks. And that is the way with a 
great many sinners. They doubt that God is willing to save them, 
when His love is as strong as ever, in spite of their many transgres- 
sions. We have been praying for intemperate men at this after- 
noon’s prayer-meeting. Some of you, perhaps, will think that God 
can not save you, but God’s grace is able to give you victory, and, 
though a besotted drunkard, to snap your thirst for liquor. 

I remember going into a young converts’ meeting in Philadelphia, 
where I heard a story that thrilled my soul. A young man said he 
had been a great drunkard. He kad lost one situation after another, 
till finally he came to the very dregs. He left Philadelphia, and went 
first to Washington, and then to Baltimore. One night he came 
back to Philadelphia. He had lost his key and could not get into 
his home. He was afraid to go into the house while the people 
were stirring, so he staid outside watching till all had retired. He 
knew that after that there would be at least one who would hear 
him and come to the door. He went, he knocked; when he heard 
the footsteps of his mother. “Oh, Edward,” said she, “I am so glad 
to see you.” She did not reprove him; did not rebuke him. He 
went up-stairs and did not come down for two days. When he 
came down, the servants were walking about the house very softly ; 
everything was quiet. They told him that his mother was at the 
_ point of death. His brother was a physician, and he went to him 
and asked him if it was so. ‘Yes, Ned,” said he, “mother can not 
live.” He immediately went up-stairs, and asked his mother’s for- 
giveness, and prayed to his mother’s God to have mercy upon him. 
“And God,” said he, “my mother’s God, heard my prayers.” And 
as the tears trickled down his face he said, “ God has kept me straight 
these four years in the face of all trials.” Oh, sinner, ask for His 
grace and might; do not turn Him away. Oh, to-night let Him 
save you. 


ERS. 


ighbor went 
time—found 
e took hiin 
| to him, “I 
ind you and 
ou will only 
tely inelted, 
way with a 
» save them, 
y transgres- 
t this after- 
ik that God 
rictory, and, 
or. 
hiladelphia, 
nan said he 
ter another, 
ia, and went 
ht he came 
ot get into 
the people 
etired. He 
would hear 
en he heard 
/am so glad 
ehim. He 
When he 
very softly ; 
was at the 
ent to him 
her can not 
other’s for- 
y upon him. 
ers.” And 
me straight 
ask for His 
ht let Him 


XIV. 


WORK FOR EVERY MAN. 


MARK xiii. 34: ‘For the Son of Man is as a man taking a far journey, who left 


his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his work, 
and commanded the porter to watch.” 


HERE are quite a number of leaves coming out of my Bible 
ale at the places where I have preached from it the most. The 
third chapter of John is loose, and so is this thirteenth of 
Mark, “To every man his work.” 
carefully it don’t read, “to every man some work,” or “to every 
man a work,” but “to every man his work.” And I believe, if the, 
truth was known, that every man and woman in this assembly has | 
a work laid out for them to do; that every man’s life is a plan of | 
the Almighty, and way back in the councils of eternity God laid | 
out a work for each one of us. There is no man living that can do 
the work that God has got for me to do. Noone can do it but’ 
myself. And if the work ain’t done, we will have to answer for it 
when we stand before God’s bar. For it says: “ Every man shall 
be brought unto judgment, and every one shall give an account of 
the deeds done in the body.” And it seems to me that every one 
of us ought to take this question home to-night: « Well, am I 
doing the work that God has for me to do?” God has got a work 
for every one of us to do. N ow, in the parable the man who had 
two talents had the same reward as the man who had five talents. 
He heard the same words as the man who had five talents: “ Well 
done, thou good and faithful servant, enter thou into the joy of thy 
Lord.” The men that take good care of the talents that God has 
loaned them, He always gives them more. But if we take the talent 
that God has given us and lay it away carefully in a napkin and 
bury it away, God will take even that from us. God don’t want a 
man that has got one talent to do the work of a man that has got 
ten. All a man has got to answer for is the one that God has 
given each man. If we were all of us doing the work that God has 


(115) 


Now, by reading that verse ( 


\ 


116 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


got for us to do, don’t you see how the work of the Lord would 
advance? I believe in what John Wesley used to say, “All at it, 
and always at it,” and that is what the Church wants to-day. 
Every one of you has his own appointed task, and no minister, or 
deacon, or elder, or steward can possibly do it for you. 
A great many Christians are weak and sickly, and all the time 
Y getting into Doubting Castle, because they don’t have this text 
thoroughly fixed in their hearts. I sometimes think it would bea 
good plan to watch the records of the churches, and when anybody 
wants to join, to have the minister ask him, “ What do you want 
to come in for? Is it to get out of trouble, and to sleep and take it 
easy? If that is the case, we don’t want you; we have plenty of 

, such members already.” What a pity that there should be so 

| many silent partners, or, as the English call it, sleeping partners, in 

this business of carrying on the salvation of souls. What a misfortune 

yy it would be if your child should not grow any for ten or fifteen 

ae i | years; but that is just the case with a great many of the Lord’s 

| children here in Chicago. I know some of them who are praying 

the same old prayers to-day that they were praying in 1856, when I 

first came out here; they haven’t grown a bit in all that time. The 
reason of it is because they have not done their work. 

What makes the Dead Sea dead? Because it is all the time re- 
ceiving, never giving out anything. Why is it that many Christians 
are cold? Because they are all the time receiving, never giving out 
anything. You go every Sunday and hear good sermons, and think 
that is enough. You are all the time receiving these grand truths, 
but never give them out. When you hear it, go and scatter the 
sacred truth abroad. Instead of having one minister to preach to 
a thousand people, this thousand ought to take a sermon and spread 
it till it reaches those who never go to church or chapel. Instead 
of having a few, we ought to have thousands using the precious tal- 
ents that God has given them. 

You think it is a great misfortune if a child isdumb; but God has 
a great many dumb children; they can talk politics, or business, or 

| gossip fast enough, but they tell their pastor not to call on 

| them to pray or speak in meeting; they could not think of doing 
such a thing—have no gift of speech at all. About nine-tenths of 
the people are dwarfs, and cripples, and deaf and dumb, and a good 
many of them are almost dead. _ 

There are many of us that are willing to do great things for the 


RS, 


ord would 
“All at it, 
its to-day. 
1inister, or 


the time 
this text 
vould be a 
1 anybody 
you want 
ind take it 
plenty of 
uld be so 
artners, in 
nisfortune 
or fifteen 
he Lord’s 
e€ praying 
6, when I 
ime. The 


e time re- 
Christians 
piving out 
and think 
nd truths, 
catter the 
preach to 
ind spread 

Instead 
2cious tal- 


t God has 
isiness, or 
9 call on 
- of doing 
tenths of 
id a good 


gs for the 


WORK FOR EVERY MAN. 117 
Lord; but few of us are willing to do little things. The mighty . 
Sermon on regeneration was preached tooneman. There are many 
who are willing to preach to thousands, but are not willing to take 
their seat beside one soul, and lead that soul to the blessed Jesus, 
We must get down to personal effort—this bringing one by one to 
the Son of God. We can find no better example of this than in the 
life of Christ Himself. Look at that wonderful sermon that He 
preached to that lone woman at the well of Samaria. He was tired 
and weary, but He had time and the heart to preach to her. This 
is but one of many instances in the life of the Master from which we 
may learn a precious lesson. If the Son of God had time to preach 
to one soul, can not every one of us goand dothesame? If people, 
instead of coming to these meetings, folding up their arms and 
enjoying themselves, without personal effort, would wake up tothe 
fact that they have a work to do, what a wonderful work could be 
done! It is not enough to come to these meetings’ ; we want ten 
thousand workers in this city. We want ten thousand men and 
women that are willing to say, “ Lord, here am I, use me.” Ten 
thousand of such people would revolutionize this city in a little 
while. Look at the work of the mighty Wesley. The world never 
saw a hundred such men living at thesame time. The trouble is, we f 
are afraid to speak to men about their souls. Let us ask God to | | 
give us grace to overcome this man-fearing spirit. There is a wife, || 
but she dare not speak to her husband about his soul. There is a 
father who is afraid to speak to a son about his soul. What we } 
want to do is to speak to our neighbors about these things. We | 
call it a little work, but let me say to you it isa great deal. Ifwe 
would do this, we might turn ten thousand to the Son of God. 

You know the old-country fashion of holding meetings in the 
school-houses at early candle-light. Well, when it begins to grow 
dark, a man comes and brings his candle ; goes into the dark room 
and strikes a light. That one tallow-candle can’t do much toward 
lighting up the school-house, but pretty soon another man comes 
and brings his candle, and then another, and another; and, by the 
time they have a hundred candles lighted, the place is pretty well 
lit up. Now, my friends, you can not all of you be light-houses, 
but every one of you ought to be at least a tallow-candle. I have i 
heard people say, “Oh, I have only one talent; if I had ten talents, 
like somebody else, I might be of some use;” and that is nothing 
but pride. The text says, every man to his work. You don’t need 


ieiaandne tla saa sasniiet 


ve 


4 
hes \ 


T1s MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 
talents to do somebody else’s work, and every one of you has tal- 


ent enough for his own work. I haven't any talent for singing: 
Mr. Sankey hasn’t a very great talent for preaching. God has ap- 


‘pointed to each of us his own work, and to every other man, woman, 


and child in the whole world. 

Somebody invited me to go down to the dog market in London 
one day. He said they were going to have some preaching down 
there among those rough people. The streets were crowded with 
the roughest-looking set I ever saw. Almost everybody had some- 
thing to sell: a pup, or a fighting-cock, or something in that line, 
which he wanted to sell to get liquor. The preachers came and 
tried to be heard, but the people paid no attention to them. By 
and by some one said, “ Moody, you are from America; get up and 
tell them who you are, and they will listen to you.” 

So they did for awhile, for those people think that America is the 

next thing to Paradise. But as soon as I began to tell them about 
a better place than America, and invite them all to go to Heaven, 
they hurried away from me and went on with their dog-fighting and 
their cock-fighting. At last there came a rough man who had been 
converted right out from among that rough crowd ; and when he got 
up on the chair and began to speak, all his old mates crowded around 
to hear him tell the story of the Cross. God had given him a work 
to do among those lost sinners which He had not given to any of 
the rest of us; there are plenty of people who would take things 
from you that they wouldn’t take from the minister. 

There was a man at the Washington Market in Philadelphia, who 
was converted in our meetings there, and after that he used to look 
up his friends and neighbors, and bring them into the meetings, go 
with them into the inquiry-rooms, and read the Bible and pray with 
them, one after another, till they found Christ, and then he would 
go and look up somebody else. After we got through I said to him: 
“T wish you would bring me a list of those people,” for I knew he 
had kept one; and he brought me a paper with fifty-nine names 
and addresses on it of persons whom he had that winter led to 
the Saviour. There is a kind of work which every one of you 
can do. 

There is another lesson I want you to learn, viz.: God will give 
us just as many talents as we make good use of, and if we use one 
talent well, He will give us two; if we make good use of five, He 


will give us ten. Don’t you remember the Master asking the dis-. 


u has tal- 


r singing : 
d has ap- 


n, woman, 


1 London 
ing down 
yded with 
1ad some- 
that line, 
came and 
hem. By 
et up and 


rica is the 
em about 
> Heaven, 
hting and 
had been 
en he got 
>d around 
m a work 
to any of 
ke things 


phia, who 
d to look 
stings, go 
pray with 
he would 
d to him: 
knew he 
ne names 
er led to 
e of you 


will give 
> use one 
five, He 


the dis-. 


WORK FOR EVERY MAN. lig 


ciples what they had to feed the multitude with? They said five 


loaves and a few fishes. “It is enough,” said the Master, “ bring 
them to me.” And then I can seem to see one of the disciples, 
Andrew, perhaps, taking one of the loaves, after the Master had 
blessed it, to go out and feed the people. May be he did not have 
very much faith, and so broke off a little piece to give to the first 
man, thinking to make the bread hold out; but there was no less 
after he had broken off the little piece, so he breaks off a bigger one, 
and it does not seem to reduce the size of the loaf any, and so his 
faith gets larger and he goes on, breaking off big pieces, giving the 
people as much as they need. One of the Scotch brethren said he 
had no doubt but every man in the whole camp of Israel believed 
that God could use him to go out and fight against Goliath, but 
David was the only man among them who believed that God would 
do it. What we want is to believe that God will use us, that He 
actually gives us a work to do for Him, a work that is our own, and 
which if not done by us will never be done at all, and then let us 
take hold of the work feeling perfectly sure that we can do it with 
God's help. What a mighty work of grace there would be going on 
among us if there were two or three thousand Christians watching 
for souls to lead to Christ. 

When we were in Belfast, there was a man who heard about lead- 
ing souls to Christ. He began by talking to his wife, and to his 
servant, and to his children, and just as we were’ leaving Belfast, 
they were very much interested, but not converted. He came down 
to Dublin—broke up his home, left his business, and came to Dublin. 
One night he came to me, very joyous, and he says, “ My wife has 
been converted.” A little while after he came and said, “My 
younger son has been converted;’’ and a little while after he said, 
“‘ My oldest son has been converted.” And now the whole family 
isin the ark. And he came over to Manchester, and he came up to 
London, and now, perhaps, in all Belfast, there is not one that works 
harder than that whole family. Look at this man’s success. He 
found his work was right there in his own household; and if the 
fathers, and mothers, and sisters, and wives, and brothers, will try to 
bring the members of their families to Christ, and cry, “O God, 
teach me what my work is,” the Spirit of God will surely tell them 
what their work is, and then, if they are ready to go and do it, there 
will be thousands converted in this city in a few days. Oh, may the 
Spirit of the Lord come upon us to-night, and may every one of us 


‘ 
\ 


120 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


be taught by the Holy Ghost what our work is, and may we be 
ready to do it. 

Now, I am going to ask you this question: How many of you 
here will promise the Lord to select some one person among your 
acquaintance and make an honest effort this week to bring him to 
Christ? All of you who will do that, rise and stand on your feet 
while we pray. 


PRAYER. 


Our Father, we love Thee. We have come again tc-night to 
receive the blessing. We expect to receive when we ask, because 
our faith will not let Thee go. We cling to Thee, our Father, and 
ask Thee for souls. We have come again to-night to continue this 
work. We thank Thee for what we have seen within these walls 
during the past weeks. We are glad that souls are coming to Christ. 
Surely, O Father, Thou art in this good work! We want all the 
men and women to know Thee, and learn of Jesus. We want these | 
people as they come in here to embrace the Saviour. We want 
these boys and girls, and these young men and these young women, 
to be converted and drink of the stream of salvation. O Father, 
we know that if we but touch the border of Thy garment we shall 
be made whoie. ‘Help these people to see this to-night ; and may 
scores and hundreds come to Christ. All this we ask through 
Immanuel our Saviour. Amen. 


RS, 
nay we be 


ny of you 
long your 
ig him to 
your feet 


‘night to 
+, because 
ither, and 
tinue this 
1ese walls 
to Christ. 
it all the 


ant these 


We want 
g¢ women, 
) Father, 
we shall 
and may 
through 


XV. 


ON BEING BORN AGAIN. 


JOHN iii 3; ‘‘Jesus answered and said unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto thee, 
F¢eept a man be born again, he can not see the kingdom of God,” 


UPPOSE I put the question to this audience, and ask how 
many believe in the Word of God, I have no doubt every.man 
and every woman would rise and say, “I believe.” There 

might be an infidel or skeptic here and there, but undoubtedly the 
great mass would say they believed. Then what are you going to 


do with this solemn truth, “ Except a man be born again, he can not 
see the kingdom of God,” much less inherit it? There area great — 


many mysteries in the Word of God. There are a great many dark 
sayings of which we have not yet discovered the depth. But God 
has put that issue so plainly and simply that he who runs may read 
if he will. This third chapter of St. John makes the way to Heaven 
plainer than any other chapter in the Bible; yet there is no truth so 
much misunderstood, and the church and the world are so troubled 
about, as this. Let me just say, before I go any further, what regen- 
eration is not. It is not going to church. How many men think 
they are converted because they go to church! I come in contact 
with many men who say they are Christians because they go to 
church regularly. It is a wrong idea that the devil never frequents 
any place but billiard-halls, saloons, and theatres; wherever the 
Word of God is preached, He is there. He is in this audience to- 
day. You may go to church all the days of your life, and yet not be 
converted. Going to church is not being born again. But there is 
another class who say, “I don’t place my hopes in going to church. 
I have been baptized, and I think I was regenerated when that took 
place.” Where do those persons get their evidence ? Certainly not 
in the Bible. You can not baptize men into regeneration. If you 
could, I would go up and down the world and baptize every man, 
woman, and child; and if I could not do it when they were awake, 


I would do it while they slept. But the Word says, “ Except a man , 


(121) 


\ 


122 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


be born again”—born in the Spirit, born in righteousness from 
above—“ he can not see the kingdom of God.” 

There is another class who say, “I was born again when I was 
confirmed. I was confirmed when I was five years old.” But con- 
firmation is not regeneration. A new birth must be the work of 
God, and not the work of man. Baptism, confirmation, and other 
ordinances are right in their place, but the moment you build hope 
on them instead of on new birth, you are being deceived by Satan. 
Another man says, ‘‘ That is not what my hope is based upon; I say 
my prayers regularly.” I suppose there was no man prayed more 
regularly than Paul did before Christ met him; he was a praying 
man. But saying prayers is one thing, and praying is another. Say- 
ing prayers is not conversion. You may pray from education; your 
mother may have taught you when you were a little boy. I remem- 
ber that I could not go to sleep when I was a little boy unless I said 
my prayers, and yet perhaps the very,next word I uttered might be 
an oath. There is just as much virtue in counting beads as in 
saying prayers, unless the heart has been regenerated and born 
again. 

There is another class who say, “I read the Bible regularly.” 
Well, reading the Bible is very good, and prayer is very good in 
its place; but you don’t see anything in the Scriptures which says, 
“Except a man read the Bible he can not see the kingdom of God.” 
There is still another class who say, “I am trying to do the best I 


* can, and I will come out all right.” That is not new birth at all; 


that is not being born of God. Trying to do the best you can 
is not regeneration. This question of new birth is the most im- 
portant that ever came before the world, and it ought to be settled 
in every man’s mind. Every one should inquire, Have I been born 
of the Spirit >—have I passed from death unto life ,—or am I building 
my hopes of Heaven on some form? In the first chapter of Genesis 
we find God working alone; He went on creating the world all alone. 
Then we find Christ coming to Calvary alone. His disciples for- 
sook Him, and in redemption He was alone. And when we get to 
the third chapter of John we find that the work of regeneration is 
‘the work of God alone. The Ethiopian can not change his spots; 
we are born in sin, and the change of heart must come from God. 
We believe in the good old Gospel. 
What man wants is to come to God for this new heart. The mo- 
ment he gets it he will work for the Lord. He can not help it; it 


| do . i ae ee oe ee ee, ee. 


Lon J 


"es CO, QP rt Qsthnn on = 3 


; from 


I was 
it con- 
ork of 
| other 
1 hope 
Satan. 
; Tsay 
| more 
raying 

Say- 

; your 
emem- 
I said 
ght be 
; as in 
1 born 


larly.” 
ood in 
h says, 
God.” 
- best I 
at all; 
ou can 
yst im- 
settled 
n born 
uilding 
yenesis 
alone. 
es for- 
get to 
ition is 
spots; 
n God. 


he mo- 
D it; it 


ON BEING BORN AGAIN. 123 


becomes his second nature. Some say, “I would like to have you 
explain this new birth.” Well, I might as well be honest, and own 
right up that I can not explain it. I have read a great many books 
and sermons trying to explain the philosophy of it, but they all fail 
to do it. I don’t understand how it is done. I can not understand 
how God created earth. It staggers me and bewilders me when I 
think how God created nature out of nothing. But, say the infidels, 
He did not do it. Then hor did Hedoit? A man came to me in 
Scotland, and said he could explain it, and I asked him how those 
rocks are made. He said, “They are made from sand.” “What 
makes the sand?” “Oh!” he replied, “rocks.” Then,” I asked 
him, “what made the first sand?” He couldn’t tell. ‘Notwith- 
standing the philosophy of some people, we do believe that God did 


create the world. We believe in redemption. We believe that, . 


Christ came from the Father, and that He grew up and taught men. 
We believe He went into the sepulchre and burst the bands of 
death. You may ask me to explain all this; but I don’t know how 
to do it. You ask me to explain regeneration. I can not do it. 
But one thing I know—that I have been regenerated. All the infi- 
dels and skeptics could not make me believe differently. I feel a 
different man than I did twenty-one years ago last March, when 
God gave me a new heart. I have not sworn since that night, and 
I have no desire to swear. J delight to labor for God, and all the 
influences of the world cai not convince me that I am not a differ- 


ent man. I heard s ~ time ago about four or five commercial 
travelers going to hear er preach., When they got back to 
their hotel, they began tv ‘the sermon. A good many peo- 


ple just go to church for th. , urpose of discussing those things, but 
they should remember that they must be spiritually inclined to un- 
derstand spiritual things. Those travelers came to the wise conclu- 
sion that the minister did not know what he was talking about. An 
old man heard them say they would not believe anything unless 
they could reason it out,and he went up to them and said: “While 
I was coming down in the train this morning I noticed in a field some 
sheep, some geese, some swine, and cattle eating grass. Can you 
tell me by what process that grass is turned into hair, feath- 
ers, wool, and horns?” “No,” they answered, “not exactly.” 


“Well, do you believe it is done?” ‘Oh, yes, we believe that.” . 


“ But,” said the old man, “ you said you could not believe anything 
unless you understood it.” “Oh,” they answered, “we can-not help 


124 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


believing that ; we sce it.” Well, I can not help believing that I 
am regenerated, because I feel it. Christ could not explain it to 
Nicodemus, but said to him, “ The wind bloweth whete it listeth, and 
thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh 
and whither it goeth.” Can you tell all about the currents of the air? 
He says it is every one that is born of the Spirit. Suppose, because 
I never saw the wind, I say it was all false. I have lived nearly 
forty years, and I never saw the wind. I never saw a man that ever 
did see it. I can imagine that little girl down there saying, “ That 
man don’t know as much asI do. Didn’t the wind blow my hat off 
the other day? Haven't I felt the effects of the wind? Haven't I 
felt it beating against my face?” And I say you never saw the 
effects of the wind any more than a child of God felt the Spirit 
working in his heart. He knows that his eyes have been opened; 
that he has been born of the Spirit; that he has got another nature, 
a heart that goes up to God, after he has been born of the Spirit. 
It seems to me this is perfectly reasonable. 
We have a law that no man shall be elected President unless he 
was born on American soil. I never heard any one complain of 
that law. We have Germans, Scandinavians, foreigners coming here 
from all parts of the world, and I never heard a man complain of 
that law. Haven’t we got a right to say who shall reign? Had I any 
right when I was in England, where a Queen reigns, to interfere? 
Has a foreigner any right to interfere here? Has not the God of 
Heaven a right to say how a man shall come into His kingdom, and 
who shall come? And He says: “Except a man be born again, he 
can not see the kingdom.” How are you going to get in? Going 
to try to educate men? That is what men are trying to do, but it 
is not God’s way. A man is not much better after he is educated if 
he hasn’t got God in his heart. Other men say, “I will work my 
way up.” That is not God’s way, and the only way is God’s way— 
to ke born again. Heaven isa Prepared piace for a prepared people. 
You take an unregenerated man in Chicago and put him on the crys- 
tal pavements of Heaven, and it would be hell! A man that can’t 
bear to spend one Sunday among God’s people on earth, with all 
their imperfections, what is he going to do among those who have 
made their robes white in the blood of the Lamb? He would say 
that was hell for him. Take the unregenerated man and put him 
into the very shadow of the Tree of Life, and he wouldn’t want to 
sit there. A man who is born of the Spirit becomes a citizen of 


. Rema e a ae a i ee 
e~T TS Ho ta wTnwnNn fp nmeey 


C! 


S. 


ig that I 
ain it to 
teth, and 
: cometh 
the air? 
because 
1 nearly 
hat ever 
 * That 
hat off 
aven’t I 
saw the 
e Spirit 
»pened ; 
nature, 
> Spirit. 


iless he 
lain of 
ng here 
lain of 
id I any 
erfere ? 
God of 
ym, and 
rain, he 
Going 
, but it 
ated if 
rik my 
way— 
reople. 
e crys- 
t can’t 
ith all 
> have 
ld say 
it him 
ant to 
en of 


ON BEING BORN AGAIN. 125 


another world. He has been translated into new life, taken out of 
the power of darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of Light. 


Haven’t you seen all around you men who had become suddenly 
and entirely changed ? 


Just draw a picture: Suppose we go down into one of these 


alleys—and I have been into some pretty dark holes down here in 
this alley that used to lie back of Madison street, and I have seen 
some pretty wretched homes. Go to one of those rooms, and you 
find a wife, with h.r four or five children. The woman is heart- 
broken. She is discouraged. When she married that man he 
swore to protect, love, and care for her, and provide for all her 
wants. He made good promises and kept them, for a few years, 
and did love her. But he got led away into one of these drinking 
saloons. He was a noble-hearted man by nature, and those are 
just the ones that are led astray. He has now become a confirmed 
drunkard. His children can tell by his footfall that he comes home 
drunk. They look upon him asa monster. The wife has many a 
scar on her body that she has received from that man’s arm who 
swore to love and protect her. Instead of being a kind-hearted 


husband, he has become a demon. He don’t provide for that poor. 


woman. What a struggle there is! And may God have mercy 
upon the poor drunkard and his family is my prayer constantly! 
Suppose he is here in that gallery up there, or in the dark back 
there, and you can’t see him. May be he is so ashamed of himself 
that he has got behind a post. He hears that he may be regen- 
erated; that God will take away the love of strong drink, and snap 
the fetters that have been binding him, and make him a free man, 
and he says, “ By the grace of God I will ask Him to give mea 
new heart.” And he says, “O God, save me!” Then he goes 
home. His wife says, “I never saw my husband look so happy for 
years. What has come over him?” He says, “I have been up 
there to hear these strangers. I heard Mr. Sankey singing ‘ Jesus 
of Nazareth passeth by,’ and it touched my heart. The sermon 
about being born again touched my heart, and, wife, I just prayed 
right there, and asked God to give me a new heart, and I believe 
He has done it. Come, wife, pray with me!” And there they 
kneel down and erect the family altar. 

Three months hence you go to that home, and what do you 
find? All is changed. He is singing “Rock of Ages, cleft for 


me,” or that other hymn his mother once taught him, “ There ig 


} 
q 4 = 
> 
f iow 
‘ 
ya 
at 
> Ihe 
i! i . 
; viet 
Hf 7 
4 
iH 
a 
i j 
‘ i 
He fh 
Ned Vv + 
b q 
‘oe 
bd id 
WH fie. 
4 
) ate 
| te> 
i a 
if 
min: 
i} ‘ 
\ 1 
| q 
} ' “ 
ip 
j, 


: a. 


SE = oumg = 
EIS LEER I 


, 


‘ 
\ 


126 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


a fountain filled with blood.” His children have their arms 
upon his neck. That is Heaven upon earth. The Lord God 
dwells there. That man is passed from death unto life. That 
is the conversion we are aiming at. The man is made better, 
anc that is what God does when a man has the spirit of Heaven 
upon him. He regenerates them, re-creates them in His own 
image. Let us pray that every man here who has the love of 
strong drink may be converted. Unite in prayer with me now 
and ask God to save these men that are rushing on to death 
and ruin. 


PIMAP ARP aperreaerearstoremetaresmasen ree eae ae ee 


4 Fi Le ' 
RS, 


neir arms 
ord God 
e. That : 
e better, | 
f Heaven : 


His own XVI. 


> love of ; i 
me now THE BRAZEN SERPENT. ' 
to death i 


JOHN iii. 14, 15: “ And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so 
must the Son of Man be lifted up ; that whosoever believeth in Him should not “ 
perish, but have eternal life.” 


DIDN'T get through with the subject—Being born again—and 
I will just continue it. I was trying to show from Scripture that 
a new birth is not a reformation—is not a turning over a new leaf, 
as some call it, is not a making up your mind to simply lead better 
lives. They must be born of the Spirit, and then they will live ac- 
cording to the Spirit. Unless they do this, reformation will be worth- 
less. To be born again does not merely mean a resolve to be better, 
The fountain from which these resolves spring must be good—must be 
of the Spirit, and the tree will be good. If you havea fountain which 
contains bitter water, you can not expect sweet water to flow from 
it. Men try to make their lives sweet, and they have an undercur- 
rent of bitter water. That undercurrent must be sweetened first if 
they have to lead pure lives, and that is the meaning of the text, 
“Except a man be born again.” Now, I have found a good many 
men who believed that this passage referred to drunkards and har- 
lots. ‘They need to be reformed, and that’s what’s meant by it,” 
they say. Oh, they need to be regenerated. But who was this that 
Christ talked regeneration to? It was Nicodemus. We are told 
that he was a nobleman, a counselor, one of the chief rulers, apd 
there were none higher among the Jews for integrity and honor 
than this same Nicodemus. He was at the very top round of the | 
ladder. He had believed in the teachings of Moses, and lived ac- _ 
cording to them. He had heard of Jesus, and one night he came to 
| Him and said, “ We know that Thou art a teacher come from Gog, 
: i for no man can do these miracles that Thou doest except God be 
| with him.” I don’t know whether anything was said after that, but, 
the next verse we see Jesus telling him, “Except a man be born | | 
again he can not enter the kingdom of God,” and he met him with | jj 
(127) a 


dt 


128 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


a “how.” I don’t know if a man has ever come to Christ without 
first coming with a “how;” they want to know the how and the 
wherefore. And so Nicodemus asked him, “How can a man be 
born again when he is old?” and Christ goes on to tell him how he 
can be reborn. ‘That which is born of the flesh is flesh,” and it 
will remain so till it crumbles away in the grave. We may try to 
patch up our old Adam nature, but it is of no use. It will be a fail- 
ure. Men have tried to do it for six thousand years, and what God 
can not do, men need not try.. By the birth Christ offers us He 
makes a new creation. He does not put a new piece upon an old 
garment ; He does not put new wine into old bottles. He makes a 
new garment, and it is new wine into new bottles. Men may as 
well give up the idea of making the old into a new nature. God has 
said it is bad, and that it can never come into His sight unless there 
is a new birth. 
When I was born of my parents,,in 1837, I received my human 
\nature from them, and it was a very bad nature too. The nature 
\they received from their forefathers was bad also, and we might 
itrace it right back to Adam. When I was born of the Spirit, in 
11857, there was a struggle between the Adam nature and the new 
mature; a conflict between the Spirit and the flesh. And this takes 
place with every one who accepts the birth of the Spirit. It has to 
fight against lust, idolatry, and the other works of the flesh spoken 
of-in the chapter we read in Galatians. When these works of the 
flesh are overcome, we put on anew man and walk into a new life. 
The child of God is one of the most remarkable of human beings. 
He has two natures. The one is love and the other is enmity 
toward God. Christ told Nicodemus he must be born again, and 
_ did not leave him in darkness on the subject. He showed him how 
he might be born again. He gave him a remedy to change his nat- 
ure given him by Adam. You may say that the earth is a vast hos- x 
pital. Every man and woman coming into it needs a physician. 
If you search you will find every one wounded. By nature we are 
sinners, and there is just one Physician who can come in, and 
that is Christ Himself. While in Belfast I learned of a surgeon 
who had a custom, when he went into the hospital and found a 
patient who had broken his arm or leg, or whatever the wound 
might be, of saying to that patient, “ Now, take a good look at 
your wound,” and after that was done he would say, “ Now, take 
your eyes off the wound and look at me.” And that is the way 


without 
ind the 
man be 
how he 
’ and it 
y try to 
e a fail- 
1at God 
us He 
an old 
makes a 
may as 
x0d has 
ss there 


human 
nature 
> might 
pirit, in 
he new 
is takes 
t has to 
spoken 
of the 
ew life. 
beings. 
enmity 
iin, and 
im how 
his nat- 
ast hos- x 
ysician. 
we are 
in, and 
surgeon 
ound a 
wound 
look at 
w, take 
he way 


MOODY AND SANKEY’S TABERNACLE, BOSTON, 
be eas 


q 
q 
i 
i 


PS 
' 


tell me there is no hope for me. 


THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 


120 


with the great Physician. He wants us to take a look at our 
wounds—at the badness of our heart—and then take our eyes off 
and fix them on Him. He has given us a remedy and directions of 
how to take it. In the third chapter of John at the beginning He ab 
tells:you what you have to get before you can enter the kingdom ; 
and away down in the fourteenth verse He tells you how to get it: 
‘And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so 
must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in Him 
should not perish, but have eternal life.” Here is the remedy, and, + 
thank God, it is a universal remedy. We have not got to pick a 
man here and there—that man in the gallery there, or that woman 
yonder, and say, “You can be saved.” It is for all, all! Someone x 
may say, “That is Universalism.” Call it what you like. God has 
offered the blessing to every wounded one, to every one who groans : 
under the curse of the flesh, and thus I can prove that any man le 
born on the earth has got a Saviour. “Ye must be born again,” it 
and “He must be lifted up.” He has done His part—He has given __ I; 
us the remedy, and we must lift Him up. ek 
A great many people complain of the justice of God. They say, X oe [4 
“What a piece of injustice it is in God to condemn us because ee 
Adain sinned six thousand years ago; because somebody else ‘a 
sinned we are to be punished.” We hear this every day—we hear q 
it in the streets of Chicago. “We don’t believe the Bible if it con- 
demns us for the sins of a man who lived six thousand years ago,” |g 
Now if you hear this or say this, let me tell you if any of you are | @ 
stumbling over this mistake, it isa lie. If you are lost it is because et 
you are spurning the remedy—not because God don’t want to save 
you. Well, you will say, it is because of Adam’s sin that there is 
the necessity of being saved, I say it is, and I also say it ain’t. Ah, 
you will say, “ That is a contradiction.” Let me give you an illus- 
tration. Suppose I am just living my last days on earth, and con- 
sumption is my disease. I have had the leading physicians around 
me, and they say I can not live thirty days. Well, somebody comes 4 
along and says: “ Moody, you have consumption.” “Well, you 
needn’t tell me that,” I respond. “But, Moody, I’ve got a 
remedy,” he says. “There’s no remedy for me,” I tel] him: ©4 
have been to all the Physicians of Europe and America, and they 
They all say my lungs are clean 
Yone, and it’s impossible for me to live.” « But I tell you you 


dn’t die,” this man says, “there’s a remedy. Ten years ago I 
9 


See ger oo —— — 
ee ee olan EOLA ERROR Rt myn mpsyt ccm. ay 
~ 2s es 3 


130 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


was on the verge of the grave. Doctors told me I couldn’t live ; 
that my lungs were gone, and all that, but a friend came to me and 
gave me the medicine and I-took it. It cured me.” “That is a 
very strange story,” I might reply; “I have known you for a good 
many years, and if you were before a jury I would believe your 
testimony before almost any man I know; but when you tell me 
you were as far gone asI am, and that you were saved by that 
medicine, I can not believe you.” Well, off he goes and brings a 
friend, and he testifies that he himself was as bad as I am and was 
cured. I have known the man for years and never doubted his 
word. Here are two. instances. You can establish anything in 
court if you can get them to agree on any one point. Well, those 
two witnesses testify to me, but I don’t believe them. So they go 
and get others to testify, and then the first one says: “ Now, 
Moody, you have the testimony of these friends. The medicine 
cost me a great deal, but I would like to see you recover, and I 
give it to you for nothing.” This is the way with salvation. It is 
as free as the air we breathe, and it cost God all that He could give. 
It cost Heaven its richest jewel. And so this friend says to me, 
“Moody, that medicine cost me everything I had; take it, it is 
free.”’ I take the remedy, and, instead of using it, dash it to the 
ground, and die of consumption. The fact of my having consump- 
tion was not the reason of my death. It was because I spurned the 
remedy. If you men and women are lost it is because we have 
spurned the remedy, not because we are the sons of Adam and 


have inherited his nature. Salvation is a gift. Take God’s Son as. 


a Saviour. “ As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even 
so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth in 


Him should not perish, but have eternal life.” Now He has been X 


lifted up, and we have just to take salvation as a gift. 

Let us look into the camp of Israel when Moses lifted up that 
serpent. There are three millions of people coming up out of Egypt, 
out of bondage. When they had come to a certain length they had 
disobeyed God. He brought them safely through the Red Sea, and 
now they turn aside from Him and He has brought judgment upon 
them, just as He has brought judgment upon this city. The people 
were dying everywhere, and a petition went up to God to have mercy 
upon them. You could hear the groans of the wounded and the 
dying from one end of the camp to the other. There is a mother 
bearing away her loved child to the grave and lamenting over her 


Pe ENE oy wk et te SiR Nea a niga pen set i aL LY ae AT 


— 


‘ 
< 


ildn’t live ; 
>to me and 
‘That is a 
1 for a good 
elieve your 
rou tell me 
red by that 
nd brings a 
am and was 
loubted his 
inything in 
Well, those 
So they go 
ys: “Now, 
ie medicine 
cover, and I 
ition. It is 
‘could give. 
says to me, 
take it, it is 
th it to the 
ig consump- 
spurned the 
ise we have 
Adam and 


od’s Son as. 


erness, even 
believeth in 


te has been X 


ted up that 
ut of Egypt, 
th they had 
.ed Sea, and 
pment upon 
The people 
have mercy 
ded and the 

is a mother 
ng over her 


ne 


THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 131 


fost one. At another corner we see a son mourning over the death 
of a mother. Again, we see a family group plunged in affliction. The 
father has died and left a widow and a large family, and they are 
bearing the body away to that grave in the wilderness. There is a 
young man who has just been cut down. He was in the bloom and 
flush of manhood, and here is a young lady who has received t! - 
fatal sting, and is being laid in her narrow bed, her friends mourn. 
ing that they have to leave her in that desert forever. Not a family 
but who has lost some loved one; all is despair and desolation. 
And what a picture of the world to-day! Look over the audience. 
Yonder a father who has just lost a son who was the pride of his 
heart ; here again is a young widow who is mourning over the loss 
of her husband ; there a child who has just seen her mother or father 
laid at rest forever. There is mourning all over. Ah, there is many 
a dark and desolate home in the city to-night which but reflects the 
picture of the wilderness, These serpents were very busy, and the 
moment a man or woman was bitten, they were gone. There was 
no physician who could heal them. It was sure death, and when 
Moses lifted up that serpent as a remedy, how the news spread. I 
can see a mother whose boy has been bitten. Ah, I can imagine 
how that mother felt toward that boy. Mothers, you know how 
you love your only child. There she is leaning over her boy, and 
she says: “Oh, my son, those beautiful eyes will soon be closed in 
death and you will be gone forever.” She sees the glaring film 
gathering over them; she feels the cold hand of death stealing over 
her darling; she hears the death-rattle in his throat, and all 
at once there is a great noise. Some one at that moment rushes 
past her tent, and she stops him and asks, “What is all that 
noise?” “Why,” says the man, “God has provided a remedy, 
and all those who have been bitten by the fiery serpent can live if 
they but take the remedy.” “Tell me what it is. Where is it?” 


' eagerly inquires the woman. “ Well,” responds the man, “God has 


told Moses to make a brass serpent and lift it up with prayer, 
and that shout was the shout of all Israel when the serpent was 
lifted up.” “Where is it?” she inquires with eagerness. “ Right 
up yonder, on the hill.” And she goes a little way and sees the 
serpent, and comes running back to her boy and says, “ You haven’t 
got to die, my boy, God has provided a remedy.” “A remedy?” 
ejaculates the boy. « Yes,” says the mother, “God has told Moses 
to make a brass serpent and put it up, and if the people who have | 


é 


jitiie po Michelman AO pas 
‘ih i " t rr rind 
: 7 ! * me 


! 


132 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


been bitter but look at it, they will be cured.” “Is it true, mother?” he 
asks the boy, with a little incredulity. “Why, certainly it is true, th 
my dear; I saw some persons running about who had been bitten.” of 

“ How I wish I could walk to it; but I can’t; I am too weak.” So he 
the mother just takes the boy in her arms and runs with him to the ha 

_ i ot of the hill, and turns his face to the serpent and tells him to yo 
ia 6 ~—s look. =‘ There is a film almost over his eyes, and he says, “ Mother, I an 
a can’t see it.” ‘ Keep on looking, my boy,” urges the mother .~.° an 
he strains his eyes in the direction of the serpent, and at las’ ' ph 
catches a faint glimpse of it, and leaps from his mother’s arms per- of 
fectly well. He trusted his mother, and he took the remedy she ba 
told him of. He is a young convert now, and I can see him now fre 
running about and telling every one what the Lord had done for we 
him. Said a Scotch woman, who had been converted, ‘The Lord we 

| will never hear the last of this,” and so a convert can not keep his it! 
peace. He must run about and;tell what he has found—try and tel 
share his joy with others. This boy was a convert, and tells every sin 
one he meets what has been done to him by looking on the ser- ma 
pent—how he has been healed. He hears of a man who has been me 
bitten, and rushes to his tent and shouts, “I’ve got good news for “ji 
you. Youcan be saved.” “That’s nonsense,” says the man, “I no 
never knew of a man who had been bitten but who died.” “Oh, in 
but God has provided a remedy,” replies the boy. ‘God has cal 
told Moses to lift up a brass serpent, and tell every one who has you 
been bitten to look on it and they will be saved. I was bitten as wh 
bad as you are and I have been saved.” “Why,” replies the man, wo 
“you don’t think I am fool enough to believe that a man as near sal 
death as I am can be saved by merely looking at a brass serpenton [in 

a pole?” He couldn’t believe it-—he didn’t see the philosophy of _ & are 

it. That is a type of a class of people here in Chicago. They want to 
to know the philosophy of salvation. “If they had some remedy you 
to take out the poison of the sting,” says the man, “I might believe pol 
you; but the idea of looking at a brazen serpent on a pole is pre- Th 
posterous.” ‘Well, I tell you,” urges the boy, “twenty minutes jae the 
ago I was as nearly dead as you are now. My mother came and | eve 
told me of it, and I was too weak to go, but she carried me where ie (wil 

I could catch a glimpse of it, and in a minute—yes, in the twin- ul eve 
kling of an eye, I was made perfectly well.” ‘You don’t say,” | ee 
he responds, rather curiously. ‘Yes, I do say so,” rejoins the boy. | bite 


The man does not know what to make of this. And let me say | pret 


eS. 


nother?’ 
t is true, 
n bitten.” 
2ak.” So 
im to the 
ls him to 
Mother, I 
ther .-* 
it las’ 
arms per- 
medy she 
him now 
done for 
The Lord 
keep his 
—try and 
ells every 
. the ser- 
has been 
news for 
man, “I 
Peleus) 1 
God has 
‘who has 
bitten as 
the man, 
nas near 
erpent on 
ysophy of 
‘hey want 
e remedy 
ht believe 
le is pre- 
7 minutes 
came and 
me where 
the twin- 
yn’t say,” 
; the boy. 
st me say 


q 
i 


| 
i} 
L} 
an 
ti] 
in 
tl 
a 
T 


THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 133 


here that there is nothing that upsets an infidel or a scoffer more 
than a conversion. It is better than all books; better than scores 
of sermons on the subject. This man heard this young convert, but 
he wanted to know the philosophy of it—even after he tells him he 
had been bitten himself, and explains how he had been cured. The 
young convert urges him to come to the door of the tent and lock, 
and but to look, and he will be cured. “ Why, you don’t think I 
am going to make such a fool of myself unless you can show me the 


' philosophy of it?”” Away the young convert goes and brings one 


of his friends to the man and says to him: “Wasn't you bitten as 
bad as this man?” The friend tells how he was only a few minutes 
from death, and how he only looked at that serpent and became as 
well as ever he was in his life. “I can hardly believe your cases 
were as bad as mine. There must be some mistake. I can’t believe 
it!” But while they are speaking, this man’s mother rushes in and 
tells how hundreds of men who were bitten have been cured by 
simply looking at the serpent set up by Moses. “Why,” says the 
man, “that is just what these young men have been trying to tell 
me; but I can not believe it.” “It’s true,” responds the mother; 
“just come to the door of the tent and you will be cured.” “I-can 
not do it,” says the son. “It is hard to die in the camp and be put 
in a grave in the desert ; but, mother, I can not understand this—I 
can't see the philosophy of it; I can’t reason it out.” And the 
young man dies in his unbelief.. Now, whose fault was it? Tell me 
whose fault it was? God offered a cure to that young man, and he 
wouldn’t take it. God has offered a remedy tous. He has offered 
salvation. The way of this young man is but the way of hundreds 
in Chicago. They are unwilling to take the salvation offered. They 
are unwilling to take it without adding something to it. They want 
to add something to the finished work of Jesus Christ. These 
young men were not saved by holding up the pole or looking at the 
pole. All the churches in Christendom never saved a Christian. 
They are but poles on which is seen salvation. Look, look clear to 
the top of the pole, look to the brazen serpent ; look and live for- 
ever! Look to the top, for “As Moses lifted up the serpent in the 
wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up, that whoso- 
ever believeth in Him should not perish, but have eternal life.” 


iy « There are a great many people who say, “I wish I could feel the 


bite more.” If you don’t feel the bite, it is evident that you are 
pretty severely bitten. If then you don’t-feel that the punishment is 


a 
ees | 


Fg en ee es ae 


\ 
™ 


134. MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


hanging over you, you are pretty far gone; if you don’t feel that 
you have committed a sin, you are pretty far gone. Some say to 
us: “I wish I had. your faith "—you don’t want our experience. 
Look toward your Saviour. He is offered free to all. I never 
preach upon the third chapter of John without telling an incident 
that occurred after the battles of Pittsburgh Landing and Murfrees- 
boro. I had been talking one night to the soldiers, and telling them 
to drink of the waters of life, and they would never die. I was very 
tired, and when I went to bed, I soon fell asleep. Soon after I had 


| retired, a soldier came and aroused me, and wished me to come to a 


man who was dying. I soon was at his bedside, and he said, 
“Chaplain ’—he called me chaplain, although I was only a member 
of the Christian Commission—“ Chaplain, I wish you would help 
me to die.” “My friend, I would willingly carry you unto the 
kingdom of God, but I can not; Christ can only do that,” 
and I preached Jesus to him. “ But,” said the soldier, “ He won't 
help me; I've been fighting Him all my life. I had a praying 
mother, and I disregarded her prayers always; but I told her when 
I joined the army that if I got through the war I would become a 
Christian. But I am dying now.” I looked at the man and said he 
was dying, and thought how anxious that mother must have been, 
and how happy it would make her if he could just get a sight of 
Heaven. So I quoted promise after promise; but he could not see 
them, and I got nearly discouraged. His condition seemed to grow 


darker and darker, and I didn’t know what to do. At last the 


thought occurred to me to read the story of Nicodemus, and I said, 
“ My friend, I am going to read you a story, and I want you to pay 
attention.” When I commenced, I noticed how eagerly he listened, 
how greedily he seemed to devour every word. It seemed as if he 
drank in every letter of the verses. When I got to the verse, “As 
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son 
of Man be lifted up, that whosoever believeth on Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life,” the dying man stopped. “What 
is that?” he asked. “Is that true? I want you just to read that 
again,” and I read the two verses over carefully, and as I finished, he 
rose in his bed and shut his eyes, and said: “Bless God for that,” 
and the cloud that had rested on his face gave place to a look of 
gladness. “Won't you please read that again?” TI did so, and as 
I finished, he folded his arms across his breast and closed his eyes, 
When I had read it the third time, I went on to the next verse, 


RS. 


't feel that 


ome say to 
xperience, 
I never 
n incident 
Murfrees- 
lling them 
I was very 
ifter I had 
come toa 
1 he said, 
a member 
ould help 
unto the 
do that,” 
He won’t 
a praying 
her when 
become a 
id said he 
ave been, 
. sight of 
d not see 
1 to grow 
last the 
nd I said, 
Su to pay 
listened, 
las if he 
tse, “vig 
- the Son 
ould not 
“What 
read that 
ished, he 
or that,” 
_ look of 
9, and as 
his eyes, 
xt verse, 


THE BRAZEN SERPENT, 135 


“For God so loved the world thit He gave His only begotten Son . 
that whosoever believeth in Him should not. perish, but have ever- 
lasting life.’ I read on through the whole chapter, and when I got 
through, he turned to me and said, “I understand it now ; write to 
my mother and tell her I died trusting in Christ,” and in a whisper- 
ing voice repeated the fourteenth and fifteenth verses ; and out of 
that hospital he arose and took his seat in the kingdom of God. 
There is enough in those verses to save every one here, and all that 
you have to do is to look on Him and be saved. 


— “a Bt 
__ ERRNO desea im 


a 
. 


sO 


“ gee 


had 


XVII. 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET IT. 


MAT. xv. 28: “ Great is thy faith.” 


WANT to call your attention to what many call a very dry sub- 

ject. I can imagine some of you saying, “If I had known that, 

I wouldn’t have come here.” The subject is “ Faith,” and it is 

a very important subject, if it is dry, because we read that it is im- 

possible to please God without it, and it is by it that we are really 

led to Christ. We never really will see the kingdom of God with- 

out it. In Hebrews xi. Paul tells us, if he wrote this epistle to the 
Hebrews: 

“ Now faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of 
things not seen. 

“ For by it the elders obtained a good report. 

“Turough faith we understand that the worlds were framed by 
the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of 
things which do appear. 

“ By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than 
Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous, God 
testifying of his gifts: and by it he being dead yet speaketh. 

“ By faith Enoch was translated, that he should not see death; 
and was not found; because God had translated him: for before his 
translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God. 

“ But without faith it is impossible to please Him; for he that 
cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder 
of them that diligentiy seek Him. 

“ By faith Noah, being warned of God of things not seen as yet, 
moved with fear, prepared an ark to the saving of his house; by the 
which he condemned the world and became heir of the righteous- 
ness which is by faith. 

“ By faith Abraham, when he was called to go out into a place 
which he should after receive for an inheritance, obeyed ; and he 
went out not knowing whither he went.” 

(136) 


dry sub- 
wn that, 
and it is 
it is im- 
re really 
od with- 
eto the 


lence of 


imed by 
made of 


fice than 
us, God 
h. 

» death; 
efore his 


he that 
rewarder 


n as yet, 
; by the 
shteous- 


a place 
- and he 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET IT. 137 


And so it goes on through the chapter, and I think the word 
“faith” occurs fourteen times. It is by faith these men did so and 
so; by faith these men overcame the world; by faith they received 
courage, and, in fact, every successful man in the whole Bible has 
obtained his success by faith. Without faith it is impossible to 
please God. Many people don’t rightly understand what faith-is, 
and they want to get acorrect definition of it. It isthe dependence 
upon the veracity of another, and the dependence is composed of 
three things. The first is knowledge. The second is assent. Many 
have got these two, yet they are not saved men. They say “I 
believe ’—they give their assent, but they are not Christians until 
they have the third, and that is laying hold. That is the kind of 
faith we want here to-night. Faith says, “ God has got that, and I 
am going to have it;” unbelief says, “You sha’n’t.” 

Faith is the foundation of all society. We have only to look 
around and see this. You and I could not live in this community if 
it weren’t for faith; commercial relations couldn’t exist. Let men 
lose confidence—which is faith—in one another, and there would 
be such a run upon the banks to-morrow that would cause general 
bankruptcy. Men have faith in one another. A great many 
people think that the faith spoken of in the Bible is not of the 
right sort—they don’t think they have got the proper kind of faith, 
and they are waiing for some new kind of faith to come out of 
Heaven. The faith spoken of in the Bible is no miraculous kind 
of faith. It is the same kind of faith we have in one another. 
Faith has an outward look and an inward look. Many people 


never look any other way than inward. They are like a horse. 


working a treadmill, going round and round and never get out 
of the circuit—never look beyond it. Faith says, Look to God— 
take Him at His word. They don’t do this, and their path is 
shadowed by clouds; but the moment they take Him at His word 
the clouds of darkness disappear and they walk under an unclouded 
sky. 

There is just one thought here I want to call your attention to. 
The reason so many men are doubtful about faith is because they 
have put confidence in men and have been deceived, and they put 
God in the same category. Now the Lord warns us about this: 
“Thus saith the Lord. Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, 
and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departech from the 
Lord. For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not 


138 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


see when good cometh; but shall. inhabit the parched places in the 
wilderness in a salt land and not inhabited.” How true that is. If 
a man has not got faith in God, but in man, he gets no blessing, no 
good comes to him. Many in this assemblage will get the blessing, 
and others sitting by their side will get no blessing. And then the 
next verses are: “Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord 
and whose hope the Lord is. For he shall be as a tree planted by 
the waters, and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall 
not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not 
be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding 
fruit.” And it goes on to say: “The heart is deceitful above all 
things and desperately wicked ; who can know it?” Or, in other 
words, don’t trust in your heart. Do not listen to your own heart ; 
I would sooner trust to God than to the promptings of my own 
treacherous heart. If you like to speak honestly, you will indorse 
this. There is not a man here but who, if he is frank, can testify 
that his heart has led him into wickedness. “The heart is deceit- 
ful above all things and desperately wicked.” It isa good deal 


’ 


better to put our trust in God than in ourselves, because He has 


never yet failed. I never knew a man who put faith in his own 
heart, who trusted to the arm of the flesh, but who failed. We 
don’t want to put any trust in ourselves, but put our trust in God, 
and then we shall be established and receive strength from Him. 
The Psalmist says: “ Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son 
of man, in whom there is no help. His breath goeth forth, he 
returneth to his earth; in that very day his thoughts perish. Happy 
is-he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the 
Lord his God.” Now my experience has been this, that whenever I 
found a man or woman in any part of the world who put their trust 
in God and not in themselves, they were filled with peace and joy 
all the time; but if they put their trust in any church, any creed, 
or any minister they were disappointed. If they put it in a minister 
and he dies, they say, we can not get any other preacher like him; 
“We can not find one to fill his place;” but if they have looked 
beyond the minister and put their trust in God, they were never 


‘disappointed. That is one reason why so many Christians are in 


sorrow. They have put their trust in preachers or in some institu- 
tion of man. 


In the days of the war a great many men started from Indiana, 
you recollect. Many of them had been propped up by some church, 


Pree a, 


RS, 


aces in the 
hat is. If 
lessing, no 
e blessing, 
d then the 
the Lord 
slanted by 
, and shall 
d shall not 
m yielding 


l above all, 


r,in other 
wn heart ; 
f my own 
ill indorse 
an testify 
t is deceit- 
good deal 


se He has 


1 his own 
iled. We 
st in God, 
rom Him. 
in the son 
forth, he 
h. Happy 
e is in the 
henever I 
their trust 
e and joy 
uny creed, 
a minister 
like him; 
ve looked 
ere never 
ans are in 
ie institu- 


Indiana, 
1e church, 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET IT. 139 


or they were wrapped up in some minister, and how many of them 


fell simply because they hadn’t learned that lesson to trust in.the ~ 


Lord. But those who had learned the lesson in the eleventh chapter 
of Mark, “ Have faith in God,” how firm they stood amid all temp- 
tation. The trust we put in God when we accept Him in faith—- 
the moment we do it we stand before the face of hell—we triumph 
amid all difficulties. We are never disappointed. When Christ was 
here you know how sweet faith was to Him when He found it, and 
those who came to Him with it received whatever they asked. Mr. 
Morehouse said the other day at the noonday meeting that faith 
was everything for him; and if men could only get their eyes off 
themselves and put them on Him, all blessings would come. Now 
let us get our eyes off one another and fix them upon Christ, and 
have faith in Him and His works. 

The eleventh chapter of Hebrews takes up Abel, and Enoch, and 
Noah, and Abraham, and goes on down the whole line. Paul com- 
mences the twelfth chapter by saying: ‘“ Wherefore, seeing we are 
also compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses,” we must 
look “unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith.” He says: 
“Take your eyes off Enoch, and Noah, and Abraham.” ‘These are 
very good men; but we can not afford to trust in them. We have 
got something better than them—“ looking unto Jesus.” 

Now, a great many people tell us it don’t matter what kind of a 
god man believes in, so long as he is sincere in his belief. My 
friends, there is no more delusive idea—no more pernicious doc- 
trine ever came out of hell. Why, the most sincere men I ever 
heard of were the followers of Baal. How they cut themselves 
with knives and stones, and tore themselves to pieces, and how 
they jumped upon their altars and cried in their agony, “Baal, 
Baal!” They believed in their god, but he did not answer them. 
Any creed is good, as I say, with some people, if they only believe 
it. What folly that is—what foolish men. I remember reading 
about two men who intended starting in a balloon. One of the 
men had got into the car, and thought it was fastened at each side, 
so he cut one rope, and that was the only fastening, and he was 
swept up through the heavens, but the other remained on the earth. 
The man that went up was terribly in earnest as he cut that rope, 
but he was lost. And so aman may believe an error and be lost. 
We must believe the truth as given us. It isn’t our error, or'a lie. 

And how many people go wandering about without any definite 


J 


ii _ sth esas ee cate ails i 


140 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


belief—who don’t know what they believe? I remember meeting a 
man,in Europe, and I asked him, “ What do you believe?” “ Well,” 
said he, “I go to the. church and I believe what the church 
believes.” He didn’t know exactly what he did believe; and there 
are a great many people just like that man. If you ask them what 
they believe, they will say they believe as the church they attend 
believes, but they don’t know really what that is. They never 
realize that it is of the utmost importance to know in whom we 
trust. We must be sure of what we have faith in. How are we 
going to get that faith? I don’t know how many times I have been 
asked this question. I did not get faith in a minute—I was montns 
in getting it. Why? Because I didn’t understand the Word of 
God. We must first acquaint ourselves with Him, and faith will 
come tous. ‘“Acquaint thyself with Him, and He will come after.” 
When I first got acquainted with my friend Mr. Sankey, J had not 
large faith in him, because I was not acquainted with him. But at 
the end of the first year I had more faith in him, and at the end of 
the second year I had still more; and now five years have gone by, 
and I have a great deal of faithin him. Why? Because I find 
him a true man. If God had proved untrue to those who have 
trusted in Him in adversity, amid the billows of persecution, we might 
not trust Him. But all testimony goes to show that when men 
trusted God as the waves of trouble dashed against them with their 
fiercest fury, He never forsook them. God has never deceived; 
man has. 

I contend that those infidels who assail us, have no weight with 
us, and have no right to speak about our faith, because they are 
talking about something they know nothing about. They have no 
knowledge upon the. subject. Not forty-eight hours ago, a man 
came to me and began to talk against a public man Iam acquainted 
with. I just said to him, “Did you ever know him?” “No.” 
“ Ever hear him speak?” “No.” ‘Well,’ said I, “I contend you 
have no right to speak about him at all.” He had a feeling of prej- 
‘udice against that man, and he was willing to condemn him upon 
the strength of that feeling. And so it is about God. Infidels and 
scoffers who are filled with prejudice condemn God. If you want 
to know about God, read His blessed Word. The more you read 
about Him the more faith you will feel toward Him. When I was 
converted, twenty years ago, I felt a faith in God; but five years 
after I had a hundred times more faith, and five years ago I had 


RS, 


meeting a 
’ “Well,” 
he church 
and there 
hem what 
1ey attend 
hey never 
whom we 
yw are we 
have been 
as montns 
Word of 
faith will 
me after.” 
T had not 
1. But at 
he end of 
e gone by, 
use I find 
who have 
, we might 
when men 
with their 
deceived ; 


eight with 
> they are 
2y have no 
70, a man 
acquainted 
"UNG 
ntend you 
ng of prej- 
him upon 
nfidels and 
you want 
» you read 
Jhen I was 
five years 
ago I had 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET IT. 14! 


more than ever, because I became better acquainted with Him. I 
have read up the Word, and I see that the Lord has done so and 


so, and then I have turned to where He has promised to perform it, © 


and when I see this I have reason to believe in Him. 

Suppose a man in this audience made a hundred promises, and 
said to me: “T will fulfill those promises in ten years.” At the end 
of nine years ninety-nine of those promises have been fulfilled, and 
one year remains for the fulfillment of the last promise. Well, I 
have known that man all those years, and he has fulfilled those 
ninety-nine promises and his disposition is unchanged. Have I any 
reason to believe that he will not fulfill that last promise during the 
remaining year? No. And no man who knows God and reads of 
the promises He has fulfilled can help having faith in Him. It is 
only those men who do not know Him that doubt Him. I remem- 
ber, while in Mobile attending meetings, a little incident occurred, 
which I will relate. It was a beautiful evening, and just before the 
meeting some neighbors and myself were sitting on the front piaz- 
za enjoying the evening. One of the neighbors put one of his 
children upon a ledge eight feet high, and he put out his hands and 
told him to jump. Without the slightest hesitation he sprang into 
his father’s arms. Another child was lifted up, and he, too, readily 
sprang into the arms of his father. He picked up another boy, 
larger than the others, and held out his arms, but he wouldn’t jump. 
He cried and screamed to be taken down. The man begged the 
boy to jump, but it was no use; he couldn’t be induced to jump. 
The incident made me curious, and I stepped up'to him and asked, 
“How was it that those two little fellows jumped so readily into 
your arms and the other boy wouldn’t?” “Why,” said the man, 
“those two boys are my children and the other boy isn’t. He 
didn’t know me.” My friends, can you draw the inference? These 
infidels will not trust God. 

How are you going to get faith? Read your Bibles. Instead of 


trying to get faith by talking about it, read your Bibles, Take those, 


people who read their Bibles—who know them back to back, and see 
how they stand—they are not shaken by doubts. They know in 
whom they believe. They have got their Bibles well read. They 
are not carried away by any doubt. My friends, take your Bibles 
and turn to John xx. 31, and read: “ But these are written that ye 
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that 
believing ye might have life through His name.” These things are 


si i. 
oy 


pa. Simao 


hi, 5 ee 


Leen ote wom 


> tame ow 
yr 
eS DS SRE a a 


Sono apace 
a 


142 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


written that ye might believe in Christ and have life through Him. 
The whole Gospel of John is written for one purpose—that man 
“might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that 
believing ye might have life through His name.” And in another 
part we read that He came unto His own, and as many as believed 
in Him gave He power to become the sons of God. There are 
several other passages in John where He speaks of believing. Now, 
if you want to have faith in Christ, read the Gospel of John. Read 
it carefully. There is not a book in the Bible from which you can 
derive greater faith than the Gospel according to John. Why? 
Because he knew Him who came to seek that which was lost better 
than any one else. And I do not know any book in the world that 
will scatter men’s disbelief in Christ, that will break down infidelity, 
like the book of John. A man came to me and said, “I want to be 
well read, well posted in the life of Christ. What would you advise 
me to read?” “ Well,” I said, “I couldn’t advise you to read a bet- 
ter work than that written by his old friend John.” I think if peo- 
ple read it oftener—read it on their knees—they would have more 
faith in Christ. 

I would like to direct your attention to the tenth chapter of 
Romans, and will commence at the ninth verse: 

“That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, 
and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised Him from the 
dead, thou shalt be saved. 

“For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and 
with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. 

“For the Scripture saith, Whosoever believeth cn Him shall 
not be ashamed. 

“For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek; 
for the same Lord over all is rich unto all that call upon Him. 

“For whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall 
be saved. 

“Flow, then, shall they call upon Him in whom they have 
not believed? and how shall they believe in Him of whom they 
have not heard ? and how shall they hear without a preacher ? 

“And how shall they preach except they be sent? as it is 
written, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel 
of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things ! 

“But they have not all obeyed the Gospel; for Esaias saith, 
Lord, who hath believed our report ? 


ERS. 


ough Him. 
—that man 
1, and that 
in another 
as believed 
There are 
ing. Now, 
hn. Read 
ch you can 
in. Why? 
lost better 
world that 
. infidelity, 
want to be 
you advise 
read a bet- 
ink if peo- 
have more 


chapter of 


ord Jesus, 
n from the 


sness, and 
Him shall 


1e Greek; 
Him. 
.ord shall 


they have 
hom they 
her ? 

’ as it is 


he Gospel 


uias_ saith, 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET IT. 143 - 


“So, then, faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the Word 
of God.” 

“So, then, faith cometh by hearing the Word of God.” That's 
how you get faith; and when we come to a promise in it and see 
that God says it, that should be enough for us. If He has said it, 
He will keep His word. Men have tried to prove that He has 
broken it; the devil and all hell have been in league for ages to try 
and get God to tell a lie, but they have failed, for, as John says in 
his gospel, toth chapter, 35th verse, “The Scripture can not be 
broken.” If you want evidence for your faith, go to the Word of 
God, and believe the evidence you see. There is a story told of 
Napoleon—Napoleon the First. His horse, a very high-spirited 
animal, became frightened, and away went the horse. A young man 
in the ranks saw the Emperor’s peril—saw that his life was in danger, 
and, at the risk of his own life, caught the horse. When the 
Emperor saw the man, he asked him what he was, and he touched 
his hat and told him his rank. “I will make you captain of my 
body-guard,” replied the Emperor. The man took him at his word. 
He didn’t go back to the ranks, but took a position at the head of 
the column. The captain stationed there ordered him back. He 
smiled and replied: “I am a captain.” “Who said so?” “The 
Emperor.” That was enough. The Emperor’s word was taken. So, 
if God says He will do anything or commands us to do anything, 
that ought to be enough. I fix my standard then against the devil 
and all hell combined. : 

He says “Come.” Take,Him at His word to-night. He is 
worthy of being trusted. Some people—a great many people they 
see it all—-they hear the word “Come,” but still they have a little 
doubt. That has been the condemning sin of the world. Christ 
found it on both sides of the cross. He had to contend with that 
all the time He was here. It is the thing that has kept back the 
blessing in the churches—the doubt, the unbelief of the heart of the 
people in the churches. You’ve got no reason to doubt the Word 
of God. Suppose you are working with a man, and you find him 
dealing with you with the utmust honesty, and you turn round and 
call him a liar, That’s what you are doing. By your showing of 
disbelief you tell to every one, “(Cod is a liar.” Unbelief—doubt 
is the bane of the world. Oh, let it,.be swept out of this building 
to-night, and may every one, in the place of doubt and unbelief, have 
faith in the living God. 


144 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


I have met many people who have said to me: “Mr. Moody, I 
am glad to see you with such faith; very glad to see you have that 
child-like trust in God—very; but I am not so constituted. I can 
not have it.” You believe it;do you? I believe there is no man 
in the world so constituted but who can believe in God’s Word. 
He simply tells you to believe in Him, and He will save you. Sup- 
pose a doctor said to me: “I want you to come to dinner with me 
to-morrow, Mr. Moody.” “Well,” I reply, “I would feel great 
pleasure in accepting your invitation, but I don’t know how I will 
feel to-morrow.” “What is the matter?” he asks. ‘“ Well, the 
fact is, I don’t know how I will feel to-morrow,” is my reply. “Why, 
you ain’t sick, are you?” “No, but—ah, the fact is, 1 am so con- 
stituted I can not believe you mean to invite me.” [Laughter]. 
You laugh at that; but you treat God’s invitation in a similar way. 
You are under the power of the devil. You can believe it if you 
will. There’s no ground for your doubting. What we want to do 
is each one of us just to take God at His word. He has offered 
salvation to every soul here; tell Him you will reach out your hand 
to-night and accept faith in Him. 

There is another class of people who are always trying to find out 
the proper kind of faith. They want to search and discover a par- 
ticular kind of faith. Any kind of faith that brings you to Christ 
is the proper kind of faith; is the right kind of faith. I remember 
Mr. Morehouse, while here four years ago, used an illustration 
which has fastened itself on my mind. He said, Suppose you go up 
the street and mcet a man whom you have known for the last ten 
years to be a beggar, and you notice.a change in his appearance, 
and you say, “Hallo, beggar, what’s come over your” “I ain’t 
no beggar. Don’t call me a beggar!” “Why,” you say, “T saw 
you the other day begging in the street.” “ Ah, but a change has 
taken place,” he replies. “Is that so; how did it come about?” 
you inquire. “Well,” he says, “I came out this morning and got 
down here, intending to catch the business men and get all the 
money out of them, when one of them came up to me and said 
there was ten thousand dollars deposited for me.” “ How do you 
know this is true?” you say. “i went to the bank and they put 
the money in my hand.” “.’\re you sure of that?” you ask ; 
“how do you know it was tae right kind of a hand?” But he 
says, “I don’t care whether it was the right kind of a hand or not; 
I got the money, and that’s all I wanted.” And so peopie are 


RS, 


Moody, I 
have that 
d. Ican 
is no man 
d’s Word. 
you. Sup- 
sr with me 
feel great 
how I will 
Well, the 
ly. “Why, 
am so con- 
Laughter]. 
milar way. 
> it if you 
‘ant to do 
has offered 
your hand 


to find out 
over a par- 
1 to Christ 
remember 
illustration 
you go up 
ie last ten 
ppearance, 
YT sint 
iy, “I saw 
hange has 
e about?” 
g and got 
xet all the 
e and said 
ow do you 
d they put 
you ask; 
” But he 
ind or not; 
peopie are 


\ 


FAITH, AND HOW TO GET IT. 145 


looking to see if they’ve got the right kind of a hand before they 
accept God by it. They have but to accept His testimony and they 
are saved, for, as John says, “ He that hath received His testimony 
hath set his seal that God is true.” Is there a man in this assem- 
blage who will receive His testimony and set his seal that God is 
true? Proclaim that God speaks the truth. Make yourself a liar, 
but make God’s testimony truthful. Take Him at His word. 

Some time ago I remember reading an incident that occurred 
between a prince in a foreign land and one of his subjects. This 
man for rebellion against the government was going to be ex- 
ecuted. Ile was taken to the guillotine block. When the poor 
fellow reached the place of execution he was trembling with fear. 
The prince was present and asked him if he wished anything before 
judgment was carried out. The culprit replied: “A glass of 
water.” It was brought to him, but he was so nervous he couldn't 
drink it. “Do not fear,” said the prince to him, “judgment will 
not be carried out till you drink that water,” and in an instant the 
glass was dashed to the ground and broken into a thousand pieces. 
He took that prince at his word. 

Oh, sinner, take God at His word. He has promised to save 
you—to save all who trust Him. Now let us put away every false 
refuge, and just take the Prince of Heaven at His word. Is 
there a man or woman in this assemblage who will take Him at 
His word? 

10 


XVIII. 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD 


HEBREWS ix, 22: “ And almost all things are by the law purged with blood; and 
without shedding of blood is no remission,” 


HE subject will be “The Precious Blood.” I want to call 
your attention, first, to the second chapter and sixteertth verse 
of Genesis: “And the Lord God commanded the man, say- 

ing, Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat; but of the 
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it ; 
. for in the day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.” 
There can not be a law without a penalty. There is not a law in 
our land but has a penalty attached to it. If our legislative repre- 
sentatives, or members in Congress, were to make a law and have no 
penalty appended to it, it would be worthless. We might make a 
law forbidding men to steal; but if we had no penalty to that law, 
I don’t think we could go home without having our watches stolen 
from us. We could not live without law, and God put Adam into 
the garden under law, attached to which was a penalty. Well, we 
know how he disobeyed, and how he fell, and so the penalty of death 
came upon him. Many people stumble over this. I used to 
wonder how it was that the penalty of death fell upon him when he 
lived so many years after he broke the law; but when I understood 
my Bible better, I learned that it was death to the soul—not phys- 
ical death, but spiritual death. When God came to seek him in the 
garden, we are told that he hid himself ; he was ashamed of his 
iniquity, just like hundreds of his sons in Chicago; and then we 
find Him dealing with Adam by showing him grace. This was 
the very first thing He did. A great many people think Ged was 
very severe in His treatment of Adam; but He, whenever the 
offence was committed, whenever the law was broken, showed 
mercy, showed grace; and by this grace a way of escape was pre- 


sented to them. Ah, that little hymn expresses it: “Grace, friend, 
(146) 


lood; and 


to call 
th verse 
an, say- 
t of the 
t of it; 
ly die.” 
2 law in 
e repre- 
have no 
make a 
1at law, 
s stolen 
um into 
Tell, we 
f death 
sed to 
hen he 
orstood 
t phys- 
1 inthe 

of his 
1en we 
lis Was 
od was 
er the 
howed 
as pre- 
friend, 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD. 147 


contrived a way” by which Adam could regain the life he had for. 


} feited. And so we read that the Lord made “coats of skin” to 


clothe them, before He drove them out of Paradise. They received 
grace before, as we see in the twenty-fourth verse: “He drove out 
the man, and He placed at the east end of the Garden of Eden 
cherubim and a flaming sword, which turned every way, to keep 
the way of the tree of life.” There’s grace and government ; and 
from that day till the present, God has been dealing with us in 
that way. He ides, we may say, in a chariot with two wheels— 
one, grace, and the other, government. We can see in this world 
how it would be if we had no government. There would be no 
living in it. Adam broke the divine law, and so he had to suffer 
the penalty; but He gave him grace to be redeemed by. He 
showed Adam and Eve grace by killing the animals and then cover- 
ing their nakedness with coats made from the skins. I can imagine 
Adam’s turning to Eve and saying, “ Well, in spite of what we’ve 
done, God loves us after all. He has clothed us; He has given us 
grace for our sin.” And here we find the first glimpse of the doc- 
trine of substitution—the substitution of the just for the unjust— 
the great doctrine of atonement and substitution foreshadowed in 
Genesis. _ 

Then as we go on we find the story of Cain and Abel, and we are. 
told that “in process of time it came to pass that Cain brought of 
the fruit of the ground an offering unto the Lord. And Abel, he 
also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof, | 
and the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering; but unto | 
Cain and his offering He had not respect. And Cain was very | 
wroth, and his countenance fell.” Now we find that Cain brought | 
a bloodless sacrifice —“ he brought of the fruit of the ground ’— | 
and Abel brought a bleeding lamb. Right on the morning of grace 
we see here that God had marked a way for men to come to Him, 
and that way was the way that Abel took, and Cain came to God _ 
with a sacrifice of his own—in his own way. So we find men and 
women in the churches of to-day coming to God with a sacrifice, | 
not in God’s way, but in their own—coming with their own good 
deeds, or their works, or their righteousness, and ignoring the Lamb | 
altogether—ignoring the blood completely. They don’t want to. 
come that way; they want to come in their own fashion. Cain | 
perhaps reasoned that he didn’t see why the products of the earth, | 
why the fruit shouldn’t be as acceptable to God as a bleeding | 


ate 


148 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


_tamb. He didn’t like a bleeding lamb, and so he brought his fruit. I 
"| Now we don’t know how there was any difference between those c 
two boys. Both must have been brought up in the same way ; n 
both came from the same Parents; yet we find in the offering there 0 
was a difference between them. One came with the blood, and the A 
other without the blood; and the one with the blood had the ac- \ 
ceptable sacrifice to God. h 
We pass over to the second dispensation—to the eighth chapter d 
of Genesis, where we find Noah coming out of the ark and putting A 
blood between him and his sins. “And Noah builded an altar unto tz 
the Lord, and took of every clean beast and of every clean fowl st 
and offered burnt-offerings on the altar.’ God had Noah bring al 
those animals clear through the flood that he could offer them as a cc 
sacrifice when he came from the ark. He took a coup:e of each M 
kind into the ark, and when he came out we find him making a 6 
blood-offering the very first thing. He was a man of God; he th 
walked in the fear of the Lord, aad so he made the offering of H 
blood. The first thing in the first dispensation we see is blood, and Ai 
the first thing in the second dispensation is blood. tir 
In the twenty-second chapter of Genesis we find the story of po 
Abraham and his only son, Isaac. Abraham was a follower of Ey 
God; aman who loved and feared God, and He commanded him to bo 
make a blood sacrifice. We read in this chapter that He com- tel 
manded Abraham to make the sacrifice of his only son. And we lan 
read that the next morning the old man saddled his ass and wh 
started. He didn’t tell his wife anything about it. If he had she wh 
would likely have persuaded him to remain where he was. But he str, 
has heard the voice of God and he obeys the command; he has "4% fice 
heard God’s wish and he is going to do it. So early in the morn- mu 
ing—he didn’t wait tili ten o’clock or twelve o'clock, but went Hi 
early in the morning—he takes two of his young men with him hin 
and his son Isaac, and you can see him starting out on the three kni. 
days’ journey. They have the wood and the fire, for he is going voi 
to worship his God. As he goes on he looks at his boy and says, i sono: 
‘It is a strange commandment that God has given. I love this boy hi met 
dearly. I don’t understand it; but I know it’s all right, for the i pict 
Judge of ail the earth makes no mistakes.” An order from the i =you 
Judge of Heaven is enough for him. The first night comes and wn His 
their little carp is made and Isaac is asleep. But the old man fest: 


doesn’t sleep. He looks into his face sadly and says, “I will have the 


ERS, 


ht his fruit. 
ween those 
same way; 
ering there 
od, and the 
iad the ac- 


th chapter 
nd putting 
altar unto 
clean fowl 
oah bring 
them asa 
ie of each 
making a 
God; he 
ffering of 
blood, and 


story of 
llower of 
ed him to 
He com- 

And we 
; ass and 
e had she 
But he 
1; he has 
he morn- 
out went 
vith him 
the three 
‘is going 
and says, 
this boy 
:, for the 
from the 
mes and 
old man 
vill have 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD, 149 


no boy soon; I shall never see him on earth again; but I must 
obey God.” I can see him marching on the next day, and you 
might have seen him drying his tears as he glanced upon that 
only son and thought upon what he had been called upon to do, 
The second night comes; to-morrow is the day for the sacrifice. 
What a night that must have been to Abraham. « To-morrow,” 
he says, sadly, “I must take the life of that boy—my only son, 
dearer to me than my life—dearer to me than anything on earth.” 


tain in the distance, when he says to the young men: “You 
stay here with the beasts.” He takes the wood and the fire, and 


thus showing that the boy knew nothing of what was in store. 
How the question must have sunk down into the old man’s heart. 
And he answers: “The Lord will provide a sacrifice.” It was not 
time to tell him, and they go on until they come to the place ap- 
pointed by God, and built the altar, and lay the wood upon it. 
Everything is ready, and I can just imagine the old man take the 
boy by the hand, and leading him toa rock, sitting down there and 
telling him how God had called upon him to come out of his native 
land; how God had been in communion with him for fifty years ; 
what God had done for him. “And now,” he says, ‘my boy, 
when I was in my bed three nights ago, God came to me with a 
strange message, in which He told me to offer my child as a sacri- 
fice. I love you, my son, but God has told me to do this, and I 
must obey Him. So let us both go down on our knees and pray to 
Him.” After they have sent up a petition to God, Abraham lays 
him on the altar and kisses him for the last time. He lifts the 
knife to drive it into his son’s heart, when all at once he hears a 
voice, “ Abraham, Abraham! spare thine only son.” Ah, there was 


your only son, and ti./nk what it must have caused God to give up 
His only Son. We are told that Abraham was glad. The mani- 
festation of Abraham’s faith so pleased God that He showed him 
the grace of Heaven and lifted the curtain of time to let him look 


150 MOOMY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


down into the future and see the Son of God offered bearing 
the sins of the » orld. From the peak of this very mountain 
might have been been the very spot where died the Saviour of 
the world. 

We find Abel the first man who went to Heaven, and he went by 
way of blood, and we find it in all the worships of God from the 
earliest times. Mr. Sankey sings solos upon the redeeming ‘100d. 
I can imagine when Abel got there how he sang the song of re- 
demption. How the angels gathered around him and listened to 
that song; it was the first time they had ever heard that song before ; 
but six thousand years have gone and there’s a great chorus of saints 
redeemed by the atoning blood. The first man that went to Heaven 
went by the way of blood, and the last man who passes through 
those pearly gates must go the same way. We find not only Abel and 
Abraham, and Isaac and Jacob, but all of them, went there through 
an atonement. Now, we find in the twelfth chapter and second 
verse of Exodus—the most important chapter in the Word of God: 
“This month shali be unto you the beginning of months; it shall 
be the first month of the year to you,” and then in the fourth verse, 
“And if the household be too little for the lamb, let him and his 
neighbor next unto his house take it according to the number of the 
souls; every man according to his eating shall make your count for 
the lamb.” Now it don’t say, “if the lamb be too small for the 
household,” but “if the household be too little for the lamb.” You 
may have some pretty large households; your houses may be too 
small for them, but Christ has plenty of room. We don’t start from 
the cradle to Heaven, but from the cross. That’s where eternal life 
begins—when we come to Calvary; when we come to Christ and 
get grace. Wedon’t come to Heaven when we are born into the 
natural world, but into the spiritual world. That’s where we date 
our spiritual lives from. Before that our lives are a blank so far as 
grace is concerned. Adam dated from the time of the blood, and 
Noah, when he came from the ark, dated from the blood-orfering, 
and so the children of Israel when they came out of ‘Egypt. And 
even to-day when they take up their pens and date 1876 years, 
when do they date from? Why, from the blood of Christ. Every- 
thing dates from blood. In this chapter we see the command to 
sacrifice. They slew the lamb. God didn’t say, “Put a lamb to 
your front door and I will spare you,” but on the houses. 

Some classes of people say preach anything but the death, preach 


ERS. 


‘ed bearing 
7 mountain 
Saviour of 


he went by 
d from the 
ning «ood, 
song of re- 
listened to 
ong before ; 
‘us of saints 
‘to Heaven 
es through 
ly Abel and 
re through 
and second 
rd of God: 
hs; it shall 
urth verse, 
lim and his 
mber of the 
ir count for 
all for the 
imb.” You 
nay be too 
t start from 
eternal life 
Christ and 
rn into the 
re we date 
nk so far as 
blood, and 
od-orfering, 
rypt. And 
1876 years, 
st. Every- 
mmand to 
a lamb to 


ath, preach 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD, ist 
the life of Christ. You may preach that and you'll never save a 
soul. I: is not Christ’s sympathy—lHis life—we preach, it is His 
sacrifice. That’s what brings men out of darkness, I can imagine 
some proud Egyptians that day who, when they heard the bleating 
of the lambs—there must have been over two hundred thousand 
Jambs—saying, “ What an absurd performance. Every man has got 
a lamb, and they have got the best lambs out of the flock, too, and 
they are going to cover their houses with the blood.” They looked 
upon this as an absurd proceeding—a flaw in their character. You 
may find a good many flaws in your character, but you can not find 
a flaw in the Lamb of God. When the hour came you could see 
them all slaying their lamb, and not only that, but putting the blood 
on ihe door-posts. To those Egyptians, or to the men of the world 
how absurd it looked. They probably said, “ Why are you div- 
figuring your houses in that way?” It was not upon the thresheld. 
God didn’t want that, but they were to put it upon the lintels and 
door-posts-—-where God could sce it that night so that (thirteenth 
verse) He might see it asa token. This blood was to be a substi- 
tution for death, and all who hadn’t that token in the land of Egypt 
had their first-born smitten at midnight. There was a wail from 
Egypt from one end to the other. But death didn’t come near the 
homes where was the token. It was death that kept death out of the 
dwelling. 

Many people say, “I wish I was as good as that woman who has 
been ministering to the sick for the last fifty years. I would feel 
sure of Heaven.” My friends, if you have the biood behind you, 
you are as safe as anybody on this earth. It is not because that 
woman has been living a life of sacrifice in her ministrations to the 
poor that she will enter the kingdom of God. It is not our life of 
good deeds or our righteousness that will take us to Heaven, but 
the atonement. And the question ought to come to every one to- 
night, “ Are we sheltered behind the blood?” If not, death will 
come by and by, and you will be separated from God for eternity, 
If you have not a substitute you will die. Death is passed upon 
all of vs. Why? Because of our sin. If we have not a substitute 
we have no hope. 

Not only were they to have a token, but they were to do some. 
thing else. We read in the eleventh verse: “And thus shall ye eat 
it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff 
in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste; it is the Lord’s Pass- 


152 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


over.” Now a great many people wonder why they haven't got 
more spiritual power, and have not the joy of the Lord with them 
all the time. It is because they haven’t got the blood of the Lamb 


_ with them. These pilgrims had a long journey before them, and 


the Lord told them to eat the lamb. If we feed upon the Lamb 
we will get strength in proportion. My friends, be sure before you 
commence on your pilgrimage that you are sheltered behind the 
blood, for when He sees the blood, death will pass over you. And 
let me ask this assemblage to-night if every one of you have the 
token? I was speaking to a man some tiine ago, who, when I asked 
him if he had the token, said, “I have prayer,” and when he got to 
Heaven he would pray, and he thought that would admit him. I 
said to him, “You won't get in that way. You must be cleansed 
by the blood of Christ. That is the only power that will open the 
gates of Heaven—the only countersign.” 

When I went East the other,night the conductor came around 
and called for tickets. I pulled out my ticket and he punched it. 
He didn’t know whether it was a white or a black man who pre- 
sented it, I believe. He didn’t care who it was; all he wanted was 
the token. So all that God wants is the token of our salvation. It 
doesn’t depend upon our deeds, our righteousness, or upon our 
lives; it depends upon whether or not we are sheltered behind the 
blood. That is the question. It didn’t matter in that land of 
Goshen whether the child was six months or six years old if it was 
behind the blood. It was not their moral character, nor their con- 
nections, but the blood that saved them. It is the atonement that 
saves, and that is the teaching all through your Bible. 

There is another verse in the twenty-ninth chapter of Exodus I 
want to call your attention to: “Thou shalt slay the ram, and thou 
shalt take his blood and sprinkle it round about the altar.” Now 
we see that Aaron, the high-priest, could not come to God with his 
prayers alone. He had to sprinkle the blood upon the altar. There 
was a time when I didn’t believe in the substitution and in the 
blood, and my prayers went no higher than my head; but when I 
came to God by Jesus Christ—by the way of blood—it was different. 
I never knew a man who came to God really but who came this 
way. That great high-priest had to come this way too. 

Then again, in the thirtieth chapter, tenth verse, we see: “And 
Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once ina year, 
with the blood of the sin-offering of atonements; once in the year 


SP ee ee re eet ee a ee ee ee ee 


em 


ORS. 


aven't got 
with them 
‘the Lamb 
them, and 
the Lamb 
before you 
sehind the 
you. And 
1 have the 
en I asked 
1 he got to 
it him. I 
ye cleansed 
|| open the 


ne around 
unched it. 
1 who pre- 
ranted was 
vation. It 
upon our 
yehind the 
t land of 
1 if it was 
their con- 
sment that 


Exodus I 
,and thou 
ar.” Now 
d with his 
ar. There 
nd in the 
ut when I 
s different. 
came this 


ee: “And 
ina year, 
1 the year 


~~ 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD. 153 


shall he make atonement upon it throughout your generations; it 
is most holy unto the Lord.” Now, an atonement is the only 
thing that makes a sinner and God one—is the only thing that will 
bring God and the sinner together. I would like, if I had time, to 
give you all the passages touching upon atonement in the Old Tes. 
tament, but it would take too long. Turn again to the eighth 
chapter of Leviticus. This book of Leviticus is one of the most 
valuable, because it relates all about the worship of God. I re- 
member when I used to read this book, 1 wendered what it was all 
about—a verse like this, for instance: “And he slew it; and Moses 
took of the blood of it, and put it upon the tip of Aaron’s right ear, 
and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of 
his right foot.” I would say, “ What does this mean? ‘ Put it upon 
the tip of Aaron’s right ear.’” What for? I think I have got a 
little light upon the subject since those days. “Blood upon the 
ear?” So that a man might hear the voice of God, of course. 
And so a man who has accepted the atonement can hear the Word 
rightly. Blood upon the hand of a man, so that he who works for 
God can work rightly. Hundreds of men think they are working 
out their salvation, and they are only deceiving themselves. Bear in 
mind, then, that a man can not do anything until he is sheltered be- 
hind the blood. When a man is in this position, then he can go and 
be acceptable to God. Then blood upon the feet, so that a man 
can walk with God. You know when God came to Adam he hid 
himself. He hadn’t the blood, and he couldn't walk with God. He 
put those people in question behind the blood, and he walked among 
them. When they came to the Red Sea the mighty waters opened, 
and God walked with them. In the wilderness they wanted water, 
and a rod struck the rock, and a crystal stream gushed forth. Why? 
Because they had had the substitution. 

Many people say this is a very mysterious thing. We don’t un- 
derstand why God wants blood as an atonement. A man said to 
me: “I detest your religion; I hate your God.” “Why?” I asked. 
“T detest a God who demands blood,” he replied. Now, God is not 
an unjust God. He don’t demand it without giving us a reason. 
He tells us in His Word that “the life of the flesh is in the blood.” 
Take the blood out of me and I am a dead man. Life has been 
forfeited, the law has been broken, and the penalty must come 
upon us, and this blood He gives us is life; it is the life of our 
flesh. Three times we see “ blood” mentioned in the twenty-third 


- ee 


4 


154 MOODY'S § ERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


and twenty-fourth verses, and the reason is that it is life. You and 
I have lost life by the fall, and what we want is to get back that life 
we lost, and we have it offered to us by the atonement of Ckrist. I 
have often thought I would far rather be out of Eden and have the 
blood than be in Eden without it. Adam might have been there 
ten years, and Satan might have come and got him. But some 
can’t see why God permitted Adam to fall. They begin to discern 
the philosophy of it. They can’t see why God ever permitted origi- 
nal sin to come into the world. The best answer to that was given 
by the Rev. Andrew Bonar, who said, “It was a great deal more 
wonderful that God should send His Son down to bear the brunt of 
it.” Let us thank God we have a refuge, a substitute for the sin we 
are groaning under. 

Turn to the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah. You hear a good many 
people saying, “I don’t believe in the Old Testament, I believe in 
the New.” My friends, both are inseparable. A scarlet thread 
runs through the two and binds them together. We, like sheep, 
have gone astray, but “ He was wounded for our transgressions, He 


. was bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was 


upon Him; and with His stripes we are healed.” My friends, in 
the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, we see it prophesied seven hundred 
years before it took place, that He would die and be a substitute 
for you and me, that we might live. And now, my friends, let us 
accept Him. It seems base ingratitude not to praise God every 
hour of our lives that He has given such a Saviour. Let us take 
time. Many a young man thinks it noble to scoff at this; I think it 
the basest ingratitude. This atonement is the only hope of my 
eternal life. Take the doctrine of substitution out of my Bible, and 
I would not take it home with me to-night. Let us praise God 
that He loved us so as to give us His only Son so that we might 
be saved. 

I remember some years ago reading about a New York family. 
A young man, during the gold fever, went out to the Pacific, and 
left his wife and little boy. Just as soon as he was successful he 
was going to send money. A long time elapsed, but at last a letter 
came enclosing a draft, and telling his wife to come on. The woman 
took a passage in one of the fine steamers of the Pacific line, full of 
hope and joy at the prospect of soon being united to her husband. 
They had not been out many days when a voice went ringing 
through the ship, “Fire! fire!” The pumps were set to work and 


ERS. 


You and 
ick that life 
f Christ. I 
id have the 
been there 

But some 
1 to discern 
itted origi- 

was given 
deal more 
1e brunt of 
the sin we 


sood many 
believe in 
let thread 
ike sheep, 
ssions, He 
peace was 
friends, in 
n hundred 
substitute 
nds, let us 
sod every 
t us take 
I think it 
ype of my 
Bible, and 
raise God 
we might 


tk family. 
acific, and 
cessful he 
st a letter 
he woman 
1e, full of 
husband. 
t ringing 
work and 


TRACING THE SCARLET THREAD. 155 


the buckets were brought into operation, but the fire gained upon 
them. There was a powder magazine on board, and the captain 
ordered all the boats to be instantly lowered. He knew whenever 
the fire reached the powder they would all be lost. The people 
scrambled into the boats, and the mother and boy were left on. 
deck. As the last boat was being pushed off, the woman begged to 
be taken in. The majority insisted the boat was too full, and wanted 
to push off, but one man put in a word for her, and they said they 
could allow one more on board, but no more. What did the 
mother do? Did she go on board and leave her son? No. She 
put her boy into that life-boat, and told him if he ever lived to see 
his father to tell him, “I died to save you.” And the boat pulled 
away from that ship, and left the mother standing there. The 
vessel went on burning. Presently an explosion was heard, and all 
was buried in the ocean. Suppose that young man was here to-night. 
Suppose you spoke to him about the act of his mother, and he 
turned around and scoffed at it. « Why,” you would say, “that un- 
grateful wretch don’t deserve to live.” And this is what you are 
doing. He laid down His life for you. Now will you speak con- 
temptuously about Him? Will you speak lightly of the blood laid 
down on Calvary for you? Let us rather all thank God we have 
such a Saviour. Let us live for Him when He died for us, Let us 


pray. 


XIX. 


THE BLOOD OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 


MATTHEW xxvi. 28: “For this is My blood of the New Testament, which is shed 
for many, for the remission of sins.” 


ik WANT to take up some passages referring to the subject of the 
Precious Blood in the New Testament. Soon after we came 
back from Europe to this country, I received a letter from a 
lady saying that she had looked forward to our coming back to this 
country with a great deal of interést, and that her interest remained 
after we had commenced our services until I came to the lecture on 
the blood, when she gave up all hope of our doing any good. In 
closing that letter she said: ‘“ Where did Jesus ever teach the peril- 
ous and barbarous doctrine that men were to be redeemed by the 
shedding of His blood? Never! never did Jesus teach that monstrous 
idea.” Let us turn to the fourteenth chapter of Mark, twenty-fourth 
verse, and we will find: “ And He said unto them, This is My blood 
of the New Testament, which is shed for many ;” and alsoin Matthew 
xxvi. 28: “For this is My blood of the New Testament, which 
is shed for many for the remission of sins.” There are a good 
many passages, but it is not necessary to refer to more. If Christ 
did not teach it, and also the Apostles—if Christ did not preach it, 
then I have read my Bible, all these years, wrong. I haven’t got 
the key to the Scriptures; it is a sealed book to me, and if I don’t 
preach it—if I give it up, I’ve nothing left to preach. Take the 
blessed doctrine of the blood out of my Bible and my capital is 
gone, and I've got to take to something else. 
I remember when in the old country a young man came to me— 
a minister came around to me, and said he wanted to talk with me. 
He said to me: “ Mr. Moody, you are either all right and I am all 
wrong, or else I am right and you are all wrong.” “Well, sir,” said 
I, “you have the advantage of me. You have heard me preach, and 
know what doctrines I hold, whereas I have not heard you, and don’t 
(156) 


INT. 


1ich is shed 


‘ct of the 
we came 
r from a 
ck to this 
remained 
ecture on 
‘ood. In 
the peril- 
sd by the 
1onstrous 
ty-fourth 
My blood 
Matthew 
it, which 
-a good 
If Christ 
reach it, 
ren’t got 
f I don’t 
Take the 
‘apital is 


to me— 
with me. 
I am all 
ir,’ said 
ach, and 
nd don’t 


THE BLOOD OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, 157 


know what you preach.” “Well,” said he, “the difference between 
your preaching and mine is, that you make out that salvation is got 
by Christ’s death, and I make out that it is attained by His life.” 
“Now, what do you do with the passages bearing upon the death?” 
and I quoted the passages, “ Without the shedding of blood there 
is no remission,” and “ He Himself bore our sins in His own body 
on the tree,” and asked him what he did with them, for instance. 
“Never preach on them at all.” I quoted a number of passages 
more, and he gave me the same answer. “ Well, what do you preach ?” 
I finally asked. ‘Moral essays,” he replied. Said I, “ Did you ever 
know anybody to be saved by that kind of thing—did you ever con- 
vert anybody by them?” “I never aimed at that kind of conver- 
sion; I mean to get men to Heaven by culture—by refinement.” 
“Well,” said I, “if I didn’t preach those texts, ancl only preached 
culture, the whole thing would be a sham.” “And it isa sham to 
me,” was his reply. I tell you the momcut a man breaks awey from 


this doctrine of blood, religion becomes a shain, because the whole - 


teaching of this book is of one story, and this is that Christ came 
into the worid and died for our sins. 

I want to call your attention to the nineteenth chapter of John 
and the thirty-fourth verse: “But one of the soldiers with 2: spear 
pierced his side, and forthwith came thereout blood and water.” 
“Came thereout blood and water.” Now, it was prophesied years 
before that there should open a fountain which should wash away 
sin and uncleanness, and it seems that this fountain was opened 
here by the spear of the-soldier, and out of the fountain came blood 
and water. It was the breaking of the crown of hell and the giving 
of the crown to Heaven. When the Roman soldier drove out the 
blood, out came the water, and it touched that spear, and it was not 
long before Christ had that Roman government. It is a throne and 
a footstool now, and by and by it will sway the earth from pole to 
pole. This earth has been redeemed by the blessed blood of Christ. 
Peter says in his first Epistle i. 18: “Forasmuch as ye know that 
ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from 
your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers ; But 
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and 
without spot.” You are not redeemed by such corruptible things 
as gold or silver, but by the precious blood of the Lamb—* the pre- 
cious blood of Christ—as of a lamb without blemish.” Ifsilver and 


gold could have redeemed us, it would have been the easiest thing | 


. ’ 
re F po-onaihmctilasietdcmpnalbeame eee leaner ? 
i 


ov Rapeeee nt ramen meee paged tents teenie a neta oarena Licance eae ee 


a I jr 


158, 4f00DY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. ( 


to have made a pile of gold ten thousand times larger than the bulk 
of the earth. Why, the poorest thing is gold in Heaven. But gold 
couldn’t do it. .The law had been broken, and the penalty of death 
had come upon us, and it required life to redeem us. Now, it says 
we shall be redeemed. My friends, redemption is to me one of the 
most precious treasures in the Word of God—to think that Christ 
has bought me by His blood. Iam no longer my own, Iam His. 
‘He has ransomed me. 

A friend of mine once told me that he was going out from Dublin 
one day, and met a boy who had one of those English sparrows in 
his hand. It was frightened, and just seemed to sit as if it pined for 
liberty, but the boy held it so tight that it could not get away. The 
boy’s strength was too much forthe bird. My friend said : “ Onen your 
hand and let the bird go. You will never tame him; he is wild.” But 
the boy replied, “ Faith, an’ I'll not; I’ve been a whole hour trying to 
catch him, an’ now I’ve got him I’m going to keep him.” So the 
man took out his purse and asked the boy if he would sell it. A 
bargain was made, and the sparrow was transferred to the man’s hand. 
He opened his hand, and at first the bird did not seem to realize it 
had liberty, but by and by it flew away, and as it went it chirped, 
as much as to say, “You have redeemed me.” And so Christ 
has come down and offered to re:‘eem us and give us liberty when 
we were bound with sin. Satan was stronger than we were. He 
has had six thousand years’ experience. He did not come to buy 
us from Satan, but from the penalty of our sin. 

Another thought about the blood. It makes us all one. The 
blood brings us into one family, into the household of faith. I re- 
member during the war Dr. Kirk, one of the most eloquent men I 
ever heard, was speaking in Boston. At that time, you recollect, 
there was a good deal said about the Irish and the black man, and 
what an amount of talk about the wa’ of races. He said while 
preaching one night: “I saw a poor Irish:uan and a black man and 
an Englishman, and the blood of Christ came down and fell upon 
them and made them one.” My friends, it brings nationalities to- 
gether; it brings those scattered with the seeds of discord together 
and makes them one. Let us turn to Acts xvii. 26, and we read: 
“ And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on 
all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before 
appointed and the bounds of their habitation.” That’s what the 
blood of Christ does. It just makes us one. I can tell a man that 


5. 


the bulk 
But gold 
of death 
y, it says 
c of the 
it Christ 
am His. 


1 Dublin 
rrows in 
dined for 
ay. The 
nen your 
id.” But 
rying to 

So the 
lit. A 
n’s hand. 
realize it 
chirped, 
o Christ 
tty when 
sare. He 
e to buy 


1c. The 
i, 1 £é« 
nt men I 
recollect, 
nan, and 
rid while 
man and 
ell upon 
lities to- 
together 
ve read: 
dwell on 
‘s before 
what the 
man that 


if/ has been redeemed by the blood ; they speak all the same 


i 


4 


«Eh f 


THE BLOOD OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 159 - 


language. I don’t require to be in his company ten minutes before 
I can tell whether or not he has been redeemed. They have only 
one language, and you can tell when they speak whether they are 
outside the blood or sheltered by it. The blood has two voices— 
one is for salvation and the other for condemnation. The blood 
to-night cries out for my salvation or for my condemnation. If we 
are sheltered behind the blood, it cries for our salvation, for we see 
in Galatians: “It cries for our peace.” There is no peace till a 
ian has been sheltered by that blood. 

Again, I would like to call your attention to the twenty-sixth 
chapter of Matthew, twenty-eighth verse, where we find Christ 
speaking of His blood: “For this is My blood of the New Testa- 
ment, which is shed for the remission of sins.” This blood was 
“shed for the remission of sins.’ Then in Hebrews ninth and 
twenty-second, where it says, “ Without the shedding of blood is 
no remission of sins.” Men don’t realize that this is God’s plan of 
salvation. Said aman to me last night after the meeting: “Why, 
God has got a plan to save us.” Certainly He has. You must be 
saved by God’s plan. It was love that prompted God to send His 
Son to save us and shed His blood. That was the pian. And 
without the blood what hope have you? There is not a sin from 
your childhood—from your cradle—up till now that can be for- 
given, unless by the blood. Let us take God at His word: « With. 
out the shedding of blood there is no remission of sins.” Without 
the blood no remission whatever. I don’t see how a man can fail 
to comprehend this. That’s what Christ died for; that’s what 
Christ died on Calvary for. If aman makes light of that blood 
what hope has he? How are you going to get into the kingdom 
of God? You can not join in the song of the saints if you don’t go 
into Heaven that way. You can not sing the song of redemption. 
If you did, I suppose you would be off in some corner with a harp 
of your own, and singing, “I saved myself; I saved myself.” You 
can’t get in that way. You must accept the plan of redemption 
and come in through it. “He that climbeth up some other way 
the same is a thief and a robber.” 

Then, in the tenth chapter of Hebrews, we find Paul, if he wrote 
this, just taking up the very thought: “He that despised Moses’ 
law died without mercy under two or three witnesses.” You know 
when a man made light of the law under the Mosaic dispensation, 


f 


160 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


whenever two witnesses came into court and swore that he hadn’t 
kept the law, they just took him out and stoned him to death. 
Take up the next verse: “Of how much surer punishment suppose 
ye, shall be thought worthy who hath trodden under foot the Son 
of God, and hath counted the blood of the covenant wherewith He 
was sanctified an unholy thing, and hath done despite unto the 
spirit of grace.” My friends, what hope is there if a man tramples 
the blood of Christ under his foot if he says, “I will have nothing to 
do with that blood?” I ask, in all candor, what mercy is there? 
What hope has he if he “hath trodden under foot the Son of God; 
and hath counted the blood of the covenant wherewith He was sanc- 
tified an unholy thing?” This is the only way to get to Heaven—no 
other way. Turn again to the eleventh verse of the same chapter, 
and we see: “But the Man after He had offered one sacrifice for 
sin ”’—mark that, He had settled the questica of sin—* forever sat 
down on the right hand of God.” The high-priests could never sit 
down; their work was never done. But our High-Priest had put 
sin away by one sacrifice and then ascended to God. And in this 
same chapter of Hebrews we see again: “ Having therefore, breth- 
ren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a 
new and living way, which He hath consecrated for us through the 
veil, that is to say, His flesh, and having a High-Priest over the 
house of God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance 
of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our 
bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the profession of 
our faith without wavering, for He is faithful that promised.’ [| 
want to call your attention to the twentieth verse more particularly 
—by a new and living way.” Now Christ has opened a new and 
living way. We can not get to Heaven by our own deeds now. He 
has opened “a new and living way.” We don’t need a high-priest 
to go once a year and praytoGod. Thank God, we are all kings and 
high-priests. We can go right straight to the Father in the name 
of the Lord Jesus Christ. When Christ died that veil was rent from 
the top to the bottom—not from the bottom to the top—and every 
poor son of Adam can walk right in and worship—right into the 
‘presence of God, if he only comes by the way of the blood. Yes, 
thank God, He has opened a new and living way whereby we can come 
to Him. Let us thank Him for a new and living way. We don’t 
need any bishop, we don’t need any pope, we don’t need any priest or 
prophet now; but every one can be made king and priest and we 


1e hadn’t 
‘0 death. 
suppose 
the Son 
with He 
into the 
tramples 
thing to 
is there? 
of God; 
vas sanc- 
ven—no 
chapter, 
rifice for 
‘ever sat 
never sit 
had put 
d in this 
>, breth- 
us, by a 
ugh the 
ver the 
surance 
and our 
ssion of 
ed. I 
icularly 
1ew and 
ww. He 
li-priest 
ngs and 
ie name 
nt from 
d every 
ito the 
we VB, 
in come 
e don’t 
riest or 
and we 


‘THE BLOOD OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 161 


can come through this living way to His presence and ask Him to 
take away our sins. There’s not a man in this assemblage but can 
come to Him to-night. 
There’s a good deal about the blood in Hebrews that I would like 
to bring up; time passes, and I have just to fly through the subject. 
Now I don’t know any doctrine I have preached that has been 
talked about more than the doctrine of blood. Why, the moment 
Satan gets a man to leave out this doctrine of blood, he has gained 
all he wants. It is the most Pernicious idea to leave it out. A man 
may be a brilliant Preacher, he may have a brilliant intellect, and 
may have large crowds of people; but if he leaves this out, no one 
will be blest under his ministry, no one will be born in God’s king- 
dom. Ifa man leaves out this blocd he may as well go.and whistle 
in the streets, and try to convert people that way, for all the good 
he will do in saving souls. It is said that old Dr. Alexander, of 
Princeton College, when a young student used to start out to preach 
always gave them a piece of advice. The old man would stand with 
his gray locks and his venerable face and say, “ Young man, make 
much of the blood in your ministry.” Now, I have traveled consid. 
erably during the past few years, and never met a minister who 
made much of the blood and much of the atonement, but God had 
blessed his ministry, and souls were born into the light by it. But 
é man who leaves it out--the moment he goes, his church falls to 
Pieces like a rope of sand, and his Preaching has been barren of 
good results. And so if you find a man preaching w hohas covered 
up this doctrine of blood, don’t sit under his ministry; I don’t care 
what denomination he belongs to, get out of if, Fly from it as those 
who flew from Sodom. Never mind how you get out of it—leave 
it. It is a whited sepulchre. There is no life if they don’t preach 
the blood. It is the only way we've got to conquer Satan—the 
only way we can enter Heaven, and we can not get there unless we 
have washed our robes in the blood of the Lamb. If we expect to 
conquer, we must first be washed by that blood. A man who has 
not realized what the blood has done for him, has not the token of 
salvation. It is told of Julian, the apostate, that while he was fight. 
ing, he received an arrow in his side. He pulled it out, and taking 
a handful of blood, threw it into the air, and cried, “Galilean, Galilean, 
thou hast conquered!” Yes, the Galilean .; going to conquer, and 
you must bear in mind if you don’t accep’ the blood—don’t submit 


to it and let it cleanse you—the rock wil: ...'lon you, because the 
II 


162 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


decree of Heaven is that every knee shall bow to the will of Heaven: 
The blood is a call of mercy now. He wants you to come—He 
beseeches you to accept and be saved. 

I heard of an old minister who had preached the Gospel for fifty 
years faithfully. “Ah!” many here will say, “I wish I was as safe 
to go to Heaven as him.” When he was reaching his end he asked 
' that his Bible should be brought to him. His eyes were growing 
dim in death, and he said to one of those about him, “I wish you 
would turn to the first epistle of John i. 7,” and when it was found, 
the old man put his dying finger on the passage where it says: “ But 
if we walk in the light as He is in the light we have fellowship one 
with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us 
from all sin,” and he said, “I die in the hope of that.” It was the 
blood in his ministry that cleansed him. And so it is the only way 
by which our sins can be washed away. Why, there was a question 
once asked in Heaven when a great crowd were gathering there, 
“ Who are those?” and the answer was, “ They are those who have 
come up through great tribulation, and have been washed by the 
blood of the Lamb.” 

Now, the question is, what are you going to do with that blood ? 
I would like to ask you, what are you going to do about it? You 
must do either of two things—take it or reject it. Trample it under 
foot or cleanse your sins by it. I heard of a lady who told a serv- 
ant to cook alamb. She told him how to do it up and all about 
it, but she didn’t tell him what to do with the blood. So he went 
to her and asked, “‘ What are you going to do with the blood of the 
lamb?” She had been under conviction for some time, and such a 
question went like an arrow to her soul. She went to her room and 
felt uneasy, and the question kept continually coming to her, ““ What 
are you going to do with the blood of the lamb?” and before morn- 
ing she was on her knees asking for the mercy of the blood of the 
Lamb. 

Now the most solemn truth in the Gospel is that the only thing 
He left down here is His blood. His body and bones He took 
away, but He left His blood on Calvary. There is either of two 
things we must do. One is to send back the message to Heaven 
that we don’t want the blood of Christ to cleanse us of our sin, or 
else accept it. Why, when we come to our dying hour the blood 
will be worth more than all the kingdoms of the world to us. Can 
you afford to turn your back upon it and make light of it? Dr. 


cas 
n~ 


Heaven: 
yme—He 


, 
| for fifty 
as as safe 
he asked 
growing 
wish you 
as found, 
vs: “ But 
yship one 
inseth us 
t was the 
only way 
question 
ng there, 
who have 
d by the 


it blood ? 
it? You 
> it under 
ld a serv- 
all about 
» he went 
od of the 
nd such a 
room and 
r, “ What 
ore morn- 


od of the 


nly thing 
He took 
er of two 
o Heaven 
ur sin, or 
the blood 
‘us. Can 
fit?) = Dr. 


. blood of the Lamb.” 


THE BLOOD OF THE NEI TESTAMENT. 


163 


‘King, when the war was going on, went down to the field with the 
Christian Commission. He used to go around among the soldiers, 
and during one of his visits he heard a man cry, “ Blood! blood ! 
blood!” He thought that, as the man had just been taken off the 
battle-field, the scene of carnage and blood was still upon his mind. 
The doctor went to him and tried to talk to the man about Christ, 
and tried to divert his mind from the scenes of the field. “Ah, 
doctor,” said the man feebly, “I was not thinking of the battle. 
field, but of the blood of Christ ;’ and he whispered the word 
“blood” once more and was gone. 
Dear friends, do you want all your sins washed away from your 
It was shed for the remission of sins, and without the shedding of 
blood there would be no remission. There is blood on the mercy- 
seat. “Iam not looking to your sins now,” God says, “but come 
and press in, press in and receive remission.” Thank God, the 
blood is still on the mercy-seat. It is there, and He beseeches you 
to accept it. What more can He do for your salvation? Now, my 
friends, don’t go out of this Tabernacle laughing and scoffing at the 
precious offering made to you, but just bow your head and lift up 
your voice, “Oh, God of Heaven, may the blood of Thy Son 
cleanse me from all sin.” The blood is sufficient. 

Some years ago I was journeying to the Pacific coast, and nearly 
every stage-driver I met was talking about a prominent stage-driver 
who had just died. You know that in driving over those rocky 
roads they depend a good deal upon the brake. 
when he was dying, was heard to say: “I am on the down grade 
and can not keep the brake.” Just about that time one of the most 
faithful men of God, Alfred Cookman, passed away. His wife and 
friends gathered around his death-bed, and when his last moments 
arrived, it scemed as if Heaven had opened before him, as with a 
shout he cried, “I am sweeping through the gates washed by the 
What a comfort this must have been to his 
friends; what a comfort it must have been to him, the blood of the 
atonement in his last hours. 

My friends, if you want a glorious end like the end of that sainted 
man, you must come to the blood of Christ. Let us bow our heads, 
in prayer; let us have a few moments of silent prayer, and let us: 
ask the Lord to let us see this great truth. 

Mr. Sankey sang the following hymn, as a song-translation of the 
story told by Mr. Moody, at the conclusion of his sermon: 


This poor man, 


e 


ny 
Se oe | a te eee eae mene. re pins Be: L-elaainenae 
¢ 


{ 


164 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


I am now a child of God, 
For I’m washed in Jesus’ blood ; 
I am watching, and I’m longing while I wait. 
Soon on wings of love I'll fly 
To my home beyond the sky, 
To my welcome, as I'm sweeping thro’ the gate. 


Refrain—In the blood of yonder Lamb, 
Washed from every stain I am; 

Robed in whiteness, clad in brightness, 

I am sweeping thro’ the gates, 


Oh! the blessed Lord of light, 
I loved Him with my might ; 
Now His arms enfold and comfort while I wait. 
I am leaning on His breast, 
Oh! the sweetness of His rest. 
And I’m thinking of my sweeping thro’ the gate, 


Burst are all my prison bars, 
And I soar beyond the stars ; 
To my Father’s house, the bright and blest estate. 
Lo! the morn eternal breaks 
And the song immortal wakes, 
Robed in whiteness, I am sweeping thro’ the gate. 


pen 


nee OD mepeaees ie to 


AX, 
HOW GOD LOVES MEN. 


I JOHN iv. 16: “God is love,” 


T is a text on fire, and I hope it will burn down into your souls, ye | 

t “God is love.” Now, if you can not remember a word of the ge 
sermon, and your friends ask you what I preached about, just i 
bear in mind that text—« God is love.” I don’t believe there is a 
truth in the Word of God that tells us so thoroughly that God will 
blot out our sins as the text. I remember the rebuilding of a church 
on the North Side, by a friend of mine, after the fire, and he was 
very anxious to make the people believe this truth, To do this he 
had the text put up in the church like this. One night a man going 


by—the door was ajar a little—happened to look in, and there he 
saw this text, “God is love.” 


that ; God don’t love me;” 
mind, but couldn’. He ke 
over in his mind until it see 
He went a few blocks away 
would just go back and seé 
the conclusion of the service 


’t believe 
and he tried to pass the words from his 


, and after a little hesitation, thought he 
what was going on in that church. At ay 
s I found a man sitting away back in a BT: 

I asked him, « Well,” said 
eart—God is love.” I asked 
love, and spoke about it to him, 
his knees, and he accepted the 


ay some—I hope there are hundreds 
here who will believe this in spite of what the devil says, who is con- | 
tinually striving to make men believe it isn’t true, 2 


My friends, “God is love,” and He wants you all to receive =m 


he, “that text up yonder has broke my h 
him if he was willing to accept His 
and ina little time I had him o 

text. I hope there are some, I s 


truth. You may ask, « Why does God love me?” It isa mystery, 
and always has been, to me why He loves the rebellious sons ot 
Adam ; but, I suppose, it is upon the same principle as the shining 
of the sun—can not help it. The trouble is with us; we are all the 
time trying to measure God’s love with our own. If a man proves. 


(165) 


166 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


treacherous, if he proves a traitor to us, we turn our back upon him 
and cast him off. Our love may have been very strong toward this 
man, but whenever we find the bad traits in his character we throw 
him off. It is not so with the divine love. God’s love is unchange- 
able. Ifa man goes down to hell, it is because he has turned from 
that love himself. God hates sin, mark you; but He loves the sin- 
ner. Keep this in your minds—it is sin that He hates with a per- 
fect hatred, but He loves the sinner. “ Now before the feast of the 
passover, when Jesus knew that His hour was come that He 
should depart out of this world unto the Father, having loved His 
own which were in the world, He loved them unto the end.” 
He loved them that very night. He knew that one of those dis- 
ciples would betray Him for thirty pieces of silver, and yet He 
loved them. If there is anything that makes hell unendurable to 
Judas Iscariot it is the knowledge that He loved him even when he 
betrayed Him—that He loved him even while he kissed Him. 
That very night when He knew Peter was to forsake Him— 
that very night when He was hastening to the cross, He loved him. 
He loved them all to the end. Let us not be guilty of measuring 
God’s love with our own. God loves us when we do not love Him. 
God loves us when we are at enmity with Him—when we are at 
war with Him. Just turn to the forty-ninth chapter of Isaiah and 
fifteenth verse: “Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she 
should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they 
may forgat, yet I will not forget thee.” Now what an illustration 
that is. How the prophet just draws on this scene with which we 
are so familiar in our homes. Can a mother forget the child of her 
bosom? There are unnatural mothers in Chicago, of course. They 
have drank so much whiskey that they have lost all love for their 
children. But they are very few. The most devoted love on 
earth is the love of a mother for her child; but what is it in com- 
parison to God's love? Mothers “may forget, yet I will not 
forget thee.” This is what God was saying to Israel. My friends, 
just picture to yourself the love of a mother. Why, there is no 
love so strong as the love of a mother for her child. There are a 
great many things to separate a man from his wife, or one friend 
from another, but the mother’s love is generally unchangeable. 
Her son may be a murderer; public opinion may be against him ; 
the daily journals may write him down; his friends may forsake 
him; but that mother will take her stand in the court beside her 


a es a neecnaansth ne 


ee ee 


peri 


ee a 


on him 
ird this 
» throw 
shange- 
d from 
che sin- 
1 a per- 
t of the 
hat He 
red His 
> end.” 
ose dis- 
yet He 
rable to 
vhen he 
d Him. 
Him— 
ed him. 
sasuring 
ve Him. 
e are at 
1iah and 
that she 
ea, they 
istration 
yhich we 
ld of her 
e. They 
for their 
love on 
-in com- 
will not 
, friends, 
ere is no 
ere area 
1e friend 
ingeable. 
nst him; 
y forsake 
eside her 


HOW GOD LOVES MEN. 


167 


boy. The jury may give a verdict against him, and he may be 
sentenced to death; but you will fina that mother going down to 
his cell, and she will love him through it all. She doesn’t care for 
public opinion ; she doesn’t heed the sentiments of the press, Every- 
thing may be gone from her, but love for her son will remain. And 
_when that son has been executed, and life has left his body she 
will go down to his grave and water it with tears, and will cherish 
the memory of that boy as long as she lives. But all this is not to 
be compared with the love of God. God’s love is not confined 
to one man; it is universal and is unfailing and unchangeable. 
Let us turn to Jeremiah and we read: “ His love is everlasting.” 
He loves us with an everlasting love, and if you are lost, it is be 
cause you despise this everlasting love. It is not because He doesn’ 
love you, for we see here He loves you with an everlasting love. | 
was sheer love which gave Christ for us, and every man and woman 
in this house can be a partaker of it. He said this to Israel when 
they were in a backslidden state. He gave them blessings 
He gave them prophets. He led them through dangers and diffi 
culties, and they had now forsaken His law, and He said to Jere 
miah go and tell them that “ His love is everlasting.” But eve 
after that they despised His love and affection, and ruin came upo 
them. 

I can imagine some of you saying, “Well, if God loves with an 
unfailing love, with an unchangeable love, with an everlasting love, we 
are all right.” Some men say, “I ignore the doctrines you have been 
preaching the last two nights—I don’t believe in your blood doc-} 
trine; but I believe in the love of God. Heisa God of love, and! 
by His love He will save me.” 

I had a lady come to me while in England, and 
woman whose heart was broken it was she. 
sad story. She hada family of five children, and one of them was in 
exile in Australia. The parents loved that boy, it seemed, almost 
more than all the others; but they had to banish him from home. 


He had written to his parents to allow him to come home, but his 


father had replied, “ No ; if you only repent of your sins you may come 


home; but if not, you can not come.” They told me tha. they 
yearned to have him home, but they couldn’t have him. When he 
was beside them he made their house a perfect hell. If he came, it 
would ruin all the other children; and so, don’t you see, if an unre- 
generated man came into the kingdom of Heaven, he would make a 


if ever I saw a | 
She told me a very 


ere 


Se ace a 


168 


MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


perfect hell ofit. There would be another war in Heaven. He isa God 


of love, but He can not let an unregenerated man into His king- 


dom. If He did, there would soon be no more joy in Heaven than — 


there is onearth now. Before a man enters there, he must be regen- 
erated. And so that Saviour offers you that salvation through His 
love; wants to bless you to-night; and I say again if you do not 
accept this love you will trample the mercy of God under your feet. 

I was told by a prominent man in Boston of a young man in 


New York. 


He had put his mother into the grave by his conduct, 


and he was fast bringing his father to an untimely end. One night 
while he was going out his father met him in the hall, and said to 
him kindly, “You have not, my son, spent a night with me since 


your poor mother was buried. 


It is very lonely here now. 


There 


are none but the servants in the house; now won’t you spend this 


night with me? I want to talk to you; 
there with his gray hairs and appealed to his son. 


” 


and the old man stood 
But the answer 


was, “No, I won't.” “You have killed your mother through your 
conduct; these gray hairs will soon be lying beside her, and I must 


tell you of your peril. 


You shall not go; or if you will go to your 


ruin you must go over my body,” and the old father lay down at 
the door and the young man leaped over his father—leaped to his 
ruin. The old man loved him, but he trampled his love under his 


feet. What are you doing, sinner? 


“T have no pleasure in the 


death of the wicked; turn ye, turn ye, oh House of Israel.” 
God does not come down here without giving us a token of His 
love. Many people profess great love for us, but they give us no 
token. It isn’t so with God. Find here in the thirty-eighth chap- 
ter of Isaiah, seventeenth verse: ‘“ Behold, for peace I had great 
bitterness, but Thou hast in love for my soul delivered it from the 
pit of corruption, for Thou hast cast all my sins behind Thy back.” 
Out of love for my soul He has cast all my sins behind His back. 
That is the way He shows His love by taking all our sins and cast- 
ing them behind His back. Could you want them put in any safer 
place than behind His back? Not behind my back, where Satan 
might get at them, but behind God’s back, where Satan can not get 
them. He says: “Thou hast cast all””—TI like that little word all— 
“behind thy back.” They are there for time and eternity, and I can go 
on my way shouting for glory. There are two or three ways of ex- 


pressing the taking away of our sins by God. 
and we are told that He puts them “ into the sea of forgetfulness,” 


There is this one, 


wo - es Aa 


pitic 
God 
thin] 
His 


isa God 
is king- 
en than 
e regen- 
ugh His 
1 do not 
yur feet. 
man in 
onduct, 
1e night 
| said to 
le since 
There 
snd this 
n stood 
- answer 
gh your 
| I must 
to your 
down at 
d to his 


ider his 


> in the” 


Israel.” 
1 of His 
e us no 
th chap- 
id great 
rom the 
y back.” 
is back. 
nd cast- 
ny safer 
e Satan 
/not get 
ord all— 
Ican go 
1s of ex- 
his one, 
fulness,” 


HOW GOD LOVES MEN, 169 


and some others, but this one is the best of them all, 
them all behind His back. Let us rejoice in such a Rede 
takes our sins right out of the way, 
sinner to come to Him. 

Now, it is out of pure love for us that 


them away. A great many people are trying to put away their own 
sins, but they can’t do it. Suppose you stole a thousand dollars 
from a man, and you said, “TI forgive the man I stole that money 
from.” You can not do that, for he has got something against you. 


It is he that has to forgive, because you have sinned against him. 
So mea go on sinning against God; and if we want our sins can- 
celed for time and eternity, we must accept God’s forgiveness for 
time and eternity. 


There is another verse in the sixty-third chapter of Isaiah, in 
which He shows His love for us, which I 
to: “In all their affliction He was afflicted, and the angel of His 
Presence saved them; in His love and in His pity He redeemed 
them; and He bare them, and carried them all the days of old. 
But they rebelled and vexed His Holy Spirit ; therefore He was 
turned to be their enemy, and He fought against them.” Now God 
loves every one of His children. None of them can be afflicted but 
He feels it, just as a mother feels for her child. How many times 
have you seen a mother sitting up with her child seven, eight, or 


With 


He casts 
emer. He 
and the road is clear for the 


He takes ours sins and puts 


want to call your attention 


disease out of the bosom of th 


would do it. God takes that place with us. In all their afflictions 
He was afflicted, “and the angel of His presence saved them; in 


His love and in His pity He redeeined them,” 


Here is the God 
who pitied and redeemed Israel in spite of their transgressions, and 


yet they turn right round and condemn Him, charge back upon Him 
all their troubles, Just so with people here; they charge back their 
sins to God, and blame God for bringing them into the world at all, 
and some even blame Him for giving them salvation, and yet it is 
without price. They spurn His offers and they spurn His love. 
Now let me touch upon this verse. He says, “in His pity.” He 


Pitics us. When Adam fell from his high estate, it brought out 
God’s love and pity, and He showed him merc f 


a 


170 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


shown in God’s love. No sooner did the news reach Heaven of 
Adam’s fall, than Heaven came down to reach him. A friend of 
mine, before the fire, went to Manchester, England, and used to tell 
the people of the greatness of Chicago—of its lumber, of its elevators, 
of its manufactures; but he said the people of Manchester didn’t 
seem to take any interest in what he said. But one day a dispatch 
came over the cable saying that in Chicago a large fire was going on, 
and the people became a little interested. By and by, a telegram 
came saying that the city was burning, and that 10,000 people were 
homeless, and the people began to gather around the telegraph 
offices, and there was great interest. But after a little, a message 
came across saying the city was burned and that 100,000 people 
were homeless, and the people flocked to the rescue and gave their 
thousands. It was Chicago’s calamity that brought out their love. 
So it was Adam’s calamity that brought out God’s love. And so, 
don't say that because a man is a sinner, He does not love him. 
He remembers our afflictions, :and He comes and says: “If 
you will, I will take your affliction away; I will take your sorrow 
from you; I will take away all your suspense and troubles, 
and I will take you by the right hand and lead you through 
this dark world to my kingdom in the Heavens.” Ho! ho! sinner! 
let the Lord take your right hand and lead you to Paradise. I 
don’t know who you may be—I don’t care whether you are a poor 
tramp who has been wandering about from door to door to-day, 
seeking a crust of bread—I tell you that God loves you. Say yes. 
He wants to save you. He wants to get His arm under your body 
and take you to His kingdom. Won’t you have Him? 

Many people say: “If I could get rid of my sins I would come.” 
Come to “ Him that loved us and then washed us in His blood.” 
That's the plan of Christ’s redemption. And so He takes sin from 
us and loves the sinner, and wants to wash you to-night in His 
blood. There is nothing to hinder you from being saved; you have 
just to come, as Paul says, “unto Him that loved and gave Him- 
self for us.” He does not love one man, but He loves the world. 
It was in His great love for us that He came down from Heaven. 
What we want to know is, that He is for each and every one of us 
—He is not a national Christ; He is a personal Saviour. Suppose 
England gave America $:00,000, and I wanted two or three thou- 
sand dollars, that money given to the American government would 
not help me any. . What I want is a personal Christ, and I find this 


feaven of 
friend of 
sed to tell 
elevators, 
ter didn’t 
. dispatch 
going on, 
telegram 
ople were 
telegraph 
. Message 
90 people 
rave their 
heir love. 
And so, 
love him. 
ays: “If 
ur sorrow 
troubles, 
through 
.! sinner! 
radise. I 
ire a poor 
r to-day, 
Say yes. 
our body 


d come.” 
s blood.” 
sin from 
it in His 
you have 
ie Him- 
he world. 
Heaven. 
yne of us 
Suppose 
ree thou- 
nt would 
find this 


XXI. 


GOD HATES SIN AND LOVES THE SINNER. 
I JOHN iv. 16: “God is love.” 


if WOULD like to call your attention to Ephesians iij, Tae 
“For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, . 
“Of whom the whole family in Heaven and earth is named, 
“That He would grant you, according to the riches of His glory, 
to be strengthened with might by His Spirit in the inner man ; 
“That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being 
rooted and grounded in love, 


“ May be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, 
and length, and depth, and height: 

“And to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that 
ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.” 

That ye may know “the breadth, and length, and depth, and 
height” of the love of Christ. That was Paul’s prayer forthe Chris- 


tians in Ephesus that they might know the breadth, and length, and 
depth, and height of Christ’s love. There is nothing, my friends, that 
brings out the love of God like the cross of Christ; it tells of the 
breadth, and length, and depth, and height of His love. If you 
want to know how much God loves you, you must go to Calvary 
to find out. A man going out of this hall last night was heard to 
say, “That’s not true; God doesn’t love me.” Now, if a man 
doesn’t know his Bible, that May account for such an expression ; 
but ifa man has his Bible open before him I don’t see how he can 
say this. How aman can speak in this way if he has looked into 
the Scriptures is a mystery to me. This idea probably was the 
same in Paul’s days as it is in ours, and that’s why he bowed his 
knee so that they might comprehend the extent of God’s love 
for them. 


(173) 


174, MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, , 


I am told that during the war in France—when France was fight- 
ing with Germany—when the trouble broke out in Paris, the Com- 
munists had a number of citizens in prison. Among the number 
there was an archbishop. In the window of his little cell he had a 
cross, and before he was led to execution he cut at the head of the 
cross, “height,” at the bottom, “depth,” and at each of the arms, 
“length” and “breadth.” Ah, he knew something about the love 
of God—he had discovered the great love of Christ. It reaches 
from north to south, from east to west; it reaches from Heaven to 
hell—-to all the corners of the earth; it has height, it has depth, it 
has length, it has breadth. Oh, may God open our eyes to this 
truth—show us the greatness of this love, and may He not let a 
man go out of this building saying, “God does not love me,” for 
He does. I wish I had time to read to you all the passages in the 
Scriptures that speak of His love; to show you that He did not 
come down from Heaven to curse you, but to bless you; not to do 
you harm, but to do you good. He seeks to deal with you only for 
your happiness. I can imagine you saying as some one said to me 
lately, “If He loves us so much, why does He let us have so much 
sotrow?” He answers this in the Scriptures—“Whom the Lord 
loveth He chasteneth.” Did you ever hear of a man who loved his 
child neglecting to chasten it? If you spare the rod it is sure ruin 
to your child. Why, this very passage is proof of God’s love. Look 
at a father who has a child who lies and steals, and does everything 
that’s bad; if he don’t chasten that child it is a sure proof that the 
father doesn’t love that child. God loves us, and whenever He sees 
we require it, He chasteneth. Because you receive stripes, my friend, 
don’t listen to the devil’s whisper in your ear that God’s love is not 
for you. If we got everything we wanted in this world in the shape 
of property, my friends, it would be our ruin. It is prosperity that 
ruins more men than anything else. When affliction and misfortune 
come upon us we ought to thank God, for it is an evidence of His 
love. He doesn’t chasten us because He loves to do it, but because 
we have sinned before Him. And if there is a poor sinner here who 
has felt the chastisement of the Father, who is suffering affliction 
rather than murmur, we should kiss the rod, because it is a strong 
proof of His love. 

I remember my little girl had a habit of getting up in the morn- 
ing very cross. I don’t know whether your children are like that. 
She used to get up in the morning speaking cross, and it made the 


RS, 


was fight- 
the Com- 
e number 
he had a 
ad of the 
the arms, 
‘the love 
t reaches 
‘eaven to 
depth, it 
s to this 
not let a 
- me,” for 
res in the 
e did not 
not to do 
u only for 
aid to me 
-so much 
the Lord 
loved his 
sure ruin 
ve. Look 
verything 
f that the 
r He sees 
ny friend, 
ve is not 
che shape 
rity that 
isfortune 
se of His 
t because 
here who 
affliction 

a strong 


he morn- 
ike that. 
made the 


GOD HATES SIN AND LOVES THE SINNER. 


175 


family very uncomfortable. So I took her aside one morning and 

said to her, “Emma, if you go on that way I shall have to correct 

you; I don’t want to do it, but I will have to.” She looked at me 
for a few moments—I had never spoken that way to her before-— 
and she went away. She behaved herself for a few weeks all right, 
but one morning she was as cross as ever, and when she came to me 
to be kissed before going to school, I wouldn’t do it. Off she went 
to her mother, and said, “ Mamma, papa refused to kiss me; I can 
not go to school, because he won't kiss me.” Her mother came in, 
but she didn’t say much; she knew the child had been doing wrong. 
The little one went off, and as she was going down-stairs I heard 
her weeping, and it seemed to me as if that child was dearer to me 
then than ever she had been before. J] went to the window and saw 
her going down the street crying, and as I looked on her I couldn't 
repress my tears. That seemed to be the longest day I ever spent 
in Chicago. Before the school was out I wos home, and when she 
came in, her first words were: “ Papa, won’t you forgive me?” and 
I kissed her and she went away singing. It was because I loved 
her that I punished her. My friends, don’t let Satan make you be- 
lieve, when you have any trouble, that God does not love you. 

In Romans we read: “For all things work together for good to 
them that love God, to them who are the called according to His pur- 
pose.” So, when you have crosses, affliction, and sorrow, and misfor 
tune, remember that all those things, “ work together for pood, 
remember when the same child was taken with scarlet fever I was 
very anxious that the prescription should be filled carefully, and I 
went right to the head clerk of a drug store and he took first a little 
stuff from one bottle and a little from another until he had a lot of 
different medicine in one jar; and he stirred them all up, and 
it proved to be the right remedy. So God gives us a little sorrow 
and affliction and misfortune; it is only a remedy for us. If things 
work against you it is oaly for your good. 

I can imagine Paul when he got on that platform, Low he 
felt when his misfortunes came upon him. When they threw 
him into prison and gave him stripes he would shout, “ All 
things work together for my good.” When they took up great 
stones and stoned him and stripped him: “ All things work 
together for my good—everything is for the Lord.” Satan, while 
Paul was suffering, could not make him disbelieve that all this mis. 
fortune was for good; he believed that all things worked together 


176 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. , 


for good. That’s what made him so mighty; it was this fact that 
made him carry everything before him; it was this knowledge that 
enabled him, instead of giving way to despair, to take up his pen in 
that prison, and write those great epistles—those epistles which 
have done so much good to man. Men who have received bless- 
ings from his teachings are constantly going there, and I can 
imagine them, when they reach the golden gates, meeting Paul and 
taking him by the right hand and saying: “Paul, lam glad you 
wrote that epistle to the Ephesians ; I was saved by it.” “ Paul, I 
am glad you wrote that epistle to the Corinthians; I received sal- 
vation by it.’’ “ Paul, your epistle to the Hebrews was the means 
of giving me a crown of glory.” The sermons he preached, most 
of them, have gone, but these epistles come down to us as living 
testimony of God’s goodness to us. It was Paul’s affliction that 
gave usthem. So, if the world is dark around us, and we are sur- 
rounded, remember that “all things work together for our good,” 
and be sure that you love Him. 

God loves the Christian—‘those that serve Him.” I can hear 
some one saying: “I never served God; I never prayed to Him in 
my life ; Inever sought for a knowledge of God. He doesn’t love me. 
He’s angry with me.” I know a great many people have got this 
idea. I suppose they got it from some of our preachers. I re- 
member I used to do this too—say that God was angry with the 
sinner, and I thought it was true; but that time has passed away. 
This very text might have shown me I was wrong. If I have a son 
who is a drunkard, or a gambler, or a thief, I love him still—I am 
angry with his sin. 

I will tell you how I got my eyes open to the truth that God 
loves the sinner. When I went over to Europe, I was preaching in 
Dublin, when a young fellow came up to the platform and said to 
me that he wanted to come to America and preach. He had a 
boyish appearance; did not seem to be over 17 years old. I 
measured him all over, and he repeated his request, and asked me 
when I was going back. I told him I didn’t know, probably I 
wouldn’t if I had known. I thought he was too young and inexpe- 
rienced to be able to preach. In course of time I sailed for 
America, and hadn’t been here long before I got a letter from him, 
dated New York, saying that he had arrived there. I wrote him 
a note and thought I would hear no more about him; but soon 
I got another letter from him, saying that he was coming soon to 


S. ’ 


fact that 
dge that 
is pen in 
es which 
ed bless- 
id I can 
Paul and 
glad you 
Pahl 
cived sal- 
le means 
ed, most 
as living 
tion that 
> are sur- 
ir good,” 


can hear 
9 Him in 
‘love me. 

got this 
rs, lL rés 
with the 
ed away. 
ave a son 
ill—I am 


that God 
aching in 
id said to 
Te had a 

old. I 
asked me 
obably I 
d inexpe- 
sailed for 
rom him, 
rote him 
but soon 
* soon to 


} GOD HATES SIN AND LO VES THE SINNER, 177 


Chicago, and would like to preach. I sent him another letter tell. 
ing him if he came, to call on me, and closed with a few common- 
place remarks, I thought that would settle him, and I would hear 
no more from him. But in a very few days after, he made his appear- 
ance. I didn’t know what to do with him. I was just going off to 
Towa, and I went to a friend and said: “T have got a young Irish. 
man (I thought he was an Irishman because I had met him in 
Ireland), and he wants to preach. Let him preach at the meetings— 
try him, and if he fails I will take him off your hands when I come 
back.” When I got home—I remember it was on a Saturday 
morning—I said to my wife: “Did that young man preach at the 
meetings?” “Yes.” “How did they like him?” « They liked 
him very much,” she replied; “he Preaches a little different from 
you ; he preaches that God loves sinners.” I had been preaching that 
God hated sinners; that He had been standing behind the sinners 
with a double-edged sword, ready to cut off the heads of the sinners, 
So I concluded if. he preached different from me I would not 
like him. My Prejudice was up. Well, I went down to the meeting 
that night, and saw them coming in with their Bibles with them. | 
thought it was curious. It was something strange to see the people 
coming in with Bibles, and listen to the flutter of the leaves. The 
young man gave out his text, saying: “Let us turn to the third 
chapter of John, and sixteenth verse, ‘For God so loved the world 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in 
Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.’” He didn’t 
divide up the text at all. He went from Genesis to Revelations, giv- 
ing proof that God loved the sinner, and before he got through two 
or three of my sermons were spoiled. I have never preached them 
since. The following day (Sunday) there was an immense crowd 
flocking into the hall ; and he said: “ Let us turn to the third chapter 
of John, sixteenth verse, ‘For God so loved the world that He gave 
His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not 
perish, but have everlasting life;’” and he preached the fourth 
sermon from this verse. He just seemed to take the whole text and 
throw it at them, to Prove that God loved the sinner, and that for 
six thousand years He had been trying to convince the world of 


this. I think I thought I had never heard a better sermon in my 
life. It seemed to be a new revelation to all. Ah, I notice there 


£2 tU ai 
are some of you here who remember those times, remember those 


nights, I got a new idea of the blessed Bible. On that Monday 
12 


178 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


night I went down and the young man said, “ Turn to the third 
chapter of John, sixteenth verse,” and he seemed to preach better 
than ever. Proof after proof was quoted from Scripture to show 
how God loved us. I thought sure he had exhausted that text, 
but on Tuesday he took his Bible in his hand and said: “Tura to 
the third chapter of John, sixteenth verse ;” and he preached the 
sixth sermon from that text. He just seemed to climb over his 
subject, while he proved that there was nothing on earth like the 
love of Christ, and he said, “If I can but convince men of this love, 
if I can but bring them to believe in the text, the whole world will 
be saved.” On the Thursday he selected the old text, John iii. 
1, and at the conclusion of the sermon he said, “I have been 
trying to tell you for seven rights how much God loves you, but I 
can not do it. If I coule borrow Jacob’s ladder and climb up to 
Heaven, and could see Gabriel there and ask him to tell me how 
much God loves me, he would anly say, ‘God so loved the world 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in 
Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.’”’ 

My friends, I hope none here will go down to hell who has 
heard this text of Scripture. If he does, he will have trampled it 
under his feet—he will have flung away God’s goodness. His hell 
will be two hells if he remembers that “God so loved the world 
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” How a man 
can go out of this Tabernacle after hearing this text, saying, “ God 
does not love me,” is a mystery to me. 

I want to turn your attention to Romans v. 8: “ But God com- 
mendeth His love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners 
Christ died for us.” Men have an idea that He did not come to 
rid men of their sins. That is not true. He didn’t come to call 
the righteous, to call the just to His kingdom, but sinners. It 
there had been no sin in the world He needn’t have come here. It 
was the fact of sin being in the world that brought Him from the 
bosom of His Father—it was that that brought Him to Calvary— 
Christ’s love for a perishing world. He wants to cover us with 
His love. Look at that beautiful passage in the song of Solomon: 
“His left hand is under my head, and His right hand doth 
embrace me,” and “ His banner over me is love.”” Yes, His banner 
is love. ‘There isa story told of a man who came to this country 


\ 
) 
' 


S. 


the third 
ch better 
to show 
hat text, 
‘Tura to 
ched the 
over his 
like the 
this love, 
rorld will 
John iii. 
ave been 
ou, but I 
1b up to 
| me how 
he world 
lieveth in 


who has 
umpled it 

His hell 
the world 
believeth 
w a man 


ng, God 


xyod com- 
2t sinners 
come to 
ne to call 
iners. If 
here. It 
from the 
Calvary— 
r us with 
Solomon: 
and doth 
lis banner 
s country 


\ 
) 
{ 


GOD HATES SIN AND LOVES THE SINNER. 179 
from England, and who became naturalized. Soon afterward he 
became restless for a change, and went to Cuba. It was when 
the war broke out there in 1867. He had not been long in that 
island when he was arrested as aspy. He was tried and sentenced 
to be executed—ordered to be shot. He sent for the British 
and American Ministers, who looked into his case and found he 
was innocent. They went to the Spanish authorities and said: 
“Why, this man is innocent; you can not execute this man,” but 
they replied that he had been tried under Spanish laws, and found 
guilty, and must die. They hadn’t time (there was no cable in 
those days) to send to their government. The man was finally 
brought to be shot, and the Spanish soldiers were ordered to put an 
end to that young man. At that point a carriage drove rapidly up, 
and the two Ministers leaped out and flung the British flag and star- 
spangled banner before the man, and said to the soldiers, “ Fire, if 
you dare!” and they didn’t. Those flags gave that man the protec- 
tion of the government ; the governments of those countries repre- 
sented were behind those flags. Ah, my friends, come under the 
banner of Heaven; the government of Heaven is behind it. His 
banner offers us His love—it js a banner of love. You will then be 
under the protection of high Heaven as you journey through the 
world. If you are assailed, He will send legions of angels, if neces- 
sary, to fight your way up to Heaven. 

May the God of grace break your hearts, and may no man go 
out of this building saying, “God does not love me.” It was 
the love of God that broke my heart years ago, and if J put it 
to the vote of the Christians in this assemblage to testify what 
broféht them to Christ, they would turn to this text: “For God so 
loved the world that He gave His only begotten Son, that whoso- 
ever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” 
Will you take His love to-night? Bear in mind that He stands at 
the door of your heart with His locks wet with the dew of night. 
And what does He do? He knocks; just listen! Can you hear 
this loving Saviour calling you to Him? Can you heara gentle 
knock? That is Christ knocking at the door of your heart. “Be. 
hold I stand at the door and knock, and if any man”—mark the 
language of the Scripture—“ any man,” he may be a drunkard, a 
thief, a sambler—« open the door I will come in and sup with him 
and he with Me.” I have been in homes in Chicago where I couldn’t 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


180 


stay five minutes—they were so dark and gloomy, just like some of 
our hearts. Won’t you pull back the bolts and open the door of 
your heart, and He will come in and reign and give you peace and 
joy all the rest of your days? Is there one here to-night who will 
let Him in? May the God of all grace lead to the cross any 
wanderer here to-night. Let us pray. 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we pray Thee that Thou wilt help each one 
of us, that we may know what to do with Thy Holy Son that Thou 
hast given us. May these men and women give up their wayward 
life, and may these that are old in a life of sin give up that life, and 
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. And, our Saviour, may many feed 
on Thy Spirit as the bread of their life. May we have the joy of 
seeing many turning from their sins and enriched with Thy Holy 
Spirit. May we see many this night coming to God and acknowl- 
edge that the glorious Spirit of Christ saveth. May all in this meet- 
ing to-night be found lifting up their hearts to the Lord. And this 
night may there be no criticisms upon the work that is going on, 
but may all work together for the glory of God, and we will give 


Thee all the praise. And may Thy blessing rest on the songs we’ 


shall sing and the Gospel we shall preach. Amen. 


S. 


some of 
door of 
sace and 
who will 
ross any 


each one 
iat Thou 
wayward 
life, and 
any feed 
1e joy of 
hy Holy 
acknowl- 
his meet- 
And this 
zoing on, 
will give 


songs we 


XXII. 


THE PROP 1ET DANIEL, 


WANT to talk about the life of the prophet Daniel. The word 
means “God with him,” not the public with him ; not his fellow- 
men, but God. Therefore he had to report himself to God, and 

hold himself responsible to Him. I do not know just what time 
Daniel went down to Babylon. I know that in the third year of King 
Jehoiakim, Nebuchadnezzar took ten thousand of the chief men of 
Jerusalem and carried them captive down to Babylon. I am glad 
these chief men who stirred up the war were given into the great 
king’s hands. Unlike too many of the ringleaders in our great war, 
they got the punishment on their own heads. Among the captives 
were four young men. They had been converted, doubtless under 
Jeremiah, the “ weeping prophet” that God had sent to the children 
of Israel. Many had mocked at him when he lifted up his voice 
against their sins. They had laughed at his tears and told him to 
his face, as many say of us, that he was getting up a false excite- 
ment. But these four young men listened, and had the backbone to 
come out for God. 

And now, after they were come to Babylon, the king said a num- 
ber of the children should be educated, and ordered the same kind 
of meat and wine set before them that were used in his own palace, 
and that at the end of a year they should be brought before him. 
Daniel and his three friends were among these. Now, no young 
man ever comes to the city but he has great temptations cross his 
path as he enters it. And just at this turning-point in his life, as in 
Daniel’s, must lie the secret of his success. If you see success in 
statesmen, in lawyers, or men in any walk of life, you ask the secret 
of it, and you find it in this same time of youth. Jacob turned 
away from God, and David turned away from God, but only just in 
Proportion as they had not fully and entirely given themselves up to 
Him when they were young men. Yes, that was the secret of this 
(x81). 


7 


LO 


1.4 


125 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


hic 


tograp 


S 
a 


° 
° 
wn 
of 
« 
ww 
o 
° 
= 
La 


i 
us 
=< 
ni - 
z> 
<z 
=e 
-— w 
Nn pe 
vn 
a 
o 
ss 


ociences 
Corporation 


mene " LL LS ASST AN SRS SS Ac cnn 


: Sete Tok ene, One 

“482 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 
young man Daniel’s success; he took his stand with God right on 
his entering the gate of Babylon, and cried to God to keep him 
steadfast. And he needed to cry hard. A grave law of his and 
his nation’s God was, that.no man should eat meat offered to 
idols; but now comes the king’s first edict that this young man 
should eat the meat he himself did. I do not think it took young 
Daniel long to make up his mind. The law of God forbade it, and 
he would not de it. “He purposed in his heart ”’—in his heart, mark 
that —“ that he would not defile himself.” He did not do it in 
his head, but love in his heart prompted him. If some Chicago 
Christians could have advised Daniel they’d have said, “ Don’t you 
do it; don’t set aside the meat; that would be a species of 
Pharisaism. The moment you take your stand and say you won't 
eat it, you say in effect you are better than other people.” That is 
the kind of talk too often to be heard now. Oh, yes, “ When you 
are in Rome do as the Romans do;” they would have insisted to 


ee the poor young captive that he might, and ought to, carry out the 


commandments of his God when he was in his own country, but not 
there where he was a poor slave ; he could not possibly carry along his 
. religion down there in Babylon. Thank God, this young man said he 
. would not eat, and ordering the meat taken away, got the eunuch to 
bring him pulse. And behold, when he came before the king, the 
eunuch’s fears were gone, for the faces of Daniel and the rest of the 
dear boys were fairer and fatter than any that the king looked down 
upon. They hadn’t noses, like too many in our streets, as red as if 
they were just going to blossom. It is God’s truth, and Daniel 
tested it, that cold water, with a clear conscience, is better than 
wine. 

And the king one day had a dream, and all the wise men were 
galled. But they all said, We can not interpret it; it is too hard. 
The king in wrath threatened them, and, still getting no answer, 
mawe an edict that all the wise men should be put to death. And 
the officers came to Daniel with the rest of the wise men, but 
Daniel was not afraid. I can imagine he prayed to God, falling 
low on his knees with his face to the earth. and asked Him what to 
do; and then he crawled into bed and slept like a child. We 
would hardly sleep well under such circumstances, And in his 
sleeo God told him the meaning of the dream. There must have 
beer. joy among the wise men that one of their number had found 
it, anc that the king would save their lives. And he is brought 


JO Mm @4@ Ga me ms om ty me ot lee lu 


right on 
eep him 
his and 
fered to 


ng man 
k young 
e it, and 
rt, mark 
do it in 
Chicago 
on’t you 
cies of 
Nu won't 
That is 
hen you 
isted to 
out the 
but not 
long his 
1 said he 
nuch to 
‘ing, the 
st of the 
ed down 
ed as if 
- Daniel 
er than 


en were 
0 hard. 
answer, 
1. And 
en, but 
, falling 
what to 
1. We 
1 in his 
ist have 
d found 
brought 


{ 


before the ‘king, and cries out, “ re) king, while thou didst lie With — 


thy head on thy pillow, thou didst dream, and in thy dream thou 
sawest a great image.” { can imagine at these opening words how 
the king’s eyes flashed, and how he cried out with~joy, “ Yes,s 
that is it, the whole thing comes back to me now.” And ‘then 


Daniel, in a death-like stillness, unfolded all the interpretation, and‘ - | 


told the king that the golden head of the great image represented 
nis own government. I suppose Babylon was the biggest city ever 


in the world. It was sixty miles around. Some writers put the |. 


walls from sixty-five to eighty-five feet high and twenty-five feet 


wide; four chariots could ride abreast on the top of them. A a 
street fifteen miles long divided the grand city, and hanging | | 


gardens in acres made the public parks. It was like Chicago— | 
so flat that they had to resort to artificial mounds; and, again 


like Chicago, the products of vast regions flowed right into and a 


through it. This great kingdom Daniel told the king was his 
own; but he said a desttoying kingdom should come, and after- 
ward a third and fourth kingdom, when at the last the God of 
Heaven should set up His kingdom. And Daniel himself lived to . 
see the first overthrown, when the Medes and Persians came in, and 
centuries after came Alexander, and then the Romans. I believe 
in the literal fulfillment, so far, of Daniel’s God-given words, and 
in the sure fulfillment of the final prophecy of the “stone cut out 
of the mountain without hands,” that by and by shall grind the 
kingdoms of this world into dust, and bring in the kingdom of peace. 
Then will be the millennium and Christ will sway His sceptre over 
all the earth. Well, the king was very much pleased. He gave 
him a place near the throne and he became one of the chief men. 
of the world, and all his three friends were put in high office. — 
God had blessed them signally, and He blessed them still more, 
and that was perhaps a harder thing—in keeping them true to 


Him in their prosperity. Their faith and fortunes waxed strong — 
together. 


ne 
Time went on, and now we reach a crisis indeed. “Nebuchad- 


nezzar, the king,” yw: read, “ made an image of gold, one hundred 
and ten feet high and nine feet wide.” It was not gilded, but solid 
gold. When Babylon was pillaged the second time a single god 


was found in the temple that was worth between two and three 


million pounds sterling. The king’s monstrous image was set up” 
in the plains of Dura, near to the city. I suppose he wanted to 


THE PROPHET DANIEL, . 183 


ae 


Pa 


184 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


please his kingly vanity by inaugurating a universal religion. 
When the time came for the dedication, I do not suppose Daniel 
was there. He was perhaps in Egypt or some other province on 
affairs of the empire. Counselors, satraps, high secretaries, and the 
princes of the people were ordered to hasten to the dedication, and 
_ when they should hear the sound of the cornet, flute, and psaltery 
announce that the great idol was consecrated, they were to bow 
down and worship it. Perhaps they called the ceremony the un- 
yeiling of the monument, as we would say; but one command is 
certain, that at the given signal all the people were to fall to the 
earth in worship. But in the law of God there is something against 
that: “ Thou shalt have no other gods before Me.” God’s law went 
right against the king’s. Oh, would all of us have Daniel’s three 
friends to do the right thing at all hazards? Would none of us, 
without backbone, have advised him to just bow down a little so 
that no one would notice it, or to merely bow down, but not wor- 
ship it? The hour came, and Daniel’s friends refused to bow 
down. They refused utterly to bend the knee to a god of gold. 
How many cry out in this city, “Give me gold, give me money, 
and I will do anything.” Such may think that men in Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s time should not bow down to a golden idol, but they 
themselves are every day doing just that very thing. Money is 
their golden image, or position, or golden ambition. Well, the in- 
formers came to the king and told him that Shadrach, Meshach, 
and Abednego had stood with unbended knee, and straightway 
they were hurried before him, the old king speechless with rage 
and gesturin his commands. I can imagine that one last chance 
was given them, after the king finally regained his voice, and that 
one of them, probably Meshach, spoke up in a respectful, but firm 
voice that they must obey God rather than man. At once the 
raging king cried out: “ What is your God that He can deliver you 
out of our hands?” And in the same breath screamed a command 
to bind them hand and foot and cast them into the fiery furnace, 
and make it seven times hotter than ever. The command was in- 
stantly executed, and the flames leaped out from the door and 
consumed the officers who cast them in. But Jesus was with His 
servants as the flames wreathed about them, and soon word was 
brought to the king that four men walked about in the flames. 
Yes, they walk there with Jesus—they didn’t run—as in a green 
pasture and beside still waters. And directly the king rushed up 


S. 


religion. 
e Daniel 
vince on 
and the 
ion, and 
psaltery 
to bow 
the un- 
mand is 
| to the 
against 
iw went 
l’s three 
e of us, 
little so 
ot wor- 
to bow 
of gold. 
money, 
buchad- 
it they 
[oney is 
_ the in- 
[eshach, 
ightway 
th rage 
chance 
nd that 
ut firm 
nce the 
ver you 
mmand 
furnace, 
was in- 
yor and 
rith His 
ord was 
flames. 
a green 


shed up 


THE PROPHET DANIEL, 185 


and cried, “Ye sons of the living God, come forth.” And behold 
even the hair of their heads was not singed. Then made the king 
a royal edict that all in his realm should reverence the God of 
Meshach, Shadrach, and Abednego. 

These glorious heroes braved even death because God was with 
them. Oh, friends, we want to be Christians with the same back- 
bone, men and women who stand up for the right and never mind 
what the world may say. I believe before God there would be ten 
thousand conversions in Chicago in the next twenty-four hours 
had we only a perfect consecration. God grant it us, out of the 
abundance of His grace. The next thing that comes before us is 
that the king is in trouble again. He has had another dream. He 
called in the wise men of Babylon and told them what he had 
dreamt about, but they were not able to interpret what it meant. 
But the prophet is brought in, and he at once told him the dream. 
He says: “O king, this is your own kingdom. God has made it 
to extend to the four corners of the earth, and now since God has 
exalted you, you have become proud, and have not given Him the 
glory ; but if thou wilt humble thyself He may spare thee.” Now 
Daniel preached to him a good sermon. It may be he told him 
of Nineveh, and how the Lord had spared it when its people 


repented. We find the king saying, one year afterwards: “Is 


not this the great kingdom I have built up by my power?” 
We're told that a voice from Heaven said, “O king, thy glory is 
departed from thee.” He left the throne, was next driven from 
among men, and dwelt with the beasts of the field. At the end 
of seven times—some think that means seven years — his reason 
returned, and the last glimpse we catch of the mighty monarch 
is in the fourth chapter of Daniel, where he sends out his last 
decree. Now he has got home to himself. The language of 
this touches the king on his throne; it sounds as if it came 
from a man who has met the God of all grace, and his heart 
has been changed. He says: “Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise 
and honor, and extol the King of Heaven.” We have very good 
reason to believe that he was a saved man. We have very good 
reason to suppose that Daniel was successful, by his faithfulness, 
in winning him to the God of the Hebrews. For fifteen years 
we lose sight of the mighty prophet. Another takes the throne. 
We do not find out who that second ruler was, but now we find 
Belshazzar, who reigns next, had a feast. There he is, with his 


186 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


thousand lords, come up from different parts of the empire. No 
doubt he thought, like every sinner, that he was perfectly secure. 
They are praising their gods of gold, silver, and brass. While the 
banquet is going on, the king orders the vessels that had been taken 
from the temple to be brought in. All at once, in that banqueting 
hall, every voice is hushed. The king trembles from head to foot. 
What is the matter? Every eye is directed yonder, to the wall. 
There is seen a handwriting there, “ Mene, mene, tekel, upharsin.” 
There was not any of his wise men could read the writing. No 
uncircumcised eye could read God’s writing. Daniel was sent for. 
With one look he can see it without any trouble. It was his 
Father’s writing. It read, “Thy kingdom is numbered, thou art 
weighed in the balance and found wanting, thy kingdom is given to 
the Medes and Persians.” He thought not that while this was 
going on. the Medes and Persians were already at work—that very 
night they were marching up the streets of Babylon. They battered 
down the gates of the palace, and soon the king’s blood flowed with 
the wine of the banquet. He blazed forth for one single night, and 
this is the fist and the last we ever hear of him. Now, Darius the 
Mede takes the throne. 

We find that Daniel was put over the presidents and made the 
chief man in all the realm. He was put there to see that no 
damage was done to the king. He held the position for a long 
time, but at last there was a conspiracy raised against him. 
No man can be true to God but some one rises up that wants 
him to be got out of the way. If they could only just get one of 
their own number in his place, what would they not gain? After 
talking it over, they could find no occasion against Daniel but 
touching the love of his God. Oh, thank God for such a man. 
Would to God we had more like him. He had put no friends into 
office that had swindled the government. Though he had been 
chief secretary, they could find nothing against him. At last one 
of them said; “I have got a plan.” I can imagine the one hundred 
~ and twenty princes all together one night, and one of them gets up 
and says: “ Do you know that this man Daniel won’t worship any 
one but the God of the Hebrews? Now, if we could get Darius to 
sign a decree that no man shall be worshiped for thirty days but 
himself! Just make a lion’s den, and make it the penalty for any 
man who refuses to obey the decree, and we shall soon get him out 
of the way.” But they said: “ Look here, this must be a profound 


eS. 


ire. No 
ly secure. 
Vhile the 
cen taken 
inqueting 
d to foot. 
the wall. 
pharsin.”’ 
ng. No 
sent for. 
- was his 
thou art 
; given to 
this was 
that very 
battered 
wed with 
ight, and 
arius the 


made: the 
- that no 
yr a long 
nst him. 
lat wants 
st one of 
i? After 
aniel but 
h a man. 
ends into 
had been 
last one 
hundred 


n gets up 
‘ship any 
Darius to 
days but 
y for any 
: him out 
profound 


THE PROPHET DANIEL, 187 


secret. We must not go out of the council chamber to-night 
until we get the king’s signature.” They very carefully drew 
up the document. Next morning some of them called on the 
king, saying: “O king, live forever. We have been thinking 
how we can increase your popularity, and we’ve made up’ our 
minds that if you should sign a decree, that not one in your 
empire should worship any god but yourself, it would make you 
the most popular monarch that ever ruled.” It can not but 
touch the king’s vanity. He liked it very much. They showed 
him the document. “ Well,” he said, “I can see no objection 
to that.” The king takes his signet, down comes the stamp, and 
he signs it. As he does so, one of them cries: “The law of 
the Medes and Persians altereth not.” There also was a pen- 
alty put in the decree. I can imagine one of Daniel’s friends 
runs and tells him. I can imagine what Christians of the present 
day would say: ‘‘ Now these men want to plunder the government. 
Hadn't you better go off to some remote part of the country for 
the thirty days? If you don’t, they will catch you and throw you 
into the lions’ den.” Or, “Daniel, if you pray, don’t pray with 
your window open towards Jerusalem. If you will pray, put 
down the blinds and pray in secret. Put something in the keyhole 
so they can’t be peeping in.” How many men are trying to serve 
God in that way. How many young men I have heard of who 

when they hear the footsteps of their comrades will at once get off 
their knees. Do you think Daniel is going to turn to the right 
hand or the left in his old days? Thank God, Daniel had time to 
pray. If there had been a daily prayer-meeting in Babylon he 
would have attended it regularly. Now, these princes watch him. 
He knelt down as aforetime. He prayed that God might direct 
Darius in the affairs of his kingdom, but he didn’t pray to Darius. 
When they told the king, I can imagine him stretching himself and 
saying, “Who is: he?” “Why, that man you put over us, that 
Hebrew.” The king was troubled when he heard it, and set his 
heart for the delivery of his friend Daniel, but the laws could not 
be altered. He and every peasant knew he was the best man they 
had in the whole country. Darius loved him very much, but he 
couldn’t save him. He.didn’t love him as much as Jesus loved us. 
Our Darius died Himself that the law might be kept. And now, 
there is the old man moving on to that den like a conqueror. He 
knows if God wants him to go to Heaven from the den, it is all the 


a 
| 


A SP IE pe er aR NR 


‘ 


188 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


same. These princes thought the lions would make short work of 
him. Ah, down comes an angel and shuts every mouth. I can 
imagine he even uses one as a pillow. He would rather be there 
with a clear conscience than Darius on his throne with a guilty 
one. Now I can hear about daybreak the king’s chariot going 
over the streets of Babylon. In great haste he comes to the den 
and cries, “‘O Daniel, is that God whom thou servest able to deliver 
thee from the mouth of the lion?” “Yes, my God is able to de- 
liver me, Darius.” He takes him out; they embrace each other, 
and I can imagine they breakfast together that morning. Daniel 
ever after was greatly beloved. Let us pray. 


S. 


work of 
I can 
ye there 
a guilty 
t going 
the den 
» deliver 
2 to de- 
1 other, 
Daniel 


XXITI. 
THE SINNER’S EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY. 


LUKE xiv. 19: ‘1 pray thee have me excused.”’ 


HRIST had been invited to dine with a rich Pharisee, and it 
seemed as though this man had gathered his friends together 
in a kind of conspiracy to catch Christ. They watched Him. 

A man who had had dropsy was placed before Jesus, as though 

they wanted to see what He would do. Christ read their hearts, 

and so before He healed the man He asked them if it was lawful - 
to heal on the Sabbath day. But they didn’t want to answer, for 
fear they’d betray themselves, and so they held their peace. Then 

Christ put the question to them in another way, and asked them if 

any of them had an ox or an ass fall into a pit, should he not 

straightway pull him out on the Sabbath day, and then he healed 
the man, as the Pharisees and lawyers weren’t able to answer Him. 

Then he told them about the feast, and told them to be humble. 

When a man prepares a feast, men rush in; but when God prepares 

one they all begin to make excuses, and don’t want to go. The 

first excuse was that made by Adam, “ The woman Thou gavest me, 
she gave me to eat.” These men that excused themselves made 
manufactured excuses; they didn’t really have any. The drunkard, 
the libertine, the business man, the citizen, the harlot, all had 
their excuses. If God were to take men at their word about 
these excuses, and swept every one into his grave who had an ex- 
cuse, there would be a very small congregation in the Tabernacle 

next Sunday, there would be little business in Chicago, and in a 

few weeks the grass would be growing on these busy streets. 

Every man who was nufsing a sin had an excuse, as though God 

had asked them to go into a plague-stricken city, or a hospital, or 

to hear a dry lecture, or something repelling and objectionable, 
something that wasn’t for their greatest good. 

Take the excuses. ‘There wasn’t one that wasn’t a lie. The 
devil made them all; and if the sinner hadn’t one already, the devil. 

(189) 


——— oe 


A A AR RA, gi HPT 


190 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


was there at his elbow to suggest one, about the truth of the Bible, 
or something of that sort. One of the excuses mentioned was that 
the man invited had bought a piece of ground, and had to look at 
it. Real estate and corner lots were keeping a good many men out 
of God’s kingdom. It was a lie to say that he had to go and see it 
then, for he ought to have looked at it before he bought it. Then 
the next man said he’d bought some oxen, and must prove them. 
That was another lie; for if he hadn’t proved them before he 
bought them he ought to have done, and could have done, it after 
the supper just as well as before it. But the third man had the 
silliest, the worst excuse of all; he said he had married a wife, 
and couldn’t come. Why didn’t he bring her with him? She 
would have liked the supper just as well as he, and would have en- 
joyed a supper, as almost any young bride would. 

These seemed to be foolish excuses, but they were not any more 
so than the excuses of to-day. Indeed, the excuses of men are 
getting worse and worse all the time. They say they can’t believe 
the Bible; it’s so mysterious. Well, what of it? Infidels, skeptics, 
pantheists, deists, said they didn’t believe the Bible. Had they 
ever used it? Did they read it as carefully as they read any other 
book? This was their excuse. If everybody could understand 
everything the Bible said, it wouldn’t be God’s book; if Christians, 
if theologians had studied it for forty, fifty, sixty years, and then 
only began to understand it, how could a man expect to understand 
it by one reading? A child the first day at school couldn’t even 
know the alphabet, and yet it wasn’t a sign that it was a poor 
school because he didn’t learn the first day all about grammar, 
arithmetic, and geometry. Another said God was a hard Master. 
No; that was one of Satan’s lies. The devil’s the hard master. 
In the Tombs in New York there is over the door the remark, 
“The way of the transgressor is hard.” God’s yoke is easy, His 
burden light. Ask prisoners, ask gamblers, ask sinners, if Satan’s 
yoke is easy. It’s the hardest of all. God’s service a hard one! 
How will that sound in the judgment? Many said it wasn’t that, 
but there is such a struggle. Wasn’t all life a struggle? Some said 
they were wicked. Those are just the kind Jesus came to save. 
They weren’t too wicked to be saved. They were so worldly- 
minded, so hard-hearted; that was another falsehood. Look at 
what God did for Bunyan and John Newton and many others who 
were the wickedest, and even the thief on the cross, God is already 


~ 


Fi 


ie Bible, 
vas that 
look at 
nen out 
id see it 
Then 

e them. 
fore he 
it after 

had the 
a wife, 

i? She 


ave en- 


ly more 
nen are 
believe 
keptics, 
id they 
y other 
erstand 
ristians, 
id then 
erstand 
’t even 
a poor 
ammar, 
Master. 
master. 
remark, 
sy, His 
Satan’s 
d one! 
t that, 
me said 
O save. 
vorldly- 
ook at 
rs who 
already 


THE SINNER'S EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY. Ig! 


reconciled; He doesn’t need the sinner to be reconciled to Him. 
The Lord prepares the sinner. 

Yet you hear people say they can’t understand that; they can 
not imagine but ¢hey have to do something to satisfy God. But I 
tell you that God is satisfied, God is reconciled. You have the 
word of Paul that God is reconciled to us. Yes, thank God, He is 
reconciled to the world. Can you reconcile God? Christ has done 
that. The moment a sinner takes this to heart, and comes to Jesus, 
that moment he is saved. Perhaps a story will illustrate this as 
well as anything. In England I was told about an only son—these 
only sons are hard to bring up properly; they have every whim 
and caprice gratified; they generally grow up headstrong, self- 
willed, and obstinate, and make it miserable for any one to have 
anything to do with them. Well, this son had a father something 
like himself in disposition. And one day a quarrel arose between 
them, and at last, as the son would not give in and own he was 
wrong, the father, in a fit of anger, said that he wished his son would 
leave his house and never come back again. “ Well,” rejoined the 
boy (as angry as his father), “I will leave, and I never will enter your 
house again until you ask me.” “ Well, then, you won’t come back 
in a hurry,” replied his father. The boy then left. The father gave 
up the boy, but the mother did not. Perhaps these men here won't 
understand that, but you women do. A great many things will 
separate a man from his wife, a father from his son, but nothing 


in the wide, wide world will ever separate a mother from her child. - 


A jury can bring in a verdict against her son; the hisses may go up 
against him; he is condemned to be hanged; there is not a friendly 
paper to write an article in his favor. But if his mother be there, 
the boy has at least one eye to rest upon him, one heart to beat in 
sympathy with him. He is taken to the cold, damp cell and left to 
his fate. All forsake him but his mother. She comes there; she 
puts her arms around his neck; she kisses him; she would spend all 
the time with him if the officers would allow it. She can not ’save 
him. The day before his execution she sees him for the last time; 
she has not the courage to see him in the shadow of the gallows. 
The supreme moment at length arrives; he is led forth, and in a 
few moments he dangles a corpse. Does the mother then forget 
him? No; even now she goes to his grave, strews flowers upon it, 
and waters them with her tears. A mother’s love is next to God’s 


love. Death is stronger than everything else; yes, but with the’ 


— 


— = 
J 


SS ee 


‘ 


192 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


exception of one thing—a mother’s love. Death and decay may 
wreck this city, buildings may cease to exist, everything yields be- 
fore them but a mother’s love. To refer to the illustration again: 
When the father had given the boy up, he thought he would never 
come back. The mother was taken very sick. She had been trying 
by every means in her power to effect a reconciliation between the 
father and son. When she found she could not recover from her 
illness she again renewed her efforts with all the power of a mother’s 
love. She wrote to her son, imploring him to ask his father’s for- 
giveness. He sent word back that he would not write to his father 
unless his father first wrote to him. “I will never come home until 
he asks me,” he said. The mother began to get lower and lower. 
Her husband at this time came to the bedside and asked if there 
was anything he could do for her. “Yes, yes,” she cried, “there is 
one thing—you can send for my boy. That is the only wish I have 
on earth that is not gratified. If you do not care for him while I 
am alive, who will care for him when I am gone? I can not bear to 
die and leave my child among strangers. Just let me see him and 
speak to him and I will die in peace.” The father said he could not 
send for him. He could, but he wouldn’t. He did not want to. 
The mother has but a few hours now to live. She again beseeches 
her husband that he will send for their son. The father said he 
would send a dispatch to him, but in her name. “ No, no; that 
would not do.” Well, he can stand it no longer, and he signs his 
own at the foot of the telegram. It was sent, and the moment the 
boy received it he took the first train home. The father was stand- 
ing by the side of the bed when the son arrived. But when he 
saw the door open he turned his back upon him and walked away. 
The mother grasped the hand of her boy and pressed it again and 
again, and kissed him fervently. “Oh! just speak to your father, 
won't you? Just speak the first word.” “No, mother, I will not 
speak to him until he speaks to me.” The excitement was too much 
and she was rapidly sinking. She told her husband she was dying. 
She now took his hand in hers, and held the hand of her boy in the 
other, and sought and strove to bring about a reconciliation. But 
neither would speak. With her last strength she then placed the 
hand of the son into the hand of the father and sank down into the 
arms of death, and was borne by the angels into the kingdom of 
God. The father looked at the wife and then at the boy , he caught 
his eye; they fell upon each other’s necks, and there stood weeping 


RS, 


ecay may 
yields be- 
mM again: 
uld never 
en trying 
veen the 
from her 
mother’s 
her’s for- 
iis father 
me until 
id lower. 
if there 
‘ there is 
sh I have 
1 while I 
t bear to 
him and 
‘ould not 
want to. 
eseeches 
- said he 
no; that 
signs his 
ment the 
as stand- 
when he 
ed away. 
yain and 
ir father, 
will not 
oo much 
is dying. 
yy in the 
yn. But 
iced the 
into the 
zdom of 
e caught 
weeping 


THE SINNER'S EXCUSES SWEPT A WAY, 193 


by the bed of the departed. That is the illustration I have given, 
but it is not a fair illustration in this respect : God is not angry with 
us. With that exception it is a good illustration of reconciliation. 
Christ brought the hand of the Father clear down to the world; He 
put the hand of the sinner into the hand of His Father and died that 
they might be reconciled. You have nothing to do then to bring about 
a reconciliation. God is already reconciled to us and is ready to save 
us. “ Blessed is he who shall be at the marriage supper of the Lamb.” 
I have missed a good many appointments in my life, but there is 
one I will not miss. I would rather be at the marriage feast than 
have the whole world rolled at my feet. I want to be there and sit 
down with Isaac and Jacob, and Abraham, at that supper. It is an 
invitation for joy and gladness that comes from the King of kings, 
from the Lord of glory, to every man and woman in this assembly 
—the invitation to be at the Marriage supper of the Lamb. It js 
not a personal invitation, but a universal one--“ Go out into the 
highways and hedges and compel them to come in, that my house 
may be filled.” Bid them come, “the poor and the maimed, and 
the halt, and the blind,” to the marriage feast prepared at great 
expense by our blessed Redeemer. 

People began to make excuses very early in the history of Christi- 
anity, and they are still at it. Nineteen hundred years have nearly 
rolled away, and still there are excuses, One of the excuses that 
we very often hear people giving is, that they don’t want to become 
Christians because it will make them gloomy—they will have to put 
on long faces and button their coats up, cut off all joy and walk 
through the world till they get to Heaven, where they will have 
pleasure forevermore. We look forward to that happy future, but, 
thank God, we have some pleasure here; indeed, no man in the 
world should be so happy as a man of God. It is one continual 
source of gladness. He can look up and say, “God is my Father,” 
“Christ is my Saviour,” and “the Church is my mother.” <All who 
think otherwise than that a Christian life is one of unceasing joy are 
deceiving themselves. I was going by a saloon the other day and 
Saw a sign, “ Drink and be merry.” Poor, blind, deluded fellows, if 
they think this will make the mmerry. If you want to be merry, you 
must come to the living fountain that bursts from the throne of 
God; then you will have true pleasure. A man away from 
God can not have true pleasure. He is continually thirsting 


for something he can not get—-thirsting for something that can 
13 


194. MOODY'S SERMONS, 4DDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


quench his thirst—he can not get it until he comes to the living 
fountain. My friends, that is just another wile of the devil to keep 
men from grace. It is false. The morea man is lifted up to Heaven, 
the more joy and peace and gladness he has. He is lifted away from 
gloom. Look at a man on his way to execution. Suppose I ran up 
to him, holding out my han! and saying: “There is a pardon that 
has been signed by the Governor,” and I give it him. Would he be 
glootay and joyless? That is Christ. He comes down with a 
pardon to us poor men and wonien, on our way to execution. 
Yonder is a man starving. I go to him and give him bread. Is 
that going to make him gloomy? A poor man comes along crying 
with thirst, and I give him a glass of ice water; would that make 
him gloomy? That’s what Christ is doing for us. He has a well 
of living water, and He asks every thirsty soul to drink freely. 
Don't you believe for a moment that Christianity is going to make 
you gloomy. 

I remember when I was a boy I thought I would wait till I died 
and then become a Christian. I thought if I had the consump- 
tion, or some lingering disease, I would have plenty of time to be- 
come one, and in the meantime I would enjoy the best of the pleas- 
ures of the world. My friends, I was at that time under the power 
of the devil. The idea that a man has more pleasure away from 
church is one of the devil’s lies. Do not believe it, but accept of 
this universal invitation to the marriage feast. 

I can imagine some men saying, “Mr. Moody has not touched 
my case at all. That ‘s not the reason why I won't accept Christ. 
I don’t know if I am one of the elect.” How often ar, met with 
this excuse—how often do I hear it in the inquiry. « om! How 
many men fold their arms and say, “If I am one of the elect I will 
be saved; and if I ain’t, I won’t. No use of your bothering about 
it.” Why don’t some of those merchants say, “If God intends to 
make me a successful merchant in Chicago, I will be one whether I 


like it or not ; and if He doesn’t, I won't.” If you are sick, if a doctor _ 


prescribes for you, don’t take the medicine ; throw it out of the door; 
it don’t matter, for if God has decreed you are going 19 die you 
will, and if he hasn’t you will get better. If you use that argu- 
ment you may as well not walk home from this Tabernacle. If 
God has said you'll get home, you'll get there—vou'll fy through the 
air, if you have been elected to go home. These illustrations are 
just the same as the excuse. You can not go up there and give 


BoA, OMe — cee, NI SI” = “Mey” SGPC a LMR A Ae Re Se 


a 


Oo '?d a.2 


R Ss. 


the living 
vil to keep 
0 Heaven, 
away from 
e I ran up 
ardon that 
ould he be 
nm with a 
execution. 
bread. Is 
ong crying 
that make 
has a well 
nk freely. 
ge to make 


till I died 
consump- 
me to be- 
the pleas- 
he power 
way from 
accept of 


; touched 
pt Christ. 
met with 
n! How 
lect I will 
ng about 
ntends to 
whether I 


fadoctor | 


the door; 
o die you 
hat argu- 
acle. If 
rough the 
tions are 
and give 


THE SINNER'S EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY. 195 


that excuse. The water of life is offered freely to every one. No 
unconverted man in the wide, wide world has anything to do with 
the doctrine of election any more than I have to do with the 
government of hina. That epistle of Paul was written to godly 
men. Suppose I pick up a letter and open it, and it tells me about 
the death of my wife. Dear me-—my wife dead. But I look on 
the other side of the 'ctter and find that it is directed to another 
man. And so a great many people take Paul’s letter to the 
churches and take it asa personal letter. This is what you have 
to take up: “ Whosoever will, let him drink of the water of life 
freely.” He came down sixty years after His resurrection and said 
to John, put it so broad that no one will mistake it—put it so 
broad that no one in Chicago can be stumbling over it—so that all 
men may see it plainly—“ Whosoever will, let him drink of the 
water of life freely.” If you will, you will; if you won't, you 
won't. Do you think that God would come down here to give you 
salvation without giving you the power to take it, and then con- 
demn you to eternity for not taking it? With the gift comes the 
power, and you can take it and live if you will. Don’t stumble 
over election any more. You have to deal with that broad _proc- 
lamation: “ Whosoever will, let him drink of the waters of life 
freely.” I can imagine some one in the gallery clear up there 
saying, “I never have bothered my head about election; I don’t 
believe men are gloomy when they become Christians. If I was 
alone I would tell you my reason, but I do not like to get up in 
this large assemblage and talk here. The fact is, there are hypo- 
crites in the churches. I know a man, a prominent man in the 
church, who cheated me out of twenty-five dollars. I won’t accept 
this invitation because of those hypocrites in the churches,” My 
friend, you will find very few there if you get to Heaven. There 
won't be a hypocrite in the next world, and if you don’t want to be 
associated with hypocrites in the next world, you will take this in- 
vitation. Why, you wiil find hypocrites everywhere. One of the 
apostles was himself the very prince of hypocrites, but he didn’t get 
to Heaven. You will find plenty of hypocrites in the church. 
They have been there for the last eighteen hundred years, and will 
probably remain there. But what is that to you? This is an in- 
dividual matter between you and your God. Is it because there 
are hypocrites you are not going to accept the invitation ? 

“ Ah, well, Mr. Moody, that is not my case. I am a business man, 


PEF ms, sae 


‘ 


\ 
\ 


196 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS ° 


and Ihave notime. Since the Chicago fire I have had as much 
as I could attend to in recovering what I lost.” If I stood at 
the door and asked any one who went out to accept the invita- 
tion, I believe hundreds of you would say, “Mr. Moody, you will 
have to excuse me to-night; time is very precious with me, and 
you'll have to excuse me.” What have you been doing the last 
twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years that you haven’t had a moment to 
devote to the acceptance of this invitation? That is the cry of the 
world to-day: “Time is precious; business must be attended to, 
and we have no time to spare.” Some of you women will say, “I 
can not wait; I have to go home and put the children to bed; this 
is more important.” My friends, to accept this invitation is more 
important than anything else in this world. There is nothing in the 
world that is so important as the question of accepting the invita- 
tion. How many mechanics in this building have spent five years 
learning your trade, in order to support your families and support 
yourselves a few years—forty or fifty years at the longest? How 
‘many professional men have toiled and worked hard for years to 
get an education that they might go out to the world and cope 
with it, and during all these years have not had a minute to seek 
their salvation? Is that a legitimate excuse? Tell Him to-night 
that you haven’t time, or let this be the night—the hour—cost you 
what it will, when you shall say, “ By the grace of God I will accept 
the invitation and press up to the marriage supper of the Lamb.” 

“Qh, but that is not my case,” says another, “I have time. If I 
thought I could become a Christian I would sit here all night and 
let business and everything else go, and press into the kingdom of 
God. Iam not fit to become a Christian; that’s the trouble with 
me.” He says: “Go into the highways and hedges,” and “ bring 
in hither the poor, and the maimed, and the halt, and the blind ’— 
just invite them all, without distinction of sect or creed, station or 
‘nationality ; never mind whether they are rich or poor. If the Lord 
don’t complain about your fitness, you shouldn’t look to see if you 
have the right kind of clothes. I had to notice during the war, 
when enlisting was going on, sometimes a man would come up with 
a nice silk hat on, patent-leather boots, nice kid gloves, and a fine 
suit of clothes, which, probably, cost him a hundred dollars; per- 
haps the next man who came along would be a hod-carrier, dressed 
in the poorest kind of clothes. ‘Both had to strip alike and put on 
the regimental uniform. So when you come and say you ain't fit, 


ee te ce ns eevee 


a 


as much 
stood at 
ie invita- 
, you will 
me, and 
the last 
yment to 
ry of the 
nded to, 
l say, “I 
xed ; this 
1 is more 
ng in the 
le invita- 
ive years 
support 
? How 
years to 
ind cope 
to seek 
to-night 
cost you 
Il accept 
amb,” 
ie, If] 
ight and 
xdom of 
ble with 
1 “bring 
lind ”— 
‘ation or 
he Lord 
e if you 
the war, 
up with 
id a fine 


WS; per- 
dressed 
1 put on 
ain’t fit, 


THE SINNER'S EXCUSES SWEPT AWA Y. 107 
haven't got good clothes, haven’t got righteousness enough, remem- 
ber that He will furnish you with the uniform of Heaven, and you 
will be set down at the marriage feast of the Lamb. I don’t care 
how black and vile your heart may be, only accept the invita- 
tion of Jesus Christ and He will make you fit to sit down with 
the rest at that feast. How many are continually crying out, 
“TI am too bad; no use of me trying to become a Christian.” 
This is the way the devil works. Sometimes he will say to a 
man, “You don’t want to be saved; you are good enough al- 
ready; and he will point to some black-hearted hypocrite and 
say: “Look at him and see how you appear in comparison; you 
are far better than he is.” But, by and by, the man gets a glimpse 
of the blackness of his heart, and his conscience troubles him. 
Then says the devil: “You are too bad to be saved; the Lord 
won't save such as you; you are too vile; you must get better 
before you try to get God to save you.” And so men try to make 
themselves better, and instead, get worse all the time. The Gospel 
bids you come as you are. Seek first the kingdom of Heaven— 
make no delay; come just as you are. I heard of an artist who 
wanted to get a man to sit for a painting of the prodigal son. He 
went down to the almshouses and the prisons, but couldn’t get 
one. Going through the streets one day, he found a poor, wretched 
man, a beggar, coming along, and he asked him if he would sit for 
the study. He said he would. A bargain was made and the artist 
gave him his address. The time for the appointment arrived, and 
the beggar promptly arrived and said to the artist: “I have come to 
keep that appointment which I made with you.” “An appointment 
with me?” replied the artist; “you are mistaken: I have an 
appointment with a beggar to-day.” “ Well,” said the man, “I am 
that beggar, but I thought I would put on a new suit of clothes 

before I came to see you.” “ f don't want you,” was the artist’s 

reply, “I want a beggar.” And soa great many people come to God 
with their self-righteousness, instead of coming in their raggedness. 

Why, some one has said, “It is only the ragged sinners that open 

God’s wardrobe.” If you want to start out to get a pair of shoes 

from a passer-by, you would start out bare-footed, wouldn’t you? I 

remember a boy to whom I gave a pair of boots, and I found him 

shortly after in his bare feet again. I asked him what he had done 
with them, and he replied that when he was dressed up it spoiled 
his business; when he was dressed up no one would give him any- 


aN 


198 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


thing. By keeping his feet naked he got as many as five pairs of 
boots a day. So, if you want to come to God, don’t dress yourself 
up. It is the naked sinners God wants to save. Come to Him after 
you have cast off your self-righteousness and the Son of God will 
receive you. 


I remember, some years ago, of a man who had gone to sea. He — 


led a wild, reckless life. When his mother was alive she was a 
praying mother. Ah, how many men have been saved by their 
mothers after they have gone up to Heaven, and perhaps her influ- 
ence made him think sometimes. When at sea, a desire of leading 
a better life came over him, and when he got on shore, he thought 
he would join the Freemasons. He made application, but upon 
investigation, his character proved he was only a drunken sailor, and 
he was black-balled. He next thought of joining the Odd Fellows, 
and applied, but his application met with a like result. While he 
was walking up Fulton street, one day, a little tract was given him 
—an invitation to the prayer - meeting. He came and Christ 
received him. I remember him getting up in the meeting and 
telling how the Freemasons had black-balled him, how the Odd 
Fellows had black-balled him, and how Christ had received him as 
he was. A great many orders and societies will not receive you, 
but I tell you, He will receive you, vile as you are—He, the Saviour 
of sinners—He, the Redeemer of the lost world—He bids you come 
just as you are. | 

Ah, but there is another voice coming down from the gallery 
yonder: “T have intellectual difficulties; I can not believe.” A man 
came to me some time ago and said: “I can not.” “Can not what?” 
I asked. “Well,” said he, “I can not believe.” “Who?” 
“Well,” he repeated, “I can not believe.” “Who?” I asked. 


“'Well-I-can’t-believe-myself.” “Well, you don’t wan’t to.” Make . 


yourself out false every time, but believe in the truth of Christ. If 
a man says to me, “ Mr. Moody, you have lied to me; you have 
dealt falsely with me,”—it may be so, but no man on the face of 
the earth can ever say that God ever dealt unfairly, or that He lied 
to him. If God says a thing, it is true. We don’t ask you to believe 
in any man on the face of the earth, but we ask you to believe in 
Jesus Christ, who never lied—who never deceived any one. If a 
man says he can not believe Him, he says what is untrue. 

“Ah, well, all those excuses don’t apply to me,” says another, 
“TI can’t feel.” That is the very last excuse. When a man comes 


& 
. 


pairs of 
yourselr 
im after 
z0d will 


ea. He © 


e was a 
by their 
er influ- 
leading 
thought 
ut upon 
lor, and 
Fellows, 
‘hile he 
ven him 
| Christ 
ing and 
he Odd 
1 him as 
ve you, 
Saviour 
yu come’ 


gallery 
A man 
what?” 
Who ?” 
asked. 


Make . 


rist. If 
wu have 
face of 
He lied 
believe 
lieve in 
» Ifa 


nother, 
| comes 


THE SINNER’S EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY. 199 


with this excuse he is getting pretty near the Lord. We are having 
a body of men in England giving a new translation of the Scriptures. 
I think we should get them to put in a passage relating to feeling. 
With some people it is feel, feel, feel all the time. What kind of 
feeling have you got ? Have you got a desire to be saved ?—have you 
got a desire to be present at the marriage supper? Suppose a 
gentleman asked me to dinner, I say, “I will see how I feel.’ 
“Sick?” he might ask. “No; it depends on how I feel.” That 
is not the question—it is whether I will accept the invitation or not. 
The question with us is, Will we accept salvation—will you believe? 
There is not a word about feelings in the Scriptures. When you 
come to your end, and you know that in a few days you will be in 
the presence of the Judge of all the earth, you will remember this 
excuse about feelings. You will be saying, “I went up to the 
Tabernacle, I remember, and I felt very good, and before the meet- 
ing was over I felt very bad, and I didn’t feel I had the right kind 
of feeling to accept the invitation.” Satan will then say, “I made 
you feel so.” Suppose you build your hopes and fix yourself upon 
the Rock of Ages, the devil can not come to you. Stand upon the 
Word of God and the waves of unbelief can not touch you; the 
waves of persecution can not assail you; the devil and all the fiends 
of hell can not approach you if you only build your hopes upon 
God's word. Say, “TI will trust Him, though He slay me—I will take 
God at His word.” 

I haven’t exhausted all the excuses. If I had, you would make 
more before to-morrow morning. What has to be done with all the 
excuses is to bundle them all up and label them “Satan’s lies.” 


_ There is not an excuse but is a lie. When you stand at the throne 


of God no man can give an excuse. If you have got a good ex- 
cuse, don’t give it up for anything I have said; don’t give it up for 
anything your mother may have said; don’t give it up for anything 
your friend may have said. Take it up to the bar of God and state 
it to Him; but if you have not got a good excuse—an excuse that 
will stand eternity—let it go to-night, and flee to the arms of a 
‘sing Saviour. It is easy enough to excuse yourself to hell, but 
you can not excuse yourself to Heaven. If you want an excuse 
Satan will always find one ready for you, Accept the invitation 
now, my friends. Let your stores be closed till you accept this invi- 
tation; let your households go till you accept this invitation. Do 
not let the light come, do not eat, do not drink, till you accept the 


4 
\ 


200 MOOD Y'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


most important thing to you in this wide world. Will you stay to- 
night and accept this invitation? Don’t make light of it. I can 
imagine some of you saying, “ Well, I never get so low as to make 
light of religion.” Suppose I got an invitation to dinner from a 
citizen of Chicago for to-morrow and I don’t answer it; I tear the 
invitation up. Would not that be making light of it? Suppose 
you pay no attention to the invitation to-night; is not that making 
light of it? Would any one here be willing to write out an excuse 


something like this: “The Tabernacle, October 29. To the King ' 


of Heaven: While sitting in the Tabernacle to-day I received a 
very pressing invitation from one of your servants to sit at the mar- 
riage ceremony of the Son of God. I pray you have me excused.” 
Is there a man or woman in this assembly would take their pen and 
write their name at the bottom of it? Is there a man or woman 
whose right hand would not forget its cunning, and whose tongue 
would not cleave to their mouth, if they were trying to do it? 
Well, you are doing this if you get up and go right out after you 
have heard the invitation. Who will write this: “To the Lord of 
lords and King of Glory: While sitting in the Tabernacle this beau- 
tiful Sabbath evening, October 29, 1876, I received a pressing invi- 
tation from one of your servants to be present at the Marriage sup- 
per. I hasten to accept.” Will any one sign this? Who will put 
their name to it? Is there not a man or woman saying down deep 
in their soul, “ By the grace of God I will sign it;” “I will sign it 
by the grace of God, and will meet that sainted mother who has 
gone there;” “TI will sign and accept that invitation and meet that 
loving wife or dear child.” Are there not some here to-night who 
will accept that invitation ? 

I remember while preaching in Glasgow an incident occurred 
which I will relate. I had been preaching there several weeks, and 
the night was my last one, and I pleaded with them as I had never 
pleaded there before. I urged those people to meet me in that 
Jand. It is a very solemn thing to stand before a vast audience for 
the last time and think you may never have another chance of ask- 
ing them to come to Christ. I told them I would not have another 
opportunity, and urged them to accept, and just asked them to 
meet me at that marriage supper. At the conclusion I soon saw a 
tall young lady coming into the inquiry-room. She had scarcely 
come in when another tall young lady came in, and she went up to 
the first and put her arms around her and wept. Pretty soon an- 


6 T 
dez 
on 

tiat 


S, 


| Stay to- 
fe dha 
to make 
1 from a 
tear the 
Suppose 
- making 
n excuse 


he King ' 


ceived a 
the mar- 
xcused.” 
pen and 
‘woman 
> tongue 
> do it? 
fter you 
Lord of 
is beau- 
ng invi- 
age sup- 
will put 
wn deep 
| sign it 
vho has 
eet that 
zht who 


ccurred 
2ks, and 
d never 
in that 
ence for 
of ask- 
another 
hem to 


n saw a 
scarcely 
it up to 
oon an- 


THE SINNER'S EXCUSES SWEPT AWAY. 201 


other young lady came and went up to the first two and just put 
her arms around them both. I went over to see what it was, and 
found that although they had been sitting in different parts of the 
buildimg the sure arrow of conviction went down to their souls and 
brought them to the inquiry-room. Another young lady came 
down from the gallery and said, “ Mr. Moody, I want to become a 
Christian.” I asked a young Christian to talk to her, and when she 
went home that night, about ten o’clock—her mother was sitting up 
*for her—she said, “ Mother, I have accepted the invitation to be 
present at the marriage supper of the Lamb.” Her mother and 
father laid awake that night talking about the salvation of their 
child. That was Friday night, and next day (Saturday) she was 
unwell, and before long her sickness developed into scarlet fever, 
and a few days after I got this letter : 

“Mr. Moopy—Dear Sir: It is now my painful duty to intimate 
to you that the dear girl concerning whom I wrote you on Monday 
has been taken away from us by death. Her departure, however, 
has been signally softened to us, for she told us yesterday she was 
“going home to be with Jesus,’ and after giving messages to many, 
told us to let Mr. Moody and Mr. Sankey know that she died a 
happy Christian.” 

When I read this I said to Mr. Sankey, “If we do nothing else we 
have been paid for coming across the Atlantic. There is one soul 
we have saved, whom we will meet on the resurrection morn.” 

“My dear sir, let us have your prayers that consolation and 
needed resignation and strength may be continued to us, and that 
our two dear remaining little ones may be kept in health if our 
Father wills. I repeated a line of the hymn— 


“«In the Christian’s home in glory, 
There remains a land of rest,— 


2n she took it up at once and tried to sing, 


“ «There the Saviour’s gone before me, 
To fulfill my soul’s request.’ 


“This was the last conscious thing she said. I should say that my 
dear girl also expressed a wish that the lady she conversed with 
on Friday evening should also know that she died a happy Chris- 
tian. 


\ 
* 


202 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


Oh, my dear friends, are there not some here to-night who will 
decide this question? Do accept this invitation; let sickness come, 
let sorrow come, you will be sure of meeting at the niarriage su p- 
per of the Lamb. Blessed is he who shall be found at that mar- 
riage feast. 


~~ 
Ye 


vho will 
3s come, 
ige sup~ 
at mar- 


XXIV. 


THE GLORIOUS GOSPEL. 


LUKE iv. 18: “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed 
me to preach the Gospel to the poor; He hath sent me to heal the broken- 
hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the 
blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised.” 


W * are told that after He had read this verse He closed 
the book and sat down. This, we might say, was Christ’s 

inaugural sermon. It was the first sermon He preached 
after He had been baptized in the Jordan by John, and it was to His 
own townsmen in the synagogue at Nazareth that He spoke. He 
had been away from Nazareth for a few weeks, and strange rumors 
had reached that place of what had taken place on the banks of 
the Jordan; and the proclamation that John had made, that He 
was the Lamb of God, the true Messiah, had excited their curiosity. 
I don’t know on what day He arrived. It might have been late 
on Friday evening when the Jewish Sabbath was just coming on. 
On the following day, the Sabbath, He went into the synagogue, 
where He found the townsmen gazing at Him curiously to see 
whether He was the same one as the one they knew to be the son 
of Joseph the carpenter. And when He had gone in—it was 
probably nothing unusual for Him to go into the synagogue—they 
handed Him the book of the prophet Isaiah to read. He might 
have turned to the first chapter, but that would have stirred up 
their Jewish pride; He might have read that chapter where He is 
called the Prince of Peace and the Everlasting Father, but that 
might have made them mad, to think that He was the Wonderful 
Counsellor, the mighty God spoken of there, and He didn’t. He 
passed over the ninth chapter. He might have read the thirty- 
fifth, where it tells of the ransomed of the Lord returning to Zion 
with songs and evezlasting joy upon their heads. That meant the 
mille ‘um, and the time was not yet come. Calvary had to have 
a victim first. He might have turned to the fifty-fifth chapter, but 

(203) 


204 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


the crucifixion had to take place before that chapter could be 
literally true. And so He turned to the sixty-first chapter of 
Isaiah and read, “The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me, because the 
Lord hath anointed Me to preach good tidings unto the meek; 
He hath sent Me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty 
to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that are 
bound; to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.” Now, 
if you will turn to the sixty-first chapter of Isaiah you will find 
that He closed right in the middle of the sentence, and left out 
the remaining part—“the day of vengeance is at hand.” He 
didn’t read that because it hadn’t come. When the prophet Isaiah 
wrote that he might have gone on and written all about the two 
comings, but he only mentioned the day of vengeance, which 
meant the second coming. Nearly nineteen hundred years have 
rolled away since the first coming, and the day of vengeance has 
not come yet. But it will come. No man knoweth the day nor 
the hour when the Son of Man cometh. When He comes again 
He will not come with grace, but He will open the book at the 
place where He left off, and then there will be no more hope for 
those who have sat and listened to the preaching of the Gospel. 
Thank God, this day has not yet come. We can still preach grace 
as the means by which God saves sinners, as the means by which 
He forgives the wanderer. 

You will find that there are seven things which Christ came to do, 
six of which He read to those men of Nazareth before He closed 
the book. And how sweet those six things are. The world ought 
to rejoice in them. When the Spirit came to Moses, the plagues 
came upon Egypt, and he had power to destroy men’s lives; when 
the Spirit came upon Elijah, fire came down from Heaven; when 
- the Spirit came upon Gideon, no man could stand before him; and 
when it came upon Joshua, he moved around the city of Jericho, 
and the whole city fell into his hands; but when the Spirit came 
upon the Son of Man, He gave life; He healed the broken-hearted, 
He set at liberty those that were bruised. The only man who ever 
suffered before Christ was that servant who had his ear cut off. But 
most likely ina moment afterward he had it on, and very likely it 
was a better ear than ever, because whatever the Lord does He 
does well. No man ever lost his life with Him when the Spirit 
came upon Him, but received it from Him. He came to heal, give 
liberty, and proclaim the Gospel. 


i] 


5. 


could be 
apter of 
cause the 
e meek ; 
m liberty 
that are 
” Now, 
will find 
left out 
d.” He 
et Isaiah 
the two 
e, which 
ars have 
ance has 
- day nor 
ies again 
k at the 
hope for 
Gospel. 
ch grace 
oy which 


ne to do, 
le closed 
Id ought 
> plagues 
s; when 
n; when 
im; and 
Jericho, 
rit came 
-hearted, 
who ever 
off. But 
likely it 
does He 
he Spirit 
eal, give 


THE GLORIOUS GOSPEL. 205 


I want to call your attention to the word Gospel. I said about 
grace that there was, probably, not another word in the English 
language so little understood. There is one exception, and that is 
the word Gospel. I don’t think there is another word about which 
so little is known. J. was a partaker of it for more than ten years 
before I understood its meaning. I think if I picked many out 
here they would blush if I asked them to state in this building what 

~ it means. i. the correct definition of it was known in Chicago to- 
night, ten thousand men would believe it. A great many people 
think the Gospel means death; and when you go to them they say, 
like the poor man at the tombs: “ Why do you come to torment 
me before my time?” The Gospel means “God spares,” it means 
good tidings. When that angel came down from Heaven and said, 
“T bring you good tidings, for unto you this day is born a Saviour,” 
no better news ever fell upon the ears of men. No news ever 
reached men, no news so sweet ever came out of Heaven as the 
. Gospel of the Son of God. It is the Gospel of good tidings. If 
men will only believe it, instead of looking so sad and melancholy, 
their faces will be lit up with joy and gladness. When I preach be- 
fore an assemblage I can tell by the faces of those before me 
whether they believe it or not. Some look as cross as if they were 
going to be led to an execution. They can not hear good things; 
they can not believe good news when they hear it. Suppose, while 
I am talking, a boy comes running in with a telegraph message and 
delivers it to that gray-haired man yonder. It tells him that a prodigal 
son, who had gone to California years ago, has repented, and is \ 
coming home, and asks that father to meet him at the train. I can 
see how that father’s face would light up with joy at the prospect of 
soon meeting that boy. He goes home elated, and hands the message 
to his wife. The news is too good to keep all to himself; no man can 
keep good news, and that is the way with young converts. They must 
go and spread it, publish it to all men. But if the dispatch reads 
that a son is dead, how the man is cast down. People—many of 
them—just look when we preach the Gospel as if we w>re reading 
them some bad news, because they can’t believe it; but how do 
those who believe it look? Their faces are aglow with pleasure ; 
they drink in every word, because they rejoice to hear the Gospel 
of the Son of God. Just let every one here to-night believe what 
God says is good news—believe what the angel said to the shep- 
herds: “It brings good tidings,” the best tidings you can ever 


aia 1a. be 4 


206 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


hear, for “unto you is born a Saviour,” to save you from your sins. 

»And, my friends, this is the only way out of our sins—the way of 
Christ. How are we going to get to Heaven if not by Christ? No 
angel from Heaven ever preached another Gospel. If a man tells 
you he is going to get to Heaven without Christ don’t you believe 
him. That is man’s gospel. Paul tells us Christ died for our sins. 
and that is Paul’s doctrine—that is the good news of the Gospel 
and just let us believe it. 

I will tell you why I like the Gospel. It has taken four of the 
bitterest enemies out of my path that I had, and if you accept it, 
it will take them out of your path—simply receive Him. You 
will all admit that death is a great enemy. You hear some men in 
a boastful way say that they don’t fear it—let it come when it may. 
But if you notice when death comes near and takes a good look at 
them, they are not so boastful. Men are not so fluent and flippant 
when they are coming near God. When danger comes to them 
they take it very different from what they do when it is far away. 
I have been out at sea when the storm was raging and the ship was 
tossing wildly. Some men looked very different than they did in 
a calm day. They didn’t know how soon they might go to the 

‘bottom. How many times have you read of sailors who, when out 


of danger, were swearing men, in an instant during a storm they 


have become praying men. I remember while in New England it 
was the custom to toll the bell of the village church when any one 
died. When the bell tolled for an old man or woman I used to 
listen and think that death was far away; but when it came down 
to the teens, I used to think it was coming very near. I recollect 
acting as one of the pall-bearers at the funeral of one of my young 
friends, and how solemn it made me feel. It used to make me 
afraid that something would happen and take me away as that 
young friend was taken away. Put that terror has passed away, 
and I look forward to death as one of the most beautiful features 
of this earthly pilgrimage. If you take the sting out of a hornet or 
a wasp you are not afraid of it. Christ has taken the sting out of 
death. He has pursued him into the grave and cast him into the 
bottomless pit, so that a man can shout, “Oh, death, where is 
thy sting?” and a voice comes down from Heaven, “ Buried in the 
bosom of the Lord.” Yes, my friends, there is no fear of death to 
a man who has accepted the Son of God. 

There is a portion of Scripture in the Twenty-third Psalm that is 


OS we llr Oe oF? 


Oy Ss Ss et 


e+ 7) 04 


SS 


RS, 


. your sins. 
he way of 
irist? No 
1 man tells 
‘ou believe 
Yr Our sins, 
he Gospel 


our of the 
accept it, 
im. You 
ne men in 
en it may. 
od look at 
id flippant 
s to them 
| far away. 
e ship was 
ley did in 
go to the 
when out 
‘orm they 
ngland it 
Nn any one 
I used to 
ame down 
[ recollect 
ny young 
make me 
y as that 
sed away, 
1 features 
hornet or 
ng out of 
n into the 
where is 
ied in the 
‘death to 


Im that is 


THE GLORIOUS GOSPEL, 207 


as often misquoted as any in the Bible, and that is where, “I walk 
through the dark valley "—man put that word dark in; it isn’t in 
the Scripture—* of the shadow of death*I will fear no evil, for 
Thou art with me.” You-have stood in the shadow of a man cast 
in the sunlight ; that is all that death can do to us—can just throw 
his shadow upon us, and if you want to get victory over death 
you must believe in the Gospel—believe in Christ, that He came to 
give you liberty—that He died for your sins. 

Another thing is sin. That is the story of death. As I told you 
the other night, the blessed Gospel tells us that sin is out of the 
world. If aman is in Christ he is perfectly safe. Out of love to 
me He has taken my sins and put them behind His back. You 
have seen at night a great cloud in the sky, but in the morning that 
cloud was gone. You can’t find it—you don’t know where it has 
gone. Our sins are blotted out as a cloud; after we have accepted 
Christ they are gone—we can not find them. How that used to 
trouble me. But I have found, since I accepted Christ, that they 
have been taken from me, and He has put them behind His back. 
By the death of Himself He has taken them all away, and, therefore, 
I can shout in my liberty, for if He has taken them He is not going 
to bring them up against us. They are swept out of our way for- 
ever. 

I used to think the grave was a terrible thing. To think of lying 
one day in that cold, narrow house of earth, and the worms 
creeping through me, used to fill my heart with terror. When I 
used to stand at a grave and hear the earth rattling on the coifin-lid, 
and think of the time when I would be lying there, it seemed as if 
death had every terror. But now, if my friend dies, I know that 
there is a glorious hope. “I will raise him up at the last day.” He 
will come forth from the grave and shout, “I am he that died and 
is alive forevermore.” All that death can get from me is that old 
clay temple when I die. I shall rise again, by and by, with a new 
body-—a body that can not be drawn away from Jesus Christ ; I 
shall be transformed into His own image. 

And the last thought. The fourth thing that used to trouble me 
was the judgment day. I used to think I may slip and fall; didn’t 
know whether I would be accepted when I came to be judged or 
not. I suppose I got this idea from Christians, and a great many 
people here have got this idea from the same source. They don’t 
know whether they will stumble before they get there, and when 


208 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


they stand before the Great Judge they don’t know whether their 
place will be on the right hand or the left. I used to wonder whether 
I would be among thosé whom He would tell to “ Depart from Me, 
ye cursed.” But that is passed. Christ was judged forme. He was 
condemned for me--and by His death on the tree, ransomed me. 
God is not going to demand double payment for me. That judg- 
ment is not a judgment of our sin; it is already passed. Not one 
of the sins of the believer will come up against him. My friends, 
dont think for a moment that you are to be at the throne to be 
judged—it is to judge the world. You are among the chosen—your 
place is by the Lamb. This thought, as I go toward Heaven, makes 
me shout and triumph over death and the grave; I am filled with 
joy that my sins are behind His back, and that the judgment is 
already passed, and my course to Heaven is clear. We haven’t got 
to wait till we reach Heaven to know whether we area child of God 
or not. When we accept this Gospel we all become sons and 
daughters of God, and are safe from all danger. 

You know when men go out hunting, the long grass of the prai- 
ries being dry and parched, very often catches fire, and when there 
is a high wind the flames will roll twenty feet high sometimes, and 
the fire will travel at the rate of thirty miles an hour. The fastest 
horse can not run as fast. What do these frontiermen do? They 
set fire to a portion of the grass near them. After it has been 
burned they get inside of this spot, and when the fire comes rushing 
toward them, although they hear the roar of the flames all around, 
they stand perfectly secure. There is one spot on earth that the 
Lamb of God has cleared for mankind, and that is Calvary; and if 
we but stand here, we are safe for eternity. Let us proclaim this 
glorious truth of the Gospel. I don’t blame that man who said he 
wished every hair of his head was a man, so that he could send them 
out to proclaim this glorious Gospel. How can men say that God 
is not willing to save them, when the Gospel tells us that Christ 
tasted death for every man, and all we have to do is to take this 
truth. There is a young man, I think, in the meeting to-night, who 
called on me, while I was getting my tea this evening, at the hotel. 
He said he had been trying for a long time to become a Christian. 
“My friend,” said I, “probably you have been working too hard. 
Just receive it as a gift. Ifitisa gift we can not get it by our tears. 
We can not get it by efforts of our own. Cease your efforts and just 
accept Him, and He will come to you if you will accept His gift.” 


eS. 


her their 
r whether 
— oo ‘ 

_ He was Mil | | 
omed me. | ' 
hat judg- 
Not one 
y friends, 
ne to be 
en-——your 
Nn, makes 
lled with 
gment is 
ven’t got 
d of God 
sons and 


} I! ?. ibe 


' 
Hy 
| 

4} 


i is 


the prai- 
en there 
mes, and 
le fastest 
? They 
las been 
s rushing 
| around, 
that the 
; and if 
laim this 
» said he 
nd them 
hat God 
it Christ 
ake this 
‘ht, who 
1e hotel. 
hristian. 
90 hard. 
ur tears. 
and just 
lis gitt.” 


Mr. MOODY’S NEW CHURCH AT CHICAGO. 


bo Lilo N Y= 


—— 


u| 


1 ANE ie AA 


Ph. 


refor 


THE GLORIOUS GOSPEL. 


209 
The will had a terrible battle at first with that young man. Idon't 
believe any man ever comes to Christ without having a fight with 
his will. But, by and by, he said he would accept, and down we 
went on our knees, and victory was won. The hardest thing, I will 


admit, ever a man had to do, is to become a Christian, and yet it is 
the easiest. This seems to many to be a paradox, but I will repeat 
it—it is the most difficult thing to become a Christian, and yet it is 
the easiest. I have a little nephew in this city; when he was about 
three or four years of age, he threw that Bible on the floor. I think 
a great deal of that Bible, and I did not like to see this. His mother 
said to him, “Go pick up uncle’s Bible from the floor.” “I won't,” 
he replied. “Go and pick up that Bible, directly.” “I won't.” 
“What did you say?” asked his mother. She thought he didn’t 
understand; but he understood well enough, and had made up his 
mind that he wouldn’t. She told the boy that she would have to 
punish him if he didn’t, and then he said he couldn’t, and by and by 
he said he didn’t want to. And that is the way with people in 
‘coming to Christ. At first they say they won't; then, they can’t; 
and then, they don’t want to. The mother insisted upon the boy 
picking up the Bible, and he got down and put his arms around it 
and pretended he couldn’t lift it. He was a great, healthy boy, and 
could have picked it up easily enough. I was very anxious to see 
the fight carried on because she was a young mother, and if she 
didn’t break that boy’s will, he was going to break her heart by and 
by. So she told him again if he didn’t pick it up she would punish 
him, and the child just picked it up. It was very easy to do it 
when he made up his mind. So it is perfectly easy for men to accept 
the Gospel. The trouble is, they don’t want to give up their will. 
If you want to be saved you must just accept that Gospel—that 
Christ is your Saviour, that He is your Redeemer, and that He has 
rescued you from the cursé of the law. Just say, “Lord Jesus 
Christ, I trust you from this hour to save me,” and the moment 
you take that stand, He will put His loving arms around you, and 
wrap about you the robe of righteousness. May God help you to 
believe that Gospel. It is so simple, that men can not believe they 
can be saved for nothing. 
I remember hearing, a few years ago, a story about a young man 
away off in Russia. He was a wild, reckless, dissipated youth. His 
father, thinking that if he could get him away from his associates, a 
reform would be worked, procured a commission ‘in the army for 
14 


* 


4 


210 MOODY'S SERMCNS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


him. And this is a mistake a great many Christian people fall into 
in dealing with their sons. It is not a change of place they require, 
it is a change of heart. A change of place will not take them away 
from the tempter. Well, off to the army this young man went, and, 
instead of reforming, he gambled, and borrowed, and took to drink- 
ing as vigorously as ever. At length he had borrowed all the money 
he could, and, as we say here, he “had come to the end of his rope.” 
A certain sum of money had to be paid the next day, and he did 
not see how it could be done without selling his commission, and if 
he did that he would be compelled to leave the army and go home 
to his father disgraced. The laws were very rigid in Russia upon 
the matter of debt, and if he couldn’t pay he knew he would have 
to goto prison. That night, as he sat in his barracks, heart-broken 
at the prospect before him, he thought he would take up paper and 
figure up his debts, and see how he stood. And here, let me say, 
it would be well if the sinner would pause occasionally, try and 
figure up his sin, and see where he stood with God. Well, this 
young man put down one debt after another until they made a long 
column. The total completely disheartened him; and he just put 
at the bottom of the figures, ‘Who is to pay this?” He laid his 
head upon his desk wearied, and fell asleep. That night the Czar, 
according to his custom, was walking through the barracks while the 
soldiers slept, and happened to come to that spot where the young 
soldier slept. He saw upon the desk the column of debts, and when 
he came to the bottom saw the question: “ Who’s to pay them?” 
and wrote underneath the name “ Nicholas.” When the young 
man awoke he took up the paper and found written at the bottom 
the signature of the Czar of all the Russias. What did it mean? 
Had an angel dropped down and canceled the debt ? It was too good 
to be true. He couldn't believe it. But by and by the money came 
from the Emperor himself. This story may be true or not. I don’t 
care whether it is or not; but there is one thing I do know is true, 
and that is, that the great Emperor of Heaven is here to-night, and 
if you put down all your sins and multiply them by ten thousand, 
He will pay it and shelter you underneath the blood of Jesus Christ, 
which cleanseth us from all sin. Thank God for the glorious Gos- 
pel of Jesus Christ ; thank God that every man and woman in this 
assembly can be saved. As the rain is coming down on this buiid- 
ing, so God will shower His blessings upon us if we will only receive 
the truth. Let us pray. 


wa: 
her 
me 
can 
Prit 
priv 
but 
the 
mys 
ther 
cian 
grav 
weig 
the 
here 
Hea 
He t 
Ye 
from 
was 
brok 
few j 
learn 


the | 


anotl 
you t 
histo: 


5. 


> fall into 
y require, 
em away 
ent, and, 
to drink- 
1e money 
1is rope.” 
dhe did 
n, and if 
go home 
sia upon 
uld have 
‘t-broken 
aper and 
me say, 
try and 
Vell, this 
le a long 
just put 
» laid his 
the Czar, 
while the 
e young 
ind when 
them?” 

e young 
> bottom 
t mean? 
too good 
1ey came 
I don’t 

v is true, 
ight, and 
housand, 
is Christ, 
gus Gos- 
in in this 
iis build- 
y receive 


the poor. If you could but gO up one of our avenues 


XXV, 


THE FRIEND OF THE SORROWING. 
LUKE iv. 18: “He hath sent Me to heal the broken-hearted.” 


_WANT to take up this one thought—that Christ was sent into 
the world to heal the broken-hearted. When the Prince of 
Wales came to this country a 


few years ago, the whole country 
was excited as to his purpose. What was his object in coming 


here? Had he come to look into our republican form of govern- 
ment, or our institutions, or was it simply to see and be seen? He 
came and he went without telling us what he came for. When the 
Prince of Peace came into this dark world He did not come in any 
private way. He tells us that He came not to see and to be seen, 
but to “seek and to save that which was lost,” and also « to heal 
the broken-hearted.” And in the face of this announcement it is a 
mystery to me why those who have broken hearts will rather carry 
them year in and year out than just bring them to the great Physi- 
cian. How many men in Chicago are just going down to their 
graves with a broken heart? They have carried their hearts 
weighted with trouble for years and years, and yet when they open 

the Scriptures they can see the passage telling us that He came 

here for the purpose of healing the broken-hearted. He left 

Heaven and all its glory to come to the world—sent by the Father, 

He tells us, for the purpose of healing the broken-hearted. 

You will find, my friends, that there is no class of people exempt 
from broken hearts. The rich and the poor suffer alike. There 
was a time when I used to visit the poor, that I thought all the 
broken hearts were to be found among them; but within the last 
few years I have found there are as many broken hearts among the 
learned as the unlearned, the cultured as the uncultured, the rich a5 


and down 
people, and get them to tell 
you would be astonished at the wonderful 

I remember a few years ago I had been 
(211) 


another and reach the hearts of the 
you their whole story, 
history of every family. 


212 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


out of the city for some weeks. When I returned I started out to 
make some calls. The first place I went to I found a mother, her 
eyes red with weeping. I tried to find out what was troubling her, 
and she reluctantly opened her heart and told me all. She said, 
“Last night my only boy came home about midnight drunk. I 
didn’t know that he was addicted to drunkenness, but this morning 
I found out that he has been drinking for weeks, and,” she con- 
tinued, “I would rather have sgen him laid in the grave than have 
had him brought home in the condition I saw him in last night.” 
I tried to comfort her as best I could when she told me her sad 
story. When I went away from that house I didn’t want to go into 
any other house where there was family trouble. The very next 
house I went to, however, where some of the children who attended 
my Sunday-school resided, I found that death had been there and 
laid his hand on one of them. The mother spoke to me of her 
affliction, and brought to me the playthings and the little shoes of 
the child, and the tears trickled down that mother’s cheeks as she 
related to me her sorrow. I got out as soon as possible, and hoped 
I would see no more family trouble that day. The next visit I 
made was to a home where I found a wife with a bitter story. Her 
husband had been neglecting her for a long time, “and now,” she 
said, “he has left me, and I don’t know where he has gone. Winter 
is coming on, and I don’t know what is going to become of my 
family.” I tried to comfort her, and prayed with her, and endeav- 
ored to get her to lay all her sorrows on Christ. The next home I 
entered I found a woman crushed and broken-hearted. She told 
me her boy had forsaken her, and she had no idea where he had 
gone. That afternoon I made five calls, and in every home I found 
a broken heart. Every one had a sad tale to tell, and if you visited 
any home in Chicago you would find the truth of the saying that 
“there is a skeleton in every house.” I suppose while I am talking 
you are thinking of the great sorrow in your own bosom. I do not 
know anything about you, but if I came round to every one of you, 
and you were to tell me the truth, I would hear a tale of sorrow. 
The very last man I spoke to last night was a young mercantile 
man, who told me his load of sorrow had been so great that many 
times during the last few weeks he had gone down to the lake and 
had been tempted to plunge in and end his existence. His burden 
seemed too much for him. Think of the broken hearts in Chicago 
to-night! They could be numbered by hundreds—yea, by thou- 


RS, 


ed out to 
other, her 
bling her, 
She said, 
drunk. I 
5 morning 
’ she con- 
than have 
st night.”’ 
e her sad 
to go into 
very next 
attended 
there and 
ne of her 
shoes of 
‘ks as she 
nd hoped 
xt visit I 
ory. Her 
now,” she 
Winter 
ne of my 
d endeav- 
ct home I 
She told 
e he had 
e I found 
ou visited 
ying that 
m talking 
I do not 
1e of you, 
f sorrow. 


1ercantile 
hat many 
lake and 
is burden 
1 Chicago 
by thou- 


THE FRIEND OF THE SORROWING. 253 


sands. All over this city are broken hearts. If all the sorrow rep- 
resented in this great city was written in a book, this building 
couldn’t hold that book, and you couldn’t read it ina long lifetime. 
This earth is not a stranger to tears, neither is the present the only 
time when they could be found in abundance. From Adam’s days 
to ours tears have been shed, and a wail has been going up to 
Heaven from the broken-hearted. And I say it again, it is a mys- 
tery to me how all those broken hearts can keep away from Him 
who has come to heal. them. For six thousand years that cry of 
sorrow has been going up to God. We find the tears of Jacob 
put on record when he was told that his own son was no more. 
His sons and daughters tried to give him comfort, but he refused 
to be comforted. Weare also told of the tears of King David. I can 
see him, as the messenger brings the news to him of the death of 
his son, exclaiming in anguish, “Oh, Absalom, my son, would that 
I had died for thee.” And when Christ came into the world the 
first sound He heard was woe—the wail of those mothers in Beth- 
lehem, and from,the manger to the cross He was surrounded with 
sorrow. We are told that He often looked up to Heaven and 
sighed. I believe it was because there. was so much suffering 
around Him. It was on His right hand and on His left—every- 
where on earth; and the thought that He had come to relieve the 
people of the earth of their burdens, and so few would accept Him, 
made Him sorrowful. He came for that purpose. Let the hun- 
dreds of thousands just cast their burdens on Him. He has 
come to bear them as well as our sins. He will bear our griefs 
and carry our sorrow. There is not a burdened son of Adam in 
Chicago who can not but be freed if he will only come to Him. 
Let me call your attention to this little word “sent”—“He hath 
sent Me.” Take your Bibles and read about those who have been 
sent by God, and one thought will come to you—that no man who 
has ever been sent by God to do His work has ever failed. No 
matter how great the work, how mighty the undertaking ; no 
matter how many difficulties had to be encountered, when they 
were sent from God they were sure to succeed. God sent Moses 
down to Egypt to bring three million people out of bondage. The 
idea would have seemed absurd to most people. Fancy a man | 
with an impediment in his speech, without an army, without 
generals, with no record, bringing three million people from the 
power of a great nation like that of the Egyptians. But God sent 


214 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


him, and what was the result? Pharaoh said they should not go, 
and the great king and all his army were going to prevent them. 
But did he succeed? God sent Moses and he didn’t fail. We find 
that God sent Joshua to the walls of Jericho, and he marched 
around the walls, and at the proper time these walls came tumbling 
down and the city fell into his hands. God sent Elijah to stand 
before Ahab, and we read the result. Samson and Gideon were 
sent by God, and we are told in the Scriptures what t .ey accom- 
plished ; and so all through the Word we find that when God sent 
men they have never failed. Now, do you think for a moment that 
God’s own Son, sent to us, is going to fail? If Moses, Elijah, 
Joshua, Gideon, Samson, and all those mighty men sent by God 
succeeded in doing their work, do you think the Son of Man is 
going to fail? Do you think, if He has come to heal broken hearts, 
He is going to fail? Do you think there is a heart so bruised and 
broken that can’t be healed by Him? He can heal them all, but 
the great trouble is that men won’t come. If there isa broken 
heart here to-night just bring it to the Great Physician. If you 
break an arm or a leg, you run off and get the best physician. If 
you have a broken heart you needn’t go toa doctor or minister 
with it ; the best physician is the Great Physician. In the days of 
Christ they didn’t have hospitals or physicians as we have now. 
When a man was sick he was taken to the door, and the passers- 
by prescribed for him. If a man came along who had had the 
same disease as the sufferer, he just told him wh-t he had done 


to get cured. I remember I had a disease for 2 chs, and 
when I recovered if I met a man with the same lis. had to 
tell him what cured me; I could not keep the presct _a all to 


myself. When He came there and found the sick at their cottage 


doors the sufferers found more medicine in His words than there 


was in all the prescriptions of that country. He isa mighty Phy- 
sician who has come to heal every wounded heart in this building 
and in Chicago to-night. You needn’t run to any other physician. 
The great difficulty is that people try to get some other physician 
—they go to this creed and that creed, to this doctor of divinity 
and that one, instead of coming directly to the Master. He 
has told us that His mission is to heal the broken hearts, and if 
He has said this, let us take Him at His word and just ask Him 
to heal. 

- I was thinking to-day of the difference between those who know 


RS, 


d not go, 
ent them. 
We find 
marched 
tumbling 
to stand 
eon were 
y accom- 
God sent 
nent that 
3, Elijah, 
: by God 
f Man is 
n hearts, 
ised and 
n all, but 
a broken 
If you 
cian. IREf 
minister 
: days of 
ive now. 
passers- 
had the 
ad done 
ths, and 
~ had to 
ral all to 
' cottage 


an there © 


ity Phy- 
building 
hysician. 
hysician 
divinity 
ef. ite 
s, and if 
isk Him 


10 know 


THE FRIEND OF THE SORROWING. 215 


Christ when trouble comes upon them and those who knuw Him 
not. I know several members of families in this city who are just 
stumbling into their graves over trouble. I know two widows in 
Chicago who are weeping and moaning over the death of their 
husbands, and their grief is just taking them to their graves. In- 
stead of bringing their burdens to Christ, they mourn day and 
night, and the result will be that in a few weeks or years at most 
their sorrow will take them to their graves when they ought to 
take it all to the Great Physician. Three years ago a father took 
his wife and family on board that ill-fated French steamer. They 
were going to Europe, and when out on the ocean another vessel 
ran into her and she went down. That mother, when I was preach- 
ing in Chicago, used to bring her two children to the meetings 
every night. It was one of the most beautiful sights I. ever looked 
upon to see how those little children used to sit and listen, and to 
see the tears trickling down their cheeks when the Saviour was 
preached. It seemed as if nobody else in that meeting drank in 
the truth as eagerly as those little ones. One night when an invi- 
tation had been extended to all to go into the inquiry-room, one 
of these little children said: “Mamma, why can’t I go in too?” 
The mother allowed them to come into the room, and some friend 
spoke to them, and to all appearances they seemed to understand 
the plan of salvation as well as their elders. When that memorable 
night came, that mother went down and came up without her two 
children. Upon reading the news, I said: “It will kill her,” and I 
quitted my post in Edinburgh—the only time I left my post on 
the other side—and went down to Liverpool to try and comfort 
her. But when I got there I found that the Son of God had been 
there before me, and instead of me comforting her, she comforted 
me. She told me she could not think of those children as being in 
the sea; it seemed as if Christ had permitted her to take those 
children on that vessel only that they might be wafted to Him, and 
had saved her life only that she might come back and work a little 
longer for Him. When she got up the other day at a mothers’ 
meeting in Farwell Hall, and told her story, I thought I would tell 
the mothers of it the first chance I got. So if any of you have had 
some great affliction, if any of you have lost a loved and loving 
father, mother, brother, husband, or wife, come to Christ, because 
God has sent Him to heal the broken-hearted. 

Some of you, I can imagine, will say, “Ah, I could stand that 


216 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYRES, 


affliction; I have something harder than that.” I remember a 
mother coming to me and saying, “It is easy enough for you to 
speak in that way; if you had the burden that I’ve got, you couldn’t 
cast it on the Lord.” « Why, is your burden so great that Christ 
can’t carry it?” I asked. “No, it isn’t too great for Him to carry, 
but I can’t put it on Him.” “That is your fault,” I replied, and I 
find a great many people with burdens who, rather than just come 
to Him with them, strap them tighter on their backs and go away 
staggering under their load. I asked her the neture of her trouble, 
and she told me, “I have an only boy who is a wanderer on the 
face of the earth. I don’t know where he is. If I only knew where 
he was I would go round the world to find him. You don’t know 
how I love that boy. This sorrow is killing me.” “Why can’t you 
take him to Christ ? You can reach Him at the throne, even though 
He be at the uttermost part of the world. Go tell God all about 
your trouble, and He will take away his sin, and not only that, but 
if you never see him on earth, God can give you faith that you will 
see your boy in Heaven.” And then I told her of a mother who 
lived down in the southern part of Indiana. Some years ago her 
boy came up to this city. The boy was a moralist. My friends, a 
man has to have more than morality to lean upon in this great city. 
He hadn’t been here long before he was led astray. A neighbor. 
happened to come up here and found him one night in the streets 
drunk. When that neighbor went home, at first he thought he 
wouldn’t say anything about it to the boy’s father, but afterward he 
thought it was his duty to tell. So in a crowd in the street of their 
little town, he just took that father aside, and told him what he had. 
seen in Chicago. It wasa terrible blow. When the children had 
been put to bed that night he said to his wife, “ Wife, I have bad 
news. I have heard from Chicago to-day.” The mother dropped her 
work in an instant, and said, “Tell me what it is.” “ Well, our son 
has been seen on the streets of Chicago drunk.” Neither of them 
slept that night, but they took their burden to Christ, and about 
- daylight the mother said: “I don’t know how, I don’t know when 
or where, but God has given me faith to believe that our son will be 
saved, and will never come to a drunkard’s grave.” One week after, 
that boy left Chicago. He couldn’t tell why—an unseen power 
seemed to lead him to his mother’s home, and the first thing he said 
‘on coming over the threshold was, “ Mother, I have come home to 
ask you to pray for me;” and soon after, he came back to Chicago 


S. 


ember a 
r you to 
couldn’t 
it Christ 
0 Carry, 
d, and I 
st come 
gO away 
trouble, 
-on the 
v where 
’t know 
an’t you 
though 
1 about 
hat, but 
rou will 
1er who 
ago her 
iends, a 
at city. 
cighbor. 
streets 
ight he 
vard he 
of their 
he had. 
en had 
ve bad 
sed her 
ur son 
f them 
about 
v when 
will be 
< after, 
power 
1e said 
me to 


hicago 


THE FRIEND OF THE SORROWING, 217 


a bright and a shining light. If you have got a burden like this, 
fathers, mothers, bring it to Him and cast it on Him, and He, the 
Great Physician, will heal your broken hearts. 

I can imagine, again, some of you saying, “ How am I to do it?” 
My friends, go to Him as a personal friend. He is not a myth. 
What we want to do.is to treat Christ as we treat an earthly friend. 
If you have sins, just go and tell Him all about them; if you have 
some great burden, “Go bury thy sorrow,” bury it in His bosom. 
If you go to people and tell them of your cares, your sorrows, they 
will tell you they haven't time to listen. But He will not only hear 
your story, however long it be, but will bind up your broken heart. 
Oh, if there is a broken heart here to-night, bring it to Jesus, and I 
tell you upon authority He will heal you. He has said He will 
bind your wounds up—not only that, He will heal them. 

During the war I remember of a young man not twenty, who was 
court-martialed, down in the front, and sentenced to be shot. The 
story was this: The young fellow had enlisted. He was not 
obliged to, but he went off with another young man. They were 
what we would call “chums.” One night this companion was 
ordered out on picket duty, and he asked the young man to go for 
him. The next night he was ordered out himself; and having been 
awake two nights, and not being used to it, fell asleep at his post, 
and for the offence he was tried and sentenced to death. It was 
right after the order issued by the President that no interference 
would be allowed in cases of this kind. This sort of thing had be- 
come too frequent, and it must be stopped. When the news reached 
the father and mother in Vermont it nearly broke their hearts. The 
thought that their son should be shot was too great for them. They 
had no hope that he would be saved by anything they vould do. 
But they had a little daughter who had read the life of Abraham 
Lincoln, and knew how he loved his own children, and she said: 
“If Abraham Lincoln knew how my father and mother loved my 
brother he wouldn’t let him be shot.” That little girl thought this 
over, and made up her mind to see the President. She went to the 
White House, and the sentinel, when he saw her imploring looks, 
passed her in, and when she came up to the door and told the 
private secretary that she wanted to see the President, he could not 
refuse her. She came into the chamber and found Abraham Lincoln 
surrounded by his generals and counselors, and when he saw the 
little country girl he asked her what she wanted. The little maid 


if 
} 


218 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


told her plain, simple story—how her brother, whom her mother 
and father loved very dearly, had been sentenced to be shot. How 
they were mourning for him, and if he was to die in that way it would 
break their hearts. The President’s heart was touched with com- 
passion, and he immediately sent a dispatch canceling the sentence 
and giving the boy a parole so that he could come home and sce 


that father and mother. I just tell you this to show you how. 


Abraham Lincoln’s heart was moved by compassion for the sorrow 
of that father and mother; and if he showed so much, do you think 
the Son of God will not have compassion upon you, sinner, if you 
only take that crushed, bruised heart to Him? He will heal it. 
Have you got a drunken husband? Go tell Him. He can make 
him a blessing to the Church and to the world. Have you a profli- 
gate son? Go take your story to Him, and He will comfort you, 
and bind up and heal your sorrow. What a blessing it is to have 
such a Saviour. He has been sent to heal the broken-hearted. 
May the text, if the sermon doesn’t, reach every one here to-night, 
and may every crushed, broken, and bruised heart be brought to 
that Saviour, and they will hear His comforting words. He will 
comfort you, as a mother comforts her child, if you will only come 
in prayer and lay all your burdens before Him. 


Ye 


mother 

How 
it would 
th com- 
entence 
and see 


ou how. 


sorrow 
uu think 
,if you 
heal it. 
in make 
a profli- 
yrt you, 
to have 
hearted. 
o-night, 
ight to 
He will 
ly come 


XXVI. 


DELIVERANCE FOR CAPTIVES. 


LUKE iv. 18: “To preach deliverance to the captives.” 


NOW take up the words, “ To preach deliverance to the captives.” 
That is what I want to call your attention to. He not only 
came to preach the Gospel and heal the broken-hearted, but He 

came to preach deliverance. There is a verse, I think it is in the 
forty-ninth chapter of Isaiah, which shows us our necessity of deliv- 
erance. ‘Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful 
captive delivered? But thus saith the Lord, Even the captives of 
the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be 
delivered.” Now, every man who has broken the law of God is a law- 
ful captive ; he has been taken into captivity, and the question is, can 
he deliver himself? Can aman who has broken the law of God save 
himself? Ifa man breaks the laws of our land, can he save himself? 
If a man commit murder, can he save himself from punishment ? 
He requires some power outside of himself. So if a man has 
broken the law of God, he must be saved by some means outside of 
himself, and this text states the way this power has to be got. He 
comes to proclaim liberty to the captive. 

Suppose I come here and say there is no hope to-night for a man 
who has broken the law of God—all who have disobeyed God must 
perish; there is no hope. How many of you would stay in this 
building and listen to me—how many of you would just rise up and 
go out? Why, every gambler and drinker would say, “ He has no 
right to stand up and preach this. We know better than that.” 
Thank God, we don’t need to tell you that. We can preach Christ 
to you as a deliverer. I remember hearing a story of Mr. George 
Stewart. One day, the Governor of Pennsylvania came to him and 
said, “ Mr. Stewart, I want you to go to such a prison and tell that 
man for whose execution I signed the warrant the other day, that 
there is not a ray of hope for him. When the day and hour comes 
he must be executed. His mother has been tormenting the life out 
(219) 


220 MOODY'S SERMCNS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYFRS, 


of me, and all his friends have been running after me day and night, 
and they are giving the poor fellow a false hope.” ‘That is a very 
disagreeable thing to do, Governor,” answered Mr. Stewart. “ Well, 
I want you to goand tell him, so that he can be scttled in his mind.” 
The story goes, that when the doors of the cell were opened, that 
prisoner seized Mr. Stewart’s hands, and in his joy cried, “ You are 
a good man. I know you have come with a pardon from the 
Governor.” But when Mr. Stewart told him the Governor had sent 
him to say there was not a ray of hope for him, upon the day and 
hour he must be executed, the man completely broke down and fainted 
away. The thought that at such a day and such an hour he was going 
to be ushered into eternity, was too much for the poor fellow. Sup- 
pose I come to you to-night and tell you there is not a ray of hope— 
that you have broken the law of God, and have not one ray of hope for 
pardon. How many would say, “I know a great deal better; the 
blackest sinner on earth, Christ can,save to the utmost. He says so.” 
But, my friends, there is no hope without the deliverance to be free 
from the bondage of sin, because He says you are “lawful captives.” 
Who are you going to be delivered by? Why, you must be by 
Christ. He was the only one who ever preached this. No other 
one ever announced himself a deliverer. If you read your Bibles 
carefully you will find that was what He came to do-—what He 
preached all His life, that He came to deliver men from the cap- 
tivity of sin. And you will find, too, that He was the most extra- 
ordinary preacher that ever was on the earth. He didn’t come to 
preach fine sermons; He didn’t come to preach up the greatness 
and goodness of man—you have enough of that kind of preaching 
in the churches; but He came to give a groaning world assistance 
and power to be saved; He came to tell men to come out of their 
sins, and show them the way. It was not to preach in eloquent 
words—not to preach sermons on science, and with literary skill 
that He came; it was to proclaim liberty to the captive, and every 
burdened sinner will be free if he only comes to Him. For six 
thousand years, all along the stream of time—from Adam’s till our 
own day—Satan has been at men, binding them hand and foot. 
‘That’s what he has been doing to some of you. He has just been 
Linding you hand and foot until you can’t move from him. He 
commences, to be sure, in a very little way. The bond is so small 
and delicate at first that you might blow it away with a breath. 
But by and by it becomes a little thread no bigger. than a spider’s 


“ 


Qn 


d night, 
Sa very 
“Well, 
; mind.” 
ed, that 
You are 
om the 
ad sent 
Jay and 
fainted 
1s going 
Sup- 
hope— 
10pe for 
er; the 
ays So.” 
be free 
ytives.” 
be by 
o other 
' Bibles 
1at He 
1e cap- 
; extra- 
ome to 
eatness 
‘aching 
istance 
f their 
oquent 
‘y skill 
l every 
‘or six 
till our 
1 foot. 
t been 
1. He 
» small 
oreath. 
pider’s 


DELIVERANCE FOR CAPTIVES. 221 


web—you can hardly see it. “Oh,” you say, “that is nothing; that 
can’t have any hold on me.” It grows a little stronger and becomes 
athread. “I can break that any time,” you say; “I can snap that 
whenever I like.” But it grows stronger and stronger and stronger, 
and then you find that you have been taken captive, like Samson, 
by Satan, and then he laughs at you. How many men are there in 
Chicago who have been bound hand and foot in this way? 

Mr. Spurgeon, a number of years ago, made a parable. He 
thought he had a right to make one, and he did it. He said, 
“There was once a tyrant who ordered one of his subjects into his 
presence, and ordered him to make a chain. The poor blacksmith 
—that was his occupation—had to go to work and forge the chain. 
When it was done he brought it into the presence of the tyrant, 
and he was ordered to take it away and make it twice the length. 
He brought it again to the tyrant, and again he was ordered to 
double it. Back he came when he had obeyed the order, and the 
tyrant looked at it and then commanded the servants to bind the 
man hand and foot with the chain he had made, and cast him into 
prison. And,” Mr. Spurgeon said, “that is what the devil does with 
men. He makes them forge their own chain, and then binds them 
hand and foot with it and casts them into outer darkness.” My 
friends, that is just what these drunkards, these gamblers, these 
blasphemers—that is just what every sinner is doing. But, thank 
God, we can tell you of a Deliverer. The Son of God has power to 
break every one of these fetters if you will only come to Him. 

Now I notice there is not a hope for a man to be delivered till he 
knows that he has become a captive and that he needs a deliverer. 
If a man thinks he can deliver himself, of course he will not call 
upon God for assistance. But a man can’t—every one here knows 
that. If you doubt it, just ask this, ask yourselves this question, 
‘How many times have I determined to break off this and that sin, 
and resolved to become better, and the resolution has only lasted for 
a short time?” Young man in the gallery yonder, haven’t you said 
a hundred times I will stop doing this and that evil habit? It may 
be you are a great swearer—a great blasphemer; haven’t you made 
up your mind to stop swearing, and after a little time you found you 
could not keep back the oaths as they rose to your lips? You sit 
there with your arms folded, as much as to say you can break the 
habit. Well,suppose you can. I will take it on that ground. Sup- 
pose every man can break himself away from his sin. What are 


222 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


you going to do with your sin? Nature won’t deliver you from the 
sins you have committed, even if you can break yourself from them. 
The mightiest man that ever lived could not deliver himself from 
his sins. If a man could have saved himself, Christ would never 
have come into the world. If man could save himself, there would 
have been no need of a deliverer. Now I just want to tell you, 
swearing men, you, blasphemers, if you want to stop, I will tell you 
of a way by which you can be delivered and by which your habit 
can be broken. Just come to the Great Deliverer; ask Him to save 
you, and He will put a new tongue into your mouth. I tell you as 
soon as Christ comes into a man he is a changed man every way. 
Temper, language, disposition is all changed. I remember before I 
came to Christ how I used to get into a passion at nothing at all, 
and how I used to wish myself dead—which is just murder in the 
sight of God—whenever anything displeased me. But since I came 
to Christ He has kept me—kept me for twenty years from my evil 
temper. I tell you if a man or woman here is troubled with a bitter 
temp_¢ the T.ord will deliver you from it. He came to deliver us 
from our sinful dispositions and create in us pure hearts, and when 
we have Him with us it will not be hard for us. Then the service 
of Christ will be delightful to us. A man to get salvation must 
come to Him; he can not deliver himself. I hope every one in this 
meeting to-night will give up all hope of saving themselves. If you 
stop here to-night, right where you are, and just cry, ‘Oh, God, de- 
liver me from my sin; deliver me from this terrible temper; deliver 
me from this awful sin of blasphemy; deliver me from the passion ot 
strong drink; Almighty God, reach out Thy hand and deliver me”’— 
just send up this cry, and see how quick God will be by your side. 
Why, He calls Himself our elder brother. We ought to be proud 
of such an elder brother. Why, look at the two boys coming from 
school. One is a big boy and he wants to fight the little one. The 
little fellow knows he will be beaten, so he says: “ Just wait till I 
get my big brother,” and he runs away to get him; but when. he 
comes back the big boy is gone. He was no match for the big fel- 
low, and so we are no match for Satan; but when we bring our big 
brother to him, he runs away. There is not a poor slave of Satan 
here but can be delivered if he will. 

A great many of you will say,“ I am no slave of Satan.” Are 
you a child of God? If you are not, then you are a slave of Satan; 
not only that, but you are a lawful slave. The fact is, we are born 


Po’ 


the 
the 


S. 


from the 
mm them. 
elf from 
ld never 
re would 
ell you, 
tell you 
ur habit 
1to save 
l you as 
ory way. 
before I 
> at all, 
r in the 
>I came 
my evil 
a bitter 
liver us 
id when 
service 
on must 
> in this 

If you 
sod, de- 
deliver 
ssion ot 
r me’ — 
ur side. 
> proud 
ig from 
e. The 
it till I 
hen. he 
big fel- 
our big 
f Satan 


* Are 
Satan; 
‘e born 


DELIVERANCE FOR CAPTIVES. 223 


under Satan’s power. In sin my mother conceived me. By nature 
man is born away from God; therefore we have to be born of God 
before we can be delivered from that sin. We divide the people of 
the world into different classes—the rich and the poor, the learned 
and the ignorant, the refined and the rude, the cultured and the un- 
cultured ; but God has only got men placed into two classes. Christ 
on Calvary divided the world eighteen hundred years ago into two 
sets. On one side of the cross were the believers, on the other side 
were the unbelievers. And from that day to this the world has 
stood—those with Him and those against Him, and Satan controls 
every man and woman in this assembly who is not with Christ. You 
may believe it ornot. But I tell you that you must be either a child of 
disobedience or a child of God; and unless you are born of God, you 
are not free from the slavery of sin, and can not come into the king- 
dom of God. I can not decide on which side you will be. That 
is a matter between you and God. If you area child of God, you 
are no longer under the slavery of sin; you have been delivered. 
If you haven’t been born of Him, oh let Him reach you to-night— 
just go with your burdens to Him and He will deliver you. 

Satan holds men to his kingdom by various means. He will let 
you go to hell through wealth, through position, through pleasure. 
He will let you go to hell through one of the pews of our Christian 
churches. He will give you anything to get you into his kingdom ; 
and unless you are a child of God, and one ied bya supernatural 
power—by the power of Him who preached deliverance to the cap- 
tive—you will be dragged into Satan’s army, and he will take good 
care not to let you get out. He will give you everything and bind 
you tighter and tighter. A great many persons say, “ How am I to 
do this >—how am I to get the deliverance?” As I said the other 
night, it is the easiest thing to do. Suppose I was interested in this 
contest very much, and was a member of one of the parties, and all 
at once I awoke to the fact that if my party got into power it would 
be sure ruin to the country, wouldn’t I go to the other party with- 
out delay? All at once, I become interested in that party, and go 
to all my friends, and all my associates, and use every power I know 
to induce them to leave my original party. Now, there are two 
powers in the world—the power of God and the power of Satan— 
the power of good and the power of evil. If you are under 
the power of evil, and want to get under the power of God, cry to 
Him to bring you over to His service; cry to Him to take you into 


224 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


His army. He will hear you; He will come to you, and, if need be, 
He will send a legion of angels to help you to fight your way up to 
Heaven. God will take you by the right hand and lead you 
through this wilderness over death, and take you right into His 
kingdom. That’s what the Son of Man came to do. He has never 
deceived us; just say here, “Christ is my Deliverer.” A great 
many people think that churches are the true deliverers. Mark 
me, all the churches in Christendom never saved a soul. I am not 
speaking without consideration when I say this. I repeat it, all the 
churches in Christendom never saved a soul. They haven’t the 
power todoit; andthe moment a man puts his faith in churches, he 
has taken the wrong road to get deliverance. Every soul delivered 
from sin must be delivered by the Master. All the ministers, all 
the learning, all the friends you have can not save you. That is the 
reason so many are stumbling all the time. They are continually 
iooking to this man and that man, this church and that church, and 
when the tempter comes they are overcome. The moment a man 
puts his trust in Christ, and He enters into his heart, that moment 
he finds a power given him to resist temptation. I not only want 
my sins forgiven, but I want power to resist sin. That’s what | 
want. If there is a poor one here who wants to get victory over 
the tempter, all that you have to do is to believe in the Lord Jesus 
Christ. By just coming to Him you will receive a power such as 
man never felt before—a power by which victory shall succeed vic- 
tory with you, and day by day you will walk in your strength. If 
you go to this man and that man for deliverance, you will just 
stumble. Man can not save you. Sin will overtake you. Only one 
man ever overcame the lion of hell, and that was the Lion of Judea. 
Amid the waves of opposition, amid the waves of persecution, He 
stood erect. You have been down at the lake, and you have seen 
the great wave gathering in its strength, and come rolling on, and 
dashing on a rock, and it was just broken into pieces; another comes 
on in all its fury and dashes on that rock, and its power is smashed ; 
another and anather comes rolling on in all their fierceness, and 
spend their fury on that rock, and the old rock has stood for ages, 
and for centuries that sea has been trying to batter it down. Look 
at those friends, in the lost world, as they linger around that cross, 
and the billows of persecution and fury dash against it; hear the 
jibes and the sneers hurled at Him, when all at once He cried, “ It 
is finished.” He had overcome the lion of hell, and from that tree 


Se 


need be, 
fay up to 
ead you 
into His 
las never 
A great 
5. Mark 
I am not 
t, all the 
ren’t the 
rches, he 
delivered 
isters, all 
1at is the 
ntinually 
irch, and 
nt aman 
moment 
nly want 
s what | 
ory over 
ord Jesus 
- such as 
ceed vic- 
eth. If 
will just 
Inly one 
of Judea. 
tion, He 
ave seen 
ron, and 
er comes 
mashed ; 
less, and 
for ages, 
» Loole 
at cross, 
hear the 
ried, “It 
that tree 


DELIVERANCE FOR CAPTIVES, 225 


He went and took His seat at the right hand of God, and now calls 
to us, “I will deliver you from all the sins inherited from Adam-— 
but come to Me and I will save you.” My friends, cry to-night to 
Him and He will come to you. I don’t know if I ever saw a man 
get down on his knees who was not saved. I never Saw a poor cap- 
tive crying, “ My God, my God, save me!” but the deliverance came. 
If there is one here to-night—I don’t care who he is—who wants deliv. 
erance, the Son of God is here to give it you to-night. Sometimes 
it appears to me in this Tabernacle—where we have had many bet- 
ter meetings than ever we had anywhere on opening—sometimes it 
seems as if we could almost hear the footsteps of the Son of God, 
the stately stepping of Jesus. And He is here to-night. 

There is a story told of an incident that occurred during the last 
Indian mutiny. The English were besieged in the city of Lucknow, 
and were in momentary expectation of perishing at the hands of the. 
fiends that surrounded them. There was a little Scotch lassie in 
this fort, and, while lying on the ground, she suddenly shouted, her 
face aglow with joy, “Dinna ye hear them comin’; dinna ye hear 
them comin’?” “ Hear what?” they asked. “ Dinna ye hear 

. them comin’?” And she sprang to her feet. It was the bagpipes 
of her native Scotland she heard. It was a native air she heard 
that was being played by a regiment of her countrymen marching 
to the relief of those captives, and these deliverers made them free, 
Oh, my friends, don’t you hear Him crying to you to-night? I re- 
member when General Grant was at Richmond it was my privilege 
to be there. Libby Prison was crowded with captives. All at 
once the bands came marching into the place playing ‘‘ The Star- 
Spangled Banner.” Those poor prisoners heard their native air, and 
it was sweet music to them—it filled the hearts of those poor fel- 
lows with joy, and they knew that the iron bolts of their prison 
doors would soon be drawn and they would be captives no longer. 
They knew that by the music they heard that their countrymen 
had come to give them liberty. Christ has come to set you free. 
You may be bound by the chains of sin, and you have tried in vain 
to set yourselves free. Christ can do it. It is as easy for Him todo 
it as it is for me to put my hand on the Bible. How many of you are 
just being drawn down by passion, by lusts, by drink—just being 
dragged down to the pit, and you feel yourself powerless. The Son 
of Man can deliver you. He will deliver you. Thank God for this 
sweet Gospel; thank God for this doctrine of deliverance. Thank 

T5 


226 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


God, we can preach it. I want to tell you, again, that Christ came 
for this purpose—to set the poor captives free. 

Look at that prison. See that poor prisoner who has been sen- 
tenced to be hung. His friends have been to the Governor to 
obtain a pardon, but the Governor has refused. Every means has 
been tried and he knows that he is adoomed man. The last day 
comes and he says: “To-morrow I am going to die; to-morrow I 
must go into the presence of Almighty God; to-morrow I must 
stand bef> =, Creator.” He hears those carpenters busy with 
their hamt; —-recting the scaffold on which he has to die. I can 
see that poor man tremble at the sound. He doesn’t sleep any 
that night. In the morning he can not eat. The hour comes and 
he hears the town bell tolling his death-knell. By and by he hears 
foot-falls near his door and he now knows that his time has come. 
He thinks it is the sheriff who has come to lead him forth. The 
door is unlocked and aman says to that prisoner: “You can go 
free.” ‘“ What! what’s that?” exclaims the criminal. “You can 
go free.” “What do you mean?” inquires the culprit. “Why, the 
Governor has not only saved your life, but given you freedom.” My 


dear friends, that is the Gospel; that’s the Gospel of Christ. He . 


opens the prison doors of sin and sets the captive free and pardons 
his sins. If there is a poor soul here to-night, Christ will break 
your captivity, if you only open the door of your heart and let Him 
in. Is there a poor drunkard, is there a poor blasphemer, is there 
one of you who are in sin who wants to get victory to-night? The 
Son of God has come to preach deliverance of the captives. He 
will set your captive soul free; He will snap the fetters which bind 
you. May God help you to-night to seek Christ ; lay your burdens 
before Him, and He will deliver you. Let us pray. 


RS, 


hrist came 


been sen- 
vernor to 
neans has 
e last day 
-morrow I 
v I must 
susy with 
ie. I can 
sleep any 
‘omes and 
7 he hears 
has come. 
rth. The 
yu can go 
‘You can 
Why, the 
lom.” My 


irist. He. 


d pardons 
vill break 
1 let Him 
r, is there 
ht? The 
ives. He 
Thich bind 
ir burdens 


XXVII. 


THE BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL. 
LUKE iv. 18: “ And recovering of sight to the blind.” 


HE Lord Jesus tells us that He came to give sight to the blind. 
Paul says in his Epistle to the Corinthians, fourth chapter and 
third verse: “ But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that 

are lost; in whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of 
them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of 
Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.” 
“If the Gospel be hid;” “In whom the god of this world 
hath blinded.” Now you may see this world is just one large blind 
asylum—it is full of blind people. I tried to tell you that the world 
was full of broken hearts ; that the world was full of captives, bound 
hand and foot in sin, and now I tell you that it is full of blind peo- 
ple. Not only blind people, but they are bound and broken-hearted. 
You might say that nearly all those in the world come under the 
three heads. Now just look at the contrast between Satan and 
Christ. Satan breaks men’s hearts, but Christ binds them up; Satan 
binds the people of this earth hand and foot, but Christ breaks the 
fetters and sets them free; Satan makes us blind, but Christ opens 
our eyes. He came to do this, and just see how He was received. 
He went into that synagogue at Nazareth and preached this glorious 
Gospel, and commenced by telling them that the Spirit of the Lord 
was upon Him, and went on to tell them that He had come to save 
them, and what did they do? They thrust Him out of the city, and 
took Him to the brow of the hill, and would have hurled Him into 
hell if they could. And men have been as bitter toward the Gospel 
aii along these eighteen hundred years. Why, some men would 
tear the preachers of it limb from limb if it wasn’t for the law. Then 
we find when He goes to Bethany, and raising up the mother of 
* (227) 


228 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


Martha and Mary, and binding up broken hearts as He wer ‘ along, 
and preaching mercy, they want to kill Him. We find Him in 
the third chapter of Mark setting the captive free. Here we find a 
man possessed of demons, whom no one could cure, set at liberty by 
the Son of Man; and in the healing because they lost a few swine 
they told Him to depart from their coasts. Then we find Him just 
a few days before His death, almost on His way to Calvary, giving 
sight to that blind man. And for all this they take Him to that 
mount and nail Him to across. Oh, what blindness! 

We are told there are three million people in the world who are 
called blind. Every one calls them blind because they haven’t their 
natural sight. But do you ever think how many are spiritually 
blind in this world? Why, if there are three million people in the 
world who have not their natural sight, how many do you suppose 
are spiritually blind? We sympathize with those who have lost 
their sight. Nothing appeals to our sympathy so readily. I believe 
I could raise thousands of dollars among you by telling you about 
some blind one who is suffering for the necessaries of life through 
their affliction. How many of you wouldn’t put your hands in 
your pockets and give liberally? How it moves our compassion— 
how it moves our hearts as we see the blind men, women, and chil- 
dren in the streets. How your heart goes out to those poor un- 
fortunates. I was at a meeting in London, when I was there, and I 
heard a man speaking with wonderful power and earnestness. “Who 
is this man?” Tasked, my curiosity being excited. “ Why, that is Dr. 
. Heis blind.” I felt some interest in this man, and at the close 
of the meeting I sought an interview, and he told me that he 
had been stricken blind when very young. His mother took him to 
a doctor, and asked him about his sight. “You must give up all 
hope,” the doctor said. “Your boy is blind, and will be forever.” 
“ What, do you think my boy will never see?” asked his mother, 
“Never again.” The mother took her boy to her bosom and cried, 
“Oh, my boy, who will take care of you when I am gone—who will 
look to you!” forgetting the faithfulness of that God she had 
learned him to love. He became a servant of the Lord, and was 
permitted to print the Bible in twelve different languages, printed 
in the raised letters, so that all the blind people could read the 
Scriptures themselves. He had acongregation, my friends, of three 
million people, and I think that blind man was one of the happiest 


beings in all London. He was naturally blind, but he had eyes to 
? 


RS, 


er“ along, 
d Him in 
we find a 
liberty by 
few swine 
Him just 
ry, giving 
n to that 


1 who are 
ren’t their 
spiritually 
ole in the 
u suppose 
have lost 
I believe 
rou about 
e through 
hands in 
passion— 
and chil- 
poor un- 
ere, and I 
s. “Who 
hat is Dr. 
the close 
that he 
1k him to 
re up all 
forever.” 
; mother, 
ind cried, 
-who will 
she had 
and was 
» printed 
read the 
, of three 
happiest 
l eyes to 


THE BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL. 229 


his soul, and could see a bright eternity in the future. He had 
built his foundation upon the living God. We pity those who have 
not their natural sight; but how you should pity yourself, if you are 
spiritually blind. If we could get all the blind, spiritually, in this 
city! You talk about those great political meetings—they would be 
nothing to the crowd you would collect. Why, just look at all the 
men in this city who are blind, and many of them are in the 
churches. This has. been the trouble with men always. Christ 
couldn’t get men to understand they were blind—He couldn’t even 
get His disciples to open their eyes until after He went up to Heaven, 
And then they received the spiritual truth. 
I think to-night I might pick up some of the different classes who 
are blind. I am somewhat acquainted with the rich men of this 
city, and I don’t think it would take Jong to prove that the leading 
men of this city are blind—blind to their own interests. Take a 
man just spending all his strength and energies to get money. He 
is money blind. He is so blind in his pursuit that he can not see 
the God of Heaven. Money is his god. His cry is continually, 
“Money, money,” and it is the cry of many here in Chicago. They 
don’t care about God, don’t care about salvation, don’t heed their 
eternal condition so long as they get money, money, money. And 
agreat many of them have got it. But how lean their souls are. God 
has given the desire of their heart, but He has given them leanness 
of soul. I heard of a man who had accumulated great wealth, and 
death came upon him suddenly, and he realized, as the saying is, 
that “there was no bank in the shroud,” that he couldn’t take any- 
thing with him; we may have all the money on earth, but we must 
leave it behind us. He called a lawyer in and commenced to will 
away his property before he went away. His little girl couldn't 
understand exactly where he was going, and she said, “ Father, have 
you got a home in that land you are going to?” The arrow went 
down to his soul. “Got ahome there?” The rich man had hurled 
away God and neglected to secure a home there for the sake of his 
money, and he found it was now too late. He was money mad, he 
was money blind. It wouldn’t be right for me to give names, but I 
could tell you of a good many here in Chicago who are going on in 
this way—just spending all their lives in the accumulation of what 
they can not take with them. This is going on while very many 
Poor people are suffering for the necessaries of life. These men 
don’t know they are blind—money is their god. 


230 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


There is another class who don’t care so much for money. We 
might call them business blind. It is business, business, business 
with them all the time. Inthe morning they haven't time to worship. 
They must attend to business; must get down tothe store. Down 
they run, and haven’t time to get home to dinner. They mustn’t 
let any one get ahead of them; and they get home late at night and 
their families have gone to bed. They scarcely ever see their chil- 
dren. It is all business with them. A man told me not long ago, 
“I must attend to my business. That is my first consideration, 
and see that none get ahead of me.” That is his god. I don’t 
care if he is an elder or a deacon in the church. That is his god. 
The god of business has blinded him. Look at the merchant prince 
who died the other day. Men called him a clever, shrewd man. 
Call that shrewdness—to pile up wealth for a lifetime and leave no 
record behind so that we know he has gone to Heaven? He rose 
above men in his business; he devoted his whole soul to it, and the 
world called him a power among men; the world called him great, 
But let the Son of God write his obituary; let Him put an epitaph 
on his tomb-stone, and it would be, “Thou fool.” Man says, “I 
must attend to business fisi;” God says, “Seek first the kingdom 
of God.” I don’t care whit your business may be; it may be hon- 
orable, legitimate, and all that, and you think you must attend to it 
first; bear in mind that God tells every ma’ to seek His kingdom 
first. 

There is another class of people who are blind. They don’t care 
so much about riches; they are not very ambitious to become rich; 
they don’t spend their lives in business matters. They are politi- 
cally blind. They are mad over politics; they are bound up in the 
subject. There will be a great many broken hearts in a week hence. 
They have got their favorite candidate to attend to, and they can 
not find time to worship God. How little prayer there has been 
about the election. There has been a good deal of work, but how 
much praying has been done? We want a prayer to go up all over 
our land that honest men may rule us. But they are so excited 
over this election that ihey have no time to pray to the God of 
IIeaven. They are politically blind. How many men within our 
recollection who have set their hearts upon the Presidential chair 
have gone down to the grave with disappointment? They were 
poor, blind men, and the world called them great. Oh, how fool- 
ish; how blind. They didn’t seek God; they only sought one 


=) -@ -h 8802 oth be ct 


ree to OO Ft = oS 


a | 


eS. 


ley. We 
, business 
worship. 
Down 

7 mustn’t 
right and 
heir chil- 
ong ago, 
deration, 
I don’t 
his god. 
nt prince 
wd man. 
leave no 
He rose 
,and the 
m great, 
| epitaph 
says, “I 
kingdom 
‘be hon- 
end to it 
kingdom 


on’t care 
me rich; 
re politi- 
ip.in the 
k hence. 
they can 
las been 
out how 
all over 
excited 
God of 
thin our 
ial chair 
ley were 
ow fool- 
sht one 


THE BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL. 231 


thing—greatness, position, and office. They were great, brilliant, 
clever men, but when they were summoned into the presence of 
their Go¢c, what a wreck. Men so brilliant might have yielded an 
influence for the Son of God that would have lived in the hearts of 
the people for generations to come, and the streams of their good. 
ness might have flowed long after they went to Heaven. But they 
lived for the world and their works went to dust. | 
But u great number of people don’t care for business or politics; 
they only want a little money so as to get pleasure. How niany 
men have been blinded by pleasure. A lady told me in the inquiry- 
room she would like to become a Christian, but there was a ball 
coming on, and she didn’t want to become a Christian til! after the 
ball. The bali was worth more to her than the kingdom of God. 
Yor this ball she would put off the kingdom of God until it was 
over, forgetting that death might come to her in the meantime and 
usher her into the presence of God. How blind she was, and many 
are just like her. The kingdom of God is offered to them without 
money and without price, and yet for a few days of pleasure they 
forfeit Heaven and everything dear to their eternity. I was talking 
to a lady who, with the tears running down her cheeks, upon my 
speaking to her, said, “ The fact” is, if I become a Christian I have 
to give up all pleasure. I can not go toa theatre ; I can not read 
any novels; I can not play cards. I have nothing else to do.” Oh, 
what blindness! Look at the pleasure of being taken into the 
Lord’s vineyard, and the joy and luxury of working for Him and 
leading souls to Christ. And people with their eyes wide open 
would rather bend down to the god of pleasure than become a 
Christian. 

Then there is a god of fashion. How many women just devote 
their lives to it. They want to see the last bonnet, the last cloak, 
the last dress. They can’t think of anything else. Saida lady to 
me, “I 2m always thinking of fashion; it don’t matter if I get 
down on my knees to pray, I am always thinking of a new dress.” 
You may laugh at this, but it’s true. Pleasure in the ball-room 
and fashion is the god of a great many people. Oh, that we may 
lift our eyes to something nobler, Suppose you don’t have so 
many dresses and give something to the poor, you will have some- 
thing then which will give you joy and comfort that will last you 
always. I pity the man or woman who lives for the day like the 
butterfly—those whose minds are fixed upon fashion and pleasure, 


232 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


and have no time to look to their perishing soul. A good many 
people don’t know they are hid. Look at that young man. You 
call him a fast young man. He has got a salary of $1,000, and it 
costs him $3,000 to live. Where does he get the money? Where 
does it come from? His father can not give it to him, because he 
is poor. The employer begins to get suspicious. “I only give 
him $1,000 a year and he is living at the rate of $3,000.” By and 
by he looks into his account and finds it overdrawn. Thus he is 
fuined—character blasted. Oh, how many are of this stamp in 
Chicago! It is only a question of time. How many young men 
have we got just living beyond their income—taking money out of 
their employer’s drawer. They say, “Well, I am going to the 
theatre to-night, and I will just take a dollar; will put it back 
next week.” But when next week comes, he hasn't put it back, 
and takes another dollar. He has taken two dollars now. He keeps 
on drawing, drawing, drawing, when by and by it all comes out. He 
loses his place; don’t get any letters of recommendation, and the 
poor man is ruined. My friends, this is not a description of an iso- 
lated case. This class is all over the country. I wish I could send 
you the letters I get about just such cases. I got one the other day 
from a young mother with a family of beautiful children. She told 
me how happy they had lived—husband, wife, and children—and 
how one night her husband came home excited, his face white with 
terror, and said, “I’ve got to fly from justice. Good-bye.” He has 
gone from her, and she said it seemed as if she could die; her hus- 
band disgraced and starving ; couldn’t get anything todo. Her 
cry seemed to be, “ Help, help me.” Is not the country full of 
such cases? Is it not blindness and madness for men to go on in 
this way? If any one is here to-night following in the way of these 
men, I pray God your eyes may be opened before you are led to 
death and ruin. 

I noticed a young man while I was coming down to-night pretty 
blind. I will just read what Solomon says about him: 

“‘ My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee. 

“ Keep my commandments, and live; and my law as the apple 
of thine eye. 

“Bind them upon thy fingers, write them upon the table of thy 
heart. 

“Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister, and call understanding 
thy kinswoman. 


5. 


\d many 
n, You 
>, and it 
Where 
ause he 
ily give 
By and 
1s he is 
amp in 
ng men 
- out of 
to the 
it back 
it back, 
le keeps 
ut. He 
and the 
"an iso- 
ild send 
her day 
she told 
‘n—and 
ite with 
He has 
ner hus- 
» Her 
full of 
ro on in 
of these 
> led to 


| pretty 


th thee. 
> apple 


of thy 


randing 


THE BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL. 233 


“That they may keep thee from the strange woman, from the 
stranger which flattereth with her words. 

“For at the window of my house I looked through my case- 
ment. 

“And beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the 
youths, a young man void of understanding, 

“ Passing through the street near her corner: and he went the 
way to her house. 

“In the twilight in the evening, in the black and dark night, 

“ And behold, there met him a woman with the attire of a harlot, 
and subtle of heart. 

“(She is loud and stubborn; her feet abide not in her house ; 

“ Now is she without, now in the streets, and lieth in wait at 
every corner.) 

“So she caught him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face 
said unto him, 


“TI have peace offerings with me; this day have I paid my 
vows. 


“Therefore came I forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy 
face, and I have found thee. 

“T have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry, with carved 
works, with fine linen of Egypt. 

“I have perfumed my bed with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon. 

“Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning; let us 
solace ourselves with loves. 

“For the good man is not at home, he is gone a long journey. 

“He hath taken a bag of money with him, and will come home 
at the day appointed. 

“With her much fair speech she caused him to yield, with the 
flattering of her lips she forced him. 

“ He goeth after her straightway, as an ox goeth to the slaughter, 
or a fool to the correction of the stocks ‘ 

“Till a dart strike through his liver; as a bird hasteth to the 
snare, and knoweth not it is for his life. 

“Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children, and attend to 
the words of my mouth. 

“Let not thy heart decline to her ways, go not astray in her 
paths. 


“ For she hath cast down many wounded ; yea, many strong men 
have been slain by her. 


J 


r Lg 


~ 234 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


“Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of 
death.” 

My friends, I don’t know a much quicker way down to ruin than 
that ; I don’t know a much quicker way down to hell than that. How 
many young men in this city—in this audience-—have been led 
astray by the harlot. A young man comes up from the country 
who has left a mother and sister pure as angels, and by and by news 
reaches them that he is on his way to hell by this road. I beg of 
you, young men, don’t take this way. May God give you strength 
and power to say, “ By the grace of God I will not.” 

How many young men are there who spend their time in the 
saloons of this city. I always dread an election day—I generally 
see so many young men beastly drunk. They are led away, and 
that is another quick road down to hell. May the young men see 
the folly of this, and on that day stand firm. May God open your 
eyes. How many young men are there whose characters have 
been blasted by strong drink. How many brilliant men in the 
Chicago bar have gone down to death by it. Some of the noblest 
Statesmen, some of the most brilliant orators and men of all pro- 
fessions have been borne down to the drunkard’s grave. May God 
open your eyes to show the folly of tampering with strong drink. 
Now, many men say, “I am not going down to the grave of a 
drunkard.” They think they have strength to stop when they like. 
When it gets hold there is nothing within us by which we can save 
ourselves. He alone can give you power to resist the cup of temp- 
tation; He alone can give you power to overcome its influence, 
if you only will believe Him. The god of this world has been try- 
ing to make you believe that man can do it himse!f, and Christ will 
have nothing to do with him. The god of this world is a liar, I 
come with authority to tell you—I don’t care how far gone you 
are; don’t care how bestial you may be—that the Son of God can 
and will save you if you only believe Him. If there is one here to- 
night under the power of strong drink, come to-night. We lift up 
our voice to warn you. 

Look at that man in a boat on Niagara River. He is only about 
a mile from the rapids. A man on the bank shouts to him, “ Young 
man, young man, the rapids are not far away, you'd better pull for the 
shore.” “You attend to your own business; I will take care of my- 
self,” he replies. Like a great many people here, and ministers, too, 
they don’t want any evangelist here—don’t want any help, however 


EE aA TD SIE Toba sacri tares pass 


S. 


nbers of 


1in than 
t. How 
een led 
country 
by news 
beg of 
treneth 


/in the 
snerally 
ay, and 
nen see 
on your 
‘s have 
in the 
noblest 
ull pro- 
ay God 
drink. 
re ofa 
2»y like. 
n save 
temp- 
luence, 
en try- 
ist will 
lat, 
le you 
»d can 
ere to- 
lift up 


about 
Young 
or the 
of my- 
s, too, 
wever 


THE BLIND WHOM CHRIST WOULD HEAL, 235 


great the danger ahead. On he goes, sitting coolly in his boat. Now 
he has got a little nearer, and a man from the bank of the river sees 
his danger, and shouts: “ Stranger, you’d better pull for the shore; if 
you go further you'll be lost. You can be saved now if you pull in,” 
“Mind your business, and you'll have enough to do. I'll take care 
of myself.” Like a good many men, they are asleep to the danger 
that’s hanging over them while they are in the current. And I say, 
drinking young man, don’t think you are standing still. You 
are in the current, and if you don’t pull fora rock of safety, you 
will go over the precipice. On he goes. I can see him in the boat 
laughing at the danger. A man on the bank is looking at him, and 
he lifts up his voice and cries, “ Stranger, stranger, pull for the shore; 
if you don’t you will lose your life,” and the young man laughs at 
him—mocks him. That is the way with hundreds in Chicago. If 
you go to them and point out their danger they will jest and joke at 
you. By and by he says: “I think I hear the rapids—yes, I hear 
them roar;” and he seizes his oars and pulls with all his strength, 
but the current is too great, and nearer and nearer he is drawn on 
to that abyss, until he gives one unearthly scream, and over he goes, 
Ah, my friends, this is the case with hundreds in this city. They 
are in the current of riches, of pleasure, of drink, that will take them 
to the whirlpool. Satan has got them blindfolded, and they are on | 
their road to the bottomless pit. 

We hear men say in a jesting way, “Oh, we are sowing our wild 
oats; we will get over this by and by.” I have seen men reap their 
wild oats. It’s all well enough sowing, but when it comes to the 
reaping it’s a different thing. I remember I went home one night 
and found all the people in alarm. They had seen a man coming 
running down the street, and as he approached the house he gave 
an unearthly roar, and, in terror, they had bolted the door. He came 
right up to my door, and, instead of ringing the bell, just tried to 
push the door in. They asked him what he wanted, and he told 
them he wanted to see me. They said I was at the meeting, and 
away he ran, and they could hear him groan as he disappeared. I 
was coming along North Clark street, and he shot past me like an 
arrow. But he had seen me, and turned and seized me by the arm, 
saying eagerly, “Can I be saved to-night? The devil is coming to 
take me to hell at one o'clock to-night.” “My friend, you are mis- 
taken.” I thought the man was sick. But he persisted that the devil 
had come and laid his hand upon him, and told him he might have 


ne ee 


236 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


till one o’clock, and said he: “Won't you go up to my room and 
sit with me?” I got some men up to his room to see to him. At 
one o'clock the devils came into that room, and all the men in that 
room could not hold him. He was reaping what he had sown. 
When the angel of Death came and laid his cold hand on him, oh, 
how he cried for mercy—how he beseeched for pardon. Ah, yes, 
young men, you may say, in a laughing and jesting way, you are 
sowing your wild oats, but the reaping time is coming. May God 
show you, to-night, what folly it is—what a miserable life you are 
leading. May we lift our heart here to the God of all grace, so 
that we may see our lost and ruined condition if we do not come 
to Him. Christ stands ready and willing to save—to save to-night 
all those who are willing to be saved. Let us pray. 


im, eae 


pak Ry Ee Se Ne OA LP eM HY oe 


ou are 
y God 
DU are 
ce, so 
come 
-night 


XXVIIL 


ON SEEKING AND FINDING [HE LORD. 


ISAIAH lv. 6, 7: “Seek ye the Lord while He may be found, call ye upon Him 


while He is near: Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his | 


thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord and He will have mercy upon him, 
and to our God, for He will abundantly pardon,” 


HAVE been talking about God—as to how God is seeking for 
I the sinner. To-night I want to turn the question, and talk of 
man’s state. Under this text man is told to seek the Lord. 
“Seek ye the Lord while He may be found, and call ye upon Him/ 
while He is near.” N ow, I have learned this in dealing with men, 
that there isn’t much hope of being saved until they seek the Lord + 
with ali their heart. One reason that men do not find the Lord is. 
that they don’t seek for Him with all their heart. Very often you. 
meet people who say, “ Well, I don’t know as I have any objections: 
to be saved.” Well, I don’t know as I ever knew of any one that | 
found Christ that had that spirit. You have got to have something | 
beyond that. I said to a man some time ago, that I could tell him : 
the day he was going to be converted. I said to him, “I can tell 
you when you will be converted, although I ain’t a prophet, and ' 
although I don’t pretend to be a prophet.” “Well,” he said, “I. 
would like to have you tell me that, for I would like to know my-) 
self.” “Well,” I said, “you shall find Him when you seek for Him, 
and search for Him with all your heart.” In the twenty-ninth 
chapter of Jeremiah, thirteenth verse, it says, “And ye shall 
seek Me and find Me when ye shall search for Me with all your 
heart.” I wish men would seek for Christ as they seek for wealth. { iy 
I wish men would seek for Christ as they seek for position in this/ i 
world. Man prepares his feast, anc there is a great rush to see who} i 
will get there first. God prepares His feast, and the excuses come! #2 
in, “I pray thee have me excused.” Suppose I should state that. if 
last night a man came into this place and lost a very valuable pres. 
ent; something he valued a great deal more than the value of the’ | | 
(237) 


238 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


present, because it was the gift of his dying mother. Suppose he 
‘should send up a note to me saying, “Mr. Moody, I lost last night 
a very valuable diamond, and I am willing to give any one that 
can find that diamond twenty thousand dollars.” Iam sure there 
_ would be a great search. How many do you suppose would be 
_ seeking for that diamond? I would not give much for my sermon, 
Aman might say, “I am poor, and if I could find that diamond, 
wouldn’t that take me out of poverty and out of want?” You 
-wouldn’t wait until I got through my sermon, but you would be 
looking down at your feet and under the benches. My friend, isn’t 
_the salvation of your soul worth more than all the diamonds that 
‘the world has seen? Isn’t it worth more than the whole world 
itself, and isn’t it the best thing you can do to seek the Lord ? 

Not orily that, but it is a command to seek the Lord while He 
may be found, and call ye upon Him while He is near. It is just 
as much a command for you to seek the Lord as it is that you 
sha’n’t swear. It is just as much a command as it is that you 
sha’n’t steal. It is a command. There are a great many com- 
mandments. Some people have got an idea that there are only 
ten commandments in the Bible. There are thousands of them, 
and this is one of them. It is the voice of the Lord Himself. 
Seek Him with all your heart. Now just see how men seek for 
wealth. When the California fever—the gold fever—broke out, 
_. men left their wives, and left their children, and left their parents 
and their homes and luxury, and went out to the Pacific coast and 
slept out in the open air and under tents, and endured want. What 
for? That they might get wealth. They could not make too great 
a sacrifice to get wealth, and when I was out there in business I was 
amazed when news came that gold was found one hundred miles 
away. They would pack up, men, women, and children, and away 
they would go. A whole town would move just to seek wealth. 
Then they went out to Australia in the time of the gold fever in 
that country. They were willing to make almost any sacrifice. 
Look and see how these politicians work. Let one of them be 
nominated for alderman or some position under the government, 
and how they will seek your vote. They will come around to your 
house early in the morning just to seek your vote. They don’t 
sleep at night; they are wiiling to do everything to accomplish 
their purpose. 

Let us go and learn a lesson from that. If there is no reality in 


— = Pr ee. 


pees 


ON SEEKING AND FINDING THE LORD, 


239 
roae ‘fie this gift of God, if it is alla myth, then let us dismiss it. If it is. 
t night true, and we can find the Lord by seeking Him, let us seek Him. ? 
te that A man will go around this world for his health ; he will cross oceans’ 
e there and climb steep mountains, just to get his health. Thanks be to. 
ald: Be God, you haven’t got to go around the world to get salvation. i 
erinan: You haven’t got to go out of this building to find salvation, « Ye 
amond, shall find Me when ye shall search for Me with all your heart.” 
ran Now, there isn’t anything a man values as he does his life. You 
wuld be take a man on a wrecked vessel; that vessel is going down; that 
d, isn’t man may be worth a million, and the only way he can save his life 
de elat is to give up that million—he would do it as quick asa flash. Now, : 
- world the gift of God is eternal life; it is life without end. Christ says, 
1? “What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his _ 
ifle Be own soul?” Iwould like to ask this audience a question. Is it ! 

is just true that a man can find the Lord here at once? Now won't you 
at you just stop and think a moment? Young man, do you believe that 
at you the Lord can be found here? If He can be found, why not seek 
com. for Him, and why not look? If it is true that the Lord is worth 
re only more than the whole world, and He can be found by secking, why ) 
them, not seek for Him—not with half a heart, but with all your heart ? 
Hmuelé, I read, a number of years ago, of a vessel that was wrecked. 
sale fey The life-boats were not enough to take all the Passengers. A man 
ce out, who was swimming in the water, swam up to one of the life-boats 
parents that were full and seized it with his hand. They tried to prevent 
nat and him, but the man was terribly in earnest about saving his life, and 
What one of the men in the boat just drew a sword and cut off his hand, 
o great But the man didn’t give up; he reached out the other hand. He 
at was was terribly in earnest ; he wanted to save his life. But the man in 
1 miles the boat took the sword and cut off his other hand. But the man 
d away did not give up. He swam up to the boat and seized it with, his 
vealth, : teeth. Some of them said, “Let us not cut his head off,” and they 
ever in drew him in. That man was terribly in earnest, and, my friends, if 
crifice: you want to get into the kingdom of God you will seek your soul’s 
em be salvation now. Be ir earnest once as for your life, and seek the 
nment, a kingdom of God with all yo. heart, and-you shall find it. It isa 
© your geod time to seek the Lord while the Spirit of God is abroad in the 
» don’t 4 community. I contend that this is a proof that the Lord can be 
mplish found here now, because I don’t believe there has been a meeting 
but that some have found Him. Last night a brother came to my 
lity in & private room and called me, and said, “I want to introduce you to 


ra 


Ba 240 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


some one,” and there stood a wife, her face lit up with joy. She 
wanted to tell me that her husband was converted. She said, “I 
have been praying for him these twenty years, and he has found the 
Lord to-night.” “Seek ye the Lord while He may be found, call 
ye upon Him while He is near.” 

How many men were there that were converted in the great revi- 
val of ’57 and ’58, and yet some people cry out against revivals— 
they had rather be converted at any time than during a revival. It 
was not long after the revival of ’57 and ’s8 that the nation was 
deluged with blood, and half a million of men laid down their lives. 
Wasn’t it the best thing they could have done, to seek the Lord 
then? It was my privilege to be in the army at that time; I was 
by their cots when I saw them die. I never saw a man all through 
the war that regretted that he became a Christian. The best 
thing they could do was to call upon the Lord. It was a great 
calamity, and came right home to the heart of the nation. We are 
just now, I am afraid, going to have some of this sad work. I be- 

_ lieve that we are even now on the eve of just such work. I believe 
that judgments are going to happen upon this nation again; grace 
always precedes judgments. A great revival is in progress all over 
the country. So there was in Jerusalem a day of grace, but the 
opportunity was spurned. Jerusalem and the country took no heed 
to their ways, and soon Titus appeared with a great army and be- 
sieged it, and more than one million, one hundred thousand people 
perished. Those men rejected the Gospel and the Word of God. 


ma 


pei 


| ,And now we hear Jesus calling to repentance throughout all the 


land. It is time, my friends, to be up and doing. Save yourselves, - 


and then plead with your friends and bring them to Jesus. Tell 
them the glad tidings and bring them into the fold of the Good 
Shepherd. If we are faithful now and watch for souls, we shall 
|see in every town and city thousands who will accept Christ. It is 
‘time for us to go out and say to our friends and relatives, “ Come 
in, the Lord is coming; the Lord is at work. Jesus of Nazareth 
‘is passing through the city. Let us call upon Him while He may 


SS = fA 2 p= 


~~ 
Ye 


y. She 
aid. 1 
und the 
ind, call 


sat revi- 
vivals— 
val. It 
ion was 
‘ir lives. 
e Lord 
; I was 
hrough 
1e best 
a great 
We are 

I be- 
believe 
; grace 
all over 
nut the 
10 heed 
ind be- 
people 
»f God. 


all the 


rselves, - 


Tell 
- Good 
e shall 

It is 
‘Come 
zareth 
e may 


i 


ON SEEKING AND FINDING THE LORD 241 
be found ; let us implore Him to save us while He is near.” The 
very text implies that the time is come when the world should throw 
off its sloth and wake to repentance. The text implies that God is 
near and pleads with His people; that the time and the Son of God | 
are near now. Isn’t it true that He is seeking for you when you 
seek for Him? Seek, then, the Lord while He may be found; call 
upon Him while He is near. Mr. Sankey sang about those virgins. 
We read that five sought to gain admission too late. There was a 
time that they might have called upon tlte Lord; there was a time 
when, had they sought, they would have found Him. But they 
slumbered and slept until it was too late. Then they cried, but the 
door was shut—the day of grace was over. And so it may be the 
same withyou. The day of grace may be drawing to a close with 
you too. It may be that I am ‘speaking to many here for the last 
time. This may be the last year they may have on earth. The’ 
prophecy may be true in regard to you and me—“ This year thou 
shalt die.” Is it, or isn’t it a time to seek the kingdom of God, to 
seek His face while Christ is calling upon us to repent, while the 
Spirit of God is moving upon our hearts? Isn’t it the very best 
time to seek the Lord while He may be found? Those antediluviar: 
people called upon Noah to open the door of the ark and take them 
in. But it was too late. God will shut the door against you, too. 
You will soon be without hope. Undoubtedly those men, women, and 
children called upon God to save them on that terrible day; but the 
day of grace was over forthem. The day of wrath then had come, and 
the day of judgment had fallen upon them. Oh, who shall stand 
on the day of wrath? When the Lord shall shake the earth, what 
shall then save the souls of men? The day of grace is here. 
Save yourselves; wash yourselves in His precious blood and be re- 
deemed. Oh, this very hour, let there be a cry for salvation. In 
the tenth chapter of Romans it is written, “ For whosoever shall 
call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.” I heard of a man 

away off in the mining district, who had wandered from his house 

and got lost. In that region the ground is full of holes, and some 
pretty deep ones, too. But it was night, and he could not make his 
way along. Had he undertaken to move on, there were the holes 
before him, and any step might precipitate him into a cavern. He 

did not know what to do, and he could not stira step. At last he 

commenced to cry out, “ Help, help, help,” and his cry was heard ; 


they came with lanterns and brought him safely out of his danger 
16 


242 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


The depths of sin are surrounding you; the next step may land 

you into darkness and death. Old man, do you hear? Young lady, 

do not laugh at it. Don’t make light of this warning voice. ‘Seek 

the Lord while He may be found, call upon Him while He is 
near.” 

Let me warn you against the next verse. A great many people 

put the seventh verse ahead of the sixth. “Let the wicked forsake 

his way and the unrighteous man his thoughts.” If ye would be 

saved, call upon God first, and then God will give you help, and by 

| His power you can then turn away from sin, and from your evil 

| thoughts, and will get pardon. But you haven’t power to give up 

- your evil courses until you call upon God, and until He gives you 

strength. After you have called upon the Lord, you must receive 

Him when He comes; you must make room for Him. He has 

gone to make room for you, and you must make room for Him. I 

once found a man in the inquiry-room who was puzzled to know 

how there would be room for the saved in Heaven. I tell you, my 

friends, as I told him, you needn’t borrow trouble on that account. 

If He finds He will not have room for you or me, or for any of His 

chosen people in the Heaven that He now has, He will. make 

another. Can He not make another Heaven by a word? Can He 

not make another place of happiness as easy as He made the 

present one? The Lord God of Heaven can make plenty of room 

for you. You must not give that as an excuse. The Lord can 

make all the room He wants. Now, my friends, let me ask you this 

fston: In all candor, why don’t you settle the question now? 

—— Will the Son of God ever have more power? Will He be more 

/ready to use it for your salvation at any other time than now? 

| Hasn’t He said that, “All power is given unto Him both in Heaven 

and on earth?” Has He not the power to save every one here? Is 

_ He not able to save unto the uttermost? Hasn’t He the power, 

_ and hasn’t He the will? Hasn’t He said, “As I live, saith the Lord, 

| I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. Oh, turn ye! turn 

_ ye! Why should ye die, oh House of Israel?” If you turn now 

* and call upon Him, He will forgive your sins; He will forgive every 

one all his sins, no matter how many they are. He will save you, 

Mif you truly repent and write your name in th Book of Life. But 

you must call upon Him with the heart. 
As Spurgeon remarks, the Bible does not say you must have new 
heads, or that you must seek Him with your head; but it says you 


fed ae £8 ee ee ee oe 


of< A. 


tet 


tc 


RS. 


may land 
ung lady, 
» “Seek 
ile He is 


1y people 
‘d forsake 
would be 
p, and by 
your evil 
O give up 
ives you 
st receive 

He has 
Him. I 
to know 
you, my 
account. 
1y of His 
ill. make 

Can He 
aade the 
of room 
Lord can 
you this 
on now? 
be more 
an now ? 
. Heaven 
here? Is 
e€ power, 
he Lord, 
ve! turn 
urn now 
ve every 
ave you, 
fe. But 


lave new 
says you 


ON SEEKING AND FINDING THE LORD. 243 
must have new hearts, and must seek Him with your heart. If it 
meant head it would have said so. Seek ye the Lord, therefore, 
with your hearts, and Christ will enter into your hearts and not into 
your heads. Give Christ your whole heart, and He will enter into 
it. If your heart is all right, your head will be also. For out of the 
heart proceeds all evil; let that reservoir of sin be broken up and 
emptied, and all the rest of you will come around right. Is there 
one here to-night who will not cry out, “God be merciful to me, a 
sinner!” “Tord, have mercy upon me!” Why not call upon 
Him? Why not seek the Lord now? Why not make up your 
mind that you will not leave the room until the great question of 
eternity has been settled? Don’t put it off until it is too late. 
Don’t neglect salvation. Some people say, “Why, what have I 
done?” I tell you, if you have done nothing but neglect salvation, 
you will go to death and ruin. Look at the man on the river in his; 
boat. He is not rowing; he is making no effort ; but he has his) 
hands folded, and is letting his boat drift down the stream toward). 
the rapids. Thecurrent is taking him on without any help from him, . 
He will soon go over the rapids into the jaws of death. All he has | 

to do is to sit still and be lost. Yes, I tell you, if you don’t actually ; 

do any sin, yet if you neglect Christ, and neglect salvation as a gift | 
from God, you must perish. Salvation is a free gift; conversion 

begins at some particular minute, although the Chriscian’s life is a 

growth. Many who have attended these meetings have found 

Christ. Two young ladies went home a few evenings ago and 

woke their mother to tell her they had found the Lord. Then 

came the question: “When can I be saved?” There i. only one 
word in God’s book about it, and that word is, “Now.” If any one 
put it off for a year, he might be dead and damned before that. It 

was a good time to seek Christ in a revival. It’s hard to convert a 

man in a dead church, away from where the 

working. 
While we were in Euro 


Spirit is moving and 


pe, a man came into one of the meetings, 
in the coal region, and when the audience was dismissed he was seen 
to remain, standing against a post. One of the elders approached 
him and asked why he remained. He said he had made up his 
mind not to leave that church until he found the kingdom of God. 
The elder remained with him for a long time, and at last the miner 
made his surrender. The next day he went into the coal pit, and 
before night the mine fell in and buried him. He was taken from the 


244 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAY'ERS, 


ruins just before life became extinct, and was heard to say, “It was 
a good thing; I settled it last night.” Wasn’t it a good thing? 
Young lady, what say you? Young man, what do you think? 
When Mr. Sankey and I wete in the north of England, I was 
( preaching one evening, and before me sat a lady who was a skeptic. 
When I had finished, I asked all who were anxious to remain. 
Nearly all remained, herself among the number. I asked her if she 
was a Ch.istian, and she said she was not, nor did she care to be. I 
prayed for her there. On inquiry, I learned that she was a lady of 
good social position, but very worldly. She continued to attend 
_the meetings, and in a week after 1 saw her in tears. After the 
sermon I went to her and asked if she was of the same mind as 
before. She replied that Christ had come to her and she was 
happy. Last autumn I had @ note from her husband saying she was 

( dead, that her love for the Master had continually increased. When 
I read that note, I felt paid for crossing the Atlantic. She worked 
sweetly after her conversion, and was the means of winning many 
of her fashionable friends to Christ. Oh, may you seek the Lord 
while He may be found, and may you call upon Him while you may. 


RS, 


y, “It was 
od thing? 
su think ? 
nd, I was 
a skeptic. 
O remain. 
her if she 
-to be. I 
a lady of 
to attend 
After the 
* mind as 
i she was 
ie she was 
d. When 
1e worked 
ing many 
the Lord 
you may. 


XXIX, 
A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUGHT HOME, 


MAT. vi, 33: “But seek ye first the kingdom of God.’ 
it got two texts to which I 


want to call your attention. The . 


John and part of the thirty-eighth 
vetse. It was one day after He had been baptized by John, 
about four o'clock in the afternoon, when, as He was going along, 


He saw John with two of his disciples, and he said, “ Behold the 
Lamb of Ged.” Those 


seek ye?” To which they said, “ Rabbi, where dwellest Thou?” 
and He answered, “Come and see.” These words are recorded by 
John as having been uttered by his Master: “What scek ye?” and 
I thought I would like this question Passed around and have cvery 
man and woman assembled here ask themselves, “ What seek. I?” 
“What brought me here?” In the days of Christ many sought 


Him just fora sign. The Jews were constantly asking Him for a 
sign. Others came just out of sole curiosit 
loaves and fishes, and He accused them of this, 
to-day who are co 
themselves: 


There is a class 
ntinually after the loaves and fishes. They ask 


“ How much 
will we gain by becoming a disciple of Jesus Christ?” 


and as soon as they found that He had come 


temporal kingdom, they turned from Him, Judas 
was one of that kind. Others sought Him for temporal aid; they 
wanted to get: rid of their burdens and troubles, in this world, which 
bore down uyon them. Well, that was a good motive. That is 


what we want people to do. When they once get His aid and coms 
(245) 


246 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


fort they will never leave Him. Others wanted to entangle Him in 
conversation so that they could get something against Him between 
the chief priests in order to put Him to death and get rid of Him. 
They just wanted to get into a discussion with Him—some of them 
—imerely for the sake of discussion ; and there are many of this class 
around us to-day. They want, immediately, to get into a discussion 
and investigate who God is, and find out all about Him, and where 
Heaven is. Whenever they saw Him they wanted to get into an 
argument. But how quick He silenced those men, If they asked 
Him one question, His answer made them never ask another. But, 
thank God, there were some who sought God for what He was. 
To-night I would like to ask this assembly—bring it right down 
to you— What brought you here to-night?” That is the question 
I would like to press upon you. “ What brought you here to-night?” 
Let it be a personal question. Let it go tothe conscience of every 
one of you here. Now, young, lady yonder, “ What brought you 
here to-night?” Young man over there, “ What brought you to 
the Tabernacle to-night? What is your motive for coming here?” 
It is interesting, sometimes, to hear the young converts get up and 
tell the motives that brought them first to the meetings. I have 
had young converts come to me and say: “ Mr. Moody, I came to 
the meeting to make light of it—to make sport of it; but, thank 
the Lord, He opened our eyes.’ One man told me, in Phila- 
delphia, that his motive was to come and see the empty chairs. One 
of his friends had told him that he had been at the hall, and that it 
was the most wonderful sight to see ten thousand empty chairs. So 
he thought he would just come and see this sight, and he was about 
the first man in the building that night. Thank God, he got caught, 
and the Gospel took him. I suppose some here to-night have no 
higher motive for coming. Some think it would be a wonderful 
sight to see so many people gathered together, and have just come 
to see the crowd. They didn’t know anything about the Gospel; 
don’t care anything about the sermon; they have just come to see 
the crowd. Thank God you have, even with that motive, for maybe 
you'll get caught. But what brought you here? Some say, “ My 
mother has been very anxious that I should come here. She has 
been bothering me for weeks, and I’ve just come. I know she is 
praying for me.” Perhaps some have come owing to the letter of 
some relative or friend. A man told me, last week, that in a letter 
a young convert in London had asked him to come to these meet- 


\ 


= 


aad a -~ O08 = 2&¢ © © = 


AO er a 


S. 


e Him in 
between 
of Him. 
e of them 
this class 
liscussion 
nd where 
t into an 
ey asked 
ier. But, 
e was. 
cht down 
question 
night?” 
: of every 
ught you 
it you to 
g here?” 
et up and 
I have 
camc to 
ut, thank 
in Phila- 
airs. One 
nd that it 
hairs. So 
vas about 
t caught, 
‘have no 
wonderful 
ust come 
> Gospel ; 
ne to see 
or maybe 
say, “My 
She has 
ow she is 
letter of 
in a letter 
ese meet- 


A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUGHT HOME, 247 


ings. He said he had determined to receive no blessings from the 
meetings, and he would just come out of curiosity; but, thank God, 
he got caught in the Gospel-net. Even if you have come to the 
meeting with no higher motive than to satisfy a friend, I am glad of 
it, and I hope that God will catch you here to-night. Some have 
come only to hear the singing. We don’t care if they only are 
reached ; we only want to catch men. We would stop preaching 
if we could sing the Gospel down to the hearts of men. Some have 
come for no other motive than to be seen. They have got a new 
bonnet—they want people to see it. You may laugh at this, but a 
good many have come for no other purpose. Let the question come 
to you, to every one here, “ What seek ye?” And let me say to 
those who have come to seek the kingdom of God, if you have come 
for that motive, the God of Heaven will be found here. Grant that 
there are hundreds who have come here with no other motive—with 
no other desire—only to be saved. 

You remember me reading a passage from the prophecies of 
Isaiah: “Seek the Lord while He may be found;” and I want to 
couple it with another in Matthew: “ But seek ye first the kingdom 
of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added 
unto you.” A man asked me the other day: “ How many com- 
mandments are there?” I said I didn’t know. “You a preacher, 
and don’t know how many commandments there are?” he replied; 
“you'd better give up preaching till you find out.” ‘ How many 
are there?’ ‘ Why, ten.” “ Ah, indeed; just turn over to the 
New Testament, and you will find many more.” I’ve got one here 
that is just as much a commandment as any given by Moses, and 
if you go out of this hall without seeking the kingdom of God in 
the face of this commandment, you are trampling the kingdom of 
God under your feet; you are disobeying the voice of God; you 
are trampling this commandment. “Seek first the kingdom of God 
and His righteousness,” and then we are told that “all these things 
shall be added unto you.” <A great many people wonder why it is 
that they don’t prosper, and are not blessed in the world. It is no 
wonder tome. The wonder is that God blesses them as He does. 
If I had a child in constant rebellion toward me, I wouldn’t want 
that child to prosper until that spirit of rebellion would be swept 
away, because prosperity would ruin him. Look at the tens of 
thousands of men who come up to Chicago only for the purpose of 
getting money —trampling this commandment continually under 


248 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


r 


their feet. Their first consideration is money. God says, “Seek: 


first the kingdom of God.” Man says, “ The most important thing 
to seek is position, wealth, temporal blessings first, and after I get 
these blessings I will seek the kingdom of God.” “Seek first the 
kingdom of God’”’—that is what God says—“and all these things 
shall be added.” Now, I have lived in Chicago most of the last 
twenty years. I came here in 1856, and during those twenty years I 
have been a member of three different churches, and during all that 
time I have not found a member of these churches who has lived a 
consistent Christian life.who has ever come to want. Now, mark 
me: Ihave never known one Christian man or woman who has 
been a consistent member of the Christian church who has ever come 
to want. I will tell you why so many men come to want. They 
are living in rebellion to God; they have turned their backs to 
God. They are living ignoring Him and His kingdom, not caring 
anything at all for Him. I can imagine some of you saying, “It is 
easy for you, Mr. Moody, to say this. If you had a family in want 
and were out of employment-—had nothing to do—you would talk 
differently ; you would talk about something else.” I would talk 
about nothing of the kind. If I did, I would have to reverse 
God’s word. If there is a young man out of a situation—can not pay 
his board bill, whose outlook is very dark indeed, may be in actual 
want, and struggling against poverty, I say to that young man, 
“Seek first the kingdom of God”’—press into the kingdom of God 
before you do anything else. No one has ever seen a true child of 
God starving in the street; no one ever saw a child of God coming 
to the poor-house. Suppose you did come to the poorhouse. I 
would rather go into the kingdom of Heaven through the poor- 
house than go down to hell in a golden chariot ; I would rather be 
poor and lean in the world’s goods than lose my place in the king- 
dom of Heaven. 

I can imagine some of you saying, “It is all good enough to say 
this; if you were struggling in poverty you would think differently. 
You have no sympathy with us.” If you are in want to-night, my 
friend, I tell you I sympathize with you; I could weep with you. 
But I tell you the first thing to do is to seek the kingdom of God. 
I have known what it was to struggle against poverty, andI ama 
thousand times more in sympathy with that class of people than 
with those who have got abundance. My dear friends, His words 
are first to seek the kingdom of God, and “all these things will be 


Sr Ff @ A MY we ™ a 


S. 


» “Seek: 


nt thing 
er I get 
first the 
> things 
she last 
years I 
all that 
lived a 
v, mark 
vho has 
er come 
They 
acks to 
caring 
pets 
in want 
ild talk 
Id talk 
reverse 
not pay 
1 actual 
g man, 
of God 
hild of 
coming 
use. [ 
> poor- 
ther be 
e king- 


| to say 
rently. 
ht, my 
h you. 
f God. 
Iama 
e than 
; words 
will be 


A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUGHT HOME, 249 
added.” He will provide for you if you only obey His command. 
ment. He will take care of all who put their trust in Him. Don’t 
He take care of the lily? We are told that Solomon, in all his 
glory, was not arrayed like one of them. Look how He takes care 
of the sparrow; and if you but depend on Him don’t you think He 
will take care of you? If your way is rugged, believe that it is out 
of love to you, so that He will reveal Himself to you. If we are 
Prosperous we do not care for His laws; we don’t care for His com- 
mandments. How many men in Chicago for whom I have worked 
to get a situation, the moment they became prosperous they have 
turned around and don’t care for the church or the Bible. They 
went on for a time, but generally came to ruin. How many men 
have been untrue to all those who have helped them up. 

Many of you are doubtless saying, “ You are very harsh and un- 
sympathetic.” Some of you young men are, I can imagine, saying, 
“Ah, you can’t appreciate my position.” My friends, I have walked 
the streets of Boston without a situation, and I know what it is to 
be without money and homeless, and I believe it was that that first 
opened my eyes to the truth. If you won't look to the loaves and 
fishes, and trust in Him, I believe within twenty-four hours you will 
be provided for. I remember a few years ago I used to think it was 
necessary for a man to preach the Gospel with a loaf in one hand 
and the Bible in the other. Dr. Chalmers used to tell the mission. 
aries never to give money at first, and I used to think he was wrong. 
But I have since found that the old Doctor was right. We got up 
the relief society, and we found that whenever we went into a house 
a man would get his eye on the loaves and fishes, and no sooner 
would he be supplied than he would look for another loaf and a 
fish, and so I came to the conclusion that a loaf of bread in one 
hand and the Gospel in the other was not right. If men are in 
want it is because they are not in the kingdom of God. Don’t 
come for the loaves and fishes, but seek Him for what He is. 

Now these two men, when they were asked, “ What seek ye?” re. 
plied with a question, “ Rabbi, where dwellest Thou?” They took 
iim as a personal Christ. The moment you seek Him in this way 
—~as a personal Christ—that moment you will find the fullness of 
Heaven flowing to your soul. You can not get a blessing till you 
come to Christ. When they went down to the kingdom of Egypt 


to get corn, they had to go to Joseph to get it. All the blessings 


of Egypt came through Joseph. He was the channel for all the 


ROARS ST a peas BE SS 


250 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


blessings to flow through. So we can not get blessings until’ we 
come to Christ—all our blessings must flow through that channel, 
and I have never seen the righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging 
bread. If a man be true to God, God will be true to him. Now, 
let me ask you again, What are you really seeking in coming here? 
What is your motive? This audience must have come here seeking 
something. Every man in Chicago is seeking something. Walk 
into the busy thoroughfares— Madison, Clark, or Washington streets 
—all these busy men and women are seeking something. The mo- 
ment a man seeks the kingdom of God with all his might, that mo- 
ment the kingdom of God is set up in his heart. Now, seek first 
that kingdom before anything else. I heard of a man who, when 
dying, told his son—what a blind man that father was—“ James, 
take my advice, and whatever you do, don’t give your time and at- 
tention to religion. I tell you, get established in business, and 
when you are established and comfortable, then you may have time 
to attend to religious matters.” ‘What a blind father to tell his son 
to lay aside the order of Heaven, to lay aside the Word of God. 
The eternal God says, “ First seek the kingdom.” What right had 
the father to tell his son to seek wealth before the kingdom of God? 
Before he got established in business death might come. Suppose 
when that man had got his wealth, and the Lord had come and said, 
“ Te-night thy soul shall be required of thee,” all his wealth would 
have to be left, and he would go to the judgment without a place in 
God’s kingdom. Before you get established in business, my friends, 
seek the kingdom of God and His righteousness. Be obedient, and 
do what He tells you. 

And let me say here, in seeking the kingdom of God don’t seek 
empty forms. We have a great many people here who are just 
living on empty forms, and that is why they see no living reality in 
the kingdom of Christ. Some have just the form without any pow- 
er. If the kingdom of God is set up in our heart, why, the Gospel 
becomes a fire in our bones, and we have to go and work for it. 
But these men who are living a mere empty form, are like that Ro- 
man soldier, who, upon finding a bag filled with precious diamonds, 
turned the diamonds out and took the bag. So some people here 
are just throwing away the cream of the Gospel and taking the 
empty form. They don’t live in the power of the Gospel, and 
therefore the world is full of struggling men, living on form and not 
on the living Christ. Don’t look to forms, but seek first the king- 


sae MP I TT er ee ana fe omnna sar en tte HH a coe AS 


S. 


until’ we 
channel, 
begging 
. Now, 
ig here? 
> seeking 
. Walk 
n streets 
The mo- 
that mo- 
eek first 
10, when 
“James, 
: and at- 
1ess, and 
ave time 
1 his son 
of God. 
ight had 
of God? 
Suppose 
and said, 
th would 
, place in 
y friends, 
ient, and 


mn’t seek 
are just 
eality in 
ny pow- 
> Gospel 
k for it. 
that Ro- 
iamonds, 
ple here 
king the 
spel, and 
. and not 
he king- 


A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUGHT HOME, 251 


dom of God. And you can not wait till I get through this sermon; 
the command is to seek the kingdom of God now. Young man, 
why not seek it now, where you sit? Let your soul go out to God 
in prayer; let your soul cry, “God save me now! Bless me with 
eternal life. Set up Thy kingdom in my heart.” Let that cry go 
up to Heaven and He will come. 
There is a story of Dr. Chalmers. A lady came to him and said, 
“Doctor, I can not bring my child to Christ. I’ve talked, and 
talked, and talked, but it’s no use.” The doctor thought she had ° 
not much skill, and said, “ Now you be quiet, and I will talk to her 
alone.” When the doctor got the Scotch lassie alone he said to 
her, “ They are bothering you a great deal with this question; now 
suppose I just tell your mother you don’t want to be talked to any 
more upon this subject for a year. How will that do?” Well, the 
Scotch lassie hesitated a little, and then said she “ didn’t think it would 
be safe to wait for a year. Something might turn up. She might die 
before then.” “ Well, that’s so,” replied the doctor ; “ but suppose we 
say six months.” She didn’t even think this would be safe,“ That’s 
so,” was the doctor's reply; “well, let’s say three months.” After a 
little hesitation, the gir! finally said, “I don’t think it would be safe 
to put it off for three months—don’t think it would be safe to put it 
off at all,” and they went down on their knees and found it. Can you 
afford to put it off for one night? A minister in the South once 
said, while addressing a meeting, “ Look around this audience; is 
there one here who dares to take the risk?” A young lady took 
her hymn-book and wrote on it, “I will take that risk.” Two weeks 
after she was a corpse. The hymn-book was found, and this was 
found on it. Can you say, “I will put it off; I can afford to take 
that risk?” Ask every true friend you have on this earth—every 
one who loves you—what you should do; not a professed friend 
whose love is not very deep, but a sincere one. Any man who 
tries to stand between you and God is your worst enemy. I don’t 
care who he is. He may be a dearly-loved relative—he may be 
your father. If he interferes between you and the kingdom of God, 
he is your worst enemy. Take a friend who really loves you. 
Young man, perhaps you are sitting beside your mother; I will 
excuse you whispering to that mother. Just ask her what you will 
do, and I yenture to say that the reply of ninety-nine mothers out 
of one hundred will be: “ My son, seek first the kingdom of God; 
first do what God tells you.” If I could ask Jesus, who sits at the 


x 


252 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


tight hand of God—if I could just say: “ Lord Jesus, speak to this 
audience in the Tabernacle to-night ; just tell them what to do.” 
Don’t you hear the voice coming away down from Heaven this 
very moment, “Seek first the kingdom of God?” If I could ask 
those redeemed saints up yonder—perhaps one of them is a loved 
mother looking at her boy here—and I say, “Your boy is in the 
gallery yonder—mother, mother, what shall I tell him?’—<‘ First 
seek the kingdom of God.’” If the redeemed saints could speak 
back to earth from that world, their cry would be, “ Seek first the 
kingdom of God.” I will go further. If I could go down to the 
spirits of the damned and put this question, a wail would come up, 
“Tell them to seek first the kingdom of God. Go'to my home and 
tell my five brothers not to come to this place of torment. Go and 
tell them to seek and be saved.” Heaven and hell would all unite 
in telling you to forego everything until you have found the king- 
dom. Will you say, “I will seek the kingdom of God first?” or 
will you say, “I will go outvof this building without seeking it?” 
Do you say you havea darling sin which you would rather indulge 
than seek the kingdom? If you area drunkard, would you rather 
have the bottle than the kingdom? If you are a gambler, would 
you rather waste your time in gaming than seek it? If you area 
libertine, would you rather spend your life in lasciviousness than look 
to your eternal happiness? If you would, go on. You area free 
agent. You can choose life or death. I set before you life and 
death, Heaven and hell. Go, seek the kingdom, if you would 
have life—press into it. You can do it if you will. When that 
nill fell in at Lawrence, the superintendent told me that three girls 
were confined in a little room, and escape for them was impossible, 
The citizens gathered round, but could not get them out. The 
flames were gradually gaining upon their place of captivity, but 
rescue was impossible. The friends kept bringing them coffee and 
tea, to make their last hours as pleasant as they could. When they 
saw their end approaching they commenced to sing that beautiful 
hymn, “ My Heavenly Home is Bright and Fair;” and when they 
came to the last verse: 
“Let others seek a home below 
Where flames destroy and waves o'erflow. 


Be mine the happier lot to own 
A heavenly mansion near the throne.” 


These were the !ast words heard from them. By the grace of 


le 


: to this 
to do.” 
en this 
uld ask 
a loved 
in the 
— First 
| speak 
irst the 
to the 
me up, 
me and 
Go and 
ll unite 
e king- 
te” or 
@ it?” 
ndulge 
rather 
would 
u area 
n look 
a free 
fe and 
would 
n that 
e girls 
ssible, 
The 
y, but 
e and 
1 they 
utiful 
1 they 


ice of 


4A FUNDAMENTAL COMMAND BROUGHT HOME, 253 


God I mean to go to the kingdom of God. I would rather have a 
place in the kingdom of God than all Chicago. I would rather have 
a place in the kingdom of God—have my name written in the Book 
of Life, and know that I am an heir of Christ ; I would rather know © 
that by and by I am sure of entering into those heavenly mansions 
—than have all the wealth of Chicago rolled at my feet. You who 
are seeking fame, position, wealth, get a hope of salvation; it is 
worth all the world. 

Let me tell, in closing, an incident. When I was a young boy— 
before I was a Christian—I was in a field, one day, with a man who 
was hoeing. He was weeping, and he told mea strange story, which 
I have never forgotten. When he left home his mother gave him 
this text: “Seek first the kingdom of God.” But he paid no heed 
to it. He said when he got settled in life, and his ambition to get 
money was gratified, it would be time enough then to seek the 
kingdom of God. He went from one village to another and got 
nothing todo. When Sunday came he went into a village church, 
and what was his great surprise to hear the minister give out the 
text, “Seek first the kingdom of God.” He said the text went 
down to his heart. He thought that it was but his mother’s prayer 
following him. Some one must have written to that minister about 
nim. He felt very uncomfortable, and when the meeting was over 
he could not get that sermon out of his mind. He went away from 
that town, and at the end of a week went into another church and 
he heard the minister give out the same text, “Seek first the king- 
dom of God.” He felt sure this time that it was the prayer of his 
mother, but he said calmly and deliberately, “No, I will first get 
wealthy.” He said he went on and did not go into a church for a 
few months, but the first place of worship he went into he heard a 
third minister preaching a sermon from the same text. He tried to 
drown, to stifle his feelings; tried to get the sermon out of his 
mind, and resolved that he would keep away from church altogether, - 
and for a few years did keep out of God’s house. “ My mother 
died,” he said, “and the text kept coming up in my mind, and I 
said I will try to become a Christian.” The tears rolled down his 
cheeks as he said, “I could not; no sermon ever touches me; my 
heart is as hard as that stone,” pointing to one in the field. I couldn’t 
understand what it was all about—it was fresh to me then. I went 
to Boston and got converted, and the first thought that came to me 
was about this man. When I got back I asked my mother, “Is Mr. 


254 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


L living in such a place?” “ Didn't I write to you about him?” 
she asked. ‘They have taken him to an insane asylum, and every 
one who goes up there he points with his finger up there and tells 
him to ‘Seek first the kingdom of God.’” There was that man with 
his eyes dull with the loss of reason, but the text had sunk into his 
soul—it had burned down deep. Oh, may the Spirit of God burn 
the text into your hearts to-night. When I got home again my 
mother told me he was in her house, and I went tosee him. Found 
him in a rocking-chair, with that vacant, idiotic look upon him. 
Whenever he saw me he pointed at me, and said, “ Young man, 
seek first the kingdom of God.” Reason was gone, but the text 
was there. When I was laying my brother down in his grave I 
could not help thinking of that poor man who was lying so near 
him, and wishing that the prayer of his mother had been heard, and 
that he had found the kingdom of God. 

Young man, young woman, won’t you seek the kingdom of God 
when He tells you to? May every man and woman assembled here 
seek the kincdom of God. 


him?” 
d every 
nd tells 
an with 
nto his 
d burn 
ain my 
Found 
n him. 
g man, 
he text 
srave I 
30 near 
rd, and 


of God 
2d here 


XXX. 


REPENTANCE. 


ACTS xvii. 30: “ But now commandeth all men everywhere to repent.” 


_ HAVE heard a number of complaints about the preaching here 
in the Tabernacle, that repentance has not been touched upon. 

The fact is, that I have never had very great success in preach- 

ing upon repentance. When I have preached it, people haven’t re- 
pented. I’ve had far more success when I’ve preached Christ’s 
goodness. But to-night I will preach about repentance, so you will 
have no more cause of complaint. I believe in repentance just as 
much as I believe in the Word of God. When John the Baptist 
came to preach to that Jewish nation, his one cry was, “Repent! 
epent!” But when Christ carne He changed it to “The blood of 
the Lamb taketh away the ‘sin of the world.” I would rather Cty, 
“The blood of the Lamb taketh away the sin of the world” than 
talk about repentance. And when Christ came we find Him say- 
ing, “‘ Repent ye,” but He soon pointed them to something higher— 
He told them about the goodness of God. It is the goodness of 
God that produces repentance. When, upon the day of Pentecost, 
they asked what to do to be saved, we find Him telling men, “ Re- 
pent, every one of you.” When Christ sent His disciples out to 
preach, two by two, we find the message He gave them to deliver 
was, “Repent ye, for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand.” It is 
cleatly preached throughout the Scriptures. There isa great deal 
of trouble among people about what repentance really is. If you 
ask people what it is, they will tell you, “It is feeling sorry.” If 
you ask a man if he repents, he will tell you, “Oh, yes; I generally 
feel sorry for my sins.” That is not repentance. It is something 
more than feeling sorry. Repentance is turning right about and 
forsaking sin. I wanted to speak on Sunday about that verse in 
Isaiah, which says, “Let the wicked forsake his way, and the un- 
righteous man his thoughts.” That is what it is. If a man don’t 
turn from his sin he won’t be accepted of God; and if righteous- 
(255) 


2%56 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


ness don’t produce a turning about—a turning from bad to good— 
it isn’t true righteousness. 
Unconverted people have got an idea that God is their enemy. 
Now, let me impress this: God hates sin with a perfect hatred; He 
will punish sin wherever He finds it, yet He at the same time loves 
the sinner, and wants him to repent and turn to Him. If men will 
only turn, they will find mercy, and find it just the moment they 
turn to Him. You will find men sorry for their misdeeds. Cain, 
no doubt, was sorry, but that was not true repentance. There is no 
cry recorded in the Scriptures as coming from him, “O my God, O 
my God, forgive me.” There was no repentance in his only feeling 
sorry. Look at Judas. There is no sign that he turned to God— 
no sign that he came to Christ asking forgiveness. Yet, probably, 
he felt sorry. He was, very likely, filled with remorse and despair ; 
but he didn’t repent. Repentance is turning to Him who loved us 
and gave Himself for us. Look at King Saul, and see the differ- 
ence between him and King David. David fell as low as Saul, and 
a good deal lower-—he fell from a higher pinnacle; but what was the 
difference between the two? David turned back to God and con- 
fessed his sin and got forgiven. But look at King Saul. There was 
no repentance there, and God couldn’t save him till he repented, 
You will find all through the Scriptures where men have repented, 
God has forgiven them. Look at that publican when he went up 
to pray; he felt his sin so great that he couldn’t look up to Heaven 
—all he could do was to smite his heart and cry, “God forgive me, 
a sinner.” There was turning to God—repentance, and that man 
went down to his home forgiven. Look at that prodigal. His 
father couldn’t forgive him while he was still in a foreign land and 
squandering his money in riotous living; but the moment he came 
home repentant, how soon that father forgave him—how quick he 
came to meet him with the word of forgiveness. It wouldn’t have 
done any good to forgive the boy while he was in that foreign coun- 
try unrepentant. He would have despised all favors and blessings 
from his father. That is the position the sinner stands in toward 
God. He can not be forgiven and get His blessing until he comes 
to God repenting of all his sins and asking the blessing. 

Now, we read in Scripture that God deals with us as a father 
deals with ason, Fathers and mothers, you who have children, let 
me ask, by way of illustration, Suppose you go home, and find that 
while you have been here your boy has gone to your private drawer 


S, 
) good— 


r enemy. 
red; He 
ne loves 
men will 
nt they 
; Cai, 
sre is no 
God, O 
, feeling 
» God— 
robably, 
despair ; 
oved us 
e differ- 
aul, and 
was the 
nd con- 
ere Was 
‘pented., 
pented, 
vent up 
Heaven 
rive me, 
at man 
I. His 
nd and 
le came 
uick he 
’t have 
n coun- 
lessings 
toward 
> comes 


. father 
ren, let 
nd that 
drawer 


REPENTANCE, 257 


and stolen five dollars of your money. You go to him and say: 
“John, did you take that money?” “ Yes, father, I took that 
moncy,” he replies. When you hear him saying this without any 
apparent regret you won’t forgive him. You want to get at his 
conscience; you know it would do him an injury to forgive him 
unless he confesses his wrong. Suppose he won’t do it. “ Yes,” 
he says, “I stole your moncy, but I don’t think I’ve done wrong.” 
The mother can not, the father can not forgive him unless he sees 
he has done wrong, and wants forgiveness. That’s the trouble 
with the sinners in Chicago. They've turned against God, broken 
His commandments, trampled His law under their feet, and their 
sins hang upon them; until they show signs of repentance their sin 
will remain. But the moment they see their iniquity and come to 
God, forgiveness will be given them and their iniquity will be taken 
out of their way. Said a person to me the other day, “ It is my 
sin that stands between me and Christ.” “It isn’t,” I replied, 
“it’s your own will.” That’s what stands between the sinner and 
forgiveness. Christ will take all your iniquities away if you will. 
Men are so proud that they won’t acknowledge and confess before 
God. Don’t you see on the face of it, if your boy won’t repent, you 
can not forgive him ? and how is God going to forgive a sinner if he 
don’t repent? If He was allowing an unrepentant sinner into His 
kingdom there would be war-in Heaven in twenty-four hours. 
You can not live ina house with a boy who steals everything he 
can lay his hands on. You would have to banish him from your 
house. Look at King David with hisson, Absalom. After he had 
been sent away he got his friends to intercede for him to get him 
back to Jerusalem. They succeeded in getting him back to the city, 
but some one told the king that he hadn’t repented, and his father 
would not see him. After he had been in Jerusalem some time, try- 
ing his best to get into favor and position again without repentance, 
he sent a friend, Joab, to the king, and told him to say to his father: 
“Examine me, and if you find no iniquity in me, take me in.” He 
was forgiven, but the most foolish thing King David ever did was 
to forgive that young prince. What was the result? He drove him 
from the throne. That’s what the sinner would do if he got into 
Heaven unrepentant. He would just drive God from the throne— 
tear the crown from Him. No unrepentant sinner can get into the 
kingdom of Heaven. 


“ Ah,” some people say, “I believe in the mercy of God; I don’t 


17 


258 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


believe God will allow one to perish; I believe every one will get 
to Heaven.” Look at those antediluvians, Do you think He swept 
all those sinners, all those men and women who were too wicked to 
live on earth—do you believe He swept them all into Heaven, and 
left the only righteous man to wade through the flood? Do you 
think He would do this? and yet many men believe all will go into 
Iicaven. The daz will come when you will wake up and know that 
you have been deceived by the devil. No unrepentant sinner will 
ever get into Heaven; unless they forsake their sin they can not 
enter there. The Law of God is very plain on this point : “ Except 
aman repent.” That’s the language of Scripture. And when this 
is so plainly set down, why is it that men fold their arms and say, 
“God will take me into Heaven, anyway?” Suppose a Governor, 
elected to-day, comes into office in a few months and he finds a 
great number of criminals in prison, and he goes and says, “I feel 
for those prisoners; they can not stay in jail any longer ;” suppose 
some murders have been committed, and he says, “I am tender- 
hearted, I can’t punish those men,” and he opens the prison door 
and lets them all out—how long would that Governor be in his 
position? These very men who are depending on the mercy of God 
would be the first to raise their voice against that Governor. These 
men would say, “These murderers must be punished, or society will 
be imperiled ; life will not be safe,” and yet they believe in the 
mercy of God, whether they repent or not. My dear friends, don’t 
go on under that delusion; it is a snare of the devil. I tell you, the 
‘Word of God is true, and it tells us, ‘“ Except a man repent ” there 
‘is not one ray of hope heid out. May the Spirit of God open your 
eyes to-night and show you the truth—let it go into your hearts. 
‘Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous his thoughts. 
Now, my friends, repentance is not fear. A great many people 
say I don’t preach up the terrors of religion. I don’t want to— 
don’t want to scare men into the kingdom of God. I don’t believe 
in preaching that way. If I did get some in that way they would 
soon get out. If I wanted to scare men into Heaven I would just 
hold the terror of hell over their heads and say, “Go right in.” 
But that is not the way to win men. They don’t have any slaves 
in Heaven; they are all sons, and they must accept salvation volun- 
tarily. Terrornever brought a man in yet. Lookata vessel tossed 
upon the billows, and sailors think it is going to the bottom and 
death isupon them. They fall down on their knees, and you would 


RS, 


e will get 
He swept 
wicked to 
aven, and 
Do you 
ill gu into 
know that 
sinner will 
y can not 
“ Except 
when this 
and say, 
Governor, 
ie finds a 
s, “I feel 
_ suppose 
n tender- 
ison door 
be in his 
cy of God 
r. These 
ciety will 
ve in the 
nds, don’t 
l you, the 
nt’ there 
ypen your 
ir hearts. 
oughts. 
1y people 
vant to— 
't believe 
ley would 
ould just 
right in.” 
ny slaves 
on volun- 
sel tossed 
ttom and 
ou would 


_ pentant and turn his face from sin toward God, 


REPENTANCE, 259 
think they were all converted, They ain’t converted, they're only 
scared. There’s no repentance there, and as soon as the storm is 
over, and they get on shore, they are the same as ever. All their 
terror has left them—they've forgotten it, and they fall into their old 
habits. How many men have, while lying on a sick bed, and they 
thought they saw the terrors of death gathering around them, made 
resolutions to live a new life if they only get well again, but the 
moment they get better they forget all about their resolutions. It 
was only a scare with them ; that’s not what we want to feel. Fear 
is one thing, and repentance is another. True repentance is the 
Holy Ghost showing sinners their sin, That’s what we want. May 
the Holy Ghost reveal to each one here to-night out of Christ their 
lost condition unless they repent. 
If God threw Adam out of Eden on account of one sin, how can 
you expect to get into the heavenly paradise with ten thousand? I 
can imagine some one saying, “I haven't got anything to repent 
of.” If you are one of those Pharisees, I can tell you that this ser- 
I would like to find one man who 
could come up here and say, “I have no sin.” If I was one of 
those who thought I had no sin to repent of, I’d never go to church ; 
I certainly would not come up to the Tabernacle. But could you 


aman to live without sinning, there 


ay the heart and affections of men 
from God. I feel as if I ought to be repenting all the time. Is 


there a man here who can say honestly, “TI have not got a sin that 
I need ask forgiveness for. I haven’t one thing to repent of?” Some 
men seem to think that God has got ten different laws for each of 
those ten commandr ‘ts; but if you have been guilty of breaking 
one, you are guilty of breaking all. Ifa man steals five dollars, and 
another steals five hundred, the one is as guilty of theft as the other. 
A man who has broken one commandment of God is as guilty as he 
who has broken ten. If aman don’t feel this, and come to Him re- 


there is not a ray of 
Genesis to Revelation. 
“T have nothing to repent.” 
converted. <A friend asked 
said he, “I never troubled my 


are so many things to draw aw 


hope. Nowhere can you find one ray from 
Don’t go out of this Tabernacle saying, 
I heard of a man who said he had been 
him if he had repented. “No,” 


peer 


CRT creer acs, - ial ai 
eee eR eee ion 


" sage 
a 


260 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


head about it.” My friends, when a man becomes converted, the 
work has to be a little deeper than that. He has tow become re- 
pentant, and try to atone for what he has done. If he is at war with 
any one, he has to go and be reconciled to his enemy. If he doesn’t, 
his conversion is the work of Satan. When a man turns to God he 
is made a new creature—a new man. His impulses, all the time, 
are guided by love. He loves his enemies, and tries to repair all 
wrong he has done. This is a true sign of conversion. If this sign 
is not apparent, his conversion lias never got from his head to his 
heart. We must be born of the Spirit, hearts must be regenerated 
—born again. When a man repents and turns to the God of Heaven, 
then the work is deep and thorough. I hope that every one will see 
the necessity of true repentance when they come to God for a bless- 
ing, and may the Spirit move you to ask it now. 

I can imagine some of you saying, ‘How am I to repent?” My 
friends, there are only two parties in the world. There has been a 
great political contest here to-day, and there have been two sides. 
We will not know before forty-eight hours which side has triumphed. 
There is great interest now to know which side has been the 
stronger. Now, there are two parties in this world —those for 
Christ and those against Him; and to change to Christ’s party is 
only moving from the old party to the new. You know that the 
old party is bad, and the new one is good, and yet you don't 
change. Suppose I was called to New York, and went down to the 
Illinois Central Depot to catch the ten o’clock train. I go on the 
train, and a friend should see me and say, “ You are on the wrong 
train for New York. You are on the Burlington train.” “Oh, no,” 
I say, “ you are wrong; I asked some one and he told me this was 
the right train.” “Why,” this friend replies, “I’ve been in Chicago 
for twenty years, and know that you are on the wrong train,” and 
the man talks, and at last convinces me, but I sit still, although I 
believe I am in the wrong train for New York, and I go on to Bur- 
lington. If you don’t get off the wrong train and get on the right 
one you will not reach Heaven. If you have not repented, seize 
your baggage and go to the other train. 

If a man is not repentant his face is turned away from God, and 
the moment his face is turned toward God, peace and joy follow. 
There are a great many people hunting after joy, after peace. Dear 
friends, if you want to find it to-night, just turn to God, and you 
will get it. You need not hunt for it any longer; only come and 


Se crftu. ff DOD fF HH = te OH 


ad 
a4 


S. 


srted, the 
‘come re- 
war with 
> doesn’t, 
9 God he 
the time, 
repair all 
this sign 
ad to his 
renerated 
Heaven, 
e will see 
ra bless- 


tP?” My 
is been a 
wo sides. 
iumphed. 
been the 
those for 
$3 party is 
that the 
rou don’t 
wn to the 
x0 on the 
he wrong 
‘Oh, no, 
> this was 
1 Chicago 
rain,’ and 
Ithough I 
nto Bur- 
the right 
ited, seize 


God, and 
oy follow. 
ice. Dear 
,and you 
come and 


REPENTANCE, 261 


get it. When I was a little boy I remember I tried to catch my 
shadow. I don’t know if any of you were ever foolish; but I re- 
member running after it and trying to get ahead of it. I could not 
see why the shadow always kept ahead of me. Once I happened 
to be racing with my face to the sun, and I looked over my head 
and saw my shadow coming back of me, and it kept behind me all 
the way. It is the same with the Sun of Righteousness—peace and 
joy will go with you while you go with your face toward Him, and 
these people who are getting at the back of the Son are in darkness 
all the time. Turn to the light of God and the reflection will flash 
in your heart. Don’t say that God will not forgive you. It is 
only your will which keeps His forgiveness from you. 

My sister, I remember, told me her little boy said something 
naughty one morning, when his father said to him, “Sammy, go 
and ask your mother’s forgiveness.” “TI won't,” replied the child. 
“Tf you don’t ask your mother’s forgiveness I'll put you to bed.” 
It was early in the morning—before he went to business, and the 
boy didn’t think he would do it. He said “I won't” again. They 
undressed him and put him to bed. The father came home at 
noon expecting to find his boy playing about the house, He didn’t 
see him about, and asked his wife where he was. “ In bed still.” 
So he went up to the room, and sat down by the bed, and said: 
“Sammy, I want you to ask your mother’s forgiveness.” But the 
answer was “No.” The father coaxed and begged, but could not 
induce the child to ask forgiveness. The father went away, ex- 
pecting certainly that when he came home at night the child would 
have got all over it. At night, however, when he got home he 
found the little fellow still in bed. He had lain there all day. He 
went to him and tried to get him to come to his mother, but it was 
no use. His mother went, and was equally unsuccessful. That 
father and mother could not sleep any that night. They expected 
every moment to hear the knock at their door by their little son. 
Now they wanted to forgive the boy. My sister told me it was 
just as if death had come into their home. She never passed 
through such a night. In the morning she went to him and said: 
“Now, Sammy, you are going to ask my forgiveness,” but the boy 
turned his face to the wall and wouldn’t speak. The father came 
home at noon and the boy was as stubborn as ever. It looked as 
though the child was going to conquer. It was for the good of the 
boy that they didn’t want to give him his own way. Itisa great 


262 MOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


deal better for us to submit to God than have our own way. Our 
own way will lead us to ruin; God’s way leads to life everlasting. 
The father went off to his office, and that afternoon my sister went 
in to her son about four o’clock and began to reason with him, and 
after talking for some time, she said, “ Now, Sammy, say ‘mother.’” 
“Mother,” said the boy. “ Now say ‘for.’” “For.” “Now just 
say ‘give.’” And the boy repeated “give.” “Me,” said the 
mother. “Me,” and the little fellow fairly leaped out of bed. “I 
have said it,” he cried; “take me down to papa so that I can say it 
to him.” Oh, sinner, go to Him and ask His forgiveness. This 
is repentance. It is coming in with a broken heart and asking the 
King of Heaven to forgive you. Don’t say you can’t. It isa lie. 
It is your stubborn will—it is your stubborn heart. 

Now let me say here to-night you are in a position to be recon- 
ciled toGod now. You are not in a position to delay this reconcili- 
ation a week, a day, an hour. God tells you now. Look at that 
beautiful steamer At/antic. There she is in the bay groping her 
way along a rocky coast. The captain don’t know, as his vessel 
plows through that ocean, that in a few moments it will strike 
a rock and hundreds of those on board will perish in a watery 
grave. If he knew, in a minute he could strike a bell and the 
steamer would be turned from that rock and the people would be 
saved. The vessel has struck, but he knows now too late. You 
have time now. In five minutes, for all you and I know, you 
may be in eternity. God hangs a mist over our eyes as to our 
summons. So now God calls—now every one repent, and all your 
sins will be taken from you. I have come in the name of the 
Master to ask you to turn to God now. May God help you to turn 
and live. 


5. 


y. Our 
rlasting. 
er went 
1im, and 
other.’” 
low just 
aid the 
ed, “] 
in say it 
s. This 
king the 
is a lie. 


» recon- 
>concili- 
at that 
ing her 
s vessel 
1 strike 
watery 
and the 
ould be 
» You 
Ww, you 
to our 
ll your 
of the 
to turn 


XXXI. 


WHAT CHRIST IS TO US. 


OW Iam not going to take a text. I am going to take a sub- 


ject, and that subject will be, “What Christ is to us;” and. 


if you say when I get through that Christ is not what I try 
to make Him out to be, it will be your own fault and no one else’s, 
because He is a thousand times more to every soul here than I can 
make Him out to be to-night. A man can not tell what Christ is 
in a few moments—can not begin to express what Christ is to us. 
I remember talking on the same subject at a meeting in the north 


of England. I felt that I had not said enough about Him when I. 


got through. When I went home I went with a Scotchman, and I 
was compiaining and groaning over the meeting, and told him I had 
only got half through with my subject, when the Scotchman turned 
to me and said, “ Ye dinna expect to tell a’ aboot Christ in one hour, 
d' ye? Why, ’twould tak a’ eternity to do it, man.” I thought I 
could get through in an hour; but, my friends, it can not be done. 
I’m not going to talk to you an hour to-night, however, and now I 
would like to call your attention to the second chapter of Luke, 
eleventh verse: “For unto you is born this day in the city of 
David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord.” That’s what Christ 
offers to be to every soul that comes into this world. God gives 
Him to the world. “Unto you is born this day a Saviour.’ God 
gave Him to free us from our sins; that is what Christ came into 
the world todo. To get Him we must first meet Him at Calvary 
as our Jesus, our Purifier, our Sanctification, our Redemption, our 
Saviour. We must first pass Calvary before we can see Him as our 
Saviour. And He wants you to come there—He wants to be a 
Saviour to every soul in Chicago. He is not only a Saviour who 
takes us from the pit of hell, but He delivers us from sin. A great 
many people have a wrong idea of Christ. They think He only 
saves us from hell, but He keeps us from sin day by day. God 
(263) 


264 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


knew a great deal better what the world needed than ourselves. 
Therefore, He gave us Christ, not only to save us from death, but to 
free us from sin. He is not only a Saviour; He is a Redeemer. 
Redemption is more real than salvation. I asked a man some time 
ago why he thought so much about a certain man. I noticed that 
he could not speak of him but tears came into his eyes, and so I 
asked him, “ Why is it that you love that man as youdo?” « Why, 
Mr. Moody,” he said, “that man saved me.” He told me in confi- 
dence how he got involved; how he took what did not belong to 
him, thinking he could replace it ina few weeks; but when the time 
came, found he could not. In a week or twu exposures would come 
and it would be sure ruin to him, wife, and family. How he went 
to a friend and poured out his heart, and how that friend advanced 
him the money and paid the debt, and he added, “I would be will- 
ing to lay down my life for that friend. He saved me.” It was 
out of gratitude to that man that he was willing to give his life for 
him. When we appreciate what redemption is, and what Christ 
has done for us, we are willing to lay down our life for Him—sacri- 
fice everything for His sake. 
Redemption is more. It is buying back, for we are told in Gal- 
atians, “ He hath redeemed us from the curse.” The curse of the 
law rests upon every son of Adam—“ He hath redeemed us from 
the curse of the law.” Redemption is buying back. He has bought 
us back from the sentence of justice. We belong to Him—“He 
hath redeemed us by His blood.” I remember, I was going from 
my home to preach in a neighboring village. My brother was with 
me, and I saw a young man driving before us. I said to my brother, 
“Who is that young man? I’ve never seen him before.” “ Do you 
see that farm, those beautiful buildings; do you see all these fields, 
and the pasture? That is his farm. His father was a drunkard and 
squandered his money, buried his home in debt, and died. His 
mother had to go to the poor-house. That young man went away, 
earned money, came back, and redeemed the farm and took his aged 
mother from the"poor-house; and he is looked upon as one of the 
noblest young men in the country.” That's what Christ is doing 
for us. Adam sold us very cheap, and Christ comes and redeems us 
—does it without any cost. He is more than a Saviour and a 
Redeemer—he is a Deliverer. A great many people go to Calvary 
and believe He is their Redeemer, but they forget that He came to 
deliver us from all temptation, from all appetite, and from all lust. 


ee ge ne RR napa cae 


= THK AHA Be LI tH ee er en TK ao Re eR He 


RS, 


ourselves. 
ith, but to 
cedeemer. 
ome time 
‘iced that 
and so I 
y 66 Why, 
> in confi- 
elong to 
| the time 
uld come 
y he went 
advanced 
1 be will- 

It was 
is life for 
at Christ 
n—sacri- 


d in Gal- 
se of the 
us from 
s bought 
m—“ He 
ing from 
was with 
brother, 
Do you 
se fields, 
card and 
d. His 
nt away, 
his aged 
e of the 
is doing 
eems us 
r and a 
Calvary 
came to 
all lust. 


WHAT CHRIST IS TO US. 265 


Now, when God put the children of Israel behind the blood at 
Goshen, they were safe. When they came to the Red Sea, and they 
heard the King of Egypt with his mighty army, his horsemen, and 
his chariots come rolling on to their destruction, it was then that 
the God of Heaven showed His power as a Deliverer. He said to 
Moses, “ Stretch out thy rod,” and the sea opened and His chosen 
people passed over in safety. God is a deliverer to all His children, 
whatsoever you may be. He is a great Physician to us all, and He 
will deliver you from all your difficulties. 

In the fifth chapter of Mark, we see Him as a Deliverer. I do 
not think God ever found harder cases in Chicago than those were 
there. We have got hospitals for the incurables, and if they had had 
them in those days, these cases would have been put there. First, 
look at that man whe had his dwelling in the tombs. They tried 
to tame him, but he snapped the chains as Samson did the pillars. 
They tried to bind him, they tried to keep him clothed, but he tore 
his garments into shreds. There he was, a wild man, and a terror to 
everybody. The childrem were afraid of him, amd the women and 
men hearing his cries at night, dreaded to go near that spot. Ther 
he was, a slave of the devils. But Christ came to that part of the 
country. See how they tried to chain him, to bind him, to tame 
him; but they all failed. But Christ came and with one word 
delivered him. One word, and these devils forsook him. And his 
countrymen hearing of the incident, came out. They did not go out 
to see what Christ had been doing, but they came out to look for 
their swine. A good many men here in Chicago value swine more 
than they do the salvation of souls. Let pork go up or down, and 
see what a commotion there would be. But if there are souls 
to save here to-night, they would never trouble themselves. 
They came out to look for their swine, and there they found the wild 
man sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind. 
When the man found himself delivered he wanted to go with the 
Saviour. That was gratitude. Christ had saved him, had redeemed 
him. He had delivered him from the hand of the enemy. And 
this man cried: “ Let me follow You round the world ; where You 
go I will go.” But the Lord said: “You go home and tell your 
friends what good things the Lord has done for you.” And he 
started home. I would like to have been in that house when he 
came there. I can imagine how the children would look when they 
saw him, and say: “Father is coming.” “Shut the door,” the 


seinenere seseietaaea ai 


266 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


mother would cry; “look out; fasten the windows; bolt every door 
in the house.” Many times he, very likely, had come home and 
abused his family, and broken the chairs and tables, and turned the 
mother into the street, and alarmed all the neighbors. They see 
him now coming down the street. Down he comes till he gets to 
the door, and then gently knocks. You don’t hear a sound as he 
stands there. At last he sees his wife at the window, and he says, 
“Mary!” “Why,” she says, “why, he speaks as he did when I 
first married him ; I wonder if he has got well?” So she looks out, 
and asks: “ John, is that you?” “Yes, Mary,” he replies, “it’s me, 
don’t be afraid any more, I’m well now.” I see that mother, how 
she pulls back the bolts of that door, and looks at him. The first 
look is sufficient, and she springs into his arms, and clings about his 
neck. She takes him in, and asks him a hundred questions—how it 
all happened—all about it. “ Well, just take a chair and I'll tell you 
how I got cured.” The children hang back and look amazed. He 
says: “I was there in the tombs, you know, cutting myself with 
stones, and running about in my nakedness, when Jesus of Nazareth 
came that way. Mary, did you ever hear of Him? He is the most 
wonderful man. I’ve never seen a man like Him. He just ran in 
and told those devils to leave me, and they left me. When he had 
cured me I wanted to follow Him, but He told me to come home 
and tell you all about it.” The children, by and by, gather about 
his knee, and the elder ones run to tell their playmates what wonder- 
ful things Jesus has done for their father. Ah, my friends, we have 
got a mighty Deliverer—don’t care what affliction you have, He will 
deliver you from it. The Son of God, who cast out those devils, can 
deliver you from your besetting sin. A man iold me, last night, in 
speaking about drunkards, the trouble is that the passion for drink 
becomes a disease, and when it does, there is no hope. That man 
didn’t know the Gospel, my friend. Christ is a physician who has 
never lost a case yet. We've got a great many fine physicians— 
how many of them can say, “I have never lost a case?”’ Christ has 
never failed, and He has had some pretty hard cases. Just lock « 

the woman suffering for years from an issue of blood. Probahly 

she had visited all the physicians around—had gone clear up to 
Damascus and down to Egypt. Perhaps she had spent all her money 
in trying to get better. but instead, had only grown worse. That's 
just the case with Christians to-day. Instead of her coming to 
Christ, she went to the physicians around. I can imagine one of 


the 


ry door 
ne and 
1ed the 
ley see 
gets to 
as he 
€ says, 
vhen I 
ks out, 
t’s me, 
r, how 
1e first 
out his 
how it 
ell you 
l. He 
If with 
zareth 
e most 
ran in 
he had 
» home 
about 
onder- 
e have 
Te will 
Is, can 
cht, in 
- drink 
t man 
10 has 
ians— 
ist has 
00k ai 

Ibably 

up to 
noney 
That’s 
ing to 
ne of 


WHAT CHRIST IS TO US. 267 


her friends coming in and saying, “Have you ever heard of Jesus 
of Nazareth?” “No.” “Well, He is a great prophet. I have 
never seen Him myself, but they tell me He is in Jerusalem doing 
wonderful things. I heard of a man who was troubled with leprosy, 
and another with palsy, aad they went to Him, and, in a moment, 
were cured. They say, too, He gives sight to blind men.” As her 
friend tells her those things, a ray of hope breaks upon that poor 
woman’s soul, and she questions the friend further. “ Yes, and 
I heard of another cure of a poor cripple who had been lame 
for years, so lame that he had to be carried to the prophet. When 
they got there they found such a crowd that they had to cut a hole 
in the roof and let him down, and whenever He saw him, just 
touched him, and he was healed.” “Hemust bea great physician. 
How much does He charge?” “ Don’t charge you anything.” And 
this is the trouble with a great many people to-day. They think 
they have something to do for the Lord—something to give Him 
in return for the salvation He offers. “Do you mean to tell me He 
don’t charge anything?” “Yes, I tell you, He cures all the people 
who come to Him for nothing!” “I never heard of such a thing 
in my life. Whenever He comes here I am going to see Him.” 
By and by she hears that He is passing through her town, and she 
prepares to go. Her children probably come to her and urge her 
not to go. “Don’t go to any more physicians. You've been run- 
ning after too many, and they’ve only made you worse.” But she 
gives them a deaf ear. She wants to be blessed. I don’t know 
what they called the yoman’s garments in those days, but we will 
come down to the present. She gets down her old shawl. The 
doctor took all her money, and she can’t afford to buy a new one. 
When she gets to where He is, she finds a crowd around Him—per- 
haps four or five times as many people as we have here. I can see 
that woman elbowing her way through the crowd as she says to her- 
self, “If I can only get near that man I know by His looks He can 
bless me.” There she goes, pushing her way among the crowd of 
able-Lodied men standing between her and the Saviour. “ Why 
don’t you go away or stand still?” they say to her: “there are 
plenty more beside you who want to get near Him.” But she keeps 
on, and by and by she gets near enough to touch Him. She is just 
about to touch Him, when some one is thrust in between her anc 
the Saviour, and she is driven back. But she works her way on, and 
comes near enough again, and I can see that thin, pale hand as it 


. os 
onan eet 


rai rae 


268 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


comes from under that shawl, and it creeps to His garment—lo, in 
a moment she is well. Some one has said that He has got more 
medicine in this garment than there is in all the apothecaries’ stores 
in the world. A mighty physician! If you have a sick soul, come 
up to Him. There is no case too bad for Him. I don’t care if you 
have some sin to which you are a slave—He can heal you of it. 
Yes, my friends, He is a mighty physician, and can save all who 
come and seek His aid. I can imagine some of you say, “I am a 
good deal worse than any of you have spoken of; I am dead to 
everything that is pure and holy; I come here night after night and 
those remarks never touch me; those sweet songs never thrill me; 
Iam dead.” Well, right here we find the story of one who was 
dead—Jairus’ daughter. When He came to the house they said He 
was too late. You and I have been too late, but Christ never. 
They forgot He was the resurrection and the life. When He went 
into that room with Peter and John among the weeping mourners, 
He just said to that dead girl, “‘Damsel, I say unto thee, arise,” and 
she was awakened from the sleep of death. If there is a dead soul 
here to-night, He cansave you. He said at the creation, “ Let there 
be light,” and lo! the light appeared. If He commands your dead 
souls to live, they will surely live. Let your prayers be going up to 
God that your dead souls may be filled with the light of His pres- 
ence. He said to that woman’s son, “Young man, arise.” Why, 
He could raise men out of the stones in the street. There is no 
limit to the power of the Lord God of Israel. ‘If there is a dead 
soul here, He can fiil it with purity. Our Saviour, our Redcemer, 
our Deliverer, our Physician is able to do this. He can quicken 
dead souls; He can make them alive. 

You know when He took the children of Israel through the Red 
Sea and into the wilderness He became their Way. You hear people 
sometimes saying: “If I become a Christian I don’t know what 
Church I will join. I find the Roman Catholic Church saying they 
are the only true Church—the only apostolic Church ; and unless I 
join it they say I can not enter Heaven. Then the Baptists tell me 
I can not get into Heaven unless I become immersed; the Epis- 
copalian Church claims to be the only true Church. So with the Pres- 
byterians, Methodists; and I don’t know really what way to take.” 


Thank God, we need not be in darkness as to that. He tells us, - 


“Tam the way.” The greatest mistake of the present day is the 
following of this creed and that one, and this and that Church, and 


S. 


t—lo, in 
ot more 
s’ stores 
ul, come 
re if you 
su of it. 
all who 
I ama 
dead to 
ight and 
rill me; 
vho was 
said He 
t never. 
Te went 
ourners, 
se,” and 
2ad soul 
et there 
ur dead 
iz up to 
is pres- 
Why, 

e is no 
a dead 
deemer, 
quicken 


he Red 
r people 
w what 
ng they 
inless I 
tell me 
e Epis- 
1e Pres- 
» take.” 


ells us, © 


y is the 
ch, and 


WHAT CHRIST IS TO US. 269 


a great many listen to the voice of the Church instead of the voice 
of God. The Catholic Church or any other never saved a soul. 
The Son of God is the Saviour of the world. The very name of 
Jesus can save His people from their sins. He is a real personal 
Saviour, and if a man wants to become a Christian, let him put his 
eyes on that Saviour and he will be saved. You know that the 
children of Israel had a cloud going ahead of them. When the 
cloud moved they moved, when it stopped they stopped, and when 
it started they followed it. So, my friends, it is Jesus that is our 
way, and if we follow His footsteps we will be in the right Church. 
Who could have led those chosen people through that wilderness 
better than God Almighty? He knew of all dangers and difficul- 
ties. When they wanted bread, He opened His hand and gave 
it them; when they wanted water, He commanded Moses to strike 
a rock, and lo, the crystal stream gushed forth. Who could better 
lead them through the wilderness, and who could better lead us to 
Heaven than Jesus? A great many people don’t like the old way 
our fathers taught. Well, the people in the days of Jeremiah 
didn’t like the old way; they hated it, and so He put them in 
slavery for seventy years. The good old way our fathers taught is 
better than our own way. People say this Bible was good enough 
for ancient days, but we have men of culture, of science, of litera- 
ture now, and its value has decreased to the people of our day. 
Now, give mea better book and I will throw it away. Has the world 
ever offered us a better book? These men want us to give up the 
Bible. What are you going to give us in its place? Oh, how cruel 
inidelity is to tell us to give up all the hope we have—to throw 
away the only book which tells us the story of the resurrection. 
They try to tell us it is all a fiction, so that when we lay our loved 
ones in the grave we bid them farewell for time and eternity. 
Away with this terrible doctrine. The Bible of our fathers and 
mothers is true, and the good old way is true. When man comes 
and tries to draw us from the old to the new way, it is the work of 
the devil. But men say we have outgrown this way. Why don’t 
men outgrow the light of the sun? They shouldn’t let the light of 
the sun come into their buildings—should have gas; the sun is old, 
and gas is a new light. There is just as much sense in this as to 
take away the Bible. How much we owe the blessed Bible. W hy, 
I don’t think human life would be safe in this city if it wasn’t for it. 
Look at the history of the nations where the Bible has been 


See sani 


SRS 


eon 


270 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


trampled under foot. Only a few years ago France and England 
were pretty nearly equal. England threw the Bible open to the 
world, and France tried to trample it. Now the English language 
is spoken around the world, and its prosperity has increased, while 
it stands foremost among nations. But look at France. It has 
gone down and down with anarchy and revolution. Let us not 
forsake the old way. The Chief Shepherd has gone in through 
the gates, and tells us to come in through Him. When I was in 
Dublin I heard of a little boy who, while being taught in one of 
the mission schools, had found Christ. When he got home he 
tried to talk to his father and mother about his Redeemer. The 
little fellow sickened and died, and when I was there, four years 
after the death of that boy, the father might have been seen night 
after night reading his Bible. If you had asked him what he was 
looking for, he would have told you he was looking for the way his 
little son had taken to get into Heaven. He was trying to find 
the way. My friends, our Elder Brother has gone before us and has 
taken His seat at the right hand of His God, and He won’t leave us 
in darkness. 
f remember a number of years ago I went out of Chicago to try 
to preach. I went down to a little town where was being held a 
Sunday-school convention. I was a perfect stranger in the place, 
and upon my arrival a man stepped up to me and asked me if my 
name was Moody. I told him it was, and he invited me to his 
house. When I arrived, he said he had to go to the convention, 
and asked me to excuse his wife, as she, not having a servant, had 
to attend to her household duties. He put me into the parlor, and 
told me to amuse myself as best I could till he came back. I sat 
there, but the room was dark, and I could nat read, and I got tired. 
So I thought I would try and get the children and play with them. 
I listened for some sound of childhood in the house, but could not 
hear a single evidence of the presence of little ones. When my 
friend came back, I said: “ Haven’t you any children?” “Yes,” he 
replied, “TI have one, but she’s in Heaven, and I am glad she is there, 
Moody.” “ Are you glad that your child is dead?” I incuired. He 
went on to tell me how he had worshiped that child; how his whole 
life had been bound up in her, to the neglect of his Saviour. One 
day he had come home and found her dying. Upon her death he 
accused God of being unjust. He saw some of his neighbors with 
their children around them. Why hadn’t He taken some of them 


-— =— — vn, 8635 me hee elk tlk. tll! 


S. 


England 
n to the 
anguage 
-d, while 
It has 

- us not 
through 
I was in 
1 one of 
ome he 
r. The 
ir years 
in night 
- he was 
way his 
to find 

and has 
leave us 


oO to try 
held a 


1 them. 
ild not 
len my 
es,” he 
; there, 
d. He 
; whole 

One 
ath he 
rs with 
f them 


WHAT CHRIST JS TO US. 271 
away? He was rebellious. After he came home from her funeral 
he said, “ All at once I thought I heard her little voice calling me, 
but the truth came to my heart that she was gone. Then I 
thought I heard her feet upon the stairs; but I knew she was lying 
in the grave. The thought of her loss made me almost mad. I 
threw myself on my bed and wept bitterly. I fell asleep, and while 
I slept I had a dream, but it almost seems to me like a vision. I 
thought I was going over a barren field, and I came toa river, so 
dark and chill-looking that I was going to turn away, when, all at 
once, I saw, on the opposite bank, the most beautiful sight I ever 
looked at. I thought death and sorrow could never enter into that 
lovely region. Then I began to see beings, all so happy-looking, 
and among them I saw my little child. She waved her little 
angel hand to me and cried, ‘Father, father, come this way. I 
thought her voice sounded much sweeter than it did onearth. In 
my dream I thought I went to the water and tried to cross it, but 
found it deep and the current so rapid that I thought if I entered, 
it would carry me away from her forever. I tried to find a boatman 
to take me over, but couldn’t, and I walked up and down the river 
trying to find a crossing, and still she cried, ‘Come this way.’ All 
at once I heard a voice coming rolling down, ‘I am the way, the 
truth, and the life; no man cometh unto the Father but by Me.’ 
The voice awoke me from my sleep, and I knew it was my Saviour 
calling me, and pointing the way for me to reach my darling child. 
I am now superintendent of a Sunday-school; I have made many 
converts; my wife has been converted, and we will, through Jesus 
as the way, see one day our child.” 

Am I not speaking to some father who has some loved one in 
yonder land? Am TI not speaking to some mother who has a little 
one in that happy land? And if you could but hear their voice 
would it not be, “Come right this way?” Am TI not speaking to 
some here who have representatives there? There’s not a son here, 
if he could hear his mother's voice, but who would be told to come 
right that way. Thank God, we have all an Elder Brother there. 
Nearly nineteen hundred years have passed since He went there, 
but He is as constant to us now as He was when first He went 
there, Dear friends, as He calls us up to Him, let us turn our back 
to this world. Let us take Christ as our Redeemer, as our Deliy- 
erer, as our Physician, as our Way, as our Truth, and as our Light. 
May the blessing of Heaven fall upon us all, and may every man 


272 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


and woman here who is out of the kingdom accept Him and press 
into His dominions. 

I want to speak of Christ now as our Keeper. Many people in 
the inquiry-rooms complained that they could not hold out; they 
commenced all right, but could not hold out. Of course they could 
not if they tried to do so of themselves. But, thank God, they had 
a Keeper. A man when asked what persuasion he was, replied that 
he was of the same as St. Paul was, and he said, “I believe that 
He is able to keep that which is committed to Him.” That isa 
good denomination, and I recommend it to your attention What 
is this keeping? What does it consist of? If one of you had one 
hundred thousand dollars in your pocket, and knew that fifteen or 
twenty thieves had their eyes on you, and wanted to rob you, what 
would you do? You would find a safe bank and put it there 
and feel safe. Now, every one of you has a precious soul, which 
the devil is striving to rob you of, and you can not be safe until 
you have given it into Christ’s keeping. The Lion of the tribe of 
Judah is the only one that can safely keep us. What does the 
Word say? “Tam ti.: light of the world; if any man follow Me, he 
shall have the light of life.’’ Why are so many of us in darkness? 
Because we will not follow the light, will not follow Christ. It does 
not matter who it is; a man of talent and intellect is no better than 
any one else if he does not walk in the light. I remember, during 
the second year of the war, when things looked very bad for the 
country, they had a meeting, and every one spoke gloomily, and 
hung their heads like so many bulrushes. One old man, though 
gray-bearded, and with a face that literally shone-—he was a man 
who looked like Moses—commenced to upbraid them that they did 
not look toward the light ; that they should remember that if it was 
dark around them it was light higher up, where their Elder Brother 
was, and it only rested with them to climb higher. There is no 
darkness where Jesus is. Let us ask ourselves, let each one ask: 
“Am Ta light in my family, among my companions?”” The Word 
said, “Ye are the light of the world.” Are you, brethren? Just 
consider over it. Let us keep our loins girded and our lamps burn- 
ing, or people will stumble over us. Oh, my friends, if the light in 
us be darkness, how great is that darkness. If we would light the 
world up, we must borrow the light; we must take no glory to our- 
selves, but merely reflect the light of Jesus Christ. The Bible does 


not say, “ Make your light shine before men,” but “Let your light 


d press 


ople in 
t; they 
y could 
1ey had 
ed that 
ve that 
lat isa 

What 
iad one 
‘teen or 
u, what 
t there 
, which 
fe until 
tribe of 
oes the 
Me, he 
rkness? 
It does 
er than 
_ during 
for the 
ly, and 
though 

a man 
hey did 
f it was 
Brother 
e is no 
ne ask: 
e Word 
? Just 
ys burn- 
light in 
ght the 
to our- 
yle does 


ur light 


WHAT CHRIST IS TO US. 


shine.” Let it shine. God supplies us with it for the asking. Oh, 
my friends, will you not ask for it? and when you once have it, 
hundreds of thousands of others will see it and want it as well. 
Keep your lower lights burning, as Mr. Sankey has sung to you. 
Now I also like to think of Christ asa Shepherd. The duty of a 
shepherd is to take care of his sheep. When a bear attacked David’s 
flock, he seized his spear and slew the intruder, and your Shepherd 
will take as much care of you. Oh, what joy in the news to those 
who can say, “ The Lord is my Shepherd.” Think of the shepherd 
carefully counting his sheep at the close of the day. One is missing; 
what does he do? Is he content with his ninety and nine, and leave 
the missing? No, he safely houses the others, and then goes in 
search of the other which is missing. Can you not see him hunting 
for the lost one, going over mountains and rocks, and crossing brooks, 
and what joy there is when the wanderer is found? Oh, what a 
Shepherd is that. He wants to be a Shepherd to all. Will you not 
accept Him? The man who saw a shepherd calling his sheep by 
name wondered if he could tell one from another, they all looked 
so much alike. When he inquired on the matter he was pointed to 
several little defects on the sheep; one had a black spot, another a 
torn ear, another a bad toe. One was cross-eyed, and so on. You 
see the shepherd knew his sheep by their defects, and I think it is 
so with our Heavenly Father. He knows us all by our defects; and 
yet, with all our faults, He loves us. You may ask, “If He loves me, 
why does He afflict me?” Well, now, I once saw a drove of sheep 
looking very tired and weary, being hurried on by a shepherd and 
his dogs, and when they wanted to stop and drink at the brook by 
the wayside, they were not allowed to, but driven on. I felt that 
it was very unkind of that shepherd ; but, by and by, they stopped 
before a pair of handsome gates, and the flocks were turned into 
beautiful green pastures, with a clear stream running through them. 
Then I knew that I had been hasty ; that the shepherd had not been 
unkind, but lind, in not allowing his sheep to drink from that muddy 
stream in the road, for he had been saving them and taking them on 
to something better. So with our Heavenly Father, our Shepherd ; 
He is compelled to afflict us sometimes while leading us into green 
pastures. Oh, brethren, let us give thanks that we have such a good 
Shepherd to guide and protect us, and though these afflictions may 
cone upon us and seem hard at the time, let us remember His 


\ Sreat mercy and loving-kindness, and bow and kiss the rod. Let us 


look to God for His blessing. 


273 


_IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


16 


ca 


6” 


ora 


= 3 
2% 
. }& 


I 


N“ 


& 
On 
SS 


ae 


2 
- 4 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 
14580 
(716) 872-4503 


WEBSTER, N.Y. 


Photographic 
sciences 
Corporation 


XXXIL 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK. 


ACTS xix. 2: “ Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?” . 


OW many people in this audience would know how to 
answer that question if it was put to them personally? 
“Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed?” 

A great many of us, if we were asked, would not know what it 
meant. I was a Christian some years before I knew anything about 
it. I remember once in Brooklyn, speaking at a Sunday-school 
meeting. I thought there was a good deal of feeling in the meeting, 
and on going out, feeling perfectly satisfied, an old man touched 
me on the shoulder, and in a trembling voice and with tears in his 
eyes said, “Young man, when you speak again, honor the Holy 
Ghost.” I didn’t know what he meant, and went to other schools, 
but this always kept ringing in my ears, “ Young man, when you 
speak again, honor the Holy Ghost.” Months went, and still I kept 
thinking about this, and wondering what the old man meant. I 
think I have found it out. My friends, there is a good deal of 
work among us that goes for naught, because we don’t honor the 
Holy Ghost. Let me say right ‘here, that I have never stood be- 
fore an audience honoring the Holy Ghost but He has heard me 
and the work has been deep and thorough, because the work has 
been done in the spirit. All that is done in the spirit will be lasting, 
but all that is done in the flesh will pass away. The workers should 
be led in all their efforts by the Spirit or the Holy Ghost and their 
work will then be successful. 

I want to call your attention to what the Holy Spirit is. He is 
one with the Father and the Son, and the way to honor Him is to 
look upon Him as equal with the Father and Son. We heara 
great deal about Christ, and many of us honor Him—many of us 
honor the Fathe:, but how many of us honor the Holy Spirit ? Are 
we honoring the Lioly Spirit when we talk about Him as an influ- 
ence, or as a Spirit only? Now, in the twenty-eighth chapter of 
(274) 


, 
“) 


ed ? a9 , 


how to 
rsonally ? 
slieved ?” 
’ what it 
ng about 
ay-school 
meeting, 
- touched 
ars in his 
the Holy 
r schools, 
when you 
till I kept 
neant. I 

deal of 
1onor the 
stood be- 
1eard me 
work has 
e lasting, 
rs should 
and their 


s. Heis 
Him is to 
Te heara 
iny of us 
irit? Are 
an influ- 
apter of 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK. 275 


Matthew and nineteenth verse we see these words: “ Go ye, there- 2 


fore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” They are almost 
the last words that fell from the lips of the Son of God as He as- 
cended and went back to Heaven, and they seem to linger on the 
earth yet. He had passed over Calvary, had been through the grave, 
and was now about to ascend and sit at the right hand of God, the 
Father, where all power was to be given Him, and we find Him 
sending out His disciples, saying: “Go ye, therefore, and teach all 
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, 
and of the Holy Ghost.” 

The next thought is, that He wasin the world before Christ was. 
A great many people have got a false impression about the Holy 
Ghost. They think He didn’t come before the day of Pentecost, 
but He was in the world long before that. Just turn to Luke ii. 26: 
“And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should 
not see death before he had seen the Lord’s Christ.” The Holy 


Ghost revealed it unto him. Then we read in the second epistle of — 


Peter i. 21: “For the prophecy came not in old time by the will 
of man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the 
Holy Ghost.” You will find from Genesis to Revelations one Spirit 
running through the Bible, and that’s the Spirit of the Holy Ghost. 
You don’t find one doctrine in Exodus and another in Kings; one 
Spirit pervades the Word of God. Why? Because all the holy 
men were prompted by God. Therefore we have but one doctrine 
and one Bible, which contains writings executed by men inspired 
by the Holy Ghost, and that Holy Ghost is a person. Now, 
that’s one thing a good many Christians don’t understand. I was 
a Christian about ten years before I found it out. I remember 
an old divine getting up in Farwell Hall, and he spoke about Chris- 
tians honoring the Holy Ghost. He said that very few people 
thought He was as much a person as Christ. I got my Bible, and 


soon I saw he was right. Now, just turn to the fourteenth chapter - 


of John and the sixteenth verse, and we read, “I will pray the 
Father, and He shall give you another Comforter, that He may 
abide with you forever.” If the Spirit was not a person, Christ 
would not have spoken about Him as He did. “That He may 
abide with you forever.” Then we go on: “Even the Spirit of 
Christ, whom the world can not receive because it seeth Him not, 
neither knoweth Him ; for He dwelleth with you, and shall be in you.” 


- 


. 


oe | 276 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


Three times in that verse Christ speaks of the Holy Spirit as “ Him,” 
and in the two verses we find Him referred to three times as “ He.” 
It is He, Him, Him, He, all through those two verses. The Son of 
Man knew Him; that’s the reason. Again, we read in the twenty- 
sixth verse: “ But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom 
the Father will send in My name, He shall teach you all things, and 


' bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto 


you.” We find the Spirit again referred to as “He” in sixteenth 
John, and it is just repeated over and over again in Scripture. If 
you have got ycur Bible, just turn to the sixteenth chapter of John, 
eighth verse: “ And when He is come He will reprove the world of 
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment.” He wouldn’t speak 
about the Holy Ghost in that way if He was only an influence, a 
breath of God, as some people believe. He wouldn’t speak about 
the Spirit as “ Himself” if He was only this: “ Howbeit when He 
the Spirit of Truth is come; He will guide you into the truth, for 
He shall not speak of Himself, but whatsoever He shall hear that 
shall He speak, and He will show you things to come.” “He will 
show you things to come.” 

Again, I want to call your attention to averse in First Peter: 
“For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, 
that He might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh, but 
quickened by the Spirit.” Now, every dead soul brought to life 
must be brought to life by the power of the Holy Spirit. No soul 
has ever been brought to life unless it has been quickened by the 
Holy Ghost. The moment the Spirit of God quickens a soul and 
brings it into life, from t.. .. moment they have a love to serve God, 
and a power to save people. Till then it is impossible—that’s the 
only way of receiving salvation. And let me say here, that the idea 
of educating people into the kingdom of God is not the way. You 
may educate them and educate them, but they will be as far from 
conversion as ever. Men have all to be quickened by the Holy 
Ghost; as Christ tells us. So I suppose some of you have found 


in the inquiry-room that you could get a certain length with people 


and then stopped ; couldn’t get any further. How many people have 
come to me and said of some one, “I can not bring him into the 
light of Christ!” “You can’t? that’s not extraordinary.” My 
friend, you can only bring people to a certain length, and then the 
Spirit of the Holy Ghost must show them light ; and when He does 
it, He will do it thoroughly.. We can not force inquirers into the king- 


0 areal. te eg tty pas 


'S. 


3“ Him,” 
is “ He.” 
e Son of 
twenty- 
t, whom 
ings, and 
1id unto 
ixteenth 
ure. If 
of John, 
world of 
’t speak 
uence, a 
k about 
hen He 
‘uth, for 
sar that 
He will 


- Peter: 
unjust, 
esh, but 
to life 
No soul 
by the 
oul and 
ve God, 
it’s the 
he idea 
You 

ir from 


dom of God. The Holy Spirit must quicken, and the Lord Jesus 
Christ must do the rest. 

The next thing I want to speak to you about is Hiswork. We find 
in Romans, fifth chapter: “And hope maketh not ashamed, because 
the love of God is shed abroad in vur hearts by the Holy Ghost 
which is given unto us.” His work is to impart love. There is not 
a better evangelist in the world than the Holy Spirit. If the 
churches would just let Him come in, there would soon be mighty 


work for Christ. You may say that what the Church wants to-day 


more than anything else, is love. In Galatians we find what should 


dwell in the churches. There are nine different qualities—peace; - 
gentleness, long-suffering, hope, patience, charity, etc., but you can 


sum them all into one, and you have love. I saw something in a 
writing the other day, bearing upon the subject, which I just took a 
copy of: “The fruit of the Spirit is in one word—love. Joy, is love 


exalted ; peace, is love in repose ; long-suffering, is love-enduring; , 


gentleness, is love in society; goodness, is love in action ; faith, is 
love on the battle-field ; meekness, is love in school; and temper- 
ance, is love in training. And so, you can say that the fruit is all 
expressed by one word—love. When the fruit of the Spirit is in 
my heart, I can love them that hate me. To love a man who 
thinks a great deal of you is natural love with every one, but to love 
those who hate you is a different thing, and whenever a man gets 
the Spirit he loves his enemies. The Spirit of Christ on Calvary 
comes to my soul. When they reviled Him, He cried, “ Father, 
forgive them, they know not what they do.” I can tell you ina 
minute if the church has got it. When it isn’t there, when the ser- 
mon is over, the people rise up and walk out. They don’t speak to 
each other. They do just as if they were at the theatre ora concert. 
But if the love of God is there, you will see, whenever the sermon 
is ‘inished, the people gather in little groups and talk about how 
much good it did them, and they will carry it home to their families 
and tell it to their neighbors. While the preaching is going on they 
are praying all the time for Him. They are in sympathy with Him, 
and a bond of love is apparent among them all. My friends, the 
great want of the present day in American churches, is the want of 
the love of God in the hearts of their members, shed by the Holy 
Ghost. We can not love Him, we can not serve Him till we have 
His love in our hearts. Said a young lady, in the inquiry-room, to 
me: “TI am going to try my very best to become a Christian.” « I 


‘THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK. 277 


278 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


don’t like that,” I said; “have you got a mother?” “No.” 
- “ Have you got a father?” “Yes.” “Are you going to try to love 
him?” “No; there is no use of my trying; I love him already.” 
She couldn’t help loving her father, because it was spontaneous, 
‘The moment the love of God is shed in our hearts, my friends, we 
can not help loving Him and working for Him. . 

People you sometimes hear say on hearing a sermon, “It is a 
wonder to me that it, so powerful, didn’t convict hundreds.” Some- 
times the discourse would be full of apparently overwhelming and 
- convincing argument, and they can not see why it shouldn’t have a 
very powerful influence. The trouble was, there was no love in it. 
If there was no love in it, it will fail of getting any fruit. We've 
got—if I may use the expression—to pepper our discourse with 
love, salt it with love, and we will walk into the affections of the 
people and turn them toward God. If we don’t, our words will be 
as sounding brass and tinkling cymbals—nu power where there is 
want of love. A remark made by Dr. Gibson the other day has 
been in my mind ever since. It was when we had the seventh 
chapter of John, when he told us how to find out the thirsty ones. 
“Why, let some one bring in the water, and see how quick the 
thirsty ones will reach out their hands. We ministers must first 
show our friends that we have the water, and then the people will 
drink.” My friends, the reason why there is so little power in the 
churches is because the ministers are carrying around empty buck- 
ets. The people won’t come near them. But when the minister 
of God has a bucket filled with sparkling water, see how quick the 
people will come to him. If we are not successful, the cause is 
want of love. Whenever we have the Spirit, love is very quickly 
seen. Why, when an inquirer gets up from his knees, the first 
_ thing he says is, “ Will you pray for my father?” His love goes 
right out. Last night a young lady came and said, “Won't you 
pray for my brother?” For several nights she had been on her 
knees—couldn’t think of any one else but herself; but the moment 
she got the Spirit the love was seen, and weat out toward her 
brother. Our love should be sincere. Now the world is pretty 
keen to detect between the true and the false. People can tell very 
quickly whether we have love in our hearts or not. God don’t 
want any shams. I remember I went to see a man at his place of 
business. The moment hs saw me he sprang up from his seat and 
seized my hand as if I was his twin brother. Pretty soon another 


RS. 


) 6“ No.” 
ry to love 
already.” 
ntaneous, 
iends, we 


‘lt is a 
” Some- 
ning and 
’t have a 
Ove in it. 
We've 
irse with 
is of the 
ls will be 
there is 
day has 
seventh 
sty ones. 
uick the 
lust first 
ople will 
er in the 
ty buck- 
minister 
luick the 
cause is 
’ quickly 
the first 
ve goes 
on’t you 
1 on her 
moment 
vard her 
S pretty 
tell very 
1d don’t 
place of 
seat and 
another 


as rats 5 sf. 0 +5 Bn LV intiian pve lib SRE = ans. v0 
7 : 7 “ sre a at , es 


4 i 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK, 


279 


man came in, and he jumped up and shook his hand with the ut. 
most cordiality apparently. The man couldn’t stay, and told the 
man of business he would have to go. The business man begged 
and entreated him to stay, to sit down. He wanted to know how 
his wife was, and all his children, and his friends. He couldn’t re. 
main, however, and excused himself. The moment the door was 
closed he said, “ He’s an awful bore.” I got out as soon as posti- 
ble. Thought he would be saying the same of me. He proffered 
love, but it was alla sham. How many callers have you whom you 
treat with the greatest cordiality, while you wish them out of the 
house? God wants us to be sincere, and it will not be unless we 
have the Spirit. If the Holy Spirit is in us, our love will be deep 
and thorough, and we will then find our way easily enough to the 
hearts of the people. 

The next thing the Holy Spirit imparts is hope. In Romans xv. 
13, we find, “Now the God of hope will fill you with all joy and 
peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope through the power a 
of the Holy Ghost.” You just let the Spirit begin to work in the 
churches and see how hopeful the church becomes. The minister 
is lifted up, the people are lifted up—all are rejoicing. Take a 
minister who has lost hope in his church—he is discouraged, and as 
soon as he gets discouraged there’s no power there. If they are 
not hopeful the Lord don’t help them. The Spirit not only imparts 
love, but He gives hope. I never saw a Christian who had much 
of the Holy Ghost who was ever discouraged. I have yet :o find 
one Christian with the Spirit who is not hopeful. Why, they are 
mounting up on wings of hope, higher, higher, all the time, just like 
a man I heard of who had two bags of gas on either side of him. 
Whenever he touched the ground he would leap over a hill, over 
trees, over fences. So when we are full of hope we rise up all the 
time. He has come here now. He is just knocking at the door of 
every church in Chicago, and it will be sharp, and thorough, and 
lasting if you let Him in. Let Him into your heart, and let Him 
fill you with His influence. 

The next thought is the liberty the Spirit gives us. See what 
Paul says about this in Second Corinthians iii. 17: “ Now the Lord 
is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty,” 7 
What do the workers want any more than liberty? What do the 
ministers require more than liberty? It is easy to preach if we've 
got the Spirit of God with us. We're not afraid of public opinion 


ry 
280 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


at all—we’ve perfect liberty. The meeting last Monday night in 
Farwell Hall was one of the best I ever attended. Why? Because 
we had perfect liberty there. The Spirit of the Lord was there. 
The rich and poor, the educated and ignorant, high and low, as- 
sembled, were all free. I don’t know anything that retards the 
cause of Christ in the churches more than the stiffness, the coldness 
in them. There’s no liberty where there’s stiffness. If a young 
convert got up he would be chilled through. When we have the 
Spirit we are not afraid of the opinion of our neighbor, of the opinion 
of this man or that man.. We say, “ What can I do for the Son of 
God?” What do we want more than love, hope, and charity? 
Before the Chicago fire T used to preach in this hall. If it was pretty 
nearly full I used to be lifted up at the sight of so many people be- 
fore me. I remember an old woman coming to me, and saying, “I 
am praying for you; you haven’t got liberty yet.” I thought I had 
—thought I was all right; but she knew better, I feel more in- 
debted to that old woman than to almost anything else. So, ministers, 
if you have got some old saint in your churches, look to her. How 
often have I thanked God for sending that woman to pray for my 
liberty. Why, a few years ago I could not stand before an assem- 
blage of ministers for trembling. I was always afraid I would say 
something wrong. But I’ve got liberty now. Ifa man is bound hand 
and foot, like Lazarus, when he came out of the grave, he can not have 
any freedom. Hewill be spluttering and splashing in his sermon, and 
the church don’t take any interest in it. What we want is liberty. 
What we want is to know that we are sons and daughters of God. 
Sons haye always liberty. A man once said he could always tell 
who were the boarders and who were members of the family in a 
house. A boarder would come in, eat, and then walk out to the 
theatre; but the son would come in and sit down, and inquire all 
the news from his mother. My friends, the church is full of board- 
ers. You see them in the church, but you never see them at any 
of the meetings. If they do come and you ask them to pray, “Oh, 
don’t call upon me; I haven’t liberty.” They’re bound hand and 
foot. Loosen their bands and let them g0; give them freedom and 
liberty, and see how they will take an interest in everything con- 
nected with the church. Two young men went from Yale College 
down to Natchez to teach, some years ago, before the slave law was 
repealed. As they went along a road one day, a venerable colored 
man was coming toward them. Says one of them, “ Let’s have 


RS. 


y night in 
> Because 
was there. 
id low, as- 
etards the 
ie coldness 
fa young 
> have the 
he opinion 
he Son of 
1 charity? 
was pretty 
people be- 
aying, “T 
ight I had 

more in- 
ministers, 
er. How 
ry for my 
an assem- 
would say 
und hand 
1 not have 
rmon, and 
is liberty. 
s of God. 
ways tell 
mily in a 
ut to the 
nquire all 
of board- 
‘Mm at any 
ay, “ Oh, 
hand and 
>dom and 
ing con- 
= College 
: law was 
> colored 
et’s have 


THE HOLY SPIRIT AND HIS WORK. 281 


some fun with old Sambo.” There was'a guide-post upon the 
road—one of those old red posts—pointing the way, and on it was 
the notice, “ Forty miles to Liberty.” When the old man came up 
one of the young fellows said to him, “ Well, uncle, how old are 
your” “Don’t know; guess I’m pretty old; must be ’bout 
eighty.” “Can you read, uncle?” “No; can’t read; black men 
ain't ‘lowed to read,” replied the darkey. “Well, can you tell us 
what’s on that post?” “Oh, yes; 1 knows what’s on de post; it 
says ‘Forty miles to Liberty.’” “Well,” said the young man, “ why 
don’t you go and get liberty, it’s only forty miles?” « Ah, massa, 
it points down that road to Liberty, but it’s all a sham; but if it 
pointed up there it would point to Christ, and it would be true.” 
The arrow went down to that young man’s soul. The liberty that 
Christ offers means freedom. Is there any bound, here ? Oh, may 
He open your eyes and set you free. 

When Miss Smilie went down South to teach, she went to a hotel 
and found everything covered with dirt. The tables were dirty, 
dishes dirty, and the beds dirty. So she called an old colored 
woman, who was in the house, and said, “ Now, you know that the — 
Northern people set you at liberty; I came from the North, and I 
don’t like dirt, so I want you to clean the house.” The old colored 
woman set to work, and it seemed as if she’d done more work in 
that half day than she had done in a month before. When the 
young lady got back, the colored woman came to her and said, 
“Now, is I free or ben’t I not? When I go to my old massa, he 
says I ain't free, and when I go to my own people they say I is, an’ 
I don’t know whether I’m free or not. Some people told me Abra- 
ham Lincoln signed a proclamation, but massa says he didn’t; he 
hadn’t any right to.” So Christian people go along, not knowing 
whether they are free or not. Why, when they have the Spirit 
they are as free as air. Christ came for that. He didn’t come to 
set us free and then leave us in servitude. He came to give us 
liberty now and forever. 


XX XIII. 


MAN’S RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


JOHN xiv. 17: “ He dwelleth with you and shall be in you,” 


\ XK J E very often hear people asking, What is a sin against 
the Holy Spirit? They have been told that there is no 


hope for them because they have sinned away the day of 
grace; they have committed an unpardonable sin, and there is no 
chance of their being saved. Let us read what it says in the Scrip- 
tures upon the question of an unpardonable sin. Turn to Matthew 
xii. 23. If you just turn to those passages it will help you to bear 
them in mind: 


“And all the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the Son 
of David? 

“But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This fellow doth 
not cast out devils, but by Beelzebub, the prince of the devils. 

“And Jesus knew their thoughts and said unto them, Every 
kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation; and every 
city or house divided against itself shall not stand : 

“And if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how 
shall then his kingdom stand? 

“And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your chil- 
dren cast them out? therefore they shall be your judges. 

“But if I cast out devils by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom 
of God is come unto you. 

“Or else, how can one enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil 
his goods, except he first bind the strong man? and then he will 
spoil his house. 


“He that is not with me is against me; and he that gathereth 
not with me, scettereth abroad. 

“Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin and blasphemy 
shall be forgiven unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy 
Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men. 


“And whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of Man it shall 
(282) 


lo ee ee ee ee eee eee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee a ee ae Y 


IRIT. 


in against 
1ere is no 
he day of 
ere is no 
the Scrip- 
Matthew 
u to bear 


s the Son 
low doth 
vils. 

m, Every 
ind every 
elf; how 
your chil- 


kingdom 


and spoil 
n he will 


athereth 


asphemy 
he Holy 


n it shall 


\\ 


anne 


MAN'S RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT, 283 


be forgiven him; but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Ghost, 


it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the 


world to come.’ 

t Now Matthew lIéaves us in darkness about what it means—he 
Yon’t explain it; but turn over to Mark’s gospel, where you will 
Fnd Christ explaining it Himself. If people would but turn to 
the Scriptures and read them more carefully, they would soon get 
‘ight on many of those passages which appear dark tothem. In 
the third chapter of Mark and twenty-sixth verse we read : 

“ And if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he can not 
stand, but hath an end. 

“ No man can enter into a strong man’s house, and spoil his goods, 
except he will first bind the strong man, and then he will spoil 
his house. 

“Verily, I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the 
sons of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blas- 
pheme. 

“But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never 
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation.” 

A great many people stop right there. They don’t read the next 
verse at al! which explains all that has gone before: “ Because they 
said he hath an unclean spirit.” 

Now, the reasoning is this, that if He cast out devils by the 
power of the prince of devils, and was a devil Himself, and all His 
works that had been done by the power of the Holy Ghost had 
been done really by the power of the devil, why, of course there is 
no hope. There is no hope; for if a man believes that the devil 
was working through Christ he wouldn’t come to Christ. Some 
people believe they have committed an unpardonable sin; but have 
you ever met a man who said that Christ was working through the 
devil? Those who think they have committed an unpardonable 
sin, turn over to Genesis and give out that verse: “ My Spirit shall 
not always strive with men.” They think that because the Spirit is 
not striving with them now, they have committed an unpardonable 

sin. A man in’ New York was approached, and, after quoting the 
verse in Genesis, said there was no hope for him. Why, the very 
fact that the Spirit spoke through this Christian man to him showed 
that it was striving with him. That is the way the devil speaks. 
He says first, “ You don’t need the Holy Spirit,” and if he can not 
get them to believe that, he tells them the Holy Ghost has given 


284 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


them up, they don’t need to try tocome. But if they believed this 
verse in Genesis, they might as well believe that they will live one 
hundred and twenty years, for in the next verse we read: “Yet his 
days will be one hundred and twenty years.” He strove with those 
antediluvians one hundred and twenty years to get them to repent. 
He strove with them all their lives. It is a question with me 
whether the Holy Ghost does not strive with a man from his cradle 
to his grave. So don’t let any man go away from here saying that 
he has comgnitted an unpardonable sin, and that the Spirit of God 
has left him. It is this influence that has brought you here. A 
man would be deaf and blind to all heavenly truths if His Spirit 
had left him. He wouldn't want to talk about any religious sub- 
ject; he wouldn’t want to hear anything about religion. The very 
fact of your coming to this meeting is conclusive evidence that the 
Spirit is striving with you. The devil wouldn't bring you here; it 
is the Spirit of God working with you. 

The next thought I would direct your attention to is, “ How 
shall we know we have been born of the Spirit?” A great many 
people say, “ Mr. Moody, I would like to knov whether I am a 
Christian or not. I would like to know if Iam saved.” The longer 
I live the more I am convinced that it is one of the greatest 
Privileges of a child of God to know—to be able to say, “IT am 
saved.” The idea of walking through life without knowing this 
until we get to the great white throne is exploded. If the Bible 
don’t teach assurance, it don’t teach justification by faith; if 
it don’t teach assurance, it don’t teach redemption. The doc- 
trine of assurance is as clear as any doctrine in the Bible. 
How many people in the Tabernacle, when I ask them if they are 
Christians, say, “Well, I hope so,” in a sort of hesitating way. 
Another class say, “I am trying to be.” This is a queer kind of 
testimony, my friends. I notice no man is willing to go into the 
inquiry-room till he has got a step beyond that. That class of 
Christians don’t amount to much. The,real Christian puts it, “I 
beliave; I believe that my Redeemer liveth; I believe that if this 
building of flesh were destroyed, I have a building not made with 
hands, eternal in the Heavens.” No hoping and trusting with them, 
It is, “I know why hope is assured to the Christian. It is a sure 
hope; it isn’t a doubting hope.” Suppose a man asked me if my 
name was Moody, and I said, “ Well, I hope so,” wouldn't it sound 
rather strange? “I hope it is;” or “I’m trying to be Moody,” 


es tien a aa tad Gt of («28.2 ek ie eS 


o> 


— 


VERS. 


believed this 
will live one 
d: “Yet his 
e with those 
n to repent. 
nN with me 
m his cradle 
saying that 
rit of God 
uhere. A 
His Spirit 
igious sub- 

The very 
ce that the 
ou here; it 


is, “ How 
reat many 
er Tama 
lhe longer 
e€ greatest 
ay, “I am 
wing this 
the Bible 
faith; if 
The doc- 
he Bible. 
f they are 
ting way. 
r kind of 
into the 
t class of 
its it, “T 
iat if this 
1ade with 

ith them, 

is a sure 

ne if my 

it sound 

Moody.” 


MAN'S RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT. 285 


_ Now, if a man asks you if you are a Christian, you ought to be able 


| that Spirit he is not a Christian. 


to give a reason. How do you know you are a Christian? Turn to 
the eighth chapter of Romans and ninth verse: “ But ye are not in 
the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in 
you. Now, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of 
His ”—a meek, gentle, loving, forbearing Spirit. If a man has not 
I don’t care if he is a mernber of 
fifty churches, or has his name on one hundred church records; if 
he hasn't the Spirit of Christ he isn’t a Christian. That is the 
question, has he the same Spirit as Christ had? We can soon tell if 
we have His Spirit. If we have the Spirit we will follow in His 
footsteps. We won't be in darkness at all if we only take the Word 
of God as our examiner as to whether we have it or not: 

“ And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but 
the Spirit is life because of righteousness. 

“But if the Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead 
dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from the dead shall also 
quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit that dwelleth in you. 

“Therefore, brethren, we are debtors not to the flesh, to live after 
the flesh. 

“For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through the 
Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. 

“For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons 
of God.” 

“As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of 
God.” Now you can tell whether you are led by the Spirit of God 
or not. How happy this world would be if it was led by the Spirit 
of God. Do you think the Spirit of God would lead men into 
darkness, into sorrow or trouble, into iniquity? Do you think if 
Lot had not been led by the Spirit of God he would have left 


“Sodom? Do you think the sons and daughters of the earth who 


are going down to death are being led by the Spirit of God? When 
we are led by the Spirit, there is peace, and joy, and light. 

“For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons 
and daughters of God. 

“For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but 
ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, 
Father.” 

There’s another point I want to call your attention to. The 
Spirit of the Holy Ghost bears witness to us that we are the 


Se Ng Femraceiaper no terrae BSS ARES —SeURENARrepe ee tna sasheemrpemaeeemeeenemenn Eons 


236 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


children of God. That’s how we know we are children of God. 
Don’t let any unconverted person look here for a witness of the 
Spirit. We find many in the inquiry-room saying, “Mr. Moody, I 
haven’t found the Spirit.” That’s not the first thing to look for. 
The first thing to look for is Christ, then the Holy Ghost comes into 
our hearts and shows us we are children of God. John, the 
favorite disciple, says, “ Now we know we are the children of God.” 
We are as much children of God when we have the Spirit, as if we 
were in Heaven this afternoon. There is not an inch of ground to 
stand upon for this doubting. Our doubts ought to be swept out 
of the way, and we should be able to say, “I know that my 
Redeemer liveth.” Suppose you go into the inquiry-room to-night 
and commence talking to a weeping man about his being saved. If 
you feel yourself that you are only trying, and you can’t just say 
whether you are saved or not, you can’t talk to that man. You can 
not go toa river and try to get a man out if you are in the river 
yourself. If you are in the ditch yourself, you must get out first 
before you tiy to get anybody else out. If any child of God is 
here to-day who doesn’t know whether he is saved, it is your 
privilege to know definitely before you leave here; to be able to 
say, “Christ is my faithful Saviour, Heaven is my beautiful home.” 
Christians have been doubting and hoping long enough. Now, 
know that you have been born of the Holy Ghost. In Ephesians 
i, 13, we find how we are sealed by the Holy Ghost : 

“In whom ye also trusted, after that ye heard the word of truth, 
the Gospel of your salvation; in -vhom ilso, after that ye believed, 
ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise.” 

And in the fourth chapter, thirtieth verse, we read: 

“And grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed 
unto the day of redemption.” 

Now, when we are washed by the blood, we become a temple for 
the Holy Ghost to dwell in. When we are cleansed by the blood, 
we become a temple for Him, and are sealed till the day of 
redemption, and neither devil nor man can break God’s seal. And 
when we are cleansed, the Holy Ghost comes and dwells with the 
believer. You haven't to go up and bring Him down, or go down 
and bring Him up. He dwells with us, and seals us for the day of 
redemption, There was a poor man who had been a servant of 
God and died in the poor-house. The people were hurrying him 
off, and a gentleman happening to pass, said, “ Tread softly, for you 


an te. A SS ; \ ce eed 
ad e e \ 


‘ERS. 


ren of God. 
tness of the 
ir. Moody, I 
to look for. 
t comes into 

John, the 
en of God.” 
irit, as if we 
f ground to 
e€ swept out 
w that my 
om to-night 
y saved. If 
n’t just say 
1. You can 
in the river 
et out first 
of God is 
it is your 
be able to 
iful home.” 
gh. Now, 

Ephesians 


d of truth, 
e believed, 


are sealed 


temple for 
the blood, 
ie day of 
sal. And 
s with the 
tr go down 
he day of 
ervant of 
rying him 
y, for you 


MAN'S RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT, 287 


are carrying a temple of the Holy Ghost.” By the Redeemer’s 
grace we become a temple, my friends, and are sealed for the day 
of redemption. 

The work of the Holy Ghost is the next point I wish to call your 
attention to. Turn to John xv. 26; 

“ But when the Comforter ‘s come, whom I will send unto you 
from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth from 
the Father, He shall testify of Me.” 

“He shall testify of me.” He saw Him when He went into 
Heaven, when He came home after being down on this earth. He 
saw Him when He swept through the pearly gates, and then he 
came to testify of Him; and so when Peter came to speak of the 
day of Pentecost, and addressed those unbelievers of Jerusalem and 
told them He had ascended into Heaven, He indorsed Peter. 
That’s so. I suppose there were more converts made from that 
sermon of Peter than were made from the years of Christ’s teach- 
ing. Don’t you see, if He didn’t come and testify to men of Christ, 
we couldn’t convince men that He who had died such an ignomin- 
ious death outside the walls of Jerusalem—the death of a common 
malefactor—we couldn’t convince men that He was a Saviour. The 
Greeks, in all their wisdom, couldn’t see this. The Jews can’t un- 
derstand why His name has been heralded through the world for 
nineteen centuries. It is the Holy Ghost convincing men that this 
Saviour is a living reality, and when we speak to inquirers we should 
remember that it is the Holy Ghost testifying this truth. Why, 
how quick they forgot His birth! They would have forgotten His 
death in thirty years if it hadn’t been for the Holy Ghost. We 
couldn’t convince men of Him as a Saviour if it wasn't for the Holy 
Ghost. Said an old man some time ago in Chicago: “I don’t un- 
derstand the Holy Ghost. He's never revealed Himself to me. 
I can’t just get Him right in my mind.” “Well,” said the old 
saint he was talking to, “He don’t intend you should. He has 
come to testify of Christ; He don’t speak about Himself, He 
speaks of Christ.” This remark has helped me wonderfully when I 
have stood up and preached to the perishing multitude. My 
friends, if we but keep Christ up and put ourselves in the back- 
ground, He will be true to His mission. He will fulfill His prom- 
ises if we proclaim Him. Upon this point let me turn to 
John xvi. 13: 

“ Howbeit, when He, the Spirit of Truth, is come, He will guide 


1 tl ii Se ay 
: 


288 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


you into all truth; for He shall not speak of Himself; but what. 
soever He shall hear, that shall He speak; and He will show you 
things to come.” 

He don’t speak about Himself, but about the Master. In Genesis 
we find Abraham sending his faithful servant off into another coun- 
try for a bride for his only son Isaac. The servant went, and 
he found Rebekah at the well. He told her what his mission was ; 
showed her jewels, and talked about his master’s son. He didn’t 
talk about himself. He came to get a bride for his master’s son. 
He represented the absent one to her, and his position, and at last 
she consented to go. Her parents wanted her to remain ten days. 
Ah, those ten days! How many say they want to become Chris- 
tians, but they must wait—wait just a few days more. The servant 
said, “Call the damsel, and leave it with her.” Rebekah was called, 
and she was asked, “Wilt thou go with this man?” and she an- 
swered, “I will go.” I can see them starting off on their joyful 
journey, the servant talking to Rebekah all the time about Abraham’s 
son. It was that that prompted Rebekah to go with him. When 
they come home they see a man standing at the door of the house, 
and she asks, “ Whois that man?” “That’s my master’s son,” and 
he just handed the bride over to him. He brought her through the 
wilderness and then handed her over to his master’s son. That’s 
the work of the Holy Ghost with the Church. He conducts the 
Church through the wilderness, and then will hand it over to the 
Bridegroom. Suppose a man came to me and said, “ Moody, I’m 
going down to Connecticut. You’ve an old mother on the Connect- 
icut River, and as I’m going near her place I will take any message 
you want to send her.” I give him a message, and when he gets to my 
mother’s home, he says, ‘ Mrs. Moody, I’ve just come from Chicago. 
Would you like to hear from your absent boy?” “Yes, I would; 
tell me all about him.” Well, he commences to talk about nothing 
except what concerns himself. That’s not what she wants. She 
wants to hear from her absent boy. That’s what the bride wants to 
hear in this wilderness. He wants to hear about us, not about His 
servants, 

The next thought is, that the Holy Ghost is a teacher. The past 
and the future are all alike to God, and the Spirit will teach us all 
about the future. We can see what is before us in the misty future, 
and He will bring to remembrance all things past. If a man filled 
with the Spirit takes up this book and opens it, it seems as if it was 


tS. 


ut what. 
show you 


1 Genesis 
her coun- 
ent, and 
sion was } 
le didn’t 
ter’s son. 
id at last 
ten days. 
ne Chris- 
e servant 
as called, 
| she an- 
sir joyful 
braham’s 

When 
he house, 
son,” and 
rough the 

That’s 
Jucts the 
er to the 
ody, I’m 
Connect- 
7 message 
ets to my 
Chicago. 
I would; 
t nothing 
nts. She 
- wants to 
bout His 


The past 
ich us all 
ty future, 
man filled 
s if it was 


wand oy 
(h > is fe 


IN BROOKLYN 


mp, 


id 
etl igh 
oot 

Mi ) 


ae ere 
3 ws 


THE PEOPLE GATHERING AT THE RINK 


MAN'S RELATIONS TO THE HOLY SPIRIT, 289 


filled with light. You know before they lighted the hall how dim 
and dark everything looked, but the moment the light was put to 
the gas, everything was clear. So, when the Spirit of God falls upon 
us, we are filled with light and see wonderful things. Then, when 
we take up this Bible we will see things in a new way. We find we 

‘ have everything in it—-it is the greatest book that was ever written. 
You talk about your newspapers—this is the only newspaper that 
was ever written in the world. It tells you all that has taken place 
in the past, and you will see all about the wonderful things in the 
future, if you study it with the Spirit. Turn over to First Corinth- 
ians, ii. 9, and we read: 

“But as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither 
have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath pre- 
pared for them that love Him.” 

But when people get here, then they stop, But let them read the 
next verse: : 

“But God hath revealed them unto us by His Spirit; for the 
Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.” 

| We need not be in darkness about our future home, for in Reve- | 
' lation we get a full description of it. By the Spirit we can see all ie 
things. Look at Stephen, how he, when filled with the Spirit, saw | 
the kingdom of God. When the Spirit of God comes upon us He 
teaches us all about our future home, for “God hath revealed them 
unto us by His Spirit, for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the 
deep things of God.” Many people when they come to some verse, 
they say, “It’s so dark and mysterious I can’t understand one word 
of it.” Suppose, if that’s the case with you, you just get down on 
your knees and cry, “ May the Spirit open my eyes; may the God 
of Heaven help me to dig out this deep truth.” There are passages 
in the Scriptures deep and dark that we can not solve unless we have 
the Spirit. You can not find all about them in a day; you can’t 
find them all at once; but if the Spirit of God is our teacher, we 
will find out wonderful things. And I have not much hope in the 
churches till the ministers understand them. Ifa man is running 
after this or that minister, especially if he preaches moral essays, he 
won't find ‘t out. If the Church of God teach by the Spirit, you 
can’t expect it to know much about the deep things in the Scrip- 
tures. When we have the Spirit of God we learn the secrets of 
Heaven. 

A great difficulty with us is that the Spirit of God is not sufficiently 

19 


i 


, 
i 


IN BROOKLYN 


Ve 


‘% 


THE PEOPLE GATHERING AT THE RINK 


{ 


290 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


alone with us. If we want to get the secrets of Heaven we have to 
be alone with God an hour or two a day. If we are continually in 
the buzz of the world, and don’t give God a chance to tell them to 
us, we can’t expect to learn them. Why, it is when I am alone with 
my wife that I talk about my secrets, and so when the children of 
God are alone with Him it is then that He will tell them the secrets 
of Heaven. May the Spirit of the living God show us the deep 
things of the Scriptures. My friends, the Gospel of Jesus Christ is 
not a matter of investigation, but a matter of revelation, and when 
the Spirit shows Himself to us in His beauty and loveliness, this 
world will look very small. 


[Mr. Moody’s Bible-readings on the Holy Spirit will be found 
among the Addresses. ] 


Ss. 


e have to 
nually in 
them to 
lone with 
iIdren of 
ie secrets 
the deep 
Christ is 
nd when 
ness, this 


ye found 


XXXIV. 


PERSONAL REMINISCENCES OF CHRISTIAN 
WORK. 


DAN. xi. 32: “ The people that do know their God shall be strong and do exploits.” 


~ SHOULD like to go on talking about Daniel. We find in the 
ninth, and tenth, and eleventh chapters that three times a mes- 
senger from Heaven came to him, and told him he was beloved 
of the Lord. He might have been unpopular on earth, but he 
was very popular in Heaven. But I must call your attention to 
the matter of Christian work. and, in doing so, we will take a text 
out of this same book of Daniel, the twelfth chapter, the second and 
third verses : 
“And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall 
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting 
contempt. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of 


the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars _ 


forever and ever.” 

This was the angel’s comfort to Daniel, and a great comfort it 
was. The fact with all of us is, that we like to shine. There is 
no doubt about that. Every mother likes her child to shine. If her 
boy shines at school by getting to the head of his class, the proud 
mother tells all the neighbors, and she has a right to. But it is not 
the great of this world that will shine the brightest. For a few 
years they may shed bright light, but they go out in darkness ; with- 
out an inner light supplying the brightness, they go out in black 
darkness. Where are the great men who did not know Daniel’s 
God? Did they shine long? Why, we know of Nebuchadnezzar 
and the rest of them scarcely a thing, except as they fill in the story 
about these humble men of God. We are not told that statesmen 
shall shine. “They may for a few years or days, but they are soon 
forgotten. Look at those great ones who passed away in the days 
of Daniel. How wise in council they were, how mighty and victo- 
rious over hundreds of nations; what gods upon earth they were! 
(291) 


POR at NR tae 


"y af 
~ 
/ 


292 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


Yet their names are forgotten and written in the grave. Philoso. 
phers, falsely so-called, do they live? Behold men of science—scien- 
tific men they call themselves—going down into the bowels of the 
earth, digging away at some carcass, and trying to make it talk 
against the voice of God. They shall go down to death by and 
by, and their names shall rot. But the man of God shines. Yes, 
he it is who shall shine as the stars forever and ever. This Daniel has 
been gone for twenty-five hundred years, but still increasing millions 
read of his life and actions. And so it shall be to the end; he will only 
get better known and better loved; he shall only shine the brighter 
as the world grows older. Of a truth, they that be wise and turn 
many to righteousness shall! shine on, like stars, to eternity. 

And this blessed, thrice blessed happiness, like all the blessings 


of God’s kingdom, is for every one. Even without the first claim 


to education or refinement you can shine, if you will. One of you 
sailors there can shine forever if you only go to work for the king- 
dom. The Bible don’t say the great shall shine, but they that turn 
_ many to righteousness. A false impression has got hold of many 
of God’s people. They have got the idea that only a few can talk 
about God’s affairs. Nine-tenths of people say, if anything is to 
be done for the souls of men, “Oh, the ministers must do it. ot 
doesn’t enter into the hearts of the people that they have any part in 
the matter. It is the devil’s work to keep Christians from the blessed 
luxury of winning souls to God. Any one can do this work. A little 
girl, only eleven years old, once came to me ina Sunday-school and 
said: “Won't you please pray that God will make me a winner of 
souls?” TI felt so proud of her, and my pride was justified, for she has 
become one of the best winners of souls in this country. ‘Oh, sup- 
pose she lives three-score years and goes on winning four or five 
souls every year; at the end of her journey there will be three hun- 
dred souls on the way to glory. And how long will it be before 
that little company swells to a great army? Don’t you see how that 
little mountain rill keeps swelling till it carries everything before it? 
Little trickling streams have run into it, till now, a mighty river, it 
has great cities on its banks, and the commerce of all’ nations float. 
_ ing on its waters. So whena single soul is won to Christ you can 
not see the result. A single one multiplies to a thousand, and that 
into ten thousand. Perhaps a million shall be the fruit; we can 
not tell. We. only know that the Christian who has turned so many 
to righteousness shall indeed shine forever and ever. Look at 


Philoso. 
—scien- 
s of the 
it talk 
by and 
3. Yes, 
niel has 
nillions 
ill only 
righter 
id turn 


essings | 


- Claim | 


of you 
> king- 
it turn 
many 
in tall 
is to 
OO 
Dart in 
lessed 
little 
1 and 
er of 
1e has 
, sup- 
r five 
hun- 
efore 
that 
re it? 
er, it 
float. 
| Can 
that 
- can 
nany 
k at 


PERSONAL REMINISCENCES OF CHRISTIAN WORK. 293 


those poor fishermen, Jesus’ disciples, how unlettered. They were 
not learned men, but great in winning souls. So not achild here 
but can work for God. 

The one thing that keeps people from werk is that they don’t 
have the desire. If a man has this desire; God soon qualifies him; 
and what we want is God’s qualification; it must come from Him. 
I have been thinking what shall be done the next thirty days that I. 
continue to preach here. If I should just put it to vote, and asked 
all Christians who wanted prayers to rise, all of you, I know, would 
rise. There are at least three thousand Christians here. Now, is it 
too much to ask that three thousand Christians will each lead one 
soul to Christ this coming week? The Son of God died on the 
cross for you. Right here in this Tabernacle you can tell those 
weeping over their sins about God and Heaven. How many times 
I have watched, just to see if Christians would speak to these sor- 
rowing ones. If we only had open-eyed watchers for souls, there 
wouldn’t be a night but five hundred or a thousand inquirers would 
crowd into the inquiry-rooms. These anxious inquirers are at every 
meeting, just waiting to have warm-hearted Christians bring them 
to Christ. They’re timid, but will always listen to one speaking to 
them about Clirist. Suppose each one of you now prayed: “Give 
me some soul this week for my hire;”” what would be the result ? 
This room would not hold the multitude sending up shouts of praise 
to God and making Heaven glad. Where there is an anxious sin- 
ner there is the place for the Christian. 

A little bed-ridden boy I knew kept mourning that he couldn’t 
work for Jesus. The minister told him to pray, and pray he did; 
and the persons he prayed for one by one felt the load of their sins 
and professed Christ. When he heard that such a one had not 
given in, he just turned his face to the wall and prayed harder. 
Well, he died, when, by his little memorandum, it was found he had 
prayed for fifty-six persons daily by name, and before he was buried, 
all of them had given their hearts to Jesus. Tell me that little 
boy won’t shine in the kingdom of God!* These little ones can be 
used by God. 

I remember a good many years ago I resolved I wouldn’t let a 
day pass without talking to some one about their soul’s salvation. 
And it was in that school God qualified me to speak the Gospel. 
If we are faith * over small things God will promote us. If God 
Says, “Speak to uaat young man,” obey the word, and you will be 


294 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAY its, 


given by and by plenty of souls. I went down past the corner of 
Clark and Lake streets one day, and, fulfilling my vow, on seeing a 
man leaning up against a lamp-post, I went up to him and said, “ Are 
you a Christian?” He damned me and cursed me, and said to 
mind my own business. He knew me, but I didn’t know him. He 
said to a friend of his that afternoon that he had never been so in- 
sulted in his life, and told him to say to me that I was damning the 
cause I pretended to represent. Well, the friend came and deliv- 
ered the message. “May be I am doing more hurt than good,” I 
said; “may be I’m mistaken, and God hasn’t shown me the right 
way.” That was the time I was sleeping and living in the Young 
Men’s Christian Association rooms, where I was then president, 
secretary, janitor, and everything else. Well, one night after mid- 
night I heard a knock at the door. And there on the step leading 
into the street stood this stranger I had made so mad at the lamp- 
post, and he said he wanted to talk to me about his soul’s salvation. 
He said, “‘ Do you remember the man you met about three months 
ago at a lamp-post, and how he cursed you? I have had no peace 
since that night; I couldn’t sleep. Oh, tell me what to do to be 
saved.” And we just fell down on our knees, and I prayed; and 
that day he went to the noon prayer-meeting and openly confessed 
the Saviour, and soon after went to the war a Christian man. I do 
not know but he died on some Southern battle-field or in a hos- 
pital, but I expect to see him in the kingdom of God. Oh, how 
often have I thanked God for that word to that dying sinner that 
He put into my mouth! 

And I have just been engaged in this personal work all my life. 
God’s business is not to be done wholesale. Think of the Master 
Himself talking just to Nicodemus; and then how He talked to that 
poor woman at the well of Samaria. Christ’s greatest utterances 
were delivered to congregations of one or two. How many are 
willing to speak to tens of thousands, but not to speak to a few. 
I knew a man who was going to get rich and do large things for 
God, but he never did anything; he wouldn’t do little things—that 
was the secret. Oh, be willing, Christians, to be built into the tem- 
ple, as a polished cap-stone, or just a single brick—no matter just 
how, but somehow. Say to yourself in your homes, in your Sunday- 
school classes, in your daily rounds, “I'll not let this sun go down 
till I lead one soul to Christ.” And then, having done all, shall you 
shine as gems in the great white throne forever and ever. 


rner of 
eeing a 
1, “ Are 
said to 
n. He 
n so in- 
ing the 
| deliv- 
ood,” I 
e right 
Young 
‘sident, 
er mid- 
leading 
> lamp- 
vation. 
months 
) peace 
> to be 
d; and 
nfessed 
I do 

a hos- 
hh, how 
er that 


ny life. 
Master 
to that 
erances 
iny are 
ya few. 
ngs for 
s—that 


1e tem- 
er just 
unday- 
9 down 
all you 


. 


PERSONAL REMINISCENCES OF CHRIS TIAN WORK, 


295 


I want to tell you how I got the first impulse to work solely for 
the conversion of men. For a long time after my conversion I 
didn’t accomplish anything. I hadn't got into my right place, that 
was it. I hadn't thought enough of this personal work. I’d get up 
in prayer-meeting, and I'd pray with the others, but just to go up 
to a man and take hold of his coat and get him down on his knees, 
I hadn’t yet got round to that. It was in 1860 the change came. 
In the Sunday-school i had a pale, delicate young man as one of the 
teachers, I knew his burning piety, and assigned him to the worst 
class in the school. They were all girls, and it was an awful class. 
They kept gadding around in the school-room, and were laughing 
and carrying on all the while. And this young man had better 
success than any one else. One Sunday he was absent, and I tried 
myself to teach the class, but couldn’t do anything with them; 
they seemed farther off than ever from any concern about their 
souls. Well, the day after his absence, early Monday morning, the 
young man came into the store where I worked, and, tottering and 
bloodless, threw himself down on some boxes. “What’s the mat- 
ter?” I said. “TI have been bleeding at the lungs, and they have 
given me up to die,” he said. “But you are not afraid to die?” I 
questioned. “No,” said he, “ I'am not afraid to die, but I have got to 
stand before God and give an account of my stewardship, and not 
one of my Sabbath-school scholars has been brought to Jesus. I 
have failed to bring one, and haven't any strength to do it now.” 
He was so weighed down that I got a carriage and took that dying 
man in it, and we called at the homes of every one of his scholars, 
and to each one he said, as best his faint voice would let him, “I have 
come to just ask you to come to the Saviour,” and then he prayed 
as I never heard before. And for ten days he labored in that way, 
sometimes walking to the nearest houses; and at the end of that 
ten days every one of that large class had yielded to the Saviour. 
Full well I remember the night before he went away (for the doc- 
tors said he must hurry to the South), how we held a true love-feast, 
It was the very gate of Heaven, that meeting. He prayed and 
they prayed ; he didn’t ask them, he didn’t think they could pray; 
and then we sang “Blest be the tie that binds.” It was a beauti- 
ful night in June that he left on the Michigan Southern, and I was 
down to the train to help him off. And those girls, every one, 
gathered there again, all unknown to each other; and the depot 
seemed a second gate to Heaven, in the joyful, yet tearful, commun- 


EE ae RNa at en Saavoreall 
‘ 


296 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


ion and farewells between these newly-redeemed souls and him whose 
crown of rejoicing it will be that he led them to Jesus. At last the 
gong sounded, and, supported onthe platform, the dying man shook 
hands with each one and whispered, “I will meet you yonder,” 
Some of the very best, most constant teachers I had, before going to 
Europe, were converted at that time, and they in their turn have 
gathered many sheaves, and I myself was led by this incident—this 
wonderful blessing of God on individual effort—to throw up my 
business and give my whole strength to God’s work. 


Shall not that young man have a high place, a place very near the Mak 
Saviour of men, in the day when He makes up His jewels? Oh, - 
friends, if you want to shine in the kingdom of God, work for Him 
to-day. Shall not every one go out of this building saying, “I will 
try to bring one soul to Christ to-day ?” i | 


out 
He 
and 
bloo 
brou 
been 
all it 
and 
little 
the | 
word 
tellin 
utes 
of a1 


woulc 
unless 
would 


m whose 


last the 
n shook 
ronder,” 
roing to 
rn have 
it—this 
up my 


lear the 
f Oh, 
or Him 
“T will 


XXXV. 
GOD WANTS EVERYBODY SAVED. 


MARK xvi. 15, 16: “ And He said unto them, Go ye into all the world and preach 
the Gospel to every creature; and he that believeth and is baptized, shall be 
saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned.” 


| LIKE these texts —they’ve got sucha sweep in them; they 
take in everybody. You know the great difficulty is to make 
all people believe that you are preaching to them individ. 
ually. A text like this takes in every one. It says, “Go ye into 
all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature; don’t leave 
out one.” When He delivered this command to His followers 
He was on His way home—to the land where all knew Him 
and all loved Him. Gethsemane, with its hours of agony and 
blood, was over. He could now look beyond it. He had been 
brought before Pilate and also before the Sanhedrim, and had 
been tried and condemned. All that was past. Calvary, with 
all its horrors, was over, and the empty sepulchre lay behind Him, 
and He stood with a little body of believers around Him, with a 
little handful of men, who had stood by Him in His conflict with 
the Pharisees and priests, and now He was giving them His parting 
words—a mission, as it were. It was the Captain of our salvation, 
telling His warriors what to do after He was gone. Ina few min- 
utes He was to be caught up into Heaven. They were the words 
of a resurrected man—a man who had gone down and sounded the 
depths of the grave; a man who had gone down and conquered the 
lion of hell, and now stood on resurrection ground as He said, “Go 
ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature. He 
that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth 
not shall be damned.” 

Now I want to ask you the question, Do you believe that He 
would send those men out to preach the Gospel to every creature 
unless He wanted every creature to be saved? Do you believe He 
would tell them to preach it to people without giving people the 

(297) 


298 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


power to accept it? Do you believe that the God of Heaven is 
mocking men by offering them this Gospel and not giving them the 
power to take hold of it ? Do you believe He will not give men power 
to accept this salvation asa gift? Man might do that, but God 
never mocks men. And when He says, “ Preach the Gospel to 
every creature,” every creature can be saved if he will. F or 
eighteen hundred years the heralds of the cross have been crossing 
seas and fording rivers, have been enduring hardships and persecu- 
tion, in testifying to the people these glorious truths of the Gospel. 
Their spirits have gone up amid flames and tortures, and they have 
died in prison because of their preaching of the Gospel. To-day 
we live in an open land, where the Gospel is as free as the air. 
Remember that it cost all God had to give it, and every poor, miser- 
able sinner on the earth can be saved for nothing. It is free to all, 
but don’t forget that it cost God the Son of His love, the Son of 
His bosom, to redeem a rebellious world. If you are saved, bear 
this in mind, that it is a free gift, but it cost God everything. Its 
reading is that whosoever believes it within the sound of my voice 
can have it. Some people come to me and say, “Mr. Moody, 
don’t sou feel a great responsibility when you come. before an 
audience like this—don’t you feel a great weight upon your 
shoulders?” “Well,” I say, “no; I can not convert men; I can 
only proclaim the Gospel.” Not only that, but I tell you that God 
gives me a mission to preach it to every creature. I don't care to what 
nationality you belong, what has been your early training, how far 
you are sunk in iniquity—I don’t care who or what you may be—I 
tell you, you have to receive the Gospel and be saved, or reject it 
and be damned. ‘that’s the Scripture. I was talking to a man, and 
I asked him, “ Would you like to become a Christian?” « No, sir.” 
“You would rather be damned, eh?” “ Well, I wouldn’t exactly 
like to put it that way,” he replied. “Well,” I said, “that’s the way 
you're putting it.” My friends, let’s put it in plain English, so that 
we can get hold of it. Are there any here who are willing to say 
coolly, and calmly, and deliberately, “I don’t want salvation as a 
gift, I don’t want to be saved?” Would you rather go down fight- 
ing God and the Son of His love, than accept them and be saved ? 
Now, the invitation is to every one. “Go ye into all the world and 
preach the Gospel to every creature.” It is so hard to make people 
believe it is for them—to make them take it right home, Mr. Spur- 
geon told me that he once went to his orphanage ona visit. He 


[eaven is 
chem the 
> power 
but God 
rospel to 
ll. For 
crossing 
persecu- 
Gospel. 
ley have 
To-day 
the air. 
r, miser- 
e to all, 
Son of 
ed, bear 
ng. Its 
1y voice 
Moody, 
fore an 
yn your 
1; Ican 
lat God 
to what 
how far 
y be—I 
‘eject it 
an, and 
lo, sir.” 
exactly 
he way 
so that 

to say 
nasa 
n fight- 
saved ? 
‘ld and 
people 
. Spur 
t. He 


GOD WANTS EVERYBODY SAVED. 299 


said that a great many of those orphans had uncles and aunts, and 
cousins and sisters, who brought them Christmas presents. While 
he was on this visit, a little boy came to him and said, “ Mr. Spur- 
geon, will you let me talk to you a minute?” “ Yes, my boy; what 
is it you want?” “Well,” said the boy, “ Mr. Spurgeon, suppose 
you were a poor little boy and had no aunts, or cousins, or sisters, 
or brothers, and had nobody to bring you any presents, and you saw 
others who had uncles and aunts, and cousins and sisters, and who 
brought presents to them, wouldn’t you feel bad?” “Why, yes,” 
replied Mr. Spurgeon. “That’s me; that’s me,” said the boy. 
He got Mr. Spurgeon right down to the point; and so, if men 
would just say: ‘This Gospel is for us; I Lelieve it is for myself,” 
there would be hope for them being saved. Now, I don’t see how 
you can get away from this text, it is put so plain. Don’t reject it 
any longer, my friends; every time you hear it your heart is getting 
harder and harder, and you will, the longer you keep away, have 
more difficulty in bending your will to its acceptance. I tell you, you 
will have to do either of two things to-night—reject it or receive it. 


I remember a man, upon hearing this, getting up in a furious pas- 


sion, and stamping up and down. “The idea of any one saying: 
we've got to receive it or reject it.” He didn’t like the plain state- 
ment. Well, my friends, can we tell you anything else? The 
audience must be divided into two classes, those who will receive it 
and those who will reject it. It is for you to decide on which side 
you will be. As many as receive it He will give power to become 
the sons and daughters of God. 

The question now is, what are you going to do with God’s gift? 
The question comes home to every one within this building. What 
are you going to do with the gift of God’s love? You must either 
trample Him under your feet and make light of what He has offered 
us, or you must receive Him as our Way, our Truth, our Light. I was 
down at the Ohio Penitentiary a few years ago, and the chaplain 
said to me, “I want to tell you a scene that occurred some time 
ago. Our commissioner went to the Governor of the State and 
asked him if he wouldn’t pardon out five men at the end of six 
months, who stood highest on the list for good kehavior. The 
Governor consented, and the record was to be kept secret; the men 
were not to know anything about it. The six months rolled away 
and the prisoners were all brought up—eleven hundred of them— 
and the president of the commission came up and said: “TI hold in 


300 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS 


my hand pardons for five men.” TI never witnessed anything like it. 
Every man held his breath, and you could almost hear the throbbing 
of every man’s heart. “ Pardons for five men;’’ and the commis- 
sioner went on to tell the men how they had got these pardons— 
how the Governor had given them; but the chaplain said the suz- 
Prise was so great that he told the commissioner to read first the 
names and tell the reason afterward. The first name was called— 
“Reuben Johnson”—and he held out the pardon, but not a man 
moved. He looked all around, expecting to see a man spring to 
his feet at once; but no one moved. The commissioner turned to 
the officer of the prison and inquired: “ Are all the convicts here?” 
“Yes,” was the reply. “Reuben Johnson,\come forward and get 
your pardon; you are no longer a criminal.” Still no one moved. 


The real Reuben Johnson was looking, all the time, behind him - 


and around him to see where Reuben was. The chaplain saw him 
standing right in front of the commissioner, and beckoned to him; 
but he only turned and looked around him, thinking that the chap- 
lain must mean some other Reuben. A second time he beckoned 
to Reuben and called to him, and a second time the man looked 
around. At last the chaplain said to him: “You are the Reuben.” 
He had been there for nineteen years, having been placed there for 
life, and he could not conceive it would be for him. At last it be- 
gan to dawn upon him, and he took the pardon from the commis- 
sioner’s hand, saw his name attached to it, and wept like a child. 
This is the way that men make out pardons for men; but, thank 
God, we have not to come and say we have pardons only for five 
men—for those who behaved themselves. We have assurance of 
pardon for every man. “ Whosoever will, let him drink of the water 
of life”—it is offered to every thief and harlot, to every gambler 
and drunkard; salvation for every one. Salvation is offered to every 
man, woman, and child. 

I can just imagine the scene, as those warriors of the Cross stood 
around Christ, the tears trickling down the cheeks of Peter as he 
says, upon hearing the command, “ You don’t mean, when you com- 
mand us to preach to every creature, that we are to tell the Gospel 
to those unbelievers—to those murderers in Jerusalem?” « Yes; go 
first to those Jerusalem sinners.” And at that scene of Pentecost Ican 
imagine a man coming up and saying, “ Peter, lam the man that 
spat in His face; you don’t mean to say I can be saved ?” “Yes. 
every one of you, for He told me before He left, to preach the Gospel 


Poll 
knov 
me p 
know 


e 47 


& like it. 
robbing 
commis- 
rdons— 
the sur- 
first the 
called— 
t aman 
ring to 
irned to 
here?” 
and get 
moved. 


nd him - 


aw him 
to him; 
e chap- 
-ckoned 
looked 
euben.” 
1ere for 
t it be- 
ommis- 
1 child. 
, thank 
for five 
ince of 
e water 
fambler 
o every 


s stood 
- as he 


u com- 
Gospel 
Tes; go 
st Ican 
in that 

“Yes, 
Gospel 


ajo ee 


‘ 


ory i 


GOD WANTS EVERYBODY SAl ED, 301 


to every creature.” Another man comes up and says: “ Peter, lam 
the one who made a crown of thorns; do you think I can be saved?” 
“Yes, He will give you, in return, the crown of life.” “Iam the 
man,” says another, “who drove the spear into His side.” “ Yes, I 
know it,” replies Peter, “for I saw you doing it; but even you can 
be saved.” My friends, if those Jerusalem sinners can be saved, 
there is hope for the sinners of Chicago. One man, in drawing that 
scene, said he could fancy Peter saying, “Surely you don’t mean that 
we are to go back to Jerusalem and preach to those men who sacrificed 
You—who spat in Your face?” « Yes, hunt them up; hunt up that 
man who drove the spear into My side, and tell him in its place I 
will put a sceptre in his hand if he will accept salvation from Me; 
unto that man who made a crown of thorns for My head, say I will 
give a crown of glory; tell them there is forgiveness for all.” Oh, 
my friends, the Gospel is for every creature. Take salvation as a 
gift. It is for you. God says plainly He does not will any one to 
death—He wants all to be saved. 

When I was East, a few years ago, Mr. Geo. H. Stewart told me 
of a scene that occurred in a Pennsylvania prison, when Governor 
Pollock, a Christian man, was Governor of that State. A man was 
tried for murder, and the judge had pronounced sentence upon him. 
His friends had tried every means in their power to procure his 
pardon. They had sent deputation after deputation to the Governor, 
but he had told them all that the law must take its course. When 
they began to give up hope, the Governor went down to the prison 
and asked the Sheriff to take him to the cell of the condemned man. 
The Governor was conducted into the presence of the criminal, and 
he sat down by the side of his bed and began to talk to him kindly 
—spoke to him of Christ and Heaven, and showed him that although 
he was condemned to die on the morrow by earthly judges, he would 
receive eternal life from the Divine Juage if he would accept salva- 
tion. He explained the plan of salvation, and when he left him he 
committed him to God. When he was gone the Sheriff was called 
to the cell by the condemned man. “Who was that man,” asked 
the criminal, “ who was in here and talked so kind to me?” “ Why,” 
said the Sheriff, “that was Governor Pollock.” « Was that Governor 
Pollock? O, Sheriff, why didn’t you tell me who it was? If I had 
known that was him I wouldn’t have let him go out till he had given 
me pardon. The Governor has been here—in my cell—and I didn’t 
know it,” and the man wrung his hands and wept bitterly. My 


a age 


‘ 


302 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, . 


friends, there is one greater than a Governor here. He sent His Son 
to redeem you—to bring you out of the prison house of sin. 
I come to tell you He is here. You haven’t got to go to Heaven 
to bring Him down. He is here now waiting for your acceptance. 
You can be saved for time and eternity if'you will. My friends, 
what will you do? Accept Him and receive the crown of glory, or 
reject Him and be lost? It rests with you to decide. 


Lu 
. 


. 


His Son 
of sin. 
Heaven 
eptance, 
friends, 
lory, or 


XXXVI. 
THE PRODIGAL SON. 


LUKE xv. 32: “This thy brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, 
: and is found.” 


\ K J E have for our text to-night a man, and that man is the 
one we have been singing about—that one who wandered 
off from the fold. The trouble with that young man 

was that he started wrong, and I think you will find that that is 
the trouble with hine-tenths of the young men who start out in 
this life. They start with wrong ideas of life, and when a man 
starts with wrong ideas of life, the battle goes against him, and 
there is nothing but the grace of God will help him—in fact, 
there is nothing but the grace of God will help any of us. If you 
had talked to this young man and pointed out to him the proper 
way, and put before him the grace of God, he would have told you 
he could get along well enough without the grace of God; he was 
all right. We are not toid what led him to leave his home. Perhaps 
it was restraint; perhaps he had had a difficulty with his brother; 
perhaps his father wanted to keep him in too much, and he thought 
if he could only get away from his father’s influence into a far land, 
then he would have no one to trouble him. It might have been 
that his mother went down to her grave praying for him, and he 
thought perhaps that if. he could only get away toa foreign land 
he could forget her entreaties and her counsel. So one day he said 
to that father, “Just divide my inheritance, and I will go away 
altogether,” and his wish was granted. I think it wasa mistake on the 
father’s part. If I hada wayward boy, and I was rich, and he wanted 
a large sum of money to go away, I wouldn’t give it to him.- It 
would be his ruin. I would tell him to go away and work. It 
would be a curse instead of a blessing to the boy to be in idleness 
and have plenty of money. That’s the reason why so many rich 
men’s sons are ruined. We hear people saying, “Oh, that’s a self. 
made man,” and pointing to him with admiration; but a rich man 


(303) 


Lana 


‘ 


304 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


who has nothing to do, if he lives a righteous life, deserves far more 
credit. A rich man has temptation dogging his footsteps through 
life. Money will bring a man to ruin soon enough if he has not 
righteousness. Well, the boy got his money, and away he went. 
He feels very independent ; he can take care of himself ; he can 
work his own way. I don’t know where he went to. Perhaps he 
went away down to Memphis, and perhaps he went to Egypt—got 
as far away from home as he could. When he went away he soon 
commenced to go down to ruin. When he gets down to that part of 
the country he suddenly becomes very popular with a certain class of 
men. Perhaps he was very popular with the men who hung around 
the opera house, or the theatre, or the billiard halls. A great 


many courted his company. Perhaps he was a good talker; per- 
haps he was a good singer, and could sing a comic song; perhaps. 


he was a literary man, and entertained them with his wit, and all 
were delighted with him. But as we would say, he got at the end 
of his rope, and when his money gave out, his friends disappeared. 
The poor fellow was in a blaze of glory while his money lasted, but 
when it had gone he woke up to find himself without friends. A 
man in New England said while his money lasted he had friends, 
but when he was ruined and in prison he found out who his real 
friends were. Not one’of his old friends came near him, but the 
Christian people came and spoke to him words of kindness and 
comfort, and it was then he made the discovery who his true friends 
were. So this young prodigal didn’t get his eyes open till his 
money was all gone. No one in that foreign country loved him 
then, no one in that land cared for him ; but away off over those 
green hills there was one who loved him still. 

Some one has tried to sum up what that young man had lost, his 
friends and his money, and he had to go to work to take care of 
swine. hat was about the meanest occupation he could have 
taken to. The Jews detested swine. Why, in our day a Jew won't 
look at swine’s flesh. He went to work, however, instead of beg- 
ging, and that was something in his favor. Dvea good deal more 
respect fora man who will work, however mean the occupation, 
than if he begs. A man who won't work is a most hopeless case. 
I've tried to help that class, but I’ve about given up all hope for 
alazy man. A lazy man isa good deal worse than this prodigal, 
even at his work. This was one redeeming trait in his character. 
He sunk all pride and took to this despised occupation. The next 


turne 
been 

times 
a mar 


far more 
through 
has not 
ie went. 

he can 
haps he 
‘pt—got 
he soon 

part of 
class of 
around 
A great 
er; per- 


perhaps. 


and all 
the end 
peared. 
ed, but 
ids. A 
friends, 
his real 
dut the 
oss and 
friends 
till his 
2d him 
1 those 


ost, his 
care of 
1 have 
y won't 
of beg- 
1 more 
pation, 
S Case. 
pe for 
odigal, 
iracter. 
ie next 


THE PRODIGAL SON. 305 
thing he lost was his food. His father might have a good, full 
table, but it was not long enough to reach him. He was starving ; 
he could not even get the husks with which they fed the swine. 
There he was away from his father in the devil’s country, starving. 
My friends, that’s the way the devil treats all who come into his 
country. Oh, I pity any here who have got into that country. 
When he gets you there, you go down, down, and then he tells you 
to put a revolver to your head and blow your brains out. That’s 
the way the devil treats his followers. He lost his friends and food 
and then he lost his testimony. No one would believe him. Why, 
when he told-them he was the son of a wealthy man, who among 
them would believe him? I can see him standing without his coat, 
without his hat, or his shoes, as some fast young men of that coun. 
try came along who had helped him to gamble his money away, * 
and they point at him with scorn and laugh at him in his wretched- 
ness. I can see his look of indignation rising in him as he says: 
“You laugh at me; why, my father’s servants have more good 
clothes than you have; he’s got more money than you all.” But do 
you think they believe him? Not they. It is just like that prod- 
igal who turns his back upon God. Who will believe him? Even 
the skeptics and infidels laugh at the men who have betrayed their 
God. So this poor fellow loses his testimony. He has no home 
in that part of the country. His associates, did they offer him a 
home? Did they stretch out the hand of pity? Not one of them. 
He had lost everything but a father’s love; and let me say to you, 
poor prodigal, God loves you still, in spite of all you have done and 
been, and there is one thing, if you do persist you must go down 
to hell trampling on love. A man in want wrote to me to-night a 
pitiful letter. He asked, “If God loves me, why does He keep me 
in want?” The reason is very plain to me. Why, if that prodigal 
had written to his father for money without any sign of repentance, 
and his father had given him the money, he would only have be- 
come worse. God loves men too much to give them their desires. 
At last a famine struck that land, and it brought the prodigal to 
his senses. Prosperity was his ruination, as it has been the ruination 
of nations. Why, it was when Jerusalem got prosperous that it 
turned against the Lord. How many men in this country have 
been rvined by the prosperity we have had! Now we have hard 
times upon us, and we should thank God for these hard times. If 
a man has prosperity and turns from God, he comes to want. All 


20 


/ 


Tee gigas 


f 
j 


306 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


the wealth of the world can not satisfy any one who has ever known 
God. There is a void in his breast that can not be filled till the 
love of God comes in. Look at him now, as he stands in his miser- 
able condition. Perhaps a neighbor comes along the streets and 
sees him; perhaps he has lived next door to his father. He comes 
up to him and he says, “ Why, have you been here since you left 
home?” “Yes.” “You don’t seem to be getting on very well. 
Before I came away I told your father I was coming here, and h- 
told me if I met you, to say he loves you still, and wants you |» 
come back.” I can see the prodigal’s eye light up as he asks, “ Does 
my father ever speak about me?” “ Ever speak of you! He doesn’t 
speak about any one else. He dreams of you at night; he’s had no 
peace since you left, and I believe if you stay away much longer his 
grief will bring him to his grave.” His father loves him as much as 
ever! He doesn’t say much, but goes away to the field and begins to 
think. It would be a good thing if we could get men to think. 
If we could get the people' of Chicago to rest for twenty-four hours, 
and just think where they are, whither they are going; to look into 
the future, they would soon come to their Father. Well, the young 
man got down on his knees and buried his face in his hands, like 
Elijah on Mount Carmel, and began to think of that home over 
those green hills and under that blue sky; he thinks of his father’s 
love and kindness to him, and takes a look at his condition, and the 
thought comes to him, “I perish if I stay here.” Sinner, take a 
look at your condition. Think what is going to become of you if 
you remain as you are. O prodigal, O harlot, O thief, OW + 
ask yourself what is your eternity to be—what is going to t 

end of your miserable existence. He looks to the past, ana 
members how that mother went down to her grave praying for hitu, 
and, perhaps, recollects how she left him with her blessing. He 
might have been wealthy enough to purchase a manuscript Bible, 
and he recollects how his father used to turn to that beautiful psalm 
and read to them, “ The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want.” 
That psalm comes into his mind, and as he thinks of his starving 
condition he says, “ There’s bread enough in my father’s house, and 
to spare. His servants are a great deal better off than I am,” and 
he keeps thinking of what that neighbor told him about his father’s 
love. He remembers the morning he left him, he can see his father 
as he stood at the door bidding him good-bye, nearly overcome with 
grief. All the incidents of kindness in his early life come before 


hin 
her 
in t 
agil 
tha 
arol 
tent 
min 
His 
opir 
get 
The 
ed a 
hills 
hom 
the | 
for a 
plac 
with 
prod 
child 
alive 
old r 
retur 
mout 
snoth 
writt 
is it s 
half.’ 
replie 
If I \ 
heart 
tell h 
glad | 
and n 
paren 
father 
or wi 
father 
the cc 


RS, 


ver known 
d till the 
his miser- 
reets and 
He comes 
- you left 
very well. 
e, and h- 
ts you {» 
ks, “‘ Does 
[e doesn’t 
e’s had no 
longer his 
s much as 
begins to 
to think. 
yur hours, 
look into 
he young 
ands, like 
»me over 
s father’s 
1, and the 
r, take a 
of you if 
jy  o 
ot 
, ana 
for hiti:, 
ing. He 
pt Bible, 
ful psalm 
t want.” 
starving 
use, and 
im,” and 
; father’s 
is father 
me with 
e before 


THE PRODIGAL SON. 307 
him, and at last he says, “I will arise and go to my father ; if I stay 
here longer I will perish with hunger.” That was the turning point 
in that prodigal’s life; it was when he came to himself. I can im. 
agine an angel hovering over him, and the moment he said “I will,’ 
that angel flew up faster than the morning light, and there was joy 
around the throne of Heaven over one sinner that repenteth. Nine. 
tenths of the battle of becoming a Christian is to make up your 
mind. So it was with him. _ But I can see him now he has resolved. 
His old associates laugh at him, but what does he care for public 
opinion. “TI have made up my mind,” he says. He doesn’t stay to 
get a new suit of clothes, as some men do in coming to Christ. 
They want to do some good deeds before they come; he just start- 
ed as he was. I see him walking on through dusty roads and over 
hills, and fording brooks and rivers. It didn’t take him long to go 
home when he made up his mind. Then the prodigal is nearing 
the homestead—see him. I remember going home after being away 
for a few months. How I longed to catch a glimpse of that old 
place! As I neared it, I remembered the sweet hours I had spent 
with my brother, and the pleasant days of childhood. Here is the 
prodigal as he comes near, his old home; all his days of happy 
childhood come before him. He wonders if the old man is still 

alive, and as he comes near the home he says, “It may be that the 

old man is dead.” Ah! what a sad thing it would have been, if, on 
returning, he had found that his father had gone down to his grave 
mourning for him. Is there any one here who has a father and 
snother, whose love you are scorning, and to whom you have not 
written for years? I said toa prodigal the other night, “ How long 

is it since you have written to your mother?” “Four years and a 

half.” “Don’t you believe your mother loves you?” “Yes,” he 

replied. “It is because she does love me that I don’t write to her. 

If I was telling her the life I’ve been leading, it would break her 

heart.” “If you love her,” I said, “ go and write her to-night and 

tell her all.” I got his promise, and I am happy. I can’t tell how 
glad I feel when I get those young prodigals to turn to their fathers 
and mothers, because I know what joy will be in the hearts of those 
parents when they hear from their prodigal son. As he nears his 
father’s home, he wonders again if his heart has turned against him, 
or whether he will receive a welcome. Ah, he doesn’t know his 
father’s heart. I can see the old man up there on the flat roof, in 
the cool of the day, waiting for his boy. Every day he has been 


308 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


there, every day straining his eyes over the country to catch the first 
glimpse of his son, should he return. This evening he is there, 
still hoping to see the wanderer coming back. By and by he sees 
a form in the distance coming toward the house. As he comes 
nearer and nearer, he can tell it is the form of a young man. He 
can not tell who it is by his dress; his robe is gone, his ring is gone, 
his shoes are gone, but the old man catches sight of the face. I see 
him as he comes running down, as if the spirit of youth had come 
upon him, his long, white hair floating through the air. He rushes 
past his servants, out the door, and up to his son, whom he takes to 
his bosom. He rejoices over him. The young man tries to make 
a speech—tries to ask him to be one of his servants, but the father 
won't listen to it. When he gets him to the house, he cries to one 
servant, “Go get the best robe for him ;” to another, “You go and 
get a ring and put it on his finger ;” “Get shoes for him,” he cries 
to another; “ Go kill the fatted calf,” is the order given to another, 
“for my son has returned.” Ah, there was joy there. “My boy 
who was dead is alive again.” There was joy in that house. 

Ah, sinner, it is a faint picture I have been giving you—I wish I 
could tell you how God loves you, how He wants to receive you. 
Come to Him, won’t you? I can imagine some of you saying, “I 
am afraid if I come I won't hold out.” Well, now, look at that 
prodigal. Hehascome home. They have killed a fatted calf, and 
there is a banquet spread before him. He hadn’t seen such a meal 
of victuals for many a long day. While the old man is looking in 
at his son he sees the tears trickling down his cheeks.  “ My boy, 
what’s the matter? You don’t feel bad because you are here, I 
hope?” “No, father; I’m glad I've got home—I’m thankful to be 
once more with you.” “Why are you weeping, then?” “J’m 
weeping because I may go off to that foreign country again.” How 
absurd. That is just similar to the case of these objectors. My 
friends, does sin—does the billiard hall and the rumseller satisfy 
your Who are the best friends you have? Are not your mother 
and father, who have been praying for you from your cradle up, the 
best friends you have on earth? Is not the God of Heaven who 
has offered you eternal life the best friend you have? Just like 
the prodigal say, “I will arise and go to my Father’s house; I will 
set my face like flint toward Heaven; I don’t care for the opinion 
of my associates.” 

There is another thing. When the prodigal said, “I will,” there 


was 
teré 
use 
in 1 
cou 
he | 
forg 
star 
but 
S 
say! 
que 
pra) 
mor 
hor 
wit 
witl 
grea 
not 
he h 
take 
and 
W 
hom 
“Ty I 
large 
tell | 
had 
phot 
came 
Arth 
love: 
[I am 
who 
sham 
dispa 
and | 
May 
wand 
brou; 


eS, 


h the first 
is there, 
y he sees 
he comes 
nan. He 
z is gone, 
ce. Isee 
had come 
Te rushes 
takes to 
to make 
he father 
es to one 
1 go and 
he cries 
another, 
‘My boy 


-I wish I 
‘ive you. 
ying, “T 
- at that 
calf, and 
h a meal 
oking in 


rs. My 
r satisfy 
* mother 
> up, the 
ven who 
lust like 
>; I will 


opinion 


,” there 


THE PRODIGAL SON. 309 


was very likely a struggle. He didn’t like to go back in his tat- 
tered garments. He remembered his schoolmates, and how well he 
used to be dressed in comparison to them. There was not a boy 
in the whole neighborhood who had such an appearance, and he 
could hardly think of coming before them in his condition. But 
he conquered his pride and came to his father like a man and was 
forgiven. Let every man crush his pride and arise like a hero and 
start for the kingdom of God. There is not a man or woman here 
but who can press into the kingdom if they will. 

Some time ago I received a letter front Manchester, England, 
saying: “When you were in Manchester I sent several special re- 
quests for prayer, and we have had some merciful answers; but one 
prayer still remains apparently unanswered. Will you offer it once 
more? Will you pray once again that my dear brother, who left his 
home and wife and child above a year ago, may, if in accordance 
with the will of God, either return to his house or communicate 
with his friends? His father’s health is failing, and it would bea 
great comfort to him if he could see his dear son again. He need 
not fear reproaches—only love awaits him.” I don’t know whether 
he has ever returned, but I thought I would read it and he might 
take up some of the papers and read the reports of these reporters, 
and bring joy to his sister’s heart. ; 

When I was in Liverpool an educated lady, who had a beautiful 
home, came to me, and, sobbing, told me a pitiful story. She said, 
“T perhaps am asking an unreasonable thing, but you preach to 
large audiences. You may meet my son, and if you find my boy 
tell him his mother loves him still.” Her son was a young lad, who 
had had a little difficulty at home, and just fled. She gave me his 
photograph, and wrote his name on the back, and implored me if I 
came to America to try and find him and take her message. If 
Arthur is here he will know who I mean. O Arthur, your mother 
loves you; and she told me to say her heart loves you dearly. If 
fam not speaking to that Arthur, are there not many Arthurs here 
who have fled from their mother’s love, and are living a life of 
shame and dissipation? Go and write to that mother, or send a 
dispatch, saying you are coming home to see her. If you don’t, by 
and by you will hear that that mother has gone down to her grave. 
May the voice of the Shepherd be heard by many, and may the 
wanderer come home. Let us pray that every wanderer may be 
brought back to God before they ‘leave this building. 


! 
J 
4 
; 


XXXVII. 


LESSONS FROM SAUL’S CONVERSION. 


| WANT to take up another man for my text—the one we have 
been speaking about—a much harder case than the prodigal, 

because he didn’t think he needed a Saviour. You needn’t 
have talked a great while to that prodigal before you could have 
convinced him that he needed a Saviour. It is easy to reach 
a prodigal’s heart when he has reached the end of his rope. 
This man, he stood high in the estimation of the people—he stood, 
as it were, at the top round of the ladder, while the prodigal was at 
the lowest. This man was full of self-righteousness, and if you had 
tried to pick out a man in Jerusalem asa hopeless case, so far as accept- 
ing Jesus of Nazareth asa Saviour, you would have picked out Saul. 
He was the most utterly hopeless case you could have found, I 
would sooner have thought of the conversion of Pilate than of this 
man. When they were putting to death the martyrs to the cross, 
he had cheered on the murderers; but in spite of all this, we found 
the Son of God coming and knocking at his heart, and it was not 
long before he received Him‘as his Saviour. You can see him as he 
goes to the chief-priests of Jerusalem, getting the necessary docu- 
ments that he might go to Damascus, that he inight go to the syna- 
gogue there and get all who were calling upon the Lord Jesus 
Christ cast into prison. He was going to stamp out the teachers of 
the new Gospel. One thing that made him so mad, probably, was, 
that when the disciples were turned out of Jerusalem, instead of 
stopping, they went all around and preached. Philip went down 
to Samaria, and probably there was a great revival there, and 
the news had come from Damascus that the preachers had actually 
reached that place. This man was full of zeal, and full of religion. 
He was a religious man, and no doubt he could say a prayer as long 
as any one in Jerusalem. He had kept the laws faithfully, and been 
an honest and upright man. The people, then, would never have 

(310) 


IN. 


we have 
prodigal, 
needn't 
uld have 
to reach 
is rope. 
1e stood, 
al was at 
you had 
Saccept- 
mut Saul. 
mund, I 
n of this 
he cross, 
ve found 
was not 
im ashe 
ry docu- 
he syna- 
‘d Jesus 
chers of 
ly, was, 
tead of 
it down 
sre, and 
actually 
religion. 
as long 
nd been 
er have 


LESSONS FROM SAUL'S CONVERSION. 311 


dreamed of him requiring a Saviour. A great many people right 
here in Chicago would say, “He is good enough. To be sure, he 
doesn’t believe in Jesus Christ, but he isagood man.” And there’s 
a great many in Chicago who don’t believe in Him. They think if 
they pay their debts and live a moral life, they don’t need to 
be converted. They don’t want to call upon Him; they want to 
get Christ and all His teachings out of the way, as this man 
did. That’s what they have been trying to do for eighteen centu- 
ries. He just wanted to stamp it out with one swoop. So he got 
the necessary papers, and away he went down to Damascus. Sup- 
pose, as he\rode out of the gate of Jerusalem on his mission, any one 
had said to him: “You are going down to persecute the preachers 
of Christ, but you'll come back a preacher yourself.” If a man said 
this he would not have had his head on his shoulders five minutes. 
He would have said, “I hate Him; I abhor Him; that’s me.” He 
wants to get Christ and His disciples out of the way. He was no 
stranger to Christ; he knew His working; for as Paul said of 
Agrippa, “This thing was not done in a corner.” He knew all 
about Christ’s death. Probably he was acquainted with Nicodemus 
and the members of the Sanhedrim who were against Christ. Per- 
haps he was acquainted with Christ’s disciples, and with all their 
good deeds. Yet he had a perfect hatred for the Gospel and its 
teachers, and he was going down to Damascus just to have all 
those Christians put in prison. You see him as he rides out 
of Jerusalem with his brilliant escort, and away he goes through 
Samaria, where Philip was. He wouldn’t speak to a Samaritan, 
however. The Jews detested the Samaritans. The idea of him 
speaking to an adulterous Samaritan would have been ridiculous to 
him. So he rode proudly through the nation, with his head raised, 
breathing slaughter to the children of God. Damascus was about 
one hundred and thirty-eight miles from Jerusalem ; but we are not 
told how long he took for that journey. Little did he think that 
nineteen hundred years after, in this country, then wild, there would 
be thousands of people gathered just to hear the story of his journey 
down to Damascus. He has arrived at the gates of the city, and he 
has not got cooled off, as we say. He is still breathing revenge. 
See him as he stands before that beautiful city. Some one has said 
that this is the most beautiful city in the world, and we are toid 
that when Mohammed came to it he turned his head away from it, 
lest the beauty of it would take him from:his God. So this young 


u 


312 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


man comes to the city, and he tells us the hour when he reached it. 

He never forgets the hour, for it was then that Christ met him, 

He says he “saw in the way a light from Heaven above the bright- 

ness of the sun;” he saw the light of Heaven, and a glimpse of that 

light struck him to the ground. And when God speaks to the sin- 
ner, that’s where he ought to be. Every man ought to fall on his 
face. From that light a voice called, “Saul, Saul.” Yes, the Son 
of God knows his name. Sinner, God knows your name. He 
knows all about you. He knows the street you live in, the number 
of your house, because He told where Ananias lived when Paul 
went there. ‘Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?” How the 
words must have gone down to his soul. He stopped. The words 
were tohim. And I find preaching is not attended with much good 
till men just stop and take the Gospel to themselves, May every 
sinner hear Christ calling you by name. We Want a personal 
Christ. Well, when the question was put to him, “ Why persecutest 
thou Me?” could he givé a reason? Is there any sinner can 
give a reason for persecuting Christ? Oh, why do you persecute 
Christ? I can imagine some of you saying, “I never persecuted 
Christ. I have a great many sins; I swear sometimes, some- 
times drink, but I always speak respectfully of Christ.” Do 
you? Do you never speak disrespectfully of His disciples 
and God’s children? Remember, if you speak disrespectfully 
of them, you treat Him with disrespect. When Christ asked him 
this question, “ Why persecutest thou Me?” He might have added, 
“TI lived on the earth thirty years, and I never did you any hurt. 
I never‘did you any injury; I never even injured your friends, I 
came into the world to bless you. Why persecutest thou Me?” 
Why, my friends, all the blessings you ever got came from Him; 
why can’t you live for Him? why do you go on hating Christ? Is 
there a man in this assembly who can give a reason why he doesn’t 
love Him? Is there any reason to be found in the wide, wide 
world why men and women should not love Christ ? 

I remember hearing of a Sabbath-school teacher who had led 
every one of her children to Christ. She was a faithful teacher, 
Then she tried to get her children to go out and bring other children 
into the school. One day one of them came and said she had been 
trying to get the children of a family to come to the school, but 
the father was an infidel, and he wouldn't allow it. “What is an 
infidel?” asked the child. She had never heard of an infidel before. 


eS, 


cached it, 
met him. 
le bright- 
se of that 
> the sin- 
ll on his 
the Son 
ne fie 
‘number 
len Paul 
Tow the 
1e words 
ich good 
ly every 
personal 
secutest 
ner can 
ersecute 
‘secuted 
- some- 
. Dé 
lisciples 
ectfully 
ed him 
added, 
y hurt. 
nds. I 
Me?” 
Him; 
stP Is 
loesn’t 
>, wide 


ad led 
acher, 
ildren 
1 been 
1, but 
is an 
efore. 


LESSONS FROM SAUL’S CONVERSION. 313 


The teacher went on to tell her what an infidel meant, and she was 
perfectly shocked. A few mornings after, the girl happened to be 
going past a post-office on her way to school, and she saw the infidel 
father coming out. She went up to him and said, “ Why don’t you 
love Jesns?” If it had been a man who had said that to him probably 
he would have knocked him down. He looked at her and walked 
on. A second time she put the question, “ Why don’t you love 
Jesus?” He put out his hand to put her gently away from him, 
when, on looking down, he saw her tears. “ Please, sir, tell me why 
you don’t love Jesus?” He pushed her aside, and away he went. 
When he got to his office he couldn’t get this question out of his 
mind. All the letters seemed to read, “ Why don’t you love Jesus?” 
All men in his place of business seemed to say, “ Why don’t you 
love Jesus?” When he tried to write, his pen seemed to shape the 
words, “Why don’t you love Jesus?” He couldn’t rest, but on the 
street he went to mingle with the business men, but he seemed to 
hear a voice continually asking him, “Why don’t you love Jesus?” 
He thought when night came, and he got home with his family, he 
would forget it; but he couldn’t. He complained that he wasn’t 
well, and went to bed. But when he laid his head on the pillow, 
that voice kept whispering, “Why don’t you love Jesus?” He 
couldn't sleep. By and by, about midnight, he got up and said, “I 
will get a Bible and find where Christ contradicts Himself, and then 
[ll have a reason,” and he turned to the book of John. My friends, 
if you want a reason for not loving Christ, don’t turnto John. He 
knew Him too long. I don’t believe a man can read the Gospel of 
John without being turned to Christ. Well, he read it through and 
found no reason why he shouldn’t love Him, but he found many 
reasons why he should. Heread this book, and before morning he 
was on his knees, and that question, put by that little child, led 
to his conversion. My friends, if you make up your minds 
not to go to sleep to-night without a good reason why you 
shouldn’t love Him, you will love Him. There is no reason, 
as 1 said before, in the wide, wide world, why you shouldn’t love 
Christ. Godown to the dark corners of the earth—even to hell, and 
ask them there if they can give you any reason for not loving Christ. 
My friends, the lost spirits can give you no reason. Neither on 
earth or in hell can any reason be found for not loving Him. To. 
night put this question to yourselves, “ What keeps me from coming 
to Christ?” “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?” Oh, may 


314 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS 


the question go down to our hearts to-night, and may you not sleep 
till you can look up and say, “Christ is my Saviour, He is my Re- 
deemer,” and until you can see your title clear for one of those 
mansions He has gone to prepare. 

When this question was put to Saul, “ Why persecutest thou Me?” 
he supplemented it by saying, “It is hard for thee to kick against 
the pricks.” The thought I want to call attention to is this: “It 
is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.” You and I would not 
have had any compassion upon Saul if we had been in Christ’s 
place. We would have said the hardship is upon these poor Chris- 
tians in Damascus. But the Lord saw differently. He said, “It 
is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.” In those days, when 
they didn’t drive their camels with whips, they had a piece of stick 


with a sharp piece of steel at the end called a Prick, and it was ap-_ 


plied to the animal. A lady said to me some time ago, “It is easy 
to sin, but it is hard to do right ;” or, in other words, it is hard to 
serve God and easy to serve,the devil. I think you will find hun- 
dreds of people iz Chicago who think this way. There is not a lie 
which ever came from hell so deceptive as this. It is as false as any 
lie the devil ever uttered. We want to drive that lie back where it 
came from. My friends, it ain’t true. God is not a hard Master. 
He is a lenient one. What did Christ say to Saul? “It is hard 
for thee to kick against the pricks.” There is a period at which the 
sinner arrives when he sees the truth of this. How many men have 
said to me, “Mr. Moody, the way of the transgressor is pretty 
hard.” It is a common expression. I have been with men in court 
and in prison who have said this. It is not a hard thing to serve 
God if you are born of God; but, my friends, it is a hard thing to 
serve Satan. The way of sin grows darker and harder to a man the 
longer he is in it. Before I came down I took up a paper, and the 
first thing I saw was an account of a Boston man who had forged, 
and it closed by saying his path was a hard, flinty one. — 

Now, take up any class of sinners in Chicago. We've representa- 
tives here to-night. Take the harlot. Do you think her life is an 
easy one? It is very short. The average one is seven years. Just 
look at her as she comes up to the city from the home where she 
has 'eft sisters and a mother as pure as the morning air. She came 
down to the city and is now in a low brothel. Sometimes her mind 
goes back to. the pure home where her mother prayed for her; where 
she used to lay down her head on that mother’s bosom, and she 


S, 


not sleep 
my Re- 
of those 


ou Me ?’”? 
: against 
his: “It 
uld not 
Christ’s 
or Chris- 
aid, “It 
Ss, when 
of stick 


was ap-_ 


| is easy 
hard to 
id hun- 
1ot a lie 
>as any 
vhere it 
Master. 
is hard 
ich the 
2n have 

pretty 
n court 
O serve 
hing to 
1an the 
nd the 
forged, 


esenta- 
eis an 

Just 
re she 


> came 
Y mind 
where 
id she 


LESSONS FROM SAUL'S CONVERSION. 315. 


used to press the sweet face of her child to her own. She remem- 
bers when she went to Sunday-school; remembers when her mother 
tried to teach her to serve God, and now she is an exile. She don't 
want to go home. She is full of shame. She takes a look into the 
future and sees darkness before her. In a few short years she dies 
the death of a harlot, and she is laid away in an unknown grave, 
All the flattery of her lovers is hollow and false. Is her lifea happy 
one? Aska harlot to-night, and she will tell you the way of the 
transgressor is hard; and then ask the pure and virtuous if Christ 
isa hard Master. Go ask that drunkard if his way is an easy one. 
Why, there was a man whom I knew who was an inveterate drinker. 
He had a wife and children. He thought he could stop whenever 
he felt inclined, hut he went the way of most moderate drinkers, 
I had not been gone more than three years, and when I returned I 
found that that mother had gone down to her grave with a broken 
heart, and that man was the murderer of the wife of his bosom. 
Those children have all been taken away from him, and he is now 
walking up and down those streets homeless. But four years ago 
he had a beautiful and a happy home, with his wife and children 
around him. They are gone; probably he will never see them 
again. Perhaps he has come in here to-night. If he has, I ask 
him, “Is not the way of the transgressor hard?” Is it not hard to 
fight against Him? Do not go against your Maker. Don’t believe 
the devil’s lies; don’t think God is a hard Master. If you persist 
in wrong-doing, you will find out the truth of what was said to 
Saul, “It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks,” 

Look again at that rumseller. When we talk to him he laughs 
at us. He tells you there is no hell, no future—there is no retribu- 
tion. I’ve got one man in my mind now who ruined nearly all the 
sons in his neighborhood. Mothers and fathers went to him and 
begged him not to sell their children liquor. He told them it was 
his business to sell liquor, and he was going to sell liquor to every 
one who came. The place was a blot upon the place as dark as hell. 
But that man had a father’s heart. He hadason. He didn’t worship 
God, but he worshiped that boy. He didn’t remember that what- 
soever a man soweth so shall he reap. . My friends, they generally 
reap what they sow. It may not come soon, but the retribution 
will come. If you ruin other men’s sons, some other man will rvin 
yours. Bear in mind God is a God of equity; God is a God of jus- 
tice. He is not going to allow you to ruin men and then escape 


4 


316 MOODY'S SERM. ONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


yourself. If we go against His laws we suffer. Time rolled on and 
that young man became a slave to drink, and his life became such a 
burden to him that he put a revolver to his head and blew his 
brains out. The father lived a few years, but his life was as bitter 
as gall, and then went down to his grave in sorrow. Ah, my friends, 
it is hard to kick against the pricks. You may go out of the Taber. 
nacle laughing at everything i say, but it is as true as the God in 
Heaven that the day of retribution will come. It is only a question 
of time. See that false-hearted libertine ! The day is coming when 
he will reap what he is sowing. He may not be called to reap it in 
this world, but he will be brought up before that bar of Heaven, 
and there the harvest will be seen. These men who have got smooth, 
oily tongues go into society and play their part, and still walk around, 


If a poor woman falls, she’s ruled out, but these false-hearted liber. . 


tines still go up and down the world. The eyes of justice may not 
find them out. They think themselves secure, but they are deceiving 
themselves. By and by the God of Heaven will summon them to 
give an account. They say then that God will not punish them, but 
the decree of Heaven has gone forth, “ Whatsoever a man soweth 
so shall he reap.” 

One week ago I preached -on the text, “Christ came to heal the 
broken-hearted.” I told you just before I came down that I had 
received a letter from a broken-hearted wife. Her husband one 
night came in, to her surprise, and said he was a defaulter and must 
fly, and he went, she knew not where. He forsook her and two 
children. It was a pitiful letter, and the wail of that poor woman 
seems to ring in my ears yet. That night up in that gallery was a 
man whose heart began to beat when I told the story, thinking it 
was him I meant, till I came to the two children. When I got 
through I found that he had taken money which did not belong to 
him, intending to replace it, but he failed to do so, and fled. He 
said: “I have a beautiful wife and three children, but I had to 
leave her and come to Chicago, where I have been hiding. The 
Governor of the State has offered a reward for me.” My friends, a 
week ago this poor fellow found out the truth of this text. He 
was in great agony. He felt as if he could not carry the burden, 
and he said, “ Mr. Moody, I want you to pray with me. Ask God 
for mercy for me.” And down we went on our knees. I don’t 
know if ever'I felt so bad fora man in my life. He asked me if I 
thought he should go back. I told him to ask the Lord and we 


PS. 


-d on and 
ne such a 
blew his 
as bitter 
y friends, 
ie Taber- 
e God in 
question 
ing when 
eap it in 
Heaven, 
smooth, 
- around, 


2d liber. . 


may not 
eceiving 
them to 
1em, but 

soweth 


heal the 
at I had 
ind one 
id must 
nd two 
woman 
y wasa 
king it 
1 I got 
long to 
d. He 
had to 
. The 
ends, a 
t. He 

yurden, 

sk God 

i don’t 

me if I 
ind we 


t 
} 


LESSONS FROM SAUL’S CONVERSION. 317 


prayed over it. That was Sunday evening, and I asked him to 
meet me on the Monday evening. He told me how hard it was 
to go back to that town and give himself up, and disgrace his wife 
and children. They would give him ten years. Monday came and 
he met me and said, “ Mr. Moody, I have prayed over this matter, 
and I think Christ has forgiven me, but I don’t belong to myself. 
I must go back and give myself up. I expect to be sent to the 
Penitentiary; but I must go.” He asked me to pray for his wife 
and children, and he went off. He will be there now in the hands 
of justice. My friends, don’t say the way of the transgressor is not 
hard. It is hard to fight against sin, but it is a thousand times 
harder to die without hope. Will you not just accept Christ? 
Take Christ as your hope, your life, your truth. 


cme eee 


norm 


—_ 


(press them hard with the questio 


XXXVIII. 
CONFESSING CHRIST. 


ROMANS x. 9, 10, 11: “T,. . hou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord 
Jesus, and shalt believe in tu.4.¢ heart that Gou hath raised Him from the dead, 
thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness, and 


with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. For the Scripture saith, 
Whosoever believeth in Him shall not be ashamed.” 


h OW I think we are the only people who. are ashamed of our 


religion. If a man goes amon 


among the Chinese, He will find t 
of their religion. 


g the Mohammedans, or 
hat they are not ashamed 
Even if he has a false hope, he is not ashamed 
of confessing it. Yet we who have the only religion worth having 
on the face of the earth, are the only people who are ashamed to 
own it, and to confess our Lord and Saviour. Why, I may say with 
truth, that there is only about one in ten, who profess Christianity, 
who will turn round and glorify God with aloud voice. Nine out 
lof ten are still-born Christians. You never hear of them. If you 
n whether they are Christians, they 
“might say, “ Well, I hope so.” We never see it in their actions; 
We never see it in their lives, They might belong to the church 
you go to, but you never see them at the prayer-meetings, or taking 
any interest in the church affairs. They don’t profess it among 
their tellows or in their business, and the result is that there are 
hundreds going on with a half hope, not sure whether their religion 
will stand them or not. Now, we must believe with the heart, and 
confess, not simply profess, with the mouth. We must not be 
ashamed to speak of Him. I heard of aman who came here the 
other night who got the Spirit of Christ. He made up his mind 
not to swear again. When he went down to his store he was just 
about to swear, when he caught himself and stopped. His associ. 
ates noticed this and said, « Oh, he’s been down to Moody and 
Sankey’s.” ‘That man hadn’t the courage to confess that he had 


received Christ, and he shut his mouth up. If he had had courage, 
(318) 


et 


the Lord 
the dead, 
sness, and 
ture saith, 


1 of our 
lans, or 
ishamed 
shamed 
having 
med to 
ay with 
stianity, 
ine out 
If you 
ns, they 
ctions ; 
church 
taking 
among 
ere are 
‘eligion 
rt, and 
not be 
sre the 
3 mind 
as just 
aSSOCi- 
ly and 
e had. 
urage, 


CONFESSING CHRIST. 319 
what an opportunity he had then to confess. He might have said, 
“Yes; sir, I have, and I hope to take my stand from this time on 
the Lord’s side.” But he was ashamed. Why, the men that serve 
the devil are not ashamed. They are not ashamed to swear, and 
if they are not ashamed to swear, we should not be ashamed to 
confess the Lord our Saviour. I don’t believe people will get light 
till they take a firm stand. People who have come into the inquiry- 
room, wonder why they are still in darkness. The thing is very 
clear to me—they are ashamed to confess what great things 
Christ has done for them. They are ashamed to confess it to 
friends or parents when they go home, and ashamed to confess 
it in their business. Now, my friends, believing and confessing go 
together ; the two go together, and you can not be saved unless you 
take them both. “ With the mouth confession is made unto salva- 
tion.” If you ever see the kingdom of Heaven you have to take 
this way. How was it two weeks ago when the Republicans thought 
they were going to lose the country. They went around with peti- 
tions to get men to put their names down in order that they might 
take a stand on one side or the other. The bankers and merchants 
were not ashamed to show which side they were on—not ashamed 
to take a firm stand. There are two parties in this world. The 
party of sin going down to death and ruin, rushing down to hell an 
taking hundreds with it, and there isa party of truth, and justice 
and honor, and God wants us to take our stand on one side or the 
other. This great idea of being on both sides is ridiculous. Now 
we can not but have a great disrespect to men who are on two sides, 
You find a man and you say you are a Democrat. “Oh yes, so am, 
I,” he replies, but another man comes along and he says, “I am a 
Republican,” “I ama Republican, too,” says this same man. Why, 


you detest a man of this kind. If you bring out a sentiment before: 
him, he will tell you, “ That’s just my sentiment,” and when some- 
body comes to him with an entirely different one, he says, “ My: 


friend, I agree with you.” You can not but detest that man. A 


‘ great many men are trying to serve the devil and God at the same 
time. The time is coming when the line will be drawn, and we will - 


find out who are Christ’s friends, and who are the devil’s. Why, I 


would rather be an out and out infidel than one in this condition. | 


If Christ has redeemed us, let us not try to be on both sides at the 
same time. Let the world know that we are for Him or against 
Him. How was it during our war with the men who lived on the 


ae 


320 MOOD Y's SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS, 


borders? When a Union soldier came along, 
and when. a Southern soldier came to them, 

People; we believe in the Confederacy,” and 
Confederate flag. What was the result ? 


they were Union men, 
“Oh, we are Southern 
they would run up the 
Both the Southern and 


¥ men and women, 
» have felt improved by these services, 


» but they hadn’t the moral courage. They look 
laughing at them. 


got too many head professors—too many believers with their head. 


Just look at those 


sy was taken away 
and their flesh, probably, became like a little child’s; but only one 


of them had his heart touched. He was full of Prayer and glory, 
and when He looked down at him, and asked, “Where are the 
nine?” he didn’t know. Never heard of the 


they join a‘church, and you never hear of them. 
work for Him. A great many people say, “I belong to Christ, but 
I can not work for Him.” You can tell yo 
ions what He has done for you; 
Preaching we have. I believe the recitati 
has done more to convert infidels than anything else. When a 
Christian has Christ in his heart, he will confess, Look at that man 
talked about in the fifth chapter of Mark, from whom Christ cast 
out devils; when he was clothed and in his tight mind his heart was 
full of gratitude, and he wanted to follow Christ. He wouldn’t let: 
him; but told him to go home and tell his friends what good things 


S who tell you to 


ORS, 


Inion men, 
- Southern 
‘un up the 
thern and 
ped them 
[Ondition, 
into your 
1 women, 
Services, 
ley could 
Christian 
hey look 
at them. 
€ got to 
ou don’t 


vith the 
€ saith, 
Christ 
ve have 
r head. 
t those 
n away 
ily one 
glory, 
re the 
some 
cured 
go to 
t, but 
npan- 
verful 
rsion 
len a 
man 
cast 
| Was 
t let: 
ings 
u to 


CONFESSING CHRIST, - 321 


take religion, but don’t make much ado about it. Don’t speak 
about it. Keep quiet for a few years and see if you hold out. But 
see how it was with this man. When he was cured, I suppose he 
came back; he was so overjoyed that he couldn’t keep quiet. I 
suppose he got up at some corner on the top of a barrel or dry- 
goods box and confessed Christ. Probably he did more in that 
town than Christ Himself did. He was a living witness, and the 
love within him made him preach like an angel. As he stood on 
that corner preaching, probably, two men were coming along. 
“Who is that man?” they said. “Why, he looks like the man 
who was running among the tombs the other day.” “Yes, he does; 
the voice sounds very much like his.” They examine closely, and, 
lo and behold! this is the very man who was possessed by devils; 
and they might have been converted right there. Perhaps there 
was an inquiry-meeting, and they entered and got converted. My 
friends, a great many homes would be blessed if people would but 
testify. Tell the tidings to your neighbor; get up prayer..mcetings 
and call your neighbors in, and try to bring them to Christ. The 
time will come when we will have hundreds of prayer-meetings all 
over the city. Get your friends together, and in this way tell the 
glorious news, and let it be spread. If you have been converted, 
try to give the news to every man, woman, and child. 

A great many people wonder why God does not bless them. 
The reason is, that they are asleep. You want to wake up. I want 
to call your attention to Luke ix. 23: “And He said unto them all, 
If any man will come after Me let him deny himself and take up 
the cross daily and follow Me.” Now I find there are a great many 
people who want to become Christians, but they don’t want to take 
up that cross. They are willing to go to Heaven, but they don’t 
want to take the cross. If there is a by-way where the cross is not 
on, they want to find it. My friends, there is no other way to the 
kingdom of God but by the way of the cross, and it will be easier 
for you to take it now than it will be afterward. The devil has de- 
ceived meri about the cross, too. He has made it into a mountain, 
or led them to believe that it is made of iron and they can not lift 
it. Why, the devil’s mountains are just smoke. The lions he sets 
in the way of the Christian are all tame. The moment you take up 


the cross you get a blessing, and you see how the devi! has been’ 


trying to deceive you. I remember while in Boston I attended one 
of the daily prayer-meetings. The meetings we had been holding 
a1 


| 


322 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA YERS. 


had been most always addressed by young men. I listened with 
considerable interest to the recital of experiences of these venera- 
ble saints, when a little tow-headed boy, a Norwegian by birth, who, 
I believe, could scarcely speak English, said, “If I tell the world 
about Jesus, Jesus will tell the world about me.” Why, he said 
more than all of them put together. The words burned down to 
my soul. “If I tell the world about Jesus, He will tell the world 
about me.” If you will confess Him here, He will confess you 
yonder. Now, when you accept Him you should be willing to con- 
fess Him. You should not be ashamed to own that He forgave 
your sins. You should work for Him. If you are ashamed to con- 
fess Him, you are just practically denying Him, and the world is 
stumbling over you. I do not know anything that would wake up 


Chicago better than for every man and woman here who loves Him . 


to begin to talk about Him to their friends, and just to tell them 
what He has done for you. You have got a circle of friends. Go 
and tell them of Him. Some of you business men have got clerks, 
and you have more influence over them than any minister, and if 
you don’t use your influence over these clerks for good you will be 
called upon to answer. At that day you will be called to give an 
account of your stewardship. How many are ashamed to confess 
Christ as a Saviour. They are willing to become Christians, but 
they are not willing to put on the uniform. What would you say 
of a soldier in our war who would not put on the uniform? Ifa 
recruiting officer had been told by a man, “I would like to go and 
defend my country, but I won’t put on the uniform; I want to keep 
the citizen’s dress,” do you think that officer would have énlisted 
him? There is a great number of Christians, my friends, who pro- 
fess, but who don’t want to put on the uniform. Some of you 
wealthy men have got servants. Suppose you want a coachman, 
and a man comes to you and says, “I would like to be your driver, 
but I can not put on the livery.” You wouldn’t have him. If you 
are on Christ’s side you have to put on His livery and show which 
side you are on. By Christian people doing this there are hundreds 
of thousands who would be influenced. I can’t help thinking of 
the old woman who started out, when the war commenced, with a 
poker in her hand. When asked what she was going to do with it, 
she said, “I can’t do much with it, but I can show what side I’m 
on.” My friends, even if you can't do much, show on which side 
you belong. : 


S, 


1ed with 
-venera- 
‘th, who, 
le world 
he said 
down to 
ic world 
ess you 
to con- 
forgave 
to con- 
vorld is 
vake up 


es Him. 


ll them 
Js. Go 
: clerks, 
and if 
will be 
give an 
confess 
ins, but 
ou say 
? Ifa 
go and 
0 keep 
nlisted 
ho pro- 
of you 
chman, 
driver, 
If you 
which 
ndreds 
ing of 
vith a 
vith it, 
de I’m 
ch side 


CONFESSING CHRIST. 323 
Let me direct your attention to Luke xii. 8, 9: “Also I say unto 
you, Whosoever shall confess Me before men, him shall the Son of 
Man confess before the angels of Heaven; but he that denieth Me 
before men shall be denied before the angels of God.” Now there 
are a great many professing Christians who are doing themselves 
great injury, and also the cause of Christ. Some things have come 
to my ears during the past few days that have grieved me to the 
heart. When some have come home, and told their parents where 
they have been, they have made light of the meetings; laughed 
at them. Ah, mothers, be careful how you speak to your children. 
The time may come when you will be thankful to see him go into a 
Christian vestry and pray that he may be improved. Wouldn’t you 
a thousand times better have a son come here and be improved with 
the Gospel than go into those brothels and drinking halls? Wouldn't 
you? And yet hundreds of professed Christians are ashamed to 
confess that they or their children come to such a‘place. They 
are doing all they can to keep them away from Christ. 

One place we were in, in England, I recollect a Quaker came in. 
The meeting was held in a Methodist church, and the Spirit of 
God was there—souls were being saved; multitudes were pressing 
into the kingdom. She had a brother who was a drinker, and a 
nephew who had just come to the city, and he was in a critical 
state, too. They came to the meeting with her. Everything ap- 
peared strange to her, and when she went home she did not know 
really what to say. She and her brother and nephew went up. 
stairs, and coming down she thought, “ It may be, that the destiny 
of their souls depends on what I say now.” When she entered the 
parlor she found them laughing and joking about the meeting. She 
put ona serious face and said, “I don’t think we should laugh at it. 
Suppose Mr. Moody had come to you and asked you if you was 
converted, what would you have told him?” “I would have told 
him to mind his own business,” replied one of them. “J think it is 
a very important question, and a question a Christian oughi to put 
to any one; Mr. Moody, as a Christian, has a right to ask any one.” 
She talked with them, and when that brother went to bed he began 
thinking and thinking. He had tickets for the theatre next night, 
but when next night came he said he would go to the meeting 
with his sister, and, to makea long story short, he came and was 
converted. He came to me—-he was a mechanic—and asked me to 
talk to the laborers and have them come to the meetings. He had 


. 


$24 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA YERS. 


got such a blessing himself that he wanted them to share it. That 
man brought me a list of the names of the mechanics about half as 
long as this room, and we got up a meeting in the theatre, and we 
had that theatre packed. That was the first meeting of work- 
ingmen I ever had, and the work of grace broke out among them. 
This was but the result of the woman taking her stand. She went 
into the inquiry-room and became an earnest worker, I get letters 
from her frequently now, and I do not believe there is a happier 
woman in all England. If she had taken another course she might 
have been the means of ruining these young men. There is one 
thing the Christians ought to ask themselves, Ask your heart, 
“Is this the work of the devil?” That’s the plain question. If 
it’s the work of the devil, turn your back against it. I would if I 
thought it was. If it is the work of God, be careful what you do. 
You may repent of speaking against it. My friends, it is a terrible 
thing to fight against God. If it is the Lord’s wish, come out and 
take your stand and let thete be one united column of people com- 
ing up to Heaven. Let every man, woman, and child be not 
afraid to confess the Lord Jesus Christ. The angels were not 
afraid to confess when they came down to those shepherds, “ Be- 
hold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all 
people. For unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a 
Saviour which is Christ the Lord,” and when He came up from 
Jordan, a voice from Heaven confessed, “ This is my beloved Son, 
in whom I am well pleased.” The God of Heaven was not ashamed 
to own Him, and all the great men in the Bible were not ashamed 
to own Him. If he had said to Peter, “ Who do you think I am ws 
he might have said, “ Well, some call you Elias, or one of the 
Prophets.” “But who do you thinkIam?” « You are the Son 
of the living God.” Blessed are you, Peter. He wasn’t ashamed 
to own Him. When they put Christ under oath to testify who He 
was, He confessed He was the Son of the living God. He, my 
friends, confessed He was the Son of God. A great many people 
are trying to make out that He was not; trying to say that the 
Saviour never came from Heaven. When Caiaphas asked Him if 
He was the Son of God, He was not afraid to confess it, and the 
Priest rent His clothes and shouted, “ He hath blasphemed.” It 
was because of the confession that they put Him to death. My 
friends, shall we be ashamed to confess our Lord and Saviour who 
confessed for us? 


ee a) nt a, Mt 


RS, 


it. That 
ut half as 
+, and we 
of work- 
ng them. 
She went 
ret letters 
a happier 
he might 
re is one 
ur heart, 
tion, If 
ould if I 
you do. 
1 terrible 
out and 
ple com- 
| be not 
vere not 
1s, “ Be- 
be to all 
David, a 
up from 
red Son, 
shamed 
shamed 
Iam?” 
. of the 
the Son 
shamed 
who He 
He, my 
people 
lat the 
Him if 
ind the 
a it 
». «My 
ur who 


CONFESSING CHRIST, 325 


Now, I believe every one who loves Him, will commence to con- 
fess Him to-night, and if we begin to do this we will see mighty 
results. These little children can confess Him, and how many 
fathers and mothers have been brought to Christ by their children. 
I remember when on the North Side, I tried to reach a family time 
and again and failed. One night in the meeting, I noticed one of 
the little boys of that family. He hadn’t come for any good, how- 
ever: he was sticking pins in the backs of the other boys. I 
thought if I could get hold of him it would do good. I used 
always go to the door and shake hands with the boys, and when I 
got to the door and saw this little boy coming out, I shook hands 
with him, and patted him on the head, and said I was glad to see 
him, and hoped he would come again. He hung his head and went 
away. The next night, however, he came back, and he behaved 
better than he did the previous night. He came two or three times 
after, and then asked us to pray for him, that he might become a 
Christian. That was a happy night for me. He became a Christian, 
and a good one. One night I saw him weeping. I wondered if his 
old temper had got hold of him again, and when he got up, I won- 
dered what he was going to say. “I wish you would pray for my 
mother,” he said. When the meeting was over, I went to him and 
asked, “Have you ever spoken to your mother, or tried to pray 
with her?” ‘Well, you know, Mr. Moody,” he replied, “I never 
had an opportunity; she don’t believe, and won’t hear me.” “ Now,” 
I said, “I want you to talk to your mother to-night.” For years I 
had been trying to reach her, and I couldn’t do it; so I urged him 
to talk to her that night, and I said, “T will pray for you both.” 
When he got to the sitting-room he found some people there, and 
he sat waiting for an opportunity, when his mother said it was time 
for him to go to bed. He went to the door undecided. He took 
a step, stopped, and turned around, and hesitated for a minute, then 
ran to his mother and threw his arms around her neck, and buried 
his face in her bosom. ‘ What is the matter?” she asked—-thought 
he was sick. Between his sobs he told his mother how, for five 
weeks, he had wanted to be a Christian ; how he had stopped swear- 
ing; how he was trying to be obedient to her, and how happy he 
would be if she would be a Christian, and then went off to bed. 
She sat for a few minutes, but couldn’t stand it, and went up to his, 


room. When she got to the door she heard him weeping and pray-. 
ing, “ Oh, God, convert my dear mother.” She came down again, but: 


Sa Be ret 


326 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


couldn't sleep that night. Next day she told the boy to go and 
ask Mr, Moody to come over and sce her. He called at my place 
of business—I was in business then—and I went over as quict as I 
could. I found her sitting in a rocking-chair, weeping, “Mr, 
Moody,” she said, “I want to become a Christian.” “What has 
brought that change over you; I thought you didn’t believe in it ?” 
Then she told me how her boy had come to her, and how she hadn't 
slept any all night, and how her sin rose up before her like a dark 
mountain. The next Sunday that boy came and led that mother 
into the Sabbath-school, and she became a Christian worker, Oh, 
little children, if you find Christ tell it to your fathers and mothers. 
Throw your arms around their necks and lead them to Jesus. Let 


no one here, who loves the Lord Jesus Christ, be ashamed to 
confess, 


RS, 


‘O go and 
my place 
lJuiet as I 
BO Mr, 
Vhat has 
ein it?” 
ie hadn’t 
> a dark 
mother 
er. Oh, 
nothers, 
is. Let 
med to 


XXXIX. 


NAAMAN. 


2 KINGS v. 


YA 7 FE are told in this chapter, that we have just read, that he 


was a great man, but he was a leper, and that spoiled 

him. He was a successful man, yet he was a leper; he 
was a very valiant man, but he was a leper; he was a very noble 
man, yet he was a leper. What a blight that must have cast on his 
path. It must have haunted him day and night. He was a lepe:’, 
and there was no physician in Syria that could help him. It was 
an incurable discase, and I suppose he thought he would have to 
go down to the grave with that loathsome disease. We read that 
several companies had gone down to the land of Israel and brought i 
down to Syria some poor captives, and among them was a little \). 
girl, who was sent to wait on Mrs. Naaman. I can imagine the little 4 
maid had a praying mother who had taught her to love the Lord, 
and when she got down there she was not ashamed to own / 
her religion—she was not ashamed to acknowledge her Lord. | 
One day, while waiting on her mistress, I can think of her | 
saying, ‘“ Would to God your husband was in Samaria. There | 


is a prophet there who could cure him.” I can imagine her looking 
at the girl when she said this: “ What! a man in Israel can cure my 
husband? you must be dreaming. Did you ever hear of a man being |} 
curea of the leprosy?” “No,” the girl might have said; “but that \i 
is nothing. Why, the prophet in Samaria has cured many people 
worse than your husband.” And perhaps she told him about the 
poor woman who had such an increase of oil, and how her two boys 
were saved from slavery by the prophet; and how he had raised the 
child of that poor woman from the dead, and “if the prophet can | 
raise anybody from the dead he can cure your husband.” This girl | | 
must have had something about her to make those people listen to 4 
her; she must have shown her religion in her life; her life must havqis 
been consistent with her religion to make them believe her. We 


(327) j 


i 
i 


he intends to do. 
do. I will give you letters to the king of Israel, 


to obtain it,” Like a great many men nowadays, they think if 
 , there is anything to be Sot, it is to be got from the king and not 
from his Subjects. And so you see this man Starting out to the 


to the king, announcing his arrival. The Messenger delivers the let- 
ter to the king, and the first thing he does is to open the letter and 
begin torfead it. I can see his brow knit as he goes on, « What is 
this?” he. exclaims, “ What does this ‘mean ? This man Means 
‘War—this Assyrian king means to have a war with me, Who. 
ever heard of such a thing as a man cured of leprosy ?” 
he rent his Mantie, Every one knew something was wrong 


was, he just told the king to « send-him to me.” 
major-general riding up in Srand style to the Prophet’s house. He 


in to announce 


het doesn’t even 
See him. He simply tells the servant to say to him, “ Go and wash 


ERS, NAAMAN. 


can’t I wash myself in waters of Damascus? We ve much better 


O the king 

st “T will waters than they have here. Why, if we had the Jordan in Syria, 

3 of Israel, we’d look upon it asa ditch. The idea—wash in that contemptible __ 

snow how river.” He’s as full of rage as he can be; and he said, “ Behold, I~. | 

"think if thought.” That’s the way with sinners; they always say they 

and not thought. In this expression we can see he had thought of some 

it to the plan, had marked out a way for the Lord to heal him. That is the — 

? can not way with nearly every man and woman in Chicago. They’ e gota 

hing like plan drawn out, and because God does not come and save them ac- 

ne likely, cording to their plan, they don’t take Him. Keep this in mind: 

. Well, “ My ways are not your ways, nor my thoughts your thoughts.” If | 

her © Was you look for Him to come in that direction, He will come the other 

tla that way. ‘My ways are not your ways.” He thought. My friends, | 

“ssenger no man gets into the kingdom of God till he gives up his thoughts. 

the let- God never saved a man till he gave up his own thoughts and took 

ter and up God’s. Yes, Naaman thought that the moment the prophet ‘jf 

What js knew he was outside, he would come out and bow and scrape, and 
menene say he was glad to see such a great and honorable man from Syria. [f 
Who- Instead of that, he merely sent out a messenger to tell him togo | | 

and and wash in Jordan seven times. i 

‘wrong When we were in Glasgow we had an employer converted, and he ' 

rough wanted to get a man in his employ to come to our meetings, but he 

he air wouldn't come. If he was going to be converted he wouldn't be \ 

doubt converted by those meetings. You know when a Scotchman gets | i 

vas in an idea into his head he is the most stubborn man you can find. | 

| by it He was determined he wouldn’t be converted by Moody and San- C 

antle, key. Like a good many here, they say, “ If I am going to be con- 

lat it verted I ain’t going to be converted down in that old Tabernacle.” | 

e the The employer talked and talked to this man, but couldn’t get him | 
He to come. Well, we left Glasgow and got away up to the north of 

man Scotland—in Inverness, and he sent this man up there on business, ‘ 
He thinking he might be induced to go into the meetings. One night { 

ne'Oe we were singing, “On the banks of that beautiful river,” and he 

ince happened to be passing and wondered where the sweet sounds were 

ven coming from. He came up finally, and I happened to be preach- f 

fash ing that night on the very text, “I thought.” He listened, and | 

Vaa- soon did not know exactly where he was. He was convicted; he § 

Sit was converted and became a Christian. “I thought” how many) ™ 

oes people have said, “ I'll never be converted by these meetings;” “I'jis 


never be converted in the Baptist Church;” “I'll never be co 


Whe rae 


330 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


verted in the Presbyterian Church.” A man makes up his mind not 
to go there, and he goes. A man must yield his own way to that 
of God. N OW, you can see all along that Naaman’s thoughts were 
altogether different from those of God’s. He was going to get the 


he wanted by taking letters to the king, not the Prophet. The lit. 
tle maid told him of the prophet, yet he was going to pass the 


had got better rivers in Damascus, in his own wisdom, and Says, 
“Can I not wash there and be clean?” He was angry, but when 


i | listens to reason. So his servant came to him and said, “ Suppose 
| he had bid thee do some great thing, wouldst thoy not have 
done it?” Probably had he told him to take cod liver oil for 


|; S0me sudden shock, some great event happening to them, or some 
I) |. sudden flash of light to break upon them. Some think that God’s 
| plan of salvation requires months to find out. They go on stum. 
at bling over its simplicity. And so his servant said, “If the prophet 
|| had bid thee do Some great thing, wouldst thou not have done it? 


eS. 


mind not 
y to that 
hts were 
) get the 
ow think 
ends, we 
t a seat 
a gift. 
‘et what 
The lit- 
ass the 
of God 
tophet. 
on the . 
link of 
| He 
I says, 
- when 
€ peo- 
an get 
im to 
him, 
for a 
erally 
pose 
have 
1 for 
t he 
ould 
ng—— 
- be- 

It 
by 
»me 
d’s 
1m- 
het 
it ? 
P” 
lat 


- brings the message. 


F i ray 


NAAMAN. > 433 


will my enemies say when I go back to Damascus?” But he was 
influenced by the servant, and he went. That was one good thing 
in Naaman’s character—he was influenced by a humble messenger. 
A good many people won't accept a messenger because he is not 
refined, and cultured, and educated. My friends, never mind who 
It is the message you want, not the messenger. 
aphic message with good news, I 
look to see whether he was white 


If a boy was to bring me a telegr 


wouldn't notice the boy, wouldn't 
or black. It would be the message I would want. And so it was 


with Naaman. It was a little Hebrew girl that first told him to 
come to Samaria, and now he was told to wash by his servant. So 
down he goes and dips into the waters. The first time he rose he 
says, “ I’d just like to see how much my leprosy has gone.” And 
he looks, but not a bit has left him. ‘“ Why, I’m not going to get 
rid of my leprosy in this way; this is absurd.” “ Well,” said the 
servant, “do just as the man of God tells you; obey him.” And 
this is just what we are told to do in the Scriptures, to obey Him. 
The first thing we have to learn is obedience. Disobedience was 
the pit that Adam fell into, and we have to get out of it by obedi- 
encc. ‘Vell, he goes into the water a second time. If some 
Chicago Christians had been there, they would have asked, sneer- 
ingly, “ Well, how do you feel now?” He didn’t see that he was 
any better, and down he went a thir 
himself he had just as much leprosy as ever. Down he goes a 
fourth, fifth, and sixth time. He looks at himself, but not a specis 
of it is removed. “I told you this,” he says to his servant; “look ’e 
here; I’m just the same as ever.” 
must just do what the man of God tells you to do—go down seven 


” Hetakes the seventh plunge, and comes out. He looks 
‘s as that of alittle child. Hesays 


felt as good as I do to-day. I feel 
t battle. Look! I’m perfectly 


times. 
at himself, and behold, his flesh 


to his servant, ‘“ Why, I never 
better than if I had won a grea 

cleansed. Oh, what a grea 
gone.” The waters to him 
he had come out resurrec 
suppose he got into his chariot, at 
God. He had lost his teiper, 
lost his leprosy. That is the way now. 
pride, he vill soon see his lepro 

away with his pride. I believe t 


had been as death and judgment, and 
_¢ away he went to the man of 


If a man will only lose ‘his 


“But,” says the servant, “you | 


t day this is for me. The leprosy has — 


he had lost his pride, and he had | 


d time; but when he looked at” 7§ 


ted--his flesh as that of a littie child. I gam 


sy disappear. The leprosy will go ™ 
he greatest enemies of men in this 


iamegmna oes yever wai 


led the beautiful y 

ake back everything he brought from Damas. e 

Cus but his leprosy. The only thing that the sinner has got that God t 

wants is his sins, and if you let Him take them to-night, He will I 

Get rid of your leprosy; He will take it. Never mind your feelings i 

No soul in this audience will go down to the dark caverns if he is ~ 

willing to obey God. And now the question comes to you all, t! 

Will you obey Him? Yoy haven’t got to §0 a thousand miles away SI 

and dip into a Jordan, but Just believe where you sit—believe on b 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 


heavy laden, and I will give you 
you from obeying God now? He will give you power to accept 
Him. Do you believe He woul 

you the power to obey Him? 
such delusion, my friends. 
ing that you can not get rid 
course, hold on to it—ijf leprosy is worth more 


Purified, then keep it. Naaman could have 
leprosy if ‘he hadn’t met 


f you go out without ac 
if death comes, as it ma 
| in the Bible that you can 
“No leprosy there. 
into the kingdom 


Don’t go from this hall with any 
Don’t go home with 


of it. If sin is better to you, then, of 


to you than to be 


gone back with his 
that Prophet, and gone down to Jordan. 


cepting Him, you go out as a Sinner, and 
» suddenly upon you, there is no assurance 
Pass through the Pearly gates. There is 
You must leave it here. If a leper was to get 


of Heaven, all Heaven would be affected by him, 
_ There is a fountain opened in the House of David for the lepers, 


This night you can be saved if you will. The door is open—on the 
_} hinge; the battle is fought on this fact, if you will—not because you 
il) can't. % 

I Bi Oh, but you say, “I’ve tried.” Naaman might have said, “TI 
| have tried,” too, Probably he had tried all the Physicians in his 
i country, but Naaman couldn’t get cured. He couldn’t cure himself. 


\ 


f 


, When Christ said to that man who had a 


t when the 
a! | | command was given him, at was wanted 
ee was the will of the man, My friends, if you don’t accept the Gos. 


RS. 


usands in 
t for their 


and gold. 
ne proph. 
beautiful 
1 Damas- 
hat God 
He will. 
feelings, 
if he is 
you all, 
es away 
ieve on 
and are - 
hinder 
accept 
giving 
th any 
think. 
len, of 
to be 
th his 
ordan. 
r, and 
rance 
ere is 
O get 
him, 
pers, 
n the 
you 


A 66 I 
| his 
self, 
g at 
ried 
the 
ited 
10S~ 


ay iJ 
NAAMAN. 333 


I and obey it, and you go down to death, there " Mee a ay . in 
Sali vc i held out in the Bible. 
i the punishment 
oi : site fy tke. Bible to lead you.to believe that you will “a 
a peceapatian if you go down to the grave with that pride 
may think, I ask again, that He will ask you to repent ha hi 
‘dil life without giving you the power? The Paegseae 
that moment the blessing comes. Who will ce eat 
I Id believe for you all, but I can not. I would _ y ah: 
i nalts kingdom of God. One of two things you Aa g beh 
died accept the remedy He offers oi re ey Dae so ha: 
! an was going to do, an 
- ee Rare your eyes to see the necessity of being saved 
sins. 
by this great remedy. 


XL. 
HOW MEMORY TORMENTS THE LOST SOUL. 


LUKE xvi. 25: “Son, remember.” 


: A MAN came to me the other day and said, “I like your 
preaching, because you don’t preach hell. I suppose you 
don’t believe in that doctrine?” I don’t want any man to 
tise up in judgment and say that I was not faithful while here— 
~ that I only preached one side of the truth, Ifa man is a messenger 
of God he must tell His truth as He gives it to him; he must not 
pick out some passages and say they are true, and pick out others 
and say they are not true. Now, the same Bible that pictures to 
me Heaven, with all its beauty and glory, tells me of hell; and 
there is no picture of hell so vividly drawn anywhere as the one in 
this sixteenth chapter of Luke, drawn by the Son of God. No man 
could draw such a picture—no one but the Master Himself, for no 
man could look into the future as He could. He knew all about the 
future when He came here. He didn’t keep this terrible doctrine 
back. He gave it all up to us. If a mother loves ason very much 
and sees him going into sin, out of pure love for the boy she will 
tell him of his danger; and I contend that it was the pure love 
of the Master for this perishing world that He warned them of the 
danger. 

There is one thing clearly proved by Scripture, and that is, that 
our memory follows us into the other world. When He says, ‘‘ Son, 
remember,” we have got to remember, whether we will or not. We 
do a great many things in this world which we would give a good 
deal to forget—if they could be blotted out eternally. I heard 
john Gough say he would give his right arm if he could forget 
how he treated his mother. The memory of this will follow him 
to his grave; he can not forget it. A good many things y.2 have 
done have been forgotten, but they lie only buried in our memory. 
They will by and by be called up by God, and they will all come back 
_ again. When He says, “Son, remember,” He touches a secret 
(334) 


said he 
to accey 
to beco: 
of a fey 
Soidegsaa 
story wz 
charge 

they we: 


HOW MEMORY TORMENTS THE LOST SOUL. 


spring in our memory, and all those things were rushing back upon us, 
We can not forget; we must remember, and I think it is taught in 
that Word that this is the worm that will never di 


drowned; I had gone down for the first and second times, and, in 


the twinkling of an eye, everything I had done, everything I had 
thought—all came flashing across my mind like a panorama. 


If you 
ask me to explain it, I can not do so. The second time, when I got 
caught in the Wells street bridge, I thought I was gone, and in an 


instant everything flashed to me—things that I had long forgotten 
came back, back, back, vividly to my mind. This clearly teaches 
me that when God says “‘ Remember,” 
Everything will come back. Why, scientific men tell us now that 
it is an established fact, that everyt 
remember. It is stored away in our memory, and will come back 
sometime. I heard-of a servant girl 
reading Hebrew; she was taken sick shortly afterward, and talked 
Hebrew for hours and hours. She merely heard him read it, but it 


and when, 
perhaps, we would give worlds if we could forget it. The things 
says, “Son, 
rite his own 
biography. You may try and read it in a different way, but God 
will make you read it just as you have written it. 

Now, my friends, just ask the Lord God of Heaven to teach you 
because some of you may be under the power 
of the devil, who is trying to make you believe there’s not a word 
of truth init. If we believe the Bible, we can not disbelieve in hell, 
The same book tells me of Heaven which tells me of hell. The 
idea of no retribution comes from the devil, not from God. Adam, 
when he sinned, was told by Satan that he wouldn’t die, but God 
said he would. God has offered His life, and 


of a few years ago—he may be alive now-—kept continually crying, 
“Tf I only had! If I only had!” That was his only cry. The 
story was this: He was employed by a railway company, and had 
charge of a swing bridge. Some of the company sent word 
they were coming past in an express train at a certain hour. Sey. 


335 


\ 
336 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


eral boatmen asked him to open near the time when the train was 
due. At first he resisted their requests, but at last he listened to them, 
and opened the bridge. Scarcely was it opened when he heard the 
train coming tearing along, and it leaped into the jaws of death. Many 
of the people were killed. The man reeled and tottered, and went 
mad, and his cry was, “If I only had.” I believe many a one in 
the prison house of hell are shrieking, “If I only had yielded to 
the power of the Gospe.; if I only had accepted salvation when 
offered ; if I only had listened to the warning words.” I read, some 
time ago, of a man who, while mounting his horse at the door of a 
saloon, saw the deacon of a church pass by. He said, in a sneering 
way, “Say, can you tell me how far it is to hell?” The deacon 
wouldn’t answer the scoffer, and passed on, thinking he would never 
hear of him again. At acorner not far off, when the deacon came 
up he found a crowd, and in the midst of the crowd lay that young 
man. He had been thrown from his horse and had his neck 
broken, and had gone to eternity. Some men trifle with eternal 
things; laugh and scoff about them; but I would rather give my 
right hand than speak a light word about eternity. It may be that 
next Sunday night you will be in eternity, and your memory will 
follow you. You may forget this text, but it will come to you 
when He says remember. May the Spirit of God burn the text 
down into your souls. Do you think that Cain has forgotten the cry 
of that loved brother Abel? Do you think that that cry, and the 
sight of that blood, and the memory of that murder has not fol- 
lowed him through these six thousand years? Do you believe Judas 
has forgotten that kiss—forgotten the look of that loving Saviour 
as He said, “ Judas, betrayest thou thy Master with a kiss?” Ah, 
my friends, do you believe that the antediluvians have forgotten 
how Noah pleaded with them? Thousands of years have rolled 
away, but do you believe they have forgotten? No, they have 
* taken their memory into the next world. You remember you may 
forget in this world, but in a few years the worms will have eaten 
«the body, but the things done in it will be remembered. You may 
forget all the golden opportunities you have had, but they will all 
come up: Bear in mind that those men wh¢ are making light of 
these meetings, and saying in a sneering and contemptuous manner 
they are all excitement—bear in mind that the time is coming when 
there will be no special meetings to make fun of. You make fun 
of your praying mothers, but remember there will be no praying 


mothe 
may r 
no ble 
no Go 
urge | 
God, 1 
where 
comin 
you n 
you si 
comin, 
have r 
you h 
came t 
mothe 
There 
and ur 
the do 
passet] 
of Na; 
heard 
hear it 
mothe: 
you wi 
will be 
must a 
of Goc 
ing mo 
the ver 
those v 
Yes, 
some O 
in hell. 
gamble 
comma: 
spect tc 
be swey 
think tl 
not let 
Noah I 


HOW MEMORY TORMEN1S THE LOST SOUL. 337 


mothers in the lost world—no mothers pleading for you there. You 
may make light of that Bible, but bear in mind that there will be 
no blessed Bibles there—no Bibles to make fun of and to ridicule; 
no Gospel preachers to offer you salvation; no praying wives to 
urge you and plead with you to accept salvation. Thanks be to 
God, you may accept it. You are in the land of an open Bible, 
where the Gospel is proclaimed freely to you all. You hive men 
coming to you in your shops and stores telling you of it kindly, and 
you make light of the comfort offered. When they come to you, 
you say they are mad, and laugh at them. But, ah! the time is 
coming, and it may come quicker than you imagine, when you will 
have no friends to come and urge you to come to Christ. Some of 
you have praying children, and you ignore them. A little child 
came to me the other day, and asked me to pray for her father and 
mother. She was very anxious that they should become Christians. 
There will be no little children there who will come to you then 
and urge you to accept Christ. No blessed Jesus will come then to 
the door of your heart and plead with you. “Jesus of Nazareth 
passeth by ’’ now, but there will be no song in hell like that. Jesus 
of Nazareth passeth by. He don’t pass by that way. You have 
heard Mr. Sankey singing, “The Ninety and Nine ; you won't 
hear it there. You have heard that good old song which your 
mothers have taught you, “Guide Me, oh, Thou Great Jehovah ;” 
you will not hear that blessed hymn in that world. If you do, it 
will be the taunting by some fiend. If you wish to sing it, you 
must accept salvation here. If you want to come into the kingdom 
of God, you have to accept the salvation urged upon you by pray- 
ing mothers, pleading ministers, young converts. Yes, my friends, 
the very angels are hovering over this assembly, waiting to receive 
those who are willing and ready to accept salvation. 

Yes, I can imagine the skeptic saying, “Just go and tell this to 
some one else. Don’t talk about future retribution ; I don’t believe 
in hell.” Let me ask you a question: Do you think that those 
gamblers, thieves, harlots, and drunkards, who are trampling the ten 
commandments under their feet, they who have never given any re- 
spect to God’s word or to His instructions—do you think they will 
be swept into the kingdom of Heaven against their will? Do you 
think that those antediluvians, who were so sinful that God could 
not let them live on the earth, would be swept into Paradise, and 
Noah left to wade through the deluge? Do you think that these 

22 


338 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


people, too corrupt for earth, would go there? As I have said be- 
fore, an unregenerated man in Heaven would make a hell of it. An 
unregenerated man couldn't stay there. Why, some of you can not 
wait an hour here to listen to the Word of God. Before the hour 
expires you want to go out. Some of you just wish it was over so 
that you could go and get a drink in some of those saloons. I tell 
you, from the very depths of my heart, I believe Heaven would be 
a hell to an unregenerated man. “I don’t want to be here,” he 
would say. My friends, Heaven is a prepared place for prepared 
people, and no one will ever see the kingdom of God without being 
born of God. 

When I visited the Paris Exposition in 1868, I saw a picture with 
a little piece of paper underneath it on which were the words, 
“Sowing tares.” It was the picture of a man with the most hellish- 
looking countenance I ever beheld. It seemed the face of a very 
fiend. He hada basket in his hand which held seed, and every time a 
seed went down from his hand, up came a serpent, crawling and twist- 
ing all over him, and away off in the distance, among the trees, were 
all kinds of wild beasts. The picture fastened itself upon my mind. 
“Sowing tares.” My friends, if you sow tares you'll havé to reap 
them. Do you think those libertines, those gamblers, those rumsell- 
ers, who are ruining others, who are striking men down to death—do 
you think they are going into Heaven without being regenerated ? 
No, my friends, they are sowing tares, and they must reap them. 

“Son, remember!” If you forget the sermon, remember the text. 
Remember this scene. Look all around you—look up there. “God 
is love.” Away off on the shores of eternity you will remember it 
all. You will remember that you came into this Tabernacle one 
November Sunday night in 1876; you will recollect just how the 
choir looked, just how and what Mr. Sankey sang; you will re- 
member how he sang “ The Ninety and Nine,” and how the preacher 
spoke upon the text, “Son, remember.” May God wake up your 
memory, that you may escape the damnation of hell and flee to the 
bosom of the Saviour. My friends, don’t trifle with eternal things. 
Trifle with the forked lightning, trifle with some terrible disease, 
but don’t trifle with the eternal judgment. Remember that His 
ways are not like your ways. As the Heavens are higher than the 
earth, so are His ways than ours. If a man does not escape by 
Calvary there is no hope for him. If the Word of God don’t teach 
that it don’t teach anything. 


so ma 
Heave 
accept 
accept 
went | 
a mes 
chamb 
eleven 
Day ai 
him gr 
sitting 
will be 
stand f 
sick be 
Michig 
becom. 
He wil 
uncond 
next sj 
“ Don’t 
take th: 
you ne 
Just or 
to their 
had a re 
said, “ 
bear to 
He did 
and ask 


said be- 
it. An 
can not 
1e hour 
over so 

I tell 
ould be 
re,” he 
repared 
t being 


re with 
words, 
hellish- 
a very 
‘time a 
1 twist- 
s, were 
> mind. 
oO reap 
imsell- 
th—do 
rated ? 
em. 
e text. 
“God 
aber it 
le one 
ow the 
vill re- 
eacher 
> your 
to the 
things. 
isease, 
at His 
an the 
ipe by 
, teach 


HOW MEMORY TORMENTS THE LOST Sovz. 339 


I remember a few years ago I felt very anxious for a man who 
was present at a meeting like this. At the close of the meeting I 
asked all to rise, and he rose among the others. I took him aside 
and said, “Now, you are going to become a Christian—you will 
come out for the Lord now?” He said he was wanting to very 
much. The man was trembling from head to foot, and I thought 
sure he was going to accept Him. I spoke to him in his hesitating 
condition, and found out what was standing between him and Christ. 
He was afraid of his companions. Nearly every day and night 
news comes to me that some of these employers and clerks make 
light of these meetings, and make fun of all who attend them, and 
so many give the same reason as this man did. I said to him: “If 
Heaven is what we are led to believe it is, I would be willing to 
accept it and bear their fun.” I talked with him, but he wouldn’t 
accept it. He went off, but for weeks he came every night, and 
went away as he came, without accepting it. One day I received 
a message to come and see him. He was sick, and I went to his 
chamber. He wanted to know if there was hope for him in the 
eleventh hour. I spoke to him, and gave him every hope I could. 
Day after day I visited him, and, contrary to all expectation, I saw 
him gradually recovering. When he had got pretty well he was 
sitting on the front porch, and I sat down by him and said: “You 
will be going now to confess Christ ; you'll be going io take your 
stand for Him now?” « Well,” said he, “I promised God on my 
sick bed that I would; but I will wait a little. I am going over to 
Michigan, where I am going to buy a farm and settle down and 
become aChristian.” “If God can not make you a Christian here, 
He will not do it there,” I replied. I tried to get him to make an 
unconditional surrender, but he wouldn’t; he would put it off till 
next spring. “ Why,” I said, “you may not live till next spring.” 
“Don’t you see I am getting quite well?” “ But are you willing to 
take the risk till next spring?” “Oh yes, I’ll take it ; Mr. Moody, 
you needn’t trouble yourself any more about my soul; I’ll risk it.” 
Just one week from that day his wife sent for me. When I went 
to their home I found her in great trouble and learned that he had 
had a relapse. I asked if he had expressed a desire to see me. She 
said, “No; he is always saying ‘there is no hope’ and I can not 
bear to have him die in that condition.” I went into the room.. 
He did not speak to me, but I went down to the foot of the bed! 
and asked him how it was with him. What a look he gave me!! 


340 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


He said: “You needn’t talk to me any more; go talk to my wife 
and children, there’s no hope for me.” He pointed to the stove as 
he continued: ‘“‘ My heart is as hard as that stove now. WhenI 
was sick He came to the door of my heart, and I promised to serve 
Him, but I broke that promise, and now I must die without Him.” 
I got down to pray. “You neecdn’t pray for me,” he said. I 
prayed, but it seemed as if my prayer went no higher than my head. 
He lingered till that night, repeating, “The harvest is past, the 
summer is ended, and I am not saved.’’ There he lay in agony, 
every few minutes this lamentation breaking from him. Just as 
the sun was going down behind those western prairies his wife 
leaned over him, and in an almost inaudible voice he whispered, 
“The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and I am not saved,” 
and he died. He had lived a Christless life, he died a Christless 
death, he was wrapped in a Christless shroud, and he was buried in 
a Christless grave. Dear friends, the harvest is passing; the sum- 
mer will soon be ended; won’t you let Him redeem you? Accept 
His precious blood. Sinner, He comes to the very door of your 
heart. Te, the God of all grace, will save every soul here. 

There was handed to me a little piece of poetry to-day. I am 
not much given to poetry, but it seems to me to fit in here: 


A sat alone with my conscience 
In a place where time had ceased, 
And we talked of my former living 
In the land where the years increased. 
And I felt I should have to answer 
The question it put to me, 
And to face the answer and question 
Throughout an eternity. 
The ghosts of forgotten actions 
Came floating before my sight, 
And things that I thought were dead things 
Were alive with a terrible might. 
And the vision of all my past life 
Was an awful thing to face— 
Alone with my conscience, sitting 
In that solemnly silent place, 
And I thought of a far-away warning, 
Of a sorrow that was to be mine, 
In a land that then was the future, 
But now is the present time, 


x 


Ah, : 
your m 
rememl 


every s 


Die 


~~ age 


~) 


HOW MEMORY TORMENTS THE LOST SOUT, 


341 

my wife And I thought of my former thinking 

stove as Of the Judgment Day to be; 

When I But sitting alone with my conscience 

to serve Seemed judgment enough for me. 

t Him.” And I wondered if there was a future 

‘ To this land beyond the grave; 

said. I But no one gave me an answer, 

ry head. And no one came to save, 

ast, the Then I felt that the future was present, 

| agony, And the present would never go by, 

Just as For it was but the thought of my past life 

his wife Grown into eternity. 

; Then I woke from my timely dreaming, 

‘ispered, Ard the vision passed away, 

saved, And I knew the far-away warning 

hristless Was a warning of yesterday— 

uried in And I pray that I may not forget it, 

he sum- In this land before the grave, 

Accept That I may not cry in the future, ( 

And no one come to save, ft 

of your And so I have learnt a lesson ( 
Which I ought to have known before, 

7 Iam 


And which, though I learnt it dreaming, 
I hope to forget no more, 
So I sit alone with my conscience 
In the place where the years increase, 
And I try to remember the future 
In the land where time will cease, f 
And I know of the future judgment, ‘* 
How dreadful soe’er it be, 
That to sit alone with my conscience 
Will be judgment enough for me. 


Ah, sinner, take Him. Your own conscience will condemn you; 
your memory will condemn you. “Son, remember,” 


May you all 
remember that to-night is a night of mercy. Let us 


all pray for 


every soul in the assembly. a 


XLI. 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 


ACTS 8:30: “ Understandest thou what thou readest ?” 


Cy. thing I have noticed in studying the Word of God, and 
that is, when a man is filled with the Spirit he deals largely 

with the Word of God; whereas the man who is filled with 
his own ideas refers rarely to the Word of God. He gets along 
without it, and you seldom see it mentioned in his discourses, A 
great many use it only as a text-book. They get their text from 
the Bible, and go on without any further allusion to it; they ignore 
it; but when a man is filled with the Word, as Stephen was, he can 
not help speaking Scripture. You will find that Moses was con- 
stantly repeating the commandments; you will find, too, that 
Joshua, when he came across the Jordan with his people, there they 
stood and the law of the Lord God was read to them and you will 
find all through Scripture the men of God dealing much with His 
Word. Why, you will find Christ constantly referring to them, and 
saying, “Thus saith the Scriptures.” Now, as old Dr. Bonar, of 
Glasgow, said, “ The Lord didn’t tell Joshua how to use the sword, 
but He told him how he should meditate on the Lord day and 
night, and then he would have good success.” When we find a 
man meditating on the words of God, my friends, that man is full 
of boldness and is successful. And the reason why we have so little 
success in our teaching is because we know so little of the Word of 
God. You must know it and have it in your heart. A great many 
have it in their head and not in their heart. If we have the Spirit 
of God in our heart, then we have something to work upon. He 
does not use us because He is not in us. Know, as we come to 
this word to-day, as Mr. Sankey has been singing: 


“No word He hath spoken: 
Was ever yet broken,” 


Let us take this thought in John x. 35: “And the Scripture can 
(342) 


1m ett at nm 


God, and 
s largely 
lled with 
sts along 
Irses. A 
ext from 
>y ignore 
s, he can 
was con- 
oo, that 
ere they 
you will 
vith His 
lem, and 
onar, of 
e sword, 
day and 
e find a 
n is full 
so little 
Vord of 
it many 
ie Spirit 
on. He 
come to 


ure can 


read I could not have told you. Now thisis the trouble with many 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE, 343 


not be broken.” Thereis a great deal of infidelity around, and it 
has crept into many of the churches, too, These doubters take up 
the Bible and wonder if they can believe it all—if it is true from 
back to back, and a good many things in it they believe are not 
true. I have a good deal of admiration for that colored man who 
was approached by some infidel—some skeptical man, and who told 
him, “ Why, the Bible is not true; all scientific men tell us that 
now ; it’s only a bundle of fables.” “Bible ain’t true?” replied the 
colored man. “Why, I was a blasphemer an’ a drinker, an’ dat 
book jest made me stop swearin’, drinkin’, lyin’, and blasphemin’, 
an’ you say ’tain’t true.” My friends, the black man had the best 
of the argument. Do you think if the Bible was a bad book it 
would make men good? Do you think if it was a false book it 
would make men good? And so let us take our stand on the 
colored man’s platform, and be convinced that it is true. When we 
take it into our hands let us know that it is the Word of God, and 
try to understand it. Many of the passages appear to us difficult 
to understand, but if we could understand it clearly from back to 
back at first, it would be as a human book; but the very fact that 
we can not understand it all at once, is the highest proof that it is 
the Word of God. 

Now, another thought is, that a great many people read it, but 
they read it as a task. They say, “ Well, I’ve read it through, I 
know all that’s in it,” and lay it aside. How many people prefer 
the morning paper in order to get news. They prefer it, but it is a 
false idea. This Bible is the only newspaper; it tells you all that 
has taken place for the last six thousand years, and it tells you 
all the news of the future. Why, seventeen hundred years before 
Christ, the people were told in it of the coming of Christ. They 
knew He was coming. The daily paper could not tell us of this; 
they may be written by learned men, brilliant editorial writers, but 
they couldn’t have told this. If you want news, study the Bible— 
the blessed old Bible, and you will find it has all the news of the 
world. 

Now, we come up to the question, How to study it. A great 
many read it as I used to read it, just to ease my conscience. I had 
a rule, before I was converted, to read two chapters a day. If I 
didn’t do it before I retired, I used to jump out of bed and read 
them; but if you had asked me fifteen minutes after what I had 


344 MOOD YS SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA} "ERS, 


—they read with the head and not with the heart. A man may 
read his Bible, but when he has closed it you may ask him what 
chapter he read last, and he can not tell you. Hesometimes puts a 
mark in it to tell him; without the mark he don’t know, his reading 


has been so careless. It is to keep him from reading it again. Just - 


as I used to do when hoeing corn; I used to put a stick in the fur- 
row to know where I had hoed last. A good many people 
are just like this; they pick up a chapter here, and there is 
no connection in their reading, and consequently don’t know any- 
thing about the Word of God. If we want to understand it, we’ve 
got to study it—read it on our knees, asking the Holy Ghost to give 
us the understanding to see what the Word of God is; and if we 
go about it that way, and turn our face, as Joshua did, in prayer, 
and set ourselves to study these blessed and heavenly truths, the 
Lord will not disappoint us, and we will soon know our Bible; and 
when we know our Bible, then it is that God can use us. 

Let me say there are three books which every Christian ought to 
have, and if you haven’t them, go and buy them before you get 
your tea. The first is a good Bible—a good large-print Bible. I 
don’t like those little-print ones, which you can scarcely see—get 
one in large print. A good many object to a large Bible because 
they can’t carry it in their pocket. Well, if you can’t carry it in 
your pocket, it is a good way to carry it under your arm. It is 
showing what you are—it is showing your flag. Now, a great many 
of you are coming in from the country to these meetings, and when 
you get on the cars you see people who are not ashamed to sit 
down and play cards. I don’t see why the children of God should 
be ashamed of carrying their Bibles under their arms in the cars, 
“Ah,” some say, “that is the spirit of a Pharisee.” It would be 
the pharisaical spirit if you hadn’t dipped down into heavenly 
truths—if you haven’t the Spirit of God with you. Some say, “I 
‘aven't it.” Suppose you don’t read so many of these daily papers, 
and read a little oftener the Bible. Some say, “I haven’t time.” 
Take time. I don’t believe there is a business man in Chicago who 
couldn't find an hour a day to read his Bible if he wanted to. Get 
a good Bible, then a good concordance, and then a scriptural text- 
book. Whenever you come to something in the Word of God that 
you don’t know, hunt for its meaning in those books. Suppose 
after the meeting I am looking all over the platform and Dr. Kit- 
redge says, “ What are you looking for?” and I answer, “ Oh, noth. 


oss 


ORS, 


man may 

him what 
mes puts a 
nis reading 


ain. Just - 


in the fur- 
ny people 
d there is 
snow any- 
1 it, we’ve 
st to give 
and if we 
in prayer, 
ruths, the 
ible; and 


ought to 
you get 
Bible. I 
see—get 
- because 
urry it in 
m. It fg 
cat many 
ind when 
ed to sit 
d should 
the cars. 
vould be 
heavenly 
> say, “I 
y papers, 
t time.” 
ago who 
to. Get 
ral text. 
x0d that 
Suppose 
Dr. Kit- 
h, noth- 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE, 348 


ing, nothing,” he would go off. If he thought I hadn’t dropped 
something he wouldn’t stay. But suppose I had lost a very valuable 
ring, which some esteemed friend had given me, and I told him this. 
He would stay with me, and we would move this organ, and those 
chairs, and look all over, and by looking carefully we would find it. 
If a man hunts for truths in the Word of God, and reads it as if he 
was looking for nothing in particular, he will get nothing. When the 
men went to California in the gold excitement they went to dig for 
gold, and. they worked day and night with a terrible energy just to 
get a little gold. Now, my friends, if they wanted to get the pure 
gold they had to dig for it, and when I was there I was told that 
the best gold was got by digging deep for it. So the best truths 
are got by digging deep for them. 

When I was in Boston I went into Mr. Prang’s chromo establish- 
ment. I wanted to know how the work was done. He took me to 
a stone several feet square, where he took the first impression, but 
when he took the paper off the stone I could see no sign of a man’s 
face; the paper was just tinged. I said I couldn’t see any sign of 
a man’s face there. “Wait a little,” he said. He took me to an- 
other stone, but when the paper was lifted I couldn’t see any im- 
pression yet. He took me up—up to eight, nine, ten stones, and 
then I could see just the faintest outlines of a man’s face. He 
went on tiil he got up to about the twentieth stone, and I could see 
the impression of a face, but he said it was not very correct yet. 
Well, he went on until he got up, I think, to the twenty-eighth 
stone, and a perfect face appeared, and it looked as if all it had to 
do was to speak, and it would be human. If you read a chapter of 
the Bible and don’t see anything in it, read it a second time; and if 
you can not see anything in it, read it a third time. Dig deep. 
Read it again and again, and even if you have to read it twenty- 
eight times do so, and you will see the man Christ Jesus, for He is 
in every page of the Word; and if you take Christ out of the Old 
Testament you will take the key out of the Word. 

Many men in the churches nowadays are saying that the teachings 
in the New Testament are to be believed, but those in the Old are 
not. Those who say this don’t know anything about the New. 
There is nothing in the Old Testament that God has not put His 
seal upon. “Why,” some people say to me, “ Moody, you don’t 
believe in the flood? All the scientific men tell us it is absurd,” 
Let them tell us. Jesus tells us of it, and I would rather take the 


346 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


word of Jesus than that of any other one. I haven't got much re. 
spect for those men who dig down for stones with shovels, in order 
to take away the Word of God. Men don't believe in the story of 
Sodom and Gomorrah, but we have it sealed in the New Testament. 
“As it was in the days of Sodom and Gomorrah.” They don't be- 
lieve in Lot’s wife, but He says, “ Remember Lot’s wife.” So there 
is not a thing that men to-day cavil at but the Son of God indorses, 
They don’t believe in the swallowing of Jonah. They say it is im- 
possible that a whale could swallow Jonah—its throat is too small. 
They forget that the whale was prepared for Jonah; as the colored 
woman said, “ Why, God could prepare a man to swallow a whale, let 
alone a whale to swallow a man.” We find that He indorses all 
the points in the Old Testament, from Genesis to Revelation. We 


have only one book—we haven’t two. The moment a man begins » 


to cut and slash, away it all goes. Some don’t believe in the first 
five books. They would do well to look into the third chapter of 
John, where they will see the Samaritan woman at the well looking 
for the coming of Christ from the first five books of Moses. I tell 
you, my friends, if you look for Him you will find Him all through 
the Old Testament. You will find Him in Genesis—in every 
book in the Bible. Just turn to Luke xxiv, 27, you will find 
Him, after He had risen again, speaking about the Old Testa- 
ment prophets: “ And beginning at Moses, and all the prophets, 
He expounded unto them in all the Scripture the things concern- 
ing Himself.” Concerning Himself. Don't that settle the question? 
I tell you, I am convinced in my mind that the Old Testament is as 
true as the New. “And He began at Moses and all the prophets.” 
Mark that, “all the prophets.” Then in the forty-fourth verse: 
“And He said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto 
you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled which 
were written in the law of Moses and in the prophets and in the 
psalms concerning Me. Then opened He their understanding that 
they might understand the Scripture.” If we take Christ out of the 
Old Testament, what are you going to do with the psalms and 
prophets? The book is a sealed book, if we take away the New 
from it. Christ unlocks the Old and Jesus the New. Philip, in 
teaching the people, found Christ in the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah: 
“All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to 
his own way, and the Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all.” 
Why, the early Christians had nothing but the Old Testament to 


tel Bet MMS teletiininminminans..... SE eee Sr ee 
& 2 A 
aa 
ty 
ihe 


S. 


nuch re. 
in order 
story of 
stament. 
lon’t be- 
So there 
indorses. 
it is im- 
oO small, 
colored 
hale, let 
orses all 
n. We 


1 begins © 


the first 
pter of 
looking 

I tell 
shrough 
1 every 
ill find 
Testa- 
ophets, 
oncern- 
estion ? 
nt is as 
phets.”’ 
verse: 
ce unto 
| which 
in the 
ig that 
of the 
ns and 
e New 
lip, in 
‘saiah : 
one to 
s all.” 
ent to 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 347 


preach the Gospel from——at Pentecost they had nothing else. So 
if there is any man or woman in this assembly who believes in the 
New Testament, and not in the Old, dear friends, you are deluded 


‘by Satan, because if you read the Word of God you will find Him 


spoken of throughout both books. I notice if a man goes to ut 
up the Bible and comes to you with one truth and says, “I don’t 
believe this and I don’t believe that ””—I notice when he begins to 
doubt portions of the Word of God he soon doubts it all. 

Now, the question is, how to study the Bible. Of course, I can 
not tell you how you are to study it; but I can tell you how I have 
studied it, and that may help you. 1 have found it a good plan to 
take up one book at a time. It is a good deal better to study one 
book at a time than to run through the Bible. If we study one 
book ~:1u get its key, it will, perhaps, open up others. Take up the 
book of Genesis, and you will find eight beginnings; or, in other 
words, you pick up the key. of several books. The Gospel was 
written that man might believe on Jesus Christ, and every chapter 
speaks of it. Now, take the book of Genesis; it says it is the book 
of beginnings. That is the key; then the book of Exodus—it is 
tlc book of redemption ; that is the key word of the whole. Take 
up the book of Leviticus, and we find that it is the book of sacri- 
fices. And so on through all the different books; you will find each 
one with a key. Another thing: we must study it unbiased. A 
great many people believe certain things. They believe in certain 
creeds and doctrines, and they run through the book to get Scrip- 
ture in accordance with them. If a man is a Calvinistic man, he 
wants to find something in accordance with his doctrine. But if we 
seek truth, the Spirit of God will come. Don’t seek it in the blue 
light of Presbyterianism, in the red light of Methodism, or in the 
light of Episcopalianism, but study it in the light of Calvary. 
Another way to study it is, not only to take one book at a time; 
but I have been wonderfully blessed by taking up one word at a 
time. Take up the word, and go to your concordance and find out 
all about it. I remember I took up the word “love,” and turned 
to the Scriptures and studied it, and got so that I felt I loved every- 
body. I got full of it. When I went on the street I felt as if I 
loved everybody I saw. It ran out of my fingers. Suppose you 
take the subject of love and study it up. You will get so full of 
it that all you have got to do is to open your lips and a flood of 
the love of God flows upon the meeting. If you go into a court, 


348 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


you will find a lawyer pleading acase. He gets everything beariag 
upon one point heaped up so as _ to carry his argument with 
all the force he can, in order to convince the jury. Now, it seems 
to me a man should do the same in talking to an audience; just 
think that he has a jury before him, and he wants to convict a'sin- 
ner. If it is love, get all you can upon the subject, and talk love, 
love. 
Take up the word grace. I didn’t know what Calvary was till I 
studied grace. I got so full of the wonderful grace that I had ta 
speak. I had to run out and tell people about it. If you want to 
find out those Heavenly truths, take up the concordance and heap 
up the evidence, and you can not help but preach. Take Heaven; 
there are people all the time wondering what it is, and where it is. 
Take your concordance and see what the Word of God says it is, 
Let these men who are talking against blood look into the Word of 
God, and they will find if it don’t teach that, it teaches nothing else. 
When we preach about ‘that, some people are thinking we are 
taking our own views. But the Word says, “‘ The life of all flesh 
is in the blood, and without blood there is no remission.” 
The moment a man talks against blood he throws out the Bible. 
Take up Saul, study him. You will find hundreds of men in Chicago 
just like him. Take up Lot, study that character. Let me say 
right here, that if we are going to have—and I firmly believe in my 
soul that we are going to have, a revival in the N orth-west—if we 
are going to have it, you must bring the people to the study of the 
Word of God. I have been out here for a good number of years, 
and I am tired and sick of these spasmodic meetings, tired of the 
bonfires which, after a little, are reduced to a bundle of shavings. 
When I see men speaking to inquirers in the inquiry-room without 
holding the Word of God up to them, I think their work will not 
be lasting. What we want to do is to get people to study the 
Word of God, in order that the work may be thorough and lasting, 
I notice when a man is brought coolly, and calmly, and intelligently, 
that man will have a reason for being a Christian. We must do 
that ; we must bring a man to the Word of God if we don’t want 
this Western country filled with backsliders. Let us pray that we 
will have a Scriptural revival, and if we preach only the Word in 
our churches and in our Sunday-schools, we will have a revival that 
will last to eternity. Let us turn back to one of the Old Testament 
revivals, when the people had been brought up from Babylon. Look 


at th 
the ] 
all t 
the 
befo: 
and - 


. peop 


there 
man’ 
We: 
up el 
want 
ing t 
sight 
when 
great 
youn 
Ezra 
answ 
their 
groul 
and ¢ 
Now, 
peop! 
great 
made 
“No, 
so th. 
in the 
less a 
ane 
sweet 
for th 
of th 
streng 
Word 
all th 
obstac 
man | 
and if 


beari.g 
nt with 
t seems 
ce; just 
“t a sin- 
lk love, 


is till I 
had ta 
want to 
id heap 
‘eaven ; 
re it is. 
s it ‘is. 
ord of 
1g else. 
we are 
ll flesh 
ssion,” 
Bible. 
hicago 
ne say 
in my 
—if we 
of the 
years, 
of the 
lvings. 
ithout 
ill not 
ly the 
isting, 
ently, 
ist do 
want 
lat we 
ord in 
| that 
iment 
Look 


at the eighth chapter of Nehemiah: “ And Ezra, the priest, brought 
the Law before the congregation, both of men and women, and 
all that could hear with understanding, upon the first day of 
the seventh month, and he read therein, before the street that was 
before the water gate, from morning until midday, before the men 
and women and those that could understand, and the ears of the 


. people were attentive unto the Book of the Law.” No preaching 


there, he merely read the Word of God—that is, God’s word—not 
man’s. A great many of us prefer man’s word to that of God. 
We are running after eloquent preachers—after men who can get 
up eloquent moral essays. They leave out the Word of God. We 
want to get back to the Word of God. They had an all-day meet- 
ing there, something like this, “ And Ezra opened the Book in the 
sight of all the people, for he was above all the people; and 
when he opened it, all the people stood up.” I can see the 
great crowd standing up to listen to the prophet, just like 
young robins taking in what the old robin brings them. “And 
Ezra blessed the Lord, the great God, and all the people 
answered, Amen, Amen. With lifting up their hands they bowed 
their heads and worshiped the Lord with their faces to the 
ground.” “So they read in the Book in the Law of God distinctly, 
and gave the sense, and cansed them to understand the reading,” 
Now, it strikes me that it is about the height of preaching to get 
people to understand the reading of the Word. It would be a 
great deal better if a preacher would sometimes stop when he had 
made a remark, and say, “Mr. Jones, do you understand that?” 
“No, I don’t ;” and then the preacher might make it a little plainer, 
so that he could understand it. There would be a great difference 
in the preaching in some of the churches. He would talk a little 
less about metaphysics and science, and speak about somcthing else. 
“Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat and drink the 
sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared, 
for this day is holy unto our Lord, neither be ye sorry, for the joy 
of the Lord is your strength.” “For the joy of the Lord is your 
strength.” If you will show me a Bible Christian living on the 
Word of God, I will show you a joyful man. He is mounting up 
all the time. He has got new truths that lift him up over every 
obstacle, and he mounts over difficulties higher and higher, like a 
man I once heard of who had a bag of gas fastened on either side, 
and if he just touched the ground with his foot, over a-wall or a 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 349 


i \ 


_> + alii hantrdet rent ecee res ree sensei semana 


- 


350 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND Pk AYERS. 


hedge he would go; and so these truths make us so light that 
we bound over every obstacle. 
And when we have those truths our work will be successful. Just 
turn over to Jeremiah xx. 9, to this blessed old prophet. There 
was 4 11/00 when he was not going to speak about the Word of God 
any morc, Now I just want to show you this, when a man is filled 
with the Word of God you can nv keep him still. If aman has got 
the Word, he must speak or die. “Then I said, I will not make 
mention of Him, nor speak any more in His name, but His Word 
was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was 
weary with forbearing, and I could not stay.” It set him on fire, 
and so a man filled with the Word of God is filled as with a burn- 
ing fire, and it is so easy for a man to work when he is filled with 
the Word of God. I heard of a man the other week who was going 
to preach against the blood. I was very anxious to see what he 
would say about it, and I got the paper next morning and found 
there was nothing else there than Scriptural quotations. I said 
that was the very best thing he could do. As we see in the twenty- 
third chapter of Jeremiah: “Is not my Word like as a fire, saith the 
Lord, that breaketh the rock in pieces?”’ Those hard, flinty rocks 
will be broken if we give them the word of God. Those men in the 
Northwest that we can not reach by our own words, give them this 
and see if they can not be reached. Not only that, if we are full of 
Scripture ourselves, give them what God says, you will find it easy 
to preach—you will say we haven’t to get up so many sermons. It 
seems to me if we had more of the Word of God in our services 
and give up more of our own thoughts, there would be a hundred 
times more converted than there are. A preacher, if he wants to 
give his people the Word, must have fed on the Word himself. A 
man must get water out of a well when there is water. He may 
dip his bucket in if it is empty, but he will get nothing. I think 
the best thing I have heard in Chicago, I heard the other day, and 
it has fastened itself upon my mind, and I must tell it to you 
ministers. We had for our subject in Farwell Hall the other day 
the seventh chapter of John, when the Rev. Mr. Gibson said if a 
man was to come among a lot of thirsty men with an empty bucket 
they wouldn’t come to him to drink. He said he believed that 
was the trouble with most of the ministers, as that had been the 
trouble with himself. He hadn’ got a bucket of living water, and 
the people wouldn’t come to him. Just look at an audience of 


ee 


thirs 


this t 
but i 
bette: 
sO m: 
There 
‘under 
quote 
natio1 
can n 
began 
“that 
preacl 
amon; 
draw 
carefu 
better 
read t 
there 
I ws 
ing a 
said tl 
“The 
childre 
like a1 
but gx 
compa 
folk.” 
like to 
a rock 


S, 
tht that 


ul. Just 
There 
| of God 
is filled 
has got 
t make 
s Word 
id I was 
on fire, 
a burn- 
ed with 
is going 
vhat he 
1 found 
I said 
twenty- 
ith the 
y rocks 
1in the 
em this 
full of 
it easy 
ns. It 
ervices 
undred 
ants to 
elf. A 
le may 
[ think 
ly, and 
to you 
er day 
1id ifa 
bucket 
d that 
en the 
or, and 
nce of 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE, 351 


thirsty men, and you bring in a bucket of clear, sparkling water and 
see how they will go for it. If you go into your Sunday-schools and 
the children look into your buckets and see them empty, there is 
nothing for them there. So, my friends, if we attempt to feed others 
we must first be fed ourselves. 

There is another thing which has wonderfully helped me. That 

is, to mark my Bible whenever I hear anything that strikes me. If 
a minister has been preaching to me a good sermon, I put his name 
down next to the text, and then it recalls what has been said, and I 
can show it to others. You know we laymen have the right to 
take what we hear to one another. If ministers saw people doing 
this they would preach a good deal better sermons. Not only that, 
but if we understood our Bibles better the ministers would preach 
better. I think if people knew moze about the Word than they do, 
so many of them would not be carried away with false doctrine. 
There is no place I have ever been in where people so thoroughly 
‘understand their Bibles as in Scotland. Why, little boys could 
quote Scripture and take me up on a text. They have the whole 
nation just educated, as it were, with the Word of God. Infidelity 
can not come there. A man got up, in Glasgow, at a corner and 
began to preach universal salvation. “ Oh, sir,” said an old woman, 
“that will never save the like of me.” She had heard enough 
preaching to know that it would never save her. If a man comes 
among them with any false doctrine, these Scotchmen instantly 
draw their Bibles on him. I had to keep my eyes open, and be 
careful what I said there. They knew their Bibles a good deal 
better than I did. And so if the preachers could get the people to 
read the Word of God more carefully, and note what they heard, 
there would not be so much infidelity among us. 

I want to tell you how I was bles: :d a few years ago, upon hear- 
ing a discourse upon the thirtieth chapter of Proverbs. The speaker 
said the children of God were like four things. The first thing was, 
“The ants are a people not strong,” and he went on to compare the 
children of God to the ants. He said the people of God were 
like ants. They pay no attention to the things of the present, 
but go on steadily preparing for the future. The next thing he 
compared them to was the conies, “The conies are but a feeble 
folk.” It is a very weak little thing. “Well,” said I, “I wouldn't 
like to be as a coney.” But he went on to say that it built upon 
a rock. The children of God were very weak, but they laid their 


352 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


foundation upon a rock. “ Well,” said I, “I will be like a coney 
and build my hopes upon a rock.” Like the Irishman who said he 
‘trembled himself, but the rock upon which his house was built 
never did. The next thing the speaker compared them to was a 
locust. I didn’t think much of locusts, and I thought I wouldn't 
care about being like one. But he went on to read they have “no 
king, yet they go forth, all of them, by bands.” There were the 
Congregationalists, the Presbyterians, the Methodist bands going 
forth without a king, but, by and by, our King will come back again, 
and these bands will fly to them. “ Well, I will be like a locust ; my 
King’s away,” I thought. The next comparison was a spider. I 
don’t like this at all; but he said if we went into a gilded palace 
filled with luxury, we might see a spider holding on to something, 
oblivious to all the luxury below. It was laying hold on the things 
above. “Well,” said I, “I would like to be a spider.” = [ 
heard this a good many years ago, and I just put the speaker's 
name to it and it makés the sermon. But take your Bibles and 
mark them. Don’t think of wearing it out. It is a rare thing 
to find a man wearing his Bible out nowadays—and Bibles are 
cheap too. You are living in a land where there are plenty. 
Study them and mark them, and don’t be afraid of wearing them, 
Now don’t you see how much better it would be to study it? And 
if you are talking to a man, instead of talking about your neigh- 
bors, just talk about the Bible; and when Christian men come 
together, just compare notes, and ask one another: “ What have 
you found new in the Word of God since I saw you last?” Some 
men come to me and ask me if I have picked up anything new, and 
I give them what I have and they give me what they have. An 
Englishman asked me some time ago, “Do you know much about 
Job?” “Well, I know a little,” I replied. “If you've got the key 
of Job you've got the key to the whole Bible.” What,” I replied, 
“T thought it was a poetical book.” “Well,” says he, “I will just 
divide Job into seven heads. The first is the perfect man—untried 


—and that is Adam and Eve before they fell. The second head is — 


tried by adversity—Adam after the fall. The third is the wisdom 
of the world—the three friends who came to try to help Job out of 
his difficulties. They had no power to help him at all.” He could 
stand his scolding wife, but he couldn’t stand them. The fourth 
head takes the form of the Mediator, and in the fifth head God 
speaks at last. He heard Him before by the ear, but he hears Him 


mow 
men 
men, 
are s 
their 
his le 
burd 
him | 
how 
I eve 
He g 
so th 


Ou 
for p 
ask T 
this < 
than 
streng 
work, 
place 
churc!] 
havin; 
our fa 
eye; | 
ceive | 
go to 
down 
them- 
praise 


Ss. 


a coney 
said he 
as built 
[tO Was a 
vouldn’t 
ave “no 
vere the 
ls going 
k again, 
ust; my 
jider. I 
1 palace 
nething, 
e things 
eo 4 
peaker’s 
les and 
e thing 
bles are 
plenty. 
> them, 
? And 
Y neigh- 
n come 
at have 

Some 
ew, and 
re. An 
h about 
the key 
replied, 
vill just 
untried 


head is — 


wisdom 
out of 
e could 
fourth 
id God 
rs Him 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 353 


now by the soul, and he fell down flat upon his face. A good many 
men in Chicago are like Job. They think they are mighty good 
men, but the moment they hear the voice of God they know they 
are sinners—they are in the dust. There isn’t much talk about 
their goodness then. Here he was with his face down. Job learned 
his lesson. That was the sixth head, and in these heads were the 
burdens of Adam's sin. The seventh head was when God showed 
him His face. Well, I learned the key to the Bible; I can not tell 
how this helped me. I told it to another man, and he asked me if 
I ever thought of how he got his property back and his sheep back, 
He gave Job double what he had, and gave him ten children besides, 
so that he should have ten in Heaven besides his ten on earth. 


PRAYER. 


Our heavenly Father, may we look fora blessing ere we go hence, 
for precious blessings before we go out of this place. We would 
ask Thee to bless every minister and every church who have entered 
this alliance. Next Sunday may they enter their pulpits weaker 
than they have ever been before. May they lose all their own 
strength and receive from Thee that which is so necessary to the 
work. May Thy blessing descend on us as we pray here in one 
place and with one accord. May it please Thee to bless all these 
churches, not missing one, and may the news come of great things 
having been done through the medium of this gathering. Increase 
our faith; take away our miserable unbelief. May we see eye to 
eye; may every heart beat true to Christ. May all these men re- 
ceive from on high the power they need so much. And now as we 
go to the Tabernacle to speak to the drunkard who is being dragged 
down to hell, may it please Thee to give us the power to reclaim 
them—to set the captives free—and we will give to Christ all the 
praise and glory. Amen. 


23 


XLII. 


FIVE ONE THINGS. 


HE first thing is: One thing thou lackest. Now, it is a very 
common expression that that man would bea splendid man 
if it was not for one thing. How many times have wives 

come to me and said about their husbands, “ He is almost perfect, 
but is. not a Christian.” Why, if he is not a Christian he lacks 
everything. Ifa man is a beggar, all he lacks to become a rich man 
is wealth; all that a blind man lacks in order to see is his sight ; 
and, as I said the other day, if a dead man had life he would bea 
dead man no longer—he lacks life and he lacks everything. So ifa 
man lacks Christianity he lacks salvation, and that is everything. 
Now, in the nineteenth chapter of Matthew the man who spoke to 
Christ was a formalist. He said, “Good Master, what shall I do to 
inherit eternal life?” And he was told if he was to get into Heaven 


by doing anything, he was to get there by keeping the command. 


ments, and He commenced to enumerate them. When he had 
heard Him through, the young man said unto Him, “All these 
things have I kept from my youth up.” But the Lord could read 
his heart. He thought he had complied with all God’s require- 
ments, like thousands of formalists now. He saw his heart was 
given to wealth. He said to him, “If thou wilt be perfect, go and 
sell what thou hast got and give to the poor, and thou shalt have 
treasure in Heaven,” and he went away sorrowfully. His heart was 
set upon things here. He lacked one thing; in that one thing he 
lacked everything. Hundreds of thousands lack everything. They 
expect to save themselves by their good deeds. They go on doing 
good deeds, and thinking that will save them, but they must take 
salvation. Unless a man becomes converted, is born again, and be- 
comes a child of God, he can not enter the kingdom of God. 
Another thing I want to call your attention to—* There is one 
thing I know.” If a man has been saved, he has to knowit. A 


great many people have not got assurance. Many think that as- 
(354) 


suranc 

must \ 

wheth 

preach 

miiniste 

talk uf 
for a 
I woul 
that he 
man n¢ 
Aman 

can pre 
we mu: 
the Lo 

when t 
his voi 
liveth ; 

this ge 
Now tl 
gives p 
are you 
salvatic 
of God 

what at 
betwee: 
that mc 
rest, we 
have sa 
on the 

Louis i1 
is ont 
are on 

is contr 
we can 

“We kr 
epistle | 
which h 
partake 
livered 1 
this is a 


a very 
lid man 
€ wives 
perfect, 
ic lacks 
ch man 
sight ; 
Id bea 
So ifa 
ything. 
Oke to 
[ do to 
Teaven 


mand... 


1e had 
these 
d read 
>quire- 
rt was 
zo and 
t have 
rt was 
ing he 

They 
doing 
t take 
nd be- 


is one 
it. A 
lat as- 


FIVE ONE THINGS. 355 


surance is not to be had while traveling through the world—they 
must wait till they get before the terrible judgment-seat to know 
whether they are accepted or not. And I find some ministers 
preach this precious doctrine from their pulpits. I heard of a 
minister who, while on his way to the burial of a man, began to 
talk upon the subject of assurance. “Why,” said he, “if I knew 
for a certainty that I was saved, the carriage couldn’t hold me. 
I would have to jump out with joy.” A man should be convinced 
that he has the Gospel before he preaches it to any one else. Why,a 
y man necd not try to puil a man out of the river if he is in it himself. 
f® Aman need not try to lift aman out ofa pit if he is there too. No man 
i can preach salvation till he knows he is saved. Not only that, but 
™@ we must, as Paul says, be absent from the body and present with 
the Lord in order to preach effectively. Look at Job in his trials, 
when the waves of affliction were rolling over him. You can hear 
his voice shouting above the billows, “I know that my Redeemer 
liveth ;” and if Job knew, then the children of God away down in 
this generation, with an open Bible before them, ought to know. 
Now there can not be any peace where there is uncertainty. He 
gives peace and joy that flow like a river over the soul. Now, how 
are you going to have peace and joy if we do not know we have 
salvation ; if we do not know for a certainty that we have been born 
of God? Look at that mother at the sick bed of her child; with 
| what anxiety does she not hover over that little one just balancing 
f, between life and death. There is no comfort, there is no sleep for 
that mother. She is filled with uncertainty, and so we can have no 
- rest, we can have no peace, if we are uncertain whether or not we 
(have salvation. Suppose a man is going to Cincinnati, and he gets 
% on the cars, but he feels uneasy lest the train will take him to St, 
Louis instead of his destination. He will not rest till he knows he 
is on the right road, and we should not rest until we know we 
are on the right road to salvation. Not to know our destination 
is contrary to Scripture. If we want peace, we must know it, and 
we can know it; it is the Word of God. Hear what Peter says: 
», “We know we have an incorruptible dwelling.” Then ,in Paul’s 
epistle to the Colossians i. 12: “Giving thanks unto the Father 
which hath made us meet ’—hath made us, not going to—“ to be 
partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light. Who hath de- 
livered us”—not going to deliver us, but He hath delivered us; 
this is an assurance—“ from the power of darkness, and hath trans- 


356 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


lated us into the kingdom of His dear Son.” A person came to 
me some time ago and said, “ Mr. Moody, I wish you would give 
me a book that preaches assurance, and that tells the children of 
God it is their privilege to know they are accepted.” I said, “Here 
is a book; it is very orthodox. lt was written by John, the most 
intimate friend of Jesus while He was on earth ; the man who laid 
his head upon His bosom. Turn to John and see what he says in 
the 5th chapter, “For in them ye think ye have eternal life.” 
Why, that whole epistle, I believe, was written with this one object, 
that we might know we have eternal life. There is no doubt about 
assurance in the Word of God. A person said to me some time 
ago: “I think it is great presumption for a person to say she is 
saved.” I asked her if she was saved. “J belong to a church,” 
she sobbed. “ But are you saved?” “J believe it would be pre- 
sumption in me to say that I was saved.” « Well, I think it is a 
greater piece of presumption for any one to say: ‘I don’t know if 
they believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,’ because it is written, ‘He that 
believeth on Me hath everlasting life.’” It is clearly stated that we 
have assurance then. Now, I finda great many people who want 
some evidence that they have accepted the Son of God. My 
friends, if you want any evidence take God’s word for it. You 
can’t find better evidence than that. You know that when the 
Angel Gabriel came down and told Zachariah he should have a son, 
he wanted a further token than the angel’s word. He asked 
Gabriel for it and he answered, “I am Gabriel who stands in the 
presence of the Lord.” He had never been doubted, and he 
thundered out this to Zachariah. 

But he wanted a further token, and Gabriel said, “ You shall have 
a token; you shall be dumb till your son shall be given you.” And 
So, many people want a further token than His Word, and that is 
the reason there are so many dumb Christians. If He said we 


should have eternal life, He did not mean life for two years or a 


y 
oe. 


months, it is for all eternity; and if the gift of God is not everlast- 
ing life, what is it? When we partake of salvation, we partake of 
the incorruptible seed which never perishes. My friends, it is the 
privilege of every child of God to know fora certainty that you are 
saved, and if you don’t know you are saved, you are spending your 


time in nought. You can say like that blind beggar, “I know.” 


Why, all the scoffers and infidels at Jerusalem tried to make him 
believe he did not know. Probably they tried to make him believe 


ber 
aes 


ai 
F 


he w: 
tell | 
know 
And 
he c: 
suran 
Sout] 
they | 
that / 
tion, : 
Bible. 
thing 
buildi 
of sal) 
the fa 
hopes 
unto ] 
The 
A grea 
Marth 
Him. 
ple to 
when | 
—but 
may ¢ 
have n 
learnec 
I hear 
brim, a 
overflo 
as full 
was wl 
for Hit 
brimful 
and yc 
scythe 
have I 
the mo 
effort. 
dull sc 


RS. 


n came to 
ould give 
lildren of 
id, ‘“‘ Here 
the most 
| who laid 
le says in 
nal life.” 
1e object, 
ibt about 
»me time 
ty she is 
church,” 
1 be pre- 
ik it isa 

know if 
‘He that 
| that we 
ho want 
od. My 
it. You 
then the 
ve a son, 
e asked 
Is in the 

and he 


iall have 
” And 
d that is 
said we 
years or 
>verlast- 
rtake of 
it is the 
you are 
ng your 
know.” 
ake him 
believe 


FIVE ONE THINGS. 357 


he was some other woman’s son than his mother’s, They tried to 
tell him that he was not cured of his blindness, but he said, “I 
know.” He was convinced that he had got his sight that day, 
And the man of God who has fixed his feet on the rock of salvation, 
he can say with certainty, “I know.” If you have not got as- 
surance, and want it, just believe God’s Word. If you go down 
South and ask those three million colored people how they think 
they are free, they won't talk about their feclings; they just believe 
that Abraham Lincoln made them free. They believe the proclama- 
tion, and so we must believe the proclamation God has made in the 
Bible. “One thing thou teachest,” that is salvation. The next 
thing is to be sure that we have it—to know it beyond doubt; not 
building our hopes upon some rotten vision - 
of salvation upon some form or creed: not building our hopes upon 
the fact of our belonging to this or that church; but to base our 
hopes upon the sure knowledge that we have passed from death 
unto life. 
The next “one thing” I want to tell you of is what Mary chose. 
A great many women wonder why the Lord commended Mary and not 
Martha. Why, Mary just sat at the feet of Jesus and learned of 
Him. Before we can be successful in the ministry and bring peo- 
ple to Christ we must learn humility. We live ina very rapid age, 
when everything is in business—in the age of telegraph and steam 
—but we must have time to learn to sit at the fect of Jesus. You 
may go through Harvard or Princeton or Yale Colleges, but if you 
have not learned this, your efforts will not be blessed. If you have 
learned, you will be brimful of His Spirit. When I was in Glasgow 
I heard Dr. Bonar say, he got a tumbler of water just filled to the 
brim, and whenever he merely dipped his finger into it the water 
overflowed. Now every child of God wants to have his heart just 
as full of the love of God as that tumbler was of water, and that 
was what Mary had. She had a fullness and could then go to look 
for Him. May you who have come up to this convention return 
brimful of His Spirit. May they go back with their scythes whetted, 
and you know you can mow more in ten mintes with a sharp 
scythe than you can in an hour with a dull one. How many times 
have I tried to mow with a dull scythe and could do nothing, but 
the moment I got it sharpened I could cut the grass without any 
effort. That is the trouble with us; we are trying to mow with 
dull scythes. We want to be filled with the Spirit—we want to 


not building our hopes 


358 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA YEFS. 


learn humility—to sit at the feet of Jesus. If we have not learned 
this lesson we are like men with dingy lanterns; people can not see 
our light, but if we have learned this lesson we will be as living 
epistles, and we will be read by all. Yes, the third “one thing” is 
to learn to sit at the feet of Jesus. 

The fourth “one thing” is to know that He is your Master. I find 
a great many people with a good many masters. A great many of 
them work for the public, but they don’t get much for their work. 
Ask these politicians, and they will tell you they don’t get much for 
their service. Go and ask those who have been in the House of 
Representatives, or in the Senate, or in the Legislature, what they 
get for their public service. Why, they get nothing but sneers. 
The man who serves the public, when he goes down to his old age, 
how soon he is forgotten. A great many work for only selfish aims 
-—working for the accumulation of money. Others are working to 
gratify ambition ; they'‘want to make a name for themselves in letters ; 
and others again are serving the world; but all those who are not 
serving God are serving the devil, and he is binding them hand and 
foot. But if we serve Jesus Christ, He is our Master, and I want 
to testify to you that He is a good Master—that He is a kind and 
forbearing Master. If a public man makes a mistake, the world 
never forgives him. Look at the public man who has made a mis- 
take—why, he is shut out ever after; the world has written him 
down. But if the servant of the Lord Jesus Christ makes a mistake, 
all he has to do is just to come to Him and tell Him, and He will 
forgive him. He is a good Master, and if we but trust Him we will 
have success in His service. If we do not work so much for this 
society or that society, this or that public institution, but for Him, 
and remember that in Him we have our only Master, then the 
churches will be built up, because then we will be working only to 


glorify Him. We can not serve two masters. That has been de- a 


creed by Heaven already. Scripture has settled that forever. Well, 


now, who is your Master? Can you say to-night you have got only ie: 
one Master? Some men are trying to serve both Him and another 


master. Can you say He is your Master? If you can, you have but 


one, and will be working for Him alone, and your work will be suc- 4 
cessful. Look at these mighty men working for King David. They cs 
left Saul. They did not try to serve both Saul and David. They Be 


left him and went with David to the cave of Adullam, and when 


David cried, “Oh, for a draught of water,” they cut their way | 


my a 
an in 
than 
hims 


FS. 


ot learned 
‘an not see 
> as living 
thing” is 


ter. I find 
> Many of 
heir work. 
> much for 
House of 
what they 
ut sneers. 
is old age, 
sIfish aims 
orking to 
in letters; 
oO are not 
hand and 
nd I want 
kind and 
the world 
ade a mis- 
itten him 
1 mistake, 
1 He will 
m we will 
1 for this 
for Him, 
then the 
g only to 


been de- @& 


er. Well, 


got only 4 
1 another | 


have but 


Il be suc- 4 4 
id. They 2 
d. They 


ind when 
heir way 


FIVE ONE THINGS. 359 


threugh the Philistines, in the face of death, to serve him. They 
weve willing to die for him. And so if we recognize Christ as our 
Master we will be wiiling to sacrifice everything for Him, will be 
ready to die for Him. Let us look up to Him whom God has raised 
from the grave—He who was raised from the sepulchre and placed 
on His right hand. Look at those nails in His feet, look at those 
nails in His hands, see that crown of thorns on His head, and re- 
member that He is the Captain of our salvation, and let us fee} that 
we are willing to die for Him. I remember hearing of a general who 
was taken off the battle-field in a dying condition, and when they 
were bearing him away he said: “Take me back to the battle-field 
and let the men see my wounds, and that will give them courage to 
go to the battle.” He was taken back to the field, and when the 
men saw their dying general pierced by the enemy’s bullets, it filled 
them with courage, and they tore down upon the enemy and con- 
quered. Remember that Christ is our Captain, and that He has 
beeu pierced and wounded in our cause, and we will be filled with 
enthusiasm. 

The fifth “one thing” I want to call your attention to is found 
in one of the texts which I like. It was Paul’s motto. ‘He was a 
man of one idea. Now the-world looks down upon a man with one 
idea. And especially if that idea is for Christ Jesus, he is a bigot, 
a narrow-minded man in the eyes of the world. But I tell you, if a 
man has got one idea he is a terrible man. It is those men who have 
only one idea who thoroughly succ:ed. Take a man of business ; 
if he goes into several things it won’t be long before he will go 
down; he keeps to one thing and then he is successful. And so 
you ministers, if you want to serve Christ, have fewer ideas than 
you have; get off some of those committees. Some of you are 
serving on educational committees; some of you are serving on 
foreign committees. You are bound up with this and that commit- 
tee, and you have no time to devote to saving souls. I remember 
when I was in Chicago, before the fire, I was on some ten or twelve 
committees; my hands were full. If a man came to me to talk 
about his soul, I would say, “I haven’t time; got a committee to 
attend to.” But now I have turned my back on everything—turned 
my attention to saving souls, and God has blessed mé and made me 
an instrument to save more souls during the last four or five years: 
than during all my previous life. And so if a minister will devote 
himself to this undivided work, God will bless him. Take that 


360 MOOD :"S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


motto of Paul’s: “One thing I do. Forgetting the things which 
are behind, and pressing forward to those things which are be‘ore. 
I press forward toward the mark of the high calling of God in Christ 
Jesus.” Some of these dear men who have come down to this con- 


vention, think they have got all the blessing wanted. Some of - 


them say, “ We are full;” but it is a question what fullness is. I 
tell you, if a man is full of the Holy Spirit, what a mighty man he 
becomes. When he gets this idea down in his soul, he forgets every- 
thing behind him and reaches out to the things above. Do you say: 
“There is one thing I have got to do—press toward the mark of 
my higher calling?” Does everything sink beside this idea? If 
you will allow me an expression, Satan got a match when he got 
Paul. THe tried to get him away from God, but he never switched 
off. Look how they tortured him; look how they stripped and 
beat him. Not only did the Romans do this, but the Jews also. 
How the Jews tried to drag him from his high calling; how they 
stripped him, and laid upon the back of the apostle blow after blow. 
And you know that the scourge in those days was no light thing; 
sometimes men died under that punishment. If one of us got 
one of the stripes that Paul got, how the papers would talk 
about it. But it was nothing to Paul. He just looked at it 
as if it were a trivial thing—as if it were a light affliction. When 
he was scourged and striped by his persecutors you might have gone 
and asked him, “Well, Paul, what are you going to do now?” 
“Why, press toward the mark of the high calling of God 
in Christ Jesus.” Take your stand before him and ask him, as 
they bring the rod down upon his head, “ What are you going to 
do now, Paul?” “Do? I am going to press toward the mark of 
the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.” He had one idea, and 
that was ii. Look at him as they stoned him. The Jews took up 
great stones to throw upon the great apostle. They left him for 
dead, and I suppose he was dead, but God raised him up, Come 
up and look at him, all bruised and bleeding as he lies. “ Well, 
Paul, you've had a narrow escape this time. Don’t you think you 
had better give up? Go off into Arabia and rest for six weeks. 
What will you do if you remain here? They mean to kill you.” 
“Do!” he cries, as he raises himself like a mighty giant, “I am go- 
ing to press toward the mark of the high calling of God.” And he 
goes forth and preaches the Gospel. I am ashamed of Christianity 
in the nineteenth century when I think of those early Christians. 


Wh: 
Pau 
Ale: 
66 W. 
prea 
wou 
elde: 
had 
idea. 
goes 
day | 
this; 
the 
was t 
they 
they 
nine 
wher 
ashat 
Go t 
do n 
And 
stand 
these 
up 0: 
want: 
cessfi 
the s. 


. 


ss which 
- be‘ore. 
in Christ 
his con- 


ome of . 


ss is. I 
man he 
S$ every- 
ou say: 
aark of 
eae If 
he got 
vitched 
ed and 
vs also. 
w they 
*r blow. 
thing ; 
us got 
ld talk 
d at: it 
When 
ye gone 
now?” 
f God 
im, as 
ing to 
ark of 
2a, and 
ook up 
im for 
Come 
‘Well, 
ik you 
weeks. 

you.” 
im go- 
ind he 
‘lanity 
Sstians. 


FIVE ONE THINGS. 361 


Why, it would take all the Christians in the Northwest to make one 
Paul. Look at his heroism everywhere he went. Talk about your 
Alexanders; why, the mighty power of God rested upon Paul. 
“Why,” said he, “thrice was I shipwrecked while going off to 
preach the Gospel.” What did he care about that? Cold churches 
wouldn’t trouble him, although they trouble us. What would lying 
elders and false deacons be to him? That wouldn't stop him. He 
had but one idea, and over all obstacles he triumphed for that one 
idea. Look at him as he comes back from his punishment. He 
goes up some side street and gets lodgings. He works during the 
day and preaches at night on the street. He had no building like 
this; no committee to wait on him; no carriage to carry him from 
the meeting; no one waiting to pay his board bills. There he 
was toiling and preaching; and, after preaching for eighteen months, 
they say, “We'll have to pay you for all this preaching, Paul,” and 
they take him to the corner of the street and pay him with thirty- 
nine stripes. That is the way they paid him. Oh, my friends, 
when you look at the lives of such men, doesn’t it make you feel 
ashamed of yourselves? I confess I feel like hanging my head. 
Go to him in that Philippian jail and ask him what he is going to 
do now. “Do? press forward for the mark of my high calling.” 
And so he went on, looking toward one point, and no man could 
stand before him. May the spirit of consecration. come upon all 
these ministers, and may they go back to their churches and hold 
up only Christ, because it is Christ only that the perishing world 
wants. Hold Him up to your people and your efforts will be suc- 
cessful, and your preaching will be only to the glory of Him and to 
the salvation of a perishing world. 


XLII. 


REGENERATION IS INSTANTANEOUS. 


NE reason why I am ied to take up this subject is, because I 
have received a large number of letters asking me how it is that 
I can teach such a pernicious doctrine that a man can be saved 
all at once—that salvation is instantaneous. One of the writers goes 
on to state that it is clearly taught in the Word of God that conver. 
sion is a gradual thing—that it is a life-work—and that it is a dan- 
gerous thing to teach that a man can come into this Tabernacle a 
sinner and go out asaved man. Now, let us see what is taught in 
the Word of God, and if it don’t teach instantaneous salvation, let 
us give up the idea. I hold to it as I do to my life, and I would as 
quickly give up my life as give up this doctrine, unless it can be 
proved that it is not according to the Word of God. Now, I will 
admit that light is one thing and birth is another. A soul must be 
born before it.can see light. A child must be born before it can be 
taught; it must be born before it can walk; it must be born before 
it can be educated. I think the greatest mistake among ministers 
is, that they are talking to dead men; that they are talking to men 
in the flesh instead of men born of God. Now, let us get them 
into Christ, and then educate them and build them up to the high- 
est faith. Let us not try to teach men who are not born of God. 
The Scripture is very clear on this point. It gives no uncertain 
sound. Ifa man is dead in sin, you may as well talk to a corpse as 
talk to him about spiritual things. To tell an unrenewed man—- 
an unregenerated man to worship, serve, and love God is absurd ; 
you may as well tell a man to leap over Lake Michigan, as to tell a 
man not born of God to serve Him. 

Now, the first illustration I want to call your attention to is, when 
the voice came down from Heaven to Noah, “Come thou and all 
thy house into the ark, for thee have I seen righteous before Me in 
this generation.” Now, there was a minute when Noah was outside 
the ark, and another when he was inside, and by being inside he was 

(362) 


S. 


secause I 
it is that 
be saved 
ters goes 
t conver- 
is a dan- 
srnacle a 
aught in 
ition, let 
would as 
t can be 
w, I will 
must be 
it can be 
n before 
ninisters 
‘to men 
et them 
he high- 
of God. 
ncertain 
orpse as 
| man— 
absurd ; 
to tell a 


is, when 
and all 
> Me in 
outside 
> he was 


REGENERATION IS INSTANTANEOUS. 363 


saved. As long as he was outside of the ark he was exposed to the 
wrath of God, just like the rest of those antediluvians. If he stayed 
out, and remained with those antediluvians, he would have been 
swept away, as they were. It was not his righteousness, it was not 
his faith, nor his works that saved him, it was the ark. And, my 
friends, we have not, like Noah, to be one hundred and twenty 
years making an ark for our safety. God has provided an ark for 
us, and the question is, Are you inside or outside this ark? If you 
arc inside you are safe; if you are outside you are not safe. If you 
are outside you are exposed to the wrath of God continually, and 
you can not tell the day, nor the hour, nor the minute when you 
may be swept into eternity. When I was in Manchester, in one 
of the inquiry-meetings, I went up to the gallery to speak to 
some people there. While we were standing in a little group, 
aman came up and stood near us. He was a respectable-looking 
man, and I thought by his general appearance he was skeptical. I 
didn’t think he had come up as an inquirer, but as I stood I noticed 
tears trickling down his face, and I went to him and asked him if 
he wanted to seek Christ, and he answered, “Yes.” I went on 
talking to him, but he could not see what I meant. I thought I 
would use an illustration; and after I had put it to him, I asked 
him if he sawit. He said, “No.” I gave him another illustration, 
and asked him, “ Do you see it now?” But he again replied, “ No.” 
I used two or three more illustrations, but he could not see them. 
He told sme, “Mr. Moody, the fact is, I:do not feel the evidence 
of God.” “But,” I said, “I tell you you are not to be saved by 
your feelings,” and I gave him this illustration: “ What was it that 
saved Noah? Was it his ark, or was it his feelings, or his life, or 
his prayers?” “I see it now; it’s all right,” and he went away. 
This was Thursday night, and he had to leave on a night train. On 
the Sunday afternoon, while preaching in the Free Trade Hall, a 
man came and tapped me on the shoulder, and asked me if I knew 
him. I said, “ No.” And he said, “Do you remember when you 
spoke to me on Thursday, and used the illustration of Noah’s ark 
to save me?” “Yes,” I answered. “ Well, I got in then, and have 
been there ever since. The ark keeps me. Thank God for that 
illustration of the ark.” May God help you to see this illustration to- 
night, and may you not be trying to save yourselves by your feelings, 
your tears, by your wounds. God has provided an ark, and every 
man who is in it is saved, and every one who is out of it is lost. 


4 


h oi 
J 
ess 
4} 
4 
gy 
aot] 
age 
Be. 
hie 
¥ 
if 
Hf 
ie 
pees 
ai 
“ 
on 
ry ak 
4 q 
eu 
a: 
ey 
e, 
if 
i 
. 
t: 
See 
* 
be 
Fab: 
id 


, 364 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS, 


. Let us take another Bible illustration. Look at those two angels 
coming down to Sodom. They knew that God was going to destroy 
it utterly, and they led Lot out. What was it that saved his life? 
Was it his feelings, his tears? It was by obeying the call, “ Escape 
for your life.” And now God says escape for your life—escape to 
Mount Calvary. Don’t delay, because He is going to destroy this 
world as He did Sodom. While Lot was in Sodom he was liable to 
the wrath of God, but the moment he got outside of Sodom he was 
safe. As long as a man remains out of God he is liable to the wrath 
of God and the fire of Heaven. Look again; look at those chil- 
dren of Israel when they were commanded to put the blood on the 
door-posts and they would be saved from the hand of death. What 
was it that saved them? Was it the blood or was it their feelings ? 
The moment the blood was there they were saved; and if a man is 
behind the blood he is as safe as if he was walking the crystal pave- 
ment of Heaven. “When the blood was there, the angel of death 
passed over.” One moment the blood was off the posts and the 
next moment it was on. It was instantaneous salvation. You 
know Joshua received a command from God that he should erect 
six cities, three on each side of the Jordan, which were to be cities 
of refuge. There were to be great turnpikes and highways to these 
cities, which were to be kept in proper repair, and the gates of the 
cities were to be kept open day and night, and sigt.-posts were to 
be placed along the road to provide for the man’s guidance to those 
cities of refuge. 

The moment a man got inside of those cities he was safe. His 
safety was instantaneous—the moment he stepped over the boundary 
line. Just leok at two men out in the woods chopping wood. As 
one of the men brings his ax down on the tree, it splits and flies from 
his hand and kills his companion. He knows what the consequences 
will be when the killing is discovered. He knows that it will be sure 
death the moment the news reaches the nearest relative of the de- 
ceased. Tor the man who will not avenge the death of his relative 
is not considered a true man. If a relative would noi avenge the 
blood of his kinsman, it was considered very dishonorable imong the 
Israelites. The man knows that there is a city of refuge ten miles 
away, and if he can but reach it he is safe. Thank God, our city of 
refuge is not ten miles away. That man just leaps upon the high- 
way. He does not take time to argue or think; he just leaps upon 
the highway and makes for the city of refuge. The news soon 


+ 
) 


o angels 
destroy 
lis life ? 
Escape 
cape to 
roy this 
iable to 
he was 
e wrath 
se chil- 
on the 
What 
elings ? 
man is 
| pave- 
f death 
ind the 
You 

d erect 
e cities 
o these 
of the 
vere to 
o those 


» tis 
undary 
f.. 
‘s from 
uences 
De sure 
he de- 
elative 
ge the 
ng the 
1 miles 
city of 
> high- 
S upon 
Ss soon 


REGENERATION IS INSTANTANEOUS, 365 


spreads that a man has been killed, and the murderer is making for 
the city of refuge. Whenever the brother learns that his kinsman 
has been killed, he starts after that poor fugitive. On they go—the 
avenger and the fugitive—flying to his haven of hope. It is a life 
and death struggle. Look at him! Sce him, as he leaps ditches 
and speeds along the road. Some people see him flying past. “ Make 
haste,” they cry, ‘‘ because the avenger is upon you. ['ly for your 
life.” Ah, sinner, you do not know how far the avenger is behind 
you. ‘o-night he may be upon you. We do not know the day, 
the hour, when he will overtake us. The avenger, he knows now, is 
after him. On he goes, bounding over every obstacle, his speed at its 
utmost, and his face resolutely set toward the gate vherein his safety 
lies. He is terribly in earnest. See him leap over the highway; 
see his bruises, and on he goes, panting and nearly exhausted. He 
sees the gates of the city. The officers see him from the walls, and 
they shout, “ Hasten on, for the avenger is drawing near; he is be- 
hind thee.” One moment he is outside the walls—the next moment 
he is inside. He isasaved man. One moment out, the next mo- 
ment in. What are these illustrations in the Bible for, unless to show 
us how we are to be saved? Don’t you see from this that conversion 
is instantaneous? One minute you may be outside, and the next 
minute you are inside. 

I will give you another illustration, which I think you will be able 
to get hold of. You will remember when we had slavery we used 
to have men come up from Kentucky, Tennessee, and other slave 
States, in order to escape from slavery. I hope if there are any 
Southern people here they will not think, in this allusion, I am try- 
ing to wound their feelings. We all remember when these colored 
men came here how they used to be afraid lest some one should 
come and take them back. Why, I remember, in the store we had 
a poor fugitive, and he used to be quaking all the time. Sometimes 
a customer would come in, and he would be uneasy all the time. 
He was afraid it was some one to take him back to slavery. But 
somebody tells him if he was in Canada he would be perfectly 
safe, and he says: “If I could only get into Canada; if I could 
only get under the Union Jack I would be free.” There are 
no slaves under the Union Jack, he has been told—that is the 
fiag of freedom; the moment he gets under it he is a free man. 
So he starts. We'll say there are no railways, and the poor fellow 
has got ten miles ahead when his master. comes up, and he hears 


aA 
Of 
_ 
<= 
<i 
> oe 
Ww 
w & 
—_ 
Oo. 
qn 
=u 


16 


14 


125 


ww yw “ 
IO 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 


tographic 


Pro 


clences 


(716) 872-4503 


WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 


5 


Corporation 


Cae, 0 


sts 4 ea gi Ss Rae 


wee 


366. MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


| |, that his slave has fled for Canada and sets off in pursuit. Some dow 
one tells the poor fugitive that his master is after him, What does I we 

the poor fugitive do? What does hedo? He redoubles his exer- ing 

tions and presses on, on, on, on. He isa slave born, and he knew coat 

a slave belongs to his master. Faster he goes. He knows his in t 
master is after him and he will be taken if he comes up with him Hoy 

before he reaches the lines. He says, “If I can only hold out and in r 

get under the English flag, the English Government will protect suck 

me. The whole English army will come to protect me if need be.” enlis 

On he presses. He is now near the boundary line. One minute gear 

he is a slave, and in an instant he is a free man. My friends, don’t from 

' mistake. These men can be saved to-night if they cross the line. ling, 
‘ | _ Your old master, Satan, may be pressing down upon you, but there he g 
is a land of liberty up there, and the banner of Heaven is the flag He) 
of love, and under that flag you are protected from all danger ; a CI 

and if an enemy comes near you, God says: “If you touch him you take 

touch the apple of My eye.”, And He will hold you in His right Whi 

! hand and keep you for the day of redemption. Will you go out have 
‘s of this hall to-night and doubt sudden conversion? Will you say won 
it a man can not be saved all at once? Look what He said to Moses, sold 
He told him to put a brazen serpent on a pole, and whenever a a SO. 

man looked at that serpent he would live. If some preachers had that 

lived then they would have said a man may look six thousand you 

years at that and he wouldn’t be saved. A man would die while ; com 

they were discussing it. A few days ago I heard of a minister who take 

said I was preaching a most pernicious doctrine when I preached RAYS 
sudden conversion. But point out to me one single conversion in Pens 

this blessed Bible that was not a sudden conversion. Why, every yous 
conversion recorded in the Bible was instantaneous, and if preachers His 

tell men conversion is a life-work, they are keeping men out of the Trish 
kingdom of God. We can have instant conversion, “ Now is the beer 

day of salvation.” I tell you, sinners, escape for your lives; fly to trati 

the haven of safety—look, look, look, at the crucified One, and you the « 

will be saved to-night. Look and live. You will become a child to. 
of God for time and eternity. The blessing will come upon you— all w 
whenever we look we can be saved. Just go back to that camp of ay 
Israel. Every one who looked at that brazen serpent was well. It leap 
was instantaneous. poin 
When I was in England they were at me all the time about this he j 


sudder. conversion. They said it was a life-work from the cradle: 


Some 
it does 
Ss exer- 
e knew 
ws his 
th him 
ut and 
protect 
d be.” 
ninute 
_ don’t 
e line. 
- there 
1e flag 
inger ; 
m you 
right 
‘oO out 
U say 
Moses. 
ever a 
rs had 
usand 
while 
r who 
ached 
ion in 
every 
chers 
f the 
is the 
fly to 
1 you 
child 
‘ou— 
ip of 
nt 


; this 
radle : 


REGENERATION IS INSTANTANEOUS. 367. 


down to the grave. I did all I could to show them it.. One day 
I was walking down the streets of York, when I saw a soldier com- 
ing down. You can tell a soldier in England in an instant by his 
coat. I stepped up to him and said: “ My friend, I am a stranger 
in this country, and you will pardon me if I ask you a question. 
How long did it take you to become a soldier?” Well, he laughed 
in my face. I suppose he thought I was very green, to ask him 
such a question. But he told me that he made up his mind to 
enlist in Queen Victoria’s army, and he went toa recruiting ser 
geunt, and he put an English shilling into the palm of his hand, and 
from that moment he was a soldier. When he has taken that shil- — 
ling, from that moment he becomes one of the Queen’s army, and if 
he goes back he becomes a deserter, and if caught, is put into prison. 
He first made up his mind to enlist, and that is the way to become 
a Christian. Make up your mind. The next thing he did was to 
take the shilling, and from that moment he became a soldier. 
When we make up our mind to be a Christian the next thing we 
have to do is to accept His terms—take salvation as a gift. You 
wonder how a man can become a Christian as that man became a 
soldier. He was a citizen one moment; the next moment he was 
a soldier. He was no longer his own master when he had accepted 
that shilling. He belonged to the English army. So the moment 
you enlist in Christ’s army you belong to Him. If you want to be- 
come a Christian, take Christ’s shilling as a gift. The minute you 
take that gift, that minute you area child of God. See what He 
says: “To as many as received Him gave He power to become the 
sons and daughters of God.” When you accept Him He becomes 
your Way, your Truth, your Light, your all in all. You can have 
His gift if you will receive Him. While I was in New York an 
Irishman stood up in a young converts’ meeting and told how he had 
been saved. He said in his broken Irish brogue that I used an illus- 
tration, and that illustration saved him. And I declare that that is 
the only man I ever knew wh.o was converted without being spoken 
to. He said I used an illustration of a wrecked vessel, and said that 
all would perish unless some assistance came. Presently a lifeboat 
came alongside, and the captair shouted, “ Leap into the lifeboat— 
leap for your lives, or you will perish!’ and when I came to the 
point, I said, “‘ Leap into the liffeboat ; Christ is your lifeboat,” and _ 
he just leaped into the lifeboat of salvation and was saved. Ifa 
man goes out without salvation, jt won't be my fault; it will be your 


agentes 


it te ag 
mp Sass Sgn ean es 


aoe 


- 
. 
Sate eee eS ras a REI eI NE SOE 
cee ~ a. - ~ “iy . = I Bes 
=. 


368 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


own. It will not be because the ark is not open, but because you 
will not accept the invitation to enter; it will not be because the 
blessing is not there, but because you will not take it, for it’s there. 
May God open your eyes to accept Him before you leave this build- 
ing—to accept salvation as a gift. 


PRAYER. 


Oh, our Heavenly Father, we pray Thee that Thou wilt help us 
to understand the passages we have just read. We thank Thee, 
Father, for Thy precious blessings; for the faith Thou hast im- 
bedded in our hearts; for the work we have beheld within these 
walls; and for the precious work that is being done in the homes 
of the people. We are not worthy that Thou shouldst bless us 
so much. And now we come to pray Thy blessing on this week’s 
service, and may thousands come to the Lord, and may there be 
streams of salvation flowing through this city; and as we shall 
come to Farwell Hall to-rhorrow night, may we hear a great deal 
that will please us. We ask it all through the name of Immanuel 
Thy Son. Amen. 


use you 
use the 
’s there. 
is build- 


help us 
k Thee, 
ast im- 
in these 
> homes 
less us 
week’s 
1ere be 
re shall 
at deal 
manuel 


S 
“& 
SY 
Wa 


MR. MOODY’S FIRST SUNDAY AT THE DEPOT CHURCH, PHILADELPHIA. 


POI 


Bf 


XLIV. 
THE “BEHOLDS.” 


WANT to call your attention to this little word “behold.” 

“Behold, I was shapen in iniquity.” I want to speak to you 

for a few minutes about this one word, and you can not forget 
a simple text with only one word in it. The first thing a man has 
to learn in coming for salvation is that he has fallen in-the sight of 
God; to know that none are pure in His sight. You have to learn 
that you are born bad before you can ever approach Him. “ Behold, 
I was shapen in iniquity.” Now, a man needn’t live a creat number 
of years before he finds that out. Whenever he comes to God he 
will discover this. Every one who has ever taken a prominent 
place in the Bible has found this out. They might have thought 
themselves good enough before they came to God, but the moment 
they came to Him they discovered that they were shapen in iniquity. 
I suppose Isaiah thought he was as good as most men in his day, 
and, perhaps, he was a good deal better than most men; but when 
he saw the Lord he cried, “ Woe is me, for I am undone, because [| 
am a man of unclean lips.” When he saw the Lord, he saw his own 
deformity, and he fell in the dust before the Lord. And that is the 
Proper place for a sinner. As I have said before, until men realize 
their uncleanness they talk of their own righteousness, but the 
moment they catch a sight of Him their mouth is stopped. If we 
hear a man talking about himself, we may be sure that he has not 
seen God. Look at that man Daniel. Not a thing can be found 
against him; but see when he came within sight of God. He found 
that his comeliness turned to corruption. And look at Job. One 
would have thought he was all tight. He was good to the poor, 
liberal to all charities—not a better man within a thousand miles, 
If they wanted to get a thousand dollars to endow a university, a 
thousand dollars to build a Synagogue, if they wanted to have a 
thousand dollars for any charitable object, why, he was the man. 
Why, you would have liked to get him into your Presbyterian, or 

24 (369) 


370 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


Methodist, or Baptist Churches; if you wanted : chairman of a 
benevolent society, you couldn’t have found a better man. Yet 
look at him when God came near him. It is altogether different 
when He comes within our sight. It is one thing to hear Him, and 
another thing to see Him. He had heard Him with his ears, but 
now he saw Him with his eyes, and then he was silent. You 
couldn’t get another word from him. Before he saw Him he could 
argue and talk about Him to his friends—could argue as well as 
they could; but the moment Job saw Him he was silent. When 
He said, “ Gird up thy loins like a man,” from that time he put no 
more questions to Him. He had got a lesson. No man can come 
into His kingdom till he knows he is vile, till he sees Him. He 
must come down to that. That is God’s alphabet. Many men 
want to begin at Z, and don’t want to begin at A, B. A man must 
commence at the beginning, and learn there is not one thing good 
in the flesh. It is corrupt. As Paul said, “There is nothing good 
in it.” We have Adam’s flesh, and it is bad. God has said so. He 
can not find anything good in it, and if He can not, let us give up 
trying to find good spots in it. It is guilty, it is corrupt, it is false, 
it is at enmity with God. There is evil in it all through. 

My friends, if you have learned the lesson I have good tidings 
for you. You best know if you wave. There is good tidings for 
you. The voice comes down from Heaven, “ Unto you is born this 
day, in the city of David, a Saviour.” That is the best news that 
ever came down from Heaven—the best news that ever fell on the 
ears of men. Of course, if a man does not believe, he is ruined, 
he can not appreciate the news; but to the man who knows he is 
ruined, this is the best tidings that can come to him. The Gospel 
tells you plainly that you are lost, but let me tell every one in this 
hall to-night that I bring you good news. It isthe Gospel of peace, 
it is a Gospel of glad tidings, it is a Gospel of joy, it is a Gospel of 
reconciliation, And all a man has got to do is to believe this Gos- 
pel and be saved. A great many people have got a false idea from 
the preaching of the Gospel. Some think when we preach the 
Gospel it means condemnation. They shout as did those men in 
the tombs, when he came to them, “ Have ye come to torment us 
before our time?” So men don’t believe we bring good tidings. 

When I was in Glasgow I heard a story of old Dr. Arnot. He 
heard of a poor woman in great distress. She was poor, and her 
landiord was after her for the rent. He put some money in his 


. 


an of a 
in. Yet 
different 
lim, and 
ars, but 
t. You 
ie could 
; well as 

When 
‘put no 
in come 
m. He 
ny men 
un must 
ig good 
ig good 
o. He 
give up 
is false, 


tidings 
ngs for 
orn this 
vs that 
on the 
ruined, 
s he is 
Gospel 
in this 
“peace, 
spel of 
is Gos- 
a from 
ch the 
nen in 


lent us 


ngs. 
t. He 
nd her 
in his 


THE “ BEHOLDS:' 371 


pocket and started for her house. When he reached it he knocked 
at the door, but got no answer. He knocked again, but none came. 
He waited, and waited, and knocked, but could not get any one to 
come, and left. A day or two afterward he met the woman on the 
street, and said, “I heard you were in distress, and could not pay 
your rent. I came to the door the other day, but I found no one 
in your house.” The woman threw up both her hands. “ Why, I 
thought it was the landlord; I had the door locked and bolted.” 
She thought it was the landlord after her rent. And people think 
when Jesus Christ comes to them He comes to demand something. 
“Why,” said a young man, “I would like to become a Christian, 
but I would have to give up so much.” Why, that is a ridiculous 
idea. When you receive Christ you receive everything. You are 
in the position of a beggar; you give up your rags and put on a 
bran-new suit. You give up nothing and receive everything. The 
idea of a man being so deceived! Do you think the Lord Jesus 
Christ comes to you to torment you? Ask those men who have 
received Him if this is so. Ask those who have been deceived 
for forty or fifty years by Satan, and who have accepted Him. 
They will tell you they have enjoyed more peace and happiness 
in the last few days than they have in all those years put 
together. I heard a Christian saying that he had enjoyed 
more happiness the first day he accepted Christ than he did in all 
the previous years of his life. Now, my friends, God doesn’t want 
to take anything from you; He wants to give you everything 
that is good for your happiness. Now, I have two little children, 
and I wouldn't like to give them anything but what would be good 
for them. So the God of Heaven wants to keep nothing from us 
but that which will ruin us. The Son of God has come into the 
world to bless us. Look at that Sermon on the Mount. It is filled 
with the word blessed, blessed, blessed. I think it occurs nine times. 
His heart was full of blessings for the people. He had to get it out 
before He gave His sermon. Don’t believe He came to make you 
miserable. That is one of the devil’s lies. Don’t believe He has come 
to torment you. I heard some time ago of a little book. upon a 
passage of Scripture—I didn’t know there was such a passage—which 
occurred in the story of David and Mephibosheth. You know, one 
day Jonathan and David were together, and Jonathan said : “ David, 
I want you to make a vow.” I Suppose it had been revealed to 
Jonathan that he was to take his place. Instead of his heart being 


is 


hit 
“4 
r 
i 
at 
ht 
i 
k 
Mi 
i 
Hing 
|) 
ad 4 
$4} 
aya 
f 
1h 
et) 
( 
fi 
| 
eit 
i) 
A 
{ iy 
i} 
i 


ate 


ae errae 


- 
: <3 eas ae ee Eas | ake 
au = oN a 


siisticbaceeenecte setietd 


372 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


filled with jealousy he loved him as a brother. “Now I want you 
to make a vow that when you get my father’s throne, if any of my 
father’s house are alive, that you will show them kindness,” Why, 
yes, Jonathan,” replies David, “I will; I would do it for your sake 
alone.” Well, time went on. You know how Saul persecuted 
David, and drove him into the cave of Adullam, and if he could 
have caught him you know how he would have slain him. News 
came to him that the Israelites were routed, and that Saul and Jona- 
than were slain, and David came up to Hebron and reigned for seven 
and a half years, and came after this up to Jerusalem. I can see 
him in his palace in the height of his power, and the recollection 
of the old vow he made to Jonathan suddenly comes upon him. 
His conscience tells him he has made a vow to his old friend, Jona- 


than, which he has not kept. I can see him order in one of his serv- - 


ants. “Do you know if there are any of Saul’s house alive?” 


“Well, I don’t know, but there is an old servant of Saul’s, Ziba.” 


David orders him in, and asks: “ Are any of Saul’s house alive, be- 
cause, if there is, I want to show kindness to them.” I can imagine 
the expression of his face. The idea of David showing kindness to 
any of Saul’s house—to Saul, who wanted to slay him, and who 
persecuted him. “ Well, yes,” the servant answers, “there is a son 
of Jonathan living.” “What!” he cries, “ason of my old friend, 
Jonathan; where is he?” “He was at Lo-debar the last I heard of 
him.” Now, you may have been a great traveler, and yet you have 
never heard of Lo-debar. You may have been all around the world 
and still you have not heard of Lo-debar. You may work in the 
post-office and you have never heard of Lo-debar—-never saw a let- 
ter directed to that place. Still that is the place where every one of 
Adam’s sons have been. Every one has been in Lo-debar. Every 
backslider is there. When David heard where he was, he sent down 
to bring up Jonathan’s son, Mephibosheth. See that chariot sweep- 
ing through the town. “ Why, the king’s chariot is here,” the peo- 
ple say. “What does it mean?” Weare told that this poor prince 


‘ was lame, and I can see the poor, lame prince as he comes out to 


meet the servant. “What is it?” he inquires. “King David has 
sent for you,” the servant replies. I can see the prince trembling 
from head to foot, when he hears this. He thinks King David wants 
to slay him; he thinks he is just going to cut off his head. That's 
the way with sinners. They think that God stands behind them 
with a double-edged sword ready to annihilate them. The servant 


S. 


ant you 
y of my 
“ Why, 
Dur sake 
rsecuted 
ie could 

News 
id Jona- 
or seven 
can see 
lection 
on him. 
1, Jona- 


is serv- - 


alive 2?” 
, Ziba,” 
ive, be- 
magine 
ness to 
id who 
$s ason 
friend, 
sard of 
u have 
> world 
in the 
y a let- 
one of 
Every 
- down 
sweep- 
€ peo- 
prince 
out to 
id has 
nbling 
wants 
That’s 

them 
orvant 


THE “ BEHOLDS.” 373 


says: “I want you to come down and see the king.” “But,” re- 
plies the prince, “I tell you that means death to me.” Just as a 
good many sinners in Chicago think. “ But,” continues the servant, 
“he has sent,me, and wants you to come,” and he gets him into the 
carriage and onto the highway, through the streets and unto the 
palace of the king. Whenever he enters he is brought into the 
presence of the king. The king looks upon him and sees upon his 
brow the image of Jonathan, and says to Mephibosheth, “I will 
show thee kindness for thy father’s sake, and I will restore unto you 
all Saul’s possessions, and you shall sit at the king’s table.” He re- 
stores to the lame prince the inheritance he lost, and then gives him 
a place at the king’s table. That is the Gospel. God wants you to 
come up from Lo-debar to Jerusalem and take your inheritance. 
The moment you come from your Lo-debar to the city of peace, that 
moment you will learn the glad tidings. 

Now, there is another “behold.” We find it here in the first 
chapter of John, and I want to call your attention to it. “ Behold 
the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world.” Now, 
every sin which you have committed can be forgotten—every sin 
which has been committed during the past eighteen hundred years 
can be forgiven by Him. Now look at His life—look at Him from 
the manger to Calvary and see if you can find any flaw in Him. 
You hear people talking about the imperfections of Christians, and 
making this an excuse for not accepting Him. They point to some 
of them and say they have done this and that; but, my friends, it 
is impossible to find a perfect Christian. They will not be perfect 
till they arrive in the kingdom of the Master and they are washed 
in the blood of the Lamb. Lift your eyes from off these puny 
Christians—from off these human ministers, and look to Christ. 
He is the Saviour of the world. He came from the throne to this 
earth; He came from the very bosom of the Father. God gave 
Him up freely for us, and all we have te do is to accept Him as our 
Saviour. Look at Him at Gethsemane, sweating, as it were, great 
drops of blood; look at Him on the cross, crucified between two 
thieves; hear that piercing cry, “ Father, Father, forgive them, they 
know not what they do;” and as you look into that face—as you 
look into those wounds on His feet or His hands, will you say He 
has not the power to save you? Will you say He has not the power 
to redeem you? Look into His face. Can you say the Lamb of 
God will not take away your sins? All you have to do is to accept 


374 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


Him, and they are all forgiven. A great many people want to 
bring their faith, their works, their good deeds to Him for salva- 
tion. Bring your sins and He will bear them away into the wilder- 
ness of forgetfulness and you will never see them again, 
There is another “behold,” and a very important one. It is a 
“behold” of Paul. “Behold, now is the accepted time.” Now, 
some people may listen to this carelessly, “Why, we have heard 
that from childhood up. ‘Now is the accepted time.’ We don't 
like that forced upon us as if this was the only time to be saved.” 
Suppose I say, “ Behold, ten years hence will be the accepted time,” 
wouldn’t you think I had gone mad? You would say, “I might 
die before that time.” You know that it isnow. You can not roll 
back the wheel of time. Every hour that passes is gone forever. 
You can not look forward ten years. You may be in eternity then. 
You can not say the future is yours. The only time we have is 
now. “ Behold, now is the accepted time,” and salvation is offered 
you to-night, and God wants'you to take it. How many have been 
swept into eternity since we began to hold our meetings in the 
Tabernacle? Not less than eight or nine to my knowledge have 
been taken away. How many will go in the coming eight weeks? 
Only think of it. Some of them now move through those man- 
sions Christ has prepared for them; they are now walking down the 
crystal pavements of Heaven; they may be walking to the tree of 
life and plucking its fruit. They are now with the redeemed and 
the Redeemer. They are now singing the sweet hallelujahs of 
Heaven—a sweeter song than they ever heard on earth. But think 
of those who have gone to the dark caverns of hell—now with the 
fiends of darkness, now in the land where there is no hope, now lis- 
tening to the wail of despair. You can accept salvation now. The 
idea of standing still, thinking you have time to accept Christ, is a 
delusion of the devil. Don’t be deceived by Satan. We are in 
the current of time that is bearing us on to eternity, While we 
sleep and are unconscious, we are being borne swiftly to the judg- 
ment seat, and we may he there before we know. Look at that 
man on the river that runs to the rapids! Look at him as he drifts 
with the current on to death! Ina few minutes he will be in eter- 
nity, and he is not aware of it. There are thousands here sweeping 
on to death and judgment. “Now is the accepted time.” Escape 
to-night and accept the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved. 
But there is another “behold.” « Behold, I stand at the door 


© en BE Es HE oc  ~*  , Be —  ¢  , 1  ¢, ee ee eee 


—_—| Os 


S. 


want to 
or salva. 
e wilder- 


It is a 
Now, 
e heard 
'e don’t 
saved.” 
1 time,” 
I might 
not roll 
forever, 
ty then. 
have is 
offered 
ve been 
in the 
re have 
weeks ? 
e man- 
wn the 
tree of 
ed and 
ahs of 
t think 
ith the 
ow lis- 
The 
st, isa 
are in 
ile we 
-jJudg- 
t that 
. drifts 
n eter- 
>eping 
scape 
saved. 
> door 


THE “ BEHOLDS.” 375 


and knock.” He stands at the door of the sinner’s heart and knocks. 
Does your heart thrill to-night, my friends? That is the Son of 
God knocking at your heart. You haven’t to go down and bring 
Him up, nor go up and bring Him down. He is right here to-night. 
Is there a skeptical one doubts His presence here? What man 
could hold this immense audience during the past eight weeks but 
Him. Is there any political subject that could keep an audience 
every night for eight weeks as this has been kept? Or if a man 
came here to talk poetry or science, could he have such an as- 
semblage? Surely it can not be the singer or the preacher. There 
is an unseen power—a supernatural agency. It is the Son of God, 
my friends, and He is here to-night and stands at your heart and 
says, “ Behold, I stand at the door and knock.” If any one here 
hearkens to His voice and opens the door He says to him, “I 
will come unto him and sup with him and he with Me.” And no 
man, if he only enters to Him, will go down to the caverns of death 
and damnation; but if you reject Him, and shut and lock and bolt 
the door of your heart, He can not come in, and, of course, you 
must perish. In one part of Scripture He says, He “stands with 
His locks wet with the dew of the night.” He stands now. A 
man in the inquiry-room said he made a vow some years ago to 
come to Christ. He was knocking at his heart then, but for thirty 
years he kept Him out. This week he let Him in. Think how 
merciful God is. He might have called that man away to eternity 
during those thirty years. Listen, sinners; perhaps He is making 
His last call to you. A friend of mine once said when Christ came 
first He knocked pretty loud. The second time, conscience was not 
so keen, and it was not so loud. When He camea third time, 
His knock was fainter, and the fourth time fainter still, and the fifth 
time almost inaudible, till by and by He could not be heard at all. 
Is not that the case with some here? Christ stands knocking now. 
You may put Christ off—that is man’s free will, but you can not put 
death off. When he comes and puts his cold hand upon you, 
feeling for the cords of life, you can not put him off. The question 
will be then settled for time and eternity, and then you must 
answer at the judgment-seat. “Behold, I stand at the door and 
knock.” Sinner, what will you do to-night? Young man, don’t 
laugh. Don’t make light of this question. One of two things you 
must do—either reject Him or receive Him; either keep Him out 
of your heart or take Him in. 


Ser” deta ‘ 


, 
4 » r P > 
¥ ‘ . U Sad ¢ ‘> ¥ - 
eee . = pA uaa tao ay ve ss e eRe ees ike etre i ROT ee ee ae ak we ce lee 
Spit see es era 4 f 
eo) sah ai Si : rs ‘ € ‘ + i 


Pet 


: 
376 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


And there is another “behold.” It isa behold they heard of in the 
days of Paul. You know when they heard that Paul was praying, it 
did not come from Damascus, from Rome, or Jerusalem, but it came 
from Heaven, « Behold, he is praying.” I hope some are praying here 
to-night. Let the news go up to Heaven, “ Behold, he prays,” and 
“Behold, she prays,” and an answer will come. If you pray frorn 
the depchs of your soul, an answer will come to-night. If you want 
to accept on this, the last night of our meetings this week, the 
waters of life, you can. Just lift up your heart and the message 
will go up, “ Behold, he prays.” Let all Christians here pray. Let 
a silent wave of prayer go up to Heaven, and let tiiose who have 
never prayed, ask God for mercy. Let these little childrer. pray. I 
like to hear children praying. Sometimes a child’s prayers have 
more effect chan any others. How many infidel fathers and mothers 
have been brought to Christ by their praying children? I remem- 
ber while out in Kanses, while holding a meeting, I saw a little boy. 
who came to the window crying. I went to him, and said, “ My 
little boy, what is your trouble?” « Why, Mr. Moody, my mother’s 
dead, and my father drinks, and they don’t love me, and the Lord 
wou't have anything to do with me because I am a poor drunkard’s 
boy.” “You have got a wrong idea, my boy; Jesus will love you 


and save you and your father, too,” and I told him a story of a little 


boy in an Eastern city. The boy said his father would never allow 
the canting hypocrites of Christians to come into his house, and 
would never allow his child to go to Sunday-school. A kind- 
hearted man got his little boy and brought him to Christ. When 
Christ gets into a man’s heart, he can not help but pray. This father 
had been drinking one day, and coming home, he heard the boy 
praying. He went to him and said, “I don’t want you to pray any 
more. You've been clong with some of those Christians. If I catch 
you praying again I’ll flog you.” But the boy was filled with God, 
and he couldn’t help praying. The door of communication was opened 


between him and Christ, and his father caught him praying again. 


We went to him. “Didn't I tell you never to pray again? If I 
catch you at it once more, you leave my house.” He thought he 
would stop him. One Gay the old temper came upon the boy, and 


he did something wrong and got flogged. When he got over his 


mad fit he forgot the threats of his father and went to pray. His 
father had been Grinking more than usual, and coming in, found the 
boy offering a prayer. He caught the boy with a push, and said, 


Sok fe = : \ 
Os e s 2 : 


ofinthe 
ying, it 
it came 


ng here 
s,” and 
y from 
u want 
ek, the 
lessage 
Let 
o have 
ay. I 
s have 
others 
-mem- 
le boy 
“My 
ther’s 
Lord 
kard’s 
- you 
little 
allow 
» and 
kind- 
Vhen 
ather 
boy 
7 any 
catch 
God, 
ened 
gain, 
If I 
t he 
and 
r his 
His 
the 
said, 


jn 
“Didn't I tell you never to pray again? Leave’ this Ruyse. Get 
your things packed up and go.” The little fellow hadn many 
things to get together—a drunkard’s boy neve: has—and we up 
to his mother’s room. “Good-bye, mother.” “Where are yr 
going?” “T don’t know where I’ll go, but father says I can not 
stay here any longer; I’ve been praying again,” he said. The 
mother knew it wouldn’t do to try and keep the boy when her 
husband had ordered him away, so she drew him to her bosom and 
kissed him, and bade him good-bye. He went to his brothers and 
sisters, and kissed them good-bye. When hecame to the door his — 
father was there, and the little fellow reached out his hand—“ Good- 
bye, father; as long as I live I will pray for you,” and left the house. 
He hadn’t been gone many minutes when that father rushed after 
him. “My boy, if that is religion; if it can drive you away from 
father and mother and home, I want it.” Yes, may be some little 
boy here has got a drinking father and mother. Lift your voice to 
Heaven, and the news will be carried up to Heaven, “ He prays.” 
Yes, Paul prayed, and the news went, “He prayeth,” and let all 
Christians lift their voices up to Heaven, and let all who have not 


accepted Christ, cry, and He will hear you, “ God be merciful to me 
a sinner.” 


THE “ BEHOLDS." 


a ps renee haa was, pat 


MLV. 


BEST METHODS WITH INQUIRERS. 


ae chosen as my subject, “ How to hold an inquiry-meeting ; 
or, What are the best-adapted texts of Scripture to be dwelt 
upon at these meetings?” And what I want first to call your 
attention to, if you are going to be successful in winning souls to 


Christ, is the need for discrimination in finding out people’s differ. . 


ences. People are not the same in their wants, spiritual more than 
temporal. What is good for one is rank poison for another. You 


can’t treat all alike. I’ve a friend that always, when he is sick, | 


drinks a lot of hot water and goes to bed; another says to me, “ Just 
take this dose and you will get well.” It don’t make any difference 
what’s the matter with you, this friend has one single remedy. So, 
many have just one verse of Scripture. He’s always quoting it. It 
fits his case, and he thinks it does everybody else’s. A man I knew 
up in Wisconsin, was converted under a railway bridge, and to this 
day he keeps urging people to go right down under that bridge, if 
they want to get converted sure. But God never repeats Himself. 
No two thoughts are just alike, no two needs are just alike, no two 
sinners are going to come to Christ in the same precise way. In- 
stead of looking for others’ experiences, look for one for yourself. 
So, when talking to persons in the inquiry-room, you must find out 
just these differences. Now, I am going to divide inquirers into 
classes or divisions this morning, and point out a few passages suit 
able for each. 

The first class, I think, in point of numbers, is that of the doubt- 
ers, those who are always in doubting castle. And these generally 
are among professing Christians. Oh, I think we shall make a 

‘different start with these when we get to Boston from what we did 
here. I’m convinced we made a mistake here in not opening the 
inquiry-rooms for professing Christians first. For twenty or thirty 
years they have been living on, making empty professions. Now, 


they just want to get off their crutches and get to walking and run- 
(278) 


eeting ; 
e dwelt 
all your 
ouls to 


3 differ. . 


re than 
You 


is sick, 


Just 
ference 


y. So, 


it. It 
I knew 
to this 
idge, if 
fimself. 
no two 
y. In- 
ourself, 
nd out 
rs into 
es suit 


doubt- 
nerally 
lake a 
ve did 
ng the 
thirty 
Now, 
id run- 


* iM age *. JENS Wits Pa eg tot eee oe, ey Terra es oii: 7" fe 
PO Eas oN NEMS 8 RUE POR LN TORE henge eae Ry TERT eC ENC Te ie 

i Wie SP tents 2 Ree a epee. ie : ; f 
i ze ae ah : t 


BEST METHODS WITH INQUIRERS. - 379 


ning for Christ. I don't believe they can accomplish much; I know 
they can’t, if they continue in this half-dead state. If Christians 
haven't assurance, they are just stumbling-blocks, they are in the 
way of the work. How many hurts these professing Christians 
give, who show no sign of their faith. They have no joy in serving 
the Lord, and their children with reason say, “I don’t want that 
| kind of a religion.” -And here I want to call your attention to a 
| proper remedy for this class, to be found in the book of John. 
\\ That whole book was written for this one thing, to help people out 
\ of doubting castle, and teach them, that they may know they are 
saved. Very recently I met a woman, a prominent member of a 


| not saved, when we have the very word of the Lord Jesus Christ 
| for it. Oh, if you will just read those precious words, “ He that hear- 
eth My words and believeth on Him that sent Me hath everlasting 
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death 
unto life;” and then turn to those other divine words: “‘ These 
things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son 
of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may 
believe on the name of the Son of God;” if you will just read these 
_ sure words of God you will not talk about having no assurance as to 
_ your salvation. Just believe in the words of the Son of God, and 
you know right now that you are saved. You know right now, I 
_ say, and don't have to put it off till you are going to die. There- 
_ fore I would talk to these doubting citizens about the epistle of 
| John. I would say to you, persuade them to just take these words 
of Jesus. “They have passed from death to life.” Oh, yes, it is 
the privilege of every child of God to know that they are saved. 
The next class are the backsliding. They do not want so much 
assurance as reviving. I know a lady who has a homeopathic doctor’s 
book, and whenever she is at all out of sorts she goes right to it. 
In spiritual things there is a good remedy for all sorts, and for the 
backsliders as well. Though they have left God, He makes a way 
for them to return. I have just turned down the leaves of my Bible 
at the second and third chapters of Jeremiah. I don’t think any one 
can feel this way with that Bible in hand. “Thus saith the Lord, 
What iniquity have your fathers found in Me that they are gone far 
from Me, and have walked after vanity and are become vain?” 
Now, what did Christ ever do against you? Did He ever lie to you? 


Pe eee 


= 


oe 


Sa a ee 


ee 


ited me sa , 


4 


4 
neat NX 


380 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


Did He ever abuse you?. Did He ever deceive you? Only one 
man ever said that and he was out of his head, and any one would 
know he was. No man can accuse Christ of any bias or offense. 
“What iniquity have you found in Me?” Noneatall. The trouble 
has been with ourselves. It was He that brought the early Church 
through the wilderness, through all the dangers of the way, and in- 
te the promised land. It is He that gives you power and lifts you 
up. Oh, say, then, what evil or iniquity have you found in Him? 
The trouble is with you, O backsliders, who “have forsaken the 
fountain of living waters and hewed out cisterns—broken ‘cisterns, 
that can hold no water.” The nineteenth verse says, “Thine own 
wickedness shall convict thee, and thy backsliding shall reprove thee; 
know, therefore, and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou 


hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that My fear is not in thee, . 


saith the Lord of hosts.” Enforce the miseries of this text, and 
then use the exhortation of the third chapter, twenty-second verse: 
“ Return, ye backsliding children, and I wiil heal your backsliding. 
Behold, we come unto Thee, for Thou art the Lord our God,” and 
then the fourteenth verse: “Only acknowledge thine iniquity that 
thou hast transgressed against the Lord thy God.” I remember 
repeating these promises to a backslider, and he couldn’t believe 
them at first for joy. How tender these words of Scripture to the 
backslider. Bring these words right to bear on them, and tell how 
God pleads with them. Read to them the opening words of Hosea, 
fourteenth chapter: “ Return unto the Lord thy God, for thou hast 


fallen by thine iniquity; say unto Him, Take away all iniquity and 


receive us graciously. * * I (God) will heal their backsliding, I will 
love them freely; for Mine anger is turned away.” Then bring up 
the story of the prodigal for illustration; also the Apostle Peter, 
how he was drawn to God after grievously backsliding, and how he 
was even admitted to the blessings of Pentecost. Then say, “You, 


too, can be restored if you only believe, and God will yet make you, 


a blessing to believers.” 

The third class are those who are not stricken by their sins, who 
have no deep conviction of guilt. Just bring the law of God to 
bear on these and show them themselves in their own true light. 
Repeat Romans, third chapter, tenth verse: “There is none right- 
eous; no, not one;” also the succeeding verses; and then repeat 
from Isaiah: “The whole head is sick and the whole heart faint ; 
from the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness, 


nly one 
> would 
offense. 
trouble 
Church 
and in- 


ifts you 
. Him ? 
<en the 
isterns, 
ne own 
re thee; 
at thou 


n thee, . 


xt, and 
| verse: 
sliding. 
1,” and 
ty that 
nember 
believe 

to the 
211 how 
Hosea, 
ou hast 
ity and 
x, I will 
‘ing up 
: Peter, 
how he 
“You, 


ke you. 


is, who 
xod to 
> light. 
> right- 
repeat 
- faint; 
ndness, 


BEST METHODS WITH INQUIRERS. 381 


but wounds and bruises and putrefying sores ;” and then bring in 
that verse: “The heart is deceitful above all things and desperately 
wicked.” Don’t try to heal the wound before the hurt is felt. You 
may perhaps get but few satisfactory inquirers in this way, but what 
you do. get are worth something. If a man don’t see his guilt, he 
won't be a valuable or true convert. Read him the first chapter of 
First John, tenth verse: “If we say that we have not sinned, we 
make Him a liar, and His Word is not in us,” and hold Him right 
to it. Don’t attempt to give the consolations of the Gospel until 
your converts see they have sinned—see it and feel it. I met a man 
who expressed doubts of his being much of a sinner. “Well,” said 
I, “let’s find out if you have sinned. Do you swear?” “Well, as 
a general rule, I only swear when I get mad.” “Yes, yes; but 
what does the Lord say about not holding a man guiltless that 
swears? Believe me, He will hold you responsible for that; bear 
that in mind; you must be able to hold your temper, but if not, 
beware to take the name of God in vain. Are you not now a sin- 
ner ?”’ And the man was convinced. Sometimes, tuo, I’ve found a 
merchant this way, and yet one openly confesses to me that he did 
cheat sometimes. “You lie, then, don’t you?” said I. He didn’t 
want to put it quite so plainly, but pretty soon saw it in my light. 
Oh, yes; enforce this truth kindly, but firmly, that our natural 
hearts are as black and deceitful as hell. Man must say from his 
heart, “I have sinned and come short of the glory of God.” 


The fourth class are those completely broken down by a sense of > : | 


sin—those who have too much conviction of sin distinguished from 
the preceding inquirers, who haven’t enough. One of these tells 
you that God can’t save such as he. Then you have to prove his 
mistake, and show that God can save to the uttermost. Take the 
first chapter of Isaiah, eighteenth verse: “Come now, and let us 
reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins be as scarlet, they 
shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they 
shall be as wool.” Just turn vour Bible right over to that passage, 
and many such passages in Isaiah; they will all help in the inquiry- 
room. The forty-third chapt.., twenty-fifth verse, says: “I, even I, 
am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for Mine own sake, and 
will not remember thy sins.” And the twenty-second verse of the 
next chapter is stronger: ‘I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy 
transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins; return unto Me, for I have 
redeemed thee.” Make the anxious soul believe that God has 


~ 


382 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


blotted out his sins as a thick cloud; make him see the dense cloud 
vanishing, as it were, from the face of the sun, vanishing forever; 
that cloud can never come up again; others may, but that old cloud 
of the past guilt is dissolved forever; the Lord Himself has blotted 
it out. Use the two verses, John i. 11, 12: “He came unto His 
own, and His own received Him not. But as many as received 
Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of God, even to 
them that believe on His name.” The idea is that those fearing 
ones can not serve God until they receive Christ fully as their salva- 
tion; it won’t do for them to merely take up with some minister or 
church or creed. The minister dies or moves away; the only last- 
ing resource is in Christ at the right hand of God, where He will 
never forsake His own. Yes, press Jesus upon these anxious 


souls. Tell them, “God so loved the world that He gave His’ 


only begotten Son,” etc. ‘So loved the world;” that includes 
them; if they inhabited some other land they might tremble, 
but they are in this earth, for all the sons and daughters of which 
Christ died, the just for the unjust. Use, also, the text: “ Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, he that heareth My words and believeth 
on Him that sent Me shall not come into condemnation, but has 
passed from death into life.” Now, some people do not just under- 
stand believing in Christ. They believe Christ came as an histori- 
cal being, as Moses and Elijah came. They believe the Cunard 
line of steamers will take them to Liverpool in twelve or fourteen 
days. But these beliefs don’t make men good; they are head be- 
liefs only. They are not what your inquirers want. What you and 
they want is heart belief, or, in other words, to just trust Christ to 
save you. Sometimes people can’t digest the word “ belief ;” then 
let them take this sweet word “trust.” From Isaiah xxvi. 3, 4, read 
to them, “Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is 
stayed on Thee; because he trusteth in Thee. Trust ye in the 
Lord forever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.” 
By trusting in Him, you see, we have everlasting strength. You 
must get them to trust and believe entirely in Christ, and not try 
to save themselves. They can not save themselves by their feel- 
ings; assure them of that. There is not a word of warrant for such 
a thought from the first of Genesis to the last of Revelation. Oh, 
it is much better to trust in the precious, changeless Word of God 
than in our own changing feelings; thank God that this is also our 
duty. 


e cloud 
orever; 
1 cloud 
blotted 
to His 
ceived 
ven to 
fearing 
r salva- 
ister or 
ly last- 
Te will 
nxious 


ve His’ 


icludes 
emble, 
which 
Verily, 
lieveth 
ut has 
under- 
histori- 
Sunard 
urteen 
ad be- 
ou and 
rist to 
? then 
4, read 
lind is 
in the 
ngth.” 

You 
1ot try 
r feel- 
rr such 
. Qh, 
f God 
so our 


BEST METHODS WITH INQUIRERS. . 383 


Then you hear some inquirers say, “I haven't got strength suffi- 
cient.” But Christ died to be their strength. A loving hand will 
suppo t them in the Christian journey, and “his strength will be 
made perfect in weakness.” Bid such be strong in the Lord, andin 
the power of His might. 

And then another class that can not be saved in this way, they 
think, because doubting instantaneous conversion. Read to such 
from Romans, sixth chapter, twenty-third verse, “The wages of sin 
is death, but the gift of God is eternal life.” Salvation is a gift, 
and so must have a definite point in time. I say, “Will you take 
this Bible?” You must first make up your mind to take it, and 
then reach out and—the work of an instant—grasp the gift. Just 
so with God’s best gift, salvation; to take it is the work of an in- 
stant, and your inquirers may have it for the asking. “Let him 
that heareth say come;” “ Whosoever will, let him come and drink 
of the water of life freely.” With the gift, God gives the power to 
take it. When we get before the tribunal of the great white throne 
we will have to answer for it, if we refuse to take it. This is the 
richest jewel that Heaven has; God gives up His Son for our 
Saviour. 

Another class say to you and me, when, in the inquiry-room, we 
press them to openly confess Christ, “We're afraid we won't hold 
out.” Say to these repeatedly that blessed text, “Now unto Him 
that is able to keep you from falling.” Think, and tell them to 
think, of the thousands who never fall. The idea that it is neces 
sary to fall into sin is wrong. Then take those passages: “I, the 
Lord thy God, will take thy right hand;’” “ Fear not, I will lead 
thee,” and “I am persuaded that I will be able to keep them that 
are committed unto Me against that day.” Let a man just trust 
the Lord to keep him from falling and He will do it. Suppose 
I have a hundred thousand dollars with me; it’s all I have in 
the world; thieves are after it, and I’m quaking every minute 
lest they get it. I find my banker here, and I say, “ Here, take it 
quick; I can’t keep my money but by your help; I wish you would 
hurry and put it in the vault; when it’s deposited there, and not 
before, I shall be safe.” Is not this the way to give our all into 
God’s keeping? Is not this the way to live secure from temptation 
and backsliding? In God’s keeping we are safe. “Our life is hid 
with Christ in God.” Oh, let us each make this deposit of our 
personal trust this morning; trust Him entirely, and then we can 


‘ t 


384 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADORESSES AND PRAVERS. 


the better lead inquirers in the same way. Jesus can hold us close 
to Himself. “ Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall 
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus 
our Lord.” If you just take up the words of Christ in the book of 
Romans, love, and peace, and joy flow out. One verse tells of love; 
the next of joy; the next ‘and next of the peace that comes from 
believing. Romans, fourth chapter and twenty-eighth verse, and 
all those verses along there, might be read. The result of believing 
is joy, rest, and peace. John xv. 11—that is joy. Matthew xi. 28 
—that is rest. John xiv. 27—that is peace. Never, however, tell 
a man he is converted. Never tell him he is saved, Let him find 
that out from Heaven. You can’t afford to deceive one about this 
great question. But you can help his faith and trust, and lead him 
right. I find that those in the inquiry-room do best who do not 
run about from one to another, offering words of encouragement 
everywhere. They would better go to but one or two of an after- 
noon or evening. We are building for eternity, and can take time. 
The work will not then be superficial. If it is so, it will not be the 

fault of the workers or preachers. And then, to do all our duty, we 
must talk more of restitution. I don’t think we preach enough the 
need of our making good to one another injuries to person, property, 
or feeling. If you have done one a detriment, you must go and 
pay it back or make it up, if it is a tangible loss ; and if it is a wound 


to the feelings, fully apologize. It is a good deal better to go up. 


and do the fair thing, whatever the result. It may be that some 
will refuse such amends, but it is our duty to offer them. But in 
the end a complete reconciliation from such a course is almost sure 
to result. The antipathy supposed to exist on the other side is 
often only imagined. You need not expect that God is going to 
forgive you if you don’t forgive others. We say daily, “ Forgive us 
our debts as we forgive our debtors,” and we must show that we 
understand this conditional request. What if God should take us 
at our word, and just forgive us to the extent to which our small 
grievances are forgiven! And this He surely will do; so let us be 
wise. A young lady in Michigan at a recent revival service was 
troubled greatly, and to kind inquiries at last confessed that her un- 
willingness to confess Christ resulted from a school-room quarrel 
which was still unsettled. She felt she couldn't forgive her enemy, 
but at last told her trouble and asked for advice, “ Must she forgive 
her mate?” “Certainly, if you want God’s forgive’ ess,” was the 


y. 


us close 
ire shall 
st Jesus 
book of 
of love; 
es from 
‘se, and 
elieving 
W xi, 28 
ver, tell 
im find 
out this 
ad him 
do not 
gement 
n after. 
e time. 

be the 
uty, we 
igh the 
operty, 
go and 

wound 


) gO up. 


t some 
But in 
st sure 
side is 
ing to 
sive us 
hat we 
ake us 
- small 

us be 
ce was 
ler un- 
juarrel 
nemy, 
orgive 
as the 


BEST METHODS WITH INQUIRERS, 385 


answer of the minister ; and immediately she ran with all her might 
to her old friend, and, instead of meeting a cold reception, they 
were soon crying on each other’s necks. And so it always should 
be, and most always there will be the same prompt half-way meet- 
ing between those aggrieved. My wife was laboring in the inquiry- 
room recently with a lady who was in just this state of mind, and very 
soon reparation and complete reconciliation were effected, and two 
old friends walked off arm in arm, happier than ever before this little 
misunderstanding. And one of those ladies felt so strong in her 
new-found charity for all, that she won over her husband, and last 
Sunday he openly, in the Tabernacle, confessed Christ, remembering 
that “ With the mouth confession is made unto salvation,” Many 
more texts, did time allow, might be cited, all applicabléto anxious 
inquirers, 

But one word more. Do not let a man go out of the inquiry- 
room without praying with Him. Fear not, but do the work 
boldly. There was a man the other day who said, “I don’t believe 
there’s any God.” The resolute Christian worker to whom he 
spoke answered impetuously, “ I will just ask God to shake you— 
to just shake this demon out of you.” And down he fell on his 
knees by the poor infidel and prayed with loud earnestness. The 
man began to shake from head to foot. It was God shaking him. 
And by just these means, more than any others, skeptics and 
infidels will know there is a God. Let me say a word to 
those ministers who do not go into the inquiry-room. Many 
in your flocks, never seeing you there, think you are not in sym- 
pathy with this work, and think you don’t care anything about 
their salvation. They feel in bondage, and you do not go to help 
them. Well, there was a minister in a city we visited who did not 
“‘condescend” to be seen in our humble Tabernacle. He would 
have nothing to do with us. One day he was at a dinner party 
where they were discussing our work. Said he, “That sort of thing 
is good enough for those people, but it would never do for me.” 
“Well,” said another clergyman of the same belief, “ fifty-seven of 
your congregation stood up in the Tabernacle for prayers to-day, 
and all of them afterward went into the inquiry-room.” The cul- 
tured and popular pastor of those Christians could not kill the 
humane promptings to be charitable to all professing the name of 
Christ, and to worship along with .._h even in perhaps irregular 
modes. But with the cordial co-operation of every Christian pas- 

25 


al 


‘ 
\ 


386 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


tor in the Tabernacle and inquiry-room, what limit would there be 
to the Christian inroads on the citadels of sin. Oh, make it a duty, 
all of you, to talk to some soul at every meeting in these blessed 
inquiry-rooms. Don’t take those in a position in life above your 
own, but take those on the same footing, Bend all your endeavors 
to answer for poor, struggling souls that question of all importance 
to them, “ What must I do to be saved?” Yes, this is the ques- 
tion. What else but to answer it brought out these thousands at 
this early hour! My friends, God is with you in this work; go on 
more diligently and implicitly trusting in Him; go on to a more 
and more glorious harvest. : 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, for Jesus’ sake wilt Thou hear our 
prayer. May we all be of one mind and of one spirit; and grant 
that in each of these meetings we may dwell closely by Thy side. 
May this meeting be one of profit. And oh, now we pray Thee 
for these young converts. May they learn the power of salva- 
tion and come to Thee in the spirit of the Master and believe. Help 
them, O Lord, to cast all their burdens upon Thee. May they learn 
that even in gaining the whole world, if they lose their own soul, it 
profiteth them nothing. We ask it all for Jesus’ sake. Amen. 


Sy 
we 


n Ss ef wr Fr wD fF et or OHM HM OSt@ ew hs 


” ee 


there be 
it a duty, 
e blessed 
ove your 
ndeavors 
portance 
the ques- 
isands at 
‘k; go on 
oO a more 


hear our 
ind grant 
Thy side. 
ray Thee 
of salva- 
ve. Help 
hey learn 
n soul, it 
men. 


XLVI. 


CHRIST SAVED THE BELIEVING ROBBER. 


LUKE xxiii. 33-43 : ‘‘ And when they were come to the place, which is called Cal- 
vary, there they crucified Him, and the malefactors, one on the right hand, and 
the other on the left. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them ; for they know not 
what they do, And they parted His raiment, and cast lots. And the people 
stood beholding. And the rulers also with them derided Him, saying, He 
saved others ; let Him save Himself, if He be Christ, the chosen of God. And the 
soldiers also mocked Him, coming to Him and offering Him vinegar, and saying, 
If Thou be the King of the Jews, save Thyself. And a superscription also was 
written over Him in letters of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew, This is the King 
of the Jews. And one of the malefactors which were hanged railed on Him, 
saying, If Thou be Christ, save Thyself and us. But the other answering, rebuked 
him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same condemna- 
tion? And we indeed justly: for we receive the due reward of our deeds; but 
this Man hath done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember 
me when Thou comest into Thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him: Verily I 
say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise.” 


HAVE spoken two or three times about sudden conversions, 

and have been approached by several people upon the subject. 

Two ladies said they were in darkness, because I had been 
preaching that people could be converted suddenly. I thought I 
had got beyond that when trying to prove that conversion was in- 
stantaneous; but it seems we have not, and I want to call attention 
to it. Well, we are told, by both Matthew and Mark, that these | 
two thieves, who were hung up on either side of Him, reviled Him | 
and scoffed at Him, as did the crowd. They cast His title in His 
teeth. We are told there was no difference between those men. 
Both had been in rebellion against God all their lives. Both were 


‘led out to execution as thieves and malefactors on the same day; 


but one of them was converted during the day, and the other was nat. 

Over one of them came a wonderful change. What was it? How was 

it? What brought him under conviction? I don’t know; but one 

thing I do know—he was convicted of sin, and confessed, and 
(387) 


388 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


Christ saved him and snatched him from the very borders of hell, 
It says in Isaiah that He came to take the power from the 
mighty. Here was one who had been brought to the very borders 
of the pit by Satan, and yet Christ, whenever he called upon Him, 
was ready to help him. The thief had only to cry to Him 
and he was pardoned. You would think He had all He could 
do in attending to His own sufferings, when nailed to that tree, 
but the first cry from that thief was heard and answered. 
My friends, the Son of God was never in a position where 
He could not hear a sinner’s prayers. No sinner ever uttered a cry 
that was not heard by Him. This man had no works to offer Him, 
no deeds of righteousness to bring before Him. He was a lost, 
ruined sinner. He had nothing to commend himself—nothing to 
offer. There he was, all mangled and bruised, in consequence of 
his own sin. He had not only been a thief, but the very worst kind 
ofa thief. I suppose he was a companion of Barabbas, and of the 
most notorious thieves in the country. I have no doubt he was a 
highwayman, and guilty of murder. He had been tried, but his trial 
had not broken his heart; the scourge had not softened him; im- 
prisonment had not brought repentance. There he was on the cross, 
his heart as hard as ever, nailed hand and foot, and reviling the Son 
of God. I can just imagine what came over him when he heard 
the Son of God exclaim, “ Father, forgive them, for they know not 
what they do.” I can imagine this thief saying, when he heard 
this, “ That is a strange thing to say. If I had the power I couldn’t 
forgive them, but would call down fire from Heaven to consume 
these wretches who are making jests about me.” Perhaps it was the 
very cry of Christ on the cross while all those people were reviling 
Him and wagging their heads, that convicted him, and that saved 
him. When He had uttered this prayer one of the maleficturs ce 
viled Him, and we find his companion rebuking him, saying: “ Dost 
thou fear God?” We are told in Proverbs that “the fear of the 
Lord is the beginning of knowledge,” and there is no hope for a 
sinner till the fear of God comes upon him. Sometimes in an au- 
dience like this a tex: similar to this one strikes into the heart of 
the people, and ihe fear of God comes upon them and they begin to 
see knowledge. I hope that may be the case to-night. This thief 
had been tried and scourged, the nails had been driven into his 
hands and feet, and he was suffering the agonies of the terrible death 
of the crucifixion, yet we find that then the fear of the Lord camo 


¥ 


of hell. 
om the 
borders 
on Him, 
o Him 
e could 
at tree, 
iswered, 
| where 
sd a cry 
er Him, 
a lost, 
hing to 
ence of 
rst kind 
l of the 
e€ was a 
his trial 
im; im- 
ie cross, 
the Son 
> heard 
1OW not 
e heard 
ouldn’t 
onsume 
was the 
reviling 

aved 
“cs 


Dost 
of the 
ve for a 


an au- 
eart of 
egin to 
s thief 
nto his 
e death 
1 came 


CHRIST SAVED THE BELIEVING ROBBER. 389 


upon him, and the moment the fear of God came upon him, he con- 
fessed Christ. Not only did he confess Christ, but he confessed his 
own sins and turned and rebuked the thief on the other side of the 
cross, for we read that he said, ‘ We receive the due reward of our 
deeds, but this Man hath done nothing amiss.” He confessed that 
he had been a sinner, and he was getting his just reward—death ; 
and then there was hope for the man to be saved. This was the 
first step. There is no hope for a man being saved till he knows he 
is a sinner: there is no hope for a man who folds his arms and says, 
“Tam willing to take the consequences if I ama sinner; I don’t think 
God will condemn me.” This thief stood, when he confessed, where 
every sinner ought to stand. He took his place as a sinner; he con- 
fessed his sins, and if you are to be saved to-night, you must take your 
place before God asa sinner. If a man does not admit that he is 
a sinner, and that he has gone astray, there is no chance for God to 
forgive him. Suppose my boy has disobeyed me; suppose he has 
told me a falsehood, and he won't ask my forgiveness; won’t 
acknowledge that he has told a falsehood; I can’t forgive him. I 
must first get him to admit that he has told a lie, and when he does 
that, then I can forgive him. So we must confess our sins, acknowl- 
edge that we have committed sin in God’s sight, before He can for- 
give us. This thief confessed his sins and confessed Christ. “We 
receive the due reward of our deeds, but this Man hath done noth- 
ing amiss.” A great many men in Chicago think that Christ did 
many things amiss; but the poor thief, who probably never heard 
the Gospel in his life, who had, perhaps, lived in an atmosphere of 
crime, said, “This Man hath done nothing amiss.” He confessed 
Him. This must have been a sweet moment in this, the darkest 
hour of His life. Judas had betrayed Him for thirty pieces of 
silver; Peter had denied Him; He had been brought before Caia- 
phas, and had been tried and found guilty by the Sanhedrim, and a 
howling multitude around Him, jeering at His sufferings and wag- 
ging their heads, saying, “ If Thou be Christ, save Thyself.” Hew 
pleasant it must have been to the Son of Man to hear the confession 
of this thief in those moments of bitterness. We read of Abraham 
in the promised land twenty-five years, with abundant proofs of 
God’s love to build up his faith, and yet he did not seem to have as 
much faith as this man. We read of Moses in the wilderness for 
forty years; he saw God’s mighty hand leading the children through 
the Red Sea; he saw the water coming from the rock; he had every- 


\ 


390 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


thing to give him faith in his God, and yet he had not as much 
faith as this poor thief, who, during his life, had nothing to school 
him in the faith of God. Look at Elijah ; how much God gave 
him, how much He did for him, how miraculously He took care of 
him; he had everything to build up his faith; but hese is a man 
who had never heard the Gospel, who had never met Him before, 
who had mingled with the blasphemers, who had associated with 
the revilers, and consorted with the worst classes of thieves. Why, 
if he had lived in Chicago to-day, and we had looked over the annals 
of crime, we would have found that he had been familiar with the 
Penitentiary, and yet this man, as black as sin, and standing on the 
borders of hell, confessed Him and was saved. Peter had seen Him 
when raised from the dead, had witnessed the transfiguration, and 
he hadn’t the faith of this man. I consider this one of the most 
remarkable evidences of conversion suddenly—the faith of this man 

on Calvary. He had heard none of His sermons, he had seen none 

of His miracles, and yet the very day he met Christ he was convicted 

and confessed, and took his place before Him as a sinner. He 

owned himself a sinner, and I tell you, a man can never be saved 

till he has owned hiruself a sinner. If he tries to put before Christ 
his own deeds, and justify himself, there is no hope for his salvation. 
This nan merely took his place before Christ among the sinners, 
and his taith saved him. 

When I was a boy, I used to bea pretty bad speller—I haven’t 
improved much since—and I remember one day a word was given 
in the class. All passed the word, but when it came to me I was 
able to spell it, and got clear up to the head of the class, and I was 
very proud of my promotion. If you will allow me the expression, 
this thief by his faith got clear up from the foot to the head of 
the class. He passed by all the men of God, and took his lead at 
the top of the class. He surpassed Peter, he surpassed Abraham, 
Noah, Elijah, Moses, and all of them when he said, “ Why, this 


Why, there was no sceptre in His 
hand, there was no crown on His head, except a crown of thorns, 
which sent the blood trickling down His face, causing Him to look 
hideous. He was a sorry sight, and amid the jeers of the multitude 


S. 


as much 
0 school 
od gave 
care of 
$} a man 
1 before, 
ed with 

Why, 
e annals 
ith the 
‘on the 
en Him 
on, and 
ie most 
his man 
2n none 
nvicted 
r. He 
e saved 
- Christ 
vation. 
sinners, 


naven’t 
} given 
> I was 
1 I was 
ession, 
ead of 
lead at 
raham, 
y, this 


nailed 
in His 
horns, 
0 look 
titude 


CHRIST SAVED THE BELIEVING ROBBER, 391 


he called Him “Lord.” Thank God for such faith. My friends, 
call Him Lord to-night. His prayer was short. He put it into 
three words, “Lord, remember me.” It was short, but it was a 
chain of golden links. He owned Him. “Lord, remember me 
when Thou comest into Thy kingdom.” What was it that induced 
this man to call Him Lord, and ask Him to remember him when 
He came into His kingdom? The idea of the man nailed to that 
cross and bleeding from His wounds having a kingdom! If He had 
a kingdom, where were His subjects? See that howling crowd wag- 
ging their heads and reviling Him ; and when He asked a draught of 
water, they bring Him vinegar. They were not His subjects. Where 
was the kingdom? His faith went beyond that, and that is what 
faith does. He didn’t look upon his surroundings, but trusted Him 
and cried to Him, “ Lord, remember me.” And how quick the an- 
swer came. “Lord, remember me when Thou comest into Thy 
kingdom,” and back came the answer, “To-day thou shalt be with 
Me in Paradise.” He got more than he asked for; and, my friends, 
when a man comes to Christ in faith, he receives more than he asks, 
“To-day thou shalt be with Me in Paradise.” Here was instant 
conversion, sudden salvation, and I think that this is a proof which, 
if we are honest, ought to forever settle the question. How we 
linger around the death-bed of a man and hesitate about believing 
him accepted if he has not partaken of the sacrament. If he hasn't, 
people are in great distress. Now, the! man never partook of the 
sacrament. Remember, I am saying nothing against the ordinance. 
May my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth when I say any- 
thing against the ordinance commemorating the death of our Sav- 
iour. I am saying nothing against the blessed ordinance when I 
say it has nothing to do witn salvation. It is distinct. This man’s 
conversion was instantaneous. He had never been a Christian; he 
had never accepted a single Christian ordinance; he had never 
worked for Him, and yet when he called upon Him he was saved. 
The man had been a thief—a highway robber. His feet were nailed 
to that cross, and he could not have worked for Him if he’d wanted; 
but they could not nail his heart, and with his heart that man be- 
lieved, and the blessed Lord gave him salvation. If you but believe 
on Him with your heart, you will be saved. Christ did not look at 
his works. My friends, let us keep salvation in its place. It is dis- 
tinct from works, and any man or woman can be saved before leav- 
ing this hall—can be saved without lifting their hands, without mov- 


392 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


ing an eyelash. If this thief had lived fifty years he could not have 
done Him better service than by testifying his faith on that cross. 
His prayer has come down these eighteen hundred years, and its 
answer as a testimony of His love and forgiveness to the sinner. In 
the morning he was led out from that prison a blasphemer, reviling 
Christ, and in the evening he was walking the crystal pavements of 
Heaven. He only asked to be remembered, and the answer came: 
“To-day thou shalt be with Me in Paradise.” Thanks be to God, 
He was not ashamed of the poor thief. The moment the cry came 
form his lips, a welcome was given him. 

Now, my friends, why not make the prayer of this thief? If we 
make it from the heart, we can be saved. Thank God, we have 
communication from this Tabernacle to the throne, and an earnest 
prayer can go from this building, and will be answered. Suppose 
you make it now, “Lord, remember me.” Who can not say that? 
Who can not say from their heart, “ Lord, remember me.” Make it a 
personal prayer. It isa very short one. Every prayer in the Bible that 
brought salvation is very short. Peter’s prayer was only, “ Lord, 
save me.” Some one has said, “If he had made a long preamble, 
he would have been forty feet under the water.” It was simply, 
“Lord, save me.” Just say, “Lord, remember me,” and He will 
remember you. Simply do as the thief did, and you will be saved. 
That is what I call instantaneous conversion, 

Now, this thief, as I said before, when led out from the prison 

_ that morning, had no thought of being saved. His heart was not 
touched by the trial; he did not feel sorry for what he had done. 
He was hung up on one side of Christ, and reviled Him, and the 
moment he asked Him to be remembered, he got His forgiveness. 
He might have replied, “You miserable thief, you have scoffed at 
religion all your life; you were reviling Me just now, and why 
should I forgive you?” but instead of that came the answer, “ To. 
day thou shalt be with Me in Paradise.” It is said of Whitefield, 
that he once exclaimed, “ Why, the Lord is so anxious to save sin- 
ners that He is willing to take the devil’s castaways.” Lady Hunt- 
ington heard him, and took exceptions to his utterance. “The 
idea,” she said, “of the Lord being willing to take the devil’s cast- 
aways.” She wouldn't believe him; but shortly after, a poor fallen 
woman came to him, and said, “You told us the other night that 

the Lord was willing to take the devil’s castaways.” She admitted 
her sin and accepted Him. My friends, the Son will save the vilest 


. 


10t have 
ut cross. 
and its 
ner. In 
reviling 
ients of 
rcame: 
to God, 
ry came 


If we 
e have 
earnest 
uppose 
y that? 
ake ita 
ole that 
“ Lord, 
‘amble, 
simply, 
fe will 

saved. 


prison 
as not 
done. 
id the 
reness. 
fed at 
1 why 
(73 To- 
efield, 
ye sin- 
Hunt- 
“ The 
, Cast- 
fallen 
{thas 
nitted 
vilest 


CHRIST SAVED THE BELIEVING ROBBER. 393 


in Chicago to-night, if they will only admit their guilt. I was 
greatly cheered this afternoon when two men went into the inquiry- 
room, and I got down to pray with them. After I had prayed with 
them, they did not spring up on their feet as inquirers very often 
do. One of them cried, “God be merciful to mea sinner; that’s 
all I can say.” “That's enough,” I said; “ that was all the publican 
could say, and he went down to his house saved, because it came 
from his heart.” The other man could only say, “ Lord, save me,” 
and that is enough. He will save you if you only cry from your 
heart. Thank God, you can be saved if you will. 

I can imagine when they came to take down the body of Christ, 
and when they came to break the bones of those two thieves—I 
can imagine him saying to the officers: “ Hurry up, for I will soon 
be with my Master.” Christ went up before him to give hima 
warm welcome, and that thief rejoices that he will soon be in the 
kingdom. Whenever he put his trust in Him he was changed in 
the twinkling of an eye, because he had got salvation. But let me 
say here that Christ drew the dividing line while upon that cross, 
On one side of Him was unbelief, and the unbeliever died reviling 
Him. On the other side was belief, and the believer went up to 
Paradise. He believed in a moment, and yet there are men who 
can not understand sudden conversion. There are two classes in 
Chicago—as they were represented by those two thieves—those for 
and those against Him. They must either accept Him or reject 
Him. One of them would not receive salvation, and went down 
to death; the other accepted salvation as a gift, and went up 
to His kingdom. I can imagine him now singing the sweet songs 
of Moses and the Lamb. No one sings those sweet songs any 
louder than does that thief. Ask that poor thief who, when down 
here, was a reveler, who was a blasphemer, and lived at enmity 
with God, how he came into that world of light. Ask him how he 
got that sceptre in his hand, that crown on his brow; how he was 
permitted to sing the high hallelujahs of the redeemed, and his 
voice will come back telling you, “I took salvation as the gift of 
God.” Ah, my friends, there is salvation for all who will have it, 
and damnation for those who won’t accept the gift. He com. 
manded His disciples to preach the Gospel as a gift before He 
left the earth. “Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel 
to every creature: He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, 
but he that believeth not shall be damned.” One of those thieves 


y 


394. MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, — 


_ believed and was saved, the other rejected Him and was damned. 
What will you do? Will you believe and be saved? Will you 
accept this gift of eternal life or trample the gift under your feet ? 
Will you take His offer or reject it? May God open your eyes too, 
and bring you to Himself on this the last Sunday in November, one 
of the sweetest months of my life. May this be the Sabbath night 
of your salvation, and it will be an evening full of sweetness. 


XLVII. 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF. PARENTS. 


DEUTERONOMY vy. 29: “O that there were such an heart in them that they would 
fear Me, and keep all My commandments always, that it might be well with them, 
and with their children forever.” 


Also, vi. 7: “And thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy children, and shalt 
talk of them when thou sittest in thine house, and when thou walkest by the way, 
and when thou liest down, and when thou risest up.” 


| USED to think when I was superintendent on the North Side, 
when I was laboring among the children, and trying to get the 

parents interested to save their children, that if ever I did be- 
come a preacher I would have but one text and one sermon, and 
that should be addressed to parents, because when we get them in- 
terested, their interest will be apparent in the children. We used to 
say, if we get the lambs in, the old sheep will follow, but I didn’t 
find that to be the case. When we got the children interested one 
Sunday, the parents would be, sometimes, pulling the other way all 
the week, and before Sunday came again the impression that had . 
been made was gone, and I came to the conclusion that, unless we 
could get the parents interested, or could get some kind Christian 
friend to look after those children, it is almost a sin to bring them 
to Christ. If there is no one to nurse them, to care for them, and 
just to water the seed, why, they are liable to be drawn away; and 
when they grow up, to be far more difficult to reach. Iwish to say 
to-night that Iam as strong as ever upon sudden conversion, and 
there are a great many ministers, a great many parents who scoff 
and laugh when they hear of children who have been brought unto 
Christ at these meetings. Now, in many of the churches the sermons 
gu over their heads; they don’t do the young any good; they don’t 
understand the preaching, and if they are impressed here, we ought 
not to discourage them. My friends, the best thing we can do is to 
bring them early to Christ. These earliest impressions never, never 
leave them, and I do not know why they should not grow up in the 

(395) 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


395 


service of Christ. I contend that those who are converted early are 
the best Christians. Take a man who is converted at fifty. He has 
continually to fight against his old habits; but take a young man or 
a young girl and they get a character to form and a whole long life to 
give to Christ. An old man unconverted got up in an inquiry-meet- 
ing recently, and said he thought we were very hard-hearted down 
in the Tabernacle; we went right by when we saw some young per- 
son. He thought, as he was old, he might be snatched away before 
these young people; but with us it seemed as if Christ was of more 
importance to the young than the old. I confess, truly, that I have 
that feeling. If a young man is converted, he, perhaps, has a long 
life of fifty years to devote to Christ, but an old man is not worth 
much. Of course his soul is worth much, but he is not worth much 
for labor. 

While down at a convention in Illinois, an old man got up, past 
seventy years; he said he remembered but one thing about his 
father, and that one thing followed him all through life. He could 
not remember his death; he had no recollection of his funeral, but 
he recollected his father one winter night taking a little chip, and 
with his pocket-knife whittling out a cross, and with the tears in his 
eyes he held up that cross and told how God in His infinite love 
sent His Son down here to redeem us, how He had died on the cross 
for us. The story of the cross followed him through life; and I tell 
you, if you teach these children truths, they wil! follow them through 
life. We have got so much unbelief among us, like those disciples 
when they rebuked the people for bringing the children to Christ ; 
but He said, “ Suffer little children to come unto Me, and forbid 
them not, for of such is the kingdom of Heaven.” I heard of a 
Sunday-school concert at which a little child of eight was going to 
recite. Her mother had taught her, and when the night came, the 
little thing was trembling so she could scarcely speak. She com- 
menced, “ Jesus said,’ and completely broke down. Again she 
tried it, “ Jesus said, ‘Suffer,’ but she stopped once more. A third 
attempt was made by her, “ ‘Suffer little children—and don’t any- 
body stop them, for He wants them all to come,’” and that is the 
truth. There is not a child who has a parent in the Tabernacle but 
He wants, and if you but bring them in the arms of your faith, and 
ask the Son of God to bless them and train them in the knowledge 
of God, and teach them as you walk your way, as you lie down at 
night, as you rise up in the morning, they will be blessed. But I can 


Pn THURA cs UNG 6G OI ca gg TAY MEU) = NORIO ROUT SAE > SQ eo >a i RNC ag UH ES cp ggg etna AMS ga Matto 


arly are 
He has 


man or 
g life to 
y-ineet- 
1 down 
ng per- 
’ before 
»f more 
I have 
a long 
- worth 
1 much 


p, past 
ut his 


: could 
al, but 
p, and 
in his 
e love 
e cross 
1 I tell 
rough 
sciples 
hrist ; 
forbid 
dofa 
ing to 
ie, the 
: com- 
n she 
third 


[ any- 
is the 
le but 
1, and 
ledge 
vn at 
I can 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS, 307 


imagine some skeptic in yonder gallery saying, “ That’s well enough, 
but it’s all talk, Why, I have known children of ministers and 
Christian people who have turned out worse than any others.” I’ve 
heard that all my life, but I tell you that is one of the devil’s lies. 
I will admit I’ve heard of many Christian people having bad children, 
but they are not the worst children. That was tested once. A 
whole territory was taken in which fathers and mothers were 
Christians, and it was found that two-thirds of the children were 
members of churches; but they took a portion of country where all 
the fathers and mothers were not Christians, and it was found that 
not one in twelve of the children attended churches. That was the 
proportion. Look at a good man who has a bad son. Do you 
want to know the reason? In the first place, children do not in- 
herit grace. Because fathers and mothers are good, that is no 
reason why their children should be good. Children are not born 
good. Men may talk of natural goodness, but I don’t find it. 
Goodness must come down from the Father of Light. To havea 
good nature, aman must be born of God. There is another reason: 
A father may be a very good man, but the mother may be pulling in 
another way. She may be ambitious, and may want her children 
to occupy a high worldly position. She has some high ambition, 
and trains the child for the world. Again, it may be the reverse— 
a holy, pious mother and a worldly father, and it is pretty hard 
when father and mother do not pull together. Another reason is 
—and you will excuse me the expression-—a great many people 
have got very little sense about bringing up children. Now, I’ve 
known mothers to punish their children by making them read the 
Bible. Do not be guilty of such a thing. If you want children not 
to hate the Bible, do not punish them by making them read it. It 
is the most attractive book in the world. But that is the way te 
spoil its attractiveness, and make them hate it with a perfect hate. 
There is another reason: A good many people are engaged in look- 
ing after other people’s children and neglecting their own. No 
father or mother has a right to do this, whatever may be the position 
they hold in the world. The father may be a statesman or a great 
business man, but he is responsible for his children. If they do not 
look after their children, they will have to answer for it some day. 
There will be a blight in their paths, and their last days will be 
very bitter. 

There are a great matiy reasons which I might bring forward if I 


398 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


had time, why good people's children turn out bad, but let me say 
one word about bringing up these children—how to train them in 
‘Christian ways. The word is very plain: “Teach them diligently.” 
In the street cars, as we go about our business, night and morning, 
talk of Christ and Heavenly things. It seems to me as if these 
things were the last things many of us think about, and as if Christ 
was banished from our homes. A great many people have a good 
name as Christians. They talk about ministers and Sunday- 
schools, and will come down and give a dinner to the bootblacks 
and seem to be strong patrons of the cause of Christ ; but when it 
comes to talking to children personally about Christ, that is another 
thing. The word is very plain, “ Teach them diligently,” and if we 
want them to grow up a blessing to the Church of God and to the 
world, we must teach them. I can imagine some of you saying, 
“Tt may be very well for Mr. Moody to lay down theories, but 
there are a great many difficulties in the way.” I heard of a min- 
ister who said he had the grandest theory upon the bringing up of 
children. God gave him seven children and he found that his 
theory was all wrong. They were all differently constituted. I 
will admit that this is one difficulty ; but if our heart is set upon 
this one thing—to have our children in glory—God will give us all 
the light we need. He is not going to leave us in darkness. If 
that is not the aim of your heart, make it this very night. I would 
rather, if I went to-night, leave my children in the hope of Christ 
than leave them millions of money. It seems to measif we were too 
ambitious to have them make a name, instead of to train them for 
the life they are to lead forever. And another thing about gov- 
ernment. Never teach them revenge. Ifa baby falls down on the 
floor, don’t give it a book with which to strike the floor. They 
have enough of revenge in them without being taught it. Then 
don’t teach them to lie. You don’t like that; but how many 
parents have told their children to go to the door, when they did 
not want to see the visitor, and say, “ Mother is not in.” That 
is a lie. Children are very keen to detect. They very soon 
see those lies, and this lays the foundation for a great deal of trouble 
afterward. “Ah,” some of you say, “I never do this.” Well, sup- 
pose some one comes in that you don’t want to see. You give him 
a welcome, and when he goes, you entreat him to stay; but the mo- 
ment he is out of the door you say, “What a bore!” The chil- 
dren wonder at first, but they very soon begin to imitate the father 


RU RUD LN ee aR ihe ee Ta RR Da al 


fab) 


eT TO MM YW er& et fn rftn ~— 


— 


> sh 


ne say 
hem in 
ently.” 
orning, 
’ these 


Christ 
1 good 
inday- 
blacks 
then it 
nother 
lif we 
to the 
saying, 
s, but 
1 min- 
up of 
at his 
ed. I 

upon 
us all 
is. If 
would 
Christ 
re too 
em for 
t gov- 
on the 
They 
Then 
many 
ey did 

That 
- soon 
rouble 
1, sup- 
re him 


16 mo- 
e chil- 
father 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS. 399 
and mother. Children are very good imitators. A father and 
mother never ought to do a thing that they don’t want their chil- 
dren todo. If you don’t want them to smoke, don’t you smoke ; 
if you don’t want them to chew, don’t you chew; if you don’t want 
them to play billiards, don’t you play billiards; if you don’t want 
them to drink, don’t you.drink, because children are grand imitators. 
A las'y once told me she was in her pantry on one occasion and she 
was surprised by the ringing of the bell. As she whirled round to 
see who it was she broke atumbler. Her little child was standing 
there and she thought her mother was doing a very correct thing, 
and the moment the lady left the pantry the child commenced to 
break all the tumblers she could get hold of. You may laugh, but 
children are very good imitators. If you don’t want them to break 
the Sabbath day, keep it holy yourself; if you want them to go to 
church, go to church yourself. It is very often by imitation that 
they utter their first oath; that they tell their first lie; and then 
they grow upon them, and when they try to quit the habit, it has 
grown so strong upon them that they can not do it. “Ah,” some 
say, “we do not believe in children being converted. Let them 
grow up to manhood and womanhood and then talk of converting 
them.” They forget that in the meantime their characters are 
formed, and perhaps they have begun to enter those dens of 
infariy, and when they have arrived at manhood or womanhood we 
find it is too late to alter their character. How unfaithful we are. 
“Teach them diligently.” How many parents in this vast assembly 
here their sons are? Their sons may be in the halls of vice. 

‘oes your son spend his evenings? You don’t care enough 
fo. | « to ascertain what kind of company he keeps; what kind ‘of 
books he reads; don’t care whether he is reading those iniserable, 
trashy novels or not, and getting false ideas of life. You don’t 
know till it is too late. Oh, may God wake us up and teach us the 
responsibility devolving upon us in the training of our children, 
While in London, an officer in the Indian army hearing of us being 
over there, said, “ Lord, now is the time for my son to be saved.” 
He got a furlough, and left India, and came to London. 

When he came there for that purpose, of course God was not go- 
ing to let him go away without the blessing. How many men who 
are interested in their sons would do as this man did? How many 
men are sufficiently interested in them to bring them here? How 
many parents stand in the way of the salvation of their children? I 


WW 


400 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


don’t know anything that discouraged me more when I was super- 
intendent on the North Side, than when after begging with parents 
to allow their children to come to Sunday-school—and how few of 
them came; whenever spring arrived these parents would take their 
children from the school, and lead them into those Germa1 gardens. 
And now a great many are reaping the consequences. I remember 
one mother who heard that her boy was impressed at our meeting. 
She said her son was a good enough boy, and he didn’t need to be 
converted. I pleaded with that mother, but all my pleading was of 
no account. I tried my influence with the boy; but while I was 
pulling one way, she was pulling the other, and, of course, her in- 
fluence prevailed. Naturally it would. Well, to make a long story 
short, some time after I happened to be in the County Jail, and I 
saw him there. “How did you come here?” I asked ; “does your 
‘mother know where you are?” “No, don’t tell her; I came in 
under an assumed name, and I am going to Joliet for four years. 
Do not let my mother know of this,” he pleaded; “she thinks I am 
in the army.” I used to call on that mother, but I had promised 
her boy I would not tell her, and for four years she mourned over 
that boy. She thought he had died on the battle-field or in a 
Southern hospital. What a blessing he might have been to that 
mother, if she had only helped us to bring him to Christ. But the 
mother is only a specimen of hundreds and thousands of parents in 
Chicago. If we would have more family altars in our homes and 
train them to follow Christ, why, the Son of God would lead them 
into “green pastures,” and instead of having sons who curse the 
mothers who gave them birth, they would bless their fathers and 
mothers. In the Indiana Penitentiary I was told of a man who had 
come there under an assumed name. His mother heard where he 
was. She was too poor to ride there, and she walked. Upon 
her arrival at the prison she at first did not recognize her son 
in his prison suit and short hair, but when she did see who it 
was, that mother threw her arms about that boy, and said: “I 
am to blame for this; if I had only taught you to obey God 
and keep the Sabbath you would not have been here.” How 
many mothers, if they were honest, could attribute the ruina- 
tion of their children to their early training. God has said, if we 
don’t teach them those blessed commandments, He will destroy us, 
and the law of God never changes. It does not only apply to those 


super- 
Jarents 
few of 
e their 
urdens. 
lember 
ecting. 
1 to be 
was of 
I was 
ler in- 
y story 
and I 
S your 
me in 
years, 
slam 
mised 
1 over 
rin & 
> that 
ut the 
nts in 
Ss and 
them 
se the 
Ss and 
o had 
re he 
Upon 
r son 
ho it 
a fe] 

God 
How 
‘uina- 
if we 
y us, 
those 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS. 401 


callous men who make no profession of religion, but to those who 
stand high in the Church, if they make the same mistake. Look 
at that high-priest, Eli. He was a good man and a kind one, but 
one thing he neglected to'do—to train his children for God. The 
Lord gave him warning, and at last destruction came upon. his 
house. Look at that old man, ninety-eight years old, with his white 
hair, like some of the men on the platform, sitting in the town of 
Shiloh, waiting to hear the result of the battle. The people of 
Israel come into the town and take out the ark of God, and when 
it comes into the camp, a great shout goes upto Heaven, for they 
have the ark of their God among them. They thought they were 
going to succeed, but they had disobeyed God. When the battle 
came on, they fought manfully, but no less than thirty thousand of 
the Israelites fell by the sword of their enemies, and a messenger 
comes running from the field through the streets of Shiloh, to where 
Eli was, crying, “Israel is defeated, the ark is taken, and Hophni 
and Phineas have been slain in battle,” and there the old priest, 
when he heard it, fell backward by the side of the gate, and his neck 
broke and he died. Oh, what a sad ending to that man! And 
when his daughter-in-law heard the news, there was another death 
in that family recorded.. In that house destruction was complete. 
My friends, God is true, and if we do not obey Him in this respect 
He will punish us. It is only a question of time. Look at King 
David ; see him waiting for the tidings of the battle; he had been 
driven from his throne by his own son, whom he loved ; but when 
the news came that he was slain, see how he cried, “Oh, my son 
Absalom, would God I had died for thee.” It was worse than death 
to him, but God had to punish him because he did not train his son 
to love the Lord. My friends, if He punished Eli and David, He 
will punish you and me. May God forgive us for the past, and may 
we commence a new record to-night. My friends, if you have not 
a family altar, erect one to-night. Let us labor that our children 
may be brought to glory. Don’t say children are too young. 
Mothers and fathers, if you hear your children have been impressed 
with religion, don’t stand in the way of their conversion, but en- 
courage them all you can. 

While I was attending a meeting in a certain city, some time ago, 
a lady came to me, and said, “I want you to go home with 
me; I have something to say to you.” When we reached her 


26 


402 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES ANL PRAYERS. 


home, there were some friends there. After they had retired, she 
put her arms on the table, and tears began to come into her eyes; 
but with an effort she repressed her emotion. After a struggle, she 
went on to say that she was going to tell me something which she 
had never told any other living person. I should not tell it now, 
but she has gone to another world. She said she had a son in 
Chicago, and she was very anxious about him. When he was young 
he got interested in religion at the rooms of the Young Men’s 
Christian Association. He used to go out in the streets and circu- 
late tracts. He was her only son, and she was very ambitious he 
should make a name in the world, and wanted him to get into the 
very highest circles. Oh, what a mistake people make about these 
highest circles. Society is false; it is a sham. She was deceived, 
like a good many more votaries of fashion and hunters after wealth 
at the present time. She thought it was beneath her son to go 
down and associate with those young men who hadn’t much money. 
She tried to get him away from them, but they had more influence 


than she had, and finally, to break his whole association, she packed — 


him off to a boarding-school. He went soon to Yale College, and she 
supposed he got into one of those miserable secret societies there 
that have ruined so many young men ; and the next thing she heard 
was that the boy had gone astray. She began to write letters urging 
him to come into the kingdom of God, but she heard that he tore 
_the letters up without reading them. She went to him to try and 
regain whatever influence she possessed over him, but her efforts 
were useless, and she came home with a broken heart. He left New 
Haven, and for two years they heard nothing of him. At last they 
heard he was in Chicago; and his father found him and gave him 
thirty thousand dollars to start in business. They thought it would 
change him, but it didn’t. They asked me when I went back to 
Chicago to try and use my influence with him. I got a friend to 
invite him to his house one night, where I intended to meet him; 
but he heard I was to be there, and did not come near. Likea 
good many other young men, who seem to be afraid of me, I tried 
many times to reach him, but could not. While I was traveling one 
day on the New Haven Railroad, I bought a New York paper, and 
in it I sawa dispatch saying he had been drowned in Lake Michigan, 
His father came on to find his body, and after considerable search 
ing, they discovered it, all the clothes and his body covered with 


S. 


tired, she 
her eyes; 
iggle, she 
hich she 
ll it now, 
a son in 
as young 
g Men’s 
nd circu- 
itious he 
into the 
ut these 
leceived, 
‘r wealth 
yn to go 
1 money. 
influence 


> packed © 


-and she 
es there 
he heard 
‘Ss urging 
t he tore 
try and 
r efforts 
left New 
ast they 
‘ave him 
it would 
back to 
friend to 
et him; 

Like a 
, 1 tried 
ling one 
per, and 
ichigan, 
: search 
ed with 


RESPONSIBILITIES OF PARENTS, 403 


sand. The body was taken home to that broken-hearted mother, 
She said, “If I thought he was in Heaven, I would have peace,” 
Her disobedience to God’s law came back uponher. So, my friends, 
if you have a boy impressed with the Gospel, help him to come to 
Christ. Bring him in the arms of :your faith, and he will unite you 
closer to Him. Let us have faith in Him; and let us pray day and 
night that our children may be born of the Spirit. 


XLVIII. 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD. 


1 KINGs xviii, 21: “ And Elijah came unto all the people and said, How long halt 
ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow Him; but if Baal, then 
follow him. And the people answered him not a word,” 


\ A 7 E found in this portion of the Word of God that Elijah was 
calling the people of Israel back, or he was calling them to 
a decision as to whether they were for God or Baal, and a 
great many were wavering—just halting between two opinions, like 
the people of Chicago at the present time. During the last eight 
weeks a great deal has been said upon the subject of religion. Men 
have talked about it all over the city. A great many are talking— 
a great many are taking their stand for, and a great many against 
Him. Now, what will you do? I will just divide this audience into 
two portions—one against and one for Him. It seems to me a 
practical question to ask an audience like this, “How long halt ye 
between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow Him; but if 
Baal, then follow him.” A’ man who is undecided about any ques- 
tion of any magnitude never has any comfort; never has any peace. 
Not only that, but we don’t like a man who can not decide upona 
question. I like men of decision, and firmly believe that more men 
are lost by indecision than by anything else. It is a question 
whether I am not talking to many men who intend some day to 
settle this question. Probably every one here intends to make 
Heaven his home; but Satan is trying to get you to put off the 
settlement of the question till it will be too late. If he can only 
get men to put off till the “to-morrow,” which never comes, he has 
accomplished all he wants. How many in this audience have prom- 
ised some friend years ago that they would settle this question. 
May be you said you would do it when you came of age. That time 
has gone with some of you, and it has not been settled yet. Some 
have reached thirty, some forty, and others have reached fifty years, 
their eyes are growing dim, and they are hastening toward eternity, 
(404) 


GOD. 


v long halt 
Baal, then 


lijah was 
‘them to 
al, and a 
ions, like 
ast eight 
yn. Men 
alking— 
y against 
nce into 
to me a 
halt ye 
; but if 
ny ques- 
y peace. 
> upon a 
ore men 
question 
> day to 
oO make 
t off the 
san only 
sy he has 
e prom. 
juestion. 
lat time 
Some 


y years, 
sternity, 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD. 405 


and this is not settled with them yet. Some of you have promised 
dying brothers that you would meet them in that world; some have 
promised dying wives that you would see them in that land of light, 
and again others have given their word to dying children that you 


would meet thém in Heaven. Years have rolled away, and still 


you have not decided. You have kept putting it off week by week 
and year by year. My friends, why not decide to-night? “ How 
long halt ye between two opinions?” If the Lord be good, serve | 
Him ; if not, turn your backs upon Him. It seems to me a question | 
every man can settle if he will. You like those grand old charac-| 
ters in the Bible who have made a decisive stand. Look at Moses 1 


- The turning point in his life was when he decided to give up the! 


gilded court of Pharaoh and cast his lot with God’s people. You 
will find that every man who has left a record in the Bible have 
been men of decision. What made Daniel great? It was because | 
he was a man of decision. What saved the prodigal? It was not 
that he got into his father’s arms, it was not his coming home. The 
turning point was when he decided the question: “I will arise and | 
go to my father.” It was the decision of the young man that 
saved him. Many a man has been lost because of indecision. Loo 
at Felix, look at Agrippa. Felix said, “Go Thy way for this time 
when I have a convenient season I will cali for Thee.” See wha 
Agrippa said: “Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.’ 
Look at Pilate—all lost; lost because of their indecision. His 
mind was thoroughly convinced that Jesus was the true Christ ; he 
said, “I find no fault in Him,” but he hadn’t the courage to take 
his stand for Him. Thousands have gone down to the caverns of | 
death for want of courage. My friends, let us look this question in 
the face. Ifthere is anything at all in the religion of Christ, give | 
everything for it. If there is nothing in it—if it is a myth, if our 
mothers who have prayed over us have been deceived, if the pray- | 
ing people of the last eighteen hundred years have been deluded— 
let us find it out. The quicker the better. If there is nothing in the 
religion of Christ, let us throw it over and eat, drink, and be merry, for | 
time will soon be gone. If there is no devil to deceive us; no hell to 
receive us; if Christianity is a sham, let us come out like men and | 
say so. I hope to live to see the time when there will only be two } 
classes in this world —Christians and infidels —those who ort 
their stand bravely for Him and those who take their stand against | 
Him. This idea of men standing still and saying, “ Well, I don’t | 


ee 
reser ue. 


eater tees: 


406 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


|know, but I think there must be something in it,” is absurd. If 
(there is anything in it, there is everything in it. Ifthe Bible of 
lour mothers is not true, let us burn it. Is there one in this audi- 
/ence willing to say and do this? If it isa myth, why spend so 
)much money in publishing it ? Why send out millions of Bibles to 
‘the nations of the earth? Let us destroy it if it is false, and all 
ithose institutions giving the Gospel to the world. What is the 
juse of all this waste of money? Are we mad, are we lunatics 
‘who have been deluded? Let us burn the book and send upa 
| shout over its ashes. “There is no God; there is no hell; there is 
‘no Heaven; there is no hereafter. When men die, they die like 
i dogs in the street!” But, my friends, if it is true—if Heaven, if a 
' hereafter, if the Bible is true, let us come out boldly, like men, for 
‘Christ. Let us take our stand, and not be ashamed of the Gospel 
| of Jesus Christ. Why, it seems to mea question that ought to be 
settled in this nineteenth century easy enough, whether you are for 
or against Him or not. Why, if Baal be God, follow him; but if 
the Lord be God, follow Him. If there is no truth in the religion 
of Jesus Christ, you may as well tear down all your churches, de- 
stroy your hospitals, your blind asylums. It’s a waste of money to 
build them. Baalites don’t build blind asylums, don’t build hos- 
pitals, don’t build orphan asylums. 

If there hadn’t been any Christians in the world, there would have 
been no charitable institutions. If it hadn’t been for Christianity 
you would have had no praying mothers. Is it true that their prayers 
have exercised a pernicious influence? Is it true that a boy who 
had a praying father and mother, or a good teacher, is no better off 
than a boy who has been brought up amid blasphemy and infamy? 
Is it true? It must be either one way or the other. Did bad men 
write the Bible? Certainly not, or they wouldn’t have consigned 
themselves to eternal perdition. The very fact that the Bible has 
lived and grown during these eighteen hundred years is a strong 
proof that it came from God. Men have tried to put it out of the 
world; they have tried to burn it out of the world, but they have 
failed. It has come down to us—down these eighteen hundred 
years amid persecution, and now we are ina land where it is open 
to all,and no man need be without one. What put it into the minds 
of those men to give money liberally to print and circulate this 
book? Bad men wouldn’t dothis. This isa question that, it seems 
to me, could be decided to-night. If it is not good, then take your 


S. 


surd. If 
Bible of 
his audi- 
spend so 
Bibles to 
, and all 
it is the 
lunatics 
ond up a 
there is 
die like 
ven, ifa 
men, for 
> Gospel 
ht to be 
1 are for 
; but if 
religion 
ches, de- 
ioney to 
ild hos- 


ld have 
istianity 
prayers 
oy who 
tter off 
infamy ? 
ad men 
nsigned 
ble has 
, strong 
of the 
ey have 
iundred 
is open 
> minds 
ite this 
t seems 
<e your 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD. 407 


stand. Ifthe Lord be God, follow Him; but if God be Baal, then 
follow him. Some one asked Alexander how he conquered the 
world, and he replied that he conquered it by not delaying. Ifyou 
want to conquer the devil you must not delay—uaccept eternal life 
as a gift. 

Let us take the surroundings of this text. We are told that 
Elijah stood before Ahab and told him, because of the evil decds of 
Israel and the king, there would no rain come upon the land for 
three years and a half. After that Elijah went off to Brook Cherith, 
where he was fed by the ravens, after which he went to Zarephath, 
and there dwelt with a poor widow for months and months. Three 
years and a half rolled away, and not one drop of rain or dew had come 
from Heaven. Probably when Elijah told the king there would be 
no rain he laughed at him. The idea that he should have the key 
of Heaven! He scouted the very idea at first. But after a little it 
became a very serious matter. The brooks began to dry up, the 
cattle could not get water, the crops failed the first year, the next 
year they were worse, the third year they were even a worse failure, 
and the people began to flee out of his kingdom to get food, and 
yet they did not call upon Elijah’s God. They had four hundred 
and fifty prophets of Baal and four hundred prophets of the groves, 
and yet all their prayers did not bring rain. Why did they ask God 
for rain? Baal was not an answerer of prayer. The devil never 
answers prayer. If prayer has ever been answered, it has been an- 
swered by the God of our fathers, by the God of our mothers. After 
Elijah had been gone three and a half years he returns and meets 
Obadiah, the governor of the king’s house, and Ahab says: “You 
go down that way and I’ll go down this way, and see if we can’t dis- 
cover water.” They hadn’t been separated long when Obadiah meets 
Elijah and asks him to come to the king. The prophet tells him to go 
and say to Ahab, “Elijah is here. But Obadiah don’t want to leave 
him. If I lose sight of you this time, when the king knows you have 
stepped through my lands it may cost me my life. Don’t you know 
I’ve been a servant of the true God all the time, and I’ve had a 
hundred of the prophets of the Lord in a cave? If you don’t come 
I will lose my life.” Elijah tells him to go and bring Ahab, and 
instead of Elijah going to Ahab, Ahab comes to him. Whenever the 
king comes he says, “ Art thou he that troubleth Israel?” That is 
the way with men; they bring down the wrath of God upon them- 
selves and then blame God’s people. A great many people are blam- 


408 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


ing God for these hard times. Look on the millions and millions of 
money spent for whiskey. Why, it is about time for famine to strike 
the land. If men had millions of money it wouldn't be long before 
all the manhood would be struck out of them. Now, the people 
of Israel had gone over to Baal ; they had forgetten the God that 
brought them out of Egypt, the God of Jacob and Abraham, and 
of their fathers. “ Now,” says Elijah, “let’s have this settled. 
Let some of your people make an offering to their god on Mount 
Carmel, and I will make an offering to my God, and the God that 
answers by fire will be the God.” The king agreed, and the day 
arrives. You can see a great stir among the people that day ; they 
are moving up to Mount Carmel. By and by Ahab comes up in 
his royal carriage, and those four hundred and fifty prophets of 
Baal, and four hundred prophets of the groves, made a great im- 
pression. Dressed in priestly robes, they move solemnly up that 
mountain. The king has Swept along in his chariot, and perhaps 
passed by the poor priest Elijah, who comes slowly up, leaning upon 
his staff, his long, white hair streaming about his shoulders. Peo- 
ple don’t believe in sensations. That was one of the greatest sen- 
sations of their age. What is going to happen? No doubt the 
whole nation had been talking about this Elijah, and when he came 
to that mountain the crowd looked upon him as the man who held 
the key of Heaven. When he came up he addressed the children 
of Israel. Perhaps there were hundreds of thousands. “ How long 
halt ye between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow Him; 
but if he be Baal, then follow him; and the people answered not 
a word.” These eight hundred and fifty prophets made a great im- 
pression upon them, and the king was afraid, too. These people are 
just like a great many now; they are afraid to go into the inquiry- 
room for what people will say. If they do go in, they get behind a 
post, so that they can’t be seen. They are afraid the people in the 
store will find it out and make fun of them. Moral courage is 
wanted by them, as it was wanted by those people. How many 
among us have rot the moral courage to come out for the God of 
their mothers? They know these black-hearted hypocrites around 
them are not to be believed. They know these men who scoff at 
their religion are not their friends, while their mothers will do every- 
thing for them. The truest friends we can have are those who be- 
lieve in Christ. “And the people answered not aword. Then said 
Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a prophet of the Lord 


RS, 


nillions of 
1c to strike 
ong before 
he people 
God that 
aham, and 
s settled. 
on Mount 
God that 
| the day 
lay ; they 
nes up in 
yphets of 
great im- 
y up that 
| perhaps 
ing upon 
rs. Peo- 
itest sen- 
oubt the 
he came 
vho held 
children 
Tow long 
ow Him; 
ered not 
rreat im- 
20ple are 
inquiry- 
dehind a 
le in the 
urage is 
w many 
God of 
around 
scoff at 


O every- 
vho be- 
hen said 
e Lord 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD, 4c9 


but Baal’s prophets are four hundred and fifty men, Let them, 
therefore, give us two bullocks; and let them choose one bullock 
for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and put no 
fire under it ; and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on wood, 
and put no fire under it. And call ye on the name of your god, 
and I will call on the name of the Lord; and the God that answer- 
eth by fire let him be God. And all the people answered and said, 
It is well spoken.” “ Yes, sir, that’s right. We'll stand by that de- 
cision.” They built an altar and laid their bullock on it, and began to 
cry to Baal, “O Baal! O Baal! Baal! Baal!” No answer. They cry 
louder and louder, but no. answer comes. They pray from morning till 
noon, but nota sound. Elijah says, “ Louder; you must pray louder. 
He must be on a journey. He must be asleep; he must be ona 
journey orasleep.” They cry louder and louder. Some people say it 
don’t matter what a man believes so long as he is in earnest. These 
men were terribly in earnest. No Methodists shout as they did. 
They cry as loud as their voices will Iet them, but no answer. 
They take their knives and cut themselves in their earnestness. 
Look at those four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal, and 
four hundred prophets of the grove, all covered with blood as 
they cry out in their agony. They have no God. Young man, 
who is your master? Whfom do you serve? If you are serving 
Baal, I tell you if ever you get into trouble he will not answer you. 
No answer came. Three o'clock came, the hour for the evening 
sacrifice, and Elijah prepared his altar. [Te would have nothing to 
do with the altar of Baal. He merely took twelve stones, repre- 
senting the twelve tribes of Isracl, and built his altar, and laid his 
bullock on. No doubt some skeptic said he had some fire concealed 
in his garment, for he digs a trench all around it to hold water, 
Then he tells them to bring four barrels of water, and empties them 
over his sacrifice. Four more barrels are brought and thrown on 
the bullock, making eight, and then four barrels more are added, 
making twelve in all. Then there lies that bullock, dripping with 
water, and Elijah comes forward. Every ear and eye is open. 
Those bleeding Baalites look at him. What is going to be the end 
of it? He comes forward, calm as a summer evening. He prays 
to the God of Isaac and Abraham—when, behold, look! look! down 
it comes—fire from the very throne of God and consumed the wood, 
and the stones, ana the sacrifice, and the people cry, “The Lord is 
the God.” The question is decided. The God that answereth by 


410 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS. 


fire is the God of man. My friends, who is your God now? The 
God who answers prayer, or have you got no God? 

I can imagine some of you saying, “If I had been on Mount 
Carmel and seen that, I would have believed that.” But I will tell 
you of a mount on which occurred another scene. That was a won- 
derful scene, but it does not compare with the scene on Calvary, 
Look there! God’s own beloved Son hanging between two thieves 
and crying, “ Father, forgive them, for ‘=: - now not what they 
do.” Talk about wonderful things. ‘i! 4 been the wonder of 
ages. A man once gave me a book of wunderful things. I sawa 
good many wonders in it, but I did not see anything so wonderful 
in it as the story of the cross. My friends, see His expiring look; 
see what happened. The very rocks were rent; the walls of the 
temple were rent; and all nature owned its God. The sun veiled 
its face and darkness fell over the earth when the Son of Man ex- 
pired on Mount Calvary. Where can you find a more wonderful 
sight than this? Those Israelites lived on the other side of the 
cross; we live on this side of it. If a man wants proof of His 
Gospel, look around this assembly. See men who thirty days ago 
were slaves, bound hand and foot to some hellish passion which was 
drawing them to hell. What a transformation there is, All things 
seem changed to them. They have got a new nature. Is not this 
the power of God? Said a young convert to me to-day: “It seems 
as if we were living in the days of miracles, and the Son of God is 
coming down and giving men complete victory over lusts and pas- 
sions.” That is what the Son of God does for men, and yet, with 
all the proofs before their eyes, men are undecided, 

What is it that keeps you from your decision? I wish I had time 
to tell you many of the reasons. Hundreds of thousands of men 
are thoroughly convinced, but they lack moral courage to come out 
and confess their sins. Others are being led captive by some sin. 
They have got some darling sin, and as long as they hold on to it 
there is no hope. A man, the other day, said he would like to be- 
come a Christian, but he had a bet upon the election, and he 
wanted that settled first. He did not think that he might die be- 
fore that was decided. Eternity is drawing on. Suppose we die 
without God, without hope, without everlasting life; it seems to 
me it would have been better never to have been born. My friends, 
I ask you, why not come out like men? Say, “Cost what it will, I 
will accept Jesus.” Now, have moral courage. Come. How many 


S. 
we The 


n Mount 
will tell 
is a won- 
Calvary. 
) thieves 
at they 
onder of 
I saw a 
onderful 
ig look; 
s of the 
n veiled 
Man ex- 
onderful 
- of the 
of His 
ays ago 
lich was 
I things 
10t this 
t seems 
God is 
nd pas- 
st, with 


id time 
of men 
me out 
ne sin. 
yn to it 
‘to be- 
ind he 
die be- 
we die 
>ms to 
riends, 
will, I 
’ Many 


YOUNG MEN URGED TO DECIDE FOR GOD, 411 


of you are thoroughly convinced in your minds that you ought to 
be Christians? Now, just ask yourselves the question, “What 
hinders me; what stands in my way?” I can imagine some of you 
looking behind you to see how the one sitting there looks. If he 
seems serious, you look serious; if he laughs, you will laugh, and 
come to the conclusion that you'll not accept Him. You think of 
your companions, and you say you can not stand their jeers. Is not 
that so? Come. Trample the world under your feet and take the 
Lord, cost what it will. Say, “By the grace of God I will serve 
Him from this hour.’”’ Turn your backs upon hell, and set your 
faces toward Heaven, and it will be the best night of your lives. 
Have you ever seen a man who accepted Christ regret it? You 
can not find a man who has changed masters and gone over to 
Christ who has regretted it. This is one of the strongest proofs of 
Christianity. Those who have never followed Him only regret it. 
I have seen hundreds dying, when in the army and when a mission- 
ary, and I never saw a man who died conscious but who regretted if 
he had not lived a Christian life. My friends, if you accept Him 
to-night, it will be the best hour of your life. Let this night be the 
best night of your lives. Let me bring this to your mind, if you 
are lost it will be because you do not decide. “ How long halt ye 
between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow Him; but if 
Baal, then follow him.” How many men in this assembly want to 
be on the Lord’s side? Those who want to take their stand on the 
side of the true God, rise. 


ee ee 


nen 


aa Ni bent het 


XLIX., 


PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF POWER IN THE 
CHURCH. 


NEHEMIAH viii, 10: “The joy of the Lord is your strength.” 


la | OW, praise is astep in advance of thanksgiving. If you re.~ 
ceive blessings from a man, you may thank him, yet you may 
: not praise him. Now, Praise is not only speaking to the 


Lord on our own account, but it is Praising Him for what He has 
done for others. We have had a gre 


this Tabernacle during the past eight 
and I may say thousands of them ha 
give praise for this. We have in our 
but I think it would be a good thi 
occasionally. If we could only get 


full of gladness, is prais- 
he joy of Thy salvation, 
will I teach transgressors 
e had that text all over 
ime, the ministers holding it up to the 
, till it is filled with rest, 
—it seems to me that we 
asting as eternity itself. Now, as I said 
one night here before, the world is after the best thing. 
wants tc buy a horse, 


(412) 


If a man 
he goes where he can get the best horse for 


THE 


you re. 
you may 
> to the 
- He has 
g up in 
indreds, 
> should 
prayer, 
meeting 
or what 
im con- 
- us for 
nks, we 
) praise 
ide and 
And 
ow. A 
be full 
S prais- 
vation, 
ressors 
ll over 
to the 
h rest, 
hat we 
I said 
a man 
rse for 


PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF POWER IN THE CHURCH. 413 


his money. If a woman wants to get a dress, she'll hunt till she 
gets the very best she can. Why, I’ve heard of a woman going for 
half a day from store to store to get the best piece of ribbon she 
could. I!t’s a universal law; the world wants to get the very best 
thing it can. Now, if we can show the world that the religion of 
Jesus Christ is the best thing in it, the world will take it; but if we 
are despondent or cast down, look gloomy, are not full of praise, if 
we are not full of joy, the world will not want it. We will only drive 
men out of the kingdom of God. If we have a praise church we 
will have people converted. I don’t care where it is, what part of 
the world it’s in, if we have a praise church we'll have a successful 
Christianity. 

A young man went down toa church in the East, the pastor of 
which had become an old man. The people got asleep. The new 
man came and tried to rouse them, but it was of nouse. He 
preached and preached, and tried to get them aroused and to goto 
the prayer-meetings, but he could not. One night, he said: ‘“ To- 
night we'll have no prayer-meeting.” They wondered what it 
meant—the idea that this young minister should do away with this 
prayer-meeting which tivey had had for fifty years. They were 
astonished. ‘ But,” said he, ‘we will have a praise-meeting.’ At 
the close of the meeting one old elder came to another one. 
“What’s he going to give up the prayer-meeting for? Has he 
consulted you about it?” “No.” “ Well,” replied the former, 
“that’s a very serious matter; what is the meaning of a praise- 
meeting?”’ They had been going along without any praise-meet- 
ing, and they did not know what a praise-meeting meant. They 
went to ask him, but he wouldn’t tell them, but said to wait till 
Friday night and then they would see. They began to talk about 
it, and out of curiosity a great many came to see what it was. The 
young minister read some of those good old psalms. ‘“ Now,” said 
he, “if you can think of anything in your past life that you have 
received from God, praise God for it. You have been asking God 
for everything, and it chills the church through. Now, if you can 
think of any benefits you have received, praise God for them.” 
They began to think, and they found they had a good many things 
to praise God for. One man got up and praised God for a praying 
mother who had led him to Christ. Another man got up and 
praised God for the Bible. Another praised God for this and that, 
and the result was that when the meeting was over, instead of get- 


414 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


ting up and walking out, they stopped and shook hands with one 
another and spoke to one another, and said, “TI believe we are 
going to have a revival.” My friends, if we don’t thank God for 
what He has done for us, and be full of joy and gl 
wili not come to Christ. Would to God that we had a praise 
church all over Christendom. Let Christ’s name be in the churches, 
Let them praise Him for what He has done, and the world will 
come. Let the world know that that is the name in which we trust, 
that that is the name we speak well of, and when His disciples 
begin to do this, then the world will realize the goodness of His 
Gospel. Thank God, the people of Chicago begin to talk about 
Christ, and if we can get men to talk about Christ in the steam 
cars, in the places of business, in the horse cars, in the streets—if 
we can get them to talk about Christ and His loveliness, it won't 
be long before thousands are converted ina day. May God wake up 
Christians to praise Him for what He has done. 
stop to think that the heart of man is the only thing that does not 
praise the Lord ? 

The Heavens declare His glory, the sun praises Him, the moon 
and stars praise Him; as the raig falls from Heaven it , Taises God, 
all nature praises God—the very dumb creatures give Him praise, 
and it is only the heart of man that won’t praise Him. Oh, how 
deceitful is the heart of man. He who gets the most temporal 
blessings is the man that praises God least. A man may be thank- 
ful for those blessings, yet he does not praise Him. In fact, I don’t 
believe that any man can Praise God till he is born of God, You 
may be thankful for His blessings, but praising Him is another 
thing; praise is the occupation of Heaven. Those people who don’t 
Praise God here, I don’t know what they will do when they get 
into Heaven; they wili be strangely out of place there, because 
that is the occupation of Heaven. The redeemed praise Himall the 


time. There was a little boy converted and he was ful! of praise. 


When God converts a boy or man his heart is full of joy—can’t help 


praising. His father was a professed Christian. The boy wondered 
why he didn’t talk about Christ, and didn’t go down to the special 
‘meetings. One day, as the father was reading the papers, the boy 

came to him and put his hand on his shoulder, and said, “ Why 
don’t you praise God? Why don’t you sing about Christ ? Why 
don’t you go down to those meetings that are being held?” The 
father opened his eyes and looked at him, and said, gruffly, “I am 


adness, the world 


Did you ever 


RS, 


with one 
fe we are 
k God for 
the world 
a praise 
churches, 
yorld will 
we trust, 
disciples 
ss of His 
Ik about 
he steam 
reets—if 
it won’t 
wake up 
you ever 
does not 


he moon 
es God; 
n praise, 
Dh, how 
emporal 
¢ thank- 
» I don’t 
1. You 
another 
10 don’t 
hey get 
because 
all the 
praise. 
n't help 
ndered 


PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF POWER IN THE CHURCH, 415 


not carried away with any of those doctrines. I am established.” 
A few days after they were out getting a load of wood. They put 
it on the cart. The father and the boy got on top of the load and 
tried to get the horse to go. They used the whip, but the horse 
wouldn’t move. They got off and tried to roll the wagon along, 
but they could neither move wagon nor horse. ‘I wonder what's 
the matter?” said the father. ‘ He’s established,” replied the boy. 
You may laugh at that, but this is the way with a good many 
Christians. The reason is, they are not born of God, or else they 
have got so far away that they don’t exactly know where they are. 
Now, if we are really born of God, if our heart is really filled with 
the Spirit of God, we can not help praising Him. I pity the Chris- 
tian that has no praise in his heart. You are living a life of formal- 
ism—you are living on doctrines. You haven’t got Christ in your 
soul if you don’t praise Him. Now, that ought to be the text. 
Ask yourself have you praised God this peaceful day of thanks- 
giving. You say, “Qh, yes, I’ve thanked Him.” But have you 
spoken well of Christ? Have you spoken well of what He has 
done? Have you sang, “ Hallelujah! hallelujah!” for these. six 
months or a year, for this is what they say in Heaven. Ifa man is 
born of God, he can’t help praising God. Fill this building with 
young converts and see how they will sing, 


“Oh! happy day, happy day, 
When Jesus washed my sins away.’ 


They can not hear such songs without praising God. The 
first impulse of a young convert is to praise, and if he don’t | 


feel like praising the God who saved him, it is a true sign 


that he hasn’t been converted by the grace of God; he has Q 


been born to some creed or profession, some inan or some 
church, and not to the loving Son of God, because when 
Christ comes into the heart He brings yoy. Now, take a servant of 
the devil, he don’t praise. Fill this building full of unregenerated 
men, and try to get them to sing praises. You can’t do it; their 
mouths are sealed; there is no praise in their heart. But you get 
this building filled with men with the Lord Jesus Christ in their 
hearts, they can not help praising Him. How can a man whose 
master is the devil praise Him? Have you ever heard a man rejoice 
in his service? I never heara one. 

Now a great many of you say, “It is all very well for him to 


416 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


stand up there and talk about praise. If I was in a comfortable 
condition, good health, and eVerything I wanted like a good many the 
others I see, I would praise God.” It is circumstances with a good ir 
, many, but I have found people who were poor in this world's goods, his 
{ in bad health, and yet continually praising God. I can take you to we: 
~~ @ poor, burdened one who has not been off her bed for ten years, of 
and yet she praises Him more than hundreds of thousands of Chris- the 
tians. Her chamber seems to be just the ante-room of Heaven. It ma 
seems as if that woman had just all the secrets of Heaven, Her hel 
soul is full of the love of God, full of gladness, and she is poor, in 
Like Elijah at the brook Cherith, she is just fed by the Almighty ; cht 
God provides for all her wants. Any man that knows God can the 
trust Him and praise Him. He knows that the Word of God is air 
true, for he knows that He will care for him. He who cares for the cat 
lilies of the field—He, without whose knowledge not a sparrow the 
can fall to the ground—He who knows every hair of our heads— air 
any man who knows this, can not he rejoice? Is there any one cou 
here who, although he is poor, can find no reason to praise God ? fro 
Some of those Christians who are so poor, but who have the love gri 
of God, would not give up their place for that of princes. Now 
my experience is that a man who lives nearest to God, praises Him you 
most, whether he is rich or poor. The nearer he gets to Heaven dot 
the more he praises Him. The man who is furthest from God nes 
praises Him least. Now, if there is any Christian here who can not get 
praise God, there is something between you and God, and take my wir 
advice and have it removed before you go to bed to-night. What of 
the world wants is joyful Christianity, and if we have not that, we the 
are not going to see a saved world. A backslider can not see God. sun 
Fill this building with backsliders and see if they will sing praises, Go 
That prodigal off there in that foreign land would sing strangely, hoy 
“Rock of Ages, cleft for me.” Men astray from God can not praise. loc 
Do you think that Peter, when he had denied Christ, could sing a But 
song of praise to Him? The moment a man turns his back on God bac 
there is no praise. I think that is the reason there are so many wh 
quaristte choirs in the churches. The people can not sing them- No 
selves, and they have to hire people to sing for them, giving them onl: 
four or five thousand dollars per year to sing the songs of praises. i chu 
Look at a church filled with the children of God. The moment a up, 
minister gives out the song, their hearts burst with praise; they prai 


don’t want anybody to sit.g for them. | wh 


rs 


nfortable 
od many 
h a good 
l’s goods, 
e you to 
n years, 
of Chris. 
iven. It 
nn. Her 
is poor, 
mighty ; 
God can 
f God is 
s for the 
sparrow 
heads— 
any one 
se God ? 
the love 
Now 
ses Him 
Heaven 
om God 
can not 
ake my 
What 
hat, we 
ee God. 
praises, 
‘angely, 
: praise. 
| sing a 
on God 
> many 
r them- 
g them 
praises. 
ment a 
+; they 


PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF POWER IN THE CHURCH. 417 


If they can’t sing with their mouths, songs will bubble out of 
their hearts; but when a man is backslidden he wants artistic 
sounds—wants fine music to touch his ears—don’t want it to affect 
his heart. Now, Israel could not sing there in Egypt when they 
were making bricks with straw; they could not sing with the crack 
of the slave-driver’s whip in their ears; but when they got through 
the Red Sea they struck up the song of redemption, and when a 
man is redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus Christ, he can not 
help praising God. Do you know I believe the devil is very wise 
in this. He don’t want a singing church; he don’t want a praise 
church. If we have a praise church—a singing church—he knows 
there will be a good many joining us. He knows that is the native 
air of Heaven; and the moment a child is born in Heaven he 
catches the enthusiasm. I am told that once during a campaign 
the general of an army forbade the playing of the soldiers’ native 
airs, because it made them so homesick and despondent that they 
could not fight. So when we hear the songs of Zion we are weaned 
from this world and want to go home. We feel that we are pil- 
grims and strangers here and we have a better world yonder. 

Now, how is it that the Church does not praise God more? I tell 
you I think it is very plain. The trouble is, we have got settled 
down and gone to sleep. I never heard of a bird that sung in its 
nest, and I don’t believe that any man ever did, and when a church 
gets settled down it goes tosleep. It is when the bird is on the 
wing that it sings, and so it is when the church is up it sings songs 
of praise. And it can sing in the dark; a nightingale can sing in 
the dark. Paul and Silas in the darkness of that Philippian jail 
sung songs of praises. When they put them into that jail, Almighty 
God was with them. You know when Joseph went down to Egypt 
how God was with him. When they put him in prison they had to 
lock God Almighty up with him, and Joseph sung songs of praise. 
But, my friends, if we are down in Egypt and have turned our 
backs on God and been taken captive, we are dumb. It is only 
when we have been true to God that we can sing in the darkness. 
Now, I am told that an English lark never sings when coming down; 
only when mounting up. That may be true or not; but when a 
church is coming down, it is not a praise church. When mounting 
up, and it knows it is coming nearer and nearer to God, it is fuli of 
praise. It can not help it. When the lark is mounting up, up, up— 
when it is nearly out of sight, so that you can scarcely see it, it sings 


27 


\ 


418 | MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


sweetest. And so when the Christian is rising up near to Christ, so 
that you can not see him, he gives out the sweetest notes of praise 
from his heart, 

Now, I can imagine some of you saying, “I have got a good 
many things going against me; I’ve got a good many reasons for 
not praising God” I find there is no reason in the world why you 
should net'piaise God. If we have troubles, if we have sorrows or 

. afflictions, we have brought them upon ourselves. They are only to 
wean us to God. Every good gift we have had, from the cradle up, 
has*come from God. If aman just stops o think what he has to 
praise God for, he will find there is enough to keep him singing 
Praises for a week. As the flakes of snow come down from the 
heavens, He showers His blessings upon us, and if we praise Him 
abundantly for them He will bless us more abundantly. Now, there 
are people always praising. If you are sick, it is like good medicine 
tosee them. Then there are other people always looking on the dark 

_ side. There was a man converted here some years ago, and he was 
just full of praise. He was living in the light all the time. We might 
be in the darkness, but he was always in the light. He used to 
preface everything he said in the meeting with “ Praise God.” One 
night he came to the meeting with his finger all bound up. He had 
cut it, and cut it pretty bad, too. Well, I wondered how he would 
praise God for this; but he got up and said, “I have cut my finger, 
but, praise God, I didn’t cut it off.” And so, if things go against 
you, just think they might be a good deal worse. A soldier who 
came from the war, always used to say he could tell when a Chris- 
tian addressed a soldier. One man would say, “ You lost your leg. 
Where did you lose it?” ‘In the army.” “What a pity you ever 
went into the war,” he would reply ; “TI feel sorry for you.” An. 
other would come along, “ You've lost an arm; have you been in 

the army?” “Yes.” « Well, that is a pity; but, bless God, you 
didn’t lose the other arm.” There was amanon the North Side, 
and I never came out of his house without praising God. He was 
deaf, he was dumb, blind, and had the lockjaw. He had a hole in 
his throat, and all the food he took was put through that hole. My 
friend, do you ever thank God for your senses? Do you ever thank 

God for your eyes, by which you can read His Word? Think of 

the three millions of people in this world who haven't any sight at 
all. Hundreds of thousands of them never saw the mother that 
gave them birth; never saw their own offspring; never saw nature 


RS, 


Christ, so 
3 of praise 


t a good 
-asons for 
| why you 
Orrows or 
re only to 
cradle up, 
1e has to 
n singing 
from the 
rise Him 
ow, there 
medicine 
the dark 
d he was 
Ve might 
used to 
1.” One 
He had 
le would 
y finger, 
. against 
lier who 
a Chris- 
our leg, 
7ou ever 


ink of 
ight at 
er that 
nature 


PRAISE AN ELEMENT OF POWER IN THE CHURCH. 419 


in all its glory ; never saw that beautiful sun and all the stars. Do 
you ever praise God for the ears by which you can hear the voice 
of man, by which you hear the Gospel preached, by which you 
hear the songs of Zion? Did you ever praise Him for your 
hearing and for your reason? Go down to yonder mad-house; I 
never come out of it without feeling full of praise to God. There 
you will find fathers, and mothers, and children without the light 
of reason. Now, my friends, let us praise God we have a home in 
this Gospel land ; let us praise God for this blessed Bible; let us 
praise God for the gift of His only Son; let us praise Him that He 
gave up that Son freely for us all; let us praise Him to-night for 
the Son of His love, and let us go out of this building with: our 
hearts full of joy. 


Li. 


WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THE LAW. 


DAN. v.27: “ TEKEL; Thouart weighed in the balances, and art found wanting,” 


a history of this king, Belshazzar, is very short. Only one 
. chapter tells us all we know about him. One short sight of 
his career is all we see. He just seems to burst upon the stage 
and then disappears. We are told that he gave a great feast, and at 
this feast he had a thousand of his lords, and they were drinking 
and praising the gods of silver, of gold, of brass, of iron, and of wood ; 
out of the vessels which had been brought from the Temple at 
Jerusalem. As they were drinking out of these vessels of gold and 
silver from the house of Gorl—I don’t know but what it was at the 
midnight hour—all at once came forth the fingers of a man’s hand 
and began to write upon the wall of the hall. The king turns 
deathly pale, his knees shake together, and he trembles from head 
to foot. Perhaps if some one had told him the time was coming 
when he would be put into the balance and weighed, he would have 
laughed at him. But he knows the fatal hour has come, and that 
hand has written his doom in the words, “Mene, mene, tekel, up- 
harsin.” He calls the wise men of his kingdom, and the man who 
can interpret this will be made the third ruler of his kingdom, and 
be clothed in scarlet, and have a chain about his neck. One after 
another tried, but no uncircumcised eye could make it out. He was 
greatly troubled. At last one was spoken of who had been able to 
interpret the dream of his father, N ebuchadnezzar. He was told if 
he would send for Daniel he might interpret the writing. And now 
the prophet came in and looked upon the handwriting, and told him 
how his father had gone against God, and how he, Belshazzar, had 
gone against the Lord of Heaven, and how his reign was finished. 
And this was the writing: “ Mene: God hath numbered thy king- 
dom and finished it; Tekel: Thou art weighed in the balances and 


art found wanting; Peres: thy kingdom is divided, and given to 
(420) 


LAW. 


wanting.” 


)nly one 
sight of 
he stage 
t, and at 
drinking 
of wood, 
mple at 
rold and 
s at the 
’s hand 
ig turns 
m head 
coming 
Id have 
nd that 
kel, up- 
an who 
ym, and 
le after 
He was 
able to 
told if 
1d now 
id him 
ir, had 
nished. 
y king- 
es and 
ven to 


WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THE LAW. 421 


the Medes and Persians.” The trial is over, the verdict is rendered, 
and the sentence brought out. That very night the king was hurled 
from his throne. That very night the army of Darius came tearing 
down the streets, and you might have heard the clash of arms, 
shouts of war, and have seen the king’s blood mingling with the 
wine in that banquet hall. 

Now I want to call your attention to that word “tekel.” We 
are weighed in the balance. Now you cavil at the Word of God; 
you make light when all is going well in the hour of your pros- 
perity. But when the time of trial comes, and we are called into 
judgment, it will be altogether different. Suppose the sentence 
should come down from Heaven upon every man and woman in 
this Tabernacle to be weighed in the balance to-night, how would 
it be with you? Come, my friends, are you ready to be weighed 
to-night? Not in our own scales, but in God’s balance. Suppose 
the scales were dropped now from the kingdom of God; are you 
ready to step into the balance and be weighed? Are you willing to 
be weighed by the law? Ican imagine some of you saying, “I 
wouldn't be weighed by that law (meaning the decalogue) ; I don’t 
believe it.” Some men think we are away beyond the Mosaic law; 
we have got out of it. Why, Christ said in the fifth chapter of 
Matthew: “Think not that Iam come to destroy the law, or the 
prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.” “ Heaven and 
earth may pass away, but My law shall never pass away;” but not 
until Heaven and earth shall be removed will the Word of God be 
removed. Now the commandments that I read to you to-night 
are as binding as ever they have been. Many men say that we 
have no need of the commandments, only the sermon on the 
mount. “Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the 
prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.” Now, my 
friends, are you ready to be weighed by the law of God—by that 
majestic law? What is the first commandment? “Thou shalt 
have no other gods but Me.” Are you ready to be weighed by 
this commandment? Now, the question is, have you fulfilled, or 
are you ready to fulfill all the requirements of this law? A greut 
many people say if they keep the commandments they don’t need 
Christ. But have you kept them? I will admit if you keep the 
commandments you can be saved by them; but is there a man in 
this audience who can truly say that he has done this? Young 
lady, can you say: “I am ready to be weighed by the law to- 


~ 


/ 


422 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


night?” Can you, young man? Now, suppose we have these 
commandments written upon pieces of iron. You know when you 
go into a grocery store you see them taking a weight and putting 
it into the scales against what you have bought. Now, suppose 
the pieces of iron as weights, and the law of God written on them. 
Take this first commandment, “Thou shalt have no other god but 
Me,” upon one of the weights. Put it in one of the scales and just 
step on the other. “Thou art weighed in the balances.” Is your 
heart set upon God to-night? - Have you no other idol? Do you 
love Him above father or mother, the wife of your bosom, your 
children, home or land, wealth or pleasure? Have you got another 
god before Him? If you have, surely you are not ready to step in 
and be weighed against that commandment, “ Thou shalt have no 
other god before Me.” That is the commandment of God, and it 
is binding to-night. Then take another. You will say there is no 
trouble about thisone. We might go off to other ages or other lands, 
and we can find people who worship idols, but we have none here. 
But how many evils have we in our hearts? Many a man says, 
“Give me money and I will give you Heaven; what care I for all 
the glories and treasures of Heaven; give me treasures here. I 
don’t care for Heaven; I want to be a successful business man.” 
They make money and business their god. Although they don’t 
make gods of silver and gold, they bow before them. There are 
more men who worship silver and gold in Chicago than any other 
god. But take another one: “Thou shalt not take the name of the 
Lord thy God in vain.” Is there a swearing man ready to put the 
weight into the scales and step in? Young man, have you been 
taking the name of the Lord in vain to-day? What does He say ? 
“The Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh His name in 
vain.” I don’t believe men would ever have been guilty of swear- 
ing unless God had told them not to. They don’t swear by their 
friends, by their fathers and mothers, by their wives, by their chil- 
dren; but because God has forbidden it, man wants to show how 
he despises His law. “Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord 
thy God in vain.” Blasphemer, go into the scales, and see how 
quick you will fly out. You will be like a feather in the balance. 
A great many men think there is nothing very serious in swearing ; 
they don’t think there’s much wrong in it. Bear in mind that He 
sees something in it when He says, “ Thou shalt not take the name 
of the Lord thy God in vain.” You can not trifle with God.. Some 


0 OS 8 


om 
Mea atte cei OUN SC RT Lr IE I mT SCOP Dy Sie ee a eR ig em el © | saa Oe 


RS. 


ave these 
when you 
d putting 
', Suppose 
on them. 
r god but 
s and just 
Is your 
Do you 
som, your 
yt another 
Oo step in 
t have no 
od, and it 
lere is no 
her lands, 
one here. 
nan says, 
I for all 
here. I 
SS man.” 
hey don’t 
There are 
ny other 
me of the 
) put the 
you been 
He say? 
name in 
of swear- 
by their 
heir chil- 
how how 
the Lord 
see how 
balance. 
wearing ; 
that He 
he name 
.. Some 


WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THELAW. 423 


men say they never swear except when they get angry. Suppose 
you swear only once in six months, or a year—suppose you swear 
once in ten years, do you think God will hold you guiltless for that 
one act? A man that swears once shows that his heart is rebellious 
to God. What are you going to do, blasphemer? Ifthe balances 
were here, and God told you to step in, what would you do? 

But take the fourth: commandment: “Remember the Sabbath 
day to keep it holy.” Suppose you could see the law written over 
those walls, “Remember to keep the Sabbath day holy,” could you 
say that you had observed it? Are you ready to be weighed by the 
weight, “Remember the Sabbath day to keep it holy?” Some of 
us may be professed Christians, but do we observe the Sabbath? 
If this country fail to keep the Sabbath holy, it will go the way of 
France, Mexico, and Spain. Every nation that gives up the Sab- 
bath must go down. It is only a question of time with them. 
Look, wher the children of Israel refused to obey the injunctions 
of the Lord in regard to the cultivation of their land, how He took 
them into bondage and kept them for seventy years, to let them 
know that God’s law ‘vas not to be trampled under their feet. 
Are you guilty or innocent in regard to this law: “ Thou shalt keep 
the Sabbath day holy?” When I was in France, in 1867, I could 
not tell one day from another. On Sunday stores were open; 
buildings were being erected the same as on other days. See 
how quick that country went down. Only a few years ago it 
stood abreast of ‘other nations, it stood side by side almost 
with England. But it didn’t have any respect for the Sab- 
bath; it trampled God’s message under foot, and when the hour 
of battle came, God left them alone. My friends, every nation that 
tramples the Sabbath under its feet must go to ruin. Are you in- 
nocent or guilty? Do you keep the Sabbath day holy or not? I 
have been talking to those car conductors—and if there’s one class 
of men I pity more than another it is them—and they have to work 
on the Sabbath. Some of you are breaking this law by coming 
down here on Sunday in the cars. What will yor do” Foot it—it 
will be better for you. I make a point of never allowir J .cyself to 
break the Sabbath of any man. When I was in, London--and it’s a 
pretty big city, you know—in my ignorance I made arrangements to 
preach four times at different places one Sunday. After I had made 
the appointments I found I had to walk sixteen miles, and I walked 
it, and I slept that night with a clear conscience. I want no hack- 


424 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


man to rise up in judgment against me. My friends, if we want to 
help the Sabbath, let business men and Christians never patronize 
cars on the Sabbath. I would hate to own stock in those horse-car 
companies, to be the means of taking the Sabbath from these men, 
and then have to answer for it at the day of judgment. No man 
can work seven days a week and save his soul. And the very best 
thing we have is being taken from these men by us Christians. Are 
you willing to step into the balance and be weighed against “Thou 
shalt keep the Sabbath day holy?” 

Well, here is the fifth: « Honor thy father and mother.” Are 
you ready to be weighed against this? Have you honored them? 
Is there any one here to-night who is dishonoring father or mother? 
Now, I’ve lived nearly forty years, and I’ve learned one thing if I’ve 
learned nothing else: that no man or woman who treats disrespect- 
fully father or mother ever Prospers. How many young ladies have 
married against their father’s wishes, and gone off and just made 
their own ruin. I never knew one case that did not turn out bad. 
They brought ruin upon themselves. This isa commandment from 
Heaven: “Honor thy father and mother.” In the last days men 
shall be disobedient to parents, void of natural affection, and it seems 
as if we were living in those days now. How Many sons treat their 
mothers with contempt—make light of their entreaties, God says, 
“Honor thy father and mother.” If the balances were placed in 
this hall, would you be ready to step into them against this com- 
mandment ? You may make light of it and laugh at it, but, young 
man, remember that God will hedge your way. No man shall suc- 
ceed that disobeys this commandment. But bear in mind, you are 
not going to be weighed only against this solitary commandment— 
every weight will be put in. 

“Thou shalt not kill.” Most of you say, ‘That don’t touch me 
at all; I rever killed any one; I’m no murderer.” Look at that 
sermon on the mount, which men think so much of. Look at it. 
Did you never in your heart wish a man dead who had done you an 
injury? That’s murder. How are your? Innocent or guilty? If 
you have, you are a murderer at heart. Now, come, my friends, are 
you ready to be weighed against the law? Ah, if most of us were 
weighed to-night we would find this word written against us, 
“Tekel; Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting,” 

But let us take another, “Thou shalt not commit adultery.” [ 
don’t know any sin that afflicts us like this. It is a very delicate 


Sal 


eS. 


‘want to 
patronize 
horse-car 
ese men, 
No man 
very best 
ins. Are 
t “ Thou 


Are 
1 them? 
mother ? 
g if I’ve 
respect- 
ies have 
st made 
ut bad. 
nt from 
ys men 
t seems 
ut thei 
d says, 
iced in 
S com- 
young 
ll suc- 
‘ou are 
nent— 


ch me 
t that 
- at it. 
rou an 
bP 
Is, are 


WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THE LAW’. 428 


subject to approach, but I never preach without being compelled to 
touch upon it. Young men among us are being bound hand and 
foot with this evil. Young men, hear this law to-night, “Thou 
shalt not commit adultery.” Are you guilty even in thought? 
How many men have come into this Tabernacle but they are tied 
hand and foot, but who have been in the halls of vice, and some 
harlot, whose feet are fastened in hell, clings to him, and says, “If 
you give me up, I will expose you.” Can you step on the scales 
and take that harlot with you? “Thou shalt not commit adultery.” 
You may think that no one knows your doings; you may think 
that they are all concealed, but God knows it. He that covers his 
sins shall not prosper. Out with it to-night. Confess it to your 
God. Ask Him to snap the fetters that bind you to this sin; ask 
Him to give you victory over your passions, and shake yourself like 
Samson, and say, “ By the grace of God I will not go down to hell 
with a harlot,” and God will give you power. “Thou shalt not 
commit adultery.” As I said the other night, I don’t know a 
quicker way to hell. How many men have by their lecherous life 
broken their mothers’ hearts, and gone down to their grave rotten, 
leaving the effect of sin to posterity ! 

Well, let us take up the next, “Thou shalt not steal.” How 


many have been stealing to-day? I may be speaking to some clerk, - 


who, perhaps, to-day has taken five cents out of his employer's 
drawer to buy a cigar; perhaps he took ten cents to get a shave, 
and thinks he will put it back to-morrow; no one will ever know it. 
If you have taken a penny, you area thief. Do you ever think how 
those little stealings may bring you to ruin? Let an employer find 
it out. Ifhe don’t take you into the courts, he will discharge you. 
Your hopes will be blasted, and it will be hard work to get up again. 
Whatever condition you are in, do not take a cent that does not 
belong to you. Rather than steal, go up to Heaven in poverty—go 
up to Heaven from the poor-house—and be honest rather than go 
through the world in a gilded chariot of stolen riches. A man who 
takes money that does not belong to him, never gets any comfort. 
He never has any pleasure, for he has a guilty conscience. “Thou 
shalt not steal.’ Are you ready to be weighed to-night in the 
balances? 

Then let us take the ninth commandment, “Thou shalt not bear 
false witness against thy neighbor;” or, in other words, thou shalt 
not be guilty of lying. If you had a chance to make two or three 


Saree tip ey 


426 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


hundred dollars, are you not willing to go into a court and lie to 
get it? “Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.” 
Are you ready to step into the balances against this? 

Then take another, “Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's 
goods.” Are you innocent or guilty? How many times I used to 
covet that which belonged to other people before I was converted. 
I believe that is one of the greatest sins among us. My friends, 
how is it? Innocent or guilty? But suppose you are innocent of 
all these ten commandments, let us take that eleventh command- 
ment of Christ’s, “A new commandment I give unto you; thou 
shalt love one another.” My friends, how is it to-night? Is love 
reigning in your hearts? Do you love your neighbors? Do you 
try to do them good, or are you living a life of selfishness, merely 
for yourself? 

Now, I can imagine that nearly every man or woman is saying to 
himself or herself, “If we are to be judged by these laws how are 
we going to be saved?” Every one of them has been broken by 
all people. The moral man is just as guilty as the rest. There is 
not a moralist in Chicago who, if he steps into those scales, can be 
saved except he has been born again. “Except a man be born 
again he can not see the kingdom of God.” « Except ye repent ye 
shall all perish.” That is on one side of the scales, and, he will see 
on the other, “Except ye be converted ye shall not enter the 
kingdom of God.” I have heard a good many pharisees saying, 
“These meetings are reaching the drunkards, and gamblers, and 
harlots ; they are doing good ;” but they don’t think they need these 
meetings. They are all right; they are moral men.  “ Except a 
man be born again he can not see the kingdom of God.” I don’t 
care how moral he is. Nicodemus was probably one of the most 
moral men of his day. He was a teacher of the law ; yet Christ 
said: “ Except a man be born again he can not see the kingdom of 
God.” I would a good deal rather preach to thieves, and drunk. 

ards, and vagabonds, than preach to self-righteous pharisees. You 
don’t have to preach to those men weeks and months to convince 
them that they are sinners. When aman learns that he has need 
of God, and that he is a sinner, it is very easy to reach him. But, 
my friends, the self-righteous pharisee needs salvation as much as 
any drunkard that walks the streets of Chicago. There is another 
class [ want to speak of. If I had time’I would just like to take 
up the different classes in the city. That class is the rum-sellers, 


v5, 


and lie to 
eighbor.” 


eighbor’s 
I used to 
onverted. 
y friends, 
iocent of 
ommand- 
ou; thou 

Is love 

Do you 
s, merely 


saying to 
how are 
‘oken by 
There is 
s, can be 
be born 
epent ye 
: will see 
nter the 
3 Saying, 
lers, and 
ed these 
xcept a 
I don’t 
he most 
t Christ 
rdom of 
| drunk. 
s. You 
‘onvince 
as need 
Hut, 
nuch as 
another 
to take 
-sellers. 


WEIGHED IN THE BALANCES OF THE LAW, 427 


Put the rum-scellers in the balances. They ignore God’s laws; but 
by and by He will say to them: “ Tekel,” “ Woe be to the man that 
put the bottle to his neighbor's lips.’ My friends, I would rather 
have that right hand cut off before I would give the bottle toa man; 
I would rather have my right arm cut off than deal out death and 
damnation to my fellow-men. If there is a poor drunkard sum- 
moned into eternity to-night, weighed in the balances, what would 
he hear? “No drunkard shall inherit the kingdom of God.” I 
can see how he would reel and stagger when he heard that. “No 
drunkard shall inherit ‘the kingdom of Heaven.” 

My friends, if you don’t repent of your sins and ask Him for 
mercy, there is no hope for you. Let me ask you to take this ques- 
tion home to yourself. If a summons should come at midnight to 
be weighed in the balances, what would become of your souls, because 
the law of God must be kept? Now, there are many of you only 
making professions. You belong to the First Methodist church, or 
you may be a member of a Baptist church, but are you ready to 
be weighed—ready to step into those scales? I think a great many 
would be found like those five foolish virgins. When the hour came 
they would be found with no oil in their lamps. If there is a per- 
son here to-night who has only an empty lamp, or is living on mere 
formalism, I beg of you to give it up. Give up that dead, cold, 
miserable lukewarmness. God will spit it out of His mouth. He 
will have none of it. Wake up. Some of you have almost gone 
to sleep while I have been trying to weigh you in the balances. 
God will weigh you, and then if you have not Christ, it will be 
“'Tekel.”’ 

I can imagine some of you saying: “I would just like Moody 
to put those tests to himself. I wonder what would become of 
him.” My dear friends, ifGod was to ask me I would tell Him, 
“Tam ready.” I don’t say this in any spirit of egotism, of self- 
righteousness, remember. If you ask me if I have broken the law 
of Moses, I would answer, “ Yes, sir.” Ask me if I have broken the 
commandments: “Yes, sir.’ You may ask me then how I am 
ready to be weighed. If I step into the scales, the Son of God will 
step into the scales with me. I would not dare to go into them 
without Him. If I did, how quick the scales would go up. Ifa 
man has not got Christ, when the hour comes for him to be 
weighed, it will be “ Tekel, tekel, tekel.” Are.you, my friend, ready 
to be weighed? Suppose I put the question to every man and 


428 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


woman in this audience. How quick many of them would begin to 


. color up. Oh, my friends, if you haven’t got Him, get Him. May 
God open your eyes and your minds to receive Him before you leave 
this Tabernacle. Christ kept the law; Christ was the end of the 
law. If He had broken the law He would have had to die for 
Himself; but He kept it, and we are enabled to be clothed in 
righteousness, My friends, it is the .eight of madness to go out 
of this hall to-night and run the risk of being called by Ged and 
have to answer without Him. Now is the day and hour to 
accept salvation, and then He will be with us. Then there will be 
no alarm withus. I pity those Christian people who are afraid of 
death. They need not be afraid of death if they have Him. When 
He is with us it is only a translation. We are absent from the 
body to be present with the Lord. Here is the Gospel of Jesus 
Christ. Will you be saved? If you do not, when by and by God 
summons you into these scales, it will be written over you, “ Tekel, 
_tekel; thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting.” 
My friends, what will you do? Remain as you are and be lost, or 
accept salvation and be saved? 


.S. 


_ begin to 


m. May 
you leave 
id of the 
-o die for 
lothed in 
O go out 
Ged and 
hour to 
re will be 
afraid of 
n. When 
from the 
of Jesus 
1 by God 
_ “ Tekel, 
vanting.” 
e lost, or 


LI. 
THE EIGHT “I WILLS” OF CHRIST. 


YATE very often say “I will” when we don’t mean to fulfill 


what we say ; but when we come to the “I will” of Christ, 

He means to fulfill it; everything He has promised to do 
He is able and willing to accomplish, and He is going, to do it. I 
can not find any passage in Scripture, in which He says “I will” do 
this, or “I will” dothat, but it will be done. The first “I will” I 
want to call your attention to occurs in Matthew xi. 28, “Come 
unto Me all ye that labor and I will give you rest. Tale My yoke 
upon you and learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and 
ye shall find rest unto your souls. For My yoke is easy and My 
burden is light.” Now what is it that man wants more than rest ? 
What is it that the world is in pursuit of? What are cll the men 
in Chicago after, if it isn’t rest? What do business men toil for, if 
it isn’t for rest? What do men spend their lives in hunting for 
wealth, if it is not for rest? But, my friends, that is not the 
way to get rest. A man can not find it in wealth; he can not find 
it in pleasure. Take the pleasure-seekers of Chicago, and ask them 
if they have rest. They are like the waves of the sea, perpetually 
troubled. My friends, the man who is away from God never knows 
what rest is. You can see this in their faces—in the wrinkles of 
their brow. They don’t know what rest is. What does Christ say? 
“Come unto Me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will 
give you rest.” It isn’t in the market for sale. How many 
men in Chicago would not gladly go up to the Board of Trade 
to-morrow morning and give thousands for it, if it was for sale? 
They would give thousands of dollars for it if they could buy 
it. But it ain’t for sale. If you get it you must take it as a 
gift from Him who came from Heaven to give it. The moment 
a man is willing to take it as a gift, it is his. There is one thing 
I notice, that a man goes in every direction, seeks every means, 
(429) 


-| 


’ 


430 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYEAS. 


tries every person for rest before he comes to the true Source. 
He will try to get rest in the world, he will try to find it in business, 
in honor, in pleasure, in politics, but he don’t get it. You can not 
find one of these politicians who knows what rest is; you can not 
find one of those business men who knows what rest is unless he 
has Christ. Ask any man who is after the things of the world, if 
he really knows what rest is, and he will answer you, “No.” If you 
come to Christ He tells you, “I will” give it. I like this “I will,” 
He means it; and if you want rest, go to-night and say you are 
weary and your soul is seeking rest, and He will give it. He will 
give it without money and without price. Takeit. ‘“O man, thou 
hast_destroyed thyself, but in Me is thine help.” In Him is your 
help, and in Him will you find rest. If there is a poor, mangled 
one here, come to Christ and confess to Him. Come to Christ and 
He will take your burden away and put it behind His back, and He 
will give that weary soul rest. Now just ‘test it. Let every one 
who is weary and heavy laden come to Him. 

The next “I will” is in John, sixth chapter: “Him that cometh 
tc Me I willin no wise cast out.” That is as broad as the world itself, 
It takes that man in the gallery yonder; it may be there is a poor, 
afflicted one hidden behind that post, it takes him; it just sweeps 
around this building, taking rich and poor alike-—‘ He that cometh 
to Me I will in no wise cast out.” He is so anxious to save sinners 
He will take every one who comes. He will take those who are so 
full of sin that they are despised by all who know them; who have 
been rejected by their fathers and mothers, who have been cast off 
by the wives of their bosoms. He will take those who have sunk 
so low that upon them no eye of pity is cast. “Him that cometh 
to Me I will in no wise cast out.” Now, why not take Him at His 
word? I remember a few years ago aman in Farwell Hall was 
greatly troubled about his soul. “Now,” said I, “take that verse; 
what does the Lord mean when He says, ‘Him that cometh to Me 
I will in no wise cast out?’ When He says that, He means it.” The 
man replied, “I will just take Him at His word.” He started home, 
and while going over the Clark street bridge something whispered 
to him: ‘“ How do you know but that is a wrong translation?” He 
was just laying right hold of it when this was whispered to him. 
The poor fellow didn’t sleep any that night. He was greatly 
troubled, but at last he made up his mind that he would just believe 
it, and when he got to the Lamb of God he would tell Him of it, 


S. 


: Source, 
business, 
can not 
can not 
nless he 
world, if 
If you 
‘T will ;” 
you are 
He will 
an, thou 
is your 
mangled 
rist and 
,and He 
yery one 


cometh 
ld itself. 
; a poor, 
: sweeps 
cometh 
. sinners 
oO are so 
ho have 
cast off 
ve sunk 
cometh 
1 at His 
Tall was 
t verse; 
1 to Me 
t.” The 
1 home, 
ispered 
?” He 
to him. 
greatly 
believe 
m of it, 


THE EIGHT “I WILLS" OF CHRIST. 43% 


and the devil left him. Now, my friends, just take it. Some men 
say: “I am not worthy to come.” I never knew a matt yet go to 
church that was worthy. He doesn’t save worthy men; He saves 
sinners. As a man said in the inquiry-room, He didn’t come to save 
make-believe sinners—painted sinners, but real sinners. A man don’t 
want to draw his filthy rags of self-righteousness about him when 
he comes to Him. The only thing a sinner has that God wants is 
his sin. You need not bring your tears, your prayers, your good 
works, or deeds; you must come to Himas a sinner, and He will 


clothe you in a garment fit to come before Him. Now, the kings of 


this earth call around them the wealthy and influential men of their 
kingdom ; but when Christ came down here, He called the outcasts, 
the publicans, and sinners around Him. And that was the princi- 
pal fault the people found with Him. Those self-righteous Phari- 
sees were not going to associate with harlots and publicans. The 
principal charge against Him was: “This man receiveth sinners and 
eateth with them.” Who would have such a man around him as 
John Bunyan, in his time. He, a Bedford tinker, why, he couldn’t 
get inside one of the princely castles. I was very much amused 
when I was over on the other side. They had erected a monument 
to John Bunyan, and it was unveiled by lords and dukes and great 
men. Why, while he was on earth they wouldn’t allow him 
inside the walls of their castles. Yet he was made one of the 
mightiest instruments in the spread of the Gospel; no book that 
has ever been written comes so near the Bible as John Bun- 
yan's “Pilgrim’s Progress.” And he was a poor Bedford tinker. 
So it is with God. He picks up some poor, lost tramp, and makes 
him an instrument to turn hundreds and thousands to Christ. It is 
a question whether, in all Chicago, there is a man who is exercising 
such an influence for good as this man Sawyer. Four years ago he 
was a tramp; he had been cast off by his own mother, by his own 
sisters, by his wife, and he hadn’t seen his own son for fifteen years, 
Then he was a lost man—cast off by every one, but the Son of 
God stooped low enough to save him. I doubt, as I said before, 
whether there is a man who has so much influence as that man has 
to-day. ‘Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.” Is 
there some poor outcast, some poor tramp here? I’ve got a good 
message for you. May be you are hiding away behind that post. 
I've got a good message for you—the best message you ever heard: 
“Him that cometh to Me I will in no wise cast out.” Come all— 


ee > tit 


De aeons ee 


\ y 
i 


432 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


just as you are. Don’t wait. He will take you as you sit, into His 
loving bosom; He will make you a champion of the cross, and you 
will become an instrument in His hand to build up His kingdom. 
Thank God for such a book; thank God for such a Gospel; thank 
the God of Heaven for such a text: “ Him that cometh to Me I will 
in no wise cast out.” 

The next “I will” is found in Luke. We are told of a man who 
was full of leprosy; he was just rotten with it, Perhaps his fingers 
had rotted off; it might have been that his nose was eaten off. 
That is the way leprosy affects a man. Well, there is a man full 
of leprosy, and he comes to Christ just as he was. A good many 
people, if they had been in his place, would have waited till they 
got a little better before they came before Him; but this man 
wanted to get the leprosy away. If he had waited to sce if he got 
better, there would have been no sense in it. A man might as well, 
if he had a sick child, say, “ When it gets better I will send for the 
doctor.” It is because your child is sick that you want the doctor. 
It was because this man had the leprosy that he wanted Christ. 
The leper came to Him and said: “ Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst 
make me clean.” There’s faith for you; and the Lord touched him, 
saying, “I will; be thou clean,” and away went the leprosy as if it 
had been struck by lightning. I have often wondered if he ever 
turned around to see where it had gone. No doubt, like Naaman, 
his flesh became as the flesh of a little child. He didn’t wait to see 
whether the leprosy would improve, because he was convinced it 
was growing worse and worse every day. So it is with you. You 
will never have a night so favorable for coming to Christ as this one. 
If you put off till to-morrow, your sins will have become more nu- 
merous. If you wait till Sunday next, a whole week’s sins will be 
built up upon those you have already. Therefore, the sooner you 
come, the fewer sins you will have to be forgiven. Come to Him 
to-night. If you say to Him, “Lord, I am full of sin; Thou canst 
make me clean.” “Lord, I have a terrible temper; Thou canst 
make me clean.” “Lord, I have a deceitful heart; cleanse me, O 
God; give me a new heart, O God; give me power to overcome 
the flesh and the snares of the devil "—if you come to Him with a 
sincere spirit, you will hear the voice, “I will; be thou clean.” It 
will be done. Do you think that the God who created this world 
out of nothing—who, by a breath, put life into the world—do you 
think that if He says, “ Thou wilt be clean,” you will not? A great 


S. 


into His 
and you 
cingdom. 
1; thank 
Me I will 


nan who 
is fingers 
aten off. 
man full 
d many 
till they 
his man 
f he got 
as well, 
for the 
- doctor. 
Christ. 
ou canst 
ied him, 
as if it 
he ever 
Yaaman, 
it to see 
inced it 
1 You 
his one. 
lore nu- 
will be 
1er you 
to Him 
yu Canst 
u canst 
me, O 
ercome 
| witha 
nh ot 
s world 
do you 
A great 


THE EIGHT “{ WILLS” OF CHRIST. 433 


many people say, “If I become converted, I am afraid I will not 
hold out.” Why, don’t you see that we can not serve God with 
our own strength? When you accept Him, He gives you strength to 
serve Him. When He has taken away the leprosy of sin, it is easy 
to live for Him—it is easy to serve Him. And I want to call your 
attention to the fact that even if you are bad, He don’t care. It 
may be that some one here has disgraced his or her father or 
mother; it may be they have disgraced every friend they ever had, 
and that they just despise themselves. Come to Him and He will 
cleanse you. It is to you I am speaking. He can save you to the 
utmost. 

The next “I will” I want to call your attention to is the “[ 
will” of confession in Matthew: “ Whosoever, therefore, shall con- 
fess Me before men, him will I confess also before My Father which 
is in Heaven.” Let me say right here that this is the very verse 
up to which men in Chicago have come. Men come to me and 
say: “Do you mean to affirm, Mr. Moody, that I’ve got to make 
a public confession when I accept Christ; do you mean to say I've 
got to confess Him in my place of business, in my family; am 
I to let the whole world know I am on His side?” A great 
many are willing to accept Christ, but they are not willing to pub- 
lish it, to confess it. A great many are looking at the lions 
and the bears in the mountains. Now, my friends, the devil’s 
mountains are only made of smoke. Why, he can throw a straw 
into your path and make a mountain of it. He says to you: 
“You can not confess and pray to your family ; why, you'll break 
down. You can not tell it to your shop-mate ; he will laugh at 
you.” But when you accept Him you will have power to confess 
Him. He has said: “If any man will come after Me, let him deny 
himself, and take up his cross and follow Me.” It is the way to 
Heaven—by the way of the cross, and I believe in my soul that 
more men are stumbling upon this verse than upon any other, 
They are willing to do everything necessary except take up the 
cross and follow Him. Now let me read this verse again: “ Who- 
soever, therefore, shall confess Me before men, him will I confess 
also before My Father which is in Heaven.” When I was in Lens 
don there was a leading doctor in that city, upwards of seventy 
years of age, wrote me a note to come and see him privately about 
his soul. He was living at a country seat a little way out of Lon- 
don, and he only came into town two or three times a weck. He 

28 


434 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS, 


was wealthy and was nearly retired. I received the note right in 
the midst of the London work, and told him I could not see him. 
I received a note a day or two after from a member of his family 
urging me to come. The letter said his wife had been praying for 
him for fifty years, and all the children had become Christians by 
her prayers. She had prayed for him all those years, but no im- 
pression had been made upon him. Upon his desk they had found 
the letter from me, and they came up to London to see what it 
meant, and I said I would see him. When we met, I asked him if 
he wanted to become a Christian, and he seemed every way willing, 
but when it came to confession to his family he halted. “TI tell 
you,” said he, “I can not do that; my life has been such that I 
would not like to confess before my family.” “ Now there is the 
point; if you are not willing to confess Christ, He will not confess 
you; you can not be His disciple.” We talked for some time, and 
he accepted. I found while I had been in one room, the daughter 
and some friends, anxious for the salvation of that aged father, 
were in the other room praying to God, and when he started 
out willing to go home and confess Christ, I opened the door 
of the other room, not knowing the daughter was there, and the 
first words she said were, “Is my father saved?” “Yes, I think he 
is,’ I answered, and ran down to the front door and called him 
back. ‘“ Your daughter is here,” I said; “this is the time to com- 
mence your confession.” The father, with tears trickling down his 
cheeks, embraced his child. “My dear daughter, I have accepted 
Christ,” and a great flood of light broke upon him at that confession. 
A great many here in Chicago are ashamed to come out and take 
their stand for Christ. If you want peace and joy, my friends, you 
must be willing to confess. I am told that in China the height of 
a Chinaman’s ambition is to have his name put in the house of Con- 
fucius. He must have performed some great act of valor, or done 
the State some great service before he can have his name there. 4g 
That is the highest point of a Chinaman’s ambition. It ought to 7 
be the height of our ambition to have our name registered in 
Heaven, and have Christ to confess us in the courts of Heaven. 
How excited we used to be during the war when some general did 
something extraordinary, and some one got up in Congress to con- 


fess his exploits. How the papers used to talk about it. If we 4 


come out for Christ here, He will confess us in Heaven before the 
throne and the angels. May God help you to confess Him to-night. 


VERS. 


note right in 
not see him. 
of his family 
n praying for 
Christians by 
‘s, but no im- 
sy had found 
> see what it 
asked him if 
way willing, 
ted. “TI tell 
1 such that I 
y there is the 
not confess 
ne time, and 
the daughter 
aged father, 
1 he started 
ed the door 
ere, and the 
s, I think he 
1 called him 
time to com- 
ng down his 
ie accepted 
it confession. 
ut and take 
friends, you 
he height of 
ouse of Con- 
ulor, or done 
name there. 


It ought to 7 


egistered in 
of Heaven. 


general did @ 


sress to con- 
it it. 


Ifwe @ 


n before the © 


lim to-night. 


: 


THE EIGHT “I WiLLS” OF CHRIST. 435 


Another “TI will "—to me a very precious “T will ”—was given to 


those early fishermen. He said, “If you will follow Me, I will make 
you fishers of men.” That is the “I will” of service. I pity those 
Christians from the very depth of my heart, who have only made a 
profession of religion, and stopped there. My friends, they don’t 
have the joy of salvation. I tell you, the only happy Christians are 
those who are fishers of men. If aman bea true Christian, he wins 
souls. He can not help it, for He says, “If you will follow Me, I 
will make you fishers of men.” Peter caught more men at Pente- 
cost than he ever caught fish in his nets. I have often thought of 
the remark one of the disciples made to Him as they were standing 
together one day, “ Lord, we have left all to follow Thee.” What 
did they leave? A few old fishing-boats and broken nets. They 
were looking to those they had left behind, and a great many peo- 
ple here are looking to what they will leave if they serve Him. It 
ain’t necessary to ieave the things of this life when you follow Him. 
It is not necessary to give up your business, if it’s a legitimate one, 
in order to accept Christ. But you mustn’t set your heart on the 
old nets, by a good deal. Now, my friends, if you want to be a 
religious Christian, follow Him fully. No man follows Christ and 
ever regrets it, and the nearer we get to Him, the more useful we 
become. Then we will save men. It seems to me after I am dead 
and gone I would rather have a man come to my grave and drop a 
tear, and say, “ Here lies the man who converted me; who brought 
me to the cross of Christ "—it seems to me I would rather have this 
than a column of pure gold reaching to the skies, built in my honor. 
If a man wants to be useful, follow Him. You will succeed if you 
will follow Him. Whenever you find a man who follows Christ, 
that man you will find a successful one. He doesn’t need to bea 
preacher; he doesn’t need to be an evangelist to be useful. They 
may be useful in business. See what power an employer has if|he 
likes, How he could labor with his employés and in his business 
relations. Often a man can be far more useful in a business sphere 
than he could in another. If we want to spend a life of usefulness, 
accept Him, and He “will make you fishers of men.” Young man, 
don’t you want to win souls to Christ? Well, then, just follow Him. 
“You follow Me, and I will make you fishers of men.” 
The next “TI will,” a very precious one, is, “I will not leave you 
comfortless,” “TI will not leave you comfortless” down here in this 
dark world. Now, some people think they have a very hard battle 


436 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


before them when they accept Him. A lady came to me lately, and 
said, “I am the only one of my family who is a Christian, and I feel 
lonely.” “Why,” said E, “Christ is with you; if you have got an 
Elder Brother sitting at the right hand of God, what more do you 
want?” Oh, this precious “I will;” this comfort and joy, “I will 
be with you to the end of the world;” “I will never forsake you.” 
You may take comfort to-night. He will be with you always. You 
may not see Him with the eye of flesh, but you will see Him by 
the eye of faith. 

The next “I will” is found in the fourth chapter of John: “I will 
raise him up at the last day.” These bodies of ours are going down 
to the grave, but they are not going to lie there long; the Son of 
God will wake them up. When He was here He raised up three 
bodies ; and let me say to you, young children, that the first one He 
raised was a little child. Ah, there will be many little children 
there, “ for of such is the kingdom of Heaven.” He gave us three 
instances. The first was the little girl. When the people heard He 
had raised up some one from the dead, they thought it was a mistake. 
She wasn’t dead—only asleep; it wasn’t a real miracle. The next 
one was a young man. “Oh, no,” they thought ; “that’s no mira- 
cle; if they had left him alone he’d awoke up; he was only asleep.” 
But the next case that came along was that of Lazarus, and Mat- 
thew tells us he had been dead four days—had been laid away in 
the sepulchre, and the Son of God merely said: “ Lazarus, come 
forth.” Now, I like a religion that gives me such comfort, that 
when I lay away loved ones in the grave, I know they will by and 
by hear the voice of the Son of God calling them forth. I used to 
wonder how Christians had so much comfort in affliction, and used 
to question whether I could have as much; but I have learned that 
God gives us comfort when we need it. A few weeks ago I stood 
at the grave .! 1 man I loved more than any one on earth, except 
my wife and family. As he was laid down in the narrow bed, and 
the earth dropped upon the coffin-lid, it seemed as if a voice came 
to me saying, “ He will rise again.” I like a religion by which we can 
go to the grave of our loved ones and feel that they will rise again ; 
I like a religion that tells us, although we sow them in corruption, 
they will rise incorruptible; that, although we sow them in weal. 
ness, they will rise in power and glory and ascend to the kingdom 
of light. This is the comfort for Christians. Thani God for this 
“IT will not leave you comfortless.” 


rot] 
wive 
take 
this 

Fatl 
the | 
May 
into 

and 


VERS, 


me lately, and 
an, and I feel 
have got an 
more do you 
| joy, “I will 
forsake you.” 
ways. You 

see Him by 


john: “T will 
> going down 
; the Son of 
ed up three 
first one He 
ttle children 
rave us three 
ale heard He 
as a mistake. 
The next 
it’s no mira- 
only asleep.” 
is, and Mat- 
laid away in 
izarus, come 
omfort, that 
will by and 
I used to 
n, and used 
learned that 
ago I stood 
arth, except 
ow bed, and 
voice came 
yhich we can 
l rise again ; 
corruption, 
m in weak. 
1e kingdom 
od for this 


THE EIGHT “I WILLS" OF CHRIST. 437 


“T will that they may be with Me” is the sweetest of all. The 
thought that I will see Him in His beauty; the thought that I will 
meet Him there, that I will spend eternity avith Him, is the sweet- 
est of them all. This last week we had Thanksgiving Day. How 
many families gathered together, perhaps the first time in many 
years, and the thought would come stealing over some of them, Who 
will be the first to break the circle? Perhaps many of these circles of 
friends will never meet again. Thank God, yonder the circles shall 
never be broken—when the fathers, and mothers, and children 
gather around Him in those mansions into which death never enters, 
where sickness and sorrow never enter through yon pearly gates. 
Oh, thank God for this blessed religion—thank God for the blessed 
Christ—thank God for those blessed eight “I wills ””"—“ Come unto 
Me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest ;” 
“Him that cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast out ;” “ Whoso- 
ever, therefore, shall confess Me before men, him will I confess also 
before My Father which is in Heaven;” “If you will follow Me I 
will make you fishers of men;” “I will, be thou clean 3” “T will not 
leave you comfortless ;” “I will that thou may be with Me.” May 
God bless every soul in this building, and bring you to the Cross. 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we pray that Thy blessing may rest 
upon all of these friends that have arisen here to-night for prayers. 
We pray Thee that they may take hold on eternal life, and may 
many of them lift up their hearts to-night to Thee. May they be 
transformed to-night from death unto life. May they be born 
again. May they be born of the Spirit. Many of them have 
mothers that are praying for them. May the prayers of their 
mothers, of their fathers, of their sisters, of their brothers, of their 
wives, of their children, avail for them. May they from this hour 
take hold on eternal life. May they not leave this building until 
this question of salvation has removed them from their sins. Holy 
Father, accept them. Help, accept, and strengthen us all. May 
the Spirit of God take hold of every one in this building to-night. 
May they move from death unto life this night. And when we go 
into the inquiry-room, may they confess their sins and find Jesus; 
and unto Christ shall be the praise and the glory. Amen. 


LII. 


_LOT IN SODOM. 


GEN, xiii, 12: “ And Lot dwelt in the cities of the plain, and pitched his tent 
toward Sodom.” 


NE reason why I take up this character is because I believe 
C) he is a representative man, and perhaps there is no Bible char- 
acter that represents so many Chicago men at the present day 
as Lot of Sodom. Where you can find one Abraham, or one Daniel, 
or one Joshua, you gan find a thousand Lots. He started very well; 
he got rich, and that was the beginning of his troubles. He and 
Abraham, his uncle, went down to Egypt, and they came out of 
Egypt with great wealth, and the next thing we hear of is strife 
among their herdsmen. He could not get up a quarrel with Abra- 
ham. Abraham said to him, “You are my nephew, and I can not 
quarrel with you ; but take your goods and go to the right and I 
will go to'the left, or I will go to the right and you go to the left,” 
and they separated. Right here Lot made his mistake. He should 
have said, “No, I don’t want to leave you; the Lord has blessed 
me with you and I don’t want to leave you;” or, if he had been 
determined to leave his uncle, he should have asked Abraham to 
choose for him. Instead of that he lifted up his eyes and saw 
the well-watered plains of Sodom, and that decided him. No 
doubt he was very ambitious; he probably wanted to become 
richer. Perhaps there was a little spirit of rivalry toward his 
uncle. He wanted to excel Abraham in woridly goods, to be- 
come rich faster. So he saw and determined upon the well-watered 
plains of Sodom. If he had asked Abraham he would not have 
gone there. If he had asked God, Lot would never have 
entered Sodom; no man ever goes into Sodom by God’s advice. 
He determined himself and pitched his tent toward Sodom. I 
don't know how long he lived on these well-watered plains, but no 
doubt the men of those days said of him when he had settled down: 
“There is a shrewd man; he’s a smart man, (Win , I can predict 
(438) 


itched his tent 


e I believe 
) Bible char- 
present day 
one Daniel, 
d very well; 
s. He and 
ime out of 
of is strife 
with Abra- 
d I can not 
‘tight and I 
‘o the left,” 
He should 
has blessed 
> had been 
\braham to 
ss and saw 
him. No 
to become 
‘coward his 
ds, to be- 
ell-watered 
l not have 
ever have 
d’s advice. 
Sodom. I 
ins, but no 
tled down: 
an predict 


LOT IN SODOM. 439 


that in a very short time he will be a wealthier man than his uncle 
Abraham. Look at these well-watered plains; why, he is a great 
deal better off than Abraham now.” He is in a position in which 
he can soon become rich. How long he remained on these plains I 
don’t know, but the next thing we know is that he got into Sodom. 
We are told that Sodom was very wicked. He lived near it, and he 
went into it with his eyes open, and he knew all about it. The 
wickedness of Sodom was coming up to God; He was going to de- 
stroy it soon. And do you think, if Lot had asked Him, He would 
have allowed Lot to enter that city? I think one of the greatest 
mistakes the people of the present day make is that they won’t let 
God choose for them; He would not choose ruin for them. All 
the years Lot was in Sodom we don’t read that he had any family 
altar. He thought it «ould be ruin for his family to take them in 
there. He did not look at that, however. It was business that 
took him in there. He might have said, “ Well, I’ve got a large 
family; I’ve got a great many dependent upon me, and I must get 
rich faster, so I will go into Sodom. Business is the first considera- 
tion, and it must be attended to.” So he goes into Sodom, and the 
next thing we hear he is in trouble. Sodom had a war on hand, 
and when he went into the city he had to take its side. In the war 
he was taken captive. It isa great mercy he wasn’t killed in the 
battle. The first thing his uncle did when he heard of his nephew's 
trouble he set out after him. When he was taken in battle he was 
liable to be taken into slavery, and his children also. He might 
have died in slavery if Abraham hadn’t gone after him. But Abra- 
ham takes his servan's,and sets out and overtakes the warriors who 
had taken Lot captive, and brought him and all the property back 
that had been taken. Now, you would have thought that he would 
have kept out of Sodom; you’d have thought that he would have 
said, “I’ve had enough of Sodom; I won’t go near it again.” You 
would think that men, when they get into this and that difficulty 
and affliction, would strike out of Sodom; but they won’t It is 
one of the greatest mysteries to me why men will remain in their 
Sodom when they have continual trouble. So he went back. 
Probably he said, “I’ve lost a good deal, and I must go back and 
try and recover it; I must go back and make it up for my children.” 
And he prospered in Sodom. If you had gone into Sodom before 
these angels ame down, you would probably have found that no 
man had go’ or. so well. If they had a Congress, perhaps they sent 


440 : MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


him to represent Sodom, because no man had done better in busi- 
ness. That is the way of the world. Perhaps they might have 
made him Mayor of Sodom. If you could have seen his “turn- 
out” it would have been one of the very best. Mrs. Lot must 
have moved in the very best society of the city. The Misses Lot 
were looked upon as the most fashionable people there. They got 
on well. Oh, yes; that is the way the men talk now. Men thou- 
sands of iniles from God take their children right into the whirlpool 
that takes them to sure ruin. Perhaps he was a judge and had 
great influence. When the angels got to the gate they might have 


heard of the name of the honorable Judge Lot. It sounded pretty | 


well. He might have owned a good many corner-lots; he might 
have owned a good many buildings with « Lot, Lot,” painted all 
over them; and on account of his property he might have been a 
very high man in Sodom. That is the way the world looks at it. 
No doubt the dispositions of the people were exactly as they are 
to-day; human nature has been pretty much the same always, 

But time rolls on, and Lot, while sitting at the gate one evening, 
Saw two strangers upon the highway. They are coming toward 
Sodom. Likely these Sodomites did not know them, but twenty 
years before, Lot had been in the company of Abraham, and he had 
seen these men at his uncle’s home, had seen them sitting at his 
uncle’s table, and he knew these angels when they approached, and 

_ bowed down and worshiped them, and bowed down to the ground 
and invited them into his house. But it was a sink of iniquity and 
they would not go in; they preferred to walk about the streets, 
But he pressed his invitation upon them and they accepted. It 
soon got noised around the streets that he had two strangers there, 
and it wasn’t long before a crowd was around the door, and wanted 
to know who he had inside. And he came out to try and pacify 
them, but they received him with cries of “Who made this fellow 
a judge over us?” and Lot was dragged into the house and the 
door was shut against the mob. His influence was gone; he had 
been in the city twenty years and hadn’t made a convert. My 
friends, no man ever goes down to Sodom and retains his influence. 
Talk about men of influence whose hearts are not with God! What 
is their influence? Some one said to me to-night, “ You have been 
preaching to drunkards and vagabonds; why don’t you preach to 
those sinners who live in marble-front houses and have influence?” 
Why, I would rather preach to harlots and drunkards, because it is 


fo Tl @ Pla: ee ee ee ee ee ee eee ee ee ee ee 


Ty 
tes 


= < 


VERS, 


etter in busi- 
’ might have 
n his “turn. 
‘s. Lot must 
> Misses Lot 
>. They got 

Men thou- 
he whirlpool 
Ige and had 
‘might have 


inded pretty _ 


3; he might 
’ painted all 
have been a 
looks at it, 
as they are 
ilways, 

ne evening, 
ing toward 
but twenty 
and he had 
ting at his 
ached, and 
the ground 
liquity and 
the streets, 
cepted. It 
gers there, 

ind wanted 

and pacify 

this fellow 

e and the 

e; he had 

vert. My 

influence. 

od! What 

have been 

preach to 

fluence ?”’ 

cause it is 


LOT IN SODOM. A4t 


easier to get them into the kingdom of God than those sinners who 
live in marble-front houses; we can reach them sooner; it doesn’t 
take so long to convince them they are sinners. I suppose Lot 
lived in a marble-front house there, and his heart was away from 
God. Then these men said to Lot, “Who have you got here be- 
sides yourself? What is your family? Have you got any others 
besides yourself in this town?” Well, the father and mother had to 
own up that they had married their children to some of the Sodom- 
ites; that was the result of his going into the city. You go into the 
world, and live like the world, and see what the result will be. 
How many mothers and fathers are now mourning on account of 
marrying their sons and daughters to Sodomites, marrying them to 
death and ruin. “Now,” they say, “if you have any, get them out 
of this place, for God is going to burn it up. Tell them this, and 
if they won’t come, escape for your lives and leave them, for He 
will destroy the city.” People say, “ Why are we so afflicted ? Why 
have we so many sorrows?” I believe it is because our hearts are 
from God. They have gone down to Sodom and left the God of 
their fathers. Now, all these twenty years we do not know that he 
had ever a family altar. He could not call his children around him 
and pray to his God. They had become identified with Sodom and 
its people. Look at that scene. There are the men at the outside 


- Of the door groping about to find it, and the door opens and 


Lot starts out to tell his son-in-law of the coming destruction. 
I can see the old man’s head bowed down passing through the 
streets of Sodom at midnight. He goes to a house and knocks. 
No sound; all are asleep. He knocks again, and, perhaps, too, 
shouts at the top of his voice, and the man gets up and opens 
the window. He puts his head out. “Who’s there?” “Your 
father-in-law,” answers the old man. “What has brought you out of 
bed at this hour? What’sup?” “Why,” says Lot, “two angels are at 
my house, who say that God is going to destroy Sodom and every . 
one who remains.” “Why, you go home and go to bed,” replies 
the son-in-law, and mocks him. They mock him. He had lost his 
testimony, my friends. They think he is deluded. I can see him 
now going off to another daughter’s house. I don’t know how 
many daughters he had. He might have had as many daughters 
as Job; and he goes to them, and they mock him too. I tell you, 
my friends, if we have got into Sodom our .children will mock us. 
There is that old man in that midnight hour, plodding along those 


442 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA) ERS, 


streets of Sodom to urge them to flee from the city, and they mock 
him. He had been long enough with Abraham to know that every- 
thing that came from God could be relied upon. Now, he starts 
back home. You can sce iim, his head bowed down, his long white 
hair flowing over his boso., and the tears flowing from those aged 
eyes. The world calls him a successful man; but vhat a miserable 
end is his. Look at him to-night. He had got wealth; that’s what 
he was after. He obtained what he wanted, but he got leanness of 
soul. You can see him go hack bowed down with grief. Next 
morning the angels take him by the hand, and he, his wife, and two 
daughters are led out of the city. And they I!ngered. How could 
they do otherwise than linger, when they had left their sons and 
daughters in the city, and knew they would be destroyed? Where 
are your sons and daughters now? Have you taken them down to 
Sodom, saying they must live in the pleasures of society—they must 
get on in the world? Where are they now? Have you got them 
into some store or some office where they will hear nothing but in- 
fidelity? If you have, those gray hairs will come down to an un- 
timely grave. You will learn the folly of your course when it is too 
late. Take your children from that city ; urge them to come from 
the Sodom in which they are living; tell them to flee before it is 
too late, for the city will be destroyed. Yes, they linger. I don’t 
blame them. They probably had a lingering hope that the storm 
might be stayed, and they could get their children out. But the 
angels took them by the hand and hastened them out of the city. 
Poor mother! Ah! how sad when God came in judgment! I can 
see that mother hesitating, but God orders her not to look back. 
“Flee for thy life; escape or you will be destroyed.” “No man 
having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the 
kingdom of God.” She gets out of Sodom, but she looks back, and 
judgment falls upon her. And I believe that the condition of Lot’s 
wife is the condition of hundreds in Chicago. They have come out 
of Sodom, but their heart is in the world. They say, “Have I to 
give up the worltl? have I to give up all. and follow Christ ?” They 
linger and look back, and judgment will fall upon them. 
' Weare told in that portion of Scripture which was read to-night 
that they were eating, drinking, buying and selling, planting and 
building tili the very moment Lot went out of Sodom. Perhaps 
not a man in all Sodom took any account of his going out. It 
might have got rumored around that he was going because he be- 


~~ —e = — «> ~*~. me n> —, 


nar 


nn r~ itd teed 4.4 


oN a “Mea 


ra Se SR Ak ra 


S, 


ley mock 
at every- 
he starts 
ng white 
ose aged 
niserable 
it’s what 
nness of 
f. Next 
and two 
yw could 
ons and 

Where 
down to 
1ey must 
ot them 
x but in- 
O an un- 
it is too 
me from 
ore it is 

I don’t 
ie storm 
But the 
the city. 
{ I can 
ok back. 
No man 
t for the 
ack, and 
of Lot’s 
ome out 
ve I to 
’ They 


to-night 
ing and 
Perhaps 
out. It 
2 he be- 


LOT IN SODOM. 443 


lieved the city was to be destroyed, but no man believed it. His 
sons and daughters didn’t believe what their father said to them, 
and so destruction fell upon them; and the Son of God says they 
were all destroyed—great and small, learned and unlearned, rich 
and poor, all perished alike. Bear in mind that if you live in Sodom, 
destruction will come upon you. The world may call you success 
ful, but the only way to test success is to take a man’s whole life; 
not the beginning or the middle, but the whole of it. If a man is 
in Sodom, as Mr. Sankey sang to-night, he will find at last the fruits 
of his life to be 


“ Nothing but leaves, nothing but leaves,” 


Lot spent his life in gaining worldly goods for his children, and 
he lost all and his children besides. How maay men in Chicago 
are there who can only say they have the same object in view that 
Lot had? They have come to this city to make money. They 
haven’t any family altar. They recognize only two things—money, 
money, business, business. ‘ My sons,” they say, “may become 
gamblers and drunkards; my daughters may go off into ungodly 
society and marry drunkards and make their lives miserable ; but I 
want money, and I’ll have all I want if I can get it.” That is the 
condition of thousands of people. My friends, was Lot’s life a suc- 
cessful one? It was a stupendous failure. He lost his sons and 
daughters, he lost his property, his wealth, his hold on the society 
and friendship of his uncle Abraham. Is not that the condition of 
hundreds here to-night? Let us strike for a higher plane; let us 
go up to Bethel; let us call upon God to save our children before 
it is too late. If your children have wandered off and got arnong 
the Sodomites, let one piercing cry go up: “O God, save my 
children ! forgive me, O Lord, for taking them i *o Sodom.” Let 
us turn from our lukewarmness, our worldly-minucdness, and seek 
His face. Oh, may the Spirit of God come upon you, and may you 
flee from the doomed city before it is too late. A mether came to 
me a few days ago and said, “ Mr. Moody, I want you to pray for 
me.” ‘ Well,” I asked, “why do you want to be prayed for?” 
She said, “I feellam toblame. I’ve got three sons and they have 
all gone astray, and I am the most wretched woman living. I feel 
I haven’t been true to the charge God gave me, and the thought is 
killing me. I want you to pray for me, and if God will forgive me, 
and if I get right in His sight, with His grace and by my prayers and 


444 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


faith they may be brought back.” Are there not hundreds here in 
the same condition as this poor woman? You have been ambitious 
for your children; you were after great things for them, and you 
have led them into Sodom, and now ruin has come upon them ; 
darkness and misery cover them. Let us humble ourselves before 
God that He may forgive us our lukewarmness for His cause in 
our ambition to obtain great things in this world. Let us not 
follow in the footsteps of this man Lot. Look at a represeniative 
of Lot here. I can imagine him starting as a moderate drinker, but 
the passion grows, and his children are infected, and he becomes, as 
it were, the father of a whole army of backsliders. He becomes 
the father of backsliding and worldly-mindedness by turning away 
from God himself. If you are in the city of Sodom, flee from it at 
once—escape for your lives, for destruction will come. May God 
bring every one in this hall out of Sodom, is the prayer of my 
heart. | 
PRAYER. 


Oh, Thou most gracious Saviour, we thank: Thee that Thou art 
not far off, but that Thou art nigh; and, Lord, we know that Thou 
art here to-night. We rejoice in Thy presence. For all of the 
mercies that have gone out from these walls and blessed so many 
homes, we thank Thee. O Lord, we would come before Thee 
now and thank Thee for all the blessings we have received under 
this roof. Many a soul Thou hast redeemed in Thy grace within 
this house. O Lord, now we pray Thee that Thou wouldst come 
this night and remove everything from our hearts that can hinder 
us from coming to Christ. We pray that Thou wouldst appear here 
in this great assembly, and give us all a heart to listen to the things 
that shall be spoken here. We know that the wages of sin is 
death, but that the gift of Thy Son is life eternal through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. May there be many here to-night that shall know 
and believe, and who shall ask of Him the gift of God, the loving 
Saviour ; who shall drink and never thirst again. We pray that Thou 
wouldst give the stream of salvation to many a soul here to-night. 
Bless the songs that have been sung by Thy servant. May the 
Gospel be a source of rest to many a weary soul. We shall never 
forget Thy goodness through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 


RS, 


ds here in 
ambitious 
» and you 
on them; 
ves before 
3 Cause in 
et us not 
eseniative 
‘inker, but 
comes, as 
: becomes 
ling away 
from it at 
May God 
yer of my 


Thou art 
hat Thou 
all of the 
sO many 
ore Thee 
red under 
ice within 
idst come 
an hinder 
ypear here 
the things 
of sin is 
igh Jesus 
hall know 
he loving 
chat Thou 
to-night. 
May the 
all never 
len, 


LITT. 


THE RELIGION OF JESUS BETTER THAN ALL 
ISMS. 


DEUT. xxxii. 31: “ For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves 
being judges.” 


WISH that this audience, for about thirty minutes, would just 

imagine they are sitting in judgment—that each one is sitting 

upon the case brought up. We want every man, woman, and 
child in this building to decide the question brought before them, 
“For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves 
being judges.” This was uttered by Moses in his farewell address 
to Israel. He had been with them forty years, day and night. He 
had been the king, or president, or judge, or whatever you may call 
it; he had been their leader or instructor; in other words, he had 
been a god to them, for all the blessings of Heaven came through 
him. And the old man was about leaving them. He had taken 
them to the borders of the promised land, and all who had had left 
Egypt with him but Joshua and Caleb, had been laid in that wilder- 
ness. Now he is making his farewell address; and, young man, if 
you have never read it, read it to-night. It is the best sermon in 
print. I do not know any other sermon in the New or Old Testa- 
ment that compares with it. His natural activity hadn’t abated— 
he had still the vigor of youth. I can see him as he delivers it; his 
long white hair flowing over his shoulders, and his venerable beard 
covering his breast as he gives them the wholesome instruction. 

The old man was giving his farewell address, in which he said, 

“Their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being 
judges.” Now I am not going to call upon Christians to settle this 
question ; but the ungodly, the unconverted must decide this ques- 
tion, and if you be fair with the argument you will have to admit 
that “your rock is not as our Rock;” your peace is not as our peace; 
because we have got our feet on the rock of Jesus. 
(445) 


446 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


You know, in the first place, that the atheist does not believe in 
any God. He denies the existence of a God. N ow, I contend that 
his rock is not as our Rock, and will let those atheists be the judges, 
What does an atheist look forward to? Nothing. He is taking a 
very crooked path in this world. His life has been dark ; it has 
been full of disappointments. When he wasa young man, ambition 
beckoned him on to a certain height. He has attained to that 
height, but he is not satisfied. He climbs a little higher, and, per- 
haps, he has got as far as he can get, but he is not contented. He 
is dissatisfied, and if he takés a look into the future, he sees nothing. 
Man’s life is full of trouble. Afflictions are as numerous as the 
hairs of our head; but when the billows of affliction are rising and 
rolling over him, he has no God to call upon; therefore, I contend 
his “rock is not as our Rock.” Lookat him. He hasa child. That 
atheist has all the natural affection for that child possible. He has 
a son—a noble young man—who starts out in life full of promise, 
but he goes astray. He has not the will-power of his father, and 
can not resist the temptations of the world. That father can not 
call upon God to save his son. He sees that son go down to ruin 
step by step, and by and by he plunges into a hopeless, Godless, 
Christless grave. And as that father looks into that grave, he has 
no hope. His “rock is not as our Rock.” Look at him again. He 
has a child laid low with fever, racked with pain and torture, but 
the poor atheist can not offer any consolation to that child. As he 
stands by the bedside of that child, she says, “ Father, I am dying ; 
in a little while I will go into another world. What is going to be- 
come of me? Am I going to die like a dumb beast?” « Yes,” 
the poor atheist says; “ love you, my daughter; but you will soon 
be in the grave, and eaten up by worms, and that will be all. 
There is no Heaven, no hereafter; it is alla myth. People have 
been telling you there is a hereafter, but they have been deluding 
you.” Did you ever hear an atheist going to their dying children 
and telling them this? My friends, when the hour of affliction 
comes, they call in a minister to give consolation. Why don’t the 
atheist preach no hereafter, no Heaven, no God in the hour of 
affliction? This very fact is an admission that their “rock is not 
as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being the judges.” But 
look, again. That little child dies, and that atheist father follows 
the body to the grave, and lays it down in its resting-place, and 
says, “ All that is left of my child is there; it will soon become the 


ERS. 


t believe in 
yntend that 
the judges, 
is taking a 
ark; it has 
n, ambition 
ed to that 
r, and, per- 
nted. He 
es nothing. 
ous as the 
rising and 
I contend 
ld. That 
» He has 
f promise, 
father, and 
er can not 
vn to ruin 
s, Godless, 
ive, he has 
gain. He 
yrture, but 
id. Ashe 
am dying ; 
ing to be- 
“Yes.” 
u will soon 
ill be all. 
sople have 
1 deluding 
g children 
’ affliction 
‘don’t the 
> hour of 
ick is not 
res.” But 
er follows 
place, and 
2come the 


THE RELIGION OF FESUS BETTER THAN ALL JISMS, 447 


companion of worms, who will feed upon it. That is all there is.” 
Why, the poor man’s heart is broken, and he will admit his “ rock is 
not as our Rock.” A prominent atheist went to the grave with the 
body of his friend. He pronounced a eulogy, and committed all 
that was left of his friend to the winds—to nature—and bade the 
remains farewell forever. Oh, my friends, had he any consolation 
then? His “rock was not as our Rock.” 

A good many years ago there was a convention held in France, 
and those who held it wanted to get the country to deny a God, to 
burn the Rible—wanted to say that men passed away like a dog and 
a dumb animal. What was the result ? Not long since, that coun- 
try was filled with blood. Did you ever think what would take 
place if we could vote the Bible, and the ministers of the Gospel, 
and God out from among the people? My friends, the country 
would be deluged with blood. Your life and mine would not be 
safe in this city to-night. We could not walk through these streets 
with safety. We don’t know how much we owe God and the influ- 
ence of His Gospel among even ungodly men. I can imagine some 
of you saying, “Why this talk about atheists? There are none 
here.” Well, I hope there isn’t; but I find a great number who 
come into the inquiry-rooms! just te look on, who confess they 
don’t believe in any God or any hereafter. 

But there is another class called deists, who, you know, don’t be- 
lieve in revelation—who don’t believe in Jesus Christ. Ask a deist 
who is his God. “ Well,” he will say, “He is the beginning—He 
who caused all things.” These deists say there is no use to pray, 
because nothing can change the decrees of their deity; God never 
answers prayer. “Their rock is not as our Rock.” In the hour of 
their affliction they, too, send off for some Christian to administer 
consolation. But there is another class. They say, “I am no deist; 
I am a pantheist; I believe that God is in the air; He is in the sun, 
the stars, in the rain, in the water’”— they say God is in this wood. 
Why, a pantheist the other night told me God was in that post; He 
was in the floor. When we come to talk to those pantheists, we 
find them no better than the deists and atheists. There was one of 
that sort that Sir Isaac Newton went to talk to. He used to argue 
with him, and try to get the pantheist into his belief, but he couldn't. 
In the hour of his distress, however, he cried out to the God of Sir 
Isaac Newton. Why don’t they cry to their god in the hour of 
their trauble? When I used to be in this city I used to be called 


448 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND LEAVERS, 


on to attend a good many funerals. I would inquire what the man 
was in his belief, and if I found out he was an atheist, or a deist, or 
a pantheist, and when I would go to the funeral, and in the presence 
of his friends said one word about that man’s doctrine, they would 
feel insulted. Why is it that in a trying hour, when they have been 
talking all the time against God—why is it that in the darkness 
of affliction they call in believers in that God to administer consola- 
tion ? 

The next class I want to call attention to is the infidel. I con- 
tend that his “rock is not as our Rock.” Look at an infidel. An 
infidel is one who doesn’t believe in the inspiration of Scripture. 
These men are very numerous, and they feel insulted when we call 
them infidels; but a man who doesn’t believe in the inspirations of 
Seripture is an infidel. A good many of them are in the church, 
and not a few of them have crept into the pulpit. These men would 
feel insulted if we called them infidels, but if a man says—I don’t 
care who he is or where he preaches—if he tries to say that the Bible 
is not inspired from back to back, he is an infidel. That is their true 
name, although they don’t like to be called that. Now, in that 
blessed Book there are five or six hundred prophecies, and every one 
of them has been fulfilled to the letter; and yet men try to say they 
can not believe the Bible is inspired. As I said the other night, 
those who can not believe it have never read it. I hear a great many 
infidels talk against the Bible, but I haven’t found the first man who 
ever read the Bible from back to back carefully and remained an 
infidel. My friends, the Bible of our mothers and fathers is true. 
How many men have said to me, “Mr. Moody, I would give the 
world if I had your faith, your consolation, the hope you have from 
your religion.” Is not that a proof that “their rock is not as our 
Rock?” Now look at these prophecies in regard to Nineveh, in re- 
gard to Babylon, to Egypt, to the Jewish nation, and see how literally 
they have been fulfilled to the letter. Every promise God makes He 
will carry out. Although the infidel professes his disbelief in the in- 
spiration of Scripture, they do not believe what they declare in their 
hearts, else why, when we talk with them, if they have any children, do 
they send them out of the room? Now, not long ago I went into a 
mzn’s house, and when I commenced to talk about religion, he turned 
to his daughter and said: “You had better go out of the room; I 
want to say a few words to Mr. Moody.” When she had gone, he 
opened a perfect torrent of infidelity upon me. “ Why,” said I, 


RS, 


t the man 
a deist, or 
e presence 
1ey would 
have been 
- darkness 
r consola- 


1. I con- 
idel. An 
Scripture. 
2n we call 
ations of 
e church, 
len would 
—I don’t 
the Bible 
their true 
v, in that 
very one 
say they 
er night, 
eat many 
man who 
ained an 
> is true. 
give the 
ave from 
ot as our 
oh, in re- 
‘literally 
lakes He 
n the in- 
‘in their 
dren, do 
itintoa 
e turned 
room; I 
rone, he 
' said I, 


THE RELIGION OF FESUS BETTER THAN ALL ISMS. 449 


‘did you send your daughter out of the room before you said this?” 
“Weil,” he replied, “I did not think it would do her any good to 
hear what I said.” My friends, his “ rock is not as our Rock.” Why 
did he send his daughter out of the room if he believed what he 
said? When these infidels are in trouble, why do they not get some 
of their infidel friends to administer consolation? When they make 
a will, why do they call in a follower of the Lord Jesus Christ to 
carry it out? Why, it is because they can not trust their infidel 
friends. ‘ Their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies them- 
selves being judges.” 

Now, did you ever hear of a Christian in his dying hour recant- 
ing? Did you ever hear of them regretting that they had accepted 
Christianity, and in their dying hour embracing infidelity? I would 
like to see the man who could stand and say he had. But how 
many times have Christians been called to the bedside of an atheist 
or deist, or infidel, in his dying hours, and heard him crying for 
mercy. In that hour infidelity is gone, and he wants the Ged of his 
father and mother to take the place of his black infidelity. It is 
said of West, an eminent man, that he was going to take up the 
doctrine of the resurrection, and just show the world what a fraud 
it was, while Lord Lyttleton was going to take up the conversion 
of Saul, and just show the folly of it. These men were going to 
annihilate that doctrine and that incident of the Gospel. A French- 
man said it took twelve fishermen to build up Christ’s religion, but 
one Frenchman pulled it down. From Calvary this doctrine rolled 
along the stream of time, through the eighteen hundred years, down 
to us, and West got at it and began to look at the evidence; but 
instead of his being able to cope with it, he found it perfectly over- 
whelming—the proof that Christ had risen, that He had come out 
of the sepulchre and ascended to Heaven and led captivity captive. 
The light dawned upon him, and he became an expounder of the 
Word of God and a champion of Christianity. 

And Lord Lyttleton, that infidel and skeptic, hadn’t been long ai 
the conversion of Saul before the God of Saul broke upon his sight, 
and he too began to preach. I don’t believe there is a man in the 
audience who, if he will take his Bible and read it, but will bec a- 
vinced of its truth. What does infidelity do for a man? “ Why,” 
said a dying infidel, “my principles have lost me my friends, my 
principles have sent my wife to her grave with a broken heart ; they 
have made my children beggars, and I go down to my grave with- 


29 


t 


450 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


out peace or consolation.” I never heard of an infidel going down 
to his grave happily. But not only do they go on without peace, 
but how many youths do they turn away from God. How many 
young men are turned away from Christ by these infidels and dev- 


ils. Let them remember that God will hold them responsible if, 


they are guilty of turning men away from Heaven. A few infidels 
gathered around a dying friend lately, and they wanted him to hold 
out to the end, to die like a man. ‘They were trying to cheer him, 
but the poor infidel turned to them.  “ Ah,” said he, “what have I 
got to hold onto?” My friends, let me ask you what you have got 
to hold on to. Every Christian has Christ to hold on to—the res. 
urrected man. “I am He that liveth and was dead ; and, behold, 1 
am alive for evermore.” Thank God, we have some one to carry us 
through death and the grave, and into the promised land. Yes, the 
Son of God wipes away more tears in this world of sorrow than all 
the infidels put together ina lifetime. Infidels never take away sor- 
row. What can those false gods of infidelity do for them in the hour 
of trial? They are like the false gods of the Hebrews; they never 
hear theircry. Whereas, if we have the God of Daniel, of Abraham, 
He is always ready to succor us when in distress, and we can make 
Him our fortress, and we have a refuge in the storm of adversity. 
There we can anchor safely, free from danger and disaster. I was 
reading to-night almost the last words of Lord Byron, and I want 
to draw a comparison between the sorrowful words of Byron and 
those of St. Paul. He died very yceung—he was only thirty-six— 
after leading an ungodly life. 


“My days are in the sere and yellow leaf, 
The flower and fruit of love are gone; 
The worm, the canker, and the grave 
Are mine alone.” 


Compare those words with the words of St. Paul, “I have fought 
a good fight: I have finished my course; I have kept the faith. 
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which 
the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day.” What 
a contrast! What a difference! My friends, there is as much 
difference between them as there is between Heaven and heil, be- 
tween death and life. Re judges which is the most glorious— 
atheism, deism, infidelity, or the Christianity St. Paul practiced. 
May God take all these isms and sweep them from the world. 


"ERS, 


going down 
hout peace, 
How many 
els and dev- 


sponsible if, 


few infidels 
him to hold 
» cheer him, 
what have I 
ou have got 
o—the res. 
id, behold, 7 
to carry us 
d. Yes, the 
ow than all 
‘© away sor- 
in the hour 
they never 
f Abraham, 
= can make 
f adversity. 
ter. I was 
and I want 
Byron and 
thirty-six— 


ave fought 
the faith. 
1ess, which 
y.” What 
5 as much 
d heil, be- 
glorious— 
practiced. 
orld. 


THE RELIGION OF FESUS BETTER THAN ALL ISMS, 451 


I want «o read to you a letter which I received some time ago. 
I read this to you because I get letters from infidels who say, that 
not an infidel has repented during our meetings. Only about ten 
days ago I got a letter from an infidel, who accused me of being a 
liar. He said there had not been an iufidel converted during our 
meetings. My friends, go up to the young converts’ meeting any 
Monday night, and you will see there ten or twelve every night who 
have accepted Christ. Why, nearly every night we meet with a 
poor infidel who accepts Christ. But let me read this letter. We 
get many letters every day for prayer, and, my friends, you don’t 
know the stories that lie behind those letters. The letter I am’ 
about to read was not received here, but while we were in Philadel- 
phia. When I received it I put it away, intending to use it at a 
future day. 

“ DEAR SIR:—Allow me the privilege of addressing you with a few 
words. The cause »° writing is, indeed, a serious one. I am the 
son of an aristocratic family of Germany—was expensively educated, 
and at college at Leipsic, was ruined by drinking, etc.; was expelled 
for gambling and dishonesty. My parents were greatly grieved at 
my conduct, and I did not dare return home, but sailed for America. 
I went to St. Louis, and remained there for want of money to get 
away. I finally obtained a situation as bookkeeper in a dry-goods 
house; heard from home, and of the death of my parents. This 
made me nore sinful than ever before. I heard one of your ser- 
mons, which made a deep impression on me. I was caken sick, and 
the words of your text came to me and troubled me. I have tried 
to find peace with God, but have not succeeded. My friends, by 
reasoning with me that there was no God, endeavored to comfort 
me. The thought of my sinfulness and approaching the grave, my 
blasphemy, my bad example, caused me to mourn and weep. I 
think God is too just to forgive me my sins. My life is drawing to 
aclose. I he = sot yet received God’s favor. Will you not remem- 
ber me in you prayers, and beseech God to save my soul from 
eternal destruction? Excuse me for writing this, but it will be the 
last I shall write this side of the grave.” 

Ah, my friends, “his rock was not as our Rock, even our enemies 
themselves being judges.” I have two more letters I would like to 
read. I am not accustomed to read so many letters, but on this 
occasion I will read them to you. Some of you remember me 
speaking of a man who came in here who was a fugitive from jus- 


cane irEaE are cece me meni met ote ipa Balm a a i a ta 


452 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYEi S, 


tice. The Governor of the State from which he came hid offered 
a reward for him, and he came into this Tabernacle. He received 
Christ, and returned to his State. This morning I received the 
following letter ; 


“ DEAR SIR AND BROTHER :—Owing to the law’s slow delay I am 
yet a prisoner of hope. By Thursday or Friday my case will be 
reached, and I'll be committed to the Penitentiary, for how leng I do 
not know. This condition is voluntary, or of my own seeking, be- 
cause I feel it due the cause of God, or the only evidence I can 
give of my repentance and desire to do better. My family and 
friends hope ultimately to obtain a pardon. I desire to thank you 
for the interest you have taken in me, and I ask your prayers, and 
those of God’s people in Chicago, that I may have strength and 
grace to live under these calamities; that my poor heart-broken 
wife and children may be sustained; and, further, that God’s bless- 
ing may rest on all efforts being made for my future. After it is all 
over, and I am ina felon’s cell, ’ll write you. In your efforts to 
warn men to do better and lead a new life, bid them beware of am- 
bition to accomplish an undertaking at all hazards. Such is my 
condition. Had I left off speculation in an invention I might now 
be happy. Step by step I yielded until my forgeries reached over 
thirty thousand dollars. My aim was not to defraud, but to suc- 
ceed, and pay it all back. Oh, pray for me—for all who suffer with 
me. While in Chicago I was under an assumed name. Here I am, 
in my native village, in my father’s home, a prisoner, not daring to 
go out, or even to see my children (we have three, two boys and 
one girl). I hear their voices, and when they sleep I silently go in 
their little room and look at them in innocent slumber. My crimes 
are in another county, whither I go Thursday. May our heavenly 


Father bless your labors. Humbly and repentant, I am, 
% % %”? 


To-morrow probably he will go into the penitentiary to suffer for 


his crime, but now his Rock is our Rock. 

Last week a beautiful-looking young man came into the inquiry- 
room. He had been brought up in a happy home with a good 
father and mother. He had gone astray. When he came into the 
inquiry-room, he said he intended to become a Christian, but he 
could not because he knew what it would make him do. He had 
robbed an express company, and that sin came between him and 
God. He had been heard and received a verdict in his favor, but 
he knew he was guilty. He had gone into the witness box and 


21S, 


iid offered 
Je received 
ceived the 


delay I am 
ise will be 
v long I do 
eeking, be- 
sence I can 
family and 
thank you 
rayers, and 
ength and 
art-broken 
od’s bless- 
ter it is all 
r efforts to 
are of am- 
uch is my 
night now 
ached over 
ut to suc- 
suffer with 
Here I am, 
daring to 
» boys and 
sntly go in 
My crimes 
r heavenly 


% %”? 


o suffer for 


1e inquiry- 
th a good 
e into the 


an, but he 

He had 
1 him and 
favor, but 
s box and 


THE RELIGION OF FESUS BETTER THAN ALL ISMS. 453 


committed perjury. He turned away and left the building. Last 
Friday, however, he was at the noonday meeting; he was in my 
private room for a while, and I never felt so much pity for a man in 
my life. Hewanted to become a Christian, but the thought of hav- 
ing to go back and tell his father that he was guilty, after his father 
had paid two thousand dollars to conduct his trial. After a great 
struggle he got down on his knecs and cried out, ‘ O God, help me; 
forgive me my sins;” and at last he got up and straightened him- 
self and said, “ Well, sir, I will go back.” <A friend went down to 
the railway station and saw him off, and shortly after I got this 
dispatch from him: 


“MR. Moopy :--God has told me what todo. The future is as 
clear as crystal. Iam happier than ever before.” 

He went on his way, reached his native village, and I received 
this letter from him this morning, and I have felt my soul filled with 
sorrow ever since it came. Let me say here, if there is any one in 
this hall, who has taken money from his employer, go and tell him 
of it at once. It is a good deal better for you to confess it than 
have it on your mind—than to try to cover it up. “He that cov- 
ereth his sins shall not prosper.” If you have taken any money 
that doesn’t belong to you, make restitution by confession at least. 
If any one here is being tempted to commit a forgery or any crime, 
let this be a warning to them: 

“My BELOVED FRIEND AND BROTHER :—I am firm in the cause. 
I have started, and feel that God is with me in it. And, oh, dear 
brother, do never cease praying for my dear father and praying 
mother, and I wish you would some day write them and tell them 
that God will make this all for the best. If I live for ages I will 
never cease praying for them, and I never can forgive myself for 
my ungratefulness to my dear broken-hearted sisters and brothers and 
dear good parents. Oh, that link that held the once happy home is 
severed. © God! may it not be forever. Would that I had been 
a Christian for life; that I had taken my mother’s hand when a 
child and walked from there, hand in hand, straight to Heaven ; and 
then the stains would not have been. But we know, O God, that 
they can’t foliow me into Heaven, for then I will be washed of all 
my sins, and the things that are on this earth will stay here. 

“Oh, my dear Christian brother, my heart almost failed me when I 
was approaching my dear, happy home, and the thought that I was 
the one out of cight brothers and sisters to break the chain of 
happiness that surrounded that once happy and beautiful home, 


2 


454 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


which is now shaded with misery, and the beautiful sunshine that 
once lit that happy, that dearest of homes, is now overshadowed 
with darkness, Oh, I fear it will take my dear parents; it is more 
than they can bear. When I reached home, and they all greeted 
me with a kiss, and I told them I had started for Heaven, and God 
sent me home to tell them, my mother shed tears of happiness, and 
when I was jorced to bring the death-stroke upon her, the tears 
ceased to flow, and God only can describe the scene that took 
place. I called them all around me, and I thought I could not pray 
if I were to attempt it. But when I knelt with them in prayer, God 


- just told me what to say, and I found it the will of God; and after 


I hed prayed, I kissed them all, and asked their pardon for my un- 
gratefulness, which I received from them all. Then I made my 
Dreparations to leave home, for how long God only knows; but I got 
grace to leave in a cheerful way, and it appeared for a short time; 
and if God lets me live to return home, I will join my mother’s side, 
take her to church, and bring my brothers and sisters and father to 
God. We will all go to Heaven together. My beloved brother, J 
must see you some day, and just tell you what God has done for 
me, and I know He will never forsake me, when I am shut up in 
those prison walls for a crime I justly deserve. When I can’t com- 
municate with any one else, I know I will not be shut off from God. 
Oh, glory! 

“T came to Cleveland last night, and was going to get that money 
and return it to the General Superintendent, but my attorney had 
made that arrangement already. I find there is an indictment at 
Akron against me now for perjury, and I am going to take the 
morning train and go to Akron. Court is in progress now, and I 
am going to ask the court if there is an indictment against me, and 
if there is, I will hear it and then plead guilty. I will write you 
again soon, and give you all the particulars, and the length of my 
sentence.” 

I want to urge this letter upon your consideration as a warning. 
Think of the punishment that young man has brought upon him- 
self; think of the agony of that father and mother when he broke 
the news to them—when he told them of his guilt. His “rock was 
not as our Rock.” May God bless every young man here, and may 
they be brought to the acceptance of salvation. May they turn to 
Thee, God of their fathers and of their mothers, so that they can 
say, “ Your Rock is our Rock—we are servants of God.” 


"ERS. 


inshine that 
ershadowed 
; it is more 
all greeted 
en, and God 
ppiness, and 
r, the tears 
> that took 
ld not pray 
prayer, God 
1; and after 

for my un- 
I made my 
3; but I got 
short time; 
other’s side, 
nd father to 
1 brother, J 
as done for 

shut up in 
can’t com- 
f from God. 


that money 
torney had 
lictment at 
to take the 
now, and I 
ist me, and 
1 write you 
ngth of my 


a warning. 
upon him- 
n he broke 
“rock was 
‘e,and may 
ey turn to 
t they can 


LIV. 


JESUS CHRIST MUST BE RECEIVED OR 
REJECTED. 


MATT. xxvii, 22: “Pilate saith unto them, What shall I do then with Jesus 
which is called Christ? They all say unto him, Let Him be crucified.” 


pe was in difficulty. Pilate had the question sprung 
suddenly upon him — not like the citizens of Chicago before 

whom the question has been from their cradle up, and to 
whom it has been present continually. One morning—I suppose it 


. was about six o’clock—the governor was aroused by a mob in front 


of his palace, clamoring for a decision about this man. Pilate 
examined the case, and he wavered. There he made his first mis- 
take. Instead of taking his place like a man, saying, “I will never 
sanction this injustice; I have been placed here by the Roman 
Emperor to administer justice to men, and I can not deliver this 
innocent man to you.” Instead of that he compromised with 
them; he wanted to be on both sides at once. “I will chastise 
Him,” he says, and that will shift the responsibility on to the Jews. 
But he found they were enraged at this, and wanted His life. 
When he found He was from Galilee he thought he would shift the 
responsibility onto Herod, and imagined he could in this way get 
tid of this great question —that question which appeals to every 
man and woman here to-night —“ What are we going to do with 
the Son that God gave up, with the gift He gave for us?” Well, 
he sent them off to Herod. I don’t know how long they were 
gone- -perhaps about an hour; but back they came again to Pilate, 
after finding that even Herod, that blood-thirsty governor, had re- 
fused to judge Him, to get him to decide the case and have Him cruci- 
fied. He again wants to release Him. He is thoroughly convinced 
that He is a just man—an innocent man ; in fact, it is said it was envy 
that prompted them to seek His life. Pilate knew deep down in 
his heart that it was envy and malice that prompted them to bring 
(455) 


oe se 


2 
SS 


\y 


456 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


Christ before him, yet instead of taking his stand like a man and de- 
ciding for himself, as he ought to have done, he tried to be on the 
side of every party. He took the most notable prisoner of the time 


along with Jesus and said to the multitude, “I will release one of. 


them ; which will you have?” I suppose he thought sure they would 
say, “Release Jesus of Nazareth;” he thought they would keep a 
man who gave life to the people and did good everywhere. He 
went. But the chief priests ran through the crowd and got them to 

\{ be all of one mind, and they cried, “ Barabbas, Barabbas, give us 

\ Barabbas.” Then he said, ‘“ What shall I do with Jesus which is 

«called Christ?” And they cried, “Let Him be crucified.” The 
poor, blind, heathen governor then turned to them and said, “ What 
evil hath He done?” But they cried the more, and he turned Him 
over. and he took water and washed his hands of the iniquity—the 
poor, blind, deceived man. He thought he was freed from his de- 
cision by the act, but bear in mind that God held Pilate responsible 
for that decision, as he holds every man and woman responsible for 
the manner in which they freat the gift of His Son. It is an indi- 
vidual matter with us vi it was with Pilate. God gave Him to 
every one here just as He was given to Paul when he says, “ He 
loved me and gave Himself for me.” 

Now, look at this man Pilate. His judgment was convinced tha. 
Jesus was the Saviour of the world. How many men and women 
are just convinced in their judgment that Jesus Christ was sent into 
the world for the express purpose of saving them. You believe it, 
don’t you? If I were to put it to every one here to-night and ask 
them to rise and give their conviction, probably every one would 
say, “I believe Christ was sent to save the world.’ Well, you are 
like Pilate; you are convinced. But not only was his judgment 
reached, but his conscience was reached. He knew, deep down in 
his own conscience, he ought to let Him go free, but he didn’t come 
up to his conscience. His conscience was telling him to release this 
man; even his black, treacherous heart was telling him to release 
Him. He ought to have bowed before Him and called Him as his 
Lord and Saviour. Not only his conscience and his heart were tell- 
ing him this, but his wife sent to him, saying, ‘“ Have nothing to do 
with this just man, for I have suffered many things in a dream this 
day because of Him.” And with all this the man was lost for want of 
decision—-lost owing to a vacillating character, like hundreds and 
thousands of people who will be lost in Chicago. How many are 


ERS, 


man and de. 
o be on the 
r of the time 


lease one of, 


they would 
ould keep a 
where. He 
got them to 
as, give us 
us which is 
fied.” The 
aid, “ What 
turned Him 
iquity—the 
rom his de- 
responsible 
ponsible for 
t is an indi- 
ve Him to 
says, “He 


vinced tha. 
ind women 
as sent into 
1 believe it, 
sht and ask 
one would 
ell, you are 
5 judgment 
=p down in 
lidn’t come 
release this 
to release 
Him as his 
t were tell- 
thing to do 
dream this 
for want of 
ndreds and 


y Many are 


thoroughly convinced that Jesus Christ can save, that He will save, 
yet they are not willing to let Christ save them. Just like poor 
Pilate. What was the trouble that kept him back? The trouble 


was, he wanted the applause of men. He knew that He was Jesus, : 


Christ of Nazareth, that in Him there was no guile; he knew that 
He was pure as the angels of Heaven, yet poor Pilate wanted the 
applause of his fellow-men, he wanted to keep his office, and de- 
cided against Christ, and so you can say he was lost by his decision; 
and you are in the position of Pilate to-night—for or against Him. 
I don’t know vut some of you will get angry at this, as you did the 


other night, but I like to put men in a corner and hold them till 


they answer the great question. I made a remark the other night 
that every man and woman in this assembly had got to decide that 
night “ What they were going to do with God’s Son.” A great many 
have an idea that they have got plenty of time to decide the ques- 
tion as to receiving or rejecting Him. This isa delusion. Christ has 


been presented to us from our earliest years—since the time we first _ 


knew what salvation was—and during all these years we have been 
guilty of either rejecting or else receiving Him. Every time He is 
offered we must do either of the two things. Pilate came very near 
the kingdom of God. The Son of God was beside him; he talked 
with Him. No doubt he was in the presence of Jesus Christ for 
two hours, and he could have called upon Him and would have 
been saved. Yet he neglected to do so, and he was lost. 

Then look again. He was false to his own convictions. He was 
convicted of the fact that Jesus was put into his hands through 
envy. He was probably convicted that Jesus was what He 
claimed to be—the King of the Jews, the Saviour of the world— 
not only that, but he was unstable; he didn’t dare to have a mind 
of his own; he didn’t dare to decide this question according to his 
convictions, on account of public clamor; not only that, but he 
allowed others to decide for him. Young lady, is it not that which 
keeps you out of the kingdom of God? Do you not let other 
people decide for you? Are you not looking around to see what 
other people will say—what they will think if you accept Him, when 
you know deep down in your heart that He is your only salvation? 
You look to see what your companions will say, and if they lift up 
their voices in derision, you haven’t the moral courage to decide 


according to your convictions. You let them decide for you. Pilate _ 


never ought to have let this question go from him. All those 


JESUS CHRIST MUST BE RECEIVED OR REFECTED, 457 


Y 


y 
WN 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


16 


Hl 


14 


125 


© 
“o O 


(716) 872-4503 


23 WEST MAIN STREET 
WEBSTER, N.Y. 14580 


‘apnic 


aes 


ences 


orporation 


458 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


judges against Him looked to worldly interests in their decision; 
but did yo:. ever glance through the Scriptures to see what those 
people gained by fighting against Christ? Did you ever take a look 
into profane history to see what those men gained? Go and see 
what calamities befel them who fought against Christ. You all 
know what became of Judas. Look at him when he came back 
with the money. His conscience became a hell, and he came back 
to the Temple into the office where the chief priests were and threw 
down the thirty pieces of silver. Look at the picture of despair. 
He had for thirty pieces of silver, bought his own eternal damnation. 
He couldn’t keep the money, because he had been the means of 
shedding innocent blood, and threw it down before the men who 
gave it to him and went out and committed suicide. Judas was 
dead and damned before Christ died on the cross. Look at Caiaphas. 
Before the end of the year he was deposed. Then that wicked 
Herod had him dressed up like a mock king, and said, “ Hail, King 
of the Jews,” in derision, and his soldiers spat upon him. Herod 
died an infamous death after he had been hurled from his throne, 
and banished to a foreign country. And this man who gave his 
Sentence was banished, and he, too, committed suicide. I don’t 
know what made him commit suicide, but I can imagine. When 
they took his office from him, and sent him off to a foreign land, his 
conscience began to smite him. He thought of that day when 
Christ was brought before him. That was his day of decision—that 
was the crisis in his life. I believe there is a day of decision in our 
lives ; a day upon which the crisis of our lives occurs. There is a 
day when the Son of Man comes and stands at our heart and knocks 
and knocks for the last time and leaves us forever. I can imagine 
when Pilate was banished how this recollection troubled him day 
and night. He remembered how that Saviour had looked on him 
—how innocent He was; he remembered how, when the Jews were 
clamoring for His death, and the cry echoed through the streets of 
Jerusalem, “Crucify Him! crucify Him!” it seeried as if He had 
nothing but love for them. Probably some one told him the story 
of the crucifixion, and how, when nailed to the cross, and the howl- 
ing mob around Him, He cried: “ Father, forgive them; they 
' know not what they do;” he remembered how they clamored for 
His life, and now he hadn’t the moral courage to stand up for the 
despised Nazarene, and that preyed upon his mind, and he put an 
end to his miserable existence, My friends, what did these men 


eo ae Te ee ee ee © ¢, a @ Pe @ Ys a} 


ERS. 


ir decision ; 
what those 
take a look 
Go and see 

You all 
came back 
came back 
and threw 
of despair. 
Jamnation. 
- means of 
> men who 
Judas was 
t Caiaphas. 
iat wicked 
Hail, King 
n. Herod 
his throne, 
» gave his 
. I don’t 
ie. When 
n land, his 
day when 
sion—that 
sion in our 
There is a 
nd knocks 
n imagine 
| him day 
od on him 
Jews were 
streets of 
if He had 
the story 
the howl- 
em; they 
mored for 
ip for the 
he put an 
hese men 


FESUS CHRIST MUST BE RECEIVED OR REFECTED. 459 


gain by fighting against Christ? Let me ask you to-night, What 
does a man gain by fighting against Him? Does the devil pay you 
for your service? You men who make light of everything pure and 
holy; you men who make light of salvation’s gift—of the gift of 
God’s only Son, what do you gain by it? I have to find the first 
man who ever gained anything by fighting against Christ. My 
friends, “It is hard to kick against the pricks. It is hard to contend 
against God Almighty.” 

Now, it seems to me, the best thing that every man and woman 
in this audience can do to-night, is to make an unconditional sur- 
render of your soul and body to Jesus Christ. Decide this question 
to-night, “What shall I do with this Jesus?” and it may be that an 
angel is hovering over you—hovering over that young fnan as he 
says, “What shall I do?”—waiting to carry the answer back to 
Heaven. I beg of you, settle this solemn question. Say, “I ac- 
cept.” I don’t know whether Herod was touched, but Pilate, 
Agrippa, and Felix were; but they preferred a worthless bauble to 
salvation. They have come almost to a decision to accept Him, 
but, on account of unholy influences, they reject Him. As I said 


. before, men don’t like this idea of being forced to a decision. A 


man the other day got offended at me when I asked him, “ Do you 
coolly, calmly, and deliberately reject the Son of God?” “TI do.” 
“Do you know what it is to reject the Son of God? it is condemna- 
tion.” “TI deny it, sir.” ‘ Well, ‘ le that believeth in Him is not 
condemned, but he that believeth not is condemned already.’” 
“Well, I don’t like you to put it so plain,” he answered. ‘God has 
put it plain, so that we can understand it, and if we reject it we are 
condemned.” Why, people in this audience have got a good 
deal more light than Pilate had; yet because he didn’t take his 
stand and believe, he wascondemned. Now, are you going to take 
your stand beside Pilate, and spend eternity with him, or are you 
going to take your stand with Herod and mock Him? From what 
I hear, many people on going out of this building mock every- 
thing about the meetings. They mock the singers, they mock the 
preaching, the Christian people they see. Well, you can mock and 
go down with Herod. Yes, mocker, you can come into this build- 
ing and take a chair yonder, and trifle and mock everything you 
hear. You can do it; but, my friends, if you trifle with His offer 
He will condemn you. The devil, who prompts you to trifle with 
sacred things, will by and by become your tormentor. Go trifle 


460 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


with the forked lightning, trifle with small-pox, with yellow fever 
but don’t, I pray you, trifle with the Son of God. I beg of you 
don’t get up and leave this building laughing and scoffing at the 
text to-night. I don’t care how much sport you make of the min- 


ister, but I beseech you don’t make sport of the solemn question, « 


‘What shall I do then with Jesus, which is called Christ?”’ Don’t 
trifle with this gift of God for a wicked world. It was an unspeakable 
gift ; it cost God all He had. There was once a Welsh minister who 
read out the passage of Scripture: ‘“ How shall we escape if we 
neglect so great salvation?”’ And he paused and leaned over his 
pulpit and said: “ My friends, this is a question I can not answer; 
it is a question that the angels from Heaven can not answer.” 
“ How shall you escape if you neglect so great salvation?” What 
will you do with the gift to-night? Will you hurl it from you 
—trample it under your feet ? will you send back the insult- 
ing message, “I don’t want it?” O, man of pleasure, what 
will you do? Look at Solomon, now he took up mirth, and 
then wine, and then another and another pleasure, and after he 
had got to the end of the whole catalogue of pleasures he 
just bundled them together and said: “ All is vanity and vex- 
ation of spirit.” O, man of pleasure, what are you going to do? 
You may be after honor or position—that was what Pilate wanted ; 
you may seek to be governor of men, but if you seek pleasure and 
happiness in position, or in the attainment of great things, you will 
be disappointed. If you want solid comfort and peace, decide to- 
night to take Him as your Saviour—to take Him as your Redeemer, 
as your way, your light, your rightr “1sness, your justification— 
decide to-night to take Him as your ail-in-all. My friends, what 
will you do with Him? As I said before, an angel of light may be 
here—may be bending over that man in the gallery yonder. He 
may be scoffing; I don’t know. He may have a mother in the East 
who is praying for him now, or he may have a mother in the celes- 
tial kingdom. I don’t know; there may be more angels than people 
in this room waiting for your decisions. May this young man and 
that young lady say, “I will decide this question to-night; I will 
not go out of this world without Him; I can not reject again; I 
may not have another opportunity.” How many of those who 
were lost in the Lrooklyn Theatre if they had been spoken to last 
Sunday about Christ and Heaven would have rejected Him? but 
how much would they give now if they could have the opportunity 


Pe — nc, Sa a Se Se SO ee 


VERS. 


yellow fever 

beg of you 
offing at the 
> of the min- 


mn question, « 


ist?” Don't 
unspeakable 
minister who 
escape if we 
ned over his 
not answer; 
not answer.” 
yn?” What 
it from you 
< the insult- 
2asure, what 

mirth, and 
and after he 
pleasures he 
ty and vex- 
oing to do? 
late wanted ; 
oleasure and 
ngs, you will 
‘e, decide to- 
ir Redeemer, 
istification— 
friends, what 
light may be 
yonder. He 
rin the East 
in the celes- 
s than people 
ng man and 
night ; I will 
ect again; I 
f those who 
oken to last 
d Him? but 
opportunity 


FESUS CHRIST MUST BE RECEIVED OR REFECTED. 461 


you have to-night? Angels may be hovering over every one of 
you, waiting for your answer. “TI will, I will receive Him, cost 
what it may; I will break through every obstacle and take salvation 
as a gift to-night.” And how that angel will wing his way to the 
mansions of Heaven, and how the bells of Heaven will peal forth. 
their anthems, and songs will go up. “There are men and women 
in the Tabernacle to-night deciding the question,” My friends, let 
this blessed Sabbath evening be the night of your salvation. Do 
not be like Caiaphas, or Pilate, or Agrippa, or any of those men 
who despised or trifled with the question. | 
The last time I preached upon this question was in old Farwell 
Hall. I had been for five nights preaching upon the life of Christ. 
I took Him from the cradle and followed Him up to the point in 
the judgment-hall, and on that occasion I consider I made as great 
a blunder as ever I made in my life. If I could recall my act I 
would give this right hand. It was upon that memorable night in 
October, and the Court-house bell was sounding an alarm of fire, 
but I paid no attention to it. You know we were accustomed to 
hear the fire bell often, and it didn’t disturb us much when it 
sounded. I finished the sermon upon “What shall I do with 
Jesus?” And I said to that audience, “Now, I want you to take 
the question with you, think over it, and next Sunday I want you 
to come back and tell me what you are going to do with it.” What 
a mistake. It seems now as if Satan was in my mind when I said 
this. Since then I never have dared give an audience a week to 
think of their salvation. If they were lost, they might rise up in 
judgment against me. “Now is the accepted time.” We went 
down-stairs to the other meeting, and I remember what Mr. Sankey 
was singing, and how his voice rang when he came to that pleading 
verse : 
“ To-day the Saviour calls ; 
For refuge tly. 
The storm of justice falls, 
And death is nigh,” 


After the meeting we went home. I remember going down La 
Salle street with a young man, who is probably in the hall to-night, 
and saw the glare of the flames. I said to the young man, “ This 
means ruin to Chicago.” About one o’clock Farwell Hall went ; 
soon the church in which I had preached went down, and every. 
thing was scattered. I never saw that audience again. My friends, 


462 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA YERS, 


we don’t know what may happen to-morrow; but there is one thing 
I do know, and that is, if you take the gift you are saved. If you 
have eternal life you need not fear fire, death, or sickness. Let 
disease or death come, you can shout triumphantly over the grave 
if you have Christ, My friends, what are you going to do with 
Him to-night? Will you receive Him? Or put it this way: How 
many will reject Him? Suppose I was to put it to the vote, is there 
any one here who would rise and reject Him as their Saviour? Say, 
friend, what are you going to do to-night? It is a solemn question, 
and may God drive it home to your heart : “ What shall I do with 
Jesus?” How many are there here who will say, “I will receive 
Him; I believe it; from this time I will trust Him to save my 
soul?” He will save you if you but say this sincerely. May God 
bring you to a decision, and may this be the happy hour when you 
shall receive the Son of God as your Saviour and Redeemer. 


PRAYER. 


Our Father in Heaven, as we come this night we pray Thee to 
bless these men. Save them. We have come up here to pray for 
their souls’ salvation. May they realize the gift of Thy holy Son, 
Jesus Christ, and accept Him as their Saviour before they leave this 

building. May they realize the awful end that awaits them if they 
~ continue in their sins, May they realize the sweet influence of Christ’s 
love, and turn and serve Him to-night. May these fathers, these 
brothers, these sons, be converted and go from this house to their 
homes and erect there the family altar. May the prayers of their moth- 
ers, their sisters, their daughters, their wives, avail much, and may 
they be brought to see Christ their Saviour in the true light. And 
when many of them have grown old, may they look back to this 


night, and realize that it was the happiest of their life. We thank _ 


‘Thee for the great assembly within these walls to-night, for when 
we see this, we know that the Spirit of the Lord is here. Tarry 
with us, O Father, through this meeting, and may we all go home 
blessing Thee because we have found the Lord. We ask it all in 
Jesus’ name. Amen. 


"ERS, 


is one thing 
ved. If you 
ckness. Let 
er the grave 
to do with 
; way: How 
rote, is there 
riour? Say, 
an question, 
11 I do with 
will receive 
to save my 
May God 
r when you 
mer. 


ray Thee to 
to pray for 
y holy Son, 
y leave this 
1em if they 
e of Christ’s 
thers, these 
use to their 
their moth- 
1,and may 
ght. And 


ick to this _ 


We thank 
y for when 
re. Tarry 
1 go home 
kk it all in 


LV. 


THE RICH FOOL. 


LUKE xii. 20: “But God said unto him: Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be 
required of thee.” 


YS will see by reading this portion of Scripture that he was 
what we would call nowadays a successful business man—a 

man that many parents would hold up to their sons as a 
model. I don’t think he was a drinking man; there’s nothing in 
the story that would lead us to suppose he was. He hadn’t made 
his money in getting up corners on grain; he didn’t get it by any 
acts of usury by which he drew twenty nercent.; he didn’t get it 
by making a corner on gold or getting up a Black F riday ; he didn’t 
make his money by betting on elections or buying stocks, but he got 
it lawfully. No doubt he was a moralist ; certainly there is nothing 
in what we have read to-night against his character. That was not 
his fault. He didn’t rent his property for billiard halls, for liquor 
saloons, or to harlots; he was a farmer. I don’t know of a more 
lawful occupation than that of a farmer. He was a successful man, 
I don’t believe he ever compromised with his creditors by paying 
fifty cents on the dollar when he could pay a hundred. He didn’t 
get his money that way. He didn’t get it by shaving notes, or by 
taking advantage of the widow and orphan, or those who were poor, 
but he got it lawfully. He was an upright man. I presume if he was 
here we would send him to Congress, or if we could not send him 
to Congress, we would make him Mayor. He was a thoroughly 
good business man, who paid all he promised to pay. He was what 
we would call a shrewd man—a long-headed man, just deluged with 
business, and, undoubtedly, if you had spoken to him about his 
soul’s welfare he would have turned to Scripture and said, “ Be not 
slothful in business.” Business must be attended to first; that’s 
what Scripture teaches. And I think that Chicago men have got 
as far as that in Scripture, and there they stop.. A man came out 
here from the Exst, and a minister asked him to preach in his pulpit, 

(463) 


¢ 


46°4 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


and he picked out the text, “ Not slothful in business,” but went no 
further. “ Why,” said the minister to him, “ don’t you know that all 
Chicago have got that down in their soul; why don’t you preach 


upon the whole of the text, and not a part?” “Not slothful in 
business.” Chicago doesn’t want that kind of preaching. He forgot 
the rest—“fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.” This man was 


earnest with business. He had got off that part of the text. Un- 
doubtedly he moved in the best society of his time. He had the 
best turnout in that part of the country. He had the best farm 
in that section of the country, and the best horses and cattle. 
If he had been living to-day, probably he would have had the best 
short-horn cattle and the very finest-wool sheep. He had the very 
best, undoubtedly, in his time, and had been called a great success. 
No doubt, in those days they had revival-meetings ; of course they 
had, because one of the greatest revivals that ever took place occur- 
red in those days under John the Baptist. Perhaps it took place 
near his farm; but hé could not leave his business to attend it. 
Great multitudes flocked past his house from early morn till late at 
night on their way to the banks of the Jordan to hear the greatest 
revivalist that ever lived, except Jesus Christ. But he didn’t leave 
his business to go; he probably thought they were fanatics. The 
idea of a business man turning from his legitimate business, from his 
merchandise—should waste his time to hear that preacher. No 
doubt he belonged to the synagogue. He believed in set doctrines, 
and walked accordingly. He would not hear of those innovations. 
The idea of spending his time in going to listen to a man who was 
clothed with a leather girdle, and fed on locusts and wild-honey ! 
No, sir; he wouldn’t hear him. Undoubtedly, Jesus and His 
apostles passed by that way; and he might have, one night, enter- 
tained Him. Perhaps he had heard about the dead being raised 
by this man, as these drunkards are being raised in Chicago to-day 
—men who are being lifted from sin and degradation, and a new 
song put into their mouth. Like a great many of these business 
men to-day, perhaps, he said, “Oh, it’s only a nine-days’ wonder, 
and the excitement will be gone soon.” Christ came and went ; 
but he was so pressed with business that he hadn’t time to attend 
to what that Heavenly preacher said. He hadn’t time to go to 
those meetings.on the banks of the Jordan. So it is with men to- 
day. They haven’t time to look into this great question of Jesus 
Christ. They have heard of Him, but can’t stop to see how He 


YERS., 


but went no 
<now that all 
| you preach 
t slothful in 
. He forgot 
is man was 
. text. Un- 
He had the 
e best farm 
and cattle. 
1ad the best 
ad the very 
reat success. 
course they 
place occur- 
took place 
(Oo attend it. 
n till late at 
the greatest 
lidn’t leave 
latics. The 
ess, from his 
acher. No 
+t doctrines, 
nnovations. 
bawuieewae 
vild-honey ! 
is and His 
ight, enter- 
eing raised 
ago to-day 
and a new 
se business 
ys’ wonder, 
and went; 
e to attend 
e to goto 
wien to 
yn of Jesus 
fa how ble 


ee 


a ! | 


Ih} 
a 


tet | 


= 


EXTERiOR VIEW OF THE “ HIPPODROME, ” ee —_ 


Pes hs 


THE RICH FOOL. 465 


came, why He came, or what He has done. Business is so pressing, 
Undoubtedly he had the very best wine there was in the land, and 
it was always on his table, although he wasn’t a drunkard. He had 
the very best fruit, the very best fish and game upon his table. The 
very best material he wore-—perhaps he sent all the way down to 
Egypt to buy clothing for his wife and daughters. His turnout 
was the most stylish—probably he was often seen with a four-in- 
hand on the highway. Everybody said he was getting along nicely. 
If a friend came to see him, he would take him all around, and 
show him his land and his barns, and point to this and that part that 
he was going to pull down and make larger; business was increas- 
ing. He would show him all through his grand house, and tell how 
he was once a poor boy, how his father died, and how the creditors 
came and took everything—how he had commenced life with 
nothing, and he had made all his friend saw. Just like a great many 
men here. They will tell how they came to Chicago poor boys, 
how by hard work, by incessant toiling, they have gained what they 
have now, taking all the glory to themselves, instead of giving it to 
God. 

Look at him! If a man cheated him out of five dollars how he 
would resent it. Shrewd, nractical business man: and yet the 
devil was cheating him out of his soul. That is the way to-day, 
The world calls successful men—though they neglect their eternal 
welfare—shrewd, practical men. Oh, how blind—how short-sighted 
they are! They are just living for time. The great trouble with 
this man was, he was blind—he v.as just living from the cradle to the 
grave. He didn’t want to take death into his plans. “In every 
man’s garden there is a sepulchre.” My friends, in every man’s 
home there is a sepulchre. Death is inevitable, and is not a man 
mad who does not take it into his plans? 

Look at him! One night he is in the drawing-room of this 
beautiful palatial home, and he stands with an architect looking 
over plans. He is going to have a new barn built. It is going to 
be the best that money can erect. He doesn’t want any of his neigh- 
bors to approach him. It is going to be the very best. The archi- 
tect has gone away, and he stands there looking over the plans. 
His family have retired, and all the servants have gone to bed. 
The doors and windows are all double-locked, double-barred, sealed, 
chained—fastened securely ; but a stranger comes in slowly and lays 
_ acold hand upon him, and says, “Come! I must take thee away.” 


30 


466 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


‘Who art thou, stranger?” “Iam. Death.” He should not have 
been any stranger to him. The idea of Death being a stranger to 
any of us. Why, death is all around us. No doubt he had attended 
many funerals, and, perhaps, acted as pall-bearer. Perhaps he was 
like some people in Chicago; he never heard a sermon except when 
he attended a funeral. He had heard a setmon then and had seen 
the body laid in the ground, and now his time has come. He 
wants to bribe Death, and offers him thousands of dollars to give 
him a little more time; but he can not bribe Death. You can 
bribe politicians, you may bribe these business men, but there is an 
officer that never can be bought, never can be bribed, and when he 
comes, we have to obey his summons. When Death says, “‘ Come, 
you must go with me,” we have to obey him. When Death entered 
that chamber and said, “Come, I want thee,” he might have cried, 
“Let me live a little longer; let me have these places finished ; 
just a few years longer.” “Come,” says Death, “come.” “ Why, 
what are you going to do with me? Where are you going to take 
me?” “You have had time enough to see to that; you must 
come now.” The man weeps and cries, “I’ve got a loving wife, I 
have loving children, I have got a perfect palace—a beautiful home, 
which I have been all my life preparing; I’ve just got it fixed up now; 
don’t summon me away now; oh, Death, spare me a little longer.” 
Like that queen he cries, “O for an inch of time!” But says Death, 
“Come!” and lays his cold hand upon that heart, and it ceases to 
beat. Perhaps when the servants come in they find him sitting at his 
desk dead. The news spreads through the house, and that wife learns 
that she is a widow. I see that widow and those children gathering 
around the body of that father. The family physician comes. He 
looks at that body and puts his hand on that pulse, but the pulse that 
told the man how fast he was traveling toward eternity has ceased to 
beat. There is a stir in that community next morning—“ Squire so- 
and-so is dead; he was a shrewd man ; practical, successful man.” 
Perhaps, at the funeral, the whole community turned out, and prob- 
ably got a minister, as they get them in our day, to come to the 
funeral and deliver a eulogy over him, and say he was very benevo- 
lent to the poor; he was very philanthropic, and held him up as an 
example. It seems to me there is more lying at funerals than any- 
where else. Men stand up and pronounce a eulogy over men who 
have lived a churchless, Godless life—who have gone down to a 
Christless, Godless grave, and hope, because they have been wise and 


== —) ote a ee A Ls ee ee ee ee en 


OD *®, 


tat 
past 


WH OX, NM Sey OS 8 


VERS. 


uld not have 
a stranger to 
had attended 
rhaps he was 
except when 
and had seen 
s come. He 
lars to give 
h. You can 
it there is an 
and when he 
jays, “ Come, 
leath entered 
t have cried, 
ces finished ; 
ie.” Why, 
bing to take 
7; you must 
oving wife, I 
utiful home, 
ixed up now; 
ttle longer.” 
says Death, 

| it ceases to 
sitting at his 
t wife learns 
en gathering 
comes. He 
1e pulse that 
las ceased to 
-“‘ Squire so- 
essful man.” 
t, and prob- 
‘ome to the 
ery benevo- 
im up as an 
Is than any- 
er men who 
down to a 
sen wise and 


THE RICH FOOL, 467 


good to the poor, they have gone to a better world. God sees differ- 
ently. You and I maytry to make out this man as a shrewd man, a 
wise man, a man to be held up as an example, but just see what the 
Son of Man says about him. He says such a man is an abomination 
to God. The Son of Man says,“ Thou fool.” He wrote his epitaph, 
and it has been handed down to us as a warning—handed down for 
eighteen hundred years. 

I can imagine some of you saying, “If I had known that he 
would have talked about death to-night, I would not have come. 
Why doesn’t he talk about life, about happiness? Why doesn’t he tell 
us about how to get on in business—how to get through the battle 
of life? Why does he speak about death only?” Twill tell you 
why it is. It is because nine out of every ten die unexpectedly; it 
is because nine out of every ten die wholly unprepared. They may 
have been warned, death may have come very near, it might hav: 
entered their house and taken away a loved wife, loved children, a 
loved father or mother—death may have come into their homes 
four, five, six, seven, ten times, and taken relatives from their midst, 
yet they’re unprepared. Do you know that six millions of people 
die annually in this world? Since I came here and began preaching 
in this Tabernacle, death has thrown its mantle around many a one. 
Do you remember that Death, in this cold, dark, bleak night, 1s do- 
ing his work? I am speaking to some who may be in eternity to- 
morrow. I come to tell you to be prepared. Is not it downright 
folly to spend your lives in piling up wealth, aid to die as this man 
died, without hope, without Christ, without eternal life ? Let me 
call your attention to this. The sin of this man was simply neglect, 
it is clear. We can not condemn his business ; it was honest, legiti- 
mate. But the thing we do condemn is, that he neglected to secure 
his soul’s salvation. A great many say, “Am I not kind to the 
poor, am I not honorable in all my transactions, do I not pay a 
hundred cents on the dollar always?” But are you honest to your 
soul’s salvation? You may fold your arms and depend upon your 
deeds, but if you do not seek salvation in this world, you will be lost. 
You know that there are three steps down the hill, and they are 
to neglect, ‘to refuse, and to despise. Now all in this audience are 
standing on some of the steps of this ladder. You.can see if a man 
neglects his salvation he will be lost. All you men, if you neglect 
your business, leave it to itself, you know you will soon become 
bankrupt. And if a man wants to die, all he has to do is to 


468 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS, 


neglect to cail in a doctor. Look at a general of an army 
of ten thousand men. He knows that there is an army of 
ten thousand coming to meet him, but he goes and takes his glass 
and sees in the distance another army of ten thousand men who are 
coming up to reinforce his enemy. He knows he can not delay ; if 
he does he will soon be overwhelmed by the twenty thousand men 
ahead of him. A man who neglects his soul’s salvation does not 


look at what is ahead of him, and the enemy comes up and over-' 


whelins him. Death comes, as it probably came to this man, at the 
midnight hour, unexpectedly and unbidden. You know more men 
die at night than in the day—from twelve to three o’clock in the 
morning. How many die unexpectedly. Look at the millions and 
millions who die unexpectedly. Although we live the allotted time 
——three-score and ten—when death comes it comes unexpectedly, 
This man had provided for his family; he had built up a great busi- 
ness, had provided for his own wants, but he made no provision for 
his own soul. You might have gone to his house and taken up a 
pencil and written on everything he possessed, “Thou fool.” He 
spent ail bis life in accumulating money, and then he had to leave it 
all. A sailor was telling a man that his father and his grandfather 
and his great-grandfather were all drowned at sea, and the man said, 
“Why don’t you get prepared to die, then; you may be drowned any 
day, too?” “Where did your father die?” inquired the sailor. 
“On land.” “And your grandfather?” “Qn land.” “And your 
great-grandfather?” “On land, too.” “Are you prepared to 
dier” “Well, no.” “Why don’t you get prepared?” asked the 
sailor. He didn’t think he was in danger continually himself, but 
that the sailor was. 

I think the greatest text that is given to us is, “ Prepare to meet 
thy God.” Are you ready? Why do you neglect any longer to ac- 
cept salvation? Ali the children of Israel had to do to be cured 
was to look on that brazen serpent; they were healed instantly. If 
they neglected to look upon that serpent they died. Al! you have 
got to do is to look zpon Christ and receive life. Look at that In- 
dian who is in his canoe. He has gone to sleep. Perhaps he may 
be dreaming about the hunting-grounds, perhaps he may be dream- 
ing of his friends in the Indian village. Yet he is in the rapids 
which are taking him over the cataract. He is not rowing to-vard 
it; he is sound asleep, the paddle lies in the bottom of that canoe. 
Without any effort of his own, the current is taking him toward the 


oe ee eee ee ee ee ee ae 


yo ee «+ | See. ee ee ee | re ee ee ee ee ae 7 Y 


~ ~*~) 


Fe shot POS 


ERS. 


f an army 
n army of 
es his glass 
1en who are 
t delay; if 
dusand men 
on does not 


Dp and over-' 


man, at the 
y More men 
lock in the 
nillions and 
llotted time 
expectedly, 
great busi- 
rovision for 
taken upa 
fool.” He 
to leave it 
prandfather 
ie man said, 
rowned any 
the sailor. 
‘And your 
repared to 

asked the 
imself, but 


ire to meet 
nger to ac- 
» be cured 
tantly. If 
| you have 
at that In- 
ips he may 
be dream- 
the rapids 
ng to-vard 
hat canoe. 
toward the 


THE RICH FOOL. 469 


falls. By and by the poor man wakes up, he sees he is on the brink 
of the cataract. Ina few moments he will plunge over. He gives 
an unearthly cry, and down he goes into the iaws of death. How 
many men are here to-night who are in the current that is carrying 
them to the cataract—rushing on to judgment. A great many things 
in this land are not sure. You may buy grain, you may buy land, you ~ 
are not sure whether the value will go up or down; but there is one’ 
thing that you are sure of, and that is death. “For it is appointed 
unto men once to Cie, but after this the judgment.” After that the 
judgment. You can be sure of that. 

Now the question is, Are you ready? I can imagine some of you 
saying, “I’ve got time enough; I don’t propose to settle this ques- 
tion just yet; there’s a good many years before me.” Is there 
a man who can say this? Is there a man who can say, “To- 
morrow is mine?’ We are on a journey toward the judg- 
ment. Have you got a hope in the future—have you that 
which will take you over the grave—have you that power which 
will carry you through death and judgment? You go to Graceland 
and summon up the dead. Bring them into this hall in the midst 
of this audience with their ghastly winding-sheets and see how many 
of them died old. You will find that more have died young than 
old. Why, whole populations are swept into eternity before they 
reach their allotted age. Instead of three-score and ten, the allotted 
age nowadays is about thirty years. My friends, we will soon be in 
eternity. What are you doing? Are you reflecting? 

Some of you are on the second round of the ladder. You are 
ref s.g. I was talking to a lady last night, and she said calmly, 
coc .y, and deliberately, “I don’t want Him; I don’t want Christ.” 
“Do you really mean this?” I asked. “Yes, I don’t want Him.” 
I presume a few years ago she would not have said this, but she had 
got on the second round of the ladder; and some now despise it. 
If you get a tract upon the streets you will just tear it up. You mock 
or make light of the God of your father or your mother. You have 
got on the bottom round of the ladder and you despise the gift of 
God. My friends, that is the last round. A man has sunk pretty 
low when he despises the gift of God—when he hurls it back to 
God and says, “I will not have it.” 

Now, | want to ask you this question, What are you going to do? 
Will you think a few minutes, young men?. Will you stop for a 
few minutes and just think? I wish I could wake this audience up 


) 


470 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


for five minutes. Just ask yourselves where you are; or to make it 
more personal, “ What am1? Where am I going?” A dying man 
called a Hindoo priest to his bedside, and asked him where he was 
going. The priest said he was going into an animal. “ Well, after 
that where am I going?” “Going into another animal.” Where 
next?” “Into another animal;” and he went on telling the man 
he would enter into this and that animal until he stopped. Then 
the man asked, “ Where shall I go after that?” The poor heathen 
priest could not tell him. Ah, won’t you settle this question to- 
night? “What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world 
and lose his own soul?” Suppose a man has the whole wealth 
of Chicago rolled at his feet, and then he dies, what has he gained? 

A father was on his death-bed lately, and he called in his son. 
the boy was careless; he would not take death into account.’ He 
‘vanted to enjoy the pleasures of life, and he took no heed for a 
juture. The old man said, “ My son, I want to ask you one favor, 
and that is, when I am dead I want you to promise me you will 
come into this room for five minutes every day for thirty days. 
You are to come alone; not to bring a book with you, and sit 
acre.” The thoughtless young man promised to doit. The father 
died. 

The first thing when he went into that room that he thought of 
was his father’s prayer—his father’s words, and his father’s God, and 
before the five minutes expired he was crying out, “ God, be merci- 
ful to me.” It seems to me if I could get men to ask themselves, 
“What is going to be my end?” “Where am I going to spend 
eternity ?” it would not be long before they would come to Christ. 
You may be moralists, you may be proprietors of a successful busi- 
ness, you may be what the world calls successful business men, yet 
“Where are you going to spend eternity?” Can you tell me where 
you will be next year ?—can you tell me where you are going to be 
ten years hence? Can you tell me? I want to read a little notice 
on a card which is headed, “I have missed it at last.” 

A few months ago, in New York, a physician called upon a young 
man who was ill. He sat for a little by the bedside, examining his 
patient, and then he honestly told him the sad intelligence that he 
had but a short time to live. The young man was astonished; he 
did not expect it would come to that so soon. He forgot that 
death comes “in such an hour as ye think not.” At length he 
looked up in the face of the doctor, and with a most despairing 


‘to make it 
dying man 
1ere he was 
Well, after 
* “Where 
ig the man 
ed. Then 
or heathen 
uestion to- 
thole world 
ole wealth 
he gained ? 
in his son. 
ount.’ He 
heed for a 
one favor, 
le you will 
hirty days. 
ou, and sit 
The father 


hought of 
's God, and 
, be merci- 
hemselves, 
= to spend 
to Christ. 
ssful busi- 
; men, yet 
me where 
ing to be 
ttle notice 


n a young 
nining his 
-e that he 
ished; he 
rgot that 
length he 
despairing 


THE RICH FOOL, 47r 


_ countenance repeated the expression, “I have missed it—at fast.” 


‘What have you missed ?”’ inquired the tender-hearted, sympathiz- 


‘ing physician. “I have missed it—at last,” again the young man 


replied. The doctor, not in the least comprehending what the poor 
young man meant, said, “ My dear young man, will you be so good 
as to tell me what you—” He instantly interrupted, saying, “Oh, 


doctor! it is a sad story—a sad, sad story that I have to tell. But 


I have missed it.” ‘Missed what?” “ Doctor, I have missed the 
salvation of my soul.” “Oh! say not so. It is not so. Do you 
remember the thief on the cross?” “ Yes, I remember the thief 
on the cross. And I remember that Ze never said to the Holy 
Spirit, Go thy way. But Jdid. And now He is saying to me, Go 
your way.” He lay gasping awhile, and looking up with a vacant, 
staring eye, he said, “I was awakened and was anxious about my 
soul a little time ago; but I did not want religion then. Some- 
thing seemed to say to me, ‘Don’t postpone it.’ I knew I ought 
not.to do it. I knew I was a great sinner and needed a Saviour, I 
resolved, however, to dismiss the subject for the present. Yet I 
could not get my own consent to do it until I had promised that I 
would take it up again, at a time not remote.and more favorable. 
I bargained away, insulted, and grieved away the Holy Spirit. I~ 
never thought of coming to this. I meant to have religion, and 
make my salvation sure. And now I have missed it—at last.’ 
“You remember,” said the doctor, “that there were some who came 
at the eleventh hour.” “My eleventh hour,” he rejoined, “was 
when I had that call of the Spirit. I have had none since—shall 
not have. I am given over to be lost.” “Not lost,” said the doc- 
tor, “you may yet be saved.” “No—not saved—never. He tells 
me I may go my way now. I know it—I feel it here,” laying his 
hand upon his heart. Then he burst out in despairing agony, 
“Qh, I have missed it! I have sold my soul for nothing—a feather, 
a straw—undone forever.” This was said with such unutterable, 
indescribable despondency, that no words were said in reply. After 
lying a few moments he raised his head, and looking all around the 
room as if for some desired object—turning his eyes in every direc- 
tion—then burying his face in the pillow, he again exclaimed, in 
agony and horror, “Oh! I have missed it at last,” and he died. 
Dear friends, you may not hear my voice again. I may be speak- 
ing to you for the last time. You may never come into this Taber- 
nacle again, and I beg of you, asa friend, and as a brother, do not 


RR IR tacit al a fh Re A Lo eee SOME TSG vis 
iis . aR Graig susie chat Sin ath 
a ; ros i 


af 


472 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


go out of this Tabernacle without salvation. Let this night be the . 
night that you will accept everlasting life. Let this be the night on 
which you will cry from the depth of your heart, “Let me have 
Christ-—let me haye salvation.” “Though it cost me my right 
hand or my right eye I will have Christ to-night.” May that be 
_ the cry of every one here to-night, and salvation be accepted for 
time and eternity by every soul in this building. May God wake 
up every soul here to-night, and when the summons comes, may 
you go to triumph over the grave and so enter into a glorious im- 
mortality. 


"ERS, 


night be the . 
the night on 
et me have 
1e my right 
May that be 
accepted for 
y God wake 
comes, may 
glorious im- 


LVI. 


PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN; or, PRIDE AND 
: PENITENCE. 


LUKE xviii, 9-14. 


WO men went up to the Temple—one to pray to himself, and 
the other to pray to God, and I think it will be safe to divide 
the audience into two bodies, and put them under these two 
heads. I think, however, whether we divide the audience or not, 
we come under these two heads—those who have the spirit of the 
publican, and those who have the spirit of the Pharisee. You can 
find that the whole community may be divided into these two 
classes. The spirit of the prodigal and the spirit of an elder brother 
are still in the world; the spirits of Cain and Abel are still in the 
world, and these two are representative men. One of them trusted 
in his own righteousness, and the other didn’t have any trust in it; 
and I say I think all men will come under these two heads. They 
have either given up all their self-righteousness—renounced it all, 
and turned their back upon it—or else they are clinging to their 
own righteousness; and you will find that these self-righteous men 
who are always clinging to their own righteousness, are continually 
measuring themselves by their neighbors. “I thank God that I am 
not as other men are.” That was the spirit of that Pharisee, and 
that is the spirit to-day of one class in this community, and the 
other class comes under the head of this other mar. 
Now, let us look at the man Christ pictured first. It is evident 
that he was full of egotism, fell of conceit, full of pride; and I 
believe, as I have said before .». this platform, that is one of the 
greatest enemies the Son of God has to-day; and I believe it keeps : 
more men from the kingdom of God than anything else. Pride can a 
grow on any soil, in any climate—no place is too hot for it, and no Fe 
place is too cold for its growth. How much misery has it caused ‘2 
in this world! How many men here are kept from salvation by 
(473) 


474 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


pride! Why, it sprung up into Heaven, and for it Lucifer 
was cast out; by pride, Nebuchadnezzar lost his throne. As 
_he walked through Babylon, he cried, “Is not this a great 
Babylon which J have built?” and he was hurled from his. throne. 
How many men who have become drunkards, who are all broken up 
—will gone, health gone—are just as full of pride as the sun is of 
light. It won’t le: them come to Christ and be saved. A great 
many live like this Pharisee—only in the form of religion; they 
don’t want the wheat, only the husk; they don’t want the kernel, 
only the shell. . How many men are there in Chicago who are just 
living on empty form. They say their prayers, but they don’t mean 
anything. Why, this Pharisee said plenty of prayers, but how did 
he pray? He prayed with himself. He might as well pray to this 
post. He didn’t pray to God, who knew his heart a thousand times 
better than he did himself, He thought he knew himself. He for- 
gct that he was asa sepulchre, full of dead men’s bones; forgot that 
his heart was rotten, corrupt, and vile, and he comes and spreads 
out his hands and looks up to Heaven. Why, the very angels in 
Heaver. veil their faces before God as they cry, “ Holy, holy, holy.” 
But this Pharisee comes into the temple and spreads out his hands, 
and says, “ Lord, I thank Thee that I am not as other men are; | 
fast twice a week.” He set before God what he had done in com- 
parison with other men, and was striking a balance and making out 
God to be his debtor, as thousands in Chicago are doing to-day; 
and then he says, “I give one-tenth of all I possess.” I suppose 
if he was living in Chicago now, and we had gone to him and asked 
him for a donation to put up this Tabernacle, he would have said i 
“Well, I think it will do good; yes, I think it will—it may reach 


the vagabonds and outcasts—I don’t need it, of course—but if it . 


will reach that class it will do good. I will give fifty dollars, 
especially if you can get it in the morning papers; if you can have 
it announced, ‘John Jones gave fifty dollars to build the Taber- 
nacle.’” That’s the way some of the people give donations to God’s 
cause; they give in a patronizing way, but in this manner God won't 
accept it. If your heart don’t go with your gift, God will not accept 
it. This Pharisee says, “I give one-tenth of all I have; I keep up 
the services in the Temple; I fast twice a week.” He fasted twice 
a week, although once was only called for, and he thought because 
of this he was far above other men. A great many people now- 
adays think because they don’t eat meat, only fish, on Fridays, they 


VERS, 


r it Lucifer 
throne. As 
his a great 
n his. throne. 
ll broken up 
1e sun is of 
od. A great 
ligion; they 
_ the kernel, 
who are just 
7 don’t mean 
aut how did 
pray to this 
usand times 
lf. He for- 
forgot that 
and spreads 
‘y angels in 
holy, holy.” 
t his hands, 
men are; | 
one in com- 
making out 
ing to-day; 
I suppose 

. and asked 
have said : 
may reach 


——Dbut if it . 


fty dollars, 
u can have 
the Taber- 
1s to God’s 
God won’t 
not accept 
I keep up 
isted twice 
ht because 
ople now- 
days, they 


\ 


PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN. 475. 


deserve great credit, although they go on sinning all the week. Laok 
at this prayer; there’s no confession there. He had got so bad and 
the devil had so covered up his sins that he was above confession. 
The first thing we have to do when we come to God is to con- 
fess, If there is any sin clustering around the heart, bear in 
mind we can have no communion with God. It is because we 
have sin about our hearts that our prayers don’t go any higher 
than our head. We can not get God’s favor if we have any iniquity in 
our heart. People, like the Pharisee, have only been educated to 
pray. If they didn’t pray every night their conscience would 
trouble them, and they would get out of bed and say their prayers ; 
but the moment they get off their knees, perhaps you may hear 
them swearing. A man may just as well get a string of beads and 
pray to them. It would do him as much good. This Pharisee’s 
prayer showed no spirit of contrition; there was no petition ; he 
didn’t ask anything from God. That is a queer kind of prayer. 
“Lord, I thank Thee that I am not as other men are, extortioners, 
unjust, adulterous, or even as the poor publican.” Nota petition 
in his prayer. It was a prayerless prayer —it was downright 
mockery. But how many men have just got into that cradle and 
been rocked to sleep by the devil. A short time ago I said toa 
man, “ “Are you a Christian?” “Of course Iam; I say my prayers 
every night.” “But do you ever pray?” “Didn't I tell youl 
prayed?” he answered. “But do you ever pray?” “Why, of 
course I do; haven’t I said so?” was his reply. I found that he 
prayed, but he only went through the form, and after a little I 
found that he had been in the habit of swearing. “How is this?” 
I asked, “swearing and praying! Do your prayers ever go any 
higher than your head?” “ Well,” he replied, “I have sometimes 
thought that they didn’t.” My friends, if you are not in com- 
munion with God, your prayers are but forms; you are living in 
formalism, and your prayers will go no higher than your head. 
How many people in this assembly just go through the form. 
They can not rest until they say their prayers. How many are 


_ there with whom it is only a matter of education. 


But this man trusted in his own righteousness; he ignored the 
mercy of God, the love of Jesus Christ. He was measuring himself 
by his own rule. Now, if you want to measure yourself, do it by 
God’s law; by God’s requirements. A great many people have a 
tule of their own by which they measure themselves, and by that 


y 


476 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


rule are perfectly ready and willing to forgive themselves. So it was 
with this Pharisee. The idea of coming to God and ask His forgive- 
ness never enters his mind. While talking to a man—one of those 
Pharisees—some time ago about God and his need of Christ, he 
said, “I can do without Christ; I don’t want Him ; Iam ready to 
stand before God any time.” That man was trusting in his own 
righteousness. There are a good many in Chicago like this man; 
they think they can get on without Christ—without a mediator, 
Now take a good look at this man. You know I have an idea that the 
Bible islike an album. I go into a man’s house, and, while waiting for 
him, I take up an album froma table and open it. Ilookata picture. 
“Why, that looks like a man I know.” I turn over and look at an- 
other. “Well, I know that man.” By and by I come upon another. 
“Why, that man looks like my brother.” I am getting pretty near 
home; I keep turning over the leaves. “ Well, I declare, there isa 
ian who lives in the street I do-——-why, he is my next-door neigh- 
bor.” And then I come upon another, and I see myself. My 
friends, if you read your Bibles you will find your own pictures 
there. It will just describe you. Now it may be there is.some 
Pharisee here to-night ; if there is, let him turn to the third chapter 


of John, and see what Christ said to that Pharisee: “ Except a | 


man be born again he can not enter the kingdom of God.” Nico- 
demus, no doubt, was one of the fairest specimens of a man in 
Jerusalem in those days, yet he had to be born again, else he 
couldn’t see the kingdom of God. But you may say, “I am not a 
Pharisee ; I am a poor, miserable sinner, too bad to come to Him.” 
Well, turn to the woman of Samaria, and see what He said to her. 

See what a difference there was between that publican and that 
Pharisee. There was as great a distance between them as between 
the sun and the moon. One was in the very highest station, and 
the other occupied the very worst. One had only himself and his 
sins to bring to God, and the other was trying to bring in his posi- 
tion and his aristocracy. I tell you, when a man gets a true sight 
_ of himself, all his position, and station, and excellences drop. See 
this prayer: “I thank God,” “I am not,” “I fast.” “I give,” “J 
possess.” Why, if he had delivered a long prayer, and it had been 
put into the hands of printers, they would have had to send out 
for-some “T's.” “I thank God,” “I,” “I,” “I.” When a man 
prays, not with himseif, but to God, he does not exalt himself, he 
doesn’t pass a eulogy upon himself. He falls flat down in the dust 


AYERS. 


ves. Soit was 
sk His forgive- 
—one of those 
1 of Christ, he 
I am ready to 
ng in his own 
like this man; 
it a mediator, 
n idea that the 
ile waiting for 
ok at a picture. 
nd look at an- 
upon another. 
ng pretty near 
lare, there isa 
ct-door neigh- 

myself. My 

own pictures 
here is.some 
third chapter 


“Except a | 


God.” Nico- 
of a man in 
gain, else he 
“Tam nota 
ome to Him.” 
e said to her. 
ican and that 
nas between 
t station, and 
mself and his 
x in his posi- 
s a true sight 
s drop. See 
“T give,” “I 
d it had been 
to send out 
When a man 
it himself, he 
min the dust 


PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN. 477 


before God. In that prayer you don’t find him thanking God for 
what He had done for him. It was a heathen, prayerless prayer— 
merely a form. I hope the day will come when formal prayers will 
be a thing of the past. I think the reason why we can not get more 
people out to the meetings is, because we have too many formal 
prayers in the churches. These formal Christians get up like this 
Pharisee, and thank God they are better than other men ; but when 
a man gets a look at himself, he comes in the spirit of the publican. 
You see this man standing praying with himself, but God could not 
give him anything. He was too full of egotism—too full of him- 
self. There was no religion in it. God could not bless him, 

Now, for a moment, take a look at that poor publican. Just give his 
prayer your attention. There was no capital “I” there, no exalting 
of himself—* God, be merciful to this Pharisee; God, be merciful to 
other people who have injured me; God, be merciful to the church 
members who have not been true to their belief.’ Was that his 
prayer? Thank God he got to himself. “God, be merciful to me, a - 
sinner.” It was very short. He had got his eye upon himself; he 
saw that his heart was vile; he could not lift his eyes to Heaven, 
but, thank God, he could lift his heart to Heaven. There is not a 
poor publican in the audience to-night but can send up this prayer, 


_ No matter what your past life has been—no matter if it has been as 


black as hell—if you but send up the prayer, it will be heard. He 
didn’t buy his own righteousness; and God heard his prayer. 
Spurgeon, speaking of that publican, said he had the soundest the- 
ology of any man in all England. He came before God, struck his 
hand on his heart, and cried, “ God, be merciful to me, a sinner.” 
There was a man at one of our meetings in New York City, who 
was moved by the Spirit of God. He said, “I am going home, and 
Iam not going to sleep to-night till Christ takes away my sin; if I 
have to stay up all night and pray, I’ll doit.” He had a good dis- 
tance to walk, and as he went along he thought, “ Why can’t I pray 
now as I go along, instead of waiting to go home?” But he did not 
know a prayer. His mother had taught him to pray, but it was so 
long since he had uttered a prayer that he had forgotten. However, 
the publican’s prayer came to his mind. | Everybody can say this 
prayer. That man in the gallery yonder, that young lady over 
there, “God, be merciful to me, a sinner.” May God write it on 
your hearts to-night. If you forget . : sermon, don’t forget that 
prayer. It is a very short prayer, and it has brought joy—salvation 


478 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


—to many a soul. Well, this prayer came to the man, and he be. 
gan, “God, be merciful to me, a »’ but before he had got to 
sinner God had blessed him. He got up in the young converts’ 
meeting and told us that as he said those words the light of eternal 
truth broke upon his soul—the light from the celestial regions of 
glory broke upon him—and when we left New York City he was 
walking in the righteousness of God. 

In a meeting recently a man got up. I didn’t know him at first. 
When I was here he wasa rum-seller, and broke up his business and 
went to the mountains. This is how it happened. When I was 
here before, he opened a saloon and a grand billiard hall. It was 
one of the most magnificent billiard halls on the West Side, all ele- 
gantly gilded and frescoed. For the opening he sent me an invita- 
tion to be present, which I accepted, and went around before he open- 
edit. I saw the partners, and asked them if they would allow me to 
bring a friend. They said certainly, but asked me who it was, 
Well, I said it wasn’t necessary to tell who it was; but I said, “I 
never go without him.” They began to mistrust me. “Who is it ?” 
they again inquired. “Well, I’ll come with him, and if I see any- 
thing wrong, I’ll ask him to forgive you.” “Come,” said they ; 
“we don’t want any praying.” “You've given me an invitation, 
and I’m going to come.” “ But if you do come, you needn’t pray.” 
“Well,” said I, “I'll tell you what we'll do, we’ll compromise the 
matter, and if you don’t want me to come and pray for you when 
you open, let me pray for both of you now,” which they agreed to. 
It turned out that one of them had a praying mother, and the 
prayer touched his heart, and the other had a sister in Heaven, I 
asked God to bless their souls, and just to break their business to 
pieces. In a few months their business did go all to pieces. The 
man who got up in the prayer-meeting told me a story that touched 
my soul. He said with his business he hadn’t prospered—he failed, 
and went away to the Rocky Mountains. Life became a burden to 
him, and he made up his mind that he would go to some part of 
the mountains and put an end to his days. He took a sharp 
knife with him which he proposed driving into his heart. He 
sought a part of the mountains to kill himself. He had the knife 
ready to plunge into his heart, when he heard a voice—it was the 


voice of his mother. He remembered her words when she was , 


dying, even though he were a boy. He heard her say, “ Johnny, if 
ever you get into trouble, pray.” That knife dropped from his 


AYERS, 


an, and he be. 
he had got to 
oung converts’ 
light of eternal 
tial regions of 
tk City he was 


w him at first, 
is business and 
When I was 

J hall. It was 
t Side, all ele. 
me an invita- 
efore he open- 
Id allow me to 
e who it was. 
but I said, “I 
“Who is it ?” 
if I see any- 
” said they; 
an invitation, 
needn’t pray.” 
mpromise the 
for you when 
1ey agreed to. 
ther, and the 
n Heaven. I 
ir business to 
pieces. The 
that touched 
ed—he failed, 
e a burden to 
some part of 
ook a sharp 
; heart. He 
iad the knife 
2—it was the 


rhen she was , 


“ Johnny, if 
ped from his 


PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN. 479 


hand, and he asked God to be merciful to him. He was accepted, 
and he came back to Chicago and lifted up his voice for Him. He 
may be in this Tabernacle to-night. Just the moment he cried for 
mercy he got it. If you only cry, “God, be merciful to me, a sin- 
ner,” He will hear you. Is there anything to hinder you from do- 
ing this to-night ? is there anything to hinder any man, woman, or 
child in this hall to-night from sending u,) this prayer? What a 
glorious thing it would be if every soul in this hall would but lift 
up their hearts with the prayer, “ God, me merciful to me, a sinner,” 
Now, a man asked me the other day, “ How is it that a man who 
has lived an ungodly life can come in here and be saved all at once?” 
Why, God so loves the sinner that He is willing to give them salva- 
tion instantly—He wants to save every one now in Chicago. The 
trouble is that we don’t want God to be merciful; we don’t want 
His forgiveness. God is full of compassion and love. It is the 
spirit of the devil that makes you believe the sins committed during 
the past twenty years can not be forgiven to-night. My friends, 
won't you try Him? But I will take you who believe this way, 
upon your own ground. Here is a father down here. He is full of 
self-righteousness; he is a Pharisee. He has a boy whom he has 
not seen for twenty years. Well, as he goes home to-night his 
servants tell him, “ Your absent son has returned.” “ What!” he 
exclaims ; “my absent boy, Johnny, here—in this house?” « Yes; 
he is down in the kitchen; we wanted him to go into the parlor, 
but he wouldn’t; he said the kitchen was good enough for him.” 
He tells those servants to take him to his son; and for a moment 
the boy looks at him. “ Father, father,” he cries, “I have been bad; 
I haven’t done a good act in twenty years; I have been very unkind 
to you ; but, father, won’t you forgive me?” Say, father, wouldn't you 
forgive him? Wouldn’t you? I would like to seea man in Chicago who 
would not. I can give you a little experience of my own family. Be- 
fore I was sourteen years old the first thing I remember was the 
death of my father. He had been unfortunate in business and 
failed. Soon after his death the creditors came in and took every- 
thing. My mother was left with a large family of childrens One 
calamity after another swept over the entire household. Twins 
were added to the family, and my mother was taken sick. The eld- 
est boy was fifteen years of age, and to him my mother looked 
as a stay in her calamity, but all at once that boy became a wan- 


' 


- ’ ‘ 
480 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


derer. He had been reading some of the trashy novels, and the 
belief had seized him that he had only to go away and make a for- 
tune. Away he went. I can remember how eagerly she used to 
look for tidings of that boy; how she used to send us to the post- 
office to see if there was a letter from him, and I recollect how we 
used to come back with the sad news, “No letter.” I remember 
how, in the evenings, we would sit beside he: in that New England 
home, and we would talk about our father; but the moment the 
name of that boy was mentioned, she would hush us into silence. 
Some nights when the wind was very high, and the house, which 
was upon a hill, would tremble at every gust, the voice of my mother 
was raised in prayer for that wanderer who had treated her so un- 
kindly. I used to think she loved him more than all the rest of us 
put together, and I believe she did. Ona Thanksgiving day—you 
know that is a family day in New England—she used to set a chair 
for him, thinking he would return home. Her family grew up and 
her boys left home. When I got so that I could write, I sent let- 
ters all over the country, but could find no trace of him, One day 
while in Boston the news reached me that he had returned. While 
in that city I remember how I used to look for him in every store— 
he had a mark on his face—but I never got any trace. One day 
while my mother was sitting at the door, a stranger was seen com- 
ing toward the house, and when he came to the door he stopped, 
My mother didn’t know her boy. He stood there with folded arms 
. and great beard flowing down his breast, the tears trickling down his 
face. When my mother saw those tears she cried, “Oh, it’s my lost 
son,” and entreated him to come in. But he stood still. “No, 
mother,” he said, “ I will not come in till I hear first you have for- 
given me.” Do you believe that she was not willing to forcive him? 
Do you think she was likely to keep him standing long there? She 
rushed to the threshold and threw her arms around | ‘m4, and 
breathed forgiveness, Ah, sinner, if you but ask God to be merci- 
ful to you, a sinner—ask Him for forgiveness, although your life has 
been bad-—ask Him for mercy, He will not keep you long wait- 
ing for an answer. May that be the cry of every lost soul in this 
Tabernacle to. night: “God, be merciful to me, a sinner.” Now, do 
you want to have mercy? Say, young man, will you ask Him to- 
night? Young ludy, will this be your cry to-night: “ God, be mer- 
ciful to me, a sinner?” May the love of God break every obdu- 


3 2) | fA cf ih 


‘ 


1VERS, 


ovels, and the 
d make a for. 
y she used to 
s to the post- 
ollect how we 
I remember 
New England 
moment the 
into silence. 
house, which 
of my mother 
ed her so un- 
the rest of us 
ing day—you 
to set a chair 
grew up and 
e, I sent let- 
m. One day 
‘ned. While 
every store— 
e. One day 
as seen com- 
he stopped. 
folded arms 
ing down his 
, it’s my lost 
still. “No, 
ou have for- 
forcive him? 
there? She 
| ‘iid, and 
to be merci- 
your life has 
u long wait- 
soul in this 
”” Now, do 
ask Him to- 
70d, be mer- 
every obdu- 


\ 
a 
PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN. ‘481 


rate heart here to-night, and may this 
Don’t have so much pride; don't have 
that’s the spirit that keeps you from entering the inquiry-room and | 
coming to the God of love, the God of compassion, the God of 
mercy, of peace, of joy, of everlasting happiness, Let every man 
and woman in this assemblage out of Christ take the place of this 
publican and go into the inquiry-room, 
31 


be the cry of every sinner, 
the spirit of the Pharisee— 


LVII. 


“WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE?” 


SAL. vi. 7, 8, 9: “ Be not deceived ; God is not mocked ; for whatsoever a man 
soweth, that also shall he reap. For he that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh 
reap corruption ; but he that soweth to the Spirit shali of the Spirit reap life ever. 
lasting. And let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall reap, 
if we faint not.” 


HERE are some passages which we do not have to prove by 
the Word of God, but merely by our own experience. Your 
own lives will prove many passages of Scripture. You can 

take up the daily papers and see them fulfilled under your own eyes. 

This is one of them. Perhaps there has not been a text of Scripture 

run out in this Tabernacle as this one has. Night after night we 

have spoken about it. Night after night Mr. Sankey has sung out, 

“'VW/hatsoever a man soweth, that shall he reap.” My friends, 

we can not quote it too often. We want to quote it, and 

preach it till it gets down to the hearts of the people. Now 
it is very natural to be deceived. I suppose there is not a man 
or woman here but who has been deceived by his or her most 
intimate friends. You have beer deceived by your own friends, 
and you have been deceived by your enemies, and how many could 
rise up here and say they have not been deceived by themselves. 

How many of us have found our own heart more treacherous than 

anything else. How many of us have not found the truth of that 

passage, “ The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and des- 
perately wicked.’ : 

We can be deceitful to each other, to our friends and to our- 
selves, but bear in mind, we can not deceive God. How often does 
man find that Satan has deceived him? But has he ever found 
God deceiving him? I have never found a man who has said that 
he has seen or that he has heard of anybody whom God has de- 
ceived. How many times has man said he has been deceived by 


his fellows-—by his own treacherous heart ; and our experience 
(494) 


LO 


tsoever a man 
all of the flesh 
t reap life ever- 
we shali reap, 


to prove by 
nce. Your 

You can 
Ir Own eyes, 
of Scripture 
er night we 
is sung out, 
My friends, 
ote it, and 


ople. Now 
not a man 


or her most 
wn. friends, 
many could 
themselves. 
1erous than 
ruth of that 
xs, and des- 


and to our- 
, often does 
ever found 
as said that 
aod has de- 
deceived by 
experience 


“WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE?" 


in this direction only shows that we can not rely upon man, upon 
ourselves, but only upon God, 

Now, it is a law of nature that if a man sows he will reap what he 
sows. If a man sows watermelons, he doesn’t look for cauliflower; if 
a man sows potatoes, he doesn’t look for cabbages; if he sows onions, 
he doesn’t look for corn. If he plants potatoes, he expects potatoes ; 
if he sows corn, he looks for corn; or wheat, he expects to reap 
wheat. Soin the natural world a man expects to reap what he sows, 
Tf’ a man learns a carpenter's or a builder’s trade, he expects to 
put up buildings for a living. If a man toils and studies hard for a 
profession, if he is a iawyer, he expects to practice law. He doecn’t 
expect to have to preach the Gospel for a living. He has been 
sowing for years, and he expects to reap. As a man sows, so he 
expects to reap. This is the law in the natural world, and so it is 


with the spiritual. “ Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be} 


comforted ;” “ Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called 
the children of God; “ Blessed are they which hunger and thirst 
for righteousness’ sake.” Why ? Because they shall get rich? No; 
“for they shall be filled.” Now you see this is the result of spiritual 
conditions, and you will find it carried out all through this world. 
If a man is drunken and dissipated we look as a natural consequence” 
of his dissipation to see him go to ruin. A friend of mine who was 
coming down with me to-night said, “ When I look back I can see 
that I started wrong when I came here. It seems as if I must have 


been blind. I did not see this till within the last two or three | 


weeks.” My friends, that’s what Satan does with a man—he just 
blinds him, and when he has got a man blinded, he does anything 
he wants with him. It is very hard to make men understand this 
simple truth, that they will have to reap what they sow, especially 
young men from seventeen to twenty-one. That, you know, is the 
ugly stage. There is more trouble with them then that at any other 
stage. Iknew a good deal more than my mother or any of my 
friends. You take @ young man at that age, and you'll find he 
knows a great deal more than his father, his grandfather, or even 
his great-grandfather, all put together. “He is wise in his own 
conceit.” It is during that ugly age that characters are forming for 
good or evil, and bear in mind, young men, that ‘ Whatsoever a 
man soweth, that shall he also reap.” If a man sows tares, he has 
got to reap them. {t may not be fo-morrow, or next week, or next 
year, but the time of reaping will assuredly come; and when the 


483. 


484 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS, 


reaping time comes, you will moan bitterly; then you will like to 
change places with those Christians whom you despise now. When 
the reaping time comes, you would give a good deal if you could 
eXchange places with the humblest-looking Christian. I suppose 
that Cain would give a good deal to exchange places with Abel to- 
night. Do you think Pilate would not like to change places with 


Elijah, with Obadiah, or Peter to-night? Don't you think King 


Nero would like to exchange places now with Paul? Paul is reap- 
ing what he sowed, and so is Nero. All through Scripture you can 
see the proof of this text. Don’t you think that the rich man at 
whose door the beggar Lazarus jay, would like to exchange places 
with the poor Christian now? And bear in mind that you may 
look upon Christians with contempt, but the time is coming when 
you will give anything to exchange places with the meanest Chris- 
tian that walks the streets of Chicago. 
' Lused to believe twenty years ago in this text, but I believe it 
more now than ever I did. The longer I live, the more I become 
convinced of its awful truth. You know, I used to live in Chicago, 
and I used to go from house to house among the poor; and in go- 
ing among the poor, I gained no little experience of the rich people. 
In visiting the poor, I became acquainted with a good many rich 
families, and there is scarcely a week passes now but I hear of rich 
families who have gone down to ruin. Just this afternoon I heard 
of a family who twenty years ago occupied a position among the 
best. They had a beautiful daughter, who could have adorned any 
station, and a lovely home, and I heard to-day that they had gone 
down to ruin. They looked upon Christianity with scorn and con- 
tempt. The father brought his chiidren up to treat all religion with 
contempt, and his sons have gone down to their graves drunkards, 
and his daughter has died of a broken heart. Yes, a man who sows 
tares must reap them, and sometimes the harvest is a whirlwind. 
Now, just let us divide that text up; not that I want to preach 
under different heads, but just for the sake of greater clearness. 
When a man sows, he expects to reap. This truth must be aamitted 
first. A farmer that planted grain and never reaped his fields, you 
would say had gone clear mad. No man sows who doesn’t expect 


to reap. That is just what he does expect to do. The next point :: 


A man always expects to reap more than hé sowed, If he sows a 


if he sows a bushel he expects a harvest of five hundred bushels: 


<a & @& ae! Be 


Pe ee ee ae 


VERS, 


u will like to 
10w. When 
if you could 
I suppose 
rith Abel to- 
places with 


think King 


aul is reap- 
ture you can 
rich man at 
lange places 
at you may 
oming when 
anest Chris- 


I believe it 
re I become 
in Chicago, 
; and in go- 
rich people. 
1 many rich 
hear of rich 
oon I heard 
among the 
\dorned any 
ey had gone 
rn and con- 
eligion with 
drunkards, 
n who sows 
hirlwind. 
it to preach 
r clearness. 
2€ aamitted 
3 fields, you 
sn’t expect 


next point ° 


he sows a 
bushel, and 
ed bushels; 


“WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE?” 


tares in spiritual things his spiritual harvest. will be bushels of tares, 


485 
And just so it is in spiritual matters. Ifa man scatters handfuls of 


and not wheat. Whatever hé Sows’ “Shall reap; just that, and_ 


nothing more; and if he sows the wind he must reap the whirlwind. 


A man must expect aharvest of just the kind that his seed is, and 


this great law is even more true of spiritual growth than of natural 
growth. Ifa man is bad and corrupt in his thoughts, you can.tell 


precisely what his deeds will be. If he has lyi ng, thieving thoughts. 


and wishes, look out for him, for he is going to turn out a liar anda. 


thief. And the seeds of his bad character spring up even. beyond. 


his life, and choke all good from the lives of his children. His little 
children grow up to lie and deceive him just as he has deceived 
Others. A bad boy is too often the living penalty of the sins of his 
parents ; they have sown and watered, and now he is reaping the 
punishment. Another point: If a man sows, he must reap the fruit, 
no matter how ignorant he may claim to be, or really be, of the 
nature of the seed. A plea of ignorance won’t do. You sow tares 
and think it wheat, but nothing but tares will spring up. You may 
call it wheat, or rye, or grain of whatever name you please, but you 
get nothing but weeds and tares. You must look to what kind of 
seed you are sowing, for neither ignorance nor any other excuse can 
make tares bring forth wheat. And now, see how that is true in 
regard, not only to individuals, but to nations. Nations are only 


collections of individuals, and what is true of the part in regard to - > 


character is always true of the whole. In this country our fore- 
fathers planted slavery and an open Bible together, and didn’t we 
have to reap? Didn’t God make this nation weep in the hour of 
gathering the harvest, when we had to give up our young men, both 
North and South, to death, and every household almost had an 
empty chair, and blood, blood, blood, flowed like water for four long 
years? Ah, our nation sowed, and in tears and groans she had to 
reap ! 

Then look at the King in Egypt. He made a decree that all 
the male infants should be put to death, and to death they 
were put with all the horrors that hatred and jealousy could 
invent. It was terrible. Well, now, I suppose some people 
think it strange that God didn’t punish Egypt with swift destruc- 
tion. But look, the punishment only tarried. “The mills of the 
gods grind slow, but they grind exceedingly small;” in eighty years 
cast your eyes on that miserable land. God’s vengeance at length 


486 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


came down, and ruin along with it. In every house in Egypt the 
first-born was slain, from palace to the lowest hovel. There still 
lived a God, and this immutable law of His had still to be executed. 
They had to reap just what they had sown. Sometimes the hand 
of God comes down slow, but sometimes as rapidly as thunder 
follows lightning. In the very act of transgression the sinner 
perhaps is cut off. The fruit ripens in an hour, and it is death. 
Think of Judas; how straightway his conscience tormented him till 
he rushed for relief and went out and hung himself. Ah, he reaped 
the betrayer’s fruit very quickly. And so did Cain. The swift 
punishment did not tarry, but cast him headlong. Often, very 
often, judgment and retribution descend out of Heaven like a flash ; 
God’s judgments have not tarried. 

I remember in the north of England a prominent citizen 
told me asad case that happened there in the city of Newcastle- 
on-Tyne. It was about a young boy. He was very young, but he 
said he was too young to go to Sunday-school. He was an 
only child. The father and mother thought everything of him, 
and did all they could for him. But he fell into bad ways, 
He took up with evil characters, and finally got to running with 
thieves. He didn’t let his parents know about it. By and by 
the gang he was with broke into the house, and he with them. 
Yes; he had to do it all, They stopped outside the building, 
while he crept in and started to rob the till, He was caught in the 
act, taken into court, tried, convicted, and sent to the penitentiary 
for ten years. He worked on and on in the convict’s cell, till at 
last his term was out. And at once he started for home. And 
when he came back to the town he started down the street where 
his father and rnother used to live. He went to the house and 
rapped. A stranger came to the door and stared him in the 
face. “No, there’s no such person lives here, and where your 
parents are I don’t know,” was the only welcome he received. 
Then he turned through the gate, and went down the street, asking 
even the children that he met about his folks, where they were liv- 
ing, and if they were well. But everybody looked blank. The 
years had rolled by, and though that seemed perhaps a short time, 
how many changes had taken place. There where he was born and 


brought up he was now an alien, and unknown even in his old | 


haunts. But at last he found a couple of townsmen that remem- 
bered his father and mother, and they told him the old house had 


a I amen a ig glia || | ine |) acai Lal 


wil 
thi 
sen 
tha 


_pie 


der 
dea 


"ERS, 


1 Egypt the 
There still 
ye executed. 
es the hand 
as thunder 
the sinner 
it is death. 
ted him till 
, he reaped 
The swift 
)ften, very 
ike a flash ; 


nt citizen 
Newcastle- 
ing, but he 
le was an 
ig of him, 
bad ways. 
ining with 
y and by 
vith them. 
: building, 
ight in the 
nitentiary 
ell, till at 
me. And 
‘eet where 
louse and 
im in the 
here your 
received. 
et, asking 
were liv- 
nk. The 
ort time, 
born and 
n his old 
t remem- 
ouse had 


“WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE? 487 
been deserted long years ago; that he had been gone but a few 
months before his father was confined to his house, and very soon after 
died broken-hearted, and that his mother had gone out of her 
mind. He went to the mad-house where his mother was, and went 
up to her and said, “ Mother, mother, don’t you know me? I am 
your son.” But she raved and slapped him in the face and shrieked: 
“You’re not my boy!” and then raved again and tore her hair, 
He left the asylum more dead than alive, so completely broken- 
hearted that he died in a few months. Yes, the fruit was long 
growing, but at last it ripened to the harvest like a whirlwind, and 
vengeance made quick work of it. The death-harvest was reaped, 
But bear in mind what I have said to-night, and be not doubters, 
even if the harvest is slow. Let me read to you the passage: “ Be. 
Cause sentence against their evil deeds is not executed speedily, 
therefore the hearts of the sons of men are fully set in them to do 
evil. Though a sinner do evil a hundred times and his days be pro- 
longed, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear 


» God—which fear before Him; but it shall not be well with the 


wicked, neither shall He prolong his days, which are as a shadow, 
because he feareth not before God.” My friends, if you sow of the 
flesh you will of the flesh reap corruption; you will sometime or 
other reap despair; you will reap ruin; you will reap death; but if 
you sow of the Spirit you will reap joy, peace, happiness, and life 
everlasting—for God has said it. 

There are some that say, “Oh, yes; but what is the use of has- 
tening the harvest by an act of ours; what is the use of confes- 
sion?” Now, we are sure of few things earthly, but there is one 
thing we can be sure of. God says, “‘ Be sure your sins will find you 
out ;” bear that in mind. God says, “ He that covereth his sin shall 
not prosper.” 

But let me say that if you are willing to confess your sins—I 
don’t care what the sin may be—God is willing and ready to take 
it away. There has been a good deal of talk about my interfering 
with those prisoners lately. Some one has said, in speaking about 
that man in Ohio, “ Well, that is a queer kind of Christianity, to 
send a man back to the penitentiary to suffer.” Let me say here 
that that young man has said in his last letter: “I think I am hap- 


_pier than you are, Mr. Moody; God is helping me to bear the bur- 


den; God is answering my prayers.” My friends, it was a great 
deal better for that man to confess his crime than to try to hide it 


488 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


away. If a man commits a crime he should suffer the penalty. I 
must suffer the penalty if I break my arm in fighting. The man 
whom I fought may forgive me for fighting with him, but I have to 
suffer all the same with my arm. A man got into a quarrel and got 
crippled, and some time ago he became converted, but although 
God has forgiven him his sin, he has to remain a cripple all his life. 
So a man must reap what he sows. I heard of an illustration that 
just helps me out here. Suppose I have a field, and I say to a man, 
“I want you to sow that field with wheat.” The man has become 
very angry—out of sorts with me, and when he sows that wheat he 
puts in a lot of tares. When the wheat has come up I see among 
it a great many tares. I say to him, “Did you sow these tares?” 
“Well,” he says, “I will confess; yes, sir, I did it; I sowed these 
tares; I will confess it instead of covering it up; I am very sorry;” 
and I forgive him. But when the wheat has to be harvested I make 
the man reap the tares also. 

You know how David fell. No man rose so high and fell so far, 
Ithink. God took him from the sheepfold and put him upon a 
throne. He took him from obscurity and made him King of Israel 
and Judea; gave him lands in abundance, and would have given him 
more if he had wanted them. He was on the pinnacle of glory, and 
honored among men. But one day, while looking out of a window, 
he saw a woman with whom he became enamored. He yielded to 
the temptation and ordered her to be brought into the palace, and 
committed the terrible sin of adultery. After that, as is the case 
with all men who commit a sin, he had to commit another to cover 
it up, so he laid plans to kill her husband, and ordered him to be 
put in a position in the ranks of his army so that he could be killed. 
Months rolled away, and one day Nathan came into the palace of 
the king. I can imagine that David was glad to see him. Nathan 
began to tell him about two men who dwelt in a certain city. The 
one was rich and the other poor; one had herds and flocks, and the 
other had only a little ewe lamb; and he went on to tell how this 
rich man seized this ewe lamb, all that the poor man had, and slew 
it. Icansee the anger of David as it flashed from his eye when 
he heard the story, and he cried, “As the Lord liveth, the man 
that hath done this thing shall surely die.” He turned to Nathan, 
and in tones of thunder demanded who the man was. “Thou art 
the man,” was the reply of Nathan. David had convicted himself. 
“The man who did this thing shall die.” Then the Lord said, “JI 


RS. 


enalty. I 
The man 
-I have to 
el and got 
although 
ill his life. 
‘ation that 
‘toa man, 
as become 
- wheat he 
see among 
e tares?” 
wed these 
ry sorry ;” 
ed I make 


fell so far, 
m upon a 
x of Israel 
given him 
glory, and 
4 window, 
rielded to 
alace, and 
; the case 
r to cover 
him to be 
be killed. 
palace of 
Nathan 
ity. The 
s,and the 
how this 
and slew 
eye when 
the man 
. Nathan, 
Thou art 


1 himself.. 


said, “I 


“WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE?" 489 


will raise up evil against you out of thine own house because thou 
hast kept this thing secret.” Soon after, the hand of death was put 
upon that house; not only did death enter his house, but it wasn’t 
long before his eldest son committed adultery, and another com- 
mitted murder—murdered his own brothers, and went off into a 
foreign land into exile. Then he got up a rebellion and drove the 
king from the throne, and at last died and was buried like a dog, 
and they heaped stones upon his resting-place. ‘“Whatsover a 
man soweth, that shall he also reap.” David committed adultery, 
so did his son. David committed murder; his son did the same. 
He was paid back in his own coin. He learned the truth of this 
passage, “ Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” 
Why, I hear things every day in this city of Chicago that 
make my ears tingle. I heard of three cases, within the last six 
hours, where men who have gone to the altar and sworn before God 
to love, cherish, and protect the women who became their wives— 
who have become, some of them, mothers of children—and because 
these men have seen other women they like better, they cast off 
these women whom they have sworn before God to love. Do you 
think there is a God in Heaven? Do you think that God is not 
going to punish these men? They may go on in their career—pun- 
ishment may not come for a little while, but the wheels of judg. 
ment are going on, and retribution will come. Some of these heart- 
broken wives say it is hard. Wait a little while. His eyes cover 
all the earth, and man can not deceive Him. He has said: “ What- 
soever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” High Heaven has 
decreed it, and I beg of you, if you have committed this sin, go and 
cry to the God of mercy; go confess it; don’t try to cover it up. 
Let every sin be brought out; if you don't, your own conscience will 
turn against you by and by. 

When I was in London I went into Tussaud’s wax-works gallery, 
and I went into the chamber of horror. There were wax figures 
of all kinds of murderers in that room. There was Booth, who ° 
killed Lincoln, and many of that class; but there was one figure 
that I got interested in, who killed his wife because he loved another ‘ 
woman, and the law didn’t find him out. He married this woman 
and had a family of seven children, and twenty years passed away. 
Then his conscience began to trouble him. He had no rest; he 
would hear his murdered wife pleading continually for her life. 
His friends began to think he was going out of his mind; he be- 


490 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


came haggard, and his conscience haunted him till, at last, he went 
to the officers of the law and told them that he was guilty of mur- 
der. He wanted to die, life was so much of an agonytohim. His 


conscience turned against him. My friends, if you have done. 


wrong, may your conscience be woke up, and may you testify 
against yourself. It isa great deal better to judge our own acts 
and confess them, than go through the world with this curse upon 
you. And if you to-night will judge your own sin, and confess it, 
He is faithful to forgive. He will forgive every sinner here, if you 
but come to Him in faith, and will blot out all your iniquities. 

{ was telling of a young man who spoke up in the Association 
cone night. He got up at the close of the meeting and said: “ Mr. 
Moody, may I saya few words?” Well, I thought I would refuse, but 
then I thought perhaps he had a message from God, and I told him 
to speak. He went on and urged these young men to accept salva- 
tion. “If you have friends praying for you, if you have mothers 
praying for you, treat them kindly, for you will not always have 
them with you.” Then he went on to tell how he had once a father 
and mother who loved him dearly, and who prayed continually 
for him. He was an only son. His father died, and after the 
burial, his mother became more anxious than ever for his. salvation. 
_ Sometimes she would come to him and put her arms around his 
neck and say with kindness, ‘Oh, my boy, I would be so happy if you 
would only be a Christian, and could pray with me.” He would put 
her away : “ No, mother, I am not going to become a Christian yet ; 
I am going to wait a little longer and see the world.” He would 
try to banish the subject from his mind altogether. Sometimes he 
would wake up at the midnight hour, and would hear the voice of 
that mother raised in supplication for her boy, “O God, save my 
boy; have mercy upon him.” At last—this is the way he put it— 
“Tt got too hot for him.” He saw that he had either to become a 
Christian or run away. And away he ran, and became a prodigal 
and a wanderer. He heard from her indirectly; he could not let his 
mother know where he was, because he knew she would have gone 
to the end of the world to find him. One day he got word that his 
mother ‘vas very sick. He began to think, “ Suppose mother should 
die, I would never forgive myself,” and he said, “I will go home;” 
but then he thought, “ Well, if I go home she will be praying at me 
again, and I can’t stay under her roof and listen to her prayers; ” and 
his proud, stubborn heart would not let him go. Months went on, and 


ERS. 


st, he went 
Ity of mur- 
him. His 


have done: 


you testify 
r own acts 
curse upon 
confess it, 
ere, if you 
lities. 
\ssociation 
aid: “ Mr. 
refuse, but 
I told him 
cept salva- 
re mothers 
ways have 
ice a father 
continually 
after the 
» salvation. 
around his 
ippy if you 
would put 
‘istian yet ; 
He would 
netimes he 
e voice of 
1, save my 
he put it— 
become a 
a prodigal 
not let his 
have gone 
rd that his 
her should 
ro home;” 
ying at me 
rers;” and 
ent on, and 


“WHAT SHALL THE HARVEST BE?" 491 


again he heard indirectly that his mother was very sick. His consci- 
ence began to trouble him. He knew he would never forgive himsef if 
he didn’t go home, and he finally determined. There were no rail- 
roads, and he had to go in a stage-coach. At night he got into the 
town. The moon was shining, and he could see the little village 
before him. The mother's home was about a mile from where he 
landed, and on his way he had to pass the village grocery; and as 
he went a‘ong, he thought he would pass through the graveyard 
and see ‘is father’s grave. “What,” he thought, “if my mother 
has been laid there!” When he got up to the grave, he saw by 
the light of the moon a new-made grave. He felt the turf, and the 
earth was fresh and soft. He knew who had been laid there, and 
for once in his life the thought flashed upon him, “Who will pray 
now for my lost soul? My mother and father lie there, and they are 
the only ones who ever prayed for me.” “ Young men,” said he, 
“T spent that night at my mother’s grave, and before the sun rose, 
my mother’s God had become my God. But I can never forgive 
myself for murdering my mother, although Christ has forgiven me.” 
My friends, that poor fellow had to reap what he sowed. 

I may be speaking to-night to some young man whose mother, 
perhaps, just now is in her closet wrestling in prayer for you. Do 
not treat that mother contemptuously; do not deny her prayer to- 
night ; do not make light of your mother’s cries to God this night. 
God's best. gift on earth to you is that praying mother. She is your 
dearest, most unselfish friend in the world. Will you not heed her 


ple “+ nrayer? Come out like a man; come down to your 
moti ‘tour, and take Him to be your God. May the God of 
Heave:: ““t you of sin, and draw you to Himself, and this will 


be the be... night you’ve had on earth. 


LVIII. 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN. 


LUKE v, 32: “I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.’ 


VW HENEVER you find a passage recorded by all three of the 
evangelists, you may know that it is one of those important 

truths which He wants to impress upon people. ‘I came 
not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.” It was 
when He first came down to Capernaum that He uttered these 
words. He had been cast out of Nazareth; they didn’t want Him; 
they wouldn’t have salvation, and He came down to Capernaum, 
and there He found Levi sitting at the receipt of customs, and He 
called him to become one of His disciples. Levi was so full of joy 
when he had found Christ—as all young converts are—-that he got 
up a great feast, and he invited all the publicans and sinners to it. 
I suppose he wanted to get them all converted—that was the reason 
he prepared a sumptuous feast. It was not to hear Jesus, but just 
to partake of the feast that Levi had prepared for them. And 
Jesus was there, too, among these publicans and sinners. The 
Pharisees were there too, and they began to murmur against His 
disciples, saying, ‘Why do these men eat with publicans and sin- 
ners?” and it was on this occasion that Christ uttered this wonder- 
ful text, “I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to re- 
pentance.” That’s what He came into this world for—He came into 
this world just for the very purpose of saving sinners. Now, a good 
many men come to Chicago to do a certain work. Some come to 
practice law, that’s their profession; others come to practice medi- 
cine, because that’s their business; some are business men, and 
some are mechanics; and when Christ came into this world He 
came for a purpose; He had a profession, if you will allow me the 
expression—He came to call sinners to repentance. You know 
when He was going down to the Samaritan town, His disciples 
went down to see whether they would let Him come there. We 
find Him on His way from Galilee to Jerusalem. You know 
(492) 


entance.’ 


hree of the 
important 
“T came 
It was 
red these 
vant Him ; 
apernaum, 
s, and He 
full of joy 
at he got 
ners to it. 
the reason 
s, but just 
em. And 
1ers. The 
rainst His 
s and sin- 
is wonder- 
1ers to re- 
-came into 
ow, a good 
e come to 
tice medi- 
men, and 
world He 
»w me the 
You know 
s disciples 
here. We 
You know 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN. 


there was such a hatred between the Jews and the Samaritans that 
they would have no dealings with each other, and He sent His dis- 
ciples on to see if He would be allowed to enter. The Samaritans 
would not allow Him there, and His disciples were so incensed that 
James and John asked Jesus to “ command fire to come down from 
Heaven and consume them, even as Elias did.” “ Why,” said the 
Son of Man, “I didn’t come to destroy men’s lives, but to save 
them.” That’s what He came for. He came to bless men; He 
came to do men good, and there is not a sinner here to-night whe 
can not be saved, and will be saved to-night, if they wish. You 
may call this world a great hospital, and all the people are born 
sick. A great many people imagine their souls are never diseased, 
who think they don’t need a physician; but when people wake 
up to the fact that their souls are diseased, then they find the 
need of a physician. But there is no need of the physician un- 
less you feel you are sick. You know you could not send a physi- 
cian to a man who was well. Suppose I go on the West Side and 
ask a celebrated physician to come over and see Mr. White. Sup- 
pose he comes round and finds Mr. White sitting in his drawing. 
room perfectly well. “Why, how is this? Mr. Moody told me you 
were sick, and bade me make a professional call.” Not only is the 
physician disgusted, but the patient is too. The world don’t send 
for a physican till sickness comes. When it feels sick, then it sends 
for a doctor, and the doctor comes. And whenever a man feels his 
need of Christ and calls, that moment He comes and is healed. 
There is a Physican here to-night for every sinner, I don’t care what 
your sins may be, or how long you have been living in sin; I don’t 
care if your life has been as black as hell, the Great Physician is 
here. What for? Just to heal every man and woman that wants 
to be healed. 

Now, the great trouble is to make people believe they are sick; 
but the moment you believe that you are, then it is that you are 
willing to take the remedy. I remember some years ago a patent 
medicine came out, and the whole of Chicago was placarded about 
it. I could not turn my head but I saw “ Paine’s Pain Killer.” On 
the walls, on the curbstones, everywhere was “ pain killer,” “ pain 
killer.” I felt disgusted at the sight of these bills constantly telling 
me about this patent medicine. But one day I had a terrible head- 
ache, so bad that I could hardly see, and was walking down the 
streets and saw the bills again, and went and bought some. When 


494 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


I was well I didn’t care for it, but when I got sick I found it was the 
very thing I wanted. If there is one here who feels the need of a 
Saviour, remember the greater the sin the greater the need of a 
Saviour, I remember when I was coming back from Europe ona 
steamer there was a young officer aboard. I felt greatly drawn toward 
him, because I could see he was dying. It didn’t seem to him as if 
he was dying, but you know death is very deceitful. He seemed to 
be joyous and light-hearted. He would talk about his plans, and 
take out his guns and tell how he intended to go hunting when he ar- 
rived; but it seemed to me as if he would not live to see this coun- 
try. By and by he was taken down on his bed, and then the truth 
came to him that death was upon him. He got a friend to write 
out a telegram which this friend was to send to his mother when 
they arrived. It read: “Mother, I am real sick. Charlie.” As 
soon as the boat touched the shore he was to send it. “ But,” said 
some one, “ why not tell her in the telegram, ‘Come?’” “Ah,” he 
replied, “she will come.” He knew whenever she read it and saw 
that he wanted help, she would come. It was the knowledge of his 
need that would bring her. So Christ is waiting to hear our need, 
and man’s need brings out the help of God. As I said before, the 
real trouble is that men don’t think they need Him. You know that 
in one place in the fifteenth chapter of Luke they brought this 
charge against Him, “ This man receiveth sinners and eateth with 
them.” This charge was brought against Him again and again. I 
am told by Hebrew scholars that instead of “receiveth” it should 
be rendered, “ He is looking out for them.” And that’s what He 
was doing. He was looking out for them. He didn’t care how 
black in sin they might be, He was ready to take them. 

Now, a great many say, “Iam too great a sinner to be saved.” 
That is like a hungry man saying he is too hungry to eat, or a sick 
may saying he is too sick to send for a doctor, or a beggar saying, 
“T am too poor to beg; I'll wait till I get some money first.” Ifa 
man is hungry and perishing, you must relieve him. 


Now, there is not a sinner in Chicago but has his representative _ 


in the Bible. Take, for instance, the publicans. You know the 
Jews thought this class about the lowest in the world. They put 
them lower than any other kind of sinner. They always placed 
them along with the publicans—“ publicans and sinners.” The pub- 
licans were the tax collectors, and they defrauded the people at every 
turn. For instance, a man in South Chicago will pay over perhaps 


ERS, 


J it was the 
> need of a 
need of a 
urope ona 
wn toward 
> him as if 
seemed to 
plans, and 
vhen he ar- 
this coun- 
1 the truth 
d to write 
ther when 
irlie.” As 
But,” said 
“ Ah,” he 
t and saw 
dge of his 
our need, 
efore, the 
know that 
ught this 
teth with 
again. I 
it should 
what He 
care how 


e saved,” 
ora sick 
ar saying, 
m.CUCdN 6 


sentative _ 
snow the 
They put 
ys placed 
The pub- 
e at every 
r perhaps 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN. 495 


a hundred thousand dollars for the privilege of just collecting the 
taxes, and then he goes to work and screws the people out of a hun- 
dred and fifty thousand dollars. He doesn’t care a straw for justice 
or appearances. He comes into the cottage of the widow and takes 
half she has. At every house the tax collector puts the blocks to 
his victims, and famine often comes in when he goes out. The peo- 
ple detest him; they hate him with a perfect hatred. They always 
find him a drag on them, ai.d have no sympathy with them. Their 
money, they find, is taken without warrant. Their homes are broken 
up and trouble and starvation come on them. And so the publican 
is hated wherever he turns. He is the agent of the Roman tyrant, 
and the people are brought up to shun him. He has deserved it 
all, and even more, by his heartless exactions, and yet Christ for- 
gave evenhim. And just so rum-sellers can be saved. And another 
class that Christ had mercy on was the thieves. When on the cross 
He saved a thief. There may be some thief here to-night. I tell 
you, my friends, you may be saved if you only will. There may be 
some one here who is persecuting a good wife and making her home 
a perfect hell on earth. But you, too, may be saved. When Saul 
was persecuting the Christians from city to city, he was stopped 


Short by the voice of God; he was converted. And those high- 


headed Pharisces, so well versed in the law of Moses, even they 
were converted. Joseph of Arimathea was a Pharisce, and so was 
Nicodemus. But to-night I want to talk about another class that 
Jesus dealt with and led to a higher life. I want to talk about fallen 
women. There are some people who believe that these have fallen 
so low that Christ will pass them by. But, my friends, that thought 
comes from the evil one. In all this blessed Book there is not one, 
not a solitary one of this class mentioned, that ever came to Him 
but that He received them. Yes, He even went out of His way and. 
sought her out. Now I want to take three representative cases where 
these women had to do with Christ. One is the case of an awakened 
one. The Spirit of God had dealt with her anxious, awakened soul. 
The Lord was one day at Jerusalem and a banquet was given Him by 
Simeon. There was a banquet table in the house, arranged according 
to the fashion of that day. Instead of chairs for the guests, as was 
customary, the guests sat reclining on lounges. Well, it was just 
at one of the repasts that our Lord sat down’ to, along with the 
wealthy Simeon and his many guests. But no sooner had He 
entered than this woman:followed Him into the house, and falls 


496 MOOD Y’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


down at His feet, and begins to wash them with her tears. It was 
the custom in those days to wash one’s feet on entering the house. 
Sandals were worn and the practice was necessary. Well, this wom- 
an had got into the house, and once inside, had quietly stolen up 
to the feet of Jesus. And in her hands she brought a box, but her 
heart, too, was just as full of ointment as the box she carried. And 
there was the sweetest perfume as she stole to His feet. And her. 
tears started to fall down on those saci :d feet, hot, scalding tears, 
that gushed out like water. She said nothing while doing this, and 
then she took down her long, black hair and wiped His feet with 
the hair of her head. And after that she poured out the ointment 
on His feet. Then straightway the Pharisees began talking to. 
gether. How all through the New Testament these Pharisees kept 
whispering and talking together. They said, shaking their heads, 
“This Man receiveth sinners;” and then, “This Man, if He were 
a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this 
is that toucheth Him, for she isa sinner.” No prophet, they insisted, 
would allow that kind of a woman near him, but would push her 
away. And then the Saviour read these thoughts and quickly re- 
buked them. He said, “ Simeon, I have something to say to thee.” 
And he said, “ Master, say on.” And He said, “Seest thou this 
woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest Me no water to 
wash My feet; but she has washed My feet with tears, and wiped 
them with the hairs of her head. Thou gavest Me no kiss, but this 
woman, since I came in, hath not ceased to kiss My feet. My head 
with oil thou didst not anoint, but this woman hath anointed My 
feet with ointment.” Simeon was like a great many Pharisees 
nowadays, who say, “Oh, well, we will entertain that minister if 
we must. We don’t want to; he’s a dreadful nuisance ; but we will 
have to put up with him; it’s our duty to be patronizing.” Well, 
the Master said more to His entertainer. “There was a certain 
creditor,” He said, “which had two debtors; the one owed five 
hundred pence, and the other fifty, and when he had nothing to 
pay” —mark that, sinner; the debtor had nothing to pay. There 
is no sinner in the world that can pay anything to cancel his debt 
to God. The great trouble is that sinners think they can pay, some 
of them seventy-five cents on the dollar, some even feel able to pay 
ninety-nine cents on the dollar, and the one cent that they are short, 
they think they can make that up some wiy. That is not the way; 
it is all wrong; you must throw all the debt on God. Some few, 


ERS. 


ars. It was 
the house. 
, this wom- 
y stolen up 
ox, but her 
rried. And 
And her. 
iding tears, 
1g this, and 
s feet with 
e ointment 
talking to. 
risees kept 
heir heads, 
if He were 
voman this 
ey insisted, 
| push her 
quickly re- 
y to thee.” 
thou this 
0 water to 
and wiped 
s, but this 
My head 
inted My 
Pharisees 
ninister if 
ut we will 
x.” Well, 
a certain 
owed five 
othing to 
y. There 
| his debt 
pay, some 
dle to pay 
are short, 
the way; 
ome few, 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN. 


497 
perhaps, will only claim to pay twenty-five cents on the dollar, but 


n’t begin to Carry out their 


“ Now, Sim- 
the most?” 
“he that was forgiven the most,” 
this woman loves much because she 


and went on to tell Simeon all about 
her. I suppose He wanted to make it plainer to Simeon and He 


turned to the poor woman and said, “ Thy sins are forgiven ”—all 
forgiven; not part of them—not half of them, but every sin from 
the cradle up, every impure desire or thought is blotted out for 
time and eternity, and He said, “Go in peace.” Yes, truly, she 
went out in peace, for she went out in the light of Heaven. With 
what brightness the light must have come down to her from those 
eternal hills—with what beauty it must have flashed on her soul. 
Yes, she came to the feet of the Master for a blessing, and she got 
it, and if there is a poor woman here who wants « blessing, she will 
get it. 

I want to call your attention to a thought right here. You have 
not got the name of one of those poor women. The three women 
who had fallen, who had been guilty of adultery, and had been 
blessed by Him, not one of them has been named. It seems to me 
as if it had been intended that when they got to Heaven we should 
not know them—they will just mingle with the rest. Their names 
have not been handed down for eighteen hundred years. They 
have called Mary Magdalene a fallen woman, but bear in mind there 
is nothing in Scripture to mske us understand that she was a poor, _ 
fallen woman; and, I believe if she had, her name would not have 
been handed down. 

Now, the next woman was altogether different from the woman 
in Luke. She didn’t come with an alabaster box, seeking a blessing, 
She was perfectly indifferent ; she was a careless sinner. Perhaps 
there are some poor, fallen women who have come to-night in a 
careless spirit—only out of curiosity; they don’t want a Saviour ; 
they don’t want their sins blotted out; they don’t want any forgive. 
ness Perhaps she had heard that at Moody and Sankey’s they 
were going to preach repentance, and that a great many fallen 

32 


eon,” the Master asked, “which should love that man 
“T suppose,” was the reply, 
“Thou hast rightly judged; 
hath been forgiven much,” 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


498 


women were likely to be there, and thought she would just come 
down to see how they took it. Now you have a representative 
here. After Christ had that interview with Nicodemus, we are 
told He went up to Galilee by Samaria. He could have gone up to 
Galilee without going to Samaria, but He knew there was a fallen 
woman there. He got to the well, and sent off His disciples to get 
bread. Why did He not keep one with Him? Because He knew 
the woman was coming that way, and she would not probably like 
to see so many. While He is sitting on the curbstone of the well, 
a poor, fallen woman of Samaria comes along for water. You know 
the people in those days used to come out in the morning and even- 
ing to get their water, not in the blaze of the noonday sun. No 
doubt she was ashamed to come out there to meet the pure and the 
virtueus at the well, and that was the reason why she stole out at 
that hour. She brought her water-pot to get water, and when she 
came up, the Master stopped her and asked her for a drink, just to 
draw her out. She saw He wasa Jw. We can always tell a Jew; 
God has put a mark uponthem. “How is this? You, a Jew, and 
ask a Samaritan fora drink? The Jews have no dealings with the 
Samaritans.” “Ah, you don’t know Me,” He replied. “If you 
had asked Me for drink, I would have given you living water.” 
“ How could you give me living water? Why, you have no vessel 
to draw water with.” “Whosoever drinketh of this water shall 
thirst again; but whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall 
give him, will have a well spring up in his heart into everlasting 
life.’ ‘ Well,” probably she thought, “that is a good thing. One 
draught of water will give me a well—one draught of water for 
the rest of my days.” She asked Him for this living water, 
and He told her, “Go, bring thy husband.” He was just drawing 
her out, just got her up to the point of confession. “I have no 
husband,” she said. ‘“ For thou hast had five husbands, and he whom 
thou now hast is not thy husband; in that saidst thou truly.” I 
can see that woman’s astonishment. She looks all around to see 
who had told Him all about her. Like a man who came up from 
Michigan lately, who came into the Tabernacle and listened to the 
sermon, which, as he told me, seemed all to be preached at him. 
He wondered who had told me all about him. He got Christ, and 
is going back to Michigan to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ. 
The word of God reacted, and she saw she was detected. “Sir, 
I perceive Thou art a prophet ;” then she went on the old religious 


Te. oe ae Pe in A a ibm) ee ena nes NG ica 


lo eo 


Ss CO = ef ef RY A Mm A ee 


CARS, 


| just come 
resentative 
lus, we are 
gone up to 
vas a fallen 
iples to get 
e He knew 
obably like 
of the well, 
You know 
¥ and even- 
y sun. No 
ire and the 
tole out at 
d when she 
ink, just to 
tell a Jew; 
a Jew, and 
gs with the 
“Tf you 
ing water.” 
re no vessel 
water shall 
hat I shall 
everlasting 
hing. One 
f water for 
ying water, 
ust drawing 
‘I have no 
1d he whom 
1truly.” I 
ound to see 
ne up from 
ened to the 
ied at him. 
Christ, and 
esus Christ. 
ted, ‘Sir, 
Id religious 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN. 499 


discussion, but the Lord turned her from that, and told her that the 
hour had come when the people must worship the Father in spirit 
and in truth, not in this or that particular mountain, nor yet at 
Jerusalem. And she said, “ When the Messiah cometh He will tell 
us all things,” and when she had said this she was ready for the 
truth. Then Jesus said, “I am the Messiah.” Just then she saw 
His disciples coming, and probably she thought these men might 
know who she was, and she got up her pot, and away she went to 
the city. The moment she got within the gates she shouted, 
“Come and see this man I have met at the well. Is not this the 
Messiah? Why, He has told me everything I ever did.” And 
you can see all the men, women, and children running out of that 
city up to the well. As He stands in the midst of His disciples and 
He sees the multitudes coming running toward them, He says, 
“Look yonder; look at the fields, for they are already white with 
the harvest ; look what that poor fallen woman has done;” and He 
went into that town as an invited guest, and many believed on 
account of the woman’s testimony, and many more believed on 
account of His own word. 

Now, my friends, He did not condemn the poor adulteress. The 
Son of God was not ashamed to talk with her and tell her of that 
living water, those who drank of which, He said, would never die. 
He did not condemn her. He came to save her, came to tell how 
to be blessed here and blessed hereafter. 

The next case is still much worse. You may say it is like black 
blacker, blackest, compared with the other two. I want to speak 
about, this time, the eighth chapter of John. One woman I have 
spoken of was in the house of a Pharisee, at a dinner party; the 
other by the well of Sychar. And now we come to the Temple 
porch. They had taken a woman in adultery—had caught her in 
the very act. They had not got the man; they had hold only of 
the poor woman. What a commotion there would be here to-night 
if such a scene should take place in this Tabernacle, as a woman 
dragged in by her hair. The law against these poor sinners was 
most severe; a fallen woman was to be put to death—she was to be 
stoned to death. And now the Pharisees that were about to exe- 
cute the poor wretch, thought to catch the Master. They began to 
put questions to Him, tempting Him, and hoping to take Him in 
His speech. They told Him how they had surprised the wretched 
creature in the very act of sin, and then passed on to tell what the 


500 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


law of Moses had fixed as the penalty. To be stoned to death was 
the only atonement. “But what sayest Thou?” they went on, 
and then eagerly listened. But Jesus stooped down, and wrote on 
the ground, as though He hadn’t heard them. We don’t know 
what He wrote. Perhaps, “Grace and truth come by Jesus Christ ;” 
perhaps He wrote that; but while He thus busied Himself, they 
cried out the louder, demanding an answer to their question. Soat 
length He lifted Himself up, and said, “He that is without sin 
among you, let him first cast a stone at her.” Never did an answer 
more completely serve its purpose; you who never were guilty of 
this offence, just you cast the first stone. And amid the strangest 
silence, He again stooped and wrote with His finger on the ground. 
This time, perhaps, He wrote, “I am not come to call the righteous, 
_but sinhers to repentance.” And soon He rose again, but ere He 
did so, He heard the patter of retreating feet on the pavement, and 
when now He glanced up, He saw none but the woman. One by 
one they had been convicted by their own conscience, and slunk 
away; not one of them there could throw the stone. And the 
Saviour looked at the woman. I can just imagine the tears coming 
trickling down her cheeks as Jesus Christ, in kindest tones, asked 
her, “ Woman, where are those, thine accusers? Hath no man con- 
demned thee?” And for an instant she could not answer. Who 
knows how that poor soul had reached her sad plight? One of 
those very Pharisees who had left her, perhaps had led her astray. 
The very man who clamored loudest to condemn her was likely the 
guilty one. And there she stood alone; the betrayer was left un- 
touched, as too often he is to-day; a miserable, unjust, untrue 
sentiment, by which the man, who is equally guilty, is received in 
society, and the woman is condemned. But at last she gained her 
voice, and said, “No man, Lord,” and then, perhaps, told how her 
parents had died when she was very young. A stepmother, per- 
haps, had taken her and treated her harshly, and then had turned 
her adrift on the world. Or, perhaps, a drunken father had turned 
home into darkness, and she had been driven from it almost broken- 
hearted; and so in her helplessness, her innocent affections were 
gained, and then she had been led astray. The Master knew it all, 
and when He heard her reply, He said, “ Neither do I condemn 
thee ; go and sin no more.” She had been dragged into the Temple 
to be stoned, but now Christ has delivered her. She came to be 
‘put to death, but she received life everlasting. 


RS. 


death was 
7 went on, 
d wrote on 
on’t know 
us Christ ;”’ 
mself, they 
on. Soat 
vithout sin 
an answer 
> guilty of 
strangest 
he ground. 
righteous, 
mut ere He 
ment, and 
. One by 
and slunk 

And the 
irs coming 
nes, asked 
) Man con- 
yer, Who 
? One of 
her astray. 
likely the 
as left un- 
st, untrue 
eceived in 
pained her 
d how her 
other, per- 
ad turned 
ad turned 
st broken- 
tions were 
new it all, 
-condemn 
1e Temple 
ame to be 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN. 50r 


My friends, the Son of God will not now condemn any poor fallen 
woman that leaves off her sins and just casts herself down at His 
feet. He will take you up just as you are. When in Philadelphia, 
a fallen woman came into the inquiry-room and threw herself down 
on the floor. The Christian helpers talked and talked to her, but 
could get nothing out of her; they couldn’t do a thing with her. 
The Hon. George H. Stewart came to me, and said, “ We wish you 
would come, we don’t know what to make of her.’ She was weep- 
ing bitterly, and as far off as I was, I could hear her sobs all over 
the room. So I went and said, “What is the trouble?” At last 
she spoke, and the bitterness of her despairing voice went to my 
heart. “TI have fallen from everything pure, and God can not save 
me; there is no hope.” I told her tenderly that God could still 
lift her up and save her. I said, “ Are you only just willing to be for- 
given? A merciful Father is waiting and longing to pardon.” She 
said at last she could not abandon her course, as no one would give 
herahome. But that difficulty was got round by my assuring her 
kind friends would provide for her; and then she yielded, and that 
same day was given a pleasant place in the home of a Presbyterian 
minister. But for forty-eight hours after entering her new home 
that poor reclaimed woman cried, day and night, and we went for her 
mother, and on hearing our story, she clasped her hands and cried, 
“ Has my daughter really repented? thank God for His mercy, my 
heart has just been breaking. I’ve prayed so long for her without 
result; take me to her.” And that reformed daughter of sin has 
lived consistently ever since, and when I was last in Philadelphia 
she was one of the most esteemed members in that Presbyterian 
Church. And so every one of you can begin anew, and God will 
help and man will help you. Oh, turn, and do not die. Seven 
short years is the allotted life of a fallen woman. Oh, escape your 
early doom, escape your infamy, and hear God’s voice calling you 
to repent. Your resolution to amend will be borne up by hosts of 
friends; never fear for that. Just take the decided step, and you 
will be helped by every good man and woman in the community. 
Oh, I beseech you to act right now, and settle this great question 
for time and eternity. 

Let me say here, if there is any person in this Tabernacle who 
keeps a brothel, if you will but let in Christian ladies, and allow | 
them to hold meetings, they will go. This idea that Christian | | 
ladies don’t care for your class is false—as false as one of the | | 


502 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


blackest lies that ever came out of hell. Why, some of the first 
ladies of this city during the past few weeks have been visiting 
those brothels. Some time ago a few of them came to me to see 
how they could get the names and locations of some of those 
brothels, and I called at police headquarters and obtained a list, and 
since then they have been visiting. And these charges that Chris- 
tian women will not have you, after your reformation, in their homes 
is equally false. I know a lady of culture y-’» 4s not long ago in 
the inquiry-room on her knees, and when - got up, the girl in 
tears told her she was one of the fallen. “Come and stay at my 
house ; I will take care of you.” She was a poor colored girl, and 
kept her in her house till she got a situation. Let me ask you not 
to believe that we are cruel and hard-hearted—that we do not care 
for the fallen women, only the abandoned men. We havea place 
to put you, and if that is not large enough, why, the business men 
will put up another for you. There is abundance of protection and 
assistance if you only show that you are repentant. The Christian 
men and women will do all for you; they won’t try to help you 
down or cast you off. If you but repent, there are hundreds and 
thousands of people in this city whose hearts will go out to you. 


PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we pray for every poor fallen girl in this 
city; Thine eye is upon them at this hour; they are strangers to us, 
but, O God, they are not strangers to Thee. Many of them mav 
have praying hearts; it may be some of them may have praying 
fathers and mothers. O God, hear our prayers for them to-day. 
May the Spirit of God go abroad through this city between now 
and to-morrow night, and may we meet with hundreds and thou- 
sands of them; may they be drawn to the Tabernacle. And, O God, 
give us some word for them ; give us a tender, loving message for 
them. May we speak to them as if the Master Himself was there 
in person. May the Word of God that shall be read fall down into 
their hearts and save them from a life of sin, from a life of disgrace, 
from a life of ruin, to a life of purity and holiness. Do Thou, O 
Lord, hear our prayers to-day especially for this one who has written 
this letter. O God, we pray that to-day she may be convicted of 
sin, that she may be converted, that her heart may be turned to the 
God of all grace, that she may be won to Thee, and become a bright 
and shining light in this city. It may be she has come into Far- 


ERS. 


of the first 
en visiting 
me to see 
e of those 
1a list, and 
that Chris- 
heir homes 
long ago in 
the girl in 
stay at my 
-d girl, and 
sk you not 
lo not care 
ive a place 
siness men 
ection and 
e Christian 
. help you 
idreds and 
to you. 


tirl in this 
gers to us, 
them mav 
ye praying 
m to-day. 
ween now 
and thou- 
id, O God, 
essage for 
was there 
down into 
f disgrace, 
0 Thou, O 
las written 
avicted of 
ned to the 
1e a bright 
into Far- 


SERMON TO ERRING WOMEN. 503 


well Hall to-day at this hour in hopes that something would be 
said to reach her. May the prayers of this people be heard, that 
she may be saved, and that she may be one of hundreds that shall 
be saved of this class in this city in these closing days of our minis- 
try here; and, O God, help them not to go back to their old lives, 
but may they walk humbly and prayerfully all their days. Amen. 


LIX. 
THE TEN “COMES.” 


WANT to call your attention first, to the “Come” in the fifty- 
fifth chapter of the prophecies of Isaiah: “ Incline your ear 
and come unto Me; hear, and your souls shall live; and I will 


make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies ot 
David.” 


“Incline your ear and come unto Me; hear, and your soul shall 


live.” Now, I find if we get people to listen—to pause and hear 
the voice of God—it isn’t long before they are willing to follow that 
voice ; but it is so hard to get people to stop and listen for a mo- 
ment. The din of the world makes such a noise that the people 
don't hear the voice—that still, small voice. He says, “Incline your 
ear and come unto Me.” Now, if we could only get all the friends 
in this audience to incline their ears this afternoon—not only your 
natural ears, but the ears of your soul—you could be saved to-day. 
But Satan does not want you to do this; he does all he can to keep 
your ears from hearing. He makes you think about yourself, about 
your sens, your homes ; but, my friends, let us forget all those things 
to-day—let us forget all our surroundings and close our eyes to the 
world and just try and listen to the Word of God, and come and 
hear what He has to say. “ Incline your ear and come unto Me; 
hear, and your soul shall live.” Now, let us turn to the tenth chap- 
ter of Romans, where we see, “ Faith cometh by hearing, and hear- 
ing by the Word of God.” Now, it is not my words I want to have 
you listen to—it is not my words I want you to hear this afternoon, 
but I want you to hear the words of this loving King who calls you 
to Himself. What does He say? In another place He says: “ Be- 
hold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear My voice and 
open the door, I will come in to him and sup with him, and he with 
Me ;”’ or, “if any woman ”—or any one; that’s what it means, my 
friends— hear My voice and open the door, and I will come in to 
(504) 


| the fifty- 
your ear 
and I will 
nercies ot 


soul shall 


and hear 
llow that 
or a mo- 
1e people 
line your 
1e friends 
only your 
d to-day. 
n to keep 
lf, about 
se things 
es to the 
ome and 
nto Me; 
ith chap- 
ind hear- 
t to have 
ternoon, 
calls you 
s: “Be- 
Oice and 
he with 
sans, my 
ne in to 


THE TEN “COMES,” 508 
her, and will sup with her, and she with Me.” I heard of a little 
child, some time ago, who was burned. The mother had gone out and 
left her three children at home. The eldest left the room, and the 
remaining two began to play with the fire, and set the place ina 
blaze. When the youngest of the two saw what she had done, she 
went into a little cupboard and fastened herself in. The remaining 
child went to the door and knocked and knocked, crying to her to 
open the door and let her take her out of the burning building, but 
she was too frightened to do it. It seems to me as if this was the 
way of hundreds and thousands in this city. He stands and knocks, 
but they’ve got their hearts barred and bolted, because they don’t 
know that He has come only to bless them. May God help you to 
hear, and if you listen to Him and bring your burdens to Him, He 
will bless you. Heis able to open the ears of every one here if you 
but let Him in. I was up here at the hotel the other night, and I 
had the door locked and bolted, and some one came and rapped. 
I shouted, “Come in!” The man tried to come in, but he couldn't; 
I had to get up and unlock the door before he could enter. That’s 
the way with many people to-day, They’ve got the door bolted 
and barred ; but if you only open it to Him, He will come in. 

“Tf any man hear My voice and open the door, I will come in and 
sup with him and he with Me.” Now, my friends, can you hear it? 
Can you hear God’s voice speaking through His own Word? “In. 
cline your ear and come unto Me.” Just listen. You know some- 
times, when you hear a man speaking whose voice you don’t hear 
very well, and you want to hear every word the man says, you put 
your hand up to your ear to catch the sound clearer. Now, listen. 
God says, “Incline your ear and come unto Me; hear, and your 
souls shall live ; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you.” 
Now, is it not true? Can’t you hear that loving voice speaking to 
you, and won’t you obey that voice and let Him save you? But 
I can imagine some of you saying, “I can’t hear anything.” Take 
your ears to Him and He will make you hear. 

Now, let me take you to another “come.” While John and his 
disciples were standing, Jesus came along, and John said, “ Behold 
the Lamb of God!” and Jesus said, “What seek ye?” “Where 
dwellest Thou?” he asked; to which He replied, “Come and see:” 
and they just obeyed Him, and never left Him, My friends, if I 
could introduce you to Christ—could just get you to catch one 
glimpse of Him; if you could but see the King in all His beauty; 


SSS ee 


506 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


if you could but see Him in all His loveliness—you would never for- 
sake Him, for He “ shall grow up before Him as a tender plant, and 
as a root out of dry ground; He hath no form nor comeliness, and 
when we shall see Him, there is no beauty that we should desire 


Him.” Follow Him as your Saviour. In order to appreciate Him 


you have to be brought to Him; but if sin has come between you 
and Him, I can not tell you anything about Him. It is just like 
telling a blind man about the beauties of nature, the loveliness of 
the flowers, or of the world. That is the way, if sin stands between 
you and Him; and when Christians try to tell you about the beau- 
ties of Christianity, they fail; but if you come and have an inter- 
view with Him, you will see that you can not help but love Him; 
you will see that you can not but forsake all and follow Him. I re- 
member once hearing of a child that was born blind. He grew up 
to be almost a man, when a skillful physician thought he could give 
the man his sight. He was put under the doctor’s treatment, and 
for a long time he worked, till at last he succeeded. But he wouldn't 
let the man see the light of the sun all at once, lest it would strike 
him blind. It had to be done gradually. So he put a lct of band- 
ages upon his eyes, and removed one after another unt.! the last 
one was reached, and when it was taken off, the young man began 
to see. When he saw the beauties of the world, he upbraided his 
friends for not telling him of the beauties of nature. “ Why, we 
tried to tell you about the beauties of the world, but we could not,” 
they said. And so it is with us. All that we can do is to tell you 
to come and see—come and see the loveliness of Christ. 

I can imagine some of you saying, “I am blind; I can not see any 
beauty in Him.” Bring your blind men to Him as you bring your 
deaf men and He will give you sight, as He did with blind Barti- 
meus—as He did with all the blind men on earth. There never was 
a blind man who came to Him requesting his sight whose request 
was not granted, and there is not a blind soul in this assembly but 
will be healed if you come to Him. He says that’s what He came 
for, to give sight to the blind. If you can not see any beauty in 
Him, pray to God to give you sight. 

The next “come” is in the prophecies of Isaiah. “Come, now, and 
let us reason together, saith the Lord; though your sins be as scar- 
let, they shall be white as snow; though they be as crimson, they 
shall be as wool.” I find a great many people say their reason stands 
between them and God. Now, let me say here, the religion of Je- 


a ae 


Tm wy WM et = Ef TR 


ats oOo ec 


ERS. 


d never for- 
r plant, and 
eliness, and 
ould desire 
eciate Him 
‘tween you 
is just like 
veliness of 
ds between 
t the beau- 
e an inter- 
love Him; 
Tim. I re- 
le grew up 
could give 
tment, and 
1e wouldn’t 
ould strike 
+ of band- 
| the last 
nan began 
raided his 
“Why, we 
could not,” 
to tell you 


1ot see anv 
ring your 
ind Barti- 
never was 
se request 
embly but 
t He came 
beauty in 


, now, and 
be as scar- 
nson, they 
son stands 
ion of Je- 


THE TEN “COMES.” 507 


sus is a matter of revelation, not of investigation. No one ever found 
out Christ by reason. It is a matter of rev elation. Now see what 
He says, “ Come, now "—that means this afternoon—“ though your 
sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as snow.” Now He puts a 
pardon in the sinner’s face. “Your sins may be as scarlet, they 
shall be white as snow.” Take the scarlet in the lady’s shawl. It 
is a fast color. You can not wash it out and make it white; if you 
tried you would only cestroy the shawl. But He will make your 
sins white as snow, though they be as scarlet, if you come to Him, 
Just come to Him as you are, and instead of reasoning, ask Him to 
take them away. Then He will reason it out with you. The nat- 
ural rnan does not understand spiritual things; but when a man is 
born of the Spirit, then it is that spiritual things are brought out to 
him. A great many people want to investigate—want to reason out 
the Bible from back to back, but He wants us first to take a par- 
don. That’s God’s method of reason. He puts a pardon in the 
face of the sinner. “Come, now.” Do you think there is not rea- 
son in this? Suppose the whole plan of salvation was reasoned out 
to you, why, death might step in before the end of the reasoning 
was reached. So God puts a pardon first. If you will be influenced 
to-day you will just bring your reason to Him, and ask Him to give 

you wisdom to see: divine things, and He will doit. “If any of 

you lack wisdom, let him ask of God that giveth to all men liberal- 
ly and upbraideth not, and it shall be given liberally.” The idea 

that this reason that God hath given man, should keep him from 

Christ. 

A number of years ago, as I was coming out of a daily prayer- 
meeting, in one of our western cities, a lady came up to me and 
said, “I want to have you see my husband and ask him to come to 
Christ.” Says she, “I want to have you go and see him.” She 
told me his name, and it was that of a man I had heard of before. 
“Why,” said I, “I can’t go and see your husband. He isa booked 
infidel. I can’t argue with him. He is a good deal older than I 
am, and it would be out of place. Then, I am rot much for infidel 
argument.” “Well, Mr. Moody,” she says, “that ain’t what he 
wants. Tle’s got enough of that. Just ask him to come to the 
Saviour.” She urged me so hard and so strong, that I consented 
to go. I went to the office where the Judge was doing business, 
and told him what I had come for. He laughed at me. “You are 
very foolish,” he said, and began to argue with me. I said, “I don’t 


508 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


think it will be profitable for me to hold an argument with you. I 
have just one favor I want to ask of you, and that is, that when 
you are converted you will let me know.” “ Yes,” said he, “I will do 
that. When I am converted I will let you know”—with a good 
deal of sarcasm. 

I went off, and requests for prayer were sent here and to Fulton 
street, New York, and I thought the prayer there and of that wife 
would be answered if mine were not. A year and a half after, I 
was in that city, and a servant came to the door and said: “There 
is a man in the front parlor who wishes to see you.” I found 
the Judge there. He said: “I promised I would let you 
know when I was converted.” “Well,” said I, “tell me all 
about it. I heard it from other lips, but I want to hear it 
from your own.” He said that his wife had gone out to a meet- 
ing one night and he was home alone, and while he was sitting there 
by the fire he thought, “Supposing my wife is right, and my chil- 
dren are right ; suppose there is a Heaven and a hell, and I shall be 
separated from them.” His first thought was: “I don’t believe a 
word of it.”” The second thought came: “You believe in the God 
that created you, and that the God that created you is able to teach 
you. You believe that God can give you life.” ‘Yes, the God 
that created me can give me life. I was too proud to get down on 
my knees by the fire, and I said, ‘O God, teach me.’ And as I 
prayed, I didn’t understand it, but it began to get very dark, and my 
heart got very heavy. I was afraid to tell my wife, and I pretended 
to be asleep. She kneeled down beside that bed, and I knew she 
was praying for me. I kept crying, ‘O God, teach me.’ I had to 
change my prayer, ‘O God, save me; O God, take away this bur- 
den.’ But it grew darker and darker, and the load grew heavier 
and heavier. All the way to my office I kept crying, ‘O God, take 
away this load of guilt.” I gave my clerks a holiday, and just 
ciosed my office and locked the door. I fell down on my face. I 
cried in agony to my Lord, ‘O Lord, for Christ’s sake, take away 
this guiit.’ I don’t know how it was, but it began to grow very 
light. I said, ‘I wonder if this isn’t what they call conversion. I 
think I will go and ask the minister if I am not converted.’ I met 
my wife at the door and said, ‘ My dear, I’ve been converted.’ She 
Jooked in amazement. ‘Oh, it’s a fact; I’ve been converted!’ We 
went into that drawing-room, and knelt down by the sofa, and 
prayed to God to bless us.” The old Judge said to me, the tears 


RS, 


th you. I 
that when 
“T will do 
th a good 


to Fulton 
' that wife 
alf after, I 
1: “There 
I found 
| let you 
Il me all 
o hear it 
O a meet- 
ting there 
1 my chil- 
I shall be 
believe a 
n the God 
e to teach 
, the God 
- down on 
And as I 
k, and my 
pretended 
knew she 
I had to 
this bur- 
w heavier 
God, take 
and just 
y face. I 
ake away 
srow very 
ersion. I 
. I met 
ed.’ She 
sd!’ We 
sofa, and 
the tears 


“ ” 
THE TEN “COMES, 509 


trickling down his cheeks, “ Mr. Moody, I’ve enjoyed life more in 
the last three months than in all the years of my life put together,” 
If there is an infidel here—if there is a skeptical one here—ask God 
to give you wisdom to come now. Let us reason together, and if 
you become acquainted with God, the day will not go before you 
receive light from Him. 

The next “come” I want to call your attention to is a very 
sweet one. He says, “Come and reason,” “Come and see,” 
and now we have “Come and rest.” What this world wants is 
rest. Every man, every woman, is in pursuit of it, and how many 
of us have found it. How many are bearing burdens about our 
hearts always—how many have come into this hal] to-day with a 
great burden on their hearts? What does he say : “Come unto Me 
all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest,” 
Now, a great many people have an idea that they must get rid of 
their burdens themselves, but they must come to Him if they want 
to be relieved. That’s what Christ came for. Come to Him. “He 
hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows.” Thére could not be 
a sweeter “come” than this. How many mothers are bearing burdens 
for their children—how many because of their sons; or perhaps you 
have husbands who have proved unfaithful, or may be you are 
widows who have been left without support. The future may look 
dark to you; but hear the loving voice of the Saviour, “Come unto 
Me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” 
There is not a soul here—I don’t care what the burden may be— 
in this vast audience, but can lay their burden on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and He will bear it for you. We can be released; we have 
found a resting-place, and that is in the loving bosom of the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

Oh, my friends, if you want rest to-day, come to Him. He stands 
with His arms outstretched, and says, “Come to Me and rest.” 
Does the world satisfy your Are not the griefs of the world crush- 
ing many a heart here? Hear the voice of Jesus, “ Come and rest.” 
The world can not take it from you; the world’s crosses and trials 
will not tear them from you; He will give you peace, and comfort, 
and rest if you but come. 

The next “come” is, “Come and drink and eat.” You don’t 
have to pay anything. You know it is hard for a man to get a tax 
on water, unless when it has to be brought into the city. But this 
water is always without price, and salvation is like a river, flowing 


510 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


at the feet of every one; and all you have to do is to stoop down 
and drink of this living water, and never die. The world can not 
give you comfort—can not give you water to satisfy your thirst, 
and every man and woman in this world is thirsty. That’s the way 
our places of amusement are filled. People are constantly thirsting 
for something. But how are they filled with these amusements? 
They are as thirsty as ever. But if they drink the water that He 
offers, they will have a fountain of water springing up into everlast- 
ing life. I remember coming down a river with some wounded 
soldiers. The water was very muddy, and as we had no filters, they 
had to drink the dirty water, which did not satisfy their thirst. I re- 
member a soldier saying, “ Oh, that I hada draught of water from my 
father’s well.” Oh, that every woman here to-day would cry,“ Oh, that 
I had a draught of water from my Father’s well. If you drink of 
the living water your soul will never thirst again. Not only does He 
say, “ Come and drink of that living water,” but He says, “Come and 
eat.” In the 55th chapter of Isaiah you are invited to come and 
eat. You know all that the children of Israel had to do in the wil- 
derness was just to pick up the manna and eat. They didn’t have 
to make it. And people had just 'to stoop down and pick up the 
manna and eat, and drink from the flinty rock when the water 
flowed. And to-day the provision is brought to the door of your 
hearts. You haven't to go down to the earth for it, or to go up to 
the skies for it. It is here, and all you have to do is to eat it. 

You know almost the last words of Christ after His resurrection, 
when having a little fish, He said, “Come and dine.” O, what a 
sweet invitation—the invitation of the Master to His disciples, 
“Come and dine.” I invite you now to come and dine with Him; 
He will quench that thirst; He will satisfy your hunger, and all 
that you’ve got to do is to take Him at His word. 

“The Spirit and the bride say come. * * And let him that is 
athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the water of life 
freely.” Will you take it to-day? “The Spirit and the bride say 
come ;” “ Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely.” 
Now I want to ask you what are you going to do with these ten 
loving invitations to-day — ‘Come and hear,” “Come and see,” 
“Come and reason,” “ Come and rest,” “Come and eat and drink,” 
“Come and dine,” “Come and find grace,” “Come unto the mar- 
riage,” “ Come and inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world.” “Whosoever will, let him come.” Ask 


LO Eee ee ae a ee BE 


Ji ee 


$1 


IYERS. 


0 stoop down 
rorld can not 
y your thirst, 
hat’s the way 
ntly thirsting 
amusements ? 
ater that He 
into everlast- 
me wounded 
0 filters, they 
r thirst. I re- 
ater from my 
ry,“ Oh, that 
ou drink of 
only does He 
“Come and 
to come and 
o in the wil- 
‘didn’t have 
pick up the 
1 the water 
loor of your 
to go up to 
eat it. 
esurrection, 
O, what a 
is disciples, 
with Him; 
ger, and all 


him that is 
ater of life 
e bride say 
ife freely.” 
1 these ten 

and see,” 
and drink,” 
o the mar- 
u from the 
me.” Ask 


THE TEN “COMES.” 


BIT 


God to help you come to-day. IfI were in your place I would set. 
tle this question before I left this building; I would 
to the kingdom of God and take Him at His word. 


just press up 


PRAYER, 


Our Heavenly Father, we pray Thee that Thy blessings May rest 
upon all these dear friends that have arisen and said, by this act, 
“ Pray for us.” Give us the spirit of prayer, and teach us how to 
pray. May they not leave this hall until they have left all their sins 
with Thee. Dear Saviour, may they come to-day, and leave their 


? 
's wife; and may every 
woman in this assembly that has arisen, say, “ Pray for me.” We 


pray, O God, that they may drink of the living water of salvation 
to-day ; that they may have their eyes opened to live wholly for 
Christ. We pray for these mothers. May they only go home to 
erect a family altar, and bring their homes to the throne of Christ. 
We pray Thee for these sisters, and for these young wives, and may 
they be a power in the home-circle, and may they look back in 
years to come and think of this stormy Sabbath afternoon and re- 
member it as one of the happiest of their life. Blot out all their 
sins and their iniquities, and may Christ write their names in the 
great book of life, and when they have done influencing their fami- 
lies for good on this earth, bring them, O God, all to bless Thee on 
high, and Thine shall be the glory and the praise forever, Amen, 


LX. 


A CHRISTMAS SERMON. 


LUKE ii. 10. “ Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all 
people,” 


T seems to me as if every one ought to be lifted up—their hearts 

| ought to be lit up with joy to-day. I suppose millions and 
millions of people in this world to-day have read this second 
chapter of Luke, and how many eyes have fallen upon this one 
verse, “ Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall 
be to all people; for unto you is born this day, in the city of David, 
a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord,” and their hearts have been 
filled with peace and joy. I have often wondered what God could 
have given us in the place of Christ; what better gift He could 
have given us? Suppose He had given us the choice ourselves; 
what could we have selected better? How many of you have been 
wondering what you will give your children as presents! You have 
been puzzled what to give them that would suit them best, and you 
have listened to their conversations, to hear if you could catch 
what they would like. You have, perhaps, heard Charlie or Johnny 
saying they would like Santa Claus to bring them a sleigh, a drum, 
a horse, a trumpet, or a whip. You have listened to all their wants, 
and perhaps you’ve gone and bought these things, and have them 
hid away in your houses now, and to-morrow they will be brought 
out. God looked at us, and He found in every heart there was 
written want, want, and He saw what we wanted (and that was His 
own Son), and He gave us just what every one of us need. Some 
one has said that if a man had chosen something himself, from 
Adam all the way down, he could not have selected anything better 
than a Saviour. There is nothing that could be chosen in compari- 
son to Him. God saw what we needed, and He never makes a 
mistake, It is just what every man, woman, and child in this city 
needs. Not a woman in this building can get into the kingdom of 
God without taking this gift. Therefore it is good tidings when we 
(512) 


shall be to all 


their hearts 
uillions and 
this second 
yn this one 
which shall 
y of David, 
have been 
God could 
He could 
Ourselves; 
have been 

You have 
st, and you 
ould catch 
or Johnny 
h, a drum, 
heir wants, 
have them 
e brought 
there was 
ut was His 
sd. Some 
self, from 
ling better 
| compari- 
* makes a 
1 this city 
igdom of 
3 when we 


A CHRISTMAS SERMON, 


513 
ay, in the city of David, a Sav- 


read, “For unto you is born this d 
jour.” He is a gift to every one here. God gave Him y 
us all, and all we’ve got to do is to take Him. 

Now you remember how, during the war 
Peace. You could not go into a church but 
up, “Peace, peace.” In every home where 
the prayer was “ Peace,” That's just what we all want. Now 
these angels have told these shepherds on the 
that they bring peace. “Glory 


P freely to 


? 


plains of Bethlehem 
to God in the highest, and on earth 
peace, good-will toward men.” And how that ought to fill every 


soul with gladness. There is No true peace, true joy, till He comes 
into our hearts. We can not have it unless He has entered our 


ion, as if they were 
You know the colonies 
a continuance. At Jast 


» So that they could 

€ war was ended. The news spread through the 
city that day that they were coming, but the day passed into the 
night, and it looked as if the vessels would not be able to reach 
port that night. So the people went to bed. But the vessels came 
up, and these men had good news, and the boats were lowered. 
The commissioners go into the boats, and the sailors, in the dark- 
ness, pulled for the shore. When they got within hearing distance 
they could not contain themselves, and cried, “ Peace, peace,” and 
the men took up the glad news and ran up one street and down 
another shouting, “ Peace, peace ;” atid men, women, and children, 
too, came from their homes and took up the cry, and it echoed 
through the city. The cannon were booming, and the bells were 
ringing, and all New York was full of the joy of that peace. It was 


514 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


what the people wished. The war was over, peace was brought, 
and the English army was withdrawn, and we had peace in this 
biessed land for nearly one hundred years. If we have been at war 
with Him, here is reconciliation to-day. Yes, my friends, it is good. 
will to men. If you have been at enmity with Him, bear in mind 
that our enmity can cease to-day. Wecan be reconciled unto Him- 
self, we can have peace for time and eternity, for “ Behold, I bring 
you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people, for unto 
you is born this day, in the city of David, a Saviour.” 

If God does not want us reconciled to Himself, why did He send 
Christ? If He does not want us reconciled, what did He come for? 
What did He leave Heaven for if He did not want to bring peace and 
reconciliation to men? He came for this purpose, and we, as His 
commissioners, ask you to be reconciled to Him. How sweet it is 
to be reconciled to God—to be at perfect peace with Him. You 
who have been at war with God all your lives, you who have been 
at war with your neighbors, with your friends, with yourselves, will 
you not accept His Peace now? What would be more acceptable 
to that man in prison than his liberty? I remember while in Eng- 
land, I was told of a man who was to be hung at eight o’clock upon 
acertain morning. The black flag was waving from the prison where 
he was incarcerated, and the prison was in the heart of the town. 
A great many of the ministers in the churches had for their subject 
this condemned man. Everybody was talking about the execution, 
and the whole town was excited. The black flag raised upon the 
prison told them that a man was to be launched into eternity. 
Thousands were praying for him, a great many were weeping, for 
he was a man who had been very much liked by some. They had 
sent petitions to the Queen, but without any effect so far. Perhaps 
the gallows was erected inside the prison as it is here, and the poor 
captive heard the carpenters at work, and as they struck blow upon 
blow, it seemed to be upo: his breast, for every nail driven in brought 
him nearer to his doom. Now the hour is approaching. The day 
preceding his execution passes into night, and darkness hung over 
that prison. How dark it must have been in that cell that night. 
Next morning he knew he was to die upon the gallows. That night 
about midnight he heard the footfalls of the sheriff coming near his 
door. He knew the hour had not yet arrived, and he began to 


tremble. “Is he coming before my time to take me out and exe- 


cute me?” The door was unlocked, and thc sheriff said to the con- 


VERS. 


was brought, 
peace in this 
e been at war 
ds, it is good- 
bear in mind 
‘d unto Him- 
hold, I bring 
ople, for unto 


did He send 
Te come for? 
ng peace and 
1 we, as His 
w sweet it is 
Him. You 
10 have been 
irselves, will 
> acceptable 
hile in Eng- 
clock upon 
orison where 
of the town. 
heir subject 
> execution, 
‘d upon the 
to eternity. 
veeping, for 
They had 

r. Perhaps 
id the poor 
blow upon 
in brought 
The day 
hung over 
that night. 
That night 
ng near his 
> began to 
| and exe- 
to the con- 


\ 
\ 


A CHRISTMAS SERMON, 


demned man, “I bring you good news——] bring y 
the Queen.” What do you think would be the fee] 
Wouldn’t he rejoice? My friends, 


waving over you, and hell rejoicing that you will soon be there, 
but Christ comes with a pardon to 


ted out—by which all your iniquities are taken away, 
will become as a child of God 


nder sin, you 
are condemned, but you can receive a pardon, for lig 
the world. The Son of Man has come into the world, and you are 
offered a pardon as a Christmas gift. Will you take it? or wil 


accept it. 

Look at that prison in Jerusalem where Barabbas was confined, 
He had been tried, sentence had been rendered, and he was to die 
the death of the cross. He-. > 4 noted prisoner, and you know it 
was only the worst prisoners who died the death of the cross, You 
can see him as the day drew near. The day was set and the hour 
was rolling on when he was to meet death and judgment, and you 
can see the poor man trembling at the thought. Strange news 
reaches him. He hears that Christ, the Galilean prophet, is going to be 
executed with Him, and He is to be put between two thieves—He, 
the Prince of Peace. Then a rumor comes to him that Pilate is 
going to liberate Christ or himself, and he is going to let the people 
choose between them. And if some one had gone and told him this 
he would have said, “Why, of course, they will not choose Christ 
and allow me to be liberated. I have taken men’s lives all my days, 
while He has given men life; I’ve robbed men of all they have, 
while He has only given them blessings; I’ve destroyed men’s peace 
all my life, while He has only given men joy and happinecs, ard of 
course they will liberate Him.” It might have been that he ha’ i 
family living in Jerusalem, and in the morning before his execution 
his wife and children came to bid him farewell, and I’ve been told 
by executioners that the farewell between the family of the criminal 
and himself is one of the saddest things conceivable. Perhaps at a 
funeral you have seen a loving. mother coming up and imprinting 
the last kiss upon the marble brow of her boy, and one member 


ht has come into — 


gift by which every one is liberated from sin if they will only . 


\y 


516 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAVERS, 


after another of the family come up and take the last look. You 
know this is all very sad; but what is it to the grief of that heart- 
broken wife who bids farewell to her husband, who came into that 
cell in the Jerusalem prison, knowing that in a few hours he was to 
die on the cross. You can see him kiss her for the last time, and 
bidding farewell to each of his children, and they go never to see 
him again. Poor Barabbas! How he must have trembled; how he 
must have been full of sorrow and gloom as he looked forward to 
the death he was to die, and thought of those he was leaving be- 
hind. By and by he hears a footfall upon the corridor. Nearer and 
nearer it comes. “ Are they going to take me to execution now?” 
he asks himself. The bolts are pulled, the door is swung open, 
and the sheriff says, “ Barabbas, you are free ; go where you please!” 
I can see that poor, condemned man looking at the officer. “What ! 
What do you tell me; I am free? Do you mean to say that the 
people have chosen Jesus of Nazareth to be executed instead of 
me?” “Yes, they have, and you are free.” I can see him leaving 
that cell; and he goes down to his wife and children, and he draws 
that wife to his bosom. “I’ve got good news for you; I haven't only 
got my life prolonged, but I’ve got my liberty. Christ has died in 
my stead.” That is the Gospel. Christ died for every sinner, as 
Paul says, “He died and gave Himself for me”—for each of us 
here. That’s the glorious Gospel of substitution. He died “for 
our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities; the chastise- 
ment of our peace was upon Him, and with His stripes we are 
healed.” Will you walk out of this building to-day and say, 
“Christ is nothing to me; I see no beauty in Him; I see no reason 
why I should love Him?” God gave Him up for you. Not 
only was He given up for us and born in a manger and lived 
a life of toil and hardship, but He died an ignominious death. Say, 
young lady, would you rather live the life of the world—would you 
rather live a life of pleasure; would you rather have your darling 
sin than God’s gift? Won’t you to-day accept and make your 
peace for time and eternity? and this will be a joyful day for you. 

Let me say here, that I never knew one who accepted these glad 
tidings who was ever disappointed. Now, God does not offer us 
good tidings, and when we come to look we find it is bad news. 
Very often we hear in the world something which we think is good 
news, but after a little we find out that it is very bad. It is not so 
with the Gospel. 


ese hd Raines tirnenrcineergiiniennintilns pputtatiea ae iat 


[VERS, 


st look. You 
of that heart- 
ame into that 
ours he was to 
last time, and 
never to see 
bled; how he 
ed forward to 
s leaving be- 
Nearer and 
ution now?” 
swung open, 
you please!” 
cer. “ What! 
say that the 
d instead of 
‘him leaving 
ind he draws 
haven’t only 
t has died in 
ry sinner, as 
‘each of us 
e died “for 
the chastise- 
‘ipes we are 
ly and say, 
2e no reason 
you. Not 
r and lived 
leath. Say, 
—would you 
our darling 
make your 
Yy for you. 
these glad 
1ot offer us 
s bad news. 
ink is good 
it is not so 


LXI. 
OUR LORD’S RETURN. 


2 TIMOTRY iii, 16: “ All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable 
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,” 


OME people tell us when we take up prophecy that it is 
S all very well to be believed, but that there is no use in one 
trying to understand it; these future events are things that 
the Church does not agree about, and it is better to let them alone, 
and deal only with those prophecies which have already been ful- 
filled., But Paul doesn’t talk that way; he says: “ All Scripture is 
* * *® profitable for doctrine.” If these people are right, he ought 
to have said: “Some Scripture is profitable; but you can’t under- 
stand the prophecies, so you had better let them alone.” If God 
didn’t mean to have us study the prophecies, He wouldn’t have put 
them into the Bible. Some of them are fulfilled, and He is at work 
fulfilling the rest, so that if we do not see them ail completed in this 
life, we shall in the world to come. 

I don’t want to teach anything to-day, dogmatically, on my own: 
authority, but to my mind this precious doctrine—for such I must 
call it—of the return of the Lord to this earth is taught in the New 
Testament as clearly as any other doctrine in it; yet I was in the 
Church fifteen or sixteen years before I ever heard a sermon on it, 
There is hardly any church that doesn’t make a great deal of baptism, 
but the New Testament only speaks about baptism thirteen times, 
while it speaks of the return of our Lord fifty times; and yet the 
Church has had very little to say about it. Now, I cansee a reason 


for this: the devil does not want us to see this truth, for nothing 


would wake up the Church so much. The moment a man takes 
hold of the truth that Jesus Christ is coming back again to receive 
His friends to Himself, this world loses its hold upon Him; gas. 
stocks and water-stocks, and stocks in banks and in horse-railroads, 
are of very much less consequence to him then. His heart is free, 

(317) 


\eaepeueeenee 


518 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


and he looks for the blessed appearing of his Lord, who at His 


coming will take him into His blessed kingdom. 

In 2 Peter i, 20, we read: “No prophecy of the Scripture is of 

any private interpretation.” Some people say, “Oh, yes, the proph- 
ecies are all well enough for the priests and doctors, but not for the 
rank and file of the Church.” But Peter says, “The prophecy came 
not by the will of man, but holy men spake as they were moved by 
the Holy Ghost,” and those men are the very ones who tell us of 
the return of our Lord. Look at Daniel ii. 45, where he tells the 
meaning of that stone which the king saw in his dream that was 
cut out of the mountain without hands, and that broke in pieces the 
iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold. “The dream is 
certain and the interpretation thereof sure,” says Daniel. Now we 
have seen the fulfillment of that prophecy all but the closing part 
of it. The kingdoms of Babylon, and Medo-Persia, and Greece, and 
Rome have all been broken in pieces, and now it only remains for 
this stone cut out of the mountain without hands to smite the im- 
age and break it in pieces till it becomes like the dust of the sum- 
mer threshing-floor, and for this stone to become a great mountain 
and fill the whole earth. But how is He going to come? We are 
told how He is going to come. When those disciples stood looking up 
into Heaven at the time of His ascension, there appeared two angels, 
who said unto them (Acts i. 11), “Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye 
gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from 
you into Heaven shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him 
go into Heaven.” How did He go up? He took His flesh and 
bones up with Him. “Look at me; handle me; give me something 
to eat; a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have; I am the 
identical one whom they crucified and laid in the grave. Now I 
am risen from the dead and am going up to Heaven.” He is gone, 
say the angels, but He will come again just as He went. An angel 
was sent to announce His birth of the Virgin; angels sang of His 
advent in Bethlehem; an angel told the women of His resurrec- 
tion; and two angels told the disciples of His coming again. It is 
the same testimony in all these cases. 

I don’t know why people shouldn’t like to study the Bible, and 
find out all about this Precious doctrine of our Lord’s return. 
Some have gone beyond prophecy, and tried to tell the very day 
He would come. Perhaps that is one reason why people don’t be- 
lieve this doctrine. He is coming, we know that; but just when 


aos &. 8S ef = 


520 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


In the closing verses of the fourth chapter of 1 Thessalonians, 
Paul says: “If we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so 
also them which sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him. * ¥* « 
We which are alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord shal] 
not prevent them which are asleep. For the Lord Himself shall 
descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, 
and with the trump of Ged, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, 
Then we which are alive and remain sh. be caught up together 
with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall 


these words.” That is, the comforted of the Church. There was 
a time when I used to mourn that I should not be alive in the mil- 
lennium; but now I expect to be in the millennium, Dean Aiford 
says—almost everybody bows to him in the matter of interpreta- 
tion—that he must insist that this coming of Christ to take His 
Church to Himself in the clouds is not the same event as His com- 
ing to judge the world at the last day. The deliverance of the 
"Church is one thing, judgment js another. Now, I can’t find any 
place in the Bible where it tells me to wait for signs of the coming 
of the millennium, as the return of the Jews, and such like; but it 


too deep for the most of us; such things ought not to be said be- 
fore tnese young converts; only the very wisest characters, such as 
the ministers and the professors in the theological seminaries, can 
understand them.” But, my friends, you find that Paul wrote 


Here, in the first chapter of First Thessalonians, Paul Says: “Ye 
turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God, and to 
wait for His Son from Heaven, whom He raised from the dead, ever 
Jesus, which delivered us from the wrath to come.” To wait for 
His Son; that is the true attitude of every child of God. If he is 
doing that, he is ready fer the duties of life—ready for God's work; 
aye, that makes him feel that he is just ready to begin to work for 
God. Then over in the next chapter (1 Thessalonians li, 19.) he 


VERS. 


hessalonians, 
gain, even so 
m * * «4 
e Lord shall 
limself shall 
1e archangel, 
all rise first. 
up together 
and so shall 
nother with 
There was 
in the mil- 
Jean Aiford 
interpreta- 
oO take His 
is His com- 
ince of the 
t find any 
the coming 
ike; but it 
rit; tobe 
zins. The 
Vv, before J 
come asa 
or Him. 
oll, that is 
e said be. 
rs, such as 
laries, can 
aul wrote 
Thessalo- 
se words, 
tye: “Ye 
d, and to 
ead, ever 
Ywait for 
If he is 
1’s work; 
work for 


i. 19.) he 


OUR LORD'S RETURN. 521 

says: “For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are 
not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at His com. 
ing?” And again, in the third chapter, at the thirteenth verse: 
“To the end that He may stablish your hearts unblamable in holi- 
ness before God, even our F ather, at the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ with ail His saints.” Still again, in the fifth chapter: “For 
ye yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so cometh as 
a thief in the night.” He has something to say about this same 
thing in every chapter. Indeed, I have thought this Epistle to the 
Thessalonians might be called the Gospel of Christ’s coming again, 

There are three great facts foretold in the Word of God: First, 
that Christ should come; that has been fulfilled. Second, that the 
Holy Ghost should come; that was fulfilled at Pentecost, and the 
Church is able to testify to it by its experience of His saving 
grace. Third, the return of our Lord again from Heaven—for this 
we are told to watch and wait “iill He come.” Look at that 
account of the last hours of Christ with His disciples. What does 
Christ say tothem? “If I go away I will send death after you to 
bring you to Me? I will send.an angel after you?” Not at all. 
He says: “TI will come again and receive you unto Myself.” If my 
wife were in a foreign country, and I had a beautiful mansion all 
ready for her, she would a good deal rather I should come and 
bring her unto it than to have me send some one else to bring her. 
So the Church is the Lamb’s wife. He has prepared a mansion for 
His bride, and He promises for our joy and comfort that He will 
come Himself and bring us to the place He has been all this while 
preparing. 

My friends, it is perfectly safe to take the Word of God just as 
we find it. If He tells us to watch, then watch! If He tells us to 
pray, then pray! If He tells us He will come again, wait for Him! 
Let the Church bow to the Word of God, rather than trying to find 
out how these things can be. “ Behold, I come quickly,” said 
Christ. ‘ Even so come, Lord Jesus,” should be the prayer of the 
Church. 

‘take the account of the words of Christ at the communion-table. 
It seems to me that the devil has covered up the most precious 
thing about it. “ For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this 
cup ye do show forth the Lord’s death ¢:// fe come.” But most 
people scem to think that the Lord’s table is the place for self-ex- 
amination and repentance, and making good resolutions. Not at 


522 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


all; you spoil it that way; it is to show forth the Lord’s death, and 
we are to keep it up till He comes. 

Some people say, “I believe Christ will come on the other side 
of the millennium.” Where do you get it? Ican’t find it. The 
Word of God nowhere tells me to watch and wait for the coming 
of the millennium, but for the coming of the Lord. I don’t find 
any place where God says the world is to grow better and better, 
and that Christ is to havea spiritual reign on earth of a thousand 
years. I find that the earth is to grow worse and worse, and that 
at length there is going to be aseparation. “ Two women grinding 
at a mill—one taken and the other left; two men in one bed—one 
taken and the other left.” The Church is to be translated out of the 
world, and if this fail, we have two examples already, two repre- 
sentatives, as we might say, in Christ’s kingdom, of what is to be 
done for all His true believers, Enoch is the representative of the 
first dispensation, Elijah of the second, and, as a representative of 
the third dispensation, we have the Saviour Himself, who is entered 
into the heavens for us, and became the first fruits of them that 
slept. Weare not to wait for the great white throne judgment, but 
the glorified Church is set on the throne with Christ, and to help to 
judge the world. 

Now some of you think this is a new and strange doctrine, 
and that they who preach it are speckled birds. But let me tel] 
you that most of the spiritual men in the pulpits of Great Britain 
are firm in this faith. Spurgeon preaches it. I have heard New- 
man Hall say that he knew no reason why Christ might not come 
before he got through with his sermon. But in certain wealthy and 
fashionable churches, where they have the form of godliness, but 
deny the power thereof—just the state of things which Paul de- 
clares shall be in the last days—this doctrine is not preached or 
believed. They do not want sinners to cry out in their meeting, 
“What must I do to be saved?” They want intellectual preachers 
who will cultivate their taste, brilliant preachers who will rouse their 
imagination, but they don’t want the preaching that has in it the 
power of the Holy Ghost. We live in the day of shams in relig- 
ion. The Church is cold and formal ; may God wake us up! And 
I know of no better way to do it than to get the Church to looking 
for the return of our Lord. 

Some peopie say, “Oh, you will discourage the young converts 
if you preach that doctrine,” Well, my friends, that hasn’t been 


a A> = ot tes 


“ERS, 


s death, and 


e other side 
nd it. The 
the coming 
[ don’t find 
and better, 
a thousand 
e, and that 
en grinding 
e bed—one 
1 out of the 
two repre- 
at is to be 
tive of the 
ntative of 
is entered 
them that 
zment, but 
to help to 


doctrine, 
let me tell 
sat Britain 
ecard New- 
not come 
salthy and 
liness, but 
Paul de- 
cached or 
‘meeting, 
preachers 
use their 
}in it the 
s in relig- 
p! And 
> looking 


converts 
n’t been 


OUR LORD'S RETURN, 523 
my experience. I have felt like working three times as hard eyer 
since | came to understand that my Lord was coming back again, 
I look on this world as a wrecked vessel. God has given mea 
life-boat, and said to me, “ Moody, save all you can.” God 
will come in judgment and burn up this world, but the children 
of God don’t belong to this world: they are in it, but not of it, 
like a ship in the water. This world is getting darker and darker; 
its ruin is coming nearer and nearer. If you have any friends 
on this wreck unsaved, you had better lose no time in get- 
ting them off. But some one will say, “Do you, then, make the 
grace of God a failure?” No; grace is not a failure, but’ man 
is. The antediluvian world was a failure; the Jewish world 
was a failure; man has been a failure everywhere, when he has 
had his own way and been left to himself. Christ will save His 
Church, but He will save them finally by taking them out of the 
world. Now, don’t take my word for it; look this doctrine up in 
your Bibles, and, if you find it there, bow down to it and receive it 
as the word of God. Take Matthew xxiv. 50: “The Lord of that 
servant shall come when he looketh not for Him, and in an hour 
that he is not aware of, and shall cut him asunder and appoint him 
his portion with the hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnash- 
ing of tecth.” Take 2 Peter, third chapter, third and fourth verses: 
“There shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own 
lusts, and saying, Where is the promise of His coming? for since 
the Fathers fell asleep all things continue as they were from the 
beginning of the creation.” Go out on the streets of Chicago and 
ask men about the return of our Lord, and that is just what they 
would say: “ Ah, yes, the Lord delayeth His coming!” 

“ Behold, I come quickly,” said Christ to John, and the last prayer 
in the Bible is, “ Even so, Lord Jesus, come quickly.” Were the 
early Christians disappointed then? No: no man is disappointed 
who obeys the voice of God. The world waited for the first coming 
of the Lord ; waited for 4,000 years and then He came. He was 
here only thirty-three years and then he went away; but He left us 
a promise that He would come again; and as the world watched 
and waited for His first coming and did not watch in vain, so now 
to them who wait for His appearing shall He appear a second time 
unto salvation. Now let the question go round, “Am I ready to 
meet the Lord if He comes to-night?” “Be ye also ready, for in 
such an hour as ye think not the Son of Man cometh.” 


524 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 


There is another thought I want to call your attention to, and 
that is: Christ will bring all our friends with Him when He comes, 
All who have died in the Lord are to be with Him when He comes 
in the clouds of Heaven. “Blessed and holy is he that hath part in 
the first resurrection ; on such the second death has no power, but 
they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with Him 
a thousand years,” (Rev. xx. 6). “But the rest of the dead lived 
not again until the thousand years were finished ; this is the first res- 
urrection”’ (verse 5). That looks as if the Church were to have a 
thousand years with Christ before His return to the final judg- 
ment, when Satan shall be cast out, and there shall 1.e new heavens 
and new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness. 

Now, I want to give you some texts to study at home: 1 Cor, ii. 
26; Luke xix, r3} 1 Tims vi. 19; 1 Thess. ; 7; James v. 8; 1 
Thess, iv. 17-18. And so let us watch and wait till He comes, 


VERS, 


tion to, and 
n He comes. 
n He comes 
hath part in 

power, but 
1 with Him 
> dead lived 
the first res- 
>to have a 
final judg- 
ew heavens 


: I Cor. ii. 
es v. 8; 1 
comes, 


LXII. 


LESSONS FROM AHAB’S ILL-JUDGED MAR- 
RIAGE. 


1 Kings xxi, 


HESE Bible characters are all representatives of people living 
in our time. There is an old saying that “every man has his 
price,” and there is a good deal of truth in it. Judas had his 

price, and it was thirty pieces of silver. Esau had his price, and it 
was a mess of pottage. Herod had his price too, and Ahab had 
his. Ahab, we find, sold himself for a garden of herbs, and bitter 
herbs they were to him. He sold himself very cheaply. As we 
read about him and see the small price for which he sold himself, 
let us ask ourselves the question, What are we doing? Are there 
not many men in Chicago to-day guilty of selling themselves for‘a 
good deal less than Ahab? As we condemn him, ask yourselves 
what is the darling sin that keeps you bound to the world. Is it the 
pleasure of the world? Is it ambition? What is the besetting sin , 
which you are not willing to give up? Remember how Ahab sold 
himself. He had had warning after warning. God sent to him one 
of the purest men who ever walked this earth to warn him. One 
would have thought he had had warning enough on Mount Carmel, 
but he was one of those vacillating characters, one of those men 
who thought it would be better for him to go with the current, al- 
though deep down in his heart he knew the truth, No doubt when 
Elijah stood before.him Ahab locked upon him as a bigot—as be- 
longing to the school of the Puritans; one of those men who be- 
lieved in the Mosaic law which was given to the people in the wil- 
derness. But the people had got beyond that kind of thing; they 
were living in a time of culture and enlightenment, and were not 
going to be bound by that law. Bear in mind that Ahab was a re- 
ligious man. There is no man in Chicago who keeps four hundred 
and fifty prophets. Yet Ahab did so. He did a good deal to keep 

(525) 


ty 


— 


526 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


up religion; he kept up churches, and had all those prophets at 
his table. But for all that he had no religion. So with men to-day, 
They do a good deal to keep up churches and ministers, but they 
haven’t got Christ. They are living on form, which doesn’t give 
them any comfort. A good many are religious, yet they are very 
far from God, They have never been born of God; they’ve got re. 
ligion, but there’s no Christ in it. 

The first great mistake this man made was his marriage with Jez- 
ebel, the daughter of one of the Hebrew kings. She was a wicked, 
bad woman. Ahab was bad enough himself, but his wife was worse 
a hundred times. It seems as if after the marriage Ahab was mere- 
ly an instrument in her hands. No doubt the Marriage was made 
to increase his power and enlarge his kingdom, and the very thing 
she did was to ruin his kingdom. Instead of relying upon the God 
of Israel, he looked for human aid to help him, and _ his downfall 
came. Many a man has been ruined by marrying a wicked woman, 
and many a woman by marrying a wicked man. We find that no 
king had a better subject than Elijah; no one ever had better ad- 
vice than Elijah could give, because he was a messenger sent by God. 
If he had taken Elijah’s advice, and not his wicked wife’s, his king- 
dom would have been saved. Look at men now. How many young 
men have praying mothers who are giving them good advice, and 
these young men say: “Qh, she is narrow-minded, bigoted; she 
don’t know anything about the life to-day.” They think she can 

not enter into sympathy with them, and, therefore, her advice is not 
taken. How many men look down upon the ministers because they 
tell them they are going to destruction. When they are spoken to 
about their sins, they cry out, as Ahab did, “ Hast thou found me 
out, O mine enemy?” They think because we preach righteousness 
and repentance we bring trouble. The Gospel brings peace, not 
trouble. If Ahab had taken Elijah’s advice he would have saved 
his kingdom, his throne, and his life. He would not have come to 
the miserable end that he did. There are a Sreat many people who, 
if they are spoken to about their danger, think that he who warns 
them is their enemy. What would you think of a mother who, if 
she saw her child putting its hand in the fire, wouldn’t warn it? If 
she didn’t she wouldn’t have motherly instincts, And if ministers 
of the Gospel didn’t warn men of their danger they wouldn’t be true 
disciples of Christ, Suppose I saw a man going down Clark street, 
the bridge has been Swung, and he is about to walk over; would 


sc xp leh ice AU ee lage OP 


wm 


IVYERS., 


> prophets at 
h men to-day, 
ters, but they 

doesn’t give 
hey are very 
ley’ve got re- 


age with Jez- 
vas a wicked, 
ife was worse 
ab was mere- 
f© was made 
€ very thing 
pon the God 
his downfall 
ked woman, 
ind that no 
1 better ad- 
ent by God. 
's, his king- 
nany young 
advice, and 
goted; she 
ik she can 
lvice is not 
cause they 
spoken to 
found me 
hteousness 
peace, not 
ave saved 
Cc come to 
-ople who, 
vho warns 
er who, if 
rn ite If 
ministers 
’t be true 
ik street, 
rr; would 


LESSONS FROM AHAB'S ILL-FUDGED MARRIAGE, 527 
that man !ook upon me as his enemy if I warned him of his danger ? 
If these ministers, these praying mothers, warn you, know that they 
are the best friends you have got. A great many men hate that 
Bible because it tells them of their sins and warns them of their 
future. ‘ 

Look ‘at Ahab going into Samaria. He goes back like a little 
child who has had a “ miff” He goes up into Samaria ina gloomy, 
sulky spirit and throws himself on his bed. The servants bring him 
food, and he refuses to eat it. The servants g0 to the queen, 
“Something’s gone wrong with the king, he won't eat anything,” 
So the queen goes to him and says: “What’s the matier? Sick?” 
“No,” he replies, “I’m not sick, but there’s a man down at Jezreel 
who's got a vineyard near the palace, and I’ve tried to get it for its 
herbs, but he won’t-!ct me have it. I’ve offered to get him another 
better than it, and give him money, but it’s no use.” TI suppose he 
was one of those mei: who went by the law of Moses, And then 
the queen says: “ Don’t you rule your own country? I'll get it, 
and won’t have to pay for it, either.” And she went off and got a 
decree in the name of King Ahab and sent it to the noblemen and 
elders. She told them to set two sons of Belial before the door of 
Naboth, and then let them come and say that he had blasphemed 
God and the king, and take him out and stone him to death. And 
those men bowed to that wretched woman. The farce was enacted. 
What a hypocritical thing this was. The two sons of Belial were put 
in front of Naboth’s house and then testified against him, and he 


his throne, his life, and his kingdom; it was the Means of crushing 
his power and rolling the whole royal family into the pit of hell, 
He had sold himself to the devil and then exercised his right as 
master. When a man forges and thinks he will be happy in the 
Possession of the money, he is likely to find he is mistaken ; he is 
selling himself to the devil. When a man has been successful in his 
efforts to ruin the virtue of some poor woman, and thinks he has 
merely ruined her, he is mistaken ; he has ruined himself. Bear in 
mind that God from His throne sees you. 

Ahab rides in his chariot to Jezreel, and takes possession of his 
ill-gotten gains. But Elijah, the man of God, instructed by Jehovah, 
goes to meet the royal villain, and utters against him a terrible 
prophecy, and not against him only, but also against his heathen 


y~ 


' 528 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


wife, the author of his crimes, and against all their wicked house. 


A few short years pass away, and all these predictions are minutely 
fulfilled. The blood of'the false king, of his heathen paramour, and 
of their children, is poured out like water, and all his glory goes 
down into darkness and dust. Oh, the folly of sacrificing the hap- 
Piness of time and eternity for the gratification of a brief hour of 
pleasure! When will parents cease also to compromise and destroy 
the everlasting welfare of their children ? 

I remember a few years ago hearing of a young lady who had 
been brought under deep conviction of sin. She seemed just about 
accepting Him, and the father and mother did everything they 
could to hinder her. The Spirit of God was striving within her, 
and in order to get her mind from the subject of conversion, they 
thought of getting up a very expensive party, and they bought for 
the occasion a very expensive dress for her. The evening came, anc 
she had the most gorgeous dress at that party. She was the belle 
of the evening. Their object was accomplished. Three weeks af- 
ter that, the daughter was on her dying bed, and she said, “ Bring 
me my dress.”” It was brought to her, and she looked at it, and, 
pointing with her finger, said: “That is the price of my soul,” and 
in a few hours she was dead. It is terrible to think that intelligent 
young ladies nd intelligent men should stand weighing this question 
and saying to themselves, “I can’t give up the pleasures of the world 
for the kingdom of God.” Ah, my friends, the time is coming when 
you would give worlds to have settled this question in the other way. 
Don’t be like Ahab. My friends, if you take the pleasures of the 
world instead of Him, it will cost you all you have got. You will 
die a miserable death and have a miserable eternity, May the God 
of Elijah fill your hearts with His love to-night ; may He open your 
eyes to your own salvation, and may there be a rush into the inquiry- 
room, and a cry go ur to-night from the heart of every unconverted 


man and woman here. Let us pray that God may find out every 
sinner in this hall to-night. 


AYERS. 


wicked house. 


$ are minutely 
paramour, and 
his glory goes 
cing the hap- 
brief hour of 
e and destroy 


ady who had 
1ed just about 
tything they 
g within her, 
version, they 
y bought for 
ing came, and 
vas the belle 
ree weeks af- 
said, “ Bring 
d at it, and, 
Ly soul,” and 
at intelligent 
this question 
of the world 
oming when 
e other way. 
sures of the 
t. You will 
fay the God 
€ open your 
the inquiry- 
Inconverted 
d out every 


MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS, 
PRAYER, 


Our Heavenly Father, we thank Thee, for what we have heard 
to-day; we thank Thee for this blessed work that is going on in 
our city; we thank Thee for this news we have heard to-day from 
the boys’ meeting; we pray that Thou wilt keep these lads from 
harm. Be Thou a tender shepherd unto them; may not one of 
them turn back and betray thé Lord, but may they be kept by the 
mighty power of God. May their parents encourage them; may 
their parents pray for them, and have the joy of seeing them grow 


up to be godly men; may they grow up in the fear and love of 
Thee; we pray that this me 


529 


» wi mfort him, and 
strengthen him, and bless him; and grant that the grace of God 
may dwell in his heart; may he not only be a shining light in his 
home, but in the church and among his associates. And, our 
Heavenly Father, we pray that what Thou hast done in the midst 
of this mighty city may be but the beginning of a mighty work; we 
know that there are thousands and tens of thousands that are yet 
to be reached in this city. We pray that Thou wilt give us strength 
to do our work, and we pray that we may not take any of the glory 
to ourselves, but give it all to Thee, and that we may glorify Him 
who gave Himself for us. O God, give us a passion for souls, 
give us such a burden for the salvation of souls that we may not rest 
day or night until we see them brought into the fold. At the close 
of this meeting, may there be many who may inquire for Christ ; 
may the inquiry-rooms be filled ; may there be many who shall lay 
hold of Christ now. O Son of God, give us a greater blessing 
than we have had yet; may we have the joy of seeing many turned 
from darkness unto light, and from the. power of Satan unto Thee ; 
may the blessing of this meeting be such that we may go to the 
Tabernacle in the next four days rejoicing; give us wisdom from 
above to give to these souls that are perishing; we ask it all in the 
name of Thy dear Son, Christ Jesus. And we would not forget our 
country; O God, save us from war; Thou art the God of this 
nation, and we lift our eyes to Thee; Thou canst calm the Passions 
of men; bring us out of this evil; Thou canst bring us out of all 
our troubles, and we believe that Thou wilt do ‘it, and Christ shall 
have the praise and glory. Amen, 


LXII. 


FAREWELL SERMON. Gop ABLE TO KEEP, 
ROMANS xiv, 4: “For God is able to make him stand,” 


\ K J HEN T first became a Christian it was Predicted by those 
who knew me that I would not hold out; that I would 
fall away in a few months. I used to fear and tremble 

myself; I was afraid I should fall. I knew nothing of the Bible. I 
was not acquainted with this Precious Word. I do not think there 


mitted to memory, and that I could quote. I did not know this 
blessed truth I have Just read to you to-night, that God was able to 


(night who have been full of fear, full of doubt, and at times have 

actually trembled in view of the temptations surrounding them, if 
P just lay hold of this Precious word “able” it will hold you up 
fin all your pilgrimage, in all your journey, no matter how rough and 
hard. “ God is able to make you stand.” The God that can create 
a world like this, and can call it from nothing into existence—the 
God that can create life with a word—He certainly can make a poor 
(sinner like you and me “stand” by His mighty power. He was 


|in the current of a river; the high, angry waves dashed up against 
him, but there he stood; stood upright in that great city, with all 
' the world against him. God did, indeed, make him to stand. And 
: Paul, I believe, wrote this blessed text out of his experience of 
+God’s Power to establish and uphold His people in their work. 
|The God of Paul stil] lives, and He is your God. Ok, put your 
ilove in God ; look to Him and pray to Him, and He wil give you 
“strength, and He will make you to stand. Let no one fall; God 
(530) 


esi aa | sania age cal mT) igs oem oie iltercat FUN Mth allt ath te 


‘O KEEP, 
4.” 


ted by those 
that I would 
and tremble 
the Bible. I 
t think there 
t I had com- 
ot know this 
| was able to 
rts here to- 
times have 
ing them, if 
10ld you up 
Vv rough and 
t can create 
stence—the 
nake a poor 
r. He was 
emptations 
errified be- 
in Babylon 
like a rock 
UP against 
‘Y, with all 
ind. And 
crience of 
heir work, 
put your 
| ive you 
falls God 


“eR Bea 
a FAREWELL SERMON, GOD ABLE TO KEEP, 
f the 
has power enough, God has grace enough, God has strength enough 
to keep every young convert in the straight path, if only you will ' 
look to Him, if only you will pray to 


Oh, let me 


en you are very 
Paul says, “ When I 
esn’t lie in ourselves; | 
If my strength is in God, He will give me 


tumbling, 
Therefore keep a fast hold on God, who 


proud and lifted up; he 
Let him pray, and then 


have fallen at different ti 
find they stumbled on this 


z 

Lord, he never would; but in a few hours he denied his Lord, and e 
how self-confident he was! And? — 

so, always, when a man is self-confident, satisfied with himself and’ ¢ 
lifted up, he can not hope to stand; he is standing on dangerous; ee: 
ground ; look out, he will slip and tumble headlong. We find meno* “ae 
failing in their very strongest points. I don’t know how it is, un-{ = 
wants to show them their weakness—' hs 

- Thus you remember the meek and’ a 


valiant man. In ° ‘e Old Testament you fi anal 
exalted, unless }* y as Joshua, Daniel, and Joseph. But you find, * ite 
this very man, Ens..u, getting afraid, and frighte»ed almost out of » ..” 

eae 


VOD WS SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 


uts life, just at a simple message. He was cast down by alarm, and 
could not stand before Ahab; in the midst of his strength he was 
weak. So men fail in the strongest points of their character; for 
if men get to thinking they are able to stand alone, their strength 
becomes sudden weakness. If we put our confidence in character, 
in habit, in anything but the might of God, our fall is not far off. 
Now, what the text says is this: “God is able to make us stand.” 
You can’t stand alone, young converts; but God can and will give 
| you the power, and will keep your feet from falling. 

I want to call your attention to a verse in the second chapter of 
Hebrews, the eighteenth verse: « For in that He Himself hath suf. 
fered being tempted, He is able to succor them that are tempted,” 
Let me read those words again. “ Heis able to succorthem that are 
tempted.” Oh, blessed thought, that God has Himself stood these: 
temptations, and so can realize our needs, I believe these very 
trials and temptations are sent to us to give us character. Men 

‘Who never have temptations, never have trials, are not_good for 
much as Christians, I count these things as most of a Christian’s 
discipline; and the more of these thorns in his side he gets the best 
of, the better and stronger a Christian he becomes. We don’t want 
any hot-house Christians, shut up from the world and never tempted, 
never tried; but battling bravely with these powers which Christ 
came down from Heaven to bear in His person and to overcome, 
God Himself was touched with a feeling of our infirmities, coming 
down to this world and being one of us. He took upon Him your 
nature and mine; therefore He can appreciate our frailties, and is 
able — yes, abundantly able—to succor them that are tempted. 
What we want is not to pray God to deliver us from temptations; 
that is not it; but we want to pray that \.< may overcome them, 
Thus, whenever the great tempter of souls comes down upon us, 
God will give us the will, the power, and the grace to overcome 
him, and to grow stronger for the victory. Of himself a man has 
not power, but God will give him the better over all temptations if 
He is only asked to do it. Now, let me say right here that if you 
are tempted, my friends, don’t think that that is sin. It is not a sin 
to be tempted; it is only sin when you yield to temptation; it is 
only sin when you listen to the tempter. He may come—we can't 
help that ; but we want ‘to resist him, and pray God to give us grace 
to overcome him and trample him under our feet. And every 
temptation we overcome gives us more strength to overcome the 


"ERS. 


»y alarm, and 
ngth he was 
laracter; for 
eir strength 
n character, 
not far off. 
e us stand.” 
nd will give 


| chapter of 
If hath suf- 
- tempted.” 
1em that are 
stood these: 
these very 
cter. Men 
t_ good for 
Christian’s 
ts the best 
don’t want 
r tempted, 
lich Christ 
overcome. 
es, coming 
Him your 
ies, and _is 
tempted. 
aptations; 
me them. 
/upon us, 
overcome 
man has 
tations if 
lat if you 
not a sin 
ion; it is 
-we can’t 
> US grace 
nd every 
some the 


¥AREWELL SERMON, GOD ABLE TO KEEP. * $33 


next one. So little by little we go on toward the fullness of the 
Stature of Christ. 

A.great many temptations will assail you in Chicago, my dear 
young converts; a great many. dangers await you; many who 
should help you may perhaps make sport of you, and possibly . 
point the finger of ridicule at you instead of sympathizing with 
you as they ought. I pray you not to get discouraged. Instead 
of getting downhearted, go to God in Prayer; go to Jesus, for He 
is ablé *o succor you in the hour of temptation. He Himself has 
gone through it all. No one was more laughed at; no one was 
more ridiculed, more scoffed at, more jeered at, than the Son of. 
God was; and He can sympathize with you in all your hours of 
trial. Just ask of Kim help and He will succor you speedily and 
give you a glorious Victory. 

The next text I want to call your attention to is in Second Tim- 
othy i. 12: “For I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded 
that He is able to keep that which I have committed unto Him 
against that day.” Now, bear in mind that you can not keep your 
own soul; but He will keep it for us if we can believe the language 
of this text: “Am persuaded that He is able to keep that which I 
have committed unto Him against that day” Some men may 
come to you and ask you what denomination you belong to—what 
persuasion you are of. Tell them you are of Paul’s persuasion; 
say, “I am persuaded that He is able to keep that which I have 
committed unto Him against that day.” I would advise you ‘to 
belong to Paul’s persuasion. I would rather be of Paul’s persuasion 
than be in the Methodist, Presbyterian, or Baptist churches and not 
have the truth of Paul’s words sunk down in my heart. Denom- 
inations can not keep you. A man may be a Presbyterian, an Epis- 
copalian, a Methodist, or Congregationalist, and still not be a Chris. 
tian at heart. Remember, we can’t keep ourselves, neither can 
churches help us. The Son of God can only help us. He is able 
to do it. The Son of God, who stooped from the throne of Heaven 
and came into this world, is able to keep that which is committed 
unto Him. Now, if a man lives in England, he wants to have his 
money in the Bank of England. He thinks that bank is the safest 
in the land. I knowa great many people in this country who send 
money there ; they keep a regular bank account there. They think 
that that bank is safe should anything happen. If anything should 
occur with this government, they are sure their deposits. are all 


“+ 


534 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


right there. The Son of God is better able to keep your souls than 
the Bank of England is able to keep one pound of your money. 
And if we commit ourselves to Him, and trust Him to keep us, He 
will keep us, Now, if you go to the Tower of London you will see 
the crown of England, Meu watch it day and night. There is not 
one minute in the hour, nor hou; in the twenty-four, but a soldier 
in the English army has his eye on that crown, ouppose that 
Crown should be taken to Buckingham Palace, and it was then 
only under the protection of the Queen, how long would Queen 
Victoria hold it ? Why, some thief would have it in twenty-four 
hours. That weak woman would not be able to hold it herself. 
But she could keep it a great deal better than we can keep our 
souls, We have three enemies to contend against—the world, the 
flesh, and the devil—who are always striving to obtain the mastery 
over our souls. What can wedo? There is one thing we can do. 
We can call upon our Elder Brother and He will keep it from all 


harm. And if you young converts just trust Him to keep your 
souls, He will keep them. 


Then the next text is in th 


, i i ineyard. He first tells us He “is able 
to make us abound;” then He “is able to succor us in the day of 
temptation.” The next tells us He. is able to keep us; and now He 
tells us we are able to go out 
Because “God is able to make all grace abound toward you.” 
There is nothing that God calls us to do but that He will give us 
grace tc do it. All we have got te do is to come to the throne of 
God and get all the Stace we need. I hope you young converts 
have gone into the church to work. I hope that’s what you pro- 
pose todo. I hope you haven't gone into the church to rest and 
0 to sleep. What you want is to find some work in your churches. 
Let_every young convert cry, “O God, give mea soul.” Try to 
win others to Christ. Suppose you commence to-night and go 
right to work. T believe there is not a young convert in this build- 
ing that can not win at least one soul to Christ within thirty days, 
if they will. If they do this every thirty days, that will be twelve 
souls in twelve months. Suppose every young convert here led 
twelve souls to Christ in the next year, what would be the state of 
affairs in Chicago at the end of the year? Why, what a host of 


VERS, 


ur souls than 
your money. 
» keep us, He 
| you will see 
There is not 
but a soldier 
uppose that 
it was then 
ould Queen 
twenty-four 
d it herself, 
n keep our 
e world, the 
the mastery 
‘we can do. 
it from all 
keep your 


8: “ And 
- ye always 
ood work.”’ 
Te “is able 
the day of 
id now. He 
d. Why? 
ard you.” 
ill give us 
throne of 
> converts 

you pro- 
) rest and 


t and go 
his build- 
irty days, 
be twelve 

here led 
> state of 
_ host of 


FAREWELL SERMON. GOD ABLE T0 KEEP, 535 


new-born souls! What a shout of hallelujahs would be going up 
to the throne of God. It seems to me an easy thing todo. He 
has got plenty of grace for you. Lift up your voices for the Son 
of God. Go into the lanes and alleys of the city; into the garrets 
and down in the slums; into the places where sin abounds, Find 
a poor, lost one, and tell him of Christ and Heaven, | pity from 
the depths of my-heart that Christian who can’t help his brother to 
obtain salvation. He tells us to enter His vineyard and work for 
Him. I remember I had a picture that I thought a good deal of. 
It was of a woman coming up out of water, with both arms around 
the cross. I thought it was beautiful. But one day I was going 
along the street and I saw in a window another picture. It was of 
a woman coming up from the waters of death, She had one arm 
around the cross, and with the other she was helping the struggling 
people around her up to where she was. I didn’t think much of 

the first picture then. I thought it was like a good many Chris. 
tians. They had both arms tightly clasped around the Cross, and 

gave no assistance to those struggling around them. If the Son of 

God pulls you out of the pit of darkness and puts a new song into 
your mouth, don’t you hold your peace. He said to the man from 

whom He cast out the devils, “Go home, and tell your friends what 

great things the Lord has done for you.” That man had a mighty 
power in that little town, and the young converts here have a power 

as great. I don’t know any class who have more power for good in 

Chicago to-day than those young converts, One of those men who 

were dead in trespasses and sin, by his testimony can do an immense 

amount of good. I see many young converts in this audience who, 

by their testimony, have led scéres to Christ. I was some months 

a Christian before I Jed any one to Christ. I didn’t know anybody 

to tell ne how to set about it. ‘But after a while I got |. out into 

the vineyard, and I thanked God I was led out. I say to you, my 

dear young converts, go out into the world and bear witness of 

what He has done for you, and your reward in winning souls will be. 
great. 

Go to a minister and to a church where you can find something 
todo. If you don’t find it in the first one, go somewhere else; 
and if it isn’t to be found in that church, with that minister, you 
just go to a third church. Keep going until you find a home where 
they will put you to work. Don’t stand on ceremony, but pitch in. 
And don’t despise doing humble work; whatever is done for the | 


536 MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS, 


Lord Jesus is honorable. One of the holiest and most successful 
missionaries wanted to be sent Out to preach. But some objected, 


thinking ill of his talents. 


capacity; if need be, do 


drawers of water, and in dye time promotion will come. The 


trouble is, too man 


children of some poor mother who has gone down to he 


r grave, 
perhaps, with a broken heart over a husband’s drunkenness 


- Take 


Wesley; who can tell: 


brightest jewels shall sh 
on. 


Privilege than to thus toil for others 
selves true to our God. I do assure 
I began working for souls. And the more I work and preach, the 
more joy and satisfaction come to my soul. Wherefore let us all 
labor diligently, if we would have the full benefit of our religion— 
if we would keep alive and bright our own faith and devotion. 

The next thing I call your attention to is in the fourth chapter 


“He staggered not at the 
was strong in faith, giving 
glory to God. And being fully persuaded that what He has prom. 
ised He is able also to perform.” This is another “ able” I want 
to impress upon you, and this js that God is able to do all He has 
Promised. He promised when He left this world to send down the 


’ 


Holy Ghost came as Ch 


think of Joshua, how, 
elders before him and 


VERS, 


Ost successful 
ome objected, 
requests, they 
x the heathen 
soon his mar- 
very one did 
ig for in any 
of wood and 
come. The 
igs. Go ‘out 
ys, the poor 
o her grave, 
ness. Take 
bath-school. 
at little boy 
mmerfield, a 
> effort the 
nal ages roll 
oor efforts, 
"God. My 
e no higher 
| keeps our- 
Ww joy since 
preach, the 
e let us all 
 religion— 
otion. 
th chapter 
not at the 
ith, giving 
has prom. 
e” I want 
all He has 
down the 
for power 
> days, the 
mises still 
ts. Then 
hered the 
in Egypt, 


FAREWELL SERMON. GOD ABLE TO KEEP.” 39 


the forty in the desert, and then the thirty in the land of promise ; 
how he lifted up his voice and testified to the full and complete 
fulfillment of the promises of God: « Behold, this day I am going 
the way of all the earth ; and ye know in all your hearts and in all 
your souls that not one good thing hath failed of all the good things 
which the Lord your God spake concerning you ; all are come to 
pass unto you, and ye know that not one thing hath failed thereof” 
And just as in the days of Joshua, God bringeth to pass all His 
Word ; not one of His promises shall fail, but He is fulfilliag them 
all to-day. Whenever you begin to doubt God’s word think of all 
His prophets and their testimony, and then trust in Him -always, 
Now, let me say to these young converts, I hope you will rely im- 
plicitly on the precious Promises of God’s Word. Make them your 
stay and support in all your warfare, | 

Then the next time this blessed word comes is in the third chap- 
ter of Ephesians, twentieth verse: « Now unto Him that is able to 
do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think, according 
to the power that worketh in us.” When we first came to Chicago 
we did not dare expect half the good things that God had in store 
for us; we did not dare to hope. 

Again, I would call your attention to another text. You will 
find it in the twenty-fourth verse of Jude: “Now unto Him that is 
able to keep you from falling.” Let me'say right here that some 
young converts have an idea that there is such a thing as worldli- 
ness and backsliding in their heart, because they have heard of 
other men who have been converted drifting back. But it is a 
privilege of every child of God to know that you can be kept from 
falling from this night, from this hour.’ Our Saviour is able to help 
every one of you. I have taken a motto for the year, and I. would 
like to have every one of you young converts take it also. It is 
in Isaiah xli. 13: “For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right 
hand.” Now, if the God of Heaven has got hold of my right hand, 
how am I goin to fall? May this sink deep down into the heart 
of every young convert here, “ For I the Lord thy God will hold 
thy right hand.” As you go along don’t you forget where you 
caine from. It does usa great deal of good to look into the pit 
from whence we came. The text in Deuteronomy xxxii. to, will 
apply to you then: “He found him in a desert land, and in the 
waste howling wilderness ; he led him about, he instructed him, he 
kept him as the apple of his eye.” i 


538 = MOODY'S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRAYERS. 

There is an institution in London, in connection with which a 
gentleman of wealth has done a great deal of good. He went down 
to the Seven Dials, one of the worst places in London, and there he 
used to stay until two o’clock in the morning, picking up young 
street Arabs, and taking them into the house of shelter. That man 
has spent thousands of pounds in that quarter of London. When 
I was there he had upwards of three hundred young men, whom he 
had brought from those slums, some of whom are in China, others in 
Australia, and some in this country. When he would take them 
from the horrible pit he would go and get their photographs taken 


not only the rules of life, but every one of them was taught to read 
his ible. After keeping them a few years and educating them, be- 
fore they left they were 
their picture taken, and both were given them. This was to show 
them the condition in which the institution found them and that in 
which it left them. So, my friends, remember where God found 
you. Remember that He found some of you as a gambler, a drunk. 
ard, some of you standing on the very borders of hell, with all its 
horrors upon you; remember that some of you were in such a con- 
dition that you could see snakes all around you, and that He lifted 
you from the pit and placed you on a rock of safety, and put a new 
song in your mouth. And let there go up from youa song of grat. 

itude, thanking God that He has stooped down and lifted you out 

from the darkness of hell. Praise God and work for Him. | think 

it is one of the greatest privileges of Christian life that we can go 

out and work for the Son of God. 


In leaving you, young converts, I would like to leave with you 
two “w’s,”—the one is “work” and the other is the “ word,” or 
rather the first is the word and the other is work. Go out and work 
for Him and you will become strong Christians. There are two 
lives you want to lead. The one is your inner life, that the world 
knows nothing of, that the wife of your bosom knows nothing of. 
That life is between yourself and God, and if you don’t lead this 
life the outer life will not be long right. Let me say to you, young 
converts, to read your Bibles, and you will be strong. If you don’t 
you will fall, and the men who are now scoffing at this movement 

will say, “T told you you wouid fail back again; the meetings have 

been only an emotional excitement ; only a sensation.” J pray that 


> RL. |." eres ee men bce ie ee 


AVERS. 


with which a 
He went down 
n, and there he 
ing up young 
sr. That man 
ndon. When 
nen, whom he 
hina, others in 
ld take them 
graphs taken 
th and given 
it a trade, and 
aught to read 
ing them, be- 
lery and had 

was to show 

n and that in 
> God found 
bler, a drunk- 

, with all its 
1 such a con- 
lat He lifted 
id put a new 
ong of grat. 
ted you out 
im. I think 
t we can go 


fe with you 
“word,” or 
ut and work 
re are two 
t the world 
nothing of. 
't lead this 
you, young 
F you don’t 


movement 
stings have 
I pray that 


/ 


FAREWELL SERMON. GOD ABLE TO KEEP. 539 


Just have those two « w's”’ before 


I would 
You are no 


If you do 
anything wrong, go and take it to Christ. 


In Him we have an ad- 
vocate with the Father, It does not follo 


w that because you have 
committed a sin that you are not a Christian. It is only when you 


cease to be a Christian. If 
vertaken by sin, go and try 


Pp the devil to keep him down. 
Try to get that young convert on his feet. If you see une of those 


saved drunkards falling back again, go and try to wean him from 
his danger. Go and tell him Christ is full of mercy and love, and 
wants to take him back again. Peter asked Him if he should for- 
give his brother seven times. J] can imagine the €xpression on His 
face as He answered, “ Seven times, Peter? Why, forgive him seven 
times seventy times.” If the Lord forgives so freely, sha’n’t we for. 


give every man? If any man among you is led astray let his brother 
try to get him back again. : 


I hate to say farewell, J can 
myself here during the past thr 
from Europe I wanted to come h 
I was rather afraid. I was afrai 


morning I had a perfect host of ministers come to me and shake me 
by the hand, and when my brother was taken from me they gave 
me the kindest sympathy. I want to thank God for the co-opera- 
tion of the ministry, for if we had not had such co-operation our 
work would not have been near so great. While in Boston there 
will be many a prayer going up for the ministers in Chicago. Let 
me thank you, dear ministers of God, for your sympathy and 
prayers, 

The next class I want to thank is the press. I can not tell you 
how grateful I feel toward that body. I have to hear the first un- 
kind word said against me by the daily papers. May the blessings 
of Heaven rest upon every member of the press of Chicago. Thank 
God that the daily papers are assisting in the spread of the Gospel, 


and I hope that the da 
Northwestern countr 
doing for the c 
Twenty-one years ago, I gave myself to work for sou 
them to the Lord Jesus Christ. 
not neglect private or public pra 


340 MOODY S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA'ERS, 


ause of Christ. 


for work to become effective Christians. 


By this power we have done wh 


power we look 


in closing, go on to higher and higher things. 
nearer and nearer to God. 
died, and just before 


skin and bones, 


child out of his bed. But the little fell 


y is not far distant when the people of the 
y will look to the daily papers to see what is 


for a more wonderful work in Boston, Let me say, 


Continue to get 


I remember a few years ago a little child 
his soul went home, he asked his father to lift 
him up, and the father put his hand under the. he 
raised it up. But the child only said 
not what I want; lift me right up.” 


ad of his child and 
, “That is not enough; that is 
The child was wasted all to 


but stili its father complied and lifted the dying 


ow kept whispering, fainter 


and fainter, “ Lift me higher, higher, higher!” And the father lifted 
him higher and higher, till he lifted him as far as he could reach. 
Yet, still the barely audible whisper came, 


till at last his head fell back, 
King—high at last. 


“ Higher, father, higher,” 
and his spirit passed up to the eternal 
So, my dear friends, let your constant cry be, 


Higher, higher, more near the cross of the Son of God. Now, as 


an old gentleman attending a convention in the 


could not bring 
word seemed to 


“T bid you good-night,’ 
you—and yet we must part. 


Western country 


himself to say farewell to his beloved hearers—the 
choke him—and could only manage to falter out, 


"just so I can not Say good-bye, farewell to 
I must leave you, and in his words ] 


merely say to you “Good-night.” A dawn will come up yonder, 


and though never perh 


aps before that, I expect to meet you all there 


in the resurrection hour. So I bid you “Good-night,” and by the 
grace of God we will meet in the morning. 


MR. MOODY’S CLOSING PRAYER. 


Our Heavenly Father, we want to thank Thee for all the blessings 


that we have received during the | 


We want to thank Thee for the spirit of union which has prevailed 


and the Christian 


city during that time. We would thank Thee also 


harmony which has prevailed among the various 


ls and bring 
And I tell you from experience, do 
yer; only so can you fit yourself 
This is my experience, 
at we have in this city; and by this 


a in ee it ene 


— — ef £5 2h pet = op 


4d VERS, 


people of the 
to see what is 


ouls and bring 
experience, do 
ou fit yourself 
ny experience. 
y; and by this 
Let me say, 
tinue to get 
x0 a little child 
s father to lift 
‘his child and 
ough; that is 
wasted all to 
ed the dying 
bering, fainter 
le father lifted 
could reach. 
ther, higher,” 
to the eternal 
nstant cry be, 
od. Now, as 
stern country 
hearers—the 
to falter out, 
e, farewell to 
1 his words I 
> up yonder, 
you all there 
"and by the 


the blessings 
in this city. 
las prevailed 
he Christian 
ik Thee also 


the various 


| MR: MOODY'S CLOSING PRAYER. 541 


denominations, and that the hearts of their members have been 
bound together in the carrying on of the great work of the revival ; 
and we thank Thee that there has been only one spirit in all the 
meetings that have been held during those three months, 

And now that the time has come for us to separate — to go 
to other fields of labor, to another place to work for the Lord—O 
God, go with me-and with my co-laborers. May these ministers 
and this people follow us with their Prayers ; and may the tidings 
come back to this city of the great work in that city to which we 
are going in answer to their prayers. May we hear, O Lord! and 
may we ask that they will be kept in this blessed work, and that 
they may have more and more grace and vigor in Carrying the news 
of Thy Gospel to the multitude. 

We would pray to Thee for all those men that have been brought 
to Thee at these meetings. We pray that not one of them shail 
be missing from the great meeting at the last day; that they who hawe 
been with us here shall meet with us there in glory. We pray for all 
these ushers who have come here self-denyingly, night after night, 
and that Thou may look upon them with Thy grace. May Heaven’s 
blessing rest upon them to-night. We pray Heaven’s blessing may 
rest upon those committees that have been so kind to us, and who 
have been so successful in their difficult work. May they continue 
in this great work; and we pray that the power of God may come 
upon them here to-night. May they continue to be a great power 
in the meetings that may hereafter be held. May the question 
with them ever be, “ What shall we do to save?” We pray for the 
business men of Chicago. We hope that in this work the time may 
come when they shall unite together in forwarding this great work 
of spreading the Gospel; that they shall be the means of a wave 
going forth that shall spread over the whole world ; and if this is 
the last meeting, the last time that we shall be called together, ever 
permitted to meet together, O God, may we meet at Thy right 
hand. O God, grant that there shall not one be missing at that 
meeting. 

O God, grant that Thy new converts may continue constant, and 
declare bravely for Thee, for Thou art able to keep them from fall- 
ing. And now we present them to Thee for safe keeping. It is : 
the last act here to-night, and we present them, O Son of God, to 
Thee. Grant that they may be gathered within the walls of Thy 
celestial city. May they be kept from falling by Thy mighty power 


542 MOODY’S SERMONS, ADDRESSES AND PRA VERS. 


and grace. O hear our Prayer as we pray for those who have been 
almost persuaded. May the fear of the Lord come to them this night. 
May they repent of their sins and come to Thee. If any have not 
settled this question, may this be the night and this the hour that 
they shall look up to Thee and turn a new leaf. 

And now we would pray for the friends of Brother Bliss; for the 
dear mother—that heart-broken widow—for that widowed mother, 


dren. Bless little George and little Philip. Our hearts cry to-night 
for these little children — these two children, May they become 
like the father. Grant that they may grow in the fear and love of 
the Lord; that they may have God with them. And Christ shall 
have the praise and the glory forever. Amen. 


'VYERS. 


vho have been 
lem this night. 
any have not 
the hour that 


ais; ore | MOODY'S ADDRESSES. | 


owed mother, 
less the chil- 
S cry to-night INTRODUCTORY AT CHICAGO. 
they become 
sod i opening the Work in the Northwest, I would like to give 
just one of the Scripture texts as our watchword : “Not by 
might nor by power, but by My Spirit, saith the Lord of 
Hosts.” I say this is our watchword ; we are nothing at all except 
through Christ Jesus, who says: “All power is given unto Me in 
Heaven and in earth.” If we are to be a blessing in the Northwest 
it must be through the Power of God. Now let us all rise and sing 
the 110th hymn. It is one of the sweetest we have. It is not on 


the slips you have, bit I think we have it in our hearts, and that 
is much better, 


ee enema, 


I. 


FIFTY-FIRST PSALM. 


\ K 7 HEN Abraham, said Mr. Moody, came into God’s pres- 
ence, it was on his face, and in all the other instances 


where the patriarchs and prophet came to God they 
came to Him the same way. David was on his face in the psalm. 
He'd been away fro» God. Here he was getting’ back again, 
They had at first tu gcc back to God, and the blessing would come. 
Then the right spirit would come into them. They must have just 
a clean heart, then the blessing was theirs. Had they a right 
spirit? Had they got to where they could say as the Psalmist did, 
that they had sinned against God and were w 
ness? They must be able to teach transgressors God's way. How 
could they teach the wicked God’s way? They had to get the 
Holy Spirit, and then came the Joy of God's salvation. If they 


(543) 


aiting for forgive- 


MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


vould convert sinners, the 
world know God? 
did the apostle say 


y must have this spirit. How should the 
The world wouldn't read the Bible ; but what 
of Christians? They were known and read of 
all men. This was the way the world read God in them, read 
Christ in them. If he knew his own heart, it was to have God’s 
spirit. With it they could do all things; without it their work was 
as sounding brass and asa tinkling cymbal. Over in the book of 
Nehemiah it was said that there was joy in the hearts and lives of 
God's children. There were too many long-faced Christians. They 
always seemed to him to be under the lash. They’d never got 
away from the law. They wanted more joy. They needed greater 
gladness in their lives. “Then will I teach transgressors the way, 
and sinners shall be converted unto Thee.” “Then,” This is when 
God had restored to them the joy of His salvation. They didn’t 
place enough stress on the word “ then.” It was the turning point 
in their work. This was what Chicago wanted. A few hundred 
live Christians that had this spirit, could do a mighty work. The 
king could have given a good many sheep if God had wanted them, 
but He didn’t. The Lord didn’t want his money. What does He 
say? Why, to obey was better than sacrifice. This is what was, 
wanted—obedience. The human heart didn’t want to obey. They 
must have a broken and a contrite heart. An incident of an 
Illinois minister whose Jabors had been unblessed for a time was 
recited, and it was related how his heart had been broken by love 
through a little three-year-old daughter of his, and a revival in the 
church followed. So, here in Chicago, said Mr. Moody, before we 
can have any ercat blessing, or any blessing at all, the hearts of the 


people have got to be broken, and then the blessing will come. 


ee 


IT. 


POWER OF FAITH. 


R. MOODY read the ninth chapter of Mark, beginning at the 
fourteenth verse. The lesson for the day recounted the cir- 
cumstances attending the healing of the young man pos- 

sessed of the dumb spirit, “ And wheresoever he taketh him he teareth 
him ; and he foameth and gnashed with his teeth.” The young man 


memes ll 


w should the 
ale; but what 
n and read of 
1 them, read 
» have God’s 
eir work was 
the book of 
and lives of 
tians. They 
d never got 
eded greater 
ors the way, 
This is when 
They didn’t 
urning point 
ew hundred 
work. The 

anted them, 

hat does He 

is what was 
bey. They 

ident of an 

"a time was 

ken by love 

vival in the 

’, before we 

earts of the 

come. 


ning at the 
‘ed the cir- 
rman pos- 
he teareth 
foung man 


POWER OF Far TH. 


545 


was taken to the disciples. by his father, but they could not cure him, 
because as Jesus said, they did not have faith. The disciples were 
in great trouble. The Master, Peter, James, and John, had gone 


left with- 


to-day ; a great many began to question about the succe 
revival meetings, would be 


many who would disciples 


couldn’t cast out the dumb spirit. And so the disciples were glad 
when Jesus came. There was no passage of Scripture that better 
described the state of the Church to-day than this—without faith, 
as the disciples were. Their leader was away, and they had got 
their eyes off the Master. God never did anything, except those 
who asked His blessing had faith. There were not many Chris- 
tians who believed God could cast out the rum-devil as well as the 
dumb-devil. The Lord Jesus could save the drunkard as well as 
cast out the evil spirit from this young man. How long had any 
drunkard been addicted to the use of spirituous liquors? This 
young man had had this spirit*from a child. There was apparently 
no hope, but Jesus cast it out. When they were bringing the 
young man to Christ, even then the spirit threw him down. Ng 
soul ever went to Christ that was not assailed 
at the Saviour’s feet. The father brought his son to Christ, and 
mothers and fathers might bring their sons, and brothers their 
brothers, and friends their friends expecting a blessing, Churches, 
-emperance societies, pledges availed nothi 


ng unless God converted 
the soul of the drunkard. After reciting several cases of drunkards 


being cured of their appetite for liquor, Mr. Moody concluded his 
address by saying that the Lord would keep anything the sinner 
committed to His trust. All needed a keeper, and if they didn’t 
give the Lord Jesus their lives, their all, to keep, they weren’t sure 


, thrown down, even 


but that they’d fall inside of twenty-four hours. 


546 MOODY'S ADDRESSES 


ITT. 


HEART-SEARCHING. 


«¢ 4% EARCH me, \) God, and know my heart; try me and know 

S my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me, 

and lead me in the way everlasting.” “Search me ”—not 
my neighbor, nor my brother, nor my sister, but “search me.” You 
who have been here during the week will have seen that I have been 
trying to instil into all the system of heart-searching, that every 
one will go down to the bottom of his own heart. Try and get all 
to say, “O Lord, know my heart.” If God searches us through 
He will make quick work of Chicago. The great trouble is, that 
people search themselves and do not ask God’s aid. We want to 
ask God to come to us with His searching power, that our hearts 
may be bared. What is it that keeps away from us this searching 
of our hearts? It is not the world, it is not the devil, for he has 
not the power. The only thing that keeps it from us is our own 
will, and the only thing that keeps the blessing of God back from 
Chicago is the people. A great many of us wonder how it is that 
our prayers have done no good—how it is that they have gone no 
higher than our heads. The truth would be discovered if we ex- 
amined, that we are not living in communion with God. Some of 
us think that we are in communion with God, but it is a false 
thought. A false hope is worse than no hope at all, because in it a 
man is at rest and happy, and they can not do any work. If we get 
that heart-searching truly, we will know just where we stand. We 
must not look at what people think of us, but what we look like in 
God’s sight. Therefore, we must beware that we have only a false 
hope, and ask God to give us the true searching power. If we 
falsely believe that we have it, may God take it from us to-day, so 
that the work may be deep in Chicago. I have been praying all 
along that the work might be deeper here than anywhere else, but 
unless we get this searching power we won’t do much good. 

I was out on my brother’s farm a short time ago, and he was 
plowing. He could not go very deep, owing to the roots in the 
ground. So it is in Chicago—the roots have got to be taken out 
before our work can goon, Let the prayer of David, “Teach me, 


and know 
vay in me, 
me ”’—not 
ne.” You 
have been 
hat every 
nd get all 
s through 
le is, that 
> want to 
ur hearts 
searching 
or he has 
3 Our own 
pack from 
it is that 
> gone no 
if we ex- 
Some of 
is a false 
ise in ita 
If we get 
nd. We 
9k like in 
ly a false 
If we 
o-day, so 
aying all 
else, but 
. 
he was 
s in the 
ken out 
Sach me, 


HEART-SEARCHING, 547 


O Lord, and know my heart,” sink deep into us. Let us pray that 
this hour may be a heart-searching time, and if our hope is a false 
one, let us be willing to give it up. I have heard of a lady who 
would not attend our meetings when everything was pleasant. If I 
was ill with an incurable disease, and called a doctor in, and he was 
to say, “Well, you are all right, you will soon be around again,” 
although he knew I should die in thirty days, I shouldn’t like him. 
But there are a great many people whom this would suit. Those 
people do not like to come here and listen to us telling them that 
their souls are sick and diseased, and prescribing just what will cure 
them. It is better to know the truth, that unless we search those 
hearts of ours and take out the disease there is no hope for us. So 
let us pray, and let it be an honest prayer from us, “O God, search 
our hearts.” And if, when you go home, you feel troubled, don’t 
say that you won’t came back to the meetings, but ask God for 
more searching power, and then you will be ready to work. 

A doctor comes to a man who has broken his arm. The doctor 
feels around at first and he says, “Does that hurt you?” touching 
the arm. The man answers, “No.” The physician goes a little 
higher and says, “ Does that hurt you?” “No, it don’t.” But by 
and by he touches the broken part, and the man cries out, “Oh, 
that hurts me!” And so with God. He touches our broken spot 
and we don’t like it. 

Now, I have been thinking that there is a passage in Christ’s 
sermon on the mount that might point out our hindrances in Chi- 
cago—* Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there re- 
memberest that thy brother has aught against thee, leave there thy 
gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be reconciled .to thy 
brother, and then come and offer thy gift.’ Now, I don’t want you 
to think me personal, but I hope the Spirit of God may be present 
to-day to carry the truth to every one who has a quarrel going on. 
I believe the difficulty with us is the trouble in the Church, the 
strife, the dissension going on among the brethren. If you have 
come to tke altar with a quarrel between you and your brother, 
leave there thy gift and go out and be reconciled to him. If you 
have any malice or hatred toward any one, your prayers will go for 
nothing—they will go no higher than your head. I believe this is 
the reason there is so much work lost among us—that you have 
something against some one, or some one has something against you. 

I know of two brothers who had a quarrel—a regular Cain and 


H 
med 


ST 
seca Renserre tee 
Sate. 


MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


Abel over again. The mother could not get them reconciled. She 
could not sleep. Her prayers went up night after night. One of 

- the brothers saw how his mother felt, and was sorry for her. To 
please her he bought a very costly gift and took it toher. “I don’t 
want any gift,” she said. “I want you to be reconciled to your 
brother.” If he had been reconciled first, and then brought the gift 
to his mother, it would have been all right. So it is with God. 
You take your gifts to the altar and keep in your heart hatred to- 
ward your brother. God don’t want your gift until you are recon- 
ciled. 

Now think for a moment. Think of any one who believes you 
are a hypocrite, any one who Says you are black-hearted, and who 
does not believe in anything you say in the meetings. Go and 
seek him out and be reconciled to him. That is the Gospel of the 
New Testament. “ Oh!” you say, “he will not believe me—he, 

’ with whom I have a quarrel will not forgive me.” Go and speak 
kindly to him; show him a forgiving spirit yourself, and be recon- 
ciled. Go tell him that you want his forgiveness—that you do not 
want him to stumble in the way of his salvation over you. Idonot 
think of anything that would lift Chicago more than the fact of 
every one here taking this truth to their hearts. We would make 
quick work with it. 

There is a passage in the 11th chapter of Mark, if I know it cor- 
rectly. I hear it quoted very often, in the prayers at the meetings; 
‘‘Whatsoever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye shall receive 
them, and ye shall have them.” But they stop there and do not go 
on to the next verse, and they say, “God has not answered my 
Prayer,” when nothing comes from their supplication, They should 
read the next verse for the reason: ‘‘ When ye stand Praying, forgive . 
if ye have aught against any, that your Father which is in Heaven 
may forgive your trespasses. But if ye do not forgive, neither wil] 
your Father which is in Heaven forgive your trespasses.”” When 
they pray, they want God to forgive them, but they are not willing 
to forgive others, Suppose I was a minister, and I had trouble with 
a brother, and some pretty hard words arose from the quarrel. Well, 
I get up and go to a man and pray with him. I find he has a great 
deal of trouble, and I say to him: “Won’t you just cast your 
troubles on the Lord?” He says: “Well, the iact is, I have had a 
qdarrel with a man, and I feel bitter toward him.” Then I say: 
“Go and forgive the man, and be reconciled toward him.” But he 


nciled. She 
ht. One of 
or her. To 

“T don’t 
led to your 
ght the gift 
with God, 
t hatred to. 
are recon- 


slieves you 
1, and who 
. Go and 
spel of the 
e me—he, 
and speak 
be recon. 
‘ou do not 
Ido not 
1e fact of 
ould make 


Ow it cor- 
meetings ; 
ull receive 
do not go 
vered my 
ey should 
¢, forgive . 
1 Heaven 
ither will 
” When 
ot willing 
uble with 
1. Well, 


S a great 
ast your 
ve had a 
n I say: 

But he 


THE LORD'S PRAVER MISNAMED, 


549 


asks me: “You had a quarrel with a man, did you go to him and 
forgive him?” So we can not go to men and preach Christ if we 


have hard feelings ourselves for anybody. If there is any worker 


here to-day who has a quarrel with his brother, let him go at once - » 


and seek a reconciliation, 

Let us havea heart-searching here to-day. Let us ask God's and 
our own efforts, so that the car of salvation will rush along in the 
city. I trie’ to reconcile two men who stood very high in the com- 
munity, who had had a quarrel, and in their churches the wheels of 
salvation’s car were clogged. I said to one of them, “ Don’t you 
know that God is not going to bless your church as long as this 
quarrel is going on? Now, I would like you to go to that other 
man and say, ‘If you think I have done you an injustice, I want 
you to forgive me.’” « Well,” said he, “I don’t know that I can put 
it in that way. I fearlama little to blame, and I don’t think he 
would receive me.” The other man said the same thing, but I just 
reasoned with them and got them together, and they were soon 
down on their knees, asking God to bless the church. It was pride 
that kept these two men separate and hindered the work of their 
churches, and whenever that was reached and cut out, everything 
went on smoothly, 

There are a great many things that have to be rooted out in 
Chicago before the work goes on prosperously. If there is any 
secret sin clustering around our hearth, we must draw that sin out 
before our work will be blessed by fruit. 


_— 


IV. 


THE LORD’S PRAYER MISNAMED, 


HIS prayer had been called by a good many “The Lord’s 
3 Prayer,” but it wasn’t; it was the disciples’ prayer. The dis- 
ciples had been with Jesus, and He was praying. And when 

He finished, they said to Him, “Teach us, Lord, how to pray.” . 
They didn’t ask Him to teach them how to preach ; man knows how 
to do that; but they wanted to know how to pray. They’d all soon 
know how to preach if they only knew how to pray. He believed 
he spoke the feelings of thousands of Christians when he said they 


1.6 
= 


14 


1.25 


IMAGE EVALUATION 
TEST TARGET (MT-3) 


€ i L© 
a << “ee <& 
& .«& 


\,<* 


hic 


— Phot 
sciences 
Corporation 


aS 
be Fe 
a, ie sy 


MOOD Y’S ADDRESSES. 


hadn’t known what it was to pray. “Teach us” should be the 
prayer of every Christian heart. If the disciples nearest Jesus needed 
to be taught how to pray, how much more did Christians to-day, as 
lukewarm as the Church is now, need this spirit and teaching. What 
they wanted was heartfelt, heart-searching prayer. He had never 
been more impressed with the lesson than in the warning when he 
"was reading over the chapter before the meeting. In the twentieth 
chapter of Matthew, at the twentieth verse, it was said that the 
mother of James and John came to Jesus and asked Him that her 
two sons, Zebedee’s children, might sit, the one on Christ’s right 
hand, the other on His left, in His kingdom. And Jesus answered, 
“Ye know not what ye ask. Are ye able to drink of the cup that 
I shall drink of, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am bap- 
tized with? They say unto Him, We are able. And He saith unto 
_ them, Ye shall drink indeed of My cup, and be baptized with the bap- 
tism that I am baptized with: but to sit on My right hand, and on 
My left, is not Mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom 
it is prepared of My Father. And when the ten heard it they were 
moved with indignation against the two brethren.” John was near- 
est Jesus, and yet, like the others, though he knew how to preach, 
he did not know how to pray. These words were uttered by Jesus 
in the evening of His ministry. The mother of James and John 
came to Him with this prayer, but because it was prompted by a 
desire to be great in His kingdom, the Holy Spirit didn’t put it into 
her heart, and Jesus didn’t answer it. The ten disciples when 
they heard it were indignant--jealous. There would have been 
trouble if Christ hadn’t been there. Jesus then went on to speak 
about humility in Mat. xx. 25, and said to His disciples that whoso- 
ever would be chief among them, let him be the servant. “ Even,” 
said Jesus, “as the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but 
to minister, and to give His life a ransom for many.” In other 
. words, Christ taught His disciples not to be ambitious. Probably 
the mother of James and John wanted her sons to be made prime 
minister, or chief secretary, or to be appointed to some high office 
in Christ’s kingdom, when it was established, as many thought it 
would be. Christians to-day ought to pray and ask to be taught 
how to pray. In the ninth chapter of Luke it is related that when 
Jesus steadfastly set His face to go to Jerusalem, He sent on some 
of His disciples to a village of the Samaritans to make ready for 
Him. The people wouldn’t receive Him because His face was as 


ld be the 
us needed 
to-day, as 
ng. What 
lad never 
when he 


twentieth 
that the 
that her 
st’s right 
inswered, 
cup that 
| am bap- 
aith unto 
| the bap- 
1, and on 
or whom 
hey were 
vas near- 
) preach, 
by Jesus 
nd John 
ted bya 
ut it into 
=s when 
ve been 
to speak 
- whoso- 
‘Even,” 
nto, but 
n other 
robably 
© prime 
h office 
ught it 
taught 
it when 


mn some 
ady for 
; Was as 


DANIEL'S PRAYER. ge 


though He would go to Jerusalem. And when these same disciples 
saw it, they wanted Jesus to send down fire from Heaven and de- 
stroy the village. But Christ rebuked them, and told them they 
didn’t know of what manner of spirit they were, “for the Son of 
Man came not to destroy men’s lives, but to save them.” These 
disciples were closest to Christ, had been with Him all through His 


. Ministry, and yet, even when it was about to close, they hadn’t 


learned how to pray. The Lord’s prayer to His Father was given 
in the seventeenth chapter of John, but what was commonly called 
the Lord’s prayer, was the disciples’ Prayer, the one Jesus taught 
them. There was no difference between a disciple’s prayer and a 
sinner’s prayer. One spoke to God as “Our Father,” the other as 
the great God who ruled this world and all the worlds. The eight- 
een hundred years since Jesus taught His disciples how to pray _ 
had rolled away, but it hadn’t been changed, it hadn’t been im- 
proved. “Thy will be done.” The ungodly man couldn’t say that. 
The sinner’s stumbling-block is that he isn’t willing to give up his 
will for God’s. The ungodly man can’t forgive others, and so he 
can’t ask God to forgive him. God’s grace only can make man do 
this. Many men stumble over this prayer into perdition. Many 
say their prayers like the man who counts his beads—there’s no soul 
in it. No man out of communion with God can say, “ Thy will be 
done,” or “ Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who have 
trespassed against us.” 


V. 
DANIEL’S PRAYER. 


HERE is an impression abroad now that it has always been 
Ag women and a few weak men who have prayed; but you can 
scarcely find a bolder nor a wiser man than Daniel. He was 
prime minister of that great nation for a long while. He wasa wiser 
ruler and had more influence than any other man living on earth, 
and yet he was a man of prayer, and was not afraid to pray publicly, 
We are told that when he was taken down to Babylon. the great 
king had a dream, and no man in his realm could interpret it. The 
king thought of his captive, Danicl, and brought him and asked him 


552 MOOD Y’S ADDRESSES. 


what it meant. The young man, if he had not believed in God’s 
power, might have turned away. But he didn’t. He boldly told 
Nebuchadnezzar what God had written there. 

But not only was Daniel a praying man, but he had faith that 
God would ‘answer his Prayers. Some people pray enough, but do 
not have faith that the Lord will hear them. They are lukewarm. 
There are a good many people of this sort here to-day. Daniel 
spoke to God with every confidence of being answered. Look at 
- him when he went down into the den of lions how he prayed. 
Prayer was with everything he did. I think we would have a good 
deal better government in this country if our rulers prayed more. 
There would be a good many sneers at first, but the result would be 
a good government and a wise one. 

This man believed in prophecies, too, and I can fancy how the old 
man’s eyes opened on turning away back to Jeremiah’s writing, 
seventy years before, and reading, “I wi?! punish them; the young 
men shall die by the sword, their sons and their daughters shall die 
by famine,” and then looking around him and seeing how all the 
words pronounced had been fulfilled. They disobeyed the Lord. 
When they were in Palestine, He said to His people that they must 
rest on the Sabbath day, but for four hundred and ninety years 
they disobeyed God’s command, and the Lord said, “If they won’t 
do what I want them, I will make them.” So he sent Nebuchad- 
nezzar out after them, and he captured them, and held them for 
seventy years. If they would not give the Lord this, He said He 
would take it; and so if we do not give un what God wants us to, 
He will not forgive us our sins, but keep us i: bondage, and we will 
never hang our harps upon the willow, or sing the songs of Zion. 

I will just read: “We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, 
and have done wickedly, and have rebelled even by departing from 
Thy precepts and from Thy judgments, 

“Neither have we harkened unto Thy servants the prophets, 
which spake in Thy name to our kings, our princes, our fathers, and 
to all the people of the land. 

_ ©O Lord, righteousness belongeth unto Thee, but unto us con- 
fusion of faces, as at this day, to the men of Judah, and to the in- 
habitants of Jerusalem. and unto all Israel that are near and that 
are far off, through all the countries whither Thou hast driven them, 
because of their trespass that they have trespassed against us. 
“O Lord, to us belongeth confusion of face, to our kings, to 


| in God’s 
oldly told 


faith that 
th, but do 
ukewarm. 
Daniel 
Look at 
> prayed. 
re a good 
ed more. 
would be 


v the old 
writing, 
le young 
shall die 
v all the 
1e Lord. 
1ey must 
ty years 
ey won't 
‘-buchad- 
hem for 
said He 
ts us to, 
| we will 
Zion. 

niquity, 
ng from 


rophets, 
ers, and 


us con- 
the in- 
id that 
n them, 
S. 

ngs, to 


DANIEL'S PRAYER. ea 


our princes, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against 
Thee. 

“To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses, though 
we have rebelled against Him.” 

You will see by his prayer he believes in God’s power to for- 
give. He believes implicitly in the God he says his prayers to. 
Oh, that we had a lot of men in Chicago who believed like this 
Daniei' It is not preachers we want—we can get plenty of them; 
it is men who can help us by their prayers. Hear how he prayed: 

“ Neither have we obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, to walk 
in His laws, which He set before us by His servants the prophets... 

“Yea, all Israel have transgressed Thy law, even by departing, 
that they might not obey Thy voice; therefore Thy curse is poured 
upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses, the serv- 
ant of God, because we have sinned against Him. 

‘And He hath confirmed His words which He spake against us, 


and against our judges that judged us by bringing upon us a great - 


evil, for under the whole Heaven hast not been done as hast been 
done upon Jerusalem. 

“ And it is written in the law of Moses all this evil is come upon 
us: yet made we not one prayer before the Lord our God that we 
might turn from our iniquities and understand the truth. 

‘Therefore hath the Lord watched upon the evil and brought it 
upon us, for the Lord our God is righteous in all His works which 
He doeth, for we obeyed not His voice. 

“ And now, O Lord our God, Thou hast brought Thy people forth 
out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and hast gotten Thee 
renown as at this day, we have sinned; we have done wickedly. 

“© Lord, according to all Thy righteousness, I beseech Thee let 
Thine anger and Thy fury be turned away from the city of Jerusa- 
lem, Thy holy mouniain, because for our sins and the iniquities of 
our fathers, Jerusalem and Thy people are become a reproach to all 
that are about us. 

‘Now, therefore, O, our God, hear the prayer of Thy servant and 


his supplications, and cause Thy face to shine upon Thy sanctuary’ 


that is desolate for the Lord’s sake.” 
He had not Christ to pray to like us. Daniel asks: “For the 


Lord’s sake.” He lived on the other side of Christ, and could not, ~ 


like us, say, “For Christ’s sake.” Oh, what.a power we have. in 
prayer in Jesus. And he goes on: 


» 
tse NSE _ rs 
Ta a i es 


se: ' Wie 


a 


554 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


“0 Lord, incline Thine ear and hear; open Thine eyes and be. 


. \ hold our desolation and the city which is called by Thy name, for 


we do not present our supplication before Thee for our righteous- 
ness, but for Thy great mercies. 

“O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; hearken and do; defer not, for 
Thine own sake, O my God; for Thy city and Thy people are called 
by Thy name. 


“And while I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin— 

Mark that—* And confessing my sin ’— 

—“And the sin of my people, Israel, and presenting my supplica- 
tion before the Lord my God for the holy mountain of my God; 

“Yea, while I was speaking in Prayer, even the man Gabriel, whom 
I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, 

couched me about the time of the evening oblation. 

“And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, O, Daniel, I 
am now come forth to give thee skill and understanding,” 

Before he got off his knees Daniel’s message was answered. I don’t 
know how far Heaven is off, but the Angel Gabriel, the messenger 
of God, came to him while he was praying. Think of that. Here 
was a man who could not look at God for the sins of his people, who - 
only prayed earnestly, and before he was through, his prayer was 
answered, and Gabriel appeared. We know of only three visits that 
Gabriel ever made. This one, when he came to bring God’s people 
to the Promised Land. Daniel was told that God was able to do 
everything, and the messenger not only told him that the children 
of Israel were going to the Promised Land, but he let Daniel into 
the secret of the Messiah's coming. The second time he came to 
Zecharias. At first Zecharias doubted him, but he said: “Tam he 
who sits in the presence of God.” And then he came to the young 
maiden who bore the Christ, and that was the third visit. 

There are a great many young Christians in Chicago who have got 
into the way of the world, who are falling into the way of thinking 
and believing that God has given over answering prayer. God an- 
Swers prayers to-day as readily as He did of old. Infidels, and scoffers, 
and scientists may tell us that the world must move along in a cer- 
tain way, and a divine answer to a prayer is absurd—the affairs of 
the world are, and always have been, going along in a regular way. 
There were infidels and scoffers, doubtless, in Babylon, who very 


likely laughed at this answer to the prayer of Daniel. 


But we have in this book a long list of promises to answer prayer, 


es and be. 
y name, for 
righteous. 


fer not, for 
> are called 


zy my sin— 


7 supplica- 
y God; 

‘iel, whom 
ly swiftly, 


, Daniel, I 
1. Idon’t 


nessenger 
it. Here 


ople, who - 


ayer was 
isits that 
’s people 
le to do 
children 
niel into 
came to 
Iam he 
€ young 


lave got 
hinking 
God an- 
scoffers, 
nN a cer- 
ffairs of 
ar way. 
10 very 


prayer, 


Ye 


ON THE CIRCULAR CALLING TO PRAYER, 555 


and let us unite in asking God’s blessing on our meetings in Farwell 
Hall, and that the harvest of converts will be abundant. Ask it sin- 
cervely and earnestly, and you will see how quick the Lord will come 
and revive His work in this city. 


VI. 


ON THE COMMITTEE'S CIRCULAR CALLING 
TO PRAYER. 


lice I left the ministers yesterday, I turned to the 30th 
chapter of the Second of Chronicles. I thought I. had 
read it pretty thoroughly already, but began to think 
about it and that circular, and I found there was just the same 
scene enacted 2,500 years ago in Jerusalem, that was being gone 
over in Chicago to-day. Hezekiah had cleared the temple and, / 
invited all to come and worship. His father was one ot the worst 
kings Jerusalem ever had. Not only did he set up images for 
worship in place of the Lord, but he closed the gates of the 
temple of Jerusalem to all religious services, burned the young 
children, and through his cruelty was a terror to all. And he was 
the descendant of David—Jerusalem’s king. When he died, after — 
reigning nearly sixteen years, his son Hezekiah took the throne, and 
the very first thing he did, in the very first year, in the very first 
month, was'to open the temple. It took him eight days to clean it | 
from all its filth and uncleanness, to thoroughly purge it. It would 
be a good thing to clean out a few of the churches of Chicago in the 
same way. Clean out the fairs, the shows, the lyceums, the concerts 
that are held there. “Ah,” some of you will say, “how are we going 
“to pay our debts, set ourselves on our feet? It will be pretty hard 
‘to do this if we put out all our fairs.” If there is going to be a 
revival, we must do this ; and if there is a revival, your debts will soon 
be paid. I think we have been working in the wrong way. We 
want more earnestness and fewer fairs. 
It is said in the thirty-sixth verse of the twenty-ninth chapter | 
of Chronicles, that “Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, that Go a 
had prepared the people, for the thing was done suddenly.” | 
God will work mightily when we get ready; but we must be com- 
pletely ready. \Ve are not all of one mind yet. Some say, “Why 


gn ae 
nS IS 


/ 


566 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


don’t you open the inquiry-room ?” 
for a month if necessary ; 
a day than we can do in a 


“For the king had taken counsel, and his princes, and all the 
/ Congregation in Jerusalem, 


to keep the passover in the second 
month. ~ 


“For they could not keep it at that time, 
not sanctified themselves sufficiently ”— 

The ministers were not read 
read, “Neither had the peopl 
Jerusalem.” 


So it is with us, We'don’t see eye to eye, toe to toe, heart to 


heart; we don’t run together like drops of water. When we do, 
the Lord will come suddenly. 


“And the thing pleased the ki 
“So they established a decre 
all Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, that they should come to 
keep the passover unto the 
they had not done it of a lon 


because the priests had 


y, neither were the people, for ‘we 
e gathered themselves together to 


ers from the king and his princes 
Judah, and according to the command- 
ment of the king, saying, Ye children of Israel, turn again unto 
the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and He will return to 
the remnant of you that are escaped out of the hand of the kings 
of Assyria.” 

When the faith of this king was seen by the Lord, He turned His 


judgment from his people, and the sons and daughters of those who 
had been held in Assyria, by reas 


invited to the sanctuary. And I 
how the judgment of God for the ] 
against Chicago. Do you remei 


on of their transgression, were 
thought when I read this chapter 
ast sixteen years had been turned 
aber about sixteen years ago how 


_4A 8 kt fer 


Be SS ee Oe LE RS TON BN ee 


=. ~™~ het OCA et 


et us wait 
do more in 
mind that 
on: 

ote letters 
1e to the 
» the Lord 


id all the 
le second 


tiests had 


le, for ‘we 
gether to 


heart to 
nn we do, 


yn. 

roughout 
come to 
lem; for 
written.” 
1anded— 
over. It 
it out to 


3 princes 
mmand- 
lin unto 
eturn to 
he kings 


ned His 
ose who 
n, were 
chapter 
turned 
go how 


ON THE CIRCULAR CALLING -TO PRAYER. 557 


the spirit seemed to be stirred within us? How, when the war 
came, we gathered together, and how earnestly we learned to pray? 
It seemed as if the war had done more in teaching us to pray than 
anything else. But see how we have been afflicted since then. - 
You know how, after that, people—Sunday-school teachers and all 
—got a few straws and dollars together, and then they became care- 
less, went out riding on Sunday, and enjoyed the world after their 
fashion, and forgot God; how the fire came and swept away what 
they had, and then they said, “ We have no time to think of Christ; 
we must go in and make what we have lost.” And then the panic 
came and made us more worldly, and so we see how we have been 
turned off the path. No city has had such an experience, and yet 
it seems to me no city has had such blessings. We had great ad- 
vantages. Ten years ago you had your theatres shut on Sundays. 
There was a law against this thing then. Ten years ago the people 
used to go to church, but now they have their Sunday newspapers, 
and their printed sermons, and keep out of church. They read the 
polished sermons and criticise them. When people look for the 
qualification of a minister now, they say, “Oh, he’s an orator.” 
They don’t look at his faith at all—don’t ask if he has the Spirit of 
God. What we want is earnestness and faith in the sermons, and 
then their power will sweep through the whole Northwest. 

In the ninth verse we read, “ For if ye turn again unto the Lord, 
your brethren and your children shall find compassion before them 
that lead them captive, so that they shall come again into this land: 
for the Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn 
away His face from you, if ye return unto Hii.” 

They were ground down by their captivity, but if they turned 
unto the Lord they would find compassion. There may be fathers 
and mothers in this audience who have sons, now spending their 
time in the billiard saloons and drinking halls, who have been swept 
into this captivity by the letting down of our principles and morals. 
Oh, my God, show us the way to come down to days of peace and 
purity, and forgive our sins. 

The posts were sent out all over the country with the proclama- 
tion to the people. “So the posts passed from city to city through 
the couritry of Ephraim and Manasseh even unto Zebulon; but 
they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them.” 

And the people who saw the proclamation, laughed at it. Ah, 
how many men in the Northwest, when they see our circular, will 


5 38 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


take it up and say, “What! a day of fasting and prayer; that kind 
of thing has gone by,” and will treat it with scorn, Why, my 
friends, we don’t need to go back twenty-five hundred years to find 
people who will scoff at a proclamation of this kind. But, thank 
God, they did not all mock. People came in crowds to Jerusalem 
to attend the services, Jerusalem was the center of that country, 
as Chicago is of the Northwest. All through Judea the hand of 
God was seen, and they assembled, through its influence, at Jeru- 
salem, to keep the feast of unleavened bread. 

“And they arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem, 
and all the altars for incense took they away, and cast them into the 
brook Kidron.” 

By the king’s faith they gathered there and smote the idols and 
broke the altars, Let us act like Hezekiah here; let us lead the 
people by our faith into true worship. Let us be of one mind and 


one spirit—eye to eye and heart to heart for God—and see how 
quick the blessing will come. 


VIL. 
HUMILITY. 


> Gare had been at these noon meetings for four days now, and 
it didn’t often happen that they’d had such an opportunity 

for self-examination. They hadn't often had such a heart-— 
moving and such an overturning of themselves. It should trouble 
them, this question should, why God didn’t us 
They'd had this thought before them all the week. N ow, what was 
the motive they had? Was it God’s glory or their own they’re 
working for? Was it Christ’s name or theirown? The longer he 
lived the more he was convinced that the greatest enemy he had 
was spiritual pride. The soul that wasn’t renewed had enough of 
pride, God knew; but when it came to the Christian, he had it too. 
It was spiritual pride. He wanted all this rubbish in the heart 
cleared away. They'd got to live in the power of God, and feel the 
truth of the hymn, “Oh, to be nothing!” The subject he’d read, 
he said, was in the tenth chapter of First Corinthians, and at the 
thirty-first verse: “Do all to the glory of God.” They'd got to get 
se'f out of the way. They'd got to feel just as the apostie did when 


e Christians more. 


ff, &@ = 
a ee a a a Se ee a ee. ee ee a © i.) a oe 
=~ a eg | i er 


that kind 
Why, my 
ars to find 
jut, thank 
Jerusalem 
/ country, 
hand of 
, at Jeru- 


erusalem, 
1 into the 


idols and 
lead the 
nind and 
see how 


iow, and 
ortunity 
a heart. 
trouble 
iS more, 
hat was 
they’re 
nger he 
he had 
ugh of 
it too. 
e heart 
feel the 
d read, 
at the 
to get 
d when 


HUMILITY, $59 


_ he wrote this. Whatever they did had to be done to the glory’ 


of God. How quick God would come into their hearts when they 
got self out of the way. In another place Paul says that Christians: 
are not to give this glory to men, They had got to empty thems 
selves of self, and come to Him. They weren’t fountains, they’re 
only channels the streams flowed through; they weren't light, but 
merely the pipes the gas came through. John the Baptist was only 
“a voice” in the wilderness. And when Elijah was under the juni- 
per-tree he got to be jealous and wanted to die, and said he wasn’t 
any better than his father. It was the same with Jonah. He couldn't 
do anything until he let God use him just as He wanted to. It 
wasn’t the glory of God he was seeking. They had got to get out 
of self, then it would be easy enough for God to use them. It 
seemed strange that twelve men had been with Jesus for three whole 
years and yet hadn’t got out of self. But they hadn’t. In the ninth 
chapter of Mark at the thirty-first verse we read that He told His 
disciples that He’d have to be delivered into the hands of sinful men 
and be killed, and then rise again, on the third day. They could 
not understand Him, and were afraid to ask Him. But a little 
further on, Mark says, when they got to Capernaum Jesus asked His 
disciples why they disputed un the way, and then when they were 
silent He told them that they’d been talking about who'd be great- 
est. Then Jesus taught them humility. They were ashamed of 
themselves. This was why they did not speak when He asked them. 
He prayed God would make each one ashamed of himself. They 
might have an unholy ambition. It was their own glory, not 
Christ’s, they were looking after and thinking of. ‘Who should be 
greatest?” He puta little child where they could sce it in their 
midst. Jesus wanted to show them their sin and folly. John wasn’t 
humble enough, and yet was the most loving. They might be 


jealous because they didn’t belong to some clique or party. They 
‘ shouldn’t have any such feeling. Then, again, in the tenth chapter 


of Mark, at the thirty-third verse, He had to reprove the same thing. 
He was now coming to the cross, Jesus was, and His heart was sor- 
rowful, and He was on His way up to Jerusalem. James and John 


came to Him in the midst of all this, and after He had been talking . 


about His suffering, how He’d be killed and cast out, these two dis- 
ciples nearest to Him wanted to sit the one on His right hand, the 
other on His left in the kingdom. This is what comes in the churches 
when there are strifes among the brethren. And even at His death, 


560 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


in the twenty-second chapter of Luke, nineteenth verse, when He 
was at the last supper, the disciples were again discussing who 
should be greatest. Here we had it in a Baptist minister going 
across the way to see how a Methodist minister was getting on. He 
didn’t “thank God” for the work. Until they were ready to do 
that, they wouldn’t be vessels fit for the Master’s use. They hadn't 
got deep enough yet. They must be emptied of self. God must 
show them the sins that clustered around their hearts. Could they 
rejoice when God blessed some one else? Then they had got down 
where God wanted them. If it was God’s glory they were after, all 
will be willing to be nothing. 


VII. 


CALL FOR WORKERS. 


M* MOODY said the sixth week of the meetings had been 
reached. The political excitement would be over Tuesday 
night, and it was about time that some Christian work was 

done. It seemed as if for five weeks the army had been getting 

ready for a regular campaign. He wanted every man and woman 
who loved the Lord Jesus to begin to do something for Christ. He 
had noticed that a good many really honest, conscientious Chris- 
tians came to the Tabernacle frequently, but always came alone. 

Why should Christians come alone when. the streets are full of peo- 

ple who would come if they were asked? One Sunday morning fe- 

cently, as a man was on his way to the morning meeting at the 

Tabernacle, he met five Swedes who asked him if he could tell them 

where they could leave their baggage. They had just come into the 

city and were going out on a night train, and wanted to be relieved 
of their baggage so that they could see the place. He told them that 
he could take them to a place where their bags could be left, and 
brought them to the Tabernacle, where he found a room for their 
things, and they stayed to the meeting and seemed to enjoy it. On 
the way the man noticed that one of the Swedes had a very heavy 
bag, so he took hold of one side and helped him carry it. The 

Swede was gratified and surprised at this attention, and asked the 

man if he knew the eleventh commandment. The man was a little 

taken aback, and the Swede repeated it, “A new commandment give 


a ee @ Pes Se @ el oe Oe ee, ee ee eee eee 


when He 
ssing who 
iter going 
ngon. He 
ady to do 
ey hadn't 
God must 
ould they 
got down 
after, all 


iad been 
Tuesday 
york was 
getting 
woman 
‘ist. He 
s Chris- 
e alone. 
of peo- 
ning fe- 
r at the 
ell them 
into the 
relieved 
em that 
eft, and 
or their 
it. On 
7 heavy 
» The 
ced the 
a little 
nt give 


THE CHRISTIAN'S FAME, 561 


T unto you, that ye love one another.” “ Oh, yes,” the man said, he 
knew that. The Swede said a good many who preach the /en com- 
mandments never give the e/eventh, but he thought from this man’s 
kindness that he must know that commandment. Now, said Mr. 
Moody, we want to get into the spirit of that eleventh command. 
ment. Let us go into these dens of infamy and saloons, and 
bring men in from the by-ways and hedges. I think three classes 
of people come to these meetings. The first class come to criticise. 
They sit in the gallery and get behind a post and peek around. 
They say, “Oh, there’s nothing interesting here. It won't last. 
Pretty soon they’ll tear down the building and that'll be the last 
you'll hear of these meetings. Um, ah!” .We're glad to have these 
people come even if they come to criticise, but they don’t help us 
any. The second class come just to inquiry meetings. They are 
sponges. They take in, but they don’t give out anything. The 
third class are workers. If we only had one thousand workers here, 
we could work a great reformation. Go out and bring people in 
from all sorts of places. 


1X. 


THE CHRISTIAN’S FAME, 


\ Jingesee anointed Christ’s feet with the ointment. A great 
many people have lived in all ages who were ambitious of 
leaving a great name on record. We find men in this 
country, and in Europe, who would give anything to have a town or 
an institution named after them. Think of the numbers of people 
who have lived during the past 6,000 years, ambitious to attain dis- 
tinction. Think of those who lived in the time of Mary who had 
this desire. Where are they? Why, in fifty years, their names are 
blotted out. Their memory has faded away. Their names are soon 
forgotten ; but when a man or woman does anything for Christ, 
that deed lives forever. There was a woman who merely anointed 
Christ’s feet, and her name has come down to us through eighteen 
centuries. Some one has said, By that act, she has chained her 
name to the Gospel. She did not know what a great thing she was 
doing; she did it out of her great love for the Master. Look at 
that woman who cast her mite into the treasury-box in the temple. 
Her donation was so small that, in the morning, probably the 


562 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


papers of Jerusalem, if there had been any, would have taken no 
notice of such a small sum. But the Master saw it, and, not looking 
at the amount as we do in banks on earth, judged it from what it 
cost her to give it. He judged it from the standard of the Bank of 
Heaven. The speaker concluded by urging all to be more zealous 
in the service of Jesus and less ambitious of worldly affairs, 


X, 


LESSONS FROM THE RAISING OF LAZARUS. 


ee PAR, when he wanted to raise up the woman’s child, called 
4 upon God: whereas, when Christ brought Jairus’ daughter to 

life, He simply said, « Daughter, I say unto thee arise.” His 
was the voice of God. He meets a crowd of mourners bearing 
away that young man to the grave, and He steps up to the coffin and 
simply says, “ Young man, I say unto thee arise,” and he rises at once. 
Look at J.azarus—how, when he was commanded, he came forth. 
The circumstances in connection with the raising of Lazarus should 
be borne in mind. A great many people wonder why it was that 
Christ did not come at once to Martha and Mary, whom He loved, 
whenever He heard of their affliction. It was to try them; and it is 
the same with His dealings toward us. If He seems not to come 
to us in our affliction, it is only to test us. There was one thought 
in connection with the story which he (Mr. Moody) wished to 
impress upon their minds. He told these two-weeping sisters to 
perform three things—lead Him to the sepulchre, then to take away 
that stone, and then, when he got life, to loose him and let him go. 
A great many people in Chicago have received Christ, but they are 
still bound with the grave-clothes, and consequently have no power. 
If Christ had power to raise that young man who had been in the 
grave four days, He had power to put the grave-clothes from him in 
a word, and remove that stone from the sepulchre, and He must 
have known where he was placed. He gave him life, but he must 
disentangle himself of what kept him from walking. The speaker 
then urged upon all to come to Hin who had power, with a word, 
to fill ali hearts—whether they were the hearts of gamblers or 
harlots or drunkards—with purity. If He had power ta raise the 
dead from the grave, He has power to raise souls from the sink of 


> taken no 
1ot looking 
m what it 
1e Bank of 
ore zealous 
rs. 


ZARUS. 


ild, called 
lughter to 
ise.” His 
rs bearing 
coffin and 
es at once. 
ime forth. 
‘us should 
was that 
He loved, 
; and it is 
t to come 
> thought 
vished to 
sisters to 
ake away 
t him go. 
_ they are 
10 power. 
en in the 
m him in 
He must 
he must 
- speaker 
1 a word, 
iblers or 
raise the 
> sink of 


WHAT TO DO WITH DOUBTS. 563 


iniquity. He tells every man and woman in Farwell Hall that He 
can do it, for He says, “I am the Redeemer and the life.” 


XI. 


WHAT TO DO WITH DOUBTS. 


E said that he had been asked the other day by a man if 
there was any truth in. Scripture—if Jesus Christ ever said 
Himseif that He was more than man. He (Mr. Moody) did 

not see how any man could read the Gospel of John without being 
thoroughly convinced that Jesus was God in the flesh. Let us take 
the sixth chapter, and we find, “I am the bread of life;” in the 
seventh chapter, “I am from Him”—speaking of the Father. 
Then, in the eighth chapter, He proclaims Himself “the light of 
the world.” In the ninth chapter we find another allusion to His 
divinity, and in the tenth chapter He says, “I am the door,” and 
again, “Iam the good shepherd.” Do you ever think how Jews 
would have been justified in putting Christ to death if He had not 
been more than human? If He had only been a man, the Jews 
had a perfect right to put Him to death. It seemed to the speaker 
as if the book of John should forever put at rest any question of 
Christ’s divinity. In this tenth chapter we find the word “1” 
repeated some twenty-eight times. The preacher quoted several 
ver'-s from the tenth chapter, proving indisputably the divine 
nat: e of Christ, and then drew attention to the last part of the 
thirty-fifth verse: “ And the Scriptures can not be broken.” The. 
present age was a skeptical age, and we frequently heard the question 
put, “Is the Word of God true?” He (Mr. Moody) recommended 
the doubters to take this thirty-fifth verse, and then run through 
the Bible from Genesis to Revelations, and see if the Word of God 
had ever been broken. No one could ever find in a single par- 
ticular where the Word had ever been broken. Many persons came 
and said: “Mr. Moody, you surely do not believe in such a thing 
as the flood? Surely you have got beyond that?” Ifyou don’t 
believe that you must throw out Christ, for He indorsed it. So 
with the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, so with Lot’s wife 
being turned into a pillar of salt, so with Jonah, who was swallowed 
by the whale. There was not a prophecy ever made—not a prom- 


- 


MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


ise ever given to the people of this earth, but what has been: 
fulfilled. The Son of God has promised to come by and by, and it 
is only a question of time. He will be here, for the Scripture can 
not be broken.” Mr. Moody then advised any of his hearers who 
had doubts, to keep them to themselves, and they would not do so 
much harm as they did by making them public, and to take them 
* to the closet and tell them to the Lord. He wished all the doubts 
in the churches could just be cast into oblivion. The speaker con- 
cluded by urging upon his hearers the desirability of never listen- 
_ ing toa breath against Him, for we had no right to doubt Hie 
Promises or His power to fulfill them, because He has shown us 
that “the Scripture can not be broken.” 


XII. 


ON WITNESSING FOR CHRIST. 


He read the ninth chapter of the Gospel according to John, 
which relates the giving of sight to the man who had been 

blind from his birth. In the previous chapter the Lord had 
said: “ Before Abraham was I am,” claiming to be divine, when the 
Jews took up stones to ¢ast at Him. The Jews didn’t believe that 
Christ was divine, like a great many people of to-day, and. so they 
were angry, and would have killed Him had He not hid Himself 
and passed through their midst, and so have gone. It was right af- 
ter this that it is related He saw this blind man. Then the disciples 
asked Jesus who sinned, the blind man or his parents, that he was 
born sightless. Then when Christ had said what His work in the 
world was, He spat on the ground and made clay, and anointed 
the eyes of the blind man with it, and told him to go and wash at 
the pool of Siloam, which he did,’and was given sight. No blind 
soul ever came to Christ, and was sent away without sight. The 
blind man did what Christ commanded; he was obedient and ob- 
tained the blessing. His neighbors and friends were astonished 
when they saw him, and some were afraid, and said they did not know 
whether the man was the one who had been blind or not. But the 
man said, “I am he.” They asked him how he came to get his 
sight, and then he related his ‘experience to them—just the very 
thing every young convert shoulddo. This was what made the tem- 


has been: 


y, and it 
ture can 
rers who 
ot do so 
ke them 
e doubts 
ker con- 
r listen- 
ubt Hie 


lown us. 


0 John, 
id been 
ord had 
lien the 
ve that 
so they 
Timself 
ight af- 
isciples 
he was 
in the 
lointed 
vash at 
9 blind 
. The 
nd ob- 
nished 
t know 
gut the 
cet his 


e very 
ie tem- 


THE MARRIAGE AT CANA. S65. 


perance meeting of such power. The men who spoke merely told — 
what the Lord had done for them. His testimony was: “I went 
and washed, and I received sight.” Christ took His own way to cure 
this man, and He didn’t cure Him by simply saying that he should. 
receive sight, but He told him to do a certain thing, and the man 
obeyed. And when he was healed, he told all he knew, and didn’t 
tell any more. Young converts should tell only what they know, 
and they should be like this blind man, not afraid to tell what they 
know. Here were the steps in the narrative: First, the blind man 
identified himself by saying, “I am he;” then he related what the 
Lord had done for him; and then he reached the point where he 
was able to say, “He is a prophet.” Mr. Moody closed his brief 
Bible reading by saying, “ May God help every one of us to have 
the moral courage of the blind man in the ninth chapter of John.” 


XIII. 


THE MARRIAGE AT CANA. 


R. MOODY read the first eleven verses of John ii., where 
the Apostle tells of the first miracle Jesus performed. 
This was the third day after He had been with Nathaniel, 
whom He saw under the fig-tree, and with whom He conversed, 
who called Him the Son of God. Jesus had traveled ninety 
miles to be present at the wedding. The disciples believed 
in Him when they saw this miracle. The eleventh verse was 
a good place to stop, for there we come to the word “ believe” 
again. They believed in Him, because of the miracle. A. public 
speaker had said a few days before, Mr. Moody said, that there 
wasn’t a miracle that Jesus performed that couldn't be ex- 
plained on natural causes. A miracle was a wonder, and one that 
performed a miracle was a wonder-worker. Jesus wouldn't have " 
consented for a moment to have been a party to any deception, 


and so this wasn’t the work of a medium, as many people would’ 4 


have Christians believe. There was Lazarus. This public speaker 


had said that Lazarus wasn’t dead—he was only in a swoon, ina’ 


trance. But the Scriptures said he was dead, and that Jesus raised 
him from the dead. If the religion of Christ had been built on a 
sham it wouldn’t have lived and grown these 1,800 years as it did. 


566 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


The first miracle that Jesus wrought was at a marriage. The’ first 
event in Eden was a marriage, and the last thing that the Revela- 
tion spoke of was the marriage in Heaven, where the bride, the 
Lamb’s wife, would be Prepared for the bridegroom. It seenied that 
when any one nowadays spoke in public of Marriage there was a 
titter all over the house. He thought that marriage was the most 
solemn contract that any one could make. People spoke of death 
as a solemn thing, but that was joyful, for the Christian was then 
taken to Jesus. But here was a contract that either was to make 
a life useful and happy or miserable and wretched. It should 
only be after great care and thought that any should be married, 
All should remember what the apostle Paul said about being un- 
equally yoked. Christ would never have been at this wedding if 
these people had been unequally yoked. Then the next step was 
Obedience. Christ’s mother told them to do whatever He com- 
manded. Do as He says. What does He say? “Seek first the 
kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all other things shall 
be added unto you.” “Come unto Me all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden.” “ Whosoever will, let him come and take of the water 
-of life freely.” The best wine was kept to the last. The Christian 
has the Cross here; he will have the Crown by and by. All the 
- devil’s front rooms are gilded, but the back ones are terrible. 
Satan gave his sweets first; he just reversed God’s order. Look 
at the end of the gambler, the atheist, the infidel, the wicked, 
the blasphemous, the outcast : it is disease, darkness, death, 
hell, Look at the Christian’s: it is life, peace, joy, hope, salvation : 
the last is the best; it grows brighter and brighter unto the 


perfect day. 
XIV. 


DRUNKARDS SAVED BY REGENERATION, 


R. MOODY aid, in opening, that they wanted it dis- 
tinctly understood that the hour was not to be taken up in 
discussing the evils of intemperance; they were all agreed 

on that; what was needed, then, at the noon meeting, was earnest 
Prayer for those who were in the bonds of this great evil. A great 
many people were discussing the origin of sin, when what they 
should do was to try to stop it in the world. It was a good deal 


The first 
e Revela- 
ride, the 
‘med that 


sre was a 
the most 
of death 
was then 
to make 
t should 
Married, 
eing un- 
dding if 
step was 
Te com- 
first the 
1gs shall 
and are 
1e€ water 
hristian 
All the 
terrible. 
Look 
wicked, 
death, 
vation ; 
ito the 


YN. 


it dis. 
1 up in 
agreed 
arnest 


. great 
t they 
d deal 


f 


DRUNKARDS SAVED BY REGENERATION, 567 


like a drowning man in the river, who needed help to take him out :° 
instead of helping him, a good many gathered around while he was 
drowning, and began to discuss how he fell in. They were called to 
work then, not to philosophize. He called attention to but one. 
verse of the third chapter of John, the sixth verse, ‘That which is 
born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit is 
spirit.” He said he had no faith in good resolutions, in pledges 
that did not come from a regenerated soul. They must come to the- 
Saviour. After these resolutions they were not saved, they had no 
help outside of themselves. Everything had to be tried by the 
sinner before he would come to Christ. He had to feel that there 
was nothing that could save him but Christ, then he would come. 
Drop a grain of corn into the ground, it must first die beiore it 
grew again. And the sinner must be first dead to sin before he 
could become alive unto righteousiuess. When a man stopped 
trying to become better, he turned to God. Then the appetite was 
taken away; a man didn’t have to try to stop—it stops itself. In 
Corinthians the Apostle said that the first man was of the earth, 
earthy. And again: “If any man be in Christ he is a new creature; 
old things are passed away, and all things are become new.” — This 
came from regeneration; it was a new creation, a new creature, 
God didn’t patch up the old Adam like an old coat; it was a new 
creature throughout. What we wanted in this city were some resur- 
rected men. Men had got to stop patching themselves, and be 
regenerated by God’s Spirit and power. It was like what a friend 
showed him in Philadelphia. A man there had a house built when he 
was out of town, and the contractor built it with a brown-stone front, 
but made the sides an imitation, just on the surface. This stood for 
awhile ; but when the winter came it began to crack, and in the 
spring he had to have it repaired, and every year he’d had to have 
it fixed over until he put in a wall like the front. And that was like 
the sinner trying to make himself better, when what he needed was 
to be made over again, a new creature. How many who heard him 
had taken their oaths that they wouldn’t drink again, had taken 
pledges, had written their nz::ic s with their own blood, had promised 
their wives, and mothers, and friends, they would stop the use of 
the intoxicating cup, and yet who didn’t keep them. It was like 
painting the pump, expecting by that to get pure water. They 
must stop trying and come to God. Heaven is filled with twice- 
born people. Men must be born again. 


te 


4 ‘ i] seas ? Spd 
ates ~ = wl. i angel he chi 
= z si : os == 


et Si “ "4 s - e ane, ne se a _ ne ea <2 “ 
ee ——————— So ae ee (ese 
ae a = : So Sons eae oa mi 


MOOD Y’S ADDRESSES. 


XV. 
MEN FALL BY PRIDE, 


N’ encouraging words he urged those who were addicted to in- 
temperate habits to accept the only sure remedy for the slavery 
that had taken possession of them. He said they had been 

looking into several chapters of John during the past few days, and 
now they had come to the thirteenth, in which the great lesson of 
humility is taught. The fall of Judas and Peter is here related— 
their fall through their self-confidence. There was hardly a grace 
in the Christian character more difficul* to attain than this one of 
humility. As it was with Peter, we have a great deal more 
confidence in our own strength than we ought to have, and so when 
trials come we fall. The speaker said the fall of the greatest men 
in the Bible could be attributed to their reliance upon the appar- 
ently strongest point in their character, Abraham, Moses, and all 
the great men, when they failed, did so from an over-estimated 
reliance upon their own abilities. The only time the Edinburgh 
Castle was ever taken was by its strongest point. The besieged 
trusted to its precipitous and rugged rocks in the rear to keep it, 
and concentrated all their energies upon the gates; but while they 
were keeping their foe from the entrance, the enemy climbed the 
rocks, and scaled the walls, and obtained possession of the fortress. 
A man might think he has every power to resist the cup, but he will 
be disappointed. The only power that could Overcome the passion 
for strong drink was to be obtained from the Gospel, and Mr, 
Moody closed with an urgent appeal to every one within the range 
of his voice to partake of the spirit of the Gospel, which would lead 
them in the way of truth and purity. 


XVI. 


DRINKING OF GOD’S FULLNESS. 


E read the first sixteen verses of the first chapter of John. 

The difference between John and the other evangelists, is 

that he treats of Christ as the Son of God. Matthew treats 

of Him as the Son of David, Mark as the servant of God, Luke as 


ed to in- 
1e slavery 
had been 
days, and 
lesson of 
related— 
y a grace 
S one of 
eal more 
so when 
test men 
© appar- 
and all 
stimated 
dinburgh 
besieged 
keep it, 
nile they 
ibed the 
fortress, 
t he will 
. passion 
and Mr. 
1e range 
uld lead 


f John. 
lists, is 
V treats 
uke as 


COMING TO CHRIS7. 


the Son of Man. John has, with one stroke, settled the question 
of the divinity of Christ; that Christ was in the beginning with the 
Fathe, and came out from Him. John wrote for the single object 
that all might believe and have eternal life. Christ is the light of 
the world. If men are in darkness it is their own fault. They are 
away from the light. Whoever ignores Christ he is in darkness. 
Whoever is near Christ is in the light. We can’t make light in our 
hearts, we must let the light in. It would be ridiculous to try to 
bail out the darkness from Farwell Hall. If you want to get power 
over sin, over temper, over habit, receive Christ. Those who re- 
ceive Him receive power to become sons of God. In the twentieth 
verse it says that all who have received Christ receive His fullness, 
Many people think when they are converted, that they receive grace 
enough to last a lifetime. They are wrong. They must draw from 
God and receive of His fullness. Enoch and Abraham, and Joshua 
and Elijah were men of like passions with us, but they received of the 
fullness of God. Look at Bunyan, and Luther, and Knox, and the other 
reformers, they received of God’s fullness. The disciples were ignorant 
men, but they received of God’s fullness. Think of a Galilean fisher- 
man writing the book of John! He had received of God’s fullness, 


Dr. Andrew Bonar said that some Christians bring forth thirty-fold - 


and some sixty! but it is the privilege of all to bring forth a hundred. 
fold. If you haven’t all you want, go to Christ and drink deeply of 
His fullness. If the spring you have been drinking of dries up, go 
farther up the mountain to Christ. At God’s feet there is a spring 
that never dries up. May God fill us all with the living water, that 
we may go forth and work in His service. 


XVII. 


COMING TO CHRIST. 


WANT to call your attention to the three last verses of the 
eleventh chapter of Matthew: “Come unto Me all ye that are 
weary and heavy laden and I will give you rest; take My yoke 

upon you, and learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and 

ye shall find rest unto your souls, for My yoke is easy and My bur- 


den is light.” Also this verse from the Gospel of John: “Him” 


that cometh unto Me I will in no wise cast out.” I understand that 


~~ 


570 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


there are quite a number of people who come to these noon. 
meetings that can not come to the Tabernacle. There is one who 


Spirit may help me make it plain. 
Wy A dying man once said, “ Father, tell me the way to Christ, and 
i make it very simple, for I have but a little while to live.” That is 


true of all of us. This life is short at the longest, but it is long 
enough for us to come to Chris ng you 


“Come unto Me a// ye that 
e burden of his own; every 
Now the very first thing to 
The only thing that is need- 
Christ is to prove that we are 


Suppose the Mayor of Chica 
send invi 


° 
d 


“Is your name Smith ?” 


“Ts your name Smith ?” says the policeman. 

“No; my name is Sankey.” 

“Well, then, you can’t come in; you are not invited.” 

The next man who comes up is a politician 
man; next is a member of Congress, all pa 
Mayor. The policeman asks them the same questions, and keeps 
them all out because their names are not “Smith.” By and by 
there comes along a common-looking man whom nobody knows, 
and the policeman says, “ What’s your name?” The man answered, 
“My name is Smith.” « Aq] right,” says the policeman, and in he- 
Sees. He is one of those who were invited. 


Now, my friends, if you want to know whether you are invited to 


; Next isa newspaper 
tticular friends of the 


ese noon- 
Ss one who 
and dark. 
-day Iam 
all these 
in. 
hrist, and 
That is 
it is long 
thing you 
li ye that 
N; every 
thing to 
is need- 
at we are 
m Christ 


sast, and 
~ When 
| tell the 
yor, one 


/spaper 
of the 
keeps 
ind by 
knows, 
wered, 
| in he: 


COMING TO CHRIST. 571 


come to Christ, all you have to do is to find out whether you area 
sinner. If you are not, you are not invited; but if you can prove 
that you are a sinner, that is a sure title to a share of the Lord’s 
invitation. 

Some people want to know what they shall bring when they 
come to Christ. They bring prayers, and tears, and promises, and 
faith. These are all well enough in their place, but when a man 
starts to come to Christ, the only thing he wants to take with him 
is his sins. Are youa sinner? Then come to Christ and bring 
your sins along with you, for they are the only things you have 
which the Lord wants. Let me illustrate this. I have a little boy 
over on the West Side, and we will suppose when I go home to- 
night I find out by his mother that he had been telling a lie. Of 
course I am greatly troubled:’ The little fellow comes and climbs 
up into my lap, tells me how much he loves me, but that isn’t what 
I want. Somebody has given him a nice present, and he brings it 
and offers to give it to me. No, I don’t want that, either. The 
only thing that I want him to bring me is that lie. Let him come 
to me and say, “ Papa, I told a lie; I own it and am sorry for it.” 
That would make me happier than anything else. Just so it is 
with the Lord. The reason why so many of you can’t come to 
Him is because you can’t bring your sins with you; you try to 
hide them away somewhere. 

But some one will say, “Haven’t I got to repent of my sins 
before I come to Christ? Mustn’t I have misery, despair, and con- 
viction?’’ Well, I don’t know. Sometimes people have these 
things before they come to Christ, and sometimes afterward. The 
Bible don’t say when it shall be, but it says the first thing to be 
done for a sinner is to put Christ before him. Let him come to 
Christ at once, and Christ will make him feel all the penitence 
he needs to feel. If the soul is dead in sins, the first thing it 
wants is to come to Christ for life. A man can’t have a sense 
of his sins until Christ puts life into him. You may put a hundred. 
pound weight on the breast of a dead man, and he won’t mind 
anything about it, but if the man is alive he feels the weight bear- 
ing him down. 

People imagine they have got to feel their sins about so much, 
but I will tell you what I think about this matter of feeling. You 
want to feel your'sins enough to sive them up. Perhaps you have 
a sense of want, way down in y... heart. Very well, come along 


572 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


and bring your want to Christ. He is able to sy 
that is just the very thing He likes to do. 

There are three words in the Scriptures which may help you at 
this point; the first is “Believe.” « Believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ and thou shalt be saved.” “When shall I be saved ?”” 
When you believe. But somebody says, “I don’t understand this 
word.” Well, drop it, and I will give you another, «“ Trust in the 
Lord.” You know what it is to trust anybody. I have heard people 
say, “There is a man I won't trust farther than I can see him,” and 
that is just the way many of you are treating the Lord. You don’t 
understand it yet ? Well, I will give you another word: “As many 
as received Him, to them gave He power to become the sons of 
God.” You know what it is to receive a gift. Very well, the thing 


asa person. Here 


pply all wants ; 


is light.” A Scotchman came to our meeting once and heard me 
read that verse, “ Very good,” says he, “TI will try and see whether 
it is easy or not,” so he went home and told his wife he was going 
to be a Christian. The next day he went down to his place of 
business determined to put the Bible to a test, but he had about 
the hardest day he had ever had in all his life. That night he went 
home to his wife and said, “ Wife, the Bible isn’t true. It says the 
yoke of Christ is easy and His burden is light, but I have had a very 
bad day of it trying to be a Christian. It js the heaviest burden I 
ever tried to carry,” : 

His good wife was in great trouble, and wanted I should see him, 
When I came to him, I said: « My friend, have you been converted?” 

“No!” said he; “I don’t know as I have.” 

“Well, there is no use of your trying to wear the Lord’s yoke. It. 
will not fit unconverted people. You can’t wear God’s yoke until 
you are born of God. The first thing you have to do is to receive 
Christ and let Him give you a new heart, then you can wear His 
yoke and find it easy, and carry His burden and find it light.” 


“As many as received Him.” How many are there who will 
receive Christ to-day ? : 


all wants; 


lelp you at 
Lord Jesus 
e saved?” 
rstand this 
‘rust in the 
ard people 
him,” and 
You don’t 
“As many 
1e sons of 
, the thing 
on. Here 
ny burden 
heard me 
e whether 
vas going 
place of 
lad about 
t he went 
t says the 
ad a very 
burden I 


see him. 
verted?” 


yoke. It. 
Ike until 

9 receive 

vear His 

Gj" 

vho will 


THANKSGIVING AND PRAISE, 


XVIII. 


THANKSGIVING AND PRAISE. 


R. MOODY gave out as the Scripture lesson the 105th 
Psalm, commencing, “Oh give tiianks unto the Lord; call 
upon His name: make known His deeds among the people. 

Sing unto Him, sing psalms unto Him: talk ye of all His wondrous 
works,” 

We are now beginning the fourth week of these meetings, and 
while we have been talking about prayer, and consecration, and 
heart-searching, we haven't had a single day of thanksgiving and 
praise. If you look through your Bibles you will find more said 
about praise than prayer, or most anything else. This psalm was 
written by the king at the time when they were bringing the Ark 
back from Jerusalem. The whole city was full of joy, they felt so 
glad to have the Ark of the Lord with them once more. I suppose 
you might say they were having a revival. 

When our friends give us anything which is very valuable, the 
least thing they can expect of us is to thank them; they will feel 
very much mortified if we do not do it. Well, here we have been 
receiving blessings from God all the three weeks past, and it is time 
we should look over the blessings we have received and return Him 
our thanks for them. Some people forget the duty of thanksgiving ; 
they just go to God for prayer, and just ask, ask, ask, without stop- 
ping to give thanks unto the Lord. Now, the Lord isn’t pleased with 
us for that. He gives us freely and bountifully, and keeps giving us 
all the time, and has a right to expect our thanks in return. 

The next thing this psalm tells us to do is to make known His 


“deeds among the people. His deeds, not your deeds. I have seen 


a great nany prayer-meetings spoiled by some man, who would get 
up and tell all the wonderful things he had said or done. Then the 
thermometer would immediately begin to go down, and the meeting 
would become cold and dead. What we want to do is to keep cur- 
selves out of sight, and make known the deeds of the Lord. 

There is another thing to be done. Sing unto the Lord: sing 
psalms unto Him. It is one of the sure signs of a revival when the 
churches begin to sing. You take one of these fashionable, formal, 
stylish congregations, and they don’t sing to any good purpose. 


574 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


They hire a quartette, and 
them, and get a big org 


, and see how they 
all begin to sing, men, women, and children, old and young, all to- 
gether, and they are singing unto God, mind you, not to one another. 
I always feel greatly encouraged when we g 


0 to a new place, and 
the people take up these Gospel songs, and sing them in their homes, 


e them on the streets. 


doings in Chicago, and St. Louis people 
Lord can bless such a hard pl 
bless St. Louis,” 


were over in England I used 
‘ could just see such a work as this in 
Chicago I would pe periectly happy.” Well, here we are, and the 
Lord is with us. I think yesterday was the best day I ever saw. 
The power of the Lord was with us in preaching and singing, and in 
the afternoon and evening, when the People crowded into the in- 


to sing for 
amuse the 
ise of God, 
-¢ how they 
ing, all to- 
ne another, 
place, and 
1cir homes, 
ts. I sup- 
ie Ark was 
lays. The 
x to come 
the Lord, 
igs, 
wondrous 
what He 
t all over 
> Chicago 
n Chicago 
‘ival here. 
he Lord’s 
ell, if the 
can even 
, before I 
id one of 
had two 
one, and 
lave had 
rery well, 
®tiad ne 
1c Lord 
nong the 
illenium, 
ce these 
d I used 
s this in 
and the 
yer saw. 
‘and in 
the in- 


COMPASSION, 875 


quiry-rooms, and we were all busy in pointing sinners to Christ, and 
some of them were finding Him and beginning to praise Him, it 
seemed to me I never got nearer to Heaven in all my life. 

Then hear the newspapers speaking kindly of us, I thank God for 
that. They are helping to make known the Lord’s deeds among the 
people. Now let us call upon our souls and all that is within us to 
praise the Lord for what He has done for us already, and for what 
He is going to do. If He can save one soul He can save 10,000 just 
as easily. The Holy Spirit is at work; let us rejoice that He has 
power to save to-day. 

Jn closing his remarks, Mr. Moody said, “Let us give thanks.” 
He then offered a prayer of thanksgiving, full of joy and gladness, 
praising the Lord especially for the converts who found Christ in the 
inquiry-rooms. 


XIX. 


“ COMPASSION.” 
VV E hear it told over and over again in the Bible that “He 


was moved with compassion.” We read that He lifted 

up His eyes and saw an immense multitude, and He was 
moved with compassion. Perhaps that multitude was four or five 
times as great as that present here, yet He knew their hearts, knew 
all their trials, all their sorrows, and He was, accordingly, moved 
to compassion. So when the leper came to Him, what a sad story 
he could have told. I can see that man going home and saying to 
his wife, “I feel very queer. I’ve got something coming out on my 
body that looks like leprosy ;” and she says, “Well, my dear, it 
does look like it,” and they are both sorrowful, and their children 
are broken-hearted, for they know what it means if their father is 
sent away from them. He does not die, but it is worse than that; 
he is condemned to a living sepulchre. Well, he goes to the priest, 
and is told that he is unclean, and must leave his home forever. 
He goes home for the last time, and kisses little Johnny, and then 
goes away for good. He must remain without the city walls, and 
if ever any one comes near him, he must shout out, “ Unclean! un- 
clean!” and warn them to keep away. Perhaps some one called to 
him that his favorite child was dead or dying; but it was of no use, he 
could not return home to bury his child. Think of this, mothers 


MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


and fathers; you know how you love your children, Now, if any 
of you here are afflicted with the leprosy of sin, all you have to do 
is to go to Jesus with your troubles, and He will heal all. The 
leper cried, “If Thou wilt, Thou canst heal me;” only do the same, 
and He will be moved with compassion. Look at the widow of Nain ; 
her husband was gone, the boy had been her mainstay, and she 
hoped that he would close her eyes in death. But he, too, was 
stricken down; the physicians gave him up; she felt that she would 
never look into his bright, blue eyes again, never see another bright 
smile on that once happy face; she saw the icy hand of death feel- 
ing for the cords of life, and wiped the damp sweat of night off his 
clammy brow. What must have been her feelings. Some of us 
have passed through the trial of burying those near and dear to us, 
Well, the poor widow was following the bier on which lay the re- 
mains of her dear boy, when the procession was met by Jesus, who 
was entering the village. He was moved with compassion, and 
said, “Young man, I say unto you arise.” Fancy the joy of that 
poor old mother as she walked with her son back again to their 
home. Oh, mothers, if any of you have a son dead, or dying, or 
sinful, take all your sorrows to Jesus. He is full of compassion, 
and will help you as He alone can. Oh, think, just think what it is 
to have such a Saviour. Then, again, see His weeping over 
Jerusaleri, but a short time before His crucifixion. Listen to that 
plaintive cry, “Oh, Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the 
prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often 
would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth 
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not.” And ye would 
not. Is it not so with some of you to-day? Ye will not. Think 
of this, all of you here; He weeps over you to-day as He once wept 
over that city. Will you refuse Him? Will you not love and obey 
Him? Will you be damned or saved? That is the question. You 
can have no trouble and no sorrow that He can not and will not 
relieve you of. He was always unchangeable. (Look at Him even 
on the cross; forgetting His own great grief and agony, He said to 
the dying thief, “This day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise.” 
He only wants to say so to you to-day. Can you refuse to hear it? 
I remember during the war a poor mother heard that her boy had 
been wounded, and she got away to the Wilderness and found the 
hospital, and managed, after much trouble, to get to his cot. He 
was sleeping, but had been calling for her. As soon as she saw him 


Vow, if any 
have to do 
l all. The 
> the same, 
w of Nain; 
y, and she 
e, too, was 
she would 
her bright 
death feel- 
ght off his 
ome of us 
lear to us. 
lay the re- 
esus, who 
ssion, and 
oy of that 
n to their 
dying, or 
mpassion, 
what it is 
ing over 
n to that 
illest the 
ow often 
rathereth 
ye would 
Think 
nce wept 
ind obey 
n. You 
will not 
im even 
e said to 
uradise.”’ 
hear it ? 
boy had 
und the 
ot. He 
saw him 


LAE HOLY SPIRIT. 


577 


she could not help putting her hand on his head. 
in that touch; he woke, and before he could se 
was, and said, “Oh, mother, have you come?” = Jesus is waiting 
to receive us, to take us in His arms, and heal all our wounds; 
there is virtue in the touch. He can heal every crushed, bleeding, 


and broken heart. May He go through this meeting to-day, and 
touch the hearts of many, 


There was virtue 
e, he knew who it 


XX, 
THE HOLY SPIRIT. 


HE first line of Bible reading which was turned to was sug. 
gested by a note Mr. Moody received at the opening of the 

. meeting. Some one asked if they could grieve the Holy 
Spirit by not believing they had grieved the Spirit. He read a 
passage of Thessalonians, to show that those who were urged not 
to grieve the Holy Spirit were believers, not unbelievers. Then 
there was another passage in the first chapter of the same epistle, 
where it was shown that there were certain things which quenched 
the Spirit. Theatrical performances, and fairs, and fashions were 
driving out the Spirit, were quenching the Spirit. Churches were 
looking after men who were possessed of natural gifts, of eloquence, 
and of pulpit power, but didn’t have Holy Ghost power. Then the 
third step was, that the world was resisting the Holy Ghost; the 
believer grieved the Holy Spirit; the church quenched the Spirit, 
and the world resisted the Spirit. The one reason why so many 
men in Chicago to-day didn’t have power with God, was because 
they were resisting the Holy Ghost. One reason why man resists 
the Holy Ghost was that it showed man what he was, that he was 
corrupt, that he was vile, and that he had a heart as dark as hell 
itself. He related the early experiences of his own life, 
which illustrated the power of personal Holy Ghost preaching. 
The Spirit of God will tell men where the wrong is befor= he 
commits a wrong, whereas conscience never tells a man of it until 
it’s done. And then when the sinner comes to God he shall 
know of the truth, whether it be of God. He then read the 
sixth verse of the second chapter of Second Corinthians, where the. 
apostle said that the “letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.” 
This was what he termed “ dead orthodoxy,” which was killing the 


578 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


churches. This was not where God would work. <A minister might 
have all the eloquence and all the argument of a great preacher, 
but if he didn’t have the Spirit he was powerless. In the sixth 
chapter of Ephesians the Word of God was called the “ sword of the 
Spirit.” He found that there were many workers in the inquiry-room 
who went there without their Bible, and reminded him of a great 
army that had no weapons of warfare. The Word was the “sword 
of the Spirit.” Every one should come to this work prepared. 
There was another passage of Scripture—the fourteenth of John— 
where it is said, in the seventeenth verse, that the Spirit of God 
filled the new man, and then had His abode with the new man. 
There were many Christians who, like Lot in the valleys of that 
rich land, could not be recognized as Christians from the world. 
There were three places where the Holy Ghost came in and filled the 
new abode prepared for them ; first, when Moses erected the tab- 
ernacle in the wilderness, as will be seen in the fortieth chapter of 
Exodus, third verse ; and, second, the time when Solomon builded 
the temple and the Spirit rushed,in; and, third, at the day of Pen- 
tecost, when the Spirit entered into the disciples and made them a 
power. It was the same old trouble with the boy whose head was 
filled with play, and, of course could not learn his lessons; they 
should sing that hymn, “Oto be nothing!” as though they meant 
and felt it. They should be like the pipe that conveyed the light 
to the world; it was merely a conductor of light ; this was what 
they learn to do with themselves. In the second Epistle of Tim- 
othy, second chapter and nineteenth verse, there was another side 
to this, namely, that Christians should be emptied of self and fitted 
to the Master’s use. The speaker read the twelfth chapter of First 
Corinthians on the theme of the diversity of gifts. They should 
remember what Wesley said, “All at it, and always at it.” This 
was to be their watch-word. All could not be preachers or minis- 
ters ; that was not what was meant; and no one should say that be- 
cause they were not great preachers they could do nothing. Jt was 
the same Spirit which fitted the man and the woman to do the 
work to which God had called them. The Scripture had typified 
the Spirit and called it water, which had been clear, purifying, fer- 
tilizing, abundant, and freely given. It was the Rock in the wil- 
derness that followed the Israclites all through their wanderings. 
The Spirit was fire, was oil, vas rain and dew, was a dove, was a 
voice, and was a seal of redemption. 


ne 7) a 


minister might 
zreat preacher, 
In the sixth 
“ sword of the 
¢ inquiry-room 
lim of a great 
as the “sword 
ork prepared. 
ith of John— 
Spirit of God 
he new man. 
alleys of that 
m the world. 
and filled the 
-cted the tab- 
th chapter of 
omon builded 
> day of Pen- 
made them a 
ose head was 
lessons; they 
h they meant 
yed the light 
his was what 
istle of Tim- 
another side 
olf and fitted 
ipter of First 
They should 
at it.” This 
ers or minis- 
| say that be- 
ling. Jt was 
n to do the 
had typified 
urifying, fer- 
; in the wil- 
wanderings. 
dove, was a 


“GIFTS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT,” 


579 
XXII, 
“GIFTS OF THE HOLy SPIRIT.” 


a were altogether different from conversion. Many min. 
isters would bear him out when he said that nine-tenths of 
the church members were without power, because they 

didn’t have these gifts. No one would ever think of sending them 

to converse with inquirers, but when they probed deep they'd find 


how to pray as 
e Saviour said, 
shall be opened unto you.” 
fore he got Elijah’s mantle, 


John also taught his disciples.” Here was where th 
“ask,” “seek,” and “knock” and it “ 
Elisha was just as much of a disciple be 
but he got God’s Spirit when the mantle fell on him, and he did the 
work which he’d been called to,do. In the third chapter of the 
same Gospel we found that Jesus, before He commenced His min- 
istry, was anointed of the Holy Ghost, and then He went out to do 
His work. If in every one of the theological seminaries, after all 
the young students had got all the learning man could give them, 
if they’d just spend ten days in waiting on God, and then go out 
into the world, they’d be better prepared for their work than they 
were. He liked to divide Christians sometimes into five classes, 
sometimes into three, and sometimes into four classes. Here they 
were: First, in the third chapter of the Gospel of John, there was 
one class that just gave a little light, like Nicodemus; and then, in 
the fourth chapter, there was the woman of Samaria, who bubbled 
right up and went right off and told all the men in the city what 
she had found; and the third class was to be found in the seventh 
chapter of the same Gospel, where it was said of the one who was 
converted and had these gifts, that “ Out of his belly should flow 
fountains of living water.” There were two kinds of wells in this 
country, as many of those present knew; there was one kind of 
wells where they had to pump to draw the water, Many a time his 
arm had ached when he was watering the cattle. That was just the 
way with many Christians to-day. Whenever they did anything or 
said anything for God, they had to be pumped by some one, per- 
haps the ministers, and that was the reason there were so many men 


MOODY’S ADDRESSES. 


and women who could do so little for God and for His glory. Then 
the second kind of wells were these artesian wells, where the waters 
welled up without pumping. So many men—ministers—were break- 
ing down in this pumping Process, while they were trying to get men 
to be alive for God and for His work. In the twentieth chapter and 
twenty-second verse of the Gospel of John, we found another step; 
and then, again, in the third chapter of Acts, where the disciples were 
waiting for the blessing of God, the Spirit of God ; nothing was done 
until they got this Holy Ghost power. He’d rather have one drop of 
this power than all the learing, all the power, all the eloquence of the 
world. After Peter got filled with the Holy Ghost, he began to 
preach Christ ; then followed that passage, and “ they were pricked 
to the heart ’—these same men, who, a few days before, had cruci- 
fied the Lord. Then they asked, “ Men and brethren, what shall 
we do to be saved?” They were converted and were baptized, and 
then came the gifts of the Holy Ghost, which were separate from 
conversion, and which had been covered up by the Church. A great 
many people thought that because they got this power with God 
once, that they’d live on it all their lives. They’d got to have this 
food every day. The Israelites had to be taken every day. That 
was the reascn so many men and women didn’t have the power to- 
day which they had twenty years ago, when they were converted. 
We were leaky vessels, and had to keep coming to the fountains of 
God every day. In the second chapter, and again in the fourth 
chapter of John, the apostles were filled with the Holy Ghost. A 
minister asked him that day, “ How can I keep from being tram- 
meled?” If he’d had the Spirit he’d have boldness to preach. 
This was the case with all the old apostles and prophets, who went 
before kings and rulers, and when the Jewish rulers told the apostles 
not to preach, they went together, and then asked God what they 
should do; and then they went out to preach, even against the 
order of the Sanhedrim. He couldn’t carry on a work in Chicago 
with the grace he had got in Boston. They must always be hungry 
and thirsty after righteousness, for they shall be filled. Then, again, 
in the Acts of the Apostles, it was shown how the gifts of the Holy 
Ghost were altogether different from conversion. This was what 
was meant when it was said they received gifts. The Holy Ghost 
was in them when they were converted, but they should have It 
rest on them. Then, again, he said, that when the apostles went 
down to Samaria, they found many that were preaching, and the 


glory. Then 
ere the waters 
—were break- 
ig to get men 
h chapter and 
another step; 
disciples were 
ing was done 
e one drop of 
quence of the 
he began to 
were pricked 
‘e, had cruci- 
1, what shall 
aptized, and 
sparate from 
ch. A great 
er with God 
to have this 
ry day. That 
1e€ power to- 
e converted. 
fountains of 
1 the fourth 
y Ghost. A 
being tram- 
; to preach. 
s, who went 
the apostles 
1 what they 
against the 
<in Chicago 
s be hungry 
hen, again, 
of the Holy 
S was what 
Holy Ghost 
uld have It 
ostles went 
ig, and the 


NOAH'S CARPENTERS, 581 


disciples asked them, “ Have you received the Holy Ghost since ye 
believed ?”—that is, since you were converted. Here were these 
men, such as Paul, who were turned to God by the preaching of 
Jesus Christ Himself; and yet he didn’t get the Holy Ghost until the 
servant Ananias went to him, and ther he“wvent out and preached 
the Word all over the world. He recited the case of a lady in 
Philadelphia who had been a Christian for many years, and yet who 
had never turned any one to God; and when she got this blessing 
of the Holy Ghost, she aided a number in coming to Ch-ist. A 
gentleman in England, a Presbyterian minister, had got this anoint- 
ing and had preached with great power. And another in Edin- 
burgh, who first was hardly able to preach one sermon a Sunday, 
and then he hadn’t much power, and felt sick after he delivered 
this address. But when he got this Spirit he was able to forget his 
inability to preach, and preached daily, and had appointments to 
preach every day until next March; and when his wife died, he was 
given power from God to bear the burden. He said of his wife, 
that “she lived so near Heaven and God that she didn’t have far 
to go.” Mr. Moody summed up this Holy Ghost power as follows: 
“In Luke, first chapter and fifteenth and sixteenth verses, it was 
said that John would be filled with the Holy Ghost. Elizabeth, 
also, was filled with the Holy Ghost, and when Zechariah was filled 
with the Holy Ghost he prophesied and witnessed. Simon testified 
in the temple ; Luke, fourth chapter, fourth verse, where Jesus resisted 
Satan, and overcame him; then in Acts, first chapter, eighth verse; 
second chapter, fourth verse; fourth chapter and eighth verse; 
fourth chapter and thirty-first verse; sixth chapter and fifth and tenth 
verses; ninth chapter, seventeenth, twentieth, and twenty-second 
verses; eleventh chapter and twenty-fourth verse; and thirteenth 
chapter and fifty-second verse. 


XXII. 
NOAH’S CARPENTERS. 


GENESIS vii. 1: “ And the Lord said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house in- 
to the ark,” 

E remarked that he would like to repeat the different passages 

of Scripture where the word “come” was used, but would 

defer it to some other time. This was the first time that 


God used the word “come” in the Bible. Man had never had such 


/ 
/ 


582 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


a communication, before Noah’s day, with God as that. The com- 
munion which had once existed between God and man was broken 
by the fall of Adam and Eve. The human race had entered the 
world with high hopes, byt had wofully fallen short of the glory of 
God. The first man be inte the world became a murderer; he be- 
caine the killer of his own brother; and all the way down through 
the ages man had been piling up sins against God and against him- 
self. It didn’t take the Bible to prove that man was entirely de- 
praved. All the experience of every age proved it. There was 
nothing good in man. Man and nations were altogether bad, and 
it didn’t need Scripture to Prove it. In all this age of wickedness 
in which he lived, Noah was a man who braved public opinion, who 
dared public opinion. Then the men lived to be eight hundred or 
nine hundred years old, and had a chance to be awfully wicked, and 
from the Scripture it would seem that they improved their oppor- 
tunities. Then Noah began to build the ark; the dimensions of 
the ark were such that it took over a hundred years to build it. 
Noah did it at the command of God, and because he believed in 
God’s Word. Noah worked all those hundred years, and there 
didn’t seem to be any sign of the flood. No doubt if there had 
been any insane asylums in his day, they would have put him in one 
of them. The idea that God was going to destroy the world was 
preposterous to the men of his day. No doubt forty-eight hours 
before the flood he couldn’t have sold the ark for much more than 
kindling-wood. The men of that generation scoffed at him, ridiculed 
his work, and, doubtless, a good many of them asked him why he 
didn’t build it on the water and not awayup ondryland. They didn’t 
believe that God would come with a flood to sweep them from the 
earth. Men, to-day, said that God wouldn't destroy the earth, just 
as they said in Noah’s day. They said that God wouldn’t, then that 
God couldn’t, and then some went so far as to say that there 
was no God. Some say, perhaps Noah left off building, and there 
was no sound of the hammer in the ark. He may have gone to 
these antediluvians and preached to them of the coming flood. But 
their banking-houses were open as usual, their saloons and billiard 
halls were as busy as ever. No one minded him, except to rail at 
him. But Noah turned a deaf ear to their railings; but, as some 
one said, Noah didn’t turn a deaf ear to God when He spoke. The 
world went on. There were no doubt many preachers in those days 
who scoffed and turned his sayings to ridicule. There was nothing, 


The com- 
1 was broken 
entered the 
the glory of 
lerer; he be- 
wn through 
against him- 
entirely de- 
There was 
ler bad, and 
wickedness 
pinion, who 
hundred or 
wicked, and 
their oppor- 
nensions of 
to build it. 
believed in 
, and there 
. there had 
him in one 
> world was 
ight hours 
more than 
n, ridiculed 
im why he 
They didn’t 
n from the 
earth, just 
, then that 
that there 
and there 
e€ gone to 
flood. But 
id billiard 
>to rail at 
[, aS some 
oke. The 
those days 
s nothing, 


NOAH’S CARPENTERS, 


583 
perhaps, they said, but fanaticism in what old Noah said. And th 
astronomers began to look at the stars, and couldn’t tell that an 
flood was coming; and the geologists were examining and digging 
down into the earth, only to discover that there was no God—and 
so they all went on. And the scientific men said that God didn’t 
create man; that he came from a monkey, and they talked of evo- 
lution, and scoffed at the words of Noah. 

But the last day came. The last year came. Perhaps the car- 
penters were drinking in some antediluvian saloon, and men were 
scoffing at them for working for such a manas Noah. But no doubt 
they said that his money was as good as anybody’s, and they didn’t 
take any stock in it, only as it gave them something to do. Perhaps 
the songs of the drunkard, which have been forgotten, and been 
drowned by the flood, were about old Noah’s ark. But the spring 
came, and Noah didn’t plant any that spring. This was a curious 
thing. Then the voice came, “Come.” Theré was no window in 
the ark, only on the top, so that Noah had to look right up to God. 
Noah couldn’t see the destruction that came on the world, when 
there was not one left to tell the stc ry. There was one door in the 
side of the ark. On that day Noah left the old homestead that 
perhaps his grandfather Methuselah dwelt in. Then the people be- 
gan to ask where was the promise of the storm. But God gave 
them seven days of grace. Christ said when the flood came they 
Were marrying and being given in marriage. The lambs were skip- 
ping on a thousand hills. The politicians of those days were put- 
ting men in office and fixing things to suit their ends ; and yet there 
was no sign of the flood, no sign of fire. And as it was in the days 
of Noah, so shall it be in the days of the Son of Man. All were 
counseled to be ready, for, in an hour they didn’t think of, the Son 
of Man should come. . 

Then, one can imagine how much sport the antediluvians made 
of Noah when they saw him get ready to get into the ark. They 
may have asked him how he was going to catch the beasts of the 
forests and get them all in; how he was going to catch the lion and 
the tiger. But perhaps, while they were speaking, the elephants, 
two by two, the lions came two by two, and the tigers two by two, 
and the insects the same, and the air was dark with wings. Merci- 
ful God, what could it mean? Then the Tyndalls and their scien- 
tific men were consulted, and they may have said it was curious, 
but there isn’t anything supernatural about it; it’s strange, but there’s 
nothing in it ; it don’t mean anything. 


LL ACE ORONE Re 
al 


584 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


The next thing that was supernatural was that God shut the door. 
This set the people to thinking that there might be something su- 
pernatural in it. They began to wonder if it was the last day. But 
the door was shut and they didn’t think any more about it, for the 
flood didn’t come for seven days. Men and women were marrying, 
and all was merry. But‘there came a little cloud, like Elijah’s, not 
larger than a man’s hand; but it grew larger and larger, until it 
covered the sky. The antediluvians looked at their homes for the 
last time. Then the ark was worth all the world beside. There 
will be « time when Christ will be worth all the riches of ten thou- 
sand worlds; when it will be more than stocks, and business, and 
gold. He asked what the Tabernacle was builded for but to benefit 
‘man; make him escape the impending flood. It would rise in 
judgment against many. 


XXIII. 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 


GREAT many are asking the questions, Will this work hold 

r% out? Are these young converts going to stand? Now I 
am no prophet, nor the son of a prophet, but one thing I can 
predict : that every one of these new converts that goes to studying 
his Bible, and loves this Book above every other book, is sure to 
hold out. The world will have no charm for him; he will get the 
world under his feet, because in this Book he will find something 
better than the world can give him. Now what I want to say to 
these young converts, and to old converts, is to love the Word of 
God. Set more and more store by it. Then the troubles in your 
Christian life will pass away like a morning cloud. You will feed 
and live on the Word of God, and it will become the joy of your soul. 
Now, to help some of you to a right course in studying God’s 
Word, I want to point out a number of texts that you might begin 
with, and then, in the same way, you can collect others. I want to 
call your attention first to a part of the fourth chapter of Matthew. 
A little boy in the seat there, while giving his experience the other 
day, felt so sure about his strength that he defied Satan. I trem. 
bled. Those of us who are older, and know more about the devil’s 
power, know we can only meet him with the Word of God. We 
can’t withstand him by our feelings or by our being converted; he only 
~ laughs at such weanons. Read in this fourth chapter, from the third 


shut the door. 
omething su- 
last day. But 
ut it, for the 
re marrying, 
Elijah’s, not 
rger, until it 
omes for the 
side. There 
of ten thou- 
usiness, and 
it to benefit 
ould rise in 


s work hold 
d? Now I 
thing I can 
to studying 
, is sure to 
vill get the 
something 
t to say to 
e Word of 
les in your 
u will feed 
"your soul, 
ring God's 
ight begin 
I want to 
Matthew. 
> the other 
. I trem- 
the devil’s 
God. We 
d; he only 
1 the third 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. 


585 


verse on, and see how Christ overcame Satan. Not by His feelings, 
not because He had been baptized of John in Jordan, but by the 
word of the living God+ Three times Satan advanced to the charge, 
but every time he was thrust through by the sword of the Spirit. 
And that must be your sword. Don't say, like the little boy in 
Scotland, “ Old Nick, just you get behind me,” but say, “O Lord, just 
put him behind me.” You can’t do anything against Satan of your- 
self; you can only overcome him through Christ and by the word 
of tae living God. 

Then take Romans x. 15. It shows there was a work done for 
you on Calvary, but that there is another work quite distinct from 
that. “ How shall they preach except they be sent?” “Faith com- 
eth by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.” How many 
mourning Christians there are who know little about God, and the 
reason is just that they do not study the Word of God. You are 
little acquainted with this precious book. I don’t see how Chris- 
tians can habitually read the newspapers on Sunday. I wouldn't 
advise you even to read your religious weeklies on that day. I find 
too many are making these take the place of the Bible. I.et us 
have one day exclusively to study and read the Word of God. If 
we can’t take time during the week, we will have Sunday uninter- 
rupted. What can botanists tell you of the lily of the valley? you 
must study this book for that. What can geologists tell you of the 
Rock of Ages, or mere astronomers about the Bright Morning Star? 
in these pages we find all knowledge unto salvation: here we read 

ruin of man by nature, redemption by the blood, and re. 
y. ‘ton by the Holy Ghost. These three things run all through 
ar vugh them. 

But let us stick to the thought, how to study this Bible. A fa- 
vorite way with me is just to take up one word or expression, and 
run through the different places where they are. Take the uy ams 
of John; “I am the bread of life ;” “I am the water of life . “Tam 
the way, the truth, and the life;’ “Iam the resurrection ; “I am 
all, and in all.” God gives to His children a blank, and on it they 
can write whatever they most want, and He will fill the bill. 

And then the promises. A Scotchman found out thirty-one thou- 
sand distinct promises in the Word of God. There is not a despond- 
ent soul in this Tabernacle, this morning, but God has a promise 
just to suit him. They abound, even in the books of Job and 
Jonah. 


586 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


And now let us follow on the thought, “ What is God able to do.” 
Just get all the blessed texts on that subject to heart, and you can’t 
help speaking for God. Then you can indeed say, “ God is my Father, 
Jesus is my Saviour, and Heaven is my home.” There is a blessed 
verse in the Gospel of John. There is no more fruitful subject in 
the Bible than is opened up there. The conversions there and all 
through the Bible, notice, are different from each other, though all 
redounding to the glory of God. Think of Nicodemus, the woman 
at the well, and Matthew the publican. And then the conversions 
in the Acts, and those of the Philippian jailor and Cornelius. We 
make a great deal more ado about this simple act than the Bible 

teaches. Conversion is just to believe on Christ and follow Him, 
and may be but the work of a minute. 

Many people do not believe in assurance as to salvation. Turn to 
the third chapter of the first epistle of John, “ Beloved, now are we the 
sons of God.” The fifth verse of that chapter says, “And ye know 
that He was manifested to take away our sins,” and then we come 
to, “I know that my Redeemer liveth.” All the Bible puts it in that 
way. When it speaks of hope, it means a certain hope, not a doubt- 
' ful hope. The “hope of a glorious resurrection” was a sure hope. 
Then the nineteenth verse, “ Hereby we know that we are of the 
truth ;” and then, “ We know that we have passed from death into 
life,” and “Ye know that no murderer hath eternal life,” and also, 
“Hereby we know that He abideth in us by the Spirit which He 
hath given us.” There is no reason, nay, there is no excuse, for 
Christians doubting that they are saved; it is presumptuous not to 
take God at His word. Again, the second verse of the third chap- 
ter of the first epistle of John says, “ Beloved, now are we the sons 
of God, it doth not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that 
when He shall appear we shall be like Him.” 

So I find great comfort and advantage in just taking up the Word 
of God in this way, and studying it with a view to some single 
truth. Take up in this way a single name, or life, or character, 
Thus Lazarus, in his different stages, is the type of the dead soul— 
the soul dead in trespasses and sin; then he is the saved soul; then 
the feasting, rejoicing soul; then he testifies to the goodness of God. 
Galatians shows how we are first called, then justified, then sancti- 
fied ; all through there is a beautiful connection, and you have only 
to stand right with one of these thoughts, and follow the trail out. 
And then take up the Christian’s growth in grace, Psalm xxiii., 


ible to do.” 
1 you can’t 
my Father, 
s a blessed 
subject in 
‘re and all 
though all 
he woman 
onversions 
‘lius. We 
the Bible 
low Him, 


. Turn to 
are we the 
| ye know 
we come 
3 it inthat 
t a doubt- 
sure hope. 
are of the 
leath into 
and also, 
vhich He 
xcuse, for 
us not to 
1ird chap- 
- the sons 
now that 


the Word 
ne single 
character. 
id soul— 
ul; then 
s of God. 
nm sancti- 
ave only 
‘ail out. 

M Xxiii., 


TRUST. 587 


verse 2, “Lie down in green pastures;” “ Sitting at the feet of 
Jesus;” Ephesians, chapter vi., verses 1 3 and 14, “He is able to 
make us stand;” Psalms, “ Walk through the valley of the shadow 
of death;” Hebrews, chapter xii, verse 1, “Run with patience 
the race that is set before us;” Psalm xviii., verse 21, and in Isaiah 
chapter xl., verse 31, “They shall mount up with wings as eagles.” 
The Christian, these verses show, goes up higher and higher, like a 
balloon, till the world is lost to sight; till he becomes like Christ, 
and possessed of eyes that can gaze unblinded on the glory of the 


City of God. 
XXIV. 


TRUST, 


OME who had counted the verses in the Bible found that the 
S eighth and ninth verses of the one hundred and eighteenth 
Psalm were the middle verses of the Bible. “It is better to 
trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man. It is better to 
trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes.” And also he 
read the third and fourth verses of the twenty-sixth chapter of 
Isaiah: “ Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed 
on Thee; because he trusteth in Thee. Trust ye in the Lord for- 
ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.” A boy 
whose mother promises him anything knows how to trust her. If 
she promises him a pair of skates at Christmas, he doesn’t begin to 
analyze what trust is; he doesn’t begin to ask what his feeling is, 
He simply says, “‘ Mother said so, and that’s enough.” There was 
nothing miraculous about it; it was simply trust. This was the 
idea of trusting in God. They must trust God, even if they didn’t 
know what the result would be. In the sixty-second Psalm, eighth 
verse, it said: “ Trust in Him at all times, ye people; pour out 
your heart before Him; God isa refuge for us.” It was the same 
in the midnight darkness as in the daylight. It was the child in the 
light whose father was in the dark. The child leaped into its 
father’s arms though it didn’t see him. It was the simple trust 
that the father was there. Trust God at all times. Trust Him as 
one would trust a banker whom he had tried; a doctor whom he 
had confidence in; or a lawyer who had been tried and had ‘never 
lost a case. They had an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus 
Christ the Righteous. How to trust Him was shown in Proverbs 


588 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


to be with “all the heart;” not a little, but with the whole heart. 
Don’t trust the minister with the soul’s salvation, but God. God 
wants the whole heart ; God hates half-heartedness; God detests 
half-heartedness. An incident of Alexander illustrated this, where 
the Emperor was warned to beware of his physician, and to beware 
of his medicine. The Emperor took the note of warning in one 
hand and the medicine in the other, and, because he trusted in his 
physician, took his draught. That was perfect trust. Paul said: 
-“T am persuaded that He is able to keep that which I have com- 
mitted unto Him.” ‘The next step was: “ Who will trust Him?” 
This is answered in the ninth Psalm, at the tenth verse: “ They 
that know Thy name will put their trust in Thee.” He must be 
known to be trusted; He must be believed to be trusted. No infi- 
del could trust God, because he didn’t know Him. No one could 
go down to hell trusting inGod. Then came the trust: “ Thou wilt 
keep them in perfect peace that trust Thee.” In the sixteenth 
chapter of Proverbs, at the twentieth verse, was described the joy 
of the one who trusted God: “ Whoso trusteth in the Lord, happy 
ishe.” In the thirty-second Psalm, at the tenth verse, again it was 
said: “ Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, but he that trusteth in 
the Lord, mercy shall compass him about.” The joy is thus de- 
Scribed in the fifth Psalm, at the eleventh verse: “ But let all those 
that put their trust in Thee rejoice; let them ever shout for joy, 
because Thou defendest them; let them also that love Thy name be 
joyful in Thee.” The inquirer asked about feeling—how should he 
feel? He would say, “ Let your feelings take care of themselves, 
you have only to come to God.” They couldn’t be saved by their 
feelings, nor by their good morals, by trying to break off their sins 
here and there; it was like lopping off the twigs of a tree, while 
Christ laid the ax to the root. In the twenty-ninth chapter of Prov- 
erbs it was said: “Whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be 
safe ;”’ or in the margin, “set on high.” 


XXV. 
JACOB’S LIFE AND CHARACTER. 


i, Lae key to all Jacob’s difficulties will be found in the twentieth 
‘chapter of Matthew, from which Mr. Moody read an illustra- 
tion. It is the story of the laborers in the vineyard. The 


hole heart. 
God. God 
od detests 


this, where 
_to beware 
ing in one 
sted in his 
Paul said: 
have com- 
ist Him ?” 
e: “They 
e must be 
No infi- 
one could 
Thou wilt 
sixteenth 
d the joy 
rd, happy 
rain it was 
rusteth in 
} thus de- 
all those 
it for joy, 
y name be 
should he 
iemselves, 
| by their 
their sins 
ree, while 
r of Prov- 
shall be 


wentieth 
1 illustra- 
rd. The 


JACOB'S LIFE AND CHARAC TER, 589 


thought is in the second verse. The first man hired agreed to the 
bargain. The men would not go until the owner of the vineyard 
had made a bargain with them. He told them that he would pay 
them what was right. They gota penny. He gave them the law. - 
ful wages. “Is that all you're going to giveme?” they probably said. 
Jacob was all the time making bargains. The Christians who are 
making bargains with the Lord do not get as much as those who 
trust Him. It does not pay to make bargains with the Lord. 
Jacob is twin brother of most of us. Where you will find one 
Joseph or one Daniel, you will find a hundred Jacobs. We are not 
willing, all of us, to take God at His word and trust Him. There is 
a strong contrast between the character of Joseph and Jacob. The 
one trusted God implicitly; but Jacob wanted to trust Him no far- 
ther than he could see God. There would have been a great deal 
of murmuring if Jacob had been thrown into jail in Egypt. Jacob 
no doubt got a great deal of his weakness from his mother. There 
was a division in that home. Isaac favored Esau, and Rebekah 
favored Jacob. Such dissensions are just the thing to stir up the 
old Adam in the man. A mother and a father have no right to take 
this course. Rebekah planned continually to keep Jacob at home.’ 
The very thing that Rebekah tries to achieve, in that she fails, 
By nature Esau was the better of the two. If such a mean, con- 
temptible nature as Jacob’s can be saveu, then there is hope for all 
of us. The Lord promised to Jacob from the top of the ladder what 
he should have. Jacob gets up and says, “If God will be with me 
and keep and clothe me, then shall the Lord be my God.” What a 
low, contemptible idea he had. God had promised him all from 
Dan to Beersheba. That’s the difficulty with the people at the 
present time. If God will bless us in our basket and store we shall 
have Him for our God. We find Jacob after this in Haran driving ~ 

bargains all the time, and the worst of it is, he gets beat every time. 
He had to work seven years for his wife, and then gets another woman 
inher place. He gets paid back in hisown coin. We must not think 
that God will allow us to deceive without punishing us forit. He for- 
got all the vows he made at Bethel, but God did not forget His. Some 
of God’s promises are unconditional. The promise he made at Bethel 
was unconditional. God chose Jacob rather than Esau. Some peo- 
ple say that God hated Esau before he was born. That is not the 
teaching of Scripture, even though one of the minor prophets long 
years after mentioned it. God says to Jacob, after he had been in 


390 MOODY'S ADDRESSES. 


Maran for so many years, “I am the God of Bethel; arise and 
dwell there.” He ought to have been proud, and instead of leaving 
Haran like a prince, he steals away like a thief. He starts off, and 
his uncle and father-in-law pursue. God took care of him; God 
was going to keep His vows, and there is no doubt that had not 
God interfered, Jacob would have been slain. We find that Jacob 
stays behind like a miserable coward, after he had sent his effects 
away. A man out of communication with God is a coward always. 
There was a man wrestled with Jacob. It was Christ. When did 
he prevail? When his thigh was out of joint all he could do was to 
hold on and get the blessing. The man who is the lowest down is 
the man that God lifts up the highest. The man that has the 
greatest humility will be the most exalted. A great many say that 
Jacob was a different man. Would to God his thigh had been left 
out of joint so that there was no more of the flesh in him. The 
next thing, we find Jacob and Esau embracing, and we would sup- 
pose that he wouid be filled with gratitude. But no; he goes down 
to Shechem and builds an altar and calls it by a high-sounding name. ® 
Jacob in Shechem with this altar with a high-sounding name was 
no better than he was in Haran without an altar. It would be a 
good day if we people in Chicago would bury our idols, rum bottles, 
tobacco and cigars, beneath an oak in Shechem. The trouble is, 
that we have slipped down to Shechem. There his sons fell. It is 
when men go down to Haran and Shechem, instead of staying in 
Bethel, that they fall into sin. Let the Church of God come out 
and stand before the world free from idols, there would be no need 
for idols. The only thing that keeps back the blessing of God are 
the church members. He built an altar finally at Bethel. He said 
that he would go to Bethel and build an altar to his God, as if the 
Shechem altar was no altar. He called it El-Bethel. Just the mo- 
ment he came to Bethel the Lord God met him, and just as soon 
as the Church leaves Shechem and comes to Bethel, then the Lord 
God will meet it. The next thing we hear is the saddest episode 
in Jacob's life—the death of Rachel, his favorite wife. His sons go 
back to Shechem and hunt up the old idols. His sons bring him 
back news from there that his beloved son was dead. Do you see 
how he begins to reap the sins of his own earlier days? For twenty 
long years he mourned that beloved boy. He deceived his own 
father, and his own sons deceived him. What a bitter life. What 
was Jacob's dying testimony to Pharaoh? It would take ten thou- 


1; arise and 
ad of leaving 
arts off, and 
of him; God 
that had .not 
1 that Jacob 
it his effects 
ward always. 
When did 
Id do was to 
yest down is 
hat has the 
any say that 
ad been left 
-him. The 
would sup- 
> goes down 
nding name. * 
xy name was 
would be a 
‘um bottles, 
trouble is, 
s fell. It is 
staying in 
1 come out 
be no need 
of God are 
. He said 
d, as if the 
ist the mo- 
ist as soon 
1 the Lord 
st episode 
lis sons go 
bring him 
lO you see 
‘or twenty 
d his own 
fe. What 
> ten thou- 


THE LIFE OF PETER. 59g! 


sand Jacobs to get one convert like Pharaoh. “Few and evil,’ 
Jacob said, “had is days been.” He started with a lie in his mouth, 
He died in exile. He died in Egypt, not in the land God promised 
him. He would not let God choose forhim. He was saved by fire, 
or as Job said, by the skin of his teeth, We must walk less by sight 
and more by faith. It is safer for God to choose and to do the plan- 
ning. It is for us to be satisfied with God's writ. Let us be satis. 
fied and wait upon Him, saying : “ Thy will be done, and not ours,” 


XXVI. 
THE LIFE OF PETER. 


HE first glimpse we had of him was when Andrew called him. 

He was first called as a disciple, not as an apostle. The 
second call was when he was called to the work of the ministry. 

The next glimpse we had was related in the fifth chapter of the 
Gospel of Luke, when the Lord spoke to the people the words of 
God from the boat at the seaside, and then follows the miraculous 
draught of fishes. Then it was that Peter said: “ Depart from me 
for I am a sinful man, O God.” Then Jesus said that thereafter 
Peter would catch men. The thought he wanted to call attention 
to was, that when Peter was called he didn’t leave his work until 
called twice. There were too many unprepared men in the Lord’s 
work ; there were too many men made ministers in the world to- 
day. He said this because there were a good many young men, 
young converts, who were looking to the work of the ministry and 
thinking they were called to that. John Wesiey used to say to 
young men, candidates for the ministry, when they preached, 
“Did you make any one mad?” “No,” “Did you convert 
anybody?” and then they would say “no.” “Then,” Wesley 
said, “that’s a very good evidence you're not called.” Men 
need to have souls before they begin this work. The Lord 
first made these men go to the lake and take a great haul of 
fish, and then when they were called, they had something to leave. 
They didn’t have much to leave, but they left what they had. 
What had they to leave? A few broken nets and a haul of fish. 
And that’s the way with a great many Christians of the present day; 
they didn’t want to leave their little draught of fishes and their 
broken nets, The next time we get a glimpse of Peter is in the four- 


592 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


teenth chapter of Matthew, where the Lord tells Peter to walk on 
the water. Here we find Peter in “ Doubting Castle.” And that 
was where Peter got his eye off the Lord, and he saw the waves and 
heard the wind; then his eyes wandered away from Christ. But 
Peter’s prayer was to the Point ; it didn’t begin with a long pream- 
ble, which would have put him forty feet under water before the 
Lord heard it. But it was to the point : “Lord, save me ; I perish.” 
Again, in the sixteenth chapter we find that Christ is saying, 
“Whom say men that I am?” and then He asked Peter, and Peter 
said, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God.” This 
shows the power there was in confessing Christ. Peter was a true 
Trinitarian; he got Square on the rock. Again we find him indulg- 
ing in man-worship, the first beginningsof Rome. This was on the 
Mount of Transfiguration. Peter said, “ Let us make three Taber. 
nacles;”’ and as soon as he said this, why, God just snatched Moses 
- and Elias away and left them only Jesus. There was too much of 
this minister-worship, of this church-worship at the present day, 
This was illustrated in the twen-y-second chapter of Revelations, 
ninth verse, where the angel said, “Worship God.” If Christ was 
not the Son of God, then Christians were the greatest idolaters that 
ever lived. Again, we found Peter in the twenty-sixth chapter of 
Matthew, at the twenty-third verse, where Peter’s fall was recited. 
He became self-confident and spiritually proud. The Lord couldn t 
use him until he had been humbled, and here he stood up among 
the Lord’s disciples, just as though he was all-powerful. This 
lesson of humility must be learned by every man whom God uses. 
“Let him that standeth take heed lest he fall.” The greatest Bible 
characters fell because they failed in their strongest points. Moses, 
the meekest man, was not allowed to see the promised land, and 
there were Saul, and David, and Jacob, and Peter, at this very time 
when he was boasting of his own power. He was always sure that 
young converts who say they're safe were where the devil will trip 
them up. Again, Peter was asleep in the garden when the Lord 
told them to watch. That was the time when Satan had these 
Christians in the churches asleep, and then troubles came in the 
churches. Then came the next step—“he followed him afar off.” 
And this was the gradual downward course. No one would find a 
Christian man in the theatre; those Christians who are in such 
places are ali asleep. Men of the worla said they liked “liberal 
Christians,” but these men were never sent for by dying men. 


Ss 


-r to walk on 
” And that 
le Waves and 
Christ. But 
long pream- 
r before the 
¢; I perish.” 
t is saying, 
r, and Peter 
70d.” This 
Was a true 
him indulg- 
/ Was on the 
hree Taber. 
ched Moses 
20 much of 
resent day, 
.evelations, 
Christ was 
laters that 
chapter of 
‘as recited. 
rd couldn't 
up among 
ful. This 
God uses. 
atest Bible 
s. Moses, 
land, and 
very time 
sure that 
il will trip 
the Lord 
1ad these 
ne in the 
afar off,” 
uld find a 
2 in such 
1 “ liberal 
ng men. 


Ss 


WALKING WITH GOD, 593 


They would never find a card-playing 
horse-racing, and a dancing Christian who 


so here were two denials by the very man who but a few hours 
before had said he would never betray or forsake the Lord. Then, 
again, the third time the servant said, “ Thy speech betrayeth thee,” 
but Peter answered with oaths that he never knew Him. It’s hard 
for a Christian to forget the speech of the Lord’s people, even after 
he has long departed from the way of God and Christ. 


crucifixion and resurrection 
was, “Tell the disciples and Peter,” 


view with the Lord. And then, when Christ was leaving him, He 
asked him, “ Lovest thou Me more than these?” But Peter didn’t 
answer; he had learned humility, and after the Lord asked him 


again, Peter, now humble, already meet for the Master’s use, 


said, 
“Lord, thou knowest.” 


XXVII. 
WALKING WITH Gop. 


CHILD had to be born before it can walk, and a soul has to 
A believe on God before it could be with Him. God once 

walked with man in the Garden of Eden, but He forsook 
that after the fall, and only here and there walked with men. Mr. 
Moody said that he had been told that the Indians in the West had 
a peculiar way of making a trail. The chief, or head man, rode 
ahead, and all the others followed in his footsteps, and it was one 
trail. And so the Christian had Jesus in whose footsteps to 
tread and to walk the journey of life, and His example. He read 
the first quotation from the first epistle of Peter, second chapter and 
twenty-first verse: “For even hereunto were ye called; because 
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should 
follow His steps.” He was at a railway station once, and not 
knowing the time the train left, he asked a man who said he thought 
it was g o'clock; another he asked said he thought it was 8:45 


and Peter had a personal inter. - 


MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


o'clock ; and still another said it was 9:15 o'clock, so the only thing 
left that was safe to do was to consult the railway guide, and he 
did so, and found the desired information. And when any one was 
wanting to know anything about God, the best way was hot to 
consult men, but to go to the Great Guide, the Bible, and that was 
the only way to learn of a surety. In the twenty-sixth chapter of 
Leviticus at the second verse, God promises to be the God of those 
who keep His Sabbaths and reverence His sanctuary; and in the 
twelfth verse: “I will walk among you and will be your God, and 
ye shall be My people ;” and in the twenty-seventh and twenty- 
eighth verses: “And if ye will not for all this hearken unto Me, but 
walk contrary unto Me, then I will walk contrary unto you also 
in fury ; and I, even I, will chasten you seven times for your sins.” 
A great many persons never went to the Bible to know what God’s 

way was, but like Balaam, waited for the Lord to hedge up their 
way, instead of studying the Bible to find out. A man might get 

wealth and position and power, but he’d never have perfect peace 

until he was first at peace with God and walked in God’s way. 

There was a leanness of soul which would be his until he was filled 
with the contentment God gave His children. The pile of stones 

on the highway was just as good as a heap of gold if the man who 

owned the gold was not contented. 

One class of Christians who were to be met with, were those who 
wanted any way but God’s way, and were never willing to take what 
God had chosen for them. This class was referred to in the sixth 
chapter of Jeremiah, and the sixteenth verse. This class was always 
looking after new ways. They were never willing to take the “old 
paths” referred to in Jeremiah, in the sixth chapter. _If_an angel 
came and gave them their own way, they would not be able to 
make any better choice than what God had made for them: ~ This 
was seen in what was called “liberal Christianity.” He never saw 
a “liberal Christian” who was perfectly contented. No greater de- 
lusion, he believed, was ever in the world than that of these so- 
called Christians. The standard of Christians must be raised to 
where the Bible had it. They might be called Puritans, but they 
were living where the Bible would have them. There was a great 
curse abroad in the land, called “ German infidelity.” He prayed 
that there were such men to-day as Martin Luther, and Knox, and 
Whitfield, and the reformers to hold high the banner of the Cross, 
The skeptics rejected the Word of God, and did just as the Israel- 


the only thing 
guide, and he 
n any one was 
ly was hot to 
and that was 
th chapter of 
God of those 
-; and in the 
our God, and 
and twenty- 
unto Me, but 
nto you also 
or your sins.” 
v what God’s 
dge up their 
an might get 
erfect peace 
God’s way. 
he was filled 
ile of stones 
he man who 


‘e those who 
to take what 
in the sixth 
3 was always 
ke the “old 
If an angel 
be able to 
hem. This 
> never saw 
greater de- 
f these so- 
e raised to 
s, but they 
vas a great 
He prayed 
Knox, and 
the Cross, 
the Israel- 


WALKING WITH GOD. 595 


ites did before they went into captivity for seventy years in Baby- 
lon. The old way was better than the new. 

In the eighty-fourth Psalm were the words, “ No good thing will 
be withheld from them that walk uprightly.” He had another thing 
to call attention to, namely, separation. If a Christian man walked 
hand in hand with another who was not, he was dishonoring God. 
In Ephesians, the question was asked, “Can two walk together un- 
less they are agreed?” In Luke, it was related how the disciples 
walked to Emmaus, and Jesus walked and talked with them. Those 
who walk together must be of one mind. He had seen two young 
men together on the way to the theatre once; one swore horribly, 
the other didn’t, but laughed at what was said. They were agreed. 
If one man abused another man’s wife to the husband, that husband 
couldn’t walk with his wife’s enemy if they were not agreed; and 
if a Christian heard a man reviling God, he couldn’t walk with him. 

Mr. Moody then called attention to another point, from Second 
Corinthians, sixth chapter, fourteenth verse: “Be ye not unequally 
yoked together with unbelievers;” and in the seventeenth verse: 
‘Come out from among them, and be ye separate.” He lamented 
that so many Christians were married to persons who were not 
Christians. Many went into partnership with unchristian men, and 
the results were disastrous. A woman who marries an unbeliever 
is chained to a corpse for life. The trouble was that Christian 
women married saying they would influence their husbands; but if 
they couldn’t do it before marriage, they certainly could not after 
marriage. The Bible never counseled any one to leave a hus- 
band or wife because of this; but the fault was theirs, if they have 
misery now, in not seeing to it before they were yoked for life. 
Several instances were related illustrating this. Then there was 
another thing he called attention to, and he spoke of it, he said, 
feeling that he might be stepping on some one’s toes, perhaps some 
in the audience, and perhaps some of the ministers; he referred to 
lodges, no matter whether they were temperance, or anything else. 
Abraham had more influence in Sodom than Lot had, and Abraham 
knew the city was to be destroyed before Lot did; and when men 
said they did this or that to gain others’ influence, they were to re- 
member never to do evil that good might come of it. He wouldn't 
yoke himself with anything where God wasn’t to be found and hon. 
orecd. 


MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


XXVIII. 
THE TWO ADAMS. 


OD really dealt with two men; the first and the second Adam, 

e the two federal heads. Asa sort of primary examples of his 
meaning, he referred to the cares of Cain and Abel, Esau 

and Jacob, Saul and David—how th: : - «2 of Saul grew weaker 
and weaker, and that of the latter stron2 » and st~onger. He said 
he would endeavor during the afternoon—and, in fact, it was his aim 
in life—to turn the listener against this first man, which the first 


chapter said was made in God’s own image, after His own likeness, 
He then went on to say that ma 


creation, as found in the twentict] 


; ’ i e book, God commanded him not 
to eat of the tree of knowledge 


surely die. Moody said he bothe 


sinned and fell. The second Adam came, and as the fifth 
chapter of the Second Corinthians, twenty-first verse, says, the 
God made Him, His Son, “to be sin for us,” that we might rise 


again. There are the two Adams: the first Adam reduced us, the 
Bl second raised us up. 


To further illustrate his meaning, 
verses from Romans, showin 
world, and death by sin. 
making all men, as late as t 
of one man, but Mr. Mood 
but one side of the issue. 


. They forget that if 


hat they would be at 
peace and in joy with themselves. The first Adam was flesh; the 


secondis the soul. The first dies ; the second lives through eternity, 


econd Adam, 
amples of his 
| Abel, Esau 
grew weaker 
er. He said 
was his aim 
ich the first 
wn likeness. 
Over all the 
chapter of 
led him not 
r he would 
years over 
had finally 
it in the 
Eve saw 
gave it to 
\dam, who 
the fifth 

» Says, the 
might rise 
ced us, the 


read two 
-d into the 
justice in 
or the sin 
>y look at 
¢ a glance 
/o Adams, 
» be back 
ret that if 
uld be at 
flesh; the 
1 eternity, 


THE TWO ADAMS, 


597 


The first reigns supreme till it dies, but after that the second is 
ruler. Control the first, therefore, while it lives, and all flourishes 
well. Though there is death, there is life. We get death in the 
third of Genesis, and life in the third of St. John. 

He then quoted Dr, Andrew Bonar's words, who said, “It was a 
great mystery that God ever permitted man to sin, but it was a 
greater mystery that He ever allowed His Son to stand the brunt 
of it.” He would advise his hearers to remember this when in 
deubt. God was just. He was compelled to banish Adam from 
Eden, and place a guard on it. If He did not, what a perfect hell 
it would be now. He had ordained that man should die, but in 
justice He gave us a second Adam, who saved us. The first Adam 
introduced sin; the second is all that is good. Man is both, and he 
must, therefore, banish the first and encourage the second. All our 
burdens are those of the first Adam; but if we come to the Lord, 
He will carry them for us. The first gave a good many of these 
burdens, and hard ones they are to bear, but we can go to the 
second Adam. God is grace enough to carry all. Goto Him, 

Mr. Moody then told of the wealthy lady in the old country, 
whom a virtuous, Christian woman was endeavoring to interest in a 
poor bedridden woman. They called together at the tenement- 
house, and commenced to climb the rickety stairs. At the first 
landing, the dismal appearance rather appalled the wealthy being, 
who was unaccustomed to such darkness, and she asked if there was 
no danger. The friend replied, “It is better higher up.” Up to 
the next flight they continued their way, but it was getting darker 
and darker. Another frightened question only elicited the same 
reply, “It is better higher up.” Another flight and surroundings 
were simply terrible to the unaccustomed wealthy being, but her 
friend still insisted “it was better higher up.” The fifth floor was 
finally reached, and the visitors entered a plain, but home-like and 
happy home, though the woman was bedridden for four years, and 
there were evidences of many privations. The lady asked if she 
must not suffer much; but with the true spirit of the second Adam, 
she replied, “It is better higher up.” Be like the wayfarer wearily 
treading the road with the bundle over his shoulder, whom a farmer 
gave a ride, but could not induce to drop his bundle. He was 
thankful enough that he could ride himself. Mr. Moody exhorted 
them to carry their burdens with good will, and ride happily to 
Heaven. 


598 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


The forty-seventh verse of the fifteenth chapter of First Corinth- 
ians says, “ The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second man is 
the Lord from Heaven.” So it is with many after they have been 
converted, when they feel their old desires returning. He said his 
time was occupied in preventing the first Moody from assuming 
control of him that it hardly gave him time to do anything else, or 
ever gratify the most petty luxury. He then went on to show that 
if the Lord had banished man from Eden for one sin, and could de- 
liver him from his bondage by a sacrifice of His Son, how can we 
expect without the aid of God to reach Heaven with the thousands 
of sins which many of us are responsible for. Many claim it is the 
flesh which sins. Peter claimed so when he denied Christ. He did 
not want to, but could not help it. There is no good in the flesh, 
and only one way to battle. Don’t feed it, is Mr. Moody’s recom- 
mendation. But if you feed him by visiting the theatres, reading 
trashy novels, and in many other foolish ways feeding him, you can 
not expect to control him, and if you don’t control the flesh, it will 
still be the first Adam. God holds you personally responsible for 
the flesh, You must control it. A culprit in England pleaded that 
he did not want to commit the crime, but that the flesh did it. 
The judge says, “ All right. We will put the flesh in jail, and the 
spirit may go where it pleases.” A few more chapters were then 
read, showing that it is necessary also to control the flesh because 
of its testimony. Mr. Moody says the devil attacks in three differ. 
ent ways. First, he does all he can to keep you from reaching the 
second Adam; then, if you have reached it, he blackens your in- 
tentions; and should all prove futile, he will then do all he can to 
prevent you from talking. The flesh, the world, and the devil are 
man’s three great enemies, and Mr. Moody thinks flesh is the great- 
est of the three evils, for the devil will flee from you, but the flesh 
will not; it clings and incites. But on the other side, he invoked 
the audience to remember that man has three great friends, “ God 
the Father, God the Son, and God the Spirit,” and if they would 
go to them, all would be well. 


‘irst Corinth- 
econd man is 
ey have been 
He said his 
ym assuming 
hing else, or 
to show that 
nd could de- 
how can we 
ie thousands 
im it is the 
ist. He did 
in the flesh, 
\dy’s recom- 
tres, reading 
lim, you can 
flesh, it will 
ponsible for 
pleaded that 
Jesh did it. 
ail, and the 
s were then 
esh because 
three differ- 
eaching the 
ns your in- 
Il he can to 
e devil are 
is the great- 
ut the flesh 
he invoked 
ends, “ God 
they would 


XXIX. 


THE PRAYERS OF THE CHURCH STRONGER 
THAN HEROD. 


ee the twelfth of Acts we see the Church in straits, In this case 
the early Christians made their appeal directly to God. Things 
looked very dark for Peter. Herod had put him in prison, in- 
tending, after Easter, to deliver him over to the people to be 
killed, and, in order to make sure that he did not escape, there 
were sixteen soldiers, four at a time, set to keep guard over him. 
In our day we should get up an indignation meeting and _ protest 
against such treatment of a man who had committed no crime, and 
had not even been accused of any. We should probably get up a 
committee, composed of Nicodemus, Joseph of Arimathea, and 
Gamaliel, to go and represent the case to Herod and ask that Peter 
might be set at liberty; but those Christians did not commit the 
mistake which we have been making in this temperance movement 
all along, of looking to men instead of God. They appointed a 
prayer-meeting, and, to judge by the record, we may suppose they 
kept it up day and night for six days. On the seventh day, which 
was the time when Peter was to have been brought forth to die, 
they were still praying. No doubt some of us would have been dis- 
couraged the first day when we did not get any answer, and would 
have given it up; but not they. I suppose they thought that God 
would soften the heart of Herod and that he would let Peter go. 
They certainly didn’t expect God was going to send an angel and 
bring him out of that prison. But while Peter is sleeping between 
two soldiers, bound with two chains, and the keepers without kept 
the prison, the angel of the Lord came in and a light shined in the 
prison. God does not work in the dark, but in the light. Then, a3 
Peter arose at the bidding of the angel, his chains fell off. If we 
had been there, we should have taken off the chains and laid' them: 

down softly for fear of waking up the soldiers. 
“ Bind on the sandals,” says the angel. _ If we had been doing: it, 
we would have taken him out barefoot, so as not to make any naise: 

(599)> 


600 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


“Cast thy garment about thee,” says the angel. Then they go 
past one ward and another, and when they come to the great iron 
gate, it opens of its own accord, and out they go; and when Peter 
realizes that he is out of prison, he goes straight to where they are 
Praying for him, and lets them know that their prayers have been 
answered. How many men are there here chained by lust, and pas- 
sion, and appetite, to whom God has sent His angel, and delivered 
them? He has not only sent His angel, but He has sent His Son 
to redeem them, and now there is no excuse for any one who is not 
saved. There are hundreds of prisoners who were bound hand and 
foot, whom God has brought out of prison and set free during the 
past few weeks, And what will you say to their testimony? Will 
you call them all liars when they tell you that the grace of God 
through faith in Jesus Christ has taken the appetite for strong drink 
away from them? Let the Church do as it did in the case of Peter, 
pray to God to deliver these captives of Satan and help them out 
of all their difficulties, and He will do it. 


Then they go 
he great iron 
d when Peter 
yhere they are 
rs have been 
lust, and pas- 
and delivered 
sent His Son 
ne who is not 
ind hand and 
‘e during the 
nony? Will 
grace of God 
strong drink 
case of Peter, 
‘Ip them out 


XXX. 


THE RESURRECTION, 


a is surprising how widely ignorant some folks are concer. 
ing the resurrection, It was only the soul, or ghost of Jesus 
Christ, they said, that came out of the grave, while His body 

was consumed by worms. This notion was born of ignorance of 

God’s Word and the want of sound instruction. To Jesus His death 

and resurrection for sinful men were ever present. Matthew xvi. 

21, said: “rom that time forth began Jesus to show unto His dis- 

ciples how that He must go unto Jerusalem * * * 

and be raised again the third day ;”” 

“And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, 

saying, Tell the vision to no man until the Son of Man be risen 

again from the dead ;” again, in Mark ix, 31, “He taught His dis. 
ciples, and said unto them, The Son of Man is delivered into the 
hands of men, and they shall kil! Him; and after that He js killed, 

He shall rise the third day.” In these passages, and all through 

the New Testament, the blessed doctrine of the resurrection was 

brought out. The apostles had two texts, the death and the resur- 
rection of Jesus. The door hung on these two hinges; they were 
the chief corner-stones of our blessed religion. “The sign of the 


prophet Jonah” meant the resurrection. Just as Jonah had lain ins 


the bowels of the great fish prepared by God, so the Son of Man 
had to be laid in the bosom of the earth for a season, only to come 
forth on the third day. 

Have my hearers ever thought what gloom and darkness would 
settle down on this earth were it not for this sweet, comforting 
doctrine of the resurrection ? Those men who would undermine it 
were like Samson; they would bring down the pillars on their own 
heads and be crushed in Cesolation and ruin. It would be the last 
drop of bitterness to lay away a dear companion and think that 
only worms and mold were his portion—that he should never rise 
again. But, glory to God, He should come forth again; Christ had 
said that death no longer had dominion. It was written in John; 

(601) 


and be killed,’ 
again, in Matthew xvii. 9, 


602 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


“T will raise him up at the last day,” and again: “ He that believeth 
in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live.” 

Christians should go back very, very often to that sweet scene of 
the riven sepulchre. Doubtless, just before, as the Lord still lay 
there in His cerements, Satan prowled about, laughing in triuinph. 
The Son of Man, he chuckled, could not escape him. Enoch and 
Elijah had managed to, but Christ was fast there in the tomb. Yes, 
there He lay, cold and stark in death, with a great stone sealing the 
tomb. But Sunday morning came. In a twinkling all was changed. 
Those stark limbs grew warm, those glazed eyes opened, the Son 
of Man burst the bars of death, and came out of the sepulchre. All 
earth and hell could not hold Him there. 

The governor had appointed soldiers to watch the grave. A 
queer thing was noticeable —that Christ’s enemies expected Him 

_ to rise, while His own disciples had not understood His prophecies. 
A better thing was never done for Christianity than the posting of 
those sentinels before the sepulchre. Sleepless and watchful, they 
walked up and down there for three days. As the angel rolled 
away the store the soldiers trembled and fell down as dead men, 
and the earth shook. 

Very early that morning the sun let down its rays into the 
sepulchre, but the Lord was not there. He had already burst 
forth from the jaws of death when two or three women came 
early to the tomb. Nicodemus had before brought a hundred 
pounds of spices, but these women were fetching still more spices; 
they loved nothing so much as to steal up and tend that dear body. 
But already as they neared the spot, the stone was lying to one 
side; Christ, their Lord, was gone; He had risen, that “ He might 
be the justifier of the. ungodly.” In terror they hastened from 
the sepulchre, and, after a few steps, coming across one walking 
in the early morning, they cried out in anguish that the Lord 
was taken away and they knew not where to find Him. They 
thought the stranger they were talking to was the gardener. 
But directly He spoke the name Mary. How now the familiar voice 
fell on one of the women! She would have fallen again at the 
Master’s feet and bathed them with tears and ointment if He had 
permitted her. But Jesus said, “Touch Me not, for I am not yet 
ascended to My Father ; go, tell My disciples, and tell Peter.” 

The first to meet the Saviour was Mary, and in all the Saviour 
appeared eleven different times after His resurrection. The second 


He that believeth 


at sweet scene of 
he Lord still lay 
thing in triumph. 
1im. Enoch and 
nthe tomb. Yes, 
stone sealing the 
‘all was changed. 
opened, the Son 
1c sepulchre. All 


h the grave. A 
es expected Him 
1 His prophecies. 
in the posting of 
id watchful, they 
the angel rolled 
wn as dead men, 


ts rays into the 
ud already burst 
‘ee women came 
yught a hundred 
still more spices ; 
d that dear body. 
was lying to one 
that “ He might 
y hastened from 
ross one walking 
h that the Lord 
ind Him. They 
as the gardener. 
the familiar voice 
len again at the 
tment if He had 
or I am not yet 
_ tell Peter,” 

1 all the Saviour 
ion. The second 


time was when He saluted the women 


Jesus as the stranger joined them, and how they listened and mar- 
veled as the stranger expounded to them the Scriptures, and how 


THE RESURRECTION, 603 
as they ran back to tell the 
And the third appearance 
ine how that first Sabbath 
the Lord, and sought His 


disciples, and said to them, “All hail.” 
was to Simon Peter. One could imag 
morning Peter poured out his heart to 
forgiveness, and found it, 

Then the Lord appe 


ared to the two disciples as they walked to 
Emmaus. They were 


talking about the suffering and death of 


that Christ must needs die, and on the third day rise again. At the 
end of the journey one could see the two turn into the gate of a 


house and then insist that the stranger shall stop with them. Pretty 
boon they sat down to eat. Perhaps the stranger asked the bless- 
ing. In doing so, he used, may be, some old familiar sentence or 
orm of words, and at once their eyes were opened—they were en- 
rtaining the Lord Himself. They had entertained far better than 
gels unawares, 
Filled with joy, they traveled back eight miles to Jerusalem that 
‘y night, to spread the news that Christ had risen. They found 
ten (Thomas being absent), and told them the whole story. 
ud as they spake, once again, the fourth time, Jesus appeared. 
€ rose right in their midst. They could scarcely believe their 
es. They thought it was His ghost, His spirit. He bade them 
k at Him and touch Him, and, to still further reassure them, He 
led for a bit of fish and honey, and ate before them. It was in- 
ed the very Christ in human form. But Thomas was not there. 
w many Thomases had been absent from prayer-meetings where 
d had manifested His presence! Just the Wednesday night 
eting that the Christian failed to attend might be the most glo- 
us meeting of all and full of the blessed Spirit of power. 
homas, when the other apostles told him, disbelieved this last 
earance. He wouldn’t believe that Christ was risen till he 
uld thrust his hand into the Lord’s side. A good many Thom- 
is were in the Church nowadays: they wouldn’t believe the Word 
rod on the testimony of those who had had fellowship and com- 
hion with Him. An entire week rolled by, a week of mingled 
bts and expectancy, when once more, all of the eleven being 
lered together, the Lord stood in their midst. He singled out 
ple, quaking Thomas and told him to put forth his hand and 
_\in the wound from the spear. Thomas obeyed, and straight- 


604 MOODY'S ADDRESSES, 


way the tears came trickling down his face, as he cried, “ My Lorc 
@nd my God;” his doubts were all gone. That was the sixth time. 
The next occasion was when the apostles had « gone fishing,’ 
and, catching nothing, were accosted by the old, familiar voice on 
the shore. A great draught of fishes was then taken, and immedi- 
ately John said to Peter, “ That is the Lord,” and impetuous Peter 
attempted to walk upon the water. Then it was Christ asked Peter 
three times that touching question, « Lovest thou Me;” and the) 
it was He told John to “follow Him.” Just so Christians were t, 
follow, not John or any lesser leader, but “ Him,” : 
The next appearance, as near as could be found out, was to th: 
five hundred disciples. After that He appeared to James; Pau 
says He appeared to James. Then, lastly, He appeared again ti 
the eleven disciples. He took them out of Jerusalem down to th; 


with Him there. After His resurrection no uncircumcised eye s: 
Him on earth, A man must see Christ on the Cross before he CO,, 
see His resurrection, And there, the tenth time that He had } 
seen of men, He rose into Heaven, where He had told them tr dete 


announcement came that Just so they should see this same Jesus 
come again from Heaven. Then the apostles went back to Jerusa- 
lem and preached with joy the Lord’s resurrection, ey 
Blessed, blessed doctrine of the resurrection ! Preachers denied/ 
themselves great joy in not Preaching it more. The apostles hag 
no more favorite theme than « Christ, the risen, Christ at the righj 
hand of God.” Paul knew and gloried in the glorious resurrectiony 
as well he might, for even after the ascension, the Lord appeared er. 
him, “as one born out of due time.” So nowadays, let all Christijjce 
rejoice in a risen Lord ascended to the throne of Power and me¢ the 
Angels had proclaimed His birth, and the same angels, with had 
louder notes, had proclaimed His resurrection. The song of’ yet 
bursted sepulchre would be sweeter than the song of the mor, 
stars. In just a little while all His faithful children would join ingviour 
song, and be forever with their risen, ascended Lord in His second 
/ 


cried, “ My Lorc 
as the sixth time. 


Patt 


“gone fishing,’ 


familiar voice on 
cen, and immedi- 
impetuous Peter 


hrist asked Peter 
Me?” and the) 
iristians were ti 


out, was to thx 
to James; Pay 
peared again ti 
em down to th: 
over the Moun 
rhaps, near thi 
8 disciples wer 
mcised eye s: 
before he CO,) 

ut He had } 

Id them t* dese 
place for them. 
and higher He 
t, as, on tiptoe, 
till the angelic 
is same Jesus 
ack to Jerusa- 


achers denied/ 
© apostles hag) 
t at the righ{ 
-resurrectioig 
d appeared er. 
all Christijjce 
-r and me the 
Is, with had 
song of’ yet 
the mor 

d join ingviour 
n His second 


3 


ig Bt, 


| 
| 


