,,va^^  oi  ^^  ®'«"%««^  ^.,4^^ 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 


7-  ■  ; 


Shelf 


Division  Ju>^.h:^(p.<L'S 

Section  Mi^S. 

Number .V..«.^ 


2>   ! 


Mm\[ 


JiS 


NEW  COMMENTARY 


ON 


ACTS  OF  APOSTLES 


BY 

J.  W.  McGARVEY,  A.M. 

Professor  of  Sacred  History  in  the  College  of  the  "Bible.     Author  of 

"  Comment  arj'  on  {Matthew  and  {Mark,"  "Lands  of  the 

Bible,"  and  "Evidences  of  Christianitjy." 

LEXINGTON,  KY. 


VOLUME   2. 


CINCINNATI : 
The  Standard  Publishing  Company, 

Publishers  of  Christinn  Literature. 


Copyrighted,  1892,  by 
J.  W.  McCtarvey. 


COMMENTARY  ON  ACTS. 

PART  THIRD. 

PAUL'S  lOUBS  AMONG   THE  GENTILES. 

ixiii.—xxi.) 


SEC.  I.— THE  FIRST  TOUR. 

(xiii.— xiv). 

1.  Barnabas  and  Saul  Set  Apaet  to  the  Work, 
XIII.  1-3. 

Yer.  1.  The  opening  sentence  of  this  part  of  Acts 
stands  closely  connected  with  the  preceding  part,  taking 
its  start  from  the  return  of  Barnabas  and  Saul  to  Antioch  ; 
and  yet,  because  of  the  new  subject  here  introduced,  its 
style  is  the  same  as  if  it  were  the  beginning  of  an  inde- 
pendent narrative  /  (i)  Now  there  were  at  Antioch,  in 
the  church  that  was  there,  prophets  and  teachers,  Bar- 
nabas, and  Symeon  that  was  called  Niger,  and  Lucius 
of  Cyrene,  and  Manaen  foster-brother  of  Herod  the  te- 
trarch,  and  Saul. 

The  distinction  between  prophets  and  teachers  is  not 
clearly  drawn  in  the  New  Testament,  except  to  the  ex- 

^  The  new  and  quite  different  subject  matter  now  introduced, 
sufficiently  a(;counts  for  the  author's  style  here,  without  aid  from 
any  of  the  supiiositions  mentioned  by  Meyer^  including  one  of 
his  own. 

1 


2  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  1. 

tent  tliat  the  former  were  men  who  spoke  by  inspiration, 
while  the  latter  sometimes  did  and  sometimes  did  not. 
The  previous  statement  of  Luke,  that  "  there  came  down 
prophets  from  Jerusalem  to  Antioch"  (xi.  27),  of  whom 
Agabus  was  one,  may  have  included  the  prophets  who 
are  here  mentioned. 

The  order  in  which  the  five  names  are  written 
is  probably  that  of  the  relative  reputation  of  the  men. 
Barnabas,  having  been  sent  from  Jerusalem,  and  having 
been  an  eminent  man  there,  was  naturally  looked  upon 
as  the  most  important  person,  while  Saul  was  at  this 
time  the  least  noted  of  the  five.  Symeon,  as  his  name 
proves,  was  a  full-blooded  Jew ;  and  though  his  surname 
Niger  (black)  can  scarcely  justify  the  conclusion  that  he 
was  an  African  Jew,^  it  could  scarcely  have  been  given 
to  him  without  some  allusion  to  his  complexion.  Syme- 
ons  were  so  numerous  among  the  Jews  that  it  was  neces- 
sary to  distinguish  them  in  some  way,  and  it  is  highly 
probable  that  this  one,  from  having  an  unusually  dark 
complexion,  was  called  black  Symeon.^  As  some  of  the 
second  group  of  preachers  who  had  come  to  Antioch 
were  men  of  Cyrene  (xi.  20),  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that 
Lucius  of  Cyrene  was  one  of  these,  and  that  he  was 
therefore  one  of  the  founders  of  the  church.  Manaen  is 
the  Greek  form  of  the  Hebrew  name  Menahem.  Having 
been  the  foster-brother  of  Herod  the  tetrarch,  his  mother 
having  nursed  the  two  when  they  were  infants,  he  had 
in  all  likelihood  kept  up  through  life  an  acquaintance 

^"  From  his  appellation  Niger,  he  may  have  been  an  African 
proselyte."     (Alford,  in  loco). 

^  It  is  quite  common  in  America,  when  two  or  thi^ee  men  with 
the  same  name  live  in  the  same  vicinity,  to  distinguish  them  by 
their  shades  of  complexion,  or  the  color  of  their  hair :  e.  g.,  Red 
Tom,  Black  Tom,  etc. 


xiii.  1-S.]  ACTS.  3 

with  that  prince ;  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  Luke 
learned  through  him  something  of  Herod's  thoughts  and 
words  concerniui;'  John  the  Baptist  and  Jesus,  which  he 
had  recorded  in  his  previous  narrative  (Luke  ix.  7-9). 

Vv.  2,  3.  Symeon,  Lucius  and  Manaen  had  been 
the  chief  teachers  of  the  church  during  the  absence  of 
Barnabas  and  Saul  on  their  mission  to  Jerusalem,  and 
now  this  work  is  to  be  left  to  them  again.  (2)  And  as 
they  ministered  to  the  Lord,  and  fasted,  the  Holy  Spirit 
said,  Separate  me  Barnabas  and  Saul  for  the  work  where- 
unto  I  have  called  them.  (3)  Then  when  they  had 
fasted  and  prayed  and  laid  their  hands  upon  them,  they 
sent  them  away.  The  ministering  to  the  Lord  here 
mentioned  has  no  special  reference  to  the  public  worship, 
but  rather  to  their  service  in  supplying  the  wants  of 
their  brethren ;  for  such  is  the  meaning  of  the  original 
word  when  used  in  reference  to  Christian^  service.  It 
was  their  habitual,  daily  work.  For  what  cause  they 
were  fasting  just  at  this  time  we  have  no  intimation  ; 
l)ut  from  the  instruction  of  the  Master  on  the  subject 
(Mdtt.  ix.  15),  we  may  safely  infer  that  it  was  in  con- 
sequence of  some  affliction  which  had  befallen  them. 

Tiic  command  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  separate  Barna- 
bas and  Saul,  must  have  been  addressed  to  the  other 
three  brethren,  and  it  was  doubtless  communicated 
through  one  of  them  to  the  others.  The  clause,  "  the 
work  whereunto  I  have  called  them,"  implies  that  they 
had  both  been  called  to  this  work  before  this  time.    Paul 

^Such  is  the  usage  of  the  verb,  7.ei-nvpyru,  to  minister;  and  of 
the  nonns,  ?ieiTovfjyta,  and  7i£iTov()yoq,  ministry,  and  minister,  as  is 
seen  in  Rom.  xv.  16,  27;  II.  Car.  ix.  12;  Phil.  ii.  17,  30.  The  fact 
that  the  word  liturgy  is  derived  from  it  is  suggestive  of  the  great 
dej>artnr(' from  S(-riptural  ideas  and  usage  indicated  by  ancient 
and  luiiclcrn  liiur<;ios. 


4  COMMENT AR  Y.      '  [xiii.  2, 3. 

was  called  to  it  in  the  commission  given  to  him  by  the 
Lord  at  the  time  of  his  conversion,  as  we  learn  from  his 
own  lips  farther  on  (xxvi.  16-18);  but  when  Barnabas 
was  called  we  have  no  means  of  determining.  Saul  had 
been  preaching  to  Gentiles  as  well  as  to  Jews,  as  we  may 
safely  conclude,  ever  since  he  had  heard  of  the  baptism 
of  Cornelius  by  Peter ;  but  he  had  never  yet  made  the 
former  his  chief  work.  It  should  be  observed,  that  the 
thought  of  separating  the  two  to  this  work  did  not 
originate  with  tlie  brethren ;  but  it  was  expressly  com- 
municated to  them  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

The  purpose  of  the  fasting,  prayer  and  laying  on  of 
hands  is  clearly  indicated  in  the  context :  for  what  they 
did  was  doubtless  what  they  were  told  to  do ;  but  what 
they  were  told  to  do  was  to  "separate"  the  two  to  the 
work  indicated ;  and,  therefore,  fasting,  praying  and  laying 
on  of  hands  was  the  method  of  separating  them.  This 
is  the  ceremony  deemed  suitable  for  such  a  separation 
by  those  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  it 
follows  that  on  all  similar  occasions,  such  as  separating 
a  brother  to  the  ministry  of  the  word,  or  separating  one 
who  is  already  an  experienced  preacher,  as  were  both 
Barnabas  and  Saul,  to  some  new  and  different  field  of 
labor,  it  is  proper  for  those  concerned  in  the  movement 
to  lay  hands  on  him  with  fasting  and  prayer.  The  mod- 
ern conception,  that  hands  may  be  imposed  only  by  those 
holding  an  office  superior  to  that  which  is  to  be  filled,  is 
the  invention  of  an  unscriptural  hierarchy,  having  no 
support  in  the  New  Testament.  In  the  instance  before 
us,  hands  were  imposed  on  Barnabas  by  three  mm  who 
were  his  inferiors  in  the  estimation  of  the  church  ;  and 
on  Paul,  the  called  apostle  of  Jesus  Christ,  by  men  who 
were  not  apostles,  and,  so  far  as  our  information  extends, 


xiii.  2-5.]  ACTS.  5 

not  even  elders  of  the  congregation  in  wbicli  they  were 
teachers  and  prophets.  This  incident  clearly  demon- 
strates another  fact  in  regard  to  this  ceremony,  that  it 
possesses  none  of  the  magical  power  to  impart  spiritual 
graces  which  has  been  siiperstitiously  ascribed  to  it;  for 
surely  Barnabas  and  Saul  were  not  destitute  of  any  grace 
which  could  be  imparted  to  them  by  Symeon,  Lucius 
and  Manaeu.  The  truth  is,  that  this  ceremony,  now  no 
longer  called  ordination^  in  the  English  Scriptures,  was 
nothing  more  than  a  method  of  solemnly  commending  a 
man  to  God  for  the  ministration  to  which  he  was  being 
set  apart.  The  subject  will  come  before  us  again  in 
regard  to  Timothy  under  xvi.  1-3. 

Only  the  teachers  and  prophets  are  mentioned  in 
connection  with  this  proceeding,  but  we  are  not  to  sup- 
pose that  they  acted  in  private.  Doubtless  the  ceremony 
of  laying  on  hands  was  in  the  presence  of  the  congrega- 
tion ;  and  after  the  command  of  the  Spirit  was  received, 
there  was  doubtless  time  given  for  the  apostles  to  prepare 
for  the  journey,  and  for  the  congregation  to  be  notified. 
These  considerations  make  it  probable  that  the  fasting 
connected  with  the  imposition  of  hands  was  not  the  one 
in  which  the  teachers  and  prophets  were  already  engaged, 
but  one  specially  appointed  for  the  occasion. 

2.  Their  Labors  in  Cyprus,  4-12. 

Vv.  4,  5.  The  journeys  now  entered  upon  by  Saul  are 
among  the  most  momentous  ever  undertaken,  whether 
by  one  man  or  many.  They  are  worthy  therefore  of  the 
space  allotted  to  them  by  our  author,  and  of  the  most 

^  The- re\'isers  have  wisely  disconnected  this  English  word 
from  the  accounts  of  appointments  to  office,  and  confined  it  to 
decrees  and.  appointments  of  God. 


&  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  4,  5. 

careful  study  by  every  one  interested  in  human  progress. 

(4)  So  they,  being  sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  went 
down  to  Seleucia  ;  and  from  thence  they  sailed  to  Cyprus. 

(5)  And  when  they  were  at  Salamis  they  proclaimed  the 
word  of  God  in  the  synagogues  of  the  Jews :  and  they 
had  also  John  as  their  attendant.  Seleucia  was  the  sea- 
port of  Antioch,  sixteen  miles  distant,  where  all  large 
vessels  lay  at  anchor ;  for  although  the  Orontes,  on  the 
bunks  of  which  Antioch  was  situated,  was  navigable  for 
small  vessels,  it  was  too  shallow  for  those  of  the  deepest 
draught.  Embarking  here  on  some  trading  vessel,  they 
sailed  to  the  port  of  Salamis,^  which  is  at  the  eastern  end 
of  the  island  of  Cyprus. 

In  choosing  this  island  as  the  first  point  in  the  wide 
world  to  which  they  directed  their  course,  they  were 
moved  in  part,  no  doubt,  by  the  fact  that  it  was  the  birth- 
place of  Barnabas,  where  his  personal  acquaintance  would 
be  of  advantage  to  them;  but  also  in  part  by  the  con- 
sideration that  there  were  many  Jewish  synagogues  there, 
furnishing  starting  points  for  the  work,  and  that  the 
gospel  had  been  proclaimed  there  already  with  some 
success  (xi.  19,  20). 

The  John  mentioned  as  the  attendant  of  Barnabas 
and  Saul  is  the  "  John  surnamed  Mark"  of  xii.  25.  He 
had  not  been  set  apart  to  the  work,  as  had  his  older 
companions,  but  he  had  undertaken  voluntarily  to  go 
with  them  as  an  attendant.  His  work  was  to  assist  them 
in  every  way  in  which  a  young  man  can  serve  his  elders. 

Luke  is  entirely  silent  in  regard  to  the  success  of  the 
preaching  in  Salamis,  leaving  us  to  suppose  that  it  was 

^  Salamis  was  afterward  destroyed  by  war  and  earthquakes, 
and  its  site  is  now  marked  by  ruins  about  four  miles  north  of  the 
modern  town  Famagosta. 


xiii.  4-7.]  ACTS.  7 

not  great,  and  that  the  stay  of  the  apostles  there  was 
probably  void  of  stirring  incidents. 

Vv.  Q,  7.  It  was  not  till  the  preachers  reached  the 
other  extremity  of  the  island,  about  one  hundred  miles 
distant  to  the  west,  that  the  writer  pauses  to  relate  any 
of  the  incidents  of  their  labors  in  Cyprus.  (6)  And  when 
they  had  gone  through  the  whole  island  unto  Paphos, 
they  found  a  certain  sorcerer,  a  false  prophet,  a  Jew 
whose  name  was  Bar- Jesus  ;  (7)  who  was  with  the  pro- 
consul,^ Sergius  Paulus,  a  man  of  understanding.  The 
same  called  unto  him  Barnabas  and  Saul,  and  sought  to 
hear  the  word  of  God.  Pa]ihos  was  not  the  original  city 
of  that  name,  the  birthplace,  according  to  the  Greek 
mythology,  of  the  goddess  Venus,  but  a  small  city  of 
later  origin  which  inherited  the  name  after  its  predeces- 
sor had  gone  to  ruin.  It  is  now  an  insignificant  village 
called  Baflla,  or  Bafo.  At  the  time  of  our  text,  although 
situated  at  the  western  extremity  of  the  island,  it  was 
the  seat  of  the  Roman  government. 

^  For  a  long  time  modern  skeptics  contended  that  Luke  here 
made  the  mistake  of  styling  Sergius  Paulus  a  proconsul,  when  he 
should  have  called  him  proprietor,  the  latter,  and  not  the  former, 
being  the  Roman  title  borne  by  the  chief  ruler  of  the  island.  In 
vain  believers  insisted  that,  though  the  latter  was  the  usual  title, 
there  may  have  been  exceptions,  and  that  Luke  was  therefore  to 
be  credited.  "  To  set  the  matter  finally  at  rest,"  says  Farrar, 
"  coins  and  inscription  of  this  very  epoch  have  been  found  at 
Curium  and  Citium,  in  which  the  title  of  proconsul  is  given  to 
Cominius  Proclus,  Julius  Corduo,  and  L.  Annus  Bassus,  who 
must  have  been  immediate  predecessors  or  successors  of  Sergius 
Paulus."  (Life  of  Paul,  Excursus,  xvi.>  Still  later,  M.  de  Cesnolo 
found  at  Soli,  in  the  same  island,  a  coin  with  the  inscription 
"  Paulus  the  Proconsul."  (Cuprus,  p.  125).  Thus  the  defense 
of  Luke,  based  at  first  on  the  presumption  that  he  is  a  reliable 
historian,  is  made  complete  by  the  demonstration  of  that  which 
had  been  presumed  in  his  favor. 


8  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  6-8. 

Lest  the  reader  should  think  that  Luke  makes  an 
overestimate  of  Sergius  Paul  us  in  styling  him  "  a  man 
of  understanding,"  seeing  that  he  had  with  him  a  false 
prophet,  we  may  remark  that  statesmen  and  generals  in 
that  age  were  in  the  habit  of  consulting  oracles  and 
auguries  about  all  important  matters,  and  of  keeping 
about  them  some  one  who  was  credited  with  interpreting 
the  signs  of  approaching  good  and  eviL  As  there  cer- 
tainly had  been  true  prophets  among  the  Jews,  Paulus 
showed  good  sense  in  trusting  to  a  so-called  prophet  of 
that  nation,  rather  than  to  any  other;  and  when  the  two 
Jews  canpe  to  Paphos,  claiming  to  bring  fresh  revelations 
from  the  God  of  Israel,  the  same  good  sense  prompted 
him  to  send  for  them.  Such  a  mind  as  his  could  not  fail 
to  hear  with  profit  what  Barnabas  and  Saul  had  to  say. 

Ver.  8.  Bar-Jesus  saw  at  once  that  the  success  of 
Barnabas  and  Saul  in  convincing  the  proconsul  would 
be  an  end  of  his  influence  with  him,  and  of  the  profits 
which  his  pretences  were  yielding ;  so  he  ])ut  forth-  his 
utmost  efforts  to  defeat  them.  (8)  But  Elymas  the  sor- 
cerer (for  so  is  his  name  by  interpretation)  ^  withstood 
them,  seeking  to  turn  aside  the  proconsul  from  the  faith. 
It  would  be  vain  to  conjecture  the  mode  of  argumenta- 
tion or  vilification  which  he  employed.  Whatever  it 
was,  it  proved  to  Paul  that  he  was  a  villain  of  the  deepest 
dye,  fighting  against  what  he  knew  to  be  right,  and  per- 
verting that  which  he  knew  to  be  true.  Perhaps  Bar- 
nabas, as  the  chief  man  of  the  company,  had  been  the 
speaker  up  to  this  moment ;  but  Saul  saw  that  something 

^  More  properly,  "  by  translation."  Luke  translates  the  name 
Elymas,  by  some  supposed  to  be  an  Arabic,  and  by  others  an 
Aramaic  word  (Grimm's  Lexicon),  into  Greek,  by  the  word  here 
rendered  sorcerer.  His  other  name,  Bar-Jesus,  is  Hebrew,  and 
means  son  of  Jesus. 


xiii.  8-12.]  ACTS.  9 

more  decisive  than  words  was  demanded,  and  a  most 
extraordinary  scene  followed. 

Vv.  9-12.     (9)  But  Saul,  who  is  also  called  Paul, 
filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  fastened  his  eyes  upon  him, 

(10)  and  said,  0  full  of  all  guile  and  all  villainy,  thou 
son  of  the  devil,  thou  enemy  of  all  righteousness,  wilt 
thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the  right  ways  of  the  Lord  ? 

(11)  And  now,  behold,  the  hand  of  the  Lord  is  upon  thee, 
and  thou  shalt  be  blind,  not  seeing  the  sun  for  a  season. 
And  immediately  there  fell  on  him  a  mist  and  a  dark- 
ness ;  and  he  went  about  seeking  some  to  lead  him  by 
the  hand.  (12)  Then  the  proconsul,  when  he  saw  what 
was  done,  believed,  being  astonished  at  the  teaching  of 
the  Lord.  This  is  the  only  miracle  wrought  by  an 
apostle  to  the  injury  of  any  one's  person.  It  was  a  case 
much  like  that  of  Moses  in  Egypt,  who  found  it  neces- 
sary to  bring  some  irresistible  afflictions  on  the  magi- 
cians, in  order  to  destroy  Pharaoh's  confidence  in  them. 
Saul  saw  that  the  readiest  way  to  convince  the  proconsul 
that  Bur- Jesus  was  a  base  impostor  was  to  denounce  liim 
in  his  true  character,  and  then  prove  the  sentence  pro- 
nounced upon  him  true  and  just  by  blinding  him.  As 
he  groped  about,  calling  on  one  and  another  of  the 
frightened  bystanders  to  lead  him  by  the  hand,  the 
falsity  and  iniquity  of  his  pretensions  stood  practically 
confessed,  and  the  divine  mission  of  the  apostles  was 
demonstrated.  It  had  tlie  desired  effect  on  the  procon- 
sul, and  perhaps  Barnabas  and  Mark  were  as  much  sur- 
prised, though  not  so  much  frightened,  as  the  rest  of 
the  company.  Whether  the  proconsul  followed  his 
belief  with  the  proper  obedience,  Luke  fails  to  inform 
us,  and  the  omission  rather  implies  that  he  did  not.  The 
hindrances  in  the  way  of  a  heathen  of  high  rank  bccom- 


10  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  9-12. 

ing  a  Christian  in  life  were  almost  insurmountable,,  and 
if  Paul  us  had  accomplished  the  mighty  task,  it  is  unac- 
countable that  at  least  a  word  to  that  effect  is  not  spoken. 
How  long  the  "season"  during  which  Bar- Jesus  was  to 
remain  blind  proved  to  be,  is  left  to  conjecture.  It  was 
certainly  long  enough  for  him  to  have  become  a  believer 
if  his  corrupt  nature  was  capable  of  any  good. 

With  the  clause,  "  Saul,  who  is  also  called  Paul," 
this  apostle  ceases  to  be  called  Saul,  and  begins  to  be 
called  Paul.  Hitherto  he  has  occupied  a  subordinate 
j)Osition,  and  his  name  has  come  last  in  the  list  of  him- 
self and  his  companions ;  but  hereafter  he  is  to  occupy 
the  forefront  of  almost  every  scene  in  which  he  figures. 
Heretofore  it  has  been  "  Barnabas  and  Saul ;"  hereafter 
it  is  to  be  "  Paul  and  Barnabas.*'  It  is  impossible  not 
to  connect  this  change  with  the  name  of  Paulus,  who 
was  convinced  by  the  vigorous  and  unexpected  action  of 
Paul.  Many  eminent  scholars  think  that  he  had  previ- 
ously borne  both  names,  the  one  Hebrew  and  the  other 
an  adopted  Roman  name  ;  and  that  the  change  consisted 
in  using  the  latter  henceforward  exclusively.  This 
would  be  satisfactory,  if  we  had  any  evidence,  of  which 
we  have  not  the  slightest,  that  he  had  ever  borne  the 
name  Paul  previous  to  this  time ;  for  the  mere  fact  that 
many  Jews  had  Greek  or  Roman  surnames  can  not  be 
held  as  evidence  that  Paul  had.  The  obvious  explana- 
tion is,  that  just  as  his  companion  Barnabas  has  been  so 
called  by  his  brethren,  his  original  name  being  Joseph, 
because  he  was  a  good  exhorter  (iv.  36);  so  he,  on  account 
of  convincing  the  first  proconsul  who  ever  paid  respect- 
ful attention  to  the  faith  in  Christ,  and  especially  on 
account  of  the  exceptionally  bold  and  startling  way  in 
which  he  did  it,  his  brethren,  not  himself,  changed  his 


xiii.  0-13.]  ACTS. 


11 


name  to  Paulus.  The  change  was  the  more  easily  made, 
and  the  more  natnrally  suggested,  from  the  circumstance 
that  there  was  already  a  difference  of  only  one  letter 
between  the  two  names.  As  a  matter  of  course,  after 
everybody  else  had  put  upon  him  this  new  name,  he  was 
compelled,  willing  or  unwilling,  to  use  it  himself,  as  he 
does  in  all  his  epistles. 

3.  The  Journey  from  Paphos  to  Antioch,  13-15. 

Yer.  13.  Cutting  short  the  account  of  events  in 
Paphos  in  a  way  that  disappoints  our  curiosity,  the  his- 
torian hurries  us  with  the  two  apostles  on  the  further 
prosecution  of  their  tour.  (13)  Now  Paul  and  his  com- 
pany set  sail  from  Paphos,  and  came  to  Perga  in  Pam- 
phylia :  and  John  departed  from  them  and  returned  to 
Jerusalem.  So  completely  has  Paul  now  become  the 
central  figure  in  Luke's  narrative,  that  Barnabas  and 
John  Mark  are  called  simply  "his  company."  Why 
they  chose  this  portion  of  Asia  Minor  as  their  next  field 
of  labor,  is  not  stated ;  but  it  was  probably  because  Paul 
had  already  evangelized  Cilicia,  and  wished  now  to 
introduce  the  gospel  to  the  districts  adjacent  to  Cilicia 
on  the  west,  with  a  view  to  the  systematic  evangelization 
of  the  whole  peninsula.  We  shall  see  a  further  indica- 
tion of  such  a  plan  in  xvi.  1-8.  His  long  residence  in 
Cilicia  made  him  more  or  less  familiar  with  the  state  of 
society  in  the  region  which  he  now  penetrates,  and  he 
enters  it  with  intelligent  foresight. 

Luke  is  equally  silent  in  regard  to  the  reason  which 
governed  John  Mark  in  turning  back  from  Perga,  and 
going  home.  He  does  not  even  hint  at  this  point  that 
his  reason  was  unsatisfactory  to  either  of  John's  com- 
panions; though  he  shows  plainly  farther  on  (xv.  37-39) 


12  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  13-15. 

that  it  was  extremely  so  to  Paul.  It  Is  very  plausibly 
conjectured  by  Mr.  Howson  that  he  was  moved  by  fear 
of  robbers  in  the  mountains  which  they  would  have  to 
cross  in  passing  into  the  interior.  He  says :  "  No  poj3u- 
lation  through  the  midst  of  which  Paul  ever  traveled 
abounded  more  in  those  '  perils  of  robbers '  of  which  he 
himself  speaks,  than  the  wild  and  lawless  clans  of  the 
Pisidiau  highlands."^  The  preachers  were  not  burdened 
with  money  to  attract  robbers,  but  John  knew  that  rob- 
bers sometimes  kill  men  and  then  search  for  their  money. 
Vv.  14,15.  Luke  does  not  recount  the  dangers  and 
hardships  of  the  journey  across  the  mountains,  but  fol- 
lows the  two  travelers  in  silence  from  Perga  to  Antioch. 
(14)  But  they,  passing  through  from  Perga,  came  to 
Antioch  of  Pisidia ;  and  they  went  into  the  synagogue 
on  the  sabbath  day,  and  sat  down.  (15)  And  after  the 
reading  of  the  law  and  the  prophets  the  ruler  of  the 
synagogue  sent  unto  them,  saying,  Brethren,  if  ye  have 
any  word  of  exhortation  for  the  people,  say  on.  This  is 
a  graphic,  though  altogether  informal  account  of  the 
order  of  service  in  a  Jewish  synagogue.  First,  a  section 
of  the  law  is  read;  then  a  section  of  the  prophets;  then 
came  exhortations  based  on  what  had  been  read.  Paul 
and  Barnabas  had  taken  their  seats  modestly  in  the 
audience  among  the  people ;  for  so  Jesus  had  taught  his 
disciples  (Matt,  xxiii.  5-12);  and  the  reason  why  the 
ruler  gave  them  permission  to  speak  was  doubtless 
because  tbey  had  previously  sought  it.  They  had  come 
into  this  community  for  the  purpose  of  speaking  to  the 
people ;  they  had  fully  intended,  as  was  their  custom,  to 
begin  in  the  synagogue;  and  they  did  as  any  preacher 
at  the  present  day  would  do  under  similar  circumstances 

1  Life  and  Epistles  of  Paul,  i.  162,  163. 


xiii.  14-22.]  ACTS.  13 

— they  took  pains,  before  the  service  began,  to  introduce 
themselves  to  the  rulers,  and  ask  the  privilege  of  address- 
ing the  audience  ere  it  should  be  dismissed. 

This  Antioch  was  one  of  many  cities  founded  or 
enlarged  by  Seleucus  Nicator,  and  named  Antioch  in 
honor  of  his  father  Antiochus,  who  was  made  king  of 
Syria  after  the  death  of  Alexander  the  Great.  On 
account  jf  the  good  roads  which  radiated  from  it  in  every 
direction,  and  its  comparative  proximity  to  the  sea,  being 
about  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  from  Perga,  it  was 
the  center  of  a  considerable  trade,  and  this  had  attracted 
a  considerable  Jewish  population. 

4.  Paul's  Sermon  in  Antioch,  16-41. 

i.  the  introduction,  16-22. 

Yv.  16-22.  To  the  invitation  of  the  synagogue, 
rulers  Paul  responded  by  immediately  arising  and  ad- 
dres.sing  the  audience.  There  had  no  doubt  been  a 
previous  agreement  between  him  and  Barnabas  that 
he  should  thus  take  the  lead.  He  introduced  his 
discourse  by  a  brief  sketch  of  the  history  of  Israel  from 
the  exodus  to  the  time  of  David :  (i6)  And  Paul  stood 
up,  and  beckoning  with  his  hand,  said,  Men  of  Israel, 
and  ye  that  fear  God,  hearken.  (17)  The  God  of  this  peo- 
ple Israel  chose  our  fathers,  and  exalted  the  people  when 
they  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  with  a  high  arm 
led  them  forth  out  of  it.  (18)  And  for  about  the  time  of 
forty  years  suffered  he  their  manners  in  the  wilderness. 
(19)  And  when  he  had  destroyed  seven  nations  in  the 
land  of  Canaan,  he  gave  them  their  land  for  an  inherit- 
ance, for  about  four  hundred  and  fifty  years :  (20)  And 
after  these  things  he  gave  them  judges   until   Samuel 


14  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  lti-22 

the  prophet.  (21)  And  afterward  they  asked  for  a 
king :  and  God  gave  unto  them  Saul  the  son  of  Kish,  a 
man  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  for  the  space  of  forty 
years.  (22)  And  when  he  had  removed  him,  he  raised 
up  David  to  be  their  king  ;  to  whom  he  also  bore  witness, 
and  said,  I  have  found  David  the  son  of  Jesse,  a  man 
after  my  heart,  who  shall  do  all  my  will. 

The  gesture  made  by  Paul  as  he  began,  described  as 
"  beckoning  with  his  hand/'  was  habitual  with  him  / 
and  though  quite  an  unusual  gesture,  it  was  well  calcu- 
lated to  arrest  the  attention  of  an  audience.  It  indicated 
that  he  knew  what  he  was  about  to  say,  and  felt  confi- 
dent of  its  importance. 

His  brief  sketch  of  the  history  of  Israel  served  the  two 
chief  purposes  of  an  introduction — it  led  the  minds  of 
the  hearers  forward  to  the  main  theme  of  the  discourse, 
and  it  did  so  in  a  manner  well  calculated  to  interest  and 
please  them.  The  Jews  had  a  glorious  history,  of  which 
they  were  justly  proud  ;  and  any  happily  expressed  allu- 
sions to  its  more  glorious  incidents  always  awakened  their 
most  lively  emotions.  These  incidents  furnished  the  in- 
spiration of  their  songs,  the  themes  of  their  orators,  and 
their  comfort  in  persecution.  He  had  the  readiest  access 
to  their  sympathy  who  showed  the  highest  appreciation 
of  these  great  events.  Paul,  knowing  this,  passed  readily 
into  the  hearts  of  his  hearers  through  this  open  door. 

In  the  statement  of  verse  19,  that  "when  he  had  de- 
stroyed seven  nations  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  he  gave 
them  their  land  for  an  inheritance  for  about  four  hun- 
dred and  fifty  ye^s,"  the  period  given  can  not  be  under- 
stood as  beginning  before  the  destruction  of  those  nations, 
neither  can  it  be  limited  to  the  period  of  Joshua's  con- 

^  See  xxi.  40 ;  xxvi.  1. 


Kiii.  1&-22.]  ACTS.  15 

quest,  which  is  usually  estimated  at  twenty-five  years. 
It  must  then  refer  to  the  whole  period  in  which  God  was 
gradually  giving  them  full  possession  of  the  land.  It 
was  well  known  that  after  the  death  of  Joshua  many 
strongholds  were  still  in  the  possession  of  the  Canaan- 
ites,  and  of  course  they  held  the  territory  immediately 
adjacent  to  these  fortified  cities.  The  Philistines,  too, 
the  most  indomitable  of  all  these  tribes,  held  their  own 
territory  almost  without  dispute  till  after  the  death  of 
Saul,  who  perished  in  a  battle  in  which  they  defeated  the 
hosts  of  Israel.  It  was  not  until  late  in  the  reign  of 
David  that  this  obstinate  power  was  at  last  completely 
broken  down,  never  again  to  make  war  upon  Israel  (II. 
Sam.  viii.  1;  I.  Chron.  xviii.  1).  Now,  if  the  period  of  four 
hundred  and  eighty  years,  given  in  I.  Kings  vi.  1,  as  the 
time  from  the  exodus  to  the  founding  of  Solomon's  tem- 
ple in  the  fourth  year  of  his  reign,  be  understood 
as  counting,  not  from  the  start  out  of  Egypt,  but  from  the 
arrival  in  Canaan  ;  and  the  time  of  destroying  the  nations 
of  Canaan  by  Joshua  be  estimated  at  twenty-five  years, 
we  have  just  four  hundred  and  fifty-one  years  from 
the  latter  date  to  the  end  of  David's  reign ;  and  thus 
the  period  in  which  God  was  giving  the  land  to  Israel 
by  the  gradual  extermination  of  the  remnants  of  heathen 
left  by  Joshua,  was  "  about  four  hundred  and  fifty 
years,"  as  Paul  says.  It  lacked  as  much  of  it  as  the 
space  between  the  final  conquest  of  the  Philistines  and 
the  end  of  David's  reign,  concerning  which  no  figures 
are  given  in  the  Old  Testament.  Stephen,  like  Paul, 
counted  the  subjugation  of  the  Canaanites  as  in  progress 
until  the  time  of  David,  for  he  refers  to  them  as  the 
"  nations  which  God  thrust  out  before  the  face  of  our 
fathers  unto  the  days  of  David"  (vii.  45). 


16  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  16-22. 

The  next  statement  (20),  "  and  after  these  things  he 
gave  them  judges  until  Samuel  the  prophet,"  can  not 
mean  that  he  gave  them  judges  after  the  four  hundred 
and  fifty  years,  seeing  that  this  period  includes  both  the 
time  of  the  judges,  and  the  reigns  of  Saul  and  David.  The 
words  are  not,  after  this  time,  but  "  after  these  things 
(//era  rauzd)  ; "  and  they  may  therefore  be  construed  as 
referring  to  the  events  preceding  the  figures  given.  The 
last  of  the  events  is  the  destruction  of  the  seven  nations, 
that  is,  the  breaking  down  of  their  national  power  by 
Joshua;  and  it  is  true  that  after  these  things  he  gave 
them  judges,  for  it  is  at  this  very  point,  according  to  the 
book  of  Judges,  that  these  rulers  began  to  have  sway. 

The  length  of  Saul's  reign  is  not  given  in  the  Old 
Testament,  so  Paul  must  have  learned  that  it  was  forty 
years  from  some  extra-biblical  source  which  was  current 
in  his  day. 

The  words,  "  I  have  found  David  the  son  of  Jesse,  a 
man  after  my  heart,  who  shall  do  all  my  will,"  express  a 
thought  gathered  from  Psa.  Ixxxi.  20,  "  I  have  found 
my  servant  David  ; ''  and  I.  Sam.  xiii.  14,  "  The  Lord 
hath  sought  him  a  man  after  his  own  heart,  and  the  Lord 
hath  appointed  him  to  be  prince  over  his  people." 
These  words  are  not  spoken  concerning  the  whole  life  of 
David,  in  which  there  were  some  things  not  at  all  after 
God's  own  heart;  but  they  had  reference  to  David's 
character  when  chosen  to  be  the  successor  of  Saul ;  he 
was  to  do  all  God's  will  in  those  particulars  in  which 
Saul  had  failed. 

The  commentators  have  nearly  all  noticed  the  simi- 
larity between  this  introduction,  and  a  portion  of  that  of 
Stephen,  of  whom  Paul  was  a  hearer  (vii.  36-45).  The 
similarity  consists  only  in  the  fact  that  both  speakers 


xiii.  16-25.]  ACTS.  17 

make  use  of  the  deliverance  from  Egyptian  bondage ; 
for  tlie  details  which  they  mention  are  almost  totally  dif- 
ferent, and  tliey  make  the  reference  for  totally  different 
purposes — Paul's  purpose  being  to  favorably  introduce 
his  main  theme,  while  Stephen  was  gathering  up  a  bun- 
dle of  misdeeds  in  the  history  of  the  fathers,  with  which 
to  lash  the  consciences  of  sons  who  were  wickedly  imi- 
tating their  fathers  in  resistance  to  the  Holy  Spirit. 

II.  JESUS  PREACHED  AS  A  SAVIOUR,  23-29. 
(a)    THE  PROPOSITION,  23,  24. 

Vv.  23,  21.  Having  reached  the  name  of  David  in 
his  introductory  sketch,  Paul  passes  immediately  from 
this  name  to  his  main  theme,  the  appearance  and  work 
of  David's  promised  Son  :  (23)  Of  this  man's  seed  hath 
God  according  to  promise  brought  unto  Israel  a  Saviour 
Jesus ;  (24)  when  John  had  before  his  coming  preached 
the  baptism  of  repentance  to  all  the  people  of  Israel.  In 
this  brief  sentence  Paul  skillfully  introduces  Jesus  as  the 
promised  Son  of  David  who  was  to  deliver  Israel  (Ps. 
Ixxxix.  19-37),  and  also  states  the  time  of  his  public 
appearance,  in  accordance  with  the  Gospel  narratives, 
as  immediately  after  the  close  of  John's  ministry.  Thus 
he  fixes  attention  not  upon  the  time  of  his  birth,  but 
upon  the  time  that  God  "brought  him  to  Israel  as  a 
Saviour." 

(6)  JOHNS  TESTIMONY,  25. 

Ver.  25.  Having  pointed  to  the  close  of  John's  min- 
istry as  the  time  at  which  Jesus  had  been  brought  to 
Israel  as  a  Saviour,  the  speaker  next  introduces  the 
direct  testimoney  on  this  point  which  was  borne  by 
John.  (25)  And  as  John  was  fulfilling  his  course,  he  said, 


18  COMMENTARY,  [xiii.  25, 26. 

What  suppose  ye  that  I  am  ?  I  am  not  he.  But  behold, 
there  cometh  one  after  me,  the  shoes  of  whose  feet  I  am 
not  worthy  to  loose.  This  quotation  from  John  is  not 
given  in  the  words  of  either  of  our  Gospels ;  yet  it  may 
nevertheless  be  a  literal  quotation  from  his  lips:  for 
doubtless  John  very  frequently,  and  in  varying  forms  of 
speech,  corrected  the  idea  which  began  to  prevail  among 
the  people,  that  he  was  the  Christ.  The  purport  of  the 
quotation  as  used  by  Paul  is  that  John  bore  formal 
testimony  that  one  was  coming  after  him  so  much  more 
exalted  than  himself  that  he  was  not  worthy  to  perform 
for  him  the  menial  service  of  untying  his  sandals ;  and 
who  could  this  be  but  the  Christ,  the  Son  of  David?  No 
other  conclusion  could  appear  possible  to  his  hearers; 
and  thus  the  words  of  John  furnished  proof  of  the  two 
affirmations  contained  in  the  proposition  which  Paul  had 
announced ;  first,  that  the  Saviour  had  appeared ;  and 
second,  that  he  appeared  after  John  had  preached  re- 
pentance to  all  the  people  of  Israel.  It  is  highly  probable 
that  this  very  preaching  of  John  was  familiar  to  Paul's 
hearers,  as  a  consequence  of  the  visits  which  some  of 
them  had  made  to  the  festivals  in  Jerusalem,  where 
they  would  hear  all  about  it ;  and  consequently  Paul  had 
no  occasion  to  dwell  upon  it. 

(c)  PROPHECIES  FULFILLED  IN  THE  DEATH  OF  JESUS,  26-29. 
Yer.  26.  At  this  point  in  his  discourse,  moved,  per- 
haps, by  some  favorable  expression  in  the  countenances 
of  his  hearers,  or  possibly  by  some  apparent  want  of 
attention,  the  speaker  interrupts  the  course  of  his  argu- 
ment momentarily,  and  vehemently  urges  upon  his 
hearers  their  personal  interest  in  the  matters  of  which  he 
is   speaking,    (26)   Brethren,   children   of  the   stock  of 


xiii.  2.5-20.]  ACTS.  19 

Abraham,  and  those  among  you  that  fear  God,  to  us  is 
the  word  of  this  salvation  sent  forth.  But  his  impetu- 
osity was  not  so  great  as  to  make  him  forget  the  con- 
vincing and  persuasive  proofs  which  he  had  yet  to 
present,  so  he  advances  quickly  to  a  fuller  statement  of 
his  argument. 

Vv.  27-29.  After  asserting  that  the  mcssiahship  of 
Jesus  was  authenticated  by  the  testimony  of  John,  it  was 
incumbent  on  the  speaker  to  explain  the  singular  fact 
that  the  Jews  in  Jesusalem  had  put  him  to  death  as  an 
impostor.  Had  he  proceeded  to  state  this  fact  without 
qualification,  it  would  have  appeared  to  his  hearers  as 
proof  that  Jesus  could  not  be  the  Christ;  consequently, 
he  states  it  in  such  a  way  as  not  only  to  guard  against 
this  objection,  but  to  furnish  additional  evidence.  (27) 
For  they  that  dwell  in  Jerusalem,  and  their  rulers,  be- 
cause they  know  him  not,  nor  the  voices  of  the  prophets 
which  are  read  every  Sabbath,  fulfilled  them  by  con- 
demning him.  (28)  And  though  they  found  no  cause  of 
death  in  him,  yet  asked  they  of  Pilate  that  he  should  be 
slain.  (29)  And  when  they  had  fulfilled  all  that  was 
written  of  him,  they  took  him  down  from  the  tree,  and 
laid  him  in  a  tomb.  This  statement  of  the  case  made  it 
appear  that  the  Jerusalem  Jews  had  condemned  and 
slain  him  because  they  did  not  know  him ;  that  their 
failure  to  know  him  was  a  result  of  their  ignorance 
of  what  the  prophets  had  said  concerning  the  Christ; 
and  that  both  in  his  condemnation,  and  in  the  de- 
tails of  his  crucifixion,  they  ^fulfilled  what  had  been 
written  by  the  prophets  concerning  him.  Doubtless 
Paul  here  quoted  some  of  these  prophecies,  in  order  that 
his  hearers  might  see  the  correctness  of  his  statements  ; 
but  Luke,   for  brevity's  sake,   omits  them.     Thus  the 


20  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  27-33 

crucifixion  of  Jesus,  which,  as  a  naked  fact,  would  be  re- 
garded by  any  Jew  in  the  world  as  pj'ima  facie  evidence 
that  he  was  not  the  Messiah,  was  turned  into  an  un- 
answerable argument  in  his  favor,  and  at  the  same  time 
the  misconception  of  the  messiuhship  itself  which  was 
held  by  the  Jews  was  corrected. 

In  this  condensed  account  of  the  death  and  burial  of 
Jesus,  the  mention  of  their  taking  him  down  from  the 
tree,  without  a  previous  mention  of  their  hanging  him 
on  the  tree,  implies  either  that  Paul's  hearers  were 
familiar  with  the  fact  of  the  crucifixion,  or  that  Luke,  in 
abbreviating,  has  omitted  much  of  what  Paul  said.  The 
latter  is  the  more  probable  explanation ;  tor  throughout 
the  speech  Paul  speaks  as  if  his  hearers  were  ignorant  of 
the  facts  about  Jesus.  He  makes  no  distinction  between 
those  who  condemned  him  and  those  who  took  him 
down  and  buried  him,  for  the  very  obvious  reason  that 
he  is  telling  what  "they  that  dwell  in  Jerusalem,  and 
their  rulers,"  did,  and  these  expressions  include  Joseph 
and  Nicodemus,  who  buried  him.  He  calls  the  cross  a 
tree,  as  Peter  does  (v.  30;  x.  39;  I.  Pet.  ii.  24),  for  the 
reason,  most  likely,  that  the  main  shaft  of  it  was  the 
rough  undressed  trunk  of  a  small  tree.^  Sawed  timbers 
were  not  then  in  use,  and  the  soldiers  were  not  likely  to 
hew  a  piece  for  the  sake  of  appearances. 

(d)   THE  RESURRECTION  OF  JESUS,  S0-S7. 

Vv.  30-33.  The  speaker  next  presents  the  crowning 
fact  in  the  gospel  evidence,  and  he  fails  not  to  connect 

^The  word  employed  is  not  the  usual  one  for  tree  {^h'Spev). 
but  liAov,  which  strictly  means  wood,  though  it  is  employed  by 
Paul  and  Peter,  and  by  John  in  Revelation,  in  the  sense  of  tree. 
See,  besides  the  citations  made  above,  Gal.  iii.  13 ;  Rev.  ii.  7  • 
xxii.  2;  14. 


xiii.  30-33.]  ACTS.  21 

it  with  Old  Testament  predictions,  so  as  to  make  his 
Jewish  hearers  more  willing  to  receive  it.  (30)  But  God 
raised  him  from  the  dead :  (31)  and  he  was  seen  for 
many  days  of  them  that  came  up  with  him  from  Galilee 
to  Jerusalem,  who  are  now  his  witnesses  unto  the  people. 
(32)  And  we  bring  you  good  tidings  of  the  promise  made 
unto  the  fathers,  (33)  how  that  God  hath  fulfilled  the 
same  unto  our  children,  in  that  he  raised  up  Jesus ;  as 
also  it  is  written  in  the  second  psalm,  Thou  art  my  Son, 
this  day  have  I  begotten  thee.  That  the  ancient  prom- 
ise to  the  fathers,  *'  In  thee  and  in  thy  seed  shall  all  the 
families  of  the  earth  be  blessed,"  had  been  fulfilled,  was 
in  the  nature  of  the  case  good  tidings  to  these  Jews ;  but 
that  it  was  fulfilled  in  raising  Jesus  from  the  dead,  was  a 
new  thought  to  them  ;  and  that  in  this  were  fulfilled  the 
words  of  the  second  psalm,  "  Thou  art  my  Son ;  this  day 
have  I  begotten  thee,"  was  equally  new  and  startling. 
Both  propositions  needed  proof.  It  is  scarcely  possible 
that  Paul  stated  the  testimony  of  the  witnesses  of  the  res- 
urrection as  briefly  as  it  is  here  given ;  for  it  is  the  capi- 
tal fact  of  the  whole  sermon,  and  it  needed  the  most 
ample  verification  to  his  hearers.  He  doubtless  gave  the 
testimony  of  the  original  witnesses  in  full ;  but  he  seems 
to  have  omitted  his  own.  As  he  was  addressing  total 
strangers,  this  was  a  matter  of  prudence.  They  would 
be  more  ready  to  believe  what  he  said  of  the  testimony 
of  others,  than  of  his  own,  because  in  stating  the  former 
he  would  appear  more  disinterested. 

The  words,  "  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  be- 
gotten thee,"  would  naturally  be  referred  at  first  glance 
to  the  birth  of  the  person  addressed ;  but  they  are  here 
applied  to  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  In  other  instances 
of  their  occurrence  in  the   New  Testament  they  are  ap- 


22  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  30-37- 

plied  in  the  same  way.  In  Hebrews  v.  5,  it  is  said  :  "  So 
Christ  glorified  not  himself  to  be  made  a  j)riest,  but  he 
that  spake  unto  him,  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have 
I  begotten  thee."  Now  as  he  was  not  a  priest  until 
after  he  had  died  as  a  victim,  and  was  prepared  to  enter 
heaven  with  his  own  blood,  it  is  clear  that  these  words 
refer  to  his  being  begotten  from  the  dead.  In  Hebrews 
i.  5,  the  question,  "  To  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at 
any  time.  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten 
thee?"  is  adduced  as  evidence  that  he  was  superior  to 
angels,  and  it  can  not  therefore  refer  to  the  birth  by 
which  he  was  "  made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels " 
(Heb.  ii.  7).  The  context  in  the  psalm,  too,  supports 
this  application ;  for  the  words  are  addressed,  not  to  an 
unconscious  infant,  that  day  born  into  the  world ;  but  to 
an  intelligent  being  : 

"  I  will  tell  of  the  decree : 
The  Lord  said  unto  me,  Thou  art  my  Son  ; 
This  day  have  I  begotten  thee." 

The  whole  of  the  second  psalm,  from  which  the  quota- 
tion is  made,  is  evidently  Messianic ;  for  none  of  it  is 
applicable  to  any  other  person  than  the  Christ. 

Vv.  34-37.  Paul  now  adds  to  the  testimony  of  the 
witnesses  of  the  resurrection  a  still  more  formal  proof 
that  this  was  the  purpose  of  God  concerning  the  Christ. 
(34)  And  as  concerning  that  he  raised  him  up  from  the 
dead,  now  no  more  to  return  to  corruption,  he  hath 
spoken  on  this  wise,  I  will  give  you  the  holy  and  sure 
blessings  of  David.  (35)  Because  he  saith  also  in  another 
psalm.  Thou  shalt  not  give  thy  Holy  One  to  see  corrup- 
tion. (36)  For  David,  after  he  had  in  his  own  generation 
served  the  counsel  of  God,  fell  on  sleep,  and  was  laid  unto 
his  fathers,  and  saw  corruption :  (37)  but  he  whom  God 


xiii.  34-39.]  ACTS.  23 

raised  up  saw  no  corruption.  The  quotation,  "  I  will 
give  you  the  holy  and  sure  blessings  of  David,"  is  taken 
from  Is.  Iv.  3,  and  the  context  shows  that  it  has  refer- 
ence to  him  of  whom  it  had  been  promised  that  God 
would  raise  him  up  to  sit  on  David's  throne.  Paul  uses 
the  past  tense  in  regard  to  the  fulfillment  of  this  promise, 
because  his  hearers  believed  in  the  prophecies,  and 
would  readily  grant  that  every  one  of  them  must  be  ful- 
filled in  its  season.  If  he  proved,  as  he  had  done,  that 
Jesus  had  been  raised  from  the  dead,  they  would  readily 
grant  that  in  this  the  prediction  was  fulfilled. 

The  reader  will  at  once  recognize  the  next  prediction 
quoted  (35)  as  the  one  made  use  of  by  Peter  in  the  first 
division  of  his  sermon  on  Pentecost,  and  the  argument 
based  upon  it  in  the  next  two  verses  as  the  same  used 
by  Peter  on  that  occasion.  There  is  perhaps  no  passage 
in  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament  which  contains  a 
more  exjjlicit  prediction  of  the  resurrection  of  the  Christ 
than  this ;  and  for  this  reason  it  became  a  favorite  proof- 
text  with  the  early  preachers.  To  accuse  Paul  pf  copy- 
ing in  any  unbecoming  manner  from  Peter,  or  Luke  of 
falsely  putting  into  Paul's  mouth  an  argument  which  the 
latter  would  not  have  deigned  to  borrow,  as  some  have 
done,  is  absurd ;  for  if  two  men  are  to  argue  the  truth  of 
any  proposition,  how  is  it  possible  for  them  to  do  so  suc- 
cessfidly  except  by  both  employing  the  evidences  which 
support  it?  And  these  evidences,  whatever  the  nature 
of  the  proposition,  or  of  the  subject  matter,  must  from 
the  nature  of  things  be  always  largely  the  same. 

(e)  REMISSION  OF  SINS  PROCLAIMED  THRO  UGR  JESUS,  SS,  39. 

Vv.  38,  39.     Having  now  established  by  conclusive 
evidences  the  messiahship  of  Jesus,  Paul  proceeds  to  offer 


24     -  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  38, 39. 

the  audience  the  benefit  of  his  mediation  :  (38)  Be  it 
known  to  you  therefore,  brethren,  that  through  this  man 
is  proclaimed  unto  you  the  remission  of  sins :  (39)  and 
by  him  every  one  that  believeth  is  justified  from  all 
things,  from  which  ye  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law 
of  Moses.  Here  Paul  joins  with  John  the  Ba|)tist,  Jesus 
himself,  and  Peter  in  setting  forth  remission  of  sins  as 
the  one  distinguishing  blessing  to  be  enjoyed  in  Christ. 
The  revised  version,  like  that  of  King  James,  is  wrong 
here  in  the  rendering,  "  by  him,"  and  "  by  the  law." 
The  original  means  "  in  him  "  (iv  toutw)  and  "  in  the 
law"  {iu  Tif  vofiuj)}  The  thought  is,  that  the  believer 
who  is  "  in  Christ,"  a  characteristic  expression  with 
Paul,  is  justified  in  the  sense  of  enjoying  remission  of 
sins  (38),  which  blessing  those  in  cr  under  the  law  could 
not  enjoy.  He  here  teaches  concerning  the  law  what  he 
abundantly  taught  later  in  his  epistles,  that  in  it  there 
was  no  remission  of  sins,  and  that  the  promise  of  forgive- 
ness which  was  made  to  those  who  offered  the  sacrifices 
of  the  law  was  dependent  for  its  fulfillment  on  the  sub- 
sequent shedding  of  the  blood  of  Christ.^  The  benefits 
of  the  Jewish  law  were  extended  only  to  those  who  were 
born  in  or  properly  initiated  into  the  body  of  people  to 
whom  the  law  was  given ;  and  just  so,  the  remission  ot 
sins  is  here  proclaimed  to  the  believer  who  shall  be  "  in 
Christ ; "  and  as  we  learn  by  another  characteristic  ex- 
pression of  Paul,  the  believer  is  "  baptized  into  Christ,'' 
baptized  into  his  body."^  Thus  the  connection  of  the 
remission  of  sins  with  baptism,  which  was  plainly  stated 

^  "  Literally,  in  him,  as  the  sphere  in  which  forgiveness  was 
found,  rather  than  as  the  instrument  through  which  it  came." 
(Plumptre).    Meyer,  Alford  and  Lechler  give  the  same  rendering. 

2  Heb.  X.  1-4 ;  ix.  15.    ^  Rom.  vi.  3  ;  Gal.  iii.  27 ;  I.  Cor.  xii.  13. 


xiii.  38-41.]  ACTS.  25 

in  Peter's  first  discourse  (ii.  38),  is  implied  in  this,  the 
first  reported  discourse  by  Paul.  The  reason  that  he  did 
not,  like  Peter,  urge  his  hearers  to  repent  and  be  bap- 
tized, that  they  might  be  in  Christ  and  enjoy  the  re- 
mission of  their  sins,  was  because,  as  we  shall  see 
below,  he  saw  that  they  were  not  prepared  for  such  an 
exhortation. 

III.  A  WARNING,  40,  41. 

Vv.  40-41.  The  announcement  which  closed  the  pre- 
ceding division  of  the  speech  was  most  unwelcome  to 
Paul's  hearers ;  for  it  was  an  express  disparagement  of 
the  law  of  Moses,  and  such  remarks  always  grated  harsh- 
ly upon  Jewish  ears.  Peter  had  said  by  implication  the 
same  thing,  when  he  said  to  the  sanhedrim,  "neither  is 
there  any  other  name  under  heaven,  that  is  given  among 
men,  wherein  we  must  be  saved  "  (iv.  12).  That  which 
was  implied  in  Peter's  speech  was  boldly  expressed  in 
Paul's.  He  doubtless  discovered  after  this  utterance  an 
unfavorable  expression  in  the  faces  of  his  Jewish  hearers; 
for  otherwise  so  watchful  a  speaker  would  not  have  closed 
his  address  with  the  words  which  follow :  (40)  Beware 
therefore,  lest  that  come  upon  you  which  is  spoken  in 
the  prophets  ; 
(41)  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and  perish; 

For  I  work  in  your  days, 

A  work  which  ye  shall  in  no  wise  believe,  if  one  de- 
clare it  unto  you. 
The  quotation  was  intended  to  warn  them  against 
rejecting  the  good  tidings  which  he  preached  to  them, 
and  to  sliow  them  that  if  they  did,  they  would  identify 
themselves  with  the  class  to  which  these  fearful  words 
of  the   prophet   had    reference.     The   words,    "  though 


26  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  40-43. 

one  should  declare  it  unto  you,"  imply  that  the  declaration 
of  it  would  contain  such  evidence  as  would  make  the 
rejection  of  it  inexcusable.  The  words  are  quoted  from 
Habakkuk  i.  5  (Septuagint  version),  and  the  context 
there  shows  that  the  reference  is  to  an  impending  destruc- 
tion at  the  hands  of  the  Chaldeans.  Paul  applies  them 
to  the  destruction  impending  over  all  who  reject  the 
gospel;  for  in  this  the  words  have  another  fulfillment. 

5.  Immediate  Effect  of  the  Sermon,  42,  43. 

Vv.  42,  43.  Though  no  one  in  the  audience  was  pre- 
pared to  obey  the  gospel ;  and  no  one,  perhaps,  fully 
believed  what  had  been  spoken,  the  majority  were  favor- 
ably impressed,  as  appears  from  the  way  in  which  they 
spoke  and  acted.  (42)  And  as  they  were  going  out  they 
besought  that  these  words  might  be  spoken  to  them  the 
next  Sabbath.  (43)  Now  when  the  synagogue  broke  up, 
many  of  the  Jews  and  the  devout  proselytes  followed 
Paul  and  Barnabas ;  who,  speaking  to  them,  urged  them 
to  continue  in  the  grace  of  God.  The  request  mentioned 
in  the  former  of  these  two  verses  was  made  as  the  peo- 
ple pressed  around  the  apostles  after  leaving  their  seats; 
while  the  breaking  up  of  the  synagogue  mentioned  in 
the  latter  means  the  departure  of  the  people  from  the 
place.  The  dismission  by  the  elders  preceded  both. 
The  "  proselytes,"  here  first  mentioned,  were  that  por- 
tion of  the  audience  twice  addressed  in  the  course  of  the 
sermon  as  "ye  that  fear  God"  (16,26).  The  picture 
which  Luke  draws  of  these  devout  Gentiles  and  many 
of  the  Jews  following  Paul  and  Barnabas  in  a  crowd  to 
their  lodging,  and  keeping  up  an  earnest  conversation, 
shows  at  once  the  simple  habits  of  the  people,  and  the 
deep  interest  which  they  felt  in  the  new  and  thrilling 


xiii.  42-44.]  ACTS.  27 

theme  of  the  discourse.  They  were  already  "iu  the 
grace  of  God/'  au  expression  which  means  only  that  God 
regarded  them  with  favor,  as  he  does  all  earnest  seekers 
after  truth  ;  and  should  they  continue  in  it,  as  the  apostles 
exhorted  them,  they  would  soon  attain  to  the  remission 
of  sins  which  he  had  offered  in  Christ. 


6.  Results  on  the  Next  Sabbath,  44-48. 

Ver.  44.  The  profound  impression  made  by  Paul's 
sermon  in  the  synagogue,  and  by  the  conversation  of 
both  the  preachers  with  those  who  followed  them  to  their 
lodging,  very  naturally  spread  like  a  contagion  through- 
out the  citv  during  the  succeeding  week ;  and  we  are  not 
to  suppose  that  the  preachers  were  in  the  meantime  idle. 
Paul's  characteristic  zeal,  which  afterward  caused  some 
sober  men  to  style  him  a  babbler  (xvii.  18),  would  not 
permit  him  to  remain  silent  for  a  whole  week,  when  the 
tide  of  public  opinion  was  running  so  strongly  in  his 
favor.  The  first  result  was  seen  in  the  next  assemblage 
at  the  synagogue.  (44)  And  the  next  Sabbath  almost 
the  whole  city  was  gathered  together  to  hear  the  word  of 
God.  The  previous  audience  had  assembled  merely  to 
hear  the  usual  readings  and  exhortations  of  the  syna- 
gogue ;  but  this  one  assembled  for  the  purpose  of  hearing 
the  word  which  was  to  be  preached  by  Paul.  The 
synagogues  were  not  built  with  a  view  to  such  crowds, 
and  therefore  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  speaker 
stood  in  the  door,  as  has  been  done  so  often  in  our  west- 
ern country,  and  spoke  to  a  large  crowd  without,  as 
well  as  to  those  within  the  building.  The  building  was 
not  cumbered,  like  our  modern  chapels,  with  benches; 
but  the  people  sat  on  mats  laid  on  the  floor,  and  could 


28  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  45-47. 

easily  turn  their  faces  toward  the  door,  while  those  out- 
side sat  in  the  same  way  on  the  ground. 

Yer.  45.  So  large  an  assemblage  of  the  people  to 
hear  a  doctrine  which  had  appeared  disparaging  to  the 
law  of  Moses,  and  which  had  on  this  account  already 
offended  some  of  the  Jews,  could  but  arouse  the  indigna- 
tion of  the  disaffected,  and  was  calculated  to  disaffect 
those  who  had  been  favorably  impressed  on  the  previous 
Sabbath.  The  leaders  among  them  acted  as  their  coun- 
trymen of  like  spirit  in  other  countries  uniformly  acted 
under  such  circumstances.  (45)  But  when  the  Jews  saw 
the  multitude,  they  were  filled  with  jealousy,  and  con- 
tradicted the  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul,  and 
blasphemed.  This  contradicting  and  blaspheming  did 
not  of  course  precede  Paul's  remarks.  We  must  under- 
stand that  he  delivered  a  discourse,  omitted  by  the  his- 
torian, in  which  the  doctrine  of  the  previous  Sabbath 
was  again  set  forth,  and  that  during  the  course  of  its 
delivery  he  was  interrupted  by  outspoken  contradictions 
and  reproaches.  Such  interruptions  are  not  unknown 
at  the  present  day  in  oriental  congregations. 

Vv.  46,  47.     Thus  far  the  apostle  had  addressed  the 
Jews  directly,  and  the  Gentiles  present  only  indirectly ; 
but  it  now  appeared  that  it  was  useless  to  reason  further 
with    the   former,    or   to    attempt    to    conciliate    them. 
(46)  And  Paul  and  Barnabas  spoke  out  boldly,  and  said,  It 
was  necessary  that  the  word  of  God  should  first  be  spoken 
to  you.    Seeing  that  ye  thrust  it  from  you,  and  judge  your- 
selves unworthy  of  eternal  life,  lo,  we  turn  to  the  Gen- 
tiles.    (47)  For  so  hath  the  Lord  commanded  us,  saying, 
I  have  set  thee  for  a  light  of  the  Gentiles, 
That  thou  shouldst  be  for  salvation  to  the  uttermost 
part  of  the  earth. 


xiii.  48.]  ACTS.  29 

In  these  utterances  both  of  the  apostles  took  part 
(46),  and  they  were  bold  utterances  from  the  considera- 
tion that  they  were  certain  to  provoke  the  hatred  of  the 
Jews,  and  would  probably  result  in  violence.  The  state- 
ment, "  it  was  necessary  that  the  word  of  God  should 
first  be  spoken  to  you,"  shows  that  the  apostles  iinder- 
stood  that  the  preaching  was  not  only  to  begin  at  Jeru- 
salem (Luke  xxiv.  47),  but  that  it  was  in  every 
community  to  be  presented  to  the  Jews  first.  "  To  the 
Jew  first,  and  also  to  the  Greek,"  was  the  standing  rule 
with  Paul  (Rom.  i.  16  ;  ii.  10).  The  propriety  of  this 
we  have  discussed  under  i.  8. 

Ver.  48.  The  next  statement  of  our  historian  has 
been  the  subject  of  no  little  controversy.  (48)  And  as 
the  Gentiles  heard  this,  they  were  glad,  and  glorified  the 
word  of  God :  and  as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal 
life  believed.  The  controversy  turns  on  the  meaning  of 
the  word  translated  "  were  ordained  "  {i^aav  veray/iepoi). 
Calvinistic  writers  unite  in  referring  it  to  the  eternal 
election  and  foreordiuation  taught  in  their  creeds.  If 
this  were  the  correct  interpretation,  it  would  involve 
some  difficulties  which  they  seem  not  to  have  observed. 
If  "  as  many  as  were  foreordained  to  eternal  life  "  be- 
lieved on  that  day,  then  all  the  rest  were  reprobates, 
doomed  to  everlasting  punishment,  and  Paul's  further 
preaching  to  them  was  useless.  Now  it  is  unaccountable 
that  so  complete  a  separation  of  the  two  classes^ took 
place  throughout  a  large  assembly  in  a  single  day ;  and 
still  more  unaccountable  that  this  was  revealed  to  Luke 
so  that  he  could  record  it.  Our  surprise  is  even  yet 
greater  when  we  remember  that,  according  to  the  theory, 
not  even  the  elect  themselves  can  ever  know  with  cer- 
tainty that  they  are  elect.     We  should  surely  not  adopt 


30  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  48. 

a  conclusion  so  anomalous,  unless  we  are  compelled  to 
do  so  by  the  obvious  force  of  the  words  employed.  Dr. 
Hackett,  after  rendering  the  passage,  "  and  as  many  as 
were  appointed  to  eternal  life  believed/'  says :  "  This  is 
the  only  translation  which  the  philology  of  the  passage 
allows."  Grimm,  in  his  lexicon,  expresses  the  Calvin- 
istic  idea  more  fully  by  giving  as  the  meaning, ''  as  many 
as  were  appointed  (by  God)  to  eternal  life,  or  to  whom 
God  had  decreed  eternal  life.'' 

The  word  thus  translated  is  from  the  root  rdaaco, 
the  primary  meaning  of  which  is  to  set  in  order ;  or, 
as  Grimm  expresses  it,  to  place  in  a  certain  order.  In 
composition  with  dca  it  is  so  rendered  in  I.  Cor.  xi.  34  : 
^*  The  rest  will  I  set  in  order  when  I  come."  In  only 
one  other  of  its  eight  occurrences  in  the  New  Testament 
is  it  rendered  ordained;  and  in  this  it  may  as  well  have 
been  rendered  by  its  primary  meaning :  "  The  powers 
that  are  ordained  [set  in  order]  by  God  "  (Rom.  xiii.  1). 
It  is  usually  rendered  appoint ;  as,  to  appoint  a  place 
(Matt,  xxviii.  16)  ;  to  appoint  something  to  be  done  (Acts 
xxii.  10)  ;  to  appoint  a  day  (xxviii.  23).  But  in  making 
appointments  order  is  brought  out  of  preceding  confusion, 
or  want  of  order,  and  the  primary  meaning  of  the  word  is 
not  lost  sight  of  in  this  use  of  it.  The  same  is  true  when 
it  is  applied  to  a  mental  act.  When  the  mind  has  been 
in  confusion  on  a  subject,  not  knowing  what  to  think, 
and  finally  reaches  a  definite  conclusion  or  purjsose,  the 
thoughts  are  brought  out  of  confusion  into  order,  and  this 
term  properly  expresses  the  change.  A  striking  example 
is  found  in  xvi.  2,  where  the  brethren  in  Antioch  are 
said  to  have  heard  "  no  small  dissension  and  question- 
ing," between  Paul  and  Barnabas  on  one  side,  and  certain 
men  from  Judea  on  the  other,  in  reference  to  a  vital 


xiii.  48.]  ACTS.  31 

question.  While  tliis  dissension  was  in  progress,  the 
rank  and  file  of  the  brethren  and  sisters  must  have  been 
in  the  utmost  confusion;  but  they  finally  reached  a  con- 
cUision  as  to  what  should  be  done,  and  this  change  is  ex- 
pressed by  the  word  in  question;  "they  determined 
(iraqrvJ)  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  and  certain  others  of 
them  should  go  up  to  Jerusalem  to  the  apostles  and 
elders  about  this  question."  This  is  the  rendering  of 
A.  v.,  and  it  correctly  represents  the  mental  change 
which  occurred.  Dr.  Hackett  affirms  that  the  terra 
"  was  not  used  to  denote  an  act  of  the  mind  ;  "  but  the 
translation  to  which  this  idea  forced  him  is  conclusive 
evidence  to  the  contrary.  He  renders  the  clause  in 
question,  "  they  appointed  that  they  should  go  up,"  etc.; 
and  in  this  he  is  followed  by  the  authors  of  R.  V.  This 
is  not  good  English.  It  is  an  ungrararaatical  use  of  the 
word  appoint.  When  a  mission  is  determined  on,  we 
appoint  the  men  who  shall  be  sent,  but  we  do  not  ap- 
point that  they  shall  go.  Evidently  the  state  of  the  case 
was  this:  the  brethren  were  at  first  undetermined  what 
to  do ;  and  they  finally  determined  to  do  what  they  did. 
Our  English  word  disposed  has  a  similar  usage.  It 
means  to  arrange  in  a  certain  order,  and  it  applies  pri- 
marily to  external  objects ;  but  when  one's  mind  is 
arranged  in  accordance  with  a  certain  line  of  conduct, 
we  say  he  is  disposed  to  pursue  it. 

We  scarcely  need  to  observe,  after  the  preceding  re- 
marks, that  the  specific  meaning  of  this  verb  in  a  given 
])assage  is  to  be  determined  by  the  context.  In  the 
passage  before  us  the  context  presents  no  allusion  to 
something  done  by  God  f)r  one  part  of  the  audience, 
and  not  done  for  the  other ;  or  to  some  purpose  enter- 
tained respecting  the  one,  and  not  the  other ;  but  it  speaks 


32  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  48- 

of  two  contrasted  states  of  mind  among  the  people,  and 
two  consequent  courses  of  conduct.  Of  the  Jews  pres- 
ent it  is  said,  first,  that  they  were  filled  with  jealousy ; 
second,  that  they  contradicted  the  things  which  were 
spoken  by  Paul,  and  blasphemed;  third,  that  they  judged 
themselves  unworthy  of  eternal  life.  In  contrast  with 
these,  the  Gentiles,  first,  were  glad ;  second,  they  glori- 
fied the  word  of  God ;  third,  they  were  rszay/jLivoi  for 
eternal  life.  Now  which  of  the  specific  meanings  of  the 
Greek  word  shall  we  here  insert  ?  It  stands  contrasted 
with  the  mental  act  of  the  Jews  in  judging  themselves 
unworthy  of  eternal  life,  and  the  law  of  antithesis  requires 
that  we  understand  it  of  some  mental  act  of  the  opposite 
nature.  The  rendering,  were  determined,  or  were  dis- 
posed for  eternal  life,  is  the  only  one  of  which  the  case 
admits.  The  verb  is  in  the  passive  voice,  and  a  past 
tense,  and  therefore  it  represents  a  mental  state  which 
had  been  brought  about  before  the  moment  of  which  the 
writer  is  speaking.  In  other  words,  the  statement  that 
"  as  many  as  were  determined  for  eternal  life  believed  " 
implies  that  they  were  brought  to  this  determination  be- 
fore they  believed.  At  some  previous  time  in  their  his- 
tory these  Gentiles,  who  had  been  born  and  reared  in  hea- 
thenism, had  heard  of  eternal  life  as  taught  by  the  Jews. 
Either  under  the  teaching  of  the  Jews,  or  under  the  teach- 
ing of  Paul  since  his  arrival  in  Antioch,  or  under  both 
combined,  they  had  been  brought  out  of  a  state  of  mental 
confusion  on  this  transcendently  important  subject,  into 
a  determination  to  obtain  eternal  life  if  possible.^ 

^  "  Better, '  as  many  as  were  disposed  for.'  "  (Plumptre).  "  All 
who,  by  the  grace  of  God,  desired  to  range  themselves  in  the 
ranks  of  those  who  desired  eternal  life  accepted  the  faith." 
(Farrar,  Life  of  Paul,  211).  "  Rather,  were  set  in  order  for,  i.  e., 
disposed  for  eternal  life."  ( Jacobson  in  Speaker's  Com.)   "  As  many 


xiii.  48, 49.]  ACTS.  33 

Let  it  be  noted  that  the  being  determined  for  eternal 
life,  and  the  believing,  stand  here  as  cause  and  effect,  or 
at  least  as  antecedent  and  consequent.  This  is  not  at  all 
unnatural  or  uncommon.  A  man  who  has  learned  that 
eternal  life  may  be  obtained,  and  has  made  up  his  mind  to 
obtain  it  if  within  his  power,  is  the  very  man  to  readily 
accept  the  true  way  of  obtaining  it  when  tliat  way  is 
clearly  pointed  out  to  him  ;  while  the  man  who  is  so 
much  absorbed  in  worldly  matters  as  to  be  indifferent  to 
eternal  life  is  the  very  man  to  allow  the  testimony  con- 
cerning the  way  of  obtaining  it  to  pass  in  at  one  ear  and 
out  at  the  other.  We  find  it  so  in  all  of  our  congrega- 
tions at  the  present  day.  Two  men  sit  side  by  side 
under  the  sound  of  the  same  gospel  sermon;  one  is 
awake  to  the  importance  of  the  life  to  come,  while  the 
other  is  absorbed  in  the  life  that  now  is.  The  latter  will 
turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  preaching,  incurring  Paul's  reproach 
of  judging  himself  unworthy  of  eternal  life,  while  the 
former  will  believe  the  glad  message,  and  fly  to  the  seat 
of  mercy.  It  is  precisely  this  difference  as  respects 
eternal  life  which  Luke  here  points  out;  and  he  points  it 
out  because  it  accounts  for  the  fact  that  one  class  in 
Paul's  audience  believed,  and  the  other  did  not.  It 
leaves  the  responsibility  for  belief  and  unbelief,  with 
their  eternal  consequences,  on  men,  and  not  on  God. 

7.  Final,  Results  in  Antiogh,  49-52. 

Ver.  49.     The  devout  proselytes  who  believed  under 
Paul's  second  sermon  proved  to  be  the  first  fruits  of  a 

as  were  disposed  to  eternal  life.  The  meaning  of  the  word  dis. 
posed  must  be  determined  by  the  context.  The  Jews  had  judged 
themselves  unworthy  of  eternal  life :  the  Gentiles,  as  many  as 
were  disposed  to  eternal  life,  believed."     (Alford). 


34  COMMENTARY.  [xiii.  50. 

large  harvest.  (49)  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  spread 
abroad  throughout  all  the  region.  This  means  that  not 
only  in  Antioch,  but  in  all  Pisidia  lying  adjacent  to  it, 
converts  to  the  truth  were  made.  Paul's  labors  were 
apparently  confined  to  the  city,  but  the  report  of  his  work, 
as  it  spread  from  place  to  place,  brought  interested  hear- 
ers from  every  direction,  even  as  we  see  in  our  own  age. 
Ver.  50.  The  jealousy  of  the  Jews,  which  had  been 
aroused  by  the  presence  of  the  great  audience  that  heard 
Paul's  second  sermon,  was  intensified  by  these  triumphs 
of  the  word,  and  it  led,  as  similar  triumphs  had  done 
from  the  beginning  in  Jerusalem,  to  the  violence  which 
Paul  and  Barnabas  had  anticipated  (46).  (50)  But  the 
Jews  urged  on  the  devout  women  of  honorable  estate,  and 
the  chief  men  of  the  city,  and  stirred  up  a  persecution 
against  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  cast  them  out  of  their 
borders.  These  devout  women  were  among  the  Gentile 
proselytes  who  heard  Paul ;  for  such  is  the  usage  of  the 
word  rendered  devout ;  but  they  were  not  of  those  who 
had  been  determined  for  eternal  life;  and  this  shows  that 
not  all  the  Gentile  attendants  of  the  synagogue  became 
believers  under  the  second  sermon.  That  these  women 
were  of  honorable  estate,  that  is,  of  high  connections  in 
the  political  world,  and  satisfied  with  the  present  life,  ac- 
counts for  their  being  less  determined  for  eternal  life  than 
those  who  believed.  They  doubtless  belonged  to  the 
families  of  the  "  chief  men  of  the  city,"  and  it  was 
through  their  influence  that  the  latter  were  stirred  up  to 
persecute  the  apostles  by  banishing  them  from  the  city. 
Women  have  always  been  among  the  most  steadfast 
friends  of  Jesus,  and  yet  some  women  have  been  ready 
and  effective  tools  of  his  enemies.  It  seems  that  the  Jews 
acted  with  practical  unanimity  in  this  wicked  procedure, 


xiii.  50-52.]  ACTS.  35 

and  that  the  favorable  impression  made  on  some  of  them 
by  Paul's  first  sermon  (43)  was  bnt  transitory. 

Vv.  51,  52.  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  not  without 
iudiy;nation  when  they  were  thus  ignominiously  expelled 
from  the  city.  They  were  pained  to  think  of  the  ingrati- 
tude which  it  manifested,  and  to  anticipate  the  prejudice 
which  the  fact  would  excite  against  them  when  they 
should  enter  into  oth(>r  cities  with  this  stigraa  upon  them. 
Luke  tells  us  briefly  how  they  acted,  and  how  the 
disciples  felt  after  their  teachers  were  driven  from  them. 
(51)  But  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet  against 
them,  and  came  unto  Iconium.  (52)  And  the  disciples 
were  filled  with  joy  and  with  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  act 
of  the  departing  apostles,  witnessed  no  doubt  by  those 
for  whom  it  was  intended,  was  not  an  idle  or  childish 
mark  of  resentment,  as  it  would  be  in  an  uninspired 
teacher ;  but  it  was  designed  as  a  solemn  "  testimony 
against  them  " — a  prophecy  of  the  righteous  judgment  of 
God,  whom  they  had  rejected  in  rejecting  his  chosen 
messengers  (Mark  vi.  11  ;  Luke  x.  16).  The  statement 
that  the  disciples,  under  these  painful  circumstances,  were 
"  filled  with  joy  and  the  Holy  Spirit,"  is  to  us  a  surprise; 
for  we  should  have  expected  them  to  be  filled  with  grief 
and  fear.  It  shows  that  their  assnrance  concerning  the 
everlasting  life  for  which  they  had  been  determined,  and 
tlieir  belief  that  the  Spirit  of  God  now  dwelt  in  their 
mortal  bodies,  gave  them  a  joy  which  coidd  now  be 
maintained  without  the  aid  of  human  teachers,  and  of 
which  no  luiman  power  could  deprive  them.  They 
were  capable  now  of  standing  alone,  and  of  edifying  one 
another. 


36  COMMENTARY.  [xiv.  1. 

8.  Events  in  Iconium,  xiv.   1-7. 

Ver.  1.  On  leaving  Antioch  the  apostles  took  a 
road  leading  to  the  southeast,  as  if  they  were  aiming  to 
reach  Cilicia,  Paul's  native  province.  They  pursued  this 
course  over  a  vast  plain  grazed  by  innumerable  flocks  of 
sheep  for  about  ninety^  miles,  when,  after  crossing  a 
mountain  ridge,  they  reached  Iconium,  the  largest  and 
most  important  city  in  that  part  of  Asia  Minor,  both 
then  and  now.  Lofty  mountains  rise  to  the  west,  to  the 
north,  and  to  the  south  of  it,  while  to  the  east  there 
opens  another  vast  plain  with  a  beautiful  lake  in  the 
midst  of  it.  Here  the  principal  routes  of  travel  from  the 
cardinal  points  of  the  compass  meet  and  cross  one  an- 
other, making  Iconium  a  center  of  traffic  and  travel  for 
an  extensive  region.  The  apostles  had  passed  by  all 
smaller  places  on  the  way,  and  kept  this  city  in  view, 
both  because  it  was  such  a  center,  and  because  it  con- 
tained a  synagogue,  within  and  around  which  they  could 
find  a  people  prepared  to  hear  the  gospel,  (i)  And  it  came 
to  pass  in  Iconium,  that  they  entered  together  into  the 
synagogue  of  the  Jews,  and  so  spake  that  a  great  multi- 
tude both  of  the  Jews  and  the  Greeks  believed.  The  mul- 
titude who  believed  was  great,  not  in  proportion  to  the 
whole  population  of  the  city,  but  to  the  number  who 
usually  believed  in  such  places,  and  especially  to  those  in 
Antioch.    The  Greeks,  wlio  made  up  part  of  the  number, 

^  The  geography  of  the  interior  of  Asia  Minor  is  very  imper- 
fectly known  by  western  scholars.  This  is  strikingly  illustrated 
by  the  conflicting  statements  of  the  distance  from  Antioch  to 
Iconium,  found  in  recent  commentaries.  It  is  represented  by 
Farrar,  Jacobson,  and  Plumptre,  as  60  miles ;  by  Gloag  as  50  ;  and 
by  Hacket  as  45.  Prof.  Ramsey,  who  must  be  accepted  as  author- 
ity on  the  subject  because  of  his  very  recent  explorations  in  that 
region,  furnishes  the  figures  given  above. 


xiv.  1-3.]  ACTS.  37 

were  doubtless  proselytes  in  the  main.  The  immediate 
cause  of  their  l)eliof  is  distinctly  stated  by  Luke  ;  the 
apostles  "  so  spake  "  that  they  believed.  It  was  the  con- 
clusiveness of  the  evidence,  and  the  earnestness  with 
which  it  was  presented,  that  carried  conviction  to  the 
hearers,  thus  verifying  Paul's  subsequent  doctrine,  that 
"faith  comes  l»y  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of 
Christ"  (Rom.  X.  17).  * 

Vv.  2,  3.  More  Jews  were  won  to  Christ  there  than 
in  Antioch,  but  those  who  were  not  won  exhibited  the 
spirit  univei-sal  with  their  class.  (2)  But  the  Jews  that 
were  disobedient  stirred  up  the  souls  of  the  Gentiles,  and 
made  them  evil  affected  against  the  brethren.  (3)  Long 
time  therefore  they  tarried  there,  speaking  boldly  in  the 
Lord,  who  bare  witness  unto  the  word  of  his  grace,  grant- 
ing signs  and  wonders  to  be  done  by  their  hands.  The 
Gentiles  whom  the  disobedient  Jews  stirred  up  included 
others  besides  Greeks ;  that  is,  the  native  Lycaonians, 
and  perhaps  persons  of  other  nationalities  residing  in  the 
city.  It  must  have  been  by  false  and  malicious  repre- 
sentations that  the  Jews  succeeded  in  stirring  them  up. 
This  opposition  seems  to  have  increased  the  boldness  of 
the  apostles,  and  it  caused  them  to  continue  there  "  a 
long  time ; "  but  how  many  days,  weeks,  or  months,  we 
can  not  say.  This  is  the  only  note  of  time  given  by 
Luke  m  the  whole  account  of  this  tour. 

The  manner  in  which  the  Lord  bore  witness  to  the 
word  of  his  favor,  as  here  stated  by  Luke,  is  worthy  of 
notice  for  the  contrast  which  it  presents  with  much  of 
the  plirasoology  of  modern  times.  The  proof  with  many 
in  these  days,  that  a  man's  ministry  is  "  owned  and  ac- 
cepted "  Ijy  the  Lord,  is  found  in  the  "  abundant  outpour- 
ings of  the  Holy  Spirit"  which  attend  it;  and  this  means 


38  COMMENTARY.  [xiv.  3-7. 

the  number  of  "powerful  conversions"  which  reward  it. 
But  the  Lord's  method,  according  to  Luke,  was  by 
"  granting  signs  and  wonders  to  be  done  "  by  the  hands 
of  the  preachers.  Not  a  word  is  said  by  him,  or  by  any 
other  inspired  writer,  of  such  an  attestation  as  is  now 
constantly  brought  forward.  This  difference  shows  that 
our  modern  revivalists  confound  the  attestations  of  the 
word  by  sigdfs  and  miracles,  which  was  common  in  the 
apostolic  age,  with  the  exciting  scenes  which  now  occur 
in  revivals,  many  of  which  were  not  dreamed  of  by  the 
early  evangelists.  This  whole  subject  needs  to  be  re- 
studied  in  the  light  thrown  upon  it  l)y  the  book  of  Acts. 
Vv.  4-7.  The  bold  and  persistent  efforts  of  Paul  and 
Barnabas  stirred  the  city  to  its  depths,  but  they  failed 
to  overcome  the  obstinacy  of  the  Je\vs,  and  the  depravity 
of  the  Gentiles.  (4)  But  the  multitude  of  the  city  was 
divided  ;  and  part  held  with  the  Jews,  and  part  with  the 
apostles.  (5)  And  when  there  was  made  an  onset  both 
of  the  Gentiles  and  of  the  Jews  with  their  rulers,  to  en- 
treat them  shamefully,  and  to  stone  them,  (6)  they 
became  aware  of  it,  and  fled  unto  the  cities  of  Lycaonia, 
Lystra  and  Derbe,  and  the  region  round  about :  (7)  and 
there  they  preached  the  gospel.  Here,  as  in  Antioch, 
the  Jews  dared  not  use  violence  toward  the  preachers, 
for  fear  that  they  would  themselves  suffer  as  disturbers 
of  the  peace;  so  they  worked  through  others  until  they 
gained  the  cooperation  of  the  city  rulers.  As  the  onset 
which  was  concocted  involved  stoning  as  well  as  other 
mistreatment,  we  suppose  that  the  Jews  had  obtained 
permission  to  do  that  part  of  the  work,  for  it  was  their 
national  form  of  capital  punishment.  As  in  all  such 
cases,  although  the  multitude  of  the  city  was  divided, 
the  party  for  truth  and  right  were  less  active  than  the 


xiv.  4-12.]  ACTS.  S9 

party  for  injustice ;  and,  beoause  they  were  for  the  right, 
they  were  not  willing  to  use  violence.  The  escape  of 
the  missionaries  must  have  been  narrow  ;  and  it  was  due, 
no  dcnibt,  to  the  watchful  kindness  of  some  friend,  it 
may  be  from  among  the  disobedient,  who  exposed  the  plot 
in  time  to  prevent  its  execution.  The  next  journey  of 
the  apostles,  like  the  preceding,  was  toward  the  sotith- 
east,  across  the  extensive  plain  which  we  have  already 
mentioned  (1),  to  Lystra,  about  forty  miles  from  Iconium. 

9.  Labors  and  Eesults  in  Lystra,  8-20. 

Vv.  8-12.  Lycaonia,  the  district  into  which  the 
apostles  fled,  was  east  of  Pisidia,  and  north  of  the  Taurus 
mountains.  The  exact  site  of  Lystra  was  not  known  in 
modern  times  until  it  was  recently  identified  by  Prof. 
Ramsay.     (Historical  Geography  of  Asia  Minor). 

Finding  at  Lystra  no  Jewish  synagogue  to  afford 
them  an  assembly  of  devout  hearers,  the  missionaries 
were  constrained  to  preach  in  the  open  air.  The  narrow 
streets  universal  in  the  cities  of  that  age  were  unsuited 
to  gatherings  of  the  people;  but  in  every  city  there  was 
more  or  less  unoccupied  space  about  the  gates,  both  in- 
side and  outside,  and  these  were  always  favorite  places 
of  concourse.  It  seems  from  the  context  below  (13) 
that  Paul  was  addressing  a  crowd  at  the  principal  gate 
when  the  following  incident  took  place :  (8)  And  at 
Lystra  there  sat  a  certain  man,  impotent  in  his  feet,  a 
cripple  from  his  mother's  womb,  who  never  had  walked. 
(9)  The  same  heard  Paul  speaking  ;  who,  fastening  his 
eyes  upon  him,  and  seeing  that  he  had  faith  to  be  made 
whole,  (10)  said  with  a  loud  voice.  Stand  upright  on  thy 
feet.  And  he  leaped  up  and  walked.  (11)  And  when 
the  multitude  saw  what  Paul  had  done,  they  lifted  up 


40  COMMENTARY.  [xiv.  8-12. 

their  voice,  saying  in  the  speech  of  Lycaonia,  The  gods 
are  come  down  to  us  in  the  likeness  of  men.  (12)  And 
they  called  Barnabas,  Jupiter  ;  and  Paul,  Mercury,  be- 
cause he  was  the  chief  speaker.  The  "  faith  to  be  made 
whole,"  which  Paul  discovered  in  the  countenance  of  the 
cripple,  is  no  more  nor  less  than  belief  that  Paul  could 
make  him  whole.  The  idea  that  it  was  a  faith  which 
would  enable  Paul  to  make  him  whole  finds  no  coun- 
tenance in  the  Scriptures.  (See  remarks  under  iii.  16). 
He  could  not  have  obtained  this  faith  from  anything 
miraculous  which  Paul  had  yet  done ;  for  evidently  this 
was  the  first  cure  effected  in  Lystra.  The  source  of  his 
belief  then  must  have  been  something  which  Paul  had 
said.  Paul  had  probably  spoken  of  the  miraculous  cures 
wrought  by  Jesus,  and  of  the  power  given  by  him  to  his 
apostles  to  work  similar  cures  in  proof  of  their  divine 
mission.  He  may  even  have  mentioned  the  miracles 
which  he  had  wrought  at  Icouium  (3),  and  have  com. 
menced  looking  in  the  crowd  around  him  for  a  proper 
subject.  Seeing  the  cripple,  and  fastening  his  eyes  upon 
him,  he  saw  that  the  cripple,  with  that  credulity  which 
always  characterizes  persons  with  chronic  diseases,  be- 
lieved, from  the  solemn  statements  made,  that  Paul  had 
the  power  which  he  claimed.  Instantly,  therefore,  with 
a  loud  voice,  Paul  commanded,  "Stand  upright  on  thy 
feet."  With  amazement  the  crowd  fell  away  from  him 
as  he  leaped  and  walked,  and  as  quickly  as  the  shock  of 
surprise  would  allow  them  to  think,  with  one  accord 
there  flashed  into  their  minds  the  only  conclusion  which 
their  heathen  education  would  allow,  that  two  gods  in 
the  form  of  men  had  come  down  to  them.  We  shall  see 
another  heathen  crowd  jump  to  the  same  conclusion  from 
a  similar  event  farther  on  (xxviii.  1-6).     As  instantane- 


xiv.  8-1.^1  ACTS.  41 

Oils  as  the  conviction  that  the  preachers  were  gods,  was 
the  opinion  as  to  wliich  gods  they  were;  for  who  could 
one  of  them  be  but  Jupiter,  whose  temple  stood  before 
their  gate  as  the  patron  god  of  the  city?  And  as  the 
other  was  the  chief  speaker,  who  could  he  be  but  the  god 
of  eloquence,  and  Jupiter's  interpreter?  Their  excite- 
ment caused  them  very  naturally  to  break  forth  in  their 
native  tongue,  instead  of  the  Greek  in  which  Paul  had 
addressed  them,  and  which  they  spoke  as  an  acquired 
language.  Their  shouts  necessarily  silenced  Paul  for  the 
time  being,  and  perhaps,  while  he  was  waiting  for 
silence  to  be  restored  so  that  he  could  continue  his 
remarks,  he  failed  to  notice  that  a  part  of  the  crowd 
darted  away,  some  to  bring  two  or  more  fat  bulls  which 
were  in  readiness  for  a  sacrifice  to  Jupiter,  and  some 
to  bring  garlands  of  flowers  with  which  to  decorate  the 
horns  of  the  victims. 

Ver.  13.  While  Paul  was  still  waiting  to  renew 
his  discourse,  the  people  made  a  rush  toward  the  temple, 
and  he  learned  from  their  outcries  what  was  about  to  take 
place.  (13)  And  the  priest  of  Jupiter  whose  temple  was 
before  the  city,  brought  oxeu'  and  garlands  unto  the 
gates,"  and  would  have  done  sacrifice  with  the  multi- 

^  The  original  is  rnvpovq,  bulls. 

^  The  position  is  taken  by  Mr.  Howson  (Life  and  Epistles  of 
Paul),  and  he  is  followed  in  it  by  several  commentators,  that  the 
word  here  rendered  gates,  vrvAwmc,  never  means  the  gates  of  a  city, 
but  always  the  gates  of  a  private  house  ;  and  that  we  are  there- 
fore to  understand  that  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  retired  to  their 
place  of  lodging,  and  that  the  idolators  brought  the  victims  to  the 
gate  of  the  latter  to  make  the  sacrifice.  But  the  criticism  on  the 
use  of  the  Greek  word  is  proved  to  be  inaccurate  by  the  fact  that 
in  the  Apocalypse  it  is  used  repeatedly  for  the  gates  of  a  city. 
See  xxi.  12,  1.3,  15,  21,  25  ;  xxii.  14.  Furthermore,  as  there  was  a 
temple  to  Jupiter  in  front  of  the  city  gate  (13),  the  priest  could 


42  COMMENTARY.  [xiv.  13-18. 

tudes.  The  priest  was  doubtless  moving  toward  the 
altar  in  front  of  the  temple,  which  may  have  been  but  a 
few  steps  from  where  Paul  stood,  and  the  people  at  once, 
by  a  common  impulse,  rushed  forward  to  join  in  the 
honors  so  promptly  made  ready  for  their  heavenly  vis- 
itors. 

Vv.  14-18.  Paul  and  Barnabas  were  shocked  beyond 
measure  to  see  themselves  about  to  be  honored  as  gods. 
(14)  But  when  the  apostles,  Barnabas  and  Paul,  heard  of 
it,  ^  they  rent  their  garments,  and  sprang  forth  among 
the  multitude,  crying  out  (15)  and  saying,  Sirs,  why 
do  ye  these  things  ?  We  also  are  men  of  like  passions 
with  you,  and  bring  you  good  tidings,  that  ye  should 
turn  from  these  vain  things  unto  the  living  God,  who  made 
the  beaveji  and  the  earth  and  the  sea,  and  all  that  in 
them  is :  (16)  who  in  the  generations  gone  by  suffered 
all  the  nations  to  walk  in  their  own  ways.  (17)  And 
yet  he  left  not  himself  without  witness,  in  that  he  did 
good,  3.nd  gave  you  from  heaven  rains  and  fruitful  sea- 
sons, filling  your  hearts  with  food  and  gladness.  (18) 
And  with  these  sayings  scarce  restrained  they  the  mul- 
titudes from  doing  sacrifice  unto  them. 

It  should  be  observed  that  Luke  here  applies  the 
title  apostle  to  both  Barnabas  and  Paul  (14),  as  we  have 

not  have  thought  of  leaving  it,  and  going  into  the  street  to  oflFer 
sacrifice.  Tliese  considerations  constrain  us  to  take  the  view  of 
the  whole  transaction  which  we  have  given. 

^  Not  "  lieard  of  it,"  asjf  they  were  at  a  distance,  and  did  not 
see  it;  or  as  if  they  did  not  understand  the  Lycaonian  dialect, 
and  therefore  knew  not  that  they  had  been  called  gods  until  some 
one  who  could  speak  Greek  told  them  of  it ;  but  simply  "  heard 
it"  (aKovaavTEc).  They  may  have  seen  the  priests  and  others 
bringing  the  bulls  and  flowers  without  the  thought  of  what  was 
intended  until  some  outcry  from  the  priests,  or  from  the  crowd 
immediately  about  the  apostles,  made  it  known  to  them.    The 


xiv.  14-18.]  ACTS.  43 

doiie  occasionally  in  pi'ecediug  remarks.  "While  Barna- 
bas was  not  one  of  the  twelve,  and  therefore  not  an 
apostle  in  the  same  sense  that  they  were,  he  still  bore 
the  title  iu  common  with  some  others/  This  was 
probably  due  to  their  having  been  under  the  personal 
instruction  of  Jesus,  or  possibly  to  their  having  been 
present  when  the  great  commission  was  given  as  recorded 
by  Matthew.^ 

The  habit  of  rending  one's  clothing  when  suddenly 
and  violently  agitated,  though  as  old  as  the  time  of 
Jacob  (Gen,  xxxvii.  29-34),  appears  here  (14)  the  last 
time  in  the  Bible.  The  self-possession  which  the  Chris- 
tian faith  inculcates  and  imparts  soon  made  it  disappear 
from  the  customs  of  the  Christian  Jews. 

Though  Barnabas,  on  this  occasion,  received  the  chief 
honor  from  the  people,  Luke  on  that  account  placing  his 
name  foremost  in  the  paragraph  just  quoted,  yet  Paul 
was  the  master  spirit  in  all  these  exciting  scenes.  He 
continued  to  play  the  part  of  Mercury,  which  the  people 
had  assigned  him ;  for  the  speech  to  the  idolaters  is  his  in 
tliought  and  diction.  Mr.  Howson  notes  the  coincidence 
between  the  exhortation  to  the  Lystrians,  that  they  should 
"turn  from  these  vain  things  to  the  living  God,"  and 
his  remark  to  the  Thessalonians,  that  they  had  "turned 
from  idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God ; "  between 
the  remark,  that  "  in  generations  past  God  had  suffered 
the  Gentiles  to  go  in  their  own  ways,"  and  his  statement 
to  the  Athenians,  the  "time  of  this  ignorance  God  has 

narrative  furnishes  no  ground  at  all  for  the  supposition  that 
neither  Paul  nor  Barnabas  understood  what  tlie  Lycaonians  had 
said, 

'  Rom,  xvi,  7 ;  II.  Cor,  xi.  1.3 ;  Gal.  i.  19 ;  Rev,  ii,  2. 

^  For  an  elaborate  discussion  of  the  N.  T,  use  of  this  title,  see 
the  essay  on  the  subject  in  Lightfoot's  commentary  on  Galatians. 


44  COMMENTARY.  [xiv.  14-19. 

overlooked;''  and  finally,  between  the  argument  to 
prove  that  God  had  not  left  himself  without  witness 
among  the  heathen,  and  that  in  Romans  (i.  20),  where 
he  says :  "  The  invisible  things  of  him  since  the  creation 
of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  perceived  through 
the  things  which  are  made,  even  his  everlasting  power 
and  divinity;  that  they  may  be  without  excuse."  To 
which  I  may  add,  that  the  coincidence  in  thought  be- 
tween this  speech  and  that  made  in  Athens  to  another 
company  of  idolaters  (xvii.  22-31)  is  so  striking  that 
the  latter  might  be  regarded  as  the  same  speech  altered 
to  suit  another  audience.  The  speech  was  successful  in 
preventing  the  sacrifice  intended,  but  it  left  the  idola- 
trous crowd  sorely  perplexed  as  to  who  their  two  visitors 
might  be. 

Yer.  19.  Paul  continued  his  labors  from  day  to  day, 
but  so  dense  was  the  darkness  in  which  these  idolaters 
were  enshrouded,  that  he  labored  in  vain  to  make  them 
understand  the  revelation  which  he  brought  to  them. 
In  the  meantime  the  news  of  that  strange  scene,  in  which 
men  were  about  to  be  worshiped  as  gods,  flew  like  wild 
fire  from  city  to  city,  until  it  reached  the  ears  of  Paul's 
enemies  in  Iconium  and  Antioch,  when  a  number  of 
these,  urged  by  hatred,  made  a  swift  journey  to  Lystra. 
(19)  But  there  came  Jews  thither  from  Antioch  and 
Iconium:  and  having  persuaded  the  multitudes,  they 
stoned  Paul,  and  dragged  him  out  of  the  city,  supposing 
that  he  was  dead.  It  is  difficult  to  comprehend  the 
malignity  of  these  Jews.  Those  who  came  from  Antioch 
had  journeyed  one  hundred  and  thirty  miles,  and  those 
from  Iconium  forty,  to  maltreat  a  man  who  had  not 
harmed  them,  but  whom  they  hated  without  a  cause.  It 
is  not  so  difficult  to  imagine  the  representations  by  which 


xiv.  19.]  ACTS.  45 

they  persuaded  the  Lystrians.  They  could  say,  We  un- 
derstaud  that  you  have  taken  these  two  countrymen  of 
ours  for  gods  in  human  form.  We  can  tell  you  who  they 
they  are.  They  are  Jews  who  came  to  Antioch  and  acted 
so  base  a  part  as  to  disgust  all  of  their  fellow  Jews  in 
the  city,  and  to  cause  the  honorable  women  and  chief 
men  of  the  city  to  rise  up  and  drive  them  away.  They 
then  went  to  Iconium,  and  made  themselves  such  pests 
that  the  city  rulers,  with  the  aid  of  Jews  and  Gentiles 
acting  together,  prepared  to  stone  them,  when  Jhey  fled 
like  thieves  and  came  to  Lystra.  We  are  not  willing 
for  them  to  disgrace  our  name  and  nation  any  longer, 
and  with  your  permission  we  will  put  an  end  to  their 
sorcery ;  for  it  is  by  the  power  of  evil  spirits  that  they 
work  wonders  among  the  people.  On  hearing  such 
representations  from  the  countrymen  of  Paul  and  Bar- 
nabas, the  Lystrians  readily  consented  to  let  them  have 
their  own  way. 

Knowing  from  past  experience  how  certainly  Paul 
would  escape  their  hands  if  he  should  learn  what  was 
on  foot,  they  waited  till  he  came  forth  as  usual  to 
preach  near  the  gateway,  when  they  made  a  rush  with 
stones  already  prepared,  and  pelted  him  to  death  in  a 
moment.  He  fell  inside  the  city  gate.  Two  or  three  of 
the  rudest  and  strongest  of  the  crowd  were  directed  to 
remove  his  body ;  so,  seizing  him  by  the  hands,  or  per- 
haps by  the  feet,  they  dragged  him  to  a  place  outside  the 
city  where  his  body  was  left,  like  that  of  a  dead  beast,  to 
any  fate  which  might  await  it.  Satisfied  with  what  they 
had  done,  and  fearing,  possibly,  that  some  authority 
higher  than  that  of  the  city  rulers  might  call  them  to 
account  for  their  bloody  work,  the  murderers  in  all  prob- 
ability started  the  same  hour  on  their  journey  homeward. 


46  COMMENTARY.  [xiv.  19, 20. 

They  supposed  that  they  would  never  hear  of  Paul  again 
as  a  living  disturber  of  their  peace. 

Ver.  20.  Up  to  this  moment  Luke  has  given  us  no 
intimation  that  Paul's  labors  in  Lystra  had  been  rewarded 
with  converts.  Now  they  appear  on  his  page,  and  in  a 
most  pitiable  condition.  (20)  But  as  the  disciples  stood 
round  about  him,  he  rose  up,  and  entered  into  the  city : 
and  on  the  morrow  he  went  forth  with  Barnabas  to 
Derbe.  How  long  the  disciples  waited  before  they  ven- 
tured out  to  where  the  body  lay;  how  long  they  stood 
over  him  before  he  showed  signs  of  returning  conscious- 
ness; and  how  long  after  that  before  he  and  they  ven- 
tured back  into  the  city,  Luke  leaves  to  the  imagination 
of  his  reader.  We  can  readily  imagine  the  bitter  tears 
and  cries  of  that  little  band,  while  they  gazed  upon  the 
wounds  and  bruises  of  one  whom  they  had  learned  to 
love  so  tenderly;  while  they  thought  of  the  cruelty  with 
which  he  had  been  murdered ;  and  when  they  glanced 
at  the  future  awaiting  themselves,  like  lambs,  as  they 
were,  in  the  midst  of  wolves.  We  can  rejoice  with  them 
when  Paul  opened  his  eyes;  and  wonder  with  them  that, 
after  he  w'as  stoned  to  unconsciousness,  the  last  spark  of 
life  w^hich  may  have  lingered  in  his  body  was  not  extin- 
guished by  the  horrid  manner  in  which  he  was  dragged 
over  the  rough  pavements,  and  through  the  dust  and 
filth  of  the  street  and  of  the  highway,  to  the  place 
where  they  found  him.  And  how  was  he  able,  so  soon, 
to  rise  up  and  walk?  How  is  it  possible  that  he  was 
able  to  start  on  a  new  journey  with  Bainabas  the  next 
day  ?  Does  not  the  last  fact  especially  tell  us  of  gentle 
hands  and  loving  ministrations  all  through  the  night, 
bathing  and  dressing  his  many  wounds  and  bruises,  and 
cheering  him  with  words  of  deepest  sympathy? 


xiv.  20.]  ACTS.  47 

Thank  God,  we  are  not  left  altogether  to  imagination 
for  the  names  of  those  tender  and  loving  friends.  Tim- 
othy was  a  native  of  Lystra,  baptized  during  this  very 
visit  of  Paul;  and  many  years  after  this  we  hear,  from 
the  depths  of  the  Roman  prison  whence  Paul  was  led 
forth  to  the  executioner's  block,  these  melting  words 
addressed  to  this  most  beloved  of  all  his  companions  in 
tribulation  :  "  I  thank  God,  whom  I  serve  from  my  fore- 
fathers in  a  pure  conscience,  how  unceasing  is  my  re- 
membrance of  thee  in  supplications,  night  and  day  long- 
ing to  see  thee,  remembering  thy  tears,  that  I  may  be 
filled  with  joy;  having  been  reminded  of  tlie  unfeigned 
faith  that  is  in  thee;  which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grand- 
mother Lois  and  in  thy  mother  Eunice ;  and,  I  am 
persuaded,  in  thee  also"  (11.  Tim.  i.  3-5).  Were  those 
remembered  tears  the  tears  which  Timothy,  then  a  boy 
of  fifteen,^  shed  over  Paul's  bruised  and  mangled  body? 
And  were  the  faithful  Eunice  and  the  venerable  Lois  in 
the  group  which  stood  around  that  body  till  animation 
was  restored  ?  If  it  was  into  their  house  that  Paul  was 
led,  and  by  their  hands  that  he  was  nursed  through  the 
night,  the  mystery  of  his  speedy  recovery  is  in  part  at 
least  explained.  What  a  scene  was  that  to  be  witnessed 
by  a  boy  of  fifteen,  who  had  been  trained  from  infancy 
to  the  holiest  sentiments  of  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  who 
was  but  newly  born  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Redeemer, 
and  whose  soul  was  responsive  to  everything  noble  in 
human  character !     No  wonder  that  his  heart  was  ever 

*As  this  event  occurred  not  later  tfian  the  year  48,  and  as 
Timothy  was  still  a  youth  at  the  date  of  Paul's  first  epistle  to 
him  (I.  Tim.  iv.  12),  which  was  written  not  earlier  than  64, 
Timothy  could  not  at  the  time  of  the  stoning  have  been  niui^h 
older  than  fifteen. 


48  COMMENTARY.  [xiv.  20-22. 

after  bound  to  Paul's  like  that  of  a  dutiful  son  to  a  lov- 
ing father.  And  what  a  compensation  did  Paul  himself 
afterward  find  for  all  his  suiferings  in  Lystra,  in  the  life- 
long devotion  of  him  concerning  whom  he  could  say, 
"  I  have  no  man  likeminded  ?"  The  very  hour  in  which 
the  whole  world  seemed  to  forsake  him  and  hate  him 
brought  to  his  side  the  dearest  friend  he  ever  knew. 

10.  Success  in  Deebe,  and   Return  to  Antioch, 

21-28. 

Vv.  21,  22.  Having  been  compelled  to  fly  from 
Antioch,  from  Iconium,  and  from  Lystra,  who  can  tell 
the  feelings  of  the  wounded  missionary  as  he  approached 
the  gates  of  another  heathen  city,  bearing  visible  marks 
of  the  indignity  which  he  had  suffered  ?  But  He  who 
brings  light  out  of  darkness  caused  a  refreshing  light  to 
shine  on  the  dark  pathway  of  his  faithful  servant  by 
granting  him  here  a  peaceful  and  abundant  harvest  oi 
souls.  (21)  And  when  they  had  preached  the  gospel  to 
that  city,  and  had  made  many  disciples,  they  returned 
to  Lystra,  and  to  Iconium,  and  to  Antioch,  (22)  confirm- 
ing the  souls  of  the  disciples,  exhorting  them  to  continue 
in  the  faith,  and  that  through  many  tribulations  we 
must  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 

At  Derbe,  where  the  apostles  seem  to  have  suffered  no 
persecution,  they  were  some  miles  farther  eastward  than 
at  Lystra,  and  were  not  far  from  the  well  known  pass 
called  the  Gates  of  Cilicia,  which  leads  through  the 
Taurus  mountains  down  into  the  plain  of  Cilicia  in  the 
direction  of  Tarsus.  Had  Paul  allowed  the  thought  of 
rest  for  a  time  among  friends  and  kindred  to  control  his 
movements,  he  would  now  have  revisited  the  iiome  of 
his  childhood  j  but  he  thought  of  the  disciples  whom  he 


xiv.  21-23.]  ACTS.  49 

had  loft  behind  hira  to  an  unknown  fate,  and  he  turned 
back  at  great  hazard  to  revisit  them.  How  he  succeeded 
in  re-entering  Lystra,  and  Iconiura,  and  Antioch,  and 
remaining  in  each  long  enough  to  instruct  and  organijse 
the  disciples,  without  a  renewal  of  the  persecutions  which 
had  driven  him  away  from  all  of  these  cities,  Luke  does 
not  inform  us.  It  is  possible  that  the  fury  of  the  mob 
had  spent  itself,  and  that  his  presence  was  tolerated  be- 
cause he  made  no  further  effort  to  gain  converts  to  the 
new  faith.  The  meetings  were  doubtless  held  in  private, 
and  perhaps  in  the  night.  The  apostles  confirmed  the 
souls  of  the  disciples  by  exhorting  them  to  continue  in 
the  faith,  and  by  assuring  them  that  the  pathway  into 
the  everlasting  kingdom,  at  least  in  their  day,  was 
through  many  such  tribulations  as  they  had  already  en- 
dured. They  were  made  to  realize  that  the  prize  at  the 
end  of  the  journey  was  worth  all  the  hardships  of  the 
way,  and  thus  they  were  made  strong  to  endure.  There 
were  many  tearful  scenes,  as  the  two  brethren,  who  had 
come  among  these  people  like  visitors  from  a  better 
world,  were  bidding  them  a  final  farewell,  and  leaving 
them  to  make  their  own  way  through  the  temptations 
and  conflicts  which  beset  them. 

Ver.  23.  They  were  left  as  '*  sheep  in  the  midst  of 
wolves;"  but  they  were  committed  to  the  care  of  the 
great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,  and  were  supplied  with 
uuder-shepherds  to  keep  them  in  the  fold.  (23)  And 
when  they  had  appointed^  for  them  elders  in  every 
'  The  word  here  translated  appointed  [xFipfiroiio))  means  prima- 
rily to  stretch  out  the  hand ;  secondarily,  to  appoint  by  a  show 
of  the  hand  ;  and  thirdly,  to  appoint  or  elect  without  regard  to 
the  method.  See  Grimm's  N.  T.  Greek  Lexicon.  Whether  it 
designates  here  an  act  of  Paul  and  Barnabas,  or  one  which  they 
caused  the  people  to  do,  is  not  made  clear.     The  force  of  the 


50  COMMENTARY.  [xiv.  23. 

church,  and  had  prayed  with  fasting,  they  commended 
them  to  the  Lord,  on  whom  they  had  believed.  Here  we 
see  fasting  and  prayer  connected  with  the  appointment  of 
elders,  as  we  saw  prayer  and  tlie  imposition  of  hands  in  the 
appointment  of  the  seven  servants  of  the  church  in  Jeru- 
salem (vi.  6),  and  as  we  saw  the  last  two  with  fasting  in 
the  separation  of  Barnabas  and  Saul  to  their  appointed 
work  (xiii.  3).  The  laying  on  of  hands,  which  was  part 
of  the  ceremony  in  those  two  services,  is  not  mentioned 
here;  but  as  we  have  seen  that  it  was  a  part  of  the 
service  of  appointment  to  office,  we  may  safely  infer  that 
it  was  not  omitted. 

It  should  be  observed  that  a  plurality  of  elders  were 
appointed  in  "  every  church  ; "  and  this,  so  far  as  we  are 
able  to  trace  the  facts,  was  the  universal  practice  of  the 
apostles.  In  appointing  these,  Paul  and  Barnabas  were 
but  following  the  example  of  the  older  apostles,  by 
whom  this  office  was  instituted  in  the  churches  of  Judea 
(xi.  30).  An  elaborate  discussion  of  the  subject  would 
belong  properly  to  a  separate  treatise,  or  to  a  Commentary 
on  I.  Timothy.  If  any  one  is  surprised  that  men  were 
found  in  these  newly  founded  congregations  possessed  of 
the  high  qualifications  for  the  office  laid  down  by  Paul 
in  his  epistles  to  Titus  and  Timothy,  he  should  remem- 
ber that  although  these  disciples  had  been  but  a  compara- 
tively short  time  in  the  church,  many  of  them  were,  in 
character  and  knowledge  of  the  Scriptures,  the  ripest 
fruits  of  the  Jewish  synagogue  ;  and  they  needed  only  the 

word  favors  the  former  view,  while  the  previous  act  of  the  twelve 
in  requiring  the  multitude  to  choose  the  deacons  (vi.  1-3),  favors 
the  latter.  For  a  summary  of  many  opinions  on  the  subject,  see 
Meyer's  commentary,  note  L  by  the  American  editor  after  chap- 
ter xiv. 


xiv.  23-26.]  ACTS.  51 

additional  knowledge  Avliich  the  gospel  brought,  in  order 
to  be  models  of  wisdom  and  piety  for  the  churches. 
They  were  not  "  novices  "  (I.  Tim.  iii.  6)  in  the  sense  of 
being  ne\vly  turned  away  from  wickedness.  Cornelius 
the  centurion  might  represent  the  class,  as  respects  Gen- 
tile converts,  and  Nathaniel  those  brought  in  from  the 
Jews. 

Vv.  24-26.  Having  done  all  in  their  power  for  the 
churches  which  they  had  planted^  the  ajjostles  continued 
their  homeward  journey  by  descending  from  Antioch  to 
Perga,  where  they  had  first  landed  in  their  voyage  from 
Cyprus.  (24)  And  they  passed  through  Pisidia,  and 
came  to  Pamphylia.  (25)  And  when  they  had  spoken 
the  word  in  Perga  they  went  down  to  Attalia ;  and 
thence  they  sailed  to  Antioch,  from  whence  they  had 
been  committed  to  the  grace  of  God  for  the  work  which 
they  had  fulfilled.  Why  they  did  not  ''.  speak  the 
word  "  in  Perga  at  their  first  visit,  and  what  success 
they  had  now,  are  alike  left  out  of  tiie  account  of 
Luke,  whose  omissions,  like  those  of  all  other  New 
Testament  writers,  are  not  less  remarkable  than  what 
he  records.  It  is  probable  that  the  preaching  done 
here  now  was  actuated  more  by  the  desire  to  use- 
fully occupy  the  time  of  waiting  for  a  vessel  bound 
to  Antioch,  than  by  a  decided  hope  of  accomplishing 
visible  results ;  and  this  view  is  confirmed  by  the  fact 
that  they  at  last  went  by  land  to  Attalia,^  about  six- 
teen miles  distant  on  the  sea  coast,  where  they  would 
be  more  certain  to  find  a  vessel  than  up  the  river  Ces- 
trus  at  Perga.  Thence  they  "sailed  to  Antioch,"  with- 
out going  ashore  at  any  intermediate  point. 

'  Attalia  is  still  a  seaport  of    some  importance  at  which  the 
coasting  steamers  of  the  Levant  make  regular  calls. 


52  COMMENTARY.  [xiv.  27, 28. 

Vv.  27,  28.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  church  in 
Antioch  had  lieard  from  Paul  and  Barnabas  since  they 
first  left  Perga.  John,  on  his  return,  may  have  brought 
them  news  of  the  journey  to  that  point.  When,  there- 
fore, they  appeared  unheralded  on  the  streets  of  the  city, 
after  an  absence  of  three  or  four  years,  we  may  well 
suppose  that  they  were  met  with  hearty  greetings  and 
much  questioning.  They  had  gone  on  the  first  mission 
ever  sent  out  to  the  heathen  world,  and  they  were  as 
eager  to  tell  their  story  as  the  disciples  were  to  hear  it. 
He  who  returns  from  a  hard  fought  field  bearing  good 
tidings,  pants  beneath  the  burden  of  his  untold  story. 
(27)  And  when  they  were  come,  and  had  gathered  the 
church  together,  they  rehearsed  all  things  that  God  had 
done  with  them,  and  how  that  he  had  opened  a  door  of 
faith  to  the  Gentiles.  (28)  And  they  tarried  no  little  time 
with  the  disciples.  The  metaphor  of  an  open  door  to 
represent  men's  access  to  the  privileges  of  the  gospel,  or 
the  access  of  the  preacher  to  the  hearts  of  the  people,  was 
first  employed  by  our  Lord  (Jno.  x.  1,  2,  7,  9)  ;  it  was  a 
favorite  with  Paul  (I.  Cor.  xvi.  9  ;  II.  Cor.  ii.  12 ;  Col.  iv. 
3) ;  and  it  is  found  in  the  lips  of  our  Lord  after  his  glori- 
fication (Rev.  iii.  8,  20).  Its  employment  here  to  rep- 
resent the  access  to  faith  which  had  now  been  opened  to 
the  heathen  world  by  the  mission  of  the  apostles,  is 
probably,  as  Plumptre  suggests,  an  echo  in  Luke's  nar- 
rative of  Paul's  own  language,  in  the  report  under  con- 
sideration. The  "  no  little  time"  which  the  apostles 
now  spent  in  Antioch  counts  forward  to  their  journey 
to  Jerusalem  mentioned  in  the  next  chapter,  and  if  we 
estimate  it  by  comparison  with  their  previous  stay  in 
the  same  city,  it  was  more  than  a  year  (c/.  xi.  26). 


XV.  1.]  ACTS.  63 

SEC.  II.  A  CONTROVERSY  ON  CIRCUM- 
CISION. 

(XV.) 

1.  The  Beginning  of  the  Controversy,  1-5. 

Ver.  1.  At  this  point  our  historian  makes  a  sud- 
den transition  from  the  conflicts  of  the  disciples  with 
Jews  and  Gentiles,  to  one  of  momentous  importance 
among  themselves.  One  phase  of  this  controversy  had 
taken  its  origin  from  the  baptism  of  uncircumcised  Gen- 
tiles in  the  h'ouse  of  Cornelius.  The  question  then  was 
whether  such  persons  should  be  baptized ;  and  by  the 
evidences  of  the  divine  will  which  had  been  presented  to 
Peter,  and  which  he  presented  to  the  brethren,  it  was 
settled,  definitely  and  finally  (xi.  18).  This  fact,  strangely 
overlooked  by  many  commentators,  it  is  necessary  to 
bear  distinctly  in  mind,  if  we  would  distinguish  the  suc- 
cessive phases  which  this  controversy  assumed.  The 
question  now  raised  in  Antioch  was  a  different  one. 
Without  controverting  the  jjropriety  of  baptizing  Gen- 
tiles, as  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  been  doing,  both  abroad 
and  here  in  Antioch,  the  disputants  took  the  position  that 
after  being  baptized,  and  receiving  forgiveness  of  sins, 
they  must  be  circumcised  as  a  condition  of  their  final 
salvation.  The  position,  and  the  men  who  assumed  it 
arc  thus  introduced :  (i)  And  certain  men  came  down 
from  Judea  and  taught  the  brethren,  saying,  Except  ye 
be  circumcised  after  the  custom  of  Moses,  ye  can  not  be 
saved.  The  fact  that  these  men  came  from  Judea, 
where  the  gospel  was  first  preached,  and  where  the 
original  apostles  had  been  the  teachers,  gave  their  utter- 
ances much  authority  with  the  Antioch  brethren,  so  it 


54  COMMENTARY.  [xv.  1, 2. 

is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  they  claimed  express 
authority  from  the  apostles  for  their  teaching,  though  it 
is  possible  that  they  did.  They  insisted  on  circumcision, 
not  because  of  the  covenant  with  Abraham,  which  was 
the  original  ground  of  the  obligation,  but  because  of 
the  law  of  Moses ;  and  they  did  so  because,  as  a  part  of 
the  law  of  Moses,  circumcision  bound  those  who  submit- 
ted to  it  to  keep  all  of  the  law,  while  circumcision  as  a 
mere  Abrahamic  rite  did  not ;  for  the  Ishmaelites,  the 
Edomites,  the  Midianites,  and  other  descendants  of  Abra- 
ham, were  confessedly  not  brought  under  the  law  of 
Moses  by  their  circumcision.  The  phraseology  em- 
ployed shows,  what  is  brought  out  expressly  farther  on 
(5),  that  they  insisted  on  circumcision  "  after  the  custom 
of  Moses,"  because  they  held  that  all  the  baptized, 
whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,  must  keep  the  law  of  Moses 
in  order  to  final  salvation.  They  could  not  conceive, 
as  yet,  that  this  divinely,  given  law,  which  had  been 
in  existence  so  long,  and  for  the  preservation  of  which 
their  fathers  had  suifered  so  much,  could  be  disre- 
garded by  any  who  would  be  heirs  of  eternal  life. 
When  they  thought  of  the  apostolic  commission,  they 
must  have  included  circumcision  and  the  keeping  of  the 
law  among  the  things  referred  to  in  the  words,  "  teach- 
ing them  [the  baptized]  to  observe  all  tilings  whatso- 
ever I  have  commanded  you"  (Matt,  xxviii.  20). 

Ver.  2.  Paul,  who  had  long  ago  received  by  direct 
revelation  from  Christ  a  correct  knowledge  of  the  gospel 
which  he  preached  (Gal.  i.  11,  12),  knew  perfectly  that 
this  teaching  was  erroneous,  and  Barnabas  had  learned 
the  same  from  him,  if  not  from  some  other  source  ;  so  the 
two  united  with  all  their  might  in  opposing  the  Judean 
teachers.     We  have  to  think  of  a  congregation  in  our 


XV.  2.]  ACTS.  55 

owQ  day,  distracted  by  an  earnest  controversy  between 
its  teachers  over  a  vital  question  of  doctrine,  in  order  to 
realize  the  distress  and  confusion  which  must  liave 
racked  the  minds  of  the  brethren  in  Antioch  while  this 
controversy  was  in  progress.  Paul  and  Barnabas  did  not 
succeed  in  silencing  their  opponents,  but  they  so  con- 
ducted the  discussion  as  to  bring  about  a  fortunate 
decision  of  a  provisional  character.  (2)  And  when  Paul 
and  Barnabas  had  no  small  dissension  and  questioning 
with  them,  the  brethren  determined'  that  Paul  and 
Barnabas,  and  certain  other  of  them,  should  go  up  to 
Jerusalem,  unto  the  apostles  and  elders  about  this 
question. 

If  the  brethren  at  Antioch  had  properly  estimated 
the  authority  of  an  inspired  apostle,  they  would  have 
accepted  implicitly  Paul's  decision  without  this  mission 
to  Jerusalem;  but  their  familiarity  with  the  person  of 
the  apostle,  like  that  of  the  !Nazarenes  with  the  person 
of  Jesus,  made  them  slow  to  realize  that  he  spoke  with 
divine  authority;  and  tlie  fact  that  he  was  not  one  of  the 
original  twelve  caused  them  to  think  his  utterances  less 
authoritative  than  theirs.  They  learned,  as  the  result  of 
the  mission,  what  4hey  should  have  realized  at  first;  and 
it  is  not  probable  that  they  ever  doubted  Paul's  teach- 
ing again. 

As  the  proposal  to  send  Paul  and  the  others  to  Jeru- 
salem about  this  matter  involved  the  implication  that 
the  former  was  inferior  in  authority  to  the  apostles 
and  elders  there,  it  is  probable  that  Paul,  for  the  main- 
tenance of  his  apostolic  prerogative,  would  have  refused 
to  go,  had  not  the  Lord  expressly  commanded  him  to  do 

'  On  the  correctness  of  the  renderine;,  "  determined,"  instead 
of  "appointed,"  (R.  V.),  see  the  discussion  under  xiii.  48. 


56  COMMENTARY.  [xv.  2,3. 

SO  ;  for  he  himself  says  in  reference  to  this  journey,  "  I 
went  u|)  by  revelation  "  (Gal.  ii.  2).  This  revelation 
requiring  him  to  go  was  made  because  it  was  the  divine 
purpose  to  settle  the  question  at  issue,  not  for  the  church 
in  Antioch  alone,  but  for  all  the  world  and  for  all 
time. 

Before  we  leave  this  verse,  let  it  be  distinctly  noted 
that  this  procedure  was  not  an  appeal  from  the  decision 
of  a  church  to  some  higher  tribunal ;  for  in  fact  no  de- 
cision had  been  rendered.  Neither  was  it  an  overture 
from  a  congregation  to  a  representative  body,  asking  for 
instruction ;  for  the  body  applied  to  was  composed  of 
the  elders  of  another  single  congregation,  together  with 
such  apostles  as  might  be  found  there.  In  truth  only 
three  of  the  older  apostles,  as  the  sequel  shows,  took  part 
in  rendering  the  decision  (Gal.  ii.  9).  In  these  two 
essential  particulars  the  step  taken  by  the  Antioch  church 
differs  fi-om  all  modern  appeals  from  lower  to  higher 
ecclesiastical  courts,  and  it  furnishes  no  precedent  for 
the  latter. 

Ver.  3.  The  journey  to  Jerusalem  was  made  by 
land,  and  the  messengers  passed  through  two  districts 
which  had  been  evangelized  already  to  a  considerable 
extent.  (3)  They  therefore  being  brought  on  their  way 
by  the  church,  passed  through  both  Phoenicia  and  Sama- 
ria, declaring  the  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  ;  and  they 
caused  great  joy  unto  all  the  brethren.  The  Samaritans, 
although  circumcised  like  the  Jews,  had  far  less  antip- 
athy to  Gentiles  than  the  latter ;  while  the  disciples  in 
Phoenicia,  though  made  up  largely  of  Jews,  were  closely 
identified  with  Gentiles ;  and  so  both  were  prepared  to 
rejoice  at  the  triumphs  of  the  gospel  in  the  heathen 
world. 


XV.  4.]  ACTS.  67 

Ver.  4.  After  a  pleasant  journey  through  the  midst 
of  rtjoiciog  churches,  they  reached  Jerusalem,  where  the 
name  of  Barnabas  was  held  in  sacred  remembrance  on 
account  of  his  usefulness  in  the  church's  infancy;  where 
Paul  was  now  well  known  as  a  courageous  and  self- 
sacrificing  evangelist;  and  where  the  news  of  the  suc- 
cessful tour  of  both  into  heathen  lands  had  preceded 
them.  The  reception  which  was  accorded  them  was 
most  natural.  (4)  And  when  they  were  come  to  Jeru- 
salem, they  were  received  by  the  church  and  the  apostles 
and  the  elders,  and  they  rehearsed  all  things  that  God 
had  done  with  them.^     It  was  a  tlirilling  story   which 

^  There  has  been  much  discussion  as  to  whether  this  visit  of 
Paul  to  Jerusalem  is  the  one  mentioned  in  the  second  chapter  of 
Galatians,  or  some  other;  but  recent  writers  are  almost  unan- 
imous in  deciding  that  it  is  the  same.  Farrar  puts  the  decisive 
evidence  in  a  nutshell  as  follows:  "In  the  two  narratives  the 
same  people  go  up  at  the  same  time,  from  the  same  place,  for  the 
same  object,  in  consequence  of  the  same  interference  by  the 
same  agitators,  and  with  the  same  results.  Against  the  absolute 
certainty  of  the  conclusion  that  the  visits  described  were  one  and 
the  same,  there  is  nothing  whatever  to  set  but  trivial  diflerences 
of  detail,  every  one  of  which  is  accounted  for  in  the  text."  {Life 
and  Work  of  Paul,  228,  n.  5).  Rationalists  admit  this,  but  they 
use  the  fact  to  show  that  as  Paul  represents  this  as  his  second 
visit  to  Jerusalem  since  his  conversion,  therefore  Luke's  account 
of  his  visit  with  Barnabas  on  the  alms-giving  trip  mentioned  in 
xi.  is  false-.  (Banr,  Life  of  Paul,  i.  114, 115 ;  Zeller  on  Acts  ii.  8). 
But  Paul  does  not  say  that  the  visit  of  Gal.  ii.  was  his  second 
visit.  He  merely  says,  "  Then  after  the  space  of  fourteen  years 
I  went  up  again  "  (Gal.  ii.  1).  This  was,  however,  the  second 
visit  with  which  his  line  of  argument  in  Galatians  was  concerned  ; 
for  his  |)urpose  is  to  show  that  he  had  not  before  this  enjoyed  an 
opportunity  to  be  instructed  by  the  older  apostles,  except  during 
the  fifteen  days  of  his  first  visit  (Gal.  i.  18) ;  and  during  his  brief 
visit  mentioned  in  the  eleventh  chapter,  Peter,  the  only  apostle 
in  the  city,  was  shut  up  in  prison  during  the  passover  week, 


58  COMMENTARY.  [xv.  5. 

they  told,  and  it  must  have  drawn  many  tears  from  the 
eyes  of  the  symjDatliizing  audience,  while  it  Aroused  them 
to  fresh  enthusiasm  in  the  cause  of  human  redemption. 
Ver.  5.  Touching  and  inspiring  as  was  the  occa- 
sion, some  brethren  in  the  church  were  not  willing  to 
miss  the  opportunity  of  suggesting  what  they  regarded 
as  a  serious  defect  in  the  instruction  which  Paul  and 
Barnal)as  had  given  their  Gentile  converts.  (5)  But 
there  rose  up  certain  of  the  sect  of  the  Pharisees  who 
believed,  saying,  It  is  needful  to  circumcise  them,  and 
to  charge  them  to  keep  the  law  of  Moses.*  After  read- 
ing so  much  in  the  earlier  chapters  of  Acts  respecting 
the  hostility  of  the  sect  of  the  Pharisees  to  the  church,  it 
is  a  surprise  to  here  meet  with  some  of  that  party  inside 
the  church,  and  occupying  a  position  of  some  influence, 
though  it  is  not  a  surjjrise  to  find  them  on  the  wrong 
side  of  an  important  question.  They  found  it  no  longer 
possible  to  resist  the  evidence  in  favor  of  Jesus,  and  had 
tlierefore  been  baptized  into  his  name;  but  they  still 
clung  tenaciously  to  some  of  their  former  ideas.  Long 
after  this  meeting,  when  Paul  had  come  to  fully  under- 
stand their  motives,  even  if  he  did  not  at  the  time,  he 
styles  them  "  false  brethren  privily  brought  in,  who  came 

and  then  fled  from  the  city.  Paul  and  Barnahas  seem  not  to  have 
gone  mto  the  city  at  all  until  their  mission  among  the  churches 
of  Judea  was  accomplished,  and  then  their  stay  must  have  heen 
very  hrief  on  account  of  the  danger  imminent.  See  xi.  29 — xii.  25. 
1  Baur  {Life  of  Paul,  i.  117-119  ;  Church  Hist.  1.  52),  followed  by 
the  whole  school  which  he  represents,  declares,  without  reason 
worthy  of  the  name,  that  Luke  here  falsifies  the  facts,  and  that 
the  older  apostles  themselves,  and  not  certain  Pharisees  who 
believed,  were  Paul's  opponents.  Paul's  own  statements  about 
the  perfect  agreement  between  himself  and  the  other  apostles 
(Gal.  ii.  6-10),  show  clearly  the  falsity  of  this  assertion,  and  the 
truthfulness  of  Luke. 


XV.  5.]  ACTS.  69 

in  privily  to  spy  out  our  liberty  which  we  have  in  Christ 
Jesus,  that  they  might  bring  us  into  bondage  "  (Gal.  ii.  4). 
From  this  judicial  sentence  upon  them  we  ascertain  that 
when  they  despaired  of  destroying  the  church  by  perse- 
cution from  without,  they  deliberately  confessed  Christ 
and  came  into  the  church  for  the  purpose  of  controlling 
it  from  within.  It  was  their  design  to  keep  the  church 
under  the  bondage  of  the  law,  and  thus  prevent  it  from 
very  seriously  modifying  the  state  of  things  among  the 
Jews  in  which  the  Pharisees  were  the  predominant 
party.  Partisan  zeal,  the  bane  of  their  former  life,  was 
still  their  controlling  passion.  It  is  highly  probable 
that  among  them  Paul  recognized  some  of  his  old 
acquaintances,  who  had  once  been  his  helpers  in  perse- 
cution, and  had  more  recently  been  of  the  number  who 
sought  to  put  him  to  death.  He  knew  them  through 
and  through. 

The  essential  issue  between  Paul  and  the  Pharisees 
had  reference  to  the  perpetuation  of  the  law  of  Moses  in 
the  church  of  God  ;  and  the  same  issue  has  been  in 
debate  under  different  phases  from  that  day  to  this. 
Paul  defeated  the  attempt  to  fasten  circumcision  on  the 
cliurch,  but  later  Judaizers  succeeded  in  perpetuating  it 
under  the  form  of  infant  immersion,  and  afterward  of 
infant  sprinkling.  That  which  the  Pharisees  failed  to 
accomplish  openly  was  thus  accomplished  under  a  thin 
disguise.  The  Pharisees  failed  to  consolidate  the  law 
and  the  gospel  ;  but  their  imitators  have  largely  suc- 
ceeded in  teaching  men  that  the  church  of  Christ  origin- 
ated in  the  family  of  Abraham,  and  that  the  Jewisli 
tribes  and  the  Christian  congregations  constitute  one 
identical  church.  The  Roman  apostasy  perpetuates  the 
daily  sacrifice  and  pompous  ritual  of  the  temple ;  relig- 


60  COMMENTARY.  [xv.  5, 6. 

ions  zealots  have  slaughtered  Canaan ites  in  the  persons  oi 
modern  heretics ;  professed  Christians  go  to  war  under 
the  old  battle-cry  of  the  "  sword  of  the  Lord  and  of 
Gideon  ; "  the  "  Latter-day  Saints  "  emulate  Solomon  in 
the  multiplication  of  wives ;  and  for  all  these  corruptions 
authority  is  found  in  the  laws  and  customs  of  ancient 
Israel.  The  intelligent  reader  of  the  New  Testament 
knows  scarcely  which  of  these  errors  is  farthest  from  the 
truth ;  and  he  feels  bound  to  struggle  with  untiring 
energy  and  ceaseless  vigilance  to  uproot  them  all  from 
the  minds  of  men. 

2.  Anothee  Meeting,  and  a  Speech  by  Peter, 

6-11. 

Ver.  6.  After  the  Pharisees  had  stated  their  posi- 
tion, distinctly  affirming  that  the  Gentiles  should  be 
circumcised  and  keep  the  law,  the  assembly  adjourned 
without  discussing  the  question.  The  second  meeting  is 
announced  in  these  words :  (6)  And  the  apostles  and  the 
elders  were  gathered  together  to  consider  of  this  matter. 
Neither  this  nor  the  first  meeting  was  composed  exclu- 
sively of  the  apostles  and  the  elders ;  for  we  have  seen  (4) 
that  at  the  first  the  messengers  were  "  received  by  the 
church,"  and  from  verse  22  below  we  learn  that  the 
church  was  now  present.  There  was,  however,  between 
these  two  public  meetings  a  private  meeting  of  Paul  and 
Barnabas  with  the  three  apostles  who  were  then  in 
the  city.  This  we  learn  from  Paul's  epistle  to  the 
Galatians,  in  which  he  both  states  the  fact,  and  gives  his 
reason  for  seeking  the  interview.  He  says  :  "  Then 
after  the  space  of  fourteen  years  I  went  up  again  to 
Jerusalem  with  Barnabas,  taking  Titus  also  with  me. 
And  I  went  up  by  revelation ;  and  I  laid  before  them 


XV.  6.]  ACTS.  61 

the  gospel  which  I  preach  among  the  Gentiles,  but 
privately  before  them  who  were  of  repute,  lest  by  any 
means  I  should  be  running,  or  had  run,  in  vain."  The 
force  of  the  reason  given  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  if  he 
had  found  the  old  apostles  on  the  side  of  the  Pharisees, 
their  influence  would  have  overborne  his  with  the  breth- 
ren, and  all  of  his  work,  both  past  and  future,  would 
have  been  overthrown  by  bringing  his  converts  under 
the  bondage  of  the  law/  The  result  of  the  interview  he 
states  in  these  words :  "  But  from  those  who  were  re- 
puted to  be  somewhat — whatsoever  they  were,  it  raaketh 
no  matter  to  me ;  God  accepteth  not  man's  person — they, 
I  say,  who  were  of  repute  imparted  nothing  to  me ;  but 
contrariwise,  when  they  saw  that  I  had  been  intrusted 
with  the  gospel  of  the  uncircumcision,  even  as  Peter 
with  the  gospel  of  circumcision,  (for  he  that  wrought  for 
Peter  unto  the  apostleship  of  the  circumcision  wjought  for 
me  also  unto  the  Gentiles) ;  and  when  they  perceived 
the  grace  that  was  given  unto  me,  James  and  Cephas 
and  John,  they  who  were  reputed  to  be  pillars,  gave  to 
me  and  Barnabas  the  right  hands  of  fellowship,  that  we 
should  go  unto  the  Gentiles,  and  they  unto  the  circum- 

'  I  can  not  withhold  my  surprise  that  Farrar  has  so  completely 
misunderstood  Paul's  meaning  here  as  to  write  the  following 
sentence:  "When  he  says  to  the  Galatians  that  he  'consulted 
them  about  the  gospel  he  was  preaching,  lest  he  might  be  or  had 
been  running  to  no  purpose,'  he  shows  that  at  this  period  he  had 
not  arrived  at  the  quite  unshaken  conviction,  which  made  him 
subsequently  say  that,  '  whether  he  or  an  angel  from  heaven 
preached  any  other  gospel,  let  him  be  anathema,"  {Life  of  Paul, 
228.)  This  is  totally  inconsistent  with  Paul's  repeated  declaration 
in  the  previous  chapter  of  Galatians,  that  he  had  received  his 
knowledge  of  the  gospel  by  direct  revelation,  and  that  therefore 
he  could  not  have  any  doubts  concerning  it.  Compare  Lightfoot 
on  the  passi^je  in  his  commentary  on  Galatians. 


62  COMMENTARY.  '    [x v.  6-11. 

cision  "  (Gal.  ii.  6-10).  From  this  account  of  the  inter- 
view it  appears  that  as  soon  as  the  three  older  apostles 
heard  Paul's  statement  of  the  case,  they  heartily  ap- 
proved it,  and  indicated  the  fact  by  extending  their 
right  hands  to  him  and  Barnabas.  The  words,  "  im- 
parted nothing  to  me/'  are  well  chosen  ;  for  the  question 
was  whether  or  not  Paul  bad  taught  the  Gentiles  their 
whole  duty;  if  not,  something  additional  would  have 
been  imparted.  With  this  information  a^  to  the  perfect 
understanding  and  agreement  between  the  inspired  apos- 
tles before  us,  we  can  plainly  see  that  the  second  public 
meeting  of  the  whole  church  was  called,  not  for  the  pur- 
pose of  bringing  about  an  agreement  between  the  apos- 
tles, but  for  the  purpose  of  enabling  the  apostles  to 
bring  the  whole  church  into  agreement  with  themselves. 
In  this  light  we  must  study  the  proceedings,  or  we  shall 
totally  misconstrue  them. 

Vv.  7-11.  Men  who  are  in  error  can  never  be  con- 
vinced that  they  are  wrong  by  denying  them  freedom  of 
speech.  Not  till  ihej  have  been  allowed  to  express 
themselves  to  the  last  word  are  they  capable  of  listening 
dispassionately  to  the  other  side.  The  apostles,  knowing 
this,  or  at  least  acting  on  it,  permitted  the  judaizers  in 
the  church  to  say  all  that  they  wished  to  say  before  any 
reply  was  made  to  their  position  and  arguments.  Then, 
when  they  had  completely  emptied  themselves,  the  apos- 
tles, one  by  one,  and  in  a  succession  apparently  pre- 
arranged, gave  utterance  to  facts  and  judgments  which 
compelled  assent.  (7)  And  when  there  had  been  much 
questioning,  Peter  rose  up,  and  said  unto  them, 

Brethren,  ye  know  how  that  a  good  while  ago  God 
made  choice  among  you,  that  by  my  mouth  the  Gentiles 
should  hear  the  word  of  the  gospel,  and  believe.    (8)  And 


XV.  7-11.]  ACTS.  63 

God,  who  knoweth  the  heart,  bare  them  witness,  giving 
them  the  Holy  Spirit,  even  as  he  did  unto  us  ;  (9)  and 
he  made  no  distinction  between  them  and  us,  purifying 
their  hearts  by  faith.  (10)  Now  therefore  why  tempt  ye 
God,  that  ye  should  put  a  yoke  upon  the  necks  of  the  dis- 
ciples, which  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  were  able  to 
bear  ?  (11)  But  we  believe  that  we  shall  be  saved  through 
the  grace  of  the  Loid  Jesus,  in  like  manner  as  they. 

The  Greek  word  rendered  questioning  in  verse  7 
{^^rjvr^ac:;)  literally  means  a  question ;  but  here  it  has  the 
sense  of  debate  or  disputation  (Grimm's  Lexicon)  ;  and  it 
is  used  here  rather  than  the  more  usual  word  for  debate 
(<T'j^3^'r}^<7rc),  to  indicate,  I  think,  that  the  discussion  was 
conducted  chiefly  by  asking  questions —  a  very  common 
way  of  putting  an  adversary  to  a  disadvantage.  The 
debate  was  probably  one-sided,  the  Pharisees  putting  all 
the  questions,  and  putting  them  so  that  each  one  carried 
in  it  an  argument,  or  implied  a  conclusion.  It  is  perhaps 
because  they  had  adopted  this  form  of  argumentation 
that  Peter  put  the  main  point  of  his  answer  (10)  in  the 
same  form. 

Peter's  speech  contains  just  three  points  of  argument : 
First,  that  in  the  well  known  case  of  the  first  Gentile 
converts  in  the  house  of  Cornelius,  God,  by  giving  them 
the  Holy  Spirit  as  he  had  given  it  to  the  apostles,  made 
no  distinction  between  Jews  and  Gentiles;*  from  which 
the  silent  inference  is  that  as  God  had  made  no  distinc- 
tion men  should  make  none.  Second,  to  put  on  the 
necks  of  these  Gentile  converts  the  yoke  of  the  law, 
which  no  generation  of  Jews  had  been  able  to  bear, 
would  be,  in  the  light  of  the  preceding  fact,  tempting 
God;  that  is,  trying  his  forbearance  by  their  own  pre- 
sumption.    Third,  the   settled    belief,  indicated   in   the 


64  COMMENTARY.  [xv.  7-12. 

words  "  we  believe/^  that  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  were 
to  be  saved  through  grace,  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  implies  necessarily  that  they  were  not  to  be  saved 
by  keeping  the  law.  In  affirming  that  the  law  was  a 
yoke  that  the  Jews  had  not  been  able  to  bear,  he  meant 
that  they  had  not  been  able  so  to  keep  it  as  to  be  saved 
by  the  perfection  of  their  obedience  to  it.  This  speech, 
it  would  seem,  should  have  been  enough  to  end  the 
whole  controversy;  but  it  was  wisely  planned  among 
the  apostles  that  the  evidence  on  the  subject  should  be 
multiplied  in  a  way  to  leave  no  room  for  more,  and  no 
room  for  subsequent  caviling. 

3.  Speeches  by  Baenabas  and  Paul,  12. 

Ver.  12.  After  Peter  sat  down,  Barnabas  spoke 
next,  and  then  Paul,  each  setting  forth  other  evidences 
of  God's  will  on  the  question  at  issue.  (12)  And  all  the 
multitude  kept  silence ;  and  they  hearkened  unto  Bar- 
nabas and  Paul  rehearsing  what  signs  and  wonders  God 
had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  by  them.  Their  line 
of  argument  was  a  continuation  of  Peter's.  As  the 
miracle  of  giving  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  case  of  Cor- 
nelius and  his  friends  gave  proof  of  God's  approval  in 
that  case,  so  the  "signs  and  wonders"  which  he  wrought 
by  the  hands  of  Barnabas  and  Paul  while  they  were 
bringing  in  flie  Gentiles  and  organizing  them  as  congre- 
gations without  circumcision,  and  without  requiring  them 
to  keep  the  law,  gave  proof  of  his  approbation  in  these 
cases  also.  The  argument  of  the  three  speeches  was 
exactly  the  same,  though  based  upon  different  facts, 
and  these  facts  were  presented  in  their  chronological 
order. 


XV.  13-21.]  ACTS,  65 

4.  A  Speech  by  James,  13-21. 

Vv.  13-21.  As  in  the  case  of  the  death  and  resur- 
rection of  tlie  Messiah,  no  amount  of  contemporary  evi- 
dence could  convince  the  average  Jew,  unless  he  could 
be  made  to  see  that  such  a  death  and  resurrection  were 
spoken  of  in  the  predictions  concerning  the  Messiah,  so, 
in  reference  to  the  question  in  hand,  they  could  not  be 
silenced  without  evidence  from  the  jJrophets.  To  James 
was  assigned  the  task  of  setting  forth  the  evidence  on 
this  point,  and  also  of  proposing  a  decision  in  harmony 
with  the  result  of  the  private  conference.  (13)  And  after 
they  had  held  their  peace,  James  answered,  saying, 

Brethren,  hearken  unto  me  :  (14)  Symeon  hath  re- 
hearsed how  first  God  did  visit  the  Gentiles,  to  take  out 
of  them  a  people  for  his  name.  (15)  And  to  this  agree 
the  words  of  the  prophets ;  as  it  is  written,  (16)  After 
these  things  I  will  return,  and  I  will  build  again  the 
tabernacle  of  David,  which  is  fallen,  and  I  will  build 
again  the  ruins  thereof,  and  I  will  set  it  up;  (17)  that 
the  residue  of  men  may  seek  after  the  Lord,  and  all  the 
Gentiles  upon  whom  my  name  is  called,  (18)  saith  the 
Lord,  who  maketh  these  things  known  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world.  (19)  Wherefore  my  judgment  is,  that 
we  trouble  not  them  who  from  among  the  Gentiles 
turn  to  God ;  (20)  but  that  we  write  unto  them,  that  they 
abstain  from  the  pollutions  of  idols,  and  from  fornica- 
tion, and  from  what  is  strangled,  and  from  blood.  (21) 
For  Moses  from  generations  of  old  hath  in  every  city 
them  that  preach  him,  being  read  in  the  synagogues 
every  Sabbath. 

The  words,  ''James  answered"  (13),  indicate  that 
this  speech  was  in  answer  to  the  positions  of  the  Phari- 


66  COMMENTARY.  [xv.  13-21. 

sees.  The  argument  is,  that  the  statements  of  Peter,  of 
which  those  made  by  Barnabas  and  Paul  were  a  mere  sui>- 
plement,  and  needed  not  special  mention,  were  in  fulfill- 
ment of  prophecy  concerning  the  Messiah's  reign ;  and  it 
supplied  all  that  was  lacking  to  convince  the  brethren. 
While  he  quotes  only  one  prophet  (Amos  ix.  11,  12),  he 
says, "  to  this  agree  the  words  of  the  prophets,"  meaning 
that  other  prophets  besides  the  one  quoted  had  used  words 
of  the  same  import.  The  quotation  is  made  from  the 
Septuagint,  as  appears  from  its  agreeing  more  closely 
W'ith  that  version  than  with  the  Hebrew.  The  prophet 
had  in  previous  verses  predicted  the  downfall  of  the 
Jewish  kingdom,  which  would  be  the  overthrow  of  the 
tabernacle  or  house  of  David,  whose  descendants  were 
the  reigning  kings;  and  in  the  verses  quoted  he  predicts 
the  rebuilding  of  the  same,  which  could  occur  only  by 
some  descendant  of  David  again  ascending  the  throne. 
But  after  that  downfall,  no  man  of  David's  race  became 
a  king  until  Jesus  was  enthroned  in  heaven.  This,  then, 
was  the  rebuilding  of  the  ruins,  and  it  was  to  be  followed 
by  "  the  residue  of  men,"  that  is,  the  Gentiles,  seeking 
afler  the  Lord,  as  Gentiles  had  been  doing  ever  since 
Peter's  visit  to  the  house  of  Cornelius. 

The  fact  that  James  introduces  the  decision  which 
he  proposes  with  the  words,  "  Wherefore  my  judgment 
is,"  has  been  construed  by  many  as  evidence  that  he 
was  president  of  the  conference,  and  as  such  rendered  a 
decision  which  the  others  were  bound  to  accept.  But 
there  is  no  evidence  whatever  that  he  acted  in  this 
capacity,  or  that  his  judgment  in  the  case  was  more 
authoritative  than  that  of  Peter,  or  of  John,  who  also 
was  present.  The  four  things  from  which  James  proposed 
that  the  Gentiles  should  be  required  to  abstain  had  been 


KV.  13-21.]  ^^^^-  ^^ 

HKKle  unlawful,  not  by  the  Mosaic  law,  but  by  the  re- 
velaiions  of  the  patriarchal  age.     From  the  begmmng 
it  had  beeu   known  to   the  patriarchs  that  it  was  sinful 
to    have    anv  responsible    connection  with    idols    or  to 
indulge   in   forniealion ;  and   from  the  time  of   the  law 
given  to  the  race  in  the  family  of  Noah,  eatmg  blood 
and  consequently  eating  things  strangled  which  retained 
their  blood  within  them,  had  been  wrong,  and  it  will 
continue   to   be    until  the  end  of  the    world         So    in 
regard    to    the    question  at  issue,  whether  the  Gentile 
disciples  must  observe   the   law  of  Moses    James    pro- 
posal that  -  we  trouble  them  not,-  was  fully  carried  out 
by  itnposing  nothing  on  them  that  was  peculiar  to  the 

^"^The  remark  with  which  James  closes  his  speech,  that 
Moses  was  preached  in  every  city  by  being  read  ,n  the 
synagogues,  was  intended,  I  think,  to  meet  an  objection 
xvhich  he  knew  to  be  in  the  minds  of  some  of  his  hearers, 
and  itmaj^havej^e^^ 

iFarrar  and  Liahtfoot,  followed  by  others,  hold  that  these 
nrovisions  were  intended  to  be  temporary  and  local.     Both  reter 
or  proof  of  this  to  Paul's  subsequent  discussion  of  ea.m,  things 
offered  to  idols,  assuming  that  he  permitted  it ;  and  the  former 
^p^'ls  to  the  'fact  that  the  Judaizing  party  in  the  church  after- 
ward  disre<nir.led  the  decree    (Farrar's   L,Je  of  Paul,  24o,    244 
UMfo^^t  onGnlatian.,  127  [1].)    But  the  fact  that  it  was  repudja  ed 
afterward  by  the  Judaizers  only,  shows  that  tlu;y  deserved  the 
Jtern    ebukL  which  Paul  administers  to  then,  in  the  ep.s^le  to 
h     Galatians  (i.  6-9;   iv.  17;   v.  1;   -.12^3  'and  m  Paul 
discussion  of  the  question,  while  he  admits  that  to  eat   me., 
offered  to  idols  is  not  sinful  when  the  fact  of  its  be.ng  so  offered 
is  not  known  to  the  eater;  and  while  he  shows  that,  if  for  no 
other  reason,  one  should  abstain  on  account  of  the  harm  wh.ch 
eating  mi-'ht  do  to  weak  brethren ;  he  finally  takes  the  very  posi- 
tion of  th^  decree,  forbidding  it  altogether  as  a  communion  with 
demons.    See  I.  Cor.  viii.  S-13 ;  x.  14-22. 


68  COMMENTARY.  [xv.  13-29. 

whom  he  was  answering — the  objection  that,  if  the  Gen- 
tiles were  not  required  to  keep  tlie  law  of  Moses,  the  law 
would  fall  into  disrepute,  and  be  forgotten  among  men. 
Of  this  James  would  assure  them  there  would  be  no 
danger,  seeing  that  the  synagogue  service  would  prevent 
such  a  result. 

It  naturally  seems  strange  to  our  generation  that 
the  apostles  thought  it  worth  while  to  warn  the  Gentile 
disciples  against  "pollutions  of  idols,  and  fornication." 
But  they  had  been  trained  for  generations  back  to  regard 
the  latter  vice  as  an  innocent  gratification  of  a  natural 
desire,  and  to  look  upon  the  former  as  a  solemn  religious 
duty ;  and  it  was  not  easy,  w^hen  they  became  believers, 
to  shake  off  convictions  which  had  been  thus  imbedded 
in  their  moral  nature.  The  same  difficulty  is  encoun- 
tered to  this  day  by  missionaries  among  the  heathen. 

5.  The  Decision  of  the  Apostles  and  Elders, 

22-29. 

Vv.  22-29.  The  speech  of  James  brought  the  dis- 
cussion to  a  close.  The  combined  force  of  the  four 
speeches  made  the  will  of  God  so  clear  that  the  opposi- 
tion was  totally  silenced,  and  the  only  remaining  ques- 
tion was,  how  best  to  carry  out  the  proposal  submitted 
liy  James.  (22)  Then  it  seemed  good  to  the  apostles  and 
the  elders,  with  the  whole  church,  to  choose  men  out  of 
their  company,  and  send  them  to  Antioch  with  Paul  and 
Barnabas  ;  namely,  Judas,  called  Barsabbas,  and  Silas, 
chief  men  among  the  brethren :  (23)  and  they  wrote  thus 
by  them,  The  apostles  and  the  elder  brethren  unto  the 
brethren  which  are  of  the  Gentiles  in  Antioch  and  Syria 
and  Cilicia,  greeting  :  (24)  Forasmuch  as  we  have  heard 
that   certain    who  went    out   from   us     have    troubled 


XV.  22-20.]  ACTS.  69 

you  with  words,  subverting  your  souls ;  to  whom  we 
gave  no  commandment ;  (25)  it  seemed  good  to  us,  having 
come  to  one  accord,  to  choose  out  men  and  send  them  unto 
you  with  our  beloved  Barnabas  and  Paul,  (26)  men  who 
have  hazarded  their  lives  for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  (27)  We  have  sent  therefore  Judas  and  Silas, 
who  themselves  also  shall  tell  you  the  same  things  by 
word  of  mouth.  (28)  For  it  seemed  good  to  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  to  us,  to  lay  upon  you  no  greater  burden 
than  these  necessary  things ;  (29)  that  ye  abstain  from 
things  sacrificed  to  idols,  and  from  blood,  and  from  things 
strangled,  and  from  fornication  ;  from  which  if  ye  keep 
yourselves,  it  shall  be  well  with  you.     Fare  ye  well. 

Athough  this  document  was  written  in  the  name  of 
'*  the  apo.stles  and  the  elder  brethren  "  (23),  the  latter 
expression  being  the  equivalent  of  "  the  elders  "  of  22, 
yet  "  the  whole  church  "  (22)  was  present,  and  the  ex- 
pression of  verse  25,  "  having  come  to  one  accord," 
refers  to  the  apostles  having  brought  all  the  members  of 
the  church  to  the  judgment  in  which  they  themselves 
had  previously  united.  Observe  that  it  begins  by  repu- 
diating all  responsibility  for  the  teaching  of  the  men 
%ho  had  started  the  trouble  in  Antioch,  declaring  that 
the  apostles  and  elders  had  given  them  no  command- 
ment at  all.  The  wisdom  of  sending  Judas  and  Silas  is 
seen  in  the  fact  that  they  had  not  been  connected  at  all 
with  the  M  ork  among  the  Gentiles,  and  that  their  per- 
sonal influence  would  tend  to  silence  any  objections 
which  might  be  raised  by  refractory  Jews.  They  could 
explain,  without  suspicion  of  bias,  anything  in  the  writ- 
ten document  which  might  appear  to  any  one  obscure. 

This  is  the  earliest  document,  so  far  as  we  know,  that 
issued  from  the  pen  of  any  apostle.     It  antedated  all  of 


70  COMMENTARY.  [xv.  22-29. 

the  Gospels,  and  all  of  Paul's  epistles.  It  circulated  as 
a  separate  document  among  the  churches  until  it  was  in- 
corporated into  Acts,  when  previously  existing  copies  of 
it  were  naturally  allowed  to  perish.  It  is  called  an 
epistle  (30),  and  also  the  "  decrees  [ra  d6Y[xa.ra\  which 
had  been  ordained  by  the  apostles  and  elders  that  were 
at  Jerusalem "  (xvi.  4).  It  makes  a  formal  claim  of 
inspiration  by  the  words,  "  it  seemed  good  to  the  Holy 
Spirit  and  to  us."  No  uninspired  men  could  dare  to  use 
such  language  ;  and  this  circumstance  differentiates  it 
from  all  the  decrees  and  deliverances  of  all  the  ecclesi- 
astical courts  from  that  day  to  this,  not  excepting  those 
of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  which  makes  blasphemous 
pretences  of  infallibility.  Be  it  observed,  too,  that  while 
this  conference  is  constantly  referred  to  by  Romanists 
and  other  supporters  of  episcopacy,  as  the  first  general 
council,  it  was  no  general  council  at  all.  It  was  not 
composed  of  representatives  from  the  congregations  of  a 
district,  however  small,  but  of  the  members  of  a  single 
church.^  Furthermore,  it  decided,  on  the  authority  ot 
the  inspired  men  who  directed  its  decisions,  a  question 
of  doctrine  affecting  the  salvation  of  souls ;  and  this  no 
set  of  men  except  the  apostles  have  ever  had  the  right  t6 
do.  In  no  sense,  then,  can  its  action  be  pleaded  as  a 
precedent  for  the  existence  of  any  ecclesiastical  court 

^  It  is  gratifying  to  observe  that  Archdeacon  Farrar,  himself  a 
high  dignitary  of  the  Church  of  England,  with  a  tender  side 
toward  Romanism,  unites  with  the  non-episcopal  writers  in  the 
view  expressed  above.  He  says:  "  The  so-called  Council  of  Jeru- 
salem in  no  way  resembled  the  general  councils  of  the  churcli , 
either  in  its  history,  its  constitution,  or  its  object.  It  was  not  a 
convention  of  ordained  delegates,  but  a  meeting  of  the  entire 
church  of  Jerusalem  to  receive  a  deputation  from  the  church  at 
Antioch."     {Life  of  Paul,  243). 


XV.  22-34.]  ACTS.  71 

whatever  outside  of  the  individual  congregation,  or  for  the 
purpose  of  settling  by  authority  any  question  of  doctrine. 

6.  Peace  Restored  in  Antioch,  30-35. 

Vv.  30,  31.  The  return  journey  of  the  messengers, 
and  the  effect  in  Antioch  of  the  decision  which  tliey 
brought,  is  briefly  stated.  (30)  So  they,  when  they  were 
dismissed,  came  down  to  Antioch ;  and  having  gathered 
the  multitude  together,  they  deliverd  the  epistle.  (31) 
And  when  they  had  read  it  they  rejoiced  for  the  consola- 
tion. As  the  Jewish  brethren  in  Antioch  had  not  become 
partisans  in  the  controversy,  and  had  desired  only  a 
peaceable  settlement  of  the  question,  their  rejoicing  at  the 
result  was  a  natural  consequence.  If  any  of  those  who 
had  raised  the  question  at  first  were  still  in  the  city, 
doubtless  they  were  crestfallen,  but  their  mouths  were 
stopped,  and  it  is  possible  that,  like  their  sympathisers  in 
Jerusalem,  they  acquiesced  in  the  decision.  Thus  the 
triumph  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  was  most  signal  and  com- 
plete. It  was  rendered  more  so  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Antioch  brethren  from  the  fact  mentioned  by  Paul 
(Gal.  ii.  1-4),  but  not  by  Luke,  that  Titus,  a  Gentile, 
had  gone  with  Paul ;  that  a  strenuous  effort  was  made 
to  have  him  circumcised;  and  that  he  had  come  back 
nncircumcised,  Paul  having  refused  to  give  place  to  the 
Judaisers  for  a  single  hour.^ 

Vv.  32-34.     Judas  and  Silas  had  now  accomplished 
the  main  purpose  for  which  they  were  sent  to  Antioch, 

^The  attempt  of  some  writers,  including  Farrar  {Life  of  Paul, 
233-  237),  to  make  it  appear  that  Titus  was  circumcised,  and  that 
Paul's  language  a])out  the  incident  means,  he  was  not  compelled 
to  be  circumcised,  but  I  circumcised  him  for  the  sake  of  peace, 
appears  to  me  like  a  mere  conceit.  Even  Baur  repudiates  it, 
saying,  "  Nothing  can  be  more  absurd."    (Li/e  of  Paul ;  i.  122,  n.  1). 


72  COMMENTARY.  [xv.  32-35. 

but  they  found  opportunity  to  make  themselves  still 
further  useful.  As  they  had  been  "  chief  men  among 
the  brethren  "  in  Jerusalem,  it  was  a  source  of  delight  to 
the  brethren  in  Antioch  to  hear  them.  (32)  And  Judas 
and  Silas,  being  themselves  also  prophets,  exhorted  the 
brethren  in  many  words,  and  confirmed  them.  (33)  And 
after  they  had  spent  some  time  there,  they  were  dis- 
missed in  peace  from  the  brethren  to  those  who  had  sent 
them  forth. ^  The  fact  that  they  were  "  themseh^es  also 
prophets,"  gave  inspired  authority  to  all  their  utterances, 
and  made  their  exhortations  the  more  edifying  to  the 
brethren. 

Ver.  35.  The  city  of  Antioch  was  still  a  profitable 
field  for  apostolic  labor,  and  the  scene  of  interesting 
events.  (35)  But  Paul  and  Barnabas  tarried  in  Antioch, 
teaching  and  preaching  the  word  of  the  Lord,  with  many 
others  also.  To  justify  the  united  labors  of  so  many 
eminent  men,  the  number  of  disciples  to  be  taught  and 
the  number  of  others  willing  to  hear  the  preaching 
must  have  been  very  great. 

It  is  during  this  period  that  the  most  judicious  com- 
mentators, and  I  may  say  all  recent  scholars,  locate  the 
visit  of  Peter  to  Antioch,  and  the  rebuke  administered 
to  him  by  Paul,  as  recorded  in  the  second  chapter  of 
Galatians.  It  has  been  erroneously  affirmed  that  in 
this  affair  Peter  acted  in  direct  conflict  with  the  epistle 
which  he  and  others  are  represented  as  having  so  recently 
written  to  this  church.  The  harshness  of  this  supposi- 
tion has  led  some  to  deny  the  truthfulness  of  Luke'-, 
representations  about  that  epistle.     It   is   argued    that 

^  Verse  34  of  the  A.  V.,  from  the  Textus  Receptus,  is  rightly 
omitted  from  the  corrected  Greek  text  and  R.  V.,  for  want  of  MS. 
evidence. 


XV.  :r..]  .         ACTS.  73 

Peter  would  Dot  have  been  guilty  of  such  inconsistency ; 
and  if  he  had,  Paul,  instead  of  rebuking  him  in  the 
terms  which  he  reproduces  in  Galatians,  would  have  ap- 
pealed to  the  epistle  itself  as  the  most  direct  method  of 
refuting  Peter/  Both  of  these  considerations  involve  a 
misconception  of  the  relation  between  that  epistle  and 
Peter's  present  conduct.  The  epistle,  or  the  decree,  as 
we  should  rather  style  it,  had  reference  to  imposing  the 
law  of  Moses  on  the  Gentiles,  and  it  said  nothing  at  all 
about  the  kind  of  social  intercourse  which  should  be 
maintained  between  them  and  the  Jews.  Now  it  was 
with  reference  to  the  latter  alone  that  Peter  was  at  fault 
in  Antioch.  "  When  Cephas  came  to  Antioch,"  says 
Paul,  "  I  resisted  him  to  the  face,  because  he  stood  con- 
demned. For  before  that  certain  came  from  James,  he 
did  eat  with  the  Gentiles ;  but  when  they  came  he  drew 
back  and  separated  himself,  fearing  them  that  were  of 
the  circumcision  "  (Gal.  ii.  11,  12).  To  quote  the  decree 
against  him  for  this  would  have  been  irrelevant;  there- 
fore Paul  says  nothing  about  the  decree ;  but  he  brings 
up  that  which  was  strictly  in  point,  Peter's  eating  with 
Gentiles  in  the  house  of  Cornelius,  which  he  had  defend- 
ed and  justified  when  censured  for  it  in  Jerusalem  (xi. 
1-3).  Paul  alludes  to  this  in  the'  remark :  "  If  thou, 
being  a  Jew,  livest  as  do  the  Gentiles  [he  had  done  this 
only  in  CVesarea  before  this  time],  and  not  as  do  the 
Jews,  how  compellcst  thou  the  Gentiles  to  live  as  do  the 
Jews?"  '*  For  if  I  build  up  again  those  things  which 
I  destroyed,  I  prove  myself  a  transgressor"  (Gal.  ii. 
14-18).  Peter  had  lived  like  a  Gentile  in  the  house 
of  Cornelius,  and  had  done  the  same  for  a  time  in 
Antioch  ;  but  now,  by  withdrawing,  he  was  virtually 
'  Banr,  Life  of  Paul,  i.  28/.,  followed  t)y  all  of  his  school. 


74  COMMENTARY.  [xv.  35. 

saying  to  the  Gentiles,  You  must  live  like  the  Jews  if  you 
have  social  intercourse  with  me.  The  trouble  doubtless  lay 
in  the  fact  that  Gentiles  placed  on  their  table  dishes  which 
the  Jews  had  been  taught  to  consider  unclean,  and  they 
also  neglected  the  legal  purifications  of  their  own  per- 
sons. It  would  be  hazardous  to  say  that  James  agreed 
with  the  men  who  came  from  him  ;  for  we  are  warned 
against  this  by  the  fact  that  the  men  from  Jerusalem 
who  stirred  up  the  first  strife  in  Antioch  had  received  no 
commandment  at  all  (xv.  24). 

The  truthfulness  of  Luke's  whole  account  of  the 
mission  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  to  Jerusalem  has  been 
denied  by  rationalists,  because  in  his  account  of  it  there 
is  an  omission  of  almost  every  particular  which  is  men- 
tioned in  Paul's  own  account  given  in  Galatians.  We 
have  seen,  as  we  passed  along,  that  there  is  no  contra- 
diction between  the  two  ;  but  it  can  not  be  denied  that  the 
difference  just  mentioned  exists.  It  is  accounted  for, 
in  a  most  natural  way /by  the  fact  that  Paul's  epistle  was 
written  at  least  five  years  before  Acts,  and  a  much  longer 
time  before  according  to  the  estimates  of  the  rationalists 
themselves,  and  probably  the  facts  mentioned  in  it  were 
well  known  to  Luke's  readers,  and  needed  not  to  be  re- 
peated. All  that  was  needed  was  to  set  forth  those 
details  which  Paul  had  omitted. 


XV.  36-39.]  ACTS.  75 

SEC.  III.  PAUL'S  SECOND  TOUR. 

(>CV.   36— XVIII.    iiS.) 

1.  Change  of  Companions,  and  Beginning  of  the 
Tour,  36-41. 

Yer.  36.  We  have  lingered  long  on  the  interval 
spent  by  Paul  and  Barnabas  in  Antioch.  We  are  now 
to  follow  the  former  in  his  second  tour  among  the  Gen- 
tiles. (36)  And  after  some  days  Paul  said  unto  Barnabas, 
Let  us  return  now  and  visit  the  brethren  in  every  city 
wherein  we  proclaimed  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  see  how 
they  fare.  We  shall  find  as  we  proceed  that  the  visit 
extended  far  beyond  the  remotest  church  which  they 
had  previously  planted ;  but  Paul's  proposal  contemplat- 
ed, as  the  primary  purpose  of  the  tour,  the  care  of  the 
brethren  whom  they  had  baptized.  This  shows  that  his 
solicitude  for  the  congregations  which  he  had  planted 
was  no  less  ardent  than  his  zeal  for  the  conversion  of 
sinners. 

Vv.  37-39.  The  best  of  friends  sometimes  differ  on 
questions  of  expediency  and  of  personal  preference;  and 
we  now  learn  that  on  such  questions  even  inspired  men 
were  liable  to  differences.  (37)  And  Barnabas  was  minded 
to  take  with  them  John  also,  who  was  called  Mark.  (38) 
But  Paul  thought  not  good  to  take  with  them  him  who 
withdrew  from  them  from  Pamphylia,  and  went  not  with 
them  to  the  work.  (39)  And  there  arose  a  sharp  conten- 
tion, so  that  they  parted  asunder  one  from  the  other,  and 
Barnabas  took  Mark  with  him,  and  sailed  away  unto 
Cyprus  :  Paul's  judgment  was  controlled  in  the  matter  l)y 
his  high  estimate  of  the  courage  and  self-sacrifice  which 
ought  to  characterize  a  preacher  of  the  gospel,  while 


76  COMMENTARY,  [x v.  37-41. 

Barnabas  was  undoubtedly  warped  by  his  personal  rela- 
tionship to  Mark,  who  was  his  cousin  (Col.  iv.  10). 
Which  of  the  two  acted  the  more  wisely  we  are  not  now 
able  to  determine,  fur  want  of  acquaintance  with  the 
motives  which  actuated  Mark  in  turning  back,  and  with 
the  circumstances  under  which  he  did  so;  and  even  if  we 
could  decide,  the  decision  might  be  of  no  practical  util- 
ity. Suffice  it  to  say,  that  Mark  was  afterward  fully 
restored  to  Paul's  confidence,  and  that  no  permanent 
alienation  from  Barnabas  took  place,  as  we  learn  from 
the  manner  in  which  Paul  afterward  expressed  himself 
in  regard  to  both.^  Notwithstanding  their  disagreement 
and  separation,  they  did  not  allow  the  good  cause  to 
suffer,  nor  did  they  fail  to  accomplish  separately  that 
which  Paul  proposed  that  they  should  accomplish  to- 
gether ;  for  Barnabas,  in  revisiting  Cyprus,  saw  a  portion 
of  the  brethren  to  whom  he  and  Paul  had  preached, 
while  Paul,  by  a  different  route,  visited  the  others.  The 
separation  of  Barnabas  from  Paul  is  our  separation  from 
Barnabas ;  for  his  name  is  not  again  mentioned  by  Luke- 
But  as  we  bid  him  a  final  farewell,  the  sails  are  spread 
which  are  to  bear  him  over  the  sea,  that  he  may  make 
the  islands  glad  with  the  knowledge  of  salvation  ;  and 
the  later  incidents  of  his  noble  life  will  be  made  known 
to  us  when  we  sit  down  with  him  in  the  everlasting 
kingdom. 

Vv.  40,  41.  We  turn  with  Luke  to  follow  the  steps 
of  him  who  was  in  labors  more  abundant  and  in  prisons 
more  frequent  that  all  the  apostles,  and  to  form  a  better 
acquaintance  with  his  new  companion.  (40)  but  Paul 
chose  Silas,-  and  went  forth,  being  commended  by  the 
brethren  to  the  grace  of  the  Lord.  (41)  And  he  went 
1 1.  Cor.  ix.  6 ;  Col.  iv.  U  ;  II.  Tim.  iv.  11. 


XV.  40,  41.]  ACTS.  77 

through  Syria,  and  Cilicia,  confirming  the  churches. 
The  fact  that  Silas,  who  had  been  one  of  the  "  chief  men 
among  the  brethren  "  in  Jerusalem  (22),  and  had  been 
selected  by  the  apostles  and  elders  there  to  represent 
them  in  settling  the  controversy  at  Antioch,  consented 
now  to  unite  with  Paul  in  his  work  among  the  heathen, 
is  a  proof  to  us  of  the  perfect  agreement  which  existed 
between  Paul  and  the  authorities  of  the  church  in 
Jerusalem  ;  and  it  was  a  guarantee  to  the  Jewish  breth- 
ren whom  the  two  might  visit  in  their  journey  that 
there  was  no  antagonism  between  their  teaching  and  that 
of  the  older  apostles.  The  fact  that,  in  addition  to  this, 
Silas  was  a  prophet  (32),  completed  his  fitness  as  Paul's 
fellow  laborer. 

The  statement  that  "  they  were  commended  by  the 
brethren  to  the  grace  of  the  Lord  "  implies  a  meeting  of 
the  church  for  this  purpose ;  and  it  is  not  improbable 
that  the  prayer  of  commendation  was  accompanied,  as  in 
the  case  of  Barnabas  and  Paul  in  the  beginning,  by 
imposition  of  hands  (c/.  remarks  under  xiii.  3). 

During  the  interval  between  Paul's  departure  to 
Tarsus  (ix.  30)  and  his  arrival  in  Antioch  (xl.  25,  26),  he 
had  preached  the  gospel  in  Syria  and  Cilicia  (Gal.  i. 
21) ;  and  now  he  revisits  with  Silas  the  churches  which 
he  had  planted  at  that  time.  His  proposal  to  Barnabas 
(36)  contemplated  only  a  revisitation  of  the  churches 
w^hich  they  together  had  planted ;  but  as  Barnabas  went 
with  Mark  to  some  of  these,  Paul  was  left  free  to  revisit 
some  which  he  alone  had  planted,  and  thus  the  work  of 
revisitation  was  made  the  more  complete  by  the  separa- 
tion which  took  place. 

Some  of  the  advocates  of  the  episcopal  rite  of  con- 
firmation affect  to  find  in  the  words,  "  confirming  the 


78  COMMEN TA U  Y.       [x v.  40,  41— xvi.  1, 2. 

churches"  (41),  authority  for  this  rito ;  but  it  requires 
only  a  glance  at  the  four  passages  in  which  the  original 
term  occurs  [iTzcaTrjfjc^oj)  to  see  that  it  has  reference  not 
to  laying  hands  on  new  converts  in  order  to  admit  them 
to  full  fellowship,  but  to  making  firm  by  proper  instruc- 
tion and  exhortation  the  souls  of  those  already  in  the 
full  fellowship  of  the  church.^ 

2.  Churches  of  the  First  Tour  Revisited, 
XVI.  1-5. 

Vv.  1,  2.  Omitting  the  details  of  Paul's  labors  in 
Syria  and  Cilicia,  Luke  hurries  us  forward  to  his  arrival 
in  Derbe  and  Lystra,  the  scenes  respectively  of  the  most 
painful  and  the  most  consoling  incidents  of  his  former 
tour.  Had  he  been  disposed  to  indulge  in  descriptions 
of  scenery,  which  he  never  does,  he  might  have  given  us 
a  vivid  picture  of  the  Gates  of  Cilicia,  the  magnificent 
pass  through  the  Taurus  mountains  which  opens  a  way 
from  the  lowlands  of  Cilicia  to  the  uplands  of  Lycaonia. 
The  grandeur  of  the  view  must  have  deeply  impressed 
Paul  and  Silas,  as  it  does  all  modern  travelers ;  but  Luke 
found  no  room  on  his  living  pages  for  even  an  allusion 
to  such  things.  He  is  hurrying  to  introduce  to  us  a  new 
and  most  interesting  character,  destined  to  play  an  im- 
portant part  in  the  subsequent  portion  of  the  narrative. 
(i)  And  he  came  also  to  Derbe  and  to  Lystra  :  and  behold, 

^  This  is  clearly  perceived  and  admitted  by  Plumptre,  and  yet 
he  makes  an  attempt,  though  a  feeble  one,  to  connect  the  term 
with  the  episcopal  rite  of  .confirmation  :  "  Confirming  is,  it  need 
hardly  be  said,  used  in  the  general  sense  of  strengthening  ;  but  as 
the  bestowing  of  spiritual  gifts  by  laying  on  of  hands  was  a  chief 
part  of  the  work  so  done,  it  at  least  approximates  to  the  idea  of 
confirming  in  the  later  and  more  technical  sense  of  the  term." 
{Com.  in  loco). 


xvi.  1-3.]  ACTS.  79 

a  certain  disciple  was  there,  named  Timothy,  the  son  of  a 
Jewess  who  believed  ;  but  his  father  was  a  Greek.  (2) 
The  same  was  well  reported  of  by  the  brethren  that 
were  at  Lystra  and  Iconium.  The  grandmother  as  well 
as  the  mother  of  this  disciple  was  a  believer,  and  both 
had  preceded  him  into  the  kingdom.  By  these  two 
godly  women  he  had  been  instructed  from  his  infancy  in 
the  Holy  Scriptures  (II.  Tim.  iii.  14,  15) ;  he  had  been 
baptized  during  Paul's  previous  visit  to  Lystra ;  he  had 
witnessed  the  stoning  of  Paul ;  had  wept  over  his  pros- 
trate form  ;  had  seen  him,  as  if  raised  from  the  dead, 
rise^up  and  return  into  the  city ;  and  had  seen  him  de- 
part on  the  next  day  with  unconquerable  determination 
into  another  field  of  conflict  for  Christ.^  It  is  not  won- 
derful that  now,  with  several  added  years  of  Christian 
experience,  he  was  well  spoken  of  by  the  brethren. 
The  fact  that  he  was  thus  attested  not  only  at  Derbe  and 
Lystra,  close  about  his  home,  but  also  at  the  distant  city 
of  Iconium,  renders  it  probable  that  he  was  already  a 
young  preacher,  and  that  the  imposition  of  hands  by  the 
elders  of  the  church,  which  is  mentioned  later,  had 
already  taken  place.^ 

Ver.  3.  The  discerning  eye  of  Paul  soon  discov- 
ered in  this  youth  qualities  which  would  render  him  a  fit 
companion  and  assistant,  and  he  secured  him  for  this 
position.  (3)  Him  would  Paul  have  to  go  forth  with 
him ;  and  he  took  and  circumcised  him  because  of  the 
Jews  who  were  in  those  parts :  for  they  all  knew  that 
his  father  was  a  Greek.  The  "  Jews  who  were  in  those 
parts,"  like  all  other  Jews,  could  not  look  favorably  on 

^  See  remarks  under  xiv.  19,  20. 

^  See  I.  Tim.  iv.  14,  where  the  original  word,  TTiieojivTifnnv,  is  im- 
properly rendered  presbytery,  instead  of  eldership. 


S^  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  3. 

a  man  of  Jewish  blood  who  was  uncircumcised.  He 
appeared  to  be  repudiating  his  nationality.  His  father 
having  been  a  Greek  is  mentioned  as  the  cause  of  the 
neglect  of  the  rite  in  Timothy's  infancy. 

To  a  reader  not  fully  informed  as  to  Paul's  position 
in  regard  to  circumcision,  it  seems  very  strange  that  he 
circumcised  Timothy  so  soon  after  refusing  to  do  the 
same  with  Titus  in  Jerusalem.^  It  seems  also  to  conflict 
with  statements  of  Paul  in  his  epistles,  especially  with 
that  in  Galatians  v.  2-4 :  "  If  ye  receive  circumcision 
Christ  will  profit  you  nothing.  Yea,  I  testify  again  to 
every  man  who  receiveth  circumcision,  that  he  is  a  debtor 
to  do  the  whole  law.  Ye  are  severed  from  Christ,  ye  who 
would  be  justified  by  the  law ;  ye  are  fallen  away  from 
grace."  But  the  very  terms  of  this  passage  show  that  he 
is  contemplating  one  who  receives  circumcision  in  order 
that  he  may  come  under  the  law,  and  be  saved  by  keep- 
ing the  law.  To  cases  in  which  this  was  not  the  purport 
of  the  act  this  censure  could  not  apply.  If  Titus  had 
been  circumcised,  this  would  have  been  precisely  the 
import  of  it;  for  it  was  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  him 
under  the  law  as  a  means  of  final  salvation,  that  it  was 
demanded  by  the  Pharisees.  But  the  circumcision  of 
Jews  like  Timothy  stood  on  an  altogether  different  foot- 
ing. Circumcision,  as  our  Lord  had  taught,  was  "  not  of 
Moses,  but  of  the  fathers  "  (Jno.  vii.  22).  The  obligation 
to  observe  it  did  not  originate  in  the  law,  but  in  the  cove- 
nant with  Abraham ;  and  its  connection  with  the  law 
grew  out  of  the  fact  that  the  law  was  given  to  a  portion 
of  Abraham's  circumcised  offspring.  As  then  the  obliga- 
tion did  not  originate  with  the  law,  the  abrogation  of 
the  law  could  not  annul  it.  For  this  reason  the  propriety 
^  See  the  remarks  under  xv.  30,  31. 


xvi.  3-5.]  ACTS.  81 

of  circumcising  children  of  Jewish  blood  was  never 
called  in  question  by  Paul ;  but  he  and  all  the  disciples 
recognized  it  to  the  very  last  (xxi;  20-25).  The  cove- 
nant with  Abraliaiu  in  regard  to  this  rite  is  an  everlast- 
ing covenant,  and  the  only  penalty  of  neglecting  it  is 
the  same  to-day  that  it  has  ever  been,  that  of  being  cut 
off  from  Abraham's  recognized  posterity  (Gen.  xvii. 
9-14).  As  it  was  a  national  mark,' it  had  no  connection 
with  salvation,  or  with  a  man's  relation  to  Christ ;  hence 
Paul's  declaration,  "  In  Christ  Jesus  neither  circum- 
cision availeth  anything,  nor  uncircumcision ;  but  faith 
working  through  love"  (Gal.  v.  6). 

At  some  time  Paul  laid  hands  on  Timothy  to  impart 
to  him  a  spiritual  gift  (II.  Tim.  i.  6)  ;  but  whether  at  this 
time,  or  after  he  had  tried  him  in  the  field  for  a  while, 
we  have  no  means  of  knowing.  The  same  is  true  of 
the  imposition  of  hands  by  the  eldership  mentioned  in 
I.  Timothy  iv.  14.  It  is  highly  probable,  though,  that 
inasmuch  as  Paul  himself  had  been  separated  to  thjs 
work  by  imposition  of  hands  (xiii.  3),  the  elders  fol- 
lowed this  precedent  in  the  case  of  Timothy.  At  any 
rate,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt  that  this  cere- 
mony on  the  part  of  the  eldership  was  intended  to  set 
him  apart  to  the  work  of  preaching  ;  for  there  is  no 
other  purpose  that  can  account  for  it.  The  conceit  that 
Paul  ordained  him  on  the  recommendation  of  two  or 
three  churches,  is  read  into  the  text  by  those  who  think 
they  find  it  there. 

Vv.  4,  5.  Resuming  now  the  thread  of  his  narra- 
tive where  he  had  broken  it  to  speak  of  Timothy,  Luke 
tells  us  of  the  other  work  done  by  the  apostles  in  the 
cities  which  they  had  reached.  (4)  And  as  they  went  on 
their  way  through  the  cities,  they  delivered  them  the  de- 


82  COMMENTARY.  [xwl  4-8. 

crees  for  to  keep,  which  had  been  ordained  of  the  apostles 
and  elders  that  were  at  Jerusalem.  (5)  So  the  churches 
were  strengthened  in  the  faith,  and  increased  in  number 
daily.  This  statement  shows  that  the  decrees  were  not 
intended  for  Syria  and  Cilicia  alone,  but  for  all  the  Gen- 
tile churches.  They  were  everywhere  needed  to  unite 
in  harmonious  fellowship  the  Jewish  and  Gentile  con- 
verts. As  Paul  had  founded  these  churches,  and  as  Si- 
las had  been  sent  out  from  Jerusalem  by  the  apostles  for 
the  express  purpose  of  cooperating  with  him  in  main- 
taining the  teaching  of  the  decrees,  the  latter  came  to 
the  ears  of  both  Jews  and  Gentiles  with  all  their  force, 
and  produced  the  happiest  eflPects.  The  churches  "  in- 
creased in  number  daily,"  in  consequence  of  being  "con- 
firmed in  the  faith." 

3.  Preaching  in  Phrygia   j.  nd   Galatia,  and  a 
Call,  to  Macedo.^ia,  6-10. 

Vv.  6-8.  A  line  drawn  from  Derbe  westward  to 
Antioch  of  Pisidia  might  be  styled,  in  military  phrase- 
ology, the  base  line  of  Paul's  present  advance  into  the  in- 
terior of  Asia  Minor,  with  a  view  to  spreading  the  gos- 
pel over  all  its  districts.  In  person  he  went  no  farther 
in  this  direction  than  Phrygia,  which  lay  to  the  north- 
west from  Antioch;  and  Galatia,  which  lay  to  the  north; 
but  churches  planted  in  these  regions,  if  active  and  zeal- 
ous, would  soon  cause  the  truth  to  be  sounded  out  through 
more  distant  provinces.  Journeys  and  labors  which 
must  have  occupied  many  months  are  recounted  by  Luke 
in  the  few  words  which  follow :  (6)  And  they  went 
through  the  region  of  Phrygia  and  Galatia,  having  been 
forbidden  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  speak  the  word  in  Asia ; 
(7)  and  when  they  were  come  over  against  Mysia,  they 


xvi.  6-8.]  ACTS.  83 

assayed  to  go  into  Bithynia,  and  the  Spirit  of  Jesus 
suffered  them  not ;  (8)  and  passing  by  Mysia  they  came 
down  to  Troas.  We  arc  wariiod  by  this  brief  sentence  not 
to  assume  from  the  brevity  of  Luke's  narration  at  any 
given  point  that  ho  is  brief  because  he  has  nothing  in- 
teresting or  impcrtant  to  tell,  for  we  learn  from  Paul 
himself  that  it  was  far  otherwise  with  the  journeys  here 
so  hurriedly  passed  over.  Many  congregations  sprang 
into  existence  under  his  labors  in  Galatia  (I.  Cor.  xvi.  1), 
and  their  subsequent  unhappy  condition  called  forth  one 
of  his  most  valuable  epistles.  The  Galatians  were 
Gauls,  whose  ancestors,  as  predatory  warriors,  iiad  wan- 
dered from  Gaul  (modern  France)  over  into  Asia  Minor 
before  the  Christian  era,  and  had  by  the  time  of  Paul's 
visit  become  a  settled  agricultural  people.^  It  was  not 
Paul's  intention  at  first  to  preach  among  them,  because 
doubtless  he  was  looking  to  what  he  supposed  more 
fruitful  ^elds ;  but  he  was  constrained  by  sickness  to 
tarry  until  he  found  among  them  unexpectedly  a  field 
ripe  for  the  sickle.  He  wrote  to  them  afterward,  "  Ye 
know  that  because  of  an  infirmity  of  the  flesh  I  preached 
the  gospel  unto  you  the  first  time."  The  infirmity,  as  we 
ascertain  from  what  he  further  says  about  it,  was  that 
"  thorn  in  tlie  flesh  "  which  he  had  prayed  the  Lord  in 
vain  to  take  from  him.  It  was  of  such  a  character  that 
strangers  like  these  would  be  likely  to  despise  and  re- 
ject him  on  account  of  it;  but  they  received  him  so  dif- 
ferently that  he  wrote  to  them  afterward  these  grateful 
words :  "  That  which  was  a  temptation  to  you  in  my 
flesh  ye  despised  not,  nor  rejected ;  but  ye  received  me 

*  An  elaborate  account  of  the  Galatians  is  given  by  Bishop 
Lightfoot  in  an  essay  on  their  history  and  character  appended  to 
his  commentary  on  the  epistle  written  to  them. 


84  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  6-8. 

as  an  angel  of  God,  even  as  Christ  Jesus.'*  And  he 
adds,  "  I  bear  you  witness,  that  if  possible,  ye  would 
have  plucked  out  your  own  eyes  and  given  them  to  me  " 
(Gal.  iv.  14,  15).  His  distress  of  mind  and  weakness  of 
body  may  have  imparted  a  mellow  tone  to  his  preaching 
wliich  at  once  awakened  the  quick  sympathies  of  the  ex- 
citable people,  and  encouraged  him  to  continue  his  labors 
far  beyond  his  first  intention.  Out  of  the  most  un pro- 
pitious circumstances  under  which  he  had  ever  intro- 
duced the  gospel  to  a  new  community,  with  the  single 
exception  of  his  going  from  Lystra  to  Derbe,  there 
sprang  up  the  sweetest  fruits  of  ail  his  labors  ;  for  there 
are  no  other  churches  of  whose  devotion  to  him  he  speaks 
in  similar  terms.  Such  experiences  as  this  illustrated  to 
him  the  Lord's  meaning,  when  he  said  to  him  in  answer 
to  his  prayer  about  this  thorn  in  the  flesh,  "  My  grace  is 
sufficient  for  thee,  for  my  power  is  made  perfect  in  weak- 
ness ; "  and  it  was  experience  like  this  which  enabled 
him  at  length  to  say,  "  Most  gladly  therefore  will  I 
rather  glory  in  my  Aveaknesses,  that  the  strength  of 
Christ  may  rest  upon  me.  Wherefore  I  take  pleasure  in 
weaknesses,  in  injuries,  in  necessities,  in  persecutions,  in 
distresses  for  Christ's  sake  :  for  when  I  am  weak,  then 
am  I  strong"  (II.  Cor.  xii.  9,  10). 

Another  new  and  strange  experience  befell  Paul  in 
this  interval.  Not  only  had  he  been  led  by  sickness  to 
preach  in  Galatia  contrary  to  his  intention,  but  when  he 
formed  the  purpose  of  carrying  the  gospel  next  into  the 
province  of  Asia,  the  Holy  Spirit  would  not  permit  him 
to  do  so.  The  name  Asia  at  that  time  was  chiefly  used 
for  the  Roman  province  of  which  Ephesus  was  the  prin- 
cipal city  ;  and  doubtless  Ephesus,  in  which  he  afterward 
preached  two  years  and  three  months,  was  his  objective 


xvi.  6-10.]  ACTS.  85 

point.  This  is  the  first  time  of  which  we  read  that  his 
own  judgment  as  to  his  next  field  of  labor  was  overruled 
by  the  Holy  Spirit.  But  this  was  not  all ;  for  when  he 
was  forbidden  to  go  into  Asia,  which  was  southwest  of 
him,  he  next  proposed  to  go  into  Bithynia,  a  rich  and 
important  province  to  northward,  and  he  was  likewise 
forbidden  to  go  thither.  Having  finished  up  the  work 
behind  him,  and  being  thus  forbidden  to  turn  either 
to  the  left  or  the  right,  he  had  no  alternative  but  to  go 
right  forward ;  and  this  took  him  through  Mysia  in  a 
northwesterly  direction.  He  went  through  this  district 
without  stopping  (for  such  is  the  meaning  of  the  ex- 
pression, "  passing  by  Mysia  "),  because  he  saw  no  open- 
ing for  work  on  the  way,  and  he  came  down  to  Troas, 
which  was  on  the  seashore,  and  here  he  ran  upon  the 
barrier  of  the  sea.  It  is  not  possible  that  he  and  his 
companions  failed  to  be  very  much  puzzled  by  these 
mysterious  directings  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  questions 
must  have  pressed  upon  them  with  increasing  interest  at 
every  step.  Why  are  we  turned  back  from  these  inviting 
fields?  and  whither  is  the  Lord  directing  us  ? 

Vv.  9,  10.  During  the  first  night  of  their  stay  in 
Troas  the  mystery  was  solved,  at  least  in  part.  (9)  And 
a  vision  appeared  to  Paul  in  the  night ;  there  was  a  man 
of  Macedonia  standing,  beseeching  him,  and  saying, 
Come  over  into  Macedonia,  and  help  us.  (10)  And  when 
he  had  seen  the  vision,  straightway  we  sought  to  go 
forth  into  Macedonia,  concluding  that  God  had  called  us 
for  to  preach  the  gospel  to  them.  They  now  understood  a 
l)art  of  God's  purpose ;  they  afterward  understood  it 
more  fully.  At  this  point  our  author  first  indicates  his 
own  presence  by  the  use  of  the  pronouns  *'  we  "  and 
"  us."     The  words,  "  concluding  that  God  had  called  us 


86  COMMENTARY.  [x\d.  9-12. 

to  preach  the  gospel  to  them,"  imply  that  the  author  was 
one  of  those  who  had  been  turned  aside  from  the  places 
in  which  they  had  intended  to  preach  (6,  7),  and  that 
therefore  he  had  joined  the  company  in  the  interior  of 
Asia  Minor.  The  traveling  companions  are  now  Paul, 
Silas,  Timothy  and  Luke. 

4.  Aerival  in  Macedonia,  and   Baptism  of  Cer- 
tain Women,  11-15. 

Vv.  11,  12.  It  was  not  every  day  that  a  ship  could 
be  found  in  the  harbor  of  Troas,  and  still  less  frequent- 
ly one  bound  for  the  unimportant  seaport  of  Neapolis, 
and  ready  to  set  sail.  When,  therefore,  the  apostolic 
company  found  one  to  suit  their  purpose,  and  just  ready 
to  weigh  anchor,  they  must  have  realized  that  God  was 
at  last  favoring  their  journey,  (ii)  Setting  sail  there- 
fore from  Troas,  we  made  a  straight  course  to  Samoth- 
race,  and  the  day  following  to  Neapolis;  (12)  and  from 
thence  to  Philippi,  which  is  .a  city  of  Macedonia,  the 
first  of  the  district,  a  Roman  colony :  and  we  were  in 
this  city  tarrying  certain  days.  The  remark,  "  we  made 
a  straight  course  to  Samothrace,''  implies  a  favorable 
wind ;  for  only  with  such  a  wind  can  a  sailing  vessel 
make  a  straight  course.  We  have  evidence,  too,  that  this 
favorable  wind  was  blowing  a  stiff  breeze,  which  bore 
the  ship  along  rapidly ;  for  on  a  subsequent  journey 
(xx.  6)  five  days  were  occupied  in  the  same  voyage. 
Here  was  another  indication  of  a  favoring  providence 
which  the  voyagers,  after  their  strange  experience  just 
past,  could  not  fail  to  observe. 

Samothrace  is  an  island  in  the  Archipelago,  and  Ne- 
apolis (Newtown,  now  called  Ka valla)  was  a  seaport  for 
Philippi.     The  latter  city  is  about  ten  miles  from  Neap- 


xvi.  11-15.]  ACTS.  87 

oHs  in  a  northwesterly  direction.  The  road  passes  over 
a  high  ridge  which  rims  east  and  w^est,  and  thence  de- 
scends into  an  extensive  plain  in  which  Philippi  stands 
on  an  elevation.  As  the  travelers  approached  the  city, 
they  crossed  the  river  Gangites,  on  opposite  banks  of 
which  the  armies  under  Brutus  and  Cassius  on  one  side, 
and  Octavianus  and  Antony  on  the  other,  were  formed 
in  order  of  battle  before  that  final  struggle  which  decid- 
ed the  fate  of  the  Roman  Republic.  The  missionaries 
walked  through  the  field  of  battle  as  they  drew  near  the 
city.  They  found  it  a  Roman  city  with  a  Greek  popu- 
lation all  around  it ;  for  such  is  the  force  of  the  remark 
that  it  was  a  colony.  Augustus  Casar,  in  commemora- 
tion of  the  great  battle,  had  made  it  such  by  filling  it 
with  Romans  transported  from  Italy.  The  apostles  were 
now  in  Europe,  and  this  was  their  first  contact  with  a 
community  of  Romans.  The  remark  that  Philippi  was 
"  the  first  city  of  the  district,"  can  not  mean  that  it  was 
the  most  important  city  of  one  of  the  four  parts  into 
which  Macedonia  was  divided  ;  for  Amphipolis  occupied 
this  distinction  in  the  part  to  which  Philippi  belonged  : 
but  it  refers  to  a  smaller  district,  and  the  comparison  is 
to  the  small  cities  and  villages  not  far  away. 

Vv.  13-15.  On  entering  this  strange  city  the  apos- 
tles found  no  Jewish  synagogue  in  which  they  might  be 
invited  to  speak  "  a  word  of  exhortation  to  the  people  ;'' 
and  they  were  doubtless  no  little  perplexed  as  to  how 
they  should  introduce  the  gr^spel  to  the  heathen  popula- 
tion. The  way  in  which  the  problem  was  solved  is 
stated  in  the  next  words  of  our  text :  (13)  And  on  the 
Sabbath  day  we  went  forth  without  the  gate  by  a  river 
side,  where  we  supposed  there  was  a  place  of  prayer  ; 
and  we  sat  down  and  spoke  to  the  women  who  were 


88  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  13-15. 

come  together.  (14)  And  a  certain  woman  named  Lydia, 
a  seller  of  purple,  of  the  city  of  Thyatira,  one  that  wor- 
shiped God,  heard  us ;  whose  heart  the  Lord  opened,  to 
give  heed  unto  the  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul. 
(15)  And  when  she  was  baptized,  and  her  household,  she 
besought  us,  saying.  If  ye  have  judged  me  to  be  faithful 
to  the  Lord,  come  into  my  house,  and  abide  there.  And 
€he  constrained  us.  From  this  it  seems  that  they  re- 
mained until  the  Sabbath  before  they  decided  how  and 
where  to  begin  their  work.  Had  they  met  with  Lydia 
and  her  household  sooner,  it  might  have  been  diflFerent. 
The  cause  of  their  thinking  that  there  was  a  place  of 
prayer  on  the  bank  of  the  river  may  have  been  that 
they  saw  something  indicative  of  it  as  they  crossed  the 
river  in  approaching  the  town,  or  it  may  have  been  that, 
in  the  course  of  inquiry  as  to  the  presence  of  Jews  in 
the  city,  they  had  heard  of  some  women  being  accus- 
tomed to  go  out  to  this  place  for  some  purpose  every 
seventh  day. 

Thyatira,  the  home  of  Lydia,  was  a  city  of  procon- 
sular Asia  (Rev.  i.  11),  situated  on  its  northern  border; 
and  Paul's  company,  in  "  passing  by  Mysia  "  on  their 
way  to  Troas,  had  probably  passed  near  it.  It  was 
noted  for  the  excellence  of  its  purple  dyes,^  and  it  is  still 
a  pleasantly  situated  town  of  about  ten  thousand  inhab- 
itants.^ As  purple  was  a  very  costly  dye,  it  was  used  on 
none  but  costly  goods;  and  the  fact  that  Lydia  was  a 
dealer  in  these  implies  that,  while  she  was  not  above  the 
necessity  of  labor,  she  was  in  comparatively  easy  cir- 

^  Citations  to  this  effect  are  made  from  Homer's  Odyssey,  i.  14 ; 
iii.  9  ;  and  from  Strabo,  xiii.  4-14. 

^  For  a  description  of  its  present  condition  and  appearance, 
see  the  author's  Lands  of  the  Bible,  585. 


xvi.  13-15.]  ACTS.  89 

cumstanccs.  The  same  is  implied  in  the  fact  that  she 
had  a  house  called  her  own,  which  was  large  enough  to 
entertain  Paul  and  his  three  companions,  and  that  her 
household  included  a  plurality  of  women  (13  cf.  15). 
Her  character  is  indicated,  not  only  by  the  statement 
that  she  was  „''  one  that  w^orshiped  God,"  but  by  the  con- 
siderations that  in  this  heathen  city,  where  the  Sabbath 
was  unknown  to  the  inhabitants,  she  was  faithful  in  ob- 
serving it ;  that  wliile  the  other  dealers  in  purple  goods 
were  busy  on  that  day,  she  closed  her  shop  regardless  of 
the  demands  of  competition;  and  that,  although  there 
was  no  synagogue  in  which  to  worship,  and  no  male 
Jews  to  conduct  the  accustomed  worshij),  she  and  her 
employes  habitually  left  the  noisy  city,  and  spent  the 
holy  day  in  prayer  on  the  bank  of  the  river.  Such 
fidelity  to  God,  under  circumstances  so  unfavorable,  is  not 
often  witnessed  in  our  own  more  favored  times.  It  was 
observed  from  on  high,  and  it  met  its  reward. 

We  can  now  begin  to  see  the  design  of  God  in  turn- 
ing Paul  back  from  Asia,  and  back  from  Bithynia,  when 
he  desired  to  go  to  these  countries ;  in  leading  him 
across  Mysia  to  Troas ;  in  sending  him  the  vision  by 
night  in  that  city,  and  in  bringing  him  and  his  company 
by  so  singular  a  chain  ot  providences  to  this  Roman 
colony.  These  women  had  been  wont  to  repair  to  this 
river  bank  on  the  Sabbath  day  for  prayer.  God  had 
heard  their  prayers,  as  in  the  case  of  Cornelius,  and  he 
chose  this  mysterious  way  of  bringing  to  them  the 
preachers  through  whose  words  they  might  believe  in 
Christ  and  learn  the  way  of  salvation.  He  had  directed 
the  journey  of  Paul  by  land  and  sea,  and  had  timed  the 
motion  of  the  ship  with  reference  to  that  weekly  prayer- 
meeting,  as  he  had  once  directed  the  flight  of  an  angel 


^^  •  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  13-15. 

from  heaven,  and  timed  the  steps  of  Philip  with  refer- 
ence to  movements  of  the  eunuch's  chariot.  Now,  as  in 
those  instances,  he  answers  the  prayers  of  the  uncon- 
verted, not  by  direct  operations  of  his  Spirit  within 
them,  but  by  bringing  to  them  the  gospel  on  the  lips  of 
a  living  preacher  ;  and  it  is  quite  a  singular  circumstance, 
as  noted  by  Alford,  that  though  Paul  had  been  forbidden 
to  preach  in  Asia,  his  first  converts  in  Philippi  were 
Asiatics. 

The  statement  that  the  Lord  opened  Lydia's  heart 
implies  that  previously  her  heart  was  in  some  way  closed. 
It  was  certainly  not  closed  by  the  hardness  of  a  sinful 
life,  or  by  inherited  depravity  ;  for  such  a  supposition  is 
forbidden  by  the  steadfastness  with  which,  under  great 
temptation,  she  had  previously  clung  to  the  worship 
of  God.  It  was  closed  in  the  sense  in  which  the  pious 
and  earnest  heart  of  a  Jewish  worshiper  might  be  closed. 
Every  Jew,  and  every  Jewish  proselyte,  was  at  that 
time  so  wedded  to  the  belief  that  the  coming  Christ 
would  establish  an  earthly  kingdom,  as  to  have  the  heart 
very  tightly  closed  against  the  conception  of  a  crucified 
Christ,  whose  reign  as  a  king  is  purely  spiritual.  It  was 
this  that  had  caused  the  mass  of  the  Jews  to  reject  the 
Christ  while  he  was  still  on  earth,  and  it  continued  to  be 
their  "stumbling  block"  (Jno.  v.  44;  I.  Cor.  i.  23). 
Whether  Lydia  was  a  Jewess  or  a  proselyte,  this  was 
"  the  hope  of  Israel "  in  which  she  had  been  instructed, 
and  for  which  she  had  been  taught  to  devoutly  pray ; 
and  if  the  natural  effect  of  it  had  not  been  removed  from 
her  heart,  she  must  have  rejected  the  gospel,  as  did  the 
mass  of  those  who  had  been  her  teachers.  The  state- 
ment then  that  the  Lord  "  opened  her  heart "  means  that 
he  removed  this  mistaken  conception  which  would  have 


xvi.  13-15.] 


ACTS.  91 


prevented  her  from  receiving  the  Christ.  The  effect  of 
the  opening  was  precisely  that  which  was  aimed  at;  it 
led  her  "  to  give  heed  to  the  things  which  were  spoken 
by  Paul."  The  Greek  verb  here  rendered  "to  give 
heed  "  means,  in  some  connections,  to  fix  the  mind  upon 
a  matter,  and  in  others,  to  put  something  in  practice.^ 
Here  it  can  not  mean  the  former,  for  Lydia  had  already 
fixed  her  mind  upon  the  preaching,  as  is  declared  in  the 
words,  "  a  certain  woman  named  Lydia  heard  us."  She 
first  heard,  then  the  Lord  opened  her  heart,  and  then  she 
gave  heed  to  the  things  which  Paul  had  spoken.  The 
meaning  is,  that  she  put  in  practice  the  things  spoken  by 
Paul.  What  these  things  were,  Luke  has  told  us  so 
often  that  he  does  not  reiterate  them  here,  but  he  indirect- 
ly shows  that  baptism  is  one  of  them  by  the  way  in 
which  he  mentions  her  observance  of  that  ordinance. 
He  says,  "  and  when  she  was  baptized,"  implying  that 
this  was  one  of  the  things  that  she  gave  heed  to.  We 
know  that  in  preaching  to  such  persons  Paul  always 
directed  them  to  believe  the  gospel,  to  repent  of  their 
sins,  and  to  be  baptized  ;  and  if  Lydia  gave  heed  to  the 
things  which  he  spoke,  she  did  these  three  things. 

We  have  yet  to  notice,  from  another  point  of  view, 
the  statement  nowhere  else  found  in  connection  with  a 
case  of  conversion,  that  the  Lord  opened  Lydia's  heart. 

'  The  word  is  -ponex^i-v.  It  is  used  in  the  sense  of  fixing  the 
attention,  in  such  expressions  as  these :  "  Take  heed  that  ye  do 
not  your  alms  before  men  ?"  (Matt.  vi.  1) ;  "  Beware  of  false 
prophets"  (vii.  15) ;  "  Take  heed  to  yourselves  "  (Luke  xvii.  3) ; 
"  Neither  give  heed  to  fables  and  endless  genealogies  "  (I.  Tim.  i.  4) ; 
et  al.  It  has  the  other  sense  in  these  clauses :  "  Not  given  to  much 
wine  "  (I.  Tim.  iii.  8) ;  "  Give  heed  to  reading,  to  exhortation,  to 
teaching  "  (iv.  13) ;  "  From  which  no  man  hath  given  attendance  at 
the  altar"  (Heb.  vii.  13). 


92  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  13-15. 

We  have  seen  what  the  opening  was,  and  what  were  its 
eflPects ;  we  now  inquire  in  what  way  it  was  done  by  the 
Lord.  It  is  too  common  to  understand  such  expressions 
as  this  in  the  sense  of  immediate  actions  of  God  or  of 
his  Holy  Spirit,  and  to  ignore  the  secondary  agencies  or 
instrumentalities  employed.  In  this  instance  we  are 
likely  to  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Lord  opened 
Lydia's  heart  by  a  direct  operation  of  his  Spirit,  and 
thus  to  ignore  a  very  different  method  clearly  indicated 
by  the  context.  In  order  to  see  this,  we  must  put  our- 
selves in  the  place  of  our  author,  and  inquire  what  led 
him  to  make  a  remark  in  regard  to  Lydia,  which  he  has 
not  made  in  regard  to  any  other  person  whose  conversion 
he  has  described.  It  can  not  be  because  God  did  for 
Lydia  something  which  he  omitted  in  other  cases  ;  for  in 
the  case  of  every  Jew  and  proselyte  the  same  process 
was  necessary.  The  difference  is  only  in  the  phraseology 
employed.  This  is  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  Luke, 
together  with  Paul  and  all  his  company,  had  been  very 
much  puzzled  for  weeks  past,  as  to  what  God  was  doing 
and  intending  to  do,  by  turning  them  away  from  fields 
of  labor  which  appeared  to  them  the  most  promising, 
and  leading  them  on,  they  knew  not  whither,  until  he 
had  brought  them  to  this  heathen  city  where  there  ap- 
peared to  be  no  opening  for  a  ready  introduction  of  the 
gospel.  In  the  very  midst  of  their  perplexity  they  un- 
expectedly met  with  these  women  ;  and  though  they  had 
never  met  them  before,  and  though  they  might  have 
expected,  under  the  circumstances,  a  long  and  ardent 
struggle  to  overcome  their  natural  repugnance  to  a  cruci- 
fied Messiah,  they  are  surprised  to  find  Lydia's  heart  im- 
mediately opened,  and  they  see  at  once  what  the  Lord 
has  done  and  has  been  doing  since  they  were  first  for- 


xvi.  lS-150  -^CTS.  93 

biddeu  to  go  into  Asia.  Had  not  the  Lord  interfered, 
Paul  would  now  have  been  in  Asia  or  Bithynia,  and 
these  simple  hearted  women  would  have  still  prayed  on 
in  ignorance  of  the  salvation  which  had  been  provided 
for  them.  It  was  so  strikingly  the  Lord's  doing,  that 
Luke  was  moved  to  this  mode  of  expressing  it.  The 
Lord  opened  Lydia's  heart,  as  he  did  that  of  the  eunuch, 
by  bringing  from  afar,  at  the  proper  juncture,  the  liv- 
ing preacher  through  whose  word  the  end  was  accom- 
plished. 

The  fact  that  Lydia's  household  were  baptized  with 
her  has  been  taken  by  some  Piedobaptist  scholars  as 
presumptive  evidence  in  favor  of  infant  baptism.  Al- 
bert Barnes  argues  as  follows :  "  The  case  is  one  that 
affords  a  strong  presumptive  proof  that  this  was  an  in- 
stance of  household  or  infant  baptism.  For  (1)  her  be- 
lieving is  particularly  mentioned.  (2)  It  is  not  inti- 
mated that  they  believed.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  strong- 
ly implied  that  they  did  not.  (3)  It  is  manifestly  im- 
plied that  they  were  baptized  because  she  believed. "  It 
would  be  difficult  to  find  an  instance  of  more  fallacious 
reasoning.  In  the  expression,  "  household  or  infant 
baptism,"  it  is  tacitly  assumed  that  the  two  are  identi- 
cal, the  very  thing  to  be  proved.  The  statement  that 
"  her  belief  is  particularly  mentioned  "  is  misleading ; 
for  her  belief  is  not  mentioned  at  all;  it  is  only  implied. 
Finally,  the  assumed  implication  that  "  they  did  not  be- 
lieve," and  that  "  they  were  baptized  because  she  be- 
lieved," has  not  the  slightest  supjwrt  in  a  word  of  the 
text.  It  was  read  into  the  text  from  Mr.  Barnes'  imagi- 
nation. Dr.  Alexander  states  the  case  thus  :  "  The  real 
strength  of  the  argument  lies  not  in  any  one  case,  but  in 
the  repeated  mention  of  whole  households  as  baptized ;" 


94  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  13-15. 

and  in  thus  stating  it,  he  follows  the  oft  quoted  demand 
of  Bengel :  "  Who  can  believe  that  in  so  many  families 
there  was  not  an  infant  ?"  The  answer  is,  that  there  are 
only  four  whole  households  mentioned  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment as  being  baptized,  and  that  there  is  positive  proof 
that  in  three  of  these  there  was  not  an  infant.  In  that 
of  Cornelius  there  was  none,  for  they  all  spoke  in  tongues 
and  believed  (x.  46  ;  xv.  9) ;  none  in  that  of  the  jailer, 
for  they  all  believed  and  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  (xvi.  34)  ; 
and  none  in  that  of  Stephanas,  for  "  they  set  themselves 
to  minister  to  the  saints  "  (I.  Cor.  i.  16  ;  xvi.  15).  The 
inference,  therefore,  in  reference  to  the  household  of 
Lydia  is  reversed ;  for,  inasmuch  as  one  peculiarity  of 
all  the  households  baptized,  of  which  the  facts  are 
known,  is  the  absence  of  infants,  we  are  justified  in  the 
conclusion,  no  evidence  to  the  contrary  appearing,  that 
this  was  also  a  peculiarity  of  the  household  of  Lydia. 
If  the  number  of  whole  households  baptized  were  much 
greater  than  it  is,  the  argument  would  remain  the  same  ; 
and  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  it  is  an  every  day 
occurrence  now,  among  the  large  number  of  evangelists 
who  are  constantly  baptizing  multitudes  in  our  western 
states,  to  baptize  whole  households  without  an  infant  in 
them.  Almost  any  active  evangelist  can  relate  many 
such  instances  within  his  own  experience.  The  ablest  of 
Psedobaptist  commentators  are  more  candid  on  this  sub- 
ject ;  thus  Alford,  commenting  on  the  case  of  Lydia, 
says  :  "  It  may  be  that  no  inference  for  infant  baptism  is 
hence  deducible."  Gloag  says  :  "  Evidently  the  passage 
in  itself  can  not  be  adduced  as  a  proof  either  for  or 
against  infant  baptism ;  there  is  in  it  no  indication 
whether  there  were  or  were  not  infants  in  the  household 
of  Lydia."     Meyer  says  that  of  the  baptism  of  infants 


xvi.  13-15.]  ACTS.  95 

"  uo  trace  is  found  in  the  New  Testament ;"  and  Dean 
Pluniptre  expresses  himself  in  these  words:  "The  state- 
n)eut  that  her  household  were  baptized  has  often  been 
urged  as  evidence  that  infant  baptism  was  the  practice  of 
tiie  apostolic  age.  It  must  be  admitted,  however,  that 
this  is  to  read  a  great  deal  between  the  lines,  and  the  ut- 
most that  can  be  said  is  that  the  language  of  the  writer 
does  not  exclude  infants.  In  this  instance,  moreover, 
there  is  no  evidence  that  she  had  children,  or  even  that 
she  was  married.  The  household  may  well  have  con- 
sisted of  female  slaves  and  freed-women  whom  she  em- 
ployed, and  who  made  up  her  familiaJ'  In  this  last 
remark  this  acute  and  candid  writer  hits  upon  the  ex- 
planation really  given  in  the  text ;  for  v/hen  Paul 
reached  the  river  bank  he  "  spoke  to  the  women  who 
were  come  together"  (13)  ;  and  when,  in  the  second 
verse  after  this,  the  writer  speaks  of  Lydia's  household, 
he  evidently  means  to  identify  those  women  as  the  house- 
hold. It  is  entirely  within  the  range  of  probability,  as 
Plurnptre  also  suggests,  that  among  these  women  were 
Eiiodia  and  Syntyche,  who  subsequently  labored  with 
Paul  iu  the  gospel,  and  whose  alienation  from  each  other 
at  a  still  later  period  became  a  subject. of  deep  solicitude 
to  the  apostle  (Phil.  iv.  2,  3). 

The  baptism  of  this  whole  family  opened  to  the 
apostle  and  his  companions  a  lodging  place  far  more 
congenial  than  that  in  some  heathen  household,  which 
they  had  hitherto  endured ;  and  yet  a  proper  feeling  of 
delicacy  forbade  him  to  accept  Lydia's  hospitality,  until 
her  plea  showed  clearly  that  she  would  regard  a  final 
refusal  as  evidence  that  she  was  not  fully  trusted  as 
"  faithful  to  the  Lord."  By  this  plea,  Luke  says,  "  she 
constrained  us." 


96  COMMENTARY.  [[xvi.  16-18. 

5.  Paul  and  Silas  are  Scoueged  and  Impeis- 
ONED,  16-24. 

Vv.  16-18.  We  are  next  introduced  to  an  incident 
which  led  to  the  first  persecution  experienced  by  the 
apostles  at  the  instigation  of  Gentiles.  (i6)  And  it 
came  to  pass,  as  we  were  going  to  the  place  of  prayer, 
that  a  certain  maid  having  a  spirit  of  divination  met 
us,  who  brought  her  masters  much  gain  by  sooth- 
saying. (17)  The  same  following  after  Paul  and  us 
cried  out,  saying.  These  men  are  servants  of  the  most 
high  God,  who  proclaim  unto  you  the  way  of  salvation. 
(18)  And  this  she  did  for  many  days.  But  Paul,  being 
sore  troubled,  turned  and  said  to  the  spirit,  I  charge  thee 
in  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  to  come  out  of  her.  And  it 
came  out  that  very  hour.  Literally  translated,  it  was  a 
Python  sjjirit  by  which  the  maid  was  possessed,  the  word 
Python  identifying  its  manifestations  with  those  of  the 
women  who  gave  out  the  oracles  at  Delphi  in  Greece ; 
and  who  were  supposed  by  the  heathen  to  be  inspired 
by  the  serpent  called  Python,  to  whose  wisdom  these 
oracles  were  accredited.  Luke's  language  can  not  be 
regarded  as  an  indorsement  of  this  supposed  inspiration  ; 
but  he  distinctly  recognizes  a  real  spirit  in  the  maid,  and 
styles  it  a  Python  spirit  for  the  reason  given.  The  case 
was  undoubtedly  one  of  demon  possession,  such  as  so  fre- 
quently occur  in  our  gospel  narratives,  and  with  which 
Luke's  readers  were  presumed  to  have  become  acquaint- 
ed through  his  former  narrative.  It  is  worthy  of  remark, 
too,  that  the  title  "  most  high  God,"  which  is  used  by 
this  spirit,  is  the  same  that  was  used  by  "  the  legion  " 
in  Gadara  (Mark  v.   7). 


xvi.  16-21.]  ACTS.  97 

As  the  maid  was  proclaiming  the  truth  to  a  people 
who  had  some  confidence  in  her  utterances,  and  the  very 
truth  which  Paul  was  most  solicitous  that  they  should 
accept,  why  did  he  reject  her  cooperation,  and  shut  the 
mouth  of  an  apparent  friend  ?  The  answer  can  only  be, 
that  to  have  accepted  demons  as  witnesses  to  the  gospel 
would  have  convinced  the  people  that  there  was  an 
alliance  between  them  and  the  apostles;  and  thus  all 
tlie  good  repute  of  the  apostles  would  have  been  reflected 
on  the  demons,  and  all  the  evil  repute  of  the  demons 
would  likewise  have  been  reflected  on  the  apostles. 
To  guard  against  this  double  evil  both  Jesus  and  the 
apostles  invariably  cast  out  all  demons  who  ventured  to 
speak  in  their  favor.  Paul  was  "  sore  troubled  "  in  this 
iustance,  and  delayed  for  many  days  the  act  which  at 
last  became  unavoidable,  because  he  knew  that  the 
money  value  of  the  slave  would  be  greatly  reduced  by 
the  expulsion  of  the  demon,  and  he  dreaded  the  conse- 
quences of  appearing  in  this  heathen  city  to  interfere 
with  the  rights  of  property.  That  the  maid  followed 
the  preachers  to  the  place  of  prayer  many  days  before 
the  demon  was  expelled,  indicates  that  the  place  of 
prayer  was  chosen  as  their  daily  place  of  preaching.  It 
is  highly  improbable  that  they  could  find  so  suitable 
a  place  inside  the  city.  What  became  of  the  maid 
thus  miraculously  relieved  of  demon  possession,  we  are 
not  informed  ;  but  gratitude  for  so  great  a  deliverance 
sliould  have  thrown  her  under  the  influence  of  Paul  and 
of  the  good  women  who  were  now  actively  cooperating 
with  him,  and  who  would  be  naturally  interested  in  her 
behalf. 

Vv.  19-21.  The  consequences  which  had  troubled 
Paul  in  anticipation  (18)  were  soon  realized.     (19)  But 


98  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  19-24. 

when  her  masters  saw  that  the  hope  of  their  gain  was 
gone/  they  laid  hold  on  Paul  and  Silas,  and  dragged 
them  into  the  marketplace  before  the  rulers,  (20)  and 
when  they  had  brought  them  unto  the  magistrates,  they 
said,  Thes'^^  men,  being  Jews,  do  exceedingly  trouble  our 
city,  (21)  and  set  forth  customs  which  it  is  not  lawful 
for  us  to  receive,  or  to  observe,  being  Romans.  The 
officers  here  called  magistrates  were  styled  in  Latin 
duumviri,^  two  men  in  whom  was  lodged  the  supreme 
power  in  a  Roman  colony.  It  seems  that  the  apostles 
were  first  brought  before  rulers  of  a  lower  rank  in  the 
agora,  the  open  square  improperly  called  "  market  place" 
in  our  version,  and  that  by  these  officers  they  were 
referred  to  the  two  chief  rulers.  The  real  cause  of  com- 
plaint was  suppressed,  and  a  false  one  preferred,  because, 
in  the  first  jjlace,  to  have  stated  the  fact  in  the  case 
would  have  reflected  credit  on  Paul  in  the  eyes  of  the 
magistrates;  and  in  the  second  place,  it  was  easy  in  a 
heathen  city  like  this  to  get  up  an  outcry  against  Jews 
on  almost  any  pretence.  When  Paul  reached  Corinth  on 
his  present  tour  all  Jews  had  but  recently  been  expelled 
from  Rome  by  order  of  the  emperor  (xviii.  2),  and  per- 
haps this  had  already  taken  place.  If  so,  the  circum- 
stance could  but  intensify  in  the  minds  of  all  loyal 
Romans  the  common  hatred  of  this  persecuted  race. 

Yv.  22-24.  The  hypocritical  outcry  of  the  slave 
owners  had  the  effect  aimed  at  on  the  heathen  rabble, 
and  on  the  magistrates.     (22)  And  the  multitude  rose  up 

^  Lnke  here  makes  a  somewhat  humorous  pkiy  upon  a  word, 
which  is  lost  to  the  English  reader.  He  says  that  when  the  evil 
spirit  k^fpSev  "  went  out,"  the  masters  saw  that  the  hope  of  their 
gain  e^f/Wev  "  went  out." 

^  The  Greek  word  employed  is  GrpaTT/yol,  the  equivalent  of  ihe 
Latin,  praetors. 


xvi.  22-LY..]  acts:.  99 

together  against  them  :  and  the  magistrates  rent  their 
garments  off  them,  and  commanded  to  beat  them  with  rods. 
(23)  And  when  they  had  laid  many  stripes  upon  them, 
they  cast  them  into  prison,  charging  the  jailer  to  keep 
them  safely :  (24)  who,  having  received  such  a  charge, 
cast  them  into  the  inner  prison,  and  made  their  feet  fast 
in  the  stocks.  Here  we  have  an  example  of  that  same 
Inickliug  to  the  clamor  of  a  mob  which  has  made  in- 
famous the  name  of  Pontius  Pilate;  for  the  magistrates 
gave  the  prisoners  no  opportunity  to  defend  themselves, 
so  that  even  the  forms  of  justice  were  disregarded.  The 
rods  with  which  the  apostles  were  beaten  were  those 
habitually  borne  in  a  bundle  by  the  lictors,  who  always 
attended  Roman  praetors;  and  in  order  that  the  beating 
might  be  effectually  applied,  the  victims  were  doubtless 
strapped,  as  usual,  to  the  whipping  post.  The  jailer 
entered  fully  into  the  spirit  of  the  mob,  and  carried  out 
the  order  to  "  keep  them  safely  "  with  the  utmost  rigor. 
Locking  them  up  in  the  inner  prison  would  have  kept 
them  safely ;  but  to  safe  keeping  he  added  torture  by 
means  of  the  stocks.  With  their  legs  locked  in  these 
clamps,  and  their  feet  projecting  beyond  them,  they 
could  neither  lie  down  nor  sit  up  without  pain,  nor  could 
they  find  relief  by  a  change  of  position.  The  pain  grew 
more  intense  continually,  and  no  one  who  has  never  ex- 
perienced it  can  imagine  how  intense  it  was. 

6.   The  Jailer  and  his  Family  are  Baptized, 
25-34. 

Vv.  25,  26.  The  condition  of  the  two  prisoners  ns 
night  drew  on  was  piteous  in  the  extreme.  Besides  the 
physical  pain  of  sitting  in  a  dark  dungeon  with  their 
backs  bleeding  from  the  scourge,  and  their  legs  cramped 


100  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  25,  26. 

in  the  stocks,  they  were  racked  in  mind  by  a  sense  of 
the  cruel  injustice  which  they  had  suffered  at  the  hanrls 
of  men  whom  they  came  to  bless ;  and  their  faith  was 
heroic  indeed  if  some  painful  questioning  did  not  intrude 
as  to  why  God  allowed  them  to  receive  such  a  reward 
for  their  faithful  service.  The  historian  leaves  all  this 
to  our  imagination  as  respects  the  first  half  of  the  night. 
(25)  But  about  midnight  Paul  and  Silas  were  praying  and 
singing  hymns  unto  God,  and  the  prisoners  were  listen- 
ling  to  them ;  (26)  and  suddenly  there  was  a  great  earth- 
quake, so  that  the  foundations  of  the  prison-house  were 
shaken  :  and  immediately  all  the  doors  were  opened ;  and 
every  one's  bands  were  loosed.  Men  do  not  pray  when 
they  are  enraged,  or  sing  when  they  are  in  deep  distress. 
That  these  men  prayed  at  midnight  is  therefore  proof 
that  ere  this  the  tempest  of  their  feelings,  which  at  tlie 
whipping  post,  and  when  first  thrust  within  the  dungeon 
and  fastened  in  the  stocks,  made  them  almost  wild,  had 
now  subsided.  The  cheerfulness  necessary  to  singing  must 
have  been  a  consequence  of  their  prayer ;  and  thus  Paul 
was  learning  by  experience  the  lesson  which  he  after- 
ward taught  the  disciples  in  this  very  city,  saying  :  "  In 
nothing  be  anxious  ;  but  in  everything  by  prayer  and 
supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be 
made  known  unto  God.  And  the  peace  of  God,  which 
passcth  all  understanding,  shall  guard  your  hearts  and 
your  thoughts  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil.  iv.  6,  7).  That 
singing  was  a  strange  sound  to  the  criminals  in  the 
jirison ;  and  when,  as  thf y  listened  attentively,  they 
suddenly  felt  the  rocking  of  the  earthquake,  heard  the 
slamming  of  the  prison  doors,  and  felt  their  own  fetters 
slipping  off  their  limbs,  they  instinctively  connected 
these   frightful   phenomena  with    the   singers,  and  with 


xvi.  27-30.]  ACTS.  101 

the  God  whose  praises  they  sang.     The  effect  was  para- 
lyzing. 

Vv.  27,  28.  The  jailer  seems  not  to  have  heard  the 
singing.  He  was  awakened  by  the  motion  of  the  earth- 
quake, and  he  doubtless  heard  the  slamming  of  the 
doors,  and  the  clanking  of  the  fetters  as  thoy  fell  on  the 
stone  floor.  (27)  And  the  jailer  being  roused  out  of 
sleep,  and  seeing  the  prison  doors  open,  drew  his  sword, 
and  was  about  to  kill  himself,  supposing  that  the  prison- 
ers had  escaped.  (28)  But  Paul  cried  with  a  loud  voice, 
saying,  Do  thyself  no  harm  :  for  we  are  all  here.  Know- 
ing that  death  was  the  penalty  for  allowing  prisoners  to 
escape,  he  was  about  to  act  upon  the  Roman  code  of 
honor,  which  required  a  man  to  die  by  his  own  hand  if 
necessary  to  escape  that  of  an  enemy  or  an  executioner. 
It  is  not  likely  that  he  rushed  to  this  desperate  resort 
without  some  outcries  which  indicated  his  purpose,  and 
whieh  were  caught  by  the  quick  ear  of  Paul,  whose  loud 
voice  snatched  him  back,  in  the  very  nick  of  time,  from 
the  brink  of  eternity. 

Vv.  29,  30.  As  soon  as  the  jailer  could  collect  his 
senses  he  remembered  that  the  speaker  who  had  called 
to  him  had  been  preaching  salvation  in  the  name  of 
the  God  of  Israel,  and  he  instantly  perceived  that  the 
eartliquako,  the  opening  of  the  doors,  and  the  unlocking 
of  the  fetters  were  connected  with  him,  and  were  the 
work  of  his  God.  Seizing  this  thought,  and  glancing 
into  the  black  eternity  from  which  he  had  just  been 
rescued,  his  own  salvation,  rather  than  the  security  of 
his  prisoners,  at  once  absorbed  his  thoughts.  (29)  And 
he  called  for  lights,  and  sprang  in,  and,  trembling  for 
fear,  fell  down  before  Paul  and  Silas,  (30)  and  brought 
them  out,  and  said.  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ? 


102  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  29-34. 

At  sunset,  when  coldly  thrusting  the  apostles  into  the 
dungeon,  he  cared  nothing  for  them,  or  for  the  salvation 
which  he  knew  they  had  been  preaching  ;  for  then  he  was 
in  the  midst  of  life  and  health,  and  all  went  well  with 
him;  but  at  midnight,  when  he  had  been  within  an  inch 
of  death,  a  change  as  sudden  as  the  earthquake  passes  over 
him,  and  he  falls  trembling  at  the  feet  of  his  prisoners. 
The  other  prisoners  are  forgotten  ;  and  even  Luke  is  so 
absorbed  in  the  excitement  of  the  jailer  that  he  fails  to 
tell  us  what  became  of  them.  We  may  infer  that  they 
were  so  paralyzed  with  fear  that  they  remained  qniet 
in  their  places  until  Paul  and  Silas  were  led  out,  and 
the  outer  door  was  locked. 

Vv.  31-34.  Leading  the  apostles  into  his  family 
apartment,  he  received  at  once  a  full  and  satisfactory 
answer  to  his  questions.  (31)  And  they  said,  Believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  thou  and  thy  house. 
(32)  And  they  spake  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  him, 
with  all  that  were  in  his  house.  (33)  And  he  took  them 
the  same  hour  of  the  night,  and  washed  their  stripes ; 
and  was  baptized,  he  and  all  his,  immediately.  (34)  And 
he  brought  them  up  into  his  house,  and  set  meat '  before 
them,  and  rejoiced  greatly,  with  all  his  house,  having 
believed  in  God.  The  jailer  had  not  previously  listened 
to  Paul  very  attentively,  if  at  all,  or  he  would  have- 
known  what  to  do  to  be  saved ;  for  the  apostles,  unlike 
many  modern  preachers,  never  left  their  hearers  in  doubt 
on  that  supreme  question.  The  first  part  of  PauFs 
answer  would  have  been  vain  without  the  remainder. 
Had  he  stopped  with  the  words,  "  Believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus,''  the  jailer  might  have  answered,  as  did  the 

^  Literally,  set  a  table  before  them  {-TrapidiiKE  rpdne^ov),  equivalent 
to  our  houseliold  phrase,  set  the  table. 


xvi.  31-34.]  ACTS.  103 

man  born  blind  (Jno.  ix.  36),  "  Who  is  he,  sir,  that  I 
may  believe  on  him?"  For  this  reason  the  preacluTs 
**  sp:ike  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  him."  As  Plumptre 
happily  expresses  it :  "  The  very  title  of  Christ  ;  the  acts 
and  words  that  showed  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ;  his 
life  and  death  and  resurrection ;  the  truths  of  forgiveness 
of  sins  and  communion  with  him,  and  the  outward  signs 
which  he  had  appointed  as  witnesses  of  these  truths  ;  all 
this  must  have  been  included  in  the  word  of  the  Lord 
which  was  preached  to  that  congregation  so  strangely 
assembled  between  the  hours  of  midnight  and  dawn." 
All  this  was  included  in  the  answer  to  the  question, 
"  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ; "  and  the  words,  "  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  and  thy 
house,"  are  but  the  beginning  of  it.  Those  therefore 
who  catch  at  these  words  of  Paul,  and  draw  the  conclu- 
sion that  salvation  is  by  faith  alone,  leave  the  jail  too 
soon.  They  should  remain  till  they  hear  all — till  they 
hear  Paul  tell  the  man  to  repent  and  be  baptized  ;  till 
the  design  of  baptism  is  explained  to  him ;  till  he  is  bap- 
tized ;  till  he  is  found  rejoicing  greatly  immediately  after 
his  baptism.  It  would  not  require  a  long  delay  ;  for  it 
was  all  done  "  the  same  hour  of  the  night."  If  we  com- 
pare Paul's  answer  with  those  given  by  Peter  and 
Ananias  when  the  same  question  was  propounded,  we 
find  that  Ananias  said,  "Arise  and  be  baptized,  and  wash 
away  thy  sins;"  for  the  questioner  in  that  case  had 
already  believed  and  repented;  that  Peter  said,  "■  Rep(  nt 
and  l)e  baptized;"  for  his  questioners  had  already  be- 
lieved ;  while  Paul  says  to  his  (luestioner,  who  had  done 
neither  of  the  three,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus," 
and  then  added  the  other  two  commands.  Thus  the 
three    inspired    oracles    perpectly    agree.     The    conse- 


104  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  31-34. 

quence  of  faith,  '^  and  thou  shalt  be  saved,  and  thy 
house,"  is  stated  in  connection  with  the  command  to 
believe,  not  because  salvation  would  follow  faith  unat- 
tended by  repentance  and  baptism  ;  but  because  the  right 
degree  of  faith  always  wrought  repentance,  and,  in  the 
apostolic  practice,  was  always  promptly  followed  by  baj)- 
tism.  In  other  words,  belief,  in  such  connections,  was  put 
for  the  whole  process  which  it  constantly  superinduced. 
Wliile  some  Ptedobaptist  writers  are  candid  enough 
to  admit  that  the  baptism  of  the  jailer  and  his  family 
furnishes  no  evidence  for  infant  baptism,^  others  have 
tried  to  show  that  it  favors  both  this  practice  and  affu- 
sion. In  support  of  the  latter  it  is  assumed  that  the  bab- 
tism  took  place  in  the  prison,  and  it  is  claimed  that  facil- 
ities for  immersion  could  scarcely  have  been  found  there. 
But  it  is  clearly  stated  that  the  jailer  "  brought  them  out 
of  the  prison  "  (30)  before  they  preached  ''  unto  him,  with 
all  that  were  in  his  house."  It  is  made  equally  clear  that 
he  "  took  them  "  somewhere  to  wash  their  stripes  and  to 
be  baptized  (33) ;  and  then  it  is  said  (34)  that  after  the 
baptism  "  he  brought  them  up  into  his  house."  It  fol- 
lows that  the  baptism  occurred  neither  in  the  prison  nor 
in  the  house,  but  in  the  place  to  which  ''  he  took  them." 
Whether  this  was  in  the  court  of  the  prison,  if  it  had  a 
court,  or  in  the  river  in  which  Lydia  was  baptized,  wc 
have   no  certain  means  of  deciding ;  but  in  either  case 

*  Thus  Plamptre,  in  commenting  on  the  passage,  remarks: 
"  Wliat  has  been  said  above  (see  note  on  verse  15)  as  to  the  bear- 
ing of  the  narratives  on  the  question  of  infant  baptism,  applies 
here  also,  with  the  additional  fact  tliat  those  who  are  said  to  have 
been  baptized  are  obviously  identical  with  tliose  whom  St.  Paul 
addressed  (the  word  "  all  "  is  used  in  each  case),  and  must,  there, 
fore,  have  been  of  an  age  to  receive  instruction  together  with  the 
gaoler  hi mself. "     ( Cummentary  in  loco). 


xvi.  r>l-34.]  ACTS.  105 

there  is  nothing  unfavorable  to  the  practice  of  immersion. 
The  iilea  advanced  by  the  English  translator  of  Lech- 
ler's  Acts  is  worthy  of  notice  here,  because  it  presents 
tliis  issue  from  the  point  of  view  held  by  some  extreme 
controversialists.  He  demands:  "  If  Paul  had  stealthily 
gone  forth  during  tlie  night,  in  order  to  immerse  the 
jailer  in  a  neighboring  stream,  how  could  he,  as  an 
honest  man,  have  on  the  next  day  declared  that,  after 
being  ignominiously  conducted  within  the  prison  walls 
he  would  not  leave  them  until  the  magistrates  personally 
led  him  forth  ?"  To  this  it  is  answered,  that  it  is  very 
absurd  to  represent  Paul  as  going  forth  "stealthily,"  if 
he  went  to  administer  a  solemn  ordinance  of  the  Lord 
which  he  had  reason  to  believe  he  would  not  be  per- 
mitted to  administer  the  next  day;  and  this,  too,  when 
God  had  himself  opened  the  prison  doors  and  prepared 
the  way  for  this  baptism.  It  would  be  equally  absurd 
to  suppose,  as  others  have  done,  that  the  jailer  would 
have  scruples  about  going  out  for  this  purpose  wnth  his 
prisoners;  for  he  did  so  in  obedience  to  manifestations  of 
divine  power  and  authority.  As  to  Paul's  honesty  in 
doing  this,  and  then  refusing  to  leave  the  prison  the 
next  morning  until  escorted  by  the  magistrates,  the 
question  of  honesty  has  no  place  in  the  matter  ;  for  the 
demands  of  duty  to  God  in  the  salvation  of  his  converts 
required  -the  former,  while  the  protection  of  his  own 
reputation,  as  we  shall  see  below,  required  the  latter. 
The  supposition  that  there  is  here  evidence  for  infant 
baptism  is  not  only  unfounded,  but  it  is  precluded  by  the 
facts ;  for  Paul  spake  the  word  of  the  Lord  to  all  the 
household,  and  in  common  with  the  head  of  the  house 
tliey  all  rejoiced,  and  all  believed  in  God.  There  were 
certainly  no  infants  in  the  family. 


106  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  85-39. 

7.  The  Peisonees  aee  Released,  35-40. 

Vv.  35,  36.  When  the  magistrates  ordered  Paul 
and  Silas  to  prison,  we  would  naturally  suppose  that  they 
intended  to  make  some  further  inquiry  into  the  charges 
preferred  against  them.  (35)  But  when  it  was  day,  the 
magistrates  sent  the  Serjeants,  saying.  Let  those  men 
go.  (36)  And  the  jailer  reported  the  words  to  Paul,  say- 
ing, The  magistrates  have  sent  to  let  you  go  :  now  there- 
fore come  forth,  and  go  in  peace.  This  order  was  issued 
without  knowledge  of  what  had  taken  place  in  the  night, 
so  far  as  we  are  informed.  As  for  the  earthquake,  by 
which  some  scholars  suppose  that  the  magistrates  had 
been  alarmed,  as  it  was  undoubtedly  a  miraculous  and 
not  a  natural  one,  there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that 
it  extended  beyond  the  prison.  The  order  for  release 
is  most  naturally  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that,  as  the 
scourging  and  imprisonment  had  been  inflicted  only  to 
silence  the  clamor  of  the  mob,'^there  was  now  no  need  of 
protracting  the  imprisonment.  It  was  thought  that  the 
prisoners,  released  thus  early  in  the  morning,  would  be 
glad  to  escape  from  the  city,  and  no  further  agitation  of 
the  multitude  would  occur.  The  magistrates  little  knew 
the  kind  of  men  they  were  dealing  with. 

Vv.  37-39.  To  be  thus  released  from  prison,  as 
though  they  had  merely  suffered  punishment  which  they 
deserved,  would  be  injurious  to  the  apostles,  if  a  report 
of  it  should  follow  them  to  other  cities ;  and  fortunately 
the  means  of  escaping  it  Avere  at  hand.  (37)  But  Paul 
said  unto  them,  They  have  beaten  us  publicly,  uncon- 
demned,  men  that  are  Romans,  and  have  cast  us  into 
prison ;  and  do  they  now  cast  us  out  privily  ?  nay, 
verily  ;  but  let  them  come  themselves  and  bring  us  out. 


xvi.  37-39.]  ACTS.  107 

(38)  And  the  Serjeants  reported  these  words  unto  the 
magistrates  :  and  they  feared,  when  they  heard  that  they 
were  Romans ;  (39)  and  they  came  and  besought  them  ; 
and  when  they  had  brought  them  out,  they  asked  them  to 
go  away  from  the  city.  The  word  Serjeants  is  a  mod';ni 
English  title  improperly  used  here  in  our  version  for 
lictors,  the  real  title  of  these  officers.  They  habitually 
attended  Roman  prajtors  with  bundles  of  rods  in  their 
hands,  and  by  them  the  "  many  stripes"  had  been  laid 
on  Paul  and  Silas  the  day  before.  The  purpose  of  Paul's 
demand  is  obvious  ;  if  now  the  fact  of  his  having  been 
scourged  and  released  should  follow  him  to  other  cities, 
there  would  also  follow  the  fact  that  the  rulers  by  whose 
order  it  was  done  had  made  amends  for  it,  while  the  vic- 
tims had  spared  their  persecutors  deserved  punishment. 

As  it  was  a  crime  under  Roman  law  to  scourge  a  Ro- 
man citizen,^  the  apostles  might  have  avenged  them- 
selves for  the  outrage  j^erpetrated  upon  them,  but  Paul 
taught  his  brethren  not  to  avenge  themselves  (Rom.  xii. 
19),  and  he  acted  according  to  his  own  precepts.  The 
incident  justifies  Christians  in  appealing  to  the  civil  law 
for  protection ;  but  not  for  the  punishment  of  their 
enemies. 

Baur  attempts  to  discredit  this  whole  story  by  argu- 
ing that  if  the  apostles  had  really  asserted  their  citizen- 
ship they  would  have  done  so  before  the  scourging,  as 
Paul  did  on  a  subsequent  occasion  (xxii.  25)  ;  and  that, 
if  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  scourged   when   they 

'  The  "  Porcian  law,"  enacted  B.  C.  300,  forbade  absolutely  the 
scourging  of  a  Roman  citizen  (Livy,  x,  9).  A  climax  used  by 
Cicero,  in  pleading  against  Verres  for  a  violation  of  this  law,  is 
often  quoted  :  ".  It  is  a  misdeed  to  bind  a  Roman  citizen — a  crime 
to  scourge  him — almost  parricide  to  put  him  to  death." 


108  COMMENTARY.  [xvi.  37-40. 

could  so  easily  have  prevented  it,  they  had  themselves 
aloue  to  blame  for  it  [Paul,  i.  154).  But  how  does  Baur 
know  that  they  did  not  assert  it  before  the  scourging  ? 
Certainly  the  silence  of  the  historian  does  not  furnish 
this  information,  and  it  is  highly  improbable  in  itsc4f. 
Much  more  probable  is  it  that,  as  these  men  were  ar- 
raigned under  the  guise  of  Jews  who  exceedingly 
troubled  the  city  by  introducing  unlawful  customs,  their 
claim  of  Roman  citizenship,  though  proclaimed  by  them, 
was  disbelieved  and  scoffed  at  in  the  excitement  of  the 
moment;  but  that,  when  repeated  the  next  morning  in 
connection  with  a  refusal  to  leave  the  prison  without  an 
apology  from  the  magistrates,  it  was  believed  and  re- 
spected. 

Ver.  40.  When  the  prisoners  were  discharged  they 
took  their  own  time  to  comply  with  the  request  of  the 
magistrates,  and  they  did  so  with  becoming  dignity. 
(40)  And  they  went  out  of  the  prison,  and  entered  into 
the  house  of  Lydia  :  and  when  they  had  seen  the  breth- 
ren, they  comforted  them,  and  departed.  The  brethren 
here  mentioned  were  doubtless  those  who  had  been  bap- 
tized during  the  "  many  days  "  (18)  which  the  apostles 
had  spent  in  the  city  before  their  imprisonment.  Luke 
and  Timothy,  as  we  shall  see  farther  along  (xvii.  1), 
were  also  among  the  number.  These,  together  with  the 
jailer's  family,  constituted  the  church  now  ])lanted  in 
Philippi,  and  Paul  has  learned  more  fully  the  divine  pur- 
pose in  bringing  him  thither  instead  of  permitting  him 
to  go  to  Asia  or  to  Bithynia. 


xvii.  1-3.]  ACTS,  109 

8.  Preaching  and  Persecution  in  Thessalonica, 
XVII.  1-9. 

Vv.  1-3.  The  pronoun  of  the  third  person  which 
Luke  now  resumes,  after  using  that  of  the  second  person 
since  the  apostolic  company  left  Troas,  implies  that  he 
himself  remained  at  Philippi ;  and  as  the  pronoun  used 
refers  grammatically  to  Paul  and  Silas,  it  is  implied  that 
Timothy  also  remained  with  Luke,  to  still  further  in- 
struct and  organize  the  church.  We  find  this  church  at 
a  later  period  fully  equipped  with  officers  (Phil.  i.  1) ; 
and  the  appointment  of  these  was  doubtless  the  work  of 
these  two  brethren.  Leaving  the  cause  thus  guarded  in 
their  rear,  Paul  and  Silas  advance  to  another  field  of 
labor,  (i)  Now  when  they  had  passed  through  Amphip- 
olis  and  Apollonia,  they  came  to  Thessalonica,  where 
was  a  synagogue  of  the  Jews :  (2)  and  Paul,  as  his  cus- 
tom was,  went  in  unto  them,  and  for  three  Sabbath  days 
reasoned  with  them  from  the  Scriptures,  (3)  opening  and 
alleging,  that  it  behoved  the  Christ  to  suffer,  and  to  rise 
again  from  the  dead ;  and  that  this  Jesus  whom  I  pro- 
claim to  you,  is  the  Christ.  The  distance  from  Philippi 
to  Thessalonica  is  about  one  hundred  miles.  It  was  doubt- 
less tlie  synagogue  in  this  city  which  drew  the  apostles  on 
without  stopping  to  preach  in  Amphipolis  or  Apollonia, 
for  a  synagogue  in  a  city  indicated  the  presence  of  a  con- 
siderable Jewish  population,  with  a  nucleus  of  Gentile 
proselytes  about  it,  and  furnished  an  open  avenue  for  the 
introduction  of  the  gospel.  Thessalonica,  on  account  of 
its  commercial  importance,  was  then,  and  continues  to  be, 
under  its  modern  name  Salon ica,  a  great  resort  for  Jews. 

The  course  of  argument  followed  by  Paul  on  these 
three  Sabbath  days  was  substantially  the  same  as  his 


110  COMMENTARY.  [xvii.  1-3. 

own  in  Antioch  of  Pisidia,  and  Peter's  on  Pentecost ; 
and  doubtless,  if  we  had  reports  of  his  sermons  preached 
to  Jews  elsewhere,  we  would  find  them  very  much  the 
same.  It  was  the  course  dictated  by  the  state  of  mind 
of  the  hearers.  The  preaching  of  the  Christ  as  one 
who  had  been  crucified  was  to  the  mass  of  the  Jews  a 
scandal,  because  it  appeared  to  them  totally  inconsistent 
with  the  glorious  reign  of  the  Christ  as  they  read  it  in 
the  prophets.  Until  they  could  be  made  to  see  that  in 
this  particular  they  misread  the  prophets,  it  was  impossi- 
ble to  convince  them  that  the  crucified  Jesus  could  be 
their  Christ;  so  to  this  end  Paul  first  addressed  his  re- 
marks, and  when  he  had  proved  according  to  the 
prophets  "  that  it  behoved  the  Christ  to  suffer,  and  to 
rise  again  from  the  dead,"  it  was  a  very  easy  task  to  show 
that  "this  Jesus  whom  I  preach  to  you  is  the  Christ.'' 
It  was  well  known  that  he  had  suffered  death  ;  and  Paul 
had  abundant  means  of  proving  that  he  had  risen.  This 
latter  proof  was  not  limited  to  the  testimony  of  the 
original  witnesses,  but  he  gave  ocular  demonstration  of 
the  living  and  divine  power  of  Jesus,  by  working  mira- 
cles in  his  name.  This  we  learn  from  the  first  epistle  to 
the  church  which  he  established  here,  in  which  he  says : 
'•  Our  gospel  came  not  to  you  in  word  only,  but  also  in 
power,  and  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  in  much  assurance ; 
even  as  ye  know  what  manner  of  men  we  showed  our- 
selves toward  you  for  your  sake"  (I.  Thess.  i.  5).  The 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  working  miracles  before  them 
gave  an  assurance  of  the  resurrection  and  glorification  of 
him  in  whose  name  they  were  wrought,  which  "  the  word 
only  "  of  all  the  men  on  earth  could  not  give.  With- 
out such  attestation  the  word  of  man  in  reference  to 
the  affairs  of  heaven  has  no  claim   on  our  confidence  ; 


xvii.  1-9.]  ACTS.  Ill 

but  with  it,  it  has  a  claim  which  none  can  honestly 
reject. 

During  the  two  weeks  intervening  between  the  three 
S  ibbaths  mentioned,  the  two  brethren  carefully  avoided 
everything  which  might  raise  a  suspicion  of  selfish  mo- 
tives. They  would  not  burden  any  one  by  even  asking 
for  their  daily  bread ;  and  although  they  received  some 
contributions  from  the  church  at  Philippi,  the  amount 
was  so  scanty  as  to  leave  them  to  the  necessity  of  "  labor- 
ing night  and  day"  (I.  Thess.  ii.  9;  Phil.  iv.  15,  16). 

Ver.  4.  Such  arguments  and  demonstrations,  ac- 
companied by  such  a  life,  could  not  fail  of  good  results. 
(4)  And  some  of  them  were  persuaded,  and  consorted 
with  Paul  and  Silas  ;  and  of  the  devout  Greeks  a  great 
multitude,  and  of  the  chief  women  not  a  few.  It  seems 
from  tliis  statement  that  the  largest  class  of  the  converts 
were  "  devout  Greeks,"  that  is,  Gentiles  who  had  learned 
to  worship  God  according  to  the  example  of  the  Jews. 
Next  to  these  were  the  chief  women,  also  Gentile  pros- 
elytes ;  and  least  of  all,  Jews.  The  great  majority,  then, 
were  Gentiles  ;  and  Paul,  on  account  of  this  preponder- 
ance, could  afterward  write  to  them,  "  Ye  turned  unto 
God  from  idols,  to  serve  a  living  and  true  God "  (I. 
Thess.  i.  9). 

Vv.  5-9.  Such  a  movement  among  the  devout  Gen- 
tiles, whose  presence  in  the  synagogue  was  a  source  of 
pride  to  the  Jews,  was  exceedingly  mortifying  to  those 
Jews  who  remained  in  unbelief,  and  they  were  able,  by 
their  number  and  their  influence  with  the  rabble  of  the 
city,  to  give  serious  trouble  to  Paul  and  Silas,  which 
they  were  not  slow  to  do.  (5)  But  the  Jews,  being 
moved  with  jealousy,  took  unto  them  certain  vile  fellows 
of  the  rabble,  and  gathering  a  crowd,  set  the  city  on  an 


112  COMMENTARY.  [xvii.  5-9, 

uproar ;  and  assaulting  the  house  of  Jason,  they  sought 
to  bring  them  forth  to  the  people.  (6)  And  when  they 
found  them  not,  they  dragged  Jason  and  certain  brethren 
before  the  rulers  of  the  city,  crying.  These  that  have 
turned  the  world  upside  down  are  come  hither  also  ;  (7) 
whom  Jason  hath  received  :  and  these  all  act  contrary 
to  the  decrees  of  Caesar,  saying  that  there  is  another 
king,  one  Jesus.  (8)  And  they  troubled  the  multitude 
and  the  rulers  of  the  city,  when  they  heard  these  things. 
(9)  And  when  they  had  taken  security  from  Jason  and 
the  rest,  they  let  them  go.  The  Jews  seem  not  to  have 
had  the  same  influence  with  the  chief  men  of  tlie  city 
as  in  Antioch  of  Pisidia  (xiii.  50) ;  so  they  stirred  up 
the  rabble,  and  through  them  brought  the  aflFair  before 
the  rulers.  Knowing  that  Paul  and  Silas  lodged  in  the 
house  of  Jason,  "  they  sought  to  bring  them  forth  to  the 
people/'  with  the  evident  purpose  of  subjecting  them  to 
mob  violence ;  but  failing  to  find  them,  their  proceedings 
with  Jason  himself  were  more  orderly — they  dragged 
him  and  some  of  the  other  disciples  before  the  officers, 
styled  in  the  Greek  politarchs  (city-rulers).  The  charge 
of  turning  the  world  "  upside  down  '^  was  based  on  the 
mob  violence  which  had  attended  their  labors  in  other 
cities,  of  which  these  Jews  of  Thessalonica  had  evidently 
heard  a  great  deal,  and  for  which  they  unjustly  laid  the 
blame  on  the  apostles,  while  they  were  themselves  re- 
peating the  wicked  procedure  of  other  mobs.  The  other 
charge  was  true  in  a  proper  sense,  for  they  had  preached 
Jesus  as  a  king  ;  but  the  charge  was  a  perversion,  delib- 
erate and  intentional,  on  the  part  of  the  Jews,  though 
not  detected  as  such  by  the  rabble.  The  people  and  the 
rulers  were  troubled,  because  they  feared  the  conse- 
quences of  permitting  treasonable  plots  against  Caesar  to 


xvii.  5-10.]  ACTS.  113 

be  propagated  in  the  city.  If  Paul  and  Silas  had  them- 
selves been  brought  before  tiie  politarchs,  it  is  not  cer- 
tain that  ihey  would  have  fared  better  than  at  the  hands 
of  the  praators  of  Philippi ;  but  as  the  only  accusation 
against  Jason  was  that  he  had  entertained  the  preachers, 
he  was  released  after  giving  bond  to  keep  the  peace. 

The  title  politarch,  which  Luke  here  applies  to  the 
chief  magistrates  of  Thessalonica,  is  nowhere  else  found 
as  an  official  title  in  all  Greek  literature ;  and  it  is  easy 
to  see  what  a  clamor  the  enemies  of  the  faith  would 
liave  made  over  this  use  of  the  term,  but  for  the  fact  that 
an  ancient  triumphal  arch  of  marble  until  recently 
spanned  the  principal  street  of  the  city,  with  an  inscrip- 
tion in  which  this  very  title  is  applied,  and  the  names  of 
seven  of  the  politarchs  are  preserved.  When  the  arch 
was  torn  down,  the  slabs  containing  the  inscription  were 
secured  by  the  British  consul  then  at  Thessalonica,  and 
they  are  now  kept  in  the  British  Museum.  Three  of  the 
names  are  Sosipater,  Secundus  and  Gains,  the  names  of 
three  well  known  fellow  laborers  of  Paul  (xix.  29; 
XX.  4). 

9.  Success  in  Bercea,  10-15. 

Ver.  10.  Although  Paul  and  Silas  suffered  less  in 
Thessalonica  than  in  Philippi,  tlieir  departure  from  the 
former  was  more  humilating  than  from  the  latter.  When 
they  heard  the  result  of  the  attempt  to  seize  them,  they 
saw  at  once  that  their  further  continuance  in  the  city 
would  be  likely  fo  involve  Jason  and  the  others  in  a  for- 
feiture of  their  bond,  and  would  bring  personal  violence 
to  themselves ;  so  they  sought  safety  for  all  in  flight. 
(lo)  And  the  brethren  immediately  sent  away  Paul  and 
Silas  by  night  unto  Beroea  :  who  when  they  were  come 


114  COMMENTARY.  [xvii.  10. 

thither  went  into  the  synagogue   of  the  Jews.     This 

flight  by  night  must  have  reminded  Paul  of  that  from 
Damascus  in  the  beginning  of  his  apostolic  career  ;  and 
it  may  have  been  eifected  by  a  similar  method  of  escape. 
From  Philippi  to  Thessalonica,  Paul  and  Silas  had 
followed  one  of  those  splendid  military  roads  constructed 
by  the  Romans  for  the  passage  of  armies  at  all  seasons  of 
the  year,  which  were  properly  graded,  and  then  paved 
with  flag-stones.  Remnants  of  them  are  still  found  in 
almost  every  country  then  included  in  the  empire ; 
and  this  one,  called  the  Via  Egnatia,  connecting  the 
Hellespont  with  the  Adriatic  sea,  was  the  great  thorough- 
fare across  the  peninsula  of  Macedonia  toward  the  dis- 
tant East.  On  leaving  Thessalonica  in  the  night  they 
did  not  have  to  grope  their  way  ;  for  they  still  followed 
the  same  highway  westward  till,  probably  after  daylight, 
they  left  it  and  turned  more  to  the  southwest  in  order  to 
reach  Beroea.  Their  route  all  the  way  lay  across  a  level 
country  traversed  by  historic  streams;  and  Beroea  itself, 
about  sixty  miles  from  Thessalonica,  is  thus  described : 
"  Bercea,  like  Edessa,  is  on  the  eastern  slope  of  the 
Olympian  range,  and  commands  an  extensive  view  of 
the  plain  which  is  watered  by  the  Haliacmon  and  the 
Axius.  It  has  many  natural  advantages,  and  is  now 
considered  one  of  the  most  agreeable  towns  of  Rumili, 
Plane  trees  spread  a  grateful  shade  over  its  gardens. 
Streams  of  water  are  in  every  street.  Its  ancient  name 
is  said  to  have  been  derived  from  the  abudance  of  its 
waters ;  and  the  name  still  survives  in  the  modern 
Verria,  or  Kara-Verria."  ^  It  is  still  a  walled  city  with 
a  population   of  between  fifteen  and  twenty  thousand 

^Conybeare  and   Howsun,  following  the  description   of   the 
traveler  Leake. 


xvii.  11,  12.]  ACTS.  115 

Here  again  the  apostle  found  a  synagogue,  and    made 
it  the  starting  point  of  his  labors. 

Vv.  11,  12.  We  now  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  one 
Jewish  community  listen  to  the  truth  and  examine  it  like 
rational  beings,  (ii)  Now  these  were  more  noble  than 
those  in  Thessalonica,  in  that  they  received  the  word  with 
all  readiness  of  mind,  examining  the  Scriptures  daily, 
whether  these  things  were  so.  (12)  Many  of  them  there- 
fore believed  ;  also  of  the  Greek  women  of  honorable 
estate,  and  of  men,  not  a  few.  The  conduct  of  these 
Jews  can  not  be  too  highly  commended,  or  too  closely 
imitated.  A  common  sin  of  men  is  a  refusal  to  examine 
candidly  and  patiently  the  claims  of  the  gospel.  The 
Jews,  having  fallen  into  error  by  their  traditions,  re- 
sisted with  passion  and  uproar  every  attempt  to  give 
them  the  true  light ;  and  their  folly  has  been  imitated 
ever  since  by  both  unbelievers  and  the  partisans  of  relig- 
ious error.  If  such  persons  live  and  die  in  ignorance  of 
the  truth,  and  in  consequent  neglect  of  duty,  their  ignor- 
ance, instead  of  excusing  them,  will  be  one  of  their  chief 
sins.  There  is  scarcely  a  greater  sin  than  to  stop  our 
ears  when  God  speaks,  or  to  close  our  eyes  to  truth 
which  he  brings  before  us.  All  who  profess  to  be  dis- 
ciples of  Christ  should  search  the  Scriptures  upon  the 
presentation  of  everything  oiFering  a  decent  claim  to 
be  God's  truth,  and  see  "  whether  these  things  are 
so."  To  follow  implicitly  wherever  the  word  of  God 
leads  can  never  be  unacceptable  to  its  Author.  As  a 
consequence  of  the  noble  conduct  of  the  Berocan 
Jews,  the  result  was  not,  as  in  Thessalonica,  that  some 
of  them  believed,  and  a  great  multitude  of  the  Greeks^ 
but  many  of  them  believed,  and  not  a  few  of  the 
Greeks.    Let  us  not  fail  to  notice,  too,  that  their  believing 


116  COMMENTARY.  [xvii.  11-14. 

is  ascribed  by  Luke  expressly  to  the  fact  that  they 
searched  the  ScrijDtures,  whether  these  things  were  so ; 
again  showing  that  faith  comes  by  hearing  the  word  of 
God. 

Vv.  13,  14.  There  seems  to  have  been  no  serious 
obstacle  to  the  gospel  in  Beroea,  and  the  disciples  may 
have  begun  to  flatter  themselves  with  the  hope  of  turn- 
ing the  whole  city  to  the  Lord,  when  an  unexj)eeted  foe 
assailed  them  from  the  rear.  (13)  But  when  the  Jews  of 
Thessalonica  had  knowledge  that  the  word  of  God  was 
proclaimed  by  Paul  at  Beroea  also,  they  came  thither 
likewise,  stirring  up  and  troubling  the  multitudes.  (14) 
And  then  immediately  the  brethren  sent  forth  Paul  to  go 
as  far  as  to  the  sea :  and  Silas  and  Timothy  abode  there 
still.  (15)  But  they  who  conducted  Paul  brought  him  as 
far  as  Athens  :  and  receiving  a  commandment  unto  Silas 
and  Timothy  that  they  should  come  to  him  with  all 
speed,  they  departed. 

Here  is  an  exhibition  of  that  same  malevolent  zeal 
, which  characterized  the  Jews  of  Antioch  and  Iconium 
when  they  pursued  Paul  to  Lystra  (xiv.  19),  showing 
that  the  Jews  were  the  same  the  world  over.  Again  it 
was  the  heathen  population  that  they  stirred  up,  and  one 
of  their  pleas,  no  doubt,  as  in  the  case  at  Lystra,  was 
that  these  men  had  been  compelled  to  fly  from  the  city 
of  Thessalonica.  Thus  one  persecution  was  made  the 
plea  for  another. 

"When  Paul  left  Beroea,  it  seems  from  the  expressions 
used,  that  he  had  formed  his  plans  only  so  far  as  to  go 
to  the  sea,  which  was  about  sixteen  miles  distant  at  the 
nearest  point ;  but  on  going  that  far  it  was  determined 
that  he  should  sail  to  Athens,  and  this  determination 
made  it  necessary  for  him  to  send  back  word  to  Silas 


xvii.  13-17.]  ACTS.  117 

antl  riniothy.  Tlie  obvious  purpose  of  leaving  these  two 
liretlireu  behind,  at  some  risk  no  doubt  to  their  personal 
safety,  was  to  still  further  instruct  and  encourage  the 
newly  baptized  disciples  ere  they  were  left  to  their  own 
resources  for  edification.  As  Timothy  had  been  left 
with  Lui<e  at  Philippi  (xvi,  40),  and  now  first  appears 
ajfain  in  the  narrative,  it  is  uncertain  whether  or  not  he 
overtook  Paul  in  Thessalonica.  In  leaving  Macedonia 
Paul  left  behind  him  three  churches,  planted  at  radiating 
points,  from  which  the  gospel  could  be  successfully 
spreadiihroughout  the  province,  if  the  disciples  proved 
fiithful  and  zealous.  Thessalonica  occupied  the  central 
position,  with  Philippi  one  hundred  miles  to  the  north- 
east, and  Beroea  sixty  miles  to  the  southwest.  We 
have  the  testimony  of  Paul  that  from  at  least  one  of 
these  the  light  shone  with  great  brilliancy  ;  for  he  after- 
ward wrote  to  the  Thessalonians :  "  From  you  hath 
sounded  forth  the  word  of  the  Lord,  not  only  in  Mace- 
donia and  Achaia,  but  in  every  place  your  faith  to  God^ 
ward  is  gone  forth ;  so  that  we  need  not  to  speak  any- 
thing" (I.  Thess,  i.  8).  There  was  no  need  of  Paul's 
voice  at  any  but  central  points  when  he  could  leave 
such  congregations  behind  him.  No  doubt  much  of  their 
zeal  and  fidelity  was  due  to  the  fostering  care  of  liuke, 
Timothy  and  Silas,  who  alternately  lingered  behind  the 
apostle  for  this  purpose. 

10.  Paul  in  Athens,  16-21. 

Vv.  16,  17.  In  the  ancient  world  there  were  two 
d  siinct  varieties  of  civilization,'which  had  reached  their 
culmination  in  the  days  of  the  apostles.  One  was  the 
result  of  human  philosophy  ;  the  other,  of  a  divine  reve- 
lation.    The  chief  center  of  the  former  was  the  city  of 


118  COMMENT  A  R  Y.  [x  vi  i .  1 T,,  1 7. 

Athens  ;  of  the  latter,  the  city  of  Jcriisaleni.  If  we  com- 
pare them  with  respect  either  to  the  moral  character  of 
the  peoples  brought  under  their  influence  respectively, 
or  with  reference  to  their  preparation  for  the'  perfect 
religion  of  Christ,  we  shall  find  the  advantage  in  favor 
of  the  latter.  Fifteen  hundred  years  before,  God  had 
placed  the  Jews  under  the  influence  of  revelation,  and 
left  the  other  nations  of  the  earth  to  "  walk  in  their  own 
ways."  By  a  severe  discipline,  continued  through  many 
centuries,  the  former  had  been  lifted  out  of  the  idolntry 
in  which  they  were  sunk  at  the  beginning,  audi  which 
still  prevailed  over  all  other  nations.  As  a  consequence 
they  presented  an  example  of  purity  in  private  morals 
which  stands  unrivaled  in  ancient  history  previous  to 
the  advent  of  Christ.  On  the  other  hand,  the  most  ele- 
gant of  the  heathen  nations  were  now  exhausting  in  their 
social  life,  as  Paul  testifies  in  the  first  chapter  of  his 
epistle  to  the  Romans,  the  catalogue  of  base  and  beastly 
practices  of  which  men  and  women  can  be  guilty.  In 
Athens  itself,  where  flourished  the  most  profound  phil- 
osophy, the  most  glowing  eloquence,  the  most  exquisite 
poetry,  and  the  most  refined  creative  art  whicli  the 
world  has  ever  seen,  there  was  the  most  complete  and 
studied  abandonment  to  every  vice  which  passion  could 
prompt  or  imagination  invent.  In  the  center  of  Jewish 
civilization  the  gospel  had  now  been  preached,  and 
many  thousands  who  had  embraced  it  had  attained  to  an 
excellence  in  human  virtue  not  known  before  since  the 
fall  of  man.  In  surrounding  countries,  and  in  distant 
lands,  wherever  the  Jewish  synagogue  was  found,  devout 
and  honorable  men  and  women  by  the  thousands  had 
done  the  same;  but  nowhere  had  this  blessed  bglit 
penetrated   far  into  the   darkness  of  heathenism.     The 


xvii.  KMS.]  ACTS.  110 

struggle  now  about  to  take  place  in  Athens  is  to  dem- 
onstrate still  further,  by  contrast,  how  successful  a 
"  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ "  had  been  the 
law  and  the  prophets.  Paul  knew  well  the  reputa- 
tion of  Athens,  but  he  could  not  iiave  realized,  until  he 
saw  it,  the  extent  to  which  it  was  given  to  idolatry. 
(i6)  Now  while  Paul  waited  for  them  at  Athens,  his 
spirit  was  provoked  within  him,  as  he  beheld  the  city 
full  of  idols.  (17)  So  he  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  with 
the  Jews  and  the  devout  persons,  and  in  the  market 
place  daily  with  them  that  met  with  him.  Though  a 
lonelv  stranger,  who  might  have  been  awed  into  silence 
by  the  magnificence  with  which  sin  had  fortified  itself 
in  this  great  city,  his  soul  was  stirred  to  make  a  mighty 
struggle  for  the  triumph  of  the  gospel  even  here.  His 
first  effort,  as  usual,  was  in  the  Jewish  synagogue  ;  but 
the  Jews  and  proselytes  were  so  completely  under  the 
spell  of  the  gilded  iniquity  around  them,  that  his  efforts 
were  unsuccessful.  Having  access  to  no  other  formal 
assembly,  he  next  goes  upon  the  streets,  and  the  places 
of  public  concourse,  and  discourses  with  "  them  that  met 
with  him." 

Ver.  18.  By  persistent  efforts  Paul  succeeded  in 
attracting  some  attention  from  the  idle  throng,  but  it 
was  of  a  character  at  first  not  at  all  flattering.  (18)  And 
certain  also  of  the  Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers 
encountered  him.  And  some  said.  What  would  this 
babbler  say  ?  Other  some.  He  seemeth  to  be  a  setter  forth 
of  foreign  demons  :  ^  because  he  preached  Jesus  and  the 

'  Instead  of  "  stranse  gods,"  as  in  our  version,  the  more  cor- 
rect rendering  is  "  foreign  demons."  Our  English  translators  have 
dealt  very  strangely  with  the  term  (^ai/x6vcm>.  In  every  other  place 
they  have  rendered  it  devils,  though  there  is  but  one  devil,  and 


120  COMMENTARY.  [xvii.  18. 

resurrection.  The  persistency  with  which  he  pressed 
his  message  on  every  one  he  met  suggested  the  epithet 
babbler,  while  the  prominence  which  he  gave  to  the 
name  of  Jesus,  a  man  who  had  died  and  risen  again, 
suggested  the  idea  of  demon-worship,  because  the  demons 
worshiped  by  the  Greeks  were  dead  men  deified. 

The  two  classes  of  philosophers  which  he  encoun- 
tered were  the  antipodes  of  each  other,  and  the  practical 
philosophy  of  each  was  antipodal  to  the  doctrine  of  Paul. 
The  Stoics  taught  that  the  greatest  good  in  life  was  to  be 
attained  through  a  total  indifference  to  both  the  sorrows 
and  the  pleasures  of  the  world ;  the  Epicureans,  that  it 
was  to  be  obtained  through  the  prudent  gratification  of 
every  passion  and  propensity  ;  and  they  united  in  denying 
conscious  existence  after  death.  In  opposition  to  the 
former,  Paul  taught  that  we  should  weep  with  those  who 
weep,  and  rejoice  with  those  who  rejoice ;  in  opposition 

here  they  have  most  inconsistently  rendered  it  gods.  But  while 
demons  were  worshiped  by  the  Greeks,  they  were  a  class  of 
beings  distinct  in  the  minds  of  Jews  from  the  devil  and  fallen 
angels,  and  distinct  in  the  minds  of  Greeks  from  those  gods 
which  they  styled  "  The  Immortals  ;"  and  it  is  inexcusable  in  a 
translator  to  confound  to  the  minds  of  his  readers  things  which 
are  so  distinct  in  the  original.  A  uniform  use  of  the  word  demon 
throughout  the  N.  T.,  which  was  insisted  upon  by  the  American 
Committee  of  the  Revisers,  is  plainly  demanded  by  fidelity  to  the 
original.  The  term  C^voc,  here  rendered  strange  in  our  version,  as 
it  is  everywhere  else  except  in  one. passage  where  there  is  a 
necessity  for  a  variation  (Rom.  xvi.  23),  has  a  more  definite  mean- 
ing than  our  word  strange.  It  means  foreign,  in  thefsense  of  be- 
longing to  another  country,  or  a  difi'erent  system.  Here,  and  in 
verse  20,  it  has  specific  reference  to  the  origin  in  a  foreign  land, 
that  is,  in  Judea,  of  the  teaching  to  which  it  is  applied  ;  and  in 
verse  21  those  called  strangers  in  our  version  were  foreigners,  and 
not  mere  strangers  to  the  Athenians,  which  they  might  have 
been  if  they  were  Greeks  who  had  not  visited  Athens  before. 


xvii.  18-21.]  ACTS.  121 

to  the  latter,  that  we  should  deny  all  ungodliness  and 
worldly  lusts  ;  and  in  opposition  to  both,  that  the  final 
goal  of  human  hopes  is  a  resurrection  from  the  dead  to 
life  everlasting. 

Vv.  19-21.  Notwithstanding  the  contempt  with 
which'PauI  was  regarded  by  many,  he  succeeded  at  last 
in  arresting  the  earnest  attention  of  a  few.  (19)  And  they 
took  hold  of  him,  and  brought  him  unto  the  Areopagus, 
saying,  May  we  know  what  this  new  teaching  is,  which 
is  spoken  by  thee  ?  (20)  For  thou  bringest  certain  for- 
eign things  to  our  ears  :  we  would  know  therefore  what 
these  things  mean.  (21)  (Now  all  the  Athenians  and  the 
foreigners  sojourning  there  spent  their  time  in  nothing 
else,  but  either  to  tell  or  hear  some  new  thing.)  They 
"■  took  hold  of  him"  in  a  familiar  way,  to  lead  him  from 
the  noisy  crowd  to  a  better  place  of  hearing.  The  agora 
(inaccurately  rendered  "  market  place  "  in  our  version), 
in  which  Paul  was  talking  to  the  people,  was  bounded 
on  the  whole  northern  side  by  a  ridge  of  coarse  marble 
which  rises  abruptly  to  the  height  of  about  thirty  feet. 
Toward  the  west  it  slopes  do-wnward  gradually  until  in 
the  course  of  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  it  descends  to  the 
level  of  the  plain.  This  is  the  Areopagus,  or,  as  ren- 
dered into  English,  the  hill  of  Mars — so  called  because  a 
temple  of  Mars  once  stood  on  its  summit.  Its  summit 
is  reached  from  the  agora  by  a  flight  of  steps  cut  in  the 
natural  rock,  the  most  of  which  remain  unbroken  to  the 
present  day ;  and  here  in  the  open  air  sat  the  court  of 
the  Areopagus,  by  whose  decisions  grave  questions  in 
religion  were  settled,  and  sometimes  great  criminals  were 
condemned.  The  informal  character  of  the  proceedings 
on  this  occasion  shows  that  it  was  not  the  court  that  had 
summoned  Paul;  but  merely  that  the  philosophers  who 


122  COMMENTARY.  [xvii.  21-23. 

wished  to  give  him  a  quiet  hearing  chose  this  spot  for  the 
purpose.  The  agora  was  spread  out  in  full  view  below, 
and  the  hum  of  its  confused  sounds  could  be  distinctly 
heard ;  but  these  would  not  prevent  the  small  audience 
from  hearing  the  voice  of  the  speaker. 

Luke's  parenthetical  statement,  that  all  the  Athen- 
ians and  the  foreigners  dwelling  there  spent  their  time 
in  nothing  but  hearing  and  telling  something  new, 
though  not  true,  of  course,  of  the  laboring  classes  and 
tradesmen,  who  are  evidently  not  contemplated  in  the 
remark,  was  strictly  true  of  the  great  mass ;  for  in  those 
days  men  came  to  Athens  from  every  nation  to  extend 
their  education  by  hearing  the  numerous  lecturers  on  all 
topics ;  and  to  learn  about  countries  foreign  to  their  own 
from  visitors  therefrom;  so  that  every  one  was  both  a 
hearer  and  a  teller  of  something  that  was  new  to  others- 
It  was  in  perfect  keeping  with  this  habit  that  these 
philosophers  desired  to  hear  the  foreign  teaching  which 
Paul  seemed  anxious  to  impart. 

11.  Paul's  Discourse   on   "The   Unknown   God," 

22-31. 
Vv.  22,  23.  After  his  persevering  but  necessarily 
disconnected  conversations  in  the  agora,  Paul  was  de- 
lighted to  have  now  an  audience  assembled  for  the  ex- 
press  purpose  of  hearing  him.  He  could  not  begin  by 
opening  the  Scriptures,  and  speaking  of  the  long  expect- 
ed Messiah ;  for  of  the  Scriptures,  and  even  of  the  God 
who  gave  them,  his  auditors  were  profoundly  ignorant. 
Before  he  could  preach  to  them  Jesus  as  the  Son  of  God, 
he  must  make  them  acquainted  with  God  himself;  and 
for  this  purpose  his  observations  in  the  city  had  supplied^ 
him  with  a  most  admirable  text.     (22)    And  Paul  stood 


xvii.  22, 23.J  ACTS.  123 

in  the  midst  of  the  Areopagus,  and  said,  Ye  men  of 
Athens,  in  all  things  I  perceive  that  ye  are  very  demon- 
fearing.'  (23)  For  as  I  passed  along,  and  observed  the 
objects  of  your  worship,  I  found  also  an  altar  with  this 
inscription,  TO  AN  UNKNOWN  GOD.  What  therefore 
ye  worship  in  ignorance,  this  set  I  forth  unto  you.  The 
people  of  Athens  were  worshipers  of  demons,  or  of  dead 
men  deified,  and  they  regarded  it  as  a  virtue  to  be  scru- 
,  piilous  in  all  the  forms  of  this  worship."     Paul's  audi- 

^  The  Greek  word  here  rendered  "  too  superstitious  "  in  the 
A.  v.,  and  "somewhat  superstitious"  (margin,  "religious")  in 
the  R.  v.,  is'^tv(7i(5a///owCT7t/jot'f,  the  comparative  degree  of  (5t«atJa//z6Jv, 
which  means  demon -fearing.  It  is  compounded  of  fe'fJw,  to  fear, 
and  i^aiu(j)v,  a  demon.  As  Oeoaelii/g  is  properly.translated  god-fearing, 
deimSai/iuv  is  with  equal  propriety  rendered  demon- fearing.  The 
comparative  degree  of  the  adjective  does  not  institute  an  explicit 
comparison  between  the  Athenians  and  others  in  this  respect ; 
for  the  context  furnishes  no  basis  for  such  a  comparison  ;  and 
therefore,  according  to  a  common  rule  of  Greek  grammar,  it  is  to 
be  construed  as  indicating  an  unusual  degree  of  the  quality  re- 
ferred to,  and  should  be  preceded  by  the  adverb  very  in  the  Eng- 
lish rendering  of  it.  "  Very  demon -fearing,"  then,  is  the  exact 
meaning  of  the  word.  While  the  Athenians  were,  from  eitlier  a 
Jewish  or  a  Christian  point  of  view,  "somewhat  superstitious," 
"  too  superstitious,"  and  "  somewhat  religious,"  in  thus  fearing 
demons,  these  expressions  fail  to  translate  the  term  emi)loyed  by 
Paul,  and  therefore  they  should  not  be  employed.  They  really 
express  an  inference  of  the  translators,  and  therefore  have  the 
nature  of  a  comment,  rather  than  that  of  a  translation.  It  is  as 
if  one  were  translating  a  single  word  from  some  foreign  tongue 
which  meant  the  fear  of  ghosts,  and  were  to  render  it  too  super- 
stitious ;  or  a  Chinese  word  meaning  the  fear  of  Joss,  an<l  were  to 
render  it  somewhat  religious.  See  more  on  the  subject  of  demon 
worship  in  the  next  note  below,  and  the  note  under  xxv.  19. 

■-'  Paul  says  (I.  Cor.  x.  20) :  "  The  things  which  the  Gentiles 
sacrifice  tiiey  sacrifice  to  demons,  and  not  to  God."  He  probably 
meant  to  stigmatize  all  of  their  deities  as  demons;  or  it  may  be 
that  lie  had  in  mind  their  own  distinction  between  demons  and 


124  COMMENTARY.  [xvii.  23. 

tors  therefore  were  complimented  by  his  opening  re- 
mark.    His  next  remark  presented  a  proof  of  the  first. 

gods,  and  meant  that  not  all,  but  the  great  mass  of  their  sacri- 
fices were  offered  to  the  former,  which  was  true.  One  of  the  most 
prominent  of  the  complaints  brought  against  the  Cliristians  of 
the  second  century  by  Celsus  was  based  on  their  refusal  to  honor 
the  demons,  and  in  making  it  he  seems  to  have  been  in  earnest. 
He  says:  "  We  must  either  not  live,  and  indeed  not  come  into 
this  life  at  all,  or  we  must  do  so  on  condition  that  we  give  thanks 
and  first  fruits  and  prayers  to  demons,  who  have  been  set  over 
the  things  of  this  world ;  and  that  we  must  do  as  long  as  we  live, 
that  they  may  prove  good  and  kind."  (Origen  vs.  Celsus,  viii.  33)^ 
"  The  satrap  of  a  Persian  or  Roman  monarch,  or  ruler,  or  gov- 
ernor, or  general,  yea,  even  those  who  fill  lower  offices  of  trust  or 
service  in  the  state,  would  be  able  to  do  great  injury  to  those 
who  despised  them,  and  will  the  satraps'and  ministers  of  earth 
and  air  be  insulted  with  impunity?"  {ib.  35).  He  styles  Jesus 
the  Christian's  demon,  and  says:  "Do  you  not  see,  good  sir^ 
that  even  your  own  demon  is  not  only  reviled,  but  banished  from 
every  land  and  sea,  and  you  yourself,  who  are  as  it  were  an 
image  dedicated  to  him,  are  bound  and  led  to  punishment,  and 
fastened  to  the  stake,  whilst  your  demon,  or,  as  you  call  him,  the 
Son  of  God,  takes  no  vengeance  on  the  evil-doer?"  {ih.  39  ;  see 
also  vii.  67-69).  As  to  the  nature  of  these  beings,  there  was  in 
the  minds  of  Greek  writers  some  confusion ;  but  Plato  says : 
"  The  poets  speak  excellently  who  affirm  that  when  good  men 
die  they  obtain  great  honor  and  dignity,  and  become  demons  " 
(Cratulus).  He  also  says,  "Every  demon  is  a  middle  between 
God  and  mortal;"  and  he  shows  the  ground  of  the  worship  of 
these  good  demons  by  the  further  statement :  "  Demons  are  re  ■ 
porters  and  carriers  from  men  to  the  gods,  and  again  from  the 
gods  to  men,  of  the  supplications  and  prayers  of  the  one,  and  of 
the  injunctions  and  rewards  of  devotion  from  the  other  "  {Sympos. 
iii.  202,  203).  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  here  the  source  of  the  invo- 
cation of  saints  practiced  by  Greek  and  Roman  Catholics.  But 
in  tlie  Greek  system  there  were  also  wicked  demons.  Plutarch 
writes :  "  It  is  a  very  ancient  opinion  that  there  are  certain  wick- 
ed and  malignant  demons,  who  envy  good  men,  and  endeavor  to 
hinder  them  in  their  pursuit  of  virtue,  lest  they  should  be  par- 
takers of  greater  happiness  than  they  enjoy  "  {Dion.  i.  958).    The 


xvii.  23.]  ACTS.  125 

The  uukuown  god,  to  which  the  altar  mentioned  had 
been  erected,  could  not  be  one  of  the  immortals,  who 
were  all  well  known,  and  therefore  he  must  have  been  a 
demon  not  hitherto  worshiped  by  name.  After  erecting 
altars  and  statues  to  all  the  known  gods,  so  that  a  Ro- 
man satirist  ^  said  that  it  was  easier  to  find  a  god  than  a 
man  in  Athens,  they  had  shown  their  zeal  for  demon- 
worship  by  honoring  a  being  whom  they  did  not  know. 
The  commentators  have  suggested  many  hypotheses  to 
account  for  the  erection  of  this  altar  ;  but  there  are  so 
many  causes  which  may  have  led  to  it,^  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  fix  upon  any  one  with  much  assurance.  It 
is  sufficient  that  it  answered  Paul's  purpose  in  proving 
that  the  Athenians  were  very  demon-fearing,  and  in  in- 
troducing to  them  the  only  true  and  living  God,  as 
though  he  were  the  God  whom  they  thus  already  wor- 
shiped. In  this  way  he  avoided  the  appearance  of  in- 
viting them  to  a  worship  which  was  foreign  to  their  cus- 
toms, and  which  they  otherwise  might  have  regarded  as 
unlawful. 

Jewish  conception  was  precisely  the  same,  except  that  they 
limited  their  use  of  the  term  to  the  spirits  of  wicked  men.  Thus 
Josephus  says:  "  Demons  are  no  other  than  the  spirits  of  the 
wicked,  that  enter  into  men  that  are  alive,  and  kill  them,  unless 
they  can  obtain  some  help  against  them  "  ( Wars,  vii.  6.  3).  This 
being  the  accepted  meaning  of  the  term  with  both  Jews  and 
Greeks,  we  must  understand  it  when  used  by  Jesus  and  bj''  Paul 
in  the  same  sense.  Similar  information  is  furnished  in  a  con- 
densed form  in  the  Liddell  and  Scott  Greek  Lexicon,  under  the 

word  ('iai/tuv.  - 

'  Petronius,  Satire  17. 

-  Individuals  as  well  as  the  state  were  in  the  habit  of  erecting 
small  marble  altars  to  the  honor  of  gods  or  goddesses  from  whom 
they  supposed  themselves  to  have  received  special  favors.  Some 
of  these,  recovered  from  the  ruins,  are  even  now  standing,  as 
they  did  in  ancient  times,  in  the  court  of  the  Acropolis. 


126  COMMENTARY.  [xvii.  24-28- 

Vv.  24-28.  He  next  introduces  the  God  to  whom 
lie  refers,  by  making  a  series  of  statements  concerning 
him,  every  one  of  which  presents  him  in  striking  con- 
trast with  the  gods  of  the  Greeks.  (24)  The  God  that 
made  the  world  and  all  things  therein,  he,  being  Lord 
of  heaven  and  earth,  dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with 
hands ;  (25)  neither  is  he  served  by  men's  hands,  as 
though  he  needed  anything,  seeing  he  himself  giveth  to 
all  life,  and  breath,  and  all  things  ;  (26)  and  he  made 
of  one  every  nation  of  men  for  to  dwell  on  all  the  face  of 
the  earth,  having  determined  their  appointed  seasons,  and 
the  bounds  of  their  habitation ;  (27)  that  they  should 
seek  God,  if  haply  they  might  feel  after  him,  and  find 
him,  though  he  is  not  far  from  each  one  of  us  :  (28)  for 
in  him  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being ;  as  cer- 
tain even  of  your  own  poets  have  said.  For  we  are  also 
his  offspring.  With  Paul's  hearers  there  was  no  God 
who  "  made  the  world  and  all  things  therein  ;"  so,  by 
this  thought  he  lifted  his  God  above  all  that  they  con- 
ceived of  theirs.  As  he  had  made  all  things,  this  made 
him  Lord,  not  of  the  sea,  as  Neptune,  nor  of  the  sky, 
ns  Jupiter,  but  "  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth."  From 
this  it  was  easy  to  see  the  conclusion,  that  he  dwells  not 
in  handmade  temj^les — that  these  are  too  small  to  con- 
tain him.  Here  Paul  had  allusion  to  the  magnificent 
marble  temples  which  were  in  sight  all  around  him,  and 
especially  to  the  Parthenon,  the  glory  of  Greek  archi- 
tecture, which  towered  above  the  Areopagus  just  to  the 
cast.  Both  from  this  consideration,  and  from  another 
next  mentioned,  this  God  is  not  served  by  men's  hands, 
as  though  he  needed  something  which  men  could  supply, 
seeing  that  from  him,  as  the  final  source,  men  receive 
their  life,  their  breath,  and  all  that   they  enjoy.     Of  no 


xvii.  28.]  ACTS.  127 

li  ailit'u  god  had  this  been  said  ;  for  to  none  of  them  did 
tiicir  worshipers  ascribe  sucli  power.  He  next  shows 
tiiat  this  Goil,  instead  of  being  the  god  of  some  single 
nation,  over  whose  destiny  he  presides,  while  he  defends 
it  a;4aitist  all  other  nations,  actually  cr(>ated  every  nation, 
made  them  all  from  one  man,  to  dwell  on  the  face  of  the 
whole  earth  ;  and  further,  that  the  seasons  of  prosperity 
and  adversity  of  all  these  nations,  together  with  their 
national  boundaries,  instead  of  being  regulated,  as  the 
heathen  supposed,  by  separate  national  gods,  were  all 
controlled  by  this  one  God.  Finally  he  shows  them 
that  the  purpose  of  God  in  all  these  things  was  to  induce 
men  to  obtain  the  very  knowledge  of  himself  which  Paul 
was  now  trying  to  impart  to  his  hearers.  What  nobler 
pursuit  of  knowledge  than  to  seek  such  a  God,  even 
though  we  have  to  "  feel  after  him  "  like  blind  men. 
But  such  obscure  seeking,  he  lets  them  know  in  the  same 
breath,  is  not  needful,  seeing  that  he  is  not  far  away,  but 
round  about  us  at  all  times  and  in  all  places.  One  of 
their  own  poets  had  very  nearly  expressed  this  thought, 
in  saying,  "  We  are  also  his  offspring  ;"  for  God,  like  an 
earthly  father,  would  not  leave  his  children  to  grope 
after  him  in  the  dark,  and  to  call  him  an  "  unknown 
god."  By  this  train  of  thought,  more  fully  expressed 
no  doubt  than  we  have  it  in  Luke's  epitome,  the  God 
whom  they  had  worshiped  without  knowing  him  was 
brought  before  them  ;  and  let  it  be  observed  that  they 
had  worshiped  him  in  a  closer  sense  than  we  are  apt  to 
suppose  ;  for  whatever  may  have  been  the  benefit  re- 
ceived, which  had  led  some  one  to  set  up  the  altar  in 
question,  that  benefit  had  really  come  from  the  true  God, 
and  this  expression  of  gratitude  had  been  offered  un- 
wittingly. 


128  COMMENTARY.  xvii.  29-31.] 

Ver.  29.  From  these  reflections,  and  especially 
from  the  last,  Paul  next  draws  a  logical  conclusion 
inimical  to  all  forms  of  idol  worship.  (29)  Being  then 
the  offspring  of  God,  we  ought  not  to  think  that  the  God- 
head is  like  unto  gold,  or  silver,  or  stone,  graven  by  art 
and  device  of  man.  Their  own  self-respect  should  forbid 
them  to  think  of  him  from  whom  they  derived  their  be- 
ing as  like  these  dead  works  of  their  own  hands,  how- 
ever skillfully  and  beautifully  wrought  out. 

The  statement  in  verse  26,  that  God  "  made  of  one 
all  the  nations  of  men,"  is  an  incidental  assertion  of  the 
unity  of  the  human  race  ;  and  it  accords  with  the  Mosaic 
history.  To  deny  it  because  we  find  some  difficulty  in 
reconciling  it  with  the  present  diversities  in  the  types  of 
men,  is  to  deny  an  assertion  of  the  Scriptures,  not  be- 
cause of  what  we  know,  but  because  of  what  we  do  not 
know  ;  for  if  we  knew  the  whole  history  of  our  race,  we 
should  doubtless  know  the  causes  of  these  varieties,  and 
the  times  in  which  they  came  into  existence. 

Yv.  30,  31.  Having  now  made  known  the  true  God 
to  his  hearers,  Paul  next  calls  upon  them  to  repent  of 
their  idolatry  ;  and  he  presents,  as  a  motive  to  this,  the 
solemn  fact  of  the  future  judgment.  (30)  The  times  of 
ignorance  therefore  God  overlooked  ;  but  now  he  com- 
mandeth  men  that  they  should  all  everywhere  repent : 
(31)  inasmuch  as  he  hath  appointed  a  day,  in  the  which  he 
will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness  by  the  man  whom 
he  hath  ordained  ;  whereof  he  hath  given  assurance 
unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead. 
By  saying  that  God  had  overlooked  the  times  of  ignor- 
ance, Paul  does  not  mean  that  he  had  excused  it ;  for 
this  would  be  inconsistent  with  this  call  to  repentance. 
He  means  that  God  had  not  hitherto  attempted  to  break 


xvii.  31.]  ACTS.  129 

it  up,  as  he  now  does,  by  sending  forth  preachers  of  the 
truth.  True,  the  message  of  Jonah  to  Nineveh,  the 
proclamations  concerning  the  true  God  forced  from  the 
pens  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  Darius  and  Cyrus,  together 
with  many  overthrows  of  heathen  armies  like  that  of 
Sennacherib,  were  loud  voices  from  heaven  reminding 
heathen  nations  of  the  God  whom  they  had  forgotten ; 
but  these  were  isolated  acts,  and  not  parts  of  a  continu- 
ous and  systematic  call  to  repentance^  such  as  was  sent 
forth  by  the  mission  of  the  apostles. 

The  soul-stirring  fact  that  God  has  "appointed  a  day 
in  which  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righteousness,"  is  a 
powerful  motive  to  repentance,  because  a  judgment  in 
righteousness  must  inevitably  involve  the  condemnation 
of  all  the  unrighteous ;  and  Paul's  hearers  could  now 
see  the  unrighteousness  of  their  idolatry.  In  thus  pre- 
senting the  final  judgment  as  the  first  and  foremost  mo- 
tive to  bring  men  to  repentance,  Paul  was  but  following 
the  example  of  Jesus,  and  proceeding  according  to  the 
demands  of  human  nature.  The  terrors  of  that  great 
day,  and  of  the  awful  fate  awaiting  those  who  shall  then 
be  condemned,  constitute  the  heavy  artillery  of  the  gos- 
pel, by  which  the  fortification  that  sin  has  constructed 
about  the  hearts  of  wicked  men  must  be  battered  down, 
ere  the  tenderer  motives  of  the  gospel  can  be  brought  to 
bear.  The  wicked  man  must  be  made  afraid  to  continue 
in  sin,  before  the  goodness  of  God  can  lead  him  to  re- 
pentance ;  and  the  preacher  of  the  gospel  who  neglects 
to  employ  the  thunders  of  this  heavenly  artillery  not 
only  fails  to  preach  according  to  the  divine  model,  but 
he  will  preach  a  feeble  gospel  that  can  never  work  deep 
seated  repentance. 


130  COMMENTARY.  [xvii.  31-33. 

It  is  just  at  this  point  in  his  discourse  that  Paul  first 
introduces  Jesus  ;  and  he  introduces  him  first,  not  as  a 
loving  Saviour,  but  as  a  universal  judge;  he  introduces 
him  not  in  his  birth  of  the  virgin,  or  in  his  baptism  by 
John,  or  in  his  healing  power,  or  in  his  death  for  the 
sins  of  men;  but  in  the  closing  act  of  his  Messianic 
reign,  the  everlasting  judgment ;  and  he  presents,  as  the 
proof  that  Jesus  will  thus  judge,  the  fact  that  God  has 
raised  him  from  the  dead.  This  fact,  considered  in  it- 
self alone,  would  not  furnish  this  proof;  but  considered 
in  connection  with  the  statement  of  Jesus  before  his 
death,  that  all  judgment  had  been  given  into  his  hands 
(Jno.  V.  22-29),  it  does.  Of  course  Paul's  hearers  did 
not  .yet  see  the  force  of  this ;  for  what  is  here  said  about 
Jesus,  even  without  naming  him,  Avas  evidently  intended 
by  Paul  as  the  mere  introduction  of  a  theme  which  he 
intended  to  expand  in  the  remainder  of  his  remarks. 
Indeed,  he  had  just  now  reached  that  which  was  to  be 
the  chief  theme  of  his  discourse ;  and  we  can  see  that 
his  plan  of  discourse  was,  first,  to  make  these  idolaters 
acquainted  with  the  true  God ;  second,  to  call  on  them 
to  repent  toward  God  ;  and  third,  to  present  Christ  as  he 
through  whom  their  repentance  might  be  available  in 
enabling  them  to  obtain  forgiveness  of  sins  and  ever- 
lasting life. 

Vv.  32,  33.  But  Paul  was  not  permitted  to  finish 
his  discourse.  Just  as  he  had  reached  its  most  vital  part 
he  was  interrupted.  (32)  Now  when  they  heard  of  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  some  mocked ;  but  others  said, 
We  will  hear  thee  concerning  this  yet  again.  (33)  Thus 
Paul  went  out  from  among  them.  From  a  modern  point 
of  view  there  are  two  strange  features  in  the  conduct  of 
this  audience  :  first,  that  they  listened  quietly  while  Paul 


xvii.  :r.,  ;u.]  ACTS.  l-'l 

was  demonstrating  the  folly  of  tiieir  idolatrous  worship, 
which  we  should  naturally  expect  them  to  defend  ;  and 
second,  that  they  interrupted  him  when  he  spoke  of  a 
resurrection  from  the  dead,  which  we  should  have  ex- 
pected them  to  welcome  as  a  relief  from  the  gloom  that 
shroudod  their  thoughts  of  death.  But  the  former  is 
accounted  for  by  the  infidelity  which  then  prevailed 
among  philosophers  in  reference  to  the  heathen  deities, 
rendering  formal  and  heartless  with  them  the  worship 
which  was  still  observed  by  the  ignorant  masses  with 
some  devoutness  and  sincerity ;  while  the  latter  is  ex- 
plained by  their  pride  of  opinion  and  their  party  zeal. 
The  two  sects  of  philosophy  to  which  they  belonged 
had  long  ago  proved,  by  arguments  which  the  Platonists, 
they  fondly  thought,  could  never  set  aside,  that  there  is 
no  future  state,  and  that  therefore  the  idea  of  a  resurrec- 
tion from  the  dead  is  preposterous.  Thus  a  false  phil- 
osophy had  crushed  out  of  their  hearts  some  of  the  bet- 
ter instincts  of  our  nature,  and  caused  them  to  mock  at 
that  which  is  the  dearest  of  all  hopes  to  the  chief  part 
of  mankind.  Still,  those  who  said,  '•  We  will  hear  thee 
concerning  this  yet  again,"  began,  perhaps,  to  feel  a  re- 
kindling of  their  better  instincts  ;  and  let  us  hope  that 
some  of  these  may  yet  be  found  among  the  sons  of 
light^ 

Ver.  34.  Although  his  discourse  was  broken  oflF  by 
the  mockery  of  a  portion  of  his  audience,  the  apostle's 
effort  was  not  altogether  fruitless.  (34)  But  certain  men 
clave  unto  him,  and  believed  :  among  whom  also  was 
Dionysius  the  Areopagite,  and  a  woman  named  Damaris, 
and  others  with  them.  Among  these  converts  Dionysius 
is  selected  for  special  mention,  because,  as  his  title  indi- 
cates, he  was  one  of  the  judges  of  the   Areopagus,  and 


132  COMMENTARY.  [xvii.  34— xviii.  1. 

therefore  a  man  of  high  official  standing  in  the  city ;  and 
Damaris  is  made  conspicuous  because  it  was  unusual  for 
a  woman  to  be  found  in  an  audience  of  philosophers. 
That  she  was  there,  however,  proves  the  freedom  of  the 
Greek  women  of  the  period,  and  is  quite  inconsistent 
with  the  notions  often  expressed  by  shallow  interpreters 
concerning  some  of  Paul's  remarks  about  women  in  his 
epistles.^ 

12.  Paul  Begins  the  Work  in  Coeinth, 
I.  ' 

XVIII.  1-4. 

Ver.  1.  Paul's  comparative  failure  in  Athens  aptly 
illustrates,  if  it  did  not  suggest,  his  subsequent  remark  to 
the  Corinthians,  "  God  made  foolish  the  wisdom  of  the 
world.  For  seeing  that  in  the  wisdom  of  God  the  world 
through  its  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  was  God's  good- 
pleasure  through  the  foolishness  of  the  preaching  to  save 
them  that  believe"  (1.  Cor.  i.  21).  Having  thus  failed 
in  the  literary  capital  of  Greece,  he  next  resorts  to  its 
2)olitical  and  commercial  capital,  (i)  After  these  things 
he  departed  from  Athens,  and  came  to  Corinth.  This 
city  was  situated  on  the  western  coast  of  the  isthmus 
which  connects  the  Peloponnesus  with  Attica.  It 
was  only  nine  miles  distant  across  the  isthmus  from 
Cenchrea  at  the  head  of  the  Saronic  gulf,  and  in  this 
direction  it  had  easy  communication  with  all  the  great 
cities  of  Asia ;  and,  being  at  the  head  of  the  gulf  of 
Corinth  on  the  west,  it  enjoyed,  through  it  and  the  Adri- 
atic sea,  close  communication  with  Italy  and  the  west. 
It  was  therefore  a  city  of  great  commercial  advantages, 
and  these  had  drawn  into  it  a  large  Jewish  popula- 
lation. 

}  I.  Cor.  xiv.  34-37  ;  I.  Tim,  ii.  8-15. 


xviii.  2-4.]  ACTS.  133 

Vv.  2-4.  Paul  entered  this  great  city  alone,  a  total 
stranger,  and  penniless.  The  little  means  which  he  had 
brought  with  him  from  Macedonia  was  exhausted,  and 
his  attention  was  turned  first  to  tlie  supply  of  his  daily 
bread.  By  a  combination  of  providences  he  found  most 
desirable  lodgings,  and  the  means  of  livelihood.  (2) 
And  he  found  a  certain  Jew  named  Aquila,  a  man  of 
Pontus  by  race,  lately  come  from  Italy,  with  his  wife 
Priscilla,  because  Claudius  had  commanded  all  the  Jews 
to  depart  from  Rome  :  and  he  came  unto  them  ;  (3)  and 
because  he  was  of  the  same  trade,  he  abode  with  them, 
and  they  wrought ;  for  by  their  trade  they  were  tent- 
makers.  (4)  And  he  reasoned  in  the  synagogue  every 
Sabbath,  and  persuaded  Jews  and  Greeks.  To  be  thus 
under  the  necessity  of  laboring  as  a  journeyman  tent- 
maker,  when  he  was  aiming  to  evangelize  a  proud  and 
opulent  city,  was  anything  but  encouraging.  From  the 
calm  and  unimpressive  style  of  Luke's  account,  we 
miglit  imagine  that  Paul's  feelings  were  callous  to  such 
considerations;  but  his  own  pen,  which  often  reveals 
emotions  unnoticed  by  Luke,  gives  a  far  different  repre- 
sentation. Writing  to  the  Corinthians  several  years 
afterward,  when  all  transient  emotions  had  been  for- 
gotten, he  says  :  "  I  was  with  you  in  weakness,  and  in 
fi'ar,  and  in  much  trembling"  (I.  Cor.  ii.  3).  He  was 
keenly  sensitive  to  the  weakness  of  his  situation ;  he 
feared  a  failure  similar  to  that  in  Athens;  and  he 
trembled  at  the  thought  that  the  salvation  of  so  many 
souls  was  dependent  on  so  feeble  an  instrumentality. 
Whetiier  he  found  in  Aquila  and  Priscilla  immediate 
Christian  fellowship  and  encouragement,  we  are  not  able 
to  determine  ;  for  while  it  is  possible  that  they  were 
among  the  Jews  from  Pontus  who  were  present  on  the 


134  COMMENTARY.  [xviii.  4-7. 

great  day  of  Pentecost  (ii.  9) ;  or  that  they  may  have 
been  baptized  more  recently  in  Rome  by  disciples  there 
who  had  heard  Peter's  great  sermon  (/6.) ;  and  while 
there  is  nothing  said  by  Luke  about  their  being  baptized 
by  Paul  ;  yet  if  they  were  already  disciples,  it  is  very 
difficult  to  account  for  Luke's  entire  silence  in  reference 
to  the  fact.  At  any  rate,  Paul  found  them  true  hearted 
worshipers  of  God,  and  formed  a  personal  attachment 
to  them  which  lasted  to  the  latest  day  of  his  life.  We 
shall  meet  them  again  and  again  in  the  course  of  the 
narrative,  and  always  to  hear  of  something  praiseworthy 
in  their  conduct. 

The  preaching  in  the  synagogue,  which  continued 
through  several  Sabbaths,  seems  to  have  been  slower 
than  usual  in  taking  effect.  Perhaps  this  was  because 
the  preacher  was  a  tent-maker,  as  well  as  a  stranger; 
and  jiossibly  it  was  due  in  part  to  the  less  aggressive 
manner  of  Paul,  superinduced  by  the  weakness  and  fear 
and  trembling  of  which  we  have  just  spoken. 

13.  The  Arrival  of   Silas   and  Timothy,  and  a 
Breach  with  the  Jews,  5-11. 

Vv.  5-7.  The  loneliness  of  Paul's  situation  was  at 
length  relieved,  and  a  change  came  over  his  manner  of 
preaching.  (5)  But  when  Silas  and  Timothy  came  down 
from  Macedonia,  Paul  was  constrained  by  the  word, 
testifying  to  the  Jews  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ.  (6) 
And  when  they  opposed  themselves,  and  blasphemed,  he 
shook  out  his  raiment,  and  said  unto  them.  Your  blood 
be  upon  your  own  heads  ;  I  am  clean  :  from  henceforth  I 
will  go  unto  the  Gentiles.  (7)  And  he  departed  thence, 
and  went  into  the  house  of  a  certain  man  named  Titus 
Justus,  one  that  worshiped  God,  whose    house    joined 


xviii.  7.]  ACTS.  r.\5 

hard  to  the  synagogue.  It  will  be  remembered  by  tlio 
reader  that  Silas  aud  Timothy,  whose  arrival  is  hero 
mentioned,  had  tarried  in  Beroea,  that  Paul  had  sent 
them  word  to  rejoin  him  as  soon  as  possible,  aud  that 
he  had  waited  for  them  in  Athens  (xvii.  15,  16).  Luke 
is  silent  as  to  whether  they  overtook  him  at  Athens;  but 
we  learn  from  Paul  that  Timothy  did.  He  writes : 
"  Whenwe  could  no  longer  forbear,  we  thought  it  good  to 
be  left  behind  at  Athens  alone,  and  sent  Timothy  ...  to 
establish  you  and  comfort  you  concerning  your  faith " 
(I.  Thess.  iii.  1,  2).  This  remark  not  only  shows  that 
Timothy  had  overtaken  Paul  at  Athens,  but  that  he  had 
been  sent  back  thence  to  Thessalonica.  It  also  proves  the 
correctness  of  our  judgment  as  to  why  Paul  had  habitu- 
ally left  behind  him  for  a  time,  with  almost  every 
church  planted,  some  one  of  his  fellow  laborers — that  is, 
"to  establish  them  and  comfort  them  concerning  the 
faith."  Timothy's  present  arrival  in  Corinth,  as  we 
now  see,  was  not  from  bis  original  stay  in  Beroea,  but 
from  "a  recent  visit  to  Thessalonica.  Probably  Silas  had 
remained  until  now  in  Beroea. 

The  statement  that  ou  the  arrival  of  Silas  and 
Timothy  Paul  was  "constrained  by  the  word,  testifying 
to  the  Jews  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ,"  implies,  I  think, 
that  hitherto  he  had  only  argued,  as  at  the  beginning  in 
Thessalonica,  that  according  to  the  Scriptures  the  Christ 
must  suffer  and  rise  again  from  the  dead,  without  ad- 
vancing as  yet  to  the  further  proposition,  that  "  this 
Jesus  whom  I  preach  to  you  is  tiie  Christ."  The  former 
might  cause  no  outbreak ;  the  latter  was  sure  to  do  so 
among  .Jews  who  had  already  heard  something  of  Jesus, 
as  the  Corinthian  Jews  almost  certainly  had.  The  antici- 
pated  crisis   came,   and    the   breach    followed.     Fortu- 


136  COMMENTARY.  [xviii.  7-10. 

nately,  one  Gentile  proselyte,  who  was  a  man  of  means, 
was  favorably  impressed  by  Paul ;  and  as  he  had  a  house 
close  to  the  synagogue,  he  threw  it  open  for  the  subse- 
quent meetings.  Justus  was  not  yet  a  disciple,  but,  as 
suits  the  meaning  of  his  name,  he  desired  to  see  justice 
done  to  the  apostle  and  his  cause. 

Ver.  8.  Although  Paul  left  the  synagogue  in  appar- 
ent discomfiture,  he  was  not  without  fruits  of  his  labor. 
(8)  And  Crispus,  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  believed  in 
the  Lord  with  all  his  house ;  and  many  of  the  Corin- 
thians, hearing,  believed,  and  were  baptized.  It  was 
very  seldom  that  men  of  high  positions  in  the  synagogue 
obeyed  the  gospel;  and  it  is  therefore  greatly  to  the 
credit  of  Crispus  that  he  did  so,  and  this  at  the  moment 
when  the  opposition  and  blasphemy  of  the  other  Jews 
was  at  its  height.  He  must  have  been  a  man  of  inde- 
pendence and  sincerity — the  very  kind  of  man  to  form 
the  nucleus  for  a  congregation  of  disciples.  His  conver- 
sion, and  that  of  the  other  Corinthians  here  mentioned, 
are  not  so  fully  described  as  those  of  the  eunuch,  of 
Saul,  and  of  Cornelius ;  yet  enough  is  said  to  show  that 
the  process  was  the  same.  "  Hearing,  they  believed  and 
were  baptized."  To  hear  the  gospel  preached,  to  believe 
it,  and  to  be  baptized,  is  the  whole  process  briefly 
expressed. 

Vv.  9,  10.  Although  his  success  when  leaving  the 
synagogue  must  have  been  a  source  of  comfort  to  Paul, 
we  have  evidence  that  he  was  far  from  being  relieved  as 
yet  from  the  "  weakness,  and  fear,  and  much  trembling," 
which  had  oppressed  him  since  his  coming  to  Corintli. 
We  have  now  reached  the  period  of  his  letter-writing', 
and  we  shall  henceforth  have  his  epistles  as  contempo- 
rary documents  to  fill  some  of  the  blanks  in  his  personal 


xviii.  S-10.]  ACTS.  137 

liistory  left  by  Luke.  The  first  epistle  to  the  Thossa- 
lonians  was  writtcMi  from  Corinth  soon  after  the  arrival 
of  Silas  and  Timothy,  as  is  proved  by  the  concurrence 
of  the  fwo  facts,  that  tliesc  two  bretliren  overtook  Paul 
in  Corinth,  and  tliat  in  the  epistle  Paul  speaks  of 
Timothy's  arrival  as  having  just  taken  place  at  the  rime 
of  writing  (iii.  G).  Several  statements  in  this  epistle 
throw  light  on  the  inner  experience  of  Paul  at  the  time. 
He  was  racked  by  uncontrollable  anxiety  for  the  breth- 
r^n  in  Thessalonica,  for  whom  he  would  willingly  have 
laid  down  his  life,  and  who  were  suffering  the  severest 
persecution  (ii.  8;  14-16).  The  good  report  of  their 
constancy  brought  to  him  by  Timothy  gave  him  much 
joy;  but  it  was  joy  in  the  midst  of  distress;  for  he  says  : 
"  When  Timothy  came  even  now  unto  us  from  you,  and 
brought  us  glad  tidings  of  your  faith  and  love,  and  that 
ye  have  good  remenibrauce  of  us  always,  longing  to  see 
us,  even  as  we  also  to  see  you  ;  for  this  cause,  brethren, 
we  are  comforted  over  you  in  all  our  distress  and  afflic- 
tion through  your  faith:  for  now  we  live  if  ye  stand 
fast  in  the  Lord  "  (iii.  6-8).  Undoubtedly  a  part  of 
this  "  distress  and  affliction"  was  the  result  of  his  failure 
to  save  those  Jews  in  Corinth  who  were  now  reviling 
him,  and  who,  he  well  knew,  would  leave  untried  no 
device  by  which  they  might  hope  to  drive  him  from  the 
city.  It  was  just  at  this  crisis  that  the  Lord  Jesus,  in 
whose  behalf  he  was  suffering,  drew  aside  the  intervt  n- 
iiig  veil,  and  gave  a  word  of  cheer.  (9)  And  the  Lord 
said  unto  Paul  in  the  night  by  a  vision,  Be  not  afraid,  but 
speak,  and  hold  not  thy  peace :  (10)  for  I  am  with  thee, 
and  no  man  shall  set  on  thee  to  harm  thee :  for  I  have 
much  people  in  this  city.  The  I^ord  never  broke  his 
accustomed   silence   to   comfort   a  servant  except    when 


138  COMMENTARY.  [xviii.  10,  11. 

comfort  was  needed.  The  comfort  which  he  gave  on 
this  occasion  was  not  tlie  assurance  of  personal  safety 
alone,  but  that  which  Paul  valued  far  higher,  the  assur- 
ance that  his  labors  and  sufferings  in  Corinth  would  yet 
be  rewarded  by  the  salvation  of  many  souls. 

In  the  words,  "  I  have  much  people  in  this  city," 
the  Lord  speaks  of  persons  who  were  as  yet  unblievers, 
and  perhaps  idolaters.  This  accords  with  the  Calvin- 
istic  idea  that  God's  people  are  a  definite  number  wlioni 
he  has  individually  selected  from  all  eternity  ;  but  it 
does  not  prove  it;  for  the  language  equally  accords  with 
the  supposition  that  he  called  them  his  merely  because 
he  foresaw  that  under  Paul's  preacliing  they  would  yet 
believe.  The  same  style  is  employed  in  Revelation, 
when  the  angel,  announcing  the  downfall  of  mystic 
Babylon,  cries,  "  Come  out  of  her,  ray  people,  that  ye  be 
not  partakers  of  her  sins,  and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her 
plagues"  (xviii.  4).  God  knew  that  in  answer  to  his 
call  a  peojjle  would  come  out  of  Babylon  whom  he 
would  accept,  and  he  calls  them  his  people  by  way 
of  anticipation. 

Vv.  11.  Supported  by  the  assurance  given  in  the 
vision,  Paul  continued  his  labors  long  and  patiently. 
(ii)  And  he  dwelt  there  a  year  and  six  months,  teach- 
ing the  word  of  God  among  them.  This  is  longer  than 
^he  had  ever  yet  stayed  in  any  one  city,  and  the  word 
'■  teaching,"  which  describes  his  work,  shows  that  dur'ng 
this  long  period  he  was  executing  chiefly  the  second  part 
of  the  apostolic  commission,  '^teaching  them  to  observe 
all  that  I  have  commanded  you  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  20). 
From  this  we  can  see  that,  notwithstanding  the  muny 
disorders  which  were  afterward  found  in  the  Corinthi  .n 
church,    it   was    probably   the    best    taught    of   all    the 


xviii.  11-16.]  ACTS.  139 

churches  thus  far  planted  by  Paul.  If  they  had  been 
less  fully  instructed,  what  might  have  been  their  later 
condition  ? 

14.  Paul  Arraigned  Before  Gallic,  12-17. 

Vv.  12,  13.  The  attempt  of  the  Jews  to  suppress  the 
preaching,  which  Paul  had  been  looking  for  ever  since 
he  left  the  synagogue,  came  at  last,  but  it  came  in  an 
unusual  form,  and  Avith  unusual  results.  (12)  But  when 
Gallic  was  proconsul  of  Achaia,  the  Jews  with  one 
accord  rose  up  against  Paul,  and  brought  him  before 
the  judgment  seat,  (13)  saying,  This  man  persuadeth 
men  to  worship  God  contrary  to  the  law.  The  charge 
])referred  was  that  of  law-breaking,  as  in  Philippi  and 
Thossalonica  ;  but  in  those  instances  it  was  preferred  by 
Gentiles  with  reference  to  Roman  law,  while  in  this  the 
Jews  bad  the  boldness  to  prefer  it  in  their  ovvn  name, 
and  with  reference  to  their  own  law.  This  indicates  a 
degree  of  confidence  in  their  own  influence  which  we 
have  not  met  with  in  any  other  Gentile  city.  They 
hoj)cd  that  Gallic  would  be  willing  to  silence  a  Jew  who 
was  teaching  contrary  to  the  law  of  his  own  people. 

Vv.  14-16.  In  this  instance,  however,  the  Jews 
had  to  deal  with  a  man  far  different  from  the  prajtors  of 
Philippi,  or  the  politarchs  of  Thessalonica.  Gallio  was  a 
brother  of  Seneca,  the  famous  Roman  moralist,  who 
speaks  of  him  as  a  man  of  admirable  integrity,  amiable 
:ind  popular.'     He  was  true  to  this  representation  on  the 

'He  says:  "No  mortal  man  is  so  svveet  to  any  single  person 
as  he  is  to  all  mankind."  "Even  those  who  love  my  brother 
(iallio  to  the  very  utmost  of  their  power,  yet  do  love  not  him 
enoui^h  "  {QaicstioneH  Nalarales,  iv.  prfef.  Sees.  10,  11.)  It  is  a 
sa<l  comment  on  the  supetstition  which  shrouded  their  minds, 
that  both  the  brothers  perished  by  suicide. 


140  COMMENTARY.  [xviii.  14-17. 

present  occasion.  (14)  But  when  Paul  was  about  to 
open  his  mouth,  Gallio  said  to  the  Jews,  If  indeed  it 
were  a  matter  of  wrong  or  of  wicked  villainy,  0  ye 
Jews,  reason  would  that  I  should  bear  with  you  :  (15)  but 
if  they  are  questions  about  words  and  names  and  your 
own  law,  look  to  it  yourselves ;  I  am  not  minded  to  be  a 
judge  of  these  matters.  (16)  And  he  drove  them  from 
the  judgment  seat.  Gallio's  phraseology,  "  words  and 
names  and  your  law/'  shows  that  he  had  a  very  confused 
conception  of  the  issue  between  Paul  and  the  Jews ;  but 
he  knew  enough  to  justify  his  decision.  This  is  the 
only  instance  in  all  the  experience  of  Paul  in  which  his 
accusers  were  dealt  with  justly  and  summarily. 

Vee.  17.  Prompt  and  energetic  vindication  of  the 
right  nearly  always  meets  the  approval  of  the  masses  of 
the  people,  and  it  sometimes  reverses  the  tide  of  popular 
prejudice.  We  do  not  know  how  the  naasses  of  the  city 
stood  toward  Paul  before  this  decision,  but  they  ex- 
pressed themselves  very  vigorously  as  soon  as  the  deci- 
sion was  rendered.  (17)  And  they  all  laid  hold  on  Sos- 
thenes,  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue,  and  beat  him  before 
the  judgment  seat.  And  Gallio  cared  for  none  of  these 
things.  The  judgment  seat,  the  chair  of  state  in  which 
the  proconsul  sat,  was  not  erected  inside  of  a  court 
room,  as  with  us,  but  in  the  open  air,  and  usually  in  the 
agora,  or  forum.  Consequently,  all  trials  which  excited 
public  interest  were  witnessed  by  a  crowd  of  spectators 
made  up  largely  of  the  idlers  on  the  streets.  These  are 
the  only  parties  who  could  have  been  tempted  to  thus 
lay  hands  on  Sosthenes,  who,  as  the  leader  of  the  Jews, 
had  preferred  the  charge  against  Paul.  With  that  keen 
sense  of  the  fitness  of  things  which  often  characterizes 
such  a  crowd,  they  saw  that  Sosthenes  deserved  the  beat- 


xviii.  17.]  ACTS.  141 

ing  whieli  lie  luul  laid  up  for  Paul ;  and  perhaps  with  a 
huigh  and  a  yell  they  gave  it  to  hini.^  The  reason  that 
Gallio  "  eared  for  none  of  these  things  "  was  because,  as 
respects  the  question  between  Paul  and  the  Jews,  he  did 
not  understand  it ;  and  as  respects  the  beating  of  Sos- 
thenes,  he  rather  enjoyed  it,  because  Sosthenes  so  richly 
deserved  it.  The  disappointment  and  rage  of  the  Jews 
were  unbounded,  but  they  had  learned  from  bitter  ex- 
perience how  to  choke  down  such  feelings,  and  to  keep 
quiet. 

Before  Paul  left  Corinth,  and  perhaps  previous  to 
the  arraignment  before  Gallio,  he  wrote  the  second 
epistle  to  the  Thessalonians.  The  indications  of  time  and 
place  in  the  epistle  are  meager,  but  in  the  absence  of 
conflicting  evidence  they  are  conclusive.  First,  there  is 
such  a  connection  in  thought  and  subject  matter  between 
it  and  the  first  epistle  as  to  indicate  that  there  was  no 
long  interval  between  them ;  and  second,  Silas  joined 
with  Paul  in  the  salutation  (i.  1) ;  but  Silas  was  not  with 
Paul  after  the  latter  left  Corinth.  If  we  knew  just 
when  the  separation  from  Silas  took  place,  whether  on 
Paul's  departure  from  Corinth,  or  at  some  previous 
time,  we  could  come  nearer  fixing  the  exact  date ;  but  it 
is  commonly  supposed  that  it  was  written  within  the 

'The  grammatical  connection  points  to  the  term  Jews  in  the 
preceding  context  as  the  antecedent  of  "  they  ;  "  but  this  would 
make  the  Jews  the  party  that  beat  Sosthenes,  which  is  altogether 
improbable ;  for  why  should  they  beat  their  own  synagogue 
ruler  merely  becau.se  Gallio  had  driven  both  him  and  them  from 
ttie  court?  The  grammatical  connection  must  then  yield,  as  it 
does  in  xix.  33,  and  John  viii.  33,  two  parallel  cases,  to  the  de- 
mands of  the  context,  in  determining  the  meaning.  Farrar,  who 
takes  the  same  view  of  the  meaning,  says  of  it,  "  I  give  the  view 
wliich  seems  fo  me  mo^t  probable,  passing  over  masses  of  idle 
conjecture  "  {Life  of  Paul,  323,  n  4). 


142  COMMENTARY.  [xviii.  17. 

same  year  as  the  first,  and  this  would  fix  tlie  date  of 
both  in  the  year  52,^  Tlie  epistle  reveals  the  fact  that 
this  church  was  still  suffering  severe  persecution,  but 
that  they  were  enduring  it  with  marvelous  patience,  so 
that  Paul  could  say  to  them,  "■  We  are  bound  to  give 
ihanksto  God  always  for  you,  brethren,  even  as  it  is  meet, 
for  that  your  faith  groweth  exceedingly,  and  the  love  of 
each  one  of  you  all  toward  one  another  aboundeth ;  so  that 
Ave  ourselves  glory  in  you  in  the  churches  of  God  for 
your  patience  and  faith  in  all  your  persecutions  and  in 
the  afflictions  which  ye  endure"  (i.  3,  4).  The  extreme 
anxiety  which  he  had  felt  for  them  at  the  time  of 
writing  the  first  epistle,  and  his  diligence  both  in  send- 
ing Timothy  back  to  them  and  in  writing  to  them,  had 
been  abundantly  rewarded  by  their  perseverance.  Paul 
was  moved  not  only  to  thanksgiving,  but  to  many  tender 
prayers  in  their  behalf,  which  he  briefly  quotes  in  the 
epistle.^  He  had  heard  that  "  either  by  spirit,  or  by 
word,  or  by  epistle "  as  from  him,  they  had  been 
troubled  concerning  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord 
(ii.  2) ;  and  in  order  to  guard  against  imposture  in  the 
future,  he  gives  them  a  token  by  which  they  may  test 
the  genuineness  of  any  epistle  claiming  to  come  from 
him.  He  says  :  "  The  salutation  of  me  Paul  with  mine 
own  hand,  which  is  the  token  in  every  epistle :  thus  I 
write"  (ill.  17).  This  shows  that  he  ordinarily  em- 
ployed an  amanuensis  in  writing  his  epistles  {cf.  Rom. 
xvi.  22),  but  that  he  wrote  the  salutation  with  his  own 
hand  as  an  evidence  of  genuineness.  The  employment 
of  a  skillful  scribe,  such  as  could  be  found  in  every  city, 
if  he  had  no  companion   possessed  of  this  accomplish- 

^  See  Vol.  I.  Intro.,  pages  xsxix,  xxxiv.     ^See  i.  11,  12;  ii.  IG, 
17 ;  iii.  16. 


xviii.  17,  IS.]  ACTS.  14;> 

nient,  insured  such  perfection  in  the  manuscript  as  to 
leave  no  word  illegible,  while  the  autographic  salutation 
attested  the  genuineness  of  the  document.  As  these  two 
epistles  are  the  earliest  of  the  New  Testament  books,  we 
can  readily  believe  that  Paul's  example,  in  thus  guarding 
the  inspired  documents  agamst  liability  to  misreading  or 
to  imposture,  was  followed  by  the  other  writers. 

15.  Paul's  Return  to  Antioch,  18-22. 

Ver.  18.  The  last  incident  which  Luke  chooses  to 
mention  in  Corinth  was  the  arraignment  before  Galiio, 
though  Paul  continued  there  yet  for  a  considerable  time. 
(i8)  And  Paul,  having  tarried  after  this  yet  many  days, 
took  his  leave  of  the  brethren,  and' sailed  thence  for 
Syria,  and  with  him  Priscilla  and  Aquila  ;  having  shorn 
his  head  in  Cenchrea :  for  he  had  a  vow.  His  stay  of 
eighteen  months  in  Corinth  may  be  taken  as  an  indica- 
tion of  the  time  which  he  would  have  spent  wath  some 
other  churches  had  he  been  permitted  to  do  so.  Thanks 
to  Gallic,  this  was  the  only  church  in  Macedonia  and 
Greece  in  which  he  was  permitted  to  remain  as  long 
as  he  thought  j)roper.  We  shall  hereafter  see,  however 
that  this  church,  which  was  free  from  persecution,  was 
none  the  better  for  it  as  compared  with  those  in  Thessa- 
lonica  and  Philippi. 

In  aiming  to  sail  to  Syria,  it  was  necessary  to  cross 
the  isthmus  to  Cenchrea,  where  we  find  a  church  at  a  later 
period,  which  had  probably  been  planted  during  Paul's 
stay  in  Corinth.  On  arriving  at  this  port,  the  time  of 
some  vow  which  he  had  taken  expired.  In  imitation  of 
the  Nazirite,  he  had  permitted  his  hair  to  grow  during 
the  period  of  the  vow,  and  at  its  close  he  resumed  the 
regular  shaving  of  his  head  which   is  customary   with 


144  COMMENTARY.  [xviii.  18-22. 

turban-wearing  nations.  Many  have  mistaken  this  for 
the  Nazirite  vow  itself,  through  failure  to  remember 
that  at  the  close  of  this  vow  the  hair  was  to  be  shaved 
off  at  the  temple,  and  burned  in  the  fire  of  the  altar 
(Num.  vi.  13-18). 

Vv.  19-22.  A  vessel  sailing  from  Cenchrea  to 
Syria  could  very  conveniently  touch  at  Ephesus,  which 
was  the  destination  of  Aquila  and  Priscilla.  (19)  And 
they  came  to  Ephesus,  and  he  left  them  there :  but  he 
himself  entered  into  the  synagogue,  and  reasoned  with 
the  Jews.  (20)  And  when  they  asked  him  to  abide  a 
longer  time,  he  consented  not ;  (21)  but  taking  his  leave 
of  them,  and  saying,  I  will  return  again  unto  you,  if 
God  will,  he  set  sail  from  Ephesus.  (22)  And  when  he 
had  landed  at  Csesarea,  he  went  up  and  saluted  the 
church,  and  went  down  to  Antioch.  Paul  had  now 
decided  that  it  was  time  for  him  to  return  once  more  to 
Antioch,  and  report  progress,  before  undertaking  the 
evangelization  of  another  great  city.  Having  fixed  on 
Ephesus  as  his  next  j3oint  of  attack,  he  feels  the  pulse, 
as  it  were,  of  the  Jews  there,  by  a  few  remarks  in  the 
synagogue;  and  finding  it  to  beat  favorably,  he  leaves 
Priscilla  and  Aquila  there  for  the  evident  purpose  of 
preparing  the  ground  as  well  as  they  can,  and  of  being 
there  when  he  returns,  to  help  him  as  they  had  done  in 
Corinth  ;  then,  promising  to  return,  he  hurries  on.  The 
voyage  to  Csesarea,  and  thence  to  Antioch,  is  without 
recorded  incident,  except  that  on  landing  at  the  former 
city  he  "  went  up  and  saluted  the  church."  This  is  the 
church  which  had  been  planted  there  by  the  baptism  of 
Cornelius   and    his  friends.^     On   reaching  Antioch  we 

^  The   commentators  in  general,  misled    by  the   interpolated 
clause  in  the  Textus  Keceptus,  and  the  old  English  versions,  '•  I 


xviii.  22,  23.]  ACTS.  145 

can  not  doubt  that  he  once  more  gladdened  the  hearts  of 
the  brethren  who  had  commended  him  and  Silas  to  the 
favor  of  the  Lord,  by  rehearsing  to  them  all  that  God 
had  done  with  him,  and  how  he  had  opened  still  wider 
"  the  door  of  faith  to  the  Gentiles."  It  may  be  that 
Silas  had  preceded  him ;  if  not,  he  doubtless  stated  (o 
them,  as  Luke  has  not  stated  to  us,  the  circumstances 
under  which  they  had  separated.  As  to  the  changes 
which  may  have  taken  place  in  Antioch  during  the  three 
years  of  Paul's  absence,  Luke  is  equally  silent ;  for  he 
has  his  eye,  as  Paul  had  his,  on  the  contemplated  labors 
in  Ephesus,  which  he  hastens  to  describe. 


SEC.  IV.     PAUL'S  THIRD  TOUR. 

(XVIII.  23 — XXI.  16.) 

1.  Second  Visit  to  Galatia  and  Phryqia,  23. 

Ver.  23.  In  a  single  brief  sentence  Luke  disposes  of  a 
journey  which  must  have  occupied  several  months  at  least; 
for  it  covered  five  or  six  hundred  miles.  (23)  And  having 
spent  some  time  there,  he  departed,  and  went  through 
the  region  of  Galatia  and  Phrygia  in  order,  establishing 
all  the^disciples.     In  order  to  reach  Galatia  and  Phrygia 

must  by  all  means  keep  this  feast  that  comet h  in  Jerusalem." 
(21),  assume  that  the  church  which  Paul  went  up  and  saluted 
was  the  Jerusalem  church;  but  in  the  absence  of  that  clause 
there  is  nothing  to  Justify  this  conclusion.  lie  had  doubtless 
landed  at  Ctesarea  because  the  ship  in  which  he  sailed  was  bound 
for  that  harbor,  and  he  had  been  contented  to  sail  in  that  ship 
rather  than  lose  time  waiting  for  another,  because  it  was  but  a 
short  sail  from  Cti.'sarea  to  Antioch,  and  coasting  vessels  for  the 
voyage  could  be  found  almost  daily. 


146  COMMENTARY.  [xviii.  23-26. 

the  only  districts  in  the"  route  that  are  mentioned,  he 
must  have  made  the^  circuit  once  more  from  Antioch 
around  through  Syria  into  Cilicia,  and  thence  by  way 
of  the  Gates  of  Cilicia  into  the  elevated  tablelands  of 
Lycaonia  and  Pisidia,  past  Derbe,  Lystra,  Iconium  and 
the  Pisidian  Antioch.  This  was  his  third  visit  to  these 
communities,  and  his  passage  through  Galatia  and 
Phrygia  was  a  second  visit  to  the  churches  which  he  had 
planted  there.  If  we  may  judge  from  the  rapidity  of 
his  passage,  he  found  the  churches  in  all  the  regions  in 
such  a  condition  that  they  did  not  specially  need  a  pro- 
tracted visit  from  him,  yet  his  work  among  them,  brief 
as  it  was,  consisted  in  "  establishing  all  the  disciples." 
He  had  this  work  in  view,  as  well  as  the  report  in  Anti- 
och, when  he  declined  the  invitation  to  stay  in  Ephesus 
(20,  21). 

2.  Apollos  in  Ephesus  and  Achaia,  24-28. 

Vv.  24-26.  We  have  expressed  the  opinion  that 
Paul's  purpose  in  leaving  Aquila  and  Priscilla  in  Ephe- 
sus was  that  they  might  do  such  preparatory  work  as 
they  could  duriug  his  absence  (19) ;  and  now  Luke  gives 
us  a  specimen  of  the  work  of  this  kind  which  they  did. 
(24)  Now  a  certain  Jew  named  Apollos,  an  Alexandrian 
by  race/  a  learned  man,  came  to  Ephesus  ;  and  he  was 
mighty  in  the  Scriptures.  (25)  This  man  had  been  in- 
structed in  the  way  of  the  Lord  ;  and  being  fervent  in 
spirit,  he  spake  and  taught  carefully  the  things  con- 
cerning Jesus,  knowing  only  the  baptism  of  John  :  (26) 

^  Apollos  is  here  called  "  an  Alexandrian  by  race,"  {tu  yhei), 
rather  than  by  birth,  as  in  the  A.  Y.,  to  indicate  that  he  was  not 
only  born  there,  but  born  of  an  ancestry  native  to  that  city.  The 
term  serves  a  similar  jaurpose  when  used  of  Aquila  in  xviii.  1. 


xviii.  2fi.]  ACTS. 


147 


and  he  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  synagogue.  But 
when  Priscilla  and  Aquila  heard  him,  they  took  him 
unto  them,  and  expounded  unto  him  the  way  of  the 
Lord  more  carefully.  The  dlstiuguished  position  which 
Apollos  afterward  acquired  in  the  church  at  Corinth,  and 
the  familiarity  of  his  name  among  the  disciples  of  sub- 
sequent ages,  make  it  a  matter  of  interest  to  observe 
closely  what  is  here  said  of  him.  That  he  was  an  Alex- 
andrian accounts  in  part  for  his  learning,  and  indicates 
the  character  of  it ;  for  Alexandria,  having  been  for  at 
least  two  centuries  the  chief  point  of  contact  between 
Greek  and  Hebrew  literature,  had  now  become  the  chief 
seat  of  Hebrew  learning.  This  learning  included  a 
kuowledgre  of  the  Greek  version  of  the  Old  Testament, 
of  the  other  Greek  literature  of  the  later  Jewish  ages, 
and  to  some  extent  of  Greek  philosophy.  The  state- 
ment that  he  was  "mighty  in  the  Scriptures"  means 
not  merely  that  he  was  familiar  with  them,  but  that  he 
knewliowto  handle  them  in  argument  and  exposition 
with  great  effect.  In  a  day  when  a  knowledge  of  the 
Scriptures  had  to  be  acquired  from  manuscripts,  and  in 
which  even  the  art  of  reading  was  acquired  by  only  a 
few,  it  was  no  ordinary  accomplishment  to  be  thus 
familiar  with  the  Scriptures.  Such  an  attainment  is  rare 
even  in  this  day  of  printed  Bibles,  and  even  among 
preachers,  who  are  presumed  by  those  who  know  no  bet- 
ter to  devote  their  whole  lives  to  the  study  of  the  Bible. 
Preachers  would  be  more  mighty  in  preaching,  and  would 
have  less  need  to  search  for  might  where  it  can  not  be 
found,  if  they  would  be  more  careful  to  follow  the  ex- 
ample of  Apollos. 

But  while  Apollos  was  mighty  in  the  Scriptures,  and 
while    with   a   fervent   spirit   he  "  taught    carefully    the 


148  COMMENTARY.  [xviii.  20-28. 

things  concerning  Jesus/'  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  on  hear- 
ing him,  soon  discovered  that  he  did  not  understand 
Christian  baptism — that  he  knew  *^only  the  baptism  of 
John."  They  were  not  so  ignorant  on  this  subject  as  to 
suppose,  with  some  of  our  moderns,  that  there  is  no  dif- 
ference between  the  two  ba])tisms ;  nor  so  indifferent  to 
it,  as  a  "  mere  external  rite,"  that  they  considered  the 
difference  of  no  importance.  On  the  contrary,  they  took 
the  powerful  and  zealous  preacher  to  their  own  home, 
and  taught  him  the  truth  on  the  subject.  To  his  credit 
as  a  candid  seeker  after  truth,  he  appears  to  have  accept- 
ed gladly  the  correction.  He  learned  that,  while  John's 
baptism  had  attached  to  it  no  promise  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  this  was  one  of  the  distinctive  features  of  Christian 
baptism;  and  that  while  John  baptized  into  no  name, 
the  aj)ostles  were  taught  to  baptize  into  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (ii.  3; 
Matt,  xxviii.  J  9).  The  question,  whether  he  was  rebap- 
tized,  will  come  before  us  in  connection  with  xix.  5. 

It  should  be  observed  that  Priscilla  took  part  with 
her  husband  in  giving  more  perfect  instruction  to 
Ajiollos,  and  this  illustrates  the  manner  in  which  cer- 
tain faithful  women  were  eminent  helpers  of  the  apostles 
and  evangelists  in  the  spread  of  the  gospel ;  yet  it  can 
not,  without  a  deceitful  handling  of  the  Scriptures,  be 
urged  as  proof  that  even  the  most  eminent  of  the  female 
helpers  took  part  in  public  preaching. 

Vv.  27,  28.  For  a  reason  not  given,  Apollos  decided 
to  leave  Ephesus,  and  visit  the  churches  planted  by  Paul 
in  Achaia.  (27)  And  when  he  was  minded  to  pass  over 
into  Achaia,  the  brethren  encouraged  him,  and  wrote  to 
the  disciples  to  receive  him :  and  when  he  was  come,  he 
helped  them  much  who  had  believed  through  grace  :   (28) 


xviii.  28.]  ACTS.  149 

for  he  powerfully  confuted  the  Jews,  and  that  publicly, 
showing  by  the  Scriptures  that  Jesus  was  the  Christ. 
This  is  tiie  first  mention  of  letters  of  commeudatioii 
given  to  disciples  going  from  one  Christian  community 
to  another.  They  are  mentioned  at  a  later  period  as  be- 
ing in  common  use  (II.  Cor.  iii.  1,  2).  The  brethren 
"  encouraged  him"  to  go,  because  they  knew  his  pecu- 
liar power,  and  they  knew  that  the  churches  needed  it  in 
their  controversies  with  the  Jews.  Who  these  brethren 
were,  besides  Aquila  and  Priscilla,  Luke  does  not  just 
here  inform  us;  but  we  learn  a  little  farther  on  (xix.  1). 
Their  expectations  concerning  the  labors  of  Apollos  in 
Achaia  were  happily  realized  in  the  great  help  which  he 
gave  to  the  disciples,  and  his  successful  confutation  of 
the  Jews.  His  special  power  being  in  the  use  of  the 
Scriptures,  he  was  the  very  man  to  reach  the  Jews,  and 
to  strengthen  the  faith  of  the  believers.  To  confute  is 
not  always  to  convince ;  but  we  have  evidence  that  in 
addition  to  confuting  the  Jews,  Apollos  brought  many 
into  the  church ;  for  Paul  afterward  referred  to  his  labors 
as  a  watering  of  the  church  which  he  had  planted, 
and  then,  changing  his  figure,  said,  "I  laid  the  founda- 
tion, and  another  buildeth  thereon  "  (I.  Cor.  iii.  6-10). 
As  Paul  had  made  a  comparative  failure  with  the  Jews 
of  Corinth,  the  success  of  Apollos  illustrates  the  value 
of  a  variety  of  talents  and  acquirements  among  preach- 
ers, in  order  to  the  successful  evangelization  of  the  great 
variety  of  minds  and  characters  often  found  in  a  single 
community. 


150  COMMENTARY.  [xix.  1-7. 

3.  Paul.  Reaches  Ephesus,  and  Rebaptizes  a 
Dozen  Men,  xix.  1-7. 

Vv.  1-7.  The  historian  now  reaches  the  point  for 
which  he  had  so  hurriedly  passed  over  the  voyage  of 
Paul  from  Ephesus  to  Antioch,  and  his  land  journey 
thence  through  Galatia  and  Phrygia.  Paul  is  permitted 
at  last  to  begin  a  work  which  he  had  in  mind  when,  on 
his  preceding  tour,  he  was  "  forbidden  by  the  Hoi} 
Spirit  to  speak  the  word  iu  Asia  "  (xvi.  6)  ;  and  also  to 
fulfill  the  appointment  which  he  had  left  here  on  his 
journey  homeward  (xviii.  21).  (i)  And  it  came  to  pass, 
that,  while  Apollos  was  at  Corinth,  Paul  having  passed 
through  the  upper  country  came  to  Ephesus,  and  found 
certain  disciples  :  (2)  and  he  said  unto  them,  Did  ye  re- 
ceive the  Holy  Spirit  when  ye  believed  ?  And  they  said 
unto  him,  Nay,  we  did  not  so  much  as  hear  whether  the 
Holy  Spirit  was  given.  (3)  And  he  said,  Into  what  then 
were  ye  baptized  ?  And  they  said,  Into  John's  baptism. 
(4)  And  Paul  said,  John  baptized  with  the  baptism  of 
repentance,  saying  unto  the  people,  that  they  should  be- 
lieve on  him  who  should  come  after  him,  that  is,  on 
Jesus.  (5)  And  when  they  heard  this,  they  were  bap- 
tized into  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  (6)  And  when 
Paul  had  laid  his  hands  upon  them  the  Holy  Spirit  came 
on  them ;  and  they  spoke  with  tongues,  and  prophesied. 
(7)  And  they  were  in  all  about  twelve  men.  This  pass- 
age, in  connection  with  what  is  said  in  the  previous  par- 
agraph about  Apollos  (xviii.  25),  shows  that  John's  bap- 
tism was  still  preached  and  practiced  in  some  places ;  and 
it  also  shows  how  the  apostles  dealt  with  persons  thus 
baptized.  These  men  were  introduced  to  Paul  as  disci- 
ples of  Jesus,  and  they  were  doubtless  "  the  brethren  " 


xix.  7.]  ACTS.  151 

who  had  united  with  Aqiiila  in  giving  a  letter  to  Apollos 
(xviii.  27).  Paul's  first  question,  "  Did  ye  receive  the 
Holy  Spirit  when  ye  believed?"  had  reference  not  to  the 
ordinary  indwelling  of  the  Spirit;  for  this  all  receive 
who  repent  and  are  baptized  (ii.  38),  and  therefore  he 
could  have  no  ground  for  doubting  that  they  received 
this.  But  some  disciples,  after  baptism,  received  through 
imposition  of  apostolic  hands  the  miraculous  gift  of  the 
Spirit ;  and  it  is  of  this  that  Paul  inquired,  as  is  proved 
not  only  by  these  considerations,  but  by  the  fact  that  it 
is  this  which  he  conferred  upon  them  at  the  close  of  the 
conversation.  "When  they  answered,  "We  did  not  so 
much  as  hear  that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given,"  he  saw  at 
once  that  there  was  something  wrong  about  their  bap- 
tism ;  hence  his  next  question,  "  Into  what  then  were  ye 
baptized?"  He  meant  not  into  what  baptism,  but  into 
what  name ;  for  when  he  hears  their  answer,  he  directs 
them  to  be  baptized  "  into  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus," 
which  is  but  an  abbreviation  for  "  into  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,"  the 
form  of  expression  employed  by  Jesus  himself  (Matt. 
xxviii.  19).  If  they  had  been  thus  baptized  they  could 
not  have  been  ignorant  about  the  Holy  Spirit  into  whose 
name  they  were  baptized.  Moreover,  in  that  case  they 
would  already  have  been  told,  as  Peter  told  the  people 
on  Pentecost,  that  on  being  baptized  they  would  receive 
the  Holy  Spirit.  Having  no  knowledge  of  this  bapti>!:iu 
into  a  name,  and  therefore  missing  the  aim  of  Paul's  sec- 
ond question,  the  men  answered,  "  Into  John's  baptism  ; " 
and  thus  Paul  discovered  the  cause  of  their  ignorance 
about  the  Holy  Spirit ;  for  John's  baptism  had  no  promise 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  he  did  not  baptize  into  any  name. 
Paul's  brief  explanation  was  promptly  accepted,  and  when 


152  COMMENTARY.  [xix.  7. 

the  men  were  baptized  he  bestowed  upon  them  the  mirac- 
ulous gift  to  which  his  first  inquiry  had  reference. 

As  this  is  an  instance  of  the  rebaptism  of  men  who 
had  received  John's  baptism,  it  raises  the  question 
whether  all  of  John's  disciples  were  rebaptized  in  order 
to  admission  into  the  church;  and  if  not,  why  were 
these  ?  It  seems  necessary  to  answer  the  first  part  of 
this  inquiry  in  the  negative;  for  the  reason  that  the 
apostles,  some  (if  not  all)  of  whom  had  received  John's 
baptism,  and  the  one  hundred  and  twenty  who  with  the 
twelve  constituted  the  church  before  Pentecost,  of  whom 
the  same  is  almost  certainly  true,  were  not  rebaptized ;  ^ 
and  if  these  were  not,  then  the  same  must  be  true  of  the 
rest  of  John's  original  disciples.  Why  then  were  these 
at  Ephesus  baptized  again?  The  most  probable  answer, 
and  the  only  one  which  harmonizes  with  the  facts,  is 
that  they  had  been  baptized  by  ApoUos,  or  by  some  one 
teaching  as  he  taught,  since  John's  baptism  had  ceased 
to  be  a  valid  ordinance.  It  certainly  had  not  been  valid 
since  the  baptism  of  the  apostolic  commission  was  intro- 
duced on  the  great  day  of  Pentecost;  and  no  one  had 
rightly  administered  it  since  John  was  shut  up  in  prison. 

^  That  these  were  not  rebaptized  is  evident  frona  the  state- 
ment that  those  who  were  baptized  on  Pentecost  "  were  added 
unto  them"  (ii.  41).  But  if  they  were  not  baptized  at  that  time, 
they  must  have  been  previously  ;  and  as  the  only  baptism  admin- 
istered previously,  even  that  ministered  by  the  disciples  of  Jesus 
(Jno.  iv.  1.  2),  was  John's  baptism,  it  was  this  which  they  had 
received.  Furthermore,  as  Jesus  insisted  that  it  was  the  duty  of 
all  to  submit  to  John's  baptism  (Luke  vii.  29,  30),  it  is  in  the 
highest  degree  improbable  that  he  acknowledged  any  as  his 
own  disciples  who  had  refused  to  do  so.  Certainly  the  five  dis- 
ciples whom  he  gained  at  the  Jordan  shortly  after  his  own  bap- 
tism were  John's  disciples  before  they  became  his,  and  had  been 
baptized  already  (Jno.  i.  35-51). 


xix  7-0.]  ACTS.  1^^ 

Even  Jesus,  who  administered  it  for  a  short  time  before 
John's  imprisonment,  did  so  no  longer.  From  the  very 
nature  of  the  case  it  could  be  no  longer  accepted  as  a 
baptism  wiion  it  had  ceased  to  be  a  living  ordinance. 
These  twelve  were  accordingly  regarded  as  not  having 
been  baptized  at  all ;  and  now  for  the  first  time  they  re- 
ceived real  baptism.  If  Aquila  was  acquainted  with 
their  condition  before  Paul's  arrival  in  Ephesus,  he  had 
evidently  awaited  Paul's  decision  in  the  case,  instead  of 
settling  the  questron  himself.  It  is  not  certain  that  he 
felt  competent  to  say  what  should  be  done.  It  is  more 
probable,  however,  that  Paul's  question,  intended  to  as- 
certain whether  they  had  as  yet  received  any  miraculous 
gifts,  brought  to  Aquila  at  the  same  moment  that  it  did 
to  Paul  a  knowledge  of  the  facts.  If  Apollos  was  not 
rebaptized  (and  the  implication  is  rather  that  he  was  not), 
the  reason  may  be  that  Aquila  did  not  know  what  should 
be  done  in  such  cases  ;  or  it  may  be  tliat  Apollos,  while  on 
some  visit  to  Judea,  had  been  baptized  by  John  himself. 
This  incident  shows  that  Paul  was  in  the  habit  of  in- 
specting the  condition  of  the  disciples  already  found  in  a 
place,  before  adding  to  their  number;  and  it  is  a  prec- 
edent worthy  of  careful   imitation  by  modern  evangelists. 

4.  Preachixg  IX  TUE  Synagogue,  and  in  the 
School  of  Tyrannus,  8-12. 

Vv.  8,  9.  Having  corrected  what  he  found  wrong 
in  the  little  band  of  disciples,  Paul  next  grapples  with 
the  Jewish  and  pagan  errors  which  abounded  in  the  city. 
(8)  And  he  entered  into  the  synagogue,  and  spake  boldly 
for  the  space  of  three  months,  reasoning  and  persuading 
as  to  the  things  concerning  the  kingdom  of  God.  (9)  But 
when  some  were  hardened  and    disobedient,    speaking 


154  COMMENTARY.  [xix.  8-12. 

evil  of  the  Way  before  the  multitude,  he  departed  from 
them ;  and  separated  the  disciples,  reasoning  daily  in 
the  school  of  Tyrannus.  The  scene  in  the  synagogue 
is  quite  uniform  in  its  details  with  others  which  we  have 
observed — the  same  earnest  argument  and  persuasion  by 
Paul,  on  the  same  invariable  theme  ;  the  same  increasing 
obstinacy  and  evil  speaking  on  the  part  of  the  unbe- 
lieving Jews ;  and  the  final  separation  of  Paul  and  the 
believers  from  the  synagogue  and  the  majority  that 
controlled  it.  As  a  jjrivate  dwelling  had  been  Paul's 
refuge  in  Corinth,  the  school-room  of  Tyrannus  was  his 
resort  in  Ephesus.  Such  incidents .  have  their  counter- 
part in  the  history  of  all  men  who  have  attempted  to 
correct  the  religious  teachings  of  their  contemporaries. 

Vv.  10-12.  Here  once  more,  as  in  the  case  of  Paul's 
stay  in  Corinth,  Luke  gives  us  a  definite  note  of  time.  (lo) 
And  this  continued  for  the  space  of  two  years ;  so  that  all 
they  who  dwelt  in  Asia  heard  the  word  of  the  Lord,  both 
Jews  and  Greeks,  (ii)  And  God  wrought  special  mir- 
acles by  the  hands  of  Paul :  (12)  insomuch  that  unto  the 
sick  were  carried  away  from  his  body  handkerchiefs  or 
aprons,  and  the  diseases  departed  from  them,  and  the 
evil  spirits  went  out.  The  two  years  here  mentioned 
added  to  the  three  months  in  the  synagogue,  give  us  two 
years  and  three  months  as  the  length  of  Paul's  stay  in 
Ephesus — his  longest  stay  in  any  one  city,  and  men- 
tioned, no  doubt,  on  that  account.'  The  miracles  men- 
tioned are  styled  "  special,"  because  of  their  extraordinary 
character,  reminding  us  of  some  witnessed  once  in  the 
career  of  Peter  (v.  15),  and  rnce  in  that  of  the  Master 

^  When  Paul  himself  afterward  spoke  of  the  time  as  three 
years  (xx.  31),  he  followed  the  uniform  Jewish  method  of  counting 
a  part  of  a  year  at  the  close  or  the  beginning  of  a  period  as  if  it 
were  a  whole  year  (c/.  note  under  x.  30). 


xix.  12-18.]  .  ACTS.  155 

(Mark  vi.  5G).  Such  miracles  are  uo  more  incredible 
than  others.  They  were  brought  about  by  the  increas- 
ing /eal  of  the  people  in  seeking  the  benefit  of  the 
healing  power.  No  wonder  that  "all  who  dwelt  in 
Asia,"  by  which  is  meant  all  in  the  llonian  j)rovince  of 
that  name,  "  heard  the  word  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  both 
Jews  and  Greeks."  All  who  could  would  naturally 
come  to  Ephesus  to  hear,  and  all  who  came  would 
instinctively  repeat  what  they  had  heard  wherever  they 
went.  The  result  was  that  we  read  later  of  "  the  seven 
churches  of  Asia"  (E,ev.  i.  4). 

5.  Exorcists  Exposed,  and  Books  of  Magic 
BUENED,   13-20. 

V"^''.  13-17.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  how  men 
could  witness  these  miracles,  and  not  acknowledge  tiie 
presence  of  divine  power.  We  should  suppose  that  even 
atheism  would  be  confounded  before  them,  and  that  the 
most  hardened  sinner  would  tremble.  Yet  Simon  the 
sorcerer  had  sought  to  purchase  such  power  from  Peter 
with  money ;  Barjesus  had  sought  to  convince  Sergius 
Paulus  that  it  was  a  cheat;  and  a  similar  display  of 
human  dej^ravity,  followed  by  a  castigation  almost  as 
severe  as  in  the  last  instance,  occurred  here  in  Ephes:us. 
(13)  But  certain  also  of  the  strolling  Jews,  exorcists, 
took  upon  them  to  name  over  them  who  had  the  evil 
spirits  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  Saying,  I  adjure 
thee  by  Jesus  whom  Paul  preacheth.  (14)  And  there 
were  seven  sons  of  one  Sceva,  a  Jew,  a  chief  priest,  who 
did  this.  (15)  And  the  evil  spirit  answered  and  sail 
unto  them,  Jesus  I  know,  and  Paul  I  know ;  but  who  are 
ye  ?  fi6)  And  the  man  in  whom  the  evil  spirit  was 
leaped  on  them,  and  mastered  both  of  them,  and  pre- 


156  COMMENTARY.  [xix.  15-17. 

vailed  against  them,  so  that  they  fled  out  of  that  house 
naked  and*  wounded.  (17)  And  this  became  known  to 
all,  both  Jews  and  Greeks,  that  dwelt  at  Ephesus ; 
and  fear  fell  upon  them  all,  and  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  was  magnified.  These  exorcists,  as  their  title  in- 
dicates, pretended  to  the  power  of  casting  out  demons; 
and  they  appeared  to  the  people  to  succeed  often  enough 
to  keep  up  some  reputation.  Doubtless  the  fact  that  they 
were  seven  brothers  added  to  the  mystery  of  their  pre- 
tensions, just  as  a  fortune-teller  at  the  present  day  who 
is  the  seventh  daughter  of  the  seventh  daughter  is  more 
highly  credited  than  others  of  her  class.  They  employed 
for  the  purpose  incantations  over  the  demoniacs,  in 
which  they  uttered  certain  unmeaning  words  that  they 
claimed  to  have  derived  from  Solomon,^  and  they  natu- 
rally supposed  that  the  secret  of  Paul's  power  was  some- 
thing of  the  same  kind  ;  so  they  watched  him  as  he  c^st 
out  demons,  to  see  if  they  could  discover  his  talismanic 
word.  They  were  not  long  in  observing  that  in  every 
instance  he  used  the  name  of  Jesus ;  and  they  concluded 
that  the  charm  was  in  that  word;  so  two  of  them  put 
the  matter  to  a  test  by  getting  a  demoniac  into  a  room 
where  they  would  be  unobserved  if  they  met  with  a  fail- 
ure, and  intending,  if  they  succeeded,  to  go  before  the 
public  as  rivals  of  Paul.  The  evil  spirit  seems  to  have 
been  outraged  by  the  wickedness  of  the  two  villains, 
and  the  manner  in  which  he  exposed  them  seems  like  a 
grim  joke.  Certainly  all  Ephesus  must  have  laughed  at 
them  as  they  fled  naked  and  bruised  along  the  street; 
but  when  the  people  took  a  second  thought,  and  remem- 


iJosephus  gives  a  detailed  account  of  an  expulsion  of  a 
demon  in  the  presence  of  Vespasian  during  tlie  siege  of  Jerusa- 
lem (Ant.,  viii.  2,  5;  Wars.?) 


xix.  17-20.]  ACTS.  157 

bercJ  that  this  discomfiture  had  come  from  a  misuse  of 
the  name  of  Jesus,  it  was  but  natural  that  this  name  was 
magnified,  and  that  fear  came  upon  all. 

Vv.  18-20.  The  exposure  of  the  seven  exorcists,  by 
the  mysterious  but  very  effective  way  in  which  it  was 
accomplished,  threw  discredit  on  all  the  pretenders  to 
magic  in  Ephesus.  The  visible  results  were  immense  and 
astonishing.  (i8)  Many  also  of  them  that  had  believed 
came,  confessing,  and  declaring  their  deeds.  (19)  And 
not  a  few  of  them  that  practiced  curious  arts  brought  their 
books  together,  and  burned  them  in  the  sight  of  all;  and 
they  counted  the  price  of  them,  and  found  it  fifty  thou- 
sand pieces  of  silver.  (20)  So  mightily  grew  the  word  of 
the  Lord  and  prevailed.  It  is  not  to  be  understood 
that  the  believers  who  confessed  had  continued  to  prac- 
tice magic  after  they  became  believers;  but  only  that 
they  now  confessed  and  declared  the  secret  processes  by 
which  they  had  formerly  deceived  the  people.  Of  the 
book-burners,  many,  apparently,  and  possibly  all,  were 
not  as  yet  disciples,  though  they  were  deeply  impressed 
with  the  wickedness  of  their  deceptive  practices.  The 
fifty  thousand  pieces  of  silver  were  doubtless  Attic  di~ 
drachmas  ;  for  Ephesus  was  a  Greek  city,  and  this  was 
the  most  common  silver  coin.  Its  value  was  about 
the  same  as  that  of  the  Roman  denarius,  so  often  trans- 
lated "penny  "  in  our  version,  which  equals  a  little  more 
than  sixteen  cents  of  American  money.  The  whole 
value  then  of  the  books  was  more  than  $8,000.  Their 
value  depended  not  so  much  on  their  number  or  their 
size,  as  on  their  contents  ;  for  they  contained  plainly 
written  directions  for  the  performance  of  tricks  of  jug- 
glery, and  the  purchaser,  by  a  little  practice,  could  be  as 
skillful  a  juggler  as  the  original  owner.     The  book,  like 


158  COMMENTARY.  [xix.  20-22. 

the  secret  in  the  compound  of  a  patent  medicine,  which 
could  be  written  on  a  small  scrap  of  paper,  was  the  stock 
in  trade  of  the  juggler,  and  its  value  depended  upon  its 
being  kept  secret.  This  wholeaccount  fully  confirms  the 
reputation  assigned  to  Ephesus  by  ancient  writers  as  the 
chief  center  of  magical  arts  in  the  whole  Roman  em- 
pire.^ 

6.  Paul  Foems  a  Plan  foe  Future  Joueneys, 

21,  22. 
Vv.  21,  22.  The  great  triumph  of  the  word  of  the 
Lord  which  followed  the  book-buruing  brought  the 
affairs  of  the  church  to  such  a  point  that  Paul  began  to 
think  of  leaving  Ephesus.  (21)  Now  after  these  things 
were  ended,  Paul  purposed  in  the  spirit,  when  he  had 
passed  through  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  to  go  to  Jerusalem, 
saying,  After  I  have  been  there,  I  must  also  see  Rome. 
(22)  And  having  sent  into  Macedonia  two  of  them  who 
ministered  to  him,  Timothy  and  Erastus,  he  himself 
stayed  in  Asia  for  a  while.  We  shall  see  hereafter  that 
this  plan  of  future  journeying  was  carried  out  to  the 
letter,  but  in  a  way  far  different  from  that  which  Paul 
purposed.  The  words,  "  he  purposed  in  the  Spirit,'^ 
have  been  taken  by  the  majority  of  the  commentators  to 
mean  no  more  than  that  he  formed  the  purpose ;  and  our 
revisers  seem  from  their  use  of  the  small  s  with  the  word 
spirit,  to  have  understood  them  in  the  same  way.  But 
if  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  it  is  tautologi- 
cal, the  words  "  in  the  spirit  "  being  redundant.  These 
writers  forget  the  facts  mentioned  before  by  Luke, 
which  account  for  the  expression.     When  Paul  first  pur- 

1  See  the  citations  on  this  subject  in  Conybeare  and  Howson. 
ii.  21,  and  in  Farrar's  Life  of  Paul,  358. 


:;ix.  22.]  ACTS.  l-')9 

posed  to  come  to  this  very  city  of  Ephesiis,  as  the 
capital  of  Asia,  he  was  forbidden  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
do  so ;  aud  when  he  then  purposed  to  go  into  Bithynia 
he  was  likewise  forbidden  (xvi.  6,  7) ;  and  by  this  expe- 
rience he  had  learned  to  lay  out  no  plans  for  the  future 
without  an  expressed  allowance  for  this  divine  overrul- 
ing. Even  when  he  promised,  on  leaving  Aquila  and 
Priscilla  at  Ephesus,  to  return  thither,  his  words  were, 
"I  will  return  again  unto  you  if  God  will "  (xviii.  21). 
So  now,  when  forming  a  purpose  concerning  journeys 
which  might  require  years  for  their  accomplishment,  he 
purposes  "in  the  Spirit"  to  make  them.  A  few  inter- 
preters understand  the  expression  as  meaning  that  the 
Spirit  moved  him  to  form  the  purpose  ;  but  in  that  case 
we  should  not  find  him  so  uncertain  as  he  afterward  was, 
as  to  whether  they  could  be  carried  out  (see  Rom.  xv. 
24 ;  30-32).  The  real  meaning,  determined  by  both  his 
previous  and  his  subsequent  experience,  is  that  he 
formed  this  purpose  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  with  a  conscious  reference  to  the  probability 
that  the  Spirit  might  overrule  it.  Timothy  was  sent 
into  Macedonia,  that  he  might  go  thence  to  Corinth, 
and  give  the  brethren  there  some  instruction  concerniug 
Paul's  ways  and  teaching  (I.  Cor.  iv.  17)  ;  while  Erastus 
was  sent  because,  being  the  treasurer  of  Corinth  (Rom. 
xvi.  23),  that  was  his  home ;  and  perhaps,  also,  that  he 
might  render  assistance  to  Timothy. 

Some  scholars  have  argued  with  much  plausibility 
that  Paul  had  made  a  short  visit  to  Corinth  before  this, 
and  returned  to  Ephesus,  using  as  evidence  certain  state- 
ments in  Second  Corinthians.  The  question  is  not  an 
important  one;  and  consequently,  while  I  regard  the 
evidence  for  the  position  as  inconclusive,  I  will  not  dis- 


160  COMMENTARY,  [xix.  22. 

cuss  it.  The  reader  who  is  curious  to  investigate  it  will 
find  the  arguments  in  the  affirmative  well  set  forth  by- 
Mr.  Howson,  and  those  in  the  negative  by  Paley. 

The  first  epistle  to  the  Corinthians  was  written  from 
Ephesus,  and  at  a  time  of  great  prosperity  in  the  work 
there,  as  appears  from  the  following  words  in  the  epistle : 
"  I  will  tarry  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost ;  for  a  great 
and  effectual  door  is  opened  to  me,  and  there  are  many 
adversaries"  (I.  Cor.  xvi.  8,  9).  This  language  fixes 
not  only  the  place  of  writing,  but  almost  exactly  its 
date.  The  opening  of  the  "great  and  effectual  door" 
can  refer  only  to  the  triumph  attending  the  book-burn- 
ing. The  epistle  was  written,  then,  about  the  time  that 
Timothy  and  Erastus  were  sent  forward  into  Macedonia 
on  their  way  to  Corinth,  and  there  can  be  no  reasonable 
doubt  that  one  of  them  was  the  bearer  of  it. 

This  is  not  really  the  first  epistle  written  by  Paul  to 
the  church  at  Corinth ;  for  in  it  he  speaks  of  another 
which  he  wrote  previously  on  the  subject  of  fornication : 
"  I  wrote  you  an  epistle  not  to  keep  company  with  forni- 
cators" (v.  9).  This  single  statement  contains  all  we 
know  of  this  epistle ;  and  perhaps  the  document  was 
allowed  to  perish  because  the  contents  of  it  were  re- 
jjeated,  and  the  subject  treated  more  elaborately  in  the 
epistle  now  called  the  first. 

Subsequent  to  the  date  of  the  lost  epistle  some  mem- 
bers of  the  household  of  Chloe,  a  sister  in  the  church  at 
Corinth,  had  brought  Paul  information  of  great  disorders 
and  corruption  in  the  church  (i.  11),  and  it  was  for  the 
purpose  of  correcting  these  that  the  epistle  was  written. 
He  learned  that  the  congregation  was  distracted  by 
party  strife  (i.  12  ;  iii.  1-4) ;  tbat  fornication,  and  even 
incest  were  being  tolerated  (v.  1-13) ;  that  some  mem- 


xix.  22-27.]  ACTS.  161 

bers  were  engaged  in  litigation  against  the  brethren  in 
the  civil  courts  (vi.  1-8)  ;  that  his  own  apostolic  author- 
ity was  being  called  in  question  (iv.  1-6;  14-21);  that 
their  women,  contrary  to  the  prevailing  rules  of  mod- 
esty, engaged  in  the  public  worship  with  unveiled  faces 
(xi.  1—16)  ;  that  some  confusion  and  jealousy  had  arisen 
in  reference  to  spiritual  gifts  (xii.  xiii.  xiv.) ;  that  some 
among  them  were  even  denying  the  resurrection  (xv. 
12) ;  and  that  the  Lord's  supper  was  profaned  by  feast- 
ing (xi.  17-34).  Besides,  he  had  received  a  letter  from 
the  church  calling  for  information  in  reference  to  mar- 
riage and  divorce,  and  the  eating  of  meats  offered  to 
idols  (vii.  1 ;  viii.  1).  Although  the  epistle  in  which  these 
questions  are  answered,  and  all  these  disorders  rebuked, 
is  calm  and  severe  in  its  tone,  it  is  not  conceivable 
that  Paul  could  hear  of  this  state  of  things  in  a  church 
which  had  cost  him  so  much  labor  and  anxiety,  with- 
out great  pain  and  sorrow.  He  suppressed  these  feelings 
as  he  wrote,  but  afterward  he  confessed  them,  saying, 
"  Out  of  jnuch  affliction  and  anguish  of  heart  I  wrote  to 
you  with  many  tears"  (II.  Cor.  ii.  4).  It  was  with  a 
heart  full  of  anguish,  then,  in  reference  to  some  of  the 
results  of  his  past  labors,  but  buoyed  by  the  opening  of 
a  wide  and  effectual  door  in  his  present  field,  that  he 
sent  forward  Timothy  and  Erastus  with  this^  epistle, 
while  he  tarried  for  a  season  longer  in  Asia. 

7.  The  Mob  of  the  Silversmiths,  23-41. 

'Vv.  23-27.  By  the  same  stroke  of  the  pen  with 
which  Paul  wrote  to  the  Corinthians,  "  a  great  and 
effectual  door  is  opened  unto  me,"  he  also  wrote,  "  and 
there  are  many  adversaries  "  (I.  Cor.  xvi.  8,  9) ;  which 
shows  that  he  was  not  unmindful  of  the  power  of  that 


162  COMMENTARY.  [xix.  23-27. 

foe  over  wliicli  lie  had  won  a  great  victory.  Idolatry 
and  superstition  had  been  cripj)led  in  one  of  their  strong- 
holds, but  they  could  not  be  expected  to  die  without  a 
desjjerate  struggle.  Sooner  than  Paul  may  have  antici- 
pated, the  powers  of  darkness  rallied.  (23)  And  about  that 
time  there  arose  no  small  stir  concerning  the  Way.  (24) 
For  a  certain  man  named  Demetrius,  a  silversmith,  who 
made  silver  shrines  for  Diana,  brought  no  little  business 
unto  the  craftsmen ;  (25)  whom  he  gathered  together, 
with  the  workmen  of  like  occupation,  and  said,  Sirs,  ye 
know  that  by  this  business  we  have  our  wealth.  (26) 
And  ye  see  and  hear,  that  not  alone  at  Ephesus,  but  al- 
most throughout  all  Asia,  this  Paul  hath  persuaded  and 
turned  away  much  people,  saying  that  they  be  no  gods, 
which  are  made  with  hands :  (27)  and  not  only  is  there 
danger  that  this  our  trade  come  into  disrepute  ;  but  also 
that  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess  Diana  be  made 
of  no  account,  and  that  she  should  even  be  deposed  from 
her  magnificence,  whom  all  Asia  and  the  world  wor- 
shipeth. 

This  is  the  most  truthful  and  candid  of  all  the 
speeches  made  against  Paul  by  any  of  his  contemporaries. 
All  the  charges  were  strictly  true,  and  the  dangers 
apprehended  from  his  influence  were  accurately  stated. 
Even  the  motive  actuating  the  speaker  was  not  dis- 
guised. He  was  not  ashamed  to  acknowledge  that  his 
love  of  gain  was  that  which  inspired  his  zeal.  At  the 
same  time,  he  and  the  craftsmen  whom  he  addressed  had 
reason  to  know,  even  better  than  any  one  else  in  Ephe- 
sus, that  the  pieces  of  silver  which  they  had  hammered 
and  polished  with  their  own  hands  were  not  gods.  His 
allusion  to  the  temple  can  be  better  appreciated  when 
we  remember  that  it  was  one  of  the  seven  wonders  of 


xiK.  27.]  ACTS.  103 

the  ancient  world,  and  the  glory  of  the  city  of  Ephesus. 
It  was  four  hundred  and  twenty-five  feet  long,  and  one 
lumdrcd  and  twenty  wide.  All  around  this  vast  space 
stood  a  row  of  white  marble  columns  sixty  feet  high, 
and  less  than  four  feet  apart.  They  were  one  hundred 
and  twenty  in  number,  and  they  supported  an  entablature 
of  vast  marble  slabs  which  constituted  the  roof  of  the 
peristyle.  The  interior  was  adorned  with  paintings  and 
sculptured  figures  wrought  by  the  most  famous  artists  of 
antiquity,  and  an  inner  sanctuary  contained  a  rude  image 
of  a  many-breasted  woman,  the  symbol  of  fecund  if  y, 
which  was  believed  to  have  been  dropped  down  from 
heaven  by  Jupiter.  Three  or  four  temples  like  Solo- 
mon's could  have  been  placed  within  the  circuit  of  its 
magnificent  colonnade.  No  wonder  that  the  wrath  of 
the  heathen  populace  was  kindled  against  Paul,  when  it 
appeared  that  by  his  preaching  this  magnificent  structure 
was  to  be  brought  into  contempt.* 

^The  process  by  which,  through  a  long  series  of  ages,  this 
temple  was  brought  to  utter  ruin,  is  so  happily  sketched  by 
Phiniptre,  that  we  quote  his  words  entire  :  "  Tlie  first  real  blow 
to  the  worship  which  liad  lasted  for  so  many  ages  was  given  by 
the  two  years  of  Paul's  work  of  which  we  read  here.  As  by  the 
strange  irony  of  history  the  next  stroke  aimed  at  its  magnificence 
came  from  the  hand  of  Nero,  who  robbed  it,  as  he  rol)bed  tlie 
temples  of  Delplii,  and  Pergamos,  and  Athens,  not  sparing  even 
villages,  of  many  of  its  art  treasures  for  tlie  adornment  of  his  goldeu 
house  at  Rome.  Tnijan  sent  its  richly  sculptured  gates  as  an 
oflfering  to  a  temple  at  Byzantium.  As  the  Cliurch  of  Christ  ad- 
vanced, its  worship,  of  course,  declined.  Priests  and  priestesses 
ministered  in  deserted  shrines.  When  the  empire  became  Chris- 
tian the  temple  of  Ephesus,  in  common  with  that  of  Delphi,  sup- 
plied materials  for  the  church  erected  by  Justinian  in  honor  of 
the  divine  wisilom,  which  is  now  the  mosque  of  St.  Sophia.  When 
the  Goths  devastated  Asia  Minor,  in  the  reign  of  Gallienus  (A.  D. 
263),  they  plundered  it  with  a  reckless  hand,  and  the  work  which 


164  COMMENTARY.  [xix.  28-31. 

Vv.  28,  29.  The  artisans  were  enraged  at  the  pros- 
pect of  financial  ruin,  but  they  were  shrewd  enough  to 
see  that  reverence  for  the  temple  and  the  goddess  was 
the  better  theme  on  which  to  cry  out  before  the  people. 
(28)  And  when  they  heard  this  they  were  filled  with 
wrath,  and  cried  out,  saying,  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephe- 
sians.  (29)  And  the  city  was  filled  with  the  confusion  : 
and  they  rushed  with  one  accord  into  the  theater,  having 
seized  Gaius  and  Aristarchus,  men  of  Macedonia,  Paul's 
companions  in  travel.  The  outcry,  and  the  tone  in 
which  it  was  uttered,  awakened  the  old-time  enthusiasm 
of  the  idolaters  who  heard  it,  suggesting,  as  it  did,  some 
assault  on  the  honor  of  the  goddess.  The  gathering 
mob  was  in  a  frenzy,  and  it  was  a  kind  providence  that 
Paul  was  out  of  their  reach.  They  rushed  into  the 
theater  because  there  was  not  room  in  the  narrow  streets 
common  to  all  Asiatic  cities  for  such  a  multitude.  That 
theater  still  remains  with  its  marble  seats  intact,  by  far 
the  best  preserved  ruin  on  the  site  of  Ephesus.^  It  was 
capable  of  seating  several  thousand  spectators. 

Vv.  30,  31.  When  Paul  heard  that  his  two  com- 
panions had  been  seized  by  the  mob  and  dragged  within 
the  theater,  he  feared  that  they  would  be  torn  to  pieces 
in  his  stead,  and  he  instantly  resolved  that  this  should 
not  be.  (30)  And  when  Paul  was  minded  to  enter  in 
unto  the  people,  the  disciples  suffered  him  not.  (31) 
And  certain  also  of  the  chief  officers  of  Asia,  being  his 
friends,  sent  unto  him,  and  besought  him  not  to  adven- 

they  began  was  completed  centuries  later  by  the  Turks  "  {Com- 
mentary in  loco). 

^  When  the  author  visited  the  spot  in  1879  he  took  a  solemn 
pleasure  in  standing  on  one  of  the  highest  tiers  of  marble  seats 
and  reciting  to  his  companions  the  speech  of  the  town  clerk 
•which  follows  below. 


xix.31-:u]  ACTS.  165 

ture  himself  into  the  theater.  The  feelings  which  im- 
pelled him  were  confessed  afterward  to  his  brethren  in 
Corinth :  "  We  would  not  have  you  ignorant,  brethren, 
concerning  our  affl  ction  which  befell  us  in  Asia,  that  we 
were  weighed  down  exceedingly,  beyond  our  power,  inso- 
much that  we  d''spaired  even  of  life  ;  yea,  we  ourselves 
have  had  tlie  answer  of  death  within  ourselves,  that  we 
should  not  trust  in  ourselves,  but  in  God  who  raiseththe 
dead  :  who  delivered  us  out  of  so  great  a  death,  and  will 
deliver  "  (II.  Cor.  i.  8-10).  Both  he  and  his  friends 
were  fully  persuaded  that  to  go  into  the  theater  was  cer- 
tain death ;  and  his  resolve  to  go  in  was  a  resolve  then 
and  there  to  die.  The  timely  inhibition  of  his  brethren 
and  the  friendly  officials  he  regarded  as  the  hand  of  God 
delivering  him  from  "so  great  a  death."  The  words, 
"  chief  officers  of  Asia,"  represent  only  the  single  word 
Asiarchs  in  the  original,  the  title  of  ten  men  of  wealth 
and  reputation,  who  were  chosen  annually  to  preside 
over  the  athletic  games  of  the  province.  That  some  of 
these  were  friends  of  Paul,  is  an  indication  of  the  extent 
to  which  his  preaching  and  his  personal  character  had 
become  known  in  the  highest  circles  of  heathen  society 
in  Asia. 

Vv.  32-34.  After  showing  what  it  was  that  kept 
Paul  out  of  the  theater,  and  saved  his  life,  Luke  next 
leads  us  inside  that  enclosure,  to  witness  the  further  pro- 
ceedings of  the  mob.  (32)  Some  therefore  cried  one  ■ 
thing  and  some  another :  for  the  assembly  was  in  con- 
fusion ;  and  the  more  part  knew  not  wherefore  they  were 
come  together.  (33)  And  they  brought  Alexander  out 
of  the  multitude,  the  Jews  putting  him  forward.  And 
Alexander  beckoned  with  the  hand,  and  would  have 
made  a  defense  unto  the  people.     (34)    But  when  they 


166  COMMENT AkY.  [xix.  34-41. 

perceived  that  he  was  a  Jew,  all  with  one  voice  about 
the  space  of  two  hours  cried  out,  Great  is  Diana  of  the 
Ephesians.  The  Jews  had  good  reason  to  fear  the 
wrath  of  this  mob ;  for  it  was  well  known  in  Ephesus 
that  they  were  as  much  opposed  to  idolatry  as  Paul  was, 
and  it  was  also  known  that  Paul  himself  was  a  Jew. 
Fidelity  to  their  own  principles  should  have  prompted 
them  to  stand  by  Paul ;  but  if  the  defense  which  they 
wished  to  make  through  Alexander  had  been  heard,  it 
would  have  been  an  attempt  to  show  that  Paul  was  an 
apostate  from  the  Jewish  faith,  and  that  the  Jews  must 
not  be  held  responsible  for  what  he  might  say.  The 
quick-witted  in  the  crowd  saw  through  the  trick  at  once, 
and  gave  it  the  rebuke  which  it  deserved  by  drowning 
Alexander's  voice  in  their  yells. 

Vv.  35-41.  The  fury  of  a  mob,  when  at  its  height, 
is  always  inflamed  by  opposition,  as  a  fire  by  fresh  fuel  ; 
but  when  it  begins  to  be  exhausted  a  few  well  chosen 
words  will  often  restore  quiet.  Recognizing  this,  the 
city  authorities  did  not  at  first  interfere;  but  when  the 
long  continued  vociferation  of  the  people  had  nearly  ex- 
hausted their  strength,  the  following  well  timed  and  well 
worded  speech  was  addressed  to  them.  (35)  And  when 
the  town  clerk  had  quieted  the  multitude,  he  saith,  Ye 
men  of  Ephesus,  what  man  is  there  who  knoweth  not  how 
that  the  city  of  the  Ephesians  is  temple-keeper  of  the 
great  Diana,  and  of  the  image  which  fell  down  from 
Jupiter  ?  (36)  Seeing  then  that  these  things  can  not  be 
gainsaid,  ye  ought  to  be  quiet,  and  to  do  nothing  rash. 
(37)  For  ye  have  brought  hither  these  men  who  are 
neither  robbers  of  temples,  nor  blasphemers  of  our  god- 
dess. (38)  If  therefore  Demetrius,  and  the  craftsmen 
who  are  with  him,  have  a  matter  against  any  man,  the 


xix.  38-41.]  ACTS.  167 

courts  are  open,  and  there  are  proconsuls  :  let  them  accuse 
one  another.  (39)  But  if  ye  seek  anything  about  other 
matters,  it  shall  be  settled  in  the  regular  assembly.  (40) 
For  indeed  we  are  in  danger  to  be  accused  concerning  this 
day's  riot,  there  being  no  cause  for  it :  and  as  touching 
it,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  give  account  of  this  concourse. 
(41)  And  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  dismissed  the 
assembly.  This  is  evidently  the  speech  of  a  man  well 
skilled  in  the  management  of  excited  crowds;  and  we 
may  suppose  that  the  town  clerk  was  selected  for  the 
task  by  those  in  authority,  because  of  his  known  skill 
in  this  particular.  His  assertion  that  no  man  could  be 
ignorant  of  the  devotion  of  Ephesus  to  the  worship  of 
Diana,  or  of  the  fact  that  the  image  was  heaven-descend- 
ed, was  an  open  espousal  of  their  cause ;  and  the  remark, 
that  the  unquestionable  certainty  of  these  facts  ought  to 
make  them  feel  quiet,  even  though  some  one  should  con- 
tradict them,  was  the  very  remark  to  bring  about  the 
composure  at  which  he  aimed.  Advancing  then  to  the 
cause  of  the  disturbance,  like  a  trained  advocate  he 
ignores  the  real  charge  against  the  disciples,  that  of 
denying  that  images  made  with  hands  are  gods,  and  de- 
clares that  the  men  are  neither  temple-robbers,  nor  blas- 
phemers of  the  goddess.  Clearing  them  of  this  charge 
appeared  to  the  majority,  who  "  knew  not  wherefore 
they  had  come  together,"  a  complete  vindication  of  the 
prisoners.  Then,  as  for  the  men  who  had  disturbed  the 
multitude  with  private  matters  of  their  own,  their  proper 
recourse  was  to  the  proconsular  court.  This  was  calcu- 
lated to  turn  the  feeling  of  the  people  against  the  silver- 
smiths, as  having  made  tools  of  their  neighbors  for  the 
benefit  of  their  craft.  Finally,  the  remark  about  the 
unlawfulness   of  the   assembly,  and   their   inability   to 


168  COMMENTARY.  [xix.  41— xx.  1. 

account  for  the  riot,  was  a  hint  of  danger  from  the 
Roman  authorities  in  the  way  of  fines  which  might  be 
imposed  on  the  whole  community;  it  made  every  man 
of  property  feel  anxious  to  get  away.  The  formal  dis- 
mission, as  if  the  assembly  had  gotten  through  with  its 
business,  and  a  motion  to  adjourn  had  been  adopted, 
was  the  last  skillful  device  of  the  olerk,  and  it  sent  the 
people  down  the  streets  in  perfect  quiet.  The  city  au- 
thorities congratulated  themselves  and  their  clerk  that  so 
fierce  a  mob  had  been  so  easily  quelled ;  and  the  disci- 
ples were  very  thankful  to  God  that  they  had  escaped  so 
easily.  Even  Gains  and  Aristarchus,  who  had  doubtless 
despaired  of  life,  escaped,  and  lived  to  labor  and  suffer 
much  longer  in  the  Master's  cause.^ 

8.  Paul's  Second  Visit  to  Macedonia  and 
Greece,  xx.  1-6. 

Ver.  1.  (i)  And  after  the  uproar  was  ceased,  Paul 
having  sent  for  the  disciples  and  exhorted  them,  took 
leave  of  them,  and  departed  to  go  into  Macedonia.  Thus 
ended  the  long-continued  abode  of  Paul  in  Ephe- 
sus.  The  "  great  and  effectual  door  "  which  was  open 
to  him  but  a  few  weeks  previous  had  been  suddenly 
closed ;  and  the  "  many  adversaries,"  for  the  noble  pur- 
pose of  resisting  whom  he  had  resolved  to  remain  in 
Ephesus  until  after  Pentecost  (I.  Cor.  xvi.  8,  9),  had 
prevailed  against  him.  He  had  accomplished  mvich  in 
the  city  and  province,  but  there  had  come  a  fearful  re- 
action in  favor  of  the  time-honored  idolatry,  threatening 
to  crush  out  the  results  of  his  protracted  and   arduous 

^Both  of  them  traveled  with  Paul  afterward  from  Corinth  to 
Jerusalem  (xx.  3,  4),  and  Aristarchus  was  his  fellow  prisoner  on 
his  voyage  from  Jerusalem  to  Rome  (xxvii.  1,  2 ;  Col.  iv.  10). 


XX.  1.]  '  ACTS.  KiO 

labors.  When  tlie  disciples,  whom  he  had  taught  and 
warned  with  tears  both  publicly  and  from  house  to  house 
for  the  space  of  three  years  (verse  31),  were  gathered 
about  him  for  the  last  time,  and  he  was  about  to  leave 
them  iu  a  great  furnace  of  affliction,  no  tongue  can  tell 
the  bitterness  of  the  farewell.  All  was  dark  behind 
him,  and  all  forbidding  before  him,  as  he  turned  his  face 
toward  that  shore  across  the  ^gean  on  which  he  had 
been  welcomed  before  with  stripes  and  imprisonment. 
We  have  no  expression  of  his  feelings  until  he  reached 
Troas,  where  he  was  to  embark  for  Macedonia,  and 
where  he  expected  to  meet  Titus  with  news  from 
Corinth.  At  this  point  a  remark  of  his  own  reveals  the 
pent  up  sorrow  of  his  heart.  He  writes  to  the  Corinth- 
ians :  "  When  I  came  to  Troas  for  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
and  when  a  door  was  open  to  me  in  the  Lord,  I  had  no 
relief  for  my  spirit,  because  I  found  not  Titus  my 
brother;  but  taking  my  leave  of  them,  I  went  forth  into 
Macedonia"  (II.  Cor.  ii.  12,  13).  We  have  followed 
him  through  many  disheartening  scenes,  and  will  yet 
follow  him  through  many  more ;  but  only  on  this  occasion 
do  we  find  h's  heart  so  sinking  within  him  that  he  can 
not  enter  an  open  door  to  preach  the  gospel.  He  had 
hoped  that  the  weight  of  sorrow  which  was  pressing  him 
down,  above  his  strength  to  bear,  would  be  lightened  by 
the  sympathy  of  Titus,  and  especially  by  some  good 
news  from  the  distracted  church  in  Corinth  ;  but  the 
pang  of  disappointment  added  the  last  ounce  to  the 
weight  that  was  crushing  him,  and  he  rushed  on,  blinded 
with  tears,  in  the  direction  from  which  Titus  was  coming. 
A  heart  so  strong  to  endure,  when  once  crushed,  can  not 
readily  resume  its  wonted  buoyancy.  Even  after  the 
sea  was  between  him  and  Ephesus,  and  he  was  once  more 


170  COMMENTARY.  [xx.  1. 

among  the  beloved  disciples  of  Philippi,  he  was  con- 
strained to  confess,  "  When  we  came  into  Macedonia, 
our  flesh  had  no  relief,  but  we  were  afflicted  on  every 
side;  without  were  fightings,  within  were  fears  "  (II.  Cor. 
vii.  5).  Finally,  the  long-looked-for  Titus  met  him  with 
good  news  from  Corinth,  and  thus  the  Lord,  who  never 
forgets  his  servants  in  their  affliction,  brought  relief  to 
the  overburdened  heart  of  Paul,  and  enabled  him  to 
change  the  tone  of  his  second  epistle  to  the  Corinthians, 
and  to  say  :  *'  Nevertheless  he  that  comforteth  the  lowly, 
even  God,  comforted  us  by  the  coming  of  Titus ;  and 
not  by  his  coming  only,  but  also  by  the  comfort  where- 
with he  was  comforted  in  you,  while  he  told  us  of  your 
longing,  your  mourning,  your  zeal  for  me ;  so  that  I  re- 
joice yet  more  "  (ib.  6,  7).  And  this  shows  us  that  it 
was  not  on  account  of  himself,  but  on  account  of  his 
children  in  the  gospel,  that  he  had  been  so  distressed. 
Titus  told  him  of  the  good  effects  of  the  former  epistle ; 
that  the  majority  of  the  church  had  repented  of  their 
evil  practices;  that  they  had  excluded  the  incestuous 
man  (ii.  5-11) ;  and  that  they  were  forward  in  their 
preparation  for  a  contribution  to  the  poor  saints  in  Judea 
(ix.  1,  2).  But  the  news  was  not  all  of  a  cheering  kind. 
He  also  brought  word  that  Paul  had  some  personal  ene- 
mies in  the  church  who  were  endeavoring  to  impair  his 
'influence  and  break  down  his  apostolic  authority  (x,  1; 
xi.  13-15).  For  the  purpose  of  counteracting  Hhe  machi- 
nations of  these  "  ministers  of  Satan,"  encouraging  the 
faithful  brethren  in  their  renewed  zeal,  and  presenting  to 
all  many  touching  reflections  suggested  by  his  own  suf- 
ferings, he  addressed  to  them  another  epistle,  and  for- 
warded it  by  the  hands  of  Titus  and  two  other  brethren 
whose  names  are  not  given  (viii.  16-20).     That  we  are 


XX.  1-3.]  ACTS.  171 

right  in  regard  to  the  date  of  this  epistle,  is  easily 
proved  ;  for  first,  Paul  refers  in  the  epistle  to  having  re- 
cently come  from  Asia  into  Macedonia  (i.  8  ;  vii.  5) ; 
and  this  he  had  just  done  according  to  the  paragraph  of 
the  history  now  before  us.  Second,  he  wrote  from  Mace- 
donia when  about  to  start  from  that  province  to  Corinth 
(ix.  3,  4;  xii.  14;  siii.  1),  which  he  had  not  done  pre- 
vious to  this,  except  when  there  was  as  yet  no  church  in 
Corinth,  and  which  he  never  did  afterward.  The  time 
was  the  summer  of  the  year  57,  the  first  epistle  to  the 
same  church  having  been  written  in  Ephesus  the  previ- 
ous spring.^ 

Vv.  2,  3.  The  labors  of  the  apostle  on  this  visit  to 
Macedonia  and  Greece  are  summed  up  in  this  brief 
statement.  (2)  And  when  he  had  gone  through  those 
parts,  and  had  given  them  much  exhortation,  he  came 
into  Greece.  (3)  And  when  he  had  spent  three  months 
there,  and  a  plot  was  laid  against  him  by  the  Jews  as  he 
was  about  to  set  sail  for  Syria,  he  determined  to  return 
through  Macedonia.  Several  events  of  great  importance 
occurred  in  the  interval  thus  hurriedly  passed  over,  a 
knowledge  of  which  can  be  gleaned  from  Paul's  epistles. 

We  remember  the  promise  made  by  Paul  to  Peter 
James  and  John,  that  while  laboring  among  the  Gen- 
tiles he  would  "remember  the  poor"  in  Judea  (Gal.  ii. 
6-10).  In  accordance  with  this  agreement  we  find  that 
Paul  was  now  urging  a  general  collection  in  the  churches 
of  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  as  he  had  done  in  Galatia, 
for  this  purpose  (I.  Cor.  xvi.  1,  2;  II.  Cor.  viii.  1-15). 
For  prudential  considerations,  such  as  prompted  him  so 
often  to  labor  without  compensation,  he  declined  to  bear 
the  gift  himself,  though  the  churches  in  Macedonia  had 
'  See  Introduction,  Chronology,  xxviii. 


172  COMMENTARY.  [xx.  3. 

entreated  him  to  do  so  (II.  Cor.  viii.  4).  At  first  indeed 
he  had  not  fully  intended  to  go  to  Jerusalem  in  connec- 
tion with  it,  but  had  said  to  the  churches,  "  Whomsoever 
ye  shall  apjjrove  by  letters,  them  will  I  send  to  carry 
your  bounty  unto  Jerusalem :  and  if  it  be  meet  for  me 
to  go  also,  they  shall  go  with  me"  (I.  Cor.  xvi.  3,  4). 
The  importance  of  the  mission,  however,  grew  as  time 
advanced,  so  that  he  resolved  to  go  himself;  and  the  en- 
terprise assumed  a  most  absorbing  interest. 

The  circumstance  which  led  to  this  change  of  pur- 
pose was  the  increasing  alienation  between  the  Jews  and 
the  Gentiles  within  the  church.  The  decree  of  the  apos- 
tles, as  we  have  seen,  gave  great  comfort  to  the  church 
in  Antioch,  where  the  controversy  originated,  and  it  had 
done  good  everywhere  it  had  been  carried  (xv.  31;  xvi. 
4,  5)  ;  but  other  judaizing  teachers  had  renewed  the  con- 
troversy, and  were  ignoring  the  decree.  They  had  per- 
sisted in  their  schismatical  efforts  until  there  was  now  a 
widesjjread  disaffection  between  the  two  sections  of  the 
church.  By  their  influence  the  churches  in  Galatia  had 
become  alienated  from  Paul,  for  whom  they  once  would 
have  been  willing  to  pluck  out  their  own  eyes,  and  they 
were  being  rapidly  led  back  under  the  bondage  of  the 
law  (Gal.  i.  6;  iv.  15-20).  The  church  in  Rome,  at  the 
western  extremity  of  the  territory  which  had  been  evan- 
gelized, was  also  disturbed  by  the  controversy,  the  Jews 
insisting  that  justification  was  by  works  of  law,  and  that 
the  distinction  of  meats  and  holy  days  should  be  perpet- 
uated in  the  church  (Rom.,  iii. ,  iv.,  v.,  xi v.).  This  state  of 
affairs  filled  Paul  with  inexpressil)le  anxiety,  and  while 
the  danger  was  imminent  he  bent  all  his  energies  to  the 
task  of  averting  it. 


XX.  3.]  ACTS.  173 

Already  engaged  in  a  general  collection  among  Gen- 
tile churches  for  the  poor  in  Judea,  and  knowing  the 
tendency  of  kindness  to  win  back  alienated  affection,  he 
pushed  the  work  forward  for  this  additional  considera- 
tion, as  we  see  from  the  following  appeal  which  he  made 
to  the  Corinthians:  "  For  the  ministration  of  this  serv- 
ice not  only  filleth  up  the  measure  of  the  wants  of  the 
saints,  but  aboundeth  also  through  many  thanksgivings 
unto  God ;  seeing  that  through  the  proving  of  you  by 
this  ministration  they  glorify  God  for  the  obedience  of 
your  confession  unto  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  for  the 
liberality  of  your  contribution  unto  them  and  unto  all ; 
while  they  themselves  also,  with  supplication  on  your 
behalf,  long  after  you  by  reason  of  the  exceeding  grace 
of  God  in  you"  (II.  Cor.  ix.  12-14).  So  great  was  his 
confidence  in  the  good  results  of  the  enterprise  that  he 
here  speaks  as  if  they  were  already  accomplished — as  if 
the  Jews  were  already  offering  many  thanksgivings  and 
prayers  for  the  Gentiles  in  consideration  of  their  kind- 
ness. 

Thus  Paul  felt  while  he  was  stimulating  the  liber- 
ality of  his  brethren  ;  but  when  the  collections  had  all 
been  made,  and  he  M'as  about  to  start  from  Corinth  to 
Jerusalem  with  the  money,  he  began  to  fear  that  the 
Jews  in  Palestine  would  not  accept  the  gift,  and  that  by 
their  refusal  the  breach  which  he  was  trying  to  close 
would  be  opened  wider.  We  know  this  by  the  almost 
j)ainful  earnestness  with  which  he  besought  the  brethren 
in  Rome  to  pray  with  him  that  this  calamity  might  be 
averted.  He  says :  "  Now  I  beseech  you,  brethren,  by 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  the  love  of  the  Spirit, 
that  ye  strive  together  with  me  in  your  prayers  to  God 
for  me ;  that  I  may  be  delivered  from  them  that  are  dis- 


174  COMMENTARY.  [xx.  3. 

obedient  in  Judea,  and  that  my  ministration  which  I 
have  for  Jerusalem  may  be  acceptable  to  the  saints ;  that 
I  may  come  unto  you  in  joy  through  the  will  of  God, 
and  together  with  you  find  rest"  (Rom.  xv.  30-32).  If 
he  called  thus  earnestly  for  the  prayers  of  the  distant 
church  in  Rome,  how  much  more  must  he  have  enlisted 
those  of  the  churches  in  Achaia  and  Macedonia,  who 
were  immediate  participants  in  the  enterprise.  We 
have  here  the  spectacle  of  a  man  who  was  regarded  with 
suspicion,  if  not  with  positive  dislike,  by  a  large  portion 
of  his  brethren,  securing  from  others,  who  were  involved 
with  him  in  the  same  reproach,  a  self-denying  contribu- 
tion for  the  temporal  wants  of  the  disaffected  party ;  and 
then,  fearing  lest  their  disaffection  was  so  great  as  to 
cause  them  to  reject  the  gift — a  fear  which  would  cause 
most  men  to  withhold  it  entirely — he  calls  upon  all  the 
donors  to  unite  in  persistent  prayer  that  it  might  not  be 
rejected.  No  nobler  example  of  disinterested  benevo- 
lence can  be  found  in  the  history  of  men.  The  prose- 
cution of  the  enterprise,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  was 
in  keeping  with  the  magnanimity  of  its  inception.  But 
before  we  consider  it  further  we  must  notice  briefly  some 
kindred  facts. 

For  the  same  noble  purpose  which  prompted  the 
great  collection,  Paul  wrote,  during  his  three  months  in 
Corinth,  his  epistles  to  the  Galatians  and  the  Romans. 
This  date  we  have  already  assumed  in  referring  to 
them  as  contemporaneous  documents.  The  most  con- 
clusive evidence  for  assigning  them  this  date  may  be 
briefly  stated  as  follows  :  In  the  epistle  to  the  Romans 
Paul  expressly  states  that  he  was  about  to  start  for  Jeru- 
salem with  a  contribution  which  had  been  made  by  the 
churches  in   Macedonia  and  Achaia   (xv.  25,  26)  ;  and 


XX.  3.]  ACTS.  175 

this  could  have  been  said  only  at  the  close  of  his  present 
stay  in  Corinth.  Moreover,  Gains,  who  lived  in  Corinth, 
was  his  host  at  the  time  of  writing  (xvi.  23  ;  cf.  I.  Cor.  i. 
14) ;  and  Pha3be,  of  the  Corinthian  seaport  Cenchrea, 
was  the  bearer  of  the  epistle  (xvi.  1).  As  for  Galatians, 
it  contains  an  allusion  to  Paul's  first  visit  to  Galatia, 
implying  that  he  had  been  there  a  second  time.  His 
words  are  :  "  Ye  know  that  by  an  infirmity  of  the  flesh 
I  preached  the  gospel  unto  you  the  first  time"  (iv.  13). 
It  was  written  then,  after  this  second  visit,  and  another  re- 
mark shows  that  it  was  not  very  long  after  that  visit.  He 
says,  "  I  marvel  that  ye  are  so  quickly  removing  from 
him  that  called  you  in  the  grace  of  Christ  unto  a  differ- 
ent gospel "  (i.  6).  \yhen  at  Corinth  he  had  been  away 
from  Galatia  only  a  little  more  than  three  years  ;  and 
this  was  a  short  time  for  so  great  a  revolution  in  senti- 
ment and  faith  as  had  occurred  in  those  churches.  Fi- 
nally, the  close  correspondence  in  subject  matter  between 
this  epistle  and  that  to  the  Romans,  both  being  devoted 
principally  to  setting  forth  the  doctrine  of  justification  by 
feith,  in  opposition  to  the  scheme  of  salvation  by  works 
of  law  which  was  propagated  l)y  the  judaizers,  indicates 
that  they  were  both  written  under  the  same  condition  of 
affairs,  and  therefore  about  the  same  time.  As  in  Ro- 
mans Paul  speaks  of  his  departure  to  Jerusalem  as 
imminent,  it  is  probable  that  Galatians  had  been  written 
a  short  time  previous.  In  both  the  apostle  contended  by 
argument  and  by  authority  against  the  destructive  teach- 
ing of  the  judaizers,  at  the  same  that  he  was  aiming,  i)y 
a  noble  act  of  self-denial,  to  win  back  their  good  will 
both  to  himself  and  the  Gentiles  whose  cause  he  had 
espoused. 


176  COMMENTARY,  [xx.  3-5. 

Having  dispatched  these  two  epistles,  and  collected 
about  him  the  messengers  of  the  various  churches,  the 
apostle  was  about  to  start  for  Syria  by  water,  which  was 
much  the  swifter  route,  when,  as  the  text  last  quoted 
affirms,  he  learned  that  a  jjlot  was  laid  against  him  by 
the  Jews,  which  led  him  to  change  his  course.  This 
plot  probably  consisted  in  a  notification  to  highwaymen 
to  lie  in  wait  for  the  company  in  the  mountains  between 
Corinth  and  Cenchrea,  and  rob  them  of  the  money  which 
they  were  bearing  to  Jerusalem.  By  the  change  of 
route,  the  road  to  Cenchrea  could  be  avoided,  and  the 
waiting  robbers  left  in  the  lurch.  A  much  longer  jour- 
ney was  necessitated;  but  it  led  Paul  once  more  by  the 
way  of  churches  which  he  would  otherwise  have  failed 
to  revisit. 

Vv.  4,  5.  (4)  And  there  accompanied  him  as  far  as 
Asia  Sopater  of  Bercea,  the  son  of  Pyrrhus ;  and  of  the 
Thessalonians,  Aristarchus  and  Secundus  ;  and  Gains  of 
Derbe,  and  Timothy ;  and  of  Asia,  Tychicus  and  Tro- 
phimus.  (5)  But  these  had  gone  before,  and  were  wait- 
ing for  us  at  Troas.  These  seven  brethren  were  the 
messengers  chosen  by  the  churches,  as  Paul  had  direct- 
ed (I.  Cor.  xvi.  3),  to  bear  their  contributions  to  Jeru- 
salem. There  being  no  banks  or  paper  currency  in  those 
days,  the  money  had  to  be  carried  in  silver  on  the 
persons  of  the  messengers,  and  it  was  important  that  no 
one  should  be  so  loaded  as  to  indicate  the  fact  to  the 
sharp  eyes  of  robbers  :  hence  the  necessity  for  so  many 
messengers  to  carry  it.  Sopater  (abbreviation  of  Sosi- 
pater)  was  a  kinsman  of  Paul,  one  of  his  converts  at 
Beroea,  and  had  united  with  him  in  saluting  the  church 
in  Rome  (Rom.  xvi.  21).  Aristarchus  was  doubtless  the 
same  Macedonian  who  was  seized  by  the  mob  in  Ephesus 


XX.  5,  C]  ACTS.  177 

(xix.  29),  but  had  escaped  and  readied  his  home  iu 
Thobsalonica.  Secundus  (^second)  was  probably  so  named 
because  he  was  his  father's  second  son,  as  were  Tertius 
and  Quartus  (third  and  fourth),  because  they  were  the 
third  and  fourth  sons  (Rom.  xvi.  22,  23).  As  they  were 
all  three  with  Paul  at  Corinth,  it  is  not  improbable  that 
they  were  brothers.  Gains  of  Derbe  was  not  of  course 
the  Macedonian  Gains  who  had  suffered  in  the  silver- 
smith mob  with  Aristarchus.  His  presence  here,  so  far 
west  from  his  home,  implies  that  he  had  followed  Paul 
through  interest  in  his  labors.  Tychicus  (fortunate)  and 
Trophimus  (foster-child)  are  new  names  among  the 
companions  of  Paul.  As  they  are  of  Asia,  they  had 
doubtless  turned  to  the  Lord  while  Paul  was  preaching 
in  Ephesus,  and  had  followed  him  thence  into  Greece. 
Luke's  "■  us,''  here  introduced  once  more,  implies  that 
he  too  joined  the  company  at  Philippi.  It  was  here,  on 
the  first  tour,  that  this  pronoun  was  dropped,  and  the 
presumption  is  that  Luke  had  remained  at  Philippi  ever 
since  the  departure  of  Paul  and  Silas  therefrom,  six  or 
seven  years  previous.  During  this  absence  from  the 
narrative,  many  parts  of  it  have  been  hurried  and  ellipti- 
cal ;  but  we  shall  henceforth  find  it  much  more  circum- 
stantial. 

Ver.  6.  If  Paul's  only  purpose  in  passing  through 
Macedonia  was  to  reach  Asia  in  safety,  he  would  have 
had  no  occasion  to  revisit  Philippi,  which  was  at  least  a 
day's  journey  out  his  way ;  but  the  next  verse  finds  him 
in  that  city  and  leaving  it  for  Troas,  (6)  And  we  sailed 
away  from  Philippi  after  the  days  of  unleavened  bread, 
and  came  unto  them  to  Troas  in  five  days  :  where  we 
tarried  seven  days.  The  other  brethren,  in  going  before 
unto  Troas,  had  probably  set  sail  from  Thessalonica,  or 


178  COMMENTARY.  [xx.  6, 7. 

Neapolis,  without  making  the  detour  northward  to 
Philippi ;  and  their  design  in  going  before  may  have 
been  to  get  speedily  out  of  the  countiy  in  which  many 
enemies  knew  of  the  money  on  their  persons,  while  Paul, 
freed  from  anxiety  on  that  account,  might  make  another 
short  visit  to  the  church  at  Philippi,  whose  honored 
teacher  was  to  join  him  in  the  journey  to  Jerusalem.  It 
so  happened  that  the  days  of  unleavened  bread,  the  seven 
days  following  the  paschal  supper,  had  just  expired  when 
he  and  Luke  set  sail  for  Troas,  and  thus  we  are  able  to 
see  that  nearly  a  whole  year  had  passed  since  he  left 
Ephesus ;  for  he  left  there  earlier  than  he  had  expected, 
and  therefore  earlier  than  Pentecost  the  previous  year 
(I.  Cor.  xvi.  8). 

The  fact  that  the  voyage  from  Philippi  to  Troas  occu- 
pied five  days,  whereas  on  a  former  occasion  they  sailed 
from  Troas  to  Philippi  in  two  days  (xvi.  11,  12),  is  sug- 
gestive of  adverse  winds. 

When  Paul  was  last  in  Troas  an  effectual  door  was 
opened  to  him  by  the  Lord,  but  he  passed  on  without 
entering  it  (XL  Cor.  ii.  12).  Now  at  last  some  of  the 
work  then  neglected  was  done ;  for  the  seven  brethren 
had  preceded  him  more  'than  five  days,  and  the  whole 
company  remained  there  seven  days ;  and  nine  such  men 
as  these  could  accomplish  much  in  a  town  like  this  in 
the  course  of  two  weeks. 

9.  A  Lord's  Day  Mep:ting  iisr  Troas,  7-12. 

Ver.  7.  The  stay  of  seven  days  in  Troas  termi- 
nated on  the  Lord's  day.  (7)  And  upon  the  first  day  of 
the  week,  when  we  were  gathered  together  to  break 
bread,  Paul  discoursed  with  them,  intending  to  depart  on 
the  morrow ;  and  prolonged  his  speech  until  midnight. 


XX.  7.]  ACTS.  179 

Tiii-s  passage  shows  I  hat  the  first  day  of  the  week  was  the 
day  in  which  tlie  disciples  broke  the  loaf;  and  also 
that  the  prime  purpose  of  their  meeting  on  that  day 
was  to  observe  this  ordinance.  Paul's  preaching  on  the 
occasion  was  iuciilentul.  In  the  original  institution  of 
the  Lord's  supper,  nothing  was  said  as  to  the  frequency 
with  which  it  was  to  be  observed.  The  Lord's  words 
are,  "  This  do,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remembrance  of 
me  "  (I.  Cor.  xi.  25).  Had  nothing  more  been  said,  every 
cono-reoration  of  believers  would  have  been  left  to  its  own 
judgment  as  to  frequency  of  observance.  But  the  apos- 
tles were  afterward  guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit  in  this,  as 
in  other  matters  left  indefinite  by  the  Lord's  personal 
teaching,  and  their  example  is  our  guide.  Little  is  said 
on  the  subject,  but  th  it  little  is  decisive  in  favor  of  a 
weekly  observance  of  the  ordinance.  Here  it  is  repre- 
sented as  furnishing  tiie  chief  purpose  of  the  Lord's 
day  meeting;  and  the  same  appears  in  the  rebuke  ad- 
ministered to  the  Corinthians:  "When  therefore  ye 
assemble  yourselves  together,  it  is  not  possible  to  eat  the 
Lord's  supper;  for  in  your  eating  each  one  taketh  before 
otiier  his  own  supper"  (I.  Cor.  xi.  20,  21).  Such  being 
the  purpose  of  the  Lord's  day  meeting,  as  surely  as  the 
disciples  met  every  Lord's  day,  they  broke  the  loaf  on  that 
day.  Slight  as  this  evidence  is,  when  taken  in  connection 
with  the  universal  practice  of  the  church  in  the  second' 
century,  and  for  a  long  period  afterward,  it  has  proved 
sufficient  to  win  universal  agreement  among  biblical 
scholars,  that  this  was  the  apostolic  custom;  and  as  the 
example  of  the  a])ostles  acting  under  the  guidance  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  shows  plainly  the  will  of  the  Lord,  our  cus- 
tom should  be  the  same,  and  all  the  excuses  which  we 
ingeniously  frame  for  rejecting  this  custom  are  invalid. 


180  COMMENTARY.  [xx.  7-10. 

It  is  this  ordinance  which  brings  us  nearest  of  all  to 
the  sufferings  of  our  Redeemer;  and  if  we  commemorate 
weekly  the  fact  that  he  arose  again  for  our  justification, 
why  should  we  not  as  frequently  oommemorate  the 
fact  that  he  died  for  our  sins  ? 

The  extreme  length  of  Paul's  discourse  on  this  oc- 
casion is  accounted  for  in  the  remark  that  he  was 
'•intending  to  depart  on  the  morrow;"  and  we  learn 
further  on,  that  he  expected  never  to  see  these  disciples 
again  (38) ;  hence  his  desire  to  give  them  all  possible 
instruction  and  admonition  while  he  w^as  with  them. 

Vv.  8—10.  The  long,  solemn  discourse  was  broken 
off  at  midnight  by  an  incident  which  ■caused  great  alarm 
and  confusion  in  the  audience.  (8)  And  there  were  many 
lights  in  the  upper  chamber,  where  we  were  gathered 
together.  (9)  And  there  sat  in  the  window  a  certain 
young  man  named  Eutychus,  borne  down  with  deep 
sleep ;  and  as  Paul  discoursed  yet  longer,  being  borne 
down  by  his  sleep  he  fell  down  from  the  third  story,  and 
was  taken  up  dead.  (10)  And  Paul  want  down,  and  fell 
on  him,  and  embracing  him  said,  Make  ye  no  ado ;  for 
his  life  is  in  him.  This  passage  shows  that  the  meeting 
was  held  in  the  night,  and  in  tiie  third  story  of  the 
building.  The  third  story  is  suggestive  of  cheap  rent, 
and  also  of  precaution  against  interruption  of  tlie  wor- 
\'^hip  by  the  heathen  rabble  on  the  street.  If  some  of 
the  members  were  slaves,  a  night  meeting  was  the 
only  one  which  they  could  attend,  and  this  hour  may 
have  been  selected  to  suit  them.  It  is  probable  that  on 
account  of  Paul's  presence  tlie  room  was  crowded, 
and  that  Eutychus  had  taken  a  seat  in  the  window 
to  make  room  for  some  older  person  ;  and,  being  most 
likely  a  laboring  man,  unaccustomed  to  loss  of  sleep, 


XX.  10, 11.]  ACTS.  181 

he  found  it  impossible,  even  though  deeply  interested,  to 
keep  awake.  It  is  not  always  a  sin  to  go  to  sleep  under 
a  sermon.  Eutychus  was  dead  when  they  picked  him 
up;  but  when  Paul  had  embraced  him  his  life  was  in 
him,  and  the  embrace  brought  back  the  life  which  was 
extinguished  by  the  fall.  It  was  a  case  of  resuscitation 
like  that  of  the  daughter  of  Jairus  (Luke  viii.  49-55). 

Yer.  11.  The  alarm  caused  by  the  fall  of  Eutychus, 
the  astonishing  display  of  divine  power  in  his  restoration, 
and  the  stillness  of  the  midnight  hour  in  which  it  all 
occurred,  could  but  add  to  the  solemnity  which  already 
pervaded  the  assembly.  They  could  not  think  of  sleep, 
and  the  meeting  was  still  protracted.  They  returned  to 
the  upper  chamber,  where  the  lights  were  still  burning, 
and  where  the  elements  of  the  Lord's  sujjper  were  as 
yet  undistributed.  Paul,  notwithstanding  the  length 
and  earnestness  of  his  discourse,  was  unexhausted,  (ii) 
And  when  he  was  gone  up,  and  had  broken  the  bread, 
and  eaten,  and  had  talked  with  them  a  long  while,  even 
till  break  of  day,  so  he  departed.  Thus  the  whole 
night  was  spent  in  religious  discourse  and  conversation, 
interrupted  at  midnight  by  a  death  and  a  resurrection, 
and  this  followed  by  the  commemoration  of  the  Lord's 
death  which  brings  hope  of  a  resurrection  far  better.  At 
daybreak  the  meeting  terminated  in  one  of  those  tender 
farewells  so  often  spoken  among  believers,  iu  which  the 
pain  of  parting  and  the  hope  of  meeting  to  part  no  more 
struggle  so  tearfully  for  the  mastery.  It  was  a  night 
never  to  be  forgotten  by  those  who^  were  there,  and  in 
eternity  it  will  be  a  theme  for  much  conversation. 

It  is  a  question  of  some  interest,  whether  it  was  on 
Sunday  morning  or  Monday  morning  that  this  parting 
took  place.     The  brethren  met  in  the  early  part  of  the 


182  COMMENTARY.  [xx.  11-13. 

night,  yet  it  was  ''the  first  day  of  the  week."  We  have 
no  evidence  that  either  Jews  or  Gentiles  had  yet  adopted 
the  custom  of  counting  the  hours  of  the  day  from  mid- 
night ;  consequently  we  must  suppose  that  the  night  in 
question  was  that  belonging  to  Sunday,  as  it  was  then 
reckoned,  or  Saturday  night,  as  we  now  style  it.  It  was 
the  night  following  the  Jewish  Sabbath,  which  was  still 
observed  by  all  Jewish  disciples,  and  the  incident  shows 
that  the  disciples  at  Troas  were  in  the  habit  of  meeting 
on  this  night  to  break  bread.  Any  time  after  sunset  on 
that  evening  would  be  the  Lord's  day  as  they  counted 
it,  and  after  midnight,  which  was  the  time  of  breaking 
the  loaf  on  that  occasion,  was  on  the  Lord's  day  as  we 
count  it. 

Ver.  12.  Recurring  again  to  the  case  of  Eutychus, 
Luke  next  remarks:  (12)  And  they  brought  the  lad 
alive,  and  were  not  a  little  comforted.  This  means  that 
they  brought  him  from  the  meeting  to  his  home.  This 
was  done  in  the  morning  after  the  separation  from  Paul 
and  his  company,  and  four  or  five  hours  after  the  fall 
from  the  window.  Having  expected  to  take  him  home 
dead,  and  to  be  charged,  perhaps,  with  fault  in  reference 
to  his  death,  they  were  not  a  little  comforted  that  they 
could  bring  him  home  with  such  a  story  as  they  could 
now  tell  to  his  friends  and  neighbors. 

10.  The  Voyage  from  Troas  to  Miletus,  13-16. 

Ver.  13.  The  brethren  of  Troas  returned  to  their 
homes,  while  Paul  and  his  companions  resumed  their 
long  journey.  (13)  But  we,  going  before  to  the  ship,  set 
sail  for  Assos,  there  intending  to  take  in  Paul :  for  so  had 
he  appointed,  intending  himself  to  go  by  land.  Troas 
and  Assos  are  on  opposite  sides  of  a  peninsula  which 


XX.  13.]  ACTS.  183 

tenulnatcs  in  Cape  Lectmn.  The  distance  across  from 
city  to  city  is  about  twenty  miles,  while  the  coast  line 
around  is  about  forty.  Paul  could  easily  walk  across 
while  the  ship  was  sailing  around.  But  why  did  Paul 
choose,  after  spending  a  sleepless  night  in  preaching  and 
conversing,  to  still  further  tax  his  power  of  endurance  by 
this  walk  of  twenty  miles  ?  One  would  suppose  that  he 
would  have  preferred  resting  upon  a  hammock  in  the 
ship.  Nothing  short  of  an  excitement  which  eschews 
rest  for  either  mind  or  body  can  account  for  it.  But 
Paul  had  received  in  every  city  on  his  journey  prophetic 
warnings  of  bonds  and  imprisonment  awaiting  him  (23) ; 
he  was  agitated  by  the  critical  state  of  the  churches 
everywhere ;  he  was  saddened  by  the  final  farewells 
which  he  was  giving  to  the  churches  on  his  way  ;  and  he 
longed  for  a  season  of  meditation  and  prayer  which  could 
be  found  only  in  solitude.  Amid  the  more  stirring 
scenes  of  the  apostle's  life,  while  announcing  with  oracu- 
lar authority  the  will  of  God,  and  confirming  the  word 
to  trembling  thousands  by  signs  and  wonders  following, 
we  are  'apt  to  lose  our  human  sympathy  for  the  man  in 
our  admiration  for  the  apostle.  But  when  we  contem- 
plate him  under  circumstances  like  the  present,  worn 
down  by  the  sleepless  labors  of  a  whole  night ;  burdened 
in  spirit  too  heavily  to  enjoy  the  society  of  sympathizing 
friends ;  and  yet,  with  all  his  weariness,  choosing  a  long 
day's  journey  on  foot  that  he  might  indulge  to  satiety 
the  gloom  which  oppressed  him,  we  are  so  much  remind- 
ed of  our  own  seasons  of  afflictions  as  to  feel  the 
human  tie  which  binds  our  hearts  to  his.  No  ardent 
toiler  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord,  ready  to  sink  at  times 
beneath  his  load  of  anxiety  and  disappointment,  but 
finds  relief  in  permitting  the  excess  of  his  sorrow   to 


184  COMMENTARt.  [xx.  13-16. 

waste  itself  in  silence  and  solitude.  In  such  hours  it 
will  do  us  good  to  walk  with  Paul  from  Troas  to  Assos, 
and  to  remember  how  much  has  been  endured  by  greater 
and  better  men  than  ourselves. 

Vv.  14-16.  The  ship  and  the  footman  were  not  far 
apart  in  reaching  Assos.  (14)  And  when  he  met  us  at 
Assos,  we  took  him  in,  and  came  to  Mitylene.  (15)  And 
sailing  from  thence,  we  came  the  next  day  over  against 
Chios  ;  and  the  next  day  we  touched  at  Samos  ;  and  the 
day  after ^we  came  to  Miletus.  (16)  For  Paul  had  deter- 
mined to  sail  past  Ephesus,  that  he  might  not  have  to 
spend  time  in  Asia  ;  for  he  was  hastening,  if  it  were  pos- 
sible for  him,  to  be  at  Jerusalem  the  day  of  Pentecost.  The 
ship  was  coasting  among  the  islands  scattered  along  the 
eastern  shore  of  the  JEgean  Sea,  as  a  glance  at  the  map 
will  show;  and  the  part  of  the  voyage  here  described 
occupied  four  days.  They  cast  anchor  in  the  harbor  of 
Mitylene  the  first  night.  This  city,  beautifully  situated 
on  the  northern  shore  of  the  island  then  called  Lesbos, 
but  now  Mitylene,  from  the  name  of  the  city,  is  still  a 
handsome  town  with  a  considerable  trade.  On  the 
second  night  anchorage  was  found  "  over  against  Chios," 
without  entering  a  harbor.  On  the  third  day  they  crossed 
the  mouth  of  the  bay  which  leads  up  to  Ephesus,  and 
"  touched  at  Samos/'  perhaps  for  business  as  well  as  for 
a  safe  anchorage  at  night ;  and  a  short  run  on  the  fourth 
day  brought  them  to  the  important  seaport  of  Miletus 
on  the  main  shore.  As  they  passed  by  Ephesus,  and 
were  yet  so  near  to  that  scene  of  protracfed  labor  and 
suffering,  Luke  felt  called  upon  for  the  explanation 
which  he  gives.  If  the  ship  had  been  under  Paul's  con- 
trol, he  could  have  spent  at  Ephesus  the  time  afterward 
spent  at  Miletus  (17,  18),  without  delaying  his  arrival 


XX.  14-21.]  ACTS.  185 

in  Jerusalem ;  but  as  the  vessel  was  going  on  its  way 
without  regard  to  his  wishes,  he  could  visit  Ephesus 
only  by  running  in  on  some  other  vessel  from  Chios, 
and  taking  the  risk  of  finding  one  in  good  time  sailing 
from  Ephesus  to  Syria.  The  reason  for  his  anxiety  to 
reach  Jerusalem  by  Pentecost  was,  that  then  brethren 
from  every  village  in  Palestine  would  be  in  the  city,  and 
he  could  see  to  the  distribution  of  the  alms  which  his 
companions  bore,  without  the  necessity  of  visiting  all 
the  churches.  We  will  yet  see  that  he  made  the  journey 
in  time  for  the  feast. 

11.  An  Interview  with  the  Elders  op  the 
Church  at  Ephesus,  17-38. 

Ver.  17.  As  Paul's  vessel  was  to  lie  at  anchor  in 
the  harbor  of  Miletus  for  at  least  two  or  three  days,  he 
took  advantage  of  the  delay  to  gratify  in  part  his  desire 
to  communicate  once  more  with  the  I-rethren  of  Ephesus. 
(17)  And  from  Miletus  he  sent  to  Ephesus,  and  called  to 
him  the  elders  of  the  church.  The  distance  was  about 
thirty  miles.  He  might  have  gone  to  Ephesus  instead 
of  sending  for  the  elders,  but  for  some  uncertainty  as  to 
the  time  of  the  ship's  departure.  If  he  should  miss  this 
vessel,  it  might  defeat  his  purpose  to  attend  the  feast ; 
wherea.s,  if  the  elders  should  arrive  after  his  departure, 
they  would  suffer  only  the  inconvenience  of  the  short 
journey. 

Vv.  18-21.  The  interview  which  Paul  now  holds 
with  these  elders  may  be  regarded  as  a  type  of  all  those 
which  he  held  with  various  bodies  of  disciples  on  this 
mournful  journey.  He  begins  his  remarks  to  them  by  a 
brief  review  of  his  labors  in  their  city.  (18)  And  when 
they  were  come  to  him,  he  said  to  them,  Ye  yourselves 


186  COMMENTARY.  [xx.  18-21. 

know,  from  the  first  day  that  I  set  foot  in  Asia,  after 
what  manner  I  was  with  you  all  the  time,  (19)  serving 
the  Lord  with  all  lowliness  of  mind,  and  with  tears,  and 
with  trials  which  befell  me  by  the  plots  of  the  Jews : 
(20)  how  that  I  shrank  not  from  declaring  unto  you  any- 
thing that  was  profitable,  and  teaching  you  publicly  and 
from  house  to  house,  (21)  testifying  both  to  Jews  and  to 
Greeks  repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  toward  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  These  eldeis  must  have  been  among  , 
the  first  fruits  of  Paul's  preaching  in  Ephesus,  seeing 
that  they  knew  so  perfectly  his  manner  of  life  from  the 
first  clay  that  he  set  foot  in  Asia.  His  remark  about  the 
lowliness  of  mind,  and  the  tears  which  had  characterized 
him,  shows  that  the  great  distress  which  we  have  seen 
attendant  on  the  wild  proceedings  of  the  silversmith 
mob,  was  by  no  means  the  beginning  of  this  kind  of  ex- 
perience in  Ephesus.  The  reference,  too,  to  trials  which 
befell  him  by  the  plots  of  the  Jews,  brings  out  a  new 
feature  of  his  experience  there ;  for  in  the  narrative  Luke 
has  mentioned  only  one  indication  of  the  existence  of 
such  plots,  the  attempt  to  put  forward  Alexander  before 
the  mob  in  the  theater  (xix.  33,  34).  It  was  Paul's  sad 
experience  to  suffer  more,  throughout  his  career,  from 
his  own  countrymen  than  from  the  heathen. 

The  statements,  that  he  had  not  shrunk  from  de- 
daring  to  the  brethren  anything  that  was  profitable  for 
them,  and  that  he  had  taught  from  house  to  house,  as 
well  as  publicly,  are  both  worthy  of  solemn  considera- 
tion by  the  preachers  of  the  present  age.  The  former 
presents  Paul  in  striking  contrast  with  the  time-servers 
so  abundant  in  our  modern  pulpits,  who  never  rebuke 
sin  except  at  a  long  distance ;  who  speak  none  but 
smooth   words   about   corruption   in    the  church ;   and 


XX.  18-21.]  ACTS.  187 

whose  whole  study  is  personal  popularity.  Such  men 
care  for  souls  only  as  these  souls  may  in  some  way  glo- 
rify them.  They  are  too  faithful  to  their  own  aggrandise- 
ment to  think  of  being  faithful  to  God.  The  second 
statement  places  Paul  in  contrast  with  another  class  of 
modern  preachers,  who  either  neglect  to  go  from  house 
to  house  in  their  ministrations,  and  study  jjaltry  excuses 
for  the  neglect ;  or  who  go  from  house  to  house,  not  to 
teach  the  people,  but  to  enjoy  society  and  to  engage  in 
gossip.  Let  all  such  take  notice  that,  in  the  true  apos- 
tolic method  of  evangelizing  a  community,  and  of  edify- 
ing a  congregation,  earnest  work  from  house  to  house 
was  on  a  par  with  that  in  the  pulpit. 

The  order  in  which  Paul  here  mentions  repentance 
toward  God  and  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  has  been 
an  occasion  of  confusion  to  some  minds,  and  has  fur- 
nished a  proof  text  to  some  who  have  espoused  the  posi- 
tion that  in  the  sinner's  conversion  to  Christ  repentance 
precedes  faith.  It  is  true  that  Paul  preached  repentance 
toward  God  before  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  his 
aim  was  to  induce  men  to  repeat  toward  God  as  a 
preparation  for  faith  in  Christ.  John  the  Baptist  pre- 
pared the  people  for  Christ  by  preaching  repentance 
toward  God;  Jesus  did  the  same;  and  Paul,  in  address- 
ing the  heathen  in  Athens,  first  presented  to  them  the 
true  God,  then  called  on  them  to  repent  of  their  idola- 
tries which  had  dishonored  (Jod;  and  then  presented  to 
them  the  risen  Christ  (xvii.  29-31).  The  two  themes 
were  not  presented  in  this  order  because  it  was  impossi- 
ble for  men  to  believe  in  Christ  before  repenting  toward 
God ;  but  because,  if  they  are  brought  to  repentance 
toward  God  in  whom  they  already  believe,  they  are  in  a 
better  frame  of  mind  for  hearing  the  gospel  of  Clirist, 


188  COMMENTARY.  [xx.  18-27. 

and  believing  in  him.  In  general  terms,  if  we  repent  of 
sinning  against  the  light  we  have,  we  are  better  prepared 
to  receive  any  new  light  which  God  may  see  fit  to  give 
us;  whereas,  if  we  are  impenitent  in  regard  to  the 
former,  we  will  almost  certainly  despise  the  latter.  To 
sinners  of  all  ages  and  countries,  who  know  something 
of  God,  but  nothing  of  Christ,  this  method  of  preaching 
faith  and  repentance  is  doubtless  the  best ;  but  it  may 
not  be  so  with  sinners  reared  in  Christian  lands,  who 
have  by  tradition  the  same  fiiith  in  Christ  which  they 
have  in  God,  and  who  realize  that  their  past  sins  are 
really  sins  against  Christ.  This  method,  however,  is 
very  far  from  supporting  the  idea  that  repentance  pre- 
cedes faith  in  the  sense  usually  attached  to  that  proposi- 
tion ;  for  this  would  require  men  to  repent  toward  God 
before  they  believe  in  God,  and  toward  Christ  before 
they  believe  in  Christ — an  obvious  absurdity. 

Vv.  22-27.  After  this  very  brief  review  of  his 
labors  in  Ephesus,  the  apostle  next  speaks  of  his  own 
future,  and  reveals  to  the  elders  the  cause  of  the  gloom 
which  had  shrouded  his  spirit  on  this  journey.  (22)  And 
now,  behold,  I  go  bound  in  the  spirit  unto  Jerusalem,  not 
knowing  the  things  that  shall  befall  me  there :  (23) 
save  that  the  Holy  Spirit  testifies  unto  me  in  every  city, 
saying  that  bonds  and  afELictions  abide  me.  (24)  But  I 
hold  not  my  life  of  any  account  as  dear  unto  myself,  so 
that  I  may  accomplish  my  course,  and  the  ministry 
which  I  received  from  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  testify  the  gos- 
pel of  the  grace  of  God.  (25)  And  now,  behold,  I  know 
that  ye  all,  among  whom  I  went  about  preaching  the 
kingdom,  shall  see  my  face  no  more.  (26)  Wherefore  I 
testify  unto  you  this  day,  that  I  am  pure  from  the  blood 
of  all  men.     (27)  For  I  shrank  not  from  declaring  unto 


XX.  22-27.]  ACTS.  189 

you  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  By  the  expression, 
"  bound  iu  the  spirit,"  he  has  reference  to  the  bonds 
that  awaited  him  in  Jerusalem,  aud  he  means  that  he 
felt  in  spirit  as  if  the  bonds  were  already  upon  him. 
He  was  so  certain  that  the  predictions  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
would  be  fulfilled,  that  they  seemed  a  present  reality. 
This  testimony  of  the  Spirit  had  undoubtedly  been  given 
to  him  through  prophets  whom  he  had  met  in  every 
city ;  for  if  it  had  been  given  to  him  directly,  it  would 
not  have  been  confined  to  the  cities.  This  is  another 
evidence  that  the  prophetic  power  of  the  apostles  was 
not  used  to  foresee  their  own  future,  as  their  healing 
power  was  not  used  to  cure  their  own  diseases.  When 
he  adds,  "  I  know  that  ye  all  among  whom  I  went  about 
preaching  the  gospel,  shall  see  my  face  no  more,"  we  are 
not  to  understand  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  had  previ- 
ously revealed  some  of  his  future  to  him  through  others, 
had  now  revealed  this  to  him  directly  ;  but  rather  that 
he  here  expresses  a  strong  conviction,  based  on  these  pre- 
dictions, and  also  on  his  own  fixed  purpose,  God  willing, 
to  spend  the  remnant  of  his  days  in  new  fields  of  labor 
(xix.  21  ;  Rom.  xv.  23,  24).  When  therefore  we  learn 
from  his  first  epistle  to  Timothy  (i.  1-3)  that  he  did 
afterw^ard  revisit  Ephesus,  the  fact  should  occasion  no 
great  surprise. 

In  the  closing  remark  of  this  part  of  the  address 
(26,  27),  Paul  recurs  to  his  fidelity  in  declaring  every- 
thing that  was  profitable  to  them,  and  he  holds  this  uj) 
as  proof  that  he  is  free  from  every  man's  blood.  "  I 
am  pure  from  the  blood  of  all  men.  For  I  shrank  not 
from  declaring  unto  you  the  whole  counsel  of  God."  It 
is  implied  that  if  a  religious  teacher  does  shrink,  through 
any  personal  or  selfish  consideration,  from  declaring  the 


190  COMMENTARY.  [xx.  27-35. 

whole  counsel  of  God  to  those  whom  he  teaches,  in  some 
sense  the  blood  of  those  who  may  be  lost  through  his 
neglect  will  be  upon  him  {cf.  xviii.  6;  Ezek.  iii.  16-21). 
This  is  an  unspeakably  fearful  responsibility,  and  it 
should  never  be  lost  sight  of. 

Vv.  28-35.  Having  spoken  of  his  own  past  and  his 
own  future,  the  apostle  next  speaks  of  the  future  of  the 
elders  and  their  church;  and  he  places  his  own  example 
before  them  for  imitation.  (28)  Take  heed  unto  your- 
selves, and  to  all  the  flock,  in  the  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
has  made  you  bishops,  to  feed  the  church  of  God,  which 
he  purchased  with  his  own  blood.  (29)  I  know  that  after 
my  departing  grievous  wolves  shall  enter  in  among  you, 
not  sparing  the  flock  ;  (30)  and  from  among  your  own 
selves  shall  men  arise,  speaking  perverse  things,  to  draw 
away  the  disciples  after  them.  (31)  Wherefore  watch  ye, 
remembering  that  by  the  space  of  three  years  I  ceased 
not  to  admonish  every  one  night  and  day  with  tears. 
(32)  And  now  I  commend  you  to  God,  and  to  the  word  of 
his  grace,  which  is  able  to  build  you  up,  and  to  give  you 
the  inheritance  among  all  them  that  are  sanctified.  (33) 
I  coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold,  or  apparel.  (34)  Ye 
yourselves  know  that  these  hands  ministered  unto  my 
necessities,  and  to  them  that  were  with  me.  (35)  In  all 
things  I  gave  you  an  example,  how  that  so  laboring  ye 
ought  to  help  the  weak,  and  to  remember  the  words  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,  how  he  himself  said,  It  is  more  blessed 
to  give  than  to  receive. 

Here  the  aj)ostle  styles  bishops  those  whom  Luke  at 
verse  17  calls  elders,  which  shows  that  the  two  titles 
were  applied  to  the  same  church  officer,  and  that  the  bish- 
ops of  the  apostolic  church  were  not  diocesan  bishops, 
such  as  now  rule  in  episcopal  bodies,  but  officers  of  sin- 


ss.  28-35.]  ACTS,  191 

gle  cougregatious.  While  the  word  bishop  is  derived 
from  the  original  term  here  used  (i-caxo-o^) ,  it  does  not 
translate  it,  because  the  idea  commonly  attached  to  the 
one  is  quite  different  from  the  meaning  of  the  other. 
The  exact  English  equivalent  of  the  Greek  word  is  over- 
seer, which  is  used  here  in  the  A.  V.,  and  should  have 
been  retained  by  the  revisers.  In  order  to  impress 
these  brethren  more  deeply  in  regard  to  their  responsi- 
bility, Paul,  reminds  them  that  they  had  been  made  over- 
seers of  the  flock  in  Ephesus  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  The 
Holy  Spirit  had  made  them  overseers  by  giving  them 
the  spiritual  qualifications  which  rendered  them  eligible 
to  the  office,  and  by  guiding  the  church  in  selecting 
them,  as  well  as  the  apostle  in  appointing  them.  They 
are  exhorted,  first,  to  take  heed  to  themselves ;  second, 
to  take  heed  to  "all  the  flock;"  and  third,  to  be  shep- 
herds to  the  church;  for  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  word 
rendered  to  feed.  The  first  required  that  personal  godli- 
ness without  which  no  man's  ministrations  in  the  church 
have  any  value;  the  second  required  such  watchfulness 
as  would  allow  nothing  in  the  condition  of  the  church 
to  escape  their  notice  ;  and  the  third  required  them  to  do 
for  the  church  all  that  an  eastern  shepherd  does  for  his 
flock.  They  were  reminded  that  this  church  was  pur- 
chased by  God  with  his  own  blood  shed  in  the  person  of 
his  Son,  in  order  that  they  might  be  willing,  on  account 
of  the  price  God  paid  for  it,  to  make  all  needed  sacri- 
fices for  its  good.  They  were  warned  against  two  dan- 
gers which  Paul's  prophetic  vision  could  foresee :  the  en- 
tering in  of  men  from  abroad,  whom  he  styles  "  grievous 
wolves"  who  would  not  "spare  the  flock ;"  and  the  up- 
rising from  among  themselves  of  factionists,  who  would 
draw  the  disciples  away  from  the  Lord  to  follow  them. 


192  COMMENTARY,  [xx.  28-35. 

It  would  have  been  useless  to  tell  them  of  these  dangers, 
if  there  were  no  means  of  guarding  against  them ;  so 
they  are  told,  first,  to  watch.  Watchfulness  would  enable 
them  to  see  the  first  symptoms  of  coming  trouble,  and 
to  attack  it  while  it  was  weak.  The  shepherd  of  the 
church  who  is  not  watchful  as  to  the  teachers  who  come 
from  abroad,  and  as  to  ambitious  men  within  the  con- 
gregation, is  like  the  literal  shepherd  who  sleeps  until 
the  wolf  has  entered  the  fold,  or  until  the  flock  begins 
to  scatter.  Secondly,  they  are  told  to  remember  how  he 
had  done  in  such  matters  during  his  stay  among  them — 
to  remember  it  that  they  might  imitate  it — that  is,  he 
had  "  not  ceased  to  admonish  every  one  night  and  day 
with  tears."  By  such  admonitions,  on  the  first  ajjpear- 
ance  of  trouble  from  within  or  from  without,  they  were 
to  keep  in  safety  the  flock  committed  to  their  care.  In 
leaving  them  to  this  great  responsibility,  he  points  them 
to  the  only  source  of  courage  and  strength  sufficient  for 
them,  by  commending  them  to  God  and  to  his  word,  assur- 
ing them  that  the  word  was  able  to  build  them  up,  and 
to  give  them  inheritance  among  the  sanctified.  After 
this  benediction,  which  appears  as  if  intended  to  close 
the  addj'ess,  he  adds  still  another  admonition,  which  he 
enforces  by  both  his  own  example  and  some  treasured 
words  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  has  reference  to  caring  for 
God's  poor;  and  it  required  them,  elders  though  they 
were,  to  labor  wuth  their  own  hands  that  they  might  be 
able  to  ''  help  the  weak."  His  own  example  was  most 
graphically  and  touchingly  depicted  in  the  words :  "  I 
have  coveted  no  man's  silver,  or  gold,  or  apparel.  Ye 
yourselves  know  that  these  hands  [lifting  them  up]  have 
ministered  to  my  necessities,  and  to  them  that  were  with 
me ;"  and  the  sentence  quoted  from  the  Lord  Jesus,  "  It 


XX.  28-38.]  ACTS.  193 

is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive,"  was  one  of 
those  precious  morsels  of  divine  truth,  of  which  many 
thousands  fell  from  his  lips  that  are  not  recorded  in  our 
brief  gospels. 

Vv.  36-38.  An  address  so  solemn,  so  tender,  so 
heart- crushing  both  to  speaker  and  hearers,  could  be 
followed  with  propriety  only  by  prostration  before  the 
throne  of  grace.  (36)  And  when  he  had  thus  spoken, 
he  kneeled  down,  and  prayed  with  them  all.  (37)  And 
they  all  wept  sore,  and  fell  on  Paul's  neck,  and  kissed 
him,  (38)  sorrowing  most  of  all  for  the  word  which  he  had 
spoken,  that  they  should  behold  his  face  no  more.  And 
they  brought  him  on  his  way  unto  the  ship.  Luke  records 
not  a  word  of  that  prayer.  There  are  some  prayers  that 
are  so  broken  with  emotion,  so  interrupted  by  weeping, 
that  though  they  leave  a  holy  benediction  on  the  soul, 
no  connected  words  in  them  are  remembered.  The  tears 
of  women  and  of  children  are  sometimes  shallow ;  but 
when  full  grown  men  like  these,  men  of  gray  hairs,  who 
have  been  hardened  to  endurance  by  years  of  danger 
and  suffering,  are  seen  to  weep  like  children,  and  to  fall 
upon  one  another's  necks,  the  depth  of  their  grief  can 
not  be  questioned.  When  the  man  of  the  world  is  thus 
overcome  with  grief,  his  heart  often  grows  harder  while 
it  is  breaking ;  but  the  sorrow  of  the  man  of  faith  is 
softening  and  purifying ;  it  binds  the  afflicted  more 
closely  to  one  another  and  to  God,  while  it  is  sanctified 
by  prayer.  It  is  a  sorrow  which  we  are  willing  to  feel 
again,  and  which  we  love  to  remember.  The  pathway 
of  the  church  is  strewn  with  scenes  like  this.  When 
the  paths  of  many  pilgrims  meet,  and  for  a  few  days  they 
mingle  together  their  prayers,  their  songs  of  praise,  their 
counsels,  and  their  tears,  the  hour  of  parting  is  often  a 


194  COMMENT AR  Y.  [xx.  3G-38. 

repetition  of  this  scene  on  the  sea  shore  at  Miletus. 
Tears  and  heavings  of  the  breast,  which  tell  of  grief  and 
love  and  hope  struggling  within,  the  parting  hand,  the 
fond  embrace,  the  blessing  of  God  invoked,  and  the  sad 
turning  away  to  duties  which  the  soul  feels  for  the  mo- 
ment too  weak  to  attempt — these  are  all  familiar  to  the 
toiling  servants  of  God. 

If  Paul  had  been  parting  from  these  brethren  under 
cheerful  anticipations  for  himself  and  them,  the  parting 
would  have  been  painful ;  but  added  to  the  pain  of  a 
final  parting  was  the  gloom  of  their  own  uncertain 
future,  and  of  the  undefined  afilictions  which  certainly 
awaited  him.  He  had  already,  twelve  months  before  this, 
recounted  a  catalogue  of  sufferings  more  abundant  than 
had  fallen  to  the  lot  of  any  other  man.  He  had  been 
often  in  prison,  and  often  on  the  verge  of  death.  From 
the  Jews  he  had  five  times  received  forty  stripes  save 
one,  and  three  times  he  had  been  beaten  with  rods. 
Once  he  was  stoned,  and  left  on  the  ground,  supposed  to 
be  dead.  He  had  been  shipwrecked  three  times,  and 
had  spent  a  day  and  a  night  in  the  waters  of  the  great 
deep.  In  his  many  journeys  he  had  been  exposed  to 
perils  by  water,  by  robbers,  by  his  own  countrymen,  by 
the  heathen;  in  the  city,  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  sea, 
and  among  false  brethren.  He  had  suffered  from  weari- 
ness and  painfulness  and  wakefulness.  He  had  endured 
hunger  and  thirst,  and  he  had  suffered  from  cold  for 
want  of  sufficient  clothing.  Throughout  all  he  had 
borne,  and  was  still  bearing,  that  which  was  little  less 
painful,  the  care  of  all  the  churches.  At  the  same  time 
there  was  a  thorn  in  his  flesh,  a  messenger  of  Satan  to 
buffet  him,  which  was  so  irritating  and  humiliating  that 
he  had  three  times  prayed  the  Lord  to  take  it  from  him. 


\'x.  3G-xxi.  8.]  ACTS.  195 

He  had  beeu  coustraiucd  to  write  to  the  brethren  in 
Galatia,  "  From  henceforth  let  no  man  trouble  me : 
for  I  bear  branded  on  my  body  the  marks  of  the  Lord 
Jesus."  ^  Most  men  would  have  said,  I  have  suffered 
enough  :  the  success  of  my  present  enterprise  is  doubtful 
at  best,  and  it  is  certain  to  bring  me  once  more  into  prison, 
and  into  untold  afflictions  :  I  will  therefore  remain  where 
1  am,  amid  brethren  Avho  love  me,  and  let  my  companions 
complete  this  work  of  benevolence  which  I  have  under- 
taken. But  no  such  thoughts  were  entertained ;  and 
when  the  Ephesian  elders  were  parting  from  such  a  man, 
well  might  they  weep,  and  stand  mute  upon  the  shore 
till  the  sails  of  his  vessel  grew  dim  in  the  distance,  ere 
they  turned  in  loneliness  to  the  toils  and  dangers  which 
they  now  knew  they  must  encounter  without  the  pres- 
ence or  the  counsel  of  their  great  teacher.  We  are  not 
permitted  to  return  with  them  to  Ephcsus,  or  to  hear 
their  sorrowful  convei'sation  by  the  way ;  for  we  must 
follow  the  receding  vessel,  and  witness  the  bonds  and 
afflictions  which  await  its  most  noted  passenger. 

12.  The  Journey  from  Miletus  to  C^sarea, 
XXI.  1-9. 

Vv.  1-3.  The  vessel  proceeded  for  a  time  on  its 
coasting  voyage  along  the  shore  of  Asia  Minor,  and  then 
struck  out  into  the  open  sea.  (i)  And  when  it  came  to 
pass  that  we  were  parted  from  them,  and  had  set  sail,  we 
came  with  a  straight  course  unto  Cos,  and  the  next  day 
unto  Rhodes,  and  from  thence  unto  Patara ;  (2)  and  having 
found  a  ship  crossing  over  unto  Phoenicia,  we  went  aboard, 
and  set  sail.  (3)  And  when  we  had  come  in  sight  of 
Cyprus,  leaving  it  on  the  left  hand,  we  sailed  unto  Syria, 
'  II.  Cor.  xi.  21-28  ;  xii.  7-10 ;  Gal.  vi.  17. 


196  COMMEXTARY.  [xxi.  1-3. 

and  landed  at  Tyre :  for  there  the  ship  was  to  unlade  her 
burden.  That  they  sailed  with  a  "  straight  course  "  from 
Miletus  to  the  island  of  Cos,  implies  a  favorable  wind  on 
the  first  day.  At  the  city  of  Rhodes,  on  the  island  of  the 
same  name,  they  cast  anchor  for  the  night  in  the  harbor, 
the  mouth  of  which  had  once  been  ornamented  by  a 
colossus  which  was  one  of  the  seven  wonders  of  the 
world.  It  was  a  brazen  statue  of  Helios,  one  hundred  and 
five  feet  in  height.  It  was  prostrated  by  an  earthquake, 
224  B.  C.  ;  but  its  fragments  were  still  on  the  spot  at  the 
time  of  Paul's  visit.  Patara,  where  they  changed  vessels, 
is  on  the  southern  coast  of  Lycia.  They  made  the 
change  because  the  new  vessel  was  going  directly  to  the 
port  of  Tyre,  nearly  in  the  exact  direction  in  which  they 
desired  to  sail ;  and  this  implies  either  that  the  vessel 
which  they  left  was  going  no  farther  than  Patara,  or 
that  it  was  intending  still  to  hug  the  shore  of  Asia 
Minor.  On  passing  in  sight  of  Cyprus,  Paul  must  have 
been  reminded  of  his  early  experience  in  that  island? 
when  he  and  Barnabas  had  preached  there  on  his  first 
missionary  tour  (xiii.  4-12).  The  ship's  run  from  Patara 
to  Tyre  was  one  of  several  days  and  nights  in  the  open 
sea,  without  casting  anchor  as  they  had  done  every 
night  since  leaving  Troas.  Such  a  run  the  ships  of  that 
day  never  made,  except  when  they  could  hope  for  the  light 
of  the  moon  or  stars  at  night ;  and  it  is  a  singular  circum- 
stance that  we  are  able  to  determine  the  phase  of  the 
moon  at  the  time  of  this  run.  Paul  left  Philippi  seven 
days  after  the  full  moon  ;  and  he  was  five  days  reaching 
Troas,  where  he  spent  seven  diys  (xx.  6).  This  makes 
nineteen  days  after  the  full  moon.  Leaving  Troas,  they 
reached  Miletus  in  four  days,  and  from  Miletus  they 
sailed   to    Patara   in   three   days    (xx.   13-15 ;  xxi.  1). 


xxi.  1-4.]  ACTS.  197 

These  seven  days  atUled  to  the  nineteen  make  twenty- 
six;  and  if  they  spent  three  days  in  Miletus,  these  would 
make  the  aggregate  twenty-nine  since  the  last  full  moon, 
when  it  would  be  full  moon  again.  Any  traveler  who 
has  sailed  by  moonlight  in  the  summer  time  on  the  Medi- 
terranean Sea,  when  the  water  was  smooth,  remembers  it 
as  a  delightful  exporieuce,  and  it  must  have  helped  to 
soothe  the  troubled  spirits  of  Paul  and  his  companions. 
Ver.  4.  The  time  employed  by  the  sailors  in  put- 
ting out  freight,  and  perhaps  in  taking  in  a  fresh  cargo, 
gave  another  opportunity  for  communing  with  brethren 
on  shore.  (4)  And  having  found  the  disciples,  we  tar- 
ried there  seven  days  :  and  these  said  to  Paul  through 
the  Spirit,  that  he  should  not  set  foot  in  Jerusalem. 
The  words,  "  having  found  the  disciples,"  imply  that 
some  search  had  to  be  made  for  them ;  and  this  followed 
from  the  fact  that  Paul  had  not  been  there  before  since 
the  church  was  established,  and  his  companions,  being 
all  of  foreign  birth,  were  total  strangers  in  the  city. 
But  a  church  was  at  any  rate  found  in  Tyre,  verifying 
the  words  of  our  Lord  addressed  to  cities  of  Galilee  :  "  If 
the  mighty  works  had  been  done  in  Tyre  and  Si  don 
which  were  done  in  you,  they  would  have  repented 
long  ago  in  sackcloth  and  ashes"  (Matt.  xi.  21).  We 
are  not  to  understand  that  the  entreaties  of  these  Tyrian 
brethren  were  dictated  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  for  this 
would  have  made  it  Paul's  duty  to  comply  with  them, 
and  he  certainly  would  have  done  so ;  but  we  are  to 
understand  that  the  Holy  Spirit  revealed  to  some  of 
them,  as  he  had  done  in  other  cities,  what  awaited 
Paul  in  Jerusalem,  while  they  of  their  own  accord 
entreated  him  not  to  go  thither.  Their  entreaties  show 
that  although  they  had  not  been  evangelized  by  Paul, 


198  COMMENTARY.  [xxi.  4-7. 

they  knew  and  appreciated  his  worth  to  the  cause  of 
Christ. 

Vv.  5,  6.  When  the  seven  days  were  past,  including, 
as  they  must,  a  Lord's  day  in  which  the  disciples  came 
together  to  break  bread,  another  scene  of  painful  parting 
occurred  like  that  at  Miletus.  (5)  And  when  it  came  to 
pass  that  we  had  accomplished  the  days,  we  departed 
and  went  on  our  journey  ;  and  they  all,  with  wives  and 
children,  brought  us  on  our  way,  till  we  were  out  of  the 
city  ;  and  kneeling  down  on  the  beach,  we  prayed,  (6) 
and  bade  each  other  farewell ;  and  we  went  on  board 
the  ship,  but  they  returned  home  again.  Here  the  part- 
ing scene  was  even  more  tender  than  that  at  Miletus ; 
for  the  sobs  of  women  and  children  were  mingled  with 
those  of  the  men.  All,  however,  were  sanctified  by  a 
prayer  which  must  have  soothed  every  heart,  and  have 
remained  in  blessed  remembrance  with  the  saints  at 
Tyre. 

Ver.  7.  The  rest  of  the  journey  by  water  was  com- 
pleted ia  a  single  day ;  for  the  distance  is  not  more  than 
a  day's  journey  by  land.  (7)  And  when  we  had  finished 
the  voyage  from  Tyre,  we  arrived  at  Ptolemais ;  and 
we  saluted  the  brethren,  and  abode  with  them  one  day. 
Ptolemais  was  the  name  at  that  time  of  the  modern  city  of 
Acre.  Its  original  name,  Accho,  which  it  bore  while  in 
possession  of  the  Canaanites,  had  been  changed  to  Ptol- 
emais by  one  of  the  Ptolemies  of  Egypt,  in  honor  of  him- 
self; but,  as  is  the  case  with  many  cities  of  Palestine 
whose  names  were  changed  by  its  Greek  and  Roman 
conquerors,  when  the  conquering  power  passed  away  the 
original  name  in  a  slightly  different  form  was  restored. 
That  Paul  found  brethren  here  as  well  as  in  Tyre,  is 
proof  of  the  thoroughness  with  which  this  region  had 


xxi.  7-9.]  ACTS.  199 

been  evangelized.  Acre  was  situated  in  the  territory 
formerly  occupied  by  the  tribe  of  Asher,  but  it  had 
become  a  Greek  city  in  the  interval  since  the  captivity. 

Vv.  8,  9.  The  single  day  spent  with  the  brethren  in 
Ptolemais  was  sufficient  for  the  admonitions  which  Paul 
was  leaving  with  all  the  churches,  and  for  another  pain- 
ful farewell.  (8)  And  on  the  morrow  we  departed,  and 
came  unto  Caesarea :  and  entering  into  the  house  of 
Philip  the  evangelist,  who  was  one  of  the  seven,  we 
abode  with  him.  (9)  Now  this  man  had  four  daughters, 
virgins,  who  did  prophesy.  From  Ptolemais  the  road 
leads  around  the  Bay  of  Acre,  almost  in  a  semicircle, 
along  a  smooth  beach,  to  the  sea  end  of  Mt.  Carmel, 
whence  it  leads  in  a  direct  line  almost  due  south  along 
the  Mediterranean  shore  to  Caesarea.  The  distance  is 
about  thirty-five  miles,  and  it  must  have  occupied  the 
greater  part  of  two  days. 

The  designation  of  Philip  the  evangelist,  as  "  one  of 
the  seven,"  clearly  identifies  him  as  the  Philip  whose 
early  labors  are  recounted  in  the  eighth  chapter.  At  the 
close  of  that  account  he  is  said  to  have  preached  in  all 
the  cities  from  Azotus  to  Caesarea  (viii.  39,  40),  and  now 
we  find  him  residing  in  the  latter  city.  His  four  maiden 
daughters  who  had  the  gift  of  prophecy  had  been  well 
trained  no  doubt  by  their  godly  father,  and  were  there- 
fore suitable  in  character  for  the  distinction  conferred 
upon  them  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  His  house  must  have 
been  a  capacious  one,  as  it  enabled  him  to  entertain  the 
nine  men  who  made  up  Paul's  company. 


200  COMMENTARY.  [xxi.  10-14. 

13.  Aqabus  Predicts  the  Imprisonment  op 
Paul/  10-14. 

Vv.  10-14.  During  the  time  spent  with  the  family 
of  Philip,  another,  and  the  last,  of  the  prophetic  warn- 
ings which  Paul  met  with  on  this  journey  was  given? 
and  it  caused  a  scene  similar  to  those  at  Miletus  and 
Tyre.  (lo)  And  as  we  tarried  there  many  days,  there 
came  down  from  Judea  a  certain  prophet,  named  Agabus. 
(ii)  And  coming  to  us,  and  taking  Paul's  girdle,  he 
bound  his  own  feet  and  hands,  and  said.  Thus  saith  the 
Holy  Spirit,  So  shall  the  Jews  at  Jerusalem  bind  the 
man  that  owneth  this  girdle,  and  shall  deliver  him  into 
the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.  (12)  And  when  we  heard  these 
things,  both  we  and  they  of  that  place  besought  him  not 
to  go  up  to  Jerusalem.  (13)  Then  Paul  answered,  What 
do  ye,  weeping  and  breaking  my  heart  ?  for  I  am  ready 
not  to  be  bound  only,  but  also  to  die  at  Jerusalem  for  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  (14)  And  when  he  would  not  be 
persuaded,  we  ceased,  saying,  The  will  of  the  Lord  be 
done.  Although  Luke  here  introduces  Agabus  as  if  he 
had  not  been  mentioned  before,  he  is  doubtless  the  same 
prophet  who  predicted  in  Antioch  the  famine  which  led 
to  the  first  mission  of  Paul  and  Barnabas  from  Antioch  to 
Jerusalem  (xi.  27-29).  The  dramatic  manner  in  which 
the  prediction  was  delivered,  in  imitation  of  some  of  the 
Old  Testament  prophets,^  made  it  the  more  impressive, 
while  the  words  uttered  gave  Paul  a  more  distinct  con- 
ception of  the  affliction  which  awaited  him.  If  his 
traveling  companions  had  hitherto  been  silent  when 
brethren  were  entreating  him  not  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem, 
their  courage  now  failed  them,  and  they  joined  in  the 
^  See  Jer.  xxvii.  1-11 ;  xxviii.  1-17  ;  Zech.  xi.  7-14. 


xxi.  U>-16.]  ACTS.  201 

entreaties  of  the  brethren  iu  Csesarea.  The  prospect 
was  sufficiently  trying  while  he  enjoyed  the  silent  sym- 
pathy of  his  brave  fellow-laborers ;  but  when  they  threw 
tlie  weight  of  their  own  entreaties  on  the  heavy  burden 
he  was  already  bearing,  the  effect  was  crushing  to  his 
heart,  though  the  steadfastness  of  his  purpose  was  not 
shaken.  Whatever  he  might  suffer  would  be  for  the 
name  of  Jesus,  because  it  was  for  the  church  which  up- 
held the  honor  of  that  name  among  men ;  and  to  serve  this 
high  purpose  was  paramount  to  all  personal  considera- 
tions. Men  of  less  faith  in  divine  providence  than  were 
his  companions,  when  they  found  all  their  entreaties 
were  in  vain,  might  have  reproached  him  for  his  self- 
will  ;  but  these  men  saw  in  this  very  fixedness  of  purpose 
the  guiding  hand  of  God,  and  hence  their  exclamation, 
"The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done." 

14.  The  Joueney  From   Cjesarea  to  Jerusalem, 

15,  16. 

Vv.  15,  16.  It  seems  that  the  prediction  by  Agabus 
was  uttered  about  the  close  of  the  time  which  Paul's  com- 
pany spent  in  Ccesarea ;  and  though  we  may  believe  that 
the  first  part  of  that  stay  was  rich  in  religious  com- 
munion to  the  saints  gathered  there  from  the  east  and 
the  west,  it  had  a  sorrowful  termination.  (15)  And  after 
these  days  we  took  up  our  baggage,  and  went  up  to 
Jerusalem.  (16)  And  there  went  with  us  also  certain  of 
the  disciples  from  Caesarea,  bringing  with  them  one 
Mnason  of  Cyprus,  an  early  disciple,  with  whom  we 
should  lodge.  The  journey  had  been  completed  in  time 
for  the  Pentecost :  for  to  the  twenty-nine  days  which  we 
have  already  counted  between  the  previous  Passover 
and  the  arrival  at  Patara  (see  under  3),  we  have  to  add, 


202  COMifENTARY^  [xxi.  15,  16. 

say  three  days  from  Patara  to  Tyre,  seven  days  at  Tyre, 
and  four  in  passing  thence  to  Csesarea,  which  make  an 
aggregate  of  forty-three  out  of  the  fifty  between  the 
Passover  and  the  Pentecost,  leaving  six  for  the  stay  in 
Csesarea.  But  it  is  almost  certain  that  in  this  count  some 
pieces  of  days  are  counted  as  whole  days,  and  that  the 
time  in  Csesarea  was  more  than  six  days.  This  last  stay 
is  styled  "  many  days "  by  Luke,  not  because  it  was 
many  compared  with  other  stops  on  this  journey,  but 
because  it  was  many  for  men  going  to  Jerusalem  on  an 
important  mission,  and  now  within  two  short  days' 
journey  of  the  Holy  City.  Naturally,  they  would  have 
been  expected  to  hasten  to  their  journey's  end.  The 
l^ict  that  Mnason  of  Cyprus  had  a  house  in  Jerusalem  in 
which  all  of  Paul's  company  could  lodge,  implies  that  he 
was  a  man  of  means,  if  not  of  wealth,  who,  besides  his 
home  in  Cyprus,  kept  one  also  in  Jerusalem.  He  is 
styled  "  an  early  disciple,"  because  he  had  become  one 
in  the  early  history  of  the  church. 


COMMENTARY  ON  ACTS. 


PART  FOURTH. 

PAULS  FIVE  YEARS'  IMPRISONMENl. 

(XXI.  17.— XXVIII.  SI.) 


SEC.  I.— HIS  IMPRISONMENT  IN  JERUSALEM. 

(XXI.  IT  —XXIII.   SO.) 

1.  His  Reception  by  the  Elders,  and  Their 
Advice,  17-25. 

Ver.  17.  The  hour  which  had  been  looked  forward 
to  for  months  with  prayerful  anxiety  had  now  come, 
and  Paul  was  to  know,  without  further  delay,  whether 
the  service  which  he  had  for  Jerusalem  would  be  accept- 
ed by  the  saints  (Rom.  xv.  31).  The  historian  was  able 
to  say :  (17)  And  when  we  were  come  to  Jerusalem,  the 
brethren  received  us  gladly.  If  Luke  had  said  anything 
at  all  about  the  contribution  which  Paul  brought,  we 
should  have  expected  him  to  say  something  more  definite 
about  its  reception  than  is  implied  in  this  remark.  But 
as  he  saw  fit  to  omit  all  mention  of  the  enterprise,  we 
are  at  liberty  to  infer  from  the  glad  reception  of  the 
messengers  the  grateful  reception  also  of  their  gift. 
The  main  purpose  of  Paul's  visit,  and  of  his  prayers, 
was  now  accomplished.     He  had  finished  this  part  of  his 

203 


204  COMMENTARY.  [xxi.  17-26. 

course  and  of  his  ministry  witli  joy,  and  whether  the 
Lord  would  deliver  him  from  the  disobedient  in  Jeru- 
salem was  to  him  a  matter  of  minor  importance. 

Ver.  18-26.  After  the  general  statement  that  they 
were  gladly  received  by  the  brethren,  Luke  states  more 
in  detail  what  followed.  (i8)  And  the  day  following 
Paul  went  in  with  us  unto  James ;  and  all  the  elders 
were  present.  (19)  And  when  he  had  saluted  them,  he 
rehearsed  one  by  one  the  things  which  God  wrought 
among  the  Gentiles  by  his  ministry.  (20)  And  they, 
when  they  heard  it,  glorified  God ;  and  they  said  unto 
him,  Thou  seest,  brother,  how  many  thousands  there 
are  among  the  Jews  of  them  who  have  believed  ;  and 
they  are  all  zealous  for  the  law :  (21)  and  they  have 
been  informed  concerning  thee,  that  thou  teachest  all  the 
Jews  who  are  among  the  Gentiles  to  forsake  Moses,  tell- 
ing them  not  to  circumcise  their  children,  neither  to 
walk  after  the  customs.  (22)  What  is  it  therefore  ?  they 
will  certainly  hear  that  thou  art  come.  (23)  Do  there- 
fore this  that  we  say  to  thee  :  We  have  four  men 
who  have  a  vow  on  them  :  (24)  these  take,  and  purify 
thyself  with  them,  and  be  at  charges  for  them,  that  they 
may  shave  their  heads  :  and  all  shall  know  that  there  is 
no  truth  in  the  things  whereof  they  have  been  informed 
concerning  thee  ;  but  that  thou  thyself  also  walkest  or- 
derly, keeping  the  law.  (25)  But  as  touching  the  Gentiles 
who  have  believed,  we  wrote,  giving  judgment  that  they 
should  keep  themselves  from  things  sacrificed  to  idols, 
and  from  blood,  and  from  what  is  strangled,  and  from 
fornication.  (26)  Then  Paul  took  the  men,  and  the  next 
day  purifying  himself  with  them  went  into  the  temple, 
declaring  the  fulfillment  of  the  days  of  purification,  until 
the  offering  was  offered  for  every  one  of  them. 


xxi.  18-26.]  ACTS.  205 

In  verse  18  a  distinction  is  made  between  James  and 
the  elders,  which  indicates  that  he  did  not  bear  the  latter 
title.  In  a  later  age,  when  the  organization  of  the 
church  had  been  changed  by  uninspired  men,  it 
became  customary,  as  it  still  is  among  episcopalian 
bodies,  to  call  him  bishop  of  the  church  in  Jerusalem, 
because  he  seems  here  to  have  had  precedence  over  the 
elders.  But  nowhere  in  the  New  Testament  is  the  title 
bishop  thus  used;  and  consequently  this  custom  reads 
into  the  inspired  record  most  improperly  an  unauthor- 
ized conception  of  a  later  age.  As  we  have  seen  before 
(Vol.  I.  189),  James  ranked  as  an  apostle  of  the 
secondary  class,  and  this  fully  accounts  for  his  position 
at  the  head  of  the  Jerusalem  church,  when  none  of  the 
twelve  was  present.  Paul's  minute  rehearsal,  "  one  by 
one,"  of  the  things  which  God  had  wrought  by  his  min- 
istry, most  probably  went  back  no  farther  than  the  time 
of  the  conference  described  in  the  fifteenth  chapter ;  for 
then  he  had  rehearsed  to  James  and  others  all  that  had 
preceded  that  date  (xv.  4).  The  fact  that  when  they 
heard  it  all  "they  glorified  God,"  shows  plainly  enough 
that  they  were  in  full  accord  with  Paul  in  his  teaching 
and  practice,  and  contradicts  flatly  the  modern  assump- 
tion of  rationalists,  that  there  was  antagonism  between 
Paul  and  the  leading  men  of  the  Jerusalem  church. 

The  remarks  addressed  to  Paul  by  these  brethren, 
doubtless  through  James  as  their  spokesman,  show  very 
plainly  the  position  held  by  the  Jerusalem  church  as  to 
the  law  and  circumcision,  and  also  the  exact  ground  of 
the  prejudice  entertained  against  Paul  by  members  who 
were  laboring  under  false  information  concerning  him. 
They  show,  first,  that  these  disciples  were  "  zealous  for 
the  law  "  (20)  ;  second,  that  they  continued  to  circumcise 


206  COMMENTARY.  [xxi.  18-26. 

their  children  (21)  ;  third,  that  the  purifications  of  the 
law,  though  they  involved  in  some  instances  the  offering 
of  sacrifices,  were  still  regarded  as  proper  for  Christians 
(23,  24) ;  and  fourth,  that  they  imposed  none  of  these  ob- 
servances on  the  Gentile  brethren,  but  still  adhered  to  the 
decision  which  had  been  issued  in  the  name  of  the  whole 
church  at  the  time  of  the  conference  (25).  The  ground 
of  prejudice  against  Paul  on  the  part  of  the  multitude 
is  stated  with  equal  clearness.  It  was  that  he  had 
taught  the  Jews  who  were  among  the  Gentiles  to  forsake 
Moses ;  and  there  were  two  specifications  under  this  gen- 
eral charge :  first,  that  he  taught  them  not  to  circumcise 
their  children  ;  second,  that  he  taught  them  not "  to  walk 
after  the  customs  " — an  expression  for  those  observances 
which  had  acquired  the  force  of  law  in  the  Jewish  con- 
science, although  they  were  not  specified  in  the  law  itself 
(21).  The  advice  given  in  the  address,  having  in  view 
the  specific  purpose  of  proving  to  the  multitude  that 
there  was  no  truth  in  these  things,  and  that  Paul  did 
walk  orderly,  keejsing  the  law  (24),  shows  that  James 
and  the  elders  understood  that  these  reports  were  false ; 
while  Paul's  agreement  to  do  as  they  advised  shows  that 
they  certainly  were  false.  He  had  not  taught  the  Jews 
not  to  circumcise  their  children  ;  on  the  contrary,  he 
had  with  his  own  hand  circumcised  Timothy,  who 
was  one-half  a  Jew.  He  had  not  taught  them  to  forsake 
the  customs ;  on  the  contrary,  he  had  written  to  the  Cor- 
inthians more  than  a  year  previous,  that  he  had  been  a 
Jew  to  the  Jew,  that  he  might  win  the  Jew ;  and  as  to 
the  law  in  general,  he  had  been  "  as  under  the  law,"  that 
he  might  gain  them  who  considered  themselves  still 
bound  to  keep  the  law  (I.  Cor.  ix.  20,  21)  In  order  to 
reconcile   this  position  with    Paul's   teaching   in  those 


xxi.  18-26.]  ACTS.  207 

epistles  written  previous  to  this  time,  we  have  only 
to  observe  the  distinction  which  he  never  lost  sight  of, 
between  that  which  we  are  at  liberty  to  do  for  the  sake 
of  others,  and  that  which  we  are  bound  to  do  in  order 
to  obey  God.  He  had  taught  that  the  law  had  been 
"our  tutor  to  bring  us  to  Christ;"  and  that  since  faith 
is  come  "we  are  no  longer  under  a  tutor"  (Gal.  iii. 
24-25)  ;  that  the  Jews  had  been  made  "  dead  to  the  law 
through  the  body  of  Christ"  (Rom.  vii.  4) ;  and  that  in 
Christ  neither  circumcision  availeth  anything,  nor  un- 
circumcision  (Gal.  v.  6;  vi.  15;  I.  Cor.  vii.  19).  But 
while  teaching  thus,  he  had  found  no  fault  with  the 
Jews  who  continued  the  observances  of  the  law ;  he  had 
only  tried  to  convince  them  that  the  observance  was  no 
longer  binding  on  their  consciences.  The  only  differ- 
ence between  him  and  the  most  extreme  Judaizers,  of 
whom  there  were  doubtless  some  in  the  multitude  of 
believers  to  whom  James  referred,  was  that  the  latter 
held  these  observances  to  be  matters  of  duty,  while 
he  held  them  to  be  matters  of  indifference. 

The  device  of  uniting  himself  with  the  four  disciples 
who  had  a  vow,  in  order  to  convince  the  multitude  that 
they  had  been  misinformed,  sets  the  whole  subject  of 
Paul's  relation  to  the  law  in  a  still  stronger  light. 
These  four,  as  a  comparison  of  what  is  said  of  them 
with  the  law  of  Nazirite  clearly  shows,  were  under  the 
Nazirite  vow,  and  had  become  unclean  from  a  dead  body 
before  the  termination  of  the  time  included  in  the  vow 
(23,  24,  26,  c/.  Num.  vi.  2-12).  This  necessitated  their 
purification,  which  required  seven  days  for  its  com- 
pletion, the  shaving  of  their  heads  at  the  altar,  the 
sacrifice  of  a  sin  offering  and  a  burnt  offering  for  each 
of  them,  and  the  loss  of  the  time  passed  under  the  vow. 


208  COMMENTARY.  [xxi.  18-26. 

Paul's  part  with  them  was,  first,  "  to  be  at  charges  for 
them,"  meaning  that  he  paid  part  or  all  the  expenses  of 
the  victims  which  they  had  to  offer ;  and  second,  to  go 
into  the  temple  and  notify  the  priests  when  their  days  of 
purification  would  be  fulfilled,  so  that  a  priest  might  be 
prepared  to  sacrifice  their  oiFe rings  (23,  26).  The  last 
they  could  not  do  themselves,  because  the  law  shut  them 
out  of  the  Jewish  court  during  their  uncleanness;  but 
as  Paul  was  unclean  not  from  contact  with  a  dead  body, 
but  from  some  of  the  many  other  causes  mentioned  in 
the  law,  he  could  purify  himself  in  a  single  day  by  wash- 
ing his  clothes  and  bathing  his  flesh  and  remaining  un- 
clean until  evening  (Lev.  xv.  1-30,  et  al.).  That  which 
renders  this  proceeding  a  more  striking  exhibition  of 
Paul's  present  attitude  toward  the  law  is  the  fact  that  in 
it  he  participated  in  the  offering  of  sacrifices,  which 
seems  to  be>-inconsistent  with  his  repeated  declaration  of 
the  all-sufficiency  of  the  blood  of  Christ  as  an  atone- 
ment for  sin.  I  think  it  must  be  admitted  that  subse- 
quent to  the  writing  of  the  epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  and 
more  especially  that  to  the  Hebrews,  he  could  not  con- 
sistently have  done  this  ;  for  in  those  epistles  it  is  clearly 
taught,  that  in  the  death  of  Christ  God  has  broken 
down  and  abolished  "  the  law  of  commandments  con- 
tained in  ordinances,"  which  he  styles  "the  middle  wall 
of  partition"  (Eph.  ii.  13-15) ;  that  the  Aaronic  priesthood 
had  been  abolished  (Heb.  vii.,  viii.)  ;  and  that  the  sacri- 
fice of  Christ  had  completely  superseded  that  of  dumb 
animals  (ix.,  x.).  But  in  Paul's  earlier  epistles,  though 
some  things  had  been  written  which,  carried  to  their  logi- 
cal consequences,  involved'  all  this,  these  points  had  not 
yet  been  clearly  revealed  to  his  mind,  and  much  less  to 
the  minds  of  the  other  disciples ;  for  it   pleased  God  to 


xxi.  18-30.]  ACTS.  209 

make  Paul  the  chief  instrument  for  the  revealatiou  of 
this  part  of  his  will.  His  mind,  and  those  of  all  the 
brethren,  were  as  yet  in  much  the  same  condition  on 
this  question  that  those  of  the  early  disciples  had  been 
in  before  the  conversion  of  Cornelius  in  reference  to  the 
salvation  of  the  Gentiles.  If  Peter,  by  the  revelation 
made  to  him  in  connection  with  Cornelius,  was  made  to 
understand  better  his  own  words  uttered  on  Pentecost 
(ii.  39),  it  should  cause  no  surprise  that  Paul  in  his  early 
writings  uttered  sentiments  the  full  import  of  which  he 
did  not  apprehend  until  later  revelations  made  them 
plain.  That  it  was  so,  is  but  another  illustration  of  the 
fact  that  the  Holy  Spirit  guided  the  apostles  into  all  the 
truth,  not  at  one  bound,  but  step  by  step.  In  the  wis- 
dom of  God  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  the  special  value 
of  whicii  lies  in  its  clear  revelations  on  the  distinction 
between  the  sacrifices  and  priesthood  under  Moses  and 
those  under  Christ,  was  written  but  a  few  years  previous 
to  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish  temple,  and  the  compul- 
sory abrogation  of  all  the  sacrifices  of  the  law;  and  that 
thus  any  Jewish  Christian,  whose  natural  reverence  for 
ancestral  and  divinely  appointed  customs  may  have  pre- 
vented him  from  seeing  the  truth  on  this  subject,  might 
have  his  eyes  opened  in  spite  of  himself. 

2.   Paul,  is  Assailed  by  the  Mob,  and  Arrested 
BY  THE  Chief  Captain,  27-36. 

Vv.  27-30.  Thus  far  Paul's  reception  in  Jerusalem 
was  gratifying,  and  to  all  human  foresight  his  prospect 
for  escaping  personal  violence  was  good  ;  and  so  it  con- 
tinued for  several  days.  (27)  And  when  (he  seven  days 
were  almost  completed,  the  Jews  from  Asia,  when  they 
saw  him  in  the  temple,  stirred  up  all  the  multitude,  and 


210  COMMENTARY.  [xxi.  27-34. 

laid  hands  on  him,  (28)  crying  out,  Men  of  Israel, 
help  :  This  is  the  man,  that  teacheth  all  men  everywhere 
against  the  people,  and  the  law,  and  this  place  :  and 
moreover  he  brought  Greeks  also  into  the  temple,  and 
hath  defiled  this  holy  place.  (29)  For  they  had  before 
seen  with  him  in  the  city  Trophimus  the  Ephesian, 
whom  they  supposed  that  Paul  had  brought  into  the 
temple.  (30)  And  all  the  city  was  moved,  and  the  peo- 
ple ran  together  :  and  they  laid  hold  on  Paul,  and 
dragged  him  out  of  the  temple  :  and  straightway  the 
doors  were  shut.  The  "  Jews  from  Asia "  who  raised 
this  outcry  were  a  portion  of  those  from  whose  plots 
Paul  had  suffered  so  much  iu  Ephesus  (xx.  19).  Their 
false  accusation  as  to  what  he  had  taught  everywhere 
was  that,  the  report  of  which  had  excited  the  prejudices 
of  his  own  Jewish  brethren,  as  stated  by  James  (21). 
They  had  no  reason  whatever  to  believe  that  Paul  had 
brought  Trophimus  iuto  the  temple ;  but,  having  recog- 
nized Trophimus  with  him  iu  the  city,  it  occurred  to 
them  to  bring  this  accusation  as  the  quickest  way  to  ex- 
cite the  wrath  of  the  multitude.  Perhajis  the  success  of 
Demetrius  in  rousing  the  heathen  population  of  their  own 
city  by  the  outcry  concerning  the  temi)le  of  Diana,  sug- 
gested the  device  (xix.  23-28).  The  part  of  the  temple 
which  they  charged  him  with  defiling  was  the  Jewish 
court ;  for  Gentiles  were  admitted  within  the  outer  court ; 
and  so,  when  it  is  said  that  they  dragged  him  out  of  the 
temple,  its  meaning  is  that  they  dragged  him  out  of  the 
Jewish  into  the  Gentile  court.  Outside  the  latter  court, 
which  now  includes  thirty-five  acres  of  ground,  there  was 
no  room  in  the  narrow  streets  for  such  a  mob  to  move. 
Yv.  31-34.  For  the  second  time  in  his  life  a  Roman 
officer  rescued  Paul  from  the  hands  of  his  countrymen, 


xxi.  Sl-34.]  ACTS.  211 

the  first  having  occurred  in  Corinth.  (31)  And  as  they 
were  seeking  to  kill  him,  tidings  came  up  to  the  chief 
captain  of  the  band,  that  all  Jerusalem  was  in  confusion. 
(32)  And  forthwith  he  took  soldiers  and  centurions,  and 
ran  down  upon  them  :  and  they,  when  they  saw  the  chief 
captain  and  the  soldiers,  left  off  beating  Paul.  (33) 
Then  the  chief  captain  came  near,  and  laid  hold  on  him, 
and  commanded  him  to  be  bound  with  two  chains  ;  and 
inquired  who  he  was,  and  what  he  had  done.  (34)  And 
some  shouted  one  thing,  some  another,  among  the  crowd : 
and  when  he  could  not  know  the  certainty  for  the 
uproar,  he  commanded  him  to  brought  into  the  castle. 
The  expression,  "  chief  captain  of  the  band,"  should  be 
chiliarch  of  the  cohort ;  for  such  is  the  exact  meaning 
of  the  original.  The  Roman  legions  were  divided  into 
cohorts  of  a  thousand  men  each,  and  the  commander  of 
the  cohort  was  called  chiliarch,  leader  of  a  thousand, 
just  as  the  commander  of  one  hundred  was  entitled  cen- 
turion, leader  of  a  hundred. 

That  he  took  centurions,  in  the  plural  number,  each 
of  course  accompanied  by  his  command,  shows  that  he 
came  at  the  head  of  several  hundred  men.  A  smaller 
number  might  have  been  overpowered  by  the  furious 
mob.  The  expression,  "  ran  down  upon  them,"  is  the 
language  of  an  eye-witness;  for  the  tower  of  Antonia, 
the  fortress  in  which  the  Roman  garrison  was  quartered, 
stood  at  the  northwestern  angle  of  the  temple  court ;  its 
foundations  were  laid  on  solid  rock  which  rises  about 
twenty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  court ;  and  a  flight  of 
stone  steps  descended  from  its  door  to  the  floor  of  the 
court  which  is  here  the  natural  rock.^  The  chiliarch 
saw  at  a  glance  that  the  man  whom  they   were  beating 

^  For  a  full  description,  see  Lands  of  the  Bible,  177. 


212  COMMENTARY.  [xxi.  31-40. 

was  in  some  way  the  occasion  of  the  disturbance;  ami 
jumping  to  the  conclusion  that  he  was  a  criminal  on 
whom  the  Jews  were  inflicting  summary  vengeance,  he 
had  him  chained  for  safe  keeping,  and  demanded  who  he 
was,  and  what  he  had  done,  so  that  he  might  know  how 
to  deal  with  him.  But  the  majority  of  the  mob  did  not 
know  who  he  was  or  what  he  had  done,  and  the  confused 
answers  in  their  outcries  made  it  plain  to  the  chiliarch 
that  he  must  wait  and  seek  the  information  in  some 
other  way ;  hence  the  order  to  take  him  into  the  castle. 
Vv.  35,  36.  The  soldiers  very  promptly  and  vigor- 
ously obeyed  the  order  of  their  commander.  (35)  And 
when  he  came  upon  the  stairs,  so  it  was  that  he  was 
borne  of  the  soldiers  for  the  violence  of  the  crowd  ;  (36) 
for  the  multitude  of  the  people  followed  after,  crying  out, 
Away  with  him.  Paul  was  so  stunned  by  the  beating,  or 
so  reluctant  to  running  from  the  face  of  his  foes,  that  he 
did  not  move  fast  enough  to  suit  the  soldiers,  so  two  of 
them  lifted  him  in  their  arms,  or  threw  him  across  their 
shoulders,  and  thus  hurried  him  along.  As  the  pursuers 
could  not  get  hold  of  him,  they  affected  to  acquiesce  in 
what  was  being  done,  by  the  outcry,  "  Away  with  him." 

3.  Paul  Obtains  Permission  to  Address  the 
Mob,  37-40. 

Vv.  37—40.  Though  Paul  was  suffering  from  many  a 
bruise,  which,  together  with  mental  distress,  would  have 
prevented  any  other  man  from  wishing  to  make  a  speech, 
when  he  saw  those  prison  doors  about  to  shut  him  out 
from  his  enraged  countrymen,  and  leave  them  a  prey  to 
passion  aroused  by  falsehood,  he  conceived  the  thought 
of  at  once  attempting  to  appease  them.  (37)  And  as 
Paul  was  about  to  be  brought  into  the  castle,  he  saith 


xxi.  37-40.]  ACTS.  213 

unto  the  chief  captain,  May  I  say  something  unto  thee  ? 
And  he  said,  Dost  thou  know  Greek  ?  (38)  Art  thou  not 
then  the  Egyptian,  who  before  these  days  stirred  up  to 
sedition  and  led  out  into  the  wilderness  the  four  thou- 
sand men  of  the  Assassins  ?  (39)  But  Paul  said,  I  am  a 
Jew,  of  Tarsus  in  Cilicia,  a  citizen  of  no  mean  city :  and 
I  beseech  thee,  give  me  leave  to  speak  unto  the  people- 
(40)  And  when  he  had  given  him  leave,  Paul,  standing 
on  the  stairs,  beckoned  with  the  hand  unto  the  people ; 
and  when  there  was  made  a  great  silence,  he  spake 
unto  them  in  the  Hebrew  language,  saying, 

This  brief  conversation  shows  how  utterly  the  chili- 
arch,  in  the  excitement  of  the  moment,  had  misconceived 
his  prisoner.  The  Egyptian  for  whom  he  mistook  him 
is  doubtless  the  one  mentioned  by  Josephus,  but  whom 
the  latter  represents  as  leading  thirty  thousand  men  in- 
stead of  four  thousand.^  He  was  the  only  man  the  chili- 
arch  could  think  of  at  the  moment  against  whom  the 
Jews  could  feel  such  violent  hatred.  When  he  learned 
that  Paul  was  a  Jew,  and  a  citizen  of  such  a  city  as  Tar- 
sus, his  wonder  as  to  the  cause  of  the  trouble  was  greatly 
increased,  and  he  at  once  concluded  that  by  allowing  him 
to  speak  as  requested  he  could  learn  from  the  speech  the 
real  charges  laid  against  him  ;  for  he  expected  of  course 
that  Paul  would  speak  of  them  explicitly.  When  per- 
mission was  given,  the  soldiers  placed  him  on  his  feet, 
and  they  appear  to  have  released  at  least  one  of  his  arms 

^  He  claimed  to  be  a  prophet,  and  promised  his  dupes  that 
they  should  take  Jerusalem  from  the  Romans,  as  a  proof  of 
which  he  declared  that  when  he  reached  the  top  of  the  Mount 
of  Olives  he  would  cause  the  walls  of  the  city  to  fall  by  his 
miraculous  power.  Josephus  is  somewhat  inconsistent  with 
himself  in  regard  to  the  numbers  that  were  captured  and  slain. 
(Ant.  XX.  8, 6 ;  Wars,  ii.  13,  5). 


214  COMMENTATtY.  [xxi.  37— xxii.  5. 

Irom  the  chains  ;  for  he  "  beckoned  with  his  hand  to  the 
people,"  using  his  habitual  gesture/  to  secure  silence- 
It  was  the  same  that  had  been  used  in  vain  by  Alexan- 
der in  the  mob  at  Ephesus  (xix.  23).  The  silence  which 
followed  is  probably  called  "  great "  because  it  was  diffi- 
cult to  obtain  any  silence  at  all  in  such  a  multitude.  It 
was  still  greater  when  they  heard  him  speaking  in  the 
native  tongue  (xxii.  2). 

4.  Paul's  Address  to  the  Mob,  xxii.  1-21. 

I.  AN  ACCOUNT  OF   HIMSELF   BEFORE   HIS    CONVERSION, 

1-5. 

Vv.  1-5.  Seeing  that  the  chiliarch  had  so  miscon- 
ceived his  personality,  and  knowing  from  the  outcries  of 
the  people  in  answer  to  the  chiliarch's  inquiry,  that 
many  of  them  were  equally  ignorant  of  him,  Paul  begins 
his  speech  with  an  account  of  himself,  (i)  Brethren 
and  fathers,  hear  ye  the  defense  which  I  now  make  unto 
you. 

(2)  And  when  they  heard  that  he  spake  unto  them  in 
the  Hebrew  language,  they  were  the  more  quiet :  and  he 
saith, 

(3)  I  am  a  Jew,  born  in  Tarsus  of  Cilicia,  but  brought 
up  in  this  city,  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  instructed  accord- 
ing to  the  strict  manner  of  the  law  of  our  fathers,  being 
zealous  for  God,  even  as  ye  all  are  this  day :  (4)  and  I 
persecuted  this  Way  unto  the  death,  binding  and  deliver- 
ing into  prisons  both  men  and  women.  (5)  As  also  the  high 
priest  doth  bear  me  witness,  and  all  the  estate  of  the 
elders  :  from  whom  also  I  received  letters  unto  the  breth- 


1  In  addition  to  the  instance  above,  we  see  it  noted  by  Luke  in 
the  opening  of  the  address  in  Antioch  of  Pisidia,  and  in  the  one 
before  king  Agrippa  (xiii.  16  ;  xxvi.  1). 


xxii.  1-16.]  ACTS.  215 

ren,  and  journeyed  to  Damascus,  to  bring  them  also  who 
were  there  unto  Jerusalem  in  bonds  for  to  be  punished. 
Some  in  the  audience,  Paul's  old  companions  in  persecu- 
tion, and  his  subsequent  enemies,  knew  all  the  facts  here 
recited,  but  they  were  unknown  to  the  majority  of  the 
crowd;  and  his  evident  j)urpose  in  reciting  them  was, 
first,  to  disabuse  the  minds  of  any  who  may  have  made 
similar  mistakes  to  that  of  the  chiliarch,  and  secondly,  to 
awaken  some  sympathy  toward  himself  as  having  once 
stood  in  the  same  attitude  with  themselves  toward  the 
Christian  Way. 

II.  AN  ACCOUNT  OF  HIS  CONVERSION,  G-16. 

Vv.  6-16.  The  preceding  division  of  the  speech, 
which  is  its  introduction,  was  calculated  not  only  to 
awaken  sympathy  toward  the  speaker,  but  while  it 
presented  him  as  once  a  persecutor  like  his  hearers,  it 
awakened  at  the  same  moment  a  desire  to  know  what 
could  have  turned  him  from  that  position  to  the  one  he 
now  occupied ;  and  this  desire  he  next  proceeds  to 
gratify.  (6)  And  it  came  to  pass,  that,  as  I  made  my 
journey,  and  drew  nigh  unto  Damascus,  about  noon, 
suddenly  there  shone  from  heaven  a  great  light  round 
about  me.  (7)  And  I  fell  unto  the  ground,  and  heard  a 
voice  say  unto  me,  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me? 
(8)  And  I  answered,  Who  art  thou.  Lord  ?  And  he  said 
unto  me,  I  am  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  whom  thou  perse- 
cutest. (9)  And  they  that  were  with  me  beheld  indeed 
the  light,  but  they  heard  not  the  voice  of  him  that  spake 
to  me.  (10)  And  I  said,  What  shall  I  do,  Lord?  And 
the  Lord  said  unto  me,  Arise,  and  go  into  Damascus  ;  and 
there  it  shall  be  told  thee  of  all  things  which  are  appoint- 
ed for  thee  to  do.     (11)  And  when  I  could  not  see  for  the 


216  COMMENTARY.  [xxii.  6-16. 

glory  of  that  light,  being  led  by  the  hand  of  them  that 
were  with  me,  I  came  into  Damascus.  (12)  And  one  An- 
anias, a  devout  man  according  to  the  law,  well  reported  of 
by  all  the  Jews  that  dwelt  there,  (13)  came  unto  me,  and 
standing  by  me  said  unto  me.  Brother  Saul,  receive  thy 
sight.  And  in  that  very  hour  I  looked  up  on  him.  (14) 
And  he  said,  the  God  of  our  fathers  hath  appointed  thee 
to  know  his  will,  and  to  see  the  Righteous  One,  and  to 
hear  a  voice  from  his  mouth.  (15)  For  thou  shalt  be  a 
witness  for  him  unto  all  men  of  what  thou  hast  seen 
and  heard.  (16)  And  now,  why  tarriest  thou  ?  arise, 
and  be  baptized,  and  wash  away  thy  sins,  calling  on  his 
name.  This  account  furnishes  several  interesting  details 
omitted  by  Luke  in  his  brief  narrative  (ix.  3-8).^  It  in- 
forms us  that  the  light  from  heaven  flashed  around  him 
"  about  noon  ; "  that  his  companions,  though  they  heard 
the  voice,  did  not  hear  it,  that  is,  so  as  to  catch  the 
words  that  were  spoken;  and  that  the  command  to  go 
into  Damascus,  where  he  should  be  told  what  to  do, 
was  given  in  answer  to  his  inquiry,  "  What  shall  I  do, 

^  The  statement  of  Luke  that  they  heard  the  voice  (ix.  7),  and 
this  of  Paul  that  they  heard  it  not,  have  long  been  treated  by  un. 
friendly  critics  as  contradictory,  notwithstanding  the  well  known 
fact  that  it  is  common  among  all  classes  of  men  to  say,  I  did  not 
hear,  when  they  mean  that  they  did  not  hear  the  words  spoken, 
though  they  did  hear  the  sound  of  the  speaker's  voice.  Paul 
himself  furnishes  another  instance  of  the  usage  when,  writing 
about  the  employment  of  unknown  tongues  in  the  congregation, 
he  says  :  "  For  he  that  speaketh  in  a  tongue  speaketh  not  unto 
men,  but  unto  God  ;  for  no  man  heareth  "  (I,  Cor.  xiv.  2).  Here 
our  translators  have  obscured  the  usage  by  rendering  the  word 
"  understand,"  instead  of  "  hear."  If  they  had  taken  the  same 
liberty  in  the  passage  before  us,  the  question  of  a  contradiction 
would  never  have  been  raised,  at  least  by  an  English  reader ; 
and  the  idea  of  Paul  would  have  been  expressed,  but  not  in  his 
way  of  expressing  it. 


xxii.  6-10.]  ACTS.  217 

Ijord  ?  "  On  the  other  iiand,  Paul  does  not  stuto  the 
duration  of  his  blindness;  he  says  nothing  of  the  fasting 
and  praying;  and  instead  of  telling  what  the  Lord  said 
to  Ananias,  he  speaks  of  the  good  reputation  which  the 
latter  enjoyed  among  the  Jews  of  Damascus.  He  told 
this  in  order  to  reflect  respectability  in  the  minds  of  his 
hearers  on  the  proceedings  connected  with  his  baptism. 
He  also  omits  the  words  of  Ananias  quoted  by  Luke, 
and  mentions  others.  The  whole  speech  of  Ananias  is 
to  be  obtained  by  putting  together  these  two  pieces  of  it. 
The  miracle  wrought  upon  him  by  Ananias  was  men- 
tioned, not  merely  to  show  how  his  eyesight  was  re- 
stored, but  more  especially  to  show  that  God's  approval 
attended  his  baptism.  The  words,  "  why  tarriestthou  ?" 
were  suggested  by  the  unusual  delay  of  baptism  after 
believing,  a  delay  of  which  Ananias  did  not  then  know 
the  cause.  In  the  expression,  "  wash  away  thy  sins," 
there  is  undoubtedly  a  reference  to  the  forgiveness  of 
sins  which  takes  place  in  baptism,  and  the  metaphor  in 
the  term  wash  away  (a-ohioaac)  was  suggested  by  the 
washing  of  the  body  which  takes  place  in  baptism.  He 
was  to  wash  his  sins  away,  by  undergoing  that  washing 
in  which  God  forgives  them.  He  was  to  do  this,  "  calling 
on  his  name,"  because  it  is  through  the  name  of  Jesus 
that  we  now  receive  every  blessing,  and  especially  the 
forgiveness  of  sins. 

The  evident  purpose  of  this  division  of  the  speech 
was  to  win  the  Jews  to  a  favorable  consideration  of  his 
cause,  by  showing  them  that  he  had  been  turned  from 
the  position  of  a  persecutor  like  themselves,  to  that  of  a 
believer  and  advocate  of  the  claims  of  Jesus,  by  miracu- 
lous evidence  from  heaven  which  could  not  be  miscon- 
strued, and  which,  according  to  all  the  maxims   of  the 


218  COMMENTARY.  [xxii.  6-21. 

fathers,  made  it  his  indispeusable  duty  to  do  as  he  had 
done  ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  accomplished  the  additional 
purpose  of  furnishing  his  hearers  evidence  of  the  resur- 
rection and  glorification  of  Jesus,  which  ought  to  con- 
vince them  as  it  had  him.  He  was  aiming  to  defend 
himself  by  winning  his  accusers  over  to  his  own  position. 

III.  HIS  MISSION  TO  THE  GENTILES,  17-21. 

Vv.  17-21.  Paul's  next  step  was  to  show  that  the 
divine  authority  which  had  changed  him  from  a  persecu- 
tor into  an  advocate  of  the  Way  had  determined  for 
him  the  peculiar  field  of  labor  which  distinguished  him 
from  the  other  apostles.  (17)  And  it  came  to  pass,  that, 
when  I  had  returned  to  Jerusalem,  and  while  I  prayed  in. 
the  temple,  I  fell  into  a  trance,  (18)  and  saw  him  saying 
unto  me,  Make  haste,  and  get  thee  quickly  out  of  Jeru- 
salem :  because  they  will  not  receive  of  thee  testimony 
concerning  me.  (19)  And  I  said.  Lord,  they  themselves 
know  that  I  imprisoned  and  beat  in  every  synagogue 
them  that  believed  on  thee  :  (20)  and  when  the  blood 
of  Stephen  thy  witness  was  shed,  I  also  was  stand- 
ing by,  and  consenting,  and  keeping  the  garments  of 
them  that  slew  him.  (21)  And  he  said  unto  me,  Depart : 
for  I  will  send  thee  forth  far  hence  unto  the  Gentiles. 
Paul  here  reveals  to  us  the  interesting  fact,  omitted  by 
Luke  in  the  previous  narrative,  that  when  the  brethren 
sent  him  away  from  Jerusalem  to  Tarsus  (ix.  28-30),  he 
did  not  consent  to  go  until  commanded  by  the  Lord ; 
and  that  even  when  thus  commanded  he  mildly  re- 
monstrated with  the  Lord  for  so  commanding  him. 
His  plea  for  wishing  to  remain  was  based  on  the  belief 
that  as  the  Jews  knew  of  his  connection  with  the  death 
of  Stephen,  and  the  dispersion  of  the  church,  he  was 


xxii.  17-24.]  ACTS.  219 

now  the  very  man  to  bring  them  over  to  the  truth.  He 
was  forgetting  the  intense  malice  always  felt  by  partisans 
toward  a  man  whom  they  can  stigmatise  as  a  deserter,  or 
as  a  traitor  to  their  cause.  That  he  had  urged  this  plea 
when  the  Jews  were  just  then  laying  plots  to  kill  him,  is 
at  once  proof  of  his  courage,  and  of  his  willingness  to 
die,  if  need  be,  on  the  very  spot  where  he  had  witnessed 
the  death  of  Stephen. 

5.  The  Immediate  Effects  op  the  Speech,  22-29. 

Vv.  22-24.  The  unbelieving  Jews  had  learned  by 
this  time  to  endure  the  preaching  of  Christ  among  the 
circumcised,  but  they  still  had  the  greatest  abhorrence  for 
the  admission  of  the  uncircumcised  into  religious  fellow- 
ship with  Jews ;  consequently  it  was  Paul's  position  as 
the  apostle  to  the  Gentiles  which  excited  their  especial 
animosity  toward  him.  This  mob  had  now  listened  in 
perfect  silence  to  his  vindication  of  his  position  as  a 
Christian,  and  had  heard  for  the  first  time  in  their  lives 
Paul's  pecular  testimony  to  the  resurrection  and  glorifi- 
cation of  Jesus;  and  if  he  had  concluded  his  remarks  at 
that  point,  they  might  have  gone  away  with  favor- 
able impressions ;  but  when  he  claimed  that  his  going 
to  the  Gentiles,  which  they  looked  upon  as  a  shameful 
procedure,  was  due  to  an  express  command  from  heaven 
overriding  his  own  preferences,  and  was  about,  as  they 
supposed,  to  justify  all  the  charges  which  they  had  hoard 
against  him,  they  could  listen  no  longer.  (22)  And  they 
gave  him  audience  unto  this  word ;  and  they  lifted  up 
their  voice,  and  said,  Away  with  such  a  fellow  from  the 
earth  :  for  it  is  not  fit  that  he  should  live.  (23)  And  as 
they  cried  out,  and  threw  off  their  garments,  and  cast 
dust  into  the  air,  (24)  the  chief  captain  commanded  him 


220  COMMENTARY.  [xxu.  22-29. 

to  be  brought  into  the  castle,  bidding  that  he  should  be 
examined  by  scourging,  that  he  might  know  for  what 
cause  they  so  shouted  against  him.  They  did  not  dare 
to  throw  stones  at  him,  lest  they  should  strike  the  sol- 
diers :  so  they  vented  their  rage  like  maddened  brutes 
by  throwing  dust  into  the  air.  What  the  rest  of  his 
speech  would  have  been  but  for  this  interruption,  we  can 
judge  only  by  what  had  already  been  said.  It  certainly 
W0uld  have  been  a  still  farther  attempt  to  convince  his 
hearers  of  the  divine  authority  under  which  he  had  ever 
acted ;  for  he  sought  no  vindication  for  himself  that  did 
not  involve  the  vindication  of  the  cause  to  which  he  had 
committed  his  life.  Whether  Lysias  understood  the 
Hebrew  tongue  in  which  Paul  spoke,  or  had  his  words 
repeated  by  an  interpreter,  he  was  certainly  disappointed 
in  his  hope  of  learning  from  the  speech  what  the  charges 
were  which  the  Jews  held  against  Paul,  so  he  imme- 
diately determined  on  the  more  direct  method  of  extort- 
ins:  the  desired  information  from  Paul  himself.  It  was 
quite  a  common  practice  among  Roman  provincial 
rulers  to  scourge  into  a  confession  of  their  crimes  men 
whom  they  held  as  criminals,  and  against  whom  suitable 
evidence  was  not  at  hand. 

Yv.  25-29.  When  Paul  was  led  within  the  castle, 
the  executioner,  under  the  direction  of  a  centurion,  made 
immediate  preparation  for  the  cruel  task.  (25)  And  when 
they  had  tied  him  up  with  the  thongs,  Paul  said  unto 
Ihe  centurion  that  stood  by.  Is  it  lawful  for  you  to 
scourge  a  man  that  is  a  Roman,  and  uncondemned  ?  (26) 
And  when  the  centurion  heard  it,  he  went  to  the  chief 
captain,  and  told  him,  saying.  What  art  thou  about  to 
do  ?  for  this  man  is  a  Roman.  (27)  And  the  chief  cap- 
tain  came,    and   said   unto   him,   Tell  me,  art  thou  a 


xxii.  25-29.]  ACTS,  221 

Roman  ?  (28)  And  he  said,  Yea.  And  the  chief  captain 
answered,  With  a  great  sum  obtained  I  this  citizenship. 
And  Paul  said,  But  I  am  a  Roman  born.  (29)  They  then 
who  were  about  to  examine  him  straightway  departed 
from  him :  and  the  chief  captain  also  was  afraid,  when 
he  knew  that  he  was  a  Roman,  and  because  he  had 
bound  him.  Previous  to  applying  the  scourge  the  victim 
was  bent  forward  upon  a  reclining  post,  and  bound  to 
it  by  leather  thongs.  It  was  this  binding  which  alarmed 
the  chiliarch,  and  not  the  previous  binding  with  chains. 
The  latter  was  legal,  and  Paul  continued  to  be  thus 
bound  (30 ;  xxvi.  29.)  Paul  gave  no  evidence  but  his 
own  word  that  he  was  a  citizen ;  but  the  lofty  manner  in 
which  he  had  declared  himself  a  citizen  by  birth,  while 
Lysias  had  to  acknowledge  that  he  had  obtained  the 
same  distinction  by  bribery,^  together  with  the  impressive 
deportment  of  Paul  before  the  mob,  left  no  room  to 
doubt  the  truth  of  his  claim  ;  so  it  was  respected,  and  the 
executioners  did  not  wait  to  be  told  to  depart  from  him. 
Thus  a  second  time  Paul  saved  himself  from  ignominy, 
and  this  time  from  incalculable  suffering,  by  the  quiet 
proclamation  of  his  rights  as  a  Roman  citizen.  We  can 
but  admire  the  majesty  of  the  law,  which,  in  a  remote 
province,  and  within  the  walls  of  a  prison,  could  thus 

'  Citizenship  was  lawfully  obtained  in  three  different  ways. 
It  was  conferred  by  the  senate  for  meritorious  conduct ;  it  was  in- 
herited from  a  father  who  was  a  citizen ;  and  it  was  the  birthright 
of  one  who  was  born  in  a  free  city ;  that  is,  a  city  which,  for 
some  especial  service  to  the  empire,  was  rewarded  by  granting 
citizenship  to  all  born  within  its  limits.  It  was  unlawfully  ob- 
tained^by  the  use  of  money  in  the  absence  of  meritorious  con- 
duct. In  the  reign  of  Claudius,  this  distinction  had  become  such 
an  article  of  merchandise  that  Messalina,  the  wife  of  the  emperor, 
is  said  to  have  openly  sold  it,  at  first  for  a  large  sum,  and  at  last 
for  a  trifle. 


222  COMMENTARY.  [xxii.  30— xxiii.  2. 

dash  to  the  ground  the  uplifted  instruments  of  torture 
under  the  simple  declaration,  "  I  am  a  Roman  citizen." 

6.  Paul  is  Brought  Before  the  Sanhedrin, 
xxii.  30 — xxiii.  10. 

Ver.  30.  The  chiliarch  was  disposed  to  do  bis  duty 
by  the  prisoner  thrown  fortuitously  into  his  hands,  but 
he  was  puzzled  to  know  what  his  duty  was.  He  had 
first  inquired  of  the  mob ;  then  he  had  listened  to  a 
speech  from  Paul ;  then  he  had  gone  as  far  as  he  dared 
toward  the  trial  by  scourging;  yet  he  knew  nothing 
more  about  the  charges  tban  he  did  at  first.  He  deter- 
mined to  make  one  more  effort.  (30)  But  on  the  mor- 
row, desiring  to  know  the  certainty,  wherefore  he  was 
accused  of  the  Jews,  he  loosed  him,  and  commanded  the 
chief  priests  and  all  the  council  to  come  together,  and 
brought  Paul  down,  and  set  him  before  them.  This 
meeting  Avas  held  in  the  Gentile  court,  if  anywbere  about 
the  temple ;  for  Lysias  and  his  soldiers  would  not  have 
been  admitted  within  the  Jewish  court ;  and  to  this  agree 
the  words  "  he  brought  Paul  down,"  seeing  that  the 
tower  of  Antonia,  in  which  the  soldiers  were  quartered, 
stood  at  a  higher  elevation  than  this  court  (see  under 
xxi.  31-34). 

Vv.  1,  2.  No  sooner  had  the  prisoner  and  his  accus- 
ers met  face  to  face  than  the  chiliarch  must  have  sus- 
pected another  disappointment ;  for,  instead  of  preferring 
formal  charges  against  Paul,  they  required  him  to  speak 
first,  (i)  And  Paul,  looking  steadfastly  on  the  council, 
said,  Brethren,  I  have  lived  before  God  in  all  good  con- 
science until  this  day.  (2)  And  the  high  priest  Ananias 
commanded  them  that  stood  by  him  to  smite  him  on  the 
mouth.     No  doubt  the  blow  was  as  prompt  as  the  word. 


>:::i,i.  l-o.]  ACTS.  223 

Ananias  affected  to  regard  it  as  an  insult  to  the  council 
f.n*  a  man  who  was  arraigned  before  them  as  a  criminal 
of  the  deepest  dye  to  proudly  declare  that  he  had  lived 
in  all  good  conscience  before  God.  To  smite  him  in  the 
mouth  for  it,  was  much  easier  tlian  to  disprove  it.  To 
us  Paul's  remark  is  most  credible,  and  the  only  question 
is,  Did  he  intend  it  to  cover  the  period  before  his  conver- 
sion, when  he  was  persecuting  the  church,  or  only  the 
period  within  which  the  Jews  condemned  him?  It  cer- 
tainly covered  the  latter  ;  and  a  later  statement,  that  he 
verily  thought  he  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to 
the  name  of  Jesus  (xxvi.  9),  makes  it  probable  that  he 
had  the  former  also  in  mind. 

Vv.  3-5.  The  interruption,  so  unexpected  and  so 
exasperating,  called  forth  from  Paul  a  burst  of  indigna- 
tion similar  to  that  with  which  he  had  long  ago  de- 
nounced Bar-jesus  in  the  presence  of  Sergius  Paulus 
(xiii.  JO).  (3)  Then  said  Paul  unto  him,  God  shall  smite 
thee,  thou  whited  wall :  and  sittest  thou  to  judge  me  ac- 
cording to  the  law,  and  commandest  me  to  be  smitten 
contrary  to  the  law  ?  (4)  And  they  that  stood  by  said, 
Revilest  thou  God's  high  priest  ?  (5)  And  Paul  said,  I 
knew  not,  brethren,  that  he  was  high  priest :  for  it  is 
written,  Thou  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  a  ruler  of  thy  people. 
This  remark  was  not  an  outburst  of  improper  passion. 
It  was  rather  an  angry  expression  of  a  righteous  judgment 
as  to  how  God  would  deal  with  a  man  so  unjust  and 
hypocritical.  It  was  an  incident  like  that  in  the  experi- 
ence of  our  Lord,  when  he  looked  around  "  with  anger'* 
on  a  similar  set  of  men,  and  then  immediately  did  the 
act  which  they  held  to  be  a  sin  (Mark  iii.  5).  It  was,  in 
Paul's  own  phraseology,  to  "  be  angry,  and  sin  not " 
(Eph.  iv.  26).     When  told,  however,  that  it  was  the  high 


22-4  COMMENTARY.  [xxiii.  3-10. 

priest  whom  he  had  thus  denounced,  Paul  at  once  admit- 
ted, not  that  the  rebuke  was  unjust,  but  that  it  would 
have  been  improper  to  so  address  this  dignitary,  had  he 
known  who  he  was.  And  here  is  a  j)roper  distinction. 
A  rebuke  which  is  perfectly  just  and  right  in  itself  may 
be  improper  on  account  of  the  official  relations  of  the 
person  addressed.  Had  Paul  known  that  Ananias  was  the 
high  priest,  and  had  he  been  left  to  himself  without  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  promised  for  such  occasions 
(Matt,  X.  17-20),  he  would  have  withheld  the  rebuke; 
and  the  world  would  have  been  the  loser ;  for  rebukes 
like  this  help  to  strengthen  the  moral  sense  of  men.  He 
knew  not  Ananias  personally,  for  he  was  not  the  Ananias 
of  the  Gospels,  but  a  new  usurper  of  the  high  priest- 
hood ;  and  it  is  certain  that  on  this  occasion  he  wore  no 
robe  or  badge  to  indicate  his  office,  or  Paul  could  not 
have  failed  to  know  his  position.  The  fact  that  he  pre- 
sided on  this  occasion  did  not  show  it,  because  the  high 
priest  was  not  always  present  at  meetings  of  the  sanhe- 
drim, and  especially  at  meetings  called  unexpectedly,  as 
this  one  was.  This  Ananias  was  one  of  the  worst  men 
who  ever  wore  the  robes  of  a  high  priest.  His  career  of 
crime  and  extortion,  fully  set  forth  in  various  chapters 
of  Josephus,  finally  ended  in  assassination. 

Vv.  6-10.  The  presence  in  which  Paul  stood  was 
not  unfamiliar  to  him.  He  doubtless  remembered  the 
faces  of  many  in  the  council,  and  he  was  intimately 
acquainted  with  the  party  feuds  which  often  distract- 
ed their  deliberations.  He  knew  that  the  chief  insti- 
gators of  the  persecution  were  the  Sadducees,  as  they 
had  been  at  the  beginning  ;  and  he  determined  to  enlist, 
if  possible,  the  Pharisees  in  his  own  behalf;  so  we  read  : 
(6)  But  when  Paul  perceived  that  the  one  part  were  Sad- 


xxiii.  6-10.]  ACTS.  225 

ducees,  and  the  other  Pharisees,  he  cried  out  in  the 
council,  Brethren,  I  am  a  Pharisee,  a  son  of  Pharisees: 
touching  the  hope  and  resurrection  of  the  dead,  I  am 
called  in  question.  (7)  And  when  he  had  so  said,  there 
arose  a  dissension  between  the  Pharisees  and  the  Saddu- 
cees  :  and  the  assembly  was  divided.  (8)  For  the  Sad- 
ducees  say  that  there  is  no  resurrection,  ne'ither  angel, 
nor  spirit ;  but  the  Pharisees  confess  both.  (9)  And  there 
arose  a  great  clamor :  and  some  of  the  scribes  of  the 
Pharisees'  part  stood  up,  and  strove,  saying,  We  find  no 
evil  in  this  man :  and  what  if  a  spirit  hath  spoken  to 
him,  or  an  angel  ?  (10)  And  when  there  arose  a  great 
dissension,  the  chief  captain,  fearing  lest  Paul  should  be 
torn  in  pieces  by  them,  commanded  the  soldiers  to  go 
down  and  take  him  by  force  from  among  them,  and  bring 
him  into  the  castle.  Paul's  declaration  that  he  was  a 
Pharisee  has  been  treated  by  some  writers  as  deceptive ; 
and  he  has  been  censured  for  stirring  up  such  a  row 
among  his  enemies.  The  charge  is  unfounded  ;^  for  while 
it  is  true  that  he  was  not  in  every  particular  a  Pharisee, 
he  was  one  in  the  sense  attached  to  his  remark  by  his 
hearers.  All  jiresent  knew  that  he  was  a  Christian,  and 
consequently  they  knew  that  he  claimed  to  be  a  Phari- 
see only  in  the  sense  of  agreeing  with  that  party  in  their 

^  Farrar  indulges  in  this  censure.  He  says  :  "  His  belief  in 
the  risen  Messiah  was  not  the  point  on  which  he  was  mainly  be- 
ing called  in  question."  "  Did  not  then  the  words  of  the  apostle 
suggest  a  false  issue  ?"  "  Had  he  a  ri^ht  to  inflame  an  existing 
animosity?  And  could  he  worthily  say,  I  am  a  Pharisee?" 
"  Was  there  not  the  least  little  touch  of  a  suggestio  falsi  in  what 
he  said?"  Those  in.sinuations  are  sufficiently  answered  above; 
and  it  is  worthy  of  note  that  Farrar  does  not  repeat  them  in  con- 
nection with  the  same  declarations  of  Paul  made  before  king 
Agrippa  (xxvi.  6-8),  and  before  the  unbelieving  Jews  in  Rome 
(xxviii.  20). 


226-  COMMENTARY.  [xxiii.  6-10. 

.points  of  antagonism  with  the  Sadducees.  His  state- 
ment, that  it  was  touching  the  hope  of  the  resurrection 
that  he  was  called  in  question,  must  be  understood  with 
the  same  qualification.  All  knew  that  this  was  not  the 
immediate  cause  of  his  arrest ;  but  all  knew  equally  well 
that  this  was  the  ultimate  ground  of  the  hatred  of  him 
by  the  Sadducees.  Both  remarks  were  strictly  true  in 
the  sense  attached  to  them,  and  this  sense  was  distinctly 
perceived  by  both  parties.  As  to  the  row  which  fol- 
lowed, there  is  no  evidence  that  Paul  aimed  at  or  expect- 
ed such  violence.  He  aimed  at  enlisting  the  sympathy 
of  the  Pharisees,  in  the  hope  of  securing  a  more  just  con- 
sideration of  his  own  cause ;  and  he  doubtless  desired  a 
more  peaceable  procedure;  but  for  the  violence  which- 
followed  he  was  not  responsible.  And  even  if  he  had 
anticipated  all  that  followed,  it  would  seem  too  great  a 
refinement  of  moral  distinctions  to  blame  him :  as  well 
blame  a  man  for  putting  two  bulldogs  at  each  other's 
ears  to  keep  them  from  devouring  him. 

The  more  surprising  circumstance  in  the  proceedings 
is  that  some  of  the  Pharisees  (not  all)  were  so  quickly 
turned  in  Paul's  favor.  But  the  whole  council  were  in 
an  awkward  predicament.  They  were  called  together  by 
the  chiliarch,  to  show  cause  why  they  and  their  followers 
had  clamored  so  for  the  death  of  Paul,  and  they  knew 
themselves  utterly  unable  to  render  a  reason  that  would 
appear  even  plausible  to  the  mind  of  this  heathen  officer. 
It  was  for  this  cause  that,  instead  of  preferring  charges 
against  Paul  at  the  beginning  of  the  proceedings,  they 
had  required  him  to  speak  first.  All  must  have  felt 
anxious  for  some  turn  in  the  aifair  which  would  relieve 
them  of  their  embarrassment;  and  Avhen  Paul  boldly  pro- 
claimed that  he  was  a  Pharisee,  the  shrewder  men  of  that 


xxiii.  6-11.]  ACTS.  227 

})arty  saw  at  ouce  that  this  was  their  chance  to  slip  out 
and  leave  the  Sadducees  in  the  mire.  The  latter  were 
exasperated  by  the  trick,  and  thus  the  row  came  on.  The 
trick  was  the  more  exasperating,  because  the  speaker  for 
the  Pharisees  pointed  his  arrow  with  the  intimation  that 
Paul  may  have  heard  the  voice  of  an  angel  or  a  spirit, 
the  very  existence  of  whom  the  Sadducees  denied.  It  is 
not  necessary  to  suppose  that  the  Pharisees  thought  it 
probable  that  an  angel  or  a  spirit  had  spoken  to  Paul ; 
for  if  they  w^ere  known  as  not  believing  any  such  thing, 
this  only  poisoned  with  irony  the  shaft  which  they 
hurled  at  the  Sadducees. 

In  Luke's  remark,  that  while  the  Sadducees  say  there 
is  no  resurrection,  neither  angel  nor  spirit,  the  Phari- 
sees confess  both,  we  should  naturally  expect  him  to 
say  all  three,  instead  of  both  ;  but  he  doubtless  included 
in  the  thought  of  angels  and  spirits  the  single  idea  of 
beings  without  fleshly  bodies. 

Lysias  w^as  once  more  disappointed  in  his  efforts 
to  learn  the  truth  about  Paul's  case ;  but  he  certainly 
learned  that  his  enemies  had  no  charge  against  him 
which  they  were  willing  to  formulate. 

7.  Paul  is  Encouraged  by  a  Vision,  11. 

Ver.  11.  If  we  had  an  -epistle  from  Paul's  pen 
written  at  this  time,  it  would  probably  speak  of  great 
distress  and  despondency  ;  for  such  a  state  of  mind  is 
flearly  implied  in  the  incident  next  mentioned,  (ii) 
And  the  night  following  the  Lord  stood  by  him,  and  said, 
Be  of  good  cheer  :  for  as  thou  hast  testified  concerning  me 
at  Jerusalem,  so  must  thou  bear  witness  also  at  Rome. 
Such  words  of  cheer  from  the  Lord  himself  arc  not 
spoken  except   when  they  are  greatly  needed ;  and  this 


228  COMMENTARY.  [xxiii.  11-lG. 

makes  it  certain  that  Paul  was  sorely  troubled  in  spirit 
that  night.  Well  he  might  be.  The  bonds  and  affliction 
which  had  been  predicted  all  along  his  journey  from  Cor- 
inth to  Jerusalem  had  now  befallen  him,  and  it  was  not 
apparent  whether  the  earnest  prayers  which  he  and 
others  in  his  behalf  had  offered  to  God,  that  he  might  be 
delivered  from  those  who  were  disobedient  in  Jerusalem, 
were  to  be  granted.  Outside  the  prison  he  could  h()j)e 
for  nothing  but  death,  and  inside  there  was  no  field  of 
•usefulness.  In  whatever  direction  he  could  look,  prison 
walls  or  a  bloody  death  confronted  him,  and  hedged  his 
way.  At  this  opportune  moment  he  was  cheered  by  the 
first  ray  of  light  in ;  regard  to  his  future ;  and  though 
it  was  impossible  for  him  to  conjecture  as  yet  how  it  was 
to  be  brought  about,  he  had  the  assurance  that  in  the 
Lord's  own  way  and  time  he  should  yet  escape  the 
present  danger,  and  preach  the  gospel  in  Rome. 

8.  A  Conspiracy  Formed  and  Exposed,  12-22. 

Yv.  12-16.  Notwithstanding  the  gleam  of  hope 
granted  to  Paul  in  the  night,  his  prospects  grew  darker 
than  ever  the  next  morning.  (12)  And  when  it  was  day, 
the  Jews  banded  together,  and  bound  themselves  under  a 
curse,  saying  that  they  would  neither  eat  nor  drink  until 
they  had  killed  Paul.  (13)  And  they  were  moie  than 
forty  who  made  this  conspiracy.  (14)  And  they  came  to 
the  chief  priests  and  the  elders,  and  said,  We  have  bound 
ourselves  under  a  great  curse,  to  taste  nothing  until 
we  have  killed  Paul.  (15)  Now  therefore  do  ye  with 
the  council  signify  to  the  chief  captain  that  he  bring  him 
down  unto  you,  as  though  ye  would  judge  of  his  case 
more  exactly :  and  we,  or  ever  he  come  near,  are  ready 
to  slay  him.     (16)  But  Paul's  sister's  son  heard  of  their 


X3ui.  12-16.]  ACTS.  220 

lying  in  wait,  and  he  came  and  entered  into  the  castle, 
and  told  Paul.  (17)  And  Paul  called  unto  him  one  of  the 
centurions,  and  said,  Bring  this  young  man  unto  the 
chief  captain  :  for  he  hath  something  to  tell  him.  (18) 
So  he  took  him  and  brought  him  to  the  chief  captain,  and 
saith,  Paul  the  prisoner  called  me  unto  him,  and  asked 
me  to  bring  this  young  man  unto  thee,  who  hath  some- 
thing to  say  to  thee.  (19)  And  the  chief  captain  took 
him  by  the  hand,  and  going  aside  asked  him  privately. 
What  is  that  thou  hast  to  tell  me  ?  (20)  And  he  said. 
The  Jews  have  agreed  to  ask  thee  to  bring  down  Paul 
to-morrow  unto  the  council,  as  though  thou  wouldst  inquire 
somewhat  more  exactly  concerning  him.  (2 1 )  Do  not  thou 
therefore  yield  unto  them  :  for  there  lie  in  wait  for  him  of 
them  more  than  forty  men,  who  have  bound  themselves 
under  a  curse,  neither  to  eat  nor  drink  till  they  have 
slain  him  :  and  now  are  they  ready,  looking  for  the  prom- 
ise from  thee.  (22)  So  the  chief  captain  let  the  young 
man  go,  charging  him.  Tell  no  man  that  thou  hast  signi- 
fied these  things  to  me.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  the 
malignity  which  animated  these  conspirators,  both  the 
prime  movers  in  it,  and  the  priests  and  elders  who  gave 
it  their  sanction.  The  latter  classes  were  of  course  Sad- 
diicecs  who  had  been  enraged  by  the  proceedings  of  the 
previous  day,  whilst  the  former  were  desperate  roughs  of 
the  city.  Their  scheme,  if  left  unexposed,  would  almost 
certainly  have  been  successful ;  for  Lysias,  in  his  per- 
plexity, would  have  gladly  complied  with  their  request ; 
and  as  the  prisoner  was  led  along  the  narrow  street,  or 
along  the  pavement  of  the  great  court,  it  would  have 
been  easy  for  forty  desperate  men,  having  chosen  their 
position  in  advance,  to  have  rushed  in  among  the  unsus- 
pecting soldiers,  and  slain  Paul  before  a  blow  could  have 


230  COMMENTARY.  [xxiii.  12-30. 

l)eea  struck  in  his  defense.  Bat  a  conspiracy  so  desper- 
ate, known  to  so  many  persons,  and  aimed  against  a  man 
concerning  whom  the  whole  community  was  excited  to  a 
white  heat,  could  not  well  be  kept  secret.  It  leaked  into 
the  ears  of  some  of  Paul's  friends,  and  this  nephew,  who 
for  some  unknown  cause  was  in  the  city,  was  charged  with 
the  hazardous  task  of  revealing  it  to  Paul  and  to  the 
chiliarch.  The  young  man  trembled  no  doubt  when  he 
was  ushered  into  the  presence  of  the  Roman  officer;  but 
Lysias,  with  kindly  consideration,  reassured  him  by  tak- 
ing his  hand  and  leading  him  aside,  that  he  might  deliver 
his  message  in  secret.  Then,  fearing  for  the  young 
man's  life  if  his  act  should  become  known,  and  desir- 
ing to  keep  hid  from  the  conspirators  the  cause  of  the 
move  on  which  he  at  once  determined,  he  dismissed  him 
with  a  charge  of  the  strictest  secresy. 

9.  Paul  is  Eemoved  to  C^sarea,  23-30. 

Vv.  23-30.  On  receiving  this  information,  Lysias 
had  at  least  three  lines  of  policy  between  which  to  choose. 
Had  he  been  disposed  to  gratify  the  Jews,  he  might  have 
permitted  them  to  carry  out  their  plot  without  proba- 
bility of  being  known  to  his  superiors  as  accessory  to  the 
murder.  Had  he  preferred  to  defy  their  power  and  dis- 
play his  own,  he  might  have  sent  Paul  down  under  a 
guard  so  strong  and  so  instructed  that  they  would  have 
slain  the  conspirators.  Or  if  he  desired  to  protect  Paul, 
and  to  avoid  oifense  to  the  Jews  and  bloodshed,  he  might 
send  him  away  that  night  before  their  request  had  been 
laid  before  him.  It  reflects  credit  on  his  military  skill, 
and  on  his  character  as  a  man,  that  he  chose  the  course 
which  both  justice  and  prudence  dictated.  (23)  And  he 
called  unto  him  two  of  the  centurions,  and  said,  Make 


xxiii.  23-30.]  ACT,^.  231 

ready  two  hundred  soldiers  to  go  as  far  as  Cajsarea,  and 
horsemen  three  score  and  ten,  and  spearmen  two  hun- 
dred, at  the  third  hour  of  the  night :  (24)  and  he  bade 
them  provide  beasts,  that  they  might  set  Paul  thereon 
and  bring  him  safe  unto  Felix  the  governor.  (25)  And 
he  wrote  a  letter  after  this  form : 

(26)  Claudius  Lysias,  unto  the  most  excellent  gover- 
nor Felix,  greeting.  (27)  This  man  was  seized  by  the 
Jews,  and  was  about  to  be  slain  by  them,  when  I  *came 
upon  them  with  the  soldiers,  and  rescued  him,  having 
learned  that  he  was  a  Roman.  (28)  And  desiring  to 
know  the  cause  wherefore  they  accused  him,  I  brought 
him  down  unto  their  council :  (29)  whom  I  found  to  be 
accused  about  questions  of  their  law,  but  to  have  nothing 
laid  to  his  charge  worthy  of  death  or  of  bonds.  (30) 
And  when  it  was  shown  to  me  that  there  would  be  a  plot 
against  the  man,  I  sent  him  to  thee  forthwith,  charging 
his  accusers  also  to  speak  against  him  before  thee.  But 
for  one  slight  misrepresentation  in  this  letter,  there 
would  be  nothing  in  the  whole  procedure  of  Lysias  dis- 
creditable to  him.  He  had  acted  like  a  just  and  prudent 
man ;  but  in  reporting  to  his  superior  be  so  stated  the 
facts  as  to  give  himself  credit  for  rescuing  Paul  because 
he  was  a  Roman  citizen ;  whereas  he  hid  only  learned 
this  fact  when  he  was  about  to  scourge  him.  The  state- 
ment that  he  had  commanded  Paul's  accusers  to  appear 
before  Felix,  though  not  absolutely  true  at  the  moment 
it  was  written,  he  intended  to  make  true  before  the  letter 
could  be  read ;  consequently  it  was  not  intended  to  de- 
ceive. The  letter  also  shows  that,  although  he  did  not 
understand  the  nature  of  the  charge  against  Paul,  he  had 
learned  enough  to  know  that  he  was  not  accused  of  any- 
thing criminal.     Under  this  conviction,  he  would  soon 


232  COMMENTARY.  [xxiii.  26-35. 

have  released  lilm  but  for  the  plot  of  the  Jews,  and  so, 
as  they  must  have  learned  afterward,  the  conspiracy  over- 
reached itself,  and  really  caused  their  intended  victim  to 
slip  out  of  their  hands.  The  sound  judgment  and  pru- 
dence of  Lysias  was  still  farther  shown  by  the  fact  of 
his  sending  so  strong  a  body  of  troops  with  Paul  as  to 
prevent  bloodshed  even  had  his  movement  been  discov- 
ered by  the  Jews,  because  the  guard  was  too  formidable 
to  be  attacked  by  an  unarmed  mob. 

10.  Paul  is  Delivered  to  Felix,  31-35. 

Vv.  31-35.  The  centurion  in  command  executed 
his  commission  with  judgment  and  fidelity.  (31)  So  the 
soldiers,  as  it  was  commanded  them,  took  Paul,  and 
brought  him  by  night  to  Antipatris.  (32)  But  on  the 
morrow  they  left  the  horsemen  to  go  with  him,  and  re- 
turned to  the  castle :  (33)  and  they,  when  they  came  to 
Caesarea,  and  delivered  the  letter  to  the  governor,  pre- 
sented Paul  also  before  him.  (34)  And  when  he  had  read 
it,  he  asked  of  what  province  he  was ;  and  when  he  un- 
derstood that  he  was  of  Cilicia,  (35)  I  will  hear  thy  cause, 
said  he,  when  thine  accusers  also  are  come :  and  he  com- 
manded him  to  be  kept  in  Herod's  palace.  Antipatris 
was  reached  after  decending  from  the  mountains  ot 
Ephraim  into  the  plain  of  Sharon,  where  its  ruins  have 
been  identified  at  the  source  of  the  river  Aujeh.*     It  was 

^  The  place  is  called  Ras  el  Ain  {Promontory  of  the  Spring),  from 
the  large  body  of  water  which  rises  out  of  the  ground  under  its 
northern  and  western  sides  and  forms  the  river  Aujeh.  The  top 
of  the  hill  is  crowned  with  the  ruins  of  a  large  castle  built  by  the 
crusaders,  and  the  place  is  known  to  represent  Antipatris,  be- 
cause the  latter  is  represented  by  Josephus  to  be  in  the  plain, 
close  to  the  hills,  with  a  river  encompassing  it  {Anfiq  xvi. 
5.  2),  and  this  is  the  only  ruin  answering  to  the  description.     It  is 


xxiii.  ;i5-xxiv.l.]  ACTS.  23:1 

about  half  way  between  Jerusalem  and  Cajsarea,  and 
about  thirty  miles  from  either  })laco.  As  the  rapid 
march  through  the  night  had  brought  the  little  army  be- 
yond all  possible  danger  of  attack  from  Jerusalem,  the 
seventy  horsemen  were  a  sufficient  guard  the  rest  of  the 
way.  To  Paul,  unaccustomed  to  riding  on  horseback, 
this  long  and  rapid  ride  through  a  whole  night  was  doubt- 
less very  fatigning  It  is  not  quite  certain  for  what  reason 
Felix  inquired  as  to  Paul's  province.  It  may  have  been 
from  natural  curiosity;  or  it  may  have  been  witii  the 
purpose  of  sending  him  to  the  governor  of  his  province, 
if  it  should  be  one  near  by;  but  whtn  he  learned  that  it 
was  Cilicia,  accessible  only  by  sea,  he  did  not  hesitate  to 
keep  him  in  his  own  hands.  It  seems  that  Herod's 
palace,  more  properly  prtetorium,  in  which  Paul  was 
now  kept  under  guard,  had  a  guard-room  in  it  for  the 
confinement  of  such  prisoners. 


SEC.  II.      PAUL'S  IMPRISONMENT    IN 
CiESAREA. 

C^CXIV.    1 — XXVI.    32.) 

1.  He  19  Accused  Before  Felix,  1-9. 

Ver.  1.  When  the  Jews  of  Jerusalem  were  com- 
manded by  Lysias  to  present  their  accusations  again.st 
Paul  before  Felix,  though  they  had  been  bitterly  disaj)- 
pointed  by  the  miscarriage  of  their  plot,  they  still  hoped 

11 J  miles  from  Lydda,  and  30}  from  C.'esarea.  "  From  it,"  says 
Conder  (Tent-Work  in  Palestine),  "  the  stream  flows  rapidly  away 
westward,  burrowing  between  deep  banks,  and  rolling  to  the  sea, 
a  yellow,  turbid,  sandy  volume  of  water,  unfordable  in  winter, 
and  never  dry,  even  in  summer." 


234  COMMENTARY.  [kxiv.  1-9. 

to  secure  his  death,  and  they  followed  up  the  prosecution 
without  delay,  (i)  And  after  five  days  the  high  priest 
Ananias  came  down  with  certain  elders,  and  with  an 
orator,  one  Tertullus ;  and  they  informed  the  governor 
against  Paul.  It  is  most  natural,  in  counting  these  five 
days,  to  suppose  that  they  extended  from  the  next  day 
after  Paul  left  Jerusalem,  which  was  the  day  on  which 
they  received  notice  from  Lysias,  till  their  arrival  in 
Csesarea.  Tertullus  was  a  Roman,  as  his  name  indi- 
cates, and  they  brought  him,  as  a  paid  attorney,  because 
they  now  had  to  appear  in  a  regular  Roman  court,  and 
they  must  have  a  man  familiar  with  the  proceedings  in 
such  a  court  to  represent  them. 

Vv.  2-9.  The  formal  proceedings  were  opened,  very 
much  as  in  our  modern  courts,  by  a  speech  from  the 
prosecuting'attorney,  presenting  the  accusation  ;  and  this 
was  followed  by  the  testimony  of  the  witnesses  for  the 
plaintiff.  (2)  And  when  he  was  called,  Tertullus  hegan 
to  accuse  him,  saying, 

Seeing  that  by  thee  we  enjoy  much  peace,  and  that 
by  thy  providence  evils  are  corrected  for  this  nation,  (3) 
we  accept  it  in  all  ways,  and  in  all  places,  most  excellent 
Felix,  with  all  thankfulness.  (4)  But  that  I  be  not  fur- 
ther tedious  unto  thee,  I  intreat  thee  to  hear  us  of  thy 
clemency  a  few  words.  (5)  For  we  have  found  this  man 
a  pestilent  fellow,  and  a  mover  of  insurrection  among  all 
the  Jews  throughout  the  world,  and  a  ringleader  of  the  sect 
of  the  Nazarenes :  (6)  who  moreover  assayed  to  profane 
the  temple';  on  whom  also  we  laid  hold  :  (8)  from  whom 
thou  wilt  be  able,  by  examining  him  thyself,  to  take 
knowledge  of  all  these  things,  whereof  we  accuse  him. 
(9)  And  the  Jews  also  joined  in  the  charge,  affirming 
that  these  things  were  so.     While  Felix  was  guilty  of 


xxiv.  2-21.]  ACTS.  235 

much  corruption  in  his  administration  of  affairs,  the 
complimentarj  words  with  which  Tertulhis  opened 
his  speech  were  not  undeserved;  for  he  had  restored 
tranquility  to  the  country  when  it  was  disturbed,  first, 
by  bunds  of  robbers;  second,  by  organized  assassins ;  and 
lastly,  by  that  Egyptian  for  whom  Lysias  at  first  mis- 
took Paul  (xxi.  38). 

The  accusation  against  Paul  was  the  general  one  of 
being  a  "  pestilent  fellow,"  and  the  specifications  under 
this  charge  were  three ;  first,  that  he  had  excited  the 
Jews  in  many  places  to  insurrections ;  second,  that  he 
was  a  ringleader  of  the  sect  of  the  Nazareues;  and  third, 
that  he  had  attempted  to  profane  the  temple.  Any  one 
of  these  specifications,  sustained,  would  sustain  the 
charge ;  and  Tertullus  closed  by  affirming  that  Felix 
could  find  proof  of  them  all  by  examining  Paul  himself 
— a  hint  of  the  examination  by  scourging,  which  Paul 
had  escaped,  Tertullus  knew  not  how,  at  the  hands  of 
Lysias.  The  witnesses  supported  the  charges  by  affirm- 
ing that  these  things  were  so. 

2.  Paul's  Defense,  10-21. 

Vv.  10-21.  Paul  was  now  required,  without  previous 
notification  of  the  charges,  and  without  a  moment  for 
premeditation,  to  make  his  defense  against  an  accusation 
which,  if  sustained  in  the  judgment  of  the  court,  would 
have  cost  him  his  life.  Without  a  single  witness  to 
support  his  representations,  he  could  rely  only  upon  the 
self-evident  truthfulness  of  what  he  might  say;  but  he 
had  the  support  of  the  words  of  Jesus:  "Settle  it  there- 
fore in  your  hearts,  not  to  meditate  beforehand  how  to 
answer  :  for  I  will  give  you  a  mouth  and  wisdom,  which 
all  your  adversaries  shall   not  be  able  to  withstand  or 


236  COMMENTARY.  [xxiv.  10-21. 

gainsay  "  (Luke  xxi.  15).  On  this  assurance  he  could 
and  did  rely.  (lo)  And  when  the  governor  had  beckoned 
unto  him  to  speak,  Paul  answered, 

Forasmuch  as  I  know  that  thou  hast  been  of  many 
years  a  judge  unto  this  nation,^  I  do  cheerfully  make 
my  defense:  (ii)  seeing  that  thou  canst  take  knowl- 
edge, that  it  is  not  more  than  twelve  days  since  I 
went  up  to  worship  at  Jerusalem:  (12)  and  neither  in 
the  temple  did  they  find  me  disputing  with  any  man, 
or  stirring  up  a  crowd,  nor  in  the  synagogues,  nor  in  the 
city.  (13)  Neither  can  they  prove  to  thee  the  things 
whereof  they  now  accuse  me.  (14)  But  this  I  confess 
unto  thee,  that  after  the  Way  which  they  call  a  sect,  so 
serve  I  the  God  of  our  fathers,  believing  all  things  which 
are  according  to  the  law,  and  which  are  written  in  the 
prophets  :  (15)  having  hope  toward  God,  which  these  also 
themselves  look  for,  that  there  shall  be  a  resurrection 
both  of  the  just  and  unjust.  (16)  Herein  do  I  also  exer- 
cise myself  to  have  a  conscience  void  of  offense  toward 
God  and  men  alway.  (17)  Now  after  many  years  ^  I 
came  to  bring  alms  to  my  nation,  and  offerings :  (18) 
amidst  which  they  found  me  purified  in  the  temple,  with 
no  crowd,  nor  yet  with  tumult :  but  there  were  certain 
Jews  from  Asia  (19)  who  ought  to  have  been  here  before 
thee,  and  to  make  accusation,  if  they  had  aught  against 
me.  (20)  Or  else  let  these  men  themselves  say  what 
wrong-doing  they  found,  when  I  stood  before  the  council, 

"^  He  was  now  in  the  seventh  year  of  his  procuratorship  of 
Judea.  This  was  "  many  years,"  in  comparison  with  those  of  his 
predecessors  in  the  same  office. 

^If  we  omit,  as  we  have  done,  the  visit  supposed  by  many  to 
be  referred  to  in  xviii.  22,  he  had  not  been  in  the  city  since 
the  visit  of  chapter  xv.,  which  was  eight  years  previous.  See 
Chronology,  Intr.  xxvii,  xxix. 


xxiv.  10-21.]       ■  ACTS.  237 

(21)  except  it  be  for  this  one  voice,  that  I  cried  standing 
among  them,  Touching  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  I  am 
called  in  question  before  you  this  day. 

This  speech  contains  a  direct  reply  to  every  sjjecifica- 
tion  made  by  TertuUus.  The  statement  that  it  was 
only  twelve  days  since  he  went  up  to  Jerusalem,  answers 
the  charge  of  stirring  up  sedition,  at  least  in  that  city ; 
for  as  he  had  been  away  from  there  five  days,  and  was 
in  prison  tliere  one,  this  left  only  six,  which  were  insuf- 
ficient for  such  movements.  Moreover,  he  had  not  engaged 
in  disputation  with  any  one,  in  the  temple,  in  the  syna- 
gogues, or  in  any  part  of  the  city.  As  to  being  a  ring- 
leader of  the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes,  without  alluding  to 
the  title  ringleader  he  admits  that  he  belongs  to  the  sect 
so-called,  yet  he  believes  all  the  law  and  the  prophets, 
hopes  for  a  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  leads  a  consci- 
entious life.  Finally,  the  statement  that,  when  found  in 
the  temple  by  certain  Jews  from  Asia,  he  was  purified  as 
the  law  required,  and  that  he  was  engaged  about  alms- 
giving and  the  ofiPerings  of  the  temple,  refuted  the  charge 
of  profaning  the  temple  (xxi.  28),  now  changed  into 
attempting  to  profane  it  (6).  In  conclusion,  he  notes  the 
significant  fact,  that  those  who  first  seized  him,  and  who 
were  the  only  personal  witnesses  of  what  he  did  in  the 
temple,  were  not  present  to  testify;  and  then  he  calls 
upon  Ananias  and  the  elders,  who  witnessed  only  what 
was  done  in  the  Sanhedrin,  to  testify  as  to  any  wrong 
doing  there,  unless  it  was  that  remark  in  reference  to 
being  a  Pharisee,  which  had  set  Ananias  and  his  friends 
in  a  fierce  quarrel  with  the  rest  of  the  elders.  He 
makes  this  last  reference,  not  because  he  was  conscious 
of   wrong   in  the   matter,  but   in   order   to   taunt   his 


238  COMMENTARY.  [xxiv.  22-24. 

Sadducee  accusers,   and   to  show  Felix  that  they  were 
moved  against  him  by  party  jealousy. 

3.  The  Case  Continued,  22,  23. 

Vv.  22,  23.  As  Paul's  defense  consisted  in  nothing 
but  his  own  statements,  it  was  doubtless  a  surprise  to 
both  him  and  his  accusers,  that  Felix  virtually  decided 
in  his  favor.  (22)  But  Felix,  having  more  exact  knowl- 
edge concerning  the  Way,  deferred  them,  saying,  When 
Lysias  the  chief  captain  shall  come  down,  I  will  deter- 
mine your  matter.  (23)  And  he  gave  order  to  the  centur- 
ion that  he  should  be  kept  in  charge,  and  should  have  in- 
dulgence ;  and  not  to  forbid  any  of  his  friends  to  minister 
unto  him.  This  decision  is  ascribed  to  his  having  more 
accurate  knowledge  of  the  Way,  by  which  we  are  to 
understand,  not  that  he  had  just  acquired  such  knowl- 
edge from  Paul's  speech,  for  it  contained  very  little  in- 
formation on  this  point,  but  that  Felix  had  already  more 
exact  knowledge  than  to  be  deceived  by  the  representa- 
tions of  the  Sadducees.  Having  been  in  Judea  now  for 
six  years  more,  he  had  been  compelled,  whether  willing 
or  not,  to  become  acquainted  with  the  religious  parties 
into  which  his  subjects  were  divided,  and  he  well  knew 
the  jealousies  which  existed  among  them.  The  reason 
which  he  gave  for  postponing  a  decision  in  the  case 
was  a  more  subterfuge,  as  mii^t  have  been  apparent  to 
the  Sadducees.  Paul's  confinement  was  now  tne  least 
irksome  that  was  consistent  with  safe  keeping. 

4.  Paul  Preaches  to  Felix  and  Drusilla, 
24-27. 

Vee.  24.  The  freedom  which  Paul  enjoyed  of  re- 
ceiving his  friends  not  only  left  open  to  him  the  frater- 


xxiv.  24.]  ACTS.  239 

nal  visits  of  Philip  and  other  brethren  who  lived  in 
Coesarea,  but  also  gave  him  opportunity  to  preach  the 
gospel  to  any  unbelievers  who  might  be  induced  to  hear 
him.  It  may  have  been  his  activity  in  this  work  that  led 
to  the  incident  next  related.  (24)  But  after  certain  days 
Felix  came  with  Drusilla,  his  wife,  who  was  a  Jewess, 
and  sent  for  Paul,  and  heard  him  concerning  the  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus.  The  word  "  came  "  indicates  either  that 
he  had  been  absent  from  the  city  and  returned  to  it,  or 
that  he  came  from  his  usual  place  of  residence  to  an 
apartment  in  Herod's  pr?etorium  where  Paul  was  kept. 
Drusilla,  as  we  learn  from  Josephus,  was  a  daughter  of 
Herod  Agrippa,  who  murdered  the  apostle  James,  and 
miserably  perished  soon  afterward  (xii.  1,  2;  20-23). 
She  was  but  six  years  old  when  her  father  perished,  and 
as  that  was  in  the  year  44,  and  her  present  appearance  in 
our  narrative  was  in  58,  she  was  now  only  twenty.  She 
had  been  given  in  marriage  at  an  early  age  to  Aziz,  king 
of  Emesa;  but  Felix,  having  seen  her  and  become 
enamored  of  her  beauty,  had,  through  the  machinations 
of  a  sorcerer  named  Simon,  induced  her  to  abandon  her 
husband  and  come  to  him,  so  she  was  now  living  in  open 
adultery  with  Felix.^  Concerning  Felix  it  is  asserted 
by  Tacitus,  one  of  the  most  judicious  and  fair-minded  of 
Roman  historians,  that  "with  every  kind  of  cruelty  and 
lust,  he  exercised  the  authority  of  a  king  with  the  temper 
of  a  slave."  ^  He  and  his  brother  Pallas  had  actually 
been  slaves  in  the  household  of  Agrippina,  the  mother  of 
the  emperor  Claudius,  and  by  the  latter  he  had  been  sent 
from  the  position  of  a  slave  to  that  of  ruler  over  a  province. 

'Josephus,  Antiquities,  xx.  7.  2. 

*"Antonius  Felix,   per  omnem    sjovitiam   et  Ubidinem,  jus 
regium  serviU  ingenio  exercuit". (History,  v.  9). 


240  COMMENTARY.  [xxiv.  25. 

Ver.  25.  Under  the  summons  to  speak  concerning 
the  faith  in  Christ,  Paul  was  at  liberty  to  choose  for 
himself  the  special  topic  of  discourse,  and  he  did  so  with 
direct  reference  to  the  spiritual  wants  of  his  hearers. 
(25)  And  as  he  reasoned  of  righteousness,  and  temper- 
ance, and  the  judgment  to  come,  Felix  was  terrified,  and 
answered,  Go  thy  way,  for  this  time  ;  and  when  I  have 
a  convenient  season,  I  will  call  thee  unto  me.  Nothing 
could  be  more  terrifying  than  to  speak  of  righteousness 
to  a  man  of  such  iniquity  ;  of  temperance  in  all  things  to 
a  man  of  such  unbridled  lust;  or  to  drive  home  what 
was  said  on  these  topics  by  depicting  the  judgment  to 
come.  I  here  adopt  the  burning  words  of  Farrar  :  "  As 
he  glanced  back  over  the  stained  and  guilty  past,  he  was 
afraid.  He  had  been  a  slave  in  the  vilest  of  all  posi- 
tions, at  the  vilest  of  all  epochs,  in  the  yilest  of  all  cities. 
He  had  crept  with  his  brother  Pallas  into  the  position  of 
a  courtier  at  the  most  morally  degraded  of  all  courts. 
He  had  been  an  officer  of  those  auxiliaries  who  were  the 
worst  of  all  troops.  What  secrets  of  lust  and  blood  lay 
hidden  in  his  earlier  life  we  do  not  know;  but  ample  and 
indisputable  testimony,  Jewish  and  Pagan,  sacred  and 
secular,  reveals  to  us  what  he  had  been — how  greedy, 
how  savage,  how  treacherous,  how  unjust,  how  steeped 
in  thCj  blood  of  private  murder  and  public  massacre — 
during  the  eight  years  which  he  had  now  sjjent  in  the 
government,  first  of  Samaria,  then  of  Palestine.  There 
were  footsteps  behind  him ;  he  began  to  feel  as  though 
*  the  earth  were  made  of  glass ' "  (Life  of  Paul,  550). 
The  terror  which  seized  him  was  the  beginning  necessary 
to  a  change  of  life ;  but  lust  and  ambition  smothered  the 
kindling  fires  of  conscience,  and  he  made  the  common 
excuse  of  alarmed  but  impenitent  sinners  to  get  rid  of 


xxiv.  25-27.]  ACTS.  241 

his  too  faithful  monitor.  The  "  convenient' season"  to 
which  he  deforred  the  matter,  never  came,  and  it  never 
could  come :  for  how  could  it  ever  be  convenient  for  a 
man  to  put  away  a  beautiful  woman  with  whom  he  was 
living  in  sin,  and  to  radically  revolutionize  the  whole 
course  of  his  previous  life  ?  This  change  must  be  made 
at  a  sacrifice  of  much  convenience  and  much  pride  by 
every  wicked  man  who  makes  it.  How  Drusilla  was 
affected  we  are  not  told ;  but  it  is  scarcely  possible  that 
she  was  more  composed  than  the  hardened  Felix. 

Vv.  26,  27.  Felix  maintained  the  character  in  which 
Tacitus  paints  him  to  the  very  last.  (26)  He  hoped, 
withal,  that  money  would  be  given  him  of  Paul :  where- 
fore also  he  sent  for  him  the  oftener,  and  communed 
with  him.  (27)  But  when  two  years  were  fulfilled, 
Felix  was  succeeded  by  Porcius  Festus ;  and  desiring  to 
gain  favor  with  the  Jews,  Felix  left  Paul  in  bonds. 
From  having  incidentally  learned,  through  Paul's  speech 
at  his  trial,  that  he  had  been  up  to  Jerusalem  to  bear 
alms  from  distant  churches,  and  knowing,  besides,  the 
general  liberality  of  the  disciples  toward  one  another 
in  distress,  he  had  not  a  doubt  that  Paul  could  raise  a 
large  sum  to  secure  his  release  from  imprisonment,  and 
that  it  would  be  forthcoming  on  the  merest  hint  that  it 
would  be  accepted.  Undoubtedly,  had  Paul  thought  it 
right  to  obtain  release  in  this  way,  the  money  would 
have  been  in  hand  soon;  for  wdiat  w^ould  not  his  breth- 
ren have  given  to  relieve  him  from  the  ignominy  of  im- 
prisonment, and  to  set  him  free  in  apostolic  usefulness. 
But  bribe-giving  is  next  in  turpitude  to  bribe-taking, 
and  Paul  could  be  no  party  to  a  crime. 

The  removal  of  Felix  was  brought  about  by  accusa- 
tions of  misgovernment  preferred  against  him  by   the 


242  COMMENT AR  Y.  [xxiv.  2G— xxv.  5. 

Jews.  He  was  called  to  Rome  by  Nero  to  answer  for 
his  crimes,  and,  barely  escaping  execution,  he  was  ban- 
ished into  Gaul,  where  he  died.  Drusilla  clung  to  him 
in  his  failing  fortunes;  but  a  son  whom  she  bore  to  him, 
and  who  was  named  Agrij)pa,  after  her  brother,  perished 
in  the  eruption  of  Mt.  Vesuvius,  which  engulfed  the 
cities  of  Pompeii  and  Herculaneura.* 

These  two  years  of  imprisonment  in  Csesarea,  if  wc 
may  judge  from  the  silence  of  history,  were  the  most  in- 
active of  Paul's  career.  There  are  no  epistles  which 
bear  this  date ;  and  though  his  brethren  and  others  had 
free  access  to  him,  we  have  no  recorded  effects  of  their 
interviews  with  him.  The  only  moments  in  which  he 
emerges  into  view  are  those  in  which  he  appears  be- 
fore his  judges. 

5.  Paul's  Trial  before  Festus,  xxv.  1-12. 

Vv.  1-5.  The  long  imprisonment  of  Paul  seems 
not  in  the  least  to  have  moderated  the  hatred  of  his 
enemies  ;  so,  on  the  change  of  governors,  they  renewed 
their  efforts  for  his  destruction,  (i)  Festus  therefore, 
having  come  into  the  province,  after  three  days,  went 
up  to  Jerusalem  from  Caesarea.  (2)  And  the  chief  priests 
and  the  principal  men  of  the  Jews  informed  him  against 
Paul ;  (3)  and  they  besought  him,  asking  favor  against 
him,  that  he  would  send  for  him  to  Jerusalem ;  laying 
wait  to  kill  him  on  the  way.  (4)  Howbeit  Festus 
answered,  that  Paul  was  kept  in  charge  at  Caesarea,  and 
that  he  himself  was  about  to  depart  thither  shortly.  (5) 
Let  them  therefore,  saith  he,  who  are  of  power  among 
you,  go  down  with  me,  and  if  there  is  anything  amiss 
in  the  man,  let  them  accuse  him.     He  also  told  them,  as 

^  Jose|)hus,  Ant.  xx.  7.  2. 


3txv.  1-0.]  ACTS.  243 

we  learn  from  a  later  speech  (IC),  that  it  was  contrary  to 
Roman  law  to  condemn  a  man  before  he  had  an  oppor- 
tunity for  defense,  face  to  face  with  ^his  accusers.  All 
this  shows  that  Festus  was  disposed  to  act  justly.  He 
of  course  knew  nothing  then  of  the  plot  to  waylay  Paul, 

Vv.  Q-8.  He  made  no  delay  in  granting  them  the 
promised  hearing.  (6)  And  when  he  had  tarried  among 
them  not  more  than  eight  or  ten  days,  he  went  down  un- 
to Caesarea  ;  and  on  the  morrow  he  sat  on  the  judgment- 
seat,  and  commanded  Paul  to  be  brought.  (7)  And  when 
he  was  come,  the  Jews  who  had  come  down  from  Jerusa- 
lem stood  round  about  him,  bringing  against  him  many 
and  grievous  charges,  which  they  could  not  prove ;  (8) 
while  Paul  said  in  his  defense.  Neither  against  the  law  of 
the  Jews,  nor  against  the  temple,  nor  against  Caesar,  have 
I  sinned  at  all.  The  specifications  which  Paul  makes  in 
his  defense  are  the  same  as  in  his  defense  against  the 
charges  preferred  by  Tertullus  before  Felix  (xxiv.  10-21), 
showing  that  the  charges  were  also  the  same.  Being  a 
"ringleader  of  the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes"  was  his  sin 
against  the  law ;  attempting  to  profane  the  temple,  his 
sin  against  the  holy  place  ;  and  the  incitement  of  insur- 
rections among  the  Jews,  his  sin  against  Cffisar.  In  the 
last  specification,  reference  was  had  to  the  mobs  which 
the  Jews  were  in  the  habit  of  stirring  up  against  him, 
whose  crimes  were  thus  charged  upon  him. 

Ver.  9.  As  the  accusers  were  not  able  to  prove  their 
charges  (7),  and  the  prisoner  pleaded  "  not  guilty  "  to 
every  one  of  them,  he  should  have  been  unconditionally 
released;  but  Festus,  at  this  point,  allowed  his  sense  of 
justice  to  be  biased  by  his  desire  for  popularity.  (9)  But 
Festus,  desiring  to  gain  favor  with  the  Jews,  answered 
Paul,  and  said,  Wilt  thou  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  there 


244  COMMENTARY.  [xxv.  9-12. 

be  judged  of  these  things  before  me  ?  As  Ctesarea 
was  the  seat  of  government  for  the  province,  he  had  no 
right  to  order  th«  trial  of  a.  citizen  elsewhere  ;  hence  the 
inquiry  whether  Paul  was  willing  to  be  tried  in  Jerusalem. 
It  is  probable  that  he  knew  nothing  of  the  plot  mentioned 
in  verse  3,  but  he  must  have  known  that  the  petition  of 
the  Jews  that  Paul  be  carried  to  Jerusalem  for  trial,  was 
j^rompted  by  some  sinister  motive,  and  he  should  have 
rejected  it  without  hesitation, 

Vv.  10-12.  The  purpose  of  the  Jews  was  well  un- 
derstood by  Paul.  He  had  not  forgotten  the  vow  of  the 
forty  conspirators,  and,  although  they  must  have  broken 
their  vow  in  breaking  their  fast  before  this  time  (xxiii. 
12,  13),  this  made  them  only  the  more  determined  to 
kill  him,  if  they  could.  Fortunately,  his  very  imprison- 
ment, w^hich  exposed  him  to  this  new  danger,  furnished 
him  the  means  of  escaping  it,  and  in  the  resolution  which 
he  instantly  formed  he  saw  a  glimpse,  at  last,  of  Rome. 
(lo)  But  Paul  said,  I  am  standing  before  Caesar's  judg- 
ment-seat, where  I  ought  to  be  judged  ;  to  the  Jews 
have  I  done  no  wrong,  as  thou  also  very  well  knowest. 
(ii)  If,  then,  I  am  a  wrong-doer,  and  have  committed  any- 
thing worthy  of  death,  I  refuse  not  to  die  ;  but  if  none 
of  those  things  is  true,  whereof  these  accuse  me,  no  man 
can  give  me  up  unto  them.  I  appeal  unto  Caesar.  (12) 
Then  Festus,  when  he  had  conferred  with  the  council, 
answered,  Thou  hast  appealed  unto  Caesar ;  unto  Caesar 
shalt  thou  go.  The  statement,  "  I  stand  at  Caesar's 
judgment-seat,  where  I  ought  to  be  judged,"  was 
his  protest  against  being  sent  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  his 
declaration  that  Festus  knew  that  he  had  done  the  Jews 
no  wrong,  was  based  upon  the  developments  of  the  trial. 
The  appeal  to  Csesar,  which  was  the  right  of  every  Roman 


XXV.  10-13.]  ACTS.  245 

citizen,  required  the  judge  before  whom  the  appeal  was 
made  to  instantly  suspend  proceedings  in  the  case,  and 
to  send  the  prisoner,  together  with  his  accusers,  to  Rome, 
that  the  case  might  be  adjudged  by  the  imperial  court. 
In  Paul's  case,  this  appeal  was  not  a  call  upon  a  military 
power  by  a  free  man  for  protection,  but  a  demand  made 
upon  the  military  power  which  held  him  in  unjust  con- 
finement, not  to  add  to  this  injustice  that  of  exposing 
him  to  assassination.  The  answer  of  Festus  betrays 
some  bitterness  of  feeling,  the  natural  effect  ®f  the  re- 
proach implied  in  the  appeal,  and  at  the  same  time  it 
hints  at  the  inconvenience  to  which  Paul  would  himself 
be  subjected  by  it.  It  subjected  him  to  being  sent  to 
Rome  as  a  prisoner  under  a  military  guard,  and  to  all  the 
delay  which  might  attend  the  coming  of  the  witnesses  to 
testify  against  him,  as  well  as  that  often  resulting  from  the 
dilatoriness  of  the  imperial  court  itself.  This  incon- 
venience deterred  citizens  from  making  the  appeal  except 
in  extreme  cases. 

6.  Paul's   Case  Stated  to  King  Agrippa,   13-22. 

Ver.  13.  The  custom  among  princes  of  extending 
congratulations  to  those  of  like  rank  who  are  newly  ap- 
pointed in  neighboring  provinces,  led  to  the  next  re- 
corded incident  of  Paul's  confinement.  (13)  Now  when 
certain  days  were  passed,  Agrippa  the  king  and  Bernice 
arrived  at  Caesarea,  and  saluted  Festus.  This  Agrippa 
was  the  only  son  of  the  Herod  who  had  murdered  the 
apostle  James  (xii.  1,  2).  He  was  only  seventeen  years 
old  when  his  father  died,  and,  being  thought  too  young 
for  the  government  of  his  father's  dominions,  he  was 
made  by  the  emperor  king  of  Chalcis,  a  small  district 
east  of  the  Jordan.     He  was  now  thirty-one  years  of 


246  COMMENTARY.  [xxv.  13-21. 

ngc.  Bernice  was  his  sister,  and  like  the  younger  sister^ 
Drusilla,  she  was  remarkable  for  her  beauty.  She  had 
been  the  wife  of  her  own  uncle,  the  former  king  of 
Chaleis,  but  she  was  now  a  widow,  and  living  with  her 
brother.^ 

Yv.  14-21.  Festus  knew  that  the  charges  against 
Paul  had  reference  to  the  Jewish  law,  but  he  was  still 
very  much  in  the  dark  as  to  their  exact  nature ;  and  as 
he  was  now  under  the  necessity  of  sending  a  statement 
of  them  to  the  emperor,  he  determined  to  seek  for  light 
by  appealing  to  Agrippa's  more  intimate  knowledge  of 
Jewish  affairs.  (14)  And  as  they  tarried  there  many  days, 
Festus  laid  Paul's  case  before  the  king,  saying,  There 
is  a  certain  man  left  a  prisoner  by  Felix  ;  (15)  about 
whom,  when  I  was  at  Jerusalem,  the  chief  priests  and 
the  elders  of  the  Jews  informed  me,  asking  for  sentence 
against  him.  (16)  To  whom  I  answered,  that  it  is 
not  the  custom  of  the  Romans  to  give  up  any  man  before 
that  the  accused  have  the  accusers  face  to  face,  and  have 
had  opportunity  to  make  his  defense  concerning  the 
matter  laid  against  him.  (17)  When,  therefore,  they 
were  come  together  here,  I  made  no  delay,  but  on  the 
next  day  sat  down  on  the  judgment  seat,  and  commanded 
the  man  to  be  brought.  (18)  Concerning  whom,  when  the 
accusers  stood  up,  they  brought  no  charge  of  such  evil 
things  as  I  supposed;  (19)  but  had  certain  questions 
against  him  of  their  own  demon-worship,^  and  of  one 
Jesus,  who  was  dead,  whom  Paul  affirmed  to  be  alive. 
(20)  And  I,  being  perplexed  how  to  inquire  concerning 
these  things,  asked  whether  he  would  go  to  Jerusalem, 

*  Josephus,  Ant.  xx.  7.  3. 

^  For  a  justification  of  this  rendering,  see  remarks  under  xvii. 
18.  23. 


XXV.  14-22.]  ACTS.  247 

and  there  be  judged  of  these  matters.  (21)  But  when 
Paul  had  appealed  to  be  kept  for  the  decision  of  the  em- 
peror, I  commanded  him  to  be  kept  till  I  should  send  him 
to  ^Caesar.  From  this  speech  we  learn  the  exact  con- 
ception which  Festus  had  thus  far  formed  of  Paul's  case. 
He  had  discovered  that  Paul  contended  for  the  worship, 
with  divine  honors,  of  Jesus,  a  man  who  was  dead;  and 
as  this,  to  the  mind  of  a  Greek  or  a  Roman,  was  demon- 
worship,  he  so  styles  it  here.  He  supposed  that  the 
Jews,  like  other  nations,  were  accustomed  to  such  wor-' 
ship,  and  consequently  that  the  dispute  between  them 
and  Paul  was  over  the  jquestion  whether  they  should 
worship  Jesus  in  common  with  other  demons.  His  ig- 
norance of  the  religious  ideas  of  the  Jews,  and  his  still 
more  susprising  ignorance  about  Jesus,  whom  he  styles 
"  one  Jesus,"  as  though  he  had  never  heard  of  him  be- 
fore, shows  that,  like  most  politicians  in  that  day  as  in 
our  own,  he  had  made  no  study  of  religious  questions, 
Agrippa  must  have  smiled  at  his  ignorance. 

Ver.  22.  This  could  not  have  been  the  first  time 
that  Agrippa  had  heard  of  either  Paul  or  Jesus.  Being 
the  son  of  the  Herod  who  tried  to  suppress  the  Christian 
faith  by  killing  the  apostle  James,  and  imprisoning 
Peter  with  the  purj^ose  of  killing  him  ;  a  nephew  of  the 
Herod  who  had  killed  John  the  Bai)tist,  and  mocked 
Jesus  on  the  day  of  his  crucifixion  ;^and  a  great  grand- 
son of  the  one  who  attempted  to  kill  Jesus  in  his  cradle 
at  Bethlehem,  the  names  of  Jesus  and  his  apostles  had 
been  household  words  in  his  family  for  generations  back. 
The  name  of  Paul  was  doubtless  less  familiar  than  those 
of  the  original  apostles,  but  of  him  he  could  not  have 
been  ignorant.  He  would  not  have  deigned,  as  would 
none  of  his  ancestors,  to  visit  a   congregation    for   the 


248  COMMEXTARY.  [xxv.  22,  23. 

purpose  of  hearing  an  apostle  ;  but  in  the  privacy  of  the 
pretorium  in  which  Paul  was  a  prisoner  he  could  gratify 
his  curiosity  by  hearing  him,  and  at  the  same  time  ren- 
der some  assistance  to  Festus.  (22)  And  Agrippa  said 
unto  Festus,  I  also  could  wish  to  hear  the  man  myself. 
To-morrow,  saith  he,  thou  shalt  hear  him.  The  pro- 
posal pleased  Festus,  because  of  the  information  which 
he  hoped  to  obtain,  and  also,  perhaps,  because  it  pro- 
vided another  day's  entertainment  for  his  royal  guests. 

8.  Paul's  Case  Publicly  Stated,  23-27. 

Ver.  23.  Without  intending  to  honor  Paul,  but 
rather  to  suitably  entertain  his  royal  guests,  Festus  pro- 
vided for  Paul  the  most  magnificent  audience,  from  a 
worldly  point  of  view,  that  he  had  ever  been  permitted 
to  address.  (23)  So  on  the  morrow,  when  Agrippa  was 
come,  and  Bernice,  with  great  pomp,  and  they  were  en- 
tered into  the  place  of  hearing,  with  the  chief  captains, 
and  the  principal  men  of  the  city,  at  the  command  of 
Festus  Paul  was  brought  in.  If  the  officer  who  was 
sent  for  Paul  had  told  him  that  king  Agrippa  wanted 
him  brought  out  that  he  might  behead  him,  as  his  father 
had  beheaded  James,  he  would  probably  have  been  but 
little  surprised.  But  who  can  imagine  his  surprise  when 
told  that  this  scion  of  the  Herod  family  desired  to  hear 
him  preach  ?  Could  it  be  true  [that  the  gulf  between 
Christ  and  this  bloodiest  of  all  the  families  which  had 
stood  against  him  ^since  the  beginning,  was  so  nearly 
bridged]over  that  one  of  them,  and  he  a  king,  really  de- 
sired to  hear  the  gospel  f  This  question  must  have 
flashed  upon  Paul's  mind,  as  he  made  hasty  preparation 
to  appear  before  the  splendid  audience  awaiting  him. 
The  bare  possibility  of  winning  a  Herod  over  to  the 


XXV.  23-27.]  ACTS.  240 

taiisc  of  Christ  must  have  thrilled  his  soul,  and  stirred 
him  up  to  au  effort  worthy  of  the  auspicious  occasion. 
He  began  to  feel  almost  repaid  for  two  years  of  confine- 
ment, by  the  privilege  now  afforded  hira.  For  the  first 
time,  and  perhaps  the  last,  au  ajiostlc  stood  face  to  face 
with  a  Herod,  unless  James  had  enjoyed  that  privilege 
just  before  he  was  beheaded. 

Vv.  24-27.  The  proceedings  were  conducted  with 
all  the  dignity  and  formality  suited  to  so  august  an  au- 
dience. (24)  And  Festus  saith,  King  Agrippa,  and 
all  men  who  are  here  present  with  us,  ye  behold  this 
man,  about  whom  all  the  multitude  of  the  Jews  made  suit 
to  me,  both  at  Jerusalem  and  here,  crying  that  he  ought 
not  to  live  any  longer.  (25)  But  I  found  that  he  had 
committed  nothing  worthy  of  death  ;  and  as  he  himself 
appealed  to  the  emperor,  I  determined  to  send  him.  (26) 
Of  whom  I  have  no  certain  thing  to  write  unto  my  Lord. 
Wherefore  I  have  brought  him  forth  before  you,  and  es- 
pecially before  thee,  king  Agrippa,  that,  after  examina- 
tion had,  I  may  have  somewhat  to  write.  (27)  For  it 
seemeth  to  me  unreasonable,  in  sending  a  prisoner,  not 
withal  to  signify  the  charges  against  him.  This  was  a 
very  candid  confession,  before  a  brilliant  audience,  of  his 
heathenish  ignorance  concerning  a  faith  which  had  been 
propagated  in  every  part  of  the  Roman  empire,  and  had 
established  itself  even  in  the  imperial  city  of  Rome. 
There  were  probably  many  in  the  audience  besides 
Agrippa  who  were  surprised  at  such  ignorance ;  for  it  is 
scarcely  jjossible  that  tlie  "  chief  men  of  the  city  "  who 
were  present,  and  even  some  of  the  chiliarchs  under  his 
own  command,  did  not  understand  the  position  of  Paul. 
But  all  could  see  that  Festus  was  in  a  bad  predicament, 
in  having  held  as  a  prisoner  a  man  who  was  entitled  to 


^50  COMMEN TA R  Y.  [xxv.  24— xxvi.  3. 

his  liberty,  until,  now  that  he  had  appealed  to  Csesar, 
there  was  no  chance  to  get  rid  of  him. 

8.  Paul's  Defense  before    Agrippa,  xxvi.  |1-29. 
1.  his  introduction,  1-3. 

Vv.  1-3.  When  Festus  took  his  seat,  Agrippa  as- 
sumed control  of  the  proceedings,  (i)  And  Agrippa 
said  unto  Paul,  Thou  art  permitted  to  speak  for  thy- 
self. Then  Paul  stretched  forth  his  hand,  and  made 
his  defense : 

(2)  I  think  myself  happy,  king  Agrippa,  that  I  am 
to  make  my  defense  before  thee  this  day  touching  all 
the  things  whereof  I  am  accused  by  the  Jews  ;  (3)  es- 
pecially because  thou  art  expert  in  all  customs  and  ques- 
tions which  are  among  the  Jews :  wherefore  I  beseech 
thee  to  hear  me  patiently.  This  was  a  sincere  expression 
of  his  happiness  on  the  occasion.  He  was  happy  for  a 
reason  which  it  would  have  been  unwise  for  him  to  ex- 
press— the  hope  of  winning  the  young  king  to  Jesus; 
and  for  the  especial  reason,  that  now  he  had  an  oppor- 
tunity to  speak  before  one  who,  unlike  Lysias,  Felix, 
and  Festus,  being  familiar  with  Jewish  questions  and 
customs,  would  be  able  to  understand  the  case.  Agrippa 
had  been  brought  up  in  the  Jewish  faith,  and  on  this 
, account  had  been  entrusted  by  the  emperor  with  the 
oversight  of  religious  affairs  in  Jerusalem,  while  Judea 
was  under  Roman  procurators.^ 

2.  HIS  POSITION  TOWARD  JEWISH  PARTIES,  4-8. 
Yy,  4-8.     After  the  exordium  he  proceeds  to   de- 
clare that  he  had  been   reared  a  Pharisee,  and  that    he 
still  adhered  to  the  hope  peculiar  to  that  party.     (4)  My 
*  Josephus,  Ant,  kx.  i.  3, 


xxvi.  4-8.]  :ACTS.    \  251 

manner  of  life  then  from  my  youth  up,  which  was  from 
the  beginning  among  mine  own  nation,  and  at  Jerusalem, 
know  all  the  Jews  ;  (5)  having  knowledge  of  me  from  the 
first,  if  they  be  willing  to  testify,  how  that  after  the 
straitest  sect  of  our  religion  I  lived  a  Pharisee.  (6) 
And  now  I  stand  here  to  be  judged  for  the  hope  of  the 
promise  made  of  God  unto  our  fathers ;  (7)  unto  which 
promise  our  twelve  tribes,  earnestly  serving  God  night 
and  day,  hope  to  attain.  And  concerning  this  hope 
I  am  accused  by  the  Jews,  0  king !  (8)  Why  is  it 
judged  incredible  with  you,  if  God  doth  raise  the  dead? 
His  purpose  iu  these  statements  was  not  to  defend  him- 
self against  any  charge  ;  for  they  meet  no  charge  which 
hud  been  preferred ;  but  to  awaken  within  the  heart  of 
the  king  a  chord  of  sympathy  with  himself,  and  thus  to 
open  the  way  for  more  serious  impressions  which  he 
hoped  to  make.  To  this  ond  also  he  emphasized  the 
fact  that  he  had  spent  his  youth  among  his  own  nation, 
and  in  Jerusalem  ;  for,  had  he  spent  it  among  foreigners, 
he  might  have  been  indifferent  to  Jewish  hopes  and  in- 
terests. His  declaration  that  he  was  brought  into  judg- 
ment because  of  the  hope  of  the  resurrection,  is  to  be  un- 
derstood here,  as  in  xxiii.  6,  and  xxiv.  21.  He  means 
that  his  persecution  by  the  Sadducees,  the  real  authors  of 
his  present  imprisonment,  was  instigated  chiefly  by  his 
preaching  the  resurrection,  and  preaching  it  through  tlie 
risen  Jesus.  In  the  demand,  "Why  is  it  judged  incred- 
ible with  you,  if  God  doth  raise  the  dead?"  he  turned,  as 
the  plural  number  of  the  pronoun  shows,  from  Agrippa, 
whom  he  had  addressed  exclusively  before,  to  the  rest  of 
the  assembly,  who  were,  including  Festus,  unbelievers 
in  the  resurrection.  The  purpose  of  the  demand  was  to 
challenge  them  to  produce  in  their  own  minds  a  reason 


252  COMMENTARY.  [xxvi.  4-11. 

for  their  incredulity.  It  was  calculated  also  to  strengthen 
the  hold  on  Agrippa  which  he  may  have  gained  by  his 
previous  remarks. 

3.  HIS  FORMER  POSITION  TOWARD  JESUS,  9-11. 

Vv.  9-11.  Iq  the  next  division  of  the  speech,  Paul 
makes  another  and  more  obvious  attempt  to  enlist  the 
sympathy  of  the  king.  (9)  I  verily  thought  with  my- 
self, that  I  ought  to  do  many  things  contrary  to  the 
name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  (10)  And  this  I  also  did  in 
Jerusalem ;  and  I  gboth  shut  up  many  of  the  saints  in 
prisons,  having  received  authority  from  the  chief  priests, 
and  when  they  were  put  to'death,  I  gave  my  vote '  against 
them.  (11)  And  punishing  them  oftentimes  in  all  the 
synagogues,  ,1  strove  to  make  them  blaspheme ;  ^  and 
being  exceedingly  mad  against  them,  I  persecuted  them 
even  unto  foreign  cities.  This  brief  review  of  his  ca- 
reer as  a  persecutor,  which,  brief  as  it  is,  adds  several 
new  items  of  information  to  those  given  by  Luke  (viii. 
1-3;  ix.  1,  2),  must  have  caused  Agrippa  to  say  within 
himself:  Why,  the  man  was  once  on  the  same  side 
with  my  family,  and  he  showed  the  same  zeal  to  sup- 
press the  cause  of  the  Nazarene  as  did  my  father,  my 
uncle,  and  my  grandfather.  It  was  intended  to  have 
this  effect,  and  also  to  start  within  the  astonished  young 

^  This  remark  shows  that  Paul  had  a  vote  in  deciding  wlio 
among  the  victims  of  persecution  should  be  slain.  This  is  usu- 
ally construed  as  proving  that  he  was  a  member  of  the  Sanhe- 
drin ;  but  it  may  be  that  his  vote  was  cast  as  a  member  of  a 
commission  apjiointed  by  the  Sanhedrin  to  conduct  the  persecu- 
tion, and  that  he  had  reference  to  this  when  he  said  that  he  had 
received  "  authority  and  commission "  from  the  chief  priests 
(xxvi.  12.) 

^  Not  blaspheme  the  name  of  God,  which  he  would  not  de- 
sire them  to  do ;  but  the  name  of  Jesus. 


xxvi.  9-lS.]  ACTS.  253 

niau  the  question  :  How  did  this  jJersecutor  come  to  un- 
dergo so  great  a  change  ? 

4.  HIS  INTERVIEW  WITH  JESUS,  12-18. 

Vy.  12-18.  As  if  to  answer  the  question  which  he 
had  raised  in  the  mind  of  Agrippa,  Paul  next  gives  the 
cause  of  his  change  from  a  bloody  persecutor  to  an  ardent 
advocate  of  the  cause  of  Jesus.  (12)  Whereupon,  as  I 
journeyed  to  Damascus  with  the  authority  and  commis- 
sion of  the  chief  priests,  (13)  at  midday  0  king,  I  saw  on 
the  way  a  light  from  heaven,  above  the  brightness  of  the 
sun,  shining  round  about  me  and  them  that  journeyed 
with  me.  (14)  And  when  we  were  all  fallen  to  the  earth, 
I  heard  a  voice  saying  unto  me  in  the  Hebrew  language, 
Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?  It  is  hard  for 
thee  to  kick  against  the  goad.  (15)  And  I  said,  Who 
art  thou,  Lord  ?  And  the  Lord  said,  I  am  Jesus 
whom  thou  persecutest.  (16)  But  arise,  and  stand  up- 
on thy  feet ;  for  to  this  end  have  I  appeared  unto  thee, 
to  appoint  thee  a  minister  and  a  witness  both  of  the 
things  wherein  thou  hast  seen  me,  and  of  the  things 
wherein  I  will  appear  unto  thee  ;  (17)  delivering  thee 
from  the  people,  and  from  the  Gentiles,  unto  whom  I 
send  thee,  (18)  to  open  their  eyes,  that  they  may  turn 
from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  un- 
to God,  that  they  may  receive  remission  of  sins,  and  an 
inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanctified  by  faith  in 
me.  On  the  supposition  that  Paul  told  the  truth, 
Agrippa  must  have  seen  in  these  statements  enough  evi- 
dence of  the  resurrection  and  glorification  of  Jesus  to 
convince  him  as  well  as  Paul  ;  and  it  was  probably  new 
evidence  to  him  ;  for,  although  he  must  have  heard  long 
before  something  about  the   testimony  of  the    original 


254  COMMENTARY.  [xxvi.  12-20. 

witnesses  of  the  resurrection,  he  may  never  before  have 
heard  of  Paul's.  The  evidence  conveyed  with  it  proof 
also  that  Paul  had  been  like  an  uuruly  ox,  kicking  when 
goaded,  and  thereby  adding  to  his  own  pain  while  he 
persecuted  the  church;  and  this  had  doubtless  been  the 
experience  of  Agrippa's  ancestors ;  for  no  man  can  per- 
secute unto  death  unresisting  men  and  women  without 
many  pangs  of  regret,  even  when  he  thinks,  as  Paul  did, 
that  he  was  doing  God  a  service  {cf.  d)}  Furthermore, 
Agrippa  learned  from  this  portion  of  the  discourse  that 
Paul  had  a  commission  from  heaven,  even  from  the 
glorified  Jesus,  to  pursue  the  very  course  in  life  which 
he  was  now  pursuing. 

5.  WHY  HE  WAS  NOW  IN  BONDS,  19-27. 

Vv.  19,  20.  Having  received  such  a  commission, 
the  speaker  next  tells  the  king  how  he  had  executed  it. 
(19)  Wherefore,  0  king  Agrippa,  I  was  not  disobedient 
unto  the  heavenly  vision ;  (20)  but  declared  both  to 
them  of  Damascus  first,  and  at  Jerusalem,  and  through- 
out all  the  country  of  Judea,^  and  also  to  the  Gentiles, 
that  they  should  repent  and  turn  to  God,  doing  works 
worthy  of  repentance.  Did  not  the  king  respond  within 
himself.  You  are  right,  Paul ;  if  you  saw  what  you  say 

^  The  fact  that  he  thought  he  was  doing  God  service  must 
prevent  us  from  interpreting  the  remark  about  kicking  against 
the  goad  as  referring  to  the  goadings  of  conscience. 

^  By  construing  Paul's  language  here  as  if  he  were  aiming  to 
mention  the  countries  which  he  evangelized  in  the  order  in 
which  he  visited  them,  and  comparing  it  with  the  previous  re- 
cord in  Acts,  he  has  been  made  to  contradict  Luke.  But  he 
uses  no  expression  to  indicate  that  he  is  following  such  an  order. 
He  follows  the  order  of  place  instead  of  the  order  of  time,  and 
therefore  there  is  no  contradiction.  This  statement  is  to  be 
understood  in  the  light  of  the  preceding  narrative. 


xxvi.  19-24.]  ,ACT&.  255 

y.)u  did,  you  were  right  to  obey  the  heavenly  vision,  and 
uiir  people  have  done  wrong  in  opposing  you. 

Vv.  22,  23.  To  show  still  further  that  his  enemies 
were  in  the  wrong,  he  proceeds  to  toll  how  they  had 
acted.  (21)  For  this  cause  the  Jews  seized  me  in  the 
temple,  and  assayed  to  kill  me.  (22)  Having  therefore 
obtained  the  help  that  is  from  God,  I  stand  unto  this  day 
testifying  both  to  small  and  great,  saying  nothing  but 
what  the  prophets  and  Moses  did  say  should  come  ;  (23) 
how  that  the  Christ  must  suffer,  and  how  that  he  first 
by  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  should  proclaim  light 
both  to  the  people  and  to  the  Gentiles.  Unless  Paul 
was  insincere  in  these  statements  of  what  he  had  done 
and  taught,  Agrippa  had  no  alternative  but  to  acknowl- 
edge that  he  had  been  unjustly  dealt  with  by  the  Jews ; 
and  he  could  certainly  see  no  ground  for  doubting  Paul's 
sincerity.  Furthermore,  while  claiming  that  he  had 
taught  nothing  contrary  to  the  law  and  the  prophets, 
Paul  very  ingeniously  wove  into  his  argument  the  claim 
thatthe  essential  feature  of  his  preaching,  the  resurrec- 
tion of  the  Christ  from  the  dead,  was  itself  a  matter  of 
inspired  prediction.  Indeed,  he  shows  that  according  to 
jjrophecy  the  Christ  by  his  own  resurrection  was  to 
throw  clear  and  unmistakable  light  on  that  very  hope  of 
resurrection  which  had  been  the  glory  of  Israel,  and  es- 
pecially of  the  Pharisees,  All  of  this  was  calculated  to 
very  deeply  impress  the  mind  of  the  king. 

G.  xVN  INTERRUPTION,  AND  THE  CONCLUSION,  24-29. 

Ver.  24.  At  this  point  in  the  speech  Paul  was  in- 
terrupted by  Fe.stus.  In  the  ears  of  that  benighted 
heathen  the  speech  was  a  very  strange  one.  It  presented 
to  him  a  man   who  from  his  youth  had  lived  in  a  faith 


256  COMMENTARY.  [xxvi.  24,  25. 

whose  chief  tenet  was  belief  in  the  resurrection  of  the 
dead ;  who  had  once  persecuted  to  the  death  his  present 
friends,  but  had  been  led  to  change  his  -course  by  a 
vision  from  heaven  ;  and  who,  from  the  moment  of  that 
change,  had  been  enduring  stripes,  imprisonment,  and 
constant  exposure  to  death,  in  his  efforts  to  inspire 
others  with  his  own  hope  of  a  resurrection.  Such  a 
career,  on  the  part  of  a  man  of  great  learning  and  talent, 
he  could  not  reconcile  with  those  maxims  of  ease  or  of 
ambition  which  he  regarded  as  the  highest  rule  of  life. 
Moreover,  he  saw  this  strange  man,  when  called  to 
answer  the  accusations  of  his  enemies,  appear  to  forget 
himself  in  his  zeal  to  convert  his  judges.  There  was  a 
magnanimity  in  both  the  past  and  the  present  of  his 
career,  which  rose  above  the  comprehension  of  the  sen- 
suous politician,  and  which  he  knew  not  how  to  recon- 
cile with  soundness  of  mind.  He  seems  to  have  for- 
gotten the  proprieties  of  the  occasion,  so  deeply  was  he 
absorbed  in  listening  to  and  thinking  of  Paul.  (24)  And 
as  he  thus  made  his  defense,  Festus  saith  with  a  loud 
voice,  Paul,  thou  art  mad ;  thy  much  learning  doth  turn 
thee  to  madness.  How  darkened  the  mind  that  could 
regard  in  this  light  the  life  which  has  been  the  admiration 
of  enlightened  men,  both  believers  and  unbelievers,  in 
every  subsequent  age ! 

Ver.  25.  Paul  saw  from  the  tone  and  manner  of 
Festus,  as  well  as  from  the  admission  of  his  own  great 
learning,  that  the  charge  of  madness  was  not  intended  as 
an  insult,  but  was  rather  the  sudden  outburst  of  an  excited 
and  puzzled  brain;  so  his  answer  was  respectful,  and 
even  courteous.  (25)  But  Paul  saith,  I  am  not  mad, 
most  excellent  Festus ;  but  speak  forth  words  of  truth 
and  soberness.     This  reply  is  the    only  remark  in  the 


xxvi.  25-28.]  ACTS.  257 

whole  speech  expressly  intended  for  Festus.  Paul  knew 
before,  and  the  charge  of  madness  was  only  an  additional 
proof  of  it,  that  Festus  was  beyond  the  reach  of  the 
gospel ;  so  he  seems  to  have  had  no  thought  of  him  while 
he  was  reaching  after  king  Agrippa. 

Vv.  26,  27.  In  Agrippa  Paul  had  a  very  different 
hearer.  His  Jewish  education  enabled  him  to  appreciate 
Paul's  arguments,  and  to  see  repeated  in  that  noble  life 
of  self-sacrifice,  which  was  an  enigma  to  Festus,  the 
heroism  of  the  old  prophets.  As  Paul  turned  his  eyes 
away  from  Festus  and  fixed  them  again  on  the  king,  he 
saw  the  hold  which  he  had  obtained  on  the  latter,  and  he 
pressed  the  advantage  to  the  utmost.  (26)  For  the  king 
knoweth  of  these  things,  unto  whom  also  I  speak  freely  ; 
for  I  am  pursuaded  that  none  of  these  things  is  hidden 
from  him ;  for  this  hath  not  been  done  in  a  corner. 
(27)  King  Agrippa,  believest  thou  the  prophets  ?  I 
know  that  thou  believest.  He  could  speak  thus  confi- 
dently of  Agrippa's  knowledge  and  of  his  belief,  because 
he  knew  his  past  history.  He  knew  that  the  name  of 
Jesus  and  his  apostles  had  been  household  words  in  the 
family  of  Agrippa  for  generations,  and  that  the  questions 
between  them  and  the  unbelieving  Jews  had  been  dis- 
cussed in  his  presence  from  his  childhooil,  though  always 
from  the  view  of  the  enemies  of  the  faith.  The  remark 
that  "  this  hath  not  been  done  in  a  corner  "  was  intended 
for  Festus,  to  let  him  know  that  his  ignorance  of  the 
matter  was  no  proof  of  its  obscurity. 

Ver.  28.  With  matchless  skill  the  apostle  had 
brought  his  evidences  to  bear  upon  his  principal  hearer, 
and  with  the  boldness  which  only  those  orators  can  feel 
who  are  determined  upon  success,  he  pressed  this  per- 
sonal appeal  so  unexpectedly  that  the  king,  like  Festus, 


258  COMMENTARY.  [xxvi.  28-32. 

was  surprised  into  an  open  exjDression  of  his  thoughts. 
(28)  And  Agrippa  said  unto  Paul,  With  but  little 
pursuasion  thou  wouldst  fain  make  me  a  Christian.^ 
The  remark  shows  that  Agrippa  saw  very  clearly  the 
aim  of  the  apostle.  It  is  to  his  credit,  being  a  Herod, 
that  he  did  not  take  offense  at  an  obvious  attempt 
of  the  kind.  It  was  evidently  embarrassing  to  him  ; 
but  while  he  turned  it  off  in  this  cool  manner,  he 
evidently  regarded  Paul  with  a  respect  far  beyond  that 
ever  entertained  for  an  apostle  by  any  of  his  ancestors. 
This  was  a  great  gain  for  the  gosjjel ;  for  it  showed  that 
by  the  patient  endurance  of  persecution,  and  the  continu- 
ous pressing  of  the  gospel's  claims  upon  men,  the  later 
generations  of  its  bloodiest  foes  had  been  made  willing 
to  give  it  a  respectful  hearing. 

Ver.  29.  Paul's  reply  was  never  excelled  for  pro- 
priety of  diction  and  magnanimity  of  sentiment.  (29)  And 
Paul  said,  I  would  to  God,  that  whether  with  little,  or 
with  much,  not  thou  only,  but  also  all  that  hear  me  this 
day,  might  become  such  as  I  am,  except  these  bonds.  It 
was  not  till  he  came  to  express  a  good  wish  for  his  hearers 
and  his  jailers,  a  wishforthat  blessedness  which  he  himself 
enjoyed  in  Christ,  that  he  seems  to  have  thought  again 
of  himself,  and  to  have  remembered  that  he  was  in  chains, 

9.  The  Immediate  Result  of  the  Speech,  30-32. 

Yv.  30-32.  The  heart  that  beats  beneath  a  royal 
robe  is  too  deeply  absorbed  in  worldly  cares  to  often  or 

^  Except  for  the  nee<lless  introduction  of  the  obsolete  word 
"  fain,"  this  rendering  is  sustained  by  the  scholarship  of  this  age, 
the  expression  £v  bliyift^  on  which  the  whole  meaning  turns^ 
never  having  the  meaning  "  almost,"  which  is  given  it  in  the 
rendering  of  A.  V. 


xxvi.  30-32.]  ACTS.  259 

seriously  entertain  the  claims  of  the  religion  of  Jesus. 
A  corrupted  Christianity,  which  shifts  its  demands  to 
suit  the  rank  of  its  hearers,  has  been  acceptable  to  the 
great  men  of  the  nations,  because  it  helps  to  soothe  an 
aching  conscience,  and  it  is  often  useful  in  controlling 
the  ignorant  masses ;  but  men  of  rank  and  power  are 
seldom  willing  to  become  altogether  such  as  the  apostle 
Paul.  They  turn  away  from  a  close  pressure  of  the 
truth,  as  did  Paul's  royal  auditor.  (30)  And  the  king  rose 
up,  and  the  governor,  and  Bernice,  and  they  that  sat 
with  them:  (31)  and  when  they  had  withdrawn,  they 
spake  one  to  another,  saying,  This  man  doeth  nothing 
worthy  of  death  or  of  bonds.  (32)  And  Agrippa  said 
unto  Festus,  This  man  might  have  been  set  at  liberty  if 
he  had  not  appealed  unto  Caesar.  The  decision  of  those 
who  hail  not  heard  Paul  before,  that  he  was  not  worthy 
of  death,  or  even  of  bonds,  was  based  on  nothing  but 
the  speech  to  which  they  had  listened  ;  and  in  that  there 
was  no  attempt  to  state  the  charges,  or  to  make  a  formal 
reply  to  them.  The  decision  then  was  evidently  the  re- 
sult of  the  tone  of  honesty  and  sincerity  which  breathed 
all  through  the  speech,  and  which  could  not  be  feigned 
so  as  to  deceive  these  experienced  men  of  the  world. 
As  Agrippa  coincided  with  the  rest,  Festus  was  led  to 
regret  that  he  had  not  released  Paul  before  he  made  his 
appeal  to  Ctesar  ;  for  now  he  is  in  the  same  predicament 
precisely  as  when  he  first  stated  the  case  to  the  audience. 
He  was  under  the  painful  necessity  of  sending  to  the  em- 
peror a  prisoner,  the  charges  against  whom  he  was  not 
able  to  express  in  writing,  and  of  whom  he  would  be 
compelled  to  say,  that  he  had  done  nothing  worthy  of 
being  sent  at  all.  The  fact  that  he  did  send  such  a  state- 
ment   {rlogeum  was  its  oftioial  title)    must  have  much  to 


260  COMMENTARY.         [xxvi.  30— xxvii.  2. 

do  with  the  mildness  of  Paul's  imprisonment  when  he 
reached  Rome  (xxviii.  16,  30,  31),  and  with  his  subse- 
quent release. 


SEC.  III.     PAUL'S  VOYAGE  TO  ROME. 

(xixvii     1— :x:x:viii.  i6.) 

1.  From  C^sarea  to  Fair  Havens,  1-8. 

Vv.  1,  2.  Very  soon  after  the  speech  before  Agrippa, 
Paul  found  himself  about  to  begin  the  long  expected 
voyage  to  Rome.  The  answer  to  his  prayers  was  about 
to  be  realized  (Rom.  xv.  30-32),  and  the  promise  made 
by  night  in  the  prison  of  Claudius  Lysias,  that  he  should 
yet  testify  of  Jesus  in  Rome,  was  about  to  be  fulfilled. 
This  was  brought  about,  not  by  any  miraculous  interpo- 
sition, but  by  a  providential  combination  of  circum- 
stances. The  machinations  of  the  Jews,  the  avarice  of 
Felix,  the  indecision  of  Festus,  the  prudence  of  Paul, 
and  the  Roman  statute  for  the  protection  of  citizens,  had 
very  strangely,  yet  very  naturally,  combined  to  fulfill 
a  promise  of  God  made  in  answer  to  prayer,  (i)  And 
when  it  was  determined  that  he  should  sail  for  Italy, 
they  delivered  Paul  and  certain  other  prisoners  to  a  cen- 
turion named  Julius,  of  the  Augustan  band.  (2)  And 
embarking  in  a  ship  of  Adramyttium  which  was  about 
to  sail  unto  the  places  on  the  coast  of  Asia,  we  put  to  sea, 
Aristarchus,  a  Macedonian  of  Thessalonica,  being  with 
us.  Here  once  more  w^e  see  the  significant  "  we  ^'  ot 
Luke,  showing  that  he  was  in  Paul's  company  at  this 
time,  and  started  with  him  to  Rome.  As  he  had  come 
with  Paul  to  Jerusalem  (xxi.  17,  18),  the  probability  is 


xxvii.  1-3.]  ACTS.  201 

that  he  had  been  close  to  him  during  his  imprisonment. 
This  stay  of  more  than  two  years  in  Palestine  gave 
Luke  the  opportunity,  if  he  had  not  enjoyed  one  before, 
to  gather  up  all  the  information  contained  in  his  gospel ; 
and  it  is  highly  probable  that  he  also  composed  his 
gospel  at  this  interval  of  comparative  inactivity.^ 
Aristarchus  had  also  come  up  with  Paul  to  Jerusalem 
(xx.  4),  and  as  Paul,  in  an  epistle  written  after  his  ar- 
rival in  Rome,  styles  him  his  fellow-prisoner  (Col.  iv.  10), 
it  is  probable  that,  for  some  cause  not  mentioned  in  the 
text,  he  also  had  been  arrested  in  Judea,  and  was  sent  to 
Rome  on  an  apj)eal  to  Caesar.^ 

The  Augustan  band  (cohort),  in  which  Julius  was  a 
centurion,  was  so  called  in  honor  of  the  emperor.  As 
the  ship  was  of  Adramyttium,  a  city  on  the  western 
coast  of  Mysia,  it  was  homeward  bound  ;  and  it  was  not 
expected  to  convey  the  soldiers  and  their  prisoners  to 
Rome.  The  centurion  started  out  with  the  expectation, 
afterw^ard  realized,  of  falling  in  with  some  vessel  sailing 
to  Italy,  into  which  he  could  transfer  his  prisoners  and 
soldiers. 

Ver.  3.  Luke's  account  of  the  voyage  on  which 
Paul  and  his  company  are  now  embarked  is  the  only 

'If  tlie  book  of  Acts  was  completed,  as  I  have  argued  in  the 
Introduction  (xxiii. /".),  daring  the  Roman  imprisonment,  Luke's 
gospel,  which  certainly  was  written  earlier  (Acts  i.  1),  was  prob- 
aVjly  written  during  the  first  part  of  the  same  imprisonment,  or 
during  that  in  Ctcsarea ;  for  there  was  probably  no  earlier  interval 
in  which  he  had  the  leisure  and  the  opportunity  to  gather  all  the 
information  which  he  claims  in  his  introduction  (i.  1-4). 

''This  is  held  in  doubt  by  Alford  and  Gloag  (see  their  com- 
mentaries), who  suppose  that  tlie  term  "  fellow  prisoner"  is  used 
figuratively  when  applied  to  Aristarchus ;  but  there  is  no  fact 
noted  by  either  of  them  to  justify  the  figurative  interpretation  of 
the  term. 


262  -  COMMENTARY.  [xxvii.  3-6. 

narrative  of  the  kind  in  the  Bible,  and  it  is  full  of  in- 
terest from  beginning  to  end.  (3)  And  the  next  day  we 
touched  at  Sidon ;  and  Julius  treated  Paul  kindly,  and 
gave  him  leave  to  go  unto  his  friends  and  refresh  him- 
self. The  friends  found  in  Sidon  were  doubtless  breth- 
ren in  Christ ;  and  from  this  we  infer  that  Sidon,  as 
well  as  Tyre,  had  received  the  gospel  (c/.  xxi.  3-6). 
With  the  brethren  in  the  latter  place  Paul  had  spent  a 
week  on  his  sad  voyage  to  Jerusalem,  and  now,  on  his 
voyage  to  Rome,  he  is  cheered  by  the  hospitality  of  those 
in  the  former.  That  he  needed  refreshing  the  next  day 
after  he  had  set  sail  is  best  accounted  for  by  supposing 
that  he  was  subject  to  seasickness,  and  the  side  wind 
them  prevailing  (4),  which  caused  the  ship  to  rock,  ac- 
counts for  the  seasickness.  A  few  hours  on  shore  afforded 
great  relief,  although  it  was  but  temporary. 

Vv.  4-6.  The  vessel  continued  to  sail  northward 
for  a  time,  and  avoided  striking  out  into  the  open  sea. 
(4)  And  putting  to  sea  from  thence,  we  sailed  under  the 
lee  of  Cyprus,  because  the  winds  were  contrary.  (5)  And 
when  we  had  sailed  across  the  sea  which  is  off  Cilicia 
and  Pamphylia,  we  came  to  Myra,  a  city  of  Lycia.  (6) 
And  there  the  centurion  found  a  ship  of  Alexandria  sail- 
ing for  Italy ;  and  he  put  us  therein.  As  the  proper 
course  of  the  ship  was  westward,  the  lee  of  Cyprus  must 
have  been  its  eastern  end,  whereas  the  southern  coast 
would  have  been  chosen  had  the  wind  been  favorable. 
Another  reason  for  passing  into  the  waters  north  of 
Cyprus  and  south  of  Cilicia  may  have  been  that  sailors 
then  knew,  as  they  do  now,  that  a  sea  current  there 
runs  to  the  westward,  by  the  aid  of  which  they  could 
make  better  headway  in  tacking  against  a  contrary  wind. 
The  ship   from  Alexandria,  which   they  met  according 


sxvii.  4-S.]  ^C2\Sf.  2(J3 

to  their  expectation,  must  also  have  encountered  the 
prevailing  westerly  winds,  and  was  therefore  far  to  the 
east  of  the  direct  line  from  Alexandria  to  Italy.  She 
had  a  cargo  of  wheat  (38)  brought  from  the  granaries  of 
Egypt,  and  she  was  a  vessel  of  the  largest  size,  accommo- 
dating, after  her  new,passengers  were  taken  aboard,  two- 
hundred  and  seventy-six  souls,  including  the  crew  (37). 
Yv.  7,  8.  When  they  left  Myra  in  the  new  ship  the 
wind  was  still  contrary.  (7)  And  when  we  had  sailed 
slowly  many  days,  and  were  come  with  difRcuity  over 
against  Cnidus,  the  wind  not  further  suffering  us,  we 
sailed  under  the  lee  of  Crete,  over  against  Salmone  ;  (8) 
and  with  difficulty  coasting  along  it  we  came  unto  a  cer- 
tain place  called  Fair  Havens  ;  nigh  whereunto  was  the 
city  of  Lasea.  The  distance  from  Myra  to  the  Island  of 
Cmdus  is  only  about  one  hundred  and  thirty  miles, 
and  as  they  were  "many  days "  making  that  distance, 
the  sailing  must  have  been  slow  indeed.  From  that 
island  to  Cape  Salmone,  the  eastern  extremity  of  Crete, 
the  direction  is  nearly  due  south  ;  and  this  run  was  there- 
^  fore  made  at  a  right  angle  to  the  wind.  The  purpose  of 
this  tack  was  to  avoid  the  open  sea  west  of  Cnidus,  and 
also  to  take  advantage  of  the  lee  shore  of  Crete,  by 
which  they  could  make  about  one  hundred  miles  to- 
ward their  destination  before  reaching  the  open  sea 
again.  In  the  meantime  they  were  hoping  every  day 
for  a  change  of  the  wind.  The  difficulty  of  sail- 
ing along  the  coast  of  Crete  grew  out  of  the  unfavor- 
able course  of  the  wind,  which  constantly  threatened  to 
drive  them  out  to  sea,  and  compelled  them  to  make 
short  tacks,  as  the  headlands,  causing  counter  currents 
in  the  wind,  afforded  them  opportunity.  Good  soannin- 
ship  was  required   for  this,  as  it  had  been  all  the  way. 


264  COMMENTARY.  [xxvii.  7-12- 

Fair    Havens   was   about    halfway   the   length   of    the 
island. 

2.  Discussion  about  Continuing  the  Voyage,  9-12. 

Vv.  9-12.  The  voyage  had  thus  far  been  so  tedious 
that  winter  was  now  approachingj  and  it  was  deemed 
unsafe  to  attempt  to  complete  it  before  spring.  It  was  a 
question,  however,  whether  they  should  spend  the  winter 
where  they  were,  or  try  to  reach  a  more  desirable  win- 
ter haven.  (9)  And  when  much  time  was  spent,  and 
the  voyage  was  now  dangerous,  because  the  Fast  was 
now  already  gone  by,  Paul  admonished  them,  (10)  and 
said  unto  them,  Sirs,  I  perceive  that  the  voyage  will  be 
with  injury  and  much  loss,  not  only  of  the  lading  and 
the  ship,  but  also  of  our  lives.  (11)  But  the  centurion 
gave  more  heed  to  the  master  and  to  the  owner  of  the  ship, 
than  to  those  things  which  were  spoken  by  Paul.  (12) 
And  because  the  haven  was  not  commodious  to  winter  in, 
the  more  part  advised  to  put  to  sea  from  thence,  if  by 
any  means  they  could  reach  Phcenix,  and  winter  there  ; 
which  is  a  haven  of  Crete,  looking  north-east  and  south- 
east. The  fast  here  mentioned  is  the  Jewish  fast  on  the 
day  of  atonement,  which  was  the  tenth  day  of  the  seventh 
Jewish  month  (Lev.  xxiii.  26,  27),  and  it  occurs  usually 
within  our  month  of  October.  Paul's  advice  was  the  be- 
ginning of  an  activity  on  his  part  which  forms  the  chief 
matter  of  interest  in  the  remainder  of  the  voyage.  He 
spoke  from  experience,  and  not  from  inspiration  (see  un- 
der 21-26),  but  his  words,  as  we  shall  see,  came  very 
near  being  fulfilled.  It  was  quite  natural  that  the  cen- 
turion credited  the  judgment  of  the  sailing  master  and 
the  owner  of  the  ship,  rather  than  that  of  Paul,  of  whose 
nautical  experience  he  knew  nothing.     The    centurion 


xxvii.  0-20.]  ACTS.  205 

h;i(l  control  of  the  ship,  notwithstanding  the  presence  on 
board  of  the  owner,  because  he  had  taken  it  into  the 
service  of  the  emperor.  As  the  harbor  of  Phcjcnix  looked 
(seaward)  to  the  north-east  and  the  south-east,  being- 
open  in  those  directions,  and  closed  in  others,  it  was 
well  adapted  to  protecting  vessels  from  such  winds  as 
had  been  prevailing.  It  was  westward  of  Fair  Havens 
on  the  southern  coast  of  Crete,  and  only  thirty-four 
miles  distant. 

3.  A  Vain  Attempt  to  Reach  Phcenix,  13-20. 

Ver.  13.  The  harbor  called  Fair  Havens  lay  on 
the  east  side  of  Cape  Matala,  which  the  sailors  would 
have  to  double  in  order  to  reach  Phoenix,  and  tiiis  they 
could  not  do  in  the  face  of  a  west  or  northwest  wind  ;  so 
tliey  waited  for  the  wind  to  change.  (13)  And  when  the 
south  wind  blew  softly,  supposing  that  they  had  obtained 
their  purpose,  they  weighed  anchor  and  sailed  along 
Crete,  close  in  shore.  The  words,  "  thinking  they  bad 
gained  their  purpose,"  express  the  thought  that  they 
were  "  as  good  as  there "  when  they  started  with  this 
soft  wind  from  the  south,  the  very  wind  for  which  they 
had  waited.  It  was  a  deceitful  lull,  the  prelude  to  a 
fearful  change. 

Vv.  14-20.  The  ship  sailed  smoothly  for  awhile 
over  an  unruffled  sea,  with  its  boat  hanging  astern  ready 
for  the  debarkation  at  Phoenix.  (14)  But  after  no  long 
time  there  beat  down  from  it  a  tempestuous  wind, 
which  is  called  Euraquilo  ;  (15)  and  when  the  ship  was 
caught,  and  could  not  face  the  wind,  we  gave  way  to  it, 
and  were  driven.  (16)  And  running  under  the  lee  of 
a  small  island  called  Cauda,  we  were  able,  with  diffi- 
culty, to   secure  the   boat ;    (17)    and   when    they  had 


206  COMMENTARY.  [xxvii.  14-20. 

hoisted  it  up,  they  used  helps,  undergirding  the  ship  ; 
and,  fearing  lest  they  should  be  cast  upon  the  Syrtis, 
they  lowered  the  gear,  and  so  were  driven.  (i8)  And 
as  we  labored  exceedingly  with  the  storm,  the  next  day 
they  began  to  throw  the  freight  overboard  ;  (19)  and  the 
third  day  they  cast  out  with  their  own  hands  the.  tack- 
ling of  the  ship.  (20)  And  when  neither  sun  nor  stars 
shone  upon  us  for  many  days,  and  no  small  tempest  lay 
on  us,  all  hope  that  we  should  be  saved  was  now  taken 
away.  The  name  Euraquilo,  given  to  this  wind,  is 
equivalent  to  North-easter,  and  it  indicates  the  direction 
from  which  it  blew.  It  rushed  down  suddenly  from  the 
mountain  tops  of  Crete,  and  struck  the  vessel  when  she 
was  within  but  a  few  hours  of  her  destination.  Under 
the  lee  of  Cauda  the  water  was  not  so  rough,  and  this  en- 
abled the  sailors,  before  getting  out  into  the  rough  water 
again,  to  take  the  three  precautions  here  mentioned. 
They  got  the  boat  on  board  to  prevent  it  from  being 
dashed  to  pieces  against  the  side  of  the  vessel.  The  un- 
dergirding consisted  in  passing  cables  around  the  hull  of 
the  vessel,  and  drawing  them  tight  by  the  capstan,  so  as 
to  add  their  strength  to  that  of  the  vessel's  hull,  and  pre- 
vent her  timbers  from  parting.  The  gear,  or  rigging, 
was  lowered,  all  except  sail  sufficient  for  steering  the 
vessel,  in  order  to  impede  her  progress  toward  the  dreaded 
Syrtis,  the  great  banks  of  quicksand  near  the  coast  of 
'Africa,  toward  which  the  wind  was  driving  them.  The 
vessel  was  lightened  on  the  following  day  by  tossing 
overboard  a  part  of  the  freight,  that  in  consequence  of 
drawing  less  water,  the  waves  might  strike  her  sides 
with  less  force.  The  tackling  was  thrown  overboard  the 
next  day  for  the  same  purpose  ;  and  it  consisted  in  the 
spars,  planks,  cordage,  and  so  forth,  which  were  carried 


sxvii.  IJ-i'G.]  ACTS.  267 

for  the  purpose  of  making  repairs.  As  the  mariners  of 
the  age  were  dependent  on  the  sun  and  the  stars  exclu- 
sively for  a  knowledge  of  the  direction  in  which  they 
were  sailing,  wiien  they  had  seen  neither  for  many  days, 
and  the  storm  was  unabated,  they  had  no  definite  idea  as 
to  where  they  were,  and  hence  their  despair  of  being 
saved. 

Vv.  21-20.  The  owner  of  the  ship,  the  master,  the 
centurion,  and  all  on  board  had  formed  by  this  time  a 
better  estimate  of  Paul's  judgment,  and  they  were  pre- 
pared to  listen  with  respect  when  he  addressed  to  them 
the  following  speech  :  (21)  And  when  they  had  been  long 
without  food,  then  Paul  stood  forth  in  the  midst  of  them, 
and  said,  Sirs,  ye  should  have  hearkened  unto  me,  and 
not  have  set  sail  from  Crete,  and  have  gotten  this 
injury  and  loss.  (22)  And  now  I  exhort  you  to  be  of 
good  cheer  ;  for  there  shall  be  no  loss  of  life  among  you, 
but  only  of  the  ship.  (23)  for  there  stood  by  me  this 
night  an  angel  of  the  God  whose  I  am,  whom  also  I  serve, 
(24)  saying,  Fear  not,  Paul ;  thou  must  stand  before 
Caesar  ;  and  lo,  God  hath  granted  thee  all  them  that  sail 
with  thee.  (25)  Wherefore,  sirs,  be  of  good  cheer  ;  for 
I  believe  God,  that  it  shall  be  even  so  as  it  hath  been 
spoken  unto  me.  (26)  Howbeit  we  must  be  cast  upon  a 
certain  island.  Paul's  former  prediction  had  come  so 
near  being  fulfilled,  that  his  hearers  were  not  disposed  to 
be  captious  about  the  apparent  discrepancy  between  that 
and  what  he  now  says;  and  when  they  heard  him  now 
predict  their  safety  on  the  ground  of  a  direct  revelation 
from  heaven,  which  he  had  not  claimed  before,  they 
could  see  clearly  that  the  former  prediction  was  only  his 
judgment.  Moreover,  the  words  of  the  angel,  "  I  have 
granted  thee  all  them  that  sail  with  thee,"  conveyed  the 


268  COMMENTARY.  [xxvii.  21-32. 

idea  that  but  for  this  grant  they  all  would  have  perished, 
and  that  this  grant  was  made  in  answer  to  hi-s  prayers  in 
their  behalf.  Let  it  be  noted,  too,  that  foremost  of  all  in 
this  answer  to  Paul's  prayers  is  the  assurance  that  he 
"must  stand  before  Csesar;"  for  with  Paul  the  chief 
ground  of  wishing  to  escape  the  present  danger  was  that 
he  might  at  last  see  Rome,  answer  before  Csesar  as  he 
had  before  Agrippa,  and  then,  being  set  free,  preach  to 
the  Jews  and  the  Gentiles  in  the  "eternal  city." 

4.  The  Ship  at  Anchoe,  and  Patjl  ox  the 
Watch,  27-32. 

Vv.  27-32.  Notwithstanding  the  assurance  of  safety 
given  by  Paul,  the  peril  for  a  time  became  more  immi- 
nent. (27)  But  when  the  fourteenth  night  was  come,  as 
we  were  driven  to  and  fro  in  the  sea  of  Adria,  about  mid- 
night the  sailors  surmised  that  they  were  drawing  near  to 
some  country ;  (28)  and  they  sounded,  and  found  twenty 
fathoms  ;  and  after  a  little  space,  they  sounded  again, 
and  found  fifteen  fathoms.  (29)  And  fearing  lest  haply 
we  should  be  cast  ashore  on  rocky  ground,  they  let  go 
four  anchors  from  the  stern,  and  wished  for  day.  (30) 
And  as  the  sailors  were  seeking  to  flee  out  of  the  ship, 
and  had  lowered  the  boat  into  the  sea,  under  color  as 
though  they  would  lay  out  anchors  from  the  foreship, 
(31)  Paul  said  to  the  centurion  and  to  the  soldiers,  Ex- 
cept these  abide  in  the  ship,  ye  can  not  be  saved.  (32) 
Then  the  soldiers  cut  away  the  ropes  of  the  boat,  and  let 
her  fall  off.  The  ship  was  nearing  the  island  now  called 
Malta,  which  is  farther  south  than  that  portion  of  the 
sea  now  called  the  Adriatic,  so  this  nauie  covered  a 
greater  space  in  geography  then  than  now.  The  ground 
of  the  surmise  among  the  sailors,  'that  they  were  nearing 


xxvii.  27-32.]  ACTS.  269 

land,  must  have  been  the  roar  of  breakers  on  the  rocky 
shore,  at  first  so  indistinct  that  they  could  not  be  certain 
what  it  was.  The  sounding  tested  the  surmise,  the  rap- 
idly decreasing  depth  proving  that  land  was  near.  To 
run  ashore  in  such  a  storm,  and  on  such  a  coast,  would 
be  certain  destruction  to  the  ship  and  all  on  board.  To 
cast  out  all  the  anchors  at  hand  would  be  in  all  proba- 
bility to  wreck  the  vessel  where  she  was  by  attempting 
to  hold  her  stiff  against  the  rushing  waves,  even  if  the 
cables  did  not  part  and  leave  her  to  drift  upon  the  rocks. 
The  sailors  fel*  so  sure  that  the  one  fate  or  the  other 
would  befall  the  ship  before  morning,  that  they  resolved 
to  risk  their  own  lives  in  an  attempt  to  get  ashore,  not- 
withstanding the  darkness  and  the  rocks.  They  easily 
deceived  the  landsmen  by  their  pretense  of  putting  another 
anchor  out  at  the  bow,  where  it  could  not  possibly  be  of 
any  service  ;  but  Paul  was  too  much  of  a  seafaring  man  to 
be  so  deceived,  and  his  watchfulness  saved  the  lives  of 
all  the  passengers.  Although  he  had  assurance  from 
God,  which  he  implicitly  believed,  that  not  a  life  on 
board  would  be  lost,  he  remembered  that  the  promise 
was,  "  God  hath  granted  thee  all  them  that  sail  with 
thee,"  and  so  he  was  just  as  watchful  to  save  those  com- 
mitted to  his  care  as  if  no  promise  of  their  escape  had 
been  given.  Indeed  he  goes  so  far  as  to  tell  the  soldiers 
that  none  would  be  saved  if  the  sailors  were  allowed  to 
leave  the  ship.  This  was  because  none  but  skillful  sail- 
ors could  run  the  vessel  safe  ashore  in  such  a  wind  and 
on  such  a  coast.  From  this  we  gather  the  lesson,  that 
when  God  makes  us  any  promise  the  realization  of  which 
can  in  any  part  be  promoted  by  our  own  exertion,  such 
exertion  is  an  understood  condition  of  the  promise.  The 
rule  has  many  applications  in  matters  both  temporal  and 


270  COMMENTAR  Y.  [xxvii.  27-36. 

spiritual,  which  we  can  not  pause  to  specify.  In  decree- 
ing that  a  thing  shall  be  done,  or  predicting  that  it  will 
be  done,  God  anticipates  the  voluntary  actions  of  the 
parties  concerned,  and  interferes  directly  only  when  the 
purpose  would  otherwise  fall ;  and  in  our  dealings  with 
God  we  are  therefore  to  be  as  active  and  laborious  as 
though  we  had  no  promise  of  his  help,  and  yet  as  confi- 
dent of  help  as  though  all  were  to  be  done  by  God  alone. 

5.   Paul,  Comforts  the  Creav,  and  the  Ship 

IS   LiGHTEXEP,  33-38. 

Vv.  33-36.  When  the  treacherous  attempt  of  the 
sailors  had  been  frustrated,  there  seemed  to  be  nothing 
to  do  but  to  trust  to  the  anchors  and  wait  for  day.  The 
deck  was  swept  from  stem  to  stern  by  every  large  wave 
so  doubtless  the  hatchways  were  closed,  and  all  descended 
below.  In  moments  of  supreme  terror  like  this,  when 
the  stoutest  heart  is  apt  to  quail,  a  man  who  maintains 
complete  self-possession  is  instinctively  leaned  upon  by 
the  rest.  Paul  was  this  man.  By  outwitting  the  sailors 
he  had  impressed  both  them  and  the  soldiers  with  a  sense 
of  his  coolness  and  watchfulness,  ind  this  at  once  made 
him  the  leading  spirit  in  the  whole  ship's  company;  and 
now,  while  they  were  swinging  at  anchor,  and  had  noth- 
ing to  do  except  to  keep  themselves  from  rolling  about 
on  the  floor,  he  imparted  to  them  all  a  portion  of  his  own 
cheerfulness  and  strength.  (33)  And  while  the  day  was 
coming  on,  Paul  besought  them  to  take  some  food,  say- 
ing, This  day  is  the  fourteenth  day  that  ye  wait  and  con- 
tinue fasting,  having  taken  nothing.  (34)  Wherefore  I 
beseech  you  to  take  some  food,  for  this  is  for  your  safety  ; 
for  there  shall  not  a  hair  perish  from  the  head  of  any 
of  you.     (35)    And   when   he   had   said  this,  and   had 


xxvii.  33-38.]  ACTS.  271 

taken  bread,  he  gave  thanks  to  God  in  the  presence  of 
all,  and  he  brake  it,  and  began  to  eat.  (36)  Then  were 
they  all  of  good  cheer,  and  themselves  also  took  food. 
Paul  knew  that  there  is  nothing  so  cheering  to  tired  and 
hungry  men  as  a  good  meal ;  and  he  knew  that  in  order 
to  safely  reach  the  shore,  there  was  exertion  yet  to  be 
required  of  them  for  which  they  were  not  capable  in 
their  present  enfeebled  condition.  His  statement  that 
they  had  taken  no  food  for  fourteen  days,  if  taken  liter- 
ally, would  not  be  incredible  to  those  who  are  familiar 
with  the  famous  fast  of  forty  days  by  Dr.  Tanner,  of 
Philadelphia;  but  in  rightly  judging  it  we  are  tore- 
member  that  this  is  not  Luke's  statement  to  his  readers, 
but  Paul's  to  his  hearers ;  and  thai  if  they  had  taken 
any  food  at  all,  they  knew  how  to  interpret  his  remark 
accordingly.  "When  a  kind  hostess  in  these  days  asserts 
that  her  guests  have  eaten  nothing  at  all,  and  insists  that 
they  shall  take  a  little  more,  no  one  misunderstands  her, 
or  charges  her  with  misrepresentation.  It  is  a  colloquial 
exaggeration  which  is  common  and  admissible.  Those 
addressed  by  Paul  had  certainly  eaten  but  little ;  those 
of  them  who  were  much  given  to  seasickness  had  scarcely 
raised  their  heads  from  their  couches  during  the  time; 
and  those  who  had  suffered  the  least  had  not  been  able  to 
sit  down  in  quiet  to  eat.  Certainly  no  cooking  could 
have  been  done  on  the  vessel.  The  free  and  easy  way  in 
which  Paul  spoke  of  the  matter  was  in  itself  cheering, 
and  the  statement  that  the  eating  which  he  advised  was 
for  their  safety,  still  further  exhibits  his  conviction  that 
the  promised  escape  of  every  one  was  dependent  in  part 
on  their  own  exertions  {cf.  note  under  31). 

Vv.  37,  38.     The   assembling   of  the   whole   ship's 
company  at  the  time  of  this  meal  seems  to  have  suggested 


272  COMMENTARY,  [xxvii.  37-41. 

the  mention  of  the  number  of  persons  on  board ;  and 
perhaps  it  was  at  this  moment  that  a  count  was  first 
made^  in  order  that,  by  another  count  when  they  landed, 
it  should  be  known  whether  any  perished,  and  if  so,  how 
many.  (37)  And  we  were  in  all  in  the  ship  two  hundred 
three  score  and  sixteen  souls.  (38)  And  when  they  had 
eaten  enough,  they  lightened  the  ship,  throwing  out  the 
wheat  into  the  sea.  This  further  lightening  of  the  ship 
was  for  the  purpose  fof  enabling  her  to  run  nearer  in 
shore  than  she  otherwise  could,  ere  she  would  strike  bot- 
tom. It  was  no  easy  task  to  raise  the  sacks  of  grain  from 
the  hold  of  the  vessel  and  get  them  overboard  when  she 
was  pitching  and  rolling  as  she  must  have  been.  They 
needed  for  it  all  the  renewed  strength  imparted  by  the 
food  they  had  taken. 

6.  The  Ship  is  Stranded,  but  the  Men 
Escape,  39-44. 

Vv.  39-41.  All  was  now  done  that  could  be  until 
daylight  should  reveal  the  exact  nature  of  the  breakers 
ahead,  and  of  the  shore  beyond.  (39)  And  when  it  was 
day,  they  knew  not  the  land  ;  but  they  perceived  a  cer- 
tain bay  with  a  beach,  and  they  took  counsel  whether 
they  could  drive  the  ship  upon  it.  (40)  And  casting  off 
the  anchors,  they  left  them  in  the  sea,  at  the  same  time 
loosing  the  bands  of  the  rudders ;  and  hoisting  up  the 
foresail  to  the  wind,  they  made  for  the  beach.  (41)  But 
lighting  upon  a  place  where  two  seas  met,  they  ran  the 
vessel  aground ;  and  the  foreship  struck  and  remained 
unmovable,  but  the  stern  began  to  break  up  by  the  vio- 
lence,of  the  waves.  It  seems,  from  the  consultation  of  the 
sailors,  that  they  thought  it  barely  possible  to  so  guide 
the  ship  as  to   strike  the   only  smaoth  spot   on    the 


xxvii.  39-44.]  '  ACTS.  273 

shore  ;  aud  the  difficulty  was  occasioned  by  the  inter- 
vening rocks  between  -which  the  ship  must  be  safely 
steered.  This  revealed  to  the  passengers  the  wisdom  of 
Paul  in  keeping  the  sailors  on  board  when  they  tried  to 
leave  the  ship  the  night  before.  The  anchors  were  left 
in  the  sea,  both  because  they  would  be  of  no  further  use 
to  the  ship,  and  because,  if  ever  so  much  needed,  they 
could  not  have  been  recovered.  The  rudders  were  only 
paddle-rudders,  one  at  each  corner  of  the  stern,  and 
while  the  ship  was  riding  at  anchor  their  handles  were 
pressed  down  on  deck,  and  fastened  there,  so  that  their 
paddle  ends  would  be  lifted  out  of  the  water,  and  saved 
from  being  broken  by  the  waves.  These  were  now 
loosed  that  they  might  be  used  in  steering,  and  at  the 
same  moment  the  foresail  was  hoisted  to  give  the  vessel 
the  forward  movement  through  the  water  without  which 
the  rudders  would  have  little  effect.  By  skillful  use  of 
both  sail  and  rudders,  the  ship  was  steered  clear  of  the 
rocks,  and  landed  at  or  near  the  point  aimed  at.  The 
impetus  with  which  wind  and  wave  sent  her  forward 
caused  her  bow  to  plow  its  way  deep  into  the  sand,  so 
that  she  was  held  fast.  Two  heavy  waves  (in  sailor's 
phraseology,  "  two  seas"),  coming  from  different  direc- 
tions around  the  rocks,  alternately  struck  the  immovable 
stern  like  two  immense  hammers  in  the  hands  of  giants, 
and  the  timbers,  which  had  already  been  greatly  strained 
by  swinging  at  the  cables  all  night,  immediately  began 
to  give  way.  If  the  persons  on  board  were  to  escape, 
there  was  now  no  time  to  be  lost  in  leaving  the  vessel. 

Vv.  42-44.  At  this  critical  juncture  the  soldiers 
proved  themselves  as  unfeeling  as  the  sailors  had  in 
the  night.  They  could  now  see  plainly  that  they  owed 
their  lives  to  Paul,  yet  they  had  no  sense  of  gratitude 


274  COMMENTARY.       [xxvii.  42— xxviii.  2. 

for  it.  (42)  And  the  soldiers'  counsel  was  to  kill  the 
prisoners,  lest  any  of  them  should  swim  out  and  escape. 
(43)  But  the  centurion  desiring  to  save  Paul,  stayed 
them  from  their  purpose  ;  and  commanded  that  they  who 
could  swim  should  cast  themselves  overboard,  and  get 
first  to  the  land  :  (44)  and  the  rest,  some  on  planks,  and 
some  on  other  things  from  the  ship.  And  so  it  came  to 
pass  that  they  all  escaped  safe  to  the  land.  The  centu- 
rion, who  showed  himself  a  kind  and  discreet  man 
throughout  the  voyage,  seems  to  have  been  the  only 
soldier  on  board  who  had  the  right  sense  of  gratitude  to 
Paul  for  his  invaluable  services,  and  yet  for  the  other 
prisoners  he  seems  to  have  had  little  or  no  concern,  seeing 
that  it  was  for  Paul's  sake  [that  he  saved  them.  The 
necessity  for  swimming,  even  after  the  vessel  struck, 
grew  partly  out  of  the  fact  that  she  was  still  in  water  too 
deep  for  wading;  for  a  ship  of  her  size  draws  not  less 
than  eight  or  ten  feet  when  she  is  light ;  and  partly  be- 
cause large  waves  were  rolling  in  from  the  deep  and 
sweeping  high  up  on  the  shore.  It  was  no  easy  task  to 
reach  the  shore,  and  the  escape  of  all  was  truly  remark- 
able, the  more  so  in  that  it  had  been  predicted  by  Paul. 

7.  Paul  Escapes  Another  Peril,  xxviii.  1-6. 

Yv.  1,  2.  Fortunately  for  the  shipwrecked  voy- 
agers, they  struck  a  hospitable  shore,  and  one  that  was 
well  populated.  Doubtless  as  soon  as  daylight  appeared 
the  inhabitants  along  the  coast  saw  the  distressed  vessel, 
and  watched  with  eagerness  her  perilous  run  ashore. 
They  were  at  the  spot  in  crowds  when  the  vessel  stranded, 
(i)  And  when  we  were  escaped,  then  we  knew  that  the 
island  was  called  Melita.  (2)  And  the  barbarians  showed 
us  no  common  kindness;  for  they  kindled  afire,  and  re- 


Txviii.  1-6.]  ACTS.  275 

ceivel  us  all  because  of  the  present  rain,  and  because  of  the 
cold.  They  knew  the  name  of  the  island  (now  Malta)  by 
Nvhat  the  islanders  told  them.  Luke  calls  the  islanders 
barbarians  because  thus  the  Greeks  and  Romans  styled 
all  people  except  themselves.  The  term  bore  less  of  re- 
proach then  than  it  does  with  us.  These  barbarians  were 
very  far  from  being  savages.  It  was  with  no  little  labor 
that  they  kindled  a  fire  in  the  rain,  and  a  fire  so  large 
that  two  hundred  and  seventy-six  men  could  get  near  it. 
These  men  were  already  drenched  from  swimming  ashore, 
and  the  rain  that  was  falling  prevented  them  from  get- 
ting dry  ;  but  still  the  warmth  of  a  large  brush  fire  made 
them  much  less  uncomfortable.  The  rain  was  one  of 
those  chilling  October  or  November  drizzles,  which  are 
sometimes  more  disagreeable  than  a  colder  rain  in  the 
middle  of  winter. 

Vv.  3-6.  Paul  was  not  a  preacher  afler  the  style  of 
a  modern  clergyman,  who  is  particular  not  to  soil  his 
hands  with  menial  labor,  and  who  expects  everybody  to 
be  ready  to  serve  him,  while  he  preserves  his  dignity  and 
looks  on.  He  did  not  stand  by  the  fire  which  others 
had  kindled,  and  allow  others  without  his  help  to  keep 
it  burning;  but  he  took  a  hand  in  the  disagreeable  job 
with  the  barbarians  and  the  sailors.  (3)  But  when  Paul 
had  gathered  a  bundle  of  sticks,  and  laid  them  on  the 
fire,  a  viper  came  out  by  reason  of  the  heat,  and  fastened 
on  his  hand.  (4)  And  when  the  barbarians  saw  the 
beast  hanging  from  his  hand,  they  said  one  to  another, 
No  doubt  this  man  is  a  murderer,  whom,  though  he  has 
escaped  from  the  sea,  yet  Justice  hath  not  suffered  to 
live.  (5)  Howbeit  he  shook  off  the  beast  into  the  fire, 
and  took  no  harm.  (6)  But  they  expected  that  he  would 
have  swollen,  or  fallen  down  dead  suddenly ;.  but  when 


276  COMlfENTARY.  [xxviii.  3-10. 

they  were  long  in  expectation,  and  beheld  nothing  amiss 
come  to  him,  they  changed  their  minds,  and  said  that  he 
was  a  god.  This  is  Lystra  reversed.  There  Paul  was 
first  taken  for  a  god,  and  afterward  stoned.  Here  he 
was  first  taken  for  a  murderer,  and  then  for  a  god.  The 
bad  opinion  of  him  was  not  based  on  the  naked  fact  that 
he  had  been  bitten  by  the  viper ;  for  they  knew  that 
good  men  were  liable  to  that ;  but  by  the  occurrence  of 
this  fatality  in  so  close  connection  with  his  escape  from 
an  apparently  hopeless  shipwreck.  If  they  had  discov- 
ered that  he  was  a  prisoner,  this  contributed  to  their 
conclusion.  They  ascribed  his  punishment  to  the  god- 
dess of  justice,  [ocxYi)  who  appeared  to  be  determined 
that  he  should  not  escape  her  hands.  But  when  they 
discovered  that  the  bite,  the  fatality  of  which  they  knew 
so  well,  had  no  effect  on  him,  their  conclusion  that  he 
was  a  god  was  as  natural  to  them  as  the  previous  con- 
clusion that  he  was  a  murderer.  The  miracle  was 
wrought  by  the  direct  power  of  God,  and  it  was  intended 
to  make  the  very  impression  on  the  islanders  that  it  did 
— a  temporary  impression  which  must  have  been  followed 
before  many  days  by  a  true  conception  of  Paul's  person 
and  office  ."^ 

8.  Paul's  Usefulness  in  Melita,  7-10. 

Vv.  7-10.  The  voyagers  were  fortunate  in  the  place 
at  which  they  landed,  not  only  in  its  being  inhabited, 
but  in  the  character  of  its  principal  inhabitants.  (7) 
Now  in  the  neighborhood  of   that  place  were  lands  be- 

^For  the  nautical  information  connected  with  this  voyage, 
not  found  in  the  text,  I  am  largely  indebted  to  Mr.  Howson's  ex- 
haustive treatise  on  the  subject  in  Life  and  Epistles  of  Paul,  vol. 
ii.  chap,  xxiii. 


xxviii.  7-10.]  ACTS.  277 

longing  to  the  chief  of  the  island  name  J  Pub!i::3,  \/liO 
received  us,  and  entertained  us  three  days  courteously. 
(8)  And  it  was  so,  that  the  father  of  Publiuslay  sick  of 
fever  and  dysentery ;  unto  whom  Paul  entered  in,  and 
prayed,  and  laying  his  hands  on  him  healed  him.  (9) 
And  when  this  was  done,  the  rest  also  who  had  diseases 
in  the  island  came  and  were  cured :  (10)  who  also  hon- 
ored us  with  many  honors  :  and  when  we  sailed,  they 
put  on  board  such  things  as  we  needed.  The  title  here 
given  to  Publius,  "  the  chief  man  of  the  island/'  is  am- 
biguous ;  but  the  Greek  words  so  translated  (o  TzpiTjvo^  tYj:; 
vr^aoo)  have  been  found  on  inscriptions  in  the  island,  as 
the  title  of  the  Roman  ruler,  and  this  justifies  the  con- 
clusion that  Publius  held  this  office.  If  by  "  us,"  in 
verse  7,  Luke  means  the  whole  ship's  company,  which  is 
the  most  natural  reference,  the  hospitality  of  Publius  in 
entertaining  with  food  and  lodging  two  hundred  and  sev- 
enty-six men  was  worthy  of  all  commendation.  Per- 
haps he  placed  some  of  them  in  the  houses  of  his  tenants 
on  the  estate,  but  they  were  provided  for  at  his  expense 
for  three  days,  after  which  some  other  arrangement 
seems  to  have  been  made.  He  was  Wcsll  rewarded  how- 
ever by  Paul  in  the  healing  of  his  father,  whose  disease, 
even  in  our  own  days  of  medical  skill,  is  considered  a 
very  dangerous  one.  It  is  probable,  too,  that  the  ship's 
company  found  accommodations  in  the  homes  of  the 
others  in  the  island  whose  sick  were  healed  in  the  same 
manner.  In  this  way  Paul,  who  at  the  beginning  of  the 
voyage  was  one  of  the  most  unobserved  of  all  the  pas- 
sengers, at  last  became  the  mainstay  of  the  whole  com- 
pany, and  exercised  an  ascendancy  over  every  mind.  It 
was  gratitude  to  him  that  caused  the  islanders  at  last  t« 
supply  the  ship's  company  with  all  the  comforts  needed 


278  COMMENTARY.  [xxviii.  10-14 

for  the  remainder  of  their  voyage.  By  this  time  the 
soldiers  were  doubtless  glad  that  they  had  not  killed  him 
before  they  left  the  ship  (xxvii.  42). 

We  can  not  supj^ese  that  Paul  healed  diseases  among 
the  islanders  so  generally  without  mentioning  the  name 
of  Jesus.  On  the  contrary,  though  Luke  makes  no  men- 
tion of  it,  we  must  think  that  from  the  palace  of  the 
governor  to  the  remotest  hamlet  of  the  island  the  name 
and  power  of  Jesus  were  fully  made  known  during  the 
three  months  of  his  stay. 

9.  The  Journey  Completed,  11-16. 

Vv.  11-14.  It  was  the  winter  months  which  were 
spent  in  the  island  ;  and  so  soon  as  navigation  was  con- 
sidered safe  in  the  early  spring,  the  voyage  was  resumed, 
(ii)  And  after  three  months  we  set  sail  in  a  ship  of 
Alexandria,  which  had  wintered  in  the  island,  whose 
sign  was  The  Twin  Brothers.  (12)  And  touching  at 
Syracuse,  we  tarried  there  three  days.  (13)  And  from 
thence  we  made  a  circuit,  and  arrived  at  Rhegium  :  and 
after  one  day  a  south  wind  sprang  up,  and  on  the  second 
day  we  came  to  Puteoli ;  (14)  where  we  found  brethren, 
and  were  intreated  to  tarry  with  them  seven  days  ;  and 
so  we  came  to  Rome.  This  ship  of  Alexandria,  like  the 
one  that  had  been  wrecked,  was  doubtless  loaded  with 
wheat  for  the  Italian  market ;  and  it  had  been  checked 
in  its  course  the  previous  fall  by  the  same  tempest  which 
had  wrecked  the  other  ship.  It  was  kept  in  port  three 
months  or  more  when  it  was  within  three  or  four  days' 
sail  of  its  destination.  The  Twin  Brothers,  whose 
wooden  images,  standing  at  the  bow  or  the  stern,  consti- 
tuted her  sign,  or,  as  we  would  say  in  modern  phraseol- 
ogy, her  name,  were  Castor  and  Pollux,  the  two  fabled 


xxviii.  14-16.]  ACTS.  279 

sons  of  Jupiter  who  were  the  special  guardians  of  sailors. 
Thus  the  emblems  of  heathenism  were  kept  constantly 
before  the  eyes  of  the  early  Christians.  The  stay  at 
Syracuse,  the  famous  city  of  ancient  Sicily,  may  have 
been  occasioned  either  by  contrary  winds,  or  by  the  dis- 
charge of  freight.  It  is  distant  from  Malta  something 
less  than  one  hundred  miles,  and  the  run  was  made  in 
less  than  twenty-fonr  hours.  Rhegium,  the  next  port 
at  which  they  touched,  was  at  the  southern  extremity  of 
Italy,  and  not  far  from  the  mouth  of  the  straits  of 
Massena.  It  is  now  called  Reggio.  The  circuitous 
sail  in  reaching  it  was  doubtless  the  result  of  unfavorable 
winds.  The  south  wind  which  sprang  up  after  they  left 
Rhegium  was  directly  in  their  favor,  and  the  run  of 
one  hundred  and  eighty  miles  thence  to  Puteoli,  in  a 
single  day,  was  a  swift  one.  Puteoli,  the  ruins  of  which 
are  still  visited  by  travelers,  was  situated  on  the  northern 
shore  of  the  bay  to  which  Naples  afterward  gave  its 
name.  The  latter  city,  which  was  then  a  mere  hamlet, 
superseded  Puteoli  in  the  course  of  time  as  the  seaport 
of  that  portion  of  Italy,  while  the  latter  gradually  sank 
into  decay.  That  Paul  found  brethren  in  Puteoli,  is 
proof  of  the  extent  to  which  the  gospel  had  already  been 
preached  in  Italy  ;  and  that  he  obtained  permission  from 
the  centurion  to  remain  with  them  seven  days,  is  proof 
additional  of  the  respect  with  which  Julius  had  come  to 
regard  him.  The  seven  days  included  a  Lord's  day,  in 
which  Paul  and  his  companions  had  the  privilege  of 
breaking  the  loaf  with  these  newly  found  brethren. 

Vv.  15,  16.  The  journey  from  Puteoli  was  over  a 
paved  road,  which  was  a  branch  of  the  famous  Appian 
Way  that  led  from  Rome  to  Brundusium,  the  modern 
Brindisi.     The   space  is  now   traversed  by  a  railroad. 


280  COMMENTARY.  |[xxviii.  15, 16. 

This  main  road  was  reached  at  Capua,  thirty-three  miles 
from  Puteoli,  whence  the  route  lay  along  this  road  to 
Rome,  the  whole  distance  by  land  being  about  one  hun- 
dred and  fifty  miles.  The  reason  that  the  ship  had 
landed  so  far  from  Rome,  was  that  Puteoli  had  the  near- 
est harbor  that  would  admit  vessels  of  the  deepest  draft. 
The  delay  at  Puteoli.  and  the  long  journey  by  land,  had 
given  time  for  the  brethren  in  Rome  to  hear  that  Paul 
was  coming.  (15)  And  from  thence  the  brethren,  when 
they  heard  of  us,  came  to  meet  us  as  far  as  the  Market 
of  Appius,  and  the  Three  Taverns :  whom  when  Paul 
saw,  he  thanked  God,  and  took  courage.  (16)  And  when 
we  entered  into  Rome,  Paul  was  suffered  to  abide  by 
himself  with  the  soldier  who  guarded  him.  The  market 
(more  properly  forum)  of  Appius,  was  a  town  on  the 
Appian  Way  forty-three  miles  from  Rome ;  and  the 
place  called  Three  Taverns  was  a  village  ten  miles  far- 
ther toward  the  city.  The  group  of  brethren  who  met 
Paul  at  the  latter  place  started  later,  no  doubt,  than  the 
others.  That  Paul  thanked  God  and  took  courage  when 
he  met  them,  implies  that  he  had  until  then  experienced 
some  fear  as  to  his  reception  by  these  jbrethren.  As  he 
was  coming  to  this  jiroud  city  a  prisoner  in  chains,  they 
might  have  felt  that  the  reputation  of  the  cause  in  Rome 
forbade  their  recognition  of  him  as  one  of  their  great 
men;  and  if  the  brethren  in  the  city  should  thus  stand 
aloof  from  him,  it  would  be  vain  to  hope  to  accomplish 
any  great  good  there  while  a  prisoner,  or  even  after  se- 
curing his  freedom.  When,  however,  the  brethren 
showed  themselves  so  true  in  Christian  sympathy  as  to 
ignore  time-serving  considerations,  and  to  come  as 
though  they  were  meeting  a  man  who  would  reflect  hon- 
or upon  them,  all  gloomy  doubts  were  dissipated,  and 


xxviii.  15-10.]  ACTS.  281 

courageous  hope  took  their  place.  Among  those  breth- 
ren we  may  suppose  that  he  recognized  some,  at  least,  of 
that  noble  baud  whose  names  he  had  mentioned  with 
high  encomiums  in  the  last  chapter  of  his  epistle  to  their 
church,  and  who  had  passed  with  him  through  trials  of 
the  faith  in  years  gone  by.  He  had  a  thrilling  story  to 
tell  these  fliithful  brethren  abont  his  voyage,  and  it  was  cer- 
tainly a  matter  of  delight  to  them  to  find  that,  although  he 
was  a  prisoner,  he  had  won  the  esteem  and  coufidence  of  the 
centurion  who  had  him  in  charge,  and  as  we  may  safely 
suppose,  of  all  the  soldiers  who  had  once  thought  of 
killing  him  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  his  escape.  They 
witnessed,  too,  on  the  arrival  in  Rome,  the  extension  to 
him  of  the  further  and  unusual  courtesy  of  permitting 
him,  instead  of  being  placed  in  the  common  military  pri- 
son, to  dwell  by  himself,  with  no  restraint  other  than  that 
of  having  a  single  soldier  to  guard  him.  This  favor  was 
the  result  of  the  representation  made  by  Festus,  that  he 
had  done  nothing  worthy  of  death  or  of  bonds,  and  also 
of  the  representation  made  by  the  centurion  Julius  of  his 
conduct  on  the  journey.  Like  Joseph  when  a  slave  in 
the  house  of  Potiphar,  and  a  prisoner  in  the  king's 
prison,  he  had  so  conducted  himself  as  to  win  the  im- 
plicit confidence  of  those  who  had  him  in  charge,  from 
the  beginning  to  the  end  of  his  confinement.  So  it  must 
ever  be  with  him  who  maintains  under  all  circumstances 
a  strictly  Christian  deportment. 


282  COMMENTARY.  [xxviii.  17-20. 

SEC.  IV.    PAUL'S  PRISON  LABORS  IN  ROME, 

(xxviii.  lT-31.) 

1.  He  Obtains  an  Interview  with  the  Leading 
Jews,  17-22. 

Vv.  17-20.  Paul  had  now  completed  a  journey  which 
he  had  contemplated  for  many  years,  and  he  had  met 
with  some  brethren  whom  he  had  requested  more  than 
three  years  before  to  strive  together  with  him  in  prayer 
to  God,  that  he  might  come  to  them  with  joy,  and  with 
them  find  rest  (Rom  xv.  24 ;  30-32).  But  how  different 
his  entrance  into  the  imperial  city  from  that  for  which 
he  had  hoped.  Instead  of  coming  a  free  man,  to  appear 
in  the  synagogue  and  the  forum  for  the  name  of  Jesus, 
he  had  been  marched  in  between  files  of  soldiers,  pre- 
sented to  the  authorities  as  a  prisoner  sent  up  for  trial, 
and  was  being  kept  under  a  military  guard  night  and 
day.  How  dismal  his  prospect  for  preaching  the  gospel 
to  those  who  were  in  Rome  !  If  Paul  the  tent- maker, 
a  stranger  and  penniless,  had  commenced  his  labors  in 
the  commercial  emporium  of  Greece,  "  in  weakness  and 
in  fear  and  in  much  trembling "  (I.  Cor.  ii.  3),  how 
must  Paul  the  chained  prisoner  have  felt  when  he  began 
a  similar  work  in  the  capital  city  of  the  whole  world  ? 
The  prospect  was  sufficiently  disheartening ;  but  he  had 
one  ground  of  encouragement  which  he  did  not  enjoy  in 
Corinth  ;  he  was  supported  by  a  band  of  tried  lieutenants, 
both  men  and  women,  as  brave  and  true  as  ever  executed 
the  orders  of  a  great  leader ;  and  every  one  of  these  was 
a  hand  which  he  could  stretch  out  to  lead  interested 
hearers  to  his  place  cf  confinement.  He  made  no  delay 
in  beginning  his  work,  and  his  first   movement  was  to 


xxviii.  17-22.]  ACTS,  283 

call  the  principal  unbelieving  Jews  of  the  city  to  a  fra- 
ternal interview.  (17)  And  it  came  to  pass,  that  after 
three  days  he  called  together  those  that  were  the  chief 
of  the  Jews  ;  and  when  they  were  come  together,  he  said 
to  them,  I,  brethren,  though  I  had  done  nothing  against 
the  people,  or  the  customs  of  our  fathers,  yet  was  deliv-, 
ered  prisoner  from  Jerusalem  into  the  hands  of  the  Ro- 
mans ;  (18)  who,  when  they  had  examined  me,  desired  to 
set  me  at  liberty,  because  there  was  no  cause  of  death  in 
me.  (19)  But  when  the  Jews  spake  against  it,  I  was 
constrained  to  appeal  unto  Caesar  ;  not  that  I  had  aught 
to  accuse  my  nation  of.  (20)  For  this  cause  therefore  did 
I  intreat  you  to  see  and  to  speak  with  me  ;  for  because 
of  the  hope  of  Israel  I  am  bound  with  this  chain.  Paul's 
wisdom  in  seeking  this  interview,  and  iu  making  these 
particular  statements,  is  quite  obvious.  It  would  natur- 
ally have  been  supposed,  from  the  fact  that  he  was  ac- 
cused by  his  own  countrymen  in  Judea,  that  he  had 
committed  some  crime;  and  from  his  apjieal  to  Cresar, 
that  he  intended  to  prefer  grave  charges  against  his  ac- 
cusers. The  statement  that  the  Romans  would  have  re- 
leased him  but  for  the  opposition  of  the  Jews,  was  much 
in  his  favor  on  the  first  point ;  and  on  the  latter,  his  own 
disavowal  was  sufficient.  His  closing  remark,  that  it 
was  for  the  hope  of  Israel  that  he  was  bound  with  a 
chain,  which  is  to  be  understood  in  the  same  sense  as 
when  made  on  two  previous  occasions  (xxiii.  6  ;  xxvi. 
67),  was  calculated  to  enlist  their  sympathies,  because  it 
was  no  uncommon  thing  for  Jews  to  be  persecuted,  and 
because  it  gave  them  assurance  that  he  still  cherished  the 
fondest  hope  of  the  pious  Jew. 

Vv.  21,  22.     The  response  of  the  Jews  was  candid 
and  becoming.     (21)  And  they  said  unto  him,  We  nei- 


284  COMMENTARY,  [xxviii.  21-24. 

ther  received  letters  from  Judea  concerning  thee,  nor  did 
any  of  the  brethren  come  hither  and  report  or  speak  any 
harm  of  thee.  (22)  But  we  desire  to  hear  of  thee  what 
thou  thinkest :  for  as  concerning  this  sect,  it  is  known 
to  us  that  everywhere  it  is  spoken  against.  It  is  rather 
surprising  that  they  had  heard  nothing  from  Judea  con- 
cerning Paul ;  but  it  often  happens  that  events  pass 
almost  unnoticed  by  a  living  generation,  which  become 
afterward  the  important  events  of  history.  By  hearing 
nothing  they  had  heard  "  no  harm  "  of  him,  though  they 
had  heard  much  prejudicial  to  the  "sect"  which  he  re- 
represented.  If  they  had  acted  as  many  do  now,  they 
would  have  refused  to  hear  him  at  all  because  of  the  evil 
report  of  his  sect :  but  the  fact  that  the  latter  was  every- 
where spoken  against  was  the  very  reason  they  wished 
to  hear  Paul  in  reference  to  it.  Perhaps  they  had  them- 
selves refused  to  hear  the  preachers  that  preceded  Paul 
in  Rome  ;  but  the  courteous  manner  in  which  he  had  in- 
vited them  to  his  lodging,  and  the  conciliatory  manner 
of  his  address  to  them,  had  won  them  to  a  better  feeling. 
Had  they  always  felt  as  they  now  did,  they  would  doubt- 
less have  heard  of  him  before,  and  most  favorably, 
through  the  epistle  which  he  had  written  to  the  church 
in  their  city  more  than  three  years  previous. 

2.  A  Second  Interview  with  the  Jews,  23-28. 

Vv.  23,  24.  Before  the  Jews  took  leave  of  Paul 
they  made  an  appointment  to  come  again  and  give  him 
a  formal  hearing.  (23)  And  when  they  had  appointed 
him  a  day,  they  came  to  him  into  his  lodging  in  great 
number :  to  whom  he  expounded  the  matter,  testifying 
the  kingdom  of  God,  and  persuading  them  concerning 
Jesus,  both  from  the  law  of  Moses  and  from  the  prophets, 


xxviii.  24-28.]  ACTS,  285 

from  morning  till  evening.  (24)  And  some  believed  the 
things  which  were  spoken,  and  some  disbelieved.  The 
discourse  was  a  long  one,  occupying  sufficient  time  to 
place  the  whole  subject  before  them,  and  to  support 
every  sepo.rate  proposition  with  adequate  evidence  ;  but 
the  result  was  the  one  always  experienced  in  a  cougrega-, 
tiou  of  Jews.  , 

Vv.  25-28.  From  what  follows  we  have  reason  to 
suppose  that  the  disbelieving  party  gave  some  unbecom- 
ing expression  to  their  sentiments.  (25)  And  when  they 
agreed  not  among  themselves,  they  departed,  after  that 
Paul  had  spoken  one  word,  Well  spake  the  Holy  Spirit 
by  Isaiah  the  prophet  unto  your  fathers,  (26)  saying. 

Go  thou  unto  this  people  and  say. 

By  hearing  ye  shall  hear,  and  shall  in  no  wise  un- 
derstand ; 

And  seeing  ye  shall  see,  and  shall  in  nowise  per- 
ceive : 
(27)  For  this  people's  heart  is  waxed  gross, 

And  their  ears  are  dull  of  hearing. 

And  their  eyes  they  have  closed  ; 

Lest  haply  they  should  perceive  with  their  eyes, 

And  hear  with  their  ears, 

And  understand  with  their  heart. 

And  should  turn  again. 

And  I  should  heal  them. 
— (28)  Be  it  known  therefore  unto  you,  that  this  salva- 
tion of  God  is  sent  unto  the  Gentiles  :  they  will  also 
hear.  So  skillful  a  preacher  as  Paul  would  not  have 
closed  his  discourse  with  a  warning  like  this,  had  he  not 
seen  or  heard  something  in  his  audience  to  call  forth 
these  burning  words  from  the  sixth  chapter  of  Isaiah. 
The  passage  had  been  quoted  before  by  Jesus,  and  ap- 


286  COMMENTARY.  [xxviii.  25-28. 

plied  to  the  unbelieving  Jews  of  Galilee  (Matt.  xiii.  14, 
15) ;  and  it  was  after  this  used  by  the  apostle  John  in 
explaining  the  unbelief  of  those  who  heard  Jesus  in  Je- 
rusalem (Jno.  xii.  40).  It  furnishes  the  true  explanation 
of  the  failure  of  the  gospel  to  win  some  who  hear  it  fully 
proclaimed;  and  the  explanation  is  contradictory  to  the 
once  popular  doctrine,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  must  regen. 
erate  the  soul  by  an  immediate  exercise  of  its  power  be- 
fore the  gospel  can  be  received.  According  to  this  doc- 
trine, the  reason  why  some  of  Paul's  hearers  went  away 
unbelievers  was  that  a  divine  influence  was  withheld 
from  them  which  was  granted  to  the  others.  But  accord- 
ing to  the  view  expressed  in  this  passage,  the  Lord  had 
done  as  much  for  the  one  class  as  he  had  for  the  other  ; 
and  the  reason  some  were  believers  and  the  others  not, 
was  because  the  latter  were  "  dull  of  hearing,  and  their 
eyes  were  closed."  Their  eyes  and  ears  were  not  closed 
by  some  power  above  themselves ;  for  they  are  exjiressly 
charged  with  closing  them.  As  they  closed  them  volun- 
tarily, they  had  the  power  to  keep  them  023en ;  and  it  is 
implied  that,  had  they  done  so,  the  result  would  have 
been  reversed — that  they  would  have  seen  the  truth, 
that  they  would  have  heard  it  favorably,  that  they  would 
have  understood  it,  and  that  they  would  have  turned  to 
the  Lord  and  been  healed.  This  was  precisely  the  ex- 
perience of  the  party  who  believed.  They  had  them- 
selves been  gross  of  heart  and  dull  of  hearing,  and  had 
closed  their  eyes  against  the  previous  preachers  in  Rome  ; 
but  now  they  opened  their  eyes  and  ears  to  what  Paul 
presented,  and  as  a  consequence  they  understood  with 
their  hearts,  they  turned,  and  were  healed.  In  this  or- 
der of  things  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God, 
neither  can  any  man  ascribe  his  final  ruin  to  a  with- 


xxviii.  30, 31.]  ACTS.  287 

holiling  of  saving  influences  on  the  part  of  the   Holy 

Spirit. 

3.  Duration  op  the  Imprisonment,  and 
Continued  Labors,  30,  31. 

Vv.  30,  31.  The  narrative  is  now  brought  abruptly 
to  a  close.  (30)  And  he  abode  two  whole  years  in  his 
own  hired  dwelling,  and  received  all  that  went  in  unto  . 
him,  (31)  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  teaching 
the  things  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all 
boldness,  none  forbidding  him.  This  hired  dwelling  is 
the  one  alluded  to  iu  verse  16,  where  it  is  said  that  "Paul 
was  suffered  to  abide  by  himself  with  the  soldier  that 
guarded  him.''  This  soldier,  as  we  see  in  the  remark,  "  I 
am  bound  with  this  chain,"  (20)  was  chained  to  him  day 
and  night.  The  guard  was  changed  according  to  uni- 
form custom  every  three  hours,  unless  an  exception  wag 
made  of  the  sleeping  hours  in  this  particular  case.  In 
this  way  it  became  the  privilege  of  not  less  than  five  or 
six  different  soldiers  to  be  present  and  hear  his  preaching 
and  teaching  every  day.  As  this  continued  for  two  whole 
years,  it  is  by  no  means  surprising  to  hear  Paul  say  in 
his  epistle  to  the  Philippians,  "  My  bonds  became  man- 
ifest in  Christ  throughout  the  whole  praetorian  guard, 
and  to  all  the  rest"  (i.  13).  The  prsetoriau  guard  was  a 
body  of  soldiers  kept  at  Rome,  in  a  camp  outside  the 
city,  for  the  purpose  of  guarding  the  emperor,  and  keep- 
ing prisoners  awaiting  trial  in  the  imperial  court.  As 
each  soldier  returned  to  the  camp  from  guarding  Paul,  he 
had  a  strange  story  to  pour  into  the  ears  of  his  com- 
panions, and  so  it  spread  from  lip  to  lip.  It  even  reached 
some  of  the  household  of  Ca33ar,  perhaps  by  means  of 
the  guards  about  the  palace  {ib.  iv.  22). 


288  COMMENTARY.  [xxviii.  30  31. 

The  remark,  that  "  he  received  all  that  went  in  unto 
him,"  implies  many  visitors.  These  were  in  part  drawn 
together  by  the  increasing  fame  of  the  imprisoned 
preacher  ;  but  chiefly  we  may  assume  by  the  activity  of 
Paul's  brethren  in  the  city,  who  would  naturally  busy 
themselves  in  this  way.  By  the  zeal  of  the  same  breth- 
ren the  rent  of  his  hired  dwelling  was  paid ;  but  such 
was  their  own  poverty,  that  when  a  contribution  was 
forwarded  to  him  by  the  distant  church  in  Philippi,  it 
relieved  a  felt  want  (Phil.  iv.  10,  11,  18). 

Preaching  and  teaching  are  here  distinguished,  as 
they  are  throughout  the  book  of  Acts,  the  former  being 
addressed  to  the  unbelievers,  and  the  latter  to  the  be- 
lievers. That  he  did  both  shows  that  both  believers  and 
unbelievers  were  drawn  to  his  lodging.  His  activity 
was  unforbidden,  because,  being  limited  to  those  who 
voluntarily  sought  him  in  his  private  dwelling,  it  could 
cause  no  such  outbreak,  as  it  had  in  other  cities.  The 
results  of  these  labors  Llike  does  not  see  fit  to  enu- 
merate, neither  does  he  gratify  the  natural  curiosity  of 
the  reader  by  telling  us  the  result  of  Paul's  appeal  to 
Caesar.  This  last  circumstance  can  be  accounted  for,  as 
we  have  argued  in  the  Introduction  (xxiii.-xxvi.)  only 
by  the  supposition  that  the  last  sentence  of  the  book  was 
written  just  at  the  end  of  the  two  years,  and  previous  to 
the  trial.  But  with  the  exception  of  this  omission,  the 
leading  purpose  of  the  narrative  suggests  this  as  a  fitting 
close.  Having  started  out  to  show  the  manner  in  which 
the  apostles  executed  their  commission  in  turning  sinners 
to  the  Lord,  the  writer  has  now  led  us  from  Jerusalem 
through  Judea,  Samaria,  the  provinces  of  Asia  Minor, 
the  islands  of  the  Mediterranean,  Macedonia,  and  Achaia, 
to  the  imperial  city  of  Rome ;  and  leaving  the  principal 


ACTS,  289 

laborer  bere,  still ''  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
teaching  the  things  concerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ," 
his  main  purpose  is  accomplished,  and  the  narrative 
closes. 

A  commentary  on  Acts,  strictly  confined  to  the  text, 
would  here  be  brought  to  a  close ;  but  as  it  has  been  a 
part  of  our  plan  to  give  more  fullness  to  the  narrative  by 
drawing  from  other  inspired  sources,  we  have  yet  a  few 
paragraphs  to  pen.  The  desire  inspired  in  the  thought, 
ful  reader  by  the  closing  chapters,  to  trace  a  little  far- 
ther the  career  of  Paul,  may  in  some  degree  be  gratified. 
This  desire  has  reference  especially  to  the  two  questions, 
what  were  the  results  to  the  cause  of  Christ  of  his  long 
imprisonment?  and  what  was  the  issue  of  his  appeal  to 
Cffisar  ? 

In  reference  to  the  first  question,  we  have  already  re- 
marked that  his  entrance  into  Rome  was  so  different 
from  that  which  he  had  hoped  for,  that  his  prospect  for 
doing  good  there  must  have  been  very  gloomy.  But  as 
he  was  permitted  without  interruption  to  teach  and 
preach  for  two  whole  years  in  his  hired  dwelling,  we  can 
not  doubt  that  he  accomplished  much,  notwithstanding 
his  confinement  as  a  prisoner.  We  learn  something  of 
the  results  from  epistles  written  during  the  time.  Ephe- 
sians,  Colossians,  and  Philemon  were  the  earliest  of  these 
epistles.  They  were  all  written  at  one  time,  and  for- 
warded, the  first  two  by  Tychicus,  and  the  last  by  Onesi- 
mus,  the  two  messengers  traveling  together.^     In   the 

'  As  he  sent  Onesimus  back  to  Philemon,  and  had  to  send  the 
epistle  by  some  messenger,  we  conclude  that  he  sent  it  by  him 
(8-12) ;  and  as  he  sent  Tychicus  to  the  brethren  to  whom  the  two 
other  epistles  were  directed,  we  likewise  conclude  that  he  sent 
thoseepistle3byhim(Eph.  vi.  21,  22;  Col.  iv.7,  8);  and  it  is  stated 
expressly  that  Onesimu*  was  sent  with  Tychicus  (Col.  iv.  8,  9). 


290  COMMENTARY. 

two  former  he  shows  a  sense  of  the  embarrassments  of 
his  situation,  by  exhorting  the  brethren  to  pray  for  him> 
that  a  "door  of  utterance  "  might  be  opened  to  him,  and 
that  he  might  have  boldness  to  speak  the  gospel  as  it 
ought  to  be  spoken.  The  last  reveals  the  fact  that  at 
the  same  time  he  had  already  accomplished  something. 
Out  of  the  very  dregs  of  the  dissolute  society  of  the 
metropolis,  a  runaway  Greek  slave  had  been  induced  to 
visit  the  apostle,  and  hear  the  gospel.  It  proved  the 
power  of  God  to  free  him  from  a  bondage  far  worse  than 
that  from  which  he  had  fled.  After  he  became  a  disciple 
Paul  found  him  "  profitable  to  him  for  the  ministry,"  be- 
ing of  service,  no  doubt,  in  bringing  within  the  sound  of 
the  gospel  many  of  his  former  companions.  His  master 
was  Philemon,  a  convert  of  Paul's  residing  in  Colosse. 
Paul  desired  to  retain  him  in  his  service  ;  but  out  of  re- 
spect to  the  legal  rights  of  Philemon  he  sent  him  home 
with  an  epistle  in  which  he  delicately  intimates  the  pro- 
priety of  setting  free  a  slave  capable  of  such  usefulness ; 
and  thinking  it  probable  that  Onesimus  had  defrauded 
his  master  in  some  way,  promises  to  pay  the  sum,  what- 
ever it  might  be  (Philemon,  8-21).  His  preaching  had 
begun  to  take  effect  on  the  most  hopeless  class  of  the 
city's  population,  at  the  time  when  he  was  urging  distant 
brethren  to  pray  that  God  would  open  to  him  a  door  of* 
utterance  (Eph.  vi.  18-20;  Col.  iv.  2,  3).  But  eventu- 
ally a  door  of  utterance  was  opened  far  wider  than  he 
had  dared  to  expect.  In  the  epistle  to  the  Philippians, 
written  at  a  later  period,  when  he  was  expecting  his 
trial  and  release,  he  says  :  "  Now  I  would  have  you 
know,  brethren,  that  the  things  which  have  happened  to 
me  have  fallen  out  rather  unto  the  progress  of  the  gospel ; 
so  that  my  bonds  became  manifest  in  Christ  through- 


ACTS.  291 

out  the  whole  praetorian  guard,  and  to  all  the  rest ;  and 
that  most  of  the  brethren  in  the  Lord,  being  confident 
through  my  bonds,  are  more  abundantly  bold  to  speak 
the  word  of  God  without  fear  "  (i.  12-14).  He  also  says, 
near  the  close  of  the  same  epistle,  "  All  the  saints  salute 
you,  especially  they  tliat  are  of  Csesar's  household  ''  (iv. 
22).  These  results,  as  we  have  stated  before,  sprang 
most  naturally  from  the  word  carried  into  the  barracks 
of  the  praitorian  guard  by  the  many  soldiers  who  alter- 
nately guaided  Paul,  and  heard  what  he  taught  and 
preached  to  his  visitors ;  for  the  soldiers  of  the  guard, 
and  the  employes  about  the  palace  of  Qesar,  would  nat- 
urally be  among  the  very  last  to  visit  the  apostle's  lodg- 
ing for  the  purpose  of  hearing  him. 

During  these  arduous  and  embarrassing  labors,  Paul 
enjoyed  the  cooperation  not  only  of  the  true  and  brave 
men  and  women  whom  he  found  in  the  church  at  Rome, 
but  also  of  other  fellow-laborers  who  had  toiled  with  him 
in  other  fields,  and  who  came  to  him  from  a  distance. 
Timothy,  last  mentioned  before  in  the  journey  from 
Corinth  to  Jerusalem,  united  with  him  in  the  salutations 
of  Colossians,  Philemon,  and  Philippians.  Aristarchus 
and  Epaphras  were  his  fellow  prisoners  (Col.  iv.  10 ; 
Philemon  23)  ;  Mark,  who  once  forsook  him,  and  went 
not  wuth  him  and  Barnabas  to  the  work,  was  now  with 
him,  and  about  to  go  on  a  distant  journey  at  his  request 
(Col.  iv.  10)  ;  Demas,  who  afterward  forsook  him  and 
went  to  Thessalonica,  "  having  loved  this  present  world," 
was  as  yet  by  his  side  (Col.  iv.  14  ;  II.  Tim.  iv.  10)  ;  and 
Luke,  the  beloved  physician,  who  shared  the  perils  of 
his  voyage  from  Cajsarea,  was  his  constant  companion 
(Col.  iv.  14). 


^92  COMMENTARY. 

In  reference  to  Paul's  appeal  to  Csesar  nothing  is  said 
expressly  in  the  New  Testament ;  yet  there  is  conclusive 
inferential  ground  for  the  belief  that  it  was  successful  in 
securing  his  release.  This  evidence  is  found  in  the 
events  and  journeys  described  in  the  epistles  to  Timothy 
and  Titus,  for  which  no  place  can  be  found  in  the  period 
covered  by  Aots.  Among  these  are  his  leaving  Tim- 
othy in   Ephesus  to  counteract  the   influence  of  certain 

(teachers,  while  he  went  into   Macedonia  (I.  Tim.  i.  3) ; 

*his  leaving  Titus  in  Crete  to  set  in  order  the  things 
that  were  wanting  there  (Titus  i.  5.)  ;  his  visit  to  Mile- 
tus when  he  left  Trophimus  there  sick  (II.  Tim.  iv.  20)  ; 
and  his  journey  toward  Nicopolis  to  spend  the  winter 
(Tit.  iii.  12.) 

It  would  be  interesting,  were  it  not  going  beyond  the 
limits  of  a  commentary  on  Acts,  to  follow  in  the  details 
of  these  labors  till  the  curtain  of  authentic  history  drops 
and  shuts  out  from  our  view  his  departure  to  be  with 
Christ.  When  he  obtained  a  hearing  under  the  appeal 
which  brought  him  to  Rome,  his  enemies  could  have 
nothing  to  say  against  him  worse  than  they  had  said  be- 
fore Felix  and  Festus ;  and  his  defense  before  them,  to- 
gether with  that  before  King  Agrippa,  suggests  the  line 
in  matter  and  method  of  that  which  he  most  probably 
laid  before  the  emperor  and  his  council.  We  shall  not 
tax  our  imagination  in  an  attempt  to  depict  the  scene. 
We  bid  him  adieu  till  the  resurrection  morning,  well 
pleased  that  the  course  of  the  narrative  on  which  we 
have  commented  has  kept  us  for  so  long  a  time  in  his 
company. 


INDEX. 


Adding  to  tba  Cluirch,  i.  45,  49. 

Agabus,  i.  229 ;  ii.  2(X). 

Agrippa  the  elder, — liis  early  life,  i,  231;  he  beheads  James  and 
imprisons  Peter,  231,  232;  he  slays  the  guards,  239;  his  death,  240. 

Agrippa  the  younger,  ii.  215-261. 

Ananias  and  Sapphira,  i.  82-90. 

Antioch, — a  church  founded  there,  i.  222-224;  Barnabus  sent  thitlier, 
225;  he  brings  Paul  thither,  22G;  the  name  Christian  given  there, 
228;  relief  sent  thence  to  Jndea,  229;  teachers  in  the  church  there, 
ii.  1-3;  Barnabus  and  Saul  sent  thence  to  the  Gentiles,  4,  5;  they 
return  thither,  51,  52;  controversy  there  on  circumcision,  53-55;  the 
question  settled  there,  71;  Paul  rebukes  Peter  there,  72;  Paul  and 
Barnabas  separate  there,  75,  76:  Paul's  last  visit  there,  144,  145. 

Antipatris,  ii.  232. 

Apollos,— at  Ephesus,  146-148;  in  Corinth,  149. 

Aquila  and  Priscilla,  ii.  133, 143, 148. 

Areopagus,  ii.  121. 

Aristarchus,  ii.  261. 

Ascension  of  Jesus,  i.  3,  7.  ' 

Athens,  ii.  117-119. 

Author  of  Acts,  Int.  viii. 

Baptism, — its  connection  with  remission  of  sins,  i.  33,  62,  161,  178,  243; 
ii.  26,  103,  136,  217;  of  those  on  Pentecost,  i.  42-45;  of  the  Samar- 
itans, 139;  of  the  eunuch,  157-159;  of  Saul,  177;  of  Cornelius,  216, 
217;  of  Lydia,  ii.  91;  of  the  jailer,  104,  105;  of  many  Corinthians, 
136;  of  disciples  of  John,  150-153. 

Barnabas,— his  name  changed,  i.  81;  he  befriends  Saul,  188;  he  is  sent 
to  Antioch,  225;  he  is  sent  thence  to  Judea,  229;  lie  returns  to 
Antioch,  242;  he  is  sent  to  the  Gentiles,  ii.  3,  4;  with  Saul  in 
Cyprus,  5;  becomes  second  to  Paul,  10;  with  Paul  in  Antioch  of 
Pisidia,  12;  in  Iconium.  36;  taken  for  Jupiter  in  Lystra,  40;  styled 
an  apostle,  42;  returns  to  Antioch,  48-51;  separates  from  Paul  and 
goes  again  to  Cyprus,  75. 

Bar-Jesus,  ii.  8. 

Bernice,  ii.  245. 

Beroga,  ii.  114-116. 

Books  of  magic  burned,  ii.  157. 

Breaking  bread,  i.;47;  49;  IL  178-182L 

Csesarea,  L  197,  n.  1. 


294  INDEX. 

Children,— promise  to,  i.  40. 

Christian , — origin  of  the  name,  i.  227,  228. 

Chronology,  of  Acts,  Int.  xxxiv. 

Circumcision,— controversy  on;  its  beginning,  i.  21^221;  second  stage 
of,  ii.  53-71;  decree  of  the  apostles  on,  68-71 ;  Timothy  circum- 
ciied,  79-81;  position  of  the  Jerusalem  church,  205,  206. 

Citizenship,  ii.  107,  221,  222,  224. 

Collections  for  the  saints  in'Judea,  ii.  171,  172,  173, 174,  176,  241. 

Community  of  goods,  i,  48,  80,  103,  2.30. 

Corinth,  ii.  132;  "  much  people  in,"  138;  disorder  in  the  church  there, 
160,  161. 

Cornelius,  i.  197-202;  20.5-208;  213-218. 

Credibility  of  Acts,  Int.  xii. 

Crispus,  ii.  136. 

Date  of  Acts,  Int.  xxiii. 
Deacons  appointed,  i.  103-108. 
Demon-worship,  ii.  119,  n.  1, 123,  n.  1, 
Demetrius,  ii.  162. 
Design  of  Acts,  Int.  xv. 
Discipline, — good  effects  of,  i.  89. 
Dispersion  of  Jerusalem  church,  i.  134-136. 
Divisions  of  Acts,  Int.  xiv. 
Drusilla,  ii.  239,  242. 

E]ders,—in  the  churches  of  liidea,  i.  229,  230;  appointed  in  churches 
of  Asia  Minor,  ii.  49;  in  the  church  at  Ephesus,  185;  styled  bishops 
t)r  overseers,  190;  their  duty  to  be  shepherds,  191-193;  in  the  Jeru- 
salem church,  205. 

Epicureans,  ii.  120,  131. 

Epistles,— I.  Thess.,  ii.  136-138:  II.  Thess.,  141-143;  I.;Cor.,  160;  II.  Cor.. 
170;  Romans  and  Galatians,  174r-176;  Ephesians,  Colossians  and 
Philemon,  289,  290;  Philippians,  290. 

Eunuch,  The  Ethiopian,  i.  149-163. 

Euraquilo,  ii.  266. 

Faith,— its  connection  with  heahng,  i.  55;  itslconnection  with  repent- 
ance, ii.  187. 
Felix,  ii.  232,  242. 
Fellowship,  i.  46. 
Festus,  ii.  242-261. 

Free  Agency  and  Divine  Sovereignty,  i.  57. 
Freedmen  (libertines),  1.  111. 

Galatia,  ii.  83,  84. 


INDEX.  ,  295 

Gallio,  ii.  139-141.  "^ 

Gamaliel,  i.  97,  98,  166.  ^ 

N 

Herod,— (see  Agrippa  the  elder). 

Holy  Spirit,— last  promise  of  i.  5;  baptism  in,  22,  23;  effects  of  on  the 
multitude,  24,  25;  prediction  of  by  Joel,  26,  27;  gift  of,  38,  39; 
Peter  filled  with,  71;  the  apostles  filled  with,  78;  a  witness  for 
Jesus,  95;  "  the  seven  "  full  of,  104;  Stephen,  full  of,  132;  imparted 
by  Peter  and  John,  141-144;  Simon's  proposal  respecting,  145; 
speaks  to  Philip,  153;  catches  Philip  away,  156,  160;  Saul  to  l)e 
filled  with,  177;  speaks  to  Peter,  201;  received  by  the  uncircum- 
cised,  213-217;  the  last  a  baptism  in  the  Spirit,  220;  Barnabas 
full  of,  225;  Agabus  inspired  by,  229;  commands  the  setting 
apart  of  Barnabas  and  Saul,  ii.  3;  Saul  filled  with  at  Paphos,  9; 
disciples  in  Antioch  of  Pisidia  filled  with,  35;  the  apostolic  de- 
cree inspired  by,  69,  70;  Paul's  journey  overruled  by,  84,  85;  sup- 
,  ported  Paul's  preaching  in  Thessalonica,  110;  imparted  bj^  Paul 
to  twelve  disciples  in  Ephesus,  151;  Paul's  imprisonment  pre- 
dicted by,  188,  189,  197,  200 ;  men  made  overseers  of  the  church 
by,  191. 

Immersion,— evidence  of,  i.  42-45;  159, 160;  177;  ii.  104, 105. 
Infant  baptism,  ii.  93-95;  104. 

Jailer  at  Philippi,  ii.  99-103. 

James,  the  apostle,  i.  231,  232. 

James,  the  Lord's  brother, — in  Jerusalem  with  Peter,  i.  189;  head  of 

Jerusalem  churcli,  238;  speech  on  the  circumcision  of  Gentiles, 

ii.  65-67 ;  receives  and  advises  Paul,  204. 
John,  the  apostle,— with  Peter  in  Solomon's  porch,  i.  50,  52;  arrested, 

66;  sent  to  Samaria  with  Peter,  141,  149;  in  the  conference  at 

Jerusalem,  but  silent,  ii.  61. 
Judas,— his  fate,  i.  11-13 ;  his  place  filled,  15-18. 
Julius,  the  centurion,  ii.  260,  261,  262,  264,  274,  279,  281. 

Justus,  ii.  134. 

t 

Laying  on  hands,  i.  105;  ii.  3-5. 

Literature  of  Acts,  Int.  xxxiv. 

Lydia,  ii.  88-95. 

Lysias,  ii.  220-232. 

Luke,— appears  first  in  the  narrative,  ii.  85;  remains  at  Philippi,  109; 
goes  with  Paul  to  Jerusalem,  177;  with  Paul  on  the  voyage  to 
Eome,  260,  261 ;  with  Paul  during  his  Roman  imprisonment,  291. 

Mark,— his  mother's  house  in  Jerusalem,  i.  236;  he  goes  with  Barna- 
bas and  Saul  to  Antioch,  242;  goes  with  the  same  to  Cyprus  and 


296  INDEX. 

Perga,  ii.  6;  turns  back  from  Perga,  11, 12;  goes  with  Barnabas  to 
Cyprus,  75;  'with  Paul  in  E-ome,  291. 
Mars  HiU,  u.  121. 

Neglect  of  Acts,  Int.  vii.  .    ; 

Ordained  to  eternal  life,  ii.  2&-33. 

Paul, — his  earlier  labors,  bis  childhood  and  youth,  i.  164-167  ;bis"career 
as  a  persecutor,  134,  168,  169;  his  conversion,  169-180;  he  preaches 
in  Damascus,  180-182;  he  flees  from  Damascus,  183;  his  visit  to 
Arabia,  184^186;  his  return  to  Jerusalem,  187,  188;  he  is  sent  to 
Tarsus,  189,  190;  he  preaches  in  Syria  and  Cilicia,  190;  he  is 
called  thence  to  Antioch,  226;  he  is  sent  thence  to  Judea,  229,  230; 
be  returns  to  Antioch,  242. 

Paul,— his  first  tour  among  the  Gentiles;  he  is  set]apart  to  the  work, 
ii.  3-5;  he  preaches  in  Cyprus,  where  his  name  is  changed,  6-9; 
goes  thence  to  Antioch  in  Pisidia,  7-9 ;  his  sermon  in  Antioch,  13- 
27 ;  his  second  sermon  there,  27-33 ;  he  is  expelled  from  Antioch,  34, 
35;  his  labors  in  Iconium,  36,  39;  he  preaches  in  Lystra,  and  is 
stoned,  39-48 :  he  preaches  in  Derbe,  and  returns  to  Antioch  in 
Syria,  48-52;  has  a  controversy  on  circumcision  in  Antioch,  53-71; 
bis  second  visit  to  Jerusalem,  57,  n.  1 ;  he  separates  from  Barna- 
bas, and  chooses  Silas,  76. 

Paul, — his  second  tour  among  the  Gentiles ;  he  starts  in  company  with 
Silas,  77-81;  his  first  experience  in  Galatia,  83,  84;  is  forbidden  to 
visit  Asia  or  Bithynia,  84,  85,  89;  he  is  called  to  Macedonia,  85-87; 
be  baptizes  Lydia  and  her  household,  88-95 ;  he  is  scourged  and 
imprisoned,  96-99;  he  baptizes  his  jailer  and  is  released,  90-107; 
bis  preaching  in  Thessalonica,  109-111;  he  is  driven  from  Tbessa- 
lonica,  but  succeeds  in  Beroea,  112,  113;  he  preaches  in  Athens, 
119-132;  in  Corinth,  133-142;  he  shaves  his  head  at  Cenchrea,  143; 
calls  at  Ephesus  on  his  voyage  to  Antioch,  144. 

Paul, — his  third  tour  among  the  Gentiles ;  he  revisits  Galatia  and 
Phrygia,  145, 146;  his  labors  in  Ephesus,  150-168;  he  revisits  Mace- 
donia and  Greece,  168-176;  he  starts  for  Jerusalem,  176;  spends  a 
week  in  Troas,  178-182;  walks  from  Troas  to  Assos,  182,  183;  sails 
thence  to  Miletus,  184;  has  an  interview  with  the  Ephesian  elders, 
185-195;  his  voyage  from  Miletus  to  Tyre,  195-197;  spends  a  week 
with  the  disciples  in  Tyre,  197,  198 ;  calls  on  those  at  Ptolemais, 
198;  reaches  Csesarea,  199;  is  there  warned  by  Agabus,  200;  he 
arrives  in  Jerusalem,  201, 202. 

Paul, — bis  five  years  imprisonment;  bis  kind  reception  in  Jerusalem, 
202-204;  his  connection  with  the  Nazarites,  204,  209;  be  is  assailed 
by  a  mob,  and  taken  to  prison,  209-212;  he  addresses  the  mob. 
212-220;  be  is  brought  before  the  Sanhedrin,  222-227;  he  is  sent 


INDEX. 


297 


to  Ccesarea,  228-232;  he  is  tried  by  Felix,  233-238;  he  preaches  to 
Felix,  238-241;  his  trial  before  Festus,  242-244;  his  appeal  to  Civsar^ 
244-  his  case  stated  by  Festus,  24»)-250;  his  defense  before  Agrippa, 
250^'>G0-  he  is  sent  to  Rome,  2(J0-2G4;  he  opposes  the  departure 
from  Fair  Havens,  264;  he  is  sliipwrecked,  2&5-274;  he  is  bitten 
by  a  viper,  274-270;  he  heals  the  father  ^of  Publius,  276-278;  his 
voyage  from  Mehta  to  Rome,  278-281;  his  interviews  with  the 
Jews  of  Rome,  282-2S7;  his  other  labors,  in  Rome,  287-292. 
Pentecost,  i.  19;  ii.  184,  201. 
Persecution  of  the  Twelve,  i.  90-102. 

Peter,~his  speech  about  Judas,  i.  11-15;  his  sermon. on  Pentecost, 
26-41;  he  heals  a  lame  man,  50;  his  second  sermon,  53-56;  he  is 
arrested  and  tried,  68-78;  his  mission  to  Samaria,  141-145,  149; 
his  work  in  Lvdda,  192;  in  Joppa,  193-197;  his  vision  in  Joppa. 
202-205-  his  sermon  in  the  house  of  Cornelius,  209-213;  he  is  ac- 
cused in  Jerusalem,  218-221;  he  is  imprisoned,  and  miraculously 
released,  233-235;  his  speech  on  the  circumcision  of  the  Gentiles, 
ii.  62,  63-  lie  is  rebuked  by  Paul  in  Antioch,  72-74. 
Pharisee's,— they  lead  in  the  persecution  of  Stephen,  i.  112-115;  they 

contend  for  the  circumcision  of  Gentile  converts,  ii.  58,  59. 
Philip— his  work  in  Samaria,  i.  137-141;  his  mission  to  the  eunuch, 
149-1.50;  his  labors  in  PhiUstia,  163;  his  daughters,  and  his  resi- 
dence in  Cfesarea,  ii.  199. 
Philippi,  its  situation,  ii.  87. 

Pools  of  Jerusalem,  i.  42-45.  _ 

Prayer,-of  the  disciples  about  filling  the  place  of  Judas,  i.  16;  of  the 
twelve  about  their  persecution,  75-78;  of  Stephen  when  dying, 
132-  of  Peter  and  John  for  the  Holy  Spirit,  141;  of  Saul  when 
blinded,  174;  of  Peter  over  the  body  of  Tabitha,  195;  of  Cornelius, 
199-201;  of  Peter  on  the  house-top,  202;  of  the  disciples  for  Peter, 
236 -'of  those  who  laid  hands  on  Barnabas  and  Saul,  ii.  3;  of  Lydia 
and  her  friends,  87,  89;  of  Paul  and  Silas  in  prison,  100;  of  Paul 
at  Miletus,  193 ;  of  Paul  on  the  beach  at  Tyre,  198. 
Priests  obey  the  faith,  i.  109,  110. 
Promise  to  Abraham,  i.  ft5 ;  117,  118 ;  ii.  21 ;  2.51. 

Psalm  ex.  ascribed  to  David,  i.  35,  n.  1.  i 

Python  spirit  cast  out,  ii.  96,  97. 

Repentance,-what  it  is,  i.  38,  n.  1;  58-62;  its  connection  with  remis- 
sion of  sins,  38,  02,  243-262;  enjoined  upon  Shnon,  146;  granted  to 
the  Gentiles,  220;  its  connection  with  faith,  ii.  187. 

Sadducee3,-they  begin  the  persecution,  i.  67;  they  persecute  Paul,  ii. 

224-226. 
Samaritans,- the  conversion  of,  i.  137-140.' 
Sergius  Paulus,— his  title,  ii.  7,  n.  1;  his  conversion,  8,9. 


'298^  INDEX. 

Silan,— sent  to  Antioch,  ii  69,  72;  labors  -with  Paul,  76;  scourged  and 
imprisoned  at  Philippi,   96-99;    flees  from  Thessalonica,  113,114; 

I  tarries  in  Bercea,  116 ;  reaches  Cornith,  135;  separates  from  Paul, 
141,  145. 

Simon  the  sorcerer,  i.  138,  140,  145. 

Sorcery  vs.  miracles,  i.  139,  140;  ii.  ,  89;  155-158. 

Sosthenes,  ii.  141,  142;  sources  of  information  in  Acts,  Int.  xi. 

Starting  point  of  Acts,  i.  1. 

Stephen, — his  activity]and  arrest,  i.  111-115;  his  discourse,  116-136; 
his  death  and  burial,  131-134t 

Stoics,  120,  131. 

Tabitha,  i.  193-197J 

Tarsus,  i.  165. 

Temple  of  Diana,  162,  163.      e 

Thessalonica,  ii.  109. 

Theudas, — reference  to  by  Gamaliel,  i.  97,  98.1 

Title  of  Acts,  Int.  vii. 

Timothy, — a  witness  of  the  stoning'of  Paul,  ii.  47;   his  parentage  and 

education,  79;  chosen  by  Paul  and  circumcised,  78-81;  tarries  in 

Philippi,  109;  tarries  in  Beroea,  116,  117;  at  Athens  and  Cornith, 
I         l35 ;  sent  into  Macedonia,  158 ;  goes  with  Paul   from  Corinth  to 

Jerusalem,  176;  with  Paul  in  Rome,  291;  left  by  Paul  in  Ephesus, 

292. 
Town  clerk, — his  speech  to  the  mob,  ii.  166-168. 
Troas, — Paul's  first  arrival  at,  ii.  85;  Paul's  second  visit  to,  169;  his 

third  visit,  178 ;  Lord's  day  meeting  in,  178-182.  ] 
Tyrannus, — school  of,  ii.  154. 

Unity  of  the  Jerusalem  church,  i.  78,  79. 

What  to  do  to  be  saved,  ii.  102-104. 


DATE  DUE 


t-'Cv^'i'^" 


W'»v  3-i: 


•fTv  •^•K•^-'■''- 
7''  -f^v '.'*'*■•  .,^7^ 


|cii:;^-rTg7r 


■■*^' ••::.-'€•*"• 


CAVLOnO 


PRINTED  IN  USA. 


'^::!r_i"^^^-^«-Mpost,es. 


Ilp12  00067  7163 


■■^i:o,^^   ;:.'vV  ;:! 


Illll 


^•misii 


