Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



6000988593 




NINE LECTURES 



ON 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 



BT 



J. N. D. 



LONDON : 
W. H, BROOM, 25, PATERNOSTER SQUARK 

1882. 




EXPLANATORY. 

It should be stated that these Lectures on 1 John were 
delivered in London more than thirty years ago, and also that, 
while there is abundant evidence that they were carefully 
reported, they have never been seen or revised by the Lecturer. 
Many will be interested in their perusal, as well as in comparing 
them with the Lectures of a later date ; and beyond this, they 
contain so much valuable truth, and truth so simply put, that, 
with the Lord's blessing, their publication cannot fail to be f or 
the profit of His people. 

London, 1882. 



LECTURES 



ON 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 



I. 

The great purpose of God in all His dealings in 
grace is to bring us individually into fellowship 
with Himself. " Truly our fellowship is with the 
Father." Thus we have the full knowledge of 
God as far as it can be known, and that in full 
communion with Him, and that in a way that *s not 
in the way of creation. Not merely as a creature, 
for we are made partakers of the Holy Ghost that 
there may be power ; " we dwell in Him, and He in 
us." There can't be anything more intimate. It is 
not knowledge or science that has anything to say 
to this ; for if it be but the human mind working 
on the things of God, it is but that high thing that 
exalteth itself against the knowledge of God. 
Babes in Christ have possession of these things, 
not have to seek for it; they are in posaeasiaw. 
Of course they have to ripen in kuo^\ft^^ei \\a53si\ 



4 LECTURES ON 

mere knowledge puffs up ; but it is being brought 
loWy and then the Spirit of God can act upon the 
soul, and give knowledge in communion and 
fellowship with God. Although the Epistle of 
John is very abstract, yet it is abstract about 
things that the very feeblest saint knows in Christ. 
God is brought down to us; for God can come 
down to us in our weakness in Christ. 

The dijBference between the writings of Paul and 
John is this : that Paul imfolds to us the counsels 
of God in creation, the counsels of God towards the 
Jews (there are various developments of Christ's 
person, as in Hebrews and Colossians) ; but John 
may be called more abstract, because he speaks of 
the nature of God Himself. The purpose and 
object of God is to bring us into full fellowship 
with ffimself. There are three things here I 
would notice. First, the work of God, by which 
we can stand in His presence perfectly free from 
any question of sin, so that we can enjoy all God 
is. Second, justification by faith and acceptance in 
the Beloved, perfect cleansing of the conscience, 
knowing we are accepted, so as to be able to be 
before "ffiTn in perfect peace. Third, the new birth, 
commonly called regeneration. There must be a 
new nature capable of affections towards God. 
An orphan who never knew a father has the 
affections of a child, is capable of loving a father, 
and is often very unhappy because without the 
object towards whom those affections would 
natiimUj Bow ; so the capacity to love God is what 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 5 

we get by being partakers of the divine nature. 
It is the Holy Ghost that gives us competency 
to enjoy these things: "We have an unction 
from the Holy One " given to us, to enable us to 
€njoy what God has given to us. There must be 
our standing in the presence of God without our 
conscience being at work at all, a nature capable 
of enjoying God; a new nature, and power to 
work in that new nature, which is by the Holy 
Ghost dwelling in us. The thing brought 
specially before us is what that is we are to 
enjoy, the nature of the things brought down to 
the understanding of a poor sinner, and that tries 
the conscience just as it moves the affections. 
God is light, and if I am brought into the blessed- 
ness of what God is, it must put the conscience to 
the test ; and, I ask, am I standing in it ? If I 
am capable of it, then I enjoy all the joy of 
standing in the light, and can test all that pretend 
to possess this character. " God is light'* He is 
bringing this home to the hearts of the saints, and 
this must be by presenting Christ Himself. There 
was a great deal made of development, and he 
wants to bring them back to the truth. Science, 
so called, had got in. The character of apostolic 
teaching was to bring them back ''earnestly to 
contend for the faith once delivered to the saints." 
" But continue thou in the thing which thou hast 
learned," "that which was from the beginning." 
My soul ought to know Christ bettet ^n^tj ^^ • 
The moment I get God " manifest m ^3afe ^^^^^^^ ^ 



6 LECTURES ON 

can't know anything out of that but that which is 
false. The question of knowledge is to give place 
to Christ. If I get there nothing can shake me ; 
I 'm in Christ. " These things write we unto you, 
that you may believe on the name of the Son of 
God." Do you believe on the Son? Thm, resi 
there. 

(Verse 1.) First, it was from the beginning; 
second, it was a real substantial Person they had 
known familiarly, not a doctrine ; that *s the blessed 
secret of alL If they have got Christ, then they 
have got aU that the Father has got, all that 's re- 
vealed of Him, and they can't go from that with- 
out being wrong. They've got eternal life, the 
perfect revelation of God, the power of life in 
Christ. This is what is presented to us as the 
full enjoyment and the safeguard of the saint. It 
is ours through that which was with the Father, 
yet was so near to us; not union, but so near 
to us that nothing could be so near as Christ 
Himself. Instead of wanting anything between 
myself and Christ, it was so revealed that no- 
thing could be so near to me as Christ Himself. 
This is the eternal life that was with the Father, 
and it is as we study the Lord Jesus Christ we 
shall have affections established towards Him that 
nothing can break. The poor woman who was a 
sinner had that confidence in Him that she had 
come to Him and loved Him. The secret of our 
joy is to know the love of Christ to us, and then 
we have confidence in Him, undeistaudm^ tha.t 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 7 

God has come so near as to reveal Himself and 
inspire confidence. The more we go out and 
study Christ, the more we penetrate into His 
ways, the more we learn the depth of all these 
riches in Him, and the more EUs divine fulness is 
revealed to us. If it is His taking little children 
up in His arms, I see in it what God's character 
is. " He that has seen me has seen the Father." 
Having truth thus revealed in a Person, I get it 
for the humblest, lowest, poorest sinners, because 
it's a personal act of our Lord Jesus Christ. 
" That which was from the beginning," and now 
mark this " word of life " while it shows what 
God was in Christ, shows it communicated to 
us. 

That's now what he teaches; and now he 
brings me up to the object — what God was. 
That which we have seen with our eyes : " God is 
light." The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us 
from all sin. The communication of life in the 
Christian, the height of the source of the life 
communicated to us ; but in the Gospel of John 
you 'U find, " Of His fulness have all we received, 
and grace for grace," which thing is true in Him 
and in you. "An old commandment which was 
fi-om the beginning," now a new commandment. 
Having life in Him, it became true in Him and 
in you; so He called it a new commandment, 
though an old one, a simple truth that Christ 
Himself is become our life, "that the MSa ot Q\fisrs^ 
might be manifest in out Taott^oX \»ftcL^'9»? ^ ^ 



8 LECTURES ON 

poor siimer is converted, he has the life communi- 
cated from Christ up there, and yet it comes down 
to the lowest need in us, and yet how high it 
rises ! The Gospel begins before creation. Genesis 
begins with creation, gives the scene in which 
all is to be acted ; but John gives Him who 
created. So also in the Epistle to the Hebrews, 
''Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the 
foimdation of the earth," " Thou art the same," we 
get Christ before the creation, and then in creation. 
" The Word was made flesh and dwelt among us," 
and became the source of life; and we receive 
our life from Him who existed before all worlds, 
from everlasting. We received our new nature 
from, and are imited to. Him who was before the 
world, and who created the world. And this has 
a double effect (if right with God), lifting our 
hearts up in ten thousand thousand thanks, if it 
does manifest the life of Jesus. The least thing 
manifests the life of Jesus. Whatever does not 
manifest Him is of the world; whatever is not 
the manifestation of the life of Christ in our souls, 
that is sin, and this should be a cause of joy 
rather than of sorrow. I would have your hearts 
enlarged, as the Apostle says,"Be ye also enlarged." 
Oh to have Christ so before the eye as io be able 
to judge everything in His light! Don't think 
it 's great learning. No ; there may be the lust of 
the mind as well as of the flesh, but if in com- 
munion with Qod it discerns, I call your minds 
dacJt to see the way we received t\ie 'tiSfe — \t ^«fi 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. y 

in the humblest and simplest way ; He who came 
into the world to save sinners. He has made us 
vessels of His fulness. Thus we have fellowship 
with the Father and with the Son, and display it. 
" Truly our fellowship is with the Father and with 
His Son." The effect is, we have the Father and 
the Son, and we have nothing more to seek. I 've 
the Father and the Son. Can I get truth outside 
of the Father and the Son ? I may have more to 
learn. If a man is on the ocean, there may be a 
great deal he has to discover of it, but he has not 
to get there. He says / am there, so / am in the 
truth. I have got a great deal to learn ; but I 'm 
in the Father and the Son, and I 'm in the truth. 
I don't want to seek it if I *m in it. I have the 
very eternal God, in whom I dwelL I 've come to 
the Father when there is a consciousness of this. 
Oh, what a comfort! It's peace. Not only a 
guarding us from evils without, but a spiritual 
rest within. If I'm striving to get something 
I've no communion. If I want to get to the 
Father when I'm in His presence already I've 
no communion, and if I 'm not brought up there 
I can't have the sense of what the conscience 
ought to be in God's presence. The joy is, our 
fellowship is with the Father, and rwt in the hope 
of getting there. 

" These things write we unto you, that your joy 
may be full." There is where God brings the 
saint if there is humbleness, and if t>\\s&\% ^& ^SkSi^ 
humbleness we shall slip. ^\i<eii n?^ \Q!e» *^siRk 



10 LECTURES ON 

sense of God's presence — the sense of it, I say, 
because we are always in His presence in truth — 
we are at the point to sin. My natural character 
or flesh will show itself if I 'm out of His pre- 
sence. There is such a thing as the saints dwell- 
ing in the conscious presence of God without fear. 
If there is anything between me and God my con- 
science will be at work ; but when the Spirit is 
not grieved the soul is in the presence of God for 
joy, learning holiness, but in joy, because occupied 
in communion instead of in detection, and that 's a 
great thing. There is such a thing as being in 
His presence without the conscience having to be 
exercised, and in perfect joy. " My peace I give 
unto you." What was that peace ? There were 
no wandering affections, there could not be, and so 
there was full peace of heart with God. He was 
divinely perfect — all His affections always in tune 
with God. Now, through the grace and power of 
God, we may be brought to that. Christ having 
been revealed to the soul, the world is cast out, 
and Christ is everything, and there is perfect joy. 
This is often what our experience is after con- 
version ; but afterwards the love to Christ grows 
less fervent, the world creeps in little by little, 
and we have less joy. 

There are three things which characterize a 

Christian. First, he is " in the light as God is in 

the light." Now God had said to Israel, "1*11 

dwell in the thick darkness," and at Sinai told 

tJ^em to keep off; *'foT if so much aa a \iea^t toueh. 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 11 

the mountain, it shall be stoned." There was a 
great deal of good there; but He was in His 
pavilion of darkness, not seen. So we see God 
acted towards Israel, but did not show Himself. 
Now the veil is rent fix)m top to bottom, and aU 
is light. It 's the very nature of the truth we are 
in, that God is now manifestly revealed ; and He 
that is come in through the rent veil stands in the 
light of God's holiness, perfect purity in itself, 
and it shows everything that's not so. Second, 
fellowship one with another. We are there to- 
gether, and all have fellowship by the same Holy 
Ghost dwelling in all. Third, we can be there, 
because the "blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us 
tiom all sin." The more in the light, the more it 
is seen that there is no spot on us through the 
blood. That could not be said of a Jew. But 
now the righteousness of God is set forth, and we 
are brought into the light as He is in the light. 
Is this a thing that makes you unhappy, or that 
gives you joy of heart ? If we are true of heart, 
we shall be glad of the light to detect the dark- 
ness in us. "Search me, God." We don't 
want to escape from the light, but to be searched 
by it; not with a pretension that we've no sin, 
but a consciousness that "the blood of Christ 
cleanseth us from all sin," for the effect of being 
in the light is, that we confess our sins. "In 
whose spirit there is no guile." There are two 
things there, the confession and tli^ \on^- ^\.^\s>l 
the first to the end of the fouttla. Nets»^ Ha ^Sos^ 



12 LECTURES ON 

there may be no deception; then in the fifth 
verse, " This is the message we have heard of Him, 
God is light ; " and now that 's the test Where 
Christ is known in the presence of Grod, there is 
no question about sin. How came I there? I 
came through the blood, then I 've got peace. If 
I 'm reasoning about God, that 's another thing ; 
but if we've got there, we got there through the 
blood, and that gives peace, a peace which is never 
lost. There is a peace which may be lost. Happy 
at first, while fresh from conversion, and all is 
easy and smooth with us, our hearts attracted by 
the grace of Christ ; but if failure comes in con- 
science is awakened, a sense of sin alarms, and we 
lose our peace, so that we don't know where we 
are. Until we have apprehended we are brought 
to God, where we never could be brought if there 
remained a spot of sin upon us, we can't know 
settled peace in our souls as spoken of in Hebrews, 
" no more conscience of sin," and that is enduring 
grace. The power of the aflFections of the new 
nature form a link of fellowship with God, and 
only as we keep in the light shall we know the 
practical enjoyment of it. We must be in the 
light, that the evil thoughts may be shut out, so 
that we may have fellowship with God. In how 
many things in our intercourse with one another 
or with the world self comes in, and is not 
judged by us. There is a practical consciousness 
in the Christian that he can't go on without 
Ood, anA he judges, waits, and conJeaaea, \,T\3La\»\T^ 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 13 

in God ; and thus his heart is kept calm and in 
peace. 

There are two things : 1. The manifestation of 
the eternal life; for it has been manifested unto 
us. 2. We are partakers of it. I have fellowship 
with the Father and Son. He has communicated 
to us that nature, so that we can delight in His 
fellowship. The Lord give us to keep ourselves 
in the love of God, in His presence, in the light, 
detecting everything that is not of Him, judging 
it, and thus to be in the enjoyment of His love ! 



14 LECTURES ON 



11. 

The beginning of this chapter refers to the pre- 
ceding chapter ; there He is speaking of the mani- 
festation of the light and life, for the life is the 
light of men. "If we say we have fellowship 
with Him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do 
not the trutL" Then in the second chapter he is 
speaking of the resources of a Christian when he 
&ils, as, alas! we know we all do fail. In the 
former chapter, as we were seeing, he speaks of 
three things : First, in the light, as God is in the 
light; second, fellowship with God ; and third, the 
blood of Christ cleansing from all sin. There in 
the second chapter, the Christian having sinned, 
we have an Advocate with the Father, and this is 
bringing out quite another principle altogether. 
It is not merely having a divine nature, because 
that he has when he fails ; but he is not walking 
in the power of it, and consequently fails, and 
therefore needs an Advocate with the Father, and 
this is quite another aspect; it is not joying in 
God, but the interference of God in grace in the 
person of a Mediator, one between God and us ; 
but this is not a question of justification ; there is 
no possibility of anything being imputed to me. 
He was made sin for us, and tbe Mvoik of Christ 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 16 

has put US in His presence without any question, 
and that we never lose. It is not that here, but 
another thing of importance to me — the daily 
exercise of affection. It 's not that we fail hefort 
Him, but down here we do. In many things we 
offend all ; we fail constantly, inwardly and out- 
wardly; but there is the exercise of affections, 
according to what we axe down here, an increasing 
in the knowledge of God, and what His love is, and 
what our real state is. God demands righteous- 
ness ; but it is not as many think, that the work has 
to be done over again ; for the moment I believe 
I am God's righteousness in Christ. There is no 
decay of it ; it is always of the same value ; it is 
a question of who He is ; it is founded on the fact 
that in virtue of this sacrifice I can now exercise 
my conscience in a way I could not. He is Jesus 
Christ the righteous. The righteousness is always 
in the presence of God. He has not to look for that 
now in his dealing with us ; He is always there. 
God has been perfectly displayed in the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and now I can go into His presence and 
not be afraid, because of this righteousness. How 
is my intercourse with God to be carried on by 
such a poor, failing thing as I am ? It goes on in 
virtue of wtat I am in Christ. Christ's righteous- 
ness does not need to be maintained, but I need to 
be sustained. Suppose I Ve foiled, well here the 
advocacy comes in ; Christ's intercession comes in 
to meet me ; it does not acquire the righteouana^k^^ 
but lifts me up if I fail. Tke m\iert^^'a»'svOTL ^'l 



16 LECTURES ON 

Christ as the Advocate with the Father leads 
me to judge myself accordmg to the light I 
have been brought into by this righteousness. 
My judgment of good and evil increases as I grow 
up into God. Here are two things needed — grace 
to keep us in the way, and mercy to restore us to 
communion. There 's all the grace we need by the 
road, and He 's assuring us constantly of the cer- 
tainty of our position before God. Peter did not 
lose his trust and confidence in God, though he 
denied his Master. Satan might come and say to 
the soul, " It is all over with you ; you are too 
bad ; his sentence is gone out against you, and there 
is no hope." So confidence in God may be lost ; 
but before Peter failed Christ had prayed for him, 
thus he learned what he was in himself, and knew 
the grace that sustained him, and then he uses it 
to profit. "Strengthen thy brethren." He was 
competent to help those who were weak and failing 
like himself. It is exactly the same grace that met 
us at the first that sustains us all the journey 
through. 

Here is the government of God, as a father with 
his fjGunily. It is not like " Ephraim is joined to 
idols, let him alone ;" no, (rod having an interest 
in us will never leave us alone or give us up ; but 
He will deal with us according to our ways. As 
I have before remarked, this is sometimes made to 
depend on our acts and doings, as in John xiv. 3 ; 
XV. 10 ; but God's love to us is not made to depend 
on OUT love to Him, on our conduct \ iot ^Stet ^ V\» 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 17 

is grace that enables us to go on welL God, and 
Christ as a Son over His own house, deals with the 
children. If we speak rashly to our brother, or 
walk abroad carelessly through the streets, and see 
some vanity, we shall find the effect of it in our 
own souls at the end of the day with God. If any 
angry word escapes me I feel the effect at the end 
of the day with God ; grace will restore us ; He 
will follow us and bring us back. If we had a 
child that was unruly we should not give it up, 
but wait upon it in love, and correct it in hope of 
reclaiming it. I might see a chUd go wrong and 
leave it ; but because it is my own child I must go 
after it and bring it back. This is the patience of 
His grace. At the same time God can never give 
up His Holiness; no. He could not pass by or 
suffer imholiness in His child, therefore it was 
needful Christ should die. Thus God was debtor 
to Christ, on account of His work for the glory of 
His character. "Therefore doth my Father love 
me, because I lay down my life that I might take 
it again." " I have glorified thee on the eartL" 

The same thing is true in regard of His advocacy 
in virtue of the propitiation. Christ exercises His 
advocacy for us. If there is failure God sees it ; 
but Jesus comes in and intercedes for us. Some 
say that we have to use the advocacy of Chiist, 
but it is not so. Christ uses it for us. Why do I 
turn to God when I have failed ? It is because 
He uses it, and fresh grace ia oj^JVi'eidL, ix^^ ^^wvr*^ 
ia wrought in my mind. Tlier^ la Tio>iX5i\i%\si^>s»^^^^^^ 



13 UBTfTiaB OS 

Inngs OS back Id God bet 6esii gnce wvxkmgin 
our eooadenee. T hnefij ie it is smd, * If my man 
sin we hsre an Airocate widi the Fatfaer.* It is 
not *if any man rvpralL* It is just as much pure 
grace as at the fiist locdced iqMm ns when we were 
in our sins. In the case of PeCier the hoftd foietold 
him what would take jdaoeL "Satan has desired 
to haTC thee that he maj sift thee as wheal* We 
all want siftii^; "but I haTe prayed tar thee." 
Before Peter got into the dai^er the Lord had 
prayed for him, and His grace is in exerdse, and 
at the moment when it is needed. " He looked at 
Peter," and his weeping was an avowal of Christ's 
intercession. The grace and intercession of Jesus 
is towards us in all the grace and wisdom of (jod. 
It is grace which makes our very failure the 
occasion of Grod's coming in with more grace. 
The righteousness is not called in question ; it is 
not touched. It is through the intercession of 
Christ that I can get to Grod about my evil thoughts. 
All the consciousness of failure, all the exercises 
of heart, are the occasion of my going to the Father, 
and so many links to link my soul to Grod. We 
learn it in our everyday wants and failures ; we 
are all astray if we don't see that God has a holy 
foundation for all this. It does not follow that we 
must fail any more than that we must sin. We 
ought not to fail, though we all do. Our wretched 
self-confidence makes us fail, and then comes in the 
advocacy. 
In a similaT manner it was Aaxoioi^ to^ \k^t 



THE FIKST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 19 

swaUowed up eveiy other rod, shewing divine 
power in Priesthood; that's the way grace takes 
away the murmuring of the heart. Two years 
Israel was in the desert, and thirty-eight years 
more because they did not go up and take 
the land as they had been told, and if we, like 
Israel, won't go up it detects our state; we are 
making the way long. Israel had not the faith to 
go up to the Anakims. If we would break with 
the world, and take up the cross properly, it would 
give us the enjoyment of the full power of com- 
munion with God at once ; if not we must learn 
by its daily mortification in the desert what flesh 
is. If we think to escape dangers by leaving the 
path of faith, we shall surely get into sin. Israel 
found the same people were there, the giants still 
there, when they got into the land at last that 
frightened them at the first, and hindered their 
taking possession. What is the reason Christians 
have often more joy on a death-bed than all their 
life through before ? Why, the reason is they had 
never till then surrendered up all for Christ, had 
never before learned Christ to be everything, and 
everything else to be dung and dross. Israel's 
raiment had not waxed old for forty years in the 
wilderness, neither did their feet swelL They 
learned in all this way the wonderful detail of all 
God's goodness. The manna never ceased, and the 
patient grace never failed to the end; but our 
foolish hearts will not trust God, a\A ^^ "Ow^^^^^ 
shows us the patience of H.is gw^e.^. ^^ ^o^^^^^^ 



20 LECTURES ON 

US wherever we go, even in our failures, and if our 
hearts have experienced the exercises of the desert, 
we have learned the vanity of earthly things, and 
after all find it better to give it all up, and trust 
God that He may be every thing to us, and if we 
have done it at first we should have had it at once. 
And now as to the constant exercise of Christ's 
intercession; it is carried on in heaven in connection 
with our heavenly standing, and is also made to 
bear on our actual daily state down here. Christ 
was a man down here ; we are joined to Christ by 
one Spirit " He that is joined to the Lord is one 
Spirit" — mark the effect. What was Christ? 
Not only the obedient Man, the perfect Man under 
the law, but He was the perfect manifestation of 
the divine nature in man ; there was in a Man 
all the effect that Godhead could produce of good- 
ness in a man. I am not speaking of miracles, 
patience, endurance, love, &c. It is not that we 
can be as Christ was^ because sin is in us ; there 
was none in Him ; but we are called to walk as 
He walked ; we are called not to walk in the flesh, 
but to walk as He walked ; but we do not walk as 
He walked; there is not a willingness to walk, 
there is a will in U8. He must break our will so 
long as our walk does not flow from the word of 
God. There is flesh working and must be weak- 
ness. Well, but one may say, T am so young a 
Christian, I am so weak. It is not a question of 
age in grace ; Chtist would not suffer you to be 
tempted above that you are a\i\a,W\.^Qvil^,V\\3a. 



THE FIRST EPISTLB OF JOHN. 21 

the temptation, make a way for you to escape. 
We may be weak, but that is no hindrance to our 
walking as He walked ; for His strength is made 
perfect in weakness ; but He cannot be the strength 
of our wilL One bom only yesterday may follow 
Christ as much as an old Christian, and Christ is 
as much for him. There may not be so much 
wisdom, but in the child there is often more single- 
ness of eye, and more of undividedness of heart ; 
the great thing is, that the will does not work. 
There again we see where Christ was so perfect. 
The will of God was the spring of all Christ's con- 
duct. He came to do His will — •* Lo, I come to do 
thy will, God." "Mine ears hast thou opened," put 
Himself in the place of obedience. **A body hast 
thou prepared me," became a man, took the place 
of a servant He was to walk by what He heard : He 
was willing to do this : " Lo, I come," not my will, 
but " thine be done." The will of God was the 
spring of all His conduct. He was not only the 
obedient One, conformed to it — "Man shall not live 
by bread alone, but by every word," &c. "As 
the Father has sent me, and I live by the Father," 
&c. We are not only so to walk, as He walked, 
but the way He walked. The spring of Christ's 
conduct was never His own will, not that His will 
had to be corrected, but He came to do His Father's 
wilL Satan tried to hinder, man tried to hinder, 
but He goes through it all. He takes the ^^la^e. 
first. He must go first in the diffi.c\3\\ABa\ ^'VjkKiJL'^^ 
pnttetb forth His own sheep He goe\\i\ieSOT^^^'^' 



22 LECTURES ON 

He was led by the Spirit to be tempted ; everything 
that could put His obedience to the test must be 
tried on Him. We see the difference in the gloiy 
of Christ's person from another. Moses had to 
fast forty days to be with God on the mount 
Christ as a living man on earth was always with 
God. He fasts forty days to be with Satan tempted 
in the wilderness, and you could not see Him in 
those circumstances without seeing who was there. 
If all the glory of the world was offered to Christ 
there, it is offered to you every day, and we see in 
a day like this people are hurrying after it with 
all their hearts. Well, Christ meets himu '' Make 
these stones bread," satisfy your hunger by your 
own will. He had no word from God for it. 
His will was never showed ; it was perfect obedi- 
ence ; the humble, holy, patient life that does not 
stir without God. If you will not do anything 
without a word fiom God, then you are sure to 
have the strength of God in what you do. " Cast 
thyself down." No ; He would not put God to 
the test. He was not going to tempt God by trying 
whether He would protect Him. He had confi- 
dence in God ; so we read, " The people tempted 
God, saying, Is God among us ?" They would prove 
whether He was among them or no, and this is 
called " tempting God." He was sure in the way 
of obedience to find Him. When Mary and Martha 
sent to the Lord, saying, " Lazarus is sick," He did 
not stir. He had no word from God, and Lazarus 
died. Mary might think it ciuei. >Jti«A. lEL^ ^^xil^ 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 23 

abide two days in the same place, and not come 
immediately to heal him. If He had been there He 
might have wrought a common miracle ; but His 
raising Him fix)m the dead is for the glory of God. 
Satan then tries Him in another way. " If thou 
wilt fall down and worship me, all shall be thine.*' 
"Get thee behind me, Satan." He again takes the 
word " It is written." Satan has power against pre- 
tension, against knowledge, but no power against 
obedience — ^if we are acting by the Word, ho will 
of our own. He ordered his conduct from the 
Word. It was the source of His conduct. "K 
we say we abide in Him, we ought to walk even 
as Christ also walked." Satan was baffled, the 
strong man was bound, and that is how He 
bound him, by simple obedience. (The exercise 
of power is a distinct subject; healing the sick 
He would have set men right if they had been 
capable of happiness and prepared to enjoy God.) 
Christ passed through everything that could be 
put before Him to hinder Him in the path of 
godliness, everything that could test the divine 
life. Christ knew in that sense what it was to 
be tempted; it was all the exercises He went 
through which prepared Him to be our High 
Priest. We need sympathy in the exercises of 
the divine life in our souls, not sympathy in 
our lusts; those we must mortify. Everything 
that could try a living man, He passed through^ 
perfect in all, and He learned t\ve wg^'^'^^'^ ^^"^ 
all in the peace which He expei:\siic.^> ^sA ^^'^'^ 



24 LECTURES ON 

He can say, "My peace and my joy." "K the world 
has hated me it will hate you ; but be of good 
cheer; I have overcome the world." He knew, 
and understood experimentally and practically, as 
a man in passing through this world, how the grace 
fix)m above, in the comforts and applyings of divine 
grace to His soul, was suflScient for every soul's 
need to live in holiness, not applied to a testing 
from sin, but a life of holiness. " He suffered 
being tempted." The Lord knew what trouble 
was ; His soul was bowed down with trouble ; but 
the first word is, " Father." The first moment we 
are in sorrow, instead of looking around for com- 
fort, for sympathy, or looking to the actings of the 
flesh, as to what I have done, or what I have not 
done, and pouring forth our sorrow in nothing but 
fleshly murmuring, let us turn immediately to 
God, and then the heart would be cast down in 
perfect submission to the will of God, and thus 
the sting of the sorrow would be removed. The 
instant there is perfect submission there is perfect 
peace. " Now is my soul troubled, and what shall 
I say ? Father, save me from this hour : not my 
will, but thine, be done." 

Another thing. He could have raised Abraham 
and Isaac as He did Lazarus, and have brought 
in all the promised blessing at once; but men 
did not like Him to be there. Man showed 
himself to be alienated from God, and was 
proved utterly incapable of enjoying happiness. 
'JVbir have ye seen and hated toVSi me^ «ol^ Tsi^ 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 25 

Father." Christ could not have anything to do 
with the world in its moral state. He now had to 
meet the effect of sin in the power of Satan, hold- 
ing man captive under death to the judgment and 
wrath of God against sin to redeem man, and now 
He takes His place in resurrection to apply re- 
demption. The righteousness was worked out that 
we should take our place in heaven. We must be 
broken off from the world. He gives us every- 
thing in the way, but never presents it as our end; 
it is neither Canaan nor Egypt, but a wilderness. 
By clinging to it we are not in the wilderness but 
in Egypt, and that is why so many need chasten- 
ing ; for if we would make a Canaan of it, then it 
will become Egypt to us. The moment we make 
it our home, and settle down in it, it *s our Egypt. 
The Lord must break our wilL He says, "A little 
while and the world seeth me no more." It 's all 
done witL He puts a distinction between Him- 
self and the world, therefore if we take Him we 
can't have the world, and if we take the world we 
can't have Him; we can't have both. "If any 
man love the world, the love of the Father is not 
in him.'' « Demas hath forsaken me, having loved 
this present world." Men are everjrwhere playing 
into the infidel's hands in thinking to make the 
world better with their brotherly love, their arts 
and sciences, their social intercourse^ making them- 
selves happy without Grod ; for while they make a 
show of their cleverness, and taXk^i^^a^ftj^^^^^jfi^ 
acknowledging God's gift in t\kft ^sSX ^xA ^^^3&^ 



26 LECTURES ON 

He has bestowed upon man, they continue still 
to reject both God and His gifts, " and will not 
have a God in Christ*' Men think the world can 
be set right by cultivation and science, by en- 
couraging the arts, and such like. Why Christ 
could not set it right Infidels are saying, Chris- 
tianity is all a figment, for it has not set the world 
right ; and men are taking the words of Christ in 
their mouths, saying, "Men should love one 
another as brethren," and bringing all nations to- 
gether to cultivate amity and good will, and the 
very words that they tdce in their mouths while 
they are thus seeking to make the world happy are 
the words that the infidels use. The world, its 
day is over. Christ was rejected by the world, and 
its day is closed. God's grace is gathering out 
sinners ; but as to the world the Lord said, " It 
seeth me no more.*' Either it's to get better 
without Christy or not to get better at all. " It has 
hated both me and my Father," and its day is over. 
" I have got one Son ; it may be they will reverence 
my Son." They took Him and slew Him, and 
said, "The inheritance will be ours," and are 
making the world comfortabla The Lord preserve 
us from all the deception which by the side of 
Christ we so soon detect. He has taken a heavenly 
place. "Such a High Priest became us, who is 
holy, hemnless, undefiled, separate from sinners, 
made higher than the heavens." He exercises His 
ministry where we belong. I don't belong to the 
earth; we have a heavenly cctffing, wA xvafc^ ^ 



THE FIBST EPISTLB OF JOHN. 27 

heavenly Priest, who has gone up on high to take 
our hearts up with Him ; our body is not gone up 
yet, but we have our place with Him up thera 
Christ Himself, who was a man on earth, mani- 
fested a heavenly character down here. Christ 
having given us our place down here, and taken 
away all our sins, sends down the Comforter, that 
we may manifest Him in our walk down here, 
being " living epistles of Christ, known and read 
of all men." God loved us when we hated Him ; 
we are to love those who do not love us, and thus 
show the character of God down here. Christ was 
the living expression of it as a man. ** He that 
saith he abideth in Him ought himself so to walk 
even as He walked." By His intercession Christ 
obtains for us all we need, and lifts us up if we 
do fall ; but He sustains us to walk as He walked, 
having the word of Qod as the source of our 
actions, as God was the source of all His thoughts; 
but if we fail there is grace to restore us. . . . 
''That ye sin not. And, if any man sin, we have an 
Advocate," &c. Mesh ought never to work ; your 
life ought never to be an expression of the flesh, 
but the obedience of a child ; the youngest child in 
Christ can't walk as a father in Christ, but he 
can walk in the obedience of a child with Christ. 
We have the flesh ; but if I 'm in the light practi- 
cally with God I know all about the flesh ; but 
then all that I am is judged. A child of two years 
old can be as obedient as a dm\<3L ol \7«^^<b ^<^kss^» 
It 'a not a question of age, ol ^\xeck^2cL^Vo5^ ^JvsRftJ^- 



28 LECTURES ON 

ence. We have the pattern of Christ at twelve 
years old, who was obedient to His father and 
mother, and went home with them, being subject 
unto them. ** He that saith He abideth in Him 
ought himself so to walk/' &c. Is this the delight 
of your soul, to walk as He walked, as self-denjring, 
as separated from the world, with as much love ? 
or would you spare something — a little bit of the 
world, a little bit of comfort ? Christ never did, 
or you could not have been saved Peter said 
this, " Be it far from thee, Lord ; spare thyself." 
His reply was, "Get thee behind me, Satan." 
How often does our wretched heart say, ** Spare 
thyself?" That is not walking as Christ walked, 
not doing His bidding as our Master. Have your 
hearts been attracted by the beauty of Christ? It 
is real liberty. The world is merely a snare to 
entrap us ; not that I *d scorn the world. Christ 
did not scorn it ; but the world is just this, Satan 
using all manner of things to seduce the flesh, and 
that *s the world. Satan attracts us by his snares, 
and has the soul in bondage ; but the liberty in 
which the Son has set us is to be free from the 
flesh, the world, and sin, and Satan, not only to 
walk as He walked, but to walk with Him in the 
perfect freedom, and in the comfort and conscious- 
ness of walking with Him. May we find our joy 
in Him, not pursuing a life of our own hearts, but 
a life of His grace and goodness, and may He 
keep our hearts fixed on Him and a crown with 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 29 



III. 

It was not my thought to go through the Epistle ; 
but as we were lingering last week on the inter- 
cession of Christ, I take up the subject again in this 
chapter ; that is, the communication of divine life 
from the Father Himself in the person of the Son, 
who comes down on earth, and by Him it is com- 
municated to us. There is the manifestation of all 
we ought to be, and a test by which we may prove 
what is of Christ, and detect that which is not. 

The greater part of the New Testament (the 
Epistles), owes its origin to the mischief Satan did 
in the ChurcL The mischief was only permitted 
that the folly of these things might be made 
manifest, that the full glory of the truth might 
be brought out. ** These things have I written 
unto you concerning them that seduce you." 
The things here written of are what some pre- 
tenders held; they were persons of the highest 
pretensions, that would seduce them. Not the 
Gospel of course, but the great body of the Epistles, 
of which those to the Thessalonians, Corinthians, 
and Galatians are examples, were occasioned by 
the mischief the adversary brought in. In Corinth- 
ians he attacked the resurrection*) ixiTk^^'e&'^^^iS^s^^ 
the coming of the Lord •, m Gc^iaSasKoa Sj^i^<iJ&R»*- 

i 



30 LECTUEES ON 

tion by faith ; not Fhilippians, because there Paul 
was comforted by their love. It is the same in 
regard to the mischief he has done from the 
beginning. The fall itself is the occasion of God's 
introducing greater blessing than before. What- 
ever Satan seeks to do, as it has done from the 
beginning, must ultimately tend to the divine 
glory, and the comfort and blessing of our souls, 
who seek to serve God. Of course man gets 
humbled in it ; but Gt)d overrules it for greater 
good. If we turn to Christ's rejection by the Jews, 
it brings out the Church. Though He wept over 
Jerusalem, the energy of Satan was there exhibited 
against the Lord Himself, so He said, " Now is my 
soul troubled ; and what shall I say ? Father, save 
me from this hour: but for this cause came I unto 
this hour. . . . For I, if I be lifted up, will draw 
all men unto me." He looked with sorrow at the 
evil ; but it was the occasion of infinite blessing. 
And thus by His rejection was the greatest bless- 
ing brought out; for if Jesus had not died, we 
had not been saved; and though Satan thought 
he had triumphed over Him by the cross, God 
raised Him from the dead. So whatever Satan 
does, it is always the bringing out on God's part 
of greater blessing, and so it is in our day. We 
find man spoiling that which has been committed 
to him, and God bringing in something much 
better. And what do we find here ? Antichrist 
was going on, and it led to the bringing out the 
workings of divine life. It's \3aft o^ca&\QtL ydl 



THE FIBST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 31 

God's hands of bringing into greater blessing them 
that trust Him. The history from the beginning 
is just that, so it will be to the end, until Satan is 
cast into the burning lake of fire and brimstone ; 
it wiU be then to bring in heavenly blessing. The 
power of divine life, first manifested in Christ, is 
then manifested in us. We shall see the instruc- 
tions He gave, guiding us by His precepts accord- 
to His life. "He that saith he abideth in Him 
ought himself so to walk, even as He walked." 
Not so to be, because we have sin, and He had 
none ; but so to walk. ** Again a new command- 
ment I write unto you, which thing is true in Him 
and in you, because the darkness is past, and the 
true light now shineth." Here we get a very im- 
portant principle of the divine life — ^what is our 
life, and whence its source. There are two points 
of the manifestation of the divine life. What He 
was in His own person down here, and now what 
He is as exalted — what He manifests through and 
in us of the divine life. 1st. Christ the source of it 
for us. " The Word was made flesh," &c. 2nd. The 
manifestation through and in us. There we can 
correct every estimate we form of our lives, be- 
cause we have the perfect and wonderful model of 
it in Christ Himself, who is the power of it. He 
is the very eternal life that was with the Father, 
and He has given us that eternal life. "In the 
beginning was the Word, and the Word was 
with God, and the Word wa& Go3i. Twb ^^kcm^ 
was in the beginning witYi C3fod. iiX^ >Ccax^^ ^^st^ 



32 LECTUBES ON 

made by Him," &c. He was eternally with 
Grod before He created. "And the Word was 
made flesh, and dwelt among us;" and he 
adds, "Of His fulness have all we received." 
Two things. 1. "The Word was made flesh," as 
also in Hebrews: "The brightness of His glory, 
and the express image of His person." "The 
image of the invisible Grod," as in Golossians, 
the perfect representation of what God was. "Have 
I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou 
not known me, Philip? He that hath seen me 
hath seen the Father." We get in His person the 
life itself that was vdth the Father " from the be- 
ginning." He was the life, it was in Him. Now 
it is never said eternal life is in us; it is in ELim. 
But it is given to us; that's a different thing. 
He Himself is our life; He has life in Himself. 
" God has given us eternal life, and this life is in 
His Son ;" but the Son has life in Himself. My 
hand is alive, but my life is not in my hand ; my 
hand lives by virtue of its union with my body ; 
take it off, and I shall live still. So the Church 
or an individual soul lives by virtue of its imion 
with Christ, the Head. It 's in Him the reality 
of the life is. 

2. When Christ was down here, all His instruc- 
tions were the expression of this life. It was not 
like a commandment given by the Law, because 
the Law enacted from man what was becoming, 
and what man ought to be in relation to God. It 
took the responsibility tliiat «\>W^\i^^ t^ moa's 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 33 

"TJirst^Scter as man, and did not go beyond it ; but 
we get in Christ the manifestation of what God 
was to man — ^love acting in the midst of evil. It 
was no part of the law to love sinners; but it 
was a part of the Lord to come down to love. 
Another thing — in all His thoughts and tones of 
feeling for us He went far beyond the mere letter 
of the law; for the law could not say, "Blessed 
are the poor in spirit," that must arise from an esti- 
mate of God ; the law could not proclaim, "Blessed 
are the peacemakers:" Christ was Himself the 
Prince of Peace, showing there was peace to be 
made. So the duties. There was a spirituality in 
the law beyond what we see ; but there was a 
power of good in Christ that went beyond the 
eviL The law never manifested power over evil 
in the shape of love — there was manifested in 
Christ the power of good over evil — and that was 
Christ's life. We get in all His actings the char- 
acter and expression of what God was in man 
when on earth — and that is so lovely. He was the 
eternal life that was with the Father. John the 
Baptist, who was next to Christ, and immediately 
preceded Him, of whom the Lord testified — " Of 
them that are born of woman there has not been 
a greater than John the Baptist" — came in the 
way of righteousness, and therefore went away 
from men altogether, was in the desert, kept no 
company with any, was a herald before Christ to 
announce Him, had nothing to say t^ ^\3c^^ ^^ 
locusts and wild honey — but GfOd,\>e^\i^^^ ^^^^\^ 

c 



34 LECTURES ON 

that was offended, could come in grace near to 
them, and speak to them in the spirit of grace, 
which rises above and overrides the evil, and ex- 
presses what Ood is ; and they said, " Never man 
spake like this man." Then it is said, " He went 
about doing good." In Him was found the activity 
of good ; the suffering for righteousness' sake, and 
for " His name's sake ;" the exercise of love in the 
activities of grace. 

There is another thing which specially charac- 
terizes the divine life of Christ, the discernment 
of it in those who possess this life, the power 
of discerning the spirit of life in another. It 
has been said, ** It requires much grace in oneself 
to discern a little grace in another." There is 
an attractive power in grace which recognises 
the spirit of Christ in another. He could say, 
" Forasmuch as this man also is a child of Abra- 
ham." There was that which attracted in Christ. 
The moment a Christian recognises divine life 
in another, in spite of difference of education, 
rank, and many other things, he will be drawn 
towards him. It 's characteristic ; he can't help it. 
The moment a man discerns the Spirit of Christ 
in another, there is a necessary attraction to it. 
At once they are united together in love. "By 
this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, 
if ye have love one to another." The instant the 
Spirit and character of Christ is manifested there 
is necessarily an attraction where the Spirit of 
Chriat is. " Ee went about. fliOAng^ %oo4.!' Tlv^u 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 35 

there is the blessed discernment of the traits of it 
— its discerning Christ, " Love your enemies, and 
those who are good for nothing." In Christ we love, 
see God coming down, and manifesting this life in 
a man on the earth, so as to attract towards Him, 
and to bring into His presence in rest. "As I 
have loved you, you ought also to love one 
another." "Be ye perfect, as your Father in 
heaven is perfect." He overcometh evil with 
good; you must do as God does, love your 
enemies. It was that proved Him to be God, in 
that He could love that in which there was 
nothing lovable. In God, the spring of love is 
from Himself; but we need something to attract 
us. 

The primary revelation is that which was 
from the beginning, and however much we may 
go on, we must come back after all to it. It is 
always perfect, because it*s God Himself is 
manifested. You never can bring me to anything 
where God was manifested but to the living 
word of Christ, or the written word of Scripture. 
We have only to ask, " Is it that which you have 
had from the beginning ? K not it 's evil seducers. 
If it is that which we have had from the begin- 
ing, it is of God, and that must test everything, 
and that 's the character of the Word. Bring a 
sinner opposite the Word, and you learn what he 
is, as in the case of the poor Samaritan woman. 
The written Word is the man\.fest^\.\oxv q!1 ^otti\^^ 
and 13 a discemer of the t\io\x^\ia «aA \\i\*^\i5^ ^^ 



36 LECTURES ON 

the heart. Man cannot judge God's word with- 
out judging himself; so if he judges it to be 
wrong, he is judged himsel£ " He that believeth 
not is condemned abeady." He's incapable of 
seeing Christ, who was God manifested in the 
flesh, and the Word judges him. You may talk 
about colours or light to a blind man; but if 
a man is blind he won't understand you ; it is his 
non-perception of light and colours that proves he 
is blind. It must be so where God is manifested. 
If I am incapable of discerning what manifests 
Christ, and the word don't reach my soul, it is 
that which judges me. " The Word that I speak, 
the same shall judge you in the last day." AH 
God's ways now are presenting His moral raani- 
festation ; it will next be His judicial manifesta- 
tion. If the moral manifestation is not received, 
"the Word which I have spoken shall judge him 
at the last day." The Lord did not accompany 
the Word with judgment when it was spoken ; but 
that Word will judge him at the last day, and he 
will be condemned; and man still is proved. 
The first way God taught them was through the 
Lord Jesus Christ, " whom ye have taken, and by 
wicked hands have crucified and slain." Being 
rejected, and having ascended up on high, and 
become the expression of what we should be, the 
Church should be the manifestation of what Christ 
is. Then comes the communication of the life 
from Him in heaven. This was the new thing : 
A new commandment I ^v© uii\.o ^om, \Xia.\. ^^ 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 37 

love one another." It was not a new command* 
ment to love one another ; it was the old com- 
mandment, and yet new, because it was now given 
in the power of it, being not merely commanded 
in His word, but communicated to you by the 
power of the Holy Ghost, to reproduce in you the 
life of Christ ; and there is a new thing, and you 
are to manifest it The Church of God is to be 
that vessel for the manifestation of Christ down 
here, according to the power of the life of its head 
in heaven. 

God acted in government towards Israel when 
He dwelt in thick darkness ; He acted in govern- 
ment according to a known law ; but He was hid 
behind a veil, " set bounds about the mount." But 
now, when Christ died, the darkness was passed 
in the cross, and there was a full display of the 
holiness of God. At the same moment His wrath 
burst forth against sin the light burst forth which 
fully manifested His character. ** The darkness is 
passed, and the true light now shineth." The 
veil is rent, and we can now enter into the pre- 
sence of God Himself, into the holiest, which is 
opened to us. " Walk in the light, as God is in 
the light." "Ye were sometime darkness, but 
now are ye light in the Lord." " If ye walk in 
the light as God is in the light." Nothing must be 
allowed that cannot bear the light. Men perish 
for lack of knowledge, alienation from the life of 
Gk)d. " The true light now shineth," Tha N<»L^a» 
rent God ia fully manifested. \a \,\\3l>Jcl^\AVs^^' 



38 LECTURES ON 

If He 'd been only just, we should have perished. 
If He 'd been only love, there would have been no 
justice; but there was justice and holiness with love, 
and God has been; glorified about our sins in the 
death of the Loi-d Jesus Christ. The light now is 
shining. Christ, the source of that light, to be 
manifested in us, which thing is true in Him and 
in you. It's an old commandment which was from 
the beginning, Christ Himself. You can't have a 
better than that; and now the manifestation of it is 
learned in us. If we want it as a test, it must not 
be the imperfect light that is in us, but in Christ 
Himself. While it is given to us as the means of 
detecting errors, it is also to build us up in what 
Christ is. In looking at these traits we discover 
more and more that they are thoroughly divine. 
I learn in Christ such and such a trait, and I say, 
''That's God manifest in the flesh;" and thus I 
learn what I shall know in heaven. "You've 
seen the Father." We learn the beauty in Jesus, 
and learn it is divine ; and learning what God is, 
we are happy and peaceful ; and if you 've seen 
a saint dying, if he has faith in the blood of 
Christ, he'll have peace; but if you look for 
joy it must spring from the affections being ac- 
quainted with the Lord Jesus Christ You'll 
sometimes see a saint, and there is joy, and by- 
and-by his peace is gone. That's where the soul's 
not settled ; there ought to be both. The blood 
gives peace ; but it 's my acquaintance with and 
knowledge of Christ g|ivea me y>^. 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 39 

Three characters are presented here. He says, 
'' He that saith he is in the light, and hatdh his 
brother." The Apostle always speaks of the 
abstract principle, "He that loveth his brother." 
" Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin." 
'* He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, 
and there is none occasion of stumbling in him." 
If he stumble at Christ it *s his own fault. We 
never ought to be, by not being like Christ, a 
stumblingblock. There is.no greater snare than 
the fear of offending, and no greater sin than the 
fear of offending, if Christ is the offence. If 
it's Christ that offends, the offence of the cross 
has not ceased ; you will never please the world 
with the cross of Christ. If I am walking in 
perfect love, my love will flow out to others ; if 
I have the affection in myself, I shall love my 
brother, and shall not stumble. If I am not 
walking in love of the brethren, I am going all 
crooked myseli I may rebuke, Christ did that ; 
but if the desire to do them good is not in me, I 
am going crooked myself, I have not the Spirit of 
Christ 

(Verse 12.) " I write unto you * children * " (not 
little children, but all saints) *' because your sins 
are forgiven you for His name's sake." A settled 
thing — ^you are not Christians at all without your 
sins are forgiven you. The poor jailor wanted 
salvation, and that 's what he got. He cried out, 
"What must I do to be saved T That'^ ^W^ 
be wanted If I come to lieat t\ift Xfe^xKscLWi^ ^^ 



40 LECTURES ON 

God, what I want is to be saved, to get life. Nico- 
demus came by night with his question. The 
Lord said, "You must be bom again.*' He that's 
in Christ is a new creation. The jailor did not 
know what being in Christ meant; but he believed. 
What's the consequence? He was saved by a 
work which was accomplished before ever he asked 
to be saved. If he believed in Christ, he was 
saved ; he had eternal life, that 's what he got. If 
the light gets into the soul men can't be happy 
until they have peace with God. There is diffi- 
culty now with Christians having peaca Before 
Christianity became a profession in the world a 
Christian was counted and understood to be saved; 
but now all pretend to be Christians, and they 
who are really so want to know if they are true 
Christians, whereby the simple fact of redemption 
is very much lost sight of. " Your sins are for- 
given you for His name's sake." God's judgment 
is passed already on your sins in Christ If I 
look to Christ to be saved, as bearing my sins, 
His judgment is, " You 've eternal life." That 's 
just as much the judgment of God as if Christ had 
pronounced it on His judgment-seat. He knows 
the value of the work of His Son. He is the 
judge, and not you. 

" I write unto you, little children." He can add 

a great deal to the little children; but to the 

fathers he has only one thing to say, " You have 

known Him that is from the beginning." What- 

erer else it might be, it ends afl. m \JcL\a, " "K-tlwiix 



THE FIKST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 41 

Him that is from the beginning;" that is, Christ. 
If anything is brought to me that is not Christ, I 
reject it. If I know a person, it 's himself that I 
know. I am to know that my sins are forgiven 
me for His name's sake ; but I am to know Him 
that was from the beginning. " No man knoweth 
the Son but the Father." What's the object of 
all this knowledge of Christ? All the promises 
are in Christ; He is the object of the Father's 
delight. 

The Apostle distinguishes growth. The fathers 
have known Christ from the beginning, the true 
Christ that guards the soul, knowing Him perfectly 
— no ambiguity, no uncertainty ; and all the exer- 
cises and experiences of the Christian, which are 
often so much dwelt on, are but the scafifolding of 
the soul to get at this — " known Him that is from 
the beginning." 

The young Christian is full of the joy, and is 
thus taken up with himself, whereas the old Chris- 
tian speaks less about the joy; but says, "It's 
Christ Himself possessed that makes me happy." 
His heart trusts in the Lord. The things of the 
world, even the things of the Church, don't disturb 
him. He counts on the love ever watchful, and is 
not afraid of any evil tidings. He knows that 
though heaven and earth were to dissolve and 
crumble into pieces, and the Church itself, which 
is impossible, God's throne remains. There is a 
steadiness in the man's soul, because he knows 
"ffim that is from the \>e^imii%^* — -"Nkok^^ ^k»^ 



42 LECTURES ON 

manifests Christ; one whom John had looked 
upon with his eyes, and his hands had handled. 
He was speaking of a Christ he had known, and 
seen, and handled, and which was from the begin- 
ning, and says, ''There is the Father's character;" 
and he has nothing to add. 

How far have your souls found steady rest in 
Christ, or how far are they satisfied with Christ ? 
Forsaken of firiends, are you still satisfied with 
Him, or how far are there things that you crave 
and have to resist? Have you done with the 
world, not as tired of its vanities, and weary of 
its pleasures, but because your souls have found 
something in Christ that satisfies for all ? Is He 
found such a manifestation of God to your souls 
that you rest in Him ; having found such a ripe- 
ness in Christ that the soul is satisfied, so as not 
to want other things ? Then, if you have, you 
can say, " None of these things move me." 

The two points to young men and children are, 

1. That they have overcome the wicked one, the 
prince of this world. 

2. That they have known the Father through 
believing in Christy and have therefore the Spirit 
of adoption, and have no doubt of the Father's love. 

The young men overcoming the wicked one is 
connected with their having the word of God 
abiding in them, and overcoming the world. "Love 
not the world," &c. 

Then the Uttle children are warned against 
the seduetiona of false doctrinfca, &^. ^^^\i^ \»\\a 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 43 

anointing ye have received of Him. . . . Abide in 
Him." 

I would remark that v^rhich specially charac- 
terises the young men is conflict with the world, 
and if we would be satisfied vrith the knowledge 
of Him that is from the beginning, there must be 
the overcoming the world. "All that is in the 
world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, 
and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is 
of the world." There must be conflict with the 
world if the soul is to grow up into Christ in all 
things; thete must be the giving up of the 
world. " They are not of the world." 

May we so see the excellency of Christ, and so 
know, in the ways of that lowly Man, the full ex- 
pression, unfolding, and manifestation of the char- 
acter of God, that our hearts may be knit to Him ; 
and soon we shall see Him face to face, "aud know, 
even as we are known." 



4t IDCIUllS 



IV. 

A5T of yoa who were here last Tuesday will 
remember we were dwdlii^ a little on the three 
characters of the common position of Christians, 
which are twice repeated; yiz^ fathers, yonng 
men, and litUe children. Fathers are addressed 
in the fourteenth verse, yonng men from the 
fourteenth verse to the seventeenth, and little 
children from the eighteenth to the twenty- 
seventh. That which characterizes the fathers is 
the knowledge of Him that is from the b^;inning, 
^Ye have known Him that was from the b^in- 
ning;" that is, Christ. In the Gospels we get 
what He was from the b^inning ; but John goes 
further than the other (rospels. These pretenders 
thought to bring in something else, to add some- 
thing else by way of precept to what He was 
down here, and the Apostle draws their attention 
to Him that was from the beginning. 

Now Christ being risen, and ascended up on 
high, has become the communication of that life 
(which we have received) of which He was the 
expression. The fulness of eternal life was 
manifested in Him, and is reproduced in us. The 
only real value of experiences is that they are the 
meana of developing what C\it\a\. \a> Vst^aJdu^ 



V 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 45 

down what we are, so that we may gradually lose 
sight of ourselves, and grow up into Him. When 
he comes to young men and little children he 
has a great deal to say; when speaking to the 
fathers he has nothing to say but "you have 
known Him that is from the beginning " — simply 
tells them of the fulness of Christ, and that is 
sufficient to draw forth their affections ; but to the 
young men and children it is different : " I have 
written to you, young men, because ye have over- 
come the wicked one." The characteristic is not 
that of knowledge of Him that is from the 
beginning, but conflict with Satan. That which 
characterizes the babes in Christ is the knowledge 
of the Father. They were more sensible of His 
love as little children, and as such were in danger 
of being seduced ; " but ye have an unction from 
the Holy One " to judge them that would seduce 
you. The Apostle refers to that which is the 
power by which they are to overcome them. 

You 11 find three great contrasts : Christ in 
contrast with Satan, Spirit in contrast with flesh, 
and the Father in contrast with the world." 
Christ put the world to the test, and found it 
wanting when He says, " But when the Spirit 
of truth is come. He shall convince the world 
of sin," &c., not wicked men of their sins, but 
the world that rejected Christ. " The Word was 
made flesh." The Son of God came and is gone 
away. What the Holy Ghost calls the world 
to account about is tiie aJoaeiifi^ oi V!JHm\i\ ^Ska 



46 LECTURES ON 

Cain and Abel, not merely, " Why are you naked?" 
but, "Where is Abel, thy brother r Adam had been 
turned out of Paradise because he did not obey 
God in the garden. Now in his posterity there is 
hatred in his heart against his brother, but more 
than this, against Christ Christ was presented, 
and man's enmity broke out. It was not only 
Gain had slain Abel, but his blood cried from the 
ground; and as God said to Cain, "Where is Abel?" 
so now He says by the Holy Ghost, "What have 
you done with my Son V It is not merely that 
the law of God has been outraged, but when God 
Himself came into the world as a man they 
rejected Him. Satan is the prince of this world, 
was always so from the fall of man, but was first 
called so in connection with the scene of Geth- 
semane. " I have yet one Son ; " I '11 send him, 
it may be they will reverence my Son; "and 
when He came they said, This is the heir, come, 
let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours." 
They crucified God's Son, and there is no more to 
be offered to the world, nothing to be presented, 
as if it were a question whether the world should 
be condemned or not. Christ was a minister of 
the circumcision for the truth of God to confirm 
the promises made unto the fathers; but the 
Jews would not have Him, and the Jew now has 
no title whatever to the promises, but must come 
in as a sinner on the same ground of mercy and 
grace as the Gentiles. The testimony of the Holy 
Ghost is, " that the whole \voiVd lieJOtL Sxv V\d&fiAr 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 47 

ness," all that is in the world. Therefore these 
things are valuable in the world, " the lust of the 
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life." 
Satan manages the world by them, and men 
manage one another as well as they can. Satan 
is of the world, the Son is of the Father. He 
gave Himself for our sins that He might de- 
liver us from this present evil world, the lust of 
the eyes, the pride of life, and the energy of 
nature. Just so far as we have the Spirit of 
Christ in us we shall be dead to the world, not for 
peace, for that God gave us in Christ — inward 
peace I mean. Here he puts the young men 
in contrast, as overcoming the world, and shows 
where their real strength is, divine strength. 
"The word of God abideth in you," not merely 
you refer to it, but it abideth in you. If you look 
to Christ in the temptation, His answers to Satan, 
there was no lust of the flesh, could be none ; but 
He was hungry. Satan says, " Make these stones 
bread," to tempt Him, " Cast thyself down," then 
shows Him all the glory of the world, and says, 
" All the glory of this world is given to me ; the 
world ^is given to me, worship me ; and all shall be 
thine, own me as the prince of this world, and 
you shall have it all." His answer was in every 
case the word of God. All Christ's thoughts and 
life were the expression of the word of God abid- 
ing in Him. He was the Word, the living Word. 
So what characterizes the young men is having 
the Word abiding in fhem, 1\. \& ii'^^. \£kKt^ 



48 LECTURES ON 

recollecting something to say, or finding out 
something in the Word when we want it; but 
the word of God must be the spring of our 
actions, and that's what he means by the word 
of God "abiding in you." A "young man" 
does not fly to it just when he wants it, but 
lives in it. God's words living in his mind, 
he knows all that is in the world is not of the 
Father. If I get my thoughts from this world, 
and talk of riches, I shall say, " That man has a 
fine fortunty The Lord says it 's almost impos- 
sible for a man with a fine fortune to get to 
heaven, though all things are possible with God. 
Many are the expressions of our desires in this 
world. If the mind is living in that sphere 
of thought, our taste and habit will be formed 
by it. The Spirit of God has a world of His 
own, and the written Word becomes the guide 
for everything. That's how we are to judge 
everything by the word of God. I can do so 
according to the state of my souL If the word 
of God is abiding in me, the world and every- 
thing beside will be judged by it. 

For example, Israel was called out to be put into 
the land, and certain things were stated on the 
ground. of which they might get into the land ; but 
they had totally failed, and they were in a peculiar 
condition. One book (Deuteronomy) contained 
the precepts which were to conduct them into 
Canaan. Well, Christ was sent in the proper 
time as Messiah to take tbia ^osv^Ai^i mth the 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 49 

poor people, but their consciences did not recog- 
nize Him. That book formed His mind. The 
Lord quotes out of that book: "Cast thyself 
down." No, " I 'm with my people to obey God." 
He had got into Israel's place where God's mind 
and Spirit put the godly. His soul was fixed ; 
His soul and life were in God's thoughts, and so if 
your mind were habitually formed by God's word, 
instead of living in the world, you wouldn't want 
to be getting a text for what you do, but you 
would be living in the Word, and the world would 
be at once judged ; that 's what it is to have the 
word of God abiding in you. Some did not dis- 
cern Christ, because, as He says, " Ye have not 
the word of God abiding in you." If their hearts 
had not been in a fleshly state they would have 
known John the Baptist. All the poor and needy 
ones did. They would have known Christ; but 
they said, " He hath a devil, and is mad." John 
came in the way of righteousness, dwelt in the 
desert apart from all men, and ate locusts and 
wild honey, and they said John was mad. Christ 
came in grace, eating and drinking with men, and 
they said He was a glutton and a wine-bibber ; 
but God's wisdom was in Christ, and in John, and 
wisdom is justified of her children. " John pro- 
claimed that the axe was laid to the root of the 
tree ; " but when Christ came it was to " bind up 
the broken-hearted," &c. The poor broken heart 
said, " That 's what I want." Wisdom is justified 
of her children. The Word a\>odi<^\xil5AscL^*^^'^ 

D 



50 LECTURSS ON 

how the stax>iig man was bound. It was not by a 
miracle wrought by the putting forth His power, 
or we could not be enjoined to do it; but by 
meeting him with " It is written," and we are to 
use Scripture as He did, not looking for a scrip- 
ture to meet it when the temptation comes, but 
having the soul in that state through the word of 
God abiding in us, that Satan can't touch us. 
Satan attacks the flesh ; but if I 'm walking in the 
Spirit he can't touch me, for the new nature can't 
sin when cast into temptation. 

Thus I 'm not to have to seek the Word for a 
text to suit my case, but to be living in it ; for 
it 's the delight of the new man to be living by 
every word of Gk)d. There is strength and real 
liberty, and Satan can't touch me if my soul is 
living in that ; all the rest is set aside. I am 
not harassed or uncertain. I may have sin in 
me, but my meat is to do the will of God. The 
heart's at liberty, and the Spirit of God feeds it 
with Christ. We are not perfect; indeed, none 
of us are as perfect here as we might be ; but we 
have the privilege, that though we have the flesh 
in us, we are not obliged to live and walk after it, 
or even to think of it. The word of God abideth 
in you, not for you to fly to it when temptation 
comes. We are to keep Satan out, have the door 
barred against him. " Eesist the devil, and he will 
flee from you." A woman may be alone in a 
house, by herself, and a robber be attempting to 
break in; but if the dooi is abut shft ia not in 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 51 

danger. As long as she keeps the door shut she 
need not fear robbers ; for the question is not as 
regards her own weakness, but the strength of the 
door. So we are to be dwelling in the Word to 
keep out Satan. Having Christ between us and 
Satan we are safe, whatever his artifices. 

A Christian has no right to have a will of 
his own, nor should he desire it, but rather " to 
know what is that good and perfect will of 
God." All that is in the world is not of the 
Father; the affections of the flesh are in the 
world, and there is the power of Satan. The 
Father delights in Christ. If I delight in Christ 
there is communion of affection. I have the 
affections of the Father: "If any man love the 
world the love of the Father is not in him," 
and the fashion of this world passeth away; 
"but he that doeth the will of God abideth for 
ever." All His counsels He will make good 
morally. I am brought into the way of God's 
will, and He is not going to destroy His own 
will ; it abideth for ever. I am to grow up into 
Christ 

The address to the little children would be 
esteemed by many the most obscure part of 
Scripture. It is the last time. The thing that 
marks it is there are many Antichrists. That 
which characterizes the last time is the corrupting 
and spoiling God*s last testimony of good, and 
thus bringing weakness where there ahoviii. V^-"^ 
power. We see in the case of t\i^ ^\!a.CiV^'^'Sk ^\A.*Ow^ 



52 LECTURES ON 

dumb spirit that man is not able to use the power 
God gave to cast out Satan's power. " Why could 
not we cast him out ? ** which brought out the 
exclamation : '' faithless and perverse generation, 
how long shall I be with you ? how long shall I 
suffer you ? " As much as to say, " It 's no use my 
staying here if there 's not power to put out the 
eviL" It 's the last time. There are many Anti- 
christs. That 's a solemn thing. God's patience, 
how wonderful ! As long as there is a soul to win 
God's patience goes on bearing with wickedness 
and corruption; but many Antichrists are come 
in. It 's often thought to be something requiring 
depth of knowledge. No; little children are 
told of it ; it 's a common truth. Antichrist was 
to come; but that before he comes there are 
many Antichrists, and they might seduce them, 
there is the danger. The antichrist is to come, who 
will deny both the Father and the Son. They 
can't mistake him ; there 's no subtlety in Anti- 
christ His is a bold, open denial; but John 
speaks of antichrists already come. He says," They 
went out from us because they were not of us." 
Jude says, " There are certain men crept in un- 
awares, who were before of old ordained to this 
condemnation." It was a common doctrine that 
Antichrist was to come, and the babes knew he 
would come in opposition to Christ, to oppose and 
set aside what Christ had done, but the Apostle 
tells them there are many Antichrists now ; there 
were those before the Antidoiiat c»)Xclq. That they 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 53 

would need the unction of the Holy One, as well as 
the warning of the Apostle, to be able to detect ; for 
" Satan transforms himself into an angel of light." 
It 's the seductions of the Antichrists now in the 
world, against which he warns them. Those who, 
by the power of Satan, set up to seduce away 
from Christ, not to frighten away, but to ensnare 
those who have not the unction from the Holy 
One. He does not tell them there were many 
Antichrists to come ; but many now, and it 's the 
direct power of Satan. That 's what characterizes 
properly Antichrist. Satan is not only called a 
liar, but a Serpent. Antichrist is a religious 
character; he works miracles, and all that have 
not received the love of the truth are seduced by 
him. He is a prophet, has a religious character, 
as spoken of in Thessalonians, with all power, 
and signs, and lying wonders, and with all de- 
ceivableness of imrighteousness, not merely civil 
power. 

Of what is Satan the Prince ? Of this world. 
And how? By the lusts of this world. Where 
the object of the heart is the grandeur of the 
world, or prosperity in this world, the character of 
it is to obliterate that which shows what man is. 
The spirit of the world hides from man the secret 
of man's departure from God. I must keep my- 
self from it The saint has to be kept out of the 
spirit of the world. Whatever has not the charac- 
ter of the word of God is of the world, and 
Satan is the prince of it, and 1 ci^XL^\\a;M^^'«)^asiL'5. 



54 LECTURES ON 

prosperity without having Satan's idols. If you 
take Christ and His glory, you must take His 
cross ; you can't have Christ and the worid that 
rejected Him. Where there is the unction from 
the Holy One (if the Spirit is not grieved in us), 
though only a babe, we can say at once, "It's 
not of the Father, but of the worid." The Apostle 
said, "He that is of God heareth vsP Where 
there is not due place given to the word of God, 
there is no protection against the seducers. Is 
the place of the Church of God in the world that 
rejected Christ ? No ; it 's in heaven, joined to 
Christ, and the Church takes the word of God as a 
guide while on earth. If I have a desire for a single 
thing in the world, it 's not of the Father, it 's of 
the world. Speaking of responsibility in Christ, 
I don't see how we can be kept from imbibing the 
spirit of Antichrist, except it is as being not of 
the world, even as Christ is not of the world. 

First, then, we must have the word of God 
abiding in us ; next, there must be the unction 
from the Holy One, by which everything will be 
judged ; and, lastly, there must be the perception 
of the distinctness and definiteness of the place 
of the Church of God. The world cannot know 
the place of the Church. "They went out from 
us because they were not all of us ; but ye have 
an unction from the Holy One, and know all 
things." 

We are to judge the many Antichrists, not the 
Antichnat, but the many Aiit\.cl[vtvEt.», before he 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 55 

aes, that which ministers to the flesh and 
uces from the Father. " Come out of her, my 
►pie, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and 
t ye receive not of her plagues." It 's a moral 
Qg to be kept from the things of the world; 
y are not of the Father. We must be iden- 
3d with Christ if we would realize joy and 
)ngth. 



56 LECTURES ON 



V. 

We were led, in speaking of the three classes of 
Christians, we were led to see, in the last specially, 
it is warnings against the seductions of Anti- 
christ. 

In the first, to the fathers, it is, that they have 
known Him that is &om the beginning. In the 
second, to young men, they have overcome the 
world ; and in the last, to the little children, it is 
warning them against the seductions of Anti- 
christ. And now we resume at the 28th verse, 
"And now, children, abide in Him; that, when 
He shall appear, we may have confidence, and not 
be ashamed before Him at His coming. If ye 
know that He is righteous, ye know that every 
one that doeth righteousness is bom of Blm." On 
this the third chapter is founded. Being bom of 
Him, there will be the nature and character of 
Him of whom we are bom. 

That's the character throughout the epistle. "He 
that does righteousness is righteous." If the life 
of Christ is there it will show itself; if the eternal 
life that was with the Father was manifested in 
righteousness, it will be manifested in righteous- 
ness in us. If I see righteousness in the sense 
that Chriat is righteous, 1 say ttia ^\«tMl life is 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 57 

there ; that person is bom of God. I don't mean 
righteousness as between man and man. We see 
in Christ that righteousness is having no will of 
one's own ; that 's never found in an unconverted 
man. Again, we see He never did a single thing 
for Himself, yet you find Him full of joy. Well, 
that kind of righteousness is only found where 
the divine life is. Where God is the motive for 
everything to the heart and conscience, the motive 
of the heart characterizes the man, the thought of 
the presence of God governs the conduct. Take 
an honest man in the world. There is righteous- 
ness between man and man, but what detects the 
unrighteousness of the world is, God is entirely 
shut out. It is man's righteousness, and not 
Christ's righteousness. Man's righteousness never 
brings God in. If a man has wronged his neigh- 
bour, he is condemned by all as a bad man. God 
may be wronged over and over again, all their life 
through, and they don't care. They say nothing 
about it; they will let God be what a man 
pleases, and say, " It is between him and God ; it 
does not concern us. We have nothing to do with 
it, provided only that he is honest with men." And 
that's horrid unrighteousness, because self is the 
centre from beginning to end; that's how the 
world is governed. It may be seen in a child at 
school wanting to get a prize, to the exclusion of 
others; for only one can get it That's what's 
called emulation, which men are so ready to 
praise. Self ia the spring o£ eNex^^CtiMi^^^sA^^ 



58 LECTUBES OK 

God ; 80 if there is righteousness in the things of 
men, righteousness in the things of Grod is alto- 
gether left out, and Gk)d must call that horrid un- 
righteousness which is called honour in the world. 
We should be thankfid for government ; but when 
the young man in the Grospel came to Jesus, and 
said, " Bid my brother, that he divide the inherit- 
ance with me," He replied, "Who made me a 
divider and a judge ? " He leaves the question of 
right according to man (for it was right that he 
should have that which belonged to him), and 
shows what is under the surface: ''Beware of 
covetousness." The Lord is our pattern in every- 
thing, and when the Lord is the pattern it detects 
the motives of the heart ; so He said, " Beware of 
covetousness/' The one desired to have it, the 
other desired not to give it up. Take care that 
the motive and spring of conduct is God, and not 
self. There He strikes at the principles of covet- 
ousness; there must be that state of heart in 
which Grod is the spring of the wilL Christ is the 
test—" He that is bom of God." 

" Behold what manner of love the Father hath 
bestowed on us, that we should be called the sons 
of G^d." Now let us see what are the privileges 
and condition of those in such a state. Bom of 
God, think of the love expressed in our being 
'' called sons of God." And what a thought it is ; 
not merely I'm safe, but I am connected with God's 
nature. I can delight in God's nature and affec- 
tdons. I have the nature of God \x^ delight in, and 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 59 

enjoy God in the character of a son ; and know- 
ledge of the nature Christ came to tell of, and to 
declare in the character of Father. He who knew 
it as dwelling in His bosom from all eternity, " No 
man hath seen God at any time ; the only-begotten 
Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, He has 
declared Him," told us God's character. He who 
hath enjoyed the outgoings of the Father's love, 
He came to tell us of that love as He knew it to 
be. If I am to give you the character of my 
father, it must be as I have known him. Christ 
has entered into, apprehended, and enjoyed all 
that God was as the Father. ** In Him dwelt all 
the fulness of the Godhead bodily." He in whom 
all the divine nature rested. He has declared Him. 
Christ having become a man, and come down from 
heaven to declare the Father, takes this place as 
Son on the earth, that we might know the rela- 
tionship of sons; and the heart of the Father 
came out in approbation, "This is my beloved 
Son, in whom I am well pleased." Christ having 
enjoyed His sonship down here, desires that ive 
should know down here all that love, that our 
souls should understand the relationship of what 
God was to Christ down here, and know that the 
Father loves us as He loved Him, " I have de- 
clared thy name unto my brethren, and will declare 
it, that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may 
be in them, and I in them " — this our souls may 
know. It may be very feebly, but we are called 
to know God in fellowship ml\iG\im\»\S5w»^"^^K^ 



60 LECTUBES ON 

down here we are to see in what He was to 
Christ, what He is to us^ called sons of God, " that 
the same love may be in them, and I in them." He 
is the conductor of all this love into our souls. 

How can we know Gk)d ? The mind can never 
find out God. "Who by searching can find out 
God?" Nothing but faith can put God in His 
place. If I am to find out God by searching, my 
mind must be master of my subject, and then 
God wouldn't be God. The mind can't judge the 
character of God ; we can only take it where it is 
revealed. It 's in Christ We learn it there, not as 
a matter of knowledge, but as that which should 
sanctify our souls. I know we fail, but there is such 
a thing as dwelling in God. There is acquaintance 
with God, so as to give settled peace. " Acquaint 
thyself with God, and be at peace." " This is life 
eternal, that they might know thee, the only true 
God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." 
Don't say it 's too high for us, as if it were an at- 
tainment in philosophy. No, it's not the mind. 
How do I begin to know God is love ? Why, He 
loved me, a sinner. I thus begin at the lowest 
point. " Herein is love ; not that we loved God, 
but that He loved us, and sent His Son to be the 
propitiation for our sins," I know it by the in- 
carnation of the Son of God ; there He 's become 
everything to us. He is perfect love, perfect pa- 
tience, perfect goodness ; all that is nearest to the 
every-day wants of a soul, the commonest wants 
of bumanity. 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 61 

"Beloved, now are we the sons of God" — we 
are called sons of God, thus called by the same 
name as Christ, and the world knows us not, 
but thinks we are mad — "therefore the world 
knoweth us not, because it knew Him not." It 
was just the same thing with Christ. They said 
He was mad, had a deviL No wonder they don't 
understand what we are: "Therefore the world 
knoweth us not, because it knew Him not." 
Who ? JETim, Christ The Apostle's mind was so 
occupied with Christ, he did not even name Him; 
he thought everyone must know. Suppose your 
child was sick, and I were to ask you, " How is 
he ? " you would know directly I meant your sick 
child, because your mind would be dwelling on 
nothing else, so here it is taken for granted, you 
know ; therefore he does not tell us, does not say 
who it is. His mind is occupied with Christ, the 
eternal life that was with the Father, and has 
been manifested to us. He dwells in you, and 
you in him; that's where the world has no 
knowledge, and that 's how the world is no match 
for a Christian. It does not know his resources ; 
nay, it will even taunt him on that score, as Eab- 
shakeh did Hezekiah when he said, " Now I will 
give thee 2000 horses, if thou be able on thy part 
to set riders upon them." 

"Now are we the sons of God;" not merely 
when we are up where we shall be, but now. It 's 
the only relationship we can be in to God. A man 
under the law was a servant ', \i\AxLO^ ^^"^i^-vOwba. 



62 LECTUBES ON 

come, bom of a woman, bom under the law, and we 
are sons. We can't be anything else, as in the case 
of the prodigal son. God can't take His child into 
His house as a servant, because His heart could not 
be satisfied. He could not treat as a servant for 
this reason one whom He loved as a son. When the 
prodigal knows the father's love, he does not say 
as he had intended to say, '* Make me as one of 
thy hired servants.** How could he say it when 
his father's arms were hanging on his neck, and 
when all the house was. to be happy because the 
father was happy and satisfied with his son ? He 
could do nothing but wonder and adore ; and, as it 
has been remarked, we lose sight of the prodigal, 
and all we get after is about the father and his 
house. Now as the father's house was ap- 
proached, what fears and tremblings, what ques- 
tionings were in his mind, such as. What will he 
say to me ? and the like ; and the nearer he got, 
the more uneasy he would grow, until the father 
was on his neck, and then all was over. So it is 
with a soul getting to God. There is uneasiness, 
if the work of the Spirit is there, until God's 
mind has been accepted from Himself; not from 
any progress or experience we may have known, 
but from Himself; and the nearer the heart gets 
to God, it is always the more uneasy until we 
know God's mind and get it from Himself. Then 
we know it for ourselves. When we have learned 
to take our thought of our case from God's mind 
we get peace. It would be inconaiatent for us to 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OP JOHN. 63 

say we are not sons because we are so failing ; for 
if the Father is Father, the son must be son. He 
h8U3 no other place to give us but sons; for He 
can't take us out of Christ and make us something 
else. " Now are we the sons of God." We have 
our place as sons on earth. We know the perfect 
relationship, but we don't know the glory yet, 
"what we shall be." "We, through the Spirit, 
wait for the hope of righteousness." I don't wait 
to be a child, I am one ; nor wait for righteous- 
ness, I 've got it in Christ ; but for the glory which 
is the hope of righteousness. 

How am I to know the clue for all this, that I 
may understand it ? I must get back to Christ as 
the pattern of revelation, the model Man ; " for we 
know that when He shall appear we shall be like 
Him." He is the first-bom among many brethren. 
" We shall be like Him ; for we shall see Him as 
He is." All the glory is BUs who became a man, 
that He might take us back into all the joy of the 
Father's presence. It is this that makes Christ's 
coming again the one object, the one hope of our 
heart, though death would be gain to me. I don't 
hope for death. I might rejoice, but I don't hope 
to die. I hope for Christ to come; "not that I 
would be unclothed, but clothed upon;" not to 
put off this tabernacle, but that mortality may be 
swaUowed up of Ufe. He'd got eternal life, having 
got hold of it in Christ ; and he has such a sense 
of the power of this life, that he longs to be in 
the enjoyment of all its coMec^vvfeTkR.^. "SaSs*^- 



64 LECTURES ON 

ways confident: "Absent from the body, present 
with the Lord." If I drop the body I have life, 
eternal life, in my soul, and I *m looking for the 
glory if I die. Blessed as it is to see a saint die 
(and it's the most lovely sight in the world), that's 
not the hope of the saint. Our only hope is, when 
Christ shall appear " we shall be like Him." We 
shall not all die, but we shall all be conformed to 
the likeness of God's Son. It's God's intention 
to confonn us to the likeness of His Son in glory. 
I don't look to be conformed to Him in the grave, 
but as He is; for we shall be witnesses of His 
victory over death. The thief on the cross said, 
" Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy 
kingdom." But Christ said. You shall not wait till 
then ; you shall be happy to-day with me in Para- 
dise, thus bringing in the separate state of blessed- 
ness of a soul; and it surely is a blessed thing. 
But God's intention is to conform us to Christ in 
glory, and Christ's coming is the only hope of the 
Church. " It doth not yet appear what we shall 
be, but we know when He shall appear we shall 
be like Him." And what is more, " We shall see 
Him as He is;" not see Him as He was, but as 
He is. In one sense, I am not nearer to His 
likeness at the day of my death than at the day 
of my conversion ; but morally I am, and they 
are never separated. The revelation of the glory 
to my soul shuts out everything inconsistent with 
it. Paul says to the Philippians, "If by any 
means I might attain unto tiie leavjctx^eXAOTL cS. llvs 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 65 

dead," nothing can ever satisfy my soul but that. 
There is present fellowship with his suflferings, 
looking forward to the prize of his high calling ; 
but he says, I have not got it yet, " I press toward 
the mark." *' Our conversation is in heaven, from 
whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord 
Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that 
it may be fashioned like unto His glorious body." 
Actual glory with and in Christ, " forgetting those 
things which are behind, and reaching forth to 
those things which are before." He would not 
have or allow one atom of his life to be inconsis- 
tent with the resurrection. We ought sdl to be 
able to say, * This one thing I do ; forgetting the 
things which are behind, I am reaching forward to 
be like Christ.' " He that hath this hope in him 
purifieth himself even as He is pure." 

Take Christ's love in Ephesians : " Christ loved 
the Church, and gave Himself for it; that He 
might sanctify and cleanse it by the washing of 
water by the Word, that He might present it to 
Himself a glorious Church." The application of 
the Word did not make the glory brighter, but 
was preparing for it The revelation of Christ 
as He is forms the soul to think. If I am to be 
like Him by-and-by, I'll be as like Him as I 
can now. " He that hath this hope in him puri- 
fieth himself, even as He is pure;" so that he 
may be like Him now, having the blessed privilege 
to get this as the measure, "ev^ii ^a^'^Sa.^Nssfe? 
"I aanctify myself;" that, la, B.^ '\a xJw^ w^a 'e^^ 



66 LECTUBES ON 

apart as the one according to GocTs mind, as the 
model, that we may look at Him and be like 
Him. *' That they also might be sanctified through 
the trath/' the Holy Ghost taking of the things of 
Christ and shewing them unto us. " We behold- 
ing, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are 
changed into the same image from glory to glory." 
The real practical power of the hope of the coming 
of the Lord sanctifies and forms the affections of 
the heart, and the revelation of the glory of Christ 
is the means of my purifying myself as He is 
pure, the Word revealing Christ, and drawing 
forth the affections of the heart to Him, that I 
may grow up to Him in all things. 

In Colossians it is that He might present every 
man perfect in Christ Jesus; that is,havingthe heart 
fully set on everything that belongs to Christ, 
" who is the image of the invisible God, in whom 
it pleased the Father «dl fulness should dwell." 
After developing all these things of Christ's glory, 
he says, "I want to get every man perfect ac- 
cording to these glories of Christ;" and that 
which makes it so blessed is, that it is the joy of 
being like Christ. It 's not as giving us a law to 
walk by, or precepts to guide us. There are pre- 
cepts; but that which purifies is the affections 
being set on Christ, to be like Christ now, as it is 
the purpose of God that we should be conformed 
to the image of His Son. I would just say, Christ's 
coming is to receive the Church to Himself before 
He appears, as in Thessalomas^ \ ^xid thia is the 



THE WEST EPISTLB OF JOHK. 67 

delight of the heart's affections (it is a little differ- 
ent to the appearing with Him in glory) ; " so shall 
we ever be with the Lord." We get the thought : 
we are all to be caught up together to meet the 
Lord. I might say, "There's one so strong in 
faith and good works, he will surely go up first." 
No; all distinction fades away in Christ; all is 
gone in the thought, we all get there together. When 
I look back and see the devotedness of Paul, I 
think of the love of Christ, who takes us all up 
together ^ to be with Him for ever. That there may 
be no difference, all alike are to be conformed to 
the image of God's own Son. Christ 's love rests 
perfectly upon the Church, because it is Himself; 
He cannot hate His own flesh. That which is most 
intimate in affection is common to us all. We go 
to be with the Lord ; not to appear with Christ, 
blessed as that is, but to be with Him, It is a special 
blessing to he with Christy which is far better than 
to appear with Him as partaker of the glory. It 
is a marvellous honour to be honoured with Him, 
but it is better to be with Him; therefore the 
Apostle says, "So shall we ever be with the Lord." 
He is satisfied with that In Colossians it is, 
" When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then 
shall ye also appear with Him in glory ; " and he 
immediately connects it with responsibility. "Mor- 
tify therefore your members which are on the 
earth;" but when he speaks of being with the 
Lord, oh, that will not be connected with wjl^ 
growth or progress I may laav^ TiiajiLfc^\s^ ^'vjl Ski^^ 



68 . LECTURES ON 

common ground of Christ's love to His own! 
I can look at the saints, even at Paul, and say, 
We shall be with Him together. The appearing 
with Christ is connected with responsibility of 
service. I shall delight in the Thessalonian be- 
lievers when in the glory as well as Paul; but 
they won't be my crown of rejoicing, but Paul's — 
the reward of his service. That principle is never 
to be the motive of conduct. The hope of reward 
should never lead me into service ; but when tried 
in service, as we surely shall be, then it sustains 
the soul in the path. What was Christ's motive ? 
Infinite, divine love. But what is said of Him, 
" who for the joy that was set before Him endured 
the cross," is also said of Moses : " He endured, 
as seeing Him who is invisible ; for he had respect 
unto the recompence of reward." If I am preach- 
ing to sinners the love of Christ constrains me, 
but I want something to sustain me in the path. 
Love is the motive, but we need to be sustained 
by the hope set before us as we tread the path 
from the cross to the crown, when we shall be 
conformed to Him. "Beloved, now are we the 
sons of God." We have not to enquire if we are 
sons, but take that as the ground of our now being 
conformed to Him. 

Our souls must get to delight in Gk)d. God has 

imfolded Himself. " Oh," you '11 say, " that 's so 

high ! " Well, but Christ has come as the link to 

what is so high by coming so low (and He stooped 

lower than any), and He made ^itaaA^ wsx only 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 69 

object. It 's not the power of the mind that thinks 
about it, but the singleness of the eye that looks 
at it; the single eye has no object but Christ, 
The old nature is not to act. The new man has 
no other object than Christ. 

You are called to know God. " Acquaint thy- 
self with God, and be at peace." That was always 
true, but you are now called to know God in 
Christ. Oh that the world may not get into our 
hearts in such sort as to make us incapable of en- 
joying God! He is leading us from circum- 
stances by the communication of the divine nature 
to the knowledge and enjoyment of God. If I 
am in sorrow, God is my comfort ; if I Ve suf- 
fered loss, Christ is everything to me. We are to 
cast all our cares upon Him, great and small ; and 
so '* the peace of God shall keep our hearts and 
minds by Christ Jesus." Is His throne shaken 
by your cares, because they are so many, and so 
great? No; His throne is unaffected by them 
all. Thus, while it is applicable to the commonest 
cares, all these things but bring us into the know- 
ledge of God. 

May our communion and fellowship be such as 
that we may know His peace; not peace with 
Him, but the peace in which He dwells ; to know 
that His throne is not disturbed by all our cares, 
and thus to know Him, and find our joy in Him, 
and wait to be like Him, "purifying ourselves 
even as He is pure ! " 



70 LECTURES ON 



VI. 

It was not simply now (any more than with us) 
the setting forth of the grace and goodness of 
Grod in a world that knew Him not, in the midst 
of a world of sin and misery, though it was a 
blessed privilege that one should be permitted to 
be the channel of such a testimony as the Gospel, 
the messenger to bring in the wondrous message of 
love to this wretched world. That, of course, 
met with opposition, but it was a wonderful and 
sensible blessing to man. But the Spirit had 
another service to perform, another truth to unfold. 
"Ungodly men had crept in unawares," and it 
became necessary to warn against eviL It is far 
more diflScult to preserve blessing when it is 
brought in than to testify of it at the first So 
we find in Jude the exhortation given to earnestly 
contend for the faith once delivered to the saints, 
not merely to publish the tidings of the blessing 
that had been brought in pure and uncorrupted. 
" Believe not every spirit." Far happier to say, 
** Believe the Spirit ; " but because of error it had 
to be said, " Believe not'' — the mystery of iniquity 
which was to come in, and was already in the 
world, required it. All the Apostles had to warn 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 71 

thus against the evil which had come in, and John 
more especially, as being the last of them. 

"Try the spirits, whether they are of God, 
because many false prophets are gone out into the 
world." Men had slept, and the enemy had sown 
tares. Satan always seeks by violence and opposi- 
tion to resist the coming in of truth, and to hinder 
its reception ; or if he can't do that, then, when it 
is come in, he will corrupt the truth. " Evil men 
have crept in unawares," false prophets (or false 
spirits) are gone out into the world, holy kind of 
men, it may be, in their way, but false prophets, 
who attack true and simple souls, with great 
apparent power, mingling of much real truth ; but 
error must be put down in the heart and con- 
science. It is a great mercy to have orthodoxy 
professed ; by orthodoxy, I mean the cardinal truths 
of the Gospel, although, of course, the profession of 
orthodoxy is not life. There may be orthodoxy, 
and yet not life, especially in these days, and we 
have to come back to where the Spirit of God will 
keep the soul in the profession of the trutL 
There may not be salvation, though there may be 
orthodoxy of profession. The Lord may allow 
intellect to work, and then the question may 
arise, as with Pilate, " What is truth ? ** We find 
in men two things, scepticism and infidelity. The 
sceptic doubts all the truth ; the infidel denies the 
truth altogether, and says there is no truth, no 
knowledge, no doctrine; that's what infidelity 
always will do. But ther^ i^ diSSiexji^Tj Vcl ^s^^st^ 



72 LECTURES ON 

tmth; the conseqn^ice is, that when men get 
tired of their sins, and think aboat giving them 
np, or are troubled about the consequences, they 
b^ to enquire about truth, turn very serious 
for a while, attend to their religious duties, as 
they call it, and all that ; but finding it difficult, 
they tire, and soon grow weary of it^ and seek to 
get hold of something that promises certainty, 
and at the same time saves them the trouble of 
knowing truth for themselves. So they look for 
something established on human authority, and 
lean on the judgment and opinions of men. This 
is authority in a bad sense, man's word. God 
exercises true authority over the conscience. The 
truth is authority ; but men want something that 
will save them the exercise of their hearts and 
consciences before GUmL On human authority the 
conscience ia not with Grod, and they would be 
independent of God. Now this d^rades man 
beneath what he was intended to be ; for his true 
position was to be dependent on GUmL This is 
man's true glory. The conscience must be 
brought into contact with Grod, into the presence 
of God, and this is true ministry. Whatever 
ministry fails to do this, or has not this for its 
object, is not of God, because it is putting some- 
thing between the soul and God. If ministry be 
real, it brings God directly to the conscience 
i through the Word, whereas that which is false 

stands between God and the conscience ; and this 
will enable us to detect the difference, and to 



4 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 73 

discern at once what is false or true ministry. 
God has promised to guide the humble, and 
He will secure the humble soul against false 
prophets. The word of Gk>d never treats man's 
mind as being competent to judge it ; for it would 
be the judgment of what is authority itself over 
the conscience. People have confounded the 
power of the Word to work in the conscience, 
with a competency to judge the Word, and it's 
an awful thing ! Man's mind is incapable of 
judging God's word. If he could, it would not 
be God's at all; for that would be supposing 
man's mind equal with God, and there would be 
no God. But the natural conscience may judge 
of individual commands; such as, ''Thou shalt 
not steal" I am capable of also judging, so far 
as to know that it is good when it has acted on 
my souL It is like taking food. I may be 
entirely ignorant of the process of nutrition and 
digestion, yet I may know the full value of food, 
and be conscious of the invigorating effect pro- 
duced by the food when eaten. There are many 
things that may be estimated when they have 
acted on me, though I may have no competency 
to judge of them but by their effect. God's 
word tells me that I am thus or thus. The soul 
receives the effect by divine power. That is the 
Word judging me, not my judging the Word ; but 
the Word can produce in me the competency to 
judge, and these are often confounded in reasoning. 
Where am I to find the compet^ncY? tJia.t^a.Mcss^ 



74 LECTUBES ON 

question. It is in the Word, because it comes 
and approves itself to the heart by acting with 
power on the conscience. 

Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is 
come in the flesh is bom of God ; it begins with 
power. " Believe not every spirit" It is not simply 
the truth, and men's minds are at work ; there are 
false spirits acting on man's mind. Certain ener- 
gies are at work acting on man's mind; while poor 
man thinks himself independent, there is a spirit 
working which is either of God or of the devil, 
either truth or error to the soul. " False prophets 
are gone out into the worid." The confession of 
Jesus Christ come in the flesh is of God. That 
which puts all to the test is the real acknowledg- 
ment of Christ come in the flesh. It proves the 
truth of the person ; it 's the proper faith of him 
that speaks, and not a mere confession, because i^ 
I have faith in a thing I am subject to it ; that is, 
I am subject to Christ. No evil spirit is that. It 
would not be an evil spirit if it was; "try the 
spirits." Unless Jesus Christ is owned as God 
manifest in the flesh, it is not of God. '* Many 
false prophets are gone out into the world," and 
the owning the Lordship and authority of the 
Lord Jesus Christ is to be the test of everything. 
Tou will find a thousand things set up instead; 
but that spirit that does not bow to the Lord 
Jesus Christ is not of God. "Ye are of God, 
little children." There is no thought of putting 
them on their own competency or ability to 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 75 

judge, or on the authority of other men, but on 
the Spirit of God ; *' for greater is he that is in 
you than he that is in the world." As much 
as to say, If the Holy Ghost is in you, He 
will overcome; if not, Satan will surely get the 
better. The Church of God is, as it were, the 
great prize between Satan and God. So with 
Pharaoh and Israel when he refuses to let the 
people go. " Thus saith the Lord, Let my people 
go." Immediately the answer is, "Who is the 
Lord that I should obey Him ?" Though there it 
was to bring out the manifestation of the power 
of God in His judgment upon Pharaoh that He 
might prove Himself the mightier, as Jethro 
speaks, "Now I know that the Lord is greater 
than ill gods : for in the thing wherein they dealt 
proudly He was above them." (Ex. xviii. 11.) And 
by-and-by He will show this out more fully : when 
the Lord appears, and Satan is bound, there will 
be an "end of this conflict. But now it is carried 
on in our individual walk, and God would now 
exercise men's faith and conscience, and manifest 
His power in keeping them. And we get here 
the power of walk : " Greater is He that is in you 
than he that is in the world." 

One of the most alarming symptoms in the 
religious world at the present day is the idea that 
there is power in the truth to preserve. There is 
no power in the truth to preserve ; but the question 
is, whether the soul holds fast the truth. Unless 
my thoughts, my heart, are in the trvvt^tijA^^^ ^^r^ 



76 LECTUEES ON 

be no power in the truth to me. It is very certain 
that God will keep His truth; but is my heart 
kept? If not, it's the mere confidence of man's 
mind ; for " greater is He that is in you than he 
that is in the world." The only ground of victory 
is the power of the Spirit of God in the aflfections 
and consciences of the saints, and then the heart 
will be set on Christ, and the things of Christ to 
love Him, enjoy Him, and serve Him better. The 
conflict and dif&culty are rather when the truth is 
brought in question than when it first goes forth 
in power. If I am not kept by the Spirit of God, 
I shall not be able to resist the daily solicitations 
of sin. Man may grow tired of his sins, and tired 
of the world ; for he has long been in bondage to 
them, and desire sincerely too to break off from his 
sins; and he is attracted at first by that which 
promises him deliverance, and is glad to close with 
the offer, and so breaks off from his sins for a while, 
and is very religious, and seems devoted too ; but 
his soul does not continue. He does not like the 
trials and tribulations which ansa He can't bear 
to lose his friends, and his prosperity, and his 
place in the world, and then error is found the 
easier thing, and there must come a falling away, 
and so it will be but a little flock. False religion 
might make a monk, but can never put the con- 
science into the presence of God. Error quarrels 
not with men's passions ; for false religion in the 
man ever ministers to the passions, the thoughts, 
the feelings of men ; and thus it is false religion 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 77 

that suits the world better than truth, because it 
suits itself to man, and the mass will ever follow 
error, so Paul had to say, "All Asia is turned 
away from me." The Apostle did not expect that 
truth would have power over the world, but plainly 
declared that error would. So we see when the 
Lord allows the sifting of a large body of people 
on a point of truth, the greater number will adopt 
the error. 

"They are of the world, therefore speak they 
of the world, and the world heareth them." But 
ye are of God, little children, and have over- 
come them." If God were in them, they were 
kept; if not, they would fall away from the 
truth. We must rely on what has been declared 
by the Spirit of God, rather than what is the 
expectation of men. The Apostle himself be- 
lieved in the power of truth as much as any one, 
but he had not the vain expectation that the truth 
had power to reform the world. " Ye are of God, 
little children." This is the guard, not of the 
power, but of the means. We are of God. " He 
that knoweth God heareth us." It is not said 
" overcomes," but heareth us — he is of the truth. 
They had the spiritual power of discovering what 
was truth. The means of ascertaining truth from 
error was the recognition of the Word. Whoso- 
ever did not submit to the inspired Word was not 
to be listened to. Though they might speak like 
angels, it was not of God, it was of themselves. 

" He that is of God heareth oas." 1 cwyXA. \i^V^^ ^ 



m ■ 



78 LECTURES ON 

You must hear me or you will be lost; but I could 
say this. If you don't hew the message of the 
Gospel which I speak to you, you will perish, 
because it's the truth of God, and you are to 
search for yourselves and see. I am no guarantee 
of truth. I have it from God; but in the 
apostles themselves I get the guarantee and the 
test of truth. If you are of God you will believe 
it ; but if any one hindered any from hearing an 
apostle he could say at once he was not of God ; 
for "he that is of God heareth vs." Their 
immediate testimony is the test God was using of 
truth and error. No man now is the immediate 
vessel or guarantee of trutL Mark further, the 
moment I require anything to establish the 
authority of the Word, I take the authority of the 
Word away ; for the thing rested on is, of course, 
that which is supposed to establish the Word, and 
not the Word itselt If I take anything as 
proving the word of God, and so believe it, that 's 
not believing the Word. The Spirit of God and 
the word of God must go together. The word of 
God won't do alone; for I may attempt to judge 
of the Word by my own private judgment, and so 
get wrong. The Spirit of God won't do alone 
either ; for I may mistake my own fancies for the 
Spirit ; thqy go together. Then the moment the 
Word reaches my heart it is absolute authority, 
and the Word judges me. When they are both 
received into the heart, when thus in complete 
possession of me, Satan can't touch me, because 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 79 

they will allow nothing of the flesh, self-will, &c., 
to work. Is there evil in me ? They will enable 
me to judge it in myself and in everything around 
me. Such a one is guaranteed against all error ; 
he has the Spirit and the word of God. These 
are the comforting, peaceful, blessed means of 
guarding us from all eviL The effect of a man's 
being saved is, he is brought to God, having 
perfect peace, brought into an entire new world, 
where God is revealing Himself in His word, and 
he has his soul constantly delighting in the Word, 
where all the wisdom of God is brought out for 
his soul to be exercised in, endless and safe, learn- 
ing all that God is. And what we have all to seek 
is to be occupied with the truth every day, know- 
ing more of delighting and feeding on Christ, as 
the true God, and as the perfect Man, subject in 
all things to His Father ; and all this not so as to 
be able to write an essay on, but as the Christ, 
in whom I know God and man, the One who lived 
by the Father, depending on the Father, then 
everything that's not of Him strikes upon my 
souL It's THAT Christ who is touched, and it 
affects the whole harmony of the soul. Be 
sure of this, if it is not the living power of a 
living Christ known and enjoyed in the soul, you 
can't withstand error. It must be truth held in 
connection with the person of Christ or it will 
not guard you against error ; the mere truth is no 
match for Satan. I would not venture to meet 
Satan on the truth if I were not caLLed to <i<;^ ^5;»^ 



80 LECTURES ON 

and warn the saints, and for the glory of God, 
because I should be afraid, but I know God will 
keep me when in His service ; but I do not there- 
fore cast myself down from off the pinnacle of 
the temple, because it is written in the Word, 
"He will give His angels charge over thee to 
keep thee in all thy ways." 

We get set forth in Cain and Abel the traits of 
the two families ; viz., in Cain, hatred, violence, and 
wickedness ; in Abel, suffering, righteousness, and 
love. The eternal life which was with the Father 
is communicated to the Christian, producing in Him 
Christ's ways, thoughts, and feelings. Everyone 
that loveth is born of God. "He that dwelleth 
in Him dwelleth in God, for God is love." Love 
is the inner development of the divine nature, as 
I cannot enjoy or exercise the faculties and afiTec- 
tions of a man if I have not got the nature of a 
man, no more can I enjoy God's affections unless 
I have the nature of God. It is an old remark, 
that "knowledge can't love." You must have 
this nature, be born of God, or you can't love. 
Man's searching gets nothing. Unless he know the 
love of God in the Lord Jesus Christ he can't 
love. Suppose there is a general notion of God, 
and that His eternal Godhead is seen and ac- 
knowledged. If I have knowledge, and try to 
understand things, I shall be confounded; for 
when the state of the whole world is looked upon, 
what do I see? Why three-fourths of it given 
up to idolatry, worshipping the devil, and oppres- 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 81 

sion, degradation, and misery overwhelming all 
multitudes even in this great city, and the mind 
gets into confusion. Men may try to say that it 
is all needful for the general government of man, 
but this will not do for those who are suffering, 
if it be said, " Sin is the cause of it alL" Then I 
say, If sin has come in, what can I have, as a 
sinner, to say to God ? How can I meet God ? 
It 's of no use to tell me that He is good. He is 
that ; but I am responsible to God, and the more 
I get into the truth, the more I am confounded, 
and thrown almost into despair. Neither scepti- 
cism nor authority will do anything for me here ; 
but the moment I get Christ the whole thing is 
clear, Christ clears all up. I have not got some- 
thing now that can deal with it, but God who has 
dealt with it. God is seen in Him as dealing with 
this creation in all its sin and misery ; then I say 
sin has ruined us. All are guilty. I am guilty. But 
He has met my sin in the very way I wanted it. 
When I was in perplexity and despair about my 
sins, and when I found no way of meeting God, 
there it was God who met me, and showed me 
how He had settled it all to His glory in the 
person of the Lord Jesus Christ, who has met all 
for me, coming into the world to be a propitiation 
for our sins, into all the misery to put it away, 
and give Himself as the source of life, and putter 
away of that sin which would hinder the enjoy- 
ment of God; and then, to the perfecting of this 
love, to introduce us into thsA» '^Vds&L \a ^fe«^^. 

F 



82 LECTUKES ON 

He came down that He might take us up with 

Him. "Herein is love, not that we loved Grod, 

but that He loved us, and sent His Son to be the 

propitiation for our sins." "Herein is our love 

made perfect," or love with us made perfect, "that 

we may have boldness in the day of judgment : 

because as He is, so are we in this world." I get 

the love manifested in His coming to me and 

taking me up into the presence of God perfect in 

Himself The communication of the nature gives 

the power to love, and then it is, "Not that we 

love Him, but that He loved us, and sent His Son 

to be the propitiation for our sins." Thus giving 

us the object for our love to rest upon and work 

upon, always elevating, always satisfying. It is 

not the mysticism that delights in its own exercise 

working on itself; but there is an infinite and 

blessed object, and we are brought into association 

with and likeness to that blessed object, not 

allowing in us the least fear, all being taken away 

by His divine work, and we at rest, perfectly 

happy with God. Whatever does not make our 

hearts know God as perfect in love to ourselves 

and in ourselves, is not the whole truth ; whatever 

does not set me in the presence of God without a 

single fear remaining, so that I can enjoy His love, 

is not adequate to His love to me. 



THE HBST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 83 



VII. 

The Apostle in this part of the chapter returns to 
the great doctrine of the whole epistle. It is not 
here so much the great truth which sets the soul 
before God, but the truth we have when we are 
before God. We have already been seeing the differ- 
ence between Paul and John. While Paul sets the 
Church as justified before God, opening out the 
counsels of God, &c., John brings out the nature 
of God in the saints. It is not so much the ground 
of that which brought the soul to God, although 
he does speak of that too, but it is the character 
of the life that is communicated — the life which 
is in God the Father, derived through Christ ; it is 
first in Christ, and then manifested in the saints. 
The traits of the divine nature are brought out 
through the Christian, and this is particularly 
brought out in John. There is also another thing 
in this chapter. It is not merely that there is a 
nature and capacity to enjoy God, but the Holy 
Ghost is given as the power of that nature. The 
Holy Ghost dwelling in us gives us the power of 
enjoyment ; but that there may not be mysticism, 
that there may be no vacillation or uncertainty, he 
grounds the testimony in the public manifestation 
oif the Lord Jesus Christ ; but \Si^ ^^•wafe^ ^\ <sor 



84 LECTURES OK 

joying the source of the life is by the power of the 
Holy Ghost dwelling in us. God is love, and that 
is first openly seen at the cross of Christ ; and then 
in the new nature we have a capacity to enjoy that 
love ; but the fear must be taken away, because 
fear hath torment, and torment is not enjoyment, 
and then he shows what removes the fear. " Perfect 
love casteth out fear," not perfect righteousness, 
that had given the peace before God, but the reve- 
lation of Himself, and what He is, alone casteth 
out fear. If it be asked, How do you know God 
loves you? Oh, I reply, I have a certain and 
constant proof of that in the gift of His Son ! and 
then besides that I have the daily and hourly 
enjoyment of God as my Father, and I know it 
because I am enjoying it. I may prove to another 
the love of God by certain acts, such as the gift 
of His own Son, which is an open manifestation 
of God's love ; but this does not take away from 
the daily enjoyment of God, the capacity for which 
I get in the new nature and by the power of the 
Spirit. 

It is remarkable to see how the apostle guards 
from mysticism by bringing the mind back to the 
plain statement of the Gospel "We have seen, 
and do testify, that the Father hath sent the Son 
to be the Saviour of the world." In the seventh 
verse He begins by saying, ** Beloved, let us love 
one another." Here we have the love of God in 
exercise in the new nature, and the characteristic 
of this nature is to recognize i^^ iel wiotker. If I 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 85 

have got this divine nature, I can't help liking it 
in another. I may have many prejudices to over- 
come, but there is an attractive power in the thing 
itself. I don't speak of it as a mere duty ; it is there 
in the nature, and being divine it is much above 
angels, although they are higher creatures. We are 
to love all men, to do good to all ; that is, benevo- 
lence which acts towards that which is in need. I 
don't speak of that now; but there is an attractive 
power in the communication of the divine liature 
which necessitates love, which links one to another, 
and to Christ. There is power there; it may be very 
imperfect in us, but it is real, and attracts to the 
Divine Person. We need something more than 
the new nature, because the new nature is a depen- 
dent nature, therefore wants something else. Christ 
when down here lived a dependent life. " I live 
by the Father." The old man sets himself up and 
pretends to be independent, but all the while is 
under the power of Satan ; but the new nature is 
a dependent nature. It leans on power, and de- 
lights to do so. The Holy Ghost is the power, 
" strengthened with all might by His Spirit in the 
inner man." And that 's the f illl blessing, both in 
the individual soul and in the Church of God. 
Though we have the new nature, we want the 
power of the Holy Ghost in us to remove the 
obstacles to its display. Labour won't do; you 
may labour, but just as a mountain of cold snow, 
which no labour can remove, melts before the 
bright shining of the sun, and ^\\N^Ti\&V^%^^^^. 



86 LECTURES ON 

SO nothing but the warm kindlings of divine affec- 
tions in the soul by the power of the Holy Ghost 
will dissolve the thick ice of our hearts, and melt 
away all that which is in us to obstruct and hinder 
its fuller manifestation. 

"Love is of God, and everyone that loveth is 
bom of God." When I have got this nature I 
am born of God, and am brought into a position 
to refer everything up to God ; for the nature we 
get from God has God for the object of that new 
nature to act upon. When I see the traits of 
this nature in another I say he is born of Grod. 
I see love in natural affection, but here it is in 
a divine sense. In natural affection selfishness 
is the ground of it all ; but in the saint he that 
loveth is bom of God; while selfishness is the 
spring of everything out of God. We find in 
the soul that is bom of God another principle, 
which takes a man dean out of himself, A man 
makes himself a fortime by some new invention 
that makes the world more comfortable, and what 
is this but selfishness? and all that gives an 
impulse to the prpgress of the world is selfish- 
ness. And here is the difference, because we are 
in a world where we all have to follow our various 
occupations and callings. In a Christian it is not 
selfishness ; it is love. He has got out of every 
other motive ; he is bom of God, and love is the 
spring of all his actions, as love is the principle 
of God's natura It may be very feeble in me ; 
but am I to be satisfied t\i&t ii ahould remain 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 87 

SO ? Whatever is bom of God came down from 
God, and returns to God again, therefore " be ye 
imitators of God as dear children." This perfect 
love came down from God that it might return to 
God again; for who did Christ come down to 
glorify but His Father ? for aU that Christ did 
returned to God, a sweet-smelling savour, or else 
it would have been lost. There are many beauti- 
ful qualities in a creature of God, but do they 
return to God again ? No ; then it becomes sin. 
I get a good thing, and I enjoy it, and leave God 
out, and that is man's sin. There may be a 
great deal of selfishness under that which out- 
wardly appears like liberality, and you will see a 
Christian help his brother, and look up to God as 
doing it to Gt)d, because he loves God ; but if he 
helps him and says to himself, "I have done well," 
it ceases to be love ; it is self-applause, and that 
is selfishness. The new nature gets God as the 
source, and God as the object, and thus is the 
truth of the new nature guarded, by being con- 
nected with this counter truth, that God is the 
object for this new nature to act upon. The 
new nature acts in us like God, so that others 
can see it; but then it knows God, and I can 
conceive of nothing higher than to know God. 
"Everyone that is bom of Gt)d hnoweth Ood;" 
and it is a great comfort to say in everything, I 
have found God. 

Then mark another tmth {v. 8), " He that loveth 
not knoweth not God," Thei^ ia TL^^i tajkSs^V&j^ 



88 LECTURES ON 

of God ; but in the possession of the nature of 
God there is no power to apprehend Him. You 
may see His works, and say there must be a 
God ; but is that knowing Him ? I must have 
God's nature to know Him, because none can 
know love but by loving, and he who thus knows 
Him will apprehend Him. Take a philosopher 
who talks about God, and set him in the presence 
of God, you would find it 's the last place he would 
like to be in, and why so ? Because he has never 
been there before. 

"In this was manifested the love of God toward 
m** This is no abstract notion about love ; it is 
not said merely, " In this was manifested the love 
of God," but, " In this was manifested the love 
of God toward vs" Man's mind can't measure 
God; mind can only measure mind, measure 
thoughts ; but mind can't measure love, for love 
is only known by loving and being loved. If 
man's mind were a competent judge of what 
God should be, Grod would not be God, and how 
must this love of God be found? In a most 
humble way (so much the better) the soul must 
come in as wanting this love ; for if it can come 
in any other way it does not want God. The moment 
any soul finds its need of God, there and then God 
is waiting to meet its need. It was so in the case 
of the Syrophoenician woman, which brought forth 
that word of the Lord — *' woman, gre^t is thy 
faith : be it unto thee even as thou wilt !" The 
ffreat faith is knowing my n^ed, counting on God's 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 89 

willingness to meet it. It may be vague ; it was 
in the woman who came into the house ; but still 
there was faith. When I find that manifested in 
God which meets my need, that is faith. I never 
get into the place of God 's meeting my need till 
I know God is God and I am a sinner. When we 
are in owr place we shall find God in His; when 
I am brought down to the sense that the only 
thing I have got is sin, then God can act ; " when 
we were without strength" God acted "in due 
time." God being the doer, does it in the perfect- 
ness of His own love and time. "In this was 
manifested the love of God toward us^ I can 
stand before God and talk to sinners, and say, " I 
know God in a way that angels don't know Him, 
which things the angels desire to look into— God's 
love toward us^ I don't say me, but towards 
us, taking in all the saints — that little word us, 
ceaselessly rung in our ears by the Holy Ghost 
putting us in the full consciousness of the favour 
of God toward us, "that we might live through 
Him." Not only is God's love manifested when 
it is wanted, but where it must have its own proper 
perfectness, and it comes out perfectly where no- 
thing depends on man to bring it out or make it 
clear. It 's manifested when we were dead, " that 
we might live through Him^ If I were to examine 
my own heart I can't find it out I know more of 
God's heart than I do of my own ; for my own is 
so subtle I can't get to the bottom of it ; for " the 
heart is deceitful above aU thiiig&^Q.i!Ld das^^^sai^fiJ^ 



90 LECTURES ON 

wicked, who can know it ? '* and the best man 
upon earth will be the first to confess this. I do 
not get the full character of God to my soul till I 
see it in the cross ; for what was in man was 
nothing but sin, and when that sin was met 
there was nothing between God and His Son; 
and if He was alone in that work, this is a proof 
of what God has done in my circumstances of 
death. He sent His Son that I might live through 
Him, and not only live through Him, but my sins 
being all put away I see eternal life through Him 
for me, and He being the propitiation for my sins, 
I find my sins are gone, and life is come. Well 
then, after such a proof of God's love, let us not 
be thinking of our love to God. Who am I that 
I should be coupling God's love with mine ? Don't 
talk to me about loving God ; it's a wretched poor 
thing (I do love Him) ; but let us talk of God's 
loving us. The moment I begin to think of my 
love to God, that moment it ceases, it is gone ; the 
manna I gathered yesterday has turned to cor- 
ruption. 

Heaven will be when I have entirely forgotten 
myself, and am filled with Gk)d. That very same 
love which will fill heaven was manifested in the 
cross ; for there it put all my sins away, and in 
heaven there are none. I want something on which 
my soul may be stayed. Well, God loves me ; and 
that which makes me know how much He loves 
me is, that He gave His Son for me. Then, as my 
soul rests upon this love o£ God, no measure of 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 91 

failure can be adequate to shake my confidence, as 
I estimate God's love in the gift of His Son. His 
love is not exhausted, though my need may be 
great and my failures many ; but I have a constant 
abiding proof, which follows me all my life 
through. How much He loves me in the gift of 
His Son ; and my soul rests in peace on this love, 
as manifested in the cross, which is ''the same 
yesterday, to-day, and for ever." It was proved at 
the cross, and abides there ; it was outside us in 
the world, and it was made known to us when we 
wanted it in getting life, finding nothing in us but 
the need that depends upon it. The enjoyment of 
this love is another thing, and that is carried on 
by the daily and hourly communion with God as 
our Father, by the Spirit in us. 

Verse 11. The Apostle having given a proof of 
God's love goes on to the exercise of it in us while 
down here. " Beloved, if God so loved us we ought 
also to love one another," and this principle we 
find brought out in other parts of the Word, as 
in Eph. iv. 32 : " Forgiving one another, even as 
God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you;" also in 
Col. iii. 13. 

Verse 12. " No man hath seen God at any time." 
I can't know God by seeing Him ; but in John's 
Gospel (ch. i. 18), " The only begotten Son, which 
is in the bosom of the Father, He hath declared 
Him." He who knew what was God's love has 
told it out — the Son who dwelt in the bosom of 
the Father, who enjoyed the Fathet'a lovo* ^vtJas^xiik 



92 LECTURES ON 

any alloy, He is the One who comes to tell it to 
me, as He knew and enjoyed it Himself, and I 
know Grod according to that revelation He has 
made ; for " He hath declared Him." But in the 
Epistle of John He goes a step further. It is 
communicated livingly to vs. " True in Him and 
in you." (Chap. ii. 8.) It was true in Him, and 
now it is true in you who believa 

"If we love one another, Gk)d dwelleth in us. 
That is the source of it, and the enjoyment of it 
is by the power of the Holy Ghost. "His love 
is perfected in us." It's not my love perfected 
to God, but His love is perfected in me; and I 
know, being in Him that is infinite, I shall never 
get out of it. It is not that I am infinite 
myself, but "I am in Him that is infinite." 
His love is perfected in us. " Hereby know we 
that we dwell in Him, and He in us, because 
He hath given us of His Spirit." {v. 13.) Here 
it is communion, and not merely power. It *s in 
the nature of God, and not merely the power of 
God. I enjoy it because He has given me of His 
own Spirit, the joy of communion being by the 
power of ffi$ Spirit Angels know not this joy, 
and why is this ? Because they never have the 
Holy Ghost dwelling in them; but God hath 
"given vs of His Spirit," because we are members 
of Christ, the fruit of the travail of His soul, what 
He desires (not we), for we are lost in Him ; there- 
fore, having received of His own Spirit, we ought 
to seek to have the life of Jeaxi^ made manifest in 



THE FmST EPISTLS OF JOHN. 93 

our mortal bodies. The divine nature in a man is 
shown by having God for its object 

"And we have seen and do testify that the Father 
sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world." {v. 14.) 
Observe, the Apostle gets back to the person of 
the Son, but in a more advanced state of soul, as 
knowing Him who sent the Son " we have seen" 
Thus it was a known and enjoyed love. While 
Paul gives us the Church and the purposes and 
counsels of God, John speaks of the nature in 
which God dwells, and what is the eflfect of this ? 
Worshipy because the highest thing we can enjoy 
in the knowledge of God. Look at the scene in the 
Sevelation. God is on His throne, and the elders 
are on thrones around. Can anything be higher 
than this ? Yes ; they fall down in worship before 
Him who sat on the throne, and cast down their 
crowns before the throne, saying, "Thou art worthy^ 
Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power." 
Then observe, when the Apostle realized the privi- 
lege of getting up to the Giver of every good and 
perfect gift, then he turns to the very simplest 
truth — " The Father sent the Son to be the Saviour 
of the world." Thus we see the very highest saints 
are the best Evangelists. The father in Christ 
links Himself with the weakest babe, and the very 
way of bringing God into a world of sinners was 
by lin k ing Himself with the most needy thing on 
the face of the earth. It is not the extent of 
knowledge that is needed, but the knowledge of 
God in the power of living communion^ that is th^ 



94 LECTUBES ON 

power of evangelizing. The love that reaches the 
highest will stoop the lowest. " The Father sent 
the Son to be the Saviour of the world ; it 's not 
here merely as the Messiah to the Jews, but as the 
Saviour of the world. 

"Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son 
of God, God dwelleth in Him, and He in God." 
(v. 15.) The soul that has this fellowship and 
communion God dwelleth in it, and it in God ; 
for ''whosoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of 
God is bom of God." " The Father sent the Son." 
Here we have the subordination of the Son in 
connection with the Father. "The Father sent 
the Son." His eye rests on Him, on the man 
Christ Jesus. We are not to reason about it. I 
must not have philosophy, but faith ; and the soul 
taught of God can say, "I know that the man 
Christ Jesus was the Son of God." 

"Herein is love with us made perfect . . . 
because as He is, so are we in this world." {v. 17.) 
Here he is not speaking of the love of God mani- 
fested to the sinner on the cross, but the extent of 
it in the saint, who is taken up in and with Christ. 
As He has been made sin for you on the cross, so 
you will be made the righteousness of Gk)d in 
Him in heaven, therefore there can be no question 
of judgment unless Christ can be judged. 

"We have known and believed the love God 
hath to us." Love can't be enjoyed where there 
is a bad conscience, therefore you must get the 
conscience purged. Satan may act on the con- 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 95 

science as well as the Spirit of God, but you 
may always detect the difference^ as Satan always 
acts in the way of despair; while the Spirit of 
God always points to a resource in God, and 
the soul, however much distressed, feels there is 
goodness in God if it can only get at it. So the 
prodigal knew his need, and said, " There is bread 
enough and to spare in my father's house/* Thus 
the soul knows God's love, and believes in it ; and 
when the Father is on the neck of the prodigal 
that settles every question ; for the son is lost in 
the testimony of what the Father is, and having 
peace with God, we have access by faith into this 
grace wherein we stand. "God is love." There 
is not a word here of what man is. God is love, 
that is the only God I know, and the only way 
that I can know Him. If I am in Christ, is God 
going to impute to me the sin Christ has put 
away ? Certainly not. I have sins, but they have 
all been judged in Christ, then God will not judge 
them again. What difficulty we have in beUeving 
what God really is, because we have been so long 
away from God, that we have become so narrowed 
in ourselves ; but if we do come to know Him, 
then our hearts should be as wax, ready to receive 
the impressions of His love. 



96 LECTUBES OK 



VIIL 

The last time, speaking on the preceding verses of 
this chapter, I was in closing referring to two 
things here — ^the first, in verse 9, the love of God as 
manifested to the world in giving His Sou. for us; 
and, in verse 17, in its double firuit of love and life 
in ws. God's love in contrast to man's love is 
distinguished by this, that while man must have 
something to draw out his love, as it is said, "For 
a good man some would even dare to die," ** God 
commendeth His love to us, in that, while we were 
yet sinners, Christ died for us." (Jod's love is 
without motive, there being nothing attractive in 
the object that draws it out " In due time Christ 
died for the ungodly." God's love sees no good in 
us. The brightest proof of God's love and man's 
enmity was seen in the cross. They met there, 
and thus showed the superiority of God's love. 
As Jethro says, " In the thing wherein they dealt 
proudly He was above them." Then, having 
shown out the Jirstfruit in verse 9 ; i.e. the open 
manifestation of His love to us while we were yet 
sinners, we learn His purposes and counsels 
about us as saints in the second point in verse 17 : 
"Herein is love with us made perfect^ that we 
majr have boldness in tlie day of judgment, be- 



THE FIRST BPISTLB OF JOHN. 97 

cause as He is so are we in this world." This is 
a very different thing from His first visiting us in 
our sins — " Herein is love with us made perfect." 
The perfectness of God's love towards His saints 
is seen in the bringing them to be like Himself. 
The sovereign grace of Gk)d puts the saint into 
the same place as Christy that we may have the 
same kind of fellowship with the Father that 
Christ had. So in John xiv. the Lord says, " My 
peace I give unto you ;" that is, the peace He has 
with the Father. " Not as the world giveth give I 
unto you." The world has the character of a 
benefactor, and that it sometimes gives generously 
I do not deny ; but then it is by helping a man as 
he is out of the resources which it has, which may 
be all very well, because by helping him it 's only 
taking care of itself. But it is evidently a 
different thing here ; for Christ takes us clean out 
of our condition^ putting us into the same relation- 
ship with the Father as Himself. The world can't 
give in this way. There is no guarding anything 
for self in Christ's unjealous love, but in us there 
is. Therefore He could say, "Not as the world 
giveth give I unto you." His delight was to show 
that the Father loved them, as He loved Him. 
"The glory thou hast given me I have given them, 
that the world may know thou hast loved them 
as thou hast loved me." Jesus not only loves 
them Himself, but He will have it known that 
they are loved by the Father as He Himself is 
loved. Can there be anything moi^ ^m\^\^^^^^ 

a 



98 LECTUBES ON 

than this ? (though the word disinterested fails to 
give the full meaning). Still all this is guarded ; 
for Christ ever keeps His place as the eternal Son 
of Gkxl, as at the mount of transfiguration. The 
moment there is the question of putting Moses 
and EUas in an equality with Jesus they both 
disappear; for when Peter said^ "Let us make 
here three tabernacles; one for thee^ one for Moses, 
and one for Elias. While he thus spake, there 
came a cloud, and overshadowed them/' and in- 
stantly they vanished. " And there came a voice 
out of the cloud, saying. This is my beloved Son ; 
hear Him." It is not said hear them, but hear 
Him, and when the voice was passed Jesus was 
found alone. If Christ in His wondrous grace 
reveals Moses and Elias as EUs companions and 
associates in the glory, the moment Peter in his 
foolishness gives utterance to the thought that 
would place them on an equality with Christ they 
must both vanish from the scene. 

It does not say, as the Father has loved them, but 
" as He has loved me " (as a man) ; for however 
Christ may bring us into the same place with Him- 
self, if we pride ourselves on our equality with 
Christ immediately we shall be above Him ; but it 
is ever the case, that the more a saint enters into 
his elevation, as being brought into the same place 
with Christ, the more he adores Christ as God 
over all blessed for evermore. This is ever to be 
borne in mind. The thought in verse 17, "As He is 
so are we," is of putting tine Bamt& in the same 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 99 

place as Christ. If I have righteousness, it's a 
divine righteousness. "We are made the right- 
eousness of God in Him." If eternal life, it 's a 
divine life. If glory, it 's the same glory. " The 
glory thou hast given me I have given them." If 
it's the inheritance, we are "joint heirs with 
Christ." If love, it's the same love wherewith 
the Father loves Christ. "Thou hast loved them 
as thou hast loved me." The love is the most 
difficult thing for us to enter into ; but the Lord 
would have our hearts enjoying it. All that we 
have in Christ is brought out in this passage, in 
this general expression, " JLs He is so are we." It 
is the thought and purpose of God's grace to bless 
us not only by Christ, but tvith Christ. Christ 
could not be satisfied unless it were so, we being 
the fruit of the travail of His souL "Father, I 
will that those whom thou hast given me be mth 
me." Again, " I will come again, and receive you 
unto myself, that where I am ye may be also." 
The Father's love is seen in giving His Son for us, 
and the Son's love in giving Himself for us, and 
thus bringing us into the perfect place. 

There's nothing more comforting than the perfect 
confidence of having God as my Father. I can't get 
the affections in full play if I think God is going to 
judge me ; but if I have the Spirit of adoption, and 
I sin or do wrong, I run to my Father directly, 
because I know my Father is not going to judge 
me for it; for God is my Father, and not my 
Judge, therefore boldness ia need^dL tot >3cl^ ^TL^\^^afc 



100 LECTURES ON 

of the spiritual affections in me. And we oaght 
to remember this; for Christians often shrink 
from it But it is evident that if I am hesitating 
whether Grod is going to bless me or to judge me, 
I can*t love Him. Then observe another thing. 
There is a great difference between spiritual desires 
and spiritual affections, though both have the same 
root. The spiritual desires, if the relationship 
which would meet them be not known, only 
produce sorrow. Take an orphan, for instance, in 
a fetmily where the parents' love to the children is 
witnessed every day, the sorrowful experience 
would be, " Oh that I had a father !" The child 
who has its parents has the same desires ; but the 
relationship existing of parent and child it knows, 
and the joy and gkdness which flows from such 
relationship. So that we may have joy and glad- 
ness as the children of God we' must have the 
consciousness of the relationship in which we 
stand to God. It is not merely that we have a 
divine nature, which gives us spiritual desires, but 
we must also have the consciousness of the 
relationship in which we are brought by the power 
of what Christ has done, and it is clear there 
never could be a question between Christ and His 
Father, as He daily and hourly enjoyed the con- 
sciousness of His Father's love. "This is my 
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." So 
also He says, " My peace I give unto you." Again 
He says, " That they might have my joy fulfilled 
in tbemselvea" 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 101 

The Father's delight was in Christ, and He 
knew it in the daily enjoyment of it. Well, " as 
He is so are we in this world." While Christ lays 
the ground of our relationship by being the pro- 
pitiation for our sins, and the source of our life, 
yet it is not by Christ's righteousness that I get 
boldness. I must be righteous of course. I can't 
have boldness without it. But besides this there 
is the character God has towards me — that of a 
Father; and I have another character towards 
God, as a child. I have not only righteousness, 
but I am a son. And here I would notice the 
defectiveness of some of our hymns, which caU 
Christ our Brother. We never find in Scripture 
that Christ is called our Brother. In the fulness 
of His grace He is not ashamed to own and call 
us His brethren. My Father is a man; but I 
don't call Him a man. It would show a want of 
filial reverence in me if I did. In nothing is the 
power of the Spirit of God more shown in the 
child of God than in the suitableness of his ex- 
pressions and feelings towards God. If we are 
really enjoying our place of infinite privileges, the 
source and giver of these privileges will maintain 
His own proper place in our hearts. Theorizing 
about it won't do. A common expression is, we 
cannot be always on the mount. So far that's 
true, because we all have our place of service down 
here; but I would observe that being in the 
mount of God's presence always humbles, though 
when a saint gets down agam Yifc TCka.^ \i<i ^\wiSiw ^\ 



mm 



102 LECTUBES ON 

having been there. Paul was not puffed up when 
he was in God's presence caught up to the third 
heavens ; but after he had been there, he needed 
a thorn in the flesh, lest he should be exalted 
above measure. The heart is never proud in God's 
presence, and onlj when it is reallj there is it in 
its right place ; for when out of it the Jlesh turns 
everything into mischief. 

"As He is so are we." Not only in the 
same standing and acceptance as Christ, but 
brought by the communication of His life into 
the same relationship as Himself. While in the 
beginning of the Epistle the foundation is laid 
deep and wide in the cleansing of the blood, still 
the grand subject of the Epistle is the place into 
which we are brought. "Herein is love with 
us made perfect." If my heart has seized the 
truth that God as a Father is acting in grace 
towards me, there is no place for fear. In all my 
need, and even in that with which I ought to have 
nothing to do, in all my sin, I fly to Him. I could 
not in my sin fly to my judge ; but I have confi- 
dence in my Father's love, and I fly to Him 
without fear ; for " perfect love casteth out fear." 
In all my sins and follies I can always look to 
Him who gave His Son for me; that is where 
grace puts me. 

The proof of God's love is that He has given 

His Son; the perfection of His love is that He 

has brought us into His presence, (v. 19.) We 

Jove Him because He fiiat lo^ed us* We now 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 103 

delight in the Lord ; but we did not come in in 
that way ; it is a mistake to think so. We don't 
come in by loving Grod. We don't love God 
because He is lovely; we are not competent; 
we can't love Him; we should not be sinners 
if we could. But we are sinners, and must 
come in as sinners, as debtors to His grace; 
and then, having come in as debtors, and finding 
Gk)d to be what He is — love, meeting us in our 
every need — then we love Him, finding how He 
had first loved us. 

Verse 20. "If a man say he loves God and 
hateth his brother, he is a liar." Here we see 
the truth is checked in an interesting way by 
practical details. If a man does not love his 
brother he can't love God. Wherever the divine 
nature is, it is attractive to one born of God. 

Verse 21. "And this commandment have we 
jBrom Him." We have another important principle 
in this verse. Whatever the energy of the divine 
life in me it always will bear the character of 
obedience. While there was in Christ the de- 
votedness of love, there also was obedience. We 
are to love the brethren, as being led by the 
energy of the Spirit, but to love them in the 
holy place of obedience to God. There is nothing 
80 humble as obedience. Love never takes us 
out of the place of obedience. So the Lord 
said, "As the Father gave me commandment 
even so I do." So again when Lazarus was sick, 
and they sent to Jesus, He aboda tvro Aaq^Va.*^^ 



101 LBCTUBI8 GB 

aame place, because He bad no wovd fitom His 
Father; and so if I bave any litde service to do 
for my brother it must be done in obedience to 
the word of (3od It is what Satan tried to get 
the Lord out of in the wildemesa. ^'Ob," says 
Satan, "have your own will, if it 's in only ever so 
little a bit, by making these stones into bread now 
you are hungry* "No,'* says the Lord; "it is 
written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but 
by every word whicb proceedeth out of the mouth 
of GkML" And here we get a counter check to all 
the workings of nature ; for if it is not a command 
it is not of Grod. Man may put on all the forms 
of love imaginable, and become like an angel; 
but if it is not in obedience to a command, it is 
nothing, and won't do. 

Chap. V. 1. " Whosoever believeih that Jesus is 
the Christ is bom of God," and there we get the 
link between Grod and the family. When anyone 
is bom of Gk)d he is my brother, and is that which 
is a link between my soul and God. If the question 
be asked, How am I to know who is my brother ? 
every one that is bom of God is my brother. I 
may have to sorrow over him sometimes; but 
still he is my brother, because I am linked to him 
by the same divine nature. It is of great import- 
ance to remember this in the present day, because 
where the Holy Ghost really acts there will be a 
tendency to follow different courses. There has 
been an awakening from the deadness around by 
the power of the Spirit. Tbexe ate glimmerings 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 105 

of light. Mere stones would be motionless ; but 
a moving power comes in, and they all go in 
different directions. If they were all subject 
to the Spirit of God, they would all go one 
way. 

And there is another thing to be observed, that 
we are not at the beginning of Christianity, but 
at the dark end, and escaping, as it were, but by 
different roads. The operation of the Spirit of God, 
if we were absolutely and perfectly subject to the 
Spirit in all things, would be to produce perfect 
unity. But we are not thus subject; and being 
what we are, there is a tendency in us to go in 
different directions. The remedy for this will be 
that, so far as my heart is in fellowship with 
Christ's heart, we shall have love to all saints ; to 
the same extent that Christ is valued will the saints 
be valued. In proportion as Christ's thoughts are 
known to me will all saints be in my thoughts. 
I don't know Christ's love rightly if one saint 
is left out. As it is said in Eph. iii 18 : " May 
be able to comprehend with all saints, .... that ye 
may be filled with all the fulness of God." If I 
should leave one out, I should leave out part of 
Christ's heart. In Colossians it is your love to all 
saints. In Colossians we have the fulness of the 
Head, and in Ephesians the fulness of the Body. 
God's grace working in me makes every one bom 
of God the object of my affections. I cannot go 
every way at once; and a real difficulty arises 
now to walk in fidelity to Christ aivi va. Iss^^'^f^ 



106 LECTUBES OS 

brethren, so as not U) let the affections get in a 
loose and general way. I cannot love Ghxl without 
loving all the children of God. 

"By this we know that we love God when we love 
His children," and t;ic0i»0rsa. Now that's reasoning 
in a circle, as men say; but there is truly in it a 
counter check against the evil of our own heart* 
II I love the Father, I shall love the children for 
the Father's sake ; but if I were to lead them to do 
anything wrong, it would show that I did not love 
them for the Father's sake, but for my own satis- 
faction and pleasure. K it 's for the Father's sake 
you love the children, then it is as (rod's chUdren 
you love them, and not for your own comfort and 
pleasure ; and this is proved by your loving God, 
and keeping His commandments. Obedience and 
faith in your own walk will prove that it is as 
God's children you love the brethren. How 
practical is this both in wisdom and in love! 
If I know that a member of Christ's body is going 
wrong, does that make me cease to love him ? 
No; but because he is going wrong my soul is 
more deeply and affectionately going out after 
him, as being one with Christ. To be able to 
love the brethren faithfully we must keep close 
to Christ. 

Again, we have what I call a countercheck. If 
one comes to me with a vast amount of truth 
without holiness I cannot recognise such ; he is not 
of the Spirit, for the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of 
hoUneaa, Or if there be a gieat ^how of holiness^ 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 107 

and truth be absent, that also is not of the Spirit ; 
He is the Spirit of truth. 

Satan never touches that which is born of God ; 
he cannot touch it. Worldliness is a dreadful 
hindrance to the saint. We have the threefold 
opposition in the world, the flesh, and the devil. 
The world opposing the Father, the flesh opposing 
the Spirit, and the devil opposing Christ. The 
difficulty lies in this, maintaining our nearness to 
Christ, which the world comes in and hinders. 
Then I am open to all sorts of error ; for I shan't 
take the trouble to be right, unless 1 am near to 
Christ. It is very troublesome and disagreeable 
sometimes to have to do even with saints. One 
can't give up this thing, another can't give up that, 
and so they get off the foundation ; and if we are 
at a distance from Christ we shall be ready to 
give them up, and shall not take the pains to get 
them right when they happen to be wrong. So 
Moses said, "Have I conceived all this people, 
have I begotten them, that thou shouldest say 
unto me, Carry them in thy bosom ? " Paul 
says, "My little children, of whom I travail in 
birth again until Christ be formed in you." 
You have got off the right ground, and I must 
have you, as it were, born again. I am tra- 
vailing over again for you, that you may be 
right, because you belong to Christ. When Paul 
looked at them in confusion as they were away 
from Christ, he could only say, " I stand in doubt 
of you ;" but when he looked at them as in Ghciat 



108 LECTURES ON 

he could say, " I have confidence in you through 
the Lord." How is this ? Paul himself was 
nearer to Christ. Faith sees not only Christ in 
the glory, but sees also the connection between the 
glory of Christ and saints, the link and tie between 
God and His people, and it is that which enables 
one to get on. So Moses said of Israel Not only 
God was their God, but "they are thy people." 
The greater the trouble, the greater the joy, be- 
cause that is the link. 

The real hindrance is the world. There's 
nothing takes the energy of the Spirit out of 
the heart like the world. See Gehazi in the 
king's court. His heart had drawn in the spirit 
of the world, and he was able to entertain the 
world with the mighty actings of the Spirit. 
The world must be entertained, and it will be 
entertained by religion when it can't get any- 
thing else. All that I know of the world's path, 
spirit, affections, and conduct is, that it has cruci- 
fied my Lord. Not in its affections and lusts 
merely, but by wicked hands it has crucified my 
Master. Suppose it was but yesterday you had 
seen Pontius Pilate, the chief priest, and elders 
of the people, putting Christ to death, would you 
feel happy to-day in having communication and 
fellowship with them ? Well, the stain of Christ's 
blood is as fresh upon the world in God's sight as 
if it had been done but yesterday. The time 
which has elapsed makes no difference in the 
moTsil guilt. The question is, Am I to get under 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 109 

the power of the world, or am I to overcome it — 
in my heart I mean? When Christ was down 
here, with all the beauty and attractive grace in 
which God the Father would delight, there was 
not found in the world one thought or sentiment 
of common feeling with Hinu The world in all 
its classes — rulers, priests, Pharisees, and the 
multitude — all have been associated in hanging 
the Son of God and Son of man on a gibbet 
Such is the world's true heart. If I have seen 
the glory of His person, and see that He is the 
very Son of God who came down, and that the 
world turned Him out, can I be happy with it ? 
The link between the thoughts and affections 
and the world exists in every heart ; so that in all 
sorts of things, even in walking through the streets, 
I constantly find that which attracts my eye, and 
my eye affects my heart. Nothing will overcome 
the world in my heart but the deep consciousness 
of how it has treated Christ. Take my children, 
for instance. I want them to get on well in the 
world ; I must have good places for them in it, 
and nothing but knowing the place Christ had in 
it will overcome the world in my heart. There is 
no possibility of getting on unless the world is 
given up, and the heart is satisfied with Christ, 
and Christ is everything to it. What do I read 
of Abraham? That he left his country, his 
kindred, and his father's house, and sojourned in 
a strange land, where he had not a place to set 
his foot on. We are not of th^ ^0Yl<i^^\i.^%Rk>&» 



110 LECTURES ON 

is the test of our affections; for we are not a1 
once taken out of the evil, as we must have oui 
hearts exercised to godliness. 

It is very easy to overcome the world when the 
love of Christ has made it distasteful Satan is 
the god of this world. Perhaps you will say that 'g 
true of the heathen world. Yes ; but it 's true oi 
the whole world, though it was not till after the 
rejection of Christ that it was brought out ; it was 
true before. God hjui spoken by His servants the 
Prophets, and the world had beaten one, and stoned 
another, and killed another. Then He said, " I will 
send my beloved Son ; may be they will reverence 
Him when they see Him," and Him they crucified, 
thus proving that Satan was the master of man 
So the Lord said, " righteous Father, the world 
hath not known thee !" You will not have spiritual 
discernment or power of motive unless the heart 
is kept near to Christ, and I shall not want the 
world if Christ is in my heart If my delight ia 
in that in which God delights — i.e, Christ — then 
I can overcome. " Whether therefore you eat ot 
drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory 
of God." What, must I do everything to Christ 1 
Oh, that very question proves a heart away fix)m 
Christ, showing that it is bondage to you to do all 
to the glory of God ! It is not that we are to scorn 
the world in the least ; for God's grace is for every 
poor sinner that will receive it. It is the spirit 
of the world in my own heart which I have to 
overcome, that which my Yieo^ \& ycl d&njger of 



THE FIBST EPISTLE OF JOHN. Ill 

being led by. I will now just look back to the 
three points on which I have touched. 

1st Perfect love with us. There is not merely 
the manifestation of God's love to the poor sinner, 
but association with Christ's life, putting us in 
relationship with God. 

2nd. Love to every saint is our place ; but we 
are to love them as Gkxl's children, and ourselves 
being found loving God, and keeping His com- 
mandments. 

3rd. We are to overcome the world. The heart, 
resting on, looking to, eating, feeding upon Christ, 
gets the consciousness of what the world is, and 
overcomes. 

The Lord keep us in humble dependence on 
Himself. His grace is sufficient for us. His 
sfoieDgth made perfect in our weakness. 



112 LECTUBES ON 



I 



IX. 

We were seeing last evening in the precedii 
verses the question between Gkxl and the worl 
brought to an issue. The Son of God havii 
been sent in the world, and in the world and I 
the world crttcijied, thus putting the world to tl 
test^ Grod could do nothing in the world after 
had crucified His Son. " righteous Father, tit 
world hath not known thee!" Having hui 
God's Son on the cross, that moment cut the wor] 
off; therefore now the world is a thing to be ove 
come by the saint. 

"This is He that came by water and blood 
What the Apostle now presents is the charact< 
and value of the cross. " He came by water an 
blood." The water and the blood are as a wi 
ness on God's part, the testimony that God give 
(The words witness, record, and testimony are a 
the same word in the original.) You may r< 
mark here, "This is the witness, that God hat 
given to us eternal life, and this life is i 
His Son." This is the thing witnessed. *'Th 
is the record" (or testimony), "that God hi 
given to us eternal life, and this life is in £ 
Son; " not in the first Adam, but in "His Son; 
not in ma!n, nor by his works^ nor any meai 



THE FIRST BPISTLB OF JOHN. 113 

whatever, it's Ood's gift, "He hath given/* 
And not properly and intrinsically in us, it 's in 
HiB Son ; and even when we are quickened, the 
life is not looked at as in vs. " Because I live, ye 
shall live also." It is therefore immutable. If 
Christ's life can be in any way annulled or set 
aside, then can the life in us be so likewise, and 
not otherwise. If Christ can die, so can we ; but 
if death hath no more dominion over Him, no 
more hath it over us; and this it is that gives 
the amazing value and blessed character of this 
life. It's given to the Son to have life in Him- 
self. (John V. 26.) For example, my finger has 
life, my natural life flowing through it ; but the 
seat of life is not there. My finger may be cut 
off (I am not here supposing that a member of 
Christ can be cut off; that cannot be, as we have 
ofben seen) ; but if my finger be cut off, the life 
still remains in my body, the seat of life not being 
in my finger. My finger was as much alive as the 
rest of my body, but the seat of life was not there. 
The seat of life is in Christ ; *' our life is hid with 
Christ in God." Hence all the character of the 
life and all the communion flows from this blessed 
truth — in Sis Son. The character of this life is 
nearness to God. Christ Himself is my life. It 
is of the last importance for the strength and 
comfort of our souls, and for all blessed delight in 
God, clearly to understand what our life is ; for 
our thoughts on regeneration are altogether im- 
perfect until we apprehend ti\i^\» \\» \& ^ ^<^^^^^ 

H 



114 LECTURES ON 

which we have, associating us with His Son, not 
possessed before, and in virtue of which we get 
communion with the Father, who has given us 
eternal life ; not in vs, but in His Son. 

We get brought out in various testimonies what 
Christ is to us, as in 1 Cor. vi 1-11, where the 
Apostle, speakingof the offscouringof the earth, says, 
" Such were some of you : but ye are washed, but 
ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name 
of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." 
And so here we get a corresponding testimony 
brought out in these three witnesses, the water, the 
hlood, and the Spirit. In John xix. 34 : ** When 
one of the soldiers pierced His side, and forthwith 
came thereout blood and water." The Hood and 
the water flowed from a dead Christ. We see how 
manifestly the link between the natural man and 
God are broken for ever : " In that He died. He 
died unto sin." It 's all gone for ever. All that 
Christ could have blessed in nature is now en- 
tirely and for ever gone ; and if there is to be any 
blessing now, it must be in a new nature, and 
through a dead Christ, as aU connection and as- 
sociation with God, expiation, purity, life, can 
alone be had through a dead Christ. It 's a dead 
Christ must purify me, if I am to be purified. 
Until the death of Christ, God was dealing with 
nature to see (or rather to teach us, for He knew 
what it was) if any good thing could come out of 
nature. Well, the Cross proved, God's rejected 
Son proved, that it was iio\i ^o^^ftAa \3aa.t any good 



THE FIRST EPISTLfi OF JOHN. 115 

thing could come out of nature. Man is not 
merely a sinner driven out of Paradise, as we 
know Adam was ; for man's state now results, not 
only from his being turned out of God's presence 
because of sin, but in the will and energy of his 
evil nature he has cast God out of His own world. 
The cross shows man's nature is utterly incapable 
of being acted on by any motive whatever which 
could set it right. This is very humbling, yet 
very blessed. Heaven won't do, Earth won't do, 
the Law won't do. I have yet one thing in 
heaven. My beloved Son, I '11 send Him. May 
be they will reverence Him when they see Him. 
No ; the determination of man's will is to have 
the world without God. This is what man wants. 
He will not have God in any sense. Here it is 
brought to a climax ; for the very worst display 
of Christianity will be just this. 

If any here present should be seeking pleasure in 
the world — you know you don't want to find God 
there ; for if you did, it would upset it all — ^thus 
are you saying in spirit, " Let us kill the heir." 
You may not have lifted up your hand to slay 
God's Son, but you have turned Him out of your 
heart. Man's great abilities will be much more 
developed in the day that is just approaching 
than they have ever yet been, in trying to make 
the world go on thoroughly well without God. 
When was there ever a time when everything was 
going on so well, as men speak ; such unity among 
nations as now, or such dramii^ o\>X. oi ^^ssiNiXRRsJV 



116 LECTUSBS ON 

The cry is, "Peace ! peace /" by the energies and 
working of man's will without Grod. Man looks 
for progress in the philosophy, commerce, politics, 
and comfort of this world; but still there is in 
his heart a dread of the consequences of the pro- 
gress of this self-wiU. Thus is fulfilled the ap- 
parent paradox of Scripture, the cry of peace 
combined with men's hearts failing them for fear. 
Now men could say that's a contradiction. No; 
for while men are building up commerce, arts, and 
science in the energy of self-will, who is there 
among them that would undertake to answer for 
the state of any nation in three years* time ? Man 
is afraid of the working of self-wiU in his neigh- 
bour, although he likes to exert it in himself. But 
the Christian has learned that the question as to 
the world is settled — ^in the rejection of Christ 
At that moment it was all over with the world. 
The question between God and man is settled as 
to man himself; for not only is man turned out of 
Paradise, but when Grod's Son C6une they crucified 
Him, and now grace comes in ; and the Christian 
goes outside the world to get in God's rejected 
Son, the life which is to be had in Him alone. 
This is God's record, that He hath given to us 
eternal life, and this life is in His Son. 

Amidst all this turmoil and trouble, where shall 

I get peace ? The moment I get a pierced Christy 

I have that which expiates and purifies. All this 

not a theory, not a doctrine merely, but a reality ; 

for the moment my consdeii^ \i^^\i'^ ta work, I 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 117 

find that by nature I am separate from God, that 
my carnal mind is enmity against God ; that it is 
not only the world that has crucified God*s Son, 
but my sins pierced Him. This is an individual 
thing, for this is how individual souls are brought 
into the blessing; for when I have real faith in 
what God's word tells me about my own evil, then 
the question arises, What am I to do ? All that 
which makes me a mere moral man declares that 
I could have nothing to say to God ; but through 
a pierced Christ I have three witnesses that I can 
have to say to God. The highest act of insolence 
that it was possible for man to do against God 
brought out the very thing that put the guilt 
away, even the blood and water flowing from His 
side. Suppose it was but yesterday that I wielded 
the spear against Jesus ; the very act that brought 
out my enmity brought that which put it away. I 
can't estimate sin aright till I see the water and 
blood flowing out of the pierced side of Christ 
putting it away, when I must be brought to the 
consciousness that I in spirit was there, my en- 
mity to God did it, my sins pierced Him. 

It was thus God addressed the Jews, telling them 
they had killed the Heir; i.e. their hearts had 
consented to it. Again, those Jews whom Peter 
addressed, saying, "Ye have taken, and by wicked 
hands have slain," had not actually murdered the 
Prince of life ; they had not held the spear any 
more than you did ; and it is thus God deals with 
the world. As His question with the ^QdilS&^ 



118 LECTURES ON 

What have you done with my Son ? and so with 
Gain, Where is Abel thy brother ? and the only 
answer they can give is, We have slain Him. 
The moment the Messiah was rejected, that 
moment all title to the promises was lost to the 
Jews. All hopes of salvation, everything is now 
gone from them as a people; and now, if they 
would get blessing, they must come in as sinners, 
and have their sin put away by the blood that 
flowed from the pierced side of their Messiah. 
Now then, as all title to anything is gone, Grod is 
giving eternal life. God must direct the heart 
away from itself (except the sense of its own sin- 
fulness) to Ghrist. Have I estimated my own sin 
as the murderer of Ghrist ? Well, the blood has 
put the sin away ; for the blood has cleansed the 
man who held the spear that pierced His sida 
You are nothing but sin. Well, Ghrist was made 
sin for you ; and through a dead Ghrist you get 
the blood as a witness that your sins are all put 
away, the blood being a witness of the perfect ex- 
piation of all sin. It was what He came into the 
world for, and He accomplished it. 

Observe another thing. There is the watety and 
what's that? The water cleanses: "That He 
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of 
water by the Word.*' While the blood expiates, 
the water cleanses. The water bears witness to 
the same life-giving power. "Except a man be 
born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter 
into the Idngdom of God." Ths Spirit of God is 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 119 

the source of life, and acting through the Word 
gives life. Practically the Word is the instru- 
ment, the incorruptible seed, and it is also a dis- 
cerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart ; 
and it is that by which God's thoughts are com- 
municated to us, and it is out of the pierced side 
of Christ that these testimonies of God flow, thus 
writing death upon every production of nature, as 
it is not a modifying of the nature which now 
exists, but counting everything outside Christ to 
be dead ; so that there is not a thought, lust, or 
desire about the world upon which Christ does not 
write death, and thus we get altogether new aflfec- 
tions. Dead unto sin, but alive unto God through 
the life in His Son ; for the real character of puri- 
fying is thus writing death upon everything that 
flows not from a pierced Christ. The water is the 
purification, but the purification is through a dead 
Christ; it's not out of Adam, but out of God's 
Son. Christ all His life through was the pattern 
in man of what man ought to be. 

But there is a third thing. We have not only the 
blood which expiates, and the water which purifies, 
through which we are dead to sin, but He has ob- 
tained for us the Spirit, the presence of the Holy 
Ghost as the power of the Word. But it may be 
objected, I don't find myself thus dead to sin and 
purified. But you have a hatred to sin, which is a 
proof of your having died to it. And "in that 
Christ died, He died unto sin once ;" " so likewise 
BECKON ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto 



120 LECTURES ON 

sin ;" for God ever treats us according to what He 
has really given us, treating us as though we had 
realized it all. So in John, the Lord says, " And 
whither I go ye know, and the way ye know." 
Now they did know Him who was truly the way 
to the Father, yet Thomas objected, and said, "We 
know not the way," because they had never 
realized it. The instant I believe in Jesus, I am 
called upon to reckon myself dead. I am never 
told to die, but I am told to mortify my members 
that are upon the earth ; but I am never told to 
die. A man under the law will be trying to die 
with all his might, but he will never succeed. 
But a Christian is dead, and his life is hid with 
Christ in God; and therefore he mortifies his 
members which are upon the earth, as living in 
the power of the life he has in the Son of God. • 
Observe, He does not speak of your life being on the 
earth, for that is above with Christ in Gx)d, there- 
fore treats us as dead ; but our members which 
are upon the earth we are to mortify. He never 
tells us to kill ourselves, but faith takes God's 
testimony as true. Therefore I say I am dead, 
and because I am dead I have to mortify, my 
members being as dead to the earth as Christ was; 
for I have God telling me that I am dead through 
believing. This is most practical as to peace of 
soul; for the moment I believe in Christ I am 
delivered from all these things. I am not seeking 
to die ; for I have the secret of power, and count 
myself dead. 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 121 

Here is a practical difficulty as to the water; 
for how can I say I am washed if I still find 
myself to be dirty ? But I can say I am dead 
in Christ; for I shall never succeed in killing 
myself. The moment I believe in Christ, all 
that He has done as a Saviour is mine, and God 
appropriates and applies it to me. I may have 
failed to realize it, but the treasure is put in my 
possession. Some souls often say, *' I believe all 
the value and efficacy of Christ's work, but I can't 
apply it ; " and who asks you to do so ? It is God 
who applies it, and He has applied it to you, if 
you believe in its value and efficacy. The moment 
we believe in Christ, we have the Holy Ghost as 
bearing witness: *'He shall take of mine and 
show it unto you." Just as the Son came down 
to do God's will, and then ascended up again into 
heaven, so at the Son's ascension the Holy Ghost 
came down as a Person on the earth ; for the Holy 
Ghost is always spoken of as being on the earth, 
and it is this which gives the true and peculiar 
character of the Church of God ; and here we get 
the third witness, in the Spirit of truth coming 
down to the earth. The moment I believe, I am 
sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise. All that 
I can produce of God's good fruits as a Christian 
is the consequence of being sealed by the Holy 
Ghost. Bedemption being perfectly accomplished, 
then the Holy Ghost comes down in Person ; so 
that the position of the Church on the earth is 
between these two things, thi^ iftd.^\£L^\Kssv3L \fiA^^ 



122 LECTURES ON 

and the glory in prospect, as the Holy Ghost 
comes down between redemption and the Church's 
glory. The knowledge of being dead with Christ 
gives me a pure heart, as being myself dead to 
sin, the world, and law. By the hlood we have 
peace, and a good conscience ; and then the Holy 
Ghost comes down from God. Thus we have 
perfect peace of heart, having God's own witness. 
Well then, I have left the whole scene, I have 
done with it altogether; my sins are all gone. 
The blood has put them away, and I am now 
dead unto sin, and aUve unto Grod, The cross, 
the wounds of Christ are the door by which I 
entered, and the presence of the Holy Ghost is 
the power by which I enjoy the fruits of it. 

As we have seen, the witnesses of God on the 
earth are three — ^the Spirit, the water, and the 
blood, and these three agree in one; ''for this is 
the witness of God which He hath testified of 
His Son." The heart is constantly looking for 
God to give it a testimony about itself, but God is 
giving a testimony about His Son, and not about 
what you are ; for if God were to give a testimony 
about you, it must be about your sin and unbelief 
of heart. But no ; and it is of great importance 
in this day of infidelity to see that if God gives a 
testimony it 's about His Son, and what He is to 
the sinner. If you believe that, you will get 
peace. If I am going about to get a standing 
before God on the ground of my holiness, that 
would be self-righteousness, and, of course, I shall 



THE FIK8T EPISTLE OF JOHN. 123 

not get a witness from God as to that ; but if my 
soul takes its stand with God on the testimony 
God has given to His Son, then I get the witness 
in myself. When I have got this faith, I have 
got the thing in my own soul. For instance, look 
at Paul before Agrippa: "I would to God, that 
not only thou, but also all that hear me this day, 
were both almost, and altogether such as I am, 
except these bonds." He was so thoroughly con- 
scious in his soul of happiness in Christ, and he 
was so happy in this consciousness, that he 
wished the whole company were like himself 
(except the bonds), having Christ as a well of 
water springing up within. That which makes 
heaven to be a heaven to the soul is just this, 
that he finds the same Christ in heaven that he 
has in his own soul, and all the subtleties of 
infidelity cannot touch that soul that possesses 
Christ thus within ; for no reasoning of an infidel 
can shake my confidence if I am happy in Christ; 
for if a man came to tell me there was no Christ 
when my soul was happy in Him, I should not 
believe him. There may be no intellectual or 
logical proof on my part; but it will be, to a 
certain extent, a moral testimony of the happiness 
of my soul, and the warmth of my affections are 
centred in Christ. I have often found how much 
it tells with men of all conditions to assure them 
that I am perfectly happy in Christ, and quite 
sure of going to heaven. Are you so ? they say. 
I only wish I could say it. It would ivat \«k -^ 



124 LECTUKES ON 

proof to an infidel, his merely seeing you were 
happy ; but it comes home to the heart of man, as 
there is a craving in man's heart that will never 
be met till they get Christ there ; for man is never 
happy without Christ, whatever he may say. 

" He that believeth not God hath made Him a 
liar." The sin of man is in making God a liar 
when they do not believe the record God has 
given of His Son ; for men do quarrel with you 
when you tell them you know that you are saved. 
They say. How can you know that ? which is just 
as much as saying that God is not capable of 
communicating any blessing to man ; it is calling 
God's wisdom in question as well as His power in 
the testimony of His mercy and grace. This is 
what I have felt in the great question about the 
Bible ; it 's not whether it is the people's right to 
have the Bible, but it is questioning God's right in 
giving it. The treason is in keeping away God's 
message to His servants. It is not merely the 
servant's right to have the message, but it is God's 
right in giving it that is called in question, as it is 
interfering with God's right of communicating 
His thoughts in His word; and whenever God 
gives a revelation, man is responsible to receive it. 
Grod has given a witness, in which He reveals the 
glory of His Son ; and when man calls in question 
that Word, he is disputing with Qod in the testi- 
mony of His grace as to what He is. 

Who can explain the riddle of this miserable 
world without Christ? Go into the alleys and lanes 



THE FIRST EPISTLB OF JOHN. 125 ' 

of this vast city, and see the woe and degradation 
even in this best and most civilized of countries^ 
and learn there what sin does. In the drawing-room 
you may philosophise about it, but it is not in a 
drawing-room that you will learn what the world 
is ; but when you tell me it was because of all 
this sin and wretchedness that God's Son came 
down into this world to put the sin away, then I 
can understand it, and that Gx)d gives eternal life ; 
not life for a moment, or a life we can sin away as 
Adam, but eternal life, which is above and beyond 
sin altogether, being in His Son, and therefore 
can never be lost. "This life is in His Son," 
who was ever the subject of His Father's delight; 
for when down here Gx)d could not be silent in 
His expression of joy, saying, " This is my beloved 
Son." And God, in giving me eternal life, has 
also given me a nature and capacity to enjoy Him 
for ever; I am brought into an association with 
God, a relationship to Gk)d and an enjoyment of 
God which the angels know not, although holy in 
their nature and exalted. We are thus brought 
near that we might know the love of Christ 
which passeth knowledge, that ye may be filled 
with all the fulness of God. In what a wondrous 
place we are set, if we could but be purged, not 
from gross sins, but from the vanity and earthlinesa 
that fills our minds, to enter into all our blessed- 
ness and the association which We have thus with 
God, the very same which Christ has ! He hath 
borne the wrath of God for our eia^^\i^\JKss^\5SS^ 



126 LECTURES ON 

cup of blessing might be given to ns. In all this 
Grod would have simplicity of heart A man may 
talk about many things, but knowledge apart 
from Christ will never do; but if we possess 
Christ ivithin Satan can never touch us, and if he 
comes he will find Christ there, who has overcome 
him. And it is a sweet and blessed thing that 
any saint, though bom but yesterday, has all in 
Christ that I have ; and if one says, '^ I am such 
a great sinner," well, the blood has put that away, 
and settled that question for ever. 

''And this is the confidence that we have in Him, 
that if we ask anything according to His will. He 
hearethus." Here is a confidence in God that applies 
itself to all the details of life through which I may 
be called to pass. This is the confidence we have 
in Him. His ear being ever open to us, we have 
what we ask for, when we ask according to God's 
wilL How wondrous is this, that God's ear is 
ever open to us ; for surely we should not desire 
to ask for anything contrary to His will ! " And 
if we know that He hear us, whatsoever we ask, 
we know that we have the petition that we 
desired of Him." I am so made to know the love, 
that if I ask I shall have. If I am really in 
earnest to do God's will, to preach the Gospel, for 
instance, and there are hindrances in the way, 
Satan in the way, I have only to ask, and I have 
all God's power at my disposal, His ear being 
open to me. If you know what conflict and difii- 
cnltjr are, what a bleasmg \a ^3bAa,\a Vw^ God's 



THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN. 127 

ear open to you, and to know if you are doing 
God's will, you will always succeed in doing His 
will. 

" There is a sin unto death ; I do not say ye 
shall pray for it." Temporal death is here in- 
tended as chastening in the way of God's govern- 
ment. " There is a sin not unto death." And if 
there be real intercession, God will forgive us. 
(James v. 14, 15.) If you ask me what the sin 
unto death is, it may be any sin ; it may be the 
telling of a lie, as in the case of Ananias and 
Sapphira (Peter did not pray for them). See also 
in Corinthians, "For this cause many are sickly 
among you, and many sleep," &c. The horribly con- 
fused state of the Church causes the government to 
be kept more in the hands of God, and from the saints* 
incompetency to walk in the power of the Spirit 
they are necessarily more thrown on the Lord, whose 
faithfulness to us will not allow our sins to go on 
unjudged : " He withdraweth not His eye from the 
righteous." May we be so walking in the power 
of holiness, that we may not be struggling with 
sin under His correcting hands! May we be 
walking in full communion with His grace! 
Amen. 



London : W, H. Baoou, 25, TaXnciiofftet ^te^saax%. 



K 

*■ 



•^ .. 



