L\  O     M  O  R  E  , 
CKYING. 

AN    ADDRESS    TO    CHILDRE^^ 

H  Y     'I  II  K 

RIGHT  REV.  J.  C.  RYLE,  B.D., 

T.ORT)   BISHOP  OP  LI\T?RPOOL. 


LONDON  : 

WILLIAM    HUNT    AND    COMPANY, 

PATERNOSTER   ROW. 

IPSWICH  : 
WILLIAM    HUNT,   TAVKBN    STKKET. 


NO   MOUE    CEYING! 


*^  God  SITALL  WIPE  AWAY  ALL  TEAES  PROM 
THEIR  eyes;  and  THERE  SHALL  BE  NO 
MORE  DEATH,  NEITHER  SORROW  NOR 
CRYING,    NEITHER   SHALL   THERE   BE  ANY 

MORE  PAIN." — Eev,  xxi.  .4.. 


Beloved  Children, 

A  Bible  text  stands  at  the 
top  of  this  page.  I  should  like  you  to  read 
it  twice  over.  I  am  going  to  tell  you 
something  which,  I  hope,  will  make  you 
remember  that  text  as  long  as  you  live. 

I  am  going  to  tell  you  about  three  places 
of  which  the  Bible  says  a  great  deal. 
It  matters  little  what  we  know  about  some 
places.  But  it  matters  much  to  know 
something  about  the  three  places  of  which 
I  am  now  going  to  speak. 


2  NO   MORE   CRYING. 

I.  Firstly, — There  is  a  place  where 
there  is  a  great  deal  of  crying. 

II.  Secondly, — There  is  a  place  where 
there  is  nothing  else  but  crying. 

III.  Thirdly, — There  is  a  place  where 
there  is  no  crying  at  all. 

Now,  attend  to  me,  and  I  will  tell  you 
a  few  things  worth  knowing. 

I.     First   of   all,    there   is   a   place 

WHERE  THERE  IS  A  GREAT  DEAL  OF  CRYING. 

What  is  that  place  ?  It  is  the  world, 
in  which  you  and  .1  live.  It  is  a  world  full 
of  beautiful  and  pleasant  things.  The  sun 
shining  by  day  and  the  stars  by  night, — 
tl]e  blue  hills  looking  up  to  heaven,  and 
the  rolling  sea  ebbing  and  flowing, — 
the  broad  quiet  lakes,  and  the  rushing, 
restless  rivers, — the  flowers  blooming  in 
tlie  spring,  and  the  fields  full  of  corn  in 
autumn, — the  birds  singing  in  the  woods, 
and  the  lambs  playing  in  the  nieadows, — 
all,  all  are  beautiful  things.  I  could  look  at 
them  for  hours,  and  say,  '*What  a  beau- 
tiful world  it  is ! ''  But  still  it  is  a  world 
where  there  is  a  great  deal  of  crying.  It 
is  a  world  where  there  are  many  tears. 

There  was  ** crying"  in  Bible  times. 
Hagar  wept  when  she  thought  Ishmael  was 
dying.     Abraham  mourned  when  Sarah 


NO  MORE  CRYiisra,  3 

died.  Joseph  wept  when  his  brothers 
sold  him  into  Egypt.  David  wept  when 
Absalom  was  killed  There  was  weeping 
at  Jerusalem  when  good  king  Josiah  was 
slain  in  battle.  There  was  weeping  at 
Bethlehem  when  Herod  killed  all  the 
little  children  who  were  two  years  old. 
These  things,  and  many  like  them,  you 
will  find  in  your  Bibles. 

There  is  ^  *cry ing ' '  now  all  over  the  world . 
Ijittle  babies  cry  when  they  want  anything, 
or  feel  pain.  Boys  and  girls  cry  when 
\hey  are  hurt,  or  frightened,  or  corrected. 
J>rown  up  people  cry  sometimes  when  they 
are  in  trouble,  or  when  they  see  those  die 
whom  they  love.  In  short,  wherever  there 
is  sorrow  and  pain,  there  is  **  crying." 

I  dare  say  you  have  seen  people  come 
to  church  all  dressed  in  black.  That  is 
called  being  in  mourning.  Some  relation 
or  friend  of  these  people  is  dead,  and 
therefore  they  dress  in  black.  Well,  re- 
member when  you  see  people  in  mourning, 
somebody  has  been  **  crying.'' 

I  dare  say  you  have  seen  graves  in 
churchyards,  and  have  heard  that  when 
people  die,  they  are  buried  there.  Some 
of  them  are  very  little  graves,  not  longer 
than  you  are.  Well,  remember  that  when 


4  NO   MORE   CRYING. 

those  graves  were  made,  and  little  coffins 
were  let  down  into  them,  there  was 
"crying.'^ 

Children,  did  you  ever  think  what  all 
this  crying  came  from?  Did  you  ever 
consider  how  it  first  began  ?  Did  you  ever 
hear  how  weeping  and  tears  came  into 
the  world  ?  God  did  not  make  crying ; — 
that  is  certain.  All  that  God  made  was 
<<very  good.*'  Listen  to  me  and  I  will 
tell  you  how  ^'  crying  "  began. 

Crying  came  into  the  world  by  reason  of 
sin.  Sin  is  the  cause  of  all  the  weeping, 
and  tears,  and  sorrow,  and  pain,  which 
there  are  upon  earth.  All  the  crying  began 
when  Adam  and  Eve  ate  the  forbidden 
fruit  and  became  sinners.  It  was  sin 
which  brought  into  the  world  pain,  and 
sickness,  and  death.  It  was  sin  which 
brought  into  the  world  selfishness,  and  ill- 
nature,  and  unkindness,  and  quarrelling, 
and  stealing,  and  fighting.  If  there  had 
been  no  wickedness,  there  would  have 
been  no  weeping.  If  there  had  been  no 
sin,  there  would  have  been  no  **  crying." 

See  now,  my  beloved  children,  how 
much  you  ought  to  hate  sin.  All  the 
unhappiness  in  the  world  came  from  sin. 
How  strange  and  wonderful  it  is  that  any 


NO  MORE  CRYING.  5 

one  can  take  pleasure  in  sin !  Do  not  lot 
that  be  the  case  with  you.  Watch  against 
sin.  Fight  with  it.  Avoid  it.  Listen  not 
to  it.  Take  the  advice  of  St.  Paul : — 
'^  Abhor  that  which  is  evil.''  Take  the 
advice  of  Solomon:  —  *'When  sinners 
entice  thee,  consent  thou  not.'*  Say  to 
yourself  every  morning,  *^Sin  caused 
crying,  and  so  I  wiU  hate  sin.'' 

See  again,  my  beloved  children,  how 
foolish  it  is  to  expect  perfect  happiness  in 
this  world.  It  is  expecting  what  you  will 
not  find.  The  world  is  a  place  where  there 
is  much  **  crying,"  and  where  things  do 
not  always  go  on  pleasantly.  I  hear  many 
boys  and  girls  talking  of  the  pleasures  they 
will  have  when  they  are  men  and  women. 
I  am  sorry  for  them  when  I  hear  them 
talking  in  this  way.  I  know  they  are  mis- 
taken. I  know  they  will  be  disappointed. 
They  will  find  when  they  grow  up,  that 
they  cannot  get  through  the  world  without 
many  troubles  and  cares.  There  are  no 
roses  without  thorns.  There  are  no  years 
without  dark  and  rainy  days.  There  is 
no  living  on  earth  without  **  crying  "  and 
tears. 

II.  I  will  now  speak  of  the  second 
place  about  which  I  promised  to  tell  you 


6  NO  MORE  CRYING. 

sometliing.    There   is  a  place  'wtcerb 

THERE  IS  NOTHING  ELSE  BUT  **  CRYING." 

What  is  this  place  ?  It  is  the  place  to 
which  all  bad  people  go  when  they  are 
dead.  It  is  the  place  which  the  Bible  calls 
hell.  In  hell  there  is  no  laughter  and 
smiling.  There  is  nothing  but  **  weeping 
and  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth.**  In 
hell  there  is  no  happiness.  Those  who 
go  there  cry  on  night  and  day  without 
stopping.  They  have  no  rest.  They 
never  go  to  sleep  and  wake  up  happy. 
They  never  stop  crying  in  hell. 

Beloved  children,  I  am  sorry  to  tell  you 
that  there  are  many  people  going  to  hell. 
*^  Broad  is  the  way  that  leadeth  unto 
destruction,  and  many  there  be  which  go 
in  it."  I  am  afraid  that  many  children 
are  going  to  hell.  I  see  many  boys  and 
girls  who  are  so  naughty  and  ill-behaved, 
that  I  am  sure  they  are  not  fit  for  heaven. 
And  if  they  are  not  fit  for  heaven,  where 
will  they  go  if  they  die  ?  There  is  only 
one  other  place  to  which  they  can  go. 
They  must  go  to  hell. 

Dear  children,  it  makes  me  sad  to  say 
these  things.  I  cannot  bear  the  thought 
of  boys  and  girls  going  to  that  dreadful 
place  where  there  is  nothing  but  crying. 


NO   MORE  CRYING.  7 

My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for 
you  is,  that  you  may  not  go  to  hell.  But 
I  want  you  to  know  some  things  which 
you  must  mind  if  you  would  not  go  to 
hell.  Listen  to  me  now  while  I  ask  you 
a  few  questions. 

For  one  thing  I  will  ask  you,— Do  you 
love  Jesus  Christ?  You  ought  to  love  Him. 
He  died  for  your  sins  upon  the  cross, 
that  He  might  save  you  from  hell.  Ho 
allowed  Himself  to  be  shut  up  in  the  dark 
prison  of  the  grave,  that  your  sins  might 
be  forgiven,  and  that  you  might  not  be 
chained  in  hell  for  ever.  Dear  childreup 
think  about  this !  If  you  love  nothing  but 
play,  and  eating,  and  drinking,  and  fine 
clothes,  and  story-books,  and  do  not  love 
Christ,  you  are  not  in  the  right  way.  Take 
care.  If  you  do  not  mind,  you  will  go 
at  last  to  the  place  where  there  is  nothiko 

BUT  **  CRYING.'' 

I  will  ask  you  another  thing. — Do  you 
try  to  please  Christ  ?  You  ought  to  do  so. 
I  read  in  the  Bible  that  Jesus  Christ  said, 
**If  ye  love  Me,  keep  my  commandments." 
— "Ye  are  my  friends  if  ye  do  whatsoever 
I  command  you."  Dear  children,  think 
about  this !  If  you  are  selfish,  or  passionate, 
or  tell  lies,  or  (quarrel  with  one  another, 


8  NO   MORE   CRYINQ. 

or  do  not  do  as  you  are  bid,  you  aro 
not  Christ's  friends.  Take  care.  If  you 
do  not  mind,  you  will  go  at  last  to  the  place 
where  there  is  nothing  but  ^*  crying." 

I  will  ask  you  another  thing. — Do  you 
keep  the  Sunday  holy?  You  ought  to  do 
so.  God  commands  it,  and  it  is  for  your 
good.  I  once  heard  of  a  little  boy  who 
went  to  play  upon  the  ice  on  Sunday, 
instead  of  coming  home  straight  from 
church.  ^ '  Tommy, ' '  said  his  mother,  *  *  why 
did  you  do  so  ? ' ' — *  *  Mot  her, "  said  Tommy, 
^*I  did  not  remember  that  it  was  Sunday." 
— *^  Tommy,"  said  his  mother,  ^^that  is 
the  very  thing  God  told  you  not  to  do. 
He  said  in  the  fourth  commandment,  re- 
member,— ^Eemember  to  keep  holy  the 
Sabbath.'  "  Dear  children,  think  about 
this !  If  you  do  not  like  to  give  God  ono 
day  in  the  week,  your  hearts  are  not  right. 
Take  care.  If  you  do  not  mind,  you  will 
go  at  last  to  the  place  where  there  is 

NOTHING  BUT  *^  CRYING." 

I  will  ask  you  another  thing. — Do  you 
say  your  prayers  ?  You  ought  f o  do  so. 
God  will  never  be  a  friend  to  3^ou  if  you 
do  not  speak  to  Him,  and  ask  Him  to  take 
care  of  your  soul  and  make  you  good. 
If  you  never  pray,  or  say  your  prayers 


NO   MORE   CRYING.  9 

without  thinking,  your  heart  will  soon 
be  full  of  mischief  and  sin.  It  will 
never  be  empty  for  a  day.  I  once  heard 
of  a  boy  who  had  a  little  garden  given  to 
him  all  full  of  flowers.  But  he  did  nothing 
for  it.  He  never  raked  it,  or  weeded  it. 
And  after  a  few  weeks  the  weeds  came  up 
so  thick  that  the  flowers  died.  Dear 
children,  think  of  this  !  If  3  ojl  do  not  ask 
God  to  put  the  Holy  Spirit  in  your  hearts, 
the  devil  will  soon  fill  them  with  sin. 
Take  care.  If  you  do  not  mind,  you  will 
go  at  last  to  the  place  where  there  is 

NOTHING  BUT  *' CRYING.'' 

I  will  ask  you  one  more  question. — Do 
you  read  your  Bible  r  You  ought  to  do 
so.  That  beautiful  book  is  able  to  keep 
you  from  hell  and  save  your  soul.  If  you 
use  the  Bible  rightly,  you  will  not  be 
hurt  by  the  devil.  I  once  heard  of 
a  little  boy  in  Africa  who  was  sleeping 
with  his  father  in  the  open  air,  near  a 
fire.  He  awoke  in  the  middle  of  the 
night,  and  saw  a  great  lion  close  to  him, 
looking  as  if  he  was  going  to  seize  him. 
The  little  boy  took  up  a  lighted  stick  out  of 
the  fire,  and  put  it  in  the  lion's  face,  and 
drove  him  away.  Dear  children,  think  of 
this!  The  devil  is  '*a  roaring  lion,  seeking 


10  KO  MORE   CRYING. 

whom  he  may  devour.''  But  he  cannot 
harm  you,  if  you  make  a  right  use  of  the 
Bible.  If  you  would  drive  him  from  you, 
you  must  read  your  Bible.  If  you  can 
read  and  yet  neglect  your  Bible,  you  are  in 
great  danger.  Take  care.  If  you  do 
not  mind,  the  devil  will  carry  you  off  to 
the  place  where  there  is  ^*  nothing  but 

CRYING." 

Beloved  children,  remember  my  five 
questions.  Think  of  them  often,  and  try 
your  own  hearts  by  them.  I  am  not  afraid 
about  children  who  love  Jesus,  and  try  to 
please  Him,  and  keep  the  Sunday  holy, 
and  pray,  and  read  their  Bibles.  I  am 
not  afraid  that  they  will  go  to  hell  if  they 
die.  But  I  am  afraid  about  children  who 
care  nothing  about  these  things.  I  think 
they  are  in  great  danger. 

III.  I  will  now  speak  of  the  third 
place  about  which  I  promised  to  tell  you 
something.      There  is  a  place  where 

THERE  IS  NO  CRYING  AT  ALL. 

What  is  this  place  ?  It  is  heaven.  It 
is  the  place  to  which  all  good  people  go 
when  they  are  dead.  There  all  is  joy  and 
happiness.  There  no  tears  are  shed.  There 
sorrow,  and  pain,  and  sickness,  and  death, 
can  never  enter  in.     There  can  be  no 


NO  MORE  CRYING.  11 

crying  in  heaven,  because  there  is  nothing 
that  can  cause  grief. 

Dear  children,  there  will  be  no  more 
lessons  in  heaven  :  all  will  have  been 
learned.  The  school  will  be  closed :  the 
rod  and  correction  will  be  laid  aside  for 
ever.     There  will  be  an  eternal  holiday. 

There  will  be  no  more  work  in  heaven. 
Man  will  no  longer  need  to  labour  for  his 
bread.  The  head  will  no  longer  have  to 
ache  with  thinking:  the  hands  will  no 
longer  be  stiff  and  brown  with  toiling. 
There  will  be  an  eternal  rest  for  the 
people  of  God. 

There  will  be  no  sickness  in  heaven. 
Pain,  and  disease,  and  weakness,  and 
death,  will  not  be  known.  The  people 
who  dwell  there  shall  no  more  say,  **I 
am  sick : ''  they  will  be  always  well. 
There  will  be  nothing  but  health  and 
strength  for  evermore. 

There  will  be  no  sin  in  heaven.  There 
will  be  no  bad  tempers,  no  unkind  words, 
no  spiteful  actions.  The  great  tempter, 
the  Devil,  will  not  be  allowed  to  come  in 
and  spoil  the  happiness.  There  shall  be 
nothing  but  holiness  and  love  for  ever- 
more. 

Best  of  all,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Him- 


12  NO  MORE   CRYING. 

self  will  be  in  the  midst  of  heaven.  His 
people  shall  at  last  see  Him  face  to  face, 
and  go  out  from  His  presence  no  more.  He 
shall  gather  His  lambs  into  His  bosom,  and 
wipe  away  all  tears  from  all  eyes.  Where 
He  is  will  be  fulness  of  joy,  and  at  His 
right  hand  shall  be  pleasures  for  evermore. 

Dear  children,  would  you  not  like  to  go 
to  heaven  ?  We  cannot  live  always  in  this 
world.  A  day  will  come  when  we  must 
die,  like  the  old  people  who  have  died 
already.  Children,  would  you  not  like  to 
go  to  heaven  when  you  die  ?  Listen  to 
me,  and  I  will  tell  you  something  about 
the  way  by  which  you  must  go. 

If  you  would  go  to  heaven,  you  must 
have  your  sins  forgiven,  and  your  hearts 
made  new  and  good.  There  is  only  One 
who  can  do  this  for  you  :  that  One  is  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  God  has  appointed 
Him  to  be  the  Friend  of  sinners.  He  can 
wash  away  your  sins  in  His  own  precious 
blood.  He  can  make  your  hearts  new  by 
putting  the  Holy  Spirit  in  them.  He  is 
the  Way  and  the  Door  into  heaven.  He 
has  the  keys  in  His  hand.  Children,  if 
you  want  to  go  to  heaven,  you  must  ask 
Jesus  Christ  to  let  you  in. 

Ask  Jesus  in  prayer  to  get  ready  a  place 


NO   MORE  CRYING.  13 

for  you  in  that  world  where  there  is  no 
*'  crying."  Ask  Him  to  put  your  name  in 
His  book  of  life,  and  to  make  you  one  of 
His  people.  Ask  Him  to  cleanse  you  from 
all  your  sins,  and  to  put  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  your  heart.  Ask  Him  to  give  you 
power  to  fight  His  battle  against  sin,  the 
world,  and  the  devil.  Ask  Him  to  give 
you  grace  to  make  you  good  while  you 
are  young,  and  good  when  you  grow  up, 
that  so  you  may  be  safe  while  you  live, 
and  happy  for  ever  when  you  die. 

Children,  Jesus  Christ  is  ready  to  do  all 
this,  if  you  will  only  ask  Him.  He  has 
done  it  for  many  people  already.  He  is 
waiting  to  do  it  for  you  at  this  very  time. 
Do  not  be  afraid  to  ask  Him.  Tell  Him 
you  have  heard  that  He  was  very  kind  to 
people  when  He  was  on  earth,  and  ask 
Him  to  be  kind  to  you.  Eemind  Him  how 
kind  He  was  to  the  poor  dying  thief  on 
the  cross.  Say  to  Him,  *^Lord  Jesus,  re- 
member me ;  I  want  to  go  heaven.  Lord, 
think  upon  me.  Lord,  give  me  the  Holy 
Spirit.  Lord,  pardon  my  sins,  and  give 
me  a  new  heart.     Lord  Jesus,  save  me." 

And  now,  children,  I  have  kept  my 
word.  I  have  told  you  of  three  places. 
I  have  told  you  of  a  place  ^here  there  is 


14  NO   MORE  CBYING. 

nothing  but  crying.  I  hope  none  of  you 
will  go  there. — I  have  told  you  of  a  place 
where  there  is  no  crying.  I  hope  you  will 
all  go  there. — I  have  told  you  of  a  place 
where  there  is  a  great  deal  of  crying. 
That  place  is  the  world  in  which  you  are 
living. — Would  you  like,  last  of  all,  to 
know  the  best  way  to  be  happy  in  this 
world  ?   Listen  to  me,  and  I  will  tell  you. 

The  happiest  people  in  this  world  are 
those  who  make  the  Bible  the  rule  of  their 
lives.  They  read  their  Bibles  often.  They 
believe  what  the  Bible  says.  They  love 
that  Saviour  Jesus  Christ  of  whom  the 
Bible  speaks.  They  try  to  obey  what  the 
Bible  commands.  None  are  so  happy 
as  these  people.  They  cannot  prevent 
sickness  and  trouble  coming  to  them  some- 
times ;  but  they  learn  from  the  Bible  to 
bear  them  patiently.  Children,  if  you 
would  get  through  the  world  happily, 
make  the  Bible  your  best  friend. 

Shall  I  tell  you  a  story  that  I  once 
heard  about  a  little  boy  and  the  Bible  ? 
Perhaps  it  will  help  you  to  remember 
what  I  have  just  been  saying.  I  want' 
the  words  I  have  just  written  to  stick  for 
ever  in  your  minds. 

**I?ather,''  said  this  little  boy  one  da^r* 


NO  MOEE  CRYING.  15 

**Ido  not  see  any  use  in  reading  the  Bible. 
I  do  not  see  that  it  does  people  any  good.'* 
— Little  Johnny  said  this  in  a  rather  cross 
and  pettish  way,  and  his  father  thought  it 
best  not  to  begin  reasoning  with  him. 
**  Johnny,*'  he  said,  '*put  on  your  hat,  and 
come  out,  and  take  a  walk  with  me.'' 

Johnny's  father  took  him  first  to  a  house 
where  there  was  an  old  woman  who  was 
very  poor,  and  he  talked  to  her  about  her 
poverty. — *^Sir,"  said  the  old  woman,  **I 
do  not  complain.  I  have  read  in  the  Bible 
these  words, — *  I  have  learned  in  whatso- 
ever state  I  am  therewith  to  be  content.' " 
— **  Johnny,"  said  the  little  boy's  father, 
**  hear  what  the  old  woman  says." 

They  went  on  to  another  house,  where 
there  was  a  young  woman  who  was  very  ill, 
and  never  likely  to  get  better.  Johnny's 
father  asked  her  if  she  felt  afraid  to  die. 
— **  No  :  "  she  said,  **  I  find  it  written  in 
the  Bible,  *  Though  I  walk  through  the 
valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  I  will  fear  no 
evil,  for  Thou  art  with  me.' "  **  Johnny," 
said  the  little  boy's  father  again,  **hear 
what  the  young  woman  says." 

Children,  when  Johnny  and  his  father 
came  home  that  afternoon  from  their 
walk;,  tis  JEscther  asked  him  one  question. 


16  NO    MORE   CRYING.  ' 

**  Johnny/'  he  said,  '*do  you  think  it  is 
of  any  use  to  read  the  Bible?  Do  you 
think  reading  the  Bible  does  people  any 
good?'' 

And  now  what  do  you  think  Johnny 
said?  I  will  tell  you.  He  held  down 
his  head,  and  said  nothing.  But  his  face 
got  very  red,  and  he  looked  very  much 
ashamed. 

Children,  from  that  very  day  Johnny 
was  never  heard  again  to  say,  **It  is  of 
no  use  reading  the  Bible.'' 

Beloved  children,  remember  my  parting 
words.  The  way  to  get  through  the  world 
with  the  least  possible  crying,  is  to  read 
the  Bible,  believe  the  Bible,  pray  over 
the  Bible,  live  by  the  Bible. 

He  that  goes  through  life  in  this  way 
will  have  the  least* ^crying"  in  this  world; 
and,  best  of  all,  he  will  have  no  crying 

AT  ALL  IN  THE  WORLD  TO  COME. 


LONDON  :    WILLIAM  HtTNT  AND  COMPANY. 


I 


BY    THE    SAME    AUTHOR. 


dV<lcll'o^^^i4e^^     to     OHil<lxH' 


IN    lAXt;Y    C()VKl(..s. 


BOYrt  AM)  GIKLS  PLAYlNt;. 
THE  TWO  BEARS! 
ClHLDllEN  \VALK1N6  IN  TRU'I  H 
LIT'J'LE  AND  WISE 
NO  MORE  CRYING. 
SEEKING  THE*  LORD  EARLY 
THE  HAPPY  LITTLE  GlRLr  ■ 
LITTLE  THINGS.     A  tai  k    a 

MiSSlnNS. 


HlMUdW    OV 


These  Addresses  eacli  On  a  l^enny,  or  l-f,  assortetl  n 
copies, in  packetjOne  Shilling. 


