tarsi 
AGiat 
eu 


ke 
Ph 
ca 


oh 


ate vauher “Bate 
Tae reales 


s 
‘inant 
SST 


anrad) 
an 


eee 


tacos 


svat ue seas wreweaeey waren Neh 
AIG PagnP EHO AMS 


G. M. ELLIOTT LIBRARY 
CINCINNATI BIBLE SEMINARY 
2700 GLENWAY AVE. 

PR. O. BOX 043200 
CINCINNATI, OHIO 45204-3200 


N@TES 
ON THE 


MINOR 
EROPHETS 


By 
H. A. IRONSIDE, Litt.D. 


Author of NOTES ON JEREMIAH AND LAMENTATIONS; 
NOTES ON EZEKIEL THE PROPHET; LECTURES ON DANIEL THE PROPHET; 
NOTES ON THE MINOR PROPHETS, etc., etc. 


Cie) 


THE CINCINNATI BIBLE SEMINARY 
LIBRARY 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, INc., BIBLE TRUTH DEPOT 


A Nonprofit Organic igidie vagy to the Lord’s Work 
and to the Spread of His Truth 


Neptune, New Jersey 


FIRST EDITION, AUGUST 1909 
TENTH PRINTING, SEPTEMBER 1969 


22A.F 


emmy 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/notesonminorprop0000hair_o4r2 


PREFACE 


It was with no definite purpose of writing a 
series of Notes on the Minor Prophets as a whole, 
that I first began to take up various books of the 
twelve, in monthly installments in HELP AND Foop 
FOR THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH. But after penning 
some notes on Habakkuk, Jonah, and Obadiah, I 
found my own soul helped, and an interest de- 
veloped in the further study of these much-ne- 
glected portions of Scriptures, and so took up 
Hosea and the books following. I have sought to 
press their practical application as giving im- 
portant teaching for a remnant people in a day 
of decline, while not neglecting their dispensa- 
tional bearing. This, I am persuaded, is what is 
greatly needed at the present moment. If God be 
pleased to use the Notes for the stirring of His 
people’s consciences and the comfort of their 
hearts, the desired end will be realized. 


H. A. IRONSIDE. 


Chap. III. 


INDEX 


NOTES ON HOSEA 
Chap. I. The Blood of Jezreel 


II. The Valley of Achor 

III. Israel’s Present and Future 

IV Joined) to idols) saa. Bas 
V. “I Will Hide Myself’ 4 
VI. “What Shall I do unto Thee?” . 
VII. A Cake Not Turned 


VIII. “A Vessel Wherein is no Pleasure” 


IX. The Days of Visitation 
X. An Empty Vine 

XI. Bands of Love. . 

XII. The Balances of Deceit 
XIII. “In Me is thy Help” .. . 
XIV. Restoration ond Blessing 


NOTES ON JOEL 


Introduction . 
Chap. I. The Locust Plague 


II. Outpouring of the Spirit Promised . 
III. The Valley of Decision 


NOTES ON AMOS : 
Introduction . . js 
Chaps. I & II. The Indictment of the Nations 

The Chastisement of the Chosen Nation 


IV. “Yet Have Ye Not Returned!” . 
V. A Lamentation for Israel . 
WileACS asenin Zion ge 

VII. Teaching by Symbols 

VIII. A Famine of the Word 

TXee NOt a, Grain ost... ees 


NOTES ON OBADIAH 


The Doom of Edom ..... 


NOTES ON JONAH 


Introduction 5 eDrdn ato) ute Siscwee om 
hap. I. The Unwelcome Message . 


II. Out of the Depths... . . 
III. Death and Resurrection Ses 
IV. The Repentance of Nineveh . 


° 


vi INDEX 


NOTES ON MICAH 

Chap. I. The Summons to Hearken . A 
II. “Is the Spirit of the Lord Straitened?” . 
III. Princes and Priests Apostate 2 
IV. The First Dominion . ; 
V. The Smitten Judge . 
VI. The Lord’s Controversy . é 
VII. Future Repentance and Blessing 


NOTES ON NAHUM 
Chap. I. Faith’s Refuge . 
II. The Destruction, of Nineveh 
III. Beyond Healing - 


NOTES ON HABAKKUK 
Introduction . . 
Chap. I The Prophet’s Perplexity 
II. On the Watch-Tower . . 
III. The Prayer of Habakkuk . 


NOTES ON ZEPHANIAH 


Chap.I. The Day of the Lord . . , : 
II. The Judgments of the Nations at 
III. The Remnant and the Lord in the Midst 


NOTES ON HAGGAI 
Introduction . 
Chap. I. Consider Your Ways 
TiS ee Begstiong a see 


NOTES ON ZECHARIAH 
Introduction SEX: celeie Read Oa Oe CHA TS Oe 
Chap. I. Israel and the Divine rapier oe 
II. Jerusalem’s Restoration 
III. A Brand Plucked out of the Fi ire . 
IV. The Two Anointed Ones . . 
V. The Flying Roll and the Ephah 


VI. The Four Chariots and the Crowning Day , 


VII. The Need of Reality . 

VIII. The Light of the Future on the Present . 
IX. The Coming King A ; 
X. The Regathering 3 

XI. “Thirty Pieces of Silver” 3 

XII. The True Day of Atonement for Judah . 


XIII. T he ana Opened and the Shepherd 


XIV. The True reset ‘of "Tabernacles ; 


NOTES ON MALACHI 
Chap. I. The Failed Remnant .. . 
IIs” DheiSinjotstheseniestsi.) anes 
III. Preparation for the nest 
IV. The Sun- Se ates 
Postscript : 


Notes on the 


PROPHECY OF HOSEA 


CHAPTER I 


THE BLOOD OF JEZREEL* 


called Minor Prophets, was a contempo- 

rary of Isaiah throughout almost his en- 
tire ministry, as also of Amos in his earlier years. 
A comparison of the first verses of each of their 
books with the one before us makes this evident. 
During the long reign of Jeroboam II, king of 
Israel, and those of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and 
Hezekiah, kings of Judah, there was much to re- 
buke in the two nations. Hosea seems to have 
confined most of his direct messages to Judah, 
speaking rather of the ten tribes than to them; 
but the scope of his prophecy embraces both, and 
that very fully. In fact, no other messenger gives 


Hee whose book is the first of the so- 


*It is essential the reader should first read with care, 
in Scripture, the chapter under consideration in these 
“Notes.” To derive profit and blessing, the subject must 
be familiar.—[Ed. 


8 Notes on Hosea 


so complete an outline of the ways of God with 
His earthly people as does Hosea, even Daniel not 
excepted. Read in connection with the visions of 
the latter, the one throws much light on the other. 
Of Hosea’s personal history it has not pleased 
God to give us any particulars, save in relation 
to his marriage, and the issue therefrom. His 
father’s name is given as Beeri, but neither the 
prophet’s tribe nor the place of his nativity is 
mentioned. Hosea means help, or salvation. With 
a single vowel-point added it becomes Hoshea, 
salvation of Jah. Beeri is said to mean The well 
of Jehovah. The two names together remind us 
of the Lord’s words to the woman of Samaria. 
He offered her living water from Jehovah’s well, 
which would result in her assured salvation. 
“The beginning of the word of the Lord by . 
Hosea” was a command for the prophet himself, 
bidding him do what would be obnoxious to mere 
nature, and which must have tested the heart of 
Jehovah’s servant in a very marked way. As in 
the case of Isaiah, he and his were to be for signs 
in Israel; so he is told to unite himself in mar- 
riage to a woman devoid of character—a harlot; 
thus signifying the wretched condition of unfaith- 
ful Israel, who nevertheless remained the object 
of Jehovah’s love, despite their iniquity, and the 
filthiness that was in them. What more wonderful 
picture could we have of grace, not only to the un- 
deserving, but to those who had deserved the very 


The Blood of Jezreel 9 


opposite? It is important to remember that grace 
is not merely uwnmerited favor, but it is favor 
spite of merited judgment. 

Such is the marvelous loving-kindness of our 
God that He finds the objects of His love, not 
among the righteous and the holy, but among 
sinners lost and ruined, deserving naught but 
judgment, stained with guilt and polluted by sin, 
having all gone out of the way and become un- 
profitable; nevertheless He sets His love upon 
wretches so vile and unworthy, and redeems them 
to Himself. Jehovah’s dealings with Israel of old 
picture His ways of grace with believers now. 
“All these things happened unto them for types, 
and they are written for our admonition upon 
whom the ends of the ages have arrived.” 

In obedience to the voice of the Lord, Hosea 
“went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim” 
as his wife; thus giving to her who before had 
no standing the place and honor of a wife in Is- 
rael. Of her he had several children. Having 
‘died to her old wretched life, of which she might 
well be ashamed, she brings forth fruit unto him 
who has set his love upon her and given her his 
name and protection. It is easy to see in all this 
a lovely illustration of the words of the Holy 
Spirit in Rom. 6: 21, 22: “What fruit had ye then 
in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? 
for the end of those things is death. But now 
being made free from sin, and become servants 


10 Notes on Hosea 


to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the 
end everlasting life.’ As also in verse 4 of the 
following chapter: “Wherefore, my brethren, ye 
also are become dead to the law by the body of 
Christ; that ye should be married to another, 
even to Him who is raised from the dead, that 
we should bring forth fruit unto God.” 

Hosea had to bear the shame of having es- 
poused one of so wretched a character, but he did 
not have to die for her. It was far otherwise 
with our blessed Lord Jesus. He not only came 
where we were in our sin and shame, but on Cal- 
vary’s cross He was made sin for us that we might 
become God’s righteousness in Him. There He 
purchased us with His own precious blood, “that 
He might redeem us from all iniquity and purify 
unto Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good 
works” (Titus 2:14). 

Of His all-conquering love, the kindness shown 
by Hosea to Gomer is but a very faint picture; 
as also of Jehovah’s undying affection for Israel, 
the earthly bride. For the cross was where the 
purchase-price was paid for both the heavenly 
and the earthly people. 

When the first son was born, “the Lord said 
unto him, Call his name Jezreel; for yet a little 
while, and I will avenge the bleod of Jezreel upon 
the house of Jehu, and will cause to cease the 
kingdom of the house of Israel. And it shall come 
to pass at that day, that I will break the bow of 


The Blood of Jezreel 11 


Israel in the valley of Jezreel” (vers. 4,5). The 
name Jezreel itself speaks of blessing, yet here it 
is used to tell of judgment. Jezreel means “sown 
of God,” and in chapter 2, as also in the last verse 
of this present chapter, it is used in a very differ- 
ent connection from that in which it is here 
found. 

God was about to cast Israel, the northern 
kingdom, out of His sight among the Gentiles, in 
order that they might be chastened for their in- 
iquities. He had redeemed them in grace and 
brought them to Himself; but they had proven 
false and treacherous. Therefore they must learn 
by judgment what they would not learn by loving- 
kindness. He connects their destruction with 
“the blood of Jezreel.”” This is most significant, 
for the reigning house of Israel had succeeded to 
the throne through that very “blood of Jezreel.” 
It was when Jehu became the instrument for the 
destruction of Ahab’s house, at Jezreel, that he 
ascended the throne, and Jeroboam II was of his 
dynasty. 

But neither Jehu nor his house had profited by 
the lesson of Ahab’s judgment. They had them- 
selves walked in the ways of the nations, and fol- 
lowed false gods; therefore the blood of Jezreel 
would be avenged upon them, and they too should 
be cut off. 

But there is more yet connected with Jezreel. 
It will be remembered that this was originally 


12 Notes on Hosea 


the inheritance of the righteous man Naboth. In 
1 Kings 21 we learn that this Naboth “‘had a vine- 
yard which was in Jezreel.”” Ahab coveted the 
vineyard, and sought to buy it, that he might 
transform it into a garden. Naboth rightfully 
refused to sell his inheritance, saying, “The Lord 
forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of 
my fathers unto thee” (ver. 3). Heavy and dis- 
pleased, Ahab “laid him down upon his bed, and 
turned away his face, and would eat no bread.” 
The proud and wilful monarch could not brook 
the thought that one so insignificant as this 
Jezreelite should thwart his wishes. Jezebel, his 
heathen wife, however, wrote letters in his name, 
saying, ‘‘Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high 
among the people: and set two men, sons of 
Belial, before him, to bear witness against him, 
saying, Thou didst blaspheme God and the king. 
And then carry him out, and stone him, that he 
may die’ (vers. 9, 10). The ungodly plot was 
duly perpetrated. False witnesses swore away 
the life of the righteous one, and “they carried 
him forth out of the city, and stoned him with 
stones, that he died” (ver. 18). 

His inheritance was declared forfeited, and 
Ahab went down to take possession of it. But 
on the way he was met by Elijah the prophet, 
who was sent with a message of judgment upon 
his lips. Jehovah’s eye had been looking on, and 
He commanded His servant to declare to the god- 


The Blood of Jezreel 13 


less king that his doom was sealed, and his house 
should fall. The blood of Jezreel should be his 
ruin, for, “Thus saith the Lord, In the place 
where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs 
lick thy blood, even thine” (ver. 19). 

“And of Jezebel also spake the Lord, saying, 
The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the wall of Jezreel’”’ 
(ver. 23). All this was literally fulfilled. Ahab 
was slain in the battle of Ramoth-Gilead; and we 
read, “So the king died, and was brought to 
Samaria; and they buried the king in Samaria. 
And one washed the chariot in the pool of Sama- 
ria; and the dogs licked up his blood; and they 
washed his armor; according unto the word of 
the Lord which He spake” (1 Kings 22: 37, 38). 
This was in the portion of Jezreel, Ahab’s sum- 
mer home. 

Ahab was succeeded by his ungodly son Joram, 
or Jehoram, as he is sometimes called. Jehu 
having been anointed king of Israel by Elisha, 
the man of God, set out first of all to put Joram 
to death. The latter had “returned to be healed 
in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had 
given him, when he fought with Hazael king of 
Syria” (2 Kings 9:15). In the portion of Naboth 
the Jezreelite the two met; Ahaziah king of Judah 
also being with the Israelitish monarch. “And it 
came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he 
said, Is it peace, Jehu? And he answered, What 
peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother 


14 Notes on Hosea 


Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?” Joram 
attempted to flee, but Jehu pierced him through 
with an arrow, and, in fulfilment of the word of 
Jehovah, cast his bleeding corpse into the plot of 
Naboth. Ahaziah too was smitten, but fled to 
Megiddo to die. It was against the house of Ahab 
the Lord’s vengeance was to fall in the portion 
of Jezreel! 

Here too Jezebel met her dreadful fate, as the 
prophet had predicted. “When Jehu was come 
to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it, and she painted 
her face, and tired her head, and looked out at a 
window.” As she taunts Jehu as a regicide, he 
calls for one upon his side to throw her down. At 
once several eunuchs lay hands upon her, and 
“they threw her down, and some of her blood was 
sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses: and he 
trode her under foot.” Afterwards Jehu sent his 
servants to bury her, but they found that dogs 
had devoured her in the portion of Jezreel, as 
the Lord had spoken (2 Kings 9: 30-37). The 
present dynasty (Jehu’s) had therefore come to 
the throne through this blood of Jezreel; but, 
alas, they had failed to profit by the solemn lesson 
of God’s hatred of sin, and abhorrence of idolatry 
in particular! Therefore this same valley of Jez- 
reel should be the scene of their judgment; as 
it was some few years later, when in that very 
spot (called then Esdraelon) the Assyrian de- 
feated Israel, and their captivity began. 


The Blood of Jezreel 15 


Dispensationally, all this is fraught with truth 
of a solemn and important character. Israel, ac- 
cording to Isa. 5, is Jehovah’s vineyard. Of 
Israel therefore the vineyard of Jezreel speaks. 
They were “sown of God” in the land of Canaan, 
to be Jehovah’s portion. But they hired false 
witnesses against the Lord of the vineyard, the 
Righteous One, who would not give to the enemy 
His rightful inheritance. By wicked hands they 
slew the Husbandman, and claimed the vineyard 
as their own. Because of this the Gentile op- 
pressor was permitted to overturn the kingdom, 
and power was transferred to the nations. The 
awful prayer, “His blood be on us, and on our 
children!”” has been terribly answered, as the 
antitypical blood of Jezreel witnesses. In the very 
place where they slew the Lord of glory their 
blood has been poured out as wine bursting from 
the winepress, and they have been devoured by 
the dogs—the unclean Gentiles. 

Have the Gentiles, on their part, profited by the 
dreadful lesson of the blood of the seed of God? 
Far from it. High-minded and indifferent to God’s 
claims upon them, they have gone on in their own 
ways, and refused to hearken to His word. There- 
fore they too shall be cut off, and thus God will 
avenge upon them the blood of Jezreel. 

Coming back to the literal application of the 
passage in Hosea, we note that Jehovah was about 
“to break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jez- 


16 Notes on Hosea 


reel’ (ver. 5). Because they had not taken to 
heart the fact that Ahab’s evil house was de- 
stroyed because of sin, but had walked in the 
same unholy paths, the ten tribes were to be car- 
ried into Assyria; a prophecy which, as we well 
know, came to pass about fifty years later, in the 
days of King Hoshea, who was imprisoned by 
Shalmaneser the Assyrian ruler, and his people 
taken captive. 

In the next verse we learn that a daughter was 
borne by Gomer, who was called Lo-ruhamah, in 
obedience to the word of God. The name means, 
“Not having obtained mercy,” and sets forth the 
present state of Israel since they have been cast 
out of their land. On Judah the Lord would still 
have mercy, and would save them from their 
enemies. They had not yet openly revolted, as 
had the ten tribes (ver. 7). 

A third child, this time a son, was named Lo- 
ammi; that is, “Not My people:” for the Lord 
now declared, “Ye are not My people, and I will 
not be your God.” They had broken the cove- 
nant, entered into long ago at Sinai and ratified 
in the plains of Moab. From the beginning they 
had been treacherous and rebellious; therefore 
on the ground of merit they can claim nothing. 
Hence God gives them up for the time being, and 
refuses to own them as His people. This Lo-ammi 
sentence remains unrepealed to the present day. 
At the Babylonian captivity Judah also came 

g 


The Blood of Jezreel 17 


under it, and all Israel have been in its shadow 
ever since. This accounts for the omission of the 
name of God in the book of Esther, which sets 
forth His providential care over them while they 
are scattered among the nations, and when He 
cannot publicly identify Himself with them.* 
With verse 9 the first chapter ends, according 
to the Hebrew arrangement; the two verses that 
follow being the introduction to chapter 2. They 
speak of mercy yet to be manifested, and tell us 
that though all is forfeited on the ground of 
works, God still has in reserve boundless stores of 
grace, the enjoyment of which they are to enter 
into in the latter day. ‘Yet the number of the 
children of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, 
which cannot be measured nor numbered; and it 
shall come to pass, that in the place where it was 
said unto them, Ye are not My people, there it 
shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the 
living God.t Then shall the children of Judah 


* This has been gone into at some length in the author’s 
“Notes on the Book of Esther,” to be had of the same 
publishers. Paper covers, 30 cts.; cloth, 75 cts. 

+ It will be observed that, in justifying from Scripture 
the present work of God in showing mercy to the Gen- 
tiles, this is one of the passages to which the apostle Paul 
appeals in Rom. 9: 25; while his brother-apostle Peter ap- 
plies the same words to the present remnant of Israel in 
1 Pet. 2:10. Both Jew and Gentile stand now on the same 
ground before God; therefore the same passage may well 
apply to both, for the salvation of either is on the ground, 
not of legal works, but of pure grace. 


18 Notes on Hosea 


and the children of Israel be gathered together, 
and appoint themselves one head, and they shall 
come up out of the land: for great shall be the 
day of Jezreel” (vers. 10, 11). 

The reference to the sand of the sea carries us 
right back to the original covenant of pure grace 
made with Abraham, and confirmed by the oath 
of El Shaddai. God will not forego the promise 
made to the fathers, however great the failure of 
the children. A numberless host of reunited Is- 
rael and Judah shall yet be brought into blessing, 
never more to be forfeited, in the very land 
pledged to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, and 
stained with the blood of Jesus. This is not the 
return that took place under Cyrus. Very few 
from the ten tribes came back at that time, and 
all have since been driven out of their land be- 
cause of the rejection of Messiah when He came, 
in accordance with prophecy, to offer Himself as 
, King. When the Lord’s set time has come, they 
shall return from all the lands whither they have 
been scattered, and shall no longer be divided, but 
be one happy, united people, under one Head, the 
once-rejected Jesus—the Christ of God. That will 
be the true day of Jezreel, when the field of blood 
will become again the vineyard of Jehovah, and 
they shall be sown of God in the land of their 
fathers, never to be rooted up again. 


CHAPTER II 


THE VALLEY OF ACHOR 


marvelously blended in this first recorded 

instance of the prophet’s ministry, which 
follows closely on the promise in the last two 
verses of the previous chapter. In accordance 
with the assurance of future restoration and 
blessing, Jehovah cries, “Say ye unto your breth- 
ren, Ammi, and to your sisters, Ruhamah” (ver. 
1). It is faith’s anticipation of the time when 
the “Lo” (not) shall be removed, and they shall 
again be owned as His people, who have obtained 
mercy. This, of course, looks on for its accom- 
plishment to the Millennium, when “all Israel 
shall be saved.’”* But it becomes true even now 
whenever a soul of either Israel or the nations 
turns to God in repentance, trusting the once- 
rejected Messiah. 

It is to lead Israel to this place of self-judg- 
ment and abhorrence of her past ways that He 
so searchingly outlines her grievous sin in de- 
parting from Himself in verses 2 to 5. As a 


Cr ways of grace and government are 


* That is, the remnant of Israel: “Because a short work 
will the Lord make upon the earth.” See Rom. 9: 27-29; 
Isa. 10: 20-23. The remnant then becomes the righteous 
seed for the millennial kingdom.—[Ed. 


20 Notes on Hosea 


wretched harlot—nay, worse than such, an adul- 
teress—He had to put her away. For, after all 
the love and grace lavished upon her, she had 
turned from Him to idols, in spiritual harlotry. 
Because of this He will see that she eats of the 
fruit of her own devices. His dealings with her 
in His holy and righteous government are sol- 
emnly portrayed in verses 6 to 18. This is in full 
accord with Jeremiah’s words, “Thine own wick- 
edness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings 
shall reprove thee: know therefore and see that 
it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast for- 
saken the Lord thy God” (Jer. 2:19). It is in 
this way He makes sin to serve. If His people 
do not refrain their feet from evil, but persistent- 
ly take their own course, and refuse to obey His 
voice, then they must be taught by their own sin 
the lesson they would not learn from His words 
of warning and admonition. Israel had forsaken 
Him for idols: she should be given up by Him for 
a time, and left to the idols of her own choosing 
for her correction; and in her trouble she would 
find none to answer (ver. 7). Broken-hearted and 
world-weary at last, chastened and disciplined by 
her experiences, she would cry, “I will go and re- 
turn unto my first husband, for then was it better 
with me than now.” Amazing the grace that, 
after such heartless abandonment on her part, 
would yet cause Him to open His arms to her 
again in the day of her genuine repentance. 


The Valley of Achor 21 


It is the same love and grace that every weary 
sinner and every failing saint is made to know 
when he seeks God’s face, confessing the sin and 
shame of his evil ways. No transgression is too 
great for Him to pardon, no evil-doing is too 
much for His mercy, if there be but a breaking- 
down before Him, and He be justified by the 
erring one, while the wrong-doer condemns him- 
self.* 

Touchingly Jehovah points out the insensibil- 
ity of Israel as to the true source of all her past 
blessing. “She did not know,” He says, “that J 
gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied 
her silver and gold, which they prepared for 
Baal” (ver. 8). The treasures He bestowed with 
lavish hand she had poured out upon the altars 
of her shame! Therefore He would withhold His 
favor until she learned that her false gods could 
bring her no good, but only sorrow and want of 
all things. One by one, all she valued would be 
stripped from her till she should learn that in 
Jehovah, whom she had so dishonored, was all 
blessing to be found. His gifts she had attrib- 
uted to her idols, saying, “These are my rewards 


*It is a sad and significant fact that the three words, 
“Condemn not thyself,’ form an oft-repeated motto 
among so-called Christian Scientists of our day. Thus 
they lock against themselves the door to all true blessing; 
for God can only justify the one who condemn’ himself 
and his ways 


22 Notes on Hosea 


that my lovers have given me” (ver. 12): but, 
bereft of all, she shall learn that she had been 
deluding herself and dishonoring Jehovah.* 
When at last her lesson has been learned, Je- 
hovah has purposes of grace in store for her 
which will be fully revealed upon her repentance. 
This is the precious and tender theme of the 
balance of the chapter. ‘Therefore, behold, I will 
allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and 
speak comfortably unto her” (Heb., speak to her 
heart). “And I will give her her vineyards from 
thence, and the valley of Achor (Trouble) for a 
door of hope: and she shall sing there, as in the 
days of her youth, and as in the day when she 
came up out of Egypt” (vers. 14, 15). He loves 
to remember the days of her first betrothal to 
Himself, when she went after Him into the wil- 
derness, into a land that was not sown; when she 
was holiness unto the Lord, and her heart was 
fixed upon Him alone. Those happy days of her 
first love are to be renewed. Once more He will 
allure and draw her away from the scenes of her 
captivity and dishonor. Alone with Himself in 
the wilderness of the peoples (see Ezek. 20: 35), 
He will plead with her face to face. Her vine- 
yards of joy will He restore, and the valley of 


* For a striking instance of what is here portrayed, see 
Jer. 44: 15-23. There the remnant actually trace their 
temporal mercies back to their idolatrous rites, 


The Valley of Achor 23 


Achor (of trouble) shall become an opening of 
expectation. Achor was the scene of Achan’s 
judgment, as recorded in Josh. 7: 24-26. Defiled 
by her unholy departure from her God and covet- 
ing of the accursed thing, Israel’s blessing shall 
begin when the sin that has troubled her is 
judged and put away. Then, restored to Him 
from whom she had wandered so long, she shall 
sing (or, perhaps, respond) as in the days of her 
early freshness, as in the days of her coming out 
of Egypt. 

The application to the individual soul is simple 
and natural. For the backslidden child of God 
who, having learned the folly of departure from 
the Eternal Lover of his soul, returns to Him, 
stoning his Achans, and thus putting away the 
accursed thing, the joy of early days will be re- 
stored, and communion, long lost, be once more 
enjoyed. 

In the day of Israel’s restoration she shall be 
owned as the wife of Jehovah. It is important 
to notice the difference between her place and 
portion and that of the Bride of the Lamb in 
Rev. 19 and 21. The one is earthly; the other, 
heavenly. The former is not called a bride, be- 
cause she is a restored wife, who had long wan- 
dered from her husband. The latter is presented 
as the bride for the first time at the marriage- 
supper of the Lamb in heaven. In the Millennium, 
the Lamb and His heavenly bride will reign over 


24 Notes on Hosea 


all redeemed creation. On the earth the restored 
wife of Jehovah will have her place in the land 
of Palestine. The New Jerusalem above is the 
capital city of the first; the rehabilitated Jeru- 
salem on earth that of the second. Then will the 
words be fulfilled, ““And it shall be at that day, 
saith the Lord, that thou shalt call Me Ishi (2. e., 
my Husband); and shalt call Me no more Baali 
(i. e., my Lord, or my Master). For I will take 
away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and 
they shall no more be remembered by their name” 
(vers. 16, 17). These will be the days of Isa. 54: 6, 
“For the Lord hath called thee as a woman for- 
saken and grieved in spirit, and a wife of youth, 
when thou wast refused, saith thy God.” Then 
shall the land become the land of Beulah, and both 
land and people be manifestly Jehovah’s. 

Of this joyous period the prophets treat in 
large measure. It is the day of the glory of the 
kingdom, when Jesus shall be owned as “the 
blessed and only Potentate” by the world that 
once rejected Him. 

It will be a time of universal diffusion of spirit- 
ual light and blessing. But not only that, the 
curse shall be lifted from the ground, and the 
lower creation be brought into the liberty of the 
glory for which it has groaned so long (Rom. 8: 
22). “In that day will I make a covenant for 
them with the beasts of the field, and with the 
fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of 


The Valley of Achor 25 


the ground: and I will break the bow and the 
sword and the battle out of the earth, and will 
make them to lie down safely’ (ver. 18). All 
this is the result of the exaltation of the Son of 
Man of the 8th psalm, whose beneficent sway all 
creation shall rejoice in. Isa. 11 strikingly sets 
forth the blessings of that halcyon age, the true 
golden age, to be ushered in by the return of the 
Lord Jesus from heaven, who is to shepherd the 
nations with a rod of iron (Ps. 2; Rev. 19). 

Nor shall Israel ever prove unfaithful again. 
The blotted history of the past will be forgotten, 
or remembered only to emphasize the grace that 
shall have restored. “And I will betroth thee 
unto Me forever” is Jehovah’s word; “‘yea, I will 
betroth thee unto Me in righteousness, and in 
judgment, and in loving-kindness, and in 
mercies: I will even betroth thee unto Me in faith- 
fulness: and thou shalt know the Lord” (vers. 
19, 20). Not to the Church do these words refer, 
but to literal Israel, who, upon the expiration of 
the now fast-concluding “times of the Gentiles,” 
will be grafted in again into the olive-tree of 
promise, restored to God and to their land, and 
made the inheritors of the promises assured to 
the fathers. A careful reading of such portions 
as Rom. 11; Jer. 30; 31; Ezek. 36: 22-38, and 37 
should make clear to the least-instructed reader 
that God has not cast off His ancient people for- 
ever. When He restores them, it will be in pure 


26 Notes on Hosea 


grace, on the ground of the New Covenant, sealed 
already with the blood of His Son. Nothing shall 
ever destroy that hallowed union, or again divorce 
the earthly spouse from Jehovah. 

A lovely millennial picture concludes the chap- 
ter. “And it shall come to pass in that day, I 
will hear, saith the Lord, I will hear the heavens, 
and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall 
hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and they 
shall hear Jezreel. And I will sow her unto Me 
in the earth; and I will have mercy upon her that 
had not obtained mercy; and I will say to them 
which were not My people, Thou art My people; 
and they shall say, Thou art my God” (vers. 21- 
23). This passage may be a little plainer if we 
read “respond to’ or “answer” in place of “hear.” 
In the soon-coming day of Messiah’s glory, heaven 
and earth shall together be united in the blessing. 
of “the times of restitution of all things spoken 
by the prophets.” 

The heavens, in which will dwell the glorified 
saints who have been raised or changed at the 
coming of the Lord, will respond to the joy of a 
redeemed earth, even as God Himself will respond 
to them. It will be a scene of blissful communion, 
never again to be broken, despite Satan’s last 
effort to mar and ruin what God shall have 
wrought (Rev. 20: 7-10). 

The earth, freed from the primeval curse, shall 
no longer yield thorns and briars, but shall re- 


The Valley of Achor 27 


spond with overflowing supplies of corn, and 
wine, and oil. The desert shall rejoice and blos- 
som as the rose. No more in the sweat of his 
face shall man eat his bread with weariness, but, 
as though an animate thing, the earth shall un- 
grudgingly yield her treasures for the redeemed 
of the Lord. 

To Jezreel all shall likewise respond. Israel 
will be sown as the seed of God in the very land 
that had once been stained with the blood of the 
righteous One, and since, in awful retribution, 
with their own blood. 

There they shall take root downward and tri- 
umphantly spring upward, and the people called 
once Lo-Ruhamah shall become Ruhamah, while 
the Lo-Ammi sentence shall be forever repealed 
and they shall be called Ammi. In gladsome 
response they lift their eyes and hearts to Jeho- 
vah’s throne, and with deepest reverence and self- 
abandonment exclaim, “My Mighty One!’ 

This shall be the closing scene of the day of 
Jezreel. No more shall sin and sorrow, war and 
desolation, sweep the plains of the field of blood, 
which shall become the scene of unmingled joy 
and blessing when Jesus is owned as Sovereign- 
Lord. 


CHAPTER III 
ISRAEL’S PRESENT AND FUTURE 


importance if one would understand the 

ways of God in regard to the earth and the 
earthly people. It is, one might say, the 11th of 
Romans of the Old Testament, and, read in con- 
nection with that portion, sheds much light on 
the mystery of Israel’s present anomalous con- 
dition and the predictions concerning their future 
glory. 

Once more the prophet’s relation to his wife is 
taken up as an illustration. She who had been 
before denominated a harlot is now an adulteress. 
The difference in its application is readily per- 
ceived. Israel, utterly unworthy before Jehovah 
took them up in His wondrous grace, had—-after 
their union with Himself had been sealed by cov- 
enant—proven more unworthy still, so that they 
are likened, not only by Hosea, but other proph- 
ets also, to an adulteress, following strangers 
instead of her husband. 

Here the language used is significant. The 
prophet is not told to love his wife. She had for- 
feited all claim to that relation. She is simply 
called “fa woman,” and he adds, “beloved of a 
friend;”’ that is, one who had, as we have seen, 
chosen another in place of her rightful spouse. 

Hosea’s love for so unworthy and worthless a 
creature was to be a picture of “the love of the 


[ino chapter, brief as it is, becomes of vast 


Israel’s Present and Future 29 


Lord toward the children of Israel,’’ who, pro- 
fessing themselves to be in covenant-relation with 
Him, yet “look to other gods and love grape- 
cakes” (ver. 1). The latter expression is the 
correct reading, in place of “‘flagons of wine,” 
which has no specific reference to idolatry. The 
cakes were expressive of the idolatrous relation 
they were sustaining, as the reader may see by 
consulting Jer. 7:18 and 44:19. It was thus they 
honored her who in that day bore the title of 
“Queen of heaven’—a title which in apostate 
Christendom has been given to Mary the mother 
of our Lord, and that in direct defiance of Scrip- 
ture. 

Gomer (for I doubt not she is indeed the 
“woman” the passage speaks of) seems to have so 
involved herself that only by paying a redemption 
price can she be released from her wretched and 
degrading position; so the prophet “bought her 
to him for fifteen pieces of silver, and for a homer 
of barley, and a half homer of barley’”—the pur- 
chase-price of a common slave, thus illustrating 
the words of Isaiah, “Ye have sold yourselves 
for naught, and ye shall be redeemed without 
money”* (Isa. 52:3). Tenderly had Jehovah en- 
treated them through the same prophet to “Re- 
turn unto Me, for I have redeemed thee” (ch. 44: 


*I take “without money” to mean that they had no 
money to redeem themselves with—so had to be redeemed 
by another. 


30 Notes on Hosea 


22). But though the purchase-price was paid at 
Calvary’s cross, Judah and Israel are wayward 
still, and the marriage-covenant has not been re- 
newed. 

Hosea says to Gomer, “Thou shalt abide for 
me many days; thou shalt not play the harlot, 
and thou shalt not be for another man: so will I 
also be for thee” (ver. 3); that is, a period of 
testing, undefined in duration, is to pass ere she 
shall be restored to conjugal privileges. 

The application is made by the Holy Spirit in 
the closing verses, “For the children of Israel 
shall abide many days without a king, and with- 
out a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without 
an image, and without an ephod, and without 
teraphim, afterward shall the children of Israel 
return, and seek the Lord their God, and David 
their king; and shall fear the Lord and His good- 
ness in the latter days” (vers. 4,5). In these two 
verses we have succinctly set forth their whole 
state for this entire dispensation, as also the 
future blessing that is to be theirs in the day of 
the kingdom, when it is displayed in power and 
glory. 

The “many days” run throughout the whole 
present period until the fulness of the Gentiles 
shall be completed. 

Ever since the destruction of Jerusalem by the 
Romans they have answered to the description 
here given. They have been a nation of wan- 


Israel’s Present and Future 31 


derers, with no national standing, “without a 
king, and without a prince.” The sceptre has 
departed from Judah and the lawgiver from be- 
tween his feet—solemn witness of the fact that 
Shiloh is already come, but come only to be re- 
jected by them. Thus they are left without a 
_ Sacrifice, for their temple is destroyed and their 
altar profaned. From nation to nation, and from 
city to city, they have wandered through the cen- 
turies; a homeless, often-hated people, despised 
by man and without means of approach to God 
on the ground of the law which they have broken. 

Ritual and Talmudic lore have in large meas- 
ure taken the place of God’s appointed ordinances 
and the authority of the “Torah” (the law) 
among them. But from year to year they have 
to confess in anguish, as they beat their breasts, 
“Woe unto us, for we have no Mediator!” The 
smoke of sacrifice ascends not to heaven; the 
blood of atonement is not sprinkled within the 
veil in any earthly sanctuary; and blindness in 
part having wrapped them in judicial darkness, 
they know not that by the one offering of the 
Lord Jesus on the cross iniquity is taken away 
and sin purged, because eternal redemption has 
been found in that precious blood. 

Thus not only are they without a sacrifice, but 
without a priest also—“without an ephod’”—for 
all records have long been lost: and though many 
survive who are in the direct line of priesthood 


s2 Notes on Hosea 


(as shall be made manifest in the day of their 
restoration), yet they cannot now trace their ge- 
nealogy; and if they could, there is no temple in 
which to officiate. Meantime the heavenly Priest 
ministers in the sanctuary above, but their eyes 
are holden, and they know Him not. 

It might naturally be supposed that, being de- 
nied all the consolations of the religion of their 
fathers, they would have fallen again into the 
idolatrous practices of the heathen: but no; for 
we learn they were to abide “without an image,” 
and “without teraphim.” The Babylonian cap- 
tivity cured them of idolatry. Since then, that 
at least has not been one of their national sins. 
They have no means of access to the true God 
while they revile and refuse His Anointed. On 
the other hand, they follow not after idols, but 
wait, like the redeemed wife of the prophet, till 
the day when they will again be publicly owned 
by Jehovah. 

When the present dispensation is ended, and 
the Church has been translated to heaven, God 
will once more take them up in grace and fulfil 
the promises made to the fathers.* After pass- 
ing through the unparalleled tribulation of the 
latter days, as predicted by Jeremiah (ch. 30), by 
Daniel (chs. 11 and 12), by Zechariah (chs. 12- 


* For a fuller opening-up of Israel’s past, present, and 
future see a book entitled “The Mysteries of God.” The 
same author and publishers. Paper, 30 cts.; cloth, 75 cts. 


Israel’s Present and Future 33 


14), and by our Lord Himself in Matt. 24 and 
kindred scriptures, they shall “return and seek 
the Lord their God, and David their king; and 
shall fear [or the Hebrew may be rendered, ‘shall 
hasten to’] the Lord, and His goodness.” It will be 
the fulfilment of that to which all the prophets 
have looked forward, when Israel’s wanderings 
shall be over, their sins blotted out, themselves 
renewed, and the kingdom confirmed to them. In 
that day Jesus will be King over all the earth, sit- 
ting upon the throne of His father David, and 
reigning in glorious power and majesty. It would 
seem, too, from a careful comparison of this pas- 
sage with the latter part of Ezekiel’s prophecy, 
that a lineal descendant of David’s line (called 
“the prince”) shall exercise regency on earth over 
the restored nation, under the authority of Him 
whose capital city will be the new and heavenly 
Jerusalem, the “city that hath foundations, whose 
builder and maker is God.” 

Thus shall the years of Israel’s mourning be 
ended, and the day of Messiah’s glory have ar- 
rived; for the two synchronize. There can be 
no full blessing for Israel and the earth till the 
tragedy of Calvary is repented of, and Jew and 
Gentile unite in owning their sin in crucifying the 
Lord of glory and killing the Prince of life. 

Till then, the unhappy condition delineated in 
the next chapter must continue—save that the 
curse of idolatry has been done away, as we have 
seen. 


CHAPTER IV 


JOINED TO IDOLS 


ing (that Israel should abide many days 

without an image or teraphim), seems all 
the more remarkable when we remember the 
gross idolatry into which they had fallen at the 
time when Hosea was divinely called to declare 
the mind of Jehovah regarding their state. Idol- 
atry was then the characteristic condition; and 
from it, as from a parent-stem, sprang all the 
other evils for which the prophet was obliged to 
rebuke them. 

Because truth had departed, and with it, mercy 
and all knowledge of God, Jehovah had a con- 
troversy with the inhabitants of the land. His 
holy eye beheld only swearing, lying, murder, 
theft, and adultery, in place of holiness and fidel- 
ity to Himself. The covenant entered into at 
Sinai had been broken in every particular. Not 
one of the ten words remained inviolate on their 
part. For all this He must set His face against 
them in His righteous government, as He had 
warned them He would, through the lips of the 
law-giver himself (vers. 1-3). 

So utterly fallen and wretched were they that 
none was fit to reprove another. All were alike 


[ie statement we have just been consider- 


Joined to Idols 35 


sharers in the common guilt. The leaven of idol- 
atry openly introduced in the wilderness, though 
secretly carried from Egypt and even from be- 
yond the Euphrates (Josh. 24: 2), had been work- 
ing unjudged until they were utterly perverted; 
—so true is it that “evil communications corrupt 
good manners.” They had become like those who 
“strive with the priest:’ that is, they persistently 
refused to subject themselves when the mind of 
God was made known (ver. 4). 

The lesson for us is a solemn one. Another 
has well said that evil never dies of old age. 
Sin unjudged among the people of God becomes 
like a fretting leprosy or a cancerous sore, ever 
working and extending its ramifications till the 
whole mass becomes defiled. 

With Israel it was not ignorance that led to 
their downfall in the first place; though, neces- 
sarily, light refused resulted in darkness. They 
were like those who fall in the day, even their 
prophets doing likewise. Hence they must be cut 
off (ver. 5). 

“My people are destroyed through lack of 
knowledge.” Such was Jehovah’s lament. But 
the lack of knowledge was the certain result of 
their own refusal to hearken. He had pressed 
His truth upon them, but they would have none 
of it. Therefore He adds, “Because thou hast 
rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that 
thou shalt be no priest to Me: seeing thou hast 


36 Notes on Hosea 


forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget 
thy children” (ver. 6). Light rejected results 
in deeper darkness than ever, and involves the 
offender in sore trouble, and rejection from God. 

Often in the history of the Church has a sim- 
ilar state existed to what we have here, and al- 
ways the issue is the same. When in the 16th 
century God raised up Luther to sound, with 
clarion voice, the battle-cry of the Reformation, 
“The just shall live by faith!’ the mass of the 
professing Church had no ear for the message, 
and sank into deeper superstition and folly. The 
Wesleys and their co-laborers, later, were or- 
dained of God to arouse the lifeless profession of 
their day with a call to repentance, but the ma- 
jority refused to hearken, and formalism became 
more formal and ritualism gained its harvest of 
lost souls. 

When at the beginning of the last century the 
truths of the unity of the Body of Christ and the 
presence of the Holy Ghost were recovered, the 
apostles of what were incorrectly called, ‘The 
new doctrines,” were ridiculed, abused and re- 
proached. As a result, Christendom is rapidly 
going into apostasy, and the presence of the Holy 
Ghost is unknown in many places. The Scrip- 
tures are rejected as God’s revelation and put 
on a par with human writings, while pride and 
arrogance are the order of the day. The Lord’s 
words are having a solemn and awful fulfilment, 


Joined to Idols 37 


“If therefore the light that is in thee be dark- 
ness, how great is that darkness” (Matt. 6: 23). 

Is the reader one to whom light has come, 
which you are afraid or unwilling to obey? Re- 
member that when you act in accordance with 
the mind of God as made known to you through 
His Word, your path shines brighter and brighter 
unto the perfect day. On the other hand, re- 
vealed truth wilfully ignored, or still worse, 
refused, has a hardening effect upon the con- 
science. We have known of persons who had 
learned from Scripture certain truths which, if 
acted upon, would have delivered them from 
worldly ways and worldly religious associations, 
and given them liberty to go forth unto the re- 
jected One, bearing His reproach. They hesi- 
tated because of possible worldly loss, or of prob- 
able family difficulties. Seeking an easier path 
to that marked out in the Book, they argued down 
their consciences and quenched the Spirit of God. 
Behold the sad result! Bereft of spiritual power, 
shorn of their strength, the truths they once en- 
joyed have become as a dead letter to them; their 
consciences are calloused and their testimony for 
God is over. In vain they may talk of, and en- 
deavor to make sacrifices on other lines, but this 
will not do for Him who has said, “To obey is 
better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat 
of rams” (1 Sam. 15: 22). 

Israel’s solemn history may well be a warning 


38 Notes on Hosea 


to us of the dire consequences of resisting the 
truth, “As they were increased, so they sinned 
against Me: therefore will I change their glory 
into shame” (ver. 7). Prosperity had not turned 
their hearts to Him, but the contrary, so He must 
deal with them according to their deserts. De- 
lighting in their iniquity and ignoring God’s 
word, He would give them up to destruction; and 
priest and people should suffer together. In their 
path of self-pleasing they should learn to their 
cost that there is nothing satisfying apart from 
going on with Him. Their unholy ways would 
but “take away the heart,” and they should stum- 
ble and fall “because they have left off to take 
heed to the Lord” (vers. 8-11). 

They were ready to ask counsel of their idols, 
but were too haughty and self-sufficient to turn 
to Him to whom they owed every blessing! It 
has often been noticed that when people get away 
from God they can be most punctilious about self- 
imposed rites and superstitious observances, 
while counting it a hardship to obey the voice of 
the Lord. The same is true as to credulity and 
faith. He who finds it difficult to trust the sim- 
plest statement of the Holy Scriptures can accept 
with amazing ease the most remarkable hypo- 
theses and notions of unbelieving theorists. So 
was it with Israel at this time. Nothing that 
their false gods were supposed to demand was 
too much for them; but the law of Jehovah they 


Joined to Idols 39 


could not away with; “Therefore,” said He 
against whom they had so openly transgressed, 
“the people that doth not understand shall fall’’ 
(vers. 12-14). These things are among those 
“written for our admonition.” Oh, for grace to 
learn and act accordingly. It was this the 
prophet sought to press on Judah. “Though thou, 
Israel, play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend!” 
(ver. 15). But, alas, later on we find the south- 
ern kingdom in like apostasy to the northern. 

Because Israel had been given over to sliding 
back, “like a backsliding heifer,” God would, as 
it were, give them their way. They should be 
as a lamb feeding in a large place, left free to 
go all lengths, but with certain judgment com- 
ing: for though they thought they were pleasing 
themselves, they were like lambs fattening for 
the slaughter. The word had gone forth, 
“Ephraim is joined to idols: let him alone!” 
(vers. 16, 17). 

“Joined to idols: let him alone!” Nothing can 
be more solemn than this. It is as though God 
had exhausted every possible means for their re- 
covery, save one, and that one the giving them 
up to learn, by bitter experience, what they would 
not take to heart in any other way. In the New 
Testament it answers to being “delivered unto 
Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the 
spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.” 
(See 1 Cor. 5.) When a soul proves utterly stub- 


40 Notes on Hosea 


born and wilful, God may at times say of him as 
of Israel, “he is joined to his idols.” Further re- 
proof or brotherly correction is useless. Let him 
severely alone, till he learns in Satan’s sieve how 
far he has got from God and how low he has 
fallen. Observe: it is only after the failure of 
all other means to recover the wanderer that 
God so deals with souls. It was when His pa- 
tience had come to an end, as it were, that He 
gave up Ephraim. From the first He had borne 
with them, ministered to them, chastened, en- 
treated, and disciplined them; but all had been 
in vain. They were set on having their own way. 
At last, because He loved them too much to finally 
give them up forever, He says, “Let them alone.” 
Now they are where they shall learn by sad ex- 
perience the full result of departure in heart from 
Himself. They should be given up to their own 
hearts’ lusts till they should “be ashamed because 
of their sacrifices” (vers. 18, 19). 

How deep the love that breathes through all 
this unhappy description. How tender the grace 
that persisted to the end in seeking the restora- 
tion of those so worthless and so undeserving! 

And for us too, it is precious to know that His 
grace is unchanging; and if saved by that 
precious blood of Christ, we are the objects of 
that 


“Faithful and forbearing love 
That never turns aside.” 


Joined to Idols Al 


Surely, nothing should have so powerful an 
effect upon our ways, as the fact that our way- 
wardness has not, cannot, quench His love. No 
change in us results in any corresponding change 
in Him. Therefore we are bidden, “Grieve not 
the Holy Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed 
unto the day of redemption.” It is not to grieve 
Him away, as people often mistakenly insist it 
means, for then the words would be in the nature 
of a threat, instead of the exhortation to every 
child of God, which comes home to us with the 
force of so tender an entreaty. How base the 
soul who would take advantage of love so im- 
measurable to follow its own bent, and thus do 
despite to the Spirit of grace! 


CHAPTER V 


I WILL HIDE MYSELF 


istry for the consciences of the people of 

God in all ages, which we of the present 
latitudinarian times will do well to lay to heart. 
It may be part of a single discourse of which the 
previous chapter is the introduction, and the bal- 
ance of the book the remainder; or the various 
sections may have been penned at different inter- 
vals, as the prophet was led of God to write them. 
In either case the moral value is the same, and 
the object is one throughout, namely, to bring 
the backslidden people into the presence of God, 
that they may be restored in soul, and taste the 
sweets of companionship and communion with 
the Everlasting One. 

Priests, people, and the royal house, are all 
alike addressed in ver. 1, and told that judgment 
is toward them. It had not yet come; but it was 
as an angel of wrath with drawn sword facing 
their way, and naught but repentance could cause 
that sword to be sheathed. 

In vain they had been rebuked by Him to whose 
eyes all things are naked and open. Their in- 


[ise chapter is replete with searching min- 


I Will Hide Myself 43 


iquity was ever before Him; but though He had 
sought their recovery so long, they persistently 
refused to “frame their doings to turn unto their 
God.”’ A malignant demon, “the spirit of whore- 
doms,” seemed to possess them, and they knew 
not the Lord (vers. 1-4). 

Nor was this the worst. Despite their wretch- 
ed condition, they were puffed up with haughti- 
ness. ‘The pride of Israel doth testify to his 
face.” Because of this they must be brought low. 
“Therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their 
iniquity; Judah also shall fall with them” (ver. 
5). Failing to learn by the sin of her sister, 
Judah had followed in the same path, and she too 
must be cast out of the land under the judgment 
of God. 

The sentence of Lo-Ammi, referred to in the 
first chapter, cannot be turned aside. Even 
though there seem to be a desire after God, they 
shall not find Him; for they had hated knowl- 
edge and despised all His reproof. 

When people refuse light, the light is with- 
drawn, and they are given up to judicial dark- 
ness. So here we read: “They shall go with their 
flocks and with their herds [for sacrifice] to seek 
the Lord; but they shall not find Him; He hath 
withdrawn Himself from them” (ver. 6). Thus 
should be fulfilled the word spoken through Moses 
long years before: “I will hide My face from 
them, I will see what their end shall be: for they 


44 Notes on Hosea 


are a very froward generation, children in whom 
is no faith” (Deut. 32:20). 

Observe, God would not forget them, nor 
should they be finally cast out of His presence; 
but He would withdraw Himself from them, leav- 
ing them to spiritual famine and desolation till 
they realized their true condition, and owned it 
before Him. 

In the present dispensation of grace we are not 
without instances of similar dealing. It was thus 
the Lord acted in the case of the Gadarenes. 
Finding them bent upon going their own way, 
He left them for a time, but was welcomed by 
them on His return. And indeed this incident 
pictures to us His rejection when He came at 
first, but points too to the day when He shall re- 
turn in glory, and shall be welcomed by the cry, 
“Blessed is He who comes in the name of Jeho- 
vah!” All this is in full accord with Hosea’s 
prophecy. 

Till repentance ensues, He will not publicly 
manifest Himself on their behalf. They may go 
on in their pride, begetting strange children and 
boasting of progress and enlargement, but all 
is hollow and empty, for the Judge is at the door 
(ver. 7). 

From vers. 8 to 14 the prophet seems to have 
the invading army in sight. ‘The day of rebuke” 
is almost upon Israel. In vain they blow the 
trumpet and seek to defend themselves. In vain 


I Will Hide Myself 45 


they attempt an alliance with Assyria. It is but 
leaning on a broken reed. God has become as an 
enemy, and He it is with whom they have to do. 
To both Ephraim and Judah He will be as a de- 
stroying lion, from whose power none shall de- 
liver them. 

But, be it noted, in all this He is seeking their 
blessing still. So He says, “I will go and return 
to My place, till they acknowledge their offence, 
and seek My face: in their affliction they will seek 
Me early” (ver. 15). 

How clearly is the Spirit of Christ here dis- 
cerned to be speaking in the prophet. The same 
conditions prevailed when the Lord Jesus pre- 
sented Himself that were characteristic of 
Hosea’s day. True, idolatry was done away; but 
pride, arrogancy and self-will abounded on every 
hand. Consequently, “He came unto His own, 
but His own received Him not.” Therefore He 
had to say, “I will go and return to My place.” 
If they had no room for Him here, the Father 
had a seat for Him on His throne. So He left 
their house desolate, and has gone up on high, 
where He waits till they acknowledge their 
offence. The great tribulation—the time of 
Jacob’s trouble—will result in a remnant seeking 
His face in contrition of heart. Then He will no 
longer hide Himself, but shall appear as their 
Deliverer in manifested glory. 


CHAPTER VI 


WHAT SHALL I DO UNTO THEE? 


HE opening verses (1 to 3) connect inti- 
iE: with what we have just been con- 

sidering, while the balance of the chapter 
is another appeal to the consciences of Ephraim 
and Judah. 

Nothing could be more suited than the expres- 
sion of these first three verses upon the lips of 
the restored remnant in the coming day of His 
power whose face has so long been hidden from 
them: “Come, and let us return unto the Lord: 
for He hath torn, and He will heal us; He hath 
smitten, and He will bind us up. After two days 
will He revive us: in the third day He will raise 
us up, and we shall live in His sight. Then shall 
we know, if we follow on to know the Lord: His 
going forth is prepared as the morning; and He 
shall come unto us as the rain, as the latter and 
former rain unto the earth.” 

It is the cry of the returning residue who have 
learned to know the Lord in the smoking furnace 
of the tribulation period, and who now ask the 
way to Zion, and with chastened spirits return 
unto the One so long despised. The awakening in 
the 12th chapter of Zechariah links closely with 
what we have here. Like Naomi, they recognize 
that He it is who has torn and smitten them; but 
faith counts on Him for healing and enlargement. 


What Shall I do unto thee? 47 


After two days of solemn testimony to their con- 
sciences, leading to manifest repentance, He re- 
vives them on the third day; answering to the 
day upon which the water of separation was 
sprinkled upon the unclean man (Num. 19), that 
he might be declared clean upon the seventh day. 
Thus they who once were defiled by the dead are 
made to live in His sight. So when He descends 
in glory like showers upon the grass, they find 
revival and blessing, with daily growth in the 
knowledge of Himself in His kingdom throughout 
the age to come. 

But, alas, though this shall indeed be when 
they are made willing in the day of His power, 
they were far from being in that happy state 
when the prophet Hosea was sent among them. 
The lovely millennial picture is presented but for 
a moment ere the Spirit of God goes on to deal 
with them because of their wretchedly fallen con- 
dition, and to plead in tenderest beseechings that 
they turn from their evil ways. 

There had once been what seemed like a desire 
to be true to Himself, but it had proven to be 
but transitory. “O Ephraim,” He cries, “what 
shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do 
unto thee? for your goodness is as a morning 
cloud, and as the early dew it goeth away” (ver. 
4). Like Ephesus of a later day, it was but for 
a brief season that they clung to their first love. 
The tender feelings of those early days, when 


48 Notes on Hosea 


they went after Him into the wilderness, had 
been evanescent indeed, and had now vanished 
like the dew when the sun rises in its strength. 
Because of this, in place of sending prophets to 
gladden their spirits, He had been obliged to give 
them a ministry like that afterwards given 
through John the Baptizer, laying the axe unto 
the root of the trees, which in their pride rose 
up in such loftiness (ver. 5). The distinction 
might be made that the prophets of old were more 
like men sent to prune and hew away all ex- 
crescences, thus endeavoring to trim the trees 
and purge them, with a view to fruitfulness. But 
all their efforts were in vain; so John came to 
lay the axe untc the root of the trees. All must 
come down. Recovery was hopeless. The first 
man could bring forth nothing for God. He must 
be superseded by the Second! This is the great 
difference between the closing books of the Old 
Testament and the opening message of the New. 

Mere outward correctness and attention to 
forms and ceremonies would not do for God. His 
word is, “I desired mercy, and not sacrifice; and 
the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings’”’ 
(ver. 6). Isaiah similarly declared the incompat- 
ibility of mere ritualistic observances when the 
heart was far from the Lord. See Isa. 58, et al. 
God must have reality. All else is but hollow 
mockery in His sight who is of purer eyes than 
to behold iniquity. 


What Shall I do unto thee? 49 


Like Adam (see margin, ver. 7), they had 
transgressed the covenant. God had made known 
His will to them, but they had violated His every 
command, following the lust of the flesh, the lust 
of the eye, and the pride of life. Thus had they 
dealt treacherously with Him whose servants 
‘they professed to be. 

And Gilead, so greatly favored naturally, had 
become a city of iniquity, and stained with blood 
(ver. 8). A priestly city, it should have been 
holy to the Lord; but these godless sacerdotalists 
were but as troops of robbers, plundering those 
they should have led in the right way; living in 
uncleanness too, instead of in God’s holy ways. 
The leaders of the people caused them to err, and 
led them astray from the paths of truth. 

Who can fail to see the same ungodly condi- 
tions developing now in Protestantism, so-called? 
The open debauchery of the well-named “Dark 
Ages” has been checked by the light of an open 
Bible, which has made men ashamed of what 
they once dared to revel in, in the darkness and 
ignorance of Romanism and medieval times. But 
now Satan’s supreme effort is to poison the minds 
of men by the unholy speculations of infidel 
clerics who give free rein to the filthiness of the 
spirit, and use their positions as “leaders of 
Christian thought” to enrich themselves while 
starving the true flock of Christ and poisoning 
those who, while bearing the name of Christians, 


50 Notes on Hosea 


are destitute of divine grace! Terrible must be 
the end when false religion is judged in the day 
of the Lord’s anger! 

In vain the warning voice was raised of old. 
In vain it is raised today. The mass, then and 
now, went recklessly on their way, heedless of 
His solemn rebuke. “I have seen a horrible thing 
in the house of Israel: there is the harlotry of 
Ephraim, Israel is defiled” (ver. 10). 

The last verse seems to admit of a double in- 
terpretation. For Judah a harvest is appointed 
when their captivity shall be brought again. It 
might mean that God would get His harvest, 
whatever man’s failure, when they are at last 
restored to Himself; but as Judah alone is men- 
tioned, while the guilt of both had just been pro- 
claimed, I judge the harvest referred to is that 
awful one of judgment yet to be reaped because 
of the rejection of Messiah. Judah must pass 
through this, as we have already noticed, just 
prior to their restoration and blessing. The ten 
tribes, as such, had no part in the rejection of 
the Lord Jesus. It was not on them the rabid 
elders invoked the curse when they cried, “His 
blood be on us, and on our children!” Conse- 
quently, for Judah a terrible harvest is yet to 
come. They sowed the wind: they shall reap the 
whirlwind, when the vials of the wrath of God 
are poured out upon the prophetic earth. 


CHAPTER VII 


A CAKE NOT TURNED 


UDGMENT is God’s strange work. He had 
no desire to punish the people He had taken 
into covenant-relation with Himself, but who 

had violated the covenant from the first. On the 
other hand, blessing and restoration had ever 
been offered them, conditioned on repentance. 
But when He would have healed Israel — had 
there been any evidence of self-judgment — He 
had to say “the iniquity of Ephraim was dis- 
covered, and the evils of Samaria: for they com- 
mit falsehood; and the thief cometh in and the 
troop of robbers spoileth without” (ver. 1). No 
sign of contrition for all their offences could His 
holy eye detect, only sin and lawlessness delib- 
erately persisted in, despite every entreaty to 
cease therefrom. In carnal security they con- 
sidered not in their hearts that He remembered 
all their wickedness, till “their own doings” had 
beset them round, so that they were openly be- 
fore His face. Their rulers delighted in the de- 
bauched state into which they had fallen, taking 
an unholy satisfaction in the dishonesty and 
wickedness prevailing (vers. 2, 3). 

In verse four, a most significant picture is pre- 


sented for our contemplation. M8. are all 


E CINCINNATI BIBLE SEMINARY j 
ti LIBRARY ABu 9 


52 Notes on Hosea 


adulterers, as an oven heated by the baker, who 
ceaseth from raising after he hath kneaded the 
dough until it be leavened.” The leaven of un- 
righteousness had long since been secretly work- 
ing in the nation, but now was energetically and 
openly corrupting the whole. Satan’s effort had 
been only too successful. Idolatry having been 
early introduced, and never thoroughly judged, 
had permeated the entire nation. To this passage 
the apostle Paul doubtless would have directed 
the minds of the Corinthian saints when he 
wrote, “Know ye not that a little leaven leaven- 
eth the whole lump?” Upon the Galatians he 
also pressed the same serious principle (1 Cor. 
5:6; Gal. 5:9). 

Leaven, in Scripture, never typifies that which 
is good; it is always significant of some form of 
evil. Here we see all Israel leavened with the 
unholy system of idolatry, with its corrupting 
influences, doing its deadly work for centuries. 
Once the leaven is inserted in the dough, the 
baker knows it will act according to its nature; 
he sleeps now through the night, but the oven 
is prepared for the morning. The oven was to 
be the furnace of judgment. 

In Christendom we see the same thing. The 
Lord Jesus told of a woman who hid leaven in 
three measures of meal till the whole was leav- 
ened. Be it noted: there is no such thing as the 


“leaven ye the mee Of the leaven of the 


A Cake not Turned 53 


Pharisees, of the Sadducees and of the Herodians 
we are warned. They seem to speak of hypoc- 
risy, false teaching and worldliness. The leaven 
of malice and wickedness we are told of in 1 Cor. 
5; but of the leaven of grace there is not a hint 
in the sacred writings. Consequently we infer 
that just as, in Israel, the leaven of idolatry was 
introduced when they made the calf in the wil- 
derness, and, being never fully judged, worked 
on till it had permeated the whole nation; so, 
early in the Church’s history, did a woman, the 
false church, insert the leaven of error into the 
food of the people of God, which has never since 
been put away, but is rapidly leavening the whole 
lump: it is identical with the mystery of iniquity 
of which the Holy Ghost warns us in the second 
chapter of the second epistle to the Thessalonians, 
which will soon be headed up in Babylon the 
Great and the Antichrist.* 

Believers are called upon to “purge out the old 
leaven,’’ whenever it is made manifest in their 
assemblies. If, however, the mass are already 
so corrupted that there is no activity in obeying 
the word of the Lord, he who would be “a vessel 
unto honor, sanctified and meet for the Master’s 
use,” must purge himself from the unholy mix- 
ture, walking in separation from that which is 


* For a fuller consideration of this solemn theme, see 
chapter eight of “The Mysteries of God.” Same author 
and publishers. Paper covers, 30 cts.; cloth, 75 cts. 


54 Notes on Hosea 


opposed to the holiness that becomes God’s house, 
and finding his fellowship with those who “fol- 
low righteouness, faith, love, peace,” and “call 
upon the Lord out of a pure heart” (see 2 Tim. 
2: 16-22). 

For Israel there was no hope. The entire body 
politic was symbolized in the king at their head, 
made sick with the wine of fleshly exultation 
and stretching out his hand with the scorners. 
Their own hearts were as the oven of the baker, 
who could sleep in the night while the leaven 
wrought, and the fire was prepared to heat the 
oven for the baking of the coming day. Thus 
they themselves should work out their own judg- 
ment, because there were none who called upon 
God (vers. 5-7). 

“Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the 
people [as one with the nations]; Ephraim is a 
cake not turned. Strangers have devoured his 
strength, and he knoweth it not: yea, gray hairs 
are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth it 
not. And the pride of Israel testifieth to his 
face: and they do not return to the Lord their 
God, nor seek Him for all this” (vers. 8-10). It 
is their unconsciousness of their true condition 
which this section emphasizes. Like a cake placed 
upon the coals and forgotten by the house-wife, 
till, left unturned, it is all burned on one side; so 
they were quite indifferent to their actual state 
before God. The mass taking no heed to the 


A Cake not Turned 55 


prophet’s warnings, went carelessly on in their 
own way, taking it for granted that all was as it 
should be, when, in reality, everything was all 
wrong. It is this apparently unconscious back- 
sliding that is so sad a feature in many today. 
Away from the Lord, yet professing, and even 
supposing, that all is well—how many are thus 
like a cake not turned! This one-sidedness is 
what tells the tale to an observant, anointed eye, 
that something is radically wrong in many a case. 
Often saints make much of the truth as a matter 
of doctrine while allowing themselves to become 
utterly negligent as to walking in that truth from 
day to day. They are like a cake not turned, all 
brown on one side and raw dough on the other. 
Doctrinally, they may be very particular. Prac- 
tically, they are loose and unconcerned. 

At other times the case is just reversed: much 
is made of experience, with little or no heart for 
what is slightingly termed “dry doctrine.” But 
it is as necessary to “hold fast the form of sound 
words,” as it is to seek to live in a godly way. 
In fact, doctrine is the root of all practice; and 
our experience will prove a very faulty one if it 
be not the result of a knowledge of the mind of 
God as revealed in His Word. 

Let us never forget that truth and practice go 
together, even as position and condition must 
never be divorced. 

Ephraim’s first grave mistake was in mixing 


56 Notes on Hosea 


himself among the people. God had called Israel 
to dwell alone, and not be reckoned among the 
nations. Nothing but evil ever resulted from 
mixing with those from whom they had once 
been separated. It was “the mixed multitude” 
who first caused them trouble in the wilderness, 
and started their murmuring and longing for 
Egyptian food in place of the bread from heaver 
—type of our Lord Jesus Christ come down in 
grace to meet His people’s need. See Exod. 16; 
Num. 11; and compare with John 6. Again, 
when Balaam could not curse because God had 
blessed, he taught Balak to cast a stumbling- 
block before the children of Israel by causing 
them to mix with the daughters of Moab; the 
result of which brought dire judgment upon them 
—stayed only by the javelin of Phinehas. 

This mixing among the people was the ruin of 
Samson, the mighty Nazarite, who gave up the 
secret of his strength when he lay upon the lap 
of Delilah. Alas, how many a valiant servant 
of God has become weak as other men in a similar 
way since! 

And so we might trace the same evil practice 
all down through the history of the chosen race, 
until at last it ended in their being cast out by 
the Lord, in judgment, to mix among the nations 
till they should have their fill of the society of 
the strangers who devoured their strength and 
brought them to desolation. 


A Cake not Turned 57 


The lesson is an important and salutary one 
for us who have been called with a higher calling, 
and are commanded to walk apart from a godless 
world and a corrupt Church. Indifference as to 
this separation of the clean from the unclean has 
had a lamentable effect upon the testimony and 
experience of thousands. Yet we learn so slowly. 
Oh, that there were in us hearts to cleave to the 
Lord, heeding His word, “Come out from among 
them, and be ye separate!” 

It is as vain to hope to reform and recover 
what is not of God, by intermingling therewith 
in fellowship and intimate association, as it would 
be to try to teach sparrows or linnets to sing like 
a warbler by placing a canary in a cage with 
them. The only result would be that the canary 
would lose its song, while the sparrows would 
chirp on as before. Alas, how many a once joy- 
ous saint has lost his song by mixing among the 
people of the world and the world-church! Such 
an one may boast of his liberality and breadth of 
mind, and be as unconscious as was Ephraim of 
the true state of affairs; but the spiritually- 
minded shake their heads in sorrow as they say, 
“Strangers have devoured his strength, and he 
knoweth it not: yea, gray hairs are here and 
there upon him, yet he knoweth not.” 

The gray hair is the sign of departing strength, 
and tells the tale that its owner is going down- 
hill—age and decrepitude are coming on. But 


58 Notes on Hosea 


Ephraim, like many another backslider in heart, 
was quite unaware of the true condition of 
affairs. In such a case others may note the gray 
hairs “here and there upon him’”—the careless- 
ness here—the indifference there—a growing 
fondness for worldly companionship—less and 
less time spent in prayer and over the Word of 
God—increased love for that which is light and 
frivolous—the name of Jesus less frequently upon 
the lips, and a growing fondness for conversation 
that is not for profit. Contrast with this 1 Tim. 
4: 15, 16. 

Accompanying this, will invariably be found 
an assumption of easy-going superiority. “The 
pride of Israel testifieth to his face;” but there 
will be no turning to God and seeking to get His 
mind regarding it all, till broken by discipline. 

Ephraim, like a silly dove, without affection 
for Him that had carried them in His bosom, 
had turned to Egypt, then to Assyria, for help 
when the hour of trial came. But the Lord loved 
them too much to permit them to find anything 
stable in what spoke of the world and its vain 
pomp and show. So He would spread His net 
upon them, like one taking a bird in a snare. 
He cannot allow those who are in covenant- 
relationship with Him to go on in their own way 
for long (vers. 11, 12). 

They had transgressed against Him, though He 
had redeemed them; reminding us of some in a 


A Cake not Turned 59 


later day, who, having drifted away from God, 
had “forgotten that they were purged from their 
old sins:” with supreme indifference to their ac- 
tual state they blamed Him for what had come 
upon them as though they themselves were blame- 
less; so that He charges them with speaking lies 
against Him. “I sometimes think,” said one,* 
“that God has been hard with me, when I forget 
how hard I have been with God!” This is ever 
the tendency of a heart not before Him in self- 
judgment (ver. 18). 

And so, for long years had they gone on, 
neither seeking Him when alone in the secrecy of 
their own chambers, upon their beds, nor when 
gathering together in what should have been a 
solemn assembly, but was really a season of god- 
less merriment. ‘‘They howled upon their beds,” 
but not in repentance, only bewailing His dis- 
cipline instead of their own evil ways. Jehovah 
had indeed trained them to confide in Him, and 
strengthened their arm against their adversaries, 
but in recompense they think ill of Him, turning 
to any expediency rather than turning to God—so 
incorrigible is the heart of man, even of a saint, 
when away from God. So they must be left to 
sound deeper depths of sorrow and disaster, like 
the incestuous man of 1 Cor. 5, who was “de- 
livered unto Satan for the destruction of the 


*G. V. Wigram, a man of much devotedness—now 
with the Lord. 


60 Notes on Hosea 


flesh, that the spirit might be saved in the day 
of the Lord Jesus.” Their princes were to be de- 
stroyed, and they themselves would become a 
laughing-stock to their Egyptian allies, upon 
whom they had vainly depended (vers. 14-16). 

Surely, the way of man is not in himself. It is 
not in man to direct his own steps. Therefore 
the need of brokenness of spirit and self-judg- 
ment before God, that He may lead in the paths 
of righteousness for His name’s sake. 


CHAPTER VIII 


A VESSEL WHEREIN IS NO PLEASURE 


OD seems almost to exhaust figurative 
|} language in describing the unhappy con- 
dition of His deluded people, their hearts 
set on wandering from Him who was their only 
real good. We have already contemplated them 
in their wretchedly fallen estate, under the ex- 
pressive symbols of an adulterous wife, a wine- 
inflamed drunkard, a backsliding heifer, troops 
of robbers, a leavened mass, a cake not turned, 
a silly dove, and a deceitful bow. Now they are 
warned that because of their sins they shall be 
scattered among the nations as “‘a vessel wherein 
is no pleasure.” 

This was the logical result of the covenant at 
Sinai, where they pledged themselves to obey all 
the words of the law, which promised blessing to 
all who kept it, but invoked a curse upon the vio- 
lators of its precepts. According to this chapter, 
Israel had broken it at every point. Therefore, 
on that ground, they had nothing to claim. That 
God had wondrous resources of grace, yet to be 
manifested, the final chapter makes abundantly 
plain; but they would only come into the good of 
it when they owned their sin and gave up all 
pretension to merit. 


62 Notes on Hosea 


The prophet, as it were, sounds the trumpet to 
summon the whole congregation into the presence 
of the Lord, that they may face the reality of 
their condition as a people who have transgressed 
the covenant and trespassed against the law (ver. 
1): 

In the second verse, we might understand a 
hint of future restoration: “Israel shall cry unto 
Me, My God, we know Thee.” But it seems rather 
to imply their unconsciousness of their true state 
at that time, and during the years of their wan- 
derings while under God’s hand. With amazing 
effrontery, they cry, “My God, we, Israel, know 
Thee,” as the R. V. puts it; while all the time 
they go on in their folly, having cast off the thing 
that is good, and so are driven before their en- 
emies. They set up kings after their own heart, 
and make princes without asking Jehovah’s coun- 
sel. Idolatry too is everywhere flourishing, and 
the temple service but a mockery (vers. 3, 4). 
Thus do they profess that they know God, but in 
works deny Him. How easy it is, alas, to fall 
into the truly lamentable state of soul here de- 
picted! How many today talk of being the people 
of the Lord, or being ‘“‘in the line of the testi- 
mony” (to use a vainglorious phrase popular in 
certain quarters), while all the time condoning 
unrighteousness and walking in disobedience to 
the Word of God. In His time our Lord had to 
say: “The scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses’ 


A Vessel Wherein is no Pleasure 63 


seat: all therefore whatsoever they bid you ob- 
serve, that observe and do; but do not after their 
works: for they say, and do not”—they could 
preach to others fairly well according to the Law, 
but their practice was the true indicator of their 
soul’s condition—and how far from God! It 
should ever be remembered that while it is of 
prime importance to be in a right position as to 
ecclesiastical and other lines of truth, a merely 
correct position is a poor thing if there be nof 
likewise a right condition of soul. Neither can 
be neglected without loss; but nothing can be 
worse than to be priding oneself on “maintaining 
divine ground,” and going on ‘“‘in the line of the 
testimony,” while the life is defiled and the heart 
is insubject to the truth. 

But the soul that turns from the living and 
true God to idols, of whatever nature, will learn 
at last what it is to be bereft and forsaken when 
help is most needed. The calf of Samaria cast 
them off. As with the priests of Baal in Elijah’s 
day, they cried, but there was none that answer- 
ed, nor any that regarded. And how could it be 
otherwise, when the work of their own hands 
was that in which they trusted! (vers. 5, 6). 

Thus, having sown the wind, they had to reap 
the whirlwind, as many a soul has done before 
and since. Yet how slow we are to learn! Theo- 
retically, all saints know that there can be no 
real blessing apart from walking with God; but 


64 Notes on Hosea 


experimentally, how easily most of us are lured 
aside, and led after other gods, when some op- 
portunity seems to present itself for profit or ad- 
vantage! But at last all have to realize that the 
only result of such sowing will be disappointment 
and sorrow. “The bud shall yield no meal: if so 
be it yield, the strangers shall swallow it up” 
(ver. 7). 

Apply this to every department of life, and it 
will be found to be a rule to which there are no 
exceptions. Apparent success may seem to follow 
upon disobedience, but “the end is not yet.” We 
may fancy God and His Word can be disregarded, 
but we shall prove in bitterness of soul that it 
is an evil thing indeed to choose our own path. 

How many a broken-hearted wife could be cited 
as an example of the principle here enunciated; 
or how often a wretched and unhappy husband 
becomes a living illustration of it! God has 
plainly forbidden unequal yokes. The Word is 
clear, and the young saint has it pressed home 
upon the conscience. But one who seems to prom- 
ise well as a suited life-partner crosses the path. 
Esteem develops into affection. Affection ripens 
into love. A proposal of marriage is made. Then 
begins a period of doubt and vacillation. God’s 
Word is plain enough, but its clear precepts are 
forgotten. Amiable qualities are remembered. 
The fact that the other party is unsaved is 
glossed over. A readiness to go to the meetings 


A Vessel Wherein is no Pleasure 65 


of Christians, a willingness to listen to the Scrip- 
ture, is magnified into a persuasion that a work 
of God has begun in the soul; and at last the 
other party, only too readily, is drawn into the 
snare. An unequal yoke is entered into, and a 
lifetime of regret follows. In by far the majority 
of cases the seeming interest in divine things 
passes away with the first few weeks of married 
life, and then, even if open opposition is not de- 
veloped, a cold, studied indifference ensues in 
regard to eternal things that no kindness or con- 
sideration can cover up. Thus the child of God 
is doubly wretched as the sense of disobedience 
comes home to the, at last, awakened conscience; 
and the realization presses upon the soul that the 
one so loved has no concern about God or His 
Christ, and that, if not soon awakened and saved, 
two who loved each other on earth must be sep- 
arated for all eternity. 

And so in many other ways the same sad law 
is fulfilled, whether in business, social, or re- 
ligious life. Oh that we might learn from what 
God has so plainly put before us in His Word, 
and from the unhappy experiences of thousands, 
the danger of trifling with conscience, and with 
the truth which sanctifies the obedient soul! 

It was because of refusing thus to obey His 
Word that God had at last to say of His earthly 
people, “Israel is swallowed up: now shall they 
be among the Gentiles as a vessel wherein is no 


66 Notes on Hosea 


pleasure” (ver. 8). This describes in one verse 
their history for over two thousand years. Driven 
out of their land, scattered among all nations, 
they have been as a vessel in which God could 
take no delight. In this, how opposite to Him 
who came to save them! “This is My beloved 
Son, in whom I am well pleased,’ was the 
Father’s announcement when, at His baptism, He 
offered Himself as the One who came to “do al- 
ways those things that please Him,” 7%. e., the 
Father. He is the vessel of God’s pleasure. Israel 
has become a vessel wherein is no pleasure. How 
marked the contrast! 

It was in vain for them to turn to Assyria, or 
any of the surrounding nations. There could be 
no help for them while under the curse of the 
broken law. Like a wild ass, they had shown the 
untameableness of their nature. They knew not 
how to obey. So they must sorrow under the 
power of the Gentile oppressor whom God had 
made “a king of princes’”—that is, Nebuchadnez- 
zar, king of Babylon (vers. 9, 10; compare Ezek. 
26: 7)—for God is evidently passing by the As- 
syrian, and has before His mind him to whom 
the Gentile dominion was first fully entrusted. 

Ephraim had made many altars to sin, by offer- 
ing sacrifice to demons, and not to God. His sin 
should return upon his own head (ver. 11). 

The pith of all Jehovah’s controversy with him 
is declared in ver. 12: “I have written to him the 


A Vessel Wherein is no Pleasure 67 


great things of My law, but they were counted as 
a strange thing.” They were responsible to act 
in accordance with the written Word. They had 
failed to do so. Therefore the Judge was at the 
door. As with them, so it is with Christendom— 
never more manifest than at the present time— 
God’s Word is despised and set at naught on all 
sides. The end, therefore, cannot now be far off. 

Having despised the Word, it was useless to 
bring offerings and to sacrifice and eat flesh be- 
fore the Lord. He could not accept worship from 
a disobedient and gainsaying people. He remem- 
bers their sins, and must deal with them because 
of their rejection of His law. Morally, they should 
return to Egypt, as in fact actually a remnant did 
in the last days of Jeremiah. “For Israel hath 
forgotten his Maker, and buildeth temples!” They 
cast His commandments behind their back, yet 
built temples where a pretended worship was 
offered. History repeats itself. The words might 
well describe what is so prevalent today. But 
the day of the Lord is coming; and, as of old, 
a fire shall be sent forth from God that will con- 
sume all the vain works of haughty men when the 
hour of Jehovah’s wrath shall strike (vers. 138, 
14). 

Be it remembered, responsibility is always in- 
creased in accordance as God’s truth is revealed. 
How solemn then the present moment, and how 
serious must be the results, if truth be held in 
the mind that does not change the life! 


CHAPTER IX 


THE DAYS OF VISITATION 


as compared with a saint of God away in 

heart from Him whose child he is. This is 
what the opening verse emphasizes. ‘Rejoice not, 
O Israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast 
gone a whoring from thy God.” Nations who 
had never known the Lord might go on with a 
measure of rejoicing, in their ignorance and su- 
perstition; but for Israel, that could not be. Hav- 
ing once become the object of His loving-kind- 
ness, to whom He had revealed Himself as the one 
true and living God, they could never be happy 
in their sin again. 

The very recollections of past joys, of hours 
and days when the soul delighted in God and 
found precious food in His Word, but make all 
the more cheerless the restless, unhappy experi- 
ences of the backslider in heart as he becomes 
filled with his own devices. And what a mercy 
to us that it is so! How grateful we may well 
be to our God and Father that we cannot be in 
the enjoyment of true peace and genuine happi- 
ness while out of communion with Him to whom 
we are indebted for every good we have. 


EF =: an utter worldling is relatively happy 


The Days of Visitation 69 


It is true the soul away from Him may find a 
certain excitement and pleasurable exhilaration 
in the follies of earth; but they are only the 
“pleasures of sin for a season,” and not to be 
compared to those precious realities which were 
before the soul of the psalmist when he sang, 
“At Thy right hand are pleasures for evermore!” 

And so of fallen Israel, we read that the floor 
and the winepress should not satisfy them, and 
the new wine should fail. Nor should they dwell 
in the Lord’s house, but return to Egypt, and 
feed on the unclean in Assyria. Having despised 
the service of the Lord, they should be cut off 
from His temple, and should not eat of His sacri- 
fices (vers. 1-4). 

Then he presses home the question, “What will 
ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the 
feast of the Lord?” when, scattered among the 
heathen, they thought of past seasons of blessing, 
and remembered that once more a solemn feast- 
day had come round, but they were cut off from 
its privileges; what then would they do, and 
how would they be able to satisfy their souls? 

How seldom do the people of God think of these 
things as they should! Lured on by the world, 
fired by unholy ambition and stimulated by pride, 
believers often allow themselves to be drawn 
away from the simplicity that is in Christ! Soon 
they who once took sweet counsel together as 
they wended their way to the gathering-place of 


70 Notes on Hosea 


those who loved their Saviour and the truth of 
God, are widely sundered. Souls who once were 
filled with sweet contemplations as they sat at 
the table of the Lord, remembering His love to 
us in His sufferings unto death, are now drifting 
away in darkness. What must be the feelings of 
such when, on the Lord’s Day, they call to mind, 
amid scenes of worldly religiousness, or of irrelig- 
ious worldliness, the sacred seasons once spent 
before the Lord with holy joy! To remember 
that, at the very hour when they are engaged in 
something which cannot have the Lord’s appro- 
bation, saints once well known and loved are com- 
muning one with another, and with Himself, at 
the feast His loving heart led Him to institute 
to remind us of Him when He had passed from 
human sight—surely in such tender recollections 
there must be mingled a grief and a remorse not 
easily overcome! 

Such, in their measure, should be the nature 
of Israel’s memories as the appointed seasons for 
the passover, the solemn atonement-day, or the 
gladsome feast of tabernacles, came round; and 
they were scattered among strangers, and unable 
to participate in privileges once held so lightly. 
Gone from their land, a spoil to Egypt (typical 
of that world from which the believer has once 
been delivered), their precious things would be 
a prey to their enemies (“their silver shall be 
desired,” see margin), and they themselves 


The Days of Visitation rat 


wounded by thorns and nettles—pierced through 
with many sorrows (ver. 6). What a desolate, 
yet graphic, picture of that which every back- 
slidden soul must prove! 

And in all this they would be but reaping ag 
they had sown. They had said (and in solemn 
irony they are reminded of it), “The prophet is 
a fool, the spiritual man is mad!” So they had 
tried to quiet their consciences because of the 
multitude of their iniquities. Now, when all these 
things would have come to pass, they should know 
that “the days of visitation are come, the days 
of recompense are come” (ver. 7). 

The watchman of Ephraim, who had sought to 
turn them from their evil way, was with God. 
But they had said, ‘The prophet is a snare of a 
fowler in all his ways,” because of their hatred 
against the house of his God* (ver. 8). So easy 
is it to denounce one who faithfully rebukes sin, 
and strives to hinder declension in the soul. The 
leaven of Gibeah’s wickedness (the record of 
which we have in the last chapters of the book of 
Judges) was still at work among them after these 
centuries. Sin never dies a natural death; it 
must be thoroughly judged. Like leaven, it is 
stopped by fire—by “judgment,” self-judgment 


*I understand verse 8 should read as follows: “The 
watchman of Ephraim was with God. [But] the prophet 
is a snare of a fowler in all his ways! [Because of] 
hatred against the house of his God.” 


72 Notes on Hosea 


or God’s judgment; for sin ever works on until 
it is judged. When indulged in by an individual, 
or permitted in a company, it continues working, 
though often impercevtibly, until it is judged, 
either in oneself, or by God’s people, or by God 
Himself. This is the solemn lesson here incul- 
cated. Doubtless those addressed here had for- 
gotten all about the days of Gibeah, or might 
have pleaded that the trouble at Gibeah happened 
centuries before they were born, and it was there- 
fore useless to concern themselves about it. But 
God’s holy eye saw deeper than this. He saw that 
the self-will and corruption manifested at Gibeah 
were still rampant among them, and called for 
humiliation and self-judgment before His face. 
This they ignored. Therefore He must visit them 
and remember their sins (vers. 8 and 9). 

All this is intensely solemn, and may well ex- 
ercise us in the present season of the Church’s 
deep failure and ruin. Are we not a part of that 
house of God set up in responsibility upon earth? 
Do we bear on our hearts the sense of God’s dis- 
honor in that house, of which we form a part? 
May God give grace to both reader and writer to 
let the truth of it penetrate the heart and arouse 
the conscience; thus leading to a godly discern- 
ment as to what is opposed to the holiness that 
becometh His house, and self-judgment because 
of the part one has taken in helping on what is 
not of Himself. It is easy to judge others. We 


The Days of Visitation 73 


are called upon to judge ourselves. But true 
self-judgment will lead one to go back over the 
path of declension trodden by the people of the 
Lord with whom I am united in blessing and 
responsibility. This involves a quickened con- 
science, and is the very opposite to ecclesiastical 
pretension and spiritual pride. 

In verse 10 God lingers lovingly over the early 
history of His people, when He found Israel like 
grapes in the wilderness—precious fruit for Him- 
self in a dry and thirsty land. But, alas, how 
soon did that early freshness disappear! It was 
not long till “they went to Baal-peor, and sepa- 
rated themselves unto that shame.” Balaam’s 
wretched counsel was only too literally followed 
when he “taught Balak to cast a stumbling-block” 
before the separated nation. The daughters of 
Moab effected what all the enchantments of the 
false prophets could not do; “and their abomina- 
tions were accordingly as they loved.” Let the 
reader carefully study the whole account in Num. 
25, and 31:16, compared with Rev. 2: 14. 

From the very beginning Ephraim had proven 
himself untrustworthy. Therefore his glory 
should fly away like a bird, and they should be 
bereaved till none were left. ‘Yea,’ said God, 
“woe also to them when I depart from them” 
(vers. 11, 12). 

It should ever be borne in mind that the Spirit 
of adoption—the indwelling Spirit—who seals all 


74 Notes on Hosea 


true believers in the present dispensation of 
grace, will never depart from those whom God 
thus marks as His own—much as they may fail: 
but there is what evidently answers to it; namely, 
the Holy Spirit grieved, communion interrupted, 
and the Lord ceases to own one as a testimony for 
Himself when waywardness becomes character- 
istic. 

Ephraim, once “planted in a pleasant place,” 
could no longer be blessed with children. ‘Fruit- 
fulness” is what the name Ephraim signified. But 
they should become fruitless and barren; or if 
children were born they would only be appointed 
to death (vers. 13, 14). Communion with God 
and fruit for God go together. Where the first is 
lacking, the desired result will be absent likewise. 

Gilgal, once the place where the reproach of 
Egypt was rolled away, and the witness to their 
sanctification to the Holy One of Israel, was now 
but a testimony to their wickedness. Therefore 
He whom they had so dishonored would drive 
them from His house, and disown them, because 
of their revolt from Himself. When He says 
“T will love them no more,” it is not that His 
heart or purposes had changed, but He would 
not openly interfere for them. He would give 
them up to their enemies as One who, so far as 
they could see, loved them no longer (ver. 15). 

Thus, as above noted, Ephraim should belie his 
name. Smitten in chastisement, “they shall bear 


The Days of Visitation 75 


no fruit;” and even if they brought forth, His 
hand would be against them for destruction. In 
this way would God vindicate His holiness, cast- 
ing them out of His sight, that they might be- 
come wanderers among the nations (vers. 16, 17). 
Moses had warned them of this from the be- 
ginning; but they had given no heed to what 
should have been ever before them if they had 
had eyes to see, ears to hear, and a heart to 
understand. Therefore they must learn by dis- 
cipline, because they had despised the word of 
the Lord. Are we, with so much greater light, 
any wiser than they? Let us search ourselves 
before Him whose eyes are as a flame of fire, 
and answer as in His own holy presence. 


CHAPTER X 


AN EMPTY VINE 


E have already been reminded of Israel’s 

\X / early freshness when God found them 
like grapes in the wilderness. In those 

happy days of their first deliverance they bore a 
little fruit for the Lord (ch. 9:10). Now we 
have to notice His solemn judgment of them as an 
utterly failed testimony: “Israel is an empty vine, 
he bringeth forth fruit unto himself” (ver. 1). 
The lesson of the vine is an important one, 
which we shall do well to trace out through both 
Testaments. In Psalm 80, beginning at ver. 8, 
we have a most significant statement. “Thou 
hast brought a vine out of Egypt: Thou hast 
cast out the heathen and planted it. Thou pre- 
paredst room before it, and didst cause it to take 
deep root, and it filled the land. The hills were 
covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs 
thereof were like the goodly cedars. She sent 
out her boughs unto the sea, and her branches 
unto the river.” This was Israel according to 
the mind of God, as His testimony in the earth. 
Such they would ever have remained, had there 
been lowliness of mind and subjection of heart, 
leading to confidence in and dependence upon Him 


An Empty Vine Td 


continually. But the very opposite of this was 
developed, as we well know, and Scripture makes 
abundantly clear. Therefore “the boar out of the 
wood doth waste it, and the wild beast of the field 
doth devour it” (ver. 1 of the same psalm). God 
came looking for fruit in accordance with Isaiah 
5. Gazing down upon His vine, seeking grapes, 
He found only wild grapes. It was, as described 
by Hosea, “an empty vine;” there was no fruit 
for the Lord. All was for self. 

Therefore the vine of the earth was set aside 
eventually, its enclosing wall broken down, and 
it will be fully judged in the awful vintage yet 
to come (Rev. 14:18-20). Meantime upon the 
rejection of the empty vine, God brings in a vine 
that will bear—one that He will ever find fruit 
upon. So the Lord Jesus, the Man of God’s pur- 
pose, tells His disciples in John 15 of “the True 
Vine,”’ even Himself. He takes the place of Israel 
to maintain a testimony for God in the earth. In 
matchless grace He associates His redeemed with 
Himself in this: “I am the Vine, ye are the 
branches.” Empty branches, with no vital link, 
may be intruded among the branches as belong- 
ing to the vine; but as there is no living con- 
nection with the vine there will be no fruit. Such 
are false professors who are cut off, and cast 
forth as branches, withered, and whose end is to 
be burned. The fruit-bearing branches are 
purged that they may bear more fruit. Yea, God 


78 Notes on Hosea 


the Father is glorified when they bear much fruit! 

It will be seen from this that the vine refers 
to the earth. It is God’s testimony in the world; 
once committed to Israel, now maintained by 
Christ through His beloved people in this scene. 
The empty vine has been set aside in judgment. 
The True Vine has taken its place, and shall 
never be set aside, for it is Christ Himself and 
His people in Him. Therefore, however individ- 
uals fail, we find Him introducing Himself to 
Laodicea as “The faithful and true Witness” 
(Rev. 3:14). 

This tenth chapter before us but concludes the 
proof that Israel had indeed fallen into the sad 
condition described in the first verse. All hope 
of recovery was gone for the present. They must 
pass through affliction and tribulation, and con- 
sequent repentance, ere they could again be taken 
up; and when they are, it will be as branches in 
the living Vine, linked up with their once-rejected 
Messiah as God’s testimony in the Millennium; no 
longer as under the old covenant, on the ground 
of their responsibility (in which position they 
failed from the first), but under the new covenant 
of God’s pure grace toward them, unmerited and 
sovereign. 

The opening words of the second verse give 
the root-trouble in a very brief sentence, “Their 
heart is divided.’”’ This was the cause of all sub- 
sequent sorrow and failure. They did not cleave 


An Empty Vine 719 


to the Lord with purpose of heart. They were 
double-minded, and therefore unstable in all their 
ways. A single heart for God’s glory is the prime 
necessity for a holy life. This they had neglected. 
Therefore they had to eat of the fruit of their 
Own devices. 

To walk with God with a divided heart is 
utterly impossible. He is not asking for the first 
place in the heart, either—as people often put it. 
He is far too exclusive for that. His word is, 
“My son, give Me thy heart’’ — the whole heart, 
with no reservation whatever. Only when this 
is done will the walk and ways be in accordance 
with His mind. Here Israel failed, as their idola- 
trous altars testified; and when God chastened 
them for their sin, instead of owning His right- 
eousness in thus dealing with them, they sought 
to make a covenant with the nations, that they 
might escape the merited discipline. Having no 
prince to save them, they made desperate efforts 
to secure an arm of flesh elsewhere on which to 
lean; but that God would not permit (vers. 3, 4). 

The inhabitants of Samaria, who, for so long, 
had “feared the Lord and served their own gods” 
(2 Kings 17: 33), must now be made to tremble 
“because of the calves of Beth-aven,’” upon them 
they had relied: for at last, after so long a trial, 
God had written “Ichabod” over the whole north- 
ern kingdom. The glory had departed (ver. 5). 
Therefore they were to be carried as a gift to the 


80 Notes on Hosea 


king of Assyria, that Ephraim might receive 
shame and Israel be ashamed of his own counsel. 
Thus Samaria’s king would prove as powerless 
as the foam upon the water, which seems for a 
moment substantial and real; but, in the next, has 
vanished away (vers. 6, 7). 

The eighth verse manifestly looks on to a far 
more solemn fulfilment than its secondary appli- 
cation to the Assyrian victory of old. The ex- 
pressions used connect it with the awful over- 
throw of all established order in the last days, 
as described under the sixth seal of Rev. 6. Then 
“they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and 
to the hills, Fall on us.” This will be the time 
when they shall receive of the Lord’s hand double 
for all their sins, and shall realize, in bitterness 
of soul, their folly in departing from the living 
God. 

Again He reminds them, as in the previous 
chapter (ver. 9), that they had sinned from the 
days of Gibeah. The iniquity then perpetrated 
had never been thoroughly judged, but rather, 
as leaven, had wrought throughout all the years 
since, permeating the mass. Therefore He must 
chastise them, because of His yearning desire 
for their blessing. He loved them, and, because 
of this, He had to discipline them for their sins. 

The expression, “When they shall bind them- 
selves in two furrows,” is variously rendered, and 
seems ambiguous. The R. V. gives, ‘““When they 


An Empty Vine 81 


are bound to their two transgressions.” Might 
“their two transgressions” be the “two evils” 
of Jer. 2:13? They had forsaken Him who is 
the Fountain of living waters, and had hewed 
out broken cisterns for themselves. The prophet 
Isaiah similarly charges them with two trans- 
gressions—the rejection of God’s Anointed, and 
the setting up of idolatry. 

The happy result of the disciplinary ways of 
the Lord is beautifully portrayed in vers. 11, 12, 
which here come in parenthetically, ere the sub- 
ject of their sin and its punishment is continued 
in the closing verses. Both Judah and Ephraim, 
as tractable oxen, shall submit to the yoke, and 
delight to tread out the corn in the days when 
their lesson shall have been learned in the pres- 
ence of God. But this will only be when they sow 
in righteousness and godliness. Then they shall 
reap in mercy. The fallow ground must be broken 
up by the power of the Word ministered in the 
energy of the Holy Ghost. Thus will there be 
response when the set time has arrived to seek 
the Lord that He may come and rain righteous- 
ness upon them. For us, all this has its present 
application, if we have hearts to bow to it. 

But though, for Israel and Judah, such blessing 
is in store, the last three verses describe their 
unhappy state till they are made willing in the 
day of His power. 


82 Notes on Hosea 


Plowing wickedness, they but go on reaping 
iniquity and eating the fruit of lies; because 
their trust is not in Him, but in their own way 
and the multitude of their mighty men. Conse- 
quently breaking up and spoiling, in place of 
repairing the breach and restoration, must be 
their portion. See Isa. 58:12. Bethel, which 
had become the centre of their idolatry, would 
prove their undoing; speaking as it did of their 
grievous apostasy. Judah, we know, was pre- 
served for a time, and a light maintained for 
David’s sake, till Messiah should appear; but the 
king of Israel was utterly cut off and the throne 
over-turned, never to be re-established till He 
shall come whose right it is to reign. Then the 
breach between Israel and Judah shali be healed, 
as predicted by all the prophets, when the times 
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the 
Lord. No longer will “an empty vine” be de- 
scriptive of the earthly people; but as a vine 
flourishing they shall take root downward and 
send forth fruit-laden branches above, to the 
praise of the giory of Jehovah’s grace. 


CHAPTER XI 


BANDS OF LOVE 


“ HEN Israel was a child, then I loved 

\ X / him, and called My son out of Egypt.” 

It is plain, from a consideration of 
Matt. 2:15, that God had in view His own Son, 
our Lord Jesus Christ, when the prophet uttered 
these words. Clearly, and unmistakably, the 
Holy Babe’s sojourn in the land of Egypt is de- 
clared to be, “That it might be fulfilled which was 
spoken of the Lord by the prophet, saying, Out 
of Egypt have I called My Son.” 

And yet a careful reading of the first few 
verses of this chapter will make it equally clear 
that the prophet himself, doubtless, had none 
other than Israel nationally before him when he 
spoke the words quoted. He was dwelling on 
Israel’s past deliverance from the house of bond- 
age, when Jehovah loved him and called him, as 
His son, out of the land dominated by the Pha- 
raohs. 

Is there then contradiction here? Far other- 
wise. There is the most perfect agreement, which 
another passage at once manifests. In 2 Cor. 3 
we learn from ver. 17, read in connection with the 
entire chapter, that the Lord is the Spirit of the 
Old Testament. He is everywhere presented to 


84 Notes on Hosea 


the anointed eye. Hence the apostle wrote by 
divine inspiration when he declared that Hosea’s 
words prophetically foretold the coming up of 
God’s Son out of Egypt. In wondrous grace He 
would, as it were, begin as His people began, in 
regard to His earthly pilgrimage. So, as a Babé 
whose life is sought by Herod, He is carried over 
the route taken by Jacob when driven by famine 
to Egypt; and from that land whence His people 
had been delivered when oppressed by Pharaoh, 
He later returns to Palestine. Thus would He 
be identified with them in their wanderings, that 
they might understand how the Holy Spirit spoke 
of Him when He said, “In all their affliction He 
was afflicted, and the Angel of His Presence saved 
them” (Isa. 63:9). 

Called out of Egypt, He was ever the One in 
whom the Father found delight. In this how 
blessedly opposite to Israel! Redeemed by power 
from Egyptian tyranny, they went far from Him, 
though He called them in tenderest love. Turn- 
ing away, they sacrificed unto Baalim, and wor- 
shiped images of man’s design (ver. 2). 

Yet He had taught Ephraim to take his earli- 
est steps, as it were; holding his arms and direct- 
ing his way. But they soon, like an ungrateful 
child, forgot Him to whom they owed so much, 
and knew not that He had healed them. Tenderly 
He recalls those early days when He drew them 
with cords of a man and with bands of love, de- 


Bands of Love 85 


livering them from the yoke, and providing all 
that they needed for their sustenance and enjoy- 
ment (vers. 3, 4)—what saint but will see in 
words so lovely the story of his own deliverance 
from sin and Satan, when first brought to the 
knowledge of Christ! Long enthralled in worse 
than Egyptian bondage, how unspeakably pre- 
cious was the earliest revelation of His grace to 
our souls, when He drew us to Himself from our 
wickedness and waywardness by the bands of 
love; which were indeed the cords of a man—the 
Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom 
for all! Let us challenge our hearts as to what 
return we have made to love so deep and tender. 
What is the Baal that has lured some of us so far 
from Him who once was everything to our hearts, 
when we took our first steps out into the wilder- 
ness with Him to whom we owed so much? Rest 
assured, fellow-believer, till every idol is de- 
stroyed, we shall never know again the freshness 
and joy of those early days, if we have allowed 
other lords to have dominion over us. 

Once set free from Egypt, Israel, nationally, 
could never return there. But because of their 
sins, they were given into the hand of the Assyr- 
ian; as will, in a more awful manner, be the case 
in the last days, when the sword shall abide upon 
them, “because of their own counsels’ (vers. 
5, 6). 

Such must be the bitter fruit of forgetting 


86 Notes on Hosea 


their God and taking their own foolish and sinful 
way. From the first they had been “bent to back- 
sliding’ from Him, though He had called them 
again and again to repentance. But they per- 
sisted in their folly till there was no remedy 
(ver. 7). 

Yet His yearning heart causes Him to cry, 
“How shall I give thee up?... My heart is turned 
within Me, My repentings are kindled together” 
(ver. 8). He could not bear to make them as the 
cities of the nations upon whom His wrath had 
fallen without any mixture of mercy. Zeboiim 
and Admah (see Gen. 14:8) were two of the 
cities of the plain blotted out in the day when 
Sodom and Gomorrah fell beneath His judgment 
(Deut. 29: 23). Of a similar doom Moses warned 
Israel if they failed to keep His holy law. Thus 
they were righteously under that awful sentence; 
but God, falling back upon His own sovereignty, 
declares, “I will not execute the fierceness of 
Mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim: 
for I am God, and not a man; the Holy One in 
the midst of thee: and I will not enter into the 
city” —i. e., to utterly consume it (ver. 9). 

It is most blessed to realize that God, who, 
once He has given His word in grace, will never 
repent, or permit that people to be cursed whom 
He has blessed (as He made known to Balaam), 
yet reserves to Himself the right to turn from 
the greatness of His wrath, however richly de- 


Bands of Love 87 


served, and manifest His loving-kindness to the 
people of His choice upon their repentance. There- 
fore, though He might righteously have utterly 
destroyed Ephraim, He preserved a remnant, in 
grace, who shall yet be to the praise of His glory 
in the land of their fathers; when “they shall 
walk after the Lord,” in the day that “He shall 
roar like a lion,” causing His once-blinded people 
to tremble at His word; when He shall “set His 
hand again the second time to recover the rem- 
nant of His people which shall be left, from As- 
syria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and 
from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and 
from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea” 
(Isa. 11:11). At His call they will come, weep- 
ing because of their sin, yet rejoicing in His 
love; “as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out 
of the land of Assyria,” to be placed “in their 
houses,” never again to be removed, according to 
the word of Jehovah (ver. 11). 

This verse completes another distinct division 
of the prophecy, which extends from their first 
call out of Egypt to their restoration to the land 
and to God in the days of the millennial kingdom. 

The last verse is properly the introduction to 
chapter 12, and brings in a new subject, which 
closes with the end of chapter 18. When Hosea 
prophesied, as frequently noted, the iniquity of 
Judah was not yet so manifest as that of the ten 
tribes whom Jeroboam had led astray from the 


88 Notes on Hosea 


very beginning, turning them away from Jeho- 
vah, and setting up the golden calves for their 
worship. They had been idolatrous from the 
first, and all their kings had followed in the steps 
of “Jeroboam the son of Nebat, which made Israel 
to sin.” Therefore sentence was early pronounced 
on them because God had to say, ‘Ephraim com- 
passeth Me about with lies, and the house of 
Israel with deceit.”” There had never been any 
response to the many warnings and entreaties 
sent them by the Lord. 

But with Judah it was far otherwise. Among 
them, decline was a matter of slow, and some- 
times thwarted, progress. Hence we read, “But 
Judah yet ruleth with God, and is faithful with 
the Most Holy” (ver. 12, margin). Up to the time 
when Hosea prophesied, there was still a measure 
of devotion to Jehovah in Judah. Moreover, re- 
vival after revival followed the fervent calls to 
repentance uttered by the prophets; but it will 
be observed that as the years went on, they too 
became less and less responsive to the voice of 
God, until they lost all concern for His holiness.* 


* Hypocrisy, therefore, developed especially in Judah— 
“This people honoreth Me with their lips, but their heart 
is far from Me” (Mark 7:6; Isa. 29:18). This is the 
danger where doctrine is right and outward form correct 
while the heart is away from God. Let every child of 
God beware of this. See Luke 12: 1.—[Ed. 


CHAPTER XII 


THE BALANCES OF DECEIT 


S already noticed, a new section of the 
A prophecy began with verse 12 of the pre- 

vious chapter, in which God most search- 
ingly exposes the hidden corruptions of Ephraim, 
laying bare the moral springs of their being, 
which resulted in such open revolting from their 
God. 

Like the royal Preacher of Ecclesiastes, Ephra- 
im, seeking in vain for something to fill the heart 
apart from God, had been feeding on wind and 
following the desolating wind of the east, and 
thus proving that “all is vanity and vexation of 
spirit’ when the heart is estranged from the one 
true Source of all good. Endeavoring to make 
a league with the powerful Assyrian whom they 
dreaded, and sending oil (as a bribe, evidently) 
into Egypt to buy the help of their old enemy, 
they thus sought to avert the evil day; but they 
were following lies and desolation. No human 
ingenuity could turn aside the day of the Lord’s 
dealings with them for their sins (ver. 1). 

With Judah too He had a controversy; for the 
encouraging word spoken in verse 12 of chapter 
11 did not necessarily imply that God was fully 
satisfied with them. The seed of Jacob, as a 


90 Notes on Hosea 


whole, were emulating the crookedness of him 
from whom they sprang; so they must be visited 
according to their ways, and recompensed accord- 
ing to their doings (ver. 2). 

In verses 3 to 6 Jacob is himself before us, as 
in all respects a picture of the people descended 
from him. A supplanter from his birth, he mani- 
fested his overreaching spirit from the womb, 
taking his brother by the heel, as recorded in 
Gen. 25:26. Nevertheless grace had come in, and 
in his distress he laid hold upon God; or, as the 
margin says, “He behaved himself princely with 
God;” thus making good his new name, Israel— 
a-prince with God. 

When unable longer to struggle, he clung to 
Him against whom he had striven; and this was 
the power in which he prevailed—when he wept 
and made supplication to Him. It was what an- 
other has called “the irresistible might of weak- 
ness’—clinging to Him that is mighty, even as 
the apostle declared, “When I am weak, then am 
I strong.” This was the secret of Jacob’s prevail- 
ing with God, who had found him in Bethel when 
he was a fugitive and a wanderer because of his 
sin. “There He spake with us” implies, I judge, 
that the word of the Lord to him on the night 
when a stone was his pillow was intended like- 
wise for all his house to the end of time. What- 
ever their failings, His eye would ever be upon 
them; “Even the Lord God of hosts, the Lord 


The Balances of Deceit 91 


(Jehovah—the eternal, the unchanging One) is 
his memorial.” 

Oh that Israel would learn from all these things 
to turn to their God, keep judgment and mercy, 
and wait on Him continually! 

Instead of this, they had but followed in the 
first ways of Jacob their father; so that God 
likens Ephraim to a merchantman, or a trafficker, 
in whose hand are the balances of deceit. He is 
really a Canaanite—for such is the word rendered 
merchantman. Could anything more aptly de- 
scribe the Hebrew as he has ever since been 
known? Conscienceless when business interests 
were at stake, there can be no doubt that the 
anti-Semitism of Europe is in large measure the 
judgment upon his knavery (ver. 7). And so un- 
conscious is he of wrong-doing when he takes 
advantage of the need or covetousness of his vic- 
tim, that he congratulates himself on his increas- 
ing wealth (as his store grows day by day, swol- 
len with ill-gotten gains), saying, “In all my 
labors they shall find none iniquity in me that 
were sin” (ver. 8). 

But however dark the picture may be at the 
present (and that present is from Hosea’s day to 
now), the Lord has never utterly cast off the 
nation whose God He was “from the land of 
Egypt.” In pure grace He shall yet restore them 
to their ancient land, fulfilling all His pledges, 
and bringing them into the full enjoyment of the 


92 Notes on Hosea 


true feast of tabernacles; when, their toil ended, 
their lessons learned, and their warfare accom- 
plished, they shall dwell every man beneath his 
own vine and fig tree, with none to make them 
afraid (ver. 9). 

To this end God had spoken by His prophets, 
multiplying visions and using similitudes; thus 
pressing upon the people’s consciences their un- 
happy condition, and encouraging them by the 
promise of blessing conditioned upon repentance 
(ver. 10). In reading the ministry of these proph- 
ets, it is important to bear in mind the instruction 
given us in the New Testament, that no prophecy 
of Scripture is of its own interpretation, but all 
must be read in view of the ways of God, as set 
forth so fully by both Hosea and Daniel. The 
end of all the burdens of the prophecies of these 
men of God is the bringing in of the day of the 
Lord, and the establishment of the kingdom in 
glory on this earth; when Israel shall return in 
heart to Jehovah, and own their once-rejected 
Messiah as David’s Son, for whom they have 
waited so long. 

The ministry of the prophets was for the lay- 
ing bare the true state of affairs. So they dis- 
covered the iniquity of Gilead. Vanity was writ- 
ten on all. In Gilgal, where once the reproach 
of Egypt had been rolled away, they sacrificed, 
but not to Jehovah. Altars were everywhere, 
like heaps of stone piled in the furrows of the 


The Balances of Deceit 93 


field, but not to His glory (ver.11). So they must 
find their symbol once more in Jacob, who, be- 
cause of his deceit, fled into the land of Syria, 
and there kept Laban’s sheep, that he might pur- 
chase his wife by hard toil (ver. 12). When, of 
old, the Lord’s set time had come to bring Israel 
out of Egypt, it was by a prophet He did so; 
and by a prophet he led them through the wilder- 
ness, preserving them in all their trials (ver. 13). 
So the same kind of ministry must be heeded 
again, ere they would be delivered from the 
bondage of their sins and brought into the en- 
joyment of the promised inheritance. 

But instead of heeding the word of the Lord, 
and humbling themselves before Him, when He 
sent His servants to them, “Ephraim provoked 
Him to anger most bitterly: therefore shall He 
leave his blood upon him, and his reproach shall 
his Lord return unto him” (ver. 14). God-sent 
ministry, heeded and bowed to, leads to enlarge- 
ment and blessing; but the Spirit’s testimony 
rejected increases the guilt of him who hardens 
himself against it, and makes his condition far 
worse than before. It is ever the case that light 
refused makes the darkness all the deeper. Hence 
the need of a tender conscience, quick to respond 
to every word from God. 


CHAPTER XIII 


IN ME IS THY HELP > 


tinuation of the burden begun in the last 

verse of chapter 11, remind us forcibly of 
the word of the Lord to Saul when he had turned 
back from obeying His voice. (See 1 Sam. 15: 
17.) “When Ephraim spake trembling, he ex- 
alted himself in Israel: but when he offended in 
Baal, he died” (ver. 1). 

These words give us the spiritual history of 
thousands who have begun well, but ended badly, 
because of failure to cleave to the Lord with pur- 
pose of heart. As we trace out the biographies 
of many of the kings of Judah, we see the same 
thing exemplified. And if it is otherwise with 
the kings of Israel, it is only because not one of 
them began with God at all. They were idolators, 
all of them; and of the entire number, Jehoahaz 
is the only one of whom it is stated that he ever 
sought the Lord, and that only when in deep dis- 
tress. 

But among Judah’s rulers there were many who 
started out well, of whom it might be said that 
“as long as he sought the Lord, the Lord made 
him to prosper.” With most of them, however, 


[sin opening words, which are really a con- 


In Me is Thy Help 95 


failure came in eventually, to mar their testi- 
mony, and bring sorrow and trouble in its train. 

When God first took Ephraim up, he “was little 
in his own eyes,” and “he spake trembling;’ that 
is, realizing in some measure his weakness and 
insufficiency, he was humbled when the word of 
the Lord came to him. God says, “To this man 
will I look; even to him that is poor and of a 
contrite spirit, and trembleth at My word” (Isa. 
66:2). Such was Ephraim in the freshness of 
early days. And when this was his condition, 
“he exalted himself in Israel. But when he of- 
fended in Baal, he died.”’ Alas, that the last sen- 
tence had ever to be penned! How much happier 
had it been for Ephraim, as for untold thousands 
more, if they had never left their first love! These 
things are our types, and from them God would 
have us learn not to trust our own deceitful 
hearts, but to walk softly before Him, in rever- 
ence and godly fear. In no other way shall we be 
preserved from a moral and spiritual breakdown. 
Self-confidence is ever the prelude to severe and 
crushing defeat. 

And it is generally found that, the first step 
taken away from God, each succeeding one be- 
comes easier and easier. Twinges of conscience 
are less frequent; the strivings of the grieved 
Holy Spirit attract less and less attention as the 
heart becomes hardened through the deceitfulness 
of sin. So was it with Ephraim. “And now they 


96 Notes on Hosea 


sin more and more,” says the prophet, as he pro- 
ceeds to picture the gross idolatry which every- 
where pervaded the land, prevailing among all 
classes of people (ver. 2). Consequently they are 
to be carried away in judgment. “They shall be 
as the morning cloud, and as the early dew that 
passeth away, as the chaff that is driven with the 
whirlwind out of the floor, and as the smoke out 
of the chimney” (ver. 3). In this way the Lord 
was about to “purge His floor.” 

But, as so frequently declared, He did not pur- 
pose to make a full end of them, the people of 
His choice. On the contrary, He remained the 
only true God, the Lord who had been their God 
from the land of Egypt. The day would come 
when they should own Him alone, and know no 
God besides Him; for He only was the Saviour of 
Israel. In the wilderness—that dry and thirsty 
land—He had sustained them, till their heart 
was exalted: and when they were filled with all 
good things they had forgotten Him, thereforé 
He who had given them all these mercies would 
be to them as a leopard by the way, and as a bear 
bereaved of her whelps, who would rend the caul 
of their heart, and tear them like a lion. The wild 
beast was appointed to devour them (vers. 4-8). 

In the figures here used it would seem that we 
have more than a hint of the character of the 
Gentile empires which were to become succes- 
sively the oppressors of Israel. If the passage be 


In Me is Thy Help 97 


compared with Dan. 7, I think most readers will 
feel that it is more than a mere coincidence that 
the lion was there used as the symbol of Babylon; 
the bear, of Medo-Persia; and the leopard, of 
Greece. The generic term, “the wild beast,” or, 
“the beast of the field,” is possibly a veiled refer- 
ence to the last beast, “dreadful and terrible,” 
typifying the Roman empire, for long years the 
persecutor of Israel, and which, though now fal- 
len, is yet to be revived in the first beast of Rev. 
13, when the time of the end is come, and the 
great tribulation shall conclude the sufferings of 
Jacob. 

They alone were responsible for all that had 
befallen them, and for all that should yet come 
upon them. ‘“O Israel,” God says, “thou hast de- 
stroyed thyself; but in Me is thy help” (ver. 9). 
Their self-will had been their ruin; but He waited 
still to save, ready to make bare His arm for their 
deliverance, if there were any sign of repentance 
and self-judgment. None other could avail for 
their salvation if they turned not to Him. “Where 
is thy king?” He asks. (See margin.) Hoshea,* — 
in whom they trusted, was a prisoner in the hands 
of Shalmaneser, king of Assyria (2 Kings 17: 
1-4). Where was any other that could save them, 
in all their cities? They had asked for a king, 


* In so writing, I simply follow the marginal note. There 
is no positive proof that Hosea prophesied in the days of 
Hoshea, or that he is the king referred to. 


98 Notes on Hosea 


to be like the nations around them; God had 
granted their request; but where was the power 
of their king and his judges? They had been 
trusting in a bruised reed. 

It may seem strange, so many centuries after 
the establishment of the monarchy, and at the 
close of the history of the ten tribes as such, that 
God should thus reproach them for the sin of ask- 
ing a king in the days of Samuel. This but illus- 
trates the remarks already made in seeking to 
expound chapter 7. The same spirit of independ- 
ency that led them to desire a king to go in and 
out before them (when Jehovah Himself was 
their King), prevailed among them still; and for 
that, judgment must fall. Solemn are the words, 
“TI gave thee a king in Mine anger, and took him 
away in My wrath” (ver. 11). So may God often 
allow His children to have what they desire, when 
their hearts are away from Him; giving them 
their requests, but sending leanness into their 
souls. It is well when the will is subject, and in 
all our prayers and supplications we say, ‘““Thy 
will be done.’”’ He knows so much better than we 
possibly can what is best for us; and where there 
is subjection of heart He will reply, not accord- 
ing to our faulty petitions, but according to His 
own loving-kindness and wisdom. When it is 
otherwise, He often has to answer our prayers in 
judgment, and we may have years to regret our 
folly in not having left all our affairs in His 
hands. 


In Me is Thy Help 99 


To all his other failures Ephraim added this, 
that he kept his iniquity bound up and his sin 
covered (ver. 12). As long as this is the case 
with any, God’s hand must be on them in dis- 
cipline: “He that covereth his sins shall not pros- 
per.” On the other hand, the moment all is out 
in the light, and sin is judged and confessed, God 
Himself provides a covering, and the evil is gone 
from His sight forever. “Blessed is he whose 
transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. 
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth 
not iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile” 
(Psco2c 1, 2). 

Because of Ephraim’s persistency in covering 
his own sin, the sorrows as of a travailing woman 
must come upon him. This at once suggests an- 
other simile. He is an unwise son, remaining 
where his presence can only be most embarrass- 
ing and foolish. So he persisted in his folly when 
warned and entreated to cease therefrom (ver. 
31). 

The last two verses continue the general sub- 
ject, declaring the terrible extent of the disas- 
trous judgments they must undergo. But ere 
these solemn scenes are depicted, a precious word 
of grace, like a rainbow of hope in the gloomy, 
wrath-laden sky, is seen in ver. 14. He who is 
about to visit them in His anger speaks of mercy 
and kindness, giving a promise of the triumph 
of His love at last. “I will ransom them from 


100 Notes on Hosea 


the power of sheol; I will redeem them from 
death: O death, I will be thy plagues; O sheol, 
I will be thy destruction: repentance shall be hid 
from Mine eyes.” 

What could be more blessed than such a prom- 
ise in the midst of so solemn an arraignment? 
In wrath God will remember mercy. He will yet 
appear as the Redeemer of His chosen, despoiling 
death and sheol (synonymous with hades, the un- 
seen world of spirits—not hell nor the grave) of 
their prey, and saving all who turn to Him in 
brokenness of spirit, owning their guilt. Of His 
purposes of grace He will never repent; they shall 
abide forever in His goodness and mercy. 

For centuries now Israel has been like a dead 
man, buried among the nations, wandering like a 
shade in sheol; but the hour is not far distant 
when the closing message to Daniel shall be ful- 
filled, as also the prophecy of the valley of dry 
bones in Ezek. 37. “At that time shall Michael 
stand up, the great prince which standéth for the 
children of thy people: and there shall be a time 
of trouble, such as never was since there was a 
nation even to that same time: and at that time 
thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall 
be found written in the book. And many of them 
that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, 
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and 
everlasting contempt” (Dan. 12:1, 2). Such also 
is the testimony of an older prophet, Isaiah (ch. 


In Me is Thy Help 101 


26:19, R. V.). “Thy dead shall live; my dead 
bodies shall arise. Awake and sing, ye that dwell 
in the dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, 
and the earth shall cast forth her dead.” All 
these passages will have their glorious fulfilment 
when the Remnant of Israel and Judah are awak- 
ened from their death-sleep, and shall come forth 
at the call of God to return to Zion with singing 
and with everlasting joy upon their heads. 

Literally, too, there will be a wondrous fulfil- 
ment when “All that are in the graves shall hear 
His voice, and shall come forth; they that have 
done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they 
that have done evil, unto the resurrection of judg- 
ment.” “Blessed and holy is he that hath part in 
the first resurrection!’ (John 5: 28, 29; Rev. 20: 
6). 

It would be happy indeed to close our chapter 
with this precious reminder of the grace of our 
Saviour-God. But it is salutary and necessary to 
be reminded that the day of Jehovah’s power and 
Messiah’s appearing has not yet come; so we are 
once more turned back to contemplate the lament- 
able estate of Israel and the dark days awaiting 
them ere the glory dawns. 

As we dwell upon the solemn words of verses 
15 and 16, the “rainbow like unto an emerald” 
seems to fade away; the dark clouds of doom 
gather heavier and heavier above the land of 
promise; while “out of the throne proceeds light- 


102 Notes on Hosea 


nings, and thunderings, and voices,” presaging 
the dreadful storm about to burst upon those who, 
having eyes to see, saw not, and having ears to 
hear, heard not the ominous rumblings of the 
approaching day of wrath, till it was too late to 
find a hiding-place. An east wind from Jehovah 
“shall come up from the wilderness,” drying up 
all the springs of hope and fountains of joy, and 
spoiling all the vessels of desire. Desolation 
should enwrap Samaria in midnight gloom and 
direst woe; “for she hath rebelled against her 
God.” Therefore they should fall beneath the 
avenging hand of the bloodthirsty Assyrian, who 
would spare neither age, sex, nor condition. 

All this has had a fulfilment in the march of 
Shalmaneser’s hordes through the land. It shall 
have another and more dreadful one when the last 
Assyrian sweeps down,* like a resistless flood, 
till stopped by the breath of the Lord. 

With this the body of the prophecy closes. The 
next, and last, chapter is a tender call addressed 
to the backslidden people, exhorting them to re- 
turn to Him, who is their only good and their 
only hope. 


*This will take place when they shall be restored to 
the land of Palestine in unbelief, subsequent to the rap- 
ture of the Church, and previous to the establishment of 
Messiah’s kingdom. This has been gone into at length, 
both in the Author’s “Notes on Jeremiah” (chaps. 30 and 
81), and in “The Mysteries of God,” to which attention 
has already been drawn. 


CHAPTER XIV 


RESTORATION AND BLESSING 


rejected Messiah to weep over Jerusalem as 

He said, “If thou hadst known, even thou, 
at least in this thy day, the things which belong 
unto thy peace!” is manifest throughout this 
final chapter of our prophet. It is one of the most 
touching yet faithful entreaties to be found in the 
Book of God, reminding us of the soul-stirring 
appeals uttered by the Holy Spirit through a later 
servant, Jeremiah. Not only does it give us the 
beseechings of Jehovah that His people heed His 
voice and return to Himself, but it sets forth 
clearly just how they should go about it, even 
putting into their lips the words which, if they 
came from their hearts, He would delight to hear. 
Abundant promises too are given of blessing to 
be poured out upon them when they should thus 
bow before Him in repentance and contrition of 
heart. 

“O Israel, return unto the Lord thy God; for 
thou hast fallen by thine iniquity!’ (ver. 1). 
How bitterly had they proven that “the way of 
transgressors is hard!” “Righteousness,” we are 
elsewhere told, ‘“exalteth a nation; but sin is a 


[si same yearning tenderness that led the 


104 Notes on Hosea 


reproach to any people.’ Had they followed in 
the paths of uprightness which their faithful, 
covenant-keeping God had marked out for them, 
theirs had been a very different history. But 
they refused to hearken, and turned away the 
shoulder. The result was failure and disaster 
from first to last. They had indeed fallen very 
low. Yet He, who had been so grievously sinned 
against, could lovingly entreat them still to return 
unto Him, who was their God from the land of 
Egypt. 

Let us learn from their unhappy course both 
to avoid their sins and to know the exceeding 
grace of our God. The Church, as a testimony 
for an absent Lord, has failed as fully as Israel. 
But however dark the day, wherever a true heart 
turns back to God, judging itself for participa- 
tion in the common sin of those so highly privi- 
leged, He who has been so grievously dishonored 
will still gladly receive such an one; yea, He waits 
but for open doors to come in and sup in com- 
munion, though the hour be late. 

If the soul say, “But I have erred so seriously, 
I know not how to approach so holy a God after 
having dishonored Him to such an extent;” then 
He Himself will put a prayer into the lips of 
the returning one: thus assuring each seeking 
soul of His willingness to hear. “Take with you 
words, and turn to the Lord: say unto Him, Take 
away all iniquity, and receive us graciously: so 


Restoration and Blessing 105 


will we render the calves of our lips. Asshur 
shall not save us; we will not ride upon horses: 
neither will we say any more to the work of our 
hands, Ye are our gods: for in Thee the father- 
less findeth mercy” (vers. 2, 3). 

This prayer, indited by God Himself, will re- 
pay the most careful consideration. Let us take 
up its clauses one by one, weighing each in the 
presence of the Lord. “Take away all iniquity, 
and receive us graciously,” cries the repentant 
soul. Having long been defiled, till the conscience 
was almost calloused, the light of God has now 
shown things up as they really are. This pro- 
duces an abhorrence of the waywardness so long 
tolerated as though it were a thing indifferent. 
Unconcern is succeeded by deep exercise. “Take 
away all iniquity!” is the soul’s longing. Sin be- 
comes hateful the moment one gets into the pres- 
ence of God. Then the need of grace is felt, and 
so the cry comes, “Receive us graciously.” What 
a mercy that it is to “the God of all grace” we are 
directed to come! 

There can be no restoration so long as one sin 
is trifled with and remains unjudged; but the in- 
stant a full confession is made and all iniquity is 
honestly turned from, the Word assures us of in- 
stant forgiveness. “If we confess our sins, He 
is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to 
cleanse us from all unrighteousness” (1 John 1: 
9). This is the principle that applies to a lost 


106 Notes on Hosea 


sinner seeking salvation, or an erring saint desir- 
ing restoration of soul. Sin judged is sin gone; 
and the soul may afresh enjoy the communion 
that has been interrupted from the moment evil 
was allowed upon the conscience. In the knowl- 
edge of this—a knowledge received, not by feel- 
ings, but resting on the testimony of Scripture— 
praise and worship once more spring up in the 
heart. “So shall we render the calves of our 
lips!” 

Only when the life is right and the conscience 
pure from defilement can there be worship in 
spirit and in truth. Then the happy saint can 
without hindrance pour forth into the ear of God 
his grateful praises, and his worship, like incense, 
arise from the heart to which Christ is all. Israel 
shall enter into this, when, restored to their land 
after their disciplinary wanderings, they rejoice 
before Him who shall dwell in the midst of 
them, having first purged them with the spirit 
of burning from all that has hindered their full 
acknowledgment of His grace. 

“Asshur shall not save us,” is the cry of a peo- 
ple who have learned to “cease from man, whose 
breath is in his nostrils.””’ We have seen through- 
out this book how in the hour of their distress 
they turned, not to God against whom they had 
revolted, but to Assyria, the proud northern 
power, who was destined to be their ruin. Thus 
they learned that “vain is the help of man.” 


Restoration and Blessing 107 


Therefore they will say in the day of Jehovah’s 
might, ‘“Asshur shall not deliver us;’’* but in God 
alone will they find their Saviour. 

Nor will they depend in that day upon their 
own. armies, mounted like the cavalry of the na- 
tions. “We will not ride upon horses.” It is 
noticeable throughout this history that their 
strength for warfare consisted not in imitating 
the manners and customs of the nations, but in 
reliance upon God in the spirit of praise. When 
Judah (“praise”) led, they conquered, as they 
counted on the Lord alone for succor. When 
Jehoshaphat met the enemy, he put singers, not 
cavalrymen, in the van, and a great victory en- 
sued. To this they shall return when humbled 
before God because of all their failure and sin. 
“A horse is a vain thing for safety,” though it 
seem to add wonderfully to human prowess. But 
better far is it to lean upon the arm of Jehovah, 
and remember that the battle is His, not ours. 

Idolatry had been their undoing in the past. 
But then they shall cry, “Neither will we say 
any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our 
gods!” Having learned the impotence of the 
“gods many and lords many” who have had do- 
minion over them, the Lord alone shall be exalt- 


*It is usually God’s way to cause the very thing in 
which His people have dishonored Him to become their 
chastisement—thus to deliver the heart from the idol it 
has sought after.—[Ed. 


108 Notes on Hosea 


ed in that day. It is a lovely picture of a soul 
who has proven that no power, seen or unseen, 
can avail for deliverance, but the strength of 
“the mighty God of Jacob.’’ When everything is 
thus out in His presence, and no guile remains 
in their spirit, they can add with assurance, “For 
in Thee the fatherless findeth mercy.” Israel had 
been Jehovah’s son, whom He had called out of 
Egypt. But they had forgotten Him, and done 
despite to His Spirit of grace. Therefore He had 
pronounced the Lo-ammi and Lo-ruhamah sen- 
tences upon them, as we saw in the beginning of 
the prophecy. Thus, when they return, they come 
in on the ground of pure grace and mercy. They 
come as “the fatherless;’” not to claim the rights 
of a child, but to be the subjects of that loving- 
kindness which is better than life. How suited 
to the lips of the Remnant of the last days will 
be the words of this prayer! 

The gracious response of the Lord immediately 
follows: “I will heal their backsliding, I will love 
them freely; for Mine anger is turned away from 
him” (ver. 4). It is as though His great heart 
of love had been full, nigh to bursting, but their 
sins had kept Him from expressing all that was 
there. Now every barrier is removed, and, like 
an irresistible torrent, His kindness flows forth, 
overleaping, or sweeping away, every obstruction 
that a timid faith might yet raise. Loving them 
freely, He will set them in paths of righteous- 


Restoration and Blessing 109 


ness, healing their souls and turning them from 
all their backslidings. Everything of the dark 
past forgiven and gone, His wrath has vanished, 
and His grace knows no bounds. 

No longer shall they be as a barren and deso- 
late heath, but like a watered garden, tended and 
kept by Himself. “I will be as the dew unto Is- 
rael: he shall blossom as the lily, and cast forth 
his roots as Lebanon” (ver. 5). The dew ever, 
in Scripture, sets forth the refreshing influences 
of the Holy Spirit, ministering the truth in grace 
to the soul. The manna in the wilderness fell on 
the dew—type of Christ ministered in the power 
of the Holy Ghost. Gideon’s signs pictured in a 
marvelous way God’s varied dealings in this re- 
gard. At first the dew was on the fleece, while 
all the ground was dry. Again, the fleece was 
dry, but all the ground covered with dew. So 
had Israel been blessed with the Spirit’s testi- 
mony, while the world lay in ignorance and idola- 
try. But Israel rejected Messiah at His first com- 
ing, and now the chosen nation is dry and deso- 
late, while the Spirit of God is working among 
the Gentiles. In the Millennium He will be poured 
out on all flesh; then fleece and ground shall alike 
be refreshed with the dew. In Psalm 133 “the 
dew of Hermon” sets forth the same quickening 
and revivifying power as here in Hosea. God 
Himself will be as the dew unto His restored peo- 
ple, giving new life and freshness, that they may 


110 Notes on Hosea 


evermore rejoice in Him. Under His kindly nur- 
ture, they shall put on the beauty of the lily, with 
the strength of the cedar of Lebanon. No fading 
glory shall again be theirs, but a beauty that shall 
endure, and a strength that can never fail. 

Then “his branches shall spread, and his beauty 
shall be as the olive tree, and his smell as Leb- 
anon” (ver. 6). ‘Towering up to heaven like a 
mighty cedar, Israel’s branches shall go out in 
majesty, and their fragrance shall be wafted in 
the air, that all may know that the Lord has taken 
them as His own. Nor is it only dignity and fra- 
grance, but there shall be all the loveliness and 
fruitfulness of the olive tree—the oil tree, as the 
word might be rendered. This too speaks of the 
Holy Spirit, who will permeate the nation as the 
oil permeates the olive, making it a source of 
spiritual blessing to the whole earth. 

“They that dwell under his shadow shall re- 
turn; they shall revive as the corn, and grow as 
the vine: the scent thereof shall be as the wine 
of Lebanon” (ver. 7). Figure after figure is 
pressed into service to tell the joy of the Lord in 
His people, and their beauty and preciousness in 
His eyes. Jacob shall not only be regathered, 
but others shall find blessing through him, ac- 
cording to the promise to the fathers. Many shall 
“dwell under his shadow,” finding rest through 
the message committed to him. The corn and 
wine tell of strength and gladness. It shall no 


Restoration and Blessing ala: 


more be said, “Israel is an empty vine; he bring- 
eth forth fruit unto himself.’ But, planted again 
in the land, the vine of the Lord shall flourish, 
and send forth its branches laden with choice 
~ clusters, to provide the wine of joy for the whole 
earth. 

Then shall Ephraim say, “What have I to do 
any more with idols?” Dwelling in fellowship 
with God, and enjoying His matchless love and 
grace, the wretched follies of the past will be de- 
tested. The new affection will so possess the heart, 
that the vain idols at whose altars they once 
bowed will be hated and forgotten. In holy com- 
placency the Lord looks down and says, “I have 
heard him, and observed him.’’* In joyous exul- 
tation, Israel answers, “I am like a green fir 
tree !”—not temporary verdure; but, like an ever- 
green, they will be perennially fresh and lovely in 
His eyes. But all their goodness is from Him- 
self; so He replies, “From Me is thy fruit found.” 
Apart from Him, all would be barrenness once 
more, even as Jesus said, “Without Me, ye can 
do nothing.” But, abiding in the uninterrupted 


* There is good ground here to question the proper con- 
struction of this dialogue. I have followed J. N. Darby’s 
suggestion in “The Synopsis of the Books of the Bible.” 
We might understand Israel as saying, “What have I to 
do any more with idols? I have heard Him, and observed 
Him! I am like a green fir tree.” Then Jehovah’s an- 
swer, “From Me is thy fruit found.” 


112 Notes on Hosea 


enjoyment of His love, their fruit shall never fail 
nor their freshness ever depart. 

This closes the prophecy; but pointedly the 
Lord presses upon every reader the importance 
of weighing all in His presence. “Who is wise, 
and he shall understand these things? prudent, 
and he shall know them? for the ways of the 
Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them: 
but the transgressors shall fall therein” (ver. 9). 
The ways of the Lord has been the theme of the 
book. Happy shall we be if we are, through 
grace, numbered among the wise and prudent who 
know and understand, and the just who walk in 
them !, 

The Lord give efficacy to His Word for His 
name’s sake! Amen. 


Notes on the 


PROPHECY OF JOEL 


ee ee 


INTRODUCTION 


save what little we can glean from the 

three chapters forming his message to 
Israel. Jewish tradition places him in the days 
of Uzziah; but authoritative proof there is none. 
His name means, Jehovah is God; and his father’s 
name, Vision, or, Wisdom of God, according to 
some; or, Be ye enlarged (or persuaded), accord- 
ing to another. 

The immediate circumstances of his testimony 
seem to be these. The land of Israel had been 
visited by a terrible plague of locusts, which had 
devoured every green thing, leaving barrenness 
and famine in their wake. Joel is inspired of 
God to press home upon the consciences of the 
nation of Judah (for it is in and to the southern 
kingdom he prophesies) the fact that this visita- 
tion was from the Lord, because of the sin of His 


people. 


C) F Joel the son of Pethuel we know nothing, 


114 Notes on Joel 


Then, by the Spirit, he is carried on to the last 
days, and he beholds in the dire calamity by 
which they were afflicted a picture of the time 
of Jacob’s trouble, to take place ere Messiah re- 
ceives the kingdom. Thus the then present deso- 
lation becomes the text of a solemn prophetic 
discourse that is far-reaching in character. This 
emphasizes what has already been noticed in our 
study of Hosea, that while prophecy is in many 
parts, and may have many applications, it is 
never limited to local matters, but all has its end 
and complete fulfilment in “the day of the Lord” 
yet to come. 

Another principle of grave moment is likewise 
brought to our attention by the manner in which 
the prophet seeks to use the calamity the people 
were suffering under at the time, to exercise them 
as to their own state of soul. God would ever 
have His children recognize His hand in all such 
visitations. For the believer, there are no second 
causes. The Lord has said, “I Jehovah create 
peace, and create evil.” And He asks the ques- 
tion, “Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord 
hath not done it?” (Isa. 45:7; Amos 3: 6). Evil, 
in both these passages, is, of course, calamity— 
the opposite of a peaceful, quiet condition. If I 
am called to pass through such experiences, it is 
because God has seen a need in my soul for just 
such disciplinary dealings. He has my best in- 
terests at heart. Be it mine then to recognize 


Introduction 115 


His actings and to be exercised thereby. This 
is the lesson of Hebrews 12, and is emphasized in 
the use Joel makes of Judah’s afflictions in this 
brief but pungent prophecy. 

Further remarks will be necessitated on this 
line as we pursue our study; so we turn at once 
to consider the teachings of the three stirring 
chapters of the book itself. May He who alone 
gives the eye-salve of the Spirit anoint our eyes 
that we may see wondrous things in His Word 
now before us! 


CHAPTER I 


THE LOCUST PLAGUE 


and called upon to declare if, in all their 

recollection, or in all the days of which their 
fathers had told them, there had ever been so 
grievous a visitation as that which the land and 
the people were groaning under at the time when 
Joel was sent to press home upon their con- 
sciences the serious lessons God would have them 
to learn (vers. 1-3). 

“That which the palmerworm hath left hath the 
locust eaten; and that which the locust hath left 
hath the cankerworm eaten; and that which the 
cankerworm hath left hath the caterpillar eaten” 
(ver. 4). Thus the destruction of every green 
thing had been complete, so that famine and 
utter ruin stared them in the face. The various 
forms of insect-life here spoken of are not gen- 
erally supposed to be diverse, unrelated creatures, 
but are probably the various stages assumed by 
the locust as it advances from the larve form to 
that of maturity.* This much-dreaded plague had 


Ts ancients of Judah are first addressed, 


* Some scholars dissent from this view; but the position 
stated is that which commends itself to most. 


The Locust Plague 117 


therefore cut off all the sources of food-supply, 
and left an appalling scene of desolation behind. 
And what was so intensely solemn was the fact 
that it was God’s voice, and there was grave like- 
lihood that the people might be occupied only with 
the rod, and fail to hear Him who had appoint- 
ed it. 

Nothing is more natural for us than this. In 
place of godly exercise, we may give way to self- 
pity, or hard, stony indifference; thus either 
fainting under the discipline of the Lord on the 
one hand, or despising it on the other. Blessing 
results from being “exercised thereby.” This was 
what Judah was in danger of missing, as with 
many others before and since. 

The pleasure-loving drunkards, who delighted 
in their wine, were called upon to awake to the 
realization of their true condition—God’s stroke 
upon them; and to learn the lesson He intended 
for them. His great army, like a nation of foe- 
men, “strong and without number,” had blasted 
the vine and barked the fig tree, so that the source 
of their carnal enjoyment was gone (vers. 5-7). 

Like a virgin girded with sackcloth, lamenting 
the untimely death of her betrothed husband, they 
were called upon to mourn over the sins that had 
drawn down the judgment of God upon them. 
His house too was affected; for there that judg- 
ment must begin. The meat, or meal-offering, 
and the drink-offering were cut off, and the 


118 Notes on Joel 


priests were left to mourn. When God’s people 
are in a famished condition, there is no real ap- 
preciation of Christ; hence the oblations cease to 
be offered. The meal-offering sets forth the man- 
hood of the Lord Jesus. The drink-offering por- 
trays His pouring out His soul unto death. But 
a spiritual famine dulls the perception and sensi- 
bilities of those indebted to His one offering for 
all their blessing; so the gifts of a worshiping 
people cease (vers. 8, 9). 

The desolate condition of the land is vividly 
described in verses 10 to 12. All the fruits of 
the field were gone, and the trees had withered 
away; even as joy had departed from the sons of 
men. Therefore the solemn admonition to those 
whose place it was to minister for them in things 
pertaining to God: “Gird yourselves, and lament, 
ye priests: howl, ye ministers of the altar: come, 
lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: 
for the meat-offering and the drink-offering is 
withholden from the house of your God” (ver. 
13). Insensibility at such a time!—how obnoxious 
to God, who wished to see a true appreciation of 
His dealings with His people. 

So he calls upon the elders and all the inhab- 
itants of the land to sanctify a fast, and call a 
solemn assembly, that they may unitedly cry unto 
the Lord, owning before His face their common 
failure, and judging their evil ways (ver. 14). 
The approaching day of the Lord is mentioned 


The Locust Plague 119 


as an incentive to this. Not that the day of the 
Lord (which, in its full, prophetic sense, refers 
to the revelation of Jesus Christ to usher in the 
kingdom) was really to occur in their time; but 
as that day will be for the manifestation of all 
that has been in accordance with the mind of 
God, they were called upon to act then in the light 
of the day that was coming (ver. 15). In like 
manner are Christians exhorted to walk now in 
view of the day of Christ, when all our works 
shall be examined at His judgment-seat. The all- 
displaying light of that hour of manifestation 
should ever be shining upon our pathway, that all 
our steps may be ordered in accord therewith. 

Throughout the book of Joel this is the stand- 
point of the prophet. The day of the Lord is com- 
ing. It will be the day of reality; when all shams 
and all hypocrisy will be manifested as what they 
are. Then, only what is of God will stand. There- 
fore the prime importance of ordering all their 
behavior so that it will bear the searching test of 
Him whose eyes are as a flame of fire. 

In verses 16 to 18 the desolate condition of the 
land is again reverted to. All their hopes have 
been blasted. The blight is upon all for which 
they have labored. But serious as their temporal 
condition had become, it was as nothing compared 
to the spiritual dearth prevailing, of which their 
utter insensibility was the saddest feature. 

Joel speaks as an exercised soul in the closing 


120 Notes on Joel 


words of the chapter. He takes his place as one 
who feels the wretched conditions existing to the 
full: “O Lord, to Thee will I cry!’ This alone 
can be his resource when “the rivers of waters 
are dried up, and the fire hath devoured the pas- 
tures of the wilderness.” 


CHAPTER II 


THE PROMISE OF THE OUTPOURING 
OF THE SPIRIT 


S we turn to this second chapter we are 

A ushered at once into the solemn and soul- 

stirring events of the coming day of the 

Lord; a day which will only come when, the 

Church having been caught up to heaven, God 

takes up Israel again as a nation, fulfilling “all 
that the prophets have spoken.” 

In so writing, I do not forget that it was the 
last part of this chapter which the apostle Peter 
quoted in explaining the wondrous manifestations 
of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost, as foretold 
in Scripture. But we shall see, when taking up 
the passage in question, that it applies primarily 
to a far wider outpouring yet to come. That of 
Pentecost was like it in nature, and a measure 
of its fulfilment; therefore Peter could say, “This 
is that.” But the prophecy was by no means ex- 
hausted then, as a careful reading of the whole 
book of Joel will make plain. 

_ The figure of the trumpet, twice used in the 
chapter (vers. 1 and 15), connects intimately with 
Numbers, ch. 10. There we find the “two trum- 
pets of silver” were used for a double purpose— 
to blow an alarm, and to summon the whole con- 
gregation to the presence of the Lord. The first 


122 Notes on Joel 


was to arouse; the second, to instruct. We find 
the same thing here. In vers. 1 to 14 the trum- 
pet of alarm is blown, and the people are warned 
of the dreadful events about to take place in the 
day of the Lord, which is declared to be nigh at 
hand, events so grave that the visitation of the 
locusts under which they had been suffering was 
but a feeble picture of what is yet in store for 
the land and the people of Judah. Then, in ver. 
15 to the end of the book, at the sounding of the 
trumpet to call a solemn assembly, instruction 
is given in detail regarding the results in bless- 
ing which will follow the judgments already de- 
picted. In the first part, the day of the Lord is 
described as ‘“‘a day of darkness and of gloominess, 
-a day of clouds and of thick darkness, as the 
morning spread upon the mountains.” As the 
darkest hour precedes the dawn, so, before the 
break of the millennial morn, the world in gen- 
eral, and Judah in particular, will pass through 
the darkest period of tribulation that has ever 
been known. 

For Judah, the chief agency in this is “a great 
people and a strong,” who are likened to the de- 
vouring locusts. It is the Assyrian of the last 
days, the dread northern power, who will overrun 
the land of Palestine just prior to the glorious 
appearing of the Sun of Righteousness. Like a 
devouring fire, they will sweep over the land, 
ravaging without mercy what was as the garden 


Outpouring of the Spirit 123 


of delight before them, but which will be left as 
a desolate wilderness (vers. 2, 3). Like mighty 
horses running to battle, and as chariots on the 
tops of the mountains, they shall seem to leap as 
from mount to mount, and from peak to peak, in 
their irresistible onslaught, as the devouring 
flames lick up all that is left in their path. Flee- 
ing before them in terror and anguish, “all faces 
shall gather blackness” in the mad effort to es- 
cape the avenging hordes (vers. 4 to 6). Their 
orderly progress, as a disciplined army, knowing 
only the behests of their commanders, is striking- 
ly depicted in vers. 7 to9. Nothing avails to turn 
them aside. They enter wherever their prey may 
hide, and overcome all obstacles as they press on 
in the fury of their power. 

The language of ver. 10 is undoubtedly apoc- 
alyptic. So tremendous will be the upheavals and 
overturnings in that day of Jehovah’s wrath, that 
it will be as the quaking of the earth and the 
trembling of the heavens. The sun will be dark- 
ened, and the moon likewise, while the stars will 
seem to be blotted out in the midnight sky. As 
in the convulsions of the sixth seal in Rev. 6, all 
that men have esteemed sure and stable will be 
overturned. It is the destruction, not of the ma- 
terial universe, but of the moral, spiritual and 
political economies. 

An appeal to the conscience of Judah is based 
upon this. Jehovah calls upon them to turn to 


124 Notes on Joel 


Him with all their hearts, bringing forth fruits 
meet for repentance. He wants reality instead 
of outward forms: so He says, “Rend your heart, 
and not your garments;” assuring them of His 
tender compassion, and His grace that cannot fail, 
if they thus turn to Him with purpose of heart. 
Even though the first droppings of the coming 
storm had already fallen, who could tell if He 
would not turn from His wrath, and leave a bless- 
ing behind Him? Though the hour was late, His 
loving-kindness might be yet toward them, in pre- 
serving them from further sorrow, and maintain- 
ing still His house and its services in their midst 
(vers. 12-14). 

The second call is in verse 15. In place of the 
alarm-trumpet, the command is given to “blow 
the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn 
assembly.” God would gather the people before 
Him that He might instruct them as to His ways, 
and direct their feet in a plain path, if they have 
but a heart to do His will. All classes are sum- 
moned, and the priests, the ministers of the Lord, 
are directed to weep between the porch and the 
altar, crying to Him before whose house they 
stand to spare His people, and not give His heri- 
tage to reproach. 

The position of the priests—between the porch 
of the temple and the brazen altar outside—is 
significant: it speaks of approach to God on the 
ground of that of which the altar speaks—the 


Outpouring of the Spirit 125 


Person and work of the Lord Jesus Christ. Only 
in His name, and because of His finished work, 
has the failing saint title to draw near. “If any 
man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, 
Jesus Christ the Righteous.” Thus the priests 
are directed to take their stand on the temple- 
side of the altar, as representing a people who, 
although in failure, are yet the redeemed of the 
Lord (vers. 16,17). 

Had there been a responsive heart to God’s 
call to contrition and self-judgment, the avenger 
would have been turned aside; Jehovah would 
have arisen in His might as their Deliverer, turn- 
ing back the judgments, and bringing in blessing 
and gladness. In the last days, the remnant who 
are to be preserved for the kingdom will take 
the place here commanded. Then all that is 
promised upon their repentance will be gloriously 
fulfilled. The northern army will be destroyed, 
and his boasted power annihilated, when the Lord 
shall drive him into a land barren and desolate. 
Every enemy shall be overthrown, and the arm 
of Jehovah made bare (vers. 18-20). 

It is manifestly in view of such an epoch of na- 
tional repentance that the consolatory promises 
that follow (to the end of the chapter) are given. 
The land is called upon to rejoice because of the 
great things the Lord is to accomplish. Even the 
lower orders of creation shall share in the bless- 
ings of the earth’s rejuvenation. It will be the 


126 Notes on Joel 


bringing-in of the liberty of the glory of the chil- 
dren of God for which the whole creation, groan- 
ing and travailing in pain, now waits (Rom. 8: 
19-23). In the present liberty of grace creation 
does not share. But the liberty of the glory will 
be all-embracing. Then “they shall not hurt nor 
destroy” in all the holy mountain; but the wolf 
and the lamb shall dwell together, “and a little 
child shall lead” the strongest and once-fiercest 
of beasts. From the vegetable kingdom as a 
whole the curse shall be lifted; the pastures of 
the wilderness shall spring into beauty and ver- 
dure; and the vine and the fig will yield abun- 
dantly—types of all food-producing plants (ver. 
22): 

In order that the fertility of the land of Canaan 
may be restored, and even marvelously surpass 
its ancient fecundity, the former and latter rains 
will be given in abundance. It is a well-known 
fact that already the God of Israel has given more 
than a hint of the literal fulfilment of this proph- 
ecy. For long centuries the latter rains had been 
withheld from Palestine, and the land that was 
once the garden of the East had become largely 
barren and desolate, scarcely able to sustain its 
scattered and meagre population. But, in our 
own times, the latter rains have returned in such 
measure that agriculture is once more in a flour- 
ishing condition, and vineyards, olive-yards and 
fig orchards abound. It is as though God were 


Outpouring of the Spirit 127 


graciously giving to the world in general, and His 
ancient people in particular (even now returning 
to the home of their fathers in some measure), an 
evidence that His eye is ever on the land He chose 
for Himself, which He covenanted to Abraham’s 
seed forever; where His only begotten Son dwelt 
in His humiliation—yea, where He was crucified, 
and which once contained His tomb, but which 
shall soon be touched by His glorious feet, when 
He descends to take His great power and reign. 
Throughout the Millennium of Christ’s reign 
(Rev. 20:6) that country will again become the 
chief garden-spot of the whole world, blessed with 
the rain in its season, and so fertile that “the 
floors shall be full of wheat, and the vats shall 
overflow with wine and oil” (vers. 238, 24). 

Then shall all the past ages of oppression and 
desolation be forgotten; for He has said, “I will 
restore to you the years that the locust hath eat- 
en, the cankerworm, and the caterpillar, and the 
palmerworm, My great army which I sent among 
you” (ver. 25). How striking the language, “My 
great army which I sent!” In the visitation re- 
ferred to in chapter 1, they were in danger of 
beholding only the plague of locusts, and for- 
getting the One who sent it. He owns it as His 
army, which He had directed against the land 
for the discipline of His people. But in the com- 
ing day of the Lord, He will abundantly make up 
for all the loss of the past. Then they shall eat 


128 Notes on Joel 


in plenty, knowing no want of any kind; while 
He who had been their Redeemer from of old will 
be the object of their praise and adoring grati- 
tude. Dwelling in His love, they shall never- 
more be put to shame, for He will dwell in their 
midst, receiving the homage of their hearts, never 
again to be displaced by the idols of the past 
(vers. 26, 27). 

Then He says: “And it shall come to pass after- 
ward” (that is, after the people of Judah have 
been restored to their land, and the nation as a 
whole brought into blessing) “that I will pour out 
My Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your 
daughters shall prophesy, your old men shall 
dream dreams, your young men shall see visions: 
and also upon the servants and upon the hand- 
maids in those days will I pour out My Spirit. 
And I will show wonders in the heavens and in 
the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke. 
The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the 
moon into blood, before, the great and the terrible 
day of the Lord come. And it shall come to pass, 
that whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord 
shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jeru- 
salem shall be deliverance, as the Lord hath said, 
and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call” 
(vers. 28-32). I have quoted this interesting and 
important passage in full, in order that the least- 
instructed reader may have it all before him, 
noting carefully its connection. It is no isolated 


Outpouring of the Spirit 129 


fragment interjected without connection with the 
balance of the book: on the contrary, the order 
is divinely perfect, and it occurs in its exact and 
proper place, in line with the events of the day 
of the Lord which the prophet has been unfolding. 

Manifestly all this can never be fulfilled till 
the people of Israel are restored to their land. 
Then God will cause His blessing to go far beyond 
them, pouring out His Spirit upon “all flesh;” 
thus bringing the spared nations into the glorious 
privileges of the millennial kingdom! Old and 
young shall be anointed with the Spirit’s unction, 
and shall be enlightened that they may dream 
dreams, see visions, and prophesy. Nor shall the 
males alone share in this, but the handmaidens 
likewise. But observe, the wonders of vers. 30 
and 31 will all take place ere this day of the Lord 
is ushered in. Then salvation shall be extended 
to all the Gentiles who had never heard the gospel 
in this dispensation of grace: “Whosoever shall 
call on the name of the Lord shall be delivered.” 
But why? The answer is, “For in mount Zion and 
in Jerusalem shall be deliverance;” that is, re- 
stored Israel will be a centre of blessing for the 
whole earth. This is not the same thing as the 
preaching of the gospel of the grace of God to- 
day. Mount Zion and Jerusalem are not now the 
depositaries of blessing for the Gentiles. The 
very contrary is true. But when the Church, the 
Body of Christ, has been caught away to be for- 


130 Noxes on Joel 


ever with the Lord (in accordance with 1 Thess. 
4:14-18), and God has once more taken up the 
Jews to make them a means of salvation to the 
heathen nations, Joel’s prophecy will be fulfilled 
to the letter. 

I think it must be evident to every careful 
reader that this is the only unforced and natural 
explanation of the passage. But this at once 
raises the question as to the apostle Peter’s use 
of it on the day of Pentecost. Are we to enter- 
tain the wretched thought that he misapplied it? 
Or, on the other hand, can it be that readers gen- 
erally have misapprehended his use of it? The 
latter alternative is, I am persuaded, the correct 
one. 

Be it noted, Peter does not say that “this is the 
fulfilment” of the prophecy. He simply finds the 
explanation of the remarkable events of that day 
of wonder in these words of Joel; and he declares, 
“This is that!’”’ In other words, he did not iden- 
tify the events. He did identify the power. That 
which had taken place on Pentecost was the very 
same thing that Joel said would take place when 
the day of the Lord had come. That the day 
spoken of had not come, Peter very well knew, 
and elsewhere has plainly declared it (2 Pet. 3: 
10). But the very same power of the Holy Spirit 
was operating in that day which shall operate 
when the kingdom is introduced by and by. There 
is here no contradiction therefore, and certainly 


Outpouring of the Spirit 131 


no misapplication. Pentecost was a sample of 
what Joel foretold; and the apostle uses the pas- 
sage illustratively, not as declaring its complete 
fulfilment at Pentecost. His own declaration in 
2 Peter 1:20 should keep any from supposing 
Peter meant to take the last verses of Joel 2 from 
their connection and apply them specifically to the 
ushering in of the Christian dispensation. 

Taken in its full connection, it will be seen the 
passage in Joel primarily refers to the bringing 
in of the kingdom—not the Church. But the 
same power that will operate in the coming day 
was manifested at Pentecost when Peter preached 
his memorable sermon. 


CHAPTER III 


THE VALLEY OF DECISION 


are to transpire in the day of the Lord, the 

prophet goes on to set forth more detailed 
information as to that long-waited-for season of 
Jehovah’s power. 

It should not be overlooked that the expression 
“the day,” or, “that day,’ so often used in con- 
nection with the ushering in of the kingdom, does 
not refer to any one day of twenty-four hours. 
On the contrary, according to the passage in 2 
Peter 3:10, already referred to, the day of the 
Lord covers the entire period from the great trib- 
ulation to the passing away of the heavens and 
earth, thus ushering in the day of God, or the 
day of eternity. 

Four dispensational days are brought before us 
in Scripture. The present is called “man’s day” 
(1 Cor. 4:8, margin). The manifestation at the 
judgment-seat of Christ is in “the day of Christ’ 
(Phil. 1:6, 10).* Then follows “the day of the 
Lord,” which is the entire period during which 
the once-rejected Lord asserts and makes good 
His title to the earth. ‘The day of God” is the eter- 
nal state, and is only mentioned in 2 Peter 3: 12. 


Se having before his soul the events that 


*“The day of Christ” in 2 Thess. 2:2 should be “the 
day of the Lord,” as a glance at any reputable critical 
version will show. 


The Valley of Decision 133 


It is therefore to this third great “day” that the 
present chapter refers, and of which the opening 
verses treat. 

“For, behold in those days, and in that time, 
when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah 
and Jerusalem, I will also gather all nations, and 
will bring them down into the valley of Jehosha- 
phat, and will plead with them there for My peo- 
ple and for My heritage Israel, whom they have 
scattered among the nations, and parted My land” 
(vers. 1, 2). The scene depicted by our Lord Him- 
self in Matt. 25:31-46 would seem to coalesce 
with this. He vividly describes the coming of the 
Son of Man in His glory to sit upon the throne 
of His glory, there to judge the living nations. 
It has long since been pointed out by others that 
this judgment-scene is something very different 
and distinct from the final judgment of the Great 
White Throne, as set forth in Rev. 20. There the 
wicked dead are judged and cast into the lake of 
fire, the righteous having been raised in glory a 
thousand years before. On the other hand, the 
judgment of the sheep and goats, as it may be 
called, is a tribunal before which appear the na- 
tions living on the earth when Christ descends 
to take the kingdom. It is pre-millennial. The 
Great White Throne is post-millennial. In Matt. 
25 the sheep are rewarded because of their treat- 
ment of Christ’s brethren, that is, the Jewish 
remnant. The goats are condemned for their 


134 Notes on Joel 


indifference, and even cruelty, to them. The same 
discriminative judgment is brought to our atten- 
tion here by Joel. 

The Son of Man will place His throne in the 
valley of Jehoshaphat. To positively locate this 
valley is an impossibility, as this is the only men- 
tion of it in Scripture. It is well known that 
there is a deep ravine now bearing this name 
just outside Jerusalem, separating the holy city 
from the mount of Olives. But it is likely that 
the name was given it only in view of this proph- 
ecy—not that it was so called when Joel spoke, nor 
yet for centuries afterward, as we have to come 
down to the fourth century of the Christian era 
before it is thus designated. If Jehoshaphat be 
understood as only an untranslated Hebrew ex- 
pression, all is clear. Then it would read, “The 
valley of Jehovah’s judgment.” 

There the Lord will sit to judge the nations 
who have oppressed and scattered His people, 
selling them into slavery and rejoicing in their 
degradation. No doubt it is God Himself who has 
permitted them thus to persecute Israel for their 
discipline; but that in no wise lessens the guilt 
of their oppressors. Therefore Tyre and Zidon, 
with all who have had a share in humiliating the 
Jew, will be recompensed according to their works 
(vers. 3-8). 

Unquestionably what is especially brought out 
in Matthew 25 is the treatment of the remnant 


The Valley of Decision 135 


witnesses, fleeing from Antichrist’s bitter perse- 
cutions. Hence to minister to them is practically 
to own the claims of the true Anointed; while to 
be indifferent to them is to tacitly consent to the 
iniquitous sway of the false prophet. Therefore 
new birth is supposed in the case of those who 
“go into life eternal.” Of this, their works were 
the proof. 

Thus we have detailed information in the New 
Testament account, which it was not God’s pleas- 
ure to reveal through Joel; but the identification 
of the judgment seems clear. 

This, the call in vers. 9 to 17 makes abundantly 
plain. The mighty men of the Gentiles are caused 
to hear an alarm and to come up to Immanuel’s 
land. Turning the implements of peace into 
weapons of war, they come in great hordes to sur- 
round Jerusalem, as predicted in Zech. 14 and 
Rev. 19. The whole land will be overrun with 
them; and all human help for the remnant of 
Israel, who cleave to the Lord, will be gone. 
Therefore they cry in the hour of their deepest 
distress, “Thither cause Thy mighty ones to come 
down, O Lord.” Knowing that the hour has 
struck when the saints shall take the kingdom, 
they turn heavenward in their affliction, calling 
for the descent of their once-rejected Messiah and 
His glorious train. The answer to their prayer is 
given in the riding forth of the warrior on the 
white horse, with all the armies of heaven, as 


136 Notes on Joel 


recorded in Rev. 19. He executes summary judg- 
ment upon the armed hosts of the nations. 

But this is not all. A sessional judgment fol- 
lows, to which all the heathen are bidden attend. 
“Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to 
the valley of Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to 
judge all the heathen round about” (ver. 12). 
This is identified with “the harvest of the earth” 
of Rev. 14: 14-16. “Put ye in the sickle, for the 
harvest is ripe.” Nor will the Gentiles alone hb» 
judged and the wheat separated from the chaff; 
but the apostate portion of the nation of Israel, 
who had owned the blasphemous claims of Anti- 
christ, will be cast as grapes fully ripe into the 
great wine-press of the wrath of God (Rev. 14: 
17-20). So we read, “Come, get you down; for 
the press is full, the vats overflow; for their 
wickedness is great” (ver. 13). 

The fourteenth verse is a graphic depicting of 
the solemn scene—a verse which has often been 
utterly misconstrued. “Multitudes, multitudes in 
the valley of decision [or threshing] : for the day 
of the Lord is near in the valley of decision!” It 
is the day of the Judge’s decisions; not a time 
when men are being called upon to decide for 
Christ. The valley of Jehoshaphat becomes as a 
great threshing-floor where the Divine Winnower 
sits to separate all that are to share His kingdom 
from those who are to go away into everlasting 
punishment. Then shall every created light fade 


The Valley of Decision 137 


away into darkness, before the presence of the 
glory of the Crucified (ver. 15)! He, who will 
be revealed as Jehovah of Hosts, “shall roar out 
of Zion, and utter His voice from Jerusalem,” 
overturning and shaking to pieces all the frame- 
work of the civil and political heavens and the 
earth, as also all religious pretension; for the 
Lord alone will be the hope of His people and the 
strength of Israel in that day (ver. 16). 

Thus shall the long-looked-for kingdom of the 
Son of Man be ushered in, and all Israel shall 
know that Jehovah their God dwelleth in Zion, 
His holy mountain. Then shall Jerusalem’s long 
period of Gentile treading-down be over; and, her 
iniquity accomplished, she shall become in very 
deed “the Holy City;” never to be trodden under 
foot of strangers forevermore. 

The final four verses apply to that glorious era; 
yet for Egypt the desolation spoken of will not 
be final, as we know from other scriptures. “And 
it shall come to pass in that day, that the moun- 
tains shall drop down new wine, and the hills 
shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah 
shall flow with waters, and a fountain shall come 
forth of the house of the Lord, and shall water 
the valley of Shittim” (ver. 18). It is a scene 
of plenty and refreshment which is presented, 
and concerning which Ezekiel adds fuller details 
in ch. 47 of his prophecy. 

Then judgment will be meted out to Egypt 


138 Notes on Joel 


and Edom for their past treatment of the people 
of Judah. Edom shall be blotted out forever as 
a nation. This the prophet Obadiah declares. 
Egypt on the other hand will be restored after 
having been punished for her sins. See Isaiah 
19: 18-25. Judah’s time of trouble shall bear 
precious fruit, leading to her full restoration and 
blessing; so she “shall dwell forever, and Jeru- 
salem from generation to generation;”’ having 
been cleansed from all their defilements, and made 
clean in His sight who will dwell in their midst 
in the city of Zion, His chosen capital. “For I 
will cleanse their blood that I have not cleansed: 
for the Lord dwelleth in Zion” (ver. 21). It 
would hardly be necessary to seek to explain this 
verse somewhat fully, were it not that in our 
day a wretchedly grotesque interpretation has 
been put upon it by deluded advocates of a dis- 
gusting modern religious fad,* whose emissaries 
frequently confuse the simple by using it as their 
proof-text. The ridiculous notion has been put 
forth that a certain spared remnant of this age, 
are to have their blood cleansed (!) from all im- 
purities that would result in natural death, so 
that they shall obtain immortality in the flesh. 
The context makes plain the fact that the words 


*T refer to the so-called “Flying Roll;” the doctrines of 
which are advocated in the misnamed “Pioneer of Wis- 
dom” which has been extensively promulgated in England 
and her colonies as also in America. 


The Valley of Decision 1389 


refer to the cleansing of literal Judah from the 
defilement of the blood of their enemies, which 
they have contracted during the unparalleled hor- 
rors of the great tribulation. They shall be 
henceforth holiness to the Lord. 

A reference to Isa. 4:4 will make this plain. 
There God speaks of the same glorious time: 
“When the Lord shall have washed away the filth 
of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged 
the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by 
the spirit of judgment, and by the spirit of burn- 
ing.” In Lam. 4:14 the prophets and priests of 
Judah are described as men who have wandered 
blindly through the streets, and “have polluted 
themselves with blood, so that men could not 
touch their garments.” Thus, by the part they 
took in slaying “the Righteous One,” all Israel 
have become polluted; but in that day the blood 
of defilement will be cleansed away and God will 
be able to dwell among them. Many other pas- 
sages could be noticed; but these are sufficient to 
show what is really intended. 

With this, Joel’s burden is concluded. He has 
carried his hearers, and readers, on to the full 
display of Messiah’s glory. Beyond that, proph- 
ecy, as connected with the earth, does not go. 
Only in the hitherto secret things of the New 
Testament do we have unfolded something of 
those things which God hath prepared for them 
that love Him, who are to share His eternal rest, 
after time has run its course and ceased to be. 


Notes on the 


PROPHECY OF AMOS 


INTRODUCTION 


than is customary concerning the minor 

prophets. He gives us, by the inspiration 
of God, several autobiographical notices of deep 
interest, which it will be well to look at briefly ere 
entering upon the study of his messages to Israel 
and the surrounding nations. 

His prophecies were given in the reigns of Uz- 
ziah king of Judah and Jeroboam II king of Is- 
rael. He describes himself as a herdman of 
Tekoa, a town in the hill-country of Judea, about 
twelve miles from Jerusalem, of which mention is 
frequently made in Scripture. Thence came the 
“wise woman” sent by Joab to persuade David to 
permit his murderer son to return to his patri- 
mony, in plain violation of all law, both human 
and divine (2 Sam. 14:2). There too, Ira the son 
of Ikkesh, one of David’s mighty men, was born 
(2 Sam. 23:26). It is noticed on numbers of 
other occasions, and even after the return from 


C): Amos, we have much more information 


Introduction 141 


Babylon, the zeal of the men of Tekoa is spoken 
of, though their nobles are reproved in connection 
with the building of the wall of Jerusalem (Neh. 
3:5, 27). A desert town, surrounded by large 
solitudes, it was a suitable place for men of 
pastoral occupation; and there Amos pursued his 
humble calling till separated by the Lord to the 
prophetic office. 

He tells us that he was neither born into the 
goodly company of the prophets, nor did he 
choose that calling for himself. But when he was 
“a herdman and a gatherer of sycamore fruit” 
(that is, the fruit of the wild fig), the Lord said 
unto him, “Go, prophesy unto My people Israel” 
(ch. 7:14, 15). This was enough for Amos. He 
was not disobedient to the voice from heaven, but, 
leaving behind the pastures of the wilderness, and 
turning his back on the place of his birth, we soon 
find him declaring the word of the Lord away up 
in the capital of the northern kingdom, greatly to 
the disgust and arousing the indignation of Jero- 
boam and his false priest Amaziah. When ordered 
to flee to his own land and do his prophesying 
there, he boldly gives his divine credentials, and 
delivers a message more searching than ever. 

Of the duration of his ministry, or the time or 
circumstances of his death, we have no record. 
But what has been vouchsafed to us is fraught 
with most important lessons. 

It is ever God’s way to prepare His servants in 


142 Notes on Amos 


secret for the work they are afterwards to accom- 
plish in public. Moses at the backside of the 
desert; Gideon on the threshing-floor; David with 
his “few sheep” out upon the hillside; Daniel re- 
fusing to be defiled with the king’s meat; John 
the Baptist in the desert; Peter in his fishing- 
boat; Paul in Arabia; and Amos following the 
flock and herding the cattle in the wilderness of 
Tekoa—all alike attest this fact. It is important 
to observe that only he who has thus learned of 
God in the school of obscurity is likely to shine 
in the blaze of publicity. 

Amos had no thought of becoming, or being 
recognized, as a prophet, as men today select “the 
ministry” as a profession. He would doubtless 
have been quite content to pursue his humble 
avocation as a small farmer, or possibly a mere 
farmer’s hand or assistant, to the end of his life, 
if such had been the mind of God for him. But 
as he followed the flock, his soul was communing 
with Jehovah. As he gathered the wild figs of 
the wilderness, his heart was meditating on the 
great issues of the soul’s relationship to God and 
the importance of walking in His ways. As he 
tended the herds he was learning wondrous les- 
sons of a faithful Creator’s love and care. And 
so, when for him “the fulness of time was come,” 
the Lord, so to speak, kindled the already pre- 
pared fuel into a flame, and the humble herdman 
became a mighty, Spirit-energized prophet of 


Introductiba 143 


God, not only to his own people, but to all Israei 
and the nations around. 

We read of no unbelieving hesitation, no par- 
leying with God, no bargaining or questioning as 
to temporal support; even as before there was no 
fleshly impatience or desire to be at the front 
attracting notice as a prophet or speaker. 
Throughout it is the record of a simple, humble 
man of God, who can wait or run as his Lord sees 
fit. In all this how much there is for our souls 
today! There are many self-made ministers 
whose inner lives are in sad contrast to their 
ministry. Many, too, insist on taking the place 
belonging to a servant of God who have never 
spent any time in His school, learning His ways, 
as did Amos. Thus their utterances are empty 
and disappointing in the extreme, as might be ex- 
pected when coming from men who had not been 
sent by the Lord. It is blessedly otherwise with 
Amos. The more we learn of the messenger, the 
more we are prepared to listen to his message. 

Those hidden years had not been wasted. Not 
only were they years in which he listened to the 
voice of God speaking to his own soul, but in 
them he was acquiring experience, and an insight 
into men and things which would be invaluable 
to him later on. Again and again in his public 
utterances he uses figures, or illustrations, which 
show how closely and thoughtfully he had ob- 
served the many things, animate and inanimate, 


144 Notes on Amos 


surrounding him in his early life. This the fol- 
lowing passages make abundantly plain: Chap- 
ters 2:13; 3:12; 4:9; 5:8; 6:12; 7:1, 2. Others 
too we shall notice as we proceed. 

The theme of the book of Amos is emphatically 
one of judgment on Israel and Judah, and the 
nations about them. 

In the first two chapters we have eight separate 
burdens, addressed respectively to Damascus, 
Gaza, Tyrus, Edom, Ammon, Moab, Judah, and 
Israel. 

The second part of the prophecy includes chaps. 
3 to 6, giving the word of the Lord to Israel, 
that is, the ten-tribed kingdom of the north. 

The third and last division takes in chaps. 7 
to 9, in which we have a series of five visions, 
with a considerable parenthesis (ch. 7: 10-17) de- 
voted to the personal history of the prophet, which 
we have already slightly noticed. The visions 
close with the declaration of millennial blessing 
and restoration, as seen in both the preceding 
books, Hosea and Joel, and generally throughout 
the Prophets. 

For though judgment be the theme, yet judg- 
ment is but to prepare the way for glory. The 
Lord will not cease till He has established right- 
eousness and blessing in all the earth. 


CHAPTERS I ann IT 


THE INDICTMENT OF THE NATIONS 


disposed to call his mean origin. He 

boldly begins with, “The words of Amos, 
who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, which he 
saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king 
of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of 
Joash king of Israel, two years before the earth- 
quake” (ver. 1). Here the prophet’s name, his 
humble calling, the place of his dwelling, and the 
date of his prophecy, are all plainly set forth. 

The earthquake referred to would doubtless 
mark a time-epoch for more than one generation; 
but we have no record by which now to locate it. 
In Jewish traditionary lore it is said to have oc- 
curred when Uzziah impiously sought to take to 
himself the office of a priest of the Lord. Josephus 
thus connects the two incidents. But of this there 
is no proof. 

Having already dwelt somewhat on the other 
points mentioned in this first verse, in the intro- 
duction, we may turn at once to the prophetic 
messages, of which, as before noted, there are 
eight in the first two chapters; five in chapter 
one, and three in the second. 


A MOS does not conceal what men might be 


146 Notes on Amos 


From verse 2 we gather that the nations ad- 
dressed are regarded in connection with Jeru- 
salem and Mount Zion. ‘There Jehovah had set 
His name. Thence He would roar in His indigna- 
tion and utter His voice in judgment, so that the 
pastures of the shepherds should mourn and the 
top of Carmel wither. 

Notice that each separate prediction begins 
with the same solemn formula, save for the 
change of the name: “For three transgressions 
of Damascus, and for four, I will not turn away 
[the punishment] thereof; because fo SEs 
the Jewish expositors generally understand to 
have the force of, “Three transgressions have I 
forgiven them, but the fourth I will visit in judg- 
ment.” It at least implies that, in His long- 
suffering, God had waited again and again, look- 
ing for some evidence of repentance ere finally 
dealing in wrath; but there was none. In three 
transgressions they had filled up the cup of their 
wickedness. In the fourth it had overflowed, and 
declared that all further testing was useless. They 
were corrupt and abominable in His sight. Judg- 
ment therefore must take its course. 

The crowning sin of each people is especially 
set forth in the terrible indictment and sentence 
combined which proceeded from the seer’s in- 
spired lips. 

Damascus had “threshed Gilead with thresh- 
ing instruments of iron.” Ruthlessly persecuting 


The Indictment of the Nations 147 


the exposed borders of Israel across the Jordan, 
they showed no mercy to age or sex, but swept 
over the land, cutting down all alike, and treat- 
ing them as grain under the flail. For this they 
should have judgment without mercy meted out 
by the Moral Governor of the Universe, whose 
eyes were upon ail their ways (vers. 3-5). 

Gaza, the ancient Philistine capital, had made 
His people their prey, taking them captive and 
selling or giving them to Edom (in type, how 
graphic a picture of false religion delivering man 
up to the power of the flesh!), and thus aiding 
this cruel unbrotherly foe to destroy and enslave 
his near kinsman. But as they had sought the 
destruction of the erring people of the Lord, His 
fire and His hand would be against Philistia, even 
to its utter destruction (vers. 6-8). 

Tyrus, the merchant city by the sea, once in 
“brotherly covenant” with Israel, in the days of 
Solomon and Hiram, had forgotten the pledges 
made, and likewise sided with Edom, delivering 
up to them the captives they had taken. There- 
fore the fire should devour the fancied impreg- 
nable wall of Tyre and blot out her palaces (vers. 
9, 10). 

Edom, ever the bitterest enemy of the seed of 
Jacob, had been unrelenting in his fury, “pursu- 
ing his brother with the sword, and casting off all 
pity.” So should the Lord forget to pity him in 
the day of His righteous wrath, recompensing to 


148 Notes on Amos 


Edom the indignities heaped upon Israel. The 
prophecy of Obadiah connects intimately with this 
passage (vers. 11,12). 

Ammon’s fiendish display of hatred against Is- 
rael, seeking by cruelty of most heinous character 
to blot out the hope of the chosen nation, that 
he might enlarge his own border, had called 
down the divine retribution upon his own guilty 
head, and he should be exposed to all the fury of 
the tempest of Jehovah in the day of the whirl- 
wind of His wrath (vers. 13-15). 

Moab, on the other hand, is not charged with 
cruelty to Israel, but with having undertaken to 
execute judgment on Edom when guilty of the 
gravest crimes himself. Therefore the judge 
should “be cut off from the midst thereof,’ and 
all their princes slain (ch. 2: 1-3). 

Thus far the prophetic messages have been 
directed against the peoples surrounding the land 
of Israel. History is the witness of their fulfil- 
ment. Gaza, Tyre, Edom, Ammon and Moab are 
now but names. Their glory has long since dis- 
appeared. Damascus still exists, but her people 
have gone into captivity and the Moslem dwells 
in her palaces. Thus have the predictions of the 
herdman-prophet been proved to be the word of 
Jehovah. 

But not only against the heathen did he lift up 
his voice. To Judah and Israel he also had to 


The Indictment of the Nations 149 


proclaim the coming of long-delayed judgment, 
because of their unholy ways. 

Judah, privileged above all others, had despised 
the law of the Lord, and refused obedience to His 
commandments. The lies of their false teachers 
had caused them to err—the prophets whom they 
preferred to the heaven-sent messengers of the 
God of their fathers. Alas, the fathers had 
turned away from their Rock, and the children 
had walked in their ways. Because of this, Jeru- 
salem’s palaces, like those of the nations, must 
be burned with fire, and the place where Jehovah 
had set His name be given up to His enemies 
(vers. 4, 5). 

The indictment of Israel is the lengthiest of all. 
The proud northern kingdom is charged with 
covetousness, licentiousness, idolatry, and yet 
with utter unconcern as to the mischief wrought. 
They sold the righteous for silver, and the needy 
for a pair of shoes. The most commonplace arti- 
cle of commerce was of more value in their cov- 
etous eyes than the cause of the poor. Living in 
the practice of uncleanness of the vilest descrip- 
tion, they yet called themselves by the holy name 
of the Lord, thus profaning it in the sight of the 
heathen. Idolatry inflamed them, and they drank 
“the wine of the condemned in the house of their 
god,” laying themselves down upon the pledged 
garments of the needy by every altar. The law 
had forbidden the keeping of the garment of the 


150 Notes on Amos 


poor as a pledge overnight; but they not only 
despised the law, but openly devoted the garments 
thus acquired to the worship of their idols. The 
judges also, contrary to all law, used the fines of 
those they condemned for the purchase of wine 
for their idolatrous festivals. This was “the wine 
of the condemned.” Thus was the Holy One of 
Israel dishonored by those who boasted in His 
name. 

Yet had He, as He touchingly reminds them, 
cast out the Amorite before them, having brought 
them up from the land of Egypt and led them 
forty years through the wilderness. He had raised 
up prophets among their sons, and Nazarites, 
devoted to Himself, among their young men. But 
they led astray the separated ones by wine, and 
refused to listen to the warnings of the prophets. 
It is a sad and pitiful picture, but how often has 
it been duplicated since! They to whom the great- 
est privileges appertain are often the greatest 
offenders. 

At last their iniquities had come to the full. 
The last sheaf had been cast upon the cart, and 
the mercy of the Lord had come to an end. There- 
fore none should stand “in that day”—the day of 
the Lord’s anger (vers. 6-16). 

How solemn the charges here recorded! Search- 
ing too are these words of old. Oh, that we who 
today are called by the name of the Lord may 
consider them well! 


CHAPTER III 


THE CHASTISEMENT OF THE CHOSEN NATION 


ITH this chapter the second division of 

\ X / the prophecy begins, going on to the end 

of chapter 6, embracing the word of the 
Lord to Israel, a last solemn remonstrance ere 
carrying out the predicted judgment we have just 
been noticing. 

It is not merely the ten tribes that Amos ad- 
dresses under the name of “sons of Israel” in this 
prophecy, but “the whole family which [the Lord] 
brought up from the land of Egypt’ (ver. 1). 
They are viewed as one nation though divided 
into two kingdoms at that time. Their special 
privileges made them far more responsible than 
their ignorant heathen neighbors. “You only,” 
He says, “have I known of all the families of the 
earth: therefore I will punish you for all your 
iniquities” (ver. 2). This is a divine principle we 
should never lose sight of. ‘Responsibility flows 
from relationship.”’ Because Jehovah had sep- 
arated Israel from the nations, and taken them 
into covenant with Himself, they were expected 
to yield that obedience which their favored posi- 
tion demanded; otherwise they must be the spe- 


152 Notes on Amos 


cial objects of His disciplinary dealing. The same 
is true as to the assembly of God in this dispensa- 
tion, viewed collectively, and of every individual 
saint likewise. We are called to walk worthy of 
our exalted vocation; and if we do not, we incur 
our Father’s discipline. Nor does chastisement 
prove that God’s heart is hardened against us; 
but the contrary. It is His love that leads Him 
so to act. The world may go on in its folly, and 
know little of such governmental care; but it must 
be otherwise with the people who are called by 
the name of the Lord. 

Verse 3 lets us into the secret of true fellow- 
ship. Two can walk together only when they are 
agreed. It is not a question of seeing all details 
alike, but of having common thoughts as to the 
ground of their communion together. God can- 
not walk with gainsayers in that intimate, happy 
sense that is here contemplated. Neither can 
saints walk together in holy association if the 
one seeks to honor God, and the other has lapsed 
into loose thoughts and evil ways. 

Beginning with verse 4, the prophet declares 
the reason for his message. Results spring from 
adequate causes. The trumpet was to be blown, 
that the people might tremble, for God was about 
to bring evil upon them. “Shall there be evil in 
the city, and the Lord hath not done it?” is His 
challenge. This verse has perturbed some, over- 
zealous for the reputation of the Lord of hosts. 


The Chastisement of the Nation 153 


But evil is, of course, calamity (not sin), as we 
have seen in the first chapter of Joel, and which 
God uses as His rod of discipline. Of this Amos 
was to warn the careless inhabitants of the cities 
of Israel. 

He has good cause to prophesy. God has re- 
vealed His secrets to him. Therefore he must 
boldly proclaim them. “The Lord God hath 
spoken; who can but prophesy?” (vers. 4-8). 
This is high ground indeed; but it is the only 
proper ground for one who essays to minister 
divine truth. If God has not spoken, then one 
man’s guess is as good as another’s; one philoso- 
pher’s speculations are as worthy of credence or 
consideration as those of his fellows. But if God 
Himself has spoken, as He has in His Word, that 
at once settles everything for the one who fears 
Him. His servant has naught to do but proclaim 
what has been revealed, rejecting “oppositions 
of science, falsely so called,” and all “vain im- 
aginations.” 

This is the value of Scripture; and of this Sa- 
tan would subtly seek to rob us at the present 
time. God has revealed His will in His Word. 
“The Lord God will do nothing, but He revealeth 
His secret unto His servants the prophets.” 
Therefore the man of faith accepts the prophetic 
writings, to which the Lord Jesus has set His 
seal, as a final court of appeal; knowing that 
“holy men of God spake as they were moved by 


154 Notes on Amos 


the Holy Ghost.” Here faith triumphs, where 
mere reason stumbles in the dark; vainly endeav- 
oring to peer into the future, to explain the past, 
or to understand the present. 

It has often been aileged by opponents of the 
inspiration of the Bible that unless we were pre- 
pared to believe that the writers of the various 
books were infallible, it was idle to talk of the 
unerring Scriptures; and this in face of the sol- 
emn declaration of the Lord Jesus that “the Scrip- 
ture cannot be broken.” But the question of 
human infallibility does not come in at all. When 
God speaks, one needs but to be obedient, not in- 
fallible, in giving out what He has made known. 
So it was with Amos and his fellow-servants of 
the prophetic band. An amanuensis need not have 
exact knowledge of the events concerning which 
he writes at the dictation of another. He hears 
the word, and transcribes accordingly. Thus can 
we understand the Old Testament writers, 
“searching what, or what manner of time, the 
Spirit of Christ which was in them did signify 
(or point out) when He testified beforehand the 
sufferings of Christ and the glories that should 
follow.” It is only unbelief that could make any 
difficulty here. 

The prophetic message is given in vers. 9 to 15. 
Israel’s dispersion is foretold; but that a remnant 
shall be saved is likewise made known. 

In the palaces of Philistia and Egypt it is to be 


The Chastisement of the Nation 155 


published that, because of their sins, the Lord God 
would no longer be a bulwark to His people. The 
nations that had once been witnesses of His 
power would now witness His righteousness. 
When His people walked not with Him, He could 
only give them up to chastisement. 

But as the Eastern shepherd ‘taketh out of 
the mouth of the lion two legs, or a piece of an 
ear; so shall the children of Israel be delivered 
that dwell in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and 
in Damascus on a couch.” The shepherd who 
lost one of the flock would have to be responsible 
for the same, unless he could bring proof that it 
was torn of beasts; therefore his anxiety to re- 
cover a portion, if only the tip of an ear, of the 
creature devoured. So shall God preserve a por- 
tion of Israel, though a very small remnant, from 
being devoured by the wild beasts of the Gentile 
empires. Their transgressions must be visited 
upon them because of their idolatrous practices, 
of which the altar at Bethel, set up by Jeroboam 
the son of Nebat, was a standing memorial. Its 
fall would involve the destruction of those who 
gloried in their wealth and reveled in luxury, 
careless of the fallen state of Israel. This is more 
fully gone into in ch. 6: 1-6, which will be noticed 
in its place. 


CHAPTER IV 


‘YET HAVE YE NOT RETURNED! 


ous means whereby God had been speaking, 

with a view to recalling them to Himself; but 
the sad result had been that they pursued their 
ways of sin regardless of warning or punishment. 
They despised the chastisement of the Lord. 

It is probably the great women of Israel who 
are addressed in vers. 1 to 3; for in place of “kine 
of Bashan,” the feminine form is used in the 
original. Luxurious, insolent, and self-pleasing, 
these haughty dames oppressed the poor and 
crushed the needy, that they might minister to 
their own carnal desires. Indifferent to the sor- 
rows their ill-gotten pleasures entailed on others, 
they feasted and rejoiced; forgetting that the 
Holy One of Israel was looking on. He had 
sworn by His holiness to visit upon them their 
sins, taking them away in the midst of their folly, 
as the angler hooks the greedy fish that fancies 
not there is danger lurking in the bait so tempt- 
ingly displayed. 

Verses 4 and 5 have been variously understood; 
some seeing therein a call to repentance seriously 
addressed to the consciences of the people. In 
this case they consider “the sacrifice of thanks- 


I: this chapter they are reminded of the vari- 


Yet have ye not Returned! 157 


giving with leaven,” to be according to the word 
of God, as set forth in Lev. 7: 18, where leavened 
bread accompanied the sacrifice of thanksgiving 
as the offerer’s acknowledgment of his own per- 
sonal unworthiness. ; 

But a thank-offering was only in place when 
the people were in a right state before God. To 
call them to the schismatic altar of Bethel, there 
to bring a thank-offering, when they needed a sin- 
offering, would surely be contrary to the mind of 
God. 

I understand the passage, therefore, to be one 
of solemn irony, after the manner of Elijah’s 
taunts to the priests of Baal. In fact, it would 
seem as though the prophet were saying, “Bring 
a sacrifice of leaven as a thank-offering, for so 
liketh you, O ye children of Israel!” There is 
no thought of the leaven here accompanying a 
slain victim or a presentation of first-fruits; but 
the leaven is the offering which they are ironi- 
cally called to bring. The whole passage is a sad 
commentary on the pitifully low state of Israel, 
whose whole system of worship was but iniquity 
and transgression, while yet they prided them- 
selves on their pomp and ritual. 

Does not He who gazes down upon the preten- 
tiousness of a guiltier Christendom regard it with 
even greater abhorrence? Where conscience is 
active it will surely lead to departure from in- 
iquity of so glaring a character. 


158 Notes on Amos 


That there was no thought in the mind of God 
of accepting a sacrifice offered at Bethel or Gilgal 
is plain from ch. 5:5. All that circled around 
these centres of apostasy was abhorrent to Him 
who had set His name in Jerusalem; though there, 
alas, it had also been profaned. 

Because of what we have been considering, He 
had sent a grievous famine upon them, “giving 
them cleanness of teeth in all their cities, and 
want of bread in all places;’’ but there had been 
no evidence of repentance, and He had to say, 
“Yet have ye not returned unto Me!’ (ver. 6). 
The rain too He had withheld, and that in such 
a way as to lead to inquiry and exercise, had con- 
science been at all active, giving rain to one city 
and withholding it from another; but again comes 
the solemn refrain, “Yet have ye not returned 
unto Me, saith the Lord” (vers. 7, 8); and with 
blasting and mildew He had smitten them, so 
that their scanty crop was ruined ere it reached 
perfection; and if the orchards, vineyards and 
gardens seemed to do well, the palmerworm (the 
locust in its most voracious form) was sent to 
destroy them. But there had been no awakening 
—conscience remained dormant. “Yet have ye 
not returned unto Me, saith the Lord” (ver. 9). 

With pestilence too He had visited them, “after 
the manner of Egypt;” the putrid carcases of 
their goodliest sons, together with their horses 
slain in battle, polluting the air so that they 


Yet have ye not Returned! 159 


breathed in disease and death. But none seem 
to have discerned who it was who afflicted them, 
and so they returned not unto Him (ver. 10). 

A great physical catastrophe, possibly an earth- 
quake, with an accompanying conflagration, had 
added to their woes. He had overthrown some 
of them after the fashion of the destruction of 
Sodom and Gomorrah, so that the survivors were 
as firebrands plucked out of the burning: yet had 
they not returned unto Him (ver. 11). Failing 
to discern His hand in all that had befallen them, 
they sought only to escape the rod, hearing it not, 
nor yet Him who had appointed it. Such is ever 
the way of man untouched by divine grace. Shut- 
ting his eyes to the most palpable evidences of 
God’s dealing, he pursues his careless way till the 
pit closes upon him.* 


* The writer passed through the California earthquake 
of April 18, 1906, and was an eye-witness of its horrors. 
Not the least solemn thing noticed was the persistent 
efforts of the preachers of all denominations to quiet the 
fears of the populace by assuring them that God had 
no part in the calamitous events that had taken place. 
Natural causes explained everything! This the Christless 
were only too ready to believe; and thus were their par- 
tially awakened consciences lulled to rest and their ears 
closed against the voice of Him who through Amos said, 
“7 have overthrown some of you!” 

From vers. 11 and 12 of this chapter, it was my solemn 
opportunity to press the truth upon many at that time, 
and not altogether, I trust, without fruit; but “the day” 
will declare it. 


160 Notes on Amos 


Because of their utter indifference, there re- 
mained only one thing more: they must meet Him 
in judgment whose warnings and acts of dis- 
cipline they had despised. “Therefore ... prepare 
to meet thy God, O Israel!” (ver. 12). 

For though they knew Him not, yet He who 
formed the mountains and created the winds, de- 
claring unto man his secret thoughts and making 
the morning darkness, treading on earth’s high 
places, was Jehovah, the mighty God of hosts 
(ver. 138). 

Him they must meet—-but how? And you too, 
my reader, have this before you, if still unsaved. 
Think well how yow will stand in that great day 
of His wrath! 

For the heliever walking carelessly, this word 
also has an application. Taking his own way, he 
may despise the chastisement of the Lord, and 
fail to hearken to His reproving voice. But not 
for long can he so continue. Sooner or later God 
must be met, and all be solemnly gone into in 
His presence. Oh, then, keep short accounts with 
Him who knows the secrets of all hearts! 


CHAPTER V 


A LAMENTATION FOR ISRAEL 


of the prophet’s lamentation over the fallen 

nation that he loved so well. They had ut- 
terly broken down as a people in their allegiance 
and fidelity to God, and on the ground of responsi- 
bility could claim no blessing whatever. If God 
take them up at all, it must be in pure grace; 
otherwise naught but judgment could be their 
portion. 

Thus has everything failed that God has com- 
mitted to man, not excepting the testimony en- 
trusted to the Church. But God has infinite re- 
sources in Himself, only to be displayed upon the 
failure of the objects of His grace. This may 
well cheer and uplift the spirits of all who sigh 
and cry for the unhappy divisions and utter 
breakdown of what should have been for testi- 
mony to Christ and the glory of God in these 
last days. Still, despondency and gloom need not 
overwhelm the soul. God may yet be entreated 
of His people. If there be brokenness and re- 
pentance manifested, He is able to do exceeding 
abundantly above all we ask or think. 

The virgin of Israel had fallen so low that she 
could never rise again—that is, so far as her own 


SS‘ and solemn are the dirge-like measures 


162 Notes on Amos 


volition was concerned; nor were there any of 
her leaders who could raise her up. But God still 
entreated, crying in the ears of any who might 
heed, “Seek ye Me, and ye shall live!” None 
could deliver but He from whom they had griev- 
ously departed. To seek to Bethel, Gilgal, or 
Beersheba, where the high places that told of 
idolatrous self-will were set up, would be all in 
vain, as ironically declared in ch. 4:4. The fact 
that a certain sacredness of association was con- 
nected with each of the places named would not 
prevent their going into captivity. Bethel was 
no longer the house of God, nor did Gilgal now 
speak of reproach rolled away. Rather had Bethel 
become a hold of demons, and Gilgal was itself 
a reproach (vers. 1-5). 

There is nothing in “succession,” whether it be 
the dream of apostolicity, or the modern notion 
prevailing in some quarters as to “the original 
ground of gathering,” and “the continuity of the 
Lord’s table.” What was once clearly of God be- 
comes readily corrupted where pride and self-will 
are at work, and may have to be turned from and 
refused, in faithfulness to the Lord, despite all 
former associations of blessedness and the mani- 
fest acknowledgment of God in the past. 

Scripture must ever be the guide—not human 
rules and assumption of authority. “That which 
was from the beginning” is the original ground— 
and only that! 


A Lamentation for Israel 163 


So Israel are exhorted to seek the Lord and live, 
“lest He break out like fire in the house of Joseph, 
and devour it, and there be none to quench it in 
Bethel” (ver. 6). Alas, the warning was unheed- 
ed; so in a very few years the threatened judg- 
ment was carried out, and the house of Joseph 
was dispossessed of their land—never to be re- 
gathered till the day of the coming glory. 

The herdman of Tekoa soars to loftiest flights 
of inspired poetry in verses 7 to 9. The “stars 
in their courses” had, no doubt, often been his 
contemplation as he watched his flocks on the hill- 
side at night. The book of Job too had evidently 
been studied, for ver. 8 is closely linked with Job 
9:9 and 38: 31. 

“Ye who turn judgment to wormwood,” he 
cries, “and cast down righteousness to the ground, 
consider the Maker of Kimah and Kesil (the 
Pleiades and Orion), even turning the shadow of 
death into morning, and who maketh the day dark 
with night; that calleth for the waters of the sea, 
and poureth them out upon the face of the earth: 
Jehovah His name; that strengthened the spoiled 
against the strong, so that the spoiled shall come 
against the fortress” (7-9). Kimah and Kesil 
cannot be identified with certainty. That they 
refer to some of the more important constella- 
tions is clear. Both in the two places in Job 
where the words occur, and in this passage, 
they are generally translated as “the seven stars,” 


164 Notes on Amos 


i.e, the Pleiades, and “Orion.” The Hebrews 
generally understood them to refer to these bril- 
liant star-groups, which display the majesty and 
glory of their Creator. The prophet calls the 
workers of iniquity to contemplate Him who 
guides the heavenly bodies, and who brought them 
into being; who causes the sun to rise in his glory, 
dispelling the darkness; and whose hand likewise 
controls the planetary movements that bring the 
night again; and who gives rain to the thirsty 
ground. With Him men have to do, whether they 
desire it or not. His eyes beheld all the unholy 
ways of the people who were called by His name. 

Wilfully rejecting light, they hated him wha 
rebuked in the gate, and abhorred him who spake 
uprightly (ver. 10). Many are their successors. 
It is a most common thing to find those walking 
carelessly, or sinfully, filled with indignation 
against any who faithfully rebuke their unholy 
ways. Easy-going, man-pleasing preachers and 
teachers are delighted in; but faithful, God-fear- 
ing men are abhorred and despised. But he who 
would stand for God must expect the opposition 
and evil-speaking of the unspiritual and worldly- 
minded. 

Knowing that he would be hated for rebuking 
in the gate, Amos nevertheless proclaims his sol- 
emn message without excuse or hesitation. He 
presses home upon their consciences the sins that 
were about to draw down coming judgment on 


A Lamentation for Israel 165 


the guilty nation. They oppressed the poor, 
thought only of their own comfort, afflicted the 
just, were bribe-takers, dealt unjustly with the 
needy in the place of judgment—the gate—and 
withal were so overbearing and insolent that it 
seemed the part of prudence to refrain from ex- 
posing their wickedness, so evil was the time 
(vers. 11-13). But God’s faithful servant covers 
nothing, using no flattering words. He manifests 
their hypocrisy, and then calls on them to “seek 
good, and not evil,” that they might live, and that 
the Lord of hosts might be with them. If the 
word was heeded, God might yet be gracious unto 
the remnant of Joseph (vers. 14, 15). 

Men like Amos are never popular with the 
mass. Better far, however, to have the approba- 
tion of One than of the many. Like Paul, he 
spoke “not as pleasing men, but God, who trieth 
the hearts.” Yet there is no railing, no cutting 
or abusive language; simply the solemn, earnest 
recital of their guilt, and a tender, loving call to 
repentance. 

If this call be unheeded, then wailing must su- 
persede their empty songs, as it did very soon, 
when all joy was darkened, and even in the vine- 
yards of gladness the lamentations of the desolate 
were heard (vers. 16, 17). 

It is remarkable how low people can fall, and 
yet how religiously and piously they can talk. 
Wretchedly vile as was Israel’s condition, there 


166 Notes on Amos 


were still to be found among them those who 
professed to desire the day of the Lord, hoping 
thereby to be delivered from their troubles—the 
fruit of their own waywardness. A woe is pro- 
nounced on such. What profit would there be for 
them in the day of the Lord? It would be as 
if a man fled from a lion, and was met by a bear. 
Seeking to escape this second danger, he flees to 
his house; but as he leans his hand against the 
wall, a poisonous serpent, concealed in some cor- 
ner, or behind some drapery, strikes him with its 
venomed fangs. There could be no escape from 
judgment. The day of the Lord is to be the day 
of manifestation, and therefore, for the wicked, 
a day of darkness, and not of light; “even very 
dark, and no brightness in it’”’ (vers. 18-20). 
Quite in harmony with this pretended desire 
for the day of the Lord was the unreality of the 
feasts and solemn assemblies. Outwardly, there 
seems to have been some pretence to honor Je- 
hovah in the reign of the second Jeroboam, but 
actually He was dishonored by the unholy prac- 
tices indulged in. Therefore He hated the feast- 
days, and would not accept their offerings. He 
looked for righteousness to roll on as a mighty 
stream in the land, not for outward forms and 
ceremonies (vers. 21-24). But, alas, their pres- 
ent unreal course had been characteristic from 
their beginning. Even in the days of the wilder- 
ness they had set up the tabernacle of their false 


A Lamentation for Israel 167 


gods beside the sanctuary of Jehovah, and had 
offered sacrifices and offerings to them through- 
out those memorable forty years. ‘Therefore will 
I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus, 
saith the Lord, whose name is The God of hosts” 
(vers. 25-27). This is intensely important, and 
worthy our most serious consideration. Here the 
Lord declares that the Assyrian captivity was the 
result of their sinful idolatry “in the wilderness!” 
Over seven hundred years had rolled by since that 
first apostasy; but as it had never been really 
judged, they must be judged for it! How this 
passage rebukes those who refuse to face the fact 
that unjudged evil is ever at work, like leaven, 
leavening the whole lump! Again we have the 
same lesson enforced which we noted at length 
in our study of Hos. 7: 4-7. Oh, for hearts to bow 
to the truth so frequently pressed in Scripture, 
and thus to be kept from the defilement of un- 
judged evil! 


CHAPTER VI 


AT EASE IN ZION! 


provoked the Lord. As before noted, Israel 

refers throughout, not to the ten tribes only, 
but to the whole nation. Therefore this division 
of the prophecy concludes with a stirring word to 
those at ease in Zion, and to those who trusted 
in the mountain of Samaria (ver. 1). Down in 
the southern kingdom, the danger threatening 
the northern one seemed far off, and they took 
comfort in the fact that Samaria would, as they 
supposed, withstand a siege long enough to give 
them plenty of opportunity to prepare if the ene- 
mies drew near. Hence they took their ease, and 
were not concerned about obeying the voice of 
God calling them to repentance, nor did they 
afflict their souls for the sorrows of their breth- 
ren. 

‘At ease in Zion” may well speak to us of that 
unexercised condition in which so many of the 
professed children of God are found at the present 
time, unheeding the special message for the mo- 
ment, and manifesting no concern as to walking 
in the power of the truth. But if God’s people 
are indifferent to that which is of importance 
in His eyes, they need not expect Him to act for 
them when difficulties and afflictions arise. 


I T was not alone the house of Joseph who had 


At Ease in Zion! 16:3 


Philistine cities, once splendid and magnificent, 
had been destroyed. Calneh, Hamath and Gath 
were but solemn reminders of past glory, and now 
in ruins. What better was Israel than these king- 
doms? They put far off the evil day, while vio- 
lence and corruption abounded within their bor- 
ders. Stretched on beds of ivory and carved 
couches, they feasted without fear on the choice 
of the flock and herd. They chanted to the sound 
of musical instruments, drank wine, and delighted 
in costly ointments; but God winds up the solemn 
indictment by declaring, ‘“‘They are not grieved 
for the breach of Joseph” (vers. 2-6). And shall 
not this have a voice for every saint of God to- 
day? Are we not in grave danger of living to 
please ourselves, rejoicing in our possessions, and 
forgetting the breach of Joseph?—forgetting the 
unhappy state of the assembly, indifferent to the 
breaches made by self-will, and which have so dis- 
honored the Lord, the Church’s glorified Head? 
Surely true love to Him will result in exercise of 
soul as to the present state of that which is so 
precious in His sight. Such exercises will lead 
to searching the Scriptures, and judging all in 
their light; to seeking to walk individually in “the 
old paths’ in which the people of God have 
walked, even if one has thus to walk alone. But, 
withal, there will of very necessity be a manifes- 
tation of that “love to all the saints” which should 
characterize every one who enters in any degree 


170 Notes on Amos 


into the truth that “there is one Body, and one 
Spirit.” 

Because of this lack of concern for the afflic- 
tion, or breach, of Joseph, the Lord could not 
show Himself strong on their behalf, but would 
abhor the excellency of Jacob, and deliver up even 
the city of David to the Gentile oppressor (vers. 
7,8). 

When at last the destruction came, the fearful 
sense of Jehovah’s wrath would close every mouth, 
even as they buried the dead, for the name of the 
Lord would be unsuited to their defiled lips (vers. 
9,10). Itis sad indeed, to be under the rod, and 
yet to be utterly unable to get into touch with 
Him who appointed it. Such is the hardening 
power of the deceitfulness of sin! 

Vers. 11 to 14 look on to the Babylonian cap- 
tivity, which followed the Assyrian invasion of 
the north over a century later. When the Chal- 
deans came in like an inundation, overflowing all 
the land, it should be as by direct command of the 
Lord, as His rod, because of Judah’s having 
turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of right- 
eousness into poisonous hemlock. The Holy One 
must Himself take sides against His own if they 
turn His truth into a lie, and walk in unclean- 
ness. So is it still. “The righteous Lord loveth 
righteousness,” and will not connect His name 
with what is contrary to it. 

With this message the second division of our 
prophet comes to a close. 


CHAPTER VII 


TEACHING BY SYMBOLS 


of five visions, symbolically setting forth 
divine judgment, and embracing chapters 7 
to 9, as noted in the Introduction. 

In verses 1 to 9 of the present chapter, three 
of these visions are described; while the balance 
of the passage gives a most interesting and in- 
structive bit of autobiography. In the first vision, 
the prophet was shown a plague of locusts (not 
merely grasshoppers), “in the beginning of the 
shooting up of the latter growth, after the king’s 
mowings.” In Palestine two crops a year were 
readily harvested. Under favorable conditions, 
“the latter growth, after the king’s mowings,” 
would have reference to the second crop, which 
would be depended on largely for the winter sup- 
plies of food and provender. But the seer be- 
holds devouring locusts destroying every tender 
shoot, leading to the heartfelt prayer on the part 
of Amos, “O Lord God, forgive, I beseech Thee: 
by whom shall Jacob arise? for he is small.” And 
the Lord hearkens to the intercession, and replies, 
“It shall not be.” 


hee last division of the book contains a series 


Li2 Notes on Amos 


Undoubtedly a desolating scourge like an army 
sweeping all before it, leaving no remnant, was 
symbolized by the locusts. As in Moses’ day, 
the anger of the Lord was kindled, and would 
have destroyed the nation; but the intercession 
of the mediator interposed. God loves to be en- 
treated. He delights to answer when He hears 
the cry of such as bear His needy people on their 
heart. 

In the second vision (vers. 4-6), Amos beheld 
a devouring fire of such intensity that it licked 
up in its fury the waters of the great deep, “and 
did eat up a part.” It is again threatened judg- 
ment of the fiercest character, yet not making a 
full end. Once more the cry comes from the 
heart of the man of God, “O Lord God, cease, I 
beseech Thee: by whom shall Jacob arise? for he 
is small.” And again, in grace, the response is 
given, “This also shall not be, saith the Lord.” 

It was the awfulness of overwhelming wrath 
without discrimination, falling on all alike, that 
appalled the prophet. Therefore in the next vision 
he is shown that which assures him that each one 
shall be dealt with according to his own iniquity. 

The Lord stood upon a wall, to test its correct- 
ness by the plumb-line in His hand; and cried, 
“Amos, what seest thou?’ The answer is given, 
“A plumb-line.” The Lord replies, “Behold, I will 
set a plumb-line in the midst of My people Israel: 
I will not again pass by them any more: and 


Teaching by Symbols 173 


the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and 
the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste; and 
I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the 
sword” (vers. 8,9). It was a figure easily under- 
stood. No words are needed when a wall is tested 
by the plumber. If out of the perpendicular, it 
is at once manifest, to the confusion of the work- 
man. God’s unerring word is such a plumb-line. 
Unmistakably it tests every soul, manifesting 
every departure therefrom, and calling down 
judgment on the violator of it. Throughout the 
whole land of Israel that Word was despised,while 
the people took their own ways, and asked not 
counsel of the Lord. Therefore none could right- 
fully complain when they were visited according 
to their ways. Every high place in the land was 
a silent testimony to the gainsaying and disobe- 
dience of the nation. Upon them all desolation 
would fall, in the day that the sword was to be 
drawn against the house of Jeroboam. It is, of 
course, the second of the name that is referred to 
—the monarch in whose reign Amos uttered his 
prophecies. 

Amaziah, the apostate priest of the high place 
at Bethel, hearing these solemn words, rises in 
. anger to denounce Amos as a traitor to the king. 
As head of the apostate ritualistic system, estab- 
lished and supported by Israel’s wayward kings, 
he would, if possible, get the pestilent preacher 
of the truth out of the way, because the craft 


174 Notes on Amos 


was in danger if such utterances were permitted 
in the land. Therefore he sent to Jeroboam, say- 
ing, “Amos hath conspired against thee in the 
midst of the house of Israel: the land is not able 
to bear all his words. For thus Amos saith, Jero- 
boam shall die by the sword, and Israel shall 
surely be led away captive out of their own land” 
(vers. 10,11). It was unpalatable truth indeed 
that Amos had declared. But Amaziah seems to 
have reported Amos’ words incorrectly, either in- 
tentionally so, or his own guilty conscience lead- 
ing him to misunderstand them. We have no 
record of Amos declaring that Jeroboam himself 
should die by the sword (which is manifestly not 
the case, see 2 Kings 14: 23-29), but that the 
sword should be drawn against his house; which 
was fulfilled in the violent death of his son 
Zachariah (2 Kings 15:10). 

We read of no reply on the part of the king. 
That energetic monarch may have considered the 
herdman-prophet and his predictions as beneath 
his notice; or he may have feared to touch one 
who evidently was sent of God. So the enraged 
prelate is left to deal with the intrusive preacher 
himself. He reasons with him, bidding him con- 
sider that he is trespassing in a parish that be- 
longs to another! “O thou seer,” he says, “go, 
flee thee away into the land of Judah, and there 
eat bread, and prophesy there: but prophesy not 
again any more at Bethel: for it is the king’s 


Teaching by Symbols 175 


sanctuary, and it is the king’s court (or palace)” 
(vers. 12,18). It is an oft-repeated complaint 
this, on the part of man-made priests and preach- 
ers, that Spirit-sent men of God must not fish in 
the waters which they claim, nor touch any of 
their flock. Looking on God’s heritage as their 
particular allotted portion, they cannot brook the 
untrammeled servant who comes with the plain 
word of the Lord, seeking not financial or other 
gain, but simply declaring the whole counsel of 
God. Being a hireling himself, Amaziah intimates 
that Amos is the same, when he urges him to go 
to Judah, and ‘“‘there eat bread.” He cannot con- 
ceive of one going forth to proclaim God’s word 
who has not his eye on a good living. His own 
covetous heart led him to consider the office of 
high priest as a desirable means of livelihood, 
and he takes it for granted that Amos, in his 
way, is as much a professional man as himself. 

Then too he arrogates to himself the right to 
be the supreme minister and spiritual adviser of 
the king and people at Bethel. It was what we 
today would call a cathedral city, and Amaziah 
was its ecclesiastical head. Away with this un- 
licensed interloper from the south. 

Amos modestly and faithfully answers the 
haughty and indignant priest. “I was no prophet, 
neither was I a prophet’s son,” he replies. He 
was neither a professional seer, nor did he obtain 
his appointment through human hands, nor by 


176 Notes on Amos 


descent. “But I was a herdman, and a gatherer 
of sycamore fruit (the wild fig of Palestine) : and 
the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the 
Lord said unto me, Go, prophesy unto My people 
Israel” (vers. 14,15). Here were credentials that 
were as inexplicable to Amaziah as they have 
been to thousands of others since. Amos entered 
upon his ministry by the direct call of God. Like 
the New Testament apostle, it was “not from 
men, nor through man” (Gal. 1:1), but by divine 
appointment. In neither Testament do we ever 
read of one man empowering another to speak 
the word of the Lord. An Elijah may, at the com- 
mand of God, anoint an Elisha; or a Paul may 
choose a Silas; but God alone gives the gift and 
accredits the servant. 

But Amaziah is to hear more. As he impiously 
attempted to control divinely-given ministry, he 
must hear his own doom pronounced. “Now 
therefore hear thou the word of the Lord: Thou 
sayest, Prophesy not against Israel, and drop not 
thy word against the house of Isaac. Therefore 
thus saith the Lord; Thy wife shall be a harlot 
in the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall 
fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided 
by line; and thou shalt die in a polluted land: 
and Israel shall surely go into captivity forth of 
his land” (vers. 16, 17). 

Plain words these; and though we have no rec- 
ord further, we cannot doubt that they were ful- 


Teaching by Symbols 177 


filled to the letter. We read of no reply on the 
part of Amaziah. His conscience was on the 
prophet’s side; and that may have sealed his lips. 
How every word must have come back to him 
when, stripped of all his honors, he lifted his 
tear-dimmed eyes heavenward in the Assyrians’ 
land! 


CHAPTER VIII 


A FAMINE OF THE WORD 


vision, and its application. It will be no- 

ticed that, with the exception of the last of 
these object-lessons, all are of such a character 
as would readily come before the mind of a young 
man who had been reared in a rural district, and 
was familiar with agricultural life. Locusts are 
the dreaded plague of the Eastern farmer. Often 
too Amos may have helped combat a brush or 
forest fire, threatening destruction to crops and 
herds alike. The use of the plumb-line would be 
quite familiar to him, as stone walls were used 
almost exclusively both in dwellings and en- 
closures under special cultivation. And the sub- 
ject of this fourth vision would be as familiar 
as the rest. 

The Lord showed him a basket of summer- 
fruit; that is, overripe fruit, which could no 
longer be preserved. In reply to His inquiry, 
“Amos, what seest thou?” the prophet answers, 
“A basket of summer-fruit.” Then comes the 
explanation of the simple symbol. Israel had be- 
come like a decaying fruit. The end was near— 
the time of being cast away. No longer would 
grace be extended to those who had rejected it 


ck opening verses (1-3) contain the fourth 


A Famine of the Word 179 


so repeatedly. The temple songs would be changed 
to woeful cries of anguish and despair, while the 
dead bodies of the despisers of God’s message 
would fill the cities, and be cast out in silence. 

Accompanying this declaration that the end 
had come, we have a solemn summing-up of the 
sin of the people. They swallowed up the needy 
in their covetousness, making the poor of the 
land to fail, as in the last days of James 5: 1-6, 
where the word is, “Ye have heaped treasure to- 
gether in (not for) the last days!’ 

This same covetous spirit made the appointed 
feasts and the sabbaths a burden. Outwardly 
they observed them, but they longed for the close 
of the day to come, that they might buy and sell, 
and get gain. 

For this the Lord sware, saying, “Surely I will 
never forget any of their works.” All were un- 
der His holy eye. All were noted in His book. 
All should be faced at His judgment-seat! If the 
eye of an unsaved sinner rests on this page, oh, 
let me press upon you this statement in all its 
solemnity. You may forget your own works, so 
great may be the number of your sins; but God 
has declared He will ever remember them. And 
if He thus remembers, you must be banished 
from His presence forever. But of all who now 
judge themselves and own their guilt, trusting 
the One who died to save, “Their sins and in- 
iquities will I remember no more” (Jer. 31: 34; 


180 Notes on Amos 


Heb. 10:17). Are your sins then, remembered 
or forgotten, dear reader ? 

For Israel’s sins the land had to tremble, and 
its people were to be carried away as by the 
overflowing river of Egypt, when the sun should 
go down at noon, and the earth be darkened in 
the clear day. It is a poetic figure for utter des- 
olation; the result of their grasping selfishness, 
their heartless misconduct toward the poor, and 
God’s displeasure upon their ways. Bitter would 
be the mourning in that day, when, alas, repent- 
ance would come too late to avert the threatened 
calamity, which was to be as the mourning for an 
only son, and the end be a day of woe (vers, 
4-10). 

But more: a famine was to come upon them— 
who would “swallow up the needy,” and “buy 
the poor for a pair of shoes.” It would not be a 
famine of bread, or a thirst for water, but of 
hearing the words of the Lord, which they had 
rejected. From sea to sea, as a people forsaken, 
they should wander, seeking on all sides for the 
once-despised word of the Lord; but too late now 
—they “shall not find it’! (vers. 11, 12). 

Undoubtedly this prophecy had its fulfilment 
in measure when the people of Israel were car- 
ried into Assyria. But a larger fulfilment awaits 
them in the days of Antichrist. Nor shall Israel 
and Judah alone pass through that famine. 
Guiltier Christendom, so richly blessed with the 


A Famine of the Word 181 


Holy Scriptures, will have utterly turned from 
the truth, and will be turned unto fables. The 
day will come when the grieved Spirit of God 
will have left the earth, and when the very Scrip- 
tures of truth shall, as it were, be taken from 
those who have esteemed them so lightly. 

Then “shall the fair virgins and young men 
faint for thirst,’’ because the water of life, which 
they refused, shall be withdrawn, when they are 
left to die in despair, and given up to strong 
delusion, that they might believe a lie, and will 
all be judged who obeyed not the truth, but had 
pleasure in unrighteousness. The famine will 
result, not in their turning to God, but they shall 
swear by their idols still, only to find, as in 
Elijah’s day, that there shall be none to hear, 
nor any to regard. So shall they fall, never to 
rise again (vers. 18, 14). 


CHAPTER IX 


NOT A GRAIN LOST 


parts. Verses 1 to 10 give the last of the 

five visions, and Jehovah’s recital of the 
afflictions awaiting Israel in the lands of their 
wanderings, but with the assurance that not a 
grain of His wheat shall be lost. Then, in verses 
11-15, as is customary with the prophets, the 
seer looks on to their restoration to glory and 
blessing in the last days, when their tribulations 
shall be forever past, and the nation be saved in 
the recovered remnant. 

The vision has to do, this time, with the house 
of God. The Lord is seen standing upon, or by, 
the altar. He commands to smite the lintel, or 
chapiter of the door, that the posts may shake. 
The fleeing priests and people are devoted to de- 
struction from which there can be no escape 
(ver. 1). He declares that though they dig into 
sheol, the world of spirits, or attempt to climb to 
the heavens, His hand will find them out. They 
might hide themselves on the top of lofty Carmel, 
or in the depths of the sea, but they should not 
escape the judgment their sins deserved. Even 
when in captivity among their enemies, He would 
send a sword after them, and set His eyes on 


"Te final chapter readily divides into two 


Not a Grain Lost 183 


them for evil, and not for good (vers. 2-4). Such 
was the vision: Amos uses it as a text in the 
following verses. He describes the might of the 
God they had contemned, and calls on nature to 
witness to His power and wisdom. At His touch 
the land melts and the dwellers therein mourn. 
He spreads the clouds over the heavens, and 
pours the rain upon the earth. Jehovah is His 
name (vers. 5, 6). Who, then, can withstand 
such a God, or who could expect to prosper who 
despised Him? Israel’s special privileges would 
not avail now. They were no more deserving 
than others. In nothing were they superior to 
the Ethiopians. The same One who brought 
Israel out of the land of Egypt had brought the 
Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from 
Kir. In His eyes, Israel was now but a sinful 
kingdom even worse than their neighbors. So 
He would destroy them from off the face of the 
earth. 

Nevertheless He remembered His promise to 
the fathers, and His word as to the coming Seed 
must not fail; so He excepts a remnant. He “will 
not utterly destroy the house of Jacob” (vers. 7, 
8). He will sift them among all nations as 
wheat is sifted in a sieve, but not the least grain 
shall fall to the ground. Only the sinners of 
His people will die by the sword, they who said, 
“The evil shall neither overtake nor hinder us’ 
(vers. 9,10). This is the figure the blessed Lord 


184 Notes on Amos 


uses when addressing self-confident Peter. He 
is to go into Satan’s sieve, but not for final de- 
struction; only that the chaff may be separated 
from the wheat. 

Such shall be the result of Israel’s sifting 
among the nations. They are not all Israel that 
are of Israel; that is, not all that are descended 
from Jacob are children of faith. Only those 
who bow to the word of the Lord and believe His 
testimony are the Israel of God. Upon such, a 
New Testament apostle invokes peace from God. 
These will be the wheat that will be preserved 
for the coming kingdom. 

In that day, David’s tabernacle, long fallen, 
will be again reared up, and the city of Jeru- 
salem will be rebuilt and raised up on the old 
ruins. Then shall restored Israel possess the 
land of Edom, and all the saved nations shall 
own their sway (vers. 11, 12). It is noticeable 
that this is the scripture quoted by James in the 
15th chapter of Acts to justify the call of the Gen- 
tiles, though there is probably more in his use of 
it than that. It harmonizes perfectly with the 
thought of grace going out to the nations. It also 
shows that after the present work of God in 
taking out from among the Gentiles a people for 
His name is completed, the Lord will turn His 
hand once more to Israel, and raise up the taber- 
nacle of David, fulfilling all the promises made 
through the prophets (Acts 15:16, 17). 


Not a Grain Lost 185 


In that glorious restoration period, Palestine 
shall once more be under cultivation, and made 
to rejoice and blossom as the rose. The captivity 
of Israel will be settled in their own patrimony. 
The waste cities shall be rebuilt and inhabited. 
Vineyards and gardens shall flourish, and God 
Himself shall plant His chosen people in the land 
given to their fathers and confirmed by His oath; 
“and they shall no more be pulled up out of their 
land,” to which He shall restore them, but shall 
dwell there under the beneficent sway of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. The words, ‘Saith the Lord 
thy God,” abruptly close the book. He has spoken, 
and He will perform His word for His own 
name’s sake. 


Notes on the 


PROPHECY OF OBADIAH 


THE DOOM OF EDOM 


part of the ministry of Obadiah the prophet 

as He foresaw would be for our admonition 
and edification. Brief as it is, its twenty-one 
verses are fraught with needed instruction, and 
may well be laid to heart by each saint of the 
Lord. 

Who Obadiah was, where he was born, of what 
tribe and family in Israel, his occupation, and 
the exact time in which he lived—all these are 
matters which God has not been pleased to re- 
veal. There was Obadiah in the court of king 
Ahab, of whose care for the persecuted prophets 
of the Lord we have knowledge; but he is not to 
be confounded with the writer of the little book 
now before us. Other Obadiahs are briefly men- 
tioned in lst and 2nd Chronicles; but whether 
any of them is identical with the prophet, we 
have no means of determining—nor is it at all 
important that we should know. It is the mes- 
sage, not the bearer of it, that God would occupy 
us with. 


le one chapter God has embodied for us such 


The Doom of Edom 187 


The first sixteen verses are concerned with the 
sin and the doom of Edom. The last five verses 
set forth the deliverance that is to come to the 
house of Jacob when the house of Esau shall have 
fallen to rise no more. 

Many important lessons are connected with the 
history of the two sons of Isaac and that of their 
respective houses. Before either child was born 
God made choice of Jacob, saying, “The elder 
shall serve the younger.” It was electing grace, 
and wondrous grace, surely! For who so un- 
worthy as cowardly Jacob; and who, from cer- 
tain worldly standpoints, more to be admired 
than the apparently brave and magnanimous 
Esau? But God chose Jacob, and thus manifested 
His purpose of grace. Let the reader be clear 
as to what is here spoken of. It was not a ques- 
tion of selecting Jacob for heaven and reprobat- 
ing Esau to hell. Theologians have so dreamed; 
but not in this way does Scripture speak. God 
chose Jacob to inherit the blessing of Abraham, 
and to be the conservator of the promise. In so 
doing He made Esau subject to his brother. It 
was the carrying out of a principle often noticed 
in the book of Genesis—the setting aside of the 
elder, and the giving the birthright to the youn- 
er; thus reminding us that God ever sets aside 
the first man to make the Second Man first. For 
“that was not first which is spiritual, but that 
which is natural; and afterward that which is 


188 Notes on Obadiah 


spiritual” (1 Cor. 15:46). This mystery is told 
out in the cases of Cain and Abel, Ishmael and 
Isaac, Esau and Jacob, Reuben and Joseph, and 
of Manasseh and Ephraim. 

In accordance with this, Esau and the race 
that bears his name figure in Scripture as types 
ef the flesh; Jacob, as the new man learning to 
overcome by discipline. When in the last book 
of the Old Testament God sums up, as it were, 
concerning the two families, He declares, ‘“‘I have 
loved Jacob, and hated Esau.” 

In reading the prophecy of Obadiah, we may 
trace throughout a typical as well as a natural 
bearing. What is said of Edom coalesces with 
the condemnation and final doom of the flesh— 
that hateful thing which ever vaunts itself, even 
in the breast of the believer, against all that is 
of God, but which shall at last be utterly de- 
stroyed, and become as though it had not existed. 
The future triumph of the house of Jacob, in the 
day of the glory of the kingdom, bespeaks the 
final enlargement and blessing when the flesh is 
overcome forever, and the man according to God 
alone remains. 

From the Lord a report had come concerning 
Edom, as a result of which an ambassador was 
sent among the nations, with a view to raising 
up their armies against the mount of Esau. 
Though once all-powerful, he was to be made 
small among them, and greatly despised. 


The Doom of Edom 189 


Edom had ever been the enemy of Israel, even 
as the flesh lusteth continually against the Spirit. 
When calamity came upon the house of Jacob, 
Edom had rejoiced. But now upon him judg- 
ment unsparing was to fall. This, no doubt, 
goes on to the time of the end; for it is just . 
before the kingdom is established that Edom’s 
power is to be utterly broken. There will be a 
people of his lineage dwelling in Idumea in the 
day of the last great coalition against Israel; 
but they will be overthrown: and when the rest 
of the world is brought into blessing under Mes- 
siah’s rule, they will be blotted out from under 
heaven. 

As with the flesh, so with Edom; his pride was 
insufferable. Dwelling in his Idumean heights 
and rocky fortresses, he considered himself in- 
vulnerable, and secure against all attack. But 
Jehovah declares, “The pride of thy heart hath 
deceived thee. . . Though thou exalt thyself as the 
eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the 
stars, thence will I bring thee down” (vers. 3, 
4). No power can avail when the Lord’s set 
time for his destruction is come. Edom has 
fallen into the condemnation of the devil, exalt- 
ing himself, and seeking his own glory. On the 
part of the creature this is rebellion against God, 
and cannot go unpunished. 

Nor will his desolation come as though thieves 
had broken in to steal, for having enough they 


190 Notes on Obadiah 


would have left something remaining; but in the 
day that Esau’s hidden things are searched out, 
there shall be no gleanings left. His destruction 
shall be complete (vers. 5, 6). Deceived by his 
own allies, and betrayed by those in whom he had 
trusted, the wise shall be destroyed out of the 
mount of Esau, and the mighty men of Teman 
shall be dismayed. None shall be spared, but 
every one cut off by slaughter (vers. 7-9). 

His violence against his brother Jacob has well 
merited such stern dealing. When Israel came 
out of Egypt, no ties of relationship served to 
cause the heart of the king of Edom to be kindly 
disposed to the Canaan-bound pilgrims, but they 
were forced to compass his land, thus adding 
much to the toil and weariness of their journey. 
From that day on, the seed of Esau had ever been 
the inveterate enemies of Jehovah’s favored peo- 
ple. 

When the hour of Jacob’s calamity struck, 
Edom stood complacently to one side, delighting 
in the ignominy to which his brother was sub- 
jected. The desolation of Jerusalem caused him, 
not grief, but joy. He joined with the Babylon- 
ians in casting lots for a division of the spoil 
(vers. 10, 11). All this Jehovah’s eye had seen, 
and it was an offence to Him, as being the very 
opposite of that love which reioiceth not in in- 
iquity, but rejoiceth with the truth. His sentence 
is, “Thou shouldest not have looked on the day 


The Doom of Edom 191 


of thy brother in the day that he became a stran- 
ger; neither shouldest thou have rejoiced over 
the children of Judah in the day of their destruc- 
tion; neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly 
in the day of distress. Thou shouldest not have 
entered into the gate of My people in the day of 
their calamity; yea, thou shouldest not have 
looked on their affliction in the day of their cal- 
amity; neither shouldest thou have stood in the 
crossway, to cut off those of his that did escape; 
neither shouldest thou have delivered up those 
of his that did remain in the day of distress” 
(vers. 12-14). Because of having acted so con- 
trary to every brotherly instinct, he should reap 
as he had sown, and judgment unsparing would 
soon overtake him, until of Edom it could be 
said, “They shall be as though they had not 
been” (vers. 15,16). When other nations, such 
as Egypt, Assyria, and even Sodom and Gomor- 
rah, are restored and brought into blessing in 
the millennial kingdom, Edom shall have fallen 
to rise no more. 

In this, how suited a picture we have of the 
carnal mind and its final destruction! Ever the 
enemy of the new life imparted to the children 
of God, because not subject to His law, as in its 
very nature it cannot be; rejoicing in impiety, 
and lifting up its haughty head in defiance of all 
that is holy, how much sorrow and secret 
anguish has its presence cost every conscientious 


192 Notes on Obadiah 


saint! But soon it shall be cast down to rise no 
more; soon the bodies of our humiliation shall 
be made like unto the body of Christ’s glory; 
and then shall the flesh and sin have .vanished 
forevermore. 

There are those who idly dream of a present 
destruction of the carnal mind, or a short cut to 
Canaan across the land of Edom; but it is all a 
delusion. Esau’s doom comes when Christ ap- 
pears to reign, as the end of the flesh in the be- 
liever will come at the redemption of our bodies 
when made like Himself. 

Synchronizing with the fall of Edom shall be 
the salvation of Israel, when “upon mount Zion 
shall be deliverance, and there shall be holiness” 
(or, it shall be holy). Then shall Jacob come 
into his rightful inheritance, and shall devour 
the house of Esau as fire devours the stubble, till 
“there shall not be any remaining of the house 
of Esau; for the Lord hath spoken it” (vers. 17, 
18). In that day the lands of all their former 
enemies, who had been for so long as thorns in 
their sides, shall become Israel’s possession, ‘‘and 
the kingdom shall be the Lord’s” (vers. 19-21). 

So may the believer look on with joyful confi- 
dence to the hour when the flesh and all that now 
disturbs and distresses shall be overthrown for- 
ever, and Christ alone shall be exalted. “Even 
so, come, Lord Jesus.” 


= 


Notes on the 


HISTORY OF JONAH 


INTRODUCTION 


Jonah is the only one which, in the ordi- 

nary sense of the word, does not contain 
any prophecy at all, except his announcement of 
the threatened destruction of Nineveh within 
forty days, which was not fulfilled. Yet the book 
is distinctly prophetic, and as such is twice re- 
ferred to by our Lord Jesus Christ. No spirit- 
ually-minded person can read it without discern- 
ing the fact that Jonah’s whole history, or at 
least that part of it here recorded for our in- 
struction, is in itself a prophecy, setting forth, as 
it does, the course of Israel, of whom Jonah was 
a type, or picture, and likewise exhibiting be- 
forehand the wondrous mystery of the Lord’s 
death and resurrection. 

Yet this truly sublime and heart-searching 
book has often been the butt of the ridicule of the 
worldly-wise rationalist and the puzzle of the un- 
spiritual religionist, who have never learned the 
importance of bowing to the authority of the 


A MONG these so-called Minor Prophets, 


194 Notes on Jonah 


Word of God. Time was when it was fashionable 
for men of science, themselves unconverted, to 
sneer at “Jonah’s whale” that could devour a 
man, on the ground that the anatomical ‘structure 
of the creature forbade such a supposition. But 
added light has revealed the fact that even if the 
Bible had declared the “prepared” fish to be a 
whale— which rightly read, it does not—still, the 
sperm whale, which in early ages frequented the 
Mediterranean, could have fully met the require- 
ments of the case. Thus once more it transpires 
that rationalism is irrational, and the Scriptures 
in every way worthy of credence. 

No thoughtful and conscientious child of God 
could think of questioning the inspiration of a 
book upon which the Lord Jesus has set His seal 
in the particular way that He has on this one. 
Indeed, it is a significant fact that Deuteronomy, 
the last part of Isaiah, Daniel and Jonah have 
been preeminently the books that the critics have 
sought to dispute the genuineness of; and these 
four portions of the Word of God have been au- 
thenticated in a most remarkable way by Him 
who could not lie. He who knew all things quotes 
Deuteronomy as the very word of God when 
meeting Satan in the wilderness; and when He 
reads from “the great unknown” in the syna- 
gogue of Nazareth, He finds in the words of 
“Tsaiah” the message of the Holy Ghost. In like 
manner He warns of the “abomination of deso- 


Introduction 195 


lation” spoken of “by Daniel the prophet,” and 
declares unhesitatingly that Jonah was a sign 
to the Ninevites after having been in the belly of 
the great fish. How great is the blasphemy of 
those who, in the face of all this, sit in judgment 
on these solemn portions of the God-breathed 
Scriptures, and profess to be wiser than the 
Omniscient Himself! 

Just when Jonah flourished we have no means 
of positively deciding. We learn that in the reign 
of Jeroboam the Second over Israel, a prophecy 
of Jonah’s was fulfilled; but whether it was made 
during Jeroboam’s lifetime or not, we are not 
informed. We are simply told that “he restored 
the coast of Israel from the entering of Hamath 
unto the sea of the plain, according to the word 
of the Lord God of Israel, which He spake by the 
hand of His servant Jonah, the son of Amittai, the 
prophet, which was of Gath-hepher” (2 Kings 
14:25). But this, though it would seem to indi- 
cate that Jonah lived and prophesied at that time, 
does not necessarily prove it, as he might have 
uttered his prophecy at an earlier date, only to 
be then fulfilled. Either way, as God has not 
been pleased to state definitely the time of his 
birth and death, we can leave it as, for us, a mat- 
ter of small moment. But the fact that he was 
born in Gath-hepher zs of moment, refuting, as 
it does, the self-confident words of the Jewish 
doctors, “Search and look, for out of Galilee 


196 Notes on Jonah 


ariseth no prophet.” Gath-hepher was in Gali- 
lee, and this is but an instance of how easy it is 
to carry the day by mere assumption, when dis- 
puting with those ignorant of Scripture, without 
proving one’s position by the Word of God. Need- 
ful it is to “prove all things,” holding fast only 
to that which is good. 

Unquestionably the great theme of this book 
is the divine sovereignty. The expressions “The 
Lord prepared” and “God prepared,” frequently 
repeated, would manifest this. Throughout, how- 
ever man may plan, and whatever he may at- 
tempt, it is God who is over all, and working all 
things in such a way as to bring glory to His own 
name. 

With these few introductory thoughts, we turn 
directly to the record itself. 


CHAPTER I 


THE UNWELCOME MESSAGE 


“6 OW the word of the Lord came unto 
N Jonah the son of Amittai, saying, Arise, 
go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry 

against it; for their wickedness is come up before 
Me” (vers. 1, 2). This was a most unexpected 
and uncongenial mission for an Israelite to be 
sent upon. Like the nation for whom he stands, 
Jonah was called to be the bearer of a message 
from God to the Gentiles. Israel had been sep- 
arated from the nations, not to dwell in a cold, 
formal exclusiveness, in utter indifference to the 
fate of the peoples about them, but to be a light 
in a dark world, making known the mind of God 
and manifesting the character of Jehovah to 
those who were sitting in darkness and in the 
shadow of death. In Jonah’s subsequent history 
we see pictured their failure in this respect, and 
the disasters that came upon them because of 
that failure, as also the foreshadowing of the 
day when, restored and brought again into bless- 
ing, they will once more be entrusted with a 
commission from the Most High. For that Jonah 
was really restored in soul at the end, whatever 
the unhappy state portrayed here to the last, we 


198 Notes on Jonah 


can have no manner of doubt; as, evidently, he 
himself it is who narrates, for our learning, the 
experiences he had undergone; but the very 
manner of the relation of them manifests the 
fact that it is as a recovered and chastened man 
he does so. It would not be God’s way that he 
should dwell upon this side of things himself. He 
simply lets us know something of his own pride 
and self-will, and the manner taken by the Lord 
to humble and bring him into touch with Him 
once more. 

For that it was pride and bigotry that was at 
the bottom of all his wilfulness and waywardness 
is clear enough. He knew that God was long- 
suffering, and that He delighted in mercy. He 
tells us that in the end. He therefore feared for 
his prophetic reputation; and his thoughts were 
so far from those of the Lord that he could not 
endure that grace should be shown to a Gentile 
power. He knew that of old Jehovah would have 
spared the cities of the plain had there been 
found but ten righteous. If Jehovah had so 
acted then, how could he depend upon His now 
pouring out His wrath upon Nineveh if its 
wicked inhabitants should bow to the word and 
fall before Him in repentance? 

In all this, what a picture we have of the de- 
ceitfulness of the human heart, even in a saint 
of God! And how often have we had to reproach 
ourselves for the same evil propensities being 


The Unwelcome Message 199 


‘allowed to act! How much easier is it to insist 
upon judgment of a brother, for instance, if he 
shave in any way hurt or injured me, than if it be 
against others, or against God only, that he has 
sinned! My own reputation must be maintained 
at all cost, and I must be cleared of all imputa- 
tion of blame, whatever it may mean to others! 
Have we not seen whole companies of the people 
of God thrown into sorrow and confusion in 
order that one self-willed man might have his 
way and be justified in his course?—let others 
suffer as they might. It is just the working of 
that same miserable pride of heart that is so 
strikingly portrayed for our admonition in the 
book before us. 

Rather than go to these Gentiles, and risk his 
reputation, “Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish 
from the presence of the Lord, and went down to 
Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish: 
so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into 
it, to go with them unto Tarshish from the pres- 
ence of the Lord” (ver. 3). To get away from 
the pathway of obedience is invariably to go out 
from the presence of the Lord; that is, so far as 
the reality of it is concerned in one’s own soul. 
Actually, it would be impossible to get where the 
eye of God was not upon him; but in his own 
consciousness of communion and enjoyment, the 
moment that Jonah made up his mind to act in 


200 Notes on Jonah 


disobedience, he lost the sense of the Lord’s pres- 
ence in his soul. 

As he flees, what a lot of going down there is! 
He went down to Joppa; he went down into the 
ship; he went down into the sides of the ship: 
and in the next chapter he has to confess, “I 
went down to the bottoms of the mountains’— 
down till he could go no deeper, unless he had 
sunk into the pit of woe: but that could not be; 
for, whatever his failure, he was a child of God 
still and the Lord was about to restore him in a 
marvelous manner. 

Oh, that we all might lay this to heart! The 
path of the one who acts in self-will is always a 
downward one, let the profession be what it may. 
One may boast of acting for God, and talk of 
having His approval; but if self is served instead 
of Christ, the feet will soon slide, and the steps 
will be down, down, down—till humbled and re- 
pentant, the soul turns back to God, and is ready 
to own the wrong of its behavior. 

From the next few verses we learn that God 
loved His poor, failing servant too well to per- 
mit him to prosper as he took his foolish and sin- 
ful course. “The Lord sent out a great wind into 
the sea, and there was a mighty tempest in the 
sea, so that the ship was like te be broken” (ver. 
4). God has begun to act. Now, let man try as 
he will, he will have to learn that all his power is 


The Unwelcome Message 201 


as nothing when it is with the Almighty One 
that he has to contend. 

All on the ship are at once aroused—at least 
all save the miserable man for whose sin the 
storm has come. He is sound asleep, having gone 
down into the sides of the ship—insensible to the 
anxiety and distress he has been the means of 
bringing upon so many others who had no share 
in his evil way. What a picture of one who has 
taken the first wrong step, and, though discipline 
has begun, is sleeping on in self-complacency, 
utterly unconscious of the fact that the hand of 
the Lord has been stretched out against him! 
This is the hardening through the deceitfulness 
of sin, concerning which the apostle warns us. 

Awakened at last by the ignorant heathen 
shipmaster, who has exhausted every device 
known to him to appease the fancied wrath of 
his gods, Jonah is put to shame before them all. 
The earnest question, “What meanest thou, O 
sleeper?” followed by the rousing command, 
“Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will 
think upon us that we perish not,” brings him to 
a realization of the terrible circumstances in 
which all are placed, but does not suffice to open 
his lips in confession. Accordingly, the sailors 
cast lots, and God deigns to use this means td 
point out the guilty man. “The lot is cast into 
the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the 
Lord” (Prov. 16: 33). “The lot fell upon Jonah.” 


202 Notes on Jonah 


But even then it is only in reply to the queries of 
the affrighted men that “he said unto them, I 
am a Hebrew; and I fear the Lord, the God of 
heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry 
land.” On his part, the confession seems to 
have been coolly enough made. He knows that 
his case is desperate. His feelings are no doubt 
aroused; but there is no evidence as yet that con- 
science is really in exercise. He is like one who 
has hazarded all on a false expectation, and now 
finds that he must lose, and so determines to 
lose like a man, as people say, philosophically 
reminding himself that it cannot be helped. 

The terrors of the heathen, when they realize 
the true state of affairs, might well have gone 
home to his conscience. “Then were the men 
exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why hast 
thou done this? For the men knew that he fled 
from the presence of the Lord, because he had 
told them.” Even natural consciences wil! view 
with alarm what a backslidden child of God can 
survey with a measure of equanimity. This is 
the awful effect of trifling with God and grieving 
His Holy Spirit. 

In desperation, seeing that all their efforts are 
unavailing, the mariners inquire of Jonah as to 
what they shall do, in order that the storm may 
cease. He accordingly directs them to throw him 
into the sea, owning that he knows the tempest 
was sent for his sake. Conscience is evidently 


The Unwelcome Message 203 


rousing now, but to what extent it is hard to say. 
The men hesitate to carry out his word; but when 
at last all their efforts to bring the ship to land 
proved unavailing, they prepare to do as he has 
directed them. Crying to the Lord not to lay it 
to their charge, and owning that sovereignty 
which Jonah had virtually denied (“Thou, O 
Lord, hast done as it hath pleased Thee’), they 
took up Jonah and cast him into the sea. Imme- 
diately the waters became calm, and “the men 
feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacri- 
fice unto the Lord, and made vows.” Dark and 
ignorant though they were, their hearts respond- 
ed to the mercy of God who had thus granted 
them so signal a deliverance. 

As for His unworthy servant, for him too there 
was mercy; but neverthless government must 
have its way, though the final result shall be that 
God will magnify Himself in the deliverance and 
restoration of the wanderer. ‘Now the Lord had 
prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And 
Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and 
three nights” (ver. 17). Dispensationally, it is 
Israel who, because of their failure as God’s wit- 
nesses in the earth, have been cast into the sea of 
the Gentiles, but who, despite all their vicissi- 
tudes, have been marvelously preserved by the 
Lord, and are yet to become His testimony- 
bearers to the whole world. 


CHAPTER II 


OUT OF THE DEPTHS 


HEN the scribes and the Pharisees 

\ i / hypocritically requested a sign that they 
might know for certain of the Lord’s 
Messiahship, He significantly replied: “An evil 
and adulterous generation seeketh after a sign; 
and there shall no sign be given to it, but the 
sign of the prophet Jonas: for as Jonas was three 
days and three nights in the belly of the great 
fish; so shall the Son of Man be three days and 
three nights in the heart of the earth. The men 
of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with this 
generation, and shall condemn it: because they 
repented at the preaching of Jonas; and, behold, 
a greater than Jonas is here” (Matt. 12: 39-41). 
In these solemn words He does two important 
things for us. He authenticates the story of 
Jonah, and He unfolds a marvelous typical line 
of truth set forth in that record, which we might 
otherwise have overlooked. Jonah’s experience 
is sober history. We have the word of the Son 
of God for it. Moreover, the prophet’s entomb- 
ment in the great fish and his subsequent deliver- 
ance were intended as a sign to the Ninevites, 
and a type of the death and resurrection of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. It is true that Jonah found 


Out of the Depths 205 


his suffering in the path of disobedience, and in 
Christ we contemplate with adoration the ever- 
faithful One who suffered to accomplish all His 
Father’s will; but this is only a proof of the fact 
that God ever causes the wrath of man to praise 
Him, and what would not do so He restrains. To 
the Ninevites Jonah was a man who had passed 
through death and resurrection. In this he por- 
trays the glorious mystery of the gospel. He 
who is now set forth as the object of faith, is the 
One who was delivered for our offences and 
raised again for our justification. He went into 
death, but could not be holden of it. In a fuller 
sense than Jonah ever knew, He could say, “The 
waters encompassed Me about, even to the soul.” 
But God has raised Him from the dead, thereby 
testifying His satisfaction in the work of His 
Son. This is the only sign now set before men. 
All who trust in the risen Saviour are forever 
delivered from wrath and judgment—that judg- 
ment so rightfully theirs. 

But in Jonah’s experiences we likewise have 
to trace God’s dealings with his own soul; and 
this has a moral lesson of the deepest importance 
for us. There is also, as previously intimated, 
the fact that Israel, the unfaithful witness- 
bearer, refusing the thought of grace going out 
to the Gentiles, is here pictured. Their present 
condition answers to this second chapter, as de- 
clared by the apostle Paul when he writes of ‘“‘the 


206 Notes on Jonah 


Jews, who both killed the Lord Jesus, and their 
own prophets, and have persecuted us; and they 
please not God, and are contrary to all men; for- 
bidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they 
might be saved, to fill up their sins alway: for 
the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost” 
(1 Thess. 2: 14-16). By and by their deliverance 
shall come, when they are ready to own that 
salvation is of the Lord, all undeserved by them. 
In that day they will become the messengers of 
the same boundless grace to heathen millions, 
once hated and despised. 

But we turn now to trace out, as intimated 
above, the exercises of the prophet’s soul when 
in his living tomb. 

In his affliction he cries to Him from whom he 
had been seeking to hide. Divine life, like water, 
seeks its proper level, or sphere. Because, what- 
ever his failings, Jonah is a child of God still, 
he turns instinctively to the very One he had 
been grieving, in the hour that he is brought 
to realize that he is the subject of divine dis- 
cipline. A man is a long way on the road to re- 
covery when he is ready to own the righteous- 
ness of his chastening, and when he sees that he 
is under the hand of God. Having already ac- 
knowledged to the mariners that such is the case, 
he now cries to Him who hears him even “out of 
the belly of hell.” 

The floods have compassed him about, even to 


Out of the Depths 207 


the soul; the weeds are wrapped about his head; 
all God’s waves and billows have gone over him; 
yet he will look again toward Jehovah’s holy 
temple (vers. 1-5). It is blessed indeed when the 
soul does not faint beneath the discipline of the 
Lord, nor yet despise it, but looks up to God and 
counts upon His grace, however the sense of 
merited affliction may press upon the conscience. 

But for deliverance there must be more than 
this, and for a time Jonah seems to fail to attain 
to it. He goes down to the bottoms of the moun- 
tains, but is able in the anticipation of faith to 
say, “Yet hast Thou brought up my life from 
corruption, O Lord my God.” His soul would 
have fainted within him, but he remembers the 
Lord, and is assured that his prayers shall be 
heard, and shall penetrate His holy temple. He 
is here in the place that the future remnant of 
Israel shall be in, in their experience, when the 
blindness of the present condition has passed 
away; afar off, yet, in accordance with the prayer 
of Solomon, looking toward the temple of Jeho- 
vah, though in ruins, as in the day that Daniel 
opened his windows toward Jerusalem (vers. 6, 
7). 

He exclaims, “They that observe lying vanities 
forsake their own mercy.” He had forsaken his 
own mercy when he sought to fiee from the pres- 
ence of the Lord. He knows therefore the condi- 
tion of the heathen by his own experience. Now, 


208 Notes on Jonah 


however, he is confident that he will wander no 
more; though, as we well know, his confidence 
was as yet misplaced. His heart was no more to 
be trusted in after he had been in the belly of 
the fish than before. When he cries, “I will sac- 
rifice unto Thee with the voice of thanksgiving,” 
and when he adds, “I will pay that that I have 
vowed,” there is still no response on the part of 
God. He is not yet at the end of himself. As in 
the conversion of a sinner, so it is with the res- 
toration of a saint: he must get to the end of 
himself before the Lord will undertake his case. 
The sinner must learn that he is without 
strength, and the erring saint must learn that in 
himself he is not a whit better or stronger than 
other men, ere God can manifest His grace. 

So it is here, that after prayers, pledges and 
vows have availed nothing, the crisis is reached 
when he simply owns, “Salvation is of the Lord!’ 
Then, and not till then, “the Lord spake unto the 
fish, and it vomited out Jonah on the dry land” 
(vers. 8-10). Jonah has thus, in figure, passed 
through death and resurrection. He is now ready 
to go to the great and godless city of the Nine- 
vites and declare the word of God to them. 

That he has not yet fully done with self is evi- 
dent later on; but he is now in God’s school, and 
he will have a patient and gracious Teacher. 


CHAPTER III 


DEATH AND RESURRECTION 


characters of the Old Testament, to distin- 

guish between a man in his individual and in 
his official aspect. In other words, one may be a 
type of the Lord Jesus, if looked at officially, who, 
if viewed morally, may be a most marked failure. 
This is strikingly illustrated in the case of David. 
As the anointed of the Lord, he is preeminently a 
type of the true King, the Anointed of Jehovah, 
yet to be set upon the holy hill of Zion; but ac- 
tually there is much in his life that is altogether 
opposed to the holiness and perfections of Him 
who was truly the Man after God’s own heart. 
In the present instance the same principle ap- 
plies. Jonah’s history is, as we have seen, sad 
and sorrowful in the extreme; but grace delights 
to take up just such as he: and so we find the 
Divine Expositor Himself declaring that His own 
death and resurrection were set forth in symbol 
in the experience that the prophet from Galilee 
passed through. It is as the one who has thus 
tasted death, but triumphed over it, that Jonah 
becomes the bearer of Jehovah’s message to the 
Ninevites. 


fe is of all importance, in studying the typical 


210 Notes on Jonah 


All his waywardness had not altered the 
thoughts of God as to his being sent to preach to 
these impious people. The servant might fail, but 
he is a servant still, as in the instances of Abra- 
ham and Job. The former was to intercede for 
Abimelech, “for he is a prophet,” though he had 
just denied his wife. The latter, restored in soul, 
no doubt, prays for his friends, though he had 
justified himself rather than God. There is a 
solemn and serious lesson here for those put in 
trust with the gospel, or who have a special min- 
istry to the people of God. They are judged of 
the Lord, not merely as saints, but as servants. 
Nor does failure relieve them of responsibility to 
serve, but calls ail the louder for self-judgment, 
that they may be in a right state of soul to min- 
ister in holy things. In so writing, I have no 
thought of countenancing clerical pretensions, or 
making of servants of Christ a special class who 
are supposed to be above the frailties common to 
men, and even to saints. But I only press what 
Scripture frequently insists on, that he who 
serves should do so because called of God to his 
particular ministry; and when so called, he has 
a most grave responsibility to walk accordingly. 
A one-man ministry is rightly rejected by many 
as unscriptural. An any-man ministry is equally 
so. He who runs unsent has failed even in his 
very start. 


Death and Resurrection 211 


Jonah had been called of God to his mission. 
He is given the command the second time to 
“Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and 
preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee.” In 
response there is apparently no hesitation now, 
for we read, “So Jonah arose, and went unto Nin- 
eveh, according to the word of the Lord.” His 
obedience now is as conspicuous as his former 
lack of it; but we know from the next chapter 
that he had not yet judged the point of departure 
from God. It is a serious thing to realize that 
people may become outwardly correct in their 
demeanor and zealous in the work of the Lord 
after a failure, so that none may realize that they 
are not yet restored in soul, while in reality the 
evil remains unjudged. The root of the matter is 
unreached. Certain acts may be confessed, and 
the confession may be real and genuine, so far as 
it goes; but the state of soul that led to these acts 
has not been faced in the presence of God. This 
was the great lack here, and a vital one. But 
God will have His own way of exposing the true 
state of His servant to himself, and of restoring 
his soul. 

“Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be over- 
thrown,” is the burden of his message to the 
voluptuous city. The result is just as he had 
feared. For himself, he had gladly proven that 
“salvation is of the Lord.” ‘The people of Nin- 
eveh shall prove the same; but so perverse is the 


212, Notes on Jonah 


human heart, even though it be the heart of a 
saint, that it fills Jonah with anger to see mercy 
going out to the repentant city. In a few graphic 
sentences the story of the great awakening is 
told. “So the people of Nineveh believed God, 
and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from! 
the greatest of them even to the least of them. 
For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and 
he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe 
from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and 
sat in ashes. And he caused it to be proclaimed 
and published through Nineveh by the decree of 
the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man 
nor beast, herd nor flock, taste anything: let 
them not feed, nor drink water: but let man and 
beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily 
unto God: yea, let them turn every one from his 
evil way, and from the violence that is in their 
hands. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, 
and turn away from His fierce anger, that we 
perish not?” (vers. 5-9). 

It is an open question if all the annals of re- 
vival-history could furnish a scene to parallel 
this. From the greatest to the least, all are cry- 
ing to God. It is noticeable that it is not to the 
Lord—that is, Jehovah—that they direct their 
prayers, nor of whom they speak. Here, as in all 
Old Testament Scripture, Elohim (God) and 
Jehovah are used with scrupulous exactness. 
Foolish men may stumble at the use of the two 


Death and Resurrection 213 


names: but it is because they are blinded by the 
god of this age, and thus they fail to see that 
Jehovah is the covenant name that links God 
with His people in known relationship, while 
Elohim speaks rather of sovereignty and Cre- 
atorship. Hence the sailors of chapter one right- 
ly use the broader title, or name, until, instructed 
by the erring prophet, they cry to Jehovah not 
to hold them accountable for his blood. And so, 
too, these Ninevites address their petitions to 
Elohim; and, as a result, we are told that “God 
saw their works, that they turned from their 
evil way; and God repented Him of the evil, that 
He had said He would do unto them; and He did 
it not’ (ver. 10). Would any find a difficulty 
here? Let them know that He with whom judg- 
ment is a strange work is ever ready to repent 
Himself, and manifest His grace upon the least 
evidence of a breaking down before Him, and 
contrition of heart because of sin. 


“His is love, ’tis love unbounded,— 
Without measure, without end. 
Human thought is here confounded, 
‘is too vast to comprehend.” 


Alas, that Jonah was in no condition of soul to 
enter into and enjoy such love and grace! His is 
the spirit of the elder son in the parable, as the 
next chapter makes manifest. 


CHAPTER IV 


THE REPENTANCE OF NINEVEH 


nal mind is not subject to the law of God, 

neither indeed can be.” It is a most humiliat- 
ing truth, but experience and Scripture every- 
where corroborate it. It is not that the carnal mind 
in an unconverted person merely, is so hopelessly 
evil; but this wretched principle is as unreliable 
and vile in the greatest saint as in the worst sin- 
ner. Indeed, it is when we see the working of the 
fiesh in one who is an example of piety that we 
appreciate its incurable iniquity as never before. 
No child of God dare trust the flesh. It will be- 
tray him into unholy thoughts and ways every 
time it is permitted to have control. I say per- 
mitted, purposely, for no Christian is of neces- 
sity subject to its power. Rightly viewed, it is a 
foreign thing, that should not have place for one 
moment. The believer is called upon to refuse its 
sway, and, in place of yielding his members unto 
it as though it had a necessary authority over 
him, he is called upon to make no provision for 
the flesh to fulfil its lusts. He is to reckon him- 
self dead to it, and to yield himself unto God as 
one alive from the dead. Let it be otherwise, 
and defeat is certain—the triumph of the flesh is 
assured. But if we walk in the Spirit, we shall 
not fulfil the lust of the flesh. 


TT HE Holy Spirit has declared that “the car- 


The Repentance of Nineveh 215 


Now in Jonah, here, we see a saint under the 
power of the flesh; though we cannot doubt that 
he was enabled to judge his failure at last, while 
commanded by God to put the record of it in the 
form it here bears in order that it might prove 
an admonitory lesson to thousands. No one 
doubts that it was the flesh that led to his fleeing 
from the presence of the Lord. It was the same 
power that was controlling him when he sat down 
outside the city, after delivering his message, to 
see what the Lord would do. Instead of his heart 
being filled with joy because of the repentance 
of the Ninevites, he was filled with anxiety as to 
his own reputation. 

Probably few of us realize what a strong place 
self has in our affections till something arises that 
touches our own personal dignity. It is then that 
we manifest what spirit we are of. There is more 
of the Jonah disposition about us than we like 
even to admit to ourselves. Yet to own failure 
is one of the first steps to deliverance from it. 

When all heaven was rejoicing at the repent- 
ance, not of one sinner, but of a vast multitude, 
we are told that “it displeased Jonah exceedingly, 
and he was very angry.” His state is most 
wretched, yet he is altogether unconscious of it. 
Puffed up with a sense of his own importance, 
the weal or woe of so many of his fellow-crea- 
tures is as nothing compared to his own reputa- 
tion. Yet so utterly unconscious is he of the 


216 Notes on Jonah 


wretchedness of his state of soul, that he can 
turn to God and express his shameful failure as 
though he had not failed at all; or even as though 
the failure, if there were any, was on the part of 
the Lord Himself. 

“He prayed unto the Lord, and said, I pray 
Thee, O Lord, was not this my saying, when I 
was yet in my country? Therefore I fied before 
unto Tarshish: for I knew that Thou art a gra- 
cious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and of 
great kindness, and repentest Thee of the evil. 
Therefore now, O Lord, take, I beseech Thee, 
my life from me; for it is better for me to die 
than to live.” It seems almost unbelievable that 
a servant of God could be in such a dreadful 
state of soul; but, alas, it was but an aggravated 
form of that insidious disease, pride, that so 
readily finds a congenial place for growth and 
expansion in the breast of any saint out of com- 
munion. 

The tender question of the Lord might well 
have broken Jonah down, had he not been so 
thoroughly self-occupied. “Then said the Lord, 
Doest thou well to be angry?” There is no re- 
proach: just the serious and solemn question that 
ought to have awakened him at once to his true 
condition of soul. 

How often He would press a similar question 
upon us when cherishing unholy thoughts or fee!- 
ings, or walking in our own paths and neglecting 


The Repentance of Nineveh 217 


His ways! “Doest thou well’ to be thus pleasing 
thyself and dishonoring Him? Surely not! But 
it is amazing how slow one can be to own how 
ill he is doing when he has become hardened by 
the deceitfulness of sin. 

On Jonah’s part there is no response in words; 
out, acting in self-will and wounded vanity, he 
goes outside the city, and, after building a booth, 
sits under its shadow, to see what would become 
of Nineveh and of his prophetic reputation. 

In grace God prepared a gourd, which, grow- 
ing very rapidly, soon overshadowed the petulant 
prophet, and thus sheltered him from the fierce 
rays of the almost tropical sun. Because it min- 
istered to his comfort, Jonah was exceeding glad 
of the gourd. This is the first note of joy on his 
part that we find recorded, and is in fact the 
last as well. His gladness was as truly from 
selfishness as was his sorrow. 

But God now prepares something that is to 
blast that joy. A worm is permitted to destroy 
the gourd, and then a vehement east wind is like- 
wise prepared by Him who has His way in the 
whirlwind and in the storm. The sickening heat 
almost overcame Jonah, so that he fainted; and 
in his chagrin and wretchedness he wished once 
more that he might be permitted to escape his 
trials by dying, saying, “It is better for me to 
die than to live.” 

Again God speaks: this time to inquire in ten- 


218 Notes on Jonah 


derest tone, “Doest thou well to be angry for the 
gourd?” Gloomily the offended prophet answers, 
“T do well to be angry, even unto death.” It is 
the callousness that comes from allowing sin to 
go unjudged, till all capacity to discern between 
right and wrong seems to have gone. 

The reply of Jehovah is an opening up of His 
grace that evidently accomplishes its end; for 
Jonah has no word of self-vindication to offer. 
He permits God to have the last word, and closes 
his record abruptly, as though what followed 
were of too sacred and private a nature for him 
to publish it abroad. The Lord said, “Thou hast 
had pity on the gourd, for the which thou hast 
not labored, neither madest it grow; which came 
up in a night, and perished in a night: and should 
not I spare Nineveh, that great city, wherein are 
more than sixscore thousand persons that cannot 
discern between their right hand and their left 
hand; and also much cattle?” The question is 
unanswerable. Jonah grieved for the loss of the 
gourd because it had ministered to his comfort. 
Jehovah yearned over the sinners of Nineveh be- 
cause of the love of His heart. How opposite 
were Master and servant! But we must leave the 
history where God leaves it. The rest we shall 
know at the judgment-seat of Christ. Meantime 
may we have grace given to daily judge in our- 
selves aught that, if left to develop, would lead 
us as far from Himself as Jonah wandered! 


Notes on the 


PROPHECY OF MICAH 


CHAPTER I 


THE SUMMONS TO HEARKEN 


ICAH’S prophecy, while simple in struc- 
M ture and clear in the main, yet contains 
a number of seemingly involved and 

obscure passages. In taking up its study, one 
feels more than ever the need of divine illumina- 
tion to understand aright the dark sayings so 
frequently occurring. But the theme of the book 
is plain. It is the wretched estate of all Israel 
because of their sin, and the wonderful deliver- 
ance to be brought in by Him “whose goings- 
forth have been of old, from everlasting,” yet 
who was to come out of Bethlehem-Ephratah to 
effect salvation for His people. Hence, though 
this first chapter begins with their solemn ar- 
raignment for “the transgression of Jacob” and 
“for the sins of the house of Israel,” the book 
concludes with the precious assurance that He 
whom they have offended will cast all their sins 


220 Notes on Micah 


into the depth of the sea. In all this we are on 
familiar ground, often trodden heretofore, and 
cast up as a highway by “Moses and all the 
prophets.” It is only as to details there is diffi- 
culty, and then nothing of a fundamental char- 
acter. 

Micah is called “the Morasthite,”’ that is, a man 
of Moreshah; or, as he himself calls it in verse 
14, Moresheth-gath; or, again, Mareshah, in the 
following verse, a town lying to the south-west of 
Jerusalem, and therefore in the land of Judah. 

Micah is cited by the elders of Jerusalem in 
the days of Jeremiah, a hundred years later, as 
an example of one who had prophesied ever 
against Israel, but who was not apprehended 
therefor by the godly king Hezekiah (Jer. 26: 
16-19). 

His prophecy might have been all delivered at 
one time, as there are no clear breaks in its con- 
tinuity; but it seems more likely that it consists 
of three discourses and a prayer—each of the 
former commencing with a summons to hear. In 
that case the first division would embrace chaps. 
1 and 2; the second, chaps. 3 to 5; and the third, 
chap. 6; while chap. 7 would be the fourth and 
last. 

Coming to the front a little later than Isaiah, 
Micah is his contemporary for the greater part 
of his ministry. In verse 1 we find, as also on 
examination of the book before us, that it em- 


The Summons to Hearken DOT. 


braces all Israel, not merely Judah, where the 
seer himself dwelt. 

“Hear, all ye people; hearken, O earth (or 
land), and all that therein is: and let the Lord 
God be witness against you, the Lord from His 
holy temple” (ver. 2). In spirit the people are 
called back to the days of Lev. 1:1, when the 
voice of Jehovah was heard from the sanctuary, 
setting forth the holiness that was comely in 
those among whom He dwelt. Now, He speaks 
again from the sanctuary; but, this time, to con- 
vict them of having violated His Word in every 
particular, and thus forfeited all title to blessing 
under the covenant of works entered into at Sinai 
and confirmed in the plains of Moab. They are 
summoned to let Adonai Jehovah* be witness 
against them. To do so will be to justify God 
and to condemn themselves; and for a failed peo- 
ple this is the path of blessing. 

It is a great thing to bow to the whole Word of 
God, even when it judges me and condemns my 
ways. To do so is the precursor to something 
better; but to excuse myself at the expense of 
God’s truth is a process most hardening to the 
conscience. 

In verses 3 and 4 the Lord is represented as 
coming out of His place to inquire into Israel’s 
state. The language used is highly figurative, the 


* Such is the divine title rendered here “the Lord God.” 


222 Notes on Micah 


sublimity of which must be conceded by all. Like 
voleanic fires bursting forth and rending the 
earth is the awakening of Jehovah to judge His 
people. 

The transgression of Jacob and the sins of the 
house of Israel furnish the occasion for this dis- 
play of power and wrath. Samaria, with her 
mixture of idolatrous rites and Israelitish wor- 
ship, is the transgression of Jacob. Jerusalem, 
in its treachery and apostasy, is the sin of Judah. 
Therefore Samaria was to become a desolation, 
as a vineyard given over to destruction. All the 
graven images and idols of every kind were to 
be beaten to pieces, and her “hires” (Lesser 
translates, “her wages of sin’) burned in the 
fire. Nothing shall abide the day of Jehovah’s 
fury (vers. 5-7). 

Ver. 8 seems to be language put into the mouth 
of the despoiled nation; or it may be the proph- 
et’s own picture of his bitter sorrow at the fate 
about to befall Samaria. It is an instance of the 
peculiar character of this book. 

Nothing now could stay the avenging hand, for 
“her wound is incurable!” It is solemn indeed 
when God thus has to pronounce upon the malady 
affecting those who bear His name. Like a spread- 
ing pestilence, “it is come unto Judah, [and] 
hath reached unto the gate of My people, even 
to Jerusalem” (ver. 9). The whole body was 
affected, and the whole head sick. See Isa. 1: 5, 6. 


The Summons to Hearken 226 


Alas, that the Philistine enemes of Israel 
should hear of so wretched a condition prevailing 
among those who were called “The redeemed of 
the Lord!’ ‘Tell it not in Gath, weep ye not 
loudly [there].” But “in Beth-le’-aphrah (‘the 
house of the dust’ ) roll thyself in the dust!’ (ver. 
10). The prophet plays on the word Aphrah, 
signifying “the dust.’”’ There, might fallen Israel 
well resort, and roll themselves in the dust be- 
cause of their sins. 

To city after city desolation and woe are as- 
sured. Saphir, “the fair,” shall be given up to 
shame. Zaanan, “the place of flocks,’ was to be 
without any to come forth of her portals. “The 
mourning of Beth-ezel (or, Beth-haezel, ‘the house 
at hand’) taketh from you its halting-place.” 
Here, again, the prophet is playing on the name. 
EReth-ezel was evidently what we would call a 
half-way house. It shall no longer be a halting- 
place for travelers on their way to the city of 
the great King (ver. 11). 

The dweller in Maroth (“bitterness”) finds only 
the bitter, and bewails the good that comes not. 
To Jerusalem’s gate, evil sweeps down like a 
flood; and what is so solemn is, that it is “from 
the Lord.” He it is who is judging His people 
because of their sin (ver. 12). 

The 18th verse is difficult of interpretation. 
For some reason Lachish is declared to be the 
beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion. Hence 


224 Notes on Micah 


her people shall flee before the advancing enemy. 

Neither are the two following verses suffi- 
ciently clear to dogmatize as to their explanation. 
They seem to imply an unsuccessful effort to 
form a Philistine alliance for protection from the 
common foe; but Achzib (“the lie”) shall become 
indeed that to the kings of Israel. Typically the 
passage may well point us to the coming day 
when the lie of Antichrist will be believed, and 
when he will be confided in to deliver the apostate 
nation from the onslaught of the last Assyrian; 
but all in vain. For the Assyrian shall prove to 
be in very deed the rod of Jehovah’s anger. 

Unhappy Israel, fallen so low that conscience 
no longer troubled, may well make herself bald 
and mourn in anguish for her delicate children, 
destroyed by the sins of the fathers. “They are 
gone into captivity from thee’ (ver. 16). 

The whole chapter is a dirge of unappeasable 
sorrow because the nation has forsaken Him who 
would have blessed them so richly had they but 
walked in His ways. May there be in us a dif- 
ferent spirit! Otherwise we too must learn in 
bitterness of soul the folly of departure from the 
living God. 


CHAPTER II 


IS THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD STRAITENED? 


taken into covenant relationship with Him- 
self should ever be overcomers. If it is — 
otherwise, the fault is in them—not in Him. He 
has abundant resources for the believer to draw 
upon. But where unbelief and disobedience hold 
sway, spiritual paralysis must necessarily ensue. 

Often had this been proven in Israel’s case, 
and never more so than when Micah was sent to 
them with Jehovah’s message upon his lips. Their 
state of soul at this time was wretchedly low; 
consequently their apprehension of divine things 
was so dulled that they had lost the power to 
distinguish what was of God, and what was of 
man. It is ever thus when people do not walk 
in obedience to revealed truth. They lose the 
power to distinguish truth from error, and may, 
under the deadening influence of the deceitful- 
ness of sin, do the most outrageous things, and 
calmly announce that they were for the glory of 
God: yea, and be deeply grieved if their high pre- 
tensions are not recognized and bowed to. 

In this second chapter the unrighteousness 
prevailing (as detailed in vers. 1 and 2) is given 
by God as the reason why He devised evil against 
the whole family of Israel. As they had ignored 


te is the will of God that those whom He has 


226 Notes on Micah 


His righteous claims in their dealings with each 
other, He could but measure out to them what 
they had measured to their fellows. So He told 
them He would bring evil upon them which no 
haughtiness could preserve them from. They 
would fall upon difficult days (ver. 3). Lamenta- 
tions and mourning were to succeed their careless 
songs. Their fields were to be divided among 
strangers, and none of themselves should “cast 
a cord by lot in the assembly of the Lord” (vers. 
4, 5)—that is, none would be left of Israel with 
authority to divide the land and measure it off, 
placing the landmarks accordingly. 

Unpalatable was this, and so they cry, “Proph- 
esy thou not!” Like many today, they would 
silence the messenger and forget the message. 
But God says, “They shall prophesy.” His ser- 
vants were not to be thus refused with impunity. 
On the other hand, the Word given and rejected, 
the Lord says, ‘“They shall not prophesy to these, 
that reproach may not overtake them” (ver. 6).* 

For the judgment was now decreed, and must 
surely fall. Nevertheless, He asks the questions, 
“Shall it be said in the house of Jacob, Is the 
Spirit of the Lord straitened? are these His do- 
ings? do not my words do good to him that 


*The A. V. is very confusing here. Verse 6, according 
to eminent scholars, should read, “Prophesy not! [say 
they; but] they shall prophesy: they shall not prophesy 
[indeed] to these, that reproach may not overtake them.” 


Is the Spirit of the Lord Straitened? 227 


walketh uprightly?” Surely He would have rec- 
ognized repentance if manifested in any, and 
shown Himself strong in their behalf, whatever 
the impending ruin. 

This is full of comfort and encouragement for 
any who in these last days of the Church’s his- 
tory on earth have an ear to hear what God has 
said in His Word. Nothing can now avert the 
soon-coming doom of haughty Christendom, nor 
raise up the fallen assembly of God. But wher- 
ever there is individual faithfulness, or wherever 
a few in weakness seek to heed the Word of God, 
there will be blessing, and the Lord will own all 
He can own as of Himself. 

God’s words will ever “do good to him that 
walketh uprightly.” Spiritual things “are spir- 
itually discerned,” and therefore only the upright 
and godly soul will find real profit and blessing 
in the Scriptures. But where there is exercise 
as to this, that Word will be found sufficient for 
all the needs of the pilgrim-path. There will 
never be a circumstance so trying, a crisis so 
serious, that the man of God will be left without 
furnishing unto all good works, if he be found 
feeding upon the truth. Scripture, with the Holy 
Spirit’s enlightenment, is all that is required in 
every emergency. 

But if the professed people of God “rise up as 
an enemy,” and refuse to heed His Word (as in 
vers. 8 and 9), then comes the call for separation 


228 Notes on Micah 


from what is unclean and unholy, “Arise ye, and 
depart; for this is not your rest: because it is 
polluted” (ver. 10). To continue in fellowship 
with what is opposed to God’s mind will result in 
desolation. We are called to “buy the truth, and 
sell it not.” 

With Israel, any false prophet was more ac- 
ceptable than a God-sent messenger (ver. 11). 
An evil man “speaking lies in hypocrisy,’ and 
“turning the grace of God into lasciviousness,” 
would have been a suited prophet for them in 
their fallen condition. 

Thus they set at naught the Shepherd of Israel, 
and would not follow His ways. Hence their 
casting off. Nevertheless His anger shall not 
burn forever; for the message closes with a pre- 
cious promise of restoration and blessing to be 
fulfilled in a day yet future (vers. 12, 13). God 
will Himself assemble the lost sheep of Jacob, 
gathering the remnant of Israel, and placing 
them together as flocks in His fold. If wails rise 
before them to bar their return to the land of 
their rest, He will send His breaker* t6 open a 
way for His redeemed, thus leading them in 
triumph back to Immanuel’s land, as it is writ- 
ten, “Their king shall pass before them, and the 
Lord at the head of them.” 

Happy ending when alli their discipline is ac- 
complished, and they ask the way to Zicn! 


* It is really “wall-breaker.” 


CHAPTER III 


PRINCES AND PRIESTS APOSTATE 


a summons to the heads and princes of Is- 
rael to hear the prophet’s rebuke. 

It is no longer the common people who are ad- 
dressed, but the princes, or judges, in vers. 1 to 
4, and the prophets in vers. 5 to 8. Then both 
are grouped together, the priests also being in- 
cluded, as “heads of the house of Jacob,” in vers. 
9 to 12, 

It is a solemn thing when the leaders of God’s 
people cause them to err; when those who should 
have been a bulwark for the truth turn away 
therefrom, “speaking perverse things, to draw 
away disciples after them.” 

They who should have known judgment, and 
who were raised up of God to rule the nation in 
righteousness, were the very ones who were lead- 
ing the mass astray. Often has it been so in 
the history of the Church, as well as of Israel. 
Therefore the need to test all that is taught or 
practised, by the only infallible rule, the unerring 
Word of God. If Christians are content to be 
styled “the laity,’ and leave their spiritual in- 
terests in the hands of their guides, they have 
themselves to blame if they are led in wrong 
paths. Each is responsible to exercise himself 
unto godliness, and to try the things that differ. 


T HE second division of the book begins with 


230 Notes on Micah 


It too frequently happens that leaders become 
pretentious and haughty, regarding themselves 
as “the clergy,” whose special province it is to 
find sustenance in “the ministry,” forgetting that 
to minister is to serve, not to lord it over pos- 
sessions. No pride is worse than spiritual pride. 
No pretension is more to be abhorred than eccle- 
siastical pretension. But there are never want- 
ing vain, self-confident men, who are ever ready 
to arrogate to themselves high-sounding titles 
and powers if the people love to have it so. And 
it is solemn indeed to realize that it generally is 
the people themselves who are responsible for 
this kind of thing, because of the readiness with 
which they accept the ipse dixit of some gifted 
uninspired man, rather than to search the Word 
for themselves, that they may find therein set 
forth the path for their feet. 

Here, the people were indifferent, and the 
princes lived recklessly, despising the “lower 
classes,” and flourishing in their presumption 
and avarice. In place of caring for the flock of 
God, as those who must give an account, they 
looked upon them as their lawful prey, “flaying 
the skin from off them” (vers. 2, 3). 

One is reminded of the grim jest of Pope Leo 
X, who, it is said, made the remark to his com- 
panion princes of the church, ‘What a profitable 
thing this myth about Jesus Christ has been to 
us!” And all because the Bible had been kept 


Princes and Priests Apostate 231 


from the people, and they were willing it should 
be so. 

But the hour of judgment is coming, when all 
such must answer to the great Shepherd of the 
sheep for their unholy ways. “Then shall they 
cry unto the Lord, but He will not hear them: 
He will even hide His face from them at that 
time, as they have behaved themselves ill in their 
doings” (ver. 4). 

In the second section it is “the prophets that 
make the people err,’”’ who are summoned to hear 
the Word of the Lord. The princes ruled by 
sheer power, because of the awe in which they 
were held. The prophets perverted the very 
words of the Lord, and gave false burdens, in 
order to hinder any from inquiring concerning 
the path of life. Prince and prophet have been 
blended into one splendid hierarchy in Christen- 
dom for centuries, but in our day have been 
largely divorced, so that we can readily distin- 
guish between those whose power rests on as- 
sumption of ecclesiastical character, and those 
who lead astray because of professed spiritual 
insight, entitling them to be heard as exponents 
of the truth, while perverting, or setting aside, 
the Word of God. 

But all alike, however their systems may dif- 
fer, have one characteristic mark: “They serve 
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; 
and by good words and fair speeches deceive the 


Don Notes on Micah 


hearts of the simple’ (Rom. 16:18). This was 
what marked the false prophets in Micah’s day— 
and in all days before and since. ‘Who, when 
they have something to bite with their teeth, 
cry, Peace; but who prepare war against him 
who putteth nothing in their mouths” (ver. 5)— 
such is Leeser’s graphic translation of a verse 
that in the Authorized Version is a little am- 
biguous. 

The true prophet of the Lord is not concerned 
about financial or other recompense. He goes 
forth in dependence on Him who has sent him, 
and is thus free to speak His Word, “not as 
pleasing men, but God, who trieth the hearts.” 
Every false religious system is marked by greed 
for filthy lucre, and its advocates act on the 
thought that so readily found lodgment in Si- 
mon’s heart, “that the gift of God might be pur- 
chased for money.” It is the error of Balaam, 
and is especially characteristic of the last days. 

Thus perverting the truth for personal profit, 
they darken counsel by words without knowl- 
edge. But as they have hidden the light from 
others, they shall go into the night at last The 
sixth and seventh verses are intensely solemn, 
and may well cause teachers of error to tremble. 
“Therefore the night shall be unto you, that ye 
shall not have a vision;:and it shall be dark unto 
you, that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall 
go down over the prophets, and the day shall be 


Princes and Priests Apostate Pas 


dark over them. Then shall the seers be ashamed, 
and the diviners confounded: yea, they shall all 
cover their lips; for there is no answer of God.” 
Unspeakably awful will be the awakening when’ 
those who have posed as the very oracles of di- 
. vine truth before their fellows shall have their 
eyes opened to see that they are lost and ruined 
forever; and though they cry out in the anguish 
of their despair, there will be no answer of God! 

How different was the case of Jehovah’s true 
servant! In simple confidence he could say, 
“Truly I am full of power by the Spirit of the 
Lord, and of judgment, and of might, to declare 
unto Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his 
sin” (ver. 8). Undismayed by the fear of man 
that bringeth a snare, he could faithfully pro- 
claim the mind of God, as revealed to him by the 
Holy Spirit. He was the servant not of men, 
but of Jehovah of hosts; and his ministry was in 
the energy of faith, hence in the mighty power 
of God. 

The last section is a summing up, ere the glad 
tidings of future blessing are told, of which 
chap. 4 treats. 

Abhorring judgment, and perverting all equity, 
the rulers built up Zion with blood; yet, with 
most barefaced effrontery, they declared the 
Lord was in their midst and ratified their doings. 
“The heads thereof judge for reward, and the 
priests thereof teach for hire, and the prophets 


234 Notes on Micah 


thereof divine for money: yet will they lean upon 
the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among us? 
none evil can come upon us” (ver. 11). Thus 
they made Him the minister of unrighteousness, 
and made His holy name their answer to any who 
sought to reach their consciences. 

Saints of God are called to “follow righteous- 
ness.” If this be overlooked, it is the veriest 
assumption to talk of having the Lord’s presence, 
and declaring themselves in the line of His tes- 
timony. This 11th verse may profitably be 
weighed in connection with Jer. 6: 138, where the 
condition a few years later is found not to have 
improved, but deteriorated, as is ever the case 
when evil is left unjudged. 

Because of this hardened condition, Zion was 
to be plowed as a field and Jerusalem destroyed; 
the mountain of Jehovah’s house being treated 
as the idolatrous high places of the groves. If 
righteousness be not maintained by His saints, 
God will remove their candlestick and annul their 
pretensions. He who is the Holy and the True 
will not go on with iniquity. 


CHAPTER IV 


THE FIRST DOMINION 


failure and sin is resumed, to turn our eyes 
for a little time to the glad scenes depicted 
in the first half of this chapter. 

The three opening verses are an almost exact 
duplicate of Isa. 2: 2-4. We need not inquire 
whether the charge of plagiarism should be 
brought against the elder or the younger prophet. 
We have not here to do with the literature of 
men, but with the inspired Word of God. He 
says, “The testimony of two men is true;” and 
He has given the same promise of millennial 
blessing through both Micah and Isaiah, that all 
may know that neither wrote from himself, but 
as he was moved by the Holy Ghost. It need be 
no matter of surprise that He chose to use the 
same language on each occasion. 

In the last days, the time to which all prophecy 
points, “the mountain of the house of the Lord 
shall be established in the top of the mountains.” 
The future millennial temple will not stand on 
mount Moriah, but on a magnificent table-land, 
lifted up above all the surrounding hills, after 
the land has gone through some remarkable topo- 
graphical changes, caused by a great earthquake, 


[: is refreshing indeed, ere the sad story of 


236 Notes on Micah 


which will occur when the feet of the Lord Jesus 
stand again on the mount of Olives. See Ezek. 
40: 2 and 48: 8-12; Zech. 14: 4. 

There, in commanding position, shall the house 
of the God of the whole earth be located, and 
thither shall the nations come up regularly to 
worship and to inquire the ways of Jehovah. 
From this sanctuary the law will go forth, and 
the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, the metro- 
polis of the world in the age to come. 


At last all delegated rule shall have ceased in 
the closing up of the times of the Gentiles. Hence- 
forth our once-rejected Lord Jesus shall “show 
who is that blessed and only Potentate, King of 
kings, and Lord of lords.” He shall minister un- 
erring justice, and bring in everlasting right- 
eousness. No more will nation lift up sword 
against nation; but all warlike instruments shall 
be destroyed, and the implements of peaceful 
agricultural pursuits take their place. 

In that day of universal blessing there will be 
no curse of poverty to contend with, no vexatious 
property questions to settle, no struggle to ac- 
quire or conflicts to hold what can never be prop- 
erly administered; but in contentment and com- 
fort “every man shall sit under his vine and 
under his fig tree; and none shall make them 
afraid.” What men have vainly striven to attain 
through socialist propaganda, or other equally 
impracticable economic systems, will then have 


The First Dominion Zoll 


been reached, and will be maintained for a thou- 
sand years by the personal presence of Him 
whose right it is to reign (vers. 1-4). The state- 
ment of the fourth verse is not found in Isaiah, 
but the call to walk in the ways of the Lord oc- 
curs immediately after what is here found in 
ver. 3. Micah presents the more nearly complete 
picture, and then gives the remnant’s answer to 
the exhortation of Isa. 2:5 in the lovely words, 
“For all people will walk every one in the name 
of his god, and [or, but] we will walk in the 
name of the Lord our God for ever and ever.” It 
is faith laying hold of the promise, and the be- 
liever walking now by the glory that is coming. 
But the nation to whom “the first dominion” 
is yet to be given must, ere that day of triumph, 
be scattered among all nations because of their 
sins. Therefore the Lord Himself will regather 
them ere the kingdom is set up in power. So 
the prophet goes on to tell how Jehovah will as- 
semble the halting and afflicted remnant, and 
bring them back by omnipotent power to the land 
of their fathers. The nation, as such (contin- 
uing in unbelief, and accepting the false Christ 
when he arrives), will never be restored; but a 
repentant remnant will be found in the last days 
who will become the nucleus of a new nation in 
the land. Over them ‘the Lord shall reign in 
mount Zion from henceforth, even forever.” Then 
shall the first dominion indeed have come for Is- 


238 Notes on Micah 


rael, when Jerusalem shall be the joy of the 
whole earth (vers. 6-8). 

But much had to elapse ere the glorious vision 
should be fulfilled. The daughter of Zion, as a 
travailing woman, should first pass through her 
hours of bitter anguish. She was to be carried 
to Babylon, and there made the sport of unfeeling 
Gentiles who were blind to her beauty and ignor- 
ant of her wondrous destiny. Her enemies are 
to magnify themselves against her till the hour 
when the set time to favor her has come, and 
the Lord Himself shall appear, te act the part of 
her Kinsman-Redeemer, delivering her from her 
bondage and bringing her into everlasting bless- 
ing. In that day their wealth shall be devoted 
to Him through whom all their joys shall come, 
and their substance will gladly be held at His 
bidding (vers. 9-13). 


CHAPTER V 


THE SMITTEN JUDGE 


all to be made good by Messiah, of whose 

rejection at His first coming we are now to 
read. In the Hebrew arrangement of the text, at 
the present, the first verse is taken from chap. 5, 
and made ver. 14 of chap. 4—thus divorcing the 
testimony as to the smitten Judge of Israel from 
the One born in Bethlehem, whose goings forth 
have been from the ages of eternity. It is easy to 
detect rabbinical opposition to the New Testa- 
ment narratives in this, slight as the difference 
might seem to the careless reader. 

Accepting the Hebrew arrangement, it would 
seem as though the Judge in question was simply 
one of the many rulers of Israel who would be 
treated shamefully by the northern foe. But the 
light of the New Testament makes it plain that 
the smitten One is none other than He who could 
say, “I gave My back to the smiters, and My 
cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid 
not My face from shame and spitting” (Isa. 50: 
6). He it was who came to His own, but His 
own people received Him not. In the high 
priest’s house “did they spit in His face, and 
buffeted Him; and others smote Him with the 


[oa promises we have been considering are 


240 Notes on Micah 


palms of their hands, saying, Prophesy unto us, 
Thou Christ, Who is he that smote Thee?” In 
the Roman pretorium likewise the rough soldiers 
“spit upon Him, and took the reed, and smote 
Him on the head” (Matt. 26: 67, 68, and 27: 30). 

But of Him it had been declared by the proph- 
et, “Thou, Beth-lehem Ephratah, though thou be 
little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of 
thee shall He come forth unto Me that is to be 
ruler in Israel; whose goings forth have been 
from of old, from everlasting [or, the days of 
eternity]” (ver. 2). Thus, in plain language, 
seven centuries before God incarnate appeared 
on earth, the place of His birth was distinctly 
indicated. To David’s city should this honor be 
given. This, as is well known, is the passage to 
which the scribes turned when they explained to 
Herod where Christ was to be born. They held 
prophetic truth, and searched the Scriptures: but 
the truth held not them, nor did they permit the 
Scriptures to search them. 

The lesson is important for us all. Mere famil- 
iarity with the written Word of God will only 
make us the guiltier if it be not that which con- 
trols all our ways. To read the Book; to study 
its various lines of truth; to be able to speak in- 
telligently of the great doctrinal principles of 
Scripture—and yet not to have received that 
Word in an honest heart, to be controlled and 
guided by it, is dreadful indeed! 


The Smitten Judge 241 


One has said, referring to the not uncommon, 
nor unhelpful, practice of Bible-marking, “It is 
a small thing how you mark your Bible, but it is 
of all importance that it mark you.” 

To Bethlehem, then, came the Eternal One, 
“God manifest in flesh.” Over His manger-bed 
angels hung, adoring their God and ours. A few 
shepherds and, later, some wise men from dis- 
tant lands, came to worship likewise; but, for the 
rest, Israel and the nations around went on in 
their indifferent, careless way. God the Son had 
become the Son of Man; but man, in the main, 
was unconcerned. “He was despised and rejected 
of men,” and the Judge of Israel was smitten on 
the cheek! Thus was Messiah cut off, and He 
had nothing. For this, judgment fell on the city 
that wickedly judged Him, and Jerusalem has for 
centuries been trodden down of the Gentiles, and 
shall be, “until the times of the nations are com- 
pleted”—“until the time that she which travail- 
eth hath brought forth: then the remnant of His 
brethren shall return unto the children of Israel” 
(ver. 3). Dispersed among all peoples, scat- 
tered into every country, suffering under every 
sky, Israel endures the awful curse invoked by 
her own elders, “His blood be upon us and our 
children.” 

Unto her a Son was born and a Child given ere 
she travailed for His birth. But her pains are 
yet to come. In the great tribulation, under 


242 Notes on Micah 


the personal Antichrist, she shall be in anguish 
to be delivered. Then shall she truly bring forth, 
apprehending in the Crucified her own Son and 
her Saviour! Compare Rev. 12:1-5 and Isa. 
66: 7-9, “Befcre she travailed, she brought forth ; 
before her pain came, she was delivered of a man 
child.” Therefore her pains are yet future, and 
she shall be in sore travail ere she recognizes and 
owns her Messiah. 

Then a multitude of sons shall also be hers 
when “the remnant of His brethren shall return 
unto the children of Israel.” The residue, called 
“His brethren” here, He owns Himself as “My 
brethren” in Matt. 25:40. Thus shall be fulfilled 
the word of the elder prophet, “As soon as Zion 
travailed, she brought forth her children” (Isa. 
66:8). He will be revealed as the long-waited- 
for Shepherd of Israel, who “shall stand and feed 
[or, shepherd] in the strength of the Lord,” and 
who shall give abiding rest to His regathered 
flock. His majesty and glory shall be made known 
throughout the habitable world, “for now shall 
He be great unto the ends of the earth” (ver. 4). 
It is a connected prophecy of the rejection of 
Christ when He came in lowly grace, to be suc- 
ceeded by His acceptance and world-wide ac- 
knowledgment when He comes the second time, 
in power and dignity becoming His exalted 
Person. 

But the hour of His appearance will be the 


The Smitten Judge 243 


hour of Israel’s deepest sorrow. Jerusalem shzil 
be compassed with armies. The Antichrist will 
be reigning, with blasphemous pretensions, in the 
city. The legions of the revived Roman empire 
will have entered into a league with him both of- 
fensive and defensive. From the south a fierce 
horde will be pouring into the land. From the 
north the dreaded power denominated “‘the As- 
syrian,” of whom Sennacherib was but as a type, 
will be marching down in exultant triumph, 
spreading desolation on every hand. “Then shall 
the Lord go forth, and fight against those na- 
tions, as when He fought in the day of battle” 
(Zech. 14:3), and “this [Man] shall be the 
peace.’”’ He who has now made peace with God 
for guilty men by the blood of His cross; He who, 
seated as Man on Jehovah’s throne, is our peace; 
He shall be the Peace in that day; and in Him 
weary, distracted Israel shall find their rest. 
The haughty Assyrian will be overthrown, and 
God’s chosen people delivered from his cruel 
power (vers. 5 and 6). Then, freed from ail 
their enemies, “the remnant of Jacob shall be in 
the midst of many people as a dew from the 
Lord, as the showers upon the grass,” bringing 
refreshment and blessing to all nations at the 
Lord’s bidding, and tarrying for none (ver. 7). 
The lion of Judah’s tribe shall arise in His 
might, subjecting all enemies to His sway. Thus 
shall Israel have become the head, and never- 


244 Notes on Micah 


more be the tail (vers. 8, 9). Everything that 
has exalted itself against the Lord shall be put 
down. Evil of every kind shall be rooted out of 
the scene, and righteousness will be triumphant 
to the ends of the earth (vers. 10-15). It is the 
end to which all the prophets looked forward; 
so it becomes a fitting end to the second section 
of our book. 


CHAPTER VI 


THE LORD’S CONTROVERSY 


E now enter upon the third division of 

\X/ the book. It is no longer the future 

that the prophet is especially looking 
forward to, either of joy or of sorrow; but he 
directs the attention of the people to their ways, 
and presses home upon the conscience moral 
truth of great moment. In other words, this final 
message is the practical application of what has 
gone before, and is, in large measure, of the 
same character as the major part of the prophecy 
of Jeremiah and much of Hosea. 

The mountains and the hills (an oft-used sim- 
ile for chief cities and their tributary villages) 
are called upon to give ear to the searching words 
of “the Lord’s controversy.” We are told, “The 
Lord hath a controversy with His people, and He 
will plead with Israel’ (vers. 1, 2). 

God always has a controversy with those who 
walk in disobedience. There can be no fellow- 
ship or communion while His Word is not bowed 
to. He desires truth in the inward parts: nothing 
else will satisfy “Him that is holy, Him that is 
true.” The moment the conscience is reached, 
and the heart bows before Him in true self-judg- 


246 Notes on Micah 


ment, controversy ceases, and communion is re- 
established. 

Let the reader note: it is not of union we write, 
but of something which flows from it, and which 
should ever be maintained with it—communion. 

Union implies being partakers of the common 
life of all God’s children. “He that sanctifieth 
and they who are sanctified are all of one” (Heb. 
2:11). All such are eternally united to Him 
from whom they derived that new life. This is a 
link that can never be broken. Otherwise the 
life communicated would be forfeitable, and not 
eternal. 

But communion is the normal state of one who 
has thus been made a child of God. It is the 
practical manifestation of that life in abiding 
fellowship with the Father and the Son. For the 
saints of Micah’s day it was, according to the 
revelation then made, enjoyment of Jehovah’s 
favor. This Israel had forfeited by disobedience; 
and it could only be regained by self-judgment. 
The principle abides. Only when that which is 
known to be contrary to the Word of the Lord 
is unsparingly condemned in my own life and 
walk, will I enjoy communion with God. 

That Israel might be stirred up to desire this, 
He takes them back over their early days, re- 
minding them of His patient grace with them 
from the day when He first brought them out of 
the house of bondage (vers. 3-5). He had led 


The Lord’s Controversy 247 


them like a flock through the wilderness, permit- 
ting none to curse them, but, in His holy dis- 
cipline, dealing with them Himself when they 
sinned, that they “might know the righteousness 
of the Lord.” 


All His chastening was with a view to their 
blessing. Therefore the humbled soul might well 
ask, “‘Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, 
and bow myself before the high God?’ Did He 
demand sacrifices and offerings? Was it these 
that were lacking? Would He be pleased with 
thousands of rams and myriads of rivers of oil? 
Even though one gave upon the altar his dearest 
and best, his first-born, would that avail for the 
sin of the soul? Was it by means such as these 
the interrupted communion was to be restored? 
(vers. 6, 7). 

No! It was righteousness that was lacking. 
Righteousness, then, must be maintained. ‘He 
hath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what 
doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, 
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy 
God?” (ver. 8). Only when they bowed before 
Him, to own the sin of the past, and sought 
strength to walk as here outlined, could there be 
that happy sense of the Lord’s favor which lifts 
the soul above all circumstances, and enables it 
to joy in God Himself. 

But that this might indeed be, “The Lord’s 
voice crieth unto the city, and the man of wis- 


248 Notes on Micah 


dom shall see thy name: hear ye the rod, and 
who hath appointed it!” (ver. 9). This is the 
beginning of blessing. When the soul bows be- 
fore God and owns the righteousness of His dis- 
ciplinary dealings, then he is in the place where 
restoring grace can meet him. As long as he 
kicks against the goads, so long must he go on 
under chastisement. But when he “hears the 
rod,” confessing his need of it, he has reached 
the point where restoration begins. 

The next three verses itemize the sins to which 
general reference had been made; that the people 
may the more readily pass judgment upon them. 
selves and all that is unholy in their ways. Cov- 
etousness, extortion, unrighteousness in business 
dealings, violence, deceit—all these evil things 
are the evidence of their wrong state of soul 
(vers. 10-12). Therefore governmental wrath 
must fall if there be no sign of repentance: they 
would be made desolate because of their sins. In 
vain should they seek satisfaction while the will 
was insubject and the walk opposed to holiness. 
They might sow, but they should not reap; in 
fact, all their labor should be for naught. The 
work of their hands would fail to meet the needs 
of the body till they came to themselves, like the 
prodigal, and owned their guilt (vers. 14, 15; see 
also Deut. 28: 38-40 and Haggai 1: 6). 


The chapter closes with the record of the mel- 
ancholy fact that Jehovah’s law was despised; 


The Lord’s Controversy 249 


but “the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the 
works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their 
counsels; that I should make thee a desolation, 
and the inhabitants thereof a hissing; therefore 
ye shall bear the reproach of My people” (ver. 
16). Solemnly and tenderly had the Lord plead- 
ed, and set forth the grounds of His controversy 
with them; but the words fell on deaf ears and 
calloused consciences. They seemed bent upon 
their own destruction—and these things are 
written for our admonition. May we have ears 
to hear and hearts to understand! 


CHAPTER VII 


FUTURE REPENTANCE AND BLESSING 


division, is closely allied to the book of the 
Lamentations. It is the prayer of the re- 
pentant remnant in the days of the great tribu- 
lation, the time of Jacob’s trouble. That is, the 
prophet sets forth the suited utterance of those 
who no longer walk in pride, but, humbled be- 
cause of their sin, own the justice of the Hand 
that smote them. Excuses there are none, nor 
do they look at second causes, but they accept 
all as the due reward of their deeds, and yet 
look up in faith to the God of their fathers, upon 
whose unfailing grace they count for restoration. 
The three discourses, or divisions, that have 
gone before, were all designed to lead to this de- 
sired end: so that this chapter sets forth the 
future result of the ministry which at the time 
seemed to fall to the ground. It was the Word 
of the living God, and could not return unto Him 
void, but must accomplish that for which it was 
sent. 
In the six opening verses we have a most 
graphic portrayal of conditions in the fearful 
days of the Antichrist. To the remnant it seems 


"Tass last chapter, which forms the fourth 


Future Repentance and Blessing 251 


as though the good have been destroyed out of 
the earth, and “there is none upright among 
men.” Treachery and deceit shall so abound 
that one dare not put confidence in his most inti- 
mate friend. Even the wife of his bosom may 
betray him to the unholy inquisition of that fear- 
ful time. For those be the days of vengeance de- 
scribed by our Lord in Matt. 24: 9-31, when the 
abomination of desolation shall stand in the holy 
place; as also in Matt. 10: 21-36, where He quotes 
this very passage when referring to the final 
testimony ere the appearing of the Son of Man. 

Such times have been known already in many 
places, as in the dark days of Roman Catholi- 
cism’s power; but for Israel, in a special sense, 
darker days are yet to come. 

The confidence of the remnant and their sub- 
mission to the will of God are beautifully deline- 
ated in vers. 7 to 10. Owning the righteousness 
of His dealings, they yet look up to Him in faith, 
crying, “I will wait for the God of my salvation ;” 
and they are assured that He will hear. The 
enemy may seem to triumph; but though fallen, 
they shall arise, and the Lord shall be their light 
when the darkness has become the deepest. In 
lowliness and humility they say, “I will bear the 
indignation of the Lord because I have sinned 
against Him.” This is remarkably fine, and 
shows how truly their exercises have resulted in 
the peaceable fruits of righteousness. Thus they 


252 Notes on Micah 


can count on God for deliverance, and wait in 
patience till He shall plead their cause and ex- 
ecute judgment for them, that they may glorify 
Him for His righteousness. Then shall Israel’s 
enemies, who taunted her in her forsaken con- 
dition, own that she is indeed the chosen of the 
Lord. 

“In that day’? temporal prosperity will return 
to Jerusalem, and her walls shall be rebuilt. Her 
children shall be brought back from Assyria and 
all the places whither they have been carried 
captive. Though the land shall first be desolated 
by the armies of the nations, because of the fruit 
of Israel’s doings, yet the old wastes shall be re- 
built, and the flock of Jehovah’s heritage shall 
be brought from their hiding-places and shep- 
herded in the choice pastures of Bashan and 
Gilead, “‘as in the days of old” (vers. 11-14). 

As once the Lord had brought them up in 
triumph out of the land of Egypt, He will show 
marvelous things when He arises for the salva- 
tion of His chosen in the last days. The Gentiles, 
who have despised and hated the Jew, will be 
filled with astonishment when the remnant are 
reestablished in the land of their fathers, and the 
first dominion has returned to Jacob (vers. 15- 
17). It will be a marvelous exhibition of grace, 
and of the loving-kindness of the Lord. 

No wonder the book closes with so precious an. 
ascription of adoring gratitude. ‘“‘Who is a God 


Future Repentance and Blessing 253 


like unto Thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and pass- 
eth by the transgression of the remnant of His 
heritage? He retaineth not His anger forever, 
because He delighteth in mercy. He will turn 
again, He will have compassion upon us; He will 
subdue our iniquities; and Thou wilt cast all their 
sins into the depths of the sea. Thou wilt per- 
form the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to Abra- 
ham, which Thou hast sworn unto our fathers 
from the days of old” (vers. 18-20). 

This will be the happy ending of all God’s ways 
with Israel. Established in the kingdom of the 
Son of Man, they will be brought into the blessed- 
ness of the knowledge of transgressions forgiven 2 
and sin covered. And they will trace all that 
blessing back to the smitten Judge, who came in 
grace to save, but who was despised and rejected 
by the very people who held in their hands the 
Scripture of truth, foretelling the actual things 
which they in their unbelief fulfilled. 

In the hour of their deepest anguish they will 
turn back to the same sacred books, and learn 
therefrom that the Nazarene was the long-ex- 
pected One whose goings forth have been of old, 
from everlasting. At last convinced of their 
fearful sin, the remnant will bow in bitterness of 
soul before God, owning the guilt of their fathers, 
and judging their own past unbelief. Then grace 
will act on their behalf, and restoration to their 
land and their God will follow. 


254 Notes on Micah 


From every renewed heart will burst the cry 
of worshipful praise, “Who is a God like unto 
Thee, that pardoneth iniquity?” 

Into the sea of His forgetfulness He will cast 

all their sins, justifying them freely by His grace 
through the same wondrous redemption which 
is now the ground of blessing for every Jew and 
Gentile who trusts in the name of Jesus. 
_ Thus Micah’s prophecy reaches the end <~v 
which all the prophets pointed; when the oath 
of Jehovah to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob wili be 
performed, and their seed will be established in 
their ancient patrimony, never again to be up- 
rooted, and enjoying all the blessings of the new 
covenant, confirmed by the precious blood of 
Christ. 


Notes on the 


PROPHECY OF NAHUM 


CHAPTER I 


FAITH’S REFUGE 


Jewish doctors, when summarily disposing 

of the claims of the Lord Jesus, “for out 
of Galilee ariseth no prophet.” We have already 
seen, in the case of Jonah, that their positive 
assertion was unsupported by the evidence of 
Scripture, to which they so coolly appealed. The 
son of Amittai was unquestionably out of Galilee. 
There ar2 the best of reasons for believing the 
same of Nahum. He is called the Elkoshite; that 
is, a man from Elkosh, or, as it is sometimes 
written, Elkesi (ver. 1). 

It is well known that there was an Assyrian 
village on the banks of the Tigris by this name; 
but Jerome states positively, when he retreated 
to Palestine from the turmoil of an unfriendly 
world, that he was shown the site of the Galilean 


Stet and look,” said the prejudiced 


256 Notes on Nahum 


Elkosh where Nahum was reported to have been 
born. 

The prophecy of Nahum bears every evidence 
of having been delivered in the land prior to the 
death of Sennacherib, and, therefore, at least a 
century before the destruction of Nineveh, of 
which it mainly treats. He was in all likelihood 
contemporary with Isaiah, and uttered his poetic 
prediction in the reign of Hezekiah. Nahum was 
therefore, one can scarcely doubt, a Galilean, who 
came at the call of God from his northern home 
to speak words of comfort to the trembling peo- 
ple of the south, whose hearts were in fear be- 
cause of the Assyrian invasion. 

The book seems to divide readily into two parts. 
Chapter 1 presents the Eternal One as the Rock 
and Stay of those who confide in Him, whatever 
the danger that threatens. Locally, it was the 
army of Sennacherib that seemed about to over- 
whelm them. But God was above all, as was soon 
made manifest. Chapters 2 and 3 give the de- 
struction of Nineveh, whence the oppressor had 
come. The description of the siege and breaking 
up of the guilty city is a masterpiece of dramatic 
poetry. 

It is of interest to note that both the prophets 
whose Galilean birth we have commented on had 
to do largely with Nineveh in their ministry. 
Jonah was used to the repentance of the genera- 
tion of his day, about one hundred and fifty years 


Faith’s Refuge 257 


ere Nahum declared the final overthrow of the 
city because its iniquities had reached unto 
heaven. In that destruction it is easy to see a 
picture of the future end of the impious Assyrian 
of the last days, to which attention has frequently 
been directed in these notes. 


Nahum means Consolation; and consolatory in- 
deed are the precious words of cheer which he 
was inspired to deliver in this first chapter. 

Vengeance belongs to God. To the Thessa- 
lonian saints Paul writes, “It is a righteous thing 
with God to recompense tribulation to them that 
trouble you.” He is ever watching over His peo- 
ple; and while He permits many things for their 
discipline, He will never overlook an indignity 
done to His redeemed. ‘He reserveth wrath for 
his enemies” (ver. 2). Note this: the enemies of 
His people are His enemies. He makes their 
cause His own. Faith rests on this, and is thus 
saved much worry and anxiety. Nature would be 
alarmed and excited, where faith is calm and 
quiet. Nature sees the Assyrian armies: faith 
looks up to the God of battles. The entire 19th 
and 20th chapters of 2 Kings may be read with 
profit in this connection, as they describe the 
actual scenes to which the first part of Nahum’s 
prophecy refers. 

The third verse contains much that is precious 
for the afflicted soul, as well as a solemn warning 
for him who hardens himself against discipline. 


258 Notes on Nahum 


Slow to wrath, and mighty in power, the Lord 
cannot pass by iniquity. He will not acquit, or 
hold guiltless, the wicked. Of old, God had de- 
clared to Moses that He was “merciful and 
gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in good- 
ness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, for- 
giving iniquity and transgression and sin, and 
that will by no means clear the guilty” (Exod. 
84:5-7). Full of love as He is—yea, though He 
is love itself—yet He is also light: therefore sin 
must be judged. This is where the cross comes 
in. But even for men who have found forgive- 
ness there, God will not tolerate unjudged evil; 
and if we judge not ourselves, we must be judged 
by Him; for “when we are judged, we are chas- 
tened of the Lord, that we should not be con- 
demned with the world” (1 Cor. 11:32). Exod. 
384: 6 is for the sinner’s warning. Nah. 1: 8 
is for the saint’s comfort. Yet the principle is 
the same; for whether in the case of men in 
general, or of His children in particular, His 
holy eye passes over nothing till all is judged. 
But if the whirlwind and the storm seem about 
to overwhelm, and for the believer the sky seems 
black with clouds, it is sweet to know that the 
Lord has His way in all that seems so terrific, 
and at times so arbitrary. The stormy wind 
but fulfils His werd, and “the clouds are the dust 
of His feet.” 


Look up then, dear tried and perplexed soul: 


Fath’s Refuge 259 


for He is just above those heavy clouds of sor- 
row. As the dust in the distance betrays the 
approach of the traveler ere the form is seen 
upon the dry roadway, so the clouds tell of His 
near presence who knows all thy griefs and comes 
in love to dry thy tears. At His word the 
tempest-tossed sea is rebuked and the rivers of 
woe assuaged, even as of old He dried up the 
Red Sea and rolled back the waters of Jordan. 
All creation must own His power, and all ele- 
ments yield to His authority. None can stand 
before His indignation nor abide the day of His 
wrath. Yet He is good, a fortress in the day of 
trouble, ‘and He knoweth them that trust in 
Him” (vers. 4-7). 

What comfort words like these would be to 
Hezekiah and his people, shut up in Jerusalem, 
affrighted and taunted by the arrogant Assyrian, 
polluting the air with his blasphemies against 
Jehovah! 

Little did Rab-shakeh and Sennacherib know 
with whom the battle was really to be fought. 
Little could they realize that Jerusalem would 
flourish long after Nineveh had become a heap 
of ruins. In accordance with Isa. 10:5 to 19, 
Nahum foretold in vers. 8 to 10 the very manner 
in which the imperial city by the Tigris was to 
be destroyed. Profane history gives its testimony 
in the record of Ctesias that while a drunken 
feast was going on, the flood-gates of the city 


260 Notes on Nahum 


were swept away by a sudden rise of the river, 
and the palace foundations were thus dissolved. 
The army of the Babylonians, who had been be- 
sieging it for some time, entered by the breach 
made, and burned it with fire while the inebri- 
ated inhabitants sought in vain to escape. See 
chap. 3:11. 

Such should be proud Nineveh’s end. Mean- 
time one had come from thence, a counselor of 
Belial, imagining evil against the Lord (ver. 11). 
This is God’s description of haughty Sennacherib, 
who may well be viewed as a type of the last 
great Assyrian, so often contemplated in the 
prophecies. 

But all his boasting was in vain: Jehovah had 
permitted his invasion as a chastisement for the 
sins of Judah. He had observed the effect. Heze- 
kiah and his princes were humbled before Him. 
Now God would act for them. Though He had 
afflicted them, He would do so no more. The 
Assyrian hosts were blasted by the breath of His 
mouth, and Sennacherib himself basely murdered 
a short time afterward, as ver. 14 declared he 
would be, by the hands of his own sons. See Isa. 
37: 36-38. 

Freed from the danger that had threatened, 
Judah could keep her feasts in peace, rejoicing 
in the appointed ministry of cheer sent by Jeho- 
vah. His messengers are spoken of in Isa. 52:7 
in almost the same language. Possibly Nahum 


Faith’s Refuge 261 


and Isaiah feasted together when the enemy was 
thus destroyed, and enlargement granted to 
Judah. 

Delivered and exultant, they are called upon 
to perform their vows, for the host that had but 
a little before struck terror to their souls would 
pass through the land no more. 

, Who can fail to see in all this a wondrous pic- 
ture of the introduction of millennial blessing 
when the last coalition against Israel has been 
overthrown, and the Lord Jesus Himself shall 
descend with feet beautiful upon the mountains 
to publish peace that shall no more be disturbed! 


CHAPTER II 


THE DESTRUCTION OF NINEVEH 


distinguish between those parts which relate 

primarily to events long since fulfilled, and 
those which have to do entirely with what is still 
future. Fulfilled prophecy is a clinching proof 
of the divine inspiration of the Scriptures. That 
which tells of what is yet to come is “‘a light shin- 
ing in a dark place,” enabling the devout reader 
to put a proper value on all he sees around him. 

On the other hand, all prophecy is one con- 
nected whole and must be read in view of that 
to which it all points—the coming day of the 
Lord. But for many peoples and nations that 
day has already come. Their course has been 
run. Their manifold iniquities have been judged; 
and their civilizations have passed out of exist- 
ence. 

The glory of Nineveh has been for over two 
and a half millenniums but a memory. That it 
should be so was predicted by Nahum a century 
at least ere his words had their awful fulfilment 
in the Babylonian conquest. This is given in 


|: is important, in reading the Prophets, to 


The Destruction of Nineveh 263 


detail in chaps. 2 and 8, a portion of Scripture 
(and of literature in general) unsurpassed for 
graphic delineation and poetic fervor. 


“He that dasheth in pieces,” the leader of the 
Chaldean hosts, is seen, in vision, coming up 
against Nineveh, proudly resting in her glory on 
the banks of the Tigris. Founded by Nimrod, as 
was also the rival Euphratean city Babylon, the 
one sets forth the world in its grandeur and in- 
dependence of God; the other, the religious world, 
the home of superstition and traditionary ritual. 
Necessarily the former must fall before the ris- 
ing power of the latter, even as, centuries later, 
paganism had to succumb to an unholy, pseudo- 
Christianity, which seemed more fully to meet 
the need of man in his hopeless depravity. Yet 
it often becomes a question to the thoughtful 
student, Which was worse, the world without 
God, or the world with a perverted idea of God, 
wrapped in the darkness of medieval superstition 
and ignorance of the Scriptures of truth? 

Let Nineveh attempt to defend herself as she 
may, no power can avail to avert the richly- 
deserved judgment (ver. 1). She had herself 
been the instrument used to punish the excel- 
lency of Jacob; but now, since they had been pun- 
ished, the heathen should not escape. It is the 
principle enunciated in 1 Pet. 4:17, 18 — judg- 
ment begins at the house of God. What then of 
those who know Him not? If He will pass over 


264 Notes on Nahum 


nothing because committed by His own, how 
solemn the day when the wicked have to answer 
for all their lawlessness! If the powers of evil 
are permitted to mar the branches of the vine 
of Jehovah’s planting, who shall prevent the 
destruction of the wild trees of the wood? (ver. 
valve 

The terrific character of the final assault on 
Nineveh is vividly described in vers. 3 to 5. As 
this passage has often been applied most fanci- 
fully, I quote it in full, in order that it may 
stand out clearly in its true connection. “The 
shield of his mighty men is made red, the valiant 
men are in scarlet; the chariots shall be with 
flaming torches in the day of his preparation, 
and the fir trees shall be terribly shaken. The 
chariots shall rage in the streets, they shall jostle 
one against another in the broad ways; they shall 
seem like torches, they shall run like the light- 
nings.” 

It is a striking portrayal of the wild disorder 
that necessarily prevailed when the Babylonian 
hordes and their Median allies poured into the 
doomed city. What is there here to suggest the 
strange and forced interpretation often put upon 
so plain a passage? Were it not so common a 
view, who could believe that sober men would 
attempt to see in words like these references to 
vailroads, electric cars, and automobiles! Yet 
sermons have been preached and books written in 


The Destruction of Nineveh 265 


which such mechanical devices are declared to 
be the fulfilment of this portion of Nahum’s 
prophecy.* It is an instance of the careless way 
in which men read Scripture; for, clearly, “the 
day of his preparation” was the day of Nineveh’s 
destruction; and the “chariots with flaming 
torches,” running “like the lightnings,” were the 
war-carriages of the victorious Babylonians. 

Against such a terrific onslaught the king of 
Nineveh tried in vain to rally his worthies. 
Drunken, as a result of their unholy feasts, they 
stumbled in their walk as they hastened to the 
wall, only to find it was too late now to attempt 
a defence (ver. 5). The rise of the river opened 
the already weakened sluice-gates; the floods 
crumbled the foundations of the palace, and made 
hope of resistance vain (ver. 6). 

Diodorus Siculus describes the end of the siege 
in the following language: ‘There was an old 
prophecy that Nineveh should not be taken till 
the river became an enemy to the city. And in 
the third year of the siege, the river being swol- 
len with continual rains, overflowed every part 
of the city, and broke down the wall for twenty 
furlongs; then the king, thinking that the oracle 
was fulfilled, and the river become an enemy to 
the city, built a large funeral pile in the palace, 


* T have even known prophetic lecturers to wax eloquent 
over “The valiant men are in scarlet;’” applying the verse 
to the red-jerseyed soldiers of the Salvation Army! 


266 Notes on Nahum 


and collecting together all his wealth and his con- 
cubines and eunuchs, burnt himself and the pal- 
ace with them all; and the enemy entered at the 
breach that the waters had made and took the 
city.” 

Thus with violence was Nineveh’s pride abased 
and “Huzzab” (“the established’) led away cap- 
tive. She had proudly thought herself estab- 
lished to abide forever, but her end had come be- 
cause she exalted herself against the Lord (ver. 
Dye 

Vers. 8 to 13 are too plain to require comment. 

_ In language unmistakable they describe the deso- 
lation following the complete overthrow of what 
had been the world’s most glorious city. So ex- 

; actly were the words fulfilled, that for ages the 

/ very site of Nineveh was lost, till, in the last 

i: century, Layard and Rawlinson made excavations 

{.| and discoveries that brought to light the ruins of 
| a metropolis so vast that none could longer doubt 

| the declarations of Jonah and Nahum in regard 
to its splendor and magnificence, and its de- 

\ struction when in the very zenith of its glory. 

It may be well to remark that the lion of vers. 
11, 12 is the king; and the lions and lionesses his 
household who perished with him amid the flames 
of his palace. 


CHAPTER III 


BEYOND HEALING 


F Nineveh’s doom we have been reading. 
CG) The last chapter continues the subject, 

and tells us that doom is irretrievable. 
But it does more. Its first four verses give us 
Jehovah’s terrible indictment, and show us why 
unsparing judgment had to fall upon it. 

A city of blood, full of lies and robbery! Such 
is the divine description. All its glory was 
stained by the iniquity of its people (ver. 1). In 
cruel warfare and sanguinary carnage its 
haughty inhabitants delighted. The sight of 
armies rushing together in battle was their joy.* 
Therefore others should exult over them when 
they fell beneath the power of their victorious 
enemies (vers. 2, 3). Uncleanness abounded; the 
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, prostitution and 
sorcery, were openly carried on, and linked with 
the worship of their demon-gods (ver. 4). There- 
fore was Jehovah’s face against them, and He 
had determined to make them a gazing-stock and 


* Nineveh seems to have been inbred with the spirit of 
its founder, Nimrod, the Cushite, “a mighty hunter before 
the Lord” (Gen. 10: 8, 9), taking pleasure in the wanton 
chase of nations for prey.—[Ed. 


268 Notes on Nahum 


a warning to all who should follow their per- 
nicious ways (vers. 5, 6). 

It was but a little before that their great king, 
Sargon, is reputed to have destoryed No Amon 
(called in the A. V. “populous No”), and carried 
her people into captivity. But Nineveh was 
equally guilty, and must herself become a prey. 
In that day the surrounding nations would take 
up a taunt against her, crying, “Nineveh is laid 
waste: who will bemoan her?’ Her course had 
left her friendless and alone in the day of the 
Lord’s anger. Imperious and vindictive, she 
sought only her own agrandizement, and in no 
sense the welfare of subject cities and provinces. 
So she must learn that “righteousness [alone] 
exalteth a nation: but sin is a reproach to any 
people’ (Prov. 14:34). No human power can 
long exist that persistently practises and encour- 
ages corruption and violence. The Most High 
rules in the kingdoms of men whether they own 
Him or not; and He puts down one people and 
exalts another at His own pleasure, taking into 
account all of their ways (vers. 7-10). 

The 11th verse seems again to refer to the last 
drunken orgy, to which, history tells us, the 
whole city was given up on the night of its awful 
fall. 

Unable in anywise to resist the invading 
hordes, the very strongholds poured forth their 
inebriated hosts for destruction like a fig tree 


Beyond Healing 269 


casting her first ripe figs into the eater’s mouth 
when shaken (vers. 12, 18). Thus her ruin was 
complete in the day when the fire devoured her 
palaces (vers. 14, 15). 

Eaten up as green leaves are destroyed by the 
locusts, so was Nineveh’s splendor to have an 
end. And if any might apply the locust-figure 
to the Assyrians themselves, they had become but 
as an insect host benumbed by cold, unable to 
pursue their prey, and who, when warmed by the 
rays of the sun, flee away, “and their place is 
not known where they are” (vers. 16, 17). 

So should perish Saracus, grandson of the 
famous Esar-haddon, Assyria’s last king, to- 
gether with all his nobles and his people; for the 
God whom he knew not, nor cared to know, had 
solemnly declared, “There is no healing of thy 
bruise; thy wound is grievous: all that hear the 
bruit (or, report) of these shall clap the hands 
over thee: for upon whom hath not thy wicked- 
ness passed continually?” (vers. 18, 19). 

Nineveh has fallen to rise no more forever. 
Her mighty men have passed off the scene, to- 
gether with all their guilt and sins, never more 
to be numbered among the living till that day 


‘“‘When the sun is old, and the stars are cold, 
And the leaves of the judgment-book unfold.” 


But in the crisis of the last days a fierce and un- 
holy power will occupy the land once dominated 


270 Notes on Nahum 


by Huzzab on the Tigris (chap. 2:7), who will 
have the traits and bitter hatred of God and His 
people once characteristic of Assyria, and, ap- 
pearing in Asshur’s spirit and power, will be 
emphatically denominated “The Assyrian,” or 
“the king of the north,” whose final doom is pre- 
figured in Nahum’s prophecy of the fall of Nin- 
eveh of old. 

Thus this book has for us a double value; let- 
ting us know how completely inspired prophecy 
has been fulfilled in the past, and in this way 
assuring our hearts as to the literal carrying out 
of all God has caused to be spoken by His di- 
vinely-inspired seers. May it be ours to “eat the 
book’ till our whole being is pervaded with its 
truth, that thus we may walk as strangers and 
pilgrims through a scene over which the Most 
High has written the awful word TEKEL! (Dan. 
Sai): 


Notes on the 


PROPHECY OF HABAKKUK 


INTRODUCTION 


the prophecy of Habakkuk—contains im- 

portant truth which no reverent student 
of the Word of God can afford to overlook. Brief 
as it is, it is directly referred to, or quotations 
made from it, a number of times in the New 
Testament. 

The great apostle to the Gentiles is particular- 
ly partial to it, finding in it the inspired author- 
ity for the fundamental doctrine of justification 
by faith, and the certainty of judgment to come 
upon all who reject the testimony of the Holy 
Ghost as to the Lord Jesus Christ. Compare 
Acts 13: 40, 41 with Hab. 1:5; and Rom. 1:17; 
Gal. 3:11; Heb. 10:38 with Hab. 2:4. There 
is evidently, likewise, very close connection be- 
tween Hab. 3:17,18 and the 4th chapter of the 
Epistle to the Philippians. As it is purposed to 
look carefully at these passages in the course of 
our study, they can be passed over now. 


Or of the shortest books of Scripture— 


272 Notes on Habakkuk 


Of Habakkuk personally very little is known. 
Like John the Baptist, he is “the voice of One,” 
himself hidden; though the exercises of his soul 
are vividly portrayed in his vigorous and soul- 
stirring prophetic poem. Jewish tradition asserts 
that he was of the tribe of Simeon, and he is 
commonly supposed to have been contemporary 
with Jeremiah during the latter part of “the 
weeping prophet’s” ministry. His book would 
seem to evidence this, as it was written in view 
of the Chaldean invasion. Of his birth or death 
we have no record. He is said to have remained 
in the land when the mass of the people were 
carried away by the triumphant armies of 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

The form of the book is that of a dialogue, and 
the structure is exceedingly simple. Habakkuk, 
oppressed by a sense of the prevalence of ini- 
quity, unburdens his heart to Jehovah, who in 
grace answers the cry of His servant. The true 
divisions are easily found. Chap. 1:1-4 gives the 
prophet’s complaint. Vers. 5-11 are the Lord’s 
answer. From ver. 12 to ver. 17 we have Habak- 
kuk’s remonstrance. Ver. 1 of ch. 2 stands by 
itself. There is no immediate reply to the ery 
with which the previous chapter was concluded. 
In vers. 2 to 4 the Lord goes far beyond the 
prophet’s thoughts, and predicts the final bring- 
ing in of blessing through Messiah: meantime 
“the just shall live by his faith.” The actual 


Introduction 273 


response to the remonstrance of chap. 1 is given 
in vers. 5to 8. The balance of the chapter would 
seem to be prophetic ministry. Having been 
made to know the end of the Lord, His servant 
delivers His word to four classes who walk not in 
His ways. A woe is pronounced upon each of 
them: the covetous, vers. 9-11; the unrighteous, 
vers. 12-14; the intemperate and shameless, vers. 
15-17; and the idolatrous, vers. 18-20. Chap. 3 
concludes with the prayer of Habakkuk, and is 
one of the most precious and sublime portions of 
Old Testament Scripture. 

While having its primary application to Israel 
and Babylon in the dark days following the cut- 
ting-off of Josiah (the same period covered by 
the major portion of Jeremiah), this book con- 
tains solemn and important principles applica- 
ble to all the Lord’s people, and to all seasons. 
“Written for our learning,’”’ we may well ponder 
its searching chapters listening like the prophet 
himself, “to see what He will say unto us, and 
what we shall answer when we are reproved.” 

That God should thus deign to meet the long- 
ing cry of His servant’s heart, is for our encour- 
agement and cheer. He regardeth the cry of the 
humble, but “the proud He knoweth afar off.” 
“The meek will He guide in judgment; the meek 
will He teach His way.” Unquestionably, the 
paramount reason why we get, as a rule, so little 
out of God’s word, is because of the appalling 


274 Notes on Habakkuk 


lack of self-judgment and brokenness before its 
Author, so prevalent on every hand. Pride, 
haughtiness, and self-sufficiency, resulting in 
headiness and wordy’ strife, abound on all sides, 
coupled with grave moral laxity and inability to 
try the things that differ. True-hearted subjec- 
tion to God and His Word is very little known or 
regarded. 

In great measure it has been forgotten that 
there must be a right moral state to enter into 
the things of God, for “spiritual things are spirit- 
ually discerned.’ Consequently, carnal, self-com- 
placent Christians, walking as men, are often 
found seeking to make up for lack of genuine, 
Spirit-given ministry by receiving or listening to 
empty platitudes or expressions (true and pre- 
cious enough in themselves) learned by rote, and 
given out in a mechanical, parrot-like manner, 
instead of waiting upon God until His voice is 
heard in the soul, exercising the conscience of 
hearer and speaker alike. 

In a day like the present, when “of the making 
of many books there is no end,” it is very easy 
for any person of average intelligence to acquire 
a fair mental acquaintance with the truths of 
Scripture, and to pose, in the presence of less in- 
structed or unspiritual persons, as an oracle of 
divine wisdom, when in reality the holy eye of 
God sees nothing but vain conceit and self-suff- 
ciency in it all. 


Introduction a £55 


Truth learned by others in deep exercise in 
the school of God, is often retailed out to admir- 
ing crowds of worldly Christians and Christless 
professors, incapable of true, godly discernment, 
by men who themselves have known little or 
nothing of its power in their own souls, or of that 
subduedness before God consistent with the teach- 
ings they set forth. 

Especially will this be found to be the case in 
regard to the teaching of Scripture as to the 
Church. How many today talk glibly of the one 
Body and the unity of the Spirit, who do not 
appear to have a particle of real concern because 
of their practical denial of that truth by identifi- 
cation with unscriptural and sectarian systems, 
where the Head of the Church is in practice dis- 
owned, and the Holy Spirit is refused His true 
place; while a human system of clergy and laity 
takes the place of the divine order laid down in 
the book of God! 

Many doubtless know Jesus as Saviour, and 
the Holy Ghost as the earnest of their inheri- 
ance, who have never learned to truly own Christ 
as the Church’s one Head, and the Holy Spirit as 
the controlling power in the assembly. With 
large numbers this is unquestionably the result 
of ignorance, and the Great Shepherd of the 
sheep will take into account the lack of instruc- 
tion and the faulty teaching in that day of mani- 
festation, now so near at hand, when “we must 


276 Notes on Habakkuk 


all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ.” 
But, alas, by how many among us can this be 
pleaded? Knowledge is even boasted of when 
there is no corresponding concern as to the exist- 
ing conditions in the house of God, and latitudi- 
narianism and independency are the order of the 
day. It is godly exercise that is so sadly lacking, 
which accounts for the indifference to Christ and 
the truth everywhere evident. 

In Habakkuk we see the very opposite of ail 
this. He is a man deeply exercised both as to 
the state of his people—yea, his own state and 
the ways of God in government. Nor can he 
rest in quietness until he has the mind of the 
Lord as to it all. His book, therefore, is of spe- 
cial value in our degenerate and Laodicean times, 
characterized by what another has designated as 
“high truth and low walk.” It strikingly por- 
trays the working of spiritual sensibilities, and 
the divine answer to the same, in a man of like 
passions with ourselves, as each chapter will make 
manifest. 


CHAPTER I 


THE PROPHET’S PERPLEXITY 


before us the deep exercises of the proph- 

et’s soul on account of the fallen estate of 
the nation of Judah, dear to his heart, not only 
because they were his people, but because he 
knew them to be Jehovah’s peculiar treasure; 
now, alas, so defiled and marred by sin. 

“The burden which Habakkuk the prophet did 
see. O Lord, how long shall I cry, and Thou wilt 
not hear! even cry unto Thee of violence, and 
Thou wilt not save! Why dost Thou show me 
iniquity, and cause me to behold grievance? for 
spoiling and violence are before me: and there 
are that raise up strife and contention. There- 
fore the law is slacked, and judgment doth never 
go forth: for the wicked doth compass about the 
righteous; therefore wrong judgment proceedeth” 
(vers. 1-4). Ina few graphic touches he depicts, 
as by a master hand, the various evils afflicting 
the unhappy nation. He takes no delight in thus 
portraying the sins of those so tenderly loved. 
It is into the ear of God, not of man, that he 
pours his complaint. For long he has been crying 
to Him; and now, overwhelmed with a sense of 


<i HE opening verses of the first chapter set 


278 Notes on Habakkuk 


the hopelessness of recovery, he appeals to Je- 
hovah in accents fraught with deepest anguish 
and concern. Could it be that his prayer was to 
go unheeded? If not, how long must he supplicate 
ere the Lord gave evidence that He had heard 
and was about to interfere? 

He felt, as many another has done, that it were 
better not to see the evil than to see it only to 
be burdened thereby, finding no remedy for the 
state that so distressed his sensitive soul. 

There is grave danger, in the present disor- 
dered condition of Christendom, that one who is 
able to see things in the light of the word of God 
may be similarly affected. Some there are who, 
quite conscious of the lapsed state of the Church, 
and aware of the unholy influences at work, can 
yet be supremely indifferent to it all; manifest- 
ing thereby their lack of real heart for what so 
intimately concerns the glory of God and the wel- 
fare of His saints. Others, whose eyes have been 
anointed and whose consciences have been exer- 
cised by the Holy Spirit, are in danger of being 
unduly oppressed and disheartened by the rising 
power of the mystery of iniquity. Quick to see 
dishonor done to Christ and departure from the 
truth on the right hand and on the left, they are 
oppressed in spirit by the seemingly irremediable 
and distressing conditions prevailing. 

Needless to say, both are wrong. Indifferent, 
no truly exercised soul could or should be. But 


The Prophet’s Perplexiiy 279 


disheartened none need be; for all has been long 
since foreseen and provided for. It was so with 
Israel: it is so with the Church. No failure on 
the part of man can avail to thwart the purposes 
of God. 

In regard to Judah, the greatest danger was 
from the spirit of strife and contention prevail- 
ing among the people, giving rise to spoiling and 
violence. As a result, the law was ignored, and 
judgment miscarried. The wicked were in high 
places, and perverted statutes proceeded from 
them. 

It was surely enough to bow the soul before 
God, not as one competent to pass sentence upon 
others, but as one who was a part of that which 
had so grievously failed. This is where Habak- 
kuk is found. He was one of them that sighed 
and cried for the abominations done in what had 
once been the holy city. 

Nor does Jehovah ignore His servant’s cry; 
but He answers him, telling of the chastisement 
He had prepared for the instruction of His diso- 
bedient and rebellous people. “Behold ye among 
the heathen, and regard, and wonder marvel- 
ously, for I will work a work in your days, which 
ye will not believe, though it be told you” (ver. 
5). This is the verse quoted by Paul at Antioch 
of Pisidia, when warning the Jews of the danger 
to which they were exposed if they neglected 
the gospel of Christ (Acts 13: 40,41). There, 


280 Notes on Habakkuk 


the work so wondrous, in which none would be- 
lieve though it be told them, was the work of 
grace wrought out on Calvary’s cross. In the 
Lord’s reply to Habakkuk’s entreaty, it was His 
strange work of judgment. Though it seem to 
be unbelievable, He was raising up the Chaldeans 
—‘“that bitter and hasty nation”’—to “march 
through the breadth of the land, to possess the 
dwelling-places that were not theirs.” Terrible 
and dreadful, carrying out what they thought 
were but the purposes of their own hearts, they 
should come up with their vast and irresistible 
armies against Jerusalem, like the eagle hasten- 
ing to its prey! They should be permitted to 
override all the power and dignity of Judah; as 
a result of which they would be lifted up in pride, 
imputing their power unto their false gods. In 
such manner Jehovah was about to deal with His 
wayward people (vers. 6-11). 

Is there not for us a weighty lesson in all this? 
Of old, in regard to the Egyptians, we are told 
that God ‘‘turned their heart to hate His people” 
(Ps. 105: 25). In our short-sightedness we might 
only have seen the energy of Satan’s power; but it 
was the Lord that used even Satan to chasten His 
people. So here: He it is who brings the armies 
of Nebuchadnezzar to the gates of Zion! 

And has He not dealt in a similar manner with 
the Assembly? It is customary to bewail the 
divisions and the distressing state of Christen- 


The Prophet’s Perplexity 281 


dom, and particularly of those who have learned 
the truth as to the Church. But are not these 
very things the evidences of the Lord’s disci- 
pline? He loves His people too well to allow them 
to prosper and remain a united company when 
pride and worldliness have usurped the place of 
humility and the pilgrim character. So He per- 
mits the power of Satan to work, and the result 
is dispersion and scattering. How this should 
call for confession and brokenness on our part! 

In Habakkuk’s case, he was amazed that God 
should so deal with the sheep of His pasture as 
to give them into the power of the wild beast of 
the nations. Discipline and chastening he knew 
were deserved, but he is astounded when he learns 
who the agent of their punishment is to be. But 
at once he turns again to the Lord, pouring out 
his prayer into His ear. “Art Thou not from 
everlasting, O Lord my God, my Holy One? We 
shall not die. O Lord, Thou hast ordained them 
for judgment; and, O mighty God, Thou hast esta- 
blished them for correction” (ver. 12). His faith 
is very simple, and very beautiful. They were in 
covenant-relation with the everlasting One, who 
“will not call back His words.” Therefore, how- 
ever sorely they might be afflicted, it could never 
be that they should utterly be cut off. Corrected 
in measure they must be, but cast off forever they 
could never be without violating the sure mercies 
of David. 


282 Notes on Habakkuk 


But that so evil a nation should be the instru- 
ment in the Lord’s hand for the punishment of 
His wayward people, passes the prophet’s com- 
prehension. “Thou art of purer eyes than to 
behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity,” he 
rightly declares; but then asks, in perplexity, 
“Wherefore lookest Thou upon them that deal 
treacherously, and holdest Thy tongue when the 
wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous 
than he?” (ver. 18). He goes on to recite the 
cruelties and iniquities practised by the Chalde- 
ans; their inhumanity, and their gross idolatry; 
for of the latter Babylon was the mother. If 
permitted to take Judah in their net, will they 
not give the glory to their own prowess, and to 
their false and revengeful deities? How can so 
perverse a people be Jehovah’s agency? It is 
what has perplexed more than Habakkuk—the 
toleration and use of the wicked to further the 
counsels of God. 

The chapter closes without an answer; but in 
the next a reply is given that is altogether wor- 
thy of God, far transcending the prophet’s high- 
est thoughts, and leading to abasement of soul in 
His holy presence. 


CHAPTER II 


ON THE WATCH-TOWER 


to wait on God. The restlessness and ac- 

tivity of the flesh will not brook delay, but 
counts time spent in waiting and watching as so 
much time lost. It is blessedly otherwise with 
Habakkuk. As no reply is at once given to his 
eager, anxious questionings, he takes the attitude 
of the patient learner who remains silent till the 
Master is ready to make known His mind. 

“T will stand upon my watch,” he says, “and 
set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what 
He will say unto me, and what I shall answer 
when I am reproved” (ver. 1). 

His words bespeak a very right and proper 
condition of soul. Perplexed and confused by the 
seeming enigma of God’s ways, he owns he may 
require reproof, and takes his stand upon the 
watch-tower, above the mists of earth, and beyond 
the thoughts and doings of men, where he can 
quietly wait upon God, and look out to see what 
He will say unto him. 

Such an attitude ensures an answer. God will 
not leave His servant without instruction if there 
be a willing mind and an exercised conscience. 

As he maintains his lonely watch, Jehovah an- 


"To va is nothing harder for man to do than 


284 Notes on Habakkuk 


swers, bidding him, “Write the vision, and make 
it plain upon tables, that he may run that read- 
eth it”? (ver. 2). The oracle about to be revealed 
is not for the prophet alone, but through him for 
all men. It is a principle of vast importance, far- 
reaching in its application. Therefore let him 
take his stylus and set it forth plainly upon a 
writing-table, that he who reads it may run and 
proclaim the message far and near. 

“For the vision is yet for an appointed time, 
but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though 
it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, 
it will not tarry” (ver. 3). What is to be de- 
clared is not for then-present alone. It shall 
have fuller, wider application in a time of the 
Lord’s appointment, which was then in the fu- 
ture. Forward to this day of blessing is the 
prophet directed to look. 

We know from Heb. 10:87 that it is really 
Messiah’s reign to which he is pointed. When 
the verse is quoted there, the pronouns are no 
longer in the neuter, but they become intensely 
personal. To Christ alone do they refer. “For 
yet a little while, and He that shall come will 
come, and will not tarry.” When the apostle 
wrote, He had already come the first time, only 
to be rejected and crucified. But He is coming 
back again, coming in a “very, very little while,” 
as the words might be rendered. When He re- 
turns He will put down all unrighteousness, and 


On the Watch-Tower 285 


bring forth judgment unto victory. Then shall 
that for which the prophet yearned have come to 
pass. The mystery of God’s long toleration of 
evil shall be finished, and the reign of righteous- 
ness shall have come in. To this period of bless- 
ing Habakkuk is to look forward; and meantime, 
though of the man of self-will it can be said, 
“Behold, his soul which is lifted up is not upright 
in him,” yet, however wickedness may triumph, 
the man of God is given to know that “the just 
shall live by his faith” (ver. 4). 

This is the oracle which Habakkuk had been 
bidden to write so plainly. This is the word that 
the reader should run to declare. 

Such a reader, and such a runner, was the apos- 
tle Paul. This verse is the key-note of his in- 
struction to both saint and sinner. Having read 
the prophet’s words with eyes anointed by the 
Holy Ghost, he runs the rest of his days to make 
them known to others. 

Three times they occur in his epistles, and in 
each place they are used with a different object 
in view. 

When, in the letter to the Romans, he is ex- 
pounding the glorious doctrine of the righteous- 
ness of God as revealed in the gospel (chap. 1: 
16, 17), he finds in these words the inspired an- 
swer to the question raised ages ago in the book 
of Job, “How then can man be justified with 
God?” (chap. 9:2; 25:4). Triumphantly he 


286 Notes on Habakkuk 


points to the revelation of the watch-tower, and 
exclaims, “The just shall live by faith!” 

When Judaizing teachers sought to corrupt the 
assemblies of Galatia by turning them away from 
the simplicity that is in Christ, implying that 
while it is by faith we are saved, yet the law be- 
comes the rule of life afterwards, he indignantly 
repudiates the false assertion by declaring that 
not only is faith the principle upon which they 
first begin with God, but “the just shall live by 
faith” (Gal. 3:11). Immediately he proceeds to 
show that “the law is not of faith,” and there- 
fore cannot be the Christian’s standard. Christ, 
and Christ alone is that. In Him we are a new 
creation. “And as many as walk according to 
this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon 
the Israel of God’’ (chap. 6:16). 

Again, when, in the treatise to the Hebrews, 
he is tracing out the pilgrim’s path through this 
world, from the cross to the glory, he shows most 
blessedly that only the entering into the power 
of the unseen can sustain the believer through a 
life of trial and conflict; and so once more he de- 
clares, “The just shall live by faith” (Heb. 10: 
38). He adds, “But if any man draw back, my 
soul shall have no pleasure in him,” which is the 
first half of the verse in the Septuagint render- 
ing. 

Thus the secret made known to Habakkuk so 
long ago becomes the watchword of Christianity, 


On the Watch-Tower 287 


as at the Reformation it most properly became 
the battle-cry of Luther and his colleagues. 


It was all-important that the lonely pruphet 
look beyond and above what his natural eyes be- 
held, and thus would he endure “as seeing Him 
who is invisible.’ 

So today. Much there is to dishearten and 
discourage. But dark though the times may be, 
the man of God turns in faith to the Holy Scrip- 
tures, there to find the mind of the Lord. He 
acts on what is written, let others do as they 
may. His path may be a lonely one, and his 
heart be ofttimes sad; but with eager, glad an- 
ticipation he looks on to the day of manifesta- 
tion, and seeks to walk now in the light of then. 

Thus his eyes are opened to behold everything 
clearly, and he is able to estimate the preten- 
sions of ungodly and spiritual men at their 
true value. The Chaldean proudly boasted of be- 
ing helped by his gods to overthrow the people of 
Jehovah. Habakkuk is shown that he is but an 
instrument used for present chastening, but soon 
to be recompensed double for all his sins. “Yea 
also, because he transgresseth by wine, he is a 
proud man, neither keepeth at home, who enlarg- 
eth his desire as hell (sheol), and is as death, 
and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him 
all nations, and heapeth unto him all people” (ver. 
5). Inflated, and self-important, like the false 
world-church of the day, Babylon would gather 


‘288 Notes on Habakkuk 


all into its fold, and stifle everything that is really 
of God. But the hour of doom is coming, when 
he shall be the sport of the people, and they 
shall tauntingly cry, “Woe to him that increaseth 
that which is not his!” Suddenly his enemies 
shall arise, and he shall be spoiled because of his 
blood-guiltiness and his blasphemy against Jeho- 
vah (vers. 6-8). 

Meantime, though the times be difficult, and 
waters out of a rull cup be wrung out to the little 
flock who seek to walk in obedience to God, the 
trusting soul looks up in holy confidence, know- 
ing that the triumphing of the wicked is short, 
Thus “the just shall live by his faith.” 

In every age, when declension came in, those 
who would live for God have found themselves 
in a position similar to that of Habakkuk. Jere- 
miah, his companion-prophet, felt it most keenly: 
but grace sustained him through all. And it is 
well if, in our day, when the word of God is in 
large measure given up, and human expedients 
take the place of divine precepts, that we be 
found walking humbly in the path of faith, able 
to say, “All my springs are in Thee!” 

The woes that follow have their application 
not only to the king of Babylon, and his cruel, 
relentless armies, but they declare the mind of 
God regarding any who are in the same unholy 
ways. 

“Woe to him that coveteth...!” The sentence, 


On the Watch-Tower 289 


uncompleted, causes the special sin to which at- 
tention is drawn to stand out all the clearer. It 
was covetousness that drew the hordes of Chal- 
dea to the gates of Jerusalem. Nebuchadnezzar 
would add “an evil gain to his house” (literal 
rendering), that he might magnify himself and 
“set his nest on high.” But though he might 
build a costly and magnificent palace by means 
of the spoil he should take, the very stones would 
cry out of the wall, and the beam of the timber 
would answer, exclaiming, “Woe unto him that 
buildeth a town with blood, and stablisheth a 
city by iniquity” (vers. 9-12). Unrighteousness 
springs out of covetousness, even as we read, 
“The love of money is a root of all evil.” That 
is, lust for wealth is a suited root for every kind 
of iniquity to spring from. 

Covetousness is unquestionably the crying sin 
of the present day. Insidiously it creeps in and 
lays hold of the people of God as well as of men 
of the world. Yet it is a sin against which the 
word of God warns with fearful solemnity. It 
has proven the undoing of many an otherwise 
valiant man, and has destroyed the pilgrim char- 
acter of thousands. 

What, then, is covetousness? And how is it 
to be distinguished from honorable thrift and a 
proper use of opportunities whereby to provide 
things honest in the sight of all men? In our 
English Bibles four words are used to express 


290 Notes on Habakkuk 


the one sin —‘covetousness,” “concupiscence,” 
“lust,” “desire.” Believers are exhorted to be 
“content with such things as ye have” (Heb. 13: 
5); we also read, “Having food and raiment, let 
us be therewith content” (1 Tim. 6:8). Covet- 
ousness is the very opposite of this. It is the 
unsatisfied craving of the heart for more than God 
has been pleased to give. “Covetousness,” we are 
told, “is idolatry !’’ Then it is plain that the covet- 
ous man is the one who puts gain between his 
soul and God. Anything that turns us from heart- 
occupation with Him is an idol. By this we may 
readily test ourselves as to where we stand. 

The sluggard and the shiftless are not com- 
mended by the word of God, but rigorously con- 
demned, and exhorted to thrift and energy. But 
to run to the other extreme, and to set the heart 
upon business and the accumulation of wealth, is 
equally fatal to spirituality. The happy medium 
is that laid down by the Holy Ghost, who bids us 
be “not remiss in zeal, fervent in spirit, serving 
the Lord.” When He is served, all else will fall 
into place. I shall then use this world “not dis- 
posing of it as my own,” but shall hold all com- 
mitted to me as His steward. 

One cannot but feel that, had we a single eye 
as to this, we should hear less of pilgrims em- 
barking in doubtful (not to say shady) business 
schemes and speculations, because of possible 
large profits; the failure of which oftentimes 


On the Watch-Tower 291 


brings grave dishonor on that holy name by which 
we are called. It may be laid down as an axiom, 
that no saint should be in any way connected 
with any business, however profitable, that could 
not bear the searching inspection of Him “whose 
eyes are as a flame of fire.” 

If it be otherwise, there may seem to be pres- 
ent success and assured prosperity, but it shall 
turn out at last as Habakkuk has written, “Be- 
hold, is it not of the Lord of Hosts that the peo- 
ple shall labor in the very fire, and the people 
shall weary themselves for very vanity?” (ver. 
13). Another passage says, “Behold, all ye that 
kindle a fire, that compass yourselves about with 
sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the 
sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have 
of My hand; ye shall lie down in sorrow’ (Isa. 
50:11). How many, alas, have had to prove this 
to the full! lLaboring in the very fire, they have 
wearied themselves in the search for vanity; 
kindling their own fire, and walking in the light 
of its sparks, they have had to lie down in sorrow, 
because of their neglect of the word of the Lord. 

But however great the apparent triumph of sin 
in the present time, the outlook is all bright for 
the man of faith. When the present evil age is 
passed away, “the earth shall be filled with the 
knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters 
cover the sea” (ver. 14). Who that has part in 
the coming day of glory but would gladly surren- 


292 Notes on Habakkuk 


der all present gain, were it his to live once more 
a life of faith during the rejection of his Lord 
and Redeemer! But it will then be too late to 
be faithful. For all self-seeking we shall “suf- 
fer loss” in the time when those who have held 
all here in view of the coming of the Lord shall 
have an entrance ministered unto them abundant- 
ly into His everlasting kingdom. 

The next woe is pronounced upon him that giv- 
eth his neighbor drink in order to encompass his 
destruction and manifest his shame. It is that 
wretched hypocrisy that speaks fair, while 
hatred fills the heart; that unholy dissimulation 
which leads one to proffer a soothing but brain- 
intoxicating draught to another in order to ac- 
complish his ruin (vers. 15-17). Terrible shall 
be the recompense of Jehovah when He makes 
inquisition for blood! To put an occasion of 
stumbling in the way of another is to draw down 
judgment on one’s own head. He who causes 
one of Christ’s little ones to fall, might better 
have had a millstone tied to his neck, and be 
thrown into the depths of the sea! 

The final woe is against idolatry, the making 
and worshipping of the idols in which Babylon 
boasted. But the idol and its worshiper shall 
perish together in the hour of Jehovah’s fury 
(vers. 18,19). He alone is God over all, blessed 
forever, now manifested in flesh in our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 


On the Watch-Tower 293. 


“The Lord is in His holy temple: let all the 
earth keep silence before Him” (ver. 20). When 
He speaks, it is for man to hear, and to bow in 
subjection to His Word. Thus has Habakkuk 
heard His voice, and his anxious questionings 
vanish. His heart is at rest, and his soul awed 
before the majesty of Jehovah’s glory. May we 
toc be of the same chastened and humbled spirit! 


CHAPTER Iii 


THE PRAYER OF HABAKKUK 


abase the soul in the presence of God, and 

to draw out the heart to Him in worship 
and adoration. It was so in the case of Habakkuk. © 
He had been admitted into the secret counsels of 
Jehovah. His word had been brought home in 
power to his soul. The result is that he prostrates 
himself before Him in the attitude of prayer and 
worship. His prayer-poem is one of the sublim- 
est portions of the Old Testament. While he is, 
as it were, overpowered by the sense of the 
majesty and omnipotence of God so that he trem- 
bles before Him, nevertheless he looks up with 
confidence to the only One who can bring revival 
and blessing to His chastened people, so right- 
fully under His rod because of their sins. 

The term “‘Shigionoth” in the introductory line 
indicates that it was set to music. Blessed is it 
when all our prayers and supplications are thus 
made to partake of the character of praise! “Be 
careful for nothing,” we are told, “but in every- 
thing by prayer and supplication, with thanks- 
giving, let your requests be made known unto 
God: and the peace of God, which passeth all un- 
derstanding, shall keep your hearts and minds 


[as proper object of divine ministry is to 


The Prayer of Habakkuk 295 


through Christ Jesus” (Phil. 4: 6, 7). Praise well 
befits the lips of sinners saved by sovereign grace, 
however trying and perplexing their circum- 
stances at times may be. David could compose 
a psalm to the same measure when in deep afflic- 
tion. Psalm 7 is described as “Shiggaion of David, 
which he sang unto the Lord, concerning the 
words of Cush the Benjamite.’”’ Cush is generally 
supposed to be another name for Shimei, who 
cursed him as he fled from Absalom his son. 
Shiggaion is the singular of Shigionoth. The 
actual meaning is not known with certainty; it 
is supposed to be, “A wandering ode.” In this 
measure, the prophet pours out his heart to the 
all-glorious One, who from of old had been the 
deliverer and the support of His redeemed people. 


“O Jehovah, I have heard Thy speech,” he says, 
“and I was afraid. 
O Jehovah, revive Thy work in the midst of the 


years, 
In the midst of the years make known; 
In wrath remember mercy” (ver. 2). 


The word of the Lord filled him with fear as 
he realized something of the depravity of his 
own heart and the state of his people. Like Isa- 
iah, he could cry, “Woe is me! for I am undone; 
because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell 
in the midst of a people of unclean lips.” On 
the ground of merit he has nothing to plead. But 
as he remembers who it is with whom he has to 


296 Notes on Habakkuk 


do, he can supplicate with confidence and assur- 
ance for revival and blessing. 

Because a people are under the hand of God 
for their failure to carry out His revealed will is 
no reason to sink down in despair, and conclude 
that the candlestick has been removed and all 
corporate testimony is gone. It is unbelief, not 
godly subjection, that leads saints to take ground 
like this. In so writing, one thinks of that move- 
ment which in these last days resulted from the 
recovery of much precious truth which had been 
treated as a dead letter for centuries. In the 
practical carrying out of that truth there has been 
undoubted failure of the most humiliating kind. 
As a result, God has permitted division and strife 
to take the place of happy unity and holy fellow- 
ship. All this is cause for brokenness and hu- 
miliation on our part, but not for utter discour- 
agement. Whatever failure may have ensued, 
God and His truth abide. “That which was from 
the beginning” is still with us, that we may order 
our ways thereby. To make failure a reason for 
further unfaithfulness is to walk in self-will, and 
to lose the force of the very lesson that our God 
would have us learn. Like Habakkuk, we have 
reason to take a very low place indeed; but, like 
him too, we can count upon God to be with us in 
that low place. 

For revival he pleads—revival, which we know 
God was pleased to grant when the chastisement 


The Prayer of Habakkuk 297 


had exercised His people. The remnant, deliv- 
ered from Babylon, own the grace of the Lord in 
giving “a little reviving’ in their bondage (Ezra 
9:8). So, may we be assured, will our God de- 
light to give revival now, though the hour be 
late, if He discerns among us that same spirit of 
lowly subjection to His will that we see here. 

The wondrous way in which Jehovah of old 
had led Jacob like a flock through the wilderness, 
when He came from Teman and shined forth 
from mount Paran, when His glory covered the 
heavens and the earth was full of His praise, is 
what the prophet contemplates as he pleads for 
present mercy. Vividly does he describe the 
march of the Mighty One of Israel through the 
desert, spreading terror and consternation among 
the heathen and filling His redeemed with exul- 
tation and rejoicing (vers. 3-6). He who had 
thus cared for His people before, would care for 
them still, however the enemy might rage. 

Like a glorious panorama, the marvelous scene 
is unfolded before his eyes. He sees the fiery 
pillar going before to drive out the hostile na- 
tions and to find out a path for the armies of the 
Lord. He beholds the floods rolling back to per- 
mit His chosen to pass through their beds. He 
notes the mystic river springing from the smit- 
ten rock. He takes up the song of the book of 
Jasher as the sun and the moon obey the word of 
a man and stand still in their habitation. He 


298 Notes on Habakkuk 


hears the shout of the victor and the wail of the 
vanquished. And as he realizes that the Shep- 
herd of Israel still abideth faithful, though so 
dreadfully dishonored, his inward parts tremble 
and his lips quiver at the voice of the Maj- 
esty. Rottenness enters into his bones, all self- 
confidence is gone, and he trembles in himself, 
that he may quietly rest in the day of trouble 
that is so soon to come upon the land; yea, that 
has already begun, for the invader had even then 
come up with his troops (vers. 7-16). 

All this is but the proof that in Habakkuk’s 
soul at least revival had already taken place. Oh, 
to enter more fully into the same spirit! 

The last three verses are the expression of a 
truly revived man who has learned to find all his 
springs in God. The apostle speaks in a similar 
strain in the 4th chapter of Philippians. In fact, 
so closely are his words allied to what we have 
here, that, as noted in the introduction, it would 
seem that he had this very scripture in mind 
when writing his epistle. 


“Although the fig tree shall not blossom, 
Neither shall fruit be in the vines; 
The labor of the olive shall fail, 
And the fields shall yield no meat; 
The flock shall be cut off from the fold, 
And there shall be no herd in the stalis: 
Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the 
God of my salvation. 
The Lord God is my strength, 
And He will make my feet like hinds’ feet, 


The Prayer of Habakkuk 299 


And He will make me to walk upon my high 
places. 
Unto the chief singer, on my stringed in- 
struments.” 


How great the difference in the opening and 
the closing of the burden of Habakkuk! He be- 
gins as a man bewildered and confused, who is 
filled with questions and perplexities; he closes 
as one who has found the answer to all his ques- 
tions, and the satisfying portion of his soul in 
God Himself. This is most blessed. As we thus 
are permitted to enter into the varied exper- 
iences that this man of like passions with our- 
selves passed through till the Lord alone filled 
the vision of his soul and satisfied his every long- 
ing, likewise resolving all his doubts and difficul- 
ties, we get some little sense of what may be the 
sustaining portion of our own hearts if He be 
but permitted to have His own way with us in 
all things. Crops might fail, flocks might be de- 
stroyed, fields might be barren, and cattle be cut 
off; but God would abide, and in Him was abun- 
dant supply to meet every need. He is the God 
of our salvation. He is the strength of our 
hearts. What more can we crave? 

Happy in this glorious consciousness, Habak- 
kuk, and we too, can walk, in faith, on our high 
places, far above the mists and snares of earth. 
Like the goats of the 104th psalm (ver. 18), we 
will be enabled to mount up to the top of the 
rocks and dwell in the high hills. Surely if a 


300 Notes on Habakkuk 


child of God in the twilight of a past dispensa- 
tion could so exult and triumph over all circum- 
stances, we who live in the full blaze of the 
day of grace, may well be stirred up to a holy 
jealousy, that, continually dwelling “in the heav- 
enlies,’ we may daily be found overcoming 
through the power of faith! 

The closing line is the dedication, and is un- 
speakably precious. The Chief Singer on the 
stringed instruments is, for us, none other than 
our Lord Jesus Christ, who as the risen One now 
leads the praises of His redeemed. As His hand 
sweeps the wonderful strings of the hearts of 
His people, what strains of heavenly melody 
greet the ear of our God and Father, and salute 
angelic hosts unnumbered who are learning 
through the Church the manifold wisdom of God. 
“In the midst of the assembly will I sing praise 
unto Thee,” He has said, as His Spirit spake 
through the prophet-poet in the 22d psalm. 
Whenever His people are gathered unto His 
peerless name, He is in their midst as the Direc- 
tor of their worship, as well as the Object of 
their adoration. 

Alas, that so many of our hearts are so often 
out of tune! Only by constant self-judgment 
and careful walking in the Spirit shall we be 
maintained in suited conditior to add to the 
sweetness of the great orchestra of the Chief 
Singer! 


Notes on the 
PROPHECY OF ZEPHANIAH 


CHAPTER I 


THE DAY OF THE LORD 


ing is known beyond what he himself tells 

us in the first verse. His pedigree is traced 
back through four generations, and the date of 
his ministry is given as “in the days of Josiah the 
son of Amon, king of Judah.” Those were days 
of blessing and revival for a remnant; but the 
mass of the people, though outwardly reformed, 
were in the sad state described in this book and 
in the early chapters of Jeremiah. The object 
of the Spirit in Zephaniah was, therefore, to warn 
the formalists of coming judgment, and to com- 
fort the hearts of the godly residue who had a 
little strength, and had not denied His name. In 
fact, the prophecy of Zephaniah has much in com- 
mon with the New Testament letter to the Phil- 
adelphian assembly, contemplating a condition of 
things answering in large measure to what we 
see at the present time—a day when many vaunt 


Or the prophet Zephaniah practically noth- 


36z Notes on Zephaniah 


themselves in Laodicean pride while walking in 
utter indifference to the written Word of God and 
despising a feeble remnant who cling to that Word 
and seek to honor Him who gave it. Such may be 
like Zephaniah himself, whose very name means, 
“Hidden of Jehovah;”’ but though unknown to 
men, they are well known to Him who speaks of 
an hour coming when the haughty opposers of 
the truth shall ““come and worship before thy feet, 
and know that I have loved thee” (Rev. 3: 7-13). 

The very fact that a remnant are at any time 
distinguished from the mass implies that the lat- 
ter are ripe for judgment; for when all goes as 
it should, there is no occasion for the faithful to 
be thus distinguished. Therefore this prophecy 
has much to say about the coming of the Lord 
when everything will be dealt with in the light 
of His revealed will. Zephaniah speaks of judg- 
ment about to fall, first on Judah and Jerusalem, 
yea, the whole land (though the ten tribes had 
been carried into Assyria nearly a century ere 
his time) ; then, on all the surrounding nations. 
For, if God begins with His people, He will not 
stop there, but all must know the power of His 
anger when He makes inquisition in regard to 
their ways. 

The three chapters may be considered as three 
divisions. Chapter 1 presents the general truth 
as to the day of the Lord which is coming upon 
Judah. Chapter 2 gives the judgment of the na- 


The Day of the Lord 303 


tions. Chapter 3 is the indictment of Jerusalem, 
with the customary promise of restoration, to be 
made good after the purging of the period of 
tribulation. 


Zephaniah was contemporary with Jeremiah 
for at least a part of the latter’s ministry, but he 
probably passed off the scene before the pre- 
dicted destruction of Jerusalem was fulfilled. 


Coming to a somewhat careful notice of this 
first chapter, we find in verses 2 to 6 the solemn 
announcement of the stretching out of Jehovah’s 
hand in judgment against the people of His 
choice. He was about to consume all things from 
off the land. Man and beast, fowls and fishes, all 
alike must feel the stroke. It speaks of utter 
desolation—the result of the fearful ravages of 
bloody warfare. Judah and Jerusalem were to 
be given up to the woes of which they had been 
warned for so long. They had turned away from 
Him, who would have been their Saviour, to fol- 
low Baal, the demon of the heathen. God would 
not cease His strange work until He had cut off 
the last vestige of Baal-worship from the land. 
The idolatrous priests who had been the instru- 
ments used to deceive the people were to be cut 
off too till the very name of the Chemarim would 
cease. The worshipers of the heavenly bodies, 
together with those who professed to follow the 
Lord, but whose profession was unreal, as also 


304 Notes on Zephaniah 


those who swore by Malcham,* the “great king” 
—all must be included in the coming doom. 

The host appointed to death is divided into two 
classes in the sixth verse: “Them that are turned 
back from the Lord; and those that have not 
sought the Lord, nor inquired for Him.” There 
were some who had at first heeded Josiah’s call 
to repentance, and who had sought for a time 
to obey the voice of the Lord; but, putting their 
hand to the plow, they looked back and relapsed 
into their old idolatrous ways. There were others 
who had never known, nor cared to know, the 
mind of God. All must perish in the common 
destruction that was coming. 

Beginning with verse 7, we have a more de- 
tailed account of the manner in which the awful 
threatenings were to be carried out. It will be 
noticed that while the prophet himself had be- 
fore his mind, beyond any doubt, the Babylonian 
conquest, the Holy Spirit who empowered him 
to speak and write had something far more seri- 
ous before Him. The day of the Lord was at 
hand, a day which will only be known in its ful- 
ness when man’s day has come to a close. In 
that day the Lord will prepare a great sacri- 


*Malcham is generally identified with Milecom, or 
Molech, whose abominable worship, with its human sacri- 
fices, the Israelites were warned against when they first 
entered the land, but whose vile service many were early 
led to adopt. 


The Day of the Lord 305 


ficial feast. Already “He hath bid His guests.” 
The language reminds us of the supper of the 
great God, or, as it should be rendered, the great 
supper of God, in Rev. 19:17, 18. In that day 
He will visit the iniquities of the princes and 
the king’s household upon them, as also all of 
foreign birth who are gathered together in the 
land of Palestine. Violence and deceit shall meet 
their just desert, and evil be everywhere abased 
(vers. 7-9). 

From gate to gate the cry of anguish will be 
heard. The merchants and great ones who have 
lived in pleasure on the earth shall in no wise 
escape the day of His wrath. James 5:1 seems 
to be intimately connected with verse 11 of this 
chapter. Both have to do with the collapse of the 
great commercial system which in our own day 
has assumed such gigantic proportions. 

It is a matter of solemn moment, the place 
given in Scripture to the mad rush for silver and 
gold in the last days. The world today presents 
an amazing spectacle if viewed from this stand- 
point. Commerce is the Baal of the hour. In 
the accumulation of great wealth, conscience and 
Christianity are pressed to the wall. Gold is 
king and god. For gold men will sacrifice every 
principle, human and divine. Covetousness is the 
ruling passion of the age. All else must go down 
before it. And Scripture warrants us to expect 
this, and emphasizes the fact that it is a sign of 


306 Notes on Zephaniah 


the near approach of the end. Happy are those 
saints who are preserved from this unholy spirit 
of the times, and who, having food and raiment, 
seek to be therewith content! 

With a lighted lamp the Lord will search Jeru- 
salem in that day; not, as now, to find the lost 
piece that typifies the poor sinner lying in dust 
(Luke 15: 8-10), but to ferret out every man who 
has been indifferent to His truth and has sought 
to make God a nonentity in His own creation, say- 
ing, “The Lord will not do good, neither will He 
do evil” (ver. 12). This is likewise characteristic 
of the present times. Men no longer believe ina 
particular providence. Even the so-called clergy 
often ridicule he idea of divine intervention in 
the affairs of men. Law, hard and inexorable, 
is supposed to control all things; so that human 
responsibility and a prayer-hearing God are alike 
practically denied. But the hour of awakening is 
nearing, when, too late, men will be made to know 
the reality of God’s government and the truth of 
His Word. Their goods shall become a prey and 
their abodes a desolation when they are snatched 
away by the fierce anger of the Lord, whose 
power and hatred against sin they have disdain- 
fully ignored (ver. 13). 

In fervid rhythm the prophet winds up the first 
section of his book with a stirring description of 
the day so long expected—the day of the Lord. 
It is near, and hasteth greatly; the day wherein 


The Day of the Lord 307 


the mighty man shall cry bitterly when he sinks 
beneath the weight of divine wrath. It shall be 
“a day of trouble and distress, a day of waste- 
ness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloom- 
iness, a day of clouds and thick darkness, a day 
of the trumpet and alarm!”’ No refuge will then 
avail, no high tower protect from the avenging 
hand of Him whom men have insulted to His 
face for so long. Like the blind who stumble in 
the daytime, they shall grope in their distress, 
only to fall into the pit prepared, “because they 
have sinned against the Lord.” The riches for 
which they have labored will be useless to save 
them. “Neither their silver nor their gold shal] 
be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord’s 
wrath.” He will not cease until He has made| 
“a speedy riddance” of all who have defiled His 
land. The fire must burn till all the chaff be con- 
sumed (vers. 14-18). 

To this, men are fast hastening on. For this, 
the Jews are even now returning in unbelief to 
their ancient home. For this, men are sacrificing 
every right and noble instinct, building, as has 
been well said, for the fire! 

What sobriety and other-worldliness* becomes 


*I have purposely written, “other-worldliness.” Mere 
unworldliness is not enough. To walk apart from this 
world might make a nun or a monk. To walk in the 
power of another world will make a true ambassador for 
Christ. 


308 Notes on Zephaniah 


the Christian in view of the end toward which 
everything is now hastening so rapidly! The 
day of the Lord is near. The Morning Star will 
soon shine forth. Be it ours then to live and act 
as men who wait for their Lord! 


CHAPTER II 


THE JUDGMENTS OF THE NATIONS 


sized in the Scriptures that while God will 

overlook nothing in His people’s ways that 
merit its rebuke, He will, on the other hand, visit 
severest judgment on all who lift their hands 
against them. Philistia, Moab, Ethiopia, or As- 
syria, might be used of Him to chastise Israel; 
but they should not delight in such service, and 
glory over them. Because of their unholy hatred 
and vindictive spirit, their own punishment would 
be all the more severe. 

This is all a picture of the time of the end. 
Judah then will be much in the position she oc- 
cupied in Zephaniah’s day—in the land, surrounds 
ed by enemies, a feeble remnant, crying, “How 
long, O Lord?” the mass, apostate and swayed by 
Antichrist—and all this because of their rejec- 
tion of Messiah when He came in grace. There- 
fore they must drink the cup of retribution to 
the dregs; but that cup emptied, the Lord will 
arise in His might as their Deliverer, and their 
enemies who have gloried over their helplessness 
shall become the objects of His avenging wrath, 
preparatory to the ushering in of the world-king- 
dom of our God and His Christ. 


qe is a principle over and over again empha- 


310 Notes on Zephaniah 


The three opening verses are a call to Judah 
with a view to the distinguishing of the remnant. 
The nation as such is not desired; they are no 
more lovely in His eyes. Polluted by sin and 
bearing the brand-marks of apostasy, Judah has 
become as a vessel wherein is no pleasure. But, 
ere the day of the Lord’s anger arrives, there is 
a summons for the faithful to gather together. 
As in Malachi’s day, they will speak often one to 
another, and will be drawn to their own company 
by a common tie and common interests. They 
are bidden to seek the Lord, to seek righteousness 
and meekness. Indeed, they are distinctively 
called, ““Ye meek of the earth, which have wrought 
His judgment” (ver. 3). 


Pretension is never becoming in fallen crea- 
tures, much less in a remnant in days of apos- 
tasy. Nor power nor great things are they to 
seek, but Jehovah Himself is to be their object, 
and therefore, necessarily, righteousness coupled 
with lowliness. It is the only suited state to 
such a company at such a time. No matter what 
the ruin that has come in throughout each suc- 
ceeding dispensation, God has always had a rem- 
nant who have sought grace to walk in His truth. 
But there is ever danger of pride destroying such 
a testimony, and thus they who begin in weak- 
ness, owning their nothingness, become occupied 
with their fancied remnant place and character, 


The Judgments of the Nations 311 


in this way getting out of the very position they 
at first took in meekness.* 

The true remnant will not be occupied with 
their remnant character, but with Him to whom 
they are separated. Such will not talk of being 
“the testimony,” or “Philadelphia,” but will be 
here to testify of Christ, and will seek to mani- 
fest Philadelphia (“brotherly love’) in their 
ways, while holding fast Christ’s word and not 
denying His name. Thus will they have His 
approbation in that day, if content to be unap- 
proved of men in this. Satisfied to let the Lord act 
for them, they will be concerned about acting for 
Him. In His own time He will show what was 
truly of Himself, even as, in connection with 
Judah, the hour was about to strike when He 
would deal with the surrounding nations and the 
apostate mass, bringing to light the hidden things 
of darkness and making manifest the counsels of 
the heart. 

Philistia must be one of the first powers de- 
stroyed, answering largely to corrupt Christen- 
dom; for the Philistines, of Egyptian origin, were 


* Only lately I heard of one self-complacently locating 
the special company of Christians to which he was parti- 
cularly attached as follows: God had called out a remnant 
in these last days. Certain meetings formed the remnant. 
Divisions had come in. A few remained on “divine 
ground,” and “alone had the Lord’s table.” It was like 
a biscuit: pieces had been broken off here and there, “but 
we remain the middle of the biscuit!” Could anything be 
more wretchedly pretentious in such a day? 


312 Notes on Zephaniah 


dwellers in Canaan, who sought to hold all for 
themselves apart from divine title, and vaunting- 
ly gave their name, Palestine, to the whole land. 
It is religious pretension seeking to control all 
that stands for God, yet only an imitation like 
that false, corrupt church that for centuries 
dominated Christendom, and still claims, while 
but a fragment of the professing body, to be alone 
catholic and apostolic. Verses 4 to 7 relate to 
Philistia’s judgment and the deliverance of the 
despised Jewish remnant, picturing for us the 
overthrow of prelatic domination and the setting 
free of a Thyatiran residue (Rev. 2:24) at the 
coming of the Lord. For Judah and Philistia 
there has already been a carrying out of this pre- 
diction literally. A more complete fulfilment will 
take place in the last days. 

Moab and Ammon (vers. 8-11) are, as often in 
the past, linked together, both being illegitimately 
descended from fallen Lot (Gen. 19: 33-38). They 
too will be judged nationally in the last days, 
when the remnant of Jehovah’s people shall pos- 
sess them. “This shall they have for their pride, 
because they have reproached and magnified 
themselves against the people of the Lord of 
hosts” (ver. 10). For centuries they have been 
under God’s hand. They shall be fully dealt with 
at the time of the end. For us they speak of those 
who, having a name to live. are dead: who, pro- 
fessing to be of the family of God, were never 


The Judgments of the Nations 313 


truly born again, but are “strange children,” in 
whom is no faith. We see them all about us in 
the so-called “church,” saying, “I am rich, and 
increased with goods, and have need of nothing,” 
while in God’s sight they are “wretched, and mis- 
erable, and poor, and blind, and naked.” It is 
the proud, Christless professors of the day who 
look with contempt and pity on any who seek 
to be guided only by the Word of God, and press 
the need of new birth giving life eternal. 

Ethiopia and Assyria are appropriately joined 
together, Nineveh being the chief city of the lat- 
ter (vers. 12-15). Man in the darkness of nature 
—the Ethiopian unable to change his skin—and 
man in his pride and haughtiness, having no 
sense of need whatever—of these do the two na- 
tions speak: on all, such desolation is soon to fall. 
We get a full description of Nineveh’s doom in 
Nahum’s prophecy. She shall never rise again. 
For Ethiopia there is yet hope, when she shall 
stretch out her hands unto God (Ps. 68: 31). 

The true significance of Nineveh is given in 
verse 15: “This is the rejoicing city that dwelt 
carelessly, that said in her heart, I am, and there 
is none beside me.” It is man all-sufficient in 
himself, utterly indifferent to God, living in plea- 
sure on the earth, and nourishing his heart as in 
a day of slaughter. But the hour of his doom 
is about to strike, when he will learn that power 
belongs to God alone. 


CHAPTER III 


THE REMNANT AND THE LORD IN THE MIDST 


that we have here what answers largely to 

Philadelphia, is fully sustained in this last 
section. Here the mass are viewed in utter rejec- 
tion of the truth, but the remnant are seen in 
weakness, yet holding fast the Word and the 
Name, while the Lord Himself is found “in the 
midst,” as He in the days of His flesh declared 
He ever would be where two or three were gath- 
ered together unto His name (Matt. 18: 20). 

It is Jerusalem, the most highly privileged of 
all cities, which is described in verse 1 as filthy 
and polluted. A fourfold indictment is drawn 
up in verse 2: “She obeyed not the voice; she 
received not correction; she trusted not in the 
Lord; she drew not near to her God!” Intensely 
solemn are these statements. Well may we search 
ourselves before Him who is called “He that is 
holy, He that is true,” that we may detect in our 
ways any departure answering to what is here 
charged against Jerusalem. Have we obeyed the 
voice? Have we received correction from the 
Word of God? Do we truly confide in the Lord, 
and draw near to our God? Serious questions are 
all these. May we answer in the fear of the Lord! 


[es remark made in the notes on chapter 1, 


The Remnant and the Lord in the Midst 315 


Verse 2 is collective. In verges 8 and 4 the 
various classes who should have been the leaders 
in the things of God are mentioned, and individ- 
ually indicted. The princes were roaring lions, 
seeking only for prey; i. e., they sought their 
own profit, not the blessing of the flocks they 
should have shepherded. The judges were even 
worse—evening wolves, secretly devouring all 
they could obtain, while professing to administer 
justice. The prophets were triflers with holy 
things, handling the Word of God deceitfully, 
traitors to their trust. The priests, who should 
have been holy and undefiled, had polluted the 
very sanctuary itself with their uncleanness, and 
done violence to the law. 

Thus, all had failed that God had established 
in responsibility. What then remained? Only 
this: “The just Lord is in the midst thereof; He 
will not do iniquity.”” He remained “the faithful 
and true witness.” He, the Amen, was still the 
resource of every faithful heart, and in Him the 
heart of God could rest. 

It is the manifestation of the Man of God’s 
pleasure when all else has been, humanly speak- 
ing, a disappointment. In the Millennium this 
will be seen in its fulness. It is to that time of 
blessing the passage applies. It is then that the 
words will be fulfilled: “Morning by morning 
doth He bring His judgment to light, He faileth 
not; but the unjust knoweth no shame” (ver. 5). 


316 Notes on Zephaniah 


Never will wickedness have risen to such a height 
as at the very time when the Lord descends to 
take the kingdom; but righteousness will then be 
firmly established, and morning by morning the 
wicked will be cut off. For centuries men have 
been warned of this, but then it will be actually 
carried into effect (vers. 6-8). 

Then shall the confusion of Babel be undone, 
and the Lord will give to all peoples “a pure lan- 
guage, that they may all call upon the name of 
Jehovah, to serve Him with one consent” (ver. 
9). From all the lands of their scattering He 
will bring His redeemed earthly people home to 
Zion, purging out pride and haughtiness, and 
making them willing in the day of His power 
(vers. 10, 11). 

The apostate portion of the nation of Judah 
will be destroyed in the time of Jacob’s trouble, 
and at the appearing of the Son of Man; but He 
says, “I will also leave in the midst of thee an 
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in 
the name of the Lord. The remnant of Israel 
shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies; neither shall 
a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for 
they shall feed and lie down, and none shall make 
them afraid” (vers. 12, 18). Thus are the faith- 
ful found in weakness and dependence, owned of 
the Lord, preserved in the midst of all the sur- 
rounding corruption, and made the nucleus of the 
kingdom when Gentile dominion and Jewish and 


The Remnant and the Lord in the Midst 317 


Christian apostasy have alike been overthrown 
forever. It is the preserved virgin-company of 
Rev. 14: 1-5, standing with the Lamb on Mount 
Zion when the glory is about to be displayed. 


In the present time it is part of God’s ways to 
preserve likewise an afflicted and poor people who 
trust in His name. Such will be characterized 
by loving devotedness to Christ, by brotherly 
kindness, by integrity of heart, by the endeavor 
to maintain a conscience void of offence toward 
God and man, by holding fast the faithful Word, 
by not denying the name of the Lord, by con- 
sistent testimony to the world and the world- 
church for the absent One now rejected, by sep- 
aration from evil, by following “righteousness, 
faith, love, peace, with them that call on the Lord 
out of a pure (or single) heart.” This is the 
“original ground of gathering.” This is Philadel- 
phian position. This alone constitutes a true rem- 
nant company. Such a path can only be main- 
tained in the energy of faith. Nature can form 
a confederacy of assemblies based on mutual ac- 
ceptance of certain guiding principles, or the bow- 
ing to assembly-judgments; but this is not faith, 
and only results in the formation of a system as 
rigid and unscriptural as any of the sects of men. 
It does away with the individual exercise of con- 
science, and substitutes the voice of the church 
for the voice of God in His Word. 

In the last part of our chapter the book comes 


2138 Notes on Zephaniah 


to a fitting close (vers. 14-20) by setting forth 
the day of display, when the hitherto despised 
remnant will be enjoying the unalloyed favor of 
the Lord for whose name they had borne reproach 
in restored Jerusalem, with Himself in their 
midst. For us, faith appropriates this now, and 
enters into the enjoyment of it in spirit. 

Zion is called upon to sing; Israel, to shout. 
The day of gladness and rejoicing has arrived 
for Jerusalem; for the Lord will then have taken 
away her judgments and cast out her enemy. He 
Himself, the glorious King of Israel (once cruci- 
fied outside the gate, on a felon’s cross, beneath 
the title, “This is Jesus of Nazareth, the King of 
the Jews”), will then dwell in the midst of the 
restored city and people, and they shall not see 
evil any more. 

This will be their joy and blessing throughout 
the Millennium. To Jerusalem it shall be said, 
“Fear thou not;” and to Zion, ‘Let not thy hands 
be slack.” Loving service will follow full deliver- 
ance from all her foes. Again it is stated, “The 
Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty.” To 
Him salvation is ascribed. He will rejoice over 
them with joy and rest in His love, joying over 
them with singing. It will be “‘the time of the 
singing” spoken of in the Canticles (2: 12), when 
all redeemed creation, heavenly and earthly, will 
resound with songs of praise and exultation. 

Once more Israel will keep her solemn assem- 


The Remnant and the Lord in the Midst 319 


blies, and her griefs will be changed to gladness. 
All who have afflicted her will be undone, and she 
who was driven away in weakness will be re- 
gathered in power. In every land where the peo- 
ple of the wandering foot had been put to shame, 
they will become objects of praise and fame when 
the Lord Himself shall make them “a name and 
a praise among all people of the earth, when I 
turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith 
the Lord” (ver. 20). 

Thus are we brought again to the end of the 
ways of God with Israel on the earth; who, what- 
ever their failures, are beloved for the fathers’ 
sakes. 

Their portion is earthly. Ours is heavenly. But 
both alike are to contribute to the glory of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, and both alike shall be vessels 
for the display of the matchless grace of our God 
throughout all the ages to come. 


Notes on the 


PROPHECY OF HAGGAT 


INTRODUCTION 


which may be read together most profitably. 

I refer to Ezra, Nehemiah, and Esther, of 
the historical part of the Bible, coupled with the 
prophetic messages of Haggai, Zechariah, and 
Malachi. To these a seventh might be added, 
viz., the book of Daniel, showing the exercises of 
soul which led up to the restoration. 

The book of Ezra opens with the people of the 
Lord in captivity to the Persian, dwelling in the 
provinces once controlled by the kings of Baby- 
lon. God’s centre, Jerusalem, where He had set 
His name, was a blackened ruin. The walls of 
the Holy City had been thrown down, and the 
very stones buried beneath piles of rubbish. All 
this may well be looked upon as a picture of the 
subjection of the Church of God to human sys- 
tems of error and superstition. For long cen- 
turies the truth as to simply gathering to the 
name of the Lord Jesus had been lost. The place 
of the name, we may say, was at Jerusalem de- 


"T we are six books of the Old Testament 


Introduction 321 


stroyed by her enemies. The walls, speaking of 
that godly separation from the world that should 
have kept the Church as “a garden enclosed,” 
had been completely demolished, and ecclesias- 
tical rubbish of all descriptions had so buried the 
truth that it seemed as though it was lost beyond 
all recovery. Separation from evil, then, is ever 
God’s principle for His people. 

However, God was watching over all, and in 
His grace raised up a testimony to these precious 
and important teachings, which had lain dormant, 
as it were, in His Word for so long. Then the 
result was a movement very much like that de- 
tailed in the record made by Ezra. From the con- 
fusion of human theologies and man-made sects 
and parties, there was a returning on the part 
of some whose hearts God had touched to the 
simplicity of early days. In much weakness, yet 
in much freshness too, and with a deep sense of 
the ruin of the Church, as a testimony for God 
in the world, and fully owning their own sad part 
in it all, a remnant returned to the Lord, finding 
in His name their centre of gathering, and abjur- 
ing everything for which they could not find a 
“Thus saith the Lord.” This is all foreshadowed, 
one might say, or at any rate a similar move- 
ment is pictured, in the book of Ezra. There is 
a separation of the clean from the unclean, a 
taking forth of the precious from the vile, and 
a setting up of the altar, called by Malachi “The 


322 Notes on Haggat 


Table of the Lord” (Mal. 1:7), round which 
gather the recovered remnant—great in nothing 
but the faith that led them thus to put Jehovah’s 
claims before all else: for, be it remembered, their 
circumstances were such under the rule of the 
Persian that they might well have dwelt more 
comfortably in the land of their captivity than 
in the land of Israel. 

Nehemiah emphasizes the need of complete 
separation from all that is contrary to the mind 
of God. He comes up later than Ezra, but his 
special work is to restore and build Jerusalem. 
Led on by this faithful servant, the remnant en- 
gage in the building of the wall that was to shut 
them in to God; and that angered their neighbors 
by its, in their eyes, sinister exclusiveness. Bit 
by bit the rubbish of years was cleared away, 
and one by one the stones of the wall were 
brought to light and fitted into their appointed 
places. Surely to all this there has been some- 
thing analogous among those who at first gath- 
ered in feebleness and with little light around 
the table of the Lord. Gradually, yet in such a 
manner as to make it manifestly the testimony 
of the Holy Ghost, the thoughts of men were put 
to one side, the rubbish of traditionalism was 
cleared away, and the stones of divine truth were 
recovered and built up—shall I say ?—into a wall 
of separation, which angered the “‘societies,’’ who 
could not bear to think of a work of God carried 


Introduction 323 


on apart from their organized control. But un- 
moved by mockery, undeterred by threats, and 
unseduced by proffers of help from those who 
had neither part nor lot in the matter, the work 
went on till the wall was finished. The truth as 
to the individual believer’s standing and state; 
the unfolding of the great mystery of Christ and 
the Church; the cluster of precious truths con- 
nected with the Coming and Day of the Lord, 
with their sanctifying effect on heart and life,— 
one by one, and often at the cost of deepest exer- 
cise and soul-travail, coupled with severe conflicts 
with the enemy within and without, were these 
stones of the separating wall recovered, and thus 
God was glorified and His people blessed. 

In the book of Esther we have set forth His 
gracious care over those who, while equally His, 
yet chose to remain where they were, rather than 
return to God’s centre: but as I have treated of 
this at length elsewhere, I need not follow it out 
here.* 

Happy would it have been if what has been 
traced above from the records of Ezra and Nehe- 
miah were the only things necessary to notice. 
But, alas, it is far otherwise. It was not long till 
almost all the evils which had at one time been on 
the outside, appeared within the wall. Pride, dis- 
sension, covetousness, worldliness in its various 


* See “Notes on the Book of Esther” (clo.,75c.; pa.,30c.). 


324 Notes on Haggai 


forms, self-seeking, and kindred unholy things 
which no walls could shut out (because they dwelt 
in the heart and were allowed to exist unjudged), 
soon marred the lovely scene. And oh, who with 
eyes to see and a heart to understand and mourn, 
can fail to observe how in all this likewise we 
have a picture of what has been so sadly true 
among those whose happy boast it has been that 
Christ alone is their Centre, and His Name their 
tower of strength? 

But, blessed be the God of all grace, He left 
not His people without needed conscience-stir- 
ring ministry; but among the returned remnant 
He raised up prophets whose messages led to 
self-judgment and abasement of soul in His pres- 
ence. Haggai and Zechariah come in here, as 
polished shafts from the quiver of the Lord, 
whose mission it was to recall the hearts of those 
so privileged to Himself. The province of the 
latter was especially to unfold the glories to come, 
that they might be stirred up to live then in the 
light of that coming day. He is emphatically “the 
prophet of the glory.” To Haggai it was given, 
on the other hand, to press home upon the con- 
science the actual conditions existing, and with 
trumpet voice to recall them to ways of practical 
holiness, with signal blessing resultant. 

That Malachi follows, in a generation later, be- 
wailing the complete breakdown of the people, is 
pregnant with warning, and may well cause us 


Introduction 325 


to search and try our ways, who today seek to 
answer to what I have been considering. Truth 
alone will not preserve if there be not corres- 
ponding exercise as to living in its power, and 
being controlled thereby. 

Nothing is more wretched than to see unspirit- 
ual, carnal men debating questions involving nice 
discriminations as to the relative bearing of par- 
ticular lines of truth, whose unholy ways are a 
reproach to Him whose truth it is. 


It is important to remember that God teaches 
through the conscience, not merely through the 
head; therefore the spectacle often presented of 
brilliant, gifted men floundering where humble, 
godly men walk securely! Blessed it is when gift 
and godliness go together; unhappy indeed when 
they are divorced! 

Of Haggai himself little is recorded in Scrip- 
ture. Even his father’s name is not given, nor 
his tribe in Israel. He appears suddenly on the 
page of inspiration in Ezra 5: 1, in all the dignity 
of a heaven-appointed messenger, with no cre- 
dentials but that the word of the Lord was on his 
lips and the power of the Lord was manifested 
in his ways. And these are surely credentials 
enough. God had fitted him to be, as he himself 
puts it, “the Lord’s messenger in the Lord’s mes- 
sage.” There is something very fine in this. It 
brings before us the divine character of proph- 
etic ministry—a ministry much needed in our 


326 Notes on Haggai 


day, and for which, in measure, we often have 
cause to give thanks. “He that prophesieth speak- 
eth unto men to edification, and exhortation, and 
comfort” (1 Cor. 14:3). Such ministry is Spirit- 
given, and sure to result in blessing; for what 
God Himself gives shall never return unto Him 
void. What that ministry was in the special case 
before us we shall now proceed to notice. 


CHAPTER I 


CONSIDER YOUR WAYS 


with the statement recorded in Ezra 4: 24. 

There we learn that, owing to the opposi- 
tion of the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin, 
the work of rebuilding the house of the Lord 
ceased “unto the second year of Darius, king of 
Persia.” As the letter which resulted in a pro- 
hibition to continue was written in the reign of 
Artaxerxes, several years had elapsed in which 
nothing had been accomplished. A period of leth- 
argy had set in, which only came to an end when 
a God-appointed ministry was given to stir up 
the consciences of the people. 

In the year above referred to, on the first day 
of the sixth month, Haggai addressed himself to 
the rulers, Zerubbabel the governor, who was of 
David’s line, and Joshua the high priest, saying, 
“Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying, This 
people say, The time is not come, the time that 
the Lord’s house should be built” (vers. 1, 2). It 
is evident from this that they were only too ready 
to refrain from the work, and that had there been 
the energy of faith, the decree of Artaxerxes, ap- 
parently contradicting that of Cyprus, would have 
been no real hindrance. The unalterable charac- 


"T we date given in verse 1 is in harmony 


328 Notes on Haggai 


ter of Persian decrees rendered the second one 
invalid had it really repealed the first. But al- 
ready self-seeking, and consequent listlessness as 
to the things of God, had come in. Hence they 
could build their own houses while neglecting the 
house of the Lord. But Artaxerxes’ decree, right- 
ly read, contained no direct prohibition against 
building the temple, but rather was directed 
against restoring and fortifying the city. 

When the conscience is not active people read- 
ily interpret circumstances to suit themselves; 
and at such times it is often amazing the amount 
of energy that will be expended on that which 
ministers to one’s own comfort, whereas utter in- 
difference characterizes that which is connected 
with the Lord’s glory. 

Thus saints have time and means for much 
that does not profit, who find it difficult to get a 
few hours for a meeting, or to spare of their 
means for the furtherance of the gospel. Once 
let the conscience be in exercise, and all will be 
in place. 

“Ts it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your 
ceiled houses, and this house lie waste?’ is the 
Lord’s challenge through His prophet. No Per- 
sian decree hindered their providing warm and 
even expensive houses for themselves; but it was 
readily made the excuse for indifference to what 
should have had the first place in their thoughts 
(vers. 3, 4). 


Consider Your Ways 329 


“Now therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts: 
Consider your ways. Ye have sown much, and 
bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; 
ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye 
clothe you, but there is none warm; and he that 
earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag 
with holes” (vers. 5, 6). This is all intensely 
solemn. May reader and writer weigh it well. 
Undoubtedly it gives the secret of many failures 
and disappointments among Christians today, as 
well as among the Jews of old. God cannot bless 
self-seeking. He calls on each one to “Consider 
your ways.” The Hebrew reads, “Set your heart 
on your ways.” It is a summons to self-judg- 
ment; for the ways manifest the state of soul. 

We may look at it as entering into every rami- 
fication of the life. Consider your ways, ye who 
have to do with the commercial world in its pres- 
ent conditions. How much is often tolerated 
among us that would not bear the all-searching 
eyes of Him who seeth not as man seeth! The 
covetous spirit of the age is eating the very life 
out of many companies of the Lord’s people. The 
grasping avariciousness everywhere prevalent in 
the world is making dreadful inroads among 
Chris‘ians. Alas, how much is sacrificed for 
money! Christian fellowship, the joys of gath- 
ering at the table of the Lord, gospel work, and 
privileges of mutual edification and instruction 
in divine things—all are parted with often simply 


330 Notes on Haggai 


because the opportunity arises of adding a few 
paltry dollars to the monthly income and savings. 
Brethren with families even will leave a town or 
city where the spiritual support and fellowship 
of their brethren is found, and where their chil- 
dren have the privileges of the gospel meeting 
and the Sunday-school, simply because they see, 
or fancy they see, an opportunity to better their 
earthly circumstances. Alas, in many instances 
they miss all they had hoped for, and lose spirit- 
ually what is never regained! 

Consider your ways in the home life. What 
place do you give the things of God there? Is 
the Bible habitually neglected, and the knee sel- 
dom bowed in prayer before the children? What 
wonder then if they grow up to think lightly of 
what you seem to place so slight a valuation up- 
on! Do you discuss servants of Christ, and the 
people of God in a cold, hard, critical manner hbe- 
fore these same children? Then do not be sur- 
prised if they learn to despise all ministers of the 
Word, and lightly esteem all those that bear the 
name of Christ. 

Consider your ways in connection with the ser- 
vice of the Lord and the assembling of His people. 
Do trifles keep you from the assemblies of God’s 
people for the remembrance of our Lord in His 
sufferings for us? Or do you neglect the preach- 
ing of the Word on the plea that “it is only the 
gospel?” Are you generally missed at the prayer- 


Consider Your Ways 331 


meeting, and seldom found at the Bible-reading? 
Is it months, or years, since you handed out a 
tract, or spoke to others of Christ? How then 
can you expect God’s blessing to be on you and 
your plans while you are so indifferent to Him 
and His purposes ? 


“Thus saith the Lord of hosts: CONSIDER YOUR 
WAYS. Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, 
and build the house; and I will take pleasure 
in it, and I will be glorified, saith the Lord” (vers. 
7, 8). Aroused from the deadening effects of self- 
seeking, judge yourself and your past loose ways 
in God’s presence; then “Put first things first,” 
as one has said, and give the Lord the supreme 
place in heart and life. Because of the lack of 
this purpose of heart to cleave to Him, He could 
not bless as He otherwise would; hence ‘Ye look- 
ed for much, and, lo, it came to little; and when 
ye brought it home,” God blew upon it, and it fled 
away. Did you wonder why failure succeeded 
failure, and plan after plan did not result as you 
hoped? Because God was not given His place, 
His house is neglected, “Therefore the heaven 
over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is 
stayed from her fruit,” and drought and barren- 
ness prevail in place of blessing and refreshment 
(vers. 9-11). 


The effect of Haggai’s words was at once man- 
ifest. Oh that this rehearsal of them may also 


goa Notes on Haggai 


be used to the arousing of those of us who are 
sleeping among the dead! 

Both leaders and people forthwith “obeyed the 
voice of the Lord their God,” and the neglected 
work was at once resumed (ver. 12). 

“Then spake Haggai, the Lord’s messenger in 
the Lord’s message unto the people, saying, I am 
with you, saith the Lord” (ver. 13). It was a 
word of cheer and encouragement, and the way 
it is introduced is very fine—“the Lord’s mes- 
senger in the Lord’s message!” It is quite pos- 
sible to be truly the Lord’s messenger, and yet 
to miss the Lord’s mind. To give His message, 
one must be in touch with Himself. Such was 
Haggai’s happy state. 

Aroused by the stirring call to consider their 
ways, and comforted by the knowledge of the 
Lord’s presence with them, the remnant went 
willingly to work, so that the actual labor on the 
house of God was resumed in twenty-four days 
(vers. 14, 15). The next chapter gives further 
ministry as the work proceeded. 


CHAPTER II 


BE STRONG 


house of the Lord had been going on less 

than a month when the word of Jehovah 
came a second time through the prophet Haggai. . 
On this occasion it was a message, not of rebuke, 
but of cheer and encouragement to both rulers 
and people alike (vers. 1,2). It is thus that God 
delights to comfort and sustain the hearts of 
those who, however poor and feeble, yet seek to 
honor Him. 

Three questions are asked: ‘Who is left among 
you that saw this house in her first glory? and 
how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in 
comparison of it as nothing?” (ver. 3). We know 
from Ezra 3:12 that there were among the re- 
stored remnant “ancient men who had seen the 
first house,” and who wept bitterly when they 
contrasted its former glory with the smallness of 
the present house among the ruins, and that the 
gladness of the younger ones (who had just been 
delivered from Babylon, and whose whole past 
lives had been in the midst of idolatry and oppres- 
sion) was almost drowned in the noise of the 
weeping. 

Now God assures them that the future has 


Ti work of building the long-neglected 


334 Notes on Haggai 


brighter things in store than the past had ever 
known; and He makes this hope the ground of a 
word of encouragement. ‘Yet now be strong,” is 
His message, “for I am with you. .. My Spirit 
remaineth among you: fear ye not” (vers. 4, 5). 

Ruin and desolation may have come in; division 
and scattering may have taken place; but those 
who are gathered back around Jehovah’s centre 
have the joy of knowing, on the authority of His 
own Word, that He is in the midst, and His Spirit 
remaineth among them. Well may they be strong 
and fear not. 

In like manner is the assurance given to Phil- 
adelphia, in the last solemn book of the Bible. 
The saints may have only “a little strength;” but 
His Word and His Name abide, and He, the holy 
and the true, is in their midst. Division and 
strife cannot alter this; nor can any particular 
company of believers claim it to the exclusion of 
others, as though they alone composed “the rem- 
nant.” “For where two or three are gathered to- 
gether in (or unto) My Name, there am I in the 
midst of them.” By this may every little com- 
pany of saints be comforted, who morally occupy 
the ground of the remnant in Haggai’s day. 

Not only had they the Lord’s presence, in 
Spirit, among them, but His coming in person 
was to be their hope, that thus their hearts might 
be lifted above their lowly circumstances as they 
waited for the coming glory. In “a little while” 


Be Strong 335 


the heavens and earth, the sea and the dry land, 
together with all the nations, would be shaken by 
the power of Jehovah, and then “the Desire of all 
nations shall come: and I will fill this house with 
glory, saith the Lord of hosts” (vers. 6,7). The 
long-desired One is none other than our Lord 
Jesus Christ. He came once in grace only to be 
rejected. He is coming again to bring in the 
glory long foreseen by the prophets of old. To 
that house (albeit refurbished and enlarged by 
the Idumean Herod) He came, only to be un- 
recognized and cast out. To that house, rebuilt 
in the last days, He will come again to take the 
kingdom and reign in righteousness. 

The remnant might be too poor to embellish 
the rebuilt temple, but His are the silver and the 
gold. Nothing shall hinder the manifestation of 
the glory when the set time has come. “The lat- 
ter glory of this house shall be greater than the 
former, saith the Lord of hosts: and in this place 
will I give peace, saith the Lord of hosts” (vers. 
8, 9). The rendering of the A. V.—“the glory of 
this latter house’ — is misleading, and has been 
generally taken by commentators to mean that 
the rebuilt temple, being hallowed by the personal 
presence of the Son of God was thus far greater 
than that of Solomon, despite the grandeur of the 
one and the paucity of the other. Some have 
supposed that the architectural beauty of the tem- 
ple after Herod’s embellishments even surpassed 


336 Notes on Haggai 


that of the “house, exceeding magnifical,” built 
by the wise king. But this was by no means the 
case, 

To the first interpretation there could be no 
real objection. It is beautiful and true in itself, 
but does not seem to be what is really meant to 
be conveyed here. “The latter glory of this house”’ 
refers undoubtedly to the millennial splendor of 
the temple depicted prophetically in Ezekiel 40 to 
48. Men may speak of temples or houses of God, 
He speaks but of the temple, or the house. 
Whether the building erected by Solomon, Zerub- 
babel, or Herod, be contemplated; or whether 
that to be rebuilt by unbelieving Judah in the 
coming tribulation, or the millennial temple suc- 
ceeding—all are denominated “‘the house” and 
“the temple” of God. It is one in His eyes. In 
that temple of old every whit of it uttered His 
glory. To that temple He came in grace only to 
be rejected. In that temple the Man of Sin shall 
yet sit. Cleansed, that temple shall be the centre 
of earth’s worship and thanksgiving for the Mil- 
lennium. At present, in this interval of “the dis- 
pensation of the mystery,’ God owns no material 
building as His abode. Believers in the aggre- 
gate, through the whole church period, are grow- 
ing into a holy temple in the Lord. All saints on 
earth at a given time form the house of God, com- 
posed of living stones, who have come to the Liv- 
ing Stone. 


Be Strong 337 


Prophecy is not occupied with this spiritual 
building. It has to do with the earth, and earthly 
things. 

In verses 10 to 14 another line of truth is 
brought in. The transition from what we have 
been considering seems most abrupt, but doubt- 
less the state of the people demanded it. In re- 
ply to a question by Haggai, the priests aver 
that if one “bear holy flesh in the skirt of his 
garment, and with his skirt do touch” articles 
of common food, the latter are not sanctified 
thereby and rendered holy. On the other hand, 
they bear testimony to the solemn fact that one 
who is unclean by the dead defiles everything he 
touches, making it unclean likewise. Such was 
the condition of the people. They were all de- 
filed, and all they did was unclean before God. 
But this only gave occasion for grace to act; 
and so, despite their uncleanness, the Lord had 
taken them up in blessing. But He would have 
them remember that all has come from His own 
heart, apart from their deserts. Though defiled, 
yet when they turned to God and bowed in sub- 
jection to Him, He could manifest Himself strong 
on their behalf. 

So in verses 15 to 19 He contrasts their condi- 
tion when apathetic in regard to His house, and 
now, that they are working in accordance with 
His word. Before, poverty, blasting and mildew 
were their portion. Now, He has, “from the day 


338 Notes on Haggat 


the foundation of the Lord’s temple was laid,” 
given increase and plenty, even as He had de- 
clared long before that “they that honor Me, I 
will honor; and they that despise Me, shall be 
lightly esteemed.” 

We may be sure none will ever be the loser who 
puts the claims of God first. ‘From this day will 
I bless you” is a promise for all who judge what 
is evil and seek to walk in the truth. 

The chapter concludes with another message 
given the same day. It is addressed alone to 
Zerubbabel, the uncrowned son of David, who 
had been appointed governor of Judah. To him 
the Lord announces the shaking of the heavens 
and the earth, and the final overthrow of all the 
kingdoms of the Gentiles, but assures him that 
he shall abide as a signet before Him, “for I have 
chosen thee, saith the Lord of hosts.” 

From Zerubbabel’s loins shall spring “the 
prince,’ who would seem to be the earthly rep- 
resentative of “great David’s greater Son” (who 
likewise came in direct descent from this lowly- 
minded scion of king David), in the day when 
all nations acclaim the splendors of “the latter 
glory of this house.” 


Notes on the 


PROPHECY OF ZECHARIAH 


INTRODUCTION 


a post-captivity prophet. He was one of 

those who came up from Babylon with 
Zerubbabel (having been born in the land of the 
stranger) and gave the word of the Lord to the 
returned remnant. It was Haggai’s mission to 
arouse to action when they had been overcome 
by sloth and self-seeking. Zechariah followed with 
messages of cheer and encouragement designed 
to bring the souls of the people into the power of 
the coming glory. He is therefore largely occu- 
pied with the appearing of Messiah and His reign 
of righteousness. There is blessing in thus hav- 
ing heart and mind transported to the days of 
heaven upon earth. It is then that one is able 
to estimate aright the transitory glories of this 
present evil age. The hope of the Lord’s coming 
has a purifying effect upon the lives of those held 
by it. “Every man that hath this hope in Him 
purifieth himself, even as He is pure” (1 John 3: 
3). 


7. 2 vntcoot like Haggai and Malachi, was 


340 Notes on Zechariah 


The Church has lost much, therefore, by neg- 
lecting the study of prophecy. It should be borne 
in mind that while the prophets of the Old Testa- 
ment do not speak of the assembly of the present 
dispensation, nevertheless those who compose the 
Body of Christ and the Bride of the Lamb may 
learn much that is for edification and blessing 
through Jehovah’s word to Israel. Then too it 
should be enough for the devoted soul to know 
that Christ is to be the center of all that glory 
which is soon to be revealed. If He is concerned 
in it, all who love Him will find spiritual delight 
in tracing the steps leading up to His exaltation 
and the establishment of His kingdom. 

This is what is characteristic in Zechariah. He 
marks out the various stages leading to the ap- 
pearing of Messiah, thus opening up, in large 
measure, “the sufferings of Christ and the glories 
to follow.” 

His book falls readily into two main parts. The 
first six chapters relate the visions of the proph- 
et. The last eight are devoted to instruction based 
upon these visions. There are numerous sub- 
divisions which we shall notice as we go on. 

It would seem as though Zechariah, like many 
of his predecessors, died a violent death, and that 
at the hands of the Jews returned from Babylon, 
when decline had again set in. At least our Lord 
Jesus speaks of “the blood of Zacharias son of 
Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and 


Introduction 341 


the altar,” and which was to be required of the 
men of that generation, who had filled up the 
iniquity of their fathers (Matt. 23: 35). 

It is barely possible, though not probable, that 
our Lord was referring to the martyrdom of 
Zechariah the son of Jehoiada, who was stoned 
to death in the court of the temple (2 Chron. 24: 
20,21); but in that case we have to suppose a 
Berechiah in the genealogy of Jehoiada, or else 
a copyist’s error in transcribing the Greek text. 
In the absence of proof to the contrary, it seems 
safer to assume that Zacharias the son of Bara- 
chias is none other than the prophet to whose 
writings we are about to turn for instruction and 
warning. 

The Jews have a tradition that he perished in 
the manner described. J. N. Darby, in his “Ir- 
rationalism of Infidelity,” says that “the Jewish 
Targum states that Zechariah the son of Iddo, a 
prophet and priest, was slain in the sanctuary.”* 

As the rabbis could have no possible reason for 
seeking to confirm the words of the Lord Jesus, 
it would seem as though their testimony were 
conclusive. 


* The whole question is pretty thoroughly examined in 
the work referred to, pp. 150-159, a volume which I am 
glad to take this opportunity of commending to any trou- 
bled with doubts as to the full inspiration of Holy Scrip- 
ture. (It may be had from my Publishers.) 


CHAPTER I 


ISRAEL AND THE DIVINE GOVERNMENT 


Y comparing verse 1 with the opening words 
B of Haggai’s prophecy, it will be observed 

that an interval of two months, approxi- 
mately, occurred between the beginning of the 
recorded ministry of the two prophets. Con- 
science was aroused, and the work of building the 
house of the Lord begun, as a result of Haggai’s 
stirring message. In the seventh month he sought 
to encourage the now awakened people by direct- 
ing their attention to the future day of Messiah’s 
glory. Then in the month following, the eighth 
of Darius’ second year, Zechariah was bidden to 
speak to them, first in a rousing call to self-judg- 
ment, followed later on by a remarkable unfold- 
ing of what Haggai had so briefly outlined in 
chapter 2: 6-9. 

Others have long since noticed the striking sig- 
nificance of the names in this first verse: ‘““Zechar- 
iah the son of Berechiah, the son of iddo.” Zechar- 
iah means Jehovah remembers; Berechiah is Je- 
hovah blesses; and Iddo, The appointed time. So 
read, we would have: “Jehovah remembers, Je- 
hovah blesses at the appointed time.” Thus, when 
the set time to favor Zion has come, all the prom- 
ises of the Lord will be fulfilled, and carried out 
in blessing. If any think such an interpretstion 


fsrael and the Divine Government 343 


fanciful, let them remember how the apostle, by 
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, dwells on the 
meaning of names, and their prder, in the case 
of Melchizedek, King of Salem, in Hebrews 7: 2. 
There is surely more than a hint in that remark- 
able passage that there are vast stores of instruc- 
tion in the names of men and places used through- 
out the Scriptures that many of us have little 
dreamed of. 

Verses 2 to 6 comprise Zechariah’s first mes- 
sage, and are a suited introduction to the book. 
In view of the return from captivity and the re- 
building of the temple, the people are warned 
not to repeat the errors of their fathers—a warn- 
ing, alas, soon forgotten and quite unheeded. 

With their ancestors the Lord had been griev- 
ously displeased, and because of their sins had 
given them into the hand of the Gentile foe. Now 
let the children of those who had failed so re- 
peatedly turn to Him with all their hearts, and 
He would turn unto them, openly acting for them 
as Jehovah of hosts. Let them not refuse to 
hearken as their fathers refused to obey the mes. 
sages of the prophets that had given them the 
word of the Lord prior to the long-predicted cap- 
tivities of Assyria and Babylon. To them He 
had cried, “Turn ye now from your evil ways, and 
from your evil doings!” but His words had been 
despised. Where were they now who had thus 
dared to refuse obedience to the Word of the liv- 


344 Notes on Zechariah 


ing God? They had been made to know the power 
of His displeasure, and had at last been obliged 
to own that His word was infallible. In the land 
of the enemy they sadly confessed, “Like as the 
Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, according to 
our ways, and according to our doings, so hath 
He dealt with us” (ver. 6). Thus had He been 
glorified even in their abasement and discom- 
fiture. In all this how serious and important the 
lesson for us! 

In verse 7 Zechariah begins to relate a series 
of eight visions, all intimately connected; all of 
which seem to have been given him on the four 
and twentieth day of the eleventh month, in the 
same year as that of verse 1. The first vision 
and its partial explanation occupies verses 7 to 17. 
For convenience we shall call it, The Man among 
the Myrtle Trees. 


The prophet beheld a man riding upon a red 
horse, in a deep valley, among a grove of myrtle 
trees, “and behind him red horses, speckled, and 
white.” In reply to his surprised inquiry, “O 
my lord, what are these?’ an angel replied, “I 
will show thee what these be.” 

Upon this the rider on the red horse, twice 
called a man, but in verse 11 identified as the 
angel of Jehovah, said, “These are they whom 
the Lord hath sent to walk to and fro through 
the earth.” 

Then, as though summoned to give account, the 


Israel and the Divine Government 345 


hitherto unmentioned riders* on the attending 
horses answered the angel of the Lord, and said, 
“We have walked to and fro through the earth, 
and, behold all the earth sitteth still, and is at 
rest.” 

The rider on the first horse would seem to be 
the Covenant-Angel, standing for the people of 
Jehovah’s choice. The other horses speak of the 
providential agencies, possibly angelically-direct- 
ed, working among the Gentile nations. Observe, 
the Lord had sent them. The powers that be 
are ordained of God. They had lately been used 
for the chastisement of offending Israel. Now all 
the world was at peace, and the nations utterly 
indifferent to the low estate of the seed of Abra- 
ham. 

Hence the cry of the Angel of Jehovah, “O 
Lord of hosts, how long wilt Thou not have mercy 
on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against 
which Thou hast had indignation these three- 
score and ten years?” (ver. 12). The Babylonian 
captivity had come to a end. Cyrus had given 
permission for the Jews to return to Jerusalem; 
but though a remnant had gone back, there was 
utter indifference on the part of the great powers 
as to any recognition nationally of the people who 


* Some suppose the other horses to be riderless, and see 
in this a significant picture of the restless energy of Gen- 
tile dominion; but this involves speaking horses, a figure, 
it seems to me, grotesque and unimplied here. 


346 Notes on Zechariah 


were destined to be the chief of the nations. 
Hence the angel’s question, which Jehovah an- 
swered with good words and comfortable words. 

It is a little difficult here to distinguish between 
the Angel of Jehovah riding on the horse among 
the myrtles (who really speaks of Messiah Him- 
self as the Angel-intercessor on behalf of Israel, 
as in Rev. 8: 1-4), and the interpreting-angel who 
explained the visions to Zechariah. The latter it 
is, in verse 14, who gives the seer a prophetic 
message telling him to, “Cry thou, saying, Thus 
saith the Lord of hosts: I am jealous for Jeru- 
salem and for Zion with a great jealousy. And I 
am very sore displeased with the heathen that are 
at ease: for I was but a little displeased, and they 
helped forward the affliction.” 

Proud and self-sufficient, the Gentile powers 
seek only their own, and regard His chosen with 
indifference and scorn; but He is looking on, 
and they are thereby but adding to the cup of 
their iniquity. 

In His own set time, as intimated already in 
connection with the prophetic character of the 
three names in verse 1, Jehovah will arise on be- 
half of His people, and return to Jerusalem, so 
long trodden under foot of the nations, with great 
mercies, bringing in all the blessings of the new 
covenant for the long-despised nation. His house 
shall be built in the land once more, on a more 
magnificent scale than ever, as set forth in the 


Israel and the Divine Government 347 


last eight chapters of Ezekiel. Jerusalem itself 
shall arise from its ruins, a glorious city, une- 
qualed in splendor by any of the cities of the na- 
tions, in the day when “the Lord shall yet comfort 
Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem” (vers. 
16,17). 

It is of importance throughout to distinguish 
between vision and interpretation. Verses 8 to 
13 give the vision. Verses 14 to 17 are the divine 
explanation. Judah and Jerusalem form the sub- 
ject. There is no reference to the Church of the 
present dispensation whatever. Spiritualizers 
have always been fond of so applying it, but to 
do so is to violently wrest the passage. 

The second vision, of the four horns and the 
four carpenters, or four smiths, is given in verses 
18 to 21. The four Gentile world-empires, made 
familiar to us in Daniel’s prophecy, are exempli- 
fied by the horns (symbols of power), viz., Baby- 
lon, Medo-Persia, Greece, and Rome. 

But for every horn there is a carpenter; and 
like as they have agreed together to oppress and 
destroy Israel and Judah, so shall God use these 
carpenters to destroy them. Israel’s enemies are 
God’s enemies, and must be frayed and broken 
when their appointed course is run, with a view 
to the full deliverance of the remnant of the peo- 
ple of His choice. 

In the Hebrew text this vision belongs to the 
next chapter, as chapter 1 ends with verse 17. It 


348 Notes on Zechariah 


requires no further comment. For the saint of 
any dispensation it ministers blessed truth, 
reminding him that God worketh all things after 
the counsel of His own will; and evil is only per- 
mitted in so far as it will serve in the carrying 
out of His wondrous purposes of blessing. 


CHAPTER II 


JERUSALEM’S RESTORATION 


of the man with a measuring-line in his 

hand. Upon beholding him, Zechariah 
asked, “Whither goest thou?” The man replied, 
“To measure Jerusalem, to see what is the- breadth 
thereof, and what is the length thereof.” 

Upon this, the interpreting angel left the proph- 
et’s side, and advanced to meet another angel 
who was coming toward him. The latter cried, 
“Run, speak to this young man,* saying, Jerusalem 
shall be inhabited as towns without walls for the 
multitude of men and cattle therein; for I, saith 


Tor chapter contains but one vision—that 


*T suppose most are aware of the foolish Mormon con- 
ceit which makes this young man to be Joseph Smith, the 
pseudo-prophet, and the angel to be Moroni, who reveals 
to him the golden plates of the book of Mormon! 

The most casual reading of the passage will make clear 
that it has no reference to a Zion in America, but is in- 
timately connected with what has gone before, and follows 
after, as to Jerusalem in the land of Palestine. 


Jerusalem’s Restoration 349 


the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round 
about, and will be the glory in the midst of her.” 
See Zeph. 3: 5, 14-20. 

The young man is Zechariah himself, who is to 
be informed of Jehovah’s purposes as to Jerusa- 
lem in order that he may write it for future gen- 
erations. The city that he knew was mean and 
paltry indeed in comparison with the Jerusalem 
that was yet to be. In the day of its glory and 
splendor there would be no need of a wall of ma- 
sonry. The Lord Himself would be her wall of 
fire, protecting from every assailant, and dwell- 
ing in her midst in the glory of the Shekinah. 

Verses 6 to 9 form the summons to the rem- 
nant to return to their land, in the day when all 
that God has promised is about to be fulfilled. 
Morally, they will still be dwelling with the 
daughter of Babylon, for Gentile dominion was 
established in Nebuchadnezzar, and the powers 
that have succeeded him are all of his spirit and 
character. For over two millenniums they have 
been the persecutors and haters of the Jew; and 
though in our day the position of the Hebrew is 
much more tolerable than ever before since their 
dispersion, there are still angry mutterings of 
anti-Semitism in many parts of Europe, which 
are destined to start a conflagration of unequaled 
fierceness in the time of Jacob’s trouble which 
follows the translation of the Church to heaven. 
But when apparently friendless and helpless, the 


‘850 Notes on Zechariah 


Lord will send His angel to gather together His 
elect from the four winds of heaven, and to re- 
establish them in peace in their long-promised 
inheritance, the land of their fathers. 

The exact time when this is to take place is 
given in verse 8: “After the glory hath He sent 
me unto the nations which spoiled you: for he 
that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of His eye.” 
The expression, “after the glory,” refers to the 
period immediately following the revelation, or 
apocalyptic appearing of Christ from heaven, 
when He descends in power and great glory to 
take the kingdom and assert His rights, as in the 
2d psalm. Then the world shall know that Israel 
are the people of His choice, and the sheep of His 
pasture. As in Esther’s time, the Jews will have 
light and joy, gladness and a good day, while their 
enemies will be humbled in the dust before them, 
and made to know that in oppressing the seed of 
Jacob they have been fighting against the living 
God. 

Verses 10 to 13 form a fitting close to such a 
prophecy. The daughter of Zion, who has hung 
her harp on the willow for so long, as she wept 
by the rivers of Babylon, is called upon to sing 
and rejoice: for her glorious Lord will Himself 
dwell in her midst, and they shall ail know Him, 
“from the least to the greatest.” 

Then shall many nations be joined to Jehovah 
and become His people, being brought into the 


Jerusalem’s Restoration 351 


same blessed knowledge vouchsafed to Israel. 
This is far different from the call of the Gentiles 
in the present dispensation. Now God is taking 
out from among the nations a people for His 
name, and uniting Jew and Gentile into one body. 
Then Israel will be supreme in the earth, and all 
the nations shall find their blessing through her, 
when “the Lord shall inherit Judah His portion 
in the holy land, and shall choose Jerusalem 
again” (ver. 12). 

So shall the years of her mourning be ended, 
and Israel’s long warfare be accomplished. In 
that day the portion of the Church will be in the 
heavenly glory, while the earthly people will find 
their blessing in the land promised to Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob as an inalienable inheritance, 
from which their seed shall never be expelled. 

The last verse expresses the attitude of all the 
world in the day when the Lord shall do this: 
“Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord: for He 
is raised up out of His holy habitation.” 

Sweet it is to know that the rising tide of evil 
will soon be checked; sin and rebellion shall in 
every shape be eliminated from the earth; all the 
spared of the nations will own the benignant yet 
righteous sway of the now-rejected Saviour, and 
Jehovah of hosts be everywhere worshipped and 
obeyed. 


CHAPTER III 


A BRAND PLUCKED OUT OF THE FIRE 


ways. Primarily it sets forth Israel’s cleans- 

ing, judicially and morally, in the last days. 
It is also a lovely gospel picture, which the soul 
delights to dwell upon. 

Joshua the high priest, the associate of Zerub- 
babel, the uncrowned heir of David’s line, is seen 
standing before the angel of Jehovah, as if for 
judgment. At his right hand appears Satan, the 
adversary, ever the accuser of the peopie of God. 
But he is not permitted to raise any question, 
or to bring any charge, though Joshua is clothed 
in filthy garments; for the Lord Himself speaks, 
saying, “Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan; even Je- 
hovah that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee; 
is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?” 
(vers. 1-3). 

It is strikingly solemn, and yet a lovely scene. 
Joshua represents the entire remnant company; 
for as priest he went in to God on their behalf. 
But he is clothed, not in the unsullied robes pre- 
scribed by the law, but in filthy garments—set- 
ting forth the moral pollution ot the whole nation. 
Isaiah’s description well accords with this signi- 
ficant picture, “Why should ye be stricken any 
more? Ye will revolt more and more: the whole 


[ws fourth vision may be looked at in two 


A Brand Plucked Out of the Fire 353 


head is sick, and the whole heart faint. From 
the sole of the foot even unto the head there is 
no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and 
putrifying sores: they have not been closed, nei- 
ther bound up, neither mollified with ointment” 
(Isa. 1: 5, 6). 

Constitutionally corrupt, the filth of Judah’s 
pollution defiled all her garments, and made them 
filthy and vile in God’s sight. Who would have 
supposed any people so unclean could have been 
accepted of Jehovah? Surely the adversary would 
find ready ear when he sought to prefer his 
charges before the throne of infinite holiness! 
But God had taken into account all Israel’s fail- 
ures when He first took them up in grace, so He 
will listen to no charge against them. He re- 
bukes the devil with the declaration that He has 
chosen Jerusalem, and that Joshua, as the peo- 
ple’s representative, is a brand plucked out of 
the fire. This is matchless lovingkindness surely, 
but just what we should expect here; for “the 
gifts and calling of God are without repentance.” 
He will chasten and discipline his failing peo- 
ple, but He will not allow Satan to prefer a single 
charge against them, for provision has been 
made for their moral fitness for His presence. 
Zechariah then hears Jehovah’s voice saying to 
those who stood before Him, “Take away the 
filthy garments from him.” While to Joshua him- 
self the word is given, “Behold, I have caused 


354 Notes on Zechariah 


thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe 
thee with change of raiment.” 

At this the prophet’s soul was stirred to its 
depths, and, entering into the spirit of the occa- 
sion, he cried out, “Let them set a fair mitre upon 
his head!” 

Immediately it is done as he requested, and as 
God had commanded. So Joshua appears no 
longer as a type, or symbolic character, of Judah, 
polluted by her failures and sins, but of the rem- 
nant which shall be regenerated in the day of Je- 
hovah’s power, when she shall be cleansed from 
all her pollutions and He will be pacified toward 
her for all that she has done (Ezek. 16: 60-62). 

No more beautiful gospel picture is found with- 
in the Bible covers than this. As aptly as Joshua 
stands for Judah, so does he represent the poor 
sinner coming into God’s holy presence with all 
his guilt upon him. It is thus every soul must 
meet Him for the first time. None can put away 
his iniquity and thereby fit himself to face that 
righteous throne. But clad in his filthy garments, 
owning fully all his dreadful guilt, every repent- 
ant soul may approach God with the conscious 
knowledge that for such as he there is mercy and 
cleansing. 

The adversary will be there to hinder if he can; 
but Jehovah will not listen to him, for He has His 
eye on the work of the Lord Jesus Christ, accom- 
plished on Calvary’s cross, when “He bare the 


A Brand Plucked Out of the Fire 355 


sin of many, and made intercession for the trans- 
gressors” (Isa. 53:12). Against that mighty in- 
tercession no Satanic charges can avail. Too 
loudly cries the blood in God’s ear that speaketh 
better things than that of Abel. Therefore of 
every believing sinner He delights to say, “Is not 
this a brand plucked out of the fire?’ 

Nor is it merely judicial clearance, but there 
will be moral fitness too; for those whom God 
justifies He likewise cleanses, purifying their 
hearts by faith, when they are born of the water 
of the Word and by the Spirit of holiness. 

To Joshua, after he has been vindicated, 
cleansed, clothed, and crowned, the angel of the 
Lord protests, bidding him hear the word of Je- 
hovah of hosts, that he may walk in His ways, and 
keep His charge, assuring him that if there be 
faithfulness and devotedness, he will judge God’s 
house and keep His courts, having “places to walk 
among these that stand by:” that is, being asso- 
ciated with those seraphic beings whose joy it is 
to obey the slightest behest of the all-glorious and 
thrice-holy One (ver. 7). 

Thus are God’s redeemed ones called to serve 
Him whose grace has plucked them as brands 
from eternal fire. And so, in the coming age, will 
restored and purged Israel delight to obey the 
voice of Him who shall have made them willing 
in the day of His power. 

In verse 8 Joshua and his fellows are said to 


356 Notes on Zechariah 


be “men wondered at,” or, more correctly, “men 
of signification ;’’ making clear that we have been 
correct in seeing in the high priest, and his com- 
panions likewise, symbolic personages. 

Only in Christ shall all these prophetic pictures 
be made good; so at once we are told, “I will bring 
forth My Servant the Branch.” The title is not a 
new one as applied to the Lord Jesus. Again and 
again had the older prophets so designated Him. 
Isaiah more than once foretold the day when 
“the Branch of the Lord” should be for beauty 
and for glory (Isa. 4:2; 11:1); and Jeremiah 
twice spoke of David’s righteous Branch, who was 
to be called Jehovah Tsidkenu (Jer. 23:5, 6 and 
83: 15,16). So Zechariah but amplifies here and 
in chapter 6:12 what God had long before made 
known. 

The Branch of verse 2 is identified with the 
Stone of verse 9, which is to be engraved as with 
the engraving of a signet, with the sign of per- 
fect intelligence, namely, seven eyes. This is the 
Stone of salvation which was once a rock of of- 
fence, and, as such, was rejected by the builders. 
Soon it shall fall from heaven, in accordance with 
Nebuchadnezzar’s vision (Dan. 2), grinding to 
powder the enemies of the Lord, but removing the 
iniquity of the land of Palestine in one day. Then 
shall the blessings of Messiah’s reign be entered 
into by the spared remnant, who shall call every 
man neighbor, under their own vine and fig tree. 


The Two Anointed Ones 357 


It is an apparently abrupt conclusion to so 
marvelous a chapter, but it accords with the gen- 
eral character of Zechariah, where sudden ter- 
minations and quick transitions abound through- 
out. 


CHAPTER IV 


THE TWO ANOINTED ONES 


fifth in the series, is of prime importance to 

any reverent student of the word of God. 
Not only does it set forth precious and important 
truth relative to Israel, as God’s light-bearer in 
the world, but it is the only instance where the 
typical meaning of oil is distinctly explained. It 
gives us therefore an unerring key whereby to 
unlock many of the treasures of symbolic teaching 
throughout the Old Testament. 

The prophet seems to have fallen into a slum- 
ber after the interpretation of the previous vision } 
for we are told that the angel who had been 
speaking with him came again, and waked him, 
as a man is waked out of his sleep, saying, “What 
seest thou?” (vers. 1,2). Zechariah looked, and 
beheld a sight of great beauty and splendor. A 
golden lamp-stand, evidently somewhat similar in 
construction to that which is described in Exod. 


"Tse striking vision next recorded, being the 


358 Notes on Zechariah 


25: 31-37, appeared before his eyes. But in one 
marked respect it differed from that whose lamps 
the priest had to carefully fill daily lest they 
should be extinguished. Here no human hand pro- 
vided the oil, nor was responsible to maintain the 
light of testimony. The stand and its lamps were 
of one piece, and the latter were continually sup- 
plied in a most remarkable manner. Upon the 
top of the central shaft was a golden bowl, or 
fountain. From this radiated seven pipes, which 
connected with the seven lamps. On either side 
of the stand an olive tree was growing, the 
branches of which were represented as bending 
over the receiver-fountain, and pouring their oil 
into it in a continual stream. Thus the light was 
ever maintained in its beauty and power (vers. 
Pos) 

In response to Zechariah’s request for enlight- 
enment as to the meaning of this, the angel said, 
“This is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, 
saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by My 
Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts. Who art thou, O 
great mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shalt be- 
come a plain: and he shall bring forth the head- 
stone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace 
unto it.” 

Here was no meaningless oracle, such as those 
of heathen sybils, but a plain declaration that 
just as the oil pouring into the golden bowl fed 
the lamps, so the Holy Spirit would confirm and 


The Two Anointed Ones 359 


unfailingly furnish Israel to be Jehovah’s testi- 
mony-bearer in the earth. He who had brought 
up a remnant from Babylon under Zerubbabel, 
the prince of David’s line, would infallibly fulfil 
every promise made through His holy prophets. 
Human power and might could neither hinder 
nor help. The Holy Spirit alone could sustain 
and maintain them as His light in the world. Thus 
we know what oil typifies. It speaks ever of the 
Spirit of God, whether as anointer or earnest. 
In His divine power alone can any testimony be 
carried on for God at any time. During the 
present dispensation of Israel’s scattering, the 
Church is the light-bearer, even as her Lord was 
while here upon the earth. By and by, when Is- 
rael shall be restored in the saved remnant, she 
will once more become God’s witness. But whe- 
ther with the blessed Lord Himself, the Church 
His Body, or Israel His people, all true testimony 
is in the energy of the Holy Spirit. 
Endued by power divine, who need fear the 
face of man? Before Zerubbabel and the feeble 
remnant in the land, Gentile authority might seem 
like a great mountain, hindering all progress in 
the special work committed to them. Only un- 
belief could so count it. Faith would say to the 
mount of difficulty, “Become a plain,” and so it 
should be. No weapon formed against them should 
prosper, no arm should be strong enough to 
hinder, till the temple was completed to the glory 


360 Notes on Zechariah 


of Jehovah, and Zerubbabel should bring forth the 
capstone amid the shoutings of a rejoicing people, 
crying, “Grace, grace unto it?” (vers. 4-7). 

Even so shall every promise made in the word 
of God be fulfilled to the letter. In this case he 
who had begun the house should finish it (see 
Ezra 3: 10-15 and 6: 14-18) ; thus proving that a 
prophet had been among them. It was a day of 
weakness, a day of small things; but they should 
not despise it, for it was the day of Jehovah’s en- 
ergy. The nations of the earth might be utterly 
indifferent to what was transpiring at the insig- 
nificant place where the Lord had set His Name; 
but there He was, working in mighty power, 
nevertheless. There the plummet of truth was 
in the hands of Zerubbabel, and the people 
wrought according as they found it written. There 
too the eyes of the Lord rested with complacency, 
after running to and fro through the whole earth 
(vers. 9, 10). 

In God’s sight it was “a great work” that was 
going on in Jerusalem, for it was the carrying 
out of His own word, with a view to the coming 
of His Son into the scene. 

On one other point Zechariah desired enlight- 
enment. He had been contemplating the two olive 
trees, wondering what they might signify; so he 
inquired boldly of the angel, asking for informa- 
tion regarding them. It would seem as though 
there was slowness of apprehension on his part; 


The Two Anointed Ones 361 


for he not only had to put his question twice over, 
but the angel did not immediately reply, but ques- 
tioned him, as in verse 5, where it seemed as 
though spiritual intuition ought to have made all 
clear, saying, “Knowest thou not what these be?” 
Confessing his ignorance, Zechariah is told that, 
“These are the two anointed ones, that stand by 
the Lord of the whole earth.” 

To him the two anointed ones could be no other 
than Zerubbabel, the prince, and Joshua the high 
priest. So in kingly and priestly power the tes- 
timony of God was to be maintained. These were 
the agencies through which Jehovah would work. 


In Rev. 11:4 the two witnesses are said to be 
“the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks 
standing before the God of the earth.” The re- 
ference is clearly to Zechariah’s vision; yet there 
is a marked difference. There we have two candle- 
sticks; here, but one. The reason is plainly this: 
the two witnesses come on the scene before Israel 
is established as God’s lamp-stand nationally. 
With them it is individual testimony. Therefore 
in place of one seven-branched lamp-stand, setting 
forth completeness of testimony we have two wit- 
nesses described as two lamp-stands. And they 
are also said to be the two olive trees; for they 
stand before God as His anointed sons of oil in 
the day when His name is denied and His word 
despised. Coming in the spirit and power of 
Moses and Elijah, they prophesy in the energy 


362 Notes on Zechariah 


of the Spirit till put to death by the Beast and 
his adherents. Thus, for the moment, all testi- 
mony for God will seem to have been blotted out; 
but the word of the Lord shall not fail, for the 
seven-branched lamp-stand shall be set up when 
the Lord descends and delivers His people Israel 
out of the hands of all who oppress them. 


CHAPTER V 


THE FLYING ROLL AND THE EPHAH 


HE visions of glory which we have been con- 
"| tenotatine in the last two chapters are suc- 
ceeded by others of very diverse kind. If 
Judah and Jerusalem are to be blessed, it must 
be on the ground of sovereign grace alone. Merit 
there was none, but the very opposite. It is this 
the ‘‘flying roll’ makes manifest. It speaks of un- 
sparing judgment “according to their works,” 
which must fall on all who refuse to judge them- 
selves according to the word of the living God. 
But it lets us know likewise that He, the Holy 
One, so grievously sinned against, has found a 
way to save in a righteous manner all who turn 
to Him and call upon His name; otherwise all 
should of very necessity be cut off. 
There is no word or apparent hint of anything 


The Flying Roll and the Ephah 363 


but wrath to the uttermost; yet, read in the light 
of the preceding symbols, our hearts are lifted up 
in holy exultation to the praise of the grace that 
saves. 

We are told, “Then I turned and lifted up mine 
eyes, and looked, and behold a flying roll. And 
he said unto me, What seest thou? And I an- 
swered, I see a flying roll: the length thereof is 
twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits. 
Then said he unto me, This is the curse that go- 
eth forth over the face of the whole earth (or, 
land, R. V.; 2. e., Palestine): for every one that 
stealeth shall be cut off as on this side according 
to it; and every one that sweareth shall be cut 
off as on that side according to it. I will bring 
it forth, saith the Lord of hosts, and it shall enter 
into the house of the thief and into the house of 
him that sweareth falsely by My name: and it 
shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall 
consume it, with the timber thereof and the stones 
thereof” (vers. 1-4). 

I have quoted the account of both the vision and 
its interpretation in full; for it is of a most sol- 
emn character, and may well speak loudly to every 
heart, both of the sinners of the Gentiles and 
of the people of Israel. Primarily it refers dis- 
tinctively to Judah. They will be restored to the 
land in unbelief when it has its fulfilment. Note 
well that the Revised reading, “land,” in verse 3, 
here, as generally in the Prophets, is much to be 


364 Notes on Zechariah 


preferred to the more general “earth” of the A.V. 
In studying the seventeen books that make up the 
last part of the Old Testament, it is of prime im- 
portance to remember that throughout God has 
Israel as a people and Palestine as their land 
before His eyes. That apparently insignificant 
strip of country is, for Him, the centre of the 
earth, and of all His ways with men on the earth. 
He gave it by inviolable covenant to Abraham and 
his descendants. There His blessed Son was born, 
and lived and died. Thence He ascended to heav- 
en. To that same land He shall descend in per- 
son to usher in the kingdom long foretold. 


For centuries that land has been trodden igno- 
miniously beneath the foot of the haughty Gen- 
tile conqueror, while its rightful inhabitants have, 
for their sins, been dispersed among the nations. 
But thither they shall return; yea, even now are 
returning in large numbers, though as yet in dark- 
ness of soul and unbelief. There, God will pass 
them through a trial of unequaled fierceness, 
called ‘“‘the time of Jacob’s trouble,” or “the great 
tribulation,” separating thereby the precious from 
the vile; destroying the sinners and transgressors 
from among them, and saving the repentant sub- 
jects of His grace, who shall form the nucleus 
for the kingdom in the day of His power. 

Of this preparatory judgment the vision now 
claiming our attention speaks. Zechariah beheld 
in the heavens a vast scroll in majestic yet hur- 


The Flying Roll and the Ephah 365 


ried notion, moving swiftly through the air, over 
all the land of Canaan. Closely observing, he saw 
that it was written on both sides with curses and 
judgments. On the one side was God’s word 
against those who wronged their neighbor, in ac- 
cordance with the second table of the law (first 
mentioned, for man can best appreciate the wick- 
edness of sin against his fellow); on the other 
side, the doom pronounced on those guilty of im- 
piety, according to the first table. 

That law, in itself “holy, and just, and good,” 
becomes their condemnation; for “as many as 
are of the works of the law are under the curse: 
for it is written, Cursed is every one that contin- 
ueth not in all things which are written in the 
book of the law to do them” (Gal. 3:10). The 
Jew makes his boast in that law; yet it speaks 
only for his condemnation. 

The flying roll is the answer to the foolhardi- 
ness of the people who cried at Sinai, “All that 
the Lord hath spoken will we do.” After a trial 
lasting through long centuries and millenniums, 
it is the witness against them, making manifest 
the solemn fact that they have failed at every 
point, so must be cut off in judgment. 

Into every house where the thief or the false 
swearer is found the curse enters, bringing utter 
destruction in its wake. This is all the law can 
do for any sinner. It can only condemn and curse 
the violator of it. 


3866 Notes on Zechariah 


And who has not violated it? Wherever it has 
been promulgated, it has found many to promise, 
but none to perform. No honest man can claim 
to have kept it; therefore on that ground, as 
righteousness he has not, salvation there cannot 
be. 

But, blessed be God, He has found a ransom for 
men and women who have forfeited all title to 
His favor. “Christ hath redeemed us from the 
curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for 
it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on 
a tree” (Gal. 3:13). On the ground of an accom- 
plished redemption, grace flows out now to every 
transgressor who owns his lost condition and 
trusts the sinner’s Saviour. On the same ground 
will the flying roll be turned aside from the houses 
of all the remnant of Judah in the last days, who 
turn to God in repentance, and, like their fathers 
on the passover night in Egypt, find shelter be- 
neath the blood of atonement. This the wondrous 
vision of chapter three has already set forth. 


Beginning with verse 5, we have another and 
a stranger symbol. Zechariah, evidently musing 
with downcast eyes on the awful portent we have 
been considering, was aroused by the interpret- 
ing angel, and called upon to observe the next 
remarkable vision. He saw a great ephah, a vessel 
for measuring merchandise, with a weighty piece 
of base metal, akin to lead, upon the top of it. 
This being lifted, he beheld a woman who was 


The Flying Roll and the Ephah 367 


cast into the ephah, which was again covered with 
the lead. Two other women then appeared, with 
wings like those of a stork, who lifted up the mea- 
sure between them and flew with it to the north. 
In reply to the seer’s question, “Whither do these 
bear the ephah?” the angel said, “To build it a 
house in the land of Shinar: and it shall be estab- 
lished, and set there upon her own base” (vers. 
5-11). 

Such was the strange portent beheld by the 
prophet. What is the meaning to be gathered 
from it? 

It is noticeable that, as we go on with the series, 
there is less and less given in the way of inter- 
pretation. It is as though the Lord would give 
enough in regard to the earlier visions to lay a 
solid foundation for the understanding of the 
later ones. Thus the need of carefully compar- 
ing what we have here with what has already’ 
come before us. 

Various interpretations have been suggested, 
many of which seem to be extremely fanciful. 
One of the most common is this: The ephah is a 
symbol of commercialism, setting forth the great 
characteristic mark of the Jewish race, who are 
a nation of keen bargainers. The woman sets 
forth iniquity in business, now come to the full. 
The carrying of the woman in the ephah to the 
land of Shinar indicates the revival of the ancient 
city of Babylon in great splendor as the commer- 


368 Notes on Zechariah 


cial centre of the coming day. Interpreters of 
this stamp point to certain negotiations now go- 
ing on for the opening up of Mesopotamia and the 
extension of railroad enterprise in that direction 
as sure indications that they are on the right 
track. But to our mind all this is pure specula- 
tion, and absolutely unsupported by Scripture. 
Both Jeremiah and Isaiah make it clear, in my 
judgment, that Babylon has fallen to rise no 
more.* It has been literally burned with fire and 
utterly destroyed, and God Himself has solemnly 
declared that for that wicked city there shall be 
no healing nor revival. 

Nor is there any solid reason for supposing 
that the ephah is in itself, of necessity, a symbol 
of great commercial enterprise. Is it not rather 
the recognized symbol of measurement, telling 
us that God shall weigh and measure Judah’s sin, 
and the sin of the whole house of Israel, with un- 
erring accuracy. When their iniquity has come 
to the full, in wondrous grace He will separate 
the wickedness from the preserved remnant, deal- 
ing with it in connection with the place of its ori- 
gin, the land of Shinar. For the woman in the 
ephah sets forth unmistakably, I judge, wicked- 


*JI do not enter into this in detail here, as I have al- 
ready done so in commenting on Jeremiah, chapters fifty 
and fifty-one. The interested reader may consult “The 
Weeping Prophet: Notes on Jeremiah and the Lamenta- 
tions.” Same author and publishers. 


The Flying Roll and the Ephah 369 


ness of a religious character, as in the parallel 
cases of the woman hiding the leaven of evil 
teaching in the food of the people of God (Matt. 
13), and the woman Jezebel corrupting the as- 
sembly at Thyatira, issuing in the awful impiety 
of the scarlet woman of Rev. 17. 

Now, Israel’s great religious sin was idolatry. 
They had been separated from the nations to be 
Jehovah’s witnesses to the unity of the Godhead. 
Instead of maintaining the place of testimony 
thus given them, they turned to the practices of 
the heathen, provoking their Rock and causing 
Him to fall upon them in indignation. Babylon 
was the mother of idolatry. It was the home of 
all that is false in a religious way. In the time 
of the end this spirit of wickedness will be sepa- 
rated from Judah and carried by stork-winged 
women (symbol surely of the unclean energy of 
the human mind, femininely lovely, but propelled 
by the energy of the prince of the power of the 
air) to the land of Shinar, where its house will 
be built. That is, there its habitation will be, and 
there will it be judged. 

It is a moral continuity. In mystical Babylon 
literal Babylon finds her identity continued and 
her sin fully dealt with. With her sorcery have 
all nations been deceived, and in her shall be 
“found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and 
of all that were slain upon the earth” (Rev. 18: 


24). 


370 Notes on Zecharian 


Thus shall Israel be purified and idolatry of 
every form meet its just and final doom, prepar- 
atory to the establishment of the world-kingdom 
of our God and His Christ. 


CHAPTER VI 


THE FOUR CHARIOTS, AND THE CROWNING DAY 


the prophecy, and is itself divided into two 

parts. Verses 1 to 8 give us Zechariah’s 
final vision. Verses 9 to 15 set forth the glorious 
climax of all prophetic instruction, in figure; the 
crowning of Joshua the high priest representing 
the coronation of our Lord Jesus Christ when He 
shall be manifested to Israel as ‘‘a Priest forever, 
after the order of Melchizedek,” who combined in 
himself the kingly and priestly offices. 

The vision is simple, yet comforting, and re- 
quires but little explanation. Zechariah saw four 
chariots, drawn respectively by red, black, white 
and speckled bay horses. No mention is made of 
drivers. It would seem as though the horses were 
directed by unseen agency, which is fully in keep- 
ing with the explanation given afterward. 

The chariots and their horses were seen coming 
out from between two mountains of brass. The 
prophet inquired as to the identity of the symbols, 


"Tee chapter concludes the first division of 


The Four Chariots, and the Crowning Day 371 


and was answered by the angel, who said, “These 
are the four spirits of the heavens, which go forth 
from standing before the Lord of all the earth. 
The black horses which are therein go forth into 
the north country; and the white go forth after 
them; and the grizzled go forth toward the south 
country. And the bay* went forth, and sought 
to go that they might walk to and fro through the 
earth.” Then the angel addressed the restless 
steeds directly, bidding them, “Get you hence, 
walk to and fro through the earth.” 

At once they started on their mission, where- 
upon the angel turned again to Zechariah, and 
said, “Behold, these that go toward the north 
country have quieted my spirit in the north coun- 
try” (vers. 1-8). 

The vision evidently sets forth God’s control of 
all destructive agencies used by Him in the pun- 
ishment of the nations that have deserved His 
wrath. It was intended to give repose of heart 
and confidence of mind to the remnant, making 
known to them the fact that the God of Israel 
was the Lord of all the earth. ‘All things serve 
His might.”” In His own way and time, therefore, 
He would send the chariots of His government 
against the nations that had made a prey of and 
spoiled His people. “Mountains of brass’ speaks 


* Some read, “the red;” see R.V., margin. Others 
translate this word, “the strong.” 


372 Notes on Zechariah 


of power in righteous judgment. From between 
two such mountains the chariots go forth. 

God’s providential agencies may seem, to unbe- 
lief, like restless, uncurbed horses rushing here 
and there according to blind chance or their own 
uncontrolled energy. But the man of faith, though 
he cannot always see the Hand that guides the 
reins, yet knows that divine wisdom orders all 
according to righteousness. 

The special prophetic application of what Zech- 
ariah had beheld was at that moment connected 
with the kingdom of Babylon on the north and 
Egypt on the south. Between these two powers 
God would sustain His feeble flock, checkmating 
every effort to destroy them till Messiah should 
Himself appear. Alas, that when He came they 
knew Him not! therefore they have been driven 
from their ancestral home and scattered among 
the Gentiles. But in the last days they will again 
be found in a similar, though more serious, state 
than that in which they once failed so grievously. 
Then the lesson of this vision will be for their 
comfort and cheer, bidding them look up in con- 
fidence to Him who controls all agencies that 
would seek their overthrow. Compare Rev. 7: 1-3, 
where four angels are seen holding the winds, or 
spirits of destruction, in check till the sealing of 
the remnant who are to be preserved for the king- 
dom soon to be established. 

We have thus gone over the apocalypse of 


The Four Chariots, and the Crowning Day 373 


Zechariah, seeking to understand his visions in 
their prophetic and moral bearing. They har- 
monize perfectly with those of Daniel and the 
Revelation, as also with the unfolding of the ways 
of God in Hosea. 

We are now to notice a symbolic action on the 
part of the prophet, which sets forth the bringing 
in of the glory, or the crowning day—the corona- 
tion of the once-rejected Jesus as Priest-King 
over all the earth. 

Zechariah was bidden to go to some of the re- 
turned captivity, and to take from them gifts of 
silver and gold to make crowns. One he was di- 
fected to set upon the head of Joshua the son of 
Josedech, the high priest; but even as he did so, 
he was to speak of a greater than Joshua, saying, 
“Behold the Man whose name is The BRANCH; 
and He shall grow up out of His place, and He 
shall build the temple of the Lord: even He shall 
build the temple of the Lord; and He shall bear 
the glory, and shall sit and rule upen His throne; 
and He shall be a priest upon His throne: and 
the counsel of peace shall be between them both” 
(vers. 12,13). 

Upon the brows of the associates of Joshua 
crowns were also placed, as setting forth the dig- 
nity of restored Israel when they shall all be a 
kingdom of priests. This was done “for a me- 
morial in the temple of the Lord”’ (ver. 14). Then 
followed a declaration that “they that are far off 


374 Notes on Zechariah 


shall come and build in the temple of the Lord, 
and ye shall know that the Lord of hosts hath 
sent me unto you. And this shall come to pass, 
if ye will diligently obey the voice of the Lord 
your God” (ver. 15). 


Those directly addressed by Zechariah did not 
diligently obey Jehovah’s voice, and so forfeited 
the promised blessing. But in a future day an 
obedient remnant will be found who shall be born 
again, and in whose hearts and minds will be 
written the law of God so that they shall delight 
in His testimonies. Then shall the Branch of 
Jehovah be glorious throughout the whole earth, 
and the crown be placed upon that brow that was 
once pierced with the mock crown of thorns, when 
Pilate led Him forth, uttering unconsciously the 
very words of the prophet, ‘Behold the Man!’ 
There he stopped, for the hour had not yet come 
when that lowly Man was to be invested with His 
regal glories. But when God brings His First- 
begotten into the world again, He will call upon 
all created intelligences, human and angelic, to 
do Him homage. Then shall the promise of the 
110th psalm be fulfilled, and His Melchizedek 
priesthood, in relation to Israel and the earth, be 
ushered in. 

The words, “‘He shall build the temple of the 
Lord,” together with the prophecy of verse 15, 
make it clear that another and more glorious 
temple than that of Zerubbabel was contempla- 


The Four Chariots, and the Crowning Day 375 


ted. That house, “exceeding magnifical,” is fully 
described, together with its surroundings and 
order, in the last eight chapters of Ezekiel. It 
is to be built when the long-looked-for King has 
come, and in His Person the two offices of Priest 
and Ruler combine. 

“The counsel of peace shall be between them 
both,” we are told. That is, the new covenant 
will rest, not on an agreement entered into by 
man and God, but it will be established forever 
on the ground of “the counsel of peace” made be- 
tween Jehovah of hosts and the Man whose name 
is “The Branch.” He, the Man of God’s purpose, 
settled every question as to sin when He died upon 
the tree; and now, “having made peace through 
the blood of His cross,” He is the agent through 
whom the reconciliation of all things in heaven 
and earth will be effected (Col. 1:20). 

Thus have we been carried in spirit from the 
days of Judah’s first restoration to her final bless- 
ing in the land, when “this Man shall be the 
peace,” and “in His own times He shall show, who 
is that blessed and only potentate, King of kings, 
and Lord of lords.” 

This is the ultimate goal of prophecy, and closes 
the first division of our book. 


CHAPTER VII 


THE NEED OF REALITY 


the prophecy of Zechariah is a little more 

than two years later than what we have 
been considering. In the meantime royal per- 
mission had been given for the completion of the 
temple, and the work went on with some degree 
of energy. See Ezra, 5th chapter. Already there 
had been some effort made to revive the ancient 
feasts, and likewise to keep the more modern 
fasts. Concerning one of the latter, a deputation 
of Jews came to consult Zechariah and the elders, 
both of the priests and prophets. Their Chaldean 
names tell that they had been born in captivity. 
As representatives of the people, “Sherezer and 
Regem-melech, and their men,” came “to pray 
before the Lord, and to speak unto the priests 
which were in the house of the Lord of hosts, 
and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the 
fifth month, separating myself, as I have done 
these so many years?” (vers. 2, 3). 

There seems to have been propriety in the ques- 
tion. For the fast of the fifth month, as also for 
the fasts of the fourth, seventh and tenth months 
(chap. 8:19), there was no direct authority in 
the word of God, and the returned remnant had 


T tte opening date for the second division of 


The Need of Reality 377 


been learning to inquire, “What saith the Scrip- 
tures?” as to both command and teaching. 

During their Babylonian sojourn they had kept 
the four fasts mentioned, commemorating vari- 
ous events in their past sad history, all connected 
with their punishment for their sins. None need 
doubt the piety that prompted the observance of 
these special seasons of humiliation before God. 

The only trouble was, that formality so readily 
took the place of reality and genuine self-hum- 
bling in the presence of the Lord. On the tenth 
day of the fifth month Nebuzar-adan burnt the 
temple and the city of Jerusalem. On the yearly 
anniversary of that solemn event they fasted and 
wept, beseeching the Lord to have mercy, and re- 
store the house and the city. 

Naturally, now that they were again in the 
midst of Jerusalem’s ruins, and their prayer 
seemed answered in measure before their eyes 
as the house of God neared completion, the ques- 
tion of the righteousness of continuing the self- 
appointed fast of the fifth month came before 
them. 

The word of the Lord of hosts came through 
Zechariah in reply. But there was no legislation 
regarding the fast at all: He neither forbade nor 
enjoined it. In itself, such a fast was without 
positive scriptural authority. On the other hand, 
it was in full keeping with the general tenor of 
the Word. It was extra-scriptural, rather than 


378 Notes on Zechariah 


un-scriptural. If the people met in true self- 
judgment and brokenness of spirit before God on 
that day, or any day, it would have been accept- 
able. If they met simply as legally observing 
a fast which, after all, He had never appointed, 
it was a weariness of the flesh, and worthless in 
His sight. Therefore Zechariah presses home the 
need of reality. What had been their object and 
condition of soul as they kept the fasts in the 
past? When they commemorated the burning 
of the temple in the fifth month (2 Kings 25: 8; 
Jer. 52:12), and the death of the faithful Geda- 
liah in the seventh month (2 Kings 25: 25; Jer. 
41: 1, 2),* did they at all fast unto Jehovah all the 
years of the captivity? 

When, on the other hand, they kept the ap- 
pointed feasts, in place of the fasts, was it His 
glory they sought? Or did they simply come to- 
gether for social enjoyment, eating and drinking, 
without one thought of honoring Him whose 
power and grace they were supposed to be re- 
membering? (vers. 6, 7). 


*]T have thought that possibly commentators in general 
are wrong in applying “the fast of the seventh month” 
to the lesser fast commemorating the murder of Gedaliah, 
and that it really refers to the great fast of the day of 
atonement. In that case the prophet would be showing 
that whether directly appointed by God in His Word, or 
added by pious consent, no observance was acceptable 
apart from reality. But as the Jews themselves apply the 
passage as in the text, I have left it at that. 


The Need of Reality 379 


Surely, if all before had been unreal and hol- 
low, now, with such marked evidences both of di- 
vine grace and government before them, they 
should turn to God with all their hearts, remem- 
bering the words which He had cried by the for- 
mer prophets, who had testified to their fathers 
before Jerusalem was destroyed, and when they 
dwelt therein in peace, and prosperity was in the 
land (ver. 7). 

This is all the answer that was given for the 
moment. It was left to them to decide whether 
they should keep the fast or not. And this is most 
significant, and has a voice for us whose lot is cast 
in a similar day, if we will hear it, emphasizing 
the fact that mere formality will never do for 
God. He must see a true turning to Himself if 
He would find delight in the gathering together 
of His people. There may not always be chapter 
and verse for every practice, but God will gra- 
ciously accept all that springs from true self- 
judgment, and that is not opposed to the plain 
letter of His Word. It has become the fashion in 
some places to ask, “Where is the scripture for a 
Bible-reading, or where the direct verse for gath- 
ering the young together to teach them the knowl- 
edge of the Bible, and thus to lead them to 
Christ?” We need not be troubled by such cold- 
hearted queries as these. Rather let the Sunday- 
school worker ask himself, or herself, ““Why do 
I thus labor among the children? Is it with me 


380 Notes on Zechariah 


but a weariness of the flesh, and a matter of 
form? Has it become simply legal drudgery, 
which I carry on because such work is now cus- 
tomary? Or do I seek thus to glorify the Lord 
Jesus Christ? Is my purpose so to minister Him 
to those young in years that their tender hearts 
may be drawn to Himself ere they become hard- 
ened by the deceitfulness of sin?” If this be the 
case, let there be no further question, but go on 
joyfully with your service, doing it heartily, as 
unto the Lord. 

The same principle applies to the meeting ap- 
pointed for the study of the Word, among be- 
lievers. There is no direct scripture that such 
meetings are to be held at stated intervals; but 
there is plenty in the way of scripture warrant 
and example to make it clear that when such 
meetings are convened by earnest, loyal-hearted 
saints, who come together hungering for the pre- 
cious truth of God, and ever letting it sit in judg- 
ment on them and on their ways, it is truly pleas- 
ing in His sight. Otherwise it is but a work of 
the flesh—religious flesh, no doubt, but flesh still, 
for all that. 

And what has been said is equally true of the 
assembly-meeting of 1 Cor. 14 and the meeting 
for the breaking of bread of 1 Cor. 11 and Acts 
20:7. It is quite possible to sit down at the 
Lord’s table, where the bread and wine speak of 
His body given and blood shed for us, and yet not 


The Need of Reality 381 


eat the Lord’s Supper at all, because the mind is 
so fully occupied with other things that there is 
no true remembrance of Christ. One may go from 
the meeting-room eased in conscience because he 
has not neglected the table of the Lord, and super- 
ciliously regarding himself as superior to Chris- 
tians whose light and privileges seem of a lower 
order, when all the time there has been nothing 
for God in it all, but the whole thing was a per- 
functory and empty ceremony, detestable in His 
eyes, if indeed there has not been an actual eating 
and drinking of judgment to oneself. 

But if there is to be reality when saints are 
gathered together, there must be righteousness 
in their daily lives. So Zechariah again speaks 
the word of the Lord, saying, “Execute true judg- 
ment, and show mercy and compassions every 
man to his brother: and oppress not the widow, 
nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the poor; and 
let none of you imagine evil against his brother 
in your heart” (vers. 9,10). Solemn words are 
these! Would that they had been oftener called 
to mind by the people of God in all ages! He has 
said, “Woe unto them that decree unrighteous de- 
crees!”? (Isa. 10:1), yet how frequently has eccle- 
siastical authority been invoked to enforce the 
most palpably cruel and unholy decisions! Oh, 
the crimes that have been committed in the name 
of the Lord and His truth! The cruelties of those 
who have vaunted the exclusive mind of the Lord 


382 Notes on Zechariah 


will make a terrible and a humiliating record at 
the judgment-seat of Christ. When will saints 
learn that nothing is of God which is unholy; 
that nothing is right which is not righteous; that 
nothing is bound, or ratified, by the Just One 
which in itself is unjust! Neither is anything to 
be owned as having divine sanction which out- 
rages the mercy and compassions of Christ. 

Because Israel forgot all this, and “made their 
hearts as an adamant stone,” the former prophets 
had been sent to warn them, and they would not 
hear; therefore great wrath came upon them. As 
they were indifferent to the cry of the distressed, 
and calloused as to the sorrows of the needy, God 
gave them over to learn in bitterness of soul what 
distress and need really meant. In the day of 
their anguished cry, He refused to hearken, even 
as they had refused to hear His voice of entreaty 
and warning. So they had been scattered with a 
whirlwind among all the nations (vers. 11-14). 
Would their children learn from the sad experi- 
ences of the past, or must they too be broken and 
driven forth because of indifference to the claims 
of the Holy and the True? 

To Christians of the present day the same ques- 
tions may well be put. May God give us grace 
to profit by the failures of the past, and to walk 
softly and in charity, according to truth, in the 
little while ere the Lord Jesus comes again! 


CHAPTER VIII 


THE LIGHT OF THE FUTURE SHINING ON THE 
PRESENT PATH 


strikingly displayed in this chapter, where 

we find God, through His servant, drawing 
back the veil that hides the coming glory, in order 
that His people may comprehend in some measure 
their hope, that their present path may be in ac- 
cordance therewith. 

It would perhaps have been better had there 
been no break between this portion and that 
which we have just had before us, as it all seems 
to be part of Jehovah’s answer to the inquirers 
regarding the propriety of observing the fast- 
day of the fifth month. 

Verses 1 to 8 form a lovely millennial picture, 
describing the conditions which will prevail when 
“Jerusalem shall be called, A city of truth, and 
the mountain of the Lord of hosts, The holy moun- 
tain.” Because of their idolatrous ways the Lord 
had been “jealous for Zion with a great jealousy,” 
and with great wrath had delivered Judah into 
the hands of their enemies, that they might learn 
in the strangers’ land the folly of trusting in 


[ss value of the study of future prophecy is 


384 Notes on Zechariah 


graven images and sacrificing to the demons be- 
hind the symbols (ver. 2). Their sojourn in Baby- 
lon had cured them of this for the time, though 
our Lord Jesus showed that they were but as a 
house empty, swept and garnished, to which the 
unclean spirit who had gone out will yet return, 
bringing with him seven demons worse than him- 
self. This will be fulfilled when idolatry of a 
worse kind than ever before is established among 
them—even the abomination of desolation stand- 
ing in the holy place. 

But all this is passed over here, for it is God’s 
purpose that is before us, not the people’s fail- 
ure. Nothing is plainer than that the latter half 
of verse 3 never could have been properly ap- 
plied to Jerusalem and Mount Zion since the re- 
turn from Babylon. Yet it is there intimately 
connected with the first part, “I am returned unto 
Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem.” 
All the succeeding failure, even to the rejection 
of Messiah Himself and their consequent disper- 
sion, is passed over in silence, and the future 
glorious estate of Jerusalem is linked up with the 
remnant then in the land. Only when the Lord 
has been manifested in power will the words that 
follow be fulfilled. Then shall there be old men 
and aged women dwelling in the restored city, 
while “the streets of the city shall be full of boys 
and girls playing in the streets thereof” (vers. 4, 
5). The street is now the place of danger. Then 


The Light of the Future on the Present 385 


the children can play therein with perfect safety. 
It is a sweet and touching thing thus to see how 
the Eternal God concerns Himself even about the 
innocent pastimes of the little ones. It might be 
well if some parents who are prone to a more than 
Puritanic legality pondered this 5th verse; for I 
fear that the boys and girls are often made to feel 
that their simple pleasures are, if not displeasing 
to Him, at least unprofitable and vain. 

The accomplishment of what has here been out- 
lined must be marvelous indeed in the eyes of 
puny man; but it is but a small thing with Him 
who hurled worlds into space, and directs the 
movements of the minutest of His creatures. His 
omnipotent Hand shall surely perform what His 
mouth has spoken. But that a future return from 
among the nations was before His mind is evi- 
denced by what follows: “Behold, I will save My 
people from the east country, and from the west 
country; and I will bring them, and they shall 
dwell in the midst of Jerusalem: and they shall be 
My people, and I will be their God, in truth and in 
righteousness” (vers. 7,8). This is the universal 
testimony of the prophets. The restoration from 
Babylon was but temporary, in order that what 
had been written concerning Messiah might be 
fulfilled. He having been cut off, they who re- 
fused Him were driven forth into all the ends of 
the earth. From thence, in God’s appointed time, 
they shall return again to that country, which is 


386 Notes on Zechariah 


still to them “the land of promise,” where all that 
the prophets have spoken shall come to pass. 


In verse 9 the practical application is pressed 
home. In view of the glory that is coming, the 
hands may well be strong. What need to be down- 
cast and discouraged with such a portion assured 
us in Christ? So the people were urged to labor 
and hope, cheered by the promises of rich reward. 
God was caring for their interests. He would 
have them in earnest as to His. When Haggai 
was first raised up to speak to them, famine 
threatened, and disappointment clouded all their 
sky. But when they willingly and cheerfully gave 
themselves to the work of building His house, He 
had declared, ‘From this day will I bless you” 
(Haggai 1: 9-11; 2: 18,19). He had been as good 
as His word, and would still watch over them for 
blessing, giving prosperity and increase while 
they “put first things first,” making His glory 
their object (vers. 10-12). 

But in all these promises it is plain that God 
has something more before Him than the little 
company then returned. He was looking on to 
fulness of blessing in the Millennium. Hence He 
declares that Israel, once a curse among the na- 
tions, shall be saved and made a blessing, ac- 
cording to His oath to Abraiiam. This was not 
true in any large measure, nor for long, of the 
actual company, or their descendants, to whom 
Zechariah spoke; for in less than six hundred 


The Light of the Future on the Present 387 


years later we hear the Holy Spirit declaring that 
through them the name of God was blasphemed 
among the Gentiles (Rom. 2: 24). And so it has 
been ever since. But God’s Word abides never- 
theless, and in a future remnant every promise 
shall be made good (ver. 13). 


The Lord had no delight in afflicting His peo- 
ple; but their fathers had provoked Him to wrath. 
Let their children take heed to their ways there- 
fore, and obey His voice, and all would be well. 
“These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye 
every man the truth to his neighbor; execute the 
judgment of truth and peace in your gates: and 
let none of you imagine evil in your hearts against 
his neighbor; and love no false oath: for all these 
are things that I hate, saith the Lord” (vers. 16, 
17). 

Practical righteousness and true morality are 
the same in all dispensations. Christians may well 
challenge their hearts as we read these verses and 
note what is abhorrent in God’s sight. Truth, 
and judgment according to truth: in these He 
delights. Evil surmisings (a most fruitful source 
of trouble in all ages) and false oaths: these He 
hates. May we have grace given to cleave to the 
former and refuse the latter! 


The question as to the fasts (chap. 7:3) is 
again reverted to in verses 18, 19. Those of the 
fifth and seventh months we have already no- 


388 Notes on Zechariah 


ticed. That of the fourth month commemorated 
the taking of Jerusalem, while that of the tenth 
called to mind the beginning of its siege. If the 
restored residue sought to walk with God, truly 
judging the past, these fasts would be trans- 
formed into cheerful feasts. “Therefore love the 
truth and peace,” they were told. Notice that 
truth comes first, then peace; as in 2 Tim. 2: 22 
believers are called upon in a day of confusion 
and distraction to follow righteousness first of all. 
Then faith, love and peace would rightly follow. 
The chapter concludes by portraying the happy 
spiritual conditions which will prevail in the day 
that Messiah’s kingdom is established. It shall 
be no matter of hardship or cold, formal obedi- 
ence to come together in a solemn assembly be- 
fore Jehovah when Israel shall be a regenerated 
and sanctified people. Each city shail then vie 
with the other in “‘provoking unto love and to 
good works,” saying one to another, “Let us go 
speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the 
Lord of hosts: I will go also” (vers. 20, 21). His 
service will then be their joy and delight. The 
122d Psalm will be fulfilled, and the voices of the 
restored remnant will sing with exultation, “I 
was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into 
the house of the Lord.” I+ is ever thus when 
Christ Himself is before the soul. The gatherings 
of the children of God become in very deed as 
foretastes of heaven when He is to His own the 


The Light of the Future on the Present 889 


altogether lovely. There are no dry, listless meet- 
ings then; but every heart thrills with a joy not 
earthly as He fills the vision of the enraptured 
soul. If right with God, there would ever be this 
holy freshness and fervent longing for His pres- 
ence. But when permitted sin has been allowed 
to do its deadly work unjudged, the Holy Spirit 
is grieved, Christ is hidden, and what would have 
been a delight becomes a weariness of the flesh, 

When the saints of God are enjoying Christ, 
others are attracted to Him and to them. So, 
when Israel shall be gathered round Himself, 
dwelling under His shadow, and happy in His 
love, there will be a great stirring of heart among 
the spared of the nations who will not have been 
destroyed when the stone falls from heaven— 
“Many people and strong nations shall come to 
seek the Lord of hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray 
before the Lord.” The Jew, so long despised and 
hated, will be looked upon as the ambassador of 
the Lord, and ten men of all languages shall 
cleave to one who is of Judah, saying, “We will go 
with you: for we have heard that God is with 
you” (vers. 22, 23). It is impossible, by any prin- 
ciple of honest interpretation, to make these 
words fit any revival of the past or present. They 
apply only to the day when Jerusalem shall be 
the spiritual metropolis of the whole earth, and 
when the name of Jew, so often used in contempt 
and derision, will proclaim one who is truly a son 


390 Notes on Zechariah 


of praise,* joyfully worshiping the Lord of hosts 
as he stands upon redemption ground. Then in- 
deed shall all the nations know that “salvation 
is of the Jews.”’ 

But that there is a spiritual application, I have 
already pointed out. When the people of God, 
in any age, are going on in happy fellowship 
with their Lord and Saviour, the unsaved will 
be attracted to Him, and will be found seeking 
out His disciples, saying, “We would see Jesus.” 


*Jew is but a contraction of Judah, which means 
“praise.” Note how the apostle interprets the name in 
Rom. 2: 28, 29. 


CHAPTER IX 


THE COMING KING 


X X YE have already pointed out that this 
book divides into two parts. The second 
division embraces chapters 7 to 14. Our 

study has shown us that, of these, chapters 7 and 

8 stand together. A second section, or subdi- 

vision, begins with chapter 9, and goes on to the 

end of chapter 11, giving in a most instructive 
way the coming of Messiah, and His rejection by 

Judah. Chapters 12 to 14 follow with the inspired 

account of His second coming and His acceptance 

by the repentant remnant. 

The refusal of Christ when He came in grace 
is morally connected with the state into which 
the people had fallen long before. The cross was 
but the culmination of a course of wilful harden- 
ing that had been going on from the days of the 
wilderness. Because of this were the various cap- 
tivities and the many afflictions which had come 
upon them. When these resulted in exercise and 
repentance, the peaceable fruit of righteousness 
and repentance followed. To this the remnant 
had been called in chapters 7 and 8. Now the 
prophet points them on to the coming Saviour- 
King, that there might be heart-preparation for 
His reception. But the 11th chapter closes with 


392 Notes on Zechariah 


the solemn prediction of the selling of the true 
Shepherd for thirty pieces of silver, and the con- 
sequent acceptance of the Idol-shepherd, the An- 
tichrist. 

The opening verses, 1 to 8, are occupied with 
the destruction of the Syrian power in “the land 
of Hadrach,” together with all Israel’s enemies 
bordering on the land of Palestine, preparatory to 
the extension of the promised kingdom; and evi- 
dently have a double application, setting forth, as 
they do, the past overthrow of the kingdoms ere 
the first coming of the Lord (which would have 
been final had He been received and owned as the 
Anointed of Jehovah), as well as the future doom 
of the powers which will be in those lands when 
comes the final triumph of the King of kings. In 
that day He wil! “encamp about His house,” be- 
coming as a wall of fire for the protection of His 
own, and every foe shall be destroyed, so that 
“no oppressor shall pass through them any more.” 

Through all these lands the victorious armies 
of Alexander passed, overthrowing all of the 
cities mentioned, in strict accordance with the 
prophetic Word. Damascus, Hamath, Tyre and 
Zidon, and the strongholds of the Philistines, were 
all alike subjugated, and some utterly ruined, to 
rise no more. Yet Judah and Jerusalem were 
spared, as if by direct divine intervention, and 
the Grecian armies became the protectors, in 
place of the destroyers, of the seed of Abraham. 


The Coming King 393 


The temple and city were preserved that in them 
might be carried out all that the prophets had 
spoken concerning the coming of the Just One, 
who was to suffer and to die there. 

So in verse 9 we have recorded the words which 
Matt. 21:4, 5 and John 12:14, 15 tell us were 
directly fulfilled when the Lord Jesus Christ rode 
into Jerusalem amid the welcoming cries of the 
disciples, the children, and of the people. “Rejoice 
greatly, O daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter 
of Jerusalem: behold, thy King cometh unto thee: 
He is just, and having salvation: lowly, and rid- 
ing upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an 
ass.”” Thus He came as the Prince of Peace, only 
to be eventually despised and set at naught. When 
He comes the second time, it will be as the War- 
rior-King on the white horse of victorious judg- 
ment (Rev. 19). 

Between verse 9 and verse 10 this entire dis- 
pensation of grace comes in; for it is evident 
that the latter part of the chapter has never yet 
had its fulfilment. The King came, but was re- 
fused. His cross becomes the sign of salvation 
for all who trust Him; while He Himself has 
taken His seat on the Father’s throne in the 
heavens. Never for one hour has He occupied the 
throne of David which is yet to be His. That 
throne He will take when He descends from the 
heavens with power and great glory. Then He 
will cut off all the enemies of Jerusalem, and 


B94 Notes on Zechariah 


“He shall speak peace unto the heathen: and His 
dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the 
river to the ends of the earth” (ver. 10). Only 
when He appears in person will these words come 
to pass. There can be no Millennium without 
Christ. 

At His glorious revelation He will deliver 
Judah’s prisoners out of the pit wherein is no 
water, through the blood of the covenant con- 
firmed in His death, bringing salvation to these 
prisoners of hope, who will find in Him a strong- 
hold and a defence from all their enemies—after 
He has rendered to Israel double for all their in- 
iquities (Isa. 40:2; 61:7). Then shall Judah be 
as a strong bow in His hand, and Ephraim as a 
polished shaft, before whom the nations shall 
bow, owning the excellency of the God of Jacob 
(vers. 11-13). 

Again we have to notice a secondary applica- 
tion of a part of this prophecy. Verses 13 to 16 
seem to refer in measure to the Maccabean con- 
test with Antiochus Epiphanes, type of the Anti- 
christ of the last days. Then Jehovah raised up 
the sons of Zion against the sons of Greece, and 
made the army of Judah “as the sword of a 
mighty man.” But undoubtedly the fuller inter- 
prevation is that which refers these words to the 
conflicts of the great tribulation, when, in their 
darkest hour of trial, “the Lord shall be seen over 
them, and His arrow shall go forth as the light- 


The Coming King 395 


ning,” when He shall blow the trumpet for the 
defence of those who in their distress shall turn 
to Him with all their hearts. 

He will “save them in that day as the flock of 
His people,” when they shall become the jewels 
of His crown, brilliantly shining upon Immanu- 
el’s land (ver. 16). What a day of glory for the 
people so long hated and oppressed! They who 
have been accounted by many as the very off- 
scouring of the earth shall shine in unequaled 
brilliancy in the diadem of the Crucified, when 
they cry, “Blessed is He that cometh in the name 
of the Lord!’ No longer will He be to them 
“without form or comeliness,” and bereft of all 
beauty that would cause them to desire Him. On 
the contrary, as they gaze astonished upon His 
head once crowned with thorns and His visage 
once marred more than any man, they will cry, 
with rapturous amazement, “How great is His 
goodness, and how great is His beauty!” Then 
shall He feed them with bountiful hand, provid- 
ing them with every needful blessing, so that 
“corn shall make the young men cheerful, and 
new wine the maids” (ver. 17). Fasting and sor- 
row will have ceased forever. The joy of an un- 
ending feast in the banqueting house will have 
begun with the banner of love waving over all. 


CHAPTER X 


THE GATHERING 


ject, detailing the glory which might long 

since have been enjoyed by Israel had they 
owned Messiah’s claims, but which, consequent 
on their rejection of Him, has been in abeyance 
during the present period of the calling out of 
the Church, and will only be made good to the 
earthly people when they own Him, whom they 
once spurned, as the Anointed of Jehovah. 

It will be noticed that all Israel are included, 
however (vers. 6, 7)—not merely Judah. At the 
appointed time a remnant from all of the twelve 
tribes will be brought into blessing and settled 
in the land of their fathers, never more to be uv- 
rooted by an enemy’s hand. 

Without the latter rain (see Joel 2:23 and 
notes) Palestine becomes little better than a wil- 
derness, though in our day conservation of the 
waters and irrigation are made somewhat to an- 
swer in its place. But: under natural conditions 
the former and the latter rains are required to 
ensure plenty and prosperity. Therefore we need 
not be surprised to find the prophets using the 
rains in a figurative sense. Spiritually, Israel 
has had her former rain, but a long season of 
drought has since come in. Now they are bidden 


Ties chapter pursues the same general sub- 


The Gathering 397 


to look up in hope, and ask of the Lord “rain in 
the time of the latter rain;” in response to which 
He pledges Himself to give showers of blessing. 
This is undoubtedly the outpouring of the Spirit 
predicted by Joel, which will surely take place at 
the time of the end. 


Till then spiritual famine necessarily prevails. 
In their idols no comfort was to be found, so at 
the captivity they put them away; but they have 
been since like an unshepherded flock, taking their 
own course, and wandering in a dry, desolate 
land. The undershepherds and the leaders of the 
people, “the goats,” have caused them to stray, 
thus incurring the Lord’s anger, who is about to 
visit His flock (limited here to the house of Judah, 
for it was they who crucified the Lord of glory) ; 
and, bringing them once more under His control, 
they shall become “as His goodly horse in the bat- 
tle” (vers. 1-8). 

Out of him, that is, Judah, came forth the Cor- 
ner-stone and the Nail. Both of these names I 
take to refer to Christ. He is the Head of the 
corner, and “it is evident that our Lord sprang 
out of Judah.” He is also the Nail upon whom 
Jehovah will hang all the glory of His Father’s 
house. (See Isa. 22: 22-24.) 

But the Battle-bow and every exactor, or ruler, 
together shall likewise spring from Judah. The 
Battle-bow seems also to be used symbolically of 
the Lord when He rides forth in His might to 


398 Notes on Zechariah 


overthrow all His enemies. With Him will be 
associated the rulers of Judah when the first do- 
minion shall have returned to the royal tribe. 

Victorious over all who have sought their de- 
struction, the once feeble remnant shall become 
as mighty men treading down their enemies when 
led to certain triumph by the Lion out of Judah 
(ver. 5). 

Every enemy at last overthrown, Jehovah will 
strengthen the house of Judah, and save the house 
of Joseph, bringing them again in mercy to their 
land, and making them one people, restoring them 
to His favor as though He had never cast them 
off (ver. 6), thus repealing the Lo-ammi sentence 
of Hos. 1: 9. The Jews, first brought back to their 
land in unbelief, will pass through the sorrows of 
the great tribulation, by means of which the rem- 
nant will be separated from the apostate mass. 
The ten tribes will be gathered later, and added 
to Judah and Benjamin, when Messiah Himself 
has appeared in glory. They had no direct part 
in the crucifixion of God’s Son, so the special hour 
of trial is not for them. 

The restoration will be far more than a politi- 
cal or national event giving them back to Pales- 
tine, their ancestral home. There will be a divine 
work in the souls of the people so long blinded, 
so that the veil of unbelief having been taken 
away, they shall rejoice in the Lord, and be glad 
in His presence. It will be the fulfilment of the 


The Gathering 399 


type of the feast of tabernacles, the happiest sea- 
son of all the year (ver. 7). Joying in conscious 
redemption, fruitfulness will again be theirs, and 
they shall increase as in the days of old. 

The manner of their ancient deliverance (vers. 
9-12) is used as a figure of this future one. They 
are to be gathered from all the lands of their 
captivity, to the land of promise, thus set in the 
midst of the nations, in accordance with the word 
of the Lord as to Jezreel, the seed of God (Hos. 
2:22, 23—see the notes.) Passing in triumph 
through the sea of affliction* and the river of 
sorrow, they shall find in the Lord their God 
strength and victory, and shall walk at liberty in 
His name. 

This is the universal testimony of Scripture as 
to the future glory of the nation now scattered 
and despised. Their blindness is to pass away; 
and, with the eyes of their heart enlightened, they 
will behold the beauty of Him who was once ab- 
horred and crucified. 

Thus shall their whole history become a lovely 
illustration of the precious words of Psalm 76: 
10, “Surely the wrath of man shall praise Thee: 
the remainder of wrath shalt Thou restrain ;’’ God 
will only permit so much evil as will ultimately 
glorify Him. Anything beyond that He will hold 


*In verse 11 read, “He shall pass through the sea of 
affliction,” as in R. V.,—not “with affliction,” as the A. V. 
has it. 


400 Notes on Zechariah 


in check. How consolatory is this for the tried 
saint in any dispensation! How often is the spirit 
overwhelmed and the soul cast down! But faith 
can look up in the hour when all seems hopeless, 
and darkness overspreads the scene, knowing that, 


“God sits as Sovereign on His throne, 
And ruleth all things well.” 


He can make a way for His redeemed through 
the sea. His power can dry up the rivers, and 
make His people to pass over dry-shod. What 
will be true for Israel nationally, it is for every 
child of God to enjoy personally. 

Zech. 10: 9-12 coalesces with Isa, 43: 1-7. “But 
now thus saith the Lord that created thee, O 
Jacob, and He that formed thee, O Israel, Fear 
not: for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee 
by thy name; thou art Mine. When thou passest 
through the waters, I will be with thee; and 
through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee: 
when thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt 
not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon 
thee. For I am the Lord thy God, the Holy One 
of Israel, thy Saviour: I gave Egypt for thy ran- 
som, Ethiopia and Seba for thee. Since thou wast 
precious in My sight, thou hast been honorable, 
and I have loved thee: therefore will I give men 
for thee, and people for thy life. Fear not; for 
I am with thee: I will bring thy seed from the 
east, and gather thee from the west: I will say 


The Gathering 401 


to the north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not 
back: bring My sons from far, and My daughters 
from the ends of the earth; even every one that is 
called by My name: for I have created him for 
My glory, I have formed him; yea, I have made 
him.” 

What human words could compare with this 
divine declaration of God’s unchangeable purpose 
in regard to His earthly people! And by what 
perverse system of interpretation can such words 
be made to find their fulfilment in the present 
work of grace going on among the Gentiles? Itis 
an instance of that high-mindedness which the 
apostle rebukes in Rom. 11, that such passages 
are wrested altogether from their true connection 
by unspiritual spiritualizers, and applied to the 
Church, whose heavenly calling is lost sight of, 
while Israel’s hope is denied. 

Only as one learns to rightly divide the word 
of truth do its various lines fall into order and 
its happy distinctions become plain to the anoint- 
ed eye. The confusion will then be seen to exist, 
not in God’s perfect Word, but in man’s bewil- 
dered mind, controlled by tradition, and often 
clouded by self-sufficiency. Truth is learned in 
the conscience. If that be in exercise, the Holy 
Spirit, who is the Spirit of Truth, can be de- 
pended on to make plain the mind of the Lord to 
the simplest. 


CHAPTER XI 


“THIRTY PIECES OF SILVER” 


briefly depicted in the preceding chapters. 

But the glory there promised is in abeyance 
during the present interval because of the rejec- 
tion of the One upon whom it all depends. So we 
now have a sorrowful account of the scornful 
refusal of the Good Shepherd and the acceptance 
instead of the Anti-shepherd, who seeks only his 
own exaltation and cares not for the ruin and 
scattering of Jehovah’s flock. 

The two opening verses sound an alarm, and 
speak of woe and disaster. “Open thy doors, O 
Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars. 
Howl, O fir tree; for the cedar is fallen; because 
the goodly ones are laid waste: howl, O ye oaks 
of Bashan; for the strong forest is come down” 
(R.V.). It is the solemn announcement of wrath 
upon the land and people because of the tragedy 
of the cross. Fire, in Scripture, speaks of God’s 
holiness exerted in the judgment of what is op- 
posed thereto. Against Judah it has been fiercely 
burning for centuries since the day when they 
cried, as to the Lord Jesus, “His blood be on us, 
and on our children.” He had come in grace as 
the Shepherd of Israel to gather together and 
feed the poor of the flock; but though He came 


G prety oenitea lovely have been the scenes 


Thirty Pieces of Silver 403 


unto His own, His own received Him not; so 
desolation and dispersion ensued. The under- 
shepherds might well cry out in dismay, for they 
themselves had led the revolt against Him whose 
love would have been as a rod and staff in the 
hour of need. Their glory is spoiled, and the 
pride of Jordan likewise. No barrier any longer 
hindered the coming in of the lions of the wil- 
derness, seeking to prey upon the flock of slaugh- 
ter (ver. 3). 

Zechariah is directed to act the part of the shep- 
herd. He is to feed the flock whose buyers slay 
them and hold themselves guiltless. Unpitied by 
their own shepherds, they were appointed to 
death; but a remnant are distinguished, even the 
poor of the flock aforementioned (vers. 4-7). 

In obedience to the command given, the proph- 
et took two symbolic staves, and fed the flock. 
One staff was called Beauty; the other, Bands, or, 
Concord. They spoke of the pastoral care Israel 
is yet to know, when, with the beauty of the Lord 
her God upon her, she shall dwell in unity and 
concord as one nation in the land covenanted to 
Abraham. Then she will sing with joy, “Jehovah 
is my Shepherd; I shall not want. He causeth me 
to lie down in pastures of tender grass: by waters 
of rest He leadeth me.” 

All this they might now be in the happy en- 
joyment of had there been but ears to hear and 
a heart to understand when He who spake as 


404 Notes on Zechariah 


mever man spake cried, yearningly, “Come unto 
Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I 
will give you rest.” But they turned a deaf ear 
and hardened their hearts to the voice of loving 
entreaty ; so they must know to the full the bitter- 
ness of forsaking the only One who could meet 
their need, both nationally and spiritually. So 
Zechariah (in vision, I take it) cuts off the hire- 
ling shepherds, who loathed him, and whom he 
loathed, because of their unprincipled conduct. 
Three in one month are judged. But there is no 
recognition, on the part of the flock, of his tender 
care; so he gives them up too, that desolation and 
cutting-off, both by their enemies and internecine 
strife, may be their portion (vers. 7-9). 

As signifying the breaking of Jehovah’s cove- 
nant, which was forfeited by their sin, he de- 
stroyed the staff called Beauty—for all their love- 
liness was gone and they were unclean in His 
sight. But still a feeble remnant is distinguished, 
for God has ever preserved an election of grace; 
and so we read, “The poor of the flock that waited 
upon me knew that it was the word of the Lord” 
(vers. 10,11). 

Then, impersonating Messiah in a manner most 
striking, he said to them, “If ye think good, give 
me my price; and if not, forbear.’”’ They need 
no time to consider. All is settled in their minds. 
His rejection is fully determined upon before he 
speaks. At once they weigh for his price “thirty 


Thirty Pieces of Silver 405 


pieces of silver”; the very sum for which Judas 
afterwards sold the true Shepherd of Israel (ver. 
12). 

Observe, it was not merely the prophet who was 
estimated at this sum; but Jehovah speaks, say- 
ing, “Cast it unto the potter: a goodly price that 
I was prized at of them.” By reference to Exod. 
21:32 the irony of this expression, “a goodly 
price,” becomes clearly manifest. Thirty pieces 
of silver was the value the law set on a slave who 
had been gored and slain by an ox. Such was the 
value man put upon Him who had been acquired 
as a bondman from His youth, See chap. 18: 5, 6, 
and notes. 

The money was cast to the potter in the house 
of the Lord; and the other staff, Unity, or Con- 
cord, was broken, that it might display the breach 
between Judah and Israel (vers. 13, 14). 

All this we see fulfilled to the letter in the case 
of the Lord Jesus. Sold for thirty pieces of silver, 
the wretched betrayer cast down the money in the 
house of the Lord; but, in blind obedience to the 
Word, which they seemed too dull to comprehend 
the import of, the chief priests gave it to the 
potter as the purchase-price of a field to bury 
strangers in. Such a potter’s field, an Aceldama 
of wrath, has Palestine been ever since.* 


*T do not consider it needful to go into the question of 
the reference to Jeremy the prophet in Matt. 27: 9. Many 
theories have been suggested. The day will declare it. 


406 Notes on Zechariah 


But ere His rejection, our Lord said to the 
Jews, “I am come in My Father’s name, and ye 
receive Me not: if another shall come in his own 
name, him ye will receive’ (John 5: 43). He 
spoke, undoubtedly, of the wilful king, the per- 
sonal Antichrist of the last days, who will be re- 
ceived by the Jews as the Messiah when he comes 
with all power and signs and lying wonders. This 
dreadful person, Zechariah is next called upon to 
set forth. He is directed by the Lord to take the 
instruments of a foolish shepherd and imperson- 
ate one who is to be raised up in the land, in 
whom Judah will vainly hope for deliverance. 
Unmarked by compassion for the flock, he will 
seek only his own ends, and “he shall eat the flesh 
of the fat, and tear their hoofs in pieces.” Upon 
this impious wretch the judgment of indignant 
heaven is to descend; so we read, “‘Woe to the idol 
shepherd that leaveth the flock! the sword shall 
be upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm 
shall be clean dried up, and his right eye shall be 
utterly darkened” (vers. 15-17). His final doom 
is given in Rev. 19, where we see the false prophet 
cast alive into the lake of fire. 

In our days of great achievement and marvel- 
ous advancement on all lines, we hear much of 
the coming man, the fully-developed, cultivated 
man of the twentieth century, upon which we 
have so recently entered. The expression refers, 
of course, to the vaunted progress of the race, not 


Thirty Pieces of Silver 407 


to any solitary individual; but it may well remind 
us of the two coming men spoken of in this chap- 
ter, and elsewhere in the book of God, though 
both are alike forgotten by people generally. God 
has His coming Man—the Man Christ Jesus. In 
speaking so of Him, the dignity of His Person 
should not be lost sight of. He is indeed declared 
to be “God over all, blessed forever” (Rom. 9:5). 
Long before this century has run its course, He 
will perhaps have returned in glory to this world, 
which, having slain Him when He was here be- 
fore, turned, Cain-like, to building cities, and 
making advancement in the arts and sciences, 
quite forgetful of the blood shed on Calvary’s 
cross, which cries still unto God from the ground. 
(Compare Gen. 4: 8-22). It is not as often insisted 
on as it should be that there are two aspects in 
which the death of Christ is brought before us in 
the Bible, with widely different results. Viewed 
as His offering Himself a sacrifice to God for sin 
and sins, and suffering at the hand of God for 
guilt not His own, the result is free salvation and 
complete justification for all who believe in Him. 
On the other hand, viewed as the One rejected of 
earth, and suffering from the hands of wicked 
men, the result is dire and unmixed judgment on 
the ordered system of things called the world, that 
cast Him out. (These two aspects and results are 
especially presented to us in Psalms 22 and 69). 

When He returns the second time, it will be 


408 Notes on Zechariah 


“without sin unto salvation” (Heb. 9:28), for all 
who have trusted Him as their Saviour, who will 
be “in the twinkling of an eye’ changed and 
caught up together in the clouds to meet Him in 
the air (1 Cor. 15: 51, 52; 1 Thess. 4: 16, 17) ; but 
He will shortly after be revealed from heaven in 
flaming fire, to take vengeance on all who have 
rejected His grace (2 Thess. 1: 7-10). 

He is to be judge of both living and dead (2 
Tim. 4: 1; 1 Pet. 4: 5). The living who have 
spurned His proffered mercy He will judge at His 
appearing to institute the kingdom long prom- 
ised by the prophets (Rev. 20: 1-6; Isa. 32, 63, 
etc.). This is the judgment of the “sheep and 
goats” depicted in Matt. 25, and is premillennial. 
The wicked dead will be judged by Him when He 
sits on the Great White Throne, at the close of the 
ages of time. 

Of the day or hour of His return no man knows, 
or can know. Computations are useless. “In such 
an hour as ye think not the Son of Man cometh.” 
It behooves all, then, to be ready to meet the Com- 
ing Man, and not be ashamed before Him. 

There is only one way by which any one born 
in sin and a transgressor by practice can be ready 
to face Him, the Holy and the True. All who 
trust Him are instantly cleansed from every sin 
by His precious blood. His work, finished when 
He was here before, is of such infinite value, and 
so thoroughly met all the claims of God’s holiness, 


Thirty Pieces of Silver 409 


that all who believe are “made meet to be par- 
takers of the inheritance of the saints in light” 
(Col. 1:12). If the reader has rested his soul 
upon Him as his Saviour, he will be ready to meet 
Him, and will be rapt away to be forever with 
Himself, if spared till He comes. 

But Satan also has his “coming man,” of whom 
our Lord spoke, as we have seen, in John 5: 438. 
In the interval between the rapture of the Church 
and the appearing in glory of the Saviour, this 
monster of infamy, in himself a very incarnation 
of the devil, will arise to dazzle the eyes of the 
‘world by his unhallowed brilliancy and power. He 
will be Satan’s masterpiece of deception, the false 
Christ, who will have sway over the minds and 
consciences of those who reject the love of the 
truth. 

He is called ‘‘the son of perdition,”’ linking him 
in character with that awful apostate who sold 
his Master for “thirty pieces of silver.” 

Think of men, men of greatest culture and eru- 
dition, bowing down before this vile creature, and 
owning him as their Lord! He is well called a 
“beast” in Rev. 18:11, though in appearance he 
is the counterfeit of the Lamb of God; but his 
speech is that of the dragon, “that old serpent, 
which is the devil, and Satan.” 

This is the coming man of the earth, as the 
Lord Jesus is the Coming Man from heaven. 

Which, dear reader, will have your heart and 


410 Notes on Zechariah 


your allegiance? If you are left behind unsaved 
at the Lord’s coming, you will worship: Anti- 
christ, for God will send them strong delusion, to 
those who obeyed not the truth, that they may 
believe the lie of “the man of sin,” to their eter- 
nal condemnation (2 Thess. 2: 8-12). 

May it be yours then, if still out of Christ, to 
“turn to God from idols to serve the living and 
true God, and to wait for His Son from heaven.” 
Then your portion will be with that blessed Man 
in glory forever. If you turn from Him, awful 
must be your doom, with “the man of the earth,” 
yea, and all the lost, in the lake of fire for eter- 


nity. 


CHAPTER XII 
THE TRUE DAY OF ATONEMENT FOR JUDAH 


HE last three chapters relate almost entire- 
ly to the period denominated the great tri- 
bulation, or the time of Jacob’s trouble, 
with the establishment of the kingdom follow- 
ing. To that short but solemn season our atten- 
tion has already been directed in what we have 
been noticing as to the Antichrist. It is the moral 
result of the rejection of the Lord Jesus, and will 
be the final governmental display of Jehovah’s 
wrath because of that colossal error on Judah’s 
part. 

He speaks of Himself in the first verse as the 
One which stretcheth forth the heavens, and lay- 
eth the foundation of the earth, and formeth the 
spirit of man within him. 

This latter clause deserves our careful atten- 
tion. God forms man’s spirit within him. The 
spirit then is an entity existing distinct from the 
body. It is not to be confounded with the breath, 
nor is it merely the same as the mind. Mind is 
one of the functions of the spirit, for it is the seat 
of the intelligence. “What man knoweth the 
things of a man, save the spirit of man which is 
in him? Even so the things of God knoweth no 
man, but the Spirit of God” (1 Cor. 2:11). Itis 
impossible logically to deny the personality of 
man’s spirit and not likewise deny the personal- 
ity of the Spirit of God. The spirit is the real 


412 Notes on Zechariah 


man, who inhabits the body during life, and at 
death puts off the tabernacle of flesh and goes out 
unclothed into the unseen world, called by the 
Jews Sheol, by the Greeks Hades. This is not 
the grave, but the condition of departed spirits, 
whether saved or lost. The spirit of the believer 
is “absent from the body and present with the 
Lord.” That of the unsaved is “in torment,” but 
awaiting the final judgment, when “death and 
Hades will be emptied into the lake of fire” (Rev. 
ZO 1D )e 

Sadducees of every stripe deny the true per- 
sonality of the spirit, as an unseen something 
formed within the man our eyes behold. God 
links this special creation with that of the heav- 
ens and the earth. “Thus saith God the Lord, 
He that created the heavens, and stretched them 
out; He that spread forth the earth, and that 
which cometh out of it; He that giveth breath 
unto the people upon it, and spirit to them that 
walk therein” (Isa. 42:5). Here breath and spirit 
are clearly distinguished. The one is fleeting, the 
other exists forever. True, it is but incidentally, 
as we would say, this statement as to the spirit 
of man is here introduced; but it is all-important 
nevertheless, and a distinct guard againt Sad- 
duceeism, if carefully considered. 

In verse 2 Jerusalem, the centre of all God’s 
ways as to the earth, is introduced, and a siege 
spoken of, which is evidently that of the last 


The True Day of Atonement for Judah 418 


days. Jersualem is then to be a cup of trem- 
bling, or reeling—that is, an intoxicating draught 
—unto all nations. Possessed with an almost in- 
sane desire to control the ancient city which is 
recognized by all as the key of the East, they 
will make desperate attempts to obtain suzerainty 
over it. But it shall prove to be then, as it has 
been down through the centuries, a burdensome 
stone. Every nation burdening itself with it shall 
be destroyed, even though a coalition were effect- 
ed for this purpose between all the people of the 
prophetic earth (ver. 3). 

There will be a number of powers, however, 
each acting for itself, in the time of the tribula- 
tion. The Roman empire will be revived in the 
form of ten kingdoms voluntarily associated to- 
gether, and giving their support to that impious 
character denominated the Beast in the first part 
of Rev. 18, whose seat will be in Rome, proudly 
called the Eternal City. In Jerusalem itself the 
Antichrist will reign, having made a league, of- 
fensive and defensive, with the Beast. He is the 
second Beast of Rev. 13, who simulates the Lamb 
of God, but whose dragonic speech betrays his 
real character. 

Against him, as prophesied in Dan. 11, two 
rival powers will set themselves, endeavoring to 
obtain Jerusalem and destroy him and each other, 
namely, the kings of the north and of the south. 
That is, an Egyptian power will attain some 


414 Notes on Zechariah 


prominence and aspire to Palestine in that time 
of trouble, but will be opposed by a northern 
power inhabiting the territory now called Turkey 
in Asia. This is identical with the Assyrian so 
frequently mentioned. 

Farther north will be the great empire of Gog, 
the last enemy to come against Jerusalem, which 
is undoubtedly Russia, ever the inveterate enemy 
of the Jews, and grasping eagerly after their 
land. The end of this power is foretold in Ezek. 
38 and 389. 

Another confederacy is mentioned in Revela- 
tion as “the kings of the east,” or, ‘“‘the sun- 
rising;” but it would seem as though the hordes 
of these nations barely reach the land ere the 
judgment falls. It is significant that Japan is 
called the kingdom of the rising sun. Who can 
say that the German emperor’s fear of ‘‘the yel- 
low peril’ is not based on something more sub- 
stantial than a political nightmare? 

In the time of the end, mighty armies will be 
gathered from all quarters against Jerusalem just 
before the appearing of Messiah in glory. They 
will clash together in the great battle of Arma- 
geddon, long since predicted by the prophets, and 
briefly depicted in verses 4 and 5, but more fully 
described in chapter 14 and in Rev. 19. 

Following upon the utter discomfiture of ali 
Israel’s foes, government will be established firm- 
ly in Judah, and Jerusalem shall be rebuilt in 


The True Day of Atonement for Judah 415 


unequaled splendor, and inhabited by a redeemed 
and happy people (ver. 6). 

The ten tribes will be regathered after the 
kingdom is set up. The tents of Judah are to be 
saved first, then the house of David distinguished 
from them, and one taken therefrom, who shall 
act as prince-regent on earth for the true Son of 
David who will reign from heaven. Afterwards, 
as we learn from various scriptures, the ten tribes 
will ask the way to Zion, and will return from 
all the countries whither they have been driven. 

Thus will that ideal state have been reached, so 
long anticipated by inspired seers, when the Lord 
Himself shall be the defence of His people, and 
the weakest among them shall be as David, the 
heroic defender of the liberties of Israel, whose 
house shall be in direct communication with heav- 
en, thus establishing a pure theocracy on earth, 
when every enemy shall be destroyed and peace 
and good will everywhere prevail (vers. 7, 8). 

All this the chosen people might long since 
have been in the enjoyment of, had they but 
obeyed the Spirit’s call to repentance as given in 
the 2d of Acts. It was a summons to self-judg- 
ment and humiliation in Jehovah’s presence be- 
cause of their national crime, the crucifixion of 
the Messiah. All their blessings wait for this, 
which will mark their entering into the truth 
of the atoning value of the work of the Lord 
Jesus. Only then will they in spirit have reached 


416 Notes on Zechariah 


the great feast of the seventh month, the true 
day of atonement. 

There is important instruction as to this in the 
23rd chapter of Leviticus. There we have the 
yearly calendar of the seven great feasts. The 
sabbath is introduced as the symbol of the rest 
which is to follow all the dispensations when the 
course of time has come to a close, as declared in 
Heb. 3: 10—4: 11. 

The passover prefigures the Cross, even aS we 
are told that “Christ our passover was sacrificed 
for us.” This is immediately followed by the feast 
of unleavened bread; so the passage referred to 
goes on to say, “Therefore let us keep the feast, 
not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of 
malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened 
bread of sincerity and truth” (1 Cor. 5:7,8). This 
sets forth the call to repentance, now extended to 
Jew and Gentile alike, who, resting beneath the 
sheltering blood of the slain Lamb, are to be found 
in holy separation from all evil, waiting the hour 
of their full redemption. 

But this does not necessarily imply the heaven- 
ly calling; so we next get the day of Pentecost, 
or the feast of weeks, when a new meal-offering 
was presented before Jehovah, setting forth the 
present truth of the mystery never made known 
till the final rejection of the testimony of the Lord 
and His apostles by Israel as a nation. Observe 
that this was in the third month. 


The True Day of Atonement for Judah 417 


Then there is a long break, until the seventh 
month. Now, as it is clear that Pentecost includes 
the calling out of a people for the name of the 
Lord from among the nations, it is evident that 
all the feasts of the seventh month have reference 
particularly to Israel when the fulness of the 
Gentiles shall have come in, and the trumpet of 
recall will once more summon God’s earthly peo- 
ple to gather around Himself in the land of their 
fathers. That trumpet will blow when the Church 
has been caught up to heaven. This the feast 
of trumpets beautifully pictures. It is the awak- 
ening of Israel when the veil shall begin to be 
taken away. (See Rom. 11, et al.). Then will come 
the call to self-abasement and contrition of heart 
for their fearful sin, which was manifested in the 
cross, and consummated in the rejection of the 
Holy Ghost. This is, for them, the great day of 
atonement. Long centuries have elapsed since the 
Victim bled, but they have never yet kept the day 
of fasting and affliction of soul that God joined 
with the offering up of the sacrifice to make 
atonement for their souls. 

To this they will come in the hour of their deep 
distress, Just prior to the appearing of the Cruci- 
fied in the glory of His Father, and all His holy 
ones with Him. This, therefore, is the mourning 
referred to in Rev. 1: 7, and here, in verses 10 to 
14. In the Apocalyptic passage we read, “Behold, 
He cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see 


418 Notes on Zechariah 


Him ... and all tribes of the land shail mourn 
over Him.” It is not wailing in terror that is 
contemplated, but the anguished mourning of the 
awakened remnant when they realize the dread- 
ful impiety of which their fathers were guilty in 
crucifying the Lord of glory. 

God Himself will pour upon the house of David 
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of 
grace and supplications, and “‘they shall look upon 
Me whom they have pierced, and they shall 
mourn for Him, as one mourneth for his only son, 
and shall be in bitterness for Him, as one that is 
in bitterness for his first-born” (ver. 10). The 
word “look” might be rendered “‘contemplate.” It 
implies an earnest attention, beholding with 
thoughtfulness, that every lineament of His face 
may be imprinted upon their souls. His once- 
marred visage, His pierced hands and side—all 
will be indelibly impressed upon them. When 
they thus learn that He who was spurned as a 
malefactor and a blasphemer was really the Lord 
of glory, their grief and repentance will know no 
bounds. 

We have two New Testament pictures of this 
scene: Thomas the apostle, called Didymus (the 
twin), believed when he saw. In the remnant of 
Judah, the other twin—may I say ?—will come to 
the front, equally unbelieving till the marks of 
spear and nails shall prove convincing. 

Then in Saul of Tarsus we have a preeminent 


The True Day of Atonement for Judah 419 


picture of the same remnant. Hating the name 
of Jesus, he goes on his way, zealously persecu- 
ting all who love that name, till arrested by a 
light from heaven: his eyes, blinded to earth’s 
glory, peer into the holiest; and there, upon the 
throne of God, he beholds the Nazarene! Thus 
he was one born before the time; that is, before 
the time when, by a similar sight, the remnant 
will be brought to cry, as he did, “Lord, what 
wilt Thou have me to do?” 

His days and nights of darkness answer to the 
period of mourning here set forth. “In that day 
shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as 
the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of 
Megiddon” (ver. 11). The reference is generally 
supposed to be to the great grief that fell on Judah 
when Josiah was slain, in the same valley where 
the Lord is yet to appear for the judgment of the 
armies of the haters of His earthly people. Megid- 
don is, of course, Armageddon, the valley of 
slaughter, of Revelation 16: 16. 

In vers. 12 to 14 the people are distinguished 
into various classes. The family of the house of 
David, the royalty of Judah, mourn apart. The 
house of Nathan, the very prophet who once re- 
proved David for his sin, mourn also apart. Then 
there are the families of Levi and of Shimei, or 
Simeon, once joined in iniquity, now each joining, 
though apart, in common confession because of 
sin. 


420 Notes on Zechariah 


So shall every family participate in the afflic- 
tion of soul that extends to the glorious appear- 
ing of Him who long since entered into the heav- 
enly sanctuary by His own blood. 

Another feast closes the series in Lev. 23. Of 
that, chapter 14 of our prophet treats; so I leave 
it till we reach that portion. 


CHAPTER XIII 


THE FOUNTAIN OPENED AND THE SHEPHERD 
SMITTEN 


Israel shall have reached, in spirit, the day 

of atonement, the fountain is provided for 
cleansing from all defilement which the first verse 
of this chapter announces. When the Spirit of 
God has wrought repentance in the remnant, the 
word of God will at once be applied in cleansing. 
It is to (not “in,” as people often attempt tc 
quote it) the house of David and to the inhabit- 
ants of Jerusalem that the fountain is opened in 
order that they may be morally cleansed from 
all sin and uncleanness, in accordance with the 
testimony of Ezekiel (chap. 36: 24-27): “For I 
will take you from among the heathen, and 
gather you out of all countries, and will bring you 


[ iss stan’ linked with the time when 


The Fountain Opened 421 


into your own land. Then will I sprinkle clean 
water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all 
your filthiness, and from all your idols, will I 
cleanse you. A new heart also will I give you, 
and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will 
take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and 
I will give you a heart of flesh. And I will put 
My Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in 
My statutes, and ye shall keep My judgments, and 
do them.” 

The day of atonement brings them to the cross. 
The next step is the laver, to which the fountain 
answers. Observe well, it is not, as Christian 
poets have sung, “a fountain filled with blood,” 
but of living water—the word of God applied 
in the Spirit’s power to their consciences. The 
same truth is taught in the Lord’s washing His 
disciples’ feet, the laver of regeneration, and the 
washing of water by the Word, but all in connec- 
tion with the present dispensation. So from the 
side of the crucified Saviour flowed both blood 
and water — blood, to expiate sin before God; 
water, to cleanse the ways and keep the saint free 
from defilement. 

As the power of the truth is brought home to 
the remnant, it will lead them to judge all ini- 
quity and to put away all uncleanness. Idolatry 
will become as an evil dream when it is past, and 
deceivers of all kinds will “pass out of the land” 
(ver. 2). 


422 Notes on Zechariah 


As all prophecy will have come to its glorious 
fulfilment, the office of the prophet shall cease. 
Any essaying that réle will be judged even by his 
own parents (vers. 3, 4). 

But One there is in contrast to the false proph- 
ets in every way, even the One for whom they 
shall mourn when they are brought to see how 
they have sinned against Him. “He shall say, I 
am no prophet, I am a husbandman; for man 
acquired Me as a servant from My youth.” Some 
have followed the rabbis in applying these words, 
and those following, to the deceivers; but it seems 
far clearer, and more in keeping with the context, 
to apply them to the Lord Jesus Christ. He was 
acquired as a servant from His youth, and, like 
the devoted slaves of Exod. 21, for love of His 
own He would not go out free. To Him the won- 
dering remnant cry, “What are these wounds in 
Thy hands?’ He replies, “Those with which I 
was wounded in the house of My friends.” What 
grace, that He should so speak of Judah, who 
knew Him not when He came among them in 
lowliness (vers. 5, 6). 

But He could never have been wounded by 
them, had it not been according to the purpose of 
God that He should be made a sin-offering. So at 
once we read, “Awake, O sword, against My 
Shepherd, and against the Man that is My Fellow, 
saith Jehovah: smite the Shepherd, and the sheep 
shall be scattered: and I will turn My hand upon 


The Fountain Opened 423 


the little ones” (ver. 7). Clearly the smitten 
Shepherd here is the wounded One of the preced- 
ing verses. There, it was man’s treatment of Him 
that was emphasized. Here, it is the solemn fact 
that God’s judgment fell upon Him when, for our 
sins, He was smitten on the cross. There, as the 
Good Shepherd, He gave His life for the sheep, 
and endured divine wrath, that all who trust in 
Him night be forever secure from the well- 
deserved vengeance of Jehovah’s insulted throne. 
So the words are directly applied in Matt. 26: 31. 
The Shepherd was smitten by Jehovah Himself. 
The sheep were for the moment scattered, but 
God’s hand is turned in grace to the little ones 
who are lowly enough to own their guilt and trust 
in Him whose precious blood cleanseth from 
every stain. To the remnant, the value of His 
work will be made known when their blindness 
has passed away, and they will be numbered 
among the feeble and the poor in spirit who cast 
themselves upon redeeming grace. 

Not all Israel, however, nor yet all of Judah, 
shall be saved. But of those restored to the land 
after the Church has been rapt away to heaven, 
two parts will be cut off in death during the time 
of Jacob’s trouble. The third part will be brought 
through the fiery trialg of the great tribulation, 
and will be refined as silver and purified as gold. 
They shall call upon Jehovah’s name, and He will 
respond to them in grace and loving-kindness. 


424 Notes on Zechariah 


To them He will say, “It is My people,” thus re- 
versing the Lo-ammi sentence of Hosea, chap. 1; 
while they in turn shall cry with hearts uplifted 
at the thought of such abounding mercy, “Je- 
hovah is my God!” 

Their salvation will be thus of a double char- 
acter, as was that of their fathers of old, wher- 
ever faith was in exercise, who were brought to 
God and saved from Egyptian bondage. 

The closing chapter gives us the details of their 
deliverance from their enemies, and does not 
leave them till they are seen keeping the happiest 
feast of all the year—that of the tabernacles— 
with the assured sense of the favor of Jehovah. 


CHAPTER XIV 


THE TRUE FEAST OF TABERNACLES 


this chapter opens, but gloriously bril- 
liant the light at the close. 

Of all Jerusalem’s sieges in the past, none were 
more severe than that depicted in the first two 
verses. They describe conditions which careful 
students of history admit have never been known 
in any past destruction of the city, and can only 
apply to something yet future. 


lL indeed is the darkness with which 


The True Feast of Tabernacles 425 


“Behold, the day of Jehovah cometh, and thy 
spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee. For 
I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to bat- 
tle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses 
rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the 
city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue 
of the people shall not be cut off from the city” 
(vers. 1, 2). From east, west, north and south, 
the armies of the nations will have advanced upon 
Jerusalem, hating the people and city of God, but 
mutually hating each other. 

Antichrist will be owned by the apostate Jews 
within the city as the Messiah and King of Judah. 
But against him the Assyrian, or king of the 
_ north, and the king of the south (terms used rela- 
tive to Palestine), will pour their hordes into the 
land in one last desperate effort to wrest from 
this wicked king his brief authority. Behind the 
Assyrian power will be Gog, the last prince of 
Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal—undoubtedly the head 
of the vast Russian empire. Allied with him will 
apparently be the kings from the sun-rising, or 
the far east, whose armies will hasten to join him 
in his assault on Jerusalem. 

On the other hand, the Beast, the elected em- 
peror of the confederacy forming the revived 
Roman Empire, will be the sworn foe of all these 
hostile powers, and the arm upon which Anti- 
christ will lean. From every part of western and 
southern Europe he will draw his vast armies. 


426 Notes on Zechariah 


who will be imbued with equal hate against both 
the faithful remnant of Judah and the Assyrian 
coalition. 

Between these conflicting powers Jerusalem’s 
position will be a most pitiable one. Unable to 
maintain the dreadful struggle, the city will be 
taken, and the horrors of a sack be again under- 
gone. 

But when, as it would seem, no power, human 
or divine, could prevent its total extinction, the 
Lord shall go forth, staining all His raiment in 
the blood of the adversaries of His people, fight- 
ing as a mighty warrior in the day of battle (ver. 
3). Before the eyes of the astonished armies of 
the world He will appear in glory, and He “shall 
stand upon the mount of Olives,’”’ from which He 
ascended to heaven when He had by Himself 
made purification for sins. 

As His feet touch that sacred spot, a great 
earthquake will rend the mount asunder, which 
will depart to the east and to the west, opening 
up a deep valley, through which the remnant of 
His people shall flee for refuge unto Azali (a spot 
now unknown), which will be as a Zoar for the 
faithful residue, when judgment is about to sweep 
over the scene. Thus will they be hidden in the 
day of the Lord’s anger till the indignation be 
overcast. 

This section closes, if properly punctuated, with 
the declaration, “Yea, ye shall flee, like as ye fled 


The True Feast of Tabernacles 427 


from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah 
king of Judah.” Here there should be a full stop. 
Of this earthquake in the days of Uzziah we have 
no specific record, though it is generally supposed 
to be the one referred to in Amos 1:1. The re- 
ference to it here completes the dramatic account 
of the siege and the deliverance. A new begin- 
ning is made in the last clause of the 5th verse, 
which introduces an orderly account of the ap- 
pearing in glory of the Lord Jesus and all His 
heavenly saints, and the blessed results that fol- 
low. ‘The Lord My God shall come, and all the 
holy ones with Thee!’”’ Thus shall be ushered in 
that glorious kingdom which has been so long 
predicted. Not by the preaching of the gospel and 
the conversion of the world will this event be 
brought to pass. Nothing less than the personal 
presence of the Son of God will ever bring in 
the Millennium. The holy ones who will come 
with Him include all the heavenly hosts—angels, 
and redeemed sinners transformed into glorified 
saints. 1 Thess. 4 and 1 Cor. 15: 51-57 make it 
plain that ere the time of trouble begins for Israel 
all the saved of every past dispensation will be 
caught up to meet their Lord in the air. 


“Dead and living, changed and rising, 
In the twinkling of an eye.” 


They will appear at His judgment-seat, to be 
rewarded according to the services rendered to 


428 Notes on Zechariah 


Himself while in this scene. Then the Church 
as the Bride, and all Old Testament saints as the 
called and chosen guests, will participate in the 
marriage supper of the Lamb, which is to be cele- 
brated in the Father’s house. After the happy 
nuptial rites, the Lord Jesus, accompanied by all 
His holy ones, will descend to take His earthly 
kingdom, and to deliver the remnant of Israel and 
Judah from their cruel and blasphemous adver- 
saries. 

This will take place on ‘fone day which shall 
be known to Jehovah,” a day which no human 
method of computation can determine. The exact 
meaning of verses 6 and 7 has puzzled the most 
scholarly; but this much seems clear, that it shall 
be a day diverse from every other, beginning in 
deepest gloom and darkness, but, brightened by 
the outshining of the Sun of Righteousness, “at 
evening time it shall be light.” So will the morn- 
ing without clouds have dawned upon this poor 
world, where night has held sway so long. 

Probably as a result of the great earthquake, 
predicted in verses 4 and 5, will be the phenom- 
ena of verse 8. According to the word of the Lord 
given in Ezek. 47:1-12 and Joel 3:18, living 
waters shall go out from Jerusalem—a perennial 
stream of refreshment, dividing into two parts, 
half going toward the eastern sea and half to- 
ward the western. Of spiritual blessing likewise 
dces this speak, for it sets before us also that 


The True Feast of Tabernacles 429 


river of God’s pleasure, the Holy Spirit’s testi- 
mony to the glories of Christ, which will be as a 
stream of life and joy to the saved nations. 

Remarkable physical changes will take place in 
Palestine. The valleys exalted, and mountains 
leveled, the country will become as a great table- 
land from Geba on the north to Rimmon, south 
of Jerusalem. This sacred city will be inhabited 
in security, and her day of trembling be forever 
past, for the Lord shall be King over all the earth, 
and be everywhere owned as the one Jehovah, 
and His name one (vers. 9-11). 

The nations who will have shown no mercy to 
Jerusalem will be dealt with in judgment without 
mercy, a plague consuming their flesh, and inter- 
necine strife, or civil feud, causing them to des- 
troy each other. Satan himself was an anarchist 
in the beginning. His kingdom is a kingdom of 
anarchy, knowing neither love nor pity (vers. 12, 
13). 

Judah will become as the battle-axe of the Lord 
in that day of His power, victorious over every 
foe, and enriched by the spoil of those who would 
fain have spoiled them. Retributive justice will 
thus be visited on all oppressors when righteous- 
ness shall no longer suffer, but reign triumphant 
over every adversary (vers. 14,15). 

Then shall the last joyful feast of the Levitical 
calendar be actually reached (that of the taber- 
nacles), which was to be observed after the in- 


430 Notes on Zechariah 


gathering for a full week, culminating in the 
holy convocation of the eighth day—looking on 
to eternity (Lev. 23: 33-43). The sowing, and the 
long period of waiting for the harvest, over, the 
reaping time will have come, when joy and praise 
will fill every heart and songs of thanksgiving be 
upon every lip. 

Nor shall Israel keep her feast: alone, but all 
the nations that are left for the kingdom shall go 
up from year to year to Jerusalem, there to wor- 
ship the King, the Lord of hosts, and to join with 
His people (they themselves being numbered 
among them) in celebrating the glorious ingath- 
ering, as they dwell in booths of verdure, as of 
old it was written in the Book. It will be a sweet 
and lovely ending after centuries, yea, millenni- 
ums, of bitter strife and bloody warfare, when 
the noise of battle shall be no more heard, national 
hatreds shall be done away, and the era of peace 
on earth and God’s good pleasure in men shall 
have in very deed arrived. 

If, as seems to be intimated in verses 17 to 19, 
at the beginning, there be any dissentients who 
shall dare to refuse to wend their way to the city 
of the great King to worship before Him, imme- 
diate judgment shall fall upon them. The heav- 
ens will be closed so that their lands wili be 
parched for lack of rain; that they may know that 
the time when God is directly governing the 
world shall have at last arrived. If the family cf 


The True Feast of Tabernacles 431 


Egypt go not up, who depend not on rain, but on 
the yearly inundation of the Nile for the fertili- 
zation and maturing of their crops, then a special 
visitation shall be theirs, a plague “wherewith 
the Lord shall smite the heathen that come not up 
to keep the feast of tabernacles.” 

In this age men may defy God and seem to 
prosper. In that, which is so soon to come, god- 
liness and prosperity will be linked together. It 
will be the dispensation of the fulness of the sea- 
sons, when all things shall be headed up in Christ, 
and every knee must bow to Him—when men 
will no longer walk by faith, as now, but by the 
sight of their eyes, beholding on every hand the 
evidences of direct divine intervention in human 
affairs. 

The last two verses form a fitting climax to the 
chapter and the book. “In that day shall there 
be upon the bells of the horses, HOLINESS UNTO 
THE LORD; and the pots in the Lord’s house shall 
be like the bowls before the altar. Yea, every pot 
in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto 
the Lord of hosts: and all they that sacrifice shall 
come and take of them, and seethe therein: and 
in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite 


in the house of the Lord of hosts.” No longer will 


a distinction be made between sacred and secular; 


but men will have learned that anything worth 


doing at all should be done for the glory of God. 
The articles for temple service (used in the re- 


Asa Notes on Zechariah 


built temple of Ezek. 40 to 48) will be sacred to 
Jehovah. But so will also be every vessel used by 
the house-wife in Jerusalem and in Judah; while 
the very bells upon the horses will tinkle His 
praises. This is the lovely ideal the Holy Ghost 
portrays for Christians living in the present age; 
as it is written, “Let the word of Christ dwell in 
you richly in all wisdom; teaching and admonish- 
ing one another in psalms and hymns and spirit- 
ual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to 
the Lord. And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, 
do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving 
thanks to God and the Father by Him” (Col. 3: 
16,17). And, again, we are told, “Whether there- 
fore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all 
to the glory of God” (1 Cor. 10: 31). He who thus 
has God’s glory ever before Him, even in the 
smallest details of life, will anticipate the Millen- 
nium, and already enter into what shall by-and- 
by be true of restored Israel under the reign of 
the Lord Jesus Christ. 

There will be no drudgery then, no mere work- 
ing for reward, for the Canaanite will have ceased 
out of the land in that day. Undoubtedly the 

name refers to the ancient enemy who ever con- 
- tested Israel’s possession of the promised inheri- 
tance; but it bears the meaning of “‘trafficker,’’ or 
“bargainer,” to whom, in Hos. 12:7, we have seen 
the sons of Jacob are compared. When ill feeling 
between Abraham and Lot was so narrowly 


The True Feast of Tabernacles 433 


averted through the generosity of the former, it 
is significantly stated that “the Canaanite ... 
dwelt then in the land” (Gen. 13:7). When all 
strife and bitterness shall be done away in Abra- 
ham’s redeemed seed, the Canaanite will have 
passed out of the scene for all time to come. 

This is Israel’s hope: the possession of the land 
pledged to their fathers, under the sway of Him 
whom David called, 


“A righteous Ruler over men, 
A Ruler in the fear of God!” 


even our adorable Lord Jesus Christ; when in His 
own times He shal]. show, who is that blessed and 
only Potentate, King of kings, and Lord of lords. 
Ours is a higher and holier portion, even to be 
the Bride of Him who is then to reign. We look 
to heaven, not to earth, for our inheritance, from 
whence we expect that very soon now “the Lord 
Himself shall descend ... with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of 
God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: then 
we which are alive and remain shall be caught up 
together with them in the clouds, to meet the 
Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the 
Lord” (1 Thess. 4: 16,17). 

Thus the two callings are clearly distinguished 
in Scripture. Israel is the wife of Jehovah, now 
divorced because of her sin, but to be brought 
back to Himself in grace and made to dwell in her 


434 Notes on Zechariah 


former land in the day when the kingdom is dis- 
played. The Church of the present dispensation 
is the Bride of the Lamb, whose nuptial hour is 
drawing near, and who will be one with her Re- 
deemer throughout all the ages to come. Old 
Testament saints, and tribulation saints who are 
taken away by death ere the kingdom is set up, 
will be, as was John the Baptizer, friends of the 
Bridegroom, “called” to the marriage-supper of 
the Lamb, to participate in their Lord’s rejoicing, 
and able also to share in Jehovah’s joy when the 
earthly Bride shall return to His arms of love and 
compassion. In heaven their position will be 
analogous to that of the spared of the nations on 
earth, who wil! rejoice with Israel when they see 
the place she will have in the millennial kingdom. 

Thus are there various companies and varied 
glories in heaven and upon earth; but when the 
authority of the Lord Jesus is owned in both 
spheres, and every enemy has been banished and 
rendered powerless, all redeemed creation will de- 
light to ascribe blessing and honor and glory and 
power to our God and to the Lamb that was slain, 
world without end. Amen. 


Notes on the 
PROPHECY OF MALACHI 


CHAPTER I 
THE FAILED REMNANT 


E know nothing whatever of the writer 
\ x / of this book. His name, Malachi, mean- 

ing “My messenger,” occurs in verse 1; 
but we read of him nowhere else in Scripture, 
and we get no particulars concerning him here. 
He was the last of the prophetic band, and his 
book appropriately closes the Old Testament 
canon. Till the advent of John the Baptist, of 
whose coming he prophesied, no other messenger 
was directly sent to Judah from God. 

The conditions he describes fit in well with 
what is recorded of the state of the returned 
remnant in the latter period of Nehemiah’s gov- 
ernorship. So it is quite likely that he lived and 
ministered the word of Jehovah either during 
that time, or a little later. 

The divisions are not very pronounced. In this 
first chapter, and going on to the 9th verse of 
the next, the prophet gives a message to the 
priests, while the balance of the book is addressed 
to the people, but includes more than the remnant, 
and really amounts to an indictment of all Judah. 


436 Notes on Malachi 


Chapters 3 and 4 tell of the coming of the day 
of the Lord, to be preceded by the one who, like 
Malachi himself, will in a distinctive sense bear 
the title of “My messenger.” 

A striking feature of the prophecy is the eight- 
fold controversy of Jehovah with His people. 
Notice chapter 1, verses 2, 6 and 7; chapter 2, 
verses 14 and 17; chapter 3, verses 7, 8, and 13. 
Again and again they are solemnly charged with 
gravest departure in heart from the Lord whom 
they outwardly professed to serve, and each time 
with brazen effrontery, they dare to contradict 
God’s testimony to their state, ask for proofs, and 
manifest an utterly calloused conscience. 

All this has a voice of exceeding seriousness 
for us, particularly if in any measure we seek 
to take the ground they did. Almost at the end 
of a dispensation, there had been an outward re- 
turn to God and to His word; but there was not 
a corresponding subjective state. They became 
occupied rather with place and position than with 
vital godliness. As a result, we have the gross 
Phariseeism of our Lord’s day, which was simply 
the outgrowth of the conditions described by 
Malachi. 

Sad as Judah’s state had become, it is of love, 
not of judgment, that the opening chapters treat. 
“T have loved you, saith the Lord.” What could 
be more tender, more calculated to touch the 
hearts of His people, if indeed they had any heart 


The Failed Remnant 437 


left, and were not altogether hardened and un- 
concerned! Unchanging was that mighty love of 
His, whatever the perversity of their ways. Yet, 
with supreme contempt, they impudently retort, 
“Wherein hast Thou loved us?” They looked for 
temporal prosperity and worldly glory as the 
proof of His love. Bereft of both, they called His 
affection in question, utterly ignoring the pro- 
longed course of carelessness and infidelity to 
Himself, for which He had chastened them. 
Patiently He deigns to reply to their caviling 
query: “Was not Esau Jacob’s brother? saith the 
Lord; yet I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau.” And 
He goes on to picture the desolations of Edom, 
and to declare that they shall never be retrieved, 
for the seed of Esau are “the people against 
whom the Lord hath indignation forever.” On the 
other hand, though Israel’s blessing seem to 
tarry, it shall surely come at last, so that all 
nations shall confess, “The Lord will be magnified 
from the border of Israel’ (vers. 1-5). 

It is His dealings with Jacob and Esau after 
long centuries had shown what they really were 
that are referred to. The phrase, “Jacob have 
I loved, but Esau have I hated,” is quoted trium- 
phantly by the apostle in Rom. 9: 13 to prove the 
wisdom of God’s choice made before the children 
were born, when He said, “The elder shall serve 
the younger.” Carefully observe, there is no 
hyper-Calvinistic question here of reprobation 


488 Notes on Malach 


for hell and predestination for heaven. It is Je- 
hovah’s inalienable right to dispose of His crea- 
tures as He will, that the apostle is contending 
for; and He manifests with holy joy that He wills 
to show mercy to those who deserved only wrath. 
Jacob and Esau are cited as illustrations. Before 
either was born, God chose Jacob to be superior 
to Esau, nationally. The elder was to serve the 
younger, and thus own the superiority of God’s 
choice. Then, when the whole Old Testament his- 
tory had come to a close, He sums up all, and 
says, “I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau.” The 
grace which took the poor heel-catcher up at first, 
was shown to his seed to the very end. 

But what return had He received from Israel 
for all this? It is clear duty for a son to honor 
his father, and a servant his master; but what 
honor had He received as a Father, or what rev- 
erence as a Master? Even the very priests in the 
newly-restored temple despised His name. But 
when the charge is brought, they superciliously 
inquire, “Wherein have we despised Thy name?” 
(ver. 6). 

Solemnly He brings their sins before them, 
declaring that polluted bread was offered on His 
altar, thus failing to own His holiness, and ignor- 
ing His claims. Again they are ready to answer 
back, ere the reply to their former question is 
complete, asking, “Wherein have we polluted 
Thee?” On His part there is amazing patience 


The Failed Remnant 439 


and grace; on theirs, almost incomprehensible in- 
sensibility and levity. They practically said, “The 
table of Jehovah is contemptible;” for they of- 
fered the blind, the lame and the sick to Him in 
sacrifice, and kept the best for themselves. Would 
they dare to so act toward their governor, or any 
other earthly ruler? Yet He, the great King, 
they could treat in a manner so unbecoming. But 
He pleads with them to repent, and cry to Him 
for that grace they were ignoring, yet needed so 
much. Covetousness was the root-sin that was 
leading them daily farther astray. The priests 
would not so much as shut the temple doors save 
for wages, nor kindle the altar-fire except for 
gain. True love for Himself was lacking, and 
their holy office had been prostituted to a mere 
worldly profession, and used as a means of enrich- 
ment. Because of this, He could have no pleasure 
in them, nor accept an offering at their hands 
(vers. 9,10). 

It seems almost unnecessary to attempt to draw 
attention to the similar state prevailing in so 
many places at the present time. Is it not patent 
to even the least spiritual that worldliness and 
covetousness are the characteristic features in 
the professing Church, and godliness and true de- 
votion the exceptions? 

Even where there has been a measure of re- 
vival and return to what is written in the word of 
God, the same evil principles have crept in insid- 


440 Notes on Malachi 


iously, and are doing their deadly work in many 
quarters. Nothing but a spirit of prayerfulness, 
coupled with careful watchfulness, will keep any 
from being carried away by the unholy current. 

But it is blessed to know that, whatever the 
present failure, God shall yet be fully glorified; 
so we read, “From the rising of the sun even 
unto the going down of the same, My name shall 
be great among the nations; and in every place 
incense shall be offered unto My name, and a pure 
offering: for My name shall be great among the 
nations, saith the Lord of hosts” (ver. 11). Itis 
hardly the present work of grace among the Gen- 
tiles that is here contemplated, but rather that 
wonderful era of blessing which is still in the 
future —the times of restitution of all things 
spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets 
since the ages began. Then shall Jehovah’s name 
be honored and His word obeyed throughout the 
whole earth, when all nations shall bask in the 
sunshine of His favor. 

In the next verse the prophet reverts to the 
serious charge made above. Judah profaned the 
table of the Lord, characterizing it as a thing 
polluted, and its meat contemptible. They de- 
clared it a weariness to attend upon its service, 
and made light of what should have been both 
sacred and precious. Their wretched thoughts 
were manifested by the unsuitable offerings they 
brought, which He would not accept, but, instead, 


The Failed Remnant 441 


invoked a curse upon the deceiver who brought 
Him that which was corrupt, while keeping the 
better for himself. Was it thus they would treat 
the King of kings, whose name was to be rev- 
erenced among the heathen? (vers. 13, 14). They 
who had known so much of His power and grace 
had proven altogether unworthy of His love. But 
the nations who had been passed by during the 
time of Israel’s special favor were yet to bow 
at His feet and own His greatness and glory. 

They who have never learned the distinctive 
character of the Spirit’s work in this dispensation 
invariably apply such passages to the present out- 
going of the gospel to the Gentiles; but while they 
may indeed, and do, prove that the call of the 
nations now is not out of harmony with the scrip- 
tures of the prophets, all these promises will have 
their complete and literal fulfilment in the Mil- 
lennium. We wait in faith for brighter and more 
glorious hopes to be consummated. 

Let shame be upon us if our state be in any 
wise like that depicted in the solemn chapter we 
have thus briefly gone over! 


CHAPTER II 


THE SIN OF THE PRIESTS 


sins of the priesthood brought home to their 
consciences in this second chapter. Anoint- 
ed for temple service, set apart to holiness, and 
devoted to the most sacred of all offices, “ordained 
for men, in things pertaining to God, to offer 
gifts and sacrifices,” they had proved recreant to 
their sacred trust, and thought only of their own 
profit. ‘Supposing that gain is godliness,” they 
lost no opportunity of ministering to their own 
desires, while neglecting their holy calling. 
There is no such official sacerdotal order rec- 
ognized by God in the present dispensation, but 
all believers are now anointed priests, both holy 
and royal, having immediate access to the holiest 
in virtue of the blood of Jesus. As worshipers 
they go in to God to offer up spiritual sacrifices. 
As royal priests separated to Himself, they come 
out to show His praises to a needy world, and as 
holy priests they are appointed to intercede on 
behalf of those who pray not for themselves. 
What cause, then, for shame and humiliation 
when our feet stumble and our paths are crooked! 
All that is here said to the earthly priesthood 
may well be pondered by the heavenly company, 
as we challenge our consciences as to whether we 
too have not failed grievously, as they did. 


[ a fuller and more pointed manner are the 


The Sin of the Priests 443 


“O ye priests, this commandment is for you.” 
Thus clearly and distinctly the hierarchy is ad- 
dressed in verse 1. If they refused to hear and 
heed the word so solemnly given, the Lord would 
send a grievous curse upon them, cursing their 
blessings, as He had already begun to do. Their 
seed should be rejected, and thus the family of 
Levi set aside from their appointed place of priv- 
ilege, as has been the case ever since the rend- 
ing of the veil, though only manifestly since Jeru- 
salem’s destruction by the Romans under Titus. 
Their solemn feasts too should be polluted, and 
they themselves rendered unclean, ceremonially, 
to set forth the uncleanness of their hearts and 
hands (vers. 2, 3). 

Of old His covenant of life and peace had been 
with Levi, when he was separated from his breth- 
ren to find his all in God. For the fear wherewith 
he feared Jehovah, when Israel made the calf in 
the wilderness (Exod. 32: 25-29), an everlasting 
covenant had been confirmed to him; but this 
should not hinder the outpouring of divine wrath 
during the season of Israel’s dispersion because 
of their sins. No longer were they afraid before 
His name, as they had been in those days of the 
wilderness. Then the law of truth was in their 
mouths and iniquity was not found in their lips, 
when in singleness of heart they walked with God 
in peace and equity, and were His honored instru- 
ments in executing judgment upon evil (vers. 


444 Notes on Malachi 


4-6). It is a lovely description of true devotion 
to the Lord. Only as the priest thus keeps his 
heart and guards his ways will God be glorified 
in his life. To talk of separation and holding the 
truth while neglecting what is here set forth is 
mere sham and hypocrisy. 

The priest’s lips should keep knowledge and 
men should seek the law at his mouth, thus ap- 
proving himself as the messenger of the Lord of 
hosts (ver. 7). Therefore the need of earnest, 
prayerful study of the whole word of God, with 
a view to bringing all the life into practical sub- 
jection thereto. The servant of God in the New 
Testament is exhorted to “study to show thyself 
approved unto God, a workman that needeth not 
to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth” 
(2 Tim. 2: 15). It is not a question of following 
some favorite teacher or cleaving to a particular 
line of doctrines, but giving the Holy Scriptures, 
in their entirety, that honored place which God 
intended they should hold as the complete guide 
for His people and the suited food for their souls. 

Nor is it merely Bible study that is enjoined, 
but we are called to be “doers of the Word,” al- 
lowing no portion of it to be a dead letter to us, 
but giving it all its due weight and authority over 
our hearts and consciences, seeking to walk in all 
that is written therein. 

This, the priests addressed by Malachi utterly 
ignored. Having departed from the path of che- 


The Sin of the Priests 445 


dience themselves, they caused the simple to stum- 
ble at the law, and to go astray from the word of 
the Lord. Therefore the covenant of Levi had be- 
come corrupted, as they had shown themselves to 
be anything but the moral seed of Phinehas,whose 
javelin had stayed the plague, and whose faith- 
fulness would be remembered to all generations. 
Contemning the law, these recreant priests had 
been made contemptible themselves, and they 
should be despised by the people they had misled. 
Their ways testified against them, so the Lord re- 
fused their service (vers. 8, 9). 

The tenth verse is the beginning of the second 
division of the book, which goes on to the end of 
the prophecy. It is now the people of Judah as 
a whole who are addressed in the last message 
they were ever to get directly from God until 
the coming of the Just One, the Amen, the faith- 
ful and true Witness, preceded as to public minis- 
try by John, the messenger whose coming is pre- 
dicted in the first verse of chapter 3. 

They had all sprung from one common father, 
Abraham, and were created by one God, Jehovah 
of hosts. Why then should brethren deal treach- 
erously with each other by profaning the cove- 
nant of their fathers? (ver. 10). It is not the 
so-called “Fatherhood of God” that is here de- 
clared. There is not the slightest evidence that 
“one father” refers to the Deity. It was the Lord 
Jesus who made known the Father. Only in a 


446 Notes on Malachi 


national sense could Israel say, “Doubtless Thou 
art our Father.” Individually they all had one 
father, however, in whom they gloried, even 
Abraham, whose seed they all were. Thus they 
were a nation of brethren. But, alas, how un- 
brotherly had they acted! 

What can be more shocking than to be called 
by a name so suggestive of love and tenderness 
(even as Abraham himself said to Lot, “We be 
brethren’’), and yet to treat one another with cal- 
lous indifference and cold-heartedness, amount- 
ing at times even to enmity and hatred. “Who 
are these brethren?” one is reported to have 
asked, concerning certain companies of factious 
saints. “They are people,” was the reply, ““who 
are very particular about breaking bread, and 
very careless about breaking hearts!” What a 
crying shame that such a testimony concerning 
any Christians should ever be more than an evil 
calumny invented by the father of lies! “Let 
brotherly love continue” is God’s admonition to 
us all. And let us bear in mind that, since our 
Head has gone back to the glory, we manifest our 
love to Him by love to His members here upon the 
earth. 

The feeble remnant, returned to the place of 
the Name, separated from the nations, surely 
needed the strength to be derived from heart- 
unity and each other’s love and brotherly encour- 
agement. Outside, the wolves raged and snarled. 


The Sin of the Priests 447 


Inside, the sheep were biting and devouring one 
another! It is a pitiable picture. Alas, it has been 
often duplicated by Christ’s sheep since. It was 
not the outside opposition that wounded the heart 
of Nehemiah: but when he found the separated 
people exacting usury of one another, and treating 
their brethren with cruelty and rigor, his great 
soul was moved to its depths. That the evil had 
never been really departed from, only temporar- 
ily checked, Malachi makes evident. 

Dealing treacherously every man against his 
brother, it was only to be expected that they 
would prove traitors to their God. And this the 
prophet charges directly upon all Judah and Is- 
rael. They had profaned the holiness of Jehovah, 
that holiness “which He loved” (how striking the 
expression!), and had been united in marriage 
to the daughters of strange gods (ver. 11). These 
mixed marriages are also mentioned in Nehemiah 
and Ezra, thus helping us to decide as to the true 
time of Malachi’s ministry. Neither true to each 
other nor to the Lord, they defiled themselves by 
forming unholy alliances with the idolatrous peo- 
ple around them. When brotherly love is lacking, 
true godly separation will soon be only a name, 
and none need be surprised if the rising genera- 
tion turn to the world for their companions when 
they have seen bickerings and variance among 
those professedly separated to the one only Name. 


448 Notes on Malachi 


But God’s face is against all those who so act, 
and He will cut them off. He could not accept 
offerings from a people so indifferent to His holy 
character, whatever the outward expression of 
grief and penitence (vers. 12, 18). 

The manner in which they inquired, “Where- 
fore?” in response to words of such pathos and 
solemnity, exhibits the actual state of their souls. 
He is not slow to reply. He was the witness to 
all their evil-doing. Forbidden to enter into mar- 
riages with the heathen, He had made of twain 
one flesh among His own people. But they had 
violated their nuptial pledges by adding to their 
households outlandish women who were leading 
them away from Himself. It was that He might 
seek a godly seed that He had thus decreed con- 
cerning their family relationships. But laxity as 
to divorce, and mixed marriages, were fast cor- 
rupting the seed of God (vers. 14, 15). 

The practice of setting aside their wives (so 
common, alas, in our own degenerate times) to 
gratify a passing whim was detestable in His 
eyes. He hates putting away. Hidden violence 
would all be searched out, and could not remain 
forever covered. All must come to light in due 
time. “Therefore take heed to your spirit,’ was 
His word, “that ye deal not treacherously”’ (ver. 
16). 

We need only to turn to the nineteenth chapter 
of Matthew to see how little effect this remon- 


The Sin of the Priests 449 


strance had upon them. Divorces were granted 
on most trifling and absurd pretences, and mean- 
time all their lawlessness was covered with a 
cloak of extreme punctiliousness in outward reli- 
gious observances. How easy it is to make much 
of externals while habitually careless as to the 
true piety and sincere obedience to the weightier 
matters of the word of God! 

The Lord was wearied with their empty relig- 
jiousness—mere words from the lips, and not the 
genuine utterance of the heart acceptable in His 
sight. But again they answer Him with a cav- 
iling question, saying, ‘““Wherein have we wearied 
Thee?” He replies, “When ye say, Every one that 
doeth evil is good in the sight of the Lord, and 
He delighteth in them; or, Where is the God of 
judgment?” (ver. 17). It was thus they were 
setting aside His revealed Word and congratulat- 
ing themselves on being Abraham’s seed, and 
therefore in the line of promise. The merits of 
the fathers were made to cover all possible de- 
linquencies in their own lives. It could not be, 
thought they, that God would visit in judgment 
those in whose veins flowed the blood of Abra- 
ham, Isaac and Jacob. Thus they dwelt negli- 
gently in a fool’s paradise, having already forgot- 
ten the lesson of the Babylonish captivity. Nor 
has it been otherwise with the Church. Ruin and 
disaster early came in, because of departure from 
the living God. For centuries spiritual Babylon 


450 Notes on Malachi 


held sway over the consciences of His children, 
and kept them in bondage and ignorance. 

At last, through the recovery of the word of 
God, came deliverance and blessing, followed, 
even in the lifetime of the Reformers, by a life- 
less orthodoxy, coupled with relaxation of morals 
and indifference to that Word so graciously en- 
trusted to them. 

Since then, there have been various revival 
periods when the special work of the Spirit has 
been to emphasize practical godliness and devo- 
tion to Christ. Each successive movement has 
begun with more or less loyalty to God and to 
His word. But decay and disintegration have 
soon followed. At last the truth of the mystery 
of Christ and the Church was brought to light, 
and the name of Jesus became the rallying- 
standard for many of His people, wearied of the 
failing systems of men. But again have pride 
and self-will wrought sad havoc; and it remains 
now to be seen how far there will be a judging 
of what has thus marred the lovely testimony 
raised up to the excellency of the peerless name 
of the Lord. 

The hour is late. The Judge is at the door. 
The coming of the Lord draweth nigh. Lowliness 
and self-judgment become us all. May we have 
grace given to discern the signs of the times, and 
to bow our hearts to His Word. 


CHAPTER III 


PREPARATION FOR THE MESSENGER OF THE 
COVENANT 


ALACHI means, “My messenger.” It was 
M through him Jehovah declared, “Behold, 
I will send My messenger (using the 
same word as the prophet’s name), and he shall 
prepare the way before ME: and the Lord, whom 
ye seek, shall suddenly come to His temple, even 
the Messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight 
in: behold, He shall come, saith the Lord of 
hosts” (ver. 1). Thus was John’s coming pre- 
dicted as the herald of the King, Messiah, but in 
such a way as to make it plain that Messiah Him- 
self was identified with Jehovah; for the word is, 
“He shall prepare the way before Me.” (See 
Matt. 11:10; Mark 1:2; and Luke 1: 76; 7: 28). 
It is also of importance to notice that “angel” 
and “messenger” are one in the Hebrew. So 
John was the angel of Jesus, but Jesus Himself 
was the Covenant-Angel of whom Jehovah had 
said long ago, “My name is in Him” (Exod. 23: 
20,21). To the very temple but lately rebuilt 
by Zerubbabel, though afterwards enlarged and 
beautified by Herod, did He suddenly come as the 
Nazarene, only to be despised, rejected, and cru- 
cified. 


452 Notes on Malachi 


But another coming is clearly foretold here; 
for when it actually takes place, the unholy will 
not be able to abide it, nor to stand in His pres- 
ence. As a refiner and purifier He shall sit to 
purify and purge the Levitical family, setting 
apart for Himself the sons of Zadok (Ezek. 48: 
11), who shall have turned to Him, owning their 
guilt and judging themselves for their share in 
the sins of the priesthood. Upon the rest judg- 
ment must burn like fire (vers. 2 and 3). 

It seems plain from verse 4, as also the 48rd 
chapter of Ezekiel, that in the days when the 
kingdom is established over all the earth, sacri- 
fices and offerings will be reinstituted in Jeru- 
salem and the land of Judah, though only as com- 
memorative of the one great sacrifice of the cross; 
thus sustaining to millennial saints the same rela- 
tionship that the Lord’s Supper now occupies 
among Christians. 

The evil-doers will be weeded out from among 
the people, and a righteous remnant alone be pre- 
served, “For I am Jehovah, I change not; there- 
fore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed” (vers. 
5, 6). 

Never had they kept His ordinances in a com- 
pletely scriptural manner. But from the days of 
their fathers they had departed from what He 
had caused to be written for their guidance. So, 
in view of the advent of the Messenger of the 
covenant, He bids them return unto Him in heart, 


The Messenger of the Covenant 453 


that He may return unto them with blessing and 
loving favor. But, as so often before, they arro- 
gantly ask, “Wherein shall we return?” (ver. 7). 
There was no sense cf need or of failure. Quite 
the contrary; they were self-satisfied and con- 
tent. So long as outward forms and ceremonies 
were attended to, they saw no reason to search 
and try their ways. 

So their sinfulness has to be pressed upon them 
more strongly still. ‘Will a man rob God?” Yet 
they had deliberately robbed Him. With amazing 
effrontery, they ask, “Wherein have we robbed 
Thee?” He replies, “In tithes and offerings,” and 
declares that the curse of the violated law rested 
upon the whole nation. It is a question which was 
the most solemn — their sinful course, or their 
calm indifference concerning it. Conscience 
seemed completely gone; and when a good con- 
science has been put away, anything can be in- 
dulged in with a degree of self-assurance that 
seems inexplicable (vers. 8, 9). 

Still, terrible as their failure had been, it is 
not too late yet to repent. He calls upon them ° 
to bring all the tithes into the storehouse, in this 
way acknowledge their stewardship under Him, 
and that needful provision may be made for those 
who served in the temple, thus releasing them 
from attention to carnal things; and they are 
promised abundant blessing if they but heed His 
voice. He would have them prove Him, and see 


454 Notes on Malachi 


if He would not open the windows of heaven and 
pour out upon them such a shower of spiritual re- 
freshment that they would be straitened as to 
storing it. The devourer, too, He wouid rebuke 
for their sakes, causing their enemies to cease 
from molesting them, that in peace and quietness 
they might enjoy the abundant fruits of their 
labor. Blessed with all that heart could desire, 
both spiritually and temporally, all nations would 
call them the happy people, and theirs should be 
a land of delight (vers. 10-12). 

All this is to be literally fulfilled when the 
spirit of grace and supplication is poured out up- 
on the future repentant remnant, and they return 
to God with their whole heart. Everything waits 
upon this, even as the Lord Jesus Himself de- 
clared, “Ye shall not see Me henceforth till ye 
shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the name 
of the Lord.” 

But for saints of every dispensation an impor- 
tant principle is here enunciated—blessing waits 
on true devotion of heart. Let all that is due to 
the Lord, long withheld because of our selfish- 
ness, be rendered to Him—all the tithes brought 
in, and He will rejoice to pour down showers of 
blessing upon His waiting and expectant people. 
God delights to give; but our low, earthly-minded 
state so frequently hinders His visiting us with 
a gracious revival. “Let us search and try our 
ways, and turn again to the Lord” (Lam. 3: 40) 


The Messenger of the Covenant 455 


is a word in season at the present solemn moment 
in the Church’s history. 

For Judah, the era of blessing had not yet 
dawned, nor has it ever really come since; for 
they knew not the time of their visitation. Their 
words were stout, or strong, against God; yet, 
when He challenged them as to this, for the 
eighth time, they brazenly challenged Him in re- 
turn, inquiring, “What have we spoken so much 
against Thee?” (ver. 13). No appeal, entreaty, 
or warning, seemed to move them, or to turn 
them in the slightest degree from their self-com- 
placency and egoism. 

Yet they had said, “It is vain to serve God,” 
for they blindly estimated things by the standard 
of worldly prosperity; and as they contrasted 
their lowly lot with the proud surrounding na- 
tions, they considered there had been no profit in 
keeping Jehovah’s word and seeking to obey His 
voice. What they did not take into account was 
that they were part of a failed nation, and still 
reaping the sad fruit of their fathers’ evil sowing, 
So they were stumbled at the prosperity of the 
wicked, but did not, like Asaph, enter with un- 
shod feet into the sanctuary, that they might un- 
derstand the end of the enemies of the Lord. (See 
Ps. 73.) 

Nevertheless all were not thus insensate and 
gainsaying. A remnant is distinguished in vers. 
16 to 18 that may well be a shining example to 


456 Notes on Malachi 


us. In the midst of ali the declension and cold- 
heartedness of the mass, a few there were who 
feared Jehovah, and sought each other out in the 
dark and cloudy day, speaking often one to an- 
other of the precious and serious things pertain- 
ing to a walk with God. The Lord took pleasure 
in this feeble company, and hearkened, and heard 
their communings and their confessions, and en- 
tered their despised names in a book of remem- 
brance, which will soon be opened at the judg- 
ment-seat of Christ: “And they shal] be Mine, 
saith the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make 
up My peculiar treasure;’” for as they had found 
their treasure in Him, He found His in them. In 
the day when He shall visit upon the wicked their 
iniquities He will spare the remnant, discerning 
between those who truly served Him, and those 
who had no heart for His Word. It is a striking 
and beautiful passage, that is rich in the ministry 
of comfort and cheer to the tried and tested ones 
who value fellowship with God above all else. 

Occupation with the evil can only weaken the 
hand and distress the spirit. But occupation 
with Him who sits in peace above all the mists 
of earth will strengthen and cheer, and prove 
the only real power for practical holiness and vic- 
tory over all the might of the enemy. 


CHAPTER IV 


THE SUN-RISING 


unfortunate, and helps to divert the mind 

from what has just been presented. The 
fact is that verse 1 of chapter 4 is but a contin- 
uation of what has gone before. The Lord is 
going to discern between the righteous and the 
wicked. When? In the coming day that shall 
burn as an oven, the day of the Lord toward 
which all prophecy points as to the time when all 
the wrongs of the ages are to be put right. For, 
be it remembered, “the day”’’ is not a brief period 
of twenty-four hours, but a day that will embrace 
the entire Millennium, concluding with the pass- 
ing away of the earth and the heavens, thus in- 
troducing the day of eternity, or the day of God, 
as set forth in Peter’s second letter (3: 10-12). 
The present season is called “man’s day,” for it 
is the time (of undefined duration) when man is 
doing his own will (1 Cor. 4:3; marginal reading, 
“day,” in place of “judgment’”’). For the heaven- 
ly saints, “the day of Christ’ will immediately 
follow, when, caught up to meet their Lord in the 
air, they shall be manifested before His judg- 
ment-seat (Phil. 1:6,10). The day of the Lord 
then begins for Israel and the nations, embracing 


i HE break between these two chapters seems 


458 Notes on Malachi 


the judgments to be visited on the earth and the 
reign of righteousness, closing when the kingdom 
is delivered up to the Father, and God (Father, 
Son, and Spirit) will be all in all throughout the 
never-ending “day of God,” the eternal state. 

It is then, of the day when the Lord Jesus re- 
turns in manifested glory to visit judgment on 
all who have refused the everlasting gospel, that 
the opening verse treats. That day will “burn as 
an oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do 
wickedly, shall be stubble: and the day that com- 
eth shall burn them up, saith the Lord of hosts, 
that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.” 
Thus will men be made to know the wrath of the 
Lamb, when He shall be revealed from heaven in 
flaming fire, taking vengeance on those who know 
not God. 

But in that day of thick darkness and gloomi- 
ness, for a preserved remnant light shail break 
forth in overwhelming glory. “Unto you that 
fear My name shall the Sun of Righteousness 
arise with healing in His wings; and ye shall go 
forth, and grow up as calves of the stall. And ye 
shall tread down the wicked; for they shall be 
ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that 
I shall do this, saith the Lord of hosts” (vers. 2, 
3). This is very different from the hope of the 
Church. We wait for the shining-forth of the 
Morning Star, not the rising of the Sun of Right- 
eousness, which latter is distinctively Israel’s 


The Sun-rising 459 


hope. The Morning Star is the herald of the 
dawn, and rises ere the Sun is yet visible. So 
will the Lord Jesus descend from heaven with a 
shout, and translate the heavenly saints to the 
Father’s house prior to the time of Jacob’s trou- 
ble, the great tribulation, which takes place upon 
the earth in a brief interval between the coming 
of Christ for the Church and His appearing with 
His holy ones in glorious majesty, for the relief 
of the remnant of Judah, and Israel, in the day 
of their sore trial as a result of their rejection of 
the Lord when He came before in grace. This is 
the shining-forth of the Sun of Righteousness, 
whose beams will bring healing for His own, but 
will consume the wicked with their intensity. It 
will not be the Church, but Israel, who will then 
tread down the evil-doers as ashes beneath their 
feet, in accordance with the universal testimony 
of the prophets. 

It should be plain to all thoughtful students of 
the word of God that this passage completely nul- 
lifies the theory of a converted world at the com- 
ing of Christ. Where, then, would be the wicked 
who are to be trodden down? The fact is that 
Scripture knows nothing of this favorite system 
of modern divines. There will be no Millennium 
till Christ appears, for He must first act in power 
for the destruction of all who have refused to 
own His claims, thus purging the scene for the 
establishment of His kingdom. 


460 Notes on Malachi 


Much has been made of these three opening 
verses by annihilationists of every school. They 
suppose the prophet to refer to the final day of 
judgment, and the ultimate destruction of the lost 
in the lake of fire. Their argument is that as the 
wicked will then be burnt up root and branch, and 
be ashes under the feet of the righteous, they will 
have ceased entirely to exist, and thus will have 
been effectually blotted out of God’s universe. 

The mistake is made by failing to observe that 
it is temporal judgment which is here foretold, 
of which that which fell upon Sodom and Gomor- 
rah was a sample. Fire from heaven will con- 
sume the bodies of the wicked on the earth before 
the millennial kingdom is set up, and thus become 
ashes under the feet of the righteous. But there 
is no hint here as to what will become of the soul 
and spirit. We learn elsewhere in Scripture of 
judgment after death, though the body be burned 
to ashes. Our Lord tells us that it shall be more 
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of 
judgment than for certain of the cities in which 
His mighty works had been performed but He 
Himself had been rejected. 

Nearly forty centuries have elapsed since the 
wicked dwellers in the cities of the plain were 
burned up root and branch. Had Abraham or Lot 
walked over the sites of those destroyed places 
a few days after the fire fell from heaven, the 
wicked would have been ashes under the soles of 


The Sun-rising © 46] 


their feet. But were they then annihilated? Far 
from it. They have yet to stand before the Great 
White Throne for judgment where they will be 
dealt with in accordance with the light they had, 
and which they refused. 

The same may be said of “the proud, and all 
that do wickedly,” spoken of here by Malachi. 
Destroyed utterly as to their bodies and place on 
earth, they yet exist in the world of spirits, and 
will prove that “it is appointed unto men once to 
die, and after this the judgment.” For, as our 
Lord Jesus said, “God is not a God of the dead, 
but of the living; for all live unto Him” (Luke 20: 
88). Let not the reader, if unsaved, be lulled to 
sleep by the devil’s gospel of final extinction. 
Abiding wrath and eternal judgment are terrible 
realities from which the precious blood of Christ 
alone can deliver. 

In Gen. 1:16 the sun is first introduced, the 
type of the Lord Jesus from whom His Church 
gets all her light, even as the moon reflects the 
glory of the sun. Ere Malachi closes the Old 
Testament canon, he reverts to that first type, and 
presents the same glorious person as “the Sun of 
Righteousness.” 

In view of all the expostulation that has gone 
before, the last three verses take on a most sol- 
emn character. Judah is exhorted to remember 
the law of Moses, which God had commanded for 
all Israel, but which they had violated from the 


462 Notes on Malachi 


first, and were now filling up the cup of their in- 
iquities. To call them back to Himself, He would 
send them Elijah the prophet, ere the coming of 
that great and dreadful day of the Lord which 
we have been contemplating. We know from Matt. 
17: 10-18, and Mark 9: 11-13, that, for faith, 
John the Baptist was that Elijah; but the nation 
received him not as such; therefore the ministry 
here referred to is yet future. As Moses and 
Elijah are coupled together in these verses (the 
lawgiver and the restorer), so we see the signs of 
each wrought by the two witnesses of Revelation 
11, which would seem to make plain the character 
of the ministry to be raised up as a testimony in 
Jerusalem at the time of the end. 

Elijah is to turn the heart of the fathers to the 
children, and the heart of the children to the 
fathers, thus bringing all the remnant into sub- 
jection to the revealed will of God, that He may 
not come and smite the earth with a curse. 

And so with this solemn word, CURSE, the Old 
Testament abruptly comes to a close. The law 
had been violated in every particular. On the 
ground of the legal covenant the people had no 
hope whatever. Wrath like a dark cloud was 
lowering over their heads. The awful curse of 
that broken law was all they had earned after 
jong ages of trial. But a Redeemer had been 
promised; and where there was faith, in any who 
felt the seriousness of their condition, they looked 


The Sun-rising 463 


‘on to the coming of the Seed of the woman who 
was to bruise the serpent’s head, and Himself be 
made a curse, that all who put their trust in Him 
might be redeemed from the doom they had so 
long and fully deserved. “To Him give all the 
prophets witness, that through His name whoso- 
ever believeth in Him shall receive remission of 
sins” (Acts 10: 48). Through Him alone can 
guilty men, who own their lost estate and trust 
His grace, be delivered from the “curse.” 


POSTSCRIPT 


AFTER many months of intermittent labor, I 
have been, through grace, enabled to complete 
this volume; and I send it forth with the earnest 
prayer that God may use it—imperfect in many 
respects as I know it to be—to the glory of His 
great name and the blessing of many of His peo- 
ple. 

Everywhere we have found the same great 
facts emphasized. Man in his best estate is alto- 
gether vanity; but grace abounds over all our sin 
and failure. 

If at times the notes seem pessimistic, and un- 
duly burdened with a sense of the failure of the 
testimony committed to man, it is not intentional, 
but rather an evidence of human frailty and im- 
perfection. For the prophets, rightly read, lead 


464 Notes on Malachi 


to optimism of the brightest hue, occupying the 
soul with evil only that it may be judged in one- 
self, but pointing on to the glad morning without 
clouds when He for whom we wait shall come 
down like rain upon the mown grass, and His dis- 
played kingdom shall be like clear shining after 
the storm has passed. 

Evil is but transitory, and has sway only for 
amoment. The good shall abide forever, when 
the last remains of sin will be banished to the 
lake of fire, and there shall be new heavens and 
a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness. 

“Wherefore, beloved, seeing that ye look for 
such things, be diligent that ye may be found of 
Him in peace, without spot, and blameless . 
Therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things 
before, beware lest ye also, being led away with 
the error of the wicked, fall from your own sted- 
fastness. But grow in grace, and in the knowl- 
edge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. To 
Him be glory both now and forever. Amen” (2 
Peter 3:14, 17,18). 


CINCINNATI BIBLE COLLEGE & SEM. LIBRARY 


main 
i Proph 


29 


224.9 Ir6m 
“THAW 
| 3 4320 00061 47 


DATE DUE 


oe Vb CINCINNATI BIBLE 
* SEMINARY LIBRARY 
a No 4L2395 


pene PO IERIE TT ed Dt fy wn <a Ow Pas oe 


Frese 
See aeoaa 
serena 


apercenvenc/ en 
My Pein 


