uy 
tes 
feesyirat 


ie 


ae 


NOTES 


on the 


PROPHECY AND 
LAMENTATIONS 


of 
JEREMIAH 


“The Weeping Prophet” 
by 


H. A. IRONSIDE 


THE CINCINNATI BIBLE SEMINARY 
LIBRARY 


LOIZEAUX “BROTHERS 
Neptune, New Jersey 


Hirst Bidition Gyan October, 1906 


PUBLISHED BY LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, Inc. 


A Nonprofit Organization, devoted to the Lord’s Work 
and to the Spread of His Truth 


FS OY 9 Ma TSR) BR Ue 
a is rH 
| os C f ey 


Lo hie 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


Chapter 


CONTENTS. 


page 
Preface to New Edition ..... slleielelleterelerel sien) 
EYOLECOR ahi e Ce wccnae ant ot: Gee ek 4 
Introd Uctoryarracm rae ee etree sisleie/sierereieaee 
A Vessel chosen and fitted ................ 15 
Entreatya angie arin ou sarpeieicstiectine reine 28 


Future Glory conditioned on Repentance ... 37 
“What agreement hath the Temple of God 


With dol 772g rian tscts ciate ccs a6 sata atone tolsciors 47 
The Burned Branches and the Swelling of 
DOVAAN ee teks. cree len cinehe ota srorel ele tiokel otettrare 55 
The Marred Girdle: “Wilt thou not be made 
Clean 2). Per. Mattila ahlicine ertrecais tas sreishes . 59 
Famine—Temporal and Spiritual .......... 64 
Sin where the Blood should be! ............ 16 
Lessons from the Potter’s house .......... 90 
Pashur’s new Name and the Prophet’s com- 
(ELS Sinciaerooements oboe cH Oo eter eaaor 96 
The Siege and Captivity foretold .......... 101 
The Seventy Years’ Captivity and the Wine- 
CUDROMCHOVAS eLUL Va. ction c ciclate eleietal sie 119 
Danger and Deliverance .............-...- 126 
Bondsmand ey OKES iectaieiaki oie oiieis cielo =! creleieiate 131 
The Letter to the Captivity ............-.. 138 
Jacob’s Trouble and the final Restoration. ..146 
Imprisoned for the Testimony of God ...... 167 
Bondage in Place of Liberty ............. 176 
The House of the Rechabites ........... . 183 


iv 
Chapter 
XX. 
XXI. 
XXII. 
XXIII. 
XXIV. 
XXV. 


XXVI. 


XXVIII. 
XXVIII. 
XXIX. 
XXX. 
XXXI. 


Contents 


page 
The first destructive Critic on Record ......189 
Thesallvot:d erusalem().).< icc cieclelerielsi-roeieyers 202 
Ishmael’s Treachery and the flight to Egypt.227 
A word for Baruch and for us all ......... 247 
Jehovah’s Word against the Nations ....... 255 
The Doom of Babylon and Deliverance of 
THE SREMMNANCM ates reyet cnelchoreieverctercreteteteterer tale 272 


The Historical Appendix .........+++++0++-302 


LAMENTATIONS. 
The Desolations of Jerusalem ............ 307 
The Day of the Lord’s Anger ....... apeoogoellt) 
“Let us search and try our Ways” ........ 325 
The fine Gold become Dim ................ 335 
“Thou, O Lord, remainest forever.” ........ B47 
Appendix: I, Boris. tine oe atohete, eetthatale terete «vue ate 855 
Appendix II. ....... ail cietevaletene srelctercletercleiers os OO 


Preface to New Edition 


——., 


After the lapse of some twenty-two years this 
book is to be reissued, and my publishers have 
asked me to go over it carefully and make any 
corrections desired, ere plating it. This T have 
done. Slight changes have been made here and 
there, not more than a dozen in all, and a few 
sentences added for greater clearness. It is a 
matter of surprise on my part and of real grati- 
tude to God that I see nothing to alter so far as 
the teaching is concerned. The principles of in- 
terpretation I accepted years ago seem clearer 
to me now than ever. The great outlines of the 
teaching of the book have only become confirmed 
in my mind with the passing of the years. I 
hold, through grace, to-day, what I held when 
I began these “Notes” nearly thirty years ago. I 
am more than ever persuaded of their dispensa- 
tional correctness, and I send the book forth 
again, in full confidence that it sets forth the 
truth of God. 


—H. A. IRONSIDE. 


September, 1928. 


. ayes Care 
1 -& 3s 
; : os P 
: Cer 
‘ Fi 
f ae ain | 
e a a 
™“ 1 Ca a 
' i gt 7 mS 


PREFACE 


The book now before the reader consists not so 
much of a commentary upon the books of Jere- 
miah and Lamentations, as of a series of medita- 
tive studies, which have been jotted down at in- 
tervals in a busy life during a period of nearly 
five years. This accounts in great measure for 
the fragmentary character of much that is here 
presented. 

It is hoped, however, that, unfinished as the 
book may appear from either an expository or a 
literary standpoint, it may be found helpful in 
exercising the consciences of the Lord’s people 
and in quickening their spiritual affections, as 
well as in opening up a portion of Scripture which 
to many is almost like an unexplored region. 

Students generally find difficulty in a careful 
survey of these books because of the arrangement 
of the chapters, so utterly regardless of chrono- 
logical order. To help such, an attempt has been 
made to present the different prophecies and his- 
torical incidents in their true relationship, at the 
end of the book. It is impossible to speak authori- 
tatively concerning every particular portion, and 
the thoughtful reader may even be able to im- 
prove upon the order there given. 


8 Preface 


The great prophetic chapters (30, 31,50, and 
51) have been treated more fully than others hbe- 
cause of the many existing misconceptions as to 
God’s past, present and future dealings with Is- 
rael and Judah (to which the first two chapters 
designated relate), and, to our mind, the base- 
less speculations in regard to the rebuilding of 
literal Babylon, which are, we believe, fully met 
in the latter two chapters. 

The book is not written for the critical scholar, 
but it is put forth in the hope that it may be 
suited ministry for the sheep and lambs of the 
flock of Christ. 

The author desires to acknowledge help re- 
ceived from Mr.J.N,Darby’s outlines of Jeremiah 
and Lamentations in his excellent “Synopsis of 
the Books of the Bible;” as also from the brief 
paper on Jeremiah by Mr. J. B. Stoney in his 
“Discipline in the School of God.” 

May the Master of Assemblies be pleased to 
make these pages a help to open up a part of 
His unerring Word for genuine profit to num- 
bers of His people. 


—H. A. IRONSIDE. 


[1906] 


INTRODUCTORY 


In taking up the study of the writings of Jere- 
miah it is not purposed to attempt a full exposi- 
tion of the books of this the tenderest of all the 
prophets. My only thought is to jot down notes 
of what has been particularly impressed on my 
own heart in going over them, in the hope that 
others, especially young Christians, may, like my- 
self, find benefit. 

The prophecy with its poetical appendix forms 
a portion of Scripture abounding in soulful, 
stirring appeals. If we think of prophecy merely 
as foretelling the future (and especially unfold- 
ing the glories of Messiah’s kingdom), we shall 
not find it nearly so full as either Isaiah, Ezekiel, 
or Daniel, with which it is commonly classed as 
being one of the major prophets. It has not the 
majesty of the first, the extended vision of the 
last, nor the wondrous imagery of the other; but 
none of these characteristics would be expected in 
a series of messages chiefly intended for the con- 
science. If, however, we think of prophecy in its 
New Testament sense, as that which brings the 
soul into the presence of God, we realize at once 
how fully this is the case here. The same is true 
in great measure of Ezekiel, but it would seem 


10 Introductory 


that there the people are practically given up 
from the start, their defection is so complete; 
part of them already having been carried into 
captivity, as in the case of the prophet himself 
(Ezek. 1:1): but in Jeremiah, in the first half of 
the book at least, we have evidently ministry with 
a view to recalling wandering hearts to the One 
they had forsaken. It is their restoration to God 
as a means of deferring the already announced 
judgment (2 Kings 22: 12-20) that is now before 
us. This stamps the book as a whole, and gives 
character to it. What in Ezekiel is expressed in 
picture—the slow and reluctant leaving of the 
Shekinah (chap. 10: 4, 18, 19)— is, in the earlier 
book, brought before us in the earnest pleadings 
and conscience-rousing entreaties of the Spirit in 
the tender-hearted Seer, sorrowing so deeply over 
the fallen condition of his people. 

I have often been struck by what seemed to be 
a characteristic likeness in Jeremiah and Nehe- 
miah. Both were actuated by the same fervent 
love for the people and city of God. Both were 
men of broken and contrite spirits, who trembled 
at the word of the Lord. Both were very easily 
moved men, tears being frequently common to 
them. In the earlier servant, however, there is 
perhaps more exaltedness of character, more self- 
forgetfulness, than in the later one. For instance, 
Nehemiah says: “Remember me, O God, concern- 
ing this, and wipe not 01 t my good deeds that I 


Introductory tT 


have done” (chap. 13: 14) ; a sentiment frequent- 
ly repeated. Jeremiah never spoke like this. 
Once only he cries, when he sees his message is 
rejected, and hope of the repentance of Judah 
is gone, and they are devising evil devices against 
him; “Remember that I stood before Thee to 
speak good for them, and to turn away Thy wrath 
from them” (chap. 18:20). He was a less in- 
trepid man naturally, however, than the other, 
the weakness of his heart being again and again 
manifested, though this only gives better oppor- 
tunity (as in the case of Gideon and Ezra) for 
God to display His power. “When I am weak, 
then am I strong,” is the “irresistible might of 
weakness,” which relies upon “One who is 
mighty.” 

Nehemiah, too, seems to be more of what peo- 
ple call a patriot than the man who advised sub- 
mission to the Babylonian yoke; but in this it is 
clear that each had the mind of God for the time 
in which he lived. One stood at the ending of a 
path of declension and backsliding; the other, at 
the beginning of a new era of temporary restora- 
tion and blessing. Men of God both were. May 
we emulate what His grace wrought in each. 

Coming, then, to the book of Jeremiah itself, 
we notice that it divides naturally into two main 
parts, with an appendix added by a later hand, 
though of course equally inspired by the Holy 


12 Introductory 


Ghost. In chapters 1—24 we hear the gracious 
pleadings of Jehovah with His erring and rebel- 
lious people. This portion is moral rather than 
devoted to foretelling events. Chapters 25—51 
give in more detail the judgments of God, by 
means of Nebuchadnezzar, resultant upon the re- 
jection of the previous messages; with, however, 
promises of future blessing and restoration at the 
expiration of seventy years’ captivity. The whole 
present interval of scattering, since the cutting 
off of Messiah, is passed over in silence. ‘Thus 
far the words of Jeremiah.” Chapter 52 is the 
historical account of the carrying out of the pre- 
dicted but long-delayed judgment: compare it 
with 2 Kings 24: 18-20; 25: 1-17. The closing 
verses intimate that as the prophecies of venge- 
ance were thus fulfilled, so shall those be that 
told of restoration, for Jehoiachin is not allowed 
to die in prison, but is taken into favor by the 
king of Babylon—earnest of what is yet to come. 

In the Lamentations we are permitted to hear 
the outpourings of the heart of the grief-stricken 
prophet bewailing the accomplishment of that 
which he himself had predicted. How gladly 
would this dear servant of God have had all his 
prophecies prove false and himself be put to 
shame, had the people but been spared! In this 
he is blessedly unlike Jonah, who was angry when 
grace was shown to the repentant Ninevites, at 


Introductory 18 


the possible expense of his prophetic reputation, 
or of his probable desire that Nineveh, from whom 
Israel had suffered, might not go unpunished. 
What makes Jeremiah’s sorrow the more bitter is 
that it has all been deserved by a rebellious and 
stiff-necked people; but he still turns to Jehovah 
for succor and renewal. “Turn Thou us unto 
Thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned; renew our 
days as of old.” 

Oh that those who seek to care for the sheep 
and lambs of the flock to-day were more char- 
acterized by the love and self-abnegation that 
marked this dear servant of God, whose spirit 
was not soured by rejection as ours often is, but 
whose love was only the deeper as the objects of 
it heaped upon him insult and ignominy. In this, 
how like the true Man of Sorrows! In fact, so 
marked is this, that the rabbis have sought to 
find in Jeremiah the patient Sufferer of Isa. 53. 
To only One, as we know, can such words really 
apply; but it speaks volumes for Jeremiah’s lov- 
ing endurance in his deep, deep grief, that he 
should be the “other man” (Acts 8: 34) whom 
Christ-rejecting doctors put in the very place of 
the Holy Sufferer of Calvary. May we be more 
and more conformed to His blessed ways down 
here, who “has left us an example that we should 


follow His steps.” 


Notes on the 


PROPHECY AND LAMENTATIONS 
of 


JEREMIAH 


—EE 


CHAPTER I 
A VESSEL CHOSEN AND FITTED 
(Chapter 1.) 


The account of Jeremiah’s call to the prophetic 
office is very instructive and deeply interesting. 
The thoughtful reader feels at once how intensely 
human was the man, how condescendingly graci- 
ous the Lord. On the part of the servant there is 
naught but backwardness and trembling when 
commissioned to be the bearer of Jehovah’s mes- 
sage to His backslidden people. It would be at 
best but a thankless task; for people away from 
God, yet proudly ignorant of their condition, do 
not, as a rule, show much gratitude to the man 
who seeks to turn the light on and manifest things 
as they really are. It is, generally speaking, a far 
more pleasant and agreeable task to preach the 
gospel to poor lost sinners than to minister to 
the needs of wayward saints. None but a man 


i6 Wotes on Jeremiah 


who is himself very low before God can accom- 
plish it successfully. If I would wash my broth- 
er’s feet, I must stoop to do it. 

But in this, as in all true service, one’s reliance 
must be upon God, who never sends a messenger 
without putting in his mouth the word he is to 
speak; and never bids one undertake a service for 
which He does not qualify the servant. So with 
Jeremiah. His confidence is to be in the God of 
resurrection, who had before made a dry stick to 
bud, and blossom, and bring forth almonds, and 
who delights to take up the foolish, the weak, the 
base, and the despised things, and us° them to 
confound the wise, the mighty, and the noble, 
“that no flesh should glory in His presence” (1 
Cor. 1: 26-29). This is the secret of His so act- 
ing. Worship in His presence all can, and should, 
who have been brought to Himself through sov- 
ereign grace; praise and adore Him they freely 
may; but glory before Him they shall not. All 
must own that they are but vessels of mercy, who 
have nothing which they have not received, and 
He must ever be the Giver, for “it is more blessed 
to give than to receive.” Impossible that the 
saved sinner should have the more blessed part. 

It is not, therefore, brilliant men whom He de- 
pends on, nor men of self-sufficiency and self-con- 
fidence, but it is ever His delight to fill the empty 
vessel and then use it to suit Himself. “We have 
this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excel- 
lency of the power may be of God, and not of 
us’. (2eCor-74 a7) 

Looking, then, a little carefully into this pre- 
liminary chapter, we note that Jeremiah was evi- 


A Vesset Chosen and Fitted 17 


dently quite a young man (“a child,”’* he says, 
ver. 7) when the word of the Lord came to him, 
in the days of the godly king Josiah—himself but 
a youth, as it was in the thirteenth year of his 
reign, and he was but eight years of age when 
he succeeded his wicked father Amon as King 
of Judah (2 Chron. 34: 1). The prophet’s min- 
istry covered a period of over forty years under 
the kings; and when royalty had departed from 
Judah and her princes, and thousands of her peo- 
ple had gone into captivity, he is still found at 
his post standing for God among “the poor of the 
flock” left in the land, looking forward to the de- 
struction of the very power to which he had pre- 
viously urged submission, and which had been 
permitted to desolate Jehovah’s heritage. 

Of his early years, before his divine call to 
publicly proclaim the word of the Lord, we have 
no authentic record. Scripture is silent regard- 
ing him, save for occasional references (2 Chron. 
85, 36) to his later ministry, corroborating, if 
corroboration were needed, his own account in the 
books before us. His father’s name, Hilkiah; his 
service, that of a priest; his home, Anathoth of 
Benjamin—these he tells us in the first verse, but 
details there are none. Men may be curious to 
know of the training and early life of those after- 
wards celebrated; but God makes no attempts 
merely to satisfy idle curiosity. In divine things 
all counts for nothing until the soul really begins 
with God. That memorable time in the case of 
this young priest (that is, the time when he con- 


*This is the same word that the angel applies to 
Zechariah—“Speak to this young man” (Zech. 2:4). 


18 Notes on Jeremiah 


sciously had to do with Him) was evidently about 
the date above mentioned. Like John the Baptist, 
he was sanctified even before his birth, and or- 
dained to be a prophet, not merely to fallen 
Judah, but to the nations. We do not know, how- 
ever, that he was aware of his exalted mission 
until this time. 

There had already been a measure of revival 
and blessing in the land; outwardly, at least. Just 
a year previously, Josiah had commenced to purge 
Judah and Jerusalem from the remains of the 
idolatrous worship which Manasseh, though hum- 
bled and repentant, had not been able to remove, 
and which the infamous and unhumbled Amon 
had but furthered and endorsed. The book of 
the law had not yet been recovered; nor was it 
until some seven years later (2 Chron. 34). That 
precious volume was still hidden (where, doubt- 
less, some faithful one had only too safely stored 
it, in the dark days preceding) in the still unre- 
paired house of the Lord. In His own time, He 
who caused it to be written and who watched over 
it would see that it was brought forth. Till then, 
and even in connection with it later, He would 
speak through a prophet. 

And right here it may be well to note Jere- 
miah’s place in connection with the other proph- 
ets whose writings we have. It was probably 
about a century since Isaiah had, if tradition 
speaks truly, been sawn asunder (see Heb. 11: 
87) by the fathers of those who now professed 
to worship Jehovah at Jerusalem. Hosea, Joel, 
Amos, Micah, and Nahum, all of them for a time 
at least contemporary with Isaiah, had long since 


A Vessel Chosen and Fitted 19 


passed off the scene; leaving the nation appar- 
ently as hardened as ever. Zephaniah and Habak- 
kuk were both still living, though we have no 
mention as to whether it was their privilege to 
“speak often one to another.” Ezekiel and Obad- 
iah were also his contemporaries during his later 
years—Ezekiel only among the captives in Baby- 
lon. Daniel prophesied subsequently in the pal- 
ace of the conquerors. He, it will be remem- 
bered, was a student of the writings of his great 
predecessor, and from this book learned of the 
appointed seventy years’ duration of the captiv- 
ity. Jonah had been much earlier than any (2 
Kings 14: 25), but we know little of the nature 
of his ministry beyond his mission to the ‘great 
Gentile city of Nineveh. The remaining three 
minor prophets, Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, 
were the bearers of Jehovah’s message to the rem- 
nant restored to their land. Between Jeremiah 
and the last a period of about three hundred years 
is generally assigned. 

We turn back now to our chapter. Just how 
the Lord spoke to Jeremiah we are not informed. 
Abruptly he is told: ‘Before I formed thee in 
the belly I knew thee; and before thou camest 
out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained 
thee a prophet unto the nations” (verse 5). It 
is the divine sovereignty that is at once brought 
before him. He is given to understand from the 
first that it is the eternal, omniscient, omnipotent 
Jehovah with whom he has to do. The natural 
man may shrink from this, but how the soul of 
the saint delights to dwell upon it! ‘Known unto 
God are all His works from the beginning of the 


20 Notes on Jeremiah 


creation.” Nothing ever takes Him by surprise. 

Consequently, with Him, there can be no 
after-thought. All was foreseen long, long before 
its actual occurrence; everything was provided 
for. Satan, sin, and their attendant evils, have 
in no wise interfered with His purpose, “who 
worketh all things according to the counsel of 
His own will.” Where had His grace found mani- 
festation, had not sin been permitted? All the 
glory of the Cross must have had no place if the 
serpent’s entrance into the garden of delight had 
been denied. Evil, dreadful as it is, is but the 
dark background that throws into relief His won- 
drous purposes of love and grace. 

It is well for the soul of the believer to grasp 
this and rest upon it. However much one’s spirit 
may be chafed and fretted and vexed by abound- 
sng iniquity, it is well to remember that there is 
One who abides in eternal peace—“‘the peace of 
God.” Not that He is indifferent to the evil; but 
He sees, as we cannot, how blessedly all shall yet 
result to the glory of the Son of His love. How 
different must have been our thoughts of Him 
had our guilt never given occasion for His empty- 
ing Himself of His dignities to become a little 
lower than the angels for the suffering of death! 
We should never have known Him as Man had 
not sin necessitated for us a Mediator. Had He 
sovereignly chosen to become such, though we 
needed Him not, we could only call Him Lord and 
not know Him as Saviour, whose precious blood 
had redeemed us to God: how little could we 
then have appreciated Him! It is our deep and 
bitter need which has revealed to us the heart of 


A Vessel Chosen and Fitted 21 


God. Very different must have been Adam’s 
thoughts of Him when forbidden the tree, and 
when clothed by His own hand in coats of skin. 

Nor need any one who has learned God in the 
person of Christ fear to dwell upon His electing 
love: it is but the assurance of his eternal 
safety. Others, who as yet cannot call Him 
“Father,” need not question whether they are 
shut out from a share in it; for His word to all 
is, “Whosoever will, let him take the water of life 
freely.” Drink, and you shall know that the 
draught was prepared for you, as though no other 
needed it. 

The Lord’s word to Jeremiah brings before the 
mind a lovely passage in the 139th psalm. Space 
forbids quoting it in full, but we may cull from 
it what seem its choicest portions, commending it 
all to the reader’s quiet meditation when time and 
opportunity afford. 

After the acknowledgment of the divine omnis- 
cience as to his present condition in vers. 1-5, and 
the divine omnipresence in vers. 7-12, the heart 
of the singer is absorbed in the contemplation of 
the thoughtfulness of the divine foreknowledge: 
“For Thou hast possessed my reins: Thou hast 
covered me in my mother’s womb. I will praise 
Thee; for I am fearfully and wonderfully made: 
marvelous are Thy works; and that my soul 
knoweth right well. My substance was not hid 
from Thee, when I was made in secret, and curi- 
ously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. 
Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being un- 
perfect; and in Thy book all my members were 
written, which in continuanze were fashioned, 


22, Notes on Jeremiah 


when as yet there was none of them. How pre- 
cious also are Thy thoughts unto me, O God! how 
great is the sum of them! If I should count 
them, they are more in number than the sand: 
when I awake, I am still with Thee” (vers. 
13-18). 

With confidence may the trusting soul turn to 
such a God, and pray, “Search me, O God, and 
know my heart: try me, and know my thoughts: 
and see if there be any wicked way in me, and 
lead me in the way everlasting” (vers. 23, 24). 
Such might well have been the answer of Jere- 
miah to the word of the Lord assuring him of 
His interest and care, long, long before he could 
in any sense respond to it; but instead, he ex- 
claims, “Ah, Lord God, behold, I cannot speak; 
for I am a child” (ver. 6). But what difference 
could that make to One who had known him thor- 
oughly even ere He had formed him? He could 
make no mistake in His choice of a servant. Had 
not He Himself made man’s mouth? And would 
He now, who had all resources in Himself, cast 
His ambassador upon his own? Ah, that would 
be altogether unlike God. Like Moses in Midian, 
Jeremiah had not yet learned Him aright, nor had 
he learned himself. The great lesson of no confi- 
dence in the flesh and of full confidence in God 
had to be put before him. The former, one might 
think he had in measure learned already; but had 
he truly done so, he would not have been disheart- 
ened when he reflected on his inability. It was 
simply natural backwardness: the flesh itself was 
not really denied. Otherwise he would neither 
have been troubled if he lacked ability, nor exalt- 


A Vessel Chosen and Fitted 23 


ed if he possessed it. Without it, God was enough. 
With it, God must still be all, or it would avail 
nothing. 

In the answer of Jehovah, it is He who assumes 
all responsibility. The servant has but to obey. 
He will attend to the question of power; and, as 
we say in New Testament language, of “gift.” 
“Say not, I am a child” (ver. 7). In short, say 
nothing about self at all. In spiritual things a 
giant has no more place than an infant. What he 
was or was not, was of no importance. How well 
had the apostle Paul learned this, to say in 1 Cor. 
3:7, “So then neither is he that planteth any- 
thing” (and it was himself who had done so in 
this case), ‘‘neither he that watereth, but God that 
giveth the increase.” 

“Thou shalt go to all that I send thee, and what- 
soever I command thee, thou shalt speak. Be not 
afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to de- 
liver thee, saith the Lord.” This settled every- 
thing. As of a later prophet, we read, “Then 
spake Haggai the Lord’s messenger in the Lord’s 
message, unto the people, saying, I am with you, 
saith the Lord” (Haggai 1:13). The remnant 
then were in the state Jeremiah was in before, 
weak and fearful; but immediately upon the proc- 
lamation of such a message, we read of a stirring 
of the spirits of the leaders and of all the people. 

It has often been noticed, too, that the last that 
Mark records of the risen and ascended Lord is 
His working with those who went forth preach- 
ing; and He it was who confirmed the word with 
signs following. Thus, for service, if we enter 
into His thoughts, it ceases to be a question of 


24 Notes on Jeremiah 


our weak self or our strong self, and becomes 
one of Himself. The instrument may be feeble, 
but it is upheld and used by an all-powerful Hand. 

In Jeremiah’s case, He who made man’s mouth 
put forth His hand and touched the lips of the 
fearful servant, thus putting His own words into 
the prophet’s mouth. This in fact is what con- 
stitutes a man a prophet. Isaiah’s touch is un- 
like this, perhaps, in some respects. In his case 
he had been learning his vileness and innate de- 
pravity. The seraphim flew with a live coal from 
off the brazen altar of judgment, where the burnt 
offering (the blessed answer to all that man is) 
was going up as a sweet savor to God. Wrath 
having been borne by Another, it removes sin and 
terror from the self-confessed and repentant sin- 
ner. That touch, to Isaiah, spoke of cleansing. 
This, to Jeremiah, tells of power. He who 
cleanses also fits for service: this is the double 
lesson the two prophets bring before us. Not 
that Isaiah was not fitted to serve: he was, as 
the subsequent verses show (Isa. 6); but that 
is not what is there emphasized. 

Jeremiah is then set over the nations and the 
kingdoms. He is commissioned “to root out, to 
pull down, to destroy, to throw down, to build up, 
and to plant” (ver. 10). That is, he must tell of 
judgment and desolation, of overturning and de- 
struction; but great and terrible though Jeho- 
vah’s vengeance must be, it is not judgment with- 
out mercy, for of restoration and recovery, of 
blessing and renewal, he is also to speak. He that 
scattereth Israel will regather it in His own ap- 
pointed time; heavy though the hand of affliction 


A Vessel Chosen and Fitted 25 


must fall upon the nations, yet the time will sure- 
ly come when “the earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the 
sea” (Isa. 11:9; Hab. 2:14). 

All this is assured in the vision that follows. 
The rod of the almond-tree is a symbol easily 
read in connection with Num. 17. It speaks of 
God’s Christ declared to be the Son of God with 
power by resurrection of the dead (Rom. 1: 4). 
It is as the God of resurrection, the One who 
intervenes when all the power of nature is at an 
end, that Jeremiah was to know the Lord. It is 
because He is such, that the building and plant- 
ing is certain, though there be first the breaking 
down and uprooting. The almond, the Hebrews 
called “the hastening tree,” because of its early 
budding when the cold of winter had scarcely 
passed away. “I will hasten My word to per- 
form it” is the divine comment on the vision 
(vers. 11, 12). 

The word to Habakkuk a few years later 
(though, as previously noted, he was contem- 
porary with Jeremiah) is, “Though it tarry, wait 
for it; because it will surely come, it will not 
tarry” (Hab. 2:3). This, the writer of the 
epistle to the Hebrews quotes, but changes the 
pronoun, and by the Spirit’s direction a Person is 
brought before us, and it reads: “Yet a little 
while, and He that shall come will come, and will 
not tarry” (Heb. 10: 37). It is the Lord Jesus 
Himself who will bring in the blessing, predicted 
by the prophets, for Israel and the earth. It is 
that same blessed Person for whom we now wait 
for our full blessing in heaven. 


26 Notes on Jeremiah 


The Rod of the hastening-tree, when He came 
in grace, was to Israel but as a dry stick, and 
worthless. Hidden away from the eyes of men, 
He has “budded and brought forth buds, and 
bloomed blossoms, and yielded almonds.” He has 
been laid up in the sanctuary above. The rod in 
the ark tells of the resurrected Man on the 
throne. (See Num. 17, throughout.) 

By and by (how soon none can tell) the once 
despised Jesus will appear in glory, and all na- 
tions will delight in His shadow and find strength 
in His fruit, while the eye will be gladdened with 
the beauty of His blossoms; “for how great is 
His goodness, and how great is His beauty!” 
(Zech. 9: 17). 

Till then, alas, there is the “seething-pot” (ver. 
13), into which “His own,” who “received Him 
not,” have been cast. This is, doubtless, akin to 
the smoking furnace of Egypt (Gen. 15). Of 
old, Pharaoh had been their oppressor. Nebuchad- 
nezzar was now to be their captor (vers. 14-16), 
though the full scope of the vision goes on evi- 
dently to the gathering of all the nations against 
Jerusalem. The seething pot* is pictured in all 
its horror in the last chapter of Zechariah. “Be- 
hold, the day of the Lord cometh, and thy spoil 
shall be divided in the midst of thee: For I will 
gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle; 
and the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, 
and the women ravished; and half of the city 
shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of 
the people shall not be cut off from the city.” But 


* Note also Ezek. 24: 2-14 in this connection. 


A Vessel Chosen and Fitted 27 


when the flames are fiercest, and the people seem 
about to be utterly consumed, the Almond-tree 
will stand again where He stood ere He was laid 
up in the sanctuary—upon the Mount of Olives. 
“The Lord my God shall come, and all the saints 
with Thee” (ver. 5). 

Having beheld the visions of the Rod and the 
seething pot—simple, yet how expressive !—Jere- 
miah is further encouraged and warned. He is 
to gird his loins as for arduous service. Stand- 
ing before the Lord, he is to “speak unto them 
all that I command thee” (ver. 17). He had but 
One to please, and he is not to be dismayed at 
the faces of the opposers: lowering they may be, 
but he is made as a defenced city, an iron pillar 
and a brazen wall against kings, princes, priests 
and people, as he stands in the strength of the 
Lord. If afraid, it will be evidence that he has 
not yet done with flesh and blood, and he will be 
confounded before them. If undismayed, they 
may fight against him, but prevail they cannot, 
for “I am with thee, saith the Lord, to deliver 
thee.” This was to be his strength. On it he 
could rely. The promise is twice repeated, for 
God designs to give him full witness—he need 
have no fear (vers. 18, 19). 

In the next chapter we find him in his public 
ministry. He has had to do with God in secret. 
He is now ready to face the people openly. 


CHAPTER II 
ENTREATY AND WARNING 


(Chap. 2:1—8:5.) 


Jeremiah’s first expostulation with his people 
—at least, the first recorded—is certainly a most 
remarkable address for one who said, “I cannot 
speak, I am but a child.” It would be difficult to 
find any portion of Scripture that would surpass 
it in genuine pathos and tenderness, not to speak 
of eloquence. The earnest pleading of the insult- 
ed and forgotten Lord, His grace and compassion 
towards the guilty nation, blended with solemn 
warnings of dreadful days to come if the heart is 
not turned back to Him—all together make up a 
discourse that might have moved the very ‘stones; 
but alas, we read of no response on the part of 
hardened, wilful Judah. 

The opening words are remarkably beautiful. 
“T remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the 
love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after 
Me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown. 
Israel was holiness unto the Lord, and the first- 
fruits of His increase. All that devour him shall 
offend: evil shall come upon them, saith the 
Lord” (vers. 1-3). How He delights to recall the 
first love of His people, when their hearts beat 
true to Himself and joy welled up in their souls 
at the thought of His dwelling among them (Ex. 
16) ! 

Do we not well remember that it was so with 


Entreaty and Warning 29 


us when first we knew Him to be really our 
Saviour-God and ourselves to be His forever, 
when the confidence of our hearts was estab- 
lished in His grace? How much He was to us 
then! What a poor thing this world seemed, 
with all its glittering baubles! How gladly we 
turned from everything we had once delighted in 
to go out after Himself revealed in Jesus! He 
was outside this scene, the rejected One; we, 
too, then, must be separated from it. That which 
had before been as the well-watered plains of 
Egypt to us now became as a desert, parched and 
dry, in which was nothing for our hearts. With 
deepest joy we exclaimed, “All my springs are 
in Thee,” and sang exultingly of the “treasure 
found in His love,’’ which had indeed “made us 
pilgrims below.” 

Those were truly bright and happy days when 
first Christ dwelt in our hearts by faith: days 
when He joyed in us and we in Him. But, may 
we not ask ourselves, is it so now? Must He 
look back and say, “I remember,” or does He find 
us still occupied with Himself, still gladly and 
cheerfully counting all below as dross and dung 
for Him, still exclaiming, “One thing I do”? Alas, 
that it should be ever otherwise! But the first 
complaint He had to make against the newly- 
founded Church, when all else was going on well 
and orderly, was this: “Thou hast left thy first 
love” (Rev. 2). 

“Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold 
king Solomon with the crown wherewith his 
mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, 
and in the day of the gladness of his heart” 


30 Notes on Jeremiah 


(Cant. 3:11). If our joy was great, how deep 
was His when first our hearts were won for Him- 
self! Beloved, do we give Him joy now as to our 
practical ways, and our heart’s affections from 
which our ways spring? Or is His Spirit grieved 
on account of our cold-hearted indifference—our 
heartlessness? for is it not worse than coldness? 
Let us turn, then, to His further gracious words 
in the portion before us. 

“What iniquity have your fathers found in Me, 
that they are gone far from Me, and have walked 
after vanity, and are become vain?” (ver. 5.) 
Just think that He should ask that question—He 
to whom they owed everything! He had deliv- 
ered them from bondage and brought them safely 
through a desert land, to their inheritance in the 
land of blessedness. He had planted them in a 
beautiful country to eat the fruit thereof and the 
goodness thereof! Alas, they had defiled the land. 
They had turned His grace into lasciviousness; 
they had made His heritage an abomination. They 
walked after things that could not profit (vers. 
4-8). Terrible indictment! Base ingratitude! But 
oh, beloved, let us ask ourselves, Are we any less 
guilty than they? Nay, have we not known a 
far greater deliverance, a more wonderful pres- 
ervation, a more costly inheritance; and yet, have 
not our hearts, too, gone after the vain and un- 
profitable things of earth? Have we not forgot- 
ten that the cedar-wood, the hyssop and scarlet, 
were cast into the burning of the heifer (Num. 
19)—that, for faith, all the glory of this world 
came to an end on the cross? That tree on which 
He hung, that testified to His entire rejection by 


Entreaty and Warning 31 


this world, has it really separated us from the- 
scene where He has been set at nought? Do we 
still want favor, power and place where He found 
only rejection, a cross, and a tomb? How, then, 
is this? What iniquity have our hearts found in 
Him that they can thus turn from Him so ruth- 
lessly? Ah, charge Him with this we cannot. 
Let us confess that it is in ourselves alone the 
iniquity is found. It is we who have changed 
our glory for that which doth not profit. Weli 
may He say: “Be astonished, O ye heavens, at 
this, and be horribly afraid, be very desolate, 
saith the Lord. For My people have committed 
two evils: they have forsaken Me, the fountain 
of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, 
broken cisterns, that can hold no water” (vers. 
12 1S) 

But has He changed towards those who have so 
changed towards Him? Far be the thought: 
though He loves His own too much to permit 
them to prosper in the paths of disobedience. He 
chastened Israel with scourge after scourge, but 
His heart of love remained unchangeably the 
same. They might blame Him for what He could 
so easily have prevented, as we are in danger of 
doing; but He can say, “Hast thou not procured 
this unto thyself, in that thou hast forsaken the 
Lord thy God, when He led thee by the way” 
(ver. 17)? He must make the backslidden in 
heart eat of the fruit of his own devices (Prov. 
14: 14) in order to turn the heart back from 
its devices to Himself, the source of all blessing. 

It is in vain to turn to Egypt, or Assyria— 
each speaking of different aspects of the world; 


82 Notes on Jeremiah 


for how can one who has known Him ever find 
refreshment and rest anywhere else? The waters 
of Sihor (supposed to be the mystic Nile, com- 
ing from no one knew where) could no longer 
satisfy those who once rejoiced in rain direct 
from heaven. Egypt is the world as we knew it 
when we groaned beneath the sense of its cruel 
bondage: Assyria is rather the world as the open 
enemy of the people of God. How can His own 
look for comfort in either of these? Yet how true 
it is that the heart when turned from Himself 
soon sinks back to the dead level of the things 
from which it was once delivered, and sometimes 
also is found ranged against the very truths it 
once enjoyed! In such a condition, when other 
remedies have failed, it is not seldom that the 
principle enunciated in ver. 19 has to be used to 
bring the wandering one to his senses. “Thine 
own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy back- 
slidings shall reprove thee: know therefore and 
see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou 
hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that My 
fear is not in thee, saith the Lord God of hosts.” 
This is, one might say, His last resource (if souls 
are not otherwise brought back to Himself) to 
“deliver unto Satan for the destruction of the 
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of 
the Lord Jesus” (1 Cor. 5). It has often been 
said that a child of God out of communion with 
the Father will stoop to evil reprobated even by 
the world—and this is doubtless true—until the 
very depths of the depravity is used of God te 
correct and reprove. So it was in the case of 
David, who, confessing his sin, acknowledged that 


Entreaty and Warning 833 


he had been left to fall so low “that Thou might-- 
est: be justified when Thou speakest, and be clear 
when Thou judgest” (Psa. 51). So, too, with 
Peter. Self-confidence had characterized him for 
some time, and his self-confidence at last correct- 
ed him; his dreadful backsliding reproved him. 
And thus it was with the wretched man of 1 Cor. 
5. He must be left to himself—given over to 
Satan till, as a result, his brokenness and peni- 
tence can be pressed, in 2 Cor. 2, as a reason for 
his being again received into the fellowship of 
the assembly. Blessed it is to know, as already 
intimated in the preceding chapter, in the wis- 
dom of God. that sin must serve. The waters be- 
low, though they speak of sinful self-will, shall 
yet be made to bring forth abundantly to the 
glory of God, as in the fifth day’s work in Gen. 1. 
This is not, in any sense, to excuse sin, but the 
contrary. Its very hideousness is used of God to 
humble and bring very low the soul that has wan- 
dered from Him. 

As we continue to look at the passage before 
us, it is well to remember that while the nation, 
as such, was in covenant-relationship with Jeho- 
vah, it was not yet the New Covenant, but that 
entered into at Sinai. It still looked for some- 
thing in man, who had said when his bonds were 
broken and he was delivered from the yoke, “I 
will not transgress” (ver. 20). But, far from 
continuing in that covenant, they had sinned and 
broken it from its very ratification. He had 
planted them a noble vine. They had by their 
ways become a degenerate plant of a strange vine 
unto Him (ver. 21). Nor was their resource in 


34 Notes on Jeremiah 


themselves: “For though thou wash thee with 
nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity 
is marked before Me, saith the Lord” (ver. 22). 
The covenant under which they had placed them- 
selves had only manifested their guilt and help- 
lessness. God alone would be their resource: and 
we know He was yet to send a Saviour whose 
precious blood does for every believing sinner 
what no “soap and nitre” (no human effort) ever 
could do—cleanse from every sin. But this it is 
not yet the province of Jeremiah to make known. 
His present object is to impress upon them their 
condition, their utter hopelessness, unless they re- 
turn to the Lord; so he next likens them to the 
untameable wild ass of the desert, refusing all 
correction. Exhorted to submission, they reply, 
“There is no hope: no; for I have loved stran- 
gers, and after them will I go” (vers. 24, 25). 

Still they were not entirely without a measure 
of shame and apparent penitence, for even at this 
time revival had begun among them; but, with 
the mass at least, there was no real conscience. 
work. “As the thief is ashamed when he is 
found, so is the house of Israel ashamed” (ver. 
26). They were ashamed to have the light turned 
on their idolatry, but not ashamed of the sin it- 
self. Not that they had utterly given up all faith 
in Jehovah. Idols might do when things went 
well outwardly. In their trouble they turned to 
God. How much do we know of this to-day! 

But if they seek not His face in times of quiet- 
ness, He will not be found of them in the day of 
their sorrow, unless it is with true self-judgment 
and confession of their sin (vers. 27, 30). 


Entreaty and Warning 35 


How sad the reproach of vers. 31, 32—“O gen- 
eration, see ye the word of the Lord. Have I 
‘been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of dark- 
ness? Wherefore say My people, We are lords; we 
will come no more unto Thee? Can a maid forget 
her ornaments, or a bride her attire? yet My peo- 
ple have forgotten Me days without number.” 
This opened the way for all else: it was quite un- 
necessary to dig deep (as the word “secret 
search” is said to mean, ver. 34) to find the evi- 
dence of the sin they refused to acknowledge. Ah, 
let God but be forgotten, let the soul be estranged 
from His presence, and most godless practices are 
indulged in unblushingly, and with a degree of 
self-confidence and effrontery that is amazing! 
But His word to such is, “The Lord hath rejected 
thy confidences, and thou shalt not prosper in 
them” (ver. 37). This did not mean, however, 
that He had done with them. Far from it. He 
might chastise and punish them, but He loved 
them still, and assures them of it; for although 
to a wife put away, who had become another 
man’s, her first husband would not return, de- 
spite the lewdness of Judah, He cries after her, 
“Yet return again to Me!” (chap. 3:1). What 
patient, matchless grace is this! Have we, too, 
wandered from Him? Have we forgotten the 
word that says, “Ye adulterers and adulteresses, 
know ye not that the friendship of the world is 
enmity with God” (James 4: 4)? Oh, then, in 
contrition of heart and self-judgment, may we 
turn again to Himself, confessing the evil of our 
unhallowed love for that which is so opposed to 
His holiness, and prove the sweetness of His re- 


36 Notes on Jeremiah 


storing mercy. Our God has withholden the rain 
(ver. 3) that we might prove the barrenness of 
a life out of communion with Himself; but He 
longs for the moment when, realizing the depth 
of our backsliding, the heart turns back to Him- 
self with this cry: ‘My Father, Thou art the 
guide of my youth!” (ver. 4). 

Observe here, that though He would have Israel 
ery “My Father,” this is far different from cry- 
ing “Abba, Father” by the Spirit of adoption, 
which we have, but they had not. Nationally 
Israel was God’s son (Hos. 11:1; Ex. 4:22, 28). 
It is only since the Cross that believers know Him 
in the individual relationship of Father—not 
merely national adoption—and, having life from 
Him, as the One revealed by the Son-in resurrec- 
tion as “My Father and your Father.” Our privi- 
leges are far greater than theirs. How much 
holier should be our lives! 


CHAPTER III 
FUTURE GLORY CONDITIONED ON REPENTANCE 
(Chaps. 3:6—6:380.) 


The next prophecy is a more extensive one, go- 
ing on to the end of the sixth chapter, and was 
uttered during the reign of the pious king Josiah 
(3:6) ; but at what particular time we are not 
told. The details of the departure from God of 
both the northern and southern kingdoms (the 
former one already in captivity) are here more 
fully gone into; but there are interspersed pre- 
cious promises of restoration and blessing upon 
their repentance which the goodness of God will 
yet lead them to, though it be through deepest 
tribulation. 

“Backsliding Israel” had openly revolted from 
sehovah from the day that Jeroboam’s golden 
calves were set up. God’s centre was disowned 
and His Word (see especially Deut. 12) despised. 
It is an oft-noted fact that of only one of their 
kings do we find it said that he sought the Lord, 
and then only when pressed by the Syrian in- 
vasion (2 Kings 138: 4, 5) ; on which occasion, as in 
the period of the Judges (to which they had prac- 
tically returned, for “every man did that which 
was right in his own eyes’), “The Lord gave 
Israel a saviour, so that they went out from un- 
der the hand of the Syrians; and the children of 
Israel dwelt in their tents as beforetime.” But 
though God was gracious, responding to the fee- 


38 Notes on Jeremiah 


blest evidence of felt need, the people were un- 
changed: “They departed not from the sins of the 
house of Jeroboam ... and there remained the 
grove also in Samaria.” This was but one in- 
stance of the many in which He said, “Turn thou 
unto Me,” but she returned not. Finally, as an 
adulterous wife, she was put away when the ten 
tribes were carried to Assyria (vers. 6, 7). 

“Her treacherous sister Judah’s” case, how- 
ever, was quite different. She had, as a rule, pro- 
fessed obedience to the Lord. At least open idol- 
atry had not always characterized her. Backslid- 
ing was not so much her continual sin as treach- 
ery. A strict attention to the outward ordinances 
of the temple worship, but the heart going after 
the filthiness of the nations, was generally her 
course; as it had been even in the days of Solo- 
mon—who built the house of Jehovah, and erected 
altars to the gods of his heathen wives! 

This is what markedly characterizes much of 
what is called Christendom to-day. There is talk 
of devotedness to the Lord, a prating of loyalty to 
Christ; but alas, alas, how little is known of sep- 
aration from that which dishonors Him! In fact, 
the position of Jeremiah in this book must be very 
much that of the man to-day who would stand for 
Christ and walk in the truth. Judah had, after 
all, but copied Israel, though not always so openly. 
“Yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah 
hath not turned unto Me with her whole heart, 
but feignedly, saith the Lord” (ver. 10). The 
king, and many more associated with him in the 
revival that was then beginning, were doubtless 
real; but there were not wanting those, as An- 


Future Glory Conditioned on Repentance 39 


anias and Sapphira in the early days of the 
Church, who sought a reputation for piety and 
devotedness while never truly separated from the 
abounding iniquity. This is a great snare, and 
only too common in our own day. It is, in fact, 
the very essence of Laodiceanism. Lukewarmness 
in divine things is treachery against Christ. Bet- 
ter to be cold than this. So he says here, “The 
backsliding Israel hath justified herself more than 
treacherous Judah” (ver. 11). She made no at- 
tempt to conceal her condition, at any rate. He 
gives her a gracious invitation to return (even 
though He had given her a bill of divorce), cou- 
pled with an assurance that He was married to 
her still! (vers. 12-14). Precious it is to know 
that her sons will, in the “age to come,” ask the 
way to Zion and return to Himself. But one 
thing His holiness demands: “Only acknowledge 
thine iniquity” (ver. 13). His mercy longed to 
go forth; His anger was already well-nigh over- 
past; but confession there must be. She must 
sit in judgment on her ways, and repent of her 
backslidings. The confession must be clear, and 
the evils specified. No mere general acknowl- 
edgment of failure will suffice: (1) “Thou hast 
transgressed against Me, (2) and hast scattered 
thy ways to strangers; (3) ye have not obeyed 
My voice.” 

Nor can it be merely a national repentance. 
Nations, as such, do not repent. It must be in- 
dividual work; so He says, “Turn, backsliding 
children” (or sons), though the figure of a wife 
is still maintained; but the nation will be saved 
in the remnant. “I will take you one of a city 


40 Notes on Jeremiah 


and two of a family and will bring you to Zion; 
and I will give you pastors according to My heart, 
which shall feed you with knowledge and under- 
standing” (vers. 14, 15). 

Jeroboam, with many successors to follow his 
steps, had been an evil shepherd, had led them 
in false ways hitherto, the fruit of which they 
were now eating; but He had for them shepherds 
‘who would delight to direct their feet to green 
pastures where the soul would find nourishment 
in the things of God. 

It may be well to state here that it is of a literal 
return of the scattered Israelites, to a literal Zion 
in the land from whence they were carried, that 
the prophet speaks throughout, as we shall see 
more particularly when we look at chapters 30 
and 31. The words are too plain and explicit to 
require spiritualizing, as has falsely been done. 

In the 16th verse we have the last mention of 
the ark of the covenant; as in 2 Chron, 35:3 we 
have its last historical notice. There was no ark 
in the second temple. There will be none in that 
depicted by Ezekiel for the Millennium. A mere 
legend, for we cannot count it as anything more, 
tells us that at the destruction of the city and 
temple Jeremiah hid the ark in a cave, as also the 
altar of incense. This story is recorded in 2 
Macc. 2:48, an apocryphal record of very dubi- 
ous authority. However that may be, we are as- 
sured that “‘in those days” (the days of the com- 
ing kingdom), “saith the Lord, they shall say no 
more, The ark of the covenant of the Lord: 
neither shall it come to mind; neither shall they 
remember it; neither shall they visit it; neither 


Future Glory Conditioned on Repentance 41 


shall that be done any more;’ or, according to 
R. V. margin, “neither shall they miss it, neither 
shall it be made any more.” Of old, under the 
first covenant, it was the throne of the Lord in 
the midst of Israel: but Jerusalem shall be called 
“the throne of the Lord; and all the nations shall 
be gathered unto it, to the name of the Lord, to 
Jerusalem: neither shall they walk any more 
after the imagination of their evil heart’? (ver. 
17). In that day the Lord Jesus, whom it typi- 
fied,—the One in whom the wood and gold, hu- 
manity and divinity, are found in one Person,— 
will Himself be in their midst; the ark, that but 
feebly foreshadowed Him, will no longer be 
needed. 

In the end of the chapter, from ver. 19 to the 
close, we have the repentance of the people al- 
ready made good by faith. It is a prophecy of 
what will yet be when they will realize that it 
is vain to hope for salvation from any but Jeho- 
vah, so long neglected. This will take place after 
the Lord has saved the tents of Judah first (Zech. 
12). 

The first two verses of chapter 4 give us His 
response to their cry of anguish, and the prom- 
ised blessing when in reality they return to God. 

From this point the message is to Judah, and is 
a call for more than mere surface work, such as 
was then going on. No real fruit for God could 
be expected where they were sowing on unbroken 
and thorn-choked ground (ver. 3). The plowshare 
of conviction must overturn the hardened soil of 
the heart. Not the natural flesh alone, but the 
heart must be circumcised (ver. 4). “For he is 


42 Notes on Jeremiah 


not a Jew which is one outwardly; ... but he is 
a Jew which is one inwardly; and circumcision is 
that of the heart, in the spirit, and not in the 
letter” (Rom. 2:28, 29). And the same apostle 
declares the true circumcision is to have “no con- 
fidence in the flesh” (Phil. 3:3). If the message 
was unheeded, then judgment must take its 
course; and already the Gentile destroyer was on 
his way. Vers. 5 to 13 furnish us a vivid picture 
of the coming fall of Jerusalem by the hand of 
Nebuchadnezzar. So astounding is this announce- 
ment that the prophet is himself astonished (ver. 
10), and can scarcely credit that the Lord will 
so deal with His people. 

There is but one door of escape, which he points 
out in ver. 14—“‘Wash thy heart.” This can only 
be by reception of the Word, and allowing it to 
work in the conscience. He immediately goes on 
to enlarge on the surely coming overthrow of the 
city, in most awe-inspiring language (vers. 15- 
21). But the people of Judah were the very 
opposite to what the apostle desired for the Ro- 
man saints (Rom. 16:19)—they were “‘wise to do 
evil, but to do good they had no knowledge” (ver. 
220 

The coming desolation of the land is graphi- 
cally depicted in ver. 23 to the end. It is not the 
earth, but the land of Palestine, that is before 
him, as the companion scripture, Isa. 24, clearly 
shows. The language is doubtless highly poetical, 
yet fully to be relied on,—perhaps one should say 
rather figurative, than poetical, as the latter ex- 
pression has been much abused of late. 

The subject is continued in the fifth chapter, 


Future Glory Conditioned on Repentance 43 


only with more perspicuity. Individuals are more 
brought before us. How fallen must have been 
their state when the prophet had to say, “Run ye 
to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and 
see now, and know, and seek in the broad places 
thereof, if ye can find a man, if there be any that 
executeth judgment, that seeketh the truth; and 
I will pardon it” (ver. 1). Does not this tell us 
what might have been had Abraham but had 
faith to plead further for Sodom? He stopped at 
ten (Gen. 18). Ten could not be found. Here, 
judgment could be averted for one. Alas, they 
had all alike despised the chastening of the Lord 
(ver. 3), and turned from the truth. This 
amazed Jeremiah the prophet. He could scarcely 
credit the utterly apostate condition of his nation. 
There must surely be righteous ones somewhere. 
He would seek them out. “Therefore I said, 
Surely these are poor; they are foolish: for they 
know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment 
of their God. I will get me unto the great men, 
and will speak unto them; for they have known 
the way of the Lord, and the judgment of their 
God: but these have altogether broken the yoke 
and burst the bands” (vers. 4, 5). His visit to 
the great we have not here (we may get many 
such later), but only proving that ignoble and 
noble are all one in the rejection of the word of 
God. So judgment must eventually have its way, 
though some years elapsed ere its fulfilment. Of 
this he continues to speak in vers. 6-19. 

How terrible the indictment of ver. 7!—‘‘When 
I had fed them to the full, they then committed 
adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in 


A4 Notes on Jeremiah 


the harlots’ houses.” What a word for the people 
of God to-day! How awful to contemplate the yet 
patent fact that those who profess to be part of 
that Church, blessed with all spiritual blessings 
in Christ, should ever turn wantonly to the world 
and its follies, as Judah had done before—though 
they were on a much lower plane, their blessings 
being earthly and temporal. “Shall I not visit for 
these things? saith the Lord: and shall not My 
soul be avenged on such a nation as this?” (ver. 
9). To Christendom He says, “I will spue thee 
out of My mouth!” (Rev. 3:16). “And it shall 
come to pass, when ye shall say, Wherefore doeth 
the Lord our God all these things unto us? then 
shalt thou answer them, Like as ye have forsaken 
Me, and served strange gods in your land, so shall 
ye serve strangers in a land that is not yours” 
(ver. 19). Sowing is followed by reaping: dread- 
ful was the reaping of Israel; more dreadful will 
be the reaping of apostate Christendom—“Baby- 
lon the Great” (Rev. 17, 18). 

Their moral condition is further exposed in 
words too plain to need comment (vers. 20-29), 
and all summarized in the last verse. “A won- 
derful and horrible thing is committed in the 
land; the prophets prophesy falsely, and the 
priests bear rule by their means; and My people 
love to have it so: and what will ye do in the end 
thereof?” (ver. 30). Solemn words! Ponder 
them carefully, my reader, and see if they be too 
severe to describe the great world-church of to- 
day. ’ 

Jerusalem’s evil condition fully manifested, the 
sixth chapter opens with a call to the children 


Future Glory Conditioned on Repentance 45 


of Benjamin to flee from her midst. Only thus 
could they escape being partakers of her sins. 
They remained and fell with her. To those en- 
tangled with religious corruption in our day the 
word is, ‘Let every one that nameth the name of 
the Lord depart from iniquity” (2 Tim. 2). 
“Come out from among them, and be ye separate 
. . . touch not the unclean thing” (2 Cor. 6). 
Later, to dwellers in the spiritual Babylon, the 
cry will go forth, “Come out of her, My people, 
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye 
receive not of her plagues” (Rev. 18). 

The present is no time for temporizing. He 
who has saved us, and is Lord of all, looks for 
clear-cut separation from all spiritual or ecclesi- 
astical as well as carnal or fleshly evil, in sanctifi- 
cation to Himself. To Christendom as a whole, 
as to Judah then, there is little use to make ap- 
peals, nor does the Lord do it. ‘Their ear is un- 
circumcised, and they cannot hearken: behold, the 
word of the Lord is unto them a reproach; they 
have no delight in it” (ver. 10). So it has often 
been noted that after the days of Pergamos, in 
Rev. 2 and 3, the call is alone to the overcomer 
—not to the mass. 

What made things all the more dreadful in 
Jeremiah’s time was the mockery of the false 
prophets, who stilled the fears of the guilty peo- 
ple and prophesied smooth things, thus turning 
aside the keen edge of the truth. Love of re- 
ward was at the bottom of their course. Can any 
be so charged to-day? “From the least of them 
even unto the greatest of them every one is given 
to covetousness; and from the prophet even unto 


46 Notes on Jeremiah 


the priest every one dealeth falsely. They have 
healed also the hurt of the daughter of My peo- 
ple slightly, saying, Peace, peace; when there is 
no peace” (vers. 18, 14). So also in Ezekiel’s day 
(chap. 13:10-12), which was nearly contempora- 
neous with this. 

But the truth rejected did not alter its char- 
acter. They would have to learn by judgment 
what they had no ears for by the word of the 
prophet. Meantime the call to any individual 
having a heart for God goes out; but there is no 
response. “Stand ye in the ways, and see, and 
ask for the old paths, where is the good way, and 
walk therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls. 
But they said, We will not walk therein. Also I 
set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the 
sound of the trumpet. But they said, We will 
not hearken” (vers. 16, 17). 

It is to “that which was from the beginning” 
God ever directs His people in times of failure. 
Man is continually running after something new, 
and thus away from God, for He is of old, from 
everlasting. Evolution there is none in the truth 
for the dispensation. It is always evil to turn 
from it. There is no restoration apart from turn- 
ing back to it. There is no room for develop- 
ment outside the Book. 

The message rejected, the nations are called on 
to acknowledge the justness of Jehovah’s dealings 
with so rebellious a people (vers. 18-21), and the 
chapter closes with the judgment reaffirmed: 
“Reprobate silver shall men call them, because 
the Lord hath rejected them.” 


CHAPTER IV 


“WHAT AGREEMENT HATH THE TEMPLE OF 
GOD WITH IDOLS?” 


(Chaps. 7-10.) 


In this section it is more the temple that is be- 
fore us, and the incongruity of professing great 
reverence for it while idolatrous practices and 
their accompanying evils are not only tolerated 
but diligently persisted in. The prophet had been 
addressing the people rather as a civil commu- 
nity before. Now he sees them in connection with 
the newly-cleansed house of Jehovah. His mes- 
sage is addressed to those “that enter in at these 
gates to worship the Lord” (ver. 2). This is 
shown to be all a mere pretence, for while they 
talked loudly of the temple—made it their rally- 
ing-cry, so to speak—their ways were anything 
but in accordance with the holiness that became 
God’s house. “Trust ye not in lying words, say- 
ing, The temple of the Lord, the temple of the 
Lord, the temple of the Lord, are these. For if 
ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings; 
if ye thoroughly execute judgment between a man 
and his neighbor; if ye oppress not the stranger, 
the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not inno- 
cent blood in this place, neither walk after other 
gods to your hurt; then will I cause you to dwell 
in this place, in the land that I gave to your 
fathers forever and ever” (vers. 4-7). 

Nothing can be more obnoxious to God than to 
have His name vauntingly connected with un- 


48 Notes on Jeremiah 


righteousness. How terrible to hear some now- 
adays prate of “the authority of the Lord in His 
assembly,” and talk of “divine ground,” while de- 
liberately refusing to execute judgment between a 
man and his neighbor, disclaiming all such re- 
sponsibility! Nay, even worse, seek to foist it 
upon the Righteous One who dwells in the midst 
of His people! Strange that the important word, 
“Follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with 
them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart” 
(2 Tim. 2:22), should be so overlooked! Such 
is Rome’s principle: sad it is, and solemn, to see 
those who should know better, following, in this 
at least, in her wake. We can rest assured no 
amount of professed regard for the assembly of 
God will atone for the neglect of righteousness. 
“The righteous Lord loveth righteousness.” It is 
with Him who is “the holy and the true” with 
whom we have to do—He in whom there is ‘“‘no 
darkness at all.” 

Nothing can be more abhorrent to Him than 
the dreadful state described in vers. 8-10. It is 
the divorce of position from condition—the mak- 
ing much of ecclesiastical place, while the walk is 
utterly at variance with the truth connected with 
it. Position is important. Nothing, in fact, is 
more so; but let us be careful to maintain the 
corresponding practice. Those who, through 
grace, have been gathered out of unscriptural sys- 
tems to the precious name of the Lord Jesus 
Christ alone, should see to it that their walk is 
consistent with their privileged place. 

The next verse, it will be noted, is referred to 
by our Lord when He made a whip of small cords 


«..the Temple of God with Idols? 49 


and drove the money-changers and venders from 
the courts of the temple (Matt. 21:13). On that 
occasion He connected two scriptures together. 
The first was from Isa. 56: 7—“My house shall 
be called a house of prayer for all people.” This 
shall yet be true when Christ’s kingdom is set 
up in power; but when the King appeared in 
lowliness, His judgment was, “Ye have made it 
a den of thieves,” as Jeremiah had said before: 
“Ts this house, which is called by My name, be- 
come a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold I, 
even I, have seen it, saith the Lord.” 

As a result, like Shiloh, it was to be left deso- 
late, and the false worshipers were to be cast out 
from their land; nor would prayer avail for them 
now. Judgment must have its way (vers. 12-16). 

“The queen of heaven” was an object of wor- 
ship then as with Rome now; for it is well known 
that Mariolatry was but the continuation of the 
worship of the false goddess here referred to, 
universally acknowledged under various names. 
“The children gather wood, and the fathers kin- 
dle the fire, and the women knead their dough, 
to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour 
out drink offerings unto other gods, that they 
may provoke Me to anger” (ver. 18). Terrible it 
is to see the evils of that dark day actually fol- 
lowed by a fast apostatizing Christendom at the 
present time! “Do they provoke Me to anger? 
saith the Lord: do they not provoke themselves 
to the confusion of their own faces?” (ver. 19). 
Fury and wrath unquenchable must they reap 
who have so grievously departed from the true 
God (ver. 20). 


50 Notes on Jeremiah 


Though the ritual service of the temple, 
had been re-established, through king Josiah, yet, 
among the mass, the question of obedience had 
been entirely forgotten : “They hearkened not, nor 
inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels and 
in the imagination of their evil heart, and went 
backward, and not forward.” And this had char- 
acterized them from the day He had brought them 
out of Egypt, though He had sent prophets to 
them again and again, “daily rising up early and 
sending them: yet they hearkened not unto Me, 
nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck: 
they did worse than their fathers” (vers. 21-26). 
The prophets’ ministry, it is plain, had become 
hopeless. The word of God was still to be pro- 
claimed; nothing was to be kept back, but all 
hope of national response was at an end. The 
verdict was already pronounced: “This is a na- 
tion that obeyeth not the voice of the Lord their 
God, nor receiveth correction: truth is perished, 
and is cut off from their mouth” (ver. 28). The 
Lord had rejected them; let them mourn and cut 
off the hair, as a woman put to shame, for they 
are denominated “the generation of His wrath.” 

Terrible was to be the desolation resulting upon 
their casting off. Tophet, the high place of the 
valley of Hinnom, where the children were sacri- 
ficed upon the heated brazen arms of Moloch, was 
to become the valley of slaughter in which they 
should bury until there was no more place, while 
fowls and beasts devoured the unburied bodies of 
the residue. “Then will I cause to cease from the 
cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, 
the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the 


....the Temple of God with Idols? 51 


voice of the bridegroom, and the voice of the 
bride: for the land shall be desolate” (vers. 30- 
34). Even the very bones of the kings and princes 
of Judah, as well as of the priests, the prophets, 
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, would be 
brought from their tombs and strewed before the 
heavenly bodies which they had worshiped in 
life; while for the residue, death will be prefer- 
able to the terrors of that evil day. Doubtless 
this all had a fulfilment in the Chaldean conquest 
and the later Maccabean times; but as “‘no proph- 
ecy of the Scripture is of any private interpre- 
tation,” it likewise pictures the direful tribula- 
tion yet to come. 

It is not because Jehovah delights in judgment 
(“His strange act”) that His people must be so 
visited. It was the inevitable result of their own 
waywardness. Theirs was a “perpetual backslid- 
ing;” and though oft pleaded with, they repented 
not, but “every one turned to his course, as the 
horse rusheth into battle” (chap. 8: 5, 6). Though 
they boasted of their wisdom, they had not the 
discernment of the migratory birds. “Yea, the 
stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times; 
and the turtle-dove and the crane and the swallow 
observe the time of their coming; but My people 
know not the judgment of the Lord” (ver. 7). 
Of the same character was the Lord’s word to the 
scribes—“‘Can ye not discern the signs of the 
times?” Yet they said, “We are wise, and the 
the law of the Lord is with us;’” but the word 
of God was practically written in vain for them 
—not denied, as it is not always denied to be 
His Word to-day, by many who politely bow it 

eee ok: 
THE CINCINNATI BIBLE SEMINARY 2 Di 2017 


LIBRARY tr rps 0 


52 Notes on Jeremiah 


out and profess veneration for it while walking 
in disobedience to it. ‘Peace, peace,” such may 
say, but true peace there is not. Priest and peo- 
ple alike deal falsely with the Sacred Oracles; as 
a result, the time of visitation cannot be long 
delayed. 

From ver. 14 of chap. 8 to the end of chap 10 
we have a most touching lamentation over the 
fallen estate of the people who have been “‘put to 
silence” by God; that is, who are so clearly 
proven to be guilty before Him that they are 
speechless in His presence. Jeremiah enters most 
deeply into all their feelings, even wailing with 
them, “The harvest is past, the summer is ended, 
and we are not saved” (chap. 8:20). It is a tem- 
poral salvation that is referred to, of course. The 
day of God’s patience with them as a nation is 
ended, and all hope is now vain. How striking 
is the impassioned cry, “Is there no balm in 
Gilead? Is there no physician there? Why then is 
not the health of the daughter of My people re- 
covered?” (See also chap. 46:11). Alas, too 
deep is the wound for Gilead’s balm to heal! 

“Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes 
a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and 
night for the slain of the daughter of my people!’ 
Well has Jeremiah been called the ‘Weeping 
Prophet.” His was not the pharisaic spirit that 
could build its own reputation for holiness on the 
ruined testimony of others. Israel was his peo- 
ple. He would not be viewed as other than a part 
of the desolate nation—he identifies himself fully 
with it. True, he longs to flee from them to a 
wayfarer’s lodge in the wilderness, as did David 


....the Temple of God with Idols? 53 


in Ps. 55:6-8; but he is one with them still,” 
Their ways grieve him to the soul, as they must 
one in fellowship with God about them; but 
for themselves he has tenderest love and compas- 
sion. Sad that it should ever be otherwise with 
any of God’s people now. Yet, alas, a hard, judg- 
ing spirit often accompanies outward separation 
from evil. How easy to forget that we are all 
part of a ruined Church, and all share in the re- 
sponsibility of that ruin. With Jeremiah, we see 
that while he is obliged to make known to his peo- 
ple their deep, deep sin and departure from God, 
he does so with breaking heart, as one who longs 
after them all and is full of heaviness on their 
account. 

How graphic is the language of ver. 21, de- 
scriptive of the decimating plague following the 
horrors of war: “Death is come up into our win- 
dows, and is entered into our palaces, to cut off 
the children from without and the young men 
from the streets.” In such a world as this, how 
strange that a man should glory in the fleeting 
things of time and sense! Yet how needful to our 
souls ever to keep in mind the verses following: 
“Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, 
neither let the mighty man glory in his might; let 
not the rich man glory in his riches: but let him 
that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth 
and knoweth Me, that I am the Lord which exer- 
ciseth loving-kindness, judgment, and righteous- 
ness in the earth: for in these things I delight, 
saith the Lord” (vers. 23, 24). 

In the close of the chapter, Israel uncircumcised 
in heart is put on a level with the uncircumcised 


54 Notes on Jeremiah 


nations about them. They must be judged with 
the idolatrous nations whose ways they had fol- 
lowed. 

Of the 10th chapter I need say little. It is 
much like the 44th of Isaiah. It gives us Jeho- 
vah’s condemnation of idolatry, and contrasts 
with the stocks and stones, to which His people 
had turned, Him who is “the portion of Jacob,” 
“the former of all things,” who would fain have 
comforted the afflicted nation, but must “sling 
out the inhabitants of the land” as from a mighty 
catapult, causing them to cry, “Woe is me for 
my hurt!” 

The 11th verse is in Chaldee, that the heathen 
might in their own tongue read the condemnation 
of their idolatry. 

Solemn are the words with which this portion 
is brought to a close: “Lord, I know that the way 
of man is not in himself: it is not in man that 
walketh to direct his steps. O Lord, correct me, 
but with judgment, not in Thine anger, lest Thou 
bring me to nothing.” 

Judgment, unsparing, will fall on the heathen; 
chastisement, leading eventually to restoration, 
must be meted out to His own. 


CHAPTER V 


THE BURNED BRANCHES AND THE SWELLING 
OF JORDAN 


(Chaps. 11, 12.) 


I have but little to say on these two chapters, 
solemn and searching as they assuredly are. It 
is the continued expostulation of Jehovah with the 
people who were ever upon His heart, however 
much they had loved to wander. 

He goes back to the beginning, the time of 
their sorrow and slavery when He found them 
in Egypt and brought them out of the iron fur- 
nace. In the joy of deliverance they had sworn 
obedience to His commandments, but their whole 
subsequent history had only manifested their 
faithlessness; in result of which the curse—the 
only thing the law could give to them or any 
other—rested upon them (chap. 11: 1-8). 

Again and again warned and entreated, both 
Israel and Judah had broken the covenant and 
joined themselves to idols (vers. 9, 10). Judg- 
ment, at last, must fall upon them, and they would 
cry in vain for deliverance to their self-chosen 
gods, powerless to save. Altars to their shame- 
ful idols were seen everywhere; but no prayer 
nor cry of need went up to Him who alone could 
deliver: now He declares, “I will not hear them 
in the time that they cry unto Me for their trou- 
ble’ (vers. 18, 14). She whom He still called 
“My beloved” had no longer any place in His 
house, for on the ground of her responsibility all 
had been forfeited. 


56 Notes on Jeremiah 


Ver. 16 is doubtless the text of the apostle’s 
dissertation in the 11th of Romans. The branches 
in the olive tree of blessing,“fair, of goodly fruit,” 
are to be destroyed with the fire of judgment. 
The apostle indeed tells us what the prophet does 
not— that wild olive branches were to be grafted 
in their place; though, if they continue not in 
God’s goodness, they too shall be cut off, and 
Israel grafted in again; for “God is able.” 

Jeremiah himself speaks in vers. 18-20, tak- 
ing, as another has said, ‘“‘the place of the faith- 
ful remnant who have the testimony of God.” 
Persecuted, he appeals to the One on whose er- 
rands he ran, and He to whom vengeance be- 
longs assures him of righteous recompense upon 
“the men of Anathoth;” for it was true of him 
as of our Lord that a prophet in his own coun- 
try and city is without honor. 

It is quite in keeping with the Old Testament 
and God’s government to find Jeremiah here pray- 
ing for the destruction of these enemies of the 
. Lord. It-is certainly not the grace of the gospel, 
but according to the righteousness of God’s moral 
government. We see the same thing in the fifth 
chapter of Revelation, which of itself should show 
that the souls under the altar are clearly Jewish 
martyrs in the tribulation period, after the pres- 
ent dispensation of grace is closed, and not Chris- 
tian martyrs, whose prayer would rather be, 
“Father, forgive them,” or, “Lay not this sin to 
their charge.” 

In chap. 12 the prophet pleads with God in re- 
gard to the vengeance soon to fall. There is 
something intensely beautiful and touching in the 


Burned Branches and Swelling of Jordan 57 


holy familiarity with which he addresses the High 
and Lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity. One is 
reminded of Abraham overlooking the cities of 
the plains. “Righteous art Thou, O Lord, when 
I plead with Thee: yet let me talk with Thee of 
Thy judgments: Wherefore doth the way of the 
wicked prosper? wherefore are all they happy 
that deal very treacherously? ... Thou art near 
in their mouth, and far from their reins.” 

How gracious of God to be thus “talked with!” 
Submissively, Jeremiah pours out his heart; not 
in complaint, but as seeking to know the mind of 
the Lord, and yet pleading that all may not be 
engulfed in the common ruin, but that the wicked 
may be separated from the mass, for the slaugh- 
ter, and thus blessing come upon the mourning 
land (vers. 1-5). 

In the answer of God, it is made known to him 
that the mass are far from His thoughts of 
righteousness; and the prophet must have a deep- 
ened and more solemnizing sense of their iniquity. 
He has been but running with footmen; and as 
they have hastened on in sin, he has been grieved 
at heart; but, like horses prepared for battle, 
like a charge of cavalry, is he to see the abound- 
ing evil: how can he contend with such? Thus 
far he has been in the land of peace, and hoping 
that widespread indignation might not be poured 
out; yet he has been wearied by their sin and re- 
bellion. He is to see the judgment of God poured 
out in all its fury, as the swelling waters of Jor- 
dan in harvest-time (Josh. 3:15), sweeping all be- 
fore them. In that day, both the righteous and the 
wicked will suffer in the desolating woes that are 


58 Notes on Jeremiah 


to be poured upon Judah. How, then, will he do? 
Even his nearest kinsmen will reject the word he 
brings, and deal treacherously with him (vers. 5, 
6). 
It is too late to plead for them. Jehovah has 
forsaken His house and left His heritage. His 
“dearly beloved” is to be given into the hand of 
her enemies. Like a lion roaring in the forest, 
they have proudly defied Him; now, like a speck- 
led bird persecuted of the birds of the wood, the 
assembled nations shall devote her to destruction. 
Their pastors had spoiled them as a ruined vine- 
yard and trodden His portion beneath their feet, 
and no man laid to heart the desolation ensuing; 
so from one end of the land to the other the sword 
of the Lord should devour and no flesh have peace. 
The awful reaping time had come, the day of the 
fierce anger of Jehovah (vers. 7-13). 

In the last section of the chapter a word is 
addressed to the surrounding nations. ‘His evil 
neighbors” He calls them, thus intimating His 
concern for Israel still; for they were not only 
Israel’s neighbors, but His. Then blessing is 
foretold both for the chosen people about to be 
scattered and to any among the nations who turn 
to their God—which looks on to the Millennium. 
The nation of Israel shall yet be the centre of 
God’s dealing with the earth, and shall be the 
means of blessing to the surrounding peoples. 
“But if they will not obey, I will utterly pluck 
up and destroy that nation, saith the Lord” (ver. 
17). 


CHAPTER Vi 


THE MARRED GIRDLE: “‘WILT THOU NOT BE 
MADE CLEAN?” 


(Chap. 18.) 


“Thus saith the Lord unto me, Go and get thee 
a linen girdle, and put it upon thy loins, and 
put it not in water’ (ver. 1). 

The Lord would now teach by what is evidently 
a vision, as it is hardly to be supposed that Jere- 
miah actually carried the girdle all the way to 
the river Euphrates. On the other hand, if a 
literal occurrence, it but exemplifies his obedience 
to the commands of God. The girdle, is the sign 
of service, as is evident in many scriptures. 
The Lord Jesus frequently so speaks of it, 
as in Luke 12:35, where He bids His servants 
have “their loins girded about,” and in the 37th 
verse of the same chapter, where He tells of His 
perpetual service for His redeemed throughout 
the ages to come. In John 13 we see Him as the 
girded servant washing His disciples’ feet, that 
they may be cleansed from earthly defilement and 
thus “have part with Him;” and when He ap- 
pears in glory to the beloved disciple on the isle 
of Patmos, He is “girt about the breasts with a 
golden girdle.” 

Israel had been Jehovah’s girded servant from 
of old; but, alas, a faithless one, as Christendom 
has been since. The girdle was the sign of serv- 
ice. Jeremiah gets one, and girds himself there- 


60 7 Notes on Jeremiah 


with. The word of the Lord comes again, telling 
him: “Take the girdle that thou hast got, which 
is upon thy loins, and arise, go to Euphrates, and 
hide it there in the hole of the rock” (vers. 3, 4). 
So should the faithless nation be carried away to 
Babylon and be defiled, by the Euphrates. Jere- 
miah does as he is commanded. “After many 
days” (indicative of the captivity by the Eu- 
phrates where they were about to be carried) he 
was sent to get it again; but, “behold, the girdle 
was marred, it was good for nothing” (ver. 7). 
The application is readily made: captivity would 
not change the state of the people’s heart. Only 
genuine self-judgment could effect that. Israel 
had been caused to cleave to the Lord as a girdle 
to the loins of a man, “that they might be unto 
Me,” He says, “for a people, and for a name, and 
for a praise, and for a glory: but they would not 
hear” (ver. 11). Therefore they must as an un- 
trustworthy servant be put away. 

By the parable of the bottle their emptiness is 
set forth (ver. 12). They shall be filled, not with 
the joy of the Lord, but with the wine of strong 
delusion, which will make them drunk with self- 
confidence and lead them to destruction. 

The prophet’s soul enters fully into this awful 
word, and he cries as from an anguished heart, 
“Give glory to the Lord your God before He cause 
darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the 
dark mountains, and, while ye look for light, He 
turn it into the shadow of death, and make it 
gross darkness. But if ye will not hear it, my 
soul shall weep in secret places for your pride; 
and mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with 


The Marred Girdle 61 


tears, because the Lord’s flock is carried away- 
captive” (vers. 15-17). He sees his light-reject- 
ing people about to be given up to judicial dark- 
ness. He would still arouse them to the solemnity 
of their condition. If they sleep on and refuse 
to hearken, he will weep bitterly as his own pre- 
dictions come to pass. 

There are differences between the darkness of 
nature, the darkness of choice, and the darkness 
of judgment. In Eph. 4:18 we read of the Gen- 
tiles “having the understanding darkened, being 
alienated from the life of God through the ignor- 
ance that is in them, because of the blindness” 
(or hardness) “of their heart.” The result of 
long years of turning away from God is that men 
are born in natural darkness. God has, however, 
sent the Light into this scene of gloom; but in 
John 3:19, 20 we learn that “this is the con- 
demnation, that light is come into the world, and 
men loved darkness rather than light, because 
their deeds were evil.” This is deliberate, wilful 
darkness. In such manner had the men of Judah 
and Jerusalem refused to come to the light when 
God was speaking to their consciences by His 
prophet. The inevitable result must be judicial 
darkness. They would be given up to the dark- 
ness they had chosen. So will it be, in an even 
more dreadful sense, with highly favored Chris- 
tendom after the Church has been caught away to 
be forever with the Lord. “God shall send them 
strong delusion, that they should believe the lie 
[of the Antichrist]: that they all might be 
judged who believed not the truth, but had pleas- 
ure in unrighteousness” (2 Thess. 2:11, 12). 


62 Notes on Jeremiah 


By commandment of the Lord, our prophet 
addresses himself directly to the king and the 
queen as the responsible leaders—probably Jehoi- 
akim and his consort. He calls upon them to hum- 
ble themselves and sit down. Their warlike prep- 
arations could be of no possible avail. It was 
repentance that was needed, not arms and soldiers. 
The captivity was decreed. Judah, as Israel be- 
fore, should be borne away from their land.““Them 
that come from the north” (ver. 20) refers to the 
Babylonian army. How touching and yet solemn 
the question put to the unfaithful king, “Where is 
the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful flock?” 
The king had not been to them an example of sub- 
jection to God, but rather of defiance to Him. So 
he is asked, “What wilt thou say when I shall 
punish thee?” As a travailing woman’s pains 
come suddenly, so should his sorrows take him; 
as indeed they did very shortly after (ver. 21). 
And if the question is asked “Wherefore come 
these things upon me?” the answer is, “For the 
greatness of thine iniquity are thy skirts discov- 
ered, and thy heels made bare” (ver. 22). 

Could they then make themselves pure in the 
sight of God? Far from it. It was just as impos- 
sible for them to do good who had been accustomed 
to do evil, as for the Ethiopian to become white 
or the leopard to change his spots. How little do 
the modern apostles of the religion of culture enter 
into this! As no account of washing can alter the 
black skin of the negro, so no merely human effort 
to reform can effect a real change if there be not 
first a divine work in the soul. 

“Altogether unprofitable,” they should be scat- 


The Marred Girdle 63 


tered as the worthless stubble is carried away by- 
the wind of the wilderness. This was their due 
reward (“the portion of thy measures’), because 
they had forgotten the Lord and trusted in false- 
hood (vers. 25, 26). Sin had made them as an 
utterly reprobate and loathsome adulteress, whose 
shame was to be openly manifested. Idolatry 
had been their ruin. ‘Woe unto thee, O Jerusa- 
lem!” he cries; but because God is gracious and 
long-suffering still, he entreats, “Wilt thou not be 
made clean? When shall it once be?” Alas, alas, 
they were turning away in their folly from the 
only One who could cleanse them, and the black 
clouds of doom were fast gathering overhead. 


CHAPTER VII 
FAMINE—TEMPORAL AND SPIRITUAL | 
(Chaps. 14, 15.) 


Of old, when Jehovah “led Jacob like a flock,” 
and brought the people of His love out of the 
cruel bondage of Egypt, He set before them bless- 
ing and cursing, life and death, good and evil. 
Earthly prosperity and honor were to accompany 
fidelity to God. No foe could harm, no drought 
afflict, no famine or sickness decimate Israel, so 
long as they were careful to obey the word of the 
Lord and walk according to His statutes. On the 
other hand, all these sore trials should certainly 
follow in the wake of indifference to God and 
rebellion against His Word. 

It is therefore quite in harmony with His ways 
that we find the people of Judah in great distress 
for lack of food and water. The real famine was 
within. The outward misery was but the reflec- 
tion of the moral state. Deeply touching, and 
highly poetical too, is the seer’s description of 
the desolation wrought in the land: “Judah 
mourneth, and the gates thereof languish; they 
are black unto the ground; and the cry of Jeru- 
salem is gone up. And their nobles have sent 
their little ones to the waters: they came to the 
pits, and found no water; they returned with 
their vessels empty; they were ashamed and con- 
founded, and covered their heads. Because the 
ground is chapped, for there was no rain in the 


Famine—Temporal and Spiritual 65 


earth, the plowmen were ashamed, they covered ” 
their heads. Yea, the hind also calved in the 
field, and forsook it, because there was no grass. 
And the wild asses did stand in the high places, 
they snuffed up the wind like dragons; their eyes 
did fail, because there was no grass” (chap. 14: 
2-6). 

The language is most pathetic, the condition of 
the people heartrending. The children cried, with 
parched tongue and fever-cracked lips, for drink; 
but there was no water to be had. They went in 
vain, at the behest of the hopeless nobles, to the 
dry wells. There was no refreshment there. All 
farming operations were at a standstill. No rain 
meant no crops and no food. The very beasts of 
the field shared in the general desolation. The 
hind, tenderest of animals, forsook her offspring 
“because there was no grass;” the eyes of the 
wild asses failed as they looked for a few spears 
of herbage. 

There was no yearly-overflowing river for 
Canaan. “It was a land that drank water of 
the rain of heaven;” a land that the Lord watched 
over continually. He it was who gave refreshing 
showers in abundance, or who withheld accord- 
ing to the state of His people. The river of 
Mizraim might flow on unceasingly, and flood its 
valley year by year, let the condition of the 
Egyptians be as it would, but it was otherwise 
in the land of Jehovah. And we may learn from 
this to-day. Men of the world are often allowed 
to prosper despite utter ungodliness. Alas, they 
are lifted up on high to fall more terribly in the 
end! On the other hand, the children of God are 


66 Notes ov Jeremiah 


under His special care, and “whom the Lord lov- 
eth He chasteneth” (or disciplineth) for their 
eternal good. The sheep of Christ have not wool 
so thick but that if they wander from the Shep- 
herd’s side they feel every cold blast of this 
world. A Christian out of communion must pass 
under the rod. To Israel it was said, “You only 
have I known of all the families of the earth; 
therefore will I punish you for your iniquities.” 
The principle is the same for us now. 

In the next three verses Jeremiah again takes 
the place of the mediator, and tenderly pleads 
for those who were called by the name of the 
Lord. He acknowledges their sin as his own. It 
is “our iniquities,” ‘‘our backslidings,” and “we 
have sinned.” Merit he does not plead; but “for 
Thy name’s sake” is his cry. “O the hope of 
Israel, the Saviour thereof in time of trouble, why 
shouldest Thou be as a stranger in the land, and 
as a wayfaring man that turneth aside to tarry 
for a night? Why shouldest Thou be as a man 
astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save? 
Yet Thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we 
are called by Thy name; leave us not” (vers. 8, 
9). The grief of the prophet, and yet his implicit 
faith in Jehovah, alike stir the soul. He who 
would have delighted to show mercy to His peo- 
ple had become as a visiting stranger, so far as 
their realization of His presence was concerned. 
In the rejected One, however, is the only “hope 
of Israel.” He had not actually withdrawn Him- 
self. The Shekinah was still in the temple. He 
abode “in the midst” of them though unrecog- 
nized and unsought by the mass. 


Famine—Temporal and Spiritual 67 


His answer is, “They have loved to wander, ° 
they have not refrained their feet, therefore the 
Lord doth not accept them; He will now remem- 
ber their iniquity, and visit their sins” (ver. 10). 
It was impossible that the Holy One could go on 
with iniquity. Judgment must begin at the house 
of God. He loved them too much to let them take 
their own way with impunity. So He says, “Pray 
not for this people for their good.” 

In the New Testament we read, “There is a sin 
unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for 
it” (1 John 5:16). If chastisement is despised, 
and the Spirit of grace insulted, there comes a 
time when it is too late for supplication or en- 
treaty. As a last act of God’s holy government, 
the erring one is cut off, and the case left for 
the Judgment Seat of Christ. We have examples 
of this in Ananias and Sapphira, both of them cut 
off in their transgression. So with some in the 
Corinthian assembly that dishonored the Lord at 
His table in the memorial Supper. The Holy 
Spirit says, “For this cause many are weak and 
sickly among you, and many sleep.” And so it 
was with Israel in the case before us. It was too 
late for grace alone to be exercised. They must 
know to the full the government of God. Neither 
fasting nor offerings would be of any avail to 
turn aside the sword, the famine, and the pesti- 
lence (ver. 12). 

Jeremiah, however, continues to plead; and 
now on the ground that the people had been mis- 
led by false prophets, who had spoken smooth 
things, and thus led their hearers to suppose that 
sin was a light thing. For answer, the Lord tells 


68 Notes on Jeremiah 


him these evil teachers shall bear their judgment, 
and be consumed with the rest; but this cannot 
free their followers, who delighted in them be- 
cause of their own wicked desires. “If the blind 
lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch!” 

In these verses what a solemn picture we have 
of Christendom as we know it! Satan’s min- 
isters turning their hearers away from the truth 
unto fables! Wolves in sheeps’ clothing posing 
as servants of Christ, yet shaking the confidence 
of the simple in the truth and authority of the 
Scriptures, ridiculing and assailing the great 
and holy truths of the atonement and the eternal 
judgment awaiting those who trample under foot 
the blood of Christ! But alas, the listeners will 
fall in the doom of the preachers! Wanting 
smooth things, they refuse the truth when pre- 
sented to them, and cling to deceivers from sheer 
love of sin. Together they shall “perish in the 
gainsaying of Core” (Jude 11). 

The pathos of the balance of the chapter is be- 
yond description. The prophet, broken-hearted, 
is inconsolable. He forms one of a trio, with 
Moses and Paul, who could all alike be cut off 
themselves if their people might but be saved. 

The famine and the sword were doing their 
deadly work in city and field, and there was no 
healing. So stirred is his soul that he cannot but 
continue his agonized intercession: “Do not ab- 
hor us, for Thy name’s sake; do not disgrace the 
throne of Thy glory; remember, break not Thy 
covenant with us” (ver. 21). It is like Joshua’s 
cry of old, “The Egyptians will hear of it.” But 
when the people of God dishonor Him by their 


Famine—Temporal and Spiritual 69 


lives, He will not spare needed discipline, even” 
though the uncircumcised glory over Him. Bet- 
ter that “the cause of Christ” be disgraced before 
the world than that His people be permitted to 
go onin sin. God will vindicate His name in His 
own way and time. 

The solemn answer of Jehovah in the first nine 
verses of chap. 15 gives no hope of deliverance. 
Even though Moses and Samuel stood to entreat 
for them, they would not be heard. The people 
must “go forth;” and if they despairingly ask, 
“Where?” the awful answer is, “Such as are for 
- death, to death; and such as are for the sword, 
to the sword; and such as are for the famine, to 
the famine; and such as are for the captivity, to 
the captivity” (ver. 2). The sword, the dogs, 
the fowls, and the beasts of the earth, are alike 
appointed to carry out the work of destruction: 
and any escaping these would be carried into 
all the kingdoms of the earth; and this because 
their share in the sin of Manasseh had never 
been repented of. None should pity nor care; 
for having forsaken the Lord, He would stretch 
out His hand against them. Young and old must 
be destroyed. “It is a fearful thing to fall into 
the hands of the living God;” for “our God is a 
consuming fire.” 

As the full extent of God’s sentence bursts upon 
his soul, Jeremiah is overcome by a sense of al- 
most unutterable desolation. How deeply he feels 
his helplessness and loneliness, as one man en- 
deavoring to stand for God and seeking the good 
of those who hate and despise Him! His pray- 
ers seem to be unavailing. God apparently re- 


70 Notes en Jeremiah 


fuses to hearken to his voice. The people, on their 
part, turn a deaf ear to his messages. He cries 
out in anguish, ‘““Woe is me, my mother, that thou 
hast borne me a man of strife and a man of con- 
tention to the whole earth! I have neither lent 
on usury, nor have men lent to me on usury; yet 
every one of them doth curse me” (ver. 10). 

The Lord at once replies in tenderest compas- 
sion and assures him that with himself and any 
who really seek His face, “it shall be well in the 
time of evil and in the time of affliction,” but due 
punishment must be meted out to the workers of 
iniquity. 

Encouraged by this evidence that his cry has 
not really been unheard and unheeded, he can now 
pray with fuller assurance; for Jehovah knows 
and will remember and visit at the appointed 
time. ‘For Thy sake,” he cries, “I have suffered 
rebuke :” then he tells of what had been his solace 
in times of indifference and rejection—the word 
of God (vers. 15, 16). “Thy words were found, 
and I did eat them; and Thy Word was unto me 
the joy and rejoicing of my heart: for I am 
called by Thy name, O Lord God of hosts.” Here 
we have two things intimately connected else- 
where in Scripture—the Word and the Name. 
“Thou ... hast kept My Word, and hast not de- 
nied My Name” (Rev. 3:8). See, also, Rev. 2: 
183—“My Name” and “My faith”—that which is 
declared by the Word. 

Jeremiah, the separatist (2 Cor. 6: 14-18; Isa. 
52:11) of his day, who, much as he loved the 
people of the Lord, yet had to turn sorrowfully 
from fellowship with them in their evil course, 


Famine—Temporal and Spiritual 71 


had to learn—as all others must who, in a day of - 
declension, seek to walk in holy separation unto 
God—that “he that departeth from evil maketh 
himself a prey” (Isa. 59:15). He was a man, 
as we have seen, characterized by much tender- 
ness of heart, and certainly by intense affection 
for the heritage of Jehovah (chap. 9:1-3); yet 
faithfulness demanded that he walk apart from 
them, testifying against their ways; and as a re- 
sult he had to say, “Every one of them doth hate 
me.” So also Paul could ask the Galatians, “Am 
I therefore become your enemy because I tell 
you the truth?” (Gal. 4:16), when witnessing 
against their departure from the faith once de- 
livered to the saints: and to the Corinthians he 
says, “I will gladly spend and be spent for you; 
though the more abundantly I love you, the less 
I be loved” (2 Cor. 12:15). These dear men of 
God are seen pursuing their well-nigh solitary 
way at times, finding their refreshment and 
strength in the Word and the Name, though de- 
nied much as to godly fellowship with others. 

In ver. 17 Jeremiah says, “I sat not in the as- 
sembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced; I sat alone 
because of Thy hand.” It was in this very period 
of loneliness for the Name’s sake, when he could 
say, “For Thy sake I have suffered reproach,” 
that the Word of God was more to him than ever 
before. The Lord’s people gave him only grief, 
but His Word filled him with joy. His heart 
might almost break as he contemplated their 
apostate condition. It was made to rejoice when 
he turned to the sure Word of God. 

Job and David in their times could speak in 


72 Notes on Jeremiah 


similar terms. The former is heard crying out, 
“TI have esteemed the words of His mouth more 
than my necessary food” (Job 23:12), and this 
at a time when the ways of God with His dear 
servant seemed quite inexplicable, and he floun- 
dered in the vain effort to find Him out. Still 
“the words of His mouth” he loved to dweil upon, 
and, relying on them, dared to say, “When He 
hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold” (ver. 
19). 

The exalted shepherd, in the “Psalm of the 
Laver” (119), sweetly celebrates the preciousness 
and cleansing efficacy of the Word, and in verse 
3 joins with “the weeping prophet” in declaring, 
“Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage 
forever; for they are the rejoicing of my heart.” 
And again, he says, “I esteem all Thy precepts 
concerning all things to be right; and I hate 
every false way” (ver. 128). See also vers. 97, 
1138, 119, 163. 

Thus we have patriarch, ruler, and prophet, 
alike testifying to the fulness and richness of the 
testimonies of the Lord. And that Word—fuller 
and richer now because of added treasures, mak- 
ing known the hitherto secret things—shall 
Christians now treat it with indifference? Many, 
it is to be feared, find little to interest them in 
its sacred pages. And the reason is not far to 
seek—there is so little practical separation from 
evil, and so little cleaving to the Lord with pur- 
pose of heart. Of one thing we can rest assured. 
Those who really enter into what is involved in 
being gathered in truth to the Name of the Re- 
jected One, will invariably find His Word an un- 


Famine—Temporal and Spiritual 13 


failing source of delight. Heart-identification 
with Christ results in heart-appreciation of His 
Word. The great desideratum is to go on quietly 
and humbly with the Lord Jesus Christ, and to 
walk apart from the abounding iniquity (both in 
its gross and its pleasing forms) of these last 
days. Then let the Word of God be the man of 
your counsel. Make it your daily companion. 
Search its precious pages prayerfully and per- 
severingly. Soon you will learn to feast upon it 
with ever-increasing delight. 

An aged Christian once said, “When first con- 
‘verted, I commenced reading the Bible. I read it 
for ten years, and I thought it a very nice book. 
I enjoyed it greatly. I read it for ten years more, 
and I thought it a wonderful book—it thrilled my 
soul. I read it for ten years more, and I thought 
it the most surpassingly precious book in the 
world. It was as food and drink to me. Now I 
have been reading it for forty years, and I am 
filled with delight and amazement at its beauties 
and depth every time I open it.” May the reader 
and the writer know more of this increasing love 
for its “sure testimonies.” Thus we shall find our 
delight in walking with Him, even though, as in 
Enoch’s day, all the world should take another 
course. 

That separation from evil is the mind of God 
for His servants is brought out clearly in the few 
remaining verses of this portion. “Therefore thus 
saith the Lord, If thou return, then will I bring 
thee again, and thou shalt stand before Me: and 
if thou take forth the precious from the vile, 
thou shalt be as My mouth: let them return unto 


74 Notes on Jeremiah 


thee; but return not thou unto them” (ver. 19). 
Whatever others might think, say, or do, Jere- 
miah is to walk apart; alone, if need be, from all 
the abounding evil; not to be amalgamated with 
it, or with those in it, in the vain hope of doing 
them good. If others took the same position as 
he, well and good; he would have their fellow- 
ship in his path of separation: but the word is 
plain, “Return not thou unto them.” 

In 2 Tim. 2 the same principle is enforced for 
the guidance of the man of God in the declension 
and ruin of the Church. He is to “purge him- 
self” from all that is contrary to the word of 
God, and from those who tolerate and condone the 
ecclesiastical lawlessness of the day. So shall he 
“be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for 
the Master’s use.” This is not, of course, to say 
that a mere Pharisaic separation from saints 
who do not see eye to eye as to details of doc- 
trine or practice is enjoined by Him who would 
have His people endeavor “to keep the unity of 
the Spirit in the bond of peace.” Unity is not 
necessarily uniformity. But the call is to sep- 
aration from what is unholy and offensive to God. 
Unspiritual Christians, as well as worldlings, will 
doubtless misunderstand and abuse the one who 
acts upon this “saying of God,” but He will see 
to the consequences if we but yield implicit obedi- 
ence to His revealed will. He promised to make 
Jeremiah as a wall of brass, and assured him 
that though “they shall fight against thee, they 
shall not prevail against thee: for I am with thee 
to save thee and to deliver thee, saith the Lord. 
And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the 


Famine—Temporal and Spiritual 15 


wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand 
of the terrible” (vers. 20, 21). 

God was for him, who could be against him? 
His faith in this would be severely tested as the 
darkness deepened and the thunders of judgment 
roared more loudly. But “I am with thee’ is 
sufficient for every trial. Devils may rage, men 
may gnash their teeth in malicious hatred, Provi- 
dence itself may seem to oppose; but the man 
who can rest in faith upon the promises of the 
Eternal shall never be put to shame. 


CHAPTER VIII 
SIN WHERE THE BLOOD SHOULD BB! 


(Chaps. 16, 17.) 


In the portion of the “Word of the Lord” 
which now claims our attention, we no longer 
hear the tender supplication of the seer on behalf 
of Judah. He pleaded unweariedly while there 
seemed to be hope of averting the threatened dis- 
aster. But there was no repentance on the part 
of the people, and the holiness of God’s character 
demanded that sin, in those so closely linked with 
His Name, be not passed over lightly. The pres- 
ent section is a solemn indictment on His part 
showing why His hand must be against them, 
however much His heart may still be for them. 

The prophet is bidden to refrain from mar- 
riage, for connubial bliss was not to be thought 
of under the present sad conditions. Children 
born in such circumstances were only being in- 
troduced into a scene of sorrow and grief, with 
the prospect of an unlamented death before them 
(vers. 1-4). Parents and offspring alike would 
be involved in the general ruin. 

He is neither to go to the house of mourning 
nor to the house of feasting. In neither are God’s 
judgments owned, nor His Word bowed to. Why 
should he go to join the general lamentation 
when the mind of the Lord had been clearly re- 
vealed? “For I have taken away My peace from 
this people, saith the Lord, even loving-kindness 
and mercies” (ver. 5). To seek to comfort them 
in their hardness of heart would be but to turn 


Sin Where the Blood Should Be 17 


aside the keenness of the chastisement. He must 
leave them severely alone. They were in the 
hand of God. 

The same thing comes out in the New Testa- 
ment in connection with discipline in the assem- 
bly. Wicked persons are to be withdrawn from 
and put away from the company of the saints. 
The moment there is brokenness of spirit mani- 
fested, the compassions of those who are spirit- 
ually minded will at once flow forth; but in any 
way to condone or encourage persons persisting 
in ungodliness, and under the Lord’s discipline, 
is only to hinder restoration and blessing. 

It is evident from verse 6 that many heathen 
customs were being regularly practised by the 
people of Judah. The announcement that none 
should “cut themselves, nor make themselves 
bald” for the dead, would not have been made 
had it not been practised; that was a plain defi- 
ance of Deut. 14:1, 2: “Ye are children of the 
Lord your God: ye shall not cut yourselves, nor 
make any baldness between your eyes for the 
dead. For thou art a holy people unto the Lord 
thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be 
a peculiar people unto Himself, above all the na- 
tions that are upon the earth.” Alas, that Jeho- 
vah’s “peculiar people” should have so far cor- 
rupted themselves as to have fallen into the most 
degrading practices of the pagan nations about 
them! So true is it that “evil communications 
corrupt good manners.” The cutting themselves 
and making baldness were in honor of heathen 
deities, notably Baal, the sun-god, who was wor- 
shiped under various names. 


78 Notes on Jeremiah 


The Revised Version probably gives the more 
exact rendering of the next verse (7): “Neither 
shall men break bread for them in mourning, to 
comfort them for the dead; neither shall men 
give them the cup of consolation to drink for their 
father or their mother.” This is the first men- 
tion in sacred Scripture of breaking bread and 
drinking a cup of consolation in remembrance of 
the departed. The Lord Jesus instituted such a 
feast on that “same night in which He was be- 
trayed.” He gave new significance to the break- 
ing of bread by declaring that it set forth the 
bruising of His precious body for our sin upon 
the cross of shame; while the cup became to us 
“the cup of blessing,” even “the communion of 
the blood of Christ,” “shed for many for the re- 
mission of sins.” 

It is clear that to have had no one break bread 
nor drink the cup of consolation in memory of 
one who had died would have betokened utter for- 
getfulness. So our Lord has said, “This do, for 
the keeping of Me in mind” (literal rendering). 
Well may our hearts respond— 


“With joy and sorrow mingling, 
We will remember Thee.” 


Jeremiah is to join in no memorial feasts, nor 
yet in seasons of mirth. In the grief and the joy 
of the people he can have no part. He is for- 
bidden to go into “the house of feasting, to sit 
with them to eat and to drink. For thus saith 
the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I 
will cause to cease out of this place in your eyes, 
and in your days, the voice of mirth, and the voice 


Sin Where the Blood Should Be 79 


of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom, and the 
voice of the bride” (vers. 8,9). So stupefied and 
insensate had they become that, like their chil- 
dren in the days of Messiah, though mourned 
unto, they lamented not; though piped unto, they 
danced not. Neither their joy nor their sorrow 
led to a recognition of the One who was dealing 
with them in these various ways; hence their 
grief should only become deeper, and their 
laughter be turned into anguish of heart. 

It was quite to be expected that, when “‘all these 
words” were proclaimed, so seared would be their 
consciences, that they would ask, ‘Wherefore 
hath the Lord pronounced all this great evil 
against us? or what is our iniquity? or what is 
our sin that we have committed against the Lord 
our God?” (ver. 10.) The hardening effect of sin 
is one of its appalling results. Even “when the 
Son of Man shall come in His glory,” and “shall 
sit upon the throne of His glory,” and all na- 
tions be gathered before Him, there will be those 
who, with amazing effrontery, shall ask, ‘“When 
saw we Thee ahungered, or athirst, or a stran- 
ger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not 
minister unto Thee?” while conscious of the fact 
that they had neglected His servants and His 
Word all their days. 

Jeremiah’s reply to the gainsayers is that their 
fathers had ever been characterized by disobedi- 
ence to God, and they had outdone them by far; 
therefore they were to be cast out of their land. 
They had walked after other gods in Canaan: 
now they should be carried away to the coun- 
tries where these false deities were especially 


80 Notes on Jeremiah 


recognized, and there they should “serve other, 
gods day and night” (vers. 11-13). 

Their casting off, however, shall not be for-' 
ever. “He that scattered Israel shall gather him.” 
Just as He of old brought them up from the land 
of Egypt, so shall it be said in the near future, 
“The Lord liveth, that brought up the children 
of Israel from the land of the north, and from 
all the lands whither He had driven them:” and 
He adds, “I will bring them again into their land 
that I gave unto their fathers” (vers. 14, 15). 
For centuries “the tribe of the wandering foot’ 
have proved the truth of His Word in regard to 
their dispersion; and the prophecies relating to 
their return and restoration shall be as literally 
carried out. The going up from Babylon, in the 
days of Ezra and Nehemiah, in no complete sense 
fulfilled this promise. A few thousand, a mere 
handful, were brought back at that time, only to 
be scattered again with their rejection of Christ. 
When the “times of restitution of all things, 
spoken of by the prophets,” shall have come, 
Israel shall then be saved; as it is written, 
“There shall come out of Sion the Deliverer, and 
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: for this 
is My covenant unto them, when I shall take 
away their sins” (Rom. 11:26, 27). Mcantime 
it is the “times of the Gentiles;” the “holy city” 
is trodden by the Gentiles; blindness is fallen 
upon Israel “‘until the fulness of the Gentiles be 
come in.” This is the universal testimony of 
the prophets, strangely overlooked by multitudes 
who, it is to be feared, read their Bibles to find 
confirmation for theories of their own, in place 


; Sin Where the Blood Should Be 81 


of reading in the fear of God, to get His mind. * 

It is interesting to notice how complete the in- 
gathering is to be in the latter day—yet only 
after the people have passed through the last and 
great tribulation by which the godly and faithful 
ones are manifested, and the unrepentant apos- 
tate part of the nation cut off. Vers. 16-18 tell 
of this: “Behold, I will send for many fishers, 
saith the Lord, and they shall fish them; and 
after I will send for many hunters, and they shall 
hunt them from every mountain, and from every 
hill, and out of the holes of the rocks. For Mine 
eyes are upon all their ways: they are not hid 
from My face, neither is their iniquity hid from 
Mine eyes. And first I will recompense their 
iniquity and their sin double; because they have 
defiled My land, they have filled Mine inheritance 
with the carcases of their detestable and abom- 
inable things.” From every corner of the earth: 
God will seek out His “lost sheep of the house of 
Israel” and bring them back to their land. Many 
return in unbelief, and judgment will be visited 
accordingly; but the result will be the reestab- 
lishment of the repentant remnant in the home of 
their fathers, and the rebuilding of the taber- 
nacle of David. During all their wanderings His 
“eyes are upon all their ways.” This is most 
strikingly brought out in the little book of 
Esther, where He is found watching over and 
caring for them even though unrecognized and 
unsought.* 


*For an exposition of this interesting and instructive 
portion of Scripture the reader is referred to “Notes on 
the Book of Esther,” by the same writer. 


82 Notes on Jeremiah 


Do these lines meet the eye of a tried and dis- 
tressed saint who has been tempted by Satan to 
believe that God has forgotten and cares not for 
him? Surely the words are as true of every 
Christian as of every Israelite, “Mine eyes are 
upon all their ways.” Oh, look up, dear doubting 
one, and faint not beneath the chastening of the 
Lord! for His eyes never lose sight of you for 
one moment, and His heart is ever concerned 
about you. He is taking careful note of all your 
circumstances, and ‘“‘He hath said, I will never 
leave thee nor forsake thee.” Sweet it is to trust 
where all is dark, and to sing with childlike faith, 
“My times are in Thy hand!” 

Israel’s enlargement shall result in blessing for 
the nations too: “For if the fall of them be the 
riches of the world, and the diminishing of them 
the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their 
fulness?” And “if the casting away of them be the 
reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving 
of them be but life from the dead?” (Rom. 11: 
12,15.) _ So we are told in verses 19 to 21 that 
the Gentiles shall come to restored Israel and to 
Israel’s God saying, “Surely our fathers have in- 
herited lies, vanity, and things wherein is no 
profit.” Turning to the only true God in confes- 
sion and repentance, He will make them to know 
Himself. 

The prophet gets but a glimpse of that day of 
glory, as if the Lord would cheer the weak heart 
of His servant by rolling back the dark clouds 
for a moment and giving him a sight of Mes- 
siah’s reign when He shall, as the Sun of Right- 
eousness, arise with healing in His wings. Jere- 


Sin Where the Blood Should Be. 83 


miah must now return to the sterner business of” 
showing the people their iniquity. 

“The sin of Judah,” they are told, “is written 
with a pen of iron, and with the point of a 
diamond: it is graven upon the table of their 
heart and upon the horns of your altars” (chap. 
17:1). This tells the awful tale in a very pro- 
nounced way. Their sin was written down where 
the blood of atonement should have been. This 
was why there must be unsparing judgment. God 
had ordained that for the sin of a priest, or of 
the whole congregation, the sacrificial blood 
should be put upon the horns of the golden altar, 
the altar of sweet incense, to make atonement for 
it, that their fellowship with Himself might be 
maintained. (See Lev. 4:7, 18.) If a ruler, or 
one of the common people, sinned, the blood was 
to be put upon the horns of the brazen altar, the 
altar of burnt offering, that all might know the 
sin had not caused the Lord to give up the sin- 
ner, but to provide a righteous ground to for- 
give him. (See Lev. 4:25, 30.) Alas! in the 
times of Jeremiah, while the offerings of Jeho- 
vah were neglected, the offerings of the false gods 
of the nations were smoking under almost every 
green tree. Therefore His holy eye sees—not the 
blood that was ordained to speak of the sacrifice 
of His beloved Son, but sees the sin of guilty 
Israel graven upon their hearts and upon the 
horns of their altars! Therefore Jehovah’s 
“Mountain in the field”—Jerusalem—where He 
had set His Name, the place where His honor 
dwelt, should be given, with all its treasures, for 
a spoil and a prey to their enemies, while their 


84 Notes on Jeremiah 


high places should be given up to sin in all their 
borders (ver. 3). 

It was not that He delighted in judgment, but 
that they had themselves given up all title to their 
inheritance. By turning aside from the com- 
mandments of the Lord and ignoring the ap- 
pointed offerings and the sprinkling of blood, 
they had forfeited all claim to their land. They 
must be carried away to a country wherein they 
should be strangers; for He could say, ““Ye have 
kindled a fire in Mine anger which shall burn 
forever” (ver. 4). 

Such is ever man’s history when placed in a 
position of responsibility. From Adam in Eden, 
to a world blessed under Messiah in the Millen- 
nium, one word gives his story —failure. He 
cannot be depended upon. “Cursed is the man 
that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm, 
and whose heart departeth from the Lord. For 
he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall 
not see when good cometh; but shall inhabit the 
parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land 
and not inhabited” (vers. 5, 6). Israel’s history, 
as well as that of all the race, should surely teach 
one the important lesson of “no confidence in the 
flesh.” But alas with most, one at least is con- 
sidered trustworthy, even one’s self. 

“Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, 
and whose hope the Lord is. For he shall be as 
a tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth 
out her roots by the river, and shall not see when 
heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and 
shall not be careful in the year of drought, nei- 
ther shall cease from yielding fruit” (vers. 7,8). 


Sin Where the Blood Should Be 85 


This is the blessed man of the first psalm — 
the man whose food is the word of God, whose 
confidence is in the Lord alone—the perfect ex- 
ample of which is our Lord Himself. How little 
do we, who know Him as our Saviour, practically 
follow Him in this! When all goes well it is 
easy to deceive ourselves and think that we are 
trusting in the Lord, when in reality we are rest- 
ing on an arm of flesh. The time of trial proves 
where our confidence really is. “If thou faint in 
the day of adversity, thy strength is small.” 

But “the heart is deceitful above all things, and 
desperately wicked;” and God Himself asks, 
“Who can know it?” He answers it by saying, 
“T the Lord search the heart and try the reins” 
(vers. 9,10). “The deceitful heart” is what all 
men have by nature—the depravity resultant 
upon the fall. In Isa. 44:20 we read that “a 
deceived heart hath turned him aside;” and in 
Deut. 11:16 Moses warns against the heart be- 
ing deceived. In these passages, however, it is 
not the condition of man by nature, but the result 
rather of listening to the suggestions of the devil 
—the arch-deceiver. All have a deceitful heart: 
those only have deceived hearts who are not sub- 
ject to the Word of God. He who tries the reins 
and searches the heart is going to give to every 
man according to the fruit of his doings. “What- 
goever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.” It 
is vain to fight against the government of God, 
for “as the partridge sitteth on eggs and hatcheth 
them not, so he that getteth riches, and not by 
right, shall leave them in the midst of his days, 
and at his end shall be a foot’ (ver. 11). 


86 Notes on Jeremiah 


Jehovah’s throne is high and glorious; yea, 
He is the high and lofty One that inhabiteth 
eternity. All men are but as the small dust of 
the balance before Him. ‘They that depart from 
Me,” He says, “shall be written in the earth” 
(ver. 18). What a vivid light this casts upon 
the striking scene in the eighth of John! There, 
when the scribes and Pharisees brought to Jesus 
the poor woman taken in adultery, He stooped 
down and wrote upon the ground. In their lofty 
pride they pressed Him for judgment. He, look- 
ing into man’s heart, bade the one without sin 
among them cast the first stone, and once more 
stooped down to write them in the earth—the 
sentence of death is upon them all! Feeling the 
exposure of His Word, they went forth from the 
convicting light of His presence one by one, leav- 
ing the sinner alone with the Saviour. 

In psalm 22 the Lord says, “Thou hast brought 
Me into the dust of death.” ‘Death,” says the 
apostle, “passed upon all men because all have 
sinned” (Rom. 5). The Lord in grace stooped 
to the dust of death to save all who turn to God 
in repentance. Those who refuse His grace must 
be “written in the earth;” that is, they are ap- 
pointed to death from which they might have 
been saved had they but accepted the Lord Jesus 
as their Deliverer from the wrath to come. He 
is “the fountain of living waters,’ where all who 
will may drink and have life forevermore. 

The 14th verse is the prophet’s cry, voicing 
their need of God’s salvation—“‘Heal me, O Lord, 
and I shall be healed; save me, and I shall be 
saved: for Thou art My praise.” 


Sin Where the Blood Should Be. 87 


Alas, they only scoff and cry, “Where is the - 
word of the Lord? let it come now” (ver. 15). 
It is the taunt of skepticism. As for Jeremiah, 
he has no unholy anxiety to see his prophecies of 
doom fulfilled. He had not desired the woeful 
day. His own inclinations had not led him to as- 
sume the role of a prophet, but God was witness 
that what he had given utterance to had been in 
sincerity as it was revealed to him. Jehovah was 
his hope in the day of evil, when his adversaries 
would be confounded and dismayed. 

It may seem, at first sight, like a break in the 
chain of thought as we pass from what has just 
been claiming our attention to the paragraph rela- 
tive to the Sabbath with which this portion of the 
prophecy is concluded. It should be remembered, 
however, that the Sabbath was the weekly me- 
morial of Israel’s covenant relation with Jeho- 
vah. It was to be kept sacred as a perpetual re- 
minder of their deliverance from Egyptian bond- 
age (Deut. 5:15); and it pointed forward to the 
final rest, when, all man’s labor ended, the re- 
deemed should enter into the undisturbed bliss of 
the new creation (Lev. 23:3). Therefore the 
state of the people was ever manifested by the 
estimation in which they held Jehovah’s holy day. 
If they “called the Sabbath a delight,” and re- 
joiced in its privileges, there was good evidence 
that their hearts were true to Himself. If on 
that day they did their own pleasure and neg- 
lected the ordinances of the law relative thereto, 
no further proof need be sought as to their 


wretched state. 
In order to bring this out beyond controversy, 


88 Notes on Jeremiah 


Jeremiah is bidden to go and stand in the gate 
(the place of judgment) and cry in the hearing 
of the king and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, 
as they passed in or out of the city, “Hear ye the 
Word of the Lord.... Take heed to yourselves, 
and bear no burden on the Sabbath day, nor bring 
it in by the gates of Jerusalem; neither carry 
forth a burden out of your houses on the Sab- 
bath day, neither do ye any work, but hallow ye 
the Sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers” 
(vers. 19-22). This summons as to the Sabbath 
would be a reminder of God’s past deliverance 
and future promise. But man prefers his use- 
less labor. “They obeyed not, neither inclined 
their ear,” but deliberately turned away from 
hearing the message and refused the instruction. 

Even at this late day they were promised a 
continuance of the divine favor if they thus re- 
turned to God, and manifested their subjection to 
Him by hallowing the seventh day. From all the 
cities of Judah and Benjamin the people should 
throng to Jerusalem as in the days of old, and 
once more sacrifices and offerings should be ac- 
cepted by the Lord at their hands. But if they 
persisted in their refusal to hearken unto Him, 
then the city, with all its palaces, should be utter- 
ly consumed. Surely never were a people more 
tenderly entreated or more faithfully warned; but 
the “evil heart of unbelief in departing from the 
living God,” was in them. Entreaties and com- 
mands alike had but fallen on ears wilfully 
closed—bent, as it were, on their own destruc- 
tion! 

It is easy enough to censure them; but oh, 


Sin Where the Blood Should Be 89 


reader, let us examine our own ways, and ask: 
ourselves whether we too may not be refusing 
Him who now speaks to us both by their example 
and by His Word. Departure from God and cold- 
ness of heart are the order of the day. The last 
great apostasy is fast hastening on. The Scrip- 
tures of truth are being readily surrendered at 
the behests of a host of veneered infidels who, 
parading as Christian ministers, are decrying 
every fundamental truth of the Bible. 


CHAPTER IX 
LESSONS FROM THE POTTER’S HOUSE 


(Chaps. 18, 19.) 


Many are the Scripture similes taken from the 
potter’s house. The manufacturer of earthen- 
ware utensils was a man of no mean repute 
among the Hebrews, nor yet among the sur- 
rounding nations. In 1 Chronicles 4: 22, 23, the 
potters are among those who “dwelt with the king 
for his work.’”’ They were under the royal pat- 
ronage and the royal eye. They speak of that 
communion with the Lord which is an absolute 
essential if there be work in accordance with His 
mind. The laborer must dwell with Him if he 
would be “well-pleasing to Him.” 

In Ps. 2:9 and Rev. 2:27 Messiah takes the 
part of the offended potter, dashing in pieces the 
unworthy vessel. Isaiah in chapters 29:16 and 
64:8 of his magnificent prophecy, and Paul in 
Rom. 9: 20, 23, use the same figure as this chap- 
ter in Jeremiah brings before us. God is the 
Potter, we are but the clay in His hands. (See 
also Isa. 30:14.) 

The feet of the great image of Gentile power 
and dominion in Dan. 2: 41 are part of iron and 
part of potter’s clay; the iron speaking of strong 
authority, the pottery of the unstable masses; all 
alike to be smitten by the Stone that shall soon 
fall from heaven at the second appearing of 
earth’s rightful King. 


Lessons from the Potter’s House 91 


It is noticeable, too, that with the money paid 
for the betrayal of the Lord Jesus, the “potter’s 
field’ was purchased to be a place to bury stran- 
gers in. This earth is but the Potter’s field. It 
was ever His own: but in a most solemn sense 
it was purchased by the suffering of the Son of 
God; and what a vast burial-place it is! He, the 
heavenly stranger, was buried in it Himself; but 
He rose in triumph, and is alive forevermore. 
Soon, from earth and sea, He shall call into life 
the dust of all His saints to share His excellent 
glory; and, later, awake the unrepentant by the 
summons to judgment! 

Solemn and needful lessons are to be learned 
in the house of the potter—lessons for puny 
man’s pride and self-sufficiency. And the Lord 
said to Jeremiah, “Arise, and go down to the 
potter’s house, and there I will cause thee to hear 
My words” (chap. 18:2). In unquestioning 
obedience he goes to the appointed place of in- 
struction arriving just in time to find the potter 
working a vessel on the wheels : marred in his 
hands, he takes it up anew, and as Jeremiah 
looked on “he made it again, as it seemed good 
to the potter to make it” (vers. 8, 4). 

At once the word of Jehovah came to His serv- 
ant. Taking what had just occurred before his 
eyes, He likened it to the way in which He was 
about to deal with marred, sin-disfigured Israel; 
and not with Israel only, but, later, with many 
nations of the earth. The grand lesson of the 
divine sovereignty with which he first began his 
course in the school of God (chap. 1) is now 
illustrated and amplified for his soul’s benefit. 


92 Notes on Jeremiah 


“Then the word of the Lord came to me, say- 
ing, O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as 
this potter? saith the Lord. Behold, as the clay 
is in the potter’s hand, so are ye in My hand, 
O house of Israel” (vers. 5, 6). 

This being an incontestable fact, none could 
deny His righteousness in sparing a nation, as 
He spared Nineveh, after sentence of judgment 
had gone forth—provided the guilty people 
should turn from their evil way and seek His 
face. This they all admitted. The other side 
would be less readily received, but equally true. 
If He had blessed a nation, and had spoken “con- 
cerning a kingdom to build and to plant it,” if 
it turned from the path of obedience to His voice 
and did evil in His sight, He would repent of 
the good with which He had said He would benefit 
them (vers. 7-10). The first proposition was the 
only ground for hope left to Judah and Israel. 
The last meant their undoing, for it pictured 
their case exactly. 

Therefore Jeremiah is to go again to the men 
of Judah and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem with 
the warning that the Lord had devised evil 
against them; but he is also to exhort them to 
return from their iniquitous course, and to make 
their ways and their doings good (ver. 11). On 
their part, however, there was no sign of peni- 
tence—not to speak of repentance. With that 
awful boldness that so often characterizes men 
away from God, they replied, “There is no hope: 
but we will walk after our own devices, and we 
will every one do the imagination of his evil 
heart” (ver. 12). They had committed them- 


Lessons from the Potter’s House 93 


selves to a course of rebellion and treachery, and - 
they desired nothing better than their own god- 
less way. Who can tell the depths to which even 
one who has known much of divine care and 
guidance can sink when once a good conscience 
has been put away? 

The Lord’s patience and grace are markedly 
manifested in the following verses, albeit His 
long-tarrying judgment must soon be carried out. 
Who among the heathen had heard of anything 
so horrible as that which the virgin of Israel had 
done? Had the snow of Lebanon ceased to sup- 
ply the cold flowing waters of the springs? (See 
R. V., ver. 14.) In other words, had His gracious 
provision for their refreshment failed, that they 
should have forgotten Him and have burned in- 
cense to vanity? They had stumbled in their 
ways, from the ancient paths, had walked in by- 
paths and in a way not cast up—that is, in a way 
that He had not marked out for them. Their 
land should be made desolate, so that every 
passer-by should be astonished, and they them- 
selves should be scattered as with an east wind 
—the wind of adversity. How have the centuries 
since testified to the truth of these words! 

At the time they were uttered the prophet’s 
hearers refused to credit them; and playing on 
the words of Jehovah, they said, “Come, and let 
us devise devices against Jeremiah.”’ They would 
make him the responsible party, and they sought 
to wreak their vengeance on the servant, in place 
of bowing to the words of the Master. With vain- 
glorious self-confidence, they cried, “The law shall 
not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the 


94 Notes no Jeremiah 


wise, nor the word from the prophet!” They re- 
ferred, of course, to their own false priests, teach- 
ers, and prophets, whom God had not sent nor 
anointed. “Come, and let us smite him with the 
tongue,” said they, “and let us not give heed to 
any of his words” (ver. 18). In place of con- 
tending with them, Jeremiah makes his supplica- 
tion to the One who had sent him; for “the serv- 
ant of the Lord must not strive.” At the very 
moment when they in their bitter hatred and 
hostility had “digged a pit” for his soul, he 
prays, “Remember that I stood before Thee to 
speak good for them, and to turn away Thy wrath 
from them” (ver. 20). But because they de- 
spised their own mercies, and persisted in their 
wilful course, he makes intercession, as Elijah 
had done, against them, and calls for the ful- 
filment of his prophecy (vers. 21, 23). 

In the first verse of chap. 19 he is sent to get 
a potter’s earthen bottle, and is told to take elders 
of the people and of the priests with him as wit- 
nesses. 

Going forth unto the valley of the son of. Hin- 
nom, the place where the refuse of the city was 
afterwards burned, but which at this time was 
still the theater of the performance of the abom- 
inable rites of Moloch-worship, he was to pro- 
claim once more to the kings of Judah and the 
inhabitants of Jerusalem both the guilt of the 
people and the judgment that was about to be 
meted out to them (vers. 2-5). The Valley of 
Hinnom should soon be known as the Valley of 
Slaughter; for as they had slain their sons in 
that dreadful Tophet as offerings to Baal and 


Lessons from the Potter’s House 95 


Moloch, He would cause them to fall there by the 
sword of their enemies, and would give their un- 
buried carcases to be meat for the fowls of 
heaven and the beasts of the field (vers. 6-9). 

The bottle was then to be broken in the sight 
of the ancients, as he proclaimed Jehovah’s mes- 
sage: “Even so will I break this people and this 
city, as one breaketh a potter’s vessel, that can- 
not be made whole again: and they shall bury 
them in Tophet, till there be no place to bury” 
(ver. 11). Such should be the end of their re- 
jection of God for the idols of the heathen. 

Returning from Tophet, or the valley of Hin- 
nom, “he stood in the court of the Lord’s house, 
and said to all the people, Thus saith the Lord 
of hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring 
upon this city and upon all her towns all the evil 
that I have pronounced against it, because they 
have hardened their necks, that they might not 
hear My words” (vers. 14, 15). He had warned, 
pleaded, and entreated, but their hearts had not 
relented. They must know the bitterness of the 
cup of His wrath. 


CHAPTER X 


PASHUR’S NEW NAME AND THE PROPHET’S 
COMPLAINT. 


(Chap. 20.) 


With callous indifference, not so much actual 
persecution, our prophet thus far has had to cope. 
He is now to experience physical suffering at the 
hands of one from whom, above many others, bet- 
ter things might have been expected. Pashur, a 
priest and chief governor in the house of Jeho- 
vah, resents the faithful preaching of Jeremiah, 
and seeks to put a stop to it by forcible means. 
Scripture is silent elsewhere as to this man, al- 
though several other persons by the same name 
are mentioned in this book. Here we are only 
told that he was the son of Immer; that is, he 
belonged to the sixteenth course of the priest- 
hood (1 Chron. 24:14). He heard that “Jere- 
miah prophesied these things,” and he resolved 
to make a public example of him. We are told that 
he smote the prophet, ‘‘and put him in the stocks 
that were in the high gate of Benjamin, which 
was by the house of the Lord” (vers. 1, 2). He 
was thus ignominiously exposed to the taunts of 
the vulgar multitude. For a part of a day and a 
night he seems to have been left in this position; 
then, on the morrow, his persecutor “brought him 
forth out of the stocks.” 

The degradation and suffering had in nowise 
daunted the man of God. Naturally, as we have 


Pashur, and the Prophet’s Complaint 97 


seen, a timid, backward man, he is now bold as - 
a lion, in accordance with the promise made to 
him by the Lord when he began his ministry. 
The man who has so often wept over the stony- 
hearted men of Judah and Jerusalem has now no 
fears for himself, nor yet any soft words for the 
renegade priest. Abruptly he declares, “The Lord 
hath not called thy name Pashur, but Magor- 
missabib” (ver. 3). Pashur is commonly said to 
mean “prosperity.” He should never prosper 
more, for he had lifted up his hand against the 
Lord’s anointed and rejected His Word. Magor- 
missabib means “terror” (or fear) “on every 
side.” Such should be his future condition. A 
terror to himself and to all his friends, living 
in abject fear for his own life from day to day, 
this should be his reward till carried away in 
captivity to Babylon; and there he must die and 
be buried in the land of the uncircumcised. 

We read not of any reply on the part of the 
false priest. The power of Jeremiah’s words 
must have struck deep, however much he hated 
him; so he seems to have dismissed him from 
his presence. 

And now we find the man who could be so 
bold before the despiser of the word of Jehovah, 
in brokenness and even fear before the Lord. He 
was no stoic. He felt most keenly the reproach 
of his position. From verse 7 to the end of the 
chapter we have a kind of soliloquy. He pours 
out first his complaints, then his praises, and 
again his remonstrances, into the ears of the 
Lord of Hosts. “O Lord, Thou hast persuaded 
me, and I was persuaded” (R. V.): Thou art 


98 Notes on Jeremiah 


stronger than I, and hast prevailed: I am in 
derision daily, every one mocketh me.” He did 
not court persecution and taunts: on the con- 
trary, it stung him to the quick to be thus de- 
spised, and to find his messages derided. But 
Jehovah had persuaded him. He believed; there- 
fore had he spoken. 

His preaching from the beginning had been of 
violence and spoil; hence the word of the Lord 
was made a reproach unto him, and a derision 
daily (ver. 8). Had he prophesied smooth things 
and given utterance to sentiments calculated to 
soothe the people in their sin, he would have been 
held in honor and esteem. But this could not be, 
for he had to proclaim the words given him by 
the Lord. 

So painful was it to his sensitive nature to 
meet with reproach and rejection everywhere, 
that he had made up his mind not to prophesy 
further. “Then I said, I will not make mention 
of Him, nor speak any more in His name.” This, 
however, was for him an impossibility. ‘His 
word,” he says, “was in my heart as a burning 
fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary of 
forbearing, and I could not stay” (ver. 9). “Woe 
is me,” declared the apostle of the Gentiles, “if 
I preach not the gospel.” Men sent forth by God 
with a message from Himself are unable to be 
at rest if that message is unproclaimed. How 
different this is to the perfunctory service of 
multitudes of modern clergymen! “A burning 
fire’ must have vent, and if the word of God be 
thus surging up in one’s breast he simply must 
preach. To seek to imitate this is but folly. Any 


Pashur, and the Prophet’s Complaint 99 


spiritual person, and many utterly godless ones, 
can readily detect the difference between giving 
forth that which has been implanted in the in- 
most soul by the Holy Spirit, and the mere vapor- 
ings of a wrought-up sermon. 

The very “defaming of many on every side” 
but served to cast Jeremiah the more on God, and 
nerve him, if we may so speak, in the conflict for 
the truth he proclaimed. Those who professed 
friendship for him, his “familiars,” watched for 
his halting, and hoped he might be enticed, that 
they might be avenged on him. Fear was round 
about as he had declared to Pashur. But he could 
say, “The Lord is with me as a mighty terrible 
one: therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and 
they shall not prevail: they shall be greatly 
ashamed; for they shall not prosper” (the refer- 
ence here is clearly to the name Pashur): “their 
everlasting confusion shall never be forgotten” 
(ver. 11). Therefore to Jehovah of Hosts, the 
One that tries the righteous and sees the reins 
and the heart, he commits his cause, and pleads 
that he may see the divine vengeance upon the 
enemies of Judah’s peace. Strong in faith, he 
counts the things that are not as though they had 
already come to pass, and cries in his exaltation 
of spirit: “Sing unto the Lord, praise ye the 
Lord: for He hath delivered the soul of the poor 
from the hand of evil doers” (ver. 13). It is not 
“He will deliver,” but faith says, “He hath deliv- 
ered.” 

Who would suppose that the same man would 
be in this truly blessed state of soul at one mo- 


ment, and perhaps immediately afterwards be 


100 Notes on Jeremiah 


plunged into the abyss of the few remaining 
verses? Ah, it is an experience common to most 
of the children of God. While faith is in exer- 
cise, all is bright. When self is looked to, all 
becomes dark. In the verses we have been con- 
sidering, the Lord has been before the prophet’s 
soul. In those to follow, it is with himself he is 
occupied. The result is a sudden depression of 
his spirit, akin to that of Job when “‘he opened 
his mouth and cursed his day” (Job 3:1). In 
fact, one can scarcely resist the conclusion that 
Jeremiah was quite conversant with the book 
that relates the ways of the Lord with the chief 
of the land of Uz. By comparing the entire third 
chapter of Job with these five verses, it will be 
seen how much alike are the complaints of each 
of these devoted men. 

Our prophet curses the day of his birth and the 
man who bore the news to his father that a man 
child had been born unto him. He wishes he had 
been slain from the womb, or that he might never 
have been born. “Wherefore,” he asks in de- 
spair, “came I forth out of the womb to see labor 
and sorrow, that my days should be consumed 
with shame?” It is the breaking down of a weak 
and tender heart when the eye has been turned 
for the time from the God of his salvation. He 
who knows the deepest feelings of the soul esti- 
mated all aright, and in the balances of the sanc- 
tuary weighed the grief of His stricken servant. 


CHAPTER XI 
THE SIEGE AND CAPTIVITY FORETOLD 
(Chaps. 21-24.) 


The various prophecies of Jeremiah as set be- 
fore us in this book do not follow any chronolog- 
ical order. The series recorded in chapters 21-24 
belong to the last days of Zedekiah, in whose time 
the final carrying away to Babylon took place. 
The next series were uttered in the fourth year 
of Jehoiakim, and the ones following in his first 
year. Nevertheless there is evidently a divine 
purpose in thus grouping them, as they follow a 
definite moral order showing how utterly hopeless 
was the state of the people. Nebuchadrezzar had 
already commenced the siege of Jerusalem when 
this portion opens. The form of his name, it will 
be noticed, is slightly different to that found in 
the book of Daniel and elsewhere, even in the 
latter portion of this same book. The spelling as 
given here agrees better with the inscriptions of 
late years unearthed in Babylonia than the other, 
which was probably a Hebraized form. This 
inighty potentate had, when still a prince, con- 
quered Palestine and Jerusalem, but had left 
Jehoiakim, brother of Jehoahaz, upon the throne 
as a tributary to Babylon. From Palestine Ne- 
buchadrezzar marched into Egypt, having al- 
ready routed the armies of Pharaoh-Necho, While 
here, tidings of the death of Nabopolassar, his 
father, reached him, whereupon he returned at 
once to Chaldea with his light troops, in order to 


102 Notes on Jeremiah 


make sure of his succession to the throne. The 
balance of his army, convoying a number of cap- 
tives of royal lineage, followed later by a more 
circuitous route. 

Soon after this, Jehoiakim rebelled against him 
(as recorded in 2 Kings 24:1), and was pun- 
ished by being carried captive to Babylon. His 
son Jehoiachin, or Jeconiah, was placed on the 
throne; but he too rebelled very soon afterwards. 
Nebuchadrezzar marched again to J erusalem, and 
carried him also captive with about ten thousand 
of the people. It was at this time that Ezekiel 
and Mordecai were carried to Babylon. 

The victorious Chaldean made Mattaniah, uncle 
of the deposed monarch, king in his stead, chang- 
ing his name to Zedekiah. Mattaniah meant 
“Gift of Jah.” Zedekiah means the “Justice of 
Jah.” This Jewish prince was a most ungodly 
man, though but a youth of one-and-twenty when 
he ascended the throne, and his reign lasted seven 
years. Of him it is recorded that “he did that 
which was evil in the sight of the Lord, accord- 
ing to all that Jehoiakim nad done. For through 
the anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem 
and Judah, until He had cast them out from His 
presence, that Zedekiah rebelled against the king 
of Babylon” (2 Kings 24:19, 20). 

The Chaldean army appeared once more be- 
fore the devoted city, and a long siege began, 
which lasted almost an entire year. It was dur- 
ing this time of distress and perplexity that 
Zedekiah sent Pashur the son of Melchiah, and 
Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, to Jere- 
miah. Of the first of these two messengers we 


The Siege and Captivity Foretold 103 


shall hear more when we come to consider the 
thirty-eighth chapter. Zephaniah we shall also 
meet with as we pursue our meditations. He is 
mentioned by name on several occasions, and on 
none to his credit (Jer. 29:25; 37:3; 2 Kings 
25:18). 

The very fact of Zedekiah having revolted and 
broken his pledges to the king of Babylon mani- 
fested his unbelieving and unsubject heart. God 
had sent the conqueror against Judah because of 
sin. That evil unrepented of, no human prowess 
could avail to effect deliverance. Yet the Judean 
monarch had thought to break off the yoke by 
force of arms. Now, in his helplessness, he sends 
to Jehovah’s prophet, but gives evidence of no 
sense of wrong-doing; consequently his petition 
is utterly devoid of any expression that might 
speak of contrition or repentance. His message 
is, “Inquire, I pray thee, of the Lord for us; for 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon maketh war 
against us; if so be that the Lord will deal with 
us according to all His wondrous works, that he 
may go up from us” (ver. 2). It all sounds pious, 
but he had not framed his ways or his doings to 
turn unto the Lord. He feels himself to be in a 
tight and difficult place. He would avail himself 
of divine power, if possible, while ignoring 
divine claims upon him. He is neither the first 
nor the last that has so acted. For him, however, 
as for any such, there is no answer of peace. 
Jeremiah bids the messengers return to their 
master, and say that not only does Jehovah re- 
fuse to fight for him, but He will fight against 
them, even to turning back the weapons of war 


104 Notes on Jeremiah 


in their hands. The city shall be delivered to 
the Chaldeans, and the bulk of the inhabitants 
shall die of the sword and a great pestilence. 
Those that are left, including Zedekiah, shall be- 
come the captives of Nebuchadrezzar and be car- 
ried away to the imperial city on the Euphrates 
(vers. 3-7). 

Yet a choice was to be given to the people. 
“The way of life and the way of death” should 
be set before them. All abiding in the city should 
die, but any who should go out and fall to the 
besiegers should live; “his life shall be unto him 
for a prey.” The city itself was to be burned 
with fire (vers. 8-10). As for the house of Judah’s 
king, there was a special exhortation and a warn- 
ing. The execution of justice morning by morn- 
ing (see Ps. 101: 8) was called for, and the de- 
liverance of the spoiled out of the hand of the 
oppressor; otherwise the fury of the Lord should 
burn against them like a fire which none could 
quench. Proudly they had said, in their fancied 
security, ‘‘Who shall come down against us? or 
who shall enter into our habitations?” The Lord 
Himself was against them, and would punish ac- 
cording to their corrupt and ungodly ways (vers. 
11-14). 

The result of this reply to the king’s message 
we are not told. We can but infer that it was 
entirely disregarded, although Zedekiah evidently 
feared it was the truth, but did not dare act upon 
it. 

In the beginning of the twenty-second chapter 
we find the prophet sent by the Lord to the royal 
palace. He was a pre-Christian John Knox, who, 


4 


“strong in the Lord and the power of His might,” 
though in himself a frail and trembling man, 
could be the reprover of kings as well as pastor 
of the poor. 

There is no hesitancy or uncertainty about his 
utterances. It is “the word of the Lord” he 
brings. He speaks as “the oracles of God.” His 
address is a call to righteousness. If the king 
will be the leader in turning to God, as he has 
been a leader in rebellion against Him, there shall 
still enter in by the gates of the royal house 
kings sitting upon the throne of David. Other- 
wise “this house shall become a desolation.” As 
Gilead and Lebanon for glory and beauty had 
they been before Him: they should become as 
the dry and parched wilderness; insomuch that 
the nations, in wonderment, should ask as they 
passed by, ‘Wherefore hath the Lord done thus 
unto this great city?” and the answer would be, 
“Because they have forsaken the covenant of the 
Lord their God, and worshipped other gods, and 
served them” (22:1-9). 

How abundantly the prophetic burden has been 
verified, let the centuries witness! Jerusalem is 
to-day the pillar of salt to the nations, crying to 
all the kingdoms of the earth, ““Remember!” The 
dead should, at least, find a grave in the land of 
their fathers—soon to be hallowed by Messiah’s 
feet. For them let none weep. For him that 
goeth away let them “weep sore,” for “he shall 
return no more, nor see his native country” (ver. 
10). 

ere otherwise called Jehoahaz (see 1 
Chron 3:15; 2 Kings 23: 30, 32), had been car- 


ie The Siege and Captivity Foretold 105 


106 Notes on Jeremiah 


ried away to Egypt by Pharaoh-Necho about 
eighteen years previously, after an evil and 
ignominious reign of but three months. Some 
perhaps had hope that he, a son of the godly 
king Josiah, might yet return as their deliverer, 
but the seer declares that “he shall not return 
thither any more: but he shall die in the place 
whither they have led him captive, and shall see 
this land no more” (vers. 10-12). This sentence 
was fulfilled very shortly afterwards. 

Ever since Josiah’s untimely death on the 
plains of Megiddo, his unworthy successors had 
been characterized by iniquity. “Woe unto him 
that buildeth his house by unrighteousness, and 
his chambers by wrong,” the reprover of kings 
goes on—“that useth his neighbor’s service with- 
out wages, and giveth him not for his work; that 
saith, I will build me a wide house,” etc. (vers. 
13, 14). Jehovah’s heart is ever concerned about 
the poor and needy. When Josiah did judgment 
and justice, it was well with him. He judged the 
cause of the afflicted and poverty-stricken; and 
this, the Lord declares, was “to know Him.” 

This crying sin of Jeremiah’s age is being 
multiplied a thousandfold in these last days. 
Rich men heap up wealth by others’ labor, and 
tread down the poor. In their pride and hauteur 
they build themselves palaces and live as though 
God had forgotten their iniquitous means of ac- 
quisition of wealth. But He that is higher than 
the highest is not an unconcerned spectator. He 
has said: “Go to now, ye rich men, weep and 
howl for your miseries that shall come upon you. 
Your riches are corrupted, and your garments 


The Siege and Captivity Foretold 107 


are moth-eaten. Your gold and silver is cankered ; 
and the rust of them shall be a witness against 
you” (hoarded riches, while multitudes are in 
distress, witness against their possessors), “and 
shall eat your flesh as it were fire. Ye have 
heaped together treasure for (or “in,” R. V.,) 
the last days. Behold, the hire of the laborers 
who have reaped down your fields, and is of you 
kept back by fraud, crieth: and the cries of them 
which have reaped are entered into the ears of 
the Lord of Sabaoth” (hosts). “Ye have lived 
in pleasure on the earth, and been wanton; ye 
have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaugh- 
ter. Ye have condemned and killed the just; and 
he doth not resist you.” The hour of Jehovah’s 
vengeance is about to strike! Meantime the word 
to the poor and lowly who trust in His name is: 
“Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming 
of the Lord: ... the coming of the Lord draweth 
nigh” (James 5:1-8). He will not look on for- 
ever in apparent (only apparent) indifference. 
There shall yet be a righting of all the wrongs 
of the ages. The workers of iniquity shall be 
visited with swift retribution, as this city of God 
was—delivered to the Gentile oppressor for its 
manifold wickedness. 

It took more than ordinary boldness to enable 
a poor priest to face proud Zedekiah and de- 
clare, “Thine eyes and thy heart are not but 
for thy covetousness, and for shedding innocent 
blood, and for oppression, and for violence” (ver. 
17)—a solemn and terrible indictment, to which 
the wicked king made no reply. His conscience, 
as in Herod’s case, was on the accuser’s side. 


108 Notes on Jeremiah 


Jehoahaz’ doom has been pronounced—to die 
in Egypt. His successor, Jehoiakim, set up by 
Pharaoh-nechoh, whose name had been changed 
from Eliakim (2 Kings 23:34), should have no 
better fate: he had been carried to Babylon seven 
years prior to this time, and for him none should 
lament, but he was destined to die in captivity 
and to be “buried with the burial of an ass, drawn 
and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem” 
(vers. 18, 19; see also chap. 36:30). Thus one 
by one the kings of Judah should be destroyed; 
for in their prosperity the Lord had spoken; but 
they had wilfully said, “I will not hear.” “This,” 
He declares, “hath been thy manner from thy 
youth, that thou hast not obeyed My voice.” 
Therefore all the shepherds of the people should 
go into captivity, that they might be ashamed and 
confounded for all their wickedness; when their 
anguish came upon them like the pangs of a trav- 
ailing woman, then might they become gracious 
and subject to His will. 

There was still another Judean king in captiv- 
ity. Coniah (called variously Jeconiah, Jehoia- 
chin, Joiakim and Joachim) had, after a brief 
and inglorious reign of a little over three months, 
been likewise carried to Babylon. For him, too, 
there should be no return. He must die in the 
land of the stranger, as ‘‘a vessel wherein is no 
pleasure” (vers. 24, 28). 

Thus one by one the men on whom the people 
had set their hopes were being taken away in 
judgment. Would they never learn? “O earth, 
earth, earth, hear the word of the Lord. Thus 
.saith the Lord, Write ye this man childless, a man 


The Siege and Captivity Foretold 109: 


that shall not prosper in his days: for no man of 
his seed shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of 
David, and ruling any more in Judah” (vers. 29, 
30). In him the line of Solomonic succession 
ends. Royalty passes over to the line of David’s 
son Nathan. This explains why we have the two 
genealogies of our Lord in the New Testament. 
Matthew gives Joseph’s line through this very 
Coniah. But if Christ came through him, He 
would not be able to sit upon the throne. In 
Luke we evidently have the line of Mary the 
daughter of Heli, Joseph’s father-in-law, through 
Nathan, thus preserving the blood-line of David 
while avoiding the curse of Coniah. 

“Write ye this man childless” is a solemn word 
for a Christian, if we may venture to spiritualize 
it. Every one saved by the blood of Christ should 
covet to be a winner of souls. “He that withhold- 
eth corn, the people shall curse him” (Prov. 11: 
26). If my reader has been born again, he is now 
in possession of a treasure for lack of which needy 
men and women on every hand are perishing— 
dying in their sins and going down to a Christ- 
less eternity. Oh, see to it that you share with 
them the great and precious things confided to 
you. Strive to be one whom God can use in lead- 
ing others to Himself. “He that is wise winneth 
souls” (Prov. 11: 30, R. V.). Thus you shall have 
the joy of beholding your children in the faith 
who shall be your crown of rejoicing in that day 
(1 Thess. 2: 19,20). Who can conceive the loss 
if one must then be written “childless!” 

Israel’s pastors—that is, their kings—had to a 
great degree failed to use their exalted office for 


110 Notes on Jeremiah 


the blessing of the sheep confided to their care. 
The last four, especially, who reigned in Jerusa- 
lem were recreant shepherds, intent only upon en- 
riching themselves, and caring nought for the 
flock. (In the opening verses of the 23d chapter 
a “woe” is pronounced upon them for destroying 
and scattering the sheep of Jehovah’s pasture. 
“Ye have scattered My flock, and driven them 
away, and have not visited them; behold, I will 
visit upon you the evil of your doings, saith the 
Lord” (vers. 1, 2). It is a pitiable thing when 
the leaders of the people of God cause the simple 
to err; when those who are set to guide and pro- 
tect the flock lead them into by-paths and ex- 
pose them to danger. Solemn will be the account- 
ing when the Lord shall visit for these things. 
By referring to the 34th chapter of Ezekiel the 
reader will get a fuller description of the course 
of these evil shepherds. See especially vers. 1 
to 6. Both there and here there are sweet assur- 
ances that, human pastors having so wretchedly 
failed, the Lord Himself will gather the remnant 
of His flock from all countries whither He has 
driven them, and will bring them again to their 
folds, where they shall be fruitful and increase 
(ver. 83). This has no reference to a conversion 
of Jews to Christianity. There is no fold now; 
but “one flock and one Shepherd” (John 10: 14%, 
R. V.). But this promise speaks of a still future 
and literal return of the Jews to their land after 
the present dispensation has closed, and the 
Church is removed to heaven. When thus re- 
stored to the home of their fathers, and to their 
King (whom they once rejected, saying, ““We have 


The Siege and Captivity Foretold 111 


no king but Cesar”), He shall then “set up shep- 
herds over them which shall feed them: and they 
shall fear no more, nor be dismayed, neither shall 
they be lacking, saith the Lord” (ver. 5). 

Twelve of these shepherds we know, for our 
Lord said to the apostles: “Verily I say unto 
you, That ye which have followed Me, in the re- 
generation when the Son of Man shall sit in the 
throne of His glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve 
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel” 
(Matt. 19:28). Judas, by transgression, for- 
feited his place, but Matthias was given the bish- 
opric thus made vacant. Through the promised 
Messiah are these covenanted mercies of David to 
be fulfilled. “Behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous 
Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and 
execute justice in the earth” (ver. 5). 

LThis Branch of the Lord’s planting is fre- 
quently referred to in the prophets. Isaiah tells of 
His beauty and glory when “the fruit of the earth 
shall be excellent and comely for them that are 
escaped of Israel, . . . and the Lord shall have 
washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion” 
(Isa. 4: 2-4). (The entire passage is depicting a 
Millennial scene. ) In Zech. 3:8 the Lord says, 
“Behold, I will bring forth My servant the 
BRANCH,” and He will then “remove the iniquity 
of that land in one day.” Also in chapter 6: 12, 
13 of the same book, we read: “Thus speaketh 
the Lord of hosts, saying, Behold the Man whose 
name is The BRANCH; and He shall grow up 
out of His place, and He shall build the temple 
of the Lord; even He shall build the temple of 


é 


«* 


112 Notes on Jeremiah 


‘the Lord; and He shall bear the glory, and 


shall sit and rule upon His throne; and He shall 
be a priest upon His throne: and the counsel of 
peace shall be between them both.” When vacil- 
lating Pilate set Jesus before the multitude, and, 
unconsciously uttering the words of the prophet, 
cried, “Behold the Man!” he was directing the 
gaze of Israel to the Branch of the Lord in whom, 
though they knew it not, all their hopes were cen- 
tered. 

“In His days ... Israel shall dwell safely; and 
this is His name whereby He shall be called, 
JEHOVAH TSIDKENU—The Lord our Righteous- 
ness” (ver. 6). Having no title to blessing in 
themselves, they shall find it all in their once re- 
jected Messiah. Like that great pattern Jew, 
Saul of Tarsus (1 Tim. 1:16), they will “be 
found in Him, not having their own righteous- 
ness, which is of the law, but that which is 
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness 
which is of God by faith” (Phil. 3:9). Unto 
them, as unto us now, He shall be made their 
wisdom: even righteousness, sanctification, and 
redemption (1 Cor. 1:30). 

“Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the 
Lord, that they shall no more say, The Lord 
liveth, which brought up the children of Israel 
out of the land of Egypt; but, The Lord liveth, 
which brought up and which led the seed of the 
house of Israel out of the north country, and 
from all countries whither I had driven them; 
and they shall dwell in their own land” (ver. 8). 
Some would seek to make the partial return in 
the days of Cyrus to be the fulfilment of this 


The Siege and Captivity Foretold 1138 


promise. It is manifestly an erroneous interpre-* 
tation. In the first place, there was no such uni- 
versal restoration then, as this verse warrants us 
to expect; and in the second, Israel did not dwell 
in the land, but were soon scattered again, and 
are to-day dispersed among all nations. Isaiah 
plainly tells us that “it shall come to pass in that 
day, that the Lord shall set His hand again the 
second time to recover the remnant of His peo- 
ple, . . . and assemble the outcasts of Israel, and 
gather together the dispersed of Judah from the 
four corners of the earth” (Isa. 11:11, 12). It 
is to this second and final deliverance that Jere- 
miah refers. 

We are next introduced to another of the con- 
trasts so frequent in this book. After having, 
for a brief moment, dwelt upon the glories of 
Messiah’s reign, he gives utterance to his lam- 
entation over the state of his people; so differ- 
ent from what it shall be in that day of Millennial 
blessing. “My heart within me is broken,” he 
says, “because of the prophets; all my bones 
shake: I am like a drunken man, and like a man 
whom wine hath overcome, because of the Lord 
and because of the words of His holiness” (ver. 
9). No unworthy jealousy of others in the pro- 
phetic office affected him thus, but his soul was 
deeply moved as the lying seers were but lead- 
ing their disciples farther from God, causing 
them to be at peace in their wretched condition. 
The whole land mourned by reason of the adul- 
teries and profaneness of the nation, and both 
prophet and priest were the leaders in the iniq- 
uities so commonly practised. Therefore “their 


114 Notes on Jeremiah 


way shall be unto them as slippery ways in the 
darkness,” and perish at the visitation of the 
Lord (vers. 10-12). 

Not only in Judah was this the state of things, 
but in Samaria, from whence the ten tribes of thé 
northern kingdom had been carried into Assyria 
long before: prophets had arisen who “prophesied 
in Baal,” and caused the remnant that were left 
in the land to err (ver. 13). But it was in Jerusa- 
lem that the evil was most manifest. There the 
prophets themselves, licentious and untruthful, 
strengthened the hands of the evil doers, keeping 
them back from repentance, until the city had be- 
come as Sodom and Gomorrah for vileness. For 
this they (the prophets) should be fed with the 
wormwood of His wrath and be made to drink 
the water of gall of His judgment (vers. 14, 15). 

The people are pleaded with not to hearken 
unto them; they were but made vain through 
their false prophets, speaking a vision of their 
own heart, having received nothing from the 
Lord. To those despising Him, they declared, 
“The Lord hath said, Ye shall have peace;” and 
they assured every one walking after the imag- 
ination of his own heart that no evil should 
come upon him (vers.16,17). As a result, a 
whirlwind of the Lord had gone forth in fury, 
for He would execute the thoughts of His heart 
against prophet and people alike; and His coun- 
sel and word should stand. In the latter days 
they should consider it, and understand that they 
were being so dealt with in chastisement for their 
departure from Himself (vers. 18-20). These 
self-appointed prophets, unsent by God and with 


» The Siege and Captivity Foretold 115 


no word from Him, could not cause the people to- 
turn from their evil ways; they but encouraged 
them in their sin. Alas! that they have had many 
successors, both in Judaism and in Christendom, 
must be patent to every thoughtful person. Do 
not such teachers and preachers abound? And 
the blind multitude, “having itching ears, depart 
from the truth” to follow after their self-chosen 
deceivers. But the eye of the Lord, who is “not 
a God afar off,” is over all, and none can “hide 
in secret places from Him who fills heaven and 
earth” (vers. 23, 24). 

He heard the lies of the prophets, who spoke 
out of the deceit of their own hearts, in the dark 
days we have been considering; and He is tak- 
ing note of all the empty vaporings of to-day. In- 
stead of His sure and faithful Word, mere idle 
dreams were being given out as the word of God. 
“The prophet that hath a dream, let him tell a 
dream; and he that hath My Word, let him speak 
My Word faithfully. What is the chaff to the 
wheat? saith the Lord” (vers. 25-28). All men’s 
brightest thoughts and loftiest imaginings are but 
as worthless chaff compared with the pure, un- 
adulterated word of God. We “have renounced 
the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in 
craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceit- 
fully; but, by manifestation of the truth, com- 
mending ourselves to every man’s conscience in 
the sight of God” (2 Cor. 4:2), is the utterance 
of the true minister. How different to Satan’s 
wretched counterfeit! 

“Ts not My Word like as a fire? saith the Lord; 
and like a hammer that breaketh the rock in 


116 Notes on Jeremiah 


pieces?” There is a power in the simple truth 
of God such as no merely human fancies or phi- 
losophies can ever have. It alone can break the 
heart of stone. But these prophets, giving out 
their dreams and speculations for the people’s 
acceptance, were actually stealing Jehovah’s 
words from them. He was therefore against 
them; and they would be of no profit to the peo- 
ple (vers. 29-32). 

On the other hand, when either priest, prophet, 
or any of the people, should come to Jeremiah in 
perplexity and fear, asking, ““What is the burden 
of the Lord?” he is to answer, according to their 
folly, “What burden? I will even forsake you, 
saith the Lord;” while all who shall profess to 
have another “burden” shall be punished, and 
“the burden of the Lord” shall be mentioned no 
more, “for every man’s word shall be his bur- 
den’”’—that is, they shall have no word from God, 
but shall be given up to their own thoughts, be- 
cause they had perverted the words of the living 
God. They must therefore bear their judgment, 
and know the truth of that which had been 
penned by Solomon, “Where there is no vision, 
the people perish” (Prov. 29:18). They shall be 
“in everlasting reproach and a perpetual shame, 
which shall never be forgotten” (vers. 33-40). 

The twenty-fourth chapter is added here as an 
appendix, because it relates a vision given after 
the carrying away of Jeconiah, therefore during 
the early part of Zedekiah’s reign. Jeremiah was 
shown by the Lord, in vision, two baskets of figs 
set before the temple of the Lord (ver. 1). The 
fig tree is the well-known symbol of Judah na- 


The Siege and Captivity Foretold 117 


tionally; as the vine is of Israel as a whole. 
Judah was likened by the Lord Jesus to a “fig 
tree planted in a vineyard.” 

In the vision following, (chap. 24 :1-6) one 
basket contained good fruit; the other bad figs, 
so bad that they could not be eaten. They set 
forth the two classes into which Jehovah had di- 
vided the people. Those carried away captive by 
the Chaldeans had been sent away “for their 
good.” He would watch over them in grace, and 
eventually restore them (the remnant) to their 
land, to be once more planted, never to be plucked 
up again. This last phrase negatives effectually 
the unworthy theory that would consider the 
promise fulfilled in the days of Ezra and Nehe- 
miah. Have they not been “plucked up again?” 
Surely. But when Jehovah’s set time has come, 
they shall be established in their land never to 
be rooted out of it again. For in that day God 
will give them a heart to know Himself: they 
shall be His people and He will be their God: for 
they shall do what the former remnant never 
did—“return unto Him with their whole heart” 
(ver. 7). 

These then are the good figs to be treasured 
up by Jehovah. The evil figs, which were utterly 
worthless, typified Zedekiah with the residue of 
Jerusalem remaining in the land, and those 
dwelling in defiance of His Word in the land of 
Egypt. They were to be removed into all the 
kingdoms of the earth “for their hurt” (as the 
others “for their good’), and should be “a re- 
proach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all 
places whither” He should drive them: ever pun- 


118 Notes on Jeremiah ’ 


ished by the sword, famine and pestilence until 
utterly consumed (vers. 8-10). Who but one in- 
spired of God could have so faithfully predicted, 
long before it came to pass, that which, for over 
two millenniums, has been a matter of history, 
familiar to all? 


CHAPTER XII 


THE SEVENTY YEARS’ CAPTIVITY AND THE WINE-CUP 
OF JEHOVAH’S FURY 


(Chap. 25.) 


The “burden” of this chapter antedates that 
which we have just been considering by about 
seventeen or eighteen years; the date in the first 
verse being the fourth year of Jehoiakim and 
the first of Nebuchadrezzar. Of the former it is 
recorded that “he filled Jerusalem with innocent 
blood; which the Lord would not pardon” (2 
Kings 24:4). Yet his father was the godly and 
devoted king Josiah who had trembled at the 
word of the Lord and sought to drive idolatry 
from the land. Grace is not inherited. ‘Ye must 
be born again” is of equal force whether applied 
to progeny of saint or sinner. 

It is to the people of Judah and Jerusalem 
that the prophet addresses himself—not to the 
rulers as such. For three and twenty years he 
had exercised his office among them, declaring 
the word of the Lord. Since the thirteenth year 
of Josiah, when the reforms were going on, to 
the present, when idolatry prevailed everywhere, 
he had spoken unto them, “rising early and 
speaking,” but they would not hearken. Other 
servants and prophets had preceded him, but to 
them likewise they had turned a deaf ear. The 
messages of all had been in a great measure alike. 
They said, “Turn ye again now every one from 
his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, 


120 Notes on Jeremiah 


and dwell in the land that the Lord hath given 
unto you and to your fathers for ever and ever: 
and go not after other gods to serve them, and 
to worship them, and provoke Me not to anger 
with the works of your hands; and I will do you 
no hurt.” But there had been no response nor 
sign of repentance, that He might not be pro- 
voked to anger (vers. 2-7). 

Because they had thus refused to hearken, the 
northern army led by Nebuchadrezzar, whom the 
Lord calls “My servant,” should be brought 
against them and the nations round about them 
who had seduced them into their idolatrous prac- 
tices. All joy and gladness, as well as all that 
told of a people pursuing the ordinary avocations 
of life, should cease, and the whole land should 
become a desolation: not forever, however, but 
“these nations,” we read, “shall serve the king 
of Babylon seventy years.” 

This period is a most significant one. When 
Israel were about to enter the land, the Lord told 
them that every seventh year was to be a sab- 
bath, in which the ground was to lie fallow. The 
commandment ran, ‘‘When ye come into the land 
which I give you, then shall the land keep a sab- 
bath unto the Lord. Six years thou shalt sow 
thy field, and six years thou shalt prune thy vine- 
yard, and gather in the fruit thereof; but in the 
seventh year shall be a sabbath of rest unto the 
land, a sabbath for the Lord: thou shalt neither 
sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard. That 
which groweth of its own accord of thy harvest 
thou shalt not reap, neither gather the grapes of 
thy vine undressed: for it is a year of rest unto 


The Captivity and Jehovah’s Fury 121 


the land. And the sabbath of the land shall be- 
meat for you; for thee, and for thy servant, and 
for thy maid, and for thy hired servant, and for 
thy stranger that sojourneth with thee; and for 
thy cattle, and for the beast that are in thy land, 
shall all the increase thereof be meat” (Lev. 25: 
2-7). A promise of assured prosperity, if ob- 
served, was also given; for we read, “And if ye 
shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? 
behold, we shall not sow, nor gather in our in- 
crease: then will I command My blessing upon 
you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth 
fruit for three years. And ye shall sow the eighth 
year, and eat yet of old fruit until the ninth year; 
until her fruits come in ye shall eat of the old 
store” (Lev. 25: 20-22). There would thus be no 
lack, but an abundant supply, if they kept the 
year of rest and gave the land its sabbath; in 
this way acknowledging the divine ownership, 
and themselves Jehovah’s servants. In Ex. 23: 10, 
11 we have the command to observe the sabbatic | 
year more briefly given: but one clause is added, 
which shows the Lord’s grace to the lowly—‘“‘That 
the poor of thy people may eat.” He would keep 
open house, as it were, and the poverty-stricken 
should avail themselves of His bounty, resting 
and eating in this year of cessation from the 
ordinary duties of husbandry. 

Not only did He promise blessing if His Word 
was obeyed; but, through Moses, He solemnly 
warned them of judgment if they failed to give 
ear to His commandments. If they walked con- 
trary to Him, He would walk contrary to them; 
and He declared, “I will scatter you among the 


122 Notes on Jeremiah 


heathen, and will draw out a sword after you: 
and your land shall be desolate, and your cities 
waste. Then shall the land enjoy her sabbaths, 
as long as it lieth desolate, and ye be in your 
enemies’ land; even then shall the land rest, and 
enjoy her sabbaths. As long as it lieth desolate 
it shall rest; because it did not rest in your sab- 
baths, when ye dwelt upon it” (Lev. 26: 34, 35). 
And in verse 43, of the same chapter, He says: 
“The land also shall be left of them, and shall 
enjoy her sabbaths, while she lieth desolate with- 
out them: and they shall accept the punishment 
of their iniquity; because, even because they de- 
spised My judgments, and because their soul ab- 
horred My statutes.” 

This word, then, it was that the Lord was about 
to fulfil. The people were to be transported to 
Babylon for seventy years. 

In the present unsatisfactory state of chronol- 
ogy, one would not build too much on numbers; 
but it would seem that for the entire period from 
the dedication of the temple till the destruction 
of it, the sabbatic year had been unobserved. This 
was approximately 490 years. Seventy Sabbaths 
had been neglected. For seventy years they 
should dwell in the stranger’s country while the 
land kept sabbath. 

In 2 Chron. 36:21, when the threatened cap- 
tivity had actually taken place, it is stated that it 
was “‘to fulfil the word of the Lord by the mouth 
of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sab- 
baths: for as long as she lay desolate she kept 
sabbath to fulfil threescore years and ten.” It is 
impossible to overreach God. Selfish Judah, 


The Captivity and Jehovah's Fury 123 


doubtless, reasoned that time would be gained 
and wealth more rapidly accumulated if the year 
of rest were allowed to pass unobserved. They 
had to learn the truth of the words, “Them that 
honor Me I will honor, and they that despise Me 
shall be lightly esteemed.” So with many a self- 
seeking child of God since. Time spent in wait- 
ing upon Him has been esteemed as time lost. 
Many are too busy to give Him His portion. 
Business, pleasure, everything that begins and 
ends with self, in short, must come first; leaving 
little or no time for Him. But He invariably bal- 
ances things at last. Many a saint has spent 
long, weary months and years on a bed of lan- 
guishing, for the simple reason that the things 
of God were crowded out and neglected in days 
of health and vigor. Yet, blessed be His name, 
as in the case of His earthly people, the days of 
captivity have been made to become days of great 
fruitfulness. It was in their subjection to the 
Babylonian yoke that Judah learned to abhor 
idols. Never has the nation offended on that 
ground since. The seasons of the Lord’s chasten- 
ing are not lost time. Afterward they yield the 
peaceable fruit of righteousness to those exercised 
thereby. 

The discipline over, and the lost sabbatic years 
made up, they were to be permitted to return to 
their land. “It shall come to pass, when seventy 
years are accomplished, that I will punish the 
king of Babylon, and that nation, saith the Lord, 
for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, 
and will make it perpetual desolations. And I 
will bring upon that land all my words which I 


124 Notes on Jeremiah 


have pronounced against it, even all that is writ- 
ten in this book, which Jeremiah hath prophesied 
against all the nations. For many nations and 
great kings shall serve themselves of them also: 
and I will recompense them according to their 
deeds, and according to the works of their own 
hands” (vers. 12-14). The overthrow of Baby- 
lon would be the signal that Israel’s redemption 
had drawn nigh. Daniel, it will be remembered, 
was a student of the writings of the former 
prophets, and it is recorded that he “understood 
by books the number of the years, whereof the 
word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet, 
that He would accomplish seventy years in the 
desolations of Jerusalem” (Dan. 9:2). He had 
God’s sure word, and he knew that he could rely 
on it. Jeremiah but spoke the words which, by 
the inspiration of the Almighty, had been given 
him. 

It is noticeable that Babylon, having been per- 
mitted to destroy Jerusalem, and having been the 
instrument of Jehovah’s discipline, should in her 
turn be utterly destroyed for her manifold abom- 
inations. 

“Judgment must begin at the house of God.” 
The nations, however, should not escape. Verses 
15 to 26 give a list in detail of the various peo- 
ples to whose lips the wine-cup of Jehovah’s fury 
must be pressed. To each one Jeremiah is to 
hand it in turn, to “‘cause all the nations ... to 
drink it.” Drinking, they would fall and rise 
no more (ver. 27). 

“And it shall be, if they refuse to take the 
cup at thine hand to drink, then shalt thou say 


The Captivity and Jehovah’s Fury 125 


unto them, Thus saith the Lord of hosts: Ye 
shall certainly drink. For, lo, I begin to bring 
evil on the city which is called by My name, and 
should ye be utterly unpunished?” (vers. 28, 29). 
Nay, it could not be; for, “if the righteous scarce- 
ly be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sin- 
ner appear?” (1 Peter 4:18). How the nations 
were made to drink and to fall before the might 
of Jehovah has been for long ages a matter of 
-uthentic history. 

In martial metre, and with graphic delineation, 
the day of the Lord’s controversy with the na- 
tions and their shepherds, or kings, is set forth 
in the closing verses (30-38). Comment is un- 
necessary. The simplicity and grandeur of the 
description need no interpreter. 


CHAPTER XIII 


DANGER AND DELIVERANCE 


(Chap. 26.) 


Some time before making the proclamation in 
the name of Jehovah which we have just been 
considering, Jeremiah’s life had been placed in 
jeopardy for his faithfulness in showing the peo- 
ple their sins and setting before them the sure 
judgment about to fall. No exact date is given 
beyond the statement that it was “in the begin- 
ning of the reign of Jehoiakim” (ver. 1). 

He had been commanded by the Lord to stand 
in the temple courts, evidently on the occasion 
of some one of the yearly feasts; for he was te 
“speak unto all the cities of Judah which come 
to worship in the Lord’s house.” He had no 
choice as to the matter of the discourse, for he 
was told to speak “all the words” (not merely 
the thoughts or ideas clothed in language of his 
own choosing, as the opponents of verbal inspira- 
tion would fain have us believe) that the Lord 
commanded him— diminishing nothing (ver. 2). 
See 1 Cor. 2:18. Notice that the very words 
spoken by the apostle were, as in Jeremiah’s case, 
those which the Holy Ghost taught. 

If the people of the cities of Judah would 
hearken, and turn from their evil way, the Lord 
might repent Him of the evil which He purposed 
to do unto them because of their iniquities. If 
they refused to heed the message, and persisted 


Danger and Deliverance 127 


in their wilful course, He would make His house 
desolate like Shiloh, where He had dwelt of old, 
and Jerusalem should become “a curse to all the 
nations of the earth” (vers. 3-6). 

Obedient to “the heavenly vision,” the prophet 
did as he had been commissioned to do, and all 
the people heard his words. 

He had barely finished his address when the 
priests and the false prophets who were serving 
in the courts of the Lord’s house, joining with 
the rabble, placed him under arrest as a disturber 
of the peace of the holy place, and a traitor to 
his king and country. The scene must have been 
a remarkable one. In large measure he was priv- 
ileged to be a partaker of the sufferings and re- 
proach of Christ, as yet unrevealed. ‘Despised 
and rejected of men,” he heard the multitude 
clamoring for his blood. They cried, “Thou shalt 
surely die. Why hast thou prophesied in the 
name of the Lord, saying, This house shall be 
like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate with- 
out an inhabitant?” The pessimist from Ana- 
thoth was weakening the hands of the warriors 
and disheartening the people. They would put 
him out of the way, and thus silence his “tongue 
of fire.” In all that crowd he was left without 
so much as one human friend. A true earlier-day 
Antipas, he stood “against all.” For we are told 
that “all the people were gathered against Jere- 
miah in the house of the Lord” (vers. 7-9). 

It is on such an occasion that one would nat- 
urally have expected so weak and fearful a man 
to be overwhelmed with gloom and even terror. 
On the contrary, he is neither crushed nor 


128 Notes on Jeremiah 


affrighted. Bold in his confidence in the word 
of Jehovah which he had proclaimed, he con- 
fronts the raging populace undismayed. 

The princes of Judah, learning of the disturb- 
ance, came up at once from the palace to the new 
gate of the temple, where inquiry is immediately 
instituted. The priests and the false prophets 
vehemently accuse Jeremiah, saying, “This man 
is worthy to die; for he hath prophesied against 
this city, as ye have heard with your ears” (vers. 
10, 11). 

Jeremiah is permitted to speak for himself. 
Without the slightest hesitation, and with no ap- 
parent concern for the outcome as to himself, he 
boldly declares, “The Lord sent me to prophesy 
against this house and against this city all the 
words that ye have heard.” The message was 
not of the servant, but of the Lord, and the case 
is one of Judah versus Jehovah, whom they hypo- 
critically professed to serve. If they disliked to 
hear threatenings of judgment and desolation 
there was a sure way to avoid their fulfilment. 
“Therefore now amend your ways and your do- 
ings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God; 
and the Lord will repent Him of the evil that 
He hath pronounced against you” (vers. 12, 13). 
Not by murdering the messenger, but by heeding 
the proclamation, could the wrath of Jehovah be 
turned aside. 

“As for me, behold, I am in your hand: do 
with me as seemeth good and meet unto you.” 
Without a quaver in his voice or a sign of pallor 
on his cheek, he gives himself up to die if they 
are determined upon it. Nevertheless he warns 


Danger and Deliverance 129 


them of the result. “But know ye for certain, * 
that if ye put me to death, ye shall surely bring 
innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this 
city, and upon the inhabitants thereof: for of a 
truth the Lord hath sent me unto you to speak 
all these words in your ears” (vers. 14, 15). It 
is the courage of one conscious of his own integ- 
rity, relying upon the justice of the Holy One. 
In a similar spirit did Robert Moffatt of Kuru- 
man bare his breast for the savages’ spears, and 
in like manner Paton of the New Hebrides fear- 
lessly faced the enraged men of Tanna. So have 
thousands of devoted saints jeoparded their lives 
for the truth’s sake, concerned far more for the 
ungrateful people to whom they ministered than 
for their own safety. 

The effect of Jeremiah’s words is most marked. 
The princes, and the fickle populace, who a few 
moments before clamored for his execution, now 
give their verdict in his favor. ‘This man,” they 
say, “is not worthy to die: for he hath spoken 
unto us in the name of the Lord our God” (ver. 
16). Alas, that acknowledging this they did not 
give heed to the exhortation! Then certain elders, 
Nicodemuses in their time, rose up to speak in 
his behalf. The case of Micah the Morasthite is 
first cited: how in the days of Hezekiah he had 
prophesied, saying, “Thus saith the Lord of 
hosts: Zion shall be plowed like a field, and 
Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain 
of the house as the high places of a forest” (vers. 
17, 18; see also Micah 3:12). Did Hezekiah put 
him to death for this solemn announcement? On 
the contrary, had it not been the means of lead- 


130 Notes on Jeremiah 


ing him the more to fear the Lord, with the 
happy result that “the Lord repented Him of the 
evil which He had pronounced against them?” If 
they acted contrary to this precedent, might they 
not procure great evil against their souls? (ver. 
19.) 

Urijah, another man of God, is next adduced. 
In his case the king had acted in the contrary 
manner. Whether evil would result remained to 
be seen; for it was in the reign of this same 
Jehoiakim who was now on the throne that 
Urijah had prophesied in the name of the Lord 
against the city and the land in terms similar to 
those employed by Jeremiah. The prophet, filled 
with fear, had fled to Egypt. Yet king Jehoiakim, 
bent on his destruction, had brought him out of 
the land of his refuge and “slain him with the 
sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of 
the common people” (vers. 20-23). Thus far the 
Lord indeed had not avenged this ignominious 
treatment of His servant; but it might be yet too 
early to judge of the consequences, and it is left 
without further comment. 

Another man now rises, Ahikam the son of 
Shaphan, in behalf of Jeremiah, preventing his 
being given into the hand of the people to be put 
to death (ver. 24). Thus, once more God vin- 
dicated and protected His servant. Had Urijah 
been a man of similar faith and trust in God, 
who can say that he too might not have been safe- 
guarded? “The name of the Lord is a strong 
tower: the righteous runneth into it, and is safe’’ 
(Prov. 18:10). 


CHAPTER XIV 
BONDS AND YOKES 
(Chaps. 27, 28.) 


Chapters twenty-seven and twenty-eight are 
intimately connected. Both alike treat of the gen- 
eral subject of passive submission to the Baby- 
lonian yoke. Strange as it may seem to those 
not conversant with the ways of God with man 
on earth as outlined in the Scriptures, it was He 
Himself who had raised up Nebuchadrezzar and 
had given His people and the Gentile nations into 
his hand. This, and the failure on man’s part 
(especially that of the “head of gold,” as the 
Chaldean monarch was declared to be), will all 
be found fully detailed in the book of Daniel. It 
was for Israel and Judah to own God’s righteous- 
ness in thus causing the dominion to pass from 
David’s house, because of their sin, and to be 
given to the stranger. This, Zedekiah, as we have 
seen, did not do; and from the present position 
it would appear that he and the kings of the sur- 
rounding nations, Edom, Moab, Ammon, etc., had 
attempted an organized coalition against the king 
of Babylon. Jeremiah is therefore commissioned 
to warn Zedekiah and his allies of the futility of 
any such attempt. 

The first verse presents a difficulty as it stands 
in the Authorized Version. It gives the date of 
the prophecy as being the same as that in the 
previous chapter, viz., “the beginning of the 
reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah,” etc. The 
Revisers have added a marginal note to the effect 


132 Notes on Jeremiah 


that it should properly read, “Zedekiah, king of 
Judah,” as is evident from the 3d, 12th and 20th 
verses, and the first verse of the next chapter. 
It is probably a copyist’s error: some ancient au- 
thorities read as just noted, though the Received 
Text has Jehoiakim. The Scriptures of the Old 
and New Testaments are the inspired Word of 
God, free from all error, as originally written. But 
this in no sense involves the reception of blunders 
easily made by translators and copyists. To ex- 
punge such minor errors, the patient labors be- 
stowed in the careful comparison of all the manu- 
scripts on hand are of importance and profit; for 
man has failed in everything to which he set his 
hand: even while duplicating copies of the sacred 
oracles. 

It was in the early part of the reign of Zede- 
kiah then, Judah’s last king, that Jeremiah was 
bidden to make bonds and yokes and put them 
first upon his own neck, then send them for a 
testimony to the kings of Edom, Moab, Ammon, 
Tyrus, and Zidon, by the hand of their own am- 
bassadors, who had come to Jerusalem to confer 
with the Hebrew ruler (vers. 2, 3). 

Not only was he to give to each the symbolic 
bonds and yokes, but he was to give them the 
explanation likewise: “And command them to 
say unto their masters, Thus saith the Lord of 
hosts, the God of Israel: Thus shall ye say unto 
your masters: I have made the earth, the man 
and the beast that are upon the ground, by My 
great power and by My outstretched arm, and 
have given it unto whom it seemed meet unto Me. 
And now have I given all these lands into the 


Bonds and Yokes 133° 


hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, 
My servant; and the beasts of the field have I 
given him also to serve him. And all nations 
shall serve him, and his son, and his son’s son, 
until the very time of his land come: and then 
many nations and great kings shall serve them- 
selves of him” (vers. 4-7). Resistance for the 
present is but folly, and worse than useless. The 
king of Babylon was the servant of Jehovah, 
though he wist it not. He could but act by di- 
vine permission, and it was the will of God to 
use him as the scourge to punish the people with 
whom He had a controversy. That purpose 
achieved, his power should be broken; but till 
then no might could stand against his victorious 
armies. 

The nation refusing to put the neck under his 
yoke would incur greater punishment, in the way 
of the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, until 
they should be utterly consumed (ver. 8). 

They were warned against giving heed to 
charlatans parading as prophets and diviners, as 
also dreamers, enchanters, and sorcerers, who 
abounded among the heathen. Such, as a rule, 
give the message which they know is most likely 
to be received with favor; but when they spoke, 
saying, “Ye shall not serve the king of Baby- 
lon,” they were prophesying a lie, and only the 
more drawing down the vengeance of God upon 
those believing and acting upon their prognostica- 
tions. If the nations would submit to the yoke, 
they should be permitted to remain in their own 
lands as tributaries to Nebuchadnezzar (vers. 


9-11). 


134 Notes on Jeremiah 


To Zedekiah also a personal warning and en- 
treaty was given. He was urged not to rise in re- 
bellion, but to bend his neck to the yoke, thus 
saving himself and the people. In his court also 
were false prophets, who predicted the success of 
his effort to throw off subjection to Babylon, but 
the Lord had not sent them. They were prophesy- 
ing lies in His name (vers. 12-15). 

To the priests and the people a similar address 
is directed. The pseudo-prophets had declared, 
“Behold, the vessels of the Lord’s house shall now 
shortly be brought again from Babylon.” This 
was utterly false; and he pleads with the people 
not to be deceived. “If,’’ he says, “they be proph- 
ets, and if the Word of the Lord be with them, 
let them now make intercession to the Lord of 
hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house 
of the Lord, and in the house of the king of 
Judah, and at Jerusalem, go not to Babylon” 
(vers. 16-18). For Jehovah had made known to 
him that not only should there be no present re- 
covery of the sacred utensils now in Babylon, 
but the brazen pillars and the sea, with all the 
vessels hitherto allowed to remain in Jerusalem, 
“which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took not, 
when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son 
of Jehoiakim king of Judah from Jerusalem to 
Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jeru- 
salem,” should soon be carried away also and kept 
in the city of their captivity until the day ap- 
pointed for His visitation, when He would bring 
them up and restore them to the holy city (vers. 
19-22). 

The record of their restoration is given in Ezra 


Bonds and Yokes 135 


1: 7-11. In His own time the word of the Lord 
was literally fulfilled, while the testimony of the 
false prophets was proven to be a lie, as the next 
incident shows. 

“And it came to pass the same year, in the be- 
ginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, 
in the fourth year, and in the fifth month, that 
Hananiah the son of Azur the prophet, which was 
at Gibeon, spake unto me in the house of the 
Lord, in the presence of the priests and of all 
the people, saying, Thus speaketh the Lord of 
hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have broken 
the yoke of the king of Babylon” (chap. 28:1, 2). 
Hananiah reiterated the statement that the ves- 
sels of the Lord’s house were soon to be returned 
from Babylon, even setting a definite time limit 
—‘‘within two full years.” He also predicted the 
return of Jeconiah, with all the captives of Judah, 
declaring that the Lord was about to break the 
yoke of the king of Babylon (vers. 3, 4). Had 
it indeed been true, Jeremiah would have heartily 
rejoiced in it; though his own utterances would 
have entirely failed. Having the secret of the 
Lord, however, he knew it should be quite the 
contrary. In reply to Hananiah, he said before 
all the priests and the people that were assem- 
bled in the house of the Lord, “Amen: the Lord 
do so: the Lord perform thy words which thou 
hast prophesied, to bring again the vessels of the 
Lord’s house, and all that is carried away cap- 
tive, from Babylon into this place” (vers. 5, 6). 

The meek and faithful Jeremiah—how gladly 
would he, true lover of Judah as he was, have 
welcomed such an end to the miseries of his peo- 


136 Notes on Jeremiah 


ple! But he knew it was not to be. ‘“Neverthe- 
less,” he continues, “hear thou now this word 
that I speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all 
the people: The prophets that have been before 
me and before thee of old prophesied both against 
many countries, and against great kingdoms, of 
war, and of evil, and of pestilence. The prophet 
which prophesieth of peace, when the word of 
the prophet shall come to pass, then shall the 
prophet be known, that the Lord hath truly sent 
him” (vers. 7-9). He brings no railing accusa- 
tion: nor is he drawn into useless argument. 
With the earlier prophets, whose writings they 
had, his word agreed; while Hananiah’s was to 
the contrary. If it be fulfilled, then he would 
admit that the Lord had sent him. ‘The servant 
of the Lord must not strive.” 

Hananiah, however, evidently fearing that the 
composure of the man of God would have some 
weight with his audience, assumes the dramatic; 
and taking off the yoke which Jeremiah, in ac- 
cordance with the Lord’s command (chap. 27: 2), 
was wearing about his neck, he broke it in pieces, 
saying, as he did so, “Thus saith the Lord: Even 
so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king 
of Babylon from the neck of ali nations within 
the space of two full years” (vers. 10, 11). Error 
is generally insistent and dogmatic—the more so, 
often, the farther it is removed from the truth. 

The servant of Jehovah makes no reply. He 
has no reputation to save: he desires not to at- 
tach the people to himself by a display of words. 
He can afford to wait, for he knows he has the 
mind of the Lord, which will be verified in its 


Bonds and Yokes 137 


own time. We simply read, “And the prophet 
Jeremiah went his way” (ver. 11). 

Alone in the presence of God he received a 
message for the man who had sought to triumph 
over him and had withstood his words. He was 
told to go and tell Hananiah that he had but 
broken yokes of wood: the Lord should make a 
yoke of iron, and put it upon the neck of all the 
nations he had before referred to, and the sen- 
tence is reaffirmed, that they should serve the 
king of Babylon (vers. 12-14). 

For Hananiah himself a most solemn word was 
added. He had sinned unto death. In God’s holy 
and righteous government, he must die. “Then 
said the prophet Jeremiah unto Hananiah the 
prophet, Hear now, Hananiah: The Lord hath 
not sent thee; but thou makest this people to 
trust in a lie. Therefore thus saith the Lord: 
Behold, I will cast thee from off the face of the 
earth: this year thou shalt die, because thou hast 
taught rebellion against the Lord” (vers. 15, 16). 
Solemn is the responsibility resting upon “vain 
talkers and deceivers,” who, by their ‘good words 
and fair speeches,” deceive the hearts of the sim- 
ple. “The Lord will not hold him guiltless that 
taketh His name in vain.” Not alone to profanity 
does this refer; but to taking upon one the name 
of the Lord when the life is dishonoring His holi- 
ness; or professing to speak in the name of the 
Lord when one has received no message from Him. 

Searce two months elapsed ere the judgment 
so solemnly foretold overtook the impostor. “So 
Hananiah the prophet died the same year, in the 
seventh month.” All God’s ways are in right- 
eousness, whether in mercy or in judgment. 


CHAPTER XV 
THE LETTER TO THE CAPTIVITY 
(Chap. 29.) 


Not alone to “the poor of the flock,” and the 
haughty rulers who remained in the land, was 
Jeremiah appointed to minister. He had also a 
service to render to those who had been carried 
into captivity. It was not his province to go to 
them in person and minister among them in the 
land of their bondage. For this service God had 
raised up Ezekiel, who was of the number of 
those who had been deported. He prophesied 
“among the captives by the river of Chebar’ 
(Ezek. 1:1). By means of a letter, the sorrow- 
ing son of Hilkiah was to give the Lord’s mes- 
sage to his dispersed countrymen. False proph- 
ets had arisen among them who were giving them 
false hopes. Their captivity had not changed 
their hearts. He must give them a word of re- 
buke, as also a word of encouragement to those 
who had faith to receive it. 

“Now these are the words of the letter that 
Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem unto 
the residue of the elders which were carried away 
captives, and to the priests, and to the prophets, 
and to all the people whom Nebuchadnezzar had 
carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon; 
(after that Jeconiah” [that is, Jehoiachin] “the 


The Letter to the Captivity 139 


king, and the queen, and the eunuchs, the princes 
of Judah and Jerusalem, and the carpenters, and 
the smiths, were departed from Jerusalem;) by 
the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, and 
Gemariah the son of Hilkiah (whom Zedekiah 
king of Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebuchad- 
nezzar king of Babylon) saying, Thus saith the 
Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, unto all that are 
carried away captives, whom I have caused to 
be carried away from Jerusalem unto Babylon” 
(vers. 1-4). The messengers who carried the let- 
ter were sent primarily as ambassadors from 
Zedekiah’s rebellious court to treat with the great 
Chaldean ruler. They bore, however, a message 
from a far greater king than either of these, even 
from Jehovah of hosts. He deigns to communi- 
cate in this way with His captive people. 

The first thing He brings before them is that 
it was no chance misfortune that had happened 
unto them. It was Himself who had caused them 
to be carried away. If they really believed this, 
how it would affect all their ways. They would 
see that it was in vain to resist His holy dis- 
cipline; but it would also, surely, be manifest to 
them that He was truly concerned about them; 
otherwise He might have left them to pursue un- 
hinderedly their self-chosen course. Ah, He loved 
them too well for that, as He loves “His own 
which are in the world” now far too much to 
permit them to go on long in a path contrary to 
His mind without causing them to feel the rod 
of chastening. Blessed it is to remember that 
He deals with us not as enemies, but as sons; for 
“what son is he whom his father chasteneth not?” 


140 Notes on Jeremiah 


The entire passage in Heb. 12 is a notable one, 
often overlooked by tried saints, who thus despise 
or faint beneath the discipline instead of being 
“exercised thereby.” 

For the dispersed of Judah, then, the message 
is that they are to receive as from His own hand 
their affliction; and in place of trying to effect 
a deliverance before the appointed time, they are 
bidden to attend with soberness to the duties of 
life, and to “seek the peace of the city” in which 
they were captives, and to “pray unto the Lord 
for it: for in the peace thereof shall ye have 
peace” (vers. 5-7). 

In a similar strain are the sojourners and pil- 
grims of a later dispensation addressed, both in 
Peter’s first letter (2: 11-17) and in Paul’s first 
epistle to Timothy (2:1-4). The former of these 
passages is especially full, and contains teaching 
often overlooked in our present restless, not to 
say reckless, age. “Submit yourselves,” we are 
told, “to every ordinance of man for the Lord’s 
sake: whether it be to the king, as supreme; or 
unto governors, as unto them that are sent by 
Him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the 
praise of them that do well. For so is the will 
of God, that with well-doing ye may put to si- 
lence the ignorance of foolish men: as free, and 
not using your liberty for a cloak of malicious- 
ness, but as the servants of God.” In the other 
portion referred to, the Christian is instructed to 
make supplication “for all men; for kings, and 
for all that are in authority.” We will never be 
at home in this world. It is a great pity if we 
seek to be; but we are here by the will of the 


The Letter to the Captivity 141 


Lord; and He would have us own in a practical 
way the great truth that “the powers that be 
are ordained of God.” This will not make world- 
ly politicians of us. We need have no more to 
do with the government ourselves than had the 
captive children of Judah in the land of Shinar; 
but we shall really be the salt, preserving the 
whole social and political system from: corrup- 
tion. It is not ours to “assert ourselves” and 
“stand for our rights.” We side with Him who 
came into this scene not to get His rights, but 
His wrongs. Like Him, then, be it ours to ren- 
der unto Cesar the things that are Cesar’s, and 
to God the things which are His. 

“For thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of 
Israel: Let not your prophets and your diviners, 
that be in the midst of you, deceive you; neither 
hearken to your dreams which ye cause to be 
dreamed. For they prophesy falsely unto you in 
My name: I have not sent them, saith the Lord” 
(vers. 8, 9). In all ages men have abounded who 
professed to speak in the name of Jehovah. By 
the Word of God their professions are to be test- 
ed, as also by their fruits. It can never be of the 
Holy One to cause people to resist divine dis- 
cipline, and to prophesy peace to those away from 
God. The diviners here referred to were sub- 
stituting their own idle dreams (in accordance 
with the desires of their unsubject hearts) for 
the burden of the Lord. 

He had already given His word, and now 
reiterates it, that “after seventy years be accom- 
plished at Babylon” He would visit them and per- 
form His good word toward them. (See chap. 


142 Notes on Jeremiah 


25:11-14.) Then He would cause them to return 
unto Jerusalem, but not before. Until the pro- 
phetic hour should strike, all effort to effect their 
restoration would be in vain. 

“For I know the thoughts that I think toward 
you, saith the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not 
of evil, to give you an expected end” (ver. 11). 
That which they desired was also His desire for 
them. The looked-for end should surely come, 
but only in His own time. How precious thus to 
learn of God’s intimate concern in the welfare of 
each saint! His thoughts toward those who are 
redeemed by the precious blood of the Son of 
His love are ever thoughts of peace—never of 
evil. David entered into this when he cried, ‘““How 
precious also are Thy thoughts unto me, O God! 
How great is the sum of them! If I should 
count them, they are more in number than the 
sand; when I awake, I am still with Thee” 
(Ps. 139:17, 18). But we must never forget 
that He has declared, “My thoughts are not your 
thoughts, neither are your ways My ways... . 
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, 
so are My ways higher than your ways, and My 
thoughts than your thoughts” (Isa. 55:8, 9). 
Though He permit sorrow and disaster to beset 
our footsteps, He will at last guide us into our 
destined haven where “there remaineth a rest for 
the people of God.” 

Israel’s God is ours, and His ways with them 
but typify His ways with us. “There is an ap- 
pointed time for all upon the earth.” For them 
the set time of their temporal deliverance was 
the expiration of the seventy years. For us, 


The Letter to the Captivity 143 


the morning of our eternal deliverance will be 
ushered in by “the coming of our Lord J esus, and 
our gathering together unto HIM.” 

The object of their discipline was to lead to 
a thorough repentance. That accomplished, they 
should call upon Him and He would hearken. 
His word ran, “Ye shall seek Me, and find Me, 
when ye shall search for Me with all your heart” 
(vers. 12, 18). Then He would indeed be found 
of them, and would turn away their captivity, 
and gather them back to their land. 

Because of the disobedience of those who 
haughtily said, “The Lord hath raised us up 
prophets in Babylon,” and who failed to bow to 
the rod, a greater judgment should yet be sent 
upon the land of their patrimony. Like vile figs 
(see chap. 24:8), the rest of the people should 
be cast out and destroyed; for when He had 
called, they had refused to listen. Thus all hope 
of present recovery should be destroyed (vers. 
15-19). 

Two of the false prophets are mentioned by 
name—Ahab and Zedekiah. Their utterances are 
plainly declared to be lies, and as a sign they 
should be delivered into the hand of Nebuchad- 
rezzar and slain before the eyes of their dupes. 
Their fate was to be a terrible one—“roasted in 
the fire” for their villainy. This form of punish- 
ment was evidently a common one with the king 
of Babylon, as we gather from Dan. 3. For these 
false prophets there should be no deliverer, as 
for the three faithful Hebrews who would not 
bow to the image set up in the plain of Dura. 
Not only had these men spoken falsely, but their 


144 Notes on Jeremiah 


lives were full of iniquity and lechery, as Jehovah 
knew and was “a witness” (vers. 20-23). 

This concludes the letter to the captivity. It 
provoked an answer from one of the dispersed 
who was known as Shemaiah the Nehelamite, or 
“the dreamer’’—a false prophet too, as this name 
seems to imply. He sent letters to the Jews re- 
maining at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son 
of Maaseiah the priest, with the rest of the 
sacerdotal company, affirming that “The Lord 
hath made thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada 
the priest, that ye should be officers in the house 
of the Lord, for every man that is mad and 
maketh himself a prophet, that thou shouldest put 
him in prison, and in the stocks” (vers. 24-26). 
He inquired therefore why Zephaniah had not 
reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth, who, according 
to him, had ‘‘made himself a prophet.” Men, un- 
sent themselves by God, are ever ready to charge 
the true servants of the Lord with being self- 
appointed men—so deceiving are the ways of 
Satan. Jeremiah’s letter had told the people, 
“This captivity is long: build ye houses, and 
dwell in them; and plant gardens, and eat the 
fruit of them” (vers. 27, 28). This aroused the 
ire of Shemaiah, as he evidently considered its 
effect would be to destroy the poeple’s hopes and 
keep them from rising in rebellion, if Zedekiah’s 
revolt seemed to be successful. 

Zephaniah the priest read the letter in Jere- 
miah’s hearing. In response, the word of the 
Lord came again to him, and he wrote a second 
epistle to “all them of the captivity.” He faith- 
fully denounced the dreamer as a prophet whom 

.the Lord had not sent, and who was causing the 


The Letter to the Captivity 145 


people to trust in a lie. Because of this, Jehovah 
would punish both him and his seed. His family 
should be utterly extirpated. Not a man should 
be left “to dwell among this people.’”’ He should 
not be permitted to live to see the good that God 
promised to do for those now oppressed and scat- 
tered, because “he hath taught rebellion against 
the Lord” (vers. 30-32). Thus the three arch- 
deceivers are doomed. Let the people heed the 
word of the One they had so often grieved! 


CHAPTER XVI 
JACOB’S TROUBLE AND THE FINAL RESTORATION 


(Chaps. 30, 31.) 


Nowhere in Scripture, so far as I am aware, 
have we clearer instruction as to the final, literal 
restoration of Israel, preceded by the great tribu- 
lation, than in the section which now claims our 
attention. If read in connection with Matt. 24, 
25; Rom. 11; and the books of Daniel and Reve- 
lation, it will help much to give a clear outline 
of what God has in store for His earthly people. 
Because of its supreme importance in this regard, 
we shall look at it verse by verse, in place of 
making as hasty a survey as of some previous 
portions. 

“The word that came to Jeremiah from the Lord, 
saying, Thus speaketh the Lord God of Israel, 
saying, Write thee all the words that I have 
spoken unto thee in a book” (vers. 1, 2). It is 
necessary that we have clearly before our souls 
the fact that here, as in all Scripture, God Him- 
self is speaking. “The Lord God will do nothing 
unless He reveal it to His servants the prophets.” 
Having been pleased thus to announce His pur- 
poses for Israel, we can be assured that it is for 
our profit and blessing to seek to become acquaint- 
ed with what is so manifestly near to His heart. 

“For, lo, the days come, saith the Lord, that I 
will bring again the captivity of My people Israel 


Jacob’s Trouble and the Final Restoration 147 


and Judah,* saith the Lord: and I will cause them 
to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, 
and they shall possess it” (ver. 3). Distinctly 
we are told that both Israel and Judah—not the 
latter only—are to be returned to their land. Nor 
does the temporary restoration at the expiration 
of the seventy years fulfil the terms of this proph- 
iecy; for, when brought back to the home of their 
fathers, they are to “possess it,” which was mani- 
festly not the case with those who returned under 
Zerubbabel, as their descendants were scattered 
again among the nations, and remain so to this 
day. At that time also, though a few from the 
ten tribes went back with the remnant of Judah, 
there was no regathering of Israel, as such. 
When Jehovah’s set time to remember Zion has 
come, twelve thousand from each of the twelve 
tribes will be delivered out of the hand of the 
Gentiles. (See Rev. 7.) The number may be 
figurative, we admit, but it at least implies a 
goodly company out of each tribe. 

“And these are the words the Lord spake con- 
cerning Israel and concerning Judah” (ver. 4). 
Here note again how clearly the northern and the 
southern kingdoms are referred to. Both have 
been scattered. Both are included in God’s coun- 
sels of judgment and grace. 

“For thus saith the Lord: We have heard a 
voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace” 
(ver. 5). Before there can be the fulfilment of 


* Having divided into two kingdoms after Solomon, the 
ten tribes (forming the bulk of the nation) are distin- 
guished as “Israel;” while the tribes of Judah and Benja- 
min formed the kingdom of “Judah.” 


148 Notes on Jeremiah 


the promises of blessing, there must be the tast- 
ing to the full of the cup of Jehovah’s indigna- 
tion. The subject therefore to which these words 
introduce us is that of “the great tribulation.” 
(See Matt. 24:21 and Rev. 7:14.) Before the 
appearing of Israel’s once rejected Messiah and 
the establishment of the kingdom, the favored na- 
tion will be exposed as never before to the power 
of the oppressor and to the malice of Satan. It 
is their special punishment for having crucified 
and slain the Anointed of Jehovah. 

“Ask ye now, and see whether a man doth 
travail with child? wherefore do I see every man 
with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, 
and all faces are turned into paleness?’ (ver. 6). 
So terrible will be that time of trial, but so sure 
is the joy to follow, that it is likened to the 
travail-pains that precede the birth of a child. 
Strong men will be in anguish as of a woman in 
her pangs. 

“Alas! for that day is great, so that none is 
like it: it is even the time of Jacob’s trouble; 
but he shall be saved out of it” (ver. 7). To the 
Church the promise is: “Because thou hast kept 
the word of My patience, I also will keep thee 
from the hour of temptation, which shall come 
upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon 
the earth” (Rev. 3:10). The saints of this dis- 
pensation shall be kept from the hour of travail. 
Those of the next period will be saved out of it: 
they will pass through it, but find deliverance at 
last when the Lord returns in glory. This short 
but dreadful time of sorrow is emphatically the 
time of Jacob’s trouble. Necessarily others will 


Jacob’s Trouble and the Final Restoration 149 


be involved in it. All “earth-dwellers,” in fact, 
will have to suffer while it continues; but it is the 
special season of Israel’s sifting, when God will 
repay them double for all their sins. Scripture 
gives no hint of the Church passing through this 
unparalleled tribulation. It is not for the testing 
of the members of the Body of Christ, but for the 
chastisement of Israel. 

“For it shall come to pass in that day, saith the 
Lord of hosts, that I will break his yoke from off 
thy neck, and will burst thy bonds, and strangers 
shall no more serve themselves of him: but they 
shall serve the Lord their God, and David their 
king, whom I will raise up unto them” (vers. 8, 
9). The yoke referred to is that of the last great 
Gentile power, the ten-horned beast of Rev. 13— 
the Roman empire revived in its last and awful 
form. The power of the beast will be destroyed 
by the appearing in flaming fire of the Lord Jesus 
Christ with all the armies of heaven (Rev. 17) ; 
after which Israel, restored to their land, shall 
enter into rest under Messiah’s beneficent rule. 
“David their king’? refers, doubtless, not to the 
first son of Jesse who wore the royal diadem, but 
to the fact that the reign of the Lord is the ful- 
filment of Jehovah’s promise to raise up, of 
David’s line, One to rebuild his fallen tabernacle 
and to sit upon his throne. “The Lord God shall 
give unto Him the throne of His father David: 
and He shall reign over the house of Jacob for- 
ever; and of His kingdom there shall be no end” 
(Luke 1:32, 33). This declaration, communi- 
cated by Gabriel, has never been fulfilled in the 
present dispensation. Not for one moment has 


150 Notes on Jeremiah 


the Lord Jesus sat upon David’s throne. He now 
sits upon His Father’s throne (Rev. 3:21; Heb. 
1:3). At the end of this age He will rise from 
that throne, when His enemies are made His foot- 
stool (Heb. 1:13; Ps. 110:1). Then He will de- 
scend to earth to fulfil the promise spoken of by 
Gabriel and all the prophets. 

“Therefore fear thou not, O My servant Jacob, 
saith the Lord; neither be dismayed, O Israel: 
for, lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy seed 
from the land of their captivity; and Jacob shall 
return, and shall be in rest, and be quiet, and 
none shall make him afraid” (ver. 10). Was this 
the case when Judah returned by permission of 
Cyrus? Were they in rest? Did none make them 
afraid? The book of Nehemiah and the apocry- 
phal records of the Maccabees give the answer, 
as also the Gospels themselves. From their re- 
turn to the destruction of Jerusalem under Titus, 
we have one long record of unrest and warfare. 
To the near future we must look for the carrying 
out of this word. 

“For I am with thee, saith the Lord, to save 
thee: though I make a full end of all the 
nations whither I have scattered thee, yet will 
I not make a full end of thee; but I will 
correct thee in measure, and will not leave 
thee altogether unpunished” (ver. 11). Their 
long sojourn among the Gentiles is but the fulfil- 
ment of this. The legend of the Wandering Jew, 
deathless, yet ever moving on, has its foundation 
here. Impossible to destroy the people of Jeho- 
vah’s choice! Empires may rise and fall, nations 
may be blotted out as the meteors of the heavens, 


Jacob’s Trouble and the Final Restoration 151 


but Israel shall abide, and at last will triumph 
and bear rule over all the earth. 

“For thus saith the Lord, Thy bruise is incur- 
able, and thy wound is grievous. There is none 
to plead thy cause, that thou mayest be bound 
up: thou hast no healing medicines. All thy lov- 
ers have forgotten thee; they seek thee not; for 
I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, 
with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the mul- 
titude of thine iniquity; because thy sins were in- 
creased” (vers. 12-14). Prophets and seers had 
sought in vain to apply the healing word. Dis- 
aster and captivity even had not resulted in re- 
covery. That the wound was utterly incurable 
so far as human power was concerned, the Cross 
would soon bring out. God in Christ walked 
among them in lowly grace. They nailed Him to 
a gibbet. Disowned by Jehovah, for a time, they 
must be. Antichrist, the false shepherd, shall 
bear rule over them in the day of their deepest 
tribulation. Their “lovers”—that is, the idols in 
which they had trusted—shall avail them naught. 
They must know to the full that “it is a fearful 
thing to fall into the hand of the living God.” 

The Gentile nations, however, who shall be the 
means of their affliction, shall in their turn know 
the rod of Jehovah’s wrath. “Therefore all they 
that devour thee shall be devoured; and all thine 
adversaries, every one of them, shall go into cap- 
tivity; and they that spoil thee shall be a spoil, 
and all that prey upon thee will I give for a prey” 
(ver. 16). All down through the centuries the 
nations have been made to know the truth of this 
verse. None have prospered long who oppressed 


152 Notes on Jeremiah 


Israel. Babylon and Assyria exist not; while 
Persia and Greece are still preserved. So among 
modern nations. There should be no question 
that one source, at least, of the strength of 
Britain and the United States is found in this, 
that they have, as a rule, befriended the Jews. 
On the other hand, the history of the powers who 
have stretched out their hands against Jeho- 
vah’s people, records disaster after disaster. 
Spain is witness to this; as, markedly, Russia is 
also—that great dominion of Gog. 

“For I will restore health unto thee, and I will 
heal thee of thy wounds, saith the Lord; because 
they called thee an Outcast, saying, This is Zion, 
whom no man seeketh after” (ver. 17). Through 
the wounded One the wounds of Israel shall yet 
be healed, when, no longer outcast, they shall be 
called ‘Sought out, A city not forsaken” (Isa. 
62:12). 

“Thus saith the Lord: Behold, I will bring again 
the captivity of Jacob’s tents, and have mercy on 
his dwelling-places; and the city shall be builded 
upon her own heap, and the palace shall remain 
after the manner thereof. And out of them shall 
proceed thanksgiving and the voice of them that 
make merry; and I will multiply them, and they 
shall not be few; I will also glorify them, and 
they shall not be small. Their children also shall 
be as aforetime, and their congregation shall be 
established before Me, and I will punish all that 
oppress them” (vers. 18-20). Temporal bless- 
ings await repentant Israel as of old, “when there 
was no strange god with him.” The city, rebuilt 
upon the ancient site, shall be filled with joy and 


Jacob’s Trouble and the Final Restoration 15% 


gladness; young and old shall alike be blessed, 
as Zechariah also prophesies: “There shall yet 
old men and old women dwell in the streets of 
Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his 
hand for very age. And the streets of the city 
shall be full of boys and girls playing in the 
streets thereof” (Zech. 8:4, 5). 

No longer oppressed by the haughty stranger, 
“their nobles shall be of themselves, and their 
governor shall proceed from the midst of them; 
and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall 
approach unto Me: for who is this that engaged 
his heart to approach unto Me? saith the Lord. 
And ye shall be My people, and I will be your 
God” (vers. 21, 22). There seems to be good rea- 
son to believe that the “governor” here spoken of 
is the same as the prince referred to so frequent- 
ly in the last five chapters of Ezekiel. (See Ezek. 
44:3; 45: 7; 46: 2, etc.). He will, we gather, be 
a direct lineal descendant of David, and will be 
the earthly ruler, subject in all things to the 
glorified Immanuel. In this day of “the restitu- 
tion of all things spoken of by the prophets,” the 
hearts of the people will have been fully turned 
to the Lord—that is, the spared remnant, for the 
apostate part of the nation will be destroyed in 
the great tribulation which is brought to our 
notice once more in the closing verses of this 
chapter. 

“Behold, the whirlwind of the Lord goeth forth 
with fury, a continuing whirlwind: it shall fall 
with pain upon the head of the wicked. The 
fierce anger of the Lord shall not return, until 
He have done it, and until He have performed 


154 Notes on Jeremiah 


the intents of His heart: in the latter days ye 
shall consider it’? (vers. 23, 24). The expression 
“the latter days” is evidently synonymous with 
“the time of the end” of Dan. 12, when “many 
shall be purified, and made white, and tried; but 
the wicked shall do wickedly: and none of the 
wicked shall understand; but the wise shall un- 
derstand” (ver. 10). The fury of the Lord will 
fall with awful power upon the ungodly part of 
the nation who own Antichrist’s impious sway; 
but those who refuse “the mark of the beast” 
(Rev. 13), and who honor Jehovah’s Word, will 
then come into blessing. 

Chapter 31 continues the general subject, dwell- 
ing more particularly upon the deliverance of the 
righteous remnant, and the establishment of the 
new covenant with them. “At that time, saith 
the Lord, will I be the God of all the families of 
Israel, and they shall be My people” (ver. 1). 
The Lo-ammi sentence of Hosea 1:9 will be 
forever repealed, for it is written: “Yet the 
number of the children of Israel shall be as the 
sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor 
numbered; and it shall come to pass, that in the 
place where it was said unto them, Ye are not 
My people, there it shall be said unto them, Ye 
are the sons of the living God” (Hos. 1:10). 

“Thus saith the Lord: The people which were 
left of the sword found grace in the wilderness; 
even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest” 
(ver. 2). The faithful remnant in the latter day 
are doubtless referred to. By Ezekiel a similar 
message is given: “I will bring you out from the 
people, and will gather you out of the countries 


Jacob’s Trouble and the Final Restoration 155 


wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, ang 
with a stretched out arm, and with fury poured 
out. And I will bring you into the wilderness 
of the people” (or nations), “and there will I 
plead with you face to face. Like as I pleaded 
with your fathers in the wilderness of the land 
of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the Lord 
God. And I will cause you to pass under the rod, 
and I will bring you into the bond of the cove- 
nant: and I will purge out from among you the 
rebels, and them that transgress against Me: I 
will bring them forth out of the country where 
they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the 
land of Israel: and ye shall know that I am the 
Lord” (Ezek. 20: 34-38). In that unparalleled 
tribulation period, referred to in Matt. 24: 21, 
the apostates of Israel will be destroyed by the 
judgment of the Lord; after which, those who 
have faithfully sought to walk in His ways will 
be established in the land. 

All this, however, is pure grace; for it is His 
own loving-kindness that shall attract their 
hearts to Himself. Hence we read: “The Lord 
hath appeared of old unto me, saying, Yea, I have 
loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore 
with loving-kindness have I drawn thee” (ver. 
8). It is His eternal love for them, not theirs 
for Him, that insures their final blessing. So 
with us: “Herein is love, not that we loved God, 
but that He loved us, and sent His Son to be 
the propitiation for our sins” (1 John 4:10). 
When in us, as in Israel, there was naught to 
draw out that love, save, indeed, our deep and 
bitter need, He set His heart upon us and wooed 


156 Notes on Jeremiah 


us for Himself. In this way had He dealt with 
His earthly people; and having once set His 
affections upon them, He will never give them up. 

“Again I will build thee, and thou shalt be 
built, O virgin of Israel: thou shalt again he 
adorned with thy tabrets, and shalt go forth in 
the dances of them that make merry” (ver. 4). 
For centuries their harps have been hung upon 
the willows, for “how can they sing the Lord’s 
song in a strange land?” But soon the scene of 
the dance and song led by Miriam on the banks 
of the Red Sea shall be repeated in grander, fuller 
measure, when all their enemies are overthrown 
forever. In that day also they “shall yet plant 
vines upon the mountains of Samaria: the plant- 
ers shall plant, and shall eat them as common 
things” (ver. 5). 

The temple at Jerusalem will be rebuilt on a 
scale of magnificence previously unknown, and 
the tribes shall once more gather there to cele- 
brate the feasts of Jehovah. “For there shall be a 
day that the watchmen upon the mount Ephraim 
shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion unto 
the Lord our God. For thus saith the Lord: Sing 
with gladness for Jacob, and shout among the 
chief of the nations: publish ye, praise ye, and 
say, O Lord, save Thy people, the remnant of 
Israel” (vers. 6, 7). The “time of the singing” 
(Cant. 2:12) will have truly come, when the 
Lord shall turn again the captivity of His people. 

“Behold, I will bring them from the north coun- 
try, and gather them from the coasts of the earth, 
and with them the blind, and the lame, the woman 
with child and her that travaileth with child to- 


Jacob’s Trouble and the Final Restoration 157 


gether: a great company shall return thither. 
They shall come with weeping, and with suppli- 
cations will I lead them: I will cause them to 
walk by the rivers of waters in a straight way, 
wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a 
Father to Israel, and Ephraim is My first-born” 
(vers. 8, 9). God was not revealed as Father in 
an individual sense in the Old Testament. To 
Abraham He was known as the Almighty, or the 
All-Sufficient; to Moses, as Jehovah; prophetic- 
ally, as the Most High; to the remnant in the 
days of Ezra and Nehemiah, as the God of 
heaven. The Lord Jesus it was who revealed the 
Father to ws—“My Father and your Father,” He 
says. This is blessedly individual. Each saint is 
a child, and can cry by the Spirit, “Abba, 
Father.” Nationally, Israel was His son. As so 
recognizing them, He is spoken of as Father, but 
in no nearer sense. “Doubtless thou art our 
Father,” the future remnant are entitled to say, 
“though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel 
acknowledge us not: Thou, O Lord, art our 
Father, our Redeemer; Thy name is from ever- 
lasting’? (Isa. 68:16). In the book we are study- 
ing we have already noticed Jehovah’s pathetic 
appeal: “Wilt thou not from this time cry unto 
Me, my Father, Thou art the guide of my youth?” 
(chap. 3:4.) As a Father, often grieved but 
loving still, He will rejoice over them when once 
more they ask the way to Zion. 

“Hear the word of the Lord, O ye nations, and 
declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He that 
scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, 
as a shepherd doth his flock” (ver. 10). No tem- 


158 Notes on Jeremiah 


porary restoration can be here contemplated; no 
gathering to allow of scattering again; but they 
shall be brought back to be kept by the faithful 
“Shepherd of Israel,” nevermore to wander from 
the fold. 

“For the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and ran- 
somed him from the hand of him that was 
stronger than he” (ver. 11). He has never given 
up His purpose of redemption. As a nation they 
were sheltered by blood from judgment and re- 
deemed by power from Pharaoh’s thraldom, 
when He brought them out of Egypt. He has 
contemplated them ever since from that stand- 
point. His grace cannot admit of failure to bring 
them into fulness of blessing at last, however 
much their ways may have necessitated chastise- 
ment in the interim. When brought safely 
through the time of Jacob’s trouble, they will sing 
the song both of Moses and of the Lamb (Rev. 
15). Their final deliverance is intimately con- 
nected with their salvation from bondage in the 
past. 

“Therefore they shall come and sing in the 
height of Zion, and shall flow together to the 
goodness of the Lord, for wheat, and for wine, 
and for oil, and for the young of the flock and 
of the herd: and their soul shall be as a watered 
garden; and they shall not sorrow any more at 
all. Then shall the virgin rejoice in the dance, 
both young men and old together: for I will turn 
their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, 
and make them rejoice from their sorrow. And 
I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, 
and My people shall be satisfied with My goodness, 


Jacob’s Trouble and the Final Restoration 159 


saith the Lord” (vers. 12-14). It is an utterly 
false system of exegesis that would spiritualize all 
this, and then apply it to the Church in this dis- 
pensation. The language is plain and simple. It 
is a millennial picture, descriptive of the joy of 
Messiah’s kingdom when set up in this world. 

In verses 15-17 we have the tribulation period 
once more referred to, with comforting assur- 
ances of blessing eventually. We know well that 
the words of verse 15 are referred by the Holy 
Ghost to the slaughter of the infants in Bethle- 
hem, under Herod’s cruel edict. “A voice was 
heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weep- 
ing; Rachel weeping for her children refused to 
be comforted for her children, because they were 
not.” (Comp. Matt. 2:17,18.) That was a sim- 
ilar case and an apt fulfilment of the passage, 
but the two following verses make it evident that 
a second and more complete fulfilment is contem- 
plated; for it is distinctly stated that the chil- 
dren of which Rachel is bereft shall “come again 
from the land of the enemy,” and that they “shall 
come again to their own border.” It is captivity, 
and not alone slaughter, that is contemplated. 
This twofold application of prophecy is very com- 
mon in Scripture, as witness Peter’s citation 
from the prophet Joel on the day of Pentecost 
(Acts 2). The words will have a fuller perform- 
ance in the last days in connection with the 
ushering in of the kingdom. 

From verses 18 to 21 the repentance of the 
ten tribes (often referred to under the name 
Ephraim, as the two tribes are included in the 
term Judah) is vividly depicted. “I have surely 


160 Notes on Jeremiah 


heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus: Thou 
hast chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bul- 
lock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn Thou me, 
and I shall be turned; for Thou art the Lord my 
God” (ver. 18). Hosea had declared that “Israel 
slideth back as a backsliding heifer” (Hos. 4: 
16). This is here taken up as their own confes- 
sion, but they turn to the One so long refused 
and sinned against. In true _ self-judgment 
Ephraim is heard to exclaim, “Surely after that 
I was turned, I repented; and after that I was 
instructed, I smote upon my thigh: I was 
ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did 
bear the reproach of my youth” (ver. 19). It is 
the acknowledgment of the Lord’s grace in bring: 
ing them back. Smiting on the thigh is, I judge, 
an expression symbolizing the entering once more 
into covenant. This breathing after Himself is 
at once responded to by Jehovah, who exclaims: 
“Is Ephraim My dear son? is he a pleasant 
child? for since I spake against him, I do earn- 
estly remember him still: therefore My bowels 
are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy 
upon him, saith the Lord” (ver. 20). Hence the 
call to take the highway leading back from the 
lands of the nations to their ancestral home in 
Palestine. “Set thee up waymarks, make thee 
high heaps: set thy heart toward the highway, 
even the way which thou wentest: turn again, 
O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities” 
(ver. 21). How boundless the grace that owns 
as a virgin the people that had been so horribly 
polluted! 

“How long wilt thou go about, O thou back- 


Jacob’s Trouble and the Final Restoration 161 


sliding daughter? for the Lord hath created a 
new thing in the earth, A woman shall compass 
aman” (ver. 22). The so-called “Fathers” were 
wont to apply this verse to the incarnation. The 
woman, with them, was the Virgin Mary: the 
man, her Holy Son. This, however, seems to be 
quite unwarranted and dubiously fanciful as an 
interpretation. Is it not more likely that the 
woman referred to is the virgin of Israel of 
the preceding passage? In that case the man 
would possibly be the symbol of power in the 
hands of the Gentile. (See Nebuchadnezzar’s 
dream in Dan. 2.) Israel, weak as a woman, 
shall compass, or overcome, the power of the na- 
tions. This would harmonize with the context. 
The verse is confessedly difficult and the meaning 
obscure. 

“Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of 
Israel: As yet they shall use this speech in the 
land of Judah and in the cities thereof, when I 
shall bring again their captivity; The Lord bless 
thee, O habitation of justice, and mountain of 
holiness. And there shall dwell in Judah itself, 
and in all the cities thereof together, husband- 
men, and they that go forth with flocks. For I 
have satiated the weary soul, and have re- 
plenished every sorrowful soul’ (vers. 23-25). 
When could Jerusalem have been referred to as 
the “habitation of justice and the mountain of 
holiness” in the five centuries following the re- 
turn by permission of Cyrus? Beyond all con- 
tradiction these are promises yet to be made 
good. They refer to Judah, not the Church; 
therefore the Jews must be brought back to their 


162 Notes on Jeremiah 


land and established there in the fear of Jeho- 
vah if this word is to be carried out. “The 
Scripture cannot be broken.” 

Our prophet has been like a man in slumber 
while this vision of future glory and rest was 
unfolded to him. He is now aroused and his heart 
filled with a sweet, trusting peace as he enters 
into the purpose of God for his people. “Upon 
this I awaked, and beheld; and my sleep was 
sweet unto me” (ver. 26). 

The few verses following recall at once the 
parable of the sour grapes uttered by Ezekiel at 
about the same time. “Behold, the days come, 
saith the Lord, that I will sow the house of Israel 
and the house of Judah with the seed of man, 
and with the seed of beast.... And I will watch 
over them, to build, and to plant, saith the Lord. 
In those days they shall say no more, The fath- 
ers have eaten a sour grape, and the children’s 
teeth are set on edge. But every one shall die 
for his own iniquity: every man that eateth the 
sour grape, his teeth shall be set on edge” (vers. 
27-30). In Ezek. 18 we find that this proverb 
had become a common one on the lips of the peo- 
ple of Judah. Blind to their own sins, they at- 
tributed their misfortunes to the Lord’s anger 
because of the evil doings of their fathers. This 
was far from being the case, as both Ezekiel and 
Jeremiah testify. Their own sins had drawn 
down condign judgment. They had eaten the sour 
grapes, therefore were their teeth set on edge. 
“The soul that sinneth, it shall die.’ This they 
will be brought to confess in the time of their 
greatest sorrow; and as a result, we find Jeho- 


Jacob’s Trouble and the Final Restoration 163 


vah sowing them once more in their land; build- 
ing and planting, whereas before He had been 
obliged to pluck up and afflict. 

Following on this, the new covenant will be 
made with them. It is important to note that 
while the blessings of the new covenant are ours, 
yet it is never said to be made with the Church. 
In the epistle to the Hebrews, as in the passage 
before us, it is distinctly stated that it is to be 
made with “the house of Israel and the house of 
Judah” (Heb. 8:8-13). The Mediator of that 
covenant is the Lord Jesus Christ. The blood 
of the new covenant is that which He shed for 
our sins. Therefore believers now rejoice in the 
distinctive blessings it insures; but it is with the 
earthly, not with the heavenly, people that the 
covenant itself is to be made. “Behold, the days 
come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new cove- 
nant with the house of Israel, and with the house 
of Judah: not according to the covenant that I 
made with their fathers, in the day that I took 
them by the hand to bring them out of the land 
of Egypt; which My covenant they brake, al- 
though I was a husband unto them, saith the 
Lord” (vers. 31, 32). It were folly to speak of 
a new covenant with the Church, when no for- 
mer covenant had been made with us. In the 
ease of Israel and Judah it is different. They 
entered into the covenant of works at Sinai. That 
covenant had two parties to it. If they did their 
part, God would fulfil His. Alas, on that ground 
they forfeited everything before ever the tables 
of the covenant were brought down from the 
mount! Legal righteousness they had none. 


164 Notes on Jeremiah 


In the new covenant God alone is the respon- 
sible One; hence they are placed in the position 
of recipients. It is pure grace. As we, also, are 
saved on this ground, it is clear that the same 
principle is operative in both cases; but the new 
covenant, as such, has its place in connection with 
them alone. We get the terms of it in the next 
two verses: 

“But this shall be the covenant that I will 
make with the house of Israel: After those days, 
saith the Lord, I will put My law in their in- 
ward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will 
be their God, and they shall be My people. And 
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, 
and every man his brother, saying, Know the 
Lord: for they shall all know Me, from the least 
of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: 
for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will re- 
member their sin no more” (vers. 33, 34). There 
is no possibility of failure here, because all the 
pledges are on God’s side. This covenant, there- 
fore, once made, shall never be abrogated. It is 
“an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things 
and sure.” Israel and Judah, one nation in 
the land—purged, repentant and forgiven—shall 
never more forfeit Jehovah’s favor. Forever they 
shall be debtors to His grace. 

“Thus saith the Lord, which giveth the sun for 
a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon 
and of the stars for a light by night, which di- 
videth the sea when the waves thereof roar; The 
Lord of hosts is His Name: If those ordinances 
depart from before Me, saith the Lord, then the 
seed of Israel also shall cease from being a na- 


Jacob’s Trouble and the Final Restoration 165° 


tion before Me forever. Thus saith the Lord: If 
heaven above can be measured, and the founda- 
tions of the earth searched out beneath, I will also 
cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they 
have done, saith the Lord” (vers. 35-37). The 
vastness of the heavens above and the earth be- 
neath set forth this immeasurable mercy to 
Israel. In the face of this passage, what pos- 
sible ground is there left for those to stand upon 
who teach the ultimate rejection of the once- 
favored nation? 

Mark: it is not here a promise to bring Israel 
into blessing through the Church, and by incor- 
poration into it. It is their national existence 
that is pledged, and their blessing as Israelites— 
not as Christians. They must be restored to their 
land, recognized once more as a nation, and 
brought into complete subjection to Jehovah, 
owning their once rejected Messiah as King and 
Saviour, or the prophecies of this chapter fall to 
the ground. All here is intensely literal. Noth- 
ing could be more so than the remaining verses, 
which need no comment. “Behold, the days come, 
saith the Lord, that the city shall be built to the 
Lord from the tower of Hananeel unto the gate 
of the corner. And the measuring line shall yet 
go forth over against it upon the hill Gareb, and 
shall compass about to Goath. And the whole 
valley of the dead bodies, and of the ashes, and 
all the fields unto the brook of Kidron, unto the 
corner of the horse gate toward the east, shall be 
holy unto the Lord; it shall not be plucked up, 
nor thrown down any more forever” (vers. 38- 
40). To no period of the past can these words 


166 Notes on Jeremiah 


apply. In our Lord’s time the filthy stench of the 
valley of Hinnom still polluted the atmosphere. 
It was in no sense holy unto Jehovah. To the 
future alone can we look for a fulfilment that 
shall accord with, and transcend, the promise. 
“The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.” 


CHAPTER XVII 
IMPRISONED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF GOD 
(Chaps. 32, 33.) 


All the fervid appeals of the prophet had been 
apparently wasted on Zedekiah. His heart was 
bent on departure from God. For over nine 
years, however, we hear of no positive act of 
persecution on his part. It is rather the other 
way. The records indicate that he stood in awe 
of the solemn and terrible denouncer of his 
iniquitous ways. His conscience would be, like 
Herod’s, on the accuser’s side. In this tenth 
year of his reign he was in great straits, owing 
to the fact that the army of the king of Babylon 
had invested Jerusalem. In his distress he turned 
not to Jehovah, but brazenly steeled his heart 
against His words. Jeremiah, particularly, was 
as a thorn in his side. He determined to silence 
him. Accordingly he commanded his apprehen- 
sion, and the prophet was soon placed under ar- 
rest and shut up in the court of the prison, which 
adjoined the royal palace. The ostensible reason 
given was that by his words he weakened the 
hands of the people of Jerusalem by declaring 
that the defence would be in vain; the Lord hav- 
ing assured him that the city was to fall into 
the hands of the besiegers. 

Of Zedekiah, too, he had prophesied only evil. 
He should not escape, but be certainly delivered 
into the power of Nebuchadrezzar and led to 
Babylon as a captive (vers. 1-5). All this was 


168 Notes on Jeremiah 


a most unwelcome message for the self-willed 
king. Having no thought to humble himself, he 
concluded to silence the seer rather than bow to 
his message. It has been the common resource 
of men in all ages, who being set upon their own 
ways are angered when coming judgment is pro- 
claimed. 

In the prison Jeremiah is instructed by the 
Lord to make what to many would have seemed 
a most unwise investment. His cousin Hanameel, 
the son of his uncle Shallum, had a field in 
Anathoth, which he, doubtless pressed by the 
troubles of the times, was desirous of realizing 
some money upon. A purchaser would be hard 
to find, but he is instructed to go direct to the 
very man who had prophesied the captivity of the 
people, to whom he offers to sell it, as the “right 
of redemption” was Jeremiah’s; that is, accord- 
ing to the law he was the Goel, or kinsman- 
redeemer. By his purchasing the field, it would 
not pass from the house of his fathers. 

Hanameel accordingly went to the court of the 
prison, there to find his cousin in durance vile. 
The Lord had already apprised Jeremiah of his 
purpose. “Buy my field, I pray thee, that is in 
Anathoth, which is in the country of Benjamin,” 
he said: “for the right of inheritance is thine, 
and the redemption is thine; buy it for thyself” 
(ver. 8). Assured that it was from the Lord, the 
prophet unhesitatingly bought the property in 
question, paying for it seventeen shekels of 
silver. The deed was accordingly made out trans- 
ferring the property to him, properly attested by 
witnesses, all in due order as required by the law 
and custom of the time. 


Imprisoned for the Testimony of God 169 


The title-deeds seem to have been contained’in 
two rolls. One was open and the other sealed. 
The open one would probably, under ordinary 
circumstances, be placed on file in the official 
archives; the sealed one was to be safely stored 
away until the seventy years’ servitude had come 
to a close, when it would be of value in deter- 
mining the portion of Jeremiah’s heirs. It was 
delivered to Baruch, of whom we now hear for 
the first time, but who was evidently the proph- 
eth’s amanuensis, and a faithful man. He was 
instructed to “take these evidences, this evidence 
of the purchase, both which is sealed, and this 
evidence which is open; and put them in an 
earthen vessel, that they may continue many days. 
For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of 
Israel: Houses and fields and vineyards shall be 
possessed again in this land’”’ (vers. 9-15). The 
purchase is thus seen to be a distinct act of faith 
on Jeremiah’s part. God had informed him of 
the sure return from Babylon of the remnant 
of the people, upon the expiration of the sev- 
enty years. He implicitly believed that word, 
and therefore bought what seemed to be a piece 
of ground now worthless, in the possession of 
which neither he nor his heirs could enter. At 
the appointed time the sealed title-deeds would 
put the rightful owner into possession of the 
field. No thoughtful Bible student can fail to see 
in this striking incident the key to the under- 
standing of the vision of the seven-sealed book 
in the Revelation. The latter is unquestionably 
the title-deed to this world. It remains sealed 
till the rightful Heir steps forth to claim it. He, 


170 Notes on Jeremiah 


the worthy One, has first to purge His heritage 
by judgment, before entering into possession of 
it. The opening of the seals is the declaration 
that He is about to enter into His vested rights. 

Returning to our chapter, we have, from the 
16th verse to the 25th, Jeremiah’s prayer upon 
the signing of the deeds, followed (from verse 
26 to the end) with Jehovah’s reiteration of the 
promise that the land shall yet be inhabited by 
Israel and fields again bought therein. 

In his prayer the prophet acknowledges the 
power, as also the loving-kindness, of the Lord, 
and owns the righteousness of His judgment upon 
His people because of their sins. “Ah, Lord 
God!” he prays, “behold, Thou hast made the 
heaven and the earth by Thy great. power and 
stretched out arm, and there is nothing too hard 
for Thee” (ver. 17). This is the ground of his con- 
fidence. He reposes upon the word of the Omnipo- 
tent God. “Thou showest loving-kindness unto 
thousands, and recompensest the iniquity of the 
fathers into the bosom of their children after 
them: the Great, the Mighty God, the Lord of 
hosts, is His name, great in counsel and mighty in 
work: for Thine eyes are open upon all the ways 
of the sons of men, to give every one according to 
his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings” 
(vers. 18, 19). He is owned as the Moral Gov- 
ernor of the universe, who deals with all accord- 
ing to their works. Nothing is too small for His 
notice, or too great for His capacity. “All things 
are naked and open before the eyes of Him with 
whom we have to do.” His eyes run to and fro 
throughout the whole earth to render to all men 


Imprisoned for the Testimony of God 171 


according to the fruit of their doings. He shows 
Himself strong in behalf of those who seek to 
honor Him; while, to such as lightly esteem 
Him, He appears as an enemy. Not that He ever 
is such—“His mercy endureth forever’—but 
from the wicked He hides His face. 

Jeremiah goes back to the nation’s beginning 
in Egypt, owning the grace that dealt with them 
in giving deliverance from the cruel oppressor 
and in bringing them into the land of promise. 
All He had undertaken had been abundantly ful- 
filled, but they obeyed Him not; therefore “all 
this evil” had come upon them (vers. 20-23). 
Now the Chaldeans surrounded the beloved city, 
while famine and pestilence raged within. ‘What 
Thou hast spoken is come to pass; and, behold, 
Thou seest it” (ver. 24). Yet the Lord had said, 
“Buy the field for money, and take witnesses;” 
even though the city was given into the hand of 
the Chaldeans (ver. 25). Here he breaks off 
abruptly, and at once Jehovah answers him by 
delineating more fully the sin of Israel and 
Judah, but in assuring him also of the everlast- 
jng nature of His covenant with them. 

He declares, in verse 27, that He is the God 
of all flesh, and asks, “Is there anything too hard 
for Me?”’—taking up the expression Jeremiah had 
used in the beginning of his prayer. Precious it 
is to have to do with One to whom nothing is 
impossible. What comfort for His imprisoned 
servant to know that it was the Almighty upon 
whom he leaned! 

Into the hand of the Chaldeans the city shall 
surely be given, He goes on to say; and Nebu- 


172 Notes on Jeremiah 


chadrezzar shall take it, destroying the houses 
and roofs where incense was offered to Baal, and 
drink offerings were poured out unto other gods. 
From their youth the course of Israel and Judah 
had been only evil. Jerusalem had been to Him 
“as a provocation” of His anger “from the day 
they built it unto this day;’’ therefore it should 
be razed to the ground (vers. 28-31). 

Kings, princes, priests, prophets, and the com- 
monalty of Judah and Jerusalem, had all been of 
one heart to do evil in His sight. They had 
turned their backs upon Him; and though He 
gave them instructors who would fain have recov- 
ered them to Himself, they had refused to heed 
their messages. Even in His own house they had 
set up their abominable idols, thus -defiling its 
sacred precincts, while unmentionable idolatrous 
practices (of which He could say, “which I com- 
manded them not, neither came it into My mind’’) 
had they perpetrated (vers. 32-36). 

Therefore there was no remedy; He would 
give them up until His chastisement had yield- 
ed “the peaceable fruit of righteousness.” In 
that day He will “give them one heart, and one 
way, that they may fear [Him] forever, for the 
good of them, and of their children after them” 
(vers. 37-39). When, in true repentance, they 
turned back to Himself, He would “make an ever- 
lasting covenant with them,” and never more 
turn away from them, but would put His fear in 
their hearts, that they should not depart from 
Him (ver. 40). With His “‘whole heart and soul” 
He will rejoice over them to do them good. How 
touchingly human the language used! (ver. 41.) 


Imprisoned for the Testimony of God 173 


All the evil prophesied had been and should 
be fulfilled to the letter. In like manner will He 
literally carry out all His promises for good. No 
word of His can by any means fail of accomplish- 
ment. Israel restored and the land once more in- 
habited in peace and safety, “men shall buy fields 
for money, and subscribe evidences, and seal 
them, and take witnesses in the land of Benja- 
min, and in the places about Jerusalem, and in 
the cities of Judah, and in the cities of the moun- 
tains, and in the cities of the valley, and in the 
cities of the south” (vers. 42-44). 

The thirty-third chapter consists of two dis- 
tinct prophecies, but we group them with the pre- 
ceding because all alike were given during the 
time that Jeremiah was shut up in the court of 
the prison. His body might be in confinement, 
but none could hinder the communication of di- 
vine messages to the soul of the man of God. 

The first section includes verses 1 to 18. Like 
the foregoing, it concerns the restoration to the 
land, but in no sense limiting it to the return at 
the expiration of the seventy years in Babylon. 
“Great and mighty things” God is about to show 
to His servant. He who, for their sins, has per- 
mitted the overthrow of Jerusalem, having hid- 
den His face from it, will assuredly bring it 
health and cure, revealing unto them “the abun- 
dance of peace and truth.” He will cause the cap- 
tivity of both Israel and Judah to return, and 
give them to know His pardoning grace, cleansing 
them from all their transgressions (vers. 1-8). 

Jerusalem is destined yet to become a “name 
of joy, a praise, and an honor before all the na- 


174 Notes on Jeremiah 


tions of the earth,” for the fame of His loving- 
kindness towards it shall go out into all the world. 
In place of the desolation which it must for a 
time know, its streets shall once more be filled 
with a joyous, God-fearing multitude who shall 
chant the praise of their covenant-keeping God 
(vers. 9-11). 


In the country round about shepherds shall 
once more pasture their flocks with none to make 
them afraid, when the cities shall be rebuilt and 
the waste places inhabited, in the day that the 
Lord will perform all His promises of blessing 
(vers. 12-14). 


At that time the veil that for centuries has cov- 
ered their hearts will be removed; the lowly 
Nazarene, once rejected as an impostor, will re- 
appear in glory, to be accepted of all the people 
as the Anointed of Jehovah. “In those days, and 
at that time, will I cause the Branch of Righteous- 
ness to grow up unto David; and He shall exe- 
cute judgment and righteousness in the land. In 
those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem 
shall dwell safely: and this is the name where- 
with she shall be called, Jehovah Tsidkenu’”’ (‘the 
Lord our Righteousness,” vers. 15, 16). We have 
already noticed that in chap. 22:6 it is He who 
is called by this significant name. Here it is ap- 
plied to her—that is, to restored Jerusalem. His 
righteousness shall be put upon her; and clothed 
in the garments of salvation she shall rejoice be- 
neath Immanuel’s sway. The promise made to 
David shall be fulfilled: he “shall never want a 
man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel,” 


Imprisoned for the Testimony of God 175 


and the priesthood likewise shall be established 
(vers. 17, 18). 

The second section is composed of the balance 
of the chapter—vers. 19 to 26, inclusive. It re- 
sembles the affirmation of chap. 31: 35-37, but is 
even fuller. If the covenant of the day and of 
the night can be broken, then may His covenant 
with David be annulled; but as truly as the stars 
of heaven cannot be numbered, nor the sand of 
the sea measured, so will He multiply the seed of 
David and of the Levites that minister unto Him 
(vers. 19-22). 

In their unbelief they had charged Him with 
violating His pledge and casting off the two fam- 
ilies (Israel and Judah) which He had chosen; 
and the reference in their complaint is probably 
to the Chaldeans: ‘‘They have despised My peo- 
ple, that they should be no more a nation before 
them” (vers. 23, 24). Their reasoning is utterly 
at fault. It is because they are His people that 
He “will punish them for their iniquity.”’ Though 
they pass under the rod, He will not utterly give 
them up. If His covenant be not with day and 
night, and if He have not appointed the ordi- 
nances of heaven and earth, then He will cast 
away the seed of Jacob and of David; otherwise 
He will certainly ‘cause their captivity to return, 
and have mercy on them” (vers. 25, 26). 

Soon, perhaps in the lifetime of many now upon 
earth, will He cause these promises to be ful- 
filled. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
BONDAGE IN PLACE OF LIBERTY 


(Chap. 34.) 


The peculiarly vacillating character of Zede- 
kiah and the nobles of Judah is very pronouncedly 
brought before us in the prophetic message to 
which our attention is now directed. 

The three kings who followed the godly Josiah 
were apparently all deliberately opposed to Jere- 
miah, the advocate of submission to Babylon. 
Their policy was to rely upon Egypt, and by a 
league with Pharaoh to throw off the Chaldean 
yoke. Jeremiah, as we have seen, ever counseled 
the contrary. The king of Babylon had been ap- 
pointed by God and set over the nations. Egypt 
was a broken reed. The only safe and right policy 
was to submit to the authority ordained of Jeho- 
vah, and to acknowledge how richly the sins of 
Israel and Judah had deserved this national de- 
gradation. 

Zedekiah was set up by Nebuchadrezzar, con- 
sequently was not so ardent an advocate of a 
confederacy with Egypt as his predecessors. In 
fact, only upon a great triumph of the Egyptian 
arms did he decide to throw in his lot with that 
once powerful nation and rebel against his liege 
lord. He seems to have had sincere respect for 
Jeremiah, frequently counseling with him; but as 
he was a man of a double heart and not upright 
before God, there is a painful lack of obedience 


Bondage in Place of Liberty 177 


to the word of God as thus delivered to him. 
Finally, when his position became desperate and 
the city seemed about to fall, he threw the 
prophet into prison, and refused to hearken to 
his admonitions. At times, however, conscience 
seemed to awake, as in the present instance, but, 
alas, only to be again lulled to sleep. The in- 
cident here recorded probably occurred prior to 
the imprisonment of which the previous section 
treats. It was an attempt to enforce the law of 
God, long neglected, upon a vitally important mat- 
ter, even the recognition of the sabbatic year. 

The armies of Nebuchadnezzar (as he is here 
called), consisting of the Chaldeans and subject 
legions from “all the kingdoms of the earth of 
his dominion,” were surrounding the devoted city 
when the prophet was commanded to go and 
speak to Zedekiah (ver. 1). The message was 
one of gloom and disaster. The Lord was about 
to give the city into the hand of the Babylonian 
spoiler, and the king himself must go into cap- 
tivity. Nevertheless, as there had been some good 
things in him—some regard, however slight, for 
the word of God, some concern for the state of 
Judah—he was informed that he should not die 
by the sword, but in peace; and that customary 
honors upon the decease of princes should be paid 
to his remains. He would be lamented in a way 
that had not been done for the former kings 
(vers. 2-5). 

Jeremiah delivered the divine communication 
as commanded, but we have no word as to the 
effect upon the unhappy monarch. 

The foe had been almost everywhere triumph- 


178 Notes on Jeremiah 


ant; only two of Judah’s defenced cities remained 
unconquered, besides the capital. These were 
Lachish and Azekah, both west of Jerusalem, and 
about some fifteen miles apart. These were in- 
vested, and all hope of their holding out much 
longer was vain (vers. 6,7). It would seem that 
Zedekiah keenly felt the plight he was in, and in 
his distress he had made a covenant with all the 
people to observe the sabbatic year—so far as it 
affected the relationship of masters and slaves. 
The portion referring to the land could not be 
carried out, as all the fields were overrun by 
the foragers of the Chaldean armies, and the hus- 
bandmen carried away or slain. 

The law (Ex. 21:1-6; Deut. 15: 12-18) reg- 
ulated servitude in Israel by commanding that 
all male slaves of Hebrew birth, and all maidens 
not betrothed to the master or his son, should 
serve at the most but six years, and in the sev- 
enth go out free; unless, having been given a 
wife in bondage, the servant should of his own 
volition choose to remain with her in his subject 
condition. Rapacity and covetousness had made 
this law a dead letter for years. Now, the king 
and people covenanted to observe it, and to “pro- 
claim liberty unto them; that every man should 
let his manservant, and every man his maid- 
servant, being a Hebrew or a Hebrewess, go free; 
that none should serve himself of them, to wit, 
of a Jew his brother” (vers. 8, 9). 

This was fully in accord with the mind of the 
Lord; and if there had been purpose of heart 
to continue in it, and genuine repentance because 
of past sin, it would have been acceptable in His 


Bondage in Place of Liberty 179 


eyes. But, alas for man’s stability when left to 
himself! The proclamation was hardly made be- 
fore it was repealed! Possibly some slight rift in 
the dark clouds overshadowing them gave them to 
suppose that, after all, the seriousness of their 
condition had been exaggerated; consequently 
they returned to their old ways, which had never 
been truly judged, bringing the servants and the 
handmaids once more into subjection (vers. 10, 
11). 

The Lord, accordingly, once more put a word 
in His servant’s mouth, and sent him unto the 
vacillating and unstable people. He reminded 
them of the covenant made with their fathers 
when He brought them out of Egypt, and of the 
provisions of the year of release, as recorded in 
Deut. 15, above referred to. Their action in pro- 
claiming liberty He describes as being right in 
His sight. In turning from their covenant, and 
causing their servants once more to enter into 
bondage, they had polluted His name. Now He 
would proclaim a liberty against them—even to 
the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine! 
(vers. 12-17). It is true of nations as of men 
that whatsoever is sown must be reaped. Obedi- 
ence to the word of God brings blessing. Dis- 
cbedience is the sure precursor of judgment. 
“Righteousness exalteth a nation, but sin is a re- 
proach to any people.” 

In the most solemn manner had Judah’s princes 
and people sealed the covenant which their cupid- 
ity caused them so readily to violate. They had 
“out the calf in twain and passed between the 
parts thereof” (ver. 18). From of old this seems 


180 Notes on Jeremiah 


to have been a customary form for the contract- 
ing parties to a solemn covenant. A sacrifice was 
offered, and the pieces or parts thereof arranged 
in order on the altar; then the persons pledging 
themselves passed between the pieces. We see 
God pledging Himself thus in Abraham’s day. 
The patriarch was instructed to take “a heifer of 
three years old, and a ram of three years old, 
and a turtle-dove and a young pigeon” (Gen. 15: 
9). All these were typical of the one true sac- 
rifice—the Lord Jesus Christ—each representing 
Him in some special aspect. The young ox speaks 
of Him as the patient Servant, providing food for 
others. The goat is, in Matt. 25, used to picture 
the sinner, and points, therefore, to Him whom 
God made sin for us, that we might become the 
righteousness of God in Him. The ram is the 
consecration offering, and tells of His submissive 
obedience unto death. The turtle-dove, as others 
have suggested, is the bird of love and sorrow; 
and never was either love or sorrow so great 
as His. The pigeon, of course, is similar; and 
both being from the heavens, they pointed to the 
One who came from heaven to die on earth for 
our redemption. 

Abram, whose name had not yet been changed, 
took “all these and divided them in the midst, 
and laid each piece one against another; but the 
birds divided he not.” Each part being placed 
in order, he kept watch over them, driving away 
the unclean fowls which gathered to devour them, 
as the Christian to-day is called to contend ear- 
nestly for the great “mystery of piety,” suffering 
no unclean one to rob him of the truth as to 
“the doctrine of Christ.” 


Bondage in Place of Liberty 181 


Night falling, the watcher wearied, and fell 
into a deep sleep. A “horror of great darkness 
fell upon him’”—a symbol of the hiding of Jeho- 
vah’s face, which his seed must in measure ex- 
perience. It was then that God drew near and 
reiterated His promise of blessing for the chosen 
race, but openend up likewise something of their 
future sorrows, coupled with their final deliver- 
ance. Then He confirmed His covenant in a re- 
markable manner. A smoking furnace was seen, 
symbol of their affliction in the Egyptian bondage, 
and, following after it, “a burning lamp, which 
passed between the pieces.’ This burning lamp, 
or, literally, lamp of fire, was the visible mani- 
festation of God’s presence. By thus passing be- 
tween the pieces He pledged Himself, by the 
Cross of His beloved Son, to fulfil all His cove- 
nant. And notice that Abram was not called upon 
to do likewise. He made no pledge. None was 
asked of him. It was a covenant of pure grace. 

In this way, then, the people of Judah had con- 
firmed a covenant in regard to the sabbatic year 
of release. They had offered to Jehovah a calf, 
and “passed between the parts thereof.’ Noth- 
ing could have been more solemn. They bound 
themselves, by the strongest of all vows, to pro- 
claim liberty to every bondman or bondmaid of 
Hebrew birth. But because there was no true 
self-judgment, no sincere repentance, they soon 
fell back to their old ways. As a result, all these 
unfaithful swearers who “passed between the 
parts of the calf” should be given up to death; 
for their so doing was practically a declaration 
that they would forfeit their lives if they vio- 


182 Notes on veremiah 


lated their agreement. They should be taken at 
their word. Jehovah would give them into their 
enemies’ hands; and their dead bodies should 
have none, like Abram, to drive away the carrion- 
birds of prey, but they should “be for meat unto 
the fowls of the heaven, and to the beasts of the 
earth” (vers. 19, 20). It is a fearful thing to 
trifle with God. He is a consuming fire. How 
little even saints realize the solemnity of having 
to do with Him, the High and Lofty One, who 
inhabiteth Eternity! 

From the last verses (21, 22) we gather that 
the direct reason for the unfaithful going back 
of the people had been the withdrawal for a time 
of the army of the besiegers. They had evidently 
struck their tents and temporarily left the city to 
itself. This was taken to mean that the siege 
was abandoned. Those who before were des- 
perate now became elated and careless. Their 
complacency was ill-timed. The Lord would com- 
mand, “and cause them to return to this city, and 
they shall fight against it, and burn it with fire.” 
The cities of Judah would become a desolation, 
without an inhabitant. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
THE HOUSE OF THE RECHABITES. 


(Chap. 35.) 


In striking contrast to the story of vacillation 
and treachery, recorded in the chapter we have 
just been considering, is the very instructive in- 
cident now brought to our notice. 

The prophet is bidden to go to the house of the 
Rechabites, and, after saluting them, to “bring 
them into the house of the Lord, into one of the 
chambers, and give them wine to drink” (vers. 
1,2). This was sometime during the reign of 
Jehoiakim; therefore a number of years before 
the broken covenant of the last chapter. There 
is, however, a beautiful moral order in present- 
ing it in this connection, utterly precluding the 
impious assumption that the various parts of this 
book have been thrown together haphazard by 
some later editor. 

These Rechabites were not originally of the 
stock of Israel. They were Kenites, a tribe, the 
origin of which is shrouded in mystery. It is 
commonly supposed that they were Midianites by 
extraction, as Jethro the father-in-law of Moses 
belonged to the Kenites (Judges 4:11). Heber 
the Kenite, with his wife Jael, took the part of 
Israel in the war with the Canaanites headed by 
Sisera, who was slain by Jael when he sought 
refuge in her tent. 


184 Notes on Jeremiah 


In 1 Chron. 2: 55 we find the Rechabites num- 
bered with the children of Judah. ‘These are the 
Kenites that came of Hemath, the father of the 
house of Rechab.” It is through their valiant 
representative Jehonadab, the son of Rechab, that 
they first acquired special prominence. It was he 
who went out to meet Jehu after he had been 
anointed king of Israel by the nameless prophet 
sent by Elisha to Ramoth-Gilead. Having de- 
stroyed the vile house of Ahab, and likewise 
many of the house of Ahaziah king of Judah, Jehu 
was riding towards Samaria when “he lighted on 
Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet 
him: and he saluted him, and said to him, Is thy 
heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And 
Jehonadab answered, It is’ (2 Kings 10:15). 
Dramatically Jehu cried, “If it be, give me thy 
hand.” Upon his doing so, he took him up with 
him into the chariot, saying, “Come with me, and 
see my zeal for the Lord.” The conclusion is ir- 
resistible that Jehu already knew Jehonadab well 
as a man devoted to the worship of Jehovah, and 
an abhorrer of idolatry. The piety of his father 
Rechab is expressed in the name given to his 
son, the meaning of which is, “Jehovah freely 
gave.” In company with the zealous but cruel 
king, Jehonadab is found commanding the search 
to see that no servants of Jehovah were mingled 
with the worshipers of Baal in the temple of 
Samaria, prior to their massacre at the order of 
Jehu. He is not again mentioned until we come 
down to our present chapter. 

In accordance with the word of the Lord, Jere- 
miah took Jaazaniah, the son of another Jere- 


The House of the Rechabites 185 


miah, and his brethren, and the whole house of 
the Rechabites, and brought them into the cham- 
ber of the sons of Hanan, a man of God, in the 
temple. Here he set before them pots full of 
wine, and said, “Drink ye wine” (vers. 3-5). 

Nobly they refused the invitation, giving as a 
reason for their conduct the fact that this 
very Jehonadab (called here Jonadab the son of 
Rechab) had, nearly three hundred years before, 
commanded them neither to drink wine, nor to 
build houses, nor sow seed, nor plant nor own 
vineyards, but to dwell ever in tents, that they 
might live many days in the land where they were 
strangers. This command they had literally 
obeyed from his days until the overrunning of 
the country by Nebuchadrezzar. The presence of 
his troops had made it impossible for them to 
live in their former unguarded manner; so, to 
save their lives, they had moved into Jerusalem; 
but although thus obliged to dwell in a walled 
city, they would not violate the command for- 
bidding them to drink of the fruit of the vine 
(vers. 6-11). Their reverence for and obedience 
to their great ancestor is all the more striking 
when the dissolute state of Israel and Judah is 
taken into consideration. 

They were a living sermon on subjection to 
the law, for any who would take cognizance of 
them. Hence Jeremiah is bidden to “Go and teil 
the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem, Will ye not receive instruction to hearken 
to My words? saith the Lord” (vers. 12, 13). 
Alas, their record had ever been that they only 
knew His law in order to break it. From the day 


186 Notes on Jeremvan 


when they made the calf in the wilderness until 
the time in which Jeremiah ministered to them, 
their history had been one long, shameful account 
of disobedience and wilful rejection of His Word. 
Long ere this, He, through Isaiah, had cried, 
“Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the 
Lord hath spoken; I have nourished and brought 
up children, and they have rebelled against Me. 
The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his mas- 
ter’s crib: but Israel doth not know, My people 
doth not consider” (Isa. 1:2, 3). Less respon- 
sive than the beasts that perish, they had turned 
away their ears from His law, and refused to 
walk in the way of His commandments. 

Has not this awful indictment a solemn mes- 
sage for Christians? How widespread is the 
same wilful spirit even among those who are 
“bought with a price,” even the precious blood 
of Christ! How many of us act as truly knowing 
our Owner? We are not our own, but His who sold 
all that He had to purchase us! What kind of a 
bargain has He had? What is our Master’s crib 
but the holy Word of God, so often neglected and 
uncared for in Christian homes! What an abun- 
dance of good provender does it contain, and all 
for the sheep of Christ! Yet how is it turned 
from, while the husks of this world are sought 
instead! It is to be feared there is very little 
moral difference between the state of Judah in 
the days of her downfall and the house of God 
to-day. Let us see to it that we learn the lesson 
of these faithful Rechabites. 

Wine, in Scripture, is the symbol of joy 
(Judges 9:13; Ps. 104:15). The Nazarite of 


The House of the Rechabites 187 


old was to refrain from it, for he found not his 
joy in a ruined creation. The sons of Rechab, 
as strangers and pilgrims, touch not that which 
comes from the vine of the earth. They speak, 
in type, of those who seek a higher, deeper, more 
lasting joy than this world can ever offer. Hav- 
ing here no continuing city, dwelling in the pil- 
grim’s tent, sinking no foundations in this ter- 
restrial scene, they reach out for that which is to 
come. What a contrast to the time-serving 
trucklers to the present age, as well as to the 
faithless people and princes of the times of Jere- 
miah! 

The Lord goes on to say that the words of 
Jonadab were performed by his descendants in 
all faithfulness; but although He had given His 
Word, “rising early and speaking,” His people had 
not hearkened. Prophets, one after another, had 
been sent, bidding them refrain from their evil 
ways and amend their doings by turning truly to 
Himself from all their false gods. If they would 
thus obey His voice, He would prosper them still, 
and preserve them in their land. But there was 
no response. They inclined not the ear, nor heark- 
ened to His entreaties. 

Once more, therefore, it becomes the painful 
duty of the man who loved them so dearly that 
his heart was pained for them, to declare the 
doom that must soon be meted out to them. All 
the evil that the Lord had pronounced against 
them must shortly fall upon the city and the 
country, because, when He spake, they listened 
not; when He called, they answered not (vers. 
16, 17). This is the opposite of what we get 


188 Notes on Jeremiah 


in Prov. 1:28. There the wayward are warned 
of a time coming of which God says, “Then shall 
they call upon Me, but I will not answer; they 
shall seek Me early, but they shall not find Me.” 
This is the fearful result of such a course as 
that pursued by treacherous Judah, and by an 
equally treacherous Christendom. 

As to the house of the Rechabites, it was de- 
clared to them, by the authority of the Lord Him- 
self, that because of their faithful adherence to 
the commandments of Jonadab their father, he 
should not want a man to stand before Jehovah 
forever (vers. 18, 19). The family of this de- 
voted man has long since been lost to history, 
both sacred and profane, but we gather from this 
promise that somewhere in this world his de- 
scendants still exist; and, doubtless, in the Mil- 
lennium, when all the prophecies regarding Israel 
and Judah are fulfilled, the house of Rechab will 
once more appear upon the scene, a testimony to 
the faithfulness of Him who is “not a man, that. 
He should lie; neither the son of man, that He 
should repent: hath He said, and shall He not 
do it? or hath He spoken, and shall He not make 
it good?” (Num. 23:19). 

In that day the Rechabites shall drink the pure 
joys that flow through the scene of Immanuel’s 
presence; nor will it appear as a hardship that 
they were denied the fruit of the vine while the 
curse rested upon the earth for man’s sake. 


CHAPTER XX 
THE FIRST DESTRUCTIVE CRITIC ON RECORD 
(Chap. 36.) 


Among the host of latter-day evils which are 
sapping the very foundations of Christianity in 
the minds of the masses, none has been more 
audaciously impious in its assault upon the truth 
of God than the so-called Higher Criticism. Un- 
der the guise of reverent scholarship seeking to 
determine the authenticity of books that faith has 
never questioned, the advocates of this destruc- 
tive school have not hesitated to cut in pieces the 
Scriptures of truth, and deliberately seek to 
falsify the very words of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
He, at least, who knew all things, had no doubts 
as to the divine authority of every jot and tittle 
of the Old Testament. It was to Him the inspired 
utterance of the Holy Ghost. 

His apostles, likewise, accepted every part of it 
—the Law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms— 
as God’s unerring message to His creatures. No- 
where is there the least hesitancy as to owning 
the full authority of any portion of what was in 
their day the accepted canon of Holy Scripture 

It has remained for present-day theorists, be- 
reft alike of sound judgment and true godliness, 
to challenge the genuineness and to impugn the 
veracity of what our Lord and His first follow- 
ers (themselves inspired men) received without 
question as the “oracles of God.” 


“190 Notes on Jeremiah 


Terrible indeed must be the judgment of those 
who seek thus to undermine faith in God’s holy 
Word, and to turn the simple from the ways that 
be in Christ to paths of error and confusion. And 
what, alas, will be the eternal state of those who, 
in many instances, accept all too greedily the poi- 
soned sweetness of these venders of religious con- 
fections, glad in heart to be released from a sense 
of responsibility to God and His Word that has 
been at least a check upon their consciences, when 
tempted to ways of utter ungodliness? 

Rest assured, dear fellow-believer, ours is a 
faith founded upon an impregnable Rock. Men 
who refuse it do so to their own destruction. The 
wild vagaries of the destructive critics are only 
the precursors of the great apostasy that is now 
near at hand. But, thank God, ere that awful 
night of gloomy unbelief settles down upon the 
minds of the great mass of Christendom, the 
Church will have been caught away to be with 
the Lord in the Father’s house. The Holy Spirit, 
with the Body of Christ, leaving this scene, Anti- 
christ will quickly arise, to whom all the vaunted 
learning of the day, then Christless, will bow the 
knee; for “God shall send them strong delusion, 
that they should believe the lie: that they all 
may be judged because they obeyed not the truth, 
but had pleasure in unrighteousness” (2 Thess. 
21412). 

These opponents of the important truth of the 
plenary inspiration of the Scriptures are but the 
John the Baptists of Antichrist—the preparers 
of his way. 

No honest reader of the Old Testament can fail 


The First Destructive Critic on Record 191 


to see that inspiration is stamped on every page. 
Jesus affirms it again and again; and when 
quoting Old Testament Scripture, does so as giv- 
ing forth the last word on the subject, against 
which there can be no gainsaying. Note it in 
His temptation, where each passage quoted in de- 
feat of Satan is taken from Deuteronomy, the 
book so much attacked by the critics. He who 
knew all things questioned neither its reputed 
authorship, nor its divine authority. Elsewhere 
He solemnly declares, “The Scripture cannot be 
broken,” and that “not one jot or tittle shall pass 
from the Law until all be fulfilled.” The Scrip- 
tures everywhere bear witness of Him, and He is 
seen as the fulfilment of Scripture. In the wilder- 
ness; in His life of service; in His passion on 
the tree—one thing after another is said or done 
“that it might be fulfilled which was written” in 
the Law, the Prophets and the Psalms concern- 
ing Him; and in resurrection it is still the same. 
To the two on the road to Emmaus He opens up 
the sacred volume, explaining in every scripture 
the things concerning Himself. 

It is the same with the apostles: for Peter, 
Paul, James or Jude the testimony of Scripture is 
the end of controversy: “Well spake the Holy 
Ghost,” “The Holy Ghost saith,” “As it is writ- 
ten”—-such are the expressions used to introduce 
passages from the three great divisions of the 
Old Testament. In reverence they received every 
word as direct from the living God. 

As to the New Testament writings, the stamp 
of divine authority rests upon every page. The 
Lord Jesus said to His apostles, “Whoso heareth 


192 Notes on Jeremiah 


you heareth Me.” And John therefore writes, 
“We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth 
us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby 
know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of er- 
ror” (1 John 4:6). In the most solemn way he 
seals the authority of the book of Revelation, 
testifying that “if any man shall add unto these 
things, God shall add unto him the plagues that 
are written in this book; and if any man shall 
take away from the words of the book of this 
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the 
book of life, and out of the holy city, and from 
the things which are written in this book’’ (Rev. 
222183019) 

Peter, too, classes the letters of “our beloved 
brother Paul’ with “the other Scriptures,” thus 
attesting their divine source; and the great 
apostle to the Gentiles asserts full inspiration in 
unmistakable terms: “Which things also we 
speak, not in the words which man’s wisdom 
teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth” (1 
Cor. 2:13). And in 1 Cor. 14: 37 he writes: “If 
any man think himself to be a prophet, or spirit- 
ual, let him acknowledge that the things that I 
write unto you are the commandments of the 
Lord.” To so acknowledge brings lasting bless- 
ing; to deny, brings shame and everlasting con- 
fusion, after the plaudits of the “liberal-minded”’ 
have been hushed for aye! 

It is sometimes stated there are portions of 
Paul’s epistles where he himself disclaims divine 
authority, but gives his own private opinion. Be- 
cause of the importance of the subject, and in 
order to help any reader who may thus be troubled, 


The First Destructive Critic on Record 193 


we will turn aside to notice these passages. .In 
1 Cor. 7 he writes, as to the relations of husbands 
and wives, and in the opening verses gives them 
their true place in the family. In ver. 5 he says: 
“Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with 
consent for a time, that you may give yourselves 
to fasting and prayer; and come together again, 
that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.” 
Then he immediately adds: “But I speak this 
by permission, and not by commandment.” That 
is, he does not command such times of separation, 
which in some households might bring in con- 
fusion—he simply permits it in cases where it 
would be profitable. The Revised Version reads: 
“T speak this by way of permission.” Only an 
ungodly will could pervert this te teach that the 
apostle was denying direct inspiration. 

Ver. 12 is supposed to teach similarly. If com- 
pared with vers. 10 and 11 all is clear. ‘Unto 
the married I command, yet not I, but the Lord, 
Let not the wife depart from her husband: but 
and if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or 
be reconciled to her husband: and let not the 
husband put away his wife.” All this was di- 
rectly commanded by the Lord in Matt. 19. There- 
fore he says, “Yet not I, but the Lord.” He had 
already spoken. Now look at the next verse: 
“But to the rest speak I, not the Lord (that is, 
the Lord had not heretofore spoken as to what 
is to follow; the apostle himself declares the mind 
of God regarding it) : “If any brother hath a wife 
that believeth not, and she be pleased to dwell 
with him,” etc.; and here instruction is given for 
varied cases as they might come ur, 


194 Notes on Jeremiah 


Notice the authoritative tone in ver. 17: “And 
so ordain I in all the churches.’”’ Here we have 
both conscious inspiration and authority. 


In ver. 25 he writes: “Now concerning virgins 
I have no commandment of the Lord: yet I give 
my judgment, as one that hath obtained mercy 
of the Lord to be faithful.’ The italicized por- 
tion negatives all thought of partial or non- 
inspiration. He gives an inspired judgment based 
on the place God has given him. The 40th verse 
is similar. His was a judgment guided by the 
Spirit of God. There is a difference between 
revelation and inspiration. Here we have the lat- 
ter, but not necessarily the former. 

As to the universality of his writings, or their 
application to all believers, the opening verses of 
the epistle we have been looking at state it most 
emphatically. He writes “unto the church of God 
which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified 
in Christ Jesus, with all that in every place call 
upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both 
theirs and ours” (ver. 2). Could words be 
plainer? Who, that is at all subject to the Scrip- 
tures, would limit the application of a letter so 
addressed ? 

Note, too, how he speaks of himself in the 
introduction to the Romans. “By whom we have 
received grace and apostleship, for obedience to 
the faith among all nations, for His name” (ver. 
5). 

And so one might go on from epistle to epistle 
and point out similar evidences of his conscious- 
ness that what he wrote was binding on the con- 


The First Destructive Critic on Record 195 


sciences of all saints, because inspired by the 
Holy Ghost. 

Let us turn now to the chapter before us, 
which gives us the first recorded instance of this 
unhallowed mutilation and rejection of the writ- 
ten Word of God—now so common. The exceed- 
ing importance of the subject alone has made so 
long a digression permissible. 

In the fourth year of Jehoiakim, Jeremiah was 
instructed by the Lord to take a roll of a book 
and to write all that He had spoken against both 
Israel and Judah and the surrounding nations, 
from the beginning of the prophet’s ministry in 
the days of Josiah unto the time when so com- 
manded (vers. 1, 2). We read of no writings of 
his prior to this; the letters of chap. 29 having 
been penned some years later. All his messages 
had been delivered orally. Now they are to be 
gathered together in the form of a book, so that 
the king and the house of Judah may the better 
consider what God had said. Jehovah adds, “It 
may be that the house of Judah will hear all the 
evil which I purpose to do unto them; that they 
may return every man from his evil way; that 
I may forgive their iniquity and their sin” (ver. 
8). How God longed for their recovery! He had 
no delight in their judgment. Much more readily 
would He have granted forgiveness had there 
been any evidence of repentance and contrition 
of heart. 

Accordingly, Baruch wrote “all the words of 
the Lord” at Jeremiah’s dictation. The prophet 
himself was “shut up” (in what way we know 
not), and could not go to the house of the Lord, 


196 Notes on Jeremiah 


but Baruch is sent to read all that has been writ- 
ten to the assembled multitudes, upon the occa- 
sion of a fast which had been proclaimed because 
of the wretched conditions prevailing, when all 
the cities of Judah would be represented in Jeru- 
salem. Gathered thus for humiliation and the 
afflicting of their souls, it might be they would 
give ear to the Word of God, and turn from 
their manifold iniquities when they knew the 
great anger of the Lord and what He had pro- 
nounced against them (vers. 6, 7). 

This fast was to take place in the ninth month 
of Jehoiakim’s fifth year. On that day the son 
of Neriah repaired to the temple and read in the 
book before all the people, at the door of the 
new gate of the Lord’s house, standing in the 
entrance to the chamber of Gemariah the son of 
Shaphan the scribe. 

The son of this Gemariah, Michaiah by name, 
seems to have been deeply affected by the words 
to which he had listened. His heart and mind 
full of them, he went down to the scribe’s cham- 
ber, of the royal palace, where he found a com- 
pany of the chief men assembled. Among them 
were his own father, and a scribe known as Eli- 
shama, together with other leaders of the people, 
and all the princes. To them the young mar 
gave an outline of all he had heard from Baruch’s 
reading of the roll. They were evidently con- 
cerned, for the time at least, for they sent at 
once to summon the servant of the prophet to 
bring the book and come to their council-hall; 
and having come, they said, “Sit down, and read 
it in our ears.” 


The First Destructive Critic on Record 197 


So for the second time that day Baruch read 
the solemn messages, with the result that they ° 
were afraid, and said to the reader, “We will 
surely tell the king of these words.” They de- 
sired to be certain that the writing was indeed 
what it professed to be, a series of messages 
from Jehovah through Jeremiah; so they asked 
Baruch, ‘Tell us now, How didst thou write all 
these words at his mouth?” He replied, “He pro- 
nounced all these words unto me with his mouth, 
and I wrote them with ink in the book.” 

Evidently realizing something of the impor- 
tance of the contents of the roll, yet fearing the 
king’s wrath upon the promulgators of it, and 
being solicitous as to the prophet’s welfare, the 
princes warned Baruch, saying, ‘“‘Go, hide thee, 
thou and Jeremiah; and let no man know where 
ye be” (vers. 11-19). 

Laying up the roll in the chamber of Elishama, 
the scribe, the princes and chief men hied them- 
selves to the king’s palace, and gave to Jehoiakim 
the gist of the words it contained. Jehudi is sent 
at once to fetch it, and began to read it in the 
presence of the king and of the princes who stood 
beside him. The reader had but gone over three 
or four leaves when the impatient monarch “cut 
it with a penknife,” or a “scribe’s knife,” and 
deliberately cast it into the fire before him. In 
vain three of the princes besought the king not 
to burn the sacred roll. The king persisted in his 
impiety; neither did he nor his servants manifest 
any fear or concern for the affront offered to 
Jehovah. On the contrary, an order was issued 
for the arrest of both Baruch and Jeremiah, but 


198 Notes on Jeremiah 


the Lord cared for His servants, and “hid them” 
(vers. 20-26). 

The king thus put himself on record as the first 
mutilator of the Word of God recorded in Scrip- 
ture. Alas, how many have followed in his steps 
since that day, when, all unknown to himself and 
his foolhardy friends, he sealed his doom by his 
wilful rejection of the inspired message. The 
“seribe’s knife’ has often been used since to 
mutilate and destroy the Word of truth—aye, 
to the final sorrow of every one that does it! 
Heaven and earth may pass away; the Word of 
God, never! Truth cannot be destroyed; it is 
unalterable, and the will of impious “scholarship” 
can never set it aside. The emissaries of Rome, 
also, sought to make an end of it in the days of 
papal persecutions. Thousands of Bibles were 
consigned to the flames, but they became as the 
seed from which millions of copies sprang. In- 
fidelity has raged and done its worst to discredit 
it. Still the Bible is triumphant. Any other 
book, so treated, would long ago have been but 
a memory, and have disappeared from the face 
of the earth: but God has cared for it. 

It has remained for so-called Christian scholars 
to emulate Romanism and Atheism, under the 
guise of legitimate criticism, in knifing the sacred 
volume and consigning large portions of it to the 
fire of their cheap scorn and derision, as un- 
reliable and uninspired; but they have yet to 
learn that the book they criticize is, itself, the 
supreme critic. “For the Word of God is quick 
and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged 
sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of 


The First Destructive Critic on Record 199 


soul and spirit and of the joints and marrow, and 
is a discerner (literally, critic) of the thoughts 
and intents of the heart. Neither is there any 
creature that is not manifest in His sight; but 
all things are naked and opened unto the eyes 
of Him with whom we have to do” (Heb. 4: 12, 
13). Of the Word of God, as of the person of 
Christ, it may be said: ‘Whosoever shall fall on 
this stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it 
shall fall, it will grind him to powder” (Matt. 21: 
44), 

In that solemn day when the “books are 
opened” Jehoiakim will find, unharmed by the 
flames, the roll he wantonly sought to destroy 
brought out as a witness against his guilty soul; 
and those who now, whatever their profession, 
assail the truth, seeking to discredit the Scrip- 
tures as the very Word of God, will be judged 
then by the very portions they now refuse. Who 
can conceive the awful awakening of men in that 
day who have filled Christian pulpits and doled 
out veneered infidelity to the ignorant and the 
blind, to the destruction of themselves and their 
willing hearers—what an awakening, when they 
stand face to face with Him who sits upon “the 
great white throne,” whose Word they have dared 
to impugn! They will behold in the glory the 
“mythical Abraham” who believed God; the “un- 
known” Isaiah, who testified to the coming of the 
Lord Jesus in terms so unmistakably clear; the 
very Jonah whose story they had laughed to 
scorn; and the Daniel whose experiences they 
had classed with fables: all these veritable, liv- 
ing men, in the abode of light and bliss; but 


200 Notes on Jeremiah 


themselves, who ridiculed their very existence, 
alas, cast into outer darkness forever, nevermore 
to doubt the Word of God! 

Jehoiakim’s effort to destroy the Scriptures, 
like all others since, could only be utterly futile. 
The Word of the Lord came again to Jeremiah to 
“take another roll, and write in it all the former 
words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim 
the king of Judah had burned” (vers. 27, 28). 
Not only would the prophecies which had been 
consigned to the flames be re-written and pre- 
served forever, but much more was to be added. 

As for the impious monarch, condign punish- 
ment must be meted out to him, that others 
might learn not to trifle with or reject the Word 
of God. “Then shalt thou say to Jehoiakim king 
of Judah, Thus saith the Lord: Thou hast burned 
this roll, saying, Why hast thou written therein, 
saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come 
and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease 
from thence man and beast? Therefore thus 
saith the Lord of Jehoiakim king of Judah: He 
shall have none to sit upon the throne of David: 
and his dead body shall be cast out in the day 
to the heat, and in the night to the frost’ (vers. 
30, 31). It may have seemed to some that this 
declaration, so far as his having none to sit upon 
David’s throne was concerned, had signally failed, 
when upon his captivity his son Jehoiakim, or 
Jeconiah, ascended that throne. But after an in- 
glorious reign of but three months and ten days 
he was carried away to Babylon with a great 
number of the people, in accordance with the 
doom pronounced upon him by this same prophet, 
in chapter 22: 30. 


The First Destructive Critic on Record 201 


Not one thing should fail of all that Jehovah 
had pronounced against Judah and Jerusalem. 
To refuse to read the roll and to destroy it in 
the fire did not in any sense annul it (ver. 31). 

In accordance with this word, “Jeremiah took 
another roll, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, 
the son of Neriah, who wrote therein from the 
mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book 
which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in 
the fire: and there were added besides unto them 
many like words” (ver. 32). 


CHAPTER XXI 
THE FALL OF JERUSALEM. 
(Chaps. 37-39.) 


We now enter upon what is more especially the 
historical part of the book. Jeremiah’s admon- 
itory ministry was drawing to aclose. Faithfully 
and fervently he had, ever since Josiah’s day 
(that is, for a period of some thirty years or 
more), warned and pleaded and entreated his 
backsliding and treacherous people; but there had 
been no true response. They had put Jehovah’s 
word behind their backs and drifted further and 
further from His counsels. Now the judgment so 
long announced, while the Lord waited in long- 
suffering patience, can be no more delayed, but 
must fall with awful fury upon the devoted na- 
tion. The words spoken through Hosea two cen- 
turies earlier must at last be fulfilled. “I will go 
and return to My place till they acknowledge 
their offence” (or, till they be guilty; that is, con- 
fessedly so), “and seek My face: in their afflic- 
tion they will seek Me early” (Hosea 5:15). 

In wondrous grace and mercy they had been 
spared the final blow thus far; but there is now 
no remedy. Nothing can turn aside Jehovah’s in- 
dignation. They must learn in captivity what 
they would not be taught in their own land. 

In the 87th and 38th chapters we have a de- 
tailed account of the temporary withdrawal of 
the Babylonian troops upon the occasion of the 


The Fall of Jerusalem 203 


Egyptian invasion. This for the moment raises 
the hopes of the people, as already noted in chap. 
34, Jeremiah, having the secret of the Lord, as- 
sures them that the respite is but temporary, and 
that the Chaldeans will return shortly and utterly 
destroy Jerusalem. 

Then we find this honored servant of God seek- 
ing to escape from the doomed city. It is appar- 
ently a mistake on his part: though we would 
not criticize. He was worn in body and mind. 
His testimony was rejected. He himself was 
hated and persecuted. What more natural than 
that, feeling his work is completed, he should seek 
quiet and respite in his old home in the land of 
Benjamin? It was indeed a natural thing, but 
not a spiritual one; hence we find the Lord does 
not permit him to carry out his purpose. His 
apprehension results in a false charge and impris- 
onment. From death he is marvelously deliv- 
ered. Chap. 39 gives the fall of the city. The 
prophet is, however, favored by the conqueror. 
There was no need to flee to Benjamin. The hand 
of God is stretched forth to protect His servant 
in the woeful day. But we must look at all this 
more in detail, for it is of intense interest, and 
pregnant with instruction. 

“And king Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned 
instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom 
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made king in 
the land of Judah. But neither he, nor his serv- 
ants, nor the people of the land, did hearken unto 
the words of the Lord which He spake by the 
prophet Jeremiah” (chap. 37:1, 2). We have 
already noticed that no chronological order is fol- 


204 Notes on Jeremiah 


lowed in the arrangement of this book. Rather, 
we have prophecies and incidents grouped to-— 
gether, and narrated in such moral order as to 
give us an ever-increasing sense of the departure 
from God, which culminated at last in His re- 
jection of His once-favored heritage, and the 
pouring out of condign judgment. In these two 
verses we have a succinct account of Zedekiah’s 
whole reign. It was eleven years of indifference 
to the Word of the Lord. This king personally 
was not so daringly impious as some of his pre- 
decessors. He realized in some measure the 
claims of God upon him and his people, but he 
never earnestly set himself, like Hezekiah or his 
father Josiah, to seek His face and to do those 
things that were pleasing in His sight. He was 
supine and frivolous—almost incredibly so, at so 
serious a time. 

In the next verse we read of his sending 
Jehucal and Zephaniah the priest (whose ac- 
quaintance we made in chaps. 21, 29) to Jeremiah 
with the request, “Pray now unto the Lord our 
God for us.” It was a similar errand upon which 
Zephaniah had gone shortly before (chap. 21:1, 
2). There is no word of repentance; no confes- 
sion, or grief for Judah’s awful sin. Jehovah is 
owned in a certain sense, and His aid is sought, 
but all is selfish; there is no prostration of soul 
in His presence. 

Pharaoh’s army had essayed to come out of 
Egypt to the relief of the Hebrew king, who had 
sent ambassadors beseeching him to “give him 
horses and much people” (Ezek. 17:15). Hear- 
ing of this move, the Chaldeans immediately 


The Fall of Jerusalem 205 


raised the siege of Jerusalem and departed -to 
give battle to this new enemy ere he could secure 
any real advantage (ver. 5). This to the Jews 
seemed a good omen and greatly revived their 
hopes. Now, if their long-neglected God would 
help them, they might achieve a decided victory, 
and by union with Egypt throw off the hated 
Babylonian yoke. This was not to be, however. 

In answer to Zedekiah’s request, the prophet 
replies: “Thus shall ye say to the king of Judah, 
that sent you unto me to inquire of me: Behold, 
Pharaoh’s army, which is come forth to help you, 
shall return to Egypt, into their own land. And 
the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight against 
this city, and take it, and burn it with fire. Thus 
saith the Lord: Deceive not yourselves, saying, 
The Chaldeans shall surely depart from us: for 
they shall not depart. For though ye had smit- 
ten the whole army of the Chaldeans that fight 
against you, and there remained but wounded 
men among them, yet should they rise up every 
man in his tent, and burn this city with fire” 
(vers. 6-10). Both in grace and in judgment 
God will fulfil all His word. For stubborn, wil- 
ful Judah there can be no deliverance, because 
there is no self-judgment nor humbling on their 
part. It seemed as though some mad infatuation 
possessed the people. They “knew not the time 
of their visitation,’ as was the case with their 
children in a later period. 

How strikingly analogous was their condition 
to that of Christendom, “whose judgment now 
for a long time slumbereth not.” Men still love 
to deceive themselves with a vain optimism 


206 Notes on Jeremiah 


founded on the desires of their own deceitful 
hearts, ignoring the sure testimonies of Him who 
hath said,“Vengeance is Mine; I will recompense.” 
Teachers and people, or clergy and laity, as 
they are unscripturally designated, congratulate 
themselves on the great strides being made, as 
they affirm, by Christianity and civilization; but, 
alas, in how large a measure is it a mere Christ- 
less religiousness and a culture that in no sense 
affects the heart! The departure from God and 
His Word plainly evidenced on every hand calls 
forth no confession of sin, no repentance; but, 
instead, men congratulate each other and boast 
of large-mindedness and liberality, while despis- 
ing the ways that be in Christ, and the paths of 
scriptural simplicity. Church and world are 
linked up in an unholy concubinage, and thus 
God is dishonored and His claims ignored. Sure- 
ly the prophetic Word points to dire judgment to 
come upon the professing body, composed largely, 
as it is, of mere earth-dwellers who are strangers 
to the heavenly calling. It is a time when every 
faithful minister of Christ needs both grace and 
wisdom to “cry aloud and spare not,” but to show 
the people their sins. We know the end of 
this empty profession, persistently dishonoring 
Christ’s holy name and Word, must be the sub- 
jection to spiritual Babylon, whose power is yet 
to be supreme on earth in matters religious, 
though but for a brief space, God having likewise 
already pronounced her judgment (Rev. 17, 18). 
What God had decreed concerning Israel and 
Judah for their apostasy and forgetfulness of 
His Word was fulfilled to the letter. His declara- 


The Fall of Jerusalem 207 


tions concerning a far guiltier Christendom shall 
likewise be carried out. 

It was when Jeremiah saw that all hope of the 
people’s repentance was past, and that sure and 
certain wrath awaited them, that he essayed to 
leave the city, where he had ministered so long, 
to go to the land of Benjamin: probably to his 
own home, for it is to be remembered he was a 
priest of Anathoth, a city belonging to that tribe. 
He was now considerably past middle life, pos- 
sibly prematurely aged because of all that he had 
gone through, and his usefulness appeared to be 
over. It does not seem to be fear that actuates 
him. Through grace he is above that. It would 
rather seem to be a longing for rest after so 
arduous a life, with its sorrows and its disap- 
pointments. Accordingly, taking advantage of 
the withdrawal of the Chaldean army, he endeav- 
ors to make good his purpose (vers. 11, 12). 
However good and right that purpose might ap- 
pear, it is a step in advance of the Lord. It is 
never safe to plan one’s own way, or to seek an 
easier path for one’s self. In this instance the 
prophet clearly is acting in the energy of nature. 
God has a service for him still, as will be mani- 
fested in due time, even after the rebellious city 
has been overthrown. Jeremiah, devoted servant 
as he was, erred in choosing for himself. Even 
a Paul went to Jerusalem against the plain testi- 
mony of the Holy Ghost, drawn by natural affec- 
tion for his kinsmen after the flesh. So our 
prophet is for the moment turned aside from the 
path of implicit dependence upon God, led appar- 
ently by a desire for rest and quiet after his 


208 Notes on Jeremiah 


stormy life. He must learn, as every other, that 
it igs not in man to direct his way. The Lord is 
not yet through with him. He has a ministry for 
the poor who are to be spared from the sword, 
and for all who are left in the land. 

As a result of his effort to better his condition, 
he is misunderstood and brought into deeper dis- 
tress. He was in the gate of Benjamin when a 
captain of the ward, Irijah, apprehended him, 
saying, “Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans” 
(ver. 18). In vain Jeremiah protested his in- 
nocence and the utter falsity of the charge. Iri- 

‘jah refused to credit his explanation, and carried 
him before the princes. It is hardly to be sup- 
posed that these men really believed him to be 
guilty, but it gave them an opportunity to vent 
their hatred upon the man who had so often re- 
proved them. He was ignominiously smitten, 
and, apparently without a hearing, was cast into 
prison, in the house of Jonathan the scribe (ver. 
15). From what befeli Jeremiah we may learn 
it is always best to sit still when there is no 
command from God to move. The best of serv- 
ants and the most faithful men blunder when 
they take things into their own hands. Little as 
one may realize it, or mean it to be so at the 
time, this acting for one’s self really implies lack 
of confidence in God’s love and care. Faith can 
wait upon Him, assured that He is far too much 
concerned about His children to overlook any- 
thing that is for their good; hence it is quiet and 
restful amid all changing circumstances. Unbe- 
lief forgets God and suggets that we must 
act; opportunities are slipping away—something, 


The Fall of Jerusalem 209 


must be done, and at once. This looks, to the 
natural mind, like sound judgment and common 
sense; but, alas, how often, when acted upon, are 
things made not better, but worse! It is far 
preferable to wait quietly upon Him whose wis- 
dom never fails, and who sees the end from the 
beginning, than to rashly venture forth in the 
energy of nature, only to be defeated in the very 
purpose one seeks to achieve. 

That the king knew the prophet was innocent 
of the charge upon which Irijah had arrested him 
is evident from the remaining verses of the chap- 
ter (16-21). Jeremiah was cast into the dungeon 
and into the cells—probably underground apart- 
ments, gloomy and damp. There he was allowed 
to remain for many days, neglected, and with no 
opportunity given to clear himself of the imputa- 
tion of treachery. Eventually Zedekiah sent and 
took him out for a secret conference in the pal- 
ace, and asked him, “Is there any word from the 
Lord?” What a picture is here presented for us: 
the man on the throne and the man from the 
dungeon confronting each other, and the former 
is forced to own the superiority of the latter. 
The falsely accused prisoner has the secret of the 
Lord, and the haughty monarch is dependent on 
the prisoner to learn of Jehovah’s purpose. 

In reply to the anxious question Jeremiah 
gives the old answer. There is indeed a message 
from the Lord: it is the same so often given be- 
fore, and unheeded. “For,” said he, “thou shalt 
be delivered into the hand of the king of Baby- 
lon.” ‘There is no effort to palliate the terrible 
truth; no endeavor to win the king’s favor by 


210 Notes on Jeremiah 


good words and fair speeches. The plain, un- 
welcome truth is declared; and then, with neither 
apology nor flattery, he pleads his cause before 
the king: “What have I offended against thee, 
or against thy servants, or against this people, 
that ye have put me in prison? Where are now 
your prophets which prophesied unto you, say- 
ing, The king of Babylon shall not come against 
you, nor against this land? Therefore hear now, 
I pray thee, O my lord the king: let my suppli- 
cation, I pray thee, be accepted before thee, that 
thou cause me not to return to the house of 
Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.” 

Manifestly the army of the king of Babylon 
had again invested the city; the word of Jere- 
miah had proved true, and the false prophets had 
been put to shame. Convinced that injustice and 
wrong had been done the man of God, Zedekiah 
gives order that his circumstances be made more 
endurable, though he does not release him nor 
declare abroad his innocence. With the shame of 
supposed crime against his country hanging over 
him still, Jeremiah is taken from the dungeon 
and given a place in the court of the prison, with 
the allowance of “a daily piece of bread out of 
the baker’s street,” so long as any bread remains 
in the city. Famine rations are being served out 
by weight. The end cannot be far away. 

Among the king’s ministers of state there were 
many, however, who entertained for the pessi- 
mistic prophet feelings far different to those of 
the monarch himself. It was reported to a few 
of these that Jeremiah had said to the people, 
“Thus saith the Lord: He that remaineth in this 


The Fall of Jerusalem 211 


city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and 
by the pestilence: but he that goeth forth to the 
Chaldeans shall live; for he shall have his life 
for a prey, and shall live.” It was also told them 
that he had declared, “Thus saith the Lord: This 
city shall surely be given into the hand of the 
king of Babylon’s army, which shall take it” (38: 
1-3. As we know, these prophecies had in- 
deed been uttered. Almost the identical words 
are recorded in chap. 21: 9, when Pashur, the 
son of Malchiah (or Melchiah, as he is there 
called), was one of the messengers sent to him 
by king Zedekiah. He is now one of Jeremiah’s 
accusers, with three others, Shephatiah, Gedaliah 
(the son of another Pashur), and Jucal. Again 
and again, on divers occasions, the fall of Jeru- 
salem had been clearly foretold. Like his Lord, 
Jeremiah could say, “In secret have I said noth- 
ing.” Openly, in the presence of the populace, 
nobles, priests, and the king, had he faithfully de- 
clared the truth of God regarding the doomed 
city. For this he was hated. His words seemed 
to put a premium upon what to the nobles and 
captains looked like treachery. 

Burning with indignation against the man who 
so solemnly declared the utter futility of all their 
schemes and devices, they accused Jeremiah be- 
fore the king, and urged that he be executed as 
a traitor. ‘We beseech thee,” they pleaded, “let 
this man be put to death, for thus he weakeneth 
the hands of the men of war that remain in this 
city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking 
such words unto them, for this man seeketh not 
the welfare of this people, but the hurt” (ver. 4). 


212 Notes on Jeremiah 


How little can worldly met. anderstand that true 
love for the people leads one faithfully to show 
them their sins and their danger! Little indeed 
could these four accusers enter into the deep sor- 
rows and anguish of heart that the “weeping 
prophet” had experienced on their account. Like 
Paul, the more abundantly he loved them, the less 
he was loved in return. It is one of the hardest 
trials a devoted servant has to bear when his 
good is thus evil spoken of, and his very affec- 
tion mistaken for malice, because it makes it im- 
possible for him to hold his peace and to permit 
the people to sleep on in their sins without lift- 
ing a warning voice. Yet, in some measure, such 
has been the cup that every truly godly soul has 
had to drink; and none ever tasted it so deeply 
and frequently as our blessed Lord Himself. It 
is of the false prophets that the world speaks well. 
The true are accounted as the offscouring of the 
earth. 

In this case Zedekiah, ever a weakling, suc- 
cumbs to the demands of his ministers. He con- 
sents to the death of Jeremiah in words that well 
betray his impotency, but which, like Pilate’s, in 
no sense lessen his guilt. “Behold, he is in your 
hand: for the king is not he that can do any- 
thing against you” (ver.5). Having obtained the 
royal consent, the four conspirators took Jere- 
miah and cast him into the dungeon of Malchiah, 
which was in the court of the prison, letting him 
down with cords—a filthy pit, with no water, but 
offensive mire, in which Jeremiah sank, and was 
heartlessly left in this wretched plight. The ob- 
ject, doubtless, was to let him die, unknown to 


The Fall of Jerusatem 213‘ 


the populace, who might have had superstitious 
or conscientious scruples about making away with 
the man who professed to speak in the name of 
Jehovah. Shephatiah and his associates would 
allow him to starve to death, alone and unsought, 
in this abominable, miry dungeon. 

God had other thoughts, however, and would 
not thus permit His servant’s martyrdom. The 
suffering and shame were all part of the disci- 
pline His love saw to be necessary, and He would 
not allow him to be spared the humiliation and 
anguish they entailed; but, like Job, his life was 
inviolable. In the prophet’s hour of need a friend 
is raised up of whom otherwise we might never 
have heard. He is a colored servant in the king’s 
household, an Ethiopian eunuch, Ebed-melech— 
perhaps nameless, so far as our narrative is con- 
cerned; for Ebed-melech, translated, is simply 
“servant of the king,’ and may not be a proper 
name at all. In this dark-skinned servant’s heart 
glowed a pity and a sympathy, as well as a recog- 
nition of the divine office of Jeremiah, to which 
the four accusers were strangers. Like the young 
man in Acts 23:16 used for Paul’s deliverance, 
here also God had prepared this His servant for 
Jeremiah’s deliverance. Hearing that the prophet 
had been left to perish in the filthy pit of the 
prison court, this Ethiopian went boldly to en- 
treat the king’s favor, who was “then sitting in 
the gate of Benjamin’”—the professed representa- 
tive of the law, in the gate to dispense justice, 
when this inexcusable injustice had been per- 
petrated with his consent (vers. 7,8). Earnestly 
and faithfully the eunuch presents the cause of . 


214 Notes on Jeremiah 


the man of God: “My lord the king,” he pleads, 
“these men have done evil in all that they have 
done to Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have 
cast into the dungeon; and he is like to die for 
hunger in the place where he is: for there is 
no more bread in the city” (ver. 9). 

Again, Zedekiah, a typical changeling, whose 
mind is controlled by the last man who gains his 
ear, reverses his judgment. Ebed-melech is com- 
manded, “Take from hence thirty men with thee, 
and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the 
dungeon, before he die’ (ver. 10). The king 
makes no confession of sin in thus having treated 
Jehovah’s messenger; nor is there a word of 
apology to the prophet for the indignities so un- 
righteously heaped upon him after his pledged 
word as to provision for his comfort! 

It is enough for the Ethiopian that he has 
permission to relieve the loved prisoner’s suffer- 
ings, and he hastens to deliver him. Thought- 
fully and tenderly he provides from the house of 
the king, under the treasury, old clouts and rags, 
which he let down by cords into the dungeon to 
Jeremiah, with directions to put them under his 
armholes under the ropes (vers. 11, 12). Appar- 
ently a trifling thing this, but a loving heart di- 
rected it, and God has been pleased to place it 
on record where it will stand forever. In that 
day when every cup of cold water given in the 
name of the Lord shall not fail of reward, Ebed- 
melech’s “old cast clouts and rotten rags’ used 
to lessen the pain of the man of God will be re- 
membered and duly taken into account. 

Thus protected, the weak and emaciated proph- 


The Fall of Jerusalem 215 


et is gently lifted out of the miry dungeon by 
the eunuch and his thirty helpers. Only once 
again is Ebed-melech mentioned, in the next chap- 
ter, for the Lord’s commendation, ere he dis- 
appears from the scene until he takes his place 
with the host of the redeemed, when his good 
deeds will have their due reward. 

Jerusalem’s case had become desperate, and in 
his distress Zedekiah once more sent for Jere- 
miah for a secret interview. Knowing in the 
depths of his heart that this man, whom he had 
so shamefully treated, had the mind of the Lord, 
he said to him, “I will ask thee a thing; hide 
nothing from me” (ver. 14). Fear now makes 
him desire to know what God had revealed; but, 
as his previous career had manifested, there was 
no true bowing of heart to that word when made 
known. A double-minded man was he, therefore 
unstable in all his ways. Self and selfish inter- 
ests ruled in his heart, not the glory of the God 
of Israel. 

The well-merited and withering reply comes to 
him, “If I declare it unto thee, wilt thou not 
surely put me to death? And if I give thee coun- 
sel, wilt thou not hearken unto me?” (ver. 15). 
Thus boldly does the prophet answer him. Cruel 
treatment had in no sense filled his soul with 
slavish fear. As God’s free man, he speaks to the 
conscience of the king. 

Secretly, the guilty monarch swore neither to 
harm him himself, nor, as before, to give him 
into the hand of the men who sought his life (ver. 
16). Accepting the pledge, Jeremiah gives him 
the word of the Lord, saying: “Thus saith the 


216 Notes on Jeremiah 


Lord, the God of hosts, the God of Israel: If thou 
wilt assuredly go forth unto the king of Baby- 
lon’s princes, then thy soul shall live, and this 
city shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt 
live, and thy house; but if thou wilt not go forth 
to the king of Babylon’s princes, then shall this 
city be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and 
they shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not 
escape out of their hand” (vers. 17, 18). For 
Zedekiah to accept the advice tendered so solemn- 
ly in the name of Jehovah would mean a com- 
plete and unconditional surrender. The victori- 
ous Chaldean army had once more spread its 
tents around Jerusalem, and was carrying on the 
siege with vigor; the Egyptian army having re- 
turned in discomfiture to their own land. This 
was in itself an evidence of the truth of Jere- 
miah’s predictions. When the false prophets de- 
clared that Nebuchadrezzar’s power was broken, 
he had insisted on the overthrow of Pharaoh’s 
forces and the early return of the Babylonians to 
invest the capital once more. Zedekiah evidently 
feared him, and in a vague, uncertain kind of 
way realized that God was with him. But he 
was of the number of those who cannot stand the 
sneers or the anger of their fellows, though they 
can sin against their Creator unblushingly. It 
is natural to fallen man to be ashamed to do 
what is right, if contrary to public opinion, and 
to do evil with a certain kind of pride. Of this 
stamp was the unworthy son of Josiah. He 
“loved the praise of men more than the praise 
of God.” 


The Fall of Jerusalem vay a 


In his faltering reply to Jeremiah, he shows 
the smallness of his soul, as also the haughtiness 
of his heart. “I am afraid,’ he owned, “of the 
Jews that are fallen to the Chaldeans, lest they 
deliver me into their hand, and they mock me” 
(ver. 19). What gross unbelief, when the Lord 
had just given the word that he should be spared 
if he surrendered; and what wretched pride that 
made the thought of mockery so bitter to the al- 
ready ruined man! 

Faithfully, even tenderly, the prophet urged 
him to obedience, assuring him that they should 
not deliver him up as he feared. “Obey, I be- 
seech thee,” he entreated, ‘‘the voice of the Lord, 
which I speak unto thee: so it shall be well unto 
thee, and thy soul shall live” (ver. 20). On the 
other hand, he warned him solemnly that if he 
refused to go forth, he should be reduced to the 
degradation of seeing “all the women that are 
left in the king of Judah’s house” brought forth 
in captivity to the princes of the king of Baby- 
lon, who should mock in their turn, and reproach 
him for his inglorious rebellion and its awful 
consequences. He, too, should be taken captive, 
and the city burned with fire; with himself alone 
to blame (vers. 22, 23). 

The moody and well-nigh distraught king 
deigned no reply that would indicate whether he 
intended to bow to the authority of the Lord or 
not, but strictly commanded silence on the part 
of Jeremiah as to the purport of the conversa- 
tion they had had together. If the princes im- 
portuned him as to what had taken place, he was 
to mention the matter of his request to be re- 


218 Notes on Jeremiah 


leased from prison, but nothing more (vers. 24- 
26). 

As anticipated, the princes did seek to know 
the drift of the conference, but he replied dis- 
creetly, as he had been bidden—the truth, though 
not all the truth—and they are satisfied to leave 
him in the court of the prison, where he remained 
until the fulfilment of his prophecies regarding 
the siege, for “he was there when Jerusalem was 
taken” (vers. 27, 28). 

This terrible climax, to which all the previous 
portion of the book has been pointing, is reached 
in chap. 39. The long-suffering patience of God 
at last gives way to judgment; the glory departs, 
and Jerusalem, whose name means “the founda- 
tion of peace,” or, “founded in peace,” is deliv- 
ered into the hands of the Gentiles. What other 
city on earth has had a history so full of pathos 
and tragedy, and which so dreadfully belies its 
name? Yet the prophetic Word assures us that 
it shall eventually be established in peace, no 
more to be overthrown. 

Nebuchadrezzar’s siege lasted eighteen months, 
save for the brief respite when he withdrew his 
troops to meet the king of Egypt. During this 
long period, how terrible the suffering of the in- 
habitants had been! Yet, in it all, there was 
callousness of conscience and hardness of heart, 
coupled with a complaisant self-righteousness 
most abhorrent in the eyes of the Lord. Trouble 
does not result in repentance, unless the soul sees 
in it the hand of God in government. Even in 
the awful days of the last great tribulation, 
when men shall be scorched with great heat, 


The Fall of Jerusalem 219 


they will blaspheme the name of God and reperit 
not to give Him glory; and when the kingdom 
of the beast (the Satan-inspired ruler of the ten 
kingdoms in that day) shall be full of darkness, 
they will gnaw their tongues for pain, and blas- 
pheme the God of heaven, repenting not of their 
deeds (Rev. 16:9, 11). 

It is a fallacy, that has become very popular 
to-day, that punishment of necessity results in 
repentance. Upon this is based the “larger hope” 
of men who try to persuade themselves that, in 
the judgment to come after death, God will be 
better than His Word, and that it will not be 
eternal in its nature, because leading those who 
are the subjects of it to self-judgment. Scripture 
holds out no such hope. There is not a single 
ray of light to illumine the future of the Christ- 
rejecter throughout eternity’s unending ages. 
“He that believeth not the Son shall not see life, 
but the wrath of God abideth on him” (John 3: 
36). Even on earth, where the Holy Spirit 
pleads with men, suffering does not always result 
in men’s turning to the Lord in confession and 
contrition of soul; neither will it when time has 
ceased to be, and the Spirit has ceased His striv- 
ing. 

In the case of the men of Judah and Jerusalem, 
the last act of the fearful tragedy found them as 
hard and unresponsive as ever. ‘In the eleventh 
year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth 
day of the month, the city was broken up” (ver. 
2). How definite the date, to be remembered by 
the Lord forever! His heritage turned over to 
_strangers, the sheep of His pasture devoured by 


220 Notes on Jeremiah 


the wild beast of the nations! That ninth day of 
the fourth month of Zedekiah’s eleventh year 
shall have its place in His heart evermore. 
Vainly had they sought to put far off the evil 
day. Long deferred in grace, while Jehovah 
waited for some sign of brokenness of spirit, it 
had to come at last. And how brief the account 
of the fall of the one-time metropolis of the 
world: “The city was broken up!” What a 
world of anguish and sorrow is wrapped up in 
these five words! The details are all omitted, 
save in regard to Zedekiah’s vain effort to escape 
when redemption point* had been passed and it 
was too late. 

The horrors of the sack of a great city by an 
Oriental army beggar all description. Neither 
age nor sex nor beauty avails to avert the cruel 
work of the blood-drunken conquerors. Death, 
shame and slavery tell the dreadful story. 

Nebuchadrezzar was not present in person 
when Jerusalem fell, but his chief princes, 
“Nergal-sharezer, Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim (chief 
of the eunuchs), Nergal-sharezer (chief of the 
Mages), and all the rest of the heads of the king 
of Babylon,” sat at the middle gate to direct the 
troops (ver. 3). We have used Dr. Young’s trans- 
lation of this verse. It will be noticed that Rab- 
saris and Rab-mag, left untranslated in the 
Authorized Version, are really not proper names, 


* Many will remember that there is an insignificant 
headland in the Niagara river, just above the Falls, 
known as “Redemption Point,” because no boat, once past, 
has ever been saved from destruction. In men’s lives 
there is also a “Redemption Point.” 


The Fall of Jerusalem 221 


but titles. This helps to distinguish the two 
princes who bear the name Nergal-sharezer. The 
second one was chief of the Magi, or the priests 
of the Babylonish mysteries. It is a similar title 
to the Roman Pontifex Maximus, and was some- 
times borne by the kings of Babylon. 

When Zedekiah and his men of war (their 
ranks sadly depleted by famine, pestilence, and 
battle) saw that all effort to save the city was 
vain, they fled, leaving Jerusalem under cover of 
darkness, “by the way of the king’s garden, by 
the gate betwixt the two walls.” It will be re- 
membered that strong walls separated the royal 
city, or the city of David, from the lower portion 
of Jerusalem. The palace and its environs as yet 
remained intact, though it was clear that their 
overthrow was but a matter of a few days at 
most, with no hope of succor. Zedekiah defended 
the stronghold to the last, and fled only when to 
remain would have been madness and a needless 
act of bravado. Stealthily the little company took 
the way of the plain, hoping to avoid detection. 
But all their efforts were in vain, for the Chal- 
deans pursued them and brought them to bay in 
the plains of Jericho. Those who could, forsook 
the king and fled to the wilderness (2 Kings 25: 
4-6). He himself was taken captive. The word 
of the Lord by Jeremiah had declared it; now 
it is fulfilled. 

Nebuchadrezzar was at Riblah (where Pharaoh- 
nechoh had bound Jehoahaz thirty-four years earl- 
ier) when Jerusalem fell. Thither, Zedekiah was 
hurried, that the conqueror might wreak his ven- 
geance upon the vassal who had rebelled against 


Zac Notes on Jeremiah 


him, violated his oath, and occupied his army for 
a year and a half in accomplishing his overthrow. 
The wretched man who had lost his crown and 
sceptre by refusing to heed the words of Jere- 
miah had to endure the anguish of beholding his 
own sons slain before his eyes, and then, that no 
other scene might ever efface that one to the end 
of his life, his own eyes were put out. Then, 
ignominiously bound in chains, he is carried to 
Babylon. The word of the Lord through Ezekiel, 
concerning Zedekiah, though he may never have 
learned of it, had been, “My net also will I spread 
upon him, and he shall be taken in My snare: and 
I will bring him to Babylon, to the land of the 
Chaldeans; yet shall he not see it, though he 
shall die there” (Ezek. 12:18). See, also, chap. 
17: 12-21 of the same book, where what is re- 
lated as history by Jeremiah is all foretold by the 
prophet of the dispersion. Thus minutely had the 
Holy Spirit made known, ere it came to pass, the 
evil that should befall Zedekiah, that when it had 
been literally fulfilled all might know that God 
had spoken. . 

The palatial residence of the kings of Judah 
was razed to the ground in the conflagration that 
followed the taking of the city: nor was the 
temple of Jehovah spared, as we learn from chap. 
52:18. The sack of the city was complete. The 
walls were broken down, and the gates consumed 
with fire. Well might the man who for so long 
had sought to turn his people’s hearts back to the 
God of their fathers cry out in the bitter anguish 
of his soul, “How doth the city sit solitary that 
was full of people! How is she become as a 


The Fall of Jerusalem 223 


widow!” (Lam. 1:1.) Her judgment had come, 
because of her unfaithfulness to her Lord (ver. 
8). 

The remnant who were not put to death were 
carried away captive into Babylon by Nebuzar- 
adan, chief of the executioners. Those also who 
had obeyed the voice of Jeremiah, and had gone 
out to the Chaldean camp before the sack of the 
city, were spared the pains of death, but sent 
captive to the queen city on the Euphrates, as 
the prophet had predicted. Step by step, down 
to the smallest detail, the word through Jeremia!: 
was fulfilled (ver. 9). 

Another prophet, Zephaniah the son of Cushi, 
had declared that even at this time a few of the 
lower class should be spared to dwell in the land. 
This too must be carried out. He lived in the 
days of Josiah, and may have known Jeremiah 
personally. He had said, “I will also leave in the 
midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and 
they shall trust in the name of the Lord” (Zeph. 
8:12). How brightly chines this instance of the 
divine clemency in behalf of a few, and their true 
piety, in a day so dark, when the mass of the na- 
tion was utterly apostate. In accordance with 
this word, Nebuzar-adan, unconscious that he was 
carrying out the declaration of the God of Israel, 
left a few “of the poor of the people, which had 
nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them 
vineyards and fields at the same time” (ver. 10). 
Striking are the lessons here brought before us. 
It is the poor in spirit who are blessed—those 
who own their nothingness. These had nothing, 
and did not seek to hide their poverty; and the 


224 Notes on Jeremiah 


Lord gave them both vineyards and fields. The 
former tells of joy; the latter, of sustenance. 
Both were to be found in Himself, though all else 
had failed. He could still meet the need of any 
who would confide in Him. Such an one was the 
prophet Habakkuk, who, though at first greatly 
bewildered by God’s governmental dealings with 
the people of His choice, learned the great les- 
son that the just shall live, not by sight, but 
faith, and could therefore sing, in view of the 
very destruction we have been considering, “AI- 
though the fig tree shall not blossom, neither 
shall fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive 
shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat; the 
flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall 
be no herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoice in the 
Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation” 
(Hab. 3:17, 18). 

There is no day so dark but that the Lord will 
be the light of every soul that ceases from man 
and turns to Himself; no sorrow so great but 
that fellowship with Him will sweeten the bitter 
waters. In every trial He is near; in every hour 
of discouragement and gloom He abideth faithful 
still—“‘He cannot deny Himself.” The little rem- 
nant left in the land might seem to be bereft of 
all that could make life worth living. But they 
had Himself, and they could call upon His name, 
knowing that if He had been faithful to His own 
holy character in chastening them for their sin, 
now bowels of mercy were moved for them vhen, 
in lowliness of mind and confession of their 
iniquities, they sought His face. 

The Lord was looking out for the interests 


The Fall of Jerusalem 225 


likewise of the now aged man who had witnessed 
for Him so long in the midst of a gainsaying 
people. In so doing He made use of what men 
call natural causes, as He often does to carry out 
His purposes. It had evidently been reported to 
Nebuchadrezzar how Jeremiah had ever counseled 
submission to the Babylonian yoke, and reproved 
the kings of Judah for breaking their oaths of 
allegiance. He therefore sent a special message 
to Nebuzar-adan regarding the prophet, bidding 
him: “Take him, and look well to him, and do 
him no harm, but do unto him even as he shall 
say unto thee” (vers. 11, 12). 

It was a pompous company who went down to 
seek out the man who was the subject of this 
communication from the king: composed of the 
chief captain himself, together with Nebushasban, 
another chief of the eunuchs, the pontifex Nergal- 
sharezer, and all the princes of Babylon. They 
found Jeremiah in the court of the prison, where 
he still abode in confinement; none having, ap- 
parently, given him a thought when the city fell. 
Releasing him, they gave him to the care of a 
man whose father, on several occasions, had be- 
friended him—Gedaliah the son of Ahikam—with 
instructions to carry him home and see to his 
welfare. Gedaliah had already been selected to 
fill the position of governor in the land. He gave 
Jeremiah liberty to go wherever he desired; “so 
he dwelt among the people”—evidently the poor 
who were left, as we have seen (vers. 13, 14). 

He had already received a message for another 
man whom God had not forgotten. While still 
in the prison-court, the word of the Lord had 


226 Notes on Jeremiah 


come to him bidding him: “Go and speak to Ebed- 
melech the Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith the 
Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel: Behold, I will 
bring My words upon this city for evil, and not 
for good; and they shall be accomplished in that 
day before thee. But I will deliver thee in that 
day, saith the Lord ... and thou shalt not fall 
by the sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto 
thee; because thou hast put thy trust in Me, saith 
the Lord” (vers. 15-18). Thus was the service of 
the faithful Ethiopian rewarded. God will be no 
man’s debtor. The last clause gives us the secret 
of Ebed-melech’s devotion: he had put his trust 
in the Lord. Though a stranger to the common- 
wealth of Israel, he was a child of God through 
faith; and faith in his case worked by love. 

Various have been the shifting scenes brought 
to our notice in this section. May grace be given 
to lay all to heart and find eternal profit from our 
meditations upon it. 


CHAPTER XXII 
ISHMAEL’S TREACHERY AND THE FLIGHT TO EGYPT 
(Chaps. 40-44.) 


Kaleidoscopic were the changes through which 
the remnant passed, while left in the land by the 
clemency of Nebuchadrezzar, in the year follow- 
ing the destruction of Jerusalem. 

Gedaliah, the governor, was a truly pious man, 
of upright principles, but not at all the kind of 
a person to take the lead in the troublous times 
that had fallen upon his native land. Brave, 
honorable and unsuspicious, he yet lacked that 
genius for true leadership, and that necessary 
sternness in dealing with evil, which the times 
demanded. It was not long, therefore, ere he be- 
came the victim of a diabolical conspiracy which 
resulted in his assassination by one whom his too 
generous heart had implicitly trusted, and who 
owed his own preservation from death to the man 
he so basely murdered. 

Nebuzar-adan having given him his liberty 
Jeremiah, as we have seen, attached himself to 
the governor. The Chaldean captain had given him 
free choice as to his abode; even offering him a 
safe and comfortable asylum in Babylon, had he 
desired it. How much this man really under- 
stood the ways of Jehovah in the chastening of 
His people, we know not; but he shows himself 
to be at least familiar with the words spoken by 
both Ezekiel and Jeremiah, alleging this in his 
interview with the latter: “The Lord thy God 


228 Notes on Jeremiah 


hath pronounced this evil upon this place” (vers. 
1.2). He gives, too, the correct reason for this 
strange dealing. Because Judah had sinned, and 
not obeyed His voice, their God had brought these 
afflictions upon them. Sad it is to note that this 
heathen conqueror had a clearer sense of the 
truth than the majority of the leaders among the 
Jews. 

Loosing Jeremiah from his chains, he gave him 
the king’s message: “If it seem good unto thee 
to come with me into Babylon, come; and I will 
look well unto thee: but if it seem ill unto thee 
to come with me into Babylon, forbear: behold, 
all the land is before thee: whither it seemeth 
good and convenient for thee to go, thither go” 
(ver.4). Then, apparently divining the proph- 
et’s mind, and courteously seeking to relieve him 
of the embarrassment of refusing his well-meant 
offer to go to the imperial city, which, after all, 
represented the power of the oppressor of his peo- 
ple, Nebuzar-adan added, “Go back also to Gedal- 
iah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, whom 
the king of Babylon hath made governor over the 
cities of Judah, and dwell with him among the 
people: or go wheresoever it seemeth convenient 
unto thee to go.” This offer Jeremiah accepted, 
and departed to seek the governor, receiving both 
victuals and a reward from the captain of the 
guard. He found Gedaliah at Mizpah, a historic 
trysting-place never to be forgotten by lovers of 
Israel. Many and varied had been the scenes 
enacted there, both in the unsettled days of the 
judges and the early days of the kings. Here 
Gedaliah kept his simple and unostentatious 


Ishmael’s Treachery 229° 


court, and here Jeremiah dwelt with him, “among 
the people left in the land” (vers. 5, 6). 

It was the choice of a man who walked with 
God, and could view things in the light of His 
presence. To many it might have been consid- 
ered a fine thing to be invited to the conqueror’s 
capital, there to be honored as a sage and a seer, 
and to receive various tokens of the king’s appre- 
ciation because of his steady opposition to the 
policy of resistance to Babylon and dependence 
upon Egypt. But in all this, Jeremiah had been 
in no sense the servant or tool of the Chaldean 
emperor. He had remained to the last the simple 
prophet of Jehovah. If he counseled submission 
to Babylon, it was because the Word of the Lord 
so directed. If he warned the princes and the 
people of the folly of counting upon the Egypt- 
ian alliance, he did so because he had the mind 
of the Lord regarding it. This did not alter his 
personal abhorrence of all that Babylon stood for. 
None knew better than he its abominable pag- 
anism and its cruel tyranny. None knew more 
clearly, too, the doom soon to fall upon it. In 
God’s government He had used it to chastise His 
erring people. Soon it also must pass under the 
rod of His vengeance. Consequently the city by 
the Euphrates had no charms for the man of 
God. Far better a small place among “the poor 
of the flock” in Immanuel’s land, than a large 
place in the Gentile oppressor’s palace. He de- 
sired not the world’s patronage, as he feared not 
its wrath. In this he is the consistent type of 
the man of God still—‘in the world, but not 
of the world”—perchance even serving the world; 


230 Notes on Jeremiah 


as Abraham long before had, in delivering Lot, 
really served Sodom; but looking for no recogni- 
tion from the world: leaving all that to the judg- 
ment-seat of Christ. 

Self-interest would surely have taken Jeremiah 
to Babylon. Providence, too, might have seemed 
to favor such a move; for, how useful to his peo- 
ple might he not have been in the councils of the 
empire—as in the cases of Mordecai and Nehe- 
miah at the court of Medo-Persia some years 
later. Faith, however, kept him in the desolated 
land of Canaan, among the poor and distressed 
remnant who called upon the name of the Lord. 
Like Moses, he chose rather to suffer afiliction 
with the people of God than to enjoy the tem- 
porary prosperity that an abode in the royal city 
might have brought him. Faith ever runs counter 
to the mere pleadings of nature. 

We shall see something very different to this 
disinterested and unselfish devotion to the Lord 
and His people as we now turn to consider the 
captains of the roving bands of the Jews, con- 
cerning which the next part of the chapter treats. 

Jerusalem being destroyed, several companies 
of unsubdued warriors remained, or fled to moun- 
tain fastnesses and wilderness hiding-places, thus 
safely eluding the Chaldean armies. These bands, 
formed in what we call “guerrilla corps,” officered 
by daring, impetuous leaders, were determined 
not to own the sway of the king of Babylon. 
Hearing that Gedaliah, one of their number, had 
been appointed governor, and that he had estab- 
lished himself at Mizpah, these outlawed bands 
now gathered about him, hoping doubtless to find 


Ishmael’s Treachery 231 


independence and rebellion. Ishmael, two song 
of Koreah (Johanan and Jonathan by name), 
Seraiah, Jezaniah, together with the sons of 
Ephai, with their companies, were the ones who 
repaired thither (vers. 7, 8). If they expected 
Gedaliah to break his plighted word, and assist 
in him one who would further their schemes of 
them in throwing off the yoke of Chaldea, they 
soon learned their mistake. He faithfully coun- 
seled submission, bidding them: “Fear not to 
serve the Chaldeans: dwell in the land, and serve 
the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with 
you” (ver. 9). As for himself, he declared his 
full determination to dwell at Mizpah, and to ren- 
der service to the nation into whose power God 
had given them. He also counseled them to cease 
from warfare, and to seek to reap the fruits of 
peace and quietness, bidding them gather wine, 
and summer fruits and oil, and dwell in the cities 
they had taken (ver. 10). We read of no dissent- 
ing voice on the part of the guerrilla captains or 
their men; but it is plain from what follows that 
they were thoroughly opposed to what must have 
seemed to them a peace-at-any-price policy. Re- 
sentment burned fiercely in the heart of one at 
least, Ishmael, though he was politic enough to 
hide his feelings for the time. 

Hearing the cruel war was over—even if dis- 
astrously ended—numbers of Jews who had fled 
to Moab, Ammon, and Edom, also returned to 
their land and gathered to Mizpah, owning the 
gentle sway of the pious Gedaliah. These quietly 
followed the advice given, and proceeded to har- 
vest the summer fruits and wines, thus making 


232 Notes on Jeremiah 


provision for the approaching winter (vers. 11, 
12). A people not strong were they, but they pre- 
pared their meat in the summer (Prov. 30: 25). 

Meantime Ishmael, returning from the country 
of the Ammonites, was secretly plotting the 
assassination of Gedaliah. We gather from the 
context he had pledged himself to Baalis, the 
king of Ammon, before he left, to do this, if 
Gedaliah was not prepared to be a tool in his 
hands. The too confiding governor was warned 
of the foul errand upon which the captain of the 
sinister name had come, for there was jealousy 
and treachery among the various outlawed chiefs, 
leading Johanan and the rest of the captains at 
last to inform upon the traitor. They told Ged- 
aliah the errand upon which he had come, sent 
by Baalis the Ammonite. Simple and honest him- 
self, the governor discredits the tale of Ishmael’s 
depravity, and takes no measures to protect his 
life, so valuable to his compatriots at this dark 
period. Johanan accordingly sought another, and 
this time a private, interview with him, assuring 
him of the truth of the former report, and plead- 
ed for commission to forestall the murder, by him- 
self taking the life of Ishmael in secret, so that 
no man should know it, pleading that in no other 
way could the death of, not only the governor, 
but all the Jews that were gathered with him, be 
averted. The noble-hearted Gedaliah replied, 
“Thou shalt not do this thing: for thou speak- 
est falsely of Ishmael” (vers. 13-16). The sequel 
shows how ill-placed his confidence was. 

Very shortly after this, and only three months 
after the sack of Jerusalem, Ishmael (who we 


Ishmael’s Treachery 233 


now learn was of the seed royal, which accounts 
in large measure for his hatred of Gedaliah), and 
ten princes came again to the house of the gov- 
ernor at Mizpah, and all ate bread together—a 
complete expression of fellowship according to 
Eastern custom. But, alas, it was like the feast- 
ing of Judas at the last passover. Those who ate 
bread with Gedaliah lifted up the heel against 
him. At Ishmael’s signal, he and the ten princes 
rose up against their gracious host, slew him in 
cold blood, and then massacred the Jews and the 
Chaldeans that were in Mizpah (41: 2). 

None of those connected with Gedaliah had 
escaped to carry to other parts the awful tale of 
carnage and bloodshed. On the morrow, four- 
score men from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from 
Samaria, came to bring an offering to the house 
of the Lord. How they had corrupted the way 
of approach to God, and taken up with heathen 
manners, is evident by their shaven beards, and 
rent clothes, and gashes upon their flesh, as were 
commonly made by the worshipers of Baal. Yet 
offerings and incense were in their hand, and 
however ignorant, they felt the need of seeking 
the face of the Lord. 

Ishmael’s abominable hypocrisy and horrid 
treachery stalk out again. Assuming the air of 
one sorely grieved over the desolations of the 
land, he goes out weeping and lamenting, and 
offers to be their guide to Gedaliah the governor. 
Having led the doomed men into the midst of the 
city, he suddenly threw off the mask, and, with 
his associates, slew these unsuspecting men, as 
he had the others before, and cast their bodies 


234 Notes on Jeremiah 


into a pit—sparing ten of them for the hidden 
stores of wheat, barley, oil and honey which they 
were to reveal (vers. 5-8). 

The pit into which the slain had been cast was 
a subterranean chamber, built by order of Asa, 
king of Judah, as a hiding-place in case Baasha 
king of Israel should besiege him during the re- 
building of Mizpah, nearly four centuries earlier 
(1 Kings 15:22). It now became the tomb for 
the guileless Gedaliah and his attached followers, 
as also for the seventy visitors (ver. 9). Having 
thus disposed of the dead, Ishmael beat a hasty 
retreat to the land of the Ammonites, carrying 
with him the king’s daughters and all the people 
(probably the poor) who dwelt in Mizpah that 
had not been included in the massacre. 

As was to be expected, the awful news of his 
bloody acts soon got abroad. Johanan and the 
other captains being apprised thereof, at once 
pursue the fleeing traitor, and overtake him by 
“the great waters that are in Gibeon’”—the old 
battlefield where Joab and Abner contended— 
pitching on either side of the pool (2 Sam. 2: 12- 
17), and near the historic spot where Joshua 
achieved his great victory over the allied armies 
of the Canaanites, when he went to the defence 
of the men of Gibeon. 

The freebooters who followed Ishmael made no 
attempt to stand against the men of Johanan, but 
fled with their leader, while all the people they 
were carrying away “cast about and returned” 
(vers. 13-15). 

Johanan was unquestionably a brave and a pa- 
triotic man, but lacked the piety of Gedaliah; a, 


Ishmael’s Treachery 235 


man of action, but not one who waited upon God 
for his path. Without hesitation, or inquiring of 
the Lord, he leads his confederates and the deliv- 
ered company to Chimham, near Bethlehem, the 
route to Egypt, determined to leave the land of 
Palestine, fearing the wrath of the Chaldeans be- 
cause of Ishmael’s assassination of the governor 
deputed by Nebuzar-adan, and the Babylonian 
guard (vers. 16-18). 

Having thus determined upon their path, like 
multitudes before and since, they make a pre- 
tence of seeking the mind of the Lord. Jeremiah 
being among the number carried away from 
Mizpah, the representatives of the people now 
turned to him. Their words were very fair and 
well-spoken: “Let, we beseech thee, our suppli- 
cation be accepted before thee,” they said, ‘‘and 
pray for us unto the Lord thy God, even for all 
this remnant (for we are left but a few of many, 
as thine eyes do behold us); that the Lord thy 
God may show us the way wherein we may walk, 
and the thing that we may do” (chap. 42: 1-3). 
One is reminded of Jehoshaphat professedly seek- 
ing the mind of God after the alliance with the 
king of Israel had already been made and his 
word pledged. Alas, this is but trifling with God; 
yet, dear reader, are we altogether clear of this? 
How many a saint has set his heart upon a cer- 
tain course without asking counsel of the Lord; 
and then, actuated by a feeling of unrest ana anx- 
iety, has sought to get the divine approbation for 
his self-concocted plans! Notice here that the 
people do not say, “The Lord our God,” but ‘““The 
Lord thy God.” There is a sense of distance. 


236 Notes on Jeremiah 


They do not feel they can approach Him with 
confidence, hence they turn to Jeremiah, and 
would fain have him act the part of a go-between, 
or a mediator. It is always a bad sign when there 
is diffidence in approaching God; when the peti- 
tioner has more confidence in the prayers of a 
ministering servant than in his own. Unmistak- 
ably, it reveals the lack of communion with God 
which inspires confidence in the hour of need. If 
the eye is single, the whole body is full of light, 
having no part dark. If the desire to glorify God 
be supreme in the soul, one can turn to Him for 
guidance without fear. But when some cherished 
aim or selfish object is controlling the heart, there 
is and must be a lack of confidence towards Him. 

Such was the present state of the spared rem- 
nant. Jeremiah makes no comment upon it, but 
quietly replies, “I have heard you; behold, I will 
pray unto the Lord your God according to your 
words; and it shall come to pass, that whatsoever 
thing the Lord shall answer you, I will declare it 
unto you; I will keep nothing back from you” 
(ver. 4). Note how he throws them back on their 
own responsibility. He says, “The Lord your 
God,” and speaks of what “the Lord shall answer. 
you.” He will be the spokesman for them, but 
not the go-between. 

In the most solemn way they declare that they 
will abide by the Word of the Lord, whatever it 
may be; and no doubt, like many another in a 
similar place, they really thought they would. 
But they had settled it in their hearts to go into 
Egypt, and they counted upon the Lord’s endorse- 
ment of their fleshly determination. They replied, 


Ishmael’s Treachery 237 © 


“The Lord be a true and faithful witness be- 
tween us, if we do not even according to all 
things for the which the Lord thy God shall send 
thee to us” (ver. 5). Then growing bolder, they 
use the term, “The Lord our God,” declaring, 
“Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we 
will obey the voice of the Lord our God, to whom 
we send thee; that it may be well with us, when 
we obey the voice of the Lord our God” (ver. 6). 
This certainly sounded well. Alas, that “good 
words and fair speeches” can be so cheap and so 
meaningless! 

A significant ten days was allowed to elapse 
ere the Lord communicated His mind to His serv- 
ant—a number suggesting man’s responsibility 
Godward and manward, as set forth in the Ten 
Commandments given at Sinai. On that ground 
the remnant could claim nothing. The delay in 
answering indicates the distance at which they 
were from God. They had failed grievously, and 
yet there was no repentance (ver. 7). 

Before all the people, Jeremiah declared the 
word of Jehovah: “Thus saith the Lord, the God 
of Israel, unto whom ye sent me to present your 
supplication before Him: If ye will still abide in 
this land, then will I build you, and not pull you 
down; and I will plant you, and not pluck you 
up: for I repent Me of the evil that I have done 
unto you” (vers. 8-10). What riches of grace are 
here unfolded! On their part, no adequate sense 
of guilt; yet on His, such amazing compassion 
and loving-kindness. If they will but trust Him 
now in their weak, broken state—if they will rely 
upon His mighty arm and thus dwell in the land 


238 Notes on Jeremiah 


He had given them—if they will accept the 
chastisement, and bow to His Word, then He will 
build them up and care for them as a husband- 
man cares for his vintage. 

Obeying His voice, they need have no fear of 
the wrath of Babylon’s king. “For I,” says God, 
“am with you to save you and to deliver you from 
his hand. And I will show mercies unto you, 
that he may have mercy upon you, and cause you 
to return to your own land” (vers. 11, 12). Res- 
toration and blessing, under the divine protec- 
tion, would be the happy result of subjection to 
Himself. On the other hand, it were worse than 
folly for them to seek relief in Egypt. Nought 
but dire distress and judgment could result. To 
go back to Egypt was like a Christian going back 
to the world for help. The Lord Jesus “gave Him- 
self for our sins, that He might deliver us from 
this present evil world, according to the will of 
God and our Father’ (Gal. 1:4). This is the 
antitype of the deliverance from Egypt of old. 

Pharaoh’s land, for the redeemed of the Lord, 
was a land of bondage—it could never be their 
home. To settle there in peace and happiness was 
absolutely impossible. To attempt to do so was 
to ignore the blood of the passover and the part- 
ing of the Red Sea. For the Christian this would 
be to forget that he is purged from his old sins 
through the shedding of the precious blood of 
Christ, and separated from this world by the 
death of that blessed One. The Cross of Christ 
has come in between the believer and the world, 
enabling him to say, “God forbid that I should 
glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, 


Ishmael’s Treachery 239 


by whom the world is crucified unto me, and*I 
unto the world” (Gal. 6:14). As the Red Sea 
rolled between Egypt and the place of Israel’s 
blessing, so the death of Christ has cut me off 
from this world if I am a child of God. I can- 
not get back to it now, save by, for the time be- 
ing, ignoring that solemn fact and acting as 
though the Cross to me were nothing! Alas, alas, 
how often, dear fellow-believer, have we so 
acted! Oh, the shame that it ever should be so! 
Yet what need there is that we own before God 
with confusion of face our wretched failures in 
this connection! But of one thing there can be 
no question: no truly converted soul was ever 
able to find rest in this world after being deliv- 
ered from it once. 

The history of the remnant here is, like all 
Scripture, “written for our admonition,” and 
should speak loudly to our consciences. To go 
back to Egypt, for them, must mean increased 
sorrow and disaster. They might try to persuade 
themselves that they would there find a land of 
plenty and quietness, where, undistracted by 
war and the sound of the trumpet, they could eat 
bread to the full and dwell in peace; but this was 
a delusion (vers. 18, 14). The sword from which 
they sought to flee should pursue them there, and 
the famine of which they were afraid should fol- 
low close after them, and Egypt should be to them 
but a graveyard, because of the anger of the Lord 
which should be poured out upon them (vers. 15- 
18). 

The Egyptians might indeed dwell securely in 
their own land, but not so with the remnant of 


240 Notes on Jeremiah 


Israel. The worldling may occupy himself in this 
scene in comparative quietness and peace, but the 
child of God is spoiled for the world and can 
never be happy in it. 

That the captains and the people had in no 
sense deceived the Lord with their fair words is 
evident in what follows. He admonished them 
faithfully not to go into Egypt, and then makes 
bare their hearts: “For ye have used deceit 
against your souls,” the prophet declares, “when 
ye sent me unto the Lord your God, saying, Pray 
for us unto the Lord our God; and according 
unto all that the Lord our God shall say, so de- 
clare unto us, and we will do it” (vers. 19, 20— 
margin). It was in vain to seek to deceive Him 
whose eyes as a flame of fire penetrate the in- 
most secrets of the being. They were not up- 
right before Him. He knew it well, and yet con- 
descended in grace to point out the path of bless- 
ing, and warn of the road to ruin. The word 
had been set before them. Already their down- 
east faces gave the answer. Jeremiah waits for 
no reply, but announces: “Now I have this day de- 
clared it to you; but ye have not obeyed the voice 
of the Lord your God, nor anything for the which 
He hath sent me unto you. Now therefore know 
certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by the 
famine, and the pestilence, in the place whither 
ye desire to go and to sojourn” (vers. 21, 22). 

Indignation filled the hearts of “the proud 
men” of Judah at these words. Angrily, Azariah 
and the captain, Johanan, exclaimed, “Thou 
speakest falsely: the Lord our God hath not 
sent thee to say, Go not into Egypt to sojourn 


Ishmael’s Treachery 241 


there. But Baruch the son of Neriah setteth thee 
on against us, for to deliver us into the hand of 
the Chaldeans, that they might put us to death, 
and carry us away captives to Babylon” (chap. 
43:1-3). It was a case of the wish being father 
to the thought. They were determined to go 
down to Egypt. They would not believe that God 
had forbidden them to do so. Nor did they have 
the effrontery, after all their humble speeches be- 
fore, to charge Jeremiah with deliberately seek- 
ing to deceive them by palming off his own 
thoughts as a divine revelation; but Baruch was 
made the scapegoat, and upon him the blame was 
laid. This man had faithfully stood in the breach 
with his master, and on several occasions had put 
his life in jeopardy by his boldness in carrying 
out commissions entrusted to him. But it was 
sheer folly to suppose the prophet to be a mere 
puppet moved by his servant. Only gross unbe- 
lief and determinate self-will could so conclude. 

Forthwith Johanan and the captains gathered 
all the remnant together, forcing both Jeremiah 
and Baruch to be of the number, and set out for 
Egypt in direct opposition to the Word of the 
Lord. We read of no further delay until they 
arrived at Tahpanhes, where they concluded to 
settle (vers. 4-7). This city was located in north- 
eastern Egypt, some twenty miles from the his- 
toric treasure city of Pithon, the scene and re- 
minder of Israel’s former degradation, as built by 
their fathers in the days of their slavery. It 
was in the land of Goshen, and was dedicated to 
a heathen goddess. 

Here the emigrants sought a home, hoping that 


242 Notes on Jeremiah 


they had left far behind them the awful trinity 
of destruction that had harassed them for so 
long—war, pestilence, and famine. This could 
not be, however, for they were bent on a course 
of rebellion against the Lord. They could never 
be at home in the land from which He had once 
delivered them, when He separated them to Him- 
self, 

Jeremiah is again commissioned to warn them 
of the impending storm of divine wrath. He may 
be in a sense a prisoner, but “the Word of the 
Lord is not bound,” and he is bidden to instruct 
the people both by an object-lesson and by word 
of mouth. At Jehovah’s bidding, he took great 
stones in his hand, which he hid in the brick-kiln 
at the entry of Pharaoh’s house in. the city, in 
the sight of the men of Judah. From this it would 
appear that the king of Egypt sometimes resided 
in Tahpanhes (vers. 8, 9), if at this time it was 
not, indeed, his capital. 

Having thus attracted the attention of the peo- 
ple, he declared in the name of the Lord of hosts 
that He was about to send Nebuchadrezzar, who 
is again designated “My servant,” and all the land 
of Egypt should be given into his hands. His 
throne was to be set upon the stones thus hidden, 
and his royal pavilion spread over them. Like a 
shepherd (as the shepherd kings had done before, 
in the days of the patriarchs), he should “array 
himself with the land of Egypt” as with a gar- 
ment. Egypt’s gods and their people would be 
destroyed in that day, and it would be vain for 
the men of Judah to seek relief from his ven- 
geance (vers. 10-13). 


Ishmael’s Treachery 243 


With more fulness of detail the same theme 
is taken up in the next chapter. Again the Word 
of the Lord came to His servant “concerning all 
the Jews which dwelt in the land of Egypt, at 
Migdol, at Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the 
country of Pathros” (ver. 1). Migdol was a royal 
fortress, not far from the place where the Red 
Sea was parted for the deliverance of the re- 
deemed host under Moses. Noph is supposed to 
be the same as Memphis, the ancient capital of 
Upper Egypt. The general term Pathros covered 
a considerable district in Upper Egypt, inhabited 
originally by the Pathrusim. It will be seen from 
the mention of these various localities that the 
Jews had in a very short time, a few months at 
most, spread themselves over a large part of the 
country; though there may have been several 
earlier colonies planted there prior to the move- 
ment we have been considering. 

The Lord’s expostulation is recorded in verses 
2 to 14. He bids them consider the evil which 
He brought upon Jerusalem and all the cities of 
Judah because of the frightful wickedness there 
perpetrated. “Rising early,” He had sought their 
good, sending prophets saying, “Oh, do not this 
abominable thing that I hate!’ It was idolatry 
that provoked His special abhorrence. But they 
would neither give heed to the warnings and en- 
treaties of the prophets nor turn from their iniq- 
uitous ways. Therefore His fury had been poured 
forth and the land now lay waste and desolate. 
Their present course was but an aggravation of 
the evil, and would, if persisted in, result in na- 
tional suicide. In Egypt they were fast relapsing 


244 Notes on Jeremiah 


into idolatry. Unless they repented, He could but 
cut them off from the face of the earth. Yea, by 
their folly, they were cutting themselves off. 

How short their memory! Had they already 
forgotten the wickedness of their fathers, and the 
wickedness of the kings of Judah, and their own 
wickedness, and the wickedness of their wives in 
the land of Judah, which had drawn down so 
awful a punishment? They were not humbled, 
even after all the past; nor was there any evi- 
dence of godly fear; neither had they walked in 
His law, nor in His statutes, which He had set 
before them and their fathers. Because of this 
persistency in wrongdoing, He would set His face 
against them for evil, to cut them all off. From 
the least to the greatest, all the men of Judah 
who dwelt in Egypt should be consumed—those, 
of course, who had gone there of their own voli- 
tion. Jeremiah and Baruch, together with many 
of Gedaliah’s former followers, were there by 
force, and hence could not be included with the 
self-willed captains and their retainers. Even 
should the latter desire to return, they would not 
be permitted so to do. ‘None shall return but 
such as shall escape” (vers. 11-14). 

Open and unblushing defiance greeted this seri- 
ous warning and earnest expostulation. The true 
state of the people was at once made manifest, 
and the hypocritical nature of their former prot- 
estations became clearly apparent. Idolatry of 
the most degrading character had already been 
secretly practised by them; the women leading, 
and the men abetting, as formerly in the land 
(ver. 15). The latter boldly declared, “As for 


Ishmael’s Treachery 245 


the word that thou hast spoken to us in the name 
of the Lord, we will not hearken unto thee” (ver. 
16). It was wilful, deliberate, high-handed oppo- 
sition to the truth! 

The reasons given illustrate the grave danger 
of trusting in experience rather than going to 
the Word of God, in spite of all outward appear- 
ances. Walking by sight, not faith, they rea- 
soned that when, in the cities of Judah, they 
ignored Jehovah’s word and burned incense unto 
the queen of heaven, and poured out drink offer- 
ings unto her, they had a measure of prosperity; 
at least they had “plenty of victuals, and were 
well, and saw no evil.” On the other hand, since 
they had left off so to do, they “have wanted all 
things, and have been consumed by the sword 
and by the famine” (vers. 17-19). Therefore 
they argue, it is clear that the blessings of the 
gods of the heathen were theirs while they thus 
served the queen of heaven. This blessing had 
been withdrawn when they gave up the outward 
symbols of idolatry and professed to worship 
Jehovah. How plausible and specious was their 
sophistry! Yet are there not many who reason 
in similar ways now? It was the appeal to a 
momentary experience, instead of to the Word 
of God—the only safe guide. 

Jeremiah’s answer is ready and convincing, 
whether they will own it or not. It was their 
idolatrous practices which brought down the 
wrath of the Lord upon them. He stood it until 
He could no longer bear it; then His judgment 
fell. For this very cause all the evil they com- 
plained of had come upon them (vers. 20-23). 


246 Notes on Jeremiah 


For the women He had a special word. Because 
they were the leaders in thus dishonoring His 
Name, that Holy Name should “no more be 
named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all 
the land of Egypt, saying, The Lord God liveth” 
(ver. 26). He would give them up to destruction, 
watching over them for evil, and not for good, 
until they should all be consumed, save a small 
number, who, escaping the sword, should return 
unto the land of Judah. Thus “all the remnant 
of Judah, that are gone into the land of Egypt to 
sojourn there, shall know whose words shall 
stand, Mine, or theirs” (vers. 27, 28). 

A sign of the coming destruction was also 
given, that, when it came to pass, they might 
know the hour of their judgment was no more to 
be delayed. Pharaoh-hophra, the king of Egypt, 
was to be given into the hand of his enemies. 
Thus the bruised reed upon which they leaned 
should be broken (vers. 29, 30). 

How vain the effort of man to withstand his 
Maker! What folly to strive with Him! Truly, 
“The fear of the Lord is the beginning of. wis- 
dom, and to depart from evil, that is understand- 
ing.” 


CHAPTER XXIII 
A WORD FOR BARUCH AND FOR US ALL 
(Chap. 45.) 


This beautiful though brief chapter of just 
five verses is pregnant with instruction for the 
children of God in all ages, and particularly for 
any who essay to serve the Lord in any public 
or official capacity. 

Chronologically, it follows chapter 36, as the 
first verse makes plain: “The word that Jeremiah 
the prophet spake unto Baruch the son of Neriah, 
when he had written these words in a book at 
the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of 
Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah.” The 
expression ‘‘these words” refers to the words 
penned by Baruch, at the prophet’s dictation, in 
the roll that was read before the king and his 
counselors, only to be contemptuously cast into 
the fire. Another copy, with added words, was 
then written by the same scribe. 

Baruch had thus been an instrument, used of 
God to communicate His mind to others. His 
own soul must not be neglected, however; hence 
the message given him, as narrated in this por- 
tion of the Scriptures. It is of the greatest mo- 
ment that those who minister to others be in a 
right state of soul themselves. Nothing is more 
dangerous than to go on giving out the truth of 
God, as suited to saint or sinner, while the heart 
is set upon self-seeking, or the private life of the 


248 Notes on Jeremiah 


servant is accompanied with unholiness and lack 
of humility before the Lord. It is this that leads 
to what another has most solemnly denounced as 
“trafficking in unfelt truth.” Only as the truth 
has power over one’s own heart and conscience 
can it be safely ministered to others. 

In Baruch’s case, it would seem that he felt 
the king’s rejection of the Word of God as an 
insult aimed at himself and his master, rather 
than at the Lord who inspired the writing that 
was in the roll. The result was sore discourage- 
ment. Therefore the prophet’s message: ‘Thus 
saith the Lord, the God of Israel, unto thee, O 
Baruch: Thou didst say, Woe is me now! for 
the Lord hath added grief to my sorrow; I fainted 
in my sighing, and I find no rest” (vers. 2, 3). 
It was quite right that the son of Neriah should 
feel, and feel keenly, the wretched state of his 
people, and their departure from holiness and 
truth. Every godly soul must of necessity have 
thus felt. Jeremiah did, as we know; and Eze- 
kiel, in vision, saw a mark placed upon the fore- 
heads of the men who sighed and cried because 
of Jerusalem’s abominations (Ezek. 9). This was 
pleasing to God, and indicated a chastened spirit 
and divine sensibilities. But the grief of Baruch 
is more personal, like that which threatened to 
consume the prophet himself, in chapter 15. It 
was prompted in large measure by disappoint- 
ment. He had not received the recognition as 
Jehovah’s servant and the amanuensis of Jere- 
miah that he looked for. Hence he faints in the 
day of adversity, because his strength is small. 
He has not yet learned to deny himself, which is 


A Word for Baruch and for Us All 249 


quite another thing to merely being self-denying. 
This latter thing he knew: the former he has not 
yet reached. Perhaps almost unknown to himself, 
and unseen heretofore even by Jeremiah, Baruch 
was seeking a measure of recognition from man. 

It is so easy to slip into this, especially if one 
is serving the Lord in the gospel, or in teaching 
the children of God. There is the secret desire, 
often, to be accorded a place, with the correspond- 
ing grief when that place is refused and one’s 
ministry is unacknowledged. Frequently this may 
be mistaken for sorrow because of the rejection 
of the Word of God; but in that case the soul 
finds refuge in the Author of that Word; and 
though tried, is not cast down, knowing that when 
the truth is proclaimed “‘we are unto God a sweet 
savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in 
them that perish: to the one we are the savor of 
death unto death; and to the other the savor of 
life unto life’ (2 Cor. 2:15, 16). 

It was not in this way that Baruch seemed 
to be affected. He felt the personal slight, the 
setting at nought, the despising of his ministry 
—always so hard for a sensitive soul to bear, if 
out of the presence of God. Therefore he fainted, 
and could find no rest. 

But the Lord has been graciously considering 
his case, and has for him a needed word, both of 
admonition and of comfort. His is no harsh, un- 
kind rebuke; no hard and severe scourging. 
Knowing full well that Baruch was, after all, 
seeking to honor Him, however he might have, 
well-nigh unconsciously, permitted self to have a 
place, He ministers a needed word in tenderness 


250 ~ Notes on Jeremiah 


and love. “Thus shalt thou say unto him,” He 
says to Jeremiah, “The Lord saith thus: Behold, 
that which I have built will I break down, and 
that which I have planted I will pluck up, even 
this whole land” (ver. 4). Surely, when all was 
so obnoxious to God, it was a specially improper 
scene for personal ambition. When the times 
were so evil, it was a specially improper season 
for self-seeking. One is reminded of Elisha’s 
words to Gehazi after he had profited in a mate- 
rial way by his deception of Naaman: “Is it a 
time to receive money, and to receive garments, 
and oliveyards, and vineyards, and sheep, and 
oxen, and menservants, and maidservants?” (2 
Kings 5:26). Poor, wretched Gehazi had been 
planning for his own comfort in a day when 
judgment, like a destroying angel, was stalking 
through the land. How awful to be so engaged at 
such a time! In a similar way the apostle Paul 
also speaks to the Corinthians when he writes: 
“But this I say, brethren, the time is short: it re- 
maineth, that both they that have wives be as 
though they had none; and they that weep, as 
though they wept not; and they that rejoice as 
though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as 
though they possessed not; and they that use this 
world, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this 
world passeth away” (1 Cor. 7: 29-381). 

This was what, in his measure, Baruch needed 
to learn. God was about to bring the then pres- 
ent order of things to an end in judgment, as He 
will soon bring the age in which we live to a 
close by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and 
our gathering together unto Him, to be followed 


A Word for Baruch and for Us All 251 


by the opening of the seven-sealed book of His 
indignation, when wrath to the uttermost must 
fall on apostate Christendom. For Baruch it was 
no time to be occupied with self-seeking, or to 
be troubled because he failed to gain the respect 
of a people who had so grievously departed from 
their God. And what shall be thought of a pro- 
fessed servant of Christ, sent to testify against 
the unspeakable corruptions of this age, expect- 
ing to be honored by the unspiritual for so doing? 
Such an one has quite failed to appreciate the 
call of God, and the condition of the world fast 
ripening for the judgment about to fall upon it. 

But the Lord goes on to give His servant a 
watchword that may well be kept in mind by all 
who endeavor in any way to contend for the 
faith once delivered. “And seekest thou great 
things for thyself? Seek them not” (ver. 5). A 
suited motto this for each of us. How apt is the 
heart to crave “great things;” but in doing so, 
how unlike the servant becomes to the Master 
who “pleased not Himself,” but could say, “I do 
always those things that please Him;” and again, 
“T came not to do Mine own will, but the will of 
Him tiat sent Me.” And does not the position 
He took when down here determine cur only 
proper one? What was it, then, as to the world? 
Alas, He was ever the Rejected One! For Him 
there was “no room in the inn” at His birth; no 
place among the great in His life; and when 
dead, only room in a borrowed tomb. He was 
always the outside One—always getting wrongs 
instead of His rights; as one has said, always 
in a different path from that of the “dwellers on 


252 Notes on Jeremiah 


the earth” in His day of humiliation. And yet it 
might have been so different—if one dare allow 
the thought. He need not have taken the place 
of rejection they gave Him. He could justly have 
claimed and acted upon the rights that were truly 
His. Had there been in Him an atom of self- 
seeking (which there was not, for He was the 
Holy One of the Father), He might have claimed 
a place among the mighty here, as others did. All 
the kingdoms of earth and the glory of them were 
offered Him; but on what conditions? Conditions 
which involved some violation of the Word of 
God. How utterly abhorrent, this, to the Holy 
One of God! (Oh that we were more like Him!) 
And so, faithfulness to God kept Him ever the 
Rejected One, till at last He suffered outside the 
gate. 

Let us ever remind ourselves that this is the 
One to whom we owe everything for eternity, 
whose loving-kindness is better than life, and 
who “also suffered for us, leaving us an example, 
that we should follow His steps: who did no sin, 
neither was guile found in His mouth: who, when 
He was reviled, reviled not again; when He suf- 
fered, He threatened not; but committed Him- 
self to Him that judgeth righteously: who His 
own self bare our sins in His own body on the 
tree, that we, being dead to sin, should live unto 
righteousness” (1 Pet. 2: 21-24). Do we, then, 
desire a place where He had none? Can we de- 
sire it so much that we will have it despite the 
fact that we must disobey His Word and grieve 
His Holy Spirit to get it; and knowing that if, 
like Him, we seek only to be faithful to God, we 


A Word for Baruch and for Us All 253 


never can obtain it? Is it really worth so much 
to be thought well of by sinful men and foolish 
saints? Will it appear so when we stand at His 
judgment-seat and gaze upon His face? Ah, bet- 
ter, far better, to be poor and despised here and 
have His approval than to seek great things for 
ourselves and lose His smile of approbation! Our 
“great things” are coming by and by. Let our 
faith lay firm hold of these. Till then may we 
have grace to truly say, 


‘We'd not have joy where He had woe, 
Be rich where He was poor.” 


If tempted to turn aside from the narrow path 
of subjection to the truth for an easier path, or 
to be better thought of in a world like this, let 
us remember these words to Baruch; if “great 
things” attract and would lure us on, remember 
the words—‘‘Seek them not.” 

The Lord adds, “For, behold, I will bring evil 
upon all flesh; . . . but thy life will I give unto 
thee for a prey in all places whither thou goest’” 
(ver. 5). No harm could come to Baruch, let men 
rage as they might, while God was His protector. 
Famine, sword and pestilence may destroy, but 
he should be preserved. He lived in a dispensa- 
tion when temporal blessing was a sign of the 
divine favor. With us, in this spiritual dispensa- 
tion, our blessings are of a different character. 
Precious it is to know that even though the body 
might be destroyed, yet nothing can touch the 
eternal life of the Christian; and even as to the 


body, 


254 Notes on Jeremiah 


“Not a single shaft can hit 
Till the God of love sees fit.” 


He who bids us not to seek great things for 


ourselves undertakes to carry us on, and has de- 
clared, ‘I will never leave thee nor forsake thee.” 


So that we may boldly say, “I will trust and not 
be afraid.” 


CHAPTER XXIV 
JEHOVAH’S WORD AGAINST THE NATIONS 


Egypt, Philistia, Moab, Ammon, Edom, Syria, 
Arabia, Elam, and Babylon. 


(Chaps. 46-49.) 


Jeremiah’s ministry to the rebellious men of 
Judah is now over. He is commissioned to an- 
nounce the judgment soon to fall upon the Gen- 
tiles. When called of God to the prophetic office, 
he was appointed to be a prophet unto the na- 
tions (chap. 1:5). Accordingly, the Word of 
the Lord is now given through him concerning the 
various peoples surrounding the land of Palestine. 
Nine different nations are brought before us: we 
take them up briefly in the order given. 


EGYPT. 


The entire forty-sixth chapter, with the excep- 
tion of the last two verses, is devoted to declar- 
ing the judgments foreseen by the prophet, which 
have fallen upon this once rich and populous 
country. In Scripture, Egypt is invariably a type 
of the world, either as the oppressor or the would- 
be patron of the people of God. As such, its 

‘judgment speaks of that which is yet to fall upon 
the present guilty order of things, which first 
crucified our Lord and persecuted His followers 
to the death, but now seeks to take them under 
its protecting wing; thus nullifying that separa- 
tion from its vanities which should have charac- 


256 Notes on Jeremiah 


terized the Church while waiting for an absent 
Lord. 

In the chapter before us we have two distinct 
prophecies, uttered about eighteen years apart. 
The occasion of the first was the attempt made 
by Pharaoh-nechoh to invade the provinces of the 
king of Babylon, and to break his rising power. 
This is set forth in vers. 2-12. It is a vivid 
apocalyptic description of the overthrow of the 
Egyptian forces by Nebuchadrezzar and his in- 
vincible armies. The date given is the same as 
for the preceding chapter. The Egyptians, “dis- 
couraged and turned away back,” were “beaten 
down, and fled apace,’ not looking back, “for 
fear was round about” (vers. 4, 5). Like the 
waters of a raging flood, the forces of Cush, Put, 
and Lydia (the various provinces subject to Pha- 
raoh), led by the trained Egyptian troops, had 
thought to overflow the land of the Chaldeans; 
but they knew not that the Lord had raised up 
Nebuchadrezzar, and that the day of His ven- 
geance upon Egypt had come, when, as a great 
sacrifice, they were to be offered up on the banks 
of the Euphrates (vers. 6-10). Hope of relief 
was vain. ‘Many medicines” would fail to effect 
acure. Egypt’s hour of doom had struck. Her 
manifold iniquities had called down Jehovah’s 
vengeance (vers. 11, 12). All this was literally 
fulfilled in the overthrow of Pharaoh-nechoh’s 
magnificent army. 

The next section refers to a later judgment; 
and although no date is given, we gather, by a 
comparison with chaps. 43 and 44, that it was 
uttered by Jeremiah during the time when the 


Jehovah’s Word against the Nations 257 


remnant abode in Egypt, after the fall of Jeru-- 
salem. It sets forth prophetically the complete 
devastation of the land of Mizraim upon the de- 
feat of Pharaoh-hophra, second after Pharaoh- 
nechoh, the last Pharaoh mentioned in the Bible. 
He is known to have been a man of ignoble spirit, 
foolhardy and deceitful. In vain he sought to 
stand against the rising power of Nebuchadrez- 
zar. His valiant men were to be swept away. 
“They stood not, because the Lord did drive 
them” (ver. 15). It should not be the might of 
Nebuchadrezzar that would insure him the vic- 
tory, neither the pusillanimity of Pharaoh-hophra 
that would determine his defeat. The Lord of 
hosts, the God of battles, was about to destroy 
the Egyptians because of their impiety and idola- 
try. He it is who puts down one nation and 
exalts another. ‘‘The most high ruleth in the 
kingdoms of men.” This the victorious Nebuchad- 
rezzar had also to learn for himself in due time. 

Hence for Egypt, her gods and her kings, there 
could be no quarter. They had defied the living 
and true God. They must be brought low till 
they learn His power. Such was the sentence; 
and it has been fulfilled to the letter, as the cen- 
turies witness. Egypt, however, has not fallen 
to rise no more. In the last days grace shall be 
shown to it. “Afterward it shall be inhabited, as 
in the days of old, saith the Lord” (ver. 26). 

In that day Judah also, together with the ten 
tribes denominated Israel, shall be delivered; and 
“Jacob shall return, and be in rest and at ease, 
and none shall make him afraid” (ver. 27). 


258 Notes on Jeremiah 


Jehovah has never forgotten His chosen. He may 
make a full end of the nations whither He has 
driven them to correct them, but He will not ut- 
terly destroy them. They must be corrected; His 
holiness demands that they be not wholly unpun- 
ished, but His grace will yet secure their reestab- 
lishment in the land, and the enjoyment of His 
covenanted mercies. 

Having pronounced the mind of the Lord as 
to Egypt, Jeremiah next gives His word in 
regard to 

PHILISTIA. 


The Philistines dwelt on the western borders 
of the land of Canaan. They were originally of 
Egypt, and therefore, typically, would speak of 
unconverted men of the world taking a place as 
dwellers in the land of blessing and privilege— 
mere unsaved professors, who, while pretending 
to be children of God, are in reality the enemies 
of His truth and of His people. Their temporal 
judgment predicted by Jeremiah, and literally 
fulfilled shortly afterwards, would set forth sym- 
bolically the more terrible judgment soon to fall 
upon the apostate class in Christendom of whom 
they are the type. 

The seven verses of chap. 47 are devoted to 
this subject. The date when first uttered is not 
definitely stated, but ver. 1 informs us that it 
was “before that Pharaoh smote Gaza,” which 
would place it about the time of the first prophecy 
regarding Egypt. 

From the north “waters should rise up;’’ that 
is, the Babylonian armies should overwhelm 


Jehovah’s Word against the Nations 259 


them; while the power of Egypt in the south’ 
was also to be turned against them. Even the 
world hates a hypocrite. Fear and anguish should 
take hold upon them; fathers and sons should be 
overwhelmed in the dreadful carnage. Tyrus and 
Zidon, Pheenician cities of Philistine origin, 
would have no power to help. It was the Lord 
who was about to destroy Philistia. The cup of 
the iniquity of this warlike and aggressive peo- 
ple was full. They must know the power of Jeho- 
vah’s anger. “The country of Caphtor’’ is a gen- 
eral name for the entire strip of country which 
they had occupied since the days of Abraham 
and Lot. Caphtor is an Egyptian word, and 
plainly indicates the ancient home and lineage of 
these intruders in the land of promise. 
“Baldness is come upon Gaza” indicates that 
this ancient city, for long in possession of Judah 
(Josh. 10: 41; Judges 1:18; 1 Kings 4: 24), had 
again fallen into the hands of its original occu- 
pants. It was devoted to destruction—so com- 
plete that it could be described as shaving city 
and people off the face of the ground; a figure 
frequently used by the prophets to signify utter 
desolation (Isa. 7:20; Ezek. 5:1, 2; Amos 8: 
10, etc.). As hair symbolizes the strength of de- 
pendence upon God (as in the example of Sam- 
son), and glory (as in the woman’s case), bald- 
ness indicates the absence of both. Philistia 
should be weak and helpless before her foes; her 
glory a mere memory, and her power departed. 
Ashkelon, likewise, was to be cut off “with the 
remnant of their valley’ (ver. 5). This, too, was 
one of the five cities of the lords of the Philistines 


260 Notes on Jeremiah 


in the days of Joshua. For location and the fer- 
tility of the surrounding country it was unex- 
celled. No doubt the desolations of Judah had 
permitted the Philistines once more to occupy it, 
but their season of repose should be brief. They 
must be broken and fall before the might of the 
armies sent against them by Jehovah whom they 
had defied. 

“The sword of the Lord” could not be quiet 
until its charge against Ashkelon had been ful- 
filled. That accomplished, it should be put into 
its scabbard. It is not that God authorized the 
numberless cruelties perpetrated by the armies of 
Pharaoh and Nebuchadrezzar, but He used them, 
in spite of all that was contrary to His mind, 
to wreak summary vengeance upon those who 
had so long been the oppressors and the enemies 
of His people. He is the Governor of the world, 
ruling among the nations; and it was true then, 
and it is true now, that “righteousness exalteth 
a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people.” 

The burden of Philistia ended, the prophet 
abruptly turns to 


MOAB. 


The somewhat lengthy forty-eighth chapter is 
taken up with the Word of the Lord to these 
descendants of inglorious Lot and his wretched 
first-born daughter; as the next chapter deals in 
part with the woes to come upon the children of 
the younger. 

Typically, these Moabites picture that large and 
careless class to-day who “have a name that they 
live, and are dead,” called in Heb. 12:8 “bast- 


Jehovah’s Word against the Nations 261 


ards, and not sons.” Illegitimately born, Moab 
was without claim to an inheritance in Israel, 
yet a near neighbor, dwelling upon the eastern 
shores of the Dead Sea. Lifeless, easy going pro- 
fession is thus set forth. Such may glide on care- 
lessly throughout life, partaking not of the 
chastisement of the Lord, which is for His own 
children; but judgment must come eventually. 

The way of address to Moab in the opening 
verse is noticeable: “Against Moab thus saith the 
Lord of hosts, the God of Israel.” This brings 
out the close relationship of Moab and Israel. To 
none of the others in this group of nations does 
He introduce Himself as “the God of Israel.” 

Woes are pronounced upon Nebo, the mountain 
of Moab from whose summit Moses viewed the 
promised land; Kiriathaim, called in Numbers 
32:37 Kirjathaim; and Misgab, a fortified city 
of which little is known. 

In Heshbon, the city of “devices,” as its name 
means, “‘they have devised evil against it.” Mad- 
men, that is, “dunghill,” shall become a scene of 
carnage. Horonaim and Luhith shall be spoiled 
likewise. ‘There shall be no more praise of 
Moab” (vers. 1-5). 

The inhabitants are warned to flee and save 
their lives; to be “like the heath in the wilder- 
ness” (ver. 6), as it is not God’s purpose to ut- 
terly destroy them. The heath (literally, “the 
naked tree”) referred to, is a desert shrub, hav- 
ing an abundance of vitality; so much so, that 
if a part be torn from the parent bush and car- 
ried away by the wind, it will take_ root where 


it may fall. The application of the figure to the 


262 Notes on Jeremiah 


remnant of Moab is plain. Their seed abides to- 
day, and shall remain even in the Millennium. 
In chap. 17:6 the same figure is applied to the 
one who trusts in man, though there it is the 
nakedness of the plant to which attention is 
drawn. 

Chemosh, the patron deity of Moab, was to be 


eens 


his priests and his princes together. Upon every 
city the spoiler should come; for so the Lord had 
spoken (vers. 7, 8). 

The only safety is in flight; for Jehovah’s curse 
rested upon him who should do the Lord’s work 
of judgment negligently. It must be unsparing, 
and he who held back his sword from blood 
should be devoted to judgment himself (vers. 9, 
10). 

For a long season Moab had been permitted 
to go unpunished. The result was a settling down 
in haughty carelessness, with utter indifference 
to the abominations everywhere practised. “Moab 
hath been at ease from his youth, and he hath 
settled on his lees, and hath not been emptied 
from vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone into 
captivity: therefore his taste remained in him, 
and his scent is not changed” (ver. 11). This 
condition can be no longer tolerated. The Lord 
is about to “send unto him wanderers, that shall 
cause him to wander, and shall empty his vessels 
and break their bottles” (ver. 12). The result 
shall be to destroy their confidence in Chemosh 
and to make them ashamed “as the house of 
Israel was ashamed of Bethel their confidence”— 
that is, of the calves set up by Jeroboam (ver. 


Jehovah's Word against the Nations 268 


13). It is evident that Moab’s destruction was 
not to be forever. Like Israel, they were to be 
punished in measure; but the discipline would 
eventually prove corrective. 

In vers. 14 to 25 the prophet sees in vision the 
advancing armies of the spoiler, and graphically 
portrays the alarm and final rout of the inhab- 
itants of the cities of this interesting people. 
“The horn of Moab is cut off” signifies that all 
his power was to be broken. In his pride he 
had “magnified himself against the Lord,” and 
gloried over Israel when their affliction came. 
“He shall wallow in his vomit, and be himself 
in derision” (vers. 26, 27). Ere the besom of 
wrath shall come upon them, the dwellers in the 
cities are warned to flee to “the rocks” for safety. 
A remnant would thus be preserved. They are 
exhorted to “be like the dove that maketh her 
nest in the sides of the hole’s mouth” (ver. 28). 

Pride ever goes before destruction, and a 
haughty spirit before a fall. It was this abomi- 
nable trait that particularly characterized these 
descendants of Lot. “We have heard the pride 
of Moab—he is exceeding proud!—his loftiness, 
and his arrogancy, and his pride, and the haughti- 
ness of his heart” (ver. 29). Because he will not 
humble himself, he must be humbled—in the case 
of individuals as well as nations who fail to 
acknowledge Heaven’s rule. Upon all the land 
the hand of God shall fall; for it ts His hand, 
though a heathen army be the instrument used. | 
Fow fitting that he who prophesies such dire sor- 
row should do so with weeping and strong cry- 
ing (vers. 30-34). 


264 Noces on Jeremiah 


Idolatry will be made to cease in their cities, 
and “There shall be lamentation generally upon 
all the housetops of Moab, and in the streets 
thereof,” when the Lord has “broken Moab like 
a vessel wherein is no pleasure” (vers. 35-41). 
It is the same simile of the potter and the ne clay, 


“And Moab shall be destroyed from being a peo- 
ple, because he hath magnified himself against the 
Lord.” This was his awful sin. How many, alas, 
have followed in his steps! For such, judgment 
is certain at last, though it may for a long time 
seem to slumber. When it falls, there shall be 
no escape. “Fear, and the pit, and the snare,” 
shall devour them all (vers. 42-46). Thus 
Balaam’s prophecy was to be at length fulfilled, 
when the Lord should “smite the corners of 
Moab” (Num. 24:17). “Yet will I bring again 
the captivity of Moab in the latter days, saith the 
Lord. Thus far is the judgment of Moab” (ver. 
Al). In the Millennium, when the Lord, in His 
own times, shall show who is that blessed and 
only Potentate, the King of kings and Lord of 
lords, Moab shall rejoice with His people, a rem- 
nant being spared to enter inte to the -world-king- 


“The burden of the ee kingdom of 
the 
AMMONITES 


is much briefer, the six opening verses of the 
next chapter giving it all. As before noted, they 
descended from the younger daughter of Lot, and 
typically speak of practically the same thing as 


Jehovah’s Word against the Nations 265 


Moab, only that they might also suggest thosé 
who prey upon the true Church of God, like 
Simon Magus and his numberless kin. They ever 
seem to have been a warlike people, and possibly 
had thus been considerably decimated, as we 
never find them occupying as large a place as the 
nation we have just been considering. Restless, 
predatory and nomadic, they did not possess the 
number of fenced cities, neither did they enjoy 
the high state of civilization characteristic of the 
Moabites. From the first they were the enemies 
of Israel, even though Moses sought to placate 
them, and directed the people to “distress them 
not” (Deut. 2: 19), as in the case of Moab also. 
In the times of Jeremiah they dwelt in several 
of the cities of Gad, and possibly also of Reuben 
and Benjamin; their own capital being Rabbath 
as of old, which was just across the border from 
Gad. Bold and fearless, but with no great cities, 
they could not be characterized by the pride of 
national glory that we have seen in Moab; but 
the indictment here brought against them is that 
she ‘‘trusted in her treasures, saying, Who shall 
come unto me?” They were thus independent of 
God equally with their more cultured neighbors. 
In verse 1 the Lord asks, “Hath Israel no sons? 
Hath he no heir? Why then doth their king in- 
herit Gad, and his people dwell in his cities?” 
The Ammonites had taken advantage of the cap- 
tivity of Israel and their manifold afflictions to 
enrich themselves, and to occupy the territory 
contiguous to their own land. ‘‘Therefore, behold, 
the days come, saith the Lord, that I will cause 
an alarm of war to be heard in Rabbah of the 


266 Notes on Jeremiah 


Ammonites; and it shall be a desolate heap, and 
her daughters shall be burned with fire: then 
shall Israel be heir unto them that were his heirs, 
saith the Lord” (ver. 2): that is, the power of 
Ammon was soon to be broken, and Israel made 
once more to occupy the cities that had been 
wrested from them. This has already had a par- 
tial fulfilment. It will have a more complete one 
in the Millennium, when Israel shall dwell in his 
own land, with none to make him afraid. 

Lamentation and mourning, the prophet de- 
clared, should take the place of Ammon’s proud 
boasting and conceit; for her king should go into 
captivity with the princes and priests, and their 
whole people that were spared from the sword 
should be driven out of their land, with none to 
“sather up him that wandereth.” Afterward, 
when the chastisement shall have been productive 
of blessing, the children of Ammon will be re- 
stored, as in the case of Moab (vers. 3-6). 

Somewhat more lengthy is the prophetic word 
concerning 

EDOM. 


The descendants of “Esau, which is Edom,” 
had ever been the enemies of the descendants of 
his brother Jacob. By comparing the short proph- 
ecy of Obadiah with the passage before us, the 
reader will get a full account of the sin and the 
doom of this high-handed race. In type, we have 
the flesh symbolized—ever lusting against the 
Spirit. Hence there is no restoration for Edom. 
They were to be utterly cut off. Human wisdom 
could not avail to save this proud nation. All 


Jehovah’s Word against the Nations 267 


their counsels were in vain. “The calamity of 
Edom” was near at hand. God had decreed it. 
None of the men should be spared. Grape-gath- 
erers leave some gleaning grapes upon the vines. 
Midnight robbers do not utterly despoil those 
whom they wrong. But in the case of the chil- 
dren of Esau they would be utterly destroyed, 
so far as nationality is concerned (vers. 7-10). 
It is touching to find in this connection the 
precious message that has been a source of un- 
told comfort to many a tried saint in later days. 
“Leave thy fatherless children, I will preserve 
them alive; and let thy widows trust in Me” 
(ver. 11). This was God’s gracious provision for 
the helpless and feeble even of Edom. How 
blessedly it tells out the real compassion of His 
heart! Judgment is His strange work. His holi- 
ness demands that sin be dealt with. In His 
righteous government the nations that have prac- 
tised iniquity must perish. But He forgets not 
the cry of the lowly; He ever remembers the 
poor and the needy. The widow and the father- 
less have a special claim upon His love and 
mercy. Never was that claim pleaded in vain. 
This is the only bright light in the dark pic- 
ture of Edom’s woes. They could not go unpun- 
ished, but must assuredly drink of the cup of 
Jehovah’s wrath. The surrounding nations were 
to be the instruments used to bring this about. 
Though Edom should make his nest as high as 
the eagle, the Lord would bring him down from 
thence, giving up his cities and fortresses to des- 
olation. The ruin was to be as complete as that 
of Sodom and Gomorrah and the cities of the 


268 Notes on Jeremiah 


plains. Like a lion coming out from the swell- 
ings of Jordan, the enemy would rise up against 
the habitation of the strong till the heart of his 
mighty men became as the heart of a woman in 
her pangs (vers. 12-22). With this the prophet 
abruptly concludes. There is no word of recov- 
ery. It is a ruin complete and irrevocable, as 
Obadiah also testifies. 


DAMASCUS 


is next told of her impending doom. Already this 
once great city was being bereft of her glory, 
the Syrian empire paling before Nebuchadrez- 
zar’s rising sun. Hamath and Arpad, famous in 
their day, were confounded. Evil tidings had 
reached them of the overthrow of the Syrian 
armies. “There is sorrow on the sea; it cannot 
be quiet.” The restlessness of the sobbing surf 
was but a picture of the state of their inhabitants. 
Damascus, waxing feeble, sought to flee; but 
“anguish and sorrows have taken her, as a 
woman in travail’ (vers. 23, 24). It is too late 
to escape. The conqueror is at the door. ‘“There- 
fore her young men shall fall in her streets, and 
all the men of war shall be cut off in that day, 
saith the Lord of hosts.” The city was to be 
burned, and the palaces of Ben-hadad, Israel’s 
old enemy, destroyed (vers. 25-27). Thus briefly, 
in the space of five verses, does the prophet por- 
tray the downfall of one of the greatest powers 
of ancient times. 


ARABIA, 


with its various tribes, is likewise apprised of 


Jehovah's Word against the Nations 269 


Nebuchadrezzar’s purpose and ultimate victory: 
Kedar and Hazor are to be smitten. Fear shall 
be on every side. The flocks and herds of these 
pastoral people shall feed the conqueror’s armies. 
All their treasures shall be seized for a spoil: 
“And Hazor shall be a dwelling for dragons, and 
a desolation forever: there shall no man abide 
there, nor any son of man dwell in it” (vers. 28- 
33). (The word for “dragons” might better be 
rendered “‘jackals.”’) 

These fierce Arabian tribes’ father was Ish- 
mael, Abraham’s first-born, by Hagar. As out- 
lined in Galatians, they picture those who, born 
after the flesh, seek to obtain a place of bless- 
ing through legal works, only to find that “the 
son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the 
son of the free woman” (Gal. 4: 30). 


ELAM. 


In the beginning of the reign of the unstable 
Zedekiah, the Word of the Lord had come to 
Jeremiah against the rising power of Elam, des- 
tined to play an important part in the history of 
nations, as an ally of the mighty kingdom of 
Persia, afterwards allied with Media, assuming 
an imperial place under Cyrus (ver. 34). It was 
at this time a Babylonian province (Dan. 8:2), 
though in years gone by it had flourished as an 
independent kingdom (Gen. 14:1-12). As being 
part of the prophet’s testimony to the nations, 
the burden of Elam is introduced here in con- 
nection with the preceding kingdoms and tribes. 

The Lord was to “break the bow of Elam, the 


270 Notes on Jeremiah 


chief of their might;’’ and by means of the four 
winds He should scatter them toward every quar- 
ter of heaven, so that there should “be no na- 
tion whither the outcasts of Elam” should not 
come. 

Dismayed before their enemies, they should 
know the fierce anger of the Lord, who would 
send a sword after them until He had consumed 
them. His throne should be set in Elam, when 
their king and princes should be destroyed. It is 
the same thing as in the case of Nebuchadrezzar 3 
they should know that “the heavens do rule” 
(vers. 35-38). This was fulfilled when the victo- 
rious Macedonians and their allies drove the 
luxurious Persian armies before them, under 
Alexander the Great. Yet between this time and 
the time when the prophecy was uttered, Elam 
rose from the position of an insignificant king- 
dom to an integral part of one of the mightiest 
empires the world had known, overthrowing the 
Babylonians and ruling the entire known world, 
with the exception of the feeble states of Europe. 
In God’s appointed time all her power availed 
nothing, and she became but another witness to 
the truth of prophecy. 

There is hope in her latter end however, for 
the Lord has pledged Himself to bring again her 
captivity. So we see the very same people exist- 
ing to-day, despite the changes of the centuries; 
and in the coming kingdom of our Lord the rem- 
nant of Elam shall have a place, when the na- 
tions that are spared shall own Messiah’s benig- 
nant yet righteous sway (ver. 39). 

Thus God had revealed “things to come” con- 


Jehovah’s Word against the Nations 271 


cerning the Gentile nations surrounding Imman- 
uel’s land. From one to another the cup of His 
vengeance should be passed. Judgment began at 
the house of God, when Israel and Judah were 
given up to captivity. Their heathen neighbors 
rejoiced in their discomfiture. But they too must 
drink of that cup, and learn that “those that walk 
in pride He is able to abase.” Egypt and her 
daughter Philistia; together with Moab, Ammon 
and Edom, so closely related to Israel; as also 
Syria, Arabia and Elam, must all alike be swept 
with the besom of His wrath. Jeremiah foretold 
it long before it became a matter of history, as 
it has become since. 

For one more nation He has a similar word 
—for the very power used to chastise Judah 
when she departed from the living God: Baby- 
lon must be destroyed when her iniquity has come 
to the full. But we reserve this for another 
chapter. 


CHAPTER XXV 


THE DOOM OF BABYLON AND THE DELIVERANCE OF 
THE REMNANT 


(Chaps. 50, 51.) 


In the New Testament two solemn chapters are 
devoted to an account of the worldly glory and 
the awful overthrow of mystical, or spiritual, 
Babylon (Rev. 17, 18). In our prophet, two 
chapters give in detail the splendor and ruin of 
literal Babylon, the city by the Euphrates, which 
answers to the Babylon of the Apocalypse as type 
to antitype. 

It has been a question with many as to whether 
or no the literal city in the plain of Shinar is 
again to be built, and destined to become the 
queen city of the world. Those who think so con- 
sider the Babylon of Revelation to refer, not to 
Rome and its unholy politico-religious system, but 
to the actual Chaldean city, when it has awak- 
ened from the slumber of centuries. Such point 
to the fact that Babylon as well as Rome was built 
upon seven hills, or mounds; and as the prophecy 
of Jeremiah so closely connects Israel’s restora- 
tion with Babylon’s ruin, they hold that it is es- 
sential to prophetic exactness that this city shall 
once more become the wonder of the world. 

On the other hand, the opponents of this view 
consider the resurrection of literal Babylon to be 
an idle dream, utterly opposed to the teaching of 
these chapters now before us. They hold that any 
plain man, reading Jeremiah’s vivid description 


The Doom of Babylon 273 


of the downfall of Shinar’s capital, could but 
gather from it that it was cast down forever. 
Unless one has a theory to uphold, this would 
be the plain sense of the passage, in their judg- 
ment. There seems to them to be no proper rea- 
son for supposing the apocalyptic Babylon to be 
other than Rome, as held by the majority of 
Christians of all ages. The de:~~iption so exactly 
tallies with papal and _agau Rome in the past, 
as well as with what one may so readily expect 
the papacy to develop in the future, when the 
Church has been caught up—and this view seems 
so thoroughly in accord with the predictions of 
Daniel and other prophets of both the Old and 
New Testaments—that one finds it difficult to be- 
lieve in the necessity for the rebuilding of the 
literal city in order to carry out the “sure word 
of prophecy.” Without desiring to be offensively 
dogmatic, the writer finds himself in this class, 
and is compelled, in what follows, to view the 
present portion of Jeremiah from this standpoint, 
Let the reader carefully seek to “prove all things, 
and hold fast that which is good.” Because of 
these conflicting views, we shall not glance as 
cursorily at these chapters as we have done in 
regard to the others that give the prophecies of 
the nations; but we shall look at them verse by 
verse, seeking to point out the general trend of 
the teaching as we go along. 

“The Word that the Lord spake against Baby- 
lon and against the land of the Chaldeans by 
Jeremiah the prophet” (chap. 50:1). It is note- 
worthy that the same man who had previously 
predicted the ascendancy of Babylon now fore- 


274 Notes on Jeremiah 


tells its doom. He who had counseled submission 
to its authority now exhorts the remnant of Israel 
to flee from it, that they be not partakers of its 
sins and its judgment. This is all perfectly con- 
sistent. Jeremiah was no politician, no courtier, 
no man-pleaser. He spake “as pleasing God that 
trieth the heart.” When the Lord would chasten 
Judah, He chose Nebuchadrezzar to be His rod, 
When Babylon lifted up herself against Him, she 
too must fall, and fall lower far than Judah, 
never to rise again. 

“Declare ye among the nations, and publish, 
and set up a standard; publish, and conceal not: 
say, Babylon is taken, Bel is confounded, Mero- 
dach is broken in pieces; her idols are confound- 
ed, her images are broken in pieces” (ver. 2). 
God speaks of the things that are not as though 
they were. Vividly He describes the downfall of 
the special form of idolatry that characterized 
Babylon, together with the taking of the city by 
the monotheistic armies of Cyrus. Bel was the 
sun-god worshiped under the names of Baal, 
Zeus, Jupiter, Osiris, etc., by various nations. 
Merodach is but another name for the same 
demon-deity. He is called Marduk in the Babylo- 
nian inscriptions. Often the two names are 
joined together, as Bel-Marduk. Bel was the 
name under which he was worshiped among the 
old Accadians. He is sometimes called Bel of 
Nippur. Before the power of Jehovah’s might 
he is to be put to shame, and all the images 
broken to pieces. 

“For out of the north there cometh up a na- 
tion against her, which shall make her land des- 


The Doom of Babylon 275 


olate, and none shall dwell therein: they shall 
remove, they shall depart, both man and beast” 
(ver. 3). The northern nation was the Medo- 
Persian confederacy, whose end we have noted in 
chapter 49. The Persians generally were believ- 
ers in one unseen God, whom they worshiped un- 
der the symbol of fire. They abhorred idolatry 
with a relentless hatred, and were a nation of 
iconoclasts. It was fitting that such a people 
should be used to overthrow the mother of all 
idolatrous practices—Babylon, with her powerful 
secret priest-caste. By this means should the way 
be opened for the return of the captivity of Israel 
and Judah to the land of their nativity. 

“In those days, and in that time, saith the Lord, 
the children of Israel shall come, they and the 
children of Judah together, going and weeping: 
they shall go, and seek the Lord their God. They 
shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thither- 
ward, saying, Come, and let us join ourselves to 
the Lord in a perpetual covenant that shall not 
be forgotten” (vers. 4, 5). We know that it was 
a mere handful that thus responded to the oppor- 
tunity given by Cyrus. Nevertheless they were 
prospered on their way, and were settled in their 
land when Messiah appeared. The perpetual 
covenant, however, shall not be truly entered into 
until their future return. The first was but a 
picture of the final restoration, when they shall 
be brought into millennial blessing. 

Touchingly, Jehovah describes the afflicted 
state of His people under Babylon’s rule: “My 
people hath been lost sheep; their shepherds have 
caused them to go astray, they have turned them 


276 Notes on Jeremiah 


away on the mountains: they have gone from 
mountain to hill, they have forgotten their rest- 
ing place. All that found them have devoured 
them: and their adversaries said, We offend not, 
because they have sinned against the Lord, the 
habitation of justice, even the Lord, the hope of 
their fathers’ (vers. 6, 7). Thus had the na- 
tions combined to heap ignominy and reproach 
upon the failed nation that had enjoyed blessing 
above every other. But though the Lord per- 
mitted all this for their discipline, He had not 
failed to note the hatred manifested toward them 
by the haughty Gentile powers. The time was 
near when He was to awake for the deliverance 
of His own, and the judgment of their oppres- 
sors. To the leaders among the captivity He 
sends the word, “Flee” (or, remove) “out of the 
midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land 
of the Chaldeans, and be as the he goats before 
the flocks” (ver. 8). His wandering sheep are 
to be restored to their own fold under the gvid- 
ance and. care of the “Shepherd of Israel.” 

“For, lo, I will raise and cause to come up 
against Babylon an assembly of great naticns 
from the north country: and they shall set them- 
selves in array against her; from thence she 
shall be taken; their arrows shall be as of a 
mighty expert man; none shall return in vain. 
And Chaldea shall be a spoil: all that spoil her 
shall be satisfied, saith the Lord” (vers. 9, 10). 
The “assembly of great nations from the north” 
under Cyrus consisted of the Persians and Medes, 
together with the Elamites and the surround- 
ing nations which had become tributary to the 


The Doom of Babyton 277 


mighty conqueror, whose triumph Daniel had 
plainly predicted in the very court of the kings 
of Babylon. 

The reason for the desolation of this once 
glorious city is given in the next two verses, as 
also a summary of her destruction. ‘Because ye 
were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye destroyers of 
My heritage, because ye are grown fat as the 
heifer at grass” (“that treadeth out the corn,” 
R. V.), “and bellow as bulls; your mother shall 
be sore confounded; she that bare you shall be 
ashamed: behold, the hindermost of the nations 
shall be a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert” 
(vers. 11, 12). 

Only genuine faith in the Word of God could 
have led any one to credit a prophecy so unlikely 
of fulfilment to the mind of the natural man. 
When Jeremiah spoke, or wrote, the words 
Babylon was the greatest city in the world, with 
apparently impregnable defences. Her massive 
walls, with their hundred gates, seemed cal- 
culated to withstand the siege of centuries; es- 
pecially as the vast space within, suitable for 
cultivation, apparently provided against all possi- 
bility of famine. But God had spoken; and 
though her inhabitants knew it not, the doom of 
proud, luxurious, idolatrous Babylon was sealed. 
Where the city once stood, now all is desert, as 
foretold by both Jeremiah and Isaiah (see Isa. 
47). It was with great difficulty that archae- 
ologists were even able to find its site, buried 
deep beneath the rubbish of ages. It shall never 
be rebuilt; for He who cannot lie hath declared, 
“Because of the wrath of the Lord it shall not 


278 Notes on Jeremiah 


be inhabited, but it shall be wholly desolate: 
every one that goeth by Babylon shall be aston- 
ished, and hiss at all her plagues” (ver. 13). 

In the light of this verse, if there were no 
other corroborative, we cannot conceive of any 
room for the notion that the city is yet to be 
rebuilt in order to be thrown down once more. 
No one, without a theory to maintain, could 
gather from these words other than that, once 
destroyed, it should rise no more forever. Jere- 
miah’s hearers must have so understood it. There 
was no hint that he referred to another destruc- 
tion than that begun under Cyrus. It is useless 
to urge against this that the desolation was not 
accomplished at once, when Belshazzar was con- 
quered and slain by the armies of Cyrus. The 
prophet does not predict a sudden blotting out. 
She is to become first the “hindermost of the na- 
tions ;” then, eventually, “a wilderness.” This is 
exactly what took place. God’s word was ful- 
filled to the letter, for “the Scripture cannot be 
broken.” 

As though beholding the invading army sur- 
rounding the city, Jeremiah vividly describes the 
onslaught of the Persian cohorts. “Put your- 
selves in array against Babylon round about: all 
ye that bend the bow, choot at her, spare no ar- 
rows; for she hath sinned against the Lord. 
Shout against her round about: she hath given 
her hand: her foundations are fallen, her walls 
are thrown down: for it is the vengeance of the 
Lord: take vengeance upon her; as she hath 
done, do unto her. Cut off the sower from Baby- 
lon, and him that handleth the sickle in time of 


The Doom of Babylon 279 


harvest: for fear of the oppressing sword they- 
shall turn every one to his people, and they shall 
flee every one to his own land” (vers. 14-16). It 
is the undeviating law of God’s government that 
“whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also 
reap”—and a nation in like manner. According 
as Babylon had done to others, so was it done to 
her. The New Testament seer uses language very 
similar in referring to mystical Babylon. (See 
Rev. 18:6.) Retribution may be long delayed, 
but it is as certain as the fixed stars. “God is 
not mocked.” He still sits on the throne as the 
moral Governor of the universe. How impor- 
tant, then, for the nations, as well as individuals, 
to remember and act upon the words of our Lord 
Jesus: “As ye would that men should do to you, 
do ye even so to them.” 

Again the prophet turns to Israel to declare 
God’s unfailing promises. They have sinned, and 
sinned most grievously, but His Word cannot be 
thus made void. “Israel is a scattered sheep; the 
lions have driven him away: first the king of 
Assyria hath devoured him; and last this Ne- 
buchadrezzar king of Babylon hath broken his 
bones. Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, 
the God of Israel: Behold, I will punish the king 
of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the 
king of Assyria. And I will bring Israel again 
to his habitation, and he shall feed on Carmel 
and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon 
mount Ephraim and Gilead” (vers. 17-19). As 
surely as Assyria’s haughty power had been 
broken, so should Babylon fall; and as surely 
as this seemingly impossible event should take 


280 Notes on Jeremiah 


place, so should Israel be brought back to the 
home of their fathers. Nor was it the merely 
temporary return under Ezra and Zerubbabel 
that is here referred to, for, “In those days, and 
in that time, saith the Lord, the iniquity of Israel 
shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and 
the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: 
for I will pardon them whom I reserve’ (ver. 
20). This will only be when “they shall look 
upon Him whom they have pierced:” and the 
remnant of Judah, as later the remnant of the 
ten tribes, shall say, “Come, and let us return 
unto the Lord: for He hath torn, and He will 
heal us; He hath smitten, and He will bind us 
up” (Hosea 6:1). 

Reverting again to the main theme, Jeremiah 
goes on to picture, as in vision, the desolation of 
Babylon. “Go up against the land of Merathaim, 
even against it, and against the inhabitants of 
Pekod: waste and utterly destroy after them, 
saith the Lord, and do according to all that I have 
commanded thee” (ver. 21). Merathaim means 
“double rebellion,” according to the best author- 
ities, and seems here to be symbolically applied 
to Chaldea. Pekod is said by some to mean 
“Visitation ;” and by reference to Ezek. 23: 23 it 
would appear to indicate a tributary city to the 
capital. If so, it is now impossible to find any 
trace of it. Some have thought it might simply 
refer to a certain quarter or suburb of the im- 
perial city. 

“A sound of battle is in the land, and of great 
destruction. How is the hammer of the whole 
earth cut asunder and broken! How is Babylon 


The Doom of Babylon 281 


become a desolation among the nations! I have 
laid a snare for thee, and thou art also taken, 
O Babylon, and thou wast not aware: thou art 
found, and also caught, because thou hast striven 
against the Lord” (vers. 22-24). It was in this 
that her great offence consisted. She had lifted 
herself up against the Most High. In no other 
city did idolatry assume so fearful a form and so 
dreadful an aspect as in the great city Babylon. 
She was, as before pointed out, the mother of 
almost every heathen system. From her, too, 
mystical Babylon borrowed far more than many 
have any conception. Almost every unscriptural 
practice in the great Romish apostasy can be 
traced back to the Babylonish rites and cere- 
monies. 

Because of her dreadful impiety, “The Lord 
hath opened His armory, and hath brought forth 
the weapons of His indignation: for this is the 
work of the Lord God of hosts in the land of 
the Chaldeans” (ver. 25). Not the superior 
strategy of Cyrus, nor yet the hardihood of his 
northern troops, nor the carelessness of her de- 
fenders, overcame Babylon. It was the hand of 
God that subverted that mighty empire when its 
iniquity had come to the full. Though the Medo- 
Persian legions knew Him not, He it was who 
summoned them, saying, “Come against her from 
the utmost border, open her storehouses: cast her 
up as heaps, and destroy her utterly: let noth- 
ing of her be left. Slay all her bullocks; let 
them go down to the slaughter: woe unto them! 
for their day is come, the time of their visita- 
tion” (vers. 26, 27). 


282 Notes on Jeremiah 


The prophetic ear, made quick to hear things 
yet to come, catches the sound borne down from 
the years of the future, of “the voice of them 
that flee and escape out of the land of Babylon, 
to declare in Zion the vengeance of the Lord our 
God, the vengeance of His temple” (ver. 28). 
That temple had been despoiled and burned with 
fire by the ruthless armies of Chaldea. Its 
sacred vessels had been carried to Babylon; and, 
later, we learn from the book of Daniel that 
the crowning act of Belshazzar’s impiety was 
reached when he caused these holy vessels to be 
desecrated at his idolatrous feasts by pouring out 
in them drink offerings to his false gods, and 
using them for the awful revels of his last great 
affront to the God of Israel. ‘The vengeance of 
the temple” was certain. No hand could stay it. 
Even as the feast went on, the wretched mon- 
arch’s doom was sealed. Weighed in the balances, 
he was found wanting; his kingdom, numbered 
and finished, was given to the Medes and Per- 
sians. 

“Call together the archers against Babylon: 
all ye that bend the bow, camp against it round 
about; let none thereof escape: recompense her 
according to her work; according to all that she 
hath done, do unto her: for she hath been proud 
against the Lord, against the Holy One of Israel’ 
(ver. 29). It was not ignorance on her part. 
Testimony after testimony had been given to the 
true and living God, but she deliberately refused 
them all and rushed madly upon “the thick bosses 
of the Almighty.” “Therefore shall her young 
men fall in the streets, and all her men of war 


The Doom of Babylon 283 


shall be cut off in that day, saith the Lord” (ver. 
30). Falling into the hands of the God of judg- 
ment, she learns His awful power, when repen- 
tance is forever too late. 

“Behold, I am against thee, O thou most proud, 
saith the Lord God of hosts: for thy day is come, 
the time that I will visit thee. And the most 
proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise 
him up: and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and 
it shall devour all round about him” (vers. 31, 
32.) Do not the words, “The most proud shall 
stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up,” 
clearly indicate that there can be no future re- 
building of this abhorred city? She had her day 
of opportunity. Blindly she refused the things 
that belonged to her peace. When her time of 
visitation came, her fall was complete and final. 

Precious is the word that follows for the rem- 
nant of Israel and for us. “Thus saith the Lord 
of hosts: The children of Israel and the children 
of Judah were oppressed together: and all that 
took them captive held them fast; they refused 
to let them go. Their Redeemer is strong; The 
Lord of hosts is His name: He shall thoroughly 
plead their cause, that He may give rest to the 
land, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon” 
(vers. 33, 34). Israel and Judah should yet know 
Him as a Saviour-God, delivering them from all 
that oppressed them. In His love and in His 
pity He had redeemed them of old, He would 
never give them up, but in His own appointed 
time He should arise to their deliverance. His 
loving-kindness endureth forever. His grace must 
have its full display, however unworthy the ob- 
jects of it may be. 


284 Notes on Jeremiah 


But if we read of mercy and compassion for 
His own, we find His sword of wrath unsheathed 
for the punishment of His enemies. “A sword is 
upon the Chaldeans, saith the Lord, and upon the 
inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, 
and upon her wise men. A sword is upon the 
liars” (or, boasters) ; “and they shall dote” (2. e., 
utter nonsense): “a sword is upon her mighty 
men; and they shall be dismayed. A sword is 
upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and 
upon all the mingled people that are in the midst 
of her; and they shall become as women: a sword. 
is upon her treasures; and they shall be robbed” 
(vers. 35-37). It is a graphic delineation of un- 
sparing judgment. No words of ours are needed 
as to what is in itself so plain. 

The next verse clearly tells the reason for so 
frightful a catastrophe. ‘A drought is upon her 
waters; and they shall be dried up: for it is the 
land of graven images, and they are mad upon 
their idols.’ The Lord’s controversy was not 
with the people of Babylon and Chaldea alone, 
but with the whole demoniacal system which, 
from the days of Nimrod, had its centre in the 
plains of Shinar. ‘Therefore the wild beasts of 
the desert with the wild beasts of the islands 
shall dwell there, and the owls shall dwell there- 
in; and it shall be no more inhabited forever: 
neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to 
generation” (vers. 38, 39). This is surely con- 
clusive. To look for a resurrection of Babylon 
only that she may be again destroyed is, in our 
judgment, an idle dream. She has been blotted 
off from the face of the earth, and shall be so 


The Doom of Babylon 285 


forever. “As God overthrew Sodom and Gomor- 
rah and the neighbor cities thereof, saith the 
Lord, so shall no man abide there, neither shall 
any son of man dwell therein” (ver. 40). The 
ruin is complete and irremediable. The silent 
mounds by the Euphrates are as distinct witness 
to the holiness of God as the salt plains by the 
Dead Sea. 

Verses 41 and 42 are a vivid description of the 
Persian cavalry, with their allies advancing to 
the siege of the luxurious city. ‘Behold, a peo- 
ple shall come from the north, and a great na- 
tion, and many kings shall be raised up from the 
coasts” (or, uttermost parts) “of the earth. They 
shall hold the bow and the lance: they are cruel, 
and will not show mercy: their voice shall roar 
like the sea, and they shali ride upon horses, 
every one put in array, like a man to the battle, 
against thee, O daughter of Babylon.” One can 
almost see the advancing armies, with the forest 
of lances and standards, as they draw near the 
city that proudly boasted of being impregnable. 
“The king of Babylon hath heard the report of 
them, and his hands waxed feeble: anguish took 
hold of him, and pangs as of a woman in travail” 
(ver. 43). All the might of Chaldea’s armies, the 
ingenuity of her officers, and the walls and 
bastions around her capital, could avail nothing 
to turn aside the dire calamity. Babylon had 
lifted herself up against Jehovah. She sought to 
measure her strength with the Almighty. She 
must be crushed to the dust never again to lift 
up her head. 

Cyrus, God’s chosen, whom Isaiah had called 


286 Notes on Jeremiah 


by name long before (Isa. 45: 1-4), is described 
as a lion coming up from the swelling of Jor- 
dan, driven into the inhabited country from the 
wilderness because of the rising waters. ‘Be- 
hold, he shall come up like a lion from the swell- 
ing of Jordan unto the habitation of the strong: 
but I will make them suddenly run away from 
her: and who is a chosen man, that I may ap- 
point over her? for who is like Me? and who 
will appoint Me the time? and who is that shep- 
herd that will stand before Me?” (ver. 44). Al- 
most the same words are used in chap. 49: 19 to 
describe the enemy of Edom. No strong habita- 
tion could withstand the assault of an army sent 
by God as a punishment for national iniquity. 

“Therefore hear ye the counsel of the Lord, 
that He hath taken against Babylon; and His 
purposes, that He hath purposed against the land 
of the Chaldeans. Surely the least of the flock 
shall draw them out: surely He shall make their 
habitation desolate with them” (ver. 45). Even 
the feeblest could overcome the mighty, when 
fighting the battles of the Lord. He had but to 
give the word, and all the defences of Babylon 
became as the toppling walls of Jericho. The 
astonishment of the nations is expressed in the 
closing verse of this chapter. “At the noise of 
the taking of Babylon the earth is moved, and the 
cry is heard among the nations” (ver. 46). 

The following chapter, which closes the series, 
continues the same general subject. “Thus saith 
the Lord: Behold, I will raise up against Baby- 
lon, and against them that dwell in the midst of 
them that rise up against Me, a destroying wind; 


The Doom of Babylon 287 


and I will send unto Babylon fanners, that shall 
fan her, and shall empty her land: for in the 
day of trouble they shall be against her round 
about” (vers. 1, 2). As grain is winnowed and 
the chaff carried off by the wind, so should the 
inhabitants of Babylon be swept away by the 
“destroying wind’ of the Lord’s indignation. 
The only wheat to be found therein was the 
feeble remnant of Israel and Judah—scattered 
because of their sins though they were. 
“Against him that bendeth let the archer bend 
his bow, and against him that lifteth himself up 
in his brigandine: and spare ye not her young 
men; destroy ye utterly all her host. Thus the 
slain shall fall in the land of the Chaldeans, and 
they that are thrust through in her streets” 
(vers. 3, 4). All attempts at defensive warfare 
were destined to be in vain. Neither archers nor 
strategy could avail anything to save the city 
when Jehovah had devoted it to destruction. 
“For Israel hath not been forsaken, nor Judah 
of his God, of the Lord of hosts; though their 
land was filled with sin against the Holy One of 
Israel” (ver. 5). Israel and Judah were under 
the rod of the Lord’s chastening because of their 
sins, but nothing could alter His covenanted 
mercies to them. It was the Holy One with whom 
they had to do; one who is of purer eyes than 
to behold iniquity; but even their failure could 
not change the word of His grace and the love 
of His heart. He was for them still, and there- 
fore more than all that could be against them. 
Accordingly, He apprises them of the judgments 
before they fall, and warns them to depart from 


288 Wotes on Jeremiah 


the doomed city. “Flee out of the midst of Baby- 
lon, and deliver every man his soul: be not cut 
off in her iniquity; for this is the time of the 
Lord’s vengeance; He will render unto her a 
recompense” (ver. 6). So also, in the days when 
the apocalyptic vials are being poured out upon 
the earth, the call will go forth to the Jewish 
remnant of that fearful time, “Come out of her, 
My people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, 
and that ye receive not of her plagues” (Rev. 
18:4). As righteous Lot was delivered from 
Sodom ere fire from heaven fell, so the oppor- 
tunity was given for the men of Judah and Israel 
to flee out of Babylon in time to escape the visi- 
tation of Jehovah’s wrath. It was the same be- 
fore Jerusalem was taken by Titus, when the 
Christians in accordance with the word of the 
Lord Jesus, were permitted to retire from the 
city prior to the final assault. The same princi- 
ple holds good in regard to the Church in this 
dispensation, which is to be caught away to be 
with the Lord before the seven-sealed book is 
opened and the trumpet and vial judgments are 
meted out to this guilty, Christ-rejecting world. 
“Because thou hast kept the word of My pa- 
tience, I also will keep thee from the hour of 
temptation which shall come upon all the world’ 
(Rev. 3:10). 

“Babylon hath been a golden cup in the Lord’s 
hand, that made all the earth drunken: the na- 
tions have drunken of her wine; therefore the 
nations are mad” (ver. 7). It is the wine of 
idolatry that was passed from one nation to an- 
other, but which had its origin in Babylon. Her 


The Doom of Babylon 289 


mystical antitype has in her hand a golden cup,- 
with which she too makes drunk the nations 
“with the wine of her fornication” (Rev. 17: 
1-6). There, the wine speaks of spiritual adultery, 
which is the union of the Church and the world. 
It will be observed how closely the New Testa- 
ment Babylon is likened to that of the older reve- 
lation. 

“Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed: 
howl for her; take balm for her pain, if so be 
she may be healed.” Though her fall is so sud- 
den, yet, as remarked in our study of the pre- 
ceding chapter, she was not instantaneously blot- 
ted out. Here, after her fall, her admirers have 
remedies to offer for her recovery. But it is too 
late. Her end is decreed. So the remnant de- 
clares: “We would have healed Babylon, but she 
is not healed: forsake her, and let us go every 
one into his own country: for her judgment 
reacheth unto heaven, and is lifted up even to 
the skies. The Lord hath brought forth our 
righteousness: come, and let us declare in Zion 
the work of the Lord our God” (vers. 8-10). 

May we not make an application of this solemn 
word to present conditions in Christendom? Not 
yet have the Roman and Protestant communions 
fully developed into Babylon the Great. But is 
it not patent, even now, that there is no healing 
for the professing body? The Word of God is 
rejected, and its inspiration called in question. 
The Holy Spirit is quenched and resisted. The 
Lordship of Christ, the Church’s Head, is denied 
practically. What remains for those who value 
the favor and the truth of God in such a time as 


290 Notes on Jeremiah 


this but to forsake every company where these 
conditions prevail? And, like Judah and Israel re- 
turning to Zion, ask once more for the old paths 
and gather in simplicity to the name of the Lord 
Jesus, refusing, in any sense, to go on with that 
which dishonors Him through whose precious 
blood we have been redeemed to God. “We would 
have healed Babylon, but she is not healed: for- 
sake her!’ It is useless to go on seeking to purify 
what will never be purified. When evil can no 
longer be purged out (as in accordance with 1 
Cor. 5), the only other resource is to purge one’s 
self out of all that is in opposition to God and 
His Word, as in 2 Tim. 2:15-21. When men who 
take the place of Christian teachers make it mani- 
fest that they have but a form of godliness and 
deny the power thereof, the only course left for 
those who would be faithful to God and His truth 
is implicit obedience to the injunction, ‘““From 
such turn away” (2 Tim. 3:5). 

Turning again to the words of Jeremiah, we 
note the realistic description of the march upon 
Babylon. “Make bright the arrows; gather the 
shields: the Lord hath raised up the spirit of 
the kings of the Medes: for His device is against 
Babylon, to destroy it; because it is the ven- 
geance of the Lord, the vengeance of His tem- 
ple. [See chap. 50:28.] Set up the standard 
upon the walls of Babylon, make the watch 
strong, set up the watchmen, prepare the am- 
bushes: for the Lord hath both devised and 
done that which He spake against the inhabi- 
tants of Babylon” (vers. 11, 12). With the vivid- 
ness of an eyewitness, the prophet depicts the ad- 


The Doom of Babylon 291 


vancing army of the enemy, led, be it noted, not- 
by Cyrus in person, though he directed it all, but 
by “the kings of the Medes.” That part of the 
army which was sent against Babylon was, ac- 
cording to Dan. 5:31, under the command of 
“Darius the Median;” and although contempo- 
rary history does not use the actual name Darius, 
it does assure us that it was a Median chief and 
not the mighty Cyrus himself who had charge of 
the troops that besieged and sacked the capital 
city. Scripture is ever exact. How could it be 
otherwise, when it is the very breathing of the 
living God? Not only does Jeremiah vividly por- 
tray the assembling of the Median troops, but 
with a few master-strokes he presents the confi- 
dent activity of the imperial guard. Every pre- 
caution was taken to insure the safety of Baby- 
lon; but they knew not that the hour of Jeho- 
vah’s vengeance had struck, the vengeance of His 
insulted and wasted temple. 

Though they dwelt in apparent security “upon 
many waters,” and flattered themselves that they 
were “abundant in treasures,” the Lord had de- 
creed, “Thine end is come, and the measure of 
thy covetousness.” He had therefore sworn by 
Himself, saying, “Surely I will fill thee with men, 
as with caterpillars; and they shall lift up a 
shout against thee” (vers. 13, 14). As the de- 
struction of a field of green herbs by that most 
common of all tropical plagues—an onslaught of 
ravenous, crawling creatures—so should be the 
destruction of haughty Babylon, the queen city of 
the ancient world, whose gardens were numbered 
among its seven wonders. 


292 Notes on Jeremiah 


He with whom they had to do was not as the 
powerless idols of the nations, nor yet as the 
malignant demons behind them. ‘He hath made 
the earth by His power, He hath established the 
world by His wisdom, and hath stretched out the 
heaven by His understanding” (ver. 15). Against 
the Mighty One who controls the vapors, the 
lightnings and the rain, had the Chaldean gird- 
ed on his armor. Made brutish by idolatry, 
confounded because of confidence in breathless 
images, they must learn the vanity of their hope; 
for “in the time of their visitation they shall 
perish” (vers. 16-18). 

How different the “portion of Jacob.” “He is 
the Former of all things: and Israel is the rod 
of His inheritance: The Lord of.hosts is His 
name” (ver. 19). He, the omnipotent Creator 
of all things, had deigned to take up the seed of 
poor, failing Jacob—surnamed, in grace, Israel. 
This people He had formed for Himself. He 
would use them as His battle-axe and weapon of 
war. With them He would break in pieces the 
nations and destroy the kingdoms of their op- 
pressors. All classes must learn that the Lord 
hath chosen Jacob; for with them, not the war- 
rior only, but the people in every walk of life, 
must be broken, and His word fulfilled which de- 
clared, “And I will render unto Babylon and to 
all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that 
they have done in Zion in your sight, saith the 
Lord” (vers. 21-24). How deeply significant it 
was, in view of all this, that in the last night of 
the Chaldean kingdom, it was a Jewish captive, 
Daniel, whe read the mystic letters of doom upon 


The Doom of Babylon 2938 


the wall of Belshazzar’s palace and gave the ter- 
rified king the interpretation! 

“Behold, I am against thee, O destroying moun- 
tain, saith the Lerd, which destroyest all the 
earth: and I will stretch out My hand upon thee, 
and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make 
thee a burnt mountain. And they shall not take 
of thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for 
foundations; but thou shalt be desolate forever, 
saith the Lord’”’ (vers. 25, 26). Words could not 
be plainer to declare Babylon’s absolute destruc- 
tion. Not only shall the city itself never be re- 
built, but the very stones should not be used, as 
in the case of many another fallen capital, for 
the building of any other place. As an accursed 
thing, her foundations should be held in perpetual 
abhorrence and her site given up to continual 
desolation. Nor can the words, by any process of 
reasoning, be legitimately made to refer to a 
future overthrow immediately before the Millen- 
nium. For over two millenniums already the 
wastes of Babylon have been a testimony to the 
sure Word of God. It will be so forever. 

Verses 27 and 28 emphasize what we have been 
going over by recapitulation, with additional de- 
tails. The kingdoms of Ararat, Minni and Ash- 
kenaz are found under the Median standard. 
“And the land shall tremble and sorrow: for 
every purpose of the Lord shall be performed 
against Babylon, to make the land of Babylon a 
desolation without an inhabitant” (ver. 29). 

The final entry into the city “at either end,” 
and the demoralization of its defenders, are de- 
scribed before the actual event in language only 


294 Notes on Jeremiah 


possible to the pen of inspiration. “The mighty 
men of bavylon have forborne to fight, they have 
remained in their holds: their might hath failed; 
they became as women: they have burned her 
dwelling-places; her bars are broken. One post 
shall run to meet another, and one messenger to 
meet another, to show the king of Babylon that 
his city is taken at one end” (properly, “at either 
end;” or, as in the R. V., “on every quarter”), 
“and that the passages are stopped, and the reeds 
they have burned with fire. and the men of war 
are affrighted” (vers. 30-32). he waters of the 
Euphrates, which flowed directly through Baby- 
lon, having been, as described by Herodotus, 
turned out of their course through the city, left 
an entry way at each end for the warriors of 
Darius to enter, under the walls, in the dry river 
bed. Thus they were able to appear suddenly in 
the streets at a time when the people were given 
up to frivolity and merry-making, and a thou- 
sand of their lords were reveling in the palace 
of the effeminate Belshazzar. 

Having thus pictured the consummation, the 
prophet goes back to continue the recital of Jeho- 
vah’s grievance against this impious city. Asa 
ripe field, ready for the threshing-floor, Babylon’s 
harvest was near, when judgment without mercy 
should be meted out to her because of Nebucha- 
drezzar’s severity to the inhabitants of Zion and 
Jerusalem. The violence done to Israel should be 
upon Babylon, and the blood shed be upon the 
inhabitants of Chaldea (vers. 33-35). Jehovah 
would plead the cause of His downtrodden peo- 
ple. He it was, not Darius merely, who would 


The Doom of Babylon 295 


“dry up her sea, and make her springs dry.” As - 
a result, “Babylon shall become heaps, a dwell- 
ing-place for jackals” (R. V.), “an astonishment, 
and a hissing, without an inhabitant. They shall 
roar together like lions, they shall yell as lions’ 
whelps” (vers. 36-38). It is to be noted that 
this utter desolation is to follow, not some future 
overthrow, but the sack of the city resulting upon 
the turning aside of the waters in which her in- 
habitants trusted. They are doomed to “sleep a 
perpetual sleep, and not wake, saith the Lord” 
(ver. 39). 

From the bed of her river her enemies should 
arise and come upon her like the sea while her 
defenders were feasting and drunken. In that 
very hour they should be given up “as lambs to 
the slaughter, like rams with he goats.” Thus 
should Sheshach be taken, and Babylon become 
a desolation among the nations (vers. 40-42). 
Sheshach is used symbolically for Babylon. The 
name is said to be derived from the goddess 
Shach. 

“Her cities are a desolation, a dry land, and 
a wilderness, a land wherein no man dwelleth, 
neither doth any son of man pass thereby’’ (ver. 
43). Such is the present state of the once pros- 
perous land of Chaldea. Even in the Millennium 
Babylon’s judgment will be the perpetual re- 
minder of God’s abhorrence of idolatry. 

“And I will punish Bel in Babylon, and I will 
bring forth out of his mouth that which he hath 
swallowed up: and the nations shall not flow 
together any more unto him; yea, the wall of 
Babylon shall fall” (ver. 44). It was against the 


296 Notes on Jeremiah 


demon symbolized by Bel that the wrath of the 
only true God was vented. He it was who had 
instigated Nebuchadrezzar and the Chaldeans to 
persecute Judah. - Because of their sins the Lord 
had given them into the hands of the Babylon- 
ians; but now He was about to visit their cruel- 
ties and wickedness upon their own heads. By 
this means would Judah’s deliverance be effected. 
To them He says, “My people, go ye out of the 
midst of her, and deliver ye every man his soul 
from the fierce anger of the Lord. And lest your 
heart faint, and ye fear for the rumor that shall 
be heard in the land; a rumor shall both come 
one year, and after that in another year shall 
come a rumor, and violence in the land, ruler 
against ruler” (vers. 45, 46). He would have 
His own little flock delivered from the strife of 
tongues, dependent upon Himself and resting on 
His Word. Whatever might come, He would not 
forget them. The warring nations should but 
work out His counsels; for ‘““He maketh the wrath 
of man to praise Him, and the remainder of 
wrath He doth restrain.” The disquieting rumors 
of approaching disaster, that might be calculated 
to strike terror to their hearts, but pointed to 
the overthrow of the power of their oppressors 
and the judgment of “the graven images of 
Babylon,” when “her whole land shall be con- 
founded, and all her slain shall fall in the midst 
of her. Then the heaven and the earth, and all 
that is therein, shall sing for [joy over] Baby- 
lon: for the spoilers shall come unto her from 
the north, saith the Lord. As Babylon hath 
caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon 


The Doom of Babylon 297 


shall fall the slain of all the earth” (vers. 47-49). 

Pointedly the remnant are told to count upon 
God when this awful period of judgment should 
arrive. It was but the precursor of their deliver- 
ance, “Ye that have escaped the sword, go away, 
stand not still: remember the Lord afar off, and 
let Jerusalem come into your mind” (ver. 50). 
In perfect accord with this, we find the Lord 
stirring up the spirit of Cyrus, in his first year 
as world-ruler, to permit the rebuilding of the 
temple and the return of the Jewish remnant to 
the land of their fathers. 

The 51st verse is the suited expression of their 
hearts as they turn again to their God. ‘We are 
confounded, because we have heard reproach: 
shame hath covered our faces; for strangers are 
come into the sanctuaries of the Lord’s house.” 
This might be taken as the key to the attitude 
of the returned company, as told in the book of 
Ezra. 

Because of the insult to Jehovah’s house, the 
days were near when He would pour judgment 
upon the idols of Babylon, and cause her wound- 
ed to groan through all the land. “Though Baby- 
lon should mount up to heaven, and though she 
should fortify the height of her strength, yet 
from Me shall spoilers come unto her, saith the 
Lord” (vers. 52, 53). He was about to arise in 
His might to avenge His own elect. Therefore 
“the sound of a cry cometh from Babylon, and 
great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans: 
because the Lord hath spoiled Babylon, and de- 
stroyed out of her the great voice; when her 
waves do roar like great waters, a noise of their 


298 Notes on Jeremiah 


voice is uttered: because the spoiler is come upon 
her, even upon Babylon, and her mighty men are 
taken, every one of their bows is broken: for the 
Lord God of recompenses shall surely requite. 
And I will make drunk her princes, and her wise 
men, her captains, and her rulers, and her 
mighty men: and they shall sleep a perpetual 
sleep, and not wake, saith the King, whose name 
is The Lord of hosts” (vers. 54-57). 

Solemn indeed is the title taken by the offended 
God of despised Jacob in this section: “The Lord 
God of recompenses.” How seldom do men in 
general think of Him in this character! In the 
24th verse He had declared that He would do 
unto Babylon and Chaldea “all their evil that 
they had done to Zion.” Here He reveals Him- 
self in a special way as the God of vengeance. In 
Ps. 94:1 the remnant of Israel are heard ad- 
dressing Him in this way: “O Lord God, to whom 
vengeance belongeth, show Thyself.” And in the 
New Testament the apostle Paul reminds us that 
He has said, “Vengeance is Mine, I will repay 
[or, recompense], saith the Lord” (Rom. 12: 19; 
Heb. 10:80; Deut. 32:35). Because of this he 
entreats the suffering Christians to avenge not 
themselves, but rather give place unto wrath. It 
is never necessary for the child of God to be 
occupied with the thought of self-preservation, 
or self-vindication. He can afford to leave all in 
the hands of “the Lord God of recompenses.” No 
power can turn aside His governmental dealings; 
none can stay His hand, or hinder the activities 
of His righteousness. “It is a righteous thing 
with God,” we are told, “to recompense tribula- 


The Doom of Babylon 299 


tion to them that trouble you” (2 Thess. 1:6).- 
This being the case, the Christian can well afford 
to leave his affairs entirely in the hands of in- 
finite wisdom, knowing that “he that doeth wrong 
shall receive for the wrong he hath done; and 
there is no respect of persons with God.” 

It was because of this principle that Jeremiah 
had ever counseled submission and obedience to 
the king of Babylon. He would have His people 
accept the affliction as from the Lord, and leave 
with Him the matter of dealing with the oppress- 
ing power in His own way and time. It was 
given to the same prophet to set forth that judg- 
ment, and to make known the nature of the rec- 
ompense that had been decreed: “Thus saith the 
Lord of hosts: The broad walls of Babylon shall 
be utterly broken, and her high gates shall be 
burned with fire; and the people shall labor in 
vain, and the nations for the fire [R.V.], and 
they shall be weary” (ver. 58). With these words 
he concludes the burden of Babylon. 

This, then, was to be the end of all her splendor 
and haughty independence of God. Her broad 
walls, upon which several chariots could be 
driven abreast of each other, if Herodotus is to 
be believed, were to be utterly thrown down, and 
her massive gates consumed by the flames. The 
labor of the people to make it the grandest city 
in all the world would thus end in vanity. They 
had been building for the fire. How significant 
the words, as given by the Revisers! May not 
the same be said of man’s vaunted energy in this 
progressive age? He fancies he is building what 
shall be the lasting admiration of generations yet 


300 Notes on Jeremiah 


unborn. But, though he realizes it not, “the com- 
ing of the Lord draweth nigh,” and it soon shall 
be manifested that he has but been building for 
the fire! 

Having concluded this series of messages to 
the nations, thus making known the future of the 
Gentiles surrounding Palestine, Jeremiah wrote in 
a book “all the evil that should come upon Baby- 
lon,” and gave it into the hand of Seraiah, chief 
chamberlain of Zedekiah. These prophecies were 
uttered a number of years before this prince was 
taken captive; it is plain, therefore, there was 
a moral reason for placing them where they are 
in the book which we have been considering. 
Seraiah was going down to Babylon on behalf of 
the Jewish monarch, as an ambassador to the 
court of Nebuchadrezzar, in the fourth year of 
Zedekiah’s reign (vers. 59,60). We thus learn 
that during much of the time that Jeremiah was 
urging submission to Babylon, he was aware of 
its impending doom. 

Seraiah was commanded to read the book when 
he reached his destination; and having done so, 
he was to say, “O Lord, Thou hast spoken against 
this place, to cut it off, that none shall remain in 
it, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be 
desolate for ever” (vers. 61,62). Having so said, 
he was instructed to bind a stone to the roll and 
cast it into the midst of the Euphrates, crying, 
“Thus shall Babylon sink, and shall not rise again, 
because of the evil that I will bring upon her: and 
they shall be weary” (vers. 63, 64, R.V.). Clearly 
and unequivocally the finality of her overthrow 
was thus attested in the mouth of two witnesses. 


The Doom of Babylon 301 


“Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.” We 
have now gone briefly over the varied messages 
of this honored, yet persecuted servant of Jeho- 
vah, embracing a very wide range of prophetic 
ministry, commencing with his early appeals to 
Judah in the revival days of Josiah, and closing 
with his words to the nations. As to the actual 
order of his prophecies, the words of chapter 44 
are the latest; but it was morally fitting that the 
messages to Judah and Israel should be given 
first, then those to the Gentiles. The order in the 
Septuagint varies considerably from that fol- 
lowed in the Hebrew, but it seems plain that in 
the Greek translation we have but a sample of 
man’s meddling, attempting to improve upon the 
divine order. The words with which the chapter 
closes are, in our judgment, meant to inform us 
that Jeremiah was his own editor. He, by the 
direct guidance of the Holy Spirit, arranged his 
books in the order we have in our Bibles. A 
later hand, equally inspired by God, added the 
Historical Appendix that follows. 


CHAPTER XXVI 
THE HISTORICAL APPENDIX 
(Chap. 52.) 


We have no means of knowing to whom, under 
God, we are indebted for the historical account of 
Zedekiah’s captivity here narrated. It has pleased 
God not to reveal the name of the man whom 
He chose for this. The chapter is practically a 
duplication of 2 Kings 24:18-20 and 25 et.al. 
Doubtless the Holy Spirit was pleased to have it 
transcribed from the other record in order that 
the prophecy and the record of its literal fulfil- 
ment might thus appear together. It.is not neces- 
sary that we know exactly who the writers of the 
various Old Testament books were, in order to be 
sure of their divine inspiration. Our Lord has 
settled that beyond the peradventure of a 
doubt by declaring that “the Scripture cannot be 
broken;’” thus setting His seal upon every por- 
tion of the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms, 
as we know them. The Holy Ghost has likewise 
told us, through the apostle Paul, that “all Scrip- 
ture is God-breathed;” and it is to be remem- 
bered that the present portion was accepted as 
a part of the Scripture at the time the words 
were written. 

False prophets had predicted the ultimate tri- 
umph of Zedekiah over Nebuchadrezzar. Jere- 
miah had proclaimed the unpopular truth of his 
crushing overthrow. History attests the reliabil- 
ity of his words. Zedekiah reigned eleven years 


The Historical Appendix 303 


in all. He was a brother of both Jehoahaz and 
Jehoiakim, and therefore a son of the pious 
Josiah; his mother being identical with the 
mother of the former king, namely, Hamutal the 
daughter of another Jeremiah, whose ancestral 
home was in Libnah (ver. 1). We have already 
noted that this Zedekiah, like his two immediate 
predecessors, forsook the ways of his father, and 
“did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord.” 
He had been placed upon the throne as a kind 
of vice-king by Nebuchadrezzar after the carry- 
ing away of his brother to Babylon, having 
pledged himself to serve the Chaldean. Treacher- 
ous, and in every sense untrustworthy, he short- 
ly after added to his manifold iniquities that of 
rebellion against his liege lord, in violation of his 
oath of fealty (vers. 2, 3), seeking an alliance 
with Egypt. This it was that brought the armies 
of the king of Babylon once more to the gates 
of Jerusalem. 

The siege was begun on the tenth day of the 
tenth month, in the ninth year of Zedekiah. Upon 
the ninth day of the fourth month, in the eleventh 
year, the garrison became so weakened by means 
of war, pestilence, and eventually by famine in 
the city, that a breach was made in the wall, and 
all the men of war fled “by night by the way of 
the gate, between the two walls, which is by the 
king’s garden.” Zedekiah himself essayed to go 
with them, as before noted in chapter 39, only to 
be apprehended in the plains of Jericho, by the 
Chaldeans. Taken to Riblah, where Nebuchadrez- 
zar was at the time, he was most severely dealt 
with. His two sons slain and his own eyes put 


304 Notes on Jeremiah 


out, he was carried in fetters to Babylon and 
kept in prison until the day of his death (vers. 
4-11). Thus he had to learn that it was an evil 
thing and bitter to have forsaken the Lord his 
God. Jerusalem was burned to the ground (in- 
cluding the temple built by Solomon) and the 
walls broken down; it doubtless being the in- 
tention of the conqueror that it should be ruined 
beyond repair (vers. 12-14). This was not God’s 
mind, however; He had decreed as to Babylon 
what its king thought to do to the capital of 
Judah. 

Nebuzar-adan, the captain of the guard, trans- 
ported the bulk of the surviving population to 
Babylon, leaving a few of the poorest of the peo- 
ple to be vinedressers and husbandmen. Even in 
this he was fulfilling the Word of the Lord, 
though he probably knew it not (ver. 15). 

With the captives, he carried away the temple 
furniture, and even its pillars, thus despoiling 
the house of Jehovah and dedicating its sacred 
things to idols. The various pieces are mentioned 
in detail, recorded in God’s book, and are precious 
as setting forth in various aspects the Person or 
work of His beloved Son (vers. 17-23); and 
when the impious Belshazzar defiantly used them 
in honor of his false deities in his revelry, how 
fitting that the predicted judgment should fall on 
that night of culminative blasphemy !* 


*Shortly after this, by order of Cyrus, they were 
brought out from the idol temples where Nebuchadrezzar 
had placed them; and, carefully numbered, were re- 
turned to Jerusalem with the returning remnant. (See 
Ezra 1: 7-11.) 


The Historical Appendix 305 


A number of priests, as well as officers and 
princes, besides threescore men of the city, were 
taken to Riblah and slain before the haughty 
tyrant who there held court. Thus, without mercy, 
was Judah devoured by the wild beast of the na- 
tions (vers. 24-28). 

Three separate times the king of Babylon car- 
ried away a portion of the people. In his sev- 
enth year he deported over three thousand Jews 
(2 Kings 24:12). In his eighteenth year over 
eight hundred and thirty more were enslaved. 
This is the occasion here referred to. Later, in 
his twenty-third year, he was responsible for the 
carrying away of seven hundred and forty-five 
persons, making thus three distinct deportations 
(vers. 28-30). 

Thus had Judah been ruined; her cities de- 
stroyed; her fields trodden down; and her people 
slain or brought into captivity. Such had been the 
awful result of forgetting the law of her God. 

But He had thoughts of compassion for her 
still, and would yet grant a deliverance from her 
cruel enemy. Accordingly, the book closes by giv- 
ing a hint of better days coming. In the thirty- 
seventh year of Jehoiachin’s captivity, Evil- 
merodach (who came to the throne of Babylon 
561 B. Cc.) conferred signal honor upon the de- 
posed king of Judah by taking him out of the 
prison and speaking kindly to him: giving him a 
throne and a position of honor above other vassal 
kings in Babylon, he changed his prison garments 
and gave him to eat of the royal fare (vers. 31- 
34). Thus a measure of prosperity was restored 
to him, through the favor of Evil-merodach, who 


306 Notes on Jeremiah 


appointed him a regular allowance till the day of 
his death. Zedekiah had died in prison. His pre- 
decessor on the throne was advanced to a position 
of honor. Jerusalem still lay a ruined heap amid 
the desolations of Immanuel’s land; but God’s 
heart was toward His people, and the year of her 
release drew on. 


THE LAMENTATIONS OF JEREMIAH 


CHAPTER XXVII 
THE DESOLATIONS OF JERUSALEM 


(Lam. 1.) 


It should be a matter of deep interest for the 
child of God, in any dispensation, to know that 
there is One above who notes with compassion all 
of his sorrows, and is afflicted in all his afflictions. 
Nothing could demonstrate this more clearly than 
the incorporation, as a part of the Holy Scrip- 
tures, of the expressions of the heart-sorrows of 
Jeremiah as he beheld the overwhelming woes oc 
his people, and the desolations of the Holy City. 
These feelings were right and proper—nay, pro- 
duced by the Spirit of God in the heart of His 
servant Jeremiah. He, the God of Israel, was no 
cold, indifferent spectator of the anguish, humili- 
ation and pains of the people of His choice. His 
holiness demanded that He chasten them for their 
iniquities; and He had used the king of Babylon 
to that end, but His heart was grieved for them 
still, as a loving father is sorely pained in his 
own correction of a wayward son. He greatly 
valued, therefore, the soul-exercises of His grief- 
stricken prophet, and has seen fit to place his 


308 Notes on Jeremiah 


lamentations on record for our instruction and 
comfort. In a certain sense Jeremiah speaks for 
the godly ones left in the land—their mouth~ 
piece, as it were. 

The peculiar structure of this elegiac poem is 
worthy of note. In their original form, the first 
four chapters are acrostic, after the pattern of a 
number of the psalms. Chapters 1, 2 and 4 con- 
sist of twenty-two verses each; every verse com- 
mencing with a different letter of the Hebrew 
alphabet, in regular order. Chapter 3, in which 
the fullest confession of their sin and grief is 
found, consists of sixty-six verses; and here three 
verses are given to each letter. That is, each of 
the first three verses begins with Aleph, the first 
letter of the alphabet; and the next three verses, 
each begins with Beth, the second letter; and so 
on to the end of the alphabet. 

In Ps. 119 we have twenty-two divisions of 
eight verses each, similarly arranged, as even the 
ordinary English Bible shows. There, every let- 
ter of the alphabet (which represents the whole 
compass of man’s speech) is used in the praise 
of the perfect law of the Lord. In Lamentations 
every letter is required to express the sorrows 
following upon the neglect and breaking of that 
law. 

Chapter 5 is an exception to the acrostic style, 
though containing the same number of verses as 
the first, second, and fourth. 

In this first chapter the remnant of Judah con- 
fess the righteousness of the Lord in permitting 
their afflictions, though they are filled with sor- 
row as they behold the sad results. They 


The Desolations of Jerusalem 309 


acknowledge their own sinfulness and extol the 
holiness of God, while calling for judgment upon 
the instrument of His wrath. 

In the opening verses the ruined city, where 
once Jehovah had set His name, is contemplated 
with broken heart and tearful eye. “How doth 
the city sit solitary, that was full of people!” ex- 
claims the prophet; “How is she become as a 
widow! She that was great among the nations, 
and princess among the provinces, how is she be- 
come tributary!” (ver. 1). To a faithful Israelite 
it was indeed a sorrowful spectacle. What joy 
and gladness had once filled that now deserted 
city, in the happy, festive days when the law of 
the land was honored and His name exalted! 
How dreadful the change—the awful result of 
departure from God, manifested in pride, self- 
will, and idolatry! How could Jerusalem remain 
the acknowledged wife of Jehovah, when so faith- 
less and wanton? Alas, she is left to sit in soli- 
tude in her widow’s weeds until the day when God 
shall grant repentance. 

“She weepeth sore in the night, and her tears 
are on her cheeks: among all her lovers she hath 
none to comfort her: all her friends have dealt 
treacherously with her, they are become her ene- 
mies” (ver. 2). The false gods in whom she 
trusted when she proved recreant to the cove- 
nant of Jehovah are unable to mitigate in any 
way her present sorrows. The powers upon which 
she sought to lean when she forsook the Word 
of her God, are all indifferent to her present 
plight. He, the “eternal Lover” whom she has 
despised, is the only One who loves her still. 


310 Notes on Jeremiah 


Yet He had given her into the hand of her 
enemies, and had apparently hidden His face 
from her. “Judah is gone into captivity because 
of affliction, and because of great servitude: she 
dwelleth among the heathen, she findeth no rest: 
all her persecutors overtook her between the 
straits” (ver. 3). In this Judah becomes a warn- 
ing beacon for saints of all time. Failing to main- 
tain the place of separation to which God had 
called her, mingling promiscuously among her 
heathen neighbors, she soon proved, as all do whe 
follow her steps, that “evil communications cor- 
rupt good manners.” Walking with idolators, 
she learned their ways; and as a result God 
gave her up to wander among the nations until 
she sickened of their practices. Has not this 
been the repeated history of every company 
which God separated from the world and owned 
as His people? How soon the apostolic Church 
corrupted itself. The dense darkness of the Mid- 
dle Ages was the governmental recompense. In 
even shorter time did the movement begun in the 
glorious Reformation of the sixteenth century be- 
come vitiated by conformity to the world; so that 
one has well asked, ‘“‘Where is the Church?” and 
replied, “In the world!” Again, “Where is the 
world?” and answered, “In the Church.” 

From this mixed multitude, at various times, 
God has been pleased to separate little remnant 
companies to Himself; only to become, in their 
turn, enamored of the world they once professed 
to forsake. Has it been otherwise with those, 
enlightened above many, who in these last days 
were called out from human systems to be a testi- 


The Desolations of Jerusalem 311 


mony to the unity and heavenly calling of the 
Church? Alas, my brethren, “how are the mighty 
fallen!” How unspeakably sad has been the 
checkered history of that movement which began 
so auspiciously, and once promised so much! 
Worldliness, like a canker, is eating out the very 
life. Pride, haughtiness and self-sufficiency are 
everywhere apparent. In judgment God has sent 
division following division until we are like to 
be utterly destroyed; and yet how much preten- 
sion; how little brokenness before Him; how 
many indifferent hearts and calloused con- 
sciences! 

Shall it be said of us as of Judah in the past, 
“The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come 
to the solemn feasts: all her gates are desolate: 
her priests sigh, her virgins are afflicted, and she 
is in bitterness. Her adversaries are the chief, 
her enemies prosper; for the Lord hath afflicted 
her for the multitude of her transgressions: her 
children are gone into captivity before the enemy. 
And from the daughter of Zion all her beauty 
is departed: her princes are become like harts 
that find no pasture, and they are gone without 
strength before the pursuer” (vers. 4-6). Nor is 
it possible to avoid so sad a result by “daubing 
with untempered mortar,” seeking to heal divi- 
sions by glossing over the evils that led to them, 
and thus failing to hear the voice of God in them. 
One course, and one alone, would have saved 
Judah. That was genuine self-judgment and 
brokenness of spirit before the Lord, causing 
the people to “tremble at His Word.” This is 
what is needed everywhere to-day. It is not so 


812 Notes on Jeremiah 


much looking for and learning new truth that 
will bless and deliver the saints of God, as test- 
ing our ways by the truth already committed to 
us, and seeking to walk in the reality of it. Be- 
cause of failure so to do, Judah went into captiv- 
ity, a Christian Church lost her candlestick of 
testimony, and the world was allowed to prevail 
against the people of the Lord. 

Sad indeed it is to have to look back to bless- 
ings, once delighted in, when all is but a mem- 
ory. “Jerusalem remembered in the days of her 
affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant 
things that she had in the days of old, when her 
people fell into the hand of the enemy, and none 
did help her: the adversaries saw her, and did 
mock at her sabbaths (or, her desolations, R. V., 
ver. 7).”’ A quiet like the rest of the sabbath lay 
over all the city, but it was the quiet of desola- 
tion and death. There was no longer anything to 
hinder her rest. The work of the Lord had often 
been a burden. She was delivered from it all 
now; but at how frightful a cost! Set aside as 
‘‘a vessel wherein is no pleasure,” Jerusalem was 
left in undisturbed repose. 

Touchingly the prophet acknowledges the jus- 
tice of all this in the four verses that follow 
(vers. 8-11). Jerusalem had grievously sinned. 
It is because of this that she ‘is removed,” or 
“has become as an unclean thing,” unfit to be used 
of God any more. Because of this, those who 
once honored, now despise her. Her nakedness 
had been openly manifested. Her filthiness is 
apparent to all. She forgot her latter end—for- 
got God’s purpose in delivering her from Egypt- 


The Desolations of Jerusalem 313 


ian bondage. “Therefore is she come down won- 
derfully,” until she has no comforter. Yet, in 
her season of dire shame and distress, there are 
some faithful hearts left to cry, “O Lord, behold 
my affliction, for the enemy hath magnified him- 
self.” Her adversary had triumphed over her, 
even defiling her sanctuary; the charge of which 
had been committed to Judah when they were 
commanded that no uncircumcised should enter 
into the congregation of the Lord. Having failed 
to guard her precious things, they were given up 
to the unclean of the nations. It is ever thus. 
If God’s people do not value what He entrusts 
them with, He will teach them its worth by tak- 
ing it from them, even to making it the sport 
of their enemies. 

Left without bread, sighing for food to refresh 
the soul, the remnant cry, “See, O Lord, and con- 
sider; for I am become vile.” These are precious 
and needful exercises. Would that they had char- 
acterized them in days of grace now gone by! 
Ah, brethren, may the spirit of humiliation and 
confession before God be found in us also. The 
Holy Spirit will associate Himself with this, and 
still comfort and bless such. 

The Spirit of Christ speaks loudly through 
Jeremiah and the remnant of Judah in the next 
few verses. Primarily, the words refer unques- 
tionably to what we have had under considera- 
tion, the chastisement meted out to the inhabi- 
tants of Jerusalem and the land. The query, “Is 
it nothing to you?” is addressed to the nations 
who had no sympathy for, but rather gloried over 
them in their deep anguish. But as all Scripture 


314 Notes on Jeremiah 


points to Christ, one must be blind indeed not to 
see here the suffering Saviour entering to the full 
into the griefs of the spared company, left like 
grape-gleanings in the vineyard. 

What a pathetic interest attaches itself to 
every word as we thus look at them. “Is it noth- 
ing to you, all ye that pass by? Behold, and see 
if there be any sorrow like unto My sorrow, 
which is done unto Me, wherewith the Lord hath 
afflicted Me in the day of His fierce anger” (ver. 
12). The sins of Judah drew down that fierce 
anger upon their heads. It was the just recom- 
pense for their departure from the Lord. But 
when He, the holy Sufferer of Calvary, bowed 
His head beneath the overwhelming flood of God’s 
wrath, it was for sins not His own; but He who 
knew no sin was made sin for us, that we might 
become the righteousness of God in Him. He was 
incomparably “the Man of Sorrows,” having full 
acquaintance with grief, that our joy might be 
full, as we enter into fellowship with the God 
we had so terribly offended. 

Can it be that any one reading these lines 
would reply to the heart rending question of the 
dying Lamb, and honestly confess, “It is nothing, 
all nothing to me?” Nothing to you that He was 
wounded for our transgressions and bruised for 
our iniquities! Nothing to you that God manifest 
in flesh so gave Himself to save guilty rebels 
against His outraged majesty! Nothing to you 
that the dreaded cup of wrath was pressed to 
His parched lips in order that the cup of sal- 
vation might be offered to you! Can it really be 
that it is nothing to you? 


The Desolations of Jerusalem 315 


Alas! there was a day when it was so with us 
all: when, even though our emotions might be 
stirred as we heard or read the story of the 
Cross, yet, so far as apprehending that it was to 
meet the need of our sinful souls, it was all noth- 
ing to us. How well has the saintly McCheyne 
expressed what many more could say: 


“I oft read with pleasure, to soothe or engage, 
Isaiah’s wild measure, or John’s simple page: 
But e’en when they pictured the blood-sprinkled tree, 
Jehovah Tsidkenu was nothing to me. 


“Like tears from the daughters of Zion that roll, 
I wept when the waters went over His soul; 
Yet thought not that my sins had nailed to the tree 
Jehovah Tsidkenu: "twas nothing to me.” 


And this might be our condition still—if not 
yet in the pit of the lost, forever beyond the 
reach of mercy—had it not been for the sovereign 
grace of God that led Him by His Spirit to show 
us our needy, lost estate, and to cause us to flee 
to Him (so long and coldly neglected) for mercy 
and pardon. 

, Thus we can join with the same poet-preacher 
and sing: 


“When free grace awoke me by light from on high, 
Then legal fears shook me—I trembled to die. 

No refuge, no safety in self could I see; 

Jehovah Tsidkenu my Saviour must be. 


“My terrors all vanished before that sweet name; 
My guilty fears banished, with boldness I came, 
To drink at the fountain, life-giving and free; 
Jehovah Tsidkenu is all things to me.” 


316 Notes on Jeremiah 


In the joy of assured redemption we can look up 
into His face, once marred more than any man’s, 
and cry from full hearts, “Yea, Lord, it 7s some- 
thing, it is everything to me, that Thou didst so 
suffer and die!” And our souls are filled with 
holy awe as we turn aside to see this great sight, 
and hear Him cry, “From above hath He sent 
fire into My bones, and it prevaileth against 
them. He hath spread a net for My feet, He hath 
turned Me back: He hath made Me desolate and 
faint all the day” (ver. 18). 

But we rejoice to know that nevermore shall 
He suffer thus. His sorrows and pains are now 
forever past; and with gladness unutterable “He 
shall see of the travail of His soul, and shall be 
satisfied” (Isa. 53:11). How expressive is the 
use of that word “travail” in this connection! 
Two women were once overheard speaking of 
their sons. The one had adopted a boy from an 
orphan-house ; the other was the mother of a 
child by birth. “I am sure,” said the first, “my 
love for my child is as deep as though he had 
actually been born into the family. I do not be- 
lieve I could love him more than I do.” “Ah,” 
replied the other, “‘you do not really know mother- 
love yet. You never suffered for your son as I 
did for mine!” 

O beloved, how He has suffered for us! What 
pangs He endured! What tears He shed! What 
drops of blood He sweat! How dreadful the 
travail He had to experience in order that we 
might be eternally saved! “Fire from above” 
descended upon Him that we might find a refuge 
where the fire has been, and thus be forever safe 


The Desolations of Jerusalem 317 


from the eternal fire to come for all who spur 
His matchless grace. Precious and holy theme 
for devout meditation! 

Not in the same sense could the next two verses 
be applied to the Lord Jesus. It involves the 
consciousness of guilt, and He was the guiltless 
One; but the words were most fitting in the 
mouth of the people of Judah. They confess that 
the yoke of their transgressions is bound by His 
hand. Like a wreath they are twined about the 
neck. Because of this, their strength failed, and 
they were unable to deliver themselves out of 
their enemies’ hands. The Lord Himself it was 
who had destroyed their mighty men and sum- 
moned the Chaldeans for their ruin. As grapes 
are trodden in a wine-press, so had He cast the 
daughter of Judah into the press of His wrath 
because of her manifold transgressions (vers. 14, 
15). 

On account of these things the prophet weeps, 
as he had wept, before they came to pass, in 
foretelling them. There is no comforter; for 
Judah’s children are desolate. Zion spreadeth 
forth her hands, but there is no helper, nor any 
to sympathize. She is as a separated, unclean 
woman, because of the Lord’s anger (vers. 16, 
Le). 

verse 18 there is the unreserved acknowl- 
edgment, “The Lord is righteous; for I have 
rebelled against His commandments.” This is an 
evidence of true godly exercise. They received 
but the due reward of their deeds; and they own 
it in contrition of heart and abasement of soul. 
They had been deceived by other lovers (ver. 19), 


318 Notes on Jeremiah 


and were left in great distress; but they humbly 
confess, “I have grievously rebelled.” This is 
what makes it all so bitter: they realize they de- 
serve all that they have been called upon to en- 
dure. 

Their enemies had heard of their sighs. They 
rejoiced in their affliction, glad that the Lord had 
so dealt with them. Their time of woe was com- 
ing. God should bring the appointed day when 
they too should know His indignation because of 
their sins (ver. 21). So the prayer goes up 
that the time may be hastened when all their 
wretchedness shall come before Him and He will 
do as He has said (ver. 22). It is a cry for ven- 
geance not consistent with Christian light and 
privilege and the grace of this dispensation, but 
thoroughly in keeping with the character of Jew- 
ish blessing. Their deliverance being an earthly 
one, it therefore requires the judgment of their 
oppressors. 

In a certain sense these last two verses might 
also be looked upon as setting forth the doom of 
those who refuse to own the Lordship of Jesus. 
He too could say of such, “Thou wilt bring the 
day that Thou hast called, and they shall be like 
unto Me.” Despising His sufferings, men who 
reject His grace must know for themselves the 
awful power of divine wrath. 


CHAPTER XXVIII 
THE DAY OF THE LORD’S ANGER 


(Lam. 2.) 


It is the city of Jerusalem in a very particular 
sense that is under contemplation in this chap- 
ter. That city, once famed as the dwelling-place 
of the great King, was now a waste of blackened 
ruins. Throughout, it is recognized that not an 
enemy from the outside acting of his own volition, 
but the Lord Himself, who had so long dwelt in 
the midst of the city, had devoted it to destruc- 
tion. 

This the very first verse brings out. “How 
hath the Lord covered the daughter of Zion with 
a cloud in His anger, and cast down from heaven 
unto the earth the beauty of Israel, and remem- 
bered not His footstool in the day of His anger!” 
It was sorrowful to contemplate that the city 
once called “the holy’ should have become so vile 
and apostate that Jehovah could no longer endure 
it. It is noticeable, however, that the beauty of 
Israel! is “cast down from heaven to earth;” not 
“to hell” (sheol, or hades, the place of the dead), 
as in the case of privileged Capernaum (Matt. 
11:23). There, the Lord Jesus had done many 
mighty works, and given a testimony beyond 
anything enjoyed by Jerusalem of old. But He 
and His words had been utterly rejected. There- 
fore Capernaum, “exalted to heaven,” should be 


320 Notes on Jeremiah 


“brought down to hell.” Its day was over for- 
ever. Not so was it with Jerusalem. “Cast down 
to earth,” treated like a city of the nations; yea, 
trodden down of the Gentiles; still it is destined 
yet to occupy a place of glory such as it never 
knew in the past. It must be disciplined by ad- 
versity, but was not forsaken in perpetuity. In 
His indignation against idolatry, the Lord had 
“swallowed up all the habitation of Jacob,” not 
pitying, because of the hardness of their hearts. 
He had “thrown down in His wrath the strong- 
holds of the daughter of Judah,” bringing them 
down to the ground and polluting the kingdom 
and princes. It was all because of sin. He loved 
them truly, but could not permit them to go in 
peace while in so dreadful a moral state. There- 
fore had He, “in His fierce anger,” cut off the 
horn of Israel, and caused their right arms to 
fail before the enemy (vers. 2, 3). 

Three times in verses 4 and 5 He is said to 
have acted as though He were their enemy. First, 
we read, “He hath bent His bow like an enemy.” 
Second, “He stood with His right hand-as an 
adversary;” and, third, “The Lord was as an 
enemy.” But it is well to notice the qualifying 
expressions “like” and “as.” An enemy He never 
was; though their conduct compelled Him to act 
as if He were. How many a Christian has had 
to know Him in a similar way! How often has 
He seemed to become an enemy! But faith looks 
beyond all that the eye can see, and knows that 
He is unchanged in His love and tenderness. It 
is sin in His children that has broken in on the 
fellowship He delights to have them enjoy. He 


The Day of the Lord’s Anger 321 


is “of purer eyes than to behold iniquity;” and - 
while He will never give up one of His re- 
deemed, He will not countenance looseness of 
walk and an unbridled tongue in any, simply be- 
cause He has saved them. In fact, it is just the 
contrary, for “whom the Lord loveth He chasten- 
eth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.” 
This was the lesson the remnant of Judah had to 
learn; bitter as it must have been. 

In verse 6, “tabernacle” should be as in the 
margin, “hedge.” By turning to Ps. 80, we find 
the same metaphor employed. Israel is likened to 
vine brought out of Egypt and planted in a 
land from which the heathen had been cast out. 
Hedged in and tended by the divine Husband- 
man, it should have borne fruit for Himself, but 
we know His verdict (Isa. 5:1-7): “It brought 
forth wild grapes.” Because of this He allows 
it to be overrun by the heathen, as we read in 
Ps. 80: 12-16, ““Why hast Thou broken down our 
hedges, so that all they which pass by the way 
do pluck her? The boar out of the wood doth 
waste it, and the wild beast of the field doth 
devour it. Return, we beseech Thee, O God of 
hosts: look down from heaven, and behold, and 
visit this vine; and the vineyard which Thy right 
hand hath planted, and the branch which Thou 
madest strong for Thyself. It is burned with fire, 
it is cut down; they perish at the rebuke of Thy 
countenance.” It is the same thought that we 
have expressed here: the enclosure which in the 
past had separated the garden of the Lord from 
the Gentiles around was broken down by the Lord 
Himself, and “the places of the assembly” de- 


322 Notes on Jeremiah 


stroyed, so that the solemn feasts and sabbaths 
had been caused to cease in Zion. 

His altar He had cast off, and abhorred His 
sanctuary; permitting the unclean to pollute it, 
because of the unfaithfulness of His people. The 
walls of the city, with the gates and bars, were 
leveled to the ground; the king and princes were 
captive among the Gentiles; the very law (so 
long despised) was no more; and the prophets 
(to whom the deaf ear had been turned for years) 
had no vision from the Lord. Zion’s elders were 
girded in sackcloth, and sat upon the ground 
with dust upon their heads in speechless grief 
as they beheld the desolations on every hand 
(vers. 7-10). It was complete and overwhelming 
ruin, brought about by Jehovah because they had 
neglected His Word and followed in the ways of 
the heathen. 

In deep-toned notes of woe Jeremiah cries: 
“Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are 
troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, for 
the destruction of the daughter of my people; be- 
cause the children and the sucklings swoon in the 
streets of the city. They say to their mothers, 
Where is corn and wine? when they swooned as 
the wounded in the streets of the city, when their 
soul was poured out into their mothers’ bosom” 
(vers. 11, 12). Only in fellowship with God do 
His people find peace and plenty. Away from 
Him unrest and famine must result. Is not this 
the reason why there are so many swooning babes 
and fainting children among the assemblies of 
God’s saints to-day? Surely it is time to con- 
sider our ways and turn again to the Lord. Some- 


The Day of the Lord’s Anger 323 


thing is radically wrong when the gathering of - 
believers is not a nursery where babes in Christ 
receive needed nourishment, and help for their 
upbuilding and establishment in the things of 
God. When it is otherwise, it augurs a fallen 
state and testimony. 

Zion had been overwhelmed as by the waves 
of the sea, so that there was no healing of her 
breach, humanly speaking (ver. 13). Her proph- 
ets had seen vain and foolish things for her (as 
in the case of Hananiah, recorded in chap. 28), 
prophesying smooth things, but not discovering 
her iniquity. True peace there could not be with 
unjudged sin upon her (ver. 14). Thus Jerusa- 
lem had become the sport of the passer-by, who 
scornfully asked, “Is this the city that men call 
The perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole 
earth?” (ver. 15). Both these titles are found 
applied to it in the Psalms: the former in Ps. 
50:2; the latter in Ps. 48: 2. 

Her enemies exulted in her ruin, and gloried 
in having “swallowed her up.” This they had 
long desired, and now attributed it to their own 
prowess, not knowing of the Lord’s controversy 
with her (ver. 16). It was not the might of their 
arms that had caused them to triumph over her. 
Her offended Lord had but done that which He 
had devised, and fulfilled His Word given in the 
days of Moses (ver. 17). To Him, therefore, the 
remnant turns, crying out in the bitterness of 
their souls and giving themselves no rest day nor 
night, but incessantly lifting up their hands to- 
ward Him for the life of their fainting children 
(vers. 18, 19). This was as it should be, and 


O24 Notes on Jeremiah 


argued a returning in heart to their God. The 
last three verses (20-22) form a prayer, and set 
forth their pitiable condition “in the day of the 
Lord’s anger.” He had said, “Call upon Me in 
the day of trouble: I will deliver thee, and thou 
shalt glorify Me.” To Him, therefore, they turn, 
bewailing their wretchedness, the result of their 
own evil ways, and beseeching His favor. They 
shall yet prove that His ear is not dull of hear- 
ing, neither is His eye blinded to their misery. 


CHAPTER XXIX 
“LET US SEARCH AND TRY OUR WAYS ” 
(Lam. 8.) 


In the sixty-six verses of this chapter, ar- 
ranged in a triple alphabetic acrostic, as before 
mentioned, Jeremiah speaks for the remnant, de- 
scribing his and their affliction, but manifesting 
unfailing faith in the goodness of God and call- 
ing upon all to search and try their ways and 
return to Him. Bearing upon his own heart the 
bitter woes of his people, as did the Lord 
Jesus, he recites his sorrows in a way that 
plainly indicates the utterance of the Spirit of 
Christ, who, as remarked in our introduction to 
Chap. I., was afflicted in all their griefs, passing 
through all in spirit with them. Jeremiah here 
may almost be looked upon as a type of that 
Blessed One; for to him also, as to no other 
prophet, could the title be applied, “A man of 
sorrows.” 

“T am the man,” he says, “that hath seen afflic- 
tion by the rod of His wrath” (ver. 1). And he 
goes on to tell how he has been brought into 
darkness, but not into light: how God is turned 
against him, His hand being upon him in judg- 
ment every day. Under the weight of the divine 
displeasure, vigor and elasticity departed, and his 
bones were as broken (vers. 2-4). It is the ex- 
pression of one who, himself well-pleasing to God, 
entered to the full into the sorrows of his people. 


326 Notes on Jeremiah 


Verses 5 to 17 continue his wail in view of the 
dire calamities which had fallen upon them. Com- 
passed with gall and travail, set in dark places 
as in the tombs of the dead, hedged about and 
weighted with a heavy chain, he cried and shout- 
ed, only to feel that God shut out his prayer. 
Nothing could be more mournful than the gloomy 
estate thus pictured to the mind’s eye. The Lord 
had apparently forgotten, or was even become as 
an enemy. He had enclosed the ways of His serv- 
ant, made his paths crooked, and been unto him 
as a bear or a lion waiting to take the prey. 
Made desolate and set as a mark for the arrow, 
Jehovah caused the darts of His quiver to enter 
into His servant’s reins. 

Thus had he become a derision to all his peo- 
ple and their song all the day. In this how like 
Him who became the song of the drunkards! (Ps. 
69:12). Filled with bitterness and drunken with 
wormwood, his teeth were as broken with gravel- 
stones, and he himself rolled in ashes. His soul 
was removed far off from peace, so that prosper- 
ity had been forgotten. It is a doleful recital of 
a man entering into the sense of God’s displeas- 
ure because of sin. 

But, though fallen, he was not completely cast 
down. True he said, “My strength and my hope 
is perished from the Lord” (ver. 18). Yet, as 
he remembered the wormwood and the gall, his 
soul was humbled within him, and he could say, 
“This I recall to my mind; therefore have I hope” 
(vers. 19-21). 

Accordingly, an entirely different note is struck 
in ver. 22, and an exalted strain of joyous con- 


“Let us Search and Try our Ways” 327 


fidence is sustained down to ver. 36. In place of 
complaining that his woes were greater than he 
had deserved, he justifies God, and gratefully 
acknowledges that justice has been tempered 
with grace. “It is of the Lord’s mercies,” he 
owns, “that we are not consumed, because His 
compassions fail not. They are new every morn- 
ing: great is Thy faithfulness” (vers. 22, 23). 
How precious the faith that, at such a time, could 
so speak! And what tried saint can truthfully 
say otherwise? Only when the soul is out of the 
presence of God does it seem as if His chastise- 
ments were too severe, and in part undeserved. 
No self-judged believer ever yet failed to own 
that he was far from receiving the full reward 
of his deeds. Rather, it seems as though God’s 
grace leads Him to overlook even serious failure, 
and to correct but in part. “His compassions fail 
not.” The rod is never directed by a cold, indif- 
ferent heart. He feels as no other can for the 
people of His choice, the children He loves. Every 
morning witnesses fresh evidences of His lov- 
ing-kindness. 

In contemplation of these precious truths the 
inspired seer can declare, “The Lord is my por- 
tion, saith my soul; therefore will I hope in 
Him” (ver. 24). All else might fail, but He will 
abide. It is the confidence of Habakkuk (Hab. 3: 
17, 18), and the abiding contentment of Paul 
(Phil. 4:11). Thus is one enabled to rejoice in 
the Lord, even when no other source of joy is left. 
He becomes the soul’s portion, as in Ps. 16:5, 
where we read, “The Lord is the portion of my 
inheritance, and my cup.” Little wonder that Ps. 


328 Notes on Jeremiah 


23:5 asserts, “My cup runneth over.” How could 
it be otherwise, when He it is who fills it? 

“The Lord is good unto them that wait for 
Him, to the soul that seeketh Him. It is good that 
a man should both hope and quietly wait for the 
salvation of the Lord” (vers. 25, 26). The rea- 
son the truths here taught are so little entered 
into is simply because waiting upon God is large- 
ly a “lost art’? among Christians nowadays. The 
rush and hurry of the age; “the lust of other 
things ;” in a word, the worldliness so character- 
istic of the present momentous period in the 
Church’s history, effectually shuts out all inclina- 
tion to wait upon God, it is to be feared, for a 
large number of those who confess the name of 
Jesus as Saviour and Lord. Consequently, little 
or nothing is known, in a practical way, of His 
goodness in meeting felt need, and of His ability 
to satisfy the soul that seeks His face. 

It is perhaps needless to say that when Jere- 
miah wrote, “It is good that a man both hope 
and quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord,” 
he was not referring to soul-salvation, but to de- 
liverance from the troubles and perplexities of the 
way. Nowhere in Scripture is the eternal sal- 
vation of the soul put before us as something to 
be waited for in patience and quietness. Again 
and again the contrary is distinctly stated. The 
prophet is not speaking of salvation in that sense. 
For light as to the salvation of the soul, we turn 
to the New Testament, especially the Gospel of 
John and the epistles of Paul, John, and Peter. 
These two aspects of salvation must be clearly 
distinguished. The Lord has nowhere promised 


“Let us Search and Try our Ways” 329 


immediate relief from sorrow and _ suffering. 
When in His righteous government He permits 
His people to be the subjects of affliction, it is 
well that they at once seek His face, and wait 
upon Him. It may not be His will to extract 
every thorn in the flesh; but if not, He will give 
to the waiting soul grace to endure, and that with 
joyfulness. 

There is a “ministry of suffering” which all 
believers have to learn in a greater or lesser de- 
gree. “It is good for a man,” we are told, “tc 
bear the yoke in his youth” (ver. 27). The result, 
if he is before God about it, will be to sober and 
humble him, and thus work out ultimate blessing. 
He may be called upon to sit alone and keep si- 
lence, to put his mouth in the dust, and, like his 
Saviour, to give his cheek to the smiters, but he 
can be assured of this: ‘The Lord will not cast 
off forever” (vers. 28-31). 

As in Judah’s case, God may cause grief— 
deep and heartrending; but He will still ‘‘have 
compassion according to the multitude of His 
mercies. For He doth not afflict willingly (or, 
from His heart), nor grieve the children of men” 
(vers. 32, 33). Not for His own pleasure does 
He chasten, but that we may be partakers of His 
holiness. He is too loving to lay upon us one 
unnecessary burden: He is too holy to omit one 
needed stroke. Unrighteousness He cannot toler- 
ate. “To crush under His feet all the princes of 
the earth, to turn aside the right of a man be- 
fore the face of the Most High, to subvert a man 
in His cause, the Lord approveth not” (vers. 34- 
36). All His ways are equal. It is only man’s 


330 Notes on Jeremiah 


defective vision that makes it appear otherwise. 
When at last He takes us by the hand, and goes 
over all the path with us, letting the light of 
His own glory shine upon every step, we shall 
understand, as we cannot now, how just and true 
were all His ways as He led us through this 
scene. 

Nothing can by any means assail His people 
apart from His permission, for ‘Who is he that 
saith, and it cometh to pass, when the Lord ap- 
proveth not?” (ver. 37). It is a simple and ele- 
mentary principle, yet which many are long years 
in comprehending. Once let it be clear before the 
soul that God is immediately concerned in every 
detail of life, and one is delivered from being en- 
grossed with the instrumentalities ‘acting. This 
comes out strikingly in the case of David when 
cursed by Shimei. He will not permit the ardent 
Abishai to touch the offender, for he realizes that 
“the Lord hath said unto him, Curse David,” and 
he can therefore leave all in His hands, trusting 
that He will change the curse into a blessing. 
Job too, in the early period of his testing, is a 
fine example of submission to the will of God; 
and, refusing to consider second causes, ‘Shall 
we receive good at the hand of the Lord,” he 
asks, “and shall we not also receive evil?’ It is 
blessedly true, and most comforting to the soul 
to know, that, “Out of the mouth of the Most 
High proceedeth not evil and good” (ver. 88); 
but, on the other hand, He allows evil for our 
chastening; even, as in the case just cited, using 
Satan as an instrument to accomplish His graci- 
ous purposes. 


“Let us Search and Try our Ways” 331 


In view of His holy and righteous government,- 
“Wherefore doth a living man complain—a man, 
for the punishment of his sins?’ Surely it is 
far more becoming to say from the heart, “Let us 
search and try our ways, and turn again to the 
Lord” (vers. 39, 40). This indicates that the dis- 
cipline is having its desired effect. “No chasten- 
ing for the present seemeth to be joyous, but 
grievous: nevertheless, afterward it yieldeth the 
peaceable fruit of righteousness (not necessarily 
in the case of every saint, but) unto them which 
are exercised thereby” (Heb. 12:11). It is this 
godly exercise that is so sadly lacking. Afflic- 
tions come, and souls faint under them; or else 
they are despised, and a stoical, self-confident air 
is assumed, that ill befits the state of one under 
God’s hand. With most of us, it is to be feared, 
the first object is to get out of the place of dis- 
cipline in any way that we can, apart from that 
breaking down before God which leads to the 
searching and trying of our ways. It was here 
that Judah so lamentably failed. When God sent 
the king of Babylon against them because of their 
sins, they turned to the king of Egypt for help, 
and that in plain defiance of the word of the 
Lord. But they had to learn in a practical way 
the bitterness of departure from God. 

Thus, humbled in His presence, every false 
hope gone, the remnant search and try their 
ways, and the end of the Lord is reached. In 
brokenness of spirit they cry, “Let us lift up 
our heart with our hands unto God in the heav- 
ens. We have transgressed and have rebelled: 
Thou hast not pardoned. Thou hast covered with 


332 Notes on Jeremiah 


anger, and persecuted us: Thou hast slain, Thou 
hast not pitied. Thou hast covered Thyself with 
a cloud, that our prayer should not pass through” 
(vers. 41-44). There is an important lesson here. 
It is useless to pray while persisting in sin. The 
man who does not seek to walk with God has no 
right to expect anything from Him. “Delight thy- 
self also in the Lord; and He shall give thee the 
desires of thy heart.” “If ye abide in Me, and 
My words abide in you, ye shall ask what ye will, 
and it shall be done unto you” (Ps. 37:4; John 
15:7). This is the key to answered prayer. 
Obedience gives confidence. It is impossible to 
ask in faith when clinging to something that is 
grieving the Holy Spirit and dishonoring the Lord 
Jesus Christ. If prayer is not answered, if the 
heavens seem as brass, it is a solemn indication 
of a wrong state of soul, and should lead to self- 
judgment and the forsaking of every evil way. 

Because of the lack of this, Judah was brought 
very low. They were made “as the offscouring 
and refuse in the midst of the people, so that their 
enemies rejoiced over them. Fear and a snare 
had come upon them. Desolation and destruction 
were their portion” (vers. 45-47). 

Hard indeed must have been the heart that 
could contemplate their sorrows without being 
deeply touched. Jeremiah says, “Mine eye run- 
neth down with rivers of water for the destruc- 
tion of the daughter of my people. Mine eye 
trickleth down, and ceaseth not, without any in- 
termission, till the Lord look down, and behold 
from heaven. Mine eye affecteth my heart, be- 
cause of all the daughters of my city” (vers. 48- 


“Let us Search and Try our Ways” 333 


51). It was the manly grief of one who was not’ 
ashamed of tears when his people were under the 
chastening hand of the Lord. Censurable indeed 
would insensibility to it all have been. 

Identifying himself with the erring ones, he 
continues to plead their cause, and invokes a rec- 
ompense upon their persecutors. He was like a 
bird chased by the hunters without cause. He 
does not in this ignore the righteousness of God 
in visiting His people with judgment. On that 
side there was cause enough. But Babylon’s op- 
pression of Judah was quite unwarrantable from 
the standpoint of human equity. Her wars were 
dictated by the greed of dominion and the lust of 
power. It often occurs that God permits sor- 
rows to come upon His own by way of discipline, 
which, so far as the actual troubles are concerned, 
were not really deserved. For instance, a saint 
may be falsely accused, and thereby caused ex- 
treme mental grief, while all the time he frets 
under the knowledge that he is guiltless of the 
cruel charge, and feels that he is wickedly treat- 
ed. But this, when rightly viewed, would be seen 
to be but an opportunity to be a partaker of 
Christ’s sufferings. For was not He hated “‘with- 
out a cause,’ and did not false witnesses rise 
up against Him? Such circumstances, therefore, 
painful as they are to flesh and blood, are often 
a necessary part of the education of the soul. 
And if, at the time, we are conscious of having 
failed in personal dealings with God, it is used 
as chastisement, that we may be partakers of His 
holiness. 

As one cast into a pit and left to die, the rem- 


334 Notes on Jeremiah 2 


nant call upon Jehovah “out of the low dungeon,” 
and faith can say, “Thou hast heard my voice,” 
and “Thou drewest near in the day that I called 
upon Thee: Thou saidst, Fear not” (vers. 52- 
57). How comforting this is! God is quick to 
respond to the first cry of a troubled soul when 
there is integrity of heart before Him. 

So the following verses celebrate His response 
in the hour of need. He has pleaded the cause 
of the soul of His afflicted one. He has redeemed 
his life. His eye has been upon all the wrong, 
and with confidence He is implored to judge the 
matter (vers. 58, 59). Into His sympathetic ear 
the story of the enemy’s heartlessness is told out, 
and to Him the whole case is committed. Rec- 
ompense upon the oppressor is also invoked, 
which, as we have already seen, is not the spirit 
of the Christian dispensation, but of the law, 
where the principle of “an eye for an eye” pre- 
vailed (vers. 60-66). To us who live in this dis- 
pensation of grace, our Lord’s instruction is to 
“pray for them that despitefully use us and perse- 
cute us,” even as He, the Lord of all, could pray, 
“Father, forgive them; for they know not what 
they do.” 

Grace is reigning; and having been taken up 
in grace we are responsible to manifest that same 
grace to others. But what we have here was quite 
in keeping with the dispensation of law, and will 
yet be suited language in the lips of another rem- 
nant, in “the time of Jacob’s trouble,’ whose 
earthly deliverance can only be through judg- 
ment upon their enemies. 


CHAPTER XXX 
THE FINE GOLD BECOME DIM 


(Lam. 4.) 


Of a deeply spiritual character is the grief ex- 
pressed in the lament of the fourth chapter. It 
is not now the temporal sorrows of the people of 
Judah and Jerusalem that occupy the prophet’s 
mind, but their unhappy estate as away from God 
and no longer a testimony for Him in the earth. 
The past and the present stand out in vivid con- 
trast. In days gone by, what grace has been 
manifested in them! Now, alas, how utterly fal- 
len have they become! 

“How is the gold become dim! How is the 
most fine gold changed! The stones of the sanc- 
tuary are poured out in the top of every street. 
The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine 
gold, how are they esteemed as earthen pitchers, 
the work of the hands of the potter!” (vers. 1, 
2). Failure has characterized every dispensation 
since Eve reached forth her hand and took of that 
which God had forbidden. ‘Man being in honor, 
abideth not, but is as the beasts that perish.” 
Every fresh trial vouchsafed by God to man has 
but given occasion for the further manifestation 
of the incurable evil of his heart. Under con- 
science, from Adam to Noah, corruption and vio- 
lence filled the earth. Under government, from 
Noah to Abraham, he forsook the true Governor 
of the universe; and not liking to retain God. 


336 Notes on Jeremiah 


in his knowledge, worshiped and served the crea- 
ture more than the Creator. Under promise and 
law, from Abraham to Christ, he violated every 
precept and broke every pledge; and at last, his 
awful course of wilfulness and rebellion culmi- 
nated in the crucifixion of the Prince of Life. Un- 
der grace, the present dispensation of the Holy 
Spirit, he has turned that very grace into lascivi- 
ousness, and corrupted every truth committed to 
the Church. 

If the long period from Abraham to Christ be 
subdivided into the numerous sections into which 
it readily falls, then each of them becomes a wit- 
ness to the same sad failure. The days of the 
patriarchs witnessed the treachery of the sons of 
Jacob, and the resultant descent into Egypt. The 
wilderness was a forty years’ record of God’s 
faithfulness and man’s unreliability. The days 
of the Judges but confirmed the same story; while 
the history of the kingdoms of Judah and Israel 
emphasized still more the deceitfulness of the hu- 
man heart. From time to time God wrought in 
power and grace, giving revival and blessing; but 
soon the people wearied of His law, and gave 
themselves up to doing their own pleasure, “till 
there was no remedy,” and Assyria and Babylon 
swallowed up the favored people. 

“Whatsoever things were written aforetime 
were written for our admonition.” Israel’s his- 
tory has often been duplicated by that of the pro- 
fessing Church; for “as in water face answereth 
to face, so the heart of man to man.” Only, in 
Christendom, the corruption has been even more 
detestable and the departure from God even more 


The Fine Gold became Dim 337 


giaring. He, blessed be His name, has never left’ 
Himself without witness; and, as in the past dis- 
pensation, so in this, has ever and anon worked 
in power bringing about special awakenings, thus 
rousing those who were sleeping among the dead 
to renewed activity and true-hearted judgment of 
what they saw His Word condemned. But how 
soon the manifested energy of the Spirit declines, 
because of a settling back into the old ways, or 
worse ones, of the next generation. What is pre- 
dicted of Israel in Josh. 24:13 has had its counter- 
part again and again down through the centuries 
since the ascension of the Lord Jesus and the 
descent of the Holy Spirit. ‘And Israel served 
the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days 
of the elders that outlived Joshua, and which had 
known all the works of the Lord that He had 
done for Israel.” But the generations following 
soon relapse into formality and worldliness. The 
fine gold soon becomes dim, and the freshness of 
early days passes away. Yet it need not be so. 
If careful to maintain a good conscience before 
God; if watchful as to the first beginnings of 
departure from the place of communion; above 
all, if prayerful and dependent, the dew of youth 
need never be lost: or, if so, it will be but to 
give place to the more mature grace of a Spirit- 
filled old age. This is equally true of movements 
as of individuals; only the difficulty there is 
greater, because movements are composed of in- 
dividuals, and only by each unit going on with 
God can the mass do so. 

In Judah’s case it had, as has been made sol- 
emnly patent, become far otherwise. ‘The pre- 


338 Notes on Jeremiah 


cious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold,” were 
esteemed as earthen pottery. The glory had de- 
parted. There was no power to nourish the 
young. “The daughter of my people,” complains 
Jeremiah, “is become cruel like the ostriches in 
the wilderness,”’ who leave their offspring to shift 
for themselves. In vain the children cried for 
bread; no man gave to them; while the tongue 
of the babe cleaved to the roof of its mouth for 
thirst (vers. 3,4). Unspeakably sad is the state 
of God’s people when their assemblies are not 
like nurseries where new-born babes and young 
saints can find nourishing food such as is suita- 
ble for them. It is to be feared the needs of 
the lambs are often forgotten; and, alas, oftener 
still there is nought to feed them with because all 
is parched and dry. If older saints are living for 
the world, it is small wonder that the babes lan- 
guish and succumb at last to the withering influ- 
ences about them, so far as their joy and testi- 
mony are concerned. 

Because of their own famished condition, the 
mothers of Judah could not nourish their chil- 
dren. “They that did feed delicately are desolate 
in the streets; they that were brought up in 
scarlet embrace dunghills” (ver. 5); so that their 
punishment seemed to be even greater than that 
of Sodom, which was overthrown in a moment, 
while with Judah the agony was long continued. 

“Her Nazarites were purer than snow, they 
were whiter than milk, they were more ruddy 
in body than rubies, their polishing was of sap- 
phire; their visage is blacker than a coal; they 
are not known in the streets: their skin cleaveth 


The Fine Gold became Dim 339 


to their bones; it is withered, it is become like 
a stick” (vers. 7, 8). In order to understand 
what the prophet refers to in these verses, it is 
necessary that one be somewhat familiar with the 
law of the Nazarite as given in Numbers, chap. 6. 
To many of our readers this edifying portion of 
Scripture is familiar; but as it may not be so 
to some of them, it may be profitable to turn 
aside for a little to consider what is there set 
forth. 

The Nazarite, as his name implies (from a root, 
meaning to separate), was one who was in a spe- 
cial sense separated to the Lord his God. All 
Israel were redeemed to be the people of God; 
but all were not Nazarites. All Christians, how- 
ever, as Nazarites, are called unreservedly to de- 
vote themselves to the Lord. It is to every saved 
one that the apostle addresses himself when he 
writes, ‘I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the 
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a liv- 
ing sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is 
your reasonable (or, intelligent) service. And be 
not conformed to this world: but be ye trans- 
formed by the renewing of your mind, that ye 
may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and 
perfect will of God” (Rom. 12:1, 2). It will be 
seen that actually this is far from being true of 
all believers, nor perhaps of any of them at all 
times. The Lord Jesus was the true Nazarite, 
separated to God from His lowly birth to His 
death of shame upon the tree. We are called un- 
doubtedly to “follow His steps;” but it is sad 
indeed to realize how few maintain the Nazarite 
character. 


340 Notes on Jeremiah 


There were three chief things in which the 
Nazarite of old was peculiar. (1) In Num. 6: 
3, 4, it was written, “He shall separate himself 
from wine and strong drink.” It is clearly speci- 
- fied that he was to partake of no product what- 
ever of the vine tree, “from the kernels even to 
the husk.” 

(2) In ver. 5 we read, “All the days of the 
vow of his separation there shall come no razor 
upon his head.” He was to let the locks of his 
hair grow long like those of a woman. 

(3) Again, in ver. 6 we are told, “All the days 
that he separateth himself unto the Lord, he shall 
come at no dead body.” It is particularly stated 
that he was not in this respect to make himself 
unclean even for his father, his mother, or any 
of his kin. 

Each command has a distinct lesson in it. Wine, 
in Scripture, symbolizes joy (Judges 9:13; Ps. 
104:15). The Nazarite must forego it. This 
world cannot minister to the joy of those who 
walk with God. Many Christians seem never to 
learn this. But such is the fact; and the sooner 
it is learned the better. The Nazarite is not with- 
out joy; but his are deeper, purer joys than this 
world’s vines can offer. The wine of earth may 
stimulate and excite the fancy, thereby causing a 
thrill of pleasure for the moment; but it can 
never produce that deep-toned joy which char- 
acterizes the one who, like Enoch, walks with 
God. “The joy of the Lord is your strength” 
(Neh. 8:10), but it comes down from heaven. 
No plant of this sin-cursed scene produces it. 

Secondly, the Nazarite allowed the hair of his 


The Fine Gold became Dim 341 


head to grow. According to 1 Cor. 11, long hair 
is the proper covering for the woman, telling of 
her place of subjection in the present order of 
things since the fall (Gen. 3:16; 1 Cor. 11: 4- 
15). If the man has long hair, it is a shame 
unto him; but it is a glory to the woman, for 
“her hair is given her for a covering.” The long 
hair speaks, then, of the place of dependence. In 
the Nazarite we see one who has voluntarily sur- 
rendered what man would call “his rights” and 
his independence in order to be wholly in subjec- 
tion to God. The Lord Jesus is the great exem- 
plar in this, as in all else, for He could say, “I 
came not to do Mine own will, but the will of 
Him that sent Me.” This was the more remark- 
able in Him, as He was the only man who ever 
had title to do His own will: but He voluntarily 
surrendered that title; and humbling himself, be- 
came the dependent Man in the fullest sense. In 
the same way must the man of God lay aside his 
own thoughts and inclinations to make the will 
of the Lord supreme in his life. 

Thirdly, the Nazarite was not to be defiled by 
the dead. So the believer who would devote him- 
self to the Lord is called upon to walk apart 
from all the defiling influences of this scene. 
Hearing the word of Jesus, “Let the dead bury 
their dead, follow thou Me,” it should be his to 
turn aside at once from everything that would 
grieve the Holy Spirit and dull his spiritual sensi- 
bilities, in order to be the Lord’s alone. It is 
quite possible to be a Nazarite at times, and not 
at others. The balance of the chapter shows the 
solemn result of defilement. If brought into con- 


842 Notes on Jeremiah 


tact with death, all the days of his separation 
that went before would be lost, because his sep- 
aration had become defiled (vers. 9-12). He could 
only be restored to that place of special blessing 
and privilege, as well as of responsibility, by 
bringing the prescribed offerings, which set forth 
the cross and the Holy One who hung there. 

Not until the days of his separation were over, 
was he to shave his head and be free to eat or 
drink of the fruit of the vine. For the believer 
this will only be when the wilderness journey is 
over and the glory is entered. Then, with the 
Lord who loved us, we shall drink the new wine 
in the Father’s kingdom, where pure joys, unsul- 
lied by sin, shall be the portion of our hearts 
forever. 

Having before us the truth which the Spirit 
of God would impart concerning the Nazarite, 
we turn to the 7th and 8th verses of our chap- 
ter with a tender and sad interest. The past days 
of devotion to God are contrasted with the awful 
failure of their present condition. “Her Naza- 
rites were purer than snow: ... their visage is 
blacker than a coal.” How terrible the declen- 
sion! Judah’s godliest and goodliest sons, once 
her proper pride, are now unknown in the streets, 
so changed are they by famine and pestilence. 
Their lot was even harder than that of those who 
had been slain with the sword, for “these pine 
away, stricken through for want of the fruits of 
the field” (ver. 9). There is no hint of inten- 
tional defilement on the part of the Nazarites; 
but the dead were everywhere, and to escape be- 
coming unclean thereby would have been impos- 


The Fine Gold became Dim 343 


sible: they share in the afflictions of the nation: 
of which they form a part. In a still deeper 
sense is this true of those who, through the bap- 
tism of the Holy Spirit, are members of the 
Church, the Body of Christ. “If one member suf- 
fer, all the members suffer with it.” The sin of 
Christendom is, in a way, our common sin; we 
are all in our measure accountable for its failure. 
It becomes us, therefore, not to spend our time 
pointing out for reprobation, or holding up to 
ridicule, the evils and follies into which our fel- 
low-members may have fallen. Rather be it ours 
to confess our share in its sin and consequent 
ruin, and look to God for His mercy for revival 
and blessing. 

In Jerusalem’s distress, the fearful predictions 
made by Moses (Deut. 28:56, 57; Lev. 26: 29) 
were again fulfilled, as they had been on several 
occasions in the past (2 Kings 6: 26-29). When 
“the hands of the pitiful women” could thus be 
stretched forth against their poor starved chil- 
dren, it is clear that the famine had done its 
worst (ver. 10). Therefore the next verse de- 
clares that “the Lord hath accomplished His fury; 
He hath poured out His fierce anger, and hath 
kindled a fire in Zion, and it hath devoured the 
foundations thereof. The kings of the earth, and 
all the inhabitants of the world, would not have 
believed that the adversary and the enemy could 
have entered into the gates of Jerusalem.” But 
it was “because of the sins of her prophets, and 
the iniquities of her priests, who have shed the 
blood of the righteous in the midst of her” (vers. 
11-13). In His righteous anger God had brought 


344 Notes on Jeremiah 


Zion to the lowest depths, else, what could the 
nations have done against her? 

It will be remembered that in Jer. 5:1 the 
Lord promised to pardon the city if even one 
person was found in it who executed judgment 
and sought the truth. One might wonder there 
were not to be found in Jerusalem a few righteous 
ones, as in a former day were found in Sodom; 
but, alas, they had all been slain or driven away 
by these ungodly priests and false prophets. A 
new translation, which we follow here, will make 
the following verses plainer: “It is for the sins 
of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests, 
who have shed the blood of the righteous in the 
midst of her. They wandered about blind in the 
streets, they were polluted with blood, so that 
men could not touch their garments. They cried 
unto them, Depart, unclean! Depart, depart, 
touch not! When they fled away and wandered 
about, it was said among the nations, They shall 
no more sojourn there. The face of Jehovah 
hath divided them; He will no more regard 
them. They respected not the persons of the 
priests, they regarded not the aged” (vers. 
138-16). The false prophets and false priests 
had put the just to death, or driven them 
into banishment. These faithful men “had trial 
of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover 
of bonds and imprisonment: they were stoned, 
they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were 
slain with the sword: they wandered about in 
sheepskins and goatskins; being destitute, afflict- 
ed, tormented; of whom the world was not 
worthy: they wandered in deserts, and in moun- 


The Fine Gold became Dim 345 


tains, and in dens and caves of the earth” (Heb. 
11: 36-38). God’s witnesses were despised and 
hated by the very people to whom they sought 
to minister. Isaiah, according to Jewish tradi- 
tion, was sawn asunder. Elijah’s life was sought 
by Jezebel and Ahab; Obadiah had to hide the 
prophets of the Lord ina cave; Amaziah endeav- 
ored to intimidate Amos (Amos 7:12,13); Jere- 
miah was imprisoned on several occasions, and 
would have been left to die in the pit but for 
Ebed-melech; Baruch’s life was declared for- 
feited. Thus, in a later day, Stephen could ask, 
“Which of the prophets have not your fathers 
persecuted? and they have slain them which 
showed before the coming of the Just One, of 
whom ye have been now the betrayers and mur- 
derers” (Acts 7:52). In rejecting those sent of 
God they rejected the Sender: therefore the woes 
that had come upon them. 

Egypt is evidently referred to in ver. 17, as a 
“nation that could not save us.” To the last 
Zedekiah and his ministers counted upon help 
from Pharaoh, but in vain. God had said that 
Egypt was a bruised reed, and so it proved to be. 

The keen eye of the ever-present Babylonians 
they could not escape. The steps of the men of 
Judah were noted. They did not dare show them- 
selves in the streets. Their persecutors were 
“swifter than the eagles of the heaven:” on the 
mountains and in the plains they pursued or laid 
wait for them (vers. 18,19). The king had been 
captured, despite his effort to escape with a few 
devoted retainers. “The breath of our nostrils, 
the anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pits, 


346 Notes on Jeremiah 


of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live 
among the heathen (or, nations)” (ver. 20). Not 
till the true “Anointed of the Lord” comes, will 
there be a ruler under whose shadow His people 
can dwell in perfect security. 

Edom had rejoiced in the day of Judah’s calam- 
ity. The cup should soon pass to her. She must 
be made drunken and naked because of her exul- 
tation in the downfall of the city of God, and her 
manifold iniquities (ver. 21). The punishment 
of the daughter of Zion was accomplished. Res- 
toration in place of captivity should soon be her 
portion, but Edom’s judgment was just about to 
begin. “If the righteous scarcely be saved, where 
shall the ungodly and the sinner appear?” 


CHAPTER XXXI 
“THOU, 0 LORD, REMAINEST FOREVER!” 
(Lam. 5.) 


The detailed story of Judah’s sufferings is 
spread out before the Lord in this last chapter, 
but the soul is stayed upon the fact that One re- 
mains, when all else is swept away. There is 
rest and confidence despite the wretched circum- 
stances brought about by sin and waywardness. 
Everything has been gone over before God, and 
in Him the hearts of Jeremiah and of the few 
who are left of his people can find repose. He 
has not failed in all that He foretold as to the 
woes entailed by their wicked ways. He will not 
fail in carrying out His promises as to future 
deliverance and restoring mercy. The last few 
verses connect closely with the theme of chap. 3: 
22-26. 

The entire portion takes the form of a prayer, 
rather than a lamentation. ‘Remember, O Lord, 
what is come upon us: consider, and behold our 
reproach” (ver. 1). It is a great relief for the 
troubled heart to feel that there is One in heaven 
who observes every trial to which His children 
are subject, and that He has ordered all accord- 
ing to His infinite wisdom and love. There is 
rest in knowing that His eye is looking on, and 
that He is no unconcerned spectator. 

Confidently, as knowing His deep interest in 
them still, though they have failed so grievously, 


348 Notes on Jeremiah 


they enumerate the causes of their anguish and 
reproach. “Our inheritance is turned to stran- 
gers, our houses to aliens” (ver. 2). The goodly 
land, unappreciated, had passed under the domin- 
ion of the Gentiles. It was not that God delight- 
ed to have it so; but that His own might realize 
the folly of departing from Him. 

“We are orphans and fatherless, our mothers 
are as widows” (ver. 3). This gave them special 
title to the care of Him who is the Father of the 
fatherless, and the Judge of the widow. In so 
speaking of themselves they express their own 
utter helplessness, and their confidence in Him 
who had been the Guide of their youth. So ear- 
nest a plea would not be despised. None ever 
called upon Him in vain when in felt need, and 
truly repentant. 

“We have drunken our water for money; our 
wood is sold unto us’ (ver. 4). All that this 
world has for the soul away from the Lord comes 
high. It may seem as though much is to be 
gained by taking one’s own way and casting the 
fear of God behind the back. Satan will suggest, 
too, that it costs too much to live for God, and 
will allure with tempting baits the already un- 
happy heart that has begun to lust after other 
things; but it will only be to prove in the end 
that disobedience to God is a costly indulgence, 
an unholy luxury, if we may use the term, that 
none can really afford. They who here complain 
that they have drunken their water for money, 
had foolishly forsaken Him who is “the Fountain 
of living waters” (of which all might drink free- 
ly), and had hewed out for themselves cisterns 


“Thou, O Lord Remainest Forever!” 349 


that could hold no water( Jer. 2:13). When they 
sought it from the enemies of the Lord, a price 
was put upon it that it burdened them to pay. 
And then, of all that they purchased so dearly, 
it could be said, “Whosoever drinketh of this 
water shall thirst again ;” while Jehovah’s living 
water satisfies the weary soul. Departure from 
God is the most foolish and worst investment any 
child of grace ever made. 

“Our necks are under persecution: we labor, 
and have no rest” (ver. 5). How could it be 
otherwise? Was rest to be found in taking their 
own way? It could not be. “Thou hast made 
us for Thyself,” said Augustine of Hippo, “and 
our souls can never be at rest until they rest in 
Thee.” It is the most egregious folly to seek for 
it anywhere else. That worldlings should make 
such a mistake is no cause for surprise: they have 
never known anything better than the alluring 
enticements of Satan’s realm: but for one who 
has shared in the deep, true peace which the 
Spirit gives to those that obey Him, to turn his 
back upon the only source of rest and seek it in 
the world from which he was once delivered, is 
an anomaly beyond explanation, save on the 
ground of hidden backsliding of heart long be- 
fore. Such we know was the case of Judah. 
Their heart went out after unholy things first; 
then the feet soon followed. But they found, like 
the dove sent forth out of the ark, no rest for 
the sole of their feet. A raven, type of the evil 
nature in every man, could rest upon a float- 
ing carcass, while feeding on the carrion; but 
the clean, pure dove, symbol of the Holy Spirit 


350 Notes on Jeremiah 


and of the new nature which all God’s children 
have received, could find neither rest nor food in 
such a scene, but must needs return to the ark, 
a type of Christ, for both. 

“We have given the hand to the Egyptians, 
and to the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread” 
(ver. 6). But Egypt soon failed them, and 
Assyria only oppressed them. All human props 
broken, the remnant were cast upon God alone, 
on whom they should have counted from the 
first. 

Continuing in their confession, they own, “Our 
fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have 
borne their iniquities” (ver. 7). They were the 
children of wayward fathers, and had gone astray 
in the same unholy paths. Bitterly they complain 
that servants had borne rule over them, and there 
was no deliverer. At the peril of their lives they 
brought in their bread, “because of the sword of 
the wilderness” (vers. 8, 9). Famine-stricken, 
their skin became “black like an oven.” The 
women of Zion and the maids of the cities of 
Judah were devoted to shame by the ravishers of 
the idolatrous armies. Princes were ignomini- 
ously hanged up by the hand; the elders were 
dishonored; while the young men and children 
were taken to be household servants (vers. 10- 
18). 

The place of judgment and the place of merri- 
ment were alike vacant. The elders were no 
longer seen in the gate, and the song of the 
youths had ceased. The joy of their heart had 
ceased, and their dance was turned into funereal 
gloom. The voice of the mourner had usurped 


“Thou, O Lord Remainest Forever!” 351 


re place of the voice of the singer (vers. 14, - 
Ve 

Realizing keenly the immediate connection be- 
tween their wrongdoing and their woes, they cry 
in contrition and penitence, “The crown is fallen 
from our head: woe unto us, that we have 
sinned!” (ver.16). Thanks to a merciful God, 
blessing is not far away when the soul thus bends 
to the rod and confesses the justness of the pun- 
ishment. “The Lord will not always chide, 
neither will He keep His anger forever.” The 
surest way to find deliverance from God’s gov- 
ernmental rod is humbly to bow in His presence, 
and frankly acknowledge how fully deserved the 
chastisement has been. 

Judah had been brought very lew; but He who 
cast them down can lift them up, when the need- 
ed lesson has been laid to heart and borne its 
fruit. Fainting in heart, with tear-dimmed eyes, 
“because of the mountain of Zion, which is deso- 
late,’ and a habitation for foxes, they look up 
to Him from whom all their past blessings had 
come, and who found it necessary to pass them 
through all their sorrows: knowing He is their 
only resource, they exclaim, “Thou, O Lord, re- 
mainest forever; Thy throne is from generation 
to generation” (vers. 17-19). Everything else 
may have been swept away, but He remains for- 
ever. 

What unspeakable consolation, dear fellow- 
saint, is in this precious fact for every tried and 
suffering child of God! Circumstances may be 
very hard; blow upon blow may strike; disaster 
follow disaster; until the stricken heart has not 


352 Notes on Jeremiah 


one earthly thing left to cling to. In such an 
hour Satan would fain lead the soul to believe 
that God too is gone: that it is no longer the 
object of His care, that He has left it to die alone. 
But no! It cannot be. Faith looks up and shouts, 
“Thou, O Lord, remainest!”’ for He abides the 
same “yesterday, and to-day, and forever.” 

There is an authentic incident related of a 
widowed Christian women who lived in Scotland 
years ago. Left with several dependent “‘bairns,” 
she was at length reduced to great straits, and in 
order to feed and clothe her little household was 
obliged to practise the strictest economy. Yet 
withal, her heart was fixed upon the Lord, and 
both by precept and practice she taught the les- 
son of trust and confidence to her children. 

But there came a day when the purse was flat 
and the cupboard bare. In the meal-barrel there 
was only left a handful of flour; and, like the 
widow of Zarephath, she went to get it to make 
a morsel of food to satisfy the craving of the 
hungry little ones, knowing not where the next 
would come from. As she bent over the barrel, 
scraping up the last of the flour, her heart for 
a moment gave way, and in a paroxysm of doubt 
the hot tears began to fall, and she felt as one 
utterly forsaken. Hearing her sobs, her little 
boy Robbie drew near to comfort. Plucking at 
her dress till he attracted her attention, he looked 
up into her face with wonder, and asked, in his 
quaint Scotch dialect, “Mither, what are ye greet- 
‘in’ (weeping) aboot? Doesna God hear ye scrapin’ 
o’ the bottom o’ the barrel, mither?” 

In a moment her failing faith reasserted it- 


“Thou, O Lord Remainest Forever!” 353 


self. Ah, yes, God did hear. All else might be- 
gone, but He remained, and His Word declared 
her every need should be supplied. And so it 
was; for help was provided from a most un- 
expected source, when the last of what she had 
was gone. 

It is the time of trial that tests faith; and never 
more so than when one is aware that the trial has 
been brought on by one’s self. The spared of 
Judah feeling this, go on to ask, “Wherefore 
dost Thou forget us forever, and forsake us so 
long time?” (ver. 20.) But in confidence they 
add, ‘“‘Turn Thou us unto Thee, O Lord, and we 
shall be turned; renew our days as of old” (ver. 
21). If He shall turn them, all will be well. 
They are unable to trust themselves. They had 
ever been treacherous and false; but He can make 
them willing in the day of His power. Then they 
shall be as He would have them. 

It would seem that neither in the Authorized 
nor in the Revised Versions is the last verse 
adequately rendered. As it stands in both, it 
would imply that they were hopeless of any re- 
covery, and considered their rejection to be final 
and their prayer unavailing. “But Thou hast ut- 
terly rejected us; Thou art very wroth against 
us” is the way both read. But the margin of the 
R. V. is suggestive. It reads: ‘Unless Thou hast 
utterly rejected us and art very wroth.” But 
we much prefer the interrogative of another 
translation. “For hast Thou utterly rejected 
us?” they ask; and the very question implies a 
confidence that it is otherwise, as Jeremiah well 
knew; though they justly add, “Thou hast been 


354 Notes on Jeremiah 


wroth against us—exceedingly.”’ This was indeed 
true, but already His fierce anger was passing 
away. He was soon to arise, to be their Deliv- 
_erer once more. This came to pass in part when, 
by permission of Cyrus, all who had heart enough 
for it returned to the cities from which their 
fathers and some of themselves had been carried 
captive. 

But the day of Judah’s lamentations will never 
be truly over until the Sun of Righteousness shall 
arise with healing in His wings, to dry their 
every tear, and to restore them to the land prom- 
ised to Abraham for an inheritance forever. 
Then shall Zion put off her sackcloth; and, 
adorned with her beautiful garments, shall be- 
come the queen city of the world, when her King 
shall reign and prosper. 

“In that day,” in place of lamentation and . 
wailing, “shall this song be sung in the land of 
Judah: We have a strong city; salvation will 
God appoint for walls and bulwarks. Open ye 
the gates, that the righteous nation which keepeth 
the truth may enter in. Thou wilt keep him in 
perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on Thee: be. 
cause he trusteth in Thee. Trust ye in the Lord 
forever: for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting 
strength” (Isa. 26:1-4). Then Jerusalem’s mourn- 


ing ‘will be accomplished; her warfare will be 
ended! 


APPENDIX I 


An Attempt to Arrange the Writings of Jeremiah in 
Chronological Order. 


(a) Reign of Josiah (B. C. 641 to 610). 


B.C.629 Chapter1 - - - - - - Jeremiah’s call. 
Chapters 2-6. Exhortations to Judah and 
Benjamin. 


(b) Reign of Jehoahaz (Shallum) B.C. 610. 


No specific portion in this brief reign of three months, 
but see Chapter 22: 10-12. 


(c) Reign of Jehoiakim (B.C. 610 to 599). 


B.C.610 Chapter 26 - - - Arrest and Acquittal 

607(?)Chapter 35 - - - + - The Rechabites. 

607 Chapter 36 - - - - The Roll burned. 

607 Chapter45 - -  - The word for Baruch. 

607 Chapter 25 - - Seventy years’ Servitude 
foretold. 


607 Chapter 46: 1-12 - Judgment on Pharaoh. 
605 Chapters 18,19 - The Potter and the Clay. 


605 Chapter 20 - - Jeremiah’s first Imprison- 
ment. 

602 Chapter 13 - - - - The Linen Girdle. 

602 Chapter 14 - - - - - - The Famine. 

601 Chapters 15-17 - - - Captivity foretold. 

600(?)Chapters 7-10 - - - Judgments predicted. 

600 Chapters 11,12 - - - -  Exhortations. 


600 Chapters 47-49 ~- - Against the Nations. 


356 


Notes on Jeremiah 


(d) Reign of Jehoiakin, or Coniah (Jeconiah) 
B.C. 599. 


B.C. 599 Chapters 22, 


23 - Unfaithful Shepherds. 


(e) Reign of Zedekiah (B. C. 599-588). 


599 Chapter 29- - - Letter to first captives. 
599 Chapter 24 - - The good and bad figs. 
598(?)Chapters 30,31 - - - Return prophesied. 
595 Chapter 27 - - - - Bonds and Yokes 
595 Chapter 28 - Controversy with Hananiah. 
595 Chapters 50,51 - - Doom of Babylon 
591 Chapter 34 - - The violated Covenant. 
590 Chapter 33 - - - Christ the Branch. 
589 Chapter 21 - - - Zedekiah’s Inquiry. 
589 Chapter 37 - - Jeremiah’s second Im- 
prisonment. 
589 Chapter 38 - Interview with Zedekiah. 
589 Chapter 32 - - - - Buying the Field. 
588 Chapter 39 - - - - Fall of Jerusalem. 
588 *Chapter 52 - - - Historical Appendix. 
588 Chapters 40, 41 - Gedaliah and Ishmael. 
588 — Chapters 43,44 - - Remnant in Egypt. 
587 Chapter 46: 13-28 - Egypt’s Judgment. 
About 587. The Lamentations. 


*Not written by Jeremiah. See comments. 


APPENDIX II 


For comparison we also give the moral order, as we 
have it in our Bibles. It will be readily seen by the 
spiritually minded that here we have no merely human 
compilation of scattered fragments, but a divine arrange- 
ment according to the subjects, in place of mere chronol- 
ogy. 


The Divisions of Jeremiah’s Writings According to Their 
Moral Order. 


First Division. 
The Call to Repentance and its Rejection. 
Chapters 1-24. 
Second Division. 
The Judgments Coming through Nebuchadrezzar. 
Chapters 25-29. 
Third Division. 


Future Restoration and Blessing. 
Chapters 30, 31. 


Fourth Division. 


The Personal History of the Prophet and the Final 
Testing of Judah. 
Chapters 32-38. 


Fifth Division. 


The Judgment Executed and the Spared Remnant. 
Chapters 39-45. 


358 Notes on Jeremiah 


Sixth Division. 
The Prophecies as to the Nations, 
Chapters 46-51. 
Appendix. 
The Historical Account of the Fall of Jerusalem. 
Chapter 52. 


Seventh Division. 


The Sorrows of Judah and their Hope in Jehovah. 
Lamentations. 


if east 
i m4 ‘ - 

mee San D: 

Lay ot eee 
er 
hey a3, ; 


ee 


nie! : 


This book may be kept | 
FOURTEEN DAYS | ° 


(DEC fire WAll be charged for each 
dav the hook is kept overtime. 


i ae 


DATE DUE 
: aye | ¢ 
= - oe res 5s 
UEC 16 04 —+— ; 
psec =a $86 


ES 
o 
8 ot 
=| 


Oo 
® 
3 
° 
2 
sy) 
9 


CINCINNATI BIBLE COLLEGE & SEM. LIBRARY _ 
I main 
an 


ii 
/ 
| 


4133 


tes on 


Vil 
00061 


00 


224. 
| 


iil 
3 4320 


H. A. IRONSIDE, internationally be- 
loved Bible teacher and preacher, was 
author of more than 60 volumes as well 
as many pamphlets and articles on Bible 
subjects. His writings include addresses 
or commentaries on the entire New 
Testament, all of the prophetic books 
of the Old Testament, and a great many 
volumes on specific Bible themes and 
subjects. 


Countless thousands of readers testify 
to Dr. Ivonside’s helpful faculty of get- 
ting to the heart of any Scripture, and 
his clear, easily grasped outlines of even 
the most é¢omplex passages make the 
Bible easier to study and to understand. 
He wrote as simply and as directly as 
he spoke—no one who has heard him 
preach will forget how vividly he made 


y _ Bible texts come to life and linger in the 


ear ts 


~ 


years of ministry, 


224.207 stor of the famous 
Ir6p 21232 rch in Chicago. In 
______rned to devote him- 

. ing and conference 
Ironside, Henry Allan o be with the Lord 


f E h 72 / 431 ) 


-.) as 


Notes on the Prophecy and 
Lamentations of Jeremiah 


iin 


NE ee ae eS 


THE CINCINNATI BIBLE 
SEMINARY LIBRARY 


oi 


ow 


