Google 



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 




600094582Y 



A 



NOTES 



ON THE 



BOOK OF JOB 



WITH A NEW VERSION 



By William Kelly. 




LONDON : 
G. MORMSH, 20, PATERNOSTER SQJJ*JB&, 



/Of. 



1879. 

• 



S2 I 



PREFACE. 



Many and able as are the extant writings on the Book 

of Job, there still seemed to the writer room and need 

both for careful translation and for fresh help towards 

the better understanding of this most interesting and 

instructive portion of the Holy Scriptures. Nor does 

he doubt that to a closer and deeper research, under 
the guidance of Him who alone can lead into all the 

truth, it will yield more and more : such is the wealth 
of that inexhaustible mine, and such the gracious power 
of the Holy Spirit. Few are likely to feel the defects 
of the present little work more than the writer ; yet he 
counts on the Lord to use it, such as it is, to the com- 
fort and edification of many a soul, and, it may be, to 
stimulate other labourers to a still more abundant 
harvest. 

Blackheath, London. 
January, 1879. 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

Introduction 1 

Chapters i., ii. — Job tried by Satan 8 

Chapter hi. — The Complaint of Job 15 

Chapters iv., v. — The First Discourse of Eliphaz ... 19 

Chapters vl, vii. — The Answer of Job 26 

Chapter viit. — The First Discourse of Bildad 31 

Chapters ix., x.— The Answer of Job 35 

Chapter xi. — The First Discourse of Zophar 43 

Chapters xii.-xiv. — The Answer of Job 46 

Chapter xv. — The Second Discourse of Eliphaz 55 

Chapters xvi., xvii.— The Answer of Job 60 

Chapter xviii. — The Second Discourse of Bildad ... 67 

Chapter xix. — The Answer of Job 72 

Chapter xx.— The Second Discourse of Zophar 76 

Chapter xxi. — The Answer of Job 81 

Chapter xxil— The Third Discourse of Eliphaz 85 

Chapters xxiil, xxiv.— The Answer of Job 96 

Chapter xxv.— The Third Discourse of Bildad 103 

Chapter xxvi. — The Answer of Job — Silence oi TiO^Shwt "\Stfb 
Chapters xxvil, xxviii. — Fresh Discourse o£ 3cto — *^> 
Chapters xxix.-xxxi. — Last Discourse oi Job * "^ 



VI CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Chapters xxxii., xxxin. — Elihu, and his First Dis- 
course 139 

Chapter xxxiv. — Elihu's Second Discourse 148 

Chapter xxxv. — Elihu's Third Discourse 154 

Chapters xxxvi., xxxvii. — Elihu's Fourth Discourse 159 
Chapters xxxvdi., xxxix. — Jehovah's Intervention... 168 
Chapters xl., xli. — Jehovah's Renewed Intervention 179 
Chapter xlii. — Jehovah's End 189 



NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 



INTRODUCTION. 



The book before us is as isolated in form as under- 
neath it is bound up by the closest ties with all 
scripture. In it we breathe the fresh and free air of 
desert life, in the strongest antithesis to the settled 
polity of Israel in Canaan ; yet is it quite distinct from 
the pilgrim character of the fathers, rather approach- 
ing the place of Lot, though with a sensible difference 
as suits the wealthiest chief of Uz, but an independent 
and honoured visitor of the city, not its denizen. No 
foreign land is so well known as Egypt; yet Job's own 
habits lie outside it. Revolutions were known, science 
and art making progress ; godly men discussed the deepest 
moral questions. The marks of hoar antiquity are graven 
on it, yet it falls in admirably with the latest outflow of 
grace to the Gentile. Contemporaneous with, if not 
before, the five books of Moses, it is of all parts of the 
Old Testament the most free from the trammels of the 
law or even from allusions to it; yet none the less 
does it shadow the ways of God with Israel, blessed of 
old, losing all meanwhile, but about to be blessed once 
more and far more in the end than in tiie \>e^m^xv^« 



2 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

The problem handled in the book is the moral go- 
vernment of God : how to conciliate His righteousness 
with the sufferings, and even extreme sufferings, of a 
just and godly man ? how to understand the permis- 
sion of evil, in its worst form of malignant persecution, 
with His own good, and this before and apart from His 
revelation in Christ and by redemption ? The books 
of Moses prepare the way for His government of a 
people, His own elect Israel, where all was to be mani- 
fest and a testimony before the world. Here it is His 
dealings with a soul before the true light shone, and 
the veil was rent, and sin condemned in the cross, 
along with the expression of exercises of heart and con- 
science under God's dealings. Now that we are re- 
conciled to God by Christ's death and know ourselves 
to be in Christ before God, there is or ought to be a 
wholly new experience. But it is of the deepest interest 
and profit to see how the believer was enabled, not 
merely to walk uprightly when things were prosperous 
in an evil world but to confide in God spite of ad- 
versity and crushing affliction, and not only to submit 
to His will as chastening but to measure and abhor 
himself in dust and ashes before God. The beginning 
teaches that not Satan but God is the source of the 
action, the middle that He only and effectually carries 
forward the true lesson for the soul, the end that He is 
exceeding pitiful and of tender mercy. A whole long 
book devoted to the exercises of a soul in suffering, 
and he a Gentile, and this in the canon of the Jewish 
scriptures from the first ! But it is not yet what some 
call the " mystery of the cross :" this was reserved for 
Christ. 



INTRODUCTION. 3 

The plan or structure is very distinct. There is a 
prologue in chapters i., ii. with a corresponding con- 
elusion or epilogue in the last chapter (xlii. 7-17). 
The question is raised in heaven between God and Satan, 
the man on earth most concerned being wholly igno- 
rant of it till grace prevailed and the word revealed all. 
Job, the object of divine interest, becomes therefore the 
butt of the malice of Satan, who is allowed to inflict his 
heaviest blows on his possessions and his family, then on 
his person short of his life, and utterly failing to en- 
snare the saint into sin disappears from the scene. 
But God, who had taken the initiative, carries on the 
trial, which, if it had stopped here, had failed to deal 
with that which needed to be reached in Job's heart 
and judged by himself in order to his deeper blessing. 
Hence the three friends are introduced, whose presenco 
in silence, as they looked on his overwhelming misery 
and grief, at length opens his mouth in curses on his 
day, not on God. (Chap, iii.) 

Then follows a threefold series of colloquies between 
Job and his friends, rich in moral suggestion and full 
of feeling, especially on the part of the sufferer, whoso 
language may seem often in words to approach that of 
Christ in the Psalms, but is really in contrast with His , 
perfection. For He ever abode in the love of Hi3 
Father, and never failed to justify His God, even when 
on the cross abandoned by Him, which Job never was 
more than any other servant of His that ever lived. 
(Chaps, iv.-xxxi.) Hence Job stands as the instruc- 
tive foil, and this not as a man merely, but as a man of 
God, to the second Man and last Adam. Bo 1&&& *&<* 
the ancients and moderns to be relied on ^rtio t^gtfcfe^ 



4 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

declaring that Job prefigured Christ as the Victim or 
undeserving Sufferer. Inconsistency most grave we see 
not in Christ but in Job, though real integrity and dis- 
interestedness, whatever said his friends or Satan. 
The converse of Christ, in absolute submission and 
justifying God under suffering (and what suffering !) 
instead of bitter complaint, is thus lost. 

In this profound discussion, after the passionate 
outburst of the long patient sufferer, each of the three 
friends first insinuates these charges home on Job — that 
grave secret sin alone could account for such calamities, 
that therefore his could be only a show of piety, that 
in short he must be a hypocrite. To each Job replies, 
with less or more indignation insisting on his integrity ; 
but while he yearns after God, if he could only get 
near Him, he complains of His dealings as severe and 
unpitying. On the third occasion (chaps, xxii.-xxxi.), 
the assailants are so evidently convicted of a too narrow 
and judicial estimate of God's ways, that Eliphaz 
drops his original mildness, acts unfairly by Job's- 
reasoning, and plays the sophist himself by converting 
special instances of divine judgment on the wicked into 
a sample of His ordinary dealings, ignoring the righteous. 
Bildad, unable to resist the rejoinder of Job who points- 
out the tangled web of human things, while he admits 
the occasional intervention in this world of Him who* 
will judge infallibly in the next, is obliged to admit tbo 
to man incomprehensible ways of God now, yet still 
holds to his suspicions of Job under the application of 
the sententious wisdom of others. After a withering 
rejoinder of heavier metal from the same arsenal,. 
Job cleaves to the assertion of his sincerity before God, 



INTRODUCTION. 5 

and magnificently contrasts with the petty and acrimo- 
nious short-sightedness of his miserable comforters 
that wisdom which is beyond the ken of the creature 
and pertains to God alone, however He of His grace 
may vouchsafe it to him that fears Himself and departs 
from evil. Zophar is utterly silenced. 

Thereon appears a hitherto unnoticed person, Elihu, 
who had kept silence as became one considerably 
younger, but now speaks as interpreting God's ways 
with man, with the soul, so that Job is reduced to 
silence no less than his friends. Their assaults Elihu 
defends no more than he insinuates hidden evil against 
Job ; but he reproves the irreverence of his replies, vin- 
dicates the dealings of God, whether in judgment of 
man or in discipline of the righteous, and proves how 
perilous his language might be for encouraging men in 
the path of reckless pursuit of prosperity here below. 
He urges on Job self-judgment and submission to God, 
exposing his self-righteousness, and condemning the 
wish for death to escape suffering as wholly unworthy, 
as well as vain before Him whose glory and withal 
interest in 'creation he describes in terms of great 
beauty and force. He completely avoids the error of 
> those who see not correction but only judgment in 
God's ways. (Chaps, xxxii.-xxxvii.) 

Jehovah then answers Job out of the whirlwind, 
asserting the majesty of His power, laying bare Job's 
ignorance to himself, and pointedly demanding, Shall 
he that contendeth with the Almighty instruct Him ? 
he that reproveth God, let him answer it. This brings 
out from Job the confession of his vttenera,^\i\t\iS& rat- 
iied on still farther, we may say fully ,\yy & icfc&x«^w\> 



$ N0TE8 ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

of Jehovah mainly grounded on but two of His earthly 
creatures. (Chaps, xxxviii. — xlii. 6.) There could be 
no more till Christ came not only bringing life and in- 
corruption to light, but clearing up what must then 
have been left to God as insoluble by man. 

The conclusion follows, Elihu the interpreter of 
good disappearing at the end, as Satan the messen- 
ger of evil at the beginning, and Jehovah turning 
the captivity of Job when he prayed for his friends, as 
well as giving him twice as much as he had before. 
(Chap. xlii. 7-17.) The friends were merely silenced; 
Job opens his mouth in full confession and thus wins 
forgiveness not merely for himself but for them by in- 
terceding on their behalf. 

The longevity of Job and the priestly action as head 
of the family (his historic reality being attested by 
Ezekiel in the Old Testament and by James in the 
New) point to patriarchal times : after Abraham and 
before the Exodus would seem the limits, if indeed 
Moses himself did not write the book. At any rate 
Dr. S. Lee has given a copious list of striking 
coincidences with the Pentateuch. The reader will 
notice how "the Almighty" (the revelation of God to 
the fathers) appears familiarly in the speeches of Job 
and his friends, as well as " God" as such. Jehovah is 
regularly used only when the writer describes or 
introduces Himself as speaking. The exception is in 
chapter xii. 9, xxviii. 18 being Adonai and not Jehovah, 
Genesis proves however that the name of Jehovah was 
not a secret before God gave it by Moses as a name of 
relation to Israel. The idolatry alluded to in chapter 



INTRODUCTION. 7 

xxxi. is the earliest that came in by Satan's craft, and 
therefore suits well the patriarchal age ; bat it does 
prove that the book mast have been written after the 
flood, for we hear of no idolatry before it. The 
mention of angels as the " sons of God" tallies with the 
Mosaic phrase in Genesis vi., and Satan's character with 
the serpent of Genesis iii. 

For these and similar reasons of no little weight, 
some of a linguistic nature, one sees how the book 
fits in with the days of the earliest revelation from 
God to man. Nothing can be conceived more opposed 
to the truthful simplicity of scripture than a late writer 
(I will not say indulging in a fiction, but) even in a 
true narrative affecting the archaic style and language of 
an age long past. Nor is it rational, to take the lowest 
ground, that the Jewish canon could have admitted 
such a book unless the prophets had accepted it as in- 
spired no less than authentic, as it is the weightiest 
and earliest witness against their narrow and exclu- 
sive spirit in respect of all outside themselves. The 
same principle applies to Melchisedek in Genesis and 
to Jethro in Exodus and Numbers. The book of Job 
therefore stands properly at the head of the Hagio- 
grapha, or poetical books of the Old Testament. Indeed 
a late Hebrew commentator deserts the general belief 
of the Rabbins for the scepticism of Samuel Bar 
Nachman, and a few others, on the express ground of 
incredulity that the patriarchs of Israel should be so 
left behind in spiritual power by a Gentile like Job, 
not to speak of his three friends and Elihu. 



CHAPTERS I., II. 

Job Tried by Satan. ' 

The Spirit of God opens the book with a lovely picture 
of Job's character, family, and position. We see him- 
self, his sons, and his daughters in all the intimacy of 
private life, and this in him ruled by the fear of God. 
" There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was 
Job; and that man was perfect* and upright, and 
fearing God, and eschewing evil. And there were born 
unto him seven sons and three daughters. His sub- 
stance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thou- 
sand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five 
hundred she-asses, and a very great household ; and 
this man was greater than all the sons of the east." 

The earthly circumstances of Job are thus clearly set 
before us. He was the greatest of all the sons of 
the East. His sons also had their separate establish- 
ments, and the description of their ordinary habits 
gives occasion for the mention of a vivid trait of Job's 
piety. " And his sons went and feasted,, each in [his] , 
house on his day ; and sent and called for their three 
sisters, to eat and to drink with them. And it was [so], 
when the days of their feasting had gone round, that 
Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the 
morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the 
number of them all: for Job said, Perhaps my 

* That is, whole, sound, sincere. 



CHAPTER I. 9 

sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts. Thus 
did Job continually." (Vers. 4, 5.) Such was the ha- 
bitual life of this godly Gentile, which the Holy Spirit 
has manifest pleasure in recording. Doubtless it was 
the fruit of the grace of God; yet Job had to learn 
better still both the God of grace, and himself in His 
presence. It is indeed the great moral of the book. 

But in order to such a lesson the veil is lifted for us 
from a higher scene. Earth is the theatre where the 
godly man is tried, but the spectacle is not later only of 
apostles and others, but even then of a saint to angels. 
" Now the day arrived when the sons of God came to 
present themselves before Jehovah, and Satan came also 
among them. And Jehovah said unto Satan, Whence 
comest thou? And Satan answered Jehovah and 
said, From going to and fro in the earth, and from 
walking up and down in it. And Jehovah said unto 
Satan, Hast thou considered My servant Job, that there 
is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright 
man, and fearing God, and eschewing evil? And 
Satan answered Jehovah, and said, For nought doth 
Job fear God ? Hast not thou made an hedge about 
him, and about his house, and about all that he hath on 
every side ? Thou hast blessed the work of his hands, 
and his substance is increased in the land: but put 
forth Thine hand now, and touch all that he hath — 
will he not curse Thee to Thy face ? And Jehovah said 
onto Satan, Lo, all that he hath is in thy power ; only 
upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went 
forth from the presence of Jehovah." (Vers. 6-12.) 

How perfect the rebuke to man's dream of God. indif- 
ferent to all I of a mere theory of earth pto£ie**\xL^TO&s£ 



10 NOTF8 ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

natural laws ! It was Jehovah who here raised the 
question : Satan could only avail himself of the pro* 
sperity of Job to insinuate self-interest. Were his pos- 
sessions to be touched, see " if he curse thee not to Thy 
face !" Jehovah gives the adversary permission to put 
forth his hand, but not against his person. What a 
comfort that even the enemy's hand is under God's 
hand I All is measured on the side of evil, infinite on 
that of good, as we ought to know well, for all things 
are ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is God's. 

The earthly issue soon appears. " And the day ar- 
rived when his sons and his daughters were eating and 
drinking wine in their eldest brother's house : and there 
came a messenger unto Job, and said, The oxen were 
plowing, and the she-asses feeding beside them ; and 
[the] Sabeans fell upon them, and took them away ; and 
they have smitten the young men with the edge of the 
sword: and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, 
and said, The fire of God is fallen from heaven, 
and hath burned up the sheep, and the servants, 
and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone 
to tell thee. While he was yet speaking, there came 
also another, and said, The Chaldeans made out three 
bands, and fell upon the camels, and have carried 
them away, and they have smitten the young men 
with the edge of the sword ; and I only am escaped 
alone to tell thee. While he was yet speaking, there 
came also another, and said, Thy sons and thy daughters 
were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's 
house : and, lo, there came a great wind from beyond the 
wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and 



CHAPTER I., II. 11 

it fell upon the young people, and they are dead ; and 
I only am escaped alone to tell thee." (Vers. 18-19.) 

Thus we see that not only men's lusts and pas- 
sions but the elements were in Satan's hand, so far as 
God allowed. In quick succession perished the herds, 
the flocks, the camels, and the children : desolation the 
more keenly felt, because not in one moment, but 
just time enough to hear of each separately! Out- 
wardly however neither God appeared nor the enemy, 
but Sabeans, and Chaldeans, and fire of God from 
heaven, and a whirlwind from beyond the wilderness. 
What was the effect of these severe and rapid blows 
on the righteous sufferer in his possessions and family? 
" And Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his 
head, and fell upon the ground, and worshipped, and 
said, Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and 
naked shall I return thither : Jehovah gave, and Jeho- 
vah hath taken away ; blessed be the name of Jehovah. 
In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly." 
(Vers. 20-22.) He sorrowed deeply, and it was right; 
but he bowed thoroughly to God. Satan was thus 
completely foiled ; but God would descend into lower 
depths, and bless Job yet further, though to the praise 
j of His own grace alone. 

Accordingly the scene opens yet once more in heaven. 
" Again the day arrived when the sons of God came to 
present themselves before Jehovah, and Satan came 
also among them to present himself before Jehovah. 
And Jehovah said unto Satan, From whence comest 
thou ? And Satan answered Jehovah and said, From 
going to and fro in the earth, and from walking \r$ *s& 
down in it . And Jehovah said unto Satan, "Eb&\» \ta&a 



12 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

•considered my servant Job, that there is none like 
him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, and 
fearing God, and eschewing evil, and still holding 
fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against 
him to devour him without cause ? And Satan answered 
Jehovah, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man 
hath will he give for his life. But put forth thine hand 
now, and touch his bone and his flesh — if he will not 
curse thee to thy face ? And Jehovah said unto Satan, 
Lo, he is in thine hand ; but save his life. And Satan 
went forth from the presence of Jehovah, and smote 
Job with malignant ulcer from the sole of his foot unto 
his crown. And he took a potsherd to scrape himself with 
it ; and he was sitting among the ashes." (Chap. ii. 1-8.) 
Henceforward the adversary vanishes ; he had failed 
no less completely in his renewed malice. What a 
-comfort to learn in a scene where to all appearance 
then as now he seems to triumph ! But so it ever is, 
whatever seems : God has His way, as the end proves 
unanswerably, and he that does the will of God, what- 
ever his weakness or exposure, abides for ever. Yet 
.at first what confusion of things ! what suffering for 
the righteous I The person of Job was smitten as 
sorely and unsparingly as before he had been stripped 
of children and possessions — all clean gone; and 
the one who was nearest to him, instead of being 
& help-meet, tempts him in despair, but in vain. 
" And his wife said unto him, Dost thou still retain 
thine integrity ? curse God, and die. But he said unto 
her, Thou speakest as one of the foolish women speak- 
eth. Ay ! shall we receive the good from God Himself, 
-and shall we not receive the evil ? In all this did not 



CHAPTER II. IS 

Job sin with his lips." (Vers. 9, 10.) It will be noticed, 
however, that here, not before, it is said, " In all this 
did not Job sin with his lips.* 9 This was much, but it 
was not all. No flesh shall glory before God. 

God soon was pleased to bring out what was in 
his heart in a way which man could not expect. Godly 
friends were nsed of Him to bring to the surface what 
the adversary had failed utterly to reach or to see. Their 
very presence drew out impatience even from the pa- 
tient Job. It is precisely where we are strongest that 
God proves our weakness. In Christ alone we stand. 
"Now three friends of Job heard of all this evil 
that was come upon him, and they came each from 
his own place, Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad 
the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite : for they had 
made an appointment together to come to mourn with 
him and to comfort him. And they lifted up their 
eyes from afar, and knew him not ; and they lifted 
up their voice and wept ; and they rent each one his 
mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward 
heaven. And they sat down with him upon the ground 
seven days and seven nights, and none spake a word 
unto him ; for they saw that the pain was very great." 

Here we pause, and reflect on successive scenes, as 
genuine in the facts as in their moral depth, which 
eclipse no less the poor and low and corrupt myths of 
the ancient heathen, than the equally meagre and even 
impious efforts of modern philosophy to solve the 
problem of the world and men as they are with God 
such as He is. Those who turn away from so holy a 
revelation, and prefer what is utterly inadequate suppos- 
ing it true, and what soon proves itself xi&\t\Aau&3 1^^ 
nauseous even to a right-minded person, ax^^Toarara^ 



14 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

tuous against God, prove at least what is the state of 
their hearts and consciences. We easily believe what 
we like. How blessed then by grace to love the truth ! 
How awful to apostatize from " the Holy, the True," for 
unholy fables, old or new ! Such alas ! is the charac- 
ter of modern infidelity. God's purpose and ways are 
revealed in His word, and they are as worthy of the 
only true God as they are of the deepest value for our 
souls and our walk in fellowship with Him day by day. 
The present world is not the manifestation of His 
government ; it does not display His estimate of sinner 
or of saint. Previously to His judgment of the quick and 
the. dead when Christ appears and reigns, He is in His 
grace causing all things to work together for good to 
them that love Him. He makes us, even in all its 
sorrows, more than conquerors through Him that loved 
us. But in order to this there are lessons we must 
learn about ourselves : what they are we maybe taught 
in measure at least as we go through this wonderful 
book, however much had necessarily to await His com- 
ing and death who gave the Holy Ghost to guide us 
into all the truth. Here we do not rise above yearning 
after a daysman : eternal redemption could not yet be 
known, nor our perfecting by the one offering of Christ. 
Hence we have distress, anxiety and conflict, at least 
when the law came in to detect the inward state, sin 
and not sins merely ; for faith as yet took the shape of 
desire for the coming One though also of dependence 
and trust in God as well as of integrity in confession, 
not yet of the calm happy knowledge of a God fully 
revealed in love and by the work of Christ— our sins 
borne away, sin judged for ever in the cross, and 
divine righteousness established and ouxb Vy %t«&* % 



CHAPTER HI. 
The Complaint of Job. 

The sympathy of his friends day after day, or their 
silent presence in face of all his troubles, was too much 
for the long-enduring saint. 

After this Job opened his mouth and cursed his 

day, 
And Job answered and said, 
Perish the day wherein I was born, 
And the night that said, A man is conceived. 
That day ! be it darkness ; 
Let not God from above ask after it ; 
And let not light shine upon it ; 
Let darkness and death- shade reclaim it ; 
Let clouds tabernacle on it ; 
Let darkenings of the day affright it. 
That night ! thick darkness seize on it ; 
Let it not be joined to the days of the year ; 
Let it not come into the number of the months. 
Lo, that night ! let it be barren ; 
Let no shout of joy come into it ; 
Let cursors of days curse it, 
Who are prepared to rouse leviathan. 
The stars of its twilight be dark ; 
Let it look for light but [have] none, 
And let it not gaze on the eyelids of the dawn ; 
Because it shut not the doors of my [mother's] belly 
And hid sorrow from mine eyes. 



16 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

Why did I not die from the womb — 
Come forth from the belly, and expire ? 
Why did the knees anticipate me, 
And why the breasts that I should sack ? 
For now I had lain and been quiet, 
I had slept, and then had there been rest for me. 
With kings and counsellors of the earth, 
Who built ruins for themselves ; 
Or with princes that had gold, 
Who filled their houses with silver ; 
Or, as a hidden abortion, I should not be, 
As infants [that] never saw light : 
There the wicked cease from raging, 
And there the weary are at rest ; 
Together rest the prisoners ; 
They hear not the taskmaster's voice 
Small and great are there the same ; 
And free the slave from his master. 

Wherefore giveth He light to the wretched one, 
And life to the bitter [in] soul ; 
Who long for death, and it [is] not, 
And dig for it more than for hid treasures ; 
Who rejoice to dancing, 
Exult when they find the grave ? 
To a man whose way is hid, 
And whom God hath hedged in ? 
For instead of my bread cometh my sighing, 
And like waters are my groans poured forth. 
For greatly I feared, and forthwith it overtook mo, 
And what I dreaded hath come to me ; 
I was not at ease, I had no quiet 
And no rest, and trouble came." 



CHAPTER HI. 17 

Thus bitterly does he deprecate the day of his birth 
and all connected with it. Indeed there had never been 
a child of Adam or a believer so visited as Job ; and as 
yet he knew not the end, that the Lord is exceeding 
pitiful, and of tender mercy. He was in the depth of 
his trial aggravated by the silence of his friends, soon 
to augment it yet more by the drawn swords of their 
increasingly expressed suspicion. And so he asks, in 
the anguish of his soul, why, if such was to be his lot 
living, did he not die from the womb ? Why should he 
have been so tenderly cared for to encounter at length 
such agony ? Why did he not share the quiet of the 
grave with earth's grandees, who were spending life in 
building monuments that decay themselves, or cram- 
ming their houses with silver and gold they must leave 
behind ; unless he had been as a still-born babe that 
never saw light, and thus be where the wicked trouble 
no more, and the weary are at rest, and the captives 
repose together, with no taskmaster's voice, small and 
great alike there, and the slave free from his master ? 

The last verses (20-26) put the question, first gene- 
rally, and then with pointed application to himself, why 
he should live, being thus miserable. There is no need 
for giving to verse 20 the impersonal turn of the English 
Bible and of many others, though there is still the 
avoidance of uttering the name of God. The full 
answer could only come in a dead and risen Christ : if 
it were not so, the most miserable of all men would be 
the Christian. But now is He risen, and become the 
first-fruits of them that sleep. Fear of evil is gone 
for ever to him who now walks by faith ; for to it evil 
is gone before God, and nothing but gpcA <&*&&% 



18 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

and triumphs in Him whom we know on the throne of 
God, now appearing in His presence for ns. Hence can 
the Christian glory in tribulations, and die daily; 
whereas Job can only say that, if he but conceived 
a fear, it forthwith overtook him, and that which he 
dreaded was come upon him; not, I think, referring to 
past anxieties during his prosperity, but the dismal 
apprehensions which succeeded each other now that 
he was passing through the furnace. 



CHAPTERS IV., V, 
The Fibst Discourse of Eltphaz. 

The eldest of the three friends proceeds to reprove 
Job. " And Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, 
Should one attempt a word to thee, wilt thou 

be grieved ? 
And yet to hold back from speaking, who is able ? 

• Lo, thou hast corrected many, 
And slack hands hast thou strengthened, 
The stumbling one thy speech did raise, 
And sinking knees thou didst confirm ; 
But now it cometh to thee, and thou art grieved, 
It toucheth thee, and thou art confounded. 
[Is] not thy fear thy confidence, 
And the uprightness of thy ways thy hope ? 
Remember, I pray thee, who perished being 

innocent ? 
Or where have the upright been blotted out ? 
So far as I have seen, they that plough iniquity, 
And they that sow trouble, reap the same. 
By the breath of God they perish, 
And by the blast of His nostrils they are consumed. 
The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the dark lion, 
And the teeth of the young lion are broken ; 
The strong lion perisheth for lack of prey, 
And the whelps of the lioness are scattered. 

And to me there stole a word, 
And mine ear caught a whisper foomil, 



20 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

In thoughts from visions of the night, 

When deep sleep falleth on man ; 

Shuddering befell me, and trembling, 

Which shook the multitude of my bones ; 

And a spirit glideth before me : 

The hairs of my body bristled up. 

It stood there — I discerned not its appearance — 

An image before mine eyes : 

Silence ! and a voice I hear, 

Is a mortal more just than God ? 

Is a man purer than his Maker ? 

Behold, His servants He trusteth not, 

And to His angels He ascribeth error ; 

How much more those who dwell in houses of clay, 

The foundation of which [is] in the dust, 

Which are crushed as though moths ! 

From morning to evening they are destroyed ; 

Before any one marketh it they perish for ever. 

Is not their cord in them torn away ? 

They die, and not in wisdom. 

Call now : is there any that will answer thee ? 
And to which of the holy ones wilt thou turn ? 
For grief killeth a fool, 
And jealousy slayeth the simple. 
I have seen a fool taking root, 
And suddenly I cursed his habitation. 
His sons are far from help, 
And are crushed in the gate without deliverance ; 
Whose harvest the hungry one devoureth, 
And taketh it off even out of a thorn-hedge, 
And the thirsty swalloweth up their wealth. 

For evil goeth not forth of the dust, 



CHAPTERS IV., Y. 21 

And trouble doth not sprout out of the ground ; 

But man is born to trouble, 

As the sparks of flame make high their flight. 

For my part, then, I would turn to God (El), 

And to God (Elohim) would I commit my cause, 

Who doeth great things and unsearchable, 

Who giveth rain on the face of the earth, 

And sendeth water on the face of the fields, 

To set the low on high, 

And raise up the mourning to prosperity. 

He breaketh to pieces the devices of the crafty, 

80 that they can do nothing to purpose ; 

He taketh the wise in their craftiness, 

And the counsel of the cunning is overturned. 

By day they run against darkness, 

And as in the night they grope at noon-day. 

And He saveth the poor from the sword out of their 

mouth, 
And from the hand of the strong ; 
So there is hope to the poor, 
And iniquity shutteth her mouth. 

Lo, happy the man whom God correcteth : 
Therefore despise not the chastening of the Almighty. 
For He woundeth, and bindeth up, 
He smiteth and His hands make whole. 
In six troubles He will deliver thee, 
And in seven no evil shall befall thee. 
In famine He hath redeemed thee from death, 
And in war from the hand of the sword. 
In the scourge of the tongue thou art hidden, 
And fearest not destruction when it com&tlL % 
At destruction and at famine thou &ta\t\wo^CL* 



NOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

And thou shalt not be afraid before beasts of the 
earth. 

For with the stones of the field is thy covenant, 

And the wild beasts of the field are at peace with 
thee. 

And thou knowest that thy tabernacle [is] peace, 

And thou shalt oversee thy place and miss nothing. 

And thou shalt know that thy seed [is] great, 

And thine offspring as the green herb of the earth* 

Thou shalt go to the grave in a full age, 

As the heap of sheaves mounteth up in its season. 

Lo, this we have searched out ; so it [is] ; 

Hear it and mark [it] well for thyself." 

Such is the opening speech of the elder of the three- 
interlocutors who henceforth proceed to sit in judg- 
ment on Job, and are successively answered by him. 
Unquestionably the gravest of them is Eliphaz, and 
this first utterance of his lets us into his character and 
style. Every word may be true in itself; all is said 
with the utmost dignity and force ; yet it is misapplied 
and one-sided, and hence, in effect, erroneous as a 
whole. Eliphaz assumes that God at the present time 
is displaying His government, and exactly measures 
prosperity or adversity to men's deserts. This is false- 
ground, and vitiates the application, especially to one 
like Job given up to be assailed by Satan, and tried to 
the end (not " the bitter," but the sweet) by God. 

Hence, though the pious sage stands revealed in 
every sentiment, though ripe experience and moral 
grandeur are everywhere felt, though the spiritual and 
the natural worlds contribute their full quota to the 
argument, though the reproach is as yet mild, and the 



CHAPTERS IV., Y. 23 

exhortation appears to be that of faithful friendship 
and earnest piety, there underlies it an assumption of 
conscious hidden guilt on Job's part, which could not 
but aggravate his grief, and which did not fail to call 
forth his too bitter resentment. 

Eliphaz begins with a glance at Job's former profes- 
sion of righteousness, but it is to reprove him for his 
actual failure in endurance. Ignorant of himself, and 
feebly realizing the accumulated and overwhelming 
pressure on Job, he is honestly astounded at his out- 
burst ; and then lays down his law of present retribu- 
tion, but rather to rouse him from his wild despair to 
the language of piety than to condemn him as impious. 
If godly fear was his, as Eliphaz trusted yet, why was 
it not his confidence ? why was not the uprightness of 
his ways his hope ? It is plain that Eliphaz was as 
ignorant as Job of the source, and character, and aim 
of the trial then going on. All he sees is the neces- 
sary triumph of righteousness, and the irretrievable 
ruin of the wicked ; and this by figures taken not only 
from men, but the wildest of beasts crushed under 
God's hand. 

Next Eliphaz sets forth in mysterious and awful 
style an oracle of the night, which impressed his own 
soul with the folly of earthly, sinful, weak, man's pre- 
tension to be more just than God by arraigning His 
dispensations. 

In the beginning of chapter v. Eliphaz proceeds in a 
strain of deepening severity, and not without a claim of 
superior moral judgment. On whom could Job call, if 
not on God, against whom he was rather murmuring? 
For himself he saw the sudden andme\\ta\A^m\ii oVO&a 



24 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

prosperous fool and of all pertaining to him. Job should 
therefore accept his suffering from God, and turn to 
Him with supplication, who is not merely great beyond 
creature search, but bountiful, and this morally to the 
abject, as surely as He confounds the crafty and the 
strong. Eliphaz finally counsels submission to the 
chastening hand of God, who would surely deliver from 
all evil, and bless him with all good ; and this in the 
name, not merely of himself, but of his friends, on 
whose entire agreement he reckons with assurance. 

It is to be noticed that the Holy Ghost is pleased to 
endorse the language of Eliphaz, and this not merely 
in the earlier revelations but in the fullest light of the 
New Testament, as we may see in the apostle's use of it 
to the Corinthians and to the Hebrews. Indeed the 
issue in the book itself was the remarkable (and pro- 
bably by himself unexpected) seal of the truth of his 
closing words, which no doubt at that time fell coldly on 
the ear and heart of the sufferer. 

How natural it is, especially for those who believe 
in a present moral government of God, to look for a 
perfect manifestation of His mind in the maintenance of 
right and the judgment of wrong in the world as it is ! 
No doubt this was strongest among the Jews, who might 
have expected it justly under the theocracy Jehovah * 
was pleased to establish in their midst. But in truth it 
is a truth indigenous to every land, and common to all 
ages, and found in every circumstance and grade of life. 
Here the three friends of Job more and more yield to 
it, and Job, who suffered from his allowance of it, was 
kept from it mainly by the unswerving consciousness of 
hia own integrity, but none the less -writhing \xndar the 



CHAPTERS IV., V 25 

inexplicable web of inflicted misery, the more poig- 
nantly felt because he never doubted that God somehow 
had to do with it all, and righteousness pleads that evil 
should be punished and good dwell in peace and honour. 
Who ever learns till he is taught of God that His chil- 
dren must wait in faith, and suffer patiently in the exer- 
cise and trial of their faith, till God has His rights in the 
return and reign of His Anointed ? Then, and not 
before, shall we reign with Him. 



CHAPTERS \L, TIL 

The Reply of Job. 

" And Job answered, and said, 
that my vexation were exactly weighed. 
And my calamity raised in the scales together f 
For now is it heavier than the sand of the seas, 
Therefore do my words rave. 
For the arrows of the Almighty are in me, 
The poison of which my spirit drinketh up.* 
The terrors of God array themselves against me» 
Doth the wild ass bray by the fresh grass ? 
Doth an ox low over his fodder ? 
Is that which is tasteless eaten without salt ? 
Is there flavour in the white of an egg ? 
My soul refuseth to touch : 
They are as the disease of my bread. 

that my request might come, 
And that God would grant my longing, 
That it might please God to destroy me, 
That He would let loose His hand, and cut me off ! 
So would it ever be my comfort, 
And I would exult if He in pain should not spare, 
For I have not denied the words of the Holy One. 
What is my strength that I should wait, 
And what mine end that I should be patient ? 
Is my strength the strength of stones ? 

* Perhaps the construction may be, as many think, " drinketh 
up my spirit," 



CHAPTERS VI., VII. 27 

Is my flesh copper ? 

Truly is not the nothingness of help with me, 

And substance driven away from me ? 

To the despairing there is gentleness from his 
friends, 
Even to one forsaking the face of the Almighty. f 
My brethren have deceived as a torrent, 
As the bed of torrents which overflow. 
Turbid are they from ice ; 
The snow hideth itself in them : 
What time heat cometh, they are cut off; 
When it is hot, they are extinguished from their 

place. 
Caravans* turn aside out of their way, 
They go up into the waste, and vanish. 
The caravans of Tema looked, 
The companies of Sheba hoped for them ; 
They were put to shame because one trusted, 
, They came up to it, and became red with shame* 
For truly ye are become nothing, 
Ye see a terror, and are dismayed. 
Is it that I ever said, Give me, 
And bring presents to me from your wealth, 
And deliver me out of the enemy's hand, 
And redeem me out of the oppressor's hand ? 
Teach me, and I will be silent, 
And shew me wherein I have erred. 
How sweet are right words ! 
And what doth reproof from you reprove ? 
Think you to reprove words, 

* Possibly it may mean the streams, not caiwrK&v \ta& Va& 
boat. 



•> 



28 NOTES ON TUB BOOK OF JOB. 

When the speeches of one despairing are but wind ? 

Ye would even let fall on the orphan, 

And would traffic for your friend. 

But now be pleased to face me, 

And to your faces it will be if I lie. 

Return, I pray, let there be no wrong ; 

Yea, return ; I am still right therein. 

Is there wrong in my tongue ? 

Doth not my palate discern calamities ? 

Hath not man a warfare on earth, 
And are not his days as the days of a hireling ? 
As the slave panting after the shade, 
And as the hireling longing for his wages. 
So I am made to inherit months of wretchedness, 
And nights of distress are appointed to me. 
When I lie down, then I say, 
When shall I arise, and the evening be gone ? 
And I am weary of restlessness till the dawn. 
My flesh is clothed with worms and crusts of earth, 
My skin healeth, and is again melted ; 
My days pass more swiftly than a shuttle, 
And come to an end without hope. 
Remember that my days are a breath, 
Mine eye will not return to see good. 
The eye of him that seeth me shall not see me ; 
Thine eyes [look] toward me : I am no more. 
The cloud consumeth, and is gone ; 
80 he that goeth down to Sheol cometh not up, 
He returneth no more to his house ; 
His place knoweth him not again. 

I also will not restrain my mouth, 
I will speak in the anguish of my spirit, 



CHAPTERS VI., VII. * 20* 

I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. 

Am I a sea, or a monster. 

That Thou settest guard over me ? 

When I say, My bed shall comfort me, 

My couch shall ease my complaint, 

Then Thou shakest me with dreams, 

And makest me tremble through visions of the- 
night, 

So that my soul chooseth strangling, 

Death rather than these bones : I would not live on - r 

I loathe it : let me alone ; my days are vanity. 

What is man that Thou magnifiest him, 

And that Thou settest Thy mind on him, 

And that Thou visitest him every morning, 

And every moment triest him ? 

How long dost not Thou look away from me, 

Nor lettest me alone till I swallow my spittle ? 

I have sinned ; what could I do to Thee ? 

Watcher of men, why makest Thou me Thy mark, 

So that I am become a burden to myself? 

And why dost not Thou pardon my transgression, 

And put away my iniquity ? 

For now shall I lie in the dust, 

And, if Thou seekest after me, I am no more.' 9 

Thus Job pleads for a fairer appraisal of his sore 
trial along with his random words. It was easy for 
others to moralize who were at ease, but as inevitable 
for him to cry out as for the beast without food. He 
owned the strokes to be from God, and only desired to 
be crushed, as his conscience was good. Hope for this 
life was gone. Such an one should have had pity from 
his friends, who had, on the contrary, p\a^e<l\ttxa. is&Rfe. 



30 NOTES OH THE BOOK OF JOB* 

as the wadys of the desert deceive in grimmer the cara- 
vans that count on them. Nor had he asked help of 
them, but was willing to learn if they could shew his 
error, instead of cavilling at the wild words of one in 
despair. He asks an open judgment of his ways, and 
a lenient estimate of his complaints. When a man has 
served out as a soldier or slave, may he not retire ? It 
was his grief that he could not, after unutterable days 
and nights of hopeless misery ; yet was he but a wind 
or cloud, and as he thought of it, he must again speak 
in his anguish. Was he a sea, or sea-monster, so un- 
controllable as to be allowed no respite, not even at 
night, from horrors enough to make him prefer strang- 
ling, any death, rather than for such bones as his to 
live on ? What was mortal man that God should make 
so much of him ? and try him as he was tried uninter- 
mittingly? Grant that he had sinned; but why set 
him as a butt till he should pass away in sorrow ? 

How beautifully in contrast with Job's repining aro 
Psalms viii. and cxliv., where a similar question brings 
out, in and by the Lord Jesus, wholly different answers. 
Yet the Lord passed into the glory of Son of man set 
over all things, through infinitely deeper suffering ; as 
He will at length close man's feeble history by His 
•coming in judgment to take the kingdom in power and 
.glory before the universe. Job gives way to murmurs 
and complaints that God should take such notice of 
man in daily government : not so He, who was rejected 
by all, and tasted death for everything, whom now we 
see exalted above the heavens, and who will ere long 
judge all men when God gives the word. 



i 



CHAPTEB VIE. 

FlBST DlSCOUBSE OF BlLDAD. 

The second of the three friends takes up Job next. He 
is inferior to Eliphaz in calm dignity, and less temperate 
in his insinuations, because more prone to judge by the 
sight of his eyes and the experience of mankind, and 
so he rushes in where angels would fear to tread, 
as they gaze in awe at the wonderful ways of God. 
It was plain enough to him why Job and his house 
were punished. 

And Bildad the Shuhite answered and said, 
How long wilt thou recite these [things], 
And the words of thy mouth [be] a strong wind ? 
Doth God pervert right, 
And the Almighty pervert justice ? 
If thy children have sinned against Him, 
And He hath cast them into the hand of their 

transgression ; 
If thou seekest earnestly unto God, 
And makest supplication to the Almighty, 
If thou [wert] pure and upright, 
He would surely now wake up for thee, 
And restore the habitation of thy righteousness ; 
And though thy beginning were small, 
Yet thy latter end would flourish greatly. 
Inquire now of the former generation, 
And give heed to the research of theix fo\iist% 
(For we [are of] yesterday, anAkaxro th&> 



82 N0TK8 ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

For our days on earth are a shadow) ; 

Shall not they teach thee, say to thee. 

And bring forth words out of their heart ? 

Doth the reed shoot up without mire ? 

Doth the flag* spread out without water ? 

While yet in its greenness, it is not cut down, 

Before all grass doth it dry up. 

So [are] the ways of all that forget God, 

And the hope of the polluted! perisheth, 

Whose confidence is cut off, 

And his truth a spider's house ; 

He leaneth on his house, but it standeth not, 

He fasteneth on it, but it abideth not. 

Green [is] he before the sun, 

And his suckers run over his garden ; 

His roots are entwined over the stonerheap, 

He looketh on a house of stone, 

When ho is swallowed out of its place, 

Then will it deny him : I saw thee not. 

Lo, this [is] the joy of his way, 

And out of the dust sprout others ; 

Lo, God will not forsake a perfect [man], 

Nor graspeth evil-doers by the hand, 

Till He fill thy mouth with laughter, 

And thy lips with shouting : 

They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame, 

And the tent of the wicked shall be no more. 

Thus does Bildad more than hint, as his explanation 
of Job's sufferings, that his children had sinned and 
so brought down the divine displeasure. It must be 
so, he thought, for God would surely defend the right 

* Or, Eastern rash. f Or, hypocrite. 



CHAPTER VIII. 83 

and punish iniquity. Instead therefore of bluster 
and complaint, let Job only turn with earnest supplica- 
tion to God the Almighty, and he will soon find, pro- 
vided he himself be pure, that prosperity from Him 
will crown his homestead, and his latter end flourish 
beyond the beginning. So it came to pass indeed, but * 
by no means as Bildad conceived, who resorts to the 
wise saws of the ancients in support of strict retribu- 
tion now at the hand of God. It is from no strength 
in itself that the papyrus lifts its head so high, but from 
the abundant mire in which it thrives its little day ; and 
80 with the flag or bulrush of the East, from mere and 
exceeding moisture, not solid ground ; and this is so 
true, that they do not decay slowly, like other plants, 
but are the first to wither without being cut down. 

So it is with the wicked, both in their elevation and their 
ruin : the paths of all that forget God end thus surely 
and miserably, the hope of the impure is alike fleeting. 
The object of their confidence is no firmer than a 
spider's web, though he may cling to it ever so tena- 
ciously. It has no more permanence than the rank weed 
which extends over a garden, and entwines its suckers 
in a stone-heap. But in vain. He may look on a house 
of stone, but is quickly destroyed, as a mere and mis- 
chievous cumberer of the ground, which denies him 
then as if it never saw him : yet though this is the joy 
of his way and the bitter end of godless prosperity, there 
is a succession of such men just as of such weeds; one 
springs up after another out of the dust, to pass away 
still more rapidly. If Job be really a perfect man, 
God will not cast him away (but neither &ooa1&& $t*s^ 
the hand of evil-doers) till Ho give laim i\ifc wca^sak 



34 H0TE8 OH THE BOOK OF JOB. 

grounds for thankful praise, confound his enemies, and 
destroy the wicked for ever. Bat, as applied to the 
present ease, there was no fellowship with God in Bil- 
dad's thoughts, no gracious consideration for the sufferer; 
and hence his judgment, being according to appear- 
ances, was unrighteous. 

We need not be surprised that he could not anticipate 
the lessons which it was the object of God by this 
very book to teach ; but a believer should not make 
haste, he should wait where he had not the assurance 
of His mind, least of all should he have put the worst 
construction possible on what he did not comprehend. 
This he did to the aggravation of Job's trial and to the 
provocation of his spirit, which again furnished an 
appearance of evil to those who suspected evil ; and 
thus the confusion was worse confounded and the true 
solution of all veiled in deeper darkness from their eyes. 
Does it seem ever to have occurred to the three friends 
that their wisdom would have been to pray rather than 
to talk, judge, and censure? Desiring to be law- 
teachers before the law, they like others since it 
understood neither what they said nor whereof they 
affirmed. 



CHAPTERS IX., X. 
The Answer of Job. 

What Bildad urged, Job admits might be and was true 
enough ; yet he feels that not only his own first appeal 
to his friends for their pity had failed, but the real 
point was in no wise reached, while the suggestion of 
hidden sin was as false as it was uncharitable. Ho 
therefore deals unsparingly with their reasonings. 

We can see how immense is the difference when tho 
gospel reveals the righteousness of God. It is no 
longer the question, How shall man be just with God ? 
It has been proved fully by the law, not to speak of 
the coming of Christ, that man has no righteousness 
for God; but now is revealed in the gospel God's 
righteousness, and hence all on man's part is excluded 
but faith, that it might be wholly grace on God's part, 
though resting on the foundation of Christ's suffering 
for sins, just for unjust, that He might bring us to 
God. Therefore does the apostle say that in the 
gospel is revealed God's righteousness from faith to 
faith. It is from faith, not from works of law, so that 
Jewish boasting is shut out ; and it is to faith, so that 
the blessing of justification is equally open to the 
Gentile, as to the Jew, who believes. But this 
wondrous, present revelation of divine righteousness, 
justifying the believer who, so far from having works 
to coast, openly confesses his own guilt and rums "^^ 
still future, in due time predicted by ftie Tgto\toetafc » % "^ 



36 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

was prefigured in the types of the law, bat now 
preached in the gospel, proclaimed as a present thing 
to every one who believes, instead of being held out as 
a promise merely. Hence "we through the Spirit 
wait for the hope of righteousness by faith," that is, 
not for righteousness or justification, but for the hope 
to which such righteousness entitles, even heavenly 
glory with Christ. But we must now return to the 
earlier questions. 

And Job answered and said, 
Verily I know that [it is] so, 
But how shall mortal man be just with God ? 
If He desire to dispute with him, 
He cannot answer Him one of a thousand : 
Wise in heart, and mighty in strength ! 
Who hath held out against Him, and been unhurt ? 
He removeth mountains, and they know not 
That He hath overturned them in His wrath ; 
He shaketh the earth out of its place, 
And the pillars of it rock themselves ; 
He commandeth the sun, and it riseth not, 
And He setteth a seal about the stars, 
Spreading out the heavens Himself alone, 
And treading on the heights of the sea, 
Making Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, 
And the chambers of the south ; 
Doing great things past finding out, 
And unravelling things past reckoning. 
Lo, He passeth by me, and I see Him not. 
And He glideth before me, and I perceive Him not. 
Lo, He snatcheth away : who shall turn Him away ? 
Who s&ith to Him, What doeatT\xou^ 



CHAPTERS IX., X. 87 

God turneth not from His wrath : 

The helpers of pride have stooped under Him. 

How much less should I answer Him— 
Choose ont my words with Him ? 
Whom, though I were just, I would not answer ; 
For mercy would I plead with my Judge. 
Though I had cited Him, and He had answered mo, 
I would not believe that He would listen to me, 
For He bruiseth me with a storm, 
And multiplieth my wounds without cause. 
He suffereth me not to draw my breath, 
But surfeiteth me with bitternesses. 
If [I turn] to might, lo, [He is] strong, 
If to judicial trial, who will cite me ? 
If I justify myself, my mouth would condemn me. 
I perfect ! He would prove me perverse. 
I perfect ! I should not know my own soul, 
I should despise my life. 
It [is] all one : therefore I said, 
He destroyeth the perfect and the wicked. 
If the scourge slay suddenly, 
He laugheth at the trial of the innocent. 
The earth is given into the hand of the wicked, 
The face of the judges He veileth : 
If not then, who [is] he ? 

And my days are swifter than a runner, 
They flee, they see not good ; 
They have swept past like* skiffs of reed, 
As an eagle swoopeth on the prey. 
If I say, I will forget my plaint, 

* Literally with. and hence as /art at. 



HOIKS OH THE BOOK or JOB. 

I wifl leave off my looks, and hrighteu up; 

I shudder at sJl my Borrows, 

I know that Thou wilt not hold me innocent. 

Forme, lam tobe guilty! whylsbourl theninvain? 

If I wash myself with snow-water, 

And cleanse my hands with lye, 

Then wonldest Thou plunge me in the ditch, 

And mine own clothes would abhor me. 

For [He is] not a man as I [that] I should 

answer Him. 
Let us come together in judgment, 
There is between us no arbiter, 
Who might lay his hand on us both. 
Let Him take His rod from off me, 
And let not His terror frighten me ; 
I would speak, and not fear Him, 
But not thus I with myself. 

Chapter x. 

My soul is weary of my life ; 

I will give way to my plaint, 

I will speak in the bitterness of my soul, 

I will say to God, Condemn me not ; 

Let me know why Thou contendest with me. 

[Is it] good to Thee that Thou oppressest, 

That Thou despisest the work of Thy hands, 

And hast shone on the counsel of the wicked t 

Hast Thou eyes of floah ? 

Seest Thou as mortal man seetb ? 

[Are] Thy days as the days of mortal man t 

[Are] Thy years as the days of a man, 



CHAPTERS IX., X. 89 

That thou inquirest for my guilt, 
And searchest after my sin, 
Upon Thy knowledge that I am not guilty, 
And that none can deliver out of Thy hand ? 
Thy hands have carved me, and fashioned me 
round about, 
And yet Thou destroyest me ! 

remember now that as clay Thou formedst me, 
And yet Thou bringest me back to dust ! 

Didst Thou not pour me out as milk, 

And curdle me like cheese, 

Clothe me with skin and flesh, 

And fence me with bones and sinews ? 

Life and favour hast Thou shewn me, 

And Thy care hath preserved my spirit ; 

And these things hast Thou hid in Thy heart ! 

1 know that this [was] with Thee. 

If I should sin, Thou wouldest mark me, 

And not in mine iniquity hold me guiltless. 

If I be guilty, woe unto me ! 

And righteous, I durst not raise my head, 

Filled with shame, and seeing my misery ; 

And should it hold itself up, as a lion Thou wouldest 

hunt me, 
And turn again, and act wondrously against me. 
Thou wouldest renew Thy witnesses against me 
And multiply Thy displeasure against me — 
Beinforcements, and a host upon me. 

Why then didst Thou bring me forth from the 

womb ? 
I might have expired, and no eye had seen me 
I might have been as though I fcsA. u<& Yte«&\ 



40 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

I might have been borne from the belly to the grave. 
[Are] not my days few ? Let Him leave me 
And pnt Himself from me, that I may brighten up 

a little, 
Before I go, and return not, 
To a land of darkness and death-shade, 
A land of gloom, like pitch-darkness itself, 
Death-shade, without order, 
And the shining like pitch- darkness itself. 
Bildad had talked truisms as to God's dealing with 
the wicked and the righteous, but he had not faced 
the question how mortal man can have a standing of 
righteousness with God. For his own part he owned 
man's incapacity, and God's title to act according to 
His power, In fact, it was exactly what Job himself 
experienced when Jehovah put His questions to him at 
the close of the book. To dispute it is to court de- 
struction. To impute his sufferings, therefore, to secret 
wickedness was ignorance of God's sovereign ways. 
For he turns from God's power in creation and provi- 
dence to His overwhelming collision with feeble and 
failing man, who cannot so much as perceive Him as 
He sweeps by in His irresistible might. 

If it be thus in the outer world, equally hopeless is 
the struggle morally, as Job proceeds next to shew. 
How vain to think of a favourable issue in a suit with 
God t It would be derogatory to His glory to think 
that He could stoop to such a contest, or give hearing 
to a creature plea against His ways. Not only must He 
crush all opposition, but man's own mouth would con- 
demn him, and himself be proved perverse. So he 
would not dare to think for himself of such a pleat 



0HAPTBR8 IX., X. 41 

bat of crying oat for mercy. For the dealings of God 
externally do not for the present discriminate among 
men. It is all one so far whether men are guilty or 
blameless. Job grows bolder and says it out, though 
his piety still withholds the name of God, as in verses 22 
et seqq., as he shrank from seeming to arraign His 
government of the world. But he does speak bitterly 
of His patience while judgment lingers, as if mocking at 
the trial of the innocent. This is what no saint should 
draw from His permission of wrong and sorrow for a 
little while. But there is no denying that He veils the 
faces of judges, the wicked being in the highest seats of 
the world's authority : if not so, who is it ? Can Bil- 
dad or Eliphaz contradict the fact, or leave God out of it ? 
But Job felt that he need not go beyond his own 
case. God does afflict the blameless as well as the 
wicked. Job's days had slipped away so that he had 
scarce tasted what good is : no runner on land, no light 
skiff on the waters, nor eagle in the air, faster than 
they ; and not this merely, but with painful dread that 
He could if He would hold him as guilty. Efforts at 
cheerfulness were therefore as vain for him as endea- 
vours to cleanse himself with the most efficacious deter- 
gents. It is not that his conscience was bad ; but he 
sees that, if God enters into judgment with His servant, 
no man living can be justified. His light would detect 
every fault, so that the clothes would shrink with horror 
from the wearer. Job therefore yearns after an umpire 
or mediator between God and man, who might lay his 
hands on both, instead of being left in his weakness and 
failings before the awful and inflexible and withering 
judgment of a Being so infinitely remcwe& ixorai \am. 



42 HOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB* 

If He would only remove His rod, he would not fear to 
speak ; but he could not in his actual state.* 

What could Job do then, but complain and depre- 
cate God's condemnation of him, without knowing why 
He so contended, while He shone on the counsel of the 
wicked ? It was the harder to understand, as God waft 
not blind or fleeting like man, needed no inquisition for 
sin, and knew the innocence of the sufferer, who could 
not escape and yet was His own curiously elaborated 
creature, preserved from first to last as if for these 
things, inevitably doomed right or wrong, and afraid to 
assert the right, lest it should provoke worse. Why, 
if not removed from birth, was there not some respite 
before going to the land of darkness ? But in this griev- 
ous expostulation against God, it will be, as it ha3 
been, remarked, that Job addresses and entreats God, 
even while he is as unjust toward God as he thinks God 
unjust toward him. He had yet to learn the pitifulness 
and tender mercy of God, spite of and above Satan's 
malice, though the day was not yet come for the Only* 
begotten Son in the bosom of the Father to declare the 
God whom no man has seen, and as the Son of man to 
glorify God, even as to sin, in the cross, whereon He 
also bore our sins who believe. How little we appre- 
ciate the value of the true light that now shines ! 

* Many understand this difficult phrase as, "But I am conscious 
of nothing myself j" or, again, "Bat in this state I have no self- 
possession." 



CHAPTER XI. 

FlBST DlSOOUBSE OF ZoPHAB. 

ib third speaker now advances, who manifests tht 
ist knowledge of himself or consideration for Job,. 
id therefore yields forthwith to a more violent tone 
censure. 

And Zophar, the Naamathite, answered and said, 

Shall not the multitude of words be answered ? 

And shall a man of lips be justified ? 

Thy babbling puts men to silence : 

And thou mockest, and no one saith, Shame t 

And thou art to say, My doctrine [is] pure, 
* And I am clean in Thine eyes I 

But that God would indeed speak, 

And open His lips against thee, 

And make known to thee the secrets of wisdom, 

That they are doubled by inspection, 

And God remitteth to thee of thine iniquity. 
Canst thou, searching, find out God ? 

Canst thou the Almighty find out to perfection ? 

Heights of heaven, what canst thou do ? 

Deeper than hell, what canst thou know ? 

Longer than the earth [is] its measure, 

And broader than the sea. 

If He pass by, and arrest, 

And gather together, who can hinder Him ? 

For He knoweth men of vanity, 

And seeth wickedness without considering [it]. 

But empty man would be wise, 



-44 NOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB* 

Yet is man born a wild ass's colt. 
If thou direct thy heart, 

And spread oat thy hands to Him ; 

If iniquity [be] in thy hand, put it far away, 

And let not evil dwell in thy tents ; 

For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot. 

And shalt be stedfast without fearing. 

For thou shalt forget trouble, 

Shalt remember [it] as waters passed away ; 

And the future shall arise brighter than noonday ; 

Thou shalt soar — shalt be as the morning. 

And thou shalt trust, because there is hope, 

And thou shalt search, thou shalt rest securely, 

And thou shalt lie down, and none shall cause 
trembling, 

And many shall caress thy face. 

But the eyes of the wicked waste, 

And refuge vanisheth away from them, 

And their hope [is] a breathing out of the soul. 
Thus Zophar gives Job credit for nothing beyond a 
multitude of words and idle talk. The unanswerable 
grounds against their hypothesis of strict present re- 
tribution were to him only babbling, and the bold 
affirmation that the wicked are allowed of God to pros- 
per in this world seemed but a mockery of those who 
really could not answer, whatever their replies. He 
yields to great irritation because of Job's assertion of 
his soundness in the faith and in his life, and only de- 
sired that God would speak as Job had ventured 
to ask as little as any expecting that interposition 
which He was about to vouchsafe, not only for them, 
but for our sakes. Zophar had not a doubt what the 



CHAPTER XI. 45 

sentence would be. He had not learnt that we should 
mot judge, lest we be judged, and that our judgments 
do really judge ourselves : if solid and gracious, prov- 
ing that we dwell in God, as dwelling in love, and 
walking according to light ; if harsh, in the like de- 
gree manifesting how far we are governed by thoughts 
and feelings which have no source higher than self* 
Job would find, he was sure, that the secrets of wisdom 
are doubled by looking in, and that God did not exact 
of him what his iniquity deserved : he held to the 
gravest fears of his friend. 

Next, Zophar descants grandly on the absolute and 
infinite perfection of God. The heights of heaven, 
the depths of hell, the length of the earth, the breadth 
of the sea, fail to measure His wisdom. How dis- 
astrous for man to stand before Him, were He to insti- 
tute proceedings, as Job had so rashly challenged. 
How soon he would find out the folly of his wisdom, 
let his heart vie in obstinacy with that of a wild ass ! 

Finally, Zophar exhorts to supplication and repent- 
ance as the only door of escape for Job, but a sure open- 
ing into a bright and prosperous and secure life, if he 
would avoid the inevitable doom of the wicked. 

In all this, it is plain, that as the ground of peace- 
was feebly seen, so the reality and the nature of God's 
righteous government of His own was not at all under- 
stood. Ignorance in a saint is not wonderful ; but it is 
sad when one forgets the need of light from above 
and dares to judge anything before the time, until the 
Lord come, who shall also both bring to light the hidden 
things of darkness and make manifest the counsels of 
hearts, when each shall have his praise from QaA. 



CHAPTERS Xn.— XIV. 
The Answer of Job* 

And Job answered, and said, 
Truly ye fare] the people, 
And wisdom shall die with you. 
But I have a heart as well as yon, 
I do not sink beneath you : 
And with whom [are] not such things as these ? 
A mockery to his neighbours am I, 
One calling on God, and He heard him : 
The just, upright, one a mockery ! 
For misfortune scorn,* in the thoughts of the 

secure, 
[Is] ready, for those that slide with the feet. 
To the spoilers are the tents at peace, 
And those who provoke God have security — 
He who causeth God to enter into his hand. 
But ask now even the beasts — they can teach thee — 
And the fowl of the heavens, and it will declare 

to thee, 
Or think on the earth, and it shall teach thee, 
And fishes of the sea shall tell out to thee : 
Who doth not know by all these 
That the hand of Jehovah hath done this ? 
In whose hand [is] the soul of every living thing, 
And the spirit of all flesh of men ? 
Doth not the ear try words, 

* Or, A lantern, contemptible in &c. 



CHAPTERS XII.— XIV. 47 

As the palate tasteth food for itself ? 
Among the aged [is] wisdom, 
And in length of days understanding. 
With Him [are] wisdom and might, 
He hath counsel and understanding. 
He breaketh down, and it is not built up. 
He shutteth up on man, and it is not opened. 
Lo, He restraineth the waters, and they dry up ; 
And He sendeth them forth, and they overturn 

the land. 
With Him [are] strength and wisdom, 
His the deceived and the deceiver, 
Leading counsellors away spoiled. 
And judges He maketh foolish ; 
The band of kings He looseth, 
And bindeth a girdle on their loins. 
He leadeth priests away spoiled, 
And overthroweth the strong. 
He removeth the lips of the trusted. 
And taketh away the tact of the aged. 
He poureth contempt upon princes, 
And looseth the girdle of the mighty. 
He discovereth deep things out of darkness, 
Andlmngeth out to light death-shade. 
He magnifieth nations, and destroyeth them, 
He leadeth out nations, and leadeth them in. 
He taketh away the heart 
Of the chief of the people of the land, 
And He causeth them to wander 
In a wilderness — no way. 
They grope in the dark without light, 
And He maketh them wander as & &x\H&ax\. 



48 VOTES CM THE BOOK OF JOB. 



Chapter xuL 

Lo, mine eye hath seen all, 
Mine ear hath heard and understood* 
What ye know, I know also, 
I do not sink beneath yon. 
But I will speak to the Almighty, 
And I desire to plead with God ; 
But ye [are] forgers of lies. 
Physicians of no value [are] ye all. 
that ye would altogether be silent, 
And it would become your wisdom. 
Hear now my reproof, 
And attend to the pleadings of my lips* 
For God do ye speak wickedly, 
And for Him do ye talk deceit ? 
Will ye lift np His countenance ? 
Will ye contend for God ? 
Is it well that He should search you out ? 
Or doceive ye Him, as one man deceiveth another ? 
He will surely reprove you, if ye secretly accept 

persons. 
Doth not His excellency terrify you. 
And His dread fail upon you ? 
Your maxims [are] proverbs of ashes, 
Your bulwarks, bulwarks of clay ! 
Be silent from me, and I speak ; 
And let pass over me what [will]. 
Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth, 
And put my life in my hand ? 



CHAPTER XIII. 4i 

Lo, He will slay me, yet will I trust Him ;* 
Bat my ways to His face I will argue. 
This also will be my salvation, 
That no polluted one shall oome before Him. 
. Hear, hear, my declaration 
And my utterances with your ears. 
Lo, now, I have ordered my cause, 
I know that I shall be justified. 
Who is he [that] will contend with me ? 
Then indeed I would be silent, and expire. 
Only two things do not Thou to me : 
Then will I not hide myself from Thee. 
Thy hand put far off from me, 
And let not Thy terror terrify me. 
Then call Thou, and I will answer, 
Or let me speak, and answer Thou me. 
How many my iniquities and sins ! 
My transgression and my sin make me know. 
Wherefore hidest Thou Thy face, 
And regardest me as an enemy to Thee ? 
Wilt Thou terrify a driven leaf, 
And wilt Thou pursue dry stubble ? 
For Thou writest for me bitter things, 
And makest me inherit the iniquities of my youth ; 
And puttest my feet in the stocks, 
And watchest all my paths, 
On the soles of my feet Thou cuttest ; 
And he as a rotten thing oonsumeth, 
As a garment which the moth hath eaten. 

* Or, according to the Ketib, I have no hope, or I will not wait. 
)ther§ contend that the Keri means until I am slain, I ^*fo\ st.»\ 
rait for Him that He may day me. 



50 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

Chapter xiv. 

Man, born of woman, 
Is of few days, and fall of trouble, 
Cometh forth as a flower, and is cat down, 
And he fleeth as a shadow, and abideth not, 
And on such an one Thou openest Thine eyes ! 
And me dost Thou bring into judgment with Thee? 
Who giveth a clean out of an unclean thing t 
Not one t 

If his days are determined, 
The number of his months with Thee, 
Thou hast set his bound which he shall not pass. 
Look away from him that he may rest, 
That he may enjoy as a hireling his day. 

For there is hope for a tree if it be cut down, 
That it will shoot again, and its sprout fail not, 
Though its root wax old in the earth, 
And its stump die in the dust : 
Through the scent of water it flourisheth, 
And putteth forth like a young plant. 
But man dieth, and is prostrate, 
And man expireth, and where is he ? 
Waters roll away from a sea, 
And the stream becometh waste and dry, 
So man lieth down, and riseth not : 
Till the heavens [be] no more, they wake not, 
Nor are roused out of their sleep. 

that thou wouldest hide me in Sheol, 
Hide me till the turning of Thine anger, 
Appoint me a set time, and then remember me I 
If a man die, shall he live ? 



CHAPTERS XI I. -XIV. 51 

All the days of my warfare would I wait 

Till my exchange should come. 

Thou wouldest call, and I would answer Thee : 

After the work of Thine hands Thou yearnest. 

But now Thou numherest my steps : 

Watchest Thou not over my sins ? 

My transgression is sealed up in a hag, 

And thou sewest up mine iniquity. 
And yet a falling mountain decayeth, 

And a rock is removed from its place, 

Waters wear away stones, 

Its floodings sweep away the soil of the earth, 

And Thou destroyest the hope of man, 

To the last Thou overpowerest him, and he goeth ; 

Thou changest his face, and sendest him away. 

His sons come to honour, and he knoweth it not ; 

And they are abased, and he perceiveth it not ; 

But his flesh in him hath pain, and his soul in him 
mourneth. 
Thus the sufferer is provoked to treat the language 
: his friends, especially Zophar's, with sarcasm, and 
> defend his own ground as sounder than theirs. He 
els how empty were their truisms as applied to his 
jculiar case, and how his rejection of them was driv- 
g themselves to the harshest judgment of his trials, 
was an upturning of all right that he should he a 
er to his friends-one that called on God, and was v 
jard by Him, just and upright, yet mocked I But it *" 
as the world's way, dwelling at ease themselves, to 
we scorn ready for the unfortunate, a fresh shove for 
ich as have begun to slide ; or, if the alternator te> 
ght, they may be gl&d in their ho\n oi taovftftfe <& *» 



52 N0TE8 OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

lantern despised when all seems easy. Bui Job reite- 
rates with boldness his counter- proposition, that in the 
world as it is, not the pious but the rapacious have 
safe tabernacles, and that none enjoy for the time more 
security than those that provoke God, who neverthe- 
less seems to fling blessings without stint into their 
hand. They might argue as they pleased, but facts 
were opposed everywhere; even in the animal king- 
dom a similar principle reigns. The beasts, the birds, 
the fishes, tell the same tale, and Jehovah's hand has 
done this. (Compare Is. xli. 20.) 

Yes, the mystery of God's permission of evil remains. 
The mystery of His will is another thing, revealed 
now, not then, and only to be manifested at the coming 
of the Lord, when all things shall be gathered in one 
under His Headship. (Eph. i. 9, 10.) It is not yet the 
time to order all as the expression of His will, though 
He is the maker and sovereign disposer of all. Un- 
doubtedly experience has its place, as each has his own 
measure of discrimination which should profit by 
length of days ; but there are no laws discoverable or 
possible to bind God, in whom alone is perfect wisdom 
and power in providence. There are laws which He 
has imprinted on all above our eyes and below our 
feet, and around us ; but the highest, truest law of all, 
if law it should be called, is that God is free, not bound, 
to act, free to act as and when He will. So He acts 
with man as with the elements, with the more and 
the less wicked, with counsellors, and judges, and 
kings, with priests, and heroes, and senators, with 
whole nations, reduced or aggrandized, with their 
chiefs infatuated to utter ruin. God is sovereign. 



CHAPTERS XU.-XIV. 55 

Such was the result of Job's observations, and they 
could not deny its justice. But he preferred having to 
do with God, as to his sorrows, rather than with such 
sophists as they had shewn themselves to be — worth- 
less physicians, quacks, to whom he would prescribe 
ailence, which might pass for wisdom. They had as- 
sumed to speak for God, but was it right to speak dis- 
honestly or presumptuously ? God did not want their 
favour any more than their fallacies. When their time 
•came to be searched out, they would adopt very different 
language. Their zeal for God was according to neither 
knowledge nor conscience ; and their confusion* and 
dread must result from His intervention, as the issue 
proved. Their apothegms were of ashes, their bulwarks 
(hardly "bodies," as in English Version) of clay: a 
fresh reason why they should hold their peace, and 
leave him to have all out with God, desperate as it 
might seem, and come what would. But His slaying 
him was not what he dreaded ; his conscience was good, 
and he would defend his ways before Him. That no 
hypocrite, none polluted, comes into His presence was 
« pledge of salvation to him, not a source of dismay. 
He calls attention to his demand earnestly and forcibly, 
* Assured of his innocence, and not refusing to die if de- 
serving it; but he deprecates two things before the 
decision of the cause : first, that God would remove 
His hand from him ; and, secondly, that He crush him 
not with His majesty. He desired to know what the 
iniquities were, why God hid His face and dealt so 
■bitterly with him, that his body was perishing under 
the utmost pain and ignominy. 

This leads him to a more general View oi Tuu^%*&&t 



54 HOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

and frail estate, but stOl expressly with bis own case 
before bis eyes. (Chap. ziv. 8.) If the fountain were 
corrupt, one need not wonder at the foulness of its 
stream. Since his brief allotted space is all in God's 
bands, why not look away, and give him a little respite, 
that he may enjoy as a hireling his day ? And the 
more, as life on earth closes for man hopelessly, though 
a tree cut down may sprout again, while, like waters that 
fail and dry up, man lies down, and rises no more 
while the heavens abide. He speaks of "man" for 
this world, and nothing can really bo conceived more 
exact. It was not the time or place to introduce the 
special blessedness of the first resurrection, which we 
shall find has its echo elsewhere in this book. Every 
scripture is given by inspiration, and consistent with 
every other. 

Job then returns to the expression of his desire that 
God would secrete him in the grave till His anger was 
turned away, appoint him a time, and then remember 
him. If a man die, shall he live ? Job was the very 
reverse of a sceptic. He looks for his time of renova- 
tion or exchange, and does not doubt at bottom God's 
yearning after the work of His hands. Man is surely 
to live again ; spirit, and soul, and body, he will be re- 
newed. But this contrast which he believes throws 
him back on the, to him, inexplicable trials he was ex- 
periencing, and he yields to a fresh torrent of feeling as 
he dwells on the ruin of man under the eye and hand 
of God, so completely that, whether his son comes to 
honour or nothingness, he is none the wiser, the only 
thing known being his own pain outwardly and in- 
wardly. 



CHAPTER XV. 

Second Discourse of Eliphaz. 

The second series of discussion now opens with the 
appeal of Eliphaz, who lets oat with less reserve the 
increasing sense his soul had that Job mast lack in- 
tegrity. As before, there is weighty truth in what he 
urges, and it is urged with great force ; but the applica- 
tion to the sufferer was groundless, and therefore un- 
just in the last degree. 

And Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, 
Will a wise man answer with windy knowledge, 
And fill his belly with the east wind, 
Arguing with speech that availeth not, 
And with words in which is no profit ? 
Yea, thou makest void the fear of God, 
And diminishest devotion before God. 
For thine iniquity teacheth thy mouth, 
And thou choosest the tongue of the crafty ; 
Thy mouth condemneth thee, and not I, 
And thine own lips testify against thee. 

[Wast] thou born the first man, 
And wast thou brought forth before the hills ? 
Didst thou listen in the councils of God, 
And dost thou reserve wisdom to thyself? 
What knowest thou that we know not ? 
[What] understandest thou that [is] not with us ? 
Also among us [is] the hoary, and the aged.* 
Bicher in days than thy father. 



56 NOTES OH THS BOOK OF JOB. 

[Are] the consolations of God too small for thee, 
And a word in gentleness with thee ? 

Why doth thine heart carry thee away, 
And why do thine eyes wink, 
That thou turnest thy spirit against God, 
And lettest words go out of thy mouth ? 
What [is] man that he should he clean, 
And one horn of woman that he should be 

righteous ? 
Behold, in His holy ones He trusteth not, 
And the heavens are not clean in His eyes ; 
How much less the abominable and corrupt, 
Man, that drinketh iniquity like water 1 

I will shew thee : hear me ; 
And what I have seen I will relate, 
Which wise men have declared 
And have not hid, from their fathers, 
To whom alone the land was given, 
And through the midst of whom no stranger passed. 

All the days of the wicked he is in torment, ~ 
And the number of years is laid up for the oppressor. 
The voice of terrors [is] in his ears ; 
In peace the destroyer falleth on him. 
He despaireth of returning from the darkness, 
And he is marked out for the sword. 
He wandereth for bread : where [is it] ? 
He knoweth that ready at his hand is a day of 

darkness. 
Trouble and anguish make him afraid, 
They overpower him, as a king ready for the onset. 
For against God he stretched out his hand, 
And against the Almighty played the hero, 



CHAPTER XV. 57 

Ban against Him with neck (proudly), 

With the thick bosses of his shields. 

For he covereth his face with his fatness, 

And gathereth fat on [his] loins : 

And he inhabiteth desolate cities, 

Houses that no man dwelleth in, 

Which are destined for heaps. 

He becometh not rich, and his wealth endoreth not. 

Nor doth his substance extend in the earth. 

He escapeth not from darkness : 

A flame withereth his shoots, 

And he passeth away by the breath of his month. 

Let him not trust in vanity ; he is deceived ; 

For vanity shall be his recompense ; 

Before his day* it is fulfilled, 

And his branch is not green ; 

He shaketh off like a vine his grapes, 

And casteth down like an olive his blossoms. 

For the company of the polluted [is] barrenness, 

And fire devoureth the tents of bribery ; 

They conceive misery, and bring forth vanity, 

And their womb prepareth deceit. 
Thus we see that Eliphaz arraigns Job of that moral 
folly which forgets the presence and light of God, by 
haughty words blinding others to what God was judg- 
ing, underneath the fair appearance of his life. Ha 
charges his language with worse than bluster, for ha 
sees in it that which was calculated to turn souls aside 
from the fear of God ; and thus Job, in his opinion, 
was self-condemned. To deny God's present retribu- 
tion, Eliphaz thought, was to undermine confidence in. 

* Literally, in his not day. 



58 NOTES OH THE BOOK OF JOB. 

His ways, and to encourage men to all lawlessness. It 
was not only conscious guilt talking with the air of 
offended innocence, bat in this venturing to shake the 
foundations of God's government. (Vers. 1-6.) 

Then he proceeds to tax Job with the grossest as- 
sumption of superiority in wisdom, without the least 
ground for it. To allow himself in such contempt of 
others, Job ought to be the first man, yea, born before 
the hills, and an assessor in the council of Eloah, con- 
scious of secrets which were confined to his own heart. 
This Eliphaz gravely doubts, and challenges Job to 
prove the reality of his claim, putting in a plea for 
himself and his friends as unworthily set at nought, in- 
instcad of having the honour due to age and experience. 
Indeed it was not of this merely that he complained ; 
for if it was wrong to despise elders, how much more 
to spoak of God as they had just heard ! and this from 
a man who should remember his own corrupt nature 
and ways, and the holy majesty of God, before whom 
the heavens are not clean, and the holy ones beneath 
His confidence. 

Finally Eliphaz proceeds to set before Job what ma- 
ture and incorrupt wisdom had found true from the be- 
ginning, before the voice of strangers had imported 
those sophistications of which they had heard too much. 
The wicked man has an internal tormenter in his own 
conscience even now, which does not fail to embitter 
his brief allotted time. He is ever foreboding death in 
life, want in abundance. The voice of alarm never 
deserts his ears. In peace the destroyer is invading 
him ; and, if darkness encompass him, he has no hope 
of emerging, ho knows that the day of daxkoess is 



CHAPTER XV. 5fr 

ready at his hand, fall of anguish and distress, even 
though he plays the hero against God, and rushes on 
Him as if he could fight it out. But God is not mocked, 
and the end, if it tarry, comes ; so he who thus braved 
God inhabits places given over to desolation, and 
his possessions vanish away, and darkness envelopes 
him, and flame devours his suckers, and himself departs 
by a blast from God's mouth. 

Thus awfully does Eliphaz describe the hollow pro- 
sperity, the actual wretchedness, and the inevitable de- 
struction of the godless. As God was not feared, 
vanity is the impress stamped on all. A man's life con- 
sists not in the abundance of his possessions, and they 
that set their mind on them must learn their vanity in 
the day of trial. They may promise like the palm, or 
the vine, or the olive ; but all is vain. Barrenness 
shall be the portion of him and his, and judgment 
consumes the tabernacles greedy after evil gain. It is 
but to conceive misery, and bring forth vanity, and 
frame deception. 



■ —W W . 



CHAPTERS XVI., XVIL 
The Answer of Job. 

And Job answered and said, . 
I have heard many such things, 
And comforters of distress [are] ye aD. 
Are windy words at an end ? 
Or what vexeth* thee that thou answerest ? 
I also could speak like yon, 
If your soul were instead of my soul, 
I could weave words against you, 
And shake my head at you ; 
With my mouth I could strengthen you, 
And the commiseration of my life could assuage. 

If I speak my pain is not assuaged, 
And if I forbear, what departeth from me? 
Surely now He hath exhausted me, 
Thou hast desolated all my company, and bound 

me; 
It became a witness, and rose up against me, 
My leanness accuseth me to the face ; 
His wrath hath torn and warred on me ; 
He hath gnashed on me with his teeth ; 
Mine enemy whetteth his eyes on me. 
They gaped at me with their mouth, 
With reproach they smote my cheeks. 
They strengthen themselves together against me. 
-God hath shut me up to the unrighteous, 

+ Hence, perhaps, t; to em\)o\<teou" 



CHAPTERS XVI., XVII. 6fc 

And thrown me over into the hand of the wicked. 

I sat at ease, and He smashed me, 

And seized me by the neck, and dashed me, 

And set me as a mark for Himself; 

His arrows* compassed me about ; 

He cleaveth my reins, and spareth not. 

He ponreth out my gall on the ground. 

He breaketh me breach upon breach, 

He runneth upon me like a warrior. 

I have sewed sackcloth on my skin, 

And stuck my horn into the dust. 

My face is red with weeping, 

And on mine eyelids [is] death- shade, 

Though no violence [is] in my hands, 

And my prayer [is] pure. 

earth, cover thou not my blood, 

And let my cry have no place. 

Even now, behold, my witness [is] in the heavens. 

And my testifier in the heights. 

My mockers [are] my friends ; 

Mine eye poureth out to God, 

That He would decide for the man with God, 

As a son of man for his friend ; 

My years of number come,+ 

And I go the way I shall not return. 

Chapter xvii. 

My spirit is broken, my days are extinct, 
For me the graves ! 

* Or, archers. 

f That is, a few years. 



<62 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

Truly* mockeries [are] with me, 

And mine eye dwelleth on their contention. 

Deposit, I pray Thee, be surety for me with 

Thyself : 
Who else would strike hands with me ? 
For their heart Thou hast hid to understanding, 
Therefore Thou wilt not exalt [them]. 
He that delivereth friends for a spoil, 
The eyes of his children shall waste away. 
And He hath set me as a bye-word of people, 
And I am one to be spit on in the face. 
Mine eye also is dim with sorrow, 
And all my frame a shadow. 
Upright [men] will be amazed at this, 
And the guiltless stirred up against the ungodly. 
But the righteous shall hold on his way, 
And the clean of hands increase in strength. 
But as for you all, return now, and come on ; 
Yet I find not a wise one among you. 
My days are gone, my plans are broken — 
The possessions of my heart. 
Night they put for day, light near 
Out of the face of darkness I 
If I wait, Shcol [is] my house, 
I have spread my bed in the darkness, 
To corruption I have cried, Thou [art] my father, 
To the worm, My mother and my sister. 
Where then now [is] my hope ? 
Yea, my hope, who beholdeth it ? 
To the bars of Sheol it goeth down, 
When at the same time [is] rest on the dust. 

• Or, if not* 



CHAPTERS XVI., XVII. 68 

Patient as Job proved, he does not spare the obsti- 
nacy of his friends, who could not make good, and 
who would not retract, their uncharitable inferences. 
Hence he begins his second reply to Eliphaz with a 
sharp complaint at their threadbare comments. Conso- 
lation there was none, only trouble extreme, in the 
words of them all. Hence he longed for an end of 
words of no more weight than the wind. It would be 
better to answer calmly, if they must speak, and not 
with the sharpness of vexation. Were it possible for 
them to stand in his stead, he could say at least as cut- 
ting words, and shake his head quite as tryingly. With 
his mouth he could strengthen them and assuage with 
lip-consolation. 

But here he arrests himself; his pain was none the 
less if he spoke ; and if he forbore, what left him ? 
He recurs to his deepest grief. If he could only look 
up, and find Him all brightness and love I But it was 
not so. He had fairly tired him out with afflictions, 
desolated all his circle, and tied himself up. His bodily 
state, his emaciation, testified against him openly. 
He was torn as by a wild beast with every mark of 
cruel unsparing wrath, teeth gnashing, eyes sharpened, 
mouth gaping. Thus did his enemies smite his cheeks 
with reproach, and muster in full force against him. 
God, he says plainly, had shut him up to the perverse 
man, and turned him over into the hand of the wicked. 
Nothing can exceed the graphic power with which he 
describes his troubles: out of ease seized by the 
neck, and smashed and broken in pieces, ;>ud set up 
as a mark to smite, with arrows whirring round.* %c& 
his reins split unsparingly, and his ga\\ tbot\t«A to H>tv« 



64 K0TB8 OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

earth, broken by breach upon breach, as could not bill 
be if such a warrior ran upon him ; so thai he was 
brought down to the last degree of misery, as well as 
degradation, grief upon grief, and with nothing save 
the shadow of death before his eyelids, though no 
violence stained his hand, and his prayer was pure. 

Job therefore calls on the earth not to hide his blood, 
(his life then, as it were, poured out, that it might stand 
forth to open vision), and to the same end that his cry 
should find no place to rest in here below, but go straight 
on high. Therefore his eye turned upward, and he 
speaks in confident faith that, spite of his inexplicable, 
or rather as yet unexplained, calamities, his witness is in 
heaven, even God Himself, to testify on his behalf in 
those high places. From his friends, who were bat 
mockers, through total misapprehension of the case 
and haste to judge him, rather than own their ignorance, 
be can but weep out his sorrow and supplication to God. 
Such seems to be the simplest way of translating and 
understanding the language, which is far from easy ; in- 
stead of taking ^^D as a plural of excellency in the 
sense of " interpreter," and thus rendering it, " My in- 
terpreter is my friend," &c, and applying all through- 
out to God, who knows all, and will not distort or 
misconceive anything, whatever the present may con- 
vey to those who look at the surface. There is cer- 
tainly in any rendering the looking for God to plead as 
well as judge : which it is strange that any Christian 
should think said by Job "with melancholy quaint- 
mess," instead of seeing in it a singular longing after 
that which was more fully realised in the mediation of 
Christ with God, a man for men, and God with God. 



CHAPTER XVII. 65 

Bat truth, to be prized and really known, must first be 
learned in the soul's guilt and need, not by the flicker- 
ing lamp of the scholar. It was so assuredly that Job 
was uttering this striking anticipation of what every 
believer learns through the Holy Spirit, but in his own 
deep wants as laid bare humblingly before God. Vin- 
dication in this life Job did not expect ; but grace was 
yet to give, as it gives us too, more than faith looks for. 
For faith is in us, though of God, and has its measure ; 
grace is in Him, free, unmixed, and unlimited. 

In chapter xvii., which of course carries on the same 
line as the close of chapter xvi., Job speaks of what he 
could not but expect naturally under such a pressure of 
overwhelming blows and piercing stabs. His spirit 
was broken, the light of his days gone out, the graves 
before him. There is obscurity in the next clause, 
mainly from the opening words, which, taken as " if 
not," imply that, unless he were mistaken, he was sub- 
ject to the strangest illusions, and these so pertina- 
ciously present, that his eye could dwell on nothing 
else. But others understand the sense to be a form of 
asseveration. " Truly mockery is with me [that is, 
speaking of the effort to make him, a dying man, confess 
what he knew was unfounded, and only existing in their 
evil surmisings], and on their quarrelling, or pertina- 
city, mine eye dwelleth." Job therefore entreats of 
God to engage and be surety for him with Himself : 
who else would strike hands with him ? His friends 
had proved themselves morally incompetent, and He 
who had closed their heart to understanding would not 
exalt them. If one betrays his friends to be 8\>Qtt&d,lta 
eyes of his children shall pine away. "ButVio^wa^ft 



66 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

himself might now be a bye-word, and openly an ob- 
ject of insult, his eye dim through grief and. his whole 
frame a shadow, upright men should yet be amazed at 
this, and the guiltless roused against the ungodly, but 
the righteous should hold fast on their way, and the 
man of clean hands increase in strength. 

Finally, Job bids them come on again, though satis- 
fied of their total lack of spiritual understanding. He 
had made up his mind for death, as well as the utter 
dissolution of his every cherished plan. His friends 
might hold out fresh and bright anticipations on his 
repentance, putting night for day, and light near out oi 
very darkness ; whereas, if he was to hope, the grave 
was his house, and his bed spread in darkness, corrup- 
tion and the worm his nearest of kin. Where, then, 
was his hope ? Yea, his hope, who sees it ? He«ee8 
none other than descending to the grave, where the]/ 
should rest together on the dust. How blessedly in 
contrast with such gloomy words of a saint is the strong 
encouragement we possess, having fled for refuge to 
lay hold on the hope set before us, which we have as an 
anchor of the soul, both sure and stedfast, and enter- 
ing into that within the veil, whither the forerunner if 
for us entered, Jesus, made an high priest for ever ac- 
cording to the order of Melchisedec ! 



CHAPTER XVHI. 

Bildad's Second Discourse. 

Bildad, who is ever brief, retorts on the copious and 
impassioned answers of Job, not only as contemptuous 
towards his friends, but as altogether vain in the effort 
to justify himself, while evidently an object of divine 
displeasure and judgment for concealed evil. Did he 
alone constitute an exception to the invariably righteous 
government of God ? If not, why such a volume of 
words, and why such vehement invectives? Divine 
judgment, however, would take its way none the less 
aurely and awfully for universal warning. 

And Bildad the Shuhite answered and said, 
How long will ye make a hunt for* words ? 
Consider, and afterwards we will speak. 
Why are we accounted as cattle, 
Stopped up [that is, stupid] in your eyes ? 
He teareth his soul in his anger : 
Shall the earth be forsaken for thee, 
And shall a rock be removed out of its place ? 

Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, 
And the flame of his fire shall not shine. 
The light in his tabernacle shall be dark, 
And his lamp shall be put out with him. 
The steps of his strength shall be straitened, 
And his own counsel shall cast him down, 

* Or t an end to. 



68 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

For by his feet is he driven into a net, 

And he walketh over the meshes ; 

The trap seizeth on his heel ; 

The snare prevaileth over him ; 

His cord [is] hidden in the earth, 

And his trap upon the pathway. 

Terrors shall terrify him around, 

And scare him at his footsteps. 

His calamity* [is] hungry, 

And destruction [is] ready at his side. 

The first-born of death devoureth the parts of his* 

skin — 
Devoureth his parts. 

His confidence shall be torn out of his tent, 
And shall march him off to the king of terrors ; 
There shall dwell in his tent what [is] not his ; 
On his dwelling shall sulphur be scattered. 
Beneath, his roots shall be dried up, 
And above, his branch shall be cut off. 
His memorial shall perish from the earth, 
And he shall have no name on the plain. 
They shall drive him from light into darkness, 
And shall chase him from the world. 
No shoot nor sprout shall he have among his 

people, 
And no escaped one in his dwellings. 
At his day they of the west will be astonished, 
And they of the east take fright. 

* The Peschito, followed by not a few moderns, has here 
calamity, and certainly this sense seems easier. The Vulgate, 
Authorized Version, and many critics, prefer "strength." 



CHAPTER XVIII. 69 

Sorely so the dwellings of the wicked, 
And this the place of [him that] knoweth not God. 
Thus keenly does Bildad cleave to his severe impres- 
sion of Job's state before God, formed by the (to him) 
irresistible evidence of divine judgments, which had 
tiwept away all his prosperity, his family, his health, 
4ind left him a prey to agonizing sorrows and conflicts 
in his soul. How could any reasonable man question 
more than he that God had a controversy with Job, 
who was suffering only as he deserved, as surely as 
<Jod is just ? He therefore felt no small vexation at 
the continuance of a controversy when the case was 
really and unanswerably plain. It was only Job's con- 
temptuous self-assurance that could evade for a moment 
the force of their reasoning. Let Job be as violently 
restive as he may, he will find out in the end that, as 
they are not to be counted cattle for stupidity, so the 
moral government of God is as immovable as the course 
of the earth, or the stubborn rock. What a man sows 
he reaps : if evil, ruin ; if good, blessing. But of the 
latter Bildad has not a word to say. Did he know what 
grace works through faith? Faith can not only re- 
move the rock, but cast a mountain into -the sea. 

Of this Bildad knew little or nothing. He only 
thinks of the deep wickedness, whatever the fair out- 
side, which had drawn down on Job such unparalleled 
misery from God. So, in forcible figures, he sets out 
the extinction of all light in the ungodly, when the 
flame of his fire should shine no more, and the lamp 
•over him should go out. No effects should extricate, 
•but rather involve him more; and not rashness, Wi 
ids own counsel, plunge him in utter ran. ^3ta 3£%&» 



70 2JOTE8 017 THE BOOK OF JOB. 

avails, but ensnares, him that trusts himself instead of 
God ; and hence his own feet send him into the net,, 
and he walks over the meshes, heedless of what is un- 
derneath. The trap, the snare, the cord, meet him 
wherever he tarns ; terrors alarm him on every side, 
and dog his footsteps. His calamity, instead of being 
satiated, is hungry for more; and destruction, or a 
heavy load of suffering, is at his side, ready to weigh 
him down. Deadly disease — death's first-born — is- 
already devouring the parts of his skin — devouring, 
more than the skin, the parts themselves. In short, 
all that makes his tent bright, in the present or in pro- 
spect, is torn out, and he has to march off to the king 
of terrors. 

Nor does the blast of God stop with the evil-doer ; 
but, extending far and long beyond himself, it hangs 
over his memory, and pursues his descendants. Hence 
there dwells in his tent that which shall not be his 
own, and over his habitation sulphur is scattered. No- 
thing but withers above ground, and all underneath 
dries away. Neither in the settled parts of the earth 
does his memorial stand, nor has he a name in the wil- 
derness, but he is an outlaw from the habitable world, 
consigned from light to darkness, with no sprout nor 
shoot remaining among his people, not one escaped ia 
his dwellings. The desolation is complete ; so much 
so, that they of the west are astounded on account of 
his day, and they of the east take fright ; unless, with 
some ancients and moderns, we take these words as de- 
scriptions, not of place, but time, and so understand 
" posterity" and " ancestors." But it is hard to see 
jiow "ancestors" could be horrified, though we caa 



CHAPTER XVm. 71 

readily think of " posterity" being astonished. Bildad 
concludes his answer with the assurance that only thus 
does it befall the dwellings of the wicked, and thus the 
place of him that knows not God. The application, in 
his mind, is as obvious as it is mistaken ; the abstract 
truth abides, and has its own just place. 



CHAPTER XIX. 
The Answer of Job. 

None can wonder that the strong language was ex- 
tremely wounding to him whose integrity was not only 
questioned, but regarded as the cover of mere godless 
hypocrisy, and his sufferings as the precursor of a de- 
struction without remedy. His rejoinder shews, how- 
ever, that if Job felt the solemn warning to be not only 
beside the mark but impertinent and cruel, he rises 
completely above the atmosphere of his self-constituted 
judges, owns the hand of God in all his sorrows with- 
out reserve, looks for final vindication, and most gravely 
admonishes those who misjudged him. 
And Job answered and said, 

How long will ye vex my soul, 

And crush me to pieces with words ? 

These ten times ye reproach me, 

And are not ashamed to stun me ; 

And, after all, if I have erred, 

With me doth mine error lodge. 

If indeed ye boast against me, 

And argue my reproach against me, 

Know now that God hath wrested me, 

And compassed me round with His net. 

Lo, I cry of violence, and am not heard, 

I call out, but [there is] no justice. 

He hath hedged my way that I cannot pass, 



CHAPTER XIX. 78 

And hath set darkness on my paths. 

He hath stripped me of my glory, 

And hath taken the crown of my head. 

He ruineth me on every side, and I am going ; 

And my hope He nprooteth like a tree. 

He kindleth His anger against me, 

And He regardeth me as His enemies. 

His troops come together, and heap up their way 

against me, 
And encamp round about my tabernacle. 
My brethren He put far away from me, 
And mine acquaintance are verily estranged 

from me. 
My kinsmen have ceased, and my confidants have 

forgotten me. 
Quests of my house, and my maid, count me a 

stranger, 
A foreigner I am become in their eyes. 
I call to my servant, but he answereth not ; 
With my mouth I make supplication to him. 
My breath is strange to my wife, 
And my entreaties for the children of my body. 
Even youngsters despise me; I rise, and they 

speak of me. 
All my intimates abhorred me, and those I loved 

turned against me. 
My bone cleaveth to my skin and my flesh ; 
And I am escaped with the skin of my teeth. 

Pity me, pity me, ye my friends, 
Por the hand of God hath stricken me. 
Why do ye persecute me as God, 
And are ye not satisfied with my fodvl 



74 NOTES OH THE BOOK OF JOB. 

0* that my words were bat written ! 

0* that they were bat inscribed in af book I 

With a pen of iron and lead, 

Graven in a rock for ever ! 

And I know my Kedeemer liveth, 

And later He shall stand np on the earth ; 

And after my skin this is torn in pieces, 

Yet from my flesh shall I see God, 

Whom I shall see for myself, 

And mine eyes shall behold, and not a stranger: 

My reins consume in mine inwards. 

If ye say, How shall we persecute him, 

And the root of the matter is found in him ? 

Fear for yourselves before the sword, 

For there is wrath, crimes of the sword ; 

That ye may know [there is] a judgment. 
Thus does Job deprecate the persistent suspicion 
which pursues him, spite of his solemn protestations 
of innocence. If it were indeed a chastisement of 
evil, it was his own affair. But he would meet their 
thought, and frankly acknowledge that his trouble did 
come from God. It was He who had hurled him down, 
and compassed him in inextricable toils. It was He 
who refused to listen to his cry, and gave no ear to his 
appeals. It was Eloah who had hedged up his way that 
he could not escape, covered his path with darkness, 
stripped him of honour, and taken the crown from off 
his head, crushing him on every side, so that he was 
going, and uprooting even his hope. It was He whose 
anger burned against him, and who counted him as of 

• Literally, who will grant . . . ? 
f Literally, the. 



CHAPTER XIX. 75* 

His foes, massing His troops, and rearing mounds 
against him, and encamping right around. Nor this 
only : it was He who embittered his social circle, and 
the privacy of home ; his brethren removed, his ac- 
quaintance estranged, his kinsmen failed, his familiars 
•blivious; his sojourners, his maid, counting him a 
stranger, an alien ; his servant called in vain, though sup- 
plicated abjectly ; himself an object of aversion to his 
wife, even when yearning after those nearest to him. 
The very youngsters despised him, and, if he rose, spoke 
at him, instead of paying any respect ; all his intimates 
loathed him, and those he loved were turned against him. 
For indeed he was emaciation personally, escaped with 
nothing but the skin of his teeth. 

But he once more appeals to their compassion in 
presence of such ruin and misery, and the more be- 
cause he owned it to be the hand of Eloah ; and he 
asks why they should follow him up like God, and not 
be satisfied with his flesh. Then does the truth of 
God's intervention at the end flash so brightly before 
his soul that he wishes his words written, inscribed in 
the book, nay, graved with a pen of iron and with lead 
on a rock for ever. And no wonder. He knows his 
Kinsman-Redeemer lives, and, the Last One, shall stand 
on the dust ; and, no matter what the ravages of this 
mortal, from his flesh he shall see Eloah — see Him for 
himself, his eyes seeing Him, and not a stranger ; so 
that his reins within pine for it now. Hence he ad- 
monishes his friends, if they persecuted and sought to 
fasten on him a moral cause for his woes, to dread an 
avenging sword for themselves. For if that be the 
day of resurrection power, it will be &\so on* A x^c^ 



76 VOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

butive dealing and wrath, when the sins thai escape 
man await God's sword. There will be no mistake then 
as to judgment. This was a cutting reproof for his 
friends. For faith rests on God's word, unbelief will 
be satisfied with nothing less than the facts when ful- 
filled, to interpret it. But the fulfilment, in fact, will 
be the sure punishment and utter ruin of the un- 
believing in that day. 

The principle, indeed, of seeing in facts or history 
the interpretation of prophecy is wholly vicious at all 
times. For it is, as we have just seen, to quit the 
ground of faith for that of unbelief, which is only con- 
vinced when it sees. Faith, on the contrary, proves 
that the Holy Spirit is the true interpreter of the pro- 
phetic word, which is found to centre in the kingdom 
of the Lord Jesus. For no prophecy of scripture is of 
its own interpretation. It is part of a system converg- 
ing on the Lord, who will judge the wicked and reign 
in power ; and this, as it is wholly outside of man's 
will, the Spirit ever holds out in the word of God. 

It will be noticed also that the concrete man is 
before the mind in the Old Testament anticipations of 
that day, no less than in the New. Nowhere does 
revelation stop short at the incomplete state when the 
spirit is severed from the body ; though it is distinct 
both as to the peculiar source and immortal character 
of man's soul from the beginning. But faith looks 
onward to full blessedness for man and the vindication 
of the word of God in glory. 



CHAPTER XX. 

Second Discourse of Zophab. 

The last of the three comes forward once more, even 
avowing the haste, if not irritation, under which he- 
sought to deal with 1 Job. Zophar's main point is the 
transient character of the evil-doer's triumph. If such 
an one seem to rise up fast to the highest pinnacle of 
prosperity, it is hut to be precipitated suddenly into the 
lowest pit of wretchedness and infamy, the evident object 
of divine resentment. 

And Zophar the Naamathite answered and said. 

Therefore do my thoughts give answer to me, 

And hence my haste in me. 

A reprimand to my shame I have to hear ; 

Yet the spirit of my understanding answeretb 
for me. 

Knowest thou this from of old, 

From the placing of man on the earth ? 

From near [is] the triumphing of the wicked, 

And the joy of the ungodly for a moment. 

Though his height mount to the heavens, 

And hid head reach the cloud, 

Like his dung he perisheth for ever ; 

They that saw him shall say, Where [is] he ? 

Like a dream shall he fly away, and not be found, 

And he shall be scared away like a vision of the 

night. 

The eye scanned him, [but] not again ; 

And bis place beholdeth him no mote. 



78 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

His children shall seek to please the poor. 

And his hands give back his wealth. 

His bones were fall of youthful vigour, 

Which will lie with him in the dust. 

Though evil maketh sweet in his month — 

He hideth it under his tongue, 

He is sparing of it, and will not let it go. 

And retaineth it in the midst of his palate — 

His food is changed in his bowels, 

The poison of asps is within him. 

Wealth hath he swallowed, and shall disgorg 

God will eject it again out of his belly. 

He shall suck the poison of asps : 

The tongue of the viper shall slay him. 

He shall not gaze on rivulets, 

Flowings of streams of honey and butter. 

What he laboured for, he shall restore, an< 

swallow. 
As the property his exchange, and he rejoiceth 
For he crushed, abandoned, the poor. 
Seized a house, and built it not ; 
For he knew no rest in his belly ; 
He shall not escape with his desirable thing. 
There is no remnant of his eating. 
Therefore his prosperity endureth not. 
In the fulness of his superfluity he is straite: 
Every hand of a wretch shall be upon him. 
That it may be to the filling of his belly, 
He shall send against him the burning of His s 
And rain upon him with his food. 
He fleeth from a weapon of iron, 
A bow of copper pier ceth him thxou$i\ 



CHAPTER XX. 79 

It is drawn, and it cometh oat of the body, 

And the glittering sword proeeedeth oat of his 
gall: 

Upon him [are] terrors. 

All darkness [is] hid for his treasures, 

A fire not blown coosameth him ; 

It shall fare ill with what is left in his tent. 

The heavens reveal his iniquity, 

And the earth riseth up against him. 

The increase of his house departeth, 

Things that ran away in the day of His anger. 

This [is] the portion of the wicked man from God 
[Elohim] , 

And the heritage of his sentence from God [El]. 
The triumphant tone of Job provoked the hasty and 
self-confident spirit of Zophar, and deep shame, because 
of a reproachful reproof, which he considered as unde- 
served, by his friends, as it ill became the man who 
was suffering the due reward of his deeds and state. 
Hence he was burning to speak and rejoin, and his irre- 
pressible impulse he mistook for fulness of solid matter. 
Yet, as applied to the case in hand, they were no more 
than his own " thoughts," true to his usual egotism, as 
distinguished from the grave wisdom of Eliphaz, and 
the traditional knowledge of Bildad. Job, in his 
opinion, had better beware : a jubilee of the godless is 
of the briefest. Lift up his head as he may, he perishes 
for ever, as the most offensive thing that men sweep 
away, so that they that see him say, Where is he ? It 
is the fullest contrast with the positive blessing of 
faith: he that does the will of God abides for ewt\ 
he that does it not is as a dream, at m^aVm^- 



80 NOTES OH THE BOOK OF JOB. 

Scanned once, he is not before the eye again ; his place 
knows him no more. 

Retribution sets in too for his children as well as 
himself. How could it be otherwise ? For, however 
sweet to him, and enjoyed tenaciously, evil might be, it 
was poison within ; and the riches so greedily and un- 
scrupulously devoured God makes him vomit forth, 
himself too slain as by a venomous bite. Honey and 
cream may flow in rivulets, brooks, streams, but they 
yield no pleasure to him. What he had laboured for 
he gives back, and swallows not ; as the property of 
exchange, he rejoices not ; for he ground down and for- 
sook the poor, seized on a house he was not to build, 
being cut off before his plans were mature and he could 
enjoy. For, insatiate in inward greed, he should not 
escape with what he values most — not a remnant for 
his eating — and his prosperity does not endure. 

How blinding is religious prejudice which could think 
thus of Job ! Wrath is cruel, anger is outrageous, and 
who is able to stand before envy or jealousy ? But error 
in religious judgment may be the most cutting of all, 
and this in proportion to the earnestness with which it is 
embraced ; for the thought of God is then abused to 
exclude every atom of human, not to say of brotherly, 
kindness. See how the final scene is painted ! In the 
fulness of abundance, says Zophar, his straits come : 
not a wretch that stretches not out his hand 
against him. God will give him plenty, but it will be 
tho burning of His wrath, raining it on him with his 
food. Does he seek to avoid some weapon of iron? 
The bow of copper pierces him through. The language 
in most telling. It is drawn, and no sooner this than 



CHAPTER XX. 81 

it comes forth from his flesh, the glittering sword out 
of his gall. Some understand " He is gone ! terrors 
over him," which certainly falls in with the graphic 
suddenness of the ruin described. But the older ver- 
sions are adverse to Rosenmiiller, Schultens, &c, who 
take it thus. 

Finally, not wealth, but all darkness, is hid for his 
treasures ; he is heaping it up for the day of wrath ; a 
fire not blown on, but burning from within, shall con- 
sume him, and what has escaped former judgments shall 
then fare ill in his tent. Instead of the heavens and 
the earth appearing to attest his innocence, according to 
Job's appeal in chapter zvi. 18 et seqq., they must give 
their evidence decisively against him, the increase of 
his house too departing as evanescent things in the 
day of divine wrath. This is the lot of the wicked 
man from Elohim, and his heritage awarded by El 
is, that he should lose all and be lost himself* 



CHAPTBE XXI. 
The Answeb of Job* 

And Job answered and said, 
Hear my speech with attention, 
And let this be your consolation. 
Suffer me, and I will speak, 
And after I have spoken thou mayest mock. 
As for me, [is] my complaint to man ? 
And why then should not my spirit be short ? 
Torn to me, and be astonished, and lay hand on 
month. 

Truly, if I think on [it], I am troubled. 
And my flesh doth shudder. 
Why do the wicked live, become old, 
And mighty- in wealth ? 

Their seed is established with them in their sight, 
And their issues, before their eyes* 
Their houses [are] peace, without fear, 
And the rod of God [is] not upon them. 
His bull gendereth, and faileth not, 
His cow calveth, and miscarrieth not. 
They send forth their sucklings as a flock. 
And their children frisk. 
They lift [their voice] to timbrel and harp. 
And rejoice at the sound of a pipe. 
They wear out their days in prosperity, 
And in a moment sink [to] Sheol. 
Yet they say to God, Depart from us* 



CHAPTER XXI. 88 

For we desired not the knowledge of Thy ways : 
What [is] the Almighty that we should serve Him ? 
And what profit have we if we meet Him ? 

Lo ! their good [is] not in their hand. 
The counsel of the wicked he far from me* 
How oft is the lamp of the wicked put out, 
And their destruction cometh upon them— 
Torments He appointeth in His anger I 
They are as straw before wind, 
And as chaff a whirlwind stealeth. 
Ood layeth up his iniquity for his children. 
He repayeth him, and he knoweth [it]. 
His own eyes see his blow, 
And he drinketh of the wrath of the Almighty. 
For what delight [hath] he in his house after 

him, 
When the number of his months is cut off? 
Shall [one] teach God [El] knowledge, 
And He nevertheless judgeth the righteous ? 

This [man] dieth in the fulness of his strength, 
Altogether at ease, and quiet ; 
His troughs are full of milk, 
And the marrow of his bones is soaked. 
And this [man] dieth with a bitter soul, 
And hath not eaten of the good. 
Together they lie down in the dust. 
And the worm covereth them over. 

Lo 1 I know your thoughts, 
And the plots ye do violently against me. 
For ye say, Where [is] the house of the prince ? 
And where the tent of the habitation* <& VW 
wicked ? 



SA sons oar ths book op job. 

Have ye not asked the passers-by? 

And their signs do ye not know ? 

To a day of destruction the wicked is spared. 

To a day of great wrath they are led off. 

Who to his face declareth his way, 

And who requiteth him what he hath done f 

And he, to the graves he is brought, 

And over the heap he keepeth watch. 

Sweet to him are the clods of the valley. 

And after him draweth everybody. 

And [there is] no counting before him. 

How vainly then ye comfort me ! 

Your answers remain falsehood. 

Job subjects bis third assailant to a closer examina- 
tion, after a call to hear, not without severity. It would 
console him most for them to listen attentively. After 
ho had spoken, Zophar might continue what he cannot 
but call mockery. Job felt far more truly than they 
that his was no common trial, and that they had wholly 
failed to help him in discerning its ground, character, 
and object. That it came from God he doubted no 
moro than they ; that it looked, yet could not be, penal 
ho felt ; yet was he wholly unable to divine the how 
and wherefore of his strange, and profound, and pro- 
longed sufferings. Thsy might complain if he com* 
plained as to man. But that God should so try one 
who held fast to his integrity to Himself, and who utterly 
denied their surmises of hidden wickedness, did try his 
spirit to the utmost, and account for his impatience. 
But he summons with marked solemnity to hear what 
he admits made himself shudder, yet an undeniable 



CHAPTER XXI. 85 

truth, in flat contradiction of their narrow thoughts, 
and wise saws, and uncharitable dogmatizing, that 
the wicked, instead of being cut down young, live on, 
grow old, become great in power, with their posterity 
established round about them, and their offspring 
before their eyes ; that their households are free from 
fear or scourge ; that their farms flourish ; that they 
-enjoy life to the full, spending their days prosperously, 
till, in a moment, not with lingering disease or racked 
with agony, they sink to Sheol; yet, spite of every 
good, not only not owning God in thankful praise, but 
•desiring no knowledge of God, yea distance from Him, 
-and accounting prayer wholly useless. 

Job, however, stands to it that somehow the prosperity 
of the wicked is not in their hand but God's, yet he 
abhors their counsel and ways. How often, he asks, 
does their lamp go. out, and destruction break on them, 
as God is pleased to apportion in His displeasure ? It 
may be now and then, hardly often ; it is false to say 
always. The day is coming when the ungodly, instead 
of prospering, shall be like the chaff which the wind 
driveth away. (Ps. i.) The friends antedated the time, 
directing their eyes (blinded, alas 1) to the present, like 
Christendom, instead of waiting, like Job, for the resur- 
rection and the kingdom. It may fall on his children, 
not on the man himself, in this world. Job looks on to 
the judgment, when the evil-doer must suffer. Let 
none then misjudge God's ways, or draw unfounded 
inferences from His government at present. Look at 
these two men, each with a full cup, one of happiness, 
the other of misery ; both lying dead together. Appear- 
ances prove nothing but the haste and folly of those 



86 NOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

who judge before the time. Such were their tho 
and plots to the wrong of himself. They might 
learnt better from those that pass by, that the "w 
is spared for a day of doom ; yet who would tel 
go ? He is buried with no less care than others, p 
following in his wake, as countless souls before, 
evidently vain was their consolation, and their *n; 
fallacious. 



CHAPTER XXH. 
Thibd DlSCOUBSE of Eliphaz. 

The third series in the discussion opens with a dis- 
course from Eliphaz, in which he sets forth the su- 
periority of God to all results from the service of man, 
however noble in his own eyes. Provoked by the per- 
tinacity of Job in the denial of hidden sin, he launches 
out first into questions, then into direct charges, which 
betrayed his conviction that Job, far from the righteous 
man he assumed to be, was really hard, selfish, unfeel- 
ing, and unjust, himself really the mere man of might 
and arrogance, who had sent away widows and orphans, 
till he was caught in his own meshes and troubled by 
fear. Indeed he does not hesitate to impute free- 
thinking* to Job, heedless of the warning God has 
given even in this world, that they may not shut out 
Himself and His oversight, cheated by the serpent to 
think that He is too high to notice mere worms of the 
earth. But as the wicked cannot thus act even now 
with impunity, so the righteous rejoice at His dealings 
however solemn. To Him therefore Eliphaz com- 
mends Job. Acquaintance with Him, and repentance 
in His sight, would soon be followed by outward and 
inward blessings ; so that he should not only be re- 
lieved from the divine pressure now upon him, but be 
used to intercede for others, and should ds&s^t \k& 
guilty through his integrity. 



as 



Cqisb >kn>] then profit God? 

For. Deng m, be profiteth himself. 

[Is sT tbea a j^aum to the Almighty if thou art 



Ltd gain if tho-i makest thy ways perfect ? 
WI3 He oat of few of thee argue with thee, 
Enter into judgment with thee ? 
Ib not thy wickedness greet, 
And no end of thine iniquities ? 
For thou distrminedst thy brother without cause, 
And didst strip off the clothes of the naked; 
To the weary thou gayest no water, 
And from the hungry didst withhold bread. 
And the man of might — his was the land, 
And the accepted of face dwelleth in it. 
Widows didst thou send empty away, 
And the arms of the fatherless were broken. 
Therefore round about thee [are] snares, 
And sudden fear overpowereth thee. 

Or seest thou not the darkness, 
And the flood of waters covering thee ? 
[Is] not God [Eloah] in the height of the heavens ? 
And see the top of the stars, how high they are ! > 
And thou sayest, What knoweth God ? 
Will He judge through the darkness ? 
Thick clouds [are] a covering to Him, and He 

seeth not, 
And He walketh on the circle of the heavens. 
Wilt thou keep to the old way 
Which men of iniquity trod, 
Who were snatched away untimely : 



CHAPTER zxn. 89 

A flood was poured on their foundation ; 
Who were saying to God, Depart from us, 
And what could the Almighty do for them ? 
And He filled their houses with good ! 
But the counsel of the wicked is far from me. 
The righteous will see and rejoice. 
And the innocent mock at them : 
Is not our adversary out down ? 
And the fire devoureth their residue. 

Acquaint thyself, I pray thee, with Him, and bb 

at peace ; 
Thereby shall good come to thee. 
Keceive, I pray thee, law from His mouth, 
And lay up His words in thy heart. 
If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be 

built up ; 
([If] thou put iniquity far away from thy tent), 
And put precious ore on the dust, 
And that of Ophir as stones of brooks ; 
And the Almighty shall be thy precious ores, 
And silver of toilings to thee. 
For then in the Almighty shalt thou delight, 
And lift up thy face to God [Eloah]. 
Thou shalt pray to Him, and He shall hear thee, 
And thou shalt pay thy vows, 
And thou shalt decree a thing, and it is established 

to thee, 
And light shall shine on thy ways. 
When they are dejected, then shalt thou say, Lift up? 
And He will save him of downcast eyes ; 
He will deliver him that is not guiltless, 
And he is rescued by the cleanness of thy hands. 



90 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

Thus does Eliphaz press on Job the inquiries whether 
God could derive benefit from, the worth of any man, 
be he who he may, because his prudence benefits him- 
self — whether Job's righteousness was a pleasure to 
the Almighty, or the blamelessness of his ways a gain 
to Him. He resents the notion as absurd and insolent, 
that God could be influenced to swerve from His un- 
bending rectitude, and therefore infers extreme wick- 
edness from the extreme dealings of His hand. Was 
it not monstrous for Job to challenge Him to an action 
at law ? It was not to be thought of that He would 
argue with Job through fear of him. There was but 
one reasonable conclusion : Job was suffering greatly 
because his wickedness was great, and his iniquities 
not ended. Warming with indignation, he ventures to 
specify the sins he conceived to be judged of God in 
the case. Stripped of his goods, had he furnished 
water to the weary, or bread to the famished ? Had 
he not been inhuman enough to take a pledge of his 
brother causelessly, yea, to deprive the naked of their 
clothing ? His course had really been a mingled one 
of power on the one hand, and of favour on the other, 
arrogant, yet fawning, so as to settle himself in the 
earth which he sought, whatever he might aver to the 
contrary. And if he sent widows away empty, and 
the arms of the fatherless were not held up but broken, 
who could wonder that snares were all around him, 
and sudden fear confounding him? Was it not the 
awful foreboding of coming and worse judgment ? 

It is a fair question whether verse 11 be more cor- 
rectly taken as concluding the first part of the chapter 
aa is most obvious and commonly uud^xstood^ or as in* 



CHAPTER XXII. 91* 

troducing a new and still worse imputation. If the 
latter, the sense would run thus: Job had already 
owned in chapter xix. that God had fenced up his way 
that he could not pass, and had set darkness upon his. 
paths. Eliphaz now turns the confession against him,, 
by asking if he did not see the darkness and the flood 
of waters covering him. So not a few, from Ewald to 
Delitzch. The Septuagint has to 0<Jc *<>< € «* gkoto* 
dwipij, k. r. X. (" the light hath turned out darkness to 
thee"), whence it would appear that these Greek trans- 
lators must have read "Y)N rather than the opening, 
particle, *IN, on the correctness of which assumption 
Michaelis acts in adopting it as the true text. 

There can be no doubt that the charge which follows 
19 one of deadly sceptical impiety; as if the incom- 
parable glory of God excluded His concerning Himself 
with the actions and thoughts of man on earth. Job- 
had indeed dwelt on the unsearchable wisdom and. 
might of God as sovereign and irresistible; he had 
complained of severe dealings, but nothing could be- 
less true, or more undeserved, than that he denied His 
government. The insinuation was due only to the per- 
verse hypothesis of Eliphaz. Job was at least as far 
as himself from saying, What doth God know ? Will 
He judge through the darkness ? Thick clouds are a. 
covering to Him, and He seeth not, and He walketh on 
the circle of the heavens. Such language and such 
thoughts were foreign to Job. Certainly Eliphaz could 
not be more opposed to the old path trodden by the 
antediluvian sinners, who had been swept away before 
the time, when their foundation was poured erovj \& *> 
Hood (or a Hood poured on it). And. mo«X yod&s:% ^st- 



D2 NOTES OK THB BOOK OF JOB. 

did they not say to God, Depart from ub ; and what 
could the Almighty do for them, though He had filled 
their houses with good? In vain then did Eliphaz 
retort on Job his own saying here, as at the beginning 
of his discourse. (Compare chap. xxi. 14-16.) Job 
was as sincere in his abhorrence of the sentiment as 
Eliphaz, who had no real ground for thus reflecting on 
Job. It was the bitter fruit of his hard, and narrow, 
and misleading theory of present affliction, as if it 
conld flow from no source but God's estimate of 
our evil. 

Not that God does not mark, when and where He 
pleases, His sense of man's impiety ; and when He 
does, Job joins Eliphaz and the righteous' generally in 
setting it to his seal that God is wise and just : above 
all will it be manifest in that day when divine judg- 
ment will deal definitively with all that is opposed to 
God's will and to His people. But the memory is apt 
to be treacherous in controversy, else Eliphaz could 
not have forgotten how impressively Job had brought 
before his friends that day, and without the least hesi- 
tation of heart or conscience. So that we might apply 
to him the spirit of the New Testament word, and 
affirm that he was one of those who love the Lord's 
appearing, when evil shall no more oppress nor defile, 
but vanish before the light and joy of day. 

Next comes the exhortation. It is well when, in 
love and with a sound judgment, we are admonished ; 
but was it so here ? A word fitly spoken, how good it 
is! But the call in this case assumed that Job was a 
wicked man, and we may find occasion to admire the 
patience he manifests, as well as see where he falls 



CHAPTER XXII. 9$ 

short. It is delightful to hear the message of love go 
forth, bat what where it implies that a true believer is- 
a hypocrite ? 

In truth Job was better acquainted with God than 
any of his friends : how painful to have the gravest of 
them so speaking as to impute worse than ignorance I 
" Acquaint thyself, I pray thee, with him, and be at 
peace : thereby shall good come to thee. Receive, I 
pray thee, law from his mouth, and lay up his words in 
thy heart." There are those to whom such a call would 
be loving and appropriate. The mistake was as to Job's 
state. The friends might have learnt much ; they had 
presumed to judge, and they had judged wrongly. 
They had no right notion of God's gracious work with 
souls to humble them, breaking self down, and making 
His grace infinitely precious. Hence, as they saw no- 
thing but retributive dealing with hidden wicked- 
ness, the extraordinary trials of Job gave them the 
fullest possible impression; and Eliphaz, regarding 
him as a renegade, exhorts him to return to the 
Almighty, and he shall be built up, and to put 
iniquity far away from his tabernacles: a faithful 
saying, if addressed to one far away from God ; but 
how galling to a deeply-tried saint to be exhorted to- 
lay his precious ore on the dust, and that of Ophir 
as pebbles of the brooks, and Shaddai should be to 
him his precious ores and hard- won silver 1 "For 
then in Shaddai shalt thou delight, and lift up thy face 
to Eloah : thou shalt pray to him, and he shall hear 
thee, and thou shalt pay thy vows. And thou shalt 
decree a thing, and it is established to thee, and light 
shall shine on thy ways." 



$4 NOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

This seemed needed and wise advice, doubtless, 
to Eliphaz, and in many a case it would be most 
applicable ; but it was wholly oat of place for Job, 
to whom gold or silver were as the dost of the ba- 
lance, and the favour of God everything. There was 
no solution of the trial as yet. Hidden sin was not in 
question, nor consequently repentance of it, bat a deep 
submission to God's will, who could employ the enemy 
to bring out the patience of the sufferer, and his friends 
to lay bare his impatience. Eliphaz did not so much 
as touch the true question. He misjudged Job, and 
would have aggravated the malady instead of curing it. 
There was no lack of practical righteousness in the ways 
of Job, nor did his failure lie in the neglect of kindness 
to others, nor even of prayer to God. Bat was he 
nothing in his own eyes ? Was grace everything to 
fri™ ? Did a word that Eliphaz had said tend to teach 
.him either lesson ? 

It is remarkable, however, that the close of Eli- 
phaz's discourse was yet to be verified before the 
book ends, in the efficacy of Job's intercession for 
Eliphaz himself. " When they are dejected, then 
shalt thou say, Lift up, and He will save him of 
downcast eyes ; He will deliver him that is not guilt- 
less, and he is rescued by the cleanness of thy 
hands." 

It may be observed here that W, which the Authorized 
Version takes in the more common sense of "island," 
or " house," as Good prefers, is really a negative particle, 
which reappears in I-chabod (not-glory) : so Gesenius 
learly proves, with a discussion on its origin, in his 
Eebrew and Chaldee Thes. i M 79> 80. Dathe follows 



CHAPTER XXII. 95 

Beiske's proposal to read tfW, a man ; but, even if 
allowable in itself, this enfeebles the idea ; for if in- 
tercession rescues one who is not guiltless, it is more 
to the purpose than availing only for the innocent. 
Indeed the true version had been given long ago by 
Tremellius and Junius, and even in the Chaldee para- 
phrase, and followed by Schultens and others. 



CHAPTERS XXm., XXIV. 
Answer of Job. 

The tone of the answer is calmer, and somewhat more 
comely, though he says that to-day ako his complaint 
is rebellion (or hitter), and his stroke heavier than his 
groaning. Bat his desire is, as before, to draw near to 
God, and have His decision, in the face of all the cir- 
cumstances that seemed to testify against his integrity, 
and of friends carried away by appearance, and as 
ready to condemn him now as his worst enemies. No- 
thing disturbs fellowship more than misjudgment, un- 
less it be positive sin, especially when concealed under 
high pretension to godliness; and this was just the 
question between Job and his friends. On the other 
hand, while re-asserting his good conscience and his 
ways, Job owns to a shrinking from His presence, be- 
cause He is inflexible in His decrees, and unnerves the 
heart by the thought of Himself more than darkness. 
And this leads him, in chapter xxiv., to shew, not that 
God has not a moral government now, but how incom- 
prehensible it is to man, the first half dwelling on the 
sad sufferings of the innocent under wicked and mighty 
foes, the second on the successful evil-doers, who long 
carry on their villainy in secret, till condign punish- 
ment comes from God, as it will, beyond doubt, at the 
end. 

Chapter xxiii. 

And Job answered and said, 
Also to-day [is] my complaint rebellion, 



CHAPTER XXIII. 97 

My stroke is heavier than my groaning. 

that I knew where to find Him ! 

1 would eome onto His chair of state, 
I would draw up the cause before Him, 
And would fill my mouth with arguments ; 

I would know the words He would answer me, 
And understand what He would say to me. 
Would He contend with me by main strength ? 
Nay, but He would give heed to me. 
There would a righteous one be pleading with 

Him, 
And I should be for ever quit of my judge. 
Behold, I go eastward, but He is not there, 
And westward, but I cannot perceive Him ; 
To the north, where He worketh, but cannot 

behold [Him] ; 
He veileth the south, and I see [Him] not. 
But He knoweth the way, who is with me ; 
He trieth me, as gold I come forth. 
To His step my foot hath held, 
His way have I kept, and not turned aside : 
The commandment of His lips I have not left, 
More than my law [or my daily bread], 
Have I kept the sayings of His mouth. 
But He [is] in one thing, and who will turn Him ? 
And His soul desireth, and He will accomplish. 
For He performeth what is appointed me, 
And much of the like [is] with Him. 
Therefore I am confounded before His face ; 
I consider, and am afraid before Him. 
For God [El] hath made my heart soft, 
And the Almighty hath confouniel m^ 



98 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

For I was not cut off before the darkness, 
And before me covered He the thick darkness. 

'Chapter xxiv. 

Why, since times are not hid from the Almighty, 
Do not those who know Him see His days ? 
They remove landmarks ; they rob flocks, and feed ; 
They drive the ass of the orphan, they distrain 

the ox of the widow ; 
They thrust the needy out of the way, 
The poor of the land must hide together. 
Behold, wild asses in the wilderness, they go forth, 
Early about their work, after prey ; 
The desert [is] to him bread for the little ones ; 
In the field they reap his cattle-fodder, 
And the vineyard of the wicked they glean. 
They make the naked lodge without clothing, 
And without covering in the cold. 
With the rain of mountains they are drenched, 
And, shelterless, they embrace a rock. 
They pluck the orphan from the breast, 
And on the poor lay distraint. 
Naked they go without clothing, 
And hungry they bear the sheaf, 
They make oil within their walls, 
They tread wine-vats, and they thirst. 
Out of the city mortals groan, 
And the soul of the wounded crieth out ; 
Yet God regardeth not the folly ! 

They are among the rebels against the light, 
They know not His ways, nor remain in His paths. 
With the light the murderer riseth, 



CHAPTER XXIV. 99 

He slayeth the poor and needy, 

And in the night he is as a thief. 

And the adulterer's eye watches for the twilight, 

Saying, " No eye observeth me," 

And he layeth a veil over the face. 

In the dark he breaketh into houses, 

They keep themselves close by day, they know not 

the light. 
For morning is to them altogether death-shade, 
When he discerneth • the terrors of the death- 
shade. 
Light [is] he on the face of the waters ; 
The portion of those on the land is despised, 
He turneth not to the way of the vineyards. 
Drought and heat consume the snow-waters ; 
[So doth] sheol [those that] have sinned, 
The womb forgetteth him, the worm feedeth on 

him, 
He is no more remembered, and wickedness is 

broken like a tree. 
He devoureth the barren that beareth not, and 

doeth the widow no good. 
And he hath drawn the mighty by his power, 
He riseth, and none believeth in life. 
He [God] giveth confidence to him, and he is 

supported ; * 

And His eyes are on their ways. 
High they are a little while, and are not, 
And they sink ; like all they are shut up, 
And are cut off, like the topping ears of corn. 
And if not so now, who proveth me a liar, 
And maketh my word nought ? 



100 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

The sufferer still pleads the extremity of his sorrows' 
as accounting for his rebellious complaint, and affirms 
that the hand laid on him was even heavier than his 
groaning. If he could only find God, he would stand 
before His tribunal, lay out his case before Him, and 
argue it out fully there, where he would learn from 
Himself the grounds of what seemed wholly inexplicable, 
and understand why He had so dealt with His servant. 
Far from meeting with fresh trial there, or such scorn 
as his friends poured on him, he was confident thai 
God would use His power to strengthen his weakness. 
The hands of God were infinitely preferable to man's,, 
even were he the oldest of his friends, and he was con- 
fident, being assured of his own integrity. He should 
thus get quit of his judge, instead of enduring the 
lingering suspicion of those who reasoned from the 
outside show of things, without a single fact to justify 
it. Nothing is harder to disprove than that which has 
its only, but deep, root in the minds of opponents 
who assume to have God's mind, and commit themselves 
thoroughly to saying so. 

But there was his fresh trouble : he knew not where- 
to find God. If he went east or west, it was equally 
vain ; either He was not there, or Job could not per* 
ceive Him. If he turned to the north, with its hail and 
snows, where He works, he could not get a glimpse ; 
much less where He veils the south in mist and cloud. 
But of this he was sure, that God knew the way with 
Job, and that, after His trial of him, he should come 
forth as gold ; for, as he so frequently says, his foot had 
held firmly to His step, and he had, without turning 
Aside, kept His way. From i\ie eomTB&aifa&ttit of His 



CHAPTER XXIV. 101 

Tips he had not swerved : more than his law (for Job 
nsed to speak and act as a prince) had he kept the say- 
ings of His month. 

Bat then there was the serious reflection that, as 
God was assuredly in these extraordinary afflictions, 
Job felt the impossibility of turning Him aside from His 
inscrutable purpose, and that what was appointed to 
him would come to pass without fail, for • He has His 
mind, and does it always. Therefore was Job con- 
founded before His face, and fear grew as he considered 
it. For El unnerved his heart, and Shaddai con- 
founded him. Eliphaz might talk of the darkness 
which he owned did surround him, and he might im- 
pute it to hidden iniquity • it was God's doing so that 
appalled and perplexed him. Some understand the 
last sentence to mean that he had this sense of dread 
because God did not cut him off before the darkness 
came, and He had not covered the thick blackness from 
bis face. 

So the beginning of chapter xxiv. has furnished 
room for no small debate, many moderns preferring to 
understand and divide it thus : Why are times not re- 
served by the Almighty, and do His friends [literally, 
knowers] not see His days ? The times are judicial 
terms when He dispenses justice, and the days are an 
even more common expression of like intervention. 
The difference is that the latter clause makes the sense 
of the former still narrower, or more definite. I have 
given what most approves itself to my mind, and dis- 
tinguished between the times not hid from Shaddai, and 
those who know Him not seeing His days of retribu- 
tion. It would not have been strange in Wio&fe \gp$nft3& 



102 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

of Him. It is the enigma of psalms and prophets, and 
most he till Christ solves it. 

Then Joh expands on the allowed evil of men, who 
profit by it shamelessly. Who of men can reckon up 
the shades of human fraud and force, of corruption and 
violence, without and within, but abpve all on the de- 
fenceless and the poor ? The country and the city, the 
desert and the sea, are the varied scenes of wickedness 
as varied, where men embezzle and plunder ; and in 
the abodes of civilization the darkness before the day 
calls them out to intrigues and crimes as dark, without 
a notice from God ; while the restless sea gives scope 
to a deeper restlessness ; yet they die, and are buried 
just as others. Again, family ties yield as little- 
guarantee against cruelty as the public life where 
a despot reigns, regardless of everything but his own 
will. 

It is not that Job doubted all to be under the eye of 
God, though as yet His hand be not on the world, 
while death comes in to cut off the highest when 
they least expect it. He is sure that his estimate can- 
not be gainsaid. 



CHAPTER XXV. 
Third Discourse of Bildad. 

This brief chapter contains the final discourse of Bil- 
dad. It is plain that the three friends are all but 
silenced. We shall see ere long that Zophar has not a 
word more to add. Job has much in proof that they, 
none of them, saw aright even the surface of his trial, 
not to speak of God's ways underneath. Yet Bildad 
speaks grandly of God's dominion as suited to over- 
whelm all thought of human righteousness, and sets 
out the sun and stars as pale and impure in presence of 
His light : how much more a mortal, son of Adam t 
And Bildad the Shuhite answered and said, 

With Him [are] dominion and fear ; 

He maketh peace in His high places. 

Is their number to His armies ? 

And on whom ariseth not His light ? 

And how is mortal man righteous with God (El) ? 

And how is he pure, born of a woman ? 

Behold, to the moon, and it shineth not, 

And the stars are not pure in His eyes : 

How much less mortal man, a maggot ; 

And the son of man, a worm t 
Such is the closing effort of Bildad, evidently wish- 
ing to say something, rather than having something to 
say. So far as it is a reply, it seems directed against 
the opening of Job's answer to Eliphaa (chap. xxiiLV 
as has been noticed by others. The m&\& yhs&Sa^&» 



104 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

awful majesty of God, who must resent the unhallowed 
thought of man's drawing near to His throne, above 
all, to debate with Him as if He could mistake, or the 
creature vindicate itself against His dealings. What 
gross forge tf ulness of His countless hosts, as if His 
power could be measured by man ; and what ignorance 
of His all-reaching light, which penetrates and mani- 
fests the remotest and otherwise hidden objects in the 
universe ! 

But he does injustice to Job's asseverations of in- 
tegrity, if he alludes to them in the latter part (for 
Job in noway denied man's natural impurity), but had, 
on the contrary, already heard, in reply to himself, a 
full demolition of every pretension to righteousness in 
chap. is. Job simply repudiated the imputation of deep 
evil, cloaked by high professions of piety, on his part, 
as the cause of his exceeding trial. But he was as far 
as Bildad from putting the creature on a false level with 
the Creator, least of all man, morally corrupt as he is. 
The lights of heaven lack lustre in his eyes : what is a 
sinner accounted ? Abstractly, what he urges is un- 
questionable truth ; as a reply and application to Job, 
it is perverse and futile. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 
Answer of Job. 

The rejoinder of Job begins with bitter sarcasm on 
the abundant help afforded by Bildad's curt speech, 
which really betrayed the inability of the friends to 
continue the discussion, and that judgment must go by 
default, on the triumphant counter-proof that in this 
life the righteous may suffer and the wicked prosper. 
He then asserts the magnificent power of God with a 
bold elevation far beyond Bildad, who failed to see the 
true question. 

And Job answered and said, 

How thou hast helped the powerless, 

Saved the arm that is strongthloss 1 

How thou hast counselled the unwise, 

And declared wisdom in abundance t 

To whom hast thou uttered words ? 

And whose breath came forth from thee ? 
The shades [Rephaim] tremble 

Beneath the waters, and they that dwell there. 

Sheol [is] naked before Him, 

And destruction hath no covering. 

He spreadeth the north over the void, 

He hangeth the earth upon nothing. 

He bindeth up waters in His thick clouds, 

And the cloud is not rent under them. 

He fasteneth the face of the throne, 

He spreadeth over it His cloud. 



106 NOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

He hath placed a bound on the face of the waters, 

Up to the limits of light and darkness. 

The pillars of the heavens tremble, 

And are astonished at His rebuke. 

By His power He stilleth the sea, 

And by His understanding smiteth Rahab. 

By His Spirit the heavens are brightness, 

His hand pierceth the fleeing serpent. 
Lo, these [are] the ends of His ways, 

And what a whisper of a word we hear of Him ! 

And the thunder of His might who understandeth ? 
The irony with which Job notices the last effort of 
the interlocutors is not more withering than is evident 
the sublime description of God's glory in creation. Job 
begins with the, to us, invisible depths to which are 
consigned the gigantic forms of those who once fought 
against God, and are now made to tremble, though the 
hour of judgment be not yet come. He sees not only 
peace in the high places, but the dread of God piercing 
far beyond the earthly scenes of His government. 
Sheol and Anaddon stand unveiled before Him. How 
incomparably nobler and more accurate is the descrip- 
tion of the world than anything in the mythology of 
the heathen, or their philosophy ! God is spoken of as 
spreading the north over empty space, Himself sustain- 
ing the vault of heaven, and suspending the earth on 
nothing, tying up the waters in thick clouds, so thai 
their contents should not escape till He please ; while 
He encloses the face of the throne (the outside of the 
heavens towards the earth), spreading over it His clouds. 
Then Job glances at the waters beneath, and fne 
horizon, where darkness meets li^JciV, W\AYv* mightiest 



CHAPTER XXVI. 107 

of earth's pillars, towering on high, are made to tremble 
and wonder at God's rebuke, while the restless sea is 
stilled at His pleasure, and the proud foe is smitten by 
His knowledge. It is by His Spirit that the heavens 
are brightness, and it is His hand that woundeth the 
fleeing serpent, a figurative description of the constel- 
lation in the sky. Yet Job rightly feels that these are 
bnt the extremities or fringes of His ways ; and if it be 
bnt a whisper that we hear, what must be the thunder 
of His might ? 



v > 



CHAPTER XXYIL 
Fresh Discourse of Job begins. 

Bildad has been answered as well as Eliphaz ; and now 
Zophar, the remaining or third censor, is silent. Not 
so Job ; he has more to say, to which he gives a sen- 
tentious form. He swears by the living God that, 
though he had not been vindicated as yet by Him, but, 
on the contrary, called still to a most bitter trial, he 
would never while he lived admit that the surmises 
against him were right, nor give up the assertion of his 
integrity — that they indeed were the guilty people who 
falsely accused him. For what is the hope of the im- 
pure (or hypocrite) when God deals with his soul? 
Does he delight himself in Shaddai, or call on Him 
at all times? They had all seen such a case, and 
therefore had no excuse for confounding Job's with it, 
and so speaking the merest trash. At any rate, as they 
had proved themselves incapable of a just application, 
he would let them know the sure end of ungodliness : 
calamities, without and within, for his offspring as for 
himself, till every trace of ill-gotten gain vanished, and 
death opened the inevitable doom for the man whom 
men, if not the wind itself, hissed out of his place, ex- 
alting over his destruction. 

And Job continued to utter his parable, and 
said, 
God [El] liveth ! He hath turned aside my right, 
And the Almighty hath. emVillex^m^ «w&\ 



CHAPTER XXVII. 1(M> 

All the while Thy breath [is] in me, 

And God's spirit in my nostrils, 

My lips shall not speak wickedness, 

Nor my tongue ntter deceit. 

Abomination to me if I justify yon t 

Till I expire I will not part from mine integrity : 

I hold to my righteousness, and will not let it go: 

Of my days my heart reproacheth not. 

Mine enemies be as the wicked, 

And mine adversary as the unrighteous. 

For what [is] the hope of the impure* that he shall' 

gain, 
When God shall draw outf his soul ? 
Doth God [El] hear his cry when trouble cometh 

on him ? 
Doth he delight in the Almighty ? Doth he call 

on God at all times ? 
I will teach you of the hand of God : 
What [is] with the Almighty I hide not. 
Behold, ye all of you have seen ; and why this — 

years altogether vain ? 
This [is] the portion of a wicked man with God, 
And the heritage of oppressors they receive from 

the Almighty. 



• Or hypocrite. 

t by?* fa a fc &r d word to account for and connect with the 

ipe. Geaenius, &c, take it as "draw out,*' or "unsheatlT Mike a 
ord from its scabbard. Geaenius owns, however, that Schnurrer's 
r,gestion is not to be despised, who takes it as abridged for 7^$* 

th compensation in the vowel lengthened for tha &w$\&& ^ > 
Ibeseneoof ''demand," as in Luko xft. 20. 



110 

If Ids children multiply, pt is] for the words, 
And Ids offspring hare not enough of bread; 
His residue are hurled in death, and their widows 

weep not. 
If he heap up silver as dost, and prepare clothing 

as clay, 
He prepareth, but the righteous shall put [it] on, 
And the innocent shall divide the silver. 
He hath built his house as a moth, and as a booth 

the watchman needeth. 
He lieth down, but shall not be gathered ; 
He openeth his eyes, and he is not. 
Terrors overtake him as waters, by night a tempest 

stealeth him away. 
An east wind taketh him up, and he is gone, and 

it sweepeth him out of his place ; 
And it casteth at him, and spareth not ; from its 

hand he would gladly flee. 
It clappeth its hands at him, and hisseth him out 
of his place. 
Tho opening language, differing from all that intro- 
duces Job's words hitherto, seems to imply that he 
pausod, after his reply to Bildad, long enough to shew 
that Zophar and the rest had nothing more to say, 
though no doubt as yet unconvinced. He begins again 
with unwonted solemnity. He appeals to the living 
El, though owning that He it was who turned aside 
His judgment, and made his soul bitter for the present;, 
that as long as he breathed his lips should not speak 
wiokoduoss, nor his tongue murmur deceit. It would 
bo but profanation for him to allow them to be in the 
right; bo to his dying bro&th ha ^ould stand to his 



CHAPTER XXVII. Ill 

integrity, and bold fast bis righteousness, without 
letting it go. For indeed bis eonsoienoe was good; 
bis heart reproached none of his doings. He was 
conscious of nothing to account for his trials; yet 
thereby he had allowed already that he was not 
justified. But what could he think of those who 
availed themselves of the trials that pressed him 
down? He could come to no other conclusion 
than that, if he were innocent, they who took the 
place of his enemy must be regarded as the wicked 
party, and those who assailed him as the unrighteous. 
He was at least as sure as they that the hope of the 
hypocrite or profane must perish when God shall sum- 
mon his soul, and that as God hoars not his cry when 
the long- deferred trouble falls on him, so he neither de- 
lights in God at any time, nor calls on Him at all times. 
That Job had claimed for himself continual clinging to 
God and vindication of His honour, spite of his own 
unparalleled sorrows at His hand, the friends well 
knew ; and, because they could not reconcile the two 
things, they had betrayed themselves into the guilt of 
surmising Job to be guilty. 

In the latter part of the chapter Job expatiates with 
great force on a case which they had before their eyes 
no less than he, but which he must expound for them, 
as they had utterly failed to lay it before him. It is 
the end of the godless, a theme he would have avoided 
if his' conscience were not good. They had trifled 
vainly with the matter. He would teach them of God's 
hand, and not keep back what is with Shaddai. For 
his children, however many, come the sword and wwal% 
they fall, unburied and unwept even oi \.\iq** TAurabAfe * 



112 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

them. His treasures go to strangers who are worthy. 
The house he built turns out as frail as a moth, like a 
shed the watchman puts up by the way. He lies down 
rich, to wake up to his ruin before God ; and his de- 
struction too is as sudden as overwhelming, terrors 
overtaking him as waters, like a whirlwind by night 
which snatches him up and whirls him away, spite of 
pitiful efforts to escape, as if it really mocked his misery 
and the place that once knew him. 



CHAPTER XXVIH. 

The connection between this chapter and the preceding 
has perplexed readers and writers on the book; but, 
though it passes (as not infrequently do Job* s discourses) 
into a sort of soliloquy, there seems to be an intelligible 
and weighty link with what went immediately before, 
where the miserable end of the ungodly fool is set out 
most vividly. This might appear an extreme case; 
but in truth it is the too general experience of the race, 
that men walk after a vain show, zealous after every 
other object under the sun, yea, in the bowels of the 
earth, and in the depths of the sea, overlooking that 
wisdom which consists in and is inseparable from the 
fear of the Lord, and that understanding which departs 
from evil. Such is God's saying, who knows the place 
of wisdom inscrutable to all others, for destruction 
and death can only say that they have heard its 
report with their ears. Not seeing the connection, the 
Vulgate, followed by Luther, &c, gives no expression 
to the particle ^3 as others soften it down into a musing 
ejaculation, " Yes truly," " Indeed." The antithesis 
in any case is in verse 12, " But wisdom," &c. 

For there is a vein for the silver, 

And a place for the gold they refine. 

Iron is taken out of earth, 

And stone molten into copper. 

He [man] putteth an end to darkae**, 



114 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

And to the end searcheth he all, 
The stone of darkness and death- shade. 
He breaketh a shaft away from a dweller, 
Forgotten of a foot they hang suspended, 
Away from men they swing : 
The earth, out of it cometh bread, 
And under it is turned up as it were fire. 
Its stones [are] the place of the sapphires, 
And nuggets of gold it* hath, 
A path no bird of prey hath known, 
Nor vulture's eye hath seen. 
The sons of pride have not trodden it, 
Nor the dark lion passed over it. 
He [man] layeth his hand on flint, 
He overturneth mountains by the root, 
He cutteth rivers in the rocks, 
And his eye seeth every precious thing. 
Floods he bindeth from dripping. + 
And bringeth to light what was hidden. 
But wisdom, where shall it be found ? 
And where this, the place of understanding ? 
No mortal knoweth its price, 
Nor is it found in the land of the living. 
The depth saith, Not in me [is] it, 
And the sea saith, It [is] not with me. 
Pure gold is not given for it, 
Nor is silver weighed, its price. 
It cannot be weighed with gem of Ophir, 
With the precious onyx or the sapphire. 



* Or he, that is, man. 
f Literally, weeping. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 115 

Gold and glass* cannot equal it, 

Nor its exchange [be] a vessel of fine gold. 

•Coral or pearl is not to be mentioned. 

And the acquisition of wisdom [is] above rubies, 

The topaz of Cush doth not match it, 

With the clear gem it is not weighed. 

And wisdom, whence cometh it, 
And where this, the place of understanding ? 
And further it is hidden from the eyes of all living, 
And it is concealed from the birds of the heavens, 
Destruction and Death have said, 
With our ears we have heard its report. 
God understandeth its way, and He knoweth its 

place. 
For He looketh to the ends of the earth, 
He seeth under the whole heaven. 
In making to wind its weight, 
And meting out the waters by measure, 
In making a law for the rain, 
And a way for the lightning of the thundor, 
Then He saw and declared it, 
He established and also searched it out ; 
And unto man He said, 

Behold, the fear of the Lord, that [is] wisdom, 
And to depart from evil understanding. 
It is impossible to overlook the comprehensive grasp 

* Pareau, who has written elaborately on this chapter (De Im- 
mortalitatU ac Vitae Futurae Notitiis ab antiquissimo Jobi 
Scriptore adliibitis), understands this to be vitrum auratum, or vi~ 
trum auro ornatum, a combination which seems to have been highly 
prized of old, but unknown to moderns, like some fe^t ovtax <& Wvsct 
rarities. 



116 K0TES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

of nature, and even art, here surveyed, especially as the* 
passage stands correctly rendered in verses 4-11, where 
even the Authorised Version fails in duly presenting 
particular phrases as well as the connection. Both aro 
given more accurately, I believe, in the version before 
the reader, and in general by those who have trans- 
lated during the last century and more, when attention 
was drawn by A. Schultens to the allusion made to 
mining operations, misunderstood in earlier days. 

Job then speaks of the realm of nature searched out 
with the keenest avidity by man, who familiarises him- 
self with the vein or mine where silver lies, as he takes 
care to refine the gold he discovers not so disposed. 
So too with iron and copper ore molten for use. He 
knows how to pursue his way spite of darkness, over- 
come with artificial light, no matter what the danger, 
learnt every now and then at cost of life. We see de- 
scribed the shaft formed far away from human dwelling, 
and means used to convey men where none could walk, 
suspended by ropes, it would seem, and swinging to and 
fro. We see not only the earth cultivated on its sur- 
face, but means of fuel found beneath its stones, the 
place of the sapphire and nuggets of gold. Into such 
depths, ransacked for its hidden treasure, no bird has 
penetrated, nor vulture's eye seen a path; not the 
boldest of beasts has trodden there, not even the dark or 
fierce lion has passed over it. Man's daring resources,, 
with covetousness behind, conquer all difficulties. The 
hard flint yields to his hand, and mountains he over- 
turns by the root if they stand in his way, as he cuts 
rivers in the rocks, to reach the precious things his eye 
discerns. Nor is it only letting the patera off in suited 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 117 

-channels, but he binds floods from oozing and making 
their way through, so as the better to bring to light 
-what lay concealed. 

But if such is man's successful pursuit of the least 
accessible objects in the bowels of the earth, where shall 
wisdom be found ? and where the place of understand- 
ing ? And it is the harder to And, as no mortal knows 
its price, and in fact it is not found in the land of the 
living. The depth disowns its presence, the sea yet 
more emphatically. Vain is the hope of adequate ex- 
change ; gold or silver is weighed in vain ; nor gem of 
Ophir, nor onyx, nor sapphire, nor golden glass, nor 
work of art in gold, nor coral or pearl, nor topaz, nor 
jewel of clearest lustre. Again, then whence comes 
wisdom ? and where the place of understanding ? But 
if besides it be hidden from the eyes of all living, and con- 
cealed from the birds of the heavens ; if destruction and 
death can only say that they have heard its report, God 
understands its way and He knows its place. The uni- 
verse in no degree distracts Him : He looks to the ends 
•of the earth, He sees not only in but under the whole 
heaven. Nothing is too ethereal or too vast for His 
ken and sway. In appointing to the winds its weight 
{surely a remarkable thought and word for these days), 
^nd meting out the waters by measure, in controlling the 
rain and the lightning, He none the less laid down 
the foundation of all righteousness, and this for favoured 
man on earth to hear. It is to give God His rights. 
Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom ; and to 
depart from evil is understanding. It is to be subject 
morally to God as Master, fearing Him and denaacli\i% 
from evil — the true wisdom and \m&exa\»m^ta%diT&s»- 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

A fresh discourse of Job here begins, and it is his 
final one, which naturally parts into the three chapters 
which follow, each presenting a distinct portion, and 
the whole a very complete summary of the case, as it 
now presented itself to the sufferer's spirit. He takes 
a retrospective glance at his past life, when divine 
favour lavished on him every enjoyment that an upright 
soul could desire on earth, and this in the relief of thfr 
needy and distressed, quite as much as in the universal 
honour of those that knew him. Then in chapter xxx. 
he contrasts his actual circumstances of degradation, an 
object of scorn and insult to the lowest, even of the 
young, and this without the smallest comfort within, 
yea, the bitterest dregs of his cup lying in the fact 
that he cried unheard to God who indeed with strong 
hand was putting him down, as surely as He had once 
blessed and exalted him ; so that he could only sur- 
render himself to hopeless sorrow as regards this life. 
Yet does he, in chapter xxxi., with the utmost detail 
and solemnity repudiate all consciousness of secret 
iniquity, whether wandering in lust, or in any stain on 
domestic propriety, either in public or in religious 
life, so as not only to imprecate judgments if there? 
was hidden evil, but to speak with unbecoming 
boldness in the presence of Gdd, who however well 
knew that His poor servant was far more distant front 



CHAPTER XXIX. 119 

ppocrisy than his friends that suspected him. Thus 

ins the first of these sections. 

And Job continued to utter his parable and said, 
Who giveth me like the months of old,* 
Like the days when God guarded me. 
When His lamp, it shone over my head — 
By His light I walked [through] darkness ; 
As I was in the days of the harvest 
When God's familiarity t [was] over my tent ; 
While the Almighty [was] still with me, 
My young ones around me ; 
When I washed my steps in cream, 
And the rock alongside me [poured] rivers of oil ; 
When I went out to the gate by the city,J 
In the open place I established my seat ; 
Youths saw me and hid themselves 
And the aged rose — stood up, 
Princes refrained from words 
And laid the hand on their mouth, 
The voice of nobles was arrested, 
And their tongue cleaved to their palate. 

For the ear heard and praised me, 
And an eye saw and testified to me. 
For I delivered the poor that cried, 
And the fatherless that had no helper. 
The blessing of the perishing came on me, 
And the heart of the widow I made sing. 
Righteousness I put on, and it put me on, 

* That is, that I were as in, &c. 

t Or, counsel. 

X The question is between Job's own door, or the gate of the 

y, where deliberation and justice wete aou%\v\ -> ^YAOa. ^«to *^- 

ided from the country. 



120 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

As a robe and a diadem mine equity. 

I was eyes to the blind, and feet [was] I to the 

lame, 
A father to the needy, and the cause I knew not I 

searched. 
And I broke the jaw of the wicked, 
And flung the prey out of his teeth. 

And I said, With my nest I shall expire, 
And as sand* shall multiply my days. 
My root is open toward the waters, 
And dew lodgeth all night on my branches. 
Mine honour remaineth fresh with me, 
And my bow is renewed in my hand. 
They hearken to me, they wait, and are silent for 

my counsel. 
After my word they repeat not, 
And my discourse droppeth on them, 
And they wait for me as rain, 
And their mouth they open wide [as] for the 

latter rain. 

• ^J7 is taken by the Sept. and Vulgate, &c, as t€ the palm" 
or sand-tree, usually called "IQJ^ from its towering straightness. 

T T 

And this sense would fall in with the context excellently. Bat 
the Jewish Rabbinical commentators, following the Talmud, and 
followed by Ewald, RosenmUller, Dillmann, Delitzsch, &c, regard it 
as " the phoenix." Bochart (Hieroz. 819) reminds us that so some 
of the fathers took the <f>oti/t| of Psalm xcii. 13, as a testimony to 

* 

resurrection. It is needless to argue against the reference to this 
fabulou3 bird, which suits the context as badly as it does in itself. 
For the common view see Psalm cxxxix., Habakkuk i. 9 where 
the sea or shore is not added ; and here it was the less necessary, 
as the sand of the desert is no less countless : so in Targ., Syr., 
Arm. ; so Luther, Trem. and Jun. ; so even Gesenius, Umbreit, 
and Kenan, not to speak of orthodox. acYuAarava £«&&?&. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 121 

I laugh on them when they have no confidence,* 
And the light of my face they cannot cast down. 
I choose their way for them, and sit head, 
And dwelt as king in the troop, the comforter of 
mourners. 
Some of the finest compositions of genius in ancient 
and in modern times embody a similar retrospect, out 
of the depths of present misery, on past prosperity 
and honour; but, touching as thoy may be, they fall as 
far short of that which has just come before us, as the 
character of an Oedipus or a Lear is inferior to this 
holy man of old. None nee,d travel out of scripture— 
I do not say for truth, found nowhere else, but — for tho 
most admirable and affecting picture of reverses, borne 
patiently, though not perfectly, till He came whose 
alone it was to sum up all, divine and human, un- 
alloyed and unconfounded in His own person. Im- 
measurably far below Him was Job, yet as far above 
the favourite sufferers of dramatists and other poets as 
faith is beyond unbelief. Nor is it only on the human 
side that we see the gulf that separates the inspired 
book from the best writings of men, but yet more on 
the divine, where no vengeful being looms behind to 

* This is generally taken to mean that, if Job laid aside his 
-dignified gravity, so far as to smile on them, they could scarcely 
believe in his paying them such notice. But the sense seems given 
•correctly in the text, and more agreeably to the connection. It 
has been also suggested to understand it as intimating that they 
would not believe that Job would laugh at them, nor cause to fall 
the light, or dignified cheerfulness of his face. Mr. Carey con- 
quers !)^QN> to mean " they presume" (literally, trust), and the 

tense to be that, spite of his graciousneas, ttay do tk& c&c&<ukSp| 
provoke or take advantage. 



122 NOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

take a spiteful pleasure in blighting at length man's 
earthly happiness. There is indeed such a being, yet 
a creature of vast but limited capacity of malicious 
power, whose defeat is here revealed for our comfort ; 
and yet more fully the delight of God in the final joy 
and blessing of those who honour Him with subjection 
of heart and word and ways, and this even on earth 
before men, as it will be on the largest scale when the 
Lord appears in His kingdom. * 

Job then sets before us a beautiful account of his 
previous life, when God shone on the days and months 
as they glided by, His lamp above his head, His light 
enabling him to walk through darkness. Especially 
does he recall the days of his harvest, of maturity 
rather than youth, when he enjoyed the familiar pre- 
sence and counsel of Eloah over his tent life, and 
beneath the shadow of Shaddai, his young surrounding 
him, and the proverbial blessings of earth beyond 
measure abundant and accessible. Nor did honour fail 
outside his own domains ; for if he went from [or to] 
the gate up to the city, and took his seat in the broad- 
way or market, youths hid themselves in awe and the 
grey-headed rose standing up till he seated himself. 
Leading men or rulers abstained from speech and 
imposed on themselves respectful silence ; those nobles 
or men of mark whose voices were wont to be heard, 
were hushed with tongue cleaving to the palate ; so great 
the reverence that greeted Job's presence in their midst, 
with an influence all the more because it was unofficial. 

Other testimony too did not fail : what distress had 
ever sought his help in vain ? What tale of woe been 
slighted? What sight of wretchedness forgotten? 



CHAPTER XXIX. 12$ 

And those relieved did not see or hear their benefactor 
unmoved, if his left hand knew not what his right had 
done. God does not let die the memory of unselfish 
goodness ; and the poor can render as true a witness to* 
lovingkindness, as the rich to a greatness beyond their 
own. And was not Job the deliverer of the poor, the 
orphan, the perishing, and the widow ? Indeed this 
field of his beneficent, ay and righteous, activity was 
large. As he put on justice, so did it fit Job, and 
judgment became him like mantle and turban. Eyes 
was he to him that bad none, and feet to the lame, and 
to the needy a father, refusing no pains to search out a 
cause unknown ; nor was his just zeal less to be dreaded 
by evil-doers — so would he break the tusks of bad 
men, and pluck the prey from their teeth. 

Assuredly, if ever mortal was entitled to look for 
a tranquil future from God and bofore men, it was the 
man of Uz. And he did say, "In [or with] my nest 
shall I expire and like the sand [or palm], multiply my 
days, my root open to the water, and the dew all night 
on my branch, my glory remaining with me, and my 
bow renewed in my hand." For how could he ignore 
the weight attached to his words, the waiting and 
silence for it ; the absence of rejoinder ; the welcome 
reception of it, as thirsty land waits for rain, with 
open mouth as for tho latter rain ? His laugh was 
suited to dispel distrust, instead of their despondency 
darkening the light of his countenance. In short Job 
was their cherished counsellor in difficulty, sat aa 
chief, dwelt like a king in the army or troop, and really 
was one that comforted the mourners. Such without a> 
break had been his life of yore. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

Now Job sets forth the misery and degradation to which 
he had been suddenly reduced. And, first, he dwells 
on the disdain which was his portion, not from the 
high and haughty, but from the most wretched and 
despicable of men. None was so low that he could not 
regard Job with derision and scorn. It would be hard 
to find such a picture of utter baseness in the habits of 
men ; yet was there no expression of malicious con- 
tempt which he had not to endure from these loathsome 
objects, who set on him, not only with their vulgar 
ribaldry, but with the coarsest of practical jokes and 
rude indecorums, which utterly unnerved him. But 
then a deeper and more constant sorrow oppressed 
him, for he could not shut out from himself the har- 
rowing conviction that his ceaseless sufferings in the 
body were from the hand of God, from whom he might 
(have looked for compassion. Whereas now he could 
not but abandon all hope of relief or deliverance from 
above, any more than of the commonest sympathy from 
men ordinarily quick enough to feel for the misery of 
their fellows. 

And now at me they laugh, younger in days 
than I, 

Whose fathers I had disdained to set with the 
dogs of my flock ! 

Even the strength of their hands, what [was] it 
to me ? 



CHAPTER XXX. 12l> 

In them the prime was lost through want and 

hunger, 
Who yesterday were gnawing the desert, the 

waste, and the wild, 
Plucking saltwort in the jungles, roots of broom 

their food. 
At them, driven out of the midst, they hooted, 

as [at] a thief, 
To dwell in the horror of glens, dens of the 

earth, and rocks. 
Among the bushes they brayed, under the nettles 

huddled, 
Sons of folly, sons of no-name, who were whipped 

out of the land. 
And now I am become their song, and I am 

their bye-word ; 
Abhorring me, they get far from me, 
And even withhold not spittle from my face. 
For He hath loosed my cord, and humbled me, 
And they have cast away the bridle before my face. 
On the right riseth up a brood ; they push aside 

my feet, 
And cast up against me their destructive ways ; 
They tear up my path, helping on my downfall ; 
They have no helper; they come as [through} 

a wide breach, 
Under the ruin they roll onward. 
Terrors turn on me ; they pursue like a storm my 

dignity, 
And my prosperity like a cloud is gone,. 

And now my soul pbureth itself out upon me ; 
Days of Buffering hold me fast *, 



126 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

The night piereeih my bones, and my gnawers rest 

not. 
With great violence is my clothing changed ; 
It girdeth me as the collar of my vest. 
He hath cast me into the mire, and I am become 

as dust and ashes. 
I cry to Thee, bat Thou dost not answer me ; 
I stand, and Thou dost look fixedly at me. 
Thou art changed to a cruel one towards me, 
With the strength of Thy hand Thou warrest 

against me. 
Raising me on the wind, Thou makest me borne off, 
And in my very substance* dissolvest me. 
And I know Thou art bringing me to death, 
And to the house of assembly for all living. 
Surely there is no prayer when He putteth forth 

the hand, 
Though they cry out, in His destroying. 
For have I not wept over one whose day is hard? 
Was [not] my soul sad over the needy ? 
Yet when I looked for good, evil came, 
And when I waited for light, darkness came. 
My bowels are made to boil, and are not silent ; 
Days of affliction have overtaken me. 
I am going as blackened without the sun ; 
I stand up in the assembly, I cry out. 
Of jackals am I become brother, and companion of 

ostriches. 

* After the Kethib man}', as Ewald, Delitzscb, &c., read 
rnj^Jl, tempest or crash of the storm. Gesenius, &c, read, 

JlwJli "Thou terrifiest me" or terrifying. The Keri rPttfil 

* - : t • \ 
in followed in the Authorised "Vernon, ati&W*. 



CHAPTER XXX. 127 



• 



My skin off me is black, and my bones are burned 
with heat, 

And my harp is [turned] to wailing, and my pipe 
to the voice of weepers. 
The acute feelings of the eastern grandee come out 
vividly in this resumption of complaint. His sensitive- 
ness was in no way impaired by his astonishing re- 
verses, and his deep and varied sufferings, but, on the 
contrary, as one might expect, quickened thereby to 
the highest degree. Thus he does not merely speak of 
the cruel age of mockery he had to endure from a crew 
of youths, incapable of appreciating worth, or of feel- 
ing for others in trouble, but breaking forth into shame- 
less mirth over his unparalleled misery. He looks at 
the antecedents and belongings of those his juniors, 
who spared no unseasonable and unfeeling jibe that 
could wound to the quick, and cannot but express the 
reflection that he would have disdained to rank even 
their fathers with the dogs of his flock. Even for 
physical strength they were worthless, their prime being 
perished through want and hunger. What else could 
be expected from such as had been till now gnawing 
what they could And in the desert ? and this not where 
bright spots smiled, but where was unrelieved waste 
and wild, plucking saltwort, when they could find it, in 
the jungles, and finding food, wretched as it was, in 
roots of broom or juniper. How sad to think of such 
degradation for members of the human race even in 
those early days! Such social outcasts, with whom 
we commonly connect the overthronged dens of infamy 
and crime in some great city, were not wanting then 
behind the scenes of desert life. M» foeta^ w^^fc* 



128 NOTES ON THS BOOK OF JOB. 

driven oat of the midst, men hooted as at a thief, com- 
pelled to find a dwelling in horrible glens, in dens of 
the earth, and in hollow rocks. Among the bashes they 
coald hardly be said to speak, bat brayed ; he adds, 
under the nettles they herded, after some beastly sort, 
sons of folly, and too obscure for a name, notorious 
only for vice and its surrounding punishment. 

And now Job was become their song and their bye- 
word. Even such as those, wretched troglodytes if not 
worse from their origin, dared to turn him into merri- 
ment and spiteful outrage. In their abhorrence they 
would retire far away, or, if they drew near, it was 
to pour on him the lowest mark of ignominious 
contempt. But Job could see that God's hand was be- 
hind all the humiliation to which he was subjected. 
The Keri gives " my," that is, Job's, cord ; the Kethib, 
"His," that is, God's, which Ewald interprets as a bow- 
string, Conant as a rein. The sense seems to be the 
letting loose of trouble and persecutions. They took 
their stand as bearing witness against the sufferer on 
the right (see Ps. cix. 6; Zech. iii. 1), as has been 
noticed by others. Thus was he deprived of firm 
ground to stand on; so that he could only compare 
himself to some place exposed to all the ways and 
means of a siege and assault, the tenor of his life being 
violently broken up, and they needing no help who 
helped to precipitate his ruin. For they poured in as 
through a wide breach, rolling onward under the crash 
of ruin ; while a crowd of terrors turned on him, each 
chasing his dignity away like a hurricane, and his pro- 
sperity vanishing like vapour. 

Hence he was utterly unnerved, and his soul dis- 



CHAPTER XXX. 129 

solved, as it were, in sorrow, as days of suffering held 
him fast; and the night, which ordinarily affords a 
respite to the most wretched, aggravated his misery to 
the piercing of his bones, as if they were picked out 
from him, and the gnawers of his flesh not only began 
their work before the time, but this sleeplessly. Such 
was the condition of his body, that it was only by the 
ntmost violence his clothing could be changed ; it sur- 
rounded him as tightly as the collar of a close-fitting 
vest. What could he feel but that God had cast him 
into the mire of abasement, so as to become like dust 
and ashes ? Job crying to Him, and He not answer- 
ing ; Job standing, and He gazing fixedly at him ! for 
there seems no warrant for transporting the negative 
into the later clause. Job did not doubt God's con- 
templating all, which made His non-intervention the 
keener pang ; and he ventured to say that He who had 
erst blessed him was now changing Himself into a 
being cruel toward him, and making war on him with 
all His might, raising him up in a storm-car, and 
causing him to be borne away only the more thoroughly 
to dissolve his very being. So that he knew it was 
God bringing him to death, and to the house where 
living men assemble at last. 

Lastly, Job contrasts his own misery, thus without 
a hearing or alleviation from above, with his tenderness 
towards incomparably less troubles among his fellows ; 
whereas, when he now cried, worse followed. Yet what 
could exceed his inward feeling, or what the effect out- 
wardly on his person, and this, not by natural or external 
causes, but by unheard-of blows and consuming disease* 
and by soul-exerciseB worse than &W.? "Ba YisA. «*«&> 



ISO NOTES OF THE BOOK OF JOB. 

cried out among men, and not to God only, and this so 
dolefolly as to set him with brutes and birds notorious 
for their yells and screeches. 

Such is the central part of what Job here pours 
forth, more like a soliloquy than a reply to the already 
silenced. It is an expression of gloom the deepest, 
beeause of the bright past he had enjoyed by God's 
favour, which had too much usurped the place of God 
Himself before his soul ; and it is immediately followed 
by a most minute and energetic repudiation of such 
sins as might have been and were conceived to be the 
secret cause of his sudden and complete downfall from 
the highest prosperity to the depths of misery. No 
solution of the riddle as yet appears. On the contrary 
the difficulty thickens, and God is yet more hidden, 
the more that the circumstances of the past and the pre- 
sent are dwelt on, with a conscience on which no evil 
lay. For all this is but self, not God ; and we must 
humble ourselves under His mighty hand, if we would 
be exalted in due time. It is not self-defence however 
true which wins the blessing, any more than repining 
or wounded feeling, but justifying God and learning 
his own vileness in His presence, as we shall see. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

Hebe, as the conclusion of his last discourse, Job 
makes the most solemn and complete protestation of 
his innocence; not of course denying what he had 
already owned of man's condition — of his own among the 
rest, but absolutely repudiating the thought of grievous 
wickedness concealed under a fair exterior, with which 
God could be now waging war, as his friends had sur- 
mised. In personal purity — and this again as a married 
man, in his behaviour toward his domestics, in his 
remembrance of the poor and exposed, in his abhor- 
rence of idolatry and avarice, in his cultivation of 
generous and hospitable ways, in his hatred of hypo- 
crisy, he prays that, if false, he may be put to utter 
shame, appeals to the Almighty for an answer, and 
Avers his willingness to endure the closest scrutiny, 
where no evil can be cloaked or tolerated ; nay, more, 
be imprecates a curse on himself from His hand, that, 
if it can tell of fraud or violence, baneful weeds and 
thorns may take the place of wheat or barley. 

I have presented a covenant to mine eyes, 

And how should I think on a maiden ? 

And what [would be] the portion of Eloah from 
above, 

And inheritance of Shaddai from on high ? 

[Is there] not destruction to the mcik&&., 

And a strange ["dream] to the 'woikeift oi Vnnp&s^ 



132 NOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

Doth not He see my ways, and count all my steps? 
If I walked with falsehood, and my foot hasted 

to deceit, 
(Let Him weigh me in a balance of justice, 
And let Eloah know mine integrity,) 
If my step turned aside from the way, 
And my heart walked after mine eyes, 
And a blot cleaved to my hands, 
Let me sow, and another eat, and my produce be 
uprooted. 

If my heart was enticed about a woman, 
And I laid wait at my neighbour's door, 
Let my wife grind for another, and others bow 

down on her. 
For this [is] an infamy, and that a crime for a judge. 
For a fire it [is], it consumeth to destruction, 
And it would uproot all my increase. 

If I despised the right of my bondman 
Or of my bondmaid, in their contending with me, 
What then shall I do when God [El] ariseth ? 
And when He visiteth, what shall I answer Him ? 
In the belly did not He that made me make him ? 
And did not One fashion us in the womb ? 

If I kept back the poor from [their] desire, 
And the eyes of the widow made to pine, 
Or ate my morsel by myself, 
And the orphan had not eaten of it 
(For from my path I brought him up as a father, 
And her I guided from my mother's womb) ; 
If I saw [any] perishing without clothing, 
And the needy without covering ; 
If his loins blessed me not, 



OHAPTEP KtXI. 18S 

And he were not warmed with the fleoce of my 

sheep ; 
If I shook my hand over the orphan, 
When I saw my help in the gate ; 
Let my shoulder fall from the blade, 
And mine arm be broken from the bone. 
For the destruction of God [El] was a terror to me, 
And before His majesty I was powerless. 
If I made gold my confidence, 
And to the pure gold said, My trust ; 
If I rejoiced because my weal [was] great, 
And because my hand found much ; 
If I saw the light when it shineth 
And the moon walking splendidly, 
And my heart was secretly enticed 
And my hand kissed my mouth 
{And this were a crime for judges, 
For to God (El) above I had lied) ; 
If I rejoiced over the ruin of my hater, 
And got uplifted when evil found him ; — 
Yea, I suffered not my palate to sin 
By asking that his soul might be under a curse ; 
If the men of my tent said not, 
Who giveth one not satisfied with his flesh ? 
The stranger passed not the night in the 

street ; 
I opened my doors to the traveller ; 
If I, like Adam, covered my transgressions, 
Hiding in my bosom mine iniquity, 
Because I feared the great multitude, 
And the contempt of families terrified me, 
So that lam silent, I go not out oi \taa taot* 



184 KOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

that One would hear me ! Lo, my sign* 
Let Shaddai answer me, 

And mine adversary with the charge : 
Would I not carry it on my shoulder ? 

1 would bind it as crowns on me. 

The number of my steps I would tell Him, 

As a prince would I go near to Him. 

If my land cry out against me, and its furrows 
weep together, 

If its strength I consumed without wrong, 

And caused the soul of its owners to expire, 

Instead of wheat let thorns come up, 

And weeds instead of barley; 

The words of Job cure ended. 
Deeply interesting and instructive is this closing burst 
of indignant self-defence on Job's part Valuable as- 
the law might be — for surely God does nothing in vain 
— we can see how high was the moral standard for the 
soul and for the walk of godly men outside Israel, 
before the legislation from Sinai, as appears in the 
patriarchs of Genesis. Nor is it only in matters of 
right and wrong, of which the conscience could judge 
with more or less precision, according to the amount of 
light possessed ; but we see the effect, in the soul and 
its affections and judgments, of divine revelation. God 
had spoken words, and had wrought too in solemn 
ways with men individually and universally, in grace 
and in judgment, long before He had inspired men to 
write His mind by divine power. And faith received 
His word, and pondered on His dealings, to rich profit, 
before scripture ; though scripture, when it was vouch- 
sated, added much to the biesam&, m& increased the- 



CHAPTER XXXI. 135 

responsibility, of those who possessed it, and alas ! of 
all who despise it. 

For it is an immense favour to have God's words in a 
permanent as well as perfect form, so communicating 
His mind, whether about Himself and His ways, or 
about man and man's ways : how much more when He 
spoke kv Y«£, not by servants, but in His Son, by whom 
He wrought eternal redemption ! On this, however, we 
dwell not now, but weigh what God gives us of those 
early days, where we see, as here, how the Holy Spirit, 
spite of scanty revelation, enabled saints, like Job, to 
feel so becomingly as to God, no less than in their or- 
dinary walk of every day. But let us remember that 
the same faith which turned the little then to such ad- 
mirable account will not be satisfied now without a 
deep and growing entrance into all the written word, 
and a hearty fellowship with Christ in all of joy or 
sorrow that His name entails on us, whether we think of 
our being in Him above, or of His being in us here 
below. Grace never enfeebles the sense of what is due 
to God's nature or authority, but, on the contrary, 
strengthens him who knows it by faith to walk, and 
worship, and testify accordingly. Knowledge or privi- 
lege, however precious intrinsically, is to us worse than 
useless, if we love not the good and hate the evil, as 
He judges each. And now our responsibility is measured 
by the fullest light and the nearest relationship ; for 
Christ is revealed, and the Holy Ghost given, and we 
are His children by that Spirit, crying Abba, Father. 

Law, as the apostle teaches us, came in by the bye 
(irap€iay\0ev) t not as a rule of life, as men perversely 
imagine, but rather of death and fcOTitaxs^Nkreu V^r& 



ICor.E) Orisftismllyaflt 
in the word of Go* as tikk^ai spiithi byfto 
Spirit Iwcmeh parrofhciiffJry that the 
might abound, the power of an, not of WJiiif , 
grace is, the exact counterpart of hew. Hence 
right ways end holy thoughts before the hew; as we are 
caDed so much the more, that sin should not hare do- 
minion over us, because we are not under hew but 
under grace. We have died with Christ to law as dis- 
tinctly and absolutely as to sin : such is the teaching of 
the Holy Ghost in Romans vL-viiL, where it is a ques- 
tion of life as the ground for holy walk, not of blood 
as for the remission of sins. Would that God's chil- 
dren cast their theological idols to the moles and to the 
bats, and sought to know and enjoy better the liberty 
wherewith Christ sets free ! Let them be assured that 
as they would be all the gainers in solid peace, so His 
name would have glory in their exceeding and abound- 
ing in love toward one another, and toward all, to 
the confirming of their hearts unblameable in holiness 
before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord 
Jesus with all His saints. 

To return, then, Job formally and minutely tests him- 
self by a very comprehensive bill of delinquency, and this 
toward God as well as man, by failure in good as well 
as by self-gratification or other sins. We may be 
assured that not one of the friends who virtually 
arraigned him oould have afforded to try himself as Job 
procoods to do here. He judges unclean lusts as well as 
aotions ; and this in the fear of Him who had power to 
east soul and body into hell — Him who meanwhile took 
cognisance of all his steps. Vanity or falsehood^ too, 



CHAPTER XXXI. 137 

was just as for from Job's spirit and ways as imparity. 
Whatever men might think who drew conclusions from 
appearances, he could ask God to weigh him in a just 
balance, whether he had resorted to deceit, or turned 
aside from the way, and if so, that another should reap 
the results of his labour, and that retribution, even as 
to his own wife, should follow any such consuming evil 
on his part. Most touchingly does he shew that, if in 
an exalted position, his heart never forgot that his 
servants were of the same race, of the same human 
family as himself, to the exclusion of unfeeling personal 
pride. Nor was it merely a strong sense of relationship 
within the household, for his compassion ever went out 
to suffering humanity — the widow and the fatherless, 
the needy and the naked — and this not casually, but 
with constant and unwearied care as a father, and with 
vigilance against taking the least advantage through in- 
fluence with others : so powerfully, he could say, had the 
fear of God, and his indignant vindication of all such 
acted within him, as to render that hardness a total 
stranger to his heart. And trust in gold, the covetousness 
which the New Testament calls idolatry, was as abhor- 
rent to his spirit as the giving to the highest orbs of crea- 
tion the glory due to God alone ; which iniquity would 
seem to have been in those patriarchal days as distinctly 
punishable before the judge, as the insidious corruptors 
of domestic sanctity. (Compare vers. 9-11 with vers. 
26-28.) 

Further, he most solemnly abjures all joy over an 
onemy's calamity, though he had not in the most indi- 
rect way asked it ; and he could appeal to those most 
familiar with the habits of his Me, -wV&Mtast * %xm&& 



188 NOTES OH THE BOOK OF JOB. 

soul had ever gone from him discontented with his fere, 
or even a stranger near him was left shelterless ; and he 
could absolutely deny the tendency to conceal evil, 
which we have all derived from our first father, unin- 
fluenced by the fear of man which is its habitual motive. 

Finally, he again renews his desire for the Almighty 
Himself to answer, this being his affidavit, as we say, 
with his mark or signature, as he earnestly wishes the 
counter-statement in the case, which, far from dread- 
ing, he longs for, and declares he would wreathe it 
round his head like chaplets of honour, and, far from 
hiding, tell all out, as he drew near like a prince, in- 
stead of a conscience-stricken coward. No violence 
nor fraud lay within ; not a field could cry against Job, 
nor its furrows weep together, as the ground did where 
Abel fell, as many a plot has since testified against 
kings and queens, down to the basest of men, through- 
out this world's sad history. But he asks that, if any 
wrong had sullied his life, even in such transactions as 
these, thorns and darnel might curse his toils, instead 
of the wheat or barley ho had sown. 

The friends were wholly wrong, unjustifiable, and 
uncharitable ; what Job says was true, but he knows 
not yet all the truth about himself, as none could of 
God, till He came who is the Truth, and proved it in 
grace to the uttermost in His cross. But Job was 
occupied and satisfied with himself. From this God 
would deliver him, and bless him thus more than ever. 
No flesh shall glory in His presence; and this Job 
must learn — to glory only in Him. We shall see in 
the sequel how he was taught it, humbly and graciously* 
But Job ended his words before it was even begun. 



chapters xxm, xxxm. 

A new, and hitherto unnoticed, person joins the great 
debate, now that even Job is silent. It is not that he 
only jnst enters the scene, for he soon gives the fullest 
proof that one present had listened most attentively 
to all that had been urged, and very especially to his 
arguments who had stopped the mouths of those that 
misjudged him. He is careful to apologise for his own 
intervention, and would evidently have preferred to> 
listen, if any one older than himself had produced 
matter relevant to the question, and adequate to expose 
the not infrequent occasions in which the sufferer had 
been provoked into impropriety. There is no lack of 
moral courage or of force in dealing with Job's actual 
words and line of thought. Whilst he avoids insinuat- 
ing evil of which none knew, he does not spare where 
there was too high a thought of self, or a lack of rever- 
ence toward God, in one under His correcting hand. 
He has juster thoughts as to the divine discipline of the 
soul than any one of the interlocutors, not excepting 
Job himself, who had not yet been brought down to the 
true place of nothingness before God. The introduc- 
tion and first discourse of Elihu go down to the end of 
chapter xxxiii. 

Chapter xxxii. 

And these three men ceased answering Job* be- 
cause he [was] righteous in his own e^fe*. &g& *&& 



140 HOTE8 OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

anger of Elihu, son of Barachel the Buzite, of 
family of Bam, burned : against Job his anger burn 
because of his justifying himself rather than God ; i 
against his three friends his anger burned, because tl 
found no .answer, yet condemned Job. And Elihu ) 
waited for Job in words [that is, till Job had spoke 
because they [were] older than he in days ; and El 
saw that [there was] no answer in the mouth of the tb 
men, and his anger burned. And Elihu, son of Ba 
•chel the Buzite, answered and said, 

I [am] young in days, and ye [are] aged : 

Therefore I did shrink, 

And feared to shew you mine opinion. 

I said, Let days speak, and the multitude a 
years teach wisdom. 

Surely the spirit [it is] in mortal man, 

And the breath of Shaddai giveth them wit. 

Not the great [in years] are wise, 

Nor do the aged understand judgment. 

Therefore I say, Hearken to me ; 

I will declare my knowledge, even I, 
Lo ! I have waited for your words, 

I gave ear to your reasons, 

Until ye might search out replies, 

And to you I gave attention ; 

And, behold, there is none that refuteth Job, 

That among you answereth his sayings, 

Lest ye should say, We have found wisdom. 

God [El] shall drive him away, not man. 

But at me he directed no word, 

And with your words I answer him not. 

They broke down, they answer uo\» ugpai, 



0HAPTER8 XXXII., XXXIII. 141 

Words are fled away from them ; 

And I waited, but they did not speak, 

For they ceased, they answered no more. 

I also will answer my part, 

I also will declare mine opinion. 

For I am fall of words ; 

The spirit of my inwards constraineth me. 

Behold, my inwards [are] like wine not opened, 

Like fresh wine-skins it is working. 

I will speak, that I may be refreshed, 

I will open my lips, and answer. 

Let me not, I pray you, accept any one's face. 

Neither to man will I give flattering titles. 

For I know not to give flattering titles ; 

[Else] my Maker would soon take me away. 

Chapter xxxiii. 

Notwithstanding, Job, I pray thee, hear my speech. 
And hearken to my every word. 
Behold, I pray thee, I opened my month, 
My tongue speaketh in my palate. 
My words [shall be] the uprightness of my heart, 
And my knowledge shall my lips utter purely. 
The Spirit of God [El] hath made me, 
And the breath of Shaddai gave me life. 
If thou canst, answer me ; 
Draw up before me, take thy stand. 
Lo ! I am God's [El], as thou ; 
Out of clay was I also formed. 
Behold, my terror will not affright thee, 
And my hand shall not be heavy on thee. 
Surely thou hast said in mine eut* % 



142 H0TE8 OH THE BOOK OF JOB. 

And I heard the voice of the words : 
I am pore, without transgression, 
I [am] clean, and have no iniquity : 
Lo ! He findeth hostilities against me, 
He counteth me as His enemy ; 
He putteth my feet into the stocks ; 
He watcheth all my ways. 
Behold, in this thou art not right, I answer thee; 
For God [Eloah] is greater than a mortal. 
Why hast thou contended against Him ? 
For He answereth not of all His matters. 
When God [El] speaketh once, and twice,— 
[Man] regardeth it not— 
In a dream, in a vision of the night, 
When deep sleep falleth on mortals, 
In slumberings on the bed ; 
Then He openeth the ear of mortals, 
And sealeth up their instruction, 
To withdraw man [from] doing ; 
And pride from man he concealeth. 
He keepeth back his soul from corruption, 
And his life from passing away by the dart. 
He is also chastised with pains on his bed, 
And the strife of his bones [is] lasting. 
And his life loatheth bread, 
And his soul meat of desire. 
His flesh wasteth out of sight, 
And his bones that were not seen stand out, 
And his soul draweth near to corruption, 
And his life to the destroyers. 
If there be by him a messenger, 
An interpreter, one of & thousand* 



CHAPTERS XXXII., XXXIII. 148 

To declare to man His uprightness ; 

And He is gracious to him, and saith, 

Deliver him from going down to corruption : 

I have found a ransom. 

His flesh [is] fresher than childhood. 

He returneth to the days of his youth. 

He supplicateth [Eloah] God, 

And He accepteth him. 

And he shall see His face with rejoicing, 

And He requiteth to mortal man His righteousness. 

He singeth before mortals, and saith, 

I sinned and perverted right, and it satisfied me not. 

He ransomed my soul from passing to corruption, 

And my life looketh on the light. 
Lo ! all these worketh God [El] twice, thrice, 
with man, 

To bring back his soul from corruption, 

That he may be enlightened with the light of life. 

Attend, Job, hearken to me ; 

Be silent, and I shall speak. 

If thou hast words, answer me — 

Speak, for I have a desire to justify thee. 

If not, hearken thou unto me ; 

Keep silence, and I will teach thee wisdom. 
Jerome, or the pseudo-Jerome (Opera, ed. Vail, iii., 
App. 895 et seqq.), seems to have led the way in 
attacking the new speaker, as others followed, inoluding 
the venerable Bede, who confounded him with Balaam ; 
a Jewish writer dared to count him Satan in disguise ; 
whilst too many to name, Protestants and Catholics 
down to our own time, held a view of him only less 
disparaging. But those who weigh, fax mot* m ^&j&» 



144 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

ness and discernment see in him one who b: 
juster and more comprehensive appraisal of J 
his friends, and the first real insight, displayed tt 
out the book, into the place and aim of dii 
through suffering. 

The opening verses of chapter xxxii. shew tl 
emotion and displeasure of Elihu at the nnsatis 
issue of the discussion, unprofitable to man, ai 
to the honour of God ; whereas, comparatively 
as he was, he could not but feel a burning desire 
reproof of what was rash and wrong on man'i 
and for the vindication of God's character and 
But if Elihu feels reluctantly forced to spi 
presence of men from whom he would gladl) 
learnt, if they could have taught, the mind of G 
is careful to stand only for what comes from Goc 
is taught, as never before, how spiritual wisdon 
God's Spirit, not of man's age. It is the very i 
of self-confidence or vain-glory, though out of the 
dance of his heart his mouth speaks. 

On what other ground could a younger spea 
speak in terms corrective of all who had gone b 
His silence, sustained till even Job had no more 
broken when Job, no less than his friends, cot 
but feel that the riddle was as yet unexplained, 
strongest proof how little he deserves censure a 
forward, officious, conceited, arrogant, boastful, 
know not what more ; while the scope of his r< 
exposes the folly of those philosophising dreame 
brand him as an aimless and unanswered talker 
the shade that he merited. One can only reply 1 
man have not faith, and that sv&h. && thus ju 



CHAPTER8 XXXII., XXXIII. 145 

scripture manifest a mind void of discernment, and 
scarce anywhere more than in a verdict like this on 
Elihu. He certainly sets in the most vivid light the 
total failure of those who had condemned Job without 
confuting him, and not without insinuations which 
condemned themselves. He feels that, as being unas- 
sailed by the sufferer, and in no way sharing their un- 
charitableness, he is in a position to lay bare not a little 
that was uncomely and presumptuous. He was amazed 
at the total rout of the friends, when he could not but 
own how much was in his heart claiming utterance 
irrepressibly, without respect of persons, and in the 
fear of God. 

But he addresses himself, above all, to Job, to whom 
he was about to speak with all possible candour. He 
did not set himself up unbecomingly, speaking of what 
he could not know, but as man to man, wholly depen- 
dent on God. He did not judge, but would fain 
appeal to him, and plead with him, as belonging to 
God, just like himself, and as he, a fellow-creature made 
of clay, so that awe had no place, but weight of truth 
only. (Compare chap. xiii. 21.) For this already had 
Job expressed the longing desire, even though he had 
too boldly declared his readiness to litigate with Him 
Who is over all. In disputing God's dealings with him, 
in asserting his own purity, without aught amiss, in 
imputing ungracious, capricious, arbitrary ways to God, 
Job had evidently put himself in the wrong. It is 
enough to answer that God is greater than weak man, 
and is necessarily sovereign, giving none account of 
His matters. Yet He speaks to man, slow to hear Hl& 
voice, in dreams and visions oi ttie n\$i\», \»o <s^ra. ^^ 

v 



146 KOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

ear, and seal instruction, so as to restrain man from 
activity and pride : also by chastenings of bodily sick- 
ness and pain, for the awakening of the soul, when all 
else becomes distasteful.. But most fully does He use a 
messenger, as interpreting his mind, however rarely 
found, to let man see his uprightness, as well as how 
gracious He is, in delivering from what is incomparably 
worse, by virtue of what He had ever before Him 
(Bom. ill. 25), when the guilty one (now won to God) 
returns to more than wonted health, enjoys lowly 
happy intercourse with Him, and gives to his fellows 
a testimony, humbling but bright, of the undeserved 
mercy that delivers. 

Such are the ways frequent with God, by dreams, 
chastenings, and messengers, to arouse man to a due 
sense of himself before God, and thereby rescue him 
from corruption, that he may be enlightened with the 
light of life. It is intelligible that men, no matter how 
erudite or superstitious, who knew not the gospel nor 
even the Spirit's application of the law to their own 
condition, should overlook the value of this wonderful 
appeal from Elihu, himself doing the part of the inter- 
preter with Job, the appeal of a man's heart purified 
by faith to unfeigned love, and filled with the sense of 
God's goodness, rich in resources to arrest the self- 
willed madness of the race. The everlasting gospel 
had its witness in Elihu, as surely as Noah preached 
righteousness to. the ungodly antediluvians, whose judg- 
ment of old was not idle, nor did their destruction 
slumber. Mark the personal earnestness of the man, 
equally ready to listen as to speak, if by any means the 
soul should be won to a bettor appreciation of God, 



CHAPTERS XXXII, XXXIII. 147 

and therefore importunate in repeated calls, which 
"weary all who share not the like love of souls for the 
Lord's sake. He was only the truer and more effective 
also, because he never dreams of sparing sin, even in 
word or thought, and was quick to feel for His honour 
who is the spring of all that is good. Not one of the 
disputants shews such a reckoning on grace in God as 
this young and valiant champion of the truth. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

The second discourse of Elihu has for its scope to 
prove that the divine equity in government is in no 
way to be doubted, and that Job, who did venture to- 
impeach it, is himself deserving of grave censure, aft 
giving countenance, in thought and word, to the evil 
and scornful. God, sovereign in Himself, cannot err 
in His ways, but is necessarily righteous. So Abraham 
reasoned in Genesis xviii. 25 ; so all men, unless their 
mind and conscience be defiled. Impossible to con- 
ceive of injustice in the Almighty. His servants may 
fail — never the Fountain of all good. And if it be in 
the highest degree unseemly to tax a king with worth- 
lessness, how much more to impute wrong to Him who 
is infinitely above all kings, and knows not the rich be- 
fore the poor, having made both alike ! Therefore 
under the invisible hand of God falls the mighty ruler 
whose guilt was marked of Him, spite of the darkness 
that enveloped it, now in the night, now openly, so as 
to warn others, as well as to deal with himself, and to 
relieve the oppressed. Submission of heart is, then, 
the only due feeling for man, that he may be taught 
moro, as becomes one conscious of his faults, and turn- 
ing from them in the fear of God. And what can be 
less consistent than, like Job, to insinuate unrighteous- 
ness to God, and withal appeal to His decision and 
dosiro his intervention? Elihu (who is sure of the 
sympathy of intelligent men) could not wish Job re- 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 149 

Ieved, but rather tried to the uttermost for thus add- 
Qg rebellion to his sin, and multiplying his words, not 
>nly among them, but at God. 

And Elihu answered and said, 

Hear, ye wise men, my words. 

And ye men of knowledge give ear to me ; 

For the ear trieth words, and the palate tasteth food. 

Let ns choose for ourselves judgment, 

Let us know among ourselves what [is] good. 
For Job hath said, I am righteous, 

And God [El] hath turned aside my right ; 

Against my right I shall lie : 

My wound [is] mortal, without transgression. 

Who [is] a man like Job ? 

He drinketh mockery like water, 

And goeth in company with workers of iniquity, 

So as to go with men of wickedness ; 

For he hath said, It profiteth not a man 

That he should delight himself with God. < 
Therefore, hear me, ye men of heart ; 

Far be it from God [El] to do wickedness, 

And [from] Shaddai to do perverseness. 

For the work of man he reporteth to him,- 

And causeth each to find according to his way. 

Yea, verily, God [El] doth not act wickedly, 

And Shaddai doth not porvert the right. 

Who committed to Him the earth ? 

And who established the whole world ? 

If He should set His heart on Himself — 

-Gather to Himself His spirit and His breath, 

All flesh would expire together, 

And man return to dust. 



150 NOTES OH THE BOOK OF JOB. 

And if [thou hast] understanding, heir this, 
Give ear to the voice of my words. 
Yea, doth a hater of right govern ? 
And wilt thou condemn the mighty just One ? 
Shall one to a king say, Belial; to princes^ 

Wicked ? 
Who accepteth not the person of princes, 
Nor hath known the rich before the poor ? 
For the work of His hands [are] they all ; 
In a moment they die ; even at midnight 
Is a people shaken, and passeth away, 
And tho mighty are removed without hand. 
For His eyes [are] on the ways of a man, 
And Ho seeth all his steps. 
Thoro is no darkness nor death-shade, 
Whore the workers of iniquity may hide. 
For Ho doth not regard man more, 
That he should go to God [El] in judgment ; 
Ho breaketh the mighty without inquiry, 
And He sotteth up others in their stead. 
Theroforo He knoweth their works, 
And overthroweth them in the night, and they are* 

bruisod. 
As wicked did He strike them publicly,* 
Who purposely turned aside from after Him, 
And attended not to any of His ways, 
So that tho cry of the poor should come to Hinv 
And the cry of the oppressed He heareth. 
And He giveth rest, and who can disturb ? 
And hideth His face, and who beholdeth it ? 

* Lit. in the place of t\u»e «»&&£. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 151 

Whether as to a nation or to a man, the same, 

That a corrupt man reign not, 

Nor snares [be] to the people. 

For had man [but] said to God [El], 

I have suffered, I will not offend : 

Things beyond [what] I see teach me : 

I have done iniquity — I will not do it again. 

According to thy judgment shall He requite him ? 

Nay, but thou hast rejected, 

Thou hast chosen, and not I. 

And what thou knowest, speak. 

Let men of heart tell me, 

And let a wise man hear me : 

Job hath not spoken with knowledge, 

And his words [were] not with wisdom. 

"Would that Job were proved to the uttermost, 

Because of replies like men of iniquity ; 

For he addeth to his sin rebellion, 

In the midst of us he mocketh [lit. clappeth], 

And multiplieth his words against God [El] . 
Thus does Elihu vindicate God and His ways with 
man, which the three elders had so painfully miscon- 
strued, not only to their own loss and the increased 
anguish of the sufferer, but to the dishonour of Him 
whom they knew too little to represent aright. Elihu 
would have his words subjected to the keenest discrimi- 
nation. Truth has nothing to fear from this, if men 
listen with conscience toward God, not with the mis- 
judged will which refuses all that lowers man, as all 
truth cannot but do, for he is fallen. But the fear of 
Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom, && *to&3 *& \&0& 
despise wisdom and instruction* , Etate£oTfe ^oe&^fcft 



152 H0TE8 OA THE BOOK OF JOB. 

call men of wisdom and knowledge to hearken. There 
is an inner man no less than an outer, and he cannot 
escape responsibility. Judgment surely becomes man 
to choose, and to know what is good in an evil world. 

At once Elihu seizes on Job's self-justification, as if 
God could set aside the right, or treat with unfairness. 
This he brands as worthy of a scorner, and expresses 
for himself the pain with which he had heard Job's heroic 
strain, drinking not indeed iniquity like water, as 
Eliphaz had harshly said, bat a taunting style, or 
mockery, which really tended to the encouragement of 
evil-doers. And was it comely to say that man is not 
profited from having pleasure with God ? Elihu scouts 
the thought of iniquity with God, the Judge of all; 
and who or what was man to sit in judgment on the 
Almighty? Was it he, or who, that put Him in 
charge of the earth ? And who founded the universe ? 
Creation owes its being and conservation to His disin- 
terested goodness, who had only to absorb His care on 
Himself, gathering up His all- quickening Spirit, and 
all flesh would breathe its last, and man, the chief of 
all here below, return to dust. 

Besides, government has its rights, and reverence is 
due to those in power and dignity. Therefore he appeals 
to his understanding whether a hater of right governed, 
and he condemned the mighty Just One ? If no man 
could address a king or prince with a disrespectful 
word, what was it to speak unworthily of Him who, 
infinitely higher than the highest, has no respect of 
persons, nor knows the rich before the poor, all being 
the work of His hands ? Death comes in a moment; 
and the night is half spent when & ^e>o^\e> \& sfoakan and 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 153 

pass away, and the mighty are removed, and not by 
hand. For all things are naked and open to His eyes 
with whom we have to do, the ways of a man and all 
his steps. Nor is there darkness or death-shade dense 
enough to hide the workers of iniquity ; neither needs 
He to look a second time on a man ere going to God in 
judgment, but is entitled, without further scrutiny, to 
break the mighty, and to set up others in their room. 
He takes cognisance of their deeds, and overturns in a 
night, and they are crushed, as wicked, struck openly 
before others, for deliberate slight of Him and His 
ways, and in vindication of the poor and oppressed who 
cried to Him. So truly sovereign is He, and withal 
just and merciful : nation or man makes no difference, 
He being above both, lest a corrupt man reign, and the 
people be ensnared. 

Man — Job — should have rather humbled himself to 
God, bowing to His hand and owning his fault, with 
desire to be taught, and to sin no more. Was God to 
recompense according to Job's mind ? It was he that 
repudiated, and he that chose, not Elihu. It was for 
Job, then, to speak what he knew. Elihu turns to men 
of discretion, that they may say whether such language 
was wise, or according to knowledge. He wished him 
not afflicted, but proved thoroughly, because of answers 
meet for or countenancing the wicked. For this was 
to add presumption in divine things, or a breaking away 
from authority, and this not without a sense of exulta- 
tion over the rest, in a multitude of words to God, 
wherein there lacked not sin. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

It is not only unkind insinuation which has danger for 
the heart. There is need of vigilance and self-judg- 
ment. And we do well, always and in everything, 
above all to vindicate God, who needs nothing from us, 
and can in no way he a debtor to us, yet deigns to oc- 
cupy Himself with us in infinitely condescending 
mercy and compassion. Here Job had failed, not under 
the blows which fell on him so heavily and fast, but 
when stung by the evil surmisings of men who knew 
incomparably less of God than he ; and as they could 
not help the sufferer to the secret none of them under- 
stood, so they hindered and provoked him by the cruel 
misunderstanding they expressed. Elihu lets him know 
plainly that he thought too much of himself, and forgot 
the majesty of God. One should not use complaints 
which imply failure in His moral government, who is 
infallibly right, and beyond measure good. None 
should indulge in the dream of blamelessness before 
God. The heavens are high above man ; but God is 
high above the heavens, and if man will talk of him- 
self or his doings, what can all this be to God, who is 
above all man's measures ? And if He seem to disre- 
gard the cry of the oppressed, He has good reason, 
and they fail to ask aright; else their lamentations 
would soon change to songs of thankful praise in 
the night. To groan is not enough, as the brute may ; 
it is to God that the tried tfooxAdi cry. QaA remains 



CHAPTER XXXV. 15i> 

God, and is the judge of all, however slow to punish, 
as He surely will in His day. Feebleness in giving 
God credit for what He is spite of appearances, Elihu 
feels, had betrayed Job into no little impropriety of 
speech. 

And Elihu answered and said, 

Hast thou counted this for judgment, 

[That] thou hast said, I am more right than God ?" 

For thou askest what is the gain to thee, 

What profit shall I have, more than by my sin ? 

I will answer thee words, and with thee thy friends.. 
Look at the heavens, and see, 

And behold the clouds — they are higher than thee. 

If thou sinnest, what doest thou against Him ? 

Thy transgressions are multiplied, what doesi 
thou to Him ? 

If thou art righteous, what givest thou to Him ? 

Or what receiveth He from thy hand ? 

Thy wickedness [is] to man like thyself, 

And thy righteousness to a son of man. 

Because of the multitude of oppressions they cry 
out, 

They cry because of the arm of the mighty. 

But no man saith, Where [is] Eloah my maker, 
, That giveth songs in tl*e night, 

That teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth. 

And maketh us wiser than the fowls of the heavens ?* 

There they cry,' but He answereth not, 

Because of the haughtiness of the wicked. 

Surely God [El] doth not hear vanity, 

And Shaddai beholdeth it not. 

Though thou, say thou seest Him no\ >> 



i 



156 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

Judgment [is] before Him, and wait thou on Him. 

And now, because His anger hath not punished 
aught, 

Doth He not very much regard insolence ? 

Therefore Job openeth his mouth to vanity, 

He multiplieth words without knowledge. 
Elihu did not tax Job with anything so presumptuous 
as a direct assertion of his own superior righteousness 
to God's. But to impeach His ways because of con- 
scious integrity under severe trial, to complain of His 
dealings as hard toward oneself, or as indifferent to 
others, what is this if not a virtual censure of His 
government, and implied preference of one's own 
thoughts? To judge from self, or anything here, 
to God, now especially that sin is come into the world, 
with all its bitter consequences and darkening influ- 
ences, is always false ground ; and Job needed to learn, 
as his friends yet more and with less excuse, that it is 
alone wise, becoming, and even safe to reason from 
Him and His revelation of Himself to ourselves or 
anything else. This Elihu could not do as those who 
have seen Jesus and the Father in Him the Son, and 
that Son a man on earth. But he does what he could 
under God's teaching, and from the heavens above man 
he points to His majesty above all. Man's sin is serious 
for himself, and may be so for his fellows ; but what 
difference does it make for God ? Not all the trans- 
gressors that dare most can darken a ray of His glory, 
though He may turn all, as He will, to exalt as 
well as to manifest what He is. And so with the right- 
eousness of man : what does it confer on God ? or 
what does He receive at man' a Yra&l Cta& \& the 



CHAPTER XXXV. 15T 

inchanging One, always good, never unrighteous : it is* 
man, tbe human race, which is affected by one's right- 
eousness or iniquity. 

Doubtless, in such a world as this, there never lacks 
an oppressor, and oppression abounds, and the oppressed 
cry out and wail because of the violence of the mighty. 
Is it that God does not hear or feel ? Not so, but that 
even human anguish fails to lead to God. As the pro- 
phet, long after, complained of the pride and silliness 
of stricken Israel : " They have not cried unto me 
with their heart, when they howled upon their beds." 
(Hos. vii. 14.) So of men generally Elihu declares, 
that none said, Where is Eloah my maker, who can 
change all and deliver at the worst extremity, thus 
giving songs in the night, teaching us more than the 
beasts of the field, and making us wiser than the birds 
of the heavens ? Now it is this very God-conscious- 
ness which distinguishes man from every other animal 
of earth or air ; not the mind, or vovq> as the heathen and 
others thought, but spirit — the highest part of the inner 
man. It is the spirit which, capable as it is of enjoying 
God, constitutes the wretchedness of the lost man, as 
it is therein by will he is God's enemy. Hence their 
reluctance to tell their sorrows to the one effectual 
source of help, and His apparent indifference, while all 
is open before Him, and known for ever. There are 
haughty as well as wicked; there are thoughtless of 
God who suffer from man. His eyes, His ears, are open 
to those who appeal, not to vain cries which have no 
more spiritual, or perhaps even moral, feeling than of the 
brutes that perish. Shaddai regards not, though all 
power be His to protect and deliver. TS\x\»lia^k\sv- 



158 NOTES OH THS BOOK OF JOB. 

terpose, though men believe not, and saints are down* 
cast, if not destroyed. Judgment is before Him. It 
is for the believer to wait on and for Him. Insolence 
of speech is none the less hateful because He not yet 
punishes. Job, therefore , had spoken to no purpose, and 
his words were multiplied without knowledge. It was 
sorrowful so to speak, but 4he truth. 



CHAPTERS XXXVI., XXXVII. 

We have next the final discourse of Elihu, in which he 
proceeds to clench his justification of God's ways against 
Job, who had virtually impeached them. He no longer 
deals with the human side, hut rises up to God's own 
character, and His moral government of men, wherein 
mercy rejoices against judgment. But there is, withal, 
that distinct reference to His glory in creation and pro- 
vidence which is characteristic of the Old Testament 
generally, whether law or prophets, yet with ample and 
definite application ethically: an admirable transition 
to the interposition of Jehovah Himself, which imme- 
diately follows. 

And Elihu added, and said, 
Wait for mo a little, and I will shew thee ; 
For [there are] yet words for Eloah. 
I mil fetch my knowledge from afar, 
And will ascribe righteousness to my Maker : 
For truly my words [shall] not [be] falsehood : 
One upright in knowledge [is] with thee.* 

Lo ! God [El] [is] great, and despiseth not, 
Great in strength — in heart. 

* This has also been taken to mean that it is One perfect in 
knowledge who dealt with Job (cf. chapter xxxvii. 16); and verse 3 
has been rendered, in unison with this, as a raising of his thought 
to the Afar, and an ascribing right to his Maker, as the ground 
for speaking confidently in His name. The double prenoaittavL^ 
O and 7, it is argued, favours this ; \>ut I £tfc*X\s toatafc. ^'Osfcs^ 



160 BOTC8 OH m BOOK OF JOB. 

He letteth not the ungodly live, 

And giveth the afflicted their right. 

He withdraweth not His eyes from the righteous, 

And with kings on the throne, yea, He established 

them for ever, 
And they are exalted. 
And if, bound in fetters, they be held with cords 

of affliction, 
Then He sheweth them their work, 
And their transgressions that they have been 

mighty ; 
And He openeth their ear to the instruction, 
And saith to them, that they turn back from 

vanity. 
If they hear and serve, they end their days in 

good, 
And their years in pleasantness ; 
But if they hear not, their soul passeth by [or like] 

the dart, 
And expireth in want of knowledge ; 
And the impious in heart lay up wrath, 
They cry not when He bindeth them ; 
Their soul dieth like that of youths, 
And their life among the polluted. 
He delivereth the afflicted by His affliction, 
And He uncovereth their ear by trouble ; 
And thee, too, He lureth out of the jaws of 

distress, 
A wide place, on the site of which [is] no strait- 

ness, 
And the setting of thy table fulness of fatness. 
.Bui hast thou filled up tue ^uA^mexfti oi \?c^ kicked ? 



CHAPTER8 XXXVI., XXXVII. 161 

Judgment and justice will take hold. 

For beware, lest wrath stir thee against the blow, 

And a great ransom turn not the scale in thy 

favour. 
Will He value thy wealth ? Not gold, nor all the 

powers of might. 
Desire not the might, the going up of nations on 

the spot. 
Take heed — look not to sin, 
So that thou wouldest choose this rather than 

affliction. 
Lo I God exalteth by His power : 
Who is a teacher like Him ? 
Who hath assigned to Him His way ? 
And who hath said, Thou doest wrong ? 
Remember that thou magnify His work, 
Which mortals behold ; all men looked on it ; 
Mortal man looketh attentively from afar. 

Lo I God [is] great — we know not ; 
As for the number of His years, [there is] no 

searching. 
When He draineth off the drops of water, 
They condense into rain in place of its mist, 
So that clouds drop, they distil copiously on man. 
Yea, doth one understand the spreading of the 

cloud ? 
The noises of His tabernacle ? 
Lo ! He hath spread over it His light, 
And hath covered the depths [or roots] of the 

sea. 
For by them He judgeth the nations ; 
He giveth food in abundance. 



162 N0TE8 OH THB BOOK OF JOB. 

On both hands He covereth lightning, 
And giveth it a charge in striking. 
The noise of it annoonceth concerning Him, 
Store of wrath against perversity.* 

Chapter xzzvii. 

Yea, at this my heart trembleth, 
And it standeth np from out of its place. 
Hear, hear, the roar of His voice, 
And the rambling that goeth forth ont of His month* 
Under the whole heaven He directeth it, 
And His light into the borders of the earth. 
After it roareth a voice, 
He thondereth with the voice of His majesty, 
And restraineth them not when His voice is heard. 
God thundereth marvellously with His voice, 
Doing great things which we know not. 
For to the snow He saith, Fall to the earth, 
And to the small rain, and to the rains of His 

strength. 
The hand of every man He sealeth up, 
That all mortals of His work may come to 
knowledge. 

* The difficulty of arriving at a sure rendering of verse 33 it 
great, from the ambiguity of the terms. Some take ty"l as God's 

noise, not the clouds ; others as his will or his friend. Moreover 
does H^pD mean possession, store, or cattle ? or, as Lee JOpD 

zeal ? Hence the last clause is by many taken as " the cattle even 
announce) Him uprising ;" for as PJ£$ may mean "also" " even," or 
u wrath/ 1 so it is a question whether |1 /ty means * u rising up" 

or "perversity." 



CHAPTERS XXXVI., XXXVII. 1CS 

.And the wild beast goeth into lair, 

And continueth in bis abodes. 

Out of its chamber cometb the hurricane, 

And cold out of scatterings. 

From the breath of God frost is given, 

And the breadth of the waters is compressed. 

And He loadeth with moisture the cloud, 

He scattereth the cloud of His light, 

Hound about it turneth itself by His counsels, 

That they may do all for which He commandcth 

them 
On the face of tho world- earth. 
"Whether for a scourge, or for His earth (or, land), 
Or for mercy, He causeth it to come. 

Hear this, Job; stand and consider the 

wonders of God. 
Knowest thou how God charged them, 
And He maketh the lightning of His cloud to> 

flash ? 
Knowest thou the balancings of a cloud, 
The marvels of Him that is perfect in knowledge, 
Thou, whose garments are warm, 
When the earth becomes still from the south ? 
Dost thou with Him spread out tho sky, 
Firm as a molten mirror ? 
Teach us what we shall say to Him ? 
We cannot set forth because of darkness. 
Shall it be told Him that I would speak ? 
Did he say that he would be destroyed ?* 
.And now indeed one seeth not the light, 

* That is, if one should say bo, \xa \*o\i\& ^\\^. 



164 BOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

Which shineth brightly in the skies ; 

Bat a wind passeth by, and cleareth them away. 

From the north cometh forth gold [that is, golden 

brightness] : 
With God [is] terrible splendour. 
The Almighty f we do not find Him oat ; great in 

power and judgment, 
And great in righteousness, He will not give 

answer. 
Therefore men fear Him : He looketh not on alt 
the wise of heart. 
Elihu had yet somewhat to say on behalf of the im- 
pugned dealings of God, who is not one-sided, like 
man, always apt to fail in power if benevolent, if 
migbty in compassionate goodness. In God not only 
is each reality perfect, but so is the whole, if we may 
so speak of the Infinite. If His greatness be beyond 
measure, so is His condescending mercy, and His heart,. 
or understanding, is as vast as His power. The Lord,, 

in the New Testament, asserts to us incessantly,, 
the minutest care of His Father, while all things 
serve His will. Hence the assurance to the soul that 
knows Him, that, in the long-run, the godly shall not 
be permitted to wither, nor the afflicted be denied their 
right. But, as Job had already insisted most truly 
against his friends, it is not yet the day for the exercise 
and display of His earthly righteousness in His kingdom ; 
and hence piety sufiers, and iniquity of every sort, 
especially toward God, may flourish in high places. 
He speaks of the righteous, as under His eye, in the- 
highest honour, but presently as bound with fetters of 
humiliating sorrow, which God x&NQittxfelfe** wssa for 



CHAPTERS XXXV I., XXXVII. 105 

•good in shewing them their ways of pride, opening 
their ears to discipline, and turning them back from 
the evil which they had failed to judge. Obedience is 
the path of good and joy; heedlessness, of ruin in 
•every way. They do always err in their heart ; they 
have not known His ways. Corruption, or hypocrisy, 
-and its course and end, are graphically set forth ; as is 
the patient goodness of God in using affliction for the 
"blessing of him who is taught by it. Not that He has 
pleasure in inflicting sorrow, but contrariwise, when 
the lesson is learnt, He brings out the sufferer into a 
largo place, whore is no straitness, but all abundance. 
Still, wrong is wrong in whomsoever, and he that does 
it, though righteous in the main, must bear his own 
burden ; and justly, for nowhere is it worse than in one 
"who has so far forgotten God, after, it may be, long 
serving Him. 

Job, therefore, had reason for care, lest his excited 
feeling might stir him up against the blow, and a worse 
thing befall him, where all resources fail, and the night, 
wherein none can work, is no comfort. It is dan- 
gerous, but very possible, to choose what is worse than 
affliction, or because of it. Elihu presses how God 
works loftily by His power, as he challenges anyone to 
«ay, Who is a Master like Him ? Who has given Him 
a charge concerning His way ? or who has ever said, 
Thou hast acted unjustly? It were better to reflect 
that His work should be magnified which men have be- 
held, or celebrated, all looking at it with amazement, 
mortals gazing at it from afar. 

Again, does he assert that God is ^fe*^ crt ^s&u^> 
and to us incomprehensible, as \tae u\xteta«t *& ^Kafc 



1C6 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

years cannot be searched out. If the phenomena are* 
so admirable, what the wisdom, power, and goodness 
that devised and formed all, with the most evident view 
to the earth and man on it, unto His own glory ! What 
skill and care in His production of every drop of water 
filtered into rain, in or with His mist ! What bountiful 
provision, as the high clouds drop down, and distil it 
on the multitudes of men ! Then what outspreadings' 
of the clouds, and what the tumult of His tabernacle I 
Not that there is any lack of light which He spreads 
over it, whilst He wraps up in darkness the roots of 
the sea. By these (the clouds and lightning) He judges 
nations, whilst He gives food in abundance ; and most 
graphic is the image of God covering His hands with 
light, while He commands it where to strike, or against 
the enemy, the noise of the storm telling of Him,. 
a store of wrath against iniquity, or, as others under- 
stand, the very cattle telling of the rising tempest. 

There is every reason to connect, not to sever r 
chapter xxxvii. " Yea, also, at this my heart trembleth, 
and is moved out of its place." And what can be finer 
than the description that follows of the thunder and 
lightning, so vivid, that not a few conceive that Elihu 
sees a storm in progress, with its attendant roar and 
rumble, followed by the fall of snow or rain in varying 
measures ? What can man do, in presence of God's 
awful voice, but seek to learn ? Even the wild beast 
retires to covert, and keeps to his abodes, while the 
whirlwind comes out of its chamber, and out of the 
north the cold. But God's breath too works marvel- 
lous change. Out of it is given ice, and the broad 
waters are compressed ; and Re \o&d& \ta* <&ro& *lso 



0HAPTER8 XXXVI., XXXVII. 1G7 

'with moisture, and scatters the clouds of His light. 
Turn about as it may, it none the less executes what 
He commands it on the face of the world of the earth. 
Whether it be as a chastising rod, if this be destined for 
His earth, or lor kindness, it is God's causing it to them. 
Who and what was Job then to arraign His ways ? 
It were better to weigh all, stand still, and consider His 
wonders. Granted, that there is such a thing as law 
in the universe ; but did Job know in whom to speak 
of them now, how God imposed it on the atmosphere, 
and caused the light of His cloud to shine ? Did he 
know aught about the balancings of the clouds, the 
wondrous works of Him who is perfect in knowledge, 
and gives the earth rest [and so sultriness] from the 
south wind, so that all is changed to scorching heat ? 
Man can feel, but can he explain ? Had Job, with 
God, spread out the skies, strong as a molten mirror ? 
If* so, he could inform us what we should say to Him : 
otherwise we have no ability to set aught in order be- 
cause of darkness. Shall it be told Him that I would 
speak ? or did one say that he would be swallowed up ? 
as Elihu insinuated for his presumption. Yet now 
one sees not the light which glances brightly in the 
skies ; but a wind passes, and clears them. From the 
north comes the golden light : as around Eloah is ter- 
rible majesty. Job had spoken thus unguardedly ; but 
it is repudiated. He who does not gaze on the Son 
cannot face God. Shaddai, whom we cannot find out, 
excellent in power and in justice, and abounding in 
righteousness, will not oppress. Therefore men fear 
Him, as He regards not those that are wise in tk&xs. 
own conceit. 



CHAPTER XXXVm., XXXIX. 

Jehovah's Intervention. 

In a material age which questions the personality of 
Him who created and governs, who saves and will 
judge, one cannot wonder that it seems wholly incredible 
that He should appear and speak. Yet the great facts 
which abide before all eyes, and attest to every upright 
mind and conscience the only writings worthy to be con- 
sidered divine revelations, bear witness to the same 
great truth, only on a larger scale. For it is impossible 
adequately to account for either the law or the gospel, 
either Old Testament or New, apart from the intervention 
of God. How God manifested His voice at this time is no 
more set out in detail here than elsewhere, save that 
He is said to have answered Job out of the storm 
or whirlwind. The fact is distinctly revealed, and this 
is enough for faith. It was what Job had ardently 
longed for, though dreading it, not because his con- 
science was bad, but through not yet knowing himself in 
His presence ; and the end of the Lord that He is ex- 
ceedingly pitiful and of tender mercy. The moral 
profit of such an intervention is beyond man's estimate. 
And Jehovah answered Job out of the storm and 

said, 
Who [is] this darkening counsel by words without 

knowledge ? 
Gird up now thy loins like a man, and I will ask thee, 

and make Me know. 



CHAPTER XXX VIII. 169 

Where wast thou when I founded the earth ? 
Declare if thou hast understanding. 
Who fixed its measure that thou shouldest know, 
Or who stretched the line upon it ? 
Whereon are its sockets sunken, 
Or who laid down its corner-stone, 
When the morning stars sang together, 
And all the sons of God shouted for joy ? 

And [who] shut up the sea with doors, 
When it burst forth — came out of the womb, 
When I made the cloud its garment, 
And thick darkness its swaddling-band, 
And broke for it my law, and set bars and doors, 
And said, Hitherto shalt thou come and no farther, 
And here let one set against the pride of thy 
waves ? 

Hast thou, from thy days, commanded the 
mornings, 
Made the dawn to know its place, 
To take hold of the wings of the earth, 
That the wicked might be shaken out of it, 
That it may change like signet-clay, 
And things stand forth like a garment, 
And from the wicked their light is withheld, 
And the uplifted arm is broken ? 

Hast thou entered into the springs of the sea, 
And walked about the secret of the deep ? 
Have the gates of death been disclosed to thee ? 
And seost thou the gates of the shadow of death ? 
Hast thou strictly attended to the breadths of the 

earth ? 
Declare if thou knowest the NrtuAfe oi Vu 



170 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

What [is] the way the light dwelleth, 
And darkness, where [is] its place, 
That thou mightest bring it to its bound, 
And that thon mightest know the path [to] its 

house ? 
Thou knowest f for thou wast then born, 
And the number of thy days [is] great. 

Hast thou entered into the storehouses of the 
snow, 
Or hast thou seen the storehouses of the hail, 
Which I have reserved against the time of trouble, 
Against the day of battle and war ? 
Where is the way the light is distributed, 
The east wind i.s dispersed over the earth ? 
Who divideth watercourses for the torrents, 
Or a way for the lightning of thunder, 
To cause it to rain on the land [where is] no many 
The wilderness wherein [is] no man, 
To satisfy the desolate and waste, 
And to make the place of the green herb to sprout ? 

Hath the rain a father ? or who begetteth the 
drops of dew ? 
Out of whose womb cometh the ice ? 
And the frost of heaven, who bringeth it forth ? 
The waters hide themselves like stone, 
And the face of the deep cleaveth together. 

Canst thou bind the bands of the Pleiades, 
Or unloose the traces of Orion ? 
Canst thou bring forth the Zodiac in his season, 
And as for Arcturus with its young, guide them ? 
Knowest thou the laws of heaven ? 
Canst thou set its dominion twet N&& roxtii? 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 171 

Canst thou apply thy voice to the cloud, 
And abundance of water shall cover thee ? 
Canst thou send forth lightnings, and they shall go 
And say to thee, Here we [are] ! 
Who put wisdom in the inward parts ? 
Cr who gave understanding to the perception ? 
Who regulateth the clouds by wisdom, 
Or who inclineth the pitchers of heaven, 
When the dust is poured into hardness, 
And the clods are compacted together ? 
Thus magnificently does Jehovah challenge Job to 
that conference he had yearned after. But where is 
the hero now ? Why silent before Him to whose seat . 
lie was so prompt to go ? Doughty words he had 
uttered in abundance when he silenced his three friends. 
But now he must learn his own measure from Jehovah 
and confess it to Him, if the words of Elihu still left 
him silent, and his own mouth failed as yet to vindicate 
the unfailing ways of God with His people. 

The first thing done is to overwhelm him, who pre- 
tended to sit in judgment on God's moral ways, with the 
sense of his utter ignorance and powerlessness in the 
least things of divine energy, even in the creation. 
Where was Job when Jehovah founded the earth ? 
What knew he of its measure fixed, or theline stretched 
on it, any more than of its deep sunken bases, or its 
eorner-stone ? And where when He set limits to tHe 
flea ? He whose understanding stood baffled at such a 
question was not in a position to judge of His deep 
things. Angels were there indeed to shout for joy 
when the sea was born and swaddled in the clouds and 
thick darkness; but, while its wild \em\Q**T&*% to^fe'tfe- 



172 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

rise up against the divine restraint, bars and doom were 
set and the irrevocable sentence fixed. Hitherto shaft 
thou come and no farther; and here be the pride of thy 
waves staid. Where was Job in all this ? Yet was it 
but a little and comparatively low part of the Creator's 
power and wisdom. For what of the sky, of the 
dawn ? Had Job, since the beginning of his days, com- 
manded the morning, or caused the day-spring to dis- 
close the wicked in their ways, setting all out plainly 
as the impression of a seal, or the embroidered figures 
-of a robe, so that evil had no longer its congenial dark- 
ness, and the arm was arrested in the very act of striking? 
Had Job so much as visited the fountains of the sea, 
and gone to explore the secret of the great deep ? Had 
the gates of death been revealed to him, or those 
realms of darkness impenetrable to mortal eye ? Or 
even to the breadth of the earth, could he say that he 
had bent his attention, or assert that he knew it all? 
Where the way to light's dwelling, and where the 
place of darkness, that he might undertake their direc- 
tion at their source ? Of course Job must know, whose 
immense space of life took in their creation ! And then 
the magazines of snow and hail, had he entered and 
-seen their vast stores reserved by Jehovah for the time 
of trouble when the day of battle rages for men that 
war ? And where the way whence light or the light- 
jiing is parted, and the east wind is driven over the 
earth ? Who divided the courses of the torrents from 
above, or the path of the thunder flash, followed on the 
one hand by rain, where man is not, but all is desolate 
and waste, and on the other to swell vegetation where 
Jt ib already ? And what co\x\& 3ob wj oi \3&a t&udl or 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 178* 

the process of dew, of iee or of hoar-frost ? What 
part did he play in these arrangements of God for the 
supply or the cheek of moisture here below ? And 
'what force could he exert on the heavenly bodies? 
Could he bind the Pleiades or loose the tiaces of Orion ? 
Could he lead forth Mazzaroth in its times, or guide the 
Bear and its sons ? What did Job know of the laws of 
heaven ? and could he arrange their dominion over the 
earth ? Could he call aloud to the clouds to cover him 
with abundance of waters? Could he commission the 
lightnings to stand submissive at his summons ? Yet 
how small a part is all this of God's ways, whose it is 
to put wisdom within and to give understanding to the 
spirit, who numbers the clouds and inclines (or stays) 
the pitchers of heaven, when the dust is dissolved, and 
the clods are compacted together I 

From the wonders of inanimate creation above, be- 
neath, and around, Jehovah now turns to the phenomena 
of the animal kingdom. The lion, the raven, the wild 
goat or ibex, the wild ass, the wild ox, the ostrich, the 
horse, the hawk, and the eagle successively appear, to- 
oonvinoe of ignorance and powerlessness him who ven- 
tures to sit in judgment on God's doings. 
Dost thou hunt prey for the lioness, 

And fill the desire of the young lions, 

When they couch in dens — abide in the covert in 
ambush ? 
Who provideth for the raven his meat, 

When his young cry to God [El] — wander without 
food? 
Knowest thou the time when the wild goats bear? 

Watchest thou over the calving of \!oa\hb&& c I 



174 NOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

Numberest thou the months that they fulfil f 
And knowest thou the time of their bearing ? 
They bow themselves, they bring forth their young; 
They cast away their pangs. 
Their young fatten, grow up in the desert, 
They go forth, and return to them no more ! 

Who sent forth the wild ass free, 
And who loosed the bands of the fleeing one ? 
Whose house I made the desert, and his abode the 

salt land. 
He laugheth at the tumult of the city. 
The cries of the driver he heareth not, 
The range of mountains [is] his pasture, 
And he secketh after every green thing. 

Will the wild ox choose to serve thee t 
Will he pass the night over thy crib ? 
Dost thou bind the wild ox in the furrow of his 

cord? 
Doth he harrow the valleys after thee ? 
Wilt thou trust him because his strength [is] great f 
And wilt thou leave unto him thy labour ? 
Dost thou trust him that he will bring back thy 

seed, 
And gather up thy threshing-floor ? 

The wing of the ostrich waveth joyously : 
Is it the pinion and plumage of the stork ? 
For she leaveth on the earth her eggs, 
And warmeth [them] on the dust, 
And forgetteth that the foot may crush them, 
And that the wild beast may trample them. 
She (lit. he) is hard on her young [as if] not for 
her; 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 175 

Without fear her labour is in vain ; 

For God hath caused her to forget wisdom, 

And hath not given her a portion in understanding; 

What time she Hfteth herself up on high, 

She laugheth at the horse, and at his rider. 
Dost thou give to the horse might ? 

Dost thou clothe his neck with quivering mane ? 

Dost thou make him leap like the locust ? 

The majesty of his snorting is terrible. 

They paw in the valley, and he exulteth in 
strength ; 

He goeth forth to meet the armour. 

He laugheth at fear, and trembleth not, 

Nor turneth back from the face of the sword. 

Against him rattleth the quiver, the blade of spear 
and lance. 

With rush and rage he swalloweth the ground, 

And stayeth not fixed when the trumpet eoundeth. 

Among the trumpets he saith, Aha t 

And from afar he scenteth the battle, 

The thunder of the chieftains, and the shouting. 

Doth the hawk fly by thy wisdom, 
And spread his pinions to the south ? 
Doth the eagle mount up at thy bidding, 
And build his nest on high ? 
He inhabiteth a rock, and lodgeth 
On the tooth of a rock, and a fastness. 
Thence he espieth food ; afar his eyes behold, 
And his young ones lap blood, 
And where the slain [are], there [is] he. 
If the king of wild beasts is first named, it is not 
without purpose that the raven ioYLcwra. '^ba ttrofcra& 



i 



170 VOTES OH THB BOOK OF JOB. 

if marked ; bat Jehovah eared lor both. He is good to 
all, and His tender mercies are over all His works. 
Was Job the one to hunt prey for the lioness, and fill 
the craving of her young, themselves soon enough 
learning to catch the prey, and springing from the thickets 
where they couched ? Was it for Job to provide the 
raven with meat ? Did not the cry of its young enter 
the ear of God, as they wandered, voracious, without 
food ? Again, was it Job that looked after the moun- 
tain goat, or kept watch over the hinds at a time most 
critical for themselves and their offspring ? Assuredly 
there is not one whose months El does not count, whose 
time of bearing He does not know. He that reckons 
the hairs of our heads, sees every sparrow that mils, 
and has His part in all, as the Saviour let the trembling 
disciples know for their encouragement, as they went 
forth at His word. So here Jehovah shews that, if 
man boasts His scanty knowledge of beasts and birds, 
and counts their classification science, it is His pro- 
vince, not man's, to enter into and watch over the need 
of every one, the most removed from human habita- 
tion, no less than those whose croakings disturb man's 
ease, it may be, but are ever before God, who has made 
them all, and provides for each as a faithful Creator. 

Think of the blindness of rationalism, which, in 
so magnificent a disproof of human presumption and 
complaint of God, sees no more than Job's ignorance 
of the time a hind, or other animal named, takes in 
gestation ! Clearly it is a question here, not of zoolo- 
gical lore, but of that beneficent care which accom- 
panies perfect knowledge of every creature. If God 
exercised such vigilant ovei&ight, according to the 

\ 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 177 

goodness and wisdom which made them, over young 
v or old, beast or bird, even the least familiar or most 
inaccessible, was it not for Job to listen and learn, in- 
stead of darkening counsel by words without knowledge ? 
And certainly His ways with saints are incomparably 
deeper than His dealings with the mere animal realm. 
Yet there we see everywhere His sovereign disposal. 
He, not man, has made them what they are, and ordered 
their habits and their habitations. If He has given 
some to be the burden-bearers of man, He has given 
others immunity from any such servitude, as the wild 
ass, with its house in the desert, and its dwelling-place 
in the steppe, where a city's tumult, and a driver's cries 
are unknown, and the mountain range he can recon- 
noitre at will, as he searches out every green thing. 

Nor can Job, or any other, pretend, whatever their 
thoughts or talk, that they can reduce the wild ox to 
the purposes of man in ordinary labour, or to submit 
quietly to his control or care. His strength might be 
invaluable ; but He who made all, and gave Adam do- 
minion over fish and fowl, cattle, every reptile, and all 
the earth did not bind the wild ox to the furrow of his 
cord, nor to harrow after Job ; nor did He ask Job to 
leave labours of the field to his responsibility, whether 
at the beginning, or at the end. 

And as to the ostrich, let its wing speed ever so joy- 
ously, still God is sovereign here, let man reason as he 
may, and makes it to differ as widely as one can conceive, 
from the pinion and plumage of the stork, whose care 
for its offspring is proverbially familiar. No bird is, on 
the contrary, so stolid as she, where natural instincts 
are usually strongest, none less oant\OM%. *&&*&&& N& 



178 NOTES OH THE BOOK OF JOB. 

not without God, who takes in more than man can 
grasp, and is pleased, of His own will and wisdom, to 
deprive the ostrich of wisdom, though He has also en- 
dowed her with a swiftness which mocks the swiftest 
horse with its rider. Let man then mark, learn, and 
worship, and not set np to judge God or to murmur. 
This were folly more guilty than the racer's of the 
desert, as well as irreverence and rebellion . 

From this Jehovah turns to the war-horse, described 
in a way worthy of Him who spoke, which makes 
the more vivid impression, as here He comes down to 
where we might be disposed to think ourselves at home. 
Other animals might be more or less strange and dis- 
tant ; but though man, and Arab man above all, might 
conceive himself to have some title to speak of what he 
most loves to use for use or ease, for pride or love, what 
had he to do with giving the horse its might or flutter- 
ing mane ? its locust- like bound ? the glory of its snort- 
ing, a terror to others? its pawing, impatient of 
restraint, and exulting in its strength ? or its un- 
dismayed advance, no matter what the clang or 
the flash of arms ? See how with impetuous rage it 
seems to bite the ground, so that it is not to be held 
in when the trumpets sound, and it answers each blast 
with Aha! as it scents the fight from afar, and the 
thunder and the shouting of the chiefs. 

Next, was it man that taught the hawk to soar, and 
spread his wings to the land of Teman ? Was it he 
who bade the eagle mount up, and build his house on 
the high rock, whence his piercing eye descries food, or 
gives his young ones to lap blood ? or himself to be 
where the slain are found ? 



CHAPTEES XL., XLL 
Jehovah's Renewed Intervention. 

It is Jehovah- God then, who alone orders, alone 
knows, with a beneficent wisdom which takes in every 
creature, and not least those which are obviously out- 
side all the care or even ken of man. Is he then 
either to contend with God, or, if he be so presump, 
tuous, can he pretend to instruct God ?* Job feels and 
owns his vileness ; ho proceeds no farther in such a> 
path ; and Jehovah gives a final word in what follows. 

Chapter xl. 

And Jehovah answered Job, and said, 
Is the censurer to correct with the Almighty ? 
The reprover of God, let him answer it. 

And Job answered Jehovah, and said, 
Lo I I am vile : what shall I answer Thee ? 
I have laid my hand on my mouth ; 
Once have I spoken, but I will not reply, / 

Yea, twice, but I will add no more. 

And Jehovah answered Job out of the storm, 
and said, 
Crird up now thy loins like a man : 
I will ask thee, and cause thou Me to know. 
Wilt thou also annul My judgment ? 
Wilt thou condemn Me that thou xnayest be 

justified ? 
Or hast thou an arm like God ([&Y), 



180 SOTXS OS TEM BOOK OF JOB. 

And with a volee like Him dost thou thunder f 

Pot on then majesty and grandeur, 

And honour and beauty put on ; 

Scatter abroad the outbursts of thine anger, 

See every proud one, and humble him ; 

See every proud one — make him bow, 

And tread down the wicked in their place ; 

Hide them in the dust together ; bind their faeeer 

in secret: 
Then even I wfll praise thee, that thy right hand 
saveth thee. 
Behold, now, Behemoth, which I made with 
thee: 
He eateth chives as an ox. Behold, now, his- 

strength [is] in his loins, 
And his might in the muscles of his belly. 
As a cedar he bendeth his tail ; 
The sinews of his thighs are knit together, 
His bones [are] tubes of copper, his spine as a bar 

of iron. 
He [is] chief of the ways of God: his Maker 

presented his scythe, 
For the mountains bring food for him, 
And all the beasts of the field play there. 
Under the lotuses he lieth down, 
In the covert of the reed and the fen ; 
The lotuses cover him with their shade, 
The osiers of the water-course cover him. 
Lo, a flood overfloweth — he hasteth not away, 
Ho is confident when a Jordan rusheth to his mouth. 
Doth [one] take him before his eyes ? 
Doth [ho] pierce through the nose mth. snares ? 



CHAPTERS XL., XLI. 181 



Chapter xli. 

Dost thou draw leviathan with an angle, 
Or, with a cord thou lettest down, his tongue ? 
Dost thou put a rash in his noso, 
Or bore his jaw with a thorn ? 
Will he multiply supplications to thee ? 
Will he speak to thee tender things ? 
Will he make a covenant with thee ? 
Wilt thou take him [for] ever as a slave ? 
Wilt thou sport with him as a bird, and bind him 

for thy girls ? 
Let partners bargain for him — divide him among 

traders t 
Dost thou nil his skin with pikes, or his head with 

fish-spears ? 
Put thine hand on him — remember the battle — 
Thou wilt not do it again : 
Behold, his hope proveth false. 
Even at the sight of him is not [one] cast down ? 
None is so fierce as to provoke him. 
And who [is] he that maketh a stand before Me ? 
Who first gave to Me, and I must repay ? 
Under the whole heaven it [is] Mine. 
I will not be silent about his parts, 
And the matter of his powers, and the beauty of 

his structure. 
Who hath uncovered the face of his garment ? 
Into his double jaws who entereth in ? 
The doors of his face, who hath opened? 
Bound about his teeth {Ab} tettot \ 



182 BOTES ON THE BOOK OF JOB. 

A pride [are] the concave shields, shut up [as] ft> 

close seal ; 
One to another they join, and air entereth not 

between them ; 
One to another they adhere, they hold together 

and separate not. 
His sneezing flasheth forth light, 
And his eyes [are] as eyelids of the dawn. 
Oat of his month proceed torches, sparks of fire> 

escape. 
Out of his nostrils issue the smoke, as out of 8> 

seething pot and caldron. 
His breath kindleth coals, and a flame cometh out 

from his mouth. 
In his neck strength lodgeth, and before him 

danceth terror. 
The flakes of his flesh are fitted close together ; 
They are fixed fast on him, immovable. 
His heart [is] firm as a stone, asti nether [millstone]- 
At his rising up the mighty tremble ; from terror 

they miss their mark. 
The sword of his overtaker doth not hold, spear, 

mace, nor lance ; 
He reckoneth iron as straw, copper as rotten wood; 
The bolt (child) of the bow causeth him not to flee; 
Sling-stones are changed into stubble for him ; 
Clubs are reckoned as stubble ; 
He laugheth at the shaking of a javelin. 
His under parts [are] the sharpest of shards ; 
He spreadeth a threshing-roller on the mire. 
He maketh the deep boil as a pot, 
He maketh the sea like a po\> oi o\&ta&si& v 



CHAPTERS XL., XLI. 183 

After him he maketh the path to shine — 

One would think the deep hoary. 

There is not on the dust dominion over him [or, 
like his], 

Who is made to be without dread ; 

He looketh on all that is high, 

He [is] king over all the sons of pride. 
It is one thing to review the opinions of men, as Job 
might those of his friends, quite another to sit in judg- 
ment on Jehovah's ways. Job had wished to come near 
His seat, and plead his own cause. Here He was now, 
if Job could answer, according to the boldness of his 
reproofs. The only answer he does make is to acknow- 
ledge himself vile. He had no answer to the divine 
challenge beyond the confession implied in laying his 
hand on his mouth. Once he had spoken, but he would 
not reply; twice, but he would add no more. The 
folly of insubmission is now before his soul. He had 
spoken too much: silence became him. It was for 
Jehovah to speak. 

And Jehovah does answer out of the storm, and 
challenge Job to gird up his loins as a hero : let the 
creature then cause the Creator to know, seeing that 
He now asks questions at his mouth ! What a proud 
thing is the flesh, and no better in the saint than in the 
sinner! Would Job also arraign and set aside the 
moral dealings of Jehovah ? — nay, more, condemn Him, 
in order to have himself justified ? Exactly the re- 
verse is that which grace produces in every soul that is 
born of God — readiness to take His part against self, to 
sit in judgment on one's own ways, and, Wn taHtaA"ros&* 
Jet it blow ever so witheringYy on ONerj ^wj «* ^<s*^ 



184 VOTES €fM TBS BOOK OF JOB. 

thought and feeling. Such if repentance, always firand 
in a saint, but often needing to be more inwrought 
where its solemn lessons were too hastily learnt at the 
first. Wisdom is beyond power, and in nothing more 
than in moral ways. Perhaps then, if Job fail here, 
ho can compare in strength. Has he an arm like £1 f 
Does he thunder with a like voice ? Let us see him 
dock himself with majesty, and grandeur, and honour, 
and beauty. What ! that poor object of compassion 1 
Lei him scatter abroad the outbursts of his anger. 
What 1 that woe-begone sufferer ( Yes, if he venture 
to sit in judgment on God's dealings, let him first see 
every proud one and humble him, see every proud one 
^-make him low, and tread down the wicked in their 
place. Compared with such a title to speak of God, 
it were a light thing to hide them in the dust together, 
and bind thoir faces in secret ; yet Jehovah declares 
that oven then He would praise Job, and own that his 
right hand savos him. What painstaking goodness in 
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that 
exalts itself against the knowledge of God, that he 
who glorios may glory in the Lord I 

Then his attention is drawn to two creatures of God, 
not now land-animals or birds, as in the former dis- 
ooiirHOR, but amphibious, though there have not been 
wanting pooplo of erudition who contend for the ele- 
phant as moant by Behemoth (chap. adi. 15), thinking 
that tho namo is a plural, majest. of HDPQ. This, 
howovor, does not suit the description, particularly as 
to tho tail ; and tho name is, as competent men believe, 
an Egyptian designation (p — ehe — mo, literally water 
ox) of tho hippopotamus in S\iem\\ivc, totm. fe^us^ 



CHAPTERS XL., XLI. 185 

the Leviathan here described (chap, xli.) seems to be 
beyond doubt, not the dolphin or the -whale, as some 
learned men have argued, but the crocodile. So most 
have been convinced since Bochart (Hieroz. iii. pp. 705, 
&c, 787, &c). It is impossible to conceive anything 
more graphic than the accounts of each, nor more 
forcible than the inference for Job or any other. If 
such the might of mere brutes, the effect of God's 
creative will, what folly to resist, censure, or even 
judge His ways t 

One cannot doubt that there was divine design in the 
detailed description of the river-horse (or ox), on the 
one hand, and, on the other, in the still more minute 
particulars of the crocodile. To an upright mind like 
Job's, they were directly and powerfully suited to 
overwhelm him under the sense that He who could do 
everything deigned to make man the object of His ways 
on earth, and ordered all things to form him in submission 
of heart to Himself. It is not here the vast height, and 
depth, and extent, and variety of His arrangements in 
inanimate nature, or in the animal world, which, inex- 
plicable as they may be to man, constitute so admirable 
a whole; but now two mighty objects, familiar to those 
near the Nile, which vindicate God's title as the only 
One who can judge absolutely in wisdom and goodness, 
as supreme in power and providence. Job therefore 
should be deeply ashamed of his self-sufficiency. 

Huge as Behemoth is, he eats herbage like the ox. 
Unlike the elephant, which is vulnerable underneath, 
sinews are there of surpassing strength ; like a cedar he 
bends his tail, and the sinews of \i\a \&\^a& vtfe %ro&$ 
knit together, his bones as copper wi9l\xoxl\ ^^Tfiw*- 



186 NOTES OF THE BOOK OF JOB. 

terpiece as he is of God's ways, be is furnished only 
with a scythe-like tooth to graze the mountains, where 
all the beasts of the field gambol. And high ground is 
not where he loves to lie down, bat under the lotuses, 
where the reed and the fen yield a covert, as the lotuses 
act as a shade, and the osiers too. No swelling floods 
startle him: he awaits with composure a Jordan rushing 
to his mouth. The closing words are difficult, and very 
different the impressions on the translators' minds, 
some regarding them not as a question, nor ironically, 
but as descriptive of his capture. 

But in this at least we may see a contrast with 
what follows of the crocodile, where ordinary means 
are ridiculed in the opening words of chapter xli. for 
securing that formidable saurian. But, if secured, is he 
soft and yielding, ready to do perpetual service ? or can 
you sport with him as a bird or hind, as a plaything for 
girls ? Ah ! no commodity for traders is he, nor game 
for the hunter, nor safe adversary for battle ; the very 
sight might prostrate, and foolhardy is the man that 
would provoke. Yet what is that to making a stand 
before God ? and who ever gave to Him that He should 
repay, Whose is all under heaven ? 

Details are then given, from verse 12 to the end. 
Who would divest that creature of his coat ? Who 
would enter his double jaws, or open the doors of his 
face, with terror round his teeth ? Then what majesty 
(or pride) the concave shields, close as a seal, so that 
breath cannot enter, and that every part holds together 
inseparably ! What light in his sneezing ! Eyes and 
mouth emit brightness, or sparks of fire, and smoke out 
of Mb nostrils as of a caldion. &ta&n^\^^\xi\aaw 



CHAPTERS XL., XLI. 187 

neck, and terror characterises all before him : what is 
left elsewhere in him is firm and immovable, his heart 
solid as stone, as the nether millstone. No wonder the 
mightiest tremble at his uprising — that they miss their 
.mark through fear — that, if one does overtake him, the 
sword does not hold, nor spear, mace, nor lance ; for he 
counts iron as straw, copper as rotten wood, and pays 
no heed to arrows, sling-stones, clubs, or javelins. Nor 
can any account be more condensed or expressive than 
of the lower parts, the underneath being compared to 
the sharpest of shards, as he rolls it like a sledge over 
the rivers. He is still more at ease in the water, 
making the deep boil as a pot, and the sea like an 
apothecary's mixture. A ship does not more distinctly 
make its path shine after it with its hoary wake. 

And that there is no such sway on earth as his is 
attested remarkably by the famous Lacepede, cited by 
the late Mr. Carteret Carey, who tells us that, not 
sharing his subsistence with the vulture (like the 
eagle), nor with the tiger (like the lion), he exercises a 
dominion more absolute than that of the lion and of 
the eagle ; and he enjoys an empire so much the more 
durable, as, belonging to two elements, he can the more 
easily avoid snares ; as, having less heat in the blood, 
he has less need to repair power not so soon exhausted ;. 
and as being able longer to resist hunger, he less fre- 
quently engages in dangerous conflicts. These, and 
other elements, still more obvious and already stated, 
of a physical kind, instinctively contribute to his fear- 
lessness; so that, though a reptile, he can look the 
highest in the face, as formidable mttv Yaa \a& *» ^rSa. 
Jub teeth, not to speak of his impenfc\»T«fcAfc vlt&bps* 



188 KOTES OK THE BOOK OF JOB. 

a veritable king over all the sons of pride or 
ferocity. 

Bat this may suffice. It was in no way intended to 
-send Job, or any other, to study the external works of 
God as a means of learning His mind, but a most im- 
pressive proof taken from His least things, which never- 
theless overawe him who regards them with the smallest 
attention, and fill him with the sense of his own 
feebleness. What then are His great things far beyond 
man's province? What the unseen and eternal, 
the existence of which, and his own relation to which; 
none can exclude, save by the most hardening unbe- 
lief to his own degradation and destruction as well as 
to God's dishonour ! This, however, was not Job's fault, 
nor yet of his friends. But the unparalleled trials 
which had put him to the proof had been used of God, 
not only to disprove the narrow and uncharitable hypo- 
thesis of those who see in God only a Judge, and in 
trials only a proof of the wickedness of those who 
suffer them, but also to detect the folly of a saint's in- 
dulging a good opinion of himself to the forgetfulness 
of God's sovereign grace, and to convince him of the 
need of his dependence on Him and of the value of 
confidence in Him. Whatever appearances may say, 
whatever the trials, God is above all evil, working by 
all things for the good of those that love Him. And 
this, assuredly, is love, though it be not that deepest 
demonstration He gave later on, when He sent His 
Son as a propitiation for our sins. It is the love of the 
vsame God, who is love. 



CHAPTER XTJT. 
Jehovah's End. 

We have now the second and closing answer of Job to 
Jehovah, while the three friends have not a word to 
say, as silent before His solemn intervention and ap- 
peal, as they had been silenced by the sufferer, and un- 
able to speak with Elihu. Here is the moral solution 
of the book before formal sentence on the great con- 
troversy was pronounced in verses 7, 8, or the open- 
mark of divine blessing followed, as in verses 10-17. 
And Job answered Jehovah, and said, 

I know that Thou canst do all things, 

And no purpose is cut off from Thee. 

Who [is] this darkening counsel without knowledge?* 

Therefore I declared what I understood not, 

Things too wonderful for me, that I knew not. 

Hear, I pray Thee, and I will speak : 

I ask Thee, and make Thou me to know. 

By the hearing of the ear I heard Thee ; 

But now mine eye seeth Thee : 

Therefore do I loathe [myself], and repent in dust 
and ashes. 
The work is now effected in the sufferer's soul. Sin- 
cerity there had been throughout ; but the very con* 
sciousness of integrity had put off the lesson when 
taught, or rather turned aside, by the thorny suspicions- 
of the three friends ; and he who needed to Wtcl\£a 
own nothingness before God, and &Y>ao\\>te> ve&sScNfcV 



190 NOTES OH THE BOOK OF JOB. 

ness to grace, was as much lifted up in spirit above 
their insinuations, as crushed by dealings of God, of 
which he could understand nothing. Elihu bad brought 
in the blessed light of soul discipline, whether to make 
God known where utter darkness reigned, or to purge 
away hindrances to a better knowledge and a deeper 
faithfulness. But Jehovah's intervention brought him 
into His presence, in a self-judgment which made him 
feel, not the glory of God only, as never before, hut 
himself nothing but an object of His grace. How much 
more should this be true of us who now know Him in 
redemption, and behold His glory in the face of Jesus 
glorified on high ! 

The friends are silent ; Job does not believe in his 
heart only but makes confession with his mouth. He 
murmurs, he resents, he questions no more, but frankly 
owns, as a thing realised in his soul, that Jehovah is 
able for all things, and no purpose withheld from Him. 
Evil in men or Satan, ruin everywhere in this fallen 
world, had touched Him in no wise. His own difficulties 
and reasonings were but the insubmissiveness of heart 
of one who, as Jehovah had Himself said in His exor- 
dium, darkened counsel without knowledge. It was Job 
that proclaimed his own ignorance, declaring that he 
did not understand, things too wonderful for him that he 
knew not. Not a word now about his friends, or their 
lack of intelligence, as of candour and charity, how- 
ever true. He judges himself before God ; and uses 
the words which God had applied to him, the withering 
proof of his presumption, as the lowly expression of 
one who felt his need of learning from God, and of de- 
sire that it might be wrought V&Y&bu Y\&a2i^h.e ae- 



CHAPTER XLIU 191 

knowledges that anything he had previously known of 
God was but like a report from afar, compared with 
that near and deep sight of Him which made him 
loathe himself, so as to repent in dust and ashes. He 
humbles himself under God's mighty hand, that he may 
be exalted in due time. 

But God humbles the proud, and this meanwhile 
where He is more or less known, as He will for the 
most stubborn in a day at hand. So He turns to those 
who had displeased Him in His dealings with Job : — 

" And it came to pass that, after Jehovah spake these 
words to Job, Jehovah said to Eliphaz the Temanite, 
Mine anger is kindled against thee, and against thy two 
friends, for ye have not spoken to (or of)* Me rightly as 
My servant Job. And now take unto you seven bullocks 
and seven rams, and go unto My servant Job, and offer 
up for yourselves a burnt-offering; and Job, My 
servant, shall pray for you — for surely his face I accept 
— that I may not deal with you [after your] folly, for ye 
have not spoken to* (or, of) Me rightly as My servant Job. 
And Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, 
[and] Zophar the Naamathite, went and did as Jeho- 
vah had said unto them; and Jehovah accepted the 



* The most common version and sense is that given in the A.V. 
4t of" or u in respect to" as in Luther, Piscator, Trem. and most 
other translations. The LXX, Syriac, and Vulgate give "before" 
or in presence of God. But if subjective reasons had not wrought 
to confound ^ with by, none would deny that >7N simply means 

to me. Noldius does try to muster examples, but not one seems 
parallel to the present case. They seem contextual or elliptic, and 
in the sense of direct object in question. At ray t*to ^a& \*a&ssl 
has the different renderings before him. 



192 N0TE8 OH THE BOOK OF JOB* 

face of Job. And Jehovah turned the captivity of Job 
in his praying for his friends ; and Jehovah increased 
all that Job had two-fold. And there came unto him 
all his brethren, and all his sisters, and ail his former 
acquaintance, and ate bread with him in' his house, and 
condoled with him, and comforted him over all the evil 
which Jehovah had brought upon him ; and they gave 
him each a kesitah, and each a ring of gold. And Je- 
hovah blessed the latter end of Job more than his be- 
ginning ; and he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six 
thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a 
thousand she-asses. And he had seven sons and three 
daughters ; and he called the name of the first Jemima, 
and the name of the second Eezia, and the name of the 
third Keren-happuch. And there were not found in 
all the land women fair as the daughters of Job ; and 
their father gave them inheritance in the midst of their 
brethren. And Job lived after this a hundred and 
forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, four 
generations; and Job died, old and sated [with] 
days." 

Thus did the Supreme Arbiter of all moral relation- 
ship decide in Job's favour, not because of his patience, 
great as it was proverbially, but because, in spite of the 
most severely searching trial — and not least from those 
who should have helped on the work of grace, instead 
of judging him ruthlessly according to appearances, 
which made them unjust to the sufferer, and left them 
wholly ignorant of God's mind — he had at length sub- 
mitted absolutely to God, and vindicated Him in the 
recognition of his own worthlessness ; while his friends 
failed to own their error, nol to 3o\> qtciVj to Elihu but 



CHAPTER XLII. 198 

even to Jehovah, preserving to the last the sullen 
reserve of pride, not judged but wounded. No repu- 
diation of themselves did they manifest, no repentance 
in dust and ashes, like Job, any more than a real and 
thorough magnifying of Him who thus deigned to make 
known His decision for the profit of faith throughout 
all time here below. It is clear and certain that all 
done in the body, yea, that the counsels of the heart, 
with the hidden things of darkness, are yet to stand out 
in the day that is coming ; but God reveals this to act' 
on our souls now, in promoting, to the highest degree, 
both self-judgment and the refusal of censoriousness. 
No notion can be more false, or less holy, than putting 
all off till then. Faith seeks and finds the blessing of 
it now ; but if of faith, it is by grace, which judges 
self in God's light, and abhors all hasty and acrimonious 
judgment of others. In that day shall every true soul 
have praise of God, who may, as in this case before us, 
vindicate one, and rebuke another, even now. But 
then, and only then, does the Christian look for it ab- 
solutely, which keeps him peaceful and dependent while 
waiting till the Lord come. 

Here the reversal was complete. Jehovah intimated 
to Eliphaz His anger against himself and his two 
companions : they had not spoken to Him rightly, like 
His servant Job. They must needs therefore approach 
Him by sacrifice through the very one they had so 
grievously misjudged, Godward and manward, perse- 
cuting him whom, we may perhaps say, God had 
smitten, and certainly talking to the grief of one whom 
He had wounded. And His servant 3o\*^\iw&fc^twyst^ 
they had contemned, would "gray for ftusia., \«& Stow* 






to blotted out of the took of the living, for 
indeed they bad wrought folly, in their thoughts and 
words at least, and Jehovah otherwise must deal with 
it on them, for they had not vindicated Him like Job. 
They therefore had thus to bow; while favour and 
Meaning more than ever crowned Job, Jehovah turning 
his e aptiiilj i when he prayed for his friends. How 
spacious, as wefl as righteous, are His ways! How holy 
and wholesome ! So He proved Himself then ; and so 
He is still, when far more fdHy, yea perfectly, revealed 
in Christ. And as we see then the form of pious con- 
fession by burnt-offering, so follows, in accordance 
with that day, the outward seal of earthly blessing in 
divinely marked abundance. Men may point to the 
twofold increase with wonder, and compare Job's 
household and stock at the end of his trial with its 
account before the trial began. Do they think God 
cannot act as He will, or count, or write ? What 
senseless unbelief! He is Sovereign, and nothing 
could be more suitable or impressive then, in itself to 
be a lesson for man always ; and if He does not so bless 
now, it is because other and higher ways of grace are 
in accomplishment, in harmony with the cross of Christ 
on earth, and His glorification in heaven. But He is 
the same God, ever good and ever wise, and His end 
then, as also His beginning now, is, that He is very 
pitiful and of tender mercy. 

Nor does it seem to me uninstructive that the 

daughters are singled out by name, especially in a 

quarter, and before the days, where men are all, and 

women but playthings ox upper store*. Not such was 

God's mini, even for those -wuo tageo, "Sim^ ««&&*. 



CHAPTER XLII. 196 

the privileges and polity of Israel. How contrasted the 
imposture of man more than two thousand years after ! 
The days of Job, confirmed by all else in the book, 
fall in with the patriarchal condition ; as the style of 
the book seems to point to Moses. The use of the 
divine names would perfectly suit in this case ; as it 
also furnishes a very striking demonstration of their 
folly, who, following a strangely shallow notion, construe 
them into evidence of different writings separated by a 
long interval of time. The Law, the Psalms, and the 
Prophets alike refute the notion as opposed to facts and 
displaying ignorance of their distinctive design under 
the guidance of the Holy Spirit in the same writer. 

May the believer humbly, happily, and holily enjoy 
the wisdom and goodness of God in His word, nowhere 
more conspicuous and withal profound than in that 
which unbelief misreads to its sin, darkness, misery 
and ruin ; as credulous of its own conceits, as ready to 
sit in judgment on God and His word. 



«•?<>•■ 



London i a Moxrlsh, V), PtteruMtat fequKt*« 



C ATALOGU E. 

3^* As Post Office Orders for sums under 10s. can now b$ 
obtained for One Penny, purchasers are requested to 
send Post Office Orders (payable at the Chief Office) 
for sums above 2s. 6rf., and halfpenny stamps for 
smaller sums. Retail purchasers are requested to send 
remittances with all Orders. 



By C. H. M 

Notes on the Book of Exodus, ditto ditto. 

Notes on the Book of Leviticus, ditto ditto. 

Notes on the Book of Numbers, ditto ditto. 

Reflections on the Life and Times of Elijah. Is. ; cloth, Is. 4d. 
The Life of Faith Exemplified ; being Thoughts on the Lift 

and Times of David. Third Edition, Is. ; oloth, Is Sd. 

Regeneration: What is it? 2d. 

Sanctification : What is it? 2d. 

Final Perseverance: What is it? 2d. 

Christian Perfection : What is it P 2d. 

Forgiveness of Sins : What is it P 2d. 

▲ Scriptural Inquiry into the True Nature of the Sabbath. 

Law, and Christian Ministry. 2d. 

u Thou and thy House ;** or, the Christian at Home. 4d. 

Reflections on the Life and Times of Hezekiah. 4d. 

The History of the Tribe of Levi. 4d. 

Discipleship in an Evil Day. 2d. 

Now and Then ; or, Time and Eternity. 3d. 

The Unequal Yoke. New Edition, Revised. 3d. 

Thoughts on the Confirmation Vows. lid. 

Thoughts on the Lord's Supper : for the Help of Christian 

in this day of difficulty. 4d. 

Call of God ; or, Reflections on Abraham and Lot. 4d 
Confidence ; or, The Peace-Giving Power of True Testimony 

82mo. Id. 

The True Ground of Peace. 6d. per dozen. 

God in Everything. Jd. 

The All- Sufficiency of Christ: a Tract for the Times. 3d 

Communion with God. Jd. 

Inside the Veil ; Outside the Camp. Jd. 

The Sunday School Teacher Encouraged. jd. 

Letters on Evangelization. 6d. 

Glad Tidings. 6d. The Three A^puta^ *** 

Q. Morrish, 20, Paternoster &quax*, l*vaitafe > '&&< 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Poet Free. 

By C. H. M. ~ ~~~~™ 

Last Days of " R. C. M." 4d. ; doth, 6d. 

The Law and the Gospel Id. Naaman the Syrian. Id. 

Competent Authority and Conflicting Opinions. Id. 

Gilgal: Joshua v. 4d. The Christian. 2d. 

Pharisee and Publican. Id. 

Job and his Friends. 4d. Once Purged. |d. 

The Two Links. Id. Reconciled and Saved. Id. 

Pages for the Anxious. 9d. Decision for Christ. 2d. 

Jehoshaphat: a Word on World-Bordering. 2d. 

Jesus Risen, a Remedy for all Evil. Jd. 

Corporal D. ; or, the Snares of a Young Convert. £d. 

The Red Heifer. 4d. The Passover in Egypt. Id. 

41 God for us." 2d. Prayer in its Proper Place. Jd. 

A Risen Saviour's Challenge. Id. 

" The Man of God.'* 3d. Eternal Punishment. §d. 

The Christian Priesthood. Id. 

G ideon and his Companions. 4d. 

Papers on the Lord's Coming. Cloth, Is. 

Life and Times of Josiah. 6d. 

The All-sufficiency of the Name of Christ. 3d. 

Edited by C. H. M. 
Things New and Old. Monthly. Id. Vols. 1—18. ls.6d. 

each. 

PROPHECY. 

Seven Lectures on the Prophetical Addresses to the Seven 

Churches. Is. 6d. 

Notes on the Apocalypse. J. N. D. 2s. 

Notes on the Book of Daniel. Is. 6d. 

Lectures on the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. 3/6 

When and How ought I to expect my Lord ? Id. 

The Second Advent and Reign of the Lord Jesus Christ Id 

Rapture of the Saints. J. N. D. 6d. 

What is the Difference between the Coming of Christ to 

receive His Saints and His appearing in Glory with them T 3d. 

Coming Events, as revealed in Scripture, showing their 

Order and Connexion. 2d. 

The Kingdom of Heaven : What is it ? With Diagram. 3d. 

Seventy Weeks of Daniel, the Prophecy of, and its Fulfil- 
ment, with Diagram. 3d. [An important subject, as answering the 
question, " Where, in Prophecy, are we now?"j 

An Inquiry into the Doctrine of a General Judgment, and 

the Christian before the Judgment-seat of Christ. 3d. 
Brief Remarks in Reply to Rev. David Brown's work on 
Christ's Second Coming. By J. N. D. fld. 

GKorrish, 20, PaternottftT &qrat*, 'Uratani/&&« 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling gent Pott Free. 

PROPHECY. 

Lectures on the Second Coming. ByJ.N.D. Cloth, Is. 6d. 
No. 1, 1 Thess. i., 2d. ; No. 2, £ph. i M 4d. ; No. 8, Rev. xii., 

4d.; No. 4, Rom. xi., 2d. ; No. 5, Matt, xiii., 4d.; No. 6, 7, Dan. li., viL, 4d. 

Fifty Plain Proofs of Christ's Personal Appearing. Id. 

Sixty Solemn Proofs of Increasing Evil, &c. 2d. 

Scripture Proofs of the Lord's Second Coming. Is. 6d.per 100. 

What Saints will be in the Tribulation. Id. 

Changed in a Moment. A Dialogue. * 2d. 

He cometh with Clouds ; or, Every Eye shall see Him. 2d. 

The One who is Coming. By G. V. W. Id. 

Coming of the Lord and order of events. 2d. 

Coming of Christ with His Saints. 4d. 

Elements of Prophecy. Id. 

Papers on the Lord's Coming. Is. 

PLAIN PAPERS ON PROPHETIC SUBJECTS. 
New Edition, Revised, Cloth, 4s. 6d. 

No. 1. The Heavenly Hope. 2d. 

2. Approaching Judgments. 2d. 

3. The Coming Crisis and its Results. 2d. 

4. The Doom of Christendom. 2d. 
5, 6. Christ and the Church. 4d. 

7. Israel in the Past and Present. 2d. 

8. Israel's Future Restoration. 2d. 

9. Israel's Restoration Introductory to Millennial 

Blessedness. 2d. 

10, 11. The Great Prophetic Question. 4d. 

12. Waiting for Christ. 2d. 

18. Ecclesiastical Corruption and Apostasy. 2d* 

14. The Last Days of Gentile Supremacy. 2d. 

15. Israel in the Approaching Crisis. 2d. 

16. The Spared Remnant. 2d. 

17. The Martyred Remnant. 2d. 

18. Apocalyptic Interpretation. 2d. 
19, 20. The First Resurrection. 4d. 
2?1. The Millennium. 2d. 

22. Recapitulation : Outline of Prophetic Truth . 2d. 
28, 24. Objections Answered. 4d. 

Thb Hopes op the Church, in Connection with the 
Destiny of the Jews and the Nations, as Revealed in 
Prophecy. Eleven Lectures. By J. N. D. Is. 6<L 
new edition, large type, 2s. 

a. Kexriih, 20, Pateraoitw fk^kix^wAs*^^ 5 ^ 



Orters t» tto aaonnt of On* 

" C. S.» TRACTS. 
Tracts, 4 pages, 1 — 16. Is. per 100. 



1 The Son of God 
1 The Handcuffs 

5 "Smashed to 
4 The J-oet Ticket 

6 •• Just in Time" 

• ^Conversation" 

T "Whata Contrasts 

• "Prog re s s ** 



t "An Interesting Question** 

10 "The Explosion" 

11 "I have my Ticket* 
1* "Over-Luggage" 

IS How doesa man become a soldierY 

14 That Sad, Sad Face? 

15 "Most I not Strive** 

16 The Lunatic and Tola Keeper 



« Plain words,*' 4 pages, 1—1 «. Is. per 100. 



1 The Little Garden 

2 Lesson from an Old School- 

master 
f. "Conversion* 
4 The Telescope 
4 H exemption 
• ••Life" 
T "TheJustincf 



9 The Burial of the Ethiopian 
IS "The Risen Christ** 
11 "The Live Bird let loose** 
IS The Great Supper 

13 flow did the Jew know fall 
Sin was Forgiven 

14 Naaman. the Leper 

15 " As it was in the days of Noah* 
f 16 "As it was in the days of Lot" 



8 Worship 
44 Bread Cast upon the Waters," 2 pages, 1—16. 6d. per 100 



10 "Repentance unto Life** 

11 What is Good News to a man 

who feels himself Lostt 
IS Wb«t is Grace? 
IS " Hath** and" Are" 

14 "The Righteousness of God" 

15 How can a Sinner be Justified ? 

16 How does the Believer know 

that he is Justified? 



1 «• Your Dying Hour" 

t "fie thou Clean*' 

8 " Have I Repented Enough f • 

4 "Thy Sins be Forgiven thee" 

5 Two Things which God hath 

Joined together 

6 " Why are ye Troubled?** 

7 How are you to be Saved? 

8 Who is to Blame? 

9 IfthouKnewesttheGiftofGod? 

Job's Conversion; or, God the Justifies 2d., or 14s. per 100. 

Ruth ; or Blessing and Rest. Id. each, or 7s. per 100. 

Mephiboshetb : Lame on Both Feet. Id. each, or 7s. per 100. 

Joseph : Type of the Risen Christ Id. each, er 7s. per 100. 

14 Awake, Awake ! Behold the Bridegroom cometh !" Id. 

Victory, Id. The Two Husbands, 2d. 

Great Stones and Costly. Id. each, or 7s. per 100. 

What God hath said on the Second Coming of Christ and the 

End of the Present age. 2d. each, or 14s. per 100. 
Millennial Reign of Christ, 2d. Justification in the Risen Christ, Id. 
What was the Sabbath ? and what is the first day of the week ? 2d. 
Doors Shut and Lamps Put Out. 2d. 
Tracts for Young Christians: No. 1, Full Redemption; No. 2, 

Lessons of the Wilderness. Id. each. 
Mount Ararat ; or, Noah raised up in the Ark. 2d. 
Coming of the Lord, &c. With Diagram. £d. 
Ritualism : and what will be the end of it ! Id. 
The Oaks Explosion, Id. Jonathan ; or, One Thing Lacking, Id. 
Plain Dialogues on Solemn Subjects: No. 1, What is the Gospel? 

No. 2, Do you Believe God? Id. each. 

The Smaller Tracts in a vol. (•); the Larger Tracts in-a voL (*♦) Is. 6d. each. 
In quantities for distribution, half price, the pur chaser paying carriage. 

0, MorriBh, 20, Paternoster Square ljoutoV&&. 



O rders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 

" C. S." TRACT8-continued. 
Short Memoir of Catherine S. Id. 
Nehemiah : or, The Building of the Wall 2d. 
The Church of God as found in the scriptures. 3d. 
Solomon's Temple. 2d. Imputed Righteousness. 2d. 
Perfection. Where is it ? what is it P 3d. 
Christ the Centre: or, Why do you meet in His name 
The Revelation of Jesus Christ. 6d. [alone ? 2d. 

The Railway Tracts in a volume. Is. 
How does a Man become a Soldier ? In German, 6d. per doz. 
The " C. S. M Tracts, Vol. 3. Cloth, Is. 6d. 

By Sir E. Denny. 

The Coming of Christ with His Saints, with two Charts, 4d. 
The Great Epistle General of John and the Seven-sealed 

Book. In sheets, price Is. 

A Prophetical Stream of Time, with Companion, £1 2s. 6d. ; 

Companion separate, 2s. 6d. 

The Seventy Weeks of Daniel, and the Cycle of Seventy 

Weeks. Two Charts, with Companion. £L 

The Great Epistle General or John to the Seven Churches 

in Asia. A Chart, 8s. ; in cloth, mounted, with Companion, 18s. 6d. 
Companion, 8d. 

The Great Epistle General of John to the Seven Churches 

in Asia. 4to. 15s. 

The Covenants and the Church of God. with Companion, 

price 7s. ; in cloth, mounted and folded, 14s. 0d. Companion, 6d. 

The Days and Hours named in Scripture, with Companion, 

price 4s. 6d. Companion, 4cL 

The Times of Methuselah and Noah. 4s. 

The Days and Hours and Times of Methuselah and Noah. 

In one case with Companion. 15s. 

The New Jerusalem. 3s. 6d.; or in cloth mounted and 

folded. 9s. Companion, 6d. 

The Five Prophetical Periods of Daniel, 3s. 6d. : Com- 
panion, 0d. In cloth, mounted and folded. 7s. Od. 

The Elect Church, 5s. In cloth, mounted and folded. 9s. 

Companion, 4d. 

The River of God, with Companion, 5s. Companion, 4d. 
The Feasts of the Lord, 2s. ; Companion, 8d. Mounted 

and varnished, 10s. ; mounted and folded, 7s. 6d. 

Babylon the Great. In sheets, 7s. ; mounted and folded, 

; Companion, 

A Miscellaneous Selection. Cloth, gilt, 8d. 

Hymns and Poems, by Sir E. Denny. 2s. 

Miscellaneous Papers. Cloth, 5s. 6d. 

Leslie's Four Marks. 4d. Mary of Bethany. Id. 

The Great Eternal Reality, exem\>\\^^m\^\^^^^so«x^A 

ofL.A. Aahby. Id. 

0. Morrish, 20, Paternoster top***' Vwtoa*'*'^ 



Now frubliihingi 
In Parts Is., and in Volumes 6s. each. 

COLLECTED WHITINGS OF J. B\ DABBY. 

Each Volume complete in itself. 
VOL. I. Ecclesiastical— Vol. I. 

Containing twenty papers on Church principles. 
VOL. II. Prophetic— Vol. I. 

Notes on the Revelation ; The Hopes 6f the Church, &c 

VOL. IIL Doctrinal— Vol. I. 

Containing eleven papers on Doctrine. 
VOL. IV. Ecclesiastical— Vol. II. 

Containing eleven papers on Church principles. 
VOL. v. Prophetic— Vol. II. 

Containing Notes m Apocalypse ; Studies on Daniel, &c. 
VOL. VL Apologetic— Vol. I. 

Containing The Irrationalism of Infidelity, &c. 
VOL. VII. Doctrinal-Vol. II. 

The Sufferings of Christ, and eleven shorter pieces. 
VOL. VIII. Prophetic— Vol. HI. 

Examination of B. W. Newton's " Thoughts on the 

Apocalypse,' 7 &c. 

VOL. ix. Apologetic— Vol. II. 

Containing Replies to the Essays and Reviews. 

VOL. X. Doctrinal— Vol. III. 

Containing twenty- four papers on Doctrine. 
VOL. XI. Prophetic- Vol. IV. 

Containing Six Lectures on the Second Coming, &c. 
VOL. XII. Evangelic— Vol. I. 

Containing Gospel Sermons and twenty-five other Pieces. 
VOL. XIII. Critical— Vol. I. 

Papers on the Greek Article, Particles, Prepositions, &c. 

VOL. XIV. Ecclesiastical— Vol. III. 

Claims of the Church of England considered, &c. 
VOL. XV. Doctrinal— Vol. IV. 
Tracts on the Doctrine of the Sufferings of our Lord, &c. 
VOL XVI. Practioal-Vol. I. 

Q. Morrish, 20, Paternoster S^ftx©,!^^^^^^* 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 

VOL. XVII. Practical- Vol. II. 

Containing Practical Reflections on the Psalms and Proverbs. 
Brief Thoughts on Philippians, and Eleven other papers. 

VOL. XVIII. Doctrinal- Vol. V. 
Containing Addresses to his Roman Catholic Brethren by 
a Minister, Christianity not Christendom, &c, &c. 

VOL. XIX. Expository— Vol. I. 

Containing Hints on the Tabernacle, Sacrifices, Day of 
Atonement, and Feasts of Jehovah, &c, &c. 

VOL. XX. Ecclesiastical— Vol. IV. 

Containing Narrative of Facts in connection with the 

Separation at Ebrington Street, Proceedings at Rawstorne 

Street, and numerous other papers. 

By J. N. £>. 

Letters on the Inspiration of the Scripture. 3d. 
Cleansing by Water, and what it is to Walk in the Light; 
Inquiry as to the Antichrist of Prophecy. 2d. [2d 

Brethren and their Reviewers. 4d. 
The Immortality of the Soul, 3d. The Morning Star, id. 
Brief Outline of the Books of the Bible. lOd. 
Practical Reflections on the Psalms. 3s. 6d. 
Hints on the Tabernacle. Cloth, 9d. 
Three Letters on Present Matters, id. 
Is the Comforter Come? And is He GoneP 4d. 
Grace the Power of Unity and of Gathering. 2d. 
Remarks on the Holy Ghost in the Christian. Id. 
„ „ Spirit of God in the Church. 3d. 
Books of the Bible — Romans. 9d. 
The State of the Soul after Death. Id. 
What the Christian has amid the Ruin of the Church. 4d. 
On Binding and Loosing by the Assembly. 2d. 
Approach to, and delight in God. Id. 
Episcopacy : What ground is there in Scripture or in 

History for accounting it an Institution of God T 2d. 

Maintenance of Scriptural Discipline, id. 

Romanism. Is. The Christ of God. Is. 6d. per 100. 

Colenso and the Pentateuch. 6d. 

Non- atoning Sufferings of Christ, id. 

Letter on Immortality and Everlasting Punishment. Id. 

The Gospel and the Church. 6d. 

0. JtorrifA, 20, Patftroattftt a<^tt* % \«a&s»^ s ^ 



Orden to the amount of One Shilling itnt Post Free. 

By J. N. D. 

Synopsis of the Books of the Bible, in 5 vols., 6s. each. 

„ „ cheap edition, 5 vols, 20s, the set. 

On the Greek Acticle ; Particles and Prepositions. 2s. 

Exposition of the Psalms. Is. 5d. The Covenants. 2d. 

Elements of Prophecy. Id. Christian Devotedness. Id, 

Who is a Priest and what is a Priest P Jd. 

Remarks on Light and Conscience. 2d. 

Christian Position as to Life and the Spirit. Id. 

On Lay Preaching. 2d. Komans VII. and VIII. 2d. 

What was the Church at the Beginning and what is its 
Present State? 2d. 

The Purpose of God, 2d. On Repentance. Id. 
What is the World, and What is its End? Id. 
Eternal Punishment, Brief Scriptural Evidence on. Id. 
Thirteen Sermons, cloth, Is. 6d. Divine Righteousness, Id* 
Sufferings of Christ, Is. How to get Peace, 2d. 
Scripture Notes and Queries. — The Acts of the Apostles. 4d. 
Christianity not Christendom. 4d. 
Brief Analysis of the Epistle to the Hebrews, in connection 

with the Priesthood of Christ. 6cL 

Irrationalism of Infidelity. Reduced to 5s. 6d. 

Rapture of the Saints, 6d. The Righteousness of God, 4d. 

By J. B. S. 

Letters on Subjects of Interest. Is. 

„ „ Second Series. Is. 

Decline and its Symptoms. Id. 
Purged or Judged, Id. 

Discipline in the School of God. Vols. 1, 2. Is. each. 
u My Gospel." 2d. 
"Our Gospel." Id. 

A Voice to the Faithful. Edited by J. B. S. Mouthly, Id. 
Vols. 1 — 9, Is. 6. each. 

CAEAP POCKET NEW TESTAMENTS. 

Nonpariel Type, bound in French Morocco, Is. 

Ditto • Blue Calf, Is. 6d. 

Ditto with Psalms, French Morocco, Is. 4d. 

Ditto Thin Edition, with references, calf, 5s. 

Minion Type, French Morocco, Is. 4d. ; Blue Calf, 2s. 

Ditto with Psalms, French Morocco, Is. 6d. 

Ditto ditto limp circuit, 3s. 

Q. Morrish, 20, Paternoster Square, Irfrofara., '&£. 



EEVELATIO 



• And it was given to her that she 
should be clothed in fine linen, 
bright and pure ; for the fine linen 
is the righteousnesses 11 of the 

9 saints. And he says to me, Write, 
Blessed [are] they who are called 
to the supper of the marriage of 
the Lamb. And he says to me, 
These are the true words of God. 

10 And I fell before his feet to do 
him homage. And he Bays to me, 
See [thou do it] not. I am thy 
fellow-bondsman, and [the fellow- 
bondsman] of thy brethren who 
have the testimony of Jesus. Do 
homage to God. For the spirit of 
prophecy is the testimony of Jesus. 

11 And I saw the heaven opened, 
and behold, a white horse, and one 
sitting on it, called 1 Faithful and 
True, and he judges and makos 

12 war in righteousness. And his eyes 
[were] m a flame of fire, and upon 
his head many diadems, haying a 
name 11 written which no one knew 

18 but himself, and clothed with a 
garment dipped in blood; and his 
name is called The Word of God. 

14 And the armies which [are] in the 
heaven followed him upon white 
horses, clad in white, pure, fine 

15 linen. And out of his mouth goes 
a sharp two-edged sword, that with 
it he might smite the nations; 
and he shall shepherd them with 
an iron rod; and he treads the 
wine-press of the fury of the 

* In Hebrew the plural of acts express- 
ing a quality Is used for the abstract 
quality itself. This maybe the case, by 
analogy, here. See Psalm xL 7, where in 
Hebrew it is ' righteousnesses/ but it is 
actual, not imputed. 

i ' Called' is a doubtful reading, some 
omit it 
"Some odd 'as,' 

* Some have hen 'hiring names written 



Second Edition, Revised, 
A NEW TRANSLATION 

OF 

THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

8. d. 

Cloth 4 

French Morocco . • • • • • 5 6 
Morocco, gilt edges • • • • 6 6 
Morocco, limp, with lappets 8 

With Pearl NEW Testament, 
Authorised Version, refer- 
ences, Morocco • • • • 8 

Cam, be bound with Bolster's Twiddle 

size Polyglot Bible or Testament 

to order. 



kings of the earth and their ar- 
mies gathered together to make 
war against him that sat upon 
the horse, and against his army. 
*° And the beast was taken, and the 
false prophet that [was] with him, 
who wrought the signs before him 
by which h* deceived them that 
received the mark of the beast, 
and those that worship p his image. 
Alive were both oast into the lake 
of fire which burns with brim- 
si stone ; *nd the rest were slain 
with tne sword of him that sat 
upon the horse, which goes out of 
his mouth ; and all the birds were 
filled with their flesh. 
XX. And I saw an angel descend- 
ing from the heaven, having the 
key of the abyss, and a great 

and a name written which/ dec. x, which 
is very incorrect in the Apocalypse, and 
nowhere a very carefully written HS, is 
quite without sense here. It has merely 
* a name knew but himself.' 

• I do not say 'had received* K<«* % \afe!- \ 
cause than tin* ta^Wcc^^w^^^^^K* 
the TeceVvVn^^^c^Sa^o^K^^M^^^ 8 " 

> * Or *&o\iQtca3pto! 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 

By W. K. 

Notes on EzekieL 2s. Lectures on the Pentateuch. 4s. 6d. 

Abram : being Lectures on Genesis zii. — xxv. Is. 

Christ : not Christendom nor Judaism. 2d. 

Lectures on the Earlier Historical Books. 3s. 6cL 

Lectures on the Minor Prophets. 4s. 6d. 

Lectures on Isaiah. 2s. 6d. Notes on Daniel, Is. 6d. 

Lectures on the Gospel of Matthew. 6s. ; gilt, 7s. 

Lectures Introductory to the Gospels. 5s. 

Lectures Introductory to Paul's Epistles. 5s. 

Lectures Introductory to the Acts, the Catholic Epistles, 

and the Revelation. 6s. 

Lectures on the Revelation, cloth, with New Transla- 
tion, 6s. 6cL 
Notes on Romans, with a New Translation. 2s. 6d. 
Lectures on Galatians, with a New Translation. Is. 6d. 

extra cloth gilt, 2s. 

Lectures on Ephesians, with a New Translation. 2s. 

Lectures on Philippians and Colossians. 2s. ; extra cloth. 

Reply to the Christian Observer. 6d. [gilt, 2s. 6d. 

Christ Preaching to the Spirits in Prison. 9d. 

Lectures on the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Eleven Occasional Lectures. 4s. 6d. [3s. 6d. 

Lectures on the Doctrine of the Holy Spirit. 4s. 

Lectures on Fundamental Truths of the Church. 2s. 6d. 

The Talmud, 3d. Second Coming of Christ, £d. 

Christ the door of the Sheep. Id. 

Three Lectures on Christian Worship. 4d. 

God's Principle of Unity. 4d. Christian Hope. 2d. 

Jesus forsaken of God. Id. Elements of Prophecy. 2s. 

BY A. M. 

Short Papers on Church History. Vols. 1 & 2, 4s. 6d. each. 
Meditations on the Christians Standing, State, Vocation, 

Warfare, and Hope. Is. 6d. 

Meditations on the 23rd and the 84th Psalms. Is. 6d. 
Meditations on the Song of Solomon. Cloth, Is. 6d. 
The Coming of the Lord and the Order of Events. 2d. 
The Christian's Conflict and God's Armour. 2d. ; cloth, 3d. 
Sympathy ; or, Comfort in Affliction. Jd. 
Man's Paradise Lost, God's Paradise Found. 32mo. Id. 
The Gospel and its Results. 2d. Philadelphia. l£d. 
Seven Plain Questions about Salvation. Is. 4d. per 100. 
A Present Salvation. Is. 6d, per 100. 

Q. fflorrish, 20, Paternoster Bqpra, !«&&«&,'&&. 



Orden to the amount of One Shilling sent Pott Tree. 

MISCELLANEOUS. 

Cruden'8 Concordance to the Holy Scriptures, unabridged 

dltion. 78. 6d. 

The Englishman's Greek Concordance. £2 2s. 

The Englishman's Hebrew Concordance. 2 vols., £3 Ids. 6d. 

That Goodly Mountain and Lebanon; being a ride through 

Samaria, Ac. Extra cloth, gilt, 0s. 

Justification and Acceptance with God. Cloth, Is. 6d. 
The Skeleton : Fnendly Address to the Christians in 

England. 2d. 

Christian Baptism : What is it P 3d. Four Horses. Jd. 

Christians Worshipping in the Last and Perilous Times. 2d. 

Sure Foundation of God in Times of Failure & Weakness. 2d. 

A Word of Exhortation to Christian Parents. 2d. 

Peace in Believing. 2d. ; cloth, 6d. 

The Father's House. Id. The Two Resurrections. 2d. 

Deliverance and Service. By W. T. T. Id. 

Jehovah Tsidkenu. (Music/) 6d. Hjmns by H. B. 6d. 

He Sitteth o'er the Water-floods (Music.) 6d. 

Pilgrim's Harp. (Music.) 1, 2, 3, 4. 2s. each. 

A Little While, and the Great Shepherd (Music). 6d. each. 

" This do in remembrance of me." Id. 

The Uses of Affliction, £d. Sympathy, Jd. 

The Blood, the Death, and the Cross. By G. V. W ls.6d. 

Christian's Scrap Book. Is. Precious Truth. Is. 

The Rule of Life : what is it ? Ud. 

What the Scriptures teach on the Judgment to come. Id. 

The Heavenly Guest : the Holy Ghost. 6d. 

The Gospels : why are there four P why do they differ 

and are they folly inspired? 6d. 

Effect of the Progress of Democratic Power. Jd. 

Plain Words on Eternal Punishment. Id. 

The Dates and Chronology of Scripture. Is. 6d. 

Why do you meet separate from other Christians? Id. 

A Man of Spirit and: a Spiritual Man. 2d. 

The Streams (poetry). Limp, 8d. ; cloth boards Is. 

The Atonement, its nature and extent. 4d. 

The Incorruptible Crown. Id. Grace or Judgment. Id. 

Cease to do evil, learn to do good. 3d. 

Become a little child (poetry). 6d. per doz. 

Life Everlasting : a Dialogue. 2d. 

The Three Gardens. Id. The Apocalyptic Symbols. 2d. 

God's Threefold Purpose. Id. Confession, id. 

Our Pilgrimage and His Rest; Notes of La*nxe». %* 

W.T.T. 4<L 

0. Jfarriih, 80, Pattrooatm •qpttsV***"****' 



Orders to the aayrant of One Shilling sent Foot Free. 

MISCELLANEOUS— continued. 
Practical Thoughts on Philippians. 3d. 
The Bright and Morning Star. A Chart. 3s. 
Gleanings from the Teaching of G. V. VV. Is. 
Ditto, Second series, Is. 

? The Lord's dealings with the Convict, Daniel Mann. 2d. 
' Things New and Old Almanac for the current year. Id. ; 

Cloth interleaved. 6<L 

What has God found in the Atoning Work and Death of 

Hie Son? Id. 

The Girdle of Truth, in 10 vols, complete, price 14s. 6d. 

Hebrew Proper Names, 3s. Toleration. Id. 

Remarks on u The Church and the World." Is. 

Are you brought to God ? 6d. per dozen. 

Pauvre Pecheur, viens ! 2s. per 100. 

Love and Hatred, Jd. The Psalms. Jd. 

Light amid the Darkness, as seen in Life of Luther. 2s. 6d. 

Lights and Shadows of the Reformation. 2s. 6d. 

Remnant Times, by W. T. T. 4d. 

PERIODICALS. 

The Present Testimony, occasionally. 6d.to2s. Vols. 1 — 15. 

6s. each. New Series, vols. 1 and 2. 6s. 

The Bible Treasury, Monthly. 3d. Vols. 7—10, 7s. 6d. each. 
A Voice to the Faithful. Id. Vols. 1 — 9, Is. 6d. each. 
Things New and Old. Id. Vols. 1—18, Is. 6d. each. 
The Sunday School Worker. Id. Vols. 1—3, Is. 6d. each. 
Faithful Words for Old and Young. Id. (Illustrated.) 
Words of Truth. Id. Vols. 1—10, Is. 6d. 
Good News for the Little Ones. Id. Vols. 1 — 1 7, Is. 6d. each. 
Ambassador. Id. Vols. 1 — 7, Is. 6d. each. 
My Little Friend, Monthly, jd. (Illustrated. ) 

HYMN BOOKS. 
Little Flock, 8d., Is., Is. 6d., 2s., 2s. 6d. ; large type, Is. 6d., 

88. 6d., 4s. 6d., 6s. 6d. 

Little Flock, bound with New Testament, limp morocco, 

8s. 6d., with flaps, 4s. 6d. Large type, limp, with flaps, 7s. <kL 

Music for Little Flock. 2s. 6d. 

Glad Tidings. 4d., 6d., Is. 

Sheet Hymns for the Gospel. Is. 6d. per 100. 

Good News Sheet Hymns for Children. Is. 6d. per 100. 

144 Hymns for Schools and Families. Cloth, 6d. 

Select Hymns for Children. Id. 

Hvmn Book for Youth. Id. ; cloth, 2d. ; gilt, 6d. 

The Halfpenny Hymn Book for Childx^. 

Q. Jforrish, 20, Paternoster Bqwxe, "Lwaftaa- ^fc* ~ 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling tent Poet Tree. 



h"wX/ , VN.%.N 



BAGSTEB'S BIBLES. 



Morocco 
Best Morocco 
Do. limp and flaps 
Do. lined with kid 



Small. 
5% X 4 in. 
9*. Od. 

J 25. 6 d. 
' 17 s. Gd. 
£l 0*. Od. 



Middle. 
6$ X M in. 

lis. Od. 

16 s. (yd. 
£1 2s. 6d. 
£l 5s. Od. 



Large. 

8J X«}in. 

145. Od 

£1 Is. Od. 
£1 7*. 6d. 
£1 10s. Od. 



(With Maps, Is. extra.) 

Imitation Morocco 
Plain Morocco - 



CHEAP BIBLES. 

GOOD READABLE TYPE. 

Small. 



Ditto limp, with flaps J 65. 6d. 



5} X 4 in. 
3*. Od. 
5s. Od. 



Middle. 
6i X 4| in. 
4s. 6d. 
6s. Od. 
Os. Od. 



For Schools and Families. 
The Teacher's Class Book. 2d. 
First Reading Book. 2d. ; cloth, 4d. 
Pleasant Tales, in assorted packets. 6d. ; in a vol. 6d. 
Gospel Stories, „ „ 4d. 

Gospel Tickets, „ „ 4d. 

Opening Buds ,, „ 6d. 

The Daisy packet. Is. 
Children's Illustrated Tracts. Is. per Packet. 
Scenes from the N. Testament, packets W f X, Y, Z, 6d. each. 

Books for Children. 

Child lost and found. £d. 

Jonas Eilcrs. 6d. Old James the Irish Pedlar. 6d. 

Letter to a Child about Jesus. Id. 

Above the bright blue sky 6d. Child Geraldine. 1s. 

The Bible in the Wall. Is. Story of Ada. 6d. 

Sophy's Story. Vol. 1 to 4. Is. 6d. each. 

Good News. Vol. 1 to 17, Is. 6d. each. 

What Little Hands can do. By the late Mrs. Owen. 2s. 6d. 

Six Days of Creation. 2s. 6d. Truths from Nature. 6d. 

What Aunty saw in Scotland. Is. 

Madagascar and its Martyrs. Is. The Daisy. 6d. 

The Voice of Flowers. Is. Opening Buds. 6d. 

Pleasant Tales. 6d. China and the Chinese. Is. 

999 Questions and Answers. 9d. 

Man after God's own heart. Is. 



Q. Morruh, 20, PatexnoaUx fiquax*, l«&Aw&% "*<&• 



Ordsrg to the amount of One Shilling mo* Pott Free. 

By J. G. B. 

Short Meditations, 3s. 6d. The Son of God, 2s. 
Family Character and Family Religion. Id. 
Musings on the Hebrews, 6d. Woollen and Linen, 4d. 
Moral Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. Is. 6d. 
'Showers on the Grass : Letters and Papers. Is. 6d. 
Belshazzah's Feast in its application to the Gt. Exhibition^! 
Abraham, Noah, Enoch, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph. 4d. each. 
" The Patriarchs," cloth, 3s. " The Evangelists," cloth, 3s. 
Matthew, 6d. ; Mark, 4d. ; Luke, Is. 6d. ; John, Is. 6d. 
A Few Words on the Present Revival. 2d. 
Heaven and Earth, 4d. Confederacies of Men, 2d. 
Introduction to Job, 4d. ; to the Canticles, 4d. 
Meditations on Elisha, 6d. ; on the Psalms, 2s. 

CHEAP GOSPEL TRACTS, 

Direct from the Publisher, for Distribution, the purchaser 

paying carriage. 

10,000 Two-page Tracts, sorted, £l. 
5,000 Four-page Tracts, sorted, £1. 
5,000 Two-page Tracts, 10s. 6d. 
2,500 Four-page Tracts, 10s. 6d. 

In less quantities. 

Two-page Tracts per 1000, 2s. 3d. By Post, 3s. 

Four-page Tracts per 1000, 4s. 6d. By Post, 6s 

Small sorted Packets not sold at these prices. 

SORTED PACKETS. 

Railway Tracts, Is. In Small Books, 8d. 

* Plain Words/' Is. In Small Books, 8d. 

u Bread Cast upon the Waters." 6d. 

Important Questions. 32mo. 4d. 

The Miniature Series of Gospel Books, tinled, 6d. 

London Series, Envelope Size, A. and B. 6d. each. 

Pleasant Tales for the Young, sorted, 6d. 

•Seed Sown by the Way. 8d. 

Water from the Wellspring. 8d. 

Glad Tidings, four pages. 8d. 

Sounds of the Trumpet, four pages. 8d. 

Home Truths. 8d. 

"Words of Eternal Life — All Scripture. 8d. 

Arrows Shot at a Venture. 6d. 

O. Morrish, 20, Paternoater fcqrat* % lAfttanV&A* 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Tree. 



•fc^fc.**^^'*"* * K-V^W* 



MINIATURE SERIES-Tinted Paper. 

4d. per dozen, 2s. per 100. Sorted packet, 6cL 

A Religion of Four Letters. Time Enough. 

Is the Link on ? Appropriation. Place of Security. 

A Special Appeal. Crucifixion with Christ 

SACRED GREETINGS. 
LEAFLETS FOE LETTEES.-On Tinted Paper. 



I Last interv ew with a serv ant 

of Christ— "My Beloved" 

2 The Invitation — The Re- 
sponse 

8 Is this the way, my Father — 
All, all is well 

4 Christ has done it all 

■5 The Service of Love 

6 The Gospel Echo 

7 The Echo of Love 

8 In everything give thanks 

9 Whom have I in heaven? 
10 The Lord our Shepherd 

I I Best of the saints above 

12 The Conqueror's Song 

13 The Ark 

14 Lord, save us, we perish 

15 This world is a wilderness 

16 Peace with God, &c. 

17 Morning Star — come, Lord 
Jesus [saved 

Best — What must I do to be 
The water of Life 
I'm but a bruised reed-Lead 
Thou me on 
A little while 

22 The Christian's Prospect 

23 I'm going home 

24 Himself hath done it 
The name of Jesus 
Take no thought for the 

morrow 



18 
19 
20 

21 



25 
26 



27 Communion 

28 Weep not 

29 She is not dead but sleepeth 

30 Song in the day of the East 

Wind 

31 Pressing forward 

82 The Day of Trouble 
88 The word of God 

84 Thou God seest me 

85 Submission 

86 Christ is mine 

87 " Unto you which Believe," 

&c. 

88 Comfort in Affliction 

89 The Christian 

40 Proof of Sonship 

41 The Man of Pleasure 

42 "What time I am afraid I 

will trust in thee" 
48 My Ain Countree 

44 To-day or To-morrow 

45 Trust in the Lord Almighty 

46 " He restoreth my soul" 

47 The Heart's Desire 

48 Best in the Bock of Ages 

49 All of Grace 

50 "What is that to thee?" 

Follow thou me 

51 Careful for nothing 

52 In the plains of Jordan 
58 If you love me lean hard 



( 54 Sunlight in the heart 
Sold separately, or in Sorted Packets, Id. & 8d. 

COLOURED HANDBILLS. 

SHILLING FEB HUNDRED. 



1. The Midnight Cry. 

% The End is near. 

8. Union : a Word to Christians. 

4. The Day Labourer. 



5. The Enquiry. 

6. Pilgrim *s Song. 

7. Song in the day of the East 

Wind. 



0. Xorriih, 20, Patftraoitot fcqjuttfc^— **3^ 



Orders to the amount of One Shilling sent Post Free. 



ENVELOPE SIZE, 0IXPEBCE PEE DOZEN. 



Boldness in the Day of Judgment. 
" And have 1 nothing to do ?" 
The Life Boat 
"What wait I for?" 
Christian Position: What is it? 
Balm for a Troubled Soul. 
Perfect and Permanent. 
God's Word and Man's Evidences. 
God's Mercy is Man's Resource. 
The True Ground of Peace. 
A Heart for Christ. 
A Worshipper and a Workman. 

One of each of the above in an 
assorted Packet (A), price 6d. 

Also in a volume, cloth gilt, 9d 



What think ye of Christ? 

The Great Salvation neglected. 

If Saved, why not Emancipated? 

The Soul saved & Satan silenced. 

" Just as I am." 

Conscience and Revelation. 

A Word to a Troubled Conscience 

Grace Triumphant. 

The Lowest Step in the Ladder. 

The Lamp and Ticket. 

The Power of Prayer. 

The Christian's Mission. 

One of each of the above in an 
assorted Packet (B), price 6d. 

Also t» a volume, cloth gilt, 9dL 



SCRIPTURE CALENDAR FOB 1878, price Is. 

With a Text of Scripture for every day in the year. 

Texts for Cottage Walls (12, sorted). 6d. 

LEAFLETS FOB LETTEBS. 
12 Copies One Penny ; in assorted Packets, 2d. 



1. Compel them to come in. 

2. Cling to the Mighty One. 

3. They're dear to God. 

4. The Unchangeable. 

5. The Quiet Mind. 

6. Watching for the Morning. 

7. The Meeting Place. 



8. Re-union. 

9. Rejoice in the Lord. 

10. The Coming Day. 

11. The Starless Crown 

12. The Everlasting Kingdom. 

13. True Royalty. 

14. A Little talk with Jesus. 



The Knowledge of God. Id. 
Scarlet Line. Id. 
A Saint New. |d. 
The Morning Star. jd. 
Jesus and the Resurrection. |d. 
Never Perish : a Dialogue for 

settled Peace. Id. 



Lost Ones Found. Id. 

Bad Halfcrown. Id. 

The Last Ball. £d. 

Infallibility, id. [Id. 
Saved by a Broken Neck. 
Believers who have not 



SCRIPTURE DATE CASE 

with double set of texts, in Japanned Cases, price 2s. 



Sayings of Jesus, Texts for a Month, on a Boiler, Is. ; Second 

Series, Is. 

0. JTor-iah, 20, Paternoster femora*, l*a&8fci'fcA. 



