s252 . 6 3 7 y 8 J) | 
ie Book of Esther 
t ° 
Notes on atte 921) 


| 
pee RRR Se seen Sees Ba ERB eee | 


OAKLAND PUBLIC LIBRARY 
OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 


1. Books may be kept two weeks and may be 
renewed once for the same length of time, except new 
books, short-time books, and magazines. 


2. A fine of two cents a day will be charged 
on each book which is not returned according to the 
above rule. 


3. All injuries to books beyond reasonable wear 
and all losses shall be made good to the satisfaction 
of the librarian. 


4. Each borrower is held responsible for all books 
borrowed on his card and for all fines accruing on it. 


OCT 21 1941 


This book may be renewed by telephone, unless 
reserve is filed. 


ITY # OF 
AKLAND 


AKTA™T? PUB: iGRARY 


ARLA. 0, CA 


10 Cents Fine for Defacing or Losing this Label 
OAKLAND PUBLIC LIBRARY 


; 
: 


\ 


NOTES 


ON THE 


BOOK of ESTHER 


By H. A. Ironside 


Author of “Mysteries of God;” “Minor Prophets;” 
“Praying in the Holy Spirit;’’ “The Four Hundred Silent Years;" 
“Lectures on Daniel;” “Lectures on the Revelation,” etc., etc. 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS, 
1 East 13th Street, New York 


WESTERN BOOK AND TRACT CO. 
1730 Telegraph Ave., Oakland, Calif. 


‘Printed in the United States of America 
At the BIBLE TRUTH DEPOT 


1. East 13th St. oe York 


‘Pubic Library 
| OCT 1941 | 
ie Oakland, California 


INDEX 


PAGE 
Prefatory Note . eas 5 
Preface to the Second Edition. . . . . ,....6 
RMAC MIGNON oar e es R ar mrt Ft ei eS ale ie ey 


CHAPTER I. 
The Royal Feast and the Divorce of Vashti. . . . . 18 


CHAPTER II. 
The Choice of Esther and the Treason Thwarted . . 20 


CHAPTER III. 
The Wrath of the Amalekite and the Decree of Doom . 38 


CHAPTER IV. 

In Sackcloth and Ashes “.°.. .0. 1.248) sw oe 49 
CHAPTER V. 

The Sceptre of Grace, the Banquet, and the Gallows . 57 
CHAPTER VI. 

A Sleepless Night and its Results. . ..... . 66 


CHAPTER VII. 
The Second Banquet and the Amalekite’s End . ... 76 


CHAPTER VIII. 
The Despised Man Exalted and the Decree of Grace . 86 


CHAPTER IX. 1-19. 


The Deliverance ... . Arcuri atine: Rae ren Mh 
CHAPTER IX. 20-82. 
The Institution of Purim.) wor ee es 107 
CHAPTER X. 
Speaking Peace. - - . +--+ + + s+ + - « - - 116 


PREFATORY NOTE 


HE book of Esther contains principles of great 
value at all times, but especially at the 
present one, when some who delve very little 
into the word of God are liable to wonder at 
some of His ways, and grow discouraged in the 
path of obedience. 

It is needful therefore, that such, and all of us, 
should have detailed before us the fact that 
“‘obedience is better than sacrifice, and to hearken 
than the fat of rams.” May God richly bless your 
effort to bring to the surface what His Spirit has 
laid up for us in this little book. 

Yours affectionately in Christ, 


Paut J. LoizEaux. 


Chis Book is the Gitt of 
WESTERN BOCK AND TRACT 


COMPANY , INC. 


PREFACE 
TO THE SECOND EDITION 


NEW edition of this little book being called 

for, I have taken the opportunity to correct 

a few ambiguities, and make occasional additions 

to the text. Otherwise, it is a reprint of the pre- 

vious edition. I have been encouraged by expres- 

sions from many, telling of blessing received 

through its unpretentious pages, and I send forth 

this revised edition, praying God to continue to 

own and bless it for the salvation of the Christ- 
less, and the edification of His beloved people. 


H. A. IRONSIDE. 


Oakland, Calif. 
December, 1921. 


INTRODUCTION 


N° attentive reader can fail to note the great 

distinguishing characteristic of the book of 
Esther: the name of God is not found in it. No 
divine title whatever, nor any pronoun referring 
to God is there in its ten stirring chapters. Neither 
is there any reference to prayer which involves the 
thought of God as the hearer and answerer. At 
first glance it might seem that the book of Esther 
is not unique in this, as the Song of Solomon 
apparently keeps company with it in the omission 
of any title of the Deity. But it is not really so; 
for the name “Jah” (the Eternal) is, in the original, 
found in the last clause of chap. viii. 6. “‘Jeal- 
ousy is as cruel as the grave; the coals thereof are 
coals of fire which hath a most vehement flame,” 
(literally as noted in the margin, “a flame of Jah’’). 
And even if this were not the case, still the bride- 
groom is so evidently Jehovah, whose bride Is- 
rael was and shall yet be manifested to be, that 
almost every masculine pronoun may be said to 
refer to Him. The Song of Songs therefore is 
really a perfect contrast with the book of Esther, 
being from end to end full of Jehovah as the 


Bridegroom of Israel. 
7 


8 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


In Esther it is quite different. Neither His 
name, nor any reference to Him, even veiled, is 
found. At least so it is on the page of the En- 
glish version. Whether there may be any divine 
purpose in the reputed fact that the name of Jeho- 
vah (Hebrew I H V H) is found there in acrostics 
four times I do not pretend to say. The passages 
in which they are said to occur are chap. i. 20, 
“all the wives shall give;” v. 4, “let the king and 
Haman come this day;” and v. 13, “all this availeth 
me nothing;” and vii. 7, “that there was evil 
determined against him.” Properly speaking God 
is entirely unmentioned: but no believer in the 
plenary inspiration of Scripture would conclude 
from this that His voice speaks not to us in this 
writing as in all the rest of the sacred Oracles. 

One rather asks: Why has He inspired so 
strange a book; and what is His reason for 
omitting His name? 

The answer, as the question, may be a double 
one. First: in this book we have Israel in what 
was really a self-chosen path, for opportunity had 
been given to return to the land of their fathers, 
there to rebuild the city of God, but they preferred 
to remain where they were rather than endure the 
hardship of emigrating to Canaan. They were 
in Persia and Babylon when they might have been 
in Palestine, gathered around God’s centre at Jeru- 
salem. Second: the great subject of Esther is 


INTRODUCTION 9 


evidently the secret providence—a “particular” 
providence too—which is ever watching over the 
scattered nation during all the long-drawn-out “times 
of the Gentiles.” 

In Hosea i. 9, we read of the prophet’s son: 
“Then said God; call his name Lo-ammi (not My 
people) for ye are not My people and I will not be 
your God.” Because of their disobedience, He was 
about to refuse to own them, and to permit them 
to be carried into captivity among the nations. In 
this condition are they found over two hundred 
years later, in the times of Esther and Mordecai. 

He who had borne with their ways for so long 
had at last given them up in chastisement, and 
allowed the Gentile oppressor to destroy the city 
and the temple, and to transport them to Babylon; 
there to learn in affliction what they would not 
learn in years of blessing and forbearance. 

The Babylonian conqueror had however in his 
turn been overthrown by the Persian, under whose 
mild rule the dispersed Jews now were. It had 
pleased the Lord to give a little reviving in the 
midst of their bondage, and a few years before the 
time of the first verse of our book, He had stirred 
up the spirit of Cyrus to issue a proclamation to 
the effect that all who had heart for it might return 
to Jerusalem and “build the house of the Lord 
God of Israel” (Ezra i. 1-3). As a result there 
“rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and 


Io NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


Benjamin, and the priests and the Levites, with 
all whose spirit God had raised to go to build the 
house of the Lord which is in Jerusalem” (Ezra 
17g.) 

With this remnant, feeble indeed, and few in 
number, the Lord is pleased in grace to connect 
His name, although the Lo-ammi sentence remains 
unrepealed; for we find that if the Name is ab- 
sent in recording His care over those who remained 
in Babylon, it is abundantly present in the books of 
Ezra and Nehemiah, which detail the experiences 
of the remnant to whom the place of the Name was 
precious, as it could not be to those who abode 
elsewhere—even in ease and comparative luxury. 
It is true it is as “the God of heaven’”” He makes 
Himself known to them; but what title more suit- 
able when all earthly glory had departed? and to 
heaven they now looked for the coming Anointed 
Deliverer. Among those who went up there was 
much to grieve and sadden; much failure and sin;— 
yet they were gathered around Himself in His 
own appointed place, in accordance with His own 
Word. Hence, He raises up ministry suited to 
their need, and is not ashamed to link His Name 
with them. 

If Ahasuerus, the great king, be Xerxes, as is 
generally believed, the history of the book of Esther 
would come in, chronologically, between the sixth 
and seventh chapters of Ezra; that is, between the 


‘INTRODUCTION It 


times when the first company returned to Jerusalem, 
and that when Ezra and his company went up. In 
that case we can well understand the fervent faith 
evidenced by this dear servant of God who “was 
ashamed to require of the king (Artaxerxes Longi- 
manus, successor to Xerxes) a band of soldiers 
and horsemen to keep us against the enemy in the 
way: because we had spoken to the king, saying, 
The hand of our God is upon all them for good 
that seek Him; but his wrath is against all that 
forsake Him” (Ezra viii. 22). How signally had 
this been proven but a short time before in the 
triumph of Esther! 

If, as others contend, Artaxerxes himself be the 
Ahasuerus referred to, it might account for the 
stirring of heart that led Ezra and this second com- 
pany to go up in faith to join their brethren in 
the city that was now rising slowly from its ashes. 
In either case, God Himself had wrought in their 
souls, and they went up to the land of their ancient 
patrimony because of their desire to glorify Him. 


NOTES ON THE 


__ BOOK OF ESTHER __ 
Bae Bae 89 
$ FUN - yest. CHAPTER I 


THE ROYAL FEAST, AND DIVORCE OF VASHTI. 


“ 


N the opening verses we note the wide extent 
of the Persian dominion. “Now it came to 
pass in the days of Ahasuerus, (this is Ahasuerus 
which reigned from India even unto Ethiopia, over 
a hundred, seven and twenty provinces,) that in 
those days, when the king Ahasuerus sat on the 
throne of his kingdom, which was in Shushan the 
palace, in the third year of his reign, he made a 
feast unto all his princes and his servants; the 
power of Persia and Media, the nobles and princes 
of the provinces being before him: when he showed 
the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honor 
of his excellent majesty many days, even a hundred 
and fourscore days” (vers. 1-4). 

These verses bring before us something of the 
earthly grandeur and glory of the “silver” kingdom, 
which had succeeded the “head of gold,” depicted 
in Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, as recorded in the 

13 


14 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


second chapter of Daniel. World-wide dominion 
would be exercised by but four powers till He 
should come whose right it is to reign, and should 
set up a kingdom that shall break in pieces all the 
others, and shall never be destroyed. This was 
what God had pictured to the king in the dream 
of the great image whose head was of gold, with 
breasts of silver, belly and thighs of brass, legs 
of iron, and feet of mingled iron and clay. 

The sphere of lordship is larger in the case of 
each succeeding empire, and yet the metal ever 
deteriorates, from gold to the iron mixed with 
miry clay, or, according to Tregelles, brittle pottery; 
the reason doubtless consisting in this, that Babylon 
presents to us an absolutely unlimited monarchy, 
while in Persia, Greece and Rome the powers of 
the chief become more or less circumscribed, first, 
by assistant counselors, and at last by a sort of 
union of royalty and democracy, which will even- 
tually result in the election of the final Roman 
emperor yet to come, in the days of the ten toes, 
which will be the last form assumed by the beast 
(Rev. xiii. 1-9) after the Church has been raptured 
away to heaven.* 

It is certainly a splendid scene to which our 


*What Nebuchadnezzar saw as a magnificent image was re- 
vealed to Daniel, the man of God, as a series of wild and fe- 
rocious beasts, the last of which is again made known to 
John in the Apocalypse (Dan. 7 and Rev. 13 and 17). 


ROYAL FEAST, AND DIVORCE OF VASHTI 15 


chapter introduces us, and in a certain sense, no 
doubt, a typical one. But it is clear that all is 
but the glory of this world, though not in the utter 
independence of God that we find in Dan. v. There 
is no mention of impiety connected with the feast 
described in the following verses: “And when 
these days were expired, the king made a feast unto 
all the people that were present in Shushan the 
palace, both unto great and small, seven days, in 
the court of the garden of the king’s palace; where 
were white, green and blue hangings, fastened with 
cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings and 
pillars of marble: the beds (or couches) were of 
gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue, 
and white, and black marble. . . . And the drink- 
ing was according to the law; none did compel: 
for so the king had appointed to all the officers 
of his house, that they should do according to 
every man’s pleasure” (vers. 5,6,8). 

If in Israel’s subjection to Babylon we get a 
picture of the days of darkness and bondage 
through which the Church passed during the 
ascendency of the papacy, it would seem that in 
the “liberal slavery” during the Medo-Persian 
supremacy, we have foreshadowed the present 
anomalous and outwardly prosperous condition of 
Protestantism. In other words, Babylon might be 
said to find its counterpart in Thyatira, when Satan 
sought to force the children of God to bow the knee 


16 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


to idolatry—to commit spiritual adultery. Sardis 
answers more to the conditions of Esther’s day— 
great outward prosperity, with a faithful few who 
have not defiled their garments, but nevertheless, 
on the part of the vast majority, a complete union 
between the world and the professing body. Phila- 
delphia corresponds well with the returned remnant, 
while Laodicea is suggested by the Pharisaic out- 
growth of self-righteousness and formality that 
followed. At least, it is plain that there are many 
striking similarities, which would seem to be more 
than mere coincidences. 

Looking at it from this standpoint, while in 
Ezra and Nehemiah we have a people separated 
to the name of the Lord, gathered around God’s 
centre, and, in measure at least, subject to His 
Word; in Esther we have a people equally the 
Lord’s, quite content to go on with the world’s 
patronage; and though here and there some are 
characterized by great devotion, there is in no 
sense the same liberty, blessing and understanding 
of the word of God as might have been theirs had 
they sought His glory more, rather than their own 
convenience. 

This feast, then, is but the general rejoicing in 
the light and liberty afforded by the spread of 
knowledge and civilization—something far dif- 
ferent from the feasts kept at Jerusalem, where 
all pointed to the Lord Jesus Christ—His sufferings 
and His glories, 


ROYAL FEAST, AND DIVORCE OF VASHTI 17 


No doubt the various colors of the hangings 
and furniture of the banquet hall may all have 
some typical meaning, but at present scholars are 
far from agreement as to the meaning of the words 
employed; so we do not attempt to enter into it. 
It is noticeable that “the drinking was according 
to the law: none did compel.” What has been 
called “the right of private judgment” was fully 
recognized. The harlot of Rev. xvii, had in her 
hand a golden* cup (for of divine things she pro- 
fessed to speak) full of abomination and filthiness. 
The language used in verse 2 seems to imply that 
she practically forced to the lips of the earth- 
dwellers the wine of her fornication. She would 
brook no objection. All must drink what she pro- 
vided. This is ever the rule of the papacy. It is 
otherwise in Protestantism: you may drink or not, 
as you please. “None did compel;” and if you 
like not the design of the cup you have, there are 
plenty of others to choose from, all of gold, all 
alike professedly of God, and yet diverse one from 
the other. 

Well it is for those who refuse every cup of 
man’s design, and in lowliness and self-judgment 
are found poring over the word of God in the 
place where He has caused his name to dwell (Neh. 
Wiis 37 Ex. 3): 

*Gold in Scripture is evidently typical or symbolical of the 
divine glory. 


18 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


The wine is “royal wine’ it is true, and it will 
exhilarate and excite and fill one with goodly 
thoughts of flesh and of the glory of earth; but 
it is not the wine that speaks of a Saviour’s precious 
blood shed for guilty sinners, who in His very 
death upon the tree was telling out the judgment 
of this world. That is seen as you stand by the 
altar in the ruined city of God, and behold the 
drink-offering poured out upon the holocaust, 
ascending as a sweet savor to God (Ezra ili. 3). 

The next few verses give us a picture which 
we find difficult to apply. When the feast had run 
on for seven days, the king, evidently inflamed 
by wine, sent for his queen Vashti to appear before 
the people and princes, to display her beauty. She 
had been banqueting with the women in the palace, 
and refused to obey the imperial mandate. Angered 
by her pertinacity, the king took counsel with his 
wise men as to what punishment he should mete 
out to her because she had not heeded his com- 
mandment. 

At the suggestion of Memucan, she was put 
away and divorced in order that her example might 
not incite the women of the empire to act as she 
had done when their husbands laid any command 
upon them. 

We are told that “the saying pleased the king 
and the princes; and the king did according to the 
word of Memucan” (ver. 21), and published broad- 


ROYAL FEAST, AND DIVORCE OF VASHTI 19 


cast the official edict that Vashti was to come no 
more into his presence. 

They all had agreed that she had proved untrue 
to her place as the leading woman of the empire, 
and that it must be given to another. One might 
suggest this as an illustration of Rom. xi,—the 
disobedience of the Gentiles giving occasion for 
the restoration of the Jews to the place of favor. 
But, shrinking from any interpretation which might 
not commend itself to the spiritual mind, we intro- 
duce our readers at once to the subject of the next 
chapter. 


CHAPTER [1. 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER AND THE TREASON 
THWARTED 


WEN the days of feasting and excitement 
described in our previous chapter had 
passed away, and the king had opportunity quietly 
to weigh his hasty action, his heart seems to have 
relented, as we are told in the first verse of chapter ii, 
that, “After these things, when the wrath of king 
Ahasuerus was appeased, he remembered Vashti, 
and what she had done, and what was decreed 
against her.” Bound by the law of the kingdom, 
which made it impossible for him to revoke his 
own imperial decree, he seems to have become a 
prey to a measure at least of remorse as he reflected 
on his way towards Vashti, of whom he had been 
so proud. 

His servants, noticing his dejection, make the 
proposal that another be sought to take the place 
of the deposed queen. Accordingly they gather 
together the fairest maidens of all the provinces, 
and bring them to Shushan the palace (identical 
with the Susa of profane history). From this 


company the future queen was to be chosen. 
20 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 2I 


There is some interesting data afforded by 
profane history on this point, to which we advert 
for a moment. 

In the third year of Xerxes’ reign, he made a 
feast to deliberate concerning the invasion of 
Greece. Four years later he returned discom- 
fited to Susa, where he plunged into all kinds of 
pleasures and excesses to drive from his mind the 
bitter memories of his defeats. His favorite queen 
seems to have been chosen at this time, and her 
name is given as Amestris—which, it will be seen, 
bears a close relation to Esther. All this goes far 
to prove the contention that Xerxes is the great 
king here referred to. The name Ahasuerus 
presents no difficulty, as it is simply an imperial 
title, like Pharaoh, or Agag, which is said to mean, 
according to Sir Henry Rawlinson, “Venerable 
King.” It is noteworthy that in Ezra iv. 6 
Cambyses is called by this name, while in Dan. 
ix. I it is applied, in all probability, to Cyaxares. 
The fact that Amestris was reported to be cruel 
and bloodthirsty would not necessarily militate 
against this view; as it is most unlikely that the 
Persians would think of Esther in any other way, 
after the great slaughter which resulted when 
the enemies of the Jews were routed. She would 
naturally be blamed for the miscarriage of Haman’s 
plan. 

Returning to the Scripture narrative, charming 


22 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


in its simplicity and straightforwardness, we are 
introduced in verse 5 to the stout-hearted Jew 
who is to figure so prominently in future chapters, 
as well as in verse 7, to his beautiful cousin 
Hadassah, or Esther. 

“Now in Shushan the palace there was a certain 
Jew, whose name was Mordecai, the son of Jair, 
the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite; 
who had been carried away from Jerusalem with 
the captivity which had been carried away with 
Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the 
king of Babylon had carried away” (vers. 5, 6). 

The Hebrews, and many Christians, have 
gathered from this that Mordecai was a lineal 
descendant of Kish, the father of Israel’s first 
king. Josephus so understood it, for he refers 
to Esther as being “herself of the royal family 
also” (Ant. vi. 1); and as she was cousin to 
Mordecai, both were necessarily of the same lin- 
eage. Kish was, however, a common Hebrew 
name, especially among the Benjamites; but 
standing here, as it does, for the father of a family, 
the presumption is certainly in favor of the above 
view. As we shall see farther on, there would 
appear to be a divine fitness in thus bringing for- 
ward at so crucial a period a member of the failed 
house of Saul. Had that rebellious and obstinate 
king (1 Sam. xv. 22, 23) faithfully performed 
the commandment of the Lord in regard to the 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 23 


utter destruction of Amalek, the book of Esther 
would in all probability never have been written, 
as Israel would never have been exposed to the 
danger therein recorded. We shall see why, 
further on. 

The name Mordecai is said to mean “Little 
man,” and was probably given him for the lack 
of that which made Saul so much admired, namely, 
greatness of stature. 

He must have been very young indeed when 
carried away to Babylon, as the captivity of 
Jeconiah, or Jehoiachin, took place B.c. 599, 
something over eighty years ere our chapter opens. 
This aged patriarch “brought up Hadassah, that 
is, Esther, his uncle’s daughter: for she had neither - 
father nor mother, and the maid was fair and 
beautiful: whom Mordecai, when her father and 
mother were dead, took for his own daughter” 
(ver. 7). She, by her grace and beauty, attracted 
the attention of the officers whose business it was 
to find a bride for the king, and she was given 
into the custody of the chamberlain Hegai. “And 
the maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindness 
of him; and he speedily gave her her things for 
purification, with such things as belonged to her, 
and seven maidens, which were meet to be given 
her, out of the king’s house: and he preferred her 
and her maids unto the best place of the 
women” (ver. 9). 


24 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


It was a strange position surely for a Jewish 
maiden to occupy, in marked contrast with Moses, 
in whom, however, she no doubt gloried. He, 
picked up as a waif, to be called the son of 
Pharaoh’s daughter, by faith relinquished this 
high place, “choosing rather to suffer affliction with 
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures 
of sin foraseason.” As one has remarked, “Provi- 
dence had placed him in Pharaoh’s house, but 
faith took him out of it.” With Esther it was 
otherwise. There can be no question that her posi- 
tion was entirely opposed to the word of God. 
Providence might seem to favor her, but faith 
would assuredly have led her at once to declare 
herself as a despised Jewess, one of the afflicted 
people of Jehovah. This she does not do, Mordecai 
having expressly urged her to carefully conceal 
it. “Esther had not showed her people nor her 
kindred: for Mordecai had charged her that she 
should not show it” (ver. 10). Faithful above 
many, Mordecai yet had not fully entered into God’s 
mind in regard to the complete separation of His 
people from the nations. The law expressly for- 
bade the giving of the daughters of Israel in 
marriage to the Gentiles; but it is very evident 
that both Mordecai and Esther thought they saw 
in the proposed union a means of blessing to their 
people. And so, indeed, it proved to be; but this 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 25 


by no means disannulled or made of none effect 
the word of God. 

In the same way people reason concerning much 
that goes on in our day. It is seldom that Chris- 
tians are found who will refuse everything that is 
contrary to the Scriptures, even though it seem 
to be the means of accomplishing much good. But 
to walk in the truth is of more importance than 
busy activity. 

Take the question of female ministry as an 
example. We have often been asked concerning 
the public ministry of women, “If not of God, 
how is it that He so frequently blesses it to the 
salvation of souls? Many women occupying the 
public platform as teachers and preachers are 
assuredly blessed of God: does He not therefore 
set the seal of His approval upon their position?” 
Admitting the premise, which may not always be 
before God as it appears to man, the conclusion 
by no means follows. Clearly and unmistakably 
the Holy Ghost has said, “I suffer not a woman 
to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, 
but to be in silence’ (I Tim. ii. 12). And again, 
“Let your women keep silence in the churches 
(assemblies); for it is not permitted unto them 
to speak; but they are commanded to be under 
obedience, as also saith the law. And if they 
will learn anything, let them ask their husbands 


26 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


at home: for it is a shame for women to speak 
in the church” (I Cor. xiv. 34, 35). Then, sol- 
emnly, he adds in verse 37, “If any man think 
himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him ac- 
knowledge that the things that I write unto 
you are the commandments of the Lord.” Here 
is the unerring word of God upon the subject. 
If that Word is violated, and still blessing re- 
sults, what does it prove? That God _ has 
changed His mind, or ignores, and would have 
us ignore, His own Word? Ah, no! What 
then? Simply that He is sovereign, and uses 
His truth wherever proclaimed, and by whom- 
soever; but the judgment-seat of Christ will 
manifest all that was contrary to His mind. 

We knew of a man saved in a Roman Catholic 
church while an ungodly priest, as his after-life 
proved, was reading the gospel for the day from 
Luke xv. Are we therefore to reason that the 
Roman priesthood is according to God because 
He sets the seal of blessing upon His Word used 
by one of them? Every unprejudiced mind will 
say, No! We give Him glory that, in spite of all 
the failure and disorder of Christendom, His 
love is so great that it breaks every barrier, and 
reaches men and women in their deep, deep need 
by any and all means whereby He can make 
Himself known; but we deprecate all disobedience 
to Him as sin. 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 27 


This principle apprehended in the soul will save 
from much confusion of mind. Had Mordecai 
apprehended it, he would never have counseled his 
cousin as he did. The word of God was ignored. 
That He deigned to use the ignorers of it in blessing 
to His people was an act of pure grace. 

In marked contrast with Esther’s course is 
that of another Israelitish captive—the little 
maid of 2 Kings v, who waited upon Naaman’s 
wife. Her sphere was much more circumscribed, 
but how faithfully she glorified God in it! “A 
word spoken in season, how good is it!’ Such 
was her testimony to her heathen mistress, and 
so wonderfully did God own and bless it that 
it brought a proud Syrian captain to confess 
Israel’s God as the only true God, whom alone 
he would henceforth serve. Oh for grace thus 
to buy up opportunities and to use them to His 
glory while ourselves walking in singleness of 
heart in the path marked out in the Scriptures 
of truth! : 

To return to Esther: Daily Mordecai walked 
before the court of the house of the women to 
learn if all was well with her. One after an- 
other, the maidens were presented to the king, 
each vying with the other in the effort to add to 
her natural charms by means of the sweet odors 
and other preparations given her. Esther—to 
her credit be it noted—disdained all these things, 


28 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


save what were officially appointed, and when she 
was presented to the king, “the king loved Esther 
above all the women, and she obtained grace and 
favor in his sight more than all the virgins; so 
that he set the royal crown upon her head, and made 
her queen instead of Vashti” (ver. 17). A signal 
honor, doubtless, but how low had she stooped 
to obtain it! How had she lost that character of 
holy separation to Jehovah which should ever 
have been hers! How truly was she degraded in 
her very exaltation! The favored wife among 
many, and her lord an uncircumcised Gentile! 
How low had the nation fallen when Mordecai, 
one of the noblest of them all, could rejoice in 
such a dubious honor being accorded her! And 
how low spiritually must the Church be, to seek, 
as she does, the patronage of the world! This 
can only be purchased by the loss of the holiness 
and separate character enjoined by the word of 
God. Such is the lesson we would seek to im- 
press upon our reader’s conscience. Far better 
had it been for Esther to have been poor and 
unknown, yet cleaving to the Lord her God 
among the returned captives at Jerusalem, than 
to be thus exalted in the house of the conqueror. 
And so to-day; far better to be little and despised 
in the eyes of a haughty world, and an equally 
haughty Christendom, while seeking to carry out 
the truth as to the Christian’s heavenly calling, 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 29 


than, through forgetting this, to be made much 
of by those “whose glory is in their shame; who 
mind earthly things.” This is a snare against 
which the Lord’s separated people need to be 
specially warned to-day. The word of Jehovah 
to Jeremiah should be often called to mind: “If 
thou return, then will I bring thee again, and thou 
shalt stand before Me: and if thou take forth the 
precious from the vile, thou shalt be as My mouth: 
let them return unto thee; but return not thou 
unto them” (Jer. xv. 19). 

The present is a time of great sweeping-away of 
the ancient landmarks. It is a day of marked in- 
difference to evil—of chronic inability to try the 
things that differ. Let us not be carried away with 
the tide, but faithfully guard the treasure committed 
to us, and spurn the patronage of that which is so 
obnoxious to God. 

The account of Esther’s marriage-feast is but 
sorrowful reading if one be able to detect the sad de- 
parture from the Word which it indicates. ‘‘Then 
the king made a great feast unto all his princes and 
his servants, even Esther’s feast; and he made a re- 
lease‘to the provinces, and gave gifts according to 
the state of the king” (ver. 18). It would seem 
that Mordecai too was advanced to a position of 
trust; for in the next verse we learn that “when the 
virgins were gathered together the second time, then 
Mordecai sat in the king’s gate,’ which implies that 


30 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


he became a petty judge, according to the Oriental 
manner of expressing it. One is reminded of 
“righteous Lot,” who sat in the gate of Sodom; and 
of how many other dear children of God since, who 
have sought and obtained positions of power and in- 
fluence in this poor “Christless world,” hoping 
thereby to be used in its improvement, only to be 
bitterly disappointed at last, besides being degraded 
themselves. 

Significantly, the next verse tells us again that 
“Esther had not showed her kindred nor her people, 
as Mordecai had charged her; for Esther did the 
commandment of Mordecai, like as when she was 
brought up with him” (ver. 20). 

This, no doubt, would be considered good policy 
on Mordecai’s part, and lovely obedience in Esther, 
but it was real unfaithfulness to God, often dupli- 
cated in our own times. What a contrast with 
Ruth, the converted Moabitess! “Thy people shall 
be my people, and thy God my God” is her bright 
confession. How much more honoring to the Lord 
than the shrewdness of Mordecai and Esther! 

In the last three verses of our chapter an event 
is recorded which becomes of grave importance 
farther on in the book. “In those days, while 
Mordecai sat in the king’s gate, two of the king’s 
chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those which 
kept the door, were wroth, and sought to lay hands 
on the king Ahasuerus. And the thing was known 


THE CHOICE OF ESTHER 31 


to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the queen; 
and Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai’s 
name. And when inquisition was made of the 
matter, it was found out; therefore they were both 
hanged on a tree: and it was written in the book 
of the chronicles before the king” (vers. 21-23). 

Although in an unscriptural position, God, who 
knows the heart of His servant, who sees in 
Mordecai and Esther true lovers of Israel, will use 
them signally for His own ends of good to His 
people, whom He truly loved. If they cover 
their nationality, and shame Him so that He hides 
His name too, He will make them nevertheless 
the instruments of His providence. Mordecai 
becomes the means by which a plot against the life 
of the king is thwarted. But for the present no 
notice is taken of him. The conspirators are 
hanged, the service of Mordecai is recorded in the 
records of the kingdom, but he himself is, appar- 
ently, forgotten. Such is the favor of this world! 
In a darker hour, however, One, in whose hand 
is a sleepless night of the king, shall see that the 
overlooked service shall be brought to the monarch’s 
attention, and turn it to account for deliverance 
of that people for whose care His eyes never 
slumber. 

It is of all inmportance that the saint should 
ever remember that “all things work together for 
good to them that love God, who are the called 


32 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


according to His purpose.” There may be times 
when God seems to have forgotten; when clouds 
are dark; when one is allowed to be neglected, 
unjustly treated, or coldly set at nought. But rest 
assured all is naked and open before Him with 
whom we have to do. Every purpose shall be 
manifested in its season; and all at last shall be 
cause for eternal thanksgivings. 


CHAPTER III 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE, AND THE 
DECREE OF DOOM 


AMAN is now brought upon the scene, who 

occupies a large place in the book, and who 
is execrated by all Hebrews to this day: “Haman, 
the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews’ 
enemy,” is his significant title. When his name is 
mentioned even now, orthodox Jews spit and curse 
him, so hateful is his memory. 

“After these things did king Ahasuerus pro- 
mote Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, 
and advanced him, and set his seat above all the 
princes that were with him” (ver. 1). Agag was 
the name given to the kings of Amalek, the people 
“against whom the Lord hath indignation forever.” 
Haman, then, is a royal Amalekite—the last of 
his proud house to occupy a position of influence 
and power; for with his death, and that of his 
ten sons, the name of Amalek, according to Jeho- 
vah’s word, is blotted out from under heaven. 

In order to understand the reason for Morde- 
cai’s unyielding attitude in regard to Haman, it 
will be necessary to look into the history of this 
warlike and impious people. 

33 


34 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


In Gen. xxxvi. 12 we find the origin of Amalek, 
the progenitor of the tribe afterwards bearing his 
name. “And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz, 
Esau’s son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek.” See 
also 1 Chron. i. 36. 

Amalek, then, sprang from Esau, which is Edom. 
Esau is ever a type of the flesh. Even ere the 
birth of the twins Esau and Jacob, they struggled 
together—picture of the flesh lusting against the 
Spirit and the Spirit against the flesh. Esau is 
the first-born, and then Jacob; for “that is not first 
which is spiritual, but that which is natural; and 
afterward that which is spiritual” (1 Cor. xv. 46). 

This is again and again set forth in Scripture, 
the first-born being set aside to make room for 
one who might stand for or set forth the Second 
Man. Cain is set aside, and Abel, revived in Seth, 
is given the pre-eminent place. Ishmael must be 
cast out that Isaac be honored. Manasseh, too, 
gives way to Ephraim, as Joseph had been given 
the place of the first-born in preference to Reuben. 

The author of the notes in the Numerical Bible 
has pointed out the close similarity in sound and 
meaning between Adam and Edom. Edom is but 
old Adam revived, and from him Amalek springs. 

What, then, comes from the flesh? Only un- 
godly lusts and passions. Of these Amalek is 
the type. “Among whom we all had our con- 
versation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 35 


fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind; 
and were by nature the children of wrath, even 
as others” (Eph. ii. 3). 

In Gen. xiv. 7 we first read of the land of the 
Amalekites, the valleys of southern Palestine, in- 
volved in the great conflicts of the Elamite ascend- 
ancy. Who the irthabitants were at that time we 
know not, but the land is called by the name of the 
war-like tribe who occupied it at the time Moses 
wrote the record. 

It is when next mentioned that we see their true 
character. In the seventeenth chapter of Exodus 
they appear as the first of Israel’s foes, and they 
proved a most persistent enemy ever after. God 
had but recently delivered His people from the cruel 
Egyptian oppressor. Sheltered by blood, they had 
eaten the passover with holy confidence while the 
Lord judged the gods of Egypt and smote the 
first-born of those who despised His word. Re- 
deemed by power, they had been led in triumph 
through the Red Sea, and on the eastern shore 
they sang their song of gladness as they beheld the 
power of the enemy broken, and knew that they 
were Jehovah’s purchased people. He took them 
under His own care, and made Himself respon- 
sible for all their needs. The waters of Marah 
He sweetened, and refreshed them beneath Elim’s 
shade. He gave them bread from heaven, and 
quails when they asked for flesh. 


36 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


But they failed to realize who it was with whom 
they had to do. When they pitched in Rephidim, 
“there was no water for the people to drink.” They 
murmured against Moses, and charged him with 
having brought them out to slay them with 
thirst. But God, ever acting in pure grace, until, 
in their self-confidence, they ptit themselves under 
law, said unto Moses, “Go on before the people, 
and take with thee of the elders of Israel; and thy 
rod, wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thy 
hand, and go. Behold, I will stand before thee 
there upon the rock in Horeb; and thou shalt smite 
the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that 
the people may drink. And Moses did so in the 
sight of the elders of Israel” (Ex. xvii. 5, 6). 

A lovely picture, surely, and easily understood 
in tha light of two New Testament Scriptures. 
“That Rock was Christ” (1 Cor. x. 4). “Jestis 
stood and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him 
come unto Me and drink. ... But this spake He 
of the Spirit, which they that believe on Him should 
receive: for the Holy Ghost was not yet given; 
because that Jesus was not yet glorified” (John vii, 
37, 39). The cross had to come in ere He could 
be glorified as man. That blessed Rock had to be 
smitten with the rod of judgment before the Holy 
Spirit could come to satisfy and fill all who would 
drink. Of this it is that mystic scene at Horeb 
speaks. Israel in type are drinking of the living 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 37 


waters. Surely their troubles are over now for- 
ever! Ah, it should have been; but, alas, it was 
not so. It is at this moment that we read, “Then 
came Amalek and fought with Israel in Rephidim.” 
And so the lusts of the flesh would ever hinder 
the believer’s enjoyment of the refreshing influences 
of the Holy Spirit. The Christian is beset by a 
tireless and hateful foe who makes it his busi- 
ness to defraud him, if possible, of the blessing 
that is rightfully his. 

It is to this the word in-Gal. v. 16, 17 refers: 
“This I say, then, Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall 
not fulfill the lust of the flesh. For the flesh lusteth 
against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: 
and these are contrary the one to the other; so 
that ye might not (literal rendering) do the things 
that ye would.” 

How will the saint thus beset find deliverance 
and victory? Only by mortifying his members 
that are upon the earth. But this he cannot do in 
his own power. And so Moses says to Joshua, 
“Choose us out men, and go out, and fight with 
Amalek: to-morrow I will stand on the top of the 
hill, with the rod of God in my hand.” Beautiful 
picture, surely, of our great Intercessor above, 
“who ever liveth to make intercession for us.” 
Aaron and Hur had to hold up the hands of Moses, 
but our blessed Lord needs none to thus assist Him. 
His advocacy is ever going on. His intercessions 


Public Library 
OCT 1941 
Oakland, California 


38 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


for His saints are unfailing, and He is thus able to 
save evermore all who come unto God by Him. 
“This is the victory that overcometh the world, 
even our faith” (1 John v. 4). 

It was on this first occasion of Amalek’s ha- 
tred and attack against His people that “the Lord 
said unto Moses, Write this for a memorial in a 
book, and rehearse it in the ears of Joshua: for 
I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek 
from under heaven. And Moses built an altar, 
and called the name of it Jehovah-nissi: for he 
said, Because of the hand upon the throne of Jah, 
Jehovah will have war with Amalek from generation 
to generation” (Ex. xvii. 14-16—marginal read- 
ing). This was Amalek’s awful sin. He would, 
if possible, tear Jehovah from His throne, and 
usurp His authority. So would the fleshly lusts, 
which war against the soul, dethrone the Holy One 
and reign in His stead. 

In Num. xiv. 44, 45 Israel disobeyed the word 
of the Lord, and presumed to go up unto the 
hill-top in their own strength to meet their foes. 
“Then the Amalekites came down... and dis- 
comfited them, even unto Hormah.” The moment 
a saint gets out of God’s order he exposes himself 
to the power of the flesh. There is no safety 
save in obedience to the Word. 

Balaam foretells the doom of this haughty foe 
in Num. xxiv. 20. “‘When he looked on Amalek, 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 39 


he took up his parable, and said, Amalek was the 
first of the nations; but his latter end shall be that 
he perish forever.” Moses too, in his last charge 
to the people, says, “Remember what Amalek did 
unto thee by the way, when ye were come forth 
out of Egypt; how he met the hindmost of thee, 
even all that were feeble behind thee” (it is ever 
such who are a prey to the lusts of the flesh), 
“when thou wast weary; and he feared not God. 
Therefore it shall be . . . that thou shalt blot out 
the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven; 
THOU SHALT NOT FORGET IT” (Deut. xxv. 17-19). 

We will not refer at any length to the woes 
brought upon Israel by Amalek in the days of 
the Judges, only bidding the reader notice that 
whenever the people rose up in the energy of 
faith and the lowliness of self-judgment, all Am- 
alek’s power was broken. It will be a profitable 
exercise to read at leisure and carefully study 
Judges v., vi., and x, on this subject. 

In connection with the commission given to king 
Saul at the mouth of Samuel, in 1 Sam. xv, we 
get the inspired account of God’s command and 
Saul’s failure to carry it out. It is most instruc- 
tive, as well as of special interest, in connection 
with our study of the book of Esther. Saul was 
commanded to “go and smite Amalek, and utterly 
destroy all that they have, and spare them not.” 

But, alas, though the young king gained a won- 


40 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


derful victory, and “utterly destroyed all the 
people with the edge of the sword,” he spared 
Agag; and Haman is witness that he likewise failed 
to exterminate the rest df the royal family. Had 
Saul been true to God, and yielded implicit obedi- 
ence to His Word, Haman could never have 
appeared on the scene. Saul’s unfaithfulness made 
the plot of “the Jew’s enemy” possible, and exposed 
the chosen nation to destruction. What a triumph 
for Satan it would have been if, in place of Amalek’s 
“utter destruction,” Israel had been rooted out from 
among the nations! 

There is a solemn lesson here. Sin unjudged, 
evil propensities unmortified, will result in grave 
trouble later. Is the reader conscious of indulging 
some fleshly desire—something, perhaps, that it 
seems hard to put to death, so dear is it to him, 
and, withal, so insignificant? Rest assured, it will 
be the cause of serious disaster if unjudged. It 
may go on unnoticed for years, but the day will 
come when it, like Haman, will rise in its power; 
and well it shall be then if it be not the cause of 
moral and spiritual shipwreck. Is it a young be- 
liever who sees these lines? Remember the word 
of the Holy Spirit to Timothy, “Flee also youthful 
lusts.” Any unholy desire tolerated in the soul 
must work eventually to the undoing of your 
discipleship, to the breaking-down of your testi- 
mony. 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 41 


Samuel showed Agag no mercy; but some of 
-his children—perhaps only one, and that one, may- 
hap, a weak and puny infant—escaped him; and 
behold, nearly six hundred years later, a royal 
Amalekite and a descendant of the house of Kish, 
the father of king Saul, confront each other! 

Haman is advanced before all the princes, for 
well the flesh knows how to work its way to the 
front. All fall down before him and own his 
authority, save one unyielding old man, insignif- 
icant in stature and unknown among the great. 
“And all the king’s servants, that were in the king’s 
gate, bowed and reverenced Haman: for the king 
had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai 
bowed not, nor did him reverence”’ (ver. 2). 

Never was Mordecai’s moral elevation higher 
than at this moment. He is no longer the crafty, 
politic man of chapter two. He shines forth as 
a man who takes his stand upon the word of the 
Eternal, let the consequences be what they may. 
There is no longer a tendency to hide his people and 
his kindred. He lets all know that he isa Jew. As 
such he cannot bow to the blatant enemy of Jehovah. 
The Lord hath indignation against Amalek. So 
also, in substance, says Mordecai. He sides with 
God. From now on he is a character delightful 
to contemplate. 

“Then the king’s servants, which were in the 
king’s gate, said unto Mordecai, Why trans- 


42 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


gressest thou the king’s commandment?” (ver. 3). 
To them it seems the essence of foolhardiness and 
stubbornness. We read not of any other, even of 
his own nation, so unyielding as he. Why not, 
at least, incline his head? Why not go with the 
crowd? Why make himself so unpleasantly con- 
spicuous by his peculiar obstinacy? Better men than 
he, perhaps, bowed. to Haman, the king’s prime 
minister. Why should he be too narrow-minded 
to do so? To all this Mordecai might have re- 
plied, God has spoken. He declares He will have 
indignation against Amalek forever. I side with 
Him. It matters not what others do, I have to 
go by what I find written in the book. 

“Now it came to pass, when they spake daily 
unto him, and he harkened not unto them, that 
they told Haman, to see whether Mordecai’s matters 
would stand; for he had told them that he was a 
Jew” (ver. 4). There is no evasion now: all is 
out at last. The judge in the king’s gate is*one 
of the despised captives, and he will risk the loss 
of name and station, yea, of life itself, rather than 
be unfaithful to the truth of God. 

The king’s servants desire to see if Mordecai’s 
matters will stand. Of course they will stand, for 
does not he stand with and for God, who “is able 
to make him stand?” None ever falls who acts 
for God. His power is over all. He may permit 
testing and trial, but “whatsoever is born of God 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 43 


overcometh the world.” He is in the right who 
sides with God. 

When Haman hears of the slight thus put 
upon him, he is “full of wrath.” He must have 
his revenge on the impudent Jew who thus refuses 
to acknowledge his prestige: but “he thought scorn 
to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had 
showed him the people of Mordecai: wherefore 
Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were 
throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even 
the people of Mordecai” (vers. 5, 6). What a 
mess had the obstinate little Jew made of it all 
now! If he must have such strong convictions, 
why could he not keep them to himself, and, by 
getting out of Haman’s way, refrain from making 
himself and all his people obnoxious to him? 
Could not he conform to the customs of the times? 
Did he not know that things were different now 
from what they were in the days of Moses, of the 
Judges, and of Samuel? Is not this the way men 
reason to-day? And, doubtless, many so reasoned in 
the times of Mordecai: but to all he could have given 
the triumphant answer, It is my place to obey God, 
and to honor His Word. I leave all consequences 
with Him. 

This is what characterizes ever the man of God 
in all dispensations. It was this spirit that sus- 
tained Noah in testimony against a corrupt, sin- 
loving world as he built his great ship on dry land. 


44 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


In this energy of faith Moses forsook Egypt; 
Caleb cried, “We are well able to overcome” ; Gideon 
went forth to war with lamps and pitchers; David 
fought an armored giant with a shepherd’s sling 
and stones; Jehoshaphat set singers in the van of 
his army where others would have set mounted 
troops; Daniel opened his windows to pray to the 
God of heaven; and Paul lived his life of devotion 
to the crucified, exalted Lord, and refused to con- 
form to the demands of the men of his day and 
age. In this spirit, too, of subjection to revealed 
truth, Athanasius suffered banishment rather than 
bow to the Arianism of the times; Savonarola 
defied the licentious, gold-hoarding officials of 
church and state; Luther uttered his mighty “No!” 
in the presence of the emperor, the bishops and 
grandees of the empire; Farel tossed venerated im- 
ages into the river in the midst of furious priests 
and populace; Knox caused a queen to tremble; 
and the Covenanters chose rather to be hunted as 
the beasts of the field than own the spiritual 
authority of degenerate kings and bishops; and a 
mighty host, “of whom the world was not worthy,” 
refused to bow the knee or bend the neck to un- 
scriptural, superstitious, and human legislation, 
making of none effect the word of God. 

Men of this stamp are certain to be dubbed by 
the time-serving trucklers to the present age as 
schismatics, separatists, and what not. But let 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 45 


such be content to know that God is pleased, and 
they fear not the frown, and court not the approval, 
of flesh and blood. 

Haman’s colossal scheme for the annihilation 
of the Jewish race is worthy of its great instiga- 
tor, that old serpent, which is the devil and Satan. 
The proud Agagite was but a mere puppet in his 
hands. Haman desired to obtain revenge for the 
slight put upon his dignity: the devil sought to 
make void the promises of God. The awful foe 
of God and man knew well that Jehovah had de- 
clared that from David’s house should arise the 
One who was to bruise his head—One who is 
to “destroy him that had the power of death, that 
is, the devil, and deliver those who, through fear 
of death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage.” 
That nation destroyed, the promised Deliverer 
could not appear, and the word of God would be 
rendered null and void. Again and again had he 
sought to accomplish this. When the hand of Saul 
threw the javelin at the youthful David, it was 
Satan who inspired it, but God who protected. the 
minstrel from the blow, that he might live to be 
the conservator of the promise. When the wicked 
queen Athaliah sought to destroy all the seed royal, 
it was the devil who put the awful thought in 
her mind, but God who nourished the infant Joash 
in the temple courts. 

And so it was the same foul spirit now who 


46 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


would sacrifice a nation to prevent the Redeemer’s 
advent; as in the day when that long-predicted 
event had actually occurred, he sought, through 
Herod, to destroy Him in His infancy by slaying 
the babes of Bethlehem, only to be outwitted. once 
more; for God directed His Son to a distant 
land. 

Some idea of Haman’s wealth and influence can 
be gained from the intimacy manifested betwixt 
him and the king in verses 8 to 11, as also the 
immense amount of silver he offered for the accomp- 
lishment of his cherished plans: ten thousand talents 
in that age having about the value of twenty millions 
of dollars now. 

His superstition too is evidenced in verse 7. 
Like many a tyrant before, and since, he was a 
great believer in lucky and unlucky days; so he 
had the wise men—the traffickers in the credulity 
of ambitious courtiers—to cast lots, called in 
Hebrew Pur, to determine a suited day when all 
signs would be propitious for the carrying out of 
his colossal massacre. Armed with what he con- 
sidered to be the favor of the gods (for it is un- 
likely that he, like the Persians, was a monotheist), 
he entered the king’s presence, and, affecting 
concern for the interests of the state, he says, “There 
is a certain people scattered abroad and dispersed 
among the people in all the provinces of thy 
kingdom; and their laws are diverse from 


THE WRATH OF THE AMALEKITE 47 


all people; neither keep they the king’s laws: 
therefore it is not for the king’s profit to suffer 
them.” And, as though in a burst of magnanimity, 
he offers to pay ten thousand talents of silver to 
rid the king of subjects so objectionable. Care- 
lessly, without so much as inquiring the name of the 
race referred to, Ahasuerus, with that disregard 
of human life so common in Xerxes, “took his 
ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman the 
son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews’ enemy,” 
saying, as he did so, “The silver is given to thee, the 
people also, to do with them as it seemeth good to 
thee” (vers. 8-11). 

Acting on this, Haman loses no time, but im- 
mediately summons the king’s scribes, and issues a 
proclamation, sealed with the king’s ring, to be 
“sent by posts into all the king’s provinces, to des- 
troy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both 
young and old, little children and women, in one day, 
even upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, 
which is the month Adar” (the date determined 
by the lot), “and to take the spoil of the people for 
a prey” (ver. 13). Thus had the entire nation been 
devoted to destruction, and under the unalterable 
laws of the Medes and Persians—the same laws 
that left Vashti still a lonely widow, and which 
would brook of no reversal. 

To every people the news went forth, urging 
them to be ready against that day. “And the 


— 


48 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


King and Haman,” as though the massacre of 
myriads had not just been planned and sealed, “sat 
down to drink; but the city Shushan was perplexed” 


(yerors ). 


CHAPTER IV 
IN SACKCLOTH AND ASHES 


Vs HEN Mordecai perceived all that was 
done, Mordecai rent his clothes, and put 
on sackcloth and ashes, and went out into the midst 
of the city, and cried with a loud and bitter cry; and 
came even before the king’s gate: for none might 
enter into the king’s gate clothed with sackcloth. 
And in every province whithersoever the king’s com- 
mandment and his decree came, there was a great 
mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weep- 
ing, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and 
ashes” (vers. I-3). 

In such solemn manner was the decree received 
by the condemned Jews. To Haman, and to the 
king, the slaughter of a nation for the gratification 
of a prince’s vanity might be a thing indifferent; 
but to the people thus devoted, it was the cause 
of heartrending scenes. They believed the word of 
Ahasuerus. The proclamation was sealed with the 
royal signet. They knew they were under sentence 
of death, and their hearts were filled with grief 
and anguish. In this, how like the condition of 
awakened sinners! All unsaved men are under a 

49 


50 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


far worse condemnation than that which darkened 
the sky of every Jew in the Persian dominions. 
Yea, more: because “all have sinned and come short 
of the glory of God” that condemnation is, unlike 
the present instance, an intrinsically righteous one. 
Every honest man must side with the dying robber 
on the cross, and confess, “We indeed justly!’ 
“Death passed upon all men, because all have 
sinned.” Therefore “it is appointed unto men 
once to die, and after this the judgment.” 

If this be really true, how is it that men and 
women in general are so indifferent to the solemn 
fact? Alas, alas! though God has given His 
Word, men will not believe it. Wherever that 
Word is believed the result is prostration of soul 
before the offended Majesty in the heavens, as in 
the case of the repentant publican, who cried from 
the depths of an anguished heart, ‘““O God, be mer- 
ciful to me, a sinner!’ It is because men do not 
believe God they can go on so carelessly with the 
dark clouds of doom gathering ever in greater 
density directly over their heads. 

Is my reader one of this class? If so, I pray 
you, receive the testimony of God against yourself 
ere the judgment falls. You have grievously 
sinned, and righteously fallen under the ban of 
the Holy One. He has published broadcast the 
proclamation, “Cursed is every one that contin- 
ueth not in all things that are written in the book 


IN SACKCLOTH AND ASHES 51 


of the law to do them.” You have not so continued. 
Therefore you are under the curse! Do not, I 
beg of you, try to forget it. How foolish would 
it have been for the Jews in the days of Esther 
to have instituted a series of games and popular 
amusements in order to banish from their minds 
the awful fact that their death-warrant had been 
signed, and was about to be put into execution! In 
such manner did the citizens of infidel Paris act 
in the days of the plague. Dancing, revelling and 
debauchery held full sway. The gay carnival went 
on as though all was well; but it was only the 
effort of a terror-stricken people to forget the 
presence of the dreaded and insidious foe. Hun- 
dreds fell, stricken on the ball-room floor; hundreds 
more dropped, grotesquely masked, amid the gayety 
of the romping crowds upon the streets. The fun 
and the forced merriment did not stay the hand 
of the destroyer; the death-cart ever followed the 
carnival parade! And in some such foolish manner 
do men, over whose heads eternal judgment hangs, 
act every day. Oh, the folly of it! Better far 
to join with Mordecai and his weeping country- 
men, and wear the sackcloth and ashes of self- 
condemnation. 


“No room for mirth or trifling here, 
For worldly hope or worldly fear, 
If life so soon is gone: 

If now the Judge is at the door, 


52 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


And all mankind must stand before 
The inexorable Throne!” 


“Because there is wrath, beware lest He take 
thee away with His stroke: then a great ransom 
cannot deliver thee” (Job xxxvi. 18). 

There was no levity on the part of the wailing 
multitude in our chapter. They were in desperate 
earnestness. They wished to be delivered from the 
condemnation. Nothing else would satisfy them. 
Sackcloth and ashes speak of repentance and self- 
judgment. In this garb Mordecai and the Jews 
arrayed themselves. 

“So Esther’s maids and her chamberlains came 
and told it her. Then was the queen exceedingly 
grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai, 
and to take away his sackcloth from him: but he 
received it not” (ver. 4). How little Esther en- 
tered into the terrible circumstances! ‘A physician 
of no value,’ she would fain strip her aged cousin 
of the coarse and ugly garb of repentance and 
robe him in some beautiful court attire, as though 
a change of clothing would assuage his grief. But 
are there not many who deal in a similar manner 
with troubled souls to-day? How common is the 
thought that outward reformation, a change of 
habits, will give peace to an anxious soul! O be 
persuaded, dear reader: no religious ceremonies; 
no ordinances, however scriptural in themselves; 
no turning-over of new leaves will ever give a 


IN SACKCLOTH AND ASHES 53 


sinner peace with God. Something more than an 
outward change is required. Mordecai might well 
have cried, Take away your beautiful garments! 
How can they give peace to a man under the death- 
sentence? Does one find delight in fine raiment 
on the gallows? It is deliverance from condemna- 
tion I want, not a mere change of attire. And 
for the sinner to-day there is no true deliverance 
until he sees the blessed truth that Another has 
borne the wrath, endured the condemnation, ex- 
hausted the judgment of God against his sin,—then, 
and then only, does he find rest and peace. 

“Mordecai received it not ;” so the queen, realizing 
at last that his must be a grief she has failed 
to fathom, sends Hatach the chamberlain to him, 
to learn the cause of his strange behavior. “So 
Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the street of 
the city, which was before the king’s gate. And 
Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto 
him, and of the sum of money that Haman had 
promised to pay to the king’s treasuries for the Jews, 
to destroy them. Also he gave a copy of the writing 
of the decree that was given at Shushan to destroy 
them, to show it unto Esther, and to declare it 
unto her, and to charge her that she should go 
in unto the king, to make supplication unto him, 
and to make request before him for her people. 
And Hatach came and told Esther the words of 
Mordecai” (vers. 6-9). 


54 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


Nothing but the knowledge that he and his people 
are freed from the ban will satisfy the man into 
whose soul the iron has so deeply entered. Esther 
is furnished with the evidence of the direful state 
of things, and doubtless well understands at last 
why Mordecai wept so bitterly, and why her fine 
raiment had no charm for him. 

He would have her go in before the king and 
supplicate his favor for her afflicted people. She 
is, however, in a dilemma as to this, being her- 
self, although a queen, subject to the iron-clad laws 
of Persian court etiquette. Doubtless genuinely 
distressed, but apparently helpless, she returns 
answer that “All the king’s servants, and the people 
of the king’s provinces, do know, that whosoever, 
whether man or woman, shall come unto the king . 
into the inner court, who is not called, there is one 
law of his to put him to death, except such to whom 
the king shall hold out the golden sceptre, that he 
may live; but I have not been called to come in unto 
the king these thirty days. And they told to Mor- 
decai Esther’s words” (vers. II, 12). 

It has evidently not dawned upon her that the 
king’s proclamation, unwittingly, had included 
herself. But so the word ran: “All Jews . . . both 
men and women.” She had kept her nationality 
a secret; therefore, unknown even to Haman, she 
had been included in the bloody edict so soon to 
take effect if a means of deliverance is not discov- 


IN SACKCLOTH AND ASHES 55 


ered. She accordingly hesitates about risking her 
life, by going into the dread sovereign’s presence 
uncalled. 

Mordecai replies with spirit: “Think not with 
thyself that thou shalt escape in the king’s house 
more than all the Jews.” Yet, such is his faith at 
this moment in the certainty of God’s counsels that 
he adds, “For if thou altogether holdest thy peace 
at this time, then shall there enlargement and deliv- 
erance arise to the Jews from another place; but 
thou and thy father’s house shall be destroyed: and 
who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom 
for such a time as this?” 

It is a stirring message, and one that has the 
desired effect upon the queen, for she rises in the 
greatness of utter self-abnegation and devotion; 
and, with the sentence of death now in herself, 
“Esther bade them return Mordecai this answer: 
Go, gather together all the Jews that are present 
in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat 
nor drink three days, night or day: I also and 
my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go in 
unto the king, which is not according to the law: 
and if I perish, I perish” (vers. 15, 16). 

A greater than Esther not only took His life 
in His hand, but gave that precious life in order 
to deliver all who would confide in Him from 
the curse of the law and the just judgment of an 
outraged God. But though Esther’s action gives 


56 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


us just the faintest hint of this, it is altogether 
admirable as showing on her part a growing moral 
elevation, hitherto unmanifested by her. That her 
confidence is in the unnamed One is clear, else why 
the summons to fasting in the city, and her own 
abstinence in the palace? It is here one is so struck 
by the absence of all reference to prayer, where 
one would naturally expect it. It is as though she 
has a sense in her soul of the unowned condition 
of herself and her people; so nothing is said about 
crying to the God of her fathers. Yet surely He 
heard the unuttered petition of the heart, and an- 
swered it, too, in His own way and time. 

“So Mordecai went his way, and did according 
to all that Esther had commanded him.” The ap- 
peal is to be made to the One they dare not mention. 
The sequel will show how deep is His concern for 
the chosen nation. 


CHAPTER V 


THE SCEPTRE OF GRACE, THE BANQUET, AND 
THE GALLOWS. 


9 aa days of fasting past, the queen ventures 
into the forbidden presence. ‘Now it came 
to pass on the third day, that Esther put on her 
royal apparel, and stood in the inner court of the 
king’s house, over against the king’s house: and the 
king sat upon his royal throne in the royal house, 
over against the gate of the house” (ver. 1). The 
die is cast. The queen has practically forfeited 
her life in order to save her people. If the king 
give it back to her it shall be well. She and all 
hers will see in it the evidence of his grace. If not, 
she can but die, and for that she is prepared. 

Her youth and beauty, as well as her confiding 
trust, draw out her lord’s admiration. “And it 
was so, when the king saw Esther the queen stand- 
ing in the court, that she obtained favor in his 
sight: and the king held out to Esther the golden 
sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther drew near, 
and touched the top of the sceptre” (ver. 2). _ 

Grace is reigning! Of this the sceptre of gold 
speaks. “The king’s heart is in the hand of the 
Lord, as the rivers of water: He turneth it whither- 

57 


58 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


soever He will” (Prov. xxi. 1). He it is who 
has inclined the proud ruler of the Medes and 
Persians to extend the token of his favor to his 
trembling queen. “The most high God ruleth in 
the kingdom of men” (Dan. iv. 25), whether they 
recognize Him or not, and all power is in His 
hand. He has heard the mute prayer of Esther 
and her people, and from henceforth we are to see 
how He worketh all things according to the counsel 
of His own will, despite every effort of the enemy 
to thwart His purpose. 


“His purposes will ripen fast, 
Unfolding every hour; 

The bud may have a bitter taste, 
But sweet will be the flower.” 


Knowing that nought but some special guerdon 
desired could have brought his favorite wife thus 
unannounced and unsent for into the throne room, 
the king said unto her, “What wilt thou, queen 
Esther? and what is thy request? It shall be even 
given thee to the half of the kingdom” (ver. 3). 
It is as if a blank check signed were handed her, 
reminding us of the many precious assurances of 
the New Testament: “My God shall supply all your 
need according to His riches in glory through Christ 
Jesus,” for “He is able to do exceeding abun- 
dantly above all that we ask or think.’ He, who 
is neither enriched by withholding nor impover- 


THE SCEPTRE OF GRACE 59 


ished by giving, says to each trusting soul, “What 
is thy request?’ And Omnipotence waits upon 
the petitions of His feeble people; and to faith He 
says: “Be it unto thee even as thou wilt.” May 
we have faith to thus enter into and enjoy His 
wondrous bounty. 

Esther is not slow to proffer her request, though 
at first sight it seems a little thing indeed. “And 
Esther answered, If it seem good unto the king, 
let the king and Haman come this day unto the 
banquet that I have prepared for him” (ver. 4). 

There is nothing that so emboldens a soul, 
burdened with anxiety, and desirous of obtaining 
help from another, like a season of communion 
and fellowship. Such a season Esther desires as 
a prelude to making known her real burden. As 
though to cover all suspicion, Haman, whose pres- 
ence must have jarred terribly at such a time, is 
invited with the king. “So the king and Haman 
came to the banquet that Esther had prepared” (ver. 
5). 

In the house of wine the king affirms again his 
promise to his beloved queen: “And the king said 
unto Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy 
petition? and it shall be granted thee: and what 
is thy request? even to the half of the kingdom it 
shall be performed.” It is, in its measure, like 
the word of the Lord to “His own” at the “banquet 
of wine” in John xiv. 13, 14, after the traitor had 


60 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


gone out: ‘And whatsoever ye shall ask in My 
name, that will I do, that the Father may be glori- 
fied in the Son. If ye shall ask anything in My 
name I will do it.” The king puts a limit: “even to 
the half of the kingdom.” Our blessed Lord puts 
a limit too: “in My name’—whatever His holy 
name may rightly be attached to. This is the 
only bound He will put to our asking. This, doubt- 
less, is the secret of many unanswered prayers. 
“Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, 
that ye may consume it upon your lusts” (Jas. iv. 3). 
Such prayer cannot have the name of the Lord 
Jesus attached to it. The expression really means, 
by His authority. One says to another, “Do so 
and so in my name.” All understand he means 
as representing, or having the authority of the 
speaker behind him. And so it is in approaching 
the God of all grace in prayer. There is holy 
confidence when the will has been so truly subdued 
that the heart’s only desire is that the Lord may 
be glorified. Then one can ask “in His name,” 
and He has pledged His Word to do it. 

We do not profess to say that queen Esther’s 
case is any parallel to this. It but gives us the hint: 
and we turn aside from the narrative to press it 
upon the reader’s attention. because of the great 
importance of the subject. 

True prayer is perhaps much rarer than many 
have any idea of. It can only spring from fel- 


THE SCEPTRE OF GRACE 61 


lowship with God in a practical sense. “If ye 
abide in Me and My words abide in you, ye shall 
ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you” 
(John xv. 7). Itis for lack of this that the prayer- 
meeting, and the daily season of reading and prayer 
in the home—not to speak of the sacred moments 
which should be spent in the closet with closed 
doors—often degenerate into a mere lifeless form. 
Souls are conscious of some secret sin indulged; 
some unscriptural thing in business or family life 
being persisted in; and of course there cannot be 
real prayer as long as this is the case. One has 
no title to expect an answer from God if walking 
in any forbidden path. May this be deeply im- 
pressed upon our souls! 

It has been sometimes said that “the prayer- 
meeting is the pulse of the assembly,” and we believe 
the expression to be a correct one. A sluggish, 
lifeless prayer-meeting is the indication that, what- 
ever the activity otherwise, things are in a very 
low state indeed. It is quite possible to carry on 
gospel and teaching meetings, and to preserve a 
certain amount of order and decorum at the table 
of the Lord, which deceives many into the belief 
that the Holy Spirit is leading ; but it is not possible 
truly to pray out of fellowship with God. This is 
especially true of the secret place. Even in the 
meeting set apart for waiting on God, a loquacious, 
self-confident man may be able to deceive himself 


62 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


and others into the impression that his is really 
the prayer of faith; but a few moments spent in 
the presence of God, alone, will show how things 
really ‘stand. There is no liberty, no power; all 
is a weariness to the flesh if the will is not truly 
subject, and the supreme desire of the soul not 
expressed in the words, “Thy will be done.” 

But we return to our narrative. It would ap- 
pear that Esther has not yet that liberty that would 
lead her to plead her case with assurance; so to 
the king’s question she replies, “My petition and 
my request is, if I have found favor in the sight 
of the king, and if it please the king to grant my 
petition, and to perform my request, let the king 
and Haman come to the banquet that I shall pre- 
pare for them, and I will do to-morrow as the king 
hath said” (vers. 7, 8). To this he evidently 
agrees; but what momentous consequences would 
hang upon that twenty-four hours’ delay! Satan, 
knowing that his time is short, and realizing that 
if his unholy purpose is to be carried out something 
must at once be done, contrives to bring about 
if possible the death of Mordecai at least, ere Esther 
has the appointed opportunity to ask his life with 
the rest. 

“Then went Haman forth that day joyful and 
with a glad heart: but when Haman saw Mor- 
decai in the king’s gate that he stood not up, nor 
moved for him, he was full of indignation against 


THE SCEPTRE OF GRACE 63 


Mordecai” (ver. 9). The apparently triumphant 
Amalekite emerges in greater hauteur than ever 
from the banqueting house. His cup of earthly 
glory seems filled to the brim. Who so honored 
as he? He, alone of all the king’s favorites, had 
been admitted to the queen’s presence. But there 
is one bitter ingredient in that so full goblet. Mor- 
decai, the sackcloth-covered Jew, pays him no atten- 
tion, whatever, as he passes by. The flesh cannot 
brook being thus despised. He is deeply grieved 
and filled with wrath against the only man who 
failed to do him honor. “Nevertheless Haman 
refrained himself: and when he came home, he sent 
and called for his friends, and Zeresh his wife, and 
Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and 
the multitude of his children, and all the things 
wherein the king had promoted him, and how he 
had advanced him above the princes and servants 
of the king” (vers. 10, 11). What a disgusting 
exhibition of vanity and pride! Surely Haman 
is now “set in slippery places.’ Even the heathen, 
noting how soon, in the moral government of the 
universe, disaster followed on unbounded self-suffi- 
ciency and inordinate self-esteem, had coined the 
proverb, “Whom the gods would destroy they first 
make mad.” And the one true God had, long ere 
Haman’s day, inspired a man to write, “Pride goeth 
before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a 
fall;’ and “when pride cometh, then cometh shame: 


64 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


but with the lowly is wisdom” (Prov. xvi. 18 and 
Pay yb 

With characteristic ‘conceit the vaingforious 
premier keeps .what he considers the choicest 
morsel to the last. ‘‘Haman said moreover, Yea, 
Esther the queen did let no man come in with the 
king unto the banquet that she had prepared, but 
myself; and to-morrow am I invited unto her also 
with the king.” But he cannot conceal his wounded 
vanity in connection with the incident at the gate, 
for he adds bitterly, “Yet all this availeth me 
nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting 
at the king’s gate” (vers. 12, 13). 

In the eyes of his satellites and his equally proud 
and vindictive wife, this is a matter that can readily 
be disposed of. Why should he wait the appointed 
time for the destruction of Mordecai with the rest 
of the Jews? Has he not just shown that none 
have such influence with the king as he? Why 
not, on some trumped-up pretext, despatch the 
insolent Hebrew at once? “Then said Zeresh his 
wife, and all his friends unto him, Let a gallows 
be made fifty cubits high, and to-morrow speak thou 
unto the king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon: 
then go thou in merrily with the king unto the ban- 
quet. And the thing pleased Haman; and he caused 
the gallows to be made” (ver. 14). 

Fifty cubits would be about eighty feet: rather 
unduly high, one would think, for one insignificant, 


THE SCEPTRE OF GRACE 65 


undersized Jew to swing from; but Haman will pub- 
lish his revenge abroad and thus give an object-les- 
son to any other who would dare defy the man of 
the hour. 

And so our chapter closes, with the last nails be- 
ing driven in the gallows in Haman’s court, while 
Mordecai is all unaware of the fate which is purposed 
to be meted out to him on the morrow; and a score 
of hours have yet to run ere the queen will prefer her 
request before the king. 

“Hath God forgotten to be gracious?” 


CHAPIER. Vi 
A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTS 


T has been well said that “although the name of 

God is not in this book, the hand of God is plainly 
to be seen throughout.” Nowhere is this more 
clearly manifested than in the present chapter, every 
verse of which attests His overruling providence 
and His unfailing love and care for His people, in 
a wrong place though they were. He is behind the 
scenes, it is true; but, to use the expression of an- 
other, He moves all the scenes that He is behind. 

It is not until the last night that He interferes: 


“God never is before His time, 
And never is behind.” 


To all appearances, Satan was to have everything 
his own way, at least so far as Mordecai was con- 
cerned. In Haman’s tessellated courtyard the now 
completed gallows stands fifty cubits high. The 
lofty Amalekite is already gloating over the death 
of the unyielding descendant of Kish, and tosses 
restlessly upon his couch as he waits for the first 
glimmer of the morning for the execution of his 
wrath. He is not, however, the only restless one, 
for “on that night could not the king sleep.” 

66 


A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTS 67 


In itself this was apparently a very trifling thing. 
How many a crowned head before and since has 
turned uneasily on its pillow and courted slumber in 
vain! But in this case, how much that sleepless 
night was to mean to Mordecai, and all his con- 
demned brethren! 

In his insomnia, the king, at last despairing of 
natural rest, called for “the strangest soporific ever 
sought.” “He commanded to bring the book of 
records of the chronicles; and they were read before 
the king” (ver. 1). Surely in those bloodstained 
annals there was enough to have driven away sleep 
forever. But One is overruling all, and the august 
Iranian emperor is but as a chess-king in His hand to 
be moved by Him at will. 

As the records of his reign are read aloud in his 
hearing, “it was found written that Mordecai had 
told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king’s 
chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who sought 
to lay hands on Ahasuerus” (ver. 2). How well 
had all been timed! He who knows the end from 
the beginning had caused this service to be here re- 
corded. He had also so ordered it that, at the time 
it was rendered, the preoccupied monarch should 
overlook entirely the one to whose faithfulness he 
owed his life. To Mordecai this may have seemed 
at the time like base ingratitude, though we read of 
no word of complaint. Possibly he had learned to 
“endure as seeing Him who is invisible.” At any 


68 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


rate it was now made manifest that there was a di- 
vine reason for the king’s forgetfulness. God had 
timed everything well, and He “makes everything 
beautiful in its season.” 

Do these pages meet the eyes of some tried and 
discouraged saint? Have you been overwhelmed 
at times by a nameless dread as though God had ut- 
terly forgotten you, and you were cast off forever? 
Have you wearied yourself devising one human ex- 
pedient after another, in the vain hope of averting 
threatened disaster by the arm of flesh? Learn, 
then, from God’s dealings with His servant of old 
that His heart and hand are for you still. And “if 
God be for us, who can be against us?” He has 
heard every sigh; noted, and stored in His bottle, 
every tear; taken account of every cry of anguish; 
heard every confiding prayer. His arm is in no- 
wise shortened; His ear is in no sense deaf to your 
cry. At the appointed time He will awake in your 
behalf, and you shall know that it is “the God of all 
grace” with whom you have to do. Only look up: 
be not cast down, for you are ever on His heart; and 
if you just leave all with Him, He will make 
your affairs His care. “Casting all your care upon 
Him, for He careth for you.” How sweet the 
words! He careth. He, the most high God: 
yea, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ 
careth. He is no indifferent spectator—no callous, 
unconcerned looker-on; but, as no one else can, He 


A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTS 69 


careth for you. Assured of this, may not the 
reader and the writer well cry, “I will trust, and 
not be afraid’? 

The hitherto neglectful king is at once aroused as 
his memory is refreshed in regard to Mordecai’s ser- 
vice in days gone by. ‘“‘And the king said, What 
honor and dignity hath been done to Mordecai for 
this? Then said the king’s servants that minis- 
tered unto him, There is nothing done for him” 
(ver. 3). He had shown himself to be a loyal and 
faithful subject, despite the fact that he was of 
the children of the captivity; but though the king 
had profited by his devotion, he allowed him to go 
utterly unrewarded, while bestowing favors with 
lavish hand on so worthless a character as the sel- 
fish and despicable Haman. Such is the favor of 
princes. “Cursed is the man that trusteth in man, 
and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth 
from the Lord. For he shall be like the heath in 
the desert, and shall not see when good cometh; but 
shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, 
in a salt land, and not inhabited. Blessed is the man 
that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord 
is. For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, 
and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and 
shall not see when heat cometh, but her leaf shall be 
green, and shall not be careful in time of drought, 
neither shall cease from yielding fruit” (Jer. xvii. 
5-8). How sharp the contrast between the time- 


7O NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


serving man of the flesh, whose eyes are fixed 
on man for his reward—doomed ever to disap- 
pointment—and the God-fearing man of faith, 
who rises above all creature-help to the Most High 
Himself! Mordecai has left all in His hands. He 
is now about to make his way prosperous. 

And yet even at the last moment how active 
is Satan in his efforts to thwart God’s purpose 
of grace! At this moment a step is heard in the 
outer court of the royal sleeping apartment. “And 
the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman 
was come into the outward court of the king’s 
house, to speak unto the king to hang Mordecai 
on the gallows that he had prepared for him. And 
the king’s servants said unto him, Behold, Haman 
standeth in the court. And the king said, Let 
him come in” (vers. 4, 5). 

If God is at work, so is the great adversary. 
Haman, still burning with wounded vanity, is early 
on the scene. He would forestall all further 
slights from Mordecai by getting the easily-influ- 
enced and luxurious despot to sign the order for 
the Jew’s execution as soon as he shall rise. Then, 
the hated object out of the way, he will be in 
good humor for the festal board. He is, however, 
but to learn that ‘those who walk in pride, God 
is able to abase.” He has reached the highest pin- 
nacle of earthly glory to which he can lawfully 


A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTS 71 


aspire. He is about to be hurled into the lowest 
depths of shame and ignominy. 

The king’s first words fairly cause his head to 
swim with wild exultation, and seem to point to 
the early fulfilment of his most cherished dreams. 
“What,” asks his royal master, “shall be done unto 
the man whom the king delighteth to honor?’ It 
is hardly to be wondered at that the vainglorious 
prince whose only concern was the advancement 
of his own interests “thought in his heart, To 
whom would the king delight to do honor more than 
to MYSELF?” What a place that same “myself” 
had in this conceited, wretched man’s mind! And 
what a snare is self-occupation, in any form, to 
the saint of God! Pride is distinctly said to be 
the cause of Satan’s fall. “Thy heart was lifted 
up because of thy beauty; thou hast corrupted thy 
wisdom by reason of thy brightness: I will cast 
thee to the ground” (Ezek. xxviii. 17). And when 
giving instruction concerning overseers in the 
house of God, in the New Testament, the Holy 
Ghost says, ‘‘Not a novice, lest being lifted up with 
pride he fall into the condemnation of the devil’ 
(1 Tim. iii. 6). 

When we see pride in another, how hateful a 
thing it is! Haman is the very incarnation of 
it; and how we loathe so despicable a character! 
Yet, alas, how readily we tolerate in ourselves 


72 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


what is so detestable in others. “The proud He 
knoweth afar off,” but “the meek will He guide 
in judgment; the meek will He teach His way.” 
Filled with a sense of his own self-importance, 
Haman replies to the king’s question in the boldest 
manner. He would have the man whom the king 
delights to honor appear before men as king him- 
self in all but name. That, too, might come later 
if the populace but grew used to him appearing 
in royal garb, and the king’s most noble princes 
were made to have a due sense of his power and 
ability. How plainly the Amalekite shows him- 
self! The hand which of old was upon the throne 
of Jah is now stretched out to grasp the throne 
of the world! “And Haman answered the king, 
For the man whom the king delighteth to honor, 
let the royal apparel be brought which the king useth 
to wear, and the horse that the king rideth upon, 
and the crown royal which is set upon his head: 
and let this apparel and horse be delivered 
to the hand of one of the king’s most noble princes, 
that they may array the man withal whom the 
king delighteth to honor, and bring him on horse- 
back through the street of the city, and proclaim 
before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom 
the king delighteth to honor” (vers. 7-9). Could 
human pretension and ingenuity go farther? In- 
tending all this for himself, can there be any doubt 
regarding his desire to have the people behold him 


A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTS 73 


in all the outward trappings of royalty, in order 
to accustom their minds to a future usurpation 
of imperial power? 

Did the king begin to see beneath the surface? 
Did he already commence to mistrust his favor- 
ite? Or is it only in our imagination that we 
see a touch of genuine irony, meant to cut to the 
very quick, in the brief and pithy command, ‘Make 
haste, and take the apparel and the horse, as thou 
hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew 
that sitteth at the king’s gate: let nothing fail of 
all that thou hast spoken.” Did the royal eye detect 
the way the color came and went in Haman’s face? 
Did it note the downcast countenance and the dis- 
appointment too deep for words that marked him 
as he turned away without reply? We do not 
know. But the readiness with which the erstwhile 
favorite is given up to a richly deserved judg- 
ment later in the day, would imply a lack of con- 
fidence already cherished in his heart. 

“Then took Haman the apparel and the horse, 
and arrayed Mordecai, and brought him on horseback 
through the street of the city, and proclaimed before 
him, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom 
the king delighteth to honor” (ver. 11). A terrible 
come-down, surely, and a remarkable turn of events! 
No wonder that we read, “And Mordecai came 
again to the king’s gate. But Haman hasted to 
his house mourning, and having his head covered” 


74 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


(ver. 12). Did Mordecai see in this sudden 
transition from ignominy to honor the pledge of 
his deliverance from condemnation? It would 
seem so, for he made no effort to resist the chang- 
ing of his attire on this occasion, Haman too 
reads a lesson in it all, and in shame and confusion 
of face hurries from the public gaze to the seclusion 
of his own house. He knows it is in vain now for 
him to seek permission to hang Mordecai. The 
gallows stand like a monument to folly and vanity, 
still towering up to heaven, casting a shadow that 
speaks of approaching disaster. 

“And Haman told Zeresh his wife and all his 
friends everything that had befallen him. Then 
said his wise men and Zeresh his wife unto him, 
If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom 
thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail 
against him, but shall surely fall before him” (ver. 
13). Little comfort indeed does he find in this, 
which is all too true, as the sequel shows. 

“And while they were yet talking with him, 
came the king’s chamberlains, and hasted to bring 
Haman unto the banquet that Esther had prepared.” 
His enthusiasm is greatly dampened. He would, 
without question, prefer retirement until he has 
regained his accustomed poise and self-confidence, 
but the king’s command must be obeyed. Yester- 
day he would have needed no chamberlains to 
summon him. To-day all is changed. Already 


A SLEEPLESS NIGHT, AND ITS RESULTS 75 


he has been greatly humbled. Ere the remaining 
hours of light pass he shall have more crushing 
experiences still, and shall prove to the full the 
truth of the ominous prophecy of his wife and 
friends. 


CHAPTER VII 


THE SECOND BANQUET AND THE AMALEKITE’S 
END 


T is hardly to be supposed that the remarkable 

happenings of the forenoon had all taken place 
without Esther's knowledge. We know that she 
was in daily communication, through her chamber- 
lains, with her aged cousin; and there can scarcely 
be any question as to her having been made 
familiar with his sudden elevation to the imperial 
favor. This would account for the lack of hesi- 
tancy and the implicit confidence with which she 
prefers her request when “the king and Haman 
came to banquet with Esther the queen” (ver. 1). 

The feast was not yet concluded when the king 
said, “What is thy petition, queen Esther? and 
it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? 
and it shall be performed, even to the half of the 
kingdom” (ver. 2). It is the same invitation to 
ask largely with the same assurance, as on the 
previous occasion, that all shall be given. ‘In the 
word of a king there is power.” How much more 
to be relied on is the word of “God that cannot 
lie,’ who has said, “Everyone that asketh, 
receiveth;” and who invites implicit confidence, on 

76 


THE SECOND BANQUET ed 


the part of His own blood-washed and redeemed 
saints, in His faithful promises. 

“Then Esther the queen answered and _ said, 
If I have found favor in thy sight, O king, and 
if it please the king, let my life be given me at 
my petition, and my people at my request: for 
we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, 
to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been 
sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my 
tongue, although the enemy could not countervail 
the king’s damage” (vers. 3, 4). Knowing that her 
lord’s favor is toward her, she pleads both her own 
cause, and her people’s. She petitions him to 
spare their and her life. 

How surprised must the king have been to hear 
her so speak. Who would dare seek the life of 
his beloved queen? And who could her people be 
who were thus placed in jeopardy of their lives? 
It is to be remembered that Esther’s kindred had 
not yet been made known to the king. He was in 
ignorance of the fact that she was a Jewess. 

Her words must have deeply agitated the already 
toppling son of Hammedatha. Was there not even 
a designed coincidence on her part between the 
decree drawn up by Haman and the queen’s words 
as she said, “We are sold, I and my people, to be 
destroyed, to be slain, and to perish?” low could 
he forget that such had been the language he had 
caused the king’s scribes to write? What an appall- 


78 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


ing discovery to learn that he had included the 
wife of Ahasuerus in his bold scheme of bloodshed 
and revenge! How earnestly he would listen for 
the king’s reply. 

“Then the king Ahasuerus answered and said 
unto Esther the queen, Who is he, and where is 
he, that durst presume in his heart to do so?” 
(ver. 5). He at once makes her enemy his; and 
demands the name of the infamous wretch who 
could dare conceive so fearful a plot. The guilty 
conspirator reclines but a few feet from him. 
His sin is to find him out at last! 

“And Esther said, The adversary and enemy is 
this wicked Haman. Then Haman was afraid 
before the king and queen” (ver. 6). He is 
manifested now in his true character. The fawning 
and politic courtier appears as the deep-dyed vil- 
lain whose perfidy is almost too great to be believed. 
Satan has again been foiled in his attempt to destroy 
the line of promise, and God has once more vin- 
dicated His Word. 

It is easy to cherish a feeling of contempt and 
disgust for so low and vile a character as Haman. 
But it is well to remember, that in every man’s 
heart is found the same evil thing, which when 
brought to its full fruition, appears so abomin- 
able in the ungodly Agagite. ‘The heart is de- 
ceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,” 
and God asks the question, “Who can know it?” 


THE SECOND BANQUET 79 


He solemnly answers Himself: ‘I the Lord search 
the heart, I try the reins, even to give every man 
according to his ways, and according to the fruit 
of his doings” (Jer. xvii. 9, 10). It is “out of 
the heart,” says the Lord Jesus, that all kinds of 
evil things proceed, and He names “evil thoughts, 
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false wit- 
ness, blasphemies” (Matt. xv. 19). “These are 
the things which defile a man,’ He adds; and we 
desire affectionately to remind the reader, lest any 
should be in danger of forgetting it, that it is the 
grace of God alone which makes one man to differ 
from another. 

No amount of education or culture, nay, nor 
self-restraint or religiousness, will eradicate the 
evil. It is the nature that is wholly and utterly 
corrupt and pernicious. Therefore before one 
can please God there must be a new nature im- 
parted, and this is the result of new birth. “That 
which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which 
is born of the Spirit is spirit.” Nothing but this 
second birth, through receiving the word of God, 
will avail to place any natural man on a different 
footing before the throne of the Majesty on high, 
than that occupied by the Hamans, the Pharaohs, 
and the Herods of the Bible. “There is no differ- 
‘ence, for all have sinned and come short of the 


glory of God.” 
People often consider it a mark of superior 


80 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


virtue to be shocked and horrified by the crimes 
of others whom they imagine to be worse than 
themselves. It is well to realize that the worst 
acts of the worst men all spring from a nature 
identical with that of all other sons and daugh- 
ters of Adam. It is because of this humbling 
fact our Lord had to tell a religious doctor that 
“except a man be born again he cannot see the 
kingdom of God,” and again, “Marvel not that 
I say unto thee, Ye must be born again.” 

Is my reader certain that he or she is the sub- 
ject of this great change? Have you truly 
turned to the Lord for yourself, and from the 
heart believed the gospel-message which declares 
that “Christ Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners?” If not, I beseech you, read no further, 
but stop right here and consider, until you have, 
as a guilty, helpless sinner, cast yourself unre- 
servedly upon that blessed One, “‘who died for all, 
that they which live should not henceforth live unto 
themselves, but unto Him which died for them and 
rose again” (2 Cor. v. 15). 

If truly a Christian, turn with us once more 
to our narrative. The poor discovered wretch 
trembles before the king and the queen; as some 
day men will tremble before the Omnipotent Judge 
when all their secret guilt shall be made known before 
an assembled universe and it will be too late to 
seek a hiding-place. 


THE SECOND BANQUET 81 


It would seem that Ahasuerus is dazed for the 
moment, as he begins to realize what Haman had 
obtained his royal consent for. He is, in a very 
grave sense, a party to the proposed indiscriminate 
slaughter of the Hebrews, which would include his 
beloved spouse. We are told that “the king arising 
from the banquet of wine went into the palace 
garden: and Haman stood up to make request for 
his life to Esther the queen; for he saw that there 
was evil determined against him by the king” (ver. 
7). The man who without a twinge of remorse 
could devote a nation to destruction, is in dire dis- 
tress at the thought of himself losing life or liberty. 
He takes the place of suppliant at the feet of the 
now triumphant Esther, cousin to the unbending 
old man he had led through the streets in the 
morning. One is reminded of the word to Phila- 
delphia, “I will make them to come and worship 
before thy feet, and to know that I have loved 
thee” (Rev. iii. 9, last clause). 

In his desperation Haman oversteps the bounds 
of both court etiquette and ordinary decency, by 
throwing himself upon the divan where the queen 
was reclining. At this juncture “the king returned 
out of the palace garden into the place of the ban- 
quet of wine; and Haman was fallen upon the 
bed where Esther was. Then said the king, Will 
he force the queen also before me in the house? 
As the words went out of the king’s mouth they 


82 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


covered Haman’s face’ (ver. 8). His very im- 
portunity, unwise in the extreme, is the means of 
his complete undoing. At a signal from the out- 
raged monarch his face is covered—token of his 
condemnation to death. Hope is gone. He shall 
never see the king’s face again; nor shall he be 
troubled by Mordecai’s uplifted form evermore. 
“Tt is a righteous thing with God to recompense 
tribulation to them that trouble you” (2 Thess. i. 6). 
The ungodly may now be supreme, while to the 
righteous “waters of a full cup” are wrung out; 
“but the triumphing of the wicked is short.” God 
is still the moral Governor of the world, to whom 
all men must give an account. He will manifest 
His power eventually when “all the proud, yea, 
and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble: and the 
day that cometh shall burn them up, saith the Lord 
of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor 
branch” (Mal. iv. 1). This passage has no ref- 
erence to judgment after death. It is not the 
unsaved dead being cast into the lake of fire. It 
refers solely and simply to God’s judgments which 
will be meted out to the oppressors of His people 
at the end of this age. Of this Haman’s case 
gives us a hint. 

The chamberlains, quick to discern the mind of 
the king, waste no sympathy on the fallen premier. 
“Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before 
the king, Behold, also, the gallows fifty cubits high, 


THE SECOND BANQUET 83 


which Haman made for Mordecai, who had spoken 
good for the king, standeth in the house of Haman. 
Then the king said, Hang him thereon” (ver. 9). 
So certain had the now friendless wretch been in 
the morning of his having no difficulty about getting 
the king’s permission to hang the refractory Jew, 
that he appears to have made no secret of his inten- 
tion. It is evident that Harbonah was quite 
familiar with it, and as it is very unlikely that 
such information had been vouchsafed after the 
procession through the street in the forenoon, it 
would seem that Haman had but added to his own 
discomfiture by explaining the purpose of his early 
Visit to some of the chamberlains before being sum- 
moned to the royal presence. The attendant 
mentions now the fact of the gallows having been 
erected, and the reason for it. Mordecai would 
have been strung up there had not Providence 
interfered. The king, hearing of it, utters but three 
words, “Hang him thereon,” and the Amalekite’s 
doom is sealed. 

It is not the only time in Scripture history that 
in God’s governmental dealings such a thing has 
occurred. Daniel furnishes us with a similar 
instance. Saved himself by Almighty power from 
the lions’ jaws, his accusers are cast into the den and 
destroyed. David wrote of the wicked; “Behold 
he travaileth with iniquity, and hath conceived mis- 
chief, and brought forth falsehood. He made a pit 


84 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


and digged it, and is fallen into the ditch which he 
made. His mischief shall return upon his own head, 
and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own 
pate” (Ps. vii. 14-16). So shall it be with the per- 
sonal Antichrist, “the Jews’ enemy” of the future, of 
whom Haman, if not a type, is at least an illustration. 
At the moment when his power shall seem to be 
supreme, and all hope for deliverance for the Rem- 
nant of Israel, who in that dark day shall cleave to 
the Lord, will have practically fled away, the warrior 
of the 19th of Revelation shall descend and hurl 
the impious usurper alive into the lake that burneth 
with fire and brimstone. 

“So they hanged Haman on the gallows that 
he had prepared for Mordecai. Then was the 
king’s wrath pacified” (ver. 10). The sentence, 
as soon as uttered, is carried out. Haman is hanged 
as one “accursed of God.” Thus “the righteous 
is delivered out of trouble, and the wicked cometh 
in his stead” (Prov. xi. 8). ‘Riches profit not in 
the day of wrath;” his wealth and power availed 
him nothing. In one moment all is manifested 
as being altogether lighter than vanity. He has 
gone out into eternity naked and alone; and as a 
later revelation tells us, “It is appointed unto men 
once to die, and after this the judgment” (Heb. ix, 
27). That stark, cold body suspended to the gallows 
preaches loudly, to all who will give heed, of the 


THE SECOND BANQUET 85 


evanescent character of all earth’s baubles, and the 
importance of living for eternity. 

“T have seen the wicked in great power, and 
spreading himself like a green bay tree. Yet he 
passed away, and, lo, he was not: yea, I sought 
him, but he could not be found” (Ps. xxxvii. 35, 36.) 


CHAPTER VIII 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED AND THE DECREE OF 
GRACE 


ig was not enough that Haman should be put 
to death, Some means must be devised 
whereby the people of the Jews could be saved 
and yet the unalterable laws of the Persians and 
the Medes remain unviolated. Of this the present 
chapter treats. 

“On that day did the king Ahasuerus give the 
house of Haman, the Jews’ enemy, unto Esther 
the queen. And Mordecai came before the king, 
for Esther had told what he was to her. And 
the king took off his ring, which he had taken 
from Haman, and gave it unto Mordecai. And 
Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman’ 
(vers. I, 2). 

The power of the enemy is overthrown. Ha- 
man’s house is presented to Esther and she ap- 
points Mordecai over it. She tells at last what 
relation he bore to her, and there is nothing more 
to hide. 

Her discipline, and his too, had been severe, 
but at last both reach a place where ‘they can 
be used in blessing to their people. There must 

86 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED 87 


ever be a divine schooling ere there can be use- 
fulness and enlargement. But although the circum- 
stances are so remarkably altered, the decree con- 
demning “all Jews, both young and old, little 
children and women,” to be slain on the thirteenth 
day of the twelfth month still stands unrevoked. 
Nor can it be revoked—for the laws of the kingdom 
once made were unchangeable. But strong in faith 
that some means would be found whereby the evil 
might be averted, and yet the dignity of the laws re- 
main untouched, we are told that “Esther spake 
yet again before the king and fell down at his 
feet, and besought him with tears to put away 
the mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his device 
that he had devised against the Jews” (ver. 3). 
The position of her people was strikingly analogous 
to that of unsaved men and women in general; 
conscious of having richly deserved the judgment 
of God, the curse of the broken law hanging over 
their heads: “Cursed is every one that continueth 
not in all things which are written in the book of 
the law to do them” (Gal. iii. 10; Deut. xxvii. 26). 
So runs the unchangeable decree of a holy God. 
All are worthy of death; for all have sinned. None 
have continued in obedience to all the command- 
ments of God. Therefore all are under the curse. 
It will not do to plead ignorance of the law, or 
sorrow for having failed. ‘The soul that sinneth 
it shall die.’ The law knows no mercy for the 


88 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


violator of it. Neither will it do to promise to 
do better in days to come; to endeavor to obey the 
Word in the future. A better future, if that were 
to be, could not change the past—and “God requireth 
that which is past” (Eccl. iii. 15). 

If saved at all, it cannot be at the expense of 
God’s character or by the violation of His word in 
any manner whatsoever. 

But it is right here that the gospel comes in. God 
can say, “Deliver him from going down to the 
pit: I have found a ransom” (Job xxxili. 24). 
The Lord Jesus has borne the sinner’s judgment. 
Yea, “God hath made Him to be sin for us, who 
knew no sin; that we might be made the righteous- 
ness of God in Him” (2 Cor. v. 21). He, ever 
spotless and undefiled, was not under the curse. 
The sentence of condemnation did not hang over 
Him. But in infinite love and mercy He stooped 
vicariously beneath our load, and “‘bare our sins in 
His own body on the tree” (1 Pet. 11. 24). “He 
was wounded for our transgressions; He was 
bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our 
peace was upon Him; and with His stripes we are 
healed” (Isa. liii 5). A righteous basis has now 
been laid, upon which God can act according to the 
love of His heart, and yet in perfect holiness. 
A second decree goes forth, not contradicting or 
annulling the former one; but which, while in perfect 
harmony with it, will provide a means whereby all 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED 89 


can be saved who avail themselves thereof. 
So we read, ‘“‘Christ hath redeemed us from the curse 
of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is 
written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a 
tree” (Gal. iii. 13). The work that saves is finished. 
All can find deliverance from the judgment of God 
who in simple faith receive and act upon the message 
of grace. 

And so, returning to our chapter, it is beauti- 
fully in keeping with this that “the king held out 
the golden sceptre toward Esther.” Grace is 
reigning and upon that ground alone can there be 
deliverance for her people. “So Esther arose, and 
stood before the king, and said, If it please the king, 
and if I have found favor in his sight, and the thing 
seem, right before the king, and I be pleasing in 
his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters devised 
by Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, 
which he wrote to destroy the Jews which are in 
all the king’s provinces: for how can I endure to see 
the evil that shall come unto my people? or how 
can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?” 
(vers. 4-6.) 

It is a touching plea that she gives utterance 
to, It hangs on this, “If the thing seem right 
before the king, and I be pleasing in his sight.” 
She does not attempt to plead the good works, 
the benevolence, or the loyalty of the Jews. She 
would have him deal with them according to his 


9 


go NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


estimate of her. Like the great apostle of the 
Gentiles who, when entreating Philemon in behalf 
of Onesimus writes, “If thou count me therefore 
a partner receive him as myself” (Phile. 17). 
And surely we have more than a hint, both there 
and here, of the great and wondrous truth ex- 
pressed in the blessed words of inspiration, “He 
hath made us accepted in the Beloved.” Esther had 
risked her life for her people and would now have 
them dealt with according to the king’s thoughts 
of herself. The Lord Jesus Christ gave His life 
a ransom for lost, guilty sinners, and now all who 
trust in Him are dealt with by God according to 
His thoughts of His Son. How tenderly this 
precious truth is expressed in the Lord’s great inter- 
cessory prayer! He says, “I in them, and Thou 
in Me, that they may be made perfect in one; and 
that the world may know that Thou hast sent Me, 
and hast loved them even as Thou hast loved 
Me” (John xvii. 23). 

Esther’s touching plea avails, and ‘“‘the king 
Ahasuerus said unto Esther the queen, and Mor- 
decai the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the 
house of Haman, and him they have hanged upon 
the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the 
Jews. Write ye also for the Jews as it liketh you, 
in the king’s name, and seal it with the king’s 
ring: for the writing which is written in the king’s 
name, and sealed with the king’s ring, may no man 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED of 


reverse” (vers. 7, 8). He who “had the power 
of death” has been destroyed. The message 
of grace can now be sent out “to deliver those 
who through fear of death” had been subjected to 
so cruel a bondage. 

“Then were the king’s scribes called at that 
time, in the third month, that is the month Sivan, 
on the three and twentieth day thereof; and it was 
written according to all that Mordecai commanded 
unto the Jews, and to the lieutenants, and the 
deputies and rulers of the provinces which are from 
India unto Ethiopia, a hundred twenty and seven 
provinces, unto every province according to the 
writing thereof, and unto every people after their 
language, and to the Jews according to their writing 
and according to their language” (ver. 9). Less 
than nine months remained ere the decree of Haman 
was due to be put into execution. Short enough 
time if the message of grace was to reach the 
farthest limits of the kingdom ere the day of 
slaughter appointed! The proclamation is as uni- 
versal as the previous one, and is written in every 
language of the known world. Its text is given 
in the verses that follow. 

“And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus’ name, 
and sealed it with the king’s ring, and sent letters 
by post on horseback, and riders on mules, camels, 
and young dromedaries: wherein the king granted 
the Jews which were in every city to gather them- 


92 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


selves together, and to stand for their life, to de- 
stroy, to slay, and to cause to perish, all the power 
of the people and province that would assault them, 
both little ones and women, and to take the spoil 
of them for prey, upon one day in all the provinces 
of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon the thirteenth day 
of the twelfth month which is the month Adar” 
(vers. 10-12). It will be seen that this proclama- 
tion in no sense contradicted the one that had gone 
before. The other gave the people command to 
destroy the Jews. This one gave to the afflicted 
nation the privilege of defending themselves. In 
other words it provided a means of salvation which 
they could accept or reject as they chose. It is 
not otherwise with the glad tidings proclaimed in 
the gospel. A Saviour is provided. All who 
avail themselves of God’s gracious interference are 
saved. All who reject the means of His providing, 
do so at their own peril. 

No time is lost in sending out the joyful tidings. 
Would that Christians were as much in earnest 
in making known to all people, far and near, the 
good news of eternal salvation through a crucified 
and risen Saviour! “The copy of the writing for a 
commandment to be given in every province was 
published unto all people, and that the Jews should 
be ready against that day to avenge themselves on 
their enemies. So the posts that rode upon mules 
and camels went out, being hastened and pressed on 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED 93 


by the king’s commandment. And the decree was 
given in Shushan the palace” (vers. 13, 14). To 
every corner of the habitable earth, the messengers 
go forth “being hastened” by the monarch’s word, 
reminding us forcibly of another commission given 
by a greater than Ahasuerus: “And Jesus came and 
spake unto them, saying, All power is given unto Me 
in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, and teach 
(Gk., “disciple’) all nations, baptizing them in the 
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things 
whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am 
with you alway even unto the end of the world. 
Amen” (Matt. xxviii. 18-20). His commandment 
was urgent. Men were in danger of something far 
worse than temporal destruction—in danger of the 
eternal judgment of God against sin. Nothing was 
to hinder. “Go ye,’ He says. And, commissioned 
by the Lord Himself, they went forth to make 
known to Jew and Gentile the exceeding riches of 
His grace. 

But what lethargy has come in since those 
early days of devotion to His name! What 
millions of. heathen are unevangelized in this 
vaunted century of progress and enlightenment. 
Solemn indeed must be the reckoning with those 
by and by who are so indifferent to “the King’s 
commandment.” What would have been thought 
of one of the couriers of Ahasuerus who, forgetting 


94. NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


the urgency and importance of his message, loitered 
among the leafy bowers of the wayside khans, or 
amused himself with the sights of the way; losing 
valuable time; forgetting that hundreds of lives 
depended upon his errand being fulfilled ere the 
thirteenth day of the month Adar. Would such 
an one not have justly deserved the severest censute, 
if not death itself? And what is to be thought 
of Christians who have heard the charge of the 
Lord Jesus, “Go ye into all the world and preach 
the gospel to every creature’ (Mark xvi. 15), but 
who, paying no attention to the appalling condition 
of lost souls on every side of them, think only of 
their own pleasure and comfort? “If thou forbear 
to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those 
that are ready to be slain, if thou sayest, Behold 
we knew it not; doth not He that pondereth the 
heart consider it? And He that keepeth thy soul, 
doth He not know it? And shall not He render 
to every man according to his works?” (Prov. 
XxXiVv. 11,12). These are unspeakably solemn words 
and worthy of being carefully pondered in the 
presence of God by every converted reader of these 
lines. May grace be given to each one to weigh well 
their solemn import, and to seek day by day to faith- 
fully make known the only message which can de- 
liver from the second death. 

“And Mordecai went out from the presence of 
the king in royal apparel of blue and white, and 
with a great crown of gold, and with a garment 


THE DESPISED MAN EXALTED ' 95 


of fine linen and purple; and the city of Shushan 
rejoiced and was glad” (ver. 15). The condem- 
nation past, Mordecai puts off the sackcloth, to 
be worn no more. Robed now as befits his exalted 
position he goes into the king’s presence. His 
clothing of blue and white and purple may surely 
have a meaning for our hearts to enter into. Blue 
is the color of the heavens, and ever seems to 
speak, in Scripture, of that heavenly character 
which should be manifested by the redeemed soul. 
White is righteousness, and put on as a habit tells of 
the practical righteousness that should adorn the 
child of God. Of this too the fine linen reminds us 
for “the fine linen is the righteousness of saints” 
(Rev. xix. 8). The purple is the color of royalty; 
while the “great crown of gold” would tell of the 
divine glory, in harmony with which Mordecai has 
now been raised from the depths of woe to the 
heights of power and blessing: blessing not for him- 
self alone, but for all who harken to his word. And 
so, from time to time, even in the broken condition 
of things in which we see the professing Church 
to-day, does God raise up men who will honor Him 
in honoring His Word, and who are thus made a 
means of untold blessing to others. 

The king’s message believed brought joy and 
gladness; even as the gospel, believed, brings the 
same to-day. “The Jews had light, and gladness, 
and joy, and honor. And in every province, and 
in every city, whithersoever the king’s command- 


96 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


ment and his decree came, the Jews had joy and 
gladness, a feast and a good day. And many of 
the people of the land became Jews; for the fear 
of the Jews fell upon them” (vers. 16, 17). It is 
important to notice that it was the word of the king 
which brought all the grief and anguish of heart 
described in chapter four. The king had spoken. 
They believed his decree, and they were miserable. 
Now it is his word that gives them peace and hap- 
piness, and drives away their sorrow. Even so, 
God’s word as to man’s lost estate and the judg- 
ment hanging over him brings the soul to cry, “The 
pains of hell gat hold upon me: I found trouble and 
sorrow” (Psa. cxvi. 3). But by the message of 
grace and truth which has come by Jesus Christ, 
truly believed, the gloom is banished, and the exul- 
tant heart cries with joy, “Thou hast delivered my 
soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet 
from falling” (Psa. cxvi. 8). It is in neither case a 
question of experience or wrought-up feelings, but 
of faith in the message proclaimed. 

And so God had turned the mourning of His 
people into rejoicing, and the result was that the 
fear of them fell upon the people of the provinces, 
many of whom sought the God of Israel and became 
proselytes, taking their places as members of the 
chosen nation. There is nothing that so appeals to 
the world as a happy, holy company of saints, whose 
spirits have been refreshed by the goodness of the 
Lord. 


CHAPTER IX 1-19 
THE DELIVERANCE 


ie was faith in the written word of the king that 
gave the Jews joy and gladness, even though the 
formerly dreaded thirteenth of Adar had not yet 
come. So does faith in the written word of God 
give boldness and confidence though the day of 
doom once feared has not yet arrived. The revela- 
tion of His grace and “perfect love’ as revealed 
in the cross “casteth out all fear,” for “faith is 
the substance”’ (or confidence) “of things hoped for, 
the evidence” (or conviction) “of things not seen” 
(Heb. xi. 1). “We walk by faith, not by sight,” 
for “what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? 
But if we hope for that we see not, then do we 
with patience wait for it” (Rom. viii. 24, 25). It 
was not an inward emotion or a passing feeling 
that gave to the people of Esther and Mordecai 
the assurance that they would not be destroyed, 
as originally intended by Haman. They had some- 
thing far better than that. Their tears were dried, 
their sorrow assuaged in resting upon the word 
alone. 

This cannot be insisted on too strongly. There 

97 


98 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


are many to-day seeking peace in an utterly wrong 
way. Some hope, because of a restful feeling 
within, that they have at, last been accepted of 
God, and are now on the way to heaven. Others 
trust in the fact that they pray and attend to various 
religious duties; while many more are without any 
confidence at all, but hope at last to have an in- 
ward sense of pardon ere they die. To all of these 
classes we would say, Do not rest in anything short 
of the revealed word of God. That Word believed, 
joy and peace must follow; but it is faith first, peace 
afterwards. 

To go direct to Scripture is the only safe way 
for every soul. For instance: I am a sinner; my 
awakened conscience troubles me about many things 
I had formerly treated as matters of indifference; 
an awful sense of condemnation and wrath hangs 
over me; I long for deliverance. I pray, and groan, 
and weep. Still there is no peace. I try to change 
my ways; break loose from old habits; forsake evil ] 
companions,—I am miserable even then. I perhaps 
go to church; submit to baptism; partake of the 
Lord’s Supper; give of my means to assist the 
cause of Christ. But alas, alas, all is in vain! I 
am only more and more aware of my true state 
since so great changes seem to be necessary to fit 
me for God’s presence. I have no assurance that 
my sins are forgiven: and it is this I must know 
if I would be at peace. At last, wearied and almost 


THE DELIVERANCE 99 


hopeless, I come to the Word itself. Perhaps such 
a passage as Acts xiii. 38, 39 meets my eye: “Be 
it known unto you.” Ah yes, that is it! I want 
to KNow. This awful uncertainty is what is haras- 
sing me and taking from me all rest, and plung- 
ing me into deepest anxiety. What is it that can 
be “known” in this verse? “Be it known unto you 
that through this Man’’—that is, through Jesus— 
not through my prayers, my devotions, my benevo- 
lences, or my changed manner of life! Nor yet 
through the church, her services, her ministers or 
her ordinances. No! blessed be God, I am turned 
from all these things—good as they may be in 
their place; I am turned to “this Man,” to Jesus— 
the Man of Calvary—the Man who is now in the 
glory. “Through this Man is preached unto you,’— 
how intensely personal it is: “known unto you;” 
“preached unto you;’—surely, then I cannot be 
mistaken in appropriating it to myself. “Preached 
unto you the forgiveness of sins!’ Ah! That is 
what I want so earnestly. This is what I can never 
be happy without. How, then, is this preached 
forgiveness to be really mine,—known and enjoyed 
as mine? Here is the answer: “By Him all that 
believe are justified from all things, from which ye 
could not be justified by the law of Moses.” Here, 
then, is the peace-giving testimony of God’s infallible 
Word. I can rest on that. I believe in the Lord 
Jesus. He died for me. I trust in Him alone. 


100 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


God declares all who so believe are “justified from 
all things.” I can trust His declaration. I have 
sure and perfect peace. “Being justified by faith, 
we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus 
Christ: by whom also we have access by faith into 
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope 
of the glory of God” (Rom. v. I, 2). 

Resting on the word of the king, the Jews found 
peace. Now we are to learn how the word of 
the king is actually fulfilled. “Now in the twelfth 
month, that is, the month Adar, on the thirteenth 
day of the same, when the king’s commandment 
and his decree drew near to be put into execution, 
in the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have 
power over them, (though it was turned to the 
contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that 
hated them,) the Jews gathered themselves together 
in their cities throughout all the provinces of the 
king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought 
their hurt: and no man could withstand them; for 
the fear of them fell upon all people” (vers. 1, 2). 
The day that had been so dreaded, ere the posts 
brought the message of grace, is now awaited with 
eager anticipation. It is to be a day of triumph 
and rejoicing to the Jews, and a day of overthrowing 
the power of their enemies. The government is 
for, not against, them. This is the reason of their 
gladness. “And all the rulers of the provinces, and 
the lieutenants, and the deputies, and officers of the 


THE DELIVERANCE Io.I 


king, helped the Jews; because the fear of Mordecai 
fell upon them. For Mordecai was great in the 
king’s house, and his fame went out throughout all 
the provinces: for this man Mordecai waxed greater 
and greater” (vers. 3, 4). 

How truly had the word been fulfilled which 
says, “Them that honor Me, I will honor; and 
they that despise Me shall be lightly esteemed’! 
It will be remembered that in the beginning, when 
Mordecai sided with God, and refused to bow to 
the haughty enemy of Jehovah, that the king’s 
servants wondered “whether Mordecai’s matters 
would stand.” How has the Lord vindicated His 
servant now! Not only have his matters stood, 
but the despised man who acted for God—although 
that meant at the time to be misunderstood by almost 
every one else—is now waxing greater and greater. 
And so will it ever be that he who sides with God 
will be triumphant at last. It is not to be expected 
that natural men, or carnal Christians, will under- 
stand a man who takes this ground. “He that is 
spiritual discerneth all things; yet he himself is dis- 
cerned of no man” (1 Cor. ii. 15—literal render- 
ing). Such an one must ever be an enigma to men 
who reason from a human standpoint, and who 
have not the mind of Christ. But God will vindicate 
His servant in His own way and time, if all is 
humbly left in His hands. Of the greatest of all 
servants it is written that “when He was reviled, 


102 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


He reviled not again; when He suffered, He 
threatened not; but committed Himself to Him that 
judgeth righteously” (1 Pet. ii. 23). And how 
gloriously has He been vindicated and exalted! 
Blessed Lord, may we Thy servants walk in Thy path 
until we see Thy face! . 

“Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with the 
stroke of the sword, and slaughter, and destruction, 
and did what they would unto those that hated 
them. And in Shushan the palace the Jews slew 
and destroyed five hundred men” (vers. 5, 6). It 
was the overthrowing of the enemies—not of the 
Jews only, but of the Lord. They impiously lifted 
their hands against the separated nation; and, how- 
ever unfaithful they may have been, He made their 
troubles His own, and delivered their foes into their 
hands. 

The Lord remembers, too, His word as to Am- 
alek spoken in the wilderness so long ago: “TI will 
utterly put out the remembrance of Amalek from 
under heaven.” Hence we read of the destruction 
of the last of the nation mentioned in Scripture. 
“And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha, and 
Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha, and Parmashta, 
and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vajezatha, the ten sons 
of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the enemy of the 
Jews, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their 
hand” (vers. 7-10). The last of this ungodly race 
have perished. God’s word, whether telling of grace 
or judgment, will be fulfilled to the letter. 


THE DELIVERANCE 103 


As typifying the lusts of the flesh, what comfort 
there is for the Christian in the utter destruction 
of Amalek! The day is not far distant when the 
old nature that dwells in every believer, and is 
the cause of so much of our failure, and sins, and 
sorrow, will be completely removed; and with it 
all lust and pride: yea, everything that hinders 
spiritual enjoyment will be gone forever. This 
never occurs while we are in the body. The dream 
of the eradication of inbred sin, and of perfection 
in the flesh while in this life, is not founded on 
the word of God. As long as we are in this scene 
we have to “mortify” our members which are upon 
the earth; but at “the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and our gathering together unto Him,” we 
shall be fully delivered from our hated foe: “for 
our conversation is in heaven; from whence also 
we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ ; who 
shall change our vile body” (or, transform the body 
of our humiliation), “that it may be fashioned 
like unto the body of His glory” (literal rendering) ; 
“according to the working whereby He is able to 
subdue all things unto Himself’ (Phil. iii. 20, 21). 
Then will the remembrance of the fleshly lusts 
that war against the soul, and now trouble us, be 
blotted out from under heaven. 

A striking’ evidence of subjection to God is 
brought before us at the end of the verses noted 
above: “upon the spoil they laid not their hand.” 
The king had granted “the spoil of them for a 


104 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


prey.” But long before, God had said, when sending 
Saul to smite the Amalekites, that he should “utterly 
destroy all that they had.” They were to take no 
spoil that day. Saul disobeyed the word and 
brought down Divine judgment upon himself and 
his house (1 Sam. xv, throughout). The scattered 
Jews of Esther’s time manifest greater faithful- 
ness. They abhor the spoil and refrain from touch- 
ing it. As it was an Amalekite that had stirred up 
the enmity of the people against them, they class 
all morally in the same category. It is an example 
of disinterested obedience beautiful to notice. They 
overcome the world but do not seek to profit through 
it nor derive benefit by indifference to that which 
they see to be evil. 

The news of the slaughter in the city of Shushan 
is reported to the king at the close of the day. 
“And the king said unto Esther the queen, The Jews 
have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shu- 
shan the palace, and the ten sons of Haman; what 
have they done in the rest of the king’s provinces? 
Now what is thy petition? and it shall be granted 
thee: or what is thy request further? and it shall 
be done” (ver. 12). 

It would seem from Esther’s reply that the day 
had closed in the midst of the conflict. There were 
still a large number of persons who were evil dis- 
posed toward the Jews. “Then said Esther, If it 
please the king, let it be granted to the Jews which 


THE DELIVERANCE I05 


are in Shushan to do to-morrow also according unto 
this day’s decree, and let Haman’s ten sons be 
hanged upon the gallows” (ver. 13). It must be 
borne in mind that the decree simply granted the 
Jews the privilege of self-defense. It is no indis- 
criminate massacre that Esther desires, but another 
day of opportunity in which to meet their foes if 
they sought to rise against them. She also desires 
the ten sons of Haman to be hung up before the 
people as accursed according to Deut. xxi, 22, 23. 
“And the king commanded it so to be done: and 
the decree was given at Shushan, and they hanged 
Haman’s ten sons” (ver. 14). 

On the fourteenth day of the month therefore 
the Jews again met any who had the hardihood 
to oppose them, and “slew three hundred men at 
Shushan,” over half the number of the previous 
day. Again we are told that “on the prey they 
laid not their hands” (ver. 15). They would 
not be enriched at the expense of the enemies of 
the Lord. 

Throughout the rest of the empire they had 
been equally victorious. We read not of the death 
of even so much as one; but they “slew of their 
foes seventy and five thousand, but they laid not 
their hands on the prey’ (ver. 16). Truly their 
sorrow had been turned into rejoicing. “Weeping 
may endure for a night but joy cometh in the 
morning.” 


106 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


In the outside districts and distant provinces 
the fourteenth day was devoted to feasting and 
gladness, while in the palace-city the day follow- 
ing was so observed. It was a season of thanks- 
giving and congratulations one to another: gifts 
and portions being exchanged. From our record 
of it though, as described in vers. 17-19, it would 
be impossible to prove that they remembered the 
Lord in it all, and gave the glory to Him. This, 
however, is but in keeping with the character of 
the book. There can be no question as to their 
hearts going out in gratitude to the God of their 
fathers who had so mercifully interfered on their 
behalf; but in describing their joy, as in making 
known their former sorrow, His name is unmen- 
tioned in the record, because they are not where He 
can publicly own them. How loudly does this very 
silence speak to every opened ear! God could do 
all we have been noting in our study of this book 
for His people who refused to gather to the place 
where He has set His name (and where a few 
“afflicted and poor’’ ones were trying amidst many 
discouragements to rebuild His ruined temple and 
to order their ways according as “they found it 
written”), but though He so graciously watches 
over them in His providence, and loves them unto 
the end, He nevertheless takes care that the inspired 
record of it all shall not so much as mention His 
name. 


CHAPTER IX 20-32 
THE INSTITUTION OF PURIM 


| eda this time, until he disappears from sacred 
history, Mordecai takes the place of a 
judge or a deliverer among his brethren. He has 
proven himself a faithful man in the main, what- 
ever failures he may also have had. In a certain 
sense his position is very similar to that occupied 
by Joseph in Egypt. In position being next to 
the king, he has been the preserver of his people 
and is afterwards their protector. 

He would have them never forget the great 
deliverance they had known, nor the means whereby 
it had been accomplished. From the twentieth 
verse, it has generally been concluded that he himself 
was the author of this book, and surely no person 
would be more likely to have been chosen for this 
service. He also, in conjunction with Esther the 
queen, established the feast of Purim, or “the lot,” 
as a perpetual commemoration of the overthrowing 
of Haman’s device. 

“And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent 
letters unto all the Jews that were in all the provinces 
of the king Ahasuerus, both nigh and far, to establish 

107 


108 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


this among them, that they should keep the four- 
teenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth 
day of the same, yearly, as the days wherein the 
Jews rested from their enemies and the month which 
was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from 
mourning into a good day: that they should make 
them days of feasting and joy, and of sending 
portions one to another, and gifts to the poor” 
(vers. 20-22). There is no reason to believe that 
this was a divinely instituted festival, like the seven 
feasts of Jehovah in Lev. xxiii. It was simply 
the grateful remembrance of a rejoicing people 
for signal mercy vouchsafed at a time of deepest 
distress. Naturally the Jews in the land did not 
as readily observe it as those scattered among the 
heathen. History tells us that it was some years 
ere it became a universal season of festivity among 
the Hebrews, and many more elapsed before a dis- 
tinctively religious character was given to it. 

But, as commanded by Mordecai and Esther, all 
was in perfect keeping with the times. In full 
accord with their Lo-ammi condition, God’s name 
is in no wise connected with it. It has kept, however, 
the record of their providential deliverance clearly 
before their minds. The exact reason for the name 
of the feast is given in the verses that follow: “And 
the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and 
as Mordecai had written unto them; because Haman 
the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy 


THE INSTITUTION OF PURIM 109 


of all the Jews, had devised against the Jews to 
destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is, the lot, to 
consume them; but when Esther came before the 
king, he commanded by letters, that his wicked 
device, which he had devised against the Jews, 
should return upon his own head, and that he and 
his sons should be hanged upon the gallows. 
Wherefore they called these days Purim, after the 
name of Pur. Therefore for all the words of 
this letter, and of that which they had seen concern- 
ing this matter, and which had come unto them, 
the Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon 
their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves 
unto them, so as it should not fail, that they would 
keep these two days according to their writing, 
and according to their appointed time every year; 
and that these days should be remembered and kept 
throughout every generation, every family, every 
province and every city; and that these days of 
Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor 
the memorial of them perish from their seed” (vers. 
23-28). 
How truly had they been made to know that 
“the lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing 
thereof is of the Lord” (Prov. xvi. 33). No 
device of the wicked against the people of the Lord 
can ever be carried out unless He see fit to permit 
it. Hence the Christian can exultingly cry, “If 
God be for us, who can be against us?” (Rom. viii. 


IIo NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


31). But, though His care is over all His saints, 
it will always be observed that there is not that 
same direct, manifest interference on their behalf 
when not walking according to His revealed will, as 
when they take the place of absolute dependence 
on Himself in subjection to His Word. Thus also 
in Christendom generally, it is more this distant 
Providential oversight that is known. 

In an indefinite way saints learn to look for 
divine interposition for evidence of the Lord’s 
concern. But it is only as one walks with God and 
trembles at His word, manifesting real heart for 
Himself, that the special supervision and intimate 
Fatherly care of which Scripture speaks is entered 
into and enjoyed. This may be seen by turning 
for a little to that exceedingly striking passage in 
2 Cor. vi. 14-18. Believers are here counseled to 
avoid putting their necks into an unequal yoke 
with those who believe not. This would refer to 
every concern of life; whether it be in regard to 
business, marriage, or ecclesiastical associations. 
No child of God can be linked up with an uncon- 
verted man in a business partnership without 
violating this Scripture. Neither could one enter 
into an engagement or marriage with an unsaved 
person and enjoy the approbation of the Lord. An 
old Puritan once wrote, “If you marry a child 
of the devil you can expect to have trouble with 
your father-in-law.” Alas, that so many, despising 


THE INSTITUTION OF PURIM III 


the Word of truth and the bitter experiences of 
thousands before them, should, with open eyes, 
yet venture on such a course, because through their 
affections they have been ensnared! How many 
Samsons have been thus shorn of their strength! 
And how many Solomons have thus had their hearts 
turned away! 

But there are many who see the nature of the 
business yoke and the family yoke, who seem 
quite unconcerned as to the ecclesiastical association 
with the world. “What agreement hath the temple 
of God with idols? For ye are the temple of the 
living God.” Believers, and believers alone, com- 
prise this spiritual house. ‘‘Know ye not that ye 
are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God 
dwelleth in you?” (1 Cor. iii. 16). Of no unregen- 
erate soul could this be said. Of those only who are 
born again and sealed with the Holy Spirit can it 
be true. It is therefore of the greatest importance 
that Christians refuse all association with world- 
lings in spiritual things. This is beautifully set 
forth in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah, where 
the faithful remnant, having come up from Bab- 
ylon and Persia, are found not only separate 
from the nations, but, when gathered at the place 
where Jehovah’s name had been set of old, they 
indignantly refuse the help of the uncircumcised in 
building the house of God or the walls of the city. 
For them, despite the fact that the Lo-Ammi 


II2 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


sentence remained unrepealed, God could act in 
a more open and manifest way than when He 
interfered for the scattered ones of the provinces 
who separated not from the nations when they had 
the opportunity presented to them in the imperial 
decree. For this remnant, He raised up suited 
ministry. Haggai and Zechariah were able to give 
with no uncertainty “the Lord’s message.’ When 
failure came in, they were in the place where all 
could be dealt with according to the Book; while 
teachers of the Law, like Ezra and the Levites, 
were given to them to instruct them in what was 
there written. 

And so in the passage we have under consider- 
ation, God says to those who “come out from 
among them,” and who “touch not the unclean 
thing,” that He will receive them; and He adds, 
“T will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be My 
sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.” 
This is unspeakably precious. God is the Father 
of all who are born again. All such have life 
eternal—divine life, and can say by the Spirit, 
“Abba Father; but though He is the Father of 
all, He is not able always to act as a Father unto 
all. 

It is the obedient who know His gracious and 
special care spoken of in this sense. Leaving all 
else for Him, they find Him to be more than all 
else to them, even in regard to temporal matters. 


THE INSTITUTION OF PURIM IT3 


“He knows, and loves, and cares; 
Nothing this truth can dim: 
He gives the very best to those 
Who leave the choice to Him.” 


Separated to Himself, dependent alone upon 
His omnipotent power, they are given to see His 
hand and to discern His actings in grace as others 
cannot who “follow afar off,’’ and fear to leave 
all that is contrary to His mind, as revealed in 
His Word. 

How blessed is it, on the other hand, that even 
where there is not this devotion to Himself that 
should characterize those redeemed at such cost, 
yet He never forgets His own, nor does He ever 
neglect them. But it is more in the manner of His 
actings in the days of Esther that He watches over 
and cares for them—often unseen and unacknowl- 
edged. “His mercy endureth forever,” and He who 
walked with His unbelieving people for forty years 
in the wilderness never ceases to care for His 
children now, however little they may realize it. 
“Having loved His own which were in the world, 
He loved them unto the end” (John xiii. 1). 

The feast of Purim, then, witnesses the nation’s . 
gratitude, however feebly it may set forth their 
recognition that it was God Himself who had so 
wondrously made their affliction the occasion for 
His acting in grace. 

“Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Abi- 


Ii4 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


hail” (Father of strength), “and Mordecai the Jew, 
wrote with all authority to confirm this second letter 
of Purim. And he sent the letters unto all the 
Jews, to the hundred twenty and seven provinces 
of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace 
and truth, to confirm these days of Purim in their 
times appointed, according as Mordecai the Jew 
and Esther the queen had enjoined them, and as 
they had decreed for themselves and for their 
seed the matters of the fastings and their cry” 
(vers. 29-31). It is not likely that the name of 
God was left unmentioned in the publications they 
thus put forth, for “words of peace and truth” 
clearly connected the humiliation of the people and 
their fasting, with the deliverance God gave them 
at the end. “Their cry’ is also mentioned. To 
whom could it be but to God? Were this narration 
of it then written by mere man, how natural would 
it have been to have added the words “to God” 
or “‘to the Lord.” But the pen of inspiration never 
errs. The One whose ways are perfect, is the real 
author of the book, whether Mordecai or some 
unknown one was the writer. 

“And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters 
of Purim; and it was written in the book” (ver. 32). 
To the present day, and for ages past, it has been 
the custom of the Hebrews to read this book at the 
annual observance of the feast; and whenever the 


THE INSTITUTION OF PURIM II5 


name of Haman is uttered, the orthodox Jews hiss, 
and stamp, and curse his memory. 

In the days when our Lord was upon earth, 
the canon of Old Testament Scripture, as we now 
know it, had been long since completed, and was 
composed of “the law, the prophets, and the 
Psalms.” Esther was always included in the latter 
division, called in the Greek version “the Hagio- 
grapha.” Jesus spoke of all as Scripture. There- 
fore we cannot question the full inspiration of this 
book, as He set His seal upon it. And yet we shall 
look in vain to find any quotation from or refer- 
ence to it in the New Testament. It is the unique 
evidence of God’s unfailing care to a faithless 
people. 

The feast of Purim is never referred to in the 
Gospels either. It did not properly belong to the 
people as in the land. While the yearly reminder of 
unchanging grace, it was also the evidence of their 
lack of heart for the One who had so acted towards 
them. At the present time it has degenerated into 
a season of godless merry-making, and is more 
patriotic than devotional in character. 


CHAPTER X 
SPEAKING PEACE 


Te story of Satan’s effort to destroy the 
nation of promise, together with the manner 
in which he was thwarted, having been so minutely 
told, there remains nothing more than to picture the 
changed conditions resultant upon the destruction 
of Haman and his house, and the advancement of 
Mordecai. The far-reaching rule of the Persian 
monarch is first shown in the statement that “‘the 
king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land and 
upon the isles of the sea” (ver. 1). All nations had 
to know and own his power, as soon they shall 
own the sway of God’s chosen King. How blessed 
the day when 


“Jesus shall reign where’er the sun 

Doth his successive journeys run: 

His kingdom spread from shore to shore, 
Till moons shall wax and wane no more.” 


“The powers that be are ordained of God;’’ but 
all are merely provisional during the present period 


of the true King’s rejection. Soon shall this groan- 
116 


SPEAKING PEACE 117 


ing scene be changed to one of unmingled joy 
and gladness for the delivered nations when there 
shall be revealed from heaven “a righteous ruler 
Over men, a ruler in the fear of God!” This, 
Ahasuerus was not. Consequently his world-wide 
domination soon passed to other hands; but when 
God’s Anointed reigns, His kingdom will never be 
superseded. 

Let the reader not fall into a mistake very com- 
monly made to-day. The Kingdom is not the 
Church. The latter is the body of Christ, composed 
of all who, in this dispensation, are called out from 
Jew and Gentile, and baptized in the power of the 
Holy Spirit. During the period in which God is 
doing this special work of His grace, the Kingdom, 
properly speaking, is in abeyance. It is true the 
principles of the Kingdom are spreading through the 
world, and all who are born again are, even now, 
in, and morally of it. 

But for all that the reigning time has not yet 
come. It is still “the kingdom and patience of 
Jesus Christ.’”” When the Lord returns from heaven 
He will descend ‘“‘with a shout” into the upper air, 
accompanied by “the voice of the archangel and 
the trump of God.” The Church will then be 
complete and her period of testimony and rejection 
on earth will be accomplished. Therefore “the 
dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are 
alive and remain shall be caught up together with 


119 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: 
and so shall we be forever with the Lord” (1 Thess. 
iv. 16, 17; see also 1 Cor. xv. 51-56). 

This will be the end of the Christian dispensation, 
but not the end of the world. There are other 
periods to follow. The first will be very brief, and 
is commonly referred to in Scripture as “the great 
tribulation,’ “the hour of trial,’ and “the time of 
Jacob’s trouble.” In this season (with which a 
great part of the Scripture is occupied, notably Matt. 
xxiv, and the bulk of the Revelation—chaps. iv-xix 
inclusive), the Jewish nation will once more be 
taken up by God. A remnant of them in their un- 
precedented tribulation will turn to His Word and 
will there see that, on account of their rejection 
of Messiah, they had been given up to partial blind- 
ness “until the fulness of the Gentiles be come in.” 
That time having been reached at the rapture of 
the Church, God will then open their eyes to their 
great sin. They will acknowledge the Crucified as 
the Anointed of Jehovah, and will separate them- 
selves from the ungodly mass to wait for His 
appearing as their deliverer. In the land of 
Palestine one will arise of whom Haman is a fit 
type—the personal Antichrist, referred to in Scrip- 
ture under various titles, as “the king’ of Dan. xi. 
36, who “shall do according to his own will;” “the 
idol shepherd” of Zech. xi. 15-17; one who “shall 
come in his own name” in John v. 43; “the wicked” 


SPEAKING PEACE II9g 


or “lawless one” of 2 Thess. ii, “whose coming 
is after the working of Satan with all power and 
signs and lying wonders;”’ and the two-horned 
beast of Rev. xiii, who has the appearance of a 
lamb, to simulate the Lamb of God, but is betrayed 
by his speech, which is that of adragon. This fear- 
ful character will be the bitter persecutor of the 
faithful Jews for a short period, but as in the mat- 
ter of Haman and Mordecai, when all seems dark- 
est, the Lord shall appear for the destruction of the 
power of evil and the salvation of His people. Then 
follows the establishment of the kingdom which is 
never to be given to another, when for one thou- 
sand years the Lord Jesus shall reign over all the 
earth. 

Whenever world-wide dominion has been en- 
trusted to man, he has, as in all else, utterly failed. 
But when ‘He shall come whose right it is,” He 
will judge the nations in righteousness and manifest 
Jehovah’s perfect rule on earth. This is the 
Kingdom which is the burden of the Old Testa- 
ment prophecies and which is frequently referred 
to in the New Testament. One passage from this 
Jatter portion we shall here quote. “Having 
made known unto us the mystery of His will, 
according to His good pleasure which He hath 
purposed in Himself: that in the dispensation of 
the fulness of times He might gather together (or 
head up) in one all things in Christ, both which 


120 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


are in heaven and which are on earth; even in 
Him” (Eph. i. 10, 11). When that long-waited- 
for dispensation arrives, “the knowledge of the 
Lord shall cover the earth as the waters cover the 
sea.” The heavenly saints will then be associated 
with their Lord in government, while saints on 
earth will, with rejoicing, own His _ beneficent 
sway. 
Misrule and oppression will have ceased forever. 
Earth’s long wail will have changed to a song 
of unending praise to the Lamb once slain.* We 
cannot forbear referring the reader to one beauti- 
ful passage, this time from the Psalms, ere leaving 
this intensely interesting subject. We refer to 
Psalm Ixxii, where Messiah’s kingdom is described 
most vividly. After telling how “He shall come 
down like rain upon the mown grass,” bringing 
refreshment and blessing to this poor parched 
world, we read that “He shall have dominion also 
from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends 
of the earth. They that dwell in the wilderness 
shall bow before Him; and His enemies shall lick 
the dust. The kings of Tarshish and of the isles 
shall bring presents: the kings of Sheba and Seba 
shall offer gifts. Yea, all kings shall fall down 


*The attentive reader who may desire further light on the 
Kingdom and connected themes will find great help in “Plain 
Papers on Prophetic Subjects,’ by W. Trotter. $1.50. At 
the same publishers. 


SPEAKING PEACE I2I 


before Him: all nations shall serve Him” (vers. 
8-11). No wonder that at the conclusion of the 
recital of His glories the inspired singer writes, 
“The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended”! 
All will be then as it should be; for the whole 
earth will be full of His glory. 

The evanescent character of human greatness 
and the crumbling kingdoms of earth as contrasted 
with the “stone kingdom” yet to come are well 
brought out in the second verse of our chapter 
in Esther. “And all the acts of his power and 
of his might, and the declaration of the greatness 
of Mordecai, whereunto the king advanced him, 
are they not written in the book of the chronicles 
of the kings of Media and Persia?” These books 
are probably lost beyond recall. God has, however, 
preserved His own record of the events of those 
days. Were it not for this, we should never have 
known from secular history of Mordecai and of 
God’s intervention for the preservation of His 
people in the land of their exile. 

Ahasuerus’ power was of the fading glory of 
this world. He is gone, and his records have 
perished. Mordecai had the interests of Jehovah at 
heart, despite the peculiar circumstances in which 
he was placed. His faithfulness will be remem- 
bered forever. “For Mordecai the Jew was next 
unto king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, 
and accepted of the multitude of his brethren, 


122 NOTES ON THE BOOK OF ESTHER 


seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking 
peace to all his seed” (ver. 3). He appears as 
a thoroughly disinterested, unselfish person, who, 
though honored by the proud conqueror, never 
acts now as of old, when he counseled Esther against 
revealing her kindred; but is a guileless man, known 
to all as a Jew, and using his power for the blessing 
of the once jeopardized nation. 

That from time to time, even where there is much 
that is contrary to the mind of God, He manifests 
His unbounded grace by giving to His people such 
deliverers is evident both in Scripture and in the 
dark and sorrowful annals of the Church on earth. 
Let no one conclude from this fact that it is a matter 
of small moment to Him if His saints go on with 
that which is contrary to His revealed Word. It 
is one thing to know a Father’s love and care, 
even though walking in self-chosen paths; it is 
another thing, like Enoch, to walk with God and 
have the testimony that one is pleasing Him. 

As an evidence of how feebly man enters into 
Divine design in Scripture, I would draw atten- 
tion, ere closing, to the well-known fact that in 
the Septuagint version of the Old Testament, and 
found in English in the Apocrypha, there are a 
number of additions to the book of Esther which 
are commonly supposed to be the work of pious 
Egyptian Jews who were troubled by the omission 
of all reference to God, and therefore supplemented 


SPEAKING PEACE 123 


the book with productions of their own, in which 
the glory would all be given to Him. These inter- 
polations are rightly rejected in our version, as 
they never formed part of the Hebrew text, and 
were written after the voice of prophecy had ceased, 
in the days of Malachi. In one of these added 
portions, Haman is referred to as a Macedonian 
whose desire it was to turn the kingdom to his 
people. This would be quite in keeping with the 
times in which they were written. The Persian 
empire was overthrown, as we know, by Alexander 
the Great, whose Macedonian troops so readily 
routed the luxurious Iranian armies. 

‘Man cannot tamper with God’s word save to 
his ruin, and to the marring of that which is abso- 
lutely perfect in itself. ‘All Scripture is given by 
inspiration of God (literally, God-breathed), and 
is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, 
for instruction in righteousness: that the man of 
God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all 
good works” (2 Tim. iii. 16, 17). 

May writer and reader seek, ever more and more, 
to walk as men of God; thus finding in every 
portion of Holy Writ divine furnishing for our 
path through this scene. 


OCT 154] 
Oakland, Califnrnin 


BY H. A. IRONSIDE 


SCRIPTURE EXPOSITIONS 


Notes on the Book of Proverbs. Cloth,..... oceseukeeaole 
Notes on the Book of Ezra. Paper, 20c.; cloth, aes ee Ou 
Notes on the Book of Nehemiah. Paper, 25c.; cloth,.. 75 
Notes on the Book of Esther. Paper, 30c.; cloth.,.... 75 
Notes on Philippians. Paper, 20c.; cloth,...........-. 75 
Notes on Jeremiah and Lamentations. Cloth,........1.00 
Notes on the Minor Prophets. Cloth,.........-+2.+.-1.00 
Lectures on Daniel the Prophet—with chart, 


PADSE OULU CIOLE, crs eile oird eraislas a/aiaiaaveiam ataralsl oale 1.25 
Lectures on Revelation. Simple & Practical, with chart. 

Pape?) (OCso CLOUD, s cic selec « erate ate iccalale slelaecauaenty ole 1.50 
Exposition of the Epistle of Jude. Paper, ..... ou state 


MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS 


A Life Laid Down. Memoir of Fannie M. Arthur. 

Thus’ds Pamersy SOG a ClOUN e cre. sire ule sintols belo ebetevels 75 
The Four Hundred Silent Years. Paper, 30c.; cloth, 75 
The Only Two Religions, and Other Gospel Papers. 


Paper ZOGNCLOCHs uiars aia lchoeietsTeidicls ols «le ciowa & seis 15 
The Mysteries of God. Paper, 25e-2 Clothjae<eaiee Sree. LS 
Sailing with Paul. Paper, 15c.; cloth, A apacatas Sipe ate ate 60 
Holiness: the False and the True. Cloth, etal aiXenotersyanerets 75 

Abridpedvedition, “Paper, jens sla: asss0cse base Oo 20 
(The! Midnight-Cry | UPaper,s es sees se cess oc ch eee 15 
Letters to a Roman Catholic Priest.................. 10 
Baptism: What Saith the Scripture? Paper,......... 15 


Apostolic Faith Missions & the So-called 2nd Pentecost 05 
Teaching of “Plymouth Brethren.” Is it Scriptural?.. 05 


On" So-called Divine’ Healing. /a.<..s1 ce lean ee dee cee 02 

nes Mormons Mistakes. vk. sa cuicwk ton aetna eran ees 03 

Setting the Stage for the last Act of the Great 
World-Drama, ‘‘The Times of the Gentiles’”...... 10 


Who will be Saved in the Coming Period of Judgment? 03 


Hebrew’s Search for the Blood of Atonement. A0c.; per | 100 
Mmsina tor a sGOOd eLune as ao cerer ioe cea 
Too Bad for Heaven and Too Good for Hell.. ” ee 


The Right Priest for a Death-Bed.......... Pa 2 
The Only Two Religions ...... Pera God $1.00 per 100 
Phe). Dying Gambler es reis see cca cree a veers * “ 
Mor Y our) Sakess fincas sisters oeccies ctor ei @ fe 
After Death, What? -.occs sess cae polprelatais ete ee 2a 
The Tramp who Became a Deacon's jen ear $2.00 per 100 


Hebrew’s Search for the Blood of Atonement—in Yiddish, 
60 cts. per 100 


Miscellaneous Writings of C. H. M. 


Each volume contains 400 or more pages. 


Vol. I., cloth, red edges......ssssseceeeccceceeseseeS 1 00 
CONTENTS: 


Forgiveness of Sins : What is it? 
Regeneration: What is it? 
Sanctification : Whatis it ? 
Final Perseverance: What is it? 
Now and Then ; or, Time and 


Job and his Friends. 

The Bible: Its Sufficiency and 
Supremacy; and Christian- 
ity: What is it? 

Jehoshaphat: A Word on 


Eternity. _ World-Bordering. 
The All-Sufficiency of Christ. Life and Times of Josiah. 
WiOIS TE. COLD. TED! CAPER. a ceic scones ces toils cass ss,acce) 2, 00 
CONTENTS: 
“God for Us.” Discipleship in an Evil Day. 
The Call of God,—Reflections on God’s Way and how to find it. 
Abraham and Lot. The Unequal Yoke. 
“Thou and Thy House.” Gideon and his Companions. 
Sin in the Flesh and Sin on the Eternal Punishment. 
Conscience. Papers on the Lord’s Coming. 
Wiolwit he Clots RECs COLCS s «ae cet oes bieicaivials ace selay ce 100 
CONTENTS: 
The Man of God. Christian Priesthood. 
Decision for Christ. Papers on Evangelization. 


Prayer in its Proper Place. 
Gilgal 


Thoughts on Confirmation Vows. 
Thoughts on the Lord’s Supper. 
The Assembly of God. 

The Christian: his Position and 


The Living God and a Living 
Faith. 

Scriptural Inquiry as to the 
Sabbath, &ec. 

The Ministry of Christ; Past, 
Present, and Future. 


his Work. Prayer and the Prayer Meeting, 
Vol. IV., cloth, red edges... ..-ssececccsccececcseseess 1 00 
CONTENTS: 
Conversion: What is it? History of the Tribe of Levi. 
Simon Peter: His Life and its Glad Tidings. 
Lessons. The Ministry of Reconciliation. 
Christian Perfection: What is it? The Great Commission. 


Vol. V., cloth, red edges ..-.-ecececcccceccseseece.. ee 1 00 
CONTENTS: 


God’s Fulness for an Empty Vessel. 


Jehovah’s Demand and Satan’s 
Objections. 

The Three Crosses. 

Our Standard and our Hope. 


etc. 


A Letter to a Friend on Eternal 
Punishment. 

Israel and the Nations. 

Grace and Government. 

Life and Times of Elijah. 


Vol. VI., cloth, red edges...--...cseee..eeeseseccosees 1 00 
CONTENTS: 


Christ in the Vessel. 
Bethany. 

Restoration. 

Jericho and Achor. 
The Three Appearings. 


The two “ Musts.”. 

Legality and Levity. 

A risen Saviour’s Challenge. 
The Remnant: Past and Presen 
Life and Times of David. 


The whole set (six volumes) $5.50, carriage paid. 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, PUBLISHERS 


1 East 13TH STREET 


New York City 


By Christopher Knapp 


A Fruitful Bough. Five Addresses on Joseph as a type 


of Christ. Paper, 25 cts.; cloth,.........+..+++> 60 
Alsatian Stories of Long Ago. Four narrratives of 

Reformation times. Paper, 25 cts.; cloth,....... 60 
Brief Biographical Sketches—Twelve gospel papers 

on narratives of the New Testament............ 
Kings of Judah and Israel. Cloth,..........-.....- 1 00 


Life & Times of Samuel the Prophet. Paper, 40c.; clo.,1 00 


Myrtie Moseley and Her Friends: A Story of the 
Bahama Islands. Illustrated. Cloth,........... 


Staff and Sceptre. Six Addresses on some of the prin- 
cipal scenes in the life of David. Paper, 25c.; cloth, 50 


Tales of Grace ; or, The Conversion of Twelve Persons 
of Eminence—with portraits. Paper, 25cts. cloth, 75 


The Time of Harvest. Three Addresses on the Book 
Of Ruth, Paper. i: scadas Qeita. voce ede comes 12 


BOOKLETS & PAMPHLETS 
A Comparative Study of our Lord’s Miracles (with 


Gharta) oe ' 2per COVER «ctele smciarelse'sle ainsicie'e salecios 10 
Arthur Stewart’s Testimony; or, A Soldier Boy’s 

Story. (Gospel) Per hundred, $1.75; each,....... 2 
Awakened in Time. (Gospel) Per hundred, $1.00; 

DOT COZ cars palnin cine ainiers slows’) siathilcvsisis's oicises te ciao 15 
Does Scripture Teach a Partial Rapture?............. 5 


On Whom Does the Door Shut at Christ’s Coming ?... 3 
The Blood-stained Bible, a Civil War Incident. (Gospel) 


We Believe, and are Sure. (Gospel) Per hundred, $1.20 
DEK GOS ds care isc ens sine custities cee cate meee 20 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS : PUBLISHERS 
One East Thirteenth Street, New York 


BY SAMUEL RIDOUT 


THE BIBLE THE TRUE UNIVERSITY. Paper, 20c.; Cloth, 50c, 


The Bible asa liberal education. The Word of God a necessity for the 
knowledge of the Works of God. 


HOW TO STUDY THE BIBLE. Paper, 50c.; Cloth, $1.00 


Gives practical hints as to methods, and provides plans for Bible study 
from a few minutes up to several hours daily. 


THE PENTATEUCH. Paper, 50c.; Cloth, $1.00 


Refutes the infidel assults upon this part of Scripture, and also shows its 
beauty of order, general theme, and the place occupied by each 
of the separate books in this connection. 


THE FOUR GOSPELS. Cloth, $1.50 


Examines the distinct yet closely connected narratives of the Life of our 
Lord, each of which presents Him in a special way. 


LECTURES ON THE TABERNACLE. Best Cloth, $2.00 


A very full exposition, with examinations of the types and doctrinal 
exemplifications from the New Testament. With nine plates. 


FROM GENESIS TO REVELATION. Paper, 50c.; Cloth, $1.00 
Twelve Lectures on the Structure and Contents of the Bible Books. 


LECTURES on the BOOK of JUDGES. Paper,50c.; Cloth, $1. 


Sets forth the various steps of declension and recoveries in Israel, 
with applications to similar conditions in the professing Church. 


THE BOOK OF JOB. An Expesition. Cloth, $1.00 
KING SAUL: The Man after the Flesh. Paper, 50c.; Cloth, $1. 


A tracing of the Holy Spirit’s lessons in connection with the natural man 
—the choice of the people; with David’s early history. 


LEP URES on the EPISTLE to the HEBREWS. 
Paper, 50c.; Cloth, $1.00 


PERSON and WORK of the HOLY SPIRIT. 
Paper, S6c.; Cloth, $1.00 


i. The Holy Spirit in the Dispensations; II. In Salvation; ITY. In 
Sanctification ; IV. In the Church; V. For Power; VI. The Holy 
Spirit and the Scriptures; VII. The Holy Spirit and Christ. 


JHE CHURCH and its Order According to Seripture. 
Paper covers, 25c. 


GLEANINGS FROM the BOOK of RUTH. Paper, 15c. 


WORKS ON PROPHECY AND THE LORD'S COMING 


The Lord’s Coming, Israel, and the Church. By T. B. Baines, 
A most excellent volume on these three subjects, which are so inti- 
mately connected with one another, Written in simple familiar style. 
460 pages. Price, $1.40 


Lectures on Revelation—with chart. By H. A. Ironside, 
A simple and practical exposition. Paper, 75 cts.; cloth, $1.50 


Eight Lectures on Prophecy. By W. Trotter. 
Best cloth, beveled boards, $1.00; paper 50 cts.; 350 pages. 
CONTENTs :—The Importance of Prophetic Study.—The Second Coming 
of Christ Premillennial.—God’s Past Dealings with Israel.—The Millen- 
nial Reign of Christ, etc., etc. 
Suited for circulation among Christians who know little of prophecy. 


Plain Papers on Prophetic & Other Subjects. By W. Trotter. 


A more complete Exposition of Prophetic Truth than the above “Hight 
Lectures on Prophecy.’’ 600 pages. Price, $1.75 


The Blessed Hope. By Edward Dennett. 
Being papers on the Lord’s Coming and connected events. Price, 60 cts, 


Papers on the Lord’s Coming. By C. H. M. 
Author of ‘ Notes”? on the Pentateuch. 


Lectures on Daniel—with chart. By H. A. Ironside. 
unas Paper, 60 cts.; cloth, $1.25 
The Midnight Cry! By H. A. Ironside. Paper, 15 cts. 


What God hath said on the Second Coming of Christ, and 
The Millennial Reign of Christ. By C.Stanley. Price, 12 cts. 


Changed in a Moment, and He Cometh with Clouds. 
A Dialogue on the Lord’s Coming. By H. T. 


“Caught Up” by the Bridegroom; and, Coming with the King. 
By Geo. Cutting. Price, 5 cts. 


A Chart on the Course of Time from Eternity to Eternity. 
In seven colors, 13x33 in, ; 


wa The above books and pamphlets will be found especially useful to 
the humble seeker of the truth, as opposition and refutation of error is 
left more to the delivering power of the truth which they beautifully 
present, by the unfolding of the word of God. 


Sf 


Se 
at Avi 


ce a her 


TT iti ing oe 


‘LIBRARY USE ONLY. 


BR A oY ne. 
Shak pees G42 “F430 


All: Zou oa ect to ae 


s 


_& Tract Co. oa 
diiCalite Meee 


vias 


S57 Sechoe 


sg 
ie 


a 


