PRIM'ETON,    N.  J 
No.  Case, 


No.  Shelf__^^^^^ 

No.  Book,-    -__-_.^5r^. 


NOTES    ON    DANIEL. 


* 


NOTES 


ON    THE 


BOOK  OF  DANIEL. 


By  William"^  KELLY. 


LONDON: 
GEORGE   MORRISH,   24,   WARWICK   LANE, 

PATERNOSTER   ROW,   E.G. 


NOTES 

ON    THE 

BOOK    OF   DANIEL. 


CHAPTER   I. 

It  must  be  evident  to  any  attentive  reader,  that  this 
first  chapter  is  purely  a  preface  to  the  book.  It  in- 
troduces us  into  the  scene  to  which  the  prophecies,  of 
which  Daniel  was  either  the  interpreter  or  the  vessel, 
are  the  great  after-piece,  the  subject-matter  which  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  about  to  convey  to  us.  We  may 
therefore  take  advantage  of  this,  to  inquire  into  the 
peculiar  nature  of  the  book  on  which  we  are  about  to 
enter. 

The  properly  prophetic  part  of  Daniel  begins  with 
the  second  chapter.  Then  follow  certain  historical 
incidents,  which,  as  I  conceive,  have  a  most  intimate 
connexion  with  the  prophecy, — if  not  directly,  in  the 
way  of  types,  — which  show  out  the  moral  principles  or 
the  issues  of  the  powers  of  the  world,  with  which  the 
book  is  occupied. 

In  order  to  understand  Daniel,  it  is  necessary  to 
bear  in  mind  that  prophecy  in  the  Old  Testament 
divides  itself  into  two  great  parts.  There  were  pro- 
phecies that  concerned  the  people  of  God,  Israel,  when 
they  were  still  under  His  government ;  unfaithful  often 
but  still  subject  to  His  discipline  and  owned  of  Him 
to  a  certain  extent.  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  and 
indeed   many  of  the  lesser  prophets,  such  as   Hosea, 


2  DANIEL. 

Amos,  and  Micah,  have  this  first  character,  Israel  was 
still  recognized  as  God's  people,  if  not  the  whole,  ati 
least  that  part  of  the  people  with  which  God  still  had 
certain  dealings  in  the  land :  of  coutse  I  refer  tc^ 
the  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  which  clave  to 
the  house  of  David.  After  awhile  they  too  fell,  and 
the  heir  of  David  became  the  leader  in  rebellious 
idolatry  against  the  Lord.  Then  a  change  of  the 
utmost  importance  ensued.  The  throne  of  the  Lord, 
which  was  established  in  Jerusalem,  ceased  altogether 
upon  the  earth.  God  no  longer  owned  Israel,  nor 
even  Judah,  as  His  people.  And  I  call  your  attention 
particularly  to  this,  because  there  are  often  vague 
thoughts  as  to  what  is  meant  by  "  the  people  of  God  " 
in  Scripture.  As  Christians  we  look  at  God's  people 
as  those  that  really  belong  to  Him — His  children  by 
faith  of  Christ.  Now  there  is  a  danger  of  carrying 
the  same  thoughts  back  to  the  language  of  the  Old 
Testament.  But  it  will  be  found,  if  we  examine 
Scripture  with  care,  that,  in  the  ancient  oracles,  by 
people  of  God  is  meant  only  the  Jews  or  Israel.  Nor 
is  it  merely  a  certain  aggregate  of  the  elect  there,  but 
the  entire  nation,  or  that  part  which  still  clung  in  a 
measure,  though  very  unfaithfully,  to  God's  king,  and 
whatever  they  might  be,  owned  as  the  people  of  God. 
Then  came  a  time  when  God  disowned  His  people. 
This  was  predicted  by  Hosea.  It  was  accomplished 
when  God  gave  up  the  last  king  of  Judah  to  the 
Chaldean  conqueror.  God  would  have  sacrificed  His 
own  holiness,  truth,  and  majesty,  if  He  had  longer 
tolerated  the  Jews  or  their  idolatrous  king. 

Now  it  is  a  remarkable  thing  in  the  history  of  the 
world,  that  although  there  were  certain  powers  of 
growing  importance  and  ambition  in  the  east,  none 
before  had  been  allowed  to  step  into  positive  superiority 
to  all  rivals.  In  the  west  there  were  only  hordes  of 
wanderers,  or,  if  some  were  settled,  they  were  uncivilized 


CHAPTER   I.  3 

barbarians.  In  the  east  and  south  powers  had  rapidly- 
risen  ;  one  of  them,  Eg-ypt,  is  particularly  well  known 
in  connexion  with  Israel.  Another  too,  Asshur,  is  quite 
as  ancient  in  its  origin :  indeed  we  read  of  its  name, 
and  of  certain  aspirations  and  efforts  after  power, 
before  we  read  of  Egypt  at  all.  These  were  the  great 
rivals  of  the  early  ^world,  and  they  had  a  civilization 
of  their  own.  It  might  have  a  rude  character,  but 
that  it  was  barbaric  grandeur  none  can  deny  who 
believes  the  scriptures,  nay,  who  sees  the  relics  of  Egypt 
and  Assyria.  Well,  these  powers  were  constantly 
struggling  for  the  mastery.  But  however  God  might 
use  the  Egyptians  and  Assyrians,  or  others  less  con- 
siderable, as  a  rod  of  discipline  for  the  good  of  Israel, 
yet  to  no  nation  on  earth  was  supremacy  allowed 
until  it  was  perfectly  plain  that  God's  people  were 
proved  to  be  unworthy  of  being  His  witness  and  the 
scene  of  His  government  on  the  earth.  First,  then, 
Ephraim  (the  ten  tribes),  having  sunk  into  hopeless 
idolatry,  was  swept  aw^ay.  For  a  long  time  there  had 
been  monarch  after  monarch  only  following  or  exceed- 
ing each  other  in  evil;  and  all  through  it  had  been  a 
scene  of  rebellion  and  idolatry.  Thus  God  had  been 
compelled  to  root  such  a  people,  that  only  disgraced 
Him,  out  of  the  land  where  they  had  been  planted. 
Still  the  two  tribes  that  clung  to  the  house  of  David 
were  owned.  But  clouds  hung  over  them,  and  snares 
were  laid  by  the  enemy  of  the  most  fatal  kind.  At 
this  crisis  prophecy  shines  out  in  all  its  fulness.  For 
prophecy  always,  1  think,  supposes  failure.  It  never 
comes  in  during  a  normal  state.  But  when  ruin  is 
impending  or  begun,  then  the  lamp  of  prophecy  shines 
in  the  dark  place. 

This  we  find  true  from  the  first.  Take  the  revela- 
tion in  Gen.  iii. — that  the  Seed  of  the  w^oman  should 
bruise  the  serpent's  head.  When  was  it  given  ?  Not 
when  Adam  walked  sinlessly,  but  after  he  and  his  wife 
were  fallen.      Then  God   appears,  and  His  word  not 


4  DANIEL. 

only  judged  the  serpent,  but  took  the  form  of  promise 
to  be  realized  in  the  true  seed — certainly  a  blessed 
disclosure  of  the  future,  on  which  the  hope  of  those 
who  believed  rested.  It  was  the  condemnation  of 
their  actual  state.  It  did  not  allow  the  faithful  who 
followed  to  sink  into  despair,  but  presented  an  object 
above  the  ruin  on  the  part  of  God,  to  which  their 
hearts  became  attached.  Again,  Enoch  is  the  person 
in  the  antediluvian  world  who,  above  all  others,  is 
said  to  have  "  prophesied,"  though  we  do  not  get  the 
record  of  it  till  one  of  the  latest  books  of  the  New 
Testament.  "  Behold  the  Lord  cometh  with  ten 
thousands  of  His  saints  to  execute  judgment  upon  all, 
and  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  among  them  of 
all  their  ungodly  deeds  which  ihey  have  ungodly 
committed,  and  of  all  their  hard  speeches  which 
ungodly  sinners  have  spoken  against  him."  Now  that 
the  evil,  found  in  the  germ  in  Adam,  had  broken  out 
into  all  but  universal  corruption  and  violence,  we  have 
a  well-defined  prophecy  of  judgment  coming  on  the 
world.  It  was  the  interference  of  God  in  testimony 
before  He  acted  in  power.  Then  Noah  is  seen,  who, 
still  more  than  Enoch,  was  publicly  connected  with 
this  evil  state.  I  believe  that  Enoch's  prophecy  had 
a  remarkable  application  to  the  deluge,  though  it  looks 
onward,  of  course,  to  the  grand  catastrophe  in  the 
last  days.  When  a  prophecy  is  given,  there  is  often 
a  partial  accomplishment  at  the  time  or  soon  after. 
But  we  must  never  look  back  at  the  past  pledge  as  if 
the  whole  thing  were  exhausted.  That  would  be  to 
make  scripture  of  private  interpretation.  And  this  is 
the  true  sense  of  2  Peter  i.  20 :  "  No  prophecy  of  the 
Scripture  is  of  any  private  interpretation."  We 
must  take  it  in  the  vast  scope  of  the  plans  of  God, 
and  the  unfolding  of  His  purposes,  which  alone  find 
their  consummation  at  the  close.  It  is  to  that  point 
that  all  prophecy  looks.  Then  only  we  have  the  grand 
fulfilment. 


CHAPTER    I.  5 

Again,  let  us  take  the  patriarchs,  who  are  expressly 
called  prophets.  "  He  suffered  no  man  to  do  them 
wrong;  yea,  he  reproved  kings  for  their  sakes,  saying. 
Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and  do  my  prophets  no 
harm."  Their  claim  to  this  title  may  be  explained  on 
the  same  principle.  They  were  the  then  interpreters 
of  the  mind  of  God;  "called  out,''  because  there  was 
a  new  and  fearful  evil  come  into  the  world,  which  we 
never  read  of  before  the  days  of  Abraham — idolatry. 
Worship  of  idols,  as  far  as  Scripture  reveals  it  to  us,  is 
only  mentioned  after  the  flood.  This  was  spreading 
everywhere,  and  becoming  paramount  even  in  the  de- 
scendants of  Shem  ;  and  therefore  God  called  out  a 
witness  in  word  and  deed  separate  from  so  flagrant 
iniquity.  Prophecy,  or  a  prophet,  always  supposes  the 
presence  of  new  and  increasing  evil,  because  of  which 
God  is  pleased  to  unfold  His  mind  with  regard  to  the 
future,  and  to  make  it  of  present  practical  value  to 
those  then  on  the  earth. 

In  the  case  of  Moses  it  was  manifest.  For  though 
he  was  the  great  lawgiver,  the  golden  calf  was  set  up 
almost  immediately  after,  and  thus  the  ruin  of  Israel, 
as  a  people  under  law,  was  complete.  And  so  it 
remained  for  him,  as  the  great  prophet  of  Israel  (Deut. 
xxxiv.  10),  to  reveal  the  sure  and  growing  corruption 
of  the  people,  whatever  might  be  the  resources  of 
God's  grace  at  the  end ;  as,  at  an  earlier  epoch,  he  had 
predicted  the  inevitable  judgment  of  God  upon  Egypt. 
Coming  lower  down  in  the  history  of  Israel,  we  have 
one  who  begins  the  line  of  prophets  emphatically 
so-called ;  for  he  is  mentioned  thus :  "  Yea,  all  the 
prophets  from  Samuel^  and  those  that  follow  after," 
&c.  His  call  was  at  a  very  critical  period  in  Israel's 
history;  at  a  time  when  the  children  of  Israel  had 
fallen  into  such  a  frightfully  low  state,  that  they  were 
willing  to  use  even  the  ark  of  God  as  a  charm  to 
preserve  them  from  the  power  of  their  enemies. 
Then  it  was  that  God  put  His  people  to  shame.     His. 


6  DANIEL. 

own  ark  was  taken,  and  Ichabod  was  the  only  name 
that  godly  feeling  could  dictate.  The  glory  was 
departed.  Just  about  that  time  we  hear  of  Samuel  the 
prophet.  If  this  was  the  token  of  some  new  crisis, 
equally  at  least  did  it  show  that  God,  in  vindication  of 
His  own  name,  brings  in  the  light  of  prophecy  as 
a  comfort  to  the  hearts  of  those  who  stand  for 
Himself. 

Descending  still  further,  we  find  the  full  outburst  of 
prophetic  light  in  the  time  of  the  prophet  Isaiah. 
The  reason  is  apparent.  Not  merely  had  Israel 
committed  itself  to  idolatry,  but  the  king,  David's 
son,  had  actually  taken  the  pattern  of  the  heathen 
altar  at  Damascus,  and  must  have  another  made  for 
himself  in  the  holy  city  !  There  was  a  sin,  heinous 
and  most  insulting  to  God.  Isaiah  is  set  apart  with 
unusual  solemnity  to  the  prophetic  office.  The  evil 
condition  of  the  Jews  is  realized  by  him.  He  sees 
the  glory  of  the  Lord,  which  draws  out  from  him  the 
immediate  confession  of  his  own  and  the  people's 
uncleanness.  "  Then  said  I,  Woe  is  me,  for  I  am 
undone,  because  I  am  a  man  of  unclean  lips,  and  I 
dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  people  of  unclean  lips  :  for 
mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
But  one  of  the  seraphim  touches  his  lips  with  a  live 
coal,  assuring  him  that  his  iniquity  was  taken  away, 
and  his  sin  purged.  And  he  is  sent  with  a  message  of 
judicial  darkness  upon  the  people,  which  must  last  till 
the  cities  were  wasted,  and  the  land  made  utterly 
desolate.  Thus  we  have  prophecy  so  much  the  more 
brilliant  because  the  evil  was  manifest  and  profound. 
The  consequence  of  the  prophetic  warning,  where 
received,  was,  a  genuine  spirit  of  repentance  and  of 
intercession.  And  God  subsequently  raised  up  a  royal 
witness  for  Himself,  so  that  for  a  time  the  evil  was 
suspended. 

And    all  this   while    you    have    prophecy   coming 
out  with  more  and  more  distinctness,  directing  the 


CHAPTER   I.  7 

hearts  of  the  saints  to  Him  whom  the  virgin  should 
conceive  and  bear —  the  Son  of  David,  Emmanuel, 
that  was  to  be  the  only  and  sure  foundation  for 
the  people  laid  in  Zion.  I  need  not  now  attempt 
to  give  even  an  outline  of  the  distinctive  features  of  the 
prophets  that  followed.  But  thus  far,  I  trust,  the 
great  principle  is  clear,  that  prophecy,  as  a  whole, 
comes  in  when  there  is  ruin  among  the  people  of  God. 
As  the  ruin  deepens,  prophecy  adds  fresh  light  in  the 
goodness  of  God. 

Besides  this  universal  character  of  prophecy,  we 
have  seen  it,  first,  while  God  is  still  disciplining  the 
people  and  owning  them  as  His.  But  there  is  another 
form  of  which  Daniel  is  the  great  example  in  the  Old 
Testament.  This  is,  when  God,  no  longer  able  to 
address  His  people  as  such,  makes  an  individual  to  bcj 
the  object  of  His  communications. 

For  this  is  the  manifest  feature  of  Daniel.  It  is 
no  longer  a  direct  address  to  the  people,  reasoning, 
pleading,  warning,  opening  out  bright  hopes,  as  in 
Isaiah,  &c.  Nor  is  it,  as  in  Jeremiah,  a  prophet 
^,'  ordained  to  the  nations,"  with  most  affecting  ap- 
peals to  Israel  and  Judah,  or  at  least  a  remnant 
there.  In  Daniel  all  is  changed.  There  is  no  message 
to  Israel  at  all ;  and  the  first  and  very  comprehensive 
prophecy  contained  in  the  book,  was  not  at  first 
given  to  the  prophet  himself,  but  rather  a  dream  of 
the  heathen  king,  Nebuchadnezzar,  though  Daniel 
was  the  only  one  who  could  recall  it,  or  furnish 
the  interpretation.  The  other  visions  were  seen  by 
Daniel  only,  and  to  him  all  the  interpretations  were 
given.  What  is  the  great  lesson  to  be  drawn  from 
this  ?  God  was  acting  on  the  momentous  fact  that 
His  people  had  forfeited  their  place — at  least  for  the, 
present.  They  had  lost  their  distinctive  standing  as  a 
nation — God  would  no  longer  own  them.  The  pre- 
sence of  elect  persons  among  them  did  not,  in  the 
least  degree,  arrest  the  divine  sentence.     It  was  not 


8  DANIEL. 

a  question  of  there  being  "  ten  righteous  in  their 
midst."  Of  a  corrupt  Canaanitish  city,  like  Sodom, 
that  was  said  as  a  reason  why  it  should  be  spared. 
But  does  God  ever  speak  so  about  Mis  people  ?  He 
may  liken  them  to  Sodom  for  their  iniquity,  but  there 
can  be  no  such  hindrance  to  judgment  in  their  case. 
On  the  contrary,  it  is  expressly  said  in  Ezekiel  xiv., 
that  "  though  these  three  men,  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job, 
were  in  it  (the  land  of  Israel),  they  should  deliver  but 
their  own  souls  by  their  righteousness ; "  and  again, 
"  they  shall  deliver  neither  son  nor  daughter."  That 
is,  in  His  own  land,  and  in  the  midst  of  His  guilty 
people,  no  matter  who  were  there,  nor  what  their 
righteousness,  the  righteous  only  should  be  delivered, 
and  God's  four  sore  judgments  must  be  sent.  And  so, 
at  this  very  crisis  of  the  captivity,  there  were  righteous 
men,  such  as  the  prophets  themselves,  and  others, 
kindred  spirits  in  their  measure.  Whatever,  then,  be 
His  willingness  to  spare  the  world,  God  does  not  refrain 
from  judging  the  evil  of  His  own  people,  because  of  a 
handful  of  righteous  men  in  their  midst.  "  Hear  this 
word  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken  against  you,  0  children 
of  Israel,  against  the  whole  family  which  I  brought 
up  from  the  land  of  Egypt,  saying,  you  only  have  I 
known  of  all  the  families  of  the  earth  :  therefore,  I 
will  punish  you  for  all  your  iniquities."  Otherwise, 
there  never  could  have  been  a  national  judgment  of 
Israel  at  all;  for  there  was  always  a  line  of  faithful 
ones  in  their  midst.  The  entire  principle  is  false.  In 
a  book  I  lately  met  with,  such  was  the  plea  why 
England  should  come  comparatively  unscathed  out  of 
the  terrible  judgments  about  to  fall  on  the  nations 
of  the  earth.  There  are  so  many  good  men ! — such 
changes  for  the  better  in  high  and  low — such  benevolent 
and  Christian  institutions — the  scriptures  not  only 
printed  in  abundance,  but  everywhere  circulated,  read, 
and  expounded !  But  these  are  the  very  grounds  which, 
to  my  mind,  make  divine  judgment  inevitable.     For  it 


CHAPTER    I^  y 

is  quite  clear  from  scripture,  that,  if  there  is  to  be  any 
difference  in  the  measure,  those  who  know  His  will 
and  do  it  not  "  shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes."  A 
more  fearful  illusion  can  scarcely  be  conceived,  than 
that  the  possession  of  a  greater  amount  of  spiritual 
knowledge  and  privilege  is  to  be  an  effectual  shield 
when  the  earth  comes  into  judgment. 

The  Lord  recalled  the  memory  of  Tyre  and  Sidon 
(Matt,  xi.),  but  it  was  only  to  show  the  far  greater 
guilt  of  the  cities  wherein  most  of  His  mighty  works 
were  done.  "  Woe  unto  thee,  Chorazin,  woe  unto 
thee,  Bethsaida<;  for  if  the  mighty  works  which  were 
done  in  you.,  had  been  done  in  Tyre  and  Sidon,  they 
would  have  repented  long  ago,  in  sackcloth  and  ashes. 
But  I  say  unto  you,  it  shall  be  more  tolerable  for 
Tyre  and  Sidon  at  the  day  of  judgment,  than  for  you." 
But  there  was  another  city  still  more  favoured  (else- 
where called  His  own  city.  Matt.  ix.  1),  because  it  was 
where  He  then  usually  dwelt;  and,  therefore,  was  its 
case  so  aggravated  in  guilt.  "  And  thou,  Capernaum, 
which  art  exalted  unto  heaven,  shalt  be  brought  down 
to  hell  ;  for  if  the  mighty  works  which  were  done  in 
thee  had  been  done  in  Sodom,  it  would  have  remained 
until  this  day.  But  I  say  unto  you,  that  it  shall  be 
more  tolerable  for  the  land  of  Sodom  in  the  day  of 
judgment  than  for  thee."  In  other  words,  the 
measure  of  privilege  is  ever  the  measure  of  respon- 
sibility. 

We  have  seen,  then,  the  startling  fact  that  the 
government  which  God  had  set  up  in  Israel  (accompa- 
nied by  the  visible  sign  of  His  presence,  i.e,  the 
Shekinah  of  glory),  was  now  to  subsist  no  more.  God 
Himself  stripped  them  of  their  name  as  His  people. 
Henceforth  they  were  "  Lo-Ammi,"  not  my  people. 
That  was  their  doom  now,  as  far  as  He  was  concerned, 
whatever  the  ultimate  designs  of  His  grace  might  be : 
for  His  "  gifts  and  calling  are  without  repentance." 

Along  with  this  sad  change,  and  dependent  on  it, 


10  .   DANIEL. 

the  prophecy  of  Daniel  begins.  And  in  this  respect 
there  is  a  strong  analogy  between  this  book  and  the 
grand  prophecy  of  the  New  Testament.  No  doubt, 
in  the  latter,  special  messages  were  sent  to  the  seven 
churches  through  John.  But  the  book,  as  a  whole, 
was  addressed  and  confided  to  him,  however  much  it 
was  intended  that  the  things  should  be  testified  in  the 
churches.  Christ  sent  and  signified  the  revelation,  by 
His  angel,  unto  His  servant  John,  who  stands  in  the 
same  sort  of  relation  to  Christendom  that  Daniel  did 
to  Israel.  The  failure  was  so  complete  that  God 
could  no  longer  address  the  prophecy  directly  to  His 
people  in  either  case.  Thus  there  is  a  very  serious 
moral  sentence  of  God  upon  the  condition  of  Christen- 
dom. It  was  a  ruin  as  regards  practical  testimony 
for  God — Ephesus  threatened  with  the  removal  of  its 
candlestick,  if  it  did  not  repent,  and  Laodicea  with 
the  certainty  of  being  spued  out  of  the  Lord's  mouth. 
Not  but  what  God  continued  to  save  souls  :  this  He 
always  did  and  does.  But  it  has  nothing  to  do  with 
the  witness  which  His  people  are  responsible  to  render. 
More  than  two  hundred  years  after  Judah  had  become 
Lo-Ammi,  Malachi  could  tell  of  them  that  feared 
the  Lord  speaking  often  one  to  another  :  "  And  they 
shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  in  that  day 
when  I  make  up  my  jewels,  and  I  will  spare  them 
as  a  man  spareth  his  own  son  that  serveth  him."  All 
that  might  be  true  ;  yet  the  solemn  sentence  of 
God — "  not  my  people  "  remained  on  them.  Circum- 
stances could  affect  neither  His  judgment  of  the  nation, 
nor  His  grace  to  faithful  souls  within  it.  And 
"what  was  true  then  remains  equally  true  now.  The 
salvation  and  blessing  of  souls  go  on.  But  before 
God,  that  which  bears  the  name  of  Christ  in  the 
world  is  as  far  from  satisfying  the  thoughts  of  God 
about  us,  as  the  people  of  Israel  were  from  fulfilling 
His  design  in  them. 
Accordingly,  we  find  that  the  character  of  the  book 


CHAPTER   I.  11 

perfectly  accords  with  the  time  and  circumstances  in 
which  Daniel  was  called  to  be  a  prophet.  It  was  when 
the  last  vestiges  of  God's  people  were  being  taken  away. 
In  Jeremiah  xxv.  1,  the  date  of  Nebuchadnezzar's 
reign  is  reckoned  from  the  first  attack.  And  I  would 
just  observe,  that  there  is  a  little  difference  from  what 
is  said  in  Daniel  ii.  In  Babylon,  where  the  latter 
wrote,  the  reckoning  was  naturally  from  the  time 
when  Nebuchadnezzar  succeeded  to  the  throne  upon 
his  father's  death  ;  whereas,  in  Jerusalem,  where 
Jeremiah  prophesies,  it  was  just  as  naturally  from  the 
time  that  Nebuchadnezzar,  during  his  father's  life, 
wielded  the  power  of  the  kingdom,  to  the  ruin  of 
Jerusalem  and  the  Jews.  The  truth  is,  the  case  is 
not  uncommon,  both  in  sacred  and  profane  history. 
Whatever  may  be  the  difficulties  in  the  word  of  God, 
they  really  arise  from  want  of  light.  Generally,  the 
object  of  the  particular  portion  where  they  occur  is 
not  understood.  But  speaking  of  dates,  another 
little  thing  it  is  well  to  bear  in  mind,  which  the  first 
verse  of  our  chapter,  as  compared  with  Jer.  xxv.  1, 
gives  occasion  to  :  years  are  sometimes  reckoned  from 
their  beginning,  sometimes  from  their  end,  that  is, 
either  inclusively  or  exclusively.  So  it  is  in  the  well- 
known  instances  of  the  days  between  our  Lord's  death 
and  resurrection,  and  of  the  six  or  eight  days  before 
the  transfiguration.  Thus  in  Daniel  it  was  said,  "  in 
the  third  year  of  Jehoiakim;"  but  in  Jeremiah,  "in 
the  fourth  year."  The  one  was  the  complete,  the 
other  the  current  year. 

Looking  then  at  the  moral  character  of  Daniel's 
prophecy,  the  key  to  the  ways  of  God  at  the  time  it 
was  given  lies  in  this,  that  God  no  longer  exercised  a 
direct,  immediate  government  upon  the  earth.  He 
had  owned  David  and  his  seed  as  the  kings  that  He 
had  set  upon  the  throne  of  Jehovah  at  Jerusalem. 
(1  Chron.  xxix.  23.)  No  other  kings  there  were  thus 
recognized  of   God.      They    were    emphatically    His 


12  DANIEL. 

anointed,  before  whom  even  the   high  priest  had  to 
walk. 

And  here  was  what  .God  intended  to  set  forth  by 
them :  a  foreshadowing  of  what  He  irs  going  to  do  by 
and  in  the  Christ,  the  true  Son  of  David.  The  same 
thing  is  found  throughout  Scripture.  First,  a  position 
is  committed  to  man's  responsibility,  and  failure  is 
immediate  ;  then,  it  is  taken  up  by  Christ,  who 
establishes  it  on  a  foundation  which  cannot  be  moved. 
Thus,  God  makes  man,  and  sets  him  sinlessly  in 
paradise,  with  dominion  over  the  lower  creation. 
Man  falls  at  once.  But  God  never  gives  up  His 
purpose  of  having  a  man  in  paradise.  Where  shall 
we  find  it  now?  In  the  first  Adam  it  broke  down 
utterly.  He  was  turned  out  of  Eden  :  his  race 
became  outcasts  from  that  day  to  this;  and  all  the 
efforts  and  the  material  progress  that  man  makes  in 
this  world,  are  only  so  many  remedial  measures  to 
hide  the  fact  that  God  has  driven  him  out  of  paradise. 
But  the  last  Adam  is  God's  glorious  answer  to  that 
first  trust  which  was  confided  to  man's  keeping — the 
Second  Man  exalted  in  the  paradise  of  God.  Again, 
Noah,  as  it  were,  begins  the  world  afresh  after  the 
flood,  and  has  the  power  of  life  and  death  first  com- 
mitted to  his  hand.  The  sword  of  magistracy  was 
introduced.  "  Whoso  sheddeth  man's  blood,  by  man 
shall  his  blood  be  shed  ;  for  in  the  image  oi  God 
made  he  man."  This  was  the  root  of  civil  government, 
and  man  was  thereby  made  responsible  to  restrain  or 
punish  the  violent  hand.  This  is  never  reversed. 
Christianity  J  wherever  received,  brings  in  other  and 
heavenly  principles.  But  the  world  remains  bound  by 
this  irreversible  statute  of  God  for  its  guidance. 
Noah,  however,  failed  in  his  trust  as  completely  as 
Adam  had  in  the  garden.  He  did  not  govern  himself 
nor  his  family  to  God's  glory.  He  becomes  intoxi- 
cated, and  his  younger  son  insults  him  :  and  the  issue 
is,  that,  instead  of  the  universal  blessing  of  righteous 


CHAPTER    I.  13 

rule,  a  curse  falls  upon  a  portion  of  his  descendants. 
So,  in  due  time,  the  principle  of  a  king,  responsible  to 
rule  righteously  over  God's  people,  -was  tried  in  the 
house  of  David.  And  what  is  found?  Even  before 
David  died,  there  was  such  dreadful  sin  that  the 
sword  was  never  to  depart  from  that  very  family 
which  ought  to  have  secured  blessing  to  Israel.  Did 
God  therefore  abandon  His  designs  ?  In  no  wise. 
The  Lord  Jesus  takes  up  headship,  government,  and 
the  throne  of  David's  Son.  And  so  with  all  the  other 
principles  that  broke  down  in  man's  hands  ;  all  will 
be  illustrated  and  established  for  ever  in  the  person 
and  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

We  saw  that  Jerusalem  ceases  to  be  Jehovah's 
throne.  And  Jeremiah  shows  us  the  holy  city  counted 
as  one  among  the  other  nations;  and  as  most  privi- 
leged, so  the  first  to  drink  the  cup  of  God's  fury. 
Babylon  must  drink  it  also,  but  Israel  first.  It  is  in 
the  same  chapter  (xxv.)  that  you  have  the  distinct 
prediction  of  the  seventy  years'  captivity,  during 
which  Judah  was  to  be  carried  away  to  Babylon  ;  and 
then  should  come  at  the  end  the  judgments  of  the 
power  that  led  them  captive.  But  while  Jeremiah 
predicts  the  rising  supremacy  of  Babylon,  and  its 
final  judgment,  and  that  too  not  as  a  matter  of  history 
alone,  but  as  the  type  of  the  world's  overthrow  in 
the  day  of  the  Lord,  we  have  not  there  the  details 
that  intervene.  So  Ezekiel,  among  the  captives  at 
Chebar,  brings  ns  up  in  the  first  half  of  his  prophecy 
to  the  time  of  the  great  struggle  for  the  chief  place 
among  the  powers  of  the  world.  Pharaoh-Necho, 
King  of  Egypt,  desired  to  have  it  ;  but,  as  the 
Assyrian  before  him,  he  is  destroyed,  and  Babylon 
remains  the  ambitious  claimant  of  universal  dominion. 
There  were  these  three  powers,  Assyria,  Egypt,  and 
Babylon  ;  the  latter  comparatively  young  as  a  great 
kingdom,  though  founded  probably  upon  the  oldest 
associations   of  all,   viz.,   Babel — "  the  beginning    of 


14  DANIEL. 

Nimrod's  kingdom."  They  were  like  fierce  animals, 
held  in  by  an  unseen  leash  till  the  experiment  was 
fairly  tried,  whether  the  daughter  of  Zion  would  walk 
humbly  and  obediently  with  the  Lord,  or  whether  she 
would  turn  from  her  backsliding  and  repent  at  His 
call.  But  she  did  neither.  This  left  room  for  what 
had  never  been  seen  before — the  rise  of  an  universal 
empire. 

After  the  flood,  and  the  judgment  of  the  Lord  at 
Babel,  the  great  dispersion  of  nations  took  place — 
families,  kindreds,  tongues,  and  lands,  all  separate. 
Israel  was  the  centre  of  this  system  of  independent 
nations.  So  it  is  written  in  Deut.  xxxii.  8  :  "  When 
the  Most  High  divided  to  the  nations  their  inhe- 
ritance ;  when  he  separated  the  sons  of  Adam,  he  set 
the  bounds  of  the  people  according  to  the  number  of 
the  children  of  Israel."  All  was  arranged  with 
reference  to  Israel,  for  "  Jehovah's  portion  is  his 
people,  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance."  They 
were  the  divine  centre  for  the  earth,  and  God  will  yet 
make  good  His  purpose.  Though  completely  frus- 
trated through  the  wickedness  of  the  people,  Israel 
must  yet  be  His  centre  of  nations  in  this  world,  for 
the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken  it.  This,  too,  was 
first  tried  in  the  hands  of  man  and  failed ;  then  it  is 
turned  over  into  the  hands  of  Christ,  who  will  esta- 
blish it  in  due  time.  Israel's  pride  made  it  to  depend 
at  first  upon  their  obedience  to  God.  At  Sinai  they 
undertook  the  responsibility  of  the  law.  V/henever  a 
sinner  attempts  to  stand  upon  that  ground  with  God, 
he  is  lost.  The  only  safe  and  lowly  ground  is,  not 
what  Israel  would  be  for  God,  but  what  God  would  be 
in  faithfulness  and  love  and  pity  toward  Israel.  And 
so  it  is  with  every  soul  at  all  times.  Israel  accepting 
that  condition,  the  law  became  their  scourge,  and  God 
was  compelled  to  judge  them.  Death  accordingly  was 
certain,  spite  of  God's  marvellous  patience.  People 
fail,  priests  fail,  and  kings  at  last  became  the  leaders 


CHAPTER    I.  15 

in  all  evil.  God  was  compelled  to  give  up  His  people. 
From  that  moment  all  that  held  in  check  the  nations 
of  the  earth  was  taken  away,  and  the  vast  rival  dynas- 
ties struggled  for  the  mastery.  God  no  longer  had  a 
people  that  He  owned  as  the  theatre  of  His  govern- 
ment. If  their  heart  had  only  turned  to  Him,  like 
the  needle  to  the  pole,  spite  of  quivering  to  and  fro, 
there  would  have  been  long-suffering  (as  indeed  there 
was  to  the  uttermost)  and  the  intervention  of  divine 
power  would  have  established  them  in  blessing  for 
evermore.  But  when  not  only  the  people,  but  the  king 
anointed  of  Jehovah,  blotted  out  His  very  name  from 
the  land ;  when  His  glory  was  given  to  another  in  His 
own  temple,  all  was  over  for  the  present,  and 
"  Lo-Ammi "  was  the  sentence  of  God.  They  had 
become  now  the  most  bitter  in  their  idolatry,  being 
apostates  from  the  living  God,  and,  if  maintained,  would 
have  been  the  active  champions  of  heathen  abomina- 
tions. By  God's  judgment,  therefore,  the  people  and 
the  king  at  length  passed  into  captivity. 

At  this  crisis  Daniel  appears  at  the  court  of  the 
Babylonish  monarch,  according  to  the  sure  word  of 
Isaiah  to  King  Hezekiah.  (Is.  xxxix.)  "  The  times  of 
the  Gentiles  "  (for  so  runs  the  remarkable  phase  in 
Luke  xxi.)  were  begun,  and  of  those  times  Daniel  was 
the  prophet.  They  are  not  always  to  run  on ;  they 
have  a  limit  assigned  by  God,  when  the  present  inter- 
ruption of  His  direct  earthly  government  shall  cease, 
and  Israel  shall  again  be  acknowledged  as  the  people 
of  God.  During  this  interval,  as  we  saw,  their  dis- 
tinctive calling  being  lost,  God  allows  in  His  providence 
a  new  system  of  government,  the  system  of  imperial 
unity,  to  rise  up  in  the  great  successive  Gentile 
powers.  It  is  no  longer  independent  nations,  each 
having  their  own  ruler,  but  God  Himself  sanctioning, 
in  His  providence,  the  surrender  of  all  nations  of  the 
earth,  to  the  absorbing  authority  of  a  single  individual. 
This  is  what  characterizes  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles." 


16-  DANIEL. 

Such  a  thing  was  unexampled  before,  though  there 
may  have  been  strong  kingdoms  encroaching  upon 
weaker  ones.  Even  the  infidel  historian  is  compelled 
to  recognize,  as  all  history  does,'  the  four  great 
empires  of  the  ancient  world.  Israel  was  now  merged 
in  the  mass  of  nations.  Hence  that  expression  comes 
in,  "the  God  of  heaven,"  He  had,  as  it  were,  re- 
treated from  the  immediate  control  of  the  earth,  in 
which  character,  at  least  in  type.  He  had  governed 
Israel.  This  had  now  wholly  disappeared,  and  God, 
acting  sovereignly,  and  at  a  distance,  so  to  speak,  from 
the  scene — "  the  God  of  heaven  "—gave  certain  defined 
powers  of  the  Gentiles  to  succeed  each  other  in  a 
world-wide  empire. 

Before  these  preliminary  remarks  close,  I  add  a  little 
word  on  the  great  moral  features  of  this  chapter  ;  for 
if  they  are  brought  out  prominently  in  Daniel,  they 
were  not  written  for  his  sake  only,  but  for  ours,  if  we 
desire  the  same  blessing. 

The  chapter  opens  with  the  scene  of  the  complete 
prostration  of  the  Jews  before  their  conqueror.  ^  They 
were  now  besieged  and  overwhelmed  in  their  last 
stronghold.  "In  the  third  year  of  the  reign  _  of 
Jehoiakim,  king  of  Judah,  came  Nebuchadnezzar,  king 
of  Babylon,  unto  Jerusalem,  and  besieged  it.  And 
the  Lord  gave  Jehoiakim,  king  of  Judah,  into  his 
hand,  with  part  of  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  God, 
which  he  carried  into  the  land  of  Shinar,  to  the  house 
of  his  God;  and  he  brought  the  vessels  into  the 
treasure-house  of  his  God."  Next  we  have  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  remarkable  prophecy  of  Isaiah,  already 
alluded  to.  Hezekiah  had  been  sick,  nigh  unto  death. 
At  his  urgent  desire  to  live,  God  had  added  to  his 
days  fifteen  years,  and  this  was  sealed  to  him  by  a 
striking  sign ;  the  sun  returned  ten  degrees  by  which 
it  was  gone  down.  But  it  had  been  better  to  have 
learnt  well  the  lesson  of  death  and  resurrection,  than 


CHAPTER    I,  17 

to  tave  life  prolonged,  fall  into  a  snare,  and  Lear  of 
the  sorrows  that  yet  awaited  his  house,  and,  with  it,  the 
eclipse  of  Israel's  hopes.  Whether  a  sign  so  remark- 
able was  what  chiefly  attracted  the  notice  of  a  nation 
the  most  celebrated  in  the  ancient  world  for  its 
astronomical  lore,  I  cannot  say.  Certain  it  is,  that  at 
that  time  the  king  of  Babylon  sent  letters  and  a  present 
to  Hezekiah,  and  this,  not  merely  because  he  w^as 
recovered  of  his  sickness,  but  to  inquire  of  the  w^onder 
that  w^as  done  in  the  land.  (2  Chron.  xxxii.  31.)  In- 
stead of  going  softly  all  his  years,  Hezekiah  displays 
his  treasures  to  the  ambassadors  of  Merodach-baladan. 
"  There  was  nothing  in  his  house,  nor  in  all  his 
dominion,  that  Hezekiah  showed  them  not."  "  Then 
said  Isaiah  to  Hezekiah,  Hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts:  Behold,  the  days  come,  that  all  that  is  in  thine 
house,  and  that  which  thy  fathers  have  laid  up  in  store 
until  this  day,  shall  be  carried  to  Babylon:  nothing 
shall  be  left,  saith  the  Lord.  And  of  thy  sons  that 
shall  issue  from  thee,  which  thou  shalt  beget,  shall 
they  take  away;  and  they  shall  be  eunuchs  in  the 
palace  of  the  king  of  Babylon." 

Here  we  see  this  accomplished.  "  And  the  king 
spake  unto  Ashpenaz,  the  master  of  his  eunuchs,  that 
he  should  bi'ing  certain  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and 
of  the  king's  seed,  and  of  the  princes;  (or  nobles;) 
children  in  w^iom  w^as  no  blemish,  but  well-favoured, 
and  skilful  in  all  wisdom,  and  cunning  in  knowledge, 
and  understanding  science,  and  such  as  had  ability  in 
them  to  stand  in  the  king's  palace,  and  whom  they 
might  teach  the  learning  and  the  tongue  of  the  Chal- 
deans." Accordingly  "  the  king  appointed  them  a 
daily  provision  of  the  king's  meat  and  of  the  wine 
which  he  drank ;  so  nourishing  them  three  years,  that 
at  the  end  thereof  they  might  stand  before  the  king." 
Along  with  this,  the  names  of  Daniel  and  of  his  three 
companions  are  changed.  It  would,  appear,  that  the 
desire  was  to  efface  the  memory  of  the  true  God,  by 
c 


18  DANIEL. 

giving  them  names  derived  from  the  idols  of  Babylon. 
"  The  prince  of  the  eunuchs  gave  to  Daniel  the  name 
of  Belteshazzar  ;  and  to  Hananiah,  of  Shadrach;  and 
to  Mishael,  of  Meshach ;  and  to  Azariah,  'of  Abed-nego ;" 
in  all  probability  names  derived  from  Bel  and  the  other 
false  gods  then  worshipped  in  Chaldea. 

And  now  let  us  mark  what  the  Holy  Ghost  records, 
as  peculiarly  showing  Daniel's  heart  for  God,  that  in 
his  moral  ways  he  might  be  a  vessel  to  honour,  and 
meet  for  the  Master's  use.  How  remarkably  is  the 
power  of  God  superior  to  all  circumstances  !  Daniel 
and  his  companions  say  nothing  to  the  change  of 
names,  painful  as  it  must  have  been.  They  were 
slaves,  the  property  of  another,  who  had  the  authority 
to  call  them  as  he  pleased.  "  But  Daniel  purposed  m 
his  heart  that  he  would  not  defile  himself  with  the 
portion  of  the  king's  meat,  nor  with  the  wine  which 
he  drank."  Naturally  they  would  have  received  such 
fare  with  thankfulness ;  faith  works,  and  it  is  refused. 
It  was  connected  with  the  false  gods  of  the  country, 
being  a  part  of  the  daily  food  of  an  idolatrous  king. 
Even  in  their  own  land,  and  apart  from  idols,  God 
insisted  upon  separating  between  things  clean  and  un- 
clean, and  much  that  was  prized  among  the  Gentiles 
was  an  abomination  to  a  Jew.  The  law  was  stringent 
as  to  these  defilements,  and  Daniel,  as  a  Jew,  was 
under  its  obligations.  Christianity  comes  in  and  de- 
livers the  conscience  from  anxiety  as  to  such  things. 
"  Whatsoever  is  sold  in  the  shambles,"  St.  Paul  says, 
"  that  eat,  asking  no  question  for  conscience  sake." 
And  so  at  a  feast.  If  it  were  known,  however,  that 
certain  food  had  been  offered  unto  idols,  the  Christian 
was  not  to  eat,  both  for  the  sake  of  those  that  named 
the  fact  and  for  conscience  sake.  But  for  the  Jew, 
there  was  unqualified  separation  required.  Daniel  at 
once  shows  himself  decided  for  the  true  God.  It  was 
not  to  him  a  question  of  doing  at  Babylon  what  was 
done  there,  but  of  the  will  of  God   as  enjoined  upon 


CHAPTER    I.  19 

Israel.  Therefore  lie  requested  of  the  prmce  of  the 
eunuchs  that  he  might  not  defile  himself.  God  had 
meanwhile  wrought  in  His  providence  that  Daniel 
should  find  special  favour.  But  this  did  not  lessen 
the  trial  of  faith.  And  when  difficulties  and  dangers 
were  pleaded,  still  he  has  confidence  in  God.  We  are 
all  apt  to  find  good  reasons  for  bad  things ;  but 
Daniel's  eye  was  single,  and  his  whole  body  full  of 
light — the  only  means  of  understanding  the  mind  of 
God.  He  did  not  consider  what  was  pleasing  to  him- 
self; he  did  not  fear  to  risk  the  peril;  he  looked  at 
the  matter  in  connexion  with  God.  He  only  asks  that 
they  may  be  proved  for  ten  days  ;  "  and  let  them  give 
us  pulse  to  eat  and  water  to  drink.  Then  let  our 
countenances  be  looked  upon,"  &c.  Not  "  pleasant 
bread,"  but  that  which  spoke  of  humbling  themselves 
before  God,  was  what  a  true  heart  felt  to  be  their 
suited  food ;  such  fare  as  the  lowest  in  that  proud  and 
luxurious  city  might  have  disdained.  What  is  the 
result  of  this  trial  ?  Daniel  and  his  companions  turn 
out  "  fairer  and  fatter  in  flesh  than  all  the  children 
which  did  eat  the  portion  of  the  king's  meat."  Thus 
they  were  spared  further  trouble  on  that  score. 

But  that  is  not  all.  There  was  the  positive  blessing 
of  God,  in  giving  them  knowledge  and  skill  in  all 
learning  and  wisdom.  And  of  Daniel  it  is  said,  that 
he  was  made  to  understand  all  visions  and  dreams. 
They  were  prepared  of  God,  each  for  what  he  had 
afterwards  to  fill.  God  was  their  teacher,  and  the 
trial  of  their  faith  was  a  needed,  essential  part  of 
their  training  in  His  school.  Then,  when  they  stood 
before  the  king,  none  was  found  like  them.  When 
the  king  inquired  of  them,  he  found  them,  in  all  mat- 
ters of  wisdom  and  understanding,  "  ten  times  better 
than  all  the  magicians  and  astrologers  that  were  in  all 
his  realm."     (Verses  17—20.) 

If  we,  too,  are  to  understand  the  Scriptures,  I  believe 
that  we  must  travel  the  path  of  separation  from  the 


20 


DANIEL. 


world.  Nothing  more  destroys  spiritual  intelligence 
than  merely  floating  with  the  stream  of  men's  opinions 
and  ways.  The  prophetic  word  is  that  which  shows 
ns  the  end  of  all  man's  projects  and  amlSition.  "  And 
the  world  passeth  away,  and  the  lusts  thereof;  but  he 
that  doeth  the  will  of  God  abideth  for  ever."  Doubt- 
less, "  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of 
the  glory  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea." 
But  all  the  plans  of  men  will  come  to  nothing  first, 
though  "  they  shall  labour  in  the  very  lire,  and  shall 
weary  themselves  for  very  vanity."  Himself  shall  do 
it.  "  If  there  be  one  scripture  truth  which  stands  out 
more  prominently  than  another,  or  rather  which  under- 
lies all  truth,  it  is  the  total  failure  of  man  in  everything 
that  pertains  to  God,  before  His  grace  interferes  and 
triumphs.  And  this  is  true,  not  of  unconverted  men 
only,  but  of  His  people  of  old,  and  of  His  Church  since. 
Nor  is  there  any  advantage  greater  for  the  enemy, 
short  of  destroying  the  foundations,  than  the  mixing 
up  of  the  saints  of  God  with  the  world,  and  the  con- 
sequent darkening  of  all  spiritual  intelligence  in  those 
who  ought  to  be  its  light.  God  would  have  us  in 
practical  communion  wdth  Himself:  in  His  light  we 
see  light.  If  we  see  the  end  of  all  the  plots  of  Satan 
to  thwart  the  work  of  God,  it  separates  us  from  what 
leads  thereto,  and  joins  us  with  all  that  is  dear  to  Him. 
Then  "  the  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light, 
which  shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day." 
So  walking,  we  shall  understand  the  word  of  God.  It 
is  not  a  question  of  intellectual  capacity  and  learning. 
I  am  confident,  that  human  erudition  in  the  things  of 
God  is  only  so  much  rubbish,  wherever  it  is  made  to  be 
anything  more  than  a  servant.  Unless  Christians  can 
keep  what  they  know  under  their  feet,  they  are  incapable 
of  profiting  fully  by  the  word  of  God.  Otherwise, 
whether  a  man  know  much  or  little,  he  becomes  its 
slave,  and  it  usurps  the  place  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Faith  is   the   sole   means   and   power    of  spiritual 


CHAPTER    II.  21 

luiderstanding ;  and  faith  puts  and  keeps  us  in  sub- 
jection to  the  Lord,  and  in  separation  from  this  evil 
age.  Daniel  was  separated  from  what,  to  a  Jew, 
dishonoured  God,  and  God  blessed  him  with  wisdom 
and  understanding. 


CHAPTER   II. 

Before  entering  upon  my  present  subject,  I  would 
point  out  an  obvious  proof  that  chapter  i.  has  a 
preparatory  character.  The  last  verse  of  the  chapter 
informs  us,  that  "  Daniel  continued  unto  the  first  year 
of  king  Cyrus."  It  is  not  merely  an  account  of  certain 
circumstances,  before  we  are  introduced  to  the  various 
revelations  or  facts  that  are  given  in  succession  in  the 
book ;  but  we  have  the  preparation  for  the  place  that 
Daniel  was  to  keep.  And  then  we  are  carried,  as  it 
were,  on  to  the  end.  The  continuance  of  Daniel  is 
shown  through  the  whole  term  of  the  Babylonish 
monarchy,  and  even  to  the  beginning  of  the  Persian. 
It  is  not  meant  that  Daniel  only  lived  to  the  first 
year  of  king  Cyrus;  because  the  latter  part  of  the 
book  shows  us  a  vision  subsequent  to  that  date.  The 
fact  is  simply  stated,  that  he  lived  at  the  commence- 
ment of  a  new  dynasty.  And  it  will  be  found  that 
the  end  of  the  last  chapter  is  an  equally  suitable 
conclusion  to  the  book ;  answering,  as  such,  to  the  first 
chapter  as  a  preface. 

But  before  going  farther,  I  would  make  one  remark 
of  a  general  kind.  The  book  divides  itself  into  two 
nearly  equal  volumes  or  sections.  First,  that  which 
refers  to  the  great  Gentile  powers,  and  the  features 
that  would  mark  their  outward  conduct;  and,  finally, 
to  the  judgment  of  it  all.     This  is  continued  up  to 


22  DANIEL. 

tlie  end  of  chapter  vi.  Then,  from  chapter  vii.  to  the 
close,  "we  have  not  the  external  history  of  the  four 
Gentile  empires,  but  that  "which  is  of,jnore  peculiar 
interest  to  God's  people.  This  was,  evidently  enough, 
indicated  by  the  circumstance,  that  the  first  portion 
of  the  book  does  not  consist  of  visions  that  Daniel 
saw ;  for  the  only  one,  properly  so  called,  was  seen  by 
Nebuchadnezzar.  There  is  one  in  chapter  ii.,  and  then 
another  of  a  different  character  in  chapter  iv.  ;  chapters 
iii,,  v.,  and  vi.,  being  facts,  that  had' to  do  with  the 
moral  condition  of  the  two  first  monarchies,  but  nothing 
at  all  that  was  made  known  in  the  first  instance  to 
Daniel,  or  visions  seen  by  the  prophet  himself;  where- 
as, the  latter  part  of  the  book  is  occupied  exclusively 
with  communications  to  the  prophet  himself.  And 
there  it  is  that  we  find,  not  merely  what  ought  to  strike 
the  natural  mind,  but  the  secrets  of  God  that  peculiarly 
affect  and  interest  His  people,  and  hence  details  also. 
The  external  proof  of  this  is,  that  chapter  vi.,  which 
closes  what  I  have  called  the  first  section  of  Daniel, 
brings  us  up  to  the  close  again.  "  So  this  Daniel 
prospered  in  the  reign  of  Darius,  and  in  the  reign  of 
Cyrus  the  Persian."  Now  this  is  remarkable,  because 
the  next  chapter  goes  back  again  to  Belshazzar.  "  In 
the  first  year  of  Belshazzar,  king  of  Babylon,  Daniel 
had  a  dream,  and  visions  of  his  head,"  &c.  That  was 
long  before  Cyrus  the  Persian.  Then  in  chapter  viii., 
"  In  the  third  year  of  the  reign  of  king  Belshazzar." 
And  in  chapter  ix.,  "  In  the  first  year  of  Darius,  the 
son  of  Ahasuerus."  So  far  all  is  regular.  Next,  we 
come  down  to  chapters  x. — xii.  "  In  the  third  year  of 
Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  a  thing  was  revealed  unto  Daniel," 
&c.  The  first  part  (i. — vi.)  brings  us  down  to  the  close 
in  a  general  way,  and  the  second  (vii. — xii.)  with 
equal  order;  divided,  not  merely  in  this  outward 
manner,  but  having  the  moral  difference,  already 
explained,  i.e.,  the  one  external  and  the  other  internal. 
That  this  is  not  an  unprecedented  thing  in  the  word  of 


CHAPTER    II.  28 

God  is  familiar  to  tlie  reader  of  Matthew  xiii.  There, 
we  have  an  orderly  setting  forth  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  under  certain  parables — the  first  of  these 
being  a  prefatory  one.  Now,  taking  the  other  six 
parables,  (for  there  are  exactly  seven  in  all,)  you  have  a 
division  of  them  into  two  sets  of  three,  the  first  of 
which  refers  to  the  exterior  of  the  kingdom,  and  the 
last  to  more  inward  and  hidden  relations. 

This  exactly  answers  to  what  we  have  in  Daniel. 
First,  the  external  history  goes  down  to  the  close,  and 
then  the  internal  succeeds,  or  what  was  of  special 
interest  to  those  that  had  understanding  of  the  ways 
of  God.  This  will  suffice  to  show,  that  the  book  is 
characterized  by  that  divine  method  which  we  ought 
to  expect  in  the  word  of  God.  There  is  a  profound 
design,  which  runs  through  the  works  of  God,  and 
more  especially  through  His  word.  The  finger  of 
God  Himself  is  evident  indeed  upon  what  He  has  made ; 
yet  death  has  come  in,  and  the  creature  is  made  subject 
to  vanity.  Hence,  we  hear  the  groans  of  the  lower 
creation;  and,  as  you  rise  in  the  scale  of  animal  life, 
the  misery  is  more  intense.  Man  is  more  conscious 
and  capable  of  feeling  the  wretchedness  that  his  own 
sin  has  brought  upon  the  world,  and  upon  that  creation, 
of  which  he  is  made  the  lord.  But  in  the  word  of 
God,  although  there  may  be  slips  and  errors  of  scribes, 
they  are  for  the  most  part  but  specks.  They  may 
obscure  its  full  light;  but  they  are  trifling  in  com- 
parison with  the  evident  brightness  of  that  which  God 
gives,  even  through  the  most  imperfect  version.  In 
passing  through  the  hands  of  men,  we  discover  more  or 
less  of  the  weakness  that  attaches  to  the  earthern 
vessel ;  but  through  the  great  mercy  of  God,  there  is 
ample  light  for  every  honest  soul. 

But  turning  to  this  first  great  scene,  we  have  the 
entire  failure  of  the  wisdom  of  the  world.  Unusual 
care  was  taken,  at  the  court  of  Babylon,  to  have  men 
trained  in  all  wisdom  and  knowledge.     The  time  was 


24 


DANIEL. 


now  come  when  this  was  to  be  put  to  the  test.  God 
was  pleased,  while  the  great  Gentile  king  was  medi- 
tating upon  his  bed,  to  give  him  a  visiojjr  of  the  future 
history  of  the  world:  on  the  one  hand,  gratifjdng  his 
desire  to  see  the  world's  course  thence  onward  unveiled ; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  he  was  made  to  feel  the  utter 
powerlessness  of  all  human  resources.  It  was  God's 
opportunity  for  displaying  His  own  power,  and  the 
perfect  wisdom  of  which  even  a  poor  captive  was  made 
the  channel.  This  is  a  signal  example  of  God's  ways. 
Here  were  these  Jews;  and  the  proud  king  might  have 
supposed  that,  if  God  was  for  them,  they  could  not 
possibly  have  come  under  his  hand.  But  if  God's 
people  are  guilty,  there  are  none  whose  faults  He  so 
much  exposes.  How  do  we  know  the  wrong  that 
Abraham  did  ?  or  David  ?  Only  from  God.  He  loves 
His  people  too  well  to  hide  their  faults.  It  is  a  part  of 
His  moral  government,  that  He  is  the  very  last  to  put 
or  allow  a  veil,  over  what  displeases  Him,  in  those  even 
whom  He  loves  best.  Take  a  well-governed  family. 
Is  it  the  way  of  .love  to  cover  over  the  fault  of  the 
child,  when  the  child  ought  to  feel  it  ? — and  feel  it  he 
must  if  he  is  to  be  happy.  So  with  God's  people. 
Israel  had  abandoned  Him — had  denied  their  relation- 
ship to  Him;  and  God  shows  that  He  felt  their  sin, 
and  that  they  must  feel  it  too.  He  disowned  them  as 
His  people  for  a  time — swept  them  out  of  the  land 
in  which  He  had  planted  them;  and  now  they  were  the 
slaves  of  the  Gentiles. 

But  in  turn  their  conqueror  must  be  taught  that, 
after  all,  the  mind — the  lieart  of  God,  was  with  the 
poor  captives.  The  power  of  God  might  be  with  the 
Gentile  for  a  season,  but  the  affections  of  God  and 
His  secret  were  with  His  own,  even  in  the  hour  of 
their  abasement. 

The  circumstances,  through  which  this  was  brought 
out,  strikingly  illustrate  the  ways  of  God.  The  king 
dreams  a  dream:    the  thing  departs  from  him.      He 


CHAPTER    II.  25 

summons  his  wise  men,  and  calls  upon  them  to  make 
known  the  dream  and  the  interpretation  of  it.  But 
all  in  vain.  ^  They  themselves  are  so  struck  with  the 
unreasonableness  of  the  demand,  that  they  say, 
"  There  is  none  other  that  can  show  it  before  the  king, 
except  the  gods,  whose  dwelling  is  not  with  flesh." 
(Ver.  11.)  It  was  impossible  to  meet  the  king's  request. 
Thus  all  was  allowed  to  come  out  in  its  reality.  Their 
wisdom  proved  to  be  unavailing  for  what  was  wanted. 
Daniel  hears  of  the  decree  which  went  forth,  that  the 
wise  men  should  be  slain.  He  goes  to  Arioch,  and 
begs  for  time  to  be  given  him.  But  mark  this — and 
it  is  the  characteristic  of  faith — he  has  confidence  in 
God.  He  does  not  wait  till  God  gives  him  the  answer, 
before  he  says  that  he  would  show  the  interpretation 
of  tlie  dream.  He  j^roffers  it  at  once.  He  is  confident 
in  God,  and  that  is  faith — a  conviction  founded  on  the 
known  character  of  God.  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is 
with  them  that  fear  Him ;  and  Daniel  feared  the  Lord. 
Therefore,  also,  he  was  not  alarmed  at  the  decree.  He 
knew  that  God  who  ga^e  could  recall  the  dream.  At 
the  same  time,  he  does  not  in  the  least  degree  pretend 
to  answer  it  himself.  We  have  thus  two  great  things 
brought  out  in  Daniel :  first,  his  confidence  that  God 
would  reveal  the  thing  to  the  king ;  secondly,  his  con- 
fession that  he  could  not.  He  goes  to  his  house,  and 
makes  the  thing  known  to  his  companions.  He  wishes 
that  they  also  should  "  desire  mercies  of  the  God  of 
heaven  concerning  this  secret."  He  has  exceeding 
value  for  the  prayers  of  his  brethren — the  witnesses 
with  himself  of  the  true  God  in  Babylon.  He  gets 
them  on  their  knees  before  God,  as  well  as  takes  that 
place  himself.  But  Daniel,  having  special  faith,  was 
the  one  that  God  therefore  honours.  "  Then  was 
the  secret  revealed  unto  Daniel  in  a  night-vision." 
(Verses  14—19.) 

Neither  does  he  go  directly  to  the  king,  nor  even  to 
his  companions,  to  tell  them  that  God  has  made  known 


26  DANIEL. 

the  dream  to  him.  The  first  thing  he  does  is  to  go  to 
God.  The  God  that  has  made  known  the  secret  is  the 
One  that  Daniel  at  once  owns.  He  is^n  the  place  of 
one  that  worships  God.  And  allow  me  to  say,  that 
this  is  the  grand  object  of  all  the  revelations  of  God. 
Do  not  suppose  it  is  a  question  of  making  known  to  me 
my  sin  and  a  Saviour  meeting  all  the  need  of  my  soul. 
What  God  works  by  His  Spirit  in  His  saints,  is  not 
merely  that  they  should  know  they  are  delivered  from 
hell,  or  that  they  should  walk  as  His  children.  There  is 
a  higher  thing  still.  God  makes  His  people  worshippers 
of  Himself;  and,  if  there  is  one  thing,  in  which  God's 
children  fail  more  than  another,  it  is  in  realizing  their 
place  as  worshippers. 

Now,  Daniel  understood  this.  Though  comparatively 
young,  he  was  well  acquainted  with  the  mind  of  God. 
And  here  we  have  this  beautiful  feature.  He  brings 
out  in  his  outburst  of  praise  the  mind  of  God;  and 
these,  not  so  much  in  connexion  with  His  power — 
though  it  is  true  that  "  He  changeth  the  times  and 
seasons;  he  removeth  kings  and  setteth  up  kings,''  &c. 
— but  what  his  heart  specially  dwells  upon  is  this :  "  He 
giveth  wisdom  unto  the  wise,  and  knowledge  to  them 
that  know  understanding."  I  call  your  attention  to 
the  words.  It  is  quite  true,  that  the  Lord  looks  with 
compassion  on  the  ignorant,  and  shows  His  goodness 
to  those  that  have  no  urderstanding.  But  Daniel  is 
speaking  of  His  ways  with  those  whose  hearts  are 
towards  Him;  and  in  their  case  the  Lord's  principle 
is,  "  To  him  that  hath  shall  be  given;  but  whosoever 
hath  not,  from  him  shall  be  taken  away  even  that  he 
hath."  Nothing  is  more  dangerous,  in  the  things  of 
God,  than  to  stop  short  in  the  path  of  learning  His 
ways.  What  arrests  souls  is  the  consciousness  that 
the  truth  is  too  practical;  and  they  fear  the  conse- 
quences: for  the  truth  of  God  is  not  a  thing  merely 
to  know,  but  to  live  ;  and  the  soul  instinctively  shrinks 
back  because  of  the  serious  present  results  it  entails. 


CHAPTER    II.  27 

In  Daniel's  case  the  eye  was  single,  and  the  whole  body, 
therefore,  full  of  light.  This  is  the  real  secret  of 
progress.  Let  the  desire  only  be  towards  God,  and  the 
progress  is  sure  and  steady. 

Daniel  then  goes  in  unto  Arioch,  and  says,  "  Destroy 
not  the  wise  men  of  Babylon :  bring  me  in  before  the 
king,  and  I  will  show  unto  the  king  the  interpretation." 
Accordingly,  Arioch  brings  him  in  before  the  king  in 
haste,  and  says,  "  I  have  found  a  man  of  the  captives  of 
Judah,  that  will  make  unto  the  king  the  interpre- 
tation." The  king  asks  him  whether  it  is  true,  that 
he  is  able  to  make  known  the  dream  and  the  interpre- 
tation. Daniel's  answer  is  beautiful.  Real,  deep 
knowledge  of  the  ways  of  God  is  always  accompanied 
by  humility.  There  is  no  greater  mistake,  nor  one 
more  nnfounded  in  fact,  than  the  supposition,  that 
spiritual  intelligence  puffeth  up ;  knowledge  may — mere 
knowledge.  But  I  speak  of  that  spiritual  understanding 
in  the  word,  which  flows  from  the  sense  of  God's  love, 
and  seeks  to  spread  itself,  if  I  may  so  say,  just  because 
it  is  divine  love.  Daniel  intimates  how  impossible  it 
was  for  "  the  wise  men,  the  astrologers,  the  magicians, 
and  the  soothsayers,"  to  show  the  dream  unto  the  king. 
"  But  there  is  a  God  in  heaven,  that  revealeth  the  secrets, 
and  maketh  known  [he  does  not  even  say  to  Daniel, 
but]  to  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar  what  shall  be  in  the 
latter  days."  He  desired  that  Nebuchadnezzar  should 
know  the  interest  that  God  took  in  him.  "  As  for 
thee,  0  king,  thy  thoughts  came  into  thy  mind,  upon 
thy  bed,  what  should  come  to  pass  hereafter;  and  he 
that  revealeth  secrets  maketh  known  to  thee  what 
shall  come  to  pass."  But  he  is  not  satisfied  with  that: 
he  adds,  "  As  for  me,  this  secret  is  not  revealed  to  me 
for  any  wisdom  that  I  have  more  than  any  living,  but 
for  their  sakes  that  shall  make  known  the  interpretation 
to  the  king,  and  that  thou  mightest  know  the  thoughts 
of  thy  heart." 

Then  he  enters  upon  the  dream.     "  Thou,  0  king, 


28  DANIEL. 

sawest,  and  "behold  a  great  image.  This  great  image, 
whose  brightness  was  excellent,  stood  before  thee; 
and  the  form  thereof  was  terrible."  He  had  seen  the 
course  of  empire,  not  merely  in  a  fragmentary  succes- 
sion al  manner,  but  as  a  whole.  In  the  latter  part  of 
the  book,  we  have  the  succession  more  minutely  marked, 
and  the  detailed  ways  of  the  different  powers  towards 
Daniel's  people:  but  here  it  is  the  general  history 
of  the  Gentile  empire. 

"  This  image's  head  was  of  fine  gold,  his  breast  and 
arms  of  silver,  his  belly  and  his  thighs  of  brass." 
That  is,  there  was  deterioration,  as  the  empires  de- 
parted from  the  source  of  power.  It  was  God  who 
gave  imperial  rule  to  Nebuchadnezzar.  Consequently, 
that  which  is  nearest  to  the  source  is  seen  as  "  this 
head  of  gold."  There  comes  in  a  certain  measure 
more  of  what  was  human  in  the  Persian  empire ;  "  the 
breast  and  the  arms  of  silver,"  an  inferior  metal  and 
so  on,  down  to  the  legs,  which  are  of  iron,  and  the 
feet,  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay.  It  is  quite  plain 
from  this,  that,  as  we  descend  from  the  original  grant  pf 
power,  there  is  a  gradual  debasement. 

But  it  is  well,  now,  to  state  a  principle  or  two, 
which  I  believe  to  be  of  importance  in  looking  at 
prophetic  scriptures.  One  of  the  commonest  maxims, 
even  among  Christians,  is  this:  that  prophecy  is  to  be 
interpreted  by  the  event —that  history  is  the  proper 
exponent  of  prophecy  —  that  when  the  prophetic 
visions  are  realized  upon  the  earth,  the  facts  explain 
the  visions.  This  is  .a  false  principle;  it  has  not  one 
particle  of  truth  in  it.  People  confound  with  inter- 
pretation of  prophecy  the  confirmation  of  its  truth. 
When  a  prediction  is  fulfilled,  of  course  its  fulfilment 
confirms  its  truth,  but  that  is  a  very  different  thing 
from  explaining  it.  The  proper  understanding  of 
prophecy  is  just  as  difficult  after  the  event  as  before  it. 
For  instance,  let  any  one  take  the  seventy  weeks  of 
Daniel.       That    chapter   has    furnished    occasion    for 


CHAPTER    II.  29 

immense  controversy  and  dispute  among  believers 
themselves.  It  is  one  of  their  commonest  assumptions, 
that  it  is  all  fulfilled,  (which  is  not  correct,)  and  yet 
there  is  no  such  thing  as  agreement  among  them  about 
its  meaning. 

Looking  again  at  Ezekiel's  prophecy,  we  find  that 
the  difficulty  of  prophecy  arises  from  a  totally  different 
source.  The  first  part  of  Ezekiel  was  fulfilled  in  the 
then  ways  of  God  with  Israel;  it  extended  over  the 
time  when  Daniel  lived.  But  that  does  not  explain  it. 
It  is,  in  fact,  more  obscure  than  the  closing  chapters, 
which  are  future. 

What,  then,  does  explain  prophecy  ?  That  whicli 
explains  all  scripture — the  Spirit  of  God  alone.  His 
power  can  unfold  any  part  of  the  word  of  God.  Do 
you  ask,  if  I  mean  to  say,  that  it  is  of  no  importance 
to  know  languages,  understand  history,  and  so  on  ?  I 
am  not  raising  a  question  about  learning:  it  has  its 
use;  but  I  deny  that  history  is  the  interpreter  of 
l^rophecy,  or  of  any  scripture.  And  if  there  are 
Christians  who  know  the  history  of  the  world,  or  the 
original  tongues  of  Scripture,  it  is  Christ  that  has  to 
do  with  their  spiritual  intelligence,  and  not  their  know- 
ledge or  learning.  Besides,  even  if  men  are  Christians, 
it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  they  understand 
Scripture.  They  know  Christ,  else  they  would  not  be 
Christians.  But  real  entrance  into  God's  mind,  in 
Scripture,  supposes  that  a  person  watches  against  self, 
desires  the  glory  of  God,  has  full  confidence  in  His 
word,  and  dependence  on  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  under- 
standing of  Scripture  is  not  a  mere  intellectual  thing. 
If  a  man  has  no  mind  at  all,  he  could  not  understand 
anything:  but  the  mind  is  only  the  vessel — not  the 
power.  The  power  is  the  Holy  Ghost,  acting  upon 
and  through  the  vessel;  but  it  must  be  the  Holy  Ghost 
Himself  that  fills  a  soul.  As  it  is  said,  "  They  shall 
be  all  taught  of  God." 

There  is  a  great  difference  in  the  measure  of  the 


30  DANIEL. 

teacliing,  because  there  is  mucli  difference  in  the 
measure  of  dependence  upon  God.  The  important 
thing  is  to  bear  in  mind,  that  the  understanding  of 
Scripture  depends  much  more  upon  what  is  moral,  than 
what  is  of  the  mind — upon  a  single  eye  to  Christ.  The 
Holy  Ghost  can  never  give  us  anything  to  save  us  from 
the  necessity  of  dependence  and  waiting  upon  God. 

How,  then,  are  we  to  interpret  prophecy?  It  is 
entirely  independent  of  history;  it  was  given  to  be 
understood  before  it  becomes  history.  That  this  is 
true  must  be  manifest.  The  great  mass  of  prophecy  is 
about  the  terrible  judgments  that  are  to  fall  at  the  end 
of  this  age.  What  becomes  of  the  people  who  do  not 
profit  by  the  prophecies,  till  the  facts  have  taken  place  ? 
It  is  a  serious  thing  to  despise  it.  The  believer  that 
understands  prophecy  has  got  special  help,  which  he 
lacks  who  neglects  it. 

Starting,  then,  with  this  great  principle — -that  it  is 
the  Holy  Ghost  who  gives  us  to  read  prophecy,  as 
bearing  upon  the  glory  of  God,  and  connected  with 
Christ,  who  shall  yet  be  exalted,  and  whose  glory  shall 
fill  the  earth  and  heavens,  all  usurpers  and  pretenders 
being  put  down  —  let  us  look  at  this  scene,  as  that 
which  shows  us  the  course  of  the  world,  up  to  that 
time.  First,  consider  the  position  of  the  parties. 
Here  was  the  proudest  king  in  the  world.  He  had 
gone  forth  at  the  head  of,  victorious  armies,  before  his 
father's  death — before  he  had  properly  come  into  the 
undivided  kingdom  of  Babylon.  And  now  he  has 
laid  open  to  him  a  sphere  of  dominion,  perhaps,  beyond 
his  ambition.  He  learns,  v/ith  certainty,  that  it  w^as 
God,  in  His  providence,  who  had  put  him  in  this 
position.  But,  more  than  that:  he  sees  brought  before 
him,  in  a  few  touches,  the  whole  chart  of  the  Gentile 
world — the  leading  features  of  its  history  from  that 
day  to  the  day  of  glory  and  judgment  that  is  coining. 
He  has  brought  before  him  the  rise  of  another  and 
neighbouring  power,  that  had  been  already  alluded  to 


CHAPTER    II.  31 

in  prophecy ;  so  that  there  was  therefore  no  difficulty 
at  all  in  gathering  what  was  meant  by  it.  The  prophet 
Isaiah,  who  lived  a  hundred -and-fifty  years  before 
Cyrus  was  born,  had  not  only  referred  by  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  the  nation  and  king  of  the  Medes  and  Persians, 
but  had  called  him  by  name. 

Again:  another  empire  was  foreshown,  that  was 
then  comparatively  in  its  infancy,  or  consisting  only 
of  so  many  se|)arate  tribes,  without  any  stable  bond 
of  cohesion  among  them  —  I  refer  to  the  Greeks. 
But,  more  remarkable  still,  the  kingdom,  which  is 
most  dwelt  upon  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  was  then  one 
that  was  in  a  mere  embryo  condition,  and  probably 
not  even  known  by  name  to  the  king  of  Babylon. 
For  though  that  kingdom  was  destined  to  play  the 
greatest  part  ever  taken  by  a  kingdom  in  the  history 
of  the  world,  it  was  then  utterly  obscure.  It  was 
engaged  in  home  and  neighbouring  squabbles  of  the 
pettiest  kind,  without  any  thought  of  extending  its 
dominion.  The  more  marvellous,  therefore,  it  is  to 
look  at  that  great  king,  and  the  servant  of  God  that 
stood  before  him,  unfolding  the  history  of  the  world. 

"Thou,  0  king,  art  a  king  of  kings:  for  the  God 
of  heaven  hath  given  thee  a  kingdom,  power,  and 
strength,  and  glory."  It  was  not  a  question  of  his 
own  prowess,  nor  special  wisdom,  that  he  possessed. 
If  Nebuchadnezzar  had  been  allowed  to  carry  away 
these  captives — to  triumph  over  the  power  of  Egypt, 
that  had  wished  to  dispute  the  supremacy  of  the 
world,  it  was  the  God  of  heaven  who  had  given  it  to 
him.  "  And  wheresoever  the  children  of  men  dwell, 
the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  the  fowls  of  heaven,  hath 
he  given  into  thine  hand,  and  hath  made  thee  ruler 
over  them  all.  Thou  art  this  head  of  gold."  Clearly 
the  Babylonish  monarchy  is  meant.  God  had  referred 
to  this  by  Isaiah.  And  Jeremiah,  who  was  a  con- 
temporary of  Daniel's,  had  brought  before  him  not 
only  the  length  of  period,  during  which   the   Baby- 


32  DANIEL. 

lonisli  monarchy  should  last,  hut  even  the  succession. 
There  would  be  Nebuchadnezzar  and  his  son,  and  his 
son's  son.  This  had  a  remarkable  fulfilment.  So 
that  we  need  not  go  beyond  Scripture  to  understand 
prophecy.  It  is  the  right  spiritual  use  of  what  is  in 
the  word  of  God,  and  I  bless  God  for  it.  If  you  find 
the  simplest  man  who  only  studies  with  diligence  the 
Bible,  in  his  mother  tongue,  and  is  led  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  he  has  the  elements  and  the  power  of  a  true 
interpretation.  But  as  sure  as  a  man  tries  to  find  an 
interpretation  here  and  there,  by  the  help  of  history, 
antiquities,  newspapers,  and  what  not,  he  is  only 
deceiving  himself  and  his  hearers.  Such  is  the  uni- 
versal moral  sentence  of  God  upon  the  soul  that 
searches,  in  what  is  of  man,  the  proper  key  to  God's 
secrets.  I  must  find  it  in  God  Himself,  by  a  right 
use  of  what  is  in  His  own  Avord. 

An  early  Jewish  writer,  whose  history  is  every 
where  read  and  valued,  Josephus,  I  had  the  curiosity 
to  look  at,  and,  finding  the  common  version  peculiar, 
I  examined  the  original  Greek  of  his  history,  but 
found  the  same  strange  sense  still.  He  makes  out 
that  the  head  of  gold  means  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the 
kings  that  were  before  him!  Thus,  there  is  an  entire 
want  of  understanding  what  the  word  of  God  says. 
The  going  away  from  Scripture,  and  allowing  one's 
own  thoughts,  always  leads  astray.  Babylon  was  first 
made  an  empire  of  in  the  person  of  Nebuchadnezzar, 
who  here  includes,  as  it  were,  those  that  were  to  fol- 
low. "  Thou  art  this  head  of  gold."  There  is  no 
reference  to  the  kings  that  were  before  him.  Babylon 
never  was  allowed  to  have  the  empire  of  the  world 
till  Nebuchadnezzar's  day;  therefore  it  Avas  that  he, 
and  not  his  forefathers,  formed  the  head  of  gold.  He 
was  the  one  in  whom  the  imperial  place  of  Babylon 
finds  its  beginning. 

In  Jeremiah  xxv.  we  find  not  only  the  epoch  of 
seventy  years  of  captivity,  but,  farther  on  (chap,  xxvii.)^ 


CHAPTER    II.  33 

the  succession  is  mentioned.  *'  All  nations  shall  serve 
him,  and  his  son,  and  his  son's  son,  until  the  very  time 
of  his  land  come."  It  happened  that,  after  his  son, 
Evil  Merodach,  was  cut  off,  there  was  one  w^ho  took 
the  throne,  not  in  the  order  of  succession,  but  called  to 
it  by  the  Babylonish  people,  with  a  sort  of  claim, 
through  marriage,  with  Nebuchadnezzar's  daughter. 
This  man  reigned  for  a  time,  and  after  him,  his  son, 
who  was,  therefore,  the  son  of  Nebuchadnezzar's 
daughter,  not  of  his  son.  It  might,  so  far,  then, 
appear  that  the  prophecy  had  failed.  Not  at  all.  A 
few  months  after,  Nebuchadnezzar's  grandson  was 
called  to  the  throne.  "  Scripture  cannot  be  broken." 
It  had  been  said,  "  Nebuchadnezzar,  his  son,  and  his 
son's  son,"  and  so  it  was.  In  Belshazzar,  the  grand- 
son of  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  whole  thing  terminated. 
For  this  then  scripture  furnishes  all  the  main  parts. 
So  that  prophecy  does,  in  fact,  explain  history,  but 
history  never  interprets  prophecy.  The  man  who 
understands  prophecy  can  open  up  history;  but  no 
understanding  of  history  will  enable  him  to  explain 
prophecy.  It  may  confirm  the  truth  of  a  prediction, 
to  a  doubter,  so  far  as  it  is  clear.  Thus,  if  the  history 
of  the  taking  of  Jerusalem,  as  it  is  given  in  the  Wars 
of  Josephus,  is  a  true  one,  it  will,  of  course,  coincide 
with  the  inspired  notice  told  us  by  St.  Luke.  But 
it  is  quite  plain,  that  if  I  have  confidence  in  the  word 
of  God,  there  I  have  a  much  more  certain  account  of 
it.  In  a  word,  the  circumstance  of  being  uttered 
before  the  event  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  matter. 
The  eye  of  God  saw  all  along,  and  through  the  stream 
of  Gentile  empire ;  and  the  language  is  as  plain  in  the 
prophecies  of  Daniel,  as  in  the  writings  of  the  Greek 
and  Latin  historians.*     And  so  true  is  this  that  those 

*"The  four  empires  are  clearly  delineated;  and  the  invin- 
cible armies  of  the   Romans  described  with  as  much  clearness, 
in  the  prophecies  of  Daniel,  as  in  the  histories  of  Justin  and 
Diodorus. ' ' — Gibbon. 
D 


'34  DANIEL. 

who  have  no  sympathy  with  what  is  of  God,  even 
infidels,  are  obliged  to  acknowledge,  that  whatever 
clearly  bears  upon  the  subject  coincides  with  what 
Daniel  had  said  hundreds  of  years  before  the  events. 

"  And  after  thee  shall  arise  another  kingdom,  inferior 
to  thee."  Not  inferior  in  territorial  extent,  but  in 
splendour,  and  perhaps  most  of  all  in  the  admixture  of 
control  outside  the  ruler,  instead  of  a  man  acting  in 
the  conviction  that  God  had  put  him  in  his  place  of 
authority.  Darius  (chap,  vi.)  took  the  advice  of 
unscrupulous  subjects  and  suffered  bitterly  for  it.  Had 
he  felt  the  sense  of  immediate  responsibility  to  God, 
the  snare  had  been  avoided.  Men  naturally  shrink 
from  absolute  authority,  chiefly  because  it  is  uncon- 
trolled power  in  the  hands  of  a  weak  and  erring  man. 
But  suf)posing  it  was  one  who  had  all  the  wisdom  and 
goodness  in  his  own  person,  nothing  could  be  happier. 
This  is  exactlv  what  will  be  true  in  the  reifjn  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  full  authority  will  be  put 
into  His  hands,  and  all  will  be  blessed  and  according  to 
the  will  of  God,  and  when  the  contrary  will  of  men 
would  only  be  rebellion. 

What  seems  to  confirm  this,  is,  that  when  we  come 
down  to  the  third  kingdom,  the  Macedonian,  of  which 
Alexander  the  Great  was  the  founder,  there  we  have  a 
man,  who  not  merely  acted  at  the  suggestion  of  his 
wise  men,  but  was  controlled  by  his  generals.  It  be- 
came, in  fact,  a  kind  of  military  rule — a  less  respectable 
thing  than  the  aristocratic  interference  of  the  Med^s 
and  Persians,  and  their  inflexible  laws. 

Then  we  come  down  much  lower  still,  and  have  a 
fourth  kingdom,  represented  by  iron.  "  And  the 
fourth  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as  iron ;  forasmuch  as 
iron  breaketh  in  pieces  and  subdueth  all  things ;  and 
as  iron  breaketh  all  these,  shall  it  break  in  pieces  and 
bruise."  There,  strength  is  the  great  feature  of  the 
kingdom,  and  the  quality  of  the  metal  is  consistent 
with  it.     But  it  is  of  the  commonest  sort — not  one  of 


CHAPTEE    II.  35 

the  precious  metals;  perhaps,  [because  the  Roman 
empire  was  distinguished  by  this,  that  it  was  nominally 
the  people  that  governed.  However  despotic  the 
emperor,  he  always  pretended,  in  theory  at  least,  to 
consult  the  people  and  senate.  Even  under  the  empire, 
the  Romans  had  still  the  semblance  of  their  old  re- 
publican constitution;  whilst,  in  point  of  fact,  it  was 
but  an  individual  who  had  clothed  himself  with  all 
the  real  power. 

Here,  then,  we  have  sketched  before  us  the  whole 
course  of  empire.  But,  it  may  be  asked,  How  do  you 
know  these  things  ?  It  is  not  said  that  the  second 
empire  represents  Medo-Persia,  or  the  third  Macedonia, 
or  the  fourth  Rome.  I  think  it  is.  It  may  not  be 
said  here  :  but  Scripture  does  not  always  hang  up  the 
key  exactly  at  the  door.  It  is  not  often  that  we  find 
the  explanation  of  one  portion  in  the  very  next  verse. 
God  wants  me  to  know  His  word,  to  be  familiar  with 
all  that  He  has  written,  and  to  be  assured  that  all  is 
very  good.  To  instruct  even  the  unconverted  child  in 
the^  Scripture  is  always  of  great  value.  It  is  like 
laying  a  fire  well,  so  that  a  spark  alone  is  needed  to 
kindle  it  into  a  flame.  It  is  a  good  and  wholesome 
thing  for  Christians  to  be  most  particular  in  training 
up  their  children  in  a  thorough  knowded^e  of  the  word 
of  God. 

But,  returning  to  consider  what  light  Scripture 
gives,  we  need  not  go  farther  than  this  Book  of  Daniel 
to  find  the  names  of  these  empires.  In  chapter  v.  28, 
we  are  told,  "Peres:  thy  kingdom  is  divided,  and 
given  to  the  Medes  and  Persians."  There  is  the 
answer  at  once.  We  find  the  Babylonian  kingdom 
just  tottering  and  about  to  be  destroyed.  We  were 
told  that  the  Medes  and  Persians  succeed.  Nothing 
simpler  or  more  certain.  The  only  people  I  ever 
heard  of  that  found  difficulties,  were  some  learned  men 
who  strove  to  make  out  that  the  empire  of  Babylon 
extends  to  Persia  as  well,  so  as  to  make  Greece  the 


36  DANIEL. 

second,  Rome  the  third,  and  the  fourth  a  distinct 
and  purely  future  antichristian  power.  Another  class 
of  these  scholars  have  contended  that  Alexander's  king- 
dom is  one  thing,  and  that  of  his  successors  another 
wholly  different:  in  fact,  one  the  third  and  the  other 
the  fourth  empire;  so  as  to  make  even  the  fifth  king- 
dom (that  of  "  the  little  stone")  a  past  or  present 
thing.  Had  Scripture  been  read  and  weighed  without 
an  object,  mistakes  like  these  could  never  have  been 
made.  But  the  believer,  instead  of  seeing  in  history 
things  to  perplex  his  mind,  takes  up  his  Bible,  and 
finds  the  solution  before  he  leaves  the  prophecy  itself. 
For  it  is  plain  from  Daniel  viii.  20,  21,  that  the  empire 
of  the  united  Medes  and  Persiars  gives  place  to  the 
Grecian  kingdom,  with  its  four-fold  division  at  Alex- 
ander's death.  This  again  is  succeeded  by  the  fourth, 
or  Roman  Empire,  the  peculiar  feature  of  which  is, 
that  in  its  last  stage  it  is  seen  divided  into  ten  separate 
kingdoms.  (Chap,  vii.)  Was  this  ever  the  case  with 
the  successors  of  Alexander  ?  His  kingdom  was 
divided  into  four,  never  into  ten.  Thus  we  have  pro- 
phecy explaining  history;  while  the  general  use  that 
mere  learning  makes  of  history  is  to  obscure  the  bright- 
ness of  the  word  of  God.  But  let  us  understand  the 
word  of  God  first;  and  then,  if  we  turn  to  history,  we 
shall  find  it  comes  in  as  a  human  witness,  and  con- 
firms, with  its  feeble  voice,  the  divine  testimon)\  It 
is  obliged  to  do  so.  Thus,  the  man  that  does  not  know 
history  stands  upon  at  least  as  good  ground  as  those 
who  are  learned,  but  find  difficulties.  He  is  not  per- 
plexed as  others  are,  who  look  through  the  mist  of 
their  own  speculations. 

In  the  third  kingdom  a  feature  is  introduced  which 
is  not  in  the  second.  It  was  to  "  bear  rule  over  all 
the  earth."  How  remarkably  this  was  fulfilled  in  the 
Macedonian  or  Grecian  kingdom  !  Because,  although 
Cyrus  was  a  great  conqueror,  it  was  altogether  in  the 
region  where   he  lived.      He  overcame  the    whole  of 


CHAPTER    II.  37 

those  parts  to  the  north  of  Media  and  Persia,  and  also 
southward,  as  well  as  the  west.  All  that  was  true; 
but  he  never  went  outside,  as  far  as  I  know,  the  bounds 
of  Asia. 

But  now  we  see  a  kingdom  marked  by  extraordinary 
rapidity  of  conquest.  One  might  challenge  all  ages  to 
show  anything  that  fulfils  this  prophecy,  as  the  king- 
dom of  Alexander  did.  In  the  course  of  a  few  years, 
that  remarkable  man  overran  almost  the  whole  of  the 
then  known  world.  He  even  lamented,  as  we  know, 
that  he  had  not  another  world  to  conquer.  This  is  a 
striking  commentary  upon  what  we  have  here.  Do 
we  need  to  go  to  history  for  it  all  ?  No.  We  find  in 
this  very  book  the  explanation.  In  chapter  viii.  20,  21, 
the  third  empire  is  shown  to  be  the  Grecian.  "The 
ram  which  thou  sawest  having  two  horns  are  the  kings 
of  Media  and  Persia."  There  you  have  also  a  con- 
firmation of  what  I  said  before,  as  to  the  second 
kingdom.  But  when  this  ram  was  there,  a  fierce  goat 
came  that  had  a  notable  horn  between  his  eyes.  With 
the  single  horn  that  he  has  in  his  head,  he  butts 
against  the  ram,  who  represented  these  kings  of  Media 
and  Persia.  Here  we  have  the  third  kingdom,  that 
was  to  "  bear  rule  over  all  the  earth."  What  is  its 
name  ?  The  21st  verse  gives  the  answer.  "  The  rough 
goat  is  the  King  of  Grecia,  and  the  great  horn  that  is 
between  his  eyes  is  the  first  king."  We  do  not  need 
history  to  explain  prophecy.  We  have  here  the 
distinct,  positive  answer  from  the  word  of  God,  as  to 
what  the  third  kingdom  is ;  and  all  real  research  you 
may  make  in  history  will  only  confirm  this,  but  you 
do  not  need  it.  If  you  take  your  stand  upon  the  word 
of  God,  you  are  upon  a  ground  that  no  history  can 
touch  for  a  single  instant.  God,  who  gives  the  only 
sure  account,  shows  that  the  Medo- Persian  empire  is 
followed  by  the  Grecian.  The  sole  great  horn  of  the 
latter  is  broken,  and  "  for  it  came  up  four  notable  ones, 
towards  the  four  winds  of  heaven."     The  kingdom  of 


38  DANIEL. 

Alexander,  at  liis  death,  was  broken  up  into  four  great 
parts,  which  his  generals  fought  for.  You  have  their 
comparative  littleness  in  the  presence  of  Alexander. 
He  was  the  great  horn,  the  first  king  and  representative 
of  the  third  kingdom.  The  next  question  is,  What 
was  to  follow  that  ?  What  other  great  empire  was  to 
succeed:  and  that,  the  last  empire  before  God  should 
set  up  His  kingdom?  The  Old  Testament  history 
closes  before  the  third  empire  begins.  The  last  facts 
historically  stated  are  in  the  Book  of  Nehemiah,  while 
the  Persian  was  still  the  great  king:  i.e.,  the  second 
empire  was  yet  supreme.  But  the  New  Testament 
history  opens,  and  what  is  found  there  ?  I  have  only 
to  read  the  beginning  of  Luke,  and  I  hear  of  another 
great  empire  then  ruling.  "  It  came  to  pass  in  those 
days,  that  there  went  out  a  decree  from  Cwsar 
Augustus,  that  all  the  world  should  be  taxed."  There 
we  have,  at  once,  the  fourth  kingdom,  without  re- 
quiring to  ask  history  for  it.  There  is  a  fourth 
kingdom,  and  the  word  of  God  shows  it  to  be  universal; 
it  summons  men  throughout  the  world  to  be  enrolled 
in  its  register,  and  God  takes  care  that  there  should  be 
a  legal  acknowledgment  even  of  His  own  Son's  having 
been  then  born. 

The  fourth  kingdom,  then,  was  the  Roman  empire. 
WTien  I  know  that  from  Scripture,*  I  can  go  to  his- 
tory, which  tells  me  that  it  was  the  Roman  Empire 
which  crushed  the  power  of  Greece.  They  got  the 
Greeks  first  to  join  them  in  beating  the  Macedonians, 
and  then  they  turned  upon  the  Greeks,  and  soon  put 
them  down. 

Afterwards,  the  Romans  extended  their  conquests 
all  over  Asia.     What  does  God  say  about  it  ?     "  The 

*  I  have  no  doubt  that,  in  "the  ships  of  Chittim,"  (Dan. 
xi.  30,)  we  have  a  reference  to  the  naval  power  of  Eome, 
which  interfered  with  Antiochus  Epiphanes.  But  as  the  allusion 
is  less  explicit  than  Luke  ii.  1,  iii.  1,  xx.  22 — 25,  John  xi.  48, 
xix.  15,  I  add  the  dkect  proof  from  the  New  Testament. 


CHAPTER    II.  39 

fourth  kingdom  shall  be  strong  as  iron:  forasmuch  as 
iron  breaketh  in  pieces. ..  .and  as  iron  that  breaketh 
all  these,  shall  it  break  in  pieces  and  bruise."  And  if 
people  do  call  in  history,  can  they  see  things  more 
clearly?  Where  can  they  show  as  just  a  description 
of  that  empire  as  that  which  God  gives  here?  One 
well-known  historian,  when  speaking  about  the  em- 
pires, describes  them  in  the  liveliest  imagery,  derived 
from  these  very  symbols  of  Daniel  the  prophet.  He 
could  find  no  figures  so  apt  as  those  which  the  Spirit  of 
God  had  consecrated  to  their  use  already,  though  every 
one  knows  it  was  from  no  lack  of  imagination,  any 
more  than  from  the  wish  to  accredit  Scripture. 

Even  this  is  not  all  that  God  gives  us.  "  Forasmuch 
as  iron  breaketh  in  pieces  and  subdueth  all  things :  and 
as  iron  that  breaketh  all  these,  shall  it  break  in  pieces 
and  bruise."  Never  was  a  description  more  exactly  to 
the  point.  I  could  quote  passages  from  the  old  Roman 
writers,  which  show  that  they  themselves  gave  an 
account  of  their  own  empire  and  policy,  in  terms 
substantially  similar. 

But  there  was  something  they  could  not  tell,  and 
that  was  beyond  what  man  could  foresee.  That  power 
that  above  all  other  was  distinguished  for  its  strength 
in  warring  down  every  one  that  rose  up  against  it, 
whatever  its  kindness  to  those  who  stooped  to  the 
conqueror — that  very  power  is  described  here  thus: — 
"  And  whereas  thou  sawest  the  feet  and  toes,  part  of 
potter's  clay,  and  part  of  iron,  the  kingdom  shall  be 
divided."  The  Romans  do  not  tell  us  this.  History 
is  not  always  a  truthful  speaker.  Those  who  describe 
their  own  country's  statecraft  are  not  in  general  very 
trustworthy.  If  there  was  that  which  threatened  ex- 
tinction, they  are  as  glad  to  hide  it,  as  they  were  ready 
to  boast  in  whatever  evidences  their  boldness,  strength, 
and  glory ;  but  God  tells  all  out ;  and  we  find,  that  the 
same  empire,  that  was  to  be  so  celebrated  for  its  amazing 
strength,    is  to    exhibit  also    the    greatest    inherent 


40  DANIEL. 

weakness.     "  There  shall  be  in  it  of  the  strength  of 
the  iron,  forasmuch  as  thou  sawest  the  iron  mixed  with 
miry  clay.     And  as  the  toes  of  the  feet  .were  part  of 
iron  and  part  of  clay,  so  the  kingdom  shall  be  partly 
strong  and  partly  broken.     And  whereas  thou  sawest 
iron  mixed  with  miry  clay,  they  shall  mingle  them- 
selves with  the  seed  of  men :  but  they  shall  not  cleave 
one  to  another,  even  as  iron  is  not  mixed  with  clay." 
The  iron  was  the  original  element;   the   clay  was 
brought  in  subsequently,  and  properly  did  not  belong  to 
the  great  metal   statue:  it  was  a  foreign  ingredient. 
When  and  whence  did  it  come  ?    I  believe  that  the  Spirit 
of  God  in  using  the  figure  of  clay  refers  not  to  the  original 
Roman  element,  which  had  the  strength  of  the  iron, 
but  to  the  barbaric  hordes,  which  broke  in  at  a  later 
period,  weakening  the  Roman  power,  and  forming  by 
degrees  separate  kingdoms.     I  can,  however,  only  state 
this  as  my  own  judgment,  founded  upon   the  general 
use  of  Scripture  language  and  ideas.     We  have  what 
was   not    properly   and    originally    Roman,   but   was 
brought  in  from  elsewhere:  and  it  is  the  mixture  of  the 
two  elements  that  is  productive  of  the  weakness,  and 
that  finally  leads  to  division.     These  hordes  of  barba- 
rians, that  forced  themselves  in  at  first,  professed  not  to 
be  conquerors,  but  guests  of  Rome,  and  finally  settled 
themselves  within  its  limits.     This  it  was  that  subse- 
quently led  to  the  division  of  the  empire  into  a  number 
of  separate  independent  kingdoms,  when  the  power  and 
pride  of  imperial   Rome  was  broken.      Charlemagne, 
later  on,  cherished  the  desire  of  universal  empire,  which 
he  laboured  hard  to  realize ;  but  it  w^as  a  failure ;   and 
all  that  he   acquired  in  his  life  was  separated  in  his 
death.     Another  man  attempted  it  in  our  own  days: 
I  mean,  of  course,  the  exile  of  St.  Helena.     He  had  at 
heart  the  same  universal  monarchy.     What  was  the 
issue  ?     His  success  was  still  more  short  lived.    All  was 
completely  broken  up  into  its  original  constituents  before 
he  had  breathed  his  last.     And  so  it  will  continue  in 


CHAPTER    II.  41 

the  main,  until  the  moment  spoken  of  here,  but  more 
fully  entered  into  in  the  book  of  the  Kevelation. 

This  is,  I  believe,  what  Scripture  lays  down  about 
the  matter.  There  will  be,  before  the  age  closes,  the 
most  remarkable  union  of  two  apparently  contradictory 
conditions — a  universal  head  of  empire,  and  separate 
independent  kingdoms  besides,  each  of  which  will  have 
its  own  king ;  but  that  one  man  will  be  the  emperor 
over  all  these  kings.  Till  that  time  comes,  every  effort 
to  unite  the  different  kingdoms  under  one  head  will  be 
a  total  failure.  Even  then,  it  will  be  not  by  fusing 
them  together  into  one  kingdom,  but  each  independent 
kingdom  will  have  its  own  king,  though  all  subject  to 
one  head.  God  has  said  they  shall  be  divided.  This, 
then,  is  what  is  shown  us.  "  They  shall  not  cleave 
one  to  another,  even  as  iron  is  not  mixed  with  clay." 
And  if  ever  there  was  a  portion  of  the  world,  that  has 
represented  this  incoherent  system  of  kingdoms,  it  is 
modern  Europe.  As  long  as  the  iron  predominated, 
there  was  one  empire :  but  then  came  in  the  clay,  or 
foreign  material.  In  virtue  of  the  iron  there  will  be  a 
universal  monarchy,  while  in  virtue  of  the  clay  there 
will  be  separate  kingdoms. 

"  And  in  the  days  of  these  kings  shall  the  God  of 
heaven  set  up  a  kingdom  which  shall  never  be  destroy- 
ed :  and  the  kingdom  shall  not  be  left  to  other  people, 
but  it  shall  break  in  pieces  and  consume  all  these 
kingdoms,  and  it  shall  stand  for  ever."  Mark  those 
words,  "  In  the  days  of  these  kings."  They  are  a  com- 
plete answer  to  those  who  have  tried  to  make  this  the 
birth  of  Christ,  and  the  introduction  of  what  they  call 
the  kingdom  of  grace.  At  the  time  here  spoken  of, 
the  empire  is  broken  up  and  divided.  Was  that  the 
case  when  the  Lord  was  born  ?  Could  it  be  said  then, 
"  in  the  days  of  these  kings  ?"  Nothing  of  the  sort. 
Rome  was  then  in  its  fullest  power:  there  was  not 
the  smallest  breach  apparent  throughout  the  empire. 
There  was  but  one  ruler,  but  one  will  predominant. 


42  DANIEL. 

It  was  not  therefore  "  in  the  days  of  these  kings." 
What  then  does  the  verse  refer  to  ?  I  believe  to  the 
closing  scene  of  the  Roman  Empire:  not' to  the  time 
when  Christ  was  born,  but  when  God  "  bringeth  again 
the  First-begotten  into  the  world  "  —  when  the  Lord 
Jesus  is  brought  in,  not  as  the  Nazarene  to  suffer  and 
to  die,  but  when  He  comes  wath  divine  power  to  judge. 
The  "  stone  cut  without  hands,"  though  in  a  sense 
applicable  to  Him  at  any  time,  applies  really  and  fully 
then.  We  have  the  interpretation  here.  It  does  not 
refer  to  His  person,  so  much  as  to  the  kingdom  that 
the  God  of  heaven  shall  set  up  in  Him  and  by  Him. 
No  doubt  He  is  the  stone;  but  this  is  a  destructive 
stone  extinguishing  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth.  Can 
any  one  deny  it  ?  The  stone  was  "  cut  out  of  the 
mountain  without  hands,  and  it  brake  in  pieces  the 
iron,  the  brass,  the  clay,  the  silver,  and  the  gold." 
There  was  the  crash  of  all  the  image.  Was  that  the 
case  when  Christ  was  born  ?  Did  Christ  attack  the  Ro- 
man Empire  ?  Did  He  destroy  it  ?  On  the  contrary, 
Christ  w^as  killed,  and  it  was  its  minister  that  was  the 
official  means  of  His  crucifixion.  The  image,  we  may 
say,  smote  Him,  instead  of  His  smiting  the  image. 
Such  an  interpretation  is  unworthy  of  serious  attention. 
The  stone  falls  upon  the  feet  of  the  image,  the  toes 
of  which  were  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay;  that  is, 
upon  the  last  condition  of  the  Roman  Empire.  After 
all  the  division,  the  stone  smites  it.  Thus,  its  action 
is  not  grace,  but  judgment.  It  is  not  a  sow^er  sowing 
seed,  to  produce  life ;  still  less  is  it  leaven  diffusing 
itself  over  certain  limits.  Its  blow  falls  destructively 
upon  the  image  and  shatters  it  completely.  It  is  evi- 
dent, then,  that  the  first  coming  of  Christ  is  not  the 
question  here.  His  birth  is  wholly  passed  by.  It  took 
place  during  the  course  of  the  Roman  Empire  and  in 
no  way  destroyed  it.  Whereas  what  will  deal  with 
the  Roman  Empire  yet,  is  the  coming  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  in  a  day  that  is  future. 


CHAPTER    II.  43 

But  some  will  say,  How  can  tliat  be  ?  There  is  no 
Roman  Empire  now.  But  let  me  ask,  How  does 
this  show  that  there  is  not  to  be  a  Roman  Empire  ? 
Can  you  prove  that  the  Roman  Empire  is  not  to  revive  ? 
What  is  given  me  here  is,  that  the  iron,  the  clay,  the 
brass,  the  silver,  and  the  gold  were  broken  in  pieces 
together,  and  became  like  the  chaff  of  the  summer 
threshing-floors. 

Further,  we  are  told  in  the  Revelation,  that  the 
beast,  representing  the  imperial  power  of  Rome,  is 
remarkably  characterized,  as  "  the  beast  that  was,  and 
is  not,  and  yet  is."  (Rev.  xvii.  8.)  The  last  clause, 
which  in  the  English  version  is  so  obscurely  rendered 
"and  yet  is,"  should  be  "and  shall  be  present."*  There 
is  no  doubt  about  this  at  all:  no  man  that  knows 
the  Apocalypse  properly  would  dispute  it.  If  so,  it 
follows  that  the  beast,  or  empire  that  existed,  when 
St.  John  was  there,  was  to  be  in  a  state  of  non- 
existence, and  then  to  appear  again,  ascending  out  of 
the  bottomless  pit.  That  is,  it  will  be  the  pow^r  of 
Satan  that  will  accomplish  the  re-union  of  the  frag- 
ments that  make  up  the  Roman  Empire.  And  it  is 
remarkable,  that  when  the  beast  is  seen  again,  this 
chapter  shows  that  there  will  be  ten  kings  who  will 
agree  to  give  their  power  to  "the  beast,"  or  person  then 
raised  up  of  Satan  to  organize  and  govern  the  empire. 
He  will  use  this  vast  power  against  God  and  the 
Lamb;  every  appearance  of  Christianity  will  be  de- 
stroyed, idolatry  will  be  restored,  and  antichrist  set 
up.  Then  God,  as  it  were,  will  say,  I  will  endure  this 
no  longer;  My  hour  is  come.  The  Lord  Jesus  will 
leave  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  will  execute  judgment 
upon  these  vile  pretenders. 

"  In   the  days   of   these   kings   shall   the    God   of 

heaven  set  up  a  kingdom it  shall  break  in  pieces, 

and  consume  all  these  kingdoms,  and  it  shall  stand  for 

*  It  depends  on  an  indisputably  good  various  reading. 


44  DANIEL. 

ever."  The  first  action  of  that  stone  is  to  destroy.  It 
is  not  a  question  of  saving  souls:  it  is  judgment  and 
destruction:  putting  down  kingdoms,  and'' everything 
that  exalts  itself  against  the  true  God. 

But  a  difficulty  may  arise  here,  as  to  how  it  is  that, 
when  this  destructive  blow  falls,  we  have  the  gold,  the 
silver,  and  the  brass  all  jumbled  together,  with  the 
iron  and  clay — as  if  these  successive  empires  existed 
together  at  the  end.  The  truth  is,  that  though  Baby- 
lon, for  instance,  lost  its  imperial  place,  it  existed 
subordinately  under  the  powers  that  succeeded ;  and  so 
with  each  following  empire  till  Eome.  (Comp.  Dan. 
vii.  11,  12.)  So  that  when  the  final  judgment  of  the 
fourth  empire  takes  place,  there  will  still  be  the  repre- 
sentatives of  its  three  predecessors,  distinct  from  itself. 
And  this  makes  evident,  that  by  the  last  empire  is 
meant  what  is  exclusively  western,  and  not  that  which 
had  belonged  to  the  previous  empires. 

Thus  it  is  the  great  seat  of  modern  civilization  (i.  e., 
the  ten  kingdoms  of  the  beast)  that  will  be  the  scene 
of  this  tremendous  apostasy.  And  this  will  be  allowed 
in  the  judicial  wisdom  of  God,  because  men  have  not 
received  the  love  of  the  truth  that  they  might  be 
saved.  God  will  send  them  strong  delusion,  that  they 
should  believe  a  lie :  "  that  they  all  might  be  damned 
who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure  in  un- 
righteousness." I  have  nou  a  question  that  this  is 
the  future  history  of  the  world,  on  the  authority  of  the 
word  of  God.  This  remarkable  prophecy  brings  us 
down  from  the  first  beginning  of  imperial  power,  and 
finally  shows  us  in  the  last  days,  before  God  sets  up 
His  kingdom,  the  judgment  of  the  world  as  it  is,  when 
God  will  deal  with  the  quick,  not  with  the  dead  merely. 
"  He  will  judge  the  habitable  world  in  righteousness, 
by  that  man  whom  he  hath  ordained;  whereof  he 
hath  given  assurance  unto  all  men,  in  that  he  hath 
raised  him  from  the  dead." 


CHAPTER   III. 

The  chapters  whicli  fill  up  tlie  interval  between  chaps, 
ii.  and  vii.  are  devoted  to  the  statement  of  historical 
facts,  and  therefore  might  not  seem,  at  first  sight,  to 
have  a  prophetical  character.  But  we  must  bear  in 
.mind  that  Scripture  in  general  has  an  infinitely  larger 
scope  than  the  bare  statement  of  circumstances,  be  it 
ever  so  instructive  and  important  morally.  Indeed, 
this  is  true  of  all  the  Bible.  Take  such  a  book,  for 
instance,  as  Genesis.  Though  it  is  clearly  historical, 
and  one  of  the  simplest  narratives  in  the  Bible,  yet  it 
would  be  wrong  to  strip  it  of  an  outlook  into  the 
most  distant  future.  We  have  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
the  New  Testament  referring  over  and  over  again  to 
its  most  significant  facts.  Thus,  in  the  incident  of 
Melchizedec,  we  see  the  bearing  that  is  given  it  by 
the  Holy  Ghost  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and 
the  allusion  to  it  in  other  parts  of  Scripture.  A 
priest  and  king,  two  characters  that  were  often  united 
in  those  days,  meets  Abraham  on  his  return  from  the 
slaughter  of  the  kings,  brings  forth  suited  refreshment 
for  the  victors,  pronounces  blessing  in  the  name  of 
Him  whose  priest  he  was,  and  receives  tithes  as  well 
from  Abraham.  Yet  we  must  remember  that  the 
word  of  God  reasons  on  this,  as  indicative  of  a  vast 
change  which  has  already  come  in,  and  leaves  open  a 
good  deal  more,  looking  onward  to  the  day  of  Christ, 
as  I  conceive.  In  the  Hebrews,  where  the  subject  ol 
Christ's  priesthood,  as  now  in  heaven,  is  discussed, 
some  important  features  of  the  type  are  barely  alluded 
to,  not  applied.  The  primary  drift  there  is  to  show, 
from  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  a  higher  character  of 
priesthood  than  that  of  Aaron — a  priesthood  that  was 
not  derived  from  any  predecessor,  nor  handed  down  to 
a  successor.     I  only  refer  to  this  to  show  that  Scripture 


46  DANIEL. 

gives  a  typical  (and  what  is  that,  in  other  words,  but 
a  prophetical  ?)  value  to  what  might  appear  to  be  an 
authentic  account  of  an  historical  event-r  Such  a 
character  I  claim  for  these  facts  in  the  Book  of 
Daniel.  For  it  is  plain  that,  if  in  the  most  un- 
varnished books  of  inspired  history,  such  as  Genesis 
or  Exodus,  where  prophecy  is  not  the  ostensible  object 
or  peculiarly-marked  feature,  you  have  incident  on 
incident,  clearly  used  in  the  New  Testament  as  fore- 
shadowing good  things  to  come,  we  may  still  more 
strongly  infer  that,  in  a  prophecy  such  as  this  of 
Daniel,  we  are  to  read  not  only  the  visions  as  directly 
prophetic,  but  also  the  facts  connected  with  them  as 
instinct  with  a  kindred  spirit.  It  were  easy  to  produce 
analogous  examples  from  elsewhere.  Let  us  look  for 
a  moment  at  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah.  There,  after  a 
long  series  of  prophetic  strains,  you  have  a  break. 
Certain  well-known  historical  facts  are  related — the 
invasion  and  destruction  of  the  Assyrian;  and  as  to 
Hezekiah,  his  sickness  and  his  recovery,  the  wonder 
done  in  the  land,  and  the  visit  of  the  embassy  from 
the  King  of  Babylon.  Then  you  have  the  prophecy 
recommencing,  and  following  on  its  course.  It  could 
be  readily  proved  that  the  facts  related  of  Sennacherib 
and  Hezekiah  have  a  definite  and  most  instructive 
bearing  upon  the  prophecies  in  the  midst  of  which  they 
are  imbedded.  So  that  meisly  to  regard  them  as  facts 
introduced  historically  into  such  a  connexion,  and,  with 
no  further  or  deeper  reason,  dividing  one  half  of  the 
book  from  the  other,  would  be  to  deprive  them  of  at 
least  half  their  value.  Am  I  too  bold,  therefore,  in 
assuming  it  as  a  general  truth,  applicable  to  the  word 
of  God  as  a  whole,  that  Scripture  is  not  to  be  lowered 
down  to  the  mere  recital  of  the  facts  it  records;  but 
that  those  facts  were  chosen  expressly  in  the  wisdom 
of  God,  and  were  given  in  an  orderly  manner,  for  the 
purpose  of  representing  the  awful  ways  of  man  and 
Satan,  and  the  glorious  scenes  before  the  mind  of  God 


CHAPTER    III.  47 

Himself,  tliat  are  to  be  re-enacted  in  the  latter  day  ? 
And  if  this  be  the  case  with  the  strictly  historical 
portion  of  God's  word,  it  is  only  reasonable  that  it 
should  be  emphatically  true  of  a  prophetic  book  such 
as   this. 

The  evidence,  however,  of  this  will  much  more 
appear  as  we  follow  the  facts  as  they  are  given  here. 
We  shall  then  see  what  is  the  connexion,  and  what 
the  special  bearing,  of  the  chapters  themselves,  better 
than  by  more  laboured  presumptions  that  one  might 
gather  from  other  parts  of  the  Word  of  God.  For 
that  is  and  must  be  the  grandest  testimony  of  all  to 
the  real  meaning  of  Scripture.  Revealed  truth  is 
like  the  light.  It  is  not  that  which  requires  illumina- 
tion from  without  in  order  to  let  us  know  what  it 
means;  but  it  displays  itself.  You  do  not  need  a 
taper  or  a  torch  from  man  to  find  out  the  light  of  day. 
The  sun,  as  it  wants  none,  entirely  eclipses  all  such 
artificial  helps;  it  shines  for  itself,  and  rules  the  day. 
So  it  is  that,  wherever  you  find  a  man  capable  of 
seeing,  the  truth  commends  itself.  He  has,  what  the 
Evangelist  Luke  calls,  "  an  honest  heart,"  and  what 
other  Scriptures  speak  of  as  "  a  single  eye."  Wher- 
ever the  truth  is  really  brought  to  bear  upon  a  man 
who  is  open  to  receive  it  as  the  precious  light  of  God 
in  Christ,  they  answer  mutually  to  each  other.  The 
heart  is  prepared  for  it — desires  it;  and  when  the 
truth  is  heard,  bows,  receives,  and  enjoys  it.  When 
the  heart,  on  the  contrary,  is  occupied  with  itself,  or 
•with  the  world,  there  is  no  truth  that  can  possibly 
bend  it.  The  will  of  man  is  at  work;  and  that  is  the 
constant,  unvarying  enemy  of  God.  Therefore  it  is 
said  (John  iii.)  that  no  man  can  see  or  enter  the 
kingdom  of  God  without  being  born  again — born  of 
water  and  of  the  Spirit.  That  is,  there  must  be  a 
direct,  positive  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  dealing  with 
the  soul,  judging  it  and  giving  a  new  nature,  which 
has  as  decided  an   affinity   for  the  things  of  God  as 


4S  DANIEL. 

the  old  life  has  for  the  things  of  the  world.  The 
Spirit  acts  upon  the  new  creature,  and  gives  intelli- 
gence; and  the  truth  is,  we  may  say,. -its  natural 
sustenance. 

I  do  not  doubt,  therefore,  that  we  shall  find,  in  this 
third  chapter  of  Daniel,  as  in  the  three  which  follow, 
that  each  has  its  distinctive  features;  and  that  these 
were  not  merely  seen  in  what  was  passing  in  the  days 
of  Daniel,  but  that  they  were  registered  by  the 
prophet  to  indicate  the  course  now  past,  and  the 
future  destiny  of  the  great  Gentile  powers.  We  are 
to  view  them  in  the  light  of  the  prophecies  that 
surround  them — to  take  them,  not  as  facts  put  down, 
as  any  man  might  do  it,  at  haphazard.  In  short,  God 
has  given  them  here,  linked  in  the  most  intimate  way 
with  the  prophecy  where  they  are  found. 

In  chap.  ii.  we  saw  God's  sovereign  dealing  with 
a  man,  raised  up  from  among  the  Gentiles,  to  be  the 
minister  of  His  authority.  This  takes  a  new  form,  in 
consequence  of  the  people  of  Israel  and  their  kings 
having  definitively  proved  themselves  unworthy  of 
God's  purpose  and  calling.  Thereon  God  introduces  the 
imperial  system  of  government  in  the  world.  It  was 
not  merely  allowing  a  single  nation  to  grow  in  power, 
and  be  the  terror  of  its  neighbours;  or  creating  a 
blessed  example  of  the  ways  of  God.  One  ruler  is 
allowed  to  be  the  master  of  the  world  —  one  great 
sovereign,  not  only  himself  mighty,  but  a  ruler  of 
kings,  who  were  but  subordinate  or  satellites.  This 
began  with  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  it  characterizes  the 
Gentile  empires.  An  objection  might  be  raised,  that 
we  do  not  find  any  such  power  existing  now.  That  is 
true.  There  exists  no  such  imperial  rule  in  the 
world,  nor  has  there  been  since  the  fall  of  Rome; 
though  there  have  been  certain  pretenders  to  it.  But 
it  has  failed.     The  Book  of  the  Revelation  shows  us 


CHAPTER    III,  49 

this  suspension.  There  was  such  a  ruler  once,  while 
imperial  Rome  subsisted — one  who  had  kings  for  his 
servants.  But  now  there  is  an  interval,  when  all  that 
is  over.  Still  it  is  to  be  revived.  And  this,  I  believe, 
is  one  great  fact  that  awaits  the  world  at  the  present 
time.  It  will  take  men  by  surprise  ;  and  when  ac- 
complished, it  will  be  the  means  of  concentrating  the 
power  of  Satan,  and  of  bringing  about  his  plans  on 
the  earth. 

All  this  has  a  very  serious  interest  for  us.  We 
stand  near  the  crisis  in  the  world's  history;  and 
even  those  who  look  for  signs  own  that  we  are  draw- 
ing near  the  close  of  the  age,  and  of  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles.  The  re-organization  of  the  empire  is  not  far 
off.  And  it  is  solemn  to  remember  that,  when  revived, 
it  will  not  be  a  mere  repetition  of  what  has  been  done 
before;  but  the  power  of  Satan  will  be  put  forth  in  a 
way  never  yet  w^itnessed.  "  And  God  shall  send 
strong  delusion  that  men  should  believe  a  lie,  because 
they  believed  not  the  truth,  and  had  pleasure  in  un- 
righteousness." Very  many  of  my  Christian  brethren 
may  cry  out  that  I  speak  uncharitably.  The  Word  of 
God,  however,  is  wiser  than  men.  It  is  not  a  thought 
of  mine,  nor  of  any  other  man.  None  would  have 
gathered  such  a  prospect  from  their  own  minds.  But 
God  has  most  clearly  revealed  it.  People  may  plead 
the  wonderful  works  of  God  of  late  in  one  distant 
country  and  another;  and  the  answer  of  blessing  that 
is,  as  it  were,  echoing  back  from  some  quarters  near  us. 
But  these  things  in  no  way  contradict  what  has  been 
stated.  We  may  always  see  these  two  things  going 
on  together,  when  men  approach  the  verge  of  some 
mighty  change.  On  the  one  hand,  the  general  power 
of  evil  increases,  and  the  pride  of  man  swells  to  an 
unprecedented  height.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Spirit 
of  God  works  energetically,  winning  souls  to  Christ, 
and  separating  those  that  are  to  be  saved  from  the 
destruction  which  is  the  necessary  end  of  sin  and  pride. 

E 


50  DAKIEL. 

Hence,  I  believe,  when  any  crisis  of  evil  is  at  hand, 
what  we  ought  to  expect  is  this  increase  of  blessing 
from  God,  during  the  time  of  suspense  winch  imme- 
diately precedes  judgment. 

But,  turning  to  the  immediate  subject  of  the  chap- 
ter, imperial  power  is  in  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles ; 
and  the  first  thing  told  of  that  power,  is,  that  It  was 
used  to  set  up  idolatry  —  abused,  rather,  to  give  a 
splendour  to  idolatry  unexampled  in  the  old  world. 
And  a  most  humbling  consideration  it  is:  the  evident 
connexion  between  the  golden  idol  that  Nebuchad- 
nezzar set  up  in  the  plain  of  Dura,  and  that  image 
which  he  had  seen  in  the  visions  of  the  night.  It  is 
true  that  the  image  he  had  made  was  not  an  exact 
copy.  Still,  is  it  not  grave  to  find  that  the  first  thing 
that  Nebuchadnezzar  does,  as  far  as  Scripture  gives  it 
to  us,  is  to  command  a  golden  image  to  be  set  up, 
that  all  the  peoi:)les,  the  nations,  and  the  languages, 
might  fall  down  and  worship  it  ?  One  thing,  at  least, 
is  plain:  that  whether  the  golden  head  of  the  great 
image  had  suggested  the  thought  or  not,  at  any  rate 
it  did  not  hinder  him.  On  the  contrary,  here  we  find 
that  the  authority  which  God  had  put  into  his  hands, 
is  turned  to  this  frightful  use.  The  reason,  I  believe, 
was  this :  Nebuchadnezzar  was  a  man  as  wise  accord- 
ing to  the  flesh  as  he  wa?  wilful.  He  stood  most 
evidently  in  a  place  that  no  man  had  ever  occupied 
before.  Not  only  the  sovereign  of  a  vast  kingdom, 
but  the  absolute  master  of  many  kingdoms,  speaking 
different  tongues,  and  having  all  sorts  of  contrary 
habits  and  policies.  What  then  was  to  be  done  with 
them?  How  were  all  these  various  nations  to  be 
kept  and  governed  under  a  single  head  ?  There  is  an 
influence  that  is  mightier  than  any  other  thing,  which, 
if  common,  binds  men  closely  together;  but  which,  if 
jarring,  on  the  contrary,  more  than  anything  else, 
arrays   people   against   people,    house   against   house, 


CHAPTER    III.  51 

cliildren  against  parents,  and  parents  against  children, 
nay,  husbands  and  wives  against  each  other.  There 
is  no  social  dislocation  to  be  compared  with  that  which 
is  produced  by  a  difference  of  religion.  Consequently, 
to  avert  so  great  a  peril,  union  in  religion  was  the 
measure  that  the  devil  insinuated  into  the  mind  of  the 
politic  Chaldean  as  the  surest  bond  of  his  empire.  He 
must  have  one  common  religious  influence  in  order  to 
weld  together  the  hearts  of  his  subjects.  In  all  pro- 
bability, to  his  mind  it  was  a  political  necessity. 
Unite  them  in  worship,  unite  all  hearts  in  bowing 
down  before  one  and  the  same  object,  and  there  would 
be  something  that  would  give  the  hope  and  opportunity 
of  consolidating  all  these  scattered  fragments  into  a 
whole.  Accordingly,  he  projects  the  idea  of  the 
gorgeous  image  of  gold  for  the  plain  of  Dura,  near  the 
capital  of  the  empire:  and  there  it  is  that  he  summons 
all  the  leading  men,  the  princes,  the  governors,  and  the 
captains,  the  judges,  the  treasurers,  the  counsellors,  the 
sheriffs,  and  all  the  rulers  of  the  provinces,  all  m  powder 
and  authority,  to  come  together  to  the  dedication.  He 
surrounds  it,  too,  with  everything  that  could  attract 
nature  and  act  u|)on  the  senses.  All  kinds  of  music 
must  contribute  to  the  scene.  When  the  sound  of  the 
cornet,  flute,  harp,  sackbut,  psaltery,  dulcimer,  &c., 
was  heard,  this  was  the  signal  for  the  representatives 
of  that  vast  realm  to  "  fall  down  and  worship  the 
golden  image  that  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  had  set 
lip."  Man  can  but  make  an  idol ;  he  cannot  even  find 
out  the  true  God.  If  it  is  a  question  of  having 
the  w^orld's  homage,  the  only  thing  that  will  carry 
awav  men  on  a  vast  scale  must  be  somethinsr  of  this 
creation,  something  adapted  to  the  nature  of  man  as 
he  is.  Yon  cannot  unite  hearts  that  are  true  with 
such  as  are  false.  But  if  the  true  God  is  shut  out, 
Satan  is  there  to  find  something  which,  if  introduced 
by  the  authority  of  man,  may  command  all  but  uni- 
versal acquiescence.     So  it  was  here.     The  authority, 


52  DANIEL. 

therefore,  of  the  empire  was  put  forth,  and  all  were 
commanded  to  worship  the  golden  image  on  pain  of 
death.  *'  AYhoso  falleth  not  down  and  worshippeth, 
shall  the  same  hour  he  cast  into  the  midst  of  a  burning 
fiery  furnance." 

"  Therefore,  at  that  time,  when  all  the  people  heard 
the  sound  of  the  cornet,  flute,  harp,  sackbut,  psaltery, 
and  all  kinds  of  music,  all  the  people,  the  nations, 
and  the  languages,  fell  down  and  worshipped  the 
golden  image  that  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  had 
set  up."     (Verse  7.) 

But  there  were  some  apart  from  that  idolatrous 
throng;  very  few,  alas  !  though,  no  doubt,  there  were 
others  hidden.  We  may  be  bold  enough  to  say  there 
was  one  not  mentioned  here — Daniel  himself.  How- 
ever that  be,  his  three  companions  were  not  there  ; 
and  this  made  them  obnoxious  to  others;  especially 
as  their  position,  exalted  as  it  was  in  the  province  of 
Babylon,  exposed  them  to  more  public  notice.  Of 
course  they  were  singled  out  for  the  king's  displeasure. 
"  Wherefore  at  that  time  certain  Chaldeans  came  near 
and  accused  the  Jews."  Then  they  remind  the  king 
of  the  decree  that  he  had  made,  and  add,  "  There  are 
certain  Jews,  whom  thou  hast  set  over  the  affairs  of 
the  province  of  Babylon,  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and 
Abed-nego.  These  men,  0  king,  have  not  regarded 
thee;  they  serve  not  thy  gods,  nor  worship  the  golden 
image  which  thou  hast  set  up.  Then  Nebuchadnezzar, 
in  his  rage  and  fury,  commanded  to  bring  Shadrach, 
Meshach,  and  Abed-nego,"  &c. 

Now  this  appears  to  me  a  fact  of  very  great  impor- 
tance. The  use  which  the  Gentile  makes  of  his  power 
is  to  set  up  a  religion  connected  with  the  politics  ot 
the  kingdom,  a  religion  for  present  earthly  purposes. 
Where  this  is  the  case,  religion  cannot  be  left  between 
God  and  the  conscience.  It  is  no  longer  a  question  of 
having  a  real  conviction  as  to  God  and  His  truth,  nor 
is  there  liberty  to  judge  the  imposture.     The  worship 


CHAPTER    III.  53 

devised  by  the  Gentile  king  is  bound  down  upon  the 
subject  under  penalty  of  death. 

There  may  be  certain  things,  "which  hinder,  for  a 
season,  the  natural  results  of  the  world's  will  in  having 
its  religion  condemned.     And  this  has  been  the  case 
for   some   time.      For  the  last  fifty  years  and  more, 
every  one  knows  there  has  been   a  certain  system  of 
opinion,    commonly  called   liberalism.      This   has  got 
hold  of  men's  minds.     In  no  way  does  it  respect  God 
and  His  Word  as  such.     Its  great  stock-in-trade  is  the 
rights  of  man.     Its  cardinal  virtue  is,  that  all  should 
be  left  free  to  think,  act,  and  worship   as  they  please. 
As  long  as  the  idea  of  man's  rights  is  allowed  to  have 
play,  the  mercy  of  God  turns  it  into  an  occasion  for 
Christians,  having  a  conscience  towards    Himself,  to 
pass  quietly  through,  and   worship  God  according  to 
His  will.     And  as  it  was  always  unquestionable  that 
God  claimed  the  right  over  His  own  people;  as    His 
revealed  will  alone  can  rightly  govern  them ;  so,  as  the 
Father,  He  now  seeks   His  children,  that  they  may 
worship   Him  in  spirit   and   in  truth.      The  renewed 
heart    and    conscience   delight   in    His   will   and    find 
the  chief  blessedness  here  in  exalting  Him.     To  the 
believer,  that  will  is  more  peremptory  than  the  abso- 
lutism of  the  heathen  king.     Liberalism  really  dislikes 
this  exclusive  claim  over  the  conscience.     Still,  it  has 
led  to  a  sort  of  calm  in  the  world;  and  the  full   ex- 
ercise of  its  authority,   as  to  religion,  is  in  abeyance 
for   the   time.      For,    apart   from   temporary    circum- 
stances, none    can  deny    that,    wherever    there    is    a 
religion  introduced  by  the  monarch,  for  the  guidance 
of    his    realm,  necessarily  it    does   not  admit  of  dif- 
ference,   contradiction,    or   compromise.      This  would 
defeat  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  imposed.     But  it 
is  to  fight  against  God.     The  monarch  himself  may 
have  a   conscience,    and  he   is,    of   course,    bound  to 
worship  God  according  to    His  will.     But  the  using 
the  authority  of   the   realm  to   coerce   others   is   the 


54 


DANIEL. 


denial,    practically,  of  God's    direct  control   over   the 
individual  conscience. 

The  lesson,  then,  that  we  have  here,  is  that,  at  the 
very  outset,  this  was  what  the  Gentile  made  of  the 
power  God  gave:  to  set  up  his  own  religion,  and  bind 
it  upon  the  whole  of  his  subjects.  That  is,  all  his 
authority  from  God  was  turned  to  deny  the  true  God, 
and  to  compel  universal  obedience  to  his  own  idol,' 
with  a  frightful  death  held  up  as  the  immediate  forfeit 
m  case  of  disobedience.  This  was  the  great  charac- 
teristic of  the  first  of  the  Gentile  empires. 

But  the  evil  of  man  and  the  craft  of  Satan  only 
serve  to  bring  the  faithful  into  view.  The  king  com- 
mands them  to  be  cast  into  the  burning  fiery  furnace. 
He  first,  no  doubt,  remonstrates,  and  gives' them  the 
opportunity  of  yielding.  "  Is  it  true,  0  Shadrach, 
Meshach,  and  Abed-nego,  do  not  ye  serve  my  gods,  nor 
worship  the  golden  image  which  I  have  set  up  ?  Now, 
if  ye  be  ready,  that  at  what  time  ye  hear  the  sound   of 

the    cornet,  flute,   harp,  &c., ye  fall  down  and 

worship  the  image  that  I  have  made,  well:  but  if  ye 
worship  not,  ye  shall  be  cast  the  same  hour  into  the 
midst  of  a  burning  fiery  furnace:  and  who  is  that  God 
that  shall  deliver  you  out  of  my  hands?"  It  is 
solemn  to  see  how  evanescent  was  the  impression  made 
upon  the  king's  mind.  The  last  act  recorded  before 
this  image  was  set  up,  was  his  falling  down  on  his  face 
before  Daniel,  paying  him  all  but  divine  honours  He 
had  even  said,  "  Of  a  truth  it  is  that  your  God  is  a 
God  of  gods  and  a  Lord  of  kings,  and  a  revealer  of 
secrets,  seeing  thou  couldst  reveal  this  secret."  But  it 
was  another  thing,  when  he  finds  out  his  power  dis- 
puted and  his  image  despised,  spite  of  the  burnino. 
nery  lurnace.  ^ 

It  was   all  very    well   to  acknowledge    God    for   a 
moment  when  He  was  revealing  a  secret  to  him.     That 


CHAPTER    III. 


55 


was  plainly  decided  in  chap.  ii.  And  Daniel  there 
represents  those  who  have  the  mind  of  God  and  who 
are  found  in  the  place  of  fearing  God.  "  The  secret  of 
the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him." 

But  God  had  delegated  power  to  the  head  of  the 
Gentiles,  Nebuchadnezzar.  And  now  that  these  men 
had  dared  to  brave  the  consequences  rather  than  wor- 
ship the  image,  he  is  filled  with  fury,  which  vents  itself 
in  scorn  of  God  Himself.  "  Who  is  that  God,"  he 
says,  "  that  shall  deliver  you  out  of  my  hands  ?  "  The 
consequence  was  that  it  became  now  a  question  between 
him  whom  God  had  set  up  and  God  Himself. 

But  a  most  beautiful  and  blessed  feature  comes  out 
here.  It  is  not  God's  way,  at  the  present,  to  meet 
power  by  power.  It  is  not  His  way  to  deal  with  the 
Gentiles  in  destruction,  even  where  they  may  be 
abusing  power  against  the  God  who  has  set  them  in 
authority.  And  I  call  your  attention  to  this,  believing 
it  to  be  an  important  thing  practically.  Shadrach, 
Meshach,  and  Abed-nego  do  not  in  any  way  take  the 
ground  of  resisting  Nebuchadnezzar  in  his  wickedness. 
We  know  afterwards  that  his  conduct  was  so  evil  that 
God  stripped  him  of  all  glory,  and  even  intelligence 
as  a  man,  for  a  long  time.  But  still  these  godly  men 
do  not  pretend  that  he  is  a  false  king  because  he  sets 
up  and  enforces  idolatry.  For  the  Christian,  the 
question  is  not  about  the  king,  but  how  he  ought  to 
behave  himself.  It  is  not  his  business  to  meddle  with 
others.  He  is  called  to  walk,  relying  on  God,  in 
obedience  and  patience.  In  the  great  mass  of  every- 
day obligations  we  can  obey  God  in  obeying  the  laws 
of  the  land  in  which  w^e  live.  This  might  be  the  case 
in  any  country.  If  one  were  even  in  a  popish  kingdom 
I  believe  that,  in  the  main,  one  might  obey  God  with- 
out transgressing  the  laws  of  the  land.  It  might  be 
necessary,  sometimes,  to  hide  oneself.  If  they  were 
coming,  for  instance,  with  their  processions,  and  re- 
quired a  mark  of  respect  to  the  host,  one  ought  to 


56 


DANIEL. 


avoid  the  appearance  of  insulting  tlieir  feelings,  while 
on  the  other  hand,  one  could  not  acquiesce  in  their 
false  worship.  -^ 

But  it   is  extremely   important  to  rememher  that 
government  is  setup  and  acknowledged  of  God;  and 
it  has,  therefore,    claims  upon  the  obedience    of   the 
Christian  man  wherever  he  may  be.     One  of  the  New 
Testament  epistles  takes  up  this  question,  the  very  one 
that,  more  than  any  other,  brings  out  the  foundations, 
characteristics,    and  effects    of  Christianity,   as  far  as 
regards    the    individual.       I    allude    to    the    Epistle 
to  the    Romans,  the   most   comprehensive   of   all  the 
Pauline  epistles.      There  we  have,  first  of  all,  man's 
condition   fully  developed;  then    the   redemption  that 
is  in   Christ  Jesus.     The  first  three  chapters  are  de- 
voted to  the  subject  of  man's  ruin;  the  next  five  to 
the  redemption  that  God  has  wrought  as  the  answer 
to  the  ruin  of  man.     Then,  in  the  three  chapters  which 
follow,  you   have  the  course  of   the   dispensations  of 
God— that  is.  His  dealings,  on  a  large  scale,  with  Israel 
and  the   Gentiles,     After  that,  we  have  the  practical, 
or,   at  least,  the  preceptive  part  of  the  epistle:  first, 
in   chapter   xii.,    the   relations    of    Christians,   one  to 
another;  and  then,  after  a  gradual  transition,  to  enemies 
at  the  close ;    and,  next,  their  relation  to  the  powers 
that    be.    (Chap,   xiii.)     The   very    expression—"  the 
powers  that  be" — seems  intended  to  embrace  every  form 
of  govei-nment  under  which  Christians  might  be  placed. 
They  were  to  be  subject,  not  merely  under  a  king,  but 
where  there  was  another  character  of  sovereign;  not 
only    where   the   government  was  ancient,  but  let  it 
be    ever  so   newly  established.      The  business  of  the 
Christian  is  to  sho^v  respect  to  all  who  are  in  authority, 
to  pay  honour  to  wdiom  honour  is  due,  owing  no  man 
anything  save  love.     What  makes  this  so  particularly 
strong,  is,  that  the  emperor  then  reigning  was  one  of 
the  worst  and   most  cruel  men   that   ever   filled   the 
throne  of  the  Cassars.     And  yet  there  is  no  reserve  or 


CHAPTER    III. 


57 


qualification,  nay,  the  very  reverse  of  an  insinuation 
that,  if  the  emi^eror  ordered  -what  was  good,  the 
Christians  were  to  obey,  but,  that  if  not,  they  were 
free  from  their  allegiance.  The  Christian  is  always  to 
obey — not  always  Nero  or  Nebuchadnezzar,  but  always 
to  obey  God.  The  consequence  is,  that  this  at  once 
delivers  from  the  very  smallest  real  ground  for  charg- 
ing a  godly  person  with  being  a  rebel.  I  am  aware 
that  nothing  will  of  necessity  bar  a  Christian  from  an 
evil  reputation.  It  is  natural  for  the  world  to  speak 
evil  of  one  that  belongs  to  Christ— to  Him  whom  they 
crucified.  But  from  all  real  ground  for  such  an  accu- 
sation this  principle  delivers  the  soul.  Obedience  to 
God  remains  untouched ;  but  I  am  to  obey  "  the  powers 
that  be"  in  whatever  is  consistent  with  obeying  God, 
no  matter  how  trying. 

The  light  of  these  faithful  Jews  was  far  short  of 
what  the  Christian  ought  to  have  now:  they  had  only 
that  revelation  of  God  which  was  the  portion  of  Israel. 
But  faith  always  understands  God:  whether  there  is 
little  light  or  much,  it  seeks  and  finds  the  guidance  of 
God.  And  these  men  were  in  the  exercise  of  a  very 
simple  faith.  The  emperor  had  put  forth  a  decree 
that  was  inconsistent  with  the  foundation  of  all  truth 
— the  one  true  God.  Israel  was  called  expressly  to 
maintain  that  Jehovah  was  such,  and  not  idols.  Here 
was  a  king  who  had  commanded  them  to  fall  down  and 
worship  an  image.  They  dare  not  sin;  they  must  obey 
God  rather  than  man.  It  is  nowhere  said,  that  we 
must  ever  disobey  man.  God  must  be  obeyed — what- 
ever the  channel,  God  always.  If  I  do  a  thing,  ever  so 
right  in  itself,  on  the  mere  ground  that  I  have  a  right 
to  disobey  man  under  certain  circumstances,  I  am  doing 
the  lesser  of  two  evils.  The  principle  for  a  Christian 
man  is  never  to  do  evil  at  all.  He  may  fail,  as  I  do 
not  deny;  but  I  do  not  understand  a  man  quietly 
settling  down  that  he  must  accept  any  evil  whatever. 
It  is  a  heathenish  idea.      An  idolater  that  had  not 


58  DANIEL. 

revealed  light  of  God  conld  know  no  better.  Yet' you 
will  find  Christian  persons  using  the  present  confession 
of  the  condition  of  the  Church  as  an  exctfse  for  per- 
severing in  known  evil,  and  saying,  Of  two  evils  we 
must  choose  the  lesser!  But  I  maintain  that,  whatever 
the  difficulty  may  be,  there  is  always  the  path  of  God 
for  the  godly  to  walk  in.  Why  then  do  I  find  practical 
difficulty  ?  Because  I  wish  to  spare  myself.  If  I 
compound  for  even  a  little  evil,  the  broad  way  of  ease 
and  honour  lies  open,  but  I  sacrifice  God  and  come 
under  the  power  of  Satan.  It  was  just  the  advice  that 
Peter  gave  our  Lord  when  He  spoke  of  being  put  to 
death.  "Far  be  it  from  thee  —  pity  thyself — Lord." 
So  with  the  Christian.  By  doing  a  little  evil,  by 
compromising  the  conscience,  by  avoiding  the  trial 
that  obeying  God  always  entails,  no  doubt  a  person 
may  thus  often  avoid  a  good  deal  of  the  world's  enmity, 
and  gain  its  praise,  because  he  does  well  to  himself. 
But  if  the  eye  is  single  in  this,  God  always  must  have 
His  rights,  always  be  owned  in  the  soul  as  having  the 
first  place.  If  God  is  compromised  by  anything  re- 
quired of  me,  then  I  must  obey  God  rather  than  man. 
Where  this  is  held  fast,  the  path  is  perfectly  plain. 
There  may  be  danger,  possibly  even  death  staring  us  in 
the  face,  as  it  was  on  this  occasion.  The  king  was 
incensed  that  these  men  should  dare  to  say,  "  O 
Nebuchadnezzar,  we  are  not-  careful  to  answer  thee  in 
this  matter."  Not  careful  to  answer  him!  And  what 
were  they  careful  for?  It  was  a  question  that  concerned 
God.  Their  care  was  to  "  render  unto  Cassar  the  things 
that  are  Cfesar's,  and  unto  God  the  things  that  are 
God's."  They  were  in  the  very  spirit  of  that  word  of 
Christ  before  it  was  given.  They  had  walked  dutifully 
in  the  place  the  king  had  assigned  them :  there  was  no 
charge  against  them.  But  now  there  arose  a  question 
that  deeply  affected  their  faith,  and  they  felt  it.  It 
was  God's  glory  that  had  been  interfered  with,  and  they 
trusted  in  Him. 


CHAPTER    III.  59 

Accordingly  they  say,  "  If  it  be  so,  our  God,  whom 
we  serve,  is  able  to  deliver  us  from  the  burning  fiery 
furnace."  How  beautiful  this  is!  In  the  presence  of 
the  king,  who  never  thought  of  serving  any  but  him- 
self, and  who  saw  none  but  himself  to  serve,  they  say, 
"  Our  God,  whom  we  serve."  They  had  served  the 
king  faithfully  before,  because  they  had  ever  served 
God:  and  they  must  serve  God  still,  even  if  it  had  the 
appearance  of  not  serving  the  king.  But  they  have 
confidence  in  God.  "  He  wid  deliver  us  out  of  thine 
hand,  0  king."  This  was  not  the  mere  abstract  truth : 
it  was  faith.  "  He  will  deliver  us."  But,  mark  some- 
thing better  still.  "  But  if  not,  be  it  known  unto  thee, 
O  king,  that  we  will  not  serve  thy  gods,  nor  worship 
the  golden  image  which  thou  hast  set  up."  Even  if 
God  will  not  put  forth  His  power  to  deliver  us,  we 
serve  Himself;  we  will  not  serve  the  gods  of  this  world. 
Oh!  beloved  reader,  in  what  a  place  of  dignity  faith 
in  the  living  God  puts  the  man  who  walks  in  it. 
These  men  were  at  that  moment  the  object  of  all 
the  attention  of  the  Babylonish  empire.  What  was 
the  image  then?  It  was  forgotten.  Nebuchadnezzar 
himself  was  powerless  in  presence  of  his  captives  of 
Israel.  There  they  were,  calm  and  undaunted,  when 
the  king  himself  showed  his  weakness.  For  what 
can  be  more  evident  weakness  than  to  yield  to  a 
fury  that  changes  the  form  of  his  visage,  and  that 
litters  menaces  which  utterly  failed  of  their  purpose  ? 
The  furnace  was  heated  seven  times  more  than  it  was 
wont  to  be  heated.  The  mighty  men,  the  king's 
agents  to  cast  them  in,  were  themselves  devoured 
by  the   flames. 

And  now,  when  the  deed  is  done,  a  new  marvel 
passes  before  the  eyes  of  the  king.  It  w^as  no  vision 
now,  but  the  manifest  power  of  God.  When  the  sword 
of  the  king  was  drawn  out  against  God,  how  miserably 
futile  it  was!  In  the  midst  of  this  burning  fiery  fur- 
nace was  a  sight  which  arrested  him.     Astonished,  the 


60'  DANIEL. 

king  "  rose  up  in  liis  haste,  and  spake,  and  said  imto 
his  counsellors,  Did  not  we  cast  three  men  bound  into 
the  midst  of  the  fire  ?  They  answered  ancTsaid,  unto 
the  king.  True,  O  king.  He  answered  and  said,  Lo, 
I  see  four  men  loose,  walking  in  the  midst  of  the  fire, 
and  they  have  no  hurt."  What  was  to  be  said  of  the 
power  of  Nebuchadnezzar  now  ?  What  did  it  avail 
to  be  the  mightiest  monarch  of  the  world,  surrounded 
too  with  all  that  constituted  the  sinews  of  his  force 
and  the  grandeur  of  his  empire  ?  There  were  these 
men,  who  had  been  bound  and  cast  into  the  midst  of 
the  burning  fiery  furnace,  apparently  the  most  pitiable 
case  in  his  realm.  But  now  he  is  obliged  to  behold 
their  bonds  burnt,  and  themselves  only  set  free  by 
what  he  meant  for  their  destruction.  But  not  this 
merely.  There  was  another  to  be  seen,  and  that  other 
he  can   but  say  is  the  Son  of  God.     "  Lo,  I  see  four 

men  loose and  the   form   of  the  fourth  is  like 

the  Son  of  God." 

Just  as  God  might  use  a  Balaam  or  a  Caiaphas 
to  speak  the  truth  when  they  little  thought  of  it 
and  had  no  communion  with  Himself  in  it,  so,  in  this 
expression  of  the  king's,  "  the  Son  of  God,"  there 
seems  to  be  amazing  propriety.  We  cannot  suppose 
that  he  entered  into  its  meaning  with  intelligence. 
Still  there  was  striking  propriety  in  this  respect. 
There  are  other  titles  he  might  have  used.  He  might 
have  said,  "  Son  of  man,"  or  "  the  God  of  Israel,"  or 
many  more.  But  "  Son  of  God"  seems  exactly  suited 
to.  describe  the  scene:  and  therefore,  I  think,  the 
overruling  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  was  manifest  in 
leading  the  king  to  use  this  expression.  In  the  New 
Testament,  where  all  truth  comes  out  with  distinctness, 
we  find  our  Lord  Himself  referring  to  these  two  titles, 
both  of  which  occur  in  Daniel — Son  of  man  and  Son 
of  God.  Son  of  man  is  the  title  of  Christ  in  His 
judicial  glory.  He  is  Son  of  man  "because  all  judg- 
ment  is   committed  to    Him."      As    Son  of  God  He 


CHAPTER    III.  61 

gives  life:  He  quickens  in  the  midst  of  death.  As 
Son  of  God,  He  frees  those  that  were  bound:  and  "  if 
the  Son  shall  make  you  free,  ye  shall  be  free  indeed." 
That  verse  seems  to  me  a  doctrinal  commentary  upon 
this  very  scene.  There  was  the  Son,  and  He  was 
making  the  prisoners  free.  Man  had  bound  them,  had 
attempted  to  execute  his  threat  of  vengeance  against 
any  who  should  acknowledge  the  true  God.  These 
three  men  had  jeoparded  everything  upon  the  truth  of 
God  Himself  against  all  rivals  and  images;  and  God 
had  come  in  for  them  with  delivering  power.  The 
proud  king  not  only  owns  his  word  changed,  but  asso- 
ciates their  names  with  the  most  high  God,  who  w^as 
not  ashamed  to  be  called  their  God. 

The  Gentile  dominion  is  not  over  yet.  And  I  be- 
lieve that  the  close  of  it  will  bring  in  the  same  thing 
with  as  great  force  as  ever.  The  Book  of  the  Revela- 
tion shows  us  that  the  last  great  Gentile  king  will 
employ  all  the  authority  of  his  government  to  enforce 
what  might  be  called  the  "  religion"  of  that  day.  And 
then  God  will  put  forth  His  power  miraculously  to 
preserve  His  witnesses  for  their  appointed  work. 
There  may  be  some  that  will  suffer  unto  death,  there 
may  be  differences  in  the  ways  in  which  God  will 
act.  But  the  Revelation  shows  us  that  there  will 
be  persons  preserved  in  the  midst  of  the  power  that 
enforces  idolatry  in  the  last  days. 

When  this  takes  place,  we  shall  not  be  upon  the 
scene.  Hence  the  mention  of  the  Jews  is  emphatic  at 
the  time  of  the  last  great  tribulation.  For  while  men 
in  general  will  be  forced  at  the  end  to  acknowledge  the 
true  God,  before  that  there  will  be  a  fiery  persecution 
put  forth.  There  will  be  such  a  thing  as  "  glorifying 
God  in  the  fires;"  an  expression  decidedly  used  about 
the  remnant  of  Israel  in  the  last  days.  The  wonderful 
hand  of  God  w^ill  be  at  work,  but  it  will  be  with  the 
Jews,  not  with  Christians.     As  far  as  we  are  concerned, 


62  DANIEL. 

tribulation  is  our  constant  and  proper  portion  in 
the  world.  The  New  Testament  shows^this  from 
beginning  to  end.  Nothing  is  plainer  than  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  never  acknowledges  the  Christian  in 
any  way  except  as  separate  from  the  world,  the 
object  of  its  animosity  and  persecution,  cast  out, 
despised,  unknown  by  the  world.  That  is  our  place 
as  recognized  by  the  word  of  God.  It  is  for 
Christians  to  account  for  the  fact,  that  they  have 
lost  it  ;  for  clearly,  what  I  have  been  describing, 
somehow  or  another,  does  not  apply  at  the  present 
time.  Is  it  that  the  world  is  getting  better,  or  that 
they  themselves  have  become  worse  ?  Conscience 
ought  to  answer,  and  God  will  use  it,  if  upright,  as 
the  means  of  bringing  one  back  to  the  place  that 
ought  never  to  have  been  left.  All  through  the  time 
of  the  Gentile  supremacy,  the  Christian's  place  is 
obedience.  For  the  most  part  what  the  power  in- 
sists upon  is  that  which  the  Christian  can  render 
with  a  ready  mind;  but  when  there  comes  a  collision 
between  the  world's  authority  and  God's,  we  must 
obey  God  rather  than  men,  let  the  consequences  be 
what  they  may.  This  is  the  only  thing  that  God 
owns  in  His  people. 

The  chapters  that  follow  have  each  of  them  an 
increasingly  marked  connexion  with  the  course  of  the 
Gentile  empire.  But  this  is  sufficient  to  bring  out 
the  fact,  that  idolatry — worldly  religion  —  a  religion 
that  is  intended  for  every  one,  and  bound  down  upon 
all,  under  pain  of  death — is  the  first  great  feature 
recorded  of  Gentile  empire,  and  will  be  found,  more 
or  less,  to  run  through  the  whole  of  it.  As  this  was 
the  first  exercise  of  authority,  so  it  will  be  at  the  end 
of  the  age.  The  Book  of  the  Revelation  shows  us  the 
last  stage  of  the  last  Gentile  empire  ;  and  there  we 
find  that  what  it  began  with,  it  will  end  with:  that 
the  same  compulsion  used  here,  to  make  all  its  subjects 


CHAPTER    III.  63 

bow  down  and  worship  in  a  way  of  its  own  setting  up, 
will  re-appear  at  the  close. 

But  we  find  another  analo.2:y.  G^od  at  that  time 
had  His  witnesses.  And  as  the  Jews  were  the  per- 
sons that  then  withstood  Gentile  idolatry,  they  will 
come  again  upon  the  stage  of  God's  dealings,  and  will 
be  especially  the  witnesses  that  God  will  put  honour 
upon.  This  godly  remnant  of  Israel  is  represented 
by  the  disciples  in  the  days  of  our  Lord's  earthly 
ministry.  They  will  be  a  godly  seed,  cleaving  to  Him 
and  loving  His  name;  and  this,  because  they  will 
have  got  hold,  with  more  or  less  light,  of  the  Messiah. 
These  persons  will  be  found  waiting  for  Jesus  to  come 
and  take  His  kingdom,  after  the  Church,  properly  so 
called,  has  passed  out  of  the  scene  of  God's  dealings 
on  the  earth. 

Thus,  then,  as  Gentile  authority  began  with  this 
idolatry  forced  upon  all,  and  the  only  witnesses  for 
God  w^ere  among  the  Jews ;  so,  at  the  close,  idolatry 
will^  re-appear,  and  God  will  have  a  faithful  remnant 
again  among  that  poor  people  —  a  testimony  for  Him- 
self in  the  midst  of  apostasy. 

But  I  hope,  in  looking  at  future  chapters,  to  enter 
a  little  more  into  details.  May  we  remember,  that 
what  we  have  been  now  seeing  is  not  merely  for  that 
day,  nor  does  it  concern  the  witnesses  of  that  time 
only  !  If  God  will  have  a  faithful  peoj^le  among  the 
Jews  then,  may  we  who  are  Christians  not  be  found 
disobedient  unto  the  heavenly  vision!  We  have  a 
brighter  prospect  than  any  vvhich  Daniel  saw.  He 
was  not  privileged  to  see  Jesus,  because  of  the  suffer- 
ing of  death,  crowned  with  glory  and  honour.  He 
could  testify,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  rejection  of 
Messiah,  and,  on  the  other,  of  His  universal  and  ever- 
lasting dominion.  Between  the  one  past  and  the  other 
future,  we  know  other  and  higher  glories  in  Him 
now,  and  Himself,  in  whom  these  blessings  are 
treasured  up.     We  know   that  He  is   the   true   God 


64  DANIEL. 

and  eternal  life,  and  ourselves  blessed  with  all  spiritual 
blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Him.  We  are  called 
out  from  this  world  to  follow  Him  and  be^he  sharers 
of  His  heavenly  glory.  It  is  but  "a  little  while,  and 
He  that  shall  come,  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry." 
And  if  this  be  so,  how  ought  we  to  be  apart  from 
this  present  evil  world  !  How  ought  we  to  keep 
clear  of  its  attempt  to  put  on  the  appearance  of 
reverence  for  the  name  of  Jesus  !  Alas  I  how  often 
people  get  perplexed,  and  ask.  Where  and  what  is 
the  world  ?  The  truth  is,  that  all  this  is  a  lament- 
able proof  that  they  are  so  mixed  up  with  the  world 
that  they  do  not  know  it.  The  Lord  grant  that  we 
may  have  no  difficulty  in  knowing  where  the  world 
is,  and  where  we  are.  The  Jew  was  obliged  to  enter 
it  with  the  sword  in  his  hand,  executing  judgment. 
But  that  is  not  the  place  of  the  Christian.  We 
began  with  the  sword  against  Christ,  and  Himself 
bowing  to  it.  We  began  and  should  go  on  with 
the  cross,  looking  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  All  our  blessedness  is  founded  on  the  cross, 
and  all  our  hopes  centre  in  His  glory,  and  His 
coming  again  for  us. 

The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  live  thus,  in  the  in- 
creasing knowledge  of  the  Blessed  One,  with  whom 
we  have  to  do,  and  to  whom  we  belong.  Whatever, 
then,  may  be  the  danger  rnd  trial,  we  shall  have  the 
Son  of  God  with  us  in  it. 

May  we  know  more  and  more  what  it  is  to  walk 
with  Christ  in  liberty  and  joy  !  So  shall  we  have 
Christ  with  us  in  every  time  of  need. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

We  have  seen,  after  the  vision  of  the  great  image, 
that  a  chapter  followed,  presenting  at  first  sight  little 
appearance  of  connexion  with  the  prophecy,  but  which, 
I  trust,  was  shown  to  have  a  very  important  bearing 
upon  it.  For  in  chap.  ii.  we  had  merely  the  general 
history  of  the  Gentile  powers,  not  their  moral  qualities. 
Empire  after  empire  rose  on,  and  disappeared  from,  the 
scene  of  God's  providence.  But  what  was  the  cha- 
racter of  these  empires,  how  they  used  the  power  that 
was  given  into  their  hands  by  God,  we  saw  not.  These 
historical  incidents  were  introduced  purposely  between 
the  first  grand  outline  in  chap  ii.  and  the  details 
which  follow  from  chap.  vii.  to  the  end  of  the  book. 
They  show  the  conduct  of  the  empires  while  in 
possession  of  supreme  authority  from  God  in  the 
world.  The  first  picture  of  their  moral  ways  was 
given  in  chap.  iii. :  religion,  such  as  it  was,  rendered 
compulsory  by  the  Gentile  power,  irrespective  of  the 
claims  of  God  and  the  conscience  of  man. 

The  principle  of  this  from  the  first  runs  through 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles.  No  doubt  it  seemed 
necessary,  in  consequence  of  the  immense  extent  of 
the  empire,  to  have  some  one  controlling  religion 
that  would  bind  together  the  various  lands  and  subject 
nations.  What  a  return  for  the  place  of  honour  in 
which  God  had  put  Nebuchadnezzar  !  Nevertheless, 
it  only  gave  occasion  for  God  to  display  His  power, 
even  in  the  Jewish  captives  now  under  the  control  of 
the  Gentiles.  In  the  chapter  before  it  was  plain  that 
the  ivhdom  of  God  was  found  among  them.  All  the 
lore  of  the  Babylonish  empire  was  completely  at 
fault.  Daniel  alone  could  explain  the  visions.  But 
although  divine  wisdom  was  there,  power  is  another 
thing,  and  God  took  advantage  of  the  terrible  punish- 


QQ  DANIEL. 

ment,  as  it  seemed,  of  the  three  Hebrews,  and  showed 
Himself  most  conspicuously  as  the  Deliverer  of  the 
faithful  in  the  hour  of  their  need.  The  "beginning  of 
Gentile  empire  is  only  the  foreshadowing  of  what  will 
he  the  closing  scene.  And  as  there  was  then  deliver- 
ance hy  divine  power  at  the  beginning,  so  there  will 
be  by  and  by  :  and  this  specially  found  in  connexion 
with  the  faithful  of  Israel,  the  Jews.  I  do  not  mean, 
of  course,  with  the  Jews  in  their  present  state;  be- 
cause, now,  a  Jew  remaining  such  is  an  enemy  of  God. 
But  that  will  not  always  be  the  case.  The  time  is 
coming  when  the  seed  of  Abraham,  without  ceasing 
to  be  Jews,  will  be  converted  to  God  —  will  receive 
the  Messiah,  according  to  the  prophecies.  I  do  not 
mean  the  Jew  will  enter  into  the  same  blessed  know- 
ledge and  enjoyment  that  we  have  now;  but  that  he 
will  be  among  the  faithful  to  be  found  in  the  latter 
day,  as  is  predicted  in  many  prophecies.  Of  course, 
a  very  important  change  is  supposed,  which  is  to  take 
place  in  the  history  of  the  world;  or  rather,  God  will 
remove  from  the  world  that  which  is  not  of  the  vv^orld, 
in  order  that  He  may  resume  His  interest  in  what  is 
taking  place  upon  the  earth.  Because,  at  the  present 
time,  God's  work  is  not  immediately  connected  with 
the  movements  of  the  world.  Its  stages  of  progress 
and  decline  are  not  the  expression  of  His  will, 
although  He  always  exercises  a  providential  control 
over   them. 

But  there  was  a  time,  we  know,  in  the  world's 
history,  when  God  took  a  direct,  immediate  interest  iu 
what  was  going  on  among  men.  Even  their  battles 
were  said  to  be  the  Lord's  battles;  and  their  defeats, 
famines,  &c.,  were  sent  as  a  known  infliction  from 
God  for  some  evil  that  He  was  dealing  with.  Now, 
while  it  remains  perfectly  true,  that  there  is  no  war  or 
sorrow  of  any  kind  that  happens  without  God,  and  all 
is  decidedly  under  His  sovereign  control,  it  is  not  in  the 
way  of  the  same  direct  government.     So  that  a  person 


CHAPTER    IV.  67 

cannot  now  say,  This  war  is  at  the  word  of  God;  or, 
This  famine  is  a  chastening  for  such  and  such  an  evil. 
That  wonld  be  indeed  both  ignorance  and  presumption. 
No  doubt  there  are  persons  quite  ready  enough  to 
pronounce  as  to  these  matters.  Their  mistake  arises 
from  not  appreciating  the  great  change  that  has  taken 
place  in  God's  government  of  the  world.  As  long  as 
Israel  was  the  nation  in  which  God  was  displaying 
His  character  for  the  earth,  these  things  were  found 
directly  and  immediately  from  God.  But  from  the 
time  God  gave  up  His  people  Israel,  it  has  been 
merely  the  indirect,  providential  control  of  a  general 
kind,  that  God  exercises  over  human  affairs. 

Another  thing  has  come  in.  When  the  true  Christ 
was  rejected  by  Israel,  and  Israel  thereby  lost  their 
opportunity  of  being  restored  to  their  place  of  supre- 
macy, God,  we  may  say,  took  advantage  of  this  to 
bring  in  another  thing  —  the  calling  of  the  Church. 
It  was  no  longer  God  governing  a  nation  like  Israel 
under  His  law ;  nor  was  it  simply  an  indirect  govern- 
ment of  the  Gentiles;  but  the  revelation  of  Himself 
as  a  Father  to  His  children  in  Christ,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven,  not  only  to  act  upon 
their  hearts,  but  to  dwell  in  their  midst,  and  to  baptize 
them,  Jew  or  Gentile,  into  one  body,  the  body  of 
Christ  the  Head  in  heaven.  That  goes  on  now.  And 
therefore  God  has  no  particular  relations  with  the 
Jews  now:  He  does  not  deal  with  them  any  more 
than  with  others,  save  that  they  have  a  sentence  of 
judicial  blindness  upon  them.  They  were  blind  before. 
God  did  not  make  them  to  refuse  Christ.  He  never 
makes  any  person  blind  in  that  sense :  only  sin  thus 
blinds.  But  when  men  refuse  the  light  of  God,  and 
obstinately  reject  its  every  testimony.  He  may  and 
does  give  up  sometimes  to  a  total  darkness,  in  the 
sense  of  its  being  a  judicial  one,  added  to  what  is 
natural  to  the  human  heart.  The  nation  of  Israel  is 
under  that  judicial  blindness  now.     But  while  this  is 


68  DANIEL. 

the  case  with  the  great  mass,  it  is  not  so  with  all. 
There  is  always  to  be  a  remnant  of  Israel.  They  are 
the  only  nation  indeed  of  which  that  can  be^said — the 
only  nation  that  God  has  never  absolutely  given  up. 
Other  nations  may  know  God  visiting  them  for  a 
time,  and  visiting  them  remarkably  in  grace.  Onr 
own  country  God  has  most  marvellously  blessed  — 
given  men  His  word  freely,  and  many  other  privileges. 
But  while  such  is  the  case,  there  is  no  obligation  on 
God's  part  always  to  keep  England  in  that  position. 
If  the  country  show  a  deaf  ear,  turning  away  from 
the  truth,  and  preferring  idolatry,  which  is  not  at 
all  impossible,  it  will  certainly  be  given  np,  and  will 
fall  under  the  delusion  which  God  will  send  upon  the 
world  by  and  by.  But  God  bound  Himself  by  special 
promise  to  Israel,  and  He  will  never  give  them  up 
entirely.  In  Israel  there  will  always  be  a  holy  seed 
in  the  very  darkest  times.  And  this  is  connected 
with  a  remark  that  I  made  before.  While  God  is 
occupied  with  the  work  of  gathering  out  the  Church, 
there  cannot  he  any  special  relation  with  Israel  in 
bringing  them  out  as  His  people,  and  delivering 
them  out  of  their  distresses,  and  the  like.  But  when 
God  is  pleased  to  remove  the  Church  out  of  this 
present  scene,  Israel  will  come  forward  again;  and 
it  is  in  that  day,  when  their  hearts  are  touched 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  there  will  be  the  fulfilment 
of  a  deliverance,  the  type  of  which  we  see  in  the  end 
of  chap.  iii. 

Upon  that  occasion,  I  may  just  observe,  the  king 
was  so  far  moved,  that  he  commanded,  as  a  sort  of 
ordinance  of  his  realm,  that  the  God  of  Shadrach, 
Meshach,  and  Abed-nego  should  be  honoured;  and 
that  any  person  w^Iio  attempted  to  speak  against  that 
God  should  be  cut  in  pieces,  and  their  houses  made  a 
dunghill.  But  w^e  do  find  this :  that,  whether  it  was 
the  special  honour  that  he  paid  to  Daniel,  in  chap,  ii., 
or  the  command  that  his  subjects  should  honour  the 


CHAPTER    IV.  69 

God  of  Shadrach,  Mesliach,  and  Abed-nego,  in  chap. 
lii.,  it  had  but  little  permanence.  It  was  merely  a 
passing  feeling,  which,  like  the  morning  cloud,  faded 
away  from  the  mind  of  the  king.  He  himself  records 
in  this  chapter  how  little  the  ways  of  God  had  reached 
his  heart,  however  he  might  for  the  moment  have 
been  struck  with  the  display  of  His  wisdom.  It  is 
one  thing  to  show  honour  to  a  prophet,  and  to  compel 
the  subjects  of  his  realm  to  honour  the  God  who 
delivered  as  none  other  could.  But  how  was  it  with 
Nebuchadnezzar  himself  ?  "  I,  Nebuchadnezzar,"  he 
says,  "  was  at  rest  in  mine  house,  and  flourishing  in 
my  palace." 

Thus,  you  see,  it  is  plain,  from  his  own  account, 
although  he  gives  it  to  show  the  mercy  mani- 
fested towards  him,  that,  after  all  the  wondrous 
transactions  of  the  previous  chapters,  Nebuchadnezzar 
was  just  the  same  man  at  bottom  still.  There  was  no 
thorough  change  in  his  soul — no  such  thing  as  his 
heart  brought  to  God.  He  was  at  rest  in  his  house 
and  flourishing  in  his  palace.  As  the  man  of  the  earth, 
all  that  God  had  given  into  his  hands  only  fed  his 
pride  and  self-complacency.  In  this  condition  God 
sends  him  a  fresh  testimony.  "  I  saw  a  dream  which 
made  me  afraid;  and  the  thoughts  upon  my  bed,  and 
the  visions  of  my  head,  troubled  me."  Therefore  he 
makes  a  decree,  commanding  to  bring  in  all  the  wise 
men  of  Babylon,  that  they  might  make  known  the 
interpretation  of  the  dream.  It  was  in  vain.  They 
came,  and  he  told  the  dream.  But  he  says,  *'  They 
did  not  make  known  to  me  the  interpretation  thereof. 
But,  at  the  last,  Daniel  came  in  before  me,  whose  name 
was  Belteshazzar,  according  to  the  name  of  my  god," 
&c.  To  him  he  speaks  with  confidence.  "  0  Belte- 
shazzar, master  of  the  magicians,  because  I  know  that 
the  spirit  of  the  holy  gods  is  in  thee,  and  no  secret 
troubleth  thee,  tell  me  the  visions  of  my  dream  that  I 
have  seen,  and  the  interpretation  thereof."     He  may 


70  DANIEL. 

speak  to  him  in  a  heathenish  style ;  the  wisdom  of  the 
Most  High  God  in  him  he  may  attribute  to^  his  own 
gods ;  but  still  he  does  acknowledge  that  there  is  some- 
thing special  and  peculiar  in  Daniel.  He  also  alludes 
.to  the  vision  in  the  same  style.  Daniel,  when  he  hears 
the  dream,  and  realizes  its  meaning,  was  troubled  and 
amazed  for  one  hour.  Nor  must  we  confine  this  to 
the  story  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  Just  as  we  saw  in 
chap.  ii.  that  the  king  was  said  to  be  the  head  of  gold, 
so  in  this  chapter  he  was  the  tree.  But  in  chap.  ii.  it 
was  not  the  king  personally  alone,  but  his  dynasty  that 
was  represented  by  the  head  of  gold.  In  a  certain 
sense,  what  was  true  of  Nebuchadnezzar  would  charac- 
terize the  Gentile  empire  to  the  close.  So  in  this 
present  scene.  Daniel  had  the  pain  and  horror  of 
seeing  what  awaited  Nebuchadnezzar.  And  this,  alas  ! 
too  plainly  foreboded  the  issue  of  this  new  system  that 
the  God  of  heaven  had  set  up. 

But  following  simply  the  chapter  before  us,  Daniel 
explains  the  vision.  "  My  lord,"  said  he,  "  let  the 
dream  be  to  them  that  hate  thee,  and  the  interpreta- 
tion thereof  to  thine  enemies.  The  tree  that  thou 
sawest,  which  grew  and  was  strong,  whose  height 
reached  unto  the  heaven,  and  the  sight  thereof  to  all 

the  earth It  is  thou,  0  kino;,  that  art  grown  and 

become  strong."  Every  one  must  be  familiar  with  the 
way  in  which  both  the  psalms  and  prophets  use  the 
figure  of  the  tree  to  describe  the  position  assigned  by 
God  to  Israel,  as  well  as  to  other  people.  Thus,  the 
vine  in  Ps.  Ixxx,  is  clearly  what  Israel  was  intended  to 
be  in  the  purpose  of  God.  But  there  w^as  total  failure. 
And  so  we  see  in  Jer.  ii.,  Ezek.  xv.,  &c.,  God's  purpose 
seemed  to  be  broken.  But  He  never  gives  it  up.  He 
may  repent  of  creation.  But  wherever  there  is  that, 
which  is  not  barely  the  work  of  His  hand,  but  the  fruit 
of  the  action  of  His  heart, — and  that  His  purpose  is, — 
God  never  abandons.  Where  He  merely  calls  into 
being  that  which  did  not  exist  before,  a  change  may 


CHAPTER    IV.  71 

come  in.  But  there  is  no  change  where  God  sets  His 
love  upon  a  person,  and  gives  certain  suited  gifts. 
"  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance." 
(Rom.  xi.  29.)  This  is  a  very  important  thing,  as 
connected  with  individual  souls.  Doubt  the  faithful- 
ness of  God  in  any  one  respect,  and  you  weaken  it  as 
to  everything  else.  If  God  could  call  His  people 
Israel,  and  afterwards  give  them  up  absolutely,  how 
could  I  be  sure  that  God  would  keep  me  always  as  His 
child  ?  For  if  ever  it  was  tried,  it  was  in  Israel. 
If  I  believe  in  the  faithfulness  of  God  to  myself, 
individually,  why  doubt  it  as  to  Israel  ?  The  question 
always  is.  Is  God  faithful  ?  Has  He  departed  from  His 
purpose,  or  withdrawn  His  gifts  ?  If  not,  whatever 
appearances  may  say  for  a  time,  God  will  vindicate  His 
truth  and  mercy  in  the  end. 

But  to  return,  the  figure  of  the  cedar-tree  in  Ezek. 
xxxi.  3,  may  yet  more  help  to  illustrate  what  we 
have  in  Daniel.  "  Behold  the  Assyrian  was  a  cedar 
in  Lebanon,  with  fair  branches  and  with  a  shadowing 
shroud,  and  of  an  high  stature;  and  his  top  was  among 
the  thick  boughs."  Then  later  on  we  find  "  the  cedars 
in  the  garden  of  God  could  not  hide  him."  Those 
were  the  other  powers  in  the  world.  "  The  fir-trees 
were  not  like  his  boughs,"  &c.  And,  further  still,  we 
find  that  there  is  an  allusion  to  Pharaoh  king  of  Egypt 
(ver.  18).  But  I  will  not  dwell  upon  it  further.  My 
desire  has  been  to  prove  from  these  various  passages, 
that  it  is  a  common  thing  in  Scripture  to  use  the  tree, 
either  as  the  symbol  of  fruit-bearing  or  of  a  place  of 
high  dignity  and  importance.  In  the  New  Testament 
the  figure  extended  to  that  which  for  a  season  super- 
sedes Israel.  Matt.  xiii.  shows  us  that  the  dispensa- 
tion of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is,  in  one  of  its  phases, 
compared  to  a  tree  sprouting  up  from  small  beginnings. 
The  Lord  unfolds  the  history  of  professing  Christen- 
dom. In  Matt.  xii.  He  had  given  His  sentence  upon 
Israel.     The  last  state  should  be  worse  than  the  first. 


72  DANIEL. 

Such  will  be  the  state  of  the  wicked  generation  of  Israel, 
that  put  the  Lord  Jesus  to  death,  before  God  judges  it. 
Then  the  Lord  turns  to  Christendom,  and  shou's,  first  of 
all,  His  own  work  on  earth.  He  sows  seed.  In  the 
next  parable  an  enemy  appears  upon  the  scene,  intrudes 
into  the  field,  and  sows  bad  seed.  It  is  the  inroad  of 
evil  into  the  field  of  Christian  profession.  The  parable 
following  discloses  that  what  was  little  in  its  commence- 
ment grows  into  a  vast  towering  thing  in  the  earth. 
The  little  mustard-seed  becomes  a  great  tree. 

Now,  we  may  see  by  these  passages  that  in  every 
case,  whether  it  be  an  individual  as  expressive  of 
power,  as  Nebuchadnezzar,  or  a  nation,  which  takes  the 
ascendant,  or  a  system  of  religion,  as  in  Matt,  xiii., 
the  symbol  of  a  tree  points  to  greatness  in  the  earth, 
unless  fruit  be  the  object.  Such  is  its  universal 
teaching.  Of  course  I  am  speaking  now  not  so  much 
of  those  trees,  that  were  merely  for  bearing  fruit,  as  of 
such  as  were  chosen  for  their  size  and  stateliness  also. 
Earthly  power  is  clearly  meant  by  the  tree  in  Daniel 
(ver.  21).  "In  it  was  meat  for  all:  under  which  the 
beasts  of  the  field  dwelt,  and  upon  whose  branches  the 
fowls  of  the  heaven  had  their  habitation.  It  is  thou, 
0  king,  that  art  grown  and  become  strong;  for  thy 
greatness  is  grown,  and  reacheth  unto  heaven,  and  thy 
dominion  to  the  end  of  the  earth."  This  tree  was  the 
admiration  of  men.  There  was  everything  that  grati- 
fied the  heart:  its  own  magnificent  proportions,  the 
beauty  of  its  boughs  and  leaves,  the  abundance  and 
sweetness  of  its  fruits,  the  kindly  shadow,  under  which 
all  these  creatures,  the  beasts  of  the  field  and  fowls 
of  heaven,  found  protection.  All  this  and  more  was 
found  in  it,  and  such  were  man's  thoughts  about  it. 
But  what  was  God's  estimate  ?  "  And  whereas  the 
king  saw  a  watcher,  and  an  holy  one  coming  down 
from  heaven,  and  saying,  Hew  the  tree  down  and 
destroy  it."  Observe,  it  is  merely  a  destruction  for  a 
time;  there   is  no  such  thing  as  annihilation  in  any 


CHAPTER    IV.  73 

one  tiling  in  the  mind  of  God.  "  Yet  leave  the  stump 
of  the  roots  thereof  in  the  earth."  There  must  be 
means  used  of  God  to  maintain  it  alive.  Leave  it, 
therefore,  He  says,  "  with  a  band  of  iron  and  brass, 
in  the  tender  grass  of  the  field ;  and  let  it  be  wet  with 
the  dew  of  heaven,  and  let  his  portion  be  with  the 
beasts  of  the  field,  till  seven  times  pass  over  him." 
"  This  is  the  interpretation,"  he  says,  "  0  king,  and 
this  is  the  decree  of  the  Most  High,  which  is  come 
upon  my  lord  the  king."  And  then  he  gives  its  per- 
sonal application  to  Nebuchadnezzar.  In  this  case 
all  was  perfectly  simple.  Nebuchadnezzar  was  warned 
of  what  was  to  come  upon  him.  He  was  to  be  driven 
from  men,  and  his  dwelling  was  to  be  with  the  beasts 
of  the  field.  But  more  than  that,  he  himself  was  to 
be  reduced  to  their  condition.  "  They  shall  make  thee 
to  eat  grass  as  oxen,  and  they  shall  wet  thee  with  the 
dew  of  heaven."  And  this  for  a  certain  defined  time. 
"  And  seven  times  shall  pass  over  thee,  till  thou  know 
that  the  Most  High  ruleth  in  the  kingdom  of  men,  and 
giveth  it  to  whomsoever  he  will."  We  need  not  dwell 
upon  this  history  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  No  simple- 
minded  believer  would  be  disposed  to  raise  difficulties 
about  it.  Men  have  done  so,  explaining  it  as  a  mere 
delusion  in  the  king's  mind.  But  these  are  not  cjues- 
tions  that  a  Christian  ought  even  to  consider,  except  for 
the  good  of  another.  The  word  affirms  that  king  Nebu- 
chadnezzar was,  by  God's  power,  reduced  in  appearance 
to  a  bestial  condition.  If  we  own  that  God  could  and 
did  set  aside  the  laws  of  nature,  giving  some  to  walk 
unhurt  in  the  fiercest  of  fires,  and  'preserving  another 
intact  in  a  den  of  lions,  we  must  feel  that  it  is  a  mere 
question  of  His  will  and  word  whether  Nebuchadnezzar 
was  brought  into  this  terrible  debasement  ;  hunted 
about  among  the  beasts  of  the  field,  and  made  to  eat 
grass  like  the  [oxen.  The  man  that  believes  the  one 
must  believe  the  other.  God's  power  alone  could  so 
work,  and  God's  power  is  the  warrant  for  all. 


74  DANIEL. 

But  while  that  is  plain  and  simple  enough,  we  have 
a  further  image  of  the  Gentile  power,  its  self-exalting 
character,  and  the  judgment  of  God  upon  it.  'T!  appre- 
hend that  Nebuchadnezzar,  personally,  only  showed 
what  would  be  the  general  tendency  of  the  Gentiles,  as 
having  power  given  him  from  God.  He  would  admire 
and  exalt  himself;  turning  all  the  greatness  that  God 
had  conferred  upon  him  to  his  own  credit.  He  was 
clearly  shown  the  judgments  that  would  come  upon 
him  ;  but  the  warning  was  unheeded.  Therefore, 
"  all  this  came  upon  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar.  At 
the  end  of  twelve  months  he  walked  in  the  palace  of 
the  kingdom  of  Babylon.  The  king  spake,  and  said, 
Is  not  this  great  Babylon,  that  I  have  built  for  the 
house  of  the  kingdom  by  the  might  of  my  power,  and 
for  the  honour  of  my  majesty  ?  While  the  word  was 
in  the  king's  mouth,  there  fell  a  voice  from  heaven, 
saying,  0  king  Nebuchadnezzar,  to  thee  it  is  spoken ; 
the  kingdom  is  departed  from  thee."  The  sentence 
was  executed.  Exactly  so  have  the  Gentile  powers 
acted  with  regard  to  God.  1  am  not  now  speaking  of 
individuals  who  may  arise  from  time  to  time.  Godly 
persons  may  have  been  in  the  position  occupied  even 
by  Nebuchadnezzar;  but,  as  a  general  rule,  his  suc- 
cessors, from  that  day  to  this — those  that  have  had  the 
supremacy  of  the  world,  and  the  world's  glory — have 
used  it  in  the  main  for  themselves.  I  do  not  now 
speak  so  as  to  allow  a  feeling  of  disrespect  towards 
these  powers  for  a  moment;  but  am  only  stating  the 
well-known  facts  of  Gentile  rule.  They  were  heathen 
for  many  centuries  down  to  Christ,  and  after  Christ ; 
and  when  Christianity  was  accepted  by  Constantine, 
and  its  profession  was  by  degrees  taken  up  by  the 
empire,  no  one  can  suppose  that  it  was  more  than  a 
system  of  religion  adopted.  But  this  did  not  hinder  the 
general  course  of  things.  The  only  difference  was :  the 
heathen  profession,  which  was  dominant  before,  was  put 
down,  and  that  Christianity,  which  was  trampled  down 


CHAPTER   IV.  75 

before,  was  set  np.  Heathenism  and  Christianity 
change  places.  Constantine  may  have  thought  it 
right  to  put  down  the  heathen  and  show  honour  to 
the  Christians ;  but  there  was  no  such  question  as  his 
taking  the  Bible  and  inquiring,  What  is  the  will  of 
God  about  me  ?  How  shall  I  show  my  obedience  to 
God  ?  That  never  has  been  the  case,  since  Nebuchad- 
nezzar's time,  with  any  one  that  has  swayed  the  world's 
destinies.  It  could  not  be.  I  speak  of  the  great 
masters  of  the  world,  when  the  empire  was  an  unbroken 
thing.  And  even  since  that,  though  there  may  have 
been  exceptional  cases  of  kings  who  have  had  the  fear 
of  God  before  them,  yet  even  then  it  has  not  been  in 
their  power  to  change  the  substantial  course  of  policy 
in  their  kingdoms.  Those  who  have  attempted  to  do  so 
have  completely  failed.  God's  authority  in  the  world 
is  one  thing,  and  God's  having  a  soul  obedient  to  Him 
as  His  servant  is  quite  another. 

This  chapter  shows  us,  then,  the  turning  of  all  the 
power,  and  authority,  and  glory  that  God  gave  men, 
into  a  means  of  gratifying  their  own  pride.  The  con- 
sequence of  this  is,  that  all  understanding  of  God's 
mind  would  be  taken  from  them.  Nebuchadnezzar 
had  remarkable  visions  and  revelations  from  God.  But 
what  did  they  avail  ?  He  had  had  this  warning,  the 
most  personal  one  of  all.  But  what  did  it  avail  ? 
Daniel  had  counselled  him  to  break  off  his  sins  by 
righteousness,  and  his  iniquities  by  showing  mercy 
to  the  poor.  He  heeded  it  not.  Twelve  months 
passed  away,  when,  in  pride  of  heart,  he  attributed  all 
the  greatness  and  splendour,  with  which  he  was 
surrounded,  to  himself  and  the  work  of  his  own  hands. 
That  great  Babylon  was  what  he  had  built  "  for  the 
house  of  the  kingdom,  by  the  might  of  mij  power, 
and  for  the  honour  of  my  majesty."  At  once  the 
sentence  takes  effect  upon  himself;  and  what  was  then 
literally  true  of  him  individually,  was  morally  true  of 
the  Gentile  powers  as  a  whole.     The  character  of  the 


76  DANIEL. 

Gentiles  all  through  would  be  without  intelligence  of 
God  and  without  subjection  to  Him. 

"  The  same  hour  was  the  thing  fulfilled  upon  Nebu- 
chadnezzar; and  he  was  driven  from  men,  and  did  eat 
grass  as  oxen,  and  his  body  was  wet  with  the  dew  of 
heaven,  till  his  hairs  were  grown  like  eagles'  feathers, 
and  his  nails  like  birds'  claws."  In  ver.  16,  it  had 
been  said,  "  Let  his  heart  be  changed  from  man's 
and  let  a  beast's  heart  be  given  unto  him."  All 
thought  of  God  was  entirely  lost.  He  had  no  more 
idea  about  God  than  the  beast  of  the  field.  Even  a 
natural  man  has  a  conscience  in  him.  But  Nebu- 
chadnezzar lost  all  thought;  he  was  reduced  to  the 
non-intelligence  of  a  beast.  Man  was  formed  to  be  the 
being  on  earth  that  looked  up  to  God,  and  stood  in 
dependence  upon  Him.  That  is  his  glory.  A  beast 
enjoys,  so  to  speak,  what  is  its  own  sphere  of  enjoy- 
ment, according  to  the  capacity  that  God  has  conferred 
upon  it  naturally,  but  it  has  no  idea  of  the  God  that 
made  it  and  all  things.  Man  has.  That  is,  recogni- 
tion of  God  is  the  great  essential  difference  between  a 
man  and  a  beast,  if  one  may  speak  now  in  a  sort  of 
practical  way  of  the  truth  intended  to  be  taught  by 
the  history.  I  apprehend  that  we  are  shown  by  this 
history,  if  we  read  it  typically,  that  the  Gentile 
powers  would  give  up  the  recognition  of  God  in  their 
government.  They  might  use  his  name  outwardly, 
but  as  for  any  owning  of  God  as  the  source  of  all  they 
possessed,  it  would  completely  pass  from  their  minds; 
and  so  it  has. 

But  there  was  a  physical  change,  which  was  what 
really  took  place  in  Nebuchadnezzar's  case.  Reduced 
to  the  condition  of  a  beast,  he  lost  what  characterizes 
a  man — all  recognition  of  God.  He  had  a  beast's 
heart,  as  it  is  said  here.  He  had  nothing  of  the 
character  and  glory  of  a  man.  Man  is  put  here  below 
as  the  image  and  glory  of  God.  He  is  responsible  to 
make  God  known;  and  he  can  only  do  it  because  he 


CHAPTER    IV.  77 

looks  np  to  God.  There  are  those  that  have  an  out- 
ward semblance  of  man,  but  "  man  that  is  in  honour 
and  understandeth  not,  is  like  the  beasts  that  perish." 
This  received  its  most  remarkable  confirmation  in  the 
case  of  Nebuchadnezzar;  but  the  same  thing  is  true,  in 
principle,  of  every  man  that  has  got  self  and  not  God 
before  his  eyes.  That  was  exactly  true  of  the  Baby- 
lonish king.  He  understood  not.  He  attributed  all 
to  himself  and  not  to  God;  and  so,  by  a  terrible  retri- 
bution, he  is  reduced  to  the  most  abject  state.  Never 
had  a  Gentile  possessed  such  glory  and  majesty  as 
Nebuchadnezzar;  but  in  a  moment,  all  is  changed.  In 
the  height  of  his  pride  the  sentence  of  God  falls  upon 
him.  "  He  was  driven  from  men,  and  did  eat  grass  as 
oxen,"  &c.  But  all  this  had  its  limit.  It  was  to  be 
"  till  seven  times  had  passed  over  him."  "  Times " 
may  have  been  used  rather  than  years,  perhaps,  because 
this  judgment  of  Nebuchadnezzar  is  the  type  of  the 
condition  to  which  the  Gentile  powers  are  reduced 
during  the  whole  course  of  their  empire.  Hence  a 
symbolic  term  may  have  been  chosen  rather  than  one 
of  ordinary  life.  The  Gentiles,  spite  of  God's  gift  of 
supreme  power,  would  be  without  any  adequate  recog- 
nition of  Him  in  their  government.  They  would  use 
their  power  for  their  own  ends  and  interests.  As  to 
really  and  honestly  conforming  themselves  to  the  will 
of  God,  when  was  such  a  thing  ever  heard  of  as  the 
great  object  of  any  nation's  policy  since  they  got  their 
power?  I  am  not  aware  that  it  was  ever  even  thought 
of.  So  truly  does  this  figure  apply  to  the  whole 
course  of  the  Gentiles. 

Let  us  look  a  little  at  the  effect  on  the  judgment  on 
Nebuchadnezzar.  The  seven  times  passed  over  the 
king.  "  And  at  the  end  of  the  days,  I,  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, lifted  up  my  eyes  unto  heaven."  Then  was  the 
first  great  sign  of  returning  intelligence.  A  beast 
looks  dowmvard.  He  never  looks  upward,  in  the 
moral  sense  of  the  expression.      Man,   acting  morally 


78  DANIEL. 

as  man,  acknowledges  in  his  conscience  One  from 
whom  he  has  derived  all,  and  One  whom  he  is  bound  to 
honour  and  obey.  Nebuchadnezzar,  when  th©  term  of 
the  judgment  was  passed,  lifted  up  his  eyes  unto 
heaven.  He  is  taking  the  true  place  of  a  man. 
"  And  mine  understanding  returned  unto  me."  What 
was  the  consequence  ?  "  And  I  blessed  the  Most 
High,  and  I  praised  and  honoured  him  that  liveth  for 
ever."  Mark  the  difference.  On  previous  occasions, 
he  might  have  bowed  down  before  the  prophet,  and 
commanded  sweet  odours  to  be  offered  to  him:  he 
might  send  out  statutes  and  decrees  that  the  God  of 
the  Jews  should  be  honoured  by  all  his  subjects.  But 
what  does  he  now  ?  He  drops  all  others  for  the 
moment,  and  bows  before  God.  Nebuchadnezzar  is 
not  occupied  with  compelling  other  people  for  good  or 
ill,  but  himself,  blessing,  praising,  and  honouring  the 
Most  High.  Observe,  too,  the  expression,  "  Most 
High;"  because  it  is  used  here  with  particular  em- 
phasis. "  I  blessed  the  Most  High,  and  praised  and 
honoured  him  that  liveth  for  ever ;  whose  dominion  is 
an  everlasting  dominion,  and  his  kingdom  is  from 
generation  to  generation.  And  all  the  inhabitants  of 
the  earth  are  reputed  as  nothing :  and  he  doeth  accord- 
ing to  his  will  in  the  army  of  heaven,  and  among  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth :  and  none  can  stay  his  hand, 
or  say  unto  him.  What  doest  thou  ? " 

When  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  close,  the  stump  will 
assert  its  vitality,  which  was  left  in  the  earth  protected 
by  divine  Providence,  and  allowed  still  to  be  a  stay 
in  the  midst  of  the  anarchy  that  would  otherwise  have 
overspread  the  earth.  We  must  remember,  that  the 
world's  government  is  a  signal  mercy  for  the  earth 
compared  with  having  no  government  at  all.  Yet, 
while  God  has  controlled  it  and  kept  it  in  His  provi- 
dence for  the  good  of  the  world,  there  is  a  time 
coming,  when  it  will  sprout  up  again  and  will  be 
found   really  fulfilling  the  object  for  which  God  has 


CHAPTER    IV.  79 

established  it  in  the  earth.  And  when  will  this  be  ? 
"  When  thy  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the  in- 
habitants of  the  world  will  learn  righteousness." 
When  everything  that  has  come  from  God  will  really 
be  accomplished  according  to  His  will — when  man 
will  be  blessed  fully,  and  will  no  longer  be  as  the 
beasts  that  perish — when  Israel  will  not  any  more  be 
found  rejecting  their  own  Messiah,  nor  the  Gentiles 
arrogating  to  themselves  the  power  conferred  on  them 
by  God,  in  His  sovereign  bounty.  That  same  day 
will  see  all  these  glories  shining  out;  but  it  can  only 
be  when  Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  and  when 
we  shall  appear  with  Him  in  glory.  It  is  reserved  for 
Him  to  be  the  head  of  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  of  the 
Jews.  All  nations  and  tribes  and  tongues  shall  serve 
Him.  For  God  can  only  be  known  where  Christ  is 
known — can  only  be  seen  in  His  goodness  and  glory 
where  Christ  is  recognized  as  the  expression  and 
substance  of  it.  And  so  it  will  be  in  that  bright  day. 
The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  Himself  will  come  and  esta- 
blish, in  perfection,  everything  that  has  only  crumbled 
imder  man's  hand,  and  had,  at  best,  only  a  negative 
effect  in  the  world,  staying  the  evil  here  and  there, 
but  far  short  of  the  full  means  of  blessing  that  God 
intends.  When  that  day  comes,  it  will  be  seen  that 
Gentile  government,  not  in  its  present  corrupt  state, 
but  cleared  of  evil,  and  expanded  according  to  the 
thoughts  of  God,  will  flourish  in  the  earth,  and  be  the 
channel  of  nothing  but  blessing.  It  is  only  sin  which 
has  hindered  God's  mercy  in  it  hitherto.  Thus,  when 
the  grand  fulfilment  will  take  place  of  this  typical 
history  of  Nebuchadnezzar — when  the  time  of  the 
*'  beast's  heart "  towards  God,  caring  only  for  self, 
gratifying  pride  and  lust  of  power,  shall  have  passed 
away,  God  will  take  the  reins  into  His  own  hands  as 
the  Most  High  God,  and  Gentiles  shall  bow  in  praise 
and  thankful  joy. 

When  that    expression,    "  Most   High   God,"    first 


30  DANIEL. 

occurs,  there  is  a  very  striking  scene.  And  in  Scrip- 
ture we  must  often  recur  to  the  first  use,  in-order  to 
get  the  full  meaning.  "  Most  High  God  "  appears 
first  in  the  case  of  Melchizedec,  when  Abraham  was 
returning  victorious  from  pursuing  the  kings  who  had 
taken  Lot  prisoner.  So  it  will  be  at  the  close  of  this 
dispensation,  when  there  will  be  not  only  victory  over 
all  the  powers  that  assemble  against  God's  people,  but 
the  answer  to  the  blessed  scene  that  followed.  Mel- 
chizedec meets  Abraham,  and  Abraham  gives  him 
tithes  of  all,  and  receives  his  blessing.  And  Melchi- 
zedec is  the  type  of  Christ  in  this,  that  He  unites 
the  kingly  glory  with  the  priestly.  He  was  the  King 
of  Salem,  and  His  very  name  was  king  of  righteous- 
ness. Then  will  be  the  day  of  peace  founded  on 
righteousness.  But  he  was  the  priest  of  the  Most 
Hio-h  God  also.  It  is  not  the  offering  of  sacrifice 
or  of  incense  that  characterizes  his  action  ;  but  the 
bringing  out  of  bread  and  wine  for  the  refreshment  of 
the  "  conquerors.  He  blesses,  and  pronounces  the 
blessing  of  the  Most  High  God,  possessor  of  heaven 
and  earth.  For  in  that  day,  there  will  be  no  longer  a 
moral  chasm  between  heaven  and  earth,  but  comj)lete 
union.  It  will  be  no  confusion  or  amalgam  of  the  two, 
but  a  link  of  most  intimate  harmony;  and  the  Lord 
Jesus  will  be  that  uniting  bond.  The  Head  of  those 
that  belong  to  heaven,  He  is  also  the  King  of  kings, 
and  Lord  of  lords — the  sovereign  Disposer  of  all 
earthly  power.  To  Him  all  will  bow,  of  things  in 
heaven  and  things  in  earth,  and  things  infernal  too. 
This  will  be  the  full  epoch  of  the  restoration  of 
Gentile  intelligence  and  blessing. 

If  any  persons  are  called  to  honour  the  truth  of 
God,  and  to  walk  in  the  intelligence  of  His  ways,  it 
is  His  own  children  who  enjoy  the  consciousness  of 
their  Father's  love.  And  may  we,  understanding  this 
our  place,  be  enabled  to  remember  what  will  be  the 
end  of  all  things,  as  far  as  man  is  concerned  !     That 


CHAPTER   V.  gl 

day  of  judgment  approaches  which  is  coming  upon 
the  world,  and  the  weight  of  which  will  fall  upon  the 
Jew  and  Gentile,  both  in  a  state  of  apostasy.  Still, 
we  know  that  it  will  see  a  remnant  of  both  brought 
out  to  shine  with  greater  blessedness  than  ever— the 
Jews  exalted,  the  Gentiles  blessed,  in  their  true  places. 
No  longer  a  poor,  mutilated  stump,  but  again  sprout- 
ing up  into  its  normal  strength  and  majesty,  under 
the  dews  of  heaven.  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may 
expect  good  from  God,  remembering  that  in  the  midst 
of  judgment  there  is  mercy  that  triumphs  over  judg- 
ment in  every  case,  save  in  that  which  utterly  rejects 
Christ  —  which  lives,  refusing  His  mercy  —  which 
dies,  counting  itself  unworthy  of  everlasting  life. 
Eemember,  that  no  soul  that  hears  the  gospel  is  lost 
simply  because  it  is  evil.  There  is  a  sure  remedy  for 
all  we  are.  Men  are  lost  because  they  reject  and 
despise  eternal  life,  pardon,  peace,  everything-,  in  the 
Son  of  God.  ^ 


CHAPTER   V. 

Dan.  v.  and  vi.  form  a  part  of  the  series  of,  what  we 
may  call,  moral  chapters.  They  are  historical,  but 
withal  stamped  with  the  character  of  a  foreshadowing 
of  the  future,  receiving  light  from  and  casting  liglu 
upon  the  prophecies  which  precede  and  follow  them. 
Of  these  practical  illustrations  of  the  Gentile  powers 
we  have  had  already  two  following  the  dream  of 
Nebuchadnezzar.  We  are  now  to  enter  upon  the 
first  of  two  more,  before  we  examine  the  more  precise 
communications  made  to  the  prophet  himself  in  chap, 
vii.  Chaps,  v.  and  vi.  have  this  peculiarity,  that  they 
bring  out,   not  so  much  the  general  characteristics  of 


82  DANIEL. 

the  Gentiles,  as  certain  particulars  to  be  found  in 
them  at  the  close,  the  forerunners  of  speedy^estruc- 
tion.  In  short,  they  typify  special  acts  or  outbreaks 
of  evil,  rather  than  what  pervaded  their  whole  stand- 
ing and  history.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a  marked 
difference  between  each  of  these  chapters,  and  we 
must  now  proceed  to  look  briefly  at  the  first  of  them. 

"  Belshazzar   made  a  great  feast  to  a  thousand  of 
his   lords,  and  drank  wine  before  the  thousand."      It 
was   a    scene    of   gorgeous,    and    perhaps    unwonted, 
revelry.     The  sacrilegious  king,  "  whiles  he  tasted  the 
wine,  commanded  to  bring  the  golden  and  silver  vessels 
which  his  father    Nebuchadnezzar   had    taken    out  of 
the  temple    which  was    in   Jerusalem;    that   the  king 
and  his  princes,  his  wives  and  his  concubines,  might 
drink  therein.     Then  they  brought  the  golden  vessels, 
&c.     They  drank  wine,  and  praised  the  gods  of  gold 
and  of  silver,  of  brass,   of  iron,  of  wood,  and  stone." 
History  may  tell  us  that  it  was  an   annual   festival, 
w^hen  a  loose  rein  was   given   to   licentiousness;  and 
that  thus  was  furnished  a  favourable  opportunity  for 
the  besieger  to  seize  an  unguarded  moment,  and  turn, 
his  vast  preparations  to  account.     Scripture  shows  us 
that  the  king,  wrapped   in    that  false  security  which 
precedes  destruction,  used   the  occasion   for   insulting 
the  God  of  Israel.     Rash,  blinded  man !     It  was  the 
eve  of  his  ruined  dynasty,  and  of  his  death. 

For  Belshazzar,  the  past  was  a  profitless  blank. 
For  him  it  was  a  lesson,  unheard  and  unlearnt,  that 
God  had  in  His  providence  made  his  forefather  to  be 
the  instrument  of  just  but  terrible  judgments.  The 
city,  the  holy  city  of  God,  was  taken,  the  temple 
burnt,  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,  with  people, 
priests,  king,  carried  into  the  enemy's  land.  It  was 
an  astonishment  to  men  everywhere  when  Israel  thus 
fell.  The  importance  of  the  fact  was  entirely  out  of 
proportion  to  the  number  of  the  nation  or  the  extent 
of  their  territory.     For  poor  as  they  might  be  indi- 


CHAPTER    V.  33 

vidually,  tlie  halo  encircled  them  of  a  God  who  had 
brought  them  of  yore  out  of  Egypt,  through  the  Bed 
Sea — who  had  fed  them  with  angels'  food  for  many  a 
long  year  in  the  dreary  desert— and  who  had  shielded 
them  for  centuries,  spite  of  sad  ingratitude,  and  a 
thousand  perils,  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  Was  it  not  a 
strange  sight  for  the  world,  when  God  gave  up  His 
own  elect  and  favoured  people  to  he  swept  out  of 
their  land  by  a  Chaldean  king,  the  chief  of  the  idolatry 
of  that  day  ?  For  Babylon  was  ever  famous  for  the 
multitude  of  her  idols. 

Nebuchadnezzar,  in  all  the  pride  of  successful 
ambition,  had  not  been  so  insensate.  He  had  bowed 
to  the  wonderful  truth,  that  the  God  of  heaven,  who 
had  abandoned  Israel  for  their  sins,  had  raised  himself 
in  His  sovereignty  to  be  the  golden  head  of  Gentile 
empire.  He  had  owned  the  God  of  Daniel  to  be  a 
God  of  gods  and  a  Lord  of  kings;  he  had  confessed 
the  God  of  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abed-nego  to  be 
the  Most  High  God  —  a  deliverer  and  a  revealer  of 
secrets  beyond  all  others.  Nebuchadnezzar  had  been 
guilty  of  much  sin— had  been  proud  and  self-compla- 
cent, spite  of  warning,  and  had  been  abased  as  no 
king  nor  man  ever  was  because  of  it;  but  he  had 
acknowledged  throughout  his  wide  realm  his  own  sin, 

and  the  mighty  wonders  of  the   King  of  heaven all 

whose  works  are  truth,  and  His  ways  judgment.  But 
before  this  bright  end,  even  in  his  most  reckless  days, 
(when  all  trembled  before  him,  and  whom  he  would 
he  slew,  and  whom  he  would  he  kept  alive,  and 
whom  he  would  he  set  up,  and  whom  he  would  he  put 
down,)  never  had  he  proceeded  to  such  an  act  of 
contemptuous  profanity  as  that  now  perpetrated  by 
his  grandson. 

But  the  sentence  of  instant,  inevitable  judgment  at 
once  made  itself  heard.  For  the  cup  of  iniquity  w^as 
full ;  and  long  had  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  proclaimed 
the  punishment  of  Babylon's  king,     (Isa.   xiii.;   Jer. 


84  DANIEL. 

XXV.,  &c.)  Yet,  even  the  stroke  does  not  fall  without 
a  solemn  sign  from  God.  "In  the  same  hojir  came 
forth  fingers  of  a  man's  hand,  and  wrote  over  against 
the  candlestick  upon  the  plaister  of  the  wall  of  the 
king's  palace  ;  and  the  king  saw  the  part  of  the  hand 
that  wrote." 

It  was  no  dream  of  the  night  now;  but  a  silent 
monitor  of  awful  omen  in  the  midst  of  their  wild 
revelry  and  impious  defiance  of  the  living  God.  The 
hour  of  the  execution  of  wrath  was  now  come.  Bel 
must  how  down,  Neho  stoop  before  an  indignant  but 
most  patient  God.  The  king  needed  no  intimation 
from  another.  His  conscience,  corroded  with  de- 
pravity, trembled  before  the  hand  which  traced  his 
doom,  though  he  knew  not  a  word  that  was  written. 
Instinctively  he  felt  that  He  whose  hands  none  can 
stay,  was  dealing  with  him.  "  Then  the  king's  counte- 
nance was  changed,  and  his  thoughts  troubled  him,  so 
that  the  joints  of  his  loins  were  loosed,  and  his  knees 
smote  one  against  another."  Forgetful  of  his  dignity 
in  his  fright,  "  the  king  cried  aloud  to  bring  in  the 
astrologers,  the  Chaldeans,  and  the  soothsayers." 
But  all  was  vain.  The  highest  rewards  are  offered; 
but  the  spirit  of  deep  sleep  closed  all  eyes.  "  They 
could  not  read  the  writing,  nor  make  known  to  the 
king  the  interpretation  thej'eof." 

In  the  midst  of  the  still-increasing  alarm  of  the 
king  and  astonishment  of  his  lords,  the  cjueen  (doubt- 
less the  queen-mother,  if  we  compare  verses  2  and  10,) 
comes  into  the  banqueting-house.  Her  sympathies 
were  not  in  the  feast,  and  she  reminds  the  king  of 
one  who  was  yet  more  outside  and  above  it  all — a 
total  stranger  in  person  to  the  impious  king.  "  There 
is  a  man,"  &c.  (Verses  11 — 14.) 

This  fact  of  Daniel's  strangership  to  Belshazzar  is 
one  that  speaks  volumes.  Whatever  the  pride  aud 
audacity  of  the  great  Nebuchadnezzar,  Daniel  sat  in 
the  gate  of   the  king — ruler  over  the  whole  province 


CHAPTER   V. 


of  Babylon,  and  chief  of  the  governors  over  all  the 
wise  men.  His  degraded  and  degenerate  descendant 
knew  Daniel  not. 

This  reminds  me,  by  the  way,  of  a  well-known 
incident  in  the  history  of  King  Saul,  the  moral  force 
of  vvhich  is  not  always  seen.  When  troubled  by  an 
evil  spirit,  a  young  son  of  Jesse  was  sought  out, 
whose  music  God  was  pleased  to  use  as  a  means  of 
quieting  the  king's  mind.  "And  it  came  to  pass 
when  the  evil  spirit  from  God  was  upon  Saul,  that 
David  took  an  harp  and  played  with  his  hand  ;  so 
Saul  was  refreshed,  and  was  well,  and  the  evil  spirit 
departed  from  him."  (1  Sam.  xvi.  23.)  Not  long 
after,  Saul  and  all  Israel  were  in  »sore  dismay  when 
the  giant  of  Gath  challenged  them  in  the  valley  of 
Elah.  God's  providence  brought  there,  in  the  humble 
path  of  unwarlike  duty,  a  youth  who  heard  the  vain- 
glorious words  of  the  Philistine  with  different  ears. 
Instead  of  terror,  his  feeling  was  rather  amazement 
that  the  uncircumcised  should  dare  to  defy  the  armies 
of  the  living  God.  The  victory  was  no  sooner  won, 
than  the  king  turns  to  the  captain  of  the  host  with 
this  question,  "  Whose  son  is  this  youth?  "  And  Abner 
confesses  his  ignorance.  Here  was  a  strange  case  : 
the  very  youth  who  had  ministered  to  him  in  his 
malady  unknown  to  King  Saul!  The  interval  was 
certainly  not  long;  but  Saul  knew  not  David.  This 
has  perplexed  the  critics  immensely;  and  one  of  the 
most  distinguished  of  Hebraists  has  tried  to  make 
out  that  the  chapters  must  have  been  shuffled  some- 
how, and  that  the  close  of  chap.  xvi.  should  follow  the 
end  of  xvii. ;  so  as  to  remove  the  difficulty  of  Saul's 
ignorance  of  David  after  he  had  stood  in  his  presence, 
won  his  love,  and  become  his  armour-bearer.  But  I 
am  convinced  that  all  this  arises  from  not  apprehending 
the  very  lesson  that  God  teaches  in  the  scene.  The 
truth  is,  that  Saul  might  have  loved  David  for  his 
services ;  but  there  never  was  a  particle  of  sympathy ; 


S6  DANIEL. 

and  where  this  is  the  case  we  readily  forget.  Stranger- 
ship  of  heart  soon  ends  in  actual  distance,  w^ben  the 
service  of  the  Lord  comes  in.  It  is  the  very  spirit  of 
the  world  towards  the  children  of  God.  As  St.  John 
says,  "  Therefore  the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because 
it  knew  him  not."  They  may  be  acquainted  with  many 
things  about  Christians,  but  they  never  know  them- 
selves. And  when  the  Christian  passes  away  from  the 
scene,  there  may  be  a  passing  reminiscence,  but  he  is 
an  unknown  man.  Saul  had  been  under  the  greatest 
obligations  to  David.  But  although  David  had  been 
the  channel  of  comfort  to  him,  yet  all  knowledge  of 
David  completely  passed  away  with  the  service  that  he 
had  rendered.  So  of  Daniel  the  queen  could  say,  "  In 
the  days  of  thy  father,  light,  and  understanding,  and 
wisdom,  like  the  wisdom  of  the  gods,  w^as  found  in 
him;  whom  the  king  Nebuchadnezzar  thy  father,  the 
king,  I  say,  thy  father,  made  master  of  the  magicians, 
astrologers,  Chaldeans,  and  soothsayers."  Yet  there 
was  no  thought  about  him  now.  He  was  comparatively 
unknown  by  those  at  the  feast.  The  only  one  who 
thought  about  him  was  the  queen,  and  she  was  only 
there  because  of  their  trouble. 

Accordingly  Daniel  is  brought  before  the  king,  and 
the  king  asks  him,  "  Art  thou  that  Daniel,  which  art 
of  the  children  of  the  captivity  of  Judah,  whom  the 
king  my  father  brought  out  of  Jewry  ?  "  Then  he  tells 
him  his  difficulty,  arid  speaks  of  the  rewards  he  is 
prepared  to  give  to  any  who  should  tell  the  interpreta- 
tion of  the  writing.  Daniel  answers  as  became  the 
occasion.  "  Let  thy  gifts  be  to  thyself,  and  give  thy 
rewards  to  another ;  yet  I  will  read  the  writing  unto 
the  king,  and  make  known  unto  him  the  interpreta- 
tion." But  first  he  administers  a  most  painful  word 
of  admonition.  He  brings  before  him  in  a  few  words 
the  history  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  God's  dealings 
with  him.  He  reminds  him  withal  of  his  own  entire 
indifference;  nay,  of  his  reckless  insults  against  God. 


CHAPTER   V.  87 

"  And  thoii  his  son,  0  Belshazzar,  hast  not  humbled 
thine  heart,  though  thou  knewest  all  this;    but  hast 

lifted  up  thyself  against  the  Lord  of  heaven and 

the  God  in  whose  hand  thy  breath  is,  and  whose  are  all 
thy  ways,  hast  thou  not  glorified."     He  brings  before 
him  what  that  scene  was  in  the  eye  of  God.     For  this 
is  what  sin,  what  Satan,  seeks  ever  to  hide.     Before  the 
Babylonish  court,  it  was  a  magnificent  feast,  enhanced 
by  the  memorials  of  the  success  of  their  arms,  and  the 
supremacy  of  their  gods.     But  what  was  their  gorgeous 
revelry  in  the  eye  of    God  ?      What  was  it  to  Him 
that  the   vessels  of    His    service  were  brought  up  so 
proudly  to  vaunt   the  triumph    of  Babylon   and   her 
idols  ?     To  one  who  knew  Him  it  must  have  been  a 
most   painful  moment,  however    sure  and    speedy  the 
issue.      Yet  there  are    scenes  that  take  place  in  the 
world  now  that  give  forebodings  of  a  character  at  least 
as  grave.      The  question  is.  Are  we  in  the  secret  of 
God  so  to  read  His  judgment  on  all  these  things  for 
ourselves  ?     We    may  readily  and   without    cost  pro- 
nounce, in  a  measure,  on  the  presumption  of  Nebu- 
chadnezzar and    on  the  open  impiety  of  Belshazzar ; 
but  the  great  moral  criterion  for  us  is  this  :  Are  we 
discerning  aright  the  face  of  the  sky  and  of  the  earth 
in  this  our  day  ?     Are  the  lowering  aspects   of  this 
time  lost  upon    us  ?      Are  we  identified    simply    and 
solely  with  the  Lord's  interests  at  the  present  time  ? 
Do  we  understand  what  is  going  on  in  the  world  now  ? 
Do  we  believe  what  is  coming  upon  it  ?     Clearly  the 
king  and  his  court  were  but  the  instruments  of  Satan  ; 
and  the  contempt  they  showed  for  the  God  of  heaven 
was  not   the  mere  working  of   their  own  minds,  but 
Satan  was  their  master.     And  it  is  a  true  saying  that 
■wherever  you  get  the  will  of  man,  you  invariably  find 
the  service  of  Satan.     Alas!  man  knows  not  that  the 
enjoyment  of  a  liberty  without  God  is  and  must  be  to 
do  the  devil's  work.      King   Belshazzar  and  his  lords 
might  think  that  it  was  but  celebrating  their  victories 


88  DAI^IEL. 

over  a  nation  still  prostrate  and  captive  in  Babylon;  but 
it  was  a  direct,  personal  insult  offered  to  the  tnia  God, 
and  He  answers  to  the  challenge.  It  was  no  longer  a 
controversy  between  Daniel  and  the  astrologers,  but 
between  Belshazzar  himself  and  God.  The  command, 
to  bring  the  vessels  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  might 
seem  but  a  wicked  drunken  freak  of  the  king's:  but 
the  crisis  was  come,  and  God  must  strike  a  decisive 
blow.  Depend  upon  it,  these  tendencies  of  our  day, 
although  not  met  at  once  by  God,  are  not  forgotten ; 
there  is  a  treasuring  up  of  wrath  against  the  day  of 
wrath.  The  present  is  not  a  time  when  God  lets  His 
judgments  fall.  Eather  is  it  a  day  when  man  is  build- 
ing up  his  sins  to  heaven,  only  so  much  the  more 
terribly  to  fall  when  the  hand  of  God  is  stretched  out 
against  him. 

But  there  is  even  then  a  warning,  solemn,  immediate, 
and  before  all.  And  observe,  as  to  this  writing  seen 
upon  the  wall,  what  was  the  great  difficulty  of  it? 
The  language  was  Chaldean,  and  those  who  saw  the 
hand  and  the  characters  were  Chaldeans.  We  might 
have  judged  then,  that  the  mere  letters  must  be  more 
familiar  to  the  Chaldeans  than  to  Daniel.  It  is  not 
the  way  of  God,  when  he  communicates  anything,  to 
put  it  in  an  obscure  form.  It  would  be  a  monstrous 
theory,  that  God,  in  giving  a  revelation,  makes  it  im- 
possible to  be  understood  by  those  for  whom  it  is- 
intended.  What  is  it  that  renders  all  Scripture  so 
difficult?  It  is  not  its  language.  A  striking  proof  of 
it  is  found  in  this:  —  if  any  one  were  to  ask,  what 
part  of  the  New  Testament  I  conceive  to  be  the  most 
p)rofound  of  all,  I  should  refer  to  the  Epistles  of  St. 
John;  and  yet  if  there  be  any  part,  more  than  others, 
couched  in  language  of  the  greatest  simplicity,  it  is 
these  very  Epistles.  The  words  are  not  those  of  the 
scribes  of  this  world.  Neither  are  the  thoughts  enig- 
matical or  full  of  foreign,  recondite  allusions.  The 
difficulty  of  Scripture  lies  herein,  that  it  is  the  revela- 


CHAPTER   V.  89 

tion  of  Christ,  for  the  souls  that  have  their  hearts 
opened  hy  grace  to  receive  and  to  value.  Now  John 
was  one  who  was  admitted  to  this  pre-eminently.  Of 
all  the  disciples  he  was  the  most  favoured  in  intimacy 
of  communion  with  Christ.  So  it  was,  certainly,  when 
Christ  was  upon  earth;  and  he  is  used  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  to  give  us  the  deepest  thoughts  of  Christ's  love 
and  personal  glory.  The  real  difficulty  of  Scripture, 
then,  consists  in  its  thoughts  being  so  infinitely  above 
our  natural  mind.  We  must  give  up  self  in  order  to 
understand  the  Bible.  We  must  have  a  heart  and  an 
eye  for  Christ,  or  Scripture  becomes  an  unintelligible 
thing  for  our  souls ;  whereas,  when  the  eye  is  single, 
the  whole  body  is  full  of  light.  Hence  you  may  find 
a  learned  man  completely  at  fault,  though  he  may  be  a 
Christian — stopping  short  at  the  Epistles  of  John  and 
the  Revelation  as  being  too  deep  for  him  to  enter  into; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  you  may  find  a  simple  man 
who,  if  he  cannot  altogether  understand  these  Scrip- 
tures or  explain  every  portion  of  them  correctly,  at 
any  rate  he  can  enjoy  them;  they  convey  intelligible 
thoughts  to  his  soul,  and  comfort,  and  guidance,  and 
profit  too.  Even  if  it  be  about  coming  events,  or 
Babylon  and  the  beast,  he  finds  there  great  principles  of 
God  that,  even  though  they  may  be  found  in  what  is 
reputed  the  obscurest  of  all  the  books  of  Scripture, 
yet  have  a  practical  bearing  to  his  soul.  The  reason  is, 
Christ  is  before  him,  and  Christ  is  the  wisdom  of  God 
in  every  sense.  It  is  not,  of  course,  because  he  is 
ignorant  that  he  can  understand  it,  but  in  spite  of  his 
ignorance.  Nor  is  it  because  a  man  is  learned,  that  he 
is  capable  of  entering  into  the  thoughts  of  God. 
AVhether  ignorant  or  learned,  there  is  but  one  way — 
the  eye  to  see  what  concerns  Christ.  And  where  that 
is  firmly  fixed  before  the  soul,  I  believe  that  Christ 
becomes  the  light  of  spiritual  intelligence  as  He  is  the 
light  of  salvation. '  It  is  the  Spirit  of  God  that  is  the 
power   of  apprehending  it;  but  Me  never  gives  that 


90  DANIEL. 

light  except  throngli  Clarist.  Otherwise  man  has  an 
object  before  him,  that  is  not  Christ,  and  therefore  can- 
not understand  Scripture  which  reveals  Christ.  He  is 
endeavouring  to  force  the  Scriptures  to  bear  upon  his 
own  objects,  whatever  they  may  be,  and  thus  Scripture 
is  perverted.  That  is  the  real  key  to  all  mistakes  of 
Scripture.  Man  takes  his  own  thoughts  to  the  Word 
of  God,  and  builds  up  a  system  which  has  no  divine 
foundation. 

To  return,  then,  to  the  inscription  upon  the  wall, 
the  words  were  plain  enough.  All  ought  to  have  been 
intelligible,  and  would  have  been,  had  the  souls  of  the 
Chaldeans  been  in  communion  with  the  Lord.  I  do 
not  mean  that  there  was  not  the  power*  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  needed  to  enable  Daniel  to  understand  it;  but 
it  is  an  immense  thing  for  the  understanding  of  the 
word,  that  we  have  communion  witli  the  God  that  is 
making  known  His  mind  to  us.  "  Therefore,"  said  St. 
Paul  to  the  elders, "  I  commend  you  to  God,  and  to  the 
word  of  his  grace." 

Daniel  was  entirely  outside  the  revellings  and  such 
like.  He  was  a  stranger  to  those  that  were  at  home 
there.  He  was  called  in  from  the  light  of  the  presence 
of  God  to  see  this  scene  of  impiety  and  darkness ;  and 
coming,  therefore,  fresh  from  the  light  of  God,  he  reads 
this  writing  upon  the  walk  and  all  was  bright  as  the 
day.  And  nothing  more  solemn.  "  This  is  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  thing."  (Yer.  25 — 28.)  He  at  once 
sees  God  in  the  matter.  The  king  had  insulted  God  in 
what  was  connected  with  His  worship.  "  Tekel;  thou 
art  weighed  in  the  balances,  and  found  wanting. 
Peres ;  thy  kingdom  is  divided  and  given  to  the  Medes 
and  Persians."  It  was  not  that  anything  appeared 
then;  nothing  was  seen  at  the  time  that  made  it 
even  probable.  And  I  call  attention  to  this,  because  it 
is  another  proof,  how  utterly  false  is  the  maxim,  that 
we  must  wait  till  prophecy  is  fulfilled  before  we  can 
understand  it.     If  a  man  is  an  unbeliever,  to  see  the 


CHAPTER   VT.  91 

fulfilment  of  prophecy  in  the  past,  is  a  powerful 
argument  that  nothing  can  surmount.  But  is  that 
what  God  wrote  prophecy  for  ?  Was  it  to  convince 
infidels  ?  No  doubt  God  may  use  it  for  such.  But 
was  that  what  God  intended  the  writing  upon  the  wall 
for  on  that  night?  Clearly  not.  It  was  His  last 
solemn  warning  before  the  blow  fell,  and  the  interpre- 
tation was  given  before  the  Persians  broke  into  the  city 
— when  there  was  not  a  sign  of  ruin,  but  all  was  gaiety 
and  mirth.  "  In  that  night  was  Belshazzar  the  king 
of  the  Chaldeans  slain.  And  Darius  the  Median  took 
the  kingdom,  being  about  threescore  and  two  years 
old."     In  short,  Babylon  was  judged. 


CHAPTER    VI. 

We  have  now  another  and  final  type  of  the  Gentile 
powers  brought  upon  the  scene.  But  in  looking  at 
types  we  must  always  bear  in  mind  that  the  question 
is  not  about  the  personal  character  of  him  that  affords 
the  type.  Thus,  Aaron  officially  was  a  type  of  Christ, 
but  we  are  not  therefore  to  suppose  that  his  ways  were 
like  His.  In  some  respects  he  was  a  very  guilty  man. 
It  was  he  who  made  the  calf  of  gold  and  who  even 
sought  to  deceive  about  it.  But  this  does  not  dis- 
qualify him  from  being  a  type  of  Christ.  He  was  a 
type  of  Christ  in  spite  of  all  that,  not  in  that.  David 
typified  Christ,  not  as  a  priest  but  as  a  king — as  a 
suffering  and  rejected  king  first,  and  then  as  one  reign- 
ing and  exalted.  There  are  two  parts  in  the  life  of 
David.  First,  the  time  when  he  was  anointed  king 
but  when  the  poAver  of  evil  was  still  allowed,  and  he 
was  hunted  about  and  persecuted;  and  secondly,  when 
Saul   died,   he  takes  the  throne  and  puts  down  his 


92  DANIEL. 

enemies.  In  both  respects,  David  was  a  type  of  Christ. 
But  there  was  manifestly  also  the  contrast  of  Chi'ist  in 
the  failure  of  King  David,  and  the  dreadful  sin  into 
which  he  fell. 

But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  a  type  here,  as  I 
helieve  there  is,  of  an  awful  scene,  that  closes  the  pre- 
sent dispensation,  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  it  cannot 
be  its  type,  because  there  were  good  equalities  in  the 
king.  King  Darius,  rather  than  Belshazzar,  fore- 
shadows the  way  in  which  man  will  take  the  place  of 
being  God.  It  was  what  Darius  did,  or  suffered  to  be 
done,  that  sets  this  forth  in  principle.  While  Belshaz- 
zar was  one  of  the  most  degraded  of  the  human  race, 
Darius  was  a  person  who,  in  his  own  character  and 
ways,  had  much  that  was  exceedingly  amiable,  if  not 
something  better.  But  I  am  not  now  raising  a  ques- 
tion of  Darius  personally.  We  have  had  the  type  of 
Babylon's  fall,  and  the  judgment  of  God  that  will 
come  down  upon  it,  because  of  its  wickedness  in  insult- 
ing and  profaning  what  belongs  to  the  true  God,  and  in 
mixing  up  its  own  idols,  and  giving  its  praise  and 
worship  to  them,  in  indifference  to  the  sorrows  of  God's 
people.  This  will  be  verified  a  great  deal  more  in 
future  history.  There  is  that  upon  the  earth  which 
takes  the  highest  place  as  being  the  church  of  God. 
There  is  that,  which  boasts  of  its  unity,  of  its  strength, 
and  antiquity;  which  boasts  of  its  uninterrupted  line- 
age; which  takes  credit  to  itself  for  sanctity  and  the 
blood  of  martyrs.  But  God  is  not  indifferent  to  its 
sins,  which  have  been  going  on  increasing  and  deepen- 
ing from  generation  to  generation;  and  they  are  only 
awaiting  the  day  of  the  Lord  to  come,  for  judgment  to 
be  executed  and  to  receive  the  sentence  that  is  due  to 
them.  In  the  Revelation  there  are  two  great  objects 
of  judgments  —  Babylon  and  the  beast.  The  one 
represents  religious  corruption,  and  the  other  violence; 
two  different  forms  of  human  wickedness.  In  the 
latter  form  of   it,  we  see  a  man  urged  on  by  Satan, 


CHAPTER    VI.  93 

presuming  to  take  the  place  of  God  upon  the  earth. 
Kow  this  is  what  Darius  permits  to  be  done.  He  might 
not  know  it  himself,  but  there  were  others  around  him 
that  led  him  to  the  dreadful  deed. 

The  historical  circumstances  that  led  to  it  were 
these  : — They  wanted  an  occasion  against  Daniel,  and 
they  well  knew  that  it  was  impossible  to  find  one  ex- 
cept they  found  it  against  him  "  concerning  the  law  of 
his  God."  So  they  jDut  their  heads  together,  and 
taking  advantage  of  the  usage  of  the  Medes  and 
Persians  for  the  nobles  to  form  the  law  and  for  the 
king  to  establish  and  sign  it,  they  devise  a  decree  that 
it  should  be  lawful  for  none  to  ask  a  petition  of  any  god 
or  man  for  thirty  days  save  of  the  king.  What  was 
this  but  for  a  man  to  take  the  place  of  God  ?  That  no 
prayer  was  to  be  offered  to  the  true  God,  and  that 
every  prayer  that  was  offered  at  all  was  to  be  offered  to 
the  king:  if  that  was  not  giving  the  rights  of  God  to 
man,  I  know  not  what  is.  The  king  fell  into  the  trap, 
and  signed  the  decree. 

But  now  we  have  to  mark  the  beautiful  conduct  of 
Daniel.  There  is  no  intimation  that  thinsfs  were  a 
secret  to  Daniel,  On  the  contrary,  he  was  perfectly 
aware  (verse  10)  of  what  had  passed  into  law.  But, 
on  the  other  hand,  he  could  not  compromise  his  God. 
His  course,  therefore,  was  taken.  He  was  an  old  man, 
and  the  faith  that  had  burned  within  him  from  early 
days  was  at  least  as  bright  as  ever.  So  when  he  knew 
that  all  was  signed,  and  sealed,  and  settled,  as  far  as 
man  could,  and  that  the  unchangeable  law  of  the 
Medes  and  Persians  demanded  that  no  knee  of  man 
should  bow  down  to  God  for  thirty  days,  knowing  it 
all,  he  goes  to  his  chamber.  There  is  no  ostentation, 
but  he  does  not  hide  it.  With  his  windows  open,  as 
usual,  toward  Jerusalem,  he  bows  down  before  his  God 
three  times  a  day,  and  prays  and  gives  thanks  as  he 
had  done  aforetime.  He  gives  his  enemies  the  occasion 
that  they  sought.     They  at  once  remind  the  king  of 


94  DAJTIEL, 

the  decree  that  he  had  made,  and  proceed  to  arraign 
Daniel  before  him.  "  That  Daniel,"  they  say,  -^  which 
is  of  the  captivity  of  Jndah,  regardeth  not  thee,  0 
king,  nor  the  decree  that  thoii  hast  signed,  but  maketh 
his  petition  three  times  a  day."  Then  Darius,  the  king, 
was  sore  displeased  with  himself,  and  labours  in  vain 
till  the  going  down  of  the  sun,  to  deliver  the  one 
whom  he  respected  at  least.  Miserable  though  he  was, 
yet,  on  the  appeal  of  the  nobles  to  him  on  the  ground 
of  the  immutability  of  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and 
Persians,  he  sins  again.  He  gives  up  the  prophet  to  the 
rage  of  his  enemies,  to  be  cast  into  the  lions'  den,  with 
the  hope,  which  perhaps  he  scarcely  allowed  himself, 
that  his  God  would  deliver  him.  And  God  appears 
for  His  servant.  God  does  deliver:  and  the  dreadful 
fate,  that  was  intended  for  the  prophet,  fell  upon  those 
who  had  accused  him  to  the  king.  "  The  heathen  are 
sunk  down  in  the  pit  that  they  .made ;  in  the  net  which 
they  hid  is  their  own  foot  taken.  The  Lord  is  known 
by  the  judgment  which  he  executeth:  the  wicked  is 
snared  in  the  work  of  his  own  hands."  Ps.  ix.  15,  16. 
Nothing  can  be  plainer  than  the  bearing  of  this  on  the 
deliverance  of  the  godly  remnant  at  the  close  by  the 
outpouring  of  wrath  and  destruction  upon  the  traitors 
within  and  the  oppressors  without  of  the  last  days. 
The  end  will  be  as  here — bhe  acknowledgment  on  the 
part  of  the  Gentiles,  that  the  living  God  is  the  God  of 
delivered  Israel,  and  that  His  kingdom  shall  not  be 
destroyed. 

Here  we  have  then,  in  Daniel  v.  and  vi.,  the  com- 
bined types  of  that  which  will  close  the  present 
dispensation.  For  if  you  look  later  on  in  this  book  of 
Daniel,  you  have  a  person  introduced  called  "the  king." 
(Chap.  xi.  36,  &c.)  You  have  there  a  direct  prophecy 
of  similar  deeds.  "  The  king  shall  do  according  to  his 
own  will;  and  he  shall  exalt  himself,  and  magnify  him- 
self above  every  god,  and  shall  speak  marvellous  things 
against  the  God  of  gods,"  &c.     Not  that  Darius  per- 


CHAPTER   VI.  95 

sonally  did  these  things.  I  am  speaking  of  what  his 
act  or  decree  meant  in  the  eye  of  God.  The  question 
is,  what  God  thought  of  the  sin  Darius  had  been  drawn 
into,  and  this,  as  a  type  of  the  future. 

It  is  said,   further,   of  "  the  king,"   in  chapter  xi., 

"  Neither  shall  he  regard  the  God  of  his  fathers 

for  he  shall  magnify  himself  above  all."  In  the  New 
Testament  we  have  this  alluded  to  in  more  than  one 
place.  A  person  might  say  to  me.  That  is  about  the 
Jews,  and  does  not  concern  the  present  dispensation. 
"Well,  then,  taking  up  what  does  refer  to  it,  I  would 
cite  in  proof  2  Thess.  ii.  3,  4.  "  Let  no  man  deceive 
you  by  any  means :  for  that  day  (that  is,  the  day  of  the 
Lord's  judgment  upon  this  world)  shall  not  come 
except  there  come  a  falling  away  first,  (strictly,  it 
means  '  the  apostasy  first,')  and  that  man  of  sin  be 
revealed,  the  son  of  perdition;  who  opposeth  and 
exalteth  himself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  or  that 
is  worshipped;  so  that  he  as  God,  sitteth  in  the  temple 
of  God,  showing  himself  that  he  is  God."  Now, 
it  is  plain,  that  what  Darius  did  was  in  effect  to  exalt 
himself  aboTC  all  that  is  called  God  or  is  worshipped. 
Because,  to  forbid  prayer  to  God,  and  to  demand  that 
the  prayer  that  was  offered  to  God  usually  should  be 
offered  to  himself,  only  for  a  certain  space  of  time, 
was  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  type  of  him  who 
would  take  this  place  in  a  far  more  dreadful  and  gross 
and  literal  way.  We  have  clearly  a  New  Testament 
proof  that  these  days  spoken  of  iu  Daniel,  and  typified 
then,  are  yet  to  come;  that  this  person,  who  is  looked 
forward  to  by  prophecy,  is  one  who  is  to  set  himself  up 
as  God,  not  as  the  vicar  of  Christ  merely,  having 
persons  ready  to  bow  before  him  and  kiss  his  foot.  All 
this  is  wicked  and  superstitious ;  but  it  is  not  a  man 
saying  that  he  is  God,  setting  himself  up  in  the  temple 
of  God,  and  saying,  There  is  no  prayer  to  be  offered 
except  to  myself.  Whatever  be  the  evil  of  Popery  and 
the  presumption  of  the  pope,  there  is   a  great   deal 


96  DANIEL. 

worse  to  come.  And  tlie  solemn  thing  to  remember  is 
this,  that  it  will  not  be  merely  the  issue  of  -Popery, 
but  of  Popery  AND  Protestantism,  &c.,  without  God. 
Not  even  the  spread  of  truth  will  be  an  infallible  pre- 
servative against  it.  Most  guilty  and  foolish  were 
those  who  once  fancied,  that  because  Israel  had  the  ark 
of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  they  were  necessarily  safe 
in  the  conflict  with  the  Philistines  !  The  ark  returned 
in  triumph,  but  where  were  they  ? 

Beware  of  the  fond  conceit  that,  because  of  religious 
zeal,  no  harm  can  befall  this  country.  Rather  be  sure 
of  this:  the  more  light,  the  more  Bibles,  the  more 
preaching,  the  more  of  everything  that  is  good  there 
is,  if  men  are  not  conformed  to  it,  and  not  w^alking  in 
it,  the  greater  the  danger.  If  they  treat  it  as  a  light 
thing,  and  despise  it;  if  they  have  no  conscience  about 
practical  bowing  to  the  light  of  Scripture,  they  are 
most  sure  to  fall  under  one  delusion  or  another.  For 
who  is  to  say  what  is  not  of  importance  in  Scripture, 
or  by  what  means  the  devil  gains  power  over  the  soul  ? 
Wherever  the  soul  commits  itself  to  a  refusal  to  listen 
to  God,  gives  itself  up  to  disobedience  to  God  in  any- 
thing, who  is  to  say  w' here  it  is  to  end  ?  There  is  no 
security  except  in  the  path  of  holy  dependence  upon 
God  and  obedience  to  His  word.  We  are  not  to 
be  choosing  one  part  of  Scripture  above  another  because 
we  get  more  comfort  from  it.  There  is  no  security  save 
as  we  take  all  Scripture.  It  is  very  sweet  to  be 
enjoying  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  but,  more  than  that, 
it  is  a  fearful  thing  to  be  found  in  disobedience  to  the 
Lord.  Disobedience  is  as  the  sin  of  witchcraft.  There 
is  nothing  more  terrible.  To  disobey  God  is  virtually 
to  destroy  His  honour.  It  was  so  in  Israel,  and  yet 
there  is  much  worse  to  come,  arising  out  of  the  lax  and 
evil  state  of  Christendom. 

We  have  first,  then,  the  apostasy.  Christianity 
■will  be  given  up,  and  the  more  light,  the  more 
certainly  it  will  come  for  the  mass  who  refuse  that 


CHAPTER   VI.  97 

light.  There  never  was  a  time  in  Israel  that  appeared 
so  promising  as  the  day  when  our  Lord  was  upon  earth, 
never  such  a  time  of  religious  activity,  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  compassing  sea  and  land  to  make  one 
proselyte.  They  showed  zeal,  apparently,  in  the  reading 
of  the  Scriptures.  They  had  the  priests  and  Levites; 
there  was  no  idolatry,  nothing  gross.  They  were  a 
Bible-reading  people,  and  a  Sabbath-keeping  people; 
they  called  our  Lord  Himself  a  Sabbath-breaker,  so 
rigid  did  they  appear  outwardly  to  observe  the  day. 
All  this  was  going  on,  but  what  did  it  end  in  ?  What 
did  they  do  ?  They  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory,  and 
they  rejected  the  testimony  and  the  gracious  working 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  so  that  the  end  was  that  the  King 
sent  forth  his  armies,  destroyed  those  murderers  and 
burned  up  their  city.  Nor  was  it  that  there  was  no 
conversion  going  on.  God  put  forth  His  power  and 
they  were  converted  by  thousands.  James  says, 
''  Thou  seest,  brother,  how  many  thousands  (rather 
myriads)  of  Jews,  there  are,  which  believe."  There 
were,  then,  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  converted 
after  the  cross  of  Jesus,  and  people  might  think  that 
all  Israel  and  the  world  were  going  to  be  converted. 
But  what  was  the  fact  ?  God  was  merely  gathering 
out  these  thousands  in  His  grace  to  leave  the  rest  to  be 
destroyed  in  the  judgment  that  fell  upon  Jerusalem. 
That  is  a  little  foreshadowing  of  the  judgment  which 
is  to  fall  upon  the  world  by  and  by.  And  if  God  is 
now  putting  forth  His  power  and  gathering  out  souls 
everywhere  from  the  world,  it  is  a  solemn  question  for 
every  one  whether  they  are  converted  or  not.  And  if 
they  are  converted,  it  is  a  call  to  them  to  be  walking  in 
the  path  of  obedience,  submitting  in  all  things  to  the 
word  of  God,  and  looking  for  Christ.  The  idea  that 
some  have  of  universal  conversion  is  a  delusion. 
Babylon  or  the  beast:  these  will  be  the  two  great 
snares  of  the  latter  day.  The  one  will  be  the  source  of 
corruption  coupled  with  religion  and  a  profaning  of  all 

H 


98  DANIEL. 

things  holy.  The  other  will  be  characterized  by  the 
last  degree  of  pride  and  violence.  It  will  appe'ar  that 
Christianity  has  been  a  complete  failure,  and  men  will 
think  they  have  a  new  panacea  for  all  the  ills  and 
miseries  of  man  better  than  the  Gospel.  And  they 
will  praise  up  their  idols  of  gold,  and  silver,  and  brass, 
glorying-  in  the  fact  that  Christianity,  save  the  outward 
form,  has  disappeared  from  the  face  of  the  earth. 
Then  will  come  the  judgment. 

Rev.  xvii.  shows  us  that  as  with  Babylon  in  Daniel, 
so  it  will  be  with  the  New  Testament  Babylon,  the 
corrupted  form  of  religious  apostasy.  Man  will  be 
used  as  the  instrument  of  the  downfall  of  Babylon, 
the  woman  drunken  with  the  blood  of  the  saints  and 
with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of  Jesus.  We  have 
men  wreaking  their  vengeance  upon  her.  She  is  no 
longer  seen  riding  upon  the  scarlet-coloured  beast,  but 
trampled  upon,  hated,  and  desolate.  And  then  what 
do  we  have  ?  Not  Christianity  everywhere  over- 
spreading the  world.  On  the  contrary,  the  beast  fills 
the  scene,  and  assumes  the  place  of  God.  Instead  of 
merely  having  an  intoxicating,  debased  Christianity,  it 
will  then  be  man  that  sets  himself  up  in  proud 
defiance  of  God.  He  takes  God's  place  upon  the 
earth.  I  do  not  pretend  to  say  what  space  of  time 
will  elapse  between  the  destruction  of  Babylon  and 
the  fall  of  the  beast.  Rev.  xvii.  proves  that  so  far 
from  the  destruction  of  Babylon  making  the  world  to 
be  an  improved  scene,  we  have  only  bold  evil  in  place 
of  hypocritical  evil;  and  instead  of  religious  corrup- 
tion, you  have  irreligious  pride  and  defiance  of  God. 
"  The  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest  are  ten  kings, 
which  have  received  no  kingdom  as  yet;  but  receive 
power  as  kings  for  one  and  the  same  time  with  the 
beast.  These  have  one  mind  and  shall  give  their 
power  and  strength  unto  the  beast"-— not  to  God. 
All  is  given  to  the  beast  for  the  purpose  of  exalting 
man.     The    hour  will  have   come  for  man    to   have 


CHAPTER   VI.  99 

tlie  supreme  place  in  the  world.  But,  contrary  to 
the  ambition  of  man  generally,  there  will  be  the 
giving  up  of  their  own  will  to  the  will  of  another 
— the  desire  to  have  some  one  very  high  and  exalted, 
to  whom  all  must  bow.  When  this  is  achieved, 
"  These  shall  make  war  with  the  Lamb,  and  the 
Lamb  shall  overcome  them."  That  this  follows  the 
destruction  of  Babylon  is  plain.  For  it  says  after- 
wards, "  The  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest,  and  the 
beast,  (so  it  ought  to  be  read,)  these  shall  hate  the 
whore,  and  shall  make  her  desolate  and  naked."  This 
is  exactly  what  answers  to  the  type  of  Darius.  Da- 
rius comes  in  and  destroys  Babylon  and  takes  the 
kingdom  immediately;  and  the  next  thing  is,  he  is 
led  on  by  his  courtiers  to  take  the  place  of  God 
Himself.  He  passes  a  law,  or  confirms  one,  that  no 
prayer  shall  be  offered  to  any  save  to  himself,  for 
thirty  days.  That  is,  he  assumes,  in  effect,  to  be  the 
object  of  all  worship;  he  arrogates  that  which  is  ex- 
clusively due  to  the  true  God. 

These  two  types  are  highly  instructive,  as  closing 
the  general  history  of  the  Gentiles.  They  show,  not 
what  had  characterized  them  from  the  beginning  and 
during  their  progress,  but  the  main  features  of  evil  at 
the  close.  There  will  be  destruction  falling  upon 
Babylon,  because  of  its  profaneness  in  the  religious 
things  of  God;  and  then  the  height  of  blasphemous 
pride  to  which  the  head  of  empire  v/ill  rise  by  assum- 
ing the  honour  and  glory  due  only  to  God  Himself. 
I  was  anxious  to  connect  the  two  things  together, 
because  we  cannot  otherwise  get  the  true  force  of 
them  so  well. 

We  have  now  concluded  what  I  may  call  the  first 
volume  of  Daniel,  because  it  divides  exactly  into  two 
portions  at  the  close  of  this  chapter;  and  that  is  one 
reason  why  it  is  mentioned  that  Daniel  prospered  in 
the  reign  of  Darius,  and  in  the  reign  of  Cyrus  the 
Persian.     In  the  next  chapter  we  shall  find  that  we 


100  DANIEL. 

come  back  to  the  reign  of  Belshazzar,  when  Daniel 
is  again  brought  before  us.  But  this  I  must  leave, 
only  praying  that  this  sample  of  the  great  importance 
of  reading  Scripture  typically,  where  it  is  so  intended 
to  be  read,  may  stir  up  the  children  of  God  to  see 
that  there  is  much  more  to  be  learnt  from  Scripture 
than  what  appears  on  the  surface  at  a  first  glance. 
What  God  says  has  got  a  character  about  it  that  is 
infinite.  Instead  of  being  exhausted  by  a  draught 
taken  from  it  here  and  there,  it  is  the  well  itself; 
the  constantly-flowing  spring  of  truth.  The  more  we 
grow  in  the  truth,  the  less  we  are  satisfied  with  what 
we  have  got,  and  the  more  we  feel  what  we  have  yet 
to  learn.  It  is  not  to  affect  words  of  humility,  but  the 
real,  deep  feeling  of  our  own  total  insufficiency,  in 
presence  of  the  greatness  and  'goodness  of  our  God, 
that  has  taken  such  poor  worms  as  we  are  to  set  us 
in  His  own  glory — for  such  indeed  are  the  mighty 
ways  of  His  grace. 


CHAPTER    YII. 

TVe  enter  now  upon  the  second  great  division  of  the 
book.  The  Spirit  of  God  gives  us  here  not  merely 
the  history  or  visions  of  heathen,  such  as  Nebuchad- 
nezzar or  others,  but  communications  from  God  to 
the  prophet  himself.  Hence  what  related  to  the  Jew 
as  the  object  of  God's  special  favour  at  that  time, 
and  more  particularly  what  was  in  store  for  them 
in  a  blessed  day  that  is  coming,  are  the  uppermost 
thoughts  in  the  mind  of  the  Spirit.  Daniel  was  the 
fitting  channel  for  such  revelations.  Accordingly,  the 
Spirit  again  goes  over  the  ground  of  the  four  great 
Gentile  empires,  as  well  as  the  fifth  empire,  the  king- 


CHAPTER   VII.  101 

dom  of  heaven,  to  be  introduced  by  the  Lord  Jesus. 
But  all  is  presented,  though  of  course  with  perfect 
consistency,  from  a  different  point  of  view.  It  is  not 
now  a  great  image  beginning  with  that  which  was 
gorgeous,  the  gold  and  the  silver,  and  descending, 
with  evident  deterioration  of  splendour,  to  the  belly 
and  thighs  of  brass,  and  the  legs  of  iron  and  feet  of 
clay.  Here  we  have  ravening  wild  beasts.  The  very 
same  powers  are  meant,  but  it  is  another  aspect  of 
them.  Most  fitly  was  the  figure  of  the  image  pre- 
sented to  the  eye  of  the  great  head  of  Gentile  empire, 
their  changes  and  relations  to  each  other;  but  it  is 
now  God's  view  of  these  same  powers,  and  their  re- 
lation to  His  people. 

Thus  we  have  in  this  simple  consideration  the  key 
to  the  different  way  in  which  these  powers  are  depicted. 
We  shall  find  also  in  the  details  that  wisdom  which 
v/e  may  always  look  for  in  what  comes  from  the  mind 
of  God. 

The  prophet,  in  the  vision,  sees  a  mass  of  w^aters, 
agitated  by  the  winds  of  heaven.  Out  of  this  troubled 
sea  four  wild  beasts  emerge,  successively  I  may  add; 
for  it  is  very  plain  that,  as  in  the  empires  set  forth  by 
the  metals,  &c.,  in  chap,  ii.,  so  in  the  same  powers  here, 
we  have  to  look  at  empires  not  contemporaneous,  but 
succeeding  each  other  in  rule  over  the  world  under  the 
providence  of  God.  "  The  first  was  like  a  lion  and  had 
eagle's  wings."  There,  beyond  question,  we  have  the 
empire  of  Babylon.  Nor  is  it  at  all  a  novelty  to  find 
the  Holy  Spirit  applying  the  figure  of  a  lion  to  Nebu- 
chadnezzar, nor  of  an  eagle  either.  Jeremiah  has 
already  employed  the  same.  "  The  lion  is  come  up 
from  his  thicket,  and  the  destroyer  of  the  Gentiles  is 
on  his  way."  ( Jer.  iv.  7.)  Ezekiel,  as  well  as  Jeremiah, 
represented  him  also  under  the  figure  of  an  eagle. 
Indeed,  he  is  mentioned  both  as  the  lion  and  the  eagle 
in  Jer.  xlix.  19,  22.  In  the  vision  of  Daniel  the  Holy 
Ghost  combines  the  two  figures  in  one  symbol,  in  order 


102  DANIEL. 

fitly  to  represent  what  the  Babylonish  empire  was  in 
the  mind  of  God.  " 

But,  besides  these  symbols  of  grandeur  and  rapidity 
of  conquest,  we  have  the  sign  of  a  remarkable  change 
that  was  to  pass  over  this  beast,  and  one  of  which 
there  was  no  appearance,  humanly  speaking,  at  that 
time.  But  all  was  open  to  the  eye  of  God,  whose 
object  in  giving  prophecy  is,  that  His  people  should 
see  beforehand  what  He  sees.  God  has  been  pleased, 
in  the  perfect  wisdom  and  goodness  that  belong  to 
His  nature,  to  impart  such  a  measure  of  knowledge  of 
the  future  as  He  sees  to  be  for  His  own  glory;  and 
an  obedient  child  hears  and  keeps  the  words  of  his 
Father. 

Now  He  brought  before  the  prophet  the  knowledge 
that  the  Babylonish  empire  was  to  be  humbled.  It 
was  not  to  be  absolutely  destroyed  as  a  nation,  but 
completely  put  down  as  a  ruling  power  in  the  world. 
This  w^as  what  was  signified  by  the  wings  being 
plucked,  and  the  animal  made  to  stand  upon  the  feet 
as  a  man,  which  would  of  course  destroy  its  strength. 
For  however  proper  such  an  attitude  may  be  to  a  man, 
it  is  plain  that  to  a  ravening  beast  it  would  be  rather 
a  humiliation.  In  accordance  too  with  this,  "  a  man's 
heart  was  given  to  it."  There  may  be  in  this  a  sort 
of  contrast  with  what  was  actually  done  in  the  case  of 
Nebuchadnezzar,  who  had  a  beast's  heart  given  to  him. 
The  proud  king  was  not  looking  up  to  God,  which 
clearly  is  the  bounden  duty  of  every  soul  of  man.  He 
is  not  properly  a  man  who  does  not  recognize  the  God 
that  brought  him  into  being,  and  that  watches  over 
him  and  abounds  in  beneficence  towards  him  every 
day:  the  God  that  claims  the  allegiance  of  the  con- 
science and  that  alone  can  convert  the  heart.  In 
Nebuchadnezzar's  case  man  was  occupied  with  himself. 
The  very  gift  of  universal  dominion  from  God  was 
perverted  by  the  power  of  Satan,  so  as  to  make  self 
and  not  God    the  object  of  his   thoughts.      In   the 


CHAPTER   VII.  103 

emphatic  phrase  of  Scripture,  his  was  not  a  man's 
heart  which  looks  up,  owning  one  above  him,  but  a 
beast's  that  looks  down  in  the  gratification  of  itself 
and  the  pursuit  of  its  own  instincts.  This  was  the 
case  with  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  therefore  a  most  solemn 
and  personal  judgment  was  executed  upon  him.  But 
the  mercy  of  God  interposed  after  a  certain  time  of 
humiliation,  and  he  was  restored.  This  was  a  token  of 
the  condition  to  which  the  Gentile  powers  were  to  be 
brought  from  not  recognizing  the  true  God ;  but  there 
was  also  the  witness  of  their  future  blessing  and  resto- 
ration, when  they  shall  own  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by 
and  by.  In  the  case  before  us,  the  lion  was  reduced 
from  its  power  as  a  beast  to  a  position  of  weakness. 
This  actually  took  place  when  Babylon  lost  its  supre- 
macy in  the  world,  which  seems  clearly  the  meaning  of 
the  latter  part  of  the  verse.  We  have  first,  Babylon, 
in  the  fulness  of  its  power,  and  then  the  great  change 
that  occurred  when  it  was  stripped  of  the  empire  of 
the  world. 

In  the  next  verse  (ver.  5)  there  is  a  description 
given  of  the  Persian  empire,  which  had  been  repre- 
sented in  the  great  image  as  "  the  breast,  &c.  of  silver." 
"  And  behold  another  beast,  a  second  like  to  a  bear, 
and  it  raised  up  itself  on  one  side," — a  remarkable 
feature,  which,  at  first  sight,  might  not  be  obvious, 
but  which  is  soon  explained.  It  was  an  empire  not 
so  uniform  as  the  Babylonish.  It  consisted  of  two 
peoples  joined  under  one  head.  Another  remarkable 
feature  is  this:  it  was  the  inferior  of  the  two  king- 
doms that  prevailed.  The  Persian  takes  the  npper 
hand  of  the  Mede.  Thus  we  saw  in  chap.  v.  that 
Darius  the  Median  took  the  kingdom;  but  Cyrus 
soon  folio vved,  and  from  thence  onward  it  was  always 
the  Persian  that  governed,  and  not  the  Median.  We 
have  in  this  circumstance  a  fresh  instance  that  we  do 
not  really  need  history  for  the  understanding  of 
prophecy.      Inattention   to  this   plunges   people   into 


104  DANIEL. 

nncertainty.  We  may  liave  recourse  to  historj.  as  a 
sort  of  homage  jDaid  to  prophecy,  but  the  historical 
confirmation  of  fulfilled  prophecy  is  a  very  distinct 
thing  from  its  interpretation.  Prophecy,  like  all 
Scripture,  is  explained  only  by  the  Spirit  of  God;  and 
Se  need  not  leave  the  written  word  for  human  help  to 
explain  what  He  has  inspired:  only  He  who  is  the 
author  of  Scripture  is  really  capable  of  explaining  it. 
I  ought  not  to  have  to  press  this,  as  it  is  a  first  principle 
of  truth ;  but  we  have  to  insist  on  first  principles  of 
truth  quite  as  much  now  as  ever. 

Here  then  Scripture  furnishes  us  with  the  evident 
fact,  that  while  the  second  empire  consisted  of  two 
parts,  and  while  the  Medes  w^ere  the  elder  branch  of  the 
empire,  yet  it  was  Cyrus  the  Persian  that  was  to  be 
most  prominent.  This  was  the  side  that  raised  itself 
up.  "  It  had  three  ribs  in  the  mouth  of  it,  between 
the  teeth  of  it,"  clearly,  I  think,  the  sign  of  the  extra- 
ordinary rapacity  that  would  characterize  the  Persian 
empire.  If  we  were  to  see  presented  to  us,  in  a  kind 
of  panorama,  different  beasts,  and  if  one  of  the  animals 
w^ere  painted  with  a  quantity  of  prey  and  actually 
devouring  it,  at  once  we  should  have  the  idea  of  a 
singularly  voracious  appetite.  Such  was  the  case  with 
the  Persians,  There  were ,  frequent  outbreaks  which 
they  had  to  encounter,  because  of  their  extortion  and 
cruelty.  It  is  true  that  God  wrought  providentially 
through  them  in  behalf  of  the  Jews;  but  this  only 
made  the  contrast  with  their  ordinary  ways  the  more 
striking.  For  while  the  Persians  were  excessively 
hard  upon  others,  there  w^as  leniency  and  favour 
shown  towards  Israel ;  but  this  was  only  the  exception. 
In  general,  as  depicting  their  character,  a  rapacious 
wild  beast  sets  it  forth.  Hence  the  bear  is  said  to 
have  three  ribs  in  its  mouth  between  its  teeth.  It 
was  in  the  very  act  of  showing  its  ravening  propen- 
sities. "  And  they  said  thus  unto  it,  Arise,  devour 
much   flesh."      That   was    the   explanation   in   words 


CHAPTER   VII.  105 

of   the  vision  :   it  referred  evidently  to  its  predatory- 
habits. 

In  the  third  case,  we  have  a  leopard,  with  some 
notable  features  about  it,  though  we  are  not  to  look 
for  the  regularity  of  pictorial  consistency.  There  are 
certain  truths  intended  by  every  figure  ;  but  if  men  try 
to  put  all  the  particulars  into  a  formal  harmony,  they 
will  not  hold  together.  In  the  present  case  there  was 
nothing  in  nature  like  this  leopard;  but  God  takes 
from  different  things  that  existed  in  nature  features 
that  were  necessary  to  give  a  combined  idea  of  this 
new  empire.  Hence,  while  the  leopard  is  remarkable 
for  its  agility  in  pursuing  its  prey,  yet,  in  order  to 
give  something  beyond  nature,  we  hear  that  it  had 
"  upon  the  back  of  it  four  wings  of  a  fowl."  If  ever 
there  was  a  case  in  which  impetuous  courage  in  pur- 
suing great  designs  and  speed  in  achieving  a  succession 
of  conquests  were  united,  we  find  it  in  the  history  of 
Alexander  the  Great.  The  Macedonian  or  Grecian 
kingdom  has  a  character  of  swiftness  attached  to  it 
that  no  other  empire  ever  had ;  and  hence  the  leopard, 
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  four  wings  of  the  fowl  on  the 
other.  But,  besides  that,  "  The  beast  had  also  four 
heads,  and  dominion  was  given  to  it."  There  you  have 
not  so  much  what  was  found  in  Alexander  himself,  but 
rather  in  his  successors.  The  four  heads  refer  to  the 
division  of  his  empire  into  four  different  parts  after 
his  death.  It  is  not,  therefore,  merely  a  symbol  of 
what  the  Greek  empire  was  in  its  first  origin,  but  it 
presents  thus  its  future  also.  It  is  emphatically  the 
empire  that  separated  into  four  distinct  divisions. 
Not  that  there  were  only  four,  because  it  is  clear  that 
at  one  time  there  was  a  sort  of  division  among  his 
generals,  six  of  whom  reigned  over  different  parts,  but 
they  gradually  subsided  into  four.  This  we  know 
from  the  next  chapter  :  there  is  no  need  to  go  to 
history  for  it.  All  facts,  all  science,  must  confirm  the 
word   of  God;    but  the  word  of   God  does  not  need 


106  DANIEL. 

them  to  prove  that  itself  is  divine.  If  it  didy  what 
would  become  of  those  who  understand  nothing  of 
science  and  history  ?  Persons  who  dabble  much  in 
either  one  or  other  for  the  purpose  of  confirming  the 
Scriptures,  have  never  reaped  anything  but  the  scan- 
tiest gleanings,  as  far  as  the  scripture  harvest  is  con- 
cerned. It  is  another  thing  if  a  person  feeds  upon 
the  word,  grows  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Scripture, 
and  then  is  called  on,  in  the  course  of  duty,  to  take 
up  what  men  say  about  it  :  he  will  find  that  there  is 
nothing,  even  down  to  the  most  recent  discoveries  of 
science,  that  does  not  pay  unwitting  obeisance  to 
Scripture.  The  man  that  takes  his  stand  upon  Scrip- 
ture, looking  up  to  God,  and  using  whatever  means 
are  given  through  the  word  and  Spirit  of  God,  has  the 
real  vantage  ground:  his  confidence  is  in  God,  and 
not  in  the  discoveries  or  the  thoughts  of  men.  The 
man  that  is  searching  here  below  is  subject  to  all  the 
uncertainty  and  mists  of  this  lower  world.  He  who 
derives  his  light  from  the  word  of  God  has  a  sun 
brighter  than  that  at  noon-day  ;  and,  therefore,  just 
as  far  as  he  is  subject  to  it,  he  will  not,  cannot, 
stray.  And  the  Spirit  of  God  is  able  and  willing 
to  produce  this  subjection  in  us.  We  all  do  stray, 
more  or  less,  as  a  fact ;  but  the  reason  is  not  from  any 
defect  in  the  word  of  God,  or  any  lack  of  power  to 
teach  on  the  part  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  We  err  be- 
cause we  have  not  sufficiently  simple  faith  in  the 
perfectness  of  Scripture,  and  in  the  blessed  guidance 
w^hich  the  Spirit  loves  to  exercise  in  leading  us  into 
all  truth. 

The  next  verse  (ver.  7)  is  the  opening  of  another 
vision.  For,  properly  speaking,  from  the  first  verse 
down  to  the  seventh  is  one  section  or  vision,  each  being 
introduced  by  the  words,  "  I  saw  in  the  night-visions." 
Daniel  first  beheld  the  four  beasts  in  a  general  way ; 
if  any  were  particularly  specified,  it  was  the  first  three. 


CHAPTER  VII.  107 

But  the  fourtli  beast  was  evidently  that  which  more 
peculiarly  occupied  the  mind  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
the  prophet,  therefore,  gets  a  fresh  view  of  it.  '^  After 
this  I  saw  in  the  night-visions,  and  beheld  a  fourth 
beast,  dreadful  and  terrible,  and  strong  exceedingly; 
and  it  had  great  iron  teeth."  Here  is,  clearly,  a  pro- 
phetic figuration  of  the  fourth  or  Roman  empire.  I 
will  not  now  enter  into  the  many  proofs  of  it.  Hardly 
any  person  who  reads  these  pages  is  likely  to  combat 
the  thought,  that  in  the  four  well-known  empires  we 
have  the  statue  of  chap,  ii,,  and  the  beasts  of  chap.  vii. 
Some  have  denied  this,  but  it  is  such  an  eccentricity, 
that  one  need  say  no  more  about  it. 

Admitting  this,  then,  we  have  in  the  fourth  beast 
the  Roman  empire  plainly  set  forth.  What  marks  it 
politically  is  all-overcoming  strength.  It  is  repre- 
sented by  a  monster  to  which  nothing  in  nature  can  be 
found  to  answer.  We  have  a  fuller  account  of  it  in 
the  Revelation ;  because  the  Roman  empire,  being  then 
established,  and  its  future  destiny  carrying  us  on  to  the 
end  of  the  age,  it  became  the  exclusive  object  of 
attention — the  beast.  Accordingly  we  have  a  descrip- 
tion of  it  in  chap,  xiii.,  where  we  find  it  represented  as 
a  leopard,  the  "  feet  as  those  of  a  bear,  and  its  mouth 
as  that  of  a  lion."  And  this  composite  creature  is 
further  distinguished  (ver.  1)  by  having  seven  heads 
and  ten  horns,  and  upon  its  horns  ten  crowns.  That 
was  the  power  under  which  St.  John  was  at  that  very 
time  suffering  in  the  isle  of  Patmos;  and  as  greater 
sufferings  were  in  reserve  for  God's  people,  and  blas- 
phemy against  God,  we  need  not  wonder  that  we  have 
a  minute  account  of  it. 

Here  it  is  seen  as  "  a  fourth  beast,  dreadful  and 
terrible,  and  strong  exceedingly ;  and  it  had  great  iron 
teeth;  it  devoured  and  brake  in  pieces,  and  stamped 
the  residue  with  the  feet  of  it."  That  is,  there  was 
unexampled  power  of  conquest  and  aggrandizement, 
and  what  it  did  not  incorporate  into  its  own  substance, 


108  DANIEL. 

it  stamped  upon  and  thus  spoiled  for  others.  "  And  it 
was  diverse  from  all  the  beasts  that  were  before  it." 
It  was  an  empire  that  maintained  a  strong  feeling  of 
the  will  of  man — of  the  people.  It  combined  certain 
republican  elements  with  as  iron  a  despotism  as  ever 
ruled  in  this  world.  These  two  things  were  brought 
into  distinct,  but  apparently  harmonious  play.  Besides 
this,  there  is  another  and  most  distinctive  mark:  "it 
had  ten  horns."  In  other  empires  it  was  not  so.  The 
Greek  empire  gradually  devolved,  after  its  founder's 
death,  into  four  heads;  but  the  peculiarity  of  the 
Roman  is  the  possession  of  ten  horns.  Yet  we  are 
not  to  look  for  the  actual  development  of  history  in 
this  vision.  Had  this  been  the  case,  it  is  clear  that 
the  ten  horns  would  not  have  been  seen  in  the  Roman 
beast,  when  it  first  met  the  eyes  of  the  prophet. 
In  fact,  it  was  not  until  hundreds  of  years  after  Rome 
had  existed  as  an  empire,  that  it  had  more  than  one 
ruler.  The  Spirit  of  God  clearly  brings  into  the  very 
first  view  the  features  that  would  be  found  at  the  close, 
and  not  at  the  beginning.  It  was  strong  and  fierce;  it 
was  one  that  devoured ;  it  stamped  the  residue  with  its 
feet;  it  was  diverse  from  all  others.  Rome  may  have 
been  all  this  during  the  time  of  the  Cassars ;  but  it  had 
not  then  ten  horns.  There  can  be  no  possible  j)retence 
for  such  a  notion  until  the  empire  was  broken  up ;  and 
after  that,  properly  spe.'^king,  the  Roman  empire 
ceased  to  exist.  There  might  be  the  keeping  up  of  the 
name  and  title  of  emperor,  but  it  was  the  emptiest 
thing  possible.  How,  then,  could  this  prophecy  be 
accomplished  if,  as  long  as  there  was  an  undivided 
empire,  there  were  no  horns ;  and  if,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  empire,  as  such,  expired  when  once  broken  up 
into  separate  kingdoms?  How  are  we  to  put  these 
two  facts  together  ?  Because  it  is  clear  from  what 
is  given  us  here,  that  a  beast  is  a  totally  different 
thing  from  a  horn.  A  beast  represents  imperial 
unity.     But  in  Rome,  as  long  as  the  empire  subsisted, 


CHAPTER   VII.  109 

there  were  no  "  ten  horns;"  and  when  the  divided 
kingdoms  sprang  up,  there  was  no  such  thing  then 
as  imperial  unity. 

How,  then,  are  the  two  things  put  together  in  the 
prophecy  ?     The  Spirit  of  God  was,  I  believe,  looking 
onward  to  the  last  stage  of  the   Roman  empire,  when 
both  features  shall  re-appear,  and  that  together.     This 
last  stage  ends  in  a  divine  judgment ;  as  it  is  written 
a  little  after,  "  I  beheld  till  the  thrones  were  set  up  ; 
(for  so  it  ought  to  be,  instead   of  "cast  down;"  and 
this  is  not  merely  my  opinion,  but  the  uniform  way  in 
which  it  is  understood  in  the  best  ancient  and  modern 
translations  of    Scripture;)  "  I  beheld  till  the  thrones 
were  set  up,  and  the  Ancient  of  Days  did  sit,  whose 
garment  was  white  as  snow,  and  the  hair  of  his  head 
like   the  pure   wool:    his   throne  was    like   the    fiery 
flame,  and   his   wheels  as  burning  fire."     There  you 
have  evidently   a  figure  of  the   divine  glory  in  judg- 
ment, not  some  mere  providential  dealing  on  the  earth, 
but  the  process  of  judgment   that   God    Himself  will 
institute.    "  A  fiery  stream  issued  and  came  forth  from 
before  him:  thousand  thousands  ministered   unto  him, 
and  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  stood  before  him : 
the  judgment  was  set,  and  the  books  were  opened." 
At  whatever  time  this  may  be  supposed  to  take  place, 
it  is  manifest  that  it  is  a  divine  judgment.     "  I  beheld 
then  because  of   the  voice  of  the  great  words  which 
the  horn  spake:  I  beheld  even  till  the  beast  was  slain, 
and   his    body   destroyed   and   given   to    the   burning 
flame."     The  horn  alluded  to  here  is  the  eleventh  one, 
the  one  that  came  up  among  the  ten.     And  it  was  this 
little  horn  that  began  with  small  beginnings,  that,  by 
some  means  or  another,  managed  to  root  up  three  of 
the  first  horns,  and  that  subsequently  became  the  guide 
and  governor  of  the  whole  beast.     "  I  beheld  because 
of  the  great  words  which  the  horn  spake,"  not  "  till 
the    horn   was  put   down,"    but    "  till   the  beast  was 
slain,"  so  that  it  is  implied  that  this  little  horn  had 


110  DANIEL. 

managed  to  govern  the  entire  beast.  This  verse 
shows  that  there  was  to  be  a  divine  judgment  that 
would  deal  with  the  little  horn  and  with  the  beast, 
and  destroy  them.  Has  that  taken  place  ?  Clearly 
not. 

It  is  plain,  that  whatever  has  fallen  upon  the 
Roman  empire  in  past  times,  has  been  the  ordinary 
course  and  decline  of  a  great  nation.  Barbarian  hordes 
tore  it  up,  and  separate  kingdoms  were  formed.  But 
prophecy  tells  us  of  another  thing  altogether.  It 
warns  of  a  judgment  that  .disposes  of  the  beast  in  a 
totally  different  way,  and  in  contrast  with  the  others. 
"  I  beheld  till  the  beast  was  slain,  and  his  body 
destroyed  and  given  to  the  burning  flame.  As  con- 
cerning the  rest  of  the  beasts,  they  had  their  dominion 
taken  away :  yet  their  lives  were  prolonged  for  a 
season  and  time."  That  is,  the  remains  of  the  Chal- 
deans, or  of  the  races  that  were  called  so,  we  have  still. 
Persia  abides  a  kingdom,  and  the  Greeks  have  lately 
become  one.  They  exist,  therefore,  though  not  as 
imperial  powers.  We  have  these  races  of  men,  more 
or  less,  representing  those  powers ;  smaller,  it  is  true, 
and  no  longer  having  dominion  as  empires.  This  is 
the  meaning  of  ver.  12.  Their  dominion  was  taken 
away  as  rulers  of  the  world,  "  but  their  lives  were  pro- 
longed for  a  season  and  time."  In  this  last  empire, 
when  the  hour  of  its  judgment  comes,  the  foot  is  far 
otherwise.  In  the  case  of  the  three  first  beasts,  they 
lost  their  imperial  dignity,  but  themselves  might  be  said 
to  exist.  But  in  the  case  of  the  fourth  empire,  the 
hour  when  its  dominion  is  destroyed  is  the  same  hour 
in  which  it  is  itself  destroyed.  "  The  beast  was  slain, 
and  its  body  destroyed,  and  given  to  the  burning 
flame."  Who  can  doubt  that  this  is  the  same  scene 
that  we  have  alluded  to  in  Rev.  xix.,  where  we  are 
told,  "  And  I  saw  the  beast,  and  the  kings  of  the 
earth  and  their  armies,  gathered  together  to  make 
war  against  Him  that  sat  on  the  horse,  and  against 


CHAPTER    VII.  Ill 

His  army  ?  "  The  prophet  had  come  to  the  last  beast. 
Further  back  in.  divine  revelation  we  had  the  other 
three  beasts;  they  had  had  their  day,  and  there  only 
remained  the  last.  Consequently,  when  John  says  "  the 
beast,"  we  are  to  understand  the  Roman  empire.  This 
beast,  then,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  are  warring 
against  the  Lord.  "  And  the  beast  was  taken,  and 
with  him  the  false  prophet  that  had  wrought  miracles 
before  him,  with  which  he  deceived  them  that  had  the 
mark  of  the  beast,  and  them  that  worshipped  his 
image.  These  both  (mark)  were  cast  alive  into  a  lake 
of  fire  burning  with  brimstone."  Now,  this  is  very 
remarkable;  because  here  we  have  the  lake  of  fire, 
which  answers  to  the  judgment  of  the  burning  flame 
ill  Daniel :  only  it  is  a  fuller  statement.  It  was  not  a 
mere  control  of  circumstances,  but  a  divine  power 
that  casts  straight  into  hell  without  the  necessity  of  a 
previous  judgment.  For  it  was  perfectly  plain  what 
they  were  about.  They  were  found  in  open  antag- 
onism to  the  Lord  of  glory,  and  were  cast  into  the 
flames.  Has  that  ever  been  verified  in  the  Roman 
empire?  Clearly  not.  What  then  follows?  The 
Roman  empire  has  passed  away ;  for  the  last  thousand 
years  and  more  it  has  had  no  existence,  except  as  an 
unmeaning  title,  which  has  been  the  object  of  conten- 
tion among  ambitious  men.  Separate  kingdoms  have 
taken  the  place  of  the  undivided  Roman  empire. 

But  what  have  we  here  ?  The  Roman  empire  re- 
appearing. And  this  exactly  agrees  with  other  parts 
of  the  word  of  God.  For  there  is  a  remarkable 
expression  in  the  Revelation,  that  has  been  alluded  to 
more  than  once.  It  is  Rev.  xvii.  8,  &c.,  "  The  beast 
that  was,  and  is  not,  and  shall  be  present^  I  do  not 
know  how  persons  could  have  used  the  expression, 
"  and  yet  is."  It  is  not  even  sense,  and  the  real  thought 
is  particularly  simple.  No  enigma  is  meant  here. 
The  Roman  empire  was  to  have  three  stages.  The 
first  is  its  original  imperial  form,  when  John  suffered 


112  DANIEL, 

under  the  last  of  the  Cassars.  Then  next  is  its  con- 
dition of  non-existence,  from  abont  the  fifth  centnry, 
when  the  Goths,  and  Vandals,  &c.,  broke  it  up;  in  that 
condition  it  is  now.  But  then  there  is  a  third  stage,  and 
it  is  in  that  last  condition  that  it  is  to  be  found  in  open 
opposition  to  God  and  the  Lamb.  This  is  the  future 
of  the  Roman  empire.  It  is  to  be  re-organized,  it  is 
to  come  out  again  as  an  empire,  and  in  this  last  phase 
it  will  fight  against  God  to  its  ruin.  And  mark  how 
this  leaves  room  for  the  point  which  I  wished  to  illus- 
trate. We  could  not  in  the  past  have  had  ten  horns  as 
well  as  the  beast;  in  the  future  we  can,  and  that  is 
what  the  scene  in  Rev.  xvii.  show's.  "  The  ten  horns 
which  thou  sawest  are  ten  kings,  which  have  received 
no  kingdom  as  yet."  But  it  is  added,  "  They  shall 
receive  power  as  kings  one  hour  with  the  beast."  So 
that  when  the  beast  should  make  its  re-appearance, 
there  would  be  this  singular  feature:  that  while  there 
would  be  a  great  head  of  imperial  unity,  it  would  not 
be  to  the  exclusion  of  separate  kings.  There  would 
still  be  the  kings  of  France,  Spain,  &c.  Let  none 
suppose  that  to  say  this  is  prophesying.  The  true  way 
to  be  kept  out  of  that  presumption  is  to  study  pro- 
phecy. In  the  one  case  you  are  learning  ^vhat  God 
says;  in  the  other  you  are  but  giving  out  your  owm 
thoughts.  In  this  passage  the  point  is,  not  an  empire 
alone  without  the  ten  kings,  nor  the  ten  kings  without 
the  empire,  but  the  union  of  these  two  things.  There 
is  the  imperial  unity,  which  answ^ers  to  the  beast  ; 
at  the  same  time  there  are  these  separate  kings.  It 
is  their  co-existence  w^hich  will  mark  the  Roman 
empire  in  its  last  phase.  To  that  everything  is 
tending  now. 

The  prophet  sav/  the  last  condition  of  this  empire 
with  its  ten  horns.  "  I  considered  the  horns,  and, 
behold,  there  came  up  among  them  another  little  horn, 
before  w^iom  there  were  three  of  the  first  horns  plucked 
up  by  the  roots:  and,  behold,  in  this  horn  were  eyes  like 


CHAPTER  VII.  113 

the  eyes  of  man,  and  a  mouth  speaking  great  things." 
(Ver.  8.)     Men  used  to  apply  all  this  to  the  pope.     No 
doubt  the  Roman  Pontiff  was  extremely  obnoxious  to 
every  one  that  valued  the  word  of  God.     But  we  must 
always  take  care,  when  we  read  Scripture,  not  to  be  too 
anxious  about  applying  the  word  of  God  to  what  is  in 
our  way,  or  to  what  we  may  think  extremely  evil — as  no 
doubt  the  pope  and  popery  are.     But  we  must  seek  to 
understand  what  God  means  by  His  word.      Granted 
that  there  is  a  remarkable  analogy  between  the  papacy 
and  the  little  horn.     It  may  have  been  intended  to  be 
applied  by  the  children  of  God  in  different  ages,  who 
were  suffering  through  the  papacy,  for  their  help  and 
encouragement.      The    changing    of   times  and    laws, 
(ver.  25,)  as  well  as  his  great  words  and  persecution  of 
the  saints,  may  have  been  accomplished  in  its  canons, 
bulls,   and  political  influence.      But  it  remains  to  be 
enquired.  Is  that  the  full  meaning  and  the  proper  design 
of  the  prophecy  ?      Take  an  example  from  Matt.  xxiv. 
There  was  the  beginning  of  sorrows ;  then  the  abomina- 
tion of  desolation  set  up  in  the  holy  place,  and  a  warning 
to  flee  from  Jerusalem ;  unexampled  tribulation,  &c.     I 
can  understand  all  this  having  a  measure  of  application 
to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by    Titus.     But  who 
will  say  that  this  is  the  end  of  all,  and  that  the  full 
meaning  is  realized  there  ?     It  is  impossible  that  any- 
one can  think  so  who  examines  it  attentively.     When 
God  gives  a  prophecy,  He  very  often  allows  that  there 
should  be  a  sort  of  earnest  in  the  accomplishment  of  it; 
but  we  are  never  to  take  that  as  the  full  thing.     The 
Roman  Empire  has  fallen,  and,  out  of  the  fall  of  that 
empire,  a  new  and  singular  power,  with  divine  claims, 
has  started  up  and  set  itself  against  God.     But  to  say 
that  this  is  the  full  accomplishment  of  the  prophecy, 
would  be  as  great  a  mistake  as  to  suppose  that  God 
never  alluded   to  it  at  all.      There  was  to  be  Maho- 
medanism  in  the   east,    and  the  papacy  in    the  west; 
but  still  the  question  recurs,  Is  that  all  that  the  Holy 
I 


114  DANIEL. 

Ghost  meant?  I  say,  No;  for  the  reason  already 
given — that  if  the  history  of  the  papacy  be  looked  at, 
the  beast  was  gone,  properly,  when  the  pope  took  his 
place. 

More  than  that.  The  pope  has  never  acquired 
three  of  the  ten  kingdoms.  He  might  receive  Peter's 
patrimony,  but  it  has  always  been  a  petty  power 
politically,  of  no  consequence  as  to  territory.  Instead 
of  acquiring  three  of  the  ten  kingdoms,  all  its  weight 
has  arisen  from  its  spiritual  delusion  over  the  souls  of 
men.  Clearly,  then,  a  power,  small  in  its  beginnings, 
is  to  rise  and  put  down  three  of  these  greater  powers, 
acquiring  all  their  dominion.  The  pope  never  has 
done  any  such  thing  So  that,  although  there  has 
been  a  measure  of  likeness,  there  is  enough  difference 
to  make  their  distinction  quite  plain. 

The  empire  is  in  full  force  at  the  time  that  these 
ten  horns  and  the  little  horn  appear.  This  last  sub- 
sequently aggrandizes  itself,  and  rules  the  whole  beast. 
Instead  of  this,  the  pope  has  long  lost  almost  the  half 
of  his  influence  in  Europe,  and  has  been  of  late  stripped 
of  the  chief  part  of  his  dominions  in  Italy;  and  what 
may  be  the  end  of  agencies  now  at  work  no  man 
can  say. 

We  have  here  a  most  vigorous  power,  that  has  the 
ten  horns  in  subjection  to  itself.  The  Eevelation  tells 
us  that  all  the  ten  kings  conspired  to  give  their  powder 
and  strength  unto  the  beast.  God  has  given  all  up, 
because  it  is  the  time  when  there  shall  be  strong  delu- 
sion, and  men  will  believe  a  lie.  I  gather  from  that, 
not  that  this  has  no  bearing  upon  the  papacy,  but  that 
its  full  accomplishment  is  in  the  future.  Scripture 
is  explicit  that  the  Roman  Empire,  which  has  ceased  to 
exist,  wall  be  re-organized,  and  will  be  the  instrument, 
under  the  direction  of  the  false  prophet,  for  carrying 
out  the  last  great  effort  of  Satan  against  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

In  Daniel  we  find  that  this  little  horn  overthrows 


CHAPTER   VII.  115 

three  powers.  Then  we  have  its  moral  characteristics. 
It  has  eyes  like  the  eyes  of  man,  and  a  mouth 
speaking  great  things.  It  is  marked  by  immense 
intelligence — not  by  brute  force.  The  description  of 
it  contrasts  with  that  of  the  Lord,  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain,  who  is  characterized  as  having  seven  horns 
and  seven  eyes — that  is,  the  perfection  of  intelligence 
and  of  power.  In  this  case  it  is  not  so.  The  power 
outwardly  looks  much  greater.  It  has  ten  horns  instead 
of  seven — a  monster  instead  of  perfection.  The  result 
is  a  sort  of  grotesque  exaggeration  of  the  power 
and  wisdom  of  Christ  that  wretched  man,  energized 
of  Satan,  will  arrogate  to  himself.  Then  comes  the 
overthrow  (ver.  11)  because  of  its  fearful  blasphemy 
against  God. 

A  new  vision  follows  (verses  13,  14,)  in  contrast 
with  the  powers  that  were  represented  by  ravening 
beasts.  The  new  and  prominent  object  is  **  one  like 
the  Son  of  man."  Just  as  in  the  second  chapter  it 
was  an  insignificant  stone  that  struck  the  great 
image,  and  all  crumbled  to  pieces  from  head  to  foot. 
Here  the  Son  of  man  "  came  with  the  clouds  of 
heaven,  and  came  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  and  they 
brought  him  near  before  him."  The  Ancient  of  days 
represents  God  as  such,  "  the  high  and  lofty  One 
that  inhabiteth  eternity." 

In  the  Revelation  the  two  glories  are  both  united  in 
the  Person  of  Christ.  Rev.  i.  shows  us  one  like  the 
Son  of  man :  but  when  we  find  the  description  of  Him, 
some  of  the  features  are  exactly  the  same  as  are  attri- 
buted here  to  the  Ancient  of  days,  whose  garment  is 
said  to  be  as  wdiite  as  snow,  and  the  hair  of  His  head 
like  the  pure  wool,  &c.  The  Jewish  prophet  sees 
Christ  simply  as  man.  The  Christian  prophet  sees 
Him  as  man,  but  as  God  withal. 

"  And  there  was  given  him  dominion,  and  glory,  and 
a  kingdom,  that  all  people,  nations,  and  languages 
should    serve    him:    his   dominion   is  an   everlasting 


116  DANIEL. 

dominion,  whicli  shall  not  pass  away,  and  his  kingdom 
that  which  shall  not  be  destroyed."  There  wilLJbe  no 
such  thing  as  its  being  taken  from  him,  or  as  another 
power  succeeding  him.  It  will  be  everlasting  in  the 
sense  of  as  long  as  the  world  shall  endure.  But, 
strictly,  this  is  not  an  eternal  scene.  The  Jewish 
prophets  show  you  the  millennium;  but  they  do  not 
unfold,  as  the  New  Testament  does,  that  when  all 
things  are  subdued  to  God,  even  the  Father,  God  shall 
be  all  in  all.  This  was  reserved  for  another  day; 
and  the  Revelation  follows  it  up  in  the  most  blessed 
manner,  in  chap.  xxi.   1 — 8. 

Just  mark,  by  the  way,  a  feature  of  some  importance. 
The  latter  part  of  the  chapter  consists  of  explanations; 
but  we  are  never  to  suj^pose  that  the  explanations  of 
Scripture  merely  refer  to  what  has  already  been  given. 
This  is  the  case  in  human  writings,  but  in  God's  ex- 
planations there  is  always  further  truth  brought  out. 
This  is  of  moment.  Through  not  understanding  it,  the 
kingdom  of  Christ  has  been  supposed  to  be  merely  the 
ascendancy  of  His  saints.  There  will  be  the  kingdom 
of  the  Son  of  man  and  the  kingdom  of  His  people, 
but  we  are  assuredly  not  to  suppose  that  thereby  is 
meant  the  reigning  of  the  saints  in  a  figurative  way  to 
the  exclusion  of  the  Son  of  man.  The  explanation 
brings  out  the  saints,  which  the  vision  does  not.  It  is 
no  less  than  denying  the  personality  of  the  reign  of 
Christ,  if  you  make  the  explanation  merely  tantamount 
to  the  vision.  But  the  principle  is  false,  and  so  is 
the  deduction. 

In  ver.  17,  the  person  to  whom  the  prophet  appeals 
tells  him,  "  These  great  beasts,  which  are  four,  are 
four  kings  which  shall  arise  out  of  the  earth."  Their 
origin  was  purely  earthly.  There  is  no  contradiction 
at  all  between  this  and  the  fact  that  we  are  told  in 
ver.  2  that  they  came  up  from  the  sea.  The  reason 
why  they  are  said  to  rise  thence  is  that  the  sea  repre- 
sents a  mass  of  men  in  a  state  of  political  anarchy. 


CHAPTER    VII.  117 

It  is  out  of  this  troubled  state  of  peoples  that  empires 
arise.  Take  the  French  Empire  for  example.  A 
revolution  broke  up  the  old  system  of  government. 
Then  followed  a  state  of  confusion,  like  the  sea  torn 
with  the  winds,  and  out  of  it  all  emerged  an  empire. 
From  such  a  state  of  things  in  the  world  the  four 
great  empires  arose.  It  was,  too,  very  much  about  the 
same  time  that  the  beginnings  of  the  four  great  empires 
were  laid.  There  was  an  immense  difference  in  the 
degree  of  development  in  the  East  as  compared  with 
the  West.  The  Western  powers  were  comparatively 
only  in  the  cradle;  but  the  beginning  of  these  various 
powers  was  traceable  to  much  the  same  date  and  the 
same  state  of  confusion  and  anarchy.  That  seems  to 
be  what  is  meant  by  their  coming  up  out  of  the  sea. 
But  in  ver.  17  they  are  said  to  arise  out  of  the  earth. 
They  have  not  a  heavenly  origin.  The  force  of  the  sea 
was  merely  to  show  that  it  is  out  of  a  previously 
troubled  state  of  society  that  they  grew.  Such  was 
their  providential  origin.  But  here  their  moral  origin 
is  looked  at  as  being  purely  earthly,  in  contrast  with 
the  Son  of  man,  who  comes  in  the  clouds  of  heaven. 

What  makes  this  still  plainer  is  that  in  the  next 
verse  (ver.  18)  it  is  said,  "  But  the  saints  of  the  Most 
High  shall  take  the  kingdom,  and  possess  the  kingdom 
for  ever."  The  margin  says,  the  saints  of  the  "  high 
ones."  It  is  the  origin  of  the  expression  in  the  New 
Testament,  "  heavenly  places."  The  phrase  is  the  same 
whether  applied  to  our  blessings,  "  blessed  with  all 
spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ,"  in 
Eph.  i.,  or  to  the  foes  in  "  high  places,"  in  Eph.  vi.  The 
saints  of  the  heavenly  places  (that  is,  probably,  of  God 
in  connexion  with  the  heavenly  places)  "  shall  take  the 
kingdom."  This  gives  the  contrast.  As  for  these  four 
great  powers,  the  best  that  could  be  said  of  them,  if 
you  look  at  their  political  origin,  was  that  they  arose 
out  of  a  confused  and  tumultuous  state  of  things  in 
the  world ;  or,  if  at  their  moral  origin,  it  was  not  from 


118  DANIEL. 

heaven.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  you  look  at  the  saints 
of  the  heavenly  places,  they  are  those  destined  t©^  take 
the  kingdom,  which  they  possess  for  evermore.  This 
adds  an  important  truth  to  the  fact  of  the  Son  of 
man's  getting  the  kingdom.  When  dominion  is 
given  Him,  He  will  not  take  it  alone.  All  that  have 
ever  waited  for  this  kingdom,  in  all  ages,  will  come 
alono:  with  Him.  It  will  be  the  time  when  He  will 
manifest  His  risen  ones,  when  Abraham,  Enoch,  David, 
no  matter  who  they  may  be  that  have  known  Him  by 
faith,  will  be  there  in  their  changed  and  glorified  bodies, 
and  will  reign  along  with  Him.  "  Know  ye  not,"  the 
Apostle  says,  "  that  we  shall  judge  the  world  ?  "  That 
clearly  must  mean  in  this  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  man. 
Because  if  it  were  merely  a  question  of  going  to 
heaven  to  be  with  Christ,  that  is  not  judging  the 
world.  So  that,  while  it  is  true  that  we  are  to  go  up 
to  heaven,  it  is  not  all.  "  Know  ye  not  that  we  shall 
judge  angels  ?  "  If  we  have  not  known  it,  how  comes 
it  to  pass  ?  Some  truth  has  been  let  slip,  if  we  have 
not  looked  for  such  things.  And  mark  the  practical 
importance  of  it.  The  very  fact  that  you  do  not  know 
it  proves  that  you  want  something  that  God  makes  a 
great  deal  of.  And  how  does  God  use  it  in  the  epistle 
to  the  Corinthians  ?  It  was  to  reproach  those  saints 
for  carrying  their  questions  before  the  world.  Do  you 
not  know,  he  reasons  with  them,  that  you  are  called 
to  this  place  of  dignity  ?  It  is  not  merely  that  you 
will  have  it  by  and  by;  but  God  makes  it  known  and 
true  to  faith  now.  Just  as  the  heir  to  the  kingdom  is 
instructed  and  fitted  for  the  throne  that  he  is  to  occupy, 
so  God  is  educating  His  saints  now  to  share  the  king- 
dom of  the  world  which  is  to  belong  to  Christ.  It  is 
a  revealed  truth  of  God  that  the  kingdoms  of  the  world 
shall  become  that  of  our  Lord  and  of  His  Christ;  but 
when  He  does  reign,  the  saints  will  reign  also.  The 
saints  of  the  heavenly  places — who  are  they  ?  Those 
whose  hearts  are  with   Christ  above,  those  who  will 


CHAPTER   VIT.  119 

be  converted  before  Christ  comes,  and  will  govern  a 
people  gathered  upon  the  earth;  those  who  have  in 
past  ages  died  in  Christ,  or  who  are  now  waiting  for 
Christ;  those  too  who  will  pass  through  the  great 
tribulation:  all  these  are  saints  of  the  Most  High. 
They  are  in  contrast  with  others.  For  there  will  also 
be  saints  when  Christ  comes  to  reign,  who  will  be 
blessed  upon  the  earth.  There  will  be  a  great  harvest 
there.  The  Lord  will  bring  those  saints  into  all  the 
promised  blessings  of  His  kingdom.  But  we  are 
chosen  in  Christ  before  the  foundation  of  the  world, 
and  shall  reign  over  the  earth.  That  is  distinguished 
from  the  kingdom  and  dominion  under  the  whole 
heaven.  There  are  certain  saints  that  are  in  the 
heavens;  but  there  is  another  class  spoken  of  that  is 
here  below.  The  kingdom  shall  be  given  to  the  people 
of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High.  Those  are  some  of 
the  persons  that  the  saints  will  reign  over.  "  Know 
ye  not,"  urges  St.  Paul,  "  that  the  saints  shall 
judge  the  world?"  Accordingly,  here  we  have  "the 
people  of  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,"  as  a  dis- 
tinct class. 

There  are  many  details  in  this  chapter  that  I  have 
not  entered  into.  But  there  is  a  description  of  the  evil 
conduct  of  the  little  horn  that  I  must  say  a  few 
words  upon,  although  a  little  out  of  order.  It  is  said 
(ver.  20,)  that  "  it  had  eyes  and  a  mouth  that  spoke 
very  great  things,  whose  look  was  more  stout  than  his 
fellows.  I  beheld,  and  the  same  horn  made  vvar  with 
the  saints,  and  prevailed  against  them ;  until  the 
Ancient  of  days  came,  and  judgment  was  given  to  the 
saints  of  the  Most  High ;  and  the  time  came  that  the 
saints  possessed  the  kingdom."  Then,  in  the  further 
account,  it  is  said,  (ver.  25,)  that  this  little  horn 
"  shall  speak  great  words  against  the  Most  High,  and 
shall  wear  out  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  (referring 
to  his  persecutions,)  and  think  to  change  times  and 
laws;  and  they  shall  be  given  into  his  hand,  until  a 


120  DANTEL. 

time  and  times  and  the  dividing  of  time."  It  is 
necessary  to  understand  what  the  little  horn  wijj  do. 
The  meaning  is,  that  he  will  destroy  the  Jewish 
worship,  at  that  time  carried  on  upon  the  earth.  By 
the  "  times "  is  meant  their  festivals  or  feast-days. 
He  will  interfere  with  these  as  Jeroboam  did ;  "  and 
they  shall  he  given  into  his  hand,"  &c.  It  has  been 
often  supposed  that  "  they "  means  the  saints.  But 
this  is  a  total  mistake.  It  is  "  the  times  and  laws  " 
that  are  to  be  given  into  his  hand,  for  a  certain  limited 
period  of  time.  God  will  allow  him  to  have  his  way. 
He  shall  think  to  do  it.  And  the  fact  that  they  are 
to  be  given  into  his  hands  shows  that  he  succeeds  for 
a  time  in  carrying  out  his  desires.  But  God  will 
never  give  His  saints  into  the  hands  of  His  enemies, 
even  for  a  time  ever  so  short.  He  always  keeps  them 
in  His  own  hands.  Job  was  never  more  in  the  hands 
of  God  than  when  Satan  desired  to  have  him  that  he 
might  sift  him  as  wheat.  The  sheep  are  in  the  hands 
of  the  Father  and  the  Son,  and  none  shall  ever  be 
able  to  pluck  them  thence.  There  is  no  such  thought 
in  the  Word  as  God  leaving  or  forsaking  them.  Here 
it  is  simply  the  outward  arrangements  of  worship,  of 
which  the  Jews  will  be  the  representatives  on  the 
earth;  and  they  will  be  allowed  for  a  time  to  fall 
under  his  power.  For  it  is  plain  that  at  that  time 
there  will  be  Jewish  saints  owning  God  and  Jesus, 
too,  in  a  measure:  as  it  is  said,  (Rev.  xiv.,)  "  Here  is 
the  patience  of  the  saints:  here  are  they  that  keep 
the  commandments  of  God  and  the  faith  of  Jesus." 
These  saints  will  be  in  a  very  peculiar  position.  There 
will  be  a  sort  of  combination  of  the  law  with  a  re- 
cognition of  Jesus  to  a  certain  extent.  During  this 
state  of  things,  they  will  come  under  the  power  of 
the  little  horn,  "  for  a  time,  times,  and  the  dividing  of 
time  " — that  is,  for  three  years  and  a  half,  closed  by  the 
coming  of  Christ  in  judgment. 


CHAPTER   VIII. 

There  is  a  remarkable  change  wliicli  takes  place  at 
the  point  where  we  are  now  arrived,  and  it  may 
not  be  known  to  all  readers  of  the  book  of  Daniel. 
The  language  in  which  the  Spirit  of  Ood  reveals  this 
vision,  and  those  that  follow,  is  a  different  one  from 
that  in  which  He  had  conveyed  the  previous  portions 
of  the  book.  From  an  early  part  of  chap.  ii.  up  to 
the  end  of  chap.  vii.  the  language  was  that  of  the 
Babylonian  monarch  —  Chaldee  :  whereas  from  chap, 
viii.  to  the  close,  it  is  Hebrew — the  ordinary  language 
of  the  Old  Testament.  Now  this  was  not  without 
purpose.  And  I  think  the  clear  inference  that  we  are 
to  gather  from  it  is  this :  that  what  particularly  con- 
cerned the  Gentile  monarchies  was  given  in  the 
language  of  the  first  great  Gentile  Empire.  They 
were  immediately  concerned  in  it:  and,  in  fact,  as  we 
know,  the  first  vision  (of  the  image)  was  seen  by  the 
Gentile  king  himself — Nebuchadnezzar.  From  that 
to  the  end  of  chap.  vii.  is  in  his  own  tongue. 

But  now  we  are  about  to  enter  upon  visions  which 
specially  concern  the  Jews.  Chap,  viii.,  e.g.,  alludes 
to  the  sanctuary,  to  the  holy  people,  to  the  daily  sacrifice, 
and  a  number  of  other  particulars,  which  would  hardly 
have  been  intelligible  to  a  Gentile,  and  which  had  no 
sort  of  interest  for  him.  But  although  they  may 
even  be  little  in  our  eyes  now,  although  it  may  seem 
only  something  of  the  past,  concerning  a  people  broken 
to  atoms,  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  earth,  yet, 
nevertheless,  it  has  a  real  and  enduring  interest  in 
the  mind  of  the  Spirit.  For  the  Jews  are  not  done 
with  yet.  Far  from  it.  The  Jews  have  known, 
throughout  their  whole  history,  the  misery  of  attempt- 
ing to  deserve  the  promises  that  were  given  to  the 
fathers;  and  they  have  been  allowed  to  work  out  the 


122  DANIEL. 

terrible  experiment  of  the  folly  and  ruin  that  neces- 
sarily follow  man's  attempting  to  earn  what  the^grace 
of  God  alone  can  bestow.     That  has  been,  and  is,  the 
whole  secret  of  their  past  and  present  history.     They 
were  brought  out  from  Egypt  by  the  power  of  God ; 
but  at  Sinai  they  undertook  to  do  all  that  the  Lord 
spoke  unto  them.     They  did  not  say  one  word  about 
what  God  had  promised.      The    Lord   alluded   to   it. 
But  in  no  way  did  they  remind  Blm  that  they  were  a 
stiffnecked   nation  —  a  rebellious,   unbelieving  people. 
And  when  God  proposed  that  they  should  obey  Him, 
instead  •  of    acknowledging     their     utter    incapacity, 
instead  of  throwing  themselves  only   on    His  mercy, 
their  answer  betrayed,  on  the  contrary,  that  boldness 
which  always  characterizes  man  in  his  natural  state. 
"  All  that  the  Lord  hath  spoken,"  say  they,  "  will  we 
do,  and  be  obedient."     The  result  was  that  they  did 
nothing  that  the  Lord  had  said.     They  were  disobedi- 
ent at  every  turn,  and   God  was  obliged  to  deal  with 
them  as  they  deserved.     No  doubt  there  was  divine 
goodness  in  it  all ;  and  every  step  even  of  their  failure 
only  brought  out,  through'  God's  grace,  some  type  or 
shadow  of  the  blessings  that  God  will  give  them  by  and 
by,  when,  cured  by  His  mercy  of  this  fatal  mistake  of 
the  flesh,  and  being  disciplined  in  suffering  and  trial 
and  that  fearful  tribulation  through  which   they   are 
destined  yet  to  pass,  they  will  then  fall  back  upon  the 
Blessed  One  whom  their  fathers  despised  and  crucified, 
and  will  own  that  the  mercy  of  God  alone  can  give 
them  any  blessing,  and  that  it  is  His  faithfulness  which 
will  accomplish  all  that  He  had  spoken  to  their  fathers. 
This  we  saw  beginning  to  dawn  in  a  particular  way  in 
the  prophecies  of  Daniel.     For  although  in  the  previous 
parts  there  had  been  types  of  it,  (Daniel  himself  in  the 
den  of  lions — or  as  interpreter  to  the  king — the  three 
Hebrew  children   who  refused   to  worship  idols,)   all 
these  things  foreshadowed  what  God  will  work  in  the 
latter  day  for  Israel,  in  a  little  seed  that  He  will  reserve 


CHAPTER    VIII.  123 

for  Himself.  But  they  are  not  types  so  clear,  but  that 
many  Christians  now  would  think  it  fanciful  to  consider 
them  as  such  at  all.  We  are  now  about  to  find  what 
none  ought  to  gainsay  for  a  moment.  Yet  there  are 
many  true  Christians  who  take  these  prophecies  as 
finding  their  only  answer  in  what  concerns  the  Christian 
Church.  Such  suppose  that  the  little  horn  of  chap.  vii. 
is  the  papacy.  And  in  this  chapter  many  have  been 
disposed  to  find  Islamism,  the  scourge  of  the  eastern 
world,  as  the  papacy  is  of  the  west.  Whatever  may 
be  the  analogies  that  would  ^readily  occur  to  any 
thoughtful  mind,  and  that  I  by  no  means  denied  as  to 
the  little  horn  in  chap,  vii.,  I  admit  there  are  the  same 
with  regard  to  Mahomedanism  in  the  east.  But  what 
I  would  desire  to  bring  out  clearly  is  the  direct  inten- 
tion of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  these  Scriptures.  It  is  all 
very  well  to  find  that  there  are  seeds  of  evil  germinating 
in  the  world,  and  that  the  horrors  of  the  last  days  have 
their  heralds — admonitory  signs  that  arise  ever  and 
anon  over  the  surface  of  the  world,  to  show  us  what  is 
coming.  But  in  looking  at  the  word  of  God,  it  is  of 
importance  to  be  divested  of  any  desire  to  find  the 
answer  to  prophecy  in  the  past  or  present.  The  great 
thing  is  to  go  to  it  with  an  unbiassed  mind,  desiring 
nothing  but  to  understand  what  God  is  teaching  us. 
Therefore,  whether  it  be  about  the  past  or  the  future, 
just  as  about  the  present,  the  chief  rec[uisite  is,  that  we 
should  be  subject  to  God  and  to  the  word  of  His  grace. 
I  desire,  in  this  spirit,  to  endeavour,  as  far  as  the  Lord 
enables  me,  to  explain  the  meaning  of  our  chapter. 

As  in  chap,  vii.,  so  here,  the  vision  was  during  the 
reign  of  Belshazzar;  w^iereas  the  subsequent  visions 
were  after  the  power  of  Babylon  was  overthrown. 
But  up  to  this  time  there  was  no  judgment  of  Babylon. 
Notwithstanding,  the  very  place  where  the  new  vision 
was  seen  prepares  us  for  a  certain  change.  It  was  in 
the  east — still  farther  east — at  Shusan  in  the  palace, 
which  is  in  the  province  of  Elam.     Elam  is  the  Hebrew 


124  DANIEL. 

name  for   Persia,  or  one  of  the  names,  at  any  rate. 
"  And  I  saw  in  a  vision,  and  I  was  by  the  river  of 
Ulai."     I  only  mention   this   to   show  that   we  have 
certain  clues  as  to  the  bearing  of  the  prophecy  that 
follows.     He  lifts  up  his  eyes  and  sees  a  ram — a  well- 
known  symbol,  used  in  Persia  itself,  and  very  familiar 
in  its   monuments   and   public   documents.      "  Behold 
there  stood  before  the  river  a  ram  which  had  two  horns : 
and  the  two  horns  were  high ;  but  one  was  higher  than 
the  other,  and  the  higher  came  up  last."     Clearly  the 
allusion  is  to  the  coniposite  character  of  the  Persian 
Empire.     There  were  wo  elements  in  that  empire,  as 
distinguished  from  others — the  Medish,  which  was  the 
first,  and  the  Persian,  which  was  the  younger  element 
of  the  two.      But  the  younger   becomes  in  course  of 
time  the  greater.     Therefore  it  saj^s  that  one  horn  was 
higher  than  the  other,  and  the  higher  came  up  last. 
Although  Darius  the  Mede  takes  the  kingdom  on  the 
fall  of  Babylon,  yet  Cyrus  the  Persian  is  the  one  who 
acquires  the  supremacy  in  due  time,  and  after  that  it  is 
always  the  Persian  that  is  more  particularly  mentioned. 
But  still,  earlier  even  in  the  language  of  the  nobles  to 
Darius,  we  find  them  saying,  "  the  law  of  the  Medes 
and  Persians."     The  ram  had  two  horns. 

"  I  saw  the  ram  pushing  westward,  and  northward, 
and  southward  " — that  is,  the  direction  of  the  various 
conquests  of  the  Persian  Empire — "  so  that  no  beasts 
might  stand  before  him,  neither  was  there  any  that 
could  deliver  out  of  his  hand :  but  he  did  according  to 
his  will  and  became  great."  We  find  as  to  this  how 
entirely  all  profane  history  is  obliged  to  bow  to  the 
word  of  God.  But  we  need  not  go  farther  than  Scrip- 
ture itself.  Let  any  one  read  the  books  of  Ezra, 
Nehemiah,  &c.,  and  he  will  see  how  wide  and  undisputed 
was  that  dominion.  Even  in  profane  history  this  was 
the  term  used  about  them — "the  great  king" — em- 
phatically so  about  the  Persian  monarchy.  It  is 
manifest  how  entirely  this  goes  along  with  the  pro- 


CHAPTER   VIII.  125 

phetical  acconnt  given  of  them  here.    "  He  did  accord- 
ing to  his  will  and  became  great." 

"And  as  I  was  considering,  behold,  an  he-goat  came 
from  the  west."     Now  this  was  the  first  inroad  that 
the  west  had  ever  made  upon  the  eastern  world.     And 
nothing  seemed  more  improbable,  because  the  east  was 
the  cradle  of  the  human  race.     It  was  in  the  east  that 
man  was  put  when  he  was  first  made.     It  was  in  the 
east  that  he  began  his  second  history  in  the  world — I 
mean  in  the  world  after  the  flood.     It  was  from  this 
centre  that  the  various  races  of  men,   after  the  Lord 
had  confounded  their  language  at  j^abel,  spread  them- 
selves all  over  the  w^orld.     It  was  also  in  the  east  that 
there  was  any  considerable  development  of  civilization, 
for  hundreds   of  years   before  the  west  had  emerged 
from  barbarism.     Yet  here  we  find,  from  this  striking 
prophetical  figure,  that  when  the  Persian  kingdom  was 
still  without   a  rival,  not  declining,   but  in  the  very 
plenitude   of  its   power,   there   suddenly   comes   from 
quite  another  quarter  a  power  represented  in  the  vision 
as  an  he-goat — a  western  adversary.     And  this  power 
advances  with  the  greatest  possible  swiftness ;  as  it  is 
said  here,  "  he  touched  not  the  ground."     No  person  of 
the  least  openness  to  conviction  could  question  for  a 
moment  what  is  meant,  even  supposing  he  had  not  a 
divine  interpretation  of  it  in  the  chapter.     There  was 
but  one  ancient  empire  that  it  could  be  conceived  to  set 
forth — the  Grecian  EmjDire — and  the  great  horn  in  its 
head  was  clearly  its  first  chief,  Alexander.     "And  he 
came  to  the  ram  that  had  two  horns  which  I  had  seen 
standing  before  the  river,  and  ran  unto  him  in  the  fury 
of  his  power.     And  I   saw  him  come  close  unto  the 
ram,  and  he  was  moved  with  choler  against  him,  and 
smote  the  ram  and  brake  his  two  horns."     Here  we 
have  the  Spirit  of  God  giving  in  a  few  words  what  all 
history  confirms.     A  new  empire  should  rise  after  the 
fall  of  the  Babylonian,  symbolized  by  the  ram,  peculiar 
in  this  that  it  had  two  difi'erent  peoples  which  composed 


126  DANIEL. 

its  strength.  This  empire  might  go  on  in  falness  of 
power  for  a  certain  time;  but  then,  from  another -quar- 
ter, where  there  had  been  no  kingdom  of  any  note 
known  before,  comes  a  power  of  amazing  swiftness  in 
its  progress,  led  on  by  a  king  of  extraordinary  courage 
and  ambition.  And  this  personage  smites  the  Persian 
empire  so  completely  that  "  there  was  no  power  in  the 
ram  to  stand  before  him,  but  he  cast  him  down  to  the 
ground  and  stamped  upon  him;  and  there  was  none 
that  could  deliver  the  ram  out  of  his  hand."  "  Moved 
with  choler  "  is  said  more  particularly  about  the  Greek 
empire  and  Alexander.  The  Greeks  had  a  ground  of 
hatred  against  the  Persians,  which  was  not  the  case 
with  the  other  empires.  There  was  much  of  personal 
feeling  in  it,  and  this  is  admirably  expressed  by  the 
word  choler  here.  Why  so  ?  We  do  not  read  of  that 
in  the  attacks  of  the  Persians  on  the  Babylonians, 
ferocious  as  they  might  be,  or  in  those  of  the  Romans 
upon  the  Greeks;  but  it  was  peculiarly  true  of  this 
Greek  inroad  upon  the  Persian  empire.  The  Persians 
had  before  invaded  Greece,  and  thus  had  roused  the 
strongest  feeling  against  themselves.  This  traditional 
resentment  descended  from  father  to  son,  so  that  the 
Greeks  considered  themselves  the  natural  enemies  of 
the  Persians.  Such  was  the  provocation  that  the 
Persians  had  given  to  the  Greeks,  who  were  but  a 
petty  nation  at  that  time,  and  who  had  not  at  all  sought 
to  extend  their  bounds  beyond  their  own  native  country. 
Now  the  moment  was  come  that  this  blow  should  be 
returned  and  the  Persians  attacked  in  their  own  land: 
and  the  he-goat  with  this  notable  horn  in  its  head 
comes,  moved  with  choler,  and  smites  the  ram  and 
breaks  his  two  horns,  casts  him  down  to  the  ground 
and  stamps  upon  him.  Nothing  can  be  clearer, 
nothing  more  exactly  descriptive  as  giving  an  idea  of 
the  relative  position  of  these  two  j)owers  to  one 
another.  If  you  were  to  read  history  all  your  life)  you 
could  not  have  a  more  vivid  picture  of  the   Persian 


CHAPTER   VIII.  127 

downfall  than  what  the  Spirit  of  God  has  furnished  in 
a  few  lines. 

In  this  case  it  was  rather  less  than  three  hundred 
years  from  the  time  of  Daniel  till  these  great  events 
took  place — a  time  long  enough  to  show  the  wonder  of 
God's  perfect  wisdom  and  the  way  in  which  He 
unveils  the  future  to  His  people,  but  a  comparatively 
short  space  in  the  history  of  the  world ;  yet  this  is  not 
His  great  object.  The  Spirit  always  looks  forward  to 
the  close.  He  may  introduce  what  is  to  be  fulfilled  in 
a  comparatively  brief  time,  but  His  main  attention  is 
directed  to  the  end  of  this  age  and  not  to  those  events 
that  actually  surround  the  parties  of  the  world.  God 
has  a  people  that  His  heart  is  set  upon :  a  people,  it  is 
true,  who,  through  their  own  folly  and  want  of  leaning 
upon  God,  have  been  most  feeble  and  failing,  and  who 
are,  to  this  day,  the  scorn  and  by-word  of  the  nations 
according  to  the  word  of  God.  But  whatever  might  he 
the  apparent  might  of  Persia,  if  not  of  Greece,  and 
the  importance  of  their  controversies  as  filling  up  the 
history  of  the  world,  God  thinks  but  little  of  them. 
He  disposes  of  the  records  of  centuries  in  a  few  words. 
The  point  to  which  God  hastens  forward,  might  be  small 
then  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  but  being  connected  with 
the  interests  of  His  king,  and  His  people,  He  goes  on  to 
the  great  events  connected  with  them  in  the  last  days. 
This  gives  the  key  to  the  verses  that  follow.  Their 
importance  is  because  of  their  connexion  with  Jewish 
history,  and  because  they  reflect  what  is  to  take  place 
before  the  great  day  of  the  Lord  come. 

"  Therefore  the  he-goat  waxed  very  great ;  and  when 
he  vvas  strong,  the  great  horn  was  broken."  This  was 
exactly  the  case  with  Alexander.  He  was  cut  off, 
while  quite  a  young  man,  in  the  midst  of  his  victories. 
"And  for  it  came  up  four  notable  ones,  toward  the 
four  winds  of  heaven."  There  was  a  certain  time  that 
elapsed  after  the  death  of  Alexander,  when  his  generals 
were  squabbling  together  and  trying  to  set  up  a  number 


128  DANIEL. 

of  kingdoms;  but  the  end  of  all  was  that  there  were 
four  kingdoms  formed  out  of  the  proper  domiuTOns  of 
Greece.  So  that  I  do  not  question  that  the  allusion 
here  is  to  the  well-known  division  of  Alexander's 
empire,  into  four  kingdoms,  which  took  place  about 
three  hundred  years  before  Christ. 

"And  out  of  one  of  them  came  forth  a  little  horn," 
otherwise  called  in  Scripture  the  King  of  the  North. 
Being  in  the  north,  he  pushes  his  dominions  down 
"  toward  the  south,  and  toward  the  east,  and  toward 
the  pleasant  land."  My  reasons  for  so  thinking,  be- 
yond that  of  the  direction  of  his  conquests  (which 
shows  where  his  own  power  lay,  and  the  point  from 
which  he  started,)  will  more  particularly  appear  when 
we  come  to  verse  11.  What  we  have  here  is  the  suc- 
cession of  these  two  empires — Persia  first,  and  then 
Greece.  For  out  of  one  of  the  fragments  of  the 
Grecian  Empire  there  sprang  a  king  that  was  after- 
wards to  play  a  most  important  part  in  connexion  with 
the  land  and  people  of  the  Jews.  This  is  the  great 
point  of  the  chapter. 

Here  then  we  find  that  this  little  horn  "  waxed  great 
even  to  the  host  of  heaven ;  and  it  cast  down  some  of 
the  host  and  of  the  stars  to  the  ground,  and  stamped 
upon  them."  Thereby  is  meant,  I  apprehend,  those 
that  were  in  a  position  of  honour  and  glory  before  the 
Jewish  people.  Thus,  stars  are  used,  in  the  New 
Testament,  as  the  symbol  of  those  who  are  set  in  a 
place  of  authority  in  the  Church.  Just  so,  I  conceive, 
the  "  host  of  heaven  "  here  alludes  to  persons  that 
held  a  place  of  authority  in  the  Jewish  polity.  It  is 
the  key-note  to  all  this  part  of  the  prophecy.  The  im- 
portance of  all  that  affects  Israel  is  now  more  and 
more  coming  into  view.  Hence  you  find  an  expression 
used  that  may  seem  strong — "  the  host  of  heaven." 
But  we  must  not  be  surprised  at  this.  God  takes  the 
utmost  interest  in  His  people.  Bear  in  mind  that  this 
does  not  imply  that  His  people  were  in  a  good  state. 


CHAPTER   VIII,  129 

On  the  contrary,  in  judging  of  failure,  we  must  take  into 
consideration  the  position  the  people  occupied,  and  for 
which  they  are  responsible.  If  you  look  at  Christendom 
you  must  remember  that  all  who  profess  the  name  of 
Christ,  whether  truly  or  falsely — every  baptized  person 
—every  person  that  has  come  under  the  outward  re- 
cognition of  the  name  of  Christ,  is  in  the  house  of 
God.  People  fancy  that  it  is  only  those  who  are  really 
converted  that  have  any  moral  obligations.  This  is  a 
total  mistake.  A  new  kind  of  responsibility,  no  doubt, 
flows  from  the  fact  of  conversion  and  the  relationships 
of  grace. 

But  there  is  a  responsibility  that  involves  a  vast 
accession  of  guilt  when  men  are  in  any  place  of  pri- 
vilege. This  is  a  very  solemn  truth,  and  God  attaches 
importance  to  it.  Look  at  the  Second  Epistle  to 
Timothy.  God's  house  is  there  compared  to  a  great 
house  among  men,  and  in  it  there  are  vessels  to  dis- 
honour as  well  as  to  honour.  The  former  are  not  con- 
verted at  all ;  they  might  be  altogether  bad  people,  but 
still  they  are  said  to  be  vessels  in  the  house  of  God. 
The  Church,  that  which  bears  the  name  of  Christ 
upon  the  earth,  is  always  responsible  to  walk  as  the 
bride  of  Christ.  Yet  you  cannot  allude  to  such  a  pri- 
vilege and  responsibility  as  that,  without  seeing  the 
utter  ruin,  and  failure,  and  declension  of  what  bears 
His  name.  And  this  is  the  practical  importance  of 
keeping  in  view  the  position  which  God  has  assigned 
us.  We  never  can  judge  how  low  we  have  got  till  we 
see  the  place  in  which  God  first  put  us.  Supposing  I 
have  to  examine  my  ways  as  a  Christian,  I  must  bear 
in  mind  that  a  Christian  is  a  man  whose  sins  are 
blotted  out;  that  he  is  a  member  of  the  body  of  Christ, 
and  loved  with  the  same  love  wherewith  the  Father 
loved  the  Son.  Some  are  accustomed  to  think  that,  if 
a  man  is  not  a  Jew  or  a  Turk,  or  heathen,  he  must  be 
a  Christian.  But  when  a  believer  hears  that  a  Christian 
is  one  who  is  made  a  king  and  a  priest  to  God-r-a  purged 

K 


130  DANIEL. 

worshipper,  having  no  more  conscience  of  sin,  he  be- 
comes anxious,  and  feels  that  he  has  not  on&Tight 
or  full  idea  of  his  own  calling  and  responsibility.  He 
then  begins  to  find  a  different  standard  of  judgment, 
in  Christ  to  measure  how  he  ought  to  feel,  and  work, 
and  walk  for  God. 

The  same  thing  applies  to  Israel  here.  Those  that 
held  this  place  of  responsible  authority  in  Israel  are 
alluded  to  here  as  the  host  and  stars  of  heaven.  They 
were  put  in  a  place  of  authority  by  God.  For  we  must 
remember,  in  connexion  with  Israel,  that  they  are  the 
people  that,  in  the  mind  of  God,  have  the  first  place 
upon  the  earth.  They  are  the  head,  and  the  Gentiles 
the  tail.  This,  I  am  aware,  is  a  new  thought  to 
persons  who  are  wont  to  look  at  Jews  with  an  air  of 
contemptuous  pity,  only  judging  of  them  by  their 
present  degraded  condition.  But,  in  order  to  judge 
rightly,  we  must  look  at  things  with  God,  we  must 
feel  with  God ;  and  God  uses  this  strong  language  in 
regard  to  persons  put  of  old  in  a  position  of  outward 
authority  among  the  Jews.  Commentators  have  sup- 
posed that,  because  certain  were  spoken  of  in  such  ex- 
alted terms,  Christians  must  be  meant.  But,  as  God's 
nation,  Israel  held  the  first  place  in  His  mind  in  the 
government  of  the  world.  That  is  their  calling ;  and 
"  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance." 
God  will  never  give  up  the  great  thought,  that  He 
has  called  Israel  into  this  place;  and  they  are  judged 
according  to  it.  This  vision  is  while  the  power  of 
Babylon  is  not  yet  judged.  It  gives  you  a  view  of 
what  will  be  realized  in  the  last  days  with  regard  to 
Israel,  before  the  power  that  began  with  Babylon  has 
been  completely  set  aside. 

This  little  horn  waxed  great,  and  cast  down  some 
of  the  hosts  and  stars  of  heaven,  and  stamped  upon 
them.  That  is,  certain  Jewish  rulers  are  overthrown 
that  were  in  this  place  of  great  authority;  treating 
them   with  the  utmost  cruelty,  and  degrading  them. 


CHAPTER   VIII.  131 

"  Yea,  lie  magnified  himself  even  to  the  prince  of  the 
host,"  which,  I  suppose,  means  the  Lord  Himself. 
The  marginal  note  is  right  in  the  next  clause.  "  From 
him  the  daily  sacrifice  was  taken  away."  This  at  once 
makes  it  all  plain.  On  the  contrary,  it  introduces  the 
utmost  confusion  to  take  "  by  him"  to  mean  the  little 
horn,  and  then  "the  place  of  his  sanctuary"  to  mean 
that  of  the  prince  of  the  host.  The  person  that  was 
represented  by  this  little  horn  is  to  magnify  himself 
even  to  the  prince  of  the  host.  "  And  from  him  the 
daily  sacrifice  was  taken  away,  and  the  place  of  his 
sanctuary  was  cast  down.  And  an  host  was  given 
him  against  the  daily  sacrifice  by  reason  of  transgres- 
sion." And  then  we  ffo  back  to  the  little  horn  asrain. 
"  And  it  cast  down  the  truth  to  the  ground;  and  it 
practised  and  prospered."  In  other  words,  the  11th 
verse  and  the  first  half  of  the  12th  form  a  parenthesis. 
Then  in  the  latter  part  of  the  twelfth  verse  we  again 
have  "  27,"  which  designates  the  little  horn  in  verse  10. 
The  "it"  takes  up  the  horn  that  was |to  appear  and 
deal  in  a  cruel  way  with  the  Jewish  people,  and  with 
their  rulers,  in  an  aggravated  form. 

Then  we  have,  as  the  prophet  says,  "  one  saint 
speaking,  and  another  saint  said  unto  that  certain 
saint  which  spake.  How  long  shall  be  the  vision  con- 
cerning the  daily  sacrifice  and  the  transgression  of 
desolation,  to  give  both  the  sanctuary  and  the  host  to 
be  trodden  under  foot  ?  And  he  said  unto  me.  Unto 
two  thousand  and  three  hundred  days;  then  shall  the 
sanctuary  be  cleansed."  I  strongly  suspect  that,  in 
the  main,  "what  we  have  here,  save  the  portion  which  is 
marked  parenthetically,  has  had  a  partial  accomplish- 
ment in  the  past.  We  shall  read  of  a  personage  in 
chap  xi.  where  the  characteristics  alluded  to  here,  as 
marking  this  little  horn,  are  still  more  minutely  stated. 
He  is  called,  in  profane  history,  Antiochus  Epiphanes, 
and  was  a  particularly  bad  man.  If  you  have  read 
the   books    of   the    Maccabees,    (which,    though    not 


132  DANIEL. 

Scripture,  are  in  the  main  historically  true,  at  least 
two  of  them,)  you  will  know  that  they  describe  this 
king  of  Syro-Maceclonia,  and  show  the  dreadful 
feeling  he  cherished  against  Israel.  He  attempted  to 
force  heathen  worship  upon  them,  especially  that  of 
Jupiter  Olympius;  and  he  put  to  death  all  the  Jews 
who  resisted  his  designs,  till  at  last,  partly  by  the 
Romans  and  partly  by  the  force  and  courage  of  the 
Maccabees  themselves,  he  was  repressed  and  defeated, 
and  the  temple  was  once  more  cleansed  again,  and 
the  Jewish  worship  resumed.  No  doubt,  this  was  the 
person  meant  historically  by  the  little  horn.  But  he 
shows  the  same  kind  of  features,  which  will  re-appear  in 
another  great  leader  of  the  last  days,  and  I  think  that 
this  will  be  made  evident  from  the  last  part  of  this 
chapter.  For  when  the  prophet  is  spoken  to  by  the 
angel  Gabriel,  he  says,  "Understand,  O  son  of  man: 
for  at  the  time  of  the  end  shall  be  the  vision." 

The  statement  denotes,  that  what  he  is  going  to 
explain  more  particularly  looks  onward  to  that  time. 
But  it  gives  me  the  opportunity  to  repeat  a  remark 
which  has  been  before  made  —  that  we  are  never  to 
suppose  that  the  explanations  of  a  vision  in  Scripture 
are  merely  a  repetition  of  what  has  j^i'cceded.  They 
allude  to  the  past,  but  they  add  fresh  features  not 
given  before.  This  is  particularly  plain  in  the  present 
case.  The  past  portion  of  the  vision  (that  which 
had  already  been  seen  by  the  prophet)  has  been  in 
the  main  accomplished ;  whereas  the  explanatory  part 
adds  fresh  imformation  that  looks  onward  to  the  last 
days.  Nevertheless,  there  is  an  explanation  in  measure 
of  what  has  gone  before.  But  it  is  observable  how 
frequently,  in  the  explanations  of  the  angel,  the  last 
days  are  brought  before  us. 

"  And  he  said,  (verse  19,)  Behold  I  will  make 
thee  know  what  shall  be  in  the  last  end  of  the 
indignation ;  for  at  the  time  appointed  the  end  shall 
be."     There  can  be  no  cjuestion,  if  we  are  at  all  familiar 


CHAPTER    VIII.  133 

"with  the  prophets,  what  this  means.  Take  the  first 
of  them.  There  I  find  this  very  expression,  "  the 
indignation."  In  the  end  of  Isaiah  v.,  and  then  in 
chaps.  ix.,x.,  this  word,  "indignation,"  is  repeated  over 
and  over  again.  The  prophet  shows,  that,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  idolatry  of  Israel,  and  especially  of  their 
kings,  God's  indignation  was  roused  against  His 
people.  He  sends  a  chastening  upon  them.  But, 
whatever  the  first  effects  of  the  chastening  might  be, 
the  evil  burst  out  again  with  fresh  fury,  as  evil  always 
does,  unless  it  is  put  away.  Therefore  sounds  forth  that 
terrible  word,  ''  For  all  this  his  anger  is  not  turned 
away  ;  but  his  hand  is  stretched  out  still."  His 
wrath  burns  again  and  again.  Then,  in  chap.  x.  25, 
we  find  the  Lord  saying  His  indignation  shall  cease. 
But  wherein  ?  There  is  a  personage  brought  forward 
there,  called  the  Assyrian  ;  and  this  scourge  of  Israel 
was  set  forth  in  measure  by  Sennacherib,  the  then 
King  of  Assyria.  He  was  the  first  who  was  par- 
ticularly mixed  up  with  the  affairs  of  Israel,  or 
rather  of  Judah.  And  what  do  we  learn  ?  The 
Assyrian  there  is  to  be  used  as  the  rod  of  God's  anger; 
but  when  God  has  performed  His  whole  work  upon 
Mount  Zion,  and  on  Jerusalem — when  He  has  allowed, 
as  it  were,  the  indignation  to  burn  out,  it  will  cease  in 
the  destruction  of  the  Assyrian  himself,  because  he 
forgot  that  he  was  merely  a  rod  in  the  hands  of  the 
Lord.  He  flattered  himself  that  it  was  all  his  own 
w^isdom  and  might;  but  the  Lord  says,  that  He  will 
deal  with  the  rod  itself  and  destroy  it.  Accordingly, 
that  very  chapter  shows  us  the  indignation  of  the  Lord 
ceasing  in  His  destruction.  The  indignation  is  solely 
connected  with   His  people  Israel. 

It  is  evident  to  me,  that  this  confirms  what  was 
before  said,  that  here  we  are  upon  Jewish  ground.  It 
is  not  a  question  of  what  popes  or  Moslems  may 
do,  nor  about  the  inroads  of  the  eastern  or  western 
apostasy.     It  concerns  Israel — the  last  indignation  o. 


134  DANIEL. 

God  against  Israel.  But,  it  may  be  asked,  Why  is 
not  the  fourth  empire  introduced  here  ?  The  reason 
is  this:  that  while  the  dominion  of  these  empires  is 
taken  away,  upon  which  we  have  the  successive  rise 
of  a  new  empire,  yet  the  body  remains  in  existence. 
Because  it  is  out  of  the  third  empire,  and  not  out  of 
the  fourth,  was  to  rise  this  power  that  plays  so  im- 
portant a  part  in  the  last  days.  So  that  w^e  must 
remember,  that  the  little  horn  of  chap.  viii.  is  an 
entirely  distinct  j^ow^er  from  the  little  horn  of  chap.  vii. 
That  of  chap.  vii.  is  the  last  leader  of  the  Roman 
Empire,  wdio  arises  out  of  the  fourth  empire  wdien  it 
is  divided  into  ten  kingdoms ;  whereas  this  power  rises 
from  the  third  empire,  wherein  there  w^as  a  division 
into  four  parts — not  into  ten.  Nothing  can  be  more 
distinct.  Although  the  chief  dominion  of  the  world  has 
passed  aw^ay  from  the  third  to  the  fourth  empire;  and 
although  we  have  had  in  Sennacherib  a  representative 
of  the  third  empire,  yet  in  the  last  days  there  will  also 
be  an  inheritor  of  the  third  empire,  who  will  meddle 
"with  Israel  in  a  particular  way.  As  there  will  be  a 
grand  leader  in  the  west,  so  there  wdll  also  be  one  in 
the  east,  springing  out  of  the  Greek  empire.  Further, 
we  must  remember,  that,  although  being  the  Grecian 
Empire,  it  w-as  west  in  comparison  with  Babylon  and 
Palestine,  it  was  east  in  comj^arison  with  Rome.  This 
little  horn  we  shall  see  more  of  afterwards. 

In  verse  20,  the  ram  with  two  horns  is  explained  to 
represent  the  kings  of  Media  and  Persia ;  and,  in 
verse  21,  "the  rough  goat  is  the  King  of  Grecia;  and 
the  great  horn  that  is  between  his  eyes  is  the  first 
king."'  Then,  in  verse  22,  we  have  the  breaking  up  of 
the  Grecian  Empire  ;  and,  in  verse  23,  it  is  added, 
"  And  in  the  latter  time  of  their  kingdom,  wdien  the 
transgressors  are  come  to  the  full,  a  king  of  fierce 
countenance,  and  understanding  dark  sentences,  shall 
stand  up."  This,  I  think,  does  not  refer  to  Antiochus 
Epiphanes,  but  to  the  person  whom  Antiochus  typified. 


CHAPTER   VIII.  135 

Mark  the  expression  again,  ''  In  the  latter  time  of 
their  kingdom,  when  the  transgressors  are  come  to 
the  full."  "  And  his  power  shall  be  mighty,  but  not 
by  his  own  power:"  a  remarkable  word,  which  is  not 
said  at  all  about  the  little  horn  of  chap  vii.  There, 
I  apprehend,  it  was  by  his  own  power.  Satan  might 
give  him  power,  too ;  but  in  his  own  person  he  wielded 
the  force  of  the  Roman  Empire.  But,  in  the  case  of 
this  ruler,  though  his  power  will  be  mighty,  it  will  not 
be  by  his  own  power.  He  depends  upon  the  strength 
given  him  by  others.  IJe  will  be  the  instrument  of 
foreign  policy  and  power,  not  his  own.  "  And  he 
shall  destroy  wonderfully,  and  shall  prosper,  and  prac- 
tise and  destroy  the  mighty  and  the  holy  people." 
That  is,  we  find  that  he  is  principally  and  expressly 
mentioned  in  connexion  with  the  Jews  as  a  people. 
Observe  here,  that  you  have  not  the  saints  of  the 
Most  High.  What  we  find  now  is  merely  a  figura- 
tive expression  of  the  great  men  of  the  Jewish  people, 
and  this,  as  contrasted  with  Gentiles.  There  is  no 
allusion  to  their  character  personally;  that  does  not 
come  into  view  in  chapter  viii. 

This  king  shall  meddle  with  them  and  destroy  the 
mighty  and  the  holy  people.  "  And  through  his  policy 
also  he  shall  cause  craft  to  prosper  in  his  hand  ;  and 
he  shall  magnify  himself  in  his  heart,  and  by  peace 
shall  destroy  many."  That  is,  he  will  take  advantage 
of  their  being  in  a  state  of  ease  and  unprepared  for 
his  wily  encroachments.  "  He  shall  also  stand  up 
against  the  Prince  of  princes ;  but  he  shall  be  broken 
without  hand."  He  will  be  utterly  helpless  in  this 
last  struggle;  as  in  another  Scripture  it  is  said,  (Dan. 
xi.  45,)  "  He  shall  come  to  his  end,  and  none  shall 
help  him." 

Let  me  point  out  Scriptures  that  will  make  the 
importance  of  this  clearer  than  by  confining  our- 
selves to  Dan.  viii.  Is  there  light  from  other  passages 
as   to    who  this  personage  is,  and  what  he  will  do? 


136  DANTEL.  ^ 

I  answer,  Yes.  He  is  the  same  person  that  is  spoken 
of,  in  various  parts  of  the  word  of  God,  as  the  "  As- 
syrian," or  "  king  of  the  north."  He  is  always  described 
as  the  great  foe  of  the  Jews  in  the  last  days.  The 
Jews  at  that  time  will  be  exposed  to  two  evils.  They 
will  have  an  evil  within  in  their  own  land  —  the 
Antichrist  setting  himself  up  as  God  in  His  temple; 
and  they  will  have  another  evil  from  without — the 
Assyrian.  He  comes  up  as  an  enemy  against  them; 
and  he  is  one  also  marked  by  a  subtle  policy.  It  is 
not  merely  by  warlike  power  that  he  is  distinguished. 
He  is,  no  doubt,  of  fierce  countenance,  but  he  under- 
stands dark  sentences.  He  will  take  the  place  of  a 
great  teacher,  which  would  naturally  have  much  in- 
fluence over  the  Jewish  mind;  for  they  have  always  been 
a  people  given  to  research  and  intellectual  speculations 
of  all  kinds.  Of  late  years,  the  mass  of  them  have 
been  too  much  occupied  with  money-getting  to  pay 
much  attention  to  these  things;  but  there  have  been 
constant  representatives  of  the  intellectual  class  among 
the  Jewish  people.  And  over  such  the  influence  of 
this  king  will  be  immense,  when  they  are  re-established 
in  their  own  land,  and  are  becoming  important  again, 
as  the  objects  of  the  dealings  of  God  in  the  way  of 
judgment.  For  the  indignation  will  not  have  ceased. 
Thus  it  is  that  these  two  evils  will  afflict  the  Jews. 
The  Antichrist,  or  the  wailful  king,  will  take  the  place 
•  of  the  true  Messiah  in  the  land  of  Israel.  For,  it  is 
plain,  that  if  anyone  assumes  to  be  Messiah,  it  must  be 
in  the  midst  of  the  Jewish  people,  and  in  the  land  of 
the  Jews ;  whereas  the  Assyrian  is  one  who  is  opposed 
to  them  as  an  open  enemy.  This  I  take  to  be  the  king 
alluded  to  by  the  other  prophets  as  the  king  of  the 
north. 

I  would  now  refer  to  a  few  Scripture  proofs,  that 
the  Assyrian  and  Antichrist  are  totally  distinct  and 
opposed  powers.  The  Assyrian  will  be  the  enemy  of 
the  Antichrist:  the  one  will  be  the  great  self-exalting 


CHAPTER   VIII.  137 

man  inside,  and  the  other  the  leader  of  the  enemies 
outside.  Isaiah  x.  gives  us  the  first  plain  intimation 
that  we  have  of  him  in  the  prophets.  '^  Wherefore  it 
shall  come  to  pass  that  when  the  Lord  hath  performed 
his  whole  work  upon  Mount  Zion  and  on  Jerusalem, 
I  will  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart  of  the  King 
of  Assyria,  and  the  glory  of  his  high  looks."  Many 
persons  will  tell  me,  the  Assyrians  are  all  gone ;  there 
is  no  such  nation  existing.  But,  I  ask,  has  the  Lord 
performed  His  whole  work  upon  Mount  Zion  and  on 
Jerusalem  ?  No  !  Then  the  Assyrian  is  not  all  gone. 
The  Lord  tells  me  here,  that  when  He  shall  have 
performed  this  whole  work,  He  will  punish  the  fruit  of 
the  stout  heart  of  the  King  of  Assyria.  But  the 
Jews  are  not  in  their  land,  and  Jerusalem  is  still 
trodden  down  of  the  Gsn tiles.  Who  knows  it  not  ?  But 
does  it  prove  that  the  Jews  are  not  to  he  in  their  land 
again,  nor  Jerusalem  to  be  delivered  from  Gentile 
JDondage  ?  When  the  power  of  God  gathers  the  Jews 
back  into  their  own  land,  that  same  Providence  will 
bring  out  the  representative  of  the  Assyrian  in  the 
last  days.  And  as  the  Assyrian  was  the  first  great 
enemy  of  Israel,  so  he  is  the  chief  one  at  the 
last.  He  it  is  that  will  come  up  for  his  judgment, 
when  the  Lord  shall  have  performed  His  whole  work 
upon  Zion  and  Jerusalem.  God  has  not  performed  the 
whole.  He  has  performed  a  part  of  it,  but  His 
indignation  still  continues  against  Israel.  This  is  the 
reason  why  they  are  not  in  their  land.  Even  when 
they  do  get  back,  the  indignation  will  still  break  out. 
There  will  be  a  return  of  the  Jews  in  unbelief;  and 
then  will  come  this  great  crisis;  and  God  will  gather 
the  scattered  ones  that  remain,  and  set  them  in  their 
own  land;  and  the  Assyrian  will  be  judged.  There  is 
a  certain  great  personage,  typified  by  the  Assyrian  in 
the  past,  that  will  re-appear  in  the  last  days.  He  is 
spoken  of  as  this  redoubtable  king.  He  will  govern 
in  the  very  quarter   where    this  Httle  horn   had   its 


138  DANIEL.  -^ 

power — Turkey  in  Asia.  Whether  the  Sultan  "will  be 
the  then  possessor  of  these  dominions,  I  do  not  pretend 
to  say;  but,  whoever  he  may  be,  he  is  the  person 
referred  to  by  our  prophet  (chap,  xi.)  as  the  king  of  the 
north.  He  will  come  down  towards  the  pleasant 
land  and  will  attack  the  Jews  ;  but  will  afterwards 
be  broken  to  pieces.  "  He  shall  come  to  his  end,  and 
none  shall  help  him." 

Look  again  at  Isaiah  xiv.  And  what  makes  it 
remarkable  is  this:  that,  in  the  beginning  of  that 
chapter,  you  have  the  King  of  Babylon  spoken  of. 
(Yer.  4.)  "  Take  up  this  proverb  against  the  King  of 
Babylon,  and  say,  Hoav  hath  the  oppressor  ceased !  the 
golden  city  ceased!  "  The  King  of  Babylon  does  not 
represent  the  Assyrian.  Babylon  and  Assyria  were 
two  distinct  powers.  Babylon  was  only  a  little  pro- 
vince when  Assyria  was  a  great  empire.  And  when 
the  Assyrian  was  in  ruins,  Babylon  rose  to  an 
altogether  new  rank,  as  an  imperial  power. 

Isaiah  xiv.  opens  by  showing,  that  "  the  Lord  will 
have  mercy  on  Jacob,  and  will  yet  choose  Israel,  and 
set  them  in  their  own  land:  and  the  strangers  shall  be 
joined  to  it  and  them,  and  they  shall  cleave  to  the 
house  of  Jacob.  And  the  people  shall  take  them, 
and  bring  them  to  their  place,"  &c.  It  proves  the 
intense  interest  that  God  will  give  the  people  of  the 
world  in  seeing  them  back  in  their  place.  "  And 
the  house  of  Israel  shall  possess  them  in  the  land  of 
the  Lord  for  servants  and  handmaids."  The  Gentiles, 
instead  of  being  masters,  will  be  glad  to  be  servants 
in  those  days.  "  And  they  shall  take  them  captives, 
whose  captives  they  were  :  and  they  shall  rule  over 
tlieir  oppressors.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the 
day  that    the    Lord    shall    give    thee    rest    from  thy 

sorrow that  thou  shalt  take  up  this  proverb 

against  the  King  of  Babylon,  and  say,  How  hath  the 
oppressor  ceased !  the  golden  city  ceased !  The  Lord 
hath  broken  the  staff  of  the  wicked,  and  the  sceptre 


CHAPTER   VIII.  139 

of  the  rulers."  There  evidently  yon  have  what  has 
never  yet  been  accomplished.  No  person  with  know- 
ledge of  Scripture  can  suppose  that  ever,  from  the 
time  of  Babylon's  supremacy,  Israel  had  been  in  a 
position  to  take  up  such  a  proverb  as  that.  The 
"  times  of  the  Gentiles "  began  with  the  Chaldean 
power  being  established  over  the  Jews.  And  Jeru- 
salem is,  to  this  day,  trodden  down  by  the  Gentiles. 
One  power  after  another  has  taken  possession  of  the 
city.  Now,  in  these  last  days  spoken  of  here,  we 
have  the  Jews  putting  these  Gentiles  under  them — 
making  them  their  servants.  And  when  that  time 
comes,  and  not  till  then,  they  will  take  up  this  pro- 
verb, "  How  hath  the  oppressor  ceased  ! "  &c.  And 
this  prophetic  strain  looks  at  the  King  of  Babylon,  of 
whom  Nebuchadnezzar  was  the  type — the  last  holder 
of  that  same  power  that  came  in  with  Babylon.  Who 
is  this  ?  The  beast — the  last  inheritor  of  the  power 
that  commenced  with  the  King  of  Babylon,  whose 
strange  destruction  calls  forth  the  joy  and  triumph 
of  Israel.  When  the  King  of  Babylon  got  this 
power,  where  was  the  Assyrian  ?  Gone — broken.  The 
empire  of  Babylon,  that  had  been  a  little  power, 
rose  upon  the  ruins  of  the  Assyrian.  But  mark,  in 
this  chapter,  ver.  24,  "  The  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sworn, 
saying.  Surely  as  I  have  thought,  so  shall  it  come  to 
pass;  and  as  I  have  purposed,  so  shall  it  stand,  that 
I  will  break  the  Assyrian  in  my  land,  and  upon  my 
mountains  tread  him  under  foot:  then  shall  his  yoke 
depart  from  off  them,  and  his  burden  depart  from  off 
their  shoulders.  This  is  the  purpose  that  is  purposed 
upon  the  whole  earth."  There,  evidently,  we  have 
the  fact,  that  when  the  day  of  Israel's  restoration 
comes,  not  only  will  they  triumph  in  the  fate  of  the 
King  of  Babylon,  but  the  Lord  will  put  down  the 
Assyrian.  How  can  this  refer  to  the  mere  historical 
Assyrian  of  the  past?  He  was  already  gone  when 
Babylon  came  into  power:  so  that  he  can  only  have 


140  DANIEL. 

been  a  type  of  a  power  yet  to  come.  This  shows  that 
there  will  be  two  great  powers  in  the  latter  day — the 
beast,  represented  by  the  King  of  Babylon,  who  at  that 
time  will  be  the  enemy  of  the  true-hearted  Jews,  though 
he  purports  to  be  the  friend  of  the  nation,  that  is,  of  the 
ungodly  mass;  as  the  Assyrian,  on  the  contrary,  will 
be  the  leader  of  the  openly  adverse  coalition  of  the 
Gentiles  against  Israel. 

Other  Scriptures  prove  the  same  thing.  Thus  in 
Isaiah  xxx.  you  will  find  the  same  two  powers 
coming  into  view  again.  In  verse  27,  it  is  said, 
"  Behold   the   name  of    the    Lord   cometh   from   far, 

burning   with   his    anger And   the    Lord    shall 

cause  his  glorious  voice  to  be  heard,  and  shall  show 

the  lighting;  down  of  his  arm For  through  the 

voice  of  the  Lord  shall  the  Assyrian  be  beaten  down 
which  smote  with  a  rod" — (evidently  alluding  to  his 
being  the  instrument  of  the  Lord's  chastening  His 
people,  as  in  Isa.  x.  5 ;)  "  And  in  every  place  where 
the  grounded  staff  shall  pass,  which  the  Lord  shall 
lay  upon  him,  it  shall  be  with  tabrets  and  harps:  and 
in  battles  of  shaking  will  he  fight  with  it.  For 
Tophet  is  ordained  of  old;"  yea,  for  the  king  it  is 
prepared :  he  hath  made  it  deep  and  large  :  the  pile 
thereof  is  fire  and  much  wood ;  the  breath  of  the 
Lord,  like  a  stream  of  brimstone  shall  kindle  it." 
This  shows  that  it  is  not  merely  a  judgment  of 
the  earth,  but  a  deeper  thing.  Tophet,  or  the  pit,  is 
ordained  of  old.  "  For  the  king  also "  is  the  true 
meaning  of  the  next  clause.  Tophet  is  not  merely 
for  "  the  Assyrian,"  but  also  for  "  the  king."  There 
are  two  distinct  personages  referred  to,  as  we  saw 
also  in  chap.  xiv.  "  The  king "  will  be  in  the  land 
of  Israel,  and  will  reign  there,  under  the  auspices  of 
the  inheritor  of  the  power  of  Babylon  in  that  day. 
He  will  there  assume  to  be  the  true  Messiah.  Tophet 
is  prepared  for  him — but  also  for  the  Assyrian.  They 
will  be  both  consigned  to  divine  judgment.     I  need  not 


CHAPTER   VITI.  141 

refer  to  all  the  passages  that  refer  to  them ;  but  ycu 
will  find  a  great  deal  that  is  deeply  interesting  in  Isaiah 
and  other  prophets  as  to  "  the  king." 

But  so  far  is  it  from  being  true,  that  Antichrist,  or 
"  the  king,"  most  occupies  the  mind  of  God,  that,  on 
the  contrary,  the  prophets  speak  far  more  of  the  As- 
syrian. Christians  are  not  generally  aware  of  the  large 
extent  of  prophecy.  One  of  the  most  important  powers 
in  it  is  hardly  thought  of  by  them.  If  you  look  at  the 
minor  prophets — for  instance,  Micah  v. — you  will  find 
an  allusion  to  the  same  ruler,  -which  is  very  plain. 
The  chapter  opens  with  a  call.  "  Now  gather  thyself 
in  troops,  0  daughter  of  troops  :  he  hath  laid  siege 
against  us;  they  shall  smite  the  judge  of  Israel  with 
a  rod  upon  the  cheek."  There  is  the  rejection  of  the 
Messiah.  Then  the  second  verse  is  a  parentheses,  which 
shows  us  who  the  Judge  of  Israel  is.  "  But  thou 
Beth-lehem  Ephratah,  though  thou  be  little  among  the 
thousands  of  Judah,  yet  out  of  thee  shall  he  come 
forth  unto  me  that  is  to  be  ruler  in  Israel."  They 
may  smite  Him  upon  the  cheek;  but,  after  all,  not  only 
is  He  to  be  the  Ruler,  but  He  is  the  everlasting  God, 
*'  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from  ever- 
lasting.'' Then  he  resumes,  in  connexion  with  verse  1, 
"  Therefore  will  he  give  them  up,  until  the  time  that 
she  which  travaileth  hath  brought  forth :"  that  is,  till 
the  great  purpose  of  God  come  to  pass  about  His 
people.  "  Then  the  remnant  of  his  brethren  shall  return 
unto  the  children  of  Israel.      And  he  shall  stand  and 

feed  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord And  this  man 

shall  be  the  peace,  when  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into 
our  land."  Mark  that  —  "when  the  Assyrian  shall 
come,"  and  "when  he  shall  tread  in  our  palaces:"  a 
thing  that  never  has  been  accomplished  yet.  When  the 
Assyrian  came  of  old  into  the  land  of  old,  it  is  clear 
there  was  no  such  fact  as  this  Judge  of  Israel  there, 
nor  had  Israel  been  given  up  at  that  time;  but  the 
Assyrian  of  that  day  was  only  the  type  of  the  great 


142  DANIEL.  "^ 

heir  of  the  same  name  and  power  of  the  last  days. 
And  then  will  the  Judge  of  Israel  go  forth  on  behalf  of 
His  people.  The  Judge,  that  was  once  smitten  upon  the 
cheek,  will  be  received  by  His  people,  Avhen  God's  great 
purposes  are  accomplished.  "  This  man  shall  be  the 
peace  when  the  Assyrian  shall  come  into  our  land." 
Then  we  find,  (verse  6,)  "  Thus  shall  he  deliver  us  from 
the  Assyrian,  when  he  cometh  into  our  land,  and  when 
he  treadeth  within  our  borders.  And  the  remnant  of 
Jacob  shall   be  in  the  midst  of  many  people  as  a  dew 

from  the  Lord and  the  remnant  of  Jacob  shall 

be  among  the  Gentiles  in  the  midst  of  many  people  as 
a  lion  among  the  beasts  of  the  forest,  as  a  young  lion 
among  the  flocks  of  sheep,  who  if  he  go  through,  both 
treadeth  down  and  teareth  to  pieces,  and  none  can 
deliver."  So  that  it  is-  very  plain,  that  we  have  the 
encroachment  of  the  Assyrian  and  his  final  overthrow 
in  connexion  with  the  final  deliverance  of  Israel. 

I  have  endeavoured  to  show,  that  while  Antiochus 
Epiphanes  was  the  type  of  this  Assyrian,  yet  that 
after  all  it  was  only  in  a  very  small  part  indeed  that 
he  meets  the  requirements  of  the  prophecy;  which, 
while  it  makes  use  of  him,  as  a  type,  looks  onward  to 
the  latter  times  of  the  indignation  of  God  against 
Israel,  when  their  foe  comes  up  to  receive  his  judgment 
from  God.  You  will  see  how  important  it  is  to  keep 
clearly  in  mind,  that  God  has  these  great  purposes 
about  Israel,  and  that  what  man  makes  so  much  of — 
the  episode  of  Popery  now  or  of  Mahomedanism — is 
passed  over  very  slightly  indeed.  I  acknowledge,  that 
we  find  a  certain  measure  of  accomplishment  in  both, 
but  the  Church  is  never  allowed  by  God  to  be  an 
earthly  people.  When  the  Jews  again  come  into  view, 
then  we  have  the  importance  of  what  touches  them, 
and  the  Assyrian  will  come  down  from  without,  at  the 
same  time  that  there  will  be  "  the  king"  within:  and 
both  will  fall  under  the  unsparing  judgment  of  God 
who  will  put  down  all  enemies.    And  His  people,  purged 


CHAPTER    IX.  143 

by  their  trials,  and  looking  to  Jehovah- Jesus,  will  be 
thus  made  meet  for  the  purposes  of  God  in  mercy,  and 
goodness,  and  glory,  throughout  the  world  to  come. 

The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  know  His  purposes 
about  us.  We  have  nothing  to  do  with  this  world, 
being  strangers  in  it.  We  are  entitled  to  read  all 
these  visions  in  the  light  of  heaven.  It  is  not  said 
that  Daniel  did  not  understand  them:  the  others  did 
not.  But,  whatever  may  have  been  the  case  then, 
we,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  are  entitled  to  understand 
these  things  now.  And  the  Lord  grant,  that  our  minds 
may  be  heedful  of  what  He  puts  before  us  as  to  our 
own  path. 


CHAPTER    IX. 

The  fall  of  Babylon  was  connected,  in  the  prophecies 
of  Isaiah,  as  well  as  Jeremiah,  with  brighter  hopes  for 
the  Jew.  The  partial  restoration,  that  took  place  in 
consequence,  furnishes  the  type  of  the  final  ingather- 
infj  of  Israel.  This  accounts  for  the  notion,  which 
has  prevailed  among  some  Christians,  that  what  hap- 
pened then  is  all  that  we  are  to  look  for  in  behalf  of 
Israel  as  such,  and  that  their  subsequent  sin  in  rejecting 
their  Messiah,  and  the  mercy  of  the  gospel  to  the 
Gentiles,  has  involved  them  in  irreparable  national 
ruin. 

Although  there  are  true  elements  in  such  thoughts, 
they  are  very  far  indeed  from  being  the  whole  truth, 
God  does  not  abandon  the  people  that  He  called. 
Never  does  He  give  a  gift  of  grace  and  then  withdraw 
it  utterly.  For  the  same  grace  which  promised  deals 
with  the  person  and  heart  of  the  believer,  and  works 
till  it  is  brought  home  morally  by  the  power  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.      Thus,  along  with  the  mercy,  whether 


144  DANIEL. 

to  an  individnal  or  to  a  people  that  He  calls,  there  is 
also  the  longsufferiiig  faithfulness  and  power,  which  in 
the  end  always  triumph. 

The  history  of  the  past,  no  douht,  has  been  a  total 
failure.  The  reason  of  this  was  because  Israel  chose 
to  stand  upon  their  own  strength  with  God,  and  not 
upon  the  goodness  of  God  towards  them.  This  is 
always  and  necessarily  fatal  for  a  time.  "  This  gene- 
ration shall  not  pass  away  till  all  these  things  be 
fulfilled."  That  is,  all  that  w^as  threatened  and  pre- 
dicted must  yet  befall  the  generation  of  Israel,  which 
presumed  upon  its  own  righteousness,  and  which 
finally  showed  its  real  character  by  rejecting  Christ 
and  the  gospel.  A  real  sense  of  moral  ruin  (that  is, 
repentance  towards  God)  ever  accompanies  real,  living 
faith.  Israel  have  gone  through  this  phase  of  self- 
confidence,  or  are  still  going  through  it.  "  This 
generation"  has  not  yet  passed  away:  all  things  are 
not  fulfilled.  They  have  not  yet  suffered  the  full 
results  of  their  own  folly  and  hatred  of  God's  Son. 
They  have  yet  to  suffer  the  severest  chastening  for  it: 
for,  although  the  past  has  been  bitter  enough,  there 
are  still  more  terrible  things  in  the  future.  But  when 
all  has  taken  place,  they  will  begin  a  new  scene, 
when  it  will  be,  not  the  Christ-rejecting  generation 
going  on,  but  what  Scripture  speaks  of  as  "  the  gene- 
ration to  come  : "  a  new  stock  of  the  same  Israel,  who 
will  be  children  of  Abraham  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus 
— children,  not  in  word  only,  but  in  spirit.  Then 
will  follow  the  history,  not  of  man's  failure,  but  of 
a  people  whom  the  Lord  blesses  in  His  grace;  when 
they  will  joyfully  own  that  same  Saviour,  whcm  their 
fathers  with  wicked  hands  crucified  and  slew. 

This  chapter  is  especially  occupied  with  Jerusalem 
and  the  Jews.  It  is  a  sort  of  episode  in  the  general 
history  of  Daniel,  but  by  no  means  an  unconnected  one. 
For   we  shall  find,  that  the  closing  history  of  Israel 


CHAPTER    IX.  145 

peculiarly  connects  tliem  with  these  personages  that 
are  yet  to  figure  against  God  and  His  people,  as  we 
have  read  in  previous  chapters.  It  must  be  evident 
to  any  person  who  reads  the  chapter  intelligently, 
that  its  main  object  is  the  destiny  of  Jerusalem  and 
the  future  place  of  God's  people.  Now  Daniel  was 
exceedingly  interested  in  this.  He  was  one  that  loved 
them,  not  merely  because  they  were  his  people,  but 
because  they  were  God's  people.  He  resembles  Moses 
in  this  —  that  even  when  the  moral  condition  of  the 
people  hindered  God  from  being  able  to  speak  of  them 
as  Ris  people  (He  might  care  for  them  secretly,  but 
I  speak  now  of  God's  publicly  owning  them),  Daniel 
still  continues  to  plead  that  they  were  His  people. 
He  never  gives  up  the  truth,  that  Jerusalem  was  God's 
city,  and  Israel  His  people.  The  angel  might  say, 
Daniel's  people  and  city — that  was  all  quite  true;  but 
Daniel  still  holds  to  the  precious  truth,  which  faith 
ought  never  to  give  up — Let  the  people  be  what  they 
may,  they  are  God's  people.  For  that  very  reason 
they  might  be  chastened  more  and  more  sorely.  In 
truth,  nothing  brings  more  chastening  upon  a  soul  who 
belongs  to  God,  and  who  has  fallen  into  sin,  than  that 
he  does  belong  to  God.  It  is  not  merely  a  question  of 
what  is  good  for  the  child.  God  acts  for  Himself  and 
from  Himself;  and  this  is  the  very  hinge  and  pivot 
of  all  our  blessing.  What  would  it  be  to  us  if  it 
were  merely  true  that  God  was  working  for  our 
glory  ?  We  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God. 
We  shall  have  something  far  better,  because  it  will 
be  God  blessing  us  according  to  what  is  worthy  of 
Himself. 

Now  Daniel  was  one  that  emphatically  entered  into 
this  thought.  It  is  the  prominent  feature  of  faith. 
For  faith  never  views  a  thing  barely  in  connexion 
with  oneself,  but  with  God.  It  is  always  thus.  If 
it  is  a  question  of  peace,  is  it  merely  that  /  want 
peace  ?     No  doubt  I  do  want  it,  as  a  poor  sinner  that 

L 


146  DANIEL. 

has  been  at  war  with  God  all  my  life.  But  how  -infi- 
nitely more  blessed  when  we  come  to  find  that  it  is 
"  peace  with  God:"  not  merely  a  peace  with  one's  own 
heart  and  conscience,  but  with  God!  He  gives  a  peace 
that  stands  in  His  sight.  All  His  own  character 
comes  out  in  giving  it  to  me,  and  in  putting  it  upon 
such  a  basis  that  Satan  shall  never  be  able  to  touch. 
It  is  to  deliver  me,  to  break  the  very  neck  of  sin;  and 
nothing  does  it  so  completely  as  this — that  God  met 
me  when  I  deserved  nothing  but  death  and  eternal 
judgment,  and  spent  His  beloved  Son  in  giving  me  a 
peace  worthy  of  Himself.  And  He  has  done  it;  He 
has  given  it;  and  all  christian  practice  flows  from  the 
assurance,  that  I  have  found  this  blessing  in  Christ. 

Here,  then,  we  have  Daniel  deeply  interested  in 
Israel,  because  they  were  God's  people.  He  conse- 
quently seeks  in  God's  word  what  He  has  revealed 
about  His  people.  This  took  place  "  in  the  first  year 
of  Darius,  the  son  of  Ahasuerus,  of  the  seed  of  the 
Medes."  It  was  not  some  new  communication.  "  In 
the  first  year  of  his  reign,  I  Daniel  understood  by 
books  the  number  of  the  years,  whereof  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came  to  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  that  he 
would  accomplish  seventy  years  in  the  desolations  of 
Jerusalem." 

Beside  being  a  prophet,  Daniel  understood  that 
Israel  were  to  be  restored  to  their  land,  before  the 
event  took  place.  He  did  not  wait  to  see  it  accom- 
plished, and  then  merely  say.  The  prophecy  is  fulfilled. 
But  he  understood  "  by  books,"  not  by  circumstances. 
No  doubt  there  were  the  circumstances  in  the  fall  of 
Babylon  ;  but  he  understood  by  what  God  had  said, 
and  not  merely  by  what  man  had  done.  This  is  the 
true  way  of  understanding  prophecy.  So  that  it  is 
remarkable  that  when  we  are  about  to  enter  upon  a 
very  distinct  prophecy,  occupied  almost  exclusively 
with  the  narrow  sphere  of  Israel,  God  shows  us  the 
true  key  to  the  understanding  of  prophecy.     Daniel 


CHAPTER   IX.  147 

read  the  propTiecy  of  Jeremiah;  and  he  saw  from  it 
clearly,  that,  Babylon  once  overthrown,  Israel  would  be 
allowed  to  return.  And  what  is  the  effect  of  this  on 
his  soul  ?  He  draws  near  to  God.  He  does  not  go  to 
the  people  whom  the  prophecy  so  intimately  concerned, 
telling  them  the  good  news,  but  he  draws  near  to  God. 
This  is  another  feature  of  faith.  It  always  tends  to 
draw  into  the  presence  of  God  him  who  thereby 
understands  the 'mind  of  God  in  anything.  He  has 
communion  with  God  about  that  which  he  receives 
from  God,  before  even  he  makes  it  known  to  those 
who  are  the  objects  of  the  blessing.  We  have  seen 
the  same  thing  in  Daniel  before,  in  chap.  ii.  Now,  we 
may  observe,  it  is  not  with  thanksgiving,  but  with 
confession.  We  could  understand  readily,  that  if  the 
people  of  Israel  were  just  going  into  captivity,  he  must 
feel  it  as  a  deep  chastening,  and  would  be  before 
God  to  acknowledge  the  sin  and  bow  under  His  rod. 
But  now  God  had  judged  the  oppressor  of  Israel,  and 
was  about  to  deliver  the  people.  Nevertheless,  Daniel 
draws  near,  and  what  does  he  say  ?  When  he  does 
speak  to  God,  it  is  not  merely  about  their  deliverance. 
It  is  a  prayer,  full  of  confession  to  God. 

As  to  this,  I  would  make  another  remark  of  a 
general  kind.  If  the  study  of  prophecy  does  not  tend 
to  give  us  a  deeper  sense  of  the  failure  of  God's  people 
upon  the  earth,  I  am  persuaded  we  lose  one  of  its 
most  important  practical  uses.  It  is  because  of  the 
absence  of  this  feeling  that  prophetic  research  is  gene- 
rally so  unprofitable.  It  is  made  more  a  question  of 
dates  and  countries,  of  popes  and  kings  ;  whereas 
God  did  not  give  it  to  exercise  people's  wits,  but  to 
be  the  expression  of  His  own  mind  touching  their 
moral  condition:  so  that  whatever  trials  and  judgments 
are  portrayed  there,  they  should  be  taken  up  by  the 
heart,  and  felt  to  be  the  hand  of  God  upon  His  people, 
because  of  their  sins.  This  was  the  effect  on  Daniel. 
He  was  one  of  the  most  esteemed  prophets — as  the 


148  DANIEL. 

Lord  Jesus  Himself  said,  "  Daniel  tlie  prophet." 
And  the  effect  upon  him  was,  that  he  never  lost  the 
moral  design  in  the  hare  circumstances  of  the  pro- 
phecy. He  saw  the  great  aim  of  God.  He  heard  His 
voice  speaking  to  the  heart  of  His  people  in  all  tliese 
communications.  And  here  he  spreads  all  before 
God.  For  having  read  of  the  deliverance  of  Israel, 
that  was  coming  on  the  occasion  of  the  downfall 
of  Bahylon,  he  sets  his  face  unto  the  Lord  God,  "  to 
seek  by  prayer  and  supplications,  with  fasting  and 
sackcloth  and  ashes.  And  I  prayed  unto  the  Lord 
my  God,  and  made  my  confession,  and  said,  0  Lord, 
the  great  and  dreadful  God,  keeping  the  covenant  and 
mercy  to  them  that  love  him,  and  to  them  that  keep 
his  commandments,  we  have  sinned,  and  have  com- 
mitted iniquity,  and  have  done  wickedly,"  &c. 

Another  thing  observe  here.  If  there  was  one  man 
in  Babylon  who,  from  his  own  conduct  and  state  of 
soul,  might  be  supposed  to  have  been  outside  the  need 
of  confession  of  sin^  it  was  Daniel.  He  was  a  holy 
and  a  devoted  man.  More  than  that,  he  was  carried 
away  at  so  tender  an  age  from  Jerusalem,  that,  it 
is  clear,  it  was  not  because  of  anything  he  had 
taken  part  in,  that  the  blow  had  fallen.  But  not  the 
less  he  says,  "  Pf'"e  have  sinned,  and  have  committed 
iniquity."  Nay,  I  am  even  bold  to  say,  that  the  more 
separate  you  are  from  evil,  the  more  you  feel  it :  just 
as  a  person  emerging  into  light  feels  so  much  the 
more  the  darkness  that  he  has  left.  So  Daniel,  being 
one  whose  soul  was  with  God,  and  who  entered  into 
His  thoughts  about  His  people — knowing  the  great 
love  of  God,  and  seeing  what  He  had  done  for  Israel, 
(for  he  does  not  keep  this  back  in  his  prayer,)  he 
does  not  merely  notice  the  great  things  that  God  had 
done  for  Israel,  but  also  the  judgments  that  He  had 
inflicted  upon  them.  Did  he,  therefore,  think  that 
God  did  not  love  Israel?  On  the  contrary,  no  man 
had  a  deeper  sense  of  the  tie  of  affection  that  existed 


CHAPTER   IX.  149 

between  God  and  His  people;  and  for  that  reason  it 
was,  he  estimated  so  deeply  the  ruin  in  which  the 
j)eople  of  God  were.  He  measured  their  sin  by  the 
depth  of  divine  love,  and  the  fearful  degradation  that 
had  passed  upon  them.  It  was  all  from  God.  He 
did  not  impute  the  judgments,  which  had  fallen  npon 
them,  to  the  wickedness  of  the  Babylonians,  or  the 
martial  skill  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  It  was  God  he  sees 
in  it  all.  He  acknowledges  that  it  was  their  sin — 
their  extreme  iniquity;  and  he  includes  all  in  this. 
It  was  not  merely  the  small  people  imputing  their 
sorrows  to  the  great,  nor  the  great  to  the  small,  as  is 
so  often  the  case  among  men.  He  does  not  dwell 
upon  the  ignorance  and  badness  of  a  few;  but  he 
takes  in  the  whole — rulers,  priests,  people.  There  was 
not  one  that  was  not  guilty.  "  We  have  sinned,  and 
have  committed  iniquity."  And  this  is  another  effect 
wherever  prophecy  is  studied  with  God.  It  always 
brings  in  the  hope  of  God's  standing  np  in  behalf  of 
His  people — a  hope  of  the  bright  and  blessed  day 
when  evil  shall  disappear,  and  good  shall  be  established 
by  divine  power.  Daniel  does  not  leave  this  out. 
We  find  it  put  as  a  kind  of  frontispiece  to  this  chapter. 
The  details  of  the  seventy  weeks  show  you  the  con- 
tinued sin  and  suffering  of  the  people  of  God.  But, 
before  this,  the  end,  the  blessing  is  brought  before  the 
soul.  How  good  this  is  of  God  !  He  takes  occa- 
sion to  give  me,  first  of  all,  the  certainty  of  final 
blessing,  and  then  He  shows  me  the  painful  pathway 
that  leads  to  it.  • 

I  need  not  enter  now  upon  the  thoughts  suggested 
by  this  beautiful  prayer  of  Daniel,  save  one  thing  of 
practical  importance.  It  is  this — that  the  prophecy 
came  from  God  as  the  answer  to  the  state  of  soul  which 
was  found  in  Daniel.  He  took  the  place  of  humble 
confession  before  God,  became  the  expression  of  the 
people,  the  representative  of  the  people,  in  spreading 
out  their  sins  before  God.      Perhaps   there   was  not 


150  DANIEL. 

another  soul  that  did  so,  certainly  there  were  not 
many.  It  is  rare,  indeed,  to  find  many  souls  taking 
the  place  of  real  confession  before  God.  How  few  nq\y 
have  an  adequate  sense  of  the  ruin  of  the  Church  of 
God  !  How  few  feel  the  dishonour  done  even  by  the 
faithful  to  the  Lord!  In  Babylon,  those  who  were  the 
most  guilty  felt  it  the  least;  whilst  the  man,  who  was 
the  most  free  from  guilt,  was  he  who  spread  it  out  the 
most  honestly  before  God. 

In  answer  to  his  genuine  and  deep  feeling  of  Israel's 
state,  God  sends  the  prophecy.  The  soul  that  refuses 
to  examine  such  words  of  God  as  these,  knows  not 
the  loss  it  thus  sustains.  And  wherever  the  child  of 
God  is  kept  from  what  God  communicates  as  to  the 
future,  (I  speak  not  now  of  mere  speculations,  which 
are  worthless,  but  of  the  grand  moral  lessons  contained 
in  prophecy,)  there  is  always  feebleness  and  want  of 
ability  to  judge  of  the  present. 

But  there  is  another  thing  to  notice,  before  passing 
to  the  seventy  weeks.  Although  Daniel  spreads  out 
before  God  their  great  failure,  and  falls  back  upon  His 
great  mercies,  yet  he  never  pleads  the  promises  that 
were  given  to  Abraham.  He  does  not  go  beyond  what 
was  said  to  Moses.  This  is  of  interest  and  import- 
ance. It  is  the  true  answer  to  any  who  suppose  that 
the  restoration  of  Israel,  which  took  place  at  that 
time,  was  the  fulfilment  of  the  Abrahamic  promises. 
Daniel  did  not  take  this  ground.  There  was  no  such 
thing  then  as  the  presence  of  Christ  among  His  people 
as  their  king.  Now,  the  promises  made  to  the  fathers 
suppose  the  presence  of  Christ,  because  Christ  is,  in 
the  only  full  and  proper  sense,  the  seed  of  Abraham. 
Without  Him  what  were  the  promises  ?  Accordingly, 
with  divine  wisdom,  Daniel  was  led  to  take  the  true 
ground.  Whatever  restoration  was  to  take  place  then 
was  not  the  complete  one.  This  prophecy  does  bring 
us  to  the  final  blessing  of  Israel  when  the  seventy 
weeks  are  consummated.     But  the  return,  after  the  fall 


CHAPTER    IX.  151 

of  Babylon,  was  the  accomplishment  of  "what  was 
partial  and  conditional,  not  the  fulfilment  of  the  pro- 
mises to  the  fathers.  This  is  worthy  of  observation. 
The  promises  made  to  Abraham,  &c.,  were  absolute, 
because  they  depended  upon  Christ,  who  is  the  true 
Seed  in  the  mind  of  God,  though  Israel  were  the  seed 
after  the  letter.  So  that  until  Christ  came,  and  His 
work  was  done,  there  could  not  be  the  full  restoration 
of  the  people  of  Israel.  When  Israel  took  the  ground 
of  the  law,  in  the  time  of  Moses,  they  soon  broke  it 
and  were  broken.  Even  before  it  was  put  into  their 
hands,  on  the  tables  of  stone,  they  were  worshipping 
the  golden  calf.  The  consequence  was,  that  Moses 
from  that  time  took  a  new  place  —  the  place  of  a 
mediator.  He  goes  up  again  into  the  mount,  and 
pleads  with  God  for  the  people.  God  would  not  call 
them  His  people.  He  says  to  Moses,  "  thy  people," 
and  would  not  own  them  as  His.  Moses,  however, 
will  not  let  God  go,  but  pleads  with  Him  that,  let  the 
people  have  done  what  they  may,  they  are  "  Tliy 
people;  "  rather  let  me  be  blotted  out  than  Israel  lose 
their  inheritance.  This  was  what  God  delighted  in — 
the  reflex  of  His  own  love  to  them.  You  may  have 
got  some  fault  to  find  with  one  whom  you  love,  but 
you  would  not  like  to  hear  another  person  finding  it. 
So  Moses'  pleading  in  behalf  of  Israel  was  what  met 
the  heart  of  God.  No  doubt  they  had  sinned  a  great 
sin,  and  Moses  felt  and  confessed  it,  but  he  insists 
withal  that  they  are  God's  people. 

God  draws  out  the  heart  of  Moses  more  and  more; 
puts  grand  things  before  him,  offers  to  exterminate  the 
people,  and  make  of  him  a  great  nation.  No,  says 
Moses,  I  would  rather  lose  everything  than  that  they 
should  be  lost.  This  was  the  answer  of  grace  to 
the  grace  that  was  in  God's  heart  about  His  people. 
Consequently,  when  God  gave  the  law  a  second  time, 
it  was  not  given  as  before;  but  the  Lord  proclaimed 
His  name  as  One  that  was  abundant  in  goodness  and 


152  DANIEL. 

truth,  while  He  showed  at  the  same  time  that  He 
would  by  no  means  clear  the  guilty.  In  other  words, 
the  first  time  it  was  pure  law,  pure  righteousness, 
which  terminated  in  the  golden  calf,  i.e.,  pure  un- 
righteousness on  the  part  of  the  people.  And  they 
must  justly  have  been  destroyed,  but  that,  on  the 
pleading  of  Moses,  God  brings  in  a  mingled  system, 
partly  law  and  partly  grace. 

This  was  the  ground  Daniel  takes  here.  He  pleads 
that,  although  they  had  broken  the  law,  God  had  pro- 
nounced His  name  as  "  abundant  in  goodness  and 
truth."  He  believes  that.  He  does  not  go  back  to 
the  promises  made  to  Abraham ;  on  which  ground  the 
restoration  would  have  been  full  and  final,  whereas 
this  was  not.  And  if  you  take  a  man  now,  who  is 
partly  standing  upon  what  Christ  has  done  for  him, 
and  partly  upon  what  he  does  for  Christ,  will  you  ever 
find  such  an  one  happy  ?  Never.  That  was  the 
ground  the  Israelites  were  on.  Daniel,  therefore,  does 
not  go  beyond  it  there.  Christ  was  not  yet  come.  On 
the  other  hand,  when  Christ  is  born,  you  will  find,  if 
you  look  at  the  song  of  Zacharias  (Luke  i.)  or  of  the 
angels  (Luke  ii.),  that  the  ground  taken  was  not  what 
God  had  said  to  Moses,  but  the  promises  made  to 
the  fathers.  Up  to  the  moment  appointed  of  God, 
Zacharias  had  been  dumb,  a  sign  of  the  condition  of 
Israel.  But  now  that  the  forerunner  is  named,  on  the 
eve  of  the  coming  of  Christ,  his  mouth  is  opened. 

Before  we  enter  upon  the  prophecy  of  the  sevfenty 
weeks  more  fully,  as  the  Lord  may  enable  us,  I  would 
first  call  your  attention  to  this — "  Whiles  I  waa 
speaking  and  praying,  and  confessing  my  sin,  and  the 
sin  of  my  people  Israel."  Observe,  all  his  thoughts 
are  about  Israel  and  about  Jerusalem.  The  prophecy 
is  not  about  Christianity,  but  about  Israel.  There  is 
no  understanding  it,  unless  we  hold  this  fast.    "  Whiles 

I  was  speaking and  presenting  my  supplication 

before  the  Lord  my  God,  for  the  holy  mountain  of  my 


CHAPTER    IX.  153 

God ;  yea,  whiles  I  was  speaking  in  prayer,  even  the 
man  Gabriel,  whom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision  at  the 
beginning,  being  caused  to  fly  swiftly,  touched  me 
about  the  time  of  the  evening  oblation."  Then,  in 
verse  24,  the  prophecy  begins.  It  has  to  do  with 
Daniel's  people — "  upon  thy  people."  It  speaks  of  a 
special  period  that  was  defined  in  connexion  with  Israel's 
full  deliverance.  "  Seventy  weeks  are  determined 
upon  thy  people  and  upon  the  holy  city."  Any  one 
must  see  that  the  Jews  and  Jerusalem  are  meant. 
It  is  "  to  finish  the  transgression,  and  to  make  an 
end  of  sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and 
to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  and  to  seal  up 
the  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to  anoint  the  most  Holy 
(or  Holy  of  holies)."  From  first  to  last  this  was  a 
period  that  was  marked  out  in  the  mind  of  God,  and 
revealed  to  Daniel,  touching  the  future  destiny  of  the 
city  and  the   people  of  God  here  below. 

Some  are  startled  and  ask,  Have  we,  then,  nothing  to 
do  with  "  reconciliation  for  iniquity  "  and  "  everlasting 
righteousness  ? "  I  ask,  of  whom  does  the  verse 
speak  ?  You  will  find  other  Scriptures,  which  reveal 
our  interest  in  the  blotting  out  of  sin,  and  the  righte- 
ousness which  we  are  made  in  Christ.  Bat  we  must 
adhere  to  this  golden  rule  in  reading  the  word  of  God 
— never  to  force  Scripture  in  order  to  make  it  bear 
upon  ourselves  or  others.  When  a  person  is  converted, 
but  not  yet  in  peace,  if  he  sees  something  about  "  an 
end  of  sins,"  he  at  once  applies  that  to  himself.  Feel- 
ing his  need,  he  grasps,  like  a  drowning  man,  at  what 
cannot  bear  his  weight,  or  at  least  is  not  said  about 
him.  If  directed  to  the  declarations  of  the  grace  of 
God  to  us  poor  sinners  of  the  Gentiles,  instead  of  loss 
great  would  be  his  gain;  he  would  have  far  more 
definite  Scripture  to  meet  his  need,  and,  if  assailed  by 
Satan,  he  would  feel  no  weakness,  or  fear,  or  un- 
certainty. Whereas,  if  he  were  taking  passages  that 
applied  to  the  Jews,  Satan  might  touch  him  as  to  the 


154  DANIEL. 

ground  of  his  confidence,  and  he  wonld  be  obliged  to 
say,  This  is  not  literally  and  certainly  about  me  at  all. 
The  "  seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  people 
and  upon  thy  holy  city."  But  I  do  not  belong  to 
them.  There  is  the  importance  of  understanding 
Scripture,  and  seeing  what  God  is  speaking  about. 

Had  this  been  borne  in  mind,  the  greater  part  of  the 
controversy  that  has  arisen  about  the  passage  never 
could  have  taken  place.  People  were  hasty  and 
anxious  to  introduce  something  about  themselves  as 
Gentiles  or  Christians;  whereas  the  attitude  of  the 
prophet,  the  circumstances  of  the  people,  and  the 
words  of  the  prophecy  itself,  exclude  all  thought,  save 
of  what  concerns  the  Jews  and  their  city.  We  must 
look  elsewhere  to  find  what  relates  to  the  Gentiles. 
Allow  me,  however,  to  remark,  that  the  end  of  sins 
for  that  city  and  people  rests  upon  exactly  the  same 
foundation  as  our  own.  Thus  the  Apostle  John  tells 
us,  Jesus  died  "  not  for  that  nation  only,  but  that  also 
He  should  gather  together  in  one  the  children  of  God 
that  were  scattered  abroad."  (John  xi.  52.)  There 
I  find  two  distinct  purposes  in  the  death  of  Christ. 
This  prophecy  only  takes  in  the  first.  He  died  for 
that  nation — the  Jewish  nation.  But  He  also,  in  the 
very  same  act  of  death,  made  provision,  not  only  for 
the  salvation  that  God  has  brought  in  for  sinners,  but 
also  for  gathering  together  '  the  children  of  God  that 
were  scattered  abroad." 

Thus,  if  we  take  the  Bible  as  it  is,  without  being 
too  anxious  to  find  ourselves  here  or  there,  instead  of 
losing,  we  shall  ahvays  be  gainers,  in  extent,  depth, 
and,  above  all,  in  clear  firm  hold  of  the  blessing  ;  and 
we  shall  not  feel  that  we  have  been  taking  other 
people's  property,  and  claiming  goods  upon  a  tenure 
that  can  be  disputed,  but  that  what  we  have  is  what 
God  has  freely  and  assuredly  given  us.  This  will 
never  be  the  case,  if  I  take  up  prophecies  about  Israel, 
and  found  my  title  to  blessing  upon  them ;  for  they  are 


CHAPTER   IX.  155 

neither  the  gospel  for  the  sinner,  nor  the  revelation  of 
the  truth  about  the  Church. 

This,  then,  is  the  proper  bearing  of  the  closing*' 
verses  of  the  chapter  before  us.  The  details  of  the 
weeks  follow  the  first  general  statement.  "  Seventy 
weeks,"  he  says,  "  are  determined  upon  thy  people, 
and  upon  thy  holy  city,  to  finish  the  transgression  and 
to  make  an  end  of  sins,  and  to  make  reconciliation  for 
iniquity,  and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  and 
to  seal  up  the  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to  anoint  the 
most  Holy."  Then,  in  verse  25,  the  first  particular 
comes  in,  after  defining  the  starting  point.  "  Know 
therefore  and  understand,  that  from  the  going  forth  of 
the  commandment  to  restore  and  to  build  Jerusalem, 
unto  the  Messiah,  the  Prince,  shall  be  seven  weeks, 
and  threescore  and  two  weeks."  Now,  in  the  book 
of  Ezra,  we  have  a  commandment  from  the  king 
Artaxerxes,  called  in  profane  history  Artaxerxes  Lon- 
gimanus,  one  of  the  monarchs  of  the  Persian  empire. 
The  first  commandment  was  given  to  Ezra,  the  scribe, 
*'  in  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes  the  king."  In  the 
twentieth  year  of  the  same  nionarch's  reign,  another 
commandment  was  given  to  Nehemiah.  Now  it  is 
important  for  us  to  decide  which  of  these  two  is 
referred  to  by  Daniel.  The  earlier  of  them  is  recorded 
in  Ezra  vii.,  the  second  in  Nehemiah  ii.  A  careful 
examination  of  the  two  will  show  which  is  meant. 
Many  excellent  persons  have  interpreted  it  in  a  way 
which  differs  from  that  which  I  believe  to  be  correct. 
But  Scripture  alone  can  decide  the  questions  that  arise 
out  of  Scripture.  Foreign  elements  often  lead  to  per- 
plexity. Remark,  that  it  is  not  merely  a  general 
order  to  the  Jews,  like  that  of  Cyrus  permitting  their 
return,  but  a  special  one  to  restore  their  polity.  Now, 
what  is  the  difference  between  the  two  in  the  reign  of 
Artaxerxes  ?  The  one  to  Ezra  was  mainly  with  a 
view  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple;  the  other  to 
Nehemiah  looks  toward  the  city.     Which  is  it  here  ? 


156  DANIEL, 

"  Know  therefore  and  understand,  that  from  the  goin^ 
forth  of  the  commandment  to  restore  and  to  build 
Jerusalem."  Evidently  the  city  is  intended  in  Daniel ; 
and  if  so,  then  we  must  see  which  of  the  two  com- 
mandments concerns  the  city.  There  can  be  little 
doubt  it  was  the  second,  not  the  first.  It  was  the 
commission  given  to  Nehemiah  in  the  twentieth  year 
of  Artaxerxes,  not  that  to  Ezra  thirteen  years  before. 
A  comparison  with  Nehemiah  will  confirm  this. 

What  led  some  to  take  the  first  of  these  decrees,  as 
the  one  meant  here,  was  the  idea,  that  the  seventy 
weeks  were  to  terminate  with  the  coming  of  the  Mes- 
siah. But  this  is  not  said.  Verse  24  gives  us  much 
more   than    the  coming  of  the   Messiah.      "  Seventy 

weeks   are  determined to  make  an  end  of  sins 

and  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity."  There  you 
have  at  least  His  work.  His  suffering  and  death,  we 
know,  are  implied.  But  more  than  that:  "  to  bring  in 
everlasting  righteousness,  and  to  seal  up  the  vision  and 
prophecy,  and  to  anoint  the  Holy  of  holies,"  by  which 
last  every  Israelite  would  understand  the  sanctuary  of 
God.  It  is  plain  that  all  this  did  not  take  place  when, 
the  Messiah  came,  nor  even  when  He  died.  For 
though  the  foundation  of  the  blessing  was  laid  in  His 
blood,  yet  the  bringing  it  in  was  not  yet  realized  for 
Israel;  and  these  seventy  weeks  suf)pose,  that  Israel 
will  after  them  be  fully  blessed.  This  shows  us  the 
great  importance  of  attending  to  the  prophecy  itself; 
not  merely  looking  at  the  events,  but  interpreting  the 
events  by  the  prophecy.  "  From  the  going  forth  of 
the  commandment  to  restore  and  to  build  Jerusalem, 
unto  the  Messiah,  the  Prince,  (without  defining  what 
time,)  shall  be "  —  not  seventy  weeks — but  "  seven 
weeks,  and  threescore  and  two  weeks;"  that  is,  sixty- 
nine  weeks.  There  at  once  I  learn  that,  for  a  reason 
unexplained  at  the  beginning  of  the  prophecy,  sixty- 
nine  weeks  out  of  the  seventy  are  rent  from  the  last 
week.     The  chain  is  broken:  one  week  is  severed  from 


CHAPTER    IX.  157 

the  rest.  I  am  told  that,  from  the  word  to  restore 
and  build  Jerusalem,  (which  is  here  made  the  starting 
point,  or  the  time  from  which  we  begin  to  reckon  the 
seventy  xveeks,)  there  are  seven  weeks,  and  sixty-two 
weeks — somewhat  separate  periods,  but  making  in  all 
sixty-nine  weeks  to  the  Messiah,  the  Prince.  There 
evidently  we  have  a  very  notable  fact.  And  why,  we 
may  ask,  are  the  seven  weeks  separated  from  the 
sixty-two  weeks  ?  The  next  words  show:  "  The  street 
shall  be  built  again,  and  the  wall,  even  in  troublesome 
times."  The  seven  weeks,  I  apprehend,  were  to  be 
occupied  with  reconstituting  the  city  of  Jerusalem. 
In  the  lapse  of  seven  weeks,  or  forty-nine  years  (for  I 
suppose  no  reader  will  doubt  that  they  are  weeks  of 
years),  from  the  point  of  departure,  the  building  that 
was  begun  would  be  finished.  The  street  was  to  be 
built  again,  and  the  w^alls,  even  in  troublous  times. 
Now  the  accounts  of  these  times  of  difficulty  and  strait 
we  have  in  the  book  of  Nehemiah,  who  gives  us  the 
latest  date  that  Old  Testament  history  records.  Then, 
taking  up  the  other  period,  after  not  only  the  seven 
weeks,  but  the  sixty-two  weeks,  "  shall  Messiah  be 
cut  off." 

Before  proceeding,  I  may  observe,  that  there  are 
several  little  inaccuracies.  It  is  "  after  the  threescore 
and  two  weeks."  The  article  is  left  out  in  ver.  26, 
where  it  ought  to  be  inserted,  and  put,  where  it  ought  not 
to  appear,  in  verse  27.  "  After  the  threescore  and  two 
weeks" — that  is,  in  addition  to  the  seven  weeks  spent 
in  building  the  city  of  Jerusalem — "  shall  Messiah  be 
cut  off,  but  not  for  himself."  The  proper  meaning 
of  that  last  expression,  no  one  can  doubt,  is  "  and 
shall  have  nothing."  The  margin  is  here  more  correct 
than  the  text,  and  gives  it  so.  The  idea  is,  that  Mes- 
siah, instead  of  being  received  by  His  people,  and 
bringing  in  the  blessing  promised  at  the  end  of  the 
seventy  weeks,  should,  after  sixty-nine  weeks,  be  cut 
off,  and  have  nothing.      The   entire  rejection   of  the 


158  DANIEL. 

Messiah,  by  His  own   people,  is   intimated   in   tliese 
words.     And  here  is  the  consequence.     The  key  conies 
in   now   and    explains    the    difficulty,    stated    at    the 
beginning,  why  the  sixty-nine  weeks  are  severed  from 
the  seventieth.      The  death  of  Christ  rent  the  chain 
and  broke  off   the   relations  of   the  people  of  Israel 
with  God.     Hence,  the  Jews  having  rejected  their  own 
Messiah,  the  last  week  is  for  a  time  set  aside.    This  week 
terminates  in  full  blessing;  but  the  Jews  are  them- 
selves rejected  for  their  sin  against  their  own  Messiah. 
That  is  the  reason  why  we  read,  after  this,  "  and  th 
people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come  shall  destroy  the 
city  and  the   sanctuary;  and  the  end  thereof  shall  be 
with  a  flood,  and  unto  the  end  of  the  war  desolations 
are  determined;"      He  had   said  before,  that  seventy 
weeks  were  determined  to  make   an  end  of  sins,  and  to 
bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  &c. ;  that  is,  at  the 
end  of   this  appointed  time,  full  blessing    should  be 
brought  in.     Whereas  now  we  find  that,  so  far  from 
the     blessing    coming    in,     they   have   cut    off   their 
Messiah,  who  has  nothing ;  and  the  consequence  is,  that 
the  city  and  sanctuary   are   not   blessed,  but  on  the 
contrary,  "  the  people  of  the  prince   that  shall  come 
shall  destroy  the  city  and  the  sanctuary,"  &c.     There 
will  be  nothing  but  wars   and   desolations  upon  the 
Jewish  people.     The  interruption  of  the  seventy  weeks 
takes   place   after  the  death  of  Christ,  and  the  next 
events  related  are  no   accomplishment   of  that   series 
at  all. 

None  can  deny,  that  a  long  period  elapsed  between 
the  death  of  Christ  and  the  taking  of  Jerusalem. 
Until  Christ  are  sixty-nine  weeks,  and  then'  events 
occur  which  the  prophecy  clearly  reveals,  but  as  clearly 
reveals  that  they  are  after  the  sixty-nine  weeks,  and 
before  the  seventieth.  We  have  another  people,  belong- 
ing to  a  prince  quite  different  from  the  already  rejected 
Messiah,  and  this  people  come  and  destroy  the  city 
and  the  sanctuary.      It  was  the*  Romans  who  came. 


CHAPTER   IX,  159 

spite  of  the  dreadful  expedient  of  Caiaphas — nay, 
because  of  it.  They  came  and  destroyed  the  city  and 
the  sanctuary.  But  thus  was  brought  the  accoraplish- 
ment  of  this  part  of  the  prophecy.  The  Messiah  was 
cut  off,  and  the  Romans,  whom  they  had  so  desired  to 
propitiate,  swept  them  away  from  off  the  face  of  the 
earth,  and  there  has  been  nothing  but  misery  in  theiy 
city  up  to  the  present  time.  Jerusalem  was  thence- 
forward to  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  until  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles  are  fulfilled.  There  is  a  period 
still. going  on.  Since  then  Jerusalem  has  only  been 
changing  one  master  for  another.  In  our  day  we 
have  seen  a  war  undertaken  about  that  very  city 
and  sanctuary,  and  none  can  say  how  soon  there 
may  be  another.  The  objects  of  that  war  have  been 
anything  but  gained  and  at  rest.  The  same  elements 
of  strife  and  combustion  still  exist.  It  is  an  un- 
settled question.  Like  Jonah  in  the  ship,  such  will 
Israel  prove  to  the  Gentiles  by  and  by.  There  will  be 
no  rest  for  them — nothing  but  storms,  if  they  meddle 
with  that  people  with  whom  the  Lord  has  a  contro- 
versy. The  Jewish  people  are  in  a  miserable  state; 
they  are  suffering  the  consequences  of  their  own  sin. 
But  those  Gentiles  will  find  their  danger  who  mix 
up  with  that  city  and  sanctuary,  which  God  does 
not  destine  yet  to  be  cleansed.  If  we  are  not  ar- 
rived at  that  period  of  blessing  yet,  it  must  be 
granted,  that  the  seventieth  week  is  not  yet  accom- 
plished. On  the  arrival  of  that  week,  full  blessing 
comes  in  for  Israel  and  Jerusalem.  But  no  such 
blessing  is  realized;  and  therefore  we  may  be  quite 
sure,  that  the  last  of  the  seventy  weeks  has  not  been 
fulfilled. 

The  prophecy  itself  ought  to  prepare  us  for  this. 
There  is  a  regular  chain  up  to  the  close  of  the  sixty- 
ninth  week,  and  then  comes  a  great  gap.  The 
death  of  Christ  broke  the  bond  of  connexion  be- 
tween   God  and  His   people,  and  there  was  now  no 


160  DANIEL. 

living  link  between  them.  They  cut  off  their  own 
Messiah,  and  have  since  lost,  for  a  time,  their  national 
y^lace.  A  deluge  of  trouble  broke  upon  them.  "  The 
king  sent  forth  his  armies  and  destroyed  those  mur- 
derers, and  burned  up  their  city."  The  last  part  of 
verse  26  shows  us  the  continuous  desolation  which 
has  befallen  their  city  and  race,  and  this  subsequent  to 
the  cross  of  the  Messiah:  and,  as  none  can  pretend  that 
anything  like  this  occurred  within  the  seven  years 
subsequent  to  the  crucifixion,  a  gap,  more  or  less  ex- 
tended, must  necessarily  be  allowed  between  the  sixty- 
ninth  and  seventieth  weeks. 

Mark  the  accuracy  of  Scripture.  It  is  not  said,  that 
the  coming  prince  was  to  destroy  the  city  and  sanc- 
tuary, but  that  his  "  people"  should.  Messiah  the 
Prince  had  already  come  and  been  cut  off.  Now  we 
hear  of  another  and  future  prince,  a  Roman  prince ; 
for  all  know,  that  it  was  the  Romans  who  came  and 
took  away  both  the  place  and  nation  of  the  Jews.  It 
is  simply  said,  "  The  people  of  the  prince  that  shall 
come,"  implying,  that  the  people  should  come  before  a 
certain  prince  who  was  yet  in  the  future.  This  I  hold 
to  be  very  important.  No  doubt  there  was  a  prince 
that  led  the  Roman  people  to  the  conquest  of  Jeru- 
salem, but  Titus  Vespasianus  is  not  the  personage 
alluded  to  here.  If  the  people  come  first,  and  the 
prince  here  intended  was  to  follow  at  some  future 
epoch,  nothing  more  simple.  "  The  end  thereof  will 
be  with  a  flood,  and  unto  the  end  of  the  war  deso- 
lations are  determined."  A  long  period  of  enmity  and 
desolation  is  intimated.  This  is  exactly  where  Israel 
are  now.  They  have  been  turned  out  of  that  city 
and  sanctuary,  and  have  never  had  it  since.  It  is 
true,  they  have  made  a  remarkable  footing  for  them- 
selves in  most  countries  of  the  earth ;  their  influence 
extends  into  every  court  and  cabinet  of  the  world; 
but  they  have  never  obtained  the  smallest  power  in 
their  own  land  and  city — they  are  of  all  persons  the 


CHAPTER    IX.  161 

most  proscribed  there.    And  there  we  see  these  deso- 
lations going  on. 

In  verse  27  comes  the  closing  scene.  "  And  he  shall 
confirm  a  covenant  with  many  for  one  week."  The 
margin  gives  it  correctly.  It  is  not  "  the  "  covenant. 
The  little  word  "  the"  has  misled  many.  It  is  "a," 
or  rather  the  idea  is  general,  meaning  "  to  confirm 
covenant."  If  you  read  it  "  the  covenant,"  the  reader 
is  at  once  apt  to  infer,  that  "  the  prince"  means 
the  Messiah,  and  that  He  was  going  to  confirm  His 
covenant.  But  the  passage  runs,  "  He  shall  confirm 
covenant  (or  a  covenant)  with  the  many  for  one  week." 
No  doubt  the  Messiah  brought  in  the  blood  of  the 
new  covenant ;  but  is  that  meant  here  ?  It  supposes 
the  desolations  going  on  all  this  while,  after  which 
comes  the  end  of  the  age,  which  includes,  or  occurs  in, 
the  seventieth  week.  The  death  of  the  Messiah  took 
place  long  ago;  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  thirty  or 
forty  years  after.  After  that  followed  a  long  period  of 
desolations  and  wars  in  connexion  with  Jerusalem. 
After  all  this,  again,  we  have  a  covenant  spoken  of. 
Thus,  we  must  examine  the  passage  to  see  who  it  is 
that  makes  this  covenant.  There  are  two  persons  men- 
tioned. In  verse  25  there  is  Messiah  the  Prince;  but 
He  has  come  and  been  cut  off.  In  verse  26  there  is 
*'  the  people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come,"  It  is  to 
this  future  Roman  prince  that  verse  27  alludes.  He  it 
is  that  shall  confirm  covenant  with  many,  or  rather 
with  "the  many;"  i.e.,  the  mass,  or  majority.  The 
remnant  will  not  have  any  part  in  it.  Observe,  that 
now  it  is,  for  the  first  time,  that  the  seventieth  week 
comes  forward.  *'  And  he  shall  confirm  covenant  with 
the  mass  for  one  week." 

Now  I  ask  those  who  contend  for  the  supposition 
that  Christ  was  meant,  what  sense  does  it  give 
here?  One  week  can  mean  nothing  but  a  period  of 
seven  years.  Was  the  new  covenant  ever  made  for 
seven  years  ?     Such  a  thought  involves  mere  nonsense. 

M 


162  DANIEL. 

Is  it  not  quite  plain,  that  the  idea  of  interpreting  this 
to  be  the  covenant  of  Christ  carries  absurdity  upon  the 
face  of  it  ?  For  Christ's  is  an  everlasting  covenant — 
this  is  only  made  for  seven  years.  When  and  how  did 
Christ  make  a  covenant  for  seven  years  ?  "  And  he 
shall  confirm  a  covenant  "with  the  many  for  one  week: 
arid  in  the  midst  of  the  week  he  shall  cause  the  sacri- 
fice and  the  oblation  to  cease."  I  am  aware  that 
persons  apply  this  also  to  the  death  of  Christ.  But 
we  have  had  Christ's  death  long  ago  —  before  the 
seventieth  week  began;  then  the  desolations  of  Israel 
flood  in  after  that;  and  subsequently  another  prince 
comes,  who  confirms  a  covenant  for  one  week.  He, 
not  Christ,  makes  it  with  them  for  seven  years. 
But,  in  the  midst  of  the  term,  he  puts  an  end  to  their 
worship.  They  have  got  sacrifice  and  oblation  again 
at  this  time,  and  he  causes  all  to  cease. 

But  have  we  not  other  light  upon  this  passage  ?  Is 
it  only  here  that  we  read  of  such  a  covenant,  and 
of  the  sudden  termination  of  Jewish  rites  and  cere- 
monies by  a  certain  foreign  prince  ?  As  to  the  cove- 
nant, if  we  refer  to  Isa.  xxviii,,  it  is  said,  in  ver.  15, 
"  Because  ye  have  said,  We  have  made  a  covenant 
with  death,  and  with  hell  are  we  at  agreement;  when 
the  overflowing  scourge  shall  pass  through,  it  shall 
not  come  unto  us."  And  in  verse  18,  "And  your 
covenant  with  death  shall  be  disannulled,  and  your 
agreement  \vith  hell  shall  not  stand;  when  the  over- 
flowing scourge  shall  pass  through,  then  ye  shall  be 
trodden  down  by  it."  I  have  no  question  that  this  is 
the  covenant  referred  to  here.  And  the  meaning  of 
it  is  confirmed  by  another  thing:  that  is  to  say,  that 
in  consequence  of  this  Roman  prince  having  made  a 
wncked  covenant  •with  the  Jewish  people,  and  then 
interrupted  their  sacrifices  and  brought  in  idolatry, 
(or  what  is  called  in  Scripture,  "  the  abomination  of 
desolation,")  he  will  stop  the  Jewish  ritual,  and  set  up 
an  idol,  and  himself  to  be  worshipped  there.     When 


CHAPTER    IX.  163 

open  idolatry  is  in  connexion  with  the  sanctuary, 
Ood  sends  a  dreadful  scourge  upon  them.  They  had 
hoped  to  escape  by  making  a  covenant  with  this  prince ; 
they  fondly  thought,  as  it  is  said  in  Isaiah,  to  be  thus 
delivered  from  the  overflowing  scourge,  i.e.,  I  suppose, 
the  king  of  the  north  that  becomes  the  great  head  of 
the  eastern  powers  of  the  world  arrayed  against  the 
western.  The  mass  of  the  Jews  will  make  a  covenant 
with  the  great  prince  of  the  west,  who  will  then  be 
nominally  their  friend.  And  when  the  half  of  the 
time  is  expired,  this  personage  will  introduce  idolatry, 
and  force  it  upon  them.  Then  will  come  the  final 
catastrophe  of  Israel. 

The  stopping  of  the  Jewish  ceremonies,  be  it  re- 
marked, does  not  depend  upon  this  scripture  only. 
In  Dan.  vii.  the  little  horn  is  the  emperor  of  the  west, 
or  "  the  prince  that  shall  come."  Of  him  it  is  said  that 
"  he  shall  speak  great  words  against  the  Most  High, 
and  shall  wear  out  the  saints  of  the  Most  High,  and 
think  to  change  times  and  laws:  and  they  shall  be 
given  into  his  hand  until  a  time  and  times,  and  the 
dividing  of  times."  Mark  the  analogy  between  that 
statement  and  w^hat  we  have  here.  What  is  meant  by 
"  a  time  and  times,  and  the  dividing  of  time  ?" 
Three  and  a  half  years,  to  be  sure.  And  what  is 
meant  by  half  a  week  ?  Exactly  the  same  period. 
In  the  midst  of  the  term  for  which  the  covenant  was 
made  with  Israel,  he  will  arrest  their  worship,  and  will 
take  all  their  Jewish  ceremonials  into  his  own  hands. 
Nor  will  he  allow  them  to  keep  their  feasts.  "  They 
shall  be  given  into  his  hand"  —  that  is,  the  Jewish 
times  and  laws.  God  will  not  own  Jewish  Avorship 
then;  and  therefore  He  will  not  preserve  them  in  it. 
He  will  let  this  man  have  his  own  way ;  who,  although 
he  has  made  a  covenant  with  Israel  as  a  friend,  will 
break  it  and  substitute  idolatry.  Then  will  come  the 
overflowing  scourge.  "  In  the  midst  of  the  week,  he 
shall  cause  the  sacrifice  and  the  oblation  to  cease." 


164  DANIEL. 

But  I  am  obliged  to  claim  another  and  more  correct 
representation  of  the  words  that  follow.  The  English 
translators  were  very  doubtful  of  its  true  meaning. 
There  are  different  ways  of  taking  it,  but  the  literal 
version  is  this :  "  And  for  (or,  on  account  of)  the 
wing  of  abominations,  a  desolator."  That  is,  because 
of  his  taking  idols  under  his  protection,  there  shall  be 
a  desolator,  namely,  the  overflowing  scourge,  or  the 
Assyrian.  "  The  prince  that  shall  come"  does  not  deso- 
late Jerusalem.  At  this  time  he  has  made  a  covenant 
with  them;  and,  although  he  breaks  his  covenant,  still, 
being  their  head  and  patron,  and  having  his  minion, 
the  false  prophet,  who  will  have  his  seat  there  as  the 
great  arch-priest  of  that  day,  he  will  carry  on,  with 
the  aid  of  this  false  prophet,  the  worship  of  his 
image  in  the  temple  of  God.  Compare  the  abomi- 
nation of  desolation  in  the  holy  place.  (Matt.  xxiv. 
15.)  In  consequence  of  this,  the  king  of  the  north 
shall  come  down  as  a  desolator.  There  will  thus  be 
two  enemies  at  that  time  for  the  righteous  Jews.  The 
desolator,  or  the  Assyrian,  is  the  enemy  from  without. 
The  enemy  from  within  is  the  Antichrist,  or  their 
wilful  king,  that  corrupts  them  in  connexion  with  the 
Eoman  prince.  Thus,  the  true  meaning  of  this  text 
is:  "  Because  of  the  protection  of  abominations,  [there 
shall  be]  a  desolator,  even  until  the  consummation, 
and  that  determined,  shall  be  jDoured  upon  the  deso- 
late." Jerusalem  is  meant  by  "  the  desolate."  And 
the  whole  consummation,  or  what  God  has  decreed 
against  the  Jews,  must  take  its  course.  "  That  gene- 
ration shall  not  pass  away  till  all  these  things  be 
fulfilled."  These  will  be  the  last  representatives  of 
the  Christ-rejecting  portion  of  Israel,  and  God  will 
allow  all  His  judgments  to  come  down  upon  them. 
They  will  be  swept  away,  and  then  will  remain  the 
holy  seed,  the  godly  remnant,  whom  God  will  con- 
stitute the  great  nucleus  of  blessing  to  the  whole  world 
under  the  reign  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 


CHAPTERS    X.,    XL 

It  is  plain  that  chapters  x.,  xi.,  xii.  are  one  continuous 
subject,  and  show  us  the  circumstances  in  which. 
Daniel  received  this  last,  and,  in  some  respects,  most 
remarkable  of  all  his  prophecies.  For,  in  the  whole 
compass  of  divine  writ,  there  is  no  such  circumstantial 
and  minute  statement  of  historical  facts,  and  that, 
too,  running  down  from  the  Persian  monarcliy,  under 
which  Daniel  saw  the  vision,  till  the  time  when  all 
the  powers  of  this  world  shall  be  obliged  to  bow  to 
the  name  of  the  Lord.  Not  that  the  prophecy  runs 
on  from  the  time  of  the  Persian  empire  to  the  reign 
of  Christ  without  a  single  break:  that  would  indeed 
be  contrary  to  the  analogy  of  all  the  rest  of  God's 
word.  But  we  have,  first  of  all,  a  concise,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  clear,  statement  of  the  facts,  until  we 
come  to  a  remarkable  personage,  who  was  the  type  of 
the  great  and  notorious  leader  of  the  opposition  to 
God's  people  at  the  close  of  the  present  age.  Having 
brought  us  up  to  this,  the  prophecy  breaks  off,  and 
then  at  once  spans  over  the  interval,  and  gives  us 
"the  time  of  the  end;"  so  that  we  can  understand 
how  it  is  that  there  is  that  gap.  For  the  present  I 
must  close  where  the  break  comes  in.  Upon  a  future 
occasion,  I  hope,  the  Lord  willing,  to  take  up  the 
antitypical  crisis  at  the  close,  which  begins  with 
chap.  xi.  36.  We  shall  find  that  it  is  not  confined  to 
any  particular  evil  one;  but  that  in  the  end  of  the 
chapter  we  have  the  conflicts  of  the  leaders  of  that 
day  in  and  round  the  Holy  Land.  And  then  chap  xii. 
shows  us  the  dealings  of  God  with  His  own  people, 
until  they  and  Daniel  himself  shall  stand  in  their  lot 
at  the  end  of  the  days:  this  last — that  is  to  say,  the 
blessing  of  God's  people,  or  at  least  of  the  godly 
remnant — being  the  great  object  of  the  close. 


166  DANIEL. 

"  In  the  third  year  of  Cyrus,  King  of  Persia,  a 
thing  was  revealed  unto  Daniel,  whose  name  was 
called  Belteshazzar,"  &c.  Daniel,  we  find,  had  not 
taken  advantage  of  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  which  went 
out  two  years  before,  leaving  the  Israelites  at  liberty 
to  return  to  their  own  land,  according  to  prophecy. 
Daniel  was  still  in  the  scene  of  the  captivity  of  the 
Jews.  But  more  than  that,  the  Spirit  of  God  drawls 
attention  to  the  state  of  the  prophet's  soul.  He  was 
not  enjoying  himself  in  a  stranger-land,  but  mourning 
and  fasting;  and  this,  in  circumstances  where  he  had 
all,  of  course,  at  his  command.  He  was  found,  as  it 
is  said,  eating  no  pleasant  bread,  "  neither  came  flesh 
nor  wine  in  my  mouth,  neither  did  I  anoint  myself  at 
all,  till  three  whole  weeks  were  fulfilled."  Now 
surely  it  is  not  for  nothing  that  the  Spirit  of  God  has 
shown  us  Daniel,  not  only  before  the  decree  of  Cyrus 
was  issued,  but  afterwards,  in  such  an  attitude  before 
the  Lord.  We  can  all  understand,  when  the  moment 
approached  for  the  little  remnant  to  leave  Babylon 
and  return  to  the  land  of  their  fathers,  that  he  should 
be  found  chastening  his  own  soul  before  God,  and 
passing  in  review  the  sin  that  had  occasioned  so  fearful 
a  chastening  upon  the  people  from  the  Lord — although 
he  was  even  then  doing  exactly  the  contrary  of  what' 
the  flesh  would  have  sought  under  these  circumstances. 
For  when  some  great  outTard  mercy  is  vouchsafed, 
then  is  the  time  when  man  naturally  is  apt  to  give 
rather  a  loose  rein  to  his  enjoyment.  In  Daniel  we 
see  the  contrary  of  this.  He  took  the  place  of  con- 
fession; and  of  confessing  the  sins,  not  merely  of  Israel, 
but  his  own.  All  was  before  him.  None  but  a  holy 
man  could  have  so  deep  a  sense  of  sin.  But  the  same 
energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  gives  real  self- 
abasement,  enables  one  also  in  love  to  take  in  the  sad 
and  abject  condition  of  God's  people.  Such  thoughts 
as  these  seem  to  have  filled  the  soul  of  Daniel  when 
he   found   out,    by   the  prophecy    of   Jeremiah,   that 


CHAPTERS    X.,    XI. 


1G7 


deliverance  was  just  at  hand  for  Israel.  There  was  no 
kind  of  exultation  over  a  fallen  enemy — no  shouts  of 
triumph  because  the  people  were  to  go  free;  although 
Cyrus  himself  considered  it  a  high  honour  that  God 
had  made  him  to  be  the  instrument  of  both.  Well 
might  a  man  of  God  ponder  over  what  sin  had  wrought, 
when  the  Lord  could  not  even  speak  of  Israel  as  His 
people,  although  faith  in  Daniel  only  the  more  led  him 
to  plead  that  they  were. 

Here  the  decree  had  gone  forth  according  to  his 
expectation.  The  Persian  conqueror  had  opened  the 
door  for  the  prisoners  of  hope  to  leave  Babylon,  and 
those  who  pleased  had  gone  back  to  their  own  land. 
Daniel  was  not  among  these.  Instead  of  novv  antici- 
pating nothing  but  bright  visions  of  immediate  glory, 
he  is  still  found,  and  found  more  than  ever,  in  a 
posture  of  humiliation  before  God.  When  the  reason 
cf  this  prolonged  term  of  fasting  comes  out,  we  are 
let  into  the  connexion  of  the  world  that  is  seen  with 
that  which  is  unseen.  The  veil  is  not  merely  raised 
from  the  future,  for  all  prophecy  does  this;  but  the 
statement  of  the  vision  here  given  us  discloses,  in  an 
interesting  light,  what  is  around  us  now,  but  unseen. 
Daniel  was  permitted  to  hear  it,  in  order  that  we 
might  know  it,  and  might  also  have  the  consciousness 
for  ourselves,  that,  beside  the  things  that  are  seen, 
there  are  things  invisible,  far  more  important  to  the 
people  of  God  than  all  man  looks  upon. 

If  there  are  conflicts  upon  earth,  they  flow  from 
higher  conflicts  —  the  angels  contending  with  these 
evil  beings,  the  instruments  of  Satan,  who  constantly 
seek  to  thwart  the  counsels  of  God  with  regard  to 
the  earth.  This  comes  out  remarkably  here.  We 
know  that  angels  have  to  do  with  the  saints  of  God; 
but  we  may  not  have  discerned  so  clearly,  that  they 
have  to  do  also  with  the  outward  events  of  this  world. 
The  light  of  God  here  shines  upon  the  subject,  so 
that  we  are  enabled  to  understand,  that  there  is  not  a 


168  DANIEL. 

movement  of  the  world  but  what  is  connected  with 
the  providential  dealings  of  God.  And  angels  are  the 
instruments  of  executing  His  will;  they  are  expressly 
said  to  do  His  pleasure.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
are  those  that  oppose  God  constantly:  evil  angels  are 
not  found  wanting.  Those  who  are  not  alive  to  this 
certainly  lose  something,  because  it  gives  us  a  far 
stronger  view  of  the  necessity  of  having  God  as  our 
strength.  Were  it  a  mere  question  between  man  and 
man,  we  could  understand  that  one  person,  in  the 
consciousness  of  his  strength  or  his  wisdom,  or  other 
resources,  might  not  fear  another.  But  if  it  be  a  fact, 
that  we  have  to  contend  with  powers  that  are  im- 
mensely superior  to  us  in  everything  of  outward 
intelligence  and  might,  (for  angels  "  excel  in  strength," 
as  we  are  told,)  it  is  clear  that  we  are  thrown,  if  we 
are  to  be  conquerors,  upon  the  support  of  Another, 
who  is  mightier  than  all  that  can  be  against  us.  The 
faith  that  thus  counts  on  God  is  a  deliverance  from 
tvnxiety  about  all  that  is  taking  place  in  the  world. 
For  although  there  are  wicked  spirits,  and  men  are 
only  as  the  pieces  that  are  moved  by  them  in  the 
game  of  this  life,  yet,  in  fact,  there  is  a  supreme  hand 
and  mind  that  leads  to  the  moves,  behind  the  scene 
and  unknown  to  the  persons  acting.  This  gives  a 
much  more  solemn  character  to  our  thoughts  of  all 
that  occurs  here  below. 

Beside  these  angels,  another  appears  on  the  scene: 
*'  a  certain  man  clothed  in  linen,  whose  loins  were 
girded  with  fine  gold  of  Uphaz."  He,  of  whom  we 
have  so  magnificent  description  in  ver.  6,  and  whom 
Daniel  alone  sees,  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a 
mere  angel.  He  may  have  been  seen  in  some  features 
of  angelic  glory ;  but  I  conceive  this  is  One,  who  often 
appears  both  in  New  and  Old  Testament  history — the 
Lord  of  glory  Himself.  He  appears  now  as  a  man — r 
as  One,  who  had  the  deepest  sympathy  with  His 
servant  upon  the  earth.    All  others  had  fled  to  hide 


CHAPTERS   X.,    XI.  169 

themselves,  Daniel  abode:  nevertheless,  there  remained 
no  strength  in  him — his  comeliness  was  turned  into 
corruption.  Even  a  beloved  man  and  faithful  saint 
of  God  must  prove  that  all  his  past  wisdom  was 
unavailing;  for  he  was  now  a  very  aged  man,  and  had 
been  singularly  faithful  to  the  Lord.  At  this  very 
time  he  was  the  one  who  best  realized  the  true  con- 
dition of  Israel.  For  he  saw  well  that  a  long  time 
must  elapse  before  the  Messiah  must  come,  and  the 
revealing  angel  had  announced  that  the  Messiah 
should  be  cut  off  and  have  nothing.  No  wonder, 
then,  that  he  was  mourning.  Others  might  be  full  of 
their  bright  hopes,  that  the  Messiah  would  soon  appear 
and  exalt  them  as  a  nation  in  the  w^orld.  But  Daniel 
was  found  mourning  and  fasting;  and  now  the  vision 
passes  before  him,  and  this  blessed  person  reveals  Him- 
self to  him.  Yet,  spite  of  all  the  love  that  rested  upon 
him — spite  of  his  familiar  knowledge  of  God's  ways, 
and  the  favour  that  had  been  shown  him  in  previous 
visions,  Daniel  is  made  thoroughly  conscious  of  his 
own  utter  weakness.  All  his  strength  crumbled  into 
dust  before  the  Lord  of  glory.  And  this  has  a  moral 
for  us  of  no  little  moment.  However  much  may  be 
the  value  of  what  a  saint  has  learnt,  the  past  alone 
does  not  enable  us  to  understand  the  new  lesson  of 
God.  God  Himself  is  necessary  for  this — not  merely 
what  we  have  learnt  already.  I  think  that  this  is  a 
weighty  truth,  and  most  practical.  We  all  know  the 
tendency  in  prudent  men  to  lay  up  a  store  for  the  time 
to  come.  I  do  not  deny  the  value  of  spiritual  know- 
ledge in  various  ways — whether  in  helping  others,  or 
in  ourselves  forming  a  right  and  holy  opinion  of  cir- 
cumstances that  are  passing  around.  But  where  the 
Lord  brings  out  something  not  previously  learnt,  then 
Daniel,  spite  of  all  that  he  had  known  before,  is  utterly 
powerless.  He  is  most  of  all  prostrated  in  this  last 
vision,  and  realizes  more  than  ever  the  nothingness  of 
everything  within  him.     He  is  thrown  entirely  upon 


170  DANIEL. 

God  for  power  to  stand  up,  and  enter  into  what  the 
Lord  was  about  to  make  known  to  him.  The  same 
thing  appears  in  St.  John,  who  had  lain  in  the 
Saviour's  bosom  while  on  earth,  and  of  all  the  disciples 
had  most  entered  into  His  thoughts.  Yet,  let  that 
Saviour  stand  before  him  in  His  glory,  to  make  known 
to  him  His  mind  about  the  future,  and  what  vvas 
even  the  Apostle  John  ?  The  Lord  has  to  lay  His 
hand  upon  him,  bidding  him  fear*  not.  He  has  to 
encourage  him  by  what  He  was  Himself — the  Living 
One,  who  had  died  but  was  alive  again,  and  had  the 
keys  of  death  and  hades.  Therefore  it  was  that  he 
was  to  listen  with  the  most  perfect  confidence, 
because  this  Avas  what  Christ  is.  There  was  no 
power  but  must  fail  before  Him. 

Here  Daniel,  in  his  measure,  enters  into  this.  The 
death  of  the  flesh  must  always  be  realized  before  the 
life  of  God  can  be  enjoyed.  This  is  important,  prac- 
tically. In  the  grace  that  brings  salvation,  it  is  not 
that  death  must  be  learnt  first,  and  life  afterwards. 
Life  in  Christ  comes  to  me  as  a  sinner,  and  that  life 
exposes  the  death  in  which  I  lay.  If  I  must  realize 
my  death  in  order  for  that  life  to  come  to  me,  it 
would  be  evidently  man  set  into  his  true  place,  as  a 
preparation  for  his  blessing  from  God.      This  is  not 

grace.     "  That  which  was  from  the  beginning 

which  we  have  looked  upon,  and  our  hands  have 
handled  of  the  Word  of  life."  That  is  to  say,  it  is 
the  person  of  Christ  Himself,  who  comes  and  brings 
the  blessing.  After  that,  the  soul  learns  that  "  God 
is  light,  and  in  Him  is  no  darkness  at  all."  It  learns 
that  if  we  say  we  have  light,  or  fellowship  with 
Him  who  is  light,  and  yet  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie, 
and  do  not  the  truth.  All  the  practical  learning  of 
what  God  is,  and  what  we  are,  follows  the  manifestation 
of  life  to  us  in  the  person  of  Christ.  If  you  speak  of 
the  order  as  to  a  sinner,  it  is  sovereign  grace  which 
gives  life  in  Another;  but  if  of  the  order  of  progress 


CHAPTERS    X.,    XI. 


171 


in  the  believer,  it  is  not  so.  The  believer,  having 
already  got  life,  must  mortify  all  that  pertains  to  him 
merely  in  nature,  in  order  that  the  life  should  be 
manifested  and  strengthened.  This  is  all  important 
for  the  saint,  as  the  other  is  for  the  sinner.  Man  in 
his  natural  state  does  not  believe  that  he  is  dead,  but 
he  is  labouring  to  get  life.  He  wants  life;  he  has 
none.  It  is  Another  alone  that  brings  and  gives  it  to 
him  in  perfect  grace — seeing  only  evil  in  him,  but 
coming  with  nothing  but  good,  and  bringing  it  in 
love.  This  is  Christ,  But  in  the  believer's  case, 
having  already  found  life  in  Him,  there  must  be  the 
judgment  of  the  evil,  in  order  that  the  new  and 
divine  life  should  be  developed  and  grow.  So  that, 
while  to  the  one  it  is  life,  exposing  the  death,  and 
meeting  the  man  in  death,  and  delivering  him  from  it, 
to  the  other  it  is  the  practical  putting  to  death  every- 
thing that  has  already  existence  naturally  in  him. 
All  this  must  have  the  sentence  of  death  put  upon  it, 
in  order  that  the  life  be  unhindered  in  its  growth 
and  manifestation. 

Daniel  was  proving  this,  as  the  practical  means  of 
entering  into,  and  being  made  the  suited  witness  of, 
the  wonders  that  the  Spirit  of  God  was  about  to 
bring  before  him.  Hence,  whatever  might  have  been 
the  favour  in  which  he  stood, — and  he  was  '*  a  man 
greatly  beloved," — nevertheless,  death  must  be  realized 
by  his  soul.  "  And  when  he  had  spoken  this  word 
imto  me,  I  stood  trembling.  Then  said  he  unto  me. 
Fear  not  Daniel;  for  from  the  first  day  that  thou 
didst  set  thine  heart  to  understand,  and  to  chasten 
thyself  before  thy  God,  thy  words  were  heard,  and  I 
am  come  for  thy  words."  And  then  we  have  an 
intimation  conveyed  to  him  how  it  was  that  there 
had  been  such  a  delay.  "  But  the  prince  of  the 
kingdom  of  Persia  withstood  me  one-and-twenty  days ; 
hut,  lo!  Michael,  one  of  the  chief  princes,  came  to  help 
me:  and  I  remained  there  with  the  kings  of  Persia." 


172 


DANIEL. 


Here,  I  apprehend,  we  have  another  person  speaking.^ 
Not  the  first  and  glorious  One  that  Daniel  had  seen, 
but  one.  used  as  a  servant — an  angel,  in  fact,  that  the 
other  employed.  The  last  chapter  will  prove  clearly 
that  there  was  more  than  one  person  sent:  and  it 
is  plain,  from  the  language  of  the  speaker,  that  he  is 
subordinate.  Daniel  is  encouraged  by  learning  that, 
from  the  first  day  that  he  had  set  his  heart  to  under- 
stand and  to  chasten  himself  before  God,  his  words 
were  heard.  He  did  not  receive  the  answer  the  first 
day  nor  the  second.  Not  until  one-and-twenty  days 
after  did  the  answer  arrive,  and  yet  it  was  sent  from 
God  the  very  first  day.  Of  course,  He  could  at  once 
have  given  it.  But  what  then  ?  First  of  all,  the 
terrible  struggle,  that  is  always  raging  between  the 
instruments  of  God  and  the  emissaries  of  Satan, 
would  not  have  been  so  clearly  understood.  Then, 
again,  faith  and  patience  would  not  have  had  their 
perfect  work. 

I  am  not  forgetting,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  sent 
down  now  to  dwell  in  the  hearts  of  believers  in  a  way 
not  known  then.  For,  although  the  Spirit  of  God 
was  always  at  work  in  the  holy  prophets  and  in  holy 
men,  yet  the  abiding  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost 
was  that  which  was  not,  and  could  not  be,  till  Jesus 
was  glorified,  and  the  great  work  of  redemption  was 
wrought,  in  virtue  of  which  ^he  Holy  Ghost  was  sent 
down  from  heaven  to  take  His  abode  in  the  hearts  of 
those  that  believe,  the  seal  of  the  blessing  which  is 
theirs  in  Christ.  So  that,  besides  the  outward  pro- 
vidential care  of  God,  so  beautifully  brought  out  here, 
we  have  that  blessed.  Divine  Person  constituting  our 
bodies  the  temple  of  God.  Yet  the  outward  struggles 
go  on.  The  same  thing,  that  hindered  Daniel  from 
having  the  manifest  answer  to  his  prayer,  may  hinder 
us  from  having  the  answer  of  circumstances.  The 
answer  of  faith  we  ought  always  to  reckon  on  at 
once ;  the  answer  of  circumstances,  governed  of  God,  so 


CHAPTERS    X.,    Xt.  173 


as  to  bring  out  a  manifest  answer,  we  may  have  to  wait 
for.  Daniel  had  to  wait,  and  the  reason  is  given  us. 
From  verse  13  we  learn,  that  although  God  had  sent 
the  answer  from  the  very  first  day,  the  prince  of  the 
kingdom  of  Persia  withstood  for  twenty-one  days — 
exactly  the  time  that  Daniel  was  kept  in  mourning 
and  fasting  before  God.  "  But,  lo !  Michael,  one  of 
the  chief  princes,  came  to  help  me;  and  I  remained 
there  with  the  kings  of  Persia."  Plainly  it  is  an 
angel  that  speaks.  It  would  be  derogatory  to  the 
Lord  to  suppose,  that  He  was  the  One  who  needed 
help  from  one  of  His  own  angels.  But  Michael  was 
mentioned  here,  because  he  was  well  known  to  be  the 
archangel,  who  took  a  special  guardian  care  over  the 
nation  of  Israel.  So  that,  however  people  may  make 
a  mock  at  the  truth  of  the  interposition  and  guardian- 
ship of  angels,  yet  Scripture  is  quite  clear  about  it. 
Romanism,  as  we  know,  has  made  them  objects  of 
adoration.     But  the  truth  itself  is  of  special  interest. 

That  angels  are  employed  of  God  in  particular  ser- 
vices is  plain  from  the  word  of  God.  Nor  was  this 
merely  a  new  truth.  We  find  that  Jude  mentions,  as  a 
well-known  circumstance,  the  contention  of  Michael 
the  archangel  with  the  devil  about  the  body  of  Moses. 
The  same  truth  comes  out  again  in  this.  It  was 
Michael's  care  over  the  Jewish  people.  He  knew 
their  tendency  to  idolatry,  and  that  the  man,  whom 
they  had  rebelled  against  during  life,  they  would  make 
an  idol  of  after  his  death.  And  thus,  Michael,  as 
the  instrument  of  blessing  on  God's  part  to  Israel, 
contends  with  Satan,  so  that  the  body  of  Moses  was 
not  found  ;  the  Lord  is  said  to  have  buried  it, 
though  the  instrument  that  the  Lord  employed  was 
Michael.  Now  here  we  have  this  interesting  ray  of 
light  cast  upon  earthly  circumstances.  The  powers 
of  this  world  may  be  governing,  but  angels  have  not 
given  up  their  functions.  There  are  the  devil  and  his 
angels,  and  Michael   and  the  holy  angels  with  him, 


174  DANTEL. 

brouglit  forward  again  in  the  last  book  of  the  Bible. 
The  facts  of  Christ  having  come,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  having  been  given,  do  not  supersede  this.  On 
the  contrary,  we  know  that  there  will  be  one  most 
tremendous  conflict  at  the  close  between  the  holy 
angels  and  the  wicked  ones,  when  the  heavens  shall 
be  for  ever  cleared  of  those  evil  powers,  which  had  for 
so  long  defiled  them.  This  is  most  interesting,  as 
showing  the  perfect  patience  of  God.  Because  we 
know,  that  with  a  word  He  could  put  down  the  devil 
and  all  his  host.  But  He  does  not.  He  allows  Satan 
even  to  venture  into  the  lower  heavens — nay,  still  to 
have  possession  of  them.  Therefore  it  is  that  he  is 
called  "  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,"  as  he  is 
called  elsewhere  "  the  prince  "  and  "  the  god  of  this 
world."  But  I  believe  it  is  only  there  that  he  is 
prince.  We  never  read  of  such  a  thing  as  Satan 
being  prince  in  hell.  It  is  a  favourite  dream  of  great 
poets,  and  of  small  ones  too,  but  we  never  read  of  it 
in  Scripture.  The  Bible  shows  us,  that  his  real 
power  now  is  either  in  the  heavens  or  on  the  earth ; 
but  that  when  he  is  broken,  both  in  his  heavenly 
usurpation  first,  and  then  in  his  earthly  power,  he  is 
cast  down  to  hell;  and  that,  instead  of  being  a  king 
in  hell,  he  will  be  the  most  miserable  object  of  the 
vengeance  of  God.  The  solemn  thing  is,  that  he  is 
reigning  here  now,  and  p'^ople  do  not  feel  it.  His 
worst  reign  is  that  which  he  acquired — not  that  which 
he  had  before.  The  death  of  Christ,  although  it  is 
the  ground  on  which  he  will  eventually  lose  all  his 
power,  was,  nevertheless,  the  means,  by  which  he 
became  the  great  usurping  power,  opposing  God  in 
all  His  thoughts  about  this  world.  But  here  is  a 
thought  that  is  of  importance  for  us.  If  God  permits 
such  a  thing  as  this — if  He  allows  the  presence  of 
this  evil  one,  the  enemy  of  His  Son  in  heaven  itself — • 
if,  instead  of  the  crucifixion  of  Christ  leading  God  to 
deprive  Satan  of  all  his  power,  we  find  Him  after  this 


CHAPTERS    X.,    XI.  175 

displaying  His  greatest  loiigsiiffering,  what  a  lesson 
it  all  is  for  ns  not  to  trouble  ourselves  about  circum- 
stances !  No  man  has  ever  trodden  these  unknown 
regions;  there  has  been  none  to  tell  us  about  them 
except  the  word  of  God,  which  lays  it  bare  before  us. 
We  do  not  know  all  of  course;  but  we  know  enough 
to  see  that  there  is  this  tremendous  power  of  evil 
opposed  to  God,  and  that  the  power  of  God  is  always 
and  infinitely  mightier  than  the  power  of  evil.  Evil 
is  but  an  accident,  which  has  got  into  the  world 
through  the  rebellion  of  the  creature  against  God.  By 
"  accident,"  I  mean  that  it  was  only  the  creature's 
interrupting  for  a  time  the  purposes  of  God;  while 
in  truth  it  but  served  to  bring  them  out  with  brighter 
lustre.  To  bless  heaven  and  earth  was  the  plan  of 
God,  and  this  will  stand.  Evil  will  be  banished  from 
the  scene,  and  evil  men  will  suffer  the  awful  conse- 
quences of  having  rejected  the  only  good  and  blessed 
One  in  Christ,  the  Lord. 

But  while  the  certainty  of  all  has  been  made  known 
to  faith  before  the  execution  of  the  thoughts  of  God, 
we  have  the  view  opened  to  us  of  the  grave  conflict 
meanwhile  that  is  unseen.  This  puts  faith  to  the  test. 
Paniel  had  to  go  on  waiting,  mourning,  praying, 
spreading  out  all  before  God.  We  see  in  him  the 
perseverance  of  faith — praying  always.  And  how  was 
his  faith  not  rewarded !      For  when   the   ansrel  does 

o 

come,  he  makes  known  this  at  the  bidding  of  the 
glorious  One,  who  had  first  appeared  to  Daniel.  It 
was  the  prince  of  the  kingdom  of  Persia  who  had 
withstood  him  one-and-tvventy  days;  but  Michael  had 
come  to  his  help. 

I  may  also  observe,  that  we  have  an  important 
hint,  in  the  next  verse,  of  the  main  objects  to  which 
God  had  an  eye  in  this  prophecy.  Only  persons  who 
have  read  much  know  the  torture  the  chapter  has  suf- 
fered through  men's  own  thoughts  brought  to  explain 
it  by.     The  pope,  of  course,  has  been  very  prominently 


176  DANIEL. 

introduced  into  it.  And  then  the  darino*  soldier  of  the 
early  days  of  this  century  was  found  in  it  too:  I  allude, 
of  course,  to  Napoleon.  In  short,  whatever  has  been 
going  on  in  the  world  of  extraordinary  interest 
persons  have  tried  to  find  in  Daniel  xi.  The  14th 
verse  of  chap.  x.  puts  to  the  rout  all  such  thoughts. 
"  I  am  come,"  says  the  angel,  "  to  make  thee  know 
what  shall  befall  thy  people  in  the  latter  days :  for 
yet  the  vision  is  for  many  days."  Nothing  can  be 
plainer.  It  is  put  as  a  sort  of  frontispiece  to  the 
prophecy  to  show,  that  the  great  thought  of  God  for 
the  earth  is  the  Jewish  people,  and  the  main  design 
of  this  prophecy  is  what  must  befall  them  in  the  latter 
days.  We  have  the  series  of  the  history  almost  from 
the  day  in  which  Daniel  lived,  but  the  latter  days 
are  the  point  of  it.  Prophecy  in  general  may  afford 
to  give  a  little  earnest  close  at  hand,  but  we  never  see 
the  full  drift  of  it,  save  in  the  latter-day;  and  then  the 
thoughts  and  plans  of  God  always  have,  as  their 
earthly  centre,  the  Jews  and  their  Messiah.  I  do  not 
mean  to  deny,  that  the  Church  is  a  far  higher  thing 
than  the  Jews,  and  the  relations  of  Christ  to  the 
Church  nearer  and  deeper  than  His  relations  to  the 
Jews.  But  you  do  not  lose  Christ  and  the  Church, 
because  you  believe  in  His  link  with  Israel.  Nay,  if 
you  believe  not  this,  you  confound  them  with  your 
own  relations  to  Christ;  and  both  are  lost,  as  far  as 
definite  knowledge  and  full  enjoyment  go.  This  is 
for  want  of  looking  at  Scripture  as  a  whole.  If 
chap.  X.  had  been  read  as  an  introduction  to  chap,  xi., 
such  a  mistake  might  not  have  been  made.  But  some 
read  Scripture  very  much  as  others  preach  it.  A  few 
words  are  taken,  and  are  made  the  motto  of  a  discourse, 
which  perhaps  has  no  real  connexion  with  the  scope  of 
that  passage  —  perhaps  not  with  any  other  in  the 
Bible.  The  thoughts  may  be  true  enough  abstractedly, 
but  what  we  want  is  a  help  to  understand  the  word  of 
God  as  a  whole,  as  well  as  the  details.     If  you  were 


CHAPTERS    X.,    XT.  177 

to  take  a  letter  from  a  friend,  and  were  merely  to  fasten 
upon  a  sentence  or  a  part  of  one,  in  tlie  middle  of  it, 
and  dislocate  it  from  the  rest,  how  could  you  under- 
stand it  ?  And  yet  Scripture  has  infinitely  larger 
connexions  than  anything  that  could  be  written  on  our 
part  ;  and  therefore  there  ought  to  be  far  stronger 
reasons  for  taking  Scripture  in  its  connexion  than  the 
little  effusions  of  our  own  mind.  This  is  a  great  key 
to  the  mistakes  which  many  estimable  people  make  in 
the  interpretation  of  Scripture.  They  may  be  men  of 
faith  too;  but  still  it  is  difficult  to  rise  above  their 
ordinary  habits.  The  pro|)hecy  before  us  shows  the 
importance  of  the  principle  I  have  been  insisting  on. 
Take  the  ordinary  books  on  this  prophecy — no  matter 
when,  where,  or  hj  whom  written,  and  you  will  find 
that  the  great  effort  is  to  make  a  centre  of  their  own 
days,  &c.  Here  is  the  answer  to  all.  Neither  Rome, 
nor  the  papacy,  nor  Napoleon,  is  the  object  of  the 
prophecy,  but  "  what  shall  befall  thy  people  (Daniel's 
people,  the  Jews)  in  the  latter  days." 

We  then  find  Daniel  expressing  in  humbleness  of 
mind  his  unfitness  for  receiving  such  communications. 
First,  one  like  the  similitude  of  the  sons  of  men 
touches  his  lips  and  he  is  instructed  to  speak  unto  the 
Lord.  He  confesses  his  weakness — that  there  was  no 
strength  left  in  him.  But  "  there  came  again  and 
touched  him  one  like  the  appearance  of  a  man,  and  he 
strengthened  me,  and  said,  0  man,  greatly  beloved, 
fear  not.  Peace  be  unto  thee ;  be  strong,  yea,  be 
strong."  Men,  until  they  are  thoroughly  established 
in  peace,  until  their  hearts  know  the  real  source  of 
strength,  are  not  capable  of  profiting  by  prophecy. 
Here  we  find  Daniel  set  upon  his  feet,  his  mouth 
opened,  his  fears  hushed,  before  the  Lord  can  open 
out  the  future  to  him.  His  heart  must  be  in  perfect 
peace  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  presence 
of  his  God.  Anxiety  of  spirit,  the  want  of  settled 
peace,  has  more  to  do  than  people  think  with  the  little 


178  DAKIEL. 

progress  that  they  make  in  understanding  many  part& 
of  God's  word.  It  is  not  enough  that  a  man  have 
life  and  the  Spirit  of  God;  but  there  must  be  the 
breaking  down  of  the  flesh  and  the  simple,  peaceful 
resting  in  the  Lord.  Daniel  must  go  through  this. 
Bcene,  in  order  to  fit  him  for  what  he  is  to  learn ;  and  so 
must  we  in  our  measure.  "We  must  realize  that  same 
peace  and  strength  in  the  Lord.  If  I  am  in  terror 
of  the  Lord's  coming,  because  I  am  not  sure  how  I 
shall  stand  before  Him,  how  can  I  honestly  rejoice 
that  it  is  so  near  ?  There  will  be  a  hindrance  in  my 
spirit  to  the  clear  understanding  of  the  mind  of  God 
on  that  subject.  The  reason  of  this  lack  of  compe- 
tence is  not  want  of  learning,  but  of  being  thoroughly 
established  in  grace — the  want  of  knowing  what  we 
are  in  Christ  Jesus.  Ko  matter  what  other  things 
there  may  be — nothing  will  repair  this  sad  deficiency. 
I  speak  now  of  christian  men.  As  for  mere  scholars 
dabbling  in  these  things,  it  is  as  completely  out  of 
their  sphere  as  a  horse  would  be  in  being  set  to  judge 
of  the  mechanism  of  a  watch.     "  The  natural  man  re- 

ceiveth  not  the  things  of  the    Spirit   of   God 

neither  can  he  know  them,  because  they  are  spiritually 
discerned."  It  is  only  a  scribe  of  this  age  meddling 
with  what  belongs  to  another  world,  of  which  he 
knows  nothing. 

We  have  a  rapid  survey  of  what  was  about  to  befall 
Israel  in  the  latter  days.  It  is  the  same  speaker 
here  as  in  chap.  x.  "  Also  I,  in  the  first  year  of  Darius 
the  Mede,  even  I,  stood  to  confirm  and  to  strengthen 
liim.  And  now  will  I  show  thee  the  truth.  Behold 
there  shall  stand  up  yet  three  kings  in  Persia." 
There  we  have  the  succession  of  Persian  monarchs 
from  Cyrus.  Scripture  does  show  us  who  these  were, 
although  their  names  are  not  mentioned  here.  I  would 
refer  you  to  Ezra  iv.,  where  will  be  found  these  very 
three  kings  mentioned.  In  Ezra  iv.  the  occasion  arose 
out  of  the  attempt  of  the  enemies  of  Israel  to  stop 


CHAPTERS    X.,    XI.  179 

the  building  of  tbe  temjDle;  and  these  hired  "conn* 
sellers  against  them  to  frustrate  their  purpose,  all  the 
days  of   Cyrus,  king  of  Persia,  even   until  the  reign 
of  Darius,  king  of  Persia."     Now  in  order  to  under- 
stand that  chapter,  you  must  bear  in  mind  that,  from 
the   sixth  verse  down    to  the  end   of  verse  23,  is  a 
parenthesis.      The  beginning  and  end  of  the  chapter 
refer  to  events  during  the  reign   of  Darius.     But  the 
Spirit  of  God  goes  back  to  show  that  these   adversaries 
had  been  working  from  the  days  of  Cyrus  till  the  days 
of   Darius.      Consequently,  in   the   parenthesis,   from 
verse  6 — 23  inclusively,  you  have  the  various  monarchs 
that  had  come  between  Cyrus  and  Darius,  whose  minds 
the  adversaries  had  been  trying  to  work  upon.      "  In 
the  reign  of  Ahasuerus,"  (i.e.,  the  successor  of  Cyrus, 
called  in  profane  history  Cambyses,)  "in  the  beginning 
of  his  reign,  wrote  they  unto  him  an  accusation  against 
the  inhabitants  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem."      Then  we 
have  the  next  king.     "  And  in  the  days  of  Artaxerxes 
wrote  Bishlam,"  &c.     This  is  a  different  person  from 
the  Artaxerxes  mentioned  in  Nehemiah,  who  lived  at 
a  later  epoch,  and  is  called  in  profane  history  Smerdis 
the  magician,  who  by  wicked  means  acquired  the  crown 
for  a  time,  and  lent  an  ear  to  the  accusations  against 
the  Jews.     This  usurper  was  put  to  death  through  a 
conspiracy  headed  by  Darius,  not  the  Mede  of  Daniel, 
but   the   Persian   spoken   of    in    the    book   of   Ezra. 
Darius  Hystaspes  was  his  historical  name.     He  follows 
immediately.    Hence  we  have  these  three  kings  enu- 
merated in  Ezra  iv.,  exactly  answering  to  the  three 
in  Daniel  xi.  2.     Thus  we  find  one  part  of  Scripture 
throwing   light  upon   another,    without    the    need   of 
going   into   the  territories   of   man  at  all.      "  Behold 
there  shall  stand  up  yet  three  kings  in  Persia."     These 
came  after  Cyrus,  and  were  called  in  Scripture,  as  we 
have  seen,  Ahasuerus,  Artaxerxes,  and  Darius;  and  in 
profane  history  Cambyses,  Smerdis   the  magician,  and 
Darius    Hystaspes.      "  And   the    fourth  shall    be   far 


180  DANIEL. 

richer  tlian  they  all;  and  by  his  strength  through 
his  riches  he  shall  stir  up  all  against  the  realm  of 
Grecia."  It  is  the  celebrated  Xerxes,  who  stirred 
up  all  against  Greece.  This  confirms  an  idea  thrown 
out  on  a  former  occasion,  that  the  reason  why  the 
he-goat  rushed  with  such  fury  against  Persia,  was 
in  return  for  the  Persian  assault  upon  Greece. 
Xerxes  was  the  man  who  made  that  great  attempt. 
His  riches  are  proverbially  known,  and  no  event 
made  so  profound  an  impression  on  the  world 
then  as  that  expedition  against  Greece  and  its  con- 
sequences. 

In  verse  3,  Persia,  the  ram  of  chap,  viii.,  is  dropped, 
and  we  find  the  he-goat  of  that  chapter,  or  rather  its 
horn.  "  A  mighty  king  shall  stand  up  that  shall  rule 
with  great  dominion,  and  do  according  to  his  will." 
This  is  Alexander.  "  And  when  he  shall  stand  up, 
his  kingdom  shall  be  broken,  and  shall  be  divided 
toward  the  four  winds  of  heaven."  That  was  true  at 
his  death:  the  Greek  empire  was  then  shivered  into 
fragments.  "  And  not  to  his  posterity,  nor  according 
to  his  dominion  which  he  ruled;  for  his  kingdom  shall 
be  plucked  up  even  for  others  besides  those."  It  was 
not  to  be  a  single  head  getting  rid  of  the  family  of 
Alexander,  and  taking  possession  of  all.  His  kingdom 
was  to  be  divided  into  a  number  of  parts,  four  more 
particularly;  and  out  of  the?e  four  divisions  two  ac- 
quire an  immense  importance.  But  what  constitutes 
their  chief  importance  here  ?  When  God  speaks  of 
things  upon  the  earth,  He  always  measures  from 
Israel;  because  Israel  is  His  earthly  centre. 

Hence  it  is,  that  the  powers  which  meddle  with 
Israel  are  those  that  in  God's  view  are  important. 
This  is  the  reason  why  the  other  kingdoms  are  not 
noticed;  only  those  of  the  north  and  of  the  south. 
And  why  are  they  so  described  ?  Palestine  is  the 
place  from  which  God  reckons.  The  king  of  the  north 
means  north  of  the  land  that  His  eyes  were  upon; 


CHAPTERS   X.,    XI.  181 

and  the  southern  power  means  south  of  that  same 
land.  These  are  the  countries  commonly  called  Syria 
and  Egypt.  They  are  the  two  referred  to  throughout 
the  chapter,  the  other  divisions  of  Alexander's  empire 
being  put  aside.  Only  those  are  looked  at  which  had 
to  do  with  Israel.  Now  we  are  told  that  "the  king  of 
the  south  shall  be  strong" — he  is  the  person  well 
known  as  one  of  the  Ptolemies  or  Lagidae — "  and 
one  of  his  princes"  (i.e.,  of  the  chiefs  of  Alexander); 
"  and  he  shall  be  strong  above  him,  and  have  dominion; 
his  dominion  shall  be  a  great  dominion."  This  is 
another  person,  the  first  king  of  the  north,  who  rises 
in  strength  above  Ptolemy.  In  profane  history  he  is 
called  Seleucus.  The  descendants  of  both  these  and 
their  strife  are  often  spoken  of  in  the  history  of  the 
Maccabees.  There  minute  accounts  are  given  of  the 
transactions  predicted  in  this  chapter ;  and  of  the  two, 
what  God  says  in  few  words  is  infinitely  more  to  the 
point  than  man's  elaborate  detail. 

But  let  us  look  a  little  at  some  of  these  events. 
"  And  in  the  end  of  years  they  (i.e.,  the  kings  of  the 
north  and  of  the  south)  shall  join  themselves  together. 
For  the  king's  daughter  of  the  south  shall  come  to 
the  king  of  the  north  to  make  an  agreement."  One 
remark  before  going  further.  In  this  chapter  it  is 
not  the  same  king  of  the  north,  nor  the  same  king  of 
the  south,  that  we  have  all  the  way  through,  but  a 
great  many  that  succeed  each  other.  The  same  official 
title  runs  throughout.  As  people  say  in  law.  The  king, 
or  the  queen,  never  dies.  That  is  just  the  way  we  are 
to  look  at  it  here.  This  sixth  verse  is  an  instance. 
*'  In  the  end  of  years  they  shall  join  themselves 
together."  They  are  not  the  same  kings  of  the  north 
and  south,  who  had  been  spoken  of  in  verse  5,  but 
their  descendants.  "  In  the  end  of  years  they  shall 
join  themselves  together;  for  the  king's  daughter  of 
the  south  shall  come  to  the  king  of  the  north  to  make 
an  agreement."     They   made,  not  only   an  alliance, 


182  DANIEL. 

but  a  marriage  between  their  families.  "  But  she 
shall  not  retain  the  power  of  the  arm."  The  attempt 
to  make  a  cordial  understanding  between  Syria  and 
Egypt,  by  marriage,  would  be  a  failure.  Of  course, 
this  was  exactly  verified  in  history.  There  was  such 
a  marriage,  and  the  king  of  the  north  even  got  rid  of 
his  former  wife  in  order  to  marry  the  daughter  of  the 
king  of  the  south.  But  it  only  made  matters  a  great 
deal  worse.  They  had  hoped  to  terminate  their 
bloody  wars,  but  it  really  laid  the  foundation  of  an 
incomparably  deeper  grudge  between  them.  As  it  is 
said  here,  ''Neither  shall  he  stand  nor  his  arm;  but 
she  shall  be  given  up,  and  they  that  brought  her,  and 
he  that  begat  her,  and  he  that  strengthened  her  in 
these  times.  But  out  of  a  branch  of  her  roots  shall 
one  stand  up  in  his  estate,  which  shall  come  with  an 
army,  and  shall  enter  into  the  fortress  of  the  king 
of  the  north,  and  shall  deal  against  them  and  prevail." 
It  was  not  her  seed,  but  her  brother — out  of  the  same 
parental  stock.  She  was  one  branch  and  he  another. 
The  brother  of  this  Bernice,  daughter  of  the  Egyptian 
king,  comes  up  to  avenge  the  murder  of  his  sister, 
and  prevails  against  the  king  of  the  north.  Here  we 
have  the  exjDlanation  confirmed  of  what  the  kingdom 
of  the  south  is.  "  He  shall  also  carry  captives  into 
Egypt  their  gods,  with  their  princes,  and  with  their 
precious  vessels  of  silver  and  gold ;  and  he  shall 
continue  more  years  than  the  king  of  the  north."  "  So 
the  king  of  the  south  shall  come  into  his  kingdom, 
and  shall  return  into  his  own  land."  There  we  see 
Egypt  triumphant  for  a  time;  but  the  tide  was  soon 
to  turn.  "  His  sons  shall  be  stirred  up,  and  shall 
assemble  a  multitude  of  great  forces.  And  one  shall 
certainly  come,  (the  other  disappeared,)  and  overflow 
and  pass  through ;  then  shall  he  return,  and  be  stirred 
up,  even  to  his  fortress.  And  the  king  of  the  south 
shall  be  moved  with  choler."  Now  comes  another 
war  at  a  subsequent  dat^ ;  and  this  time  it  is  the  south 


CHAPTERS    X.,   XI.  183 

returning  the  blow  of   the  north.     "  The  king  of  the 

south shall    come   forth    and   fight   with   him, 

even  with  the  king  of  the  north;  and  he  shall  set 
forth  a  great  multitude  ;  but  the  multitude  shall  be 
given  into  his  hand."  There  the  Spirit  of  God  refers 
to  several  notable  facts.  The  two  principal  actors  are 
the  kings  of  Syria  and  Egypt.  The  land  of  Israel, 
that  lay  between  them,  was  a  sort  of  burdensome  stone  to 
these  kings  who  made  it  their  battle-field,  which  ever 
went  to  the  conqueror.  If  the  king  of  the  north  was 
victorious,  Palestine  fell  under  Syria ;  and  in  the  same 
way  if  the  king  of  Egypt  got  the  better.  But  God 
never  allowed  rest  to  those  who  took  His  land.  They 
might  intermarry  and  contract  alliances;  but  it  only 
proved  the  prelude  to  graver  outbreaks — brothers,  sons, 
grandsons,  &c.,  taking  up  the  quarrels  of  their  kindred. 
"  The  Scripture  cannot  be  broken."  All  was  distinctly 
laid  down  beforehand. 

"  And  when  he  hath  taken  away  the  multitude,  his 
heart  shall  be  lifted  up ;  and  he  shall  cast  down  many 
ten  thousands:  hut  he  shall  not  be  strengthened  by 
it."  Then  we  find,  that  the  king  of  the  north  returns 
and  "  sets  forth  a  multitude  greater  than  the  former, 
and  shall  certainly  come  after  certain  years  with  a 
great  army,  and  with  much  riches.  And  in  those 
times  there  shall  many  stand  up  against  the  king  of 
the  south ;  also  the  robbers  of  thy  people  shall  exalt 
themselves  to  establish  the  vision."  Allow  me  to 
call  attention  to  these  words.  It  at  once  settles  the 
question  that  might  be  asked — How  do  you  know  that 
Daniel's  people  do  not  mean  God's  people  in  a  spiritual 
sense  ?  The  answer  is  given  here — "  the  robbers  of 
thy  people."  This  at  once  puts  aside  the  plea  for  a 
spiritual  sense.  We  could  hardly  talk  about  "  rob- 
bers "  in  that  case.  This  confirms  what  ought  not  to 
have  needed  further  evidence  —  that  Daniel's  people 
mean  the  Jewish  people,  and  nothing  else.  Here  we 
find  that  some  of  the  Jews  form  a  connexion  with  one 


184  DANIEL. 

of  these  contending  monarclis  of  the  north.  These 
are  called  here  "  the  robbers  of  thy  people,"  and  take 
the  part  of  Antiochns,  the  king  of  the  north,  against 
Ptolemy  Philopator,  or  rather  his  son;  but  all  came  to 
nought.  The  Syrian  king  might  hope  that,  by  bringing 
in  this  new  element,  by  getting  the  countenance  of 
the  Jews,  perhaps  God  would  be  with  him.  But  no. 
They  were  the  robbers  of  the  people — unfaithful  to 
God,  and  not  holding  fast  their  separation  from  the 
Gentiles.  They,  too,  might  think  to  establish  the 
vision,  "  but  they  shall  fall." 

"  So  the  king  of  the  north  shall  come  and  cast  up 
a  mount,  and  take  the  most  fenced  cities;  and  the 
arms  of  the  south  shall  not  withstand,  neither  his 
chosen  people,  neither  shall  there  be  any  strength  to 
withstand.  But  he  that  cometh  against  him  shall  do 
according  to  his  own  will,  (that  is,  the  king  of  the 
north,)  and  none  shall  stand  before  him:  and  he  shall 
stand  in  the  glorious  land,  which  by  his  hand  shall  be 
consumed."  Another  remarkable  thing  that  we  see 
here  is,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  still  holds  to  the  impor- 
tance of  that  little  strip  of  land  —  the  territory  of 
Palestine.  It  was  God's  gift  to  God's  people.  What- 
ever might  be  its  deplorable  condition,  it  is  the 
glorious  land  still.  God  repents  not  of  His  purposes: 
"  He  will  yet  choose  Israel,  and  set  them  in  their  own 
land."  And  if,  when  it  is  f  question  of  God's  earthly 
purposes.  He  thus  holds  to  them,  spite  of  every 
hindrance,  what  will  He  not  do  for  His  heavenly 
people  ?  Who  can  doubt  that  He  will  bring  them  to 
heavenly  glory  wdth  Christ  ? 

"  He  shall  also  set  his  face  to  enter  with  the 
strength  of  his  whole  kingdom,  and  upright  ones 
with  him;  thus  shall  he  do:  and  he  shall  give  him 
the  daughter  of  women  corrupting  her ;  but  she 
shall  not  stand  on  his  side,  neither  be  for  him." 
This  is  another  attempt  at  marriage;  only  it  is  the 
converse.     It  is  not  now  the  king's  daughter  of  the 


CHAPTERS   X.,    XI.  185 

south  'coming  to  the  king  of  the  north ;  hut  the  king 
of  the  north  gives  his  daughter  Cleopatra  to  the  king 
of  the  south,  hoping  that  she  will  maintain  Syrian 
influence  at  the  court  of  Egypt.  That  is  -what  is 
called  here  "corrupting  her;"  because  it  was  plainly 
contrary  to  the  very  essence  of  the  marriage- tie :  it 
was  an  attempt  to  use  her  in  order  to  serve  his  political 
purposes.  "  But  she  shall  not  stand  on  his  side, 
neither  be  for  him."  The  reasons  of  state — the  inner- 
most secrets  of  their  hearts,  alike  come  out  here. 

There  is  another  disgrace,  which  is  not  only  known 
to  God,  but  is  made  known  to  His  servants.  "  After 
this  shall  he  turn  his  face  unto  the  isles,  and  shall 
take  many:  but  a  prince  for  his  own  behalf  shall 
cause  the  reproach  offered  by  him  to  cease  ;  with- 
out his  own  reproach  he  shall  cause  it  to  turn  upon 
him."  That  is,  Antiochus  meddles  with  Greece, 
and  takes  many  of  the  isles;  but  this  other  prince, 
for  his  own  behalf,  takes  up  the  contest  against  the 
king  of  the  north.  Here  we  have  the  entrance  upon 
the  scene  of  a  new  power  —  the  first  allusion  to  the 
Romans.  A  Roman  consul  is  meant  by  the  prince 
that  comes  on  his  own  behalf  against  the  king  of 
the  north.  He  will  not  allow  Greece  to  be  touched. 
It  was  one  of  the  Scipios  who  interfered.  "  Then 
he  shall  turn  his  face  toward  the  fort  of  his  own 
land  ;  but  he  shall  stumble  and  fall  and  not  be 
found."  He  is  obliged  to  return  to  Syria,  but  he 
shall  stumble  and   fall. 

"  Then  shall  stand  up  in  his  estate  a  raiser  of  taxes, 
in  the  glory  of  the  kingdom,"  The  Romans,  who  de- 
feated the  father,  obliged  his  son  to  raise  a  heavy 
annual  tribute.  That  was  all  that  the  poor  man  did 
during  his  life.     "  Then  shall  stand  up  in  his  estate  a 

raiser   of    taxes but   within  few  days    he  shall 

be  destroyed,  neither  in  anger  nor  in  battle."  He 
was  killed  by  one  of  his  own  sons.  "  And  in  his 
estate  shall  stand  up  a  vile  person,  to  whom  they  shall 


186  DANIEL, 

not  give  the  honour  of  the  kingdom;  but  he'  shall 
come  in  peaceably,  and  obtain  the  kingdom  by  flat- 
teries. And  with  the  arms  of  a  flood  shall  they  be 
overthrown  from  before  him,  and  shall  be  broken; 
yea,  also,  the  princes  of  the  covenant.  And  after  the 
league  made  with  him  he  shall  work  deceitfully;  for 
he  shall  come  up  and  shall  become  strong  with  a  small 
people."  This  is  the  man  who  typifies  the  last  king  of 
the  north.  Called  in  profane  history  Antiochus  Epi- 
phanes,  he  was  morally  abominable,  but  most  notorious 
for  his  interference  with  the  Jews;  first  by  flattery  and 
corruption,  and  afterwards  by  violence.  This  is  the 
man  the  Spirit  of  God  dwells  most  on,  because  he 
most  meddled  with  Israel,  the  glorious  land,  and  the 
sanctuary.  He  it  was  who  enforced  idolatry  in  the 
temple  itself,  setting  up  an  image  to  be  worshipped 
even  in  the  holy  of  holies.  Therefore  it  is  that  he 
acquires  importance.  Otherwise  he  was  a  man  little 
known,  except  for  daring  wickedness.  Nothing  can  be 
more  simple.  His  history  consists  of  intrigues,  first 
against  the  king  of  the  south,  and  then  against  the 
Jews;  and  of  various  expeditions,  in  some  of  which 
he  was  successful  at  first  but  afterwards  entirely  defeated. 
"  He  shall  enter  peaceably  even  upon  the  fattest 
places  of  the  province;  and  he  shall  do  that  which  his 

fathers  have  not  done,  nor  his  father's  fathers 

And  he  shall  stir  up  his  power  and  his  courage  against 
the  king  of  the  south  with  a  great  army;  and  the 
king  of  the  south  shall  be  stirred  up  to  battle  with  a 
Yerj  great  and  mighty  army;  but  he  shall  not  stand." 
These  kings  meet  and  plan  against  each  other,  but 
all  is  vain.  "  Both  these  kings'  hearts  shall  be  to  do 
mischief,  and  they  shall  speak  lies  at  one  table;  but 
it  shall  not  prosper;  for  yet  the  end  shall  be  at  the 
time  appointed.  Then  shall  he  return  into  his  land 
with  great  riches;  and  his  heart  shall  be  against  the 
holy  covenant ;  and  he  shall  do  exploits  and  return  to 
his  own  land  (i.e.,  in  the  north).      At  the  time  ap' 


CHAPTERS   X.,   XL  187 

pointed  he  shall  return,  and  come  toward  the  south ; 
but  it  shall  not  be  as  the  former,  or  as  the  latter.'* 
Then  we  have  farther  details. 

"  For  the  ships  of  Chittim  shall  come  against  him.*' 
There  are  these  indefatigable  Romans  that  come  in 
again.  They  had  dealt  with  his  father  when  he  had 
made  an  attack  upon  Greece;  and  now  that  the  son 
had  his  hand  over  the  throat  of  his  prej,  the  Roman 
consul  came,  and  at  once  forbad  his  doing  anything 
further.  He  even  drew  a  circle  round  him,  as  is  well 
known,  when  the  artful  king  wished  to  gain  time  to 
evade.  The  answer  was  demanded  before  he  stepped 
out  of  the  circle,  and  he  was  obliged  to  give  it.  This 
was  a  death-blow  to  all  his  policy.  He  went  home  a 
miserable,  defeated  man,  with  a  heart  vexed  and  infuri- 
ate, though  putting  on  an  humble  appearance  before 
the  Romans.  What  should  hinder  him  from  wreaking 
out  the  anger  of  his  heart  upon  the  Jews  ?  As  it  is 
said  here,  "  Therefore  shall  he  be  grieved,  and  return 
and  have  indignation  against  the  holy  covenant:  so 
shall  he  do ;  he  shall  even  return  and  have  intelligence 
with  them  that  forsake  the  holy  covenant."  Poor  as 
the  Jews  were,  they  were  witnesses  for  God  upon  the 
earth ;  and  Antiochus  hastens  to  pour  out  his  fury  upon 
whatever  bore  a  testimony  to  God  among  them.  This 
was  his  ruin,  and  brought  God's  vengeance  upon  him. 
"  He  shall  even  return  and  have  intelligence  with  them 
that  forsake  the  holy  covenant,"  i.e.,  with  the  apos- 
tates of  the  Jews.  "  And  arms  shall  stand  on  his  part, 
and  they  shall  pollute  the  sanctuary  of  strength,  and 
shall  take  away  the  daily  sacrifice,  and  they  shall  place 
the  abomination  that  maketh  desolate."  He  will  put 
an  end  to  the  Jewish  service,  and  will  set  up  an  idol, 
"  the  abomination  that  maketh  desolate,"  in  the  tem- 
ple of  Jerusalem.  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that 
this  refers  to  the  last  days.  It  is  only  a  type  of 
what  will  take  place  then.  The  latter  part  of  the 
chapter,  and  the  next  chapter,  do  refer  to  the  latter. 


188  DANIEL. 

day  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word.  But  here  is  the  step 
of  transition  from  what  is  past  to  the  future. 

We  come  down  in  regular  historical  order- to 
Antiochus  Epiphanes,  and  then  meet  with  a  great 
break.  Scripture  itself  intimates  as  much.  But 
Antiochus  did  on  a  small  scale  what  the  great  northern 
king  of  the  latter  day  will  do  on  a  larger  one.     It  is 

said,  (v.  35,) "even   to   the  time   of    the   end: 

because  it  is  yet  for  a  time  appointed."  There  God 
stops.  He  says,  as  it  were,  I  have  come  to  the  man 
that  shows  you  in  type  what  is  to  befall  you  in  the 
latter  days;  and  so  He  dwells  emphatically  upon  this 
king,  laying  before  them  the  extreme  wickedness  of 
his  heart  and  conduct.  The  Spirit  then  cuts  short 
the  course  of  the  history,  and  plunges  at  once  into 
the  last  scene.  This,  however,  must  be  reserved  for 
another  occasion.  What  we  have  seen  shows  us  that 
whatever  may  be  the  general  outline  of  events  else- 
where, God  can  be,  and  sometimes  is,  singularly  minute 
in  the  details  of  a  prophecy,  and  no  where  more  so 
than  in  this  very  chapter.  And  what  is  the  main  ob- 
jection raised  by  infidels  against  it?  That  it  must 
have  been  written  after  the  events  had  taken  place  ! 
Certain  it  is,  that  there  is  no  historian  since  these 
times  who  gives  us  such  an  admirable  account  as  we 
have  in  these  few  verses.  If  I  want  to  know  the 
history  of  these  two  contending  monarchies,  Syria 
and  Egypt,  I  must  look  here.  How  entirely  we  can 
confide  in  the  word  of  God  about  everything  !  It 
may  be  an  exception  to  His  general  rule  to  dwell 
upon  the  kings  of  the  north  and  of  the  south,  but  He 
does  so  at  times.  The  great  thing  on  which  He  be- 
stows care  is  the  souls  of  His  people.  May  our 
hearts  answer  to  the  interest  He  takes  in  us! 

From  the  twenty-first  verse  we  have  had  the  account 
of  the  king  of  the  north,  known  in  profane  history  as 
Antiochus   Epiphanes.    The  Spirit  of  God  has  entered 


CHAPTERS    X,,   XI.  189 

into  mncli  fuller  detail  in  speaking  of  his  history, 
because  his  conduct,  specially  at  the  close,  in  meddling 
with  the  Jews,  and  their  city,  and  their  sanctuary, 
furnished  the  occasion  for  a  type  of  the  last  king  of 
the  north,  who  will  be  found  following  in  his  pre- 
decessors' wake,  save  that  his  guilt  will  be  incomparably 
graver  in  the  sight  of  God — so  flagrant  indeed,  that 
His  judgment  can  tarry  no  longer.  This  accounts  for 
a  circumstance  that  has  often  perplexed  the  students 
of  Daniel's  prophecy.  We  read  of  an  abomination  of 
the  desolation  in  the  predicted  account  of  Antiochus 
(xi.  31) ;  and  it  has  been  commonly  supposed  that  our 
Lord  refers  to  this  in  Matt.  xxiv.  15.  Those  who 
looked  for  the  future  fulfilment  of  this  abomination 
have  sought  to  reconcile  it  with  the  facts  by  the 
assumption,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  must  have  branched 
off  to  the  future  personage  that  Antiochus  represented. 
But  in  my  judgment  there  is  no  need  for  anything 
so  unnatural.  Antiochus  Epiphanes  was  only  a  type, 
and  verse  31  does  not  go  beyond  his  history,  save 
as   a   foreshadowing. 

In  other  words,  to  the  end  of  verse  31  all  is  strictly 
historical  —  typical,  of  course,  of  the  future,  but 
nothing  more.  And  therefore  the  answer  to  the 
difficulty  that  some  find  in  our  Lord's  quoting,  as 
they  suppose,  Dan.  xi.  31,  is  really  as  plain  as  possible. 
He  does  not  quote  this  verse.  The  passage  He  refers 
to  is  in  chap.  xii.  In  chap.  xii.  11,  ycu  will  find  an 
expression  similar  to  this.  "  And  from  the  time  that 
the  daily  sacrifice  shall  be  taken  away,  and  the 
abomination  that  maketh  desolate  set  up,  there  shall 
be  a  thousand  two  hundred  and  ninety  days."  There 
we  have  a  defined  date,  which  connects  this  last  setting 
up  of  the  desolating  abomination  with  the  deliverance 
our  Lord  predicts  in  Matt,  xxiv.;  for  Jacob's  most 
fiery  trial  is  that  which  just  precedes  his  deliverance. 

Now  there  are  more  reasons  than  one  for  believing 
this  passage  in  Dan.  xii.  to  be  what  our  Lord  cites. 


190  DANIEL. 

Some  of  them  depend  upon  considerations  more  fit 
for  the  study  than  for  public  ministry.  But  the  sum 
of  the  matter  is,  that  the  expressions  the  Holy  Ghost 
employs,  in  chap.  xi.  31  and  in  chap.  xii.  11,  dilfer. 
In  chap.  xi.  31  it  means  the  abomination  of  him  that 
desolates,  or  of  the  desolator.  Whereas,  in  chap.  xii. 
11,  the  true  meaning  is  that  which  is  given  in  our 
Lord's  words  —  not  the  abomination  of  him  that 
maketh  desolate,  but  "  the  abomination  of  desolation;" 
which  is,  I  suppose,  what  is  meant  in  the  English 
version  by  the  words,  "  that  maketh  desolate."  Thus 
the  two  phrases  are  distinct.  Although  there  is  a 
resemblance  between  them,  there  is  also  a  difference; 
and  that  difference  is  enough  to  show,  that  our  Lord 
spoke  not  of  the  abomination  set  up  by  Antiochus, 
but  of  that  mentioned  in  chap.  xii.  Consequently, 
there  is,  in  fact,  no  difficulty  to  be  removed;  because 
the  desolation  spoken  of  in  chap.  xi.  is  past,  and 
the  desolation  of  chap,  xii.,  that  our  Lord  draws 
attention  to,  is  future. 

That  this  is  so,  will  appear  from  other  considerations 
also.  Thus,  in  the  verses  that  follow,  we  have  a  state 
of  things  distinct  from  what  w^ill  be  in  the  future 
tribulation  of  Israel.  "  Such  as  do  wickedly  against 
the  covenant  shall  he  corrupt  by  flatteries;  but  the 
people  that  do  know  their  God  shall  be  strong,  and 
do  exploits."  Now  we  find  from  the  Revelation,  and 
other  parts  of  Scripture  which  speak  about  the  future 
of  Israel,  that  the  godly  remnant  could  hardly  be  said 
to  do  exploits.  They  will  suffer;  but  I  do  not  think 
that  deeds  of  power  thus  characterize  the  blessed 
ones  who  are  to  pass  through  the  dreadful  crisis  of 
the  future.  In  the  days  of  Antiochus,  it  was  not  so 
much  suffering,  but  "  being  strong,  and  doing  exploits" 
— exactly  what  was  true  of  the  Maccabees  and  others, 
v/ho  undoubtedly  were  not  so  much  a  band  of  martyrs 
as  a  set  of  men  who  roused  the  spirit  of  Israel,  and 
resisted  the  cruel  and  profane   scourge  of  that  day. 


CHAPTERS    X.J    XT.  19t 

Again,  we  read,  "  And  tliey  that  understand  among 
the  people  shall  instruct  many:  yet  they  shall  fall  by 
the  sword,  and  by  flame,  by  captivity,  and  by  spoil, 
many  days."  There  is  a  long  period,  observe,  of 
sorrow  and  trouble,  that  follows  the  outburst  of 
courage  and  prowess  against  the  desolator,  and  this  is 
still  continued  in  the  following  verses.  "  Now,  when 
they  shall  fall,  they  shall  be  holpen  with  a  little  help; 
but  many  shall  cleave  to  them  with  flatteries.  And 
some  of  them  of  understanding  shall  fall,  to  try  them, 
and  to  purge,  and  to  make  them  white,  even  to  the 
time  of  the  end ;  because  it  is  yet  for  a  time  appointed." 
Clearly,  then,  these  trials  are  before  the  time  of  the 
end.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  here  referring  to  what  has 
already  taken  place.  Accordingly  we  have  a  picture 
of  terrible  disaster  that  goes  on,  as  it  is  said,  "  to  the 
time  of  the  end." 

From  all  this,  I  infer,  then,  that  the  Spirit  of  God 
singles  out  the  desolation  which  then  befell  the  people 
of  Israel,  and  the  defiling  of  the  sanctuary  under 
Antiochus  or  his  generals.  This  brought  vividly  out 
the  circumstances  of  the  last  days;  but,  along  with 
them,  certain  other  circumstances  were  added,  which 
ought  not  to  be  expected  in  those  days.  In  other 
words,  we  arrive  at  what  may  be  called  the  long  and 
dreary  blank  that  severs  the  past  history  of  Israel,  and 
the  struggles  in  their  land  against  neighbouring 
aggressors,  from  the  great  crisis  of  the  last  days. 
This  is  where  the  true  break  occurs.  Certain  disasters 
were  to  go  on  ''  to  the  time  of  the  end;  because  it  is 
yet  for  a  time  appointed."  There  is  no  place  in  the 
chapter  where  the  interruption  of  the  history  so  well 
fits  in  as  after  verse  35. 

But  now,  in  verse  36,  we  have  another  person 
abruptly  introduced  into  the  scene.  We  are  not  told 
who  he  was,  or  whence  he  came;  but  the  character 
that  is  given  of  him,  the  scene  that  he  occupies,  the 
history   that  the   Spirit  of   God  enters  into  in  con- 


192  DANIEL. 

nexion  witli  him — all  declare,  too  plainly,  tliat  it  is  the 
terrible  king  who  will  set  himself  up  in  the  land  of 
Israel  in  personal  antagonism  to  the  Messiah  of  Israel, 
the  Lord  Jesus.  He  it  was  of  whom  our  Lord  spoke, 
when  He  said  that,  if  they  refused  Him  who  had  come 
in  His  Father's  name,  they  would  'receive  another 
coming  in  his  own  name.  Nor  is  this  the  only  passage 
of  Scripture,  where  this  same  false  Christ,  or  rather 
Antichrist  (for  there  is  a  difference  between  the  terms), 
is  described  as  "  the  king."  Not  only  are  there  dif- 
ferent references  to  him  under  other  epithets,  but  in  the 
greatest  and  most  comprehensive  prophecy  of  Scripture, 
Isaiah,  like  Daniel,  introduces  "  the  king,"  as  if  he 
must  he  known  at  once.  In  chap.  xxx.  we  have  an 
enemy  of  Israel  called  the  Assyrian.  Doubtless, 
looking  at  past  history,  Sennacherib  was  their  great 
head  in  that  day.  But  he  only  furnished  the  oppor- 
tunity to  the  Spirit  of  God  to  bring  out  the  future 
and  final  adversary  of  Israel.  His  fall  is  here  brought 
before  us.  "  For  through  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  shall 
the  Assyrian  be  beaten  down  who  smote  with  a  rod. 
And  in  every  place  where  the  grounded  staff  shall 
pass,  which  the  Lord  shall  lay  upon  him,  it  shall 
be  with  tabrets  and  harps:  and  in  battles  of  shaking 
will  He  fight  with  it."  After  the  end  of  that 
victory  there  will  be  exceeding  joy  for  Israel;  instead 
of  the  train  of  sorrow,  which  most  victories  hring, 
there  follows  unfeigned  gladness  before  the  Lord, 
"  It  shall  be  with  tabrets  and  harps."  For  the 
enemy  there  will  be  proportionate  misery.  Something 
still  more  awful  and  unending  than  temporal  de- 
struction falls  upon  the  proud  foe.  "  For  Tophet 
is  ordained  of  old,  yea,  for  the  king  it  is  prepared: 
He  hath  made  it  deep  and  large;  the  pile  there- 
fore is  fire  and  much  wood;  the  breath  of  the  Lord, 
like  a  stream  of  brimstone,  doth  kindle  it."  In  our 
version  there  is  a  singular  obscurity,  remarked  by 
another,  in  this  verse.     At  first  sight  it  might  appear 


CHAPTERS   X.,    XI.  19S 

that  the  Assyrian  and  "  the  king "  were  the  same 
person.  The  true  rendering  is,  "  For  the  king  also  it 
is  prepared " — that  is,  Tophet  is  prepared  for  the 
Assyrian,  but  besides,  for  the  king  also.  Just  as  in 
our  passage  in  Daniel,  we  have  the  Assyrian  or  king 
of  the  north  on  the  one  hand,  and  "  the  king  "  on  the 
other.  The  same  frightful  end  awaits  them  both. 
But  I  only  refer  to  this  now  for  the  purpose  of  showing, 
that  the  expression,  "  the  king,"  is  not  unprecedented 
in  Scripture,  and  that  it  applies  to  a  notorious  person- 
age the  Jews  were  taught  in  prophecy  to  expect. 
God,  in  judicial  retribution  for  their  rejection  of  the 
true  Christ,  would  give  them  up  ty  receive  the  Anti- 
christ. This  is  "  the  king."  He  would  arrogate  to 
himself  the  royal  rights  of  the  true  king,  the  Anointed 
of  God.  Tophet  was  prepared  for  the  king  of  the 
north,  and  also  for  "  the  king." 

But  this  is  not  all.  In  Isaiah  Ivii.  we  have  him 
introduced  quite  as  unexpectedly.  In  chap  Iv.  are 
shown  the  moral  qualities  that  God  will  produce  in 
his  people.  In  chap.  Ivii.  He  shows  us  the  fear- 
fully iniquitous  state  then  also  found  in  Israel.  And 
in  that  day  God  will  no  longer  endure  anything  but 
reality.  Forms  of  piety,  covering  uncleanness  and 
ungodliness,  will  have  passed  away.  There  'Hhe 
king"  is  suddenly  introduced  to  us  (v.  9).  "Thou 
wentest  to  the  king  with  ointment,  aud  didst  increase 
thy  perfumes,  and  didst  send  thy  messengers  far  off, 
and  didst  debase  thyself  even  unto  hell."  To  have  to 
do  with  him  was  to  debase  oneself  unto  hell.  No 
wonder  that  for  "the  king  also"  Tophet  was  prepared. 
This  shows  that,  before  the  mind  of  Israel  from  the 
first,  there  was  one  that  the  Spirit  of  God  led  them 
to  expect  to  reign  over  the  land  in  the  last  days,  who 
is  called  "  the  king." 

Thus  at  once  is  furnished  a  most  important  clue  to 
Dan.  xi.  We  are  come  to  the  time  of  the  end.  The 
blank  is  closed  —  the  long  dark  night  of  Israel's  dis- 
o 


194  ,        DANIEL. 

pei'sion  is  well-iiigh  over.     Tlie  Jews  are  in  the  land. 
In  what  condition?     Are  they  under  Christ?     Alas! 
there  is  another  and  a  terrible  scene  that  must  first 
be  enacted  there.     "  The  king"  that  we  have  read--of 
is  there,  and  the  course  he  pursues  is  just  what  we 
might  expect  from  the  landmarks  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
"  The  king  shall  do  according  to  his  will."     Ah !  are 
any  of  us  sufficiently  aware  what  a  fearful  thing  it  is 
to  be  the  doers  of  our  own  will?     Here  is  the  end  of 
it.      It  was  the  first  great  characteristic  of  sin  from 
the  beginning.     It  is  what  Adam  did,  and  the  fall  of 
the   world   was   the  immediate   result.     Here   is   one 
who  at  that  day  may  seem  to  be  the  loftiest  and  most 
influential  of  Adam's  sons.     But  he  does  "  according 
to  his  will."     And  nothing  worse.     Are  we  to  read 
such  a  history   as   this   without  moral   profit   to   our 
own  souls?     To  forget  what  an  evil  thing  it  is  ever 
to  be  the  doers  of  our  own  Avill  ?     Let  none  suppose 
that,  because  they  may  be  in  a  position  to  rule,  they 
are  therefore  outside  the  danger.     Alas!  it  is  not  so: 
no  one  thing  so  unfits  a  person  for  righteous  rule  as 
the  inability  to  obey.     It  is  good  first  to  know  v/hat 
it  is  to  be  subject.     Oh !  may  it  strike  deep  into  all 
our  hearts,  that   "  the  king,"  the  Antichrist,  is   first 
stamped  as  one  doing  his  own  will.     May  it  test  us 
how  far  we  are    seeking  ours  ! — how  far,   under   any 
circumstances,    we   are   doing,  or  allowing    anything, 
that  we  would  not  wish  e/ery  soul  in  this  world  to 
see — perhaps  even  those  that  are  nearest  to  us.     Alas ! 
one  knows,  from  experience  and  observation,  the  diffi- 
culty and  danger  in  these  things  from  one's  own  heart. 
Yet  there  is  no  one  thing  more  contrary  to  that  Christ 
whom  we  have  learnt.     We  are  sanctified  "  unto  the 
obedience  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ." 
It  is  not  only  to  the  blessing,  in  the  sprinkling  of  the 
blood,  but   to  the  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ — to  the 
same  spirit  and  principle  of  obedience;  for  that  is  the 
meaning  of  the  expression.     We  are  not  like  the  Jews 


CHAPTERS  X.,  xr.  195 


who  were  put  under  the  law,  and  whose  obedience  had 
the  character  of  obligation  to  do  such  and  such  things 
under  penalty  of  death.  We  are  already  alive  unto 
God,  conscious  of  the  blessedness  in  which  we  stand, 
and  awakened  to  see  the  beauty  of  the  will  of  God; 
for  His  will  it  is  which  has  saved  and  sanctified  us. 
This  is  our  calling,  and  our  practical  work  here  below. 
Christians  have  no  other  business,  properly  speaking, 
than  to  do  the  will  of  another.  We  have  to  do  God's 
will  according  to  the  character  of  the  obedience  of 
Christ — as  sons  delighting  in  the  will  of  the  Father. 
It  does  not  matter  what  we  may  have  to  do.  It  may 
be  one's  natural  daily  occupation.  But  do  not  make 
two  individuals  of  yourselves — with  one  principle  in 
your  business  or  family,  and  another  for  the  Church 
and  worship  of  God.  Never  allow  such  a  thought. 
We  have  Christ  for  everything  and  every  day.  Christ 
is  not  a  blessing  for  us  merely  when  we  meet  together 
or  are  called  to  die;  but  if  we  have  Christ,  we  have 
Him  for  ever,  and  from  the  first  moment  we  are 
emancipated  from  doing  our  own  will.  This  we 
learn  is  death ;  but  it  is  gone  now  in  Christ's  death. 
We  are  delivered,  for  we  are  alive  in  Him  risen. 
But  what  are  we  delivered  for?  To  do  the  will  of 
God.  We  are  sanctified  unto  the  obedience  of  Jesus 
Christ. 

As  for  "  the  king,"  you  have  in  him  the  awful 
principle  of  sin  which  has  always  been  at  work,  but 
which  here  exceeds  all  bounds.  The  moment  has 
come  when  God  will  remove  the  providential  checks 
which,  up  to  that  time.  He  will  have  put  upon  men, 
when  Satan  will  be  allowed  to  bring  about  all  his 
plans ;  and  that,  too,  in  the  very  land  whereon  the  eyes 
of  God  rest  continually. 

"  The  king  shall  do  according  to  his  own  will,  and 
he  shall  exalt  himself  and  magnify  himself  " — not  only 
above  every  man,  but  "  above  every  god."  And  it  is 
not  only  that  he  takes  his  place  above  these  so-called 


196  DANIEL. 

gods,  but  "  he  shall  speak  marvellous  things  against 
the  God  of  gods."  And,  strange  to  say,  (if  one  did 
not  know  the  perfect  wisdom  of  God,  and  could  not 
wait  for  His  counsels  to  be  matured,)  in  spite  of  his 
fearful  profanity,  "  he  shall  prosper  till  the  indigna- 
tion be  accomplished ;  for  that  that  is  determined  shall 
be  done."  The  clause  contains  a  word  that  gives  us 
the  key  to  the  passage.  For  some  have  found  immense 
difficulties  in  this  portion  of  the  word  of  God.  Many 
have  transported  into  this  verse  the  Pope  of  Rome, 
others  Mahomet,  or  Buonaparte.  But  here  we  find 
that  "  the  king"  is  to  prosper  till  the  indignation  be 
accomplished.  What,  or  about  whom?  Has  God 
indignation  against  His  Church  ?  Never.  This  is 
the  time,  too,  of  God's  patience  with  man — not  of  His 
indignation.  With  whom,  then,  is  it  connected  ? 
The  w^ord  of  God  is  perfectly  plain.  It  is  when 
dealing  with  Israel  that  God  speaks  of  indignation: 
I  have  already  shown  this  fully  from  Isa.  v. — x,,  xiv., 
and  other  passages,  as  it  is  entirely  confirmed  by  the 
whole  nature  of  the  revelation  here.  For  we  read  of 
one  that  would  be  the  king  of  Israel — not  in  Con- 
stantinople or  Rome,  but — in  Palestine.  And  the  time 
is  a  future  outburst  of  indignation  against  Israel  in 
the  promised  land.  He  (the  false  king)  shall  prosper 
till  the  indignation  be  accomplished.  Neither  shall  he 
regard  the  God  of  his  fathers,  nor  the  desire  of 
women.  The  expression,  "  the  desire  of  women," 
clearly,  to  my  mind,  refers  to  Christ — the  One  to 
whom  all  Jews  were  looking  forward,  and  whose  birth 
must  have  been  above  all  things  desired  by  Jewish 
women.  It  is  plain  from  the  connexion  that  such  is 
the  true  meaning.  For  it  occurs  between  "  the  God 
of  his  fathers"  (Jehovah)  and  "  any  god."  Nothing 
is  less  likely  than,  if  it  had  merely  referred  to  natural 
relationships,  that  it  w^ould  have  been  thus  placed.  It 
was,  probably,  from  the  wish  to  apply  this  to  the  pope 
that  such  an  interpretation  has  found  currency.     But 


CHAPTERS  X.,  xr.  197 

let  us  only  understand  that  the  prophecy  concerns 
Israel  and  their  land,  and  all  is  plain.  "  He  shall  not 
regard  the  God  of  his  fathers,  nor  the  desire  of 
women."  Christ  is  distinguished  from  "the  God  of 
his  fathers,"  perhaps,  because  the  Son  was  to  become 
incarnate.  But  Christ  is  regarded  no  more  than  the 
God  of  his  fathers — an  expression,  by  the  way,  which 
implies  that  he  himself  is  a  Jew.  It  is  "  the  God  of 
his  fathers."  "  For  he  shall  magnify  himself  above 
all.  But  in  his  estate  shall  he  honour  the  god  of 
forces."  It  is  not  that  he  goes  forward  as  Antiochus 
did,  trying  to  force  Jupiter  Olympus  upon  the  Jews ; 
but  he  adopts  a  new  superstition.  This  also  disproves 
the  reference  to  the  Syrian  king,  who  was  a  Gentile. 
Here  it  is  a  Jew,  who  will  take  the  place  of  the  Christ, 
and  who,  of  course,  regards  neither  the  true  Christ 
nor  Jehovah.  It  is  a  self-exalting  personage  who 
opposes  the  true  God,  i.e.,  who  equally  sets  aside  the 
superstitions  of  men  and  the  faith  of  God's  people. 
Self-exaltation  is  his  marked  feature. 

But  this  is  not  all.  The  Antichrist  will  be  infidel, 
but  not  merely  infidel.  He  will  have  rejected  the 
God  of  Israel,  and  the  Messiah.  Nor  will  he  honour 
any  of  the  gods  of  the  Gentiles.  But  even  this  man, 
although  he  sets  himself  up  as  the  true  God  upon  the 
earth,  will,  for  all  that,  have  some  one  to  whom  he 
bows  and  causes  others  to  bow  along  with  himself.  The 
human  heart,  even  in  Antichrist,  cannot  do  without  an 
object  of  idolatry.  So,  in  ver.  38,  there  is  this  appa- 
rent inconsistency  that  comes  out  in  the  Antichrist. 
"  But  in  his  estate  shall  he  honour  the  God  of  forces." 
He  makes  a  god,  as  well  as  setting  himself  up  to  be 
God.  "  A  god  whom  his  fathers  knew  not  shall  he 
honour  with  gold  and  silver,  and  with  precious  stones, 
and  pleasant  things."  It  is  entirely  an  invention  of 
his  own.  More  than  that.  He  will  divide  the  land 
among  his  adherents.  "  He  shall  cause  them  to  rule 
over  many,  and  shall  divide  the  land  for  gain."     Such, 


198  DANIEL. 

then,  is  God's  account  of  the  king  that  will  be  found 
in  Palestine  in  the  last  days.  And  it  is  plain  that 
this  last  verse  is  a  most  conclusive  proof  that  he  is  in 
Palestine  reigning.  It  is  "  the  land."  The  Spirit-T)f 
God  never  so  speaks  of  any  other  country.  It  was 
that  land  which  was  nearest  to  God — a  sort  of  centre 
for  all  others. 

Then  we  have  a  chanp^e  in  the  history.  "  And  at 
the  time  of  the  end  shall  the  king  of  the  south  push 
at  him."  This  confirms  what  was  said  before — that 
"  the  king"  is  found  "  at  the  time  of  the  end."  Then 
''shall  the  king  of  the  south  push  at  him:  and  the 
king  of  the  north  shall  come  against  him  like  a  whirl- 
wind, with  chariots  and  with  horsemen,  and  with 
many  ships."  The  Spirit  of  God  had  long  before 
spoken  about  the  kings  of  the  north  and  of  the  south. 
It  was  important  to  show,  that  at  the  time  of  the  end 
these  powers  will  have  successors,  who  will  make  their 
push  at  "the  king"  in  the  Holy  Land.  "  The  king  of 
the  south" — that  is,  Egypt — and  "  the  king  of  the 
north" — that  is,  the  holder  of  the  present  Syrian 
possessions  of  the  Sultan  —  these  two  persons  shall 
make  a  movement  against  "  the  king."  Not  that 
they  have  a  common  policy:  on  the  contrary,  they 
seem  bitter  enemies  one  of  another.  But  "  the  king  " 
so  exalts  himself,  arrogating  to  liimself  such  pre- 
tensions in  the  Holy  Land,  that  God  permits  the  final 
catastrophe  to  arrive.  The  king  of  the  south  comes 
first,  and  then  the  king  of  the  north,  who  appears  to 
be  the  great  military  and  naval  leader  of  the  east  in 
those  days.  "  The  king  of  the  north  shall  come 
against  him  like  a  whirlwind,  with  chariots  and  horse- 
men, and  with  many  ships  ;  and  he  shall  enter  into 
the  countries,  and  shall  overflow  and  pass  over."  *'  He 
shall  enter  also  into  the  glorious  land."  This  can  be  no 
other  land  than  that  of  Israel.  The  king  is  there. 
The  northern  king  is  a  totally  different  person,  an 
antagonist  of  "  the  king,"  as  well  as  the  king  of  the 


CHAPTERS    X.,    XI.  199 

south.  The  Spirit  of  God  having  introduced  "  the 
king,"  without  telling  us  whence  he  came,  now  drops 
that  personage  without  telling  us  what  became  of  him. 
His  frightful  destiny  is  shown  us  fully  in  other  scrip- 
tures. But  it  was  important  to  introduce  him  as  an. 
episode  in  chap,  xi.,  for  the  purpose  of  showing  the 
last  great  conflict  between  the  kings  of  the  north  and 
of  the  south.  Accordingly  he  drops  "  the  king,"  and 
the  rest  of  the  chapter  is  occupied  with  the  king  of 
the  north.  He  not  only  enters  the  glorious  land,  but 
he  goes  on  with  conquests  elsewhere.  "  Many  coun- 
tries  shall  be  overthrown,  but  these  shall  escape  out  of 
his  hand,  even  Edom  and  Moab  and  the  chief  of  the 
children  of  Ammon."  We  find  from  Isaiah  xi.  that 
this  is  a  very  notable  fact.  These  borderers  lived  on 
the  outskirts  of  the  Holy  Land.  God  so  orders  that, 
if  they  escape  the  king  of  the  north,  they  are  to  be 
ravaged  by  the  triumphant  Israelites.  God  will  not 
permit  that  the  early  and  bitter  enemies  of  Israel 
should  meet  with  their  righteous  retribution  from  the 
hands  of  any  but  the  people  whom  they  had  so  sought 
to  oppose  and  injure.  Accordingly,  it  would  appear 
from  Isaiah,  that,  a  very  little  after,  the  Israelites 
execute  God's  judgment  on  them. 

"  He  shall  stretch  forth  his  hand  also  upon  the 
countries;  and  the  land  of  Egypt  shall  not  escape. 
But  he  shall  have  power  over  the  treasures  of  gold 
and  of  silver,  and  over  all  the  precious  things  of 
Egypt;  and  the  Libyans  and  the  Ethiopians  shall  be 
at  his  steps."  From  this  we  learn,  that  the  king  of 
the  north  is  not  acting  as  a  colleague  with  the  king  of 
the  south.  He  proceeds  down  to  the  south,  where,  it 
would  appear,  (ver.  43,)  there  will  be  a  great  develop- 
ment of  material  prosperity,  whether  from  the  re- 
fiources  of  the  land  itself,  or  more  probably  from  its 
becoming  the  great  emporium  of  western  and  eastern 
commerce  in  that  part  of  the  world.  "  But  tidings 
out  of   the  east  and  out  of   the  north   shall   trouble 


200  DANIEL. 

him."  It  is  when  he  is  down  in  the  south,  beyond 
Pale^stine,  that  he  hears  these  rumours  of  perplexity 
in  the  north  and  east.  He  had  come  himself  from 
the  north,  and  was  the  conqueror  over  the  east 
also;  and  now  he  has  tidings  from  these  quarters  which 
agitate  him.  He  hastens  back  from  the  land  of  Egypt 
and  reaches  Palestine.  "  And  he  shall  plant  the 
tabernacles  of  his  palaces  between  the  seas  [that  is 
between  the  Mediterranean  and  the  Dead  seas]  in  the 
glorious  holy  mountain :  yet  he  shall  come  to  his  end, 
and  none  shall  help  him."  This  is  the  doom  of 
the  once  victorious  king  of  the  north — not  of  "  the 
king  "  who  was  introduced  by  the  way  to  show  us 
the  occasion  of  the  final  struggle  between  the  north 
and  south. 

I  would  now  desire  to  inquire  whether  there  be  not 
other  Scriptures  of  interest  to  connect  with  what  we 
have  just  been  looking  at.  In  the  close  of  Zechariah, 
we  shall  find  information  of  great  interest.  Just  a 
word  or  two  first  on  the  end  of  chap.  xi.  The  Spirit 
of  God  there  says,  "  Woe  to  the  idol  shepherd  that 
leaveth  the  flock."  This  I  conceive  is  clearly  the 
Antichrist — "the  king^."  For,  looking  at  verse  16, 
we  learn  that  this  idol  shepherd  is  in  the  land.  "  Lo, 
I  will  raise  up  a  shepherd  in  the  land,  which  shall  not 
visit  them  that  be  cut  off,  neither  shall  seek  the  young 
one,  nor  heal  that  that  is  broken,  nor  feed  that  that 
standeth  still;  but  he  shall  eat  the  flesh  of  the  fat, 
and  tear  their  claws  in  pieces."  This  utter  selfishness, 
and  self- exaltation,  and  spoiling  the  flock,  instead  of 
feeding  it  and  carrying  the  lambs  in  his  bosom,  is  in 
frightful  contrast  with  Christ,  the  Good  Shepherd. 
Thus  the  false  shepherd.  Antichrist,  is  to  be  raised  up 
in  the  land  of  Israel,  and  there  he  does  not  spare  the 
flock  of  God. 

But  in  chap.  xii.  we  have  another  power.  It  is 
said,  in  verse   2,  "  Behold  I  will  make  Jerusalem  a 


CHAPTERS    X.,    XI.  201 

cup  of  trembling  unto  all  the  people  round  about, 
•when  they  shall  be  in  the  siege  both  against  Judah 
and  against  Jerusalem."  There  are  nations  gathering 
against  Jerusalem.  Just  as  in  Dan  xi.,  the  king  of 
the  north  comes  down,  and  the  king  of  the  south. 
Nations  assemble  against  Jerusalem  while  this  idol 
shepherd  is  there.  Jerusalem  and  the  Jews  are  the 
object  of  attack.  "  And  in  that  day  will  I  make 
Jerusalem  a  burdensome  stone  for  all  people ;  all  that 
burden  themselves  with  it  shall  be  cut  in  pieces, 
though  all  the  people  of  the  earth  be  gathered  to- 
gether against  it."  Victory  seems  to  incline  to  the 
assailants  of  Israel.  But  none  can  then  harden  them- 
selves against  them  and  prosper,  because  the  Lord 
will  have  identified  Himself  with  them  in  that  day. 
'•'  In  that  day,  saith  the  Lord,  I  will  smite  every  horse 
with  astonishment,  and  his  rider  with  madness ;  and 
I  will  open  mine  eyes  upon  the  house  of  Judah;" 
and  then  we  have  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  will 
defend  His  people  in  that  day.  But  what  may  make 
it  still  plainer  is  that  which  we  read  in  chap.  xiv.  2, 
"  For  I  will  gather  all  nations  against  Jerusalem  to 
battle,  and  the  city  shall  be  taken,  and  the  houses 
rifled,  and  the  women  ravished;  and  half  the  city 
shall  go  forth  into  captivity,  and  the  residue  of  the 
people  shall  not  be  cut  off  from  the  city."  Here  we 
have  additional  disclosures  that  you  would  not  have 
gathered  from  chap.   xii.     Thus  we   learn   that  "  the 

city   shall    be   taken and    half   of    the    city 

shall  go  forth  into  captivity ;"  evidently  distinguishing 
this  future  siege  from  the  past.  When  the  Chaldeans 
took  the  city,  they  carried  all  away  captive.  When 
the  Romans  took  it,  all  they  spared  were  made 
prisoners.  Here  we  liave  another  siege,  in  which 
half  will  be  taken  and  the  other  half  not.  And  if 
anything  can  more  clearly  mark  off  the  future  from 
the  past,  it  is  that  the  nations,  having  taken  half  of 
the  city,  will  not  pursue  their  victory  farther.     Why  ? 


202 


DANIEL. 


"  Then  shall  the  Lord  go  forth  and  fight  against  those 
nations,  as  when  He  fought  in  the  day  of  battle.  And 
His  feet  shall  stand  in  that  day  upon  the  Mount  of 
Olives,  which  is  before  Jerusalem  on  the  east."  Who 
can  pretend  that  this  has  ever  been  accomplished? 
Who  can  say  that  the  Lord  has  thus  come  and  stood 
upon  the  Mount  of  Olives  ?  How  can  you  reconcile 
the  past  with  such  a  statement  as  this  ?  The  Lord 
has  never  been  on  Jerusalem's  soil  as  a  conqueror  since 
that  day.  Was  it  thus  when  Titus  besieged  it  ?  Do 
you  try  to  explain  it  away  as  merely  a  providential 
deliverance  ?  But,  I  ask,  were  they  delivered  then  ? 
They  were  taken  captive.  Jerusalem,  to  this  day, 
remains  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  and  must,  till 
the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled.  But  the  passage 
indicates  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  closing  in,  the  end 
of  Gentile  oppression.  When  this  day  is  verified, 
and  the  Lord  goes  forth  to  fight  against  those 
nations.  His  feet  shall  stand  upon  the  Mount  of 
Olives.  And,  as  a  mark  that  this  is  not  to  be  allego- 
rized, we  find  that  the  Spirit  adds,  that  the  Mount  of 
Olives  is  to  split  in  twain — an  outward  physical  proof 
that  the  Lord  God  has  planted  His  feet  there.  *'  The 
Mount  of  Olives  shall  cleave  in  the  midst  thereof  to- 
ward the  east  and  toward  the  west,  and  there  shall  be 
a  very  great  valley:  and  half  of  the  mountain  shall 
remove  toward  the  north,  and  half  of  it  toward  the 
south."  "  Ye  shall  flee  to  tne  valley  of  the  mountain," 
— that  is,  it  will  form  a  valley  between  the  two — "  for 
the  valley  of  the  mountains  shall  reach  unto  Azel. . . . 
and  the  Lord  my  God  shall  come,  and  all  the  saints 
with  thee."  There,  again,  we  find  a  most  clear 
proof  that  there  is  a  future  siege  of  Jerusalem,  and 
that  this  siege  will  be  characterized  by  two  attacks. 
The  first  attack  will  be  successful  against  Israel;  half 
the  city  will  be  taken,  and  all  the  miseries  of  a  fright- 
ful siege  will  follow,  as  far  as  half  the  city  is  concerned ; 
but  the  other  half  is  reserved  for  the  Lord,  who  will 


CHAPTERS    X.,    XT.  203 


bring  the  third  part  through  the  fire.  He  will  put 
Himself  at  their  head,  and  crush  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth  that  come  together  against  Jerusalem. 
Thus  the  second  attack  will  be  to  the  ruin  of  those 
that  make  it.  If  we  connect  this  with  Daniel,  how 
plain  is  the  additional  light  that  we  get!  The  king  of 
the  north  first  comes  down  when  the  king  of  the 
south  is  pushing  at  "  the  king"  in  the  Holy  Land. 
There  is  a  simultaneous  assault  made  upon  Israel,  to 
destroy  the  people  in  the  land,  who,  alas !  deserve  it. 
But  in  the  midst  of  evil  there  \vill  be  a  godly  seed. 
God  will  employ  these  assailants  to  do  the  work  of 
ths  executioner.  The  wncked  will  be  taken  away; 
and,  when  God  has  purged  those  that  remain,  there 
will  come  another  scene.  The  king  of  the  north, 
having  been  successful  in  his  first  attack,  pursues  his 
way  towards  Egypt,  against  the  king  of  the  south. 
He  comes  there,  but  tidings  from  the  north  and  east 
trouble  him,  and  he  returns  to  his  own  destruction. 

Meanwhile,  we  may  ask,  what  is  become  of  "  the 
king  ? "  Has  he  been  destroyed  in  the  collision 
between  the  kings  of  the  north  and  of  the  south,  that 
had  taken  place  in  the  land  ?  No.  What  then  is 
become  of  him  ?  How  does  he  fall  ?  "  By  the  bright- 
ness of  the  appearing  of  the  Lord"  from  heaven.  He 
is  reserved  for  the  hand  of  God  Himself.  He  will  be 
cast  alive  into  the  lake  of  fire  burning  with  brimstone. 
"  For  the  king  also  it  is  prepared."  Thus  we  have 
the  Old  Testament  and  the  New  giving  us  one  con- 
current testimony.  It  will  be  by  no  ordinary  doom 
of  ruined  man  that  he  will  perish.  It  is  God  de- 
parting from  all  His  ordinary  ways  of  dealing  with 
the  wicked.  Men  have  been  from  time  to  time  taken 
up  in  the  grace  of  God  from  this  world  without 
passing  through  death ;  and  there  are  men  for  whom 
it  is  destined  of  God  to  be  sent  down  alive  into  hell — 
the  terrible  contrast  of  those,  who  are  alive  when 
Christ  comes,  waiting  to  be  taken  up  to  heaven.     It 


204  DANTEL. 

will  be  so  witli  that  wicked  one,  tlie  idol  shepherd — 
"  the  king" — and  not  with  hira  only.  The  king  of  the 
north  is  a  bolder  enemy  still.  "  The  king"  has  set 
himself  up  in  the  land,  corrupting  and  apostatizing 
the  people  of  Israel.  He  has  met  with  his  doom.  If 
only  the  slightest  word  of  the  judgment  that  had  been 
executed  in  the  land  were  to  reach  the  king  of  the 
north,  we  can  understand  how  he  would  be  troubled. 
Whether  that  is  the  cause  of  his  hasty  return  to 
Palestine,  or  because  the  ten  tribes  were  in  movement, 
I  do  not  pretend  to  say.  We  are  not  told.  But 
he  comes  up  to  the  Holy  Land  again;  and,  this  time, 
it  is  to  fall  under  the  immediate  hand  of  God — 
not  with  the  sword  of  a  mighty  man,  nor  wdth  the 
sword  of  a  mean  man.  Not  man,  but  God,  will  exe- 
cute the  vengeance  upon  him.  Here  we  find  the 
reason  why  there  were  two  attacks.  After  his  first 
assault  on  Jerusalem,  he  has  gone  down  into  the 
south  and  has  pursued  certain  conquests  there.  Ex- 
cited by  the  tidings  referred  to,  he  hastens  to  return, 
hoping  now  to  have  it  all  his  own  way.  "  Then  shall 
the  Lord  go  forth  and  fight  against  those  nations,  as 
when  He  fought  in  the  day  of  battle." 

But  I  must  also  ask  you  to  look,  before  closing, 
at  one  or  two  other  passages.  Take  Isa.  xxviii. 
and  xxix.,  where  you  will  find  abundant  confirma- 
tion of  all  that  I  have  touched  upon  in  this  closing 
scene.  In  Isa.  xxviii.  you  will  observe  that  there  are 
two  great  powers  of  evil  connected  with  the  land  of 
that  day — one  ''  the  king,"  who  is  in  relation  with  the 
people,  and  in  the  land;  the  other  the  king  of  the  north, 
who  comes   down    as   an   antagonistic   power.*      We 

*  Mr.  Elliott  {HorcB  Apoc,  5th  ed.,  vol.  iv.,  p.  735,  note  4,) 
makes  it  to  be  an  essential  part  (!)  of  the  futurist  theory  that 
the  Antichrist  is,  during  part  of  the  last  three  and  a  half  years, 
to  be  occupied  in  besieging  Jerusalem  fi*om  without.  That 
some  writers,  ancient  and  modern,  have  fallen  into  this  stu- 
pendous mistake,  is  plain"  enough;  but  Mr.  E.'s  assertion  is 
totally  unfounded.    The    truth  is  (and  Mr.  E.  ought  to  know 


CHAPTERS   X.,   SI.  205 

stall  find  both  these  in  this  chapter.  First,  Ephraim 
is  mentioned,  and  the  Lord  pronounces  woe  npon 
*'  the  drunkards  of  Ephraim,  whose  glorious  beauty  is 

a  fading  flower Behold  the  Lord  hath  a  mighty 

and  strong  one,  which,  as   a   tempest   of  hail,  and  a 
destroying  storm,  as  a  flood   of  mighty  waters  over- 
flowing, shall  cast  down  to  the  earth  with  the  hand." 
There,  I  apprehend,  you  have  the  inroad  of  the  Assyrian 
as  the   dreadful    storm   from   the   north,   that   would 
break  forth  upon  Ephraim.     If  we  look  at  the  middle 
of  the  chapter,  we  shall  find  another  thing.     We  have 
seen  what  was  the  condition  of  Ephraim,  who  dwelt 
in  the  outskirts  of  the    country.     But  what  was  the 
destiny    of    Jerusalem,    the    capital  ?      "  Because    ye 
have  said,  (ver.  15,)  We  have  made  a  covenant  with 
death,    and  with  hell  are   we   at   agreement."     There 
we  have  evidently  what  is   connected  with  "  the  king" 
who  will  be  in  Jerusalem,  and  who  will  form  a  compact 
with  "  the  beast,"  the  great  imperial  power  of  that  day, 
to  whom  Satan  will  have  given  his  throne.     There  is 
full  harmony  between   what   we   have  in  Isaiah  and 
Revelation   and  Daniel.     "  We    have    made    a   cove- 
nant with  death,  and  with  hell  are  we  at  agreement; 
when  the  overflowing   scourge  shall  pass  through,  it 
shall    not   come   unto    us."     Mark   that.     The   over- 
flowing scourge  is  the  king  of  the  north,  the  outside 
power   that   is   coming    down   upon   them.     They   of 
Jerusalem  have  made  a  covenant  with  death  and  with 
hell,  (that  is,  with  instruments  of  Satan)  in  that  day: 
and  they  hope  by  this  means  to  escape  the  king  of  the 
north.     I  have  already  shown  that  "  the  beast,"  the  great 
power  of  the  west,  will  be  in  connexion  with  "  the  king" 

it  well),  that  very  many  authors,  both  historical  and  fu- 
turist, have  been  guilty  of  confounding  "the  king"  with 
"  the  king  of  the  north,"  at  the  close  of  Dan.  xi.  and  else- 
where J  but  it  is  false  that  the  error  is  essential  to  futurism 
more  than  to  the  Protestant  school.  Not  a  few  beside  myself 
had  seen  and  avoided  this  confusion  before  Mr.  E.'s  book  was 
written. 


206 


DANIEL. 


at  Jerusalem — that  the  western  parts  will  be  the 
great  seat  of  the  beast — that  he  will  command  all 
Europe  that  properly  belonged  to  the  Roman  Empire. 
When  that  empire  is  re-organized,  he  will  be  the 
main  instrument  of  using  its  strength.  ''The  king" 
will  have  made  a  covenant  with  him;  or,  as  it  is  said 
in  chap,  ix.,  he,  that  is,  the  Roman  prince,  will  make 
a  covenant  with  the  mass  of  the  Jews.  At  the  close, 
both  are  found  in  Jerusalem,  fighting  against  the 
Lord  and  His  saints  coming  from  heaven.  They  will 
find  their  supposed  strength  in  this  covenant,  but  it 
will  not  stand.  The  overflowing  scourge  (the  As- 
syrian) sweeps  on,  and  half  the  city  of  Jerusalem  is 
taken.  How  marvellously  does  Scripture  hang  to- 
gether !  Then  (Isa.  xxviii.  16)  comes  in  the  reference 
to  the  Lord's  laying  a  foundation-stone  in  Zion,  which 
is  evidently  a  word  for  the  faithful  remnant  of  that 
day,  however  true  for  us  who  believe  now. 

Isaiah  xxiv.  is  the  last  portion  to  which  I  wish  to 
refer.  There  we  have  the  closing  desolation  of  the 
city.  "  Woe  to  Ariel,  to  Ariel,  the  city  where  David 
dwelt,  o . . .  .Yet  I  will  distress  Ariel,  and  there  shall 
be  heaviness  and  sorrow :  and  it  shall  be  unto  me  as 
Ariel.  And  I  will  camp  against  thee  round  about, 
and  will  lay  siege  against  thee  with  a  mount,  and  I 
will  raise  forts  against  thee."  This  is  the  siege 
spoken  of  in  Zechariah.  "  And  thou  shalt  be  brought 
down  and  shalt  speak  out  of  the  ground,"  &c.  That  is 
their  condition  when  they  are  desolated.  But  mark, 
in  verse  5:  "  Moreover  the   multitude  of  thy  strangers 

shall  be  like  small  dust Thou  shalt  be  visited  of 

the  Lord  of  Hosts  with  thunder  and   with  earthquake 

And  the  multitude  of  all  the  nations  that  fight 

against  Ariel and  that  distress  her,  shall  be  as 

a  dream  of  a  night-vision."  The  Lord  has  gone  forth 
and  fought  with  those  nations  as  He  fought  in  the  day 
of  battle.  Sufficient  evidence  is  thus  brought  from 
yarious  parts  of  the  word  of  God,  which  entirely  falls 


CHAPTERS    X.,   XI.  207 

in  with,  and  throws  light  upon,  the  very  interesting 
portion  of  Daniel  now  before  us.  All  concur  in 
showing  most  clearly  that  there  is  a  terrible  future  for 
the  apostate  Jews  and  their  western  associates;  and  no 
less  terrible  for  their  confederate  eastern  adversaries. 
The  covenant  with  hell  will  not  stand.  When  the 
great  powers  of  the  world  will  have,  apparently, 
swept  all  before  them,  and  have  gathered  for  the 
last  great  struggle  before  Jerusalem,  God  will  take 
that  opportunity  for  dealing  with  them  after  His  long 
term  of  patience.  It  will  be  the  closing  scene.  They 
will  think  that  universal  monarchy  is  to  be  in  their 
hands;  but  it  will  be  God's  day  for  summoning  them 
to  judgment.  Here  I  speak  of  a  judgment  of  nations 
and  of  kings — not  of  the  dead  before  the  great  white 
throne.     (Rev.  xx.  11 — 15.) 

God  is  about  to  deal  with  the  earth — with  men  in 
the  midst  of  all  their  plans.  The  regeneration  of  the 
world  will  be  the  great  day  when  the  Lord,  having 
weeded  out  of  Israel  the  transgressors,  and  used 
"  the  king"  himself,  and  the  judgment  that  fell  upon 
him,  to  separate  the  true  ones  of  Judah  from  the 
wicked,  will  cause  the  hour  to  chime  when  the  account 
must  be  settled  with  the  nations.  This  appears  to 
me  to  be  the  simple,  straightforward  statement  of 
the  truth  of  God  that  we  have  here.  We  are  not  to 
suppose  it  is  merely  a  question  of  one  great  power 
only.  There  will  be  different  principles  at  work. 
And  it  is  an  awful  thing  to  think  that  these  lands, 
where  we  enjoy  such  privileges  are  to  be  then  over- 
spread with  the  deepest  darkness.  The  covenant  with 
death  and  with  hell  will  be  because  of  an  alliance 
made  with  the  highly  civilized  western  world.  What 
a  humbling  thing  for  the  pride  of  man  !  Civilization 
in  a  day  that  is  past  did  not  keep  the  mightiest  minds 
from  degrading  idolatry  and  filthiness.  Alas  !  we 
shall  have  a  still  worse  scene  at  the  close.  Christen- 
dom will  end  in  restored  idolatry,  in  novel  false  gods, 


208  DANIEL. 

in  man  himself  worsMpped  as  God.  Such,  I  be- 
lieve, is  the  predicted  future  of  this  age.  But  love 
can  keep  the  heart  the  same  from  being  entangled 
with  all  that  leads  to  it — Christ  Himself.  May 
v^^e  be  occupied  with  Him,  not  building  upon  men's 
foundations,  not  hoping  their  hope,  not  trusting  to 
progress,  or  even  to  religion,  so  called !  If  Christ  is 
my  object  in  every  tiling,  safety  is  found  there,  and 
nowhere  else. 


CHAPTER    XII. 

The  trouble,  of  which  the  prophet  speaks,  at  the  be- 
ginning of  this  chapter,  is  not  a  thing  long  after  and 
distinct  from  the  conflicts  described  at  the  end  of  the 
preceding  one,  but,  as  he  says  himself,  "  at  that  time." 
So  that  we  have  now  really  come,  in  looking  at  the 
closing  events  of  chap,  xi.,  to  the  latest  period  that 
Daniel  brings  before  us.  For  it  has  been  often  re- 
marked, that  Daniel  never  enters  upon  the  reign  of 
glory,  but  just  brings  us  up  to  that  point.  He  shows  us 
that  which  will  introduce  it,  gives  us  the  execution 
of  judgment  previous  to  it,  without  furnishing  many 
details,  and  tells  us  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  that  is 
to  fill  the  whole  earth,  but  he  does  not  describe  it. 
The  people  of  the  saints,  as  he  calls  the  Jews,  shall 
have  the  whole  kingdom  under  heaven.  The  truth  is, 
that  the  Spirit  of  God  had  already  by  others  most  fully 
entered  into  the  reign  of  the  Messiah  over  Israel  and 
the  blessedness  of  their  portion;  and  He  was  about 
to  predict  the  same  subject  by  others  subsequent  to 
the  captivity.  And  this  last  was  of  importance.  Be- 
cause He  well  knew  that  many  would  suppose  that  the 
return  of  the  Jews  from  the  Babylonish  captivity  was 


CHAPTER   XII.  209 

the  accomplisliment  of  the  prophecy.  Therefore  great 
pains  were  taken  in  some  of  the  latest  prophecies,  to 
show  that  nothing  was  farther  from  the  fact  and  that 
the  blessing  of  Israel  was  yet  future.  They  are  de- 
scribed as  being  in  a  miserable  condition  after  they 
return  from  Babylon;  and  the  Spirit  of  God  launches 
out  into  a  distant  future  as  the  period  when  Israel  are 
to  be  really  delivered  and  blessed  according  to  God's 
mind.  The  past  return  was  only  a  pledge  of  the  full 
restoration  which  God  intended  for  them.  But 
Daniel  does  not  enter  into  this  time  of  blessedness. 
He  brings  you  up  to  the  moment  and  then  closes. 
His  peculiar  object  was  "  the  times  of  the  Gentiles." 
This  accounts  for  the  remarkable  character  of  his 
prophecy.  He  is  simply  a  prophet  of  the  captivity, 
and  of  its  end. 

In  chap,  xii.,  we  have  what  takes  place  between  the 
judgment  of  the  Gentiles  and  the  ushering  of  the 
Jews  into  their  blessing.  We  have  seen  "  the  king  " 
and  his  wickedness  in  the  Holy  Land,  and  have  also 
heard  of  the  kings  from  the  north  and  from  the  south. 
Whatever  may  have  appeared  to  be  the  temporary 
power  of  the  great  leader  of  the  north  against  the  Holy 
Land,  "yet  he  shall  come  to  his  end  and  none  shall 
help  him."     Such  was  his  miserable  close. 

But  now  comes  an  interesting  question — What  will 
be  the  condition  of  Israel  at  that  time  ?  The  answer 
is  given  in  these  first  verses :  "  And  at  that  time  shall 
Michael  stand  up,  the  great  prince  which  standeth  for 
the  children  of  thy  people."  This  was  the  people  that 
Daniel  was  concerned  about.  He  had  no  idea  of  what 
we  call  now  a  Christian  people — no  notion  that  thei'e 
was  a  time  coming,  already  settled  in  the  counsels  of 
God,  when  there  should  no  longer  be  any  distinction 
between  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  when  both  would  be 
formed,  by  the  faith  of  a  crucified  Christ,  into  one 
body  by  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from  heaven.  All 
this  was   a   novelty  to   Daniel,   and  the  Lord   never 


210  DANIEL. 

even  gives  him  to  anticipate  such  a  state.  Not  one 
prophecy  in  Daniel,  nor  in  any  other,  reveals  it, 
though  many  intimate  certain  particulars  which  are 
now  realized  in  it,  as  we  see  in  Romans  ix.,  x.,  &;c^, 
"Thy  people"  means,  simply  and  solely,  the  Jewish 
people.  Daniel  was  rightly  and  deeply  interested  in 
them,  as  a  true  Israelite  of  God  should  be,  that  felt 
for  the  glory  of  God  connected  with  His  people.  Ac- 
cordingly, the  Spirit  of  God  communicates  to  him, 
that  at  that  time  there  should  be  a  turning-point  in 
Israel's  history.  Instead  of  mere  providential  control 
—  Michael  resisting  this  prince  or  that,  he  will 
stand  up  for  them,  undertaking  their  case  and  putting 
down  definitely  their  adversaries;  but,  even  then,  not 
•without  a  fearful  struggle.  Their  defence  was  his 
habitual  task.  ]^ut  now  he  shall  stand  up  to  com- 
plete the  great  earthly  purposes  of  God  in  the  de- 
liverance of  the  Jews. 

"  And  there  shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as 
never  was  since  there  was  a  nation  even  to  that 
same  time :  and  at  that  time  thy  people  shall  be  de- 
livered, every  one  that  shall  be  found  written  in 
the  book."  There  we  have  the  important  information 
that  at  once  distinguishes  this  standing  up  of  Michael 
from  all  times  that  had  ever  been.  So  far  from  de- 
liverance as  yet,  the  trouble  that  fell  upon  the  Jews 
under  Titus  was  more  terrible  than  that  which  had 
befallen  them  under  Nebuchadnezzar.  What  folloAvs 
then  ?  That  this  time  of  trouble  is  yet  to  come. 
The  Spirit  of  God  is  here  describing  that  which,  having 
had  no  answer  in  the  past,  must  await  the  future. 
And,  in  fact,  we  have  only  to  look  at  Jerusalem,  and 
at  the  present  condition  of  the  Jews,  to  see  that  this  is 
so.  Are  they  delivered  ?  On  the  contrary,  there  is 
not  a  country  under  the  sun  but  what  bears  its  witness, 
in  one  way  or  another,  that  they  are  degraded,  and  out 
of  the  land  of  their  glory,  where  the  Lord's  eyes  rest 
continually.     But  their  misery  ought  to  tell  him  who 


CHAPTER   XII.  '  211 

has  ears  to  hear,  that  Jerusalem  must  yet  be  called 
the  throne  of  Jehovah;  and  all  the  nations  shall  be 
gathered  unto  it,  to  the  name  of  Jehovah,  to  Jerusalem ; 
when  Gentiles  shall  walk  no  more  after  the  stubborn- 
ness of  their  evil  heart;  and  the  house  of  Judah  shall 
walk  with  the  house  of  Israel,  both  settled  and  united 
in  peace  and  love  in  the  land  given  of  God  for  an 
inheritance  to  their  fathers. 

There  are  those  who  regard  what  is  spoken  of  here 
as  future,  but  who  say,  that  it  must  be  taken  spiritu- 
ally, and  be  interpreted  of  the  Church,  or  God's  people 
now.  But,  first,  it  is  enough  to  answer  that  we  have 
had  a  long  prophecy  which  was  ushered  in  by  the 
angel  to  Daniel  with  the  positive  announcement  that 
it  was  what  should  befall  his  people  in  the  latter  days. 
This  excludes  such  ideas.  Next,  observe  throughout 
the  prophecy  that  none  but  Jews  are  spoken  of  as 
the  objects  of  God's  interest  up  to  this  time.  The 
Holy  Land  was  in  question,  and  the  conflicts  of  the 
north  and  south  around  it.  Under  Christianity,  there 
is  no  such  thing  as  a  holy  land.  It  is  mere  Judaism 
or  heathenism  to  regard  one  place  as  more  sacred  than 
another,  now  that  the  full  light  of  Christianity  has 
come  in.  But  if  there  be  a  land  that  is  in  God's 
purpose  glorious,  it  is  Israel's.  Only  it  loses  that 
character  during  the  Gentile  calling.  There  is  the 
revelation  of  heavenly  things  now — not  of  earthly. 
And  therefore,  whatever  was  holy  before,  in  a  mere 
earthly  point  of  view,  is  passed  away  for  the  present, 
being  eclipsed  by  something  brighter.  God  has  other 
counsels  now  in  view.  The  ancient  people  proved 
themselves  to  be  false  and  unholy  in  rejecting  their 
own  Messiah.  And  until  they  are  brought  as  a  nation 
to  Jesus,  or,  in  the  words  of  the  Revelation,  to  "  keep 
the  commandments  of  God,  and  have  the  testimony 
of  Jesus  Christ" — until  a  remnant  has  got  some 
sort  of  divine  knowledge  of  Christ,  God  will  not  own 
them.     Meanwhile,   He  has  turned  to  another  work, 


212  DANIEL. 

that  of  forming  the  Church,  -which  is  not  referred  to 
here.  It  is  a  blessed  truth  that  God  has  gone 
out  in  rich  mercy  to  the  Gentiles;  but  what  comfort 
would  this  be  as  to  what  lay  so  heavily  upon  the  heart-^ 
of  the  prophet  ?  Whereas  all  is  suitable  and  clear,  if 
we  see  that  his  own  people  are  described,  and  their 
passage  through  the  terrible  scene  spoken  of  here,  the 
eve  of  their  deliverance,  and  this  of  God.  "  There 
shall  be  a  time  of  trouble,  such  as  never  was  since 
there  was  a  nation  even  to  that  same  time :  and  at  that 
time  thy  people  shall  be  delivered,"  &c. 

I  will  show  that  this  is  not  the  testimony  of  one 
sacred  writer  only,  but  of  several.  Take  the  sorrowing 
prophet  Jeremiah,  chap.  xxx.  There  we  have  a  clear 
reference  to  Jacob's  great  trouble,  followed  by  his 
mighty  deliverance.  "  These  are  the  words  that  the 
Lord  spake  concerning  Israel  and  concerning  Judah." 
Who  will  contest  the  meaning  of  that  ?  "  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,  We  have  heard  a  voice  of  trembling,  of  fear, 
and  not  of  peace.  Ask  ye  now,  and  see  whether  a 
man  doth  not  travail  with  child  ?  Wherefore  do  I  see 
every  man  with  his  hands  on  his  loins  as  a  woman  in 
travail,  and  all  faces  are  turned  into  paleness  ?  "  It  is  a 
state  of  things  beyond  all  that  is  ordinarily  reasonable. 
Men  filled  with  the  deepest  anguish,  depicted  even  in 
their  faces,  and  their  courage  fled  in  presence  of  fear- 
ful trouble.  The  seventh  verse  explains  it.  "  Alas ! 
for  that  day  is  great,  so  that  none  is  like  it."  As  in 
Daniel,  it  is  a  time  unprecedented.  "  It  is  even  the 
time  of  Jacob's  trouble ;  but  he  shall  be  saved  out  of 
it."  Jacob,  "  that  w^orm  Jacob,"  is  the  name  used  for 
the  people  regarded  in  their  weakness,  as  Israel  is  their 
name  of  power.  It  is  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble,  but 
he  shall  be  saved  out  of  it.  So  far  it  is  the  same 
train  of  thought,  in  the  mind  of  the  Spirit,  as  we  have 
in  Daniel.  We  have  Israel  and  Judah  in  question, 
called  by  the  name  that  expresses  their  weakness 
as  exposed    to  every   kind   of   calamity    from   with- 


CHAPTER  xir.  213 

out.  It  is  a  day  of  unparalleled  trouble,  and  the 
Israel  of  that  day  are  to  be  delivered  out  of  it. 

If  I  were  to  look  through  Isaiah,  I  might  show, 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  book,  the  same 
thing,  only  more  diffused.  I  need  not  dwell  upon 
passages  so  well  known.  (Chaps,  i.,  ii.,  x.,  xiv.,  xvii., 
xxii.,  xxiv. — XXXV.,  xlix. — Ixvi.) 

But  it  may  be  asked,  if  there  be  anything  from  the 
New  Testament  to  bring  forward  ?  —  I  have  beerf' 
producing  passages  from  the  Old  Testament.  Can 
I  show  you  something  from  the  New,  giving  the  in- 
creased and  full  light  of  God  through  His  beloved 
Son?  The  thought  might  arise,  as  it  has  indeed,  that 
Christianity  sets  aside  the  Jews  altogether,  not  merely 
during  the  present  economy,  but  for  ever;  so  that  we 
are  to  read  "  the  people"  merely  as  the  type  of  those 
whom  God  is  now  forming  for  His  praise.  Our  Lord 
Himself  decides  that  question  in  Matt.  xxiv.  He 
shews  us  that  there  is  a  destiny  of  Israel  which 
Daniel  brings  before  us  and  which  is  not  to  be 
applied  to  any  other  people  under  the  sun.  It  is  their 
own  portion,  both  in  its  sorrows  and  deliverances. 
The  disciples  had  said,  (ver.  3,)  "  Tell  us,  when  shall 
these  things  be  ?  And  what  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy 
coming  and  of  the  end  of  the  age."  Observe  here  that 
the  end  of  "the  age"  is  the  only  proper  meaning.  It 
has  no  reference  to  the  last  catastrophe  of  the  world  as 
a  material  system,  but  to  a  certain  dispensation  running 
out  its  course  in  the  world,  from  which  the  term  anov 
is  totally  distinct.  The  Lord  warns  them  that  they 
were  in  danger  of  being  deceived;  that  persons  were 
to  come  pretending  to  be  Christ;  that  there  were  to 
be  outward  troubles;  that  His  testimony  was  in  no 
way  to  change  the  ordinary  current  of  human  affairs, 
for  nation  is  to  rise  against  nation,  and  kingdom 
against  kingdom;  and,  as  regarded  the  physical  state 
of  the  world,  there  would  be  famines  and  pestilences, 
and  earthquakes.      He  is  there  only  preparing  them 


214  DANIEL. 

for  a  fearful  crisis  that  was  coming.  "  All  these  are 
the  beginnings  of  sorrows."  "  Then  shall  they  deliver 
you  up  to  be  afflicted  and  shall  kill  you,  and  ye  shall— 
be  hated  of  all  nations  for  my  name's  sake."  Up  to 
verse  15,  we  have  general  statements.  Then  He  at 
once  narrows  the  scene  to  Jerusalem  and  to  the  land 
of  Judea.  He  does  not  continue  the  account  of  the 
gospel  of  the  kingdom  traversing  the  whole  world,  but 
shuts  up  His  view  to  that  strip  of  ground,  where 
God's  people  dwelt,  and  to  that  city  near  which  He 
then  pronounced  this  very  prophecy.  "  When  ye 
therefore  shall  see  the  abomination  of  desolation, 
S23oken  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  stand  in  the  holy 
place,  (whoso  readeth,  let  him  understand,) "  &c. 
Here  we  have  positive  direction  to  look  at  the  very 
book  that  we  are  examining.  The  Lord  in  this  part 
of  His  discourse  was  speaking  about  the  same  things 
that  Daniel  predicted  in  his  prophecy.  "  Then  let  them 
which  be  in  Judea  flee  into  the  mountains." 

I  ask,  can  there  be  a  question  as  to  the  meaning  of 
these  verses  ?  Does  any  one  doubt  what  "  the  holy 
place "  means  ?  Is  it  ever  used  in  any  other  sense 
than  the  sanctuary  of  God  at  Jerusalem  ?  The  holy 
place,  as  a  spot  on  earth,  is  invariably,  in  Scripture, 
the  Jewish  centre  for  worshipping  God.  The  abomina- 
tion of  desolation  means  an  idol  which  should  bring 
in  desolation  upon  the  Jews.  When  this,  then,  spoken 
of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  stands  in  the  temple,  those 
who  heed  Christ  are  to  flee.  There  is  not  a  word 
about  Gentiles  here — not  a  hint  about  the  Church  of 
God  as  such.  Godly  people,  but  Jews,  in  their  own 
city,  are  warned,  when  they  see  this  idol,  to  flee  to 
the  mountains  of  Judea  in  the  vicinity.  "  And  woe 
unto  them  that  are  with  child,  and  to  them  that  give 
suck  in  those  days.  But  pray  ye  that  your  flight  be 
not  in  the  winter,  neither  on  the  Sabbath-day."  It  is 
not  at  all  a  Christian  but  a  Jewish  scene.  The  Lord's- 
day  is  that  which  Christians  observe.     It  is  the  great 


CHAPTER   XII.  215 

symbol  of  our  recognition  of  Christ  risen,  and  of  onr 
blessing  in  Him ;  but  the  Sabbath  was  a  sign  between 
God  and  Israel. 

"  For  then  (our  Lord  says)  shall  be  great  tribulation, 
such  as  was  not  since  the  beginning  of  the  world  to 
this  time,  no,  nor  ever  shall  be."  Many,  I  am  aware, 
apply  this  to  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus, 
and  to  the  great  calamities  that  then  broke  up  the  Jews. 
But  there  is  one  essential  point  of  difference  that  ought 
not  to  be  overlooked.  The  Jewish  people  were  not 
delivered  then.  Whereas,  when  Daniel's  prophecy  is 
accomplished,  they  are,  and  must  be,  delivered — not  at 
a  subsequent  epoch,  but  at  that  time.  If  Daniel  is  a 
true  prophet,  (and  no  one  who  reveres  the  Lord,  and 
rightly  weighs  His  words,  will  question  it,)  it  is  not 
that  his  prophecy  failed,  but  that  it  remains  to  be 
fulfilled.  Our  Lord  distinctly  and  positively  quotes 
from  that  prophecy,  and  from  the  very  chapter  (xii.) 
we  are  considering.  And  what  does  He  connect  with 
Israel's  deliverance?  His  own  coming  as  the  Son  of 
Man  from  heaven.  Who  can  say  that  this  has  been? 
The  Romans,  instead  of  being  broken  down  in  the 
time  of  Titus,  were  allowed  to  enslave  the  Jews. 
These  were  not  then  delivered,  nor,  up  to  the 
present  moment,  have  they  ever  been  the  masters 
of  their  own  temple,  nor  allowed  to  be  in  their  own 
land,  even  as  ordinary  men.  If  there  is  one  race 
more  peculiarly  proscribed  in  the  Holy  Land,  it  is  the 
Jewish.  The  Turks,  the  present  possessors  of  it,  have 
held  it  for  many  a  long  year;  and  all,  whether  Cru- 
saders or  Saracens,  have  agreed  to  shut  out  the  Jews. 
So  that  there  has  been  nothing  like  the  Son  of  Man 
coming  to  deliver  Israel.  Michael  has  not  stood  up 
for  them  in  that  sense  yet. 

Thus,  what  I  have  shown  from  the  Old  Testament  is 
amply  confirmed  by  the  New.  Prophet  after  prophet, 
all  distinctly  furnish  the  same  outline,  i.e.,  a  time  of 
trouble,   such  as  never  was   before,  followed  immedi' 


216  DANTEL. 

ately  by  a  deliverance  such  as  Israel  has  never  yet 
enjoyed.  It  is  perfectly  plain,  as  we  all  believe,  that 
these  prophecies  are  of  God,  that  it  is  only  a  question 
of  waiting  God's  time  for  Himself  to  accomplish'^ 
them  to  the  very  letter.  As  our  Lord  says  in  this 
same  chap.  xxiv.  of  Matthew,  "  Heaven  and  earth 
shall  pass  away,  but  my  words  shall  not  pass  away." 
It  is  not  only  that  the  general  strain  is  true,  but 
not  one  jot  nor  one  tittle  shall  pass  till  all  be  fulfilled. 
The  notion  that  God  has  cast  away  His  people,  Israel, 
because  He  is  now  in  mercy  filling  up  the  blank  season 
of  their  rebellion  against  the  Lord  Jesus  and  the 
gospel,  is  distinctly  treated  in  Romans  xi.,  as  the  off- 
spring of  Gentile  conceit.  For  not  only  is  God  able 
to  graft  the  natural  branches  into  their  own  olive  tree, 
but  when  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  is  come  in,  all 
Israel  shall  be  saved  according  to  clear  prophecy. 
They  are  to  become  objects  of  divine  saving  mercy 
at  the  end,  as  we  now;  only  in  their  case  it  will 
be  in  their  land.  "  And  the  Redeemer  shall  come 
to  Zion,"  &c. 

If  this  be  so,  we  have  an  important  key  to  the 
prophecy  of  Daniel.  Although  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  by  the  Romans  ^vas  so  near,  yet  the  Lord 
distinctly  looks  onward  to  another  time.  And  what 
makes  it  the  more  remarkable  is,  that  one  evangelist 
does  give  us  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  the 
Romans,  but  also  distinguishes  it  from  this  future  time 
of  trouble.  In  Luke  xxi.  is  the  chief  reference  of  a 
positively  prophetic  kind  to  the  Roman  destruction 
of  Jerusalem.  And  mark  the  difference  of  the  lan- 
guage: "  And  when  ye  shall  see  Jerusalem  compassed 
about  with  armies."  Not  a  word  about  the  abomina- 
tion of  desolation  standing  in  the  holy  place.  St. 
Luke  passes  over  this  entirely,  and  introduces  what 
Matthew  does  not  mention — Jerusalem  encompassed 
with  armies.  "  When  ye  shall  see  Jerusalem,  en- 
compassed with  armies,  then  know  that  the  desolation 


CHAPTER    XII.  217 

thereof  is  nigh.  Then  let  them  which  are  in  Judea 
flee  to  the  mountains,  and  let  them  which  are  in  the 
midst  of  it  depart  out,"  &c.  That  is,  the  Lord  pre- 
scribes exactly  the  same  course  to  be  taken  by  the 
Jews  in  Jerusalem,  whether  at  the  approaching  sack 
of  the  city  by  the  Romans  (as  in  Luke),  or  at  the 
future  desolation  that  should  fall  upon  it  (as  in 
Matthew).  So  far  there  was  an  analogy  between  the 
two  things:  the  godly  were  to  flee  away;  they  were 
not  to  trust  to  vain  hopes  of  deliverance  through 
some  pretended  Messiah,  but  were  to  know  from  the 
lips  of  the  Lord  Himself,  that  Jerusalem  was  to  fall 
under  the  hand  of  the  Gentiles.  If  any  wanted  to 
escape,  it  must  be  outside  Jerusalem.  "  And  let  not 
them  that  are  in  the  countries  enter  thereinto."  No 
matter  what  people  may  say  of  the  necessity  of  any 
keeping  their  feast,  their  path  of  safety  is  to  avoid 
Jerusalem.  There  is  no  deliverance  for  Israel  yet. 
"  For  these  be  the  days  of  vengeance,  that  all  things 
which  are  written  may  be  fulfilled." 

Luke,  it  will  be  observed,  does  not  say.  This  is 
the  time  of  trouble,  such  as  was  not  since  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world.  There  is  the  most  surprising 
perfectness  of  expression.  Luke  takes  up  first  the 
destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  and  Matthew 
nothing  but  the  last  siege,  before  the  Jews  are 
delivered.  "  For  these  be  the  days  of  vengeance,  that 
all  things  which  are  written  may  be  fulfilled.  But 
woe  unto  them  that  are  with  child,  and  to  them  that 
give  suck  in  those  days!  For  there  shall  be  great 
distress  in  the  land,  and  wrath  upon  this  people.  And 
they  shall  fall  by  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  shall 
be  led  away  captive  into  all  nations."  This  was  not, 
therefore,  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble,  when  he  should 
be  delivered.  At  the  time  spoken  of  by  Luke,  instead 
of  deliverance,  they  only  fell  into  the  trouble  of  a 
captivity,  after  the  troul3le  of  the  war.  "  Jerusalem 
«hall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  until  the  times 


218  DANIEL. 

of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled."  That  is  accomplishing 
to  the  present  hour.  "  The  times  of  the  Gentiles " 
are  going  on  still.  The  Gentiles  have  always  lorded 
it  as  yet.  The  Jews  have  not  got  a  land  or  a  city" 
that  they  can  call  their  own  on  the  face  of  the  earth. 
Who  have  their  city  and  their  land  ?  The  Gentiles. 
"  The  times  of  the  Gentiles"  are  not  expired.  "  Jeru- 
salem shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gentiles,  until  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles  be  fulfilled."  They  are  its 
masters,  and,  as  such,  they  will  tread  it  down  till  the 
allotted  times  are  fulfilled — not  for  ever.  Nowhere 
is  it  said  that  this  is  to  go  on  till  the  end  of  time. 
On  the  contrary,  Gentile  dominion  over  the  Jews,  is 
soon  to  close.     We  have  this  in  the  next  verse. 

We  have  already  seen  a  most  regular,  orderly  setting 
forth  of  the  troubles  that  were  to  befall  Jerusalem. 
And  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  have  been  running  on 
ever  since  the  days  of  Titus  to  the  present  moment. 
But  in  verse  25  begins  the  closing  scene,  which  is  the 
only  thing  mentioned  in  Matt,  xxiv.,  from  verse  15 
and  onwards — and  this,  because  of  the  question  put  by 
the  disciples,  "  What  shall  be  the  sign  of  thy  coming, 
and  of  the  end  of  the  age  ? "  But  in  Luke  they 
simply  ask,  "  What  sign  will  there  be  when  these 
things  (i.e.,  the  overthrow  of  the  temple)  come  to 
pass  ?  "  Accordingly,  the  Lord  gives  them  the  coming 
up  of  the  Romans;  and  then  He  goes  on,  down  the 
Gentile  stream  of  time,  to  the  end.  But  Matthew 
confines  himself  to  the  close  in  answer  to  the  question 
which  he  records.  This  is  the  simple  reason,  and 
nothing  can  be  more  beautiful  than  the  way  in  which 
the  truth  comes  out.  After  this  in  Luke  we  have  the 
great  events  when  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  close. 
"  There  shall  be  signs  in  the  sun,  and  in  the  moon, 
and  in  the  stars;  and  upon  the  earth  distress  of  nations, 

with    perplexity men's    hearts     failing    them 

for   fear,    and    for    looking    after    those    things    that 
are  coming  on  the  earth;    for  the  powers    of  heaven 


CHAPTER    XTI.  219 

shall  be  shaken.  And  then  shall  they  see  the 
Son  of  man  coming  in  a  clond,  with  power  and 
great  glory."  All  this  is  kept  distinct  from  the  past 
siege. 

People  who  apply  Matt.  xxiv.  in  a  tropical  way  to 
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  are  obliged  to 
make  out  that  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  from 
heaven  is  a  mere  figure,  representing  the  providential 
acting  of  God  through  Titus  to  put  down  the  Jews. 
But  Luke  xxi.  gives  a  complete  refutation  to  this 
idea.  For  here  the  Spirit  of  God  shows  that  Jeru- 
salem has  been  taken,  and  the  Gentile  times  run  on: 
when  they  are  about  to  expire,  the  Son  of  man  comes 
in  the  clouds  of  heaven  with  power  and  great  glory — 
hundreds  of  years  after  Titus.  The  closing  scene  is 
brought  in  as  finishing  up,  or  consequent  on,  the 
times  of  the  Gentiles. 

But  there  is  more.  "  And  when  these  things  begin 
to  come  to  pass,  then  look  up  and  lift  up  your  heads: 
for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh."  And  then, 
a  little  further  on,  (ver.  32,)  we  find  this  remark- 
able expression,  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you.  This  gene- 
ration shall  not  pass  away  till  all  be  fulfilled."  It 
is  a  misuse  of  this  term  which  lias  led  to  a  good 
deal  of  the  confusion  on  the  subject.  When  does 
the  phrase  "this  generation"  come  in?  After  the 
Son  of  man  has  already  come  in  power  and  glory — 
not  when  they  saw  Jerusalem  compassed  with  armies. 
That  is  an  important  point  to  help  in  determining  its 
true  meaning.  If  "  this  generation  really  meant  a 
man's  life-time,  such  a  place  in  the  prophecy  would 
be  incongruous.  The  vulgar  notion  might  have  been 
reasonable,  if  the  phrase  occurred  just  at  the  compass- 
ing of  Jerusalem  with  armies.  But  it  has  no  sense  if 
put  in  after  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  are  accomplished. 
So  that  "  this  generation,"  if  taken  temporally,  must 
plainly  embrace  a  scope  of  eighteen  centuries  at  the 
least.      What    then,    is   its   true   force  ?      It    means 


220  DANIEL. 

— what  it  does  very  often  in  Scripture — this  Christ- 
rejecting  race  of  Israel,  and  not  a  mere  period  of 
time.  It  is  used  in  a  moral  sense  to  describe  a  race- 
acting  after  a  particular  way,  good  or  evil.  Moses, 
reproaching  them,  says,  "  They  have  corrupted  them- 
selves   they  are  a  perverse  and  crooked  gene- 
ration  And  he  said,  I  will  hide  my  face  from 

them,  I  will  see  what  their  end  shall  be,  for  they  are  a 
very  froward  generation."  Here,  most  clearly,  their 
moral  condition  as  a  people  is  meant,  and  not  the  time 
in  which  this  was  manifested.  In  the  Psalms  w^e  have 
a  further  key  to  the  proper  meaning.  Thus,  in  Psalm 
xii.,  *' Thou  shalt  keep  them,  0  Lord;  thou  shalt 
preserve  them  from  this  generation  for  ever."  If  by 
"  generation  "  were  merely  meant  a  term  of  thirty  or 
forty  years,  what  sense  would  there  be  in  the  words 
"  for  ever  ?  "  This  refers,  not  at  all  to  a  course  of  a  few 
years,  but  to  the  moral  state  of  a  people,  and  that  of 
the  people  of  Israel.  In  like  manner,  the  force  of  the 
words  in  St.  Luke  is  quite  plain.  "  This  generation 
shall  not  pass  away  till  all  be  fulfilled."  The  race  of 
Israel  still  going  on  in  unbelief  and  rejection  of 
Christ  is  what  the  Lord  means.  He  is  saying,  as  it 
were,  I  will  prepare  you  for  the  terrible  truth,  that 
this  Christ-rejecting  generation  is  to  continue  till  all 
these  things  are  fulfilled.  Apart  from  prophecy,  how 
could  such  an  issue  have  bean  anticipated  ?  For  it 
might  have  been  supposed  that,  while  Christianity  was 
going  over  the  whole  earth,  and  making  conquests 
everywhere,  if  one  nation  more  than  another  was  to  be 
brought  under  the  power  of  Christ,  it  must  be  Israel, 
loved  for  the  fathers'  sake.  But  no.  The  Jews  are 
to  proceed  in  the  same  unbelief.  There  might  be  a 
line  of  faithful  ones  among  them,  but  the  wicked 
generation  which  Christ  then  denounced  shall  not 
pass  away  till  all  is  fulfilled.  And  what  will  follow  ? 
Even  as  the  Psalms  say,  "  the  generation  to  come." 
Israel  will  be  born  again — will  have  a  new  heart  given 


CHAPTER   XII.  221 

tliem.  Then  are  they  to  be  the  people  that  shall 
praise  the  Lord. 

This,  I  must  add,  entirely  falls  in  with  the  rest  of 
Scripture.  For  the  Lord,  under  the  figure  of  a 
fruitless  fig-tree,  had  set  forth  the  then  Israel.  On 
that  tree  He  consequently  pronounced  a  curse.  When 
it  is  said  in  one  of  the  Gospels  that  the  time  of  figs 
was  not  yet,  it  means  the  season  of  their  ripeness  or 
of  their  ingathering  was  not  yet  arrived.  Hence  the 
figs  could  not  have  been  taken  from  the  tree.  Had  it 
borne  any,  they  must  have  been  there.  It  was  merely 
when  the  figs  were  still  unripe,  that  our  Lord  came 
to  seek  fruit;  but  there  was  not  one.  There  was 
plentiful  profession — leaves,  but  no  fruit.  Therefore 
said  He,  "  Let  no  fruit  grow  on  thee  henceforward  for 
ever  !  "  Such,  in  figure,  is  "  this  generation."  But 
how  is  that  to  be  reconciled  with  Israel's  being  to  the 
praise  of  the  Lord  by  and  by  ?  Israel  must  be  born 
again.  "  This  generation"  will  never  produce  fruit 
for  the  Lord.  It  is  to  be  destroyed  under  the  judg- 
ment of  God;  and  a  new  race  will  be  born.  The 
type  of  the  past  makes  room  for  a  striking  figure 
of  the  future. 

From  these  prophecies  that  we  have  looked  at,  two 
out  of  the  Old  and  two  out  of  the  New  Testament,  it 
is  clear  that  the  time  of  trouble  of  which  Daniel 
speaks,  is  entirely  future;  and  that  St.  Luke  dis- 
tinguishes expressly  the  time  of  great  distress  just 
about  to  fall,  and  which,  in  fact,  has  fallen  on  Jeru- 
salem, from  a  closing  time  of  far  more  intense  trouble 
which  is  yet  to  come.  We  now  return  to  Daniel,  with 
the  clear  light  of  other  Scriptures  from  both  Testa- 
ments, shewing  God's  word  to  be  positive  and  precise, 
that  Israel  must  pass  through  an  unheard-of  sea  of 
trouble,  but  out  of  that  they  are  to  be  delivered.  It 
is,  in  fact,  the  precursor  of  their  great  salvation  from 
God. 

Still     there     was    another    question     unanswered. 


222  DANIEL. 

However  important  Daniel  might  feel  it  to  know 
that  his  countrymen  would  infallibly  be  delivered,  yet 
there  was  another  question: — What  will  be  the  con- 
dition of  the  Jews  who  are  not  in  the  land  ?  What 
will  become  of  those  not  in  Jerusalem  or  in  Judea,  who 
consequently  are  not  the  immediate  objects  of  the  great 
deliverance  wrought  there  ?  The  second  verse  of  this 
chapter  answers  it.  "  And  many  of  them  that  sleep 
in  the  dust  of  the  earth  shall  awake — some  to  ever- 
lasting life  and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting  con- 
tempt." Tlie  verse  is  constantly  applied  to  the 
resurrection  of  the  body ;  and  it  is  true  that  the  Spirit 
founds  the  figure,  which  is  here  used  to  foreshadow  the 
revival  of  Israel,  upon  that  resurrection.  But  it  can  be 
shown  that  it  has  not  the  least  reference  to  a  bodily 
resurrection  either  of  us  or  of  Israel.  As  this  may 
seem  difficult  to  some,  I  am  bound  to  produce  evidence 
from  Scripture  that  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  resurrection 
as  a  figure  of  a  blessed  restoration  from  ruin. 

In  Isaiah  xxvi.  you  have  what  I  suppose  will  not  be 
questioned :  an  account  of  Israel's  trouble — their  trou- 
ble under  Gentile  lords.  In  verse  13,  it  is  said,  "  0 
Lord,  our  God,  other  lords  besides  thee  have  had 
dominion  over  us;  but  by  thee  only  will  we  make 
mention  of  thy  name."  That  is  not  by  or  about  the 
Church,  though  it  may  be  applied  to  us  ever  so  fre- 
quently. We  have  not  got  other  lords  over  us  —  the 
Jews  have.  They  have  had  masters  over  them  for 
thousands  of  years,  and  they  have  still.  "But  by  thee 
only  will  we  make  mention  of  thy  name.  They  are 
dead,  they  shall  not  live ;  they  are  deceased,  they 
shall  not  rise."  These  lords  who  had  dominion  over 
them  are  gone:  they  are  dead — they  shall  not  rise.  Can 
these  words  be  about  literal  resurrection  ?  If  it  were 
meant,  they  must  rise  like  others.  It  is  clearly  said  of 
their  perishing  in  this  world.  That  is,  the  figure  of 
the  resurrection  is  applied.  They  are  gone  and  shall 
not  be  lords  over  Israel  any  more.      "  Therefore  hast 


CHAPTER   XII.  223 

thou  visited   and  destroyed  them  and  made  all   their 
memory  to  perish.     Thoii  hast  increased  the  nation,  0 
Lord  ;  thou  hast  increased  the  nation ;  thou  art  glori- 
fied."   Who  can  doubt  that  the  passage  speaks  of  Israel 
only  ?     "  Thou  hast  removed  it  far  unto  all  the  ends 
of  the  earth."     Could  that  be  said  about  the  Church  ? 
When  the  gospel  extends  itself  all  over  the  world,  it 
is  the  power  of  love  in  men — the    activity  of  God's 
grace   going   out    everywhere.      Not    so    with   Israel. 
They  have  a  central  city,  where,  had  they  been  faith- 
ful, God  would  have  maintained  them  ; — so  that  their 
removal  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  was  a  divine  judg- 
ment upon  them,  not  a  mission  of  love.      "  Lord,  in 
trouble  have   they    visited   thee,   they   poured  out   a 
prayer  when  thy   chastening  was  upon  them."     That 
was   the   effect   of  it.     Israel    humbles   himself.      He 
that  had  waxed  fat  and  kicked,  was  now  penitent;  and 
the  Lord  listens  to  his  confession,   and  looks   on  his 
anguish.     "  Like  as  a  woman  with  child,  that  draweth 
near  the  time  of  her  delivery,  is  in  pain  and  crieth 
out  in  her  pangs;  so  have  we  been  in  thy  sight,  0 
Lord."     And   then   in   verse    19,  the    Lord   answers. 
"  Thy  dead  men  shall  live,  my  dead  body  shall  they 
arise."     He  claims  them  as  His  own,  even  though  they 
had  so   sinned  and  were  in  that  deplorable,  degraded 
condition.     "  My  dead  body  shall  they  arise."     Mark 
that  expression   as  connected  with  Daniel.     "  Awake 
and  sing,  ye  that  dwell  in  dust,  for  thy  dew  is  as  the 
dew  of  herbs,  and  the  earth  shall  cast  out  the  dead." 

Can  it  be  questioned  by  any  one  who  has  followed  the 
reasons  already  advanced,  that  the  Spirit  is  not  speak- 
ing about  the  Church  there,  but  about  Israel,  in  con- 
trast with  their  Gentile  lords  now  prostrate,  never  to 
domineer  again?  Israel,  on  the  contrary,  though  in 
the  most  dismal  condition,  was  only  as  the  dead  body 
which  the  Lord  claims  as  His  own,  and  as  pertaining 
to  Him  they  shall  arise.  The  resurrection  of  the  body, 
of  the  dead,  is  a  blessed  and  fundamental  truth,  which 


224  DANIEL. 

underlies  and  is  assumed  in  the  prophetic  imagery.  But 
the  passage  speaks  of  the  nation  as  yet  to  arise  ac- 
cording to  God  spiritually,  but  withal  as  a  nation,  too, 
as  the  next  chapter  (Isa.  xxvii,),  which  is  the  conclusion 
of  the  strain,  makes  yet  more  evident.  Use,  enjoy, 
apply  this  Scripture  as  you  will,  but  deny  not  its  strict 
and  primary  force. 

Turning  to  Daniel,  now,  see  what  a  light  is  thrown 
upon  the  passage.  Not  only  will  there  be  deliverance 
for  the  Jews  in  the  Holy  Land,  who  have  witnessed  all 
the  conflicts  between  Antichrist  and  the  king  of  the 
north,  but  for  many  that  sleep  (that  is,  many  who 
had  not  yet  come  forward,  who  had  been  apart  from 
the  troubles  of  their  nation,  who  had  been  in  total 
obscurity,  as  it  w^ere  sleeping  in  the  dust  of  the  earth). 
*'  Many  of  them  shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life, 
and  some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt."  The 
text  shows  plainly  that  it  is  not  the  resurrection  of 
the  just ;  because  when  this  takes  place,  nobody  rises 
to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt.  The  passage  has 
no  direct  reference  to  a  bodily  resurrection,  which 
simply  furnishes  a  figure  for  the  national  revival  of 
Israel,  who  are  described  as  sleeping  in  the  dust,  to 
express  the  greatness  of  their  degradation.  Now  they 
were  to  awake  and  sing,  according  to  Isaiah. 

But  we  must  turn  to  another  passage — the  clearest, 
perhaps,  of  any  upon  the  subject.  It  is  in  the  pro- 
phecy of  Ezekiel,  where,  in  a  most  plain  prediction  of 
the  restoration  of  Israel,  the  same  figure  is  used. 
Isaiah  called  them  a  dead  body,  and  spoke  of  them  as 
dwelling  in  the  dust,  from  which  they  were  to  awake. 
Daniel  also  called  it  an  awaking  out  of  their  sleep  in 
the  dust.  Ezekiel  goes  yet  farther,  and  speaks  of 
them  as  not  only  dead,  but  buried  in  their  graves. 
Now,  if  it  can  be  proved  that  this  does  not  refer  to  a 
literal  bodily  resurrection,  but  to  a  national  restoration 
of  Israel,  the  chain  of  evidence  will  be  complete. 
That  it  is  so,  I  doubt  not ;  for  in  this  prophecy  we  are 


CHAPTER   XII.  225 

not  left  to  gather  from  the  context  what  the  meaning 
is,  but  there  is  a  divine  interpretation.  We  have  not 
only  the  prophecy,  but  the  prophecy  explained.  And 
the  explanation  of  the  prophecy  given  to  and  by 
Ezekiel  shuts  out  e"very  other  thought  save  the  one  I 
have  been  endeavouring  to  set  before  you.  In  the 
beginning  of  chapter  xxxvii.  we  find  an  open  valley 
full  of  dry  bones.  "  And  he  said  unto  me,  Son  of  man, 
can  these  bones  live  ?  And  I  answered,  0  Lord  God, 
thou  knowest.  Again  he  said  unto  me,  Prophesy  upon 
these  bones  and  say  unto  them,  0  ye  dry  bones,  hear 
the  word  of  the  Lord.  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God  unto 
these  bones.  Behold,  I  will  cause  breath  to  enter  into 
you,  and  ye  shall  live.  And  I  will  lay  sinews  upon 
you,  and  will  bring  up  flesh  upon  you,  and  cover  you 
with  skin,  and  put  breath  in  you,  and  ye  shall  live;  and 
ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord.  So  I  prophesied  as 
1  was  commanded;  and  as  I  prophesied,  there  was  a 
noise,  and,  behold,  a  shaking,  and  the  bones  came 
together,  bone  to  his  bone.  And  when  I  beheld,  lo,  the 
sinews  and  the  flesh  came  up  upon  them,  and  the 
skin  covered  them  above :  but  there  was  no  breath  in 
them."  Can  any  one  seriously  think  this  is  the  way 
in  which  the  Church  will  rise  from  the  dead  ?  Is 
there  a  soul  so  deluded  as  to  take  this  for  a  description 
of  the  order  in  which  our  bodies  are  to  be  raised  ? 
Bones  coming  together  first;  then  the  flesh  and  skin 
covering ;  and  then  breath  put  into  them  ?  Can  it 
be  with  sobriety  maintained  that  this  is  primarily 
intended  as  a  figure  of  the  work  of  the  gospel  in 
giving  life  to  souls  ?  If  so,  what  is  the  meaning  of 
the  bones  first,  &c.  ? 

"  Then  said  he  unto  me,  Prophesy  unto  the  wind, 
prophesy,  Son  of  man,  and  say  to  the  wind.  Thus  saith 
the  Lord  God,  Come  from  the  four  winds,  0  breath, 
and  breathe  upon  these  slain  that  they  may  live.  So  I 
prophesied  as  he  commanded  me,  and  the  breath  came 
into  them,  and  they  lived,  and  stood  up  upon  their  feet, 


226  DANIEL. 

an  exceeding  great  army.  Then  he  said  unto  me,  Son 
of  man,  these  bones  are  the  whole  house  of  Israel." 
What  more  simple  than  the  explanation  God  gives  of 
the  vision  ?  He  applies  it  to  the  whole  house  of  Israel, 
though,  no  doubt,  it  was  the  vision  of  a  resurrection. 
Ezekiel  saw  the  bones  live,  and  the  men  stand  on  their 
feet.  But,  then,  we  have  God  giving  us  the  real  mean- 
ing and  proper  application  of  it.  The  resurrection  of 
the  body  we  have  most  fully  elsewhere,  as  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  in  Job  also.  In  the  Gospels,  the  Acts, 
the  Epistles,  and  the  Revelation,  we  have  the  resur- 
rection, both  of  the  just  and  of  the  unjust — a  blessed 
resurrection  for  the  one,  and  another  resurrection  that 
will  have  awful  consequences  of  sorrow  for  those  in- 
volved. But  here  we  have  the  same  God,  using  the 
figure  of  resurrection  to  describe  the  blessing  that 
He  is  to  confer  upon  the  people  of  Israel.  Similarly 
the  figure  is  applied  in  Luke  xv.  to  the  conversion  of 
the  prodigal  son:  "This  my  son  was  dead,  and  is 
alive  again;  he  was  lost,  and  is  found."  Paul  gives 
us  the  blessing  that  will  result  to  the  world  by  and 
by  through  the  restoration  of  Israel  under  the  same 
figure: — "What  shall  the  receiving  of  them  be,  but 
life  from  the  dead?"  (Rom.  xi.  15.)  I  maintain,  then, 
that  no  other  interpretation  of  this  passage  bears 
the  stamp  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  People  may  preach 
the  gospel  from  it,  or  apoly  it  figuratively:  I  am 
not  objecting  to  such  an  employment  of  it.  But  the 
word  of  God  gives  us  both  the  vision  and  the  inter- 
pretation. And  I  have  no  more  reason  to  believe 
the  one  than  the  other.  God  says  it  means  the 
house  of  Israel;  therefore  it  does  not  mean  the  re- 
surrection of  the  body.  When  men  are  raised  from 
the  dead  in  proper  physical  sense,  there  will  be  no 
such  thing  as  the  house  of  Israel  among;  those  so 
raised.  Resurrection  terminates  all  relations  of  time 
and  the  world.  Hence,  what  we  have  here  is  simply 
a  figure   taken  from  resurrection,  and  applied  to  the 


CHAPTER   XII.  227 

future  blessing  of  Israel — then  to  be  a  holy  nation, 
but  a  nation  still. 

"These  bones  are  the  whole  house  of  Israel:  be- 
hold they  say,  Oar  bones  are  dried,  and  our  hope  is 
lost:  we  are  cutoff  for  our  parts.  Therefore  prophesy 
and  say  unto  them,  Thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  Behold, 
0  my  people,  I  will  open  your  graves,  and  cause  you 
to  come  up  out  of  your  graves,  and  bring  you  into 
the  land  of  Israel."  Nothing  can  be  plainer.  All 
the  evidence  of  the  chapter  confirms  the  same  thing. 
But  more  than  that:  "  And  ye  shall  know  that  I  am 
the  Lord,  when  I  have  opened  your  graves,  0  my 
people,  and  brought  you  up  out  of  your  graves,  and 
shall  put  my  Spirit  in  you,  and  ye  shall  live;  and  I 
shall  place  you  in  your  own  land:  then  shall  ye  know 
that  I  the  Lord  have  spoken  it,  and  performed  it, 
saith  the  Lord."  The  next  portion  throws  yet  more 
light  upon  it.  We  have  another  vision  connected 
with  this.  Two  sticks  are  taken  and  joined  in  one, 
presenting  another  aspect  of  the  blessing  in  store  for 
Israel.  If  all  Israel  were  to  be  brought  out  of  their 
graves,  the  twelve  tribes  might  still  have  formed  two 
separate  parties,  as  in  earlier  days.  But  now  comes 
in  a  new  condition,  to  show  that,  when  the  resuscita- 
tion of  Israel  takes  place,  their  once-divided  interests 
will  coalesce.  That  does  not  refer  to  the  Church,  nor 
to  our  condition  when  raised  from  the  dead.  We 
shall  not  be  planted  in  the  land  of  Israel  under  David 
as  our  king.  Even  if  we  take  David  as  a  type  of 
Christ,  yet  this  is  not  our  relationship.  We  are 
Christ's  body  and  bride — not  a  people  merely,  reigned 
over  by  a  king. 

Thus,  by  comparing  these  different  portions  of  the 
word  of  God,  we  have  strong  proof  that  the  passage 
in  Daniel  refers  solely  to  Israel.  And  as  the  first 
verse  shows  us  the  deliverance  of  the  Jews  in  their 
land  at  the  time  of  their  sorest  trouble,  the  second 
verse  shows  us  that  which  is  the  key  to  so  many  of 


228  DANIEL. 

the  prophecies — the  coming  out  of  the  race  of  Israel 
from  their  hiding-places  and  deep  degradation,  set 
forth  under  the  figure  of  sleeping  in  the  dust,  andr- 
being  raised  up  out  of  it.  But  whether  it  be  those 
in  the  land  or  those  who  come  out  of  the  dust  of  the 
earth,  or  from  among  the  Gentiles,  none  will  be 
delivered  except  those  that  are  the  objects  of  the 
counsels  of  God,  i.e.,  "  found  written  in  the  book." 
Borne  of  them  may  awake,  as  the  figure  expresses 
it,  to  take  their  part  in  the  great  struggle  at  the  close; 
but  not  being  registered  in  God's  book,  they  shall  be 
abandoned  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt.  For 
the  rest  it  is  not  a  mere  national  deliverance,  but 
much  more.  Those  that  are  delivered  will  be  truly 
born  of  God.  A  spiritual  character  will  attach  to 
their  rise,  as  well  as  a  national  one. 

But  let  us  pursue  the  rest  of  the  chapter  briefly. 
The  Spirit  of  God  shows  us  that  some  among  them 
will  have  a  remarkable  maturity.  They  are  those 
who  are  said  to  be  "  wise."  They  that  be  wise  shall 
shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament."  These 
have  been  distinguished  in  a  time  of  trouble  among  the 
Jews.  "And  they  that  instruct  the  many  in  righte- 
ousness as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever."  We  are  obliged 
thus  to  change  the  version,  because  the  expression 
that  is  used  here — "  turn  many  to  righteousness  " — is 
unhappy.  The  real  sense  it  "  they  that  teach  righte- 
ousness to  the  many."  It  is  not  a  question  of  their 
success: — whether  they  actually  turn  them  to  righte- 
ousness, or  not,  is  not  the  point;  but  "they  that 
instruct  the  many,"  or  the  mass  of  the  Jews,  are  thus 
promised  the  blessing.  They  might,  perhaps,  have 
scanty  results;  but  the  question  is,  whether  they  are 
labouring  for  God,  and  maintaining  the  authority  of 
His  truth.  The  same  Hebrew  word  is  used  in  other 
parts  of  the  Scripture,  where  it  no  doubt  means  to 
justify.  The  English  translators — judging,  with  good 
jeason,   that  "justify"   would  not   suit   in   a    clause 


CHAPTER   XII.  229 

which  describes  the  action  of  men,  whereas  justifica- 
tion certainly  belongs  to  God — have  changed  it  into 
"turn  to  righteousness."  But  I  take  the  liberty  of 
preferring  the  version  already  mentioned — "  instruct- 
ing in  righteousness."  Thus  it  would  appear,  that 
there  are  certain  of  the  Jews  that  will  have  shown 
comparatively  a  great  degree  of  intelligence  in  the  mind 
of  God.  They  are  called  "  the  wise."  But  besides 
the  intelligent,  others  go  out  in  spiritual  energy,  as 
we  have  seen,  to  teach  the  mass  of  the  Jews,  who 
then  were,  or  afterwards  fell  under  the  power  of  Anti- 
christ. "  The  many  "  is  a  technical  phrase  in  Daniel 
for  the  faithless  mass  or  those  that  are  lost.  They 
that  instruct  the  many  in  righteousness  are  to  shine 
as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever. 

And,  further,  I  must  take  the  opportunity  of  saying 
that  this  is   the  true  meaning  of   a  verse   in   Isaiah 
liii.,  that  has  amazingly   perplexed  the  critics:  "By 
His    knowledge   shall   my   righteous    servant   justify 
many.*'      No  doubt  many    Christians  have  connected 
it    with    "  hy    His    obedience   shall    many    be    made 
righteous."      But   there   is    no    connection   whatever 
between   the   two   thoughts.      Take    it  as   has   been 
suggested  in   the  passage  before  us,  and  all  is  plain. 
Nor   have   I  the   least   doubt  that   such  is   its   true 
meaning.     It  is  to  instruct  in  righteousness;  justifi- 
cation is  not  the  point  there.     In  the  Lord's  case  the 
instruction  of  course  will  be  perfect ;  but  even  there 
the  object  is  "  many"  (not  "  the  many,"  as  in  Daniel). 
Here  we  find  that  these  godly  souls  among  the  Jews 
have  a  certain  knowledge  of  divine  truth,  and  they 
instruct  the  mass  in  righteousness.     It  will  not  be  a 
question  of  showing  and  preaching  grace  at  that  day. 
They  will  instruct  them  in  righteousness.     They  may 
bring  out  the  blessed  thoughts  of  God  in  connection, 
with  Israel ;  but  it  will  be  instruction  in  righteousness. 
The  sense  of  "justify"  would  not  be  true,  if  we  look 
either   at  the  subjects   or  the  objects  of  the  action, 


230  DANIEL. 

We  could  understand,  perhaps,  that  of  the  Lord  in 
Isaiah  liii.  But  even  so;  ask  any  person,  what  is  the 
meaning  of  His  justifying  many  through  His  know- 
ledge, and  he  will  have  to  travel  far  enough  for  a" 
probable  answer.  Some  advocates  for  it  may  try  to 
understand,  "  by  the  knowledge  of  Him,"  but  that  wnll 
not  stand.  The  true  meaning  is  that  the  Lord  would 
use  His  knowledge  as  the  means  of  instructing  many. 
In  Isaiah  and  Daniel,  it  refers  to  instructing  in  righte- 
ousness, not  justifying  nor  turning  to  righteousness. 

In  the  next  verse  comes  an  important  principle, 
upon  which  a  few  words  must  be  said,  "  But  thou,  0 
Daniel,  shut  up  the  words  and  seal  the  book,  even  to 
the  time  of  the  end;  many  shall  run  to  and  fro,  and 
knowledge  shall  be  increased."  Daniel  is  here  in- 
formed that  the  things  which  he  had  seen,  and  the 
communications  which  he  had  heard,  though  they 
were,  no  doubt,  of  God,  were  not  to  be  turned  to  use 
for  the  present.  All  was  to  be  a  sealed  book  until  a 
distant  day;  in  a  word,  until  the  time  of  the  end. 
In  a  later  verse,  Daniel  puts  the  question,  "  What 
shall  be  the  end  of  these  things  ? "  And  the  answer 
is,  "  Go  thy  way,  Daniel;  for  the  words  are  closed  up 
and  sealed  till  the  time  of  the  end.  Many  shall  be 
purified,  and  made  white,  and  tried;  but  the  wicked 
shall  do  wickedly:  and  none  of  the  wicked  shall 
understand ;  but  the  wise  shall  understand."  Thus 
clearly  are  we  shown  that  the  understanding  of  the 
words  of  God  is  a  spiritual  thing,  and  not  a  matter  of 
mere  intellect.  If  it  were  so,  then  the  wicked  might 
understand  as  much  as  the  righteous.  It  is  expressly 
said,  that  "  none  of  the  wicked  shall  understand ;  but 
the  wise  shall  understand."  That  is,  these  intelligent 
ones,  of  whom  we  have  heard  before.  Mark  the 
importance  of  this.  In  the  last  chapter  of  the 
Apocalypse,  we  have  the  prophet  John  addressed  at 
the   close   of  his  prophecy.      The  contrast   is  most 


CHAPTER    XIT.  251 

striking.  In  the  last  of  Daniel,  he  is  told  that  allfis 
to  be  closed  up  and  sealed  until  the  time  of  the  end. 
In  the  last  chapter  of  the  Revelation,  John  is  told  not 
to  seal  "the  sayings  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book: 
for  the  time  is  at  hand."  In  other  words,  there  is  an 
exact  contrast  between  the  injunction  given  to  the 
two  prophets.  To  the  Jewish  prophet  all  is  sealed 
till  the  time  of  the  end.  To  the  Christian  prophet 
nothing  is  sealed :  all  is  open.  How  comes  this  ? 
The  answer  is,  that  the  Church — the  Christian — is 
always  supposed  to  be  at  the  time  of  the  end.  The 
gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  has  changed  everything.  From 
that  time  nothing  has  been  sealed  to  the  Christian. 
All  the  mind,  the  affections,  the  counsels  of  God,  yea, 
and  His  secrets  about  the  world,  in  the  Scriptures  of 
truth,  are  opened  to  him  by  the  power  of  God. 

The  Christian,  even  if  you  take  the  weak  and  igno- 
rant, has  the  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  him.  Therefore, 
in  writing  to  the  babes,  does  St.  John  say,  "Ye  have  an 
unction  from  the  Holy  One,  and  ye  know  all  things." 
All  the  learning  in  the  world  can  never  make  a  man 
understand  the  Bible;  whereas,  if  a  soul  is  born  of 
God,  he  is  capable  of  understanding  anything  that 
God  reveals:  he  only  requires  to  be  led  on,  and  more 
perfectly  instructed.  The  apostle  is  not  speaking  of 
the  actual  acquirements  of  the  babe,  which  might  be 
very  slight.  In  whom,  then,  do  we  boast,  and  ought 
we  to  boast  ?  In  God,  who  has  given  us  such  an 
amazing  privilege.  Whoever  has  the  Spirit  of  God, 
has  therein  a  divine  capacity  of  entering  into  the 
things  of  God.  He  only  wants  to  be  in  proper  cir- 
cumstances, dependent  on  God,  and  valuing  His  word, 
and  what  is  of  God  will  be  manifest  and  proved  to  be 
divine.  This  is  connected  with  the  fact,  that  the 
Spirit  of  God  is  given  to  the  Church,  in  a  special  sense, 
which  not  even  the  prophets  knew.  For  although 
they  had  the  Spirit  to  inspire  them,  as  we,  of  course, 
have  not,  yet  we  have  the  Holy  Ghost  always  dwelling 


232  DANIEL. 

in  us;  one  consequence  of  which  is,  that  we  have 
spiritual  intelligence,  "  the  mind  of  Christ,"  which 
they  had  not.  And  therefore,  as  you  may  remember, 
the  Spirit  of  God  in  1  Peter  i.  contrasts  the  condition 
of  the  Christian  now  with  that  of  the  saints,  yea,  of 
the  prophets  themselves,  under  the  Old  Testament. 
He  shows  us  that  they  were  "  searching  what  and  what 
manner  of  time  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in 
them  did  signify,  when  it  testified  beforehand  the 
sufferings  of  Christ,  and  the  glories  that  should  follow. 
Unto  whom  it  was  revealed  that,  not  unto  themselves, 
but  unto  uSj  they  did  minister  the  things  which  are 
now  reported  unto  you  by  them  that  have  preached 
the  gospel  unto  you,  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down 
from  heaven."  That  is,  we  stand  in  the  present 
knowledge  and  enjoyment  of  things  which,  thet/  were 
told,  did  not  concern  them  but  us  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment. This  is  very  important.  They  had  the  promise, 
and  it  was  salvation  to  them.  But  we  have  much 
more:  we  have  positive,  accomplished  blessing — re- 
demption not  merely  promised,  but  effected.  And  the 
Christian  now,  relieved  by  grace  from  all  question 
about  his  sins,  is  free  to  enter  into  the  blessed  things 
of  God. 

God  accordingly  says  now,  You  are  not  to  seal 
the  book.  The  time  of  the  end  is  that  in  which  we 
are  contemplated,  the  end  morally  being  come.  And 
therefore  we  are  waiting  for  the  Lord  to  come  at  any 
time.  Where  the  Jewish  thought  prevails,  people 
are  always  looking  out  for  an  antecedent  time  of  great 
trouble.  They  do  not  see  that  God  has  a  purpose 
about  Israel,  as  well  as  about  the  Church ;  that,  when 
He  has  removed  us  to  our  own  proper  place  in  heavenly 
glory.  He  will  again  take  up  the  Jews ;  and  that  they, 
not  we,  must  go  through  the  great  tribulation,  and 
see  the  appointed  signs  which  herald  the  approach  of 
the  Son  of  man  to  the  earth. 

This  also  serves  to  explain  how  it  is  that  we  can 


CHAPTER   XII.  233 

understand  these  prophecies.  Daniel  could  not:  as  he 
says  here,  "And  I  heard,  but  I  understood  not;  then 
said  I,  0  my  Lord,  what  shall  be  the  end  of  these 
things  ?  And  he  said.  Go  thy  way,  Daniel,  for  the 
"words  are  closed  up  and  sealed  till  the  time  of  the 
end."  Then  comes  in  Christianity,  and  not  one  of  the 
words  is  sealed — not  one  shut  up.  They  are  all  open. 
To  us  the  end  is  always  nigh;  we  are  said  to  be  in 
the  end  of  the  world:  as  it  is  written  in  1  Cor.  x.  11, 
*'  These  things  were  written  for  our  admonition,  upon 
whom  the  ends  of  the  age  are  come."  And  it  is 
always  so.  "  Christ  is  said  to  have  appeared  once  in 
the  end  of  the  world,  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice 
of  himself."  The  Church  is  ever  supposed  to  be  in 
the  end,  and,  by  virtue  of  the  Spirit,  anticipating  the 
godly,  intelligent  remnant.  Indeed,  the  Church  be- 
gan with  a  remnant  of  Jews  that  had  faith  in  their 
Messiah.  Thus  Pentecost  began  with  that  which 
will  be  true  again  after  we  are  removed  to  heaven. 
For  when  God  has  translated  the  saints,  and  the  time 
of  the  end  is  literally  come,  there  will  once  more  be  a 
remnant  of  faithful  Jews.  "  But  the  wise  shall 
understand."  The  Church  is  always  supposed  to  be 
standing  in  these  privileges,  and  is  essentially  above 
the  mere  discoveries  or  progress  of  the  age. 

As  to  the  "  days"  spoken  of  in  the  close  of  the 
chapter,  what  is  their  meaning?  In  verse  11,  it  is 
said,  "  From  the  time  that  the  daily  sacrifice  shall  be 
taken  away,  and  the  abomination  that  maketh  desolate 
set  up,  there  shall  be  a  thousand,  two  hundred,  and 
ninety  days."  It  had  been  previously  said  in  verse  7, 
by  the  man  clothed  in  linen,  that  it  should  be  "  for  a 
time,  times,  and  a  half" — that  is,  for  1260  days. 
Verse  16  adds  thirty  days,  or  one  month  more,  to  the 
1260  days.  Then,  in  verse  12,  we  find  a  further 
epoch :  "  Blessed  is  he  that  waiteth  and  cometh  to 
the    thousand,    three    hundred,    and    five- and- thirty 


234  DANIEL. 

days."  That  is,  a  month  and  a  half  are  added  still. 
So  that  we  have,  first  of  all,  1260  days;  then  1290 
days;  then  1335  days.  What,  we  may  ask,  is  the^ 
meaning  of  this  ?  and  from  what  time  are  we  to 
reckon  these  days  ?  The  answer  is,  "  From  the  time 
that  the  daily  sacrifice  is  taken  away,  and  the  abomi- 
nation that  maketh  desolate  set  up." 

And  now  I  would  make  a  remark  of  some  impor- 
tance, as  linking  all  which  had  been  said  together,  and 
yielding  a  conclusive  proof  of  the  true  interpretation 
of  this  prophecy.  It  is  the  very  verse  that  our  Lord 
quoted  in  Matt.  xxiv. :  "  When  ye,  therefore,  shall  see 
the  abomination  of  desolation,  spoken  of  by  Daniel 
the  prophet,  stand  in  the  holy  place,  (whoso  readeth, 
let  him  understand!)  then  let  them  which  are  in 
Judea  flee  into  the  mountains.''  The  question  is, 
Where  does  Daniel  speak  of  this  ?  I  answer,  in  verse 
11  of  this  chapter.  It  is  the  only  verse  that  properly 
answers  to  the  one  in  Matthew. 

We  are  told  that  from  that  time  there  are  to  be 
1290  days;  next,  a  further  period  of  45  days,  and 
then  full  blessing^.  Has  that  been  the  case  ?  If  you 
apply  it  to  anything  past,  as  for  instance,  to  the  des- 
truction of  Jerusalem  by  Titus;  when  you  reckon  1335 
days  from  the  time  when  the  Romans  took  Jerusalem, 
is  the  blessing  really  come?  It  matters  little  how 
you  take  the  days.  Let  Jiem  be  conceived  to  be 
1335  years  from  that  destruction  of  Jerusalem:  still 
have  you  got  the  blessing  of  the  Jews  and  the  saint's 
blessing  according  to  the  word  of  God  here?  Nothing 
of  the  sort.  What  then  follows  ?  That  you  have 
dated  it  from  a  wrong  epoch.  "  The  abomination  that 
maketh  desolate"  is  not  yet  come;  when  it  does  come, 
in  the  sense  of  w^hich  our  Lord  speaks,  1335  days 
follow,  and  then  will  be  the  full  blessing. 

But  now  another  word  as  to  these  differences :]  first 
the  1260,  then  the  1290,  and  then,  lastly,  the  1335 
days.      I   think   the   reason  is,  because   the   blessing 


CHAPTER   XII.  235 

of  Israel  will  not  be  brought  in  at  once.  The  first 
great  turning  point  will  be  the  destruction  of  "the 
king."  That  takes  place  when  the  1260  days  expire. 
But  as  we  saw  in  chapter  xi.,  the  king  of  the  north 
has  to  be  disposed  of,  after  "  the  king."  Accordingly, 
there  is  another  period  of  delay.  But  whether  that 
will  coincide  with  the  thirty  days  more  (or  1290),  or 
with  the  subsequent  45  days  (1335),  I  am  not  pre- 
pared to  say.  Of  this,  however,  we  may  be  assured, 
that  the  last  of  them  bring  us  down  to  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  whole  work:  and  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  the  destruction  of  the  king  of  the  north  is  rather 
one  of  the  latest,  if  not  the  last,  of  these  acts  of 
judgment  before  the  epoch  of  blessing  begins.  In 
Isaiah  x.  12,  it  is  said,  "  When  the  Lord  hath  per- 
formed his  whole  work  upon  Mount  Zion  and  on 
Jerusalem,  I  will  punish  the  fruit  of  the  stout  heart  of 
the  king  of  Assyria,  and  the  glory  of  his  high  looks." 
Does  not  this  seem  to  indicate  that  it  is  the  last  act  of 
the  Lord  in  judgment  connected  with  the  blessing  of 
Israel  ?  Thus  we  have  a  brief  interval  or  two  after 
the  destruction  of  Antichrist,  during  which  the  Lord 
is  still  putting  down  His  and  Israel's  enemies.  "  Bles- 
sed is  he  that  waiteth,  and  cometh  to  the  thousand, 
three  hundred,  and  five-and-thirty  days." 

I  now  close  the  book,  praying  the  Lord  to  make  it 
of  real  profit  as  well  as  interest.  One  of  the  most 
important  points  of  profit  will  have  been  this — to  de- 
liver God's  children  from  the  idea  that  the  Church  is 
everything.  That  is  not  a  true  system.  It  is  to 
fall  into  the  same  sort  of  mistake  that  the  old  astro- 
nomers used  to  make,  when  they  viewed  the  world  as 
the  centre  of  the  solar  system,  because  it  was  the  place 
where  they  were  living.  This  always  spoils  man. 
He  makes  himself  the  centre  of  everything.  The 
same  error  is  made  in  theology.  The  Church,  because 
we  are  in  it,  has  been  made  the  centre  of  Scripture, 


236  DANIEL. 

whereas  Christ  is  the  true  one.  He  is  the  centre  of 
heavenly  blessedness,  and  the  Church  circles  around 
Him ;  He  is  the  centre  of  Jewish  blessing,  and  the 
Jews  circle  around  Him.  Therefore,  whether  in- 
heaven  or  earth,  Christ  is  the  kernel  of  all  God's 
thoughts  of  blessing.  And  when  our  hearts  are 
fixed  in  Him,  there  is  peace,  progress,  and  blessing. 
The  reason  why  souls  very  often  have  not  peace,  is 
because  they  are  occupied  with  themselves;  for  they 
do  not  find  what  they  think  ought  to  be  in  a  Christian. 
Whereas,  if  I  am  looking  at  Christ,  there  is  no  diffi- 
culty. The  question  then  becomes:  Does  Christ 
deserve  that  such  an  one  as  I  am  should  be  saved  ? 
Can  I  deny  it  ?  The  effect  of  this  is  that  I  am  happy, 
and  God  can  use  me  in  His  service.  But  if  I  am 
troubled  about  the  salvation  of  my  own  soul,  how 
can  I  be  occupied  in  the  service  of  others  ?  The 
great  question  of  self  never  will  be  settled  till  Christ 
is  the  centre  of  everything  to  us.  May  it  be  so ! 
He  is  the  centre  for  all  God's  thoughts  of  love  and 
righteousness  as  well  as  of  glory. 


G.  Morrish,  Printer,  24,  Warwick  Lane,  London. 


Date  Due 

1 

jitiiitmm 

fju^^sm 

m 

1 

' 

^ 

•I.  TrNL>:v. 

nok  <t:  Tract  J)nixjt 
<>'uerns6v. 


^.^1555 


00074 


5358 


