Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



pniiiiiii 

^^ 6000861 96Z 




NOTES ON THE GOSPEL OF LUKE. 



NOTES 



ON THE 



GOSPEL OF LUKE. 



/ Jf. % 




W: 
ROBERT L. ALLAN, 75 SAUCHIEHALL ST. 

LONDON : G. MORRISH, 24 WARWICK LANE, 
Patebnoster Row, E.G. 

DUBLIN: FRANCIS CAVENAGH, 32 WICKLOW STREET. 

GUERNSEY: J. TUNLEY, 104 VICTORIA ROAD. 



1869. 



/o/ 



/ 'f?- 



PREFACE. 



It is well that the reader should know that these observa- 
tions on the Gospel of Luke consist of mere jottings from 
the teachings of an honoured servant of Christ (J. N. D.), 
who never saw the MS. nor corrected the proofs. Sub- 
stantially, the reader may accept the little work as Mr. D.'s 
thoughts on this Book of Scripture ; the phraseology, too, 
is no doubt fairly given as far as the Notes go; but 
allowance must be made for the imperfect mode of trans- 
cription. The Editor trusts in the Lord for His blessing 
the sketch, sueh as it is, to many a soul. 



v< 



CONTENTS. 



PAOR 

Chapter I., ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9 

Chapter II., ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ■ 16 

vyHapter i.i.i.«, ... ... ••• ... ... ... ... a4 

Chapter IV., ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 33 

vyiiapxer v., ... ... *•• ... ... ... ... 4o 

Chapter VI., ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 54 

Chapter VII., ... ... *•• ... ... ... ... 67 

Chapter VIII., ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 74 

v/uapuer x.<^« , ••• ... ... ••• ... .•• ... vv 

v/xiApiier ^v . , ... ... ... ... ... •.. ... xXv 

L.;uapi!er .ZLX., ... .«> •*. ••« ... ••• ... XoX 

Chapter XII., ... ... ... ... ••• ••• . . 141 

Chapter XIII., ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... 149 

Chapter XIV., ... •>. ... ... ... ••• lOo 

Chapter XV., XVI., 171 

Chapter XVII., ... ... ... ... ... ... ..• 185 

Chapter XVIII 196 

Chapter XIX., ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 203 

(yliapuer A A.., ... ... ... ••• ... ... ... ^xu 

Chapter XXI., ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ^16 

Chapter XXII., ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ..« 221 

Chapter XXIII., ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 229 

OJiaptier ^^xv., ... ••• •■• ••• ••• ••• ... £Si 



••• 



J 



NOTES ON THE GOSPEL OF LUKE. 



CHAPTER I. 



The Saviour is presented to us in Luke in His cliar- 
acter as Son of man, displaying the power of Jehovah 
in grace in the midst of men. At firsts doubtless, we 
find Him in relationship with Israel, to whom He had 
been promised; but afterwards moral principles are 
brought out, which apply to man, as such, wherever 
he might be. And indeed what characterizes Luke's 
account of our Lord and gives special interest to his 
gospel, is that it presents to us Christ Rvmadf^ and not 
Hi« official gloiy, as in Matthew, nor His mission or 
service, as in Mark, nor the peciiliar revelation of His 
divine nature, as in John. It is Himself, such as He 
was, a man upon the earth, moving among men day 
by day. 

Yer. 1-^. Many had undertaken to give an 
account of what was historically received amongst 
Christians, as it had been related to them by the eye- 
witnesses. However well intended this might be, 
yet it was a work undertaken and executed by men. 
Luke had an exact and intimate knowledge of all 
from the beginning, and he found it good to write in 
order to Theophilus, that he might know the certainty 
of the things he had been instructed in. It is thus 
that Grod has provided for the whole Church by the 



10 

teaching contained in the living picture of Jesus that 
we owe to this man of God. For Luke, although he 
might be personally moved by Christian motives, was, 
of course, none the less inspired by the Holy Ghost 
to write. 

Yer. 5 — 17. The history brings us into the midst of 
Jewish institutions, feelings, and expectations. First, 
we have a priest of Abia, (one of the twenty-four 
classes; 1 Chron. xxiv), with his wife, who was of the 
daughters of Aaron. "They were both righteous 
before God, walking in all the commandments and 
ordinances of the Lord blameless." All was with 
them in accordance with Grod's law Jewishly ; but they 
did not enjoy the blessing so earnestly desii-ed by every 
Jew; they were childless. Yet it was according to 
the ways of God to accomplish His work of blessing 
while manifesting the weakness of the instrument 
which He was using. But now this long-prayed-for 
blessing was to be withheld no longer; and when 
Zacharias draws near to offer the incense, the angel of 
Jehovah appears to him. At the sight of so glorious 
a being, Zacharias is troubled; but the angel says to 
him, "Fear not, thy prayer is heard; and thy wife 
Elizabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call 
his name John" i.e., "the favour of Jehovah.'* And 
not only should the hearts of many rejoice in him, 
but he should be great in the sight of the Lord and 
be filled with the Holy Ghost. "Many of the 
children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their 
€rod. And he shall go before him in the spirit and 
power of Elisa to make ready a people pre- 



11 

pared for the Lord." The "spirit of Elias" was a 
firm and ardent zeal for the glory of Jehovah and for 
the re-establishment, through repentance, of Israel's 
relations with Him. The heart of John clnng to this 
link of the people with God, and it is in the moral 
force of his call to repentance that John is here com- 
pared to Elias. 

Yer. 18 — 23. But Zacharias's fai^h, as is alas! so 
often the case, was not equal to the greatness of his 
request. He knows not how to walk in the steps of 
Abraham, and he asks again how such a thing can be. 
(ver. 18.) God*s goodness turns the unbelief of His 
servant into a chastening that was profitable for him, 
and that served, at the same time, as a proof to the 
people that he had been visited from on high. 
Zacharias remains dumb until the word of Jehovah is 
accomplished. 

Ver. 24, 26. Elizabeth, with feelings so suitable to 
a holy woman, remembering what had been a shame 
to her in Israel, (the traces of which were only made 
the more marked by the supernatural blessing now 
granted to her), hides herself, whilst, at the same 
time, she owns the Lord's goodness to her. But what 
may conceal us from the eyes of men, has great value 
before God. 

Ver. 26 — 38. And now the scene changes, in order 
to introduce the Lord Himself into this marvellous 
scene that is unfolding itself before our eyes. ][n 
Nazareth, that despised place, there was found a young 
virgin, unknown by the world, whose name was Mary, 
She was espoused to Joseph, who was of the house of 



12 

Darid; but so out of order was eyerything in Israel, 
that this descendant of the king was a carpenter. 
But what is this to God? Mary was a chosen vessel; 
she had found favour in the eyes of God. 

We must remark that the subject here is the birth 
of the child Jesus, as bom of Mary. It is not so 
much His divine nature as the Word which was God 
and which was made flesh; (though, of course, it is 
the same precious Saviour presented here as in John's 
gospel;) but it is Jesus as really and truly man — 
born of a virgin. His name was to be Jesus, Le., 
Jehovah the Saviour. "He shall be called the Son of 
the highest, and the Lord Crod shall give unto him the 
throne of his father David" — still looking at Him as 
man bom into the world. But He was God as well 
as man. Holy by His birth, conceived by the power 
of God, this blessed one, who even, as bom of Mary, 
is spoken of as "that holy thing," was to be called "the 
Son of God." 

The angel then tells Mary of the blessing God had 
bestowed upon Elizabeth. The wonderful intervention 
of God had rendered Mary humble instead of lifting 
her up: she had seen God and not he^elf in what 
had happened. Self was hidden from her because 
God had been brought so near, and she bows to His 
holy will. "Be it unto me according to thy word." 

Ver. 39 — 4:5, Afterwards we find that Mary goes 
to visit Elizabeth, for her heart loves to see and 
acknowledge the goodness of the Lord. Elizabeth, 
speaking by the Spirit, acknowledges Mary as the 
mother of her Lord, and announces the accomplish- 



13 
ment of God's promise. "Blessed is she that believed," 

Ver. 46. The heart of Mary is filled with joy, and 
she breaks forth into a song of praise. She acknow- 
ledges God her Saviour in the grace that has filled 
her with such joy, whilst, at the same time, she owns 
her utter littleness. For whatever might be the holi- 
ness of the instrument that God might employ, and 
that was found really in Mary, — ^yet she was only great 
so long as she hid herself; for then God was every- 
thing. By making something of herself she would 
have lost her place; but this she did not. God kept 
her in order that His grace might be fully manifested. 

The character of the thoughts that fill the heart of 
Mary is Jewish. It reminds us of Hannah's song in 
1 Sam. ii, which speaks prophetically of this same 
blessed intervention of God. But Mary goes back 
to the promises made to the fathers, and takes in the 
whole of Israel. 

Ver. 56. After remaining three months with Eliza- 
beth, she returns to her house, humbly to follow her 
own path, in order that God's ways may be accom- 
plished. Nothing is more beautiful in its way than 
this account of the conversations of these holy women, 
unknown to the world, but who were the instruments 
of God's grace to accomplish his glorious designs. 
They moved in a scene where nothing entered but 
piety and grace. But God was there Himself, no 
better known to the world than were these poor women, 
but preparing and accomplishing what the angela would 
desire to look into. 



14 

Ver. 57 — 59. But what is only known in secret by 
£uth is at last to be accomplished before all men. The 
son of Zacharias and Elizabeth is bom, and Zacharias, 
no longer dumb, pronounces the blessed prophecy we 
have in ver. 68 — 80. The visitation of Israel by- 
Jehovah, which he speaks of, embraces all the happi- 
ness of the nullennium, connected with the presence 
of Jesus upon the earth. All the promises are Yea 
and Amen in Him. All the prophecies encircle Him 
with the glory which will be then realized. We know 
that since He has been rejected and while He is now 
absent, the accomplishment of these things is neces- 
sarily put off till His return. 



CHAPTER II. 

When God is pleased to occupy Himself with the 
world, and to take a part in what passes therein, it is 
marvellous to see how He acts and the instruction He 
gives. There is no agreement, but a total opposition, 
between His ways and those of men. The emperor 
and his decree are but insignificant instruments. 
Csesar Augustus acts in view of His subjects; yet he 
is, without knowing it, the means of accomplishing the 
prophecy that Jesus should be bom in Bethlehem. 
The entire course of the world is outside the current of 
God's thoughts. The capital fact for Him and for His 
kingdom here, is the babe's birth at Bethlehem; but 
the emperor has no thought about it. The decree puts 
the world in motion, and God makes good His thoughts 
here below. How wondrous! All the world is in 
movement to bring about this event, needed to fulfil 
prophecy, that the poor carpenter, with Mary his 
espoused wife, should be in the city of David, and 
David's heir should be bom there and then. And 
this is the more striking, for the census itself was first 
made some years afterwards, when Cyrenius was 
governor of Syria : God is accomplishing Hia purpose 
of love. But man was blind to it. Who cared to 
notice the poor Jew, though he might be of the house 
and lineage of David ? The things that are perfectly 
indifierent to man fill the heart and eye of God. 

Still we are in Jewish atmosphere. Promises are 
being accomplished; the babe must be bom in Beth- 



16 

lehem. "The city of David" is nothing to the 
Christian as such, save as showing prophecy fulfilled : 
to us the Son comes from h&av&n. On earth the babe 
is the object of God's connsels; angels and all heaven 
are occupied with His birth; but there is no place in 
the world for Him ! Gro where the great world regis- 
ters every individual, go to the little world of an inn, 
where each is measured by the servant's knowing eye, 
and place is accordingly awarded from the garret to 
the first floor; but there is no room for Jesus I And 
the manger led, in due time, to the lowest place — to 
the cross. 

What a lesson for us as to this world ! What a 
difference, too, between giving up the world and the 
world giving us up ! We may do the one with com- 
parative ease; but when we feel the world despises us 
as Christ was despised, we shall discover, unless He 
fills and satisfies the heart, that we had a value for its 
esteem that we were not aware of. When obedience 
is as important to us in our measure, as obeying was 
to Christ, we shall go ricfht on whatever be before us, 
without regarding the world: not that we shall be 
insensiMe^ but when Christ is the object, we shall only 
be occupied with Him. 

All intelligence of the things of God comes from 
His revelation, and not from the reasomngs of men. 
Hence, the simple go farther in spiritual under- 
standing than the wise and prudent of the earth. 
Grod acts here so as to set aside all appearance of 
human wisdom. Happy he who has so seized the in- 
tention of God as to be identified with it, and to want 



17 

none but Grod ! \ This was the case with the shepherds. 
They little entered into the great intent of the registra- 
tion; but it was to them, and not to the prudent, that 
God revealed Himself. Our true wisdom is through 
what Gk)d reveals. But we never get God's fullest 
blessings till we are where the flesh is brought down 
and destroyed — ^I speak as regards walT^, We cannot 
get into the simple joy and power of God, till we ac- 
cept the place of lowliness and humiliation — ^till the 
heai-t is emptied of what is contrary to the lowliness 
of Christ. These shepherds were in the quiet fulfil- 
ment of their himible duty; and that is the place of 
blessing. Whoever is keeping on terms with the 
world is not walking with God; for God is not walk- 
ing with you there. From the manger to the cross, 
all in Christ was simple obedience. How unlike a 
Theudas, who boasted himself to be somebody! Christ 
did all in ^oiPs way; and not only so, but we must 
come so too. 

The glory of the Lord shines round about the shep- 
herds, the angel speaks to them, the sign is given; and 
what a sign ! '< Ye shall find a babe wrapped up in 
swaddling clothes, lying in the manger. And suddenly 
there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly 
host praising God" — ^and for what? "The mystery 
of godliness: God was manifested in the flesh." The 
hope of Israel is revealed to them — ^glad tidings of 
great joy to all the people. For Jesus is the pivot of 
all God's counsels in grace. Adam himself was but a 
tjrpe of Him who was to come. Christ was ever in 
the mind of God. Such displays of glory are not 



18 

shown to mortal eyes every day; but Grod sets them 
before us in His word, and we must every day follow 
the sign given, follow Jesus the babe in the manger. 
If He filled th^ eye, the ear, the heart, how we should 
see the effects in person, spirit, conversation, dress, 
house, money, &a 

Such, then, is the sign of God's accomplishment of 
promise and of His presence in the world — " a babe 
in the manger" — the least and lowest thing. But 
God is found there, though these things are beyond 
man, who cannot walk with God, nor understand His 
moral glory. But God's sign is within the reach of 
faith. It is the token of perfect weakness; a little 
infant who can only weep. Such, born into this world, 
is Christ the Lord. Such is the place God chose — 
the low degree. God's intervention is recognized by 
a sign like this. Man would not have sought that. 
The heavenly host praise God and say, "Glory to God 
in the highest, and on earth peace, good-will toward 
men." Nothing higher nor more astonishing (save 
the cross) for those who have the mind of heaven. 
The choir above see God in it — God manifested in flesh, 
and praise God in the highest. They rejoice that His 
delights are with the sons of men. Of old God had 
displayed Himself to Moses in a flame of fire, without 
consuming the bush, and here, still more marvellously, 
in the feeblest thing on earth : infinite thought, morally, 
though despicable in the eye of the world ! How hard 
it is to receive that the work of God and of His Christ 
is always in weakness ! the rulers of the people saw in 
Peter and John unlearned and ignorant men. Paul's 



19 

weakness at Ooiintli was the trial of bis friends, the 
taunt of his enemies, the boast of himself. The Lord's 
strength is made perfect in weakness. The thorn 
in the flesh mads Paul despised, and he conceived it 
would be better if that were gone. He had need of 
the lesson: "My grace is suflicienfc for thee." It is 
God's rule of action, if we may so say, to choose the 
weak things. Everything must rest on God's power, 
otherwise God's work cannot be done according to His 
mind. One can hardly believe that one must be feeble 
to do the work of God; but Christ was crucified in 
weakness, and the weakness of God is stronger than 
men. For the work of God we must be weak, that the 
strength may be of God; and that work will last when 
all the earth shall be moved away. 

Ver. 21 — 38. But besides the additional testimony 
rendered by the offering of his mother to the circum- 
stances in this world, in which the Lord of glory was 
bom, we may see that while God all through the 
gospel is settling man in his new place with Himself 
He did not forget His ancient people. He shows us 
here that He met every thought in every heart that 
was touched by grace in Israel. His heart was 
especially toward those who sorrowed over the sins 
and desolation of His people; and who, withal, waited 
for redemption, crying from the darkness, "How long, 
Lordi" God will accomplish in power that wherein 
man has failed in responsibility. Should we therefore 
be content if God's people do not glorify Him? No; 
faith is not hard; it will sorrow, but it will wait for 
God, and God's time too; for faithful is He who hath 



20 



t 



promised, who also will do it. He vnil bring about 
His own purposes. 

Ver. 25. Thus was Simeon "waiting for the conso- 
lation of Israel." Thus Anna departed not from the 
temple, but served with fastings and prayers night and 
day. Thus all they that looked for redemption in 
Jerusalem. There were those who watched, and Anna 
knew and spake to them. The rest doubtless were 
occupied with Eoman oppression, but these few waited 
for Him, bowing before His hand in judgment of evil, 
but looking for His deliverance. 

I believe there was something more in Simeon's 
^oul than the joy of holding in his arms the babe, the 
expected Messiah: Simeon felt he had God, and was 
satisfied. So he says, without even looking on to the 
glory, " Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in 
peace according to thy word." In Eom. v. 11, the 
apostle, after speaking of rejoicing in the hope of the 
glory of God, says, "and not only so:" what could be 
more than that hope 1 Yes; there is more : " we also 
joy in God,*^ The eyes of Simeon have seen GocTs 
salvation, and he begs of the sovereign Lord that he 
may go. 

We often see something like this in dying saints, who 
deeply joy in the Lord's love to His own, and in the 
neamcHS of His coming for them. Why, one might 
say, what is His near coming to those who are dying, 
and departing to Him ? Just this — ^the nearer we are 
to God, the more precious is all the truth of God, and 
everything which is near to His heart. So in verses 
30 — 32, Simeon rejoices as he surveys the extent of 



21 

the divine deliyerance. It was for the revelation of 
the Gentiles, who had been, till now, hidden in the 
dark of idolatry and ungodliness, as well as for the 
glory of Israel. But his soid is satii^fied possessing 
Christ, and anticipating the effect of His presence in 
the whole world : he has all in Him, and desires to 
depart. If a man walks with Crod, and has finished 
his course, he knows that his work is done, and is con- 
scious of the Lord's time being come. He has a 
companionship and communion with the Lord he has 
walked with. If simply brought to a bed of sickness, 
he is not then ready to go j not that he fears, but Grod 
is teaching him something else. But when God's time 
is come, all is joy and readiness. He feels like Simeon,. 
Lord now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace. 

But, further, when Simeon blessed Joseph and Mary 
the Spirit gives him to disclose the more immediate 
results of the babe's presence in Israel. He should be 
the touchstone of many hearts, an occasion for the fall 
as well as the lise of many ; He should be a sign 
spoken against, a rejected Messiah : and Mary's heart 
should be pierced through, whatever the present joy or 
the future glory. 

Israel was low indeed, but did not know it; Israel 
must be made to know it, and Christians too; for 
Christ had to descend to the grave and rise again. 
The thoughts of the heart must be revealed, whatever 
the outward garb. But then He is the one who brings 
out God's thoughts too. If He is the Christ, the glory 
of God's people. He is also the one who will abase the 
flesh, and meet and humble man in his pride; He is 



23 

the one who will make you know whether Se in J£is 
rejection is more precious than all beside. 

Ver. 39. When all was done according to the la^^, 
they returned to Galilee to Nazareth. Jesus would 
not be the Christ we need, if He had taken any glory 
from Jerusalem. His place is among the poor of the 
flock — His place all through in IsraeL 

Ver. 40. " And the child grew and waxed strong in 
spirit, filled with wi&dom ; and the grace of God was 
upon him^" Luke gives us more of the reality of His 
childhood than the other gospels. He was not made 
man full -formed like Adam. 

If one only reads the accoimt without comment, 
how the sold feels it unspeakably precious ! When 
we see who it was, we see human nature in Him filled 
with God, so to speak. It is not official distinction, 
but the heart feels God brought nigh. The blessed- 
ness of the child's intrinsic loveliness fills the heart 
Deeply instructive too is the incident recorded in con- 
nexion with the passover when He was twelve years 
old. His true character comes out, though He was 
not yet to act upon it. He came to be a Nazarene — 
to be about His Father's business. This is here stated 
distinctly before He enters upon His public ministry, 
that it might be seen to be connected with His person, 
and not to depend merely upon His office. He was 
the Pastor of the flock in spirit and character. It 
belonged to Him. He was the Son of the father, 
though abiding God's time for showing it. 

Vei\ 51. Nevertheless, "He went down with them 
and came to Nazareth and was subject to them.*' 



23 

"What a majesty in His whole life ! His being Grod 
secured His perfection as a child and man here below. 
He had ever the blessed consciousness of His relation- 
ship to His Father — an obedient child, but conscious 
also of a glory unconnected in itself with subjection 
to human parentage. He belonged to Mary and even 
Joseph: in another sense he was not theirs. His 
divine Sonship was as well known to Him, as His 
obedience to His parents was iu due season absolutely 
right. 

Ver. 52. "And Jesus increased in wisdom and 
stature, and in favour with God and man." His 
human intelligence being developed, He, though ever 
perfect became so in a fuller way — the perfect child 
grows into the perfect man. The lovely plant grew 
up and imfolded before God and man. 



CHAPTER IIL 

The two preceding chapters have given the general 
character: they have shown the going out of the 
thoughts of God to man. Accordingly we find that 
the gospel, as a whole, is particularly occupied with 
what is not Jewish. Still the Jewish part is givea at 
first with considerable detail, inasmuch as Israel, be- 
cause of their unbelief and moral worthlessness, are 
to be set aside, in order to make way for new rela- 
tionships, founded on what Ood reveals Himself to be 
for man in Jesus, the true and only Mediator. But if 
chap. i. disclosed the faithfulness of €rod to the Abra- 
hamic promises, to His covenant and His oath, chap, 
ii. puts us in the presence of the actual government of 
the world and of the Lord^s land and people under the 
fourth beast, the Roman empire. What confusion 
does not sin create? The Jews are subject to the 
Gentiles: Joseph and Mary, of David's royal house, 
go up to be taxed. Nevertheless, the ways of God 
shine so much the brighter for the darkness that sur- 
rounded them: He was in Christ, reconciling the 
world unto Himself. Israel, however, would be put 
to a new moral test by His presentation of Himself. 
Alas ! it would soon appear that if they had not kept 
the law, they hated grace, '* Behold, this child is set 
for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and 
for a sign which shall be spoken against." 

In chap. iii. we have the ministry of God coming in 
by a prophet as of old by Samuel. **The word of God 



25 

came unto John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilder- 
ness." It is not without object that the Spirit men- 
tions the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar, <fec. All 
the earth was seemingly at rest under its heathen 
lord: the word of God found its suited sphere in 
the wildemeai. The law and the prophets were until 
John; and where should he be in such a state of 
things but the wilderness % Could he morally own it ? 
God will not have His messenger in Jerusalem. 

Prophecy is the sovereign means whereby God can 
communicate with His people when they are ruined 
and departed from Him. John understands this, and 
preaches the baptism of repentance for the remission 
of sins. And such was the place assigned him many 
centuries before by Esaias the prophet. It was vain 
for Israel to plead their priyileges and rights. All 
was wrong, and the Judge was at the door. John's 
work was not to lead the people back to the law : he 
was preparing the way of the Lord. Herein he 
differed from the prophets as well as the law, or 
rather, he went farther ; for God's time was come for 
a step in advance. The prophets led back to Horeb : 
John says not a word of this, though his father was a 
priest, and himself, of course, an Aaronite. He does 
not try to set up again what was closed : he announces 
the kingdom. He may not introduce the Church, nor 
even the glad tidings of God's grace, (both awaited 
the accomplishment of the work of redemption,) but 
he drops the law, and shows that God's purpose is the 
kingdom. 

The quotation from Esaias sets aside Israel — not 

c 



26 

the Gentiles merely, but Israel — as grass, withered 
grass, without a green blade left. Yet the word of 
the Lord endoreth for ever ; and this when all hope 
from man was gone. Israel may have failed, but the 
word of the Lord shall stand. Moreover, since it was 
the Lord who was coming, every valley should be filled, 
&c. Not the Jews alone, but aU flesh should see 
God's deliverance. If sin plunges all in indiscriminate 
ruin and a common judgment, God can meet man 
thus ruined, but His glory will not be shut up in 
the narrow limits of Israel. 

Ver. 7 — 14. But to be blessed, man must repent. 
God would have realities, and not a mere nominal 
people ; He must have &uits answering to hearts 
which felt and judged their moral condition, and 
which, therefore, turned from themselves to God. 
Ordinances, formal claims, &c., which should have 
been means of blessing, would be no shelter against 
the coming wrath ; nor would God permit them to 
hinder His creating true children of the promise, if 
this generation were but Ishmael over again. Judg- 
ment must begin at the house of God. 

In factf as we know, John was beheaded, and the 
Lord was crucified, and the kingdom, presented in 
Him and by Him, was rejected by Israel. By and 
by it will be set up visibly and in power.* Mean- 



• Observe, that Matthew only uses the expression "kingdom 
of heaven." It is often, in a general sense, .capable of being in- 
terchanged with "kingdom of Grod," as we see by comparing 
Luke. Notwithstanding, the two phrases cannot always replace 




27 

while the Church is set up, because the kingdom is 
not set up in this manifested way. And those who 
now take their place with the Lord share his rejection. 
They are members of his body, the Church. They 
shall share His glory, but it will be heavenly, and not 
earthly glory. In another sense we are in the king- 
dom now. To faith heaven rules now, and we own it 
and know it; but Satan is actually prince and god of 
this world ; and hence those, who are made Tdngs to 
God (for that is our true place) are called to suffer. 
Therefore Paul went everywhere preaching the king- 
dom of God, as well as Christ and the Church. We 
have that by virtue of which we shall reign with 
Christ j but even that is not our best portion. To be 
one with Christ — His body and bride — is far more 
blessed. If your mind only rests on the person of 
Christ, there is no difficulty in seeing that when He is 
cut off, aU must cease as regards the earth. He is 
the centre of all, and when rejected, what prophecy 
spoke of, and what seemed about to be accomplished, 
breaks off. Thereupon Christ ascends, and takes up a 
glory above the heavens, and there now the saints 
find their place with Him. (Comp. Psalms ii. and viii.) 
John Baptist, then, addresses himself to the Jews, 
demanding repentance, and righteousness as its fruit; 
shows them that if they were nearer to God outwardly 

when Christ the King was there ; "the kingdom of heaven" began 
with Chiist going U> heaven. By and by, when Satan ceases to 
rule, it will be the "kingdom of heaven" (and "of God" too, of 
course), not in a mystery, but in manifestation. " The kingdom 
of God" has also a moral force which "kingdom of heaven" has 
not; and in this way it is frequently used by St. Paul, and wa« 
peculiarly suitable to the Spirit's design in Luke. 



28 

as Jews, they must expect judgment the sooner. If 
the Lord was coming, He must have what became the 
Lard. The axe was even then lying at the root of the 
trees: if there was not good fruit on the trees, eveiy 
one must be hewn down and burnt. Bepentance, or 
wrath — which? The Lord would allow no plea of 
descent from Abraham, if their ways belied Abraham: 
He must have righteousness. It is the Lord that is 
just at hand, and He must have a people fit for Him; 
or He would out of the very stones make a suited 
people for Himself. 

Evidently John's word is not a voice of m ercy to 
the poor sinner. God is presented in the way of 
judgment, not of sovereign mercy. He does not say, 
^'Come unto me.'' John could not, because he was 
not Christ, and none but He could say, « Come unto 
me,^^ John came in righteousness. 

In ver. 10-14 moral testimony is given, and that 
in detail. John deals with the practical iniquity of 
each set of people. So even when the question of the 
Christ is raised (15-18), "one mightier than I cometh," 
says he. It is of His power especially he thinks — TTis 
power morally as outwardly. "He shall baptize you 
with the Holy Ghost and with fire." It is the power 
of the Holy Ghost and His consuming judgment. He 
oould not speak of the grace of the gospel which we 
know now. He proclaims One who was coming after 
him, not a present salvation. Whatever would not 
stand the fire was to be burnt up. For His fan <'is in 
His hand, and He will thoroughly purge his floor, 
and will gather the wheat into his gamer; but the 



29 

chaff he will bum with fire unquenchable. (Comp. 
tsaiah xxi. 10, ^c.) God^s floor was Israel: there He 
was getting His wheat, if any were to be found. But 
His fan is in His hand: He is going to make short 
work. Titus finally set aside God's floor upon the 
earth; Israel's sin had lost it morally when they 
rejected Christ, but at the destruction of Jerusalem it 
was done with thoroughly for the present 

Ver. 19, Ac. — ^Luke's method of instruction is to be 
noticed in passing. He shows that John had preached 
and exhorted moral truth, and then disposes of him, 
putting him, as it were, out of the scene in order to 
bring Christ in. It was not that historically John 
was imprisoned at that juncture by Herod the tetrarch; 
it took place long after. But it is a sample of Luke's 
manner, who returns to the Lord's taking His place 
amongst the remnant of Israel. For the Lord does 
not identify Himself with the nation; but directly 
there is a poor remnant, He identifies Himself with it. 

This history opens with verse 21, and how wonderM 
and full of grace. " Now when all the people were 
baptized, it came to pass, that Jesus also being bap- 
tized, and praying, the heaven was opened, and the 
Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove 
upon him, and a voice came from heaven, which said, 
Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased." 
One may have looked and listened mournfully, as one 
reads of John Baptist and his testimony. We might 
have asked, as the dying record of men passed before 
us. What is man? But now my eye rests on Jesus: 
I find the Lord from heaven a mom. All is to begin 



30 

again. Do I ask again, What is man? At once 
Christ comes out. Do I look at myself? at all 
around? What do I see? Enough to break my 
heart, if there is a heart to be broken. The only 
thing which prevents people being utterly broken 
down is that they have not a heart to feel things as 
they are. But a rest is here! I have got a man now 
who satisfied God — ^this blessed man on earth in the 
presence of God, looking to God, and an object to 
God! not Messiah purging His floor, but Him iu 
whom God's thoughts and purposes are all folded up— 
not man perishing before the moth, but Jesus the Son 
of man, not merely coming down from Abraham and 
David, but traced up, " which was the son of Adam, 
which was the son of God" — the second man, the last 
Adam, the quickening Spirit. What a relief; for 
what 18 man? What one's self when the heart's sin is 
known — ^giving up God for an apple from the begin- 
ning hitherto ! But now a man, a blessed man, 
appears, " and praying." We are not told this else- 
where, and why here? Because Luke presents man in 
his perfection — the dependent man : for dependence is 
the essence of a perfect man. Truly we see God 
shining all through, but yet in Jesus the dependent 
man, in the place and condition of perfectness as man. 
The root of sin in us is self-will, independence. Here 
my heart has rest ! A dependent man in the midst 
of sorrow, but perfectly with God in all. See Luke's 
account of the transfiguration also : in humiliation or 
in glory it makes no difference as to this: the perfect 
is ever the dependent one. 



31 

And when that blessed heart thus expressed its 
dependence, did He get no answer? "The heaven 
was opened." Does heaven open thus on me? It is 
open to me, indeed, no doubt, but / pray because it is 
open; it opened because He prayed. I come and look 
up because the heavens were opened on Him. 

It is, indeed, a lovely picture of grace, and we may 
be bold to say that the Father loved to look on — to 
look down, in the midst of all sin, on His beloved 
Son. Nothing but what was divine could thus 
awaken God's heart; and yet it was the lowly, perfect 
man. He takes not the place of His eternal glory, 
as the Creator, the Son of God. He stoops and is 
baptized. (Psalm xvi.) He says, "in thee do I trust." 
He says to Jehovah, Thou art my Lord; my goodness 
extendeth not to thee : He says to the godly remnant 
in Israel (i.e., to the saints that are in the earth and 
to the excellent). All my delight is in them. He 
needed no repentance, yet is He baptized with them; 
just as when, later on. He puts forth His sheep. He 
goes before them. He identifies Himself in grace 
with Israel, even with such as were of a clean heart. 
And the Holy Ghost descends like a dove on Him — fit 
emblem of that spotless man! — fit resting-place for 
the Spirit in the deluge of this world. And how 
sweet, too, that Jesus is pointed out to ua 2a God's 
object. I know the way the Father feels about him. 
I am made his intimate, and admitted to hear Him 
expressing His affection for His Son, to see the links 
reformed between God and man. Heaven is opened, 
not on something above, but upon a man upon ^i^** 



32 

earth. Thus I get rest, and my heart finds commu- 
nion with God in His beloved Son. It is only the 
belieyer who enjoys it, but the link is there. And if 
I have that in and about me which distresses the soul, 
I have that in Him which is imfailing joy and comfort. 
The genealogy quite falls in with the thought that 
God is showing grace in man and to man. Jesus, the 
beloved Son of God, is trac^ up to Adam and to God. 
Jesus is Son of man; He is heir in this sense. He 
takes up the inheritance God gave to man. O what a 
truth! Where could one's heart turn for rest, if it 
had not Jesus to rest in? With Him let heaven and 
earth be turned upside down, and still I have a rest. 
What blessedness for the heart to have the object 
God Himself is occupied with ! May our hearts also 
be more and more occupied with Him. 



CHAPTER IV. 

We sa-w the Lord taking His place of seryant witk 
the excellent in Israel, and thereon the heavens opened, 
and Himself owned by the Father as His beloved Son. 
His delights were with the sons of men, and He is 
traced np, not to Abraham only, the root and deposi- 
tary of Jewish promises, but to Adam and God Him- 
self. Independently of His proper divine glory as Son 
of the Father, Jesus should be called the Son of the 
Highest, the Son of God. As man on earth. He was 
sealed with the Holy Ghost. He took upon Him the 
form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. 
His entire perfectness now was to fulfil, as a servant, 
the will of Him who sent Him; for a servant doing 
his own wiU is a bad servant. Dependence, waiting, 
and obedience, were the characteristics of this place, 
and they are found in Him to the uttermost. Hence, 
as in the Psalms, "I waited patiently for the Lord.** 
He would not ask for power, but waits on God. 
"Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, 
and He shall presently give me more than twelve 
legions of angels?' Put thoroughly to the test, He 
would do nothing but His Father's will. He was to 
learn obedience. Having taken the place, He would 
go through it wholly, not in one act, but experiencing 
the force of that expression, learning obedience, with- 
out one comfort here, with enemies around, bidls of 
Bashan besetting, dogs compassing. He had to learn 
obedience where obedience was always suffering, ewsn 



34 

to the yielding up of life. Every single step was 
humiliation till the close came in the cross, where the 
wrath of God was borne in love to us. No doubt He 
found, in His i*ejection, fields white for harvest, and 
so shall we, in our measure, when walking in the same 
path. But the cross was always before Him, — every- 
thing that could stop a man. Nevertheless, He went 
on, patiently waiting, and not asking for deliverances. 
Thus, He presented perfect God to man, and perfect 
man to God. 

Yer. 1. In this chapter He begins this walk of suf- 
fering obedience publicly. And the first thing to be 
remarked is, that being full of the Holy Ghost, He is 
led hy Him into the wilderness, where He is tempted 
by the devil. There are two ways in which the enemy 
has power : first, by allurements, and secondly, by ter- 
ror. In the one, he works upon us through our lusts, 
presenting what is calculated to attract, and so he 
rules over us naturally. In the other, he has the 
power of death. Thus, Judas being a covetous man 
and without the faith which purifies the heart, Satan 
suggested the occasion and gets him. He has no right 
to rule over men, but he acquires dominion through 
the lusts of the flesh. Another way is through the 
terror of death. In both he assailed the Lord, but 
found nothing in Him. 

Here, then, we have the devil meeting mem in the 
power of the Spirit of God — ^man tempted, not in 
paradise, but in the wilderness. Jesus does not say, 
"I am God, and y(5u are Satan; go away." That 
would not have glorified God, nor have helped us. 



35 

But as the Lord was led into the wilderness, not by 
lust, (God forbid the thought!) but by the Holy 
Ghost, so in His blessed grace He puts Himself in the 
place where man was. He has help from none, not 
even from John the Baptist. There was all that might 
have stumbled rather, had it been possible : through 
all He goes as man. He must be tempted, and must 
overcome where man not only had failed, but was lying 
under the power of wickedness. 

Ver. 2, 3. There was no harm in hunger; it was 
no sin. He could have commanded stones to be made 
bread, but to do so, save at His Father's word, would 
have been doing His own will, and then He had not 
been the perfect man. Satan tries to introduce into 
His heart a desire which was not in the word of God ; 
He succeeded in insinuating a lust into the heart of 
Adam; he fails with Jesus, though He was for forty 
days exposed to his presence and power. Jesus had 
to know by experience what it was to have working 
at Him, without a single support^ without a friend, in 
solitary dreariness (save indeed the wild beasts) with 
the devil! Thus He measured the power of Satan. 
The strong man was there, putting forth all his wea- 
pons, but the stronger than he overcame : Jesus binds 
the strong man. He was abstracted from human con- 
dition for forty days, not like Moses to be only with 
God, but as the one who was always with God, to be 
exposed to Satan. None other man needs to be 
abstracted in order to be tempted, he has only to go on 
along with men. In this case, this extraordinary 
separation was to be with the devil. To be with God 



36 

He did not need anything out of His every-day path, 
for it was His natural place; but to be with Satan^ 
He needed it. Others are strangers to God, and at 
home with Satan. He, in the most adverse things, is 
a stranger to Satan, and dwells in the bosom of the 
Father. But He emptied Himself as God to become a 
servant as man, and there He waits in dependence on 
the word of Him whom He served. The liviug Father 
had sent Him, and He lived by the Father. He was 
as man under His authority, and His meat waa to do 
His will. " By the words of thy lips, I have kept me 
from the paths of the destroyer." 

Yer. 4. It is the written word He ever uses, and 
Satan is powerless. What amazing importance Jesus 
gives the Scriptures. God now acts by the word, and 
Satan is resisted morally in this way. A man cannot 
be touched by Satan while the word is simply used in 
obedience. '*He that is begotten of God keepeth him- 
self, and that wicked one touchetk him not" It was 
not a« an exercise of divine authority He dismissed 
Satan, but the enemy is proved unable to grapple with 
obedience to the word of God. If he cannot take out 
of the path of obedience, he has no power. What 
more simple 1 Every child of God has the Holy Ghost 
actmg by the word to keep Him. 

Jesus does not reason with Satan. A single text 
silences when used in the power of the Spirit. The 
whole secret of strength in conflict is using the word 
of God in the right way. One may say, I am not like 
this perfect Man : it might be so with Christ, but how 
can I expect the same result ? True, we are ignorant. 



37 

and the flesh is in us, but God is always behind, and 
He is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted 
above that we are able. Temptation may be simply a 
trial of our obedience, as in Abraham's case, not a snare 
to lead us astray. Satan presents what has no appear- 
ance of evil. The evil would be — doing one's own 
will. Now it solves every difficulty to Bsk--aot, what 
harm is there in doing this or that? — hit^ why am I 
doing it? Is it for God or myself 1 What ! am I to 
be always under this restraint ? Ah ! there the secret 
of our nature comes out : we do not like the restraint 
of doing what God will approve. It is restraint to do 
God's will ! We want to do our own will. To act 
merely becauBe one rrmst^ is law, and not the guidance 
of the Spirit. The word of God was the motive of 
Christ, and such is Christ's guidance. Not fencing 
the old man, but the new man living on the word is 
our defence against Satan. 

Yer. 3 — 13. The first temptation is an appeal to the 
need of the body. The second in Luke (not in Mat- 
thew) is the inducement of the world's glory. The 
third in our gospel is the religious temptation through 
the word of God, and therefore morally tho hardest of 
all to one who values that word. And this is the rea- 
son why Luke departs from the actual order of the 
events, in order to group them morally, as is the habit 
of this evangelist elsewhere also. Thus we have the 
tempter assailing the Lord Jesus, first, as to man's life ; 
second, as to the poioer given to man ; and third, as to 
the promises made to Christ Himself. 

The Lord might have argued with the devil, but He 



38 

does not even tell him that the dominion of the world 
would be His by and by. He takes His stand on that 
which settles everything, and is a perfect example for 
us. He stands to Gk)d*s word, and God's worship. 
He awaits Hia word, He worships Him, He serves 
Him (yrdy. How simple and how blessed ! It was the 
immediate link of an obedient heart with God. The 
question was one of relationship to God. So of old, 
Eliezar receives blessing, but before he begins to en- 
joy it, he gives thanks. He had the word first, then 
the blessing — and what follows forthwith ] He bows 
his head and worships. God is the first thought of his 
heart. And so still more fully with the Lord here. 
The last and subtlest temptation was grounded on the 
promises to Messiah. (9 — 11.) If thou art the Son of 
God, why not try] But why shoidd He try, who knew 
that God was for Him 1 Why should He be like pre- 
sumptuous Israel of old, who would go up the hill in 
disobedience, to prove whether the Lord was among 
them? Not even when Lazarus was sick would He 
stir, till it was the Father's will, though all nature 
would have moved j and He knew well the sorrow of 
that house which was His refuge; for *^ Jesus loved 
Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus." 

The Lord did not listen. Who would? you say. 
But you do listen to Satan, every day of your lives, 
that you seek a very little bit of the world. But was 
there not a promise? Doubtless there was; yet why 
should He throw Himself down to see whether God 
would be as good as His word ? Did He not know 
that God was with Him? And so with us: let us 



39 

only have the word behind us, no matter what may be 
before us. Never should we raise a question whether 
God is with us. If He does not send, let us not move, 
but let us never question His presence. If we are in 
the simple path of His will, the Holy Ghost will act 
in us to guide, and not merely ow us to correct. 

Thus then, in the order of Luke, which, as we have 
seen, ia not historical, but moral, we have the progres- 
sive exercises of a man. First, natural lusts; secondly, 
worldly lusts;* and lastly, spiritual temptations. The 
Lord Jesus was tempted Acre, not in Eden, but in the 
great system where we are. He put Himself, by the 
wiQ and wisdom of God, in the place of our difficulty 
in the world, where man is. He has gone through all 
the difficulties a saint is in. Who wants His help ? 
Not a sinner, for he wants salvation : but a saint needs 
help and sympathy in his path. We have practically 
to keep our first estate, as renewed. Satan cannot 
touch the new man, but he tries to entice out of the 
path of godliness. We want succour to walk as obe- 
dient ones where Christ walked. 

Ver. 14. "And Jesus returned in the power of the 
Spirit iuto Galilee; and He taught in their synagogues, 
being glorified of all." In all things His obedience 
is shown. Untouched by Satan, He goes forth in un- 
hindered power; as we shall in a measure, if like Him 
we pass through temptation, so a» not to be touched 
by Satan. 

* Satan's saying in Luke iv. 6. ("All this jpower," &c.) was false 
as to right ^ but true in^oc^, through men's lusts. So far as these 
go, he gives the power, but God, after all, is above him; and 
governs in providence. 



40 

Yev. 16. ^' And he came to Nazareth, where he had 
been brought up'' — ^the low, despised place, but just 
the place where spiritual power is found. Was it not 
ever thus? When was it found allied to the great 
things of this world 9 

Yer. 18. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, be- 
cause he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the 
poor," &e. It was the characteristic of grace to come 
to such. The great business of Christ was to preach, 
ie., to present God. The Holy Ghost gives the right 
word at the right time, and in the right way. " This 
day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears." (Yer. 21.) 
The Lord does not reason ; He says, Here it is. The 
way of God is to present what we want. You want 
salvation, there it is ; you want mercy, and there it is. 
Ood alone can thus come, by grace, into the place of 
a sinner. They wonder, for His were precious words, 
but soon they ask, Is not this Joseph's son 9 Was He 
ashamed of being the carpenter 1 Grace goes down 
to the lowest need. But man will take occasion to 
despise grace, because it is clothed in humiliation : 
he cannot but see God, but he ster>s aside to look at 
the humiliation, and so show out the hatred of his 
heart. God's grace is despised and His sovereignty 
is hated. God did not despise Nazareth, but man de- 
spises Jesus because He came out of Nazareth. Even 
the guileless Nathaniel asks, "Can any good thing 
come out of Nazareth ?" How little appreciation of 
the way of grace there is even in the godly ! Christ 
comes into man's misery, and finds l^im where he is. 
Could an angel ? No : he stays in his proper position, 



41 

doing tlie Lord's commandments, and hearkening to 
the voice of His word. An angel ought not to come 
down to me in my sins : God only can in His grace. 
And man despises the lowliness to which grace brought 
Him — wretched man ! 

But Israel ever resisted grace, and yet it was ever 
the way of God's delight. Witness the widow of 
Sarepta in Sidon, and Naaman the Syrian leper. Grace 
over-leaped the bounds of Israel. (Ver. 25 — 27.) They 
might be enraged, but grace does over-step their limits. 
They rose up to thrust Him down who had denied their 
privileges, but He passed through (ver. 30) to renew 
the work of grace elsewhere, (ver. 31, 32.) This does 
not move Jesus ; it tries Him and breaks His heart, 
but it does not move Him. The reproach of man turns 
Him to God. His comfort in His rejection is His 
Father's will : " Even so, Father." It was perfectness 
in the scene of gi'ace, as before in the scene of temptation. 

There was also the manifestation of power, and 
not merely promise. There was the accomplishment 
of promise for the deliverance of man in power as well 
as grace : and this remains true for us, who know Him 
as a man risen, and at the right hand of God. Mere 
promise does not give a centre for the affections ; 
Christ Himself is that — Christ to whom promise 
pointed. He awakens divine feelings and thoughts in 
us, which find no response or satisfaction from any- 
thing in this world. It is the special character of 
Christ: when He presents Himself, it is perfect peace 
and grace ; and in fellowship with Him, the soul can 
praise and rejoice in what He is. 

D 



42 

This grace adapts itself to all difficulties, so as to 
bring man into peace with God. The very demons 
knew who He was; man alone was dull and blind. 
The devil held captive, but a single word of Jesus sets 
the captive free. He was there, not a promise merely, 
but power accompUshing, the living power of the Lord 
Himself anong men, the power of God in man over- 
coming Satan. Such was Jesus in the synagogue of 
Capernaum, dealing with the unclean spirit. (Ver. 
33 — 37.) And it is the same when He goes out and 
enters Simon's house. Disease disappears, the weak 
is made strong. He ministers unto Simon's wife's 
mother, as she lay taken in a great fever, '' and imme- 
diately she arose and ministered unto them." (Yer. 
38, 39.) What can resist this delivering power in 
the person of the Lord Jesus ? " Now when the sun 
was setting, all they that had any sick, with divei-s 
diseases, brought them unto Him, and He laid His 
hands on every one of them, and healed them ; and 
devils also came out of many." He went about doing 
good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil. 
Therefore when men stayed Him that He should not 
depart, He pleads His mission to preach elsewhere 
also. He is ever the obedient onci 



CHAPTER V. 

It is interesting to know the progressive power of the 
word of Grod. The Lord was precichingy as related at 
the close of chap, iv., and in so doing, as well .as in the 
miracles He wrought, He was manifesting the power 
of goodness. Thus, in performing miracles, two pur- 
poses had to be accomplished — conformation of the 
testimony given, and present deliverance from the 
power of Satan. But His great business was preach- 
ing the kingdom of God. He will set up the kingdom 
in power by and by, but His great object then was 
(and is) to bring the heart into contact with God ; and 
the word does this more than miracles. 

Ver. 1. In a measure even the unconverted jure 
sensible of the presence of God. Adam was, when he 
tried to hide himself. When the gospel is preached 
with power, crowds are gathered together by it, 
touched, perhaps, by something new, but without 
fruit. So it was with the Lord's preaching and 
miracles. We know their motives were selfish often, 
yet He went on all the same. Come for the blessing 
of man, He would associate others with Himself in 
this work of grace ; but He calls them in such a way 
as leaves no glory to man. He ^^saw two ships 
standing by the lake, but the fishermen were gone out 
of them and were washing their nets. And He entered 
into one of the ships, which was Simon's, and prayed 
him that he would launch out a little fro;m the land ; 
and He sat down and taught the multitudes out of 



44 

the ship. Now when He had left off speaking. He said 
to Simon, T4timch out into the deep and let down jonr 
nets for a draught.'' (ver, 2 — 4.) The word had authority 
in the conscience. Peter and Andrew had seen Jesus 
before, but had not yet staid with Him : there had not 
been sufBicient power in their faith to attach them to 
Christ. There are many now, as ever, who own the 
authority of the word, and yet not attached by its 
power to His person — ^many absorbed by their every- 
day pursuits, the word not having laid hold of their 
souls so as to make them walk thoroughly with Christ 
It is one thing simply to hear His word when spoken 
to them; quite a different thing when the word 
reaches them, and becomes the spring and motive of all 
their ways. So, here, these men had spent a little 
time with Jesus, had heard Him speak, and owned 
Him as Messiah ; so, now also, we see obedience to 
His word when it comes to them. They launch out 
at His word, and at His word they let down their 
nets. 

The miracle which the Lord wrought was one every 
way suited to act on those concerned. Their own 
powerlessness was confessed. (" Master, we have 
toiled all the night, and have taken nothing.") Maij 
cotdd do nothing in such a case : if Jesus could, it was 
because eveiy thing was at His disposal *^At thy word 
I will let down the net." (ver. 5.) 

Ver. 6 — 8. " And when they had this done, they 
inclosed a great multitude of fishes, and their net 
brake. And they beckoned unto their partners .... 
and they came and filled both the ships, so that they 



I 



45 

began to sink." There was not even strength to re- 
ceive of themselves. "When Simon Peter saw it, he 
fell down at Jesus* knees, saying. Depart from me; for 
I am a sinful man, O Lord." If the word of Jesus 
had not reached Peter's heart, he would merely have 
obeyed it as a means of temporal help ; but he owns 
him as Lord^ hearing far more in the words spoken* 
His conscience was reached. The Lord Himself is 
revealed to Peter, and that shows Peter himself. When 
the eye of God is consciously upon us, we see in our- 
selves what He saw. This was Peter's case. He, 
when brought into God's presence, feels that he has 
been deceiving himself. 

Grace begins here, but we have not the end yet. 
So Paul was blind three days, and his soul so wrought 
on that he could neither eat nor drink. Here Peter 
falls down at Jesus' knees. So with us : when brought 
really into His presence, there is the discovery of our 
sinfulness. The means used to bring us there may be 
various — circumstances of life, providential occur- 
rences, (with Luther, a thunder-storm). But when 
we are there, there is the revelation of Christ Himself y 
and wherever He is, He takes his right place in the 
soul. It is not only that a man then has salvation, but 
he cannot longer be content without God having His 
due place before him. 

Peter does not fly away from the Lord, like Adam 
hiding himself : he is attracted to Him. At the same 
time he is there a judged, convicted, sinful man in his 
own conscience, which takes the part of Christ against 
itself. "Depart from me," he says, but he 88'^° ^* 



46 

at Jesus' knees. This might seem like a contradic- 
tion. It was really love to the Lord and care for 
His honour, because His word had become the revela- 
tion of Christ to him. His heart has not perfect 
])eaoe, but Christ has got possession of it. Graoe 
draws to Christ, but there is withal the sense of unfit* 
ness till His work is known in all its peaoe-giving 
consequences. God sees the thoughts and intents of 
the heart, and we are made to see these as He sees 
them. Righteousness is planted in the conscience; 
God and man are brought together. It was not that 
Peter could be happy anywhere but at the knees of 
Jesus, but he felt all the while how imfit he was to be 
in such company. 

But the Lord deals in perfect grace. He does not 
leave Simon Peter. He knew all his sin before He 
went into the ship, and says to him, (Ver. 10) ^^ Fear 
not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men." Jesus 
went into the ship to show Peter that he had nothing 
to fear. Truly " perfect love casteth out fear." Fear 
has torment till grace is fully revealed ; and now it 
was, with as much authority as that miracle-working 
word, "Let down your nets for a draught." It was the 
word of Christ to his heart. If he trusted it for the 
fish, why not for his fears? Peter had said, " Depart,*' 
but instead of that, Christ had already come, knowing 
all he was better than Peter. He was come as a 
Saviour ; nay, more. He intimates to Peter that He 
Tras going to make him an instrument in gathering 
others. Everyone who has the love of God shed 
abroad in his heart becomes a vessel of living grace 



i 



47 

himself: not tlie source^ but the river flows through 
him, so thai; people may come and drink. E^cipients 
of grace, we are associated with Christ in the activity 
of love. Outward gift is not meant here, but that, 
as members of His body, there is living fellowship 
with the Head in the testimony of His grace and 
power. 

We see in these disciples the effect of all. They 
are absorbed with Christ now. They not only look to 
Him for salvation, but they think of nothing else for 
life, speaking now generally and apart fix)m any par- 
ticular failure. " Thev foraook all and followed Him." 
Christ becomes their life. It is a new line altogether 
— ^not merely obedience to an express command, with 
the reserve of thinking and saying, perhaps, " there is 
no harm in this or that." Christ pleased not Himself. 
His reason for action was His Father's will, and not 
the absence of a prohibition. And we are sanctified 
unto the obedience and sprinkling of the blood of 
Jesus Christ. " They forsook all," and where Christ 
went they went. They are associated with their 
Lord in His love to souls, and in the walk of life. 
This is liberty. May we, having Christ our life, have 
Him as our one motive ! detached from all to Him, 
yet channels for all the blessing and grace we have 
ourselves tasted in Him ! There is power to attract 
out of every corruption around, and to gather the 
soul into the thoughts and ways of God, by the reve- 
lation of Christ Himself. 

Verse 12. Christ was the manifestation on earth of 
God's power and character — of grace, i"^' ' ' 



48 

leper's case which follows is a striking witness ; for 
lepros7 was an evil which none but God could remove. 
But God toas there in grace. Leprosy presented sin 
in the aspect of uncleanness. A man full of it on 
seeing Jesus, fell on his face, and besought Him, 
saying, ^'Lord, if Thou wilt. Thou canst make me 
clean." There is the recognition of Divine power in 
Jesus, but he has not full confidence in His grace. He 
seems disheartened by misery, and almost in despair 
says, '^ If thou urilty'^ &c. But He who alone on earth 
had the title so to say, says, "JtmlL^* It was God 
only — ^not in heaven, but come down ill man and among 
men. Christ was there, who could touch the leper 
and the leprosy without being touched by it. Divine 
power was needed, doubtless, and. the very priests 
cotdd not but attest the results of its intervention, 
but there was Divine and perfect love in His touch, 
while it was the touch of a man, a man who acknow- 
ledged the ordinances of God, as one who had been 
bom under law. Thus this " turned for a testimony." 
For the leper must go to the priest, and what could he 
think? Why, who has been here? Jehovah must 
have been to heal the man. 

Verse 16. And what next ? Jesus " withdrew Him- 
self into the wilderness and prayed.'' Let the power 

^"^tr^!!"^ ^ ®^®^ ^^ ^®**' ^^ manifestly Divine, He 
18 the dependent man; and this is just where we fail. 

» erse 1 ft it 
po f Q ^^® ^® ^^^® another thing — not the 

shTT ^.^ *^' ^ ^ chap, iv., nor the uncleanness of 

brJu^S .? ^^ ^"P^^^y^ but the guUt of sin. They 

b ^ne man, because they felt the need; and 



— 1 



49 

there was the perseverance of faith, which would not 
be put off till another day. And Jesus brings for- 
giveness of sins, as well as cleansing from defilement. 
This is what appears in the instance of the palsied 
man. The first and grand point is that Jesus pro- 
nounces his sins forgiven. Authority to pardon was 
come in the person of the Son of man on earth, what- 
ever scribes and Pharisees might think. It was God, 
the Lord Jehovah, but the Son of man withal, having 
on earth power to forgive sins, and using it. It is in 
the way Israel is to be forgiven by and by ; (compare 
Psalm ciiL 3;) and accordingly, the Lord here gives 
the proof of that authority to forgive by the healing 
the disease of the paralytic. '* That ye may know,*' 
Ac. (Verse 14.) The man was to know in his rela- 
tionship to Grod, that his guilt was gone. Through 
infinite grace, we are entitled to more than even this ; 
for we have the righteousness of the accepted man in 
God's presence. ' We are made the righteousness of 
God in Him. This palsied man was a sample of what 
will be, in the future day, Israel's portion. Jesus was 
forgiving iniquities and healing diseases. He had 
shown the power to do the one; now He would show 
that He could do the other also. It is God's delight 
to do it all. You may not believe that you can have 
such a boon, but it is ours in Ohrist. The perfect 
Man has come with perfect title in His person. God 
wrought there, but it was also as a man filled with the 
Holy Ghost. The believer walks, too, a proof not to 
himself so much as to otibers that God was there. The 
man ought not to say, " I wonder if I can walk j" if 
he has faith, he will get up and do it. 



50 

Two things are here present. First, the exceeding 
blessed grace that the Lord is eome, the power of God 
within the sphere of human misery, which, extreme as 
it may be, does but make that power evident. If I 
look around as a man, I am lost. I cannot unriddle 
the history of the world — abominations committed in 
the name of Christ, Himself rejected by His people 
Israel, and crucified by those Gentiles to whom God 
had entrusted the government of the world, Maho. 
metanism, heathenism: what kind of a Grod have you, 
says the reasoning heart, when it is such a world \ 
But here I have the Lord come down into all the 
wretchedness, sickness, sin; and my heart is drawn 
away from pleasure and sorrow to Him. How beau- 
tiful to see heart after heart brought around this One, 
the only true centre, soon to be the risen head of the 
new creation, Himself the object drawing out feelings 
and affections of which He alone is worthy ; He who 
by His excellency gives excellency, and by His gra- 
cious thoughts towards us produces and draws out 
gracious thoughts in us. Next, our hearts are fixed 
just so far as we have an object — fixed according to 
God, when we have Christ Himself before us. How 
can I love if I have nothing to love ? A man is what 
he feels, and likes, and thinks. If my soul lives and 
feeds upon that which is most excellent — Christ the 
bread of God, Christ becomes, in a practical sense, 
formed in the heart Li Him, the man Christ Jesus, 
God has had all His delight, and the display of it too. 
Bemark further, that in the accounts we have seen. 
Divine power in the person of Jesus, the Son of man. 



51 

is exercised in the midst of Israel, First, chap, iv^ 
31 — 41, its triumph over the enemy's power in sick- 
nesses and in demoniacal possessions, and the testi- 
mony of the kingdom, when all such effects of Satan's 
work should disappear. This last opens the way for 
the more positive and deeper blessing of souls^ being 
put in relationship to God. Hence from chap. v. 
1 — 26, (the call of Peter, the cleansing of the leper, 
and the pardon of the palsied man,) it is a question of 
the state of the sooil, (whatever the outward accom- 
paniments might be) of the authority of the word over 
the heart, of faith, and of Christ's personal glory. 
Still it was grace in opeiation towards Israel ; grace, 
if one may so speak, in government. To Israel God 
had said that He would not put upon them the plagues 
of Eg3^t, save for their sin. They were an outwardly 
elect, redeemed people, but they were under God's 
government ; and hence chastening came, of which 
the leprosy and the palsy were peculiar samples. Jesus 
shows Himself to be ^' Jehovah that healeth thee," in 
the midst of Israel, though He was passing away from 
them into a wider display of power and goodness. He 
could have healed every one, leprous or paralytic; He 
could have removed all the diseases, now, alas ! brought 
on the Israelites: but in these cases it is where thev 
come to Him in quest of healing, ie. it is in answer to- 
faith that He works. He was there, showing Divine 
power and grace in healing. 

Yerae 27, ko. But this grace, being of Grod and 
sovereign, could not be bounded by human circum- 
stances. Wherever a wcmt appeared to Him, could 



52 

He gainsay His power or His love? Now, see how 
that connects itself with what follows. There was fuU 
deliverance for all who trusted in Israel, but He could 
not^ and would not, limit His grace. The law limited, 
but when ffimaelf, the God who gave it, came, every 
body who needs Him is welcome : His house is a house 
of prayer for all nations. Hence He calls a publican, 
a Jew indeed, but detested by the Israelites, and in a 
sense rightly, when viewed as the mark of their servi- 
tude nationally. A publican was one who profited by 
their Gentile masters, to extort money from Israel, 
and therefore naturally regarded with horror. But 
Jesus calls one named Levi, sitting at the receipt of 
-custom,— calls him to be an apostle ! Grace must act 
according to its own rights. If God has been good 
to you or me, does that hinder His mercy and love to 
another? Grace creates the instrument it wants to 
act by ; and it will flow farther than the publican yet, 
even to the most distant Gentile. True, Israel had 
the promises, the Gentile, strictly speaking, had none; 
but for that very reason it was more purely grace, and 
grace vxndd act towards the Gentiles. The Lord Him- 
self, God, was there, and Israel could not be the cen- 
tre, nor the temple, when He was there, the despised 
Lord of both. He is the dooTy the new centre and 
turning point of blessing ; not a mere branch of the 
old vine, but Himself the true vine. As a Jew, He 
was subject to ordinances, but as the Lordy He is 
above them, and He breaks out beyond all the old 
restrictions. 

" Levi made him a great feast in his own house, and 



53 

there "was a great company of publicans and of others 
that sat down with them ; but their scribes and Pha- 
risees murmured." It was a terrible sight and blow 
to such. But Jesus answers, "They that are whole need 
not a physician, but they that are sick. I came not 
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance." They 
mistook the Lord altogether : He came to show how 
grace could deal with those who had no righteousness. 

Verse 33, &c. He is now breaking, as it were, out of 
the old thing. He is faithful to Israel, but breaking^ 
up that order of things. How could they fast who 
owned the presence of the divine husband of Israel, 
the Messiah ? The time was coming when the cross 
must be taken ; but when the Bridegroom is there, 
fasting was out of place and season. 

Ver. 36 — 39. Further, the old garment cannot be 
patched with new cloth. Jesus would do no such 
thing as tack on Christianity to Judaism. Flesh and 
law go together, but grace and law, God's righteous- 
ness and man's, will never mix. Neither can the new 
wine, the power of the Spirit, be put into the old legal 
ordinances without loss on all sides. A man accus- 
tomed to forms, human arrangement, fathers' religion, 
&c., never likes the new principle and power of the 
kingdom ; he says, The old is better. Such is nature; 
grace is offensive to it. Nor does man improve in 
divine things. He can degrade himself and give up 
what his heart never relished. And this goes on 
rapidly to-day. 



CHAPTER VI. 

Hebe we have a most weighty thing spoken of — the 
Sabbath. It is a question that often agitates the 
minds of men, and was then specially important as 
closing Jewish relations. And this, it will be borne in 
mind, was just where the Lord had morally arrived at 
the close of the preceding chapter. The rights of 
His person and His grace, now becoming more rejected 
by the religionists of Israel, reach out beyond the 
narrow bounds of that proud people. Grod thereon, by 
degrees, intimates the coming purpose of His mercy : 
His salvation in due time shall be sent unto the €^- 
tiles, and they will hear if the Jew judges himself 
unworthy of everlasting lile. God uriU have Hia own 
joy of saving souls somewhere. 

Now it is very evident that the incident of the corn- 
fields, (ver. 1 — 5,) "on the second sabbath after the 
first," thoroughly falls in with the obje(^ of the Spirit 
in hand. "The Son of man is Lord also of the sab- 
bath." His person entitles Him to supremacy over 
that which was the sign of the covenant of the law. 
In the next case, (6 — 10) He asserts the right to do 
good on the sabbath-days, as His adversaries on the 
same day show their disposition to destroy. 

The sabbath, in any real sense, man had entirely 
lost; indeed, he had never entered into God's thoughts 
of rest. It was His rest^ and had not sin spoiled all, 
man should have enjoyed that which was the result 
not of his own, but of G<xl's, labour. This is the 



55 

proper character of that rest which belongs to man 
distinctively; but sin having come in, the necessity- 
has arisen that God should work afresh, if man is ever 
to share the rest of God. (See Heb. iv.) Meanwhile, 
Christ has appeared and finished the work which God 
gave Him to do. Hence, we who believe, find rest in 
Christ, as does Grod Himself. In Him, by virtue of 
the accomplished and accepted work of redemption, 
we have our sabbath spiritually. 

The day was set apart and hallowed from the beginning 
(Gen. ii.) Afterwards it came in, first in grace to 
Israel, marked by the cessation of the manna and a 
double portion to provide for that holy day; (Exod. 
xvi.) and, secondly, as a part of the law of Sinai, and 
incorporated with every new and special dealing of 
Jehovah, (chap, xx.; see also xxxi. 13, 14 ; xxxiii. 14; 
xxxiv. 21; and xxxv. 2.) It was a memorial thence- 
forward of the deliverance out of Egypt. (Deut. v. 15.) 
Accordingly, the prophets expressly treat it as a sign 
of Israel's separation from all other nations unto 
Qod, and of God's covenant with them. (Ezek. xx. 
12 — 20; xxii. 8.; xxiii. 38; xliv. 24; Isa. IvL, Iviii; 
Jer. xviL 4.) But then, in the past, Israel, a sinful 
people, had the sabbath as a legal ordinance, and 
consequently are condemned by it as by all else. 

Where is this covenant with Israel? All gone, 
because of their iniquity. Hence they were thrown 
into the hands of the Crentiles, and became slaves. 
*^ Behold we are servants this day ; and for the land 
that thou gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit 
thereof and the good thereof, behold, we are servant^* 



56 

in it: and it yieldeth much increase unto the kings 
whom thou hast set over us, because of our sins : also 
they have dominion over our bodies, and over our cat- 
tle at their pleasure, and we are in great distress/* 
(Neh. ix. 36, 37). If they had a temple after the cap- 
tivity, it was only at the mercy of their Persian masters. 
The outward emblem lingeied on no doubt, and was 
especially made much to dishonour Him, of whom and 
whose work it was so significant; but where was its 
reality when Jesus was on earth? Alas! He lies in the 
grave all the day which His murderers kept as a day 
holy to Jehovah ("for that sabbath was an high day!") 
awful testimony to the Jews of their position. Their 
own Messiah slain by His own people : such was the 
truth which that sabbath-day uttered to him who had 
ears to hear. Israel never had the rest of God. If 
Joshua had given them rest, &c. (Heb. iv). Thei^ 
remaineth therefore a rest. They must own Jesus first. 
But the rejected Jesus was Son of man, and the 
Son of man was Lord of the sabbath (ver. 5) — a 
truth of the utmost gravity, to be asserted with all 
strength. Those who confound the Lord's-day with 
the sabbath are in danger of forgetting this. It was 
the very point here in controversy with the Jews who 
maintained that the sabbath was superior to the Lord. 
But He shows that another new principle had come in, 
which wholly over-leaped the old, and that to remain 
in the old was to have no deliverance. For thei*e is no 
possibility for a lustful creature to be under a com- 
mandment that condemns lust, without being con- 
demned. Grace, however, has entered through a 



57 

rejected Christ, and now there is rest for us who believe 
— not for those who are on the ground of law. 

This is the reason why Christians keep the first day of 
the week, and not the seventh or sabbath-day. The 
rest was acquired by the power of Christ's redemption, 
and the first day, when He arose from the dead, was 
that which proclaimed it to faith, spite of man's guilt 
and ruin. The seventh day will be the rest of man on 
earth; the first day celebrates Christ's taking us in Him 
to heaven. Then was life from the dead, life more abun- 
dantly, liberty from the law and every consequence of 
sin — in a word, the victory of grace. The Christian 
therefore has the first day distinctively, because it be- 
longs to and witnesses of the perfected work of Christ, 
and consequently introduces heavenly rest. The first 
day is in contrast with the seventh, which appertained 
to the round of man's labour in nature and of the Jew's 
under the law, in which Adam and Israel utterly broke 
down. It is the Lord^s-day emphatically, and thus 
testifies of the triumph of Christ's word and the glory 
of His person — ^not the day which guilty unbelief would 
have perverted into the proof and means of His in- 
feriority. It is positive, direct blessing to Him who 
owns and honours it — ^not because it is the close of 
legal toil, but the commencement of Christian hope — 
the resurrection-day when we begin our spiritual life; 
and look on for what will crown so precious a pledge. 

Here, however, the grand thing is the maintenance 
of the rights and authority of the Son of man. You 
never can, according to God, raise up the title of the 
sabbath against the Lord of the sabbath. 

E 



58 

Yer. 3—5. What did David, the anointed of the 
Lord, when Said persecuted him and sought his lifeY 
Was it of God, then, to uphold the ritual and so starve 
the man after His heart? No; the foundations were 
out of course, and everything became common in Israel 
when the chosen king was thus iniquitously rejected. 
But a greater One, and graver sin were now in their 
midst. The Son indeed, but the Boot of David, Crod 
Himself was there; He who instituted the sabbath, 
its Lord, was there in the person of the Son of 
man. 

Yer. 6 — 10. But if God was there, would He deny 
TTift own goodness or restrain His power in presence of 
human misery, because ^'the Scribes and Pharisees 
watched Him whether He woidd heal on the sabbath- 
day f' Divine love must act and heal the withered 
hand, even if wretched man should seek to find therein 
an accusation. And they were filled with madness and 
communed one with another what they might do to 
Jesus; (11;) but Jesus in those days retired to a 
mountain to pray. He drew near to God, to commune 
with TTiTYi what He was to do for them. (ver. 12). His 
was the activity of grace— of love displaying itself 
holily and mightily in the midst of evil. 

Yer. 13 — 16. " And when it was day he called his 
disciples," &c. In this call He proves that He was the 
only One who could empower others to bear this testi- 
mony also: and yet here, as in all that passed before. 
He is the lowly dependent One — perfect man, as well 
as God. He was in perfect, imbroken communion with 
His God and Father, though Himself God manifest in . 



59 

the flesh. How blessedly near us this brings Him, 
though so infinitely above us ! "What He did, we should 
aim at^ whatever our measure and our little sphere. In 
Him we see man perfect in that plaoe of power wherein 
He came. 

He knew whom he chose. He knew that one of 
them had a devil; but He sent them out. Twelve He 
chose specially, whom also He called apostles, ''sent 
ones." It was an important and significant word, as 
quite a distinct thing both from law and promises. 'No 
one was sent out by law. Now Qod is active; He is 
sending His Son, and the Son is sending out apostles. 
The love of God is active in gathering souls. This 
first Sent One is a man, really and truly. Gk)d*s work 
of His grace must be done by His Son: not by angels, 
but by His own Son, as the man Christ Jesus, and He 
sends men out from Himself. The gathering point is 
Man — Himself of course. To Man God has committed 
all things. While it must be Qod who shows grace, 
the Son of man it is who comes on the mission of love 
and sends out men to men. 

Ver. 17 — 19. Whatever He attracts by. He gathers 
round Himself to worship, surrounds Himself with 
them, and then comes down and stands in the plain. 
The great multitude are attracted by His miracles and 
their wants, coming to hear and be healed. The company 
of the disciples were an inner circle. "The whole 
multitude sought to touch him." . It is not said that 
they were converted, which is another thing; but living 
power went out of Him, healing their bodily misery 
and delivering from the power of Satan. 



60 

Ver. 20, <fec. He now lifts up His eyes on His dis- 
ciples and speaks to them, not as in Matt. v. &c., giving 
them the developed principles of the kingdom; but dis- 
tinguishingithose before Him as the remnant. Hence 
it is "fye" here. He puts seal and stamp on those 
actually gathered round Himself. They are to be like 
Him. He is at once their centre and their pattern. 
He was Grod, but the fulness of the Holy Ghost dwelt 
in Him[as man also; and so He could say, ''I do always 
those things which please him." So should it be with 
those around]Him. 

Ver. 20 — ^26. "Blessed [are] ye poor; for yours is 
the kingdom of Grod. Blessed [are] ye that hunger 
now; ffor ye shall be filled. Blessed [are] ye that 
weep^now; for ye shall laugh. Blessed are ye when 
men shall hate you,*' <fcc. These words of the Saviour 
give the contrast of those He pronounces blessed with 
all that are at ease in this world. Those who, if in this 
life only they had hope in Christ would be of all men 
the most miserable, are the only happy few : they are 
severed from all others, and put in relationship with 
Him the source of blessing, to be blessed. If you can 
make yourselves happy and comfortable in this world 
which has rejected Jesus, count not on His blessing. 

It is the poor, the despised with Jesus who shall have 
the kingdom. He says, if we may so speak, "I am dis- 
tinguishing youj" (for there is no enunciation of abstract 
principles, as in the beginning of Matt, v., but a speak- 
ing to the hearts of those gathered around Him). ^'I 
am come as the centre of power and active love. There 
is but one sole place of blessing on earth. With Me 



61 

you are blessed." Others may be gay and cheerful 
where Christ has no place ; but it is a time when a truQ 
spiritual soul can get no good save with Christ. It is 
a definite distinction of, and address to, the disciples who 
attached themselves to Him. This is made clear in verse 
22, where the persecution for righteousness, which St. 
Matthew carefully records, is omitted. Here it is only 
a question of suffering "for the Son of man*8 sake" 

In the midst of a world of misery and selfishness, 
there came One who displayed not law nor judgment, 
but grace. But the light shines in darkness, and the 
darkness comprehended it not. Like the adder that 
hears nothing, the world goes on as deaf as it is blind. 
No; you who are "full" now Jesus has no charm for 
you; but you, disciples, are weeping now, the sorrow 
and the sin of man distress your spirit: you shall re- 
joice. When Grod has His way, you, who cannot be 
satisfied with the husks^ shall be filled. Rejoice ye in. 
that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your reward is 
great in heaven ; for in the like manner did their fathers 
unto the prophets. You have your portion with Christ 
here, you shall have it with Christ in heaven. You 
suffer with the suffering One, you shall have glory with 
the glorified One. But the others ! — ^they shall have 
what they seek. For the full there shall be a famine 
by and by, for they have lost Qod. If you can laugh 
in such a world as this, you shall weep when Qod's 
time for blessing comes. They are of the world, and 
the world loves its own. " So did their fathers to the 
false prophets." Are the times altered? Is Christ's 
character changed? It is not a whit more »' 



62 

to the flesh. And if you can find your joy, ease, and 
pleasure in the world, Christ could not, and you have 
not His Spirit. He that will be its friend, is the 
enemy of God. Can the disciple of Jesus be merry 
and gay in a world which has sin wrapped up in iti 
There is communion with Jesus, joy in the Spirit, 
while patient in tribulation; but this is quite another 
thing. It is a serious joy, though very real and blessed. 

From verse 27, He shows what must be the conduct 
of the disciples as such. They were to manifest Gody 
to be the unfolding of what was displayed in Him. 
Grace which was in Him in fulness and perfection 
should be reproduced in them, sadly as we all faQ in 
this — ^the principle of our path. "Love your enemies," 
&c. God loved va when we were His enemies, and 
we have now to show practically what God is. Verse 
29 brings us into entirely human circumstances, 
patiently learning in them ; or, as in 1 Peter ii., doing 
well, suffering for it, and taking it patiently. This 
may seem poor comfort. But Jesfiia did so, and love 
rmjist so manifest itself in an evil world. The time 
comes when Grod will judge, instead of bearing long as 
now ; but now, at whatever cost to self, show love as 
Christ did. Flesh can love for love (v. 32, 33), but the 
disciples of Christ are called to imitate God, and walk 
in love. "Love ye your enemies, and do good and 
lend, hoping for nothing again, and your reward shall 
be greatj and ye shall be the children of the Highest ; 
for he is kind to the unthankful and to the evil.'* 

What a blessed character of God comes out here ! It 
is not righteousness, though surely there was that, but 



63 

in the world where €rod had to do with the unthankful 
and evil. He shows grace. For the angels He has not 
grace, but love ; but Christ in this world of sin is 
grace (i.e. love to those who deserve it not.) " Be ye 
therefore mercifiil, as your Father also is merciful.'' 
It is not with but " as your Father." As He loves 
His enemies, so do you ; He is merciful, be ye also 
merciful. In all this, God's character is displayed — 
perfect love in a world of sinners. It must cost us 
something; it cost the life of Christ. His love was a 
stream which, if it met with hindrances in its way, 
only went on flowing over, and leaving them behind 
till it reached the cross. 

Ver. 37. This is not certain things required in order 
to get life, but the result of certain conduct shown. 
" Judge not, and ye shall not be judged," <fec. As 
though He had said. You will find the consequences 
of your conduct as Christ did. He took the lowest 
place, but He has got the highest now. He humbled 
Himself; " wherefore God also hath highly exalted him," 
&c He came not to judge, and now "all judgment is 
committed to the Son." Thus we not only have the 
display of grace, but divine character meeting its con- 
sequences. It is a question of government — of walk- 
ing with the Lord; it must cost a great deal in the 
path, but in the end it will be "full measure, pressed 
dovm," &c. There will be God's blessing, too, in the 
way; though self is mortified. Grace will abound, 
according to God's way. 

Ver. 39. See the contrast of those who are utter 
blindness, and the blind leading the bUnd. You must 



64 

let th&m alone; leave them to go on their own way; 
but you have to take your place with Me; and the 
disciple is not above his master, but you shall be as 
your Master. If your Master suffers, you suffer; if it 
has cost your Master much, it must cost you much. If 
Christ teaches you, it is to make you possess the divine 
learning that He has Himself. And see what a place 
He gives us! When He gives, what does He give? 
The very same that He has Himself. ^' As he is, so are 
we in this world." "Not as the world giveth," which, 
if it gives a little, reserves the chief for itself; but as 
though he said, " I am putting you in the very same 
learning that is in my nature : the grace that I have 
you are to have.*' But people do not liJce to do those 
things that Jesus did. Why is there so much ai'gument 
about that one passage, "resist not evil?" It is because 
you like to resist evil. Your will is touched, your con- 
science is reached; for it is given you as matter-of-fact 
exhortation ; but you do not like it, and you will get 
rid of it if you can. These things are given as tests 
for the conscience ; they judge the eye, not the path 
only. "If thine eye be single, thy whole body shall 
be full of light." The object is wrong, if you have 
not light for the step. There may be difficulties in going 
up a steep hill, but if the object before you is clear, you 
get over them as quickly as you can. This is what is 
meant by the expression, "This one thing I do," <fcc. It 
is having one object, and the mind intent on accom- 
plishing it. If it is so with you, there will be sure to 
be light in the path — light not for ten years hence 
but for this one step that is before you, and then for the 



65 

next. It was said to Moses, " Speak to thechildren 

of Israel that they go forward ;" and when they were 

out in the wilderness, the pillar was given to be their 

constant guide. So with us; we are called out to ^go 

after Christ on the principle of obedience, and this 

puts us into connexion with Him in the revelation of 

His will, not giving us to see all the path onwards. A 

man may see a wall, and say, "I cannot go that way: 

there is a wall," while if he but takes a single step, he 

will find that there is a path all down by the side of 

the wall. 

Ver. 44. " Every tree is known by his own fruit." 
Not only bearing fruit, but fruit that Christ produces, 
should be ours. There is fruit that an upright nature 
produces, such as that of the young man who came to 
Jesus, but that was not divine fruit — "i^s ovm fruit '^^ 
and where Christ is the root and the stock, it is Chris- 
tian fruit, i. e. fruit that will remain (John xv. 16). 
Two men may go together up to a certain point, and 
then some test for Christ comes ; one goes on with Him, 
and the other turns aside. "Its own fruif — ^fruit 
shows itself, springs of itself. There will not be the 
question of, What harm in this or that ? What harm 
in being rich? as a person once asked me. If it 
shuts you out of heaven, is there any harm in that ? 
Oh, I did not think of that ! But the secret is, that 
you like the things. The evil is not the things them- 
selves dug out of the earth, but the love in the heart 
for them. " Out of the abundance of the heart the 
mouth speaketh." An impatient word betrays the 
heart. A blow I may restrain and yet utter the wr " 



66 

Ver. 47. In the hearing of all the multitude the 
Lord speaks now about the house built upon the rock, 
^c. This is not a question about building upon Christ, 
the Kock, for the salvation of the sinner. It is the 
path of the saint. But where Christ's word does con- 
nect with Himself, see the result. The very thing 
people are called upon to do is to follow Him; and 
when I follow, it proves that the Master's words have 
taken such hold upon my soul that they have power 
to carry me over the difficulties. " My soul foUoweth 
hard after Thee." A man's affections, heart, will, are 
taken and connected with Christ, instead of with 
himself. Is Christ sufficiently precious to make me 
leave all beside and follow Him, to do those things that 
please Him ? " If a man walk in the day, he stumbleth 
not, but shall have the light of life." " As when the 
bright shining of a candle doth give thee light." 
Keeping close to Christ, the light shines upon us. If 
we have to get into the light, we may be dazzled by 
it. Thus He has gathered round Himself in light 
and love those whom He will have to enjoy Himself, 
and be as their Master, at length to be conformed to 
His image in glory. 



CHAPTER VII. 

We Lave seen the Lord, rejected by Israel, gradually, 
in virtue of His person and rights, breaking out beyond 
the ancient limits, and gathering the remnant round 
Himself, the new and only just object of God, the 
source of a mission in grace, and the full development 
and exemplification of holy love in an evil world ; for 
whatever the principles laid down in chap. vL, they are 
but the expression of God's character in grace, as dis- 
played in Christ here below. 

In accordance with this, we have now (ver. 1 — 10) 
the case of the centurion, and a very full and striking 
one it is. It is not merely an act of grace, but grace, 
to a Gentile. Nor is this all. The principle on which 
the apostle rests this question is brought out. "It is 
of faith, that it might be by grace, that the promise 
might be sure to all the seed." Faith, as the great 
turning-point, is introduced. It was no mere theory : 
it was living faith, and such faith as had not been seen 
^in Israel Neither was there presumption, but on the 
contrary, remarkable humility. He recognized the 
honour God had put upon His people; he se^, 
holds to it, owns and acts upon it, spite of their low 
and debased, and in every other respect, unworthy 
condition. Despised and failing as they might be, he 
loved the Jews as God's people, and for His sake, and 
he had btdlt them a synagogue. Unfeigned lowliness 
was his, though (yea^ rather, for) his faith was fiar be- 
yond those he honoured. Consequently, he had a 



68 

verj Ixigh apprehension of the power and glory of the 
person of Christ as Divine, reaching out beyond Jewish 
thoughts altogether. He does not refer to the Liord as 
Messiah, but recognized in Him the power of God in 
love. This was blessed faith which forgets itself in the 
exaltation of its object He saw not Jesus, it -would 
seeni) but assuredly gathered from what ^' he heard,'' 
that diseases were nothing to Him but occasions 
wherein to display His absolute authority and His 
sovereign mercy. He was a stranger and the Jews 
were God's people: must not they or their elders be 
the fittest to bring this wonderful person? For he 
confided in His mercy as well as His power, and his 
servant, "dear unto him," was sick and ready to die. 
He needed Jesus. 

" Then Jesus went with them. And when he was 
now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to 
him, saying unto him^ Lord, trouble not thyself; for I 
am not worthy that thou shouldest enter under my roof; 
wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come 
unto thee: but say in a word, and my servant shall be 
healed." There was surely the deepest personal respect 
and affection. Untaught as he might be in other 
things, he strongly felt the excellency of Christ's person, 
and here again with humility correspondent to the 
measure in which His glory was seen. This message 
of the centurion's friends admirably depicts his charac- 
ter and feeling. iTetoldnothingtoJesusof his service 
to the Jews, spoke of nothing personal save his un- 
worthiness, and this so consistently, that he begged 
-^esusnot to come to his house, as unworthy to receive 



69 

Sim. There was in this soul the exact opposite of 
doing Christ an honour, by believing on Him, and far 
from him was the pretence of receiving Christ to set 
himself up: both, aJas! found often elsewhere. The 
simplicity of his heart is as apparent as his strong 
faith. There was none such in Israel, and yet it was 
in one who loved Israel. It was a lesson of grace, 
in. every way, for the crowd that followed Jesus — ^for 
us, too, most surely. 

Along with grace to the CentUes came the evidence 
of power to raise the dead, but here it was manifested 
in human sympathies, in witness that God had visited 
His people. (Yer. 11 — 17.) It was the power of re- 
surrection, a power which was yet to be shown more 
gloriously and to be the source of that which is new 
for man according to Gkxi — ^the Grod who raiseth the 
dead. It was another and wondrous proof that He is 
here going, in the character of His action, without 
the sphere of the law and its ordinances. '^ For the 
law hath dominion over a man as long as he liveth." 
What can it avail for one who is dead? "But what 
the law could not do in that it was weak through the 
flesh, God sending Qjs own Son in the likeness of sin- 
ful iiesh," <kc. It was grace, indeed, and divine energy, 
but withal displayed in One who was touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities. And how astonishingly 
all the details bring this out ? The dead man was "the 
only son of his mother, and she was a widow." "And 
when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and 
said unto her. Weep not. .... And he that was dead 
sat up and began to speak. And he delivered him to 



70 

bifl mother." How exquisitely human, and withal how 
unmifltakeablj divine! 

It ifi manifest that these two cases illustrate the change 
which the Spirit is attesting in this part of St. Luke. 
Nor is it otherwise with the scene that follows, which 
brings out in facb the hinge of the dispensation. The 
Lord bears witness to John Baptist^ not John to the 
Lord. John sends two of his disciples, on the report 
of the Lord's miracles, to learn from Himself who he 
is. Are we surprised? He had preached and bap- 
tized in the confession of sins and in faith of the 
coming Messiah. But now all was changed. John 
was in prison, not delivered, and it was no longer a 
people preparing for the Lord. Was it not strange ? 
At any rate, John sought a plain answer, and well 
could he trust the word of One who did such mighty 
and holy works. But what a comment upon the mar- 
vellous change was this very enquiry. It was a sort 
of turning over the disciples of John to the Lord. 
** And in the same hour he cured many of their in- 
firmities, and plagues, and evil spirits ; and unto many 
that were blind he gave sight. Then Jesus answering 
said unto them, Gk) your way and tell John," <fec. 
At the same time, if he receives no longer testimony 
from John, He bears it to him, owned John and his 
work. But they were owned from a higher ground 
where the Lord in grace and resurrection power had 
placed Himself; and this was based on entire rejec- 
tion in and by the world, so that, though He was 
doing all good, still it wss^^^ blessed is he whosoever 
shall not be offended in me." Hence in the very verse 



71 

where the Lord recognizes, in the fullest way, John 
the Baptist, He marks the change about to take place, 
— " he that is least in the kindgom of God is greater 
than he." Happy they who justified God in being 
baptized of John — wretched the self-righteous who 
rejected His counsel against themselves. Wisdom is 
justified of all her children* They understand the 
ways of God, whether in the servant or the Lord. 
The ways are quite different, but understood in grace. 
This generation, alas! understands none, finds fault 
with all. John is too righteous for them, Jesus is too 
gracious. The mourning of the one and the piping 
of the other are utterly distasteful. Such is man's 
wisdom to the ways of God. But the children of 
wisdom justify wisdom notwithstanding. 

And in spite of the perverseness of men, our Lord 
did not stop manifesting Himself to the world. 
Accordingly a tale follows (36 — 50) which shows how 
Crod's wisdom is justified by and in those who own it 
in Jesus. It is a tale of grace, of pure, plenary, par- 
doning grace, which rests not till its object is dis- 
missed in perfect peace. Jesus is in the Pharisee's 
house, who failed entirely in the essential point: 
Simon perceived not the glory of Christ. Li this the 
liord meets him^ and shows, in contrast with the 
woman " which was a sinner," the point where this 
Pharisee was exercising judgment to be precisely that 
wherein he failed. God's thoughts are not as our 
thoughts, nor His ways as our ways. What if the 
despised Jesus were not a prophet only, but a Saviour 
of poor lost sinners ? Ah, God was unknown — ^tha+ 



72 

the secret. The converted soul sees the glory of the 
Lord as grace towards itself; he who is unconvinced, 
however interested humanly, judges according to his 
own thoughts, and therefore necessarily fails to see 
the glory which is not according to these thoughts. 
Man's judgment of the gospel must be wrong there- 
fore ; his reception of it, as grace, is alone right, and 
alone the way of coming to the knowledge of it. 

This was, then, a direct and distinct example of 
God's ways. It was a forgiving of sins in grace, 
sovereignly and freely, to any poor sinner, manifesting 
and producing love in the forgiven, who loves God, 
because God is love, and this in respect of his sins, in 
Jesus the Lord. It was proper grace — ^the ground on 
which any one, a Gentile or not, would be received, 
and God manifested not in requirement from man 
(and so making man in the flesh of importance), but 
making God all, and His chartwH^r in sovereign grace 
so bringing in blessing, and its blessed effect upon the 
heart, developing the fruits of grace in a heart re- 
stored to confidence in God by the sense of His goodness. 

What a blessed picture ! Goodness known not only 
in the act, but in Him who did it. The discernment 
of guilt in its gross forms by man was one thing, but 
the grace of God which could blot out and forgive all 
was quite another. It was not Christ there to judge, 
and sanction Pharisees, but love to a sinner, mani- 
festing God in this new character of grace, producing 
thankftd, holy love to God, and a blessed relationship, 
sovereign, and beyond the reach of man. But how 
has God always to prove Himself right in His good- 



73 

ness to man ! so hard is man's heart. But the Lord 
identifies Himself with the believer, and vindicates 
Mm against the haughty world, aud this gives assur- 
ance. Perfectly regardless of comments. He applies 
Himself, not to unbelief^ which were useless, but to 
those who have faith, and having communicated for- 
giveness, shows the soul his uprightness, ie. the right 
thoughts of God and self, which faith has. The last 
word settles the whole question. The soul's love was 
a ground of evidence and reasoning, — ^not, of course, 
the cause. "Thy faith hath saved thee,'' said the 
Lord to the woman, "go in peace." All is dis- 
charged from the conscience, and the heart finds itself 
infinitely and everlastingly a debtor to the continual 
fountain of all grace. 



F 



CHAPTEE Vm. 

Wb have seen, in what has preceded, the Lord pre- 
senting Himself, hj His words and His work, as a 
new centre, to which and round which His people were 
gathered. Before this, Jehovah had been the centre, 
when Israel was the gathering point — ^for Jehovah was 
among the Jews, and the temple the place where He 
met with the people, But now the Son is here, "Grod 
manifest in the flesh," and He must be the centre 
of everything. But Israel would not be gathered, as 
the Lord Himself said in Matt xxiiL 37, ^O Jerusalem, 

Jerusalem, but ye wovld not** Again in Isa. 

Ixv. 2f *^ I have spread out my hands all the day to a 
rebellious people.'' Israel could not have the blessing, 
for the flesh could not hold it. The flesh simply looked 
at as such, is ''as grass." (Isa. xl). ''All flesh is 
grass.'' We have these two great principles running 
through the latter chapters of Isaiah: flrst that flesh, 
as flesh, could not hold the blessing, and be the depo- 
sitary for the promises. For when all grace came, in 
the person of the Lord, the people to whom He was 
sent He found withered down like grass. " Surely the 
people is grass : the grass withereth, the flower fadeth, 
but the word of our God shall stand for ever." But 
€rod was not going to give up His purpose. Therefore 
in chap. xlix. we find Jehovah says unto Christ, "Thou 
art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified." 
Then Christ says, If God is to be glorified in Israel, 
^' I have laboured in vain, and spent my strength for 



75 

nought, and in vain, yet surely my judgment is with 
Jehovah, and my reward with my Grod." Then saith 
Jehovah, '^ Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I 
be glorified in the eyes of Jehovah. I will also give 
thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be 
my salvation to the ends of the earth." This is what 
Christ is becoming in Luke's gospel — "a light to 
lighten the Gentiles," &c. And afterwards we find 
Paul quoting, with the perfect accuracy of the Spirit, 
this very scripture, so exactly fitted for them, to the 
Jews at Antioch. " It was necessary that the word 
of God should first have been spoken unto you, but 
seeing ye judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, lo, 
we turn to the Gentiles,*^ &c. (Acts xiii. 46, 47; and 
again. Acts xxviii. 28). Israel will be gathered after- 
wards, for Christ will hereafter raise up the tribes of 
Jacob and restore the preserved of Israel ; but before 
this. He turns to the Gentiles. All this the Lord pic- 
tures to us in Luke. In chap. vii. we see Israel refused 
both John the Baptist and Christ, but '^ wisdom is jus- 
tified of her children." The Pharisees and lawyers did 
not justify God at all, for they saw no beauty in Jesus, 
whereas the publicans did; and thus the poor woman, 
"who was a sinner," whose heart was touched by the 
grace of God, is the true child of wisdom, and is brought 
in here as an illustration of Christ being the new centre 
of blessing, " though Israel be not gathered." 

^rhe Lord then goes on with his testimony, gathering 
by the word, first, by parables, as in chap, viii., and 
then in chap. ix. sending forth his disciples to preach, 
with this commission, to shake off the dust from their 



76 

feet, if they are not received, a token of the last 
testimony being given, when they are given up. 

Here are two classes of persons gathered round Christ. 
Pirst, the twelve apostles were public witnesses, fitted 
by Divine grace to be the vessels of testimony, manifest- 
ing the electing power of God in calling them, and 
sending them forth in all the energy of ministry; 
Christ's apostles, sent out by Himself — " As my Father 
hath sent me, even so send I you" — His chosen ones. 
** Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you," &c. 
Then, secondly, there were others who were gathered 
by affection round Him, having no place of office in 
the Church, but those whose hearts were touched and 
drawn round Him, not sent out like the first class, but 
not less devoted in heart than the apostles, for they fol- 
lowed Him, and ministered to Him of their substance. 

Ver. 4 — 8, we have the parable of the sower; and 
here, as previously remarked, it is not the kingdom 
brought out, as in Matthew, but the testimony as to 
what and whom Christ was gathering, and not as to 
the form the kingdom would take afterwards. The 
very fact of Christ coming as the sower, proved that 
Israsl was set aside ; for had it been now to Israel as 
BLis vineyard. He must have come seeking fruit from 
iiie vine He had long before planted. He had come to 
Israel previously, seeking fruit, and finding none. He 
now comes in the new character of the aower^ which is 
quite another thing. He comes into a waste world, 
where there was nothing, and He begins a fresh work. 
Qod is not now looking for fruit from man in one 
sense, because man has been proved to be a bad tree; 



77 

and the more you dig about and ding a bad tree, the 
more bad fruit it produces. '' A tree is known hj its 
fruits." Christ came to seek and to save that which 
was lost. Grod is now going to produce the fruit He 
requires. He is not now looking for mem to produce 
anything, for John Baptist said, "Every tree that 
bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast 
into the fire." Therefore, the Lord now comes as 
sower, not looking for fruit, but doing that which will 
produce it. 

He then goes on to describe the character and effect 
of the sowing, and the disciples ask the meaning of the 
parable. (Yer. 9 — 15). Israel, as such, had forfeited 
its place and therefore was "a people of no understand- 
ing." (Isa. xxvii 11). Iiong patience had waited on 
Israel. Seven hundred years had passed since the 
word was given to Isaiah, " Go tell this people, Hear 
ye indeed, but understand not." As individuals, they 
might be drawn round the person of the Lord, but as a 
nation they were blinded. The disciples had an ex- 
planation of the parable, but as a nation^ the Lord 
speaks to them in parables; (see ver. 10); thus fulfill- 
ing to the nation the very words spoken by the prophet 
so long before. Kow the testimony is closed as to 
Israel, though not as to God's final purpose respecting 
them. 

The seed is sown indiscriminately, and although man 
rejects it, because his unU is opposed, nevertheless it is 
sown in his heart; for this parable shows how the word 
of God is perfectly adapted to the need of man, meet- 
ing his conscience and heart. " Kever man spake like 



78 

this man." Christ's word came with a power that 
reached the heart and affections: the will is corrupt 
and therefore resists it. It is not abstract grace here, 
but the condition of man that is recognized; therefore 
we find the word so perfectly suited to the need, not 
claiming righteousness from man, but coming in with 
power to show him that he is a sinner, and laying open 
the thoughts and intents of the heart When the heart 
is thus detected, the word comes, with all gentleness and 
comfort, for healing and rest, because there is grace to 
meet a soul in whatever state it may be found. The 
heart is spoken to, and therefore the gospel leaves 
man without excuse. Some received the word with 
joy. (ver. 13). This was a proof that the conscience 
was untouched; for when that is reached it is anything 
but joy, until forgiveness is known." The feelings 
may be moved for a time, and the word be listened to 
with a joy which will give place to sorrow. The 
reason truth is thus flippantly taken up with joy is 
because there is no root, and so it is received in joj/ 
and given up in trovhle. 

Another class is where thorns spring up and choke 
the word. The understanding may be convinced and 
receive the truth, but the cares, pleasures, and riches 
of this world come in and choke the word. Now these 
"cares" are most subtle things, because they enter as 
necessary dutiesy and there is no sin in doing one's 
duty. Nay, it is right that a man should do his duty 
in his daily calling. But if these duties choke the 
word, and a man loses his sotd through it, what then? 
The natural tendency of the heart often needs to be 



79 

met with that word, "Take heed and beware of cove- 
tousness." (chap. xiL) It is the love of possession. 
One came to the Lord, saying, " Master, speak to my 
brother, that he divide the inheritance with me." The 
heart wanted to keep it. If love of the world or cove- 
tousness gets in amongst the saints, it is an insidious 
thing and most difficult to meet, because it is often not 
open to discipline; and yet, if covetousness slips into 
the heart, it checks the power of Christ over the soul 
and conscience, and eats out the practical life of the 
Christian, and his soul is withered, withered, withered. 
It may be checked by the power of God coming in ; 
but this covetous care about earthy things is so subtle 
that while there is nothing on which to lay the hand, 
the practical power of Christian life in the soul is gone, 
though of course, I need hardly say, eternal life can 
never be lost in those who once had it. 

" That on the good ground are they which, in an 
honest and good heart, having heard the word, keep it, 
and bring forth fruit with patience." There may seem 
to the world to be fruits bright and blessed, but if 
people have not got Christ, they tire. There will be 
no enduring, imless Christ has possession of the soul ; 
but if He has, there will be an abiding motive, and 
people will go on, and "bring forth fruit with patience." 
They that hear and keep go steadily on, having their 
motive for action in the Lord. Trouble may come in, 
in the Church ; disappointment may arise, even from 
brethren; but they go on just the same, because they 
have got Christ before them; for the word they have 
heard and keep connects them with Christ, and He is 
more than anything else. 



80 

!rhis is a question, not of eternal salvation, but the 
practical effect of the word as seen in this world (ver. 
16 — 18) — the growth of the word in the soul, and that 
will not be hidden under a bushel. "Ye are the light 
of the world" and "the salt of the earth." In those 
who onlj appear to be Christians it soon comes to no- 
thing. ^'Whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken 
•away even that which he seemeth to have." But those 
in whom the word works effectually are to be as a 
"" candle" set on a candlestick. Israel being set aside 
for a season, God sets up a new light in the world ; a 
light lit up by God, because of the world's darkness. 
When Christ was here He was the light of the world, 
because of its darkness, and now we siiould be a light 
in the world, as we are "light in the Lord." The light 
is here set up by Christ's word, and people are re- 
sponsible for the word received. Suppose you have 
heard the word and bring forth no fruifc, it will all 
come out, by and by, that you have heard the word 
and lost it, and the spiritual power accompanying it. 
For, even if you are saints, all that you have heard; 
without fruit or power restdting therefrom, it will come 
out; for nothing is hid that shall not be known or come 
abroad. "Take heed Jiow ye hear." Christ is looking 
for the remits of His sowing. There must be not only 
the hearing, but the possessing, and in this rests the 
responsibility ; for if you keep the word which you have 
heard, more shall be given you. If, on hearing, I 
possess that which I hear, not merely have joy in re- 
ceiving it, but possess it as my own, then it becomes a 
part of the substance of my soul, and I shall get more; 






81 

for when the truth has become a substance in my soul, 
there is a capacity for receiving more. Suppose, e.g., 
you hear the truth of the Lord's second coming and see 
your portion as the bride of Christ, and you do not 
lay hold of it practically, so as to possess it, (have 
communion with God about it, which is possession); 
you will presently lose the expectation of His coming 
and forget your place of separation from the world, 
and the truth will gradually slip away, because you 
are not holding it in your soul before God. Conse- 
quently your soul becomes dead and dull, and you 
lose the very truth you have received. Thus, if one 
lives daily as waiting for the Lord from heaven, there 
will be no planning for the future, no laying up for 
the morrow; such a man will learn more and more, as 
other truths will open round this one grand central 
one, and he will be kept in the truth. If, on the 
other hand, he drops this centre truth by saying, "He 
cannot come yet; so many things must happen first," 
then is the progress of such an one's communion with 
God hindered, fur, as we have said, it is according to 
what a man has heard and holds with God that there 
can be any growth ; for what is the use of teaching me 
that the Lord may come to-morrow, if I am going on 
living as though He were not coming for a hundred 
years'? Or where is the comfort and blessedness of the 
truth to my soul, if I am saying in my heart, "My 
Lord delayeth his coming?" Though I cannot lose 
my eternal life, yet if I am losing the truth and light I 
have had, I shall be merely floating on in the current 
of life, half world and half Christ, and all power of 



82 

Christian life will be dimmed in my soul. If the 
truth is held in communion with God, it separates to 
Himself. Truth is to produce fruit, and you have no 
truth that does not bear fruit. Truth must build up 
the soul. "Sanctify them through thy truth; thy 
word is trutL" Christ becomes precious in and by 
the truth that I learn; and if it has not that power, it 
all drops out, comes to nothing, and is taken away. 
If Christ is precious to me, I shall be waiting for Him 
wUh affection^ and if it is not so, the bare truth will 
soon be given up. 

Ver. 19, 21. Here He closes up His connexion with 
Israel after the flesh, for the relations of mother and 
brethren put Him into connexion with Israel after the 
flesh. Observe, He here distinguishes the remnant by 
the word " these,^^ as He did in chap. vi. by the word 
"ye." His mother and His brethren came to Him on 
the ground of natural relationship only ; and there was 
all natural affection in the Lord, as on the cross we 
find Him remembering His mother, and commending 
her to the care of John. But He replies here, as much 
as to say, "I am not on that ground now — ^my mother 
and my brethren are these, which hear the word of God 
and do it." Israel was now given up as to that posi- 
tion, the Lord owning and acknowledging only those to 
be His relations on whose hearts and consciences the 
word of God had taken effect. It was not what was 
foimd in nature, but what was produced by grace, and 
being thus produced by power, through the word, the 
principle is hereby established, that it might go out to 
the Gentiles as well as to the Jews, although not fully 



83 

brought out until after His resurrection. In these 
three verses we have a judicial sentence on Israel, 
which closes in ver. 21. 

In ver. 22 — 26, it is a parabolical display- of what 
we may expect if we follow the Lord, and the opening 
out "of what the Lord would be to those tried by such 
circumstances. The consequence of being the disciples 
and companions of Jesus is that they get into jeopardy 
every hour — they are not on terra firma^ but are tossed 
about on the troubled sea, and Christ Himself absent 
("asleep"). There came down a storm of wind on the 
lake, the ship was filled with water, and they filled 
with fear and were in jeopardy. But the fact was> 
Christ was in the same boat with them. He who 
made the worlds, the Son of God, was with them, and 
yet they are afraid ! and cry out, " we perish ;" as 
though He could be drowned, thus showing they had 
no sense of who He was that was with them in the boat. 
To us, now calmly reading the circumstances, what ab- 
surdity there seems in such unbelief \ when alas ! is it 
not just the same with ourselves, spiritually % Have 
we no sense of jeopardy, when tossed about, and trouble 
is in the Church? In truth we have, for there is many 
a heart saying, " Who will show us any good," forget- 
ting what God is acting and doing, though man is 
battling to all appearance against God's purposes; but 
God is not baffled, and He is calmly carrying on His pur- 
poses, through all the storms of men's or devils' raising. 
In John xvL we find the disciples sorrowing because 
Jesus was going away ; and the Lord had said to them,, 
(chap, xiv.) "If ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because 



84 

I said, I go to the Father.'' In chap. xyL Jesus says, 
**Now I go my way to Him that sent me, and none of 
you asketh me, Whither goest thou? but because I have 
said these things, sorrow hath filled your hearts/' Grod 
was accomplishing His blessed purposes in redemption 
by Christ's going. You forget that Grod is acting in 
all this, for you cannot suppose that God is so baffled 
as to give up His purpose. The disciples thought, 
when Jesus was crucified, that all their hopes were dis- 
appointed ; they say, "we thought it had been He that 
should have redeemed Israel." In fact, in that very 
act and at that very moment, all was being accomplish- 
ed for them. Where is the Lord going 1 should have 
been their question. It is not now that there seems no 
jeopardy, no confusion, no sorrow; but faith looks at 
and through it all to God, and asks, What is the Lord 
doing] Where is the Lord going? In and through all 
the trouble, the Lord has not turned a hair's-breadth 
out of His way. We may be in distress, but faith will 
not say the Lord is far away, but will know Him nigh 
«t hand. The Lord let them be in jeopardy, the ship 
filled with water, and Himself asleep, on purpose to put 
their faith to the test, to prove if they were really trust- 
ing Him ; and that it might be seen if such foolish 
thoughts would arise, when they were put into jeopardy. 
They say, "Lord, we perish;" but they were in the 
ship with Christ, and could they be drowned ? He 
said to them. Where is your faith ! Well might He 
say thus to them, for though the water was in the 
boat, He was there too, and could sleep through it all. 
not so much of Him they were thinking as of 



85 

themselves. " We perish," (said they,) and it is just 
the same now; for the fact of being in danger with 
Christ in the boat is the same at one time as at another 
— -just as impossible ruyuo as then; and in truth Christ 
is much more with us now, being more perfectly re- 
vealed to us, and we are united to Him, one with Him, 
so that He is with us. every moment in the; power of 
the Spirit. However high the waves may rise, there 
is no drowning His love and thoughts towards us. 
The test is to our faith. The question is, Have we 
that faith which so realizes Christ's presence as to keep 
us as calm and composed in the rough sea as the 
smooth 1 It was not really a question of the rough or 
the smooth sea, when Peter was sinking in the water, 
for he would have sunk without Christ, just as much 
in the smooth as in the rough sea. The fact was, the 
eye was off Jesus on the wave, and that made him 
sink. If we go on with Christ, we shall get into all 
kinds of difficulty, many a boisterous sea ; but being 
one with Him, His safety is ours. The eye should be 
off events, although they be ever so solemn, and surely 
they are so at this present time, and I feel them to be 
so ; for none perhaps has a deeper sense than I of the 
growth of evil, and of the solemn state of things, but 
I know all is as settled and secure as if the whole 
world were favourable, I quite dread the way many 
dear saints are looking at events, and not looking at 
Christ and for Christ. The Lord Himself is the 
security of His people, and let the world go on as it 
may, no events can touch Christ. We are safe on the 
sea if only we have the eye off the waves, with the 



86 

heart concentrated on Christ and on the interests of 
Christ. Then the devil himself cannot touch us. 

Yer. 26. We have a solemn picture of the conse- 
quence of Christ's rejection by the world ! Christ 
comes and finds them utterly under the power of the 
devil. A man of the Gadarenes was possessed, but He 
delivers him, thus showing that the Lord had complete 
power over the enemy. With a word of Christ the 
devils were off. '^ The Son of God was manifested that 
he might destroy the works of the devil." What was 
ihe effect of His thus casting out Satan 1 Why, the 
whole multitude of the country round about "besought 
him [Christ] to depart from them." These Gadarenes, 
who had borne with the devils because they could not 
help it, will not bear with Christ, and they beg TTiTn 
to depart ! Man would be glad to bind legion if he 
could, for he does not like the effects of the devil's 
power; but man's ivill is against Christ; he has a de- 
liberate, determined hatred to Christ. The Lord came 
to the world full of love and power, to deliver from the 
consequences of sin, but man rejected Him, cast Him 
out; and God will not stay where the tmll is deter- 
mined against Him. When the Gadarenes request 
Christ to depart. He immediately went up into a ship 
and returned back again. And mark, the world in 
which we live is just going on as having quietly re- 
jected Christ But does God give them up, though 
Christ is gone away for a seaso^1 No, He did not give 
them up, but sent amongst them this man, whom He 

■ ■''^^led, to tell them what great things God had 
^ This is what the disciples did in the 



lio/l Irti 



87 

^world, and the delivered residue also are to tell the 
world what great things God has done for them. 

The swine appear to represent the state of the JeWs 
after their rejection of Christ. The Lord, doubtless, 
permitted the devils to enter the swine, (as the swine 
having no passions of their own, it was their being pos- 
sessed with these devils which made them run violently 
to destruction,) showing it was not merely the evil pas- 
sions in the men, but their being possessed by wicked 
spirits, which hurried them on to destruction. And we 
know historically, from Josephus and others, that one 
can hardly conceive the infatuation with which the 
Jews rushed on to their own destruction, when those 
Gentile powers went and ploughed up the holy city. 
This is just a consequence of IsraeFs rejecting the 
Lord. Then the Lord gives us two other pictures, 
through the medium of real events, of His dealings in 
deliverance. In verse 41 we have Jairus' daughter, 
who lay a dying; and here is a picture (dispensationally) 
of Israel. The Lord was going to heal Israel, who 
-was just like one dying, but while in the way, the peo- 
ple throng Him. What He came to do He did, for the 
world crowded Him while on the way to heal the sick 
"daughter of my people;" whosoever could touch Him 
by faith got healing, the activities of grace going forth 
from Him. Jairus' daughter "lay a dying." Man was 
not pronounced to be dead until Christ was killed. 
Before Christ came, there was no healing for man. 
Abraham longed for the day of Christ. There were 
prophets who spoke of Christ as a healer, blesaing 
was promised, but there was no physician. "Is there 



88 

no balm in Gilead] Is there no physician i&ere?" 
There was rume; for no physician could be found to 
heal man's condition until Christ came, and Him they 
put to death. In Him there was living power, for 
when the people thronged Him, a woman does but touch 
the border of His garment, and virtue goes out of Him 
to heal her. Healing depended not on the condition of 
those who were healed, but in the power of the healer. 
Physicians might apply remedy after remedy, but it is 
of no avail, until One came who could impart life : then 
the case was changed. When the multitude press upon 
EKm, and He recognizes the touch of one to have been 
the touch of faith. He says, " somebody has touched 
me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me." And 
now, before the Lord comes forth in resurrection power 
and glory, to bring life from the dead in Israel, there 
is perfect healing where there is faith — for the Lord is 
always alive to the exercise o£/aith. The woman hid 
herself, for there was shame in her, because of the con- 
sciousness she felt of the disease which had needed to 
be healed. ^^ But she could not be hid." The heart 
always shrinks from opening itself, when within itself; 
but when it looks at Christ, it is opened to Him — ^for 
that is always the effect of being in the presence of 
Jesus. Shame, reputation, character, all give way be- 
fore the sense of what He is. When grace gets to the 
bottom of the heart, all else is easily set aside, A link 
was formed between this woman's soul and Christ. 
'^Thy faith hath made thee whole: go in peace." He 
brings perfect peace and comfort into her heart, for His 
is not only to heal, but to make Himself known. 



89 

She is not only to be cured, but to have the assurance 
of peace from his own mouth. 

Meanwhile they come, saying that Jairus' daughter 
was dead ; " Trouble not the master." They thought 
He might, possibly, heal her, while she was living ; but 
now she is dead, they supposed He could do nothing. 
This is a picture of Israel, who are dead before God, (as 
are Gentiles, too, of course). But Jesus encourages 
them, and says, " Only believe and she shall be made 
whole." When He came to the house. He suffered no 
man to go in, save Peter, and James, and John, (the 
pillars of the future glory, when He will come forth 
as the resurrection and the life to the dead nation,) and 
the father and the mother of the maiden. 

In this chapter, we get a picture of what was then 
doing, and what will come to pass. We have the seed, 
the word sown, and the effect of it, the use man made 
of it. We have God*s explanation of all that was going 
on, as being all known and settled in His mind; and if 
a storm arise, and if Christ appear asleep, and insen- 
sible to the danger, — though " He that keepeth Israel 
shall neither slumber nor sleep," — ^as disciples we are in 
the same boat with Him. The Lord give us to rest 
on that with undivided, undistracted hearts; for Christ 
is in the boat, as well as the water. Only let the eye 
of faith rest on Christ, then come what may, we shall 
say, " Who shall separate us," &c. — nay^ in all, "more 
than conquerors." Then the more the trouble, the 
more the blessing, because of the exercise of faith. 



o 



CHAPTER IX. 

AvTEB the Lord had given a pictnroy as it were, of all 
that was going on in chap. viiL, He raises the question 
in chap. ix. as to who He was, and He tells His disci- 
ples some should see His glory — ^for the mount of 
transfiguration shows what the glory of the kingdom 
would be. Peter speaks of the power and oomingy 
<<when there came such a voice to him from the ex- 
cellent glory when we were with him in the 

holy mount." But it is a closing testimony at that 
time, though the glory would come; and as a signal 
that it was, the disciples were to shake off the dust 
from their feet^ when they were not received. It is 
interesting to mark all the circumstances which bring 
oat the fact of its being the Lord Himself there, and 
a test to LraeL He worked miracles, and could con- 
fer on others the power, as we have seen. Now we 
find another thing — ^He is committing the power to 
several together, giving to those men, a mjumber of 
them together^ -pcfweac and authority over the devils, 
and not only entrusting it to whom He pleases indi- 
vidually. 

Three things we have noticed in connection with 
the testimony of the Son of man: 1, the testimony 
of Ood to Him; 2, the misery of man set aside by 
Him; and 3, devils cast out, so proving that it was 
really the Lord visiting this world in grace and power. 
There will be the display of power by and by; but 
He was bringing in, in His own Person, the mani- 



91 

festation of that which will be then fuU and perfect^ 
so being an earnest of the '^powers of the world to 
come/' alluded to in Hebrews. This was not redemp^ 
tion, but the exercise of power in dealing with the 
enmity of man against Himself, and they would not 
have Him in this way. 

Yer. 3, &c. He is sending out His disciples, and 
in so doing He disposes of all their circumstances. 
While He was with them, He supplied them with 
everything — ^they lacked nothing. The power of the 
Lord was there to take core of them, wherever they 
wera Afterwards when He was going to leave them, 
He tells them to take a sword. They would have to 
shift for themselves, as it were ; but while He wa9 with 
them He was their shelter, &c. As in the demand for 
the ass to ride into Jerusalem, He proves His aiithority 
royal and divine altogether — ''the Lord hath need of 
him." The disciples depart, preaching the go&pel, and 
healing everywhera Then comes the questiou of who 
He was; He woxdd have the oonscienoe awakened 
about Him. There are two things in man btought 
out by the question — curiosity is excited on the one 
hand, and ]>erplexity and dismay on the other. 

Ver. 7 — 9. He goes on, and wherever there is an 
ear to hear. He ministers to them according to the 
grace of the kingdom, 

Yer. 11, 12. The disciples ask Him to send the 
multitude away. Let them go and get lodging. No, 
says the Lord, "give ye them to eat." He does not 
now say He would feed them, but He is committing 
to others the same power as He had himself, and He 



92 

would exercise their faith in what He ooold do by them. 
This applies to the church now. Faith uses the power 
that is in the Head. "Give ye them to eat." What 
He expected was for faith to exercise His divine 
power, that which they saw in Him. We should be 
so reckoning on the power in the Head. The Xjord 
was trying their faith in Him, "Give ye them to eat." 
But no ; they had no faith ; they began to reckon on their 
resources — "We have no more but five loaves and two 
fishes." So it is with us ! No faith ! Memory is not 
faith. " He smote the rock, that the waters gushed 
out, and the streams overflowed. Can he give bread 
also?" He gave us water, but can He give us food ? 
We know He has done that one thing, but can He do 
this other thing to-day? We want to count on the 
energy of the Lord's love, and expect Him to be 
interested for us. When He said, "Give ye them to 
eat," they should have expected He would give them 
the power. Jehovah was amongst them, exercising 
His own power; but we see in their answer the horrid 
principle of tmbelief Unbelief shuts out God, and 
limits itself to what it sees — "except we go and buy 
meat," &c. "He made them all sit down by fifties in 
a company. And they did eat and were all filled." 
It was said in Psalm cxxxii, "I will satisfy her poor 
with bread," and here He was doing it. This was said 
of their King, and He had chosen Zion; He had de- 
aired it for His habitation. He was here giving a sign 
that He was the One to accomplish this blessing, for 
He was feeding their poor with bread. He was not 
only sending out the power through His disciples, but 



93 

Himself among them; not only as a man, a messenger, 
but as it is said in Heb., ''the word began to be spoken 
by the Lord." He was ike Apostle, There were others 
sent afterwards, but He Himself was there first as their 
Apostle. It is a solemn thing to think that the Lord 
has really visited this world ! He has come and pre- 
sented Himself first to His people Israel, but they 
would not have Him. It shows us what the world is 
we are in. God is now dealing with it in grace, though 
His Son has been rejected. 

"Twelve baskets of fragments." Just observe, in 
passing, that the number twelve is significant of power 
exercised in the way of government — twelve apostles, 
twelve gates to the city in Revelation, <fec. 

Hitherto we have been looking at Christ presenting 
Himself among the people as Jehovah, the Messiah ; 
we now see Him as the dependent man, praying. He 
was Immannel, God with usj Son of David; Son of 
man. He was to be all. Then the question is started 
among the disciples, who He was. Some said one 
thing, and some another; but Peter said, "the Christ 
of God." Upon this. He charges them to tell no man 
that thing. There was faith, however feeble, dictating 
this answer, and therefore there is no thinking about it. 
With perfect certainty, Peter says, "The Christ of 
God." So it always is with faith. When the Spirit 
of God brings home the truth with power, there is no 
uncertainty about it. A man may not doubt whether 
Christ is the Son of God, or not; but the mind may 
work upon it^ and think, perhaps, I do not love Him 
enough to be saved; then there is uncertainty. But 



94 

'When the Spirit, with power, shows whoever canfesses 
that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him ; 
then I believe it, and I see that my sixus and jdj 
iniquities He will ^^remember no more." It may set 
a man thinking about the consequences of a truth. 

Yer. 22. He now passes hj the thing that has been 
alx^eady brought out, and He presents Himself to them 
as the Son of man, and He is going to au^ery-^to be 
emoified. They must therefore be content to take up 
their cross. A new thing was coming in; He was 
going to be rejected, going to be slain, and the third 
day rise again. It is no longer Mesnamc ground, but 
in another sphere altogether beyond this their hopes 
must lie. ^'If any man will come after me, let him 
deny himself, and take up his cross daily." **Da4l^* — 
this is the trial. A man might heroically do it once 
for all, and he would have plenty of people to honour 
him, and have books written about him, but it is iterri- 
bly difficult to go on every day denying oneself, and no 
one knowing anything about it. It came to this, that 
if you spare the flesh in this life, you will lose your 
life in the next; and what if a man gain the whole 
world and lose his own soul? what shall a man give 
in exchange for his soul? It is not a question of 
bringing life down to the flesh ; but if you lose your 
life here, you will get it elsewhere— «bove and beyond 
this world: "For whosoever will save his life shall 
lose it; but whosoever will lose his life for my sake, 
the same shall save it." It is giving up the world 
for eternal life, or for eternal misery, that is the i^l 
question. **What is a man advantaged r Ton must 
— * — It up; you cannot keep it. 



95 

Tlbei;e is the glpr^ of the kixigdom; there is the 
manifestation of glory coming. Those tastes and dis- 
positions which are attracted by Jesns, cannot find their 
portion here. *^ They declare plainly that they seek a 
conntry ; wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their 
Grod," &c. " Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, &c., 
of him shall the Son of man be ashamed," when He 
comes in the display of Sis own glory. (See Dan, vii. 1 3.) 
One like to the Son of man came to the Ancient of 
days, &c., and there was given Him dominion, <$^. 
Then He comes too in the glory of the Son of God — . 
Ui'a Father's glory, and in the glory of the angels. 
The angels are waiting upon Him who created them^ 
for they were created for Him as well as by Him, and 
thus give glory to Him as Son of man; giving Him 
His proper glory, for He has not lost a tittle of His 
glory: "Thou hast set him over the works of thy 
hands*/' "Let all the angels of Gtod worship Him." 
There was the same thing at SinaL "The law was 
ordained by angels." " The chariots of God are twe^ty 
thousand, even thousands of angels." (Ps. Ixviii). 

We are now finding the displayed glory in this triple 
character spoken of. (v, 26). It is that glory when He 
appeprs; and it is a question of His being ashamed of 
those who have been ashamed of Him : they could not 
deny themselves present advantage. I do not here 
allude to the Father's house, which of course has ano-* 
ther character. Here it is the kingdom manifested in 
its glory to the earth. 

Ver. 28. "He went to pray." This is not 

mentioned in the other gospels. He was going to show 



96 

His disciples His glory, to give the declaration of His 
power and coming. From the other gospels we find 
that a week after this, He went up to Jerusalem 
where He was to be crucified. "The fashion of his 
countenance was changed." An entire change of things 
is here. He talks of His decease, which He should ac- 
complish at Jerusalem, where He ought to have been 
crovmed; but there He is going to be crucified. There, 
where this horn of David was to bud, shall this root of 
David be taken, and by wicked hands be crucified and 
slain. This is the deep centre of all the change. 
" There talked two men with him, Moses and Elias." 
This we may look at in two ways : dispensationally, as 
representing the law and the prophets; and in this way 
Moses held a very peculiar place, for it was through Him 
the law was given — Elijah had nearly as important a 
place also, for though the Jews were in a right position, 
they had failed in it, and he goes back to Horeb. The 
other prophets were never called to work miracles. 
Except the account of the dial of Ahaz, we hear of no 
miracle in Isaiah, Jeremiah, Hosea, Habakkuk, <&c. 
Those prophets, sent of God, gave proof that He was 
caring for Israel; but there was nothing like the calling 
back in ElijaL Elias stood as the maintainer of the 
law, when the people had departed from it most grossly, 
though all the prophets, even to Malachi, called back to 

law. 

Moses and Elias were taken away, and Jesus is left 
alone. Law was gone, prophecy gone, and Christ is 
alUmey and He was going to be crucified. All the 
fabric built up by law and prophets (not the testimony 



i 



— -—-* 



97 

given by them, but law as given to man in the flesh,) 
is broken up, because man ended by killing the Lord 
come in the flesh ; therefore all is gone. Peter would 
have had the three established together, taken all alike, 
" Let us build three tabernacles," &c. But that mo- 
ment Moses and Elias disappear, and the voice is heard, 
" This is my beloved Son, hear him/' It is now the 
righteousness of God without law, in Jesus. Lam did 
not send Christ. What law could have been put upon 
Grod to do iti Nothing but divine love could have 
orignated such a thought. ^^ Grace reigned through 
righteousness." The law was good and perfect, but 
Christ was far beyond the law. Moses and Elias, 
therefore, were not to have any place with Him. God 
the Father put them aside, when Peter wishes to put 
them in connexion. They disappear immediately. 
This is the important thing for us. Every word of law 
and prophets is the truth of God, but these were until 
John. Now the Son of God is the messenger of the 
Father's love, and the accomplisher of Divine right- 
eousness. When He is there, the voice says, " This is 
my beloved Son ; hear him," — and He is left alone, 

Mark, too, that they were occupied with His deaths 
while talking with Him. One thing occupies the minds 
of heaven and earth. He was going to be crucifled 
where He ought to have been King. Under such cir- 
cumstances, there was nothing for heaven or earth to 
talk about but His death. And so for us, the great 
thing to talk about Messiah is, that He died. Though 
He could destroy all the evil that had come in. He 
must die— in grace of course. It must all end in death, 



98 

because Hke canml myid is not only under Satan's 
power, but enxnitj against God: therefore heaven ha^ 
to speak. 

Zion, the very place He had chosen, where He had 
been and is to be — ^the special place of God's fiayour, is 
to be the scene of His death. There they cast Him 
out of the world He came to save. The One in whom 
all human and Divine righteousness and perfections 
were centred, must die there. All man's nature, under 
the most advantageous circumstances; all man's wick- 
edness, spite of the public, and patient, and varied 
ways of God in government, are brought out here. 

Moses could deal with man as man ; and bring water 
from the rock for them, in answer to their murmurings; 
the prophet the same, " Flead with «ie," " Put n^e in 
remembrance, let us plead together." But now, all this 
was gone. God had cultivated the vineyard, done all 
that could be done for it. Th^re was yet one thing. 
His Son — ^the best of aU. Him He sent, and they 
cast Him out and slew Him. And now the testimony 
concerning man is, tiutt he has ^^ killed the Prince of 
life," and ^^ denied the Holy One and the Just." We 
never can have ])eace then, till we get pardon through 
Christ on the cross. Then we see a true picture of 
heaven; but all the intermediate dealings of testimony 
are entirely short of what we have in Christ oh the cross, 
because short of the ground of what man actually 19, 
which folly came out only when he " killed the Pnnqe 
of life." 

When the Lord's Messiahship was given up, we have 
seen He takes the place of translation &om earth to 



99 

beayen. He, being rejected, was no longer to be looked 
upon as the Head of Israel down here, but as the 
heavenly Christ; for He takes His place on high, when 
cast out by man, and this fact was to give a character 
to the path of those who follow Him. The two things 
go toother — ^rejection on earth and a heavenly place. 
"If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, 
and take up his cross daily, and foUow me." (ver. 23.) 
The Lord shows them that this heavenly calling in- 
Yolve's the cro88 down here, as it was with Christ Him- 
self. The peculiar place given Him in heaven was, in 
Qod's counsels, dependent on the cross which He bore 
as the Man. ^^He humbled himself and became 
obedient unto death, &c. ; wherefore God hath highly 
eisalted him,** <Sm^ It was through the cross that He 
went there; and if we are to have a place in heaven, 
we must have it too. The cross was for the destruction 
of sin and for the destruction of self, in which sin 
dwells. We have the same place; therefore He says, 
<«Let these sayings sink deep into your ears, for the 
Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men.'^ 
We want the heavenly calling to give power to take 
up the cross; and it is at the same time in proportion 
as we are dying to things down here, that the heavenly 
things are realized. When the blood was taken within 
the veil, the sacrifice was taken without the gate: so 
we are to go "without the camp, bearing his reproach;'' 
and if we apprehend the value of the blood, and go 
within the veil, we get to the place of being where 
the burning outside the camp was; for while we are 
in spirit where His blood has been carried in, our 



100 

bodies are where His body was burned. Judaism only- 
put men between the two; for they did not go in within 
the veil, His blood not having been shed; and they 
never went without the camp. (18 — 22). He is going 
to take another place, and they are to follow Him in it; 
and then, in order to strengthen them for it, He shows 
them what the heavenly place was. "He took Peter, 
and James, and John, and went up into a mountain 
to pray," &c. (ver. 28). The heavenly part of the 
kingdom is here represented by Christ, Moses, and 
Elias — the earthly part by the disciples (and there is 
one part in which the Church on earth is alluded to 
as down here). Peter speaks of this scene as the power 
and coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, <bc. Christ 
Himself, in the position of the dependent man, (praying), 
takes them up into a mountain. "Peter and they that 
were with him were heavy with sleep;" asleep in the 
presence of the glory, just as in Grethsemane, showing 
what human nature is. There is no power in it, in 
suffering or glory, to fix the attention on Christ and 
His interests. 

Moses and Elias were in the same glory, (30— 32,) 
and we are made the associates of Christ in the same 
glory (the glory of the kingdom in its broad character), 
not of course, the essential gloiy. " As we have borne 
the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image 
of the heavenly,*' even of God*s Son in glory. "We 
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him." 
^*When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, we shall 
appear with him in glory." The portion is not to be 
tmder Christy but with Christ "We shall appear with 



101 

him in glory" — with him in the same glory. We look 
for the Lord from heaven, " who shall change our vile 
body that it may be fashioned," &c. We shall be with 
Him and like Him, and this we shall all alike share, 
though there will be different degrees of glory for one 
and another: e.g., Paul's measure will not be mine. 
What we speak of now is all the same glory, and we 
are predestinated 'Ho be conformed to the image of his 
Son." '*The glory thou hast given me I have given 
them." The next thing that we see is the perfect 
familiarity in this gloiy. They are talking with Him 
— ^not presenting a petition — ^not at His feet (though 
this is our blessed place too); but this part of the 
scene represents c(ym,munion, familiarity of intercourse, 
the same as that of the disciples on earth, though 
better of course. On the holy mount they had a higher 
understanding about it, but it was the same subject 
occupied them. This shows us the kind of intercourse 
we have with Jesus now, for we belong to the heavenly 
part of the kingdom. 

A third point to mark is the subject they talked of. 
This is quite a new thing, for He ought to have been 
a king. But man was a sinner, and there was the 
determinate counsel of God to be fulfilled — redemption. 
Jerusalem was the place of royalty, and His decease 
was to be accomplished there, where He ou^ht to have 
been acknowledged King. There was fuU intimacy on 
the theme which occupied His heart, for they talked 
on this, His decease. Then He told His disciples 
afterwards the consequences of it to them. They 
must deny themselves. '^ Let these sayings sink down 



102 

into your ears." The great subject on Gkxl's heart 
should be that for us. Another thing is, it is the glory 
which enables mb to talk on this subject We cannot 
talk of it until we have peace with Qod through the 
knowledge of forgiven sin. When a man has not this, 
lie has to come in his need and get it ; but when he is 
in it, he can contemplate and enjoy it. Besides this, 
Qod saw all that was passing in Christ's soul as to 
obedience unto death, &e. We shall neyer cease having 
interest in this subject: when with the Father in the 
glory, it will be the absorbing theme. He said Him- 
self, "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I 
lay down my life." How much more shall we not 
love TTim for the same cause? Think what it must 
have been to be occupied with Christ about His decease ! 
What His knowledge was, of what He was going to do i 
He knew what man was, what the counsel of (xod was. 
He came to " reconcile all things to himself." It was so 
effectually done that the eye of God could only see the 
effect of that blood in what was washed away. The 
rejected Christ a Saviour! and this the subject of 
intercourse with Christ Himself! '* They speak of his 
decease." Peter says, " Master, it is good for us to be 
here," drc. Then immediately there was a voice from the 
cloud : "This is my beloved Son ; hear him." Hie effect 
on Peter's mind is a wish to put Moses and Elias on a 
level with Christ. We have spoken of this, viewing it 
dispensationally, law and prophecy mixed with Him ; 
but there is another thing to be noticed in it ; viz., 
that which characterized the Son was peculiar. Nothing 
^'l be put on a level with Him. There necessarily 



103 

comes out, tlierefore, the Father's testimony to the Son. 
" This is my beloved Son," &c. When a saint knoirs 
Jesus, though he also knows he will be like Him here- 
after, and that all the saints wiU be like Him too, yet 
Christ has the supremacy in his heart. He is single 
and alone in blessedness, having supremacy in the 
heart, as well as being the object of faith. I delight 
in the saints, but Christ is the alone object of faith. 
Then I get into this fellowship with the Father. I 
have the Father^s thoughts about the Son, as well as 
the Son's thoughts about the work. I have fellowship 
with the Father and the Son. We cannot have com- 
mxmion with the Fathet about redemption work because 
He has not been made a man. Notice, the Father does 
not say, This is the Son whom you ought to adore and 
admire, but He tells us His own tLou^hts about Him. 
"This is my beloved Son.'* Wl«.ere.jre "beloved!" 
"Therefore doth my Father love i j« . because I lay 
down my life;" thus I know that I ih.ve one thought 
with the Father, in delighting in the Son and in His 
death. The Father conmiunicates His own thoughts 
about the Son, and by the power of the Holy Ghost 
they are put into my heart, and I have fellowship; 
and as a consequence I know that he that hath ever- 
lasting life shall never come into judgment. 

Mark, further, how they came into the excellent 
glory. There came a cloud and overshadowed them. 
The cloud is the Shechinah, the dwelling place of God, 
which the people had to guide them through the wil- 
derness, and they were to stay or move according to it. 
It was the divine presence, and "they feared as they 



104 

entered into the cloud." They were not protected by 
the cloud, as Israel were, and as they will be by and by. 
"Upon all the glory shall be a defence;" but here 
they enter into the cloud. The fact was, coming into 
the cloud was coming into the presence of the Father 
now, a dwelling-place for us. It was thence the 
Father's voice was heard. " Tins is my beloved Son," 
&c. Thence they were told who this Son was. He 
had been with them as one of them. He was the 
Father's beloved Son, in a place worthy of adoration, 
but the companion of their hearts. He brought them 
to the Father the only place into which redemption 
brings us (as to our relationship). Until a man knows 
redemption, and is brought into His presence. He can 
never know the Father's love : but when there, he can 
never know the end of it. It is the kind of love the 
prodigal never knew till he was in his father's arms. 
He had doubts and fears as he went on, and thoughts 
about the hired servants, but none when be was in his 
fiather's house. It is known only by the teaching of 
the Holy Ghost in us — in the cloud — God in us. It 
is in the presence of the glory, realized by faith 
now, we know the power of redemption; and by 
its brightness and its truth, it blots out all other 
relationship. 

Notice who are learning this glory. Saints walking 
on the earth — ^Peter, James, and John ; and so with 
us. The truths written in this book are not for us to 
know in heaven. Is the Father's love not to be known 
till we are in heaven? Is redemption only to be known 
there? Was God less intimate with those on earth 



106 

than with those in heaven ? Not at all. It was to 
Peter, James, and John this was communicated, not to 
Moses and Elias. The Father's voice was to men on 
earth. We learn the rejection of man here and the 
grace which has brought ns to share in the glory. In 
what follows we find the Lord coming down into the 
crowd of this world, not remaining on the mount. We 
may listen and enjoy, but we have to come down and 
pass through this world. The Lord comes down and 
meets three things, a throng of men, Satan's power, and 
the disciples' unbelief. There was no seclusion here 
for Him, but He comes to a crowd. What a picture 
of distress this is ! The son of one possessed with a 
devil (ver. 39 ;) and the father's heart racked more than 
the son's body. The world will weep till they are tired 
of weeping, and then go on with the same thing 
again. 

We have seen before how the Lord was come in the 
display of His power and bound the strong man. 
The disciples covld not do it. The power of Satan re- 
mains the same unto this day. He is not literally 
cast out, but remains the " prince of this world," the 
character he has gained, not lost, by Christianity. He 
will be bound ; his power will be overthrown as a fact, 
and not to faith only. The question was to be settled 
about Satan's right, and what did the Lord say of 
himi 

" Now is the judgment of this world " — " Now is the? 
prince of this world cast out." His title is " cast out," 
but Christ has not yet exerted this power. Therefore 
in the epistles we find him spoken of as still ruling in 

H 



106 

this world. In Ephesians he is called, '' the prinoe of 
the power of the air," " the spirit that now worketh," 
&0, Then we hear of the ^ ^ rulers of the darkness of this 
world." When " the powers of the world to come" are 
in their full display, Satan will he cast out entirely; 
but these instances and more show he was here then as 
he is still. " How long shall I be with you," &c (ver. 41.) 
It was not because Satan was here that Christ said 
this, but because the disciples could not use the power 
He had brought in, and that closed the dispensation. 
So it will be in this. The power and goodness of God 
brought Christ into the world, but the incapacity of 
man to believe so as to use that power, will close it. 
So we read in Bom. xL " Toward thee (the professing 
body now,) goodness, if thou continue in his good- 
ness; otherwise thou also shalt be cut off;" but until 
His grace ceases, there is refuge for us to go to FTim. 
While He was here, the moment the father of the 
child sought to Him, He cast out the spirit. As long 
as Christ's grace is at work, if, there is only one saint 
on the earth and everything else failed around, he 
would find the power of Christ ready to be exercised 
on his behalf. There can be no failing in meeting the 
need of a soul, because as there is Christ to go to, 
there is help in Him. However dark the dispensation 
may be, there is exactly the grace that is needed for 
the position. Not that God would have our eyes 
blinded to the darkness around, for if we do not take 
heed to the ruinous state, conscience is not in its 
right place. K I am ready to say. Why should He 
not stay 1 when He says. How long shall I be with 



107 

jou? I am insensible to the state of things around 
me, and I am not awake to the response that Christ's 
love to the Church demands j but, on the other hand, 
if I am not able to look up and count on the grace of 
Christ to meet that state, however bad it may be, I 
am powerless. 

Ver. 43. " They were amazed at the mighty power 
of God.'' It is very humbling to see how amazed 
they were about this power. They did not wonder at 
the power of the evil. But they ought so to have 
counted on His power as to have been amazed if the 
power were not exerted. Christ brings them back to 
the cross. *^ Let these sayings sink down into your 
ears, for the Son of man shall be delivered into the 
hands of men." (ver. 44). You ought to have been 
able to get this power ; but you must now know not 
only the power of Christ, but the cross of the rejected 
One. ^'Kejoice not that the spirits are subject unto 
you, but rather rejoice because your names are written 
in heaven." We have more to be rejoiced at in this 
than if a miracle were to be performed to-morrow? 
It is more blessed to know the cross. It was as 
though He had said, " I had rather you should come 
now to own the rejected One than be looking for this 
power even." Beloved friends, you are not thinking 
of what God is doing at this present time, if you do 
not see that now it is not power on the earth, but 
rejection. 

Ver. 46. " There arose a reasoning which should be 
the greatest" What a tale this tells I What a selfish- 
ness runs through and through ! Even at the Lord's 



108 

supper it was the same tiling. In Luke we find it, 
where there is so much of what man is brought out. 

We see then, from what we have been tracing, that 
we need to come down from the hill ; not to be with- 
out Jesus, but to learn what man is. 

It is not necessary to come down from the mount, 
as some people say, lest we shoidd be puffed up there ; 
for we shall never be puffed up while on the mount- 
Like Peter, we may be afraid, but we are never puffed 
up in the presence of God. It is when we quit it 
that we are in danger. 

Paul was not exalted above measure when in the 
third heaven, but after he came down, he needed the 
thorn in the flesh to prevent it. 

Besides, there is an historical necessity for us to get 
through this world. But Jesus was as much with 
His disciples when they came down as while they 
were on the mount, and that is our comfort. Do not 
let us suppose we have lost Christ. We have to serve 
EUm, walk with Him, learn from Him, and mark His 
patient grace towards us in and through all circum- 
stances. The Lord give us to know, while passing 
through this world, what a Christ we have, taking 
our hearts clean out of the defiling circumstances 
around, so that, whether we get a taste of the glory, 
or are passing through the crowd of this world. He 
may be everything to us, as He is everything /or us. 

Yer. 46, <fec. The Lord is now showing His disciples 
the place they are to take upon eartL They are not 
to be in a position connected with Him as Messiah 
in earthly glory — ^heavenly glory they coidd not have 



109 

till the end. In the meantime they have to take their 
place -with Him in rejection, and this put them to the 
test, for they were to give up things right enough in 
themselves ; ag., to hate father, mother, wife, drc, aU 
which earthly relationships had a claim upon them, 
and especially so upon the Jew. " Honour thy father 
and mother," &c. But all these relationships would 
not stand in association with the cross. Everything 
must be sacrificed, everything that linked man with 
the earth must be snapped asunder to faith, when 
Christ was rejected. The character of the world was 
fully manifested in His rejection : its deeds were evil 
and it rejected the light. The incarnation, which 
should have been the link to man's blessing, is rejected. 
He accomplishes redemption by His rejection on earth, 
and He has a place in heaven. This alters the charac- 
ter of everything. It brings in the judging of self. 
There never would have been this if Christ had been 
crowned on earth. He was ''delivered into the hands 
of men," &c. He ^hose very mme carried power 
and authority is to be delivered up. If Christ had 
had His place on earth, the heart of man woidd never 
have been put to the test Why ? Because, if men 
had seen all the dignity and glory displayed on earth 
which was His right, it would have gratified their 
fiesh with its greatness. But fiesh cannot inherit 
heaven, and what place has it on the cross 1 There 
they go together so blessedly — the cross and heaven; 
and for the flesh there is no place in either. There 
was a terrible breach between man and God, and the 
One who woidd have healed it they crucified. Then 



110 

every carnal thought that was in accordance with such 
fax act must be judged. The disciples were disputing 
who should be the greatest — not greatest in the 
world, but the greatest in the glory. It is self after 
olL They have not to tell Him much, but their 
thoughts are judged. When in the light, everything 
is judged. Jacob had the word from God to go to 
Bethel (Gen. xzxv.), and he immediately says to his 
household, ''Put away the strange gods that are among 
you." And why so? Everything is detected when 
getting into the presence of God. Jacob could get 
the blessing before he went to Bethel ; but when he 
goes into God's presence, the idols are judged. When 
he has got rid of the idols, it is " El-bethel," the God 
of BetheL The disciples were reasoning which should 
be the greatest, and when He detected their thoughts 
He *' took a child and set him by him," &c. This 
shows tis our place: we ought to seek the lowest place. 
We never can have it, because Christ has taken it* 
He went down under sin, wrath, death. He took the 
lowest place, because the servant of all. This is the 
truly happy place for us, but how it judges self/ This 
is what the cross does. Not only are the idols judged, 
but self is judged. 

It is a blessed thing to have done with self. When 
there is room for God, we can be full of joy and 
happiness. We are not humble, even when we are 
occupied with our own nothingness, or how bad we 
are ; but we are humble when we do not think of our- 
selves at alL When we have to learn our nothingness 
•nd badness, that is being hvmhled. If we get away 



Ill 

from the Lord, we have to be brought back, and that 
is a humbling process. We want to judge the flesh 
in (mrselves. It is pretty easy to judge it in another, 
but it is in ourselves we miss it. (ver. 50). Things 
are brought to a crisis. ** He that is not against us is 
far us." Mark how thoroughly conscious the Lord 
was of His utter rejection by man ; so utter that He 
said, he that is not a^amat us is proved to be for us. 
Christ was perfect ; therefore He was a perfect test to 
men's consciences; and as far as iJg is manifested 
in us, we shall be so also. Paul could say, " If our 
gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost." Why 
could he say so? Becatise it went out from him as 
pure as it went in. John said, " We forbad him, be- 
cause he followeth not with usP That tells the whole 
tale. They were thinking of themselves, not of Christ ; 
of their own importance, and not His honour. If it 
had been Ris importance, they would have thought 
how blessed it was to find the effect of His name, and 
rejoiced to know how His power was being exercised 
by man. But no; they were looking at themselves 
as well as at the Messiah. Even Jolm was thus using 
Christ Himself to further his own importance. And 
is there not something in tis of the same thing, a sati^ 
Action at that which aggrandizes self as well as 
Christ, instead of seeking the honour of Christ alone % 
The Lord takes him up and answers him on the 
ground of His utter rejection, which was coming. 
" He that is not agamat us is for us.'' And mark 
that the very selfishness of John brings out the grace 
of Christ. He says " i«," You do not know the lot 



112 

you have with ma If you find one who can use the 
power of my name, r^oice in it. 

Yer. 5. '^ It cannot be that a prophet perish out of 
Jerusalem." I am going to get a portion ia heaven, 
and you are to have the same portion, but it must be 
through rejection here. *'K any man will come 
after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross 
daily," Ac. 

^^ When the time was come that He should be re- 
ceived up. He set His fetce stedfastly to go to Jeru- 
salem." In Isaiah, <^ I set my feuse as a flint." He 
was accomplishing His Father's will here, as in all 
His course. Kedemption must be accomplished 
through the cross. He ''learned obedience by the 
things which He suffered." It was the same obedience 
as at the beginning, when He was coming amongst 
them with '* Blessed are the poor," &c — ^more pmnjuly 
and of course He felt the difference; but still He 
goes in the same blessed spirit and earnestness. Are 
there not twelve hours ia the day 9 K any man walk 
in the day, he stumbleth not, &c. He had found it 
His meat to do the will of Him that sent Him. There 
was joy to Him in this ; but in the cup of wrath which 
He was going to drink there was no joy. He had met 
with scorn here, smiting there, rejection all through, 
but nothing like this cup, and therefore He cried, " If 
it be possible, let this cup pass from me," &c. Christ 
proved his perfectness, for He felt what it was to be 
'' made sin," kc. His holy nature shrunk from it, yet 
there was the same quiet, steady, patient obedience, for 
^' He stedfastly set His face to go to Jerusalem," as all 



113 

through. He knows His Father's will and He does 
it. He sets His face there, where His Father's will is 
to be done, not looking to this side or to that^ but there 
— Jerusalem, 

We, according to the measure we have of the single 
eye, shall be following in the same course, going to the 
cross steadily, with one purpose ; and in proportion as 
we do so, will those who do not so set their face oppose 
us. But the Lord says, " K any man serve me, let 
liim follow me." Service is not doing a great deal, but 
following the master, and the world and half-hearted 
Christians do not like that. There is plenty of doing 
in the world, but ** if any man serve me, let him. follow 
me" Paul wanted to serve every way, but we find 
the Spirit forbidding him to go into Bithynia or Troas, 
and yet two years afterwards we read that " all Asia 
heard the word." God's work was to be done, but it 
was to 1^ in His time and of His ordering. His ser> 
vant had only to follow in obedience. It was the same 
with Moses. Nature would say of him, Why hot stay 
in Pharaoh's court that the people there may be con- 
verted, instead of leaving it 1 Flesh cannot understand 
wh&t /aith leads to. Then after he gaes out in all the 
earnestness of his spirit, natural energy comes in, but 
then there is no deliverance. Moses has to go and 
keep sheep for forty years, to be broken down, and 
made nothing of, and what were Israel to do all that 
time ? To wait. Then when he comes back to serve 
them, how is it done? There is the fiesh appearing in 
another way. "Lord, I am not eloquent." Then 
Aaron is sent back with him, and the work is done in 
the power of God. 



114 

Ver. 62. ** They went and entered into a yilkge of 
tiie Samaritans," &c. (ver. 53.) We see the very 
reason they did not reoeive Him -was because His face 
was set towards Jerusalem. His verj obedience, 
singleness of eye, going to do God's will without hon- 
our, or attractiveness, or repute, going to Jerusalem, 
is the very reason they would have nothing to do with 
Him. (ver. 54.) See the religious opposition of the 
disciples to them. The Samaritans would not submit 
to God's way : Christ did. That is the difference : 
and the disciples went to command fire to come out of 
heaven as Elias did, and at the very place where Elias 
worked the miracle. In fleshly reasoning they think 
Christ was as worthy as Elias to call down fire. This 
is a more subtile kind of self than the other. It seem- 
ed like direct zeal for Christ, but they did not under- 
stand the zeal of Christ. He was not come for judg- 
ment ; not to destroy men's lives, but to suffer HimaeLf 
for them. If they had known God's thoughts they 
would have submitted quietly. Peter again understood 
not the Lord's mind when he drew his sword and 
smote the servant of the high priest. All the miracles 
of Elias were characterized by the spirit of judgment, 
not like Elisha who had his commission from heaven. 
ElAQoh stood in the place of judgment and righteousness, 
like John the Baptist who came in the spirit and 
power of Elias, saying, "Every tree that bringeth 
not forth fruit shall be hewn down," &c., and "the 
axe is laid to the root of the trees." JSlisha had life- 
giving power, on the contrary, and was a type of grace. 
Elijah passed th/r<yugh Jordan, (death in type,) while 



115 

^isha starts from the other side of Jordan in resur- 
rection. 

"Ver. 56. He turned round and went to another 
village. It is not pleasant to be trodden upon in this- 
-world, but Christ was. To do well, and suffer for it, 
and take it patiently, is what we have; and is it to 
end there 1 Yes, and that is " acceptable with God.**^ 
Christ came to suffer, to bear anything for the sake of 
others, and He woidd ngt have been doing that, if He 
had called down fire from heaven upon the Samaritans. 
We have to follow Christ in carrying the testimony of 
God's love into the world in all our walk through it. 
The world needs it. We must not be seeking for 
ourselves, but having Christ the object. 

At the end of the chapter He goes on to show how 
the links with this world are to be broken. 

Ver. 57, 58. One says, "Lord, I will follow thee 
whithersoever thou goest," but Christ puts him to the 
test.* You cannot go if you do not take up your lot 
with One who had not where to lay His head; for you 
may sooner go to the birds of the air for a nest, or to 
the foxes for a hole, than to the Son of man for a home 
in this world. They were not now to come to Him ba 
the One who had the promises, &c,y but to One whose 
portion was utter and entire rejection. Following Him 
could not be accompanied with ease and comfort here. 
He was to be delivered into the hands of men. At 
His birth we see the same thing. Every one found 
room in the inn save He, but any who wanted to find 
Him whom angels celebrate, must go to the manger I 
Ver. 59. He says to one, " Follow me." The ^—'- 



116 

one wanted something with Christ; but here where 
He says, *^ Follow me," then immediately a difficulty 
is started ; and it is when He caUs a man that difficul- 
ties are felt. There was no sense of the difficulties in 
the one who said, " Lord, I will follow thee," without 
His calL But this man who is called, says, " Let me 
Jlrst go and bury my father." He is going presently, 
but there is a link felt Jesus says, '' Let the dead 
bury their dead :" you must leave them to follow me. 
You may be ready to say, the things of the earth have 
no power over you ; but just try what it is to have 
them, and you will learn the extent of their power. 
A man may go to the length of his cord, but when he 
gets to the end he is checked. A father had the first 
claim in nature, and especially to a Jew, but Christ 
says, I am calling you out in the power of life ; I am 
putting in my claim for the life I give you, and it 
breaks every bond here. It is a question of life in the 
midst of death. This word, "/r«<," (let me first go 
and bury my father), shows something piit before 
Christ, as though the man said. There is something / 
put before f/<yur calling. Death had come in, and this 
very plea told Christ they were all under death. It 
was quite a right thing for the man to bury his feither; 
but if life has come in, and the question is one of 
redemption, to be lost or saved, you must give yourself 
up to it. In the divine light which is in the cross. He 
saw all dead, and therefore He said, " Let the dead 
bury their dead." The one thing to be done now is to 
follow Christ. The question is, Death in the world or 
life in Christ 1 Where are the qfectuma t 



117 

"Ver. 6 1 . "Another also said, Lord, I will follow thee^ 
but let me jvrst go bid them farewell which are at 
home at my house." In the previous case it was just 
this : When my first affections are settled, then will I 
come and follow thee. There is no good in that, the 
Lord says : "Let the dead bury their dead." But 
this case shows that those at home were not left in 
heart. He felt he had to break with them, and yet 
his heart lingered. " Ko man looking back is fit for 
the kingdom of God." "Remember Lot's wife." "A 
double-minded man is unstable in all his ways." If 
Christ be not ^5^ and last^ He will always be last^ for 
fiuth is not in exercise. The question is, whether we 
are walking as seeing what the cross tell us. The cross 
lifts the veil, showing the skeleton of this world, 
and when I see this sentence on all that is in the 
world, self as well as what is outside, and our links 
of affections with it, I learn that all is to be given up ; 
but there is Christ Kvmsdf and the love there \s 
in Him to meet it. It will and must judge self; and 
it brings out the will too, for there is a great deal of 
will in all this shunning of the cross. People may 
speak of the claims of affection, but it is not really 
and only family affection, &c., but the end which con- 
nects with self is felt. Natural affection there shoxdd 
be — ^indeed it is one of the signs of the last evil days- 
to be without it — ^but if you have power to judg^ 
yourselves, you will find that many an excuse you 
make has this secret at the end. So in affliction, be- 
reavement, &c. It is not only the affection that \& 
touched, but the vMl, There is sweetness in the sor- 



118 

» 

TOW, 80 long as we realize Ghiist in it^ and affecfdon 
only is sorrowing. But if the will is tonched, there 
is rebellion, resistance, struggling, and all this the 
Lord must judge, for a mass ofjlesh and self cam. never 
follow Christ. What a wonderful detail all this is? It 
is God going through our hearts entering into every 
comer and crevice. Whyl Because of the constant, 
undeyiating stedf astness of His love ; and as a father 
loves his child when it is naughty, as well as when it 
is good, so our God takes pains, at it were, with us all, 
even when so bad. 

The effect of all is not only to make us practically 
righteous, but happy — "imitators of God as deai* 
<$hildren." It is well, on the one hand, for us to judge 
ourselves and see what there is to detect in us, and, on 
the other, to see the fulness of his grace in Christ. 

May the Lord give us to feel more and more that 
''^the friendship of the world is enmity with Grod," and 
that the energy of the flesh cannot accomplish the work 
of God, so that we may learn to work Jrom God, /or 
God, and ifdth God. 



CHAPTER X. 

The Loi'd pursues the subject we have been looking 
at in the preceding chapter, connected with the 
change that has taken place in His own position 
amongst them. It is no longer the Messiah on earth, 
but the heavenly Christ, they are to look to. There is 
another thing brought out here in the amazing im- 
portance attached to that moment, the last testimony 
being applied to them; and those who heard it would 
be more the subject of judgment than Tyre and 
Sidon. Any among them would have repented with 
the truth you have, but they had it not. The blessing 
now was the Lord Himself being there; and he was so 
glorious and excellent that to hear Him was the prime 
source of blessing. All hung upon their reception or 
rejection of Hi/m, In the sending out of these scFenty, 
we see the same patient grace at work as when He 
sent out the twelve. If they were not received, they 
were to shake off the dust from their feet, ko. God's 
love never stops, whatever the wickedness of man, until 
SEis work is done. His grace never fails. Christ 
looks at the power of grace in €rod, more than at the 
wickedness of men, and he went patiently on, and said, 
*' the harvest is great," though knowing what there was 
all around him. The Lord was not like Elijah, who 
needed to be reminded of the seven thousand, who, as 
Grod knew, had not bowed the knee to the image of 
Baal. He came in by the door, and went through 
everything with God. Nothing stopped Him from 
seeking out His sheep, scattered on the dark moun* 



120 

taiiis. He laid down His life to save His sheep, and 
not one should be lost. To gather them, He went on 
in the power of grace. Paul was of this spirit when 
he says, " I endure all things for the elect's sakes." 

Did Christ suffer nothing in it? Look at Him, 
weary with His journey, sitting at the well, and a poor, 
wretched, vile sinner coming to meet Him, to whom 
He gives the water of life. There He finds meat to eat 
that they know not of ; and He says, " the fields are 
white imto harvest." He was as fresh and happy in 
His testimony, while sitting at the well with this poor 
woman, as if all Jerusalem had received Him ; because 
the fountain was within. In Him was ''a well of 
water, springing up," &c. So with us. If we are going 
on with him, we shall be " troubled on every side, yet 
not distressed ; perplexed, but not in despair ; cast 
down, but not destroyed." The testimony is in the 
earthem vessel, it is true, but the fountain is within, 
and they were to be perfectly dependent on God, and 
independent of everything else. They were to expect 
to meet enemies, wolves. " Go your ways, behold, I 
send you forth as lambs among wolves." You cannot 
turn a lamb into a wolf to defend itself. Peter was for 
taking a sword to smite off the servant's right ear, but 
the Lord forbids him, and says, '^ All they that take 
the sword shall perish with the sword." It is difficult 
to receive everything and do nothing, to be a lamb 
among wolves — ^like Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed- 
nego, in prospect of the fiery furnace, saying, " we are 
careful, O king, to answer thee in this matter. If it 
be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver," &c. 



121 

"Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes; and 
salute no man by the way.*' Not be uncourteous, but 
waste not time in useless cezemonies, &c 

When in God's service, and among Grod's enemies, 
€rod must be everything. It needs concentration of 
heart in Him, as knowing that the world has rejected 
your Master, and will reject you, if you are faithful to 
Him. Faith knows this, and goes on, not with carnal 
prudence and worldly wisdom, but as knowing what to 
do and going on to do it. Faith always carries to the 
house peace ; it produces enmity, — ^two against three, 
and three against two, — because some will receive it, 
and some not ; but thd thing brought is always peace. 
(ver. 7 — 9.) "The kingdom of God is come nigh unto 
you." Not merely such and such a thing is God's will, 
but whatever you do, whether you receive or reject it, 
the kingdom of God is come nigh tmto you." The 
condition of the world now is, that it has rejected it. 
The Son of God, the King, has come into the world, 
put it to the test, and it says. We will not have Him. 
This fact has not lost its solemnity now, for we are walk- 
ing through the world that has rejected Christ; we 
bring the testimony of peace to it — peace that has been 
made, for the sacrifice has been offered. It is also true 
that the testimony has been rejected. " Notwithstand- 
ing, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is 
come nigh unto you." (ver. 10, 11.) Faith carries 
things in its own sphere, needing nothing but Gbd's 
word. The sight of the eyes is constantly tending to 
dim the estimate which faith forms ; and if faith is not 
nourished by the word, it sinks down and fades away. 

I 



122 

If I am not feeding on the word, faith is not fed, for it 
cannot be fed by sight of things all around. When the 
Lord spoke to Jerusalem, saying, Their house should 
be left unto them desolate, and there should not be 
one stone left upon another, they could not actually see 
the stones then falling, but it was Chi'ist's word for 
them to believe. Natural reasoning is fed by what we 
see, but faUh is fed by what God has revealed to the 
soul. 

Ver. 15. "Thou, Capernaum, shall be thrust down 
to hell " — ^in God! 8 eye^ not man's. In man's eye, it 
might be exalted to heaven. So with this world. And 
what does that prove ? That it may last as long as Grod 
permits, but that His woixi will be fulfilled, " the earth 
and the works that are therein shall be burned up.% 
There is nothing stable here. When God comes in 
where will it all be 1 though there are scoffers who say, 
<* Where is the promise of His coming?" 

Ver. 16. "He that heareth you, heareth me." That 
is where faith has its resource. In hearing the word 
the disciples spoke, I am hearing Christ Himsel£ That 
is where faith walks. I know it must be true, for 
Christ has said it. Everything may go wrong, the 
world, Jews, the Church, iScc., but God's word never. 
And it has been given. It never changes, for it has 
been given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for 
doctrine, &c. The Church, as ground of confidence in 
testimony, is gone, (though we know it is founded upon 
a rock ; and as to its security, it can never be destroyed,) 
but God's word will not fail. Whatever we see tends 
to weaken and deface faith, puts to the test what the 



123 

affections of the soul are, because it is not to be wbat 
I like, but what God says. 

Ver. 17 — 20. "Rather rejoice because your names 
are written in heaven." This shows the chajige of 
everything. Devils may be subject to you, but the 
Lord says. That is not the portion for you to rejoice 
in; I am now showing my power in another way. 
This word, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from 
heaven," alludes to the time when Satan the "accuser 
of the brethren" will be cast down. 'Noyt he is in 
heaven, not in God's presence, in light inaccessible, but 
before the throne of judgment — ^two different things. 
" Hast thou considered my servant Job. " Proving that 
when others came before the throne, Satan came also. 
Contrast ver. 19 and 20. The one speaks of what can 
be seen, the other what could be known only to faith. 
The unseen thoughts of your heart are much more im- 
portant than what can be seen. The invisible is always 
more important than the visible. 

In this world, it is not merely that man is a sinner, 
but there is the introduction into it of the power of 
evil. Satan has got hold of this world through man's 
sin. So in the case of the poor woman it is said, 
" whom Satan has bound these eighteen yeara." But 
when the Church has been caught up, Satan will be cast 
down. There was war in heaven; but when he is on 
the earth, he will for three and a half years be raising 
up the man of the earth against the Lord from heaven. 
When He comes, Satan's power will be put away. He 
is not put into the " the lake of fire" until the close of 
the thousand years, but into "the bottomless pit." 




m 

Tbsit is just "^hat the devils asked to be saved from 
when cast out of the man whose name was Liegion; 
(chap. viiL 31 ;) "deep" meaning "bottomless pit.'' 
The Lord did not cast them down to it, because the 
time was not then come. 

This ability to cast out devils was a great thing. 
The communicating of the power hy the Lord was a 
power above the immediate working of the miracles 
themselves. It required divine power, and none but 
that could give the power, to others. In the mil- 
lennium, there will not be the power of good and evil 
together; the latter will be cast out. " Shall the throne 
of iniquity have fellowship with thee," &c. The pit 
shall be digged for the wicked. Satan must be cast out. 
And when Christ was upon earth, He was presenting 
Himself in the power of God to bind the strong man, 
and spoil his goods, &c. It was a wonderful thing to 
meet a man under the power of Satan, and to cast 
Satan out. It was an earnest of the "powers of the 
world to come;" the "world to come" referring, not to 
heaven, but to this earth being renewed. He was then 
putting forth the same power, that He will exercise 
fully in the coming kingdom. 

Ver. 19. "Behold, I give unto you power to tread 
on serpents," &c. ; and it was at the point when He 
was rejected that He says this. He knew what was 
really going on, and though He said peace, they did 
not say peace to Him. " I give you power " over all 
the power of the enemy. " Notwithstanding, in this 
rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you ; but 
xather rejoice because your names are written in 



125 

lieaven." That is the Church's place. When Christ 
wa3 manifested on earth, it was a blessed thing ; but 
it is better to be His companion in heaven, a& we 
shall be when He comes to take us. Far better to be 
with Himself and as Himself in the Father's house. 
We have nothing to do with earth, our names are 
not written in the earth, — ^kings in it indeed, but our 
portion is not in it. ''He has blessed us with all 
spiritual blessings in heavenly places.'' We shaU 
have the inheritance with Him, but it is below us; 
our hope is to be with Himself above it. The inheri- 
tance is the consequence of having this place with 
Him. (Eph. i.) We are children of the Father, to 
be "holy and without blame before him in love." 
Now we have our portion according to the riches of 
His grace, of poor sinners whom He has saved ; and 
we shall be to the glory of His grace in the manifesta- 
tion of it. The inheritance comes in afterwards. 
"Rather rejoice because your names are written in 
heaven." As though He would say to them, Do not 
let your minds be filled with things down here, 
but think of what you have in me and with me. We 
find two things brought before us in God's ways: 
first, the government of this world — ^that which is 
still prophetic, connected with the kingdom; and then 
the Church up in heaven. When the inheritance is 
spoken of, it is always future; but when our place is 
{5poken of, it is always up in heaven. The Lord saw 
that the present setting up of the kingdom would all 
fail, and He was bringing in a better thing than any 
kingdom, and He rejoiced in that; for when He gives 



126 

joy to another, He cannot help having it also Himself. 
When the thief on the cross asked Him to remember 
him in His kingdom, He said, "this day shalt thou be 
with me" &c. He was gratifying the thief and also 
Himself. So with these disciples. He would have 
them not be rejoicing in the good down here, for it is 
not good enough. Not only do not bo troubled with 
the bad, but rejoice not in the best thing in this world. 
**In that horn*, Jesus rejoiced in spirit." "Even so, 
Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight." He felt 
the circumstances deeply, but His soul was up to the 
source, and He would say, It is quite right that these 
proud and haughty ones should see they are nothing, 
and that these poor despised lambs should get the 
glory. "Even so, Father." He must bow to the evil, 
because the time to judge it was not yet come. Evil 
is going on; people are saying, Where is the God of 
the earth 1 We have to bear it; the Lord did. We 
must get our thoughts away from the expectation of 
having things better down here. The soul that enters 
into God's thoughts and purposes bows to His will. 
"Even so. Father." 

Then He, as it were, retires into the glory of His 
own person. The Son has to reveal the Father. The 
world rejects Him, and He submits to the rejection 
of the kingdom, and brings out, instead of it^ the 
blessedness of the heavenly thing, and now speaks of 
Himself as the Son, and glories in that. The present 
result of His coming is the Son revealing the Father; 
and this is even better than the kingdom. The testi- 
mony is brighter, as to what God is about, when I 



127 

take things quietlj and submit, not desiring to be a 
-wolf among the wolves. It is exceeding difficult for 
one's heart to bow and say, *I will be nothing but a 
lamb; but that is our place, for the Lord says, ven- 
geance is mine," "rather give place unto wrath;" 
(RouL xii.) and "neither give place to the devil." 
(Eph. iv.) But if you do not give place to wrath, 
you vnll give place to the devil. Shall we loose any- 
thing by being quiet, and taking things patiently? 
No, "all power," he says, "is given imto me in 
heaven and on earth." We must bow to what is, 
without, and be satisfied with what is written. If not 
we shall be only wearying ourselves in the greatness 
of our way. May we be satisfied to have our "names 
written in heaven." 

Ver. 23, 24, " He said to them privately." These 
things could only be enjoyed by faith. He would 
have them in consciousness of present blessing. 

Ver. 25. Now that the Lord has shown out the 
dispensational change, He shows the moral change^ 
A lawyer comes and asks how he is to get eternal 
life. The Lord brings him to the law — ^keep the 
law, and you shall live. But he is stoj^d directly 
with the simplicity of this, "thou shalt love thy 
neighbour as thyself." He does not love his neigh- 
bour as himself! He asks, " Who is my neighbour?" 
"This do and thou shalt live." Who does love his 
neighboTir as himself? The good Samaritan is the 
one who does not ask who the neighbour is, but acts 
in grace, without asking what title the other had. 
Christ has the title of doing good to him that is in 



128 

need and misery. This is grace that gives without a 
title. 

See how thoughtful this grace and love is. Se 
went to him, did not send some one else, but went, 
bound up his wounds, poured in oil and wine, seb bim 
on Aw owrv beaaty brought him to an inn, took care of 
him, gave him in charge to the host, and said, "When 
I come again, I will repay thee." How beautiful are 
all the details of the actings of this love which flows 
ffttm what is within, and acts according to what is 
working there, and not according to the claims upon 
it! 

In the closing part of chap. x. (ver. 38 — 42) we see 
the one great thing was to hear Jesus' word. Hence 

• the approval given to Mary above Martha, who, in a 
certain sense, was doing a very good work. She re- 
ceived Him into her house and served Him ; but there 
is something better than this : " Mary hath chosen 
that good part which shall never be taken away from 
her." He wanted His words to enter and to have 
power in the heart. The only thing that endures for 
ever is " the word of the Lord." The wisdom of this 
world is agpinst it — ^human reasoning is against it; 
but it is the only thing worth waitiug upon diligently; 
and if Christians reason about the things of God in- 
stead of appealing to the word, they are sure to be 
going down. We want to have tbe word in our 
hearts, to sit at Christ's ffeet that we may understand 
and treasure it up. ' To hear Jesus is the " one thing" 

•* needful. No attention, even to Himself in the flesh, 
thoc^h it were from one who loved Him and whom He 



129 

loved, could replace this. The '^manj things" end 
only in dLsappointment and death, instead of leading 
into life eternal, as did the words of Jesus, issuing 
from a heart broken, that it might let forth the stream 
of life. The hearing ear for His word delighted Him. 
He was bringing in truih to people's souls. *' Grace 
and truth came by Jesus Christ." " Of his own will 
begat he us by the word of truth." *' Now are ye 
clean through the word which I have spoken to you." 
Truth sets everything to rights; it sets God and man 
in their place, or it is not , truth. Sin, and righteous- 
ness, and love — these never came out fully by the law; 
but " grace and truth came by Jesus Christ." Every- 
thing was set morally in perfect light by Him ; but 
men saw it nob because they knew Him not. The 
word now is the instrument of revealing truth. The 
law was perfect because it was of God, but it did not 
tell what man wds^ much less what God was — it told 
what man ougM to be. Christ comes in as the light 
and says, You are all dead, but I can give you life. 
His coming into the world showed out everything 
exactly as it was. As the living Word He came and 
revealed to those who could see God — ^not at first in 
redemption, but in testimony. What value to Him 
was it that Martha cumbered herself about serving, 
in comparison of a soul listening to His word ! It 
is the same now to a Christian. When God's word 
comes with nothing else, it has a right to have power 
over the soul. It makes its way by its own authority 
and its attractive grace to the heart, and where re- 
ceived it gives life in Christ. There is no living power 



130 

Id a miracle to quicken a soul, but there is living 
power in the word. It is by the word that any soul 
can get into heaven. "We are begotten by the word. If 
the word cannot do it, it will never be done. There are 
three things constantly pressed in connexion with the 
power of the word. 1st, the words spoken will all 
come up against them another day (John xii., &c.); 
2nd, though perilous times come (2 Tim. iii), the 
word is able to make wise unto salvation, through 
faith which is in Christ Jesus. There is another thing 
also. When a soul is quickened by the word, the 
moral effect is to make it dependent and obedient — 
"sanctified to obedience." Such is the character of 
the new man, as the old man would be independent. 



CHAPTER XL 

Verse 1. At the beginning of this chapter we have 
another instance of our Lord praying^ the expres- 
sion of dependence. Ajid there the disciples ask 
Him to teach them to pray. They had not learnt the 
simple confidence in the Father that would go up 
naturally to Him and tell him all. There may not 
always be wisdom in asking, but there should be con- 
fidence of communion by the Holy Ghost. Even Paul 
had not always intelligence of God*s mind, or he 
would not have asked to have the thorn in the flesh 
taken away; but he was not afraid to make his re- 
quest. The disciples had not this simple-hearted con- 
fidence. They understood not their place as children 
of the Father. He condescends to teach them when 
in this condition and gives them this prayer. The 
Lord teaches them to pray for things about which His 
own heart was occupied. " Father, glorify thy name,'' 
was expressive of the grand desire of His heart. 
"Hallowed be thy name." He first tells them of 
Him with whom they are brought into relationship. 
Not that they had the present power of the Holy 
Ghost, giving them the consciousness of their relation- 
ship — that they did not get till the day of Pentecost, 
but He teaches them to say, " Father, hallowed be thy 
name." There we have perfection. It is the desire 
for Him to be glorified, though I cannot tell what it 
naay involve me in. There will be the desire not to 
sin, &c. This was the expression of the perfect desire 
that was in Christ Himself — " Hallowed be thy name." 



132 

" Thy kingdom come." There will be the removing 
of those things that are made, that *^ those things 
which cannot be shaken may remain." Are yon qnite 
sure that you would like Him to come in this kingdom 
that will involve the shaking out of everything that 
may not remain 1 Surely that will wrench the heart 
from a quantity of things that are attaching you to 
that which does not belong to the kingdom to come. 
There may be the desire for these things^ while at 
the same time the consciousness that I have not the 
sense of the object, but a sense of distance from it 
which hinders my enjoyment, though I know TTim to 
be " the chiefest among ten thousand," and the " alto- 
gether lovely." There are often complaining prayers, 
because there is not the present enjoyment of seeing 
Him in the sanctuary, though the remembrance of it. 
We may have the hope of the Lord's coming, being 
glad to get to the end of this desert, because it is a 
desert j or we may long to get out, because Canaan is 
at the end. If it is not the latter, we shall be in danger 
of being tired with running, which is always wrong. 
We should be in the spirit of waiting pilgrims, not 
weary ones. We ought not to be weary ; I do not say 
we are not, but we ought to be ever desiring His 
coming, because He is precious. In Rev. xxii. 17, 
the bride says " come^^ in answer to what He is, when 
He says, " I^am the bright and morning star." God 
does not reject the cry which comes to Him as " out of 
the depths," but there is a difference between the cry 
of distress and the cry of desire. 

When Christ was on earth, there was an answer in 



133 

Him to all God's will, for He always did the things 
'which pleased B[is Father. He did it as no angel ever 
could. Then He comes down to notice our daily need, 
and there is dependence, indeed, in this. " Give us 
day by day our daily bread." 

" Forgive us our sids," (fee. This chapter does not 
go iDto what we may call proper church privileges ; 
the desires are perfect, but the place is not known. 
Hie Lord touches upon all the circumstances down 
here. Man is looking up from the earth, he is walk- 
ing there, and needs his feet washed. There are tres- 
passes to be forgiven, and the spirit of grace is wanted. 
There is no sin imputed to tis now ; it is all put away. 
But will that make me hard when others fail ? No; 
my seeing that Christ has agonized on the cross for me, 
will give me a sense of my freedom, but not indiffer- 
ence about sin. Instead of hardness, it will give us 
tenderness and softness of spirit. 

"Lead us not into temptation." "Why should 
Crod ever lead us into temptation ? it may be asked. 
Sometimes the Lord has need to put us through a 
certain process to make us learn our weakness. 
Look at Peter. The Lord saw he needed to be sifted, 
or He could have prayed for him to be saved from that 
fall. A soul would always desire that he may not 
have this sifting. Christ Himself, though it was a 
different thing for Him, desired to be delivered from 
it when bearing sin. Paul prayed for the thorn to be 
removed. But Paul did not get a fourth heaven, that 
would have made him worse, but a "thorn in the flesh;" 
something to make him despicable in preaching, 



134 

(otherwise people might have come to him and said, 
Paul, you must be better than any one else, for you 
have been to the third heaven,) to prevent his being 
puffed up, and to keep him even. It was a gracious 
provision for him, though it is a right thing for the 
soul to desire not to be led into temptation, but to be 
delivered from the eviL 

Verse 5. "Which of you shall have a friend," &c. 
This is another character of prayer — earnest waiting' 
upon God There is majesty in Crod's goodness, and 
yet He takes knowledge of all our wants, and we must 
wait His will and pleasure. Suppose one asks his 
father for anything, and he says, "you must wait five 
minutes," is the child to say, "No, I cannot; I must 
have it directly?" Meantime, while waiting, faith is 
exercised, and the spirit broken down in the sense of 
need. Look at Daniel, and see another thing. God 
gave him a deep sense of his identification with Him- 
self in what he was doing, so He must make him pray 
three weeks before he has his request granted. This 
is a great privilege, for it is to have fellowship with 
God In the case of this friend, there is a depth of 
interest excited in desire for the thing, and because of 
his importunity he gains it. There is a certainty of 
God's answering in blessing, though He delay. 

Ver. 9 — 13. This is prayer for the Holy Spirit, 
which they, ilwugh believersj had not then received. 
In one sense a man may pray for this now, when he 
has not the Spirit of adoption, like the disciples then. 
But nowy the Holy Ghost has been given, consequent 
upon the Lord's ascension to the right hand of the 



135 

Father (Acts ii 22). There could be no union with 
the man Christ on earth. It is as a heavenly people 
that there is union with Him. Christ was looked 
upon alone until His work was done. "Except a 
com of wheat flail into the ground and die, it abideth 
alone.'' The Holy Ghost was the seal of Christ's 
work, not of John's preaching righteousness. The 
second time He received the Holy Ghost was for the 
church. He received it Himself (Matt, iii.) at His 
baptism, but for us when He ascended, having finished 
the work of our salvation. The fruits of the Spirit 
in us are the consequences of the grace and righteous- 
ness in Him, He being the only righteous man. The 
first fruits of the Spirit in us are love, joy, peace — 
then come the practical fruits toward men. The 
first-named fruits are toward God, then patience, 
temperance, &c., towards men. The Holy Ghost can- 
not be the subject for the Church, as such, to ask for 
now, seeing He has thus been given. Christ received 
Him for us. We pray by or in the Holy Ghost, not 
for Him now. We should pray for more of the work- 
ing of the Spirit in us, and desire to be filled with the 
Spirit — ^poor little hearts indeed, but they may be 
JiUed, It does not at all follow that we are filled 
with the Spirit because sealed with the Spirit. To be 
filled with the Spirit would keep out evil thoughta 
It will not take away the evil nature, which ever re- 
mains, but thereby that will be kept down. 

Yer. 14, <&c. See the dreadful opposition of man's 
heart against Him, which brings out a very important 
test. '^He that is not with me is against me, and he 



136 

tiiat gathereth not with me scattereth." When Cluist 
is manifested, it is for or agcdnst Him that people 
take their stand. We have spiritual enemies to con- 
tend with, and Joshua leading the people in conflict 
was iiguratiye of the Spirit leading the soul against 
our spiritual enemies. It is not Christians but Christ- 
who is become Good's centre. We may gather Chris- 
tians together, but if it is not Christ in one's own 
spirit^ it is scattering. God knows no centre of union 
but the Lord Jesus Christ. It is Himself the object, 
and nothing but Christ can be the centre. Whatever 
is not gathering round that centre, /or Him &xid Jrom 
Him, is scattering. There may be gathering, but if 
not "toith Me/* it is scattering. We are by nature so 
essentially sectarian, that we have need to watch 
against this. I cannot make Christ the centre of my 
efforts, if He is not the centre of my thoughts. It is 
a great thing for a man to say, I have no other object 
but Christ — ^no other activity in my heart but for 
Christ; not only that He is the chief object at bot- 
tom — every Christian has that — but there may be a 
quantity of middle things in our hearts between 
the inside and the outside. These must be judged in 
the soul. Besides love to Christ, there may be love 
of company, &c. ; and we must judge all. that is be 
tween Christ, the root, and the offspring. 

Ver. 27, &c. "Blessed is the womb that bare thee, 
<fec." They speak of the honour of being His mother. 
No, we would say, that has nothing to do with it. 
The closest connexion with the Son of man is not 
equal to keeping the word of God. Beligionists 



137 

make a great deal of natural affection, but though 
blessed in its way^ it is nothing to the life of God in 
my soul. Of course it was a blessed thing to be the 
mother of the Lord; yet, it was but a natural relation- 
shipy though a miracle; nor could it have been a light 
thing to her heart. Still, it was not equal to the 
blessing of the word of God bringing a soul to Him- 
self. O ! beloved friends, if you will only let the pure 
word of God abide in your hearts, you will find that 
it will sweep away all the cobwebs of the flesh. 

Ver. 29. They are seeking a sign, another natural 
thing, — but He says, "There shall no sign be given." 
Jonah is a sign; he preached, and they repented. 
Now my word has come to you, and that is the test to 
you. "The queen of the south," <fec. The word of 
Grod is so perfectly stiited to man's heart, even the 
natural feelings are touched by it. The word is sotim 
in the hearty though it may bring forth no fruit. 

Yer. 33 — 36. Light is there, and the question is 
about the man's eye. If a man has bad eyes, the 
light is painful. So the word to one who has not clear 
eyesight or the single eye. This is a solemn word, 
but if a person was converted only yesterday, it might 
be true of him; he might be full of light. It applies 
as much to the babe in Christ, as to the grown man. 
Where God is in the soul, His light is seen, "If a 
man walk in the day, he stumbleth not.'' "K thine 
eye be single, thy whole body shall be full of lights 
haying no part dark," &c. When the caudle is there, 
we see all around. It shows itself^ and thus shows all 
around. The eye receives the Hght, single or evil. It 

K 



138 

ifl not single or double, but single or evil. If Gfaxist 
is not the object^ there is some evil object. If the eye 
be single, it is all simple, though there will be diffioul- 
ties in the path, as with Paul The light is set on a 
candlestick, that all who come in ^^maj see the light." 
The man is forced to the question, Do you see it or 
not? Christ has set up the light in the world. €k>d 
has displayed Himself in Him, and the effect of that 
is to show your condition. Do you Say, '< Suffer me 
first to go and bury my fatherf* Ah, you have some- 
thing first If my body is not fall of light, there is 
something not single in my eye — something has not 
given way before the power of Christ — something not 
given up. People say, I cannot see. No, of course 
you cannot; you have some other light. Further, 
what you do see now will presently be given up if you 
do not walk in the power of what you have. **Take 
heed that the light that is in thee be not darknes&" 
Our manner of judging may be wrong, because the 
standard is not Christ, and then the light becomes 
darkness : we are guided wrong and mistaken in our 
path. If the eye be full of Christ, and we judge 
eveiything by that light, when I see anything that 
would not glorify Christ, I say, that will not do for 
me. I may be a little vessel, but I must be wholly 
for Christ. May we be walking in the power of the 
Holy Ghost, and by the divine teaching of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, content to follow Him, and desire no 
other path, having the eye upon Him, and only upon 
Him, so that when other objects are put before us, we 
may be able to say, ''This one thing I do." While 



139 

^valking through the world, may we be occupied with. 
Christ, not making it our business to judge eyil, but 
sim^ple concerning it. 

From veree 37 we have the sure judgment of the 
Lord on the various forms which the lifeless religion 
of those who led the people took up, expressed in dif- 
ferent ways, but His constant and unmingled judgment 
upon it all. The first ground of condemnation is the 
substitution of outward deansings and services, which 
the fiesh can render, for purity of heart and the spirit 
of love : where these last are, external things are 
dean. Thus money occupies the heart, where there 
is only a religious form, for it represents the world ; 
and pre-eminence is another expression of the same 
thing. Next, (verse 45, &c.) the doctors of the law 
are sentenced, and with them the imposing of burdens 
on others, while they spared themselves from the 
trouble. It might not at first appear why building 
the sepulchres of the prophets showed approval of 
those who killed them; but the truth was that the 
lawyers sought in this their own honour, instead of 
receiving the testimony of the prophets, which would 
have humbled them, for the moral and utter ruin of 
the nation. But they were adorning, as if all were 
right, the tombs of the righteous and good. It was 
the spirit of the world, arrogating credit to itself for 
piety to the dead, not holy fear at the prophet's re- 
bukes. But a clearer proof should be in the wisdom 
of God that they sympathized not with the word of 
the prophets, but with the works of their fathers. 
Prophets and apostles would be sent, and once more 



140 

be slain and persecuted. The Pharisees w«re hypo- 
oritca, and so judged; the expositors of the law per- 
verted their neameas to scripture in their hatred, of 
any real testimony to then- own oonHcienco. These 
could, least of all, bear what detected their evU. 
Hence, in pride and fear, they took to themselves all 
the springs of knowledge, neither entering themselves 
(for they miist do that as learners, and needy, and 
lost), nor allowing those to enter who would (lest they 
should condemn themselves, and besides, their hoaonr 
and charaoters go for nothing.) The closing versee 
show us the invariable conduct of false religioniBta. 
Having no answer of moi-al truth to the evidenco of 
deceit and evil exhibited in their ways, their effort 
was to perplex and to entrap. Convicted of sin, and 
incapable of truth, they sought to make void Qod'a 
goodness in accu^ng even Christ of error. It was 
mercy towards others to be plain as to these f&lse 
guides, and therefore the Lord denounced them un- 
sparingly. 



CHAPTER XII. 

The last section of this gospel (chap. x. 38; xL) showed 
the two great means of blessing to the soul — ^namely, 
the word of Grod and prayer, the precious gift of Grod, 
and the true need of man in the presence of a rejected 
Messiah. It showed withal the doom of the people 
who refused every testimony of God. Chap. xiL pre- 
sents the disciples carrying on their testimony in the 
midst of hypocrisy and opposition, but in the power of 
the Holy Ghost. The Lord addressed His disciples 
first of all ; but fearlessly, and without comprojuse, 
before a vast throng, as one who acted in the spirit of 
what He taught. He warns them against that reli- 
gious formaHsm which consists of what could be pre- 
sented to mem, and insists strongly and explicitly upon 
the sure bringing of all things into the light. (Verses 
1—3.) 

But just as the breaking down of forms and the 
revelation of the full light of God had its highest 
operation and effect in Has own death, so the disciples 
must look for the world's hostility, must be prepared 
for it in their own case, it might be up to death itsel£ 
If Messiah were rejected and slain, what could they 
loolr^or in the same scene, while Satan's power is not 
setr aside ? Hence, also, in these chapters it is a ques- 
tion of the «ouZ'« relationship with God. It was not 
the unfolding of the Church yet, but the kingdom in 
its Jewish application is set aside, and the consequence 
is that the disciples are to look for the Lord's coming 



142 

again, and until then, trial and violence. His return 
would have two aspects : one for such as are in rela- 
tionship with Himself, and the other for the world ; 
and both are taken up here. They were to beware of 
hypocrisy, and to remember God's necessaiy determi- 
nation to bring everything to light. " For there is 
nothing covered that shall not be revealed ; neither hid 
tliat shall not be known. Therefore whatsoever ye 
have spoken in darkness shall be heard in the light ; 
and that which ye have spoken in the ear in cloeets 
shall be proclaimed upon the housetops." 

Vers. 4, 5. Next, as to the danger of walking in the 
light. They were not to fear them who kill the body, 
but God, who could cast into hell. Jesus perfectly 
feared God, and called on His friends to fear none but 
Him. " Yea, I say unto you, fear him." But further, 
(ver. 6, 8), not even a sparrow is forgotten before €kxi ; 
and the very hairs of their head were all numbered. 
Therefore they were not to fear. Our God has made 
it of faith to be assured that He cares much for us. 

On the other hand, they were not to trust in them- 
selves — ^in their own courage or their own wisdom, but 
to confess Christ There was the result in relation 
with the humbled, but yet to be exalted. Son of man. 
There would be a return of love or shame before the 
angels of God, according as He should be confessed or 
denied before men. (Ver. 8, 9.) He had hidden His 
glory to effect grace. He had come among men and 
into the midst of evil, that God might be fully glorified 
in His humiliation. This was the patience of Gk>d, for 
Christ claimed nothing. But the Holy Ghost would 



143 

come asserting the gloiy of God^ and claiming subjection 
to ity witnessing the graoe, and proving the glory in 
power. Hence a word spoken against the H0I7 Ghost 
woidd not be forgiven. Wonderful to say, this id 
attached to the disoiples (verse 10) to console and 
strengthen them in their weakness. The Son of man 
might be slighted, and yet there was forgiveness; but 
if He by whom they would speak was blasphemed, it 
would be unpardonable. Further, (ver. 11, 12) the 
Holy Ghost would speak by them, whatever the power 
ecclesiastical or civil, that arraigned them. 

Such were the principles, the warnings, the motives, 
and the encouragements the Lord attached to a mission 
which, rejected by and outside Judaism, was the intro- 
duction of light by grace into a world of sin and 
darkness. 

Thereupon in ver. 13, 14, the Lord, by positively 
revising to adjudge in Israel, shows that Jewish bless- 
ing had lost its place. It was no longer a question of 
dividing the inheritance, but of the soul in its position 
before €U>d. Only He warns against the folly of loving 
the things which gave occasion to such disputes. 
Bighteousness on earth is not looked for now : Jesus 
declines the place of regulating it, and proceeds to show 
the inward principle of the kingdom in contrast with 
the world. Hence He told the midtitude to beware of 
coyetousness, for a man's life is not in what he possesses, 
adding a most solemn parable, as to the doom of the 
rich man, who was not rich toward God. Whatever 
he might say to his soiUy God required it that night. 
^^80 is he that layeth up treasure for himae^,^' 
(Verses 16—26). 



144 

Ver. 22 — 31. If it be thus with the world, do you 
who have a father, even the J'ather, not be anxious for 
your soul or body. Food and clothing were not just 
-objects for disciples* care, but rather to put on the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Their thoughts should be in another 
channel, rising above a mere natural view of the life 
and the body. But he proceeds to assign positive 
grounds operative upon them as believers. Keedful 
things were subsidiary which God provided, for they 
were His and under His ordering. He cared for much 
less than they were. The fowls of heaven and the 
grass of the field read them no uninstructive lesson, as 
interpreted of Christ. And if there was, on the one 
side, God's provident care for the least of His creatures, 
on the other side let them bear in mind the utter weak- 
ness of their anxieties. Whatever might be natural to 
those who knew not God, tJiey were not to be seeking 
what to eat or drink : their Father knew they wanted 
such things. Let them seek the kindgom of God, and 
all the rest should be added. 

Ver. 32 — 40. The Lord now takes higher ground for 
them. " Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father^s 
good pleasure to give you the kingdom." Therefore 
were they rather to get rid of what they had as men, 
and to provide things such as the Father gives to the 
heirs of the kingdom. They were to act the part of 
kings called to and having an higher inheritance. The 
heart follows the treasure. Let them provide a 
treasure in the heavens, and their heart will be there 
also. The great saint is not the value of what they 
gave meritoriously, but the effect internally suitable to 



145 

their position and their calling. Grod is no^ ashamed 
to be called their God. Further, (35, &c.,) they were 
to wait for their Lord. This was especially to form 
their character, and to be continually and outwardly 
expressed — ^the habitual expectancy of the Lord. Their 
loins were to be girded, and their lights burning, as if 
Christ was actually on His way. Anti He that shall 
come will come; and ^^ blessed are those servants whom 
the Lord when He cometh shall find watching; verily 
I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make 
them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and 
serve them.'* 

They were now associated with the heavenly charac- 
ter of the kingdom. This world was nought; what they 
had of it they could return into the privilege of doing 
good, unselfishly, and have their treasure above, where 
there would be no losing it, and so their hearts would be 
kept there. Thus their character would be heavenly. 
Meanwhile, they were to be as men who waited their 
Lord returning from the wedding. The general aim of 
the heavenly effect of the calling is here in question. 
They were to be on the watch. It is not prophecy, but 
character and position. There are no signs or historical 
circumstances, as in chaps, xvii. and xxi. for people on 
earth; here there is heavenly separation from it. For 
those who thus wait, Jesus is still a servant. He will 
make them sit down to meat^ and come forth and serve 
them. Girded to serve as man, His ear bored in death, 
in joy He comes forth delighting in disciples so walking. 
Gladly He releases them from their endurance and 
watching and service; He sets them at the feast, and 
honours their faithfulness thus. They were therefore 



146 

left in lu^oertamty; and so the Church, whtm formed, 
wea left. The Church is always to wait for Christy 
having no special time: every moment is its time in 
desire and duty, as alas! it is the world's for negligence. 
The Jews have a time : days, years, and earthly com- 
patations belong to them, and therefore signs. To us 
it may be second watch or third watdi : blessed only if 
we are found watching ! 

Ver. 41 — 48. Peter puts the question of the applica- 
tion of what goes before, which brings out the portion 
of those who serve faithfully. They will be set over 
all the Lord's goods when He returns to take possession 
of all He made and will inherit: a very encouraging 
thought^ though not the highest. On the other hand, 
Ghristendomapostatizes by putting off in heart the Lord's 
coming. The great stay of heavenly-mindedness is lost 
thereby, and so our peculiar calling and hope. To 
expect the Lord detaches from the world ; putting it 
off left the servant to his own will. It is not doctrinal 
denial, but he says in his hearty ''My Lord delayeth 
bis coming;" and then he acts with violence towards 
the fellow-servants, and his fellowship with the world. 
But that servant has a Lord, let him act ever so inde- 
pendently ; and He will come when not expected, and 
set that servant's portion with the unbelievers, whatever 
may have been his boasted rights and piivileges. 
Further in detail, there would be a righteous adjudgment; 
(vers. 47, 48 ;) for here we have the principles of service, 
aa before of position. The ignorance of heathenism, &a , 
will not be spared, but far more tremendous will be the 
doom of Christendom. Most righteous but oh ! how 
solemn. 



147 

Verse 49. There is another thing to be noted — ^the 
import of our Lord's coming then into the world. 
Had man been what he ought, peace would have been 
the result ; but man saw no beauty in Christ to desire- 
Him, and the effect was hatred — ^not peace, but a sword. 
The nearer the relation, the deeper the grievance. The* 
toiU of man comes out, and is utterly opposed to God. 
They would not endure to be told that they were under 
God's judgment. But there is this peculiarity in the 
character of division which the entrance of grace makes- 
He who is converted in a family becomes generally, and 
at once, the slave of the rest. Nature even is subverted 
in such cases. How often thus a husband or parent 
loses his authority! There is a fire kindled before 
Christ comes again in judgment to kindle it. He was 
not then come to judge, but they, by their rejection of 
Him, kindled the fire of judgment 

Now look at the Lord's part. "I have a baptism," (fee. 
What could straiten the Lord's heart ? The perfect, 
infinite love of God in Him was, as it were, shut up. 
If He*spoke to His disciples of His death, **That be- 
for from thee. Lord" was all the reponse He met with 
even in Peter. How painfully was He thus shut up 
into Himself! But on He went in His service of 
living love through the world, looking forward to the 
baptism of His death ; and His being straitened showed 
the fulness and strength of His love. Till then, there 
could be no letting out of heart; for who understood 
Him ? The Jews said, " Behold a gluttonous man and 
a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners!'^ 
They were shut up within the walls of Judaism ; so 
that, though One was there with a flowing river of 



148 

blessing, they would not receive Him. Divine love 
was, we may say, pent up and driven back into tbe 
heart of God. But all is met. "How am I straitened 
iiU it be accomplished r He is not straitened now. 
The barrier is broken in His death. 

How could they as sinners have communion with 
Christ 1 There could be none. When He came to 
meet man's need, they hated and rejected Him. But 
on the cross He has put away sin, and now grace can 
flow out without hindrance or measure, " Where sin 
abounded, grace did much more abound." Man is not 
changed, but Gk)d can act in His own way through 
redemption. Christ's love and glory did come out in a 
measure before, for "he could not be hid." But at the 
cross all overflowed; and looking back from that over 
His life, we see what infinite love and sorrow and suf- 
fering filled it up. 

In ver. 64 — 57, the multitude are addressed on the 
principle of personal responsibility :— first, upon the 
evident signs of God's dealing with the world, and 
next, from their moral judgment of what was right. 
The conclusion was, that God was in the way with the 
Jewish people; and that if they did not agree with 
Him then, they would turn Him into a judge, and 
must incur the full penalty of their iniquities. In hu- 
man afiairs, man would be prudent enough to come to 
terms with his adversary, knowing Hmself wrong and 
anticipating the judgment. If they did not submit 
3nd be reconciled to the Lord now in the way, they 
would soon be delivered to His judicial dealings and 
not cease from them till they had received of His hand 
double for all their sins. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

There are two great principles or subjects in connexion 
with man on the earth — ^the Church of God as such, and 
the government of Grod in the world; and these are very 
distincb. In the Church the riches of His grace are 
manifested. In His governmental dealings, we see the 
display of His justice, mercy, and goodness. An ex- 
ample of God's governmental power as to Israel we 
have in Exodus xxxiv. 6-7. This is not sovereign 
grace, bringing a soul to eternal life, but government 
of the same character as we may see every day around 
us. If a man wastes his fortune or ruins his health by 
intemperance of any kind, his children suffer for it. 
"What a man sows, that shall he also reap." See 
Grod's dealings with David, because of the matter of 
Uriah. "The sword shall never depart from thine 
house. . . . Thou didst it secretly, but I will da 
this thing before all Israel, &c., because by this deed 
thou has given great occasion to the enemies of the 
Lord to blaspheme, the child that is bom unto thee 
shall surely die." And we know that this judgment 
for his sin was accomplished in David's after-history. 
This is not grace, but government. Grod deals in the 
same way with a saint now — ^that is, both in grace and 
righteousness. 

In Luke xii. we see the Jews had this thought of 
government in their minds, nor was it wrong in itself. 
They thought that God could not let such a guilty 
fellow live as this Pilate, who had been mingling the 



150 

blood of the Galileans with their sacrifices. But Christ 
brings them to a new principle by which to judge, and 
tells them judgment was coming upon themselves if 
impenitent. '* Suppose ye that these Gralileans were 
turners" <kc? "1 tell you Nay, but except ye repent^ 
ye shall all likewise perish.'' It refers to judgment in 
the government of this world, which would overtake 
all who repented not They had God's Son there, and 
they were practically rejecting Him; and how many ci 
the Jews had their blood mingled by Titus? Christ 
had said to the Jews at the close of chap, xii, '' When 
thou goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, . . 
give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him, 
lest he hale thee to the judge," &c. ; but of the state of 
the Jews, who were under God's dealings and would 
not escape till the chastenings of the Lord upon them 
iuce complete. Thus it is very evident that this passage 
refers simply to God's government of His people. 
Natural conscience ought to have told these Jews not 
to reject the Messiah, for God was going all the way 
along with them to the magistrate, dealing with them 
in patient grace, and He would say to them, If you do 
not repent and be reconciled, judgment must come upon 
you, when it will be the same with you as with those 
whom ye think to be such sinners. 

Yer. 6. The Lord is dealing here with ihe same state 
of things. The fig-tree is Israel, and God comes seek- 
ing fruit in them and finding none. In the gosp^ there 
is this difierence, that grace, instead of seeking, sows 
in order to produce fruit. He found none, and the 
sentence thwefore upon it is, ** Cut it down." He not 



151 

only found it nselesa, but His vineyard was encum- 
bered by it. '^ The name of God is blasphemed among 
the Gtentiles, through you." Then comes in Christ's 
mission. Last of all, ''He sent his Son.'' Grod had 
planted a yineyard and pruned it/ but there was no 
fruit. Then a new Gardener comes in, and He says, 
'' Spare it this year also, tDl I shall dig about it," &c. 
It must bring forth fruit then, and be digged up. He 
has done as He said, but still there is no fruit. 

Ver. 11. The woman with an infirmity, whom Jesus 
heals on the Sabbath day, brings out another thing that 
was working in their hearts, in the place c^ the law, 
which left room for hypocrisy. They would lead an 
ox or an ass from the stall on the Sabbath, but they 
would not bear that a daughter of Abraham whom 
Satan had bound these eighteen years should be loosed 
on that day. One of the infirmities of man's inind is 
to-use possessed truth to resist reyealed truth. Paul 
was an example of this, — " as touching the righteous- 
ness of the law, blameless;" still, he ''thought he ought 
to do many things contrary to Jesus of Nazareth." So 
also Christ says of the Jews in John zvi "These 
things will they do unto you," &c. They were using 
the name of the one true God, which had been given 
them (" the Lord, thy God, is one God ") to reject the 
Son ; for when Christ came in humiliation, they would 
not receive Him. Orthodoxy is used to stop the re- 
ception of truth. When truth is the ground of a man's 
standing, it gains him credit ; but when a new truth 
comes in, it puts faith to the test. Truth that requires 
faith to walk by, is resisted by the natural heart; and 



152 

the root of this is hypocrisy. The ruler of the syna- 
gogue said, ^' There are six days in which men ought to 
work: in them come and be healed, and not on the 
sabbath day." But he ought to have known that the 
Lord of the Sabbath was there ; for that single w^ord 
** daughter of Abraham " ought to have told him who 
He was that stood there. The Lord answered him, 
<«^liou hypocrite !" A solemn word this ! 

Ver. 18. He goes on to show what the kingdom will 
be like when the king is rejected and gone away. A 
kingdom without a king ! who is sitting on His Father's 
'throne, until he comes to take His own throne. The 
kingdom is like a little seed thrown into the ground, 
which springs up and becomes a great tree, — -just what 
we call Christendom. This fills up the gap between 
His rejection and His coming again. There is no 
power exercised while the King is away. As in Mark's 
Crospel, it sprang up, men knew not how. When the 
harvest is ripe, He will come again. He sowed the 
first time, but He will put in the sickle the second 
time. He is looking for heavenly fruit now; but when 
He comes. He will find Christendom a great tree with 
the fowls of the air lodging in its branches. Pharaoh 
was a great tree — Nebuchadnezzar a greater still; they 
were the high and mighty ones of the earth, represen- 
tatives of worldly power. Even Israel, which had been 
planted a noble vine, wholly a right seed, was bearing 
no fruit. Therefore, as it is said in Ezek. xv., "what 
is the vine-tree more than any tree," if it bears no firdt ? 
It is only fit to be burned. Otherwise useless if it 
does not bear fruit, it only makes the best firewood. 



— — I 



153 

Ver. 21. Here the kingdom is likened unto leaven, 
and leaven is that which spreads throughout the whole 
mass, and also gives a character to that in which it 
works. It is nominal profession of Christianity which 
is spread into a vast system. There is not a word here 
about the Holy Ghost, but about the effect in the world. 
In Matt, xiii in the first parable, there is individual 
result, and not the kingdom spoken of. In the three 
first of the six parables, it is the public appearance ; 
in the three last, the inward character is described. 

Ver. 23. "Are there few that be saved ? The word 
used here is the same word that through the LXX. 
signifies a remnant, or such as shall be saved. The 
question really was as to whether this remnant would 
be few or many, who were to be spared when the judg- 
ment came ; but this being a mere idle question, the 
Lord does not answer it, but says to them : — 

Ver. 24. "Strive to enter in at the strait gate." The 
strait gate was receiving Christ at that time, — ^the 
real but narrow entrance of faith in Him and con- 
version to God. There will be some come and knock 
when the door is closed, to whom He will say, "I 
know you not whence you are;" you are not changed, 
Strive to enter in at the strait gate, through which 
Christ goes before you — ^that is, rejection. "Many 
shall seek to enter in, [not at the strait gate] and shall 
not be able." 

It is most simple when we see the rejection of 
Christ. Those who reject Him in the day of His 
humiliation, will themselves be rejected in the day of 
His glory; and instead of being His companions in 

L 



154 

the kingdom^ they wiU be thrust out The unbelieving 
Jews will see the Gentiles come into the glory of the 
kingdom, while they, remaining in unbelief^ will be 
cast out. 

Ver. 31. The Pharisees say to Him, "Get thee 
out and depart, for Herod will kill thee." ' Now Herod 
was an Idumsean, and what right had such a stranger 
to be their king? What had he to do with the promises 
to Israel ? Nothing. In Herod we have a figure of 
the wilful king. He tried to kill Christ, and therefore 
the character of opposition-king belongs to him. He 
kad no faith in Grod's purposes or in Chiist's glory; 
and the Lord says, " GrO and tell that fox.** I shall 
do my Father's will till the moment come for me to be 
glorified. I am here as long as my Father wills, and 
then I shall be perfected. The power of God mu^ be 
ftdly known. What divine contempt for the apostate 
king, but what perfect, human obedience combined ! 
"Nevertheless I must walk to-day, and to-morrow, 
and the day following ; for it cannot be that a prophet 
perish out of Jerusalem. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 
thou that kOlest the prophets," &c. After all, Jer- 
usalem is the guilty place. Let the Edomite king do 
and say what he will, it is " the holy city " that is 
guilty, for it was nearest to Himself The nearer I 
am to God, if I reject Him, the worse is the sin and 
the more dreadful the judgment. See Psalm cxxxiL 
" The Lord hath chosen Zion," &c., and Psalm Ixxxviii. 
65 — 68, the same election of Zion. Christ does not 
put the sin upon them till they have rejected both Him 
and His Father. He brings out a purpose of grace in 



155 

these closing verses. The old man is condemned and 
profitless — Israel and all of us. '^ Can the Ethiopian 
change his skin or the leopard his spots V The gospel 
begins "with seeking and saving that which was last. 
Here we see that though they have rejected Him in 
responsibDity, He has not rejected them in the day of 
His grace. Grace shines out in His yet choosing 
Judah. 

Notice how the divine person of the Lord comes out 
here. " O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would / 
have gathered," <&c. A prophet could not say this, 
and He was a prophet too, and more than a prophet : 
He was Jehovah, for none but Jehovah could gather 
Israel as '^ He that scattered Israel will gather hinL" 
Israel had rejected Jehovah under responsibility; but 
Jehovah will own them when He comes in sovereign 
grace. How blessed is the way; the circumstances 
through which He passed in His path down here did 
bring out in a far brighter way who He was than any 
text to prove it, important as that is in its place. For 
suppose you believed there was a God, yet if He were 
to come down by your very side and say / am, would not 
that be a very different thing ? Christ was the humbled 
man all through His path down here, for He was ever 
the servant of all ; yet when the service was done, and 
rejected as of no use, His glory shines out. " Before 
Abraham was, I am." See in this chapter of Luke the 
connexion between ver. 33, 34, and 35 as illustrative 
of this. " How often would / have gathered thee . . . 
desolate . . . desolate . . . tmtil ye shall say, blessed is 
he that cometh in the name of the Lord." The com- 



156 

plaint in the Psalms is, that there is none to say, 
" how long" — none to eount upon the faithfulness of 
God to His people. (See Psalm Ixxiv. 9.) This ex- 
pression is often used in the Psalms and in Isaiah vL 
and refers to chastening, not retribution. How long 
is Israel to stumble and fall? (Rom. xL) In Isaiah 
vL the prophet, having uttered these words, " Make 
the heart of this people fat," &c., taken up by the 
Lord in John xii, then says, " how long?" He waits 
in faith, and reckons upon God, and having God's 
mind, he cannot believe that God will give them up, 
and therefore asks, '^ how long" is the chastening to 
continue ? 

To which the Lord answers, " There shall be a great 
forsaking in the midst of the land, but in there 
shall be a tenth, and the holy seed shall be the 
substance therefore." The sap is still there though 
there are no leaves. So in Psalm cxviii, '' He hath 
chastised me sore, but He hath not given me over unto 
death." In the same way the Lord does not say, 
** Your house is left unto you desolate, and therefore 
you shall not see me again." No ; but He says, " Ye 
shall not see me until ye shall say, Blessed is He that 
cometh in the name of the Lord." He can give, as 
Jehovah, the answer in grace, and when He gives 
repentance to Israel, then He will send Jesus, whom 
until that day the heavens have received. Meanwhile 
our connexion with Him comes in. The prophet spake 
only of earthly things, though divine; but to the 
Church it is, " Holy brethren, partakers of the 
heavenly calling," and <*hath quickened us together 



157 

in heavenly places in Christ Jesus i** that gives seoority. 
How did I get there ? By virtue of Christ He is 
my title. My desire is to be acquainted with this, 
that I am one with Christ in heaven — an everlasting 
portion, that the Holy Ghost seals upon my soul, and 
would have me enjoy more and more. 

When Israel is brought to repentance, " the stone 
which the builders rejected," will be " the head of the 
comer," and owned of them, they will say, ** O give 
thanks unto the Lord, for His mercy endureth for ever." 
Alas ! they will receive another first ; but when their 
hearts are turned, and grace works, they will use the 
language of Psa. cxix. and find the expression of the 
law within their hearts ; and when faith is thus exer- 
cised, and their hearts are broken and open to receive 
Him, then He Himself will come to them. If there 
is not a prophet to say, " How long 1" Jehovah will 
give the answer. He never changes : and though He 
executes judgment and righteousness, grace is found in 
Him still. " When the Son of man cometh, shall He 
find faith on the earth ^^ Well, if there be not faith 
to be found, or a prophet to say, " How long?" there 
is One who will lay up, in His treasures, something for 
faith to lay hold on, in the sovereignty of His own 
grace. 

Thus we see Jehovah in that humbled One, and how 
He is able to rise above all iniquity. How precious 
does all this make Jesus to us ! and we are one with 
Him. May we learn Him, and so follow Him, remem- 
bering that all that is left outside the narrow way is 
the flesh and evil. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

I 

This chapter shews out the distributive justice of Grod. 
Furety it is toward His saints, the consequence of con- 
duct with Grod, and the place a man will take in view 
of that. Next, we have responsibility connected with 
grace, the moral position of the soul, because of having 
grace presented to it Slighting God's grace fills up 
the measure of man's sin. But here it is the presen- 
ttxtion, which is a different thing from the possession, 
of grace. This is brought out in those who refused to 
come to the supper. 

Ver. 1 — 6. The Lord, in bringing the dispensation 
to a close, constantly brings before Israel the Sctbbath. 
The question was, could man, as man, find rest with 
Godi Could man ever enter into God's rest? We 
know man broke God's rest directly — ^how soon we are 
not told : but, perhaps, the very day he ought to have 
rested, he ate the forbidden fruit Man never entered 
into God's rest; and now the question was haw to 
enter in — by his own work or Christ's? It was 
essential to the rest after creation, to have it at the 
end of the six days of work, and therefore it was on 
the seventh day. So, afterwards, when the legal ordi- 
nances were given, the sabbath became a sign of the 
covenant The Lord, when here, constantly trenched 
on the sabbath, to shew that, sin being unremoved 
He must toork. He could not rest, the sabbath being 
a sign of man's getting rest after work, and the law 
flhowing that man constantly broke that covenant. 



159 

The Lord presses home to their consciences their sin, 
by showing them that He must work if they were to 
have rest **My Father worketh hitherto, and I 
work." If man had kept the law, he was entitled to 
the rest, but he neither did nor could keep it. All 
that was the sign of God's rest, for man, after work 
done, failed; but "there remaineth a rest for the 
people of God." The sabbath continued as a sign ; 
and all through the prophets, we find it insisted on, 
but they did not get rest, Paul, reasoning upon it, 
in Heb. iv. says, " We which have believed, do enter 
into rest." But Canaan, the nominal rest they of old 
did not enter, save the few faithful ones and these did 
not get rest, for if they had, another day would not 
have been spokon of; and so it is said by the Psalmist, 
and quoted in Hebrews, " If they shall enter into my 
rest." "If" means "they shall not." This being the 
sabbath was no rest to them. The sabbath was still 
the sign, but no real rest. The whole thing being 
therefore gone as to man's getting into God's rest, it 
must be now on an entirely new principle, by faith 
and not by works. When Messiah came, He would 
have been rest to the people, but man would not have 
Him, as we find it here. Man coidd not have God's 
rest by law, and they would not have it by grace^ and 
this proves man altogether broken with God. If I 
have got to God, I have rest, and need not journey 
further for it. I have my rest in Himself, for grace, 
not law, has given me a capacity to enjoy what God is. 
But when the creature had broken the rest of his Cre- 
ator, there could be no relationship between them. 



160 

Sin has come in and caused God to be towards me as 
a judge, and there can be no link of heart between a 
judge and a criminal. If God judges me as a sinner^ 
the only word I can have from Him is, '^ Depart from 
me, ye cursed.'' Therefore all that man can say, is, 
" Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Liord." 
There is a link between a father and a child that brings 
them into relationship; but it is a new thing. All 
must be put on a new footing, for there is no rest in 
the old creation. 

In chap. XV. we have grace at work to give rest, the 
Shepherd bringing the sheep home, &c. ; and in this 
chapter we have a case of misery brought out in the 
man who had the dropsy. Christ said, '' Is it lawful 
to heal on the sabbath day?" But they held their 
peace. He puts the case to themselves. " If you shall 

have an ox or an ass fallen into a pit and they 

could not answer him." There was no present rest, no 
hope of rest, no possibility of rest for man as a sinner, 
and there could be no rest for God, for God could not 
rest where sin was. There was no sabbath for righteous- 
ness, for man had no righteousness. There was no 
sabbath for love, for love could not rest where judg- 
ment must be exercised. Love might come in and 
work, but ivork is not rest Man has lost his commim- 
ion with God, through his sin, and this is a solemn 
thing, for he has made God a judge through his sin. 
The very thought of judgment connected with Grod 
shows man a pinner, for there was no necessary associa- 
tion of judgment with God; but when sin came in, 
judgment must follow, for God is holy. If brought to 



161 

the consciousness of there being no relationship between 
us as sinners and God, we learn what a place becomes 
us, when once we have faith in His grace. 

Yer. 7 — 11. "And he put forth a parable to those 
which were bidden, when he marked how they chose 
out the chief rooms." It is just the place that nature 
likes. The world which has no relations with God 
delights in exalting self and shutting Him out. Self 
gets for self what it likes and forgets God. Man is 
always setting up self, pushing for self, against God. 
He does not think so, for he says he is only using his 
faculties. But so Adam did to hide himself from God. 
Do not we use our faculties to please ourselves, rather 
than for God ? While the master is away, the servants 
go on their own way and do their own will. A man 
is naturally hurt when he is put down in a comer and 
despised. Flesh does not relish being thrust aside, 
but this seeking for a place is to seek for it where 
Christ had none. " Therefore," he says, " when thou 
art bidden to a wedding, sit down in the lowest room." 
The point of this parable is seen in ver. 8 — 11 : it re- 
fers the heart to the Master^ to *' him that bade thee.'* 
If I am conscious of being a sinner, and therefore de- 
serving no place, I shall take none, but wait till God 
bestows one on me. I shall have honour indeed, when 
€rod gives me a place. The point is. What does he 
bestow upon me 1 Having the eye upon God, and re- 
ferring to Him, seek for the lowest place as Christ did. 
It will not do to say, I will not have a place in the 
world j the great thing is, the heart resting on God's 
place in the world. When the eye is thus upon God, 



162 

self is forgotten ; if not, I am thinking of the slights I 
receive, and neither faith nor grace are in exercise. If 
I could think nothing of myself, I should be perfect. 
The man who bade the guests has the right estimate 
of each and the honour due to them. The evangelist's 
place, the pastor's, the apostle's, &c., will all be appointed 
by God. When God gives me a place, it is one of 
power and nighness to Himself; but when a man takes 
a place for himself, it is one of weakness and alienation 
from God, because self is the object. 

Then, again, we must guai'd against the mere refus- 
ing to take a place in the world, because we know^ it is 
wrong, as followers of Him who has been rejected. A 
mere legal estimate of what is right can never last, A 
thing may be very right, but there is no stability in pur- 
suing it, because there is no power to subdue the flesh 
in merely doing what one knows to be right. There 
was the sense of obligation with the law, but the law 
did not set an object before me to attract my heart ; 
it did not bring God to me nor me to God. That lasts 
which feels that we are nothing and that God is every- 
thing. Many have begun very energetically, and taken 
a certain place, right in itself ; but if legality be the 
source of it, there will be no power of perseverance, 
for that which is taken up under law will be sure to be 
lost in the flesh. When God is the object, the low 
place here is sufficient. He Himself carries me on; 
and whatever it be, if the mind and affections are upon 
Him, what was hard at first is no effort as I proceed. 
His love which attracted and gave me power at first 
to take such a position, becomes brighter and brighter 



163 

when better and longer known ; and what was done 
at first tremblingly, is easy with increasiDg courage. 
The only thing which can enable me thus to go on, is 
to have Christ the object before me, and just in pro- 
portion as it is so can I be happy. There may be a 
thousand and one things to vex me, if self is of import- 
ance ; they will not vex me at aU, if 9df is not there 
to be vexed. The passions of the flesh will not harass 
us, if we are walking with God. What rubs we get 
when not walking with God, and thinking only of 
self! There is no such deliverance as that of having 
no importance in one's own eyes. Then one may be 
happy indeed before Grod. 

If we look at Christ, we learn two principles : first, 
that He humbled Himself, because of the sin of the 
world all around him ; second, the world did all they 
could to humble him, for the more He went down, so 
much the more they sought to pull Him down. 

No one cares for another ; so that if a man does 
not care for himself, he will be sure to be pushed down 
low enough. Then again, so deceitful are our hearts 
that it is possible we should be willing to humble 
ourselves, if we could get anything by it, even the 
approbation of men. On the other hand, if we, in 
the usual sense of men, merely seek to imUate Christ 
in this, it will be but legal effort. " Let this mind be 
in you which was also in Christ Jesus.'' He humbled 
Himself. First, '^ He made himself of no reputation ;" 
that is. He emptied Himself of His glory to become a 
man. In doing this, He left the Father^s glory to become 
a man. This was a great descent, (though we think a 



164 

great deal of ourselves.) But was tbat all? No. He 
humbled Himself to deaths even the death of the cross. 
It is the same principle which is put before us in this 
chapter in Luke. ^^ He that humbleth himself shall 
be exalted." E.eal lowliness is being ready to serve 
any and everybody : and though it may to the eye of 
man look low, it is in reality very high; being the 
fruit of divine love working in our hearts. God^ operat- 
ing in our hearts, makes us unselfish. The only thing 
worth doing in the world is this service— except it be 
enjoying God. We should be ready to serve one's 
enemies. ' ' He that humbleth himself shall be exalted. " 
This is not only being humbled, but humbling one^s aelf^ 
and not doing it before those*who would honour us all 
tho more for being humble. Paul could say of Him- 
self and others, " ourselves your servants for Chriist's 
sake." He felt they had a title to serve in grace ; and 
in proportion as he took the humble place, he will be 
exal ued in the day that is coming. 

Yers. 12 — 14. The next statement in the chapter 
goes on to speak of him who bade. Before, it was 
about the guest \ but here it is the principle on which 
feasts are made. " Call the poor, the maimed, the lame, 

the blind and thou shalt be blessed, for they 

cannot recompence thee, but thou shalt be recom- 
pensed at the resurrection of the just." Thus He 
takes them all out of the world again, to the time 
when they shall meet God, and makes it a present 
guide for action. They must not act on the principle 
of getting reward here, but must wait for the time 
when they are to meet the Lord, as it is not till the 



165 

Master of the house returns that the servants receive 
their wages. This is not a question of salvation, but 
of reward for service. "Thou shalt be recompensed 
at the resurrection of the juat,^^ Mark how the Lord 
brings out the just as a separate class. The resur- 
rection is not a common one; there is no such thing 
in Scripture. There is no thought of confounding in 
another world what God has separated in this. Grace 
has separated the believer, so that he has risen in his 
soul now; but he does not get the reward of his ser- 
vice till "the resurrection of the just." A sumer is 
quickened here, though not judicially manifested here; 
because we are in a dispensation of faith, and the 
portion is in glory. There is no " general " resurrec- 
tion to good and bad alike; but there is the "first 
resurrection," which is God separating in power those 
whom in grace He has made His own. It was the 
resurrection from among or out of the dead that 
awakened such wonder among the Jews. The Phari- 
sees could teach resurrection, though the Sadducees 
denied it. A resurrection was commonly believed, as 
Martha said, " I know that he shall rise again at the 
last day." But they could not comprehend divine 
power coming in to Satan's house, and taking the 
righteous dead out from among the rest of the dead. 
Jesus replied to Martha, " I am the resurrection and 
the life" — speaking of the living power that visits a 
man when he is in a state of death, and takes him out 
of it. They knew nothing of the discriminating pro- 
cess of the one to life, and the other to judgment. 
(John V.) 



166 

The master of the house yvHl show His approval of 
the faithful servant. There will be degrees of glory 
given according to the service done. Not that I shall 
be mved for what I have done; but my service wUl be 
rewarded, whatever may have been produced by the 
Holy Ghost answering the desire of Christ in working 
in me; for it is service of which I could not do an 
atom without His power. It is likewise the answ^er 
of God according to His counsels; as we may see in 
the reply to the mother of Zebedee's children, " It 
shall be given to those for whom it is prepared of my 
Father." The service of love is never influenced by 
recompence. Reward is not set before the soul as the 
motive for doing anything; but when we find dij£cal- 
ties in treading the path of service, then the crown is 
set before us to encourage us to go on. So, even 
Christ, for the joy that was set before Him, "endured 
the cross, despising the shame." So also Moses, while 
esteeming the reproach pf Christ greater riches than 
the treasures of Egypt, had respect unto the recom- 
pence of the reward. If the recompence and not love 
be the spring of our service, it would just amount to 
this, "Take thy penny, and go thy way." But if the 
world is broken with, no recompence can be looked 
for from that source, which is as great a deliverance 
m the deliverance from self. 

Now (ver. 15 — 24), see how grace, when brought 
itt> is rejected. The supper was ready; the guests 
were bidden, but they would not come. The Lord 
had before spoken of the kingdom, and here He shews 
what the reception of the kingdom would cost All 



167 

things are now leady — but tliey all make excuses. 
They do not care enough for the supper to leave their 
yoke of oxen, the piece of ground, &c. The supper 
was in God's thoughts from the beginning, and it was 
to be when He came to the Jews^ as their Messiah, at 
the close of the day; but they rejected Him — they 
did not want Him. It does not say that their sins 
shut them out from the supper, for God was in Christ 
reconciling the world unto Himself, not imputing 
their trespasses unto them. Neither was it the piece 
of ground, the oxen, or the wife that were, in them- 
selves, the evil ; but in their case they became so, be- 
cause their minds were intent on them, to the slighting 
of the supper. And is it not just the same now-^ 
What harm is there in these things, do you say ? If 
they have occupied your heart, and made you slight 
God, that is the harm. In the kingdom of God where 
are you ? There was not one link of heart between 
Christ and the people He came to, and therefore they 
rejected the supper.- This is also a test to our souls 
all through the day. It is not a question of whether 
a thing be right or wrong, but what savour have the 
things of Christ to our souls in it 1 It may be a ver}^ 
small thing. If we find the reading of a book makes 
the manifestation oi Christ to become less precious 
to us, we have got away from God, and we cannot 
tell where the next step may take us. Satan often 
cheats us in this way. The soul is put to the test 
day by day, whether the things that are revealed by 
God in Christ have so much power over us as to en- 
gage the heart; but if other things have come in 



168 

between when we toarU the enjoyment of the tilings 
of Christ, we shall not have it, and this will she'vr us 
how far we have got away. If anything comes in and 
takes the fireshness of Christ from your soid, take 
Jxeed ! for, if the oxen, dec, ai*e thus cared for, when 
you have opportunity for the things of Christ, you 
will have no taste for them. 

In ver. 21, the Lord turns to "the poor of the 
flock," those who have no yoke of oxen, and are glad 
of the feast. The priests and chiefs of the Jews had 
the first invitation, but they rejecting it, the Master 
of the house sends out into the streets and lanes of 
the city, to bring in the poor, the maimed, the lame, 
and the blind of the people, still the house is not 
filled; and then he sends outside the city, into the 
highways and hedges, and compels them to come in, 
that the house may be filled. These are the Centiles. 
In this €k)spel the poor of the flock and the Centiles 
are distinguished from each other. But in Matthew, 
whose aim is Jewish, there is no mention made of 
both classes as distinct. '* The wedding was furnished 
with guests" includes the Crentiles, gathered in after 
the Jews are brought into the blessing. Then mark 
the lowliness of the servant and the patient grace of 
the Master; that goes right on to the end. He can- 
not rest till He gets His house filled with guests. 
What perseverance there is on the part of God ! and 
we are called to go on in the same spirit. It does 
cost a great deal, to go on, and on, and on, in spite of 
everybody and eveiything; and for us to do so, marks 
the presence of Divine power in us, for Grod's grace is 



169 

unwearied. There is indeed judgment at the same time, 
for it is said, "Not one of those that were bidden shall 
taste of mj supper." But God's acting thus shows us 
what lowliness there shoxdd be in us, as regards self, and 
grace asregardseveryone else, andallgioundedon thisone 
fact, that all man's relationships with God are morally 
broken, and if you are really going to take such a 
path as that of following Christ, you must count the 
cost. It is all very well to see such grace and admire 
it, but there is no power to persevere in it, without 
such love in the heart as the establishment of a new 
relationship with God gives. There must be a link in 
the heart with the new thing, and Christ must have 
such strength in the heart as to give power to break 
with old things. 

Yer. 25 — 33. Multitudes were attracted by the 
hearing of such grace, so in verse 26 He tells them 
what discipleship will involve. There may be an 
allusion here to Micah viL 5, 6. Friends must be 
given up for Christ. A man may have to leave every- 
thing else, but the question is, Am I to leave God? 
What ! life too 1 Yes — ^no matter. In that life you 
are linked with the world, and that must be given up 
too, if / am in question: you cannot have two hearts 
— ^a heart for the world and a heart for me, Christ 
woxdd say* I tremble when I see people who have 
not counted the cost, setting out in the profession of 
following Christ. It is God's way to put the barrier 
at the first start If you can leap that, you will do. 
Legal obedience will not stand, but foUowmg Chiist 
If He is in the path, it is happy and easy; but it is a 



170 

paih between two hedges. If Cbriat is not with yon 
in it, there will be nothing but trouble and c^fficiilty. 

Ver. 34, 35. " Salt" is grace in spiritual energy; 
that is, the saints being witnesses in the world of the 
power of holy loye, instead of selfishness. Salt is tl» 
consecrating principle of grace : if that is gone, what 
is to preservel Salt is rather grace in the aspect of 
holy separateness unto €k)d, than in that of kindness 
and meekness, though of course these are also insepar- 
able from grace. If the salt has lost its savoui-, 
wherewith shall it be salted 1 If I haye meat without 
salt, I can salt it; but if there is no saltness in salt, 
what can I dol What a character we have here of 
an unspiritual church,^or an unspiritual saint ! like 
the vine which represented Israel, good for nothing at 
all but to dishonour the Lord its owner and be de- 
stroyed. Mercy, it is true may recover us; but as 
saints we i^ould have the savour of Christ* Whatever 
enfeebles attachment to Christ, destroys power. It is 
not gross sin that does it, which of course will be met 
and judged; but it is the littie things of every-day life 
which are apt to be chosen hefore Ch*ist. When the 
world creeps in, the salt has lost its savour, and we 
show that a rejected Christ has little power in onr 
eyes. 

The Lord keep us in the path with Christ, where 
all is bright and blessed. If the film of this world 
has been drawn over our spiritual vision, hiding Chiist 
irom us, He alone can remove it. 



CHAPTEBS XV., XVL 

We have seen the Lord showing out his own rejeo- 
tiony in grace, followed by an entirely new order of 
things. The Church, brought in subsequently, is not 
an age, properly so called, but a heavenly episode be- 
tween the ages. There are three ages spoken of in 
Scripture: the age before the law; the age under the 
law; and the millennial age. Christ was '^made under 
the law,*' and that age is not finished yet. The dis- 
ciples said to Him, ''What shall be the sign of thy 
coining and of the end of the ageP' That was the 
age when He was there, but when they rejected Him, 
the age was suspended. As He straitly charged Peter 
to tell no man He was the Christ, saying, ''the Son of 
Mem must suffer many things, and be rejected," &c, 
Therelbre, He says to them, "Ye shall not see me, 
till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the 
name of the Lord." We, who form a part of the 
Church of God, and not having any thing to do with 
the earth, are in no sense an age, but are a* heavenly 
people united to Christ above, during the suspen- 
sion of this age, filling up the gap between the Lord's 
leaving the Jews, and His return to them again. So 
in Bom. xL we have the olive tree with some of th(' 
branches broken off, and others graffed in. This is a 
tree with its root in the ewrth^ and consequently could 
have nothing directly to do with the Church in heaven. 
Some of the branches were broken off, and some left ; 
bat this could never be said of the Church, the body 



172 

united to its head, at the right hand of God. The 
Church, of course, does fill up a certain place and 
time, but it is during the suspension of the age to 
which Christ came. Characteristicallj we belong to 
that which is above and beyond anything connected 
with this world. It is grace that has set us there, and 
that is not of earth but of heaven. 

In chap. XV. we find the Lord rising above Jewish 
dispensation altogether, to the full display of God's 
own nature — ^love — ^in the gospeL At the close of 
chap. xiv. He takes up the professing system in its 
responsibility. ''Salt is good, but if the salt have lost 
its savour," it is good for nothing. Thus He shows 
what mem is. Then in chap. xv. come publicans and 
sinners, and we have the display of what God is. Here 
GTod is dealing with lost man, in grace. Sinners^ who 
owned their sins and came to repentance, were those 
who justified God. ''Wisdom is justified of her chiL 
dren." God is vindicated in His ways, whether in the 
condemnation or salvation of a sinner. The publicans 
and sinners justified €k)d, being baptized of John, 
while -Uie pharisees rejected His counsel against them- 
selves. All that is wanted to justify God is that He 
should show Himself; and this is what the Lord now 
does. He manifests what God is in grace, and this it 
is which makes the chapter ever so fresh and full to 
our soxds: the heart that has been awakened never 
tires of such a chapter. 

Then, in chap. xvL, He shews the responsibility of 
those who are thus dealt with. The earth was given 
to the children of men, aiid God looked for fruit. He 



173 

first deaJt with man as to what he ought to have been 
on the earth, but there was entire fanl/wre. Now there 
comes out another thing, enUre grcxe^ which is irre- 
spective of all that man was, and takes an absolutely 
heavenly character. Divine love is its source, and its 
character is heavenly. Revealing heaven, -it puts man 
into connexion with it j and the people so put must 
be a heavenly people. Why sol Because this world 
is all gone wrong; it has fallen from God, and is 
become the "far countiy." Hence, its riches are of 
no value, but a great hindrance, unless used in a 
heavenly way; and chap. xvi. shews how they sho\ild 
be used. Chap. xv. shews the sinner called out by 
grace; that which follows shews what he, who is so 
called out, is to be as a heavenly man. This world is 
a scene of evil, and that which attaches to it is now 
ruin and not blessedness (see the rich man and 
Lazarus.) Adam had a place in this world, and Israel 
had a place in it ; but now that is all gone, and grace 
has come in, lifting those who are the subjects of it 
into another state of things altogether. Christ is 
justifying God. His nature being love, it was His joy 
to manifest grace to sinners. It is not here the joy 
of those brought back, but God's own joy in bringing 
the sinner back to Himself. This gives the tone to 
heaven. "There is joy" there in the poor wretched 
sinner brought back. 

I have no doubt we have, in these three parables, 
the unfolding of the ways of the Trmity. In the first 
is shewn the Son, as the Qood Shepherd, going after 
the sheep. In the second, the woman lighting a 



174 

oandle, and searching diligently till she find tlie piece 
of silver, we have the painstaking work of the Holj 
Ghost, lighting up a testimony in this dark world. 
The third, is the Fathez's reception of the retmning 
sinner, when brought back. In this, the prodigal 
son, we find the work in the sinner: but in the two 
previous ones, it is the sovereignty and the activity of 
grace, which goes out in love to find that iv^hich was 
lost, and brings the sinner back without his having 
anything to do in it. This persevering energy of love 
is in the Shepherd Himself — ^the Crood Shepherd car^s 
for the sheep, and gives it no trouble in getting home; 
He carries it on His shoulders. Herein is seen the 
perfect grace in which the Lord Jesus has so charged 
Himself with bearing our every burden, our every 
trial and difficulty all along the road. Christ is thus 
the Shepherd and Bishop of our souls. Then mark, 
in V. 6, the peculiar character of this joy. "He 
oalleth together His friends and neighbours, saying. 
Rejoice with me, for / have found my sheep which was 
lost." There could not be a more genuine picture, or 
a fuller expression of a person being happy than this. 
Joy always speaks out. 

In the second parable, we have the same general 
principle. The painstaking of the Holy Ghost is 
shewn m the acting of the woman who sought the lost 
piece of silver; the piece of silver could have neither 
trouble nor joy itself. The difference in the two is, 

r , r g tne woman cared enough for it to take 



175 

all this trouble to seanch it out. Thus does God's love 
act toward us, to bring us out of the dack world to 
Himself. What a work it is ta himg man's heart 
back to God! 

**' Twas great to speak a world from nav^t ; 
'Twas greater to redeem.'' 

If we look at man, as he is in himself, he could 
never get back to God. But look at what God is m 
Himself, and who or what can resist His grace ! Still 
it is the joy of the finder, and not of the thiog found. 
" Bejoice with me, for I have found my she^p-^my 
piece — ^that was lost." And in the case of the 
returning prodigal, who made the feast 1 Not the 
young man, but the father, saying to those in the 
house, '^ liet tis eat and be merry, for this my son was 
dead and is alive again, he was lost and is found." All 
caught the joy of the Father's heart, the servants, <bc., 
all except the unhappy, self-righteous elder brother 
(the Pharisee, the Jew), to whom the father replied, 
^' It was meet t^at toe should make nierry and be glad, 
for this thy brother was dead and is alive again," &c. 
It is the joy God has iu receiving a sinner back to 
Himself. In the parable of the prodigal son, by 
itself, the full glory of grace is not seen, as these three 
parables set it forth together. The case of the sheep is 
the Shepherd charging himself with the whole burden 
of the sheep: the silver is the painstaking of the 
Holy Ghost. Before actual departure, there was 
moral departure. When the young man left his 
&ther's house it was but a display of the evil in his 
heart. He was just as wicked when he asked for his 



176 

portion of goods, and crossed his Other's threshold, 
as when he ate husks with the swine in the £ar 
country: he was, doubtless, more miserable then, bat 
his heart was gone before. One man may run further 
into riot than another, but if we have turned our 
backs upon Crod, we are utterly bad In this sense 
there is no difference. 

The moral evil was just the same with Eve. She 
gave up God for an apple. She, virtually, thought the 
devil a much better fviend to her than Grod, and took 
his word instead of €k)d's. Satan is a liar from the 
beginning, and at the cross the Lord Jesus proved this. 
It cost the Lord His life, to prove that God was good. 
Christ came to contradict the devil's lie, which maji 
believed, and under which the whole world is lying. 
Grace and truth came by Christ and, at all cost, w^ere 
set up by Him on the cross. Man can do without 
God, and from the beginning, the whole world has 
been a public lie against God. Who could unriddle it? 
Look at creation, how it groans under the bondage of 
corruptions. Look at providence — ^how can 1 account 
for the goodness of God when I see an infant writhing 
with pain? How can I reconcile the two things? 
The villain prospers — ^the good man suffers. When I 
see Christ on the cross, I see what God is. Death 
came on man by reason of sin. But Christ takes my 
sin on His own sinless person, bows His head in death 
upon the cross, and thus sets aside that lie of Satan, 
"Ye shall not siurely die." Thus was God's truth 
re-established here below in the work and person of 
the Lord Jesus, and nowhere else. In Him I see 
holmess, truths and love, no matter at what cost. 



177 

The natural man is just like this prodigal; he 
spends his substance in the far oountry, and ruins 
hixnsell A man having £5,000 a year and spending 
ifi20,000, will seem very rich for the time; but look 
at the results. He is a ruined man. The moment 
man departed from God, he sold himself to Satan, and 
is spending his soul, his heart, away from God: — ^he 
even spends what God has given him ngcdnst God, and 
when he is thoroughly spent, and has nothing to live 
on, he begins to be m womt. *^ There arose a mighty 
famine in that land,'' and all the world feels that. 
Hvery sinner does not go to the same lengths of eating 
the swine's husks, but all are in the same condition of 
ruin. Every man has turned his back upon God, 
though all have not run to the same excess of riot, 
nor fallen into the same degradation. The famine 
never draws back to the Father's house. The pro- 
digal joined himself to a citizen of that country, not 
his father's country. " He would fain have filled his 
belly," &c., and *^ no man gave to him." Satan never 
gives; that is found where God's love is, who spared 
not His own son. When the prodigal thinks of his 
father's house, the whole work is morally done, though 
he is not back there yet. He turns, his heart was 
changed, and thus his whole desire was to get back to 
his father's house, from whence he had departed. He 
was not yet in the full Hberty of grace, so as to have 
peace and happiness, and he says to himself, ''make 
me as one of thy hired servants." He is brought to 
a sense of his guilt, and what was it? — ^feeding with 
the swine? Ko, that was the fruit of it, but his guilt 



178 

W9B in leaving his father's house, turning away &om 
God. Wlien he came to himseif he desired to return. 
This was truly a right wish, but the form it tooik in 
his mind, from his not yet knowing grace, was a leffcU 
one. " I am no more worthy to be called thtf aan; 
make me as one of tiiy hired servants." But the 
&ther does not give him time for that. We hear 
nothing more about hired servants; for when he was 
''yet a great w,ij off, his Mker saw him, aiid had com- 
passion on him, and ran and fell on his neck and 
kissed him." He could not have been a servant vntix 
the father's arms round his neck. It would have 
spoiled the father^ a feelings, if not the ioiCs, It was 
the joy of Him who was receiving back the sinner to 
Himself; and it is the knowledge of this which gives 
peace to the soul : nothing else doe& If a man does, 
not know love, he does not know God, for God is lave. 
The full revelation of CU)d is what we have in Christ. 
''Have I been so long tune with you, and yet hast 
thou not known me?" God acts from the joy and 
delight He has in Himself, in receiving back the 
sinner, and therefore He does not think of the rags 
but of the child he has got back again. What right 
has man to call God in question, when He indulges 
His own heart in the out-flow of love to the sinner ? 
You will never get peace by the mere act of oomiog 
back, but by learning the Father's mind about you. 
Could the prodigal get peace as he was coming back 
if the farther had not met him? Ko, aU along the 
road, he would be questioning, how wiU he receive 
mel — ^will he be angry with mel — ^will he spurn me 



179 

from his presencef^-^nd, if he does, what will become 
of mel "But when he was yet a great way off his 
father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell 
on his neck, and kissed him." If not so, he would 
have trembled even to knock at the door. When the 
Father's arms were on the son's neck was he defiled 
by the rags ? ^o; and he will not have the son bring 
rags irUo the house, but orders the best robe to be 
brought out of it. God sends B[is own Son out of 
heaven, and clothes the sinner; and, thus arrayed, the 
young man could bring credit to his father's house. 
Ajnd, STirely, if we are so clothed with Chriat, we shall 
do credit to God; and, in the ages fco come, He will 
shew the exceeding riches of His grace, in His kind- 
ness toward us, through Christ Jesus. 

" Let us eat and be merry." It is not, let him eat 
and be merry. Again, he says, " It was meet that we 
should make merry and be glad." There was but one 
exception to the delight in the house. The elder 
brother (the self-righteous person) was angry, and 
would not go in. God had shewn what he was in 
Himself, by His Son, in thus receiving the prodigal ;. 
and now He would shew what they were in themselves. 
We know the Pharisees murmured from the beginning, 
and the elder brother had no communion with his 
flEither; for if the father was happy, why was not he 
happy too ! He was angry, and would not go in. If 
such a vile person as the publican gets in, that makes 
my righteousness go for nothing. It is truly so; for 
where God's happiness is, there self-righteousness 
cannot come. If God is good to the sinner, what 



180 



my righteoasnessl He bad no sympathy ^with 
his father. He ought not to have said. My father is 
happy, so I must be. There should have been com- 
munion in the joy. *'Thy brother is back." That 
ought to have rung on his heart, but no. 

Then see the perfect patience of Crod's grace: the 
fftther goes out and entreats him. And do we not, aU 
through the Acts, see God entreating the Jews to be 
reconciled, although they had crucified His Soni So 
Paul, in 1 Thess. iL 15, 16, says that the Jews filled 
up the measure of their sins by forbidding the Apostles 
to speak to the Crentiles, that they might be saved. 
It is all sdfshinesa in the elder son. ''Thou never 
gavest me a kid that I might make merry with my 
friends." To which the fSetther replies, **Son, thou art 
ever with me, and all that I have is thine." The 
oracles of God, the covenants, the promises, God gave 
to the Jews, but He will not give up the right to 
shew His grace to sinners, because of the self-righteous 
selfir.hness of the Jews, or of any one else. 

Chap, xvi '' There was a certain rich man, which 
had a steward; and the same was accused unto him, 
that he had wasted his goods.'' Man, generally, is 
God's steward; and in another sense and in another 
way, Israel was God's steward, put into God's vine- 
yard, and entrusted with law, promises, covenante, 
worship, <&c. But in all, Israel was found to have 
wasted His goods. Man, looked at as a steward, has 
been found to be entirely unfaithful. Now, what is 
to be done % God appears, and in the sovereigni-ty of 
His grace, turns that which man has abused on the 



181 

earfch, into a means of heavenly fruit. The things of 
this world heing in the hands of man, he is not to be 
using them for the present enjoyment of Una world, 
iRrhich is altogether apart from God, but with a view- 
to the future. We ai-e not to seek, to possess the 
things now, but, by the right use of these things, to* 
make a provision for other times. "Make to your- 
selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness," 
&c. It is better to turn all into a friend for another 
day than to have money now. Man here is gone to 
destruction. Therefore now man is a steward out of 
place. " Give an account of thy stewardship, for thou 
mayest be no longer steward." He is discharged from 
stewardship — has lost his place, but not the things of 
which he has the administration. Here is something 
far better than the alchemy which would turn all into 
gold. For this is grace, turning even gold itself, that 
vile thing which enslaves men's hearts, into a means of 
showing love and getting riches for heaven. 

To Israel, God is saying, you have failed in the 
stewardship, therefore now I am going to put you out. 
In chap. XV. the elder brother, the Jew, would not go 
in ; and here, in chap, xvi., God is putting the Jew out 
of the stewardship. With Adam, all is over, but we 
have a title in grace to use, in a heavenly way, that 
to which we have no title at all as man. " If, there- 
fore, ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous 
mammon, who will commit to your trust the true 
riches V* *^ If ye have not been faithful in that which 
is another man's, who shall give you that which is 
your own ?" Our own things are the heavenly things; 



182 

the earthly things are ono^A^r'a ; and if yon do not 
use your title in grace in devoting in love these eartlily 
temporal goods, which are Twt your oum, how can Grod 
trusfc you with the spiritual things which are '^ $/aur 
cum 9" Our own things are all the glories of Christ — 
all that is Christ's is owr's, for ^' we are not redeemed 
with corruptible things, as nlver and gcUdy* <bc. We 
were bought with a price, it is true, not with money ^ 
but ''with the precious blood of Christ," &a Qod 
has not given us eternal life in order that we might 
be getting money. " No man can serve two masters," 
and if you want to be rich, you cannot be seeking to 
serve Qod. We have to do our duty in this world, 
but it is never our duty to serve mamm<m and desire 
riches. 

Now He goes on to show that there are these ever- 
lasting habitations, when the grand results will appear 
of what has been done here. The old thing is fleeting 
away, and the new coming in. The Jew, who refused 
to come to the feast, is loosenmg the latOy while 
rejecting prdce, (See chap, xv., verses 18 <fe 19.) 

Y. 19. '< A certain rich man, clothed in purple," &c. 
The thought here is Jewish, and the great principle i% 
that all God's dealings, as to distributive justice on 
the earth, were no longer in force, and that now He 
only deals in gra>ce. He draws aside the vail, to shew 
the result in another world. The rich man had his 
good things here — ^he belonged to the earth, and the 
haaket and the store belonged to him — his treasure 
'W'aa on earth, and his heart there too. But look into 
^e other world and see the result — " torment." The 



183 

good things baye chAnged now. *^ The rich man died 
and was buried; and in hell he lifted up his eyes, 
being in torment." *^ And there was a certain beggar, 
named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate, full of 
sores, Ac .... and the beggar died." Was be 
buried ? Not a word about it, for he belonged not to 
the earth. ''He was carried by the angels into 
Abraliam's bosom." He who had the '' evil things " 
down here, was carried to the best place in heaven. 
Then mark, it was not the afflictions, sores, &c., of 
Lazarus made him righteous, any more than ihe riches 
of the rich man made him unrighteous. God having 
done with the earthly things, no earthly circumstances 
are a mark of Grod's present favour, or the reverse; 
though, no doubt^ God's dealings with Lazarus were 
the means of bringing down his pride, breaking the 
will, <fec., and so preparing him for the place he was 
going to take him to. 

Verse. 31. "If they hear not Moses and the pro- 
phets," &c. Here this solemn truth comes out^ that 
even the resurrection of Christ will not convince them; 
for if they refuse to hear God*s word as they have it, 
they will not hear the testimony of God, even though 
one rose from the dead ; and we know they did not. 

This chap, xvi is to let in the light of another 
world upon God's ways and dealings in this. The 
whole world is bankrupt before God ; so that man is 
now trading with another's goods. When man re- 
jected Christ he was turned out of his stewardship. 
This is man's position. We should, therefore, dispose 
of everything now, in reference to the world to come. 



184 

aoootding to tiiis penniflBOD in gnee leYealed in 
diap. xriy to use tlie tiling of widdb. we hAine tlie 
administratioiL If we aie aenring mimnnw^ we shall 
not get the blessing of serving God, in the sense ai 
Crod's gifts; for it is leirib u tive justice here, in. a 
flense. If yon are not fidthlnl in MwUier man's ^«rho 
wiU give jou that whidi is yoor own? If joa lisve 
not been fidthlbl in the nnri^teons manuiKHiy -who 
will commit to yoor trust the true riches I If jon 
are loring money, joa cannot have your heart filled 
with Christ We are not to be '* slothful in bosi- 
nesB," bat *' fervent in spirit, serving the Loid ;" and 
for this He opens heaven to nsL Not as He said to 
Abraham, '' Unto a land that I wUl shew thea" He 
has shewn heaven imto ns^ having opened it to ns in 
grace. It is the revelation of grace that gives power 
over earthly things. May the Lord ke^ before ns a 
living Christy as oor light for guidance and salvation, 
to walk and trust in ! 



CHAPTER XVII. 

^We have seen the great principle of divine graoe in 
contrast with self-righteonsness, and the Jewish eco- 
nomy, which re^ed its Messiah, the Son of Grod, set 
aside to make way for bringing to light life and incor- 
ruption through the gospel. *' Then said he unto the 
disciples, it is impossible but that offences will come ; 
but woe unto him through whom they come." (Ver. 
1.) We enter here on the spirit and way of serving, 
now that the world to come was let in upon the con- 
duct and faith of the disciples in this world, for none 
could serve two masters. God is carrying on a work — 
in a little child perhaps — ^but it is His own work and 
individual faith is needed in the path of a rejected Christ. 
Among those who professed to follow TTim and TTir 
glory on the principles of faith, there would be alas ! 
many scandals. It was not now, nor yet, to be a reign 
of judicial power when the Son of man would gather 
out of His kingdom of all scandals and them which do 
iniquity. Satan's power is permitted, the exercise of 
faith is required. It is a time of proving, by the pre- 
valence of evil, that which lasts because of God. The 
cross must be taken and self denied. It is a hard 
lesson, but blessed when learned. The cross and the 
glory are always connected. The cross must be on 
the natural man, not on sin merely, so as to break the 
will. Christ had no will, showing perfectness; but 
we need the cross practically, as the means of com- 
munion by breaking down that which hinders. Then, 



186 

again, the whole system of the world is a stumbling- 
block : there is not one thing in it which is not caJcu- 
lated to turn the heart from God. Take the merest trifle 
— dress, vanities in the street, flattery of man, of brethren 
perhaps, ko, — ^all tend to elevate the flesh. What a 
diflerent thing is heaven opening on a rejected Saviour ! 
And this is our light and pathway through the world, 
for now the heavens are open to faith, as we pass 
through it to Him whom we see in glory. There is 
an active, energetic flow of God's love in carrying on 
souls. Is our walk a witness? Take care yon are 
not a stumbling-block. You may say, a person must 
be very weak to feel such or such a thing ; but it is 
the very reajson why he is to be cared for. The Lord 
give us never to hinder but to help the weak ! These 
things are the stumbling-block of the enemy, and the 
man by whom they come is so far an instrument of 
Satan. The Lord loves His little ones. Better for 
that man that a millstone were hanged about his neck 
and he cast into the sea» than that he should oflend one 
of them. 

Yer. 3. But suppose a person does something to 
stumble you, what then] "Take heed to yourselves." 
Yotir part is to forgive. Take heed to yourselves, 
jealous "and self-judging. '^ If thy brother trespass 
against thee, rebuke him ; and if he repent, forgive 
him." What! if he trespass often — "seven times in 
a day?" Yes, if he "seven times in a day turn again 
to thee, saying, I repent, thou shalt forgive him.'' 
Watch incessantly yourselves and see to it that the 
spirit of love (the power of imity and the bond of per- 



187 

fectness, as we know from elsewhere) be not broken, 
nor the spirit of holiness, that the peace be not false. 
Blessed path ! what condescension to our weakness and 
danger in the introduction of grace, and the moral 
judgment of present things, which are the aliment of 
the flesh and the domain of the world ! Watchfulness 
agamst self and grace to others bring us through, rising 
like a life-boat above all breakers. 

Ver. 5 — 10. In such a position there would be need 
of faith and the energy proper to it. The apostles led 
of God, though perhaps seeing but a pretty part of the 
difficulty and with a confused sense of this new position, 
pray for an increase of faith. The Lord answers bj 
setting forth the fulness of its energy : for faith real- 
izes a power which is not in the person and thus acts 
without limit. He applies it also, though in general 
terms, to the removal of the obstacles of a system, 
which might present the form of what was good and 
great, but fruitless. In every need we may draw upon 
God. All consists in looking simply to Him. All 
things are possible to him that believes. For it is God 
accomplishing His will, and He has willed to accom- 
plish it by man and to honour Himself in man, after 
being dishonoured of Satan in and by man ; but this 
in faith according to His will, till the Lord Jesus re- 
turns in power and glory. God is at work, and if you 
are co-workers under Him, you could believe that He 
is and say. Let this be done and this. Is it nothing 
to wield God's power ? K you know not what it is to 
be opposed by Satan, you will feel how blessed it is ^o 
call in the power of God. Your place and work may 



188 

be very humble— outside — ^no matter what : still you 
need Grod*s power to be little. What the Liord says in 
Terses 7 — 10 is not applicable to a careless servant. If 
he has neglected his work, he is a slothful one. J3ut I 
am an unprofitable servant when I have done all that 
I am commanded. Am I neglected 1 It is to try me. 
Something needs it. Perhaps I want to learn that Grod 
can do without me. Now that Christ is rejected, God 
is at work. If He uses me, it is a great honour ; if He 
lays me by because self was elated, it is a great mercy. 
He is saying, as it were. Be satisfied with myself, be 
content to know / love thee. Are you content with 
His love % Do you want man's honour or your own 1 
Remember that, when you have done ally it is the time 
to say, " unprofitable servant !" 

Ver. 11 — 19. The history which follows shows that 
when God brings in new power, those who have bad 
the previous privileges are the last to rise above them 
into what is better. But there is a faith wrought of 
Grod in the heart which sets free from the subsidiary 
forms thrown aroimd God's will in the past economy. 
Thus, recognizing God in Jesus; it carries the soul 
beyond the law of a carnal commandment and asso- 
ciates it with Him in whom is the power of an endless 
life. It occupies us with His person who is above all 
planting us not in dishonour of the law, (" yea, we 
establish the law" through faith,) but in the liberty 
'therewith the truth — ^the Son — ^makes free. All were 
cleansed by the word of divine power. The nine went 
^^ to show themselves to the priests, acting on the 
'^ord of Jesus and thus far in faith But the Samaritan 



189 

stranger perceived God's glory in what had taken plaoe^ 
and so tinned back to Jesus and aloud glorified Qod. 
The others owned the power which had come, but 
remained in their religious habits and associations. 
He, less pre-occupied with outward institutions, re- 
turned to the source of power, not to its shadow and 
witness, which nature always uses to hide God. He 
had experienced divine power in JesuS, and instead of 
merely enjoying the gift, he most humbly, but in the 
boldness and propriety of faith, went back to own the 
Giver. " He fell down on his face at his feet, giving 
him thanks." He wanted no priest. The priest did 
not, could not cleanse, but only discern and pronounce 
a man clean. Evil had levelled the Jew and the 
Samaritan. They were alike cast out of the presence 
of divine communioD by the leprosy which a£Qdcted 
them. But He who healed lepers under the law was 
He who gave the law, and the word of Jesus at once 
recognized the law and manifested the Jehovah who 
gave it. The gratitude of faith was a readier reasoner 
than the instruction of the law ; for the blessing afforded 
by the work and presence of Jesus was to the nine the 
means of keeping up Jewish distinction, to the tenth 
it was the evidence of divine goodness. To him, there- 
fore, it was complete deliverance. He was by faith 
arrived in grcbce at the fountain-head from which the 
law itself proceeded, and was let go in peace, made 
whole by his faith having liberty from God and with 
God, giving thanks and glorifying Him, and ^thal 
knowing how acceptable it was in His sight 
How many reasons might have been pleaded for 



190 

going on and not returning to Jesus ! How mi^t 
the nine Jews have said. Ton are ordered to go and 
show yonrself to the priest ! But fidth goes straig^ht 
to the heart of €rod, and there finds all grace and a 
dismissal in the liberty of grace. To him who retnzned 
to Jesus, cleansed and with heart-felt thanks, the priests 
were left behind. In spirit and figure the healed Sama- 
riiian was passed into another system by faith — the 
grace and liberty of the gospeL It is blessed thus to 
be at the source of power and goodness, and there only 
does Grod put now those who belieye. If under the 
law before, we are become dead to it by the body of 
Christ that we should belong to another — ^to Him who 
is raised from the dead. It is this way alone that 
glorifies Qody however men may plead the latter. Thus 
only can we joy in Grod through our Lord Jesus Christ, 
by whom we have now received (not the law, but) tlie 
reconciliation. In Him, thus known and enjoyed, we 
have all and more than all than the priests ever con- 
ceived. We have communion with the Father and 
the Son by faith in God fully revealed. We have to 
do with HLm in heaven now, not with a temple and 
priests on earth. " Arise go thy way." You have 
found the person and glory of the Lord. You are be- 
yond the priests and the temple, your faith has pierced 
the veil and founcj One greater than both. The rest 
went their way, cleansed, to be under the law. Stupi- 
fied by Judaism, they did not return to glorify God. 
All this, at the point of the gospel we are arrived at, 
is full of importance. It is another light thrown on 
the passing away of the law and of that dispensation. 



191 

In ike next verses (20 et seq.) the question was ac- 
tually raised as to the coming of Crod's kingdom. The 
Pharisees asked when it should come, and the Lord 
places them on their plain responsiblity. '^ The king- 
dom of God Cometh not with observation," or outward 
show. It should not be said, Lo here ! or Lo there ! 
for that kingdom was then there among them. The 
king was speaking to them. Ought they not to have 
known Him because He came in grace? If He had 
humbled Himself to know their sorrows and to die for 
their sins, was that a reason for not decerning His 
greatness and moral perfection manifested in ten thou- 
sand ways ? Did not His holy love to the poor and 
guilty prove, plainly enough, who He was 9 If man's 
heart had not been opposed to all that was the delight 
of God in the kingdcnn, if his eye had not been blind to 
all that was lovely and of good report, he would have 
felt that the lower Christ stooped, the more wonder^l 
were His works. 

To His disciples He had other things to say. He 
was rejected and leaving them. Suffering awaited 
them. Trying as their position might now be as the 
companions of His rejection, the days would come when 
they would long in vain for one of those days when, 
they had enjoyed blessed and sweet intercourse with 
the Son of man. They would, as Jews in the land^ 
feel the dijSerence. Then Satan, to allure and deceive 
in "tiiat day, would lead men to say," Lo here,*' or ** Lo 
there;" but the disciples would know its falsehood. 
There was no hope for the nation which rejected Christ. 
The king had been there but refused; He was no longer 



192 



1 



tt 



here" or ** there." This daj the Son of man ^rould 
be as the lightning flaghing from one quarter under 
heaven to another. Bat first He must sufifer manT 
things and be rejected of this generation, Le., the un- 
believing Jews. 

It is evident that while the Lord takes this name of 
Son of man to His disciples as revealing a relation 
higher and wider than that of Messiah, (the link of 
which was broken and gone in the nation's minons 
rejection of Him,) the whole of this instruction is 
Jewish and shall find its accomplishment properly in 
a godlj remnant of the latter daj. The christian part 
is not spoken of here, for that is association after a 
heavenly sort with Christ, and we have its great 
moral outlines, at least, in Luke xii. Here we are on 
the ground of responsibilty, not of heavenly grace. 
We must separate the Church's place tmth Christ from 
the government of the world In/ Christ. The very 
chaiacter of the predicted delusion confirms this dis- 
tinction. For if men said to the Christian, " Here is 
Christ," he would instantly know that it was of Satan, 
because tve are to meet Him not here or there on 
earth, but in the air. (1 Thess. iv.) But this is not 
the case when you come to the government of the 
world. There the hope rests on Jewish groimd, and 
then the witnesses for God must go through tribula- 
tion such as has never been. Now, unless expressly 
forewarned, thej/ would naturally look here or there 
for the Deliverer: for in that character His feet shall 
stand upon the Mount of Olives, and He shall come 
to Zion and shall come out of it. " Jehovah shall send 



193 

iihe rod of thj strength out of Zion : rule thou in the 
midst of thine enemies/' All this differs from the 
Christian's hope and his desire meanwhile ; for u^ do 
not -want our enemies destroyed, but converted, and 
Ave are looking to be taken from them all to heaven 
with the Saviour, instead of waiting for Him to join 
ajid exalt us under His reign upon the earth. 

But, again, the subject here is neither the past siege 
of Jerusalem nor the future judgment of the dead. 
Titus' capture of the city was not like the lightning, 
but a long, fierce, hardly-contested struggle. Nor were 
the Jews, up to the moment of the final stroke, in a 
state of ease and carnal security, resting on the con- 
tinuance of things as they were, as in the days of Noah 
and Lot. Suddenness of judgment is its first feature, 
certainty is the next, discriminating certainty, neither 
of which things could be fairly said of the Romans. 
Without or within, at rest or at work, men or women, 
it mattered not, God would bum up the chaff and pre* 
serve the wheat: the one should be taken and the other 
left Next, there is a local, earthly stamp, which 
excludes the scene from that of the great, white- 
throne judgment. For there is no resemblance between 
the judgment of the dead and the deluge or the fate 
of Sodom. It is the end of the age, not of the world, 
and is a judgment on a temporal people, and more 
especially on their city ; for they were not to return 
into the house, if on the housetop, and if in the field; 
they were not to turn back. None of these things 
could be said of the dead, any more than the bed or 
the mill. It would be no time for human motives;. 



194 

artifioes, or cuncessioiiB. (Ver. 33.) Faithfalness to 
die Lord and His testimony wonld be tiie true and 
saving wisdom. The day of the Son of man's revela- 
ftion was in question — ^His judgment of the qoick, and 
especially of a generation which has rejected and caused 
Him to suffer. If they asked, "where?' the scdemn 
word for conscience was, where the bod j, the corpse 
was, the swift, inevitable judgments of €rod n^onld 
Ml. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 1—34. 

We saw, from verse 20 to the end of the last chapter 
(xvii), that the kingdom of God was presented, first, 
in the person of Jesus, as a question of faith, not of 
outward show, nor of a lo, here ! or lo, there ! and, 
secondly, in the way of judgment, which should de- 
liver the remnant by the execution of divine vengeance 
on their enemies. 

Verses 1 — 8. The first eight verses of our chapter 
complete the prophetic warning, and show that the 
resource of the righteous in the last days will be 
prayer. Nevertheless, though the parable has that 
special application to the future oppression of God's 
witnesses who will then be found in Jerusalem, the 
instruction, as usual with this Gospel, is made general 
so as to suit any or all kinds of difficulty by which 
men might be tried. " And he speaks a pai*able unto 
them, to this end, that men ought always to pray and 
not to faint." Faith would be put to the test. If 
God were looked to, and not merely the blessing, men 
would not faint, though there was no answer. They 
would go on, always looking up, though all seemed 
against them. The widow represents those who have 
no human resource : their resource would be constancy 
in prayer. Such will be the godly seed in Israel, for 
it is the remnant, not the Church, which is here 
meant They will plead with the judge to avenge 
them of their adversary. Their patience and confi- 
dence may be sorely tried, but they will not cry^ 



196 

in vam. '^ And the Lord said, Hear what the un- 
just judge saith. And shall not God avenge his 
own elect, which cry day and night unto him." 
He maybe slow in taking up their cause; but inrheu 
once He shall rise up, a short work will He make 
on the earth. Meanwhile, patience must have its 
perfect work. In Jesus it had its full perfection. 
There was the rejection and the reproach of men, the 
forsaking of disciples, the power of Satan, the cup of 
Grod's wrath: but He went through all to the glory 
of Crod. In detail we, too, have to be sifted, and to 
find all circumstances against us but God for us^ yet 
more than if we had outward help, miraculous power, 
the Church all right, <kc. Even joy may hinder our 
entire dependence on God, making us forget, practically, 
that the flesh profits nothing. When no circumstances 
lead you to have any hope, is your hope then in Him? 
The llesh may get on for a long while, as in Saul; 
but faith only can wait^ with all against it. It is 
then the divine life depending on divine power. Thus 
it was in Christ pre-eminently. "I believed, there- 
fore have I spoken." He went down into the dust of 
death, and has introduced a wholly new order of 
things. And we, having the same spirit of faith — we 
Also believe, and therefore speak. " Wherefore, hence- 
forth know we no man after the flesh; yea, though 
we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now hence- 
forth know we him no more. Therefore if any man 
be in Christ, he is a new creation." Christ is dead, 
risen, and now set down at the right hand of God. 
Having this life, we are put to the test practically to 



197 

learn the lesson of death and resurrection, where no- 
thing but God can sustain. 

In the parable there are two considerations. If 

tlie unjust judge hear and act for the defenceless, be 

tlie motive what it may, will not God ? But this is 

far from all. God has His aftections, not onlj His 

character, but objects of His delight. "And shall not 

God avenge His own elect f &c. It never can become 

the righteous God, who taketh vengeance to make light 

of evil or let the wicked go unpunished. For then 

how shall He judge the world ? He notices the cry 

from the oppressed day and night, and it is the cry of 

His own elect. " I tell you that he will avenge them 

speedily." But will there be the faith that expects 

His interference 1 They will cry from distress, and God 

will hear. Nevertheless, the question is raised, WiD 

there be, when the Son of Man cometh, that faith on 

the earth, which is founded on God known in peaceful 

communion? Will it not rather be the cry of the 

righteous, in bitterness of spirit, a cry forced out of 

them, and not the cry of desire ? 

Ver. 9. We have, next, the moral features of, and 
suited to, the kingdom, the characters which are in 
harmony or discord with the state of things introduced 
by grace. The Pharisee and the Publican set forth, 
not the doctrine of atonement or of justification by 
faith, but the certainty that self-righteousness is dis- 
pleasing to God, and that lowliness because of our sin 
is most acceptable in His sight. The Pharisee does 
not set God aside. He " stood and prayed thus with 
himself: God, I thank thee." But then he thanks 



198 

Ckxl for what he is, not for what God is. The onlj 
hope of the publican was in God Himself. He was 
very ignorant, no doubt, but he had the right spirit to 
get at God. Light had broken in and shown he was a 
sinner, and he submitted to the painful conyiction, 
and confessed the truth 'of his state to God. He was 
oast on God's mercy to his soul. He dared not 
appeal to justioe, he did not ask indifference, but that 
mercy which measures the sin and forgives it. The 
revelation of grace had not yet come in, the work of 
reconciliation was not yet done, so that the publican 
'Stood " afar off;" but his heart was touched, and God 
was what he wanted. If a soul is brought to a sense 
of sin now, it need not, and ought not, to stand a£ar 
off. The grace of God that bringeth salvation has 
appeared. !N'evertheless, though he did and could not 
thus know grace, the publican gives God and himself 
their true character. It was not full knowledge, but 
the knowledge, as far as it went, was true. " I tell 
you this man went down to his house justified rather 
than the other; for every one that exalteth himself 
shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall 
be exalted." Universal truth! but where so shown 
ads in Jesus? For if the jGbrst man, exalting himself^ 
was abased to hell. He who was God, made Himself 
of no reputation, humbled Himself to the death of 
the cross. Wherefore God also hath highly exalted 
him, &G. 

In one sense, men cannot humble themselves, be- 
cause they are sinners already, and cannot go lower; 
a saint may. True humility is forgetfulness of self. 



199 

This is illustrated yet n^ore by the incident that 
fblloi^s: (verses 15 — 17,) where they brought infants 
to Jesus, that He would touch them. It Js the lowli- 
ness of real insignificance, as the former was because 
of sinfulness. Who would be troubled with beings 
of such little consequence? Not the disciples, but 
Jesus. The Lord delighted in them, and that is the 
spirit of the kingdom of God. And here, too, a 
general moral maxim comes out. If a man is to enter 
that kingdom, all confidence in self must be broken 
down, and the truth be received simply, as a little 
child hears its mother. If it is not so, God and man 
have not their place. When He speaks, all I have to 
do is to listen. This is the humility of nothingness, 
as the other was on account of sin. 

Next (verses 18 et seq.) comes the question of 

doing in order to eternal Hfe, not salvation for a lost 

one, but that which searches the heart to the bottom. 

The young man was a lovely character, looked at as a 

creature. For if there are the ravages of sin in the 

world, there are traces of God there too. This ruler 

did not see God in Christ. Morally attracted, he 

came to learn to do good, without a doubt of his own 

competence. In Jesus he only saw a perfectly good 

man, and one therefore eminently able to advise and 

direct him in the same path. Sin, on the one hand, 

and grace, on the other, were altogether ignored by 

him. He knew neither himself nor God. There is 

no man good. All are gone astray. Man is a sinner, 

and needs God to be good to him: he is incompetent 

to do the good which satisfies Qod. The Lord took up 



200 

die yomig roler on his own assumption tihat lie oould 
do good for tbe pmpose of bringing out wliat he ^was. 
Tlie good Master that he had appealed to puts ^o the 
test what his heart reallj is. ^^ Yet Lu^est thou one 

thing: sell all that thoa hast, and oomey 

follow me." Would he give np sdf-impoxtanoe? 
After all, he loved his riches too welL '' He vras verj 
aorrowfal; for he was very rich.'* Hiad not such 
things been promised as a blessing to the Jews! 
C9uiBt shows them to be a snare. But then thej* do 
mnch good! Naj, are they good for yonr heart? 
It is not that they maj not be used in grace; bnt tiie 
man did not know his own heart Crood is not there, 
nor the strength to produce it. Every motive which 
governs man is rooted up by the cross. But all wdthin 
is bad, and I can never work a thing fit for €rod 
out of bad materiaL I need God therefore, Yrho can 
give me a new and holy nature, who can be merciful 
to me because He is above all sin. The spring of all 
good is, that it flows from Grod and not man. 

It is an impossibility, as far as man is concerned, 
that any should be saved. Sin has ruined man and all 
his hopes. If one looks at tbe means he can avail 
himself of, they are wholly useless to save him. But, 
"the things which are impossible with men,'* said the 
Saviour, "are possible with God." Such is the sole 
foundation for the sinner. 

On the other hand (verses 28—30), if Peter is 
quick to speak of the devotedness of the disciples, in 
Wmg all and following Jesus, the Lord shows the 
oertemty that every loss, for the kingdom's sake, will 



201 

turn into majiifold gain, both now and in the world to 
come. 

But He binds it all up (verses 31 — 33) with what 
-was coming on His own person. They were going up 
to Jerusalem, but for what? He, the Messiah, " shall 
be delivered unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, 
and spitefully entreated, and spitted on; and they 
shall scourge him, and put him to death." All hopes 
must end here: "yea, though we have known Christ 
after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no 
more." Even He, if He is to deliver the lost, must 
come down to the dust of death. Christ has no asso- 
ciation with sinful man. How then can He deliver? 
He must die for us; He cannot take corruption into 
union with Himself. A living Christ, we may 
reverently say, could not deliver us, consistently with 
God's nature and character; redemption . was a neces- 
sity. "Except a com of wheat fall into the ground 
and die, it abideth alone; but if it die, it bringeth 
forth much fruit," 

But if it was the only means of a holy salvation, 
man's full wickedness came out in the rejection and 
death of Christ. He hated what is in God and TTim 
who is God — ^hated both the Son and the Father. All 
question of human justice is settled and negatived for 
ever. 

Alas! the disciples understood none of these things, 
neither Hi a shame and death, nor His resurrection. 
It was the accomplishment of what the prophets had 
written concerning the Son of Man. But they knew 
not what He said nor what they wrote. The death 

o 



202 

of Chiist wocild manifest what man was, and wliat 
€rod was; His resonection would evince the power ci 
life that can deliv^ the dead. But He was not 
nnderstood. 

Verse 34 closed that part of our gospel which shows 
the bringing in of the new and heavenly dispensation. 
With verse 35 we enter on the historical scoonnt of 
the Lord's final interoonrse with the Jews. " Son of 
man" was the general character of the gospel, but now, 
in the midst of Israel, He takes up that of Son d 
David. Jericho was the first place Israel had to say 
to when thej (grossed the Jordan, and a special curse 
was pronounced against it. But Israel had not 
walked in obedience, and the Messiah enters not as the 
king in outward glory, but as the rejected Jesus of 
Nazareth, with blessing for the remnant that received 
Him in faith. 

'^ And it came to pass that as he was nigh unto 
Jericho," &g. It is not come nigh, as if it were neces- 
sarily His first approach, but a general expressi<m, just 
as applicable to His being nigh on His leaving the city. 
(Oomp. Matt, and Mark). '^ A certain blind man sat 

by the way side, begging and he cried, saying, 

Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me." He 
was rebuked by many, but there was the persevercmee 
of faith, and he cried so much the more, " THou Son 
of David, have mercy on me." Here was a sample of 
the gathering to the name that Israel rejected. The 
eye of the blind was opened then, as it will be in the 
remnant by and by. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Next, we have the account of Zaccheus (chap. xiz. 
1 — 10), for the Spirit of God did not tie Luke to the 
mere order of time; and morally viewed, it was the 
fitting sequel to the healing of the blind man. Found 
only in this gospel, it is a striking illustration of the 
grace which receives a man, no matter how low, and in 
the face of Jewish prejudices. For a publican, a rich 
chief of the publicans, was justly an object of abhor- 
rence to those who regarded him as the expression of 
Gentile dominion. All was wrong through sin, and 
Israel was not humbled. Still it was a sad position 
for an Israelite, however honest and conscientious 
Zaccheus might be in it. But it was the day of grace, 
and ^^he sought to see Jesus." There were difficulties^ 
hindrances in him and around; but faith perseveres 
in spite of opposition. As the blind man was bevU 6fl 
his object, so was the rich publican set on seeing Jesus. 
This marks the ^orkiug of God! 8 Spirit — ^the appre- 
hension of the worth of the object. We want it and 
more of it, we know enough to want more. It is n 
appetite produced by the Holy Spirit. It is a ter- 
rible thing if we, as Christians, have not this craving, 
this hungering and thirsting after a greater enjoyment 
of God; for where this is not, deadness and apathy of 
soul hiave come in. 

Jesus came to the place, and saw him and said unto 
him, ^^ Zaccheus, make haste and come down; for to- 
day I must abide at thy house* And he made hasten 



204 

and came down, and reoeived liim joyfully." Se had 
not yet the full knowledge of Jesus, but his desire 
had been met and he had joy. It was neither law 
nor glory, but a hidden Messiah come in full grace. 
There was abundant evidence who He was, but in 
grace He was come down where they were. No mat- 
ter what people thought. Finding Jesus is everything. 
Zaccheus had the answer to the want which divine grace 
had created. Grace does not give at first the know- 
ledge of Christ's work: there may be little or no 
understanding that we are made the righteousness of 
God in Him. Hence the first joy often wanes, be- 
cause, when conscience is accused, I want the conscious- 
ness of that righteousness. The first joy is constantly 
that of discovering that we possess the felt need 
of the soul for Christ; but the full question as to 
righteousness may still have to be met in the con- 
science, though of course every believer in possessing 
Christ does possess divine righteousness. Neverthe- 
less, much as there is to learn, there is joy. New 
interests are awakened, new desires arise, a new in- 
sight is obtained into good and evil. When there is 
a deep sense of what it is to be lost and saved, the world 
(man) is a light matter. But when the pressure on 
the conscience is removed, too often natiu*e resumes a 
sort of place, and then Christ is not all and everything 
to the saint. 

Zaccheus' heart is opened. There is confidence, which 
tells itself out. There might be ever so much honest 
effort to satisfy conscience in his false position: hut 
after all what a plaoe it was ! Men murmured. The 



205 

Liord passed all over. Self-defence was needless. The 

Xiord did not accuse, and speaks of nothing but the 

salvation that was that day come to the house. Zac- 

cheus was a son of Abraham, and the Son of man was 

come to seek and to save that which was lost. What 

could a Pharisee object ? There had been a work with 

the conscience of Zaccheus, but the Son of man was 

come and salvation was the word. He brings it. He 

gave what Zaccheus had little thought of. He was 

come to meet the need He had created. He was come 

to seek, i.e., to produce the desire; and to souoe^ i.e., to 

meet that desire. 

The Lord was now nigh to Jerusalem, and so He 
added a parable to correct the thought that the 
kingdom of God was immediately to appear; for 
Jerusalem is the city of the great king, and the 
question of His rejection woidd be closed there. He 
shows, on the contrary, that He was going away — 
going to a far country, to heaven, where He was to 
receive the kingdom and to return. The time was 
not come to set up the kingdom on earth. Meanwhile, 
the business of His servants was to trade with the 
money He delivered them. When returned, having 
received the kingdom. He assigns them places accord- 
ing to their faithfulness ; for in Luke it is a question 
of man's responsibility; in the corresponding parable 
of Matthew, God's sovereignty is the point. Differ- 
ence of gifts appears in Matthew, difference of rewa/rds 
in Luke. In Luke each servant receives a mina from 
the Lord; in Matthew all who gained in trading 
enter alike the joy of their Lord. Here the whole 



206 

lortse ia, occupy. "Occupy till I come." Our position 
Is flerving a rejected Saviour till He oomes agam. TTe 
are not yet to share in the glory of the kingdcMn. 
Wben He retoms, all will be disposed of* impartianT, 
and there will be that whicb answers to authoritj 
over ten cities and over five. The ligliteoiisiiess of 
0<Hi is the same for ns as for Panl; but as there is 
Tery difierent service, and different measirres of fidel- 
ity, so there will be speciality of reward. :5^o doubt 
it is grace that works, still here there is reward of 
fidthfal service. The secret of all service is the dne 
appreciation of the Master^s grace. If one fears him 
as '^ an austere man," there is unfaithfulness too, even 
on one's own principles. 

Verse 26 is a universal principle. When through 
grace there is the realization in our souls of the truth 
presented to us, we are of those " who haveP But if 
a truth comes before a man, and he talks about it 
without its being mixed with faith in the heart, even 
that he hath shall be taken away from him. Truth, 
if it reveals Christ, humbles me and deals with the 
evil within. Then it is not only Christ as an object 
outside me, but a Uving Christ in my soul. Know- 
ledge, which has not power over the conscience, only 
puffs up. If truth be not acted on, it troubles the 
conscience. But how often one sees a conscience, 
havinglost the light, quite easy at a lower standanl 
than before, rejoicing that it has lost its trouble. 
^^^^"^f^*<>f truth be lost with it! The soul 

-^^^« J ?7^ *^** which had exercised the con- 
science, and thua *-l^ t_ i 

^ne whole standard, prmciple, and 



207 

lif^ are lowered, and opportunities of wioning. Christ 

lost for ever. Holding last the tru^— fOhrist>-^I 

have Him as it were a part of myiael^ and learn to 

liate the evil and to delight in the good; so that I 

get more, till I grow up into Chmt, into, the measure 

of the stature of His fulness^ Common duUes do 

not rob us of Him : from these th« heart returns with 

fresh delight into its own centre. It is the heart 

clinging to vanity that spoils our joy ; it is aaiything 

which exalts self and lowers Chitixft— an idle tiiought, 

even, if allowed in the heart. 

As to ihe citizens, the Jews on whom he had rights 
as king, their will was against Hiio, not only hating 
Him there while ajnong them, hut above all, sending 
the message after him. We will not have this man to 
reign over us. Unsparing vengeance must take its 
oourse on them in Hia presence. 

Verse 28. Jesus enters Jerusalem as Messiah. 

His rights as Lord of all were to be asserted and 

acfted on (verses 29— ^6)» He presents Himself ibr 

the last time to Israel,. in the lowliiiess of grace, which 

was of far greater importance than the kingdom. This 

gives rise to the most marked coiiottrast between the 

disciples and the Pharisees., The whole multitude of 

the disciples began to rejoice andj^niise God with loud 

voice, saying, ^' Blesseil be the King that cometh in 

the na^e of the Lord : peace in heavesou and glory in 

the highest." Some cf the Pharisees appeal to Him to 

rebuke the disciplea, but learn from His lips that if 

these were silent, the very stones would cry out. 

There must be a testimuny to His glc^ (ver. 37 — 40). 



208 

When Jesus was bom, angels announced it to the 
poor of the flock, and the heavenly host praised Grod, 
saying, GI017 to God in the highest, and on earth peace 
— ^good pleasure in men. Such will be the result, and 
the angels anticipate it, without reference to the hin- 
drances, or to the means. But Christ was rejected 
here below ; and now the disciples say, " Peace in heaven 
and glory in the highest." When the question of power 
is raised, in order to establish the kingdom, there will 
be war then. (Rev. xii). In fact there can be no peace 
in heaven till Satan and his host are cast out. Then 
will the King be established in power, when the ob- 
stacles shall be taken out of the way. Psa. cxviii. 
celebrates this, His mercy enduring for ever, spite of 
all the people's sins. It is the song of the latter day. 
If God sends peace to the earth in the person of His 
Son, it is in vain, not as to the accomplishment, but as 
to present effect. Meanwhile, to faith there is peace 
in heaven, and when this is asserted in power against 
the evil spirits in the heavenly places, there will be 
blessing indeed. 0, what a time will it be ! What a 
relief to the working of God's grace ! For now it is 
ever toil and watching What, always ? Yes, al ways ; 
and that is not the rest. But then it will be, as sure 
as God takes His great power and reigns. "The Lord 
shall hear the heavens," <fea Hos. iL There will be an 
unbroken chain of blessing, and that too on earth. It 
will not be one " building, and another inhabiting," 
but blessing flowing down and around to the lowest and 
the least. Till then, as now, the word is suflering in 
grace, not victorious power. JNTever fear persecution: 



209 

it vnll make your face shine as an angel's. But God 
could not be silent if His own Son were cast out. He 
might leave Him to suffer, but not without a testimony. 
If there were no others, the stones would speak. And 
so if we are faithful and near to Christ, that will turn 
for a testimony. 

Next (ver. 41 — 44) we have, not the cursing of the 
fig tree, but the Spirit of grace, in the Lord's weeping 
over the city. The counsels of God will surely be 
accomplished, but we ought also to know His real 
tenderness in Jesus. Those tears were not in vain, 
whatever the appearances. It was the time of Jeru- 
salem's visitation, but she knew it not. "We ought as 
having the mind of Christ, to know when and how to 
interfere spiritually. We are the epistle of Christ, 
whereby the world should be able to read what God is. 
Christ manifested Him perfectly. But what did He 
find in the people 1 See verses 45, 46. God declares 
His house to be one of prayer : men — ^the Jews — had 
made it a den of thieves. It was a terrible moral 
estimate, but this is the true way to judge; i.e. having 
God's word to take facts as they are. "We are ignorant 
and morally incapable of judging without the word of 
God. Let the eye be fixed on Christ and our judgment 
be formed on things around by the word. 



CHAPTER XX. 

The first question raised ^was bj the scribes, as to 
the authority of Christ and its source. Jesus 
questions them about the baptism of John : Was it 
from heaven or of man? They reasoned without 
conscience. They owned their incompetency, rather 
than acknowledge TTia Messiahship. The simple child 
of God receives the word as certainly as Christ gives it 
Reliance on God's word is the only sure ground. How 
can you be certain ? God Jias said it. If G<xi's speaking 
requires proof, I must have something more sure and 
true than God. Is the Church % Alas ! alas ! ... If 
God cannot speak so as to claim authority, without 
another to accredit what He says, there is no such thing 
as faith. 

The parable of the husbandmen (9 et seq.) sets forth 
the Lord's dealings with Israel, to whom the vineyard 
was first let, and, upon the rejection of " the Heir," the 
gift of it to others. Nor was this all. The rejected 
stone becomes the head of the comer. Wbosoever fell 
on that stone, shoidd be broken ; but on whomsoever 
it fell, utter destruction would be the result. The past 
sins of Jerusalem illustrate the first : for the second 
we must wait for the execution of judgment when the 
Lord appears. 

Verse 19. The question of tribute to Caesar was very 
subtile. They used the effect of their own wickedness 
to tempt the Lord. Abstractedly, the Jews ought not 
to have been subject to the Gentiles. And, moreover, 



211 

the Messiah was come, the Deliverer of Israel. If He 
said obey the Gentiles, where was His delivering power? 
If He said Bebel, they would have had an excuse to 
deliver Him to Pilate. Because of Israel's sin, God 
has broken down the key-stone of nations, and given 
power to the Gentile. The Jew has been rebellious 
tinder the sentence, and ever craving deliverance from 
their thraldom. But the Lord answered with divine 
wisdom. He put them exactly in the place where 
their sin had put them : Caesar's things are to be 
rendered to Caesar, and God's things to God. 

After settling the question as to this world between 
God and the people, He next meets the Sadducean or 
sceptical difficulty as to the next world. (Yerses 27 — 
38). The Lord shows the place of the risen saints in 
entire contrast with the world. The idea of a general 
resurrection is set aside. If all rise together, there is- 
uncertainty, a common judgment, &c. ; but if the saints 
are raised by themselves because they are children of 
God, leaving the rest of the dead for another and dis- 
tinctive resurrection — a resurrection of judgment — all 
is changed. No passage of Scripture speaks of both 
rising together. The resurrection is that which most 
of all distinguishes, and this for ever. It is the grand 
testimony to the difference between good and bad. The 
saint will be raised because of the Spirit of Christ that 
dwells in him — ^the application to his body of that power 
of life in Christ which has already quickened his soul. 
It is a resurrection from among the dead, as was Christ's. 
So here, "they which shall be accounted worthy to 
obtain that age," for such it is, " and the resurrection 



from the dead." *' They are equal to the angels, and 
are the children ef Grod." Luke adds another chjucac- 
teristic point omitted elsewhere ; *' all live nnto him." 
It is the present, blessed Uving nnto Crod of thcMse who 
have died, and await the resurrection from among the 
dead. 

Then in verses 41 — 44 the Lord puts His question. 
How is David's Son, David's Lord? This was just 
what the Jews could not understand. It was the hinge 
on which turned the change in the whole moral system. 
He had taken the place of the holy dependent One, a 
pilgrim as others, and He had drunk of the brook by 
the way. He was going on in meekness and quietness, 
but living by the refreshments which came from Crod 
H^-i Father. Thus having emptied Himself, humbled 
Himself, He is now exalted by Grod. This great 
universal principle, " he that humbleth himself shall 
be exiilted, and he that exalteth himself shall be abased," 
is fully exemplified in the two Adams. The first 
Aclam, man's nature, would exalt itself to be " as God," 
until in its full ripeness antichrist will exalt himself 
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped. 
Satan tempted man at the beginning to make himself 
like God, and at the end God shall send them strong 
delusion, to believe a lie. Satan, not being able to 
exalt himself in heaven, wiU attempt to do it through 
the seed of man; but the end shall be abasement 
(Isa. xiv. 1 2 — 15). In the second Adam we have Him 
who was God hxunbliDig Himself, going down, becoming 
obedient unto death, even the vilest, and then we see 
that humbled One going back to the place of power at 



213 

God's right hand, but as inan^ as well as God. God 
Mghly exalted Him, that at the name of Jesus every 
knee should bow. Having been obedient aU through, 
in humiliation, He i« exalted to be David's Lord. This 
took Him out of the line of Jewish promises, though 
as David's son of course He had them. The Jews did 
not understand the Scriptures, and fulfilled them though 
not understanding them. Gk)d's ways have gone on 
through all, manifesting His grace and patience towards 
man. He placed man on the earth, and then sent law, 
prophets, &c., until man gets to the end in rejecting all 
God tries man and then brings in the new man, who \s 
the fulfillment of all His blessed counsels — ^the second 
Adam. Then He takes up the second Adam as the 
heavenly man into a heavenly place, and all now de- 
pends not on the responsibility of man, but on the 
stability of God. Life, righteousness, and glory descend 
from heaven. Is it life that is needed ? God gives the 
life of Christ in resun*ection. Is it righteousness? 
It is a divine righteousness that God gives. Is it a 
kingdom ? It is the kingdom of heaven. All flows 
down not simply from God in grace, but from the place 
which man has in glory, from the counsels of God about 
the heavenly man in glory. He has first taken Him 
up, and thence the blessing flows down. The man 
Christ Jesus has fully met all man's responsibilities. 
This is the reason of the fulness of the blessing of the 
gospel, and also that of the kingdom to come. The 
gospel is the power of God^ and the kingdom is to be set 
up in heaven. The king is gone into the far country, and 
when he returns, it will be to bring in the kingdom of 



214 

heaven. All the counsels of God now take their centre 
and seat in Jteaven, Thus, in the largest way, the 
turning point in all the plans and counsels of God is 
Jeeua being set at the light hand of God. All the 
character, the stabilitj, and the perfectness of our 
blessing takes its source from the exalted Jesus. The 
character of it is heavenly ; the stabiHtj is what God 
has done ; and the righteousness that £ts me for it is 
God^s. 

The Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, has come down 
to bear witness to Him, on which the peace of the soul 
rests, even on the accomplished righteousness of TTin^ 
who is taken up into glory. His office is to work 
within, and make us manifest what God is^ down hears. 
All this we have as the result of Christ, instead of 
accomplishing the promises as David's Son, bringing 
them in as David's Lord, 

Mark the moral blessedness of this general prin- 
ciple : " He that humhleth himself shall be exalted." 
Christ humbled himself, not was humbled, that is 
another thing. " He that humbleth himself shall be 
exalted." That is what we are to do — ^take the lowest 
j)lace. We cannot do this till we are christians j but 
it is our glory to take the lowest, and hear Him say, 
" Come up higher." " He hath left us an example 
that we should follow his steps." The Lord Jesus has 
been rejected as David's Son. He will come forth as 
David's Lord. 

Now, while He is thus hidden, we see the Church's 
place. We are " hid with Christ in God," and have 
our portion by faith, as united to Him, while He is 



215 

out of sight. The Holy Ghost, haviDg come down, 
gives us a place as associated with Him in aU the 
blessedness of the Father's house, and in all the gloiy 
which He has to be displayed by and by. 

The place of Eve was one of union with Adam in 
the dominion over all things. (Gen. i. 26 — 28; v. 2), 
We find the church in the display of Christ's glory 
only as by grace the bride aad companion of Christ ; 
never as part of the inheritance. Viewed even indi- 
vidually, we are "joint-heirs with Chiist." It is of the 
last importance to the saints in these days, to appre- 
hend the distinct place which we have, as one with 
Chnst, the Heavenly Man. 



CHAPTER XXL 

At the close of chap. xx. and the beginning of chap, 
xxi. we have a most instructive, though painful, contrast 
between the selfish hypocrisy of the scribes, whom He 
condemns l>efore the people, and the real devoted love 
of the widow, whom He singles out for honour. 
Kemark also that the Lord knows how to separate the 
intention of a sincere soul from the system that sur- 
rounds it, judging the whole state of that with which 
the individual is associated. Observe, further, the 
difierence of giving one's living and one's superfluity. 
It is easy to compliment Grod with presents, and thus 
really minister to self; but she who gives her living, 
gives herself in devotedness to God, and proves her 
dependence on God. Thus, the two mites of her who 
had these only, expressed all this perfectly; for there 
was need and everything else to hinder, while the 
applause of men and the pride of the donor found no 
place here. For Jewish splendour the act had little 

worth; but the Lord saw, and bore witness of, the 
poor widow, blessed in her deed. 

Yer. 5 and seq. The account which the Lord gives 
in this gospel of the sorrows of Jerusalem is also, like 
the preceding, much more allied to the simple fact of 
the judgment on the nation and the change of dispensa- 
tion. It differs much from Matt. xxiv. which fully 
refers to what is to arrive at the end; while our gospel 
bears, more than the first two, on the then present time 
and setting aside of Jerusalem. Hence, Luke plainly 



217 

sets forth the siege and destruction by Titus, and the 
times of the Grentile& Let it be observed also that 
the question in yerse 7 extends only to the predicted 
destruction. Consequently, in what follows, we have the 
judgment on the nation taken as a whole, from ita then 
destruction till the times of the Grentiles (with whose 
economy this gospel is so much occupied) be fulfilled. 
Nation should rise against nation, signs from heaven 
and sorrows on earth follow. And before all these 
the disciples would be objects of hostility, but that 
would turn for a testimony instead of destroying theirs. 
They were to go on testifying, while the unhappy 
devoted city where they were filled up its iniquity. The 
Lord would permit trial, but not a hair of their head 
would be lost. But this would close. The sign given 
here is in no wise tlie abomination of desolation, but an 
historical fact — Jerusalem encompassed with armies. 
Its desolation now approached. They were then to flee 
not to return. These were days of vengeance (it is not 
said of the unprecedented tribulation, as in Matt., which 
is only in the latter day). All that was written was 
to be fulfilled. Great distress there wa9 in the land, 
and wrath on this peopla Slauglrter first and captivity 
afterwards wrought thear cruel work of devastation, and 
Jerusalem till this hour abides, the boast and prey of 
Gentile lords, and so must it be till their day is over. 
In these earlier verses (8 — 19) the Lord dwells on 
the dangers, duties^ and trials of the disciples before 
the sack of Titus. Specially were they to beware of a 
pretended deliverer, and of the cry that the time (ie., 
of deliverance) was at hand. Neither were they to be 

p 



218 

terrified bj wars or commotionB, any more than 
seduced by fair promises. These things must first be, 
but the end not immediately. Besides, it wa9 not only 
confusion and woes and signs of coming change and 
evil outside. Before all these they themselves were to 
be in affliction and persecution for Christ's sake. Then, 
in verses 20 — 24, comes the actual judgment of the 
city and people, already judged virtually by His rejec- 
tion. This extends down to our own days in principle. 
But all is not yet fulfilled. For in verse 25 begins the 
Lord's description of the closing scene — a judgment not 
on the Jews merely, but on the Gentiles also; for the 
powers of the heavens, the source of authority, shall be 
shaken, as in Haggai iL and Heb. xii. This is not said 
to be immediately after the siege of Titus ; but, on the 
contrary, room is left for the long course of treading 
down of Jerusalem under Grentiles, till their times are 
run out. It is in Matthew that we must look for the 
great tribulation of the last days, occupied as the first 
evangelist is with the consequences of Messiah's rej ection, 
especially to Israel Therefore, it is said there, " Im- 
mediately after the tribidation of those days," Le., the 
short crisis of " Jacob's trouble" yet to come. Here, 
however, after mention of the times of the Grentiles, it 
is said that " there shall be signs in the sun and moon 
and stars, and upon the earth distress of nations with 
perplexity, the sea and waves roaring, men's hearts 
fedling them," <&c. Men were astounded because they 
saw not the end, and trembled as they were dragged 
along to some unknown, awfiil conclusion. For prin- 
ciples were at work, they knew not how, dragging them 



219 

along whether or no. The coming of the Son of man 
disclosed all the scene to the disciples. But it is clear 
from the circumstances, and especially from the charac- 
ter of the redemption spoken of, (ver. 28,) that it is a 
question, not of Christians, but of earthly disciples, and 
of an earthly deliverance by judgment here below. The 
Lord in mercy turns the terror of man into a sign of 
deliyerance for the remnant of that day. 

Vers. 31, 32 are interesting in this point of view 
here, because they furnish remarkable evidence, first, 
that the kingdom of God does not mean the gospel of 
His grace; and, secondly, that this generation ccmnot 
refer to the space of time from the prophecy to the 
destruction of Jerusalem. (1) For when they see 
these things coming to pass (and He had spoken of 
the final, universal trouble for the whole habitable 
earth, and not merely of what has befallen the Jews), 
they are to conclude that the kingdom of God is nigh. 
Now, even if it were only the Eomans taking away 
their place and nation, and still more if it include the 
latter-day trouble, it is undeniable that the gospel had 
extended £ur and wide before the first. In fact^ the 
manifestation of its influence was dtelining rather be- 
fore that time, as we see in the later epistles. But 
the things here seen were signs like the budding of 
the trees, and the kingdom of God is evidently to be 
at the coming of the king, when the Lord €k)d 
Almighty takes His great power and reigns. That 
there was a partial, analogous judgment when Jeru- 
salem fell, is true, but verses 25 — 28 ought to leave 
no doubt of a wider, subsequent judgment, with signs 



220 

wliieh introduoe, not the soirows of the Jews, but tlie 
Son of wian ooming in His kingdom. (2) For a pnmilar 
leaiBon ''this generation'' does not a|^ly to a mere 
Ufetime, but is viewed moraUy, as in Dent. xxxiL, PSb. 
xuL and many other sdiptoies. It is here expressl j 
pfat at the dose, after not only the &U of Jerusalem, 
bat the totally distmct scene of Christ's coming in 
power and glory. 

The expression in verse 33 is very solemn. I^eeper 
interests were involved than a casual change as to 
Jerusalem. The time was wrapped up in purposed 
obscurity, but nothing more sure than the facts pre- 
dicted. 

The Lord has provided for His then disciples wbat 
was needful, but also in the written word for the like 
times to come. Still, though the principle be always 
true, verse 34 clearly applies to a day to come on the 
earth. The privilege is to escape the judgments and 
stand before the Son of man. This again is earthly, 
npt the rapture to heaven. The great moial priur 
ciples, of course, remain true for all; specially indeed 
fi)r those who, by virtue of a higher calling, can enjoy 
them in a more excellent way. 

Vers. 37, 38. The Lord yet returned to give testi- 
inony, walking and working in the day; but His rest- 
ing-place was there, whence He did depart, and where 
His feet shall stand in that day. Patient in service. 
He taught daily and early in the temple; at mgU 

He was separate from the judged city. His timewas 
now come. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

m 

How was the carnal mind shown to be enmity 

against Grod in the rejection of Ohiist ! Wickedness 

was summed up and brought out in all — ^people, priests, 

rulers. If a friend, he is a traitor; if disciples, they 

either fled when danger approached or denied Him 

when near. The religious chiefs who ought to have 

owned the Messiah took Him to the infidel power of 

the world. He who was in the place of judgment 

washed his hands, owning His innocence, huf gives 

Him up to man's will and rage. Thus man's evil was 

brought into complete juxtaposition with that which 

was perfect, and this in putting Him to death. It is 

no use to look for good in man. Not that th^re are 

no amiable traits of nature, but God has no place at 

all if man is put to the test Along with this is the 

picture of the Lord's perfect patience through it all. 

Not man only, but Satan was there in temptation. It 

was the power of darkness, as well as man's hour. 

And the Lord Jesus passes through this scene of men's 

wickedness and Satan's power; His heart melted like 

wax, but the effect always being the manifestation of 

perfectness. An angel strengthens Him; for He 

was really man, but perfect man, enduring all that 

could try Him, and nothing brought out but perfect 

grace and perfect obedience. Whenever there was 

sorrow, His love surmounts the suffering to help and 

comfort others, 

Vers. 3 — 6. It is a solemn thought that the nearer 



222 

to JesoSy if there is not spiiitaal life, the more a man 
resistB God, and the more sore and sad an instnunent 
of the enemy he becomes. If trath has been presented 
and not reoeiyed, no where has Satan so mnch power.* 
Coretonsness was the means used; but though they 
plotted to betray and crucify Him in a comer, this 
ceuld not be: they were obliged to accomplish it 
according to Cknl's purposes. Then the light from, 
behind the scene (vers. 8 — 13) makes a passage. It 
is the Lord; and no matter what He suffers, or what 
is before Him, yet we find the divine knowledge and 
power. There is the chamber! What calm and 
peaceful dignity ! It is no effort, nothing to display a 
character. All yields before the unwitnessed authority 
of this rejected Saviour — all but that to which it had 
been most manifested, the unrenewed heart of man. 
To the householder, unknown it seems to every eye 
but one, it was enough to hear, "The Master saith to 
thee." 

Ver. 14, &c. How blessed to see such perfect human 
affections combined with His divine knowledge of all 
things. ''With desire I have desired to eat this 
passover with you before I suffer^' — ^like one leaving 
his family and first desiring a farewell meeting. When 
we see the divine glory in the person of Christy we 
find the human affections shining out. (Comp. Matt, 
xvii. 27). It is this which gives Him a power and 
charm which no object else has; so that God can 

* This is a sample of Luke's manner as to dates. The entrance 
of Satan into Judas was what was morally necessary to present 
here; not so the particulars. Strictly, he put it into Judas* 
heart then, and entered after the sop was received. 



223 

delight in man and man can delight in God. The 
Ix>rd breaks every link with the old thing. (Ver. 16.) 
It is not setting up the kingdom here, but setting up 
man with God when the old connexion was impossible. 
He was taking a new place where flesh and blood could 
not enter. His death and resurrection introduce a 
new relation with God. 

The Lord distiiiguishes here between the paschal 
lamb and the wine, and both from the institution of 
His Supper. He entered in the fullest way into all 
the feelings of Israel — ^the Israel of God, into the 
interests of the people as such, till His rejection put 
them on other ground, and divine favour passed into 
another scene by the resurrection, becoming Himself 
the Substitute, the true paschal Lamb. His disciples 
held the foremost rank as to this fellowship, as we 
have Hushai the king's Mend. With them He desired 
the last testimony of parting and love. But while 
thus expressing His affection to them. He assumes 
manifestly (verse 18,) the Nazarite character, which 
was always His morally, but now externally and pain- 
fully: "I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit 
of the vine until the kingdom of Gk)d coma" He 
postpones His joy with them as in the common enjoy- 
ment of the kingdom, till then. 

Then (verses 19, 20,) He institutes the memorial 
of His better redemption, of His self-sacrificing dying 
love. If He separated Himself now to God in His 
joy, it was not want of love to His disciples, but its 
fullest display. It was to be done "in remembrance" 
of Him. We remember Him suffering, dead, absent ; 



224 

ire JcTuyu) Him as a present liying Saviour. The new 
covenant is established in His blood. We cannot, in 
all the joy of fellowship with Christ above, forget what 
brought us into it. On one side, it is a body broken 
and blood shed ; on the other, it is Himself and all 
the perfectness of love in djdng for us. We are united 
to Him as a risen Christ, but He calls us to remember 
Him as a dead Christ. The blessedness of this last is 
in the work He did alonej by virtue of which I am put 
in imion with Himself, alive again for evermore. As 
to man's part in it, (vers. 21, 23,) it was treachery and 
wickedness. 

The Lord then distinctly sets forth this calling to 

walk in His own lowliness and not as the world. 

Earthly grandeur was recognized among the Jews, but 

now it was s^itenced, like all their system, as the 

rudiments of the world. All other greatness, though 

under the form of being benefactors, was worldly. 

He was one that served. The grace of His heart sets 

them right without a reproach. He lets them know 

that whatever high place they soughb, He took a low 

one. He might have said, l^othiug wiil break down 

this horrid selfishness; yet says He, "Ye are they 

which have continued with me in my temptations." 

And He is the same now. What we should seek is to 

have as much of the burden of the Church as we can. 

Suffering thus with Him, His heart goes on with us. 

Ver. 31. Peter was bold enough in the flesh to enter 
temptation. But it is impossible for man to stand 
where it is a question of good and evil. He is a sinner 
and cannot go through that trial. If God judges, 



225 

flesh comes to nothing. There is the weakness of 
human nature, but, besides, Satan's title and power 
over man, who had brought out his own condition in 
Qod'a presence, and come under death as the judgment 
of Grod. I WAj haye learnt in grace that the flesh is 
thus profitless, but it must be learnt by intercourse 
with the enemy, if not with God. For Simon, the 
Lord prayed that his faith should not faU: all his 
self-oonfldenoe must perish. Nor did he distrust 
Christ like Judas, who had no faith. What enabled 
him afterwards to strengthen his brethren? He dis- 
covered that there was utter badness in himself when 
he meant best, and that there is perfect grace in Christ 
even when he did worst. 

Vers. 35 — 38 show an entire change of circumstances. 
Previously He had protected them and supplied all, as 
Messiah disposing of everything here. That was now 
gone, since the Righteous One was being more and more 
rejected. He had come, able to destroy Satan's -power, 
but it was the Lord, and man would not have Him : 
that is the condition the world is in. He must be 
reckoned among the transgressors. What link could 
there be between God and man? Humanity is a 
condemned thing, because it refused Christ. You may 
find a scrupulous conscience as to putting the money 
in the treasury, but no conscience in betraying and 
crucifying Him. But it is in a rejected, dead Christ 
that faith delights. The Christ that man scorns, it 
requires faith and grace to own. But the disciples 
still rested on man's strength, not on Messiah crucified 
in weakness, and said " Here are two swords." The 



226 

Lord in saying *^ It is enough," alludes to their words, 
and implies that thej did not enter into E[is mind. 
He did not want to say more. 

Yerses 39 — 46. There are siftings needed to exer- 
cise US and to judge flesh. Christ, of course, did not 
need this, but dealt with all in communion with His 
Father. To Him it was a path of obedience, a blessed 
opportunity of doing (rod's wiQ : to Peter, it was 
Satan's power. Christ did not speak of the wicked- 
ness of the priests, the wiQ of the people, or the 
injustice of Pilate, but of the cup His Father gave 
Him. There was positive intercourse with Crod about 
the trial, before the time came. And so it must ever 
be. It is late to put the armour on when we ought 
to be in the battle. A man living with God, when he 
gets into trial, goes through it, in his measure, as 
Christ did. He stands in the evil day, because he has 
been with God when there was no evil day. On the 
cross it was not a question of corn/m/wnion ; in the garden 
Christ is in communion with the Father, as to Satan's 
power, which was about to fall on Him, He felt all, 
but succumbed under nothing. Thus, instead of 
entering into temptation. He was in the highest exer- 
cise of spirituality, accomplishing the will of God in 
the most difficult circumstances, and the most perfect 
submission where it cost everything. Our Father 
never can lead us into sin, but He may into tempta- 
tion, ie., into the place of sifting, where the flesh is 
exposed, when this is needftd, because hardness, or 
levity, or inattention to His patient warnings, has 
'n. It is the last, and often necessary, means of 



227 

self-knowledge and disciplina Though it is great 
grace that He should take such pains, yet seeing our 
weakness, and the terribleness of the conflict with the 
enemy, it well becomes us to pray that we may not 
be cast into the furnace. In such times a bad con- 
science drives to despair. The flesh, in its undiscem- 
ing carelessness, meets the trial in uncertainty, or 
carnal opposition, and falls. If, on the other hand, 
trial comes, we learn our position before God — watch- 
ing, prayer, entreaty, spreading all before Him in 
child-like confidence, but submissive desire that His 
will be done. 

The Lord was thoroughly mem in this, for an angel 
appears and ministers, strengthening Him: for the 
conflict of His soul was great ; but it urged Him, in 
the realization of the trial, to pray more earnestly. 
The effect of this is to see more clearly the power of 
evil and the sorrow ; and that so as to act on the very 
body. He was in agony Himself, but always says 
" Father." He is, and speaks, in His relationship as 
Son : not yet the victim before God, but the sufferer 
in spirit, feeling all the depths of the waters He is 
passing through, but crying out of them to His Father. 
Satan tried to stop Christ with the difficulty, when he 
could not beguile Him with the pleasure. But He 
went through all with His Father. At the cross was 
another thing — ^the power of God against sin. 

Verses 47 — 53. It is blessed to see these two things 
brought together — ^patience with men, and yet power 
to stop every thing. Having been in an agony with 
God, He is calm before man. When the servant's ear 



228 

was cut off, He puts forth His hand to heaL What a 
picture of man, what a picture of God, if we look here 
at Christ! 

Verses 54 — ^62. When we tremble before men, it is 
when we have not been with God. Peter breaks 
down, proving the deceitfiilness of the flesh. In 
Jesus, suffering as He was, there was nought to dis- 
able the perfect and simple action of grace at each 
moment required. When the cock crew. He turned 
and locked on Peter, who remembered His word, went 
out, and wept bitterly. 

Verses 63 — 71. The Lord spent the nighty not 
before His judges, who took their ease till morning, 
before they judged the Lord of glory, but with the 
men whom they employed, the object of all injury 
and insult. Then, when it suited the convenience of 
the Jewish rulers, they brought Him to theiu council ; 
but the Lord knew it was not Ihe time of testimony, 
and left them to their weakness. The presenting 
of Messiah to the Jews was flnished : from this the 
Son of Man was to be seated at the right hand of 
God, All was settled with God — ^they could go on. 
They /Iraw the right conclusion and He conceals no- 
thing. He was the Son of God. They must be guilty, 
not of mistake, but of condemning Him because He 
was the Son God and owned it. 



CHAPTER XXIIL 

Verses 1 — 25. Religious iniquity had now only to 
lead on the world to finish the wickedness in which 
itself had taken the lead. The civil power must give 
in to the wilful evil of the apostate people of Grod. 
This is the history of the world, and, of the two, the 
religious side is always nearest to Satan. The chief 
priests manifested their enmity by their accusation, 
which was calculated to arouse the jealousy of the 
governor; charging on Christ what was entirely false, 
as to CsBsar, but with the subtle groimdwork of that 
which they knew (reckoning on His truth) He could 
not deny. The guilt of the Jews was complete, as was 
also that of the Gentiles, for Pontius Pilate declared 
Him innocent, and desired to release Him. Cruel 
enough himself, the Roman governor disliked cruelty in 
others, but he would not go so far as to save Him from 
the malice of His enemies ; it would have cost some- 
thing to do this ; it threatened his interest, and Pilate 
gave way. The one thing that is strong in the world 
is enmity against Christ. 

But there was another form of evil to be introduced, 
to wit, Herod, the apostate king of apostate Israel : and 
in rejecting Jesus all are friends, however jealous and 
divided. How terrible the union between the fourth 
beast and God's external people ? But if the Gentiles 
failed shamefully in protecting the just and hence fell 
into basely \inrighteous judgment, the activity of an 
evil will was with the Jews. Three times the oppor- 



230 

tonity of a relenting voice was given; but, while the 
governor's indifference was as plain as the disappointed 
insolence of Herod, every time the cry of the people 
increased in ardour for the death of the Messiah. 
Pilate, therefore, released the guilty Barabbas, whom 
they desired, to appease the Jews, and delivered Jesus 
to their will. 

Verses 26 — 31. It was a terrible time and full of 
violence. It mattered little whom they met, if they 
could only force them to help in their iniquity. Their 
hour was struck, and all fell into the same mass of re- 
jection and insult of Christ, save that the Jews acted 
with more knowledga The forms of privilege became 
sorrows and harbingers of terror; they must be laid 
low, for all was untrue now. The natural feelings, 
touched by affecting circumstances, as we see in the 
weeping daughters of Jerusalem, did not change this. 
They understood neither the cross of Christ nor the 
ruin which awaited themselves. One may be affected 
with compassion, as if one were superior to Christ, and 
Ml under the judgment consequent on His rejection 
and death. No humiliation of Jesus put Him out of 
His place of perfect capability of dealing with all 
others from God. Alas ! it was not only on Pilate and 
Herod, nor on the chief priests, that judgment was 
coming, but own the woman that lamented Him, un- 
conscious of their own state, which was under con- 
demnation. Neither natural conscience, nor natural 
religiousness, nor natural feelings will do: nothing 
short of the glory of Grod in Jesus. And if He, the 
living and true vine, who indeed bore fruit to God, 



231 

was thus dealt with, what must be the lot of the fruit- 
less and unprofitable, for such branches were they? 
where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? Man 
rejects the green tree, and God rejects the dry. Life 
was there in the person of Jesus, and they would not 
have it, and are therefore given up : it cannot be had 
now but through a dead and risen Christ. 

Verses 32 — 43. There is the setting aside of all 
they looked for here in present deliverance, for Christ 
must die. But if we are also to see how low man 
can go morally, we learn, at the same time, that Christ 
in His grace can go lower still. "Except the corn of 
wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone.'' 
Therefore, whenever you see an attempt (and it is the 
attempt of man's religion) to connect a living Christ, 
before death and resurrection, with living sinners, be 
sure there is error. It unites sin with the Lord from 
heaven, and it denies that its wages is^death. Had 
Christ delivered Himself, as the rulers, with the people, 
said in derision, He would not have delivered us. 
He must pass through death, and take a higher place, 
even in resurrection, and there He takes us. Per se, 
the incarnation cannot bring life and redemption to 
those who are dead in trespasses and sios. We need 
to be set beyond all in resurrection-life in Christ. 

Thus, then, in spite of the grace of Jesus in inter- 
cession, Jews and Grentiles joined in mockery of the 
crucified; yet God had prepared, even here, the con- 
solation of His mercy for Jesus, in a poor sinner. But 
no sorrow, no shame, no sufiering brings the heart too 
low to scorn Jesus ; a gibbeted robber despising Him ! 



232 

There is an instinct, so to speak, in every unrenewed 
heart, against Jesus, which was not quelled even by 
that power of love in which He was going down into 
the deepest humiliation, to suffer the wrath due to 
sin. Say not that you are one whit better than this 
wretched man. "There is none righteous, no, not 
one; none that understandeth ; none that seeketh 
after God. They are all gone out of the way, they 
are altogether become unprofitable." In two words, 
there is no difference. You are as bad, in God's sight, 
as the railing, impenitent thief. See now the fruit of 
grace in the other. Grace works in a man who was in 
as low a condition as he who, notwithstanding his own 
dying agony and disgrace, had pleasure in outraging 
the Lord of glory ; indeed, both had done it, (Mark 
XV. 32.) But what more blessed and certain than the 
salvation of this thief, now that he bows to the name 
of Jesus 1 He is going to Paradise, in companionship 
with the. Lord whom he owned. 

It is often idly said, that there was one saved in this 
way, that none might despair, and bui one, that none 
might presume. The truth is, that this is the only 
way whereby any poor sinner can be saved. There is 
but one and the same salvation for alL There was 
evidently no time for him to do anything, had th<»6 
been the way; but all is done for him. Hiat very day 
his knees were to be broken : how could he get into 
Paradise? Christ wrought his deliverance through 
His own death, and his eye was opened in faith of what 
Christ was doing. 

Nor was it only that Christ's work was wrought ^r 



233 

him — the ground on which his soul rested for salvation. 
There was a mightrjr moral work wrought m him, 
through the reyelation of Christ to his soul, bj the 
Spirit who oonvinced him of his utter sinfulness. 
'< Dost not thou year God^^* is his rebuke to his railing 
fellow, '^ seeing thou art in the same condemnation % 
And «^, indeed^ justly.^* It was not all joy. Con- 
science had its place. There is a real sense of good 
and evil ; for he has got in spirit into God's presence, 
and this, making him forget circumstances, elevates 
him into a preacher of righteousness. And if he owns 
the lightness of Ma ovon punishment in honest confes- 
sion of sin, what a wonderful testimony he bears to 
Christ! '^This man hath done nothing amiss.'' It 
was just as if he had known Christ all his life. He 
had a divine perception of His character ; and so with 
the Christian now. Have you such jealousy about 
the spotlessness and glory of Christ, that you cannot 
help crying out when you hear Him slighted? He 
believed that He was the Lord, the Son of God, and 
so could answer with assurance for what He had been 
as a man. As completely a man as any other, the holy 
obedience of Christ was divine. '^ This man hath done 
nothing amiss." What a response in the renewed 
heart to the delight of sinlessness ! His eye glances, 
as it were, over the whole life of Christ; he could 
answer for Christ anywhere, because he has learnt to 
know Himadf, 

Then he says, turning to Jesus, *^ Lord, remember 
me, when thou comest into thy kingdom." As soon as 
he can get rid of what was sad, when he has done 

Q 



234 

-with his testunony to the other thief^ his heart tarns 
to Christ instinctiYely. How trndistracted he was! 
Was he thinking of his pain ? or of the people around 
the cross) As is always the case, where God's pre- 
sence is realized, he was absorbed. In the extremity 
of helplessness, as to outward appearance, he hears 
the Shepherd's voice, and recognized Him as the 
Saviour and King. He wants Christ to think of him. 
The judgment of men, was that CSirist was a male- 
factor. The weeping women saw not who He was. 
, But no degradation of circumstances could hide the 
glory of His person who hung by his side. He owned 
Jesus as the Lord and knows that His kingdom will 
certainly come. The other malefactor thought only, if 
he thought at all, of present deliverance; but this 
one saw the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that 
should follow. His mind was set, not on being free 
from bodily pain, but on the loving recognition of 
Christ in glory. He looks not to earth, nor nature, 
but to another kingdom, where death could not come. 
There was not a cloud, not a doubt, but the peaceful, 
settled assurance that the Lord would come in His 
kingdom. 

And the Lord gave him more than his faith asked. 
There was the answer of present peace. It was not 
only the kingdom by and by, but " Verily, verily, I 
say unto thee, to-day, shalt thou be with me in Para- 
dise.'' As if He said. You shall have the kingdom 
when it comes, but I am giving now soul-salvation j 
you are to be associated at once with me in a way 
far better and move than the kingdom, blessed and 



235 

true as it is. For indeed the work was accomplished 
on the cross, which could transport a soul into paradise. 
If the Saviour had taken the sinner's place, the sinner 
is by grace entitled to take the place of the Saviour. 
The poor thief might know but little of Christ's work 
and its effects, but the Holy Spirit had fixed his heart 
on the person of Christ. The words of the Lord 
(ver. 43) imply the atonement, by virtue of which we 
are made fit to be His companions in the presence of 
God. The work of Christ is as perfect now for us, as 
then for him ; it is as much accomplished for us as if 
we were already caught up into paradise. How dis- 
tinct this is from anything like progress of the soul 
to fit it for heaven ! And how wonderful that such a 
soul should be a comfort to the Saviour! He had 
come into the condemnation ; yea, and wrath was on 
TTim to the uttermost. And now the converted thief 
was a bright witness of perfect grace and eternal sal- 
vation through His blood. 

Yers. 44 — 4d. The scene was closed which let in the 
light beyond through the portals of a heart now purged 
by faith, and the darkness proper to the hour took now 
its suited course — specially over Israel, it would seem; 
** and the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple 
was rent in the midst." Thus the way into the holiest 
was made manifest by the act which had its plaoe in 
this darkness, and God in the grace of Christ's sacnfioe 
shone forth upon the world. Darkness of judgment 
as it was to one, the light broke through, and access 
was opened within the veiL All was finished, and 
the Lord with no hesitating voice but aloud cried. 



236 



« 



Pather, into ihy hands I commend my spirit.'' This 
waa not Jewish blessing, (for the Hving, the living, 
ihej shall praise thee,) but it was much higher : it was 
Bonship, death overcome, and the occasion merely of 
pi-esenting the spirit, safe, happy, confident, notwith- 
standing death, into the Father's care and presence. 
This is an immense principle, and, short of resurrec- 
tion, of the highest possible importance. Death in 
the hands of Jesus — what a fact ! The centurion, in 
the course of duty, struck at least in natural con- 
science, glorified God and owned a righteoiis man on 
the cross. The masses were troubled and went away, 
auguring no good. Those who knew Him, and the 
women from Galilee, were more nearly interested, but 
in fear stood afar off. 

Verses 50 — 56. But the providence and operation 
of Grod, the righteous judge, took measures for the 
body of the Holy One. If the more prominent wit- 
nesses were set aside, others feeble in the faith are 
found active and faithful in the post of danger, confes- 
sion, and attachment to the Lord. How often the 
difficulties which frighten those force these forward ! 
So was it with Joseph of Arimathea, for Jesus must 
be " with the rich in His death." The women, too, in 
true but ignorant affection, make useless preparation, 
awaiting the just Jewish time for a Lord who had 
passed far beyond their faith. The resurrection was 
soon to usher in the dawn of a bright morrow; for 
the honour of the grave, like the intentions of the 
women from Galilee, was of a Jewish character, and 
all this was now closed in death. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

What now occupies our evangelist is the Eisen Man 
again with His disciples and the testimony to the 
world founded on the resurrection — this new truth and 
power above all the principles of natural life. The 
door of the cross is shut on all that man in the Jlesh 
is, and the new thing is introduced in this risen Christ. 
Resurrection is an entirely new condition ; but even 
the Jew could not have the sure mercies of David 
without it. Man, lawless and under law, has had the 
sentence of death pronounced on him. He may pride 
himself on his natural powers, but he is without God. 
He has rejected the One who came to him, a man in 
perfect, divine grace, and in so doing has fully shown 
what he is. Therefore says the Lord, " Now is the 
judgment of this world." An entirely new ground 
appears, and this is here brought out in Christ Him- 
self. Our bodies are still the same, but the life, 
character, motive, means, end are altogether new in the 
Christian. " Old things are passed away, and all things 
are become new." The women, pre-occupied with their 
own thoughts and affections, come with their spices to 
anoint the dead body of Jesus, while he was already 
living in the perfume of His work and offering before 
God, having effected all which placed man anew before 
God the Father, the last Adam in living acceptance. 
Then they were thrown into an unlooked-for difficulty 
at first, for they did not find the Lord's body. Neither 
did they know He was risen. They understood not that 



238 

there was neither judgment nor sin remaining. There 
may be real and great love to Jesus without under- 
standing this. But soon the question -wbs pat iidiick 
involved the answer to all. " Why seek ye the living 
One among the dead T These women, faithful if 
ignorant, were not forgotten of the Lord, and He 
whose ways are grace has preserved their memorial and 
their early seeking of the Lord, thence to bear the 
message to the apostles themselves. But to them they 
were as idle tales. Peter's heart, broken and con* 
trite, was the more afifected by what he heard, and ran 
to the sepulchre, and having seen the linen clothes 
laid aside there, went away wondering. Surely it was 
a marvellous secret^ baffling and rising above all human 
thought! (Ver. 1—12.) 

Luke's statements of circumstances are always 
general. In John we have more details, especially 
developing Mary Magdalene's devoted affection to 
His person, but showing also how little she as yet 
knew of the power of God in resurrection. 

Yerses 13-r-27. The touchingness of this interview 
with the Lord on the journey to Emmaus need not be 
spoken of. How the Lord draws out all their thoughts ! 
But He is here altogether as a man, and presenting 
the truth they speak Jewishly. How naturally their 
minds rested always in the same circle ! He was a 
prophet, and they hoped He might redeem IsraeL 
The fact of the resurrection occupied their attention, 
but it had no link with the counsels of God. They 
were astonished and, like others before them, there 
they rested. Christ takes up quite other ground. 



239 

though it was only in the way of intelligence and not 
yet the power of the Holy Ghost. "O fools," says 
He, " and slow of heart to believe all that the pro- 
phets have written." These He expounds, and opens 
their understanding to them ; for though viewed com- 
pletely as man, He operates divinely and spiritually, 
on their mind " Ought not," said He — ^was it not 
the coimsel of. €k)d plainly revealed in His Word 1 
What he presses is the mind of God in the Scriptures 
relative to the Christ. This was an immense step ; it 
took them out of their egotism and the egoistical charac- 
ter of Judaism. Their thought was of the redemption 
of Israel by power. They had no idea of a new and 
heavenly life, though of course they had it. Even as 
to the Christy death must come in if God were to be 
vindicated and man really blessed, and so Moses and 
all the prophets had taught. '^ Ought not Christ to 
have suffered these things and to enter into His glory]" 
— ^not set up His kingdom down here, but *^ enter into 
his glory." 

Verses 28 — 35. Then we have a most graphic ac- 
count of the scene at Emmaus. '^ He made as though 
he would have gone further." Why shotdd He, to 
their eye " a stranger," intrude 1 " But they constrained 
him, saying, ^^ Abide with us : for it is toward evening 
and the day is far spent. And it came to pass as they 
sat at meat with him, He took bread, and blessed, and 
brake, and gave to them. And their eyes were opened, 
and they knew him : and he vanished out of their 
sight." This was not celebratii^ the Lord's Supper 
with them ; yet was it taking up that part of it — ^the 



240 

act of breaking the bread — ^which was the sign of His 
death. He was not now merely as the living bread 
that came down from heaven, but as He had said, 
'^ this is mj flesh which I will give for the life of the 
world" — not which I will take, but give. He did take 
flesh, of course, in order to give it ; but it was His 
death that became the life of the world. For Jew or 
Gentile there was no other way. The condition of 
man was such that he could be quickened only in 
connexion with the cross. All that was in man, as a 
child of Adam, was under sentence of death and 
judgment. Christ, by grace, entered into the place of 
man — came where I am, that I might be on equal 
terms with Him, as far as acceptance with God ; His 
broken body shows me that I have got that which 
brings me to God. A dead sinner can And life and 
divine favour only in a dead Christ. So the Lord had 
taught in John vi. To eat His flesh and drink His 
blood must be in order to have life. It was not any 
longer a question of His bodily presence merely as 
incarnate. Redemption was absolutely necessary, and 
faith in it Christ is to be fed upon, not alone as a 
living Messiah, nor only as One alive again for ever- 
more in resurrection; but, besides that, as He who 
died, His body broken and blood shed in atonement. 
Thus it was the Lord was known to the disciples at 
Emmaus, though it was not the Lord's Supper. Their 
hearts had been opened by what encouraged them in 
connecting the truth of God with the &cts of human un- 
belief and Christ's rejection, and thus turning the cause 
of their despair into joy and peace by the sight of the 



241 

counsels of €rod in it. But His actual revelation was 
hj the affecting circumstance of personal association 
in the breaking of bread. It was Hvmself who broke 
the bread. There could be no mistake. He was gone 
in a moment — <' vanished out of their sight." But 
His object was gained. They had life through His 
death. And He was risen. The body was a spiritual 
bodj) and had flesh and bones, which a spirit has 
not. He had shown them not only the fact, but its 
necessity. Why does He not say " did," but "must 
rise from the deadf ' Because all the sentence must 
be passed on the fii'st Adam. All that I have now is 
in* the last Adam : I am not only quickened, but 
quickened together with Christ, having all trespasses 
forgiven. Christ, by His death, put them away for all 
who believe 3 and for such, all that belonged to the 
flrst Adam is clean gone. This vk power over the 
principle of sin, which as a fact is still within. And 
hence the apostle bids the believers reckon themselves 
dead to sin. In the power of the Holy Ghost, giving 
me the consciousness of new life in Christ, I am to 
mortify my members here below, because I have to 
apply the death of Christ to my old nature. The 
monkish principle tries to kill sin in order to get life, 
but the apostle shows that we must have life by fidth 
iu Christ in order to treat sin as a dead thing. (Rom. 
VL, vu., vm.) 

The holding of the disciples' eyes was of importance. 
To have recognized Jesus would have been, in their 
state, to have satisfied their thoughts. The Lord, on 
the other hand, engaging their hearts by all Crod said 



242 

of li IiQ, fdmished them vdih scriptural intelligenoe; 
and then in the act of intimate friendship, which 
recalled the great truth of His death, brought to mind 
His great deliverance. *' We walk by fidth, not by 
sight." Filled with the concentrating event which 
began a new world, they hastened back to Jerusalem, 
where the eleven and others were occupied. "The 
Lord," said the latter, "is risen indeed, and hath 
appeared to Simon." Then the two told the tale of 
their wondrous journey, and still more wondrous recog- 
nition of Jesus in breaking of bread. The Lord was 
proving that there should be independent witnesses. 

Yerses 36 — 53. Thus their hearts were prepared. 
Tet in the fact of this new thing, " the beginning, the 
first-bom, from the dead," there was that to which 
earthly hearts could ill assort themselves. The Lord 
presents Himself as the very same man, all through 
and in every way. Li His intercourse with the two, 
it had been just the same ; all was human, thou^ what 
no man ever was, and what none but God could be, was 
shown in and through it. Here also His hands, TTia 
feet. His previous wounds are presented. He takes of 
fish and of an honey-comb, and eats before them. Two 
sentiments had overpowering possession of the disci- 
ples — joy to see Himself again, and astonishment. 
The Lord presents the truth of resurrection, not as a 
doctrine, but in living reality, thus restoring their 
souls and making them know His most familiarly, 
risen indeed, but yet a man properly and truly. " And 
he said unto them, These are the words which I spake 
unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things 



243 

must be fulfilled^ which wece written in the law of 
Moses^ and in the prophets, and in the Psalms oonoem- 
ing me. Then opened he theii* understanding, that 
thej might understand the scriptures." 

This showed the standing before God in justification 
of life and liberty. But another thing was wanted 
before men — -power. This is not the question before 
God, where the Christian stands as Christ stands^ 
'' accepted in the beloved." But the testimony of the 
Christian here below, whether preaching or anything 
else, needs power to be given. This power was pro- 
mised to the disciples, but even yet they must wait 
for it. We must not confound service of any kind 
with standing. The power of the Spirit is requisite 
to live before man — ^power over and above regeneration, 
and distinct from spiritual understanding. This last 
is needed to give us the apprehension of our standing 
in Christ ; and when He opens our imderstandings to 
understand the Scriptures, it does not puff up. It is 
a revelation oj Himself, and leads to communion with 
Him. Yet the other want still remains. Even this 
knowledge is not necessanly power. The testimony 
and purpose of God in the word has to be fulfilled* 
The great truth of a suffering, risen Christ reaches 
out to the Gentiles. In Matthew His association 
with the Jewish remnant is taken up. Consequently, 
He meets them in Galilee after, or before. His resur- 
rection; and thence flows the commission to go and 
discipline the Gentiles. But all this is dropped in Luke. 
Jerusalem, Emmaus, and Bethany, above all, are pro- 
minent ; for thence He ascends to heaven, where he 



244 

lias to do with poor sinners. The testimony was to 
begin at Jerusalem expressly : the riches of His grace 
must be shown first where there was the deepest guilt. 
The cross broke this link with the Jews as a Jewish 
Messiah, but opened the door of repentance and 
remission of sins, to the Jew first and also to the 
Crentile. " And ye are witnesses." He came in the 
need of power. " And, behold, I send the promise of 
my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city of 
Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on 
highJ* This all-important index of Christ's exaltation 
could only be obtained for man by the reception of 
Jesus in heaven when redemption was affected. The 
Holy Ghost had ever acted in creation, in providence, 
in revelation, in regeneration, and in every good thing, 
but He had never been given before. It hung on 
ihe glory of Jesus: to that the Holy Ghost could 
become a servant in man 3 for it was the divine counsel 
and the perfection of love. 

Meanwhile, before this endowment, they returned 
with great joy to the city which their Lord had left 
Their hearts were filled with the influence of this 
.great fact, that their Master was glorified, though it 
was still associated with Jewish thoughts. And these 
two elements reproduce themselves in the Acts, par- 
ticularly in the earlier part. 



ADVERTISEMENTS. 



JuA PvblUJiedf a New and Bevised EdiMon^ price St.; cUsoJhe tame an 
superior Paper and Binding^ with New TraaiaUUUm, price 6s, 6d, 
Postage Free, 

LECTURES ON THE BOOK OF REVELATION. 

By WM. KELLY. 



New and Bevised Edition of *<The Bible Treasury.'^ 

Edited by William Kelly. 

The First and Second Volumes are now ready, Price 7s. ^6d. each (being 
the same price as old edition). As only a limited number is issued, early 
application is necessary. 

« Words of Truth." Edited by F. G. Patterson. Vols. 1 

and 2. Price Is. 6d. each. 



By WILLIAM KELLY, 
Types of Scripture. Price 9d Cloth, and in eictra Cloth, Is. 
The Second Advent of Christ Fre-MilleniaL Prio& Is. 3d. 

Cloth ; and in extra Cloth, Is. 6d. 

Christ and the Seven Churches; or, Lectures on the First 

Three Chapters of Bevelation. Price Is., Cloth; Extra Cloth GiU, 
Is. 6d. 

Teetotalism and the Testimony of the BiUa Price 6d. 



By the late WILLIAM TROTTEK, 
Author of " Plain Pafebs on Pbofhetio Subjects, &c., &c. 

Essays on Prophetic Interpretation. Price Is. 6d., Cloth. 

Papers on the Pre-Millenlal Advent of the Lord Jesus, 

Price Is., Cloth. 

What is the Church 1 Do the Old Testament Saints form 

Part of it. Price 6d. 

Proofs from Scripture of the Pre-Millenial Advent of Christ 

(in a Letter to a Friend). Price 3d. 



ADVERTISEMENTS. 



By J. N. D. 

Lectures on fhe Second Coming of Chzist. Price Is. 6cL, 

Cloth Gilt, 2b. 

JIfotes on the Gospel of Xnke. Price 2s., Cloth. 

Notes on Bomans. Price 9d., Clotli; and in extra Cloth, Is. 

The Sabbath! or, is the Law Dead, or am II Price 6d. 



BY THE LATE J. G. BELLET, 

Author of " The Mobal Globt of the Lobd Jesus,** Ac, kc 

On the Betmm of the Lord Jesns to Meet His Saints in the 

Air. Frioe dd., Cloth; Gilt Edges, Is. 

The Church at Thessalonica. Price 3d. 



Notes on the Parables of Matthew ziii. Price 9d., Cloth 

limp. By B. B. 

A Short Exposition on the Epistle to the Hebrews. By the 

Author of " The Two Resurrections." Price 6d. 

ALSO, BY THE SAME, 

The Two Besurrections. Price 2d. 



Glasgow Series of Grospel Books. 

16 different kinds. One each of the^Series in ft Packet, price Is. 

Glasgow Series of Gospel Tracts. 

8 different kinds. Price 3d. per 100, or 2s. 3d. per 1000. Assorted 
Packets of 100, 4d.; by Post, 5d. 

^&]so, The New Series. 4 pp. 

: 9 different kinds. 4d. per 100, or 2s. lOd. per 1000. Assorted 
• Packet of 100, 6d.; by Post, 7d. 

Sophy's Story ; or Simple Scriptm^ Lessons. 

Price Twopence. On Toned Paper. Part I.; 64 Pages, royal 32mo. 

![bis is fhe Firat Part of a little Serial which will he found interesthig and help- 
ful for the little ones. It will (D.V.) be published Monthly. This Part contains 
Lessons from the first five Chapters of Genesis. 



ADVERTISEMENTS. 



A NEW BKRTFBfl OF GOSPEL BOOSB, 

Very mUaJble fcr Postal CircuUOUm^ by W. T. TUBFIN, asfoUotn:— 



GOD FOR US. 
RESURRECTION LIFE. 
HEAVENLY PLACB& 



PEACE WITH GOD. 
RIGHTEOUSNESS ESTABLISHED 
THE TRUE GROUND OF PEACE. 
NO CONDEMNATION. 

Sold in Sixpenny Packets, containing t each of Hit Series^ 9 Padiets 

Postage Free, 

"Eeality," being No. 1 of " Truth for this Day," by W. T. 

Turpm. Price Id. 12 Copies Postage Free. 

^'Lukewarm, and Neither (Sold nor Hot." Rev. ill 16. 

Being No. 2 of "Truth for the Day." By W, T, Turpin. A New 
Edition. Frioe Id. 12 Copies Postage Free. 

Short Lectures on the Jew, the Gentile, and the Church of 

God. Price 2d. 6 Cojaes Postage Free. 



« His Own whidi were in the World/' John xiii. By 

J. Alfred Trench* Price 2d. A lso by the same Author, 

**Let not your Hearts be Troubled." Johnxiv. Price Id. 
"Peace with God, What is it? By C. H. M. Price Id. 

«< Coming," in Verse. Suitable for Postal Circulation. 
Price One Haiij^imj, or 3s. 6d. per 100. 

A Diagram of Divine Dispensations, with Key. By D. T. 

Grimston. Price 6d., Third Edition, improyed. Key in large type. 

A NEW SEBIES OF GOSPEL TBACTS. 

Chiefiy NairraUve^ 9 different kinds, 4 poifts. Foolscap Simo, 

No. 6. BEHOLD HE COMETH. 
,, 7. I REST UPON HIM. 
„ 8. I'VE BEEN A RARE FOOK 
„ 9. THE VALUE OF THE DEATH 
OP CHRIST. 



No. 1. THE OLD CREATION AND THE 
NEW. 
„ 2. PEACE FOR THE ANXIOUS. 
„ 8. THE GLORIOUS GOSPEL. 
„ 4. REPENTANCE. 
,. 6, WORKS OR THE BLOOD. 



Price 4d, per 100, or fts, lOd, per 1000; Post free, or trough BookseUerg, 
5d, per 100, or Ss. lOd. per 1000; Assorted Packets with 
wrapper, 6d, per 100^ by Post, 7d, 



ADVERTISEMENTS. 



Ibe Last Words of Samiiel Buthexford. New ed 

FriM Qn0 Halfpenny; or 3c 6d. per 100. 

A New EQieet of Hymns for Grospel Meetings. Conta 

Thirty-Seven Hymns. Price la. dd. per 100; or 10s. per lOOi 
1000 oaniage pud. 

The Story of CHad Tidings, in Verse. Very suitabL 

the Tbung. On Toned Paper. Price One Penny. 

* 

Simple Gospel Truth. Being 10 different kinds oJ 

Glasgow Setieg of GKnpel Books bound together. Price dd.; < 
gilt. Post free. 

How Sudden; Or hov the Lord took to Himself a 1 
Boy off the Sands at Margate. (Very suitable for Sunday Sc 
Children.) By 0. S. Price Ifd. 8 Copies Postage Free. 

The Village Peasants. By H. T., Author of "COianged 

a Moment,** &c. Price l}d. 8 Copies Postage Free. 

The Object and Ohaiacter of True Service. By J. 

Trench. Price 2d« 6 Copies Postage Free. 

Precious Portions, Orignal and Selected. Price 3d.; a 

in Cloth Limp^ gilt. 4d: 

Notes of an Address on John iii From Notes of an Addre 

By J. N. D. Price Id. 

Salvation, in its different aspects. Price One Penny. 
How the Lord treated a man who had a quarrel with Eii 

Price Id. 



^. L. ALLAN, PRINTER, BOOKSELLER, AND PUBLISHE] 
. , 75 SAUCHIEHALL STREET, GLASGOW. 



I 



:A 



[k 



n 



^ 



* .* 



