ny 


yates 
ERY 


i 5) 
ane! 


Here is a precious volume of orderly 
and spiritual exposition of the profound 
truths centered in our Lord’s humilia- 
tion and exaltation and their bearing 
upon the life and conduct of the Chris- 
tian believer. 

The ‘‘Kenosis’” (Greek for “Emp- 
tying’) referred to in Philippians 2:5-8 
is one of the most sublime and wonder- 
ful mysteries of Scripture. Dr. Ironside 
makes its meaning crystal clear. He 
also exposes the various false theories 
current concerning the profound mys- 
tery. The chapter dealing with this sub- 
ject is itself a priceless treasure in this 
book of fine Bible exposition. 


Other illuminating chapters include: 


1. Christ, the Believer’s Life 

2. Christ, the Believer’s Example 
3. Christ, the Believer’s Object 
4. Christ, the Believer’s Strength 


The diligent reader will find delight 
in absorbing the truths of God's Holy 
Word and using them for the blessing 
of others. 

This book will be found very helpful 
in achieving such a good purpose. 


H. A. IRONSIDE, internationally be- 
loved Bible teacher and preacher, was 
author of more than 60 volumes as well 
as many pamphlets and articles on Bible 
subjects. His writings include addresses 
or commentaries on the entire New 
Testament, all of the prophetic books 
of the Old Testament, and a great many 
volumes on specific Bible themes and 
subjects. 


Countless thousands of readers testify 
to Dr. Ironside’s helpful faculty of get- 
ting to the heart of any Scripture, and 
his clear, easily grasped outlines of even 
the most complex passages make the 
Bible easier to study and to understand. 
He wrote as simply and as directly as 
he spoke—no one who has heard him 
preach will forget how vividly he made 
Bible texts come to life and linger in the 
memory and in the heart. 


For 18 of his 50 years of ministry, 
Dr. Ironside was pastor of the famous 
Moody Memorial Church in Chicago. In 
October 1948 he resigned to devote him- 
self to further writing and conference 
speaking. He went to be with the Lord 
on January 15, 1951. 


(ovary 


G.M. Filict’ 


Cincinai Gitte Copece 


2700 Gieniway Sven 
P.O. Box ta deu 
Cincinnail: Ghee 4525 


45 2 dae. 


seminary 


3200 


Notes 
ONeill bach. DO: LPHeE 


PHILIPPIANS 


By H. A. IRONSIDE, Litt. D. 


Author of ‘Lectures on ) Revela tion,’’ “Notes on Jeremiah,” 
“Notes on Ephesians, “Notes on the Bok of Esther,” 
“Holiness: the False and the True,” etc., etc. 


A ELL iain 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS 
Neptune, New Jersey 


FIRST EDITION, AUGUST 1922 
SECOND EDITION, JANUARY 1927 
SIXTEENTH PRINTING, JANUARY 1978 


Published by LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, Inc. 


A Nonprofit Organization, Devoted to the Lord’s Work 
and to the Spread of His Truth 


ISBN 0-87213-381-8 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


PREFATORY NOTE 


THESE notes have been jotted down at odd 
times, over a period of nearly two years, while 
the writer has been busily engaged in gospel 
work. They pretend to no literary value, and 
repetitions may sometimes occur, but such as they 
are, they are sent forth with the earnest hope 
that they may be blessed to some of “the quiet in 
the land” who enjoy simple things, plainly put. 


H. A. IRONSIDE. 


July, 1922. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2022 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/notesonepistleto0000iron 


CONTENTS 


page 
PTOLAtOLY wNOLE Hac tein ae ies eie este ee se TE ecco cies 38 
Contentsas nina eee yoo be cae een ee 5 
Introductorya Thouphtse, owe cs eieiot sca cicis's eewrecie cies uf 


CHAPTER ONE 


Christ the Believer’s Life, and the Evangelistic Spirit 


Dalutatloneacc cscicis-c otis cece oe Gh oleae are © wie's oie cule ee 13 
Pe we ANELOGUCEIOI wertecsorteter: te isiaieis ois ers lee oil erelvve ayele ei arene 17 
Joyo in, Gospel el estimony oe o.4.mi = ere aie pve ole se etereere 23 
Christus allaing lite Ore Deatis sic sree euseie creer ereeor 28 
Unity imyGospel eTestimony scirsc <s- ss rts oisseyacrerore 32 


CHAPTER TWO 


Christ, the Believer’s Example, and the Lowly Mind 


CROPS! 50 Gro aGcks HOO FOE TOO PAOD GOMOD CODD SG OCnn 37 
SC Ow KCNOSIS wameteter rate re ekeneciene ieleta ake ere sto) e+ 5 e1@te ois Crone lsionaie 40 
The Exaltation of the Man Christ Jesus ............ 44 
TNVodanaye Ofte SINAN’ ocaoodnwsrecdounods°ontods 48 
The Mind of Christ Exemplified in the Apostle Paul.. 54 
MimothyaebhesUmseliic il a SLOT ms srtererertere al etiiceree rite 58 


Epaphroditus, the Devoted Messenger .............. 62 


Contents 


CHAPTER THREE 


Christ the Believer’s Object, and the Steadfast Mind 


SSREjOICGi) Mee scerora sere cl stepatchctsrepeteystaietaerectots ereteierel ners afete tare 67 
Self-confidence sec aside for Christ ............. oe. 15 
Paul’seSteadtastebLurpose marietta cect tel ter erereistorens 80 
Perfection sinwlwowrAspecusmererticrle cisteietstelteretetetotersteterete 86 
Enemies of the: ©ross of Christ sctie > eles of etelercicle c1elets = on 
Heavenly Citizenshipiresistss ai-1-1slale1n ete ielsre)slevelelsiatere eierels 97 


CHAPTER FOUR 


Christ, the Believer’s Strength, and the Confident Mind 


Exhortationsto WU nityarerretecieeeretere i siete aicuateiaie eateries 102 
JOY ANd VPCACE Mie cta ce wis visrsts sues c acl over ee sie ererelare otaierer nae 108 
Wxhortationss: ce rierec cde vies oe idee seleie.cteislelcere i eieteinee 113 


Ministry sins Lemporale nin gsiectastietetele ceeieisieeineiieeL 1S 


NOTES ON 


PHILIPPIANS 


Introductory Thoughts 


E account of the labors and sufferings of 
the apostle Paul and his companions, in 


Philippi, is given in the 16th chapter of 


the Acts. They went to Macedonia in response to 
the vision of the man of that country calling for 
help, which Paul had seen at Troas. But when 
they reached the capital, there was apparently no 
such man feeling his need and awaiting them. 
Instead, they came first in touch with a few 
women who were accustomed to gather for prayer 
in a quiet place, by the riverside, outside the city. 
There the Lord opened Lydia’s heart to attend to 
the things spoken by Paul. Others too were evi- 
dently reached; among them some brethren, as 


8 Notes on Philippians 


verse 40 makes clear. But it was when cast into 
prison that the greatest work was done. The 
jailer and his household were won for Christ ere 
the messengers of God’s grace took their depar- 
ture for Thessalonica. 

The infant church was very dear to the heart of 
the apostle, and he was very dear to them. Their 
love and care were shown after he left them, at 
various times, and, one would judge, for a number 
of years. But at last they lost touch with him, 
apparently during his imprisonment at Czsarea. 
It was when he was in Rome that they again got 
into communication with him and fearing he 
might be in need, sent him an expression of their 
love and care by the hand of a trusted and beloved 
brother who was one of themselves, Epaphro- 
ditus. Having fulfilled his ministry, this faithful 
man fell sick, and his illness was of sufficient dur- 
ation for word regarding it to reach Philippi, and 
the news of the anxiety of the saints there con- 
cerning him had come back to Rome about the 
time that he became convalescent. Deciding at 
once to return, he was entrusted with the letter 
we have before us, which was, one would judge, 
dictated to him by the apostle. 

It is an epistle of joy, a letter of cheer. On the 


Introductory Thoughts 9 


other hand, it contains needful exhortation for a 
wilderness people, liable to fall out by the way. 

It would seem that Epaphroditus had communi- 
cated to Paul a certain concern that was weigh- 
ing upon his heart regarding a misunderstanding 
or a positive quarrel between two women in the 
assembly—both much esteemed by the saints and 
by the apostle himself—which if not checked and 
healed, was likely to prove a source of sadness, 
and possibly even division in days to come. 

This appears to be much in the apostle’s mind 
as he indites his epistle. He seeks so to present 
Christ that the hearts of all may be ravished with 
Him, and thus all selfish aims disappear, and all 
that is of the flesh be judged in His presence. 

This is ever what is needed when the flesh is at 
work among believers. Therefore the great im- 
portance of this portion of the Word of God in the 
present hour of the Church’s history. 

The epistle falls very naturally into four divis- 
ions, and these are rightly indicated in our com- 
mon version by the four chapters. The theme of 
the whole might be put in the three words, “Christ 
is all!’’ It is the epistle of Christ. It occupies us 
with Himself; and each separate division presents 
Him in some different way, and indicates the sub- 


10 Notes on Philippians 


jective result in the believer as he is occupied with 
Christ objectively in the manner presented. 

Chapter one sets forth Christ as our Life, and 
the evangelistic spirit or the gospel mind. 

In chapter two we have Christ as our Example, 
and the lowly mind, or the humble spirit of those 
who would follow Him. 

Chapter three gives us Christ as our Object, 
and, subjectively, we have the steadfast spirit, 
the determined mind; that is, the heart and 
thoughts centered on Himself. 

In the last chapter Christ is set forth as our 
Strength and Supply, and naturally we have with 
this the confident mind, the spirit of trust that 
should characterize all who know the resources 
that are in Him. 

It will be readily seen that the epistle is a very 
practical one. It has to do with our state rather 
than our standing ; with responsibility rather 
than privilege; with communion rather than with 
union. In other words, it is an epistle suited to 
our wilderness journey. It was written to guide 
our feet while going through this world. It isa 
pastoral ministry of a very precious kind. 

Others have written very fully and helpfully on 
this part of the Word of God, whose writings are 


Introductory Thoughts 11 


readily obtainable. It is not the present writer’s 
thought to attempt a labored exposition of the 
epistle, but simply to jot down some notes which 
embody the results of his own study, and which it 
is hoped may be used by the Holy Spirit for the 
edification and comfort of fellow-saints, partic- 
ularly such as are becoming discouraged because 
of the way. Much has been gleaned from what 
others have set forth, and no pretension is made 
as to originality of treatment. If Christ Himself 
becomes a little more appreciated by a few of His 
own, the object in view will have been attained. 


cf] @ ? 
q 
7 
‘¢ 
a 
- 
06 Ge 
) 
; 
ods ig 
7 


ee oe 


At _uwared 6% (a Sek -“iges 


a 
Se wiry 
ety 
a ay 
J SA. 
: 72 
ot a > o- Cy 
he ow 
e 


s a 


> ir ae 
eas eae 


eo [GeGies= hw 
6 se © 49) conned) 


@ beQtrhs 


CHAPTER ONE 


CHRIST, THE BELIEVER’S LIFE, AND THE 
EVANGELISTIC SPIRIT 


Salutation 

(vers. 1, 2.) 
“Paul and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ, to all the 
saints in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi, with the bishops 


and deacons: Grace to you and peace, from God our Father 
and the Lord Jesus Christ.” 


apostle links up younger and less experienced 

fellow-laborers with himself, as here, in his 
salutations. He was an apostle by the Lord’s call, 
occupying a unique place as His special messen- 
ger to the Gentiles. But he never stands aloof in 
complacent dignity apart from others who are 
engaged in the same ministry. He had taken 
Timothy with him when the latter had not long 
been in the knowledge and path of the truth, and 
he testifies later, in this same letter, of the truth 
that was in him. In his care for the development 
of the younger brethren, Paul becomes a model for 
older teachers and evangelists to the end of the 


1 is noticeable how, in many of his letters, the 


14 Notes on Philippians 


dispensation. If others are to follow on in the 
ways that be in Christ, it is well that more ex- 
perienced men take a personal interest in their 
less experienced brethren who manifest a mea- 
sure of gift, and by associating them with them- 
selves in ministry, lead and encourage them in the 
path of faith. It is often the other way, and the 
young are disheartened, and permitted to slip 
back into business pursuits, who, if wisely ad- 
vised, and helped when needed, might become able 
ministers of the truth. 

Paul and Timothy take no official title here. 
They are simply servants of Jesus Christ. The 
word means bondmen. They were purchased ser- 
vants, and as such, belonged entirely to Him 
whom they gladly owned as their Anointed Mas- 
ter. They were His by right, and they had re- 
nounced all title to do the will of the flesh. Nor 
is it only ministering brethren who are so des- 
ignated in Scripture. This is the name that is used 
of all Christians. Though sons and heirs we are 
also bondmen of love, whose delight it should be 
to yield ourselves unto Him as those that are alive 
from the dead. 

The saints as a whole at Philippi are greeted, 
and the elders and deacons specially mentioned. 


This is unusual. Tt evidently implies a particular 
sense of obligation to the elders and deacons on 


Salutation 15 


the part of the apostle, probably in connection 
with ministry of the assembly’s gift of love. There 
may also be the thought of addressing the leaders, 
or guides, in a special way, in view of the “rift 
in the lute’—the unhappiness between Euodia 
and Syntyche, which he desired to rectify. 

Elders may, or may not, be official. In the 
early church they were definitely appointed by 
apostolic authority. It may be unwise, and going 
beyond Scripture, for saints in feebleness to-day 
to set up or ordain official elders. On the other 
hand, those measurably possessing the qualifica- 
tions indicated in the epistles to Timothy and 
Titus, should be recognized by fellow-believers as 
God-appointed elders, whose counsel should be 
sought, and who are responsible to watch for 
souls and to take oversight in the house of God. 
To fail to own such would be insubjection to the 
Word of God, but a true bishop or overseer would 
be the last man to insist upon obedience to him. 
He would rather lead by serving the saints and 
by the force of a godly example. 

Deacons are those who minister in temporal 
things, and should be chosen by the saints for this 
purpose. The word means servant, but is differ- 
ent to that used above. It is s not “bondman,” but 
a servant acting voluntarily, and in response 
RATS to the are sks of others. 


16 Notes on Philippians 


Notice the little word “ALL.” It is used very 
significantly in this epistle—in a way not found 
anywhere else in the writings of the apostle Paul. 

Observe its use in verses 4, 7, 8, 25 in this chap- 
ter, and verse 26 in chapter 2. Is it not plain that 
Paul desired to bind all together in one bundle of 
love in this way, refusing to even seem to recog- 
nize any incipient division among them? JHe 
greeted them all, he thought well of them all, he 
prayed for them all. He knew it would in the end 
be well with them all. And so he exhorted them 
all to stand fast in one spirit. 

As customary in all his letters, he wished them 


grace and peace. Grace was the general Grecian 
SAE LS MCEEETETEM So 
he links the two together. Grace in its highest 
sense, favor against desert, could only be known 
by the Christian, And true peace rests upon the 
work of the Cross, whether it be that peace with 
God, which is fundamental, or the peace of God, 
which the apostle here would have the saints enter 
into and enjoy from day to day. Both descend 
from God, now revealed as Father, and from our 
Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have been 
brought into this place of favor. 


The Introduction 17 


The Introduction 
(verses 3-11.) 


“T thank my God upon every remembrance of you, al- 
ways in every prayer of mine for you all, making request 
with joy, for your fellowship in the gospel from the first 
day until now; being confident of this very thing, that He 
which hath begun a good work in you will perform it until 
the day of Jesus Christ: even as it is meet for me to think 
this of you all, because I have you in my heart; inasmuch 
as both in my bonds, and in the defence and confirmation 
of the gospel, ye all are partakers of my grace. For God 
is my record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels 
(or, tenderness) of Jesus Christ. And this I pray, that 
your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge 
and in all judgment (or, perception); that ye may ap- 
prove things that are excellent; that ye may be sincere 
and without offence (or, blameless) till the day of Christ; 
being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by 
Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.” 


IN these verses we have the apostle’s own intro- 
duction to this delightful specimen of early Chris- 
tian correspondence. His interest in the saints at 
Philippi did not cease with his leaving their city. 
Through all the years that had passed he had 
borne them on his heart, and presented them to 
God in prayer. There were sweet and blessed 
memories too that filled him with gladness as he 
looked back on the season of ministry spent 
amongst them, and as he learned of their contin- 
uance in the grace of God in after days. 


18 Notes on Philippians 


He thanks God upon every remembrance of 
them. There was nothing, apparently, in their 
past history that had caused him pain or anxiety 
of mind. And so, in every prayer of his for them 
all, he preferred his request with joy. Their fel- 
lowship with him in the gospel had been con- 
sistent from the beginning. It will be noticed 
what a large place “fellowship” has in this epistle, 
and also how frequently “the gospel” is men- 
tioned. An assembly of saints walking together 
in the fear of the Lord, exercised about holding 
forth the Word of Life to the unsaved, is likely 
to know more of real fellowship than a company 
of believers occupied chiefly with their own af- 
fairs, their own blessings—all about themselves. 
On the other hand, no assembly can prosper that 
fails to recognize the importance of the divine and 
holy principles given in the Word to guide believ- 
ers in this scene. 

Fellowship in the gospel may be exercised in 
various ways: by prayer, by participation in the 
public testimony, by furnishing the means to en- 
able the laborer to go forth unhindered by per- 
plexities and anxieties as to necessary means to 
carry on his work. Every servant of Christ go- 
ing forth for the Name’s sake, “taking nothing 
of the Gentiles,” should be entirely cast upon the 
Lord for his support. On the other hand, it should 


The Introduction 19 


be esteemed a privilege on the part of those abid- 
ing at home, to help them by ministering in tem- 
poral things; and such ministry will never be for- 
gotten by Him who has said, “‘Whosoever receiv- 
eth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall re- 
ceive a prophet’s reward.” 

I remember a brother’s definition of fellowship. 
He was a teamster, and was asked, “What do you 
understand by fellowship?” He replied, “For 
each one to pull his own trace and keep it tight.” 
The simile is a crude one, but will be readily un- 
derstood. 

It is noticeable that the apostle had no doubt as 
to the final outcome for every true believer. He 
was absolutely confident that the One who had 
begun a good work in them, would never leave off 
until He had perfected that which He Himself had 
commenced. But this would only be attained and 
manifested in the day of Jesus Christ. A godly 
old brother used often to say, ‘The Lord always 
looks at His people as they will be when they are 
done.” And it is well for us if we can learn to 
look at them in the same way. An incident is told 
of an artist who had conceived in his mind a great 
picture, which he meant to be the masterpiece of 
his life. He was working on a large canvas, put- 
ting in the drabs and grays that were to compose 
the background, when a friend entered, unnoticed. 


20 Notes on Philippians 


The artist worked on with enthusiasm, not aware 
of the onlooker’s presence. But, finally happening 
to turn, he saw him, and exclaimed, ‘““What do you 
think of this? I intend it to be the greatest work 
J have ever done.” His friend burst into a laugh, 
and exclaimed, ‘‘Why, to be frank, I don’t think 
much of it. It seems to me to be only a great 
daub.” “Ah,” replied the artist, at once sensing 


the situation, “you cannot see what is going to be 
there. Ican’’ And so it is with God our Father. 
He sees in every believer that which will be fully 
brought out at the judgment-seat of Christ, and 
He is working now toward that end: We too often 
see the present imperfection and forget the future 
glory. But, in the day of Jesus Christ, when all 
shall be manifested, every believer will be con- 
formed to the image of God’s blessed Son. Surely 
We can join with the apostle even now and say, 
“It is meet for me to think this of you all.” Thus 
to look upon God’s people will deliver from much 
strife, and from disappointment, when we see cru- 
dities and carnalities in those from whom we had 
expected better things. It is humbling and health- 
ful too to remember that others probably see 
similar imperfections in us. 

Paul carried the saints in his heart, and, though 
himself in prison, he recognized their fellowship 
in the defence and confirmation of the gospel, and 


The Introduction 2) 


rejoiced in the manner in which they shared this 
grace with him. He calls God to witness how 
greatly he yearned after every one of them in the 
tender love of Christ Jesus; and in verses 9-11 
we have his prayer, which reminds us somewhat 
of the prayer in Colossians 1. He would have their 
love abound yet more and more in knowledge and 
all perception, or discernment. Brotherly love is 
not a matter of mere sentimentality; it is love in 
the truth. And this calls for study of the Word of 
God in order that one may know just how to mani- 
fest that love according to each particular oc- 
casion. Let us remember there is never a time 
when we are not called upon to show love to our 
brother, but we cannot always manifest it in the 
same way, if subject to the Word of God. There- 
fore the need of instruction in that Word, and en- 
lightenment by the Holy Spirit, that we may per- 
ceive what is in accordance with the mind of God. 

The first clause in the 10th verse is sometimes 
rendered,““That ye may try the things that differ ;” 
or, as given above, “Approve things that are ex- 
cellent.” The meaning is practically the same. 
For by testing things that differ, we approve what 
is excellent. Again the test is the Word of God. 
That Word is given to try all things, and it will 
manifest what is truly excellent, thus giving the 
believer to understand how he may walk so as to 


yi Notes on Philippians 


please God, that he may be sincere and blameless 
in the day of Christ. 

Attention has often been called to the striking 
fact that we have here the Anglicized Latin word 
“sincere,” meaning, literally, “without wax”— 
used to translate a Greek word meaning “sun- 
tested.” It might seem at first as though there 
is no connecticn between the two terms. But we 
are told that the ancients had a very fine porcelain 
which was greatly valued, and brought a very high 
price. This ware was so fragile, that it was only 
with the greatest difficulty it could be fired with- 
out being cracked; and dishonest dealers were in 
the habit of filling in the cracks that appeared 
with a pearly-white wax, which looked enough like 
the true porcelain to pass without being readily 
detected in the shops. If held to the light, how- 
ever, the wax was at once manifested as a dark 
seam; and honest Latin dealers marked their 


wares “sine cera” (without wax). Thus the apos- 


out wax; that is, he would have them straightfor- 
ward, and honorable in all their dealings. Any- 

thing that savors of sham or hypocrisy is as the 

wax used to hide the imperfection in the porcelain. 

’ (see also ver. 15 of chap. 2) refers 

to motive rather than to act, I take it. It is not 


Joy in Gospel Testimony 23 


the same thing as “sinless,” which would, of 
course, imply complete moral perfection. “Blame- 

pe he truice oF 
righteousness” of verse 11 is the same as in He- 
brews 12:11, where “the peaceable fruit of right- 
eousness” is the result of exercise under the hand 
of God. All is through Jesus Christ, unto the 
glory and praise of God. 


Joy in Gospel Testimony 
(chap. 1: 12-20.) 


“But I would ye should understand, brethren, that the 
things which happened unto me have fallen out rather 
unto the furtherance of the gospel; so that my bonds in 
Christ are manifest in all the palace [or, Pretorium, i. e., 
Cesar’s Guard], and in all other places; and many of the 
brethren in the Lord, waxing confident by my bonds, are 
much more bold to speak the word without fear. Some in- 
deed preach Christ even of envy and strife; and some also 
of good will. The one preach Christ of contention, not 
sincerely, supposing to add affliction to my bonds; but the 
other of love, knowing that I am set for the defence of the 
gospel. What then? Notwithstanding, every way, whether 
in pretence, or in truth, Christ is preached; and I therein 
do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice. For I know that this 
shall turn to my salvation through your prayer, and the 
supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, according to my 
earnest expectation and hope, that in nothing I shall be 
ashamed, but that with all boldness, as always, so now 
also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be 
by life, or by death.” 


It is always a sad sign, and an evidence of 
spiritual decline, when the heart loses its interest 


24 Notes on Philippians 


in the message of grace. Some there are so oc- 
cupied with the deeper truths of the Word of God 
that they allow themselves to speak slightingly of 
the simplicity of the gospel. Paul was the pre- 
eminent teacher of the Church, but to his last 
hour, his heart was filled with gospel zeal, and his 
sympathies were with the evangelist carrying the 
Word of Life to men dead in trespasses and in 
sins. Even in his prison-house he rejoiced that 
his affairs had really tended to the progress of the 
gospel. Satan, doubtless, hoped to hinder that 
work by locking up the apostle in a jail, but even 
there it became manifest to all Cesar’s court, and 
to all others, that his bonds were for Christ’s sake. 
The very soldiers appointed to guard him were 
brought thus to hear the glorious proclamation of 
grace to a guilty world; and it is evident, both 
from the 18th verse, and the 22nd verse of the 
4th chapter, that numbers of them believed. Who 
can fathom the joy that must have filled the heart 
of Paul as he led one guard after another to the 
Saviour’s feet! Just as when cast into the Philip- 
pian dungeon, he and his companion Silas were 
used to the conversion of the jailer and his house- 
hold, so here, grace triumphed over all seemingly 
untoward circumstances, and the prison cell be- 
came a gospel chapel, where souls were being born 
of God, and stern Roman soldiers became them- 


Joy in Gospel Testimony 25 


selves the captive servants of One greater than 
Cesar. 

In the 14th verse the apostle speaks of another 
cause of joy. While he was going about from place 
to place preaching the Word, there were gifted 
men who held back, feeling, perhaps, that they 
were in no sense on a par with him, and so they 
permitted the timidity and backwardness of the 
flesh to hinder their launching out in a work to 
which the Lord was beckoning them. But now 
that he is in durance, and can no longer go about 
from place to place in this happy service, num- 
bers of these men came forward, and, for the 
Name’s sake, went forth preaching the Word 
boldly, without fear. On the other hand there 
were some restless men who had not commended 
themselves as fitted for evangelistic work, and 
while he was free, were kept in a place of subjec- 
tion; but now that he was incarcerated they saw 
their opportunity to come to the front, and went 
forth preaching Christ indeed with their lips, 
though their hearts were filled with envy and 
strife. But no jealous or envious thoughts entered 
the mind of Paul. He rejoiced in those who 
preached the Word through good will, out of love, 
knowing that he was appointed for the vindica- 
tion of the gospel; and, though he could not re- 
joice in the spirit that moved the others, he, at 


26 Notes on Philippians 


least was gladdened to know that it was Christ 
who was being preached. And so he was thankful 
for every voice telling out the story of the Cross. 
Nor would he permit anything to rob him of this 
joy. 

How marked is the contrast between the spirit 
here exhibited, and that which often prevails to- 
day. How seldom, in fact, do we see this simple 
unalloyed rejoicing that Christ is preached, let the 
aims and methods of the preacher be what they 
will. Untold harm is often done by harsh, cap- 
tious criticism of young and earnest men, who 
often have much to learn, and offend by their un- 
couthness, by their lack of discernment and un- 
derstanding of the ways of the Lord, who never- 
theless do preach Christ, and win souls. And God 
has said, ‘He that winneth souls is wise;” or, as 
the Revised Version so strikingly puts it, “He that 
is wise winneth souls.” Often have anxious souls 
been really hindered by the criticism of their el- 
ders in matters of this kind. Oh, for more of the 
spirit of Paul that would lead us to rejoice un- 
feignedly whenever Christ is preached, even 
though there be much to exercise our hearts and 
lead to prayer—and it may be to godly admoni- 
tion at times, so far as methods and expressions 
are concerned, which if rightly dealt with now, 
may soon disappear as excrescences, when the 


Joy in Gospel Testimony 27 


earnest evangelist grows in grace and in the 
knowledge of the truth. 

The 19th and 20th verses show us how the apos- 
tle relied upon the prayers of the people of God, 
and how encouraged he was by this abounding 
gospel testimony. He felt that it presaged his own 
deliverance, and pointed to the time when he 
would again be free according to his earnest ex- 
pectation, and hope, to preach Christ openly and 
widely if it should be the will of God, or else to 
glorify Him in a martyr’s death. He had but one 
ambition, and that, that Christ Himself should be 
magnified in his body whether by life or by death. 
No matter what he himself might be called upon 
to toil or suffer, if the One whom he had met on 
that never-to-be-forgotten day on the Damascus 
turnpike were exalted and honored—this would 
satisfy him. 

It is this utter absence of self-seeking that com- 
mends any true servant of Christ. We see it strik- 
ingly in John the Baptist, who said, ‘““He must in- 
or teacher. And where this spirit of self-abnega- 
tion for the glory of the Lord is really found, it 
must commend the ministry, though it makes 
nothing of the minister. Oh, that one might enter 
more fully into it! 


28 Notes on Philippians 


Christ is all in Life or Death 
(chap. 1: 21-26.) 

“For to me to live is Christ, and te die is gain. But if I 
live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labor: yet what I 
shall choose I wot not. For I am in a strait betwixt two, 
having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is 
far better: nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more need- 
ful for you. And having this confidence, I know that I 
shall abide and continue with you all for your furtherance 
and joy of faith; that your rejoicing may be more abun- 
dant in Jesus Christ for me by my coming to you again.” 


“To me to live is Christ” is Christian life and 
experience in its fulmess. It has often been re- 
marked, and is well worth remembering, that 
Christians have many experiences which are not 
properly Christian experience. The man described 
in the 7th of Romans is undergoing an experience 
which will be for his future blessing, but it is not 
proper Christian experience, though it is clearly 
enough the experience of a Christian. Christ Himi- 
self, so dominating and controlling the believer, 
that his one object is to live to His glory, is what 
Paul has before him here. This should be the ex- 
perience of Christians at all times. But, alas, how 
few of us enter into it in its entirety. It implies 
a surrendered will, and the body yielded to the 
Lord who has redeemed it, that it may be used 
only to His praise. This is life in its truest sense, 


Christ is all in Life or Death 29 


and, probably, no one ever entered into it so fully 
as the apostle Paul. 

We may, perhaps, better understand the experi- 
ence,‘‘For me to live is Christ,” if we consider for 
a moment what life means to many an other. The 
Christless business man, whose one aim and ob- 
ject is to obtain wealth, might well say, “For me 
to live is money.” The careless seeker after the 
world’s pleasures, if he told the truth, would say, 
- ” The carnal 


voluptuary given up to self-gratification, would 


say, The statesman, ex- 
ulting in the plaudits of the people, and craving 
world-notoriety, might truthfully declare, “For 


me to live is fame and power.” But Paul could 


say, and 


” 


And it is only such who can heartily add, “And 


to die is gain.” Death is no enemy to the one to 


rrr 
manifest Christ down here; 

Christ; than which nothing could be more pre- 
cious. 

The apostle himself was in a dilemma as to 
which of these he would prefer, were the choice 
left to him. If permitted to continue in the body, 
he would have further opportunity of service for 
Him who had claimed him as His own and called 


30 Notes on Philippians 


him to this ministry. But, on the other hand, he 
longed “to depart and to be with Christ, which is 
far better.” His had been a life of toil and suffer- 
ing for Christ’s sake, such as only a Spirit-sus- 
tained man could have endured without fainting; 
and as he lay in the Roman prison, his heart 
longed for release—a release which would mean 
to be forever with Christ. Labor for Christ was 
sweet, but rest with Christ would be sweeter. 
Whitefield used to say, “I am often weary in the 
york, but never weary t,’ and such was, 
doubtless, the attitude of our apostle. He loved 
to serve, yet longed too for the hour of release, 
with no selfish motive in it, for his one object was 
Christ, whether in life or in death. 

It is amazing how anyone, with words such as 
these before him, could question for a moment 
that the Word of God teaches the consciousness of 
the spirit after death. Paul had no thought that 
his spirit would be buried in the grave with his 
body, or that his soul would sleep until the resur- 
rection day. Death to him would be a departure, 
an exodus, a moving out of the travel-worn earthly 
tabernacle, and a going to be with Christ, until 
the first resurrection at the coming of the Lord. 

As he weighs everything, the unselfishness of 
the man comes out strikingly. He sees the need 
of the Church of God. As it is now, so it was 


Christ is all in Life or Death Bi 


then. There were many evangelists, or gospelers, 
but few teachers and pastors who really carried 
the people of God upon their hearts; and he felt 
that to abide in the flesh was more needful for 
the flock than rest was for himself. So he says 
he has confidence that he should abide a little 
longer, and continue in this scene of labor for the 
furtherance and joy of faith of the people of 
God. 

It is clear, I think, that he fully expected the 
Lord would permit him to revisit Philippi, that 
the rejoicings of the saints there might be more 
abundant in Christ Jesus on his behalf, through 
his coming to them again. They were his children 
in the faith: as a tender father he yearned over 
them, and longed to see them once more before 
closing his earthly ministry. We have no record 
in the Word of God as to whether this desire 
was fulfilled, but there are early church tradi- 
tions which indicate that it was. At any rate, 
we know he was released from his first imprison- 
ment, and allowed to go about in freedom for 
several years before being again apprehended and 
martyred for the sake of Christ Jesus, his and 
our Lord, following Him thus even unto death. 


4 Notes on Philippians 


Unity in Gospel Testimony 
(chap. 1: 27-30.) 

“Only let your conversation (or, behavior) be as it be- 
cometh the gospel of Christ: that whether I come and see 
you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs, that ye 
stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together 
for the faith of the gospel; and in nothing terrified by 
your adversaries: which is to them an evident token of 
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. For 
unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to 
believe on Him, but also to suffer for his sake: having the 


same conflict which ye saw in me, and now hear to be 
in me.” 


THE word “conversation,” as ordinarily em- 


ployed by our forefathers, was of far wider scope 
than as generally used by us to-day. It meant not 


only the talk of the lips, though it included that, 
but it took in the entire behavior. The apostle’s 


exhortation is to the effect that the whole manner 
of life of the people of God should be in accord- 
ance with the gospel of Christ. No more im- 
portant message was ever committed to man than 
the word of reconciliation, which God has gra- 
ciously entrusted to His people in this present dis- 
pensation of His mercy to a lost world. That gos- 
pel tells ot the divine means of deliverance from 
the guilt and power of sin. How incongruous, 


then, if the testimonies of those who undertake to 


Unity in Gospel Testimony 33 


their lives! A walk worthy of the gospel is a 
walk in the energy of the Holy Spirit; it is a life 
surrendered to Him, whose Lordship that gospel 
declares. 

But it is not merely our individual responsi- 
bility to walk worthy of the gospel that the apos- 
tle here presses. He has rather before him assem- 
He desires to hear of the af- 
fairs of the Philippians, that, as an assembly, they 
stand fast in one spirit with one mind, co-operat- 
ing vigorously for the faith of the gospel. Noth- 


Where jealousies 
and envyings come in to hinder the fellowship of 
those who should be standing together heart to 
heart and shoulder to shoulder for the truth of 
God, the effect on the world outside is most la- 
mentable. This is particularly so with the un- 
saved members of believers’ families. Nothing is 
more harmful to them than to find out that their 
elders are not commending the message they pro- 
fess to love, by unitedly standing together for the 
Word of God. 

Is there not something here that deserves the 
careful consideration of many believers in the as- 
semblies gathered to the name of the Lord Jesus 
Christ at the present time? Have we not allowed 
personalities, bickerings, and strife to greatly mar 


34 Notes on Philippians 


and hinder gospel testimony? On the other hand, 
it must be confessed that some, possessing evan- 
gelistic gift, have ignored, to a very marked de- 
gree, the importance of assembly fellowship in 
gospel testimony, launching forth often without 
the prayerful endorsement of older, more godly 
saints: they are afterwards surprised and grieved 
that they do not find heartier co-operation on the 
part of assemblies whose judgment they ignored 
to begin with. The evangelist is the Lord’s ser- 
vant, and, therefore, is not subject to human dic- 
tation, but, on the other hand, fellowship involves 
mutual responsibility, and evangelists need to re- 
member that gift is not necessarily piety, nor does 
it always carry with it good judgment and sound 
wisdom. Therefore the importance of cultivating 
humility on the part of the servant, if he would 
have the hearty fellowship of assemblies in his 
work. 

When there is this lowly, subject spirit mani- 
fested by the evangelist, and vigorous co-operation 
on the part of the assembly, God can be depended 
on to work in mighty power to the salvation of 
lost souls, and the blessing of His people; and 
this, to the enemy, is a condition he most dreads. 


Unity in Gospel Testimony 35 


or supernatural, from without. These unholy hosts 


read their own doom in the happy fellowship of 
the saints of God, and see in it a proof of the 
truth of the Lord’s words, “Upon this rock I will 
build mine assembly, and the gates of hell shall 
not prevail against it.” The thought that many 
have in mind in reading this scripture seems to 
be that the assembly of God is as a city besieged, 
beleaguered by the enemies of the Lord, and carry- 
ing on a defensive warfare, though with the 
pledge of eventual victory. This, however, is far 
from fulfilling the picture presented by our Lord. 


gates of its cities with it. It is hell, or hades, 


the realm of darkness, that is being besieged by 


nd to them 
the promise is given that “the gates of hell shall 
not prevail.” This is the “perdition” spoken of in 
verse 28. 

Such fellowship as that which the apostle brings 
before us, cannot be fully entered into apart from 
suffering, but this is to be esteemed as a privilege 
by those who fight under the banner of the risen 
Lord. It is given to such, as it were a guerdon 
greatly to be desired, in behalf of Christ Himself, 
not only to trust in Him as Saviour, but manfully 
to toil and suffer, that His name may be glorified 


36 Notes on Philippians 


in the scene where He Himself was rejected and 
crucified, and over which He is soon coming to 
reign. 

How blessedly and how fully had the apostle 
entered into this! With what joy did he endure 
and suffer that Christ might be glorified! Yea, at 
the very time of writing this letter he was the 
prisoner of the Lord in a Roman prison, while 
saints at Philippi, some of them at least, were 
living in comfort and slothfulness, and some even 
stooping to quarreling among themselves. The 
apostle’s words in verse 30 would prove, surely, 
a home-thrust to such as these, stirring heart and 
conscience, as they contrasted their easy-going 
lives with the sufferings of Christ’s dear servant, 
who was in prison because of his unselfish devo- 
wok to the Lord he loved. M 


CHAPTER TWO 
CHRIST THE BELIEVER’S EXAMPLE 


“Others’”’ 
(vers. 1-4.) 


“If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any 
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any 
bowels and mercies, fulfil ye my joy, that ye be like- 
minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one 
mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory; 
but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than 
themselves. Look not every man on his own things, but 
every man also on the things of others.” 


HE last word of this section is the keynote 
—“others.” This was the overpowering, 
dominating note in the life of our Lord 

on earth, and because of this He died. “He came 
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to 
give his life a ransom for”—others! He lived for 
Selfishness He knew 

not. Unselfish devotion for the good of others 
summed up His whole life, and all in subjection to 
the Father’s will. For God, the Father Himself, 
lives, reverently be it said, for others. He finds 
His delight, His joy, in lavishing blessing on 
others. He pours His rain, and sends His sun- 
shine upon the just and the unjust alike. He gave 
His Son for others; and having not withheld His 


38 Notes on Philippians 


own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how 
will He not with Him also freely give us all 
things ?—-we, who are included in the others for 
whom the Lord Jesus Christ endured so much. 
What wonder then that, if we would follow His 
steps, we find ourselves called upon to live for 
others, and even to lay down our lives for the 
brethren! 

In the first verse, the “if” does not imply that 
there might not be consolation in Christ, comfort 
of love, and fellowship of the Spirit, coupled with 
tender mercies toward all for whom Christ died; 
it rather has the force of since—it is an intensive 
form of saying, Since you know there are consola- 
tions and comforts in Christ. If these things are 
blessed realities, how incongruous for a believer 
to act as though they were non-existent! Drink- 
ing in the spirit of Christ, we exemplify the 
mind of Christ. And so the apostle exhorts the 
saints to fulfil his cup of jay by likemindedness 
among themselves, with equal love toward one 
another, being of one accord, of one mind. 

It is very evident that Christians will never see 

We are so largely in- 
fluenced by habits, by environment, by education, 
by the measure of intellectual and spiritual appre- 
hension to which we have attained, that it is an 
impossibility to find any number of people who 


“Others” 39 


look at everything from the same standpoint. How 
then can such be of one mind? The apostle him- 
self explains it elsewhere when he says, “I think 
also that I have the mind of Christ.” The “mind 

And, if we are all 
of this mind, we shall walk together in love, con- 
sidering one another, and seeking rather to be 
helpers of one another’s faith, than challenging 
each other’s convictions. 

This is emphasized in the third verse, “Let noth- 
ing be done through strife or vainglory.” It is 
possible, as verses 15 and 16 of chapter one have 
already shown us, to be controlled by this spirit 
of strife and vainglory, even in connection with 
the holy things of the Lord; but Paul himself has 
furnished us a beautiful example of that lowliness 
of mind of which he speaks, when he could rejoice 
even though Christ were preached in contention. 

Nothing is less suited to a follower of the meek 
and lowly Son of Man than a contentious spirit, 
and vainglorious bearing. Boasting and bitter 
words ill become one who has taken the place of 


death with Christ. If, in lowliness of mind, each 
ble for strife and contention to come in. Alas, 


that it is so much easier to speak or write of these 
things than to practically demonstrate them! 
It is not in the natural man to live out what is 


40 Notes on Philippians 


here inculcated. The man after the flesh “looks 


out for number one,” as he puts it, and is fond of 
reminding himself, and his fellows, that ‘charity 


begins at home.” But the Christian is exhorted to 
look, not on his own things, but on the things of 
others. A heavenly principle this, surely, and only 
to be attained by a heavenly man, one who walks 
in fellowship with Him who came from heaven to 
manifest His love for others. It is characteristic 
of man’s deceitful natural heart to suppose that 
his greatest pleasure can be found in ministering 
to his own desires. But the truest happiness is the 
result of unselfish devotion to the things of others. 
Were this ever kept in mind, what unhappy ex- 
periences would many of God’s dear children be 
spared, and how glad and joyous would fellowship 
in Christ become. 


“The Kenosis”’ 
(chap. 2: 5-8.) 


“Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: 
who, being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to 
be equal with God, but made Himself of no reputation, and 
took upon Him the form of a servant, and was made in the 
likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a man, 
He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death, 
even the death of the cross.” 


WE now come to consider one of the most sub- 
blime and wonderful mysteries in all Scripture: 


“The Kenosis” Al 
what has been called by theologians, “The Doc: 


trine of the Kenosis.” The title comes from the 
Greek expression, rendered in our Authorized 
Version, “made Himself of no reputation”—an 


expression which really means “emptied Himself,” 
or “divested Himself.” Its full force will come 


before us as we proceed with our study. 

It is a noticeable thing that doctrines are never 
presented in Scripture merely as dogmas to be ac- 
cepted by the faithful on pain of expulsion from 
the Christian company. The most important doc- 
trines are brought in by the Holy Spirit in what 
we might call an exceedingly natural way. I do 
not use the word “natural” here in contrast to 
“spiritual,” but rather in the sense simply of se- 
quence to the subject, introduced without special 
emphasis. In this particular instance before us, 
the doctrine of our Lord’s self-emptying comes in 
simply as the supreme illustration of that lowli- 
ness of mind which should characterize all who 
profess to be followers of the Saviour. It follows 
naturally upon the exhortation of the fourth 
verse, which we have already considered. 

“Let this mind be in you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus” is the way the subject is introduced. 
This mind is the lowly mind, as it is written, 
“Even Christ pleased not Himself.” And the ex- 
emplification of this is at once abruptly intro- 


42 Notes on Philippians 


duced. He existed from all eternity in the form 
of God. It is a declaration of His true Deity. No 
creature could exist in the form of God. Lucifer 
aspired to this, and for his impiety was hurled 
down from the archangel’s throne. Our Lord Je- 
sus Christ was in the full enjoyment of this by 
right, because He was the eternal Son. He thought 
equality with God not a thing to be grasped or 
held on to. Equal with God He was, but He chose 
to take the place of subjection and lowliness. He 
chose to step down from that sublime height 
which belonged to Him, even “‘the glory which He 
had with the Father before the world was,” and 


The second man, the Lord from heaven, came, as 
we sometimes sing, 


“From Godhead’s fullest glory, 
Down to Calvary’s depth of woe.” 


He would not retain the outward semblance of 
Deity. 

In order to do 
this He emptied Himself, or divested Himself, of 
His divine prerogatives. 

Let there be no mistake as to this. While we 
reverently put off our shoes from our feet, and 
draw near to behold this great sight, let us not 


“The Kenosis” 43 


fear to accept the declaration of Holy Scripture in 
all its fulness. He divested Himself of something 
—but of what? Not of His Deity, for that could 
not be. He was ever the Son of the Father, and, 
as such, a divine person. He could take manhood 
into union with Deity, but He could not cease to 
be Divine. Of what, then, did He divest Himself? 
Surely of His rights as God the Son. He chose to 
come to earth to take a place of subjection. He 
took upon Him the form of a servant, and was 
made in the likeness of men. 

Observe the distinction brought out in these two 
verses. He existed from all eternity in the form of 
God. He came here to take the form of a servant. 
Angels are servants, but “He took not hold of 
angels,” we are told in the epistle to the Hebrews 
(chap. 2:16, N. Trans.). He became in the like- 
ness of men. It was all voluntary on His part. 
And, as a man on earth, He chose to be guided by 
the Holy Spirit. He daily received from the Fa- 
ther, through the Word of God, the instruction 
which it became Him, as a Man, to receive. His 


mighty works of power were not wrought by His 
own divine omnipotence alone. He chose that they 


Kenosis as revealed in Scripture in contrast with 


the false teaching of men. 


44 Notes on Philippians 


Men have added to this what Scripture does not 
say. They have declared that, when He came to 
earth, He ceased to be God; that He became but 
an ignorant Galilean peasant. Hence His knowl- 
edge of divine mysteries was no greater than what 
might have been expected of any other good man 
of His day and generation. Therefore His testi- 
mony as to the inspiration of Scripture has no 
real weight. He did not know more than others 
of His day knew. He was not competent to speak 
as to the authors of the Old Testament books. He 
thought Daniel wrote the book that bears his 
name, and that Moses penned the Pentateuch. But 


the wiseacres of to-day do not hesitate to declare 

‘that He was wrong, and they base their declara- 
tion on the position above taken. He emptied 
Himself of His divine knowledge they say, there- 
fore He could not speak with authority. 


The Exaltation of the Man Christ Jesus 
(chap. 2: 9-11.) 


“Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given 
Him a name which is above every name: that at the 
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, 
and things in earth, and things under the earth (or, of 
heavenly, earthly, and infernal beings), and that every 
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the 
glory of God the Father.” 


THIS is the glorious fulfilment of the prophecy 
of the 110th psalm—a prophecy used by our Lord 


The Exaltation of the Man Christ Jesus 45 


to confound the cavillers of His day, who pro- 
fessed to be waiting for the promised Messiah, 
but rejected His deity. “Jehovah said unto my 
Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand, until I make 
thine enemies thy footstool.” He is David’s Son— 
the Branch of David, yet David calls Him Lord, 
because He is likewise the Root of David. He de- 
scended from Jesse’s son, yet the son of Jesse 
came into being through Him. His exaltation as 
man to the throne of God is not only Jehovah’s 
attestation of perfect satisfaction in His work, but 
also the recognition of His equality with Himself. 
This Man, who had so humbled Himself as to go 
even to the death of the cross, is Jehovah’s Fellow, 
as Zechariah 13: 7 declares. Of none but a Divine 
person could such language be rightly used. 


It is interesting to notice that God never per- 
His Son after His work was finished, as the 


Roman soldier, having pierced His side, released 
the atoning blood. No enemies’ hands thence- 
forth touched it. Loving disciples tenderly took 
it down from the cross, and reverently laid it 
away in Joseph’s new tomb after wrapping it in 
the linen clothes. 

Then, upon the expiration of the time appoint- 
ed, He who had died came forth in resurrection- 
life, and God the Father received Him up into 


46 Notes on Philippians 


glory. He has highly exalted Him, and given Him 
a name which is above every Name. He is the 
preeminent one in every sphere. How suited it is 
that His glory should thus answer to His shame. 
“As many were astonished at Him...so shall He 
astonish many nations” (Isa. 52:14,15, literal 
rendering). God has ordained it, and so it must 
be. At the name of Jesus—His personal name, 
which means Jehovah-the-Saviour — the name 
borne upon the title placed above His head as He 
hung upon the cross—every knee shall bow: 
heavenly, earthly, and infernal beings—all must 
own Him Lord of all. 

Observe that here, where it is a question of the 


recognition of His authority, three spherés are 


brought in, comprising all created intelligent be- 


ings—in heaven, earth and hell. There will be no 
exceptions. All must confess His Lordship to the 


glory of God the Father. All must bow in lowly 


submissiveness at the mention of the name of the 
Crucified. 


Does this then imply universal salvation, even 


the as 
some have taught? Surely not. Subjugation is’ 
one thing; reconciliation is another. When the 
latter is in question, we have but two spheres 
mentioned, as in Col. 1: 20: “Having made peace 
by the blood of his cross, by Him to reconcile all 


The Exaltation of the Man Christ Jesus 47 


things unto Himself; by Him, I say, whether they 
be things in earth or things in heaven.” There is 
here no mention of the underworld. The lost will) 
never be reconciled. Heaven and earth will even- 
tually be filled with happy beings who have been 
redeemed to God by the precious blood of Christ. 
Then reconciliation will be complete. 

But “under the earth” will be those who “have 
their part” in the outer darkness, the lake of fire. 
They flaunted Christ’s authority on earth. They 
will have to own it in hell! They refused to heed 
the call of grace and be reconciled to God in the 
day when they might have been saved. In the pit 
of woe no gospel message will ever be proclaimed, 
but the authority of the Lord Jesus Christ will be 
supremely enforced there too. There will be no 
disorder in hell; no further rebellion will be per- 
mitted. All must bow at the name of Jesus, and 
every tongue confess Him Lord. Scripture de- 
picts no wild pandemonium when describing the 
abode of the lost. 

How blessed to own His Lordship now, accord- 
ing as it is written, “That if thou shalt confess 
with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe 
in thy heart that God hath raised Him from the 
dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart 
man believeth unto righteousness; and with the 
mouth confession is made unto salvation” (Rom. 


48 Notes on Philippians 


10:9,10). How fitting it is that such, and such 
alone, should be eternally saved as a result of the 
work of the Cross. 


“Working out Salvation” 


(chap. 2: 12-16.) 


“Wherefore, my beloved, as ye have always obeyed, not 
as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, 
work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. For 
it is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of 
his good pleasure. Do all things without murmurings and 
disputings: that ye may be blameless and harmless, the 
sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and 
perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the 
world; holding forth the word of life; that I may rejoice 
in the day of Christ, that I have not run in vain, neither 
labored in vain.” 


HAVING thus occupied the hearts of the saints 
at Philippi with the self-abnegation of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, the apostle, as guided by the Holy 
Spirit, goes on, in the balance of this chapter, to 
apply the truth in a practical way. 

First, the verses now before us refer to assem- 
bly-life and responsibility. Then, from verse 17 
to the end of this chapter, three men are brought 
before us who were seeking to manifest in their 
lives the devotedness and self-denying concern for 
others that was seen in Christ as a Man on earth. 


“Working out Salvation” 49 


Verse 12 has often perplexed those who thought 
they saw clearly from Scripture the simplicity of 
salvation by grace, apart from works. Here, in 
seeming contrast to this, the apostle tells the 
saints to work out their own salvation, and that 
with fear and trembling, as though possibly there 
were danger that salvation might be forfeited be- 
cause of failure in properly working it out. 

Notice first, however, that the apostle does not 
speak of working for salvation, but of working it 
out, which is a very different thing. One might 
instance the quaint saying of the little girl who 
listened to a legal sermon preached upon this text 
by a minister who was insisting that none could 
be saved by grace alone, but all must work out 
their own salvation. Innocently she asked at the 
close of the service, ““Mother, how can you work 
it out if you haven’t got it in?” If it were in- 
dividual salvation that is here contemplated, it 
might be enough to say—it is your own; therefore 
manifest it—- work it out. But there is really 
more than this. For, taken in its full connection, 
it will be seen the passage refers to assembly sal- 
‘vation; rather than to the individual: that is, dir- 
ection is given to an assembly of Christians (ex- 
posed to difficulties from without and from within, 
passing through a world where all is in opposition 
to the testimony committed to them), showing 


50 Notes on Philippians 


them how to go on in fellowship together in spite 
of the fact that each individual has within him a 
corrupt nature, which will manifest itself to the 
detriment of the whole assembly, if given occa- 
sion. 

We have already noticed that there was some 
difficulty in the Philippian assembly, between two 
sisters of prominence, Euodia and Syntyche. This 
might easily become the occasion for distressing 
quarrels, and even division, if not judged in the 
presence of the Lord. Similar things might arise 
from time to time, and would need to be carefully 
watched against. When the apostle himself was 
with them, they could refer all such matters to 
him, and he would, so to speak, work out their 
salvation from these perplexities. He would ad- 
vise and guide as needed. Now he is far away, a 
prisoner for the gospel’s sake, and cannot per- 
sonally give the help he might desire. He, there- 
fore, directs them in his absence, as obedient chil- 
dren, to work out their own salvation in godly 
fear, and with exercise of soul, lest they depart 
from the right path, or miss the mind of God. 

Viewed from this standpoint, how salutary are 
his words for all future generations of Christians! 
There is no assembly of saints on earth but will 
probably, sooner or later, have its internal differ- 
ences, and the advice or command here given ap- 


“Working out Salvation” 51 


plies in just such cases. It is God’s way that 
assemblies should be put right from within, by 
self-judgment in His presence and submission to 
His word. 

How often do saints take the very opposite 
method. Questions arise to trouble and perplex; 
differences of judgment occur, and bickerings and 
quarrels begin. Instead of coming together in the 
presence of God for humiliation and guidance, 
seeking His mind from His own Word and acting 
accordingly, they apply to this one or that one out- 
side for help—often only to have things worse 
complicated. Those engaged in the ministry of 
the Word, traveling from place to place, are per- 
haps appealed to, and requested to adjudicate in 
matters which often only disturb their spirits, 
and, after all, cannot really effect the salvation of 
the assembly from the troubles that have arisen. 

It is easy to see how the clerical system arose, 
from such experiences. We see in the early 
Church, men of the stamp of Diotrephes, who 
loved to have the pre-eminence, and Nicolaitanes, 
that is, rulers of the people, who sought to bring 
the saints into bondage. And, on the other hand, 
it was very early made manifest that believers 
generally found it much easier to apply to noted 
preachers or teachers for help, than to be cast 
directly upon God and His Word themselves. Thus 


3.M. ELLIOTT LIBRARY 
Cincinnal) Bible College & Seminary 


52 Notes on Philippians 


gifted men became a court of appeal, and, eventu- 
ally, were recognized as “the clergy.” The same 
principle easily creeps in wherever saints look to 
men rather than to God and His Word. If it be 
said that they are too ignorant to know how to 
settle their differences, yet let it be remembered 
they have God, and the word of His grace; and if 
there be but humility and waiting upon Him, re- 
fusing to move until they find direction in the 
Book, He can be depended upon to help them 
work out their own salvation from whatever 
perplexing circumstances have arisen. He does 
not cast them upon their own resources, but on 
His Word, on Himself, who works in them the 
will to do His good pleasure. This does not mean 
that they should 


In verses 14 to 16 we see this working out of 
assembly salvation practically demonstrated. 
Murmurings and disputings must be judged in 
the presence of God. Instead of backbiting, and 
gossiping about matters, let the saints come to- 
gether before the Lord, and deal with them in the 
light of His revealed Word. Thus they shall be 
blameless and harmless, the sons of God indeed, 
without rebuke; walking in a manner worthy of 
the Lord, in the midst of a crooked and perverse 


“Working out Salvation” 53 


generation among whom they shine as lights in 
this dark world. Thus judging what would hin- 
der fellowship within, they are in a suited condi- 
tion to be a testimony to the power of grace to 
those without. And, as the apostle has already 


emphasized for us in chapter one, nothing so de- 


They who are busy 


holding forth the Word of Life have no time for 
selfish quarreling amongst themselves. 

In so walking, the saints would give joy to the 
heart of the apostle, and he could rejoice in the 
day of Christ: that is, it would be manifest at His 
judgment-seat that his labors in Philippi had not 
been in vain. The godly order and devoted gospel 
testimony would together witness to the reality 
of the work of God in and among them. 

Thus we see that “working out our own salva- 
tion” is simply submitting to the truth of God 
Bes we Ee been saved, in order that we may > 


of saints in the place of testimony. This will be 
“with fear and trembling” as we realize our lia- 
bility to err, the faultiness of our understanding 
and the holiness of the One whom we are called 


to serve in this scene. 


54 Notes on Philippians 


The Mind of Christ Exemplified in the Apostle Paul 
(chap. 2: 17, 18.) 
“Yea, and if I be offered upon the sacrifice and service 


of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you all. For the same 
cause also do ye joy, and rejoice with me.” 


THE apostolic writer now goes on to cite, though 


in an apparently casual way, three examples of 


who have exemplified in their ways the spirit of 
Christ. The first of these is himself, and of his 
testimony we shall now speak. The other two 
are Timothy and Epaphroditus, whose lowly ways 
and devoted service will occupy us later. 

Possibly no other mortal man ever drank into 
the spirit of Christ so deeply as the great apostle 
to the Gentiles. Once a proud, haughty Pharisee, 
glorying in his own righteousness, burning with 
indignant bigotry against any who pretended to a 
higher revelation than that given in Judaism, he 
had been transformed by a sight of the glorified 
Christ, when, religious persecutor as he was, he 
was hurrying to Damascus to apprehend any who 
confessed the name of Jesus. The sight of the 
once-crucified, but now enthroned Saviour, at 
God’s right hand, was the means of a conversion 
so radical and so sudden, that probably no other 
since has been so intense. 


The Mind of Christ Exemplified 55 


From that moment it was the one desire of his 
soul, over-mastering all else, the inmost yearning 
of his being, to manifest Christ in all his ways. 
Yet he was not an absolutely sinless man, nor 
without the infirmities common to the human 


race. But he was one who ever sought to judge 


His whole 
philosophy of life is summed up in his fervent 
words to the Galatians, “But God forbid that I 
should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, 
and I unto the world” (Gal. 6:14). 

It was in this spirit that he could write to his 
beloved Philippians, ‘‘Yea, and if I be offered 
(literally “poured out”) upon the sacrifice and 
service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with you 
all.”” He had just told them that 


of Christ would be to find them approved, as hav- 
ing walked before God in this scene as unre- 
buked saints earnestly engaged in holding forth 
the word of life in a dark world: their abundant 
service and the reward meted out to them, he 
would look upon as reward to himself. He would 
thus feel that he had not run in vain, neither 
labored in vain. He was willing to count all his 


service as but an adjunct of theirs; to have their 
labors and devotedness looked upon as the com- 


56 Notes on Philippians 


pletion of a work of which his was just the be- 
ginning. 

In order properly to understand this 17th verse, 
it is necessary to observe carefully what the apos- 
tle has in mind. When he says, “If I be poured 
out upon the sacrifice of your faith,” he alludes 
to the drink-offering. This was a cup of wine, 
which was poured out upon the burnt-offering, 


and was typical of the out-pouring of our Lord 


that might naturally be ex- 
pected to contribute to his joys as a man. Wine 


What man ever de- 
served to be happier than the Lord Jesus Christ? 
To whom was gladness a righteous due, if not to 
Him? Yet, in infinite grace, He became ‘‘a Man 
of sorrows and acquainted with grief.” The burnt- 
offering spoke of Him in the highest sense as 
offering Himself without spot to God, but on our 
behalf. In the sacrificial service, the burnt-offer- 
ing having been slain was cut in its pieces, was 
washed with water, then laid in order upon the 
fire of the altar and wholly consumed. The drink- 
offering was simply poured out upon it, and in 
a moment was lost to sight. Now, with this in 
mind, consider the beauty of the figure the apos- 
tle here employs. Whatever service the Philippians 
might be able to render to the Lord, would be in 


The Mind of Christ Exemplified 57 


fellowship with Christ, and thus their devoted- 
ness could be viewed as an offering or a sacrifice 
of a sweet-smelling savor unto God. It was the 
result of lives surrendered to the Lord, and Paul 


upon as the adjunct of theirs; as the drink-offer- 
ing poured upon the burnt-offering. 

What sublime self-abnegation was this! What 
delight in the labors of others! What absence of 
that which sometimes is so abhorrent in professed 
Christian service to-day! Laborers sometimes 
are jealous of the ministry of others, and envious 
of a success in which they think they have not 
shared. There was no such spirit in the apostle 
Paul. He rejoiced in everything that the Lord 
did through others, and his jealousy was only 
for the glory of God. 

And so in this he followed Christ, and he could 
confidently appeal to them to follow him, as he 
walked in His steps. So he would have them joy 
and rejoice with him in the mutual devotedness 
of both. 

It is significant that he speaks of himself and 
his service in this incidental way—in but one 
verse. When he turns to write of his fellow- 
laborer, Timothy, and of their messenger, Epa- 
phroditus, how much more he has to say. He 
could dwell with delight on the labors and service 


58 Notes on Philippians 


of others, but when writing of himself, as he tells 
us elsewhere, he felt as though he were speaking 
as a fool. 


Timothy, the Unselfish Pastor 
(chap. 2: 19-24.) 

“But I trust in the Lord Jesus to send Timotheus shortly 
unto you, that I also may be of good comfort, when I know 
your state. For I have no man likeminded, who will na- 
turally care for your state. For all seek their own, not 
the things which are Jesus Christ’s. But ye know the 
proof of him, that, as a son with the father, he hath 
served with me in the gospel. Him therefore I hope to 
send presently, so soon as I shall see how it will go with 


me. But I trust in the Lord that I also myself shall come 
shortly.” 


PAUL was not only an ardent evangelist, but 


he was also the prince of teachers, and, like his 
fellow-apostle Peter, a true pastor, or shepherd, 
of the flock of Christ. In this latter respect the 


young preacher Timothy was his ardent imitator. 
Whatever other gifts he may have had, that spe- 
cial gift which was given him in connection with 
the laying on of the elder brethren’s hands, when 
he went out in the work of the Lord, was proba- 
bly that of the pastor. This is perhaps one of the 
rarest, and yet one of the most needed, of all the 
gifts given by an ascended Christ for the edifica- 


tion of His Church. The evangelist ministers to 
those without Christ; the teacher instructs those 


Timothy, the Unselfish Pastor 59 


knowledge of abstract truth, though recognizing, 


of course, that saints are formed by the truth, and 
that a right state of soul and a walk in the truth 
go together. 


Paul, therefore, was anxious to send Timothy 
to Philippi, that he might be a help and a means 
of blessing to the assembly there, trusting that 
he might be used of God to weld their hearts into 
one, and deliver them from the dissensions that 
had come in through the misunderstanding be- 
tween Euodia and Synteche. He felt that he could 
depend on Timothy’s judgment, and he counted 
on being himself comforted when he actually knew 
their state. 

As often pointed out by others, and clearly de- 
veloped in different parts of Scripture, our stand- 
ing before God is one thing, our actual state is 
another. It was as to the latter that Paul was 
concerned. He did not know of anyone else with 
the same unselfish shepherd-heart as Timothy, 
who would whole-souledly care for their state. 
The word “naturally” does not adequately give 


the thought. ‘Dimothy’s pastoral concern was not 
a gift of nature, but a spiritual one, the result of 
exercise of soul before God; and his whole soul 


60 Notes on Philippians 


Of others, however gifted in various ways, the 
apostle could only sadly say, “They seek their 
own, and not the things which are Jesus Christ’s.” 

It is quite possible to be an admired teacher, 
upon whose words thousands hang, or an eloquent 
evangelist with eager multitudes flocking to listen 
with delight to his messages, and yet be a vain 
self-seeker, using the very gift that God has 
given, for personal aggrandizement, or to obtain 
wealth, even while professing to care little or 
nothing for money. But the more marked the 
‘pastoral gift, of very necessity the more unselfish- 
ly devoted must the servant be. It will be his 
great ambition to feed the flock and shield them 
from their dangers. 


The patriarch Jacob is an apt illustration of the 
true shepherd. Despite all his failures, and the 
fact that he was largely under the discipline of 
God through the greater part of his life, he was, 
nevertheless, 2 lover of the flock, and ever consid- 
erate of their interests. Speaking to Laban, his 
father-in-law, he could honestly say, as he looked 
back over his years of caring for the sheep, “Thus 
I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and 
the frost by night; and my sleep departed from 
mine eyes” (Gen. 31:40). And in expostulating 
with his brother Esau, who would have him hurry 
on with all his host, he says, “My lord knoweth 


Timothy, the Unselfish Pastor 61 


that the children are tender, and the flocks and 
herds with young are with me: and if men should 
overdrive them one day, all the flock will die” 
(Gen. 33:13). A Diotrephes might try to cajole 
or coerce the flock into submission to his own im- 
perious will, but a God-appointed shepherd will 
seek to lead on safely, wearing himself out for the 
blessing of others—not seeking to impress his own 
will, but to serve the Lord, and to exalt Him. 

As a son with a father, Timothy had commend- 
ed himself to the aged apostle, serving with him 
in the gospel in all lowliness and humility. Youth 
is often exceedingly energetic, and impatient of 
restraint. Age is inclined, perhaps, to be over- 
cautious and slow in coming to conclusions, and it 
often is a great difficulty for two, so wide apart in 
years as Paul and Timothy, to labor together hap- 
pily. But where the younger man manifests the 
spirit that was in Timothy, and the elder seeks 
only the glory of God and the blessing of His peo- 
ple, such fellowship in service becomes indeed 
blessed. 

Having thus proven himself, Paul could trust 
Timothy on a mission such as that upon which he 
was about to send him. He was waiting to learn 
the outcome of his appeal to Cesar, and then he 
hoped to send him on to Philippi to be a healer of 
dissensions, and thus a means of cheer and con- 


62 Notes on Philippians 


solation to the assembly. Timothy followed Paul 
as he followed Christ; he thus became the second 
in this company of men who were worthy to be 
held up as examples of those who manifested the 
mind of Christ. 

It was the apostle’s desire and hope to follow 
later himself and again visit his beloved Philip- 
pians; but whether this yearning was ever ful- 
filled we perhaps shall never know, until all is 
manifested at the judgment-seat of Christ. Pre- 
cious is the faith that can leave all with Him, as- 
sured that His ways are always perfect—always 
best! 


Epaphroditus, the Devoted Messenger 
(chap. 2: 25-30.) 


“Yet I supposed it necessary to send to you Epaphrodi- 
tus, my brother, and companion in labor, and fellow-sol- 
dier, but your messenger, and he that ministered to my 
wants. For he longed after you all, and was full of 
heaviness, because ye had heard that he had been sick. 
For indeed he was sick, nigh unto death: but God had 
mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, lest 
I should have sorrow upon sorrow. I sent him therefore 
the more carefully, that, when ye see him again, ye may 
rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful. Receive 
him therefore in the Lord with all gladness; and hold 
such in reputation; because for the work of Christ he 
was nigh unto death, not regarding his life, to supply 
your lack of service toward me.” 


Epaphroditus, the Devoted Messenger 63 


‘father in Christ. Burning with love towards the 


Lord’s dear servant who was shut up in prison 
for the gospel’s sake, he took the long journey 
from Macedonia to Rome, the world’s metropolis 
(whether by land or sea we have now no means of 
knowing), in order to assure him of the love and 
esteem of the assembly, and relieve his necessities 
by their gift. 

Having accomplished his purpose, he fell sick, 
possibly overcome by the Roman fever, so dan- 
gerous to strangers unacclimated. That his ill- 
ness was a protracted one is evident, for, ere he 
time enough had elapsed for 
word of his condition to reach the Philippians, 
and for a return message to get back to him, ex- 
pressing their solicitude for his health and an- 
xiety that he be restored to them again. It is 
touching to notice that Epaphroditus himself did 
not seem to be nearly so much concerned about 
his own illness as he was Seaiiaamei e it had been the 
cause of sorrow to them. 


paceicasc eT L _ 
well be expressed in the one word upon which we 
have already dwelt, “Others.” 

Now that he was well again he was anxious to 
be on his way, in order that he might comfort the 
assembly by his presence among them again, and 
by bringing to them this Philippian epistle, though 


64 Notes on Philippians 


it must have been hard for him to leave the apos- 
tle still a prisoner. It is evident from verse three 
of chapter four that he acted as amanuensis in 
the writing of this letter, which precious parch- 
ment he carried to Philippi, and thus preserved it 
for us and for all saints to the end of time—yea, 
and we may say forever! 

Of Epaphroditus we know nothing save what is 
here recorded, unless, as some think, he is to be 
identified with the Epaphras mentioned in the 
epistle to the Colossions. Epaphroditus means 
“favored of Aphrodite’—the Greek goddess of 
love and beauty, answering to the Roman Venus. 


This makes it manifest that he was of heathen 
parentage, but he had been brought to know 


Christ. Epaphras is said to be a diminutive of 
the same word with the name of the heathen god- 
dess omitted, and therefore simply meaning 
“graced” or “favored.” 

Having been won to Christ, he was character- 
ized by a godly zeal to make Him known to others, 
and to build up and lead on those already saved. 


as set forth in the beginning of this chapter. 
He may not have been physically strong; but, at 
any rate, he was a man who did not spare him- 
self; and for the work of Christ he was sick, nigh 
unto death. It is evident that sickness is not al- 


Epaphroditus, the Devoted Messenger 65 


ways the result of sin, as some have taught. In 
the case of this devoted man of God, it was the 
result of his self-denying activity on behalf of 
those to whom he ministered. His illness was the 
cause of deep sorrow to Paul himself, and, no 
doubt, led to much prayer on his behalf, and God 
answered, showing mercy, and raised him up. 
Let it be noted that the apostle did not consider 


he had any right to demand physical healing even 


for so faithful a laborer as Epaphroditus. Paul 
recognized it as simply the mercy of God, not as 
that to which saints have a right. This is true di- 
vine healing. And let it be remembered that sick- 
ness may be as really from God as health. It is 
clear that Paul never held or taught “healing in 
the atonement,” and therefore the birth-right 
privilege of all Christians. Nor do we ever read 
of him or his fellow-laborers being miraculously 
healed. Paul himself, Trophimus, Timothy and 
Epaphroditus, all bear witness to the contrary. 
The apostle urges the saints to receive their mes- 
senger, when he should return to them, with all 
gladness, and commands them to hold such in re- 
putation, because for the work of Christ he had 
been sick, nigh unto death, not regarding his life 
in order to serve Paul in their stead. 

Such are the men whom God delights to honor. 


Like the Lord Jesus, 


66 Notes on Philippians 


of no reputation, and because of his very lowli- 
ness he is to be held in reputation. The man who 


holds himself as one worthy of honor and esteem 
is not the one whom God calls upon the saints 
thus to recognize; but he who is willing to take 
the lowly path, seeking not great things for him- 
self, is the man whom the Lord will exalt in due 
time. 

Salutary lessons are thus manifested in all these 
three devoted men of God, upon whose self-deny- 
ing ways we have meditated. May we have grace 
to follow them as they followed Christ! 


CHAPTER THREE 


CHRIST, THE BELIEVER’S OBJECT, AND THE 
STEADFAST MIND 


“Rejoice” 
(vers. 1-3.) 


“Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord. To write the 
same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for 
you it is safe. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, 
beware of the concision. For we are the circumcision, 
which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ 
Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.’ 


AREFUL students of the epistles of Paul 
cannot but notice a peculiarity that fre- 
quently occurs in them. Having conclud- 

ed the main part of his treatise, he seems about 
to come to an abrupt conclusion, then suddenly 
is moved by the Spirit of God to launch out into 
an altogether different line of things, which comes 
in as a kind of a parenthesis, ere he actually fin- 
ishes his letter. An instance of this may be seen 
in the epistle to the Ephesians by comparing the 
first verses of chapters three and four. It is plain 
that all of chapter three, after verse one, comes in 
parenthetically, and in chapter four he concludes 
what he started to say. Here in Philippians we 
have a similar case: ‘Finally, my brethren,” he 


68 Notes on Philippians 


writes, “rejoice in the Lord;” and yet, when we 
come to chapter 4:8, where he introduces his 
closing remarks, we again have the same expres- 
sion: “Finally, brethren.” All of chapter 3 is a 
new subject, which, as we might think, he had 
no intention of discussing until pressed by the 
Holy Spirit to bring in a message for which we 
can truly thank God, as we would have lost much 
precious ministry had it been omitted. 

It has often been said that this letter is the 
epistle of joy, and indeed it is. The apostle him- 
self writes with his own heart filled with the joy- 
ful recollection of his past experiences in connec- 
tion with those scenes so dear to him, and he de- 
sires them to fulfil his joy, to share with him in 
the gladness that was his in Christ; and so we 
have this brief exhortation, “Rejoice in the Lord.” 
Circumstances may at times be anything but con- 
ducive to either peace or gladness, yet the trust- 
ing soul can always look above the fitful scenes of 
earth to the throne where Christ sits exalted as 
Lord at God’s right hand. He is over all. There 
are no second causes with Him. “Shall there be 
evil in the city and the Lord hath not done it?” 
asks the prophet. It is “evil,” not in the sense of 
sin, of course, but of calamity, even if that calam- 
ity be the result of sin; nevertheless, it cannot 
come save as permitted by the Lord. And know- 


“Rejoice” 69 


ing that “All things work together for good to 
those who love God, who are the called according 
to His purpose,” why should the believer either 
doubt or fear? Waves may roll high; stormy 
winds may beat tempestuously; all to which the 
heart had clung may seem to be swept away; but 
Christ abides unchanged and unchangeable, the 
everlasting portion of those who trust His grace. 


We read on one occasion how David, when the 
people spoke of stoning him because of a calami- 
tous event for which they held him largely respon- 
sible, “encouraged himself in the Lord his God.” 
“The joy of the Lord is your strength,” Nehemiah 
reminded the remnant of Israel; and ere return- 
ing to the Father’s house from which He came, 
the Lord Jesus imparted His joy to the trembling 
company of His disciples. Therefore it is not 
only the Christian’s privilege, but we may even 
say, his duty, to constantly rejoice in the Lord. 
Holiness and happiness are intimately linked to- 
gether. 

And yet how often we need to be reminded of 
this; as our apostle does here: “To write the same 
things to you to me indeed is not irksome, but for 
you it is safe.” It is well that we should fre- 
quently be exhorted to “rejoice in the Lord.” 

But now the mind of the Spirit refers to an- 
other line of things entirely. For our busy enemy 


70 Notes on Philippians 


has so many agencies through which he seeks to 
rob us of that joy in the Lord which is our right- 
ful portion, that ‘three times over in the second 
verse we have the significant word “beware.” 

“Beware of dogs.”’ The Jew used this oppro- 
brious title when speaking of the Gentiles who 
did not bear in their bodies the mark of the Abra- 
hamic covenant. But in the prophet Isaiah, God 
uses the term to distinguish false pastors or shep- 
herds in Israel: “His watchmen are blind: they 
are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs, they 
cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slum- 
ber. Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never 
have enough, and they are shepherds that cannot 
understand: they all look to their own way, every 
one for his gain, from his quarter” (Isa. 56: 10, 
11). And it is plain that when the apostle Peter 
says, “The dog has turned to his own vomit 
again,” it symbolizes the false religious teacher 
going back to the things he once professed to 
abhor. 


Now the Philippians, like the early Christians 
in general, were peculiarly exposed to the ravages 
of such “dogs.” Evil teachers they were, from 
Judaism, among the flock of Christ, with the pur- 
pose of perverting the saints, and leading them 
back into bondage; and that for their own selfish 
ends; they are here, by the Holy Spirit, desig- 


“Rejoice” 71 


nated by this opprobrious term. They were in- 
troducing themselves among the assemblies of 
God to rend the flock of Christ, that they might 
have special recognition as leaders in the new 
company. Professing to be ministers of Christ, 
they were in reality servants of Satan, as their 
works proved. No heart have they for the afflicted 
sheep and lambs for whom Christ died. They 
would feed themselves, and not the flock, and their 
judgment is assured. 

Consequently he adds, “Beware of evil work- 
ers.’ We need not necessarily distinguish the 
evil workers from the dogs, for false teachers, 
whatever their profession of righteousness, are, 
nevertheless, workers of iniquity. Another figure 
employed by the Lord in referring to the same 
general class, is that of “wolves in sheeps’ cloth- 
ing”—deceiving, misleading, destroying, working 
havoc among those who confess Christ’s precious ~ 
name. Legality, while professing to have in view 
greater righteousness than that produced by 
grace, yet proves to be, as the law itself is, simply 
“the strength of sin” (see 1 Cor. 15: 56). 

“Beware of the concision,” says the apostle — 
i. e€., mere mutilators of the body. It is a con- 
temptuous term he uses to designate those who 
taught that the observance of circumcision was _ 
imperative to give one a full standing before God. 


72 Notes on Philippians 


The apostle will not allow that the mere ordinance 
is really circumcision. The only true circum- 
cision since the Cross is, not a carnal ordinance, 
but the putting off of the sins of the flesh—the 
heart-recognition of the fact that the flesh has 
been put to death in the cross of Christ. It is 
only as the soul enters into this, and uses the 
sharp knife of self-judgment upon the flesh, that 
one is delivered from its power. 

The mere externalists, including legalists and 
ritualists of all descriptions, always make more 
of ordinances and outward forms than of the con- 
dition of the soul and the spiritual truths sym- 
bolized by those ordinances. In Israel we may see 
this in the fullest way. They boasted themselves 
of their connection with the temple of the Lord, 
and gloried in ordinances and legal observances, 
while actually far from God and under His dis- 
approval. Nor should Christians forget that it is 
just as possible for believers now to be occupied 
with ordinances and church position,while forget- 
ting the more important things of true piety and 
self-judgment. Nothing that God has commanded 
is unimportant; but our Lord said to the Jews of 
His times, concerning their intense regard for 
ordinances and neglect of justice and mercy, 
“These ought ye to have done, and not to have 
left the other undone.” 


“Rejoice” 73 

In the third verse, we have four distinct state- 

ments made, which we do well to consider in de- 
tail. 


baa 


First: “We are the circumcision,” that is, we 
are those who have accepted by faith the end of. 
all flesh in the cross of Christ. We recognize its 
utter corruption and its powerlessness for service 
to God, even though placed under the most careful 
training and supervision. We have, therefore, 
put it off in the cross of Christ, ‘““Where there is 
neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncir- 
cision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free; but 
Christ is all, and in all” (Col.3:11). We began 
with God by accepting the mark of judgment up- 
on the flesh; we do not now look for anything 
good in it, but triumph only in Christ. 


Second: “We worship by the Spirit of God.” 
The worship of the old dispensation was largely 
of a ritualistic character, but the Lord Jesus told 
the Samaritan woman, “The hour is coming, and 
now is, when the rorshipers shall worship — 
the Father in spirit en in ntrathy” Outward forms 
and services, music and genuflections, do not con- 
stitute worship. They may even be hindrances to 
it. Real worship is that of the heart, when the 
Spirit of God takes of the things of Christ and 
shows them unto us. As we are occupied with 


74 Notes on Philippians 


Him, true praise and adoration ascend to the 
Father. 

Third: “We glory in Christ Jesus.” Our boast 
is in the Lord. We are, ourselves, utterly unpro- 
fitable, having nothing about us to commend us 
to Him who, in gree has saved us. All our boast 

ving-kindness and His mighty power 
exercised in eee on our behalf. 

Lastly he adds: “We have no confidence in th 
flesh.” The flesh of the believer is no more to be 
trusted than the flesh of the vilest sinner. Re- 
generation is not a changing of flesh into spirit; 
nor is that sanctification in which we stand before 
God a gradual process of such a change within 
us. “That which is born of the flesh is flesh, and 
that which is born of the Spirit is spirit.” The 
fleshly nature is never improved, and the new 
nature received in new birth does not require 
improvement. “The carnal mind is not subject 
to the law of God, neither indeed can be.” And 
the spiritual mind is the mind of Christ. It is 
sienna 

‘ lesires of the flesh. But even after 
years ne iS saly emit the flesh itself is not one 
whit better than it was at the very beginning of 
our Christian life. Therefore, we dare not trust 
it, knowing that, however blessed the work of God 
is in our souls, “in our flesh dwells no good thing.” 


Self-conjidence set aside for Christ 75 


Self-confidence set aside for Christ 
(chap. 3: 4-7.) 


“Though I might also have confidence in the flesh. If 
any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might 
trust in the flesh, I more: circumcised the eighth day, of 
the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of 
the Hebrews; as touching the law, a Pharisee; concern- 
ing zeal, persecuting the church; touching the righteous- 
ness which is in the law, blameless. But what things 
were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ.” 


PAUL’S own experience comes in aptly to en- 
force the expression used in verse three, as to 
which we have been speaking. He had learned 
experimentally the utter unprofitableness of the 
flesh. Looked at from a human standpoint, he 
had far more to glory in before he was converted 
to Christ than any of the “concision” among the 
Philippians could possibly have even afterwards. 
If any had ground for confidence in the flesh, or 
thought he had, Paul could say, “I more.” For 
they, to whom he wrote, were Gentiles according 
to natural birth, and, therefore, strangers to the 
covenants of promise, aliens, and without the 
true God in the world. 

But it was otherwise with the apostle. He was 
born within the circle of the covenant. He bore 
upon his body the mark that he was within the 


76 Notes on Philippians 


sphere of the Abrahamic promise— he was cir- 
cumcised on the eighth day, and thus marked off 
from the Gentile world. Nor were his parents 
“proselytes of the gate,” as Gentiles were called 
who had forsaken idolatry, and, turning to the 
God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, had come with- 
in the blessings of the cevenant through this rite. 
He, Paul, was of the stock of Israel; for genera- 
tions back his family had belonged to the covenant 
people. Then, too, he was descended, not from 
a bond-woman but from the favorite wife of 
Jacob. Moreover, when the ten tribes revolted 
and turned away from the house of David, the 
particular tribe from which he sprung, that of 
Benjamin, had remained true to Jehovah’s centre 
and loyal to the true kingly line. For though 
Benjamin had failed grievously in the days of the 
Judges, so that they were like to have been ex- 
terminated out of Israel, yet afterwards, through 
enabling grace, they remained steadfast in the 
face of grave departure, and thus won for them- 
selves an immortal name. To be a Benjamite was 
something in which the flesh might well pride 
itself. 

And as to positive religious conviction, Saul of 
Tarsus had been a Hebrew of the Hebrews. He 
was no mere Jew by birth, as some who are in- 
different to their Hebrew faith. To the very core 


Self-confidence set aside for Christ Cie 


of his being he was a follower of the first He- 
brew, Abraham himself. As touching the law, 
he was in practice, faith, and name, a Pharisee. 
Of the various Jewish sects existing in his day, 
the Pharisees were the most intensely orthodox, 
and clung most tenaciously not only to the re- 
vealed word of God, but to a vast body of human 
traditions which had been handed down from 
their forefathers, and had become in their eyes 
as sacred as the written Word itself. It is true that 
our Lord describes many of them as hypocrites, 
but on the other hand, when He wishes to empha- 
size the need of positive righteousness, He says, 
“Except your righteousness exceeds that of the 
scribes and Pharisees ye shall in no wise enter 
into the kingdom of heaven.” He would not have 
thus spoken if it were not well known that the 
Pharisees insisted on obedience to the law of 
God; and Paul himself said, on another occasion, 
“After the most straitest sect of our religion, I 
lived a Pharisee.” He lived what he professed, 
and that was Judaism of the strictest kind. 

His zeal for the traditions of the elders was 
seen in the fact that he was a relentless perse- 
cutor of the newly-born assembly of God. ‘“Ex- 
ceedingly mad against them,” as he himself con- 
fessed, he “persecuted them unto strange cities,” 
and even “compelled them to blaspheme.” Yet 


78 Notes on Philippians 


there is no evidence that he was naturally a man 
of fierce and implacable disposition. In fact, the 
words of the glorified Lord, “It is hard for thee to 
kick against the goads,” would seem to imply the 
contrary.* What he did, he did from a stern 
sense of duty, not as the fulfilment of his natural 
desires. ‘Touching the righteousness which the 
law demanded, he was outwardly blameless. He 
tells us in the 7th of Romans that of all the com- 
mandments there was only one which really con- 
victed him of sin, and the violation of that one 
commandment, there was no external way of de- 
tecting. Who that looked upon the stalwart cham- 
pion of Jewish orthodoxy could see the covetous- 
ness that was in his heart? His outward life 
gave no evidence of it. Therefore he could speak 
of himself as blameless. 

But when this religious bigot, this stern un- 
yielding champion of what he believed to be the 
truth of God, was brought into contact with the 
glorified Christ—that never-to-be-forgotten day 


*Does not the expression imply, however, that Saul had 
fought against the testimonies to his conscience?—such as 
Stephen’s, whose face they saw “shining as an angel’s” 
while testifying before the council of the Jews, yet to 
whose death Saul gave his vote, keeping the garments of 
those that stoned him. And how many other appeals to 
his conscience, if not to his heart, there must have been 
as he beat and dragged men and women to prison, com- 
pelling them to blaspheme Jesus, if possible!—[Ep. 


Self-confidence set aside for Christ %9 


on the Damascus turn-pike—he realized in one 
moment the fact declared by the prophet that “all 
our righteousnesses are as filthy rags.’”’ And these 
things which were gain to him—these things on 
which he had been building his hopes for eternity 
—these things which gave him a standing before 
the eyes of his fellows and caused them to look 
upon him with admiration, he now saw in their 
true light—as utterly worthless and polluted gar- 
ments, unfit to cover him before the eyes of a 
holy God, and deserving only to be cast away. 
Therefore he exclaims, “What things were gain 
to me, those I counted loss for Christ.” 

Let it be carefully noted that he did not count 
them loss merely for Christianity. In other 
words, he was not simply exchanging one religion 
for another; it was not one system of rites and 
ceremonies giving place to a superior system; or 
one set of doctrines, rules and regulations mak~ 
ing way for a better one. Often this has been all 
that conversion has meant. Many people have 
thought that “changing their religion” was all 
that God required of them. But it was otherwise 
with Saul. He had come into actual contact with 
a divine Person, the once crucified, but now glori- 
fied Christ of God. He had been won by that Per- 
son forever, and for His sake he counted all else 
but loss. If any fall short of this, they are missing 


80 Notes on Philippians 


entirely the point here emphasized. Christ, and 
Christ alone, meets every need of the soul. His 
work has satisfied God, and it satisfies the one 
who trusts in Him. By resting in Christ, confi- 
dence in the flesh is forever at an end. All con- 
fidence is in Him who died and rose again, and 
who ever liveth to make intercession for us. 


Paul’s Steadfast Purpose 
(chap. 3: 8-11.) 


“Yea, doubtless, and I count all things to be loss for the 
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord: for 
whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count 
them but refuse that I may win Christ, and be found in 
Him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the 
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, the 
righteousness which is of God by faith; that I may know 
Him and the power of his resurrection, and the fellow- 
ship of his sufferings, being made conformable unto his 
death; if by any means I might attain unto the out- 
resurrection from among the dead” (last part, literal 
rendering). 


IT should be noted that many years of faithful 
witness-bearing intervene between verse 7, which 
closed our last section, and verse 8, which opens 
this. Not only had Paul counted all things but 
loss for Christ when first he saw His glory on 
the road to Damascus, but the long arduous years 
since had brought in no change as to this. He 


Paul’s Steadfast Purpose 81 


still counted all things to be of no worth as com- 
pared with that which had so dazzled the vision 
of his soul—the excellency of the knowledge of 
Christ Jesus the Lord. How different it is with 
many: fervent and self-sacrificing in their first 
love, how soon the fine gold of their devotedness 
becomes dimmed and their early freshness passes 
away! The world, which once seemed so worth- 
less in view of the matchless glory shining in the 
face of the Saviour, begins again to exercise at- 
tractive power when the heart has “begun to wax 
wanton against Christ.” It was blessedly other- 
wise with our apostle. Never for one moment 
did he go back on the great renunciation he had 
made when first won for that exalted Jesus whom 
he had ignorantly persecuted. 

And so in this section of the epistle he re- 
affirms the faith with which he began. He still 
counted all that earth could offer as dross and 
refuse when placed alongside of Christ’s surpass- 
ing glory, which was the one great object ever be- 
fore him. And this was not with him mere mys- 
tical rhapsodizing, for already had he suffered the 
loss of all things, even of liberty itself, as we 
know (though in these verses he does not refer 
to it), and this was all in accord with the domin- 
ant purpose of his life, that he might win Christ 
and be found in Him in the great consummation. 


82 Notes on Philippians 


It is not that he is putting the “being found in 
Christ” on the ground of attainment, or as some- 
thing to be earned by self-abnegation, but he is 
letting us into the secret of the supreme emotion 
of his being. It is as though he were saying, 
“Ever since I saw Christ in the glory of God I 
have considered nothing else as worth living for. 
He has so won my heart that nothing now counts 
with me but the blessedness we ange Him, of 
being completely identified with Him both in life 
and in death, yea, and beyond ent I would not 
stand before God in a righteousness of my own 
now if I could. I desire only to be found in Him. 
I long only to know Him more intimately, let the 
suffering involved be what it may; I would even 
die as He died at last, if need be—any way that 
He may choose, that at last, whatever way may 
lead me to it, I shall attain to the great rapture 
of all saints at His coming, the glorious out-resur- 
rection from among the dead. This for me will 
be the goal attained which has been for so long 
before my soul; for then I shall be so completely 
identified with Him who has won my heart to 
Himself, that I shall be like Him forever, and 
with Him through all the ages to come.” 


IT have sought thus to paraphrase his words in 
order that it may be clearly seen that there is here 
no element of uncertainty involved in them, as 


Paul’s Steadfast Purpose 83 


many have supposed, and some have taught. He 
did not fear that he might miss the first resurrec- 
tion through unfaithfulness or lack of watchful- 
ness. Nor was this out-resurrection from among 
the dead a matter of present experience (as the 
verses following show), but refers to -that one 
great event for which every instructed Christian 
should wait with eagerness—the coming of the 
Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together un- 
to Him. 

To teach that the rapture is only for,certain de- 
voted saints, and that even Paul himself was 
haunted with the fear that he would come short 
of it, would be to lose entirely the sense of the 
rich grace of God, which is to work in us that 
glorious change which will make us like Him 
for whom we wait. The uniform teaching of the 
apostle is that “they that are Christ’s” shall rise 
“at His coming.” And in this hope the aged pris- 
oner of the Lord faced the prospect of martyr- 
dom in its most cruel form. It would be but the 
appointed means by which he should attain unto 
the blessedness of the first resurrection. 

Nor, it seems to me, can we with propriety say 
that what the apostle has in mind is the power 
of resurrection-life working in him here on earth 
so that he may live in the first-resurrection ex- 
perience, as some have designated it. This would 


84 Notes on Philippians 


be dangerously near to the “death to nature” 
theories promulgated by earnest but misled men in 
the last century, and which resulted in grave 
departures from sobriety and scriptural order. 
None had more fully entered into that knowledge 
of “the power of His resurrection” in his human 
body than did the apostle, yet he puts the having 
part in the out-resurrection as the climax of all 
his years of devoted service. Everything would 
be incomplete without that. Nor do I know of 
any other place in the word of God where the ex- 
pression is used as referring to a believer’s ex- 
perience. In fact there is added here a second 
preposition to intensify the thought of a selec- 
tive resurrection; otherwise it is the regular ex- 
pression which distinguishes the first resurrec- 
tion from the second which brings up the remain- 
ing dead for judgment (Rev. 20: 4, 5). 

That there are two resurrections*— not one 
general rising of saved and unsaved at one time— 
I take it for granted is clear to my readers, as so 
much has been written and orally taught upon 
this subject in recent years. The resurrection of 
the just; the resurrection of life; the first resur- 
rection ; the resurrection from, or out of, the dead 


*If any are perplexed as to this, may I recommend “The 
Two Resurrections, and the Judgment,” by C. H. M. 


Paul’s Steadfast Purpose 85 


—these are all terms synonymous with the one 
the apostle uses here. 

It is with the eye and heart set upon this that 
the apostle can cast aside as so much impedimenta 
all that would cause him to glory in the flesh, or 
give others an occasion to glory on his behalf. 
Like the racer stripped for the contest, he strug- 
gles ardently on with his eye upon the goal, which 
is for him this out-resurrection. In view of it, 
suffering cannot daunt him, nor death terrorize 
him. He sees in both but an opportunity for ful- 
ler, sweeter fellowship with his Lord. He would 
count it all joy to drink of His cup of suffering, 
and to share in His baptism of death—the last of 
course only as witness-bearer, as was promised 
to James and John before him. 

How little do most of us enter into this holy 
“fellowship of His sufferings!” It is to be feared 
that some who make greatest pretension as to fel- 
lowship in things ecclesiastical, would be found 
sadly wanting when opportunity is given to enter 
into this fellowship of sorrow and of pain, in 
which, as in no other phase of fellowship, the soul 
enters into communion with Him who was on 
earth a Man of sorrows and acquainted with 


grief. 


86 Notes on Philippians 


Perfection in Two Aspects 
(chap. 3: 12-16.) 


“Not as though I had already attained, either were al- 
ready perfect: but I follow after, if that I may apprehend 
that for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. 
Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended; but 
this one thing I do, forgetting those things which are be- 
hind, and reaching forth unto those things which are be- 
fore, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high 
calling of God in Christ Jesus. Let us therefore, as many 
as be perfect, be thus minded: and if in anything ye be 
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. 
Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us 
walk by the same rule, let us mind the same thing.” 


VERY early in the history of the Church men 
arose who confounded certain spiritual experi- 
ences, real or fancied, with the teaching of the 
Lord Himself and His apostles in regard to the 
first resurrection. We know of two by name, 
Hymeneus and Philetus, of whom Paul wrote to 
Timothy that they had erred concerning the truth, 
“saying that the resurrection is past already,” 
and by this overthrew the faith of some. Noth- 
ing is more detrimental to Christian testimony 
than making high claims which cannot be sub- 
stantiated by experience—as some who take the 
ground of sinlessness, or of the eradication of an 
evil nature, because their teachers instructed 
them that this is their privilege as Christians. If 


Perfection in Two Aspects 87 


after-experience proves that it is impossible to 
maintain this practically, there is grave danger 
that they will become utterly disheartened, and 
possibly renounce the faith entirely, unless pre- 
served by divine grace. 

The apostle, therefore, is careful to make it 
clear that he did not claim to have reached a state 
of resurrection-perfectness while here upon earth. 
=e uses a word, in this instance, which means 

steness, that to which nothing can be added. 
This state he declares, he had not already at- 
tained. But he had it in view, for he knew that, 
at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, he would 
be made like Himself, and thus forever free from 
all tendency to sin. Meantime, he could but fol- 
low after, seeking earnestly to lay hold of that 
for which Christ Jesus had laid hold of him, and 
in a devoted life to exemplify the power of 
Christ’s resurrection, in which he shared. The 
13th and 14th verses might, perhaps, better be 
rendered as follows: “Brethren, I count not my- 
self to have apprehended; but this one thing, for- 
getting those things which are behind and reach- 
ing forth unto those things which are before, I 
press toward the mark for the prize of the calling 
of God on high in Christ Jesus.” What he says 
is that there is only one thing he professes to have 
apprehended, or laid hold of, namely, that the 


88 Notes on Philippians 


path of blessing is found in forgetting the things 
that are past, and seeking to lay hold, practically, 
of his portion in Christ from day to day while 
ever keeping the goal in view. To do this is to 
“follow holiness, apart from which no man shall 
see the Lord.” It is a great mistake to teach that 
this verse means that unless one attains to certain 
experiences in holy living he will be forever de- 
barred from a sight of the Lord; it impresses the 
fact upon us, rather, that he who will see the Lord 
is one who follows that which characterized his 
Master here—an inward and outward separation 
from all that is contrary to the mind of God. 

The calling of God on high, is that heavenly 
calling which is characteristic of the present dis- 
pensation of grace. Christ is no longer on earth, 
His world-kingdom has not yet been set up, but 
believers are linked with Him as the glorified Man 
at God’s right hand, and they are called to re- 
present Him in this scene. The prize is the reward 
conferred by His own hand at the end of the race, 
and toward this Paul was pressing on, counting as 
dross and refuse all that would hinder his pro- 
gress. 

To his fellow-believers he says, “Let us, there- 
fore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded.” 
Are we then to understand that there is real or 
implied contradiction here to what has gone be- 


Perfection in Two Aspects 89 


fore? He has told us that he was not perfect. 
Here he speaks as though he were, and links 
others with him in this perfection. The fact is, 
a somewhat different word is here used from that 
of verse 12. It implies perfection in growth—in 
development. An apple in June may be a perfect 
apple, so far, but it will have much greater com- 
pleteness, or perfection in that sense, in August 
or September. And so with the believer. 

The perfection of verse 15 is that of full 
growth, answering somewhat, if not altogether, 
to the “fathers” of 1st John, chap.2. Such have 
eschewed the world and its follies. Christ has be- 
come to them the one Object before the soul. To 
live for Him and seek His glory is the only thing 
that counts in their estimation. And yet such 
saints are still compassed with infirmity. They 
are likely to err in judgment; they may make 
grave mistakes, and come to wrong conclusions— 
influenced as we are by early education, by en- 
vironment, by mental capacity—and may even be 
misled as to doctrinal questions. Nevertheless, 
theirs is the mind of Christ, and they may be 
comforted by the added words of the apostle that, 
“Tf in anything ye be otherwise minded, God shall 
reveal even this unto you.” 

Where there is a willingness to be taught of 
God, the illuminating grace of the Holy Spirit can 


90 Notes on Philippians 


be depended upon to open up His Word, and guide 
into all truth. But he would be a bold man in- 
deed, who would dare to say, “I understand all 
truth, all mysteries are clear tome. I have a per- 
fect apprehension of the divine revelation.” Only 
the boldest egotism could lead anyone to take such 
ground. How patient, therefore, we need to be 
with one another; how ready to confess that we 
know but in part, and to recognize the fact that 
we are ever in need of further instruction. 
“Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, 
let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same 
thing.” There are truths and principles so plainly 
put in God’s Word, that any Spirit-taught be- 
liever may readily see them. 

Where these truths are learned, it is our re- 
sponsibility to walk in them—walk together in 
them, as far as possible, counting on God to re- 
veal to us whatever may be lacking, as we pa- 
tiently and prayerfully learn from Him through 
His Word. A wider recognition of these things 
would lead to more kindly consideration of one 
another, and tend to make us helpers of each 
other’s faith, rather than judges of a brother’s 
doubtful thoughts. 


Enemies of the Cross of Christ 91 


Enemies of the Cross of Christ 
(ch. 3: 17-19.) 


“Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them 
which walk so as ye have us for an example. (For many 
walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you 
even weeping, that they are the enemies of the cross of 
Christ; whose end is destruction, whose od is eine BND 
and gee glory is in their shame, who mir 


THE sentence is incomplete and needs the verses 
that follow to conclude it properly; but I have 
purposely left it so that we may consider this por- 
tion of it the more carefully, for the next part has 
to do with another and altogether happier theme. 
Here, the apostle is occupying us with the respon- 
sibilities and snares of the pilgrim path; there, 
he points us on to the goal when all danger will 
be forever past, and with it all opportunity to 
bear faithful testimony to a rejected Lord in a 
scene of contrariety. How it behoves us to con- 
sider the brevity of the time allotted us for wit- 
ness-bearing! It will soon be forever too late to 
suffer for and with Christ, and this necessarily 
means too late to win an honored place in the 
everlasting kingdom of our Saviour-God. That 
which we call “time” is the training-school for 


92 Notes on Philippians 


the ages to come. What a mistake to fritter away 
its precious moments—so few at the most, as com- 
pared with the eternal ages—in things that are of 
no lasting profit. 

Paul was an example both in life and doctrine 
for all who should come after him. It was not a 
prideful egotism that led him to plead with saints 
to follow him and his faithful companions as they 
followed Christ. He lived what he taught. His 
life was the practical exemplification of his teach- 
ing. He was not one man on the platform or in 
the meeting, and another in private or in business 
life. For we need to remember that Paul was no 
gentleman of leisure. He was not a clergyman 
afraid to soil his hands with honest labor. He 
wrought night and day tent-making, when funds 
were low or when he felt the need of setting an 
example of activity to any inclined to slothful- 
ness; yet all the while preaching and teaching 
publicly and from house to house with a diligence 
that few if any have equalled, and none have sur- 
passed. He was careful also as to his personal 
communion with the Lord, striving to keep a 
conscience ever void of offence toward both God 
and man. What an example for us all to 
follow! 

That he could not please everybody, even his 
own brethren, at all times, goes without saying. 


Enemies of the Cross of Christ 93 


His work was belittled, his appearance ridiculed, 
his apostleship denied, and his integrity called in 
question. There were those who even intimated 
that he was a crafty deceiver who, by an appear- 
ance of frankness, caught with guile the unwary, 
and at times did evil that good might come! All 
these charges and insinuations he indignantly re- 
futes in various parts of his writings, while never 
allowing calumnies to embitter him. He did not 
return railing for railing, or seek to injure those 
who would so willingly have injured him. He 
kept on the even tenor of his way, living Christ 
and preaching Christ with unchanged ardor to 
the very end; his wondrous life stood as an abid- 
ing answer to those who would malign him. 
Therefore he could say, ‘Be followers together of 
me,” and he could consistently call upon the 
saints to mark his ways and to walk in the same 
paths. 

And though centuries have rolled by since wick- 
ed men sought to dishonor him, and the execution- 
er’s axe severed his hoary head from his body by 
Ceesar’s order, thus finishing his testimony in lay- 
ing down his life for his Master’s sake, he still 
remains the pre-eminent example of what the 
Christian should be, sustained by grace divine 
while passing through this valley of death’s sha- 
dow. Let us examine our own ways and see how 


94 Notes on Philippians 


they measure up to his—not excusing ourselves 
for failure on the score that times and conditions 
have changed from those that surrounded him. 
The same One who wrought effectually in him so 
long ago, will work in us to-day if there be but 
a willing mind and a sanctified determination to 
take his path of unworldliness and devotion to 
Christ. 

Of an altogether different class the next two 
verses warn us. Many there were, then as now, 
who, while professing to be in the pilgrim path, 
walked in a vain show; by word proclaiming 
themselves Christians, but by their actions prov- 
ing that they were enemies of the cross of Christ. 
Mark it well: they were not said to be enemies of 
the blood or of the death of Christ; their opposi- 
tion was directed against that which told of His 
shame and rejection by the world—His cross. In 
that cross Paul gloried. By it he saw himself 
crucified unto the world and the world unto him. 
But the world-lovers refused this. They desired 
the benefits of His death while refusing to be 
identified with His shame. They lived for self- 
indulgence, yet made a pretence of piety. The ex- 
pression, “Whose God is their belly,” really means 
that they worshiped themselves. “Belly” is self- 
gratification; and, alas, how many live for self! 
And yet it is out of this same self, or person, that, 


Enemies of the Cross of Christ 95 


when devoted to Christ, living waters shall flow 
for the refreshment and blessing of others, as 
our Lord says in the seventh of John. Until self 
is thus displaced as an object for which to live, 
and surrendered to God as an instrument to be 
used by and for Christ, there can be no true pil- 
grim character. 

The apostle declares that for these enemies of 
the cross the end will be destruction. Consider 
for a moment the solemnity of this. They lived 
for self-gratification while in this scene; in the 
life to come they will be in a condition where the 
gratification of the smallest desire will be utterly 
impossible. Our Lord told of one who on earth 
was clothed in purple and fine linen, and fared 
sumptuously every day, but when suddenly 
snatched away from it all by the rude hand of 
death, he found himself in greatest torment, 
where not even his anguished prayer for a drop 
of water to cool his parched tongue could be 
granted. Such is the destruction awaiting those 
who live for self, ignoring the claims of the Christ 
of God. And yet, heedless of all this, they go on 
in their folly, indifferent alike to the admonitions 
of Scripture, of conscience, and of the Holy 
Spirit—indifferent also to the warnings and en- 
treaties of men of God who, like Paul, have chosen 
the better part, and know whereof they speak. 


96 Notes on Philippians 


Casting to the winds all godly counsel and sound 
advice, like flamboyant fools sporting on the edge 
of a moral precipice, displaying their heedlessness 
and folly before all, they glory in their shame, 
and exult in that which might well cause them to 
bow in penitent grief before redeeming mercy. 
Unlike Mary, who chose that good part never to 
be taken from her; or like Moses, who chose to 
suffer affliction with the people of God rather 
than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, they 
deliberately reject the good and choose the evil. 
They put away the hope of heaven for a brief 
season of sensual or sensuous pleasure here on 
earth. It is all summed up in the four little words 
— “Who mind earthly things.” Despising the 
heavenly calling, they choose the earthly, and be- 
come indeed “dwellers upon the earth,” only to 
be exposed to the fierce vials of the wrath of God 
in the day when He arises to shake terribly the 
earth. No wonder the apostle wept as he wrote 
of such, and warned them of their peril in pur- 
suing their evil ways. 


Heavenly Citizenship 97 


Heavenly Citizenship 
(chap. 3: 20, 21.) 


“For our conversation (or, ) is in heaven; 
from whence also we look for the (or, a) Saviour, the 
Lord Jesus Christ: who shall change our vile body (or, 
this body of our humiliation) that it may be fashioned 
like unto his glorious body (or, the body of his glory) ac- 
cording to the working whereby He is able even to subdue 
all things unto Himself.” 


THE Greek word politewma here rendered “‘con- 
versation” means, as is now well-known, common- 
wealth, citizenship, or it Hebe almost be transli- 
terated “politics,” for it - all three 
thoughts. The apprehension of ey scope, as here 
used by the apostle, should help the Christian to 
understand his true relationship and position re- 
garding the affairs of this life and of the earth. 

Philippi was, when Paul wrote, a Roman colony. 
That is, as a mark of special favor, Roman citi- 
zenship had been granted to all the free-born 
citizens of the former Macedonian capital. This 
was considered a great privilege. It enabled each 
Philippian, though dwelling in Macedonia, to say 
proudly, “My citizenship is in Rome.” His re- 
sponsibilities were directly to the Imperial Power. 
He had to do with the Emperor, not with the 


an 


98 Notes on Philippians 


provincial government of Macedonia. Now, apply 
this to the Christian. Saved by matchless grace, 
though still living in the world, his common- 
wealth—the government to which he primarily 
owes allegiance—is in heaven. He is directly 
subject to the Lord Jesus Christ, and his conduct 
is to be regulated by His Word. The realization 
of this, while keeping him free from entangling 
alliances with the affairs of this world, will not, 
of course, tend to lawlessness or insubjection to 
world-rulers. A Philippian, subject to imperial 
authority, would not be a law-breaker in Mace- 
donia, inasmuch as the same authority to which 
he owed allegiance had instituted the government 
of the country in which Philippi was the chief 
city. And so the apostle tells us elsewhere, “The 
powers that be are ordained of God,” and he com- 
mands Christians to be subject in all things to 
magistrates, as recognizing the divine authority 
by which they rule. 

But one will search in vain the distinctly Chris- 
tian part of the Bible—namely, the New Testa- 
ment Epistles—for any hint that Christians were 
to seek worldly power or dominion during this 
present age. Their place is that of subjection, 
not rule, until Christ Himself returns to reign. 

The Emperor, to whom the Philippians owed 
allegiance, dwelt in Rome. Should he appear in 


Heavenly Citizenship 99 


Philippi, he would recognize with special honor 
those whose citizenship was directly linked with 
the capital of the empire. Our Lord is in heaven, 
and from there we look to see Him soon descend, 
when He shall openly confess all those whose 
citizenship is in heaven—confess them before an 
astonished and affrighted world. (See 2 Thess. 
es-12.) 

It is now known, as a result of recent archeolo- 
gical discoveries, that the term kurios (the gen- 
eral word for “Lord” in the New Testament) was 
an imperial title. More than that, this imperial 
title was never used in reference to the emperors 
until, through a public ceremony, they were de- 
ified, Bee a ane to poe conceptions; therefore 

as used as a divine title. At the very time 
that Paul wrote this letter, it was common to 
address the brutal man who occupied the imperial 
throne as “our Lord Nero,” using the distinctive 
term just referred to. How marked the contrast, 
when the Christians, often writhing beneath the 
bitter persecutions of this unspeakably wicked 
tyrant, looked expectantly toward the heavens for 
the return of “our Lord Jesus Christ.” 

At His coming, the first resurrection will take 
place; the sleeping saints will be raised, and living 
saints will be changed. For “this corruptible 
must put on incorruption, and this mortal must 


wag 


100 Notes on Philippians 


put on immortality” (1 Cor. 15:53), and our na- 
tural bodies will be changed to spiritual bodies. 
It should be remembered that when our Bible 
was translated in the 17th century, the word 
“vile” did not necessarily have the thought of evil 
pee ala with it. That was Leal which was 
owly or common: so here “o ur vile body” is really 


ae us zy ae eer creation a body common 
to both saint and sinner. At the Lord’s return it 
will be transformed, and made like unto the body 
of His glory. In that resurrection-body He came 
forth from the tomb, was manifested to His dis- 
ciples, ascended into heaven, appeared to Saul of 
Tarsus, and in it He shall soon return with glory. 
The natural body is really a soulish body, or soul- 
ual, if we may coin the word; and a spiritual body 
is a body suited to the spirit. It is not that one 
is material and the other immaterial: for both 
are material, though the one is of finer substance 
than “this mortal body,” and no longer subject 
to certain laws by which the natural body is now 
controlled. In bodies of glory, then, we shall 
dwell forever in the city to which we even now 
belong. It is our own, our native country, as 
children of God; and we shall never really be at 
home until we are there with our glorified Lord 
Himself. 


Heavenly Citizenship 101 


The same divine energy that wrought in Him to 
raise Him from the dead, shall still work through 
Him until He subdues all things to Himself. Then 
as we learn from 1 Cor. 15: 24-28, He will deliver 
the kingdom to the Father, that God, in all His 
fulness—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—may be 
all in all forever, and fully manifested in Christ 
Jesus, who remains eternally our Lord and our 
Head. 


CHAPTER FOUR 


CHRIST, THE BELIEVER’S STRENGTH, AND THE 
CONFIDENT MIND 


Exhortation to Unity 
(vers. 1-3.) 


“Therefore, my brethren dearly beloved and longed for, 
my joy and crown, so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly be- 
loved. I beseech Euodia, and beseech Syntyche, that they 
be of the same mind in the Lord. And I entreat thee also, 
true yokefellow, help those women which labored with me 
in the gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellow- 
laborers, whose names are in the book of life.” 


concluded, the apostle again exhorts to 

steadfastness and unity. It is very evi- 
dent that there was incipient division of some 
nature working in the Philippian assembly. It 
was in order to meet this, as we have already no- 
ticed, that the letter was written; but Paul did 
not immediately put his finger upon the difficulty. 
Through the three previous chapters he has been 
ministering that which should prepare the hearts 
of the offenders for a final word of exhortation. 
In this section, he calls them by name, and pleads 
with them not to let self-interest hinder the work 
of the Lord. 


Ex long parenthesis of the third chapter 


Exhortation to Unity 103 


With expressions of deepest affection, he ad- 
dresses the assembly as a whole. They are his 
brethren, dearly beloved, for whom he yearns, and 
who will be, at the judgment-seat of Christ, his 
joy and crown. It will be noticed that this ex- 
pression is analogous to that of 1 Thess. 2: 19, 
20. There, addressing the saints who had been 
won to Christ through his ministry, he could say, 
“For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of re- 
joicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our 
Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye are our 
glory and joy.” When, as a servant, he stands 
at the judgment-seat of Christ, that which will 
fill his heart with gladness will be the sight of 
those for whose eternal blessing he had been used 
while laboring in this scene. Rutherford beauti- 
fully expresses the same thought when, speaking 
of the town in which he had labored so long, he 
cries, 

“Oh, if one soul from Anwoth 
Meet me at God’s right hand, 


My heaven will be two heavens, 
In Immanuel’s land.” 


Then he that soweth and he that reapeth will 
rejoice together, as each servant shall come bring- 
ing in his sheaves, and, looking up into the face of 
the Lord, will be able to say, “Behold I and the 
children whom God hath given me.” 


104 Notes on Philippians 


The crown of rejoicing is the soul-winner’s gar- 
land, composed of those he has won for Christ. 
Such must ever stand in a more precious relation- 
ship to the one who has been used to their conver- 
sion than they possibly can to any other. They 
are his children in the faith; his sons and daugh- 
ters in Christ Jesus. Their happy progress in the 
things of God gladdens his heart, and is, in itself, 
rich reward for his service in their behalf; while, 
on the other hand, their failure or break-down by 
the way, as evidenced by loss of interest in divine 
things, dissension, worldly ways again taken up, 
must rend his heart with grief, and also fill him 
with a certain sense of shame. “Now we live,” 
writes the apostle elsewhere, “if ye stand fast 
in the Lord.” A brother-servant, the apostle John, 
writing to his converts, says, “And now, little 
children, abide in Him; that, when He shall ap- 
pear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed 
before Him at his coming” (1 John 2:28). No- 
tice, it is not that they may not be ashamed, but 
“we,” that is, those who were instrumental in 
leading them to Christ. 

So it is in view of all this that Paul earnestly 
exhorts his beloved Philippians to stand fast in 
the faith. It is always the effort of Satan to 
hinder the people of God from steadfastly cling- 
ing together, and presenting a united front to the 


Exhortation to Unity 105 


enemy. Alas, that his efforts to introduce dissen- 
sion so readily succeed because of the flesh in us. 

And now, without further delay, and in perfect 
frankness, the apostle speaks directly to the two 
offenders against unity, whom he had in his mind 
from the beginning. And yet there is no stern- 
ness, no seeking to lord it over their consciences, 
but he pleads with them, as though Christ Him- 
self were beseeching, and entreats Euodia and 
Syntyche. They had been earnest laborers in the 
gospel, but had fallen out with each other, as we 
say, and they are exhorted to be of the same mind 
in the Lord. He certainly does not mean by this 
that they must think alike in everything, or see all 
things from the same standpoint. This can never 
be while we are in this world. The very pos- 
session of mind, which differentiates man from 
the brutes, of necessity gives occasion for differ- 
ences of judgment as to many things, and so calls 
for much patience toward one another. No two 
men ever saw the same rainbow. The slightest 
difference of position gives each a view at a dif- 
ferent angle. The formation and contour of the 
eye itself has to be taken in consideration. One 
may discern clearly every distinct shade, while 
the other may be color-blind, and no amount of 
argument or persuasion will enable the second to 
see that which is so clear to the first. And so 


106 Notes on Philippians 


we may even say no two men have ever read the 
same Bible. Not that there is one book from God 
for one person and a different one for another, 
but the difference is in our apprehension of 
things. Weare so influenced by our environment, 
by our education, or lack of it, that we are pre- 
judiced when we least realize it; and, even when 
we try to be the most open-minded, we are often 
misled by our impressions and the limitations of 
our understanding. Therefore, the need of great 
patience one with the other. 

But if what we have been saying is true, how 
then can we be of one mind? The verse does not 
end without making that very plain: “I beseech 
Euodia, and beseech Syntyche,” he writes, “that 
they be of the same mind in the Lord.” If both 
alike have the mind of Christ—which is the lowly 
mind—if both alike seek to be subject to the Lord, 
even though there may be differences of judgment 
as to many things, each will respect the other’s 
view-point, and neither will try to force the other’s 
conscience. Thus all occasion for dissension would 
be at an end.’ Alas, that we so little realize this, 
and are often so insistent on what seems to us 
exceedingly important truth, when nothing vital 
is at stake, while a brother or sister equally honest 
and earnest may fail to see things as we see 
them ; and, at the judgment-seat of Christ, it may 


Exhortation to Unity 107 


be manifested that, after all, they, and not we, 
were right, or perhaps that both were wrong. 

I take it that the third verse was spoken by 
Paul to Epaphroditus personally, who was, I pre- 
sume, his amanuensis in the writing of this letter. 
He was about to return to Philippi, having ful- 
filled his mission, and now, strengthened after his 
illness, was to be the bearer of this epistle. The 
apostle entreats him, as a true yokefellow, to help 
these women upon his return, to that unity of 
mind to which he had been exhorting them. He 
mentions that they had labored with him in the 
gospel, with Clement also, and with others of his 
fellow-laborers, whose names though not given 
here, are in the book of life. We are not to un- 
derstand by this that they occupied the public 
platform or taught in the assembly of God, parti- 
cipating, with Paul and Clement and these other 
laborers, in public testimony: for this would con- 
tradict the words of the Holy Ghost through the 
same apostle, as preserved for us in 1 Cor. 14 and 
in 1 Tim. 2; but there were many ways in which 
devoted women could serve the Lord in the gospel. 
In fact, in oriental, as well as in occidental lands, 
work for women is of tremendous importance. 
There were many places where a man could not 
go, where godly women may have free access. And 
“laboring in the gospel’ implies a great deal more 


108 Notes on Philippians 


than simply speaking from a platform. In fact, 
it is a question if this latter be not, in many in- 
stances at least, the lesser thing, and the individ- 
ual heart-to-heart work the greater. 

It seems clear that Epaphroditus caught the 
note of inspiration in these personal words to 
him, and so he embodied them in this letter; and 
we can be thankful to God that they have come 
down to us, for they give us deeper insight into 
the working of the spirit of grace in the mind of 
Paul, and will be valuable to all who seek to serve 
the Lord, until the Church’s history on earth is 
ended. 


Joy and Peace 
(chap. 4: 4-7.) 

“Rejoice in the Lord always: and again I say, Rejoice. 
Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord 
is at hand. Be careful for nothing: but in every thing by 
prayer and supplication with thanksgiving let your re- 
quests be made known unto God: and the peace of God, 
which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts 
and minds through Christ Jesus.” 


IN the opening verse of chapter 3 we have al- 
ready had the exhortation, “Finally, my breth- 
ren, rejoice in the Lord.” Undoubtedly, the apos- 
tle was, so far as his own mind was concerned, 
just ready to bring his letter to a close. But, as 
we have already seen, this was not the mind of 


Joy and Peace 109 


the Spirit, and, like his brother-apostle, Jude, on 
another occasion, he was “borne along” to exhort 
the saints to “earnestly contend for the faith once 
delivered.” Now he again refers to that which 
was so much upon his heart. He would have the 
saints always rejoicing in the Lord. Joy and%hol- 
ine8s arélinseparable: A holy Christian is able to 
rejoice even when passing through deepest afflic- 
tions; but a believer who, through unwatchful- 
ness, has permitted himself to fall into unholy 
ways, loses immediately the joy of the Lord, 
which is the strength of those who walk in com- 
munion with Himself. 

The second exhortation is one to which we may 
well give earnest heed. In the Authorized Version 
we read, “Let your moderation be known unto all 
men.” Undoubtedly, “moderation” is a most com- 
mendable Christian virtue, but there is more to 
the original word than this. It has been rendered 
by some “yieldingness;’’ this, too, is an excellent 
translation, so far as it goes, and suggests that 
resilience of character which many of us sadly 
lack. Rotherham gives “eonsiderateness,” which 
adds to the thought, and helps us to a better un- 
derstanding of the mind of the Spirit in this con- 
nection. The Revised Version has “forbearance,” 
and “gentleness’’ in the margin. But if we take 
all these various terms we shall, I think, find them 


110 Notes on Philippians 


summed up in the very suggestive rendering given 
years ago by Matthew Arnold, the English critic, 
who translated the passage, ‘Let your sweet rea- 
‘sonableness be manifested to all men.” He point- 
ed out the interesting fact that the word here 
used is unknown in classical Greek and it was 
his impression that Paul coined it for the occa- 
sion. What a lovely trait is this sweet reasonable- 
ness in a Christian! It is the very opposite to 
that unyielding, harshly-dogmatic, self-determined 
spirit, that so often dominates in place of the 
meekness and gentleness of Christ. “I beseech 
you, my brethren,” wrote Cromwell to the war- 
ring theologians of his day, “remember that it is 
possible you may be wrong.” How apt we are to 
forget this when engaged in discussions as to 
either doctrines, methods of service, or church 
principles! 

This does not mean that one need be lacking in 
intensity of conviction or assurance as to the cor- 
rectness of doctrines, principles or practices 
which one believes he has learned from the word 
of God; but it does imply a kindly consideration 
for the judgment of others, who may be equally 
sincere, and equally devoted—and, possibly, even 
more enlightened. Nothing is ever lost by recog- 
nizing this, and remembering that we all know 
in part. 


Joy and Peace uta Ta 


How aptly the brief sentence, “The Lord is at 
hand” comes in, in connection with the preceding 
exhortation! I take it that the thought is not ex- 
actly “The Lord is coming;” it is rather, “The 
Lord is standing by;” He is looking on; He hears 
every word spoken; He takes note of every action. 


“Closer is He than breathing, 
Nearer than hands or feet.” 


With the realization that He is thus, in the 
fullest sense, “at hand,” though unseen, how 
quickly would strife and dissension cease, and the 
forbearance and grace ever manifested in Him- 
self be seen in His followers! 

And now we have a wonderful promise based on 
a third exhortation; this time in connection with 
prayer. Our Lord Himself has warned against 
anxious thought, and the Holy Spirit expands His 
teaching by saying, “In nothing be anxious.” But 
how am I to obey an exhortation like this when 
troubles are surging around me, and my poor, 
restless mind will not be at peace? I feel I must 
tell somebody. My exercises are like those of the 
Psalmist perhaps, who wrote on one occasion, “I 
am so agitated that I cannot speak” (Ps. 77: 4, 
F. W. Grant’s Trans.). What, then shall Ido? To 
whom shall I turn? It is so natural to worry and 
fret under circumstances such as these; though I 


112 Notes on Philippians 


tell myself over and over again that nothing is 
gained thereby, and my trouble only seems to be- 
come exaggerated as I try to carry my own bur- 
dens. 

But the Spirit of God points the way out. He 
would have me bring everything) the great things 
and the little things, perplexing conditions and 
trying circumstances of every character, into the’ 
presence of God, and leave them there, By prayer 
and supplication, not forgetting thanksgiving for 
past and present mercies, He would have me pour 
out my requests unto God. I may feel that I do 
not know the mind of the Lord in regard to them, 
but that need not hinder. I am to make known 
my “requests,” counting on His wisdom to do for 
me that which is best both for time and eternity. 
Thus, casting my care upon Him, and leaving all 
in His own blessed hands, the peace of God (that 
peace which He, Himself, ever enjoys, though 
storms and darkness may be round about), a 
peace passing all understanding, shall guard, as 
with a military garrison, my heart: and (blessed 
truth, if I but enter into it) my thoughts) or 
“mind,” as it is here translated, through Christ 
Jesus. 

But this I cannot do for myself. I may tell my- 
self over and over that I will not worry, will not 
fret, but my thoughts, like untamed horses with 


Exhortations pinks} 


the bit in their teeth, if I may use such an illustra- 
tion, seem to run away with me. Or, like an at- 
tacking army, they crowd into the citadel of my 
mind, and threaten to overwhelm me. But God, 
Himself, by the Holy Spirit, has engaged to so 
garrison my mind, and so protect my restless 
heart, that my thoughts shall neither run away 
with me, nor yet overwhelm me. Every thought 
will be brought into captivity to the obedience of 
Christ. Thus I shall enjoy the peace of God, a 
peace beyond all human comprehension, as I leave 
my burdens where faith delights to cast every 
care, at the feet of Him who, having not withheld 
His own Son, has now declared that through Him 
He will freely give me all things. In this I can 
rest, for He cannot deny Himself. 


Exhortations 
(chap. 4: 8, 9.) 


“Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatso- 
ever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, what- 
soever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, what- 
soever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, 
and if there be any praise, think on these things. Those 
things, which ye have both learned, and received, and 
heard, and seen in me, do; and the God of peace shall be 
with you.” 


THESE verses conclude the instructions of the 
apostle; all that follows being in the nature of 


114 Notes on Philippians 


a postscript—and, while of deep practical value, 
not directly addressed to saints as homiletical 
teaching. 

Having throughout the epistle put Christ before 
his readers in so many different aspects, the apos- 
tle now sums all up in this brief exhortation to 
think on things holy, thus recognizing the Old 
Testament principle, “As a man thinketh in his 
heart, so is he.”” Many have missed the very point, 
however, which it seems clear he is pressing, by 
taking all these things in an abstract way. It will 
be found exceedingly difficult to think on things 
true, honest, just, pure, and lovely, if there be not 
some definite, concrete example before the mind. 
Mere occupation with beautiful sentiments and 
poetic ideals is not, I take it, what he would here 
inculcate. But all are found fully exemplified in 
our Lord Jesus Christ as the perfect Man here on 
earth; and, in measure, these qualities are repro- 
duced by the Holy Spirit in all who have been 
made partakers of the divine native. In a certain 
sense we may think of these words as linking with 
the exhortation already given to Euodia and Syn- 
tyche, who needed to see in each other what the 
Spirit had wrought. 

Let Euodia look coldly and critically upon Syn- 
tyche, and occupy her mind with whatever she can 
find in her character or ways that is contrary to 


Exhortations 115 


the virtues here mentioned, and the breach be- 
tween them will be immeasurably widened. Let 
Syntyche retort by exaggerating every defect or 
short-coming in her sister in Christ, and she will 
soon become so alienated from her that reconcilia- 
tion will be almost impossible. 

But, on the other hand, if Euodia, realizing that 
Syntyche has been redeemed to God by the same 
precious blood as herself, and is indwelt by the 
same Holy Spirit, determines to think of the vir- 
tues or anything worthy of praise in her life and 
personality; to magnify her graces and minimize 
her faults, refusing to indulge in unkind criticism, 
she will be so attracted by what is of Christ in her 
that she will find herself linked in heart to the 
one from whom she had previously turned coldly 
away. 

Is not this what we all greatly need in our deal- 
ings with each other? In every truly converted 
soul there are the manifest inwrought virtues of 
the Spirit of: God ; things that are honest, just, 
pure, lovely and of good report—the activities of 
the new nature. If we think on these things, in- 
stead of dwelling upon the failures to which all 
are liable, our fellowship one with another will 
become increasingly precious as the days go by. 
And even when there is actual cause for blame, if 
we stop to consider the circumstances that may 


116 Notes on Philippians 


have led up to that which seems to us so blame- 
worthy, Christian pity and compassion will take 
the place of criticism and unkind judgment, which 
cannot help to restore, but only serves to drive 
farther into sin the erring one. “To err is hu- 
man; to forgive divine.” And even a poet of this 
world has taught us the folly of judging that 
which the eye cannot see, when, in his quaint 
Scottish way, he has written, 


‘We only ken the wrang that’s dune, 
We ken na’ what’s resisted.” 


We may severely blame the wrong-doer for 
things that have already deeply exercised his 
heart and conscience, and been long since cleansed 
away by the washing of water by the Word as ap- 
plied by the Lord Jesus Himself. 

And, of course, in all our ways it is important 
that we should never permit our minds to feed, 
like carrion vultures, on the wicked, filthy, and 
unholy things of the flesh. This is thoroughly 
natural to the carnal man, and the carnal mind 
is still in the believer, and will be until the day 
when our bodies of humiliation shall be changed 
and made like His body of glory. But we are not 
to permit it to dominate us, since the Holy Spirit 
dwells in us to control us for Christ. There is so 
much that is honest; so much that is just or right- 


Exhortations 117 


eous; so much that is pure; so much that is lovely 
and loveable; so much that is of good report; so 
much that is virtuous and trustworthy, that it 
were folly to be occupied with the opposites, when 
we might be taken up with positive good. 

And, as we meditate on these things, we grow 
in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus 
Christ; for, as we have already noted, all these 
beautiful traits were fully exemplified in Him, 
and they have been imparted, in large measure, to 
each of His servants; probably to none more so 
than the writer of this epistle. Therefore, with- 
out pride, but as an example to the flock of Christ, 
he can add, “Those things, which ye have both 
learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, 
do.” And as thus practically walking; according 
to the power of the indwelling Spirit, we have the 
sweet assurance that “the God of peace shall be 
with you,” thus connecting all this with the prom- 
ise of verse 7 above, where we are assured that 
“the peace of God” shall garrison the minds and 
hearts of all who cast their every care on Him. 
Here we learn that the God of peace will walk 
with those who seek to walk before Him in piety 
and holiness of mind and ways. 


118 Notes on Philippians 


Ministry in Temporal Things 
(chap. 4: 10-23.) 


“But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last 
your care of me hath flourished again; wherein ye were 
also careful, but ye lacked opportunity. Not that I speak 
in respect of want: for I have learned, in whatsoever state 
I am, therewith to be content. I know both how to be 
abased, and I know how to abound: everywhere and in 
all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, 
both to abound and to suffer need. I can do all things 
through Christ which strengtheneth me. Notwithstanding 
ye have well done, that ye did communicate with my afflic- 
tion. Now ye Philippians know also, that in the beginning 
of the gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no church 
communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, 
but ye only. For even in Thessalonica ye sent once and 
again unto my necessity. Not because I desire a gift: but 
I desire fruit that may abound to your account. But I 
have all, and abound: I am full, having received of Epa- 
phroditus the things which were sent from you, an odour 
of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to 
God. But my God shall supply all your need according 
to his riches in glory by Christ Jesus. Now unto God 
and our Father be glory for ever and ever. Amen. Salute 
every saint in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are with 
me greet you. All the saints salute you, chiefly they that 
are of Czsar’s household. The grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with you all. Amen.” 


IN this, the closing section of the epistle, Paul’ 
‘thanks the assembly at Philippi for the practi? 
‘cal way in which they had manifested their fel- 


Ministry in Temporal Things 119 


lowship in the gospél! They were not of those who 
are willing to profit eternally through the gospel 
ministry, but have very little exercise as to the 
temporal welfare of the servants of Christ to 
whom they owe the knowledge of that truth which 
has made them free. From the beginning of their 
Christian lives, the Philippian saints had cared, 
as occasion offered, for the needs of the apostle, 
even sending to him of their substance when he 
was laboring in Thessalonica, where he and his 
companions had gone after being released from 
the Philippian jail. But years had elapsed since 
then, and Paul had travelled far, and passed 
through many varied experiences, often finding 
it quite impossible to keep in close touch with the 
different assemblies he had been used of God to 
establish. Consequently it was not strange that, 
at times, it should seem as if his dearest friends 
had forgotten him. Nevertheless, the love was 
there though they had lacked opportunity to dis- 
play it. But now they had learned of his circum- 
stances, as a prisoner in Rome for the truth’s 
sake, and they had hastened to show their fellow- 
ship with him in his sufferings, by sending Epa- 
phroditus with a gift of love, as we have already 
noticed. 

In acknowledging this, Paul takes occasion to 
glorify God for His care of him, even when Chris- 


120 Notes on Philippians 


tian assemblies forgot their indebtedness to him. 
He had indeed known cold neglect and indiffer- 
ence, but it never soured his spirit nor led him to 
complain. He noted the cold-heartedness, but he 
did not find fault. He left it all with the Lord, 
and committed his own circumstances to Him, as- 
sured that/He neverforgot, and was never an un- 
concerned spectator of His servant’s sufferings. 
So, he accepted it all as a course in the school of 
God, and he could say, “I have learned in what- 
soever state I am to be content.” The Lord was 
his portion, and he could rest in the knowledge 
of His unchanging love and care. | 

It was not in a moment that he entered into 
this. He, like all disciples in God’s school, had to 
advance in the life of faith by learning practically 
the things he could now teach to others. But he 
had taken his degree, so to speak, and he could 
now declare, ‘I know both how to be abased, and 
to abound; everywhere, and in all things, I possess 
the secret (or, I have been initiated) both to be 
full, and to be hungry, to abound and to suffer 
need.” Blessed lessons these! And we may say 
the soul is never really at rest in regard to the 
trials and testings of the way until these precious 
secrets have been apprehended. 

John Wesley is reported to have said that he 
did not know which dishonored God the most—to 


Ministry in Temporal Things 121 


or to curse aA swear. Yet every saint would 
shrink from the latter with abhorrence, while 
many of us have no sense of the wrong we do 
when we fret and worry. To rest in faith upon 
the knowledge that “all things work together for 
good to those who love God, who are the called 
according to His purpose,” should ever be our at- 
titude. And in a very special sense they who 
minister in word and doctrine (in entire depend- 
ence on the One who has sent them out as His 
ambassadors) are called upon to exemplify this in 
their calm dependence upon Him whom they 
serve. 

This leads me to say something upon the New 
Testament principle for the support of those who 
labor entirely in spiritual things. And, first, let 
it be noted carefully, there is no such thing known 
in Scripture as putting the servant of God upon 
the low level of a salary basis. The only man 
mentioned in the Bible to be hired by the year 
as a “minister” was the recreant Levite who was 
engaged by Micah of Mount Ephraim, and later 
by the Danites to be their “father and priest” 
(Judges, chaps. 17 and 18). Even in the legal dis- 
pensation, Jehovah Himself was the portion of the 
Levites. They were prospered, and cared for, in 
accordance with the measure in which God blessed 


122 Notes on Philippians 


His people and their hearts responded to His 
goodness. In the Christian economy we have no 
special clerical or extra-priestly class to be sup- 
ported as professional men by their so-called lay- 
brethren. The distinction of clergy and laity is 
utterly unscriptural, and is but part of the Ju- 
daizing system that has so perverted the truth 
of the Church. But there are those who are spe- 
cially gifted as evangelists, pastors, and teachers, 
and who, in many instances, though not in all, 
are called upon to separate themselves from se- 
cular pursuits in order to give their time un- 
hinderedly to spiritual service. These of old ‘“‘went 
forth for the Name’s sake,” we are told in 3rd 
John, “taking nothing of the Gentiles.” They 
were cast entirely on the Lord, and He cared for 
them through His own grateful people, accord- 
ing to the word, “Let him that is taught in the 
Word communicate unto him that teacheth in all 
good things.” And so John, by the Spirit, writes, 
“We therefore ought to receive such that we 
might be fellow-helpers to the truth.” Such ser- 
vants have a claim upon the people of God, not 
because they are official ministers, but because 
they are engaged in making known the truth, and 
in this service all believers are privileged to share. 


But observe carefully :—the servant is never to 
look to the saints for his support, but to count di- 


Ministry in Temporal Things 123 


rectly on the Lord, and make his personal needs 
known only to Him. He need not fear to acquaint 
the assemblies with special opportunities for min- 
istry to others as occasions arise. Paul did this 
frequently and earnestly. But rather than men- 
tion his personal needs, he would labor with his 
own hands; nor did he feel he was degrading his 
calling in so doing—that thus he might provide 
things honest in the sight of all men, and set an 
example to any who might be inclined to seek an 
easy path, and depend upon support by those in 
better circumstances than themselves. 

And so the principle is clear: the servant of 
Christ is to go forth in absolute dependence upon 
the One who has commissioned him, and who 
makes Himself responsible to meet his needs. But 
the people of God are called upon to be exercised 
before Him as to what share they should have in 
the support of those who are thus engaged. No 
ministering brother has the right or authority to 
demand ‘support’from"the"saints. They, not he, 
must judge whether he is worthy of that support. 
But, on the other hand, if receiving from him in 
spiritual things, it is, we are told, a small matter 
that he should reap their carnal things. “They 
that preach the gospel should live of the gospel” 
(UiCor,9): 

For a servant of the Lord to be finding fault be- 


124 Notes on Philippians 


cause of the smallness of his support, is to make 
manifest at once that his dependence is upon man 
rather than on God; and for saints to be callously 
indifferent to the temporal needs of those whom 
they recognize as God-sent messengers, is to show 
themselves out of touch with Him who has given 
to them the privilege of being in this way fellow- 
helpers to the truth. Thus should both those who 
minister and those who are ministered to, be ex- 
ercised before God as to their mutual responsi- 
bilities. 

This had been the path in which Paul had 
walked for many years, and as he looked back 
over the journey and saw how he had been sus- 
tained of God, he knew he could count on Him 
for the future, and so he faced the days to come 
with the assurance that he could do all things 
through Christ who was his strength. He who 
was to him life, example, and object, was also his 
unfailing source of supply for every emergency 
that might arise, even to a martyr’s death. 

But while he did not look to man for his sup- 
plies, he shows himself truly grateful for the 
ministry extended to him. He would not take the 
gift of love sent by his dear Philippian children 
in the faith as though it were a mere matter of 
course. He expresses himself in most apprecia- 
tive terms as he thanks them for their fellowship, 


Ministry in Temporal Things 125 


and in this he is an example to all Christ’s ser- 
vants, some of whom have been only too neglect- 
ful of the finer courtesies which often mean more 
to the saints than they realize. 


Paul received thegift not because he desired to 
profit by means of their generosity, but because 
he saw in it an added evidence of the working of 
the Spirit of graceiin:their souls) and this was for 
their blessing, as well as relieving his need. And 
so he gladly accepted it all, seeing in it “an odor 
of a sweet savor, a sacrifice acceptable and well- 
pleasing to God.” 


Nor would He, for whose glory they ministered 
the gift to His imprisoned servant, allow them to 
put Him in their debt, but engaged Himself to 
supply all their need, according to His riches in 
glory, through Christ Jesus. The more blessed 
part must always be His, for when we have given 
to our utmost limit, we have only returned Him a 
little of His own, and even that He will abun- 
dantly repay. 

The last three verses give the concluding salu- 
tation. Note again how “every saint’ is affec- 
tionately greeted. He would refuse to the last to 
recognize any parties among them. And all with 
him joined in saluting them—particularly some, 
evidently newly come to the faith, and possibly as 


126 Notes on Philippians 


a result of coming in contact with him in his 
prison-cell,whom he mentions as “those of Czesar’s 
household,” who belonged to the imperial guard. 
And so we close our meditations on this instruc- 
tive epistle with a message of “grace” ringing in 
our souls. HivA. le 


TNT 
3 4320 00120 5584 


2272607 ci fin’ 1975 
Ironside, H. A. 


Notes on the Epistle to the 
Philippians 


nad 


a 


a 


i 


