vu 


Sta 


s252 Ws 
IRONSIDE 


otes on the Book of Nehemiah > 
j (24 ed., 1925) 


OAKLAND PUBLIC LIBRARY 
OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA 


1. Books may be kept two weeks and may be 
renewed once for the same length of time, except new 
books, short-time books, and magazines. 


2. A fine of two cents a day will be charged 
on each book which is not returned according to the 
above rule. 


3. All injuries to books beyond reasonable wear 
and all losses shall be made good to the satisfaction 
of the librarian. 


4. Each borrower is held responsible for all books 
borrowed on his card and for all fines accruing on it. 


iY 


OCT 21 1941 


This book may be renewed by telephone, unless 
reserve is filed. 


10 Cents Fine for Defacing or Losing this Label 
OAKLAND PUBLIC LIBRARY 


NOTES 


ON THE 


Book or NEHEMIAH 


BY 
H. A. IRONSIDE 


Author of “Notes on Proverbs; “Notes on the Minor Prophets;” 
“Lectures on Revelation;” “Praying in the Holy Spirit;” 


“The Four Hundred Silent Years," etc., etc. 


pee aca remit TO 

fw. eC ; 

REVISED EDITION f* se ben Pete 
YY 

i aes 


f ) fo 


foe 
hen f 
fee¢ 

“i ¥ 

fs 


PRINTED 1 ona 
IN USA \ y 
dua%, @ TRRIr Abe 
swe 


LOIZEAUX BROTHERS, BIBLE TRUTH DEPOT 
1 EAST 13th STREET, NEW YORK 


THE BIBLE TRUTH PRESS 


1 EAST 13TH STREET, NEW YORK 


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 


Puoiic Library 
OCT 1541 


Oakland, California 


PREFACE 
TO THE SECOND EDITION 


IN going over these pages again after the lapse 
of nearly twelve years I feel more than ever the 
importance of the truths on which they insist. 
The need for holy separation from the world and 
worldly Christianity is more evident with each 
passing day, as the dispensation nears its close. 
On the other hand the need of increasing large- 
ness of heart toward God’s beloved people strug- 
gling against the evil and crying for light and for 
help becomes more manifest. To all such I send 
forth this little book again on its mission of love. 


H. A. IRONSIDE. 


June, 1925 


This Book is the Gilt of 


WESTERN BOOK AND TRACT 


COMPANY, INC. 


PREFATORY NOTE 


THE little book now before the reader has been 
in contemplation ever since its companion-exposi- 
tion, “Notes on the Book of Ezra,” was published. 
If read in connection with that work and also the 
writer’s “Notes on Esther” (the three issued se- 
parately, also in one volume), and the “‘Notes on 
Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi” in the volume on 
“The Minor Prophets,” a connection will be traced 
throughout. 

As heretofore, no attempt has been made to 
write for scholars or to produce a literary work. 
But in the simplest way I have sought to em- 
phasize important truths that are being neglected 
in many places where they need to be pressed more 
insistently than ever. 


The Lord watch over all for His name’s sake. 


H. A. IRONSIDE. 
Now., 1918. 


INDEX 


PAGE 
ELOUUCHION cr cielele stotersero iors ais coi cee Sie okie eee eee es LL 


Chapter I. — An Exercised Man .........ceceeceeee Il 
Chapter II. — The Failed Testimony...........eee00- 15 
Chapter III. — The Gates of Jerusalem ...........-. 24 


Chapter IV. — Soldier-Servants .......esesceseccsse OO 
Chapter V. — Internal Strife ....... pielsleisatefateletestor ni OL: 
Chapcerav le ELOLS ANG ONATES) oc e's o1e.0/c lee e's clelele else 68 
Chapter VII. — Restoring Order .......... sielaisieiosiee) 1. 
Chapter VIII. — The Great Bible-reading ......... Sprit 
Chapter IX. — The Word and Prayer .........ee0e0.- 99 
Chapter: X. — The New Start, ......ccccwcccsevesees 101 
Chapter XI. — A Willing People........ alaieaie eraloie . 109 
Chapter XII. — The Dedication of the Wall ......... 113 


Chapter XIII. — Vigilance versus Declension .........119 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2023 with funding from 
Kahle/Austin Foundation 


https://archive.org/details/notesonbookofnehOOOOiron 


las Gye Ot 
4 ae Fe t 
gt civi 
tt as NOTES 
ose 


ON THE 


BOOK of NEHEMIAH 


INTRODUCTION 


N the book of Ezra, we see a remnant peo- 
ple gathered back to the place where the 
Lord had set His name, after a long period of 
bondage and exile in Babylon, the centre of the 
false religious system of that day. Nehemiah 
pursues the further history of this company for 
some years afterwards, but is especially devoted 
to the work of guarding the place of privilege, 
as indicated in the large space given to the nar- 
ration of events in connection with the building 
of the wall of Jerusalem. This was a wall both 
of protection and exclusion, and doubtless speaks 
to us to-day of principles which may easily be 
abused where self-judgment and spirituality are 
lacking, but which are nevertheless of supreme 
importance if any scriptural testimony is to be 


8 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


maintained in a day of declension. It is con- 
sidered a mark of liberality and brotherly kind- 
ness with many, to declaim against all exclusive- 
ness on the part of believers in the Lord Jesus 
Christ. But it is to be feared numbers object to 
a term they neither understand nor see the reason 
for. 

A word in the book of Deuteronomy might help 
as to this. In chapter 22:8 we read: “When 
thou buildest a new house, then thou shalt make 
a battlement for thy roof, that thou bring not 
blood upon thy house if any man fall from thence.” 
The battlement surrounding the flat roof of the 
Israelite’s dwelling conveys much the same 
thought as the wall enclosing Jerusalem. The 
roof was to the oriental the place of communion 
and retirement (1 Sam. 9: 25; Prov. 21: 9), of 
prayer (Acts 10:9), and of testimony (Matt. 10: 
27). It was commonly used very much as both 
the parlor and the study of the occidental. There 
the family would commune together, and there 
they would entertain friends. But if there were 
no protecting wall about this favored place, it 
would be one of danger to the young and to any 
inclined to be careless. Therefore the divine in- 
struction that a battlement be built to completely 
surround the house-top; otherwise the owner of 
the house was held responsible if any one fell from 
thence, and so was slain. 

The house-top is a fitting picture of assembly — 
privilege. For, as gathered to the name of the 


Introduction 9 


Lord Jesus, believers are in the place of retire- 
ment from the distracting things of the world, of 
communion with the Father and the Son, and with 
one another, in the Spirit’s power, and this is 
likewise the place of prayer and of testimony. 
But hallowed as such a place is, there are always 
the young in Christ and those weak in the faith 
to be considered. Pre-eminently for their sakes 
it is imperative that the wall of separation (not 
only from the world, but from worldly Chris- 
tianity) be maintained, otherwise many of these 
little ones will fall from this hallowed sphere of 
privilege into which grace has brought them. 
And here I desire to quote the words of a 
brother beloved, written in a private letter some 
time since, but which I feel are of value for all 
believers desiring so to walk as to please God, 
not only individually, but in corporate testimony: 
“By some an attempt is being made to pull down 
the barriers of truth and make us give up what 
we have. If the younger men among us, who are 
soon to take the lead, if the Lord tarry yet a 
while, are not true in practice to the truth, not 
only of the gospel but also of the Church of God, 
the truth itself will slip away from them. As I 
see the developments all around, I burn with 
jealousy for the truth we have. It makes us, in 
its practice, a people rejected by all, but who 
have the bread that all need. If we keep sepa- 
rated from every movement which leaves out what 
hurts in the truth; if we just live out in prac- 


10 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


tice what the truth is, we will remain no doubt a 
small, unpopular people, but we will be to the 
end God’s vessel of truth to His whole Church on 
earth; and that will be ten thousand times better 
throughout eternity than to have been on popular 
lines for greater access to men. 

“Our assemblies, if kept truly pure, are little 
fortresses for the defence and sallying out of 
truth. Let us build them up strong, solid and 
faithful...Principles of independency annul the 
constitution of the Church of God as laid down in 
Ephesians, and make it impossible for us there- 
fore to carry out its by-laws, as I may call them, 
given us in Corinthians.”’* 

These are sound and seasonable words, and form 
a fitting introduction to the special lines of divine 
truth emphasized in this instructive portion of 
the word of God, the book of Nehemiah. 

The years that have passed since they were 
written have witnessed the rapid development of 
apostasy in the form of Modernism, making it 
more imperative than ever that real believers 
should walk in separation from those who deny 
every fundamental truth of Scripture. 


* Extracted from a letter by P. J. Loizeaux. 


CHAPTER I 


AN EXERCISED MAN 


N the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, king of 
Persia, his cup-bearer, Nehemiah, the son of 
Hachaliah, was in deep exercise of soul concern- 
ing the condition of the re-gathered remnant, 
whose history we have been studying, as related 
by Ezra the Scribe.* Nehemiah means comfort 
or consolation of Jehovah, and he ig one whose 
name expresses his character, as is so often the 
case in Scripture, when names were not given by 
any means so carelessly as now. Like Paul, he 
was to comfort others with the comfort wherewith 
he himself was comforted otf God (2 Cor. 1:4). 
This is a weighty principle in God’s ways with 
His servants. Many a saint is permitted to go 
through deep waters, to pass through severe trial 
both of body and mind, not only for his own profit, 
but that he may be the better fitted to be a channel 
of blessing to his brethren when cast down and 
in distress. Happy is the saint who is thus sub- 
ject to the will of God and enabled to be His agent 
in consoling his discouraged fellows and restoring 
them, through a ministry received in times of sor- 
row, when they are backslidden and disheartened. 


* See “Notes on the Book of Ezra,” by the same. 


12 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


The station of Nehemiah was one of worldly 
prosperity. It is true he was a servant; prob- 
ably a bondman, but so were all his people; and 
he dwelt in a royal palace, and seems to have 
been a favorite with the king. But, like Moses, 
his heart was with his lowly brethren, and his 
spirit was zealous for the testimony of the Lord. 

To him, Hanani, one of his brethren, and other 
Jews came, whom he questioned closely concern- 
ing the remnant who had gone up to Jerusalem. 
The report was not encouraging. They replied: 
“The remnant that are left of the captivity there 
in the province are in great affliction and re- 
proach; the wall of Jerusalem also is broken 
down, and the gates thereof are burned with fire” 
(ver.3). That Hanani felt this keenly there can 
be no doubt, but that he, or his companions were 
before God about it, as was Nehemiah, seems 
scarcely probable. It is one thing to shake the 
head and sigh over the vicissitudes of the con- 
gregation of the Lord, it is quite another to look 
up to Him to give deliverance, and to put His 
truth and testimony above every other interest. 
This latter Nehemiah did. 

His brethren’s unhappy report caused him 
deepest searching of heart and contrition of spirit, 
so that he gave himself to fasting and prayer 
with many tears; for, like Paul in a brighter 
dispensation, he knew much of what it was to 
weep over the failures of the people of God. To 
Him who had forsaken His city and given His 


An Exercised Man 13 


people up to captivity, but who had granted a 
little reviving in their bondage, Nehemiah turned 
in prayer. He uses the same title so fre- 
quently found in the record of Ezra, “the God 
of heaven.” This indicated the removal of God’s 
throne from earth to heaven. In deepest humilia- 
tion he joins with Ezra and Daniel in confessing 
his sin and the sin of his people. “We have 
sinned,” he cries ; and again, “Both I and my 
father’s house have sinned ;” and once more, “We 
have dealt very corruptly.” Genuine confession 
like this reaches the ear of God. It indicates a 
soul able to look at matters from God’s standpoint. 
Nehemiah is no carping critic, no self-satisfied 
Pharisaic looker-on upon the failure of others. “I 
thank Thee that I am not as other men” would 
never come from his lips. Instead, he bows his 
head in common confession with his brethren, and 
brokenly cries, “We have sinned.” 

But he is a man of faith as well as a man of 
prayer, and so he at once proceeds to remind 
God, as it were, of His own word; how He had 
declared in Lev. 26: 40-45 and Deut. 4: 23; 30: 1-6 
that even though He might scatter His people be- 
cause of their transgression, yet if in the strang- 
er’s land they would turn unto Him, keep His 
commandments, and do them, He would gather 
them again, though it were from the uttermost 
parts of the earth, and bring them back to the 
place He had chosen, “to set His name there.” 
This promise Nehemiah pleads, and touchingly 


14 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


cries: “Now these are Thy servants and Thy 
people, whom Thou hast redeemed by Thy great 
power and by Thy strong hand. O Lord, I be- 
seech Thee, let now Thine ear be attentive to the 
prayer of Thy servant, and to the prayer of Thy 
servants who desire to fear Thy name: and pros- 
per, I pray Thee, Thy servant this day, and grant 
him mercy in the sight of this man” (vers. 10, 11). 
“This man” was none other than the great Arta- 
xerxes himself; but to Nehemiah he was just a 
man, and he desired that his heart might be con- 
trolled by God for the furtherance of His purpose 
of grace towards His people. 

In other circumstances he could and did give 
honor to whom honor was due. But in the pres- 
ence of the great King of kings this puissant 
monarch was but a man, and such is he in Nehe- 
miah’s reckoning. He had, in large measure, 
learned to put not his trust in princes, but to 
cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils. 
To the living God he looked; on His compassion 
and omnipotence he reckoned; and the sequel 
shows that he was not disappointed. 


CHAPTER II 


THE FAILED TESTIMONY 


T pleased the God of heaven, in bringing about 
an answer to His servant’s petition, to attract 
the attention of the Persian ruler to the grief- 
stricken face of Nehemiah. Kindly the monarch 
inquires after the cause of this change of counten- 
ance, for the son of Hachaliah had been wont to 
exhibit a cheerful mien, as became one whose 
confidence was in the Lord. ‘Why is thy coun- 
tenance sad,” asks the king, “seeing thou art not 
sick? This is nothing else but sorrow of heart.” 
Fearful of his sovereign’s displeasure, his cup- 
bearer replies, “Let the king live forever: why 
should not my countenance be sad, when the city, 
the place of my father’s sepulchres, lieth waste, 
and the gates thereof are consumed with fire?” 
(ver. 23). Nehemiah could not be indifferent to 
a matter of this kind. He was no misanthropical 
pessimist—rather indeed the very opposite—but 
he could not be unmoved by the terrible break- 
down on the part of his loved people and the de- 
solate condition of that city that should have been 
the glory of the whole earth. 

But, observe, he did not stand aside and write 
pamphlets on the failure of his brethren or simply 
denounce them for their backslidings while doing 
nothing to help them reach a better state; nor 


16 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


did he wash his hands of the whole matter and 
conclude that because the failure had indeed come 
in, he was justified in giving up all concern about 
the testimony committed to Judah. Not at all. 
His was a grief deep and genuine; but it was one 
that led to exercise before God, and an earnest 
desire to be an instrument in the hand of the Lord 
for the establishment of the truth, and the re- 
covery and encouragement of the feeble few who 
had broken down so sadly in the very place where 
Jehovah had set His name. 

And so when the king inquired, “For what dost 
thou make request?” he did not answer till he had 
“prayed to the God of heaven.” What an atmo- 
sphere of prayer surrounds this man! It is his 
constant resource throughout all his varied ex- 
periences. He walked with God because he talked 
with God. Now, assured of the Lord’s mind, he 
made request for permission to visit the land of 
Judah and the city of Jerusalem, that he might 
“build it.” This was morally very lovely. He 
desired to build, to edify. Any one with a small 
measure of discernment can stand off and either 
bewail or criticize the failures of others, but one 
must needs be in touch with God to be a true 
builder. Such an one was Paul, “a wise master- 
builder,” and he, by the Spirit, directs that “all 
things be done unto edifying.” “Knowledge,” he 
tells us, ‘‘puffeth up, but love edifieth” (or, build- 
eth up). This is an all-important truth. 

Many there are who entered on the path of 


The Failed Testimony 17 


separation with high hopes and fond expectations; 
eagerly they drank in the precious truths the 
Holy Spirit of God was making known in the 
_place where He had liberty to work as He would. 
But to-day, alas, alas! many of these have turned 
-away disheartened, and that because of break- 
down on the part of brethren whom these others 
deem less clear of sight, less devoted and less 
intelligent than themselves. So they stand off 
and bewail the divided condition, the worldliness, 
the cold-heartedness that has come in among those 
who sought to walk together in separation from 
the prevailing apostasy. But to what end? Such 
a course profits neither those who so judge, nor 
those judged. Better, a thousand times better, to 
rise up in the spirit of Nehemiah, and throw 
oneself in the breach as a builder. The heart may 
be grieved and the countenance sad, but there will 
be a deep-toned joy in seeking thus to enlighten, 
instruct, and edify weaker brethren: endeavoring 
in the fear of God to keep the Spirit’s unity in the 
bond of peace, and occupy saints with the blessed 
Gatherer Himself instead of the failure of those 
gathered. 

Yes, as the days darken and the dispensation 
fast hastens to its close, it is men of the Nehemiah 
stamp who will be of real value to the people of 
God, and who shall thus save themselves and those 
who hear them. 

In the presence of his consort, Artaxerxes gave 
the desired permission, stipulating a defined 


18 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


leave of absence, in which Nehemiah would be 
free to carry out the desire of his heart, and go 
to his brethren as a true prophet to speak words 
of exhortation, edification and encouragement 
(ver. 6). All that may be needed for the work of 
building is granted by the king, even as the King 
of kings, who is also head of His body, the Church, 
delights to supply His willing workers with all 
things that pertain to the ministry committed to 
them. And here we note that Ezra and Nehemiah 
were men of like mind in tracing every blessing 
to the good hand of God (ver. 8). 

The intervening journey soon completed (for 
a burning love urged him on), Nehemiah crosses 
the river and presents the king’s letters to the 
governors of the mixed Samaritan people, who 
had been settled in the land of the ten tribes 
since the days of Esar-haddon. At once we read 
of two men who are grieved and displeased; they 
were Sanballat the Horonite and Tobiah the Am- 
monite, called contemptuously, Tobiah the ser- 
vant. When they heard of his arrival, “it grieved 
them exceedingly that there was come a man to 
seek the welfare of the children of Israel” (ver. 
10). As these men caused Nehemiah much trouble 
and concern later on, it will be well to inquire 
here as to who or what they might represent, and 
to ask if any such adversaries are likely to be 
encountered to-day in connection with the defence 
of the “present truth.” 


The Failed Testimony 19 


Sanballat is called a Horonite, generally sup- 
posed to mean a native of Horonaim, a city of 
Moab. Of Tobiah’s ancestry we are left in no 
doubt. We have therefore in these two foes rep- 
resentatives of those hostile races of whom it was 
written, “The Moabite and the Ammonite should 
not come into the congregation of God forever,” 
as we are reminded later in chapter 13:1. The 
prohibition in Deut. 23: 3-6 gives the reason for 
this: “An Ammonite or Moabite shall not enter 
into the congregation of the Lord; even to their 
tenth generation shall they not enter into the con- 
gregation of the Lord forever: because they met 
you not with bread and water in the way, when 
ye came forth out of Egypt; and because they 
hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor of 
Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee. Neverthe- 
less...the Lord thy God turned the curse into a 
blessing unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved 
thee. Thou shalt not seek their peace nor their 
prosperity all thy days forever.” 

Reading such a command, we naturally ask why 
such a doom upon Moab and Ammon for refusing 
aid to Israel when about to enter the land of 
promise? Why should it have been expected of 
them and not of others? The answer is very 
simple. There were ties of blood that gave Israel 
right to expect their assistance, but these ties were 
utterly repudiated. Moab and Ammon were the 
natural sons of Lot, but by his own daughters! 
They were really then “bastards, and not sons” 


20 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


(Heb. 12:8). They surely speak to us of those 
professing to be children of God, but not born 
of the Spirit. And so they ever, as born only of 
the flesh, persecuted the spiritual seed. They are 
the representatives of fleshly religion, of carnal 
profession, and as such they detest reality, and 
hate the truth that, “Except a man be born again 
he cannot see the kingdom of God.” They feel 
they have as much right to the ordinances of God, 
and as much liberty to participate in His service 
and worship as any; but they are only natural 
men with a veneer of religiousness, and such have 
ever been the bitterest opponents of what really 
honors Christ and glorifies God. They abound 
to-day as they have abounded all down the cen- 
turies, and their object is still, as ever, to corrupt 
if they can, and to destroy if they cannot corrupt. 

Leaving Sanballat and Tobiah for the present, 
gnashing their teeth in their rage and vexation, 
we follow Nehemiah to the city of God. Reaching 
Jerusalem, he rested three days. Then, confer- 
ring not with flesh and blood, but taking a few 
men with him, though telling none what God had 
put in his heart, he arose in the night and went 
out to view in silence the ruin that had come in. 
This night journey around the walls of the city is 
deeply pathetic. Who that has any real care for 
the people of God has not known something of 
it? The nobles and rulers and all the people are 
wrapt in slumber, but this lonely man, whose heart 
God has touched, keeps his midnight vigil, and 


The Failed Testimony aL 


goes from gate to gate and tower to tower, noting 
with deepest sorrow and concern the breaches sin 
has made. “I went out by night,” he says, “by 
the gate of the valley, even before the dragon 
well, and to the dung port, and viewed the walls 
of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the 
gates thereof were consumed with fire. Then I 
went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the 
king’s pool: but there was no place for the beast 
that was under me to pass. Then went I up in the 
night by the brook, and viewed the wall, and 
turned back and entered by the gate of the valley, 
and so returned” (vers. 13-15). It was no carping 
critic viewing with indifferent feelings the de- 
fencelessness of his brethren; but a man of pur- 
pose and prayer, beholding what stirred his soul 
to its depths, with the desire to build up what 
carnal ease and self-seeking had permitted to fall 
into ruin. 

It was not till after this night view that he 
called the people, with their rulers and the priests 
of the Lord together, to give them cognizance of 
his mission. He does so most delicately. There 
are no reproaches, no Pharisaic and odious com- 
parisons or contrasts, but he identifies himself 
fully with them and says: “Ye see the distress 
that we are in; how Jerusalem lieth waste, and 
the gates thereof are burned with fire: come, and 
let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be 
no more a reproach” (ver.17). Such an one is a 
God-sent and Spirit-qualified leader. He does not 


22 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


say, “You are in distress;” but “We are.” He 
does not command, “Go, and build,” but he en- 
treats, “Let us build.” He does not say, “You are 
a reproach,” but he pleads, “Let us be no more 
a reproach.” And then he tells of the good hand 
of his God upon him, and of the king’s commission. 

The people are aroused and encouraged, and cry 
at once, “Let us rise up and build;” and so they 
join hands with God’s dear servant for the work 
he has planned. No doubt there was not the 
exercise of soul in all that conditions called for; 
but the work must be done nevertheless, and there 
will be more exercise as they go on. 

And now we hear of Sanballat and Tobiah 
again; and with them a third adversary, Geshem 
the Arabian. This man is either an Edomite or 
an Ishmaelite, more probably the latter; but in 
either case he speaks of the flesh warring against 
the Spirit. Both Ishmael and Esau were types 
of the natural man—hence of the flesh—and were 
opposed to Isaac and Jacob, the seed of promise. 
Geshem is elsewhere in this book called Gashmu. 
When this unworthy trio hear of the work con- 
templated at the place of the Name, they indulge 
in sarcastic merriment. Nehemiah noted that, 
“They laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and 
said, What is this thing that ye do? will ye rebel 
against the king?” (ver. 19). 

Heretofore the line of demarcation between the 
outwardly separated Israelites and these mixed 
nations had been almost obliterated; hence there 


The Failed Testimony 23 


Was peace and quietness. But now a man has 
come who contemplates rearing afresh the wall 
of exclusion, and this is bitterly resented, though 
at first they attempt but to laugh down the de- 
termination of the remnant. To all their sneers 

-Nehemiah calmly replies: “The God of heaven, 
He will prosper us; and therefore we His ser- 
vants will arise and build: but ye have no por- 
tion, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem!” 
- (ver. 20). He has thrown down the gauntlet and 

declares his uncompromising attitude in a man- 
ner not to be misunderstood. Henceforth he will 
be hated as only those can hate who resent hav- 
ing their false religious claims made nothing of! 

The out-and-out worldling does not hate what 
is truly of God so bitterly as the Christless pro- 
fessor who has a name that he lives but is dead. 

Such an one cannot bear spiritual realities; for 
when confronted with them the hollowness of his 

profession is exposed, like Dagon when the ark of 

Jehovah was set down before it. This explains 
the bitterness with which these adversaries op- 
posed the work of God going on at Jerusalem. 


CHAPTER III 


THE GATES OF JERUSALEM 


HE work at once began, and it is to be noted 
what a thoroughly individual thing it was. 
Nehemiah is the servant used to stir up the rest; 
but they are stirred up, and ‘To every man his 
work” is the motto that might well describe the 
busy scene. This chapter is like a page from the 
books of God’s record of service, and will doubt- 
less be opened at the judgment seat of Christ, 
when each will be rewarded for his own work— 
and some who shirked, alas, will then suffer loss. 
For both the workers and the shirkers are here 
mentioned, and here their names shall stand till 
the Lord Himself has pronounced His judgment 
upon all. Such records are deeply instructive, and 
deserve to be pondered with care that they may 
stir up our minds by way of remembrance. 

In the New Jerusalem there are to be twelve 
gates (Rev. 21:12), and each several gate of one 
pearl; so that, look upon the city from which- 
ever standpoint one may, he will be reminded 
of the precious truth that Christ “loved the 
Church, and gave Himself for it” (Eph. 5: 25). 
He came from heaven as a merchantman seeking 
goodly pearls; and having found one pearl of great 
price, He bought it, at the cost of all that He 


The Gates of Jerusalem 25 


had; “though He was rich, for our sakes He be- 
came poor,” that we might be rich. And that 
heavenly city, of which Christ is the centre and 
the lamp for the display of God’s glory, has “a 
wall great and high,” speaking, as did the wall 
of the earthly city, of security and exclusion. 

Jerusalem in Nehemiah’s day seems to have 
had twelve gates also, though only ten are men- 
tioned in this chapter: but in chapter 8:16 we 
read of “the gate of Ephraim,” and in 12: 89 of 
“the prison gate.” The ten mentioned in the 
present portion remind us of the number that, it 
has been well said, sets forth responsibility to- 
wards God and man, of which the ten words in 
the law were the measure; while the twelve of the 
heavenly city (and note how many twelves there 
are in Rev. 21), as some have suggested, would 
set forth perfect administration, or governmental 
completeness, only to be known in the day that 
the kings of the earth bring the glory and the 
honor of the nations unto it. 

I have thought there might be divine lessons 
for us in the names and order of these gates. 
That there is danger always of being fanciful, 
I realize. An insubject imagination is only “evil 
continually” (Gen. 6:5), in the things of the Lord 
as well as in all else, and one would therefore 
seek to avoid it. But, in looking at these gates, 
it is not so much my thought to seek to give the 
interpretation of them as to make a practical 
application of truth which, I am convinced, is 


26 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


much needed in this Laodicean day. We shall 
therefore take them in their order, aS we go 
through the chapter, noting likewise the interest- 
ing and instructive points brought out in connec- 
tion with service as we go from port to port. 

We begin, then, with 


THE SHEEP GATE, 


of which we read in the first verse: “Eliashib 
the high priest rose up with his brethren the 
priests, and they builded the sheep gate; they 
sanctified it, and set up the doors of it; even unto 
the tower of Meah they sanctified it, unto the 
tower of Hananeel.” 

This was priestly work indeed, for through this 
gate the beasts were led whose death and blood- 
shedding were to picture the one Offering of the 
ninth of Hebrews. They pointed on to the per- 
fect sacrifice of that unnamed One of Isaiah 53, 
who was “led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as 
a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so He open- 
eth not His mouth.” 

Thankful we are that for us it is not necessary 
to ask, as did the eunuch, “Of whom speaketh 
the prophet this? of himself, or of some other 
man?” (Acts 8: 34). The other Man is well known 
indeed to those of us who have been brought 
to trust the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a 
ransom for all. In Him we have beheld the Lamb 
of God who taketh away the sin of the world 
(John 1: 29). 


The Gates of Jerusalem 27 


The Sheep Gate clearly speaks to us, then, of 
the Cross. It was at the Sheep Gate the Lord 
met the palsied man and healed him, as recorded 
in John 5, as it is at the Cross the helpless sinner 
finds life and peace. Here the remnant of old 
began to build the wall, priestly hands piling stone 
upon stone, and setting up the beams and bars. 
And here every one must begin who has really 
to do with God, other than in judgment. The 
wall, we have already seen, speaks of holiness, 
which must shut out evil; but what evil is, we can 
never rightly know until we have understood in 
some measure the meaning of the Cross. It was 
there that all the iniquity of man’s heart was 
fully revealed; there too that the absolute holi- 
ness of God’s character was declared in an even 
more marked way than it will be made known 
in the lake of fire. In the Cross it was that mercy 
and truth met together, and that righteousness 
and peace kissed each other (Ps. 85:10). 


“?Tis in the cross of Christ we see 
How God can save, yet righteous be.” 


The most important truth of Scripture is, that 
on the cross the judgment of a holy God against 
sin fell upon His spotless Son, when He “suffered, 
the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us 
to God” (1 Pet.3:18). There is nothing like the 
apprehension of this to give peace to a troubled 
soul. I have been awakened to see myself a lost, 
guilty sinner. Perhaps for years I have been go- 


28 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


ing about to establish my own righteousness, and 
trusting that all would surely be well with me 
because of fancied merit in myself. I have de- 
luded myself with the notion that God, who is 
love, must therefore allow sin to pass unpun- 
ished, or that my sin was, at any rate, of weight 
so light it would never sink me down to the pit 
of woe. But now all is changed. I have learned 
that I am a lost man! My sins, which once 
seemed like trifles, insignificant as molehills, now 
rise before my terrified vision as dark, shapeless 
mountains, which I fear will bury me beneath 
their awful weight in the nethermost depths of 
the abyss of divine wrath. I look on my right 
hand, but I find no helper. Refuge fails me. In 
my despair I cry out, “No man cares for my soul!” 
(Ps. 142: 4); and in the hour of my deepest dis- 
tress there comes to me One with feet beautiful 
upon the mountains, a messenger, one among a 
thousand, who tells me the good news that God, 
the God whom I have so grievously sinned against 
and so flagrantly dishonored, has found a ransom, 
and can thus deliver me from going down into the 
pit (Job 33:24). My sins and guilt have all been 
laid on Jesus. My judgment has fallen upon His 
holy head, and thus I can go righteously free. 

Well does such a message deserve the name of 
“gospel!’’ Good news indeed! More welcome than 
cold water to a thirsty soul! : 

As of old, when Noah took of every clean beast 
and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt-offer- 


The Gates of Jerusalem 29 


ings upon the altar (Gen. 8: 20), so now Jehovah 
has looked upon the work of His beloved Son and 
“smelled a sweet savor,’ which is truly a “savor 
of rest” (margin) ; for sin is thus canceled, and 
God can be just and the Justifier of him that be- 
lieveth in Jesus. Christ thus becomes the Door 
of the sheep, as He said: “I am the door; by Me 
_ if any man enter in, he shall be saved, and shall 
go in and out, and find pasture” (John 10:9). — 

Of all this, and more also, may the Sheep Gate 
remind us. A gate of judgment it is too; for of 
judgment, in Scripture, the gate often speaks, as 
in Oriental cities it was there that justice was ad- 
ministered. But here it is judgment falling, not 
upon the guilty, but upon the guiltless One who 
voluntarily stood in the place of the sinner. “He 
was delivered for our offences, and raised again 
for our justification; therefore being justified by 
faith, we have peace with God through our Lord 
Jesus Christ” (Rom. 4: 25; 5:1). 

All thus justified are now the sheep of the Good 
Shepherd who died, the Great Shepherd who lives 
in glory, the Chief Shepherd who is coming again. 
As His sheep, they have title to enter in through 
the gate into the city. It is saved souls, and they 
alone, who here on earth are gathered by the 
Spirit to the name of the Lord Jesus in separation 
from the world and its evil, and it is such alone 
who will be within that wall of jasper gathered 
around the Lamb in the glory. 

Let me press it upon the reader—has all this 


30 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


been made good to your soul? Is your confi- 
dence for eternity based upon the work of Christ? 
Are you trusting alone in Jesus, who in those 
solemn hours of deeper than Egyptian darkness, 
“fought the fight alone,’ vanquished Satan’s 
power in resurrection, and is now exalted at God’s 
right hand to be a Prince and a Saviour? 

Oh, be persuaded! If you are resting on any- 
thing short of this, your soul is in peril most 
grave and fearful; for it is only “the blood of 
Jesus Christ, God’s Son, that cleanses from all 
sin” (1 Jno.1:7). If, however, this is the ground 
of your confidence, if you are saved and know it, 
if the lesson of the Sheep Gate has been truly 
learned in the presence of God, I ask you to pass 
on with me now to 


THE FISH GATE, 


But on the way there is a small portion of the 
wall being built by the men of Jericho. Jericho 
was the city of the curse, but “Christ hath re- 
deemed us from the curse of the law, being made 
a curse for us; as it is written, Cursed is every 
one that hangeth on a tree.” So these happy 
Jericho men are now in the place of blessing, and 
serving in newness of spirit. Next to them builds, 
apparently alone, Zaccur, the son of Imri, but 
God’s eye is upon him, and he shall find his name 
on the honor roll in the day of Christ. Then we 
read: “But the Fish Gate did the sons of Has- 
senaah build, who also laid the beams thereof, 


The Gates of Jerusalem 31 


and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof and 
the bars thereof” (ver. 3). 

The name of this port at once brings to mind 
the word of the Lord addressed to Simon and 
Andrew when He found them “casting a net into 
the sea.” “He saith unto them, Follow Me, and 
I will make you fishers of men.” Precious it is 
to learn that, without a word as to delay, they 
“straightway left their nets and followed Him” 
(Matt. 4: 17-20). 

It is a weighty truth, often I fear forgotten in 
this pushing, restless age, that the great business 
of those already saved should be to bring others 
to Christ. Alas, alas, the indifference as to this 
among many of the people of God is most ap- 
palling! The Fish Gate is closed, or fallen in 
ruins, and there are no devoted “sons of Has- 
senaah” who are enough in earnest about the con- 
dition of the lost to build it up again. Is it not 
a shame, a crying shame, that it should ever be 
true of saints going to heaven, that they are un- 
concerned about sinners going to hell? And God 
has said, ‘“He that withholdeth corn, the people 
shall curse him.” 

Oh, the heartlessness of it! Souls perishing 
under one’s very eyes, and no voice raised to pro- 
claim God’s message of love to the lost! Brothers, 
sisters, be honest with God! Face the question in 
His presence, What are you doing for souls? Will 
friends, neighbors, relatives, rise up in that day 
and say: “I lived beside him for years; he knew 


32 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


I was going to hell; he never warned me, nor told 
me of a way of escape.” I beseech you, don’t 
turn it aside with pious expressions about, “So 
much fleshly energy,” and “the need of building 
up the saints.”” Words like these from men who 
lift not a finger to keep others from going down 
to eternal ruin, are disgusting indeed; yea, they 
are worse; they are actually wicked and abhorrent 
in the ears of Him who saith, “He that is wise 
winneth souls” (R. V.). 

Build up the Fish Gate, brethren; go out after 
the lost, and bring them inside the wall, where, 
having been saved, they will be cared for and 
helped in the things of God. 

I know all have not the same gift; all cannot 
preach to thousands. But surely it is not gift 
that is lacking so much as grace. It takes no 
special gift to distribute gospel tracts, or speak 
a loving word in season to needy souls. If you 
have “gift” enough to spend hours talking about 
the weather, or the various questions of domes- 
tic, business, or political life, you have all the gift 
that is needed to drop a tender, warning message 
in the ear of a careless one, or to point an anxious 
person to Christ. 

Let none shirk this work, for the day of mani- 
festation draws on apace. Then His eyes that 
are as a flame of fire will pierce into every hid- 
den motive, every unworthy, selfish thought, and 
bring all to light. In verse 4 we read of three 
who repaired the stretch of wall adjoining the 


The Gates of Jerusalem 33 


Fish Gate, and then we read of the Tekoites; 
and the Holy Ghost has noted that “their nobles 
put not their necks to the work of their Lord” 
(ver.5). They will have to face this record at 
the judgment-seat of Christ; and I fear there are 
some God-made, and many self-made, “nobles” 
among the people of the Lord to-day who mani- 
fest as gross indifference to the work of God. 

That, on the other hand, mere fleshly zeal will 
not be owned of God, I quite admit; and this 
brings before us the need of enforcing the lessons 
suggested by the next five gates. 


THE OLD GATE. 


“Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada tne 
son of Paseah, and Meshullam the son of Beso- 
deiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set up 
the doors thereof, and the locks thereof, and the 
bars thereof.” 

One would not try to be too insistent on the 
special meaning of this gate. I had thought of 
it as the old used in the new, the place of nature 
in the economy of grace; for our bodies, with all 
their marvelous members, belong to the old crea- 
tion still; but He who will glorify them by and 
by finds use for them in His own service even 
now in the day of their humiliation. 

But the suggestion of another that the old gate 
would be the port of entry for the old path seems 
a clearer and higher thought. It is in Jeremiah 
6:16 that we read: “Thus saith the Lord, Stand 


34 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths, 
where is the good way, and walk therein, and 
ye shall find rest to your souls.” And so the Old 
Gate might speak of subjection to the revealed 
will of God—abiding in that which was from the 
beginning. This still impresses upon us the great 
truth that we are called to recognize in all things 
the Lordship of Christ, and to hold every power 
we possess at His command, serving with grace in 
the heart. 


“Naught that I have mine own I call, 
I hold it for the Giver; 
My heart, my strength, my life, my all, 
Are His and His forever.” 


Evil is not in natural things themselves, but is 
in the abuse of them. Every talent we have is to 
be used for His glory. Woe to the man who hides 
one of them away, under pretence that nature, in 
this sense, is opposed to grace! 

This is what the Holy Spirit presses upon us 
when He says: “I beseech you therefore, breth- 
ren, by the mercies of God, that you present your 
bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
which is your reasonable service’ (Rom. 12:1). 
The child of God should remember that he has 
been bought with a price. His body is purchased 
with the blood of Christ. He is not merely called 
to “consecrate” himself, as people put it to-day, 
but to gladly own that he is already consecrated by 
the death of the Lord Jesus. The blood and the 


The Gates of Jerusalem 35 


| oil have been placed on the ear, the hand and the 
_foot—he belongs to Christ. The ear, to listen for 
His commandment; the hand, to do His bidding; 
the foot, to run in His ways (see Lev. 14: 14-18, 
25, 28, 29). 
_ Can anyone truly enter into this, and yet be 
careless in regard to service? Impossible. You 
are not only saved from hell, but purchased to be 
-the bondman of Jesus Christ. 

There is a depth of meaning in that word “pres- 

ent,” as noted above. Your body is His already. 

He might simply demand His own; but in grace 
He says, “I beseech you...present your body.” 
Have you done so? Have you, in other words, 
owned His claims upon you? If not, will you 
longer delay? O beloved, yield yourself unto Him, 
that thus you may bring forth fruit unto God. 
“Herein is My Father glorified, that ye bear much 
fruit” (John 15:8). 

I do not press it that the Old Gate was meant 
to teach this special truth, and I trust none will 
find fault over an application. 

Whatever the meaning one more spiritually- 
minded may discern, the fact remains that “Ye 
are not your own; ye are bought with a price.” 
It is this I seek to emphasize, for it is with many, 
well-nigh forgotten. Vast numbers of Christians 
live as though their only thought was to enjoy the 
present scene, “‘on the east of Jordan ;” pampering 
every whim of their blood-purchased bodies, and 
looking forward to going to heaven at last without 


36 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


having ever known the toil and conflict—yet the 
deep, hidden joy—of the servant’s path. — 

Especially is this often so of those in comfort- 
able and easy circumstances. The willing workers 
of verse 8 might well rebuke such. ‘‘Next unto 
him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah of the 
goldsmiths. Next unto him also repaired Hananiah 
the son of one of the apothecaries.” I question if 
goldsmiths’ and apothecaries’ sons had known 
much of downright hard labor, but here we see 
them hard at work helping to fortify Jerusalem. 
God has not forgotten that their soft white hands 
became hardened and sun-burned as they used 
trowel and mortar on the walls of the holy city. 

Nor would I pass over the Gibeonites, Melatiah 
and the men of Gibeon (ver. 7), whether by these 
we are to understand descendants of the once 
wily deceivers who entrapped Joshua into diso- 
bedience, or Israelites indeed, dwelling in the 
ancient city. In either case, we may be reminded 
of what we once were, and what grace has made 
us. 
After the goldsmiths and the apothecaries, re- 
paired Rephaiah, the son of Hur, ruler of half 
of Jerusalem. He did not hire a servant to do 
the work for him, but though a man of wealth 
and power, he labored with his hands, and the 
Lord took note of his devotedness. 

In verse 10 we read of a man whose sphere of 
labor was very circumscribed but very necessary. 
Jedaiah repaired “over against his house.” This 


The Gates of Jerusalem 37 


is noteworthy. Many of God’s people can do little 
in a public way in His service, but they can each 
be concerned about maintaining the wall over 
against their own houses. And this is tremend- 
ously important. It is useless to talk of separation 
in the assembly, if there be not separation main- 
tained at home. If the children are allowed to go 
into the world, or to bring the world into the 
home, depend upon it, the public testimony will 
avail for little. Godly words in the meeting and 
worldly ways in the house, will soon disgust neigh- 
bors and friends, and prove the undoing of the 
household. 

Another edifying spectacle is afforded us in 
verse 12: “Next unto him repaired Shallum the 
son of Halohesh, the ruler of the half part of 
Jerusalem, he and his daughters.” It must have 
been a grand sight to behold this ruler and his 
daughters so zealously affected in a good thing. 
Our sisters have here a bright example of devo- 
tedness to the Lord. Would that it might be fol- 
lowed by thousands more! 

Oft-times, one fears, where the truth is known 
that women are called upon to be in subjection, 
and not to lead in public work (after the fashion 
of the day), there is a settling down on the part 
of many sisters to a life of inaction and spiritual 
desuetude. But all work is not of a public char- 
acter, as we have already had occasion to observe. 
There are many ways and abundant opportun- 
ities afforded godly women to labor, both in the 


38 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


gospel and in building up the wall of protection 
and exclusion of evil, without appearing on the 
platform and usurping authority over the man. 
Let there be but a willing mind, and it will not 
be necessary to bewail the lack of opportunities 
for women’s service in a scriptural way. 

But if any are to be used of God, there must 
be not only this recognizing of His claims upon 
us, but also that lowliness of spirit that ever com- 
mends a servant. So we pass on to 


THE VALLEY GATE. 


“The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the in- 
habitants of Zanoah” (ver. 13). 

This surely suggests humility——a willingness 
to take a lowly place that thus the Lord may be 
exalted. One fears it is a gate little used by many 
of us nowadays. 

Pride is ever characteristic of fallen creatures, 
who have nothing to be proud of; for ‘“‘what hast 
thou that thou hast not received?” Even in con- 
nection with service for the Lord, how this un- 
holy thing creeps in, leading one servant to be 
jealous of another, instead of catching the Mas- 
ter’s voice as He says, “What is that to thee? 
Follow thou Me!” 

What Cowper says of sin in general may be 
predicated of pride in particular: 


“It twines itself about my thoughts, 
And slides into my prayer.” 


The Gates of Jerusalem 39 


It is indeed the root-sin of all. By it Satan him- 
self fell, and one “being lifted up with pride, falls 
into the condemnation of the devil.” 

God has said, “To this man will I look; to him 
that is humble, and of a contrite spirit, and that 
trembleth at My word.” It is perhaps merely 
a truism to write that only as one walks humbly 
before Him, is he in a condition of soul to be 
safely used in service. I do not mean that God 
cannot overrule all things, and in a sense use 
even the basest of men. The devil himself has 
to serve. God used Balaam, and others equally 
ungodly. But in such cases it is to the condem- 
nation of the very one used. 

To go on preaching and handling the truth of 
God while the heart is lifted up and the eyes 
lofty is one of the most dangerous courses one 
can take, and certain to end in ruin and dis- 
aster. 

We have much cause, as we contemplate our 
coldness and indifference, and the appalling power 
of the world over us, to be on our faces before 
God, instead of walking in pride, only to learn 
eventually that He “is able to abase”’ us, as in the 
case of Babylon’s haughty king. If we humble 
not ourselves, He must humble us in His own 
way, for it is part of His purpose to “hide pride 
from man.” 

Keeping this, then, before our minds, we pass 
on to the solemn and much-needed lesson of 


40 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


THE DUNG GATE. 


“But the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son 
of Rechab, the ruler of part of Beth-haccerem” 
(ver. 14). Humbling work this, for a ruler, but 
necessary labor surely. 

The Dung Gate was the port whence they car- 
ried forth the filth, that the city might not be 
defiled. And so we read, “Having therefore these 
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves 
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfect- 
ing holiness in the fear of God” (2 Cor. 7:1). 

Real blessing there cannot be if this is forgot- 
ten; but if we have truly learned the lesson of 
the Valley Gate, that of the Dung Gate will be 
no difficulty. As saints and servants we are called, 
not to uncleanness, but to holiness. We are to 
cleanse ourselves; that is, to judge, in the presence 
of God, and turn away from, all filthiness—let its 
form be the grosser one of the flesh, or the less 
objectionable (in the eyes of men) of the spirit. 

In the first three chapters of Romans we have 
sharply delineated the naked hideousness of the 
filthiness of the flesh. In the first three chapters 
of 1st Corinthians and in the 2nd of Colossians, 
we have unveiled the filthiness of the spirit: a 
mind exalting itself against God and His Christ 
—a wisdom that is earthly, sensual, devilish. So 
we read elsewhere of the “desires of the flesh 


The Gates of Jerusalem 41 


_ and of the mind,” in which we once walked. (See 
Eph. 2.) 

From all these things we are now called to 
cleanse ourselves. Body and mind alike are to 
be preserved free from impurity, for the glory 
of God. . 

“Flee also youthful lusts” is a much-needed 
word. In the world about us, men live to pander 
to the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, 
and the pride of life. It should be otherwise with 
the Christian, and must be otherwise if he is to 
be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for 
the Master’s use, and prepared unto every good 
work. Down with the bars of the Dung Gate, 
brethren; out with the filth! “Be ye clean that 
bear the vessels of the Lord.” 

Thus we pass on our journey round the walls, 
and come next to 


THE GATE OF THE FOUNTAIN. 


“The gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the 
son of Col-hozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah” 
(ver. 15). 

To the woman at the well, the Lord Jesus spoke 
of a fountain (not merely a well) of living water. 
Again in John 7 He cried, “He that believeth on 
Me...out of his inward parts shall flow rivers 
of living water.” The fountain of living water is 
a type, or symbol of the Holy Spirit who indwells 
all believers. 

It has been asserted by many that until the 


42 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Christian surrenders himself fully to God, he does 
not receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. This is a 
mistake. “If any man have not the Spirit of 
Christ, he is none of His” (Rom. 8:9); “After 
that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy 
Spirit of promise” (Eph.1:13)—sealed, too, “until 
the day of redemption” (Eph. 4:30); ‘Because 
ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of 
His Son into your hearts” (Gal. 4: 6). 

But that there is often in the experience of 
many what looks, indeed, like a ‘‘second blessing,” 
no observant believer can deny. What is really 
meant by it? Simply this: that though the Holy 
Spirit indwells all children of God in this dis- 
pensation, yet, in many, worldliness and self- 
pleasing are so characteristic, that He who should 
control us for Christ, and fill us with freshness 
and power as He ministers Christ to our souls, 
is become like a fountain choked with stones 
and rubbish, and thus the life is barren and the 
testimony powerless. Awakened at last to see the 
folly of such a life of uselessness to God and re- 
proach to Christ, the saint humbles himself in 
self-judgment, the filth is put away, and now the 
once-choked fountain is running over, and the 
Spirit of God in power takes control of the be- 
liever to use him for the Lord’s glory, and to 
make him a vessel of refreshment to others. There 
is a fountain of living water within, and out of 
his inward parts flow rivers of living water for 
others (John 7: 88). 


The Gates of Jerusalem 43 


“Be ye filled with the Spirit” is a word the 
importance of which cannot be over-estimated. 
May every child of grace go on to know more of 
it in power as he walks in obedience to the word 
of God! For there are two things that in Scrip- 
ture are practically inseparable—I refer to the 
Spirit and the Word. A Spirit-filled Christian 
will be a Scripture-filled Christian. 

In verses 16 to 25 we read of many persons 
who repaired that portion of the wall extending 
from the fountain gate to the water gate. There 
are fine shades and significant expressions used 
in several instances that we do well to notice. 
Of one and another we only read that they re- 
paired such and such a portion. In verse 20, of 
Baruch we are told that he “earnestly repaired 
the other piece, from the turning of the wall,” etc. 
It is not for nothing God inserted that adverb. 
Three are mentioned in verse 23 who repaired over 
against their houses, and we can be sure every 
detail was precious to God. But passing on to 
verse 26 we reach 


THE WATER GATE. 


“Moreover the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel, unto 
the place over against the water gate toward the 
east, and the tower that lieth out.” 

The Nethinim were servants, and it is meet 
that they should have the care of this gate, for 
water is very generally a type of the word of God. 
“Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? 


44 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


By taking heed thereto according to Thy word” 
(Ps. 119: 9). 

We do not read of any repairs being made 
here, only that the Nethinim dwelt over against 
the water gate. Possibly this port needed none. 
At any rate, we know that of which it speaks 
needs not to be repaired, for the word of God 
liveth and abideth forever. All vain man’s as- 
saults upon it have left it uninjured and un- 
changed. We are called upon to defend it, con- 
tending earnestly for the faith once for all de- 
livered to the people of God, but it would be im- 
piety to attempt to patch or improve it. 

The water of the Word it is that Christ uses 
to wash His disciples’ feet and to keep them free 
from defilement (Jno. 13:1-16; 15:3). It is writ- 
ten: “Christ also loved the Church and gave Him- 
self for it, that He might sanctify and cleanse it 
by the washing of water by the Word,” etc. (Eph. 
5: 25, 26.) 

It is remarkable that what in Ephesians is con- 
nected with the Spirit, is in Colossians linked with 
the Word. Compare Eph. 5: 18-20 with Col.3: 
16. Both alike are a source of joy and blessing. 
And we need not wonder at this similarity in 
effect, for of the Word it is said, “Holy men of 
God spake as they were moved by the Holy 
Ghost.” 

In chapter 8 of this book (Nehemiah) we see all 
the people gathered together ‘as one man into the 
street that was before the water gate,” there to 


The Gates of Jerusalem 45 


listen to the reading of the word of God. The 
result is joy and blessing. 

O fellow-believer, I beseech you, “meditate on 
these things, give thyself wholly to them,” and 
thus shall your profiting appear to all, as you “let 
the word of Christ dwell in you richly,” for, “All 
Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is 
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correc- 
tion, for instruction in righteousness, that the 
man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished 
unto all good works” (2 Tim.3:16,17). This, 
then, is the servant’s furnishing. He is to study 
to show himself “approved unto God, a workman 
that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing 
the word of truth.” 

And this means far more than reading books, 
however helpful, written on the Bible. It neces- 
sitates diligent, painstaking study of the sacred 
Word itself. Other books may help, often, to lead 
out the mind on certain broad lines, but the Book 
must supersede them all if there is to be real 
growth in the knowledge of God. 

By this alone will you overcome the wicked 
one, if “the word of God abideth in you” (1 John 
ZA); 

Another company of Tekoites repaired between 
the water gate and that which next claims our 
attention, namely: 


THE HORSE GATE. 


“From above the horse gate repaired the 


46 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


priests, every one over against his house” (ver. 
28). 

The horse is used with striking frequency in 
Scripture as a figure of the warrior. 

It is so described in Job 39: 19-25, where, ‘‘He 
saith among the trumpets, Ha, ha! and he smell- 
eth the battle afar off.” In Zechariah 1:8, and 
in Rev. 6, we read of four symbolic horses, which 
speak of warrior powers; and when the eternal 
Word of God, clad in blood-dipped vesture, de- 
scends from heaven to the battle preceding the 
awful supper of the great God, at the beginning 
of the Millennium, He is seen in vision riding on 
a white horse, and the saints are seen similarly 
mounted. 

The ass is the symbol of peace; the horse, of 
war. When the Prince of Peace rode into Jeru- 
salem of old, it was on the ass. When He comes 
to judgment, it is on the horse. 

The Horse Gate may speak, then, of soldier- 
service in a world opposed to God and His truth. 
It bids us “earnestly contend for the faith once 
for all delivered to the saints” (Jude 3, R. V.). 

The truth has been given to us at great cost, 
not only to the One who is Himself “the Truth,” 
but for its preservation, and recovery when lost 
at times, myriads of warrior-saints have suffered 
and died. 

Alas that we, children of such glorious sires, 
should so lightly value what to them was dearer 
than life! We live in a day not of open perse- 


The Gates of Jerusalem 47 


cution, but of laxity and latitudinarianism. We 
are affected much by the spirit of the times; hence 
there are few among us who, like that mighty 
man of old, grasp the sword of the Spirit to 
defend the truth of God, and fight till the hand 
_ cleaves to the very weapon it holds. (See 2 Sam. 
23:9,10.) But God’s Eleazars will have rich 
_ reward in the day when many, we fear, will be 
saved but so as by fire. 

Let me quote here the words of another, which 
- might well be written in letters of living fire: 

“Renounce all the policy of the age. Trample 
upon Saul’s armor. Grasp the Book of God. Trust 
the Spirit who wrote its pages. Fight with this 
weapon only and always. Cease to amuse, and 
seek to arouse. Shun the clap of a delighted 
audience, and listen for the sobs of a convicted 
one. Give up trying to please men who have only 
the thickness of their ribs between their souls 
and hell; and warn, and plead, and entreat, as 
those who feel the waters of eternity creeping 
upon them.’’* 

And remember, beloved, as you fight, that the 
day of testimony for God is fast passing away. 
It will soon be too late to stand for the truth, 
and too late to minister Christ to needy souls. 
“The night cometh when no man can work” (John 
9:4). 


*Archibald Brown, of London. 


48 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Of this we are reminded as we pass on to 
THE EAST GATE. 


“After him repaired also Shemaiah the son of 
Shechaniah, the keeper of the east gate” (ver. 
29). 

The gate of the sunrising points on—does it 
not?—to the morning without clouds, when He 
shall come down like rain upon the mown grass, 
and as clear shining after rain. 

Having shone forth as the Bright and Morning 
Star, and as such gathered His redeemed to Him- 
self in the clouds, He will be manifested to Israel 
and the nations that are spared as the all-glorious 
Sun of Righteousness, with healing in His wings. 
This is the special character in which He is pre- 
sented to Israel and the earth, but the two are 
only different aspects of His one coming again. 

For that glad morning weary saints all along 
have waited and longed, straining their eyes to 
catch the first glimpse of the Bright and Morning 
Star. Wicked servants have said, “My Lord de- 
layeth His coming; but He “is not slack, as 
some men count slackness, but is long-suffering 
to usward, not willing that any should perish” 
(2 Pet.3:9). “The night is far spent, the day is 
at hand.” It is high time to be aroused from our 
lethargy, for already the long-expected midnight 
cry is ringing through the world, “Behold, the 
Bridegroom cometh; go ye out to meet Him!” 
The shout of the Lord, the voice of the arch- 


The Gates of Jerusalem 49 


angel, and the trump of God, will soon resound 
through the vaulted heavens, announcing the re- 
turn of the long-absent One, and ushering in the 
morning. But for many it will be the beginning 
of the darkest night earth has ever known. 

Oh, let us be up and doing while it is called 
to-day, that we may not be ashamed before Him 
at His coming. ‘Even so, come, Lord Jesus.” 

Only a small part of the wall remains to be 
noticed, but among the workers upon it there is 
one we must not cursorily pass by. Meshullam 
the son of Berechiah repaired, we learn, “over 
against his chamber” (ver.30). Here was a man 
who probably had no house, no real home. He 
was but a lodger; but even so, he was faithful to 
Him who appointed him to glorify God in that 
narrow place. He went to work with energy and 
repaired over against his one little room. And 
thus he becomes a bright example for every one 
in like circumstances, bidding such remember that 
“he that is faithful in that which is least, is faith- 
ful also in much.” 


THE GATE MIPHKAD 


is the last in order. “After him repaired Mal- 
chiah the goldsmith’s son unto the place of the 
Nethinim, and of the merchants, over against the 
gate Miphkad, and to the going up of the corner” 
(ver. 31). 

The word Miphkad, according to the diction- 
aries, means review, or appointment (for judg- 


50 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


ment). It was doubtless the gate where contro- 
versies were tried, after the Eastern fashion. How 
solemn is this! For it is when the Lord comes 
that “we must all appear before the judgment- 
seat of Christ.” That will be the Gate Miphkad 
for the believer. There will be the last great 
review. Every detail of the saint’s life will come 
up for inspection. It may be then that, 


“Deeds of merit, as we thought them, 
He will show us were but sin; 
Little acts we had forgotten, 
He will tell us were for Him.” 


Oh, the unspeakable solemnity of it! All our 
ease-loving and self-seeking brought to light then! 
All our pride and vanity manifested! Everything 
put on its own proper level. All our works in- 
spected by Him who seeth not as man seeth. How 
many of us will wish we had been more true and 
real in our work down here. Things we valued 
highly on earth, how lightly will they weigh up 
there !—as the very small dust of the balance; yea, 
lighter even than that—altogether, lighter than 
vanity ! 

And those things we have neglected and fool- 
ishly ignored in the days of our pilgrimage, how 
much more precious than gold will they appear 
in the light of that judgment-seat! 

O beloved, shall we not seek to be now what 
we shall then wish we had been? Let us do now 
what we shall then wish we had done; turn now 


The Gates of Jerusalem 51 


from what we shall then wish we had judged. 
The Lord grant that His people be awakened to 
the reality of these things, and the importance of 
living for eternity! 

And thus we have traveled round the wall from 
one part to another, and have, I trust, been blessed 
in doing so. We might close our meditations here, 
only that God does not end in this way, for in the 
last verse we come back again, having made the 
circuit, to that with which we began— 


THE SHEEP GATE. 


“And between the going up of the corner unto 
the Sheep Gate repaired the goldsmiths and the 
merchants.” 

It is as though God would not have us turn 
away without reminding us that the Cross with 
which we began will be before our souls for eter- 
nity. After all has been gone into at the judg- 
ment-seat, we shall turn from it to the Judge Him- 
self, who is our Redeemer and Bridegroom. We 
shall see Him as a Lamb that had been slain. At 
His once-pierced feet we shall fall in adoration, 
and forever sing praises “unto Him that loveth 
us, and hath washed us from our sins in His own 
blood.” 

We shall never get beyond the Cross. It will 
be the theme of our praises throughout all the 
ages to come. Oh, to ever live in the light of it 
now! It speaks of sins forever put away, and 


52 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


also of a world under judgment for the rejection 
of God’s Son. Our place, then, is outside of it 
all. “Let us go forth therefore unto Him out- 
side the camp, bearing His reproach. For here 
have we no continuing city, but we seek one to 
come” (Heb. 13: 138,14). 


CHAPTER IV 


SOLDIER-SERVANTS 


HE work which was so precious in the eyes 
of the Lord was but a theme for mockery 
and scorn in the mind of the mixed people, whose 
overtures of participation on common ground had 
been refused. Sanballat’s rage is stirred; but for 
the present it takes outwardly the form of con- 
temptuous sneering: “What do these feeble 
Jews?” he asks his Samaritan brethren. “Will 
they fortify themselves? will they sacrifice? will 
they make an end in a day? will they revive the 
stones out of the heaps of rubbish which are 
burned?” And Tobiah the Ammonite joins in the 
mockery, exclaiming with a lightness he evidently 
did not feel, “Even that which they build, if a 
fox go up, he shall even break down their stone 
wall” (vers. 1-3). Yet he and all his ilk were to 
prove later that, when guarded by Jehovah’s sub- 
ject servants, it was too strong a wall for such 
foxes as they to break through. 

In the name of the Lord, Nehemiah and his 
companions built steadily on, and that Name was 
to prove a strong tower into which the righteous 
might safely retreat from the malignity of their 
foes. When the people of God cleave to His Word 
and exalt His name, they need fear no enemy, 


54 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


human or supernatural. It is themselves who are 
responsible for any breaches made in the wall. 
It is unbelief and self-will in the people of God 
that weaken or destroy those battlements against 
which the enemies outside might batter in vain. 

Realizing this in some measure, the people of 
Judah lift up their hearts to the One whose they 
were and whom they served. ‘‘Hear, O our God; 
for we are despised,” they cry; “and turn their 
reproach upon their own head, and give them 
for a prey in the land of captivity ; and cover not 
their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out 
from before Thee; for they have provoked Thee 
to anger before the builders” (vers. 4,5). If any 
feel the difference between this prayer and such 
as are suited to the Christian in this dispensation 
of grace, the explanation is involved in the ques- 
tion. That was not the time when grace and 
sufferance were enjoined. The dispensation of 
law was still in force, and we must view these 
utterances from that standpoint. The important 
thing for us to observe is the way in which the 
remnant cast themselves wholly upon God. San- 
ballat, Tobiah, and the rest are His enemies, not 
merely theirs, and they count on Him to deal 
with them. 

And so they prayed and builded, for such is 
the force of “So built we the wall,” in verse 6. 

Thus with the help of God the breaches were 
repaired, for willing hands made light work, and 
“the people had a mind to work.” 


Soldier-Servants 55 


But soon the opposition took a different form. 
When the united nations (notice the lengthened 
list — Sanballat, Tobiah, the Arabians and the 
Ammonites, and the Ashdodites) heard that the 
work was actually nearing completion, and that 
the wall was being repaired in a substantial man- 
ner, their indignation became greater than ever. 
They had hoped the rubbish would impede the 
progress of the work to such an extent as to 
completely dishearten the Jews; but bit by bit 
this had been cleared away, and the stones un- 
covered and set in their places. Hence these 
enemies of what is of God realize something more 
than mockery is required if they would not soon 
be effectually shut out of the holy city. 

As one reads such a record, it is almost impos- 
sible not to observe how accurately the history 
of old fits a later work of God—even that of the 
present time. Asa result of centuries of darkness 
and superstition, practically every precious truth 
of the Scriptures was overwhelmed by the eccle- 
siastical rubbish gradually accumulated. When 
at last the reformers were raised up to recall 
God’s people to God’s own Word, they found 
themselves confronted by just such a task as that 
which Nehemiah had to face; and ever since, 
when there has been a settling down on the part 
of God’s people, the rubbish has accumulated 
again at an alarming rate, human tradition soon 
swamping what was of God; and so the need of 
persistent, devoted, prayerful toil, to separate 


56 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


the precious from the vile has been ever mani- 
fest. Carnal professors will mock, so-called lib- 
erals will demonstrate their bitter hatred of every- 
thing holy, but they who wait upon the Lord shall 
renew their strength, and find all needed grace 
to stand in the evil day, and to distinguish be- 
tween what is really divine and what is but of 
man in the great mounds of mingled truth and 
error, lying all about the ruined wall that once 
separated Church and world. Every fresh at- 
tempt to “try the things that differ” will provoke 
the ire of the worldly-religious mass; but what is 
of God is of too much value to be surrendered at 
the behest of fleshly foes. 

The adversaries of Judah determined upon a 
sudden onslaught on the remnant, and so “con- 
spired all of them together to come and fight 
against Jerusalem, and to hinder it” (ver. 8). 
This was but a call to “watch and pray,” and so 
it was recognized by Nehemiah and his fellow- 
laborers. The language of verse 9 is most in- 
structive: ‘Nevertheless we made our prayer unto 
our God, and set a watch against them day and 
night, because of them.” This was holding things 
in the right proportion. Prayer alone would have 
been presumption. But they watch against the 
enemy at the same time that they call upon God. 

In verse 10 we have the first note of discour- 
agement from within. Constant toil and watch- 
ing have worn upon the spirits of the Jews, and so 
the report comes to Nehemiah: “The strength 


Soldier-Servants 57 


of the bearers of burdens is decayed, and there is 
much rubbish; so that we are not able to build 
the wall.” But to these disheartening words Ne- 
hemiah vouchsafes no reply, save to labor on. 
The adversaries continue their plotting without 
and the people grow faint within, but the Tir- 
shatha continues to look up and count upon the 
living God. 

The third trial is mentioned in verse 12. There 
were scattered Jews living among the Samari- 
tans. They “came unto us ten times,” says Ne- 
hemiah, warning of the preparations for an as- 
sault, and declaring the utter inability of the 
remnant to stand against such powerful foes. 

It was certainly discouraging to one who re- 
lied on a fleshly arm, but the man of faith could 
count on God through it all. Heretofore the peo- 
ple had labored, prayed, and watched. Now they 
must be prepared for conflict. So the governor 
set the people after their families in the vantage- 
places upon the wall, armed with swords, spears 
and bows. But he would not have them put their 
confidence in the weapons, but in the living God: 
“Be ye not afraid of them; remember the Lord, 
which is great and terrible, and fight for your 
brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your 
wives and your houses” (ver.14). This was to be 
their battle-cry, “Remember the Lord!” 

Many a merely human conflict has been won by 
the inspiration of a watch-word recalling some 
past great event. In our own day, again and again, 


58 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Spanish troops were repulsed as the American 
soldiery drove all before them with the cry, “Re- 
member the Maine!” So Napoleon often inspirited 
his troops by causing them to remember some 
former victory. But what could stir the soul of 
an Israelite indeed more than such a cry as this, 
“Remember the Lord!” Similarly when pressing 
upon Timothy the need of devotedness in the 
Christian warfare, Paul cries, “Remember Jesus 
Christt2(2-Tim. 23 3).* 

This is faith’s resource. The God who gave His 
Son for our redemption, who raised Him from 
the dead and set Him at His own right hand in 
highest glory, can be counted on in every time of 
trial to supply all needed grace for seasonable help. 

When Nehemiah’s enemies knew that their 
plans were known, and the citizens of Jerusalem 
armed and watchful, they gave up all hope of 
hindering by open warfare; while the remnant 
rejoiced that “God had brought their counsel to 
nought;” and so they returned every one with 
confidence to the work. 

But this deliverance did not cause them to be 
any the less careful. Henceforth Nehemiah divided 
his own servants into two companies, one of which 
wrought in the work and the other stood guard 
heavily armed; while the builders and burden- 


* The verse is really an exclamatory rather than a de- 
clarative sentence: “Remember Jesus Christ, of the seed 
of David, raised from the dead according to my gospel!” 


Soldier-Servants 59 


bearers themselves labored, each with his sword 
girded by his side, or with a trowel in one hand 
and a weapon in the other. Both alike speak of 
the Word. The trowel is the Word used for edi- 
fication, the sword is the Word used to contend 
earnestly for the faith once for all delivered to 
the saints. Significant are the words that close 
verse 18, after this vivid description of soldier- 
laborers: ‘And he that sounded the trumpet was 
by me.” The trumpet stands for the ministry of 
the Word, and it was meet that the trumpeter 
should abide with the ruler and get his instruc- 
tions directly from him. So does the servant of 
Christ need to abide in Him that he may speak 
as the oracles of God, and then the trumpet gives 
no uncertain sound. 

Scattered as the workers and soldiers were upon 
the whole length of the wall, it was important 
that all should be subject to one voice, the voice 
of Nehemiah, and this was expressed by the trum- 
pet. Wherever the loud blast was heard, there 
all were to gather, counting upon God to fight for 
them (vers, 19, 20). 

“So,’* continues the inspired record, “we la- 
bored in the work: and half of them held the 
spears from the rising of the morning till the 
stars appeared.” 

There was much work to be done and time was 


* This little word “so” is quite characteristic of Ne- 
hemiah. It is found about twenty times. 


60 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


pressing, so they dared not take their ease while 
there was light enough to labor. And at night 
all lodged within the wall, that they might be a 
defence to their brethren, though many had homes 
outside the city. 

In all this devoted service, Nehemiah and his 
guard were ensamples to the rest, for so contin- 
uously were they on duty that they did not so 
much as remove their clothes, save for washing. 
It was a time to try men’s souls, but the testing 
only proved how zealously affected in a good 
thing were the governor and his helpers. In this 
they shine as examples for us, bidding us hold 
fast what God has committed to us, and hold 
forth the word of life to others, while refusing 
all compromise with the unholy spirit of the age 
in which we live. 


CHAPTER V 
INTERNAL STRIFE 


UTSIDE foes may rage, but they cannot 
really injure the people of God if there be 

love and harmony within. “Only,” writes the 
apostle, “let your conversation (the conduct) be 
as it becometh the gospel of Christ; that whether 
I come and see you, or else be absent, I may 
hear of your affairs, that ye stand fast in one 
spirit, with one mind striving together for the 
faith of the gospel; and in nothing terrified by 
your adversaries: which is to them an evident 
token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and 
that of God” (Phil. 1: 27,28). The contrary is 
involved in the warning given by James: “Where 
envying and strife is, there is confusion and every 
evil work” (James 3:16). And this Paul also set 
before the Galatians, when he wrote: “If ye bite 
and devour one another, take heed that ye be not 
consumed one of another” (Gal. 5:15). The sheep 
of the Lord’s flock need to keep close to the 
Shepherd and to one another if they would be 
guarded from the prowling wolves who ever seek 
their destruction. But how sad, and what shame 
it is when they fall to devouring one another, 
thus giving place to the devil. Of this we are 


62 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


warned in the happenings narrated for our in- 
struction in this chapter. 

The opening verses are like Acts 6:1: “There 
was a great cry of the people and of their wives 
against their brethren the Jews. For there were 
that said, We, our sons and daughters, are many, 
and we must procure corn for them that we may 
eat, and live. Some also there were that said, We 
have mortgaged our lands, vineyards and houses, 
that we might buy corn in the dearth. There were 
also that said, We have borrowed money for the 
king’s tribute, and that upon our lands and vine- 
yards. Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our 
brethren, our children as their children; and, lo, 
we bring into bondage our sons and our daugh- 
ters to be servants, and some of our daughters are 
brought into bondage already; neither is it in our 
power to redeem them; for other men have our 
lands and vineyards” (vers. 1-5). 

What a pitiable state of affairs is portrayed 
here by the simple narrative of the complaints 
of the people against their own brethren! The 
worst of it all was, that the accusations were 
true; and the demands of the usurers were, so far 
as business principles are concerned, such as all 
nations recognize as legitimate. But God’s peo- 
ple were not to be guided by such principles. 
From the beginning He had told them not to 
exact usury of their brethren, but rather to make 
provision for the poor, as giving unto Him. They 
had all been in poverty once, and He had en- 


Internal Strife 63 


riched them according to the grace of His heart, 
not according to their deserts. Alas, how soon 
had they forgotten this when it came to dealing 
with one another. 

And what sorrows have come upon the chil- 
dren of God in all dispensations because of this 
very thing! The full manifestation of grace in 
the present age nas not hindered the same mer- 
cenary spirit often appearing among those who 
owe all to the mercy of God. We have already 
referred to Acts 6; and the conditions prevailing 
in the assembly at Corinth, long after, were the 
fruit of a similar state. Brother dragged brother 
to law, and that before the unjust—men who, 
whatever their reputation in the world, were not 
suited to deal with things in the Church. How 
incongruous are such conditions with the grace 
of Christianity! 

Nor is it only in connection with temporal 
things that such a spirit has been manifested, 
but, alas, in fancied zeal for the holy things of 
God how often has the same evil principle of 
exaction prevailed. Questions have arisen in Chris- 
tian assemblies, often of the most perplexing char- 
acter, concerning which an almost instantaneous 
judgment has been demanded; and if tried souls 
and weak gatherings have not been able to bow 
to the ipse dixit of certain carnal leaders, excision 
or excommunication have been resorted to, in 
defiance of the word of God and the Spirit of 
Christ. What is all this but the same thing pre- 


64 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


vailing in spiritual matters which wrought so 
much havoc in these temporal affairs? 

Oh for more men who, instead of tacitly ac- 
quiescing in these unholy conditions, are stirred 
to a righteous anger by such un-Christlike ways! 
Nehemiah’s upright and unselfish soul was moved 
to indignation, and with the assurance that came 
from knowing he sided with God, he rebuked the 
nobles and the rulers for thus exacting usury of 
their brethren. The matter was brought up for 
open consideration in a “great assembly,” and 
the guilt of the leaders charged home upon their 
consciences before all the people. ‘We,’ he says, 
“after our ability, have redeemed our brethren 
the Jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and 
will ye even sell your brethren? or shall they be 
sold unto us?’ They were speechless; what an- 
swer could they make? 

Apply it to conditions such as I have refer- 
ed to above. Think of the toil and labor that 
have been expended by devoted servants of Christ 
to bring lost sinners to His feet. Think of the 
ministry exercised afterwards to lead on these 
young converts and establish them in the truth. 
Think of the pastoral care exercised by earnest, 
faithful men who knew them as individual mem- 
bers of the flock of Christ—not as a mass with- 
out heart or conscience—and then think of the 
spirit of exaction that can press some test-ques- 
tion on such saints, and ruthlessly cut off and 


Internal Strife 65 


cast out souls for whose blessing others have 
labored so persistently —and this by men who 
profess to act for God and to seek His glory! 

Oh, brethren, let us listen to the words of Ne- 
hemiah and bow our head in the dust if we have 
_ been parties to such unholy ways. “It is not good 
_ that ye do: ought ye not to walk in the fear of 
our God because of the heathen our enemies? I 
_ likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might 
~ exact of them money and corn: I pray you, let us 
leave off this usury. Restore, I pray you, to them, 
- even this day, their lands, their vineyards, their 
oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth 
part of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and 
the oil that ye exact of them” (vers. 9-11). 

These are suited words for the present solemn 
time when God has been exercising many as to 
the very things of which we have been speaking. 
It is not a time to demand the uttermost farth- 
ing of one another, but rather to heed the word, 
“TI pray you, let us leave off this usury.” If we 
have been guilty of robbing any of our brethren 
of their blood-bought privileges, let us hasten to 
restore what we can ere the Lord arise as their 
champion and we be put to shame. For He has 
said, ‘Hear the word of the Lord, ye that tremble 
at His word; Your brethren that hated you, that 
cast you out for My name’s sake, said, Let the 
Lord be glorified; but He shall appear to your 
joy, and they shall be ashamed” (Isa. 66: 5). Cut- 
ting and comforting words are these mingled by 


66 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


the Lord Himself. Oh, for a heart to take heed 
to them ere it be forever too late! 

On the part of the rulers in Judah there was 
an instant response when the words of Nehe- 
miah had moved them to repentance. “Then said 
they, We will restore them, and will require noth- 
ing of them; so will we do as thou sayest” (ver. 
12). And this was sealed with an oath, and 
further confirmed by a graphic action on the part 
of the Tirshatha. He shook his lap and said, “So 
God shake out every man from his house, and 
from his labor, that performeth not this promise, 
even thus be he shaken out, and emptied.” And 
this was attested by the solemn ‘‘Amen!” of the 
congregation, who praised the Lord for the mercy 
shown. It was the same spirit that led the apostle 
Paul, long afterwards to write: “I would they 
were even cut off that trouble you!” 

In the closing verses, Nehemiah contrasts his 
own behaviour with that which he had so severe- 
ly censured. One is again reminded of Paul. It 
was an occasion where he was compelled to “speak 
as a fool” that he might close the mouths of any 
gainsayers. He relates how that from the day of 
his appointment as governor he had never availed 
himself of the perquisites of his office, that he 
might not be burdensome to the people whose 
blessing he sought. 

Former governors had felt free to do this, but 
the fear of God restrained him from doing the 
same. Instead, he had kept open house for a 


Internal Strife 67 


hundred and fifty of the Jews and rulers, besides 
strangers from the surrounding villages. He was 
one who had learned that “it is more blessed to 
give than to receive,” and he acted accordingly. 

The people might forget all this—alas, too often 
do; but he cries, “Think upon me, my God, for 
good, according to all that I have done for this 
people” (ver.19). This may seem to savor of 
self-complacency, but who of us would dare judge 
so devoted a servant? And again we need to 
remind ourselves that the dispensation of grace 
had not yet dawned. Law was still in the ascen- 
dant, and the spirit shown by Nehemiah is so 
beyond his age that we can only give thanks for 
what God had wrought in the soul of His dear 
servant, while we pray for wisdom and grace to 
serve His people in our own generation unsel- 
fishly, and in the Spirit of Christ, leaving all ques- 
tion of appreciation or reward to be settled at 
His judgment-seat. 


CHAPTER VI 
PLOTS AND SNARES 


GAIN our attention is directed to the op- 
position of Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem 
(or Gashmu) with the rest of Judah’s enemies. 
Every move within the city was reported to them 
without, and no doubt they had felt a sense of 
deep satisfaction when the news of internal strife 
had reached them. This may account for our 
having heard nothing of them in the last chapter. 
If God’s people get quarrelling among themselves, 
the enemy from without can afford to rest in his 
tents, but as soon as things get right within he 
actively bestirs himself. 

Word having reached the adversaries that the 
wall was builded and no breach left in it (although 
the doors had not yet been set up on the gates), 
Sanballat and Geshem sent an apparently friend- 
ly message to Nehemiah, saying, “Come, let us 
meet together in some one of the villages in the 
plain of Ono” (ver.2). They would lure him 
unto neutral ground, outside the wall, as though 
to confer on matters of importance; but he re- 
cognized the evil purpose of their hearts; he in- 
wardly knew their thought was to do him mis- 
chief. 

His reply is worthy of the man, and should 


Plots and Snares 69 


have a voice for any in our day who are tempted 
to take neutral ground where the truth of Christ 
is in question. “I am doing a great work, so 
that I cannot come down: why should the work 
cease, whilst I leave it, and come down to you?” 
He had been entrusted by God with a commis- 
sion ‘to restore and build Jerusalem,” and he 
would brook nothing that would for a moment 
turn him aside from this. A separated man, he 
would have no part in the surrounding confusion 
where the word of God was rejected and His peo- 
ple despised. Notice here: it was no question of 
ministering to, or caring for the children of God 
scattered abroad that was before him. We may 
be sure Nehemiah would have been as ready to 
help the dispersed of Israel as those in Jerusalem. 
But these Samaritans were the enemies of God’s 
truth,while pretending to serve Him. “They feared 
the Lord, and served their own gods” (2 Kings 
17: 33). They represent, as we have seen, unreal 
professors, yet presuming to have full title to the 
name and place of worshipers. With such the 
faithful servant can have no fellowship. He must 
maintain and guard what has been committed to 
him, and if he attempts to mix with these ‘“de- 
ceitful workers” he will only lose what he him- 
self has. 

Four times Sanballat and Geshem sent to Ne- 
hemiah “after this sort,” and four times he re- 
turned the same answer. 

Then they changed their tactics. They had tried 


70 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


conciliatory methods and failed to corrupt him. 
Now they would use a scandalous report with 
intent to intimidate him. There is nothing new 
under the sun. Satan’s wiles are such that the 
man of God must not be ignorant of his devices. 

The fifth time Sanballat sends his servant with 
‘an open letter in his hand.” Oh, these ‘‘open 
letters!” How often, while fairly worded, have 
they been penned only to gender strife. This one 
contained a covert insinuation to the effect that 
all Nehemiah’s work had been unauthorized, and 
a direct charge that his object was self-aggran- 
dizement and rebellion against the king. Them- 
selves in rebellion against God, they charge God’s 
servant with their own sin. The “open letter” 
reads somewhat graciously, but the object of its 
writer was to occupy the Jews with his apparently 
gracious spirit in order to poison their minds 
against Nehemiah. “It is reported among the 
nations, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the 
Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest 
the wall, that thou mayest be their king, according 
to these words. And thou hast also appointed 
prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying, 
There is a king in Judah; and now shall it be 
reported to the king according to these words. 
Come now, therefore, and let us take counsel to- 
gether” (vers.6,7). Such were the contents of 
the open letter, and we are not told what impres- 
sion, if any, it made on the Jews. It was so 
worded as to intimate that Sanballat’s only de- 


Plots and Snares val 


sire was to clear Nehemiah of the charges whis- 
pered about, and yet so cunningly phrased that 
any disaffected ones within might readily charge 
the governor with fearing an investigation if he 
did not go down to confer with Sanballat. 

But Nehemiah is not at all concerned about 
this. He knows he is personally right with God 
and he fears not suspicion and idle tales. .‘“There 
are no such things done as thou sayest,” he re- 
torts boldly, “but thou feignest them out of thine 
own heart.” 

So was it also when evil workers sought to un- 
dermine the apostle Paul’s influence, and so has 
it ever been when the truth was hated. To dis- 
credit, by fair means or foul, the messenger, is 
one of Satan’s cunning devices in order to dis- 
credit the message. To do this, his tools often 
affect great humility themselves; and pretending 
to be zealous for the liberty of the people of God, 
they cry “Pope!” “Diotrephes!” “Heretic!” when 
any servant of Christ and the Church seeks to 
stand steadfastly against iniquity, hoping there- 
by to throw dust in the eyes of simple believers, 
in order to gain their own unrighteous ends. 

Trials like these are not easy to bear. To 
have one’s good evil-spoken of, to be called a 
“Jord over God’s heritage” when trying to serve 
in lowliness, is painful indeed to any sensitive 
soul. But it is well not to retaliate, nor even to 
explain, but just to refuse the cowardly charge 
and leave results with God. 


Public Library 
OCT 1941 


Oakland, Califarni> 


T2, Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Nehemiah’s conscience was free, so he could 
throw the accusation back upon the man who made 
it; and knowing it was only done to weaken their 
hands from the work, he looks heavenward and 
cries, “Now therefore, O God, strengthen my 
hands” (ver. 9). 

But Satan has not yet exhausted his ammuni- 
tion. A man is found within the city to act for 
Sanballat and Tobiah, upon the payment of a 
bribe. Shemaiah, the son of Delaiah, is said to 
have been “shut up.” This probably means that 
he was ill, or confined to his house, and unable 
to take his place among the workers on the wall. 
Such a man, if not in fellowship with God as to 
His then present ways, would prove a ready tool 
for the conspirators. Nehemiah called upon him, 
and Shemaiah warned him with pretended sin- 
cerity of danger to his life, counselling that he 
should flee to the temple, there to seek security 
by hiding in the sanctuary. To do so would have 
at once spread fear and distrust among the peo- 
ple, and this was just what Sanballat desired. 

But God’s devoted servant again rose, strong in 
faith, superior to the situation. ‘Should such a 
man as I flee?” he asks, ‘‘and who is there, that, 
being as I am, would go into the temple to save 
his life? I will not go in” (ver.11). To desert 
the rest and act as though panic-stricken, would 
ill become one in his position, one who also 
had confessed his faith in God so boldly. He 
realized that he was again face to face with evi- 


Plots and Snares 13 


dence of the plots of his enemies, and that God had 
not sent Shemaiah with such a message, but that 
he was hired by Tobiah and Sanballat to give this 
unworthy counsel. With these were others who 
shared in the conspiracy; one, a prophetess named 
Noadiah, and several unnamed men, also in the 
prophetic office. Sad and solemn it is when those 
who take the place of speaking for God are found 
in sympathy with the adversaries of His truth, 
thus hindering the work He has committed to His 
loyal servants. 

Nehemiah, in his customary way, brings the 
whole matter at once to God, and puts the case 
in His hands. “My God,” he prays, “think Thou 
upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these 
their works, and on the prophetess Noadiah, and 
the rest of the prophets, that would have put me 
in fear” (ver.14). It is no longer a matter be- 
tween Nehemiah and the conspirators but it is 
now an affair between God and these unholy plot- 
ters. And in His own time He can be depended 
upon to settle all righteously. 

At last, despite every effort to frustrate the 
work, “the wall was finished” in fifty-two days 
from the time they began to labor. When this was 
manifest to the surrounding nations “they were 
much cast down in their own eyes: for they per- 
ceived that this work was wrought of our God” 
(ver.16). With what different feelings would 
the Jewish remnant contemplate the completed 
wall! Praise and thanksgiving would well up in 


74 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


their breasts, that Jerusalem was once more a 
protected city. 

No doubt the enemy hated such “narrow ex- 
clusiveness,” and would search eagerly for some 
small breach whereby to force an entrance, or 
pass in by night. Judah’s exclusiveness was their 
security. So long as the spirit of the people with- 
in answered to the strong wall without, they were 
safe. Their position was now clearly defined. The 
next question was, Would their condition answer 
to it? Alas, the very next verse manifests a bad 
state. With some at least, the separation was only 
outward—not of heart and conscience. How often 
has this been repeated in the history of God’s 
people! 

A position may be taken which outwardly is 
fully in accord with Scripture; yet the heart may 
not go with it at all. People talk of separation, 
priding themselves on being in a certain eccle- 
siastical circle, apart from sects of man’s devis- 
ing, while yet in their homes and in business- 
life going on with the world as though never 
separated at all. This is of the very essence of 
Phariseeism—an outward position rigidly main- 
tained, while inwardly corruption holds sway. 

Inside the walls of Jerusalem it was far from 
being in accord with the position taken. ‘‘More- 
over in those days the nobles of Judah sent many 
letters unto Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah 
came unto them. For there were many in Judah 
sworn unto him, because he was the son-in-law 


Plots and Snares 75 


of Shechaniah the son of Arah; and his son Jo- 
hanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the 
son of Berechiah. Also they reported his good 
deeds before me, and uttered my words to him. 
And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear” (vers. 
17-19). It was a complete overturning of divine 
order. God had said, “The people shall dwell 
alone, they shall not be reckoned among the na- 
tions.” And to so abide was to be strong and be 
under His protecting hand. But the unequal yoke 
had been entered into. Mixed marriages, despite 
the bitter lesson in Ezra’s day, were still tolerated 
and excused; and so conscience was broken down 
and the nobles of Judah lost all power of dis- 
crimination. The wall might separate between 
them and ungodly Tobiah, but there was no se- 
paration in spirit, so they easily found means of 
communication with the haters of God’s truth. 

To Nehemiah they prated of the good qualities 
and benevolence of “brother Tobiah,” and to the 
latter they spoke complainingly of the unneces- 
sary strictness of the governor. They were trait- 
ors and hinderers, though occupying positions of 
prominence among the Jews. “Discerning of 
spirits” is a gift to be coveted; for dullness of 
sight is becoming increasingly characteristic of 
many who once were counted upon as able to dis- 
cern between good and evil. 

When the heart goes with the world and worldly 
religiousness, all kinds of excuses will be made 
for those who go on with the mixed condition. 


76 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Their position and actions—no matter how un- 
scriptural—will be palliated and explained away; 
while those who truly go on with God will be sub- 
jected to the extremes of criticism, and every 
word and deed viewed as unfavorably as possible. 
Hence the need of being deeply exercised as to the 
inward state, as well as carefully walking in the 
path outlined in the word of God. 

The chapter we have been considering is full 
of warnings for our own times. Happy those who 
have ears to hear and hearts to understand. 

Mere outward separation, with its accompani- 
ment of breaking bread in scriptural simplicity on 
the first day of each week, will avail for nothing, 
if there be not heart-detachment from the world 
and heart-attachment to the Lord Jesus Christ, 
leading to holiness of life and self-judgment. Only 
thus can we keep in any measure the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace. 


CHAPTER VII 
RESTORING ORDER 


HE greater part of this chapter from verse 

6 to the end, consists of the register of the 

genealogy, which has already been considered in 

our study of the book of Ezra (chap. 2), and which 
we need not again go over here. 

This might seem to leave very little that is 
new for our present concern; but a careful ex- 
amination of the five opening verses will reveal 
much on which we may meditate with profit, as 
being of marked importance at the present seri- 
ous moment of our history as saints and servants 
of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ. The more 
Nehemiah’s record is examined, the more it will 
be seen that every sentence is pregnant with in- 
struction for these closing days of the dispensa- 
tion of grace. ‘Written aforetime,” they were, 
nevertheless, “written for our learning;”’ and we 
shall be blessed indeed if we carefully appropriate 
and earnestly practise the lessons they convey 
to us. 

“Now it came to pass, when the wall was built, 
and I had set up the doors, and the porters and 
the singers and the Levites were appointed, that 
I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the 


78 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


ruler of the palace, charge over Jerusalem; for 
he was a faithful man, and feared God above 
many” (vers.1,2). There are several matters 
of moment to occupy us in these two verses. The 
wall, we have seen, speaks of separation—both 
from the world and its evil, and to the Lord, the 
God of Israel. The gates speak, not of unscrip- 
tural exclusion that has no heart for those who 
are of the one family, but of fellowship, admit- 
ting to the privileges to be enjoyed within the 
walls all.who have divine title to enter, and bar- 
ring out all others. And this suggests the im- 
portance of Nehemiah’s appointment of porters, 
or gate-keepers. He was not indifferent as to 
who came or went. The business of the porters 
was to act as watchmen of the gates, permitting 
only such to come inside as could give evidence of 
their right so to do. 

In applying this to the ordering of the Chris- 
tian assembly, it is easy to see what an important 
place the porter occupies. Suppose a company of 
believers, gathered to the name of the Lord Jesus 
Christ, in separation from worldly and ecclesias- 
tical evil: how long will its purity and holy char- 
acter be maintained if people are allowed to come 
and go as they will without true, godly care as to 
their new birth, their behavior, the doctrines that 
they bring, or the associations they go on with? 
Hence the need of the sometimes unpleasant ser- 
vice of the porter. 

I do not mean that certain ones should be ap- 


Restoring Order 79 


pointed as inquisitors of those applying for fellow- 
ship ; rather, that all should be duly exercised be- 
fore God as to who are received to the holy and 
exalted privileges of Christian fellowship. In the 
breaking and eating of the loaf, and the drinking 
of the cup, we not only set forth the Lord’s death, 
and fellowship with Him who thus gave Himself 
for us, but we thereby manifest our communion 
or fellowship with those participating with us in 
this solemn observance. And how can there be 
fellowship if there be not confidence and unity? 
Therefore the folly of declaring that, “We examine 
no one: each must judge himself: none are ac- 
countable to others.” 

Such principles are subversive of Christian com- 
munion. We are called upon to discern those who, 
with us, partake at the table of the Lord. “If 
any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, 
or covetous, or an idolator, or a railer, or a drunk- 
ard, or an extortioner, with such an one” we are 
commanded “not to eat” (1 Cor.5:11). But must 
we not then examine those called brothers if we 
are to be obedient to this scripture? And again, 
“If there come any unto you, and bring not this 
doctrine” (i.e., the doctrine of Christ), we are 
told to “receive him not into your house, nor greet 
him, for he that greeteth him is partaker of his 
evil deeds” (2 John 10,11, N.T.). Butif the gates 
be left wide open, and the porter asleep, or off 
duty, who shall hinder persons—either themselves 
bringing the evil teaching, or contaminated by 


80 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


known association with it—forcing their way in, 
to the defilement of the whole company? Hence 
the need of godly care in receiving to Christian 
fellowship. 

It is sometimes said, “We receive all who are 
Christ’s.” But do any really mean this? Who 
dares pronounce as to those who are Christ’s? 
“The Lord knoweth them that are His” (2 Tim. 2: 
19). We make a great mistake when we attempt 
to give oracular decisions as to so momentous a 
matter. We are only called upon to examine the 
profession, the life, the doctrine, and, as a mat- 
ter of course, the associations of the applicant for 
fellowship. Even then, when all due care has been 
exercised, a self-deceived one, or a deceiver, may 
be unwittingly permitted to creep in (Jude 4), to 
cause serious trouble later; but if there were no 
porter-service at all, who can conceive the state of 
things that would soon exist! The world itself 
is not so foolish as to leave its ports of entry 
unguarded. It is certainly far easier to allow 
any who desire to come in unchallenged; but it is 
neither for their blessing nor the peace of the 
assembly, not to speak of the glory of the Lord. 
So it would have been easier in Nehemiah’s day 
to have opened the gates at dawn and left them 
open till nightfall, with no watchful porter to 
question persons desiring to enter; but in that 
case how much of the work we have been con- 
sidering would have gone for nothing! 

The porter at the gate was therefore a person 


Restoring Order 81 


of great importance in Jerusalem, and only dis- 
creet and cautious men should have performed 
this service. And what answers to this in the 
Christian assembly is the exercise of godly, 
thoughtful care as to who are permitted to share 
in the holy things committed to the people of 
God. Fellowship is worth too much to be frittered 
away by mere sentimentality. It has been said, 
“ternal vigilance is the price of liberty’—and 
we might say it of Christian fellowship also, 
which is soon dissipated if the porter’s service is 
overlooked. 

The second order established by Nehemiah was 
that of the singers. And they too may give oc- 
casion for fruitful meditation. The spirit of 
praise is the spirit of power. A rejoicing assem- 
bly will be one where God is free to work, and 
will become a channel of blessing to those with- 
out. In Israel the singers were a distinct com- 
pany, separated from the body of the people. But 
the New Testament contemplates no such incon- 
gruity as a choir—surpliced or otherwise—to lead 
the praises of the assembly. The Lord Jesus 
Himself is the Leader, and all believers are ex- 
horted to “sing with the spirit and with the un- 
derstanding also.’ “Speaking to yourselves in 
psalms, and hymns, and spiritual songs, singing 
and making melody in your heart unto the Lord; 
giving thanks always for all things unto God and 
the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ” 
(Eph. 5:19,20). “Let the word of Christ dwell 


82 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


in you richly in all wisdom; teaching and ad- 
monishing one another; in psalms and hymns and 
spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts 
unto the Lord” (Col.3:16). In these verses we 
have clearly set forth the singers, the song, and 
the accompaniment. All believers are the choris- 
ters. The accompaniment is not the grand pipe 
organ or the delightsome orchestra, but some- 
thing sweeter far in the ears of God—the melody 
that rises from a heart filled with His grace. 

We may distinguish psalms from hymns. The 
former would more properly be expressions of 
praise. To praise is to psalm. (See Ps. 105: 2, 
margin). A hymn is rather an ascription of the 
perfections of Deity ; it expresses the highest 
point of worship, magnifying God, not because 
of His works in our behalf, but of His matchless 
perfections. A spiritual song would be different 
from either of these. It might be a recital of 
God’s ways or of the believer’s experience.* 

When gathered in assembly we come together 
as singers. There the Lord takes His place in 
the midst to lead our worship and praise, as it is 
written, “In the midst of the assembly will I sing 
praise unto Thee” (Heb.2:12). Thus, as oc- 
cupied with Him, His death and the fruit re- 
sulting therefrom, praise well becomes each saint. 


* Those who are accustomed to the “Little Flock Hymn 
Book” might see in No. 235 a typical psalm; in No. 150, an 
almost matchless hymn; while No.189 is a good example 
of a spiritual song. 


Restoring Order 83 


This is not to legislate against every other spirit- 
ual exercise, but it is surely what is characteristic. 

And now we turn to consider the third class 
mentioned in the first verse. These are the Le- 
vites, or ministering servants of God. Of old one 
tribe alone were Levites. But in this dispensa- 
tion, just as all gathered saints have porter-re- 
sponsibility upon them, and all are to be singers, 
so all are servants. “To every man his work” is 
the Lord’s word for each. But Levite-service may 
also speak of public ministry, and this of course 
is not general, but a special responsibility placed 
upon those who have been gifted accordingly— 
yea, who are themselves gifts given to the assem- 
bly for the edification of the body of Christ. 

Such service must be exercised in direct re- 
sponsibility to the Lord. The Church does not 
appoint ministers of the Word. Christ as Head 
alone appoints, and by the Spirit qualifies. The 
Church tests those who come as ministers by the 
message they bring, comparing it with the word 
of God. If it be according to what is there re- 
vealed it must be accepted. If contrary to the 
teaching of Scripture, both teacher and doctrine 
are to be refused. 

There is room in every scripturally-gathered 
company of saints for all divinely-given ministry. 
The true Levite will find a welcome there. But, 
after all is said and done, there is no infallible 
court on earth that can decide whether or no a 
man is a gift to the assembly. The only rule is 


84 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


that of Prov. 18:16: “A man’s gift maketh room 
for him.” Hence, if one fancies he is called to 
expound the Word, and his ministry is not ap- 
preciated, he need not abuse the saints, but should 
rather consider that among them at least his gift 
has not made room. He may be a minister to 
others, but not to them. If assured of his divine 
call, let him patiently go elsewhere; but let him 
also carefully consider whether he may not be 
boasting himself of a false gift, and so cause 
shame at last, because of the emptiness of his 
ministry (Prov. 25:14). To serve as a Levite in 
this special sense, one must be in living touch 
with God, speaking from a full heart of what has 
stirred his own soul; otherwise his ministry will 
be barren and profitless. We shall see the Levites 
doing their God-appointed service in the interest- 
ing scenes of the next chapter. 

In the second verse now before us we read of 
two men placed over Jerusalem. We may be as- 
sured it was not nepotism that led Nehemiah to 
appoint his own brother Hanani as one of these. 
To have done this because of relationship would 
have been most offensive. On the other hand re- 
lationship must not hinder when spiritual qualifi- 
cation is evident. Of Hananiah, his coadjutor 
in this service, it is said that “the was a faithful 
man, and one that feared God above many.” Bless- 
ed words of commendation are these! Would that 
they might be rightfully applied to many more 
of us! What honor could be greater than to be 


Restoring Order 85 


designated faithful by the Lord Himself on His 
judgment-seat. 

These last-mentioned men had authority over 
the porters, and to them Nehemiah commands: 
“Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until 
the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them 
shut the doors, and bar them; and appoint watches 
of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, every one in his 
watch, and every one over against his house” 
(ver. 3). 

Two things concern us here. First :—Entrance 
into the city was to be in broad daylight. Peo- 
ple were not to be permitted to slip in, in the 
dark. This may have a voice for us. Let all as- 
sembly matters especially as concerning recep- 
tion and excision be open and above-board: noth- 
ing underhanded or hidden should be tolerated. 
Second :—Watchfulness was still required of all. 
It was not enough to have official porters. All 
were to be watchmen for the good of all. “What 
I say unto you, I say unto all: Watch!” As long 
as we have anything to maintain for God down 
here we need to be on the watch—never off guard 
for a moment, lest our wily foe introduce what 
will cause lasting sorrow and disaster. 

The city was large and great, we are told— 
that is, the space enclosed by the walls; but the 
people were few, and the houses were not builded. 
The wall enclosed all that had originally been 
marked off as the city of God. But the remnant 
were feeble, and care would be needed to main- 


86 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


tain the place taken. In view of giving each one 
his proper portion Nehemiah now investigates the 
registry made when the first company came up. 
It was no new work he was engaged in. He is 
but carrying on what had been commenced some 
years before. The original record is therefore 
examined, and all ratified by the governor. As 
we have already gone over this register we need 
only refer the reader to the remarks made in the 
notes on the 2nd chapter of Ezra. 

Its appearance here shows how completely Ne- 
hemiah had identified himself with the work which 
the Spirit of God had wrought through Zerubbabel 
and Joshua. He was one with them, and together 
they sought the glory of the God of Israel. Let 
this have a voice for all who have ears to hear. 


CHAPTER VIII 
THE GREAT BIBLE-READING 


N every genuine revival among God’s people 

the revealed Word of the Lord has had a large 
place. It was so in Josiah’s day, and in the awak- 
ening under Hezekiah. It has been so throughout 
the Church period. It was the recovery of the 
Word that brought about the Reformation of the 
16th century, and every true awakening since has 
been based upon Bible study and Bible practice. 
Of no spiritual movement in history could this 
more truthfully be said than of that special work 
of God which began almost simultaneously in 
many parts of Great Britain and Ireland in the 
first half of the 19th century. Here and there 
little companies of devoted believers were found 
gathering together to search the Scriptures, seek- 
ing a right way for themselves and their children 
in the midst of the existing ecclesiastical con- 
fusion and dead formality. To them was revealed 
from the Word that Christ Jesus is the one Centre 
of gathering, that the Church is one body in which 
the Holy Spirit dwells and which He is to guide. 
Thus disowning everything for which they could 
find neither a plain “Thus saith the Lord” nor 
a simple divine principle exemplified in Scripture, 
they turned away from all sects and systems to 


88 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


be known only as brethren in Christ, members of 
His body, seeking to walk in subjection to the 
Holy Spirit. For such, these remnant books are 
full of important and much-needed instruction. 
They have failed—failed grievously and openly— 
as did the restored Jews of old; but the same re- 
source remains for these as for those—the abid- 
ing, unerring word of God. And it is this that 
is so strikingly set forth in our chapter. There 
are seven things here brought to our notice, and 
I desire to write of them in order. 

First, it is a united people waiting on God. This 
is what verse 1 suggests. ‘‘All the people gathered 
themselves together as one man into the open 
place that was before the Water Gate.” We have 
already observed that the Water Gate intimates 
something of the cleansing, refreshing, reviving 
power of the word of God. What more fitting 
place for a company of people to be in who are 
seeking divine instruction than “the open place 
before the Water Gate?” Depend upon it, God 
will never disappoint His saints when thus before 
Him. Of old He said to Moses, “Gather the people 
together, and I will give them water” (Num. 21: 
16). And in a higher sense will that word ever 
be fulfilled when His people are with one mind 
and one heart gathered together to learn His will 
from His all-sufficient Word. 

In the second place we hear the cry, “Bring 
the Book!” Verse 1 goes on to say, “And they 
spake unto Ezra the scribe to bring the book of 


The Great Bible-Reading 89 


the law of Moses, which the Lord had command- 
ed to Israel.” People may sneer and call this 
bibliolatry if they will. Worship of the book it 
is not. It is rather the acknowledgement that 
the Author of the Book is the all-wise and all- 
sufficient One who has so given His Word as to 
make it a safe guide in every time of confusion. 
What was it that freed the people of the Lord in 
the middle ages and overthrew the power of 
Rome? It was the response to this same cry, 
“Bring the Book!” And whenever or wherever 
God’s children are thus ready to hear His Word 
and do it, there must be blessing and divine il- 
lumination. 

Mark, they did not seek Ezra’s opinion, nor the 
ideas of Nehemiah, nor yet those of Zerubbabel. 
They honored these servants of God, and right- 
fully so; they would have despised the Master if 
they had not reverenced His sent ones; but the 
servants were to be ministers of the Word—not 
of science or philosophy, nor yet of theology— 
but of the word of the living God; hence the cry, 
“Bring the Book!” 

It is a grievous thing when merely human writ- 
ings or words are put upon a level with the 
Book of books. One dreads the use often made 
of esteemed brethren’s writings. Something is 
called in question, and at once there is a great 
effort made to show that Mr. So-and-So taught 
thus, or Mr. Somebody else has written this or 
the other. In this way the authority of the word 


90 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


of God is weakened in men’s souls, and people 
are content if they think they hold what Mr. A. 
or Mr. B. held, even though they are quite unable 
to find authority for it in the book of God. This 
is a snare of which we need to be watchful lest 
we find ourselves once more teaching for doctrines 
the commandments of men. 

Thirdly, we learn that when Ezra brought the 
book, ‘‘He read therein before the street that was 
before the Water Gate from the morning until 
midday, before the men and the women, and those 
that could understand; and the ears of all the 
people were attentive unto the book of the law” 
(ver.3). This is most blessed—an attentive peo- 
ple solemnized by the word of God. So great was 
the company that a pulpit of wood was erected 
for Ezra, and on his right and left were com- 
panies of devoted Levites waiting to hear the 
Word and explain it to the people. It was a day 
when books were not easily multiplied. Perhaps 
Ezra had the only Bible there was in all the land; 
but in the manner indicated it was made the com- 
mon property of all the people. 

Subjection to the Word is the fourth point 
that comes prominently before us in verses 5 to 8. 
“Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the peo- 
ple (for he was above all the people) ; and when 
he opened it, all the people stood up: and Ezra 
blessed the Lord, the great God. And all the 
people answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up 
their hands; and they bowed their heads, and wor- 


The Great Bible-Reading 91 


shiped the Lord with their faces to the ground.” 
Who that has any conscience at all can fail to be 
touched by the reverence thus shown for the word 
of God? Such a Bible-reading was no free and 
easy, carnal coming together to argue over certain 
doctrines or debate intricate questions to the be- 
wilderment of the simple, and the spiritual harm 
of the more advanced. Neither was it a place for 
some leader to shine, and to have his interpre- 
tations received without question as the mind of 
the Lord. This great Bible-reading was marked 
by a holy subjection to God and a hallowed rever- 
ence for His Word that contrasts strikingly with 
modern flippancy and irreverence in handling holy 
things. 

To minister the Word to such a company must 
have been both a great joy and a solemn respon- 
sibility for Ezra and the Levites as they “‘caused 
the people to understand the law, and the people 
stood in their place. So they read in the book in 
the law of God distinctly, and gave the sense, 
and caused them to understand the reading” (vers. 
7,8). It needs to be borne in mind that, after 
the captivity, Hebrew, as a spoken language, had 
largely been displaced by Aramaic, hence the need 
of carefilly explaining the Hebrew words to the 
waiting people. 

Fifthly, the word of God as a source of joy and 
refreshment. This is what is suggested in the 
next section, verses 9 to 12: “And Nehemiah, 
that is the Tirshatha [or, governor], and Ezra 


92 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


the priest the scribe, and the Levites that taught 
the people, said unto all the people, This day is 
holy unto the Lord your God: mourn not, nor 
weep. For all the people wept when they heard 
the words of the law.” Their awakened con- 
sciences told them how guilty they and their fa- 
thers had been in refusing to obey the word of 
God; but their tears of penitence testified to the 
self-judgment that was going on; and, with God, 
sin judged is sin put away. Hence the cheering 
words of verse 10. “Then he said unto them, Go 
your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and 
send portions unto them for whom nothing is pre- 
pared; for this day is holy unto our Lord: neither 
be ye sorry; for the joy of the Lord is your 
strength.” God loves to surround Himselt with a 
holy, happy people; but the two things of neces- 
sity go together. Holiness and happiness are in- 
separable. Who can fail to see in what is here 
before us a striking picture, often fulfilled, when 
God has visited His people in giving them bread? 
Refreshed and edified themselves, they become 
channels of blessing to others, sharing gladly with 
those “for whom nothing is prepared.” 

“So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, 
Hold your peace, for the day is holy, neither be 
ye grieved. And all the people went their way 
to eat and to drink, and to send portions, and to 
make great mirth, because they had understood 
the words that were declared unto them” (vers. 
11,12). How much deeper the joy to-day, in the 


The Great Bible-Reading 93 


light of a full gospel, when saints gather about a 
risen Christ, and His word is brought home to 
each heart in the Spirit’s power, leading to simi- 
lar exercises and lifting-up before God. 

It is of obedience to the Word that the sixth 
section speaks. On the second day the chiefs of 
the people came together again, and the reading 
of the Word was continued. On this occasion a 
notable discovery was made: “They found writ- 
ten...that the children of Israel should dwell 
in booths in the feast of the seventh month” (ver. 
14). Now this was at once recognized as a chal- 
lenge to obedience. Here was something which 
had been unobserved for a thousand years—and 
still it was in the Book! Verse 17 shows us that 
in the palmiest days of David and Solomon no 
attention had been paid to this particular pre- 
cept. “Since the days of Joshua the son of Nun 
unto that day had not the children of Israel done 
so.” To obey it required considerable inconven- 
ience; they might have argued that what Sam- 
uel, David, Solomon and others had overlooked 
was surely non-essential; but “they found it writ- 
ten,” and that settled it for an obedient people. So 
the whole company went out to the mountains, 
and brought olive, pine, myrtle and palm branches 
and made booths, “as it is written,” and in these 
they dwelt, thus calling to mind the days of God’s 
care for His pilgrim people in the wilderness : 
“And there was very great gladness.” What a 


94 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


lovely example of unquestioning obedience to the 
Word! 

And so we come to the seventh thought, in clos- 
ing our somewhat rapid survey of the chapter: 
The word of God is all-sufficient for every ex- 
perience of life. “Also day by day, from the first 
day unto the last day, he read in the book of the 
law of God. And they kept the feast seven days; 
and on the eighth day was a solemn assembly, 
according to the manner” (ver. 18). Those seven 
days looked on to the Kingdom, when the Lord 
shall be surrounded by a happy, redeemed people, 
the eighth day bringing an outlook into eternity. 
Throughout Time the word of God contains all His 
people need for spiritual food and daily guidance. 

Oh, for grace ever to hide that Word in our 
hearts, thus to be kept from sin, and to have our 
steps ordered accordingly, and every thought 
brought into captivity to the obedience of Christ! 


CHAPTER IX 
THE WORD AND PRAYER 


HE relations of the word of God and prayer 

come out vividly in this portion. The seven 
days’ ministry of the Word had had a most blessed 
effect so that “in the twenty and fourth day of 
this month (the same month that was ushered in 
by the great Bible-reading) the children of Israel 
were assembled with fasting, and with sack- 
clothes, and earth upon them. And the seed of 
Israel separated themselves from all strangers, 
and stood and confessed their sins, and the ini- 
quities of their fathers. And they stood up in 
their place, and read in the book of the law of 
the Lord their God one fourth part of the day; 
and another fourth part they confessed, and wor- 
shiped the Lord their God” (vers. 1-3). 

The order here is most instructive. It was first 
the Word, then prayer, confession, and worship. 
The Word had been having its effect in a won- 
derfully real way since the seven days’ feast. 
What that Word judged, they had been judging. 
What that Word commanded they had sought to 
do. Hence we have as a result the remnant reach- 
ing what was probably the highest moral state 
they ever occupied from the Babylonian captivity 
to the coming of Messiah. Their separation was 
complete. “They separated themselves from all 


96 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


strangers.” It was now for the first time that 
position and condition seemed to coalesce. 

And so they come together again desiring to 
learn more of the mind of God that it might lead 
to increased devotedness. So the Bible-reading 
is again prominent. The first quarter of the day 
is spent in hearing the Word. Then the next 
quarter is given up to prayer: ““‘They confessed 
and worshiped the Lord their God.” It is un- 
wise, and may be hurtful, to reverse this order. 
The Word and prayer should ever go together— 
but it should be the Word first; then prayer fol- 
lows intelligently. The believer should be a 
man holding the even balance of learning from 
the Word and cultivating the spirit of prayer. 
We need to hear God speaking to us that we may 
speak rightly to God. 

One who gives himself pre-eminently to the 
Word, neglecting prayer, will become heady and 
doctrinal—likely to quarrel about “points,” and 
be occupied with theoretical Christianity to the 
hurt of his soul and the irritation of his brethren. 
On the other hand, one who gives himself much 
to prayer while neglecting the Word is likely to 
become exceedingly introspective, mystical, and 
sometimes fanatical. But he who reads the word 
of God reverently and humbly, seeking to know 
the will of God, and then gives himself to prayer, 
confessing and judging what the Scriptures have 
condemned in his ways, and words, and thoughts, 
will have his soul drawn out in worship also, and 


The Word and Prayer 97 


thus grow both in grace and in knowledge, be- 
coming a well-rounded follower of Christ. Apart 
from a knowledge of the Word, prayer will lack 
exceedingly in intelligence; for the objective must 
ever precede the subjective, but not be divorced 
therefrom. 

Here, in Nehemiah 9 (which as we have else- 
where noticed is linked, in confession, with Daniel 
9 and Ezra 9), the Levites lead the people in their 
prayer and praise, standing ‘‘on the stairs,” as 
though going up to the heavenly sanctuary. And 
in the prayer that follows—the longest in the 
Bible (Solomon’s dedicatory prayer being consi- 
derably shorter)—there is much blessed instruc- 
tion as we listen to the rehearsal of God’s ways 
with their fathers and the confession of their own 
failure and sin. 

The opening words remind us of the beginning 
-of what is generally called the Lord’s prayer— 
and of what should occupy a pre-eminent place 
in all prayer—“Hallowed be Thy Name.” The 
Levites called on all the people to stand up and 
bless the Eternal One, their God, whose glorious 
name is exalted above all blessing and praise. 
To Him alone creation is ascribed and, as though 
testifying against the idolatry all about them that 
led the nations to worship and serve the creature 
rather than the Creator, they acknowledge that 
“all the host of heaven worship Him.” He it 
was who had chosen Abram, bringing him out 
of the Chaldees, making him in very deed to 


98 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


answer to his new name Abraham—“the father 
of a multitude.” To him the promise of the land 
of Canaan was given which in due course was 
fulfilled in his seed—multitudinous as the sand 
of the sea, brought out of Egyptian bondage, led 
through the sea and the wilderness by the cloudy 
pillar, first to the mount of God and then to the 
land of promise (vers. 4-12). The Levites cele- 
brated the giving of the law at Sinai; and it is 
of moment to notice that they declare it was then 
—and not before —that the holy Sabbath was 
made known to them (ver.14). This would seem 
conclusive evidence that whereas God sanctified 
the seventh day at the completion of His work, 
as recorded in the second chapter of Genesis, 
He did not give it to man by command until He 
had a redeemed people gathered about Himself 
in the wilderness. It was a sign, or reminder, 
not alone of God’s rest after the creative days, 
but of the deliverance of Israel from Egyptian 
bondage, and the pledge of a rest yet to come. 
After celebrating the mighty acts of the Lord, 
the Levites go on to confess the fearful break- 
down of the people, and that from the very first. 
Their fathers dealt proudly, and in place of recog- 
nizing their dependence on this mighty Deliverer 
who had wrought so wondrously on their behalf, 
they hardened their necks and harkened not to 
His commandments—in their rebellion desiring 
even to return to the very land of bondage from 
which He had taken them. Their wilderness his- 


The Word and Prayer ~ 99 


tory was a most humbling record, full of evi- 
dences of their folly, and yet abounding with tes- 
timonies of Jehovah’s faithfulness, who sustained 
them through all those forty years “so that they 
lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not old, and 
their feet swelled not” (vers. 18-21). And when 
at last they reached the land given by covenant 
to Abraham, the nations therein were rooted out 
before them and they themselves planted in their 
place; there they multiplied and grew, rejoicing 
in the abundance of the fruitful fields of Canaan, 
and delighting themselves in the great goodness 
of their covenant-keeping God (vers. 22-25). 

But disobedience and rebellion characterized 
them almost from the days of Joshua, and God’s 
holy law they cast behind their back, despising 
His precepts and slaying His prophets, when such 
were sent to show them their sin and call them 
back to subjection to His word. When, in their 
distresses, they cried to Him He granted them 
deliverance—not for their deserts, but for His 
own name’s sake, according to His mercies; thus 
again and again manifesting His tender love and 
care. 

Yet scarcely had He interposed on their behalf 
than they turned aside as before, sinning against 
His judgments (that is, the testimonies rendered), 
“which if a man do he shall live in them,” thus 
fighting against His Holy Spirit who spake in the 
prophets; until, at last, the kings of Assyria and 
Babylonia were permitted to root them out of 


100 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


their inheritance, carrying them captive to the 
land of the stranger. 

The Levites own the justice of all God’s dealings 
with the nation. “Thou hast done right, but we 
have done wickedly,” is their humble acknowl- 
edgment. And they go on to confess how their 
kings, princes, priests and fathers had not kept 
the law, nor harkened to His commandments, nor 
turned from their wicked works; and so they re- 
mained bondmen to that very day, subject to the 
kings of Persia; even though a little reviving had 
been granted them, and they had been gathered 
once more at God’s centre. Now, bearing in mind 
all the evil consequences of disobedience in the 
past, they made a “sure covenant” (alas, again 
to be soon broken!) and, putting it in writing, 
signed and sealed it; pledging themselves to cleave 
to the Lord, to separate from all strangers, and 
faithfully to do His will (vers. 33-38). 

That they were truly in earnest none can doubt, 
but the future would show once more, as the past 
so often had done, that man is not to be trusted, 
and that were God’s covenant based on human 
faithfulness, instead of divine grace, all hope for 
man’s lasting blessing would be vain. 

Yet it is well to have such seasons of exercise 
as this which we have been contemplating. Un- 
doubtedly, it was for many a step forward, which 
they never retraced, although for the nation, as 
such, there could be no full restoration till the 
advent of God’s Anointed. 


CHAPTER X 
THE NEW START 


T is both true and false (according to the 

thought one has in mind) that God never 
- restores a failed testimony. If by this expres- 
sion, frequently heard at the present time, it be 
meant that failure having once blighted a move- 
- ment that originally was of God, it will never 
again reach its pristine glory, the statement is un- 
doubtedly true. But if it be meant that, ruin 
having come in, God will not answer the cry of 
repentance with revival and restoration when His 
face is earnestly sought, it is utterly false. It is 
to be feared that it is spiritual lethargy and an 
unwillingness to bestir oneself and seriously face 
existing conditions, which are the real causes why 
many once gathered to the name of Jesus now go 
on in isolation, blaming the divisions and lack of 
spirituality evidenced by others as the reason for 
their having left the path of subjection to God’s 
revealed will as to the corporate testimony of His 
people. 

To such, what we have just been considering 
ought to speak loudly. Things had got indeed 
very low among the remnant. Their actual con- 
dition had become most dishonoring to God. 
Nevertheless their position was a right one, and 


102 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


nothing could be gained by forsaking it. The im- 
portant thing was to remain where they were, 
and seek to put away all that hindered their en- 
joyment of the Lord’s favor, that thus their state 
individually and corporately might be approved of 
Him. 

So we have seen them turning unitedly to the 
Word, earnestly inquiring as to what God had said, 
and when “they found it written,” acting upon 
it, though it meant, as in many instances it did, 
bitter sorrow and painful humiliation. 

Having pledged themselves (in accord with the 
spirit of the legal dispensation) to put away all 
strangers and to walk obediently before God, they 
drew up a written declaration, signing and seal- 
ing it, from Nehemiah the Governor down to the 
lowest in rank of the common people, “all they 
that had separated themselves from the people 
of the lands unto the law of God, their wives, their 
sons, and their daughters, every one having 
knowledge, and having understanding” (vers. 1- 
28). 

It was a serious, solemn and definite thing they 
had undertaken, and it would require purpose of 
heart to carry it out. ‘They clave to their breth- 
ren, their nobles, and entered into a curse, and 
into an oath, to walk in God’s law, which was 
given by Moses the servant of God, and to ob- 
serve and do all the commandments of Jehovah 
our Lord, and His judgments and His statutes; 
and that we would not give our daughters unto 


The New Start 103 


the peoples of the land, nor take their daughters 
for our sons: and if the peoples of the land bring 
ware or any victuals on the Sabbath day to sell, 
that we would not buy it of them on the Sabbath, 
or on the holy day: and that we would leave the 
seventh year, and the exaction of every debt” 
(vers. 29-31). 

Notice carefully what it was they had cove- 
nanted to do— 

First: To walk in God’s law; or, in other words, 
to be subject to the Holy Scriptures. Second (and 
of course all that followed was involved in the 
first): To maintain separation from the peoples 
of the land that there be no unequal yoke. Third: 
To honor God by a careful observance of the Sab- 
bath day, not permitting greed or lust for strang- 
ers’ dainties to lead them to violate its sacredness. 
Fourth: To let the land lie fallow every seventh 
year, for disobedience to which command they had 
of old been carried to Babylon, while for seventy 
years the land kept Sabbath. Fifth: To deal gra- 
ciously with each other as brethren, leaving the 
exaction of every debt, not acting in the spirit 
of the usurer. 

Are there not weighty lessons for us in these 
pledges? I mean for those who have sought to 
give Christ His place as Head, and to act on the 
truth of the oneness of the body of Christ, but 
who have so miserably failed to keep the Spirit’s 
unity in the bond of peace. Wherein have we 
missed our way? Has it not been in what is 


104 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


here set forth in Old Testament language? Must 
we not confess that we have not been obedient 
to the word of our God? We prided ourselves on 
having taken a right position—directed thereto 
by the Word—but we have not been careful to 
be individually subject to that Word. Is it nota 
fact that to many the “voice of the assembly” has 
been louder than the voice of God in Holy Scrip- 
ture? Is it not a fact that the traditions of the 
elders have, in critical times, been more relied on 
than “Thus saith the Lord?” Is it not time then 
that, as individuals and as gathered companies 
of saints, we go back to the simplicity of early 
days, and seek to be guided henceforth alone by 
the word of the Lord which abideth forever? 

And have we not, likewise, greatly missed the 
truth of separation? Have we not often been 
quite satisfied in that we were separated eccles- 
iastically from the world-church, while socially 
and in our business relations we were linked up 
with the world to an even greater extent than 
many not outwardly separated as we? Has not 
the spirit of the world come into our homes and 
assemblies? Is it not manifest in the books we 
enjoy, the clothing we wear, the company we fre- 
quent, the language we use? What is mere ec- 
clesiastical separation if we are otherwise so much 
linked with the world? 

And is it not true that, when we have been 
somewhat aroused as to this, we have enjoined 
strictest separation from saints often more godly 


The New Start 105 


than ourselves, instead of from the spirit of the 
present age of evil? Has it not often happened 
that saints of God have been passed by or coldly 
greeted because of some difference in judgment 
as to a disciplinary question difficult to determine 
righteously, while utter worldlings have been given 
every evidence of affection? These are serious 
questions that had better be faced now than at 
the judgment-seat of Christ. 

We know that, as we are not under law but 
under grace, the Sabbath of a past dispensation 
is now for us fulfilled in Christ, but are we then 
giving Christ His place, and not permitting our 
greed for gain or our lust after earth’s pleasant 
things to break in upon that Sabbath-rest we 
should ever enjoy in Him? Can our business 
affairs always bear the test of His eyes that are 
as a flame of fire? Have we one weight for test- 
ing sacred things and another for what we call 
secular affairs? May there not be cause for ex- 
ercise as to these matters? And may it not be that 
right here is one reason for our leanness? 

And what of the seventh year? It was this 
“leaving the seventh year” that really showed 
that Israel were a people confiding in the living 
God. “To live by faith” is often spoken of as 
though it were the calling or prerogative of those 
separated to the ministry of the Word. But are 
not all believers called to live by faith—to hold 
things here with a loose grasp, but lay hold on 
eternal life as the one thing needful? And have 


106 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


we been largely forgetting this, and contenting 
ourselves with “gathering on divine ground,” 
“scripturally breaking bread,” “maintaining the 
testimony,” and all the rest of what is merely out- 
ward and ecclesiastical, while losing our grip on 
eternal realities and living as though this world 
were by far the more important of the two? Is 
it any wonder then that when matters arise 
among us calling for the exercise of spiritual dis- 
cernment and godly judgment we are found want- 
ing, and what should be for the unifying of the 
saints becomes the means of their scattering? 

And this brings us to the fifth pledge: What 
about the exaction of every debt? Have we not 
been hard and exacting and over-much righteous 
with ohe another, alienating those we ought to 
have drawn with cords of love, and demanding 
of each other what subjects of grace should be 
ashamed to press? Surely, as before intimated, 
it is high time to “leave off this usury.” 

The end of the dispensation is fast approaching. 
The Judge is standing at the door. The Lord is 
looking on, close at hand. The word of God is 
being given up and its truth denied on every 
hand. It is high time that those who love that 
Word cease their exactions one of another, and 
all alike judging everything that has hindered 
fellowship, put away for ever the evil things that 
have wrought such havoc, and so stand shoulder 
to shoulder, heart to heart, and hand in hand, for 
God and His truth with all who seek to be loyal 


The New Start 107 


to Him and His Word in the little time that re- 
mains ere “the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ 
and our gathering together unto Him.” 

On the rest of the chapter I have few remarks 
to offer. Judging the evil, the remnant sought, 
so far as they might, to put things in order in 
regard to providing for and maintaining the ser- 
vice of the house of God, giving of their first- 
fruits and tithes that there might be abundance 
to carry on the ministry and to support the min- 
isters. Depend upon it, if the Lord’s people get 
right individually, that which is corporate will 
flourish, and there will be abundant provision for 
maintaining a visible testimony. Lack of spirit- 
uality closes up hearts and purses. Godliness opens 
both. The poverty of the people was no barrier 
when their consciences were in exercise, and they 
determined “not to forsake the house of their 
God” (vers. 32-39). And so will it ever be where 
the love of Christ reigns. 

Apart from this all must degenerate more and 
more until all testimony for God is gone. One 
who knew and suffered much as standing for “‘the 
present truth” left behind seasonable words of 
warning with which I bring this portion to a 
close. 


“What is important is not ‘The Brethren,’ but the 
truth they have...God could set them aside, and spread 
His truth by others—would, I believe, though full of 
gracious patience, if they be not faithful. Their place 
is to remain in obscurity and devotedness, not to think 


108 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


of Brethren (it is always wrong to think of ourselves), 
but of souls, in Christ’s name and love, and of His glory. 

“Let them walk in love, in the truth, humble, as little 
(and content to be little) as when they began, and God 
will bless them. If not, their candlestick may go as 
that of others—and oh, what sorrow and confusion of 
face it would be after such grace!... 

“As regards also the activity outside them, it is one 
of the signs of the times, and they should rejoice in it 
-..But it does not give their testimony at all...I do not 
believe attacks on anything to be our path. Self-defence 
is every way to be avoided, The Lord will answer for 
us if we do His will...God has no need of us, but He 
has need of a people who walk in the truth, in love, 
and holiness. ‘I will leave in the midst of thee an 
afflicted and poor people, and they shall trust in the 
name of Jehovah’ (Zeph. 3: 12). 

“The gospel we may, and must, rejoice in; yet it only 
makes the testimony of Brethren outside the camp more 
necessary than ever; but it must be real...If brethren 
fall in with the current Christianity inside the camp, 
they would be but another sect with certain truths”’— 
J.N.D. 


In the light of much that has transpired one 
can almost hear the voice of prophecy in such 
words. Beloved brethren, let us one and all heed 
their serious message. 


CHAPTER XI 
A WILLING PEOPLE 


HE Bridegroom in the Canticles says: “I 

went down into the garden of nuts to see 
the fruits of the valley, and to see whether the 
vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded. Or 
ever I was aware, my soul set me among the 
chariots of my willing people” (Song 6:11, 12; 
1911 Version) ; and in psalm 110: 3 we read, “Thy 
people shall be willing (or, a free-will offering) 
in the day of Thy power, in the beauties of holi- 
ness from the womb of the morning: thou hast 
the dew of thy youth.” 

Words like these form a fitting introduction to 
the chapter now soliciting our thoughtful consi- 
deration—a passage that seems to be filled only 
with hard names and meagre details if the im- 
portant truth be passed over that it is God’s own 
inspired honor-roll, never to be forgotten, of His 
willing people. Then indeed we recognize in it such 
a delightful valley as that described in the Song, 
where the vine is flourishing and the fragrant 
pomegranates budding for the delectation of Him 
who rejoices to dwell among His willing-hearted 
saints — made willing by His power working 
among them, manifested in holiness of heart and 
life, engendered and refreshed by the precious 
dews of the Holy Spirit. 


110 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


A free-will offering was made, not now of money 
or other means, but of men devoted to the Lord, 
to dwell in Jerusalem, that the holy city might be 
furnished and defended. ‘‘And the rulers of the 
people dwelt at Jerusalem: the rest of the people 
also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in 
Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts to dwell 
in other cities. And the people blessed all the 
men that willingly offered themselves to dwell at 
Jerusalem” (vers. 1,2). As before they had tithed 
their produce and possessions, so now they tithed 
themselves. But it was not conscription; for each 
one chosen responded with a free heart, glad thus 
to be especially linked with the defence and up- 
building of the city of the Name. They loved the 
place where God’s honor dwelt, and they were 
pleased to be at home there. 

Of old, in the wilderness, it was the “willing- 
hearted and the wise-hearted” who built the sanc- 
tuary of the Lord; and may we not say that the 
willing-hearted are the wise-hearted? For surely 
it is the evidence of wisdom abiding in the heart 
when the whole life is freely devoted to the service 
of the Lord. And so when the evil had been put 
away from among the remnant of the Jews, and 
the interests of Jehovah had been made paramount 
to every other interest it was the free and loyal 
service of His willing people that gave joy to the 
heart of God. 

To most of us, perhaps, the details that follow 
in the balance of the chapter can, in the very 


A Willing People PEL 


nature of things, possess very little interest. It 
is a mere tabulation of families and individuals 
whose names to us are often well-nigh unpro- 
nounceable, and usually, forgotten almost as soon 
as read. But in the sight of God it is a tabulation 
of great importance, and, like other lists we have 
noticed in these post-captivity books, will be con- 
sulted at the judgment-seat of Christ. For these 
willing offerers shall then learn how good was 
their choice when they accepted loss in this world 
that they might the better care for the city of 
God’s choice. Very little is said of these mem- 
bers of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin (vers. 
4-9), and of Levi also who dwelt in Jerusalem 
(vers. 10-18), but every one is well known to the 
Lord, and every word and act that told their de- 
votedness of heart to Himself will be manifested 
in that day. And, even now, where scholarship 
enables one to read something of the significance 
of these names, there are doubtless helpful lessons 
which for the present most of us fail to see. 

The porters and servants (the ‘‘Nethinim’), 
yea, and the singers too—true sons of Asaph set 
“over the business of the house of God” who had 
their special portion by the king’s commandment 
(vers. 19-23)-——will all be called by name when 
Messiah sits upon His throne to reward every one 
who in every dispensation had respect unto the 
coming recompense. For it was just as truly a 
service for some to till the fields and dwell in 
the restored villages, thus holding all the land for 


112 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


God, so far as strength and numbers permitted, 
as it was for their willing-hearted brethren to 
abide in the city of the coming King (vers. 25-36). 
He valued all according to the intention of the 
heart, and He does the same to-day. 

We would not therefore pass carelessly over 
what some might call so “dry” a chapter as this, 
but reading it thoughtfully and prayerfully let us 
challenge our own hearts as to how far we have 
been and are now characterized by the spirit of 
willing, joyous obedience to all that God has been 
pleased to make known to us concerning His holy 
desires. Words need not be multiplied on such a 
theme; but exercise may well be real and deep, 
lest in that day, when the record of owr service 
is opened on high, there be only a blotted story 
of slothful, almost forced obedience, contrasting 
unfavorably indeed with the willing offering of 
these men of old. 

In view of this may we be stirred up to heed 
the Christian poet’s words: 


“Go on; go on; there’s all eternity to rest in, 
And far too few are on the active service list; 
No labor for the Lord is risky to invest in; 
But nothing will make up should His ‘Well 
done’ be missed.” 


CHAPTER XII 


THE DEDICATION OF THE WALL 


T will be remembered that in the duplicate 
lists of those who first came up to Jerusalem 
under Zerubbabel and Joshua the high priest (or 
Jeshua, as he is here called), the families only of 
the priests were mentioned, not the names of the 
chief priests themselves. That lack is supplied 
in the opening verses of the present chapter (vers. 
1-7). God would have these men in everlasting 
remembrance, who so efficiently fulfilled their 
service with true-hearted devotion. The chief of 
the Levites are also mentioned, though of these 
we have read before in chapters 8:7 and 9: 4, 5. 
A later generation of priests, serving doubtless in 
the latter days of Nehemiah, is given in verses 
12 to 21, the sons of those referred to above, 
faithful men walking in their fathers’ footsteps, 
and ensamples to the people. 

But in the intervening verses (10 and 11) we 
have a short genealogical list carrying down the 
line of Jeshua for five generations to Jaddua, the 
great and justly-celebrated high priest who held 
this supreme office in the days when the Persian 
dominion was overthrown by Alexander the Great. 


114 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


There can, I think, be no question as to this table 
having been added by a later hand, which the Holy 
Spirit was pleased to use to preserve the record 
of Jaddua’s descent. Verse 22 must have been 
added at the same time, declaring that a faithful 
record of the heads of the Levites had been kept 
to the days of Darius the Persian, whom I take 
to be Darius Codomanus, overthrown by the great 
Macedonian conqueror. It is possible indeed that 
the book of Malachi may have been written about 
that time, and that he may have added to the list, 
or the list itself. His solemn message shows us 
the sad condition into which the children of the 
remnant degenerated after the fathers had died. 

Simple souls will not be confused or perplexed 
at the suggestion we have made above, if they bear 
in mind that the entire Old Testament was in the 
hands of the Jewish doctors in the days of our 
Lord’s sojourn upon earth, and that concerning it 
all He declared, ‘‘The Scripture cannot be broken.” 
It is not necessary therefore to know in each in- 
stance the human author of a book or part of a 
book. We know that “holy men of God spake as 
they were moved by the Holy Ghost,” and thus we 
have in every part a “God-breathed” record, and 
that is enough. 

It is evident from the next table (vers. 23-26) 
that both Nehemiah and Ezra lived through ‘“‘the 
days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua,” as well as in 
the days of the father, who accompanied Zerub- 
babel in the first emigration from Babylon. Dur- 


The Dedication of the Wall 115 


ing their life-time the people clung to the word 
of God, and, with occasional individual lapses, 
such as we read of in the next chapter, main- 
tained, on the whole, a testimony for the Lord 
who had brought them back, though in feebleness, 
to the place where He had set His name. Of the 
chief of the Levites (ver. 24) it is distinctly said 
that they were appointed both “to praise and to 
give thanks, according to the commandment of 
David the man of God, ward over against ward.” 
The temple might be poor indeed as compared 
with Solomon’s building, “exceeding magnifical,” 
and the people themselves a small and afflicted 
remnant, but they sought to act on the divine in- 
struction as to the service of the house of God 
which had been communicated by David to Solo- 
mon at the beginning. Likewise, whatever the 
feebleness to-day, it is the part of faithfulness to 
go back to “that which was from the beginning,” 
and to endeavor, though in weakness, to carry out 
that which is written in the word of God. 

The present chapter is divided into two almost 
equal parts, the first twenty-six verses belonging 
properly to chapter eleven, as being entirely com- 
posed of genealogical tables similar to those of the 
previous chapter. The second division continues 
the course of the history, and contains the account 
of the feast of the dedication of the now completed 
wall of Jerusalem. This was turned into a great 
occasion of rejoicing and thanksgiving to God, who 
had not only brought the people back from the 


116 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


strangers’ land but had permitted them to sur- 
round His house and His holy city with a separat- 
ing wall, testifying both to friends and enemies 
alike that they were under His care who had once 
scattered their nation because of unjudged sin. 

From every quarter the Levites gathered “to 
keep the dedication with gladness, both with 
thanksgivings, and with singing, with cymbals, 
psalteries, and with harps” (ver. 27). It was a 
gladsome occasion indeed, and worthy of being 
joyously commemorated in coming years. 

“The sons of the singers” were gathered to- 
gether all about the city to participate in the 
general rejoicing. Jerusalem’s wall was a sym- 
bol of salvation and her gates of praise. 

After the priests and Levites had concluded a 
ceremony of purification, dedicating the people, 
the gates, and the wall to the Lord, Nehemiah 
brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall 
and divided all into two great companies, stretch- 
ing out on the right and the left “toward the 
Dung Gate.” With trumpets pealing out their 
notes of gladness and voices lifted up in songs of 
praise, the Levites and priests answered one an- 
other in antiphonal chants, after the manner of 
the 24th psalm, Nehemiah leading one company 
and Ezra the scribe the other. Thank-offerings 
were offered upon the altar, and “God made them 
rejoice with great joy”—as He always does when 
His people walk before Him in holiness and truth 
(vers. 31-43). 


The Dedication of the Wall 117 


Nor were the servants of the Lord forgotten, 
for the people brought their tithes into the store- 
house, and out of willing hearts gave abundantly 
for the maintenance of the sons of Aaron, in ac- 
cordance with the Word (vers. 44-47). 

One is reminded of the two-fold offering of 
Heb. 13: 15,16: “By Him therefore let us offer 
the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, 
the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to His name. 
But to do good and to communicate, forget not: 
for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.” These 
two offerings should never be divorced—thanks- 
giving going up to God from grateful hearts, and 
benevolence flowing forth toward men, the prac- 
tical expression of that gratitude. 

There is no surer indication of a low state in 
God’s people than to find the poor among them 
left to suffer want, and the Lord’s servants per- 
mitted to endure privation. These last are called 
to a path of trial, and must needs learn to be 
abased as well as to abound, to be full and to be 
empty; but whatever blessing they may find as 
they thus share Christ’s sufferings, it is to the 
shame of the people of God, whose debtors they 
are. Were there more conscientious concern about 
this matter in many places, there would be richer 
and fuller ministry vouchsafed by God to His 
people, and more blessing in the assemblies of 
His saints, who often need to be reminded that: 

“It never was loving that emptied a heart, 
Nor giving that emptied a purse.” 


118 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Let God be honored with the first-fruits of our 
substance, and He will soon prove that He will 
be no man’s debtor, but will abundantly confirm 
the word spoken by Malachi the prophet: “Bring 
ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there 
may be meat in my house, and prove Me now 
herewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not 
open you the windows of heaven, and pour you 
out a blessing that there shall not be room enough 
to receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for 
your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of 
your ground; neither shall your vine cast her 
fruit before the time in the field, saith the Lord 
of hosts” (Mal.3:10,11). That this illustrates 
a great spiritual truth is certain. That many have 
proven it to be intensely literal is equally sure. 
And it has been to the eternal loss of greater 
numbers who have failed in this very thing, and 
forgotten that they were only the stewards, not 
the owners, of wealth entrusted to them, to be 
used in view of the everlasting habitations. 


CHAPTER XIII 


VIGILANCE versus DECLENSION 


HE striking contrast between the praise- 

worthy vigilance of Nehemiah in detecting 
and dealing with various phases of declension, and 
the continual tendency to drift away from obe- 
dience to the written Word, on the part of many 
of the people, is most marked in this closing chap- 
ter. 

That serious evils soon developed is well known 
to the student of Jewish history. These were of 
two characters. On the one hand the separation 
truth of Nehemiah’s day was soon held in a one- 
sided manner, so that position was everything 
and condition quite ignored. This resulted in 
Phariseeism—doctrinally correct in the main, but 
cold, rigid, and heartless—glorying in separation 
while ignoring the weightier matters of true 
piety and godly benevolence. On the other hand 
there was a re-action against all that savored of 
the puritanism of those days, so that the mass of 
the people became careless and indifferent, and, 
save that idolatry was never reinstated, became 
as impious as their fathers whose sins had brought 
the captivity. In all this we may well read a 
solemn warning, bidding us never separate con- 
dition from position, nor piety toward God from 
grace toward needy men. 


120 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


Sanctification in its practical aspect is by the 
truth. Hence it is ever gradual—as the truth is 
learned in the fear of God. Of this we have a 
splendid example in the first nine verses. On 
the very day of the dedication of the wall (for so 
I understand the opening phrase), that portion 
of the book of Deuteronomy (chap. 23: 3,4) was 
read, which we have already quoted in our notes 
on chapter two, and which commanded that the 
Ammonite and the Moabite should be excluded 
from the congregation of the Lord forever be- 
cause of their iniquitous course towards Israel in 
the wilderness. This at once led to a closer ap- 
plication of the truth of separation than before. 
They had previously separated from all strang- 
ers; now they “separated from Israel all the mixed 
multitude” (ver. 3). 

Of Tobiah the Ammonite, who had so bitterly 
resented the building of the wall in the begin- 
ning, and whose wiles had failed to turn Nehe, 
miah aside from his purpose, we have not heard 
for a long time. Now we get the startling in- 
formation that Eliashib the priest, who had the 
oversight of the dwellings of the priests at the 
house of God, had made a secret alliance with 
Tobiah during a hitherto unnoticed absence of 
Nehemiah, in which time he had returned to wait 
upon the king. The vigilant governor’s eye being 
no longer upon him, Eliashib abused his liberty 
by preparing “a great chamber” for the ungodly 
Ammonite, which had been formerly used as a 


Vigilance versus Declension 121 


storehouse for the tithes and offerings. Probably 
this apartment was never occupied by Tobiah, for, 
ere Eliashib’s plan could be fully carried out, Ne- 
hemiah returned. Hearing “of the evil that 
Eliashib did for Tobiah in preparing him a cham- 
ber in the courts of the house of God,” he was 
sorely grieved, but acted with his accustomed en- 
ergy, thwarting the unholy purpose by casting the 
stuff of Tobiah out of the room and cleansing the 
chambers, into which he again brought the hal- 
lowed vessels with the offerings. What an ex- 
ample for the people; nor do we again read of 
any effort on the part of Tobiah to get a foothold 
in Jerusalem. 

But another evil soon claimed the returned 
governor’s attention. God’s servants were being 
neglected by a self-seeking people, and unable to 
support those dependent upon them, the Levites 
and the singers, who a little before had willingly 
offered themselves for the service of the house 
of God, had gone back to their fields, toiling for 
daily bread. The test, doubtless, revealed a weak- 
ness in these men themselves, but it also showed 
the declining state of the people in neglecting the 
temporalities of the house of the Lord; so Ne- 
hemiah contends with the rulers, and stirs them 
up to attend to the gathering of the unpaid tithes. 
This being accomplished, the Levites could attend 
on their service (vers. 10-14). 

A third sign of declension, encroaching upon 
the former determination to be faithful to God, 


122 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


was evidenced in the laxity of some as to the 
sanctity of the Sabbath, the Lord’s holy day, con- 
cerning which there had been such particular 
pledges made. Nehemiah saw some treading wine- 
presses and engaged in other secular occupations 
on the Sabbath, even buying and selling and carry- 
ing burdens on the day of rest. In vain at first 
he testified against them. Strangers from Tyre 
brought fish and other kinds of produce which they 
offered for sale, and for which they found ready 
buyers on the Sabbath. Thoroughly aroused, Ne- 
hemiah contended with the nobles, the rulers of 
the people, charging this profanation of the holy 
day upon them, and reminding them that it was 
for sin such as this that all the past evil had be- 
fallen the Jews and the city of Jerusalem. “Yet,” 
he cries, indignantly, “ye bring more wrath upon 
Israel by profaning the Sabbath” (vers. 13-18). 

So, with his accustomed energy, he commanded 
the gates to be shut at sundown, as the Sabbath 
drew on, and not to be opened till it was past, 
while guards were set to see that no burden of 
any kind was brought into the city on that day. 
Once or twice the merchants and hucksters lodged 
all night and all day outside Jerusalem, vainly 
pleading for admission, but Nehemiah’s orders 
were carried out to the letter. Finally, he threat- 
ened them with arrest if they came again with 
their wares on the Sabbath. Seeing the orders 
were meant to be carried out, they came no more 
on that day. 


Vigilance versus Declension 123 


As polluted, the Levites were then commanded 
to cleanse themselves, and henceforth maintain 
a guard over the gates “to sanctify the Sabbath 
day.’”’ Thus for the time the evil was again judged 
and the declension stayed (vers. 17-22). 

But not yet could vigilance be relaxed. The 
flesh was still at work. In spite of all that they 
had heard and seen, some had been marrying 
women of Ashdod, Ammon and Moab. They may 
have excused themselves, as many do now, on 
the plea that they might lead these women to 
know and worship the one true God and learn 
the ways of Israel. But it was all a delusion. 
Children had been born of these unions, and these 
children were witness to the corruption that had 
been brought in. They “spake half in the speech 
of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews’ lan- 
guage, but according to the language of each peo- 
ple” (vers. 23,24). This is ever the fruit of such 
a yoke in marriage. The children soon follow the 
ways of the unregenerate parent and use the 
language of the flesh. Too late is the error real- 
ized. Too readily they follow the example and 
speech of the parent who knows not God. 

Again Nehemiah’s righteous anger burst forth. 
He contended with these unfaithful Jews and in- 
voked the solemn judgments of the law upon them, 
even smiting some, and demanded of all that they 
swear by God no longer to countenance in any 
way these mixed marriages, from which only evil 
fruit could come. He reminded them how Solomon 


124 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


himself had failed so miserably because of this 
very thing, and besought them to harken unto 
the law and not expect others to condone their 
offences (vers. 25-27). No doubt some would speak 
of his ways as hard and bitter; but sin is hard and 
bitter; and persistency in it often requires severe 
measures to put things right. It is often not 
a sign of spirituality to be placid and sentimen- 
tally affectionate. Such behavior frequently tells 
of a conscience asleep and a soul unexercised. 
There was a time when the Lord Jesus made a 
scourge of small cords—a bitter whip—to drive 
out the traderg from God’s house (John 2:15). 
Paul’s language too was cutting and denunciatory 
when Satan’s emissaries were seeking to over- 
throw divine truth; and God’s wrath too shall be 
poured out without mixture in the cup of His in- 
dignation. 

Another instance of declension closes both the 
chapter and the book. The grandson of Eliashib, 
the high priest, having married a daughter of 
Sanballat, the man of God, Nehemiah, drives him 
away from his presence. His grandfather’s fail- 
ure is brought again to mind in the descendant’s 
defection.* Remembering Eliashib’s intriguing 
with Tobiah, we are not surprised to read of his 
grandson’s association with the family of San- 
ballat. In defiance of all that Nehemiah had been 


*It is not certain, though probable, that Eliashib the high 
priest is the same as Eliashib the chief priest of verse 4. 


Vigilance versus Declension 125 


insisting on, this youth had married the guileful 
Horonite’s daughter. He was the last with whom 
the governor had to deal, and he graphically de- 
clares, “Therefore I chased him from me.” We 
can almost see the indignant countenance of the 
now aged Nehemiah as he learns of the perfidious- 
ness of the son of Joiada, and we cannot but 
admire the energy with which the doughty old 
warrior drives the culprit from his presence— 
even making intercession in the spirit of Elijah 
against those who had defiled the priesthood and 
violated the covenant. Only by such stern mea- 
sures could they be cleansed from all strangers. 

Consistent to the last, Nehemiah appointed “the 
wards of the priests and the Levites, every one 
in his business; and for the wood-offering, at 
times appointed, and for the first-fruits.” Noth- 
ing was too great for his faith, and nothing was 
too insignificant for his consideration if it con- 
cerned the house, the people, or the honor of the 
Lord his God. This was indeed ‘a faithful man, 
and one that feared God above many”—just such 
an one as the times demanded, and he held on 
his way unflinchingly to the end, neither cajoled 
by flattery nor intimidated by opposition, for to 
him the approbation of the God of Israel was in- 
finitely more than the good opinion of carnal or 
natural men. 

And so with the prayer, “Remember me, O my 
God, for good!” the record comes to an abrupt 
termination, and Nehemiah passes from our view, 


126 Notes on the Book of Nehemiah 


only to appear again at the manifestation of the 
sons of God. 

If we would learn something of the after-state 
of the Jews we must turn, as previously intimated, 
to the last book of the Old Testament, where we 
learn through Malachi’s stern charges the low 
state into which the remnant had fallen; while 
the Gospels and the Acts give us the solemn sequel 
and show the children of those returned from the 
captivity rejecting both the Son of God come in 
flesh to them, and the Holy Spirit also! 

Well will it be for Christians who may read 
these lines, to lay all to heart, that similar de- 
clension may be through the mercy of God averted 
in the present age of grace. May He grant it 
for His name’s sake and the glory of His beloved 
Son. Amen! 


Public Library 
OCT 1941 
Oakland, California 


By H. A. IRONSIDE 


SCRIPTURE EXPOSITIONS 


Notes on the Book of Proverbs. Cloth,..... cmocagadce: al) 
Notes on the Book of Ezra. Paper, 20c.; cloth,....... 0 
Notes on the Book of Nehemiah. Paper, 25c.; cloth,.. 75 
Notes on the Book of Esther. Paper, 30c.; cloth.,.... 
Notes on Philippians. Paper, 20c.; cloth,............ 5 
Notes on Jeremiah and Lamentations. Cloth,........ 1.00 
Notes on the Minor Prophets. Cloth,...........e006. 1.50 
Lectures on Daniel the Prophet—with chart, 

PAPE MOUs: FClOCN; arte. kee wre ete he tion 1.25 
Lectures on Revelation. Simple & Practical, with chart. 

BADGE OCA CLOLNsece eee: nce oe lee Mee cl.o0 
Exposition of the Epistle of Jude. Paper, ...... re rh 8 A 


MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS 


A Life Laid Down. Memoir of Fannie M. Arthur. 

Hilus deem aAper~ GUC ClOt snc as sce seis sleeine eee 15 
The Four Hundred Silent Years. Paper, 30c.; cloth, 75 
The Only Two Religions, and Other Gospel Papers. 


PA POD aU CrsiClObl sec sluts ielo wives cre ololat nici cestorsie le ecert 15 
The Mysteries of God. Paper, 25c.; cloth,........... 15 
Halling witheeauly. Paper. Lpess cloths. cess. s eee er 60 
Holiness: the False and the True. Cloth,............ 75 

Ard SCANCCITION gas ADEE s ce lersie'e o steleicielsleie eis onsiciciece 20 
LEneMVitdnipntaC ry lee PADCK screens cieleeierstcisie cis steric ae 15 
Betters.tova woman. Catholic) Priest. ...s: sc cissicsise eiele « 10 
Baptism: What Saith the Scripture? Paper,......... 15 


Apostolic Faith Missions & the So-called 2nd Pentecost 05 
Teaching of “Plymouth Brethren.” Is it Scriptural?.. 05 
OneSo-calledeWivine Healing tir. scisie oletelere steleeieretsletsc 02 


MMhemMormon se listake ocr. steric cielo ale sieielera.s.aiece esis tole ere 03 
Setting the Stage for the last Act of the Great 
World-Drama, “‘The Times of the Gentiles”...... 10 


Who will be Saved in the Coming Period of Judgment? 03 


Hebrew’s Search for the Blood of Atonement. 40c. 
NUTRI TOLER AA GOOG LINC. nye cccse eres « vcs ose s 4d 
Too Bad for Heaven and Too Good for Hell.. 4d 4s 
The Right Priest for a Death-Bed.......... a 
Pphe Onlve wo Relie1ons:<istc0 «icis. crore plete ocieieie $1.00 per 100 
EDGED VAN G ATM DCTs, s1e'els cree 106 0101070 61 0/0)0:e)e! ere fs us 
For Your Sakes ...... Cae RAG RRR OE NEOIEES 


‘ per 100 


50 cts. per 100 


BY °A."ECBOGTH 


A CHART on the COURSE of TIME, from Eternity 
to Hternity—in seven colors—the colors being sig- 
nificant. Size, 83x13 inches. Price, with Key..... 60 


The SAME—mounted on Linen and folded—making it 
more available for study and more easily preserved. 


With Key, in strong envelope...........-...+0-. 1.25 
The KEY—a pamphlet of 34 pages,with miniature chart, 
in plain black—may be had alone,............... 10 
The CHART and i Hein Germans crc telecyolerein sisters 45 
ue % 2 z Danish-Norwegian......... 1.00 
she 4 only insitalians .. <cs sce stem leintelsre eisleleteete 40 
VATE imess. < )  SYANisiieraes sisies eel e io suate eee 10 
AY Chartiof the-A ges) so. cies errnicrou crea cere scar meiereie icin 2 
The Ministries of Peter, of John and of Paul.......... 15 
One Judgment, or Four—Which?..................:. 3 
Present Events and Christ’s Second Coming.......... 2 


The Reckoning of Time—Lessons from Israel’s History 4 


Repentancerand + Malthicc ccnteacse iets cash ee ie eee 4 
Outline of the Epistle to the Romans........ 2c.; dozen, 20 
Seven “NeglectiNotstizc% ierasia ner ccertees sre aiere ae eae 1 
Seven Steps of Progress in the Divine Life..1c.; dozen, 5 
Seventh-Day Adventism: What is it?................ 8 


The A. E. B. Series of 4-p. Gospel Tracts...100 assor’d, 25 


Orders for one dollar and above sent carriage free ; 
for smaller ones add 10 per cent for postage 


GTU 


nga 


LIBRARY USE ONTY 


GTU Library 
2400 Ridge Road 
Berkeley, CA 94709 
For renevals call (510) 645-7798 


All gems are subject to rec] 


